The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, Vol. 4
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/the-international-standard-bible-encyclopedia-volume-4_202608>. Public domain.

Sat


eet


ae ees
’


i]
zs
aa
Z,
4
©
O


UNIVERSITY


LIBRARY


Cornell University


Library


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.


There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924063472827


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD
BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


THE
INTERNATIONAL STANDARD
BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


JAMES ORR, M.A., D.D., GeNnERAL EpitTor


JOHN L. NUELSEN, D.D., LL.D.
EDGAR Y. MULLINS, D.D., LL.D.


ASSISTANT EDITORS


MORRIS O. EVANS, D.D., Px.D., Manacine Eprror


VOLUME IV
NAARAH—SOCHO


CHICAGO
. THE HOWARD-SEVERANCE COMPANY
1915


Copyricut, 1915, By
THe Howarp-SEVERANCE CoMPANY


All Rights of Translation and
Reproduction Reserved


International Copyright Secured


The Publishers supply this Encyclopaedia only through
authorized sales-agents. Booksellers cannot obtain it,


Printed by the Lakeside Press
Types cast aud set by the University of Chicago Press
Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A.


2107


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


NAARAH (V9), na‘érah; B, at képar abrav,
hai kimai autén, A, Naapaéd, Naarathé; AV Naa-
rath): A town in the territory of Ephraim (Josh
16 7). It appears as ‘“Naaran” in 1 Ch 7 28 (B,
Naapydvy, Naarndn, A, Naapdy, Naardén). Onom
(s.v. ‘“Noorath’’) places it 5 Rom miles from Jericho.
The name has not been recovered, and no identifi-
cation is certain. The position would agree with
that of el-‘Aujeh, about 5 miles N.. of Jericho.


NAARAT, na’a-ri (M192, na‘dray): Son of Ezbai,
one of David’s heroes (1 Ch 11 37). In the ||
passage (2 § 23 35), he is called “Paarai the
Arbite.”’ The true forms of the name and descrip-
tion are uncertain (see Budde, Richter u. Samuel,
and Curtis, Chronicles).


NAARAN, na’a-ran, NAARATH, ni’a-rath
(FW22, na‘drdn, NNV2, na‘drath). See Naarau.


NAASHON, ni’a-shon, nd-ash’on, NAASON,
na‘a-son, NAASSON, n4-as’on (Naacodyv, Naassén):
AV Gr form of ‘Nahshon” (thus RV) (Mt 1 4;
Lk 3 32).


NAATHUS, na’a-thus (Ndéa@es, Ndathos): One
of the sons of Addi who put away his foreign
wife (1 Esd 9 31). It apparently corresponds to
“Adna”’ of Ezr 10 30, of which it is a transposition.
B reads Adéos, Ldthos, probably confusing A and A.


NABAL, na’bal (023, nabhal, “foolish” or
“wicked”; NaBaa, Nabdl): A wealthy man of Maon
in the highlands of Judah, not far from Hebron,
owner of many sheep and goats which he pastured
around Carmel in the same district. He was a
churlish and wicked man (18 25 2ff). When
David was a fugitive from Saul, he and his followers
sought refuge in the wilderness of Paran, near the
possessions of Nabal, and protected the latter’s
flocks and herds from the marauding Bedouin.
David felt that some compensation was due him
for such services (vs 15 and 25), so, at the time of
sheep-shearing—an occasion of great festivities
among sheep masters—he sent 10 of his young men
to Nabal to solicit gifts of food for himself and his
small band of warriors. Nabal not only refused
any assistance or presents, but sent back insulting
words to David, whereupon the latter, becoming
very angry, determined upon the extermination of
Nabal and his household and dispatched 400 men
to execute his purpose. Abigail, Nabal’s wife, a
woman of wonderful sagacity and prudence as well
as of great beauty, having learned of her husband’s
conduct and of David’s intentions, hurriedly pro-
ceeded, with a large supply of provisions, dainties
and wine, to meet David and to apologize for her
husband’s unkind words and _ niggardliness, and
thus succeeded in thwarting the bloody and re-
vengeful plans of Israel’s future king. On her
return home she found her husband in the midst of
a great celebration (“like the feast of a king”),
drunken with wine, too intoxicated to realize his
narrow escape from the sword of David. On the
following morning, when sober, having heard the
report of his wife, he was so overcome with fear
that he never recovered from the shock, but died
10 days later (vs 36-88). When David heard of
his death, he sent for Abigail, who soon afterward
became one of his wives. W. W. Davirs


NABARIAS, nab-a-ri’as (NaBaptas, Nabarias,
B, NaBapelas, Nabareias): One of those who stood
upon Ezra’s left hand as he expounded the Law (1
Esd 9 44). Esdras (loc. cit.) gives only 6 names,
whereas Nehemiah (8 4) gives 7. It is probable


Mythology
Nabataeans


that the last (Meshullam) of Nehemiah’s list is
simply dropped and that Nabarias = Hashbaddanah;
or it may possibly be a corruption of Zechariah in
Nehemiah’s list.


NABATAEANS, nab-a-té’-anz, NABATHAEANS,
nab-a-thé’anz (NaBarate., Nabaiatoi; in I Macc 6
25 & reads dvaBarais ol, anabdiais hoi, V, '’Ava-
Barratos, Anabattaiois; AV Nabathites, more
correctly ‘“Nabataeans’’):

A Sem (Arabian rather than Syrian) tribe whose
home in early Hellenistic times was 8.E. of Pal,

where they had either supplanted or
1. Locality mingled with the Edomites (cf Mal
and Early 11-5). In Josephus’ day they were
History so numerous that the territory be-

tween the Red Sea and the Euphrates
was called Nabatene (Ant, I, xii, 4). They ex-
tended themselves along the E. of the Jordan with
Petra as their capital (Strabo xvi.779; Jos, Ant,
XIV, i, 4; XVII, iii, 2; BJ, 1, vi, 2, etc). Their
earlier history is shrouded in obscurity. Jerome,
Quaest in Gen 25 13, following the hint of Jos
(Ant, I, xii, 4), asserts they were identical with
the Ishmaelite tribe of Nebaioth, which is possible,
though Nebaioth is spelled with M and Nabataeans
with D. They were apparently the first allies of
the Assyrians in their invasions of Edom (cf Mal 1
I ff). They were later subdued by Sennacherib
(Sayce, New Light from the Ancient Monuments,
II, 480), but before long regained their independence
and resisted Ashurbanipal (Rawlinson, note, ad
loc.). According to Alexander Polyhistor (Ir. 18),
they were included in the nomadic tribes reduced
by David. Their history is more detailed from 312
BC (Diod. Sic. xix), when Antigonus I (Cyclops)
sent his general Athenaeus with a force against them
in Petra. After an initial advantage, the army
of Athenaeus was almost annihilated. Demctrius,
the son of Antigonus, was sent against them a few
years later, with little success, though he arranged
a friendship with them. The first prince mentioned
is Aretas I, to whom the high priest Jason fled in
169 BC. They were friendly to the early Macca-
bees in the anti-Hellenistic struggle, to Judas in
164 BC (1 Mace 5 25) and to Jonathan in 160 BC
(9 35).

Teed the end of the 2d cent. BC on the fall

of the Ptolemaic and Seleucid Dynasties, the Na-

bataeans under King Erotimus founded
2. A Strong a strong kingdom extending E. of the
Kingdom Jordan (in 110 BC). Conscious now

of their own strength, they resented
the ambition of the Hasmonean Dynasty—their
former allies—and opposed Alexander Jannaeus
(96 BC) at the siege of Gaza (Jos, Ant, XIII, xiii,
3). A few years later (90 BC) Alexander retaliated
by attacking Obedas I, king of the Nabataeans, but
suffered a severe defeat E. of the Jordan (Jos,
Ant, XIII, xiii, 5; BJ,I,iv, 4). Antiochus XII of
Coele-Syria next led an expedition against the Naba-
taeans, but was defeated and slain in the battle
of Kana (Jos, Ant, XIII, xv, 1-2; BJ, I, iv, 7-8).
Consequently, Aretas III seized Coele-Syria and
Damascus and gained another victory over Alex-
ander Jannaeus at Adida (in 85 BC). The Naba-
taeans, led by Aretas (III ?), espoused the cause of

Hyrcanus against Aristobulus, _be-
8. Conflicts sieged the latterin Jerus and provoked

the interference of the Romans, by
whom under Scaurus they were defeated (Jos, Ant,
XIV,i,4f; BJ,I, vi,2f). Afterthe capture of Jerus,
Pompey attacked Aretas, but was satisfied with a
payment (Jos, ib), and Damascus was added to
Syria, though later it appears to have again passed
into the hands of Aretas (2 Cor 11 32). In 55
BC Gabinius Jed another force against the Naba-


Nabathites
Nahum, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2108


taeans (Jos, ib). In 47 BC Malchns I assisted
Caesar, but in 40 BC refused to assist Herod against
the Parthians, thus provoking both the Idumaean
Dynasty and the Romans. Antony made a present
of part of Malchus’ territory to Cleopatra, and the
Nabataean kingdom was further humiliated by dis-
astrous defeat in the war against Herod (31 BC).

Under Aretas IV (9 BC—40 AD) the kingdcm
was recognized by Augustus. This king sided with

the Romans against the Jews, and fur-
4. End of _ ther gained a great victory over Herod
the Nation Antipas, who had divorced his daughter
to marry Herodias. Under King Abias
an expedition against Adiabene came to grief.
Malchus II (48-71. AD) assisted the Romans in
the conquest of Jerus (Jos, BJ, III, iv, 2). Rabel
(71-106 AD) was the last king of the Nabataeans
us a nation. In 106 AD their naticnality was
broken up by the unwise policy of Trajan, and Ara-
bia, of which Petra was the capital, was made a
Rom province by Cornelius Palma, governor of Syria.
Otherwise they might have at least contributed to
protecting the West against the East. Diodorus
(loc. cit.) represents the Nabataeans as a wild
nomadic folk, with no agriculture, but with flocks
and herds and engaged in considerable trading.
Later, however, they seem to have imbibed con-
siderable Aramaean culture, and Aram. became at
least the language of their commerce and diplomacy.
They were also known as pirates on the Red Sea;
they secured the harbor of Elah and the Gulf of
‘Akaba. They traded between Egypt and Meso-
potamia and carried on a lucrative commerce in
myrrh, frankincense and costly wares (KGF, 4th ed
{1901], I, 726-44, with full bibliography).
Aneus

NABATHITES, nab’a-thits: AV=RV ‘“Naba-

thaeans.”’


NABOTH, na’both, na’both (M22, ndabhoth,
from 233, ntbh, ‘a sprout’; NaPovOal, Nabouthat):
The owner of a vineyard contiguous to the palace
of King Ahab. The king desired, by purchase or
exchange, to add the vineyard to his own grounds.
Naboth, however, refused to part on any terms with
his paternal inheritance. This refusal made Ahab
“heavy and displeased” (1 K 21 4). Jezebel,
the king’s wife, then took the matter in hand, and
by false accusation on an irrelevant charge procured
the death of Naboth by stoning (1 Ik 21 7-14).
As Ahab was on his way to take possession of the
vineyard he met Elijah the prophet, who denounced
his vile act and pronounced judgment on king and
royal house. A temporary respite was given to
Ahab because of a repentant mood (I K 21 27-29);
but later the blow fell, first upon himself in a con-
flict with Syria (1 I< 22 34-40); then upon his
house through a conspiracy of Jehu, in which
Jehoram, Ahab’s son, and Jezebel, his wife, were
slain (2 I< 9 25-26.30 ff). In both cases the cir-
cumstances recalled the foul treatment of Naboth.

Henry WALLACE


NABUCHODONOSOR, nab-t-k6-don’é-sor
(NaPovxoSovorsp, Nabouchodonosér): LXX and
Vulg form of ‘‘Nebuchadnezzar” (“Nebuchad-


rezzar’) found in AV of the Apoe in I Esd 1 40.
41.45.48; 2 10; 5 7; 6 26; Ad Est 11 4; Bar 1
9.11.12. It is the form used in AV of the Apoc
throughout. In RV of Jth and Tob 14 15, the
form ‘‘Nebuchadnezzar”’ is given.


NACON, na’kon, THE THRESHING FLOOR
OF (7122, ndkhin; AV Nachon): The place where
Uzzah was smitten for putting forth his hand to
steady the ark, hence called afterward ‘“Percz-
uzzah” (28 6 8); in the | passage (1 Ch 13 9)


we have 7792, kidhon, and in Jos (Ant, VII, iv, 2)
Xeddv, Cheidin. In 18 23 23 the word nakhon
occurs, and is tr¢ “of a certainty,” m “with the
certainty” or “to a set place’; also in 15 26 4
it is tr¢ ‘of a certainty,” m “to aset place.” It is
uncertain whether in 1 S 6 6 it is a place-name at
all, and no successful] attempt has been made to
identify either Nacon or Chidon; possibly they
are both personal names. E. W. G. MasTERMAN


NACHOR, na’kor (Naxép, Nachér) AV; Gr form
of ‘Nahor” (thus RV). Grandfather of Abraham
(Lk 3 34).


NADAB, nadab (2°12, nddhabh, “noble”; Nadas,
Nadab):

(1) Aaron’s first-born son (Ex 6 23; Nu 3 2;
26 60; I Ch 63 [Heb 5 29]; 24 1). He was
permitted with Moses, Aaron, the 70 elders, and
his brother Abihu to ascend Mt. Sinai and behold
the God of Israel (Ex 24 1.9). He was associated
with his father and brothers in the priestly office
(Ex 28 1). Along with Abihu he was guilty of
offering ‘‘strange fire,” and both ‘‘died before Jeh’’
(Lev 10 1.2; Nu 34; 26 61). The nature of
their offence is far from clear. The word rendered
“strange’’ seems in this connection to mean no
more than “unauthorized by the Law” (see “A1,
ztr, in BDB, and cf Ex 30 9). The proximity of
the prohibition of wine to officiating priests (Lev
10 8.9) has given rise to the erroneous suggestion
of the Midr that the offence of the brothers was
drunkenness.

(2) A descendant of Jerahmeel (1 Ch 2 28.30).

(3) A Gibeonite (1 Ch 8 30).

(4) Son of Jeroboam I and after him for two
years king of Israel (1 K 14 20; 15 25). While
Nadab was investing Gibbethon, a Phili strong-
hold, Baasha, who probably was an officer in the
army, as throne-robbers usually were, conspired
against him, slew him and seized the throne (1 IK
16 27-81). With the assassination of Nadab the
dynasty of Jeroboam was extirpated, as foretold
by the prophet Ahijah (I K 14). This event is
typical of the entire history of the Northern King-
dom, characterized by revolutions and counter-
revolutions. Joun A. LEES


NADABATH, nii’da-bath (NaSafad, Nadabdih;
AV Nadabatha, na-dab’a-tha): A city E. of the
Jordan from which the wedding party of Jambri
were coming when Jonathan and Simon attacked
them and slew very many, designing to avenge the
murder of their brother John (1 Macc 9 37 ff).
Nebo and Nabathaea have been suggested as identi-
cal with Nadabath. Clermont-Ganneau would read
rhabatha, and identify it with Rabbath-ammon.
There is no certainty.


NAGGAI, nag’, nag’i-i (Nayyal, Naggai; AV
Nagge): In Lk 3 25, the Gr form of the Heb name
NoGab (q.v.).


NAHALAL, n@hal-al (0573, nahdlal; B, Bovd-
piv, Baithmdn, A, Naadodr, Naaldl, and other
forms): A city in the territory of Zebulun assigned
with its suburbs to the Merarite Levites, out of
which the Canaanite inhabitants were not driven
(Josh 19 15, AV [incorrectly] “Nahallal”’; 21 35;
Jgs 1 30, “‘Nahalol”), In the Talm Jerus (Meg,
i.1) it is identified with Mahlul. This name might
correspond either with ‘Ain Mahil, or with Ma‘til.
The former lies about 33 miles N.E. of Nazareth
on a hill near the eastern boundary of Zebulun.
The latter is situated about 3} miles W. of Nazareth,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Nabathites


Nahum, Book of


2109
near the southern border of Zebulun. The change
of n to m is not unusual. W. Ewino


NAHALIEL, na-hi'li-el, na-hal’i-el (O8°>D3,
nahalv él, “torrent valley of God’; B, Mavata,
Manaél, A, Naodvhd, Naaliél): A place where Israel
encamped on the way from Arnon to Jericho, named
with Mattanah and Bamoth (Nu 21 19). Onem
places it near to the Arnon. It is natural to seek
for this “torrent valley” in one of the tributaries
of the Arnon. It may be Wddy Wéaleh, which
drains a wide area to the N.E. of the Arnon; or
perhaps Wédy Zerka& Ma‘tn farther to the N.


NAHALLAL, na-hal’al, NAHALOL, ni’ha-lol.
See NAHALAL.


NAHAM, nia’ham (O73, naham, ‘“comfort’’):
A Judahite chieftain, father of Keilah the Garmite
(1 Ch 4 19); the passage is obscure.


NAHAMANTI, ni-ha-ma’ni, na-ham’a-ni (27),
nahamdni, “compassionate’): One of the twelve
heads who returned with Zerubbabel (Neh 7 7).
The name is wanting in the || list (Hzr 2 2). In
1 Esd 5 8heis called ‘“Enenens’ (RVm ‘‘Enenis’’).


NAHARATI, na’/ha-ri (W:, nahdray), NAHARI,
na/ha-ri (“IM2, nahray): One of David’s heroes,
Joab’s armor-bearer (2 8 23 37, AV ‘“‘Nahari’’;
1 Ch 11 39).


NAHASH, nahash (W2, ndhkdsh, “‘serpent’’;
Nads, Nads):

(1) The father of Abigail and Zeruiah, the sisters
of David (28 17 25; cf 1 Ch 2 16). The text
in 2 8, where this reference is made, is hopelessly
corrupt; for that reason there are various explana-
tions. The rabbis maintain that Nahash is another
name for Jesse, David's father. Others think that
Nahash was the name of Jesse’s wife; but it is not
probable that Nahash could have been the name of
a woman. Others explain the passage by making
Nahash the first husband of Jesse’s wife, so that
Abigail and Zeruiah were half-sisters to King David.

(2) A king of Ammon, who, at the very beginning
of Saul’s reign, attacked Jabesh-gilead so success-
fully, that the inhabitants sued for peace at almost
any cost, for they were willing to pay tribute and
serve the Ammonites (18 11 1ff). The harsh
king, not satisfied with tribute and slavery, de-
manded in addition that the right eye of every
man should be put out, as ‘a reproach upon Israel.”
They were given seven days to comply with these
cruel terms. Before the expiration of this time,
Saul, the newly anointed king, appeared on the
scene with an army which utterly routed the Am-
monites (1 8 11 1 ff), and, according to Jos, killed
King Nahash (Ant, VI, v, 3).

If the Nahash of 2 S 10 2 be the same as the king
mentioned in 1 § 11, this statement of Jos cannot be
true, for he lived till the early part of David's reign, 40
or more years later. It is, of course, possible that Na-
hash, the father of Hanun, was a son or grandson of the
king defeated at Jabesh-gilead by Saul. There is but
little agreement among commentators in regard to this
matter. Some writers go so far_as to claim that all
passages in which this name [Nahash] is found refer to
the same individual.”

(3) A resident of Rabbath-ammon, the capital
of Ammon (2 § 17 27). Perhaps the same as Na-
hash (2), which see. His son Shobi, with other
trans-Jordanic chieftains, welcomed David at
Mahanaim with sympathy and snbstantial gifts
when the old king was flceing before his rebel son
Absalom. Some believe that Shobi was a brother
of Hanun, king of Ammon (2 § 10 1).

W. W. Davies


NAHATH, na’hath (12, nahath):

(1) A grandson of Esan (Gen 36 13; 1 Ch 1 37).

(2) A descendant of Levi and ancestor of Samuel
(1 Ch 6 26); also called “Toah” (1 Ch 6 34) and
“Tohu” (18 1 1).

(3) A Levite who, in the time of Hezekiah,
assisted in the oversight of “the oblations and the
tithes and the dedicated things” (2 Ch 31 18).


NAHBI, na’bi ((AM2, nakb7): The representa-
tive of Naphtali among the 12 spies (Nu 13 14).


NAHOR, navhor (110), nahdr; in the NT Naxdp,
Nachor):

(1) Son of Serug and grandfather of Abraham
(Gen 11 22-25; 1 Ch 1 26).

(2) Son of Terah and brother of Abraham (Gen
on eats 22 20.23; 24 15.24.47; 29 5; Josh

A city of Nahor is mentioned in Gen 24 10; the
God of Nahor in Gen 31 53. In AV Josh 24 2;
Lk 3 34, the name is spelled ‘“‘Nachor.”’


NAHSHON, ni’shon (JWM2, nahshin; LXX
and NT, Naaccév, Naassin): A descendant of
Judah; brother-in-law of Aaron and ancestor of
David and of Jesus Christ (Ex 6 23; Nu 1 7;
1 Ch 2 10.11; Ruth 4 20; Mt 1 4; Lk 3 32).


NAHUM, na’hum (Naotp, Naowim; AV Naum):
An ancestor of Jesus in Lk’s genealogy, the 9th
before Joseph, the husband of Mary (Lk 3 25).


NAHUM, na’hum, THE BOOK OF:


I. AuTHorsuir anp Date
1, The Name
2. Life and Home of Nahum
The Four Traditions
3. Date, as Related to Assyrian History
(1) The Revolt of Shamash-shumukin
(2) The Invasion of 625 BC
(3) The Final Attack
(4) Probable Date
II. Tse Boor
1. Contents (Chs 1-3)
2. Style
3. Integrity
III. Teacuina
1. The Character of Jehovah
2. Nahum’s Glee over the Ruin of Nineveh
3. Universality of Jehovah's Rule
4, The Messianic Ontlook
LITERATURE


I. Authorship and Date.—The name Nahum
(DNS, nahtim; LXX and NT Naotp, Naonim;
Jos, Naotimos) oceurs nowhere else
in the OT; in the NT it is found in
Lk 3 25. It is not uncommon in the
Mish, and it has been discovered in Phoen inscrip-
tions. It means “‘consolation,” or “consoler,’’ and
is therefore, in a sense, symbolical of the message of
the book, which isintended to comfort the oppressed
and afflicted people of Judah.

Of the personal life of Nahum, practically nothing


1. Name


isknown. In1 1 heis called “the Elkoshite,” that

is, an inhabitant of Elkosh. Un-
2. Life fortunately, the location of this place
and Home is not known. One tradition, which


cannot be traced beyond the 16th
cent. AD, identifies the home of Nahum with a
modern village Elkush, or Alkosh, not far from the
left bank of the Tigris, two days’ journey N. of the
site of ancient Nineveh. A second tradition, which
is at least as old as the days of Jerome, the latter
part of the 4th cent., locates Elkosh in Galilee, at a
place identified by many with the modern El-
Aauze, near Ramieh. Others identify the home of
the prophet with Capernaum, the name of which
means ‘Village of Nahum.” A fourth tradition,
which is first found in a collection of traditions


Nake


Napam Book of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2110


entitled “Lives of the Prophets,’ says “Nahum
was from Elkosh, beyond Bet Gabre, of the tribe
of Simeon.” A place in the S. is more in har-
mony with the interest the prophet takes in the
Southern Kingdom, so that the last-mentioned
tradition seems to have much in its favor, but abso-
lute certainty is not attainable.

The Book of Nahum centers around the fall and
destruction of Nineveh. Since the capture of the city
is represented as still in the future,
it seems evident that the prophecies
were delivered some time before 607-
606 BC, the year in which the city was destroyed.
Thus the latest possible date of Nahum’s activity
is fixed. The earliest possible date also is indicated
by internal evidence. In3 8 ff the prophet speaks
of the capture and destruction of No-amon, the
Egyp Thebes, as an accomplished fact. The expe-
dition of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, against
Egypt, which resulted in the fall of Thebes, occurred
about 663 BC. Hence the activity of Nahum must
be placed somewhere between 663 and 607.

As to the exact period between the two dates
there is disagreement among scholars. One thing
is made quite clear by the prophecy itself, namely,
that at the time the words were spoken or written,
Nineveh was passing through some grave crisis.
Now we know that during the second half of the
7th cent. BC Assyria was threatened three times:
(1) the revolt of Shamash-shumukin of Babylon
against his brother, the king of Assyria, 650-648
BC; (2) the invasion of Assyria and threatened
attack upon Nineveh by some unknown foe, per-
haps the Scythians, about 625 BC; (3) the final
attack, which resulted in the fall and destruction of
Nineveh in 607-606 BC.

The first crisis does not offer a suitable occasion
for Nahum’s prophecy, because at that time the
city of Nineveh was not in any danger. Little is
known concerning the second crisis, and it is not
possible either to prove or to disprove that it gave
rise to the book. On the other hand, the years
immediately preceding the downfall of Nineveh
offer a most suitable occasion. The struggle con-
tinued for about 2 years. The united forces of the
Chaldaeans and Scythians met determined resist-
ance; at last a breach was made in the northeast
corner of the wall, the city was taken, pillaged and
burned. Judah had suffered much from the proud
Assyrian, and it is not difficult to understand how,
with the doom of the cruel oppressor imminent, a
prophet-patriot might burst into shouts of exulta-
tion and triumph over the distress of the cruel foe.
“Tf.” says A. B. Davidson, “the distress of Nineveh
referred to were the final onc, the descriptions of the
prophecy would acquire a reality and naturalness
which they otherwise want, and the general char-
acteristics of Heb prophecy would be more truly
conserved.” There seems to be good reason, there-
fore, for assigning Nahum’s activity to a date
between 610 and 607 BC. :

Hl. The Book.—Nahum is the prophet of Nine-
veh’s doom. Ch 1 (+2 2) contains the dceree of

Nineveh’s destruction. Jeh is a God
1. Contents of vengeance and of mercy (vs 2.3);

though He may at times appear slack
in punishing iniquity, He will surely punish the
sinner. No one can stand before Him in the day
of judgment (vs 4-6). Jeh, faithful to those who
rely upon Him (ver 7), will be terrible toward His
enemies and toward the enemies of His people (ver
8). Judah need not fear: the present enemy is
doomed (vs 9-14), which will mean the exaltation of
Judah (1 15; 2 2). The army appointed to exe-
cute the deeree'i~ approaching, ready for battle
(2 1-4). All efforts'to save the city are in vain;
it falls (vs 5.6), the queen and her attendants are


3. Date


captured (ver 7), the inhabitants flee (ver 8), the
city is sacked and left a desolation (vs 9-13). The
destruction of the bloody city is imminent (3 1-3);
the fate is well deserved and no one will bemoan
her (vs 4-7); natural strength and resources will
avail nothing (vs 8-11); the soldiers turn cowards
and the city will be utterly cut off (vs 12-18); the
whole earth will rejoice over the downfall of the
cruel oppressor (ver 19).

Opinions concerning the religious significance of
the Book of Nahum may differ, but from the stand-
point of language ard style all stu-
dents assign to Nahum an exalted
place among the prophet-poets of the
ancient Hebrews; for all are impressed with the


2. Style


| intense force and picturesqueness of his language


and style. “Each prophet,” says Kirkpatrick,
“has his special gift for his particular work. Nahnm
bears the palm for poetic power. His short book
is a Pindaric ode of triumph over the oppressor’s
fall.” Soalso G. A. Smith: “His language isstrong
and brilliant; his rhythm rumbles and rolls, leaps
and flashes, like the horsemen and chariots he
describes.”
Until recently no doubts were expressed concern-
ing the integrity of the book, but within recent years
scholars have, with growing unanimity,
3. Integrity denied the originality of 12—22
(Heb 2 3), with the exception of 2 1,
which is considered the beginning of Nahum’s
utterances. This change of opinion is closely bound
up with the alleged discovery of distorted remnants
of an old alphabetic poem in ch 1 (HDB, art.
“Nahum”; Expos, 1898, 207 ff; ZA TW, 1901, 225ff;
Eiselen, Afinor Prophets, 422 ff). Now, it is trne
that in 1 2-7 traces of alphabetic arrangement
may be found, but even here the artistic arrange-
ment is not carried through consistently; in the
rest of the chapter the evidence is slight.


The artificial character of acrostic poetry is generally
supposed to point to a late date. Hence those who be-
lieve that ch 1 was originally an alphabetic poem con-
sider it an exilic or post-exilic production, which was at
a still later date prefixed to the genuine prophecies of
Nahum. In support of this view it is pointed out further
that the prophecy in ch 1 is vague, while the utterances
in chs 2 and 8 are definite and to the point. Some derive
support for a late date also from the language and style
of the poem.

_ That difficulties exist in ch 1, that in some respects it
differs from chs 2 and 3, even the students of the Eng.
text can see; and that the Heb text has suffered in
transmission is very probable. On the other hand, the
presence of an acrostic poem in ch 1 is not beyond doubt.
The apparent vagueness is removed, if ch 1 is interpreted
as a general introduction to the more specific denun-
ciationin chs2and3. Anda detailed examination shows
that in this, as in other cases, the linguistic and stylistic
data are indecisive. In view of these facts it may safely
be asserted that no convincing argument has been pre-
sented against the genuineness of 1 2—2 2. “'There-
fore,’ says G. A. Smith, ‘while it is possible that a later
poem has heen prefixed to the genuine prophecies of
Nahum, and the first ch supplies many provocations to
belief in such a theory, this has not been proved, aud the
able essays of proof have much against them. The
question is open.”’


HIE. Teaching.—The utterances of Nahum center
around a single theme, the destruction of Nineveh.
His purpose is to point out the hand


1. The of Godin the impending fallof the city,
Character and the significance of this catastrophe
of Jehovah forthe oppressed Hebrews. Asaresult


they contain little direct religious teach-
ing; and what there is of it is confined very largely to
theopening vsof ch 1. These vs emphasize the two-
fold manifestation of the Divine holiness, the Divine
vengeance and the Divine merey (1 2.3). The
manifestation of the one results in the destruction
of the wicked (1 2), the other in the salvation of the
oppressed (1 15; 2 2). Faith in Jeh will secure
the Divine favor and protection (1 7).


2111


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA va, Book of


The fierceness of Nahum, and his glee at the
thought of Nineveh’s ruin, may not be in accord
with the injunction, ‘Love thine
2. Nahum’s enemy”; but it should be borne in
Glee over mind that it is not personal hatred
the Ruin that prompts the prophet; he is stirred
of Nineveh by a righteous indignation over the
f outrages committed by Assyria. He
considers the sin and overthrow of Nineveh, not
merely in their bearing upon the fortunes of Judah,
but in their relation to the moral government of the
whole world; hence his voice gives utterance to the
outraged conscience of humanity.
While Nahum’s message, in its direct teaching,
appears to be Jess spiritual and ethical than that
of his predecessors, it sets in a clear


3. Univer- light Jch’s sway over the whole uni-
sality of verse, and emphasizes the duty of
Jehovah’s nations as well as of individuals to
Rule own His sway and obey His will. This


attitude alone will assure permanent
peace and prosperity; on the other hand, disobe-
dience to His purpose and disregard of His rule will
surely bring calamity and distress. The emphasis
of these ethical principles gives to the message of
Nahum a unique significance for the present day
and gencration. “Assyria in his hands,” says
Kennedy, “becomes an object-lesson to the empires
of the modern world, teaching, as an eternal prin-
ciple of the Divine government of the world, the
absolute necessity, for a nation’s continued vitality,
of that righteousness, personal, civic, and national,
which alone exalteth a nation.”
In a broad sense, 1 15 is of Messianic import.
The downfall of Nineveh and Assyria prepares the
way for the permanent redemption and


4. The exaltation of Zion: ‘the wicked one
Messianic shal! no more pass through thee.”
Outlook Lrrerature.—Comms. on_the Minor


Prophets by Ewald, Pusey, Keil, Orelli;
G. A. Smith (Ezpositor’s Bible); Driver (New Cent.);


B. A. Davidson, comm. on_‘‘ Nah, Hab,” ‘“Zeph


(Cambridge_ Bible); A. F. Kirkpatrick, Doctrine of the
Prophets; Eiselen, Prophecy and the Prophets; FP. W.
Farrar, Minor Prophets (‘‘Men of the Bible’’ series);
Driver, Intro to the Lit. ofthe OT; HDB, art. ‘‘ Nahum”;


EB, art. ‘‘ Nahum.
F. C. EIseiren
NAIDUS, na’i-dus (A, Néedos, Ndeidos, B, Na-
at8os, Ndaidos): One of those who had taken
“strange wives’ (1 Esd 9 31), apparently=“Be-
naiah” of Ezr 10 30, of which it is probably a cor-
ruption or the latter part.


NAIL, nal: (1) As denoting the finger-nail, the
Heb word is JIEE, cippdren (Dt 21 12), the cap-
tive woman “shall shave her head, and pare her
nails.’ The latter was probably intended to pre-
vent her from marring her beauty by scratching
her face, an act of self-mutilation oriental women
are repeatedly reported to have committed in the
agony of theirgrief. Aram. 12Q, {phar (Dnl 4 33,
“his nails like birds’ claws’’). (2) As pin or peg (for
tents, or driven into the wall) the word is TH), yd-
thédh (in Jgs 4 21 RV, “‘tent-pin”); in Isa 22 23, “a
nailin asure place” is a peg firmly driven into the wall
on which something is to be hung (ver 24); ef Eccl
12 11, where the word is masm’réth, cognate with
masmér below. (8) For nails of iron (1 Ch 22 3)
and gold (2 Ch 3 9), and in Isa 41 7 and Jer 10
4, the word is VAD) , masmér. (4) In the NT the
word is #os, hélos, used of the nails in Christ’s
hands (Jn 20 25), and ‘“‘tonail” in Col 2 14 (“nail-
ing it to the cross’’) is TpornAbw, proséloo.

In a figurative sense the word is used of the hard
point of a stylus or engraving tool: “The sin of
Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the
point (lit. “claw,”’ “nail’’] of adiamond: it is graven


upon the tablet of their heart, and upon the horns
of your altars” (Jer 17 1). JAMES ORR


NAIN, na’in (Nalv, Nain): This town is men-
tioned in Scripture only in connection with the visit
of Jesus and the miracle of raising the widow’s son
from the dead (Lk 7 11). The name persists to
this day, and in the form of Nein clings to a small
village on the northwestern slope of Jebel ed-Duhy
(“Hill of Moreh’’), the mountain which, since the
Middle Ages, has been known as Little Hermon.
The modern name of the mountain is derived from
Neby Duhy whose wely crowns the height above
the village. There are many ancient remains,
proving that the place was once of considerable size.
It was never inclosed by a wall, as some have
thought from the mention of “the gate.” This
was probably the opening between the houses by
which the road entered the town. Tristram
thought he had found traces of an ancient city wall,
but this proved to be incorrect. The ancient town
perhaps stood somewhat higher on the hill than the
present village. In the rocks to the E. are many
tombs of antiquity. The site commands a beauti-
ful and extensive view across the plain to Carmel,
over the Nazareth hills, and away past Tabor to
where the white peak of Hermon glistens in the
sun. To theS. are the heights of Gilboa and the
uplands of Samaria. The village, once prosperous,
has fallen on evil days. It is said that the villagers
received such good prices for simsum that they cul-
tivated it on a large scale. A sudden drop in the
price brought them to ruin, from which, after
many years, they have not yet fully recovered.

_  W. Ewine

NAIOTH, na‘yoth, nidth (NYY, nayoth; B,
Atdé, Audth, A, Navidé, Nauidth): This is the name
given to a place in Ramah to which David went
with Samuel when he fled and escaped from Saul
(1 § 19 18, etc). The term has often been taken
as meaning “‘houses” or “habitations”; but this can-
not be justified. There is no certainty as to exactly
what the word signified. Clearly, however, it
attached to a particular locality in Ramah; and what-
ever its etymological significance, it denoted a place
where the prophets dwelt together. On approach-
ing it in pursuit of David, Saul was overcome by the
Spirit of God, and conducted himself like one “pos-
sessed,” giving rise to the proverb, “Is Saul also
among the prophets?” W. Ewine


NAKED, na’ked, NAKEDNESS, na’ked-nes:
“Naked” in the OT represents variqus derivatives of
“Ay, “dr, and MY, ‘arah, chiefly DV , ‘arom (adj.)
and MIN, ‘erwah (noun); in the NT the adj. is yur-
vés, gumndés, the noun yepvérns, gumndtées, with vb.
yopvyteto, gunnéteud, in 1 Cor 411. In Ex 32 25;
2 Ch 28 19, AV'adds ¥78, para‘, “break loose,”
“cast away restraint.” Both the Gr and Heb forms
mean “without clothing,” but in both languages
they are used frequently in the sense of “hghtly
clad” or, simply, ‘without an outer garment.”
Sa, probably, is the meaning in Jn 21 7—Peter was
wearing only the ehilén (see Dress); and so per-
hapsin Mk 14 51.52 and Mic 1 8. Jn Isa 20 2-4,
however, the meaning is lit. (for the “three years”
of ver 3 see the comms.). So in Gen 2 25; 3 7,
where the act of sin is immediately followed by the
sense of shame (see Delitzsch, Bib. Psychology, and
Gunkel, ad loc.). A very common use of “naked”
is also “without proper clothing” (Job 22 6; 1 Cor
4 11, etc), whence, of course, the expression “clothe
the naked.” ‘“Nakedness,” in addition, is used as
a euphemism in 1S 20 30. A «lightly different
euphemistic usage is that of sv 18 19, which in
Ezk 16 36.37 is played off against the literal sense


Name
Names, Proper


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2112


(cf Ezk 22 10; 23 18.29). The point of Gen 9
22.23 is a little hard to grasp, but apparently
there is here again a euphemism—this time for a
particularly horrible act (see the comms. and cf
Hab 2 15). Possibly some of these euphemisms
are due to the Massoretes (see OT Texts). The
Jews objected vigorously to exposure of the body
(even athletes insisting on a lom-cloth [cf 2 Mace
4 12.13]), and compulsory nudity was the extreme
of shame and humiliation (Isa 20 2-4; Lam 1 8;
Hos 2 3; Nah 3 5, etc). The relation of this
attitude to Israel’s high sexual morality needs no
explanation. Burton Scott Easton


NAME, nim (OW, sh@m; dvopa, dnoma; Lat
nomen [2 Esd 4 1]; vbs. dvoudtw, onomdzo; Lat
nomino (2 Esd 6 26)): A “name” is that by which
@ person, place or thing is marked and known. In
Scripture, names were generally descriptive of the
person, of his position, of some circumstance affect-
ing him, hope entertained concerning him, etc, so
that ‘the name’ often came to stand for the person.
In Acts 1 15; Rev 3 4, énoma stands for ‘‘per-
sons’; cf Nu 26 53, 55.

I, OT Word and Use.—The word for “name”
in the OT is shém (also the name of one of the sons

of Noah). The etymology is uncer-
1. General tain, although it may be from shémah

(obs.), ‘‘to set a mark’’; shum is the
Aram.form. For the name as descriptive of the per-
son see Names. Besides designating persons, the
name also stands for fame, renown, reputation, char-
acter gained or expressed, etc (Gen 6 4; 2.8 7 9.23,
etc); 1t might be an “evil name” (Dt 22 14.19);
the “name” is also equivalent to a “people” or
“nation” (which might be “blotted out,” 1.e. de-
stroyed [Dt 7 24, etc]); to speak or write “‘in the
name” signified authority (Ex 6 23; 1 K 21 8,
etc); to ‘‘call one’s name”’ over a place or people
indicated possession or ownership (2 5 12 28;
Am 9 12, etc); to act “in the name” was to
represent (Dt 26 6); to be called or known “by
name” indicated special individual notice (Ex 31
2; Isa 43 1; 45 3.4). Gen 2 19.20 even displays
pe of identity between the name and the
thing.

Wy name” is sometimes ’@mar, “to say’ (18
16 3); dabhar, “to speak” (Gen 23 16); ndkabh,
“to mark out” (Nu 1 17); kara’, “to call’ (Gen 48
16; Isa 61 6).


Of special interest is the usage with respect to the name


of God. (For the various Divine names and their sig-
nificance see Gop, Names or.) He re-
2. The vealed Himself to Israel through Moses by
Divine a new name (which was at the same time
that of the God of their fathers)—Jx-
Name HOVAH (q.v.). (Yahweh)—the nature of


which shonld be shown by His manifesta-
tions on their behalf (Ex 3 13-16; 15 2.3). The‘'name
of God was therefore not a mere word, but the whole of"
the Divine manifestation, the character of God as re-
vealed in His relations to His people and in His dealings
with them (Ex 9 16; Josh 7 9; 9 9, etc). The “name
of Jeh’’ was proclaimed to Moses on Mt. Sinai, ‘‘Jeh,
Jeh, 2 God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and
abundant in lovingkindness end truth,’ etc (Ex 34 6);
the name Jehovah (so revealed) was (Ex 8 15) His
‘‘memorial Name’”’ (so, often, in ARV; see Mremonta_).
His sole Deity was snch an important element in His
name that Dt 6 4f was termed the ‘‘Shema’’ (from
shema', “hear,’’ the first word in ver 4), the first article of
Israelitish faith, taught to all the children, written on the
phylacteries, and still recited as the first act in public
and private worship ‘‘twiec a day by every adult male
Jew.’’ Where Jeh is said to record His name, or to put
His name in a place (or person), some special Divine
manifestation is implied, making the place or person
sacred to Him (Ex 20 24; 1 K 8 16). His ‘‘name”
was in the angel of His Presence (2x 23 21); what He
does is “for his great name’s sake,” in fidelity to and
vindication of His revealed character and covenant
relationship (2 Ch 6 32; Ps 25 11); the great things
He should do would he ‘‘for a name’’ (Isa 55 13); He
would give His people a new name, ‘‘an cverlasting
name” (Isa 56 5); tobe ‘'called by” the vame of Jeh is


“to be his people” (2 Ch 7 14; Isa 43 7); it implies
“protection,” etc (isa 63 19; Jer 14 8.9); to “‘call
upon” the name of Jeh was ‘to worship him’’ as God
(Gen 21 33; 26 25, ete); ‘to confess” His name, to
“acknowledge him” (1 K § 33.35); to love, trust, act
in, etc, ‘the name,"’ was to love, trust, etc, Jeh Himself
(Ps 56 11; 7.17). Very frequently, esp. in the Pss and
prophecies of Isa and Jer, ‘“‘the name”’ of God stands for
God himself”; to ‘‘forget his name’’ was ‘‘to depart
from him” (Jer 23 27); ‘to minister, prophesy, or speak”
in His name signified Divine appointment, inspiration,
authority (Jer 11 21; 14 14.15, etc); we have ‘‘swear-
ing by” or ‘tin’ the name of Jeh (Dt 6 13); to take
His name “in vain’’ was to swear falsely (Ex 20 7;
Lev 19 12); we have ‘blessing’ in His name (Dt 10
8); “eursing’ (2 IK 2 24). In Lev 24 11, we have
the case of one who ‘‘blasphemed the Name, and cursed,”’
the penalty for which was death by stoning (vs 13-16).
In later Jewish usage (cf Wisd 14 21) the sacred name
Jeh was not pronounced in reading the Scriptures,
‘ddhondy (‘my Lord’) being substituted for it (the
vowels belonging to 'ddhénady were written with the
consonants of the Divine name), hence the frequent term
"the Lord” in AV, for which ARV substitutes ‘‘Jeh.””


Il, NT Word and Use.—in the NT é6noma has
frequently also the significance of denoting the
“character,” or “work” of the person,

1. Character e.g. Mt 1 21, “Thou shalt call his


and Work name Jesus; for it is he that shall
of the save,” ete (Lk 1 31; 2 21; 1 63,
Person “His nameis John’; ef the new names


given to Simon, James and John;
Saul’s new name of ‘‘Paul”). The “name” of God
has the same relation to the character of God as in
the OT (Mt 6 9; ‘Father, glorify thy name,” Jn
12 28); it is manifested by Christ (Jn 17 26; cf
ver 3); the name of Jesus, as manifesting God,
takes the place of the name of Jeh in the OT (cf Jas
2 7 with Jer 14 9, and see below); to Him is given
“the name which is above every name; that in
the name of Jesus every knee should bow .
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father,”
Phil 2 9.10 (cf Isa 45 23); “It is: not the name
Jesus, but the name of Jesus” (Lightfoot), ie.
the name (“Lord”) received by Jesus; we have
with reference to Jesus simply ‘‘the Name” (Acts


| 6 41, “worthy to suffer dishonor for the Name’;


Jas 5 14 [probable text, WH], ‘in the Name’;
3 Jn ver 7, “for the sake of the Name’); the
“name of Christ” is equivalent to “Christ him-
self” (Mt 10 22; 19 29); it is the same thing as
“his manifestation’ (Jn 20 31); therefore “to
believe on his name” is to believe in Him as mani-
fested in His life and work (Jn 1 12; 2 23); “in
the name of God” means sent by God, as repre-
senting Him, with Divine authority (Mt 21 9; 23
39); in Ike manner, we have “prophesying’’ or
“preaching” in the name of Jesus (Acts 4 18; 6
28). The “name of Jesus” represented His ‘‘author-
ity” and “power,” e.g. working miracles in His
name (Mt 7 22; Mk 9 39; Acts 47, ‘by what
name [or “power’’] have ye done this?’), and it is
contrasted with casting out evil spirits by some
other name or power (Acts 16 18; 19 17). The
gospel of salvation was to be preached “in his
name,” by His authority and as making it effectual
(Lk 24 47); sinners were justified “through his
name” (Acts 10 43; 1 Cor 6 11); sins were for-
given “for his name’s sake” (1 Jn 2 12); men
“called upon the name” of Jesus, as they had done
on that of Jeh (Acts 9 14.21 [cf 7 59]; Rom 10 13.
14).

“To name the name” of Christ to bel to Hi
(2 Tim 2 19); the calling of His Tauerors these aatling
signified their acceptance as God's people (Acts 15 17
[quoted from Am 9 12}; cf Rem 1 5); to ‘hold fast his
name’ is to be true to Him as made known (Rev 2 13;
3 8); to be “gathcred together in his name,”’ to ‘do all
things in his name,” is as ‘‘acknowledging him’ (Mt 18 20;
Col 3 17); “to baptize in” or ‘into the name” of Jesus
Christ (Acts 2 38; 22 16, ‘calling on his name," con-
trasted with baptizing into one’s own name in I Cor 1
13, ets) is ‘‘to call over them his name” (in the rite), as


2113


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Name
Names, Proper


claiming them for Christ and as their acknowledgment

of Him or of faith in Him—becoming His disciples;

similarly, to baptize ‘‘into [es] the name of the Father,

and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,’’ represents

peoeauos to"’ God as He has been revealed in
rist.


“In the name of” means ‘‘as representing’ (or
as being), e.g. “in the name of a prophet,” of ‘a
righteous man,” or of ‘a disciple’ (Mt 10 41.42);
to receive a little child ‘‘in Christ’s name,’’ i.e. as
belonging to Him, is to receive Himself (Mt 18 5;
Mk 9 37; ver 41 to disciples, RV “because ye arc
Christ’s,’’ m ‘Gr in name that ye are [Christ’s]”;
Lk 9 48; cf Mt 18 20; Mk 13 6, ‘Many shall
come in my name’’; Lk 21 8).

The significance of the name of Jesus in relation
to prayer deserves special notice. To pray in the

name of Jesus, to ask anything in


2. In His name, according to His promises,
Relation “Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name,
to Prayer that will I do” (Jn 14 13; cf 14 14;


15 16; 16 23); “Hitherto have ye asked
nothing in my name: ask .. . . that your joy may
be made full” (Jn 16 24), is not merely to add to
our prayers (as is so often unthinkingly done): “we
ask all in the name of Jesus,” or “through Jesus
Christ our Lord,” etc, but to pray or ask as His
representatives on earth, in His mission and stead,
in His spirit and with His aim; it implics union
with Christ and abiding in Him, He in us and we
in Him. The meaning of the phrase is, ‘‘as being
one with me even as] am revealed to you.” Its two
correlatives are “in me” (Jn 6 56; 14 20; 15 4ff;
16 33; cf 1_Jn 5 20), and the Pauline ‘in Christ”
(Westcott, The Gospel according to St. John).

W. L. WaLkKER
NAMES OF GOD. Sce Gop, Nass or.


NAMES, PROPER:


I. Tas Form or Hesrew Names
1. Various Types
2. Vocalization
3. Transposition of Parts
4. Methods of Abbreviation
II. Tue Ranecst or PRopeR NaMEs
1. Personal Names
(1) Not Exclusively Descriptive
(2) Drawn from a Wide Field
(3) Influences Leading to Choice
(4) Popularity of Names: Hard to Determine
2. Geographical Names
TII. Craractseristics oF BrsricaL REFERENCES
1. Derivation of Names Manifest
2. The Narrator’s Only Concern
3. Allusions Linked with Names
I. Form of Hebrew, or, More Broadly, Semitic,
Proper Names.—The Heb proper name consists of
a single word, a phrase, or a sentence.
(1) Where the name is a single word,
other than a vb., it may be (@) a com-
mon noun, concrete, as Barak, “‘light-
ning,” Tola, “crimson worm,” Elon, ‘‘oak,’’ Achsah,
“anklet,’’? Deborah, ‘bee’; or abstract, as Uzzah,
“strength,” Manoah, “rest,” Hannah, ‘‘grace’’;
or either abstract or concrete, as Zebul, “‘habita-
tion’; (6) a participle, as Saul, “asked,” Zeruiah,
“cleft’’; (c) an adj.,as Ikkesh, “perverse,” Maharai,
‘impetuous,’ Shimei, “famous’’; or (d) a word
that may be either an adj. or an abstract noun
according to circumstances. Such are formations
after the norm of kattal, as Shammua’, which arc
generally adjs.; and formations by means of the
ending am or on, as Adullam, Zalmon, Gideon, or,
with the rejection of the final n, Shilo[h] and Solo-
mo(n]. (2) The name may be a phrase, consisting
of (a) two nouns, as Penuel, ‘face of God,” Samuel,
“name of God,’ Ish-bosheth, “man _of shame’’; or
(6) an adj. and a noun, as Jedidiah, “beloved of
Jeh”’; or (c) a preposition and one or more nouns,
as Besodeiah, ‘in the intimacy of Jeh” (Neh 3 6).
(3) When the name is a sentence, the predicate may


1. Various
Types


be (a) a noun, the copula being implied, as Abijah,
“Jeh is a father,” Eliab, ‘God is a father,” Elime-
lech, “God is king’; or (b) an adj., as Tobijah, “Jeh
is good” (Zec 6 10); or (c) a participle, as Obed-
edom, “Edom is serving’; or (d) a finite vb. This
last type exhibits five or six varieties: the subject
stands before a perfect, as Jonathan, ‘“Jeh hath
given,’ Jehoshaphat, “Jeh hath judged,” Eleazar,
“God hath helped,” Elkanah, “God hath formed”’;
or before an imperfect, as Eliahba, ‘‘God hideth
Himself”; or the subject comes after a perfect, as
Benaiah, “Jeh hath built,” Shephatiah, ‘“Jeh hath
judgcd,”’ Asahel, ‘God hath made’’; or after an im-.
perfect, as Jezrecl, “God doth sow.” Very often
the subject is the pronoun included or implied in the
verbal form, as Nathan, “he hath given,” Hillel,
“he hath praised,” Jair, “he enlighteneth,’’ Jeph-
thah, “he opencth.” Occasionally the predicate
contains an object of the vb., as Shealtiel, “I have
asked God” (Ezr 3 2), or'a prepositional phrase, as
Hephzibah, “my delight is in her” (2 K 21 1).
The sentence-name is usually a declaration, but it
may be an exhortation or a prayer, as Jerubbaal,
“let Baal strive,’’ and Hoshea, ‘“‘save!” (Nu 13 16),
or it may be a question, as Micaiah, ‘‘who is like
Jeh?” All of the foregoing illustrations have been
taken from the Books of Jgs and 8, unless otherwise
noted.

The proper name is treated as one word, whether on


analysis it consists of a single word, a phrase, or a sen-
tence; and as such it is subject to the


j. laws of accent and quantity which govern
2. Vocali the Heb word. (1) A common noun used
zation as a name undergoes the variations of


pronunciation due to the custom of
lengthening a short vowel in pause and to the laws
which contro] the aspiration of certain labials, linguals,
and palatals. Thus the name Perez, ‘breach, which
appears also as Pharez in AV of the OT, occurs in
the Heb text in the four forms perec, pare¢g, pheree and
pharee (Ruth 4 18; Neh 11 4.6). (2) In a name con-
sisting of a phrase the normal advance of the accent as
usual causes the loss of a pretonic vowel, as is indicated
by the suspended letter in Jedidiah, ‘‘beloved of Jeh”;
requires a short vowel in a closed unaccented syllable,
as in Mahalal'el, ‘‘praise of God"; allows contraction,
as in Béth-el, ‘house of God'"'; and occasions the return
of a segholate noun to its primitive form, as in Abdiel,
‘servant of God,’’ where the vowel 7 is an archaism which
has lingered in compound names, but has generally dis-
appeared elsewhere in speech. (3) Names which con-
sist of a sentence are also accented as one word, and the
pronunciation is modified accordingly. The synonyms
Eliam and Ammiel, ‘God is a kinsman," not only ex-
hibit the common archaism in the retention of the vowel
z, but the name Eliam also shows the characteristic
Jengthening of the vowel_in the final accented syllable,
so common in nouns. The four forms Eliphelet, Eli-
phalet, Elpelet and Elpalet, meaning ‘‘God is deliver-
ance,"’ represent the variations of the Heb due to the
causes already mentioned (1 Ch 3 8; 14 5.7: see AV
and RV). The requirements regarding the elision and
the quantity and quality of vowels, on the shifting
of the accent, are also regularly met hy the various
types of sentence-names in which the predicate is a vb.
Thus the personal names ‘¢lishéma' and ‘elndthan (subject
followed by vb. in the perfect); ‘elydkim, 'elyahba’, and
ychoyakhin (subject and imperfect); gedhalyah, yekholyaha,
barakh'él, in which the first vowel is protected by the
implied reduplication of the Picl species, bendydah,
‘dsah'él, and ‘désah-'él, ‘dsi'él, hdzah'él and hdzé’él and
pedhah’él (perfect and subject); yigdalyaha, yibhneyah,
ya'dsi'él, yahdt’él, yehallel’él, yestmi’él (imperfect and
suhject); yerubba'al and ydshobh'am (jussive and_suh-
ject; «in sharpened, and 6 in closed, sylable; in Jasho-
beam the first long vowel is retained by a secondary -
accent, marked hy metheg); ndihdn and yiphiah, ie.
Jephthah. ihneiah shows the customary apocopation
of the imperfect of Lamedh-he vbs.; and the names
Benaiah to Pedahel show the methods of combining the
perfect of such ybs. with a following element. The
short vowel of the final closed syllahle of the imperfect
is elided, if the final consonant is permitted to hegin the
syllable of the next element of the name, as in Jezreel,
Jekabzeel, Jerabmeel, Ezekiel, Jehizkiah (see the Heh
form of these names); but it is not elided in Ishmael,
although the consonant is attached to the following syl-
lable; and elision is avoided, as in Jiphthah-el, by keep-
ing the ultimate and penultimate syllables distinct.
Jehucal, a Hophal imperfect, is peculiar in not length-
ening the vowel in the accented final syHable, when the
vb. is used as a personal name.


Names, Proper THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2114


When the name was a sentence in Heb, its con-
stituent parts could be transposed without chang-
ing the meaning. Thus the father
3. Transpo- of Bathsheba was called Ammiel, “a
sition of kinsman is God,” and Eliam, “God is
Constituent a kinsman’ (28 113; 1 Ch 3 5);
Parts and similarly, in letters written from
Pal to the king of Egypt in the 14th
cent. BC, Himilki is also called Milkili, the name
in either form signifying “God is king.’ Ahaziah,
king of Judah, is called Jehoahaz (cf 2 Ch 21 17
with 22 1), a legitimate transposition of the vb.
and subject, and meaning in each case, ‘“Jeh hath
laid hold.”

Not only did transposition take place, but the sub-
stitution of a cognate root and even the use of a differ-
ent part of the vb. also occurred. Thus King Jehoiachin
(2 K 24 6; Jer 52 31) was known also as Jeconiah
(Jer 24 1; 28 4) and Coniah (22 24.28; 37 1). The
two names Jehoiachin and Jeconiah have exactly the
same meaning, ‘‘Jeh doth establish’'; and Coniah is a
synonym, ‘‘the establishing of Jeh.” The Divine name
which begins Jehoiachin is transferred to the end in
Jeconiah and Coniah; and the Hiphil imperfect of the
vb. kin, which is seen in Jehoiachin, has been replaced
hy the Qal imperfect of the vb. kanan in Jeconiah, and
by the construct infinitive of the same species in Coniah.
Parallel cases occur in Assyr and Bab lit., among which
the two forms of the king's name, Zamama-shum-iddina
and Zamama-nadin-shum, exhihit hoth the transposition
of constituent parts and an interchange of preterite and
participle.

Twin forms like Abiner and Abner, Abishalom
and Absalom, Elizaphan and Elzaphan, are not the

full name and its abbreviation by
4. Methods syncopation, but are merely two
of Abbre- variant, equally legitimate, modes of
viation combining the constituent parts. The

_common methods of shortening were:
(1) contraction by the rejection of a weak consonant
or the apocopation of a final unaccented vowel,
notably illustrated by the Divine name yhd at the
beginning and yaha at the end of proper names:
hence Jehoash became Joash (2 K 12 1.19), and
Amaziahn became Amaziah (2 K 14 1 Heb text,
and 8); (2) abbreviation of composite geographical
names by the omission of the generic noun or its
equivalent: Jerusalem, which to the Hebrews meant
“foundation of peace,” was shortened to Salem,
“peace” (Ps 76 2); Wiriath-baal, “city of Baal’?
(Josh 15 60), to Baal or Baalah (Josh 15 9.10;
ef 28 6 2); Beeshterah, “house or temple of
Astarte,” to Ashtaroth; Beth-lebaoth, “house of
lionesses,’”’ to. Lebaoth; Beth-azmaveth to Az-
maveth; Beth-rehob to Rehob; Beth-bamoth to
Bamoth (M§, |. 27, with Nu 21 19); Beth-baal-
meon to Baal-meon (Nu 32 38; Josh 13 17); the
same custom existed among the Moabites who spoke
of this town indifferently as Beth-baal-mcon and
Baal-meon (M §, ll. 9, 30); (3) abbreviation by the
omission of the Divine name: thus the name of the
idolater Micaiah, which means, “who is like Jeh?”
(Jgs 17 1.4 [Heb]), was shortened to Micah, “who
is like?” (vs 5.8); and similarly in the case of
three other men, namely the prophet (Micaiah,
Jer 26 18 ERV, and Micah, Mic 1 1), the Levite
musician (Neh 12 35 with 11 17.22), and_the
father of Abdon (2 K 22 12 with 2 Ch 34 20).

The king of Judah, Yauhazi, as he was known to the
Assyrians, i.e. Jehoahaz, “ Jeh hath laid hold," is called
simply Ahaz, ‘‘he hath laid hold,’ in the Heh records.
The town of Jabncel, ‘‘God doth cause to be built,” was
shortened to Jabneh, ‘he doth cause to be huilt'’ (Josh
15 11; 2 Ch 26 6; ci i Macc 4 15); Paltiel, ‘‘deliver-
ance of God," was curtailed to Palti, ‘deliverance’
(1 S 25 44; 2 8 3 15); Abijah, ‘'Jeh is father,” to Ahi
(2 Ch 29 1 with 2 K 18 2); and_Bamoth-baal, “high
places of Baal,’’ to Bamoth (Josh 13 17 with Nu 21 19).
Abdi, Othni, Uzzi, and not a few other similar names,
probably represent curtailment of thissort. The omission
of the Divine title has parallels in Assyr and Bah lit.:
thus Nabu-nadin-ziri and Nahu-shum-ukin were called
Nadinu and Shum-ulkin respectively (Dynastic Tablet
no. 2, col. iv, 4,5, with Bab Chron., col. i, 13, 16).


(4) Abbreviation by the elision of the initial con-
sonant, yet so that the remainder is a synonymous
name of complete grammatical form. The name of
King Hezekiah was written by the Hebrews both
yhizkiyah, “Jeh doth strengthen,” and hizkiydh,
“Jeh is strength.’”?’ The two forms interchange
many times in 2 Ch 29-33. Similarly, Jeconiah
was shortened to Coniah, as has already been no-
ticed; the name of the town Jekabzeel, “‘God bring-
eth together,” to Kabzeel, ‘“God’s bringing to-
gether’ (Neh 11 25 with Josh 16 21; 2 S 23 20);
Meshelemiah, ‘Jeh is recompensing,”’ to Shelemiah,
“Jeh’s recompensing” (1 Ch 26 1.2 with ver 14);
Meshullam, ‘“recompensed,’’ to Shallum, ‘‘recom-
pensed” (1 Ch 9 11; Neh 11 11 with 1 Ch 6 12;
Ezr 7 2).

II. The Range of Proper Names.—(1) Not ez-
clusively descriptive——Simonis in his Onomasticum,

published in 1741, and Gesenius in his
1. Personal Thesaurus, issued during the years
Names from 1835 to 1858, endeavored to in-

terpret the proper names as though
they were ordinarily intended to characterize the
person who bore them. Embarrassed by the theory,
Gesenius tr4 Malchiel by “rex Dei, h. e. a Deo con-
stitutus’; and Simonis tr? Malchi-shua by “regis
auxilium, i.e, auxilium s. salus regi patri praestita’’;
Ammizabad was rendered by Gesenius “famulus
largitoris, h.e. Jehovae,”’ and by Simonis “populum
(i.e. copiosissimam liberorum turbam) donavit’’;
Gesenius tr? Gedaliah “quem Jehova educavit vel
reboravit,”’ Zerahiah “cui Jehova ortum dedit,”
Jehozadak “quem J ehova justum fecit,” and Joel “eni
Jehova est deus, i.e. cultor Jehovae’’; but Simonis
rendered Joel by “‘Jehoua (est) Deus . . . . vel (cui)
Jehoua Deus (est).’”? Now Malchiel means “God is
king,” Malchi-shua “‘the king, i.e. God, is salvation”
(ef Joshua), Ammizabad “the Kinsman hath en-
dowed,” Gedaliah “Jeh is great,’ Zerahiah “Jeh
hath risen in splendor,” Jehozadak “Jeh is right-
eous,” and Joel, if a compound name, ‘“Jehis God.”
A moment’s reflection makes clear that these names
do not describe the persons who bear them, but in
every case speak of God. They emphasize the
important facts that personal names might be, and
often were, memorial and doctrinal, and that per-
sonal] names were a part of the ordinary speech of the
people, full of meaning and intelligible to all, subject
to the phonetic laws of the Hebrews, and obedient
to the rules of grammar.

(2) Drawn from a wide field—Parents named
their children, and contemporaries dubbed people,
from physical and spiritual traits, whether a beauty
ora blemish; thus Hophni, ‘pertaining to the fist,”
Japhia, “gleaming,” Ikkesh, ‘perverse,’ Ira,
“watchful,” Gareb, “rough-skinned,”’ and Hiddai,
“joyful.”? Children were called by the names of
natural objects, as Peninnah, “coral,” Rimmon,
“pomegranate,” Tamar, ‘palm tree,’ Nahash,
“serpent,” Eglah, “heifer,” Aiah, “bird of prey,”
and Laish, “lion”; or after kinsfolk or remoter
members of the clan, as Absalom’s daughter Tamar
bore the name of her father’s beautiful sister, and
as the priest Phinehas took his strange name from
the noted Phinehas, who belonged to the same
father’s house in earlier days. Or the name given
to the child furnished a memorial of events in the
national history, like Ichabod, “the glory is not”
(18 4 21), and probably Obed-cdom, “Edom is
serving” (cf 1 S 14 47; 21 7); or it told of cir-
cumstances attending the child’s birth, as Saul,
“asked,” and Elishama, “God hath heard”; or it
embodied an article of the parent’s creed, as Joab
and Abijah, “Jeh is a father,” Joel, “Jeh is God”;
or it expressed a hope concerning the child or bore
witness to_a prophecy, as Jedidiah, “beloved of
Jeh,” and Solomon, “peaceable” (2 S 12 25; 1 Ch


2115


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Names, Proper


22 9). Sometimes the name of the tribe or race
to which a man belonged became his popular desig-
nation, as Cushi, ‘Cushite.’”’ All of these examples
have been cited from the records of one period of
Israel’s history, the times of Samuel and David.

(8) Influences leading to choice.—The pcople in
genera] gathered names for their children frecly
from all parts of this wide field, but in certain circles
influences were at work which tended to restrict
the choice to a smaller area. These influences were
religious: (a) In homes of piety conscious nearness
to God on the part of the parents naturally prompted
them to bestow religious names upon their children.
The name may be without distinct religious mark
in its form and meaning, as Ephraim, ‘double fruit-
fulness,” Manasseh, “making to forget,’’ and yet
have been given m acknowledgment of God’s
grace and be a constant reminder of His goodness
(Gen 41 51.52); or the name may be religious in
form, as Shemaiah, “Jeh hath heard,” and publicly
testify to the parents’ gratitude to God. (b) The
covenant relation, whieh Jeh entered into with
Israel, made the name Jehovah, and that aspect of
God’s character which is denoted by this name,
peculiarly precious to the people of God, and thence-
forth the word Jehovah became a favorite element
in the personal names of the Israelites, though not,
of course, to the exclusion of the great name El,
“God.” (c) Among the kings in the line of David,
the consciousness of their formal adoption by Jeh
to be His vicegerents on the throne of Israel (2 8
7; Ps 2) found expression in the royal names. Jeh,
the God of Israel, was acknowledged in the personal
name Abijah, borne by the son and successor of
Rehoboam. But his was an isolated case, unless
the name Asa is an abbreviated form. But with
Jehoshaphat, Abijah’s grandson, early in the 9th
cent., the custom became established. Henceforth
it was conventional for the king of Judah to have
for his name a sentence with Jeh as its subject.
The only exceptions among the 16 successors of
Asaon the throne were Manasseh and his son Amon,
both of whom were notoriously apostate from Jeh.
The full name of Ahaz was Jehoahaz. Josiah’s
son Shallum as king was known as Jehoahaz; and
his brother Eliakim, when placed on the throne
by Pharaoh-necoh, was given the name Jehoiakim.
(d) Akin to the influence exerted by the relation of
the kings to the God of Israel, and manifesting
almost equal power contemporaneously with it,
was the influence of official connection with the
sanctuary, either as priests or as subordinate min-
isters, and it frequently led to the choice of an
ecclesiastical name containing the word God or Jeh.
During the five centuries and a half, beginning near
the close of Solomon’s reign and extending to the
end of Nehemiah’s administration, 22 high priests
held office, so far as their names have been pre-
served in the records. Of these pontiffs 17 bear
names which are sentences with Jeh as subject, and
another is a sentence with E] as subject. The ma-
terials for investigation along this line are not com-
plete, ag they are in the case of the kings, and ratios
derived from them are apt to be erroneous; but
evidently the priests of Jeh’s temple at Jerus not
only recognized the appropriateness for themselves
and their families of names possessing a general
religious character, but came to favor such as ex-
pressly mentioned God, esp. those which mentioned
God by His name of Jehovah.

(4) Popularity of names: hard to determine.—
Until abundant data come to light for all periods
of the history, it is precarious to attempt to de-
termine the relative popularity of the various kinds
and types of names in any one generation, or to
compare period with period with respect to the use
or neglect of a particular class of names. For,


first, in no period are the names which have been
transmitted by the Heb records many as compared
with the thousands in use at the time; and, secondly,
the records deal with the historical event which
was conspicuous at the moment, and rarely mention
persons other than the actors in this event.


At one time men and women from the middle class of
society are asserting themselves in the national life, and
the personal names current in the families of farmers,
shopkeepers and soldiers obtain place in the annals; at
another time, when the activities of the court are of
paramount importance, it is mainly names that were
current in official circles which are chronicled; at yet
another period, when matters of the national worship
engaged the attention of the state, ecclesiastics and a
men from pious families, whose names were quite likely
to have a religious meaning, receive mention. Very few
names outside of the particular circle concerned are pre-
served in the records. It is unwarranted, therefore, to
draw inferences regarding the relative use of particular
names, secular names, for instance, at different periods
of the history of Israel, by comparing the numher of
these names found in a record of political uprisings in
the army with the numher of similar names in the narra-
tive of an episode which occnrred at a later date and in
which only pues took part. It is comparing things
that differ. Itis comparing the number of certain names
current in military circles with the numher of the same
names among ecclesiastics, in order to learn whether
these names were more common among the people as a
whole in the one period than in the other.


The brine of its waters Jed the ancient, Hebrews
to call the Dead Sea the Salt Sea. Bethesda,
‘house of mercy,’ received its name


2. Geo- from the belief in the healing virtue
graphical of its waters; Lebanon, “white,” from
Names the snows that cover its crest; Sidon


on the Mediterranean Sea and Beth-
saida on the Sea of Galilee, from their fisheries;
Tyre, from the great rock in the sea on which it
was built; the valley of Elah, from the terebinth
tree; Luz, from the almond tree; Shittim, from the
acacia groves on the eastern terrace of the Jordan
valley; and Jericho, from the fragrance of its palms
and balsams. The ‘“‘crags of the wild goats” and
En-gedi, “kid spring” (1 8 24 1.2), werein a deso-
late, rocky region where the wild goats had their
home; Aijalon signifies “place of harts,” and Etam
denotes a “place of beasts and birds of prey.” The
hopes of a people and pride in their town were ex-
pressed in names like Joppa, “beauty,” Tirzah,
“pleasantness,” Janoah, ‘rest,’ Shiloh, “tran-
quillity,” and Salem, ‘‘peace.” The resemblance
of the Sea of Galilee in shape to a harp secured for
it its ancient name of Chinnereth. Poetic imagina-
tion saw in majestic Mt. Hermon likeness to a
soldier’s breastplate, and forthwith the mountain
was called Serion and Senir. The sanctuary of a
deity might give name to a town, hence Beth-dagon,
Beth-anath, and Ashtaroth. Sometimes the name
of a place commemorated a victory, as rock Oreb,
rock Zeeb, and Eben-ezer (Jgs 7 25; 18 7 12);
or enshrined a religious transaction or experience,
Beth-el and Beracah (Gen 28 17-19; 2 Ch 20 26);
or told of a migration, as when colonists gave the
name of their native town to their new settlement
Jgs 1 23-26). Often the name of the founder or
other famous inhabitant became attached to a town,
and that for various reasons. It was often neces-
sary to distinguish places of the same name from
each other by thismethod; thus certain of the towns
called Gibeah became Gibeath-saul and Gibeath-
phinehas. The Jebusite stronghold captured by
David was named by him the city of David, and
was known by this name, as a quarter of Jerus, for
many generations (28569; 2 K 16 20). The
practice was common among the Sem contem-
poraries of Israel, as is illustrated by Dur-sharruken,
“Sargonsburg,” and I<ar-shalmanasharidu, ‘“Shal-
maneser’s fortress.” A town might also be named
after the tribe which inhabited it or after the an-
cestor of the tribe, as Dan (Jgs 18 29), and possi-


Names, Proper
Nanaea


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2116


bly under not a few geographical designations a
tribal name is hidden, even when the fact has es-
caped record and is not revealed by the form of the
name. In an inquiry after the origin of a geo-
graphical designation the first consideration is due
to the causes known to be ordinarily at work in
giving rise to names of the same aspect as the one
under scrutiny; and only when they fail to yield
a suitable explanation are less obvious causes
worthy of serious attention.

Hf, Characteristics of Biblical References.—As
a rule, Sem words clearly reveal their origin and


structure. The Semite might, indeed,
1. Deriva- err with respect to the particular
tion of meaning intended, where a word was
Names current In several significations. Thus
Manifest the vale of bakhda’, mentioned in Ps 84


7 (Eng. 6), is open to two interpreta-
tions: namely, ‘“‘valley of Baca,’ so called from the
balsam trees in it, and ‘valley of weeping,” as the
VSS render the unusual form, regarding it as equiva-
lent to a similar word meaning “weeping.” The pl.
b’kha@’im, “mulberry or balsam trees” (2 8 5 23.
24), was understood by Jos to denote a grove known
by the name Weepers (Ant, VII, iv, 1; ef LXX).
In those rare cases where several derivations were
possible, the Israelite may not always have known
which thought was intended to be embodied in the
name which he heard. But he discerned the alter-
native possibilities; and a parent, in bestowing a
name ambiguous in its derivation, might be de-
liberately taking advantage of its power to be the
vehicle for the suggestion and expression of two
thaughts (Gen 30 23.24; Joseph being derivable
from both yasaph and ’dsaph).

That the object of the Bib. writer was not to
make known the derivation of the proper names is
clear from cases like Esek, Rehoboth


2. The and Ishmael (Gen 16 11; 26 20.22):
Narrator’s Isaac called thenamce of the well, Con-
Only tention, because the herdsmen of
Concern Gerar “contended” with him; another


well he called Broad Places (roomy
places), because Jeh had “made room’ for him;
and Hagar was directed to name the son that she
was about to bear “God doth hear,” because Jeh had
“heard” her affliction. The narrator’s purpose was
not to declare that the Heb word for contention,
‘ések, is derived from the Heb vb. for “contend,”
‘asak, and that the name “God doth hear,” yish-
ma” él, signifies God doth hear, yishma‘ ’é. These
derivations and meanings were plain. The pur-
pose was to state the circumstances which led
to the choice of the name. There are instances
also where no part of the name reappears in the
words that state the reason for the use of the name.
For example, the name Maher-shalal-hash-baz is
not explained by citing the words which compose it.
One noun of the composite name appears, Indeed,
in the exposition of the meaning, but accidentally
as it were, and without prominence or significance
of position (Isa 8 3.4). Samuel is a notable ex-
ample of this method. Hannah called his name
Samuel, saying, ‘Because of Jeh I asked him’ (1 8
1 20). Simonis, Ewald and Nestle derive the name
from sh°mi*'’él, “heard of God.” This etymology
would fully satisfy the reason given for the mother’s
choice of the name; but the suggested derivation
is far-fetched, for it is not customary for a Heb word
to lose the strong guttural ‘ayin. The guttural
was not lost, but was distinctly heard, in Ishmael,
where there is the same concurrence of sounds as
in sh¢mi*’él. WKimhi, on the other hand, suggested
that Samuel is a contraction of sh@ al m@ al, “asked
of God”; and Ewald asserts that this origin is the
theory of the narrator (Lehrbuch der hebrdischen
Sprache, 275, n. 3). This is incredible. Such a


contraction is “alien to the genius of the Heb lan-
guage’ (Driver, Text of Samuel, 13), and the ab-
sence of the two consonants aleph and lamedh before
the letter m in the midst of the name Samuel would
of itself prevent the Semite from imagining such
an etymology. The derivation and meaning of
Samuel were not obscure. The type was common,
and was esp. familiar by reason of the name Peniel,
“face of God” (Gen 32 30f). Samuel means ‘name
of God” (Gesenius). As Jacob, upon his return
from Paddan-aram, in fulfilment of his vow erected
an altar at Beth-el as a memorial of God’s bestowal
of the promised blessings and named the place thus
consecrated ‘The God of Beth-el” (Gen 35 1.3.7),
so Hannah having by vow dedicated to Jeh the
son for whose birth she was praying, now that her
prayer has been answered and the son given, calls
him ‘“The name of God” in commemoration of the
Giver. The Bib. narrator states the motive which
led the mother to choose the name Samuel for her
child. In this explanation no part of the name is
used. Moreover, the slight assonance between
shema’éd and sh’ilttwin 18 1 20 was unsought, for
these words are separated in the Heb text, and the
emphasis is placed on the gift’s being “from Jeh.”
The history of the discussion concerning this name
shows how far astray criticism has been led by the
false theory that the purpose of the narrator was to
analyze the name and declare its derivation.


Renhen affords evidence to the same effect. The
name was known to the early Hebrews in this form exclu-
sively. It is attested by their most ancient literature
(Gen 29 32; 30.14; Jgs 5 15.16), by the entire OT,
by the Gr tr (A, B and Lucian), by the Tgs, and hy the
NT (Rev 7 5). Yet in the 1st cent. Jos, adding a Gr
termination, wrote Rouhelos; and later the Syr version
gave the name _as Rdhil, and the Ethiopic version as
R6b6l and Rubel. The late variation is reasonably ex-
plained as a softening of the pronunciation, which had
come into vogue in certain circles. The liquids, or, to
speak particularly regarding Reuben, the liquids n and J,
sometimes interchanged, giving riso to two forms for a
word in the same language cr in kindred languages
(Gesenius, Thesaurus, 727; Wright, Comp. Grammar,
67; Zimmern, Vergleichende Grammatik, § lla). Not-
withstanding the evidence furnished hy the literature,
preference has been given to Reubel as the original form
on the ground that ‘‘the enly plausible explanation of
the etymology’ given in Gen 25 32 ‘is that it is hased
on the form” Re'ibel =Re’& ba'al (Skinner, Gen, 386).
An _ exhibition of the etymology was needless, however,
and was not the end which the writcr had in view. His
purpose was to state the occasion for bestowing this par-
ticular namo upen the child; and in stating it he does
full justice to the clear meaning of the good, simple Heb
of the name Reuhen. The name signifies either “‘ vision
of a son” or “Behold ye! a son.” In either case the
emphatic word is “‘son.’’ As Hannah, taunted on account
of her harrenness, hesought God to look on her affliction
and give her a man-child (1 8 1 11), se Leah, using the
same words, speaking of the same mercy already shown
her, and with the same thought in mind, exclaimed:
“Jeh hath looked upon my affliction; for now my hus-
hand will love me,’’ and she called the name of her scn
“Leck ye! It's ason”’ (or, “vision of ason”). A male
child was te her a proof of God’s regard for her misery,
and a guaranty of the future love of her hushand for her.
Moreover, the name kept the thought constantly before
the mind of her husband. Gesenius remarks that
Reuben means “‘ properly, ‘See ye, a son!" but the sacred
writer in Gen 29 32 explains it as for ra’ ah (ra' ay) be'onyt,
‘provided in my affliction’” (Lericon, Thesaurus). This
curious specimen of criticism may he regarded as the
reductio ad absurdum of the hypothesis that the Heb
writers intend to give the derivation of the proper names,
The result of endeavoring to force the words of the ex-
planation into an intentional etymology compels tho
assumption that the Heb writer misunderstocd one of the
simplest. phrases of his own language and prepesed a
contraction impossible in itself and utterly foreign to the
principles which underlie Heb speech.


Allusions to proper names are made for the pur-
pose of stating the reason for the bestowal of the
name, of pointing out a coincidence

3. Allusions between the name and the character
Linked with or experience of its bearer, or of attach-
Names ing a prophecy; and it is common to
Fj link the allusion with the name by em-
ploying the root that underlies the name, or a cog-


2117


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Names, Proper


Nanaea


nate root, or some other word that resembles the
name in sound: (1) Statement of the reason for the
choice of the name: In the ease of Simeon, the root
of the name is used (Gen 29 33). Words of this
type (with the termination on) are formed from
nouns and vbs., and have the force of adjs., dimin-
utives, or abstract nouns, and are sometimes used
as concrete nouns (Stade, Lehrbuch der hebrdischen
Grammatik, § 296). The Israelite at once recog-
nized the root and formation of the name Simeon,
which was a favorite with the Hebrews, and he
knew that it_could express the abstract idea of
hearing. In Gen 29 33 the narrator is not secking
to impart etymological information; but it is clear
that he discerned the derivation when he gave the
reason for the choice of this particular name for
Leah’s second son: “‘(Leah] said, Because Jeh hath
heard that I am hated, he hath therefore given me
this son also: and she called his name Simeon.”
The root of the name is used as a vb. in the state-
ment of the motive. Jt was convenient and natural
to do so, since the vb. shkama‘ was the proper word
to express the idea and was one of the most common
words in the language. There would be no reason
to suppose that identity with the root of the name
was intentional, except that care is taken by the
narrator in the case of the other sons of Jacob to
maintain a similar correspondence. Accordingly,
that form of paronomasia is employed where a word
is used that is one with the name in derivation, but
differs from the name in form and grammatically
is a different part of speech.

In the case of Cain a cognate root is used. The
name is a segholate noun from the root kun, which
means ‘‘to form,’’ and then specifically to form at
the anvil. Cain may accordingly be an abstract
noun and denote formation, or a concrete noun
denoting a forged weapon, or the agent in the
work, namely a smith. In stating the reason for
giving this name to the child, it was not feasible
to use the vb. kun, because of the technical mean-
ing which had become attached to it. To avoid
misunderstanding the cognate vb. kdnah is em-
ployed, which has radically the same significance,
but is without the technical implications (Gen
41). The result is that kind of paronomasia which
exists between words of similar sound and cognate
origin, but difference of meaning.

In the case of Noah a root unrelated to the name in
origin, but containing a similar sound, is used. The Bib.
narrator does not state whether the name Noah is the
transliteration of a foreign word or is its tr into Heb;
he merely declares that as given it expressed the father’s
hope that through this child men were to have reliet
from the ancient curse upon the ground. If the name is
Heb, its root may be nauh, ‘‘rest."’ At any rate it
promptly suggested to the ear of the Hebrew the idea of
rest. But the vb. nuh is used in Heb, as is the corre-
sponding vb. ‘‘rest’’ in Eng., to express the two ideas
of relief and cessation. Lamech did not mean that his
son would cause men to cease from work, but that he
would secure for them restful relief from toil due to God's
curse on account of sin (Gen § 29, with a reference to
3 17-19). Tho writer does not use the ambiguous word.
To avoid ambiguity, yet with a view to preserving asso-
nance with Noah, he employs the vb. ndham, which has
as one of its meanings the sense of comfort and relief.


(2) The indication of a coincidence between the
character or experience of a person and his name:
Naomi, returning to her home bereaved and in
poverty, saw the contrast between her present
condition and her name; and she played upon her
name by using a word of opposite meaning, saying:
‘Call me not Pleasant, call me Bitter; for the
Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me’ (Ruth
1 20). In whatever sense Nabal’s name may have
been bestowed upon him originally, at any rate his
wife saw the correspondence between his name in
its ordinary meaning and his conduct toward David,
and she played upon it, saying: ‘Fool is his name,


and folly is with him’ (1 S 25 25). Likewise the
agreement between Jacob’s character and a mecan-
ing that his name has in Heb was scen, and called
forth the bitter word-play: ‘Is he not rightly
named ‘‘He supplants’”’? for he hath supplanted me
these two times’ (Gen 27 36). Isaac, so far as
the formation is concerned, may be an abstract noun
meaning “laughter,” or a concrete noun, “laughing
one,” or a vb. in the imperfect, “he laughs” or ‘“‘one
laughs” (cf Stade, Lehrbuch der hebriiischen Gram-
matik, § 259a). Whichever specific meaning may
have been in the mind of Abraham when he gave
the name to his son, yet by reason of its ever speak-
ing of laughter the name was a constant reminder
to the parents of the laughter of unbelief with which
they had listened to the promise of his birth (Gen
17 17; 1812). But in due time the child of
promise has been born. His name, as determined
upon, is Isaac. This Sarah knows (17 19; 21 3).
Accordingly, the theme with which she greets his
advent is laid in her mouth. She plays upon the
name Isaac, using the root of the word in various
forms, first as a noun and then as a vb., and giving
to the vb. a new subject and to the thought a new
turn. Instead of the laughter of unbelief, with
which the promise was received, ‘God,’ she says,
‘hath prepared for me laughter [of joy], everyone
that heareth [of the event] will laugh [with joy] for
me’ (21 6; cf Ps 126 2).

(8) Attachment of a prophecy to a name: Paro-
nomasia in all of its forms is used for this purpose.
A meaning of the name, or a sound heard in it, or
a contrast suggested by 1t may be played upon. In
these several ways the prophet Micah plays upon
successive names in one paragraph (Mic 1 10-15).
In answer to Abraham’s prayer in behalf of Ishmael,
a promise is given concerning the lad, which is in-
troduced by a play upon his name: ‘As for the boy
[named] ‘‘God heareth,” I have heard thee’ (Gen
17 18.20). To Gad a prophecy is attached in Gen
49 19. Two cognate roots are employed: gadhadh,
which underlies the word rendered troop or maraud-
ing band, and gidh, which means ‘‘to press.”” In
the use not only of the root of the name Gad, but of
a different root also that is similar in sound, it is evi-
dent that the purpose is simply to play upon the
name. The brief oracle is uttered almost exclu-
sively by means of variations in the vocalization of
the two roots, producing one of the most. successful
word-plays in Heb literature.

Judah is a noun corresponding to the Hophal imper-
fect, and_means ‘‘thing being praised,’’ ‘“‘object of
praise.’ In ect § this name upon her child the
mother signified that Jeh was the object of_her praise;
for she said: ‘‘ Now will I praise Jeh’’ (Gen 29 35). In
Gen 49 8 aprophecy is spoken concerning Judah. The
same etymology and meaning are recognized as before,
but the application is different. The birth of Judah had
made God an object of praise, the great deeds of the tribe
of Judah were destined to make that tribe an object of
praise. To quote the oracle: _‘ ‘Object of praise,’’ thee
shail thy brothers praise.’ In this difference of refer-
ence and in the repetition of the significant word con-
sists the play upon the name.

Dan is played upon in much the same way. The name
may be a participle, used as a noun, and be rendered
“judge’’; but it probably belongs to that numerous
class in which the names are vbs. in the perfect, and sig-
nifies, ‘‘he hath judged.’’ His adoptive mother had
called his name Dan, because God had heard her_com-
plaint and decided the cause in her favor (Gen 30 6).
In attaching the prophecy, the name is played upon by
changing the subject, and, in order to refer to the future,
by substituting the imperfect for the perfect of the vb.:
‘He hath judged”’ shall judge his people, as_one of the
tribes of Israel’ (Gen 49 16). Sce also Gop, Names oF;
NAME.

Joun D. Davis

NANAEA, na-né’a (Navala, Nanaia; AV Nanea):
A female deity worshipped by the Assyrians, Baby-
lonians and Persians and other Asiatic peoples,
the Nana or Nanai of the Babylonians, known as
“the lady of Babylon.” The name means “the


Naomi
Napkin


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2118


undefiled,” and probably represented originally the
productive powers of Nature (genetrix), and as such
was the compauion of the sun-god. She was identi-
fied with Ishtar in Assyria and Ashtoreth in Phoe-
nicia, by the Greeks as Aphrodite (Clem. Alex.
Protr., 19), but sometimes as Artemis the huntress
(Paus. ii1.16.8; Plut. Arlax. xxvii). Strabo (xv.
733) identifies her with Anaitis (=Anahita), the
Asian Artemis. She was the Venus, but sometimes
the Diana, of the Romans. There are many
variauts of the name: Anaeca (Strabo xvi.738),
Aneitis (Plut. Artaz. xxvii), Tanais (Clem. Alex., loc.
cit.), also Tanath, sometimes in Phoen inscriptions,
Tanata, Anta (Egyp). In 2 Mace 1 13 ff, a ficti-


tious account is given of the death of Antiochus.


Epiphanes, in a temple of Nanaea in Persia, by the
treachery of Nanaea’s priests. ‘The public treasury
was often placed in Nanaea’s temple; this, Epi-
phanes was anxious to secure under the pretext of
marrying the goddess and receiving the money as a
dowry. ‘The priests threw down great stones “like
thunderbolts” from above, killed the king and his
suite and then cut off their heads. But J Macc 6
1 ff, which is more reliable, gives a different account
of the death of Epiphanes after an attempt to rob
arich temple in Elymais. The account of 2 Mace
113 ff must be mere legend, as far as Epiphanes is
concerned, but may have been suggested or colored
by the story of the death of Antiochus the Great,
who met his death while plundering a temple of
Belus near Elymais (Strabo xvi.1.18; Diod. Sic.
573; Justin, xxxii.2). The temple of Nanaea
referred to in 2 Mace 1 13ff may be identified
with that of Artemis (Polyb. xxxi.11; Jos, Ant,
XI, ix, 1) or Aphrodite (Appian, Syr. 66; Rawlin-
son, Speaker’s Comm.). 5S. ANGUS


NAOMI, né’6-mi, na-d’mi, n&é-d’mi ("092,
no‘émi, probably = “pleasantness”; LXX B, Noe-
pelv, Noemein, A, Noeupel{v], Noemmei[n]): Wife
of Elimelech and mother-in-law of Ruth (Ruth
1 2—4 17). She went with her husband to the
land of Moab, aud after his death returned to
Bethlehem. When greeted on her return, she told
the women of the town to call her, not no‘ém7
(“pleasantness’”’), but m@raéh (“bitterness”), ‘‘for,”’
she said, ‘‘the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly
with me.”’ She advised Ruth in her dealings with
Boaz, and afterward nursed their child.

The name may mean “my joy,” “my bliss,” but
is perhaps better explained according to the tradi-
tional interpretation as “the pleasant one.”


Davip Francis Roperts
NAPHATH-DOR, nia‘fath-dér (Josh 12 23
RVm). See Dor.


NAPHISH, ni‘fish (U"D], naphish; Nadés,
Naphés, D, Nadbé&, Naphéth): A son of Ishmael
(Gen 26 15;1 Ch 131). Naphish, along with
other Hagrite clans, was overwhelmingly defeated
by the Israelitish tribes on the E. of the Jordan
(1 Ch 6 19, AV “Nephish”). Their descendants
are mentioned among the Nethinim by the name
“Nephisim,” AV and RVm ‘“Nephusim’” (Ezr
2 50); ‘‘Nephushesim,” AV and RVm ‘“Nephi-
shesim” (Neh 7 52); ‘‘Naphisi” (1 Esd 6 81).


NAPHISI, naf‘i-si (Nadiol, Naphisi, B, Nadewel,
Napheisei): The name of one of the families which
went up out of captivity with Zerubbabel (1 Esd
6 31)=“Nephushesim” of Neh 7 52; ‘‘Nephisim’”’
of Ezr 2 50. See Napuisn.


NAPHOTH-DOR, ni’foth-dér (Josh 11 2RVm).
See Dor.


NAPHTALI, naf’ta-li (5D2, naphtali; Ned-
Qarelp, Nephthaleim):


I. Tue PatrRiaRcnH
1. Name
2. Circumstances of His Birth
3. Historical and Traditional Details
It. Trips or Napata.i
. Its Relative Position —
. Its Location in Palestine
. Physical Features ,
. Distinction of the Tribe
. Sites and Inhabitants
Labors of Jesus in This District


I. The Patriarch.—The 5th son of Jacob, and


Poa oboe


‘the 2d born to him by Rachel’s handmaid, Bilhah.


He was full brother of Dan (Gen 30
1. Name 7 ff). Ean
At his birth Rachel is said to have
exclaimed, naphtalé 'élohim niphtalli, “wrestlings
of God’—i.e. “mighty wrestlings’—‘“‘have
wrestled.” Her sister’s fruitfulness
2. Circum- was a sore trial to the barren Rachel.
stances of By her artifice she had obtained chil-
His Birth dren, the offspring of her maid ranking
as her own; and thus her reproach of
childlessness was removed. The name N. given
to this son was a monument of her victory. She
had won the favor and blessing of God as made
manifest in the way yearned for by the oriental
heart, the birth of sons. ;
Personal details regarding the patriarch N. are
entirely wanting in Scripture; and the traditions
have not much to say about him.


3. Histori- According to Tg Pseudojon, he was a


cal and swift runner. It also tells us that he
Traditional was one of the 5 brethren whom Joseph
Details chose to represent the family of Jacob


in the presence of Pharaoh. He is said
to have been 132 years old at his death (Test. XII P,
vili, 1,1). When Jacob and his family moved to
Egypt, N. had 4 sons (Gen 46 24), In Egypt, he
died and was buried.
I, Tribe of Naphtali.—When the first census
was taken in the wilderness, the tribe numbered
53,400 fighting men (Nu 1 48; 2 30).
1. Relative At the second census, the numbers
Position had shrunk to 45,400 (Nu 26 48 ff);
but see Numpers. The position of
Naphtali in the desert was on the N. of the taber-
nacle with the standard of the camp of Dan, along
with the tribe of Asher (Nu 2 25 ff). The stand-
ard, according to Jewish tradition, was a serpent,
or basilisk, with the legend, ‘‘Return of Jehovah to
the many thousands of Israel” (Tg Pseudojon on
Nu 2 25). When the host was on the march, this
camp came in the rear (Nu 2 31). The prince of
the tribe at Sinai was Ahira ben Enan (2 29).
Among the spies the tribe was represented by
Nahbi ben Vophsi (13 14). Prince Pedahel ben
Ammihud was chosen from N. to assist in the di-
vision of the land (84 28). Toward the end of
David’s reign the ruler of the tribe was Jeremoth
ben Azriel (1 Ch 27 19). Hiram the Tyrian
artificer is described as “‘the son of a widow of the
tribe of N.” (1 K 7 14). But in 2 Ch 2 14 he
is called “the son of a woman of the daughters of
Dan.” Jgs 615 does not definitely associate
Barak with the tribe of Issachar; his residence was
at Kedesh (Jgs 4 6); it is therefore possible that
he belonged to the tribe of N.
In the allocation of the land, the lot of N. was the
last but one to be drawn (Josh 19 32-39). The
_ boundaries are stated with great ful-
2. Location uess. While it is yet impossible to
in Palestine trace them with certainty, the identi-
; fication of sites in recent years, for
which we are mainly indebted to the late Col.
Conder, makes possible an approximation. The
territory was bounded on the E. by the Sea of


2119


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Naomi
Napkin


Galilee and the upper reaches of the Jordan. Jos
makes it extend to Damascus (Ant, V, i, 22); but
there is nothing to support this. The southern
boundary probably ran from the point where Wady
el-Bireh enters the Jordan, westward along the
northern side of the valley to Mt. Tabor. The
western border may have gone up by way of Hattin
(Ziddim) and Ydakak (Hukkok) to Kefr ‘Anan
(Hannathon), bending there to the W., including
the land of er-Ra@meh (Ramah) until it reached the
territory of Asher. Running northward again until
nearly opposite Tyre, it bent eastward, and once
more northward to the Litény (Leontes), taking in
the larger part of what is called by the Arabs Beldd
Beshérah and Belaéd es-Shukif. Nineteen cities
in N. are named in Josh 19 32 ff. Among them
was the famous city of refuge, KEDESH-NAPHTALI
(q.v.), on the heights to the W. of the Waters of
Merom, where extensive ruins are still to be seen
(20 7). Wt, along with Hammoth-dor and Kartan,
was assigned to the Gershonite Levites (21 23;
1 Ch 6 76).

The land lying around the springs of the Jordan
was ineluded in the lot of N. Itis clear that from this
part, as well as from the cities named in Jgs 1 33,
N. did not drive out the Canaanites. These the
Danites found in possession at the time of their
raid. There is no indication that N. resented in
any way this incursion of their kindred tribe into
their territory (Jgs 18).

The district thus indicated includes much excel-
lent land, both pastoral and arable. There are the

broad, rich terraces that rise away to
3. Physical the N. and N.W. of the Sea of Galilee,
Features with the fertile plain of Gennesaret

on the seashore. The mountains imme-
diately N. of the sea are rocky and barren; but
when this tract is passed, we enter the lofty and
spacious lands of upper Galilee, which from time
immemorial have been the joy of the peasant farmer.
Great breadths there are which in season yield
golden harvests. The richly diversified scenery,
mountain, hill and valley, is marked by a finer
growth of trees than is common in Pal. The tere-
binth and pine, the olive, mulberry, apricot, fig,
pomegranate, orange, lemon and vine are cultivated
to good purpose. Water is comparatively plentiful,
supplied by many copious springs. It was one of
the districts from which Solomon drew provisions,
the officer in charge being the king’s son-in-law,
Ahimaaz (1 K 4 15).

The free life of these spacious uplands, which
yielded so liberally to the touch of the hand of in-

dustry, developed a robust manhood


4. Dis- and a wholesome spirit of independence
tinction of among its inhabitants. According to
the Tribe Jos, who knew them well (&J, HI,


ili, 2), the country never lacked mul-
titudes of men of courage ready to give a good
account of themselves on all oceasions of war. Its
history, as far as we know it, afforded ample oppor-
tunity for the development of warlike qualities.
In the struggle with Sisera, N. was found on the
high places of the field (Jgs 5 18). To David’s
forces at Hebron, N. contributed a thousand cap-
tains “and with them with shield and spear thirty
and seven thousand” (1 Ch 12 34). Their position
exposed them to the first brunt of attack by enemies
from the N.; and in the wars of the kings they bore
an important part (1 K 15 20; 2 K 12 18; 13
22); and they were the first on the W. of the Jordan
to be carried away captive (2 K 16 29). See
GALILEE.

The largest town in Mt. Naphtali today is Safed,
on the heights due N. of the Sea of Galilee, often
spoken of as the “city set on a hill.” It is built
in the form of a horseshoe, open to the N., round


the Castle Hill, on which are the ruins of the old
fortress of the Templars. This is a position of

ereat strength, which could hardly fail
5. Sites and to be occupied in ancient times,
Inhabitants although, so far, it cannot be identi-

fied with any ancient city. It con-
tains between 20,000 and 30,000 inhabitants. Over
against it to the N.W., beyond the deep gorge of


Naphtali: Safed.


Waddy Leimin, rises Jebel Jermuk, the highest
mountain in Pal proper (c 4,000 ft.) which may be
the scene of the TRransricuraTion (q.v.). The
inhabitants of Safed were massacred by Sultan
Bibars in 1266. The city suffered severely from
earthquake in 1759; and it shared with Tiberias,
also a city of N., the disaster wrought by the earth-
quake of 1837. It is one of the holy cities of the


Jews.

In the land of N. Jesus spent a great
6. Labors part of his public life, the land of
of Jesus Gennesaret, Bethsaida, Capernaum


and Chorazin all lying within its
boundaries (cf Mt 4 15). W. Ewinc


NAPHTALI, MOUNT ((2MD2 “WG, har naphtali;
év tH Open tH NeOarel, en td dret ts Nephthalei):
This was the most northerly of the three divisions
of the Western Range, which derived their names
from those of the tribes holding chief sway over
them—Mt. Judah, Mt. Ephraim, and Mt. Naphtali
(Josh 20 7 AV, RV replaces ‘‘Mount” by “‘the hill
country of’’).


NAPHTHAR, naf’thar (AV): RV “Nephthar.”


NAPHTUHIM, naf-ti’him (OAD) , naphiahim;
LXX Ned@arelp, Nephihaleim): A son of Mizraim
(Gen 10 138; 1 Ch 111); but, according to most
modern authorities, a district or a dependency of
Egypt. Among the many efforts at identification
the following deserve notice: Naphtuhim = (1)
Nephthys (Népévs, Néphihus) in the N.E. of Egypt;
(2) Na-ptah, i.e. the people of Ptah, the dwellers
in the neighborhood of Memphis; (3) Nathu (ac-
cording to Herodotus, Na@, Nathé), which occurs
in Assurbanipal’s Annals as the name of a part of
Lower Egypt; (4) Erman (ZATW, X, 118), by the
change of a lctter, reads Petemhim, which signifies
“The Northland”; (5) Spiegelberg sees in the word
an old designation of the Delta, and would therefore
render the name, “the people of the Delta” (cf Johns,
HDB; Skinner and Holzinger on Gen).

Joun A. Lrxzs

NAPKIN, nap’kin (covSdpiov, souddrion; Lat
sudarium): In Lk 19 20, the cloth in which the
“unprofitable servant” wrapped the money of his
lord; ef Jn 11 44; 20 7; see Dress, 7; Hanp-
KERCHIEF.


Narcissus
Natural, Nature


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2120


NARCISSUS, nar-sis’us (Napklooos, Narkissos):
In Rom 16 11 St. Paul sends greetings to “them
of the household of Narcissus, that are in the Lord.”
“The last words may suggest that, though only the
Christians in this household have a greeting sent
to them, there were other members of 1t with whom
the church had relations” (Denney).

Narcissus is a common name, esp. among freed-
men and slaves. But, as in the case of Aristobulus,
some famous person of this name must be meant.
Conybeare and Howson mention two, one the well-
known favorite of Claudius, the other a favorite of
Nero. The latter, who was put to death by Galba
(Dio Cass. Ixiv.3), they think to be the Narcissus
meant here (St. Paul, ch xix). On the other hand,
Bishop Lightfoot (Phil, 175) holds that ‘the power-
ful freedman Narcissus, whose wealth was pro-
verbial [Juv. Sat. xiv.329], whose influence with
Claudius was unbounded, and who bore a chief
part in the intrigues of this reign, alone satisfies
this condition.” Shortly after the accession of
Nero, he had been put to death by Agrippina (Tac.
Ann. xiiil; Dio Cass. 1x.34) in 54 AD. As this
occurred three or four years before the Ep. to the
Rom was written, some think another Narcissus
is meant. However, as was usual in such cases,
his property would be confiscated, and his slaves,
becoming the property of the emperor, would swell
“Caesar’s household” as Narcissiani.

S. F. Hunter

NARD, nard. See Spikenarp.


NASBAS, nas’bas (NacBas, Nasbds, 8, Napds,
Nabdd, read by Fritzsche): A name otherwise un-
known. It occurs only in Tob 11 18, “And Achia-
charus, and Nasbas his brother’s son,” came to
Tobit’s wedding. Opinions are divided asto whether
he was “brother’s son” of Tobit or Achiacharus.
AVm gives the suggestion of Junius, ‘‘Achiacharus
who is also called Nasbas,” thus identifying Nasbas
with Achiacharus, which might gain support from
1 22 where Achiacharus is mentioned as ‘“‘brother’s
son’ of Tobit. See AcuracHarus; AMAN. & reads
‘“Achiacharus and Nabad his brother’s sons,’’ which
is corrected by another hand to “brother’s son”
(é&ddexpos, exddelphos). The Itala gives ‘“Nabal
avunculus [‘‘maternal uncle”) illius’; the Vulg
““Nabath consobrini [‘‘cousins’’] Tobiae”; Syr “Laban
his stster’s son.”’ This person is probably identical
with the ‘“‘Aman” of Tob 14 10 (see variety of read-
ings under AMAN) and the nephew in Harris’ Story
of Ahikar and His Nephew. 8. ANcus


NASI, na’sé (B, Nacel, Nasei, A, Naol0, Nasith;
AV Nasith): The head of one of the families which
went up with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 5 32)=‘Neziah”
of Ezr 2 54; Neh 7 56.

NASOR, ni’sor. See Hazor,

NATHAN, na’than (JD, ndihan, “gift”; Naédv,
Nathin): A court prophet in David’s reign and a
supporter of Solomon at his accession. There are
three main incidents in his carcer as depicted in the
OT.

The two || narratives, 2S 7 1-17=1 Ch 17
1-15, of which the former is the original, relate how

David confided to Nathan his inten-
1. Nathan tion to build a house for Jeh’s ark.
and David’s Nathan at first blesses the project, but
Temple- that same night is given a Divine mes-
Plans sage, and returns to tell the king that

instead of David building a house for
Jeh, Jeh will build a house for David: “I willset up
thy seed after thee, . . . . and I will establish his
kingdom. .... I will be his father, and he shall be


my son: if he commit iniquity, I will chasten him
with the rod of men” (2 8 7 12-14). Ver 13 says
that ‘“He shall build a house for my name, and 1 will
establish the throne of his kingdom for ever,” but
this disturbs the one great thought of the passage,
which is that God will build a house for David, and
which is also the thought in David’s prayer (vs
18-29). t

The word ''seed"’ in ver 12 is collective and so through-
out the passage, so that the prophecy does not refer to
any Individual, but, like Dt 17 14-20; 18 15-22, be-
longs to the group of generic prophecies. Nor is it
Messianic, for ver 14 could not be reconciled with the
sinlessness of Jesus. The message is rather a promise
of the ever-merciful providence of Ged in dealing with
David's family. (See, however, C. A. Briggs, Messianic
Prophecy, 126 ff.) Budde, who says that the section be~
longs to the 7th cent. and is certainly preéxilic in the
leading thought of the passage, sees in_the prophecy
something of the idealism of Amos and Hosea, for the
prophet teaches that Jeh dwells, not in ‘‘a holy place
made with hands” (He 9 11.24), but rather in the life
of the nation as represented by the direct succession of
Davidic kings. This presents an extension of the
teaching of Paul that the very body itself is a sanctuary
unto God (1 Cor 6 19).

2S 12 1-25 narrates Nathan’s rebuke of David
for his adultery, and for causing the death of

Uriah; and then comes an account of
2. Nathan the death of Bathsheba’s child. In
and David’s vs 1-15a, we have Nathan’s parable
Sin of the rich man and the poor man’s
ewe lamb, and the application of it to

David’s conduct. But several difficulties arise
when we ask exactly what Nathan’s message to
David was: vs 13f represent the prophet as saying
that God has forgiven David but that the child
will die, while vs 10-12 speak of a heavy punish-
ment that is to come upon David and his family,
and ver 16 does not show any indication of a proph-
ecy as to the child’s death. Commentators regard
vs 1-15a as later in origin than chs 11, 12 in the
main, and hold vs 10-12 to be still later than the
rest of vs 1-15a. Budde omits vs 9a8. 10aba.11.12,
but regards even the rest of the story as interrupt-
ing the connection between 11 27b and 12 15b,
and therefore of later date.

1 K 1 isa part of “one of the best pieces of Heb
narrative in our possession” (H. P. Smith, OT Hist,


153, n. 2). It narrates the part that
3. Nathan Nathan played in the events that led
and Solo- to Solomon’s accession. David was
mon’s getting old and feeble, and the suc-
Accession cession had not been scttled. When


Adonijah, who was probably the eldest
son living, gave a banquet to some of his father’s
state officials, Nathan, who was one of those that
had not been invited, incited Bathsheba, Solomon's
mother, to remind David of his promise to her that
Solomon should succeed to the throne. This she
did, and in the middle of her audience with David,
Nathan appears with the news of Adonijah’s feast
and proclamation as king. Solomon is then
anointed king by David’s command, Nathan being
one of his chief supporters. It has been suggested
that it is only Nathan who interprets Adonijah’s
feast as a claim to the throne, but this con-
tradicts ver 5. Yet, whereas in the two sections
treated above Nathan is the prophet of Jeh, he is
represented in 1 K as an intriguing court politician,
planning very cleverly an opportune entrance into
David’s presence at the very time that Bathsheba
has an_ audience with the king. The || narrative of
1 Ch 28 makes no mention of Nathan, Solomon
being there represented as Divinely elected to suc-
ceed David.

1 K 4 5 mentions a Nathan as father of Azariah and


Zahud, two of the chief officers of Sol : i
probably the prophet. Pea oe


1 Ch, 29 29; 2 Ch 9 29 refer to ‘‘the words" or
rather ‘the acts of Nathan the prophet" as well as those


2121


of Samuel and Gad. ‘There can be no douht that these
are nothing more than references to the narratives in
which Samuel, Nathan and Gad are mentioned in our
Books of Samuel”’ (Curtis on 1 Ch 29 29). In 2 Ch 29
25, sanction 1!s claimed for Levitical temple-music as
being commanded by God throngh Nathan and Gad.

Curtis (on 1 Ch 29 29) observes that Nathan is
always called nabhi’ (‘prophet’) in 8 and K and not
ré’eh or hézeh, ‘‘seer."’


NATHAN:

(1) A prophet (28 7; Ps 61, title). See pre-
ceding article.

(2) A son of King David (2 8 6 14; 1 Ch 3 5;


14 4).

(83) Father of Igal, one of David’s heroes (2 8
23 36). In1 Ch 11 38, we have “Joel the brother
of Nathan’; LXX B has ‘‘son” in this ver, but
it is impossible to say whether Igal or Joel is the
correct name.

(4) A Jerahmeelite (1 Ch 2 36), whose son is
called Zabad, whom some suppose to be the same
as Zabud (1 K 4 5). On this view this Nathan is
the same as the prophet (see 1, above).

(5) A companion of Ezra from Babylon (Ezr 8
16 and 1 Esd 8 44).

(6) Nathanias (1 Esd 9 34), one of those who
had married foreign wives (Ezr 10 39).

(7) Name of a family (Zec 12 12).

Davin Francis Roserts

NATHANAEL, na-than’a-el (Na@avaqA, Nathan-
aél):

(1) One of the “captains over thousands” who
furnished the Levites with much cattle for Josiah’s
Passover (1 Esd 1 9)=“‘Nethanel” of 2 Ch 35 9.

(2) (Nafardydos, Nathandélos, BA om): One of
the priests who had married a “‘strange wife” (1 Esd
9 22)=‘‘Nethanel” of Ezr 10 22.

(3) An ancestor of Judith (Jth 8 1).

(4) One of the Twelve Apostles. See next article.


NATHANAEL (203, n’than’él, “God has
given”; No®avand, Nathanaél): Nathanael, who
was probably a fisherman, belonged to Cana in
Galilee (Jn 21 2). According to the “Genealogies
of the Twelve Apostles” (ef Budge, Contendings of
the Apostles, II, 50), N. was the same as Simon,
the son of Cleopas, and was one of the Twelve.
He was among those who met and conversed with
Jesus during the preaching of John the Baptist at
Bethany beyond Jordan (cf Jn 1 28). th
manner of the invitation extended to him by Philip
(Jn 1 45), it is evident that N. was well versed in
ancient Scripture, and that in him also the preach-
ing of John had aroused a certain expectancy. His
reply to Philip, “Can any good thing come out
of Nazareth?”, (Jn 1 46), was prompted, not by
any ill reputeof the place, but by its petty insignif-
icance and familiarity in N.’s eyes. To this ques-
tion Philip made no direct answer, but replied,
“Come and see.” It was the answer best fitted
to the man and the occasion; it appealed to
N.’g fair-mindedness and sincerity of purpose. He
responded nobly to the call, and on approaching
Jesus was received with the words: ‘‘Bchold, an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!’ (Jn
1 47). It was a tribute to that singleness of heart
which enabled him to overcome his initial preju-
dice. The same candor and openness distinguished
the after-interview of N. with Jesus, as is evident
by his question, “Whence knowest thou me?” (Ju
1°48). The reply of Jesus was not what he ex-
pected. It concerned the time he had spent under
the fig tree, kneeling, no doubt, in silent prayer and
communion with God, and brought to mind all the
sacred hopes and aspirations of that hour. It
taught him that here was One who read on the
instant the inmost secrets of his heart, and was
Himself the ideal for whom he was seeking; and it


Davin Francis RoBerts


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


From the |


Narcissus
Natural, Nature


drew from him the confession, “‘Rabbi, thou art the
Son of God; thou art King of Israel’? (Jn 1 49).


Although N. is mentioned by name only once agaln
In the NT, where he is one of the seven who witnessed
the appearance of the risen Jesus at the Sea of Tiberias
(In 21 2), it is evident that the connection and com-
panionship of N. with Jesus must have heen much closer
than those two incidents would lead us to suppose.
Accordingly, attempts have been made to identify him
with other NT characters, the most commonly accepted
heing Bartholomew (cf BarraoLtomew). The principal
arguments in support of this identification are: (1) N.
is never mentioned hy the synoptists, and Bartholomew
Is never mentioned hy John, who further implies that N.
was one of the twelve disciples (cf Jn 20 24-26; 21 2);
(2) in the Synoptists, Philip is closely connected with
Bartholomew (cf lists of the apostles), and in John with
N. (cf Jn 1 45 ff}; (3) the fact that most of tho other
apostles hear two names. Arguments are also adduced
to identify him with Simon the Cananaean (cf Srmon).
N. has also been identified with Matthew and Matthias
(hased on the similarity of name-meanings), with John
the son of Zehedee, with Stephen, and even with Paul.

. M. Kerr

NATHANIAS, nath-a-ni’as (Na@avias, Natha-
nias): One of those who put away their foreign


wives (1 Esd 9 384)=“Nathan” of Ezr 10 39.


NATHAN-MELECH, na’than-mé'lek (F327 70),
nthan-melekh, “king’s gift”): A Judaean official,
to whose chamber King Josiah removed ‘‘the horses
of the sun” (2 K 23 11). LX*X calls him “Nathan,
the king’s eunuch” (Na@av Baoidéws roi ebvodyou,
Nathdn basilé6s tow eunotichou).


NATIONS, na’shunz. See GEnTILES;
HEATHEN; TABLE or Nations,


NATIVITY, na-tiv’i-ty, OF MARY, GOSPEL
OF THE. See ApocryPHaL GOsPELs.


NATURAL, nat/t-ral, NATURE, na’tir (9,
lé*h; wWuxexds, psuchikds, buovxds, phusikds, dtors,
phiisis):

“Natural” is the tr of 1éh, “freshness or vigor”


Goi;


(Dt 34 7). Of Moses it is said, “His eye was not
dim, nor his natural force abated.”
a aa Weed ‘*Nature’’ in the sense of a system or


constitution does notoccurinthe OT. The
world and men, each individual, were con-
ceived as being the direct creation of a supra-mundane
God, and conserved by His power and Spirit. The later
conception of ‘’ nature’’ came in through Gr influences.

_ In the Apoc, we find “nature” in the sense of
innate character or constitution (Wisd 7 20, ‘“‘the
natures [phiisets} of living creatures”; 13 1, ‘Surely
vain are all men by nature’ [phisei], 3 Macc 3
29, “mortal nature” [phusis]).

_ Inthe NT “nature” (phusis) is frequently found
in the latter sense (Rom 1 26, “against nature’;
2 14, “by nature”; 2 27; 11 24, also


2. As Used “contrary to nature’; 1 Cor 11 14,
inthe NT ‘Doth not even nature itself teach
ou?”’; Gal 215; 48; Eph 2 3;


?
in 2 Pet 1 4, we have “that ye might be partakers
of the divine nature,’ RVm “or, a’’); phusis occurs
also in Jas 3 7, “every kind of beasts,” RVm “Gr
nature,” also “mankind” (ver 7), RVYm “Gr the
human nature.” ‘Natural’ (Rom 11 21.24) is
the tr of katé phisin, “according to nature.” Paul
in 1 Cor speaks of ‘‘the natural man” (2 14, ARVm
“or unspiritual, Gr psychical”) and of a ‘natural
body” (15 44 bis), the Gr word being psuchikos,
“of the soul’”’ (psuché), the animal, natural, principle,
as contrasted with what pertains to the higher
principle of the spirit (pnedima). In 1 Cor 15 46
the contrast is expressed, ‘‘Howbeit that is not first
which is spiritual, but that which is natural,” ARVm
“Gr psychical.” The “natural man” is the man in
whom the spirit is unquickened, the “natural body”
is that corresponding to the psychical or soul-nature,
the “spiritual body” that corresponding to the Spirit


Natural Feature
Nazareth


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2122


as the dominant principle of the life. In Jude ver
10, we have phusikés, “naturally,” “naturally, as
brute beasts,” RV “naturally, like the creatures
without reason”; génesis, “origin,” “birth,” is tr4
“natural” (Jas 1 23, “his natural face,” RVm “Gr
the face of his birth’); and “nature” (3 6, “the
course of nature,” RV “the wheel of nature,”
m “or birth”) (‘‘wheel’’ probably means “circle
of nature” [the whole creation; see Courss]);
gnéstés, ‘genuine’ (“true to right nature”), “legiti-


mate,” “sincere,” is tr? “naturally” (Phil 2 20,
“who will naturally care for your state,” RV-
“truly,” m “Gr genuinely”). W. L. WALKER


NATURAL FEATURES, fé’tirz: As has been
pointed out by various authors (cf HGHL), the
principal physical features of Pal run in N. and 8.
lines, or rather about from 8.8.W. to N.N.E.

The lowland or Shephelah (AV ‘‘vale, valley,
plain, or low country’’) includes the maritime plain
and the western foothills.

The hill country consists of the mountains of
Judaea, and its features are continued northward to
the plain of Esdraelon and southward to the Sinaitic
peninsula. It is rocky and has very little water.
Except for the few fountains, the scanty population
depends upon rain water collected during the winter
months.

The Arabah (RV) includes the Jordan valley
from the Sea of Galilee to the Dead Sea, as well as
the depression running from the Dead Sea to the
Gulf of Akabah. It is to the latter depression that
the name Wéddi-ul-‘Arabah is now applied by the
Arabs. It is bounded on the E. by Mt. Seir or
Edom, and on the W. by the mountains of the
Sinaitic peninsula. Its highest point, about half-
way between the Dead Sea and the Gulf of Akabah,
is a few hundred ft. higher than the level of the
Mediterranean, but nearly 2,000 ft. above the level
of the Dead Sea. From this point the valley slopes
southward.to the Gulf of Akabah, and northward
to the Dead Sea. The lower Jordan valley slopes
from about 600 ft. below ocean-level at the Sea of
Galilee to about 1,300 ft. below ocean-level at the
Dead Sea.

To the E. are the highlands of Gilead and Moab
rising abruptly from the valley, as does the hill
country of Judaea on the W. The country to the


“Up to Jerusalem’’ from the Good Samaritan’s Inn.


E. of the Jordan-Dead Sea—Arabah depression, to
the whole of which the name Ghaur (Ghér) is ap-
plied by the Arabs, is a great table-land sloping
gradually to the E. from the sharp edge which over-
looks the Ghaur. It has no conspicuous peaks.
What appear to be peaks when viewed from the
Ghaur are irregularities of its western contour,
which are invisible or appear as slight mounds to the
observer who looks westward from any point some
miles to the E. Mt. Nebo, for instance, when scen
from Médeba is not readily distinguishable. This
is because it really docs not rise above the general


level of the table-land. The small annual rainfall
on the heights near the Ghaur diminishes east-
ward, and the desert begins within from 20 to 40
miles.

Another term much used by OT writers is South
or Negeb, which embraces the southernmost por-


| tion of the promised land, and was never effectively


occupied by the Israelites. Its uttermost bound-
ary was the “river of Egypt” (al-‘Arish), and coin-
cides roughly with the present boundary between
the Ottoman territory on the E. and the Anglo-
Egyp territory of Sinai on the W.


The term slopes, 'déshédhoth, AV ‘‘springs,’” occurs in
Josh 10 40, "So Joshua smote all the land, the hill-
country .... and the lowland, and the slopes, and all
their kings"’; and again in Josh 12 7.8, ‘' And Joshua gave
i ... for a possession according to their divisions; in


it.
-the hill-country, aud iu the lowland, and in the Arabah,


and in the slopes, and in the wilderness, and in the
South.’ In the former passage, it seems to refer to the
foothills which form the eastern or higher part of the
lowland or Shephelah. In the latter passage, it might
mean the same, or it might mean the descent from_the
Judaeau hills to the Ghaur. In Dt 3.17; 4 49; Josh

2 3; 13 20, we have ‘‘the slopes of Pisgah” (‘ashdéth-
ha-pisgah, ‘springs of Pisgah’’), which denotes the desceut
from ‘the heights of Moab to the Ghaur. The same word
occurs in the sing. in Nu 21 15, referring to the descent
to the Arnon. ‘Slopes,’ therefore, does not seem to he
a term applied to any particular region.


The wilderness is usually the desert of the wander-
ing, including the central part of the Sinaitic
peninsula, but it is by no means always used in this
sense, e.g. Josh 8 15.20.24, where it clearly refers to
a region near Ai. ‘‘The wilderness” of Mt 4 1 is
thought to be the barren portion of Judaea between
Jerus and the Jordan. See Cuamparan; Country;
Desert; East; Hitt; Lowiann; Sours.

ALFRED ELy Day

NATURAL HISTORY, his’té-ri. See ANimMAL;
Botany; Birvs; Fisues; Insects; Zod.oey.


NATURAL MAN, THE. See Man, Tur Natv-
RAL.


NATURE. See Natunar, NaTuRE.
NAUGHT, nét, NAUGHTY, né’ti, NAUGHTI-


NESS, -nes: In the sense of bad, worthless, worth-
lessness, the wordsin AV represent the Heb 37,


ra‘, changed in RV to “bad” (2 K 2 19; Prov 20


14; Jer 24 2), 21, r67, retained in RV “naughti-
ness” (1 § 17 28), M3, hawwah, rendered in RV in
Prov 11 6 “iniquity,” and in 17 4 “mischievous.”
In Prov 6 12, “naughty person,” lit. ‘man of
Belial,” is in RV ‘worthless person.” In the NT,
“superfluity of naughtiness” in Jas 1 21 (for xaxla,
kakia) becomes in RV “overflowing of wickedness,”
m “malice,” and in Wisd 12 10 AV’s “naughty
generation” (ovnpés, ponérés) is made into “by birth
. evil”? JAMES ORR


NAUM, ni’um: AV form, Nauum (q.v.), the
name of an ancestor of Jesus (Lk 3 25).


NAVE, nav (1 K 7 33). See Sea, Motren.


NAVE, na'vé (Navq, Naué): Gr form of the Heb
prove! name ‘Nun” (so RV), found only in AV of
ir ;


NAVEL, na’v’l (18, shér [LXX in Prov 38
suggests a different reading, viz. instead of 770,
shorrekha, VW, shérckha=AINW, sh? erckha, “thy
flesh”’]): The AV translates the Heb shdrir in the de-
scription of Behemoth (Job 40 16) by “navel,’’ where
modern translators have substituted “muscles” :
similarly in the tr of shérer (Cant 7 2) it has been


2123


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Natural Features
Nazareth


replaced by “body.” There remain two passages
of RV where “navel” is retained as the tr of shar.
Thus we find the word used, pars pro toto, for the
whole being: “It {the fear of Jeh] will be health
to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones” (Prov 3 8).
The uttermost neglect which a new-born babe can
experience is expressed by Ezekiel: “In the day
thou wast born thy navel fie. umbilical cord] was
not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to cleanse
thee; thou wast not salted at all, nor swaddled at
all” (zk 16 4). H. L. E. Lurrine


NAVY, na’vi.


NAZARENE, naz-a-rén’, naz’a-rén (Natapyvés,
Nazarénés; Nazératos in Mt, Jn, Acts and Lk): A
derivative of Nazareth, the birthplace of Christ.
In the NT it has a double meaning: it may be
friendly and it may be inimical.

On the lips of Christ’s friends and followers, it is
an honorablename. Thus Matthew sees in it a ful-

filment of the old Isaian prophecy

1. An Hon- (Isa 11 1(Heb]): “That it might be

orable Title fulfilled which was spoken through the

rophets, that he should be called a

Nazarene” (Mt 2 23). According to an over-

whelming array of testimony (see Meyer, Comm., in

loc.), the name Nazareth is derived from the same

VY nagar, found in the text quoted from Isa. We

have here undoubtedly to do with a permissible
accommodation.

It 1s not quite certain that Matthew did not intend,
by the use of this word, to refer to the picture of the
Messiah, as drawn in Isa 53, on account of the iow esti-
mate in which this place was held (Jn 1 46). Nor is it
permissible, as has been done by Tertullian and Jerome,
to substitute the word ‘‘Nazarite’’ for ‘‘ Nazarene,"
which in every view of the case is contrary to the patent
facts of the life of the Saviour.

Says Meyer, ‘In giving this prophetic title to the
Messiah he entirely disregards the historical mean-
ing of the same (LXX Isa 11 1, dnthos), keeps by
the relationship of the name Nazareth to the word
ndcar, and recognizes by virtue of the same, in that
prophetic Messianic name neger, the typical refer-
ence to this—that Jesus through His settlement in
Nazareth was to become a ‘Nazoraios,’ a ‘Naza-
rene.’”’ This name clung to Jesus throughout His
entire life. It became His name among the masses:
“Jesus of Nazareth passeth by” (Mk 10 47; Lk
24 19). Perhaps Matthew, who wrote after the
event, may have been influenced in his application
of the Isaian prophecy by the very fact that Jesus
was popularly thus known. Even in the realm of
spirits He was known by this appellation. Evil
spirits knew and feared Him, under this name (Mk
1 24; Lk 4 34), and the angels of the resurrection
morning called Him thus (Mk 16 6), while Jesus
applied the title to Himself (Acts 22 8). In the
light of these facts we do not wonder that the dis-
ciples, in their later lives and work, persistently
used it (Acts 2 22; 3 6; 10 38).

If His friends knew Him by this name, much
more His enemies, and to them it was a title of
scorn and derision. Their whole atti-
tude was compressed in that one word
of Nathanael, by which he voiced his
doubt, “Can any good thing come out
of Nazareth?” (Jn 1 46). In the name ‘“Naza-
rene,” the Jews, who opposed and rejected Christ,
poured out all the vials of their antagonism, and the
word became a Jewish heritage of bitterness. It is
hard to tell whether the appellation, on the lips of
evil spirits, signifies dread or hatred (Mk 1 24;
Lk 4 34). With the gatekeepers of the house of the
high priest the case is clear. There it signifies un-
adulterated scorn (Mt 26 71; Mk 14 67). Even
in His death the bitter hatred of the priests caused


See Sarpes anv Boats, IJ, 1, (2).


2. A Title
of Scorn


this name to accompany Jesus, for it was at their
dictation written above His cross by Pilate (Jn 19
19). The entire Christian community was called
by the leaders of the Jewish people at Jerus, “the
sect of the Nazarenes” (Acts 24 5). If, on the one
hand, therefore, the name stands for devotion and
love, it is equally certain that on the other side it
represented the bitter and undying hatred of His
enemies. Henry E. Dosker


NAZARETH, naz’a-reth (Natapér, Nazarét,
Natapé@, Nazaréth, and other forms): A town in
Galilee, the home of Joseph and the
1. Notice Virgin Mary, and for about 30 years
Confined to the scene of the Saviour’s life (Mt 2
the NT 23; Mk 19; Lk 2 39.51; 4 16, etc).
He was therefore called Jesus of
Nazareth, although His birthplace was Bethlehem;
and those who became His disciples were known as
Nazarenes. This is the name, with slight modifi-
cation, used to this day by Moslems for Christians,
Nasara—the sing. being Nasrany.
» The town is not named in the OT, although the
presence of a spring and the convenience of the
site make it probable that the place was occupied
in old times. Quaresimus learned that the ancient
name was Medina Abiat, in which we may recog-
nize the Arab. el-Medinat el-baidah, ‘the white
town.” Built of the white stone supplied by the
limestone rocks around, the description is quite
accurate. There is a reference in Mish (M¢na-
héth, viii.6) to the “white house of the hill” whence
wine for the drink offering was brought. An elegy
for the 9th of Ab speaks of a “course” of priests
settled in Nazareth. This, however, is based upon
an ancient midhrash now lost (Neubauer, Géogr. du
Talm, 82, 85, 190; Delitzsch, Hin Tag in Caper-
naum, 142). But all this leaves us still in a state
of uncertainty.
The ancient town is represented by the modern
en- Nasirah, which is built mainly on the western


and northwestern slopes of a hollow
2. Posi- among the lower hills of Galilee, just
tion and before they sink into the plain of
Physical Esdraelon. It lies about midway
Features between the Sea of Galilee and the


Mediterranean at Haifa. The road
to the plain and the coast goes over the south-
western lip of the hollow; that to Tiberias and
Damascus over the heights to the N.E. A rocky
gorge breaks down southward, issuing on the plain
between two craggy hills. That to the W. is the
traditional Hill of Precipitation (Lk 4 29). This,
however, is too far from the city as it must have
been in the days of Christ. It is probable that the
present town occupies pretty nearly the ancient site;
and the scene of that attempt on Jesus’ life may have
been the cliff, many feet in height, not far from the
old synagogue, traces of which are still seen in the
western part of the town. There is a good spring
under the Greek Orthodox church at the foot of
the hill on the N. The water is led in a conduit
to the fountain, whither the women and their
children go as in old times, to carry home in their
jars supplies for domestic use. There is also a
tiny spring in the face of the western hill. To the
N.W. rises the height on which stands the sanctuary,
now in ruins, of Neby Sa‘in. From this point a
most beautiful and extensive view is obtained, rang-
ing on a clear day from the Mediterranean on the
W. to the Mountain of Bashan on the E.; from
Upper Galilee and Mt. Hermon on the N. to the
uplands of Gilead and Samaria on the S. The
whole extent of Esdraelon is seen, that great battle-
field, associated with so many heroic exploits in
Israel’s history, from Carmel and Megiddo to
Tabor and Mt. Gilboa.


Nazirite


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2124


There are now some 7,000 inhabitants, mainly
Christian, of whom the Greek Orthodox church
claims about 3,000. Moslems number
3. Present about 1,600. There are no Jews. It
Inhabitants is the chief market town for the pas-
toral and agricultural district that lies

around it.
In Nazareth, Jesus preached His first recorded
sermon (Lk 4 16 ff), when His plainness of speech
aroused the homicidal fury of His
4. Labors hearers. ‘He did not many mighty
of Jesus works there because of their unbelief”
(Mt 13 58). Finding no rest or se-
curity in Nazareth, He made His home in Caper-
naum. The reproach implied in Nathanael’s
question, “Can any good thing come out of Naza-
reth?” (Jn 1 46), has led to much speculation.


patos, nazeiratos, as also various words indicating
“holiness” or “devotion”; AV Nazarite, naz’a-rit):


1. Antiquity and Origin

2. Conditions of the Vow

3. Initiation

4, Restoration

5. Completion and Release

6. Semi-sacerdotal Character

7. Nazirites for Life

8. Samson’s Case

9. Samuel’s Case
10. Token of Divine Favor |
11. Did Not Form Communities
12, Among Early Christians
13. Parallels among Other Peoples


The root-meaning of the word in Heb as well as
the various Gr tr* indicates the Nazirite as “a con-
secrated one” or “adevotee.” Inthe circumstances
of an ordinary vow, men consecrated some mate-


NazaRETH, FROM THE RoavD To THE PLain oF Espragyon.


By ingenious emendation of the text Cheyne would
read, “Can the Holy One proceed from Nazareth?”
(EB, s.v.). Perhaps, however, we should see no
more in this than the acquiescence of Nathanael’s
humble spirit in the lowly estimate of his native
province entertained by the leaders of his people
in Judaea.

Christians are said to have first settled here in the
time of Constantine: (Epiphanius), whose mother
Helena built the Church of the Annun-
ciation. In crusading times it was
the seat of the bishop of Bethsean.
It passed into Moslem hands after the
disaster to the Crusaders at Hattin (1183). It was
destroyed by Sultan Bibars in 1263. In 1620 the
Franciscans rebuilt the Church of the Annunciation,
and the town rose again from its ruins. Here in
1799 the French general Junot was assailed by the
Turks. After his brilliant victory over the Turks
at Tabor, Napoleon visited Nazareth. The place
suffered some damage in the earthquake of 1837.

Protestant Missions are now represented in
Nazareth by agents of the Church Missionary So-
ciety, and of the Edinburgh Medical Missionary
Society. W. Ewina


5. Later
History


NAZIRITE, naz‘i-rit (WT), ndzir, eonnected
with V1}, nadhar, “to vow’’; vatelp, nazeir, vater-


rial possession, but the Nazirite consecrated himself
or herself, and took a vow of separation and self-
imposed discipline for the purpose of some special
service, and the fact of the vow was indicated by
special signs of abstinence. The chief OT passages
are Jgs 13 5-7; 1617; Nu 6; Am 2 11.12; ef
Sir 46 13 (Heb); 1 Macc 3 49-52.
The question has been raised as to whether the
Nazirite vow was of native or foreign origin in Israel.
The idea of special separatiou, how-
1. Antiquity ever, secms in all ages to have appealed
and Origin to men of a particular temperament,
and we find something of the kind in
many countries and always linked with special
abstinence of some kind; and from all that is said
in the Pent we should infer that the custom was
already ancient in Israel and that Mosaism regu-
lated it, bringing it into line with the general system
of religious observance and under the cognizance
of the Aaronic priests. The critics assign the sec-
tion dealing with this matter (Nu 6 1-21) to P,
and give it alate date, but there cannot be the least
doubt that the institution itself was carly. It
seems not unlikely that on the settlement in Canaan,
when the Israelites, having failed to overcome the
native population, began to mix freely with them,
the local worship, full of tempting Dionysiac ele-
ments, brought forth this religious protest in favor


2125


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Nazirite


of Israel’s ancient and simpler way of living, and
as a protection against luxury in settling nomads.
It is worthy of note that among the Semites vine-
growing and wine-drinking have ever been con-
sidered foreign to their traditional nomadic mode
of life. It wasin this same protest that the Rechab-
ites, who were at least akin to the Nazirites, went
still farther in refusing even in Canaan to abandon

the nomadie state. See RecwasitsEs.
The Pent, then, makes provision for the Nazirite
vow being taken by either men or women, though
the OT does not reeord a single in-


2. Condi- stance of a female Nazirite. Further,
tions of it provides only for the taking of the
the Vow vow for a limited time, that is, for the


case of the “Nazirite of days.” No
period of duration is mentioned in the OT, but the
Mish, in dealing with the subject, prescribes a
period of 30 days , while a double period of 60 or
even a triple one of 100 days might be entered on.
The conditions of Naziritism entailed: (1) the
strietest abstinence from wine and from every prod-
uet of the vine; (2) the keeping of the hair un-
shorn and the beard untouched by a razor; (3) the
prohibition to toueh a dead body; and (4) prohi-
bition of unclean food (Jgs 18 5-7; Nu 6).
The ceremonial of initiation is not recorded, the
Pent treating it as well known. The Talm tells us
that it was only necessary for one to
3. Initiation express the wish that he might be a
Nazirite. A formal vow was, however,
taken; and from the form of renewal of the vow,
when by any means it was accidentally broken, we
may judge that the head was also shorn on initiation
and the hair allowed to grow during the whole period
of the vow.
The accidental violation of the vow just men-
tioned entailed upon the devotee the beginning of
the whole matter anew and the serving
4. Restora- of the whole period. This was entered
tion on by the ceremonial of restoration,
in the undergoing of which the Nazi-
rite shaved his head, presented two turtle-doves
or two young pigeons for sin and burnt offerings, and
re-consecrated himself before the priest, further pre-
senting a lamb for a trespass offering (Nu 6 9-12).
When the period of separation was complete,
the ceremonial of release had to be gone through.
It consisted of the presentation of
6. Comple- burnt, sin and peace offerings with
tion and their accompaniments as detailed in
Release Nu 6 13-21, the shaving of the head
and the burning of the hair of the head
of separation, after which the Nazirite returned to
ordinary life.
The consecration of the Nazirite in some ways
resembled that of the priests, and similar words
are used of both in Lev 21 12 and Nu


6. Semi- 617, the priest’s vow being even
sacerdotal designated nézer. It opened up the
Character way for any Israelite to do special


service on something like semi-sacer-
dotal lines. The priest, like the Nazirite, dared
not come into contaet with the dead (Lev 21 1),
dared not touch wine during the period of service
(Lev 10 9), and, further, long hair was an ancient
priestly custom (Ezk 44 20).
The only ‘‘Nazirites for life” that we know by
name are Samson, Samuel and John the Baptist,
but to these Jewish tradition adds
7. Nazirites Absalom in virtue of his long hair.
for Life We know of no one voluntarily taking
the vow for life, all the cases recorded
being those of parents dedicating their children.
In rabbinical times, the father but not the mother
might vow for the child, and an interesting case of
this kind is mentioned im the dedication of Rabbi


Chanena by his father in the presence of Rabban
Gamaliel (Nazir, 29b).
Samson is distinctly named a Nazirite in Jgs 18
7 and 16 17, but it has been objected that his case
does not conform to the regulations
8. Sam- in the Pent. It is said that he must
son’s Case have partaken of wine when he made
a feast for his friends, but that does
not follow and would not be so understood, say, in
a Moslem country today. It is further urged that
in connection with his fighting he must have come
into contact with many dead men, and that he
took honey from the earease of the lion. To us
these objections seem hypercritical. Fighting was
specially implied in his vow (Jgs 13 5), and the
remains of the lion would be but a dry skeleton and
not even so defiling as the ass’s jawbone, to which
the erities do not object.
Samuel is nowhere in the OT called a Nazirite,
the name being first applied to him in Sir 46 13
(Heb), but the restrictions of his dedica-
9. Samuel’s tion seem toimply that he was. Well-
Case hausen denies that it is implied in 1 §
1 11 that he was either a Nathin (‘‘a
gift, [one] ‘given’ unto Jeh”; ef Nu 39; 18 6)
or a Nazirite. In the Heb text the mother’s vow
mentions only the uneut hair, and first in LXX is
there added that he should not drink wine or strong
drink, but this is one of the cases where we should
not regard silence as final evidence. Rather it is to
be regarded that the visible sign only is mentioned,
the whole contents of the vow being implied.
It is very likely that Nazirites became numerous
in Israel in periods of great, religious or political
excitement, and in Jgs 6 2 we may para-


10. Token phrase, ‘For the long-haired champions
of Divine in Israel.’ That they should be raised
Favor up was eonsidered a special token of


God’s favor to Israel, and the tempting
of them to break their vow by drinking wine was
considered an aggravated sin (Am 2 11.12). Atthe
time of the captivity they were looked upon as a
vanished glory in Israel (Lam 4 7m), but they
reappeared in later history.

So far as we can discover, there is no indieation
that they formed guilds or settled communities

like the “Sons of the Prophets.” In
11. Did Not some sense the Essenes may have eon-
Form Com- tinued the tradition, and James, the
munities Lord’s brother (Euseb., HE, I1, xxiii,

3, following Hegesippus), and also
Banus, tutor of Jos (Vita, 2), who is probably the
same as the Buni mentioned as a disciple of Jesus
in Sanh. 43a, were devotees of a kind resembling
Nazirites. Berenice’s vow was also manifestly
that of the Nazirite (Jos, BJ, II, xv, 1).

The ease of John the Baptist is quite certain, and
it was probably the means of introducing the eus-

tom among the early Christians. It
12. Among was clearly a Nazirite’s vow which Paul
Early took, “having shorn his head in
Christians Cenchreae”’ (Acts 18 18), and which

he completed at Jerus with other Chris-
tians similarly placed (Acts 21 23).

As the expenses of release were heavy for poor
men, such were at times aided in this matter by
their richer brethren. Thus Agrippa, on his return
from Rome, assisted many Nazirites (Jos, Ant,
XIX, vi, 1), and Paul was also at charges with
others (Acts 21 23).

We come across something of the same kind in
many countries, and we find special abstinence
always emphasized. Thus we meet with a class
of “votaries” as early as the days of Wammurabi,
and his eode devotes quite a number of sections
to them. Among other restrictions they were pro-
hibited from even entering a wineshop (Sect, 110).


Neah
Nebuchadnezzar


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


‘


2126


Then we are familiar with the Hierddouloi of the
Greeks, and the Vestal Virgins of the Romans.
The word n‘zir also appears in Syr


13. Par- and was applied to the maidens de-
allels voted to the service of Belthis. In
among the East, too, there have always been
Other individuals and societies of ascetics
Peoples who were practically Nazirites, and the


modern dervish in nearly every way re-
sembles him, while it is worthy of record in this
connection that the Moslem (an abstainer by
creed) while under the vow of pilgrimage neither
cuts his hair nor pares his nails till the completion
of his vow in Mecca. W. M. Curistip


NEAH, né’a (N93, ha-né‘ah, “the neah”; ’Av-
vovd, Annoud): A town in the lot of Zebulun (Josh
19 13), mentioned along with Gath-hepher and
Rimmon. It is possibly identical with ‘‘Neiel”
(ver 27). No name resembling cither of these has
yet been recovered, although the district in which
the place must be sought is pretty definitely indi-
cated. It may probably have lain to the N. of
Rimmon (Rummaneh), about 4 miles N.E. of Sef-
firiyeh.


NEAPOLIS, né-ap’é-lis (Nedwodts, Nedpolis;
WH, Néa Polis): A town on the northern shore of
the Aegean, originally belonging to Thrace but later
falling within the Rom province of Macedonia.
It was the seaport of Philippi, and was the first
point in Europe at which Paul and his companions
landed; from Troas they had sailed direct to
Samothrace, and on the next day reached Neapolis
(Acts 16 11). Paul probably passed through the
town again on his second visit to Macedonia (Acts
20 1), and he certainly must have embarked there
on his last journey from Philippi to Troas, which
occupied 5 days (Acts 20 6). The position of
Neapolisis a matter of dispute. Some writers have
maintained that it lay on the site known as Eski
(i.e. ‘“‘Old’’) Kavalla (Cousinéry, Macédoine, IT,
109 ff),and that upon its destruction in the 6th or
7th cent. AD the inhabitants migrated to the place,
about 10 miles to the E., called Christopolis in
mediaeval and Aavalla in modern times. But the
general view, and that which is most consonant
with the evidence, bath literary and archaeological,
places Neapolis at Aavalla, which lies on a rocky
headland with a spacious harbor on its western
side, in which the fleet of Brutus and Cassius was
moored at the time of the battle of Philippi (42
BC; Appian Bell. Civ. iv.106). The town lay
some 10 Rom miles from Philippi, with which it was
connected by_a road leading over the mountain
ridge named Symbolum, which separates the plain
of Philippi from the sea.

The date of its foundation is uncertain, but it seems to
have been a colony from the island of Thasos, which lay
opposite to it (Dio Cassius xlvii.35). It appears (under
the name Neopolis, which is also borne on its coins) as a
member both of the first and of the second Athenian
coufederacy, and was highly commended by the Athen-
ians in an extant decree for its loyalty during the Thasian
revolt of 411-408 BC (Inser. Graec., I, Suppl. 51). The
chicf cult of the city was that of ‘The Virgin,’’ usually
identified with the Gr Artemis. (See Leake, Travels in
Northern Greece, III, 180; Cousinéry, Voyage dans la
Macédoine, II, 69 ff, 109 ff; Heuzey and Daumet, Mis-
sion archéol. de Macédoine, 11 ff.)

M. N. Top


NEAR, né, NIGH, ni (chiefly AMP, karabh,
“to draw near,” 27P, karabh; éyybs, eggtis): Used
of proximity in place (Gen 19 20; 465 10; Ex 13
17; Ps 22 11; Jn 3 23, etc), time (Jer 48 16;
Ezk 7 7; 30 3; Mk 18 28), or kinship (Lev 21 2;
Ruth $ 12), but also employed of morud nearness.
Jeh is ‘nigh’ to them that are of a broken heart
(Ps 34 18). God draws nigh to His people, and


they to Him (Jas 4 8). The antithesis is God’s


‘arness” from the wicked.


NEARIAH, né-a-ri’a (WW 2, ne‘aryah):

(1) A descendant of David (1 Ch 3 22 f).
(2) A descendant of Simeon (1 Ch 4 42).
In both instances LXX reads “‘Noadiah.”’


NEBAI, né’bi, né-ba'i, neb’4-i (2°32, nébhay).
See Nosal.


NEBAIOTH, né-ba’yoth, né-bi’d6th ("32, M73),
nebhayoth; LXX NaBow0, Nabaidth): Firsthorn
of Ishmael (Gen 25 13; 28 9; 36 3; 1 Ch 1 29).
Isa 60 7 mentions the tribe Nebaioth with Kedar,
with an allusion to its pastoral nature: “the rams of
Nebaioth” are to serve the ideal Zion as sacrificial
victims. Again associated with Kedar, the name
occurs frequently in Assyr inscriptions. The tribe
must have had a conspicuous place among the
northern Arabs. Jos, followed by Jerome, regarded
Nebaioth as identical with the Nabataeans, the
great trading community and ally of Rome, whose
capital and stronghold was Petra. This view is
widely accepted, but the name ‘‘Nabataean’’ is
spelled with a ¢, and the interchange of ¢ and ¢,
although not unparalleled, is unusual. If the name
is Arab., it is probably a fem. pl., and in that case
could have no connection with the Nabataeans.

: . 8. Fuiron

NEBALLAT, né-bal’at (O23), n*bhallat; Na-
BaddAdr, Nabalidt): A town occupied by the Benja-
mites after the exile, named along with Lod and Ono
(Neh 11 34). It is represented by the modern
Beit Nebdala, 4 miles N.E. of Lydda.


NEBAT, né‘bat (O23), nbhat): Father of Jero-
boam [I (1 Ix 11 26, and frequently elsewhere).
The name occurs only in the phrase “Jeroboam the
son of Nebat,’” and is evidently intended to dis-
tinguish Jeroboam I from the later son of Joash.
See JEROBOAM.


NEBO, né’bd (123, n*bhd; Assyr Nabu): The
Bab god of literature and science. In the Bab
mythology he is represented as the son and inter-
preter of Bel-merodach (ef Isa 46 1; Bel and
Nebo there represent Babylon). His own special
shrine was at Borsippo. His planet was Mercury.
His name enters into Bib. names, as ‘‘Nebuchad-
nezzar,’’ and perhaps ‘‘Abed-nego” (Dnl 1 7, for
“Abed-nebo, servant of Nebo’). See BaByLonia
AND ASSYRIA, RELIGION OF.


NEBO (143, n*bhd; NaBat, Nabaii):

(1) This town is named in Nu 32 3 between
Sebam and Beon (which latter evidently represents
Baal-meon of ver 38), after Heshbon and Elealeh,
as among the cities assigned by Moses to Reuben.
It was occupied by the Reubenite clan Bela (1 Ch
6 8). Here it is named between Aroer and Baal-
meon. In their denunciations of wrath against
Moab, Isaiah names it along with Medeba (Isa 16
2) and Jeremiah with Kiriathaim (Jer 48 1), and
again (ver 22) between Dibon and Beth-diblathaim.
Mesha (M 8) says that by command of Chemosh he
went by night against the city, captured it after an
assault that lasted from dawn till noon, and put all
the inhabitants to death. He dedicated the place to
Ashtar-chemosh. Jerome(Comm.onIsa 16 2) tells
us that at Nebo was the idolef Chemosh. The site
which seems best to mect the requirements of the
passages indicated is on the ridge of Jebel Nebd to
the S.W. of Hesban, where ruins of an ancient town


aes the name of en- Nebd are found (Buhl, GAP,


2127


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Neah
Nebuchadnezzar


(2) OA}, nbha; B, NaBod, Nabovi, A, NaBo, Nabé,
and other forms): Fifty-two descendants of the
inhabitants of Nebo returned from exile with
Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 29; Neh 7 33). The place
was in Judah and is named after Bethel and Ai.
There is nothing, however, to guide us as to its
exact position. It may be represented by either
Beit Nubd, 12 miles N.W. of Jerus, or Nuba, which
lies about 4 miles 8.8.E of ‘Yd el-Md’ (Adullam).

5 W. Ewina

NEBO, MOUNT (133 °0, har n*bhd; Naat,
Nabat): A mountain in the land of Moab which
Moses ascended at the command of God in order
that he might see the Land of Promise which he
was never to enter. There also he was to die.
From the following passages (viz. Nu 33 47; Dt
32 49; 341), we gather that it was not far from the
plain of Moab in which Israel was encamped; that
it was a height standing out to the W. of the
mountains of Abarim; that it lay to the E. of
Jericho; and that it was a spot from which a wide
and comprehensive view of Pal could be obtained.
None of these conditions are met by Jebel ‘Attdris,
which is too far to the E., and is fully 15 miles 8.
of a line drawn eastward from Jericho. Jebel Osha,
again, in Mt. Gilead, commands, indeed, an ex-
tensive view; but it lies too far to the N., being at
least 15 miles N. of a line drawn eastward from Jeri-
cho. Both of these sites have had their advocates
as claimants for the honor of representing the Bib.
Nebo.

The ‘‘head” or “top” of Pisgah is evidently
identical with Mt. Nebo (Dt 34 1). After Moses’
death he was buried ‘‘in the valley in the land of
Moab,” over against Beth-peor.

The name Nebdd is found on a ridge which, some
5 miles S.W. of Hesban and opposite the northern
end of the Dead Sea, runs out to the W. from the


Mt. Nebo from the Spring ‘Ain Neba.


plateau of Moab, “sinking gradually: at first a
broad brown field of arable land, then a flat top
crowned by a ruined cairn, then a narrower ridge
ending in the summit called Siaghah, whence the
slopes fall steeply on all sides. The name Nebo
or Neba [the “knob” or ‘“tumulus”’] applies to the
flat top with the cairn, and the name Tal‘at es-Sufa
to the ascent leading up to the ridge from the N.
Thus we have three names which seem to connect
the ridge with that whence Moses is related to have
viewed the Promised Land, namely, first, Nebo,
which is identically the same word as the modern
Neba; secondly, Svaghah, which is radically identi-
cal with the Aram. Se‘ath, the word standing instead
of Nebo in the Tg of Onkelos [Nu 32 3], where it
_is called the burial place of Moses; thirdly, Tal‘at
es-Sufa, which is radically identical with the Heb
Zuph (¢aph), whence Mizpah (mi¢pah) and Zophim
(caphim)..... The name Pisgah is not now


known, but the discovery of Zophim [ef Nu 23 14]
confirms the view now generally held, that it is but
another title of the Nebo range.”

Neither Mt. Hermon nor Dan (Tell el-Kady) is
visible from this point; nor can Zoar be seen; and
if the Mediterranean 1s the hinder sea, it also is
invisible. But, as Driver says (“Dt,” TCO, 419),
the terms in Dt 34 1.3 are hyperbolical, and must
be taken as including points filled in by the imagi-
nation as well as those actually visible to the eye.
Mr. Birch argues in favor of Tal‘at el-Benat, whence
he believes Dan and Zoar to be visible, while he
identifies “the hinder sea” with the Dead Sea
(PEFS, 1898, 110 ff). W. Ewine


NEBUCHADNEZZAR, neb-ii-kad-nez’ar, NEB-
UCHADREZZAR, -rez’ar: Nebuchadnezzar, the
second king of Babylon of that name, is best
known as the king who conquered Judah, destroyed
Jerus, and carried the people of the Jews captive
to Babylon. Of all the heathen monarchs men-
tioned by name in the Scriptures, N. is the most
prominent and the most important. The prophe-
cies of Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel, and the last
chs of K and Ch centered about his life, and he
stands preéminent, along with the Pharaohs of the
oppression and the exodus, among the foes of the
kingdom of God. The documents which have
been discovered in Babylon and elsewhere within
the last 75 years have added much to our knowl-
edge of this monarch, and have in general confirmed
the Bib. accounts eoncerning him.

His name is found in two forms in the Bible, Nebu-


chadnezzar and Nebuchadrezzar. In the LXX he is
called Nafovxodovocép, Nabouchodonosér,


1. His and in the Vulg Nabuchodonosor. This
Name latter form is found also in the AV Apoc


throughout and in RV 1 Esd, Ad Est and
Bar, butnotJthor Tob. Thischange from
r to n_which is found in the two writings of the name
in the Heb and the Aram. of the Scriptures is a not un-
common one in the Sem languages, as in Burnaburiyash
and Burrahuriyash, Ben-hadad and Bar-hadad (see
Brockelmann’s Comparative Grammar, 136, 173, 220). It
is possible, however, that the form Nebuchadnezzar is
the Aram. tr of the Bab Nebuchadrezzar. If we take
the name to be compounded of Nabu-kudurri-usur in the
sense ‘‘O Nebo, protect thy servant,” then Nabi-kedina-
usur would be the best tr possible in Aramaic. Such
tre of proper names are common in the old VSS of the
Scriptures and elsewhere. For example, in WAT, V,
44, we find 4 columns of proper names of persons giving
the Sumerian originals and the Sem tr* of the same;
cf Bar-hadad in Aram. for Heb Ben-hadad. In early
Aram, the had not yet become ¢ (see Cooke, Tezt-Book
of North-Sem Inscriptions, 188f); so that for anyone
who thought that kudurru meant “‘servant,’’ N. would
be a perfect tr into Aram. of Nebuchadrezzar.


The father of N. was Nabopolassar, probably
a Chaldaean prince. His mother is not known by
name. The classical historians men-
tion two wives: Amytis, the daughter
of Astyages, and Nitocris, the mother
of Nabunaid. The monuments mention three sons:
Evil-merodach who succeeded him, Marduk-shum-
usur, and Marduk-nadin-ahi. A younger brother
of N., called Nabu-shum-lishir, is mentioned on a
building-inscription tablet from the time of Nabo-
polassar.

The sources of our information as to the life of
N. are about 500 contract tablets dated according

to the days, months and years of his
8. Sources reign of 43 years; about 30 building
of Informa- and honorific inscriptions; one historical
tion inscription; and in the books of Jer,

Eizk, Dnl, and IX. Later sources are
Ch, Ezr, and the fragments of Berosus, Menander,
Megasthenes, Abydenus, and Alexander Polyhistor,
largely as cited by Jos and Eusebius.

From these sources we learn that N. succeeded
his father on the throne of Babylon in 604 BC, and
reigned till 561 BC. He probably commanded


2. Family


Nebuchadnezzar
Needlework


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2128


the armies of Babylon from 609 BC. At any
rate, he was at the head of the army which defeated

Pharaoh-necoh at Carchemish on the
4. Political Euphrates in 605 BC (see 2 K 23 31;


History 2 Ch 36 20 ff). After having driven
! Necoh out of Asia and settled the
affairs of Syria and Pal, he was suddenly


Boundary Stone of Nebuchadnezzar I.


recalled to Babylon by the death of his father.
There he seems quietly to have ascended the
throne. In the 4th year of Jehoiakim (or 3d
according to the Bab manner of reckoning [Dnl 1 1)),
he came up first against Jerus and carried away
part of the vessels of the temple and a few captives
of noble lincage. Again, in Jehoiakim’s 11th year,
he captured Jerus, put Jchoiakim, its king, into
chains, and probably killed him. His successor,
Jehoiachin, after a three months’ reign, was be-
sieged in Jcrus, captured, deposed, and carried cap-
tive to Babylon, where he remained in captivity
37 years until he was set free by Evil-mcrodach.
In the 9th year of Zedckiah, N. made a 4th expe-
dition against Jerus which he besieged, captured,
and destroyed (see Jer 52). In addition to these
wars with Judah, N. carried on a long siege of Tyre,
lasting 13 ycars, from his 7th to his 20th year. He
had at least threc wars with Egypt. The first
culminated in the defeat of Necoh at Carchemish;
the second in the withdrawal of Hophra (Apries)
from Pul in the 1st year of the siege of Jerus under
Zedekiah; and the third saw the armies of N. enter-
ing Egypt in triumph and defeating Amasis in


| ete


N’s 37th year. In the numerous building and
honorific inscriptions of N. he makes no mention by
name of his foes or of his battles; but he frequently
speaks of foes that he had_conquered and of many
peoples whom he ruled. Of these peoples he men-
tions by name the Hittites and others (see Lang-
don, 148-51). In the Wédy-Brissa inscription, he
speaks of a special conquest of Lebanon from some
foreign foe who had seized it; but the name of the
enemy is not given.

The monuments justify the boast of N.: “Is not
this great Babylon that I have built 2’ (Dnl 4 30).

Among these buildings special emphasis

6. Build- is placed by N. upon his temples and
ings, etc shrines to the gods, particularly to
Marduk, Nebo and Zarpinat, but also
to Shamash, Sin, Gula, Ramman, Mah, and others.
He constructed, also, a great new palace and rebuilt
an old one of his father’s. Besides, he laid out and
paved with bricks a great street for the procession
of Marduk, and built a number of great walls with
moats and moat-walls and gates. He dug several
broad, deep canals, and made dams for flooding
the country to the N. and 8. of Babylon, so as to
protect it against the attack of its enemies. He
made, also, great bronze bulls and serpents, and
adorned his temples and palaces with cedars and
gold. Not merely in Babylon itself, but in many
of the cities of Babylonia as well, his building opcra-
tions were carried on, esp. in the line of temples to
the gods.

The inscriptions of N. show that he was a very
religious man, probably excelling all who had pre-

ceded him in the building of temples,

6. Religion, in the institution of offerings, and the
observance of all the ceremonies con-
nected with the worship of the gods.
His larger inscriptions usually contain two hymns
and always close with a prayer. Mention is fre-
quently made of the offerings of precious metals,
stoncs and woods, of game, fish, wine, fruit, grain,
and other objects acceptable to the gods. It is
worthy of note that these offerings differ in char-
acter and apparently in purpose from those in use
among the Jews. For example, no mention is
made in any one of N.’s inscriptions of the pouring
out or sprinkling of blood, nor is any reference made
to atonement, or to sin.


No reference is made in any of these inscriptions to
N.’s insanity. But aside from the fact that we could
scarcely expect a man to publish his own
7. Madness calamity, esp. madness, it should be noted
: that according to Langdon we have but
h three inscriptions of his written in the
period from 580 to 561 BC. If his madness lasted for
7 years, it may have occurred between 580 and 567 BC,
or it may have occurred between the Egyp campaign of
567 BC and his death in 561 BC. But, as it is more
likely that the ‘‘7 times’? mentioned in Dnl may have
been months, the illness may have been in any year after
580 BC, or even before that for all we know.
No mention is made on the monuments (1) of the
dream of N.recorded in Dn! 2, or (2) of the image of gold
f that he set up, or (3) of the fiery furnace
8. Miracles, trom which the three children were de-
etc livered (Dnl 3). As to (1), it may be
F said, however, that a bellef in dreams was
so universal among all the ancient peoples, that a single
instance of this kind may not have been considered as
worthy of special mention. The annals of Ashur-bani-
pal and Nubu-naid and Xerxes give a number of in-
stances of the importance attached to dreams and their
interpretation. t_ is almost certain that N. also be-
lieved in them. That the dream recorded in Dnl is
not mentioned on the monuments seems less remarkable
than that no dream of his is recorded. As to (2) we
know that N. made an image of his royal person (salam
sharrutiya, Langdon, XIX, B, col. x, 6; ef the image of the
royal person of Nabopolassar, id, p. 51), and it is certain
that the images of the gods were made of wood (id, p.
155), that the images of Nebo and Marduk were con-
veyed in a bark in the New Year's procession (id, pp.
157, 159, 163, 165) and that there were images of the
gods in ali the temples (id, passim); and that N. wor-
shipped before these images. That N. should have made


2129


Nebuchadnezzar
THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Needlework


an image of gold and put it up in the Plain of Dura Is
entirely in harmony with what we know of his other
“‘plous deeds.”’ (3) As to ‘the fiery furnace,” it is known
that Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, says that his own
brother, Shamash-shumukin, was burned In a similar
furnace.

The fallure of N. to mention any of the particular
persons or events recorded In Dnl does not disprove thelr
historicity, any more than his fallure to mention the
battie of Carchemish, or the siege of Tyre and Jerus,
disproves them. The fact ls, we have no real historical
inscription of N., except one fragment of a few broken
Nnes found in Egypt.

Literature.—T. G. Pinches, The NT in the Light
of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and
Babylonia; Stephen Langdon, Building Inscriptions
of the Neo-Babylonian Empire. See also, Rogers, Iis-
tory of Babylonia and Assyria; and McCurdy, History,
Prophecy and the Monuments, III.

R. Dirck WiLson


NEBUSHAZBAN, neb-t-shaz’ban (jaTW73),
n*bhishaz*bhdn=Assyr Nabusezib-anni, ‘“Nebo de-
livers me’; AV Nebushasban): An important
officer (the Rab-saris, “chief captain” or “chief
eunuch”) of the Bab army, who with Nergal-
sharezer and others was appointed to see to the
ae of Jeremiah after the taking of Jerus (Jer


NEBUZARADAN, neb-ii-z4r-a’dan, -2ir’a-dan
(FINWA2, nebhazar’ddhan = Assyr Nabu-zara-
tddina, ‘Nebo has given seed”; NeBovfapSav, Nebou-
zarddn): Nebuchadnezzar’s general at the siege of
Jerus (2 K 26 8.11.20 || Jer 562 12.15.26; 39 9.
10.11.13). Under the title of “captain of the
guard,” he commanded the army, and, after the
fall of the city, carried out his master’s policy with
regard to the safety of Jeremiah, the transport of
the exiles, and the government of those who were
left in the land.


NECHO, NECHOH,
NECOH.


NECK, nek ("72, cawwar, WWIY, cawwa’r, FAY,
cawwardn, TINIZ, cawwa’rah, Aram. “1X, ¢awwar
[Dn! 5 7.16.29], 77, ‘dreph, NPIS, miphreketh
[1 S 4 18]; varos, nétos, “back” [Bar 2 33]; occasion-
ally the words ]74, gdrén [Isa 3 16; Ezk 16 11],
and MMA, garg’rath, pl. of gargarah, lit. “throat”
(Prov 1 9; 3 3.22; 6 21], are tr? ‘“neck’’): The


né’k6. See PHArRaon-


neck is compared with a tower for beauty (Cant 4 |


4; 7 4) and is decorated with necklaces and chains
(Prov 19; 3 3.22; 6 21, Heb garg*rath; KEzk 16
11, Heb garén, “throat”; Dnl 6 7.16.29, Heb
cawwar). Itis also the part of the body where the
yoke, emblem of labor and hardship, dependence
and subjection, is borne (Dt 28 48; Jer 27 8.11.
12; 28 14; Acts 15 10). ‘To shake off the yoke,”’
“to break the yoke,” or ‘‘to take it off” is expressive
of the regaining of independence and liberty, either
by one’s own endeavors or through help from out-
side (Gen 27 40; Isa 10 27; Jer 28 11; 30 8).
Certain animals which were not allowed as food
(like the firstborn which were not redeemed) were
to be killed by having their necks (‘éreph) broken
(ix 18 18; 34 20); the turtle-doves and young
pigeons, which were sacrificed as sin offcrings or as
burnt offerings, had their heads wrung or pinched
off from their necks (Lev 6 8). In 1S 4 18 the
Heb word miphreketh signifies a fracture of the
upper part of the spinal column caused by a fall.

It was a military custom of antiquity for the con-
queror to place his foot upon the vanquished.
This custom, frequently represented in sculpture
on many an Egyp temple wall, is referred to in
Josh 10 24; Bar 4 25 and probably in Rom 16 20
and Ps 110 1. St. Paul praises the devotion of
Aquila and Priscilla, “who for my life laid down
their own necks” (Rom 16 4). See Foorstoot.


To “fall on the neck” of a person is a very usual
mode of salutation in the East (Gen 33 4; 45 14;
46 29; Tob 11 9.13; Lk 15 20; Acts 20 37). In
moments of great emotion such salutation is apt to
end in weeping on each other’s neck.

Readiness for work is expressed by “putting
one’s neck to the work” (Neh 3 5). Severe pun-
ishment and calamity are said to “reach to the
neck” (Isa 8 8; 30 28).

The Lord Jesus speaks of certain persons for
whom it were better to have had a millstone put
around the neck and to have been drowned in the
sea. The meaning is that even the most disgrace-
ful death is still preferable to a life of evil influence
upon even the little ones of God’s household (Mt
18 6; Mk 9 42; Lk 17 2).

To “make the neck stiff,’ to “harden the neck”
indicates obstinacy often mingled with rebellion
(Ex 32 9; 33 3.5; 349; 2 Ch 308; 36 18;
Neh 9 16.17.29; Ps 75 5 [RVm ‘‘insolently with
a haughty neck”; Prov 291; Jer 7 26). Cf
oxdrnpotpaxndos, sklérotrdchélos, “stiffnecked” (Acts
7 51). Similarly Isaiah (48 4) speaks of the neck
of the obstinate sinner as resembling an iron sinew.

H. L. E. Luserrme

NECKLACE, nek’lis (172), rabhidh, “chain’’):
A_neck-chain ornament, worn either separately
(Ezk 16 11), or with pendants (lsa 3 19), such as
erescents (Isa 3 18) or rings (Gen 38 25); some-
times made of gold (Gen 41 42; Dnl 5 29), or of
strings of jewels (Cant 1 10). Even beasts of
burden were sometimes so adorned by royalty
(Jgs 8 26). It was considered suggestive of pride
(Ps 73 6) or of filial loyalty (Prov 19). The
word does not occur in AV, but such adornments
have always been popular in all the Bible lands.


NECO, né’ko (33, n%khd [2 Ch 35 22; 36 4).


| See PHARAOH-NECOH.


NECODAN, né-ko'dan.


NECROMANCY, nek’ré-man-si.
oay, 1; Divination; WiTcHCRAFT.


NEDABIAH, ned-a-bi’a (W227), n*dhabhyah): A
descendant of David (1 Ch 8 18).


NEEDLE, né’d’] (pais, rhaphis): The word
‘needle’ occurs only 3 t, viz. in the reference to
Christ’s use of the proverb: “It is easier for a
camel to go through a needle’s eye, than for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of God” (Mt 19 24;
Mk 10 25; Lk 18 25). This saying ought to be
accepted in the same sense as Mt 23 24, “Ye blind
guides, that strain out the gnat, and swallow the
eamel?’ Christ used them to illustrate absurdities.
A rabbinical | is cited, ‘an clephant through a
needle’s eye.’ Some writers have attempted to
show that rhaphis referred to a small gate of a
walled oriental city. No evidence of such a use
of the word exists in the terms applied today in
Bib. lands to this opening. ‘Rich man’’ here has
the connotation of a man bound up in his riches.
If a man continues to trust in his earthly posses-
sions to save him, it would be absurd for him to
expect to share in the spiritual kingdom where
dependence upon the King is a first requisite.

The fact that needles are not mentioned elsewhere
in the Bible should not be taken to indicate that
this instrument was not used. Specimens of bone
and metal needles of ancient origin show that they
were common household objects. See CaMEt.

James A. Parca

NEEDLEWORK, né’‘d’l-wirk. See Emproip-

ERY.


See NexKopa.


See AsTROL-


Needy
Nehemiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2130


NEEDY, néd’i (j72N, ’ebhydn). See Poor.


NEESING, né’zing (Job 41 18, AV, ERV “by
his neesings a light doth shine,” ARV “sneezings’’):
“Neese”’ in Elizabethan Eng. (through two dis-
tinct derivations) could mean either ‘‘sneeze’’ or
“snort,” and it is impossible to say which force was
intended by the AV editors. The Heb is MU°D2,
‘dtishah, a word found only here, but connected with
a Sem ¥ meaning “‘sneeze,’’ or, perhaps, ‘‘snort.”
Job 41 18 is part of the description of the “‘levia-
than” or crocodile. This animal has a habit of
inflating himself, and after this he discharges through
his nostrils the moist, heated vapor, which sparkles
in the sunlight. The act is neither a “sneeze” nor
a “snort,” but the latter word is sufficiently de-
seriptive. There is no allusion to legendary ‘“‘fire-
spouting” monsters. Cf Job 39 20; Jer 8 16.

In the older edd of AV “neesed”’ is found in 2 K
4 35: “and the child neesed seven times’ (later
edd and RV “sneezed”’). Burron Scorr Easton


NEGEB, neg’eb (24377, ha-neghebh, “the negeb,”
or simply, 222, neghebh, from a y meaning “to be
dry,” and therefore in the first instance

1. Meaning implying the “dry” or ‘parched re-
gions,”’ hence in LXX it is usually tr¢

épytos, érémos, ‘“‘desert,’’ also véyeB, ndgeb): As the
Negeb lay to the 8. of Judah, the word came to he
used in the sense of “the South,” and is so used in a


few passages (e.g. Gen 13 14) andin such is tr¢ Aly, |


lips (see GEOGRAPHY).


The Eng. tr is unsuitable in several passages, and
likely to lead to confusion. Fer example, in Gen 13 1
Abram is represented as going ‘‘intc the Scuth’’ when
journeying northward from Egypt toward Bethel; in
Nu 18 22 the spies coming from the ‘* wilderness cf Zin”
toward Hebron are described as coming ‘by the South,"
although they were going north. The difficulty in these
and many other passages is at once obviated if it is receg-
nized that the Negeb was a geographical term for a definite
geographical region, just as Shephelah, lit. “lowland,”
was the name of another district of Pal. In RV‘ Negeb”’
is given in m, but it would make for clearness if it were
restored to the text.

This “parched” land is generally considered as
beginning 8. of ed Dahartyeb—the probable site of
Desir (q.v.)—and as stretching §.

2. Descrip- in a series of rolling hills running in a
tion general direction of E. to W. until the
actual wilderness begins, a distance of

perhaps 70 miles (see Narurau Featourges). To
the E. it is bounded by the Dead Sea and the south-
ern Ghor, and to the W. there is no defined bound-
ary before the Mediterranean. It is a land of
sparse and scanty springs and small rainfall; in the
ah ee of its soil it is a transition from the fertility
of Canaan to the wilderness of the desert; it is
essentially a pastoral land, where grazing is plenti-
ful in the early months and where camels and goats
can sustain life, even through the long summer
drought. Today, as through most periods of his-
tory, it is a land for the nomad rather than the
settled inhabitant, although abundant ruins in
many spots testify to better physical conditions
at some periods (see I, 5, below). The direction of
the valleys E. or W., the general dryness, and the
character of the inhabitants have always made it a
more or less isolated region without thoroughfare,
The great routes pass along the coast to the W. or

“up the Arabah tothe E. It formed an additional
barrier to the wilderness beyond it; against all who
would lead an army from the S., this southern
frontier of Judah was always secure. Israel could
not reach the promised land by this route, through
the land of the Amalekites (Nu 18 29; 14 43-45).

The Negeb was the scene of much of Abram’s
wanderings (Gen 12 9; 13 1.3; 20 1); it was in


this district that Hagar met with the angel (Gen


16 7.14); Isaac (Gen 24 62) and Jacob (Gen
87 1; 46 5) both dwelt there. Moses
3. OT sent the spies through this district


References to the hill country (Nu 13 17.22); the

Amalekites then dwelt there (ver 29)
and apparently, too, in some parts of it, the Avvim
(Josh 13 3.4). The inheritance of the children of
Simeon, as given in Josh 19 1-9, was in the Negeb,
but in Josh 16 21-82 these cities are credited to
Judah (see Stmzon). Achish allotted to David, in
response to his request, the city of ZrkLAG (q.v) in
the Negeb (1 S 27 5f); the exploits of David were
against various parts of this district described as
the Negeb of Judah, the Negeb of the Jerahmeelites,
and the Negeb of the Kenites, while in 1 $ 30 14
we have mention of the Negeb of the Cherethites
and the Negeb of Caleb. To this we may add the
Negeb of Arad (Jgs 1 16). It is impossible to de-
fine the districts of these various clans (see separate
arts. under these names). The Negeb, together
with the “hill-country” and the ‘“Shephelah,” was
according to Jeremiah (17 26; 32 44; 33 18)
to have renewed prosperity after the captivity of
Judah was ended.

When Nebuchadnezzar took Jerus the Edomites
sided with the Babylonians (cf Lam 4 21f; Ezk
35 3-15; Ob vs 10-16), and during
the absence of the Jews they advanced
north and occupied all the Negeb
and Southern Judaea as far as Hebron
(see Junara). Here they annoyed the Jews in
Maccabean times until Judas expelled them from
Southern Judaea (164 BC) and John Hyrcanus
conquered their country and compelled them to
become Jews (109 BC). It was to one of the cities
here—Malatha—that Herod Agrippa withdrew him-
self (Jos, Ant, XVIII, vi, 2).


Tbe palmy days of this district appear to have been
during the Byzantine period: the existing ruins, so far
as they can he dated at all, belong to this time. Beer-
sheba was an important city with a hishop, and Elusa
(mentioned hy Ptolemy in the 2d cent.) was the seat of a
bishop in the 4th, 5th and 6th cents. After the rise of
Mohammedanism the land appears to have lapsed into
primitive conditions. Althcugh lawlessness and want
of any central control may acccunt for much of the retro-
gression, yet it is probable that Professor Ellsworth
Huntington (lec. cit.) is right in his contention that a
change of climate has had much to do with the rise and fall
of civilization and settled habitation in this district. The
district has long been given over to the nomads, and it
is only quite recently that the Turkish policy of planting
an official with a small garrison at Beersheha and at
‘Aujeh has preduced some slight change in the direction
of a settled population and agricultural pursuits.


4. Later
History


It is clear that in at least two historic periods
the Negeb enjoyed a very considerable prosperity.
What it may have been in the days of the
5. Its Patriarchs itis difficult to judge; all we
Ancient read of them suggests a purely nomadic
Prosperity life similar to the Bedouin of today but
nA with better pasturage. In the di-
vision of the land among the tribes mention is made
of many cities—the Heb mentions 29 (Josh 15 21—
32; 19 1-9; 1 Ch 4 28-33)—and the wealth of
cattle evidently was great (ef 1S 15 9; 27 9;
30 16; 2 Ch 14 14f). The condition of things
must have been far different from that of recent
times.

The extensive ruins at Bir es
Khalasa (Elusa), Ruheibeh
‘Aujeh and other cities, together with the signs of
orchards, vineyards and gardens scattered widely
around these and other sites, show how compara-
tively well populated this area was in Byzantine
timesin particular. Professor Huntington (loc. cit.)
concludes from these ruins that the population of
the large towns of the Negeb alone at this period
must have amounted to between 45,000 and 50,000.


Seba‘ (Beersheba)
(ReHoporH, q.v.),


2131


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Needy
Nehemiah


The whole district docs not support 1,000 souls
today.

Literature.—Robinson, BR (1838); Wilton,
Negeb, or ‘South Country"’ of Scripture (1863); E. H.
Palmer, The Desert of the Exodus, Vt (1871); Trumbull,
Kadesh-Barnea (1884); G. A. Smith, HGHL, ch xiii
(1894) ; E. Huntington, Pal and Its Transformation, ch


vi, ete.
E. W. G. Masterman
NEGINAH, ne-gé'na (Ps 61 AV, title), NE-
GINOTH, ne-gé’noth, neg’i-noth (Ps 4 AV, title).
See Music; Psatms.


NEHELAMITE, né-hel'a-mit, THE ("22020,
ha-nehélami): The designation of Shemaiah, a false
prophet who opposed Jeremiah (Jer 29 24.31.32).
The word means “dweller of Nehelam,’’ but no such
place-name is found in the OT. Its etymology,
however, suggests a connection with the Heb halam,
“to dream,’’ and this has given rise to the rendering
of AVm “dreamer.”


NEHEMIAH, né-hé-mi’a, né-hem-i’a (ATO),
nthemyah, ‘comforted of Jeh’’):

1. Family

2. Youth

3. King’s Cupbearer

4. Governor of Judaea

5. Death
LiTERATURE

Nehemiah, the son of Hacaliah, is the Jewish
patriot whose life is recorded in the Bib. work named
after him. All that we know about him from con-
temporary sources is found in this book; and so
the readers of this article are referred to the Book
of Neh for the best and fullest account of his words
and deeds. See Ezra-NEHEMIAH. —

All that is known of his family is that he was
the son of Hacaliah (1 1) and_that one of his

brothers was called Hanani (1 2; 7 2);

the latter a man of sufficient character
*and importance to have been made a
ruler of Jerus.

From Neh 10 1-8 some have inferred that he was
a priest, since Nehemiah comes first in the list of names
ending with the phrase, ‘these were the priests.’ This
view is supported by the Syrand Arab. VSS of 10 1,
which read: ‘‘ Nehemiah the elder, the son of Hananiah
the chief of the priests’’; and by the Lat Vulg of 2 Macc
1 21, where he is called ‘‘ Nehemiah the priest,’ and
possibly by 2 Macc 1 18, where it is said that Nehemiah
“ offered sacrifices, after that he had builded the temple
and the altar.” ‘

The argument based upon Neh 10 1-8 will fall to
the ground, if we change the pointing of the ‘‘Seraiah”’
of the 3d verse and read ‘‘its princes,’’ referring back to
the princes of ver 1. In this case, Nehemiah and Zede-
kiah would be the princes; then would come the priests
and then the Levites.

Some have thought that he was of the royal line of
Judah, inasmuch as he refers to his ‘' fathers’ sepulchres’’
at Jerus (2 3). This would be a good argument only
lt it could be shown that none but kings had sepulchers
at Jerus.

It has been argued again that he was of noble lineage
because of his position as cupbearer to the king of Persia.
To substantiate this argument, it would need to be shown
that none but persons of noble birth could serve in this
position; but this has not been shown, and cannot be
shown.


From the fact that Nehemiah was so grieved at
the desolation of the city and sepulchers of his
fathers and that he was so jealous for
the laws of the God of Judah, we can
justly infer that he was brought up
by pious parents, who instructed him in the history
and law of the Jewish people. a

Doubtless because of his probity and ability, he
was apparently at an early age appointed by Ar

taxerxes, king of Persia, to the respon-


The


1. Family


2. Youth


3. Cup- sible position of cupbearer to the king.
bearer of There is now no possible doubt that
the King this king was Artaxerxes, the first of


that name, commonly called Longi-
manus, who ruled over Persia from 464 to 424 BC.


The mention of the sons of Sanballat, governor of
Samaria, in a lettcr written to the pnests of Jerus
in 407 BC, among whom Johanan is esp. named,
proves that Sanballat must have ruled in the time
oe Artaxerxes I rather than in that of Artaxerxes

The office of cupbcarer was “one of no trifling
honor” (Herod. i1.34). It was onc of his chief
duties to taste the wine for the king to see that it
was not poisoned, and he was even admitted to the
king while the queen was present (Neh 2 6). It
was on account of this position of close intimacy
with the king that Nehemiah was able to obtain
his commission as governor of Judaca and the letters
and edicts which enabled him to restore the walls
of Jerus.

The occasion of this commission was as follows:
Hanani, the brother of Nehemiah, and other men

of Judah came to visit Nehemiah
4, Governor while he was in Susa in the 9th month
of Judaea_ of the 20th year of Artaxerxes. They

reported that the Jews in Jerus were in
great affliction and that the wall thereof was broken
down and its gates burned with fire. Thereupon
he grieved and fasted and prayed to God that he
might be granted favor by the king. Having ap-
peared before the latter in the Ist month of the 21st
year of Artaxerxes, 444 BC, he was granted per-
mission to go to Jerus to build the city of his fathers’
sepulchers, and was given letters to the governors
of Syria and Pal and esp. to Asaph, the keeper of the
king's forest, ordering him to supply timber for the
wall, the fortress, and the temple. He was also
appointed governor of the province of which Jerus
was the capital.

Armed with these credentials and powers he
repaired to Jerus and immediately set about the
restoration of the walls, a work in which he was
hindered and harassed by Sanballat, the governor
of Samaria, and others, some of them Jews dwelling
in Jerus. Notwithstanding, he succeeded in his
attempt and eventually also in providing gates for
the various entrances to the city.

Having accomplished these external renovations,
he instituted a number of social reforms. He ap-
pointed the officers necessary for better govern-
ment, caused the people to be instructed in the
Law by public readings, and expositions; celebrated
the Feast of Tabernacles; and observed a national
fast, at which the sins of the people were confessed
and a new covenant with Jeh was solemnly con-
firmed. The people agreed to avoid marriages with
the heathen, to keep the Sabbath, and to contribute
to the support of the temple. To provide for the
safety and prosperity of the city, one out of every
ten of the people living outside Jerus was com-
pelled to settle in the city. In all of these reforms
he was assisted by Ezra, who had gone up to Jerus
in the 7th year of Artaxerxes.

Once, or perhaps oftener, during his governorship
Nehemiah returned to the king. Nothing is known
as to when or where he died. It is
certain, however, that he was no
longer governor in 407 BC; for at that
time according to the Aram. letter written from
Elephantine to the priests of Jerus, Bagohi was
occupying the position of governor over Judaea.
One of the last acts of Nehcmiah’s government
was the chasing away of one of the sons of Joiada,
the son of Eliashib, because he had become the son-
in-law to Sanballat, the governor of Samaria. As
this Joiada was the father of Johanan (Neh 12 22)
who, according to the Aram. papyrus, was high
pricst in 407 BC, and according to Jos (Ant, X1,
viii.1) was high priest while Bagohi (Bogoas) was
general of Artaxerxes’ army, it is certain.that_Ne-
hemiah was at this time no longer in power. From


5. Death


Nehemiah, Book
Nephthar


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2132


the 3d of the Sachan papyri, it seems that Bagohi
was already governor in 410 BC; and, that at the
same time, Dalayah, the son of Sanballat, was gov-
emor in Samaria. More definite information on
these points is not to be had at present.

Lrreraturs.—The only early extra-~Bib, data with
regard to Nehemiah and the Judaea of his times are to be
found: (1) in the Egyp papa of Elephantine (‘'Ara-
miische Papyri und Ostraka aus einer jiidischen Militiir-
Kolonie zn Elephantine,’’ Altorientalische Sprachdenk-
mdéler des &. Jahrhunderts vor Chr., Bearbeitet von
Eduard Sachau. Leipzig, 1911); (2) in Jos, Ant, XI,
vi, 6-8; vii, 1,2; (3) in Ecclus 49 13, where it is said:
“The renown of Nehemiah is glorious; of him who
established our waste places and restored our ruins, and
set up the gates and bars‘; (4) and lastly in 2 Macc ] 18-
36 and 2 13; in thelatter of these passages it speaks of
‘the writings and commentaries of Nehemiah; and how
he, founding a library, gathered_together the acts of the
kings and the prophets and of David and the epistles of
the kings concerning the holy gifts.’

R. Dick Witson
NEHEMIAH, BOOK OF. See Ezra-NEuEMIAH.


NEHEMIAS, né-hémi’as: Gr form of Heb
Nehemiah.

(1) Neeztas, Neemias, one of the leaders of the
return under Zerubbabel (1 Esd 5 8) =‘“‘Nehe-
miah” of Ezr 2 2; Neh 7 7.

(2) Neeulas, Neemias, B, Natulas, Naimias, the
prophet Nehemiah (i Esd 6 40 where AVm reads
“N. who also is Atharias”). Neither Nehemias
nor Attharias is found in the || Ezr 2 63; Neh 7 65,
but ROWWAG, ha-tirshatha’ =Tirshatha, “the gov-
ernor,” by whom Zerubbabel must be intended.
Thus the Heb word for “governor” has been con-
verted into a proper name and by some blunder the
name Nehemiah inserted, perhaps because he also
was known by the title of “governor.”’

S. Ancus

NEHILOTH, ne-hil’oth, néhi-loth (Ps 5, title).
See Music.


NEHUM, né’/hum (5573, nthim): One of the
twelve heads of the people who returned with
Zerubbabel (Neh 7 7). In the || passage (Ezr 2
2), the name appears as REHUM (q.v.), and in
1 Esd 5 8 as “Roimus.”


NEHUSHTA, néhnsh’ta (STW, nehushia’):
Mother of King Jehoiachin (2 K 24 8). She was
the daughter of Elnathan of Jerus. After the fall
of the city she was exiled with her son and his court
(2 K 24 12; Jer 29 2).


NEHUSHTAN, né-hnsh’tan (jMON}, nehushtan;
cf nun, nehosheth, “brass,” and WO}, ndhash,


“serpent’’): The word occurs but once,


1. Tradi- viz. in 2K 184. In the account
tional there given of the reforms carried out
Interpre- by Hezekiah, it is said that “he brake
tation in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses


had made; for unto those days the
children of Israel did burn incense to it; and he
called it Nehushtan.”’ According to RVm the word
means ‘‘a piece of brass.’ If this be correct, the
sense of the passage is that Hezekiah not only
breaks the brazen serpent in pieces but, suiting the
word to the act, scornfully calls it ‘a [mere] piece
of brass.” Hezekiah thus takes his place as a true
reformer, and as a champion of the purification of
the religion of Israel. This is the traditional inter-
pretation of the passage, and fairly represents the
Heb text as it now stands.

There are at least three considerations, however,
which throw doubt upon thisinterpretation. Inthe
first place, the word N. is not a common noun, and
cannot mean simply ‘‘a piece of brass.’”” The point
of the Bib. statement is entirely lost by such a con-


struction. It is emphatically a proper noun, and
is the special name given to this particular brazen


serpent. As such it would be sacred
2. Deriva- to all worshippers of the brazen ser-
tion: A pent, and familiar to all who fre-
Proper quented the Temple. In the second
Noun place, it is probable that N. is to be


derived from nahash, “serpent,” rather
than from nhésheth, “brass,” (1) because the Gr
VSS, representing a form of the Heb text earlier
than MT, suggest this in their transliteration of
N. (B, Nesthalei; A, Nesthdn); (2) because the
Heb offers a natural derivation of N. from nahash,
“serpent”; and (3) because the name of the image
would more probably be based on its form than on
the material out of which it was made. In the
third place, the reading, ‘‘and it was called,’’ which
appears in RVm, is decidedly preferable to that in
the text. It not only represents the best reading of
the Heb, but is confirmed by the similar reading,
“and they called it,”’ which appears in the Gr VS
referred to above. These readings agree in their
indication that N. was the name by which the
serpent-image was generally known during the
years it was worshipped, rather than an expression
used for the first time by Hezekiah on the occasion
of its destruction,

Whichever derivation be adopted, however, the
word must be construed as a proper name. If it
be derived from “brass,” then the tr must be, not
“a piece of brass,” but “The [great] Brass,” giving
the word a special sense by which it refers unequivo-
cally to the well-known image made of brass. If it
be derived from “serpent,” then the tr must be,
“The [great] Serpent,” the word in this case refer-
ring in a special sense to the well-known image in
serpent form. But the significance of the word
probably lies far back of any etymological ex-
planation of it that can now be given. It is not a
term that can be adequately explained by reference
to verbal roots, but is rather an epitome of the
reverence of those who, however mistakenly, looked
upon the brazen serpent as a proper object of
worship.

In view of the foregoing it may be concluded,
(1) that N. was the (sacred) name by which the
brazen serpent was known during the years ‘‘the
children of Israel did burn incense to it’’; (2) that
the word is derived from néhash, ‘serpent’; and
(3) that it was used in the sense of ‘“The Serpent,”
par excellence. See Imaczs, 6, (2); SERPENT,
Frery. Linpsay B. Loncacre


NEIEL, né-i'el OND}, n“val; B, vad, Inail,
A,’Awar, Aniél): A town on the boundary between
Zebulun and Asher mentioned between Jiftah-el
and Cabul (Josh 19 27). It may be the same as
Neah (ver 13), but the place is not identified.


NEIGH, na On, ¢ahal, “to ery aloud,” “neigh’’):
Figuratively used to indicate lustful desire (Jer 5 8;
of 13 29).


NEIGHBOR, ni/bér (21, re", MAY, ‘amith,
“friend,” ANP, kardbh, JD, shakhén; 6 wdyclov,


ho pléston, “near,” yelrwv, geitdn,
1. As De- [cf 2 Mace 6 8; 9 25], “inhabitant”;
scribed in Lat prozimus [2 Esd 16 19], civis [9 45;
the OT 10 2, RVm ‘“‘townman”}): In the OT,


the relationship of neighborhood in-
volves moral and social obligations which are fre-
quently emphasized. These are in the main de-
scribed in negative rather than positive terms;
e.g. there are special injunctions not to bear false
Witness against a neighbor (Ex 20 16; Dt 6 20;
Prov 26 18), or in any way to deal falsely with


2133


him, defraud him, frame malicious devices or
harbor evil thoughts against him (Ex 20 17; Lev
6 2; 19 13; Dt 23 24f; Ps 16 3; 101 5; Prov
24 28; Jer 22 13; Zec 8 17), or to lead him in-
to shameful conduct (Hab 2 15), or to wrong
him by lying carnally with his wife (Lev 18 20).
But the supreme law that underlies these negative
injunctions is stated positively, ‘Thou shalt love
thy neighbor as thyself” (Lev 19 18). In this
verse the term “neighbor” is defined by the expres-
sion, “the children of my people.’ Here, and gen-
erally in the OT, the term implies more than mere
proximity; it means one related by the bond of
nationality, a fellow-countryman, compatriot. Jeh
being regarded as a national God, there was no
religious bond regulating the conduct of the He-
brews with other nations. Conduct which was
prohibited between fellow-Jews was permitted
toward a foreigner, e.g. the exaction of interest
(Dt 23 19.20).
In the NT, this limitation of moral obligation to
fellow-countrymen is abolished. Christ gives a
wider interpretation of the command-
2. As De- ment in Lev 19 18, so as to include
scribed in it those outside the tie of nation or
inthe NT kindred. This is definitely done in
the parable of the Good Samaritan
(Lk 10 25-37), where, in answer to the question,
“Who is my neighbor?” Jesus shows that the rela-
tionship is a moral, not a physical one, based not
on kinship but on the opportunity and capacity for
mutual help. The word represents, not so much
a rigid fact, but an ideal which one may or may not
realize (ver 36, ‘‘Which of these three, thinkest thou,
proved [lit. became, not was] neighbor,” etc). ‘This
larger connotation follows naturally as a corollary
to the doctrine of the universal Fatherhood of God.
The commandment to love one’s neighbor as one’s
self must not be interpreted as if it implied that we
are to hate our enemy (an inference which the Jews
were apt to make); human love should be like the
Divine, impartial, having all men for its object
(Mt 5 43 ff). Love to one’s fellow-men in this
broad sense is to be placed side by side with love
to God as the essence and sum of human duty (Mt
22 35-40 || Mk 12 28-31). Christ’s apostles
follow His example in giving a central position to
the injunction to love one’s neighbor as one’s self
(Jas 2 8, where it is called the “royal law,’ i.e. the
supreme or governing law; Rom 13 9; Gal 6 14).
Miatit Epwarns
NEKEB, né‘keb: This name occurs only in com-
bination with “Adami” (AQ20 WAIN, ’ddhami
ha-nekebh, ‘Adami of the pass’’); LXX reads the
names of two places: xal’Appé xal NéBux, kat Armé
kat Nadbok (B); kal "Appal cal NdxeB, kat Armat
kat Ndkeb (Josh 19 33), so we should possibly read
“Adami and Nekeb.” Neubauer says (Géog. du
Talm, 225) that later the name of Nekeb was
Ciyadathah. It may therefore be represented by
the modern Seiyddeh, not far from ed-Damieh to the
E. of Tabor, about 4 miles 8.W. of Tiberias. The
name of Nekeb, a town in Galilee, appears in the
list of Thothmes ITI.


NEKODA, né-ki’da (NTP? , nekodha’):
(1) Head of a family of Nethinim (Ezr 2 48;
Neh 7 50; cf 1 Esd 6 31).


(2) Head of a family which failed to prove its


Israelitish descent (Ezr 2 60; Neh 7 62; cf 1 Esd
5 31.37). Inthe || vs of 1 Esd the names are given
thus: Nompa and Nexonan (q.v.).


NEKODAN, né-kd’dan (NexwSdv,
RVm “Nekoda”; AV Necodan):
(1) Head of a family which returned from exile,


Nekéddn;


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Nehemiah, Book
Nephthar


but “could not show their families nor their stock”
(1 Esd 6 37)=‘“Nekoda” of Ezr 2 60; Neh 7 62.
(2) See Noma.


NEMUEL, nem’i-el, né-mO’el (N77), nema’ él):

(1) A Reubenite, brother of Dathan and Abiram
(Nu 26 9).

(2) A son of Simeon (Nu 26 12; 1 Ch 4 24),
The name occurs also in the form “Jemuel’’ (Gen
46 10; Ex 615). According to Gray (HPN)
either form is etymologically obscure; but Nemuel
is probably correct, for it is easier to account for its
corruption into Jemuel than vice versa. The
patronymic Nemuelites occurs once (Nu 26 12).


NEMUELITES,


nem’t-el-its, né-mt’el-its
CONNMAIT, ha-nemi’ eli).


See NEMUEL, (2).


NEPHEA, né-fé’a. See Music.
NEPHEG, né‘feg (352, nephegh, “sprout,”
“shoot’’):


(1) Son of Izhar, and brother of Korah of the fa-
mous trio, Korah, Dathan and Abiram (Ex 6 21).


(2) Asonof David (2S 5 15; 1 Ch 3 7; 14 6).


NEPHEW, nef’t, nev’i.
Famity.


NEPHI, n@‘fi.


NEPHILIM, nef‘i-lim (prS°bs, n*philim): This
word, tré “giants’’ in AV, but retained in RV, is
found in two passages of the OT—one in Gen 6 4,
relating to the antediluvians; the other in Nu 13
33, relating to the sons of Anak in Canaan. In the
former place the Nephilim are not necessarily to
be identified with the children said to be borne by
“the daughters of men” to ‘the sons of God” (vs
2.4); indeed, they seem to be distinguished from
the latter as upon the earth before this unholy
commingling took place (see Sons of Gon). But
it is not easy to be certain as to the interpretation of
this strange passage. In the second case they
clearly represent men of gigantic stature, in com-
parison with whom the Israelites felt as if they were
“grasshoppers.” This agrees with Gen 6 4, “the
mighty men that were of old, the men of renown.”
LXX, therefore, was warranted in translating by
gigantes. JAMES ORR


NEPHIS, né’fis. See Nipuis.


NEPHISH, né'fish, NEPHISIM, né-fi’sim, NE-
PHISHESIM, né-fish’é-sim, NEPHUSIM, né-fi-
sim (D°O°D2, n*phistm, DIOND), n*phusim): The
former is the Kethibh (Heb “written’”) form of the
name adopted in RV; the latter the Keré (Heb
“vead”) form, adopted in AV and RVm (Ezr 2 50).
See NapuisH; NEPHUSHESIM.


NEPHTHAI, nef’ thi, nef’tha-i.


NEPHTHALIM, nef’tha-lim (Mt 4 13):
Gr form of NarHraLt (q.v.).


NEPHTHAR, nef’thir (Neb0dp, Nephthdr; A
and Swete, Nephthdr, AV and Vulg Naphthar),
NEPHTHAI (Ned@al, Nephthai, al. Nedael,
Nephthaet, Fritzsche, Nepd, Nephd, AV and Vulg,
following Old Lat, Nephi; Swete, following A,
gives Nephthar twice): According to 2 Macc 1 19-
36, at the time of the captivity the godly priests
took of the altar fire of the temple and concealed
it “privily in the hollow of a well that was without
water,’ unknown to all. “After many years’


See R5LATIONSHIPS,


See Neputuat.


See NeEPHTHAR.


The


Nephtoah
Nero


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2134


(upon the Return), before offering the sacrifices,
Nehemiah sent the descendants of the godly priests
to fetch the hidden fire. They reported they could
find no fire but only ‘‘thick water’ (vdwp wax,
hudér pachi), which he commanded them to draw
up and sprinkle upon the wood and the sacrifices.
After an interval the sun shone forth from behind a
eloud and the liquid ignited and consumed the sac-
tifices. Nehemiah then commanded them to pour
(xataxetvy, katachein, al. xaréxeav, katéchein, and
caragxelv, kataschein) the rest of the hquid upon
great stones. Another flame sprang up which soon
spent itself, “whereas the light from the altar shone
still” (RVm, the exact meaning being doubtful).
When the king of Persia investigated it, he inclosed
the spot as sacred. Nehemiah and _ his friends
ealled the thick liquid ‘““Nephthar,” ‘which is by
interpretation ‘cleansing’”’ («a@apiopés, katharis-
més), ‘but most men callit Nephthai.”

No satisfactory explanation is to hand of either
name, one of which is probably a corruption of
the other. And no word exists in the Heb like
either of them with the meaning of “cleansing,”
“purification.” The Vulg applies the name to the
spot (hunc locum), not the thing. The story prob-
ably originated in Persia, where naphtha was abun-
dant. The ignition of the liquid by the hot rays of
the sun and the appearance of the words render it
highly probable that it was the inflammable rock-
oil naphtha, the combustible properties of which
were quite familiar to the ancients (Pliny, NH, ii.
109; Plutarch, Alex. 35; Diosc., 1.101; Strabo, Geogr.
xvi.l, 15); the words then are probably corruptions
of what the Greeks termed vd¢éa, ndphiha. Ewald
(Hist., V, 163) says: ‘“This is but one of the many
stories which sought in later times to enhance the
very high sanctity of the Temple, with reference
even to its origin.” 8. ANGUS


NEPHTOAH, nef-td’a, nef’té-a (TMD2, neph-
t6¢h, occurs only in the expression ‘2 [3',
ma'‘yan mé n., “the fountain of the waters of Neph-
toah”; LXX ayyh tSatos Nadpéd, pégé hiidatos
Naphthé): This spring was on the border line
between Judah and Benjamin (Josh 15 9; 18 15).
The place is usually identified with Lita, a village
about 2 miles N.W. of Jerus, on the east bank of the
Wady beit Hanina. It is a village very conspicuous
to the traveler along the high road from Jaffa as
he nears Jerus. There are ancient rock-cut tombs
and a copious spring which empties itself into a
large masonry reservoir. The situation of Lifta
seems to agree well with the most probable line
of boundary between the two tribes; the spring
as it is today does not appear to be so abundant as
to warrant such an expression as “‘spring of the
waters,” but it was, like many such sources, prob-
ably considerably more abundant in OT times.

Conder would identify Lifta with the ancient
Exera (q.v.) of Benjamin, and, on the ground that
the Talm (see Talm Bab, Yoma’ 31a) identifies
Nephtoah with Eram (q.v.), he would find the site
of Nephtoah at ‘Ain ‘Atda, S. of Bethlehem. The
Talm is not a sufficiently trustworthy guide when
unsupported by other evidence, and the identifi-
cation creates great difficulty with the boundary
line. See PEF, III, 18, 43, Sh XVII.

E. W. G. MasTeRMAN

NEPHUSHESIM, né-fush’é-sim, NEPHISHE-
SIM, né-fish’é-sim (O°OW5D), nephash’sim, DOWD,
n°phishtsim): The former is the Kethibh (Heb
“written’’) form of the name adopted in RV; the
latter the Keré (Heb “‘read’”’) form adopted in AV
and RVm (Neh 7 52). See Napisy; NEpuisim.


NER, nér (13, nér, “lamp’”’): Father of Abner


(1 § 14 50f; 26 5.14, etc); grandfather of Saul
(1 Ch 8 33). Other references, though adding
no further information are 28 2 8.12; 3 23.25;
28.387; 1 K 2 5.382, ete.


NEREUS, né‘ris, né‘ré-us (Nypets, Né@revis):
The name of a Rom Christian to whom with his
sister St. Paul sent greetings (Rom 16 15). Nereus
and the others saluted with him (ver 15) formed a
small community or “house church.” The name
of the sister is not given, but the name Nereis is
found on an inscription of this date containing names
of the emperor’s servants (Lightfoot, Phil, 176).
Among the Acta Sanciorum connected with the
early church in Rome are the “Acts of Nereus
and Achilleus” which call them chamberlains of
Domitilla, the niece of Vespasian, and relate their
influence over her in persuading her to_remain a
virgin. S. F. Hunrer


NERGAL, nar’gil (2393, néreghal): A Bab
deity, identified with the planet Mars, and_wor-
shipped at Cutha (cf 2 K 17 30). See Basy-
LONIA AND ASSYRIA, RELIGION OF.


NERGAL-SHAREZER,  nii-gal-sha-ré’zar
Casa qw7 5373, nérghal-shar’ecer, Heb form of
Assyr Nergal-sar-uiur, “O Nergal, defend the
prince”): A Bab officer, the ‘“Rab-mag,”’ associated
with Nebushazban in the care of Jeremiah after the
fall of Jerus (Jer 39 3.18). According to Hommel
(art. “Babylon,” HDB) and Sayce (HDB, s.v.),
Nergal-sharezer is to be identified with Neriglissar
who succeeded Evil-merodach on the throne of
Babylon (ef Cheyne and Johns, EB, s.v.).


NERI, né‘ri (Napet, Nérei [Tisch., Treg., WH],
TR, Nupl, Néri; for Heb 7), nértyah): The
name of an ancestor of Jesus, the grandfather of
Zerubbabel (Lk 3 27). See NERIAu.


NERIAH, né-ri’a (772, nériyah, “whose lamp
is Jeh’’): The father of Seraiah and of Baruch,
Jeremiah’s friend and secretary (Jer 32 12.16;
36 4.8.32; 43 3). In Bar 11 the Gr form of the
name, Nap(e)las, Nér(e)ias, is given, and this short-
ened, Neri, oceurs in the genealogy of Jesus Christ.


NERIAS, né-ri’as (Nnplel(as, Nér[e/ias): The
Gr form of Heb Neriah found only in Bar 1 1 as
the father of Baruch=‘‘Neriah” of Jer 32 12; 36
4 ff; 48 3. To Baruch’s brother, Seraiah, the same
genealogy is ascribed in Jer 61 59.


NERO, né’rd (Népwv, Nérdn):
I. Name, Parentace anp Ear.ty TRAINING
II, Acriprina’s AMBITION ror NERO
Her Nine Measures for Bringing Him to the Throne
III. Nero's Ruicn
Quinquennium Neronis
. Poppaea Sabina
Poppaea and Tigellinns
Burning of Rome
. Persecution of Christians
Conspiracy of Piso
Nero in Greece
- Death of Nero
IV. DownraLt anp CHARACTER
1, Seven Causes of Downfall
2. Character
. ‘‘Nero Repivivus”
VI. Nero anv CHRISTIANITY
I. Nero and the NT
2. Neronian Policy and Christianity
LITERATURE


The fifth Rom emperor, b. at Antium December
nA 37 AD, began to reign October 13, 54, d. June 9,
I. Name, Parentage and Early Training.—His
name was originally Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus.


SNOT ON


2135


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Nephtoah
Nero


but after his adoption into the Claudian gens by
the emperor Claudius, he became Nero Claudius
Caesar Germanicus. His father was Enaecus
Domitius Ahenobarbus (‘‘Brazen-beard”), a man
sprung from an illustrious family and of vicious
character. His mother was Agrippina the younger,
the daughter of Germanicus
and the elder Agrippina, f
sister of the emperor Caius
(Caligula) and niece of the
emperor Claudius. On the
birth of the child, his father
predicted, amid the con-
gratulations of his friends,
that any offspring of him-
self and Agrippina could
only prove abominable and
disastrous for the public
(Suet. Nero vi: detestabile
et malo publico). At the
age of three the young
Domitius lost his father
and was robbed of his
estates by the rapacity of
Caius. In 39 his mother
was banished for supposed
complicity in a plot against Caius. N. was thus
deprived of his mother and at the same time left
almost penniless. His aunt, Domitia Lepida, now
undertook the care of the boy and placed him with
two tutors, a dancer and a barber (Suet. vi). On
the accession of Claudius, Agrippina was recalled,
and N. was restored to his mother and his patri-
mony (41 AD). é

Hl. Agrippina’s Ambition for Nero.—She cared
little for her son’s moral education, but began im-
mediately to train him for high position. She
aimed at nothing less than securing the empire for
N. With a view to this she must gain influence
over her uncle, the emperor Claudius, who was
very susceptible to female charms. At first the
path was by no means easy, while the licentious
empress, Messalina, was in power. But on the fall
and death of Messalina (48 AD)—for which Agrip-
pina may bave intrigued—the way seemed opened.
With the assistance of the emperor's freedman,
Pallas, Agrippina proved the successful candidate
for Claudius’ affections. She now felt secure to
carry out the plans for the elevation_of her son:
(1) She secured his betrothal to Octavia, the
daughter of Claudius, having previously, by the
villainy of Vitellius, broken off the engagement
between Octavia and Lucius Silanus (ib, xlvili).
Later, N. married this unfortunate lady. (2)
Vitellius again obliged by securing a modification of
Rom law so as to permit a marriage with a brother's
(not sister’s) daughter, and in 49 Agrippina became
empress. (3) In the meantime she had caused
Seneca to be recalled from banishment and had in-
trusted to him the education of N. for imperial pur-
poses. (4) The adoption of her son by Claudius
(50 AD). (5) She next secured early honors and
titles for N. in order to mark him out as Claudius’
successor. (6) She caused Britannicus, Claudius’
son, to be kept in the background and treated as a
mere child, removing by exile or death suspected
supporters of Britannicus. (7) Agrippina_was far-
sighted and anticipated a later secret of Rom im-
perialism—the influence of the armies in the nom-
ination of emperors. For this cause she took an
active interest in military affairs and gave her name
to a new colony on the Rhine (modern Cologne).
But she did not forget the importance of securing
the praetorian guard and Burrus the prefect. (8)
She persuaded Claudius to make a will in favor of
her son. All was now ready. But Claudius did
not like the idea of excluding his son Britannicus


Nero (Brit. Mus.).


from power, and murmurs were heard among the
senate and people. Delay might prove fatal to
Agrippina’s plans, so (9) Claudius must die. The
notorious Locusta administered poison in a dish
of mushrooms, aud Xenophon, Agrippina’s physi-
cian, thrust a poisoned feather down Claudius’
throat on the pretence of helping him to vomit.
Burrus then took N. forth and caused him to be

proclaimed imperator by the praetorians.
Ill, Nero’s Reign.—Nero’s reign falls into three
periods, the first of which is the celebrated quin-
quennium, or first 5 years, character-


1. Quin- ized by good government at home and
| quennium in the provinces and popularity with
Neronis both senate and people. Agrippina,


j having seated her son on the throne,
did not purpose to relinquish power herself; she
intended to rule along with him. And at first N.


| was very devoted to her and had given as watch-
word to the guard, “the best of mothers” (Tac.


Ann. xiii.2; Suet. ix). This caused a sharp conflict
with Seneca and Burrus, who could not tolerate
Agrippina’s arrogance and unbounded influence
over her son. In order to detach him from his
mother they encouraged him in an amour with a
Gr freedwoman, Acte (Tac. Ann. xiti.12). This
first blow to Agrippina’s influence was soon followed
by the dismissal from court of her chief protector
Pallas. She now threatened to bring forth Britan-
nicus and present him as the rightful heir to the
throne. This cost Britannicus his life, for N., feel-
ing insecure while a son of Claudius lived, compassed
his death at a banquet. A hot wine cup was offered
Britannicus, and to cool it to taste, cold water was
added which had been adulterated with a virulent
poison. The victim succumbed immediately. All
eyes fastened on N. in suspicion, but he boldly
asserted that the death was due to a fit of epilepsy
—a, disease to which Britannicus had been subject
from childhood. Such was the fate of Agrippina’s
first protégé. She next took up the cause of the
despised and ill-treated Octavia, which so incensed
her son that he deprived her of her guards and caused
her to remove from the palace. Agrippina now dis-
appears for the next few years to come into brief
and tragic prominence later. Seneca and Burrus
undertook the management of affairs, with results
that justified the favorable impression which the
first 5 years of N.’s reign made upon the Rom
people. Many reforms were initiated, financial,
social and legislative. These ministers treated N.
to counsels of moderation and justice, dictating
a policy which left considerable activity to thesenate.
But perceiving the bent of his evil nature, they
allowed him to indulge in low pleasures and _ ex-
cesses with the most profligate companions, think-
ing, perhaps, either that the young ruler would in
this way prove less harmful to the public, or that,
after sowing his wild oats, he would return to the
serious business of government. But in both ways
they were sorely disappointed, for N., having sur-
reudered himself to the basest appetites, continued
to go from excess to excess. He surrounded him-
self with the most dissolute companions, conspicu-
ous among whom were Salvius Otho and Claudius
Senecio.
The former had a wife as ambitious ag she was
unprincipled, and endowed, according to Tacitus,
with every gift of nature except an
2. Poppaea “honorable mind.’’ Already divorced
Sabina before marrying Otho, she was minded
(58 AD) to employ Otho merely as a tool to
enable her to become N.’s consort.
With the appearance of Poppaea Sabina, for such
was her name, opens the second period of N.’s
reign. She proved his evil star. Under her in-
fluence he shook off all restraints, turned a deaf ear


Nero


to his best advisers and plunged deeper into im-
morality and crime. She allowed, if not persuaded,
N. to give her husband a commission in the dis-
tant province of Lusitania. Her jealousy could
tolerate no possible rival. She plotted the death of
Agrippina to which she easily persuaded N. to con-
sent. This foul crime was planned and carried out
with the greatest cunning. Anicetus, admiral of
the fleet, undertook to construct a vessel that would
sink to order. N. invited his mother to his villa
at Baiae at the Quinquatrus celebration. After
the banquet she was persuaded to return to Bauli
by the vessel prepared. But the plan did not suc-
ceed, and Agrippina saved herself by swimming
ashore. She pretended to treat the matter as an
accident, sending a freedman to N. to inform him
of her escape. Anicetus, however, relieved N. of
the awkward position by pretending that Agrip-
pina’s freedman had dropped a dagger which was
considered proof enough of her guilt. Deserted by
her friends and slaves except one freedman, she was
quickly dispatched by her murderers. N. gave
out that she died by suicide (Suet. xxxiv; Tac.
Ann. exli-exlviii).
N. no longer made any secret of taking Poppaea
as his mistress, and, under her influence, bid defi-
ance to the best Rom traditions and
3. Poppaea plunged deeper into dissipation. In


and 62 AD matters grew much worse by
Tigellinus the death of the praetorian prefect,

Burrus. Seneca lost in him a power-
ful ally, and Poppaea gained in one of the new pre-


fects, Sofonius Tigellinus, a powerful ally. She
succeeded in causing Seneca to retire from the court.
Next she determined to remove Octavia. A charge
of adultery was first tried, but as the evidence proved
too leaky, N. simply divorced her because of barren-
ness. Then Anicetus was persuaded to confess
adultery with her, and the innocent Octavia was
banished to the island of Pandateria, where a little
later she was executed at Poppaea’s orders and her
head brought to her rival (62 AD). Poppaea was
now empress, and the next year bore a daughter
to N., but the child died when only three months old.
Two years later Poppaea herself died during preg-
nancy, of a cruel kick inflicted by N. in a fit of rage
(65 AD). He pronounced a eulogy over her and took
a third wife, Statilia Messalina, of whom he had no
issue.

N., having by his extravagance exhausted the
well-filled treasury of Claudius (as Caius did that
of Tiberius), was driven to fill his coffers by confis-
cations of the estates of rich nobles against whom
his creature Tigellinus could trump the slightest
plausible charge. But even this did not prevent
a financial crisis—the beginning of the bankruptcy
of the later Rom empire. The provinces which at
first enjoyed good government were now plundered;
new and heavy taxes were imposed. Worst of all,
the gold and silver coinage was depreciated, and
the senate was deprived of the right of copper coin-


age.
This difficulty was much increased by the great
fire which was not only destructive to both private
and state property, but also necessi-

of


4. Great tated the providing thousands :
Fire (July, homeless with shelter, and lowering
64) the price of corn. On July 18, 64,


this great conflagration broke out in
Circus Maximus. A high wind caused it to spread
rapidly over a large portion of the city, sweeping
before it ill-built streets of wooden houses. At the
end of six days it seemed to be exhausted for lack
of material, when another conflagration started in a
different quarter of the city. Various exaggerated
accounts of the destruction are found in Rom his-
torians: of the 14 city regions 7 were said to have


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA
—oo


2136


been totally destroyed and 4 partially. N. was at
Antium at the time. He hastened back to the city
and apparently took every means of arresting the
spread of the flames. He superintended in person
the work of the fire brigades, often exposing himself
to danger. After the fire he threw open his own
gardens to the homeless. The catastrophe caused
great consternation, and, for whatever reasons, sus-
picion seemed to fix upon N. Rumor had it that
on hearing the Greek verse, ‘‘When I am dead let the
earth be wrapped in fire,’ he interrupted, ‘“Nay
rather, while I live’ (Suet. xxxviti); that he had
often deplored the ugliness of the city and wished
an opportunity to rebuild it; that he purposely
set it on fire in order to find room for his magnificent
Domus Aurea (“Golden House”); that when the
city was burning he gazed upon it from the tower
of Maecenas delighted with what he termed ‘‘the
beauty of the conflagration’; that he recited in
actor’s costume the sack of Troy (Suet. xxxviil;
Tac. Ann. xv.38 ff). In spite of all these reports

N. must be absolved of the guilt of incendiarism.
Such public calamities were generally attributed
to the wrath of the gods. In the present case every-
thing was done to appease the offended


6. Perse- deity. Yet, in spite of all, suspicion
cution of still clung to N.  ‘‘Wherefore in order
Christians to allay the rumor he put forward as


guilty [subdidit reos], and afflicted with
the most exquisite punishments those who were
hated for their abominations [ flagitia] and called
‘Christians’ by the populace. Christus, from whom
the name was derived, was punished by the proc-
urator Pontius Pilatus in the reign of Tiberius.
This noxious form of religion [exitiabilis super-
stttio}, checked for a time, broke out again not ouly
in Judaea its original home, but also throughout
the city [Rome] where all abominations meet and
find devotees. Therefore first of all those who con-
fessed [i.e. to being Christians] were arrested, and
then as a result of their information a large number
(multitudo ingens] were implicated [reading coniunc-
ti, not convictt], not so much on the charge of in-
cendiarism as for hatred of the human race. They
died by methods of mockery; some were covered
with the skins of wild beasts and then torn by dogs,
some were crucified, some were burned as torches
to give light at night .. . . whence [after scenes
of extreme cruelty] commiseration was stirred for
them, although guilty and deserving the worst
penalties, for men felt that their destruction was
not on account, of the public welfare but to gratify
the cruelty of one [Nero]’ (Tac. Ann. xv.44).
Such is the earliest account of the first heathen
persecution (as well as the first record of the cruci-
fixion by a heathen writer). Tacitus here clearly
implies that the Christians were innocent (subdi-
dit reos), and that N. employed them simply as
scapegoats. Some regard the conclusion of the
paragraph as a contradiction to this—“though guilty
and deserving the severest punishment” (adversus
sontes ef novissima exempla meritos). But Tacitus
means by sontes that the Christians were “guilty”
from the point of view of the populace, and that
they merited extreme punishment also from his
own standpoint for other causes, but not for arson.
Fatebantur does not mean that they confessed to
incendiarism, but to being Christians, and qui
fatebantur means there were some who boldly con-
fessed, while others tried to conceal or perhaps even
denied their faith.


But why were the Christians selected as scapegoats?
Why not the Jews, who were both numerous eee had
already offended the Rom government and had been
banished in great numbers? Or why not the many
followers of the oriental religions, which had proved
more than once obnoxious ? (1) Poppaea was favorable
to Judaism and had certainly enough influence over N.


2137


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Nero


to protect the Jews; she was regarded by them as a
proselyte and is termed by Jos (Ant, XX, viil, 11) 6co-
ceBys, theosebés, ‘‘eod-fearing."’ When the populace
and N. were seeking victims for revenge, the Jows may
have been glad of the opportunity of putting forward
the Christians and may have heen encouraged in this by
Poppaca. Farrar (Early Days of Christianity, I, ch iv)
sees “in the proselytism of Poppaea, guided by Jewish
malice, the only adequate explanation of the first Chris-
tian persecution.’ (2) Closely connected with this was
doubtless the observation hy the Rom government that
Christianity was an independent faith from Judaism.
This may first have heen hrought home to the authorities
by the trial of Paul before N., as suggested by Ramsay
(Expos, ay 1893). Judaism was a recognized and
tolerated religion, a religio licita, and Christianity when
divorced from Judaism became a religio illicita and pun-
ishable by the state, for Christianity first rose ‘‘ under the
shadow of licensed Judaism" (sub umbraculo licitae
Judaeorum religionis: Tert. Apol., xxi). (3) As Chris-
tianity formed a society apart from Rom society, all
kinds of crimes were attributed to its followers, Thyes-
tean feasts, nightly orgies, hostility to temples and
images. These flagitia seemed summed up in odium
humani generis, “hatred for the human race.” (4) They
were easily selected as being so numerous and making
most progress in a line opposed to Rom spirit; cf ingens
multitudo (Tac. Ann. xv.44; Clemens Rom., Cor 1 6,
modAd TARG0s, polé pléthos; cf also ‘'great multitude” of
Rev 7 9; is 1). (5) No douht, too, early Christian
enthusiasm was unequivocal in its expressions, esp. in
its belief of a final conflagration of the world and its
serene faith amid the despair of others.


In the meantime Tigellinus’ tyranny and con-
fiscations to meet N.’s expenses caused deep dis-
content among the nobles, which cul-
6. Conspir- minated in the famous conspiracy at
acy of Piso the head of which was C. Calpurnius
(65 AD) Piso. The plot was prematurely be-
trayed by Milichus. An inquisition
followed in which the most illustrious victims who
perished were Seneca the philosopher, Lucan the
poet, Lucan’s mother, and later Annaeus Mela,
brother of Seneca and father of Lucan, T. Petro-
nius Arbiter, “the glass of fashion.’ Finally, “N.
having butchered so many illustrious men, at last
desired to exterminate virtue itself by the death of
Thrasea Paetus and Barea Soranus” (Tac. Ann.
xvi.21 f).
Having cleared every suspected person out of
the way, he abandoned the government in Rome to
a freedman Helius, and started on a


7. Visit to long visit to Greece (66-68 AD), where
Greece he took part in musical contests and
(66 AD) games, himself winning prizes from


the obsequious Greeks, in return for
which N. bestowed upon them “freedom.” N.
was so un-Roman that he was perfectly at home in
Greece, where alone he said he was appreciated by
cultured people. In the meantime the revolt of
Vindex in Gaul commenced (68 AD), but it was soon
quelled by Verginius Rufus on account of its na-
tional Gaulic character. Galba of Hither Spain
next declared himself legatus of the senate and the
Rom people. N. was persuaded to return to Rome
by Helius; he confiscated Galba’s property, but his
weakness and hesitancy greatly helped the cause
of the latter.

Nymphidius Sabinus, one of the prefects, won
over the guard for Galba, by persuading the irreso-
lute emperor to withdraw from Rome
and then told the praetorians that N.
had deserted them. N. was a coward,
both in life and in death. While he
had the means of easily crushing Galba, he was
revolving plans of despair in his Servilian gardens,
whether he should surrender himself to the mercies
of the Parthians or to those of Galba; whether
Galba would allow him the province of Egypt;
whether the public would forgive his past if he
showed penitence enough. In his distraction a
comforter asked him in the words of Virgil, “Is it
then so wretched to die?”’? He could not summon
the courage for suicide, nor could he find one to


8. Death
of Nero


inflict the blow for him: ‘Have I then neither
friend nor foe?” Phaon a frcedman offered him
the shelter of his villa a few milesfrom Rome. Here
he prepared for suicide, but with great cowardice.
He kept exclaiming, ‘What an artist I am to perish!”
(Qualis artifex pereo, Suet. xlix). On learning that
he was condemned to a cruel death by the senate,
he put the weapon to his throat and was assisted in
the fatal blow by Epaphroditus his secretary. A
centurion entered pretending he had come to help:
“Too late—this is fidelity,’ were Nero’s last words.
His remains were laid in the family vault of the
Domitii by his two nurses Ecloge and Alexandria
and his concubine Acte (Suet. 1). Thus perished
on July 9, 68 AD the last of the line of Julius Caesar
in his 31st year and in the 14th of his reign.

IV. Downfall and Character.—The causes of his down-


fall were briefiy: (1) his lavish expenditure leading to
1. Seven burdensome taxation and financial inse-


curity; (2) tyranny and cruelty of his
Causes of favorites; (3) the great fire which hrought
Downfall dissatisfaction to fasten suspicion on N.


and the consequent enlargement of his
private abode at the expense of the city—esp. the Golden
House; (4) the unpopular measure of the extension of
Rom franchise to Greece and favored foreigners; (5) the
security engendered by the success with which the con-
spiracy of Piso was crushed; (6) the discovery of another
“secret of empire,” that an emperor could he created
elsewhere than at Rome, that the succession of emperors
was not hereditary but rested with the great armies, and
(7) the cowardice and weakness which N. displayed in
the revolt which led to his death.

His reign is memorable for the activity of Seneca, the
great fire, the persecution of Christians, the heginning
of the bankruptcy of the later Rom empire, the Arme-
nian disaster of Paetus (62 AD) retrieved by Corbulo and
the humiliation of Parthia, the outbreak of the insur-
rection in Judaea (66 AD), which ended in the destruction
of Jerus.

Nero ranks with Gaius for folly and vice, while his
cruelties recall the worst years of Tiberius. Very effem-

inate in his tastes, particular ahout the
2. Char- arrangement of his hair and proud of his
acter voice, his greatest fault was inordinate

vanity which courted applause for per-
formances on non-Rom lines. He neglected his high
office and degraded Rom gravitas hy zeal for secondary
pursuits. N., like his threé predecessors, was very sus-
ceptihle to female charms. He was licentious in the
extreme, even to guilt of that nameless vice of antiquity
—love of a male favorite. His cruelty, hoth directly
and through his instruments, made the latter part of his
reign as detestahle as the guinguennium had been golden.
He loved the extravagant and luxurious in every exag-
gerated form. He was a weakling and a coward in his
life, and esp. in his death. Of his personal appearance
we are told his features were regular and good; the ex-
pression of_his countenance, however, was somewhat
repelling. His frame was ill proportioned—slender
legs and higstomach. In later years his face was covered
with pimples.

V. ‘‘Nero Redivivus. ’’—It seems as if there was some-
thing lovable even ahout this monster, which led a
freedman to remain faithful to the last, and his two old
nurses and cast-off concubine to care affectionately for
his remains, and for a long time there were not wanting
hands to strew his grave with spring and autumn flowers
and te display his effigy (Suet. Ivii). But, whether
from the strange circumstances of his death, or the suh-
sequent terrible confusion in the Rom world, or from
whatever cause, there socn arose a helief that N. had not
really died, hut was living somewhere in retirement or
had fied among the Parthians, and that he was destined
in a short time to return and bring great calamity upon
his enemies or the world (quasi viventis ef brevi magno
inimicorum malo reversuri: Suet. Ivii). This helief
was a force among the Parthians who were ready to take
up arms at the report of a pseudo-Nere (Tac. Hist. i.2).
In the confusion of the year of the four emperors, Greece
and Asia were disturbed hy the report of the advent of
N. (Tac. Hist. ii.8), and the historian promises to
mention the fortune and attempts of other pseudo-
Neres. This belief was taken up by the Jews and amal-
gamated with their legend of Antichrist. In Asc Isa 4
(1st cent. AD), the Antichrist is clearly identified with
N.: ‘ Belial shall appear in the shape of a man, the king
of wickedness, the matricide.’’ It occurs again and
again in hoth the Jewish and Christian sections of
the Sib Or (3 66 ff; 4 117£.135 ff; 5 100 £.136 £.216 f).
How far N. was regarded by the Christians as the his-
torical personage of Antichrist is a disputed point.
That the common helief of the revival or advent of N.
should infiuence contemporary Christian thought in
days of social and political turmoil is highly probable.
Bousset (Comm.) regards the heast of Rev 13 as Rome,


Nero
Nethinim


and the smitten head whose ‘'deathstroke was healed"
as N., and some scholars take Rev 17 10f as referring
to N, The “scarlet-colored beast’ of 17 3 may he
intended either for the Rom government in general or for
N. in particular. That the number 666 (Rev 13 18)
represents in Heb letters the numerical equivalent of
Neron Kesar is significant, for the Jewish Christians
would be familiar with gématriya’ (the numerical equiva-
lent of names), See Numsér. Cf Farrar, Early Days,
ch xxviii, sec. 5. In later times the idea of a twofold
Antichrist seems to have arisen—one for the Jews and
one for the Gentiles; cf esp. Commodian, Carm. Apol.
(926): ‘‘to us N. hecame Antichrist, to the Jews the
other’ (nobis Nero factus Antichristus, ille Judaets).
There was an alternate theory that N. had really been
killed, but that he would rise again (Sib Or § 216f;
Augustine, De Civ. Dei, xx.19: unde nonnulli ipsum resur-
recturum et futurum Antichristum suspicantur).


VI. Nera and Christianity.—The name Nero
does not occur in the NT, but he was the Caesar to
whom Paul appealed (Acts 26 11)
1. Nero and and at whose tribunal Paul was tried
the NT after his first imprisonment. It is
quite likely that N. heard Paul’s case
in person, for the emperor showed much interest
in provincial cases. It was during the earlier
“golden quinquennium” of N.’s reign that Paul ad-
dressed his ep. to the Christians at Rome, and prob-
ably in the last year of N.’s reign (68 AD) Paul
suffered death near the city, though Harnack
(Chronologie) places his death in the first Neronian
persecution of 64. Although the NT gives no hint
of a possible visit or sojourn of Peter in Rome, such
a sojourn and subsequent martyrdom are highly
probable and almost certain from the early per-
sistent tradition, esp. in Clement of Rome, Ignatius
and Papias, and later in Tertullian, Clement of
Alexandria and the Liber Pontificalis (catalogue
of popes). His execution at Rome under Nero is
practically certain.


The first persecution to which Christianity was sub-
jected came from the Jews: the first heathen persecution
took place under N. Up to this time the

2. Neronian Rom government had been on friendly
Policy and terms with Christianity, as Christianity
Y ane was either not prominent enough to cause
Christianity any disturbance of society or was con-
founded by the Romans with Judaism

(sub umbraculo Iicitae Judaeorum religionis: Tert.
Apol., xxi). Paul, writing to the Christians of the
capital, urged them to ‘'be in subjection to the higher
powers’’ as ‘‘ordained of God" (Rom 13 1ff), and his
high estimation of the Rom government as power
for the good of society was propels enhanced by his
mild captivity at Rome which permitted him to carry
on the work of preaching and was terminated by an
acquittal on the first trial (accepting the view of a
first acquittal and subsequent activity before condemna-
tion at a second trial). But soon, whether because of
the trial of Paul, a Rom citizen, at Rome (ahout 63),
or the growing hostility of the Jews, or the increasing
numbers and alarming progress of the new religion, the
distinction hetween Christianity and Judaism hecame
apparent to the Rom authorities. Ifit had not yet been
proscribed as a religio illicita (‘‘uulicensed religion’’),
neither had it heen admitted as a religio Iictta. Chris-
tianity was not in itself as yet a crime; its adherents
were not liable to persecution ‘‘for the name.’’ Accord-
ing to one view the Neronian persecution was a spas-
modic act and an isolated incident in imperial policy: the
Christians were on this occasion put forward merely to
remove suspicion from N. They were not persecuted
either as Christians or as incendiaries, but on account of
flagitia and odium humani generis, i.e. Thyestean feasts,
Oedipodean incest and nightly orgies were attributed
to them, and their withdrawal from society and exclu-
sive manncrs cansed the charge of ‘‘hatred for society.”
The evidence of Tacitus (Ann. xv.44) would bear out
this view of the Neronian persecution as accidental, iso-
lated, to satisfy the revenge of the moh, confined to
Rome and of brief duration. _The other view is, how-
ever, preferable, as represented by Ramsay (Church in
the Rom Empire, ch xi) and E. G. Hardy (Studies in
Rom History, ch iv). Suetonius speaks of the persc-
cution of Christians as a permanent police regulation
in a list of other seemingly permanent measures (Nero
XVi: afflict? suppliciis Christiani genus hominum super-
stittonis novae ac maleficae), which is not inconsistent
with the account of Tacitus—who gives the initial step
and Suetonius the permanent result. The Christians
hy these trials, though not convicted of incendiarism,
were brought into considerable prominence; their un-
social and exclusive manners, their withdrawal from the
duties of state, their active proselytism, together with


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2138


the charges of immorality, established them in Rom eyes
as the enemies of society. Christianity thus hecame a
crime and was hanned by the police authorities. Sueto-
nius gives a ‘‘brief statement of the permanent adminis-
trative principle into which N.’s action ultimately re-
solved itself’’ (Ramsay, op. cit., 232). No formal law
needed to be passed, the matter could he left with the
prefect of the city. <A trial must be held and the flagitia
proved hefore an order for execution, according to Ram-
say, but Hardy holds that henceforth the name itself—
nomen tpsum—was proscribed. A precedent was now
established of great importance in the policy of the im-
perial government toward Christianity (see, further,
Roman Empire; Crristianity). Thereis no reason to
suppose that the Neronian persecution of 64 extended
beyond Rome to the provinces, though no douht the
attitude of the home government must have had con-
siderahle influence with provincial officers. Paul seems
to have gone undisturbed, or at least with no unusual
obstacles, in his evangelization after his acquittal. The
authorities for a general Neronian persecution and formal
Neronian laws against Christianity are late; cf Orosius
(Hist. vii.7, ** [Nero] was the first to put to death Chris-
tians at Rome and gave orders that they should be sub-
jected to the same persecution throughout all the provinces’).


LireRaTurE.—(a) Ancient: Tacitus Annals xii-xvi;
Suetonius Nero; Dio Cassius in_KEpit. of Xiphilinus 61
ff; Zonaras xi. (6) Modern: Hermann Schiller, Ge-
schichie des rim. Kaiserreichs unter der Regierung des
Neron (Berlin, 1872); Mierivale, Hist of the Romans
under the Empire; Ramsay, Church in the Rom Empire
and Expos, 1893; E. G. Hardy, Christianity and the
Rom Government and Studies in Rom History; Mommsen,
‘Der Religionsfrevel nach rém. Recht,’’ Histor. Zeitschr.,
1890; C. F. Arnold, Die Neronische Christenverfolgung;
Farrar, Early Days of Christianity; Baring-Gould,
Tragedy of the Caesars; . H. Lewes, ''Was Nero a
Monster?" in Cornhill Magazine, July, 1863; B. W.
Henderson, Life and Principate of the Emperor Nero,
with important bibliography of ancient and modern
authorities (London, 1903); Lehmann, Claudius u. Nero.


S. Ancus

NEST (jp, kén; veooord, neossid, nossid; in the
NT katrackhvocis, katoskéndsis; Lat nidus): A re-
ceptacle prepared by a bird for receiving its eggs and
young. Nests differ with species. Eagles use a
large heap of coarse sticks and twigs on the cleft of
a mountain (Job 39 27ff; Jer 49 16; Ob ver 4);
hawks prefer trees; vultures, hollow trees or the
earth; ravens, big trees; doves and pigeons, trees or
rocky crevices (Jer 48 28); hoopoes, hollow trees;
swallows, mud nests under a roof, on cliffs or
deserted temples; owls, hollow trees, dark places in
ruins or sand burrows (on the kippéz of Isa 34 15
see OwL); cranes, storks and herons, either trees
(Ps 104 17) or rushes beside water (storks often
choose housetops, as well).

Each nest so follows the building laws of its owner’s
species that any expert ornithologist can tell from
a nest which bird builded it. Early in incubation
a bird deserts a nest readily because it hopes to
build another in a place not so easily discoverable
and where it can deposit more eggs. When the
young have progressed until their quickening is
perceptible through the thin shells pressed against
the breast of the mother, she develops a boldness
called by scientists the “brooding fever.” In this
state the wildest of birds frequently will suffer
your touch before deserting the nest. Esp. is this
the case if the young are just on the point of emerg-
ing. The first Bib. reference to the nest of a bird
will be found in Balaam’s fourth prophecy in Nu
24 21: “And he looked on the Kenite, and took up
his parable and said, Strong is thy dwelling-place,
and thy nest is set in the rock.” Here Balaam was
thinking of the nest of an eagle, hawk or vulture,
placed on solid rock among impregnable crags of
mountain tops. The next reference is among the
laws for personal conduct in Dt 22 6: “Tf a bird’s
nest chance to be before thee in the way, in any tree
or on the ground, with young ones or eggs, and the
dam sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou
shalt not take the dam with the young.” Beyond
question this is the earliest law on record for the pro-
tection of a brooding bird. It is probable that it
was made permissible to take the young, as the law


2139


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Nero
Nethinim


demanded their use, at least in the case of pigeons
and doves, for sacrifice. In 29 18, Job cries,
“Then I said, I shall die in my nest,

And I shall multiply my days as the sand:”
that is, he hoped in his days of prosperity to die in
the home he had builded for his wife and children.
In Ps 84 3 David sings,

“Yea, the sparrow hath found her a house,
And the swallow a nest for herself, where she may
lay her young,

Even thine altars, O Jeh of hosts,

My King, and my God."
These lines are rich and ripe with meaning, for in
those days all the world protected a temple nest,
even to the infliction of the death penalty on any-
one interfering withit. This was because the bird
was supposed to be claiming the protection of
the gods. Hebrew, Arab and Egyptian guarded all
nests on places of worship. Pagan Rome executed
the shoemaker who killed a raven that built on a
temple, and Athens took the same revenge on the
man who destroyed the nest of a swallow. Isaiah
compared the destruction of Assyria to the robbing
of a bird’s nest: ‘‘And my hand hath found as a
nest the riches of the peoples; and as one gathereth
eggs that are forsaken, have I gathered all the earth:
and there was none that moved the wing, or that
opened the mouth, or chirped”’ (Isa 10 14; cf 16 2).
Matthew quotes Jesus as having said, “The foxes
have holes, and the birds of the heaven have nests;
but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head”
(Mt 8 20=Lk 9 58). Genz Strarron-PorTeR


NET. See Fisning; Fow er.


NETAIM, na’ta-im, né’ta-im, né-ta’im (0°73,
neta‘tm; B, ’Aftaety, Azacim, A, ’Araely, Ataeim):
In 1 Ch 4 23 AV reads “those that dwell among
plants and hedges,” RV “‘the inhabitants of Netaim
and Gederah.” The latter may be taken as cor-
rect. Gederah was in the Judaean Shephelah.
Here also we should seek for Netaim, but no likely
identification has yet been suggested.


NETHANEL, néthan’el, neth’a-nel (yan,
nithan'él, “God has given”; Na§avaqA, Nathanaél;
AV Nethaneel, né-than’é-el):

(1) A chief or prince of Issachar (Nu 1 8; 2 5;
7 18.23; 10 15).

(2) The 4th son of Jesse (1 Ch 2 14).

(3) One of the trumpet-blowers before the ark
when it was brought up from the house of Obed-
edom (1 Ch 16 24).

(4) A Levite scribe, the father of Shemaiah (1 Ch
24 6).

(5) The 5th son of Obed-edom (1 Ch 26 4).

(6) One of the princes whom Jehoshaphat sent
to teach in the cities of Judah (2 Ch 17 7).

(7) A Levite who gave cattle for Josiah’s Pass-
over (2 Ch 365 9).

(8) One of the priests who had married foreign
wives (Ezr 10 22; cf 1 Esd 9 22).

(9) A priest registered under the high priest
Joiakim (Neh 12 21).

(10) A Levite musician who assisted at the dedi-
cation of the walls (Neh 12 36). Joun A. Lezs


NETHANIAH, neth-a-ni’a (WIED3, n*thanyaht,
“Jeh has given”; Na@avias, Nathanias):

(1) An Asaphite musician (1 Ch 26 2.12).

(2) A Levite who accompanied the princes sent
by Jehoshaphat to teach in the cities of Judah (2
Ch 17 8).

(3) Te father of Jehudi (Jer 36 14).

(4) The father of Ishmael, the murderer of


Gedaliah (Jer 40 8.14.15; 41, 11t; 2 K 26 23.25).
Some MSS of LXX read here Maththanias.


NETHINIM, neth’i-nim (0°3°M}, n‘thinim,
“given”; Naberveiuy, Natheineim; AV Nethinims):
A group of temple-servants (1 Ch 9
1. Meaning 2 and 16t in Ezr and Neh). The
word has always the article, and does
not occur in the sing. The LXX translators usually
transliterate, but in one passage (1 Ch 9 2) they
render, ‘‘the given ones” (het dedoménoi). The
Syr (Pesh) also, in Ezr, Neh, transliterates the
word, but in 1 Ch 9 2 renders it by a word mean-
ing “sojourners.” The meaning “given” is sug-
gestive of a state of servitude, and Jos seems to
confirm the suggestion by calling the N. ‘“temple-
slaves’ (hierddoulot) (Ant, XI, v, 1). It should,
however, be noted that another form of this word
is employed in the directions regarding the Levites:
“Thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his
sons: they are wholly given unto him on behalf of
the children of Israel’? (Nu 3 9; cf also 8 16.19).
Of the history of the N. in earlier times there are
but few and uncertain traces. When Joshua dis-
covered that he had been beguiled
2. History by the Gibeonites into a covenant to
let them live, he reduced their tribe
to servitude, and declared, ‘‘Now therefore ye are
cursed, and there shall never fail to be of you bond-
men, both hewers of wood and drawers of water
for the house of my God’? (Josh 9 23.27). Itis no
doubt tempting to see in the Gibeouites the earliest
N., but another tradition traces their origin to a
gift of David and the princes for the service of the
Levites (Ezr 8 20). Their names, too, indicate
diversity of origin; for besides being mostly un-
Hebrew in aspect, some of them are found elsewhere
in the OT as names of non-Israelitish tribes. The
Meunim, for example (Ezr 2 50=Neh 7 52), are
in all likelihood descended from the Meonites or
Maonites who are mentioned as harassing Israel
(Jgs 10 12), as in conflict with the Simeonites
(1 Ch 4 41), and as finally overcome by Uzziah
(2 Ch 26 7). The next name in the lists is that of
the children of Nephisim. These may be traced
to the Hagrite clan of Naphish (Gen 25 15; 1 Ch 6
19). In both Ezr and Neh, the list is immediately
followed by that of the servants of Solomon, whose
duties were similar to, it may be even humbler than,
those of the N. These servants of Solomon appear
to be descendants of the Canaanites whom Solomon
employed in the building of his temple (1 K 6 15).
All these indications are perhaps slight; but they
point in the same direction, and warrant the as-
sumption that the N. were originally foreign slaves,
mostly prisoners of war, who had from time to time
been given to the temple by the kings and princes
of the nation, and that to them were assigned the
lower menial duties of the house of God.
At the time of the return from the exile the N.
had come to be regarded as important. Their
number was considerable: 392 accom-


3. Post- panied Zerubbabel at the first Return
exilic in 538 BC (Ezr 2 58=Neh 7 60).
History When Ezra, some 80 years later, or-


ganized the second Return, he secured
a contingent of N. numbering 220 (Ezr 8 20). In
Jerus they enjoyed the same privileges and im-
munities as the other religious orders, being in-
cluded by Artaxerxes’ letter to Ezra among those
who should be exempt from toll, custom and tribute
(Ezr 7 24). A part of the city in Ophel, opposite
the Water-gate, was assigned them as an official
residence (Neh 8 26.31), and the situation is cer-
tainly appropriate if their duties at all resembled
those of the Gibeonites (see Ryle, ‘Ezra and Nehe-
miah,”’ in Cambridge Bible, Intro, 57). They were


Netophah
Nicodemus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2140


also organized into a kind of guild under their own
leaders or presidents (Neh 11 21).

The N. are not again mentioned in Scripture.
It is probable that they, with the singers and porters,
became gradually incorporated in the general body
of Levites; their name passed ere long into a tradi-
tion, and became at a later time a butt for the
scorn and bitterness of the Talmudic writers against
everything that they regarded as un-Jewish.

. Joun A. LEEs

NETOPHAH, né-td’fa (DU), netophah; LXX
Netwodd, Netophd, Nebwrd, Nephotd, and other
variants): The birthplace of two of David’s heroes,
Maharai and Heleb (2 S 23 28.29), also of Seraiah
the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, one of the
captains who came to offer allegiance to Gedaliah
(2 K 26 23; Jer 40 8). “The villages of the Neto-
phathites’” are mentioned (1 Ch 9 16) as the dwell-
ings of certain Levites and (Neh 12 28, AV “Neto-
phathi’’) of certain ‘‘sons of the singers.”

The first mention of the place itself is in Ezr 2
22; Neh 7 26; 1 Esd 5 18 (RV “‘Netophas”’), where
we have || lists of the exiles returning from Babylon
under Zerubbabel; the place is mentioned between
Bethlehem and Anathoth and in literary association
with other cities in the mountains of Judah, e.g.
Gibeon, Kiriath-jearim, Chephereh and Beeroth.
In this respect it is most plausible to identify it with
NEPHTOAH (q.v.), although the disappearance of the
terminal guttural in the latter creates a difficulty.
Conder has suggested a site known as Kh. Umm-
Toba, N.E. of Bethlehem, an ancient site, but not
apparently of great importance. Beit Nettiif, an
important village on a lofty site in the Shephelah
near the ‘Vale of Elah,” also appears to have an
echo of the name, and indeed may well be the Beth
Netophah of the Mish (Sh*bhd‘dth, ix.5; Neubauer,
Géogr., 128), but the position does not seem to agree
at all with that of the OT Netophah. For Ah.
Umm-Toba see PEF, III, 128; for Beit Nettif, PEF,
III, 24; RBR, Il, 17f£; both Sh XVII.

E. W. G. MasTerMan

NETOPHAS, né-td’fas (B, NeréBas, Netébas, A,
Nerwpat, Netdphaé): A town named in 1 Esd 6 18,
identical with “(Netophah” of Ezr 2 22; Neh 7 26.


NETOPHATHI, né-tof’a-thi, NETOPHA-
THITES, né-tof’a-thits. See NETOPHAH.


NETTLES, net”lz: (1) DIM, Aarul (Joh 30 7;
Prov 24 31; Zeph 2 9 m, in all, “wild vetches’’);
the tr ‘nettles’ is due to the supposed derivations
of hari! from an (obs.) ¥ Pinta haral, meaning ‘‘to
be sharp” or “stinging,’’ but a tr “thorns’’ (as in
Vulg) would in that case do as well. LXX has
gpvyava &ypia, phrigana dgria, ‘wild brushwood,”’
in Job, and certainly the association with the ‘‘salt-
wort” and the retm, “broom,” in the passage would
best be met by the supposition that it means the low
thorny bushes plentiful in association with these
plants. “Vetch” is suggested by the Aram., but is
very uncertain. (2) WYOP, kimmésh (Isa 34 13;
Hos 9 6), and pl. DRWAP, kimmeshinim (Prov 24
31), tr? (EV) “thorns,” because of the tr of hardl as
‘nettles’ in the same ver. From Isa 34 13 kim-
mosh is apparently distinct from thorns, and the tr
‘nettle’ is very probable, as such neglected or de-
serted places as described in the three references
readily become overgrown with nettles in Pal.
The common and characteristic Pal nettle is the
Urtica pilulifera, so called from the globular heads
of its flowers. E. W. G. Masterman


NETWORK, net'wirk (“D2Y, s‘bhakhah): RV
in 2 K 25 17; 2 Ch 4 13 (also in pl., vs 12.13),


for “‘wreathen work’’ and “wreath’’ in AV (of the
adornment of the capitals of the pillars of Solomon’s
temple; see JacHiIn anp Boaz). “Networks” in
Isa 19 9 isin RV correctly rendered ‘white cloth.”
In ARV “network” is substituted for “pictures” in
AV (Prov 26 11), “baskets” in ERV, m “‘filigree
work.”


NEW, ni, NEWNESS, nines (WI, hadhash;
katvés, kainds, véos, 7608):

The word commonly tr‘ ‘‘new”’ in the OT is hd-
dhash, “‘bright,’’ “fresh,” ‘“new’’ (special interest

was shown in, and importance at-
1. Inthe tached to, fresh and new things and
OT events); Ex 18; Dt 20 5; 22 8; 24
5; 18 67; 28 21 16; Ps 33 3, “a

new song”; Jer 31 31, ‘new covenant”; Ezk 11
19, “a new spirit’’; 18 31, “new heart’’; 36 26, etc;
hédhesh is “the new moon,” ‘the new-moon day,”
the first of the lunar month, a festival, then “month”
(Gen 29 14, “a month of days’’); it occurs fre-
quently, often tr? “month”; we have “new moon”
(1S 20 5.18.24, etc); tirdsh is ‘‘new [sweet] wine”
(Neh 10 39; in Joel 1 5; 3 18, it is ‘ass, RV ‘‘sweet
wine’); in Acts 2 13, “new wine” is glezikos.

Other words in the OT for ‘‘new”’ are hddhath, Aram.
(Ezr 6 4); tari, ‘'fresh’’ (Jigs 15 15, RV_‘’a fresh jaw-
bone of an ass’’); bder?’dh, a ‘‘creation’’ (Nu 16 30, “if
Jeh make a new thing,’’ RVm_ ‘create a creation’’);
badkhar, ‘‘to be first-frnits’’ (Ezk 47 12; so RVm);
kim, ‘'setting,”’ is trd ‘‘newly”’ (Jgs 7 19); also mik-
kardbh, ‘‘recently"’ (Dt 82.17, RV_‘‘of late’); news
is shemu‘ah, ‘‘report,” ‘tidings’; Prov 25 25, ‘‘good
news from a far country.”


In the NT “new” (mostly kainos, “new,’’ “fresh,”
‘newly made”) is an important word. We have
the title of the “New Testament”
itself, rightly given by ARV as ‘“‘New
Covenant,” the designation of ‘the
new dispensation” ushered in through
Christ, the writings relating to which the volume
contains. We have ‘new covenant’? (kainos) in
Lk 22 20, “This cup is the new covenant in my
blood” (ERVm “testament”; in Mt 26 28; Mk
14 24, “new” is omitted in RV, but in Mt m “many
ancient authorities insert new,” and in Mk “some
ancient authorities”); 1 Cor 11 25, ERVm “or
testament”; 2 Cor 3 6, ERVm “or testament’;
He 8 8, ERVm “‘or testament”; in ver 13, “cove-
nant” is supplied (cf He 12 24, neos).


2. In the
NT


Corresponding to this, we have (2 Cor § 17, AV and
RV), ‘The old things have passed away ; behold, they are
become new”; ib, If any man isin Christ, he is a new
creature,’’ RVm ‘'there is a new creation’’: Gal 6 15,


m “or creation,” “new man" (Eph 2 15; 4 24; Col
3 10 [neos]); ‘new commandment” (Jn 18 34): ‘new
doctrine” (Acts 17 19); ‘new thing’’ (17 21): ‘‘new-


ness of life’ (kainétés) (Rom 6 4);

: 5 17); “anew name” (Rev 2
; “new heavens and a new earth” (2 Pet 3
13); “new Jerusalem" (Rev 8 12; 21 2); ‘new song”
(Rev 5 9); cf “new friend” and “new wine’’ (Sir 9 108, c);
artigénnétos, ‘‘newborn"’ (1 Pet 2 2); présphatos, ‘newly
slain,” ‘‘new” (He 10 20, RV ‘a new and living way,
throngh the veil, that is to say, his flesh’’; cf Sir 9 10a;
Jth 4 3); ‘‘new’'is the tr of neos, “new,” young” (1 Cor
57; Col 3 10, *new man'’; He 12 24, "new covenant’).


The difference in meaning between kainos and
neos, is, in the main, that kainos denotes new in
respect of quality, “the new as set over against that
which has seen service, the outworn, the effcte, or
marred through age’’; neos, “new [in respect. of time],
that which has recently come into existence,” e.g.
kainén mnémeion, the “new tomb” in which Jesus
was laid, was not one recently made, but one in
which no other dead had ever Jain; the “new cove-
nant,” the “new man,” etc, may be contemplated
under both aspects of quality and of time (Trench,
Synonyms of the NT, 209 f).

In Mt 9 16; Mk 2 21, dgnaphos, “unsmoothed,”


2141


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Netophah
Nicodemus


“unfinished,” is tr4 “new,” ‘new cloth,’ RV “un-
dressed.” For “new hottles”’ (Lk 6 38 and ||’s), RV
has ‘fresh wine-skins.”’ W. L. WaLkKER


NEW BIRTH. See REGENERATION.


NEW COMMANDMENT.
Love.


See BROTHERLY


NEW COVENANT. Sec Covenant, Tus New.


NEW EARTH. See Escuato.ioay or tue NT;
Heavens, New.


NEW HEAVENS. See Heavens, New.


NEW JERUSALEM. Sce JERUSALEM,
REVELATION oF JOHN.


NEW MAN. Sce Man, New.


NEW MOON. See Moon, New; Fasts anp
Frasts.


NEW TESTAMENT. See Bis15;
THE NT; Criticism.


NEW TESTAMENT CANON. See Canon or
THE NT.


NEW TESTAMENT LANGUAGE. See Lan-
GUAGE OF THE NT.


NEW TESTAMENT TEXT. See Text or THE
NT.


New;


CANON OF


NEW YEAR. See Time; Year.


NEZIAH, né-zi’a (T"X2, n°cith): The head of a
family of Nethinim (Ezr 2 54; Neh 7 56), called
in 1 Esd 6 32, “Nasi” (AV and RVm “Nasith”).


NEZIB, né’zib (A"E2, n°cibh; B, NacelB, Naseib,
A, Nee(®, Nesib): A town in the Judaean Shephc-
lah, mentioned along with Keilah and Mareshah
(Josh 15 43). Onom places it 7 miles from Eleu-
theropolis (Bett Jibrin), on the road to Hebron.
It is represented today by Bett Nasib, a village
with ancient remains some 2 miles §.W. of Khirbet
Kila (Keilah).


NIBHAZ, nib’haz (TOA), nibhhaz): Given as
the name of an idol of the Avvites, introduced by
them into Samaria (2 K 17 31), but otherwise
unknown. The text is supposed to be corrupt.


NIBSHAN, nib’shan (}WA27, ha-nibhshan; B,
Naddatev, Naphlazén, A, NeBodv, Nebsin): A city
in the Judacan wilderness named between Secacah
and the City of Salt (Josh 16 62). Onom knows
the place but gives no clue to its identification.
The site has not been recovered. Wellhausen sug-
gests the emendation of nibhshan to kibhshan, “‘fur-
nace”’ (Proleg.?, 344).


NICANOR, ni-ka’nor, ni’ka-nér (Nuxévwp, Ni-
kdnor): The son of Patroclus and one of the king's
“chief friends’? (2 Macc 8 9), a Syrian general
under Antiochus Epiphanes and Demetrius Soter.
After the defeat of Seron by Judas, Epiphanes in-
trusted his chancellor Lysias with the reduction of
Judaea (1 Macc 3 34 ff). Nicanor was one of the
three generals commissioned by Lysias—the others
being Ptolemy, son of Dorymenes, and Gorgias
(3 38). The campaign began in 166 BC; the
Syrians were defeated at Emmaus (3 57 ff), while


Gorgias at a later stage gained a victory at Jamnia
over a body of Jews who disobeyed Judas (6 58).
The account given in 2 Macc differs considerably,
both in omissions and in additions (2 Macc 8 9 ff).
There Nicanor, not Gorgias, is the chief in command.
The battle of Emmaus is not mentioned, but “the
thrice-accursed Nicanor,” having in overweening
pride invited a thousand slavedealers to accom-
pany him to buy the Jewish captives, was humil-
lated, and his host was destroyed, he himself escap-
ing “like a fugitive slave” to Antioch (2 Macc 8
341). After the death of Epiphanes, Eupator and
Lysias (the last two at the hands of Demetrius
[1 Mace 7 2]), Nicanor appears again under King
Demetrius in the struggle between Alcimus and
Judas. Alcimus, having been seated in the pricst-
hood by Demetrius’ officer Bacchides, could not
hold it against Judas and the patriots. He appealed
again to Demetrius, who this time selected Nicanor,
now governor of Cyprus (2 Mace 12 2) and known
for his deadly hatred of the Jews, to scttle the dis-
pute and slay Judas (14 12 ff; 1 Macc 7 26 ff).
Nicanor was appointed governor of Judaea on this
occasion. Again I and 2 Mace differ. According
to 1 Mace, Nicanor sought in vain to scize Judas
by treachery. Then followed the battle of Caphar-
salama (‘‘village of peace’), in which the Syrians
were defeated, though Jos (Ant, XII, x, 5) says
Judas was defeated. Nicanor retired to Jcrus, in-
sulted the priests and threatened the destruction of
the temple unless they delivered up Judas. He then
retired to Beth-horon to find Judas posted oppo-
site him at Adasa (1 Macc 7 39 ff), 34 miles dis-
tant. Here on the 13th of the 12th month Adar
(March), 161 BC, the Syrians sustained a crushing
defeat, Nicanor himself being the first to fall. The
Jews cut off his head and proud right hand and
hanged them up beside Jerus. For a little while
Adasa gave the land of Judah rest. The people
ordained to keep this “‘day of great gladness” year
by year—the 13th of Adar, ‘the day before the day
of Mordecai” (Feast of Purim). 2 Macc mentions
that Simon, Judas’ brother, was worsted in a first
engagement (14 17), omits the battle of Caphar-
salama, and represents Nicanor, struck with the
manliness of the Jews, as entering into friendly
relations with Judas, urging him to marry and lead
a quiet life, forgetful of the king’s command until
Alcimus accused him to Demetrius. The latter
peremptorily ordered Nicanor to bring Judas in all
haste as prisoner to Antioch (14 27). The scene of
the final conflict (Adasa) is given only as ‘‘in the
region of Samaria’ (15 1). According to this
account, it was Judas who ordered the mutilation
of Nicanor and in a more gruesome fashion (15 30 ff).
It is possible that the Nicanor, the Cypriarch or
governor of Cyprus of 2 Mace 12 2, is a different
person from Nicanor, the son of Patroclus—a view
not accepted in the above account. S. ANaus


NICANOR (Nixévop, Nikdnér): One of “the
seven” chosen to superintend ‘‘the daily ministra-
tion” of the poor of the Christian community at
Jerus (Acts 6 5). The name is Gr.


NICODEMUS, nik-d-dé’mus (Nixd$qpos, Nikd-
démos): A Pharisce and a “ruler of the Jews,”
mentioned ouly by St. John. He (1) interviewed
Christ at Jerus and was taught by Him the doctrine
of the New Birth (Jn 3 1-15), (2) defended Him
before the Sanhedrin (Jn 7 50-52), and (3) assisted
at His burial (Jn 19 39-42). ‘

This meeting, which it has been surmised took
place in the house of St. John (Jn 3 1-15), was one
of the results of Our Lord’s ministry at Jerus
during the first Passover (cf Jn 3 2 with Jn 2
23). Although N. had been thus won to believe


Nicodemus
Night-Monster


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2142


in the Divine nature of Christ’s mission, his faith
was yet very incomplete in that he believed Him
to be inspired only after the fashion
1. The of the OT prophets. To this faint-
Interview hearted faith corresponded his timid-
ity of action, which displayed itself
in his coming “by night,’’ lest he should offend
his colleagues in the Sanhedrin and the other
hostile Jews (ver 2). In answer to the veiled
question which the words of N. implied, and to
convince him of the inadequacy of mere intel-
lectual belief, Christ proclaimed to him the neces-
sity for a spiritual regeneration: ‘Except one be
born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of God”
(ver 3). This was interpreted by N. only in its
materialistic sense, and therefore caused him be-
wilderment and confusion (ver 4). But Christ,
as on another occasion when dealing with His
questioners on a similar point of doctrine (cf
Jn 6 52.53), answered his perplexity only by re-
peating His previous statement (ver 5). He then
proceeded to give further explanation. The re-
birth is not outward but inward, it is not of the
body but of the soul (ver 6). Just as God is the
real agent in the birth of the body, so also is He the
Creator of the New Spirit; and just as no one
knoweth whence cometh the wind, or “whither it
goeth,” yet all can feel its effects who come under
its influence, so is it with the rebirth. Only those
who have experienced it as a change in themselves,
wrought by the Divine Power, are qualified to judge
either of its reality or of its effects (vs 7.8). But
N., since such experience had not yet been his,
remained still unenlightened (ver 9). Christ there-
fore condemned such blindness in one who yet pro-
fessed to be a teacher of spiritual things (ver 10),
and emphasized the reality in His own life of those
truths which He had been expounding (ver 11).
With this, Christ returned to the problem under-
lying the first statement of N. HN. cannot believe
in “earthly things,” i.e. in the New Birth, which,
though coming from above, is yet realized in this
world, how can he hope to understand “heavenly
things,” i.e. the deeper mysteries of God’s purpose
in sending Christ into the world (ver 12), of Christ’s
Divine sonship (ver 13), of His relationship to the
atonement and the salvation of man (ver 14), and
of how a living acceptance of and feeding upon Him
is in itself Divine life (ver 15; cf Jn 6 25-65)?
The above interview, though apparently fruitless
at the time, was not without its effect upon N. At
the Feast of Tabernacles, when the
Sanhedrin was enraged at Christ’s
proclamation of Himself as the “‘Tiving
water’ (Jn 7 37.38), N. was em-
boldened to stand up in His defence. Yet here also
he showed his natural timidity. He made no per-
sonal testimony of his faith in Christ, but sought
rather to defend Him on a point of Jewish law (Jn
7 50-52; cf Ex 23 1; Dt 1 16.17; 17 6; 19 15).
By this open act of reverence N. at last made
public profession of his being of the following of


2. The
Defence


Christ. His wealth enabled him to
3. The provide the “mixture of myrrh and
Burial aloes, about a hundred pounds,” with


which the body of Jesus was embalmed
(Jn 19 39 ff).


The Gospel of Nicodemus and other apocryphal
works narrate that N. gave evidence in favor of Christ
at the trial before Pilate, that he was deprived of. office
and banished from Jerus by the hostile Jews, and that
he was bapdized by St. Peter and 8t.John. His remains
were said to have been found in a common grave along
with those of Gamaliel and St. Stephen.


Nicodemus is a type of the “well-instructed and
thoughtful Jew who looked for the consummation
of national hope to follow in the line along which he


had himself gone, as being a continuation and not
a new beginning’ (Westcott). The manner in
which the Gospel narrative traces the overcoming
of his natural timidity and reluctant faith is in itself
a beautiful illustration of the working of the Spirit,
of how belief in the Son of Man is in truth a new
birth, and the entrance into eternal life.
Cc. M. Kerr

NICODEMUS, GOSPEL OF. See Apocry-

pHaL GospEzs, III, 3, (0).


NICOLAITANS, nik-6-lii-tanz — (NixodAairal,
Nikolaitat): A sect or party of evil mfluence in
early Christianity, esp. in the 7
1. The Sect churches of Asia. Their doctrine was
similar to that of Balaam, “who taught
Balak to cast a stumblingblock before the children of
Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols, and to commit
fornication’? (Rev 2 14.15). Their practices were
strongly condemned by St. John, who praised the
church in Ephesus for “hating their works’ (Rev
26), and blamed the church in Pergamum for
accepting in some measure their teaching (Rev 2
15). Except that reference is probably made to
their influence in the church at Thyatira also, where
their leader was ‘the woman Jezebel, who calleth
herself a prophetess’’ (Rev 2 20; cf ver 14), no
further direct information regarding them is given
in Scripture.
Reference to them is frequent in post-apostolic


literature. According to Jrenaeus (Adv. Haer., 1.

26.3; ii1.10.7), followed by Hippolytus
2. Refer- (Philos., vii.386), they were founded by
ences Nicolatis, the proselyte of Antioch, who


was one of the seven chosen to serve at
the tables (Acts 6 5). Irenaeus, as also Clement of
Alexandria (Strom., ii.20), Tertullian and others,
unite in condemning their practices in terms similar
to those of St. John; and reference is also made
to their gnostic tendencies. In explanation of
the apparent incongruity of such an immoral sect
being founded by one of “good report, full of
the Spirit and of wisdom” (cf Acts 6 3), Simcox
argues that their lapse may have been due to re-
action from original principles of a too rigid asceti-
cism. A theory, started in comparatively modern
times, and based in part on the similarity of mean-
ing of the Gr “Nikolatis,” and the Heb ‘‘Balaam,”
puts forward the view that the two sects referred to
under these names were in reality identical. Yet if
this were so, it would not have been necessary for
St. John to designate them separately.
The problem underlying the Nicolaitan contro-
versy, though so little direct mention is made of it
in Scripture, was in reality most im-


3. Nico- portant, and concerned the whole rela-
laitan Con- tion of Christianity to paganism and
troversy its usages. The Nicolaitans disobeyed


the command issued to the gentile
churches, by the apostolic council held at Jerus in
49-50 AD, that they should refrain from the eat-
ing of “things sacrificed to idols’’ (Acts 15 29).
Such a restriction, though seemingly hard, in that
it prevented the Christian communities from joining
in public festivals, and so brought upon them sus-
picion and dislike, was yet necessary to prevent a
return to a pagan laxity of morals. To this danger
the Nicolaitans were themselves a glaring witness,
aud therefore St. John was justified in condemning
them. In writing to the Corinthians, St. Paul
gives warning against the same evil practices, basing
his arguments on consideration for the weaker
brethren (cf 1 Cor 8).
Literature.—Simcox, “Rev” in the Cambridge
. B.


Bible; H. Cowan in IDB, art. ‘Nicolaitans”; H
Swete, The Apocalypse of St. John, 1xx ff, 27, 28, 37.


C. M. Kerr


2143


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Nicodemus
Night-Monster


NICOLAUS, nik-d-la’ns (EV), NICOLAS, nik’é-
las (Nukédaos, Nikélaos): One of “the seven”
chosen to have the oversight of “the daily minis-
tration” to the poor of the church in Jerns (Acts 6
5). He is called “a proselyte of Antioch’; the
other 6 were therefore probably Jews by birth. This
is the first recorded case of the admission of a prose-
Iyte into office in the Christian church. Some of
the church Fathers (Irenaeus, Hippolytus, Psendo-
Tertullian) state that he was the founder of the sect
ealled Nicovarrans (q.v.) (Rev 215). Other
Fathers seem to suggest that this was a vain claim
made by this sect in secking apostolic authority
for their opinions. It may be that the opinions
of this seet were an antinomian exaggeration of the
preaching of Nicolaiis. S. F. Hunter


NICOPOLIS, ni-kop’é-lis (Nixérodis, Niképo-
lis): A city in Pal, half-way between Jaffa and
Jerus, now called Ammds, mentioned in 1 Macc 3
40.57 and 9 50. The earlier city (Emmaus) was
burnt by Quintilius Varus, but was rebuilt in 223
AD as Nicopolis.

The Nicopolis, however, to which Paul urges
Titus to come (rpés ue eis Nixdmody, exe? yap xéxpixa
wapaxepdoa, prés me eis Niképolin, ekei gdr ké-
krika parocheimdsai [Tit 3 12]) is probably the city
of that name situated on the southwest promontory
of Epirus. If this view is correct, the statement
made by some writers that from Eastern Greece
(Athens, Thessalonica, Philippi, Corinth) Paul’s
labors extended to Italy, that he never visited
Western Greece, requires modification. It is true
that we do not hear of his preaching at Patras,
Zacynthus, Cephallenia, Corcyra (the modern
Corfu), which, as a way-station to and from Sicily,
always held preéminence among the Jonian islands;
but there can be little doubt that, if his plan of
going to Nicopolis was carried out, he desired to
evangelize the province of Epirns (as well as
Acarnania) in Western Greece. Indeed, it was in this
very city of Nicopolis, probably, that he was ar-
rested and taken to Rome for trial—during one of
the winters between 64-67 AD.

Nicopolis was situated only a few miles N. of the
modern Prevesa, the chief city of Epirus today, the
city which the Greeks bombarded in 1912 in the
hope of wresting it from the Turks. The ancient
city was founded by Augustus, whose camp hap-
pened to be pitched there the night before the
famous fight with Antony (31 BC). The gulf,
called Ambracia in ancient times, is now known
ag Arta. On the south side was Actium, where the
battle was fonght. Directly across, only half a
mile distant, on the northern promontory, was the
encampment of Augustus. To commemorate the
vietory over his antagonist, the Rom emperor built
a city on the exact spot where his army had en-
camped (‘Victory City”). On the hill now called
Michalitzi, on the site of his own tent, he built a
temple to Neptune and instituted games in honor
of Apollo, who was supposed to have helped him
in the sea-fight. Nicopolis soon became the me-
tropolis of Epirus, with an autonomous consti-
tution, according to Gr custom. But in the time
of the emperor Julian (362) the city had fallen into
decay, at least in part. It was plundered by the
Goths, restored by Justinian, and finally disap-
peared entirely in the Middle Ages, so far as the
records of history show. One document has Ne-
xbmods } viv IpéBeta, Niképolis hé niin Prébeza, “N.,
which is now Prebeza.”’ In the time of Augustus,
however, Nicopolis was a flourishing town. The
emperor concentrated here the population of Aetolia
and Acarnania, and made the city a leading member
of the Amphictyonic Council. There are consider-


able rnins of the ancient city, ineluding two theaters,
a stadium, an aqueduct, ete.
LitERATURE.—Kuhn, Ueber die Entstehung der Stddte


der Alien.
J. KE. Harry
NIGER, ni’jér (Ntyep, Niger). See Sturon, (5).
NIGH, ni. See Near.


NIGHT, nit (for the natural usage and the various
terms, see Day anp NiGur):
Figurative uses: The word “night” isn, lay-
lah, or Sobe layil) is sometimes used fig. in the OT.
Thus Moses compares the brevity of
1. Inthe time, the lapse of a thousand years,
OT to “a watch in the night”? (Ps 90 4).
Adversity is depicted by it in such
places as Job 36 10; cf Isa 8 20; Jer 15 9. Dis-
appointment and despair are apparently depicted
by it in the “burden of Dumah” (Isa 21 11.12); and
spiritual blindness, coming upon the false prophets
(Mic 3 6); again sudden and overwhelming con-
fusion (Am 5 8; Isa 59 10 AV, SW}, nesheph, “twi-
light” as in RV).
On the lips of Jesus (Jn 9 4) it signifies the end
of opportunity to labor; repeated in that touching
little allegory spoken to His disciples
2. Inthe when He was called to the grave of
NT Lazarus (Jn 11 9.10). Paul also uses
the figure in reference to the Paronsia
(Rom 13 12), where ‘‘night” seems to refer to the
present aeon and “day” to the acon to come. He
also uses it in 1 Thess 6 5.7 where the status of the
redeemed is depicted by “day,” that of the unregen-
erate by “night,” again, as the context shows, in
reference to the Parousia. In Rev 21 25 and 22 5,
the passing of the “night” indicates the realization
of that to which the Parousia looked forward, the
establishment of the kingdom of God forever. See
also Delitzsch, Iris, 35. Henry E. Dosker


NIGHT-HAWE, nit’hék (O'}0N0), tahmas, “‘tach-
mas”; yAavg, glatix, but sometimes strouthés, and
seirénos; Lat caprimulgus): The Heb tahmds
means ‘‘to tear and scratch the face,” so that it is
very difficult to select the bird intended by its use.
Any member of the eagle, vulture, owl or hawk
families driven to desperation would ‘tear and
seratch” with the claws and bite in self-defence.
The bird is mentioned only in the lists of abomina-
tions (see Lev 11 16; Dt 14 15). There are three
good reasons why the night-hawk or night-jar,
more properly, wasintended. The lists were sweep-
ing and included almost every common bird unfit for
food. Because of its peculiar characteristics it had
been made the object of fable and superstition. It
fed on wing at night and constantly uttered weird
cries. Lastly, it was a fierce fighter when disturbed
in brooding or raising its young. Its habit was to
lie on its back and fight with beak and claw with
such ferocity that it seemed very possible that it
would “tear and scratch the face.’ Some com-
mentators insist that the bird intended was an owl,
but for the above reasons the night-jar seems most
probable; also several members of the ow] family
were clearly indicated in the list. See Hawk.

Gene STRATTON-PORTER
NIGHT-MONSTER, nit’ mon-stér amy , lilith,
LXX dvokevratpos, onokeniatiros; Vulg lamia):
I. Tue Accertep TRANSLATION
1. Professor Rogers’ Statement
2. Exception to the Statement
II. FouKLore IN THE
1. Paucity of References
. References in Highly Poetical Passages
3. The References Allusive
4. Possibility of Non-mythological Interpretation
5. The Term lilith.


wo


Night-Monster [Hp [INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2144


I. The Accepted Translation.—The term “‘night-
monster” is a hypothetical tr of the Heb term mo :
liltth, used once only, in Isa 34 14. The word is
trt4 in AV “sereech-owl,”’ m “night monster,’ RV
“night-monster,” m “Lilith.” The term “night-
monster” is also an interpretation, inasmuch as
it implies that the Heb word is a Bab loan-word; and
that the reference indicates a survival of primitive
folklore.

Coneerning this weird superstition, and_ its
strange, single appearance in the Book of Isa, Pro-

fessor Rogers has this to say: “The Ul,
1. Professor or ghost, was a night-demon of terrible
Rogers’ and baleful influence upon men, and
Statement only to be cast out with many incanta-

tions. The lil was attended by a
serving maid, the ardat lili (“maid of night”),
which in the Sem development was transferred
into the fem. lilitu. It is most curious and inter-
esting to observe that this ghost-demon lived on
through the history of the Bab religion, and
was carried over into the Heb religion, there to
find one single mention in the words of one of
the Heb prophets” (Rel. of Assyria and Babylonia,
76, 77).

Exception is to be taken to this statement,

admitting the etymological assumption upon which

it rests, that “lilith’ is a word in
2. Exception mythology, on the ground that the
to the conception of a night-demon has no
Statement place in the religion of the Hebrews

as exhibited in the Scriptures. It is
certainly worthy of more than passing notice that
a conception which is very prominent in the Bab
mythology, and is worked out with great fulness of
doctrinal and ritualistic detail, has, among the He-
brews, so far receded into the background as to
receive but one mention in the Bible, and that a
bald citation without detail in a highly poetic
passage.

The most that can possibly be said, with safety,
is that if the passage in Isa is to be taken as a sur-
vival of folklore, it is analogous to those survivals
of obsolete ideas still to be found in current speech,
and in the ht. of the modern world (see Lunarrc).
There is no cvidence of active participation in
this belief, or even of interest in it as such, on
the part of the prophetical writer. On the con-
trary, the nature of the reference implies that
the word was used simply to add a picturesque
detail to a vivid, imaginative description. All
positive evidence of Heb participation in this
belief belongs to a later date (see Buxtorf’s Ler.,
s.v. Talmud”).

I. Folkiore in the OT.—Attention has been
called elsewhere to the meagerness, in the matter
of detail, of OT demonology (see Demon, Demon-
oLocy; Communion with Demons). A kindred
fact of great importance should be briefly noticed
here, namely, that the traces of mythology and
popular folklore in the Bible are surprisingly faint
and indistinct. We have the following set of items
in which such traces have been discovered: ‘‘Rahab”
(a7, rahabh), mentioned in Job 9 13; 26 12; Isa
519; “Tanin” (PEI, éannin), Isa 27 1; “Levia-
than” qa, liwyathdn), Job 3 8; Ps 74 14; Isa
27 1; Ezk 29 3; Job 41 passim; the “serpent, in
the sea,” in Am 9 3; “Scirim” (O™°2W, s*‘irim),
2 Ch 11 15; Lev 177; 2 K 23 8; Isa 13 21;
34 14; “Alukah” (Mp%>Y, ‘alukah), Prov 30 15;
“Azazel” CINTZ, ‘dza’zél), Lev 16 8.10.26; “Lilith”
(ut sup.), Isa 34 14.15. '

A review of these passages brings certain very
interesting facts to light.


The references are few in number. Rahab is
mentioned 3 t; Tanin (in this connection), once;
Leviathan, 5 t; the serpent in the
1. Paucity of sea, once; Seirim, 5 t (twice with ref-
References erence to idols); Alukah, once; Azazel,
3 tin one ch and in the same connec-

tion; Lilth, once.
These references, with the single exception of
Azazel to which we shall return a little later, are
all in highly poetical passages. On


2. Refer- general grounds ef common-sense we
ences in should not ascribe conscious and delib-
Highly erate mythology to writers or speakers
Poetical of the Bible in passages marked by
Passages imaginative description and poetic

imagery, any more than we should
ascribe such beliefs to modern writers under


like circumstances. Poetry is the realm of truth
and not of matter of fact. In passages of this
tenor, mythology may explain the word itself and
justify its appropriateness, it does not explain the
use of the term or disclose the personal view of the
writer.

All these references are in the highest degree


allusive. They exhibit no exercise of the mytho-

logical fancy and have received no
3. The embroidery with details. This is most
References significant. So far as our specific ref-
Allusive erences are concerned, we are dealing


with petrified mythology, uscful as liter-

ary embellishment, but no longer interesting in itself.
Every one of these words is sufficiently obscure
in origin and uncertain in meaning to admit the
possibility of a non-mythological in-

4. Possibil- terpretation; indeed, in several of the


ity of Non- parallels a non-mythological use is
mytho- evident. Bible-Dict. writers are apt
logical to say (e.g. concerning /7lith) that there
Interpre- is no doubt concerning the mytho-
tation logical reference. The reader may dis-


cover for himself that the lexicographers
are more cautious (see BDB, in loc.). The use of
“Rahab” in Job 26 12 is not mythological for the
simple reason that it is figurative; the use of
“Leviathan” in Isa 27 land Ezk 29 3 comes under
the same category. In Job 40 and 41, if the identi-
fication of behemoth and leviathan with hippopota-
mus and crocodile be allowed to stand and the
mythological significance of the two be admitted,
we have the stage where mythology has become a
fixed and universal symbolism which can be used to
convey truth apart from the belief in it as reality
(see Leviarnan; “Job,” New Cent. Bible, p. 335;
Afeth, Rev., May, 1913, 429 ff). The sca serpent of
Am 9 3 is not necessarily the dragon or Tiamat, and
the use of the term is merely suggestive. The term
s°tr is in literal use for “he-goat’’ (Nu 16 24, et al.)
and is doubtful throughout. Ewald translates it
“he-goat” in Isa 34 14 and “Satyr” in 13 21. It
means lit. “shaggy monster” (Vulg pilosus). We do
not hesitate on the basis of the evidence to crase
“Alukah” (Prov 30 15, RV “horse-leech,” by some
trd “vampire’’) and “Azazel’’ (Lev 16 8, etc), inter-
preted as a “demon of the desert,” from the list of
mythological words altogether. As ripe a scholar
as Perowne (“Prov,” Cambridge Bible) combats
the idea of vampire, and Kellogg (‘(Lev,”’ Expositor's
Bible, in loc.) has simply put to rout the mytho-
logical-demonie interpretation of Azazel. “Even
in the case of lilith the derivation is obscure, and
the objections urged against the demonic idea by
Alexander have not altogether lost their force (see
Comm. on Isa, in loc.). There is a close balance of
probabilities in one direction or the other.
_ One further fact with regard to lilith must be con-
sidered. The term occurs in a list of creatures, the
greater part of which are matter-of-fact animals


2145


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA fight-Monster


or birds. A comparative glance at a half-dozen tr®
of the passage Isa 34 11-14 will convince any reader
that there are a great many obscure


5. The and difficult words to be found in the
Term list. Following Delitzsch’s tr we have:
llith “pelican,” “hedge-hog,” “horned-owl,”


“raven,” “wild-dog,” “ostrich,” ‘forest-
demon” (s*‘tr), “night-monster.” This is a curious
mixture of real and imaginary creatures. Alexander
acutely observes that there is too much or too
little mythology in the passage. One of two con-
clusions would seem to follow from a list so con-
structed: Either all these creatures are looked upon
as more or less demonic (see Whitehouse, HDB, art.


black or blue. This name does not occur in the
Heb of the OT or in the Eng. tr):


I. Tue Nive in Puysica, GeocraPpHy
1, Description

2. Geological Origin

3. The Making of Egypt

4. The Inundation

5. The Infiltration

Tue Nive in History

1. The Location of Temples

2. The Location of Cemetcries
3. The Damming of the Nile

4, Egyptian Famines

Tuo Nite in RELIGION

1. The Nile as a God

2. The Nile in the Osirian Myth
3. The Celestial Nile


II.


III.


oe ££; |


Ow THE Bank oF THE Ni_e.


“Demon,” with which cf W. M. Alexander, Demonic
Possession in the NT, 16), or, as seems to the
present writer far more probable, none in the list
is considered otherwise than as supposed literal in-
habitants of the wilderness. The writer of Isa 34
14, who was not constructing a scientific treatise,
but using his imagination, has constructed a list in
which are combined real and imaginary creatures
popularly supposed to inhabit unpeopled sohtudes.
There still remains a by no means untenable suppo-
sition that none of the terms necessarily are mytho-
logical in this particular passage.
Louis Martraews SwEET

NIGHT-WATCH, nit’woch (42722 TN,
‘ashmurah ba-laylah, “watch in the night”): One of
the three or four divisions of the night. See
Watcu; Time.


NILE, nil (Nethos, Netlos, meaning not certainly
known; perhaps refers to the color of the water, as |


A river of North Africa, the great river of Egypt.
The name employed in the OT to designate the Nile
is in the Heb "N°, y’dr, Egyp dir, earlier, dtir,
usually tr4 “river,” also occasionally “canals” (Ps
78 44; Ezk 29 3ff). In a general way it means
all the water of Egypt. The Nile is also the prin-
cipal river included in the phrase WAS"), na-
héré kash, “rivers of Ethiopia” (lsa 18 1). Poeti-
cally the Nile is called 03, yam, “sea” (Job 41 31;
Nah 3 8; probably Isa 18 2), but this is not a
name of the river. VIN°U, shihor, not always
written fully, has also been interpreted in a mis-
taken way of the Nile (see Suruor). Likewise
O-wA WH, nakar migrayim, “brook of Egypt,” a
border stream in no way connected with the Nile,
has sometimes been mistaken for that river. See
River or Eeypt.

L The Nile in Physical Geography.—The Nile
is formed by the junction of the White Nile and


Nile


Nineveh


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2146


the Blue Nile in lat. 15° 45’ N. and long. 32° 45’
E. The Blue N. rises in the highlands of Abyssinia,
lat. 12° 30’ N., long. 35° E., and flows
1. Descrip- N.W. 850 miles to its junction with
tion the White N. The White N., the
principal branch of the N., rises in
Victoria Nyanza, a great lake in Central Africa,
a few miles N. of the equator, long. 33° E. (more
exactly the N. may be said to rise at the headwaters
of the Ragera River, a small stream on the other
side of the lake, 3° 8S. of the equator), and flows N.
in a tortuous channel, 1,400 miles to its junction
with the Blue N. From this junction-point the N.
flows N. through Nubia and Egypt 1,900 miles and
empties into the Mediterranean Sea, in lat. 32° N.,
through 2 mouths, the Rosetta, E. of Alexandria,
and the Damietta, W. of Port Said. There were
formerly 7 mouths scattered along a coast-line of
140 miles.
The Nile originated in the Tertiary period and
has continued from that time to this, though by
the subsidence of the land 220 ft. along
2. Geologi- the Mediterranean shore in the Plu-
cal Origin vial times, the river was very much
shortened. Later in the Pluvial times
the land rose again and is still rising slowly.
Cultivable Egypt is altogether the product of the
N., every particle of the soil having been brought
down by the river from the heart of the
3. The continent and deposited along the
Making of banks and esp. in the delta at the
Egypt mouth of the river. The banks have
risen higher and higher and extended
farther and farther back by the deposit of the sedi-
ment, until the valley of arable land varies in width
in most parts from 3 or 4 miles to 9 or 10 miles.
The mouth of the river, after the last elevation of
the land in Pluvial times, was at first not far from
the lat. of Cairo. From this point northward the
river has built up a delta of 140 miles on each side,
over which it spreads itself and empties into the sea
through its many mouths. :
The watering of Egypt by the inundation from
the N. is the most striking feature of the physical
character of that land, and one of the
4. TheIn- most interesting and remarkable physi-
undation cal phenomena in the world. The
inundation is produced by the com-
bination of an indirect and a direct cause. The
indirect cause is the rain and melting snow on the
equatorial mountains in Central Africa, which
maintains steadily a great volume of water in the
White N. The direct cause is torrential rains in
the highlands of Abyssinia which send down the
Blue N. a sudden great increase in the volume of
water. The inundation has two periods each year.
The first begins about July 15 and continues until
near the end of September. After a slight recession,
the river again rises early in October in the great
inundation. High Nile is in October, 25 to 30 ft.,
low Nile in June, about 123 ft. The Nilometer for
recording the height of the water of inundation
dates from very early times. Old Nilometers are
found still dn site at Edfu and Assuan. The water-
ing and fertilizing of the land is the immediate effect
of the inundation; its ultimate result is that making
of Egypt which is still in progress. The settling
of the sediment from the water upon the land
has raised the surface of the valley about 1 ft.
in 300 to 400 years, about 9 to 10 ft. near Cairo
since the beginning of the early great temples. The
deposit varies greatly at other places. As the de-
posit of sediment has been upon the bottom of the
river, as well as upon the surface of the land, though
more slowly, on acconnt of the swiftness of the
current, the river also has been lifted up, and thus
the inundation has extended farther and farther


to the E., and the W., as the level of the valley
would permit, depositing the sediment and thus
making the cultivable land wider, as well as the
soil deeper, year by year. At Heliopolis, a little
N. of Cairo, this extension to the E. has been 3 to
4 miles since the building of the great temple there.


aed]


Cross-Sectien of Nilometer.


At Luxor, about 350 miles farther up the river,
where the approach toward the mountains is much
steeper, the extension of the good soil to the E. and
the W. is inconsiderable.
The ancient Egyptians were right in calling all
the waters of Egypt the N., for wherever water is
obtained by digging it is simply the
5. The N. percolating through the porous
Infiltration soil. This percolation is called the
infiltration of the N. It always ex-
tends as far on either side of the N. as the level of
the water in the river at the time will permit. This
infiltration, next to the inundation, is the most im-
portant physical phenomenon in Egypt. By
means of it much of the irrigation of the land during
the dry season is carried on from wells. It has had
its influence also in the political and religious
changes of the country (cf below).
Hl. The Nile in History.—Some of the early temples


were located near the N., prehahly because of the deifi-
cation of the river. The rising of the


1. The Lo- surface of the land, and at the same time
cation of of the hed of the river, from the inunda-

tion lifted heth Egypt and its great
Temples river, hut left the temples dewn at the


’ _,eld level. In time the infiltration of the
river from its new higher level reached farther and
farther and rose to a higher level until the fleor ef these
old temples was under water even at the time of lewest
N., and then geds and goddesses, priests and ceremenial
all were drivencut. At least two of the greatest temples
and most sacred places, Heliepolis and Memphis, had te
be abandoned. Tobably this fact had as much to do
with the downfall of Egypt's religion, as its political
disasters and the actual destruction of its temples by
eastern invaders. Nature's God had driven out the

geds of Nature.
Seme prehistoric burials are found on the higher
greund, as at Kefr ‘Amar. _A thousand years of history
would be quite sufficient te teach Egyp-


2. The Lo~ tians that the N. was still making Egypt.
cation of Thenceforth, cemeteries were located at

< the mountains on the eastern and_ the
Cemeteries western boundaries of the valley. Here


. _they continue to this day, fer the mest
part still entirely above the waters of the inundation—
and usually above the reach of the infiltration.


2147


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Nile
Nineveh


The widening of the cultivable land by means of long
canals which carried the water from far up the river to
levels higher than that of the inundation,

3. Dams in farther down the river was practised from
the Nil very early times. The substitution of

6 Inve dams for long canals was reserved for
modern eugincering skill. Threo great
dams have been made: the first a little N. of Cairo, the
greatest at Assuan, and the last uear Asyut.

Famines in Egypt are always due to failure in the
quantity of the waters of inundation. Great famines
have not been frequent. The cause of
the failure in the water of inundation
is now believed to be not so much a
lack of the water of inundation from the
Blue N. as the choking of the channel of the White N.
in the great marsh land of the Sudan by the sud, a kind
of sedge, sometimes hecoming such a tangled mass as to
close the channel and impede the flow of the regular
volume of water so that the freshet in the Blue N. causes
but little inundation at the usual time, and during the
rest of the year the N. is so low from the same cause that
good irrigation by canals and wells is impossible. A
channel through the sud is now kept open by the Egyp
government.


Il. The Nile in Religion.—One of the gods of the
Egyp pantheon was Hapi, the Nile. In early times
it divided the honors with Ra, the
1. The Nile sun-god. No wonder it was so. If
asaGod the Egyptians set out to worship
Nature-gods at all, surely then the
sun and the Nile first.
The origin of the Osirian myth is still much dis-
cussed. Very much evidence, perhaps conclusive
evidence, can be adduced to prove that
2. The Nile it rose originally from the Nile; that
in Osirian Osiris was first of all the N., then the
Myth water of the N., then the soil, the prod-
uct of the waters of the N., and then
Egypt, the N. and all that it produced.
Egypt was the Egyptian’s little world, and Egypt
was the Nile. It was thus quite natural for the
Egyptians in considering the celestial


4, Famines


3. The world to image it in likeness of their
Celestial own world with a celestial Nile flowing
Nile through it. It is so represented in the


mythology, but the conception of the
heavens is vague. M. G. Kyiz


NIMRAH, nim’ta (WYO), nimrah; B, NépBpa,
Ndmbra, A,’ApBpap, Ambrdm), or BETH-NIMRAH
(70) 1B, beth nimradh; B, Noppdpn, Namrdm, A,
7ApBpdv, Ambrdn [Nu 32 36], B, BalavaBpa,
Baithanabrd, A, Bnoapva, Béthamnd [Josh 13 27)):
These two names evidently refer to the same place;
but there is no reason to think, as some have done,
from the similarity of the names, that it is identical
with Nimrim (q.v.). On the contrary, the indi-
cations of the passages cited point to a site E. of the
Jordan valley and N. of the Dead Sea. About I1
miles N.E. of the mouth of the Jordan, where Wady
Nimrin, coming down from the eastern up-lands,
enters the plain, stands a hill called Tell Nimrin,
with tombs and certain traces of ancient building.
This may be certainly identified with Nimrah and
Beth-nimrah; and it corresponds to Bethnambris of
Onom, which lay 5 Rom miles N. of Livias.

; W. Ewina

NIMRIM, nim‘rim (O™VAI%, mé nimrim;
B, NeBpelv, Nebrein, A, EBpiy, brim [Jer 48 34],
rd Uap Tis Nuppely, 16 hidor tés Nimreim (Isa 15
6]): The meaning appears to be “pure” or ‘‘whole-
some water.’ The name occurs only in Isa 15 6
and Jer 48 34 in oracles against Moab. In each
case it is mentioned in association with Zoar and
Horonaim. It is therefore probably to be sought
to the S.E. of the Dead Sea. Onom places a town,
Bennamareim, to the N. of Zoar, and identifies it
with the OT “Nimrim,” as it seems, correctly. The
name is still found in Wdady Numeireh, opening on
the sea at Burj Numeirah, N. of Ghar es-Safiyeh.
The waters of Nimrim may be sought either in


Moiyet Numeirah or in the spring higher up, where
lie the ruins of a town in a well-watered and fruit-
ful district (Buhl, GAP, 272). W. Ewine


NIMROD, nim'rod (703, nimrodh; NeBpas,
Nebréd): A descendant of Ham, mentioned in ‘the
generations of the sons of Noah” (Gen 10; cf 1 Ch
1 10) as a son of Cush. He established his king-
dom ‘in the land of Shinar,’ including the cities
“Babel, and Erech, and Acead, and Calneh”’ (ver
10), of which only Babel, or Babylon, and Erech,
or Uruk, have been identified with certainty. “The
land of Shinar’ is the old name for Southern Baby-
lonia, afterward called Chaldaea (eree kasdim), and
was probably more extensive in territory than the
Sumer of the inscriptions in the ancient royal title,
“King of Shumer and Accad,” since Accad is in-
cluded here in Shinar. Nimrod, like other great
kings of Mesopotamian lands, was a mighty hunter,
possibly the mightiest and the prototype of them
all, since to his name had attached itself the prov-
erb: “Like Nimrod a mighty hunter before Jeh”
(ver 9). In the primitive days of Mesopotamia,
as also in Pal, wild animals were so numerous that
they became a menace to life and property (Ex 23
29; Lev 26 22); therefore the king as benefactor
and protector of his people hunted these wild
beasts. The early conquest of the cities of Baby-
lonia, or their federation into one great kingdom, is
hereascribed to Nimrod. Whether the founding and
colonization of Assyria (ver 11) are to be ascribed
to N. will be determined by the exegesis of the text.
EV reads: ‘Out of that land he [i.c. Nimrod] went
forth into Assyria, and builded Nineveh,” etc, this
tr assigning the rise of Assyria to N., and appar-
ently being sustained by Mic 6 5.6 (cf J. M. P.
Smith, ‘‘Micah,” JCC, in loc.); but ARVm renders:
“Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded
Nineveh,” which tr is more accurate exegetically
and not in conflict with Mic 5 6, if im the latter
‘Vand of Nimrod” be understood, not as parallel
with, but as supplemental to, Assyria, and therefore
as Babylon (cf comms. of Cheyne, Pusey, 8. Clark,
in loc.).

N. has not been identified with any mythical
hero or historic king of the inscriptions. Some
have sought identification with Gilgamesh, the flood
hero of Babylonia (Skinner, Driver, Delitzsch);
others with a later IXassite king (Haupt, Hilprecht),
which is quite unlikely; but the most admissible
correspondence is with Marduk, chief god of Baby-
lon, probably its historic founder, just as Asshur,
the god of Assyria, appears in ver 11 as the founder
of the Assyr empire (Wellhausen, Price, Sayce).
Lack of identification, however, does not necessarily
indicate mythical origin of the name. See ASTRON-
omy, II, f1; Basyznonia AND AssyRIA, RELIGION
or, [V, 7; Meropacu; Orion. Epwarp Mack


NIMSHI, nim‘shi WA}, nimsht): The grand-
father of Jehu (2 K 9 2.14). Jehu’s usual desig-
nation is “son of Nimshi” (1 Ix 19 16).


NINEVEH, nin’é-ve (M2, nineweh; Nuivevs,
Nineué, Nwevt, Nineui; Gr and Rom writers, Nivos,
Ninos):

I. BeGinninos, NAME, Position

1. First Biblical Mention
2. Etymology of the Name
3. Position on the Tigris
IJ. Nineveu anp Its SuRROUNDINGS
. Its Walls
. Principal Mounds and Gateways
Extent and Population within the Walls
Extent outside the Walls
. Calah, Resen and Rehebotb-Ir
Khorsahad
. Sherif Khan and Selamieh
. Nimroud


WNAARWNE


Nineveh


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2148


TI. Pavaces at Ningeven Proper
1. The Palace of Sennacherib
2, The Palace of ASSur-hani-apli
IV. Sennacueris’s Description or NINEVEH
1. The Walls
. The Gates—Northwest
The Gates—South and East
The Gates—West
The Outer Wall: the Plantatiens
The Water-Supply, etc
. How the Bas-Reliefs Illustrate the King’s De-
scription
8. Nineveh the Later Capital
V. Last Days anp Fat or NINEVEH
LirERATURE G


I. Beginnings, Name, Pasition.—The first Bib.


mention of Nineveh is in Gen 10 11, where it is
stated that Nimrop (q.v.) or Asshur


Ng pup ger


1. First went out into Assyria, and builded N.
Biblical and Rehoboth-Ir, and Calah, and
Mention Resen between N. and Calah, with the


addition, “the same is the great city.”
Everything indicates that these statements are
correct, for N. was certainly at one time under Bab
rule, and was at first not governed by Assyr kings,
but by 78Saké or viceroys of ASSur, the old capital.
To all appearance N. took its name from the Bab
Nina near Laga’ in South Babylonia, on the Eu-
phrates, from which early foundation it was prob-
ably colonized. The native name appears as Ninua
or Nind (Ninaa), written with the character for

“water enclosure” with that for “fish”


2. Ety- inside, implying a connection between
mology of Nind and the Sem nin, “fish.” The
the Name Bab Nina was a place where fish were


very abundant, and IStar or Nina, the
goddess of the city, was associated with Nin-mah,
Merodach’s spouse, as goddess of reproduction.
Fish are also plentiful in the Tigris at Afosul, the
modern town on the other side of the river, and this
may have influenced the choice of the site by the
Bab settlers, and the foundation there of the great
temple of IStar or Nina. The date of this founda-
tion is unknown, but it may have taken place about
3000 BC.
N. lay on the eastern bank of the Tigris, at the
point where the Khosr falls into that stream. The
outline of the wall is rectangular on the
3. Its Posi- W., but of an irregular shape on the
tion on the E. The western fortifications run
Tigris from N.W. to 8.E., following, roughly,
the course of the river, which now
flows about 1,500 yards from the walls, instead of
close to them, as anciently.
II, Nineveh and Its Surroundings.—According
to the late G. Smith, the southwestern wall has a
length of about 2} miles, and is joined at
1. Its Walls its western corner by the northwestern
wall, which runs in a northeasterly
direction for about 1} miles. The northeastern wall,
starting here, runs at first in a southeasterly direc-
tion, but turns southward, gradually approaching
the southwestern wall, to which, at the end of about
313 miles, it is joined by a short wall, facing nearly
S., rather more than half a mile long.
The principal mounds are Kouyunjik, a little
N.E. of the village of ‘Amusiyeh, and Nebi-Yunas,
about 1,500 yards to the 8.E. Both
2. Principa) of these lie just within the S.W. wall.


Mounds Extensive remains of buildings occupy
and Gate- the fortified area. Numerous open-
ways ings occur in the walls, many of them


ancient, though some seem to have
been made after the abandonment of the site. The
principal gate on the N.W. was guarded by winged
bulls (see Layard, Monuments of Nineveh, 2d series,
pl. 3; Nineveh and Babylon, 120). Other gates
gave access to the various commercial roads of the
conntry, those on the E. passing through the curved
outworks and the double line of fortifications which


protected the northeastern wall from attack on that
side, where the Ninevites evidently considered that

they had most to fear.
According to G. Smith, the circuit of the inner
wallis about 8 miles, and Captain Jones, who made
a trigonometrical survey in 1854,


3. Extent estimated that, allotting to each in-
and Popu- habitant 50 sq. yards, the city may
lation have contained 174,000 inhabitants.
within the If the statement in Jon 4 11, that the
Walls city contained 120,000 persons who


could not discern between their right
hand and their left, be intended to give the number
of the city’s children only, then the population
must have numbered about 600,000, and more than
three citics of the same extent would have been
needed to contain them. It has therefore been

supposed—and that with great prob-
4, Extent  ability—that there was a large exten-
outside the sion of the city outside its walls. This
Walls is not only indicated by Jon 3 3,

where it is described as ‘“‘an exceeding
great city of three days’ journey” to traverse, but
also by the extant ruins, which stretch S.E. along
the banks of the Tigris as far as Nimroud (Calah),
while its northern extension may have been regarded


| as including Khorsabad.


Concerning the positions of two of the cities
mentioned with N., namely, Calah and Resen, there
can be no doubt, notwithstanding that
5. Calah, Resen has not yet been identified—
Resen and Calah is the modern Nimroud, and
Rehoboth-Ir Resen lay between that site and N.
The name Rehoboth-Ir has not yet
been found in the inscriptions, but Fried. Delitzsch
has suggested that it may be the rébit Ninua of the
inscriptions, N.E. of N. If this be the case, the
N. of Jonah contained within it all the places in
Gen 10 11.12, and Khorsabad besides.
Taking the outlying ruins from N. to 8., we begin
with Khorsabad (Dér-Sarru-kin or Ddar-Sargina),
12 miles N.E. of Kouyunjik, the great
6. Khorsa- palace mound of N. proper. Jhorsa-~
bad bad is a great inclosure about 2,000
yards square, with the remains of
towers and gateways. The palace mound lies on
its northwest face, and consists of an cxtensive plat-
form with the remains of Sargon’s palace and its
temple, with a ziggurat or temple-tower similar to
those at Babylon, Borsippa, Calah and elsewhere.
This last still shows traces of the tints symbolical
of the 7 planets of which its stages were, seemingly,
emblematic. The palace ruins show numerous
halls, rooms and passages, many of which were
faced with slabs of coarse alabaster, sculptured in
relief with military operations, hunting-scenes,
mythological figures, ete, while the principal en-
trances were flanked with the finest winged human-
headed bulls which Assyr art has so far revealed.
The palace was built about 712 BC, and was prob-
ably destroyed by fire when N. fell in 606 BC,
sharing the same fate. Some of the slabs and
winged bulls are in the Louvre and the British
Museum, but most of the antiquarian spoils were
lost in the Tigris by the sinking of the rafts upon
which they were loaded after being discovered.


Another outlying suhurh was prohahly Tarbisu, now
represented hy the ruins at Sherif Khan, about 3 miles
; N. of Kouyunjik. In this lay a temple—

7. Sherif palace"’ Sennacherih calls it—dedicated


to Nergal. Anciently it must have been
are eng a place of some importance, as Esar-
Selamie haddon seems to have built a palace there,


as well as a ‘‘seat’’ for his eldest son,
AsSur-bani-apli. The site of Resen, ‘‘hetween N. and
Calah,"’ is thought to he the modern Selamteh, 12 miles
§. of N., and 3 miles N. of Nimroud (Calah). It is in
the form of an irregular inclosure on a high mound over-
looking the Tigris, with a surface of ahout 400 acres.


2149


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Nineveh


No remains of buildings, sculptures or inscriptions have,
however, been found there.


After N. itself (Kouyunjik), the ruins known as
Nimroud, 14 or 15 miles S.E., are the most impor-


tant. They mark the site of the an-
8. Nim- cient Calah, and have already been
roud described under that heading (see p.


539). As there stated, the stone-faced
temple-tower seems to be referred to by Ovid, and
is apparently also mentioned by Xenophon (see
Resen). The general tendency of the accumu-
lated references to these sites supports the theory
that they were regarded as belonging to N., if not
by the Assyrians themselves (who knew well the
various municipal districts), at least. by the foreign-
ers who had either visited the city or had heard or
read descriptions of it.

Hf. The Palaces at Nineveh Proper.—The
palaces at N. were built upon extensive artificial
platforms between 30 and 50 ft. high, either of sun-
dried brick, as at Nimroud, or of earth and rubbish,
as at Kouyunjik. It is thought that they were
faced with masonry, and that access was gained to


them by means of flights of deep steps, or sloping

athways. Naturally it is the plan of the basement
Bose alone that can at present be traced, any upper
stories that may have existed having long since dis-
appeared. The halls and rooms discovered were
faced with slabs of alabaster or other stone, often
sculptured with bas-reliefs depicting warlike expe-
ditions, the chase, religious ceremonies and divine
figures. The depth of the accumulations over these
varies from a few inches to about 30 ft., and if the
amount in some cases would scem to be excessive,
it is thought that this may have been due either to
the existence of upper chambers, or to the extra
height of the room. The chambers, which are
grouped around courtyards, are long and narrow,
with small square rooms at the ends. The partition
walls vary from 6 to 15 ft. in thickness, and are of
sun-dried brick, against which the stone paneling
was fixed. As in the case of the Bab temples and
palaces, the rooms and halls open into each other,
so that, to gain access to those farthest from the
courtyard entrance, one or more halls or chambers
had to be traversed. No traces of windows have
been discovered, and little can therefore be said as
to the method of lighting, but the windows were
either high up, or light was admitted through open-
ings in the roof. ( )

The palace of Sennacherib lay in the southeast
corner of the platform, and consisted of a court-
yard surrounded on all four sides by
numerous long halls, and rooms, of
Palace of | which the innermost were capable of
Sennacherib being rendered private. It was in this

palace that were found the reliefs de-
picting the siege of Lachish, with the representation


1. The


Enrrance to Kovurunsix.


of Sennacherib seated on his “standing” throne
while the captives and the spoil of the city passed
before him. The grand entrance was flanked by
winged bulls facing toward the spectator as he
entered. They were in couples, back to back, on
each side of the doorway, and between each pair
the ancient Bab hero-giant, carrying in one hand
the “boomerang,” and holding tightly with his left
arm a struggling lion (Layard, Nineveh and Baby-
lon, 137) was represented, just as at his father
Sargon’s palace at Khorsabad. The upper part of
these imposing figures had been destroyed, but they
were so massive, that the distinguished explorer
attributed their overthrow not to the act of man,
but to some convulsion of Nature.
In the north of the mound are the ruins of the
palace of ASSur-bani-4pli or Assur-bani-pal, dis-
covered by Hormuzd Rassam. His
2. The latest plan (Asshur and the Land of
Palace of —§ Nimrod, Cincinnati and New York,
A8S&ur-bani- 1897, plate facing p. 36) does not give
apli the whole of the structure, much of
the building having been destroyed;
but the general arrangement of the rooms was upon
the traditional lines. The slabs with which they
were paneled showed bas-reliefs illustrating the


Assyr campaigns against Babylonia, certain Arab
tribes, and Elam. As far as they are preserved,
the sculptures are wonderfully good, and the whole
decorative scheme of the paneled walls, of which,
probably, the greater part is forever lost, may be
characterized, notwithstanding their defects of
perspective and their mannerisms, as nothing less
than magnificent. The lion-hunts of the great king,
despite the curious treatment of the animals’ manes
(due to the sculptors’ ignorance of the right way
to represent hair) are admirable. It would be diffi-
cult to improve upon the expressions of fear, rage
and suffering on the part of the animals there de-
lineated. The small sculptures showing A&sSur-
banf-4pli hunting the goat and the wild ass are not
less noteworthy, and are executed with great
delicacy.
IV. Sennacherib’s Description of Nineveh.—In
\ all probability the best description of the city is that
given by Sennacherib on the cylinder
1. The recording his expedition to Tarsus in
Walls Cilicia. From ancient times, he says,
the circuit of the city had measured
9,300 cubits, and he makes the rather surprising
statement that his predecessors had not built either
the inner or the outer wall, which, if true, shows how
confident they were of their security from attack.
He claims to have enlarged the city by 12,515
(cubits), The great defensive wall which he built
was called by the Sumerian name of Bad-imgallabi-
lu-Susu, which he translates as “the wall whose
glory overthrows the enemy.’’ He made the brick-
work 40 (cubits) thick, which would probably not
greatly exceed the estimate of G. Smith, who reck-
oned it to have measured about 50 ft. The height


Nineveh
Nineveh, Library


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2150


of the wall he raised to 180 tipki, which, admitting
the estimate of Diodorus, should amount to about
100 ft.

In this inclosing wall were 15 gates, which he enu-


meratesinfull. Three of these were situated in the short
northwest wall—the gate of Hadad; the


2. The gate of Uru or Hadad of Tarbisu (Sherif
Gates— Khan), and the gate of the moon-god

Nannar, Sennacherih’s own deity. The
Northwest plans show five openings in the wall on this


side, any of which may have heen the gate
used when going to Tarbisu, but that adorned with
winged bulls probably furnished the shortest route.


The gates looking toward the 8. and the E. were the
ASSur-gate (eading to the old capital); Sennacherib’s
Halzi-gate; the gate of Samag of Gagal,


3. The the gate of the god Enlil of Kar-Ninlil,
Gates— and the ‘'covered gate,"’ which seems to
South and have had the reputation of letting forth

the fever-demon. After this are men-
East tioned the Sibaniba-gate, and the gate of


Halah in Mesopotamia. This last must
have been the extreme northeastern opening, now com-
municating with the road to Khorsahad, implying that
Halah lay in that direction.

The gates on the west or river-side of the city
were ‘‘the gate of Ea, director of my water-
springs"’; the quay-gate, “‘ bringer


4. The of the tribute of my peoples’;
ee the gate of the land of Bari,

within which the presents of the
West Sumuilites entered (brought down


hy the Tigris from Babylonia, in
all probahility); the gate of the tribute-palace
or armory; and the gate of the god Sar-ur—
‘altogether 5 gates in the direction of the W.”
There are about 9 wide openings in the wall on
this side, 2 heing on each side of the Kouyunjik
mound, and 2 on each side of that called Nebi-
Yunus. As openings at these points would
have endangered the city's safety, these 4 have
probably to he eliminated, leaving 2 only N. of
Nebi-Yunus, 2 hetween that and Kouyunjik,


In connection with this, in all probability, he
arranged the water-supply, conducting a distant
water-course to N. by means of con-
6. The duits. Being a successful venture, he
Water- seems to have watered therewith all
Supply, etc the people’s orchards, and in winter
1,000 corn fields above and below the
city. The force of the increased current in the
river Khosr was retarded by the creation of a
swamp, and among the reeds which grew there
were placed wild fowl, wild swine, and deer(?).
Here he repeated his exotic plantations, including
trees for wood, cotton (apparently) and seemingly
the olive.
Sennacherib’s bas-reliefs show some of the phases
of the work which his cylinder inscriptions describe.
We sce the winged bulls, which are of
7. How the colossal dimensions, sometimes lying
Bas-Reliefs on their sledges (shaped like boats or


Illustrate  Assyr ships), and sometimes standing
the King’s and supported by scaffolding. The
Description sledges rest upon rollers, and are


dragged by armies of captives urged
to action by taskmasters with whips. Others force
the sledges forward from behind by means of enor-
mous levers whose upper ends are held in position
by guy-ropes. Each side has to pull with equal
force, for if the higher end of the great lever fell, the
side which had pulled too hard suffered in killed
and crushed, or at least in bruised, workmen of their
number. In the background are the soldiers of the
guard, and behind them extensive wooded hills.
In other bas-reliefs it is apparently the pleasure-
grounds of the palace which are seen. In these
the background is an avenue of trees, alternately tall
and short, on the banks of ariver, whereon are boats,
and men riding astride inflated skins, which were
much used in those days, as now. On another slab,
the great. king himself, in his hand-chariot drawn
by eunuchs, superintends the work.

How long N. had been the capital of Assyria is
unknown. The original capital was ASSur, about 50
miles to the 8., and probably this continued to be
regarded as the religious and official capital of the
country. ASSur-nasir-Apli seems to have had a


and one N. of Kouyunjik. Minor means of exit
probably existed at all points where they were
regarded as needful.
To the outer wall of the city Sennacherib gave a
Sumerian name meaning, “the wall which terrifies
the enemy.”’ At a depth of 54 gar,
5. The the underground water-level, its
Outer Wall: foundations were laid upon blocks of
the Plan- stone, the object of this great. depth
tations being to frustrate undermining. The
wall was made “high like a mountain.”
Above and below the city he laid ont plantations,
wherein all the sweet-smelling herbs of Heth (Pal
and Phoenicia) grew, fruitful beyond those of their
homeland. Among them were to be found every
kind of mountain-vine, and the plants of all the
nations around.


Bas-Relief of Sennacherib Besieging Lachish.
(Brit. Mus.)


greater liking for Calah (Nimroud), and Sargon
for Khorsabad, where he had founded a splendid
: palace, These latter, however, prob-
8. Nineveh ably never had the importance of N,,
the Later and attained their position merely on
Capital account of the reigning king building a
: palace and residing there. The period
of N.’s supremacy secms to have been from the be-
ginning of the reign of Sennacherib to the end of
that of A%Sur-bani-Apli, including, probably, the
reigns of his successors likewise—a period of about
98 years (704-606 BC).
V. Last Days and Fall of Nineveh.—N., during
the centuries of her existence, must have seen many


2151


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Nineveh
Nineveh, Library


stirring historical events; but the most noteworthy | Deluge, however, by Mr. George Smith in 1873


were probably Sennacherib’s triumphal entries,
including that following the capture of Lachish, the
murder of that great conqueror by his sons (the
recent theory that he was killed at Babylon needs
confirmation), and the ceremonial triumphs of
A&Sur-bant-dpli—the great and noble Osnappar
(Ezr 410). After the reign of ASSur-bant-Apli
came his son ASSur-étil-tlani, who was succeeded
by Sin-Sarra-igkun (Saracos), but the history of the
country, and also of the city, is practically non-
existent during these last two reigns. The Assyr
and Bab records are silent with regard to the fall
of the city, but Alexander Polyhistor, Abydenus
and Syncellus all speak of it. The best account,
however, is that of Diodorus Siculus, who refers to
a legend that the city could not be taken until the
Tiver became its enemy. Arbaces, the Scythian,
besieged it, but could not make any impression on it
for 2 years. In the 3d year, however, the river
(according to Commander Jones, not the Tigris,
but the Khosr), being swollen by rains, and very
rapid in its current, carried away a portion of the
wall, and by this opening the besiegers gained an
entrance. The king, recognizing in this the ful-
filment of the oracle, gathered together his concu-
bines and eunuchs, and, mounting a funeral pyre
which he had caused to be constructed, perished in
the flames. This catastrophe is supposed to be
referred to in Nah 1 8: ‘With an over-running
flood he [the Lord] will make a full end of her place
[i.e. of N.],” and 2 6: “The gates of the rivers are
opened, and the palace is dissolved.’”? The destruc-
tion of the city by fire is probably referred to in
3 13.15. The picture of the scenes in her streets
—the noise of the whip, the rattling wheels, the
prancing horses, the bounding chariots (3 2 ff),
followed by a vivid description of the carnage of the
battlefield—is exceedingly striking, and true to their
records and their sculptures.


Lrreraturs.—The standard books on the discovery
and exploration of N. are Layard. Nineveh and_Its
Remains (two vols, 1849); Nineveh and Babylon (1853);
Monuments of Nineveh, lst and 2d series (plates) (1849
and 1853); and Hormuzd Rassam, Asshur and the Land
of Nimrod (Cincinnati and New York, 1897).


T. G. Pincurs
NINEVEH, LIBRARY OF:


I. THe Discovery

II. THe Lisrary
Ill, Waritinac-MaTERIALS
IV. Contents

1. Philology

Astronomy and Astrology
Religious Texts
Law
Science
. Literature
History and Chronology
Commerce
Letters


I. The Discavery.—In the spring of 1850, the
workmen of Sir A. H. Layard at Nineveh made an
important discovery. In the ruins of the palace of
Assur-bani-pal they found a passage which opened
into two small chambers leading one into the other.
The doorway was guarded on either side by figures
of Ea, the god of culture and the inventor of letters,
in his robe of fishskin. The walls of the chambers
had once been paneled with bas-reliefs, one of which
represented a city standing on the shore of a sea
that was covered with galleys. Up to the height
of a foot or more the floor was piled with clay tab-
lets that had fallen from the shelves on which they
had been arranged in order, and the larger number
of them was consequently broken. Similar tablets,
but in lesser number, were found in the adjoining
chambers. After Layard’s departure, other tab-
lets were discovered by Mr. Hormuzd Rassam, and
then the excavations ceased for many years. The
discovery of the Bab version of the account of the


PRA S yup gows


led the proprictors of the Daily Telegraph to send
him to Nineveh in the hope that the missing por-
tions of the story might be found. He had not
been excavating there long before he came across
a fragment of another version of the story, and then
once more the excavations came to an end. Since
then expeditions have been sent by the British
Museum which have resulted in the recovery of
further remains of the ancient library of Nineveh.

Hl. The Library.—The tablets formed a library
in the true sense of the word. Librarics had existed


deo “E Sy Feet


Plan of the Library at Nineveh.


in the cities of Babylonia from a remote date, and
the Assyr kings, whose civilization was derived from
Babylonia, imitated the example of Babylonia in
this as in other respects. The only true book-
lover among them, however, was Assur-bani-pal.
He was one of the most munificent royal patrons
of learning the world has ever seen, and it was to
him that the great library of Nineveh owed its
existence. New editions were made of older works,
and the public and private libraries of Babylonia
were ransacked in search of literary treasures.

Hl. Writing-Materials.—Fortunately for us the
ordinary writing-material of the Babylonians and
Assyrians was clay. It was more easily procurable
than papyrus or parchment, and was specially
adapted for the reception of the cuneiform char-
acters. Hence, while the greater part of the old
Egyp lit., which was upon papyrus, has perished.
that of Babylonia and Assyria has been preserved.
In Babylonia the tablets aiter being inscribed were
often merely dried in thesun; in the damper climate
of Assyria they were baked in a kiln. As a large
amount of text had frequently to be compressed
into a small space, the writing is sometimes so
minute as to need the assistance of a magnifying
glass before it can be read. It is not surprising,
therefore, that in.the library-chambers of Nineveh
Layard found a magnifying lens of crystal, which
had been turned on the lathe.


Hineveb, Library THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2152


IV. Contents.—The subject-matter of the tab- |


lets included all the known branches of knowledge.

Foremost among them are the philo-
1. Philology logical works. The inventors of the

cuneiform system of writing had
spoken an agglutinative language, called Sumerian,
similar to that of the
‘Turks or Finns today;
and a considerable part
of the early lit. had been
written in this language,
which to the later Sem
Babylonians and Assyri-
ans was what Lat was to
the European nations in
the Middle Ages. The stu-
dent was therefore pro-
vided with grammars and
dictionaries of the two
languages, as well as with
reading-books and _ inter-
linear tr? into Assyr of the
chief Sumerian texts.
Besides this, long lists of
the cuneiform characters
were drawn up with their
phonetic and ideographic
values, together with lists
of Assyr synonyms, in
which, for example, all the equivalents are given of
the word “to go.” The Assyr lexicographers at
times attempted etymologies which are as wide of
the mark as similar etymologies given by English
lexicographers of a past generation. Sabattu, “Sab-
bath,” for instance, is derived from the two
Sumerian words, sa, “heart,” and bat, “to end,” and
so is explained to mean ‘‘day of rest for the heart.”
It is obvious that all this implies an advanced
literary culture. People do not begin to compile
grammars and dictionaries or to speculate ou the


Inscribed Tablet Im-
pressed with Seals.


origin of words until books and libraries abound |


and education is widespread.
Astronomy occupied a prominent place in Assyr
lit., but it was largely mingled with astrology.
The Babylonians were the founders of


2. Astron- scientific astronomy; they were the
omy and first to calculate the dates of lunar
Astrology and solar eclipses, and to give names


to the signs of the Zodiac. Among the
contents of the library of Nineveh are reports from
the Royal Observatory, relating to the observation
of eclipses and the like.
A knowledge of astronomy was needed for the
regulation of the calendar, and the calendar was
the special care of the priests, as the
8. Religious festivals of the gods and the payment
Texts of tithes were dependent upon it.
Most of the religious texts went back
to the Sumerian pcriod and were accordingly pro-
vided with Assyr tr’. Some of them were hymns
to the gods, others were the rituals used in different
temples. There was, moreover, a collection of
psalms, as well as numerous mythological texts.
The legal lit. was considerable. The earliest
law books were in Sumerian, but the great code
compiled by Khammurabi, the con-
4. Law temporary of Abraham, was in Sem
Babylonian (see Hammurasr). Like
English law, Assyro-Babylonian law was case-
made, and records of the cases decided from time
to time by the judges are numerous. ;
Among scientific works we may class the long lists
of animals, birds, fishes, plants and stones, together
with geographical treatises, and the
5. Science pscudo-science of omens. Starting
from the belief that where two events
followed one another, the first was the cause of the


second, an elaborate pseudo-science of augury had
been built up, and an enormous lit. arose on the
interpretation of dreams, the observation of the
liver of animals, etc. Unfortunately Assur-bani-
pal had a special predilection for the subject, and
the consequence is that his library was filled with
works which the Assyriologist would gladly ex-
change for documents of a more valuable character.
Among the scientific works we may also include
those on medicine, as well as numerous mathemat-
ical tables.

Literature was largely represented, mainly in the
form of poems on mythological, religious or his-
torical subjects. Among these the
most famous is the epic of the hero
GilgameS in twelve books, the Bab
account of the Deluge being intro-
duced as an episode in the eleventh book. Another
epic was the story of the great battle between the
god Merodach and Tiamat, the dragon of chaos
and evil, which includes the story of the crea-
tion.

Historical records are very numerous, the Assyr-
ians being distinguished among the nations of

antiquity by their historical sense.
7. History In Assyria the royal palace took the
and place of the Bab or Egyp temple;
Chronology and where the Babylonian or the

Egyptian would have left behind him
a religious record, the Assyrian adorned his walls
with accounts of campaigns and the victories of
their royal builders. The dates which are attached
to each portion of the narrative, and the care with
which the names of petty princes and states are
transcribed, give a high idea of the historical pre-
cision at which the Assyrians aimed. The Assyr
monuments are alone sufficient to show that the
historical sense was by no means unknown to the
ancient peoples of the East, and when we remember
how closely related the Assyrians were to the He-
brews in both race and language, the fact becomes
important to the Bib. student. Besides historical
texts the library contained also chronological tables
and long lists of kings and dynasties with the num-
ber of years they reigned. In Babylonia time was
marked by officially naming each year after some
event that had occurred in the course of it; the
more historically-minded Assyrian named the year
after a particular official, called limmu, who was
appointed on each New Year’s Day. In Baby-
lonia the chronological system went back to a very
remote date. The Babylonians were a commercial
people, and for commercial purposes it was necessary
to have au exact register of the time.

The library contained trading documents of
various sorts, more esp. contracts, deeds of sale of

property and the like. Now and then
8. Com- we meet with the plan of a building.
merce There were also fiscal documents
a relating to the taxes paid by the
cities and provinces of the empire to the imperial
treasury.

One department of the library consisted of letters,
some of them private, others addressed to the king
or to the high officials. Nearly a
thousand of these have already been
published by Professor Harper.

The clay books, it need hardly be added, were all
carefully numbered and catalogued, the Assyr
system of docketing and arranging the tablets being
at once Imgenious and simple. The librarians, con-
sequently, had no difficulty in finding any tablet
or series of tablets that might be asked for. We
may gather from the inscription attached to the
larger works copied from Bab originals as well as
to other collections of tablets that the library was
open to all “readers.” A. H. Sayce


6. Liter-
ature


9. Letters


2153


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA We seh Library


NINEVITES, nin’é-vits (Nwev[e]tra, Nineulelitat): | Denuar).
Only in Lk 11 30. The || passage (Mt 12 41), with |


Lk 11 32, has the fuller form, “men of Nineveh,”
which gives the meaning.


NIPHIS, ni‘fis (Newdels, Neipheis, A, Prvels,


Phineis; AV Nephis): Given in 1 Esd 6 21 m as |


=“Magbish” of Ezr 2 30, whose sons are the same
in number (156) as those of Niphis, but it would
seem rather to be the equivalent of Nebo in ver 29.


NISAN, ni‘san (j0"2, nisdn): The first month
of the Jewish year in which occurred the Passover
and which corresponds to April. The month is the
same as Abib, which occurs in the Pent. Nisan
occurs in Neh 2 1 and Est 3 7. It denotes “the
month of flowers.” See CALENDAR.


NISROCH, nis’rok, niz’‘rok (19), nisrdkh):
The Assyr god in whose temple Sennacherib was
worshipping when put to death by his sons (2 IX
19 37; Isa 37 38).
where. Some identify him with Asshur, the na-
tional deity. See BaByLonia aNp Assyria, RE-
LIGION OF.


NITRE, ni’tér (12, nether;


present use of that term. Nitre or niter is now
applied te sodium or potassium nitrate.
has in his collection a specimen of sodium carbon-
ate, called in Arab. natran, which was taken from
the extensive deposits in Lower Egypt where it is
found as a deposit underneath a layer of common
salt. Similar deposits are found in Syria and Asia
Minor. This is probably the “nitre’” of the Bible.
ARV has rendered nitre ‘lye’ in Jer 2 22, and
“soda” in Prov 25 20. Soda or lye has been used
as a cleansing agent from earliest times. It effer-
vesces energetically, when treated with an acid;
hence the comparison in Prov 25 20 of the heavy-
hearted man roiled by the sound of singing to the
sizzling of soda on which vinegar has been poured.
See VINEGAR. James A. PatcH


NO, nd.


NOADIAH, no-a-di’a (WII, na‘adhyah, “tryst
of Jeh”; NoaSel, Noadet):

(1) Son of Binnui, one of the Levites to whom
Ezra intrusted the gold and silver and sacred
vessels which he brought up from Babylon (Ezr 8
33); also called Moers (q.v.), son of Sabannus
(1 Esd 8 63). ‘ ’

(2) A prophetess associated with Tobiah and
Sanballat in opposition to Nehemiah (Neh 6 14).


See No-amMon.


NOAH, no’a (2, no*h, “rest”; LXX Nae, Noe;
Jos, Néxos, Néchos): The 10th in descent from
Adam in the line of Seth (Gen 6 28.29). Lamech
here seems to derive the word from the y¥ OM,
naham, “to comfort,” but this is probably a mere
play upon the name by Noah’s father. The times
in which Noah was born were degenerate, and this
finds pathetic expression in Lamech’s saying at the
birth of Noah, “This same shall comfort us in our
work and in the toil of our hands, which cometh
because of the ground which Jeh hath cursed.”
Concerning the theory that Noah is the name of a
dynasty, like Pharaoh or Caesar, rather than of a
single individual, see ANTEpILUVIANS. In his
600th year the degenerate races of mankind were
cut off by the Delnge. But 120 years previously
(Gen 6 3) he had been warned of the catastrophe,
and according to 1 Pet 3 20 had been preparing
for the event by building the ark (see Ark;


The name is not found else- |


virpov, nitron): |
Nitre as used in AV does not correspond to the |


The writer | 2 : soy :
| nut, “‘a city,” with the feminine ending ¢, and Amon,


In the cuneiform inscriptions Noah
corresponds to ‘‘Hasisadra’’? (Xisuthrns). After
the flood Noah celebrated his deliveranee by build-
ing an altar and offering sacrifices to Jeh (Gen
8 20), and was sent forth with God’s blessing
to be “fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the
earth’ (Gen 9 1), as Adam had been sent forth
at the beginning (Gen 1 28). In token of the cer-
tainty of God’s covenant not to destroy the race
again by flood, a rainbow spanned the sky whose
reappearance was ever after to be a token of peace.
But Noah was not above temptation. In the pros-
perity which followed, he became drunken from
the fruit of the vineyard he had planted. His son
Ham irreverently exposed the nakedness of his
father, while Shem and Japheth covered it from
view (Gen 9 22.23). The curse upon Canaan the
son of Ham was literally fulfilled in subsequent
history when Israel took possession of Pal, when
Tyre fell before the armsof Alexander, and Carthage
surrendered to Rome.
: GrorcE Freperick WRIGHT

NOAH (AY¥2, né‘ah, “movement”): One of the
daughters of Zelophehad (Nu 26 33; 27 1; 36 11;
Josh 17 3 ff).


NOAH, BOOK (APOCALYPSE) OF. See
ApocaLypTic LITERATURE.


NO-AMON, no-a’mon (FAN 83, nd’ ‘aman, Egyp


proper name of a god, City Amon, i.e. the “City,”
par excellence, of the god Amon; tr?in AV “popu-
lous No,” following the Vulg in a misunderstanding
of the word ’dmén; RV “No-amon”): Occurs in
this form only in Nah 3 8, but S3' JAN, amon
minné’, “Amon of No,’”’ oecurs in Jer 46 25. Cf
also Ezk 30 14-16, where 83, 7d’, is undoubtedly
the same city.

The description of No-amon in Nah 3 8 seems
to be that of a delta city, but D?, yam, “sea,”
in that passage is used poetically for the Nile, as
in Job 41 31 andin Isa 18 2. With this difficulty
removed, the Egyp etymology of the name leaves
no doubt as to the correct identification of the place.
The “City Amon” in the days of Nahum, Jeremiah
and Ezekiel was Thebes (cf art. ““Thebes”’ in any
general encyclopaedia). M. G. Kyte


NOB, nob (33, ndbh; B, NopBd, Nombd, A, NoBa,
Nobd, and other forms): An ancient priestly town
to which David came on his way 8. when he fled
from Saul at Gibeah (1 8S 21 1). Here he found
refuge and succor with Ahimelech. This was ob-
served by Doeg the Edomite, who informed the
king, and afterward became the instrument of
Saul’s savage vengeance on the priests, and on all
the inhabitants of the city (ch 22). The name
occurs in Neh 11 32 in a list of cities, immediately
after Anathoth. In Isaiah’s ideal account of the
Assyrians’ march against Jerus, Nob is clearly
placed S. of Anathoth. Here, says the prophet,
the Assyrian shall shake his hand at the mount of
the danghter of Zion, the hill of Jerus. It was a
place, therefore, from which the Holy City and the
temple were clearly visible.

The district in which the site must be sought is
thus very definitely indicated; but within this dis-
trict no name at all resembling Nob has been dis-
covered, and so no sure identification is yet possible.
‘Andta (Anathoth) is 23} miles N.E. of Jerus. Nob
therefore lay between that and the city, at a point
where the city could be seen, apparently on the
great road from the N. Rather more than a mile
N. of Jerus rises the ridge Rds el-Mesharif (2,665
ft.), over which the road from the N. passes; and


Nobah
Nose, Nostrils


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2154


here the traveler approaching from that direction
obtains his first sight of the city. It is fittingly
named ‘‘the look-out.’’ Col. Conder states the
ease for identifying this height with Mt. Scopus
where Titus established his camp at the siege
of Jerus (PEFS, 1874, 111 ff). Immediately S. of
the ridge, to the E. of the road, there is a small
plateau, 8. of which there is a lower ridge, whence
the slopes dip into Wédy el-Jéz. This plateau, on
which Titus may have sat, is a very probable site
for Nob. It quite suits the requirements of Isaiah’s
narrative, and not less those of David’s flight.
Gibeah lay not far to the N., and this lay in the
most likely path to the S. W. Ewina


NOBAH, nd’ba (131, ndbhah; B, NaBde, Na-
both, NaBal, Nabai, A, NaBde, Nabdth, NaPee,
Nabéth):

(1) Nobah the Manassite, we are told, “went
and took Kenath, and the villages thereof, and called
it Nobah, after his own name” (Nu 32 42). There
can be little doubt that the ancient Kenath is
represented by the modern Kanawdt, on the west-
ern slope of Jebel ed-Drduze, the ancient name having
survived that of Nobah.

(2) A city which marked the course of Gideon’s
pursuit of the Midianites (Jgs 8 11). It is possible
that this may be identical with (1). Cheyne argues
in favor of this (FB, s.v. “Gideon’’). But its
mention along with Jogbehah points to a more
southerly location. This may have been the
original home of the clan Nobah. Some would
read, following the Syr in Nu 21 30, ‘‘Nobah
which is on the desert,” instead of ‘““Nophah which
reacheth unto Medeba.” No site with a name
resembling this has yet been recovered. If it is
to be distinguished from Kenath, then probably
it will have to be sought somewhere to the N.E. of
Rabbath-Ammon (‘Ammdan). W. Ewine


NOBAI, nd‘bi, nob’é-i (22, ndbhay, or "22,
nebhay): One of those who took part in sealing the
covenant (Neh 10 19).


NOBLE, n6’b’!, NOBLES, no’b’lz, NOBLEMAN,
no’b’l-man (O°, hérim, WN, ’addir; ebyevis,
eugenés, Kpdtiotos, Krdtistos, Baovikds, basilikés):
“Nobles”’ is the tr of the Heb hérim (occurring only
in the pl.), “free-born,” “noble” (1 K 21 8.11; Neh
2 16; 6 17, etc); of ’addir, “begirded,” “mighty,”
‘Glustrious’’ or “noble” (Jgs 5 13; 2 Ch 23 20, ete);
of nadhibh, “liberal,” “a noble” (Nu 21 18; Prov
8 16, etc).


8 26, with éntimos, ‘in honor’; Wisd 18 12).
RV's uses of “nohle,"’ and ‘‘nobleness'' are for words con-
taining the . gen and referring to hirth (cf Wlisd 8 3;
2 Mace 6 27.31; 12 42; 14 42 bs). AV’s uses are wider
(Jth 2 2, etc).

Nobleman is, in Lk 19 12, the tr of eugenés
anthropos, “a man well born,” and in Jn 4 46.49
of basilikos, “kingly,” “belonging to a king,” a
designation extended to the officers, courtiers, etc,
of a king, RVm “‘king’s officer”; he was probably
an Official, civil or military, of Herod Antipas, who
was styled “king” (basileus).

For ‘‘nobles” (Isa 43 14), AV ‘‘have brought down all
their nobles,’’ RV has ‘‘I will bring down all of them as
fugitives,’ m ‘‘or, as otherwise read, all their nobles
even,’ etc: for ‘‘nobles’' (Jer 30 21), ‘‘prince’’; ERV
has ‘‘worthies" for ‘‘nobles’’ (Nah 3 18); RV has ‘‘the


noble” for ‘‘princes’? (Prov 17 26); ‘‘nobles” for
“princes” (Job 34 18; Dnl 1 3), for ‘‘Nazarites”
(Lam 4 7, m ‘“Nazirites’); ‘‘her nobles’? for ‘‘his


fugitives,” m “or, as other otherwise read, fugitives”
(sa 15 5); ARV has ‘‘noble” for “‘liberal'' (Isa 32 5);
for ‘‘The nobles held their peace,” AVm ‘‘The voice of
the nohles was hid"' (Job-29 10), RV has ‘‘The voice of the
nobles was hushed,” m “Heb hid”; for ‘‘most noble”
(Acts 24 3; 26 25), ‘‘most excellent.”
f W. L. WALKER

NOD, nod (72, nédh): The land of Eden, to
which Cain migrated after the murder of his
brother and his banishment by Jeh (Gen 4 16).
Conjecture is useless_as to the region intended.
The ideas of China, India, etc, which some have
entertained, are groundless. The territory was
evidently at some distance, but where is now un-
discoverable.


NODAB, nod’dab (AT, néddhdbh; Nabdapaion,
Nadabaioi): A Hagrite clan which, along with
Jetur and Naphish, suffered complete defeat at the
hands of the trans-Jordanic Israelites (1 Ch 5 19).
It has been suggested that Nodab is a corruption
of Kedemah or of Nebaioth, names which are asso-
ciated with Jetur and Naphish in the lists of
Ishmael’s sons (Gen 25 15; 1 Ch 1 31), but it
is difficult to see how even the most careless copy-
ist could so blunder. There is a possible remi-
niscence of the name in Nudébe, a village in the
Hauran.


NOE, nd’é (Né&e, Noe): AV of Mt 24 37.38;
Lk 3 36; 17 26.27; Tob 412. Gr form of Noaw#
(q.v.) (thus RV).


NOEBA, nd’é-ba (NoeBé, Noebd): Head of one
of the families of temple-servants (1 Esd 5 31)=
“Nekoda” of Ezr 2 48.


NOGAH, nod’ga ("32, néghah, “splendor’”):
A son of David born at Jerus (1 Ch 8 7; 14 6).
In the || list (2 8 5 14.15) this name is wanting.
In its Gr form (Neyyal, Naggat) it occurs in the
genealogy of Jesus (Lk 3 25).


NOHAH, nd‘ha (TM3, ndhah, ‘“rest’’): The
fourth son of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 2). It is prob-
able that in Jgs 20 43, instead of “‘a resting-place”
we should read ‘‘Nohah,” which may have been
the settlement of the family.


NOISE, noiz (4p, kdl, FAT, hamon, PRw,
sha’ on; avh, phéné): “Noise” is most frequently
the tr of kal, “voice,” “sound,’’ in AV (Ex 20 18,
“the noise of the trumpet,’’ RV ‘voice’; 32 17
bis.18; Jgs 6 11, “[they that are delivered] from
the noise of the archers,” RV “far from the noise,”
etc, m “because of the voice of”; 1S 4 6, etc);
hamén, “noise,” “sound” (1 8 14 19); réaghez,
“anger,’’ “rage” (Job 87 2); ré‘, “outery’ (Job
36 33); shd’on, “desolation,” “noise” (Isa 24 8;
25 5); t*shwoth, “cry,” “erying’ (Job 36 29);
pacah, “to break forth” (Ps 98 4); shame, “‘to
hear,” ete (Josh 6 10; 1 Ch 15 28); _phoné,
“sound,” “voice,” is tr? “noise” (Rev 6 1, “T heard
as it were the noise of thunder,’ RV “saying as
with a voice of thunder”); rhoizédén, “with a hiss-
ing or rushing sound” (2 Pet 3 10, ‘with a great
noise’); ginetai phoné (Acts 2 6, AV “when this
was noised abroad,” m ‘‘when this voice was made,”
RV “when thissound was heard’’); akoud, “to hear”;
dialaléo, “to talk or speak” throughout, are also tré

noised” (Mk 21; Lk 165). So RV (cf Jth 10
18, “noised among the tents’). Otherwise in RV
Apoc, thréos, ‘“‘confused noise’? (Wisd 1 10); boé,

outery” (Jth 14 19); échos, “sound” (Wisd 17 18:
ef Sir 40 13); Lat voz, “voice” (2 Esd 6 7).


2155


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Nobah
Nose, Nostrils


For “noise” (Ps 65 7 bis), RV has ‘roaring’; for
‘‘make a noise like the noise of the seas"’ (Isa 17 12),
‘‘the uproar [m ‘‘ multitude’'| of many peoples, that roar
like the roaring of the seas"’; for ‘'a voice of noise from
the city"’ (Isa 66 6), ‘a voice of tumult from the city’;
for ‘noise’ (Jer 10 22), “volce’’; for ‘‘a noise” (1 Ch
15 28), “sounding aloud,” ‘‘voice” (Ezk 43 2); for
“every battle of the warrior is with confused noise”
(Isa 9 5), “all the armor of the armed man in the
tumult,” m ‘every boot of the booted warrior"; for
“make a noise,"’ ‘‘moan’ (Ps §5 2), ‘‘roar’' ee 17
12); for ‘‘make a loud noise"’ (Ps 98 4), ‘‘break forth’;
for ‘‘maketh a noise” (Jer 4 19), ‘‘is disquieted"’; for
‘‘the noise of his tahernacle’ (Joh 36 29), ‘‘the thunder-
ings of his pavilion”; for ‘make any noise with your
voice” (Josh 6 10), ‘let your voice be heard”; ‘'joy-
ful noise,” for ‘tshouting” (Isa.16 10); for ''The Lord
on high is mightier than the noise of many waters, yea,
than the mighty waves of the sea'’ (Ps 93 4), ‘*Ahove
the voices of many waters, the mighty breakers of the
sea, Jeh on high is mighty.”


W. L. Waker
NOISOME, noi’sum (M14, hawwah, 97, ra‘;
kaxés, kakds): ‘“‘Noisome” from ‘‘annoy” (annoy-
some) has in Bible Eng. the meaning of ‘evil,’
“hurtful,” not of ‘offensive’ or “loathsome.”’ Itis
the tr of hawwah, ‘mischief,’ ‘‘calamity” (Ps 91 3,
“noisome pestilence,’ RV ‘‘deadly’); of ra‘, a
common word for ‘evil’? (Ezk 14 15.21), ‘“noisome
beasts” (RV “evil’’). It occurs also in Job 31 40
AVm as the tr of bo’shah, “noisome weeds,” AV and
RV ‘‘cockle,” m as AVm; of kakos, “evil,” “bad”
(Rev 16 2), “a noisome and grievous sore.” ‘‘Noi-
some” also occurs in Apoc (2 Macc 9 9) as the tr of
bardnd, “to make heavy,” “‘oppress,’”’ where it seems
to have the meaning of “loathsome.”
A W. L. WALKER
NON, non (713, ndn): 1 Ch 7 27 AV and RVm.
See Nun.


NOOMA, nod’é-ma (Noopd, Noomd, B, ’Oopé,
Oomd; AV Ethma): 1 Esd 9 35=“‘Nebo” of Ear
10 48, of which it is a corruption.


NOON, noon, NOONDAY, noon’da (O°,
cohtrayim; peonpBpla, mesémbria): The word
means light, splendor, brightness, and hence the
brightest part of the day (Gen 48 16.25; Acts 22
6). Seealso Mippay; Day ann Nicut; Time.


NOPH, nof (23, néph; in Hos 9 6 méph): A
name for the Egyp city Memphis (so LXX), hence
thus rendered in RV (Isa 19 13; Jer 2 16; 44 1;
Ezk 30 13.16). See Mempuis.


NOPHAH, no’fa (M2, ndphah; LXX does not
transliterate): A city mentioned only in Nu 21 30
(see Nopan). LXX reads kai hai gunaikes éti pros-
extkausan pir ept Modb, ‘and the women besides
[yet] kindled a fire at [against] Moab.”’ The text
has evidently suffered corruption.


NORTH, north, NORTH COUNTRY (71DE,
gGphén, from y JP¥, cadphan, “to hide,” i.e. “the
hidden,” “the dark” [Ges.]; Boppas, borrhds; Bopéas,
boréas [Jth 16 4]; septentrio [2 Esd 15 48]): In ad-
dition to the many places where “north” occurs
merely as a point of the compass, there are several
passages in Jer, Ezk and Zeph, where it refers to a

articular country, usually Assyria or Babylonia:
er 3 18, ‘They shall come together out of the land
of the north to the land that I gave for an inherit-
ance unto your fathers’; Jer 46 6, “In the north
by the river Euphrates have they stumbled and
fallen”; Ezk 26 7, “I will bring upon Tyre Neb-
uchadrezzar king of Babylon, king of kings, from
the north’; Zeph 2 13, “He will stretch out his
hand against the north, and destroy Assyria, and
will make Nineveh a desolation.”

While the site of Nineveh was N.E. of Jerus, and
that of Babylon almost due E., it was not unnatural


for them to be referred to as “the north,” because
the direct desert routes were impracticable, and the
roads led first into Northern Syria and then east-
ward (cf however Gen 29 1, “Then Jacob went
on his journey, and came to the land of the children
of the east?’).

In Ezk 38 6, we have, “Gomer, and all his
hordes; the house of Togarmah in the uttermost
parts of the north.’”’ It is uncertain what country
is here referred to. Some have supposed Armenia
(cf Gen 10 3; 1 Ch 1 6; Ezk 27 14).

The north border of the promised land, as outlined
in Nu 34 7-9 and Ezk 47 15-17, cannot be deter-
mined with certainty, because some of the towns
named cannot be identified, but it was approxi-
mately the latitude of Mt. Hermon, not including
Lebanon or Damascus. For North (m‘zdrim) see
ASTRONOMY. ALFRED Exiy Day


NORTHEAST, SOUTHEAST: These words
occur in Acts 27 12, “if by any means they could
reach Phoenix, and winter there; which is a haven
of Crete, looking north-east and south-east.” RVm
has, “Gr, down the south-west wind and down the
north-west wind,” which is a lit. tr of the Gr: eis
Photnika ... . liména tés Krétés bléponta (looking)
katd liba (the southwest wind) kat katd chéron (the
northwest wind). Chores does not appear to occur
except here, but the corresponding Lat caurus or
corus is found in Caesar, Vergil, and other classical
authors. AV has “lieth toward the south west and
north west.” «ard, katé, with a wind or stream,
means, ‘down the wind or stream,” ie. in the direc-
tion that it is blowing or flowing, and this interpre-
tation would indicate a harbor open to the E. If
ALY, lips, and x&pos, chéros, are used here as names
of directions rather than of winds, we should expect
a harbor open to the W. There is good reason for
identifying Phoenix (AV “‘Phenice’’) with Loutro on
the south shore of Crete (ZB, s.v. ‘‘Phenice’’), whose
harbor is open to the E. See PHornix.

Aurrep Evy Day

NOSE, niéz, NOSTRILS, nos’trilz (FX, ’aph,
‘nose,’ DY), nthirayim, dual of “"M}, nehir,
“nostrils’”): The former expression (’aph from
*anph, like Arab. Wa3l, ’anf) is often trt “face”
(which see s.v.) in EV. It is frequently referred
to as the organ of breathing, in other words, as the
receptacle of the breath or spirit of God: ‘Jeh
. .. . breathed into his nostrils the breath of life;
and man became a living soul’ (Gen 2 7; cf 7 22);
“My life is yet whole in me, and the spirit of God
is in my nostrils’ (Job 27 3). Therefore a life
which depends on so slight a thing as a breath is
considered as utterly frail and of no great conse-
quence: ‘‘Cease ye from man, whose breath is in
his nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of?”
(Isa 2 22; cf Wisd 2 2).

In poetical language such a breath of life is as-
eribed even to God, esp. with regard to the mighty
storm which is thought to proceed from His nostrils
(Ex 15 8; 2S 22 9; Ps 18 8.15).

The phrase, “a smoke in my nose, a fire that
burneth all the day” (Isa 65 5), is equivalent to a
perpetual annoyance and cause of irritation. A
cruel custom of war, in which the vanquished had
their noses and ears cut off by their remorseless con-
querors, is alluded to in zk 23 25. As a wild
animal is held in check by having his nose pierced
and a hook or ring inserted in it (Job 40 24; 41 2
{Heb 40 26]), so this expression Js used to indicate
the humbling and taming of an obstinate person
(2 K 19 28; Isa 37 29; ef Ezk 294; 38 4).
But men, and esp. women, had their noses pierced
for the wearing of jewelry (Gen 24 47; Isa 3 21;
Ezk 16 12). In one passage: the meaning is not


Nose-Jewels
Number


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2156


quite clear, viz. in the enumeration of blemishes
which disable a ‘“‘son of Aaron” from the execution
of the priest’s office (Lev 21 18), where EV trans-
lates “flat [m “slit”’] nose.” The Heb word is DY,


harum, which is a hapaxlegomenon. It corresponds,
however, to the Arab. y Lo +e ye, haram, har-


man (kharam, kharman), which means “to open,”
“to pierce the nose,” esp. the bridge of the nose.
We may accept this meaning as the one intended
in the passage.

Another dark and much discussed passage must
still be referred to: “And, lo, they put the branch
to their nose” (Ezk 8 17). The usual explanation
(whereof the context gives some valuable hints)
is that a rite connected with the worship of Baal
(the sun) is here alluded to (see Smend and A. B.
Davidson’s comms. on the passage). <A similar
custom is known from Pers sun-worship, where a
bunch (baregma) of dates, pomegranates or tamarisks
was held to the nose by the worshipper, probably
as an attempt to keep the Holy One (sun) from
being contaminated by sinful breath (Spiegel,
Eranische Altertiimer, III, 571). Among modern
Jews posies of myrtle and other fragrant herbs are
held to the nose by the persons attending on the
ceremony of circumcision, for the alleged reason
of making the sight and smell of blood bearable.
Another interpretation of the above passage would
understand 2], z°mdrah, in the sense of “male
sexual member” (see Gesenius-Buhl, s.v.; Levy,
Nhb. Worterbuch, I, 544), and the whole passage as
a reference to a sensuous Canaanite rite, such as is
perhaps alluded to in Isa 57 8. In that case the
BBS, 'appam, ‘their nose,” of the MT would have
to be considered as tikkin sdph‘rim (a correction
of the scribes) for "DN, ’app?, ‘my face.”” Or read
“They cause their stench |z*moratham] to come up
to my face” (Kraetzschmar, ad loc.). See Brancu.

H. L. E, Lurrimae

NOSE-JEWELS, niz-jii’elz, -jo0’elz (DT3, nezem
[probably from O13, nazam, “muzzle”], a “nose-
ring,” or “nose-jewel,”’ so rendered in Isa 3 21;
“jewel in a swine’s snout,” Prov 11 22, AVm
“ring”; ‘jewel on thy forehead,” Ezk 16 12, “ring
upon thy nose’’): In Gen 24 22, AV rendered in-
correctly ‘earring’; cf ver 47. Indeed, the word
had also a more generic meaning of “ring” or
‘Jewelry,’ whether worn in the nose or not. See
Gen 35 4; Ex 32 2, where the ornament was worn
in the ear. There are several cases without specifi-
cation, uniformly rendered, without good reason,
however, “earring” in AV (Ex 35 22; Jgs 8 24.
fei) Job 42 11 [“ring’’]; Prov 25 12; Hos 2 13
15]).

The nose-jewel was made of gold or of silver,
usually, and worn by many women of the East.
It was a ring of from an inch to about three inches
(in extreme cases) in diameter, and was passed
through the right nostril. Usually there were
pendant from the metal ring jewels, beads or coral.
Such ornaments are stil] worn in some parts of the
East. See also AMULET; JEWEL.

Epwarp Bacspy PoLuarp

NOTABLE, nd’ta-b’] (FI, hdzuth; yveorrds,
gnastés): “Notable” is the tr of haézath, “conspicu-
ous” (hdézah, “to see’), e.g. Dn! 8 5, “a notable
horn,” i.e. ‘‘conspicuous,’”” AVm “a horn of sight’’;
ver 8, “notable [horns]; of gnéstos, “known,”
“knowledge’”’ (Acts 4 16); of episémes, “noted,’’
‘notable’ (Mt 27 16; in Rom 16 7, ‘of note’);
of epiphanés, “very manifest,’ “illustrious” (cf
“Antiochus Epiphanes’”); Acts 2 20, “that great
and notable day,’’ quoted from Joel 2 31; LXX
for yaré’, “to be feared,” AV and RV “terrible”


(cf Mal 4 5); “notable” occurs also in 2 Mace 3
26 (ekprepés); 14 33, RV “for all to see”; 6 28
(gennaios), ‘‘a notable example,’ RV “noble”;
notably, only in 2 Macc 14 31 (gennaiés), “notably
prevented,” RV “bravely,” m “nobly.”

W. L. WALKER

NOTE, not (PpM, hakak, DW, rasham; on-
perdo, sémetdd, érlonpos, episémos): ‘Note’ (vb.)
is the tr of hakak, “to grave,’”’ “to inscribe,” etc
(Isa 30 8, “note it in a book,” RV “inscribe’’);
of rasham, “to note down,” ete (Dnl 10 21, RV
“inscribed”); of sémeiod, “to put a sign on” (2
Thess 3 14, “note that man’’).

“Note” (noun) is the tr of episémos, “marked
upon,” “distinguished” (Rom 16 7, “who are of
note among the apostles’).

‘Notes’? (musical) occurs in Wisd 19 18, ‘notes
of a psaltery” (phthéggos). W. L. Waker


NOTHING, nuth’ing xd, lo’, MAND xd, ia’
mtimah, etc; pmyfgels, médeis, ov8els, oudeis):
“Nothing” is represented by various words and
phrases, often with 16’, which is properly a subst.
with the meaning of “nothing.” Most frequently
we have 16’ m®’ amah, “not anything” (Gen 40 15;
Jgs 14 6).

Other forms are 16’ dhabhar, “not anything” (Gen_19 8);
lé'khél, “not any[thing]” (Gen 11 6; Prov 13 7); 1@’
[Aram], no,” “nothing” (Dnl 4 35, “as nothing”); ‘ephes,
“end,” “cessation” (Isa 34 12); bilti, “without,” “save,”
“not” (Isa 44 10; Am 3 4); ’ayin, ''there is not” (Isa 41
24); once t6hu, ‘‘emptiness” (Job 6 18); bal mah, ‘‘not
anything” (Prov 9 13); hinndm, “free,” “gratis” (2 8S 24
24); ma'‘at,‘‘to make small,” ‘bring tonothing” (Jer 10 24);
rak, “only” (Gen 26 29); é‘al, “for nothing” (Job 24 25).

In 2 Mace 7 12, we have “nothing,” adverbially
(en oudeni), “he nothing regarded the pains” (cf
1 K 16 21); 9 7 (oudamés), RV “in no wise’; Wisd
2 11, “nothing worth” (dchréstos), RV “of no serv-
ice’; Bar 6 17.26.

For “nothing” RV has “none” (Ex 23 26; Joel
2 3), “never” (Neh 6 8), “not wherewith’ (Prov
22 27), “vanity and nought” (Isa 41 29); for
“answered nothing’ (Mk 16 5), ‘no more answered
anything’’; “answered nothing” in ver 3 is omitted;
“anything” for “nothing” (1 Tim 6 7), “not any-
thing” (Acts 20 20), “not” (1 Cor 8 2), “no word”
(Lk 1 37), “not wherewith” (7 42); for “to noth-
ing”? (Job 6 18), “up into the waste’; for “it is
nothing with” (2 Ch 14 11), ‘there is none besides,”
m “like”; for “lacked nothing’ (1 K 4 27), “let
nothing be lacking,” for “nothing doubting” (Acts
11 12), “making no distinction’; for “hoping for
nothing again’’ (Lk 6 35), “never despairing”; for
“are nothing” (Acts 21 24), ‘no truth in”; for
“nothing shall offend them” (Ps 119 165), “no oc-
casion of stumbling”; for “bring to nothing” (1 Cor
119), ERV “reject,” ARV “bring to nought”;
“nothing better’ for “no good” (Ecel 3 12), for
“not” (Mt 13 34, different text), for “no man”
(Acts 9 8), “for nothing,” for “free” (Ex 21 11);
“miss nothing” for ‘not sin” (Job 5 24), m “shalt
not err’; “and shall have nothing” for “and not for
himself” (Dn] 9 26, m “there shall be none belong-
ing to him”). W. L. Waker


NOUGHT, nét (030, hinnam; arapyéa,
katargéo): “Nought” is to be distinguished from
“naught” implying “badness” (see NaueGar).
“Nought” in the sense of “nothing,” etc, is the tr
of hinnam, “gratis” (Gen 29 15), and of various
other words occurring once only, e.g, Gwen,
“vanity” (Am 6 5); tha, “vacancy,” “ruin”
(Isa 49 4); ’epha’, “nothing” (Isa 41 24); na-
bhél, “to fade” (Job 14 18, m “fadeth away”);
pur, “to make void” (Ps 33 10); katarges, “to
make without effect” (1 Cor 1 28; 2 6); oudets,


2157


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Nese-Jewels
: Number


“not even one” (Acts 5 36); apelegmds, “refuta-
tion’”’ (Aets 19 27, RV “come into disrepute’’);
doredn, “without payment”? (2 Thess 3 8, RV
“for nought’); eréméo, ‘to desolate” (Rev 18 17
RV “made desolate’); katalud, “to loose down’
(Acts 5 38, RV “be overthrown’’). In Apoc we
have ‘‘set at nought” and ‘come to nought,’ etc
(1 Esd 1 56; 2 Esd 2 33; 8 59).


For *nought'’' RV has "perish" (Dt 28 63); for
“‘come to nought" (Joh 8 22), *heno more”; ‘nought”


for ‘not ought”' (Ex § 11), for ‘'no might" (Dt 28 32);-


for ‘throught to silence,” bis (Isa 15 1), ‘’hrought to
nought"; ARV “hring to nought" (1 Cer 1 19) for
“bring to nothing” (ERV “reject’’); “nought but
terror’’ (Isa 28 19) for ‘'a vexation only"; ‘‘ brought
to neught"’ (Ilsa 16 4) for ‘is at an end"; ‘‘come to
nought’' for ‘taken none effect’’ (Rom 9 6); ‘set at
nought” for '‘despise'' (Rom 14 3).
. L. WALKER

NOURISH, nur’ish 7a, giddél, TT, hiyyah,
d2>2, kilkel, MDI, ribbah; tpéba, tréphd, avarpébo,
anatrépho, exrpépo, ektréphd, evtpépw, entréphd):
While the word ‘nourish” was ordinarily an appro-
priate rendering in the time of the AV, the word has
since become much less frequent, and some senses
have largely passed out of ordinary use, so that the
meaning would now in most cases be better ex-
pressed by some other word. Giddél means “to
bring up,” “rear [children] (Isa 1 2, m ‘‘made
great’: 23 4; Dnl 1 5); “cause [a tree] to grow”
(Isa 44 14). Hiyyah means ‘‘to preserve alive”
(with some implication of care) (2 8 12 3; Isa
7 21, ARV “keep alive’). Kilkel means “‘to sup-
port,” “maintain,” ‘provide for” (esp. with food)
(Gen 45 11; 47 12; 60 21). Ribbadh means “‘to
bring up,” “rear [whelps],” in a figurative use (Ezk
19 2). TrephO means “to feed’’ (transitively)
(Acts 12 20, RV “feed”; Rev 12 14); “to fatten”
(Jas 6 5, the context indicating an unfavorable
meaning). Anatrephd is “to bring up,” “rear,”
like giddél (Acts 7 20.21); ektrephé is “‘to take care
of” (Eph 6 29); entrephé means “‘to bring up in,”
“train in” (1 Tim 4 6).

Grorer Ricker Berry

NOVICE, nov’is (ved$utos, nedphutos, “newly
planted’’): In this sense it is found in LXX of Job
14 9 and Isa & 7. In the NT it occurs once only
(1 Tim 3 6), where it means a person newly planted
in the Christian faith, a neophyte, a new convert,
one who has recently become a Christian. This
term occurs in the list which Paul gives of the
qualifications which a Christian bishop must pos-
sess. The apostle instructs Timothy, that if any
man desires the office of a bishop, he must not be a
“novice,” must not be newly converted, or recently
brought to the faith of Christ “lest he be lifted up
with pride, and fall into the condemnation of the
devil.”

This means that a recent convert runs the very serious
risk of heing wise in his own eyes, of despising those who
are still on the level from which, hy his conversion, he
has heen lifted; and so he becomes puffed up with high
ideas of his own importance. He has not yet had time
to discover his limitations, he is newly planted, he does
not fully understand his true position in the Christian
community, he overestimates himself. For these reasons
he is peculiarly liable to instahility, and to the other
weaknesses and sins connected with an inflated opinion
ef his own powers. His pride is a sure indication of a
coming fall. A novice, therefore, must en no account
be appointed to the office in question, for he would be
sure to bring disgrace upon it.


NUMBER, num’bér:


1. NuMBER AND ARITHMETIC
Il. Notation or NUMBERS
1. By Words
2. By Signs
3. By Letters
III. Numpenras in OT History
IV. Rounp NumBERSs
V. Sicniricant NuMBERS
1, Seven and Its Multiples
(1) Ritual Use of Seven


JoHN RUTHERFURD


(2) Historical Use of Seven
(3) Didactic or Literary Use of Seven
(4) Apocalyptic Use of Seven
. The Number Three
- The Number Four
. The Number Ten
. The Number Twelve
. Other Significant Numbers
VI. GEMATRIA
LITERATURE
I, Number and Arithmetic.— The system of
counting followed by the Hebrews and the Semites
generally was the decimal] system, which seems to
have been suggested by the use of the ten fingers.
Heb had separate words only for the first nine units
and for ten and its multiples. Of the sexagesimal
system, which seems to have been introduced into
Babylonia by the Sumerians and which, through
its development there, has influenced the measure-
ment of time and space in the western civilized
world even to the present day, there is no direct
trace in the Bible, although, as will be shown later,
there are some possible echoes. The highest number
in the Bible described by a single word is 10,000
(ribb6 or ribbd’, murids). The Egyptians, on the
other hand, had separate words for 100,000, 1,000,-
000, 10,000,000. ‘The highest numbers referred to
in any way in the Bible are: ‘‘a thousand thousand”
(1 Ch 22 14; 2 Ch 14 9); “thousands of thou-
sands” (Dnl 7 10; Rev & 11); “thousands of ten
thousands” (Gen 24 60); “‘ten thousand times
ten thousand” (Dnl 7 10; Rev & 11); and twice
that figure (Rev 9 16). The excessively high
numbers met with in some oriental systems (cf
Lubbock, The Decimal System, 17 ff) have no
parallels in Heb. Fractions were not unknown.
We find 4 (2S 18 2, etc); 3 (Ex 26 10.17, etc);
2 (18 9 8); & (Gen 47 24); 4 (Ezk 46 14); +
(Ex 16 36); 3 (Lev 23 13); #5 (Lev 14 10),
and zty (Neh 6 11). Three other fractions are
less definitely expressed: 2? by ‘‘a double portion,”
lit. ‘“‘a double mouthful’ (Dt 21 17; 2 K 2 9;
Zee 13 8); # by “four parts’ (Gen 47 24), and
#y by “nine parts” (Neh 11 1). Only the simplest
rules of arithmetic can be illustrated from the OT.
There are examples of addition (Gen 5 3-31; Nu
1 20-46); subtraction (Gen 18 28 ff);  multipli-
cation (Lev 25 8; Nu 3 46 ff), and division (Nu
31 27 ff). In Lev 26 50 ff is what has been said
to imply a kind of rule-of-three sum. The old
Babylonians had tables of squares and cubes in-
tended no doubt to facilitate the measurement of
land (Sayce, Assyria, Iis Princes, Priesis and
People, 118; Bezold, Ninive und Babylon, 90, 92);
and it can scarcely be doubted that the same need
led to similar results among the Israelites, but at
present there is no evidence. Old Heb arithmetic
and mathematics as known to us are of the most
elementary kind (Nowack, HA, I, 298).
Hl, Notation of Numbers.—No special signs for
the expression of numbers in writing can be proved
to have been in use among the He-
1. By brews before the exile. The Siloam
Words Inscription, which is probably the
oldest specimen of Heb writing extant
(with the exception of the ostraca of Samaria, and
perhaps a seal or two and the obscure Gezer tablet),
has the numbers written in full, The words used
there for 3,200, 1,000 are written as words without
any abbreviation. The earlier text of the MS
which practically illustrates Heb usage has the num-
bers 30, 40, 50, 100, 200, 7,000 written out in the
same way.
After the exile some of the Jews at any rate em-
ployed signs such as were current among the
Egyptians, the Aramaeans, and the
2. By Signs Phoenicians—an upright lme for 1,
two such lines for 2, three for 3, and
so on, and special signs for 10, 20, 100. It had


Qobon


Number


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2158


been conjectured that these or similar signs were
known to the Jews, but actual proof was not forth-
coming until the discovery of Jewish papyri at
Assuan and Elephantine in 1904 and 1907. In
these texts, ranging from 494 to c 400 BC, the dates
are stated, not in words, but in figures of the kind
described. We have therefore clear evidence that
numerical signs were used by members of a Jewish
colony in Upper Egypt in the 5th cent. BC. Now,
as the existence of this colony can be traced before
525 BC, it is probable that they used this method
of notation also in the preceding century. Con-
jecture indeed may go as far as its beginning, for
it is known that there were Jews in Pathros, that is
Upper Egypt, in the last days of Jeremiah (Jer_44
1.15). Some of the first Jewish settlers in Ele-
phantine may have known the prophet and some
of them may have come from Jerus, bringing these
signs with them. At present, however, that is
pure hypothesis.
In the notation of the chapters and verses of the
Heb Bible and in the expression of dates in Heb books
the consonants of the Heb alphabet are
3. By employed for figures, i.e. the first ten
Letters for 1-10, combinations of these for 11—
19, the following eight for 20-90, and
the remainder for 100, 200, 300, 400. The letters
of the Gr alphabet were used in the same way. The
antiquity of this kind of numerical notation cannot
at present be ascertained. It is found on Jewish
coins which have been dated in the reign of the
Maccabean Simon (143-135 BC), but some scholars
refer them to a much later period. All students
of the Talm are familiar with this way of number-
ing the pages, or rather the leaves, but its use there
is no proof of early date. The numerical use of the
Gr letters can be abundantly illustrated. It is
met with in many Gr papyri, some of them from the
3d cent. BC (Hibeh Papyri, nos. 40-43, etc); on
several coins of Herod the Great, and in some MSS
of the NT, for instance, a papyrus fragment of Mt
(Oxyrhynchus Pap., 2) where 14 is three times rep-
resented by 7idta delta with a line above the letters,
and some codices of Rev at 13 18 where 666 is
given by the three letters chi xi vau (or digamma).
It is possible that two of these methods may have
been employed side by side in some cases, as in the
Punic Sacrificial Tablet of Marseilles, where (1. 6)
150 is expressed first in words, and then by figures.
HI, Nambers in OT History.—Students of the
historical books of the OT have long been perplexed
by the high numbers which are met with in many
passages, for example, the number ascribed to the
Israelites at the exodus (Ex 12 37; Nu 11 21),
and on two occasions during the sojourn in the
wilderness (Nu 1, 26)—more than 600,000 adult
males, which means a total of two or three millions;
he result of David’s census 1,300,000 men (2S
24 9) or 1,570,000 (1 Ch 21 5), and the slaughter
of half a million in a battle between Judah and
Israel (2 Ch 18 17). There are many other illus-
rations in the Books of Ch and elsewhere. That
some of these high figures are incorrect is beyond
reasonable doubt, and is not in the least surprising,
for there is ample evidence that the numbers in
ancient documents were exceptionally liable to
corruption. One of the best known instances is
the variation of 1,466 years between the Heb text
and the LXX (text of B) as to the interval from the
creation of Adam to the birth of Abram. Other
striking cases are 1 S 6 19, where 50,070 ought
probably to be 70 (Jos, Ant, VI, i, 4); 2 8 16 7,
where 40 years ought to be 4 years; the confusion
of 76 and 276 in the MSS of Acts 27 37, and of 616
and 666 in those of Rev 18 18. Heb MSS furnish
some instructive variations. One of them, no. 109
of Kennicott, reads (Nu 1 23) 1,050 for 50,000;


50 for 50,000 (2 6), and 100 for 100,000 (ver 16).
It is easy to see how mistakes may have originated
in many cases. The Heb numerals for 30, etc, are
the plurals of the units, so that the former, as
written, differ from the latter only by the addition
of the two letters yédh and mém composing the sylla~
ble -im. Now as the mé@m was often omitted, 3 and
30, 4 and 40, etc, could readily be confused. If
signs or letters of the alphabet were made use of,
instead of abbreviated words, there would be quite
as much room for misunderstanding and error on
the part of copyists. The high numbers above
referred to as found in Ex and Nu have been in-
geniously accounted for by Professor Flinders
Petrie (Researches in Sinai) in a wholly different
way. By understanding ’eleph not as “thousand,”
but as “family” or “tent,’’ he reduces the number
to 5,550 for the first census, and 5,730 for the second.
This figure, however, seems too low, and the method
of interpretation, though not impossible, is open
to criticism. It is generally admitted that the
number as usually read is too high, but the original
number has not yet been certainly discovered.
When, however, full allowance has been made for
the intrusion of numerical errors into the Heb text,
it is difficult to resist the belief that, in the Books of
Ch, at any rate, there is a marked tendency to
exaggeration in this respect. The huge armies
again and again ascribed to the Httle kingdoms
of Judah and Israel cannot be reconciled with some
of the facts revealed by recent research; with the
following, for instance: The army which met the
Assyrians at Karkar in 854 BC and which repre-
sented 11 states and tribes inclusive of Israel and the
kingdom of Damascus, cannot have numbered at the
most more than about 75,000 or 80,000 men (HDB,
1909, 656), and the Assyr king who reports the battle
reckons the whole levy of his country at only 102,-
000 (Der alte Orient, XI, i,14, note). In view of these
figures it is not conceivable that the armies of Israel
or Judah could number a million, or even half a
million. ‘The contingent from the larger kingdom
contributed on the occasion mentioned above con-
sisted of only 10,000 men and 2,000 chariots (HDB,
ib). The safest conclusion, therefore, seems to be
that, while many of the questionable numbers in the
present text of the OT are due to copyists, there is
a residuum which cannot be so accounted for.

IV. Round Nambers.—The use of definite nu-
merical expressions in an indefinite sense, that is, as
round numbers, which is met with in many lan-
guages, seems to have been very prevalent in West-
ern Asia from early times to the present day. Sir
W. Ramsay (Thousand and One Churches, 6) re-
marks that the modern Turks have 4 typical num-
bers which are often used in proper names with
little or no reference to their exact numerical force
—3, 7, 40, 1,001. The Lycaonian district which
gives the book its name is called Bin Bir Kilisse,
“The Thousand and One Churches,” although the
actual number in the valley isonly 28. Themodern
Persians use 40 in just the same way. “Forty
years” with them often means “many years”
(Brugsch, cited by Konig, Stilistik, 55). This lax
use of numbers, as we think, was probably very
frequent among the Israelites and their neighbors.
The inscription on the MS supplies a very in-
structive example. The Israelitish occupation of
Medeba by Omri and his son for half the reign of the
latter is there reckoned (ll. 7f) at 40 years. As,
according to 1 K 16 23.29, the period extended
to only 23 years at the most, the number 40 must
have been used very freely by Mesha’s scribe as a
round number. It is probably often used in that
way in the Bible where it is remarkably frequent,
esp. in reference to periods of days or years. The
40 days of the Flood (Gen 7 4.17), the arrangement


2159


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Number


of the life of Moses in three periods of 40 years each
(Acts 7 23; Ex 7.7, Dt 34 7), the 40 years’ rule
or reign of Eli (1 8 4 18), of Saul (Acts 13 21; cf
Jos, Ant, VI, xiv, 9), of David (1 K 2 11), of
Solomon (1 K 11 42) and of Jehoash (2 K 12 1),
the 40 or 80 years of rest (Jgs 3 11.30; 6 31; 8 28),
the 40 years of Phili oppression (Jgs 13 1), the
40 days’ challenge of Goliath (1 8 17 16), the 40
days’ fast of Moses (Ex 34 28), Elijah (1 I< 19 8),
and Jesus (Mt 4 2 and |), the 40 days before the
destruction of Nineveh (Jon 3 4), and the 40 days
before the Ascension (Acts 1 3), all suggest con-
ventional use, or the influence of that use, for it can
hardly be supposed that the number in each of these
cases, and in others which might be mentioned,
was exactly 40. How it came to be so used is not
quite certain, but it may have originated, partly
at any rate, in the idea that 40 years constituted
a generation or the period at the end of which a man
attains maturity, an idea common, it would seem,
to the Greeks, the Israelites, and the Arabs. The
period of 40 years in the wilderness in the course
of which the old Israel died out and a new Israel
took its place was a generation (Nu 32 13, etc).
The rabbis long afterward regarded 40 years as the
age of understanding, the age when a man reaches
his intellectual prime (Ab, v, addendum). In the
Koran (Sura 46) a man is said to attain his strength
when he attains to 40 years, and it was at that age,
according to tradition, that Muhammad came
forward as a prophet. In this way perhaps 40
came to be used as a round number for an indefinite
period with a suggestion of completeness, and then
was extended in course of time to things as well as
seasons.

Other round numbers are: (1) some of the higher
numbers; (2) several numerical phrases. Under
(1) come the following numbers. One hundred,
often of course to be understood literally, but evi-
dently a round number in Gen 26 12; Lev 26 8;
2S 24 3; Eccl 8 12; Mt 19 29 and ||. A thou-
sand (thousands), very often a literal number, but
in not a few cases indefinite, e.g. Ex 20 6 || Dt
610; 79; 18 187; Ps 5010; 904; 106 8;
Isa 60 22, ete. Ten thousand (Heb ribbé, ribboth,
rbhabhéh; Gr murids, mtirioi) is also used as a
round number as in Lev 26 8; Dt 32 30; Cant
6 10; Mic 67. The yet higher figures, thousands
of thousands, etc, are, in almost all cases, distinctly
hyperbolical round numbers, the most remarkable
examples occurring in the apocalyptic books (Dnl
710; Rev 5 11; 9 16; Ethiopic En 401). (2) The
second group, numerical phrases, consists of a
number of expressions in which numbers are used
roundly, in some cases to express the idea of fewness.
One or two, ete: “a day or two” (Ex 21 21), “an
heap, two heaps” (gs 15 16 RVm), “‘one of a city,
and two of a family’ (Jer 3 14), “not once, nor
twice,” that is “several times” (2 K 6 10). Twoor
three: ‘Two or three berries in the [topmost] hough”
(Isa 17 6; cf Hos 6 2), “Where two or three are
gathered together in my name,” ete (Mt 18 20).
Kénig refers to Assyr, Syr, and Arab. parallels.
Three or four: the most noteworthy example is the
formula which occurs 8 t in Am (1 3.6.9.11.13;
21.4.6), “for three transgressions . . . . yea for
four.” That the numbers here are round numbers
is evident from the fact that the sins enumerated
are in most cases neither 3 nor 4. In Prov 30 15.
18.21.29, on the other hand, where we have the
same rhetorical device, climaz ad majus, 4 is followed
by four statements and is therefore to be taken
literally. Again, Kénig (ib) points to classical and
Arab. parallels. Four or five: ‘Four or five in the
outmost branches of a fruitful tree” (Isa 17 6). Five
or siz: ‘Thou shouldest have smitten [Syria] five or
six times” (2 K 13 19), an idiom met with also in


Am Tab (Kénig, ib). Six and seven: “He will
deliver thee in six troubles; yea, in seven there shall
no evil touch thee’ (Job 5 19). Seven and eight:
“Seven shepherds, and eight principal men’ (Mic
6 5), that is, “enough and more than enough”
(Cheyne); “Give a portion to seven, yea, even unto
eight”’ (Eccl 11 2). In one remarkable phrase which
occurs (with slight variations of form) 24 t in the
OT, two Heb words, meaning respectively ‘“‘yester-
day” and “third,” are mostly used so as together
to express the idea of vague reference to the past.
RV renders in a variety of ways: ‘“beforetime”
(Gen 31 2, etc), ‘‘aforetime’ (Josh 4 18), “here-
tofore’ (Ex 4 10, etc), ‘in time [or “times”’] past”
(Dt 19 4.6; 2 8 3 17, etc).

V. Significant Numbers—Numerical symbolism,
that is, the use of numbers not merely, if at all, with
their literal numerical value, or as round numbers,
but with symbolic significance, sacred or otherwise,
was widespread in the ancient East, esp. in Baby-
lonia and regions more or less influenced by Bab
culture which, to a certain extent, included Canaan.
It must also be remembered that the ancestors of
the Israelites are said to have been of Bab origin
and may therefore have transmitted to their de-
scendants the germs at least of numerical symbolism
as developed in Babylonia in the age of Hammurabi.
Be that as it may, the presence of this use of num-
bers in the Bible, and that on a large scale, cannot
reasonably be doubted, although some writers have
gone too far in their speculations on the subject.
The numbers which are unmistakably used with
more or less symbolic meaning are 7 and its multi-
ples, and 8, 4, 10 and 12.

By far the most prominent of these is the num-
ber 7, which is referred to in one way or another in

nearly 600 passages in the Bible, as


1. Seven wel] as in many passages in the Apoc
and Its and the Pseudepigrapha, and later
Multiples Jewish literature. Of course the num-


ber has its usual numerical force in
many of these places, but even there not seldom
with a glance at its symbolic significance. For
the determination of the latter we are not assigned
to conjecture. There is clear evidence in the
cuneiform texts, which are our earliest authorities,
that the Babylonians regarded 7 as the number of
totality, of completeness. The Sumerians, from
whom the Sem Babylonians seem to have borrowed
the idea, equated 7 and “all.”’ The 7-storied towers
of Babylonia represented the universe. Seven
was the expression of the highest power, the greatest
conceivable fulness of force, and therefore was early
pressed into the service of religion. It is found in
reference to ritual in the age of Gudea, that is per-
haps about the middle of the 3d millennium BC.
“Seven gods” at the end of an enumeration meant
“all the gods” (for these facts and the cuneiform
evidence cf Hehn, Siebenzahl und Sabbath bei den
Babyloniern und im AT, 4 ff). How 7 came to be
used in this way can only be glanced at here. The
view connecting it with the gods of the 7 planets,
which used to be in great favor and still has its
advocates, seems to lack ancient proof. Hehn
(op. cit., 44 ff) has shown that the number acquired
its symbolic meaning long before the earliest time
for which that reference can be demonstrated.
As this sacred or symbolic use of 7 was not peculiar
to the Babylonians and their teachers and neigh-
bors, but was more or less known also in India and
China, in classical lands, and among the Celts and
the Germans, it probably originated in some fact
of common observation, perhaps in the four lunar
phases each of which comprises 7 days and a frac-
tion. Conspicuous groups of stars may have helped
to deepen the impression, and the fact that 7 is
made up of two significant numbers, each, as will


Number


be shown, also suggestive of completeness—3 and
4—may have been early noticed and taken into
account. The Bib. use of 7 may be conveniently
considered under 4 heads: (1) ritual use; (2) his-
torical use; (8) didactic or literary use; (4) apoca-
lyptic use.


(1) Ritual use of seven.—The number 7 plays a con-
spicuous part in a multitude of passages giving rules for
worship or purification, or recording ritual actions. The
7th day of the week was holy (see Saspatu). There
were 7 days of unleavened bread (Ex 34 18, etc), and 7
days of the Feast of Tabernacles (Lev 23 34). The
7th year was the sabbatical year (Ex 21 2, etc). The
Moabite Balak built Balaam on three occasions 7 altars
and provided in each case 7 bullocks and 7 rams (Nu
23 1.14.29). The Mosaic law prescribed 7 he-lambs for
several festal offerings (Nu 28 11.19.27, etc). The 7-fold
sprinkling of blood is enjoined in the ritual of the Day
of Atonement (Lev 16 14.19),andelsewhere. Seven-fold
sprinkling is also repeatedly mentioned in the rules for the
purification of the leper and the leprous house (Lev 14
7.16.27.51). The leprous Naaman was ordered to bathe
7 times in the Jordan (2 K 5 10). In cases of real or
suspected uncleanness through leprosy, or the presence of
a corpse, or for other reasons, 7 days’ seclusion was neces-
sary (Lev 12 2, etc). Circumcision took place after 7
days (Lev 12 3). An animal must be 7 days old hefore
it could be offered in sacrifice (Ex 22 30). Three periods
of 7 days each are mentioned in the rules for the consecra-
tion of priests (Ex 29 30.35.37). An oath seems to have
been in the first instance by 7 holy things (Gen 21 29 ff
and the Heb word for ‘‘swear’’). The number 7 also
entered into the structure of sacred objects, for instance
the candlestick or lamp-stand in the tabernacle and the
second temple each of which had 7 lights (Nu 8 2; Zec
4 2). Many other instances of the ritual use of 7 in the
OT and many instructive parallels from Bab texts could
be given.

(2) Historical use of seven.—The number 7 also figures
prominently in a large number of passages which occur
in historical narrative, in a way which reminds us of its
symbolic significance. The following aresome of the most
remarkable: Jacob’s 7 years’ service for Rachel (Gen 29
20; cf vs 27 {), and his bowing down 7 times to Esau (Gen
33 3); the 7 years of plenty, and the 7 years of famine
(Gen 41 53f); Samson’s 7 days’ marriage feast (Jgs 14
12 ff; cf Gen 29 27), 7 locks of hair (Jgs 16 19), and the
7 withes with which he was bound (vs 7 f); the 7 daughters
of Jethro (Ex 2 16), the 7 sons of Jesse (1 S 16 10), the7
sons of Saul (2 S 21 6), and the 7 sons of Job (Job 1 2;
cf 42 13); the 7 days’ march of the fpese blowing 7
trumpets round the walls of Jericho, and the 7-fold march
on the 7th day (Josh 6 8 ff); the 7 ascents of Elijah’s
servant to the top of Carmel (1 K 18 43f); the 7
sneezes of the Shunammitish woman's son (2 K 4 35);
the heating of Nebuchadnezzar’s furnace 7 times more
than it was wont to be heated (Dnl 3 19), and the
king’s madness for 7 times or years (4 16.23.25.32);
Anna’s 7 years of wedded life (Lk 2 36); the 7
loaves of the 4,000 (Mt 15 34-36 ||) and the 7 baskets
full of fragments (Mt 15 37 ||); the 7 hrothers in the
conundrum of the Sadducees (Mt 22 25 ||); the 7
demons cast out of Mary Magdalene (Mk 16 9|| Lk 8
2): the 7 ministers in the church at Jerus (Acts 6 3 ff),
and the 7 sons of Sceva (19 14, but the Western text
represents them as only 2). The number must no doubt
be understood lit. in many of these passages, but even
then its symbolic meaning is probably hinted at hy the
historian. When a man was said to have had 7 sons or
daughters, or an action was reported as done or to be
done 7 times, whether hy design or accident, the number
was noted, and its symbolic force remembered. It
cannot indeed be regarded in all these cases as a sacred
number, but its association with sacred matters which
was kept alive among the Jews by the institution of the
Sabbath, was seldom, if ever, entirely overlooked.

(3) Didactic or literary use of seven.—The symbolic
use of 7 naturally led to its employment by poets and
teachers for the vivid expression of multitude or inten-
sity. This use is sometimes evident, and sometimes
latent. (a) Evident examples are the 7-fold curse pre-
dicted for the murderer of Cain (Gen 4 15); fleeing 7
ways (Dt 28 7.25); deliverance from 7 trouhles (Job
6 19); praise of God 7 times a day (Ps 119 164); 7
abominations (Prov 26 25; cf 6 16); silver purified 7
times, that is, thoroughly purified (Ps 12 6); 7-fold sin;
7-fold repentance, and 7-fold forgiveness iis 17 4; cf
Mt 18 21); 7 evil spirits (Mt 12 45 || Lk 11 26). The
last of these, as weil as the previous reference to the 7
demons cast out of Mary Madgalene reminds us of the
7 spirits of Beliar (XII P, Reuben chs 2 and 3) and of the
7 evil spirits so often referred to in Bab exorcisms (ct
Hehn, op. cit., 26 ff), but itis not safe to connect Our
Lord’s words with cither. The Bab belief may indeed
have influenced popular ideas to some extent, but there
is no need to find a trace of it in the Gospels. The 7
demons of the latter are sufficiently accounted for by the
common symbolic use of 7. For_other_passages which
come under this head cf Dt 28 7.25; Ruth 4 15; 18
95: Ps 79 12. (b) Examples of latent use of the num-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2160


ber 7, of what Zéckler (RE?, ‘ Sieben") calls ‘‘latent
heptads,"’ are not infrequent. The 7-fold use of the
expression ‘the voice of Jeh" in Ps 29, which has caused
it to be named ‘‘ The Psalm of the Seven Thunders,” and
the 7 epithets of the Divine Spirit in Isa 11 2, cannot
be accidental. In both cases the number is intended to
point at full-summed completeness. In the NT we have
the 7 beatitudes of character (Mt § 3-9); the 7 peti-
tions of the Paternoster (Mt 6 9f); the 7 parables of the
Kingdom in Mt 18; the 7 woes pronounced on the
Pharisees (Mt 23 13.15.16.23.25.27.29), perhaps the 7
sayings of Jesus, beginning with “I am"' (egé eimi) in the
Fourth Gospel (Jn 6 35; 8 12; 10 7.11; 11 25; _14 6;
15 1), and the 7 disciples at the Lake after the Resur-
rection (Jn 21 2). Several groups of 7 are found in
the Epp. and in Rev: 7 forms of suffering (Rom 8 35);
7 gifts or charismata (12 6-9); 7 attributes of the wis-
dom that is from above (Jas 3.17); 7 graces to be added
to faith (2 Pet 1 5 ff); two doxologies each containing
7 words of praise (Rev 5 12; 7 12), and_7 classes of
men (6 15). Other supposed instances of 7-fold group-
ing in the Fourth Gospel are pointed out by E. A. Abbott
(Johannine Grammar, 2624 ff), butare of uncertain value.

(4) Apocalyptic use of seveni—As might be expected,
7 figures greatly in apocalyptic lit., although it is singn-
larly ahsent from the apocalyptic portion of Dnl.| Later
works of this kind, however—the writings bearing the
name of Enoch, the Testaments of Reuben and Levi,
2 Esd, etc—supply many illustrations, The doctrine
of the 7 heavens which is developed in the Slavonic
Enoch and elsewhere and may have been in the first
instance of Bab origin is not directly alluded to in the
Bible, but probably underlies the apostle’s reference to
the third heaven (2 Cor 12 2). In the one apocalyptic
writing in the NT, 7is employed with amazing frequency.
We read of 7 churches (1 4, etc); 7 golden candlesticks
(1 12, etc); 7 stars (1 16); 7 angels of the churches
(1 20); 7 lamps of fire (4 5); 7 spirits of God (1 4; 3 1;
45): a book with 7 seals (5 1); a lamb with 7 horns
and 7 eyes (5 6); 7 angels with 7 trumpets (8 2); 7
thunders (10 3); a dragon with 7 heads and 7 diadems
(12 3): a beast with 7 heads (13 1); 7 angels having
the 7 last plagues (15 1); and 7 golden bowls of the
wrath of God (15 7) and a scarlet-colored beast with 7
heads (17 3) which are 7 mountains (ver 9) and 7 kings
(ver 10). The writer, whoever he was, must have had
his imagination saturated with the numerical symbolism
which had been cultivated in Western Asia for mil-
lenniums. There cannot be a shadow of doubt that 7
for him expressed fulness, completeness. As this inquiry
will have shown, the significance of the number is prac-
tically the same throughout the Bible. Although a little
of it may have been rubbed off in the course of ages, the
main idea suggested by 7 was never quite lost sight of in
Bib. times, and the number is still used in the life and
song of the Holy Land and Arabia with at least an echo
of its ancient meaning.


The significance of 7 extends to its multiples.
Fourteen, or twice 7, is possibly symbolic in some
cases. The stress laid in the OT on the 14th of the
month as the day of the Passover (Ex 12 6 and 16
other places), and the regulation that 14 lambs were
to be offered on each of the 7 days of the Feast of
Tabernacles (Nu 29 13.15) hint at design in the
selection of the number, esp. in view of the fact
that 7 and 7 occur repeatedly in cuneiform liter-
ature—in magical and liturgical texts, and in the
formula so often used in the Am Tab: “7 and 7 times
at the feet of the king my lord .. . . I prostrate
myself.” The arrangement of the generations from
Abraham to Christ in three groups of 14 each (Mt
1 17) is probably intentional, so far as the number
in each group is concerned. It is doubtful whether
the number has any symbolic force in Acts 27 27;
2 Cor 12 2; Gal 21. Of course it must be
remembered that both the Heb and Gr words for 14
(arba‘ah ‘asdr; dekatéssares) suggest that it is made
up of 10 and 4, but constant use of 7 in the sense
above defined will have influenced the application
of its double, at least in some cases.

Forty-nine, or 7X7, oceurs in two regulations of
the Law. The second of the three great festivals
took place on the 50th day after one of the days of
unleavened bread (Lev 23 15 ff), that is, after an
interval of 7X7 days; and two years of Jubilce
were separated by 7X7 years (Lev 25 8 ff). The
combination is met with also in one of the so-called
Penitential Psalms of Babylonia: “Although my
sins are 7 times 7, forgive me my sins.”’


Seven multiplied by ten, or 70, was a very strong


2161


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Number


expression of multitude which is met with in a large
number of passages in the OT. It occurs of per-
sons: the 70 descendants of Jacob (Ex 1 5; Dt 10
22); the 70 clders of Israel (Ex 241.9; Nu 11
16.24 f); the 70 kings ill treated by Adonibezek
(Jgs 1 7); the 70 sons of Gideon (Jgs 8 30; 9 2);
the 70 descendants of Abdon who rode on 70 ass-
colts (Jgs 12 14); the 70 sons of Ahab (2 K 10 1.
6 f); and the 70 idolatrous elders seen by Ezekiel
(Ezk 8 11). It is also used of periods: 70 days of
Egyp mourning for Jacob (Gen 60 3); 70 years of
trial (Isa 23 15.17; Jer 26 11f; Dnl 9 2; Zec 1 12;
7 5); the 70 weeks of Daniel (Dnl 9 24); and the
70 years of human life (Ps 90 10). Other noticcable
uses of 70 are the 70 palm trees of Elim (Ex 15 27
| Nu 33 9); the offering of 70 bullocks in the time
of Hezekiah (2 Ch 29 32), and the offering by the
heads of the tribes of 12 silver bowls each of 70
shekels (Nu 7 13 ff). In the NT we have the 70
apostles (Lk 10 1.17), but the number is uncertain
B, D and some VSS reading 72, which is the prod-
uct, not of 7 and 10, but of 6 and 12. Significant
seventies are also mct with outside of the Bible.
The most noteworthy are the Jewish belief that
there were 70 nations outside Israel, with 70 lan-
guages, under the care of 70 angels, based perhaps
on the list in Gen 10; the Sanhedrin of about 70
members; the tr of the Pent into Gr by LXX (more
exactly 72), and the 70 members of a family in one
of the Aram. texts of Sendschirli. This ahundant
use of 70 must have been largely due to the fact
that it was regarded as an intensified 7.

Seventy and seven, or 77, a combination found in
the words of Lamech (Gen 4 24); the number of
the princes and elders of Succoth (Jgs 8 14); and
the number of lambs in a memorable sacrifice (Kzr
8 35), would appeal in the same way to the oriental
fancy.

The product of seven and seventy (Gr hebdomékon-
tékis heptd) is met with once in the NT (Mt 18 22),
and in the LXX of the above-quoted Gen 4 24.
Moulton, however (Gram. of Gr NT Prolegomena,
98), renders in both passages 70-+7; contra, Allen,
“Mt,” ICC, 199. The number is clearly a forceful
equivalent of “always.”

Seven thousand in 1 K 19 18|| Rom 11 4 may
be a round number chosen on account of its em-
bodiment of the number 7. In the M S the number
of Israelites slain at the capture of the city of Nebo
by the Moabites is reckoned at 7,000.

The half of seven seems sometimes to have been
regarded as significant. In Dn] 7 25; 9 27; 12 7;
Lk 4 25 || Jas 6 17; Rev 11 2; 13 5 a period of
distress is calculated at 34 years, that is, half the
period of sacred completeness.

The number three seems early to have attracted
attention as the number in which beginning, middle

and end are most distinctly marked,


2. The and to have been therefore regarded
Number as symbolic of a complete and ordered
Three whole. Abundant illustration of its


use in this way in Bab theology, ritual
and magic is given from the cuneiform texts by
Hchn (op. cit., 63 ff), and the hundreds of passages
in the Bible in which the number occurs include
many where this special significance either lies on
the surface or not far beneath it. This is owing in
some degree’ perhaps to Bab influence, but will
have been largely due to independent observation
of common phenomena—the arithmetical fact
mentioned above and familiar trios, such as heaven,
earth, and sea (or “‘the abyss’); morning, noon and
night; right, middle, and left, ete. In other words,
3 readily suggested completeness, and was often
used with a glance at that meaning in daily life and
daily spcech. Only a selection from the great
mass of Bib. examples can be given here. (1) Three


is often found of persons and things sacred or secu-
lar, e.g. Noah's 3 sons (Gen 6 10); Job’s 3 daugh-
ters (Job 1 2; 42 13) and 3 friends (Job 2 11);
Abraham’s 3 gucsts (Gen 18 2); and Sarah’s 3
measures of meal (ver 6; ef Mt 13 33/|); 3 in mili-
tary tactics (Jgs 7 16.20; 9 43; 18 11 11; 18
17; Job 117); 3 great feasts (Ex 23 14); the
3 daily prayers (Ps 55 17; Dnl 6 10.13); the 3
night watches (Jgs 7 19); God’s 3-fold call of
Samuel (1 8 3 8); the 3 kecpers of the temple
threshold (Jer 52 24); the 3 presidents appointed
by Darius (Dnl 6 2); the 3 temptations (Mt 4 3.
5f.8f ||); the 3 prayers in Gethsemane (Mt 26 39.
42.44 ||); Poter’s 3 denials (Mt 26 34.75 ||); the
Lord’s 3-fold question and 3-fold charge (Jn 21
15 ff); and the 3-fold vision of the sheet (Acts 10
16). (2) In a very large number of passages 3 is
used of periods of time: 3 days; 3 wecks; 3 months
and 3 years. So in Gen 40 12.13.18; Ex 2 2; 10
22; 2 8 24 13; Isa 20 3; Jon 1 17; Mt 16 32;
Lk 2 46; 13 7; Acts 9 9; 2 Cor 12 8. The fre-
quent reference to the resurrection “on the 3d day”
or “after 3 days” (Mt 16 21; 27 63, etc) may at
the same time have glanced at the symbolic use
of the number and at the belicf common perhaps
to the Jews and the Zoroastrians that a corpse was
not recognizable after 3 days (for Jewish testi-
mony cf Jn 11 39; Y*bhamath, xvi.3; Midr, Gen,
ch c; Semahéth, viii; for Pers ideas cf Hxpos T,
XVIII, 536). (3) The number 8 is also used in a
literary way, sometimes appearing only in the
structure. Note as examples the 3-fold bene-
diction of Israel (Nu 6 24 ff); the Thrice Holy of
the seraphim (Isa 6 3); the 3-fold overturn (Ezk
21 27 [Heb 32]); the 3-fold refrain of Pss 42, 43
regarded as one psalm (Ps 42 5.11; 43 5); the 3
names of God (the Mighty One, God, Jehovah,
Josh 22 22; cf Ps 50 1); the 3 graces of 1 Cor 13;
the 3 witnesses (1 Jn 5 8); the frequent use of 3
and 3d in Rev; the description of God as “who is
and who was and who is to come” (Rev 1 4); and
‘the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit’? (Mt
28 19). In some of these cases 3-fold repetition is
a mode of expressing the superlative, and others
remind us of the remarkable association of 3 with
deity alluded to by Plato and Philo, and illustrated
by the triads of Egypt and Babylonia and the Far
East. It cannot, however, be proved, or even
made probable, that there is any direct connection
hetween any of these triads and the Christian
Trinity. All that can be said is, that the same
numerical symbolism may have been operative in

both cases.
The 4 points of the compass and the 4 phases
of the moon will have been early noticed, and the
former at any rate will have suggested


3. The before Bib. times the use of 4 as a
Number symbol! of completeness of range, of
Four comprehensive extent. As early as


the middle of the 3d millennium BC
Bab rulers (followed long afterward by the Assyr-
ians) assumed the title “king of the 4 quarters,”
meaning that their rule reached in all directions,
and an early conqucror claimed to have subdued
the 4 quarters. There are not a few illustrations
of the use of 4 in some such way in the Bible. The
4 winds (referred to also in the cuneiform texts and
the Book of the Dead) are mentioned again and
again (Jer 49 36; Ezk 37 9), and the 4 quarters
or corners (Isa 11 12; Ezk 7 2; Rev 20 8). We
read also of the 4 heads of the river of Eden (Gen
2 10ff), of 4 horns, 4 smiths, 4 chariots, and
horses of 4 colors in the visions of Zechariah (1 8
LXX, 18 ff; 6 1 ff), the chariots being directly con-
nected with the 4 winds; 4 punishments (Jer 15 3;
Ezk 14 21, the latter with a remarkable Assyr
parallel), the 4 kingdoms in Nebuchadnezzar’s


Number
Numbers, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2162


dream as interpreted (Dnl 2 37 ff) and Daniel’s
vision (7 3 ff); the 4 living creatures in Ezk (1 5 ff;
ef 10), each with 4 faces and 4 wings, and the 4
modeled after them (Rev 4 6, etc). In most of
these cases 4 is clearly symbolical, as in a number of.
passages in Apoc and Pseudepigrapha. Whether
the frequent use of it in the structure of the taber-
nacle, Solomon’s temple, and Ezekiel’s temple has
anything to do with the symbolic meaning is not
clear, but the latter can probably be traced in pro-
verbial and prophetic speech (Prov 30 15.18.21.
24.29; Am 1 3.6, etc). The 4 transgressions of the
latter represent full-summed iniquity, and the 4-
fold grouping in the former suggested the wide
sweep of the classification. Perhaps it is not fanci-
ful to find the idea in the 4 sets of hearers of the
gospel in the parable of the Sower (Mt 13 19-28 ||).
The rabbis almost certainly had it in mind in their
4-fold grouping of characters in six successive
paragraphs (Ab, v.16-21) which, however, is of con-

siderably later date.
As the basis of the decimal system, which prob-
ably originated in counting with the fingers, 10 has
been a significant number in all his-


4. The torical. ages. The 10 antediluvian
Number patriarchs (Gen 5; cf the 10 Bab kings
Ten of Berosus, and 10 in early Iranian


and far-Eastern myths); the 10 rigbt-
eous men who would have saved Sodom (Gen 18
32); the 10 plagues of Egypt; the 10 command-
ments (Ex 20 2-17 || Dt 5 6-21; the 10 command-
ments found by some in Ex 34 14-26 are not clearly
made out); the 10 servants of Gideon (Jgs 6 27);
the 10 elders who accompanied Boaz (Ruth 4 2);
the 10 virgins of the parable (Mt 25 1); the 10
pieces of silver (Lk 15 8); the 10 servants intrusted
with 10 pounds (Lk 19 13 ff), the most capable of
whom was placed over 10 cities (ver 17); the 10
days’ tribulation predicted for the church of
Smyrna (Rev 2 10); the use of ‘10 times” in the
sense of ‘many times” (Gen 31 7; Neh 4 12;
Dnl 1 20, etc, an idiom met with repeatedly in
Am Tab); and the use of 10 in sacred measure-
ments and in the widely diffused custom of tithe,
and many other examples show plainly that 10 was
a favorite symbolic number suggestive of a rounded
total, large or small, according to circumstances.
The number played a prominent part in later Jew-
ish life and thought. Ten times was the Tetra-
grammaton uttered by the high priest on the Day
of Atonement; 10 persons must be present at a
nuptial benediction; 10 constituted a congregation
in the synagogue; 10 was the usual number of a
company at the paschal meal, and of a row of com-
forters of the bereaved. The world was created,
said the rabbis, by ten words, and Abraham was
visited with 10 temptations (Ab, v.1 and 4; several
other illustrations are found in the context).
The 12 months and the 12 signs of the zodiac
probably suggested to the old Babylonians the use
of 12 as a symbolic or semi-sacred


5. The number, but its frequent employment
Number by the Israelites with special meaning
Twelve cannot at present be proved to have


originated in that way, although the
idea was favored by both Jos and Philo. So far
as we know, Israelitish predilection for 12 was
entirely due to the traditional belief that the nation
consisted of 12 tribes, a belief, it is true, entertained
also by the Arabs or some of them, but with much
less intensity and persistence. In Israel the belief
was universal and incradicable. Hence the 12
pillars set up by Moses (Ex 24 4); the 12 jewels
in the high priest’s breast-plate (Ex 28 21); the
12 cakes of shewbread (Lev 24 5); the 12 rods
(Nu 17 2); the 12 spies (Nu 18); the 12 stones
placed by Joshua in the bed of Jordan (Josh 4 9);


the 12 officers of Solomon (1 K 4 7); the 12 stones
of Elijah’s altar (1 K 18 31); the 12 disciples or
apostles (26 t), and several details of apocalyptic
imagery (Rev 7 5 ff; 12 1; 21 12.14.16.21; 22 2;
cf also Mt 14 20 || 19 28 || 26 53; Acts 26 7). The
number pointed in the first instance at unity and
completencss which had been sanctioned by Divine
election, and it retained this significance when ap-
plied to the spiritual Israel. Philo indeed calls it a
perfect number. Its double in Rev 4 4, etc, is
probably also significant.


Five came readily into the mind as the half of 10.
Hence perhaps its use in the parable of the Virgins
t 25 2). It was often employed_in
6. Other literary division, e.g. in the Pent, the Pss,
Sienificant the part of the Hagiographa known as
& the Meghillath, the Ethiopic Enoch and
Numbers Mt(7 28: 111; 13 53; 19 1; 26 1; cf
Sir J. Hawkins, Horae Synopticae?, 163 ff).
It seems to have heen occasionally suggestive of relative
smallness, as in Lev 26 8, the 5 loaves (Mt 14 17 ||), 1
Cor 14 19, and perhaps in Am Tab. _ It has been re-
marked (Skinner, ‘‘Gen,”’ ICC, 483) that the number
occurs repeatedly in reference to matters Egyp (Gen 41 34;
45 22; 47 2; Isa 19 18), but there seems to be no sat-
isfactory explanation. Sirty: Although, as was before
observed, there is no direct trace in the Bible of the
numerical system based on 60, there are a few passages
where there may be a distant echo. The 60 cities of
Argob (Dt 3 4: Josh 18 30; 1 K 4 13); the 60 mighty
men and the 60 queens of Cant 3 7; 6 8, the double use
of 60 of Rehohoam’s harem and family (2 Ch 11 21),
the 3 sacrifices of 60 victims each (Nu 7 88), and the
length of Solomon’stemple, 60cuhits (1K 6 2||2Ch 3 3),
may perhaps have a remote connection with the Bab
use. It must be remembered that the latter was cur-
rentin Israel and the neighhoring regions in the division
of the talent into 60 minas. A few passages in the
Pseudepigrapha may be similarly interpreted, and the
Bab Talm contains, as might be expected, many clear
allusions. In the Bible, however, the special use of the
number is relatively rare and indirect. One hundred
and ten, the age attained by Joseph (Gen 50 22), is sig-
nificant as the Egyp ideal of longevity (Smith, DB?, 1804
f; Skinner, ‘'Gen,” ICC,539f). One hundred and fifty-
: The Gr poet Oppian (c 171 AD) and others are
said to have reckoned the number of fishes in the world
at this figure (cf Jerome on Ezk 47), and some scholars
find a reference to that belief in Jn 21 11 in which case
the number would be symbolic of comprehensiveness.
That is not quite impossible, but the suggestion cannot
be_safely pressed. Throughout this discussion of sig-
nificant numbers it must be borne in mind that writers
and teachers may often have beeu influenced by the
desire to aid the memory of those they addressed, and
may to that end have arranged thoughts and facts in
groups of 3, or 4, or 7, or 10, and so ou (Sir John Hawkins,
Horae Synopticae?, 166f). They will at the same time
have remembered the symbolic force of these numbers,
and in some cases, at least, will have used them as round
numbers. There are many places in which the round
and the symbolic uses of a number cannot be sharply
distinguished.


_ VE. Gematria (gématriya’).—A peculiar applica-
tion of numbers which was in great favor with the
later Jews and some of the early Christians and is
not absolutely unknown to the Bible, is Gematria,
that is the use of the letters of a word so as by
means of their combined numerical value to express
a name, or a witty association of ideas. The term
is usually explained as an adaptation of the Gr
word geometria, that is, “geometry,” but Dalman
(Wérterbuch, s.v.) connects it in this application of
it with grammateia. There is only one clear example
in Scripture, the number of the beast which is the
number of a man, six hundred sixty and six (Rev
13 18). If, as most scholars are inclined to believe,
a name is intended, the numerical value of the
letters composing which adds up to 666, and if it is
assumed that the writer thought in Heb or Aram.
Nero Caesar written with the consonants ntin = 50,
résh=200, waw=6, ntin=50, kdph = 100, samekh =60,
résh=200: total=666, seems to be the best solu-
tion. Perhaps the idea suggested by Dr. Milligan
that the 3-fold use of 6 which just falls short of 7,
the number of sacred completeness, and is there-
fore a note of imperfection, may have been also in
the writer’s mind. Some modern scholars find a
second instance in Gen 14 14 and 16 2. As the


2163


numerical value of the consonants which compose
Eliezer in Heb add up to 318, it has been main-
tained that the number is not historical, but has
been fancifully constructed by means of gematria
out of the name. This strange idea is not new, for
it is found in the Midrash on Gen (ch 43) in the name
of a rabbi who lived ¢ 200 AD, but its antiquity is
its greatest merit.


Litrratvre.—In addition to other books referred to
in the course of the art.: Hehn, Siebenzahi und Sabbath
bet den Babyloniern und im AT; KG6nig, Séilistik,
Rhetorik, Poetik, etc, 51-57, and the same writer's art.
“Number” in HDB; Sir J. Hawkins, Horae Synopticae?,
163-67; Wiener, Essays in Pentateuchal Criticism, 155—
69; ‘‘ Number" in ene epee es EB; Jew Enc; Smith,
DB; ‘‘Numbers’' in DCG; ‘‘Zahlen" in the Dicts. of
Wiener, Riehm?, Guthe; ‘‘Zahlen"' and *’ Sieben" In RE,

WiiuiamM Taytor SMITH


NUMBER, GOLDEN. Sée Gotpen NumsBer.
NUMBERING. Sce Davin; Quirinivs.
NUMBERS, num’bérz, BOOK OF:


I. Titte ann Contents
1. Title
2. Contents
II. Lirerany Structure
1. Alleged Grounds of Distribution
2. Objections to Same
(1) Hypothesis Unproved u
(2) Written Record Not Impossible
(3) No Book Ever Thus Constructed
(4) Inherent Difficulties of Analysis
(a) The Story of the Spies
(b) Rebellion of Korah
(c) Story of Balaam
TIL. Historica, CREDIBILITY
1. Seeming Chronological Inaccuracies
(1) The Second Passover
(2) The Thirty-seven Years’ Chasm
(3) Fortieth Year
2. So-called Statistical Errors
(1) Number of the Fighting Men
(2) Size of the Congregation
(a) Multiplication of People
(b) Exodus in One Day
c) Support in Wilderness
13, Room at Mt. Sinai
(e) Slow Conquest of Canaan
(3) Number of the Firstborn
3. Alleged Physical Impossibilities
(1) Duties of the Priests i
(2) Assembling of the Congregation
(3) Marching of the Host
(4) Victory over Midian
AUTHORSHIP ; Fs
1, Against the Mosaic Authorship
(1) Alternating Use of Divine Names
(2) Traces of Late Authorship
2. For the Mosaic Authorship
(1) Certain Passages Have the Appearance of
Having Been Written by Moses
(2) Acqnaintance with Egyptian Manners and
Customs
LITERATURE


I. Title and Contents.—Styled in the Heb Bible
“2702, bemidhbar, “in the wilderness,” from the
chee 5th word in 1 1, probably because of
recording the fortunes of Israel in the
Sinaitic desert. The 4th book of the
Pent (or of the Hex, according to criticism) was
designated “Ap:Ouot, Arithmoi, in LXX and Numeri
in the Vulg, and from this last received its name
“Numbers”? in the AV, in all 3 evidently because of
its reporting the 2 censuses which were taken, the
one at Sinai at the beginning and the other on the
plains of Moab at the close of the wanderings. |

Of the contents the following arrangement will be


sufficiently detailed:

2 (1) Before leaving Sinai, 1 1—10 10 (a
period of 19 days, from the Ist to the
20th of the 2d month after the exodus),
describing: :

(2) The numbering and ordering of the people, chs


1. Title


2. Contents


(b) The cleansing and blessing of the congregation,
chs 5, 6. eA

(c) The princes’ offerings and the dedication of the
altar, chs 7, 8.

(d) The observance of a second Passover, 9 1-14.

(e) The cloud and the trumpets for the march, 9 15
—10 10.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Number
Numbers, Book of


(2) From Sinai to Kadesh, 10 11—14 45 (a period of
10 days, from the 20th to the 30th of the 2d month),
narrating:


(a) The departure from Sinai, 10 11-35.
(b) ae cals at Taberah and Kibroth-hattaavah,
¢ 5


(ec) The rebellion of Miriam and Aaron, ch 12.
(d) Tho mission of the spies, chs 13, 14.

(3) The wanderings in the desert, chs 15-19 (a period
ot 37 years, from the end of the 2d to the beginning
of the 40th year), recording:


(a) Sundry laws and the punishment of a Sabbath
breaker, ch 15.

(8) The rebellion of Korah, ch 16.

(c) The budding of Aaron's rod, ch 17.

(d) The duties and revenues of the priests and
Levites, ch 1

(e) The water of separation for the unclean, ch 19.

(4) From Kadesh to Moab, chs 20, 21 (a period of 10

ee from the beginning of the 40th year), re-

citing:

(a) The story of Balaam, 22 2—24 25.

(8) The zeal of Phinehas, ch 25.

(c) The second census, 26 1-51.

(d) Directions for dividing the land, 26 52—27 II.

(e) Appointment of Moses’ successor, 27 12-23.

(f) Concerning offerings and vews, chs 28-30.

(g) War with Midian, ch 31.

(A) Settlement of Reuben and Gad, ch 32.

@) List of camping stations, 33 1-49.

(j) Canaan to be cleared of its inhabitants and dl-
vided, 33 50—34 29.

(k) Cities of refuge to be appointed, ch 35.

(l) The marriage of heiresses, ch 36.


H. Literary Structure.—According to modem
criticism, the text of Nu, like that of the other
books of the Pent (or Hex), instead of being re-
garded as substantially the work of one writer
(whatever may have been his sources of information
and whoever may have been its first or latest editor),
should be distributed—not always in solid blocks
of composition, but frequently in fragments, in
sentences, clauses or words, 50 mysteriously put
together that they cannot now with certainty be
separated—among three writers, J, E and P with
another D (at least in one part)—these writers,
individuals and not schools (Gunkel), belonging,
respectively: J to the 9th cent. BC (c 830), E to
the 8th cent. BC (c 750), P to the 5th cent.BC (c
444), and D to the 7th cent. BC (c 621).

The grounds upon which this distribution is
made are principally these: (1) the supposed pref-

erential use of the Divine names, of
1. Alleged Jeh (Lord) by J, and of Elohim (God)
Grounds of by E and P—a theory, however, which
Distribution hopelessly breaks down in its appli-

cation, as Orr (POT, ch vii), Eerd-
mans (St, 33 ff) and Wiener (£PC, I) have con-
clusively shown, and as will afterward appear;
(2) distinctions in style of composition, which are
not always obvious and which, even if they were,
would not necessarily imply diversity of authorshi
unless every author’s writing must be uniform Ban
monotonous, whatever his subject may be; and
(3) perhaps chiefly a preconceived theory of reli-
gious development in Israel, according to which the
people in pre-Mosaic times were animists, totemists
and polytheists; in Mosaic times and after, heno-
theists or worshippers of one God, while recognizing
the existence of other gods; and latterly, in exilic
and post-exilic times, monotheists or worshippers
of the one living and true God—which theory, in
order to vindicate its plausibility, required the
reconstruction of Israel’s religious documents in
the way above described, but which is now rejected
by archaeologists (Delitasch and A. Jeremias) and
by theologians (Orr, Baentsch [though accepting
the analysis on other grounds] and Kénig) as not
supported by facts.

Without denying that the text-analysis of criti-
cism is on the first blush of it both plausible and


Numbers, Book of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2164


attractive and has brought to light valuable informa-
tion relative to Scripture, or without overlooking
the fact that it has behind it the


2. Objec- names of eminent scholars and is sup-
tions to ported by not a few considerations of
Same weight, one may fairly urge against it


the following objections.

(1) Hypothesis unproved—-At the best, the
theory is an unproved and largely imaginary
hypothesis, or series of hypotheses—“hypothesis
built. on hypothesis” (Orr); and nothing more
strikingly reveals this than (a) the frequency with
which in the text-analysis conjecture (“perhaps”
and “probably’’) takes the place of reasoned proof;
(b) the arbitrary manner m which the supposed
documents are constructed by the critics who,
without reasou given, and often in violation of
their own rules and principles, lift out of J (for
instance) every word or clause they consider should
belong to E or P, and vice versa every word or
clause out of E or P that might suggest that the
passage should be assigned to J, at the same time
explaining the presence of the inconvenient word
or clause in a document to which it did not belong
by the careless or deliberate action of a redactor;
and (c) the failure even thus to construct the docu-
ments successfully, most critics admitting that J
and E cannot with confidence be separated from
each other—Kuenen himself saying that ‘the at-
tempt to make out a Jehovistie and an Elohistic
writer or school of writers by means of the Divine
names has led criticism on a wrong way”; and some
even denying that P ever existed as a separate
document at all, Eerdmans (St, 33, 82), in par-
ticular, maintaining, as the result of elaborate
exegesis, that P could not have been constructed
in either exilic or post-exilic times “as an intro-
duction to a legal work.”

(2) Written record nat impossible-—It is impos-
sible to demonstrate that the story of Israel’s ‘‘wan-
derings” was not committed to writing by Moses,
who certainly was not unacquainted with the art
of writing, who had the ability, if any man had, to
prepare such a writing, whose interest it was, as
the leader of his people, to see that such writing,
whether done by himself or by others under his
supervision, was accurate, and who besides had
been commanded by God to write the journeyings
of Israel (88 2). To suppose that for 500 years no
reliable record of the fortunes of Israel existed,
when during these years writing was practised in
Egypt and Babylon; and that what was then fixed
in written characters was only the tradition that
had floated down for 5 cents. from mouth to mouth,
is simply to say that little or no dependence can
be placed upon the narrative, that while there may
be at the bottom of it some grains of fact, the main
body of it is fiction. This conclusion will not be
readily admitted.

(8) Na book constructed in this way.—No reliable
evidence exists that any book either ancient or
modern was ever constructed as, according to
criticism, the Pent, and in particular Nu, was.
Volumes have indeed been composed by two or
more authors, acting in concert, but their contri-
butions have never been intermixed as those of
J, E, D and P are declared to have been; nor, when
joint authorship has been acknowledged on the
title-page, has it been possible for readers confi-
dently to assign to each author his own contri-
bution. And yet, modern criticism, dealing with
documents more than 2,000 years old and in a lan-
guage foreign to the critics—which documents,
morcover, exist only in MSS not older than the 10th
cent. AD (Buhl, Canon and Text of the OT, 28), and
the text of which has been fixed not infallibly either
as to consonant or vowel—claims that it can tell


exactly (or nearly so) what parts, whether para-
graphs, sentences, clauses or words, were supplied
by J, E, P and D respectively. Credat Judaeus
Apella! me

(4) Inherent difficulties of analysis.—The critical
theory, besides making of the text of Nu, as of the
other books of the Pent, such a patchwork as is un-
thinkable in any document with ordinary preten-
sion to historical veracity, is burdened with inherent
difficulties which make it hard to credit, as the
following examples, taken from Nu, will show.

(a) The story of the spies: Chs 13 and 14 are
thus distributed by Cornill, Driver, Strack and EB:

JE, 13 17b-20.22-24.26b-31.32.33;, 14 3.4.8.9.11-
25.39-45. :

P, 13 1-174.21.25.26a (to Paran).32a; 14 1.2 Gn
the main). 5-7.10.26-38 (in the main).

Kautzsch generally agrees; and Hartford-Bat-
tersby in HDB professes ability to divide between
J and E.

(i) According to this analysis, however, up to
the middle of the 5th cent. BC, either JE began
at 18 17b, in which case it wanted both the in-
struction to search the land and the names of the
searchers, both of which were subsequently added
from P (assuming it to have been a separate docu-
ment, which is doubtful); or, if JE contained both
the instruction and the names, these were sup-
planted by 1-17a from P. As the former of these
alternatives is hardly likely, one naturally asks
why the opening verses of JE were removed and
those of P substituted? And if they were removed,
what has become of them? Does not the occur-
rence of Jeh in 1-17a, on the critical principles of
some, suggest that this section is the missing para-
graph of JE?

Gi) If the JE passages furnish a nearly complete
narrative (Driver), why should the late compiler
or editor have deemed it necessary to insert two
whole verses, 21 and 25, and two halves, 26a and
32a, if not because without these the original JE
narrative would have been incomplete? Ver 21
states in general terms that the spies searched the
whole land, proceeding as far N. as Hamath, after
which ver 22 mentions that they entered the country
from the 8. and went up to Hebron and Eshcol,
without at all stating an incongruity (Gray) or
implying (Driver) that they traveled no farther N.
—-the reason for specifying the visit to Eshcol being
the interesting fact. that there the extraordinary
cluster of grapes was obtained. Vs 25.264 relate
quite naturally that the spies returned to Kadesh
after 40 days and reported what they had found
to Moses and Aaron as well as to all the congre-
gation. Without these verses the narrative would
have stated neither how long the land had been
searched nor whether Moses and Aaron had re-
ceived any report from their messengers, although
ver 266 implies that a report was given to some
person or persons unnamed. That Moses and
Aaron should not have becn named in JE is ex-
ecedingly improbable. Ver 32a is in no way in-
consistent with vs 266-31, which state that the
land was flowing with milk and honey. What ver
32a¢ adds is an expression of the exaggerated fears
of the spies, whose language could not mean that
the land was so barren that they would die of
starvation, a statement which would have expressly
contradicted ver 27 (JE)—in which case why should
it have been inserted?—but that, notwithstanding
its fruitfiulness, the population was continually being
wasted by internecine wars and the incursions of
surrounding tribes. The starvation theory, more-
over, 18 not supported by the texts (Lev 26 38;
Ezk 36_13) usually quoted in its behalf.

Gil) To argue (Driver) for two documents be-
cause Joshua is not always mentioned along with


2165


Caleb is not strikingly convincing; while if Joshua
is not included among the spies in JE, that is ob-
viously because the passages containing his name
have been assigned beforehand to P. But if
Joshua’s name did not occur in JE, why would it
have been inserted in the story by a post-exilic
writer, when even in Dt 1 36 Joshua is not ex-
pressly named as one of the spies, though again the
language in Dt 1 38 tacitly suggests that both
Caleb and Joshua were among the searchers of the
land, and that any partition of the text which con-
veys the impression that Joshua was not among the
sples is wrong?

(iv) If the text-analysis is as the critics arrange,
how comes it that in JE the name Jeh does not once
occur, while all the verses containing it are allo-
cated to P?


(b) The rebellion of Korah: Chs 16 and 17 are sup-
posed to he the work of ‘two, if not three,’ contributors
(Driver, Kautzsch)—the whole story heing assigned to
P (enlarged by additions about which the text analysts
are not unanimous), with the exception of 16 1b.2a.12-
15.25.26.27b-34, which are given to JE, though varia-
tions here also are not unknown.

It is admitted that the JE verses, if read continuously,
make out a story of Dathan and Abiram as distin-
guished from Korah and his company: that the motives
of Dathan and Abiram prohably differed from those of
Korah and his company, and that Dathan_and Abiram
were swallowed up by an earthquake, while the 250
incense-offerers were destroyed by fire. To conclude
from this, however, that three or even two narratives
have been intermixed is traveling beyond the premises.

(i) If JE contained more about the conspiracy of the
Reuhenites, Dathan and Ahiram, than has been pre-
served in the verses assigned to it, what has hecome of the
excised verses, if they are not those ascrihed to P; and,
if they are not, what evidence exists that P’s verses are
better than the lost verses of JE? And how comes it
that in P the Divine name used throughout, with one
exception, ver 22, is Jeh, while in JE it occurs only 6 t?
(ii) If JE contained only the parts assigned to it and
nothing more happened than the Reubenite émeute, why
should the Korahite rehellion have been added to it 4
cents. later, if that rebellion never happened? (iii) If
the Korahite conspiracy did happen, why should it have
been omitted in JE, and nothing whispered about it till
after the exile? (iv) If the two conspiracies, ecclesiasti-
cal (among the princes) and civil (among the laymen),
arose contemporaneously, and the conspirators made
common cause with one another, in that there was nothing
unusual or contrary to_experience. (v) If Moses ad-
dressed himself now to Korah and again to Dathan and
Abiram, why should not the same document say so?
(vi) If Dathan and Abiram were engulfed by an earth-
quake, and the 250 princes were consumed by fire from
the tabernacle, even that does not necessitate two docu-
ments, since both events might have occurred together.
fae) It is not certain that P (vs 35-43) represents Korah
as having been consumed by fire, while JE (vs 31-33)
declares he was swallowed up by the earth. At least P
(26 10) distinctly states that Korah was swallowed up
by the earth, and that only the 250 were consumed by
fire.

Wherefore, in the face of these considerations, it is not
too much to say that the evidence for more documents
than one in this story is not convincing.


(c) The story of Balaam: Chs 22-24 fare more
leniently at the hands of analysis, being all left with
JE, except 22 1, which is generously handed over
to P. Uncertainty, however, exists as to how to par-
tition ch 22 between J and BE. Whether all should
be given to E because of the almost uniform use of
Elohim rather than of Jeh, with the exception of vs
22-352, which are the property of J because of the
use of Jeh (Driver, Kautzsch); or whether some
additional verses should not be assigned to J
(Cornill, HDB), critics are not agreed. As to chs
23 and 24, authorities hesitate whether to give both
to J or to E, or ch 23 to E and ch 24 to J, or both to
a late redactor who had access to the two sourees—
surely an unsatisfactory demonstration in this case
at least of the documentary hypothesis. Comment
on the use of the Divine names in this story is
reserved till later. : ;

Yet, while declining to accept this hypothesis as
proved, it is not contended that the materials in
Nu are always arranged in chronological order, or


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Numbers, Book of


that the style of composition is throughout the
same, or that the book as it stands has never been
revised or edited, but is in every jot and tittle the
same as when first constructed. In ch 7, e.g., the
narrative goes back to the Ist day of the 1st month
of the 2d year, and in ch 9 to the 1st month of the 2d
year, though ch 1 begins with the 1st day of the 2d
month of the 2d year. There are also legislative
passages interspersed among the historical, and
poetical among the prosaic, but diversity of author-
ship, as already suggested, cannot be inferred from
either of these facts unless it is impossible for a
writer to be sometimes disorderly in the arrange-
ment of his materials; and for a lawgiver to be also
a historian, and for a prose writer occasionally to
burst into song. Assertions like these, however,
cannot be entertained. Hence any argument for
plurality of documents founded on them must be
set aside. Nor is it a fair conclusion against the
literary unity of the book that its contents are
varied in substance and form and have been sub-
jected, as is probable, to revision and even to inter-
polations, provided always these revisions and
interpolations have not changed the meaning of the
book. Whether, therefore, the Book of Nu has or
has not been compiled from preéxisting documents,
it cannot be justly maintained that the text-analysis
suggested by the critics has been established, or
that the literary unity of Nu has been disproved.
Ul. Historical Credibility.—Were the narrative
in this book written down immediately or soon after
the events it records, no reason would exist for
challenging its authenticity, unless it could be
shown either from the narrative itself or from ex-
traneous sources that the events chronicled were
internally improbable, incredible or falsified. Even
should it be proved that the text consists of two or
more preéxisting documents interwoven with one
another, this would not necessarily invalidate its
truthfulness, if these documents were practically
contemporaneous with the incidents they report,
and were not combined in such a way as to distort
and misrepresent the occurrences they related.
If, however, these preéxisting documents were pre-
pared 500 (JE) or 1,000 (P) years after the incidents
they narrate, and were merely a fixing in written
characters of traditions previously handed down
(JE), or of legislation newly invented and largely
imaginary (P), it will not be easy to establish their
historical validity. The credibility of this portion
of the Pent has been assailed on the alleged ground
that it contains chronological inaccuracies, statis-
tical errors and physical impossibilities.
(1) The second Passover (9 1-5)—The critical
argument is that a contemporary historian would
naturally have placed this paragraph
1. Seeming before 1 1. The answer is that pos-


Chrono- sibly he would have done so had his
logical In- object been to observe strict chrono-
accuracies logical order, which it manifestly was


not (see chs 7 and 9), and had he when
commencing the book deemed it necessary to state
that the Israelites had celebrated a second Passover
on the legally appointed day, the 14th of the 1st
month of the 2d year. This, however, he possibly
at first assumed would be understood, and only
afterward, when giving the reason for the supple-
mentary Passover, realized that in after years
readers might erroneously conclude that this was
all the Passover that had been kept in the 2d year.
So to obviate any such mistaken inference, he pre-
fixed to his account of the Little Passover, as it is
sometimes called, a statement to the effect that
the statutory ordinance, the Great Passover, had
been observed at the usual time, in the usual way,
and that, too, in obedience to the express command-
ment of Jeh.


Numbers, Book of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


(2) The thirty-seven years’ chasm.—Whether 20 1 be
considered the beginning of the 3d or of the 40th year,
in either case a period of 37 years is passed over—in the
one case in almost unbroken silence; in the other with
scarcely anything of moment recorded save Korah’'s
rebellion and the publication of a few laws concerning
offerings to be made when the people reached the land
of their habitation. To pronounce the whole book un-
historical because of this long interval of absolute or
comparative silence (Bleek) is unreasonable. Most
histories on this principle would he cast into the waste-
basket. Besides, a historian might have as good reason
for passing over as for recording the incidents of any
particular period. And this might have been the case
with the author of Nu. From the moment sentence of
death was passed upon the old generation at Kadesh,
till the hour when the new generation started out for
Canaan, he may have counted that Israel had prac-
tically ceased to be the people of Jeh, or at least that their
fortunes formed no part of the history of Jeh’s kingdom;
and it is noticeable that scarcely had the tribes reassem-
bled at Kadesh in preparation for their onward_march
than Miriam and Aaron, probably the last of the doomed
generation, died. Accordingly, from this point on, the
narrative is occupied with the fortunes of the new gen-
eration. Whether correct or not, this solution of the
37 years’ silence (Kurtz) is preferable to that which sug-
gests (Ewald) that the late compiler, having found it
impossible to locate all the traditions he had _ collected
into the closing years of the wanderings, placed the rest
of them in the first 2 years, and left the interval a blank—
a solution which has not even the merit of being clever
and explains nothing. It does not explain why, if the
narrator was not writing history, there should have heen
an interval at all. A romancer would not have missed
so splendid an opportunity for exercising his art, would
not have left a gap of 37 years unfilled, but like the writers
of the apocryphal Gospels would have crowded it with
manufactured tales.

On the better theory, not only is the silence explained,
but theitems inserted are accounted for as well. Though
the unbelieving generation had ceased to be the people of
Jeh, Aaron had not yet been sentenced to exclusion from
the promised land. He was still one of the representa-
tives of the kingdom of Jeh, and Korah's rebellion prac-
tically struck a blow at that kingdom. As such it was
punished, and the story of its breaking out and suppres-
sion was recorded, as a matter that vitally concerned the
stability of the kingdom. For a like reason, the legis-
lative sections were included in the narrative. They
were Jeh’s actsand not the people’s. Thcy were statutes
and ordinances for the new gencration in the new land.

(3) The fortieth year—The events recorded as having
taken place between the 1st of the 5th month (the date
of Aaron's death) and the Ist of the 11th month (the
date of Moses’ address) are so numerous and important
as to render it impossible, it is said, to maintain the
credibility of this portion, of the narrative. But (a) it
is not certain that all the events in this section were
finished hefore Moses began his oration; neither (b) is
It necessary to hold that they all occurred in succession;
while (c) until the rapidity with which events followed
one another is ascertained, it will not be possible to de-
cide whether or not they could al! have been begun and
finished within the space of 6 months.


(1) Number of the fighting men.—This, which may

be set down roughly at 600,000, has been chal-

lenged on two grounds: (a) that the

2. So-called number is too large, and (b) that the

Statistical censuses at Sinai and in Moab are
Errors too nearly equal.

The first of these objections will be
considered in the following section when treating
of the size of the congregation. The second will
not appear formidable if it be remembered (a) that
it is neither impossible nor unusual for the popu-
lation of a country to remain stationary for a long
series of years; (b) that there was a special fitness
in Isracl’s case that the doomed gencration should
be replaced by one as nearly as possible equal to
that which had perished; (c) that had the narra-
tive been invented, it is more than likely that the
numbers would have becn made either exactly
equal or more widely divergent; and (d) that so
many variations occurring in the strength of the
tribes as numbered at Sinai and again in Moab,
while the totals so nearly correspond, constitutes
a watermark of truthfulness which should not be
overlooked.

(2) The size of the congregation —Taking the
fighting men at 600,000 and the whole community
at 44 times that number, or about 2} millions,


2166


several difficulties emerge which have led to the sug-
gestion (Eerdmans, Conder, Wiener) that the 600,-
000 should be reduced (to, say, 6,000), and the
entire population to less than 30,000. The following
alleged impossibilitics are believed to justify this
reduction: (a) that of 70 families increasing to 23
millions between the descent into, and the departure
from, Egypt; (b) that of 23 millions being led out
of Egypt in one day; (c) that of obtaining support
for so large a multitude with their flocks in_the
Sinaitic desert; (d) that of finding room for them
either before the Mount at Sinai, or in the limited
territory of Pal; and () that of the long time it
took to conquer Pal if the army was 600,000 strong.

(a) Multiplication of people: As to the possi-
bility of 70 souls multiplying in the course of 215
years or 7 generations (to take the shorter interval
rather than the longer of 430 years) into 24 millions
of persons giving 600,000 fighting men, that need
not be regarded as incredible till the rate of in-
crease in each family is exactly known. Allowing
to each of Jacob’s grandsons who were married
(say 51 out of 53), 4 male descendants (Colenso
allows 44), these would in 7 generations—not in
4 (Colenso)—amount to 835,584, and with surviv-
ing fathers and grandfathers added might well
reach 900,000, of whom 600,000 might be above 20
years of age. But in point of fact, without definite
data about the number of generations, the rates of
birth and of mortality in each generation, all cal-
culations are at the best problematical. The most
that can be done is to consider whether the narra-
tive mentions any circumstances fitted to explain
this large number of fighting men and the great
size of the congregation, and then whether the
customary objections to the Bib. statement can be
satisfactorily set aside.

As for confirmatory circumstances, the Bible
expressly states that during the years of the oppres-
sion the Hebrews were extraordinarily fruitful, and
that this was the reason why Pharaoh became
alarmed and issued his edict for the destruction of
the malechildren. The fruitfulness of the Hebrews,
however, has been challenged (Eerdmans, Vorge-
schichte Israels, 78) on the ground that were the
births so numerous as this presupposes, two mid-
wives (Ex 1 15) would not have sufficed for the
necessary offices. But if the two to whom Pharaoh
spake were the superintendents of the midwives
throughout Goshen, to whom the king would hardly
address himself individually, or if they were the
two officiating in Heliopolis, the statement in Ex 1
15 will appear natural enough, and not opposed to
thestatement in Ex 1 10 that Pharaoh was alarmed
at the multiplication of the Hebrews in his land.
And, indeed, if the Hebrews were only 30,000
strong, it isnot easy to see why the whole might of
Egypt could not have kept them in subjection.
Then as to the congregation being 23 millions if the.
fighting men were 600,000, that corresponds with
the proportion which existed among the Helvetii,
who had 92,000 men capable of bearing arms out
of a population, including children, old men and
women, of 368,000 souls (Caesar, BG, i, 20). This
seems to answer the objection (Eerdmans, Vorge-
schichte Israels, 78) that the unschooled Oriental is
commonly addicted to exaggeration where numbers
are concerned.

(b) Exodus in one day: The second difficulty
would be serious were it necessary to suppose that
the Israelites had never heard about their projected
journey till the 14th of the 1st month. But the
idea of going forth from Egypt must have been
before them since the day Moses went to Pharaoh
to demand their liberation; and at least 4 days
before the 14th they had begun to prepare for de-
parture. In circumstances such as these, with a


2167


people thirsting for liberty and only waiting the
signal to move, aware also of the hour at which
that signal would be given, viz. at midnight, it
does not appear so formidable a task as is imagined
to get them all assembled in one day at a forc-
appointed rendezvous, more esp. as they were not
likely to delay or linger in their movements. But
how could there have been 24 millions of fugitives,
it is asked (Herdmans, Wiener), if Pharaoh deemed
600 chariots sufficient for pursuit? The answer is
that Pharach did not reckon 600 chariots sufficient,
but in addition to these, which were “chosen
chariots,’”’ he took all the chariots of Egypt, his
horsemen and his army (Ex 14 7.9), which were
surely adequate to overcome a weaponless crowd,
however big it might be. And that it was big, a
vast horde indeed, Pharaoh’s host implies.

(c) Support in wilderness: The supposed diff-
culty of obtaining support for 24 millions of people
with the flocks and herds in the Sinaitic desert takes
for granted that the desert was then as barren a
region as it is now, which cannot be proved, and is
as little likely to be correct as it would be to argue
that Egypt, which was then the granary of the
world, was no more fertile than it was 10 years ago,
or that the regions in which Babylon and Assyria
were situated were as desolate then as they are now.
This supposition disregards the fact that Moscs
fed the flocks of Jethro for 40 years in that same
region of Sinai; that when the Israelites passed
through it, it was inhabited by several powerful
tribes. It overlooks, too, the fact that the flocks
and herds of Israel were not necessarily all cooped
up in one spot, but were most likely spread abroad
in districts where water and vegetation could be
found. And it ignores the statement in the narrative
that the Israelites were not supplied exclusively
by the produce of the desert, but had manna from
heaven from the 1st day of the 2d month after
leaving Egypt till they reached Canaan. Ration-
alistic expositors may relegate this statement to the
limbo of fable, but unless the supernatural is to be
eliminated altogether from the story, this statement
must be accorded its full weight. So must the two
miraculous supplics of water at Horeb (Ex 17) and
at Kadesh (Nu 20) be treated. It is sometimes
argued that these supplies were quite insufficient
for 23 millions of people with their flocks and herds;
and that therefore the congregation could not have
been so large. But the narrative in Nu states, and
presumably it was the same in Ex, that the smitten
rock poured forth its water so copiously and so
continuously that ‘the people drank abundantly
with their flocks.? Wherefore no conclusion can
be drawn from this against the reported size of the
congregation. pass

(d) Room at Mt. Sinai: As to the impossibility
of finding room for 24 millions of people either
before the Mount at Sinai or within the Jand of
Canaan (Conder), few will regard this as self-
evident. If the site of their encampment was the
Er-Rahab plain (Robinson, Stanley)—though the

lain of Sebayeh, admittedly not so roomy, has
een mentioned (Ritter, Kurtz, Knobel)—esti-
mates differ as to the sufficiency of accommodation
to be found there. Conder gives the dimensions of
the plain as 4.sq. miles, which he deems insufficient,
forgetting, perhaps, that “its extent is farther in-
creased by lateral valleys receding from the plain
itself” (Forty Days in the Desert, 73; cf Keil on
Ex 19 1.2). Kalisch, though putting the size of
the plain at a smaller figure, adds that “it thus
furnished ample tenting ground for_the hosts of
Israel’’—a conclusion accepted by Ebers, Riehm
and others. In any case it seems driving literal
interpretation to extreme lengths to hold that camp-
ing before the Mount necessarily meant that every


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Numbers, Book of


member of the host required to be in full view of
Sinai. As to not finding room in Canaan, it is
doubtful if, after the conquest, the remnants of both
peoples at any time numbered as many persons as
dwelt in Pal during the most flourishing ycars of
the kingdom. It may well be that the whole popu-
lation of Pal today amounts to only about 600,000
souls; but Pal today under Turkish rule is no
proper gauge for judging of Pal under David cr
even under Joshua.

(e) Slow conquest of Canaan: The long time it
took to conquer Pal (Eerdmans, Vorgeschichie
Israels, 78) is no solid argument to prove the un-
reliable character of the statement about the size
of the army, and therefore of the congregation.
Every person knows that in actual warfare, victory
does not always go with the big battalions; and
in this instance the desert-trained warriors allowed
themselves to be seduced by the idolatries and
immoralities of the Canaanites and forgot to exe-
cute the commission with which they had heen in-
trusted, viz. to drive out the Canaanites from the
land which had been promised to their fathers.
Had they been faithful to Jeh, they would not have
taken so long completely to possess the land (Ps
81 13.14). But if instead of having 600,000 stal-
wart soldiers they had only possessed 6,000, it is not
difficult to see how they could not drive out the
Canaanites. The difficulty is to perceive how they
could have achieved as much as they did.


(3) The number of the firstborn.—That the 22,273
firsthorn males from 1 month old and upward (3 43)
is out of all proportion to the 603,550 men of 20 years
old and_upward, being much too few, has frequently
(Bleek, Bohlen, Colenso and others) been felt as a diffi-
culty, since it practically involves the conclusion that
for every firstborn there must have been 40 or 45 malcs
in each family. _Various solutions of this difficulty have
been offered. The prevalence of polygamy has been
suggested (Michaelis, Haévernick). The exclusion of
firstborn sons who were married, the inclusion only of
the mother's firstborn, and the great fruitfulness of Heh
mothers have been called in to surmount the difficulty
(Kurtz). But perhaps the best explanation is that only
those were counted who were born after the Law was
given on the night of the departure from Egypt (Ex 13
2; Nu 8 13; 8 17) (Keil, Delitzsch, Gerlach). Jt may
be urged, of course, that this would require an exception-
ally large number of births in the 13 months; but in the
exceptionally joyous circumstances of the emancipation
this might not have been impossihle. In any case, it
does not seem reasonable on account of this difficulty,
which might vanish were all the facts known, to impeach
the historical accuracy of the narrative, even in this
particular.

(Norz.—In Scotland, with a population of nearly
douhle that of the Israelites, viz. 4,877,648, the mar-
riages in 1909 were 30,092, the lowest on record for 55
years. At this rate the hirths in Israel during the first
12 months after the exodus might have been 15,046,
assuming each marriage to have had issue. As this
marriage rate, however, is excessively low for Scotland
in normal years, the numher of marriages and therefore
of births in Israel in the first year after the exodus may
well have been twice, if not 3 times, 15,046, i.e. 30,092,
or 45,138. Reckoning the half of these as males, viz.
15,046 or 22,569, it does not appear as if the number of
the firstborn in the text were quite impossible, on the
supposition made.)


(1) The duties of the priests —These are supposed
to have been so oncrous that Aaron and his sons
could not possibly have performed


3. Alleged them. But (a) the Levitical laws,
Physical though published in the desert, were
Impossi- not necessarily imtended to receive
bilities full and minute observance there, but


only in Canaan. (6) In point of fact,
as Moses afterward testificd (Dt 12 8), the Levitical
laws were not scrupulously kept in the wilderness.
(c) There is no reason to suppose that the Passover
of the 2d year was cclebrated otherwise than it had
been in Egypt before the exodus, the slaughterin:
of the lambs being performed by the heads o
families. And (d) as the Levites were set apart
to minister to the tabernacle (Nu 1 50), they would
be able in many ways to assist the pricsts.


Numbers, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2168


(2) The assembling of the congregation.—The
assembling of the congregation at the door of the
tabernacle (10 3.4) has been adduced as another
physical impossibility; and no doubt it was if
every nan, woman and child, or even only every
man was expected to be there; but not if the con-
gregation was ordinarily represented by its ‘‘re-
nowned”’ or “‘called’’ men, princes of the tribes of
their fathers, heads of thousands of Israel (1 16).
To suppose that anything else was meant is surely
not required. When Moses called all Israel and
spake unto them (Dt 5 1; 29 2), no intelligent
person understands that he personally addressed
every individual, or spoke so as to be heard by
every individual, though what he said was intended
for all. An additional difficulty in the way of
assembling the congregation, and by implication
an argument against the size of the congregation,
has been discovered in the two silver trnmpets
which, it is contended, were too few for summoning
so vast a host as 24 millions of people. But it is
not stated in the narrative either (a) that it was
absolutely necessary that every individual in the
camp should hear the sound of the trumpets any
more than it was indispensable that Balaam’s curse
should reécho to the utmost bounds of Israel (Nu 23
13), or that a public proclamation by a modern
state, though prefaced by means of an “Oyez,”’
should be heard by all within the state or even
within its capital; or (6) if it was necessary that
everyone should hear, that the trumpcters could
not move about through the camp but must remain
stationary at the tabernacle door; or (c) that in
the clear air of the desert the sound of the trumpets
would not travel farther than in the noisy and
murky atmosphere of modern cities; or (d) that
should occasion arise for more trumpets than two,
Moees and his successors were forbidden to make
them.

(3) The marching of the host—The marching of
the host in four main divisions of about half a
million each (2; 10 14-20) has also been pro-
nounced a stumbling-block (Colenso, Eerdmans,
Doughty), inasmuch as the procession formed
(i.e. if no division began to fall into line till its
predecessor had completed its evolutions) would
require the whole day for its completion, and would
make a column of unprecedented length—of 22
miles (Colenzo), of 600 miles (Donghty)—and
would even on the most favorable hypothesis travel
only a few miles, when the whole line wonld again
need to reconstruct the camp. The simple state-
ment of this shows its absurdity as an explanation of
what actually took place on the march, and indi-
rectly suggests that the narrative may be historical
after all, as no romancer of a late age would have
risked his reputation by laying down such direc-
tions for the march, if they were susceptible of no
other explanation than the above. How precisely
the march was conducted may be difficult or even
impossible to describe in such a way as to obviate
all objections. But some considcrations may be
advanced to show that the march through the
desert was neither impossible nor ineredible.
(a) The deploying of the four main divisions into
line may have gone on simultaneously, as they were
widely apart from each other, on_the E. (Judah),
on the 8. (Reuben), on the W. (Ephraim) and on
the N. (Dan). (6) There is no ground for thinking
that the march would be conducted, at lIcast at
first, with the precision of a modern army, or that
each division would extend itself to the length of
22 miles. It is more than likely that they would
follow their standards as best they could or with
such order as could be arranged by their captains.
(c) If the camps of Judah and Reuben started their
preparations together, say at 6 o’clock in the morn-


(-


ing (which might be possible), and occupied 4 hours
in completing these, they might begin to advance at
10 o’clock and cover 10 miles in another 4 hours,
thus bringing them on to 2 PM, after which 4 hours
more would enable them to encamp themselves
for the night, if that was necessary. The other
two divisions falling into line, say at 2 o’clock, would
arrive at 6 PM, and by 10 PM would be settled
for the night. (d) It does not seem certain that
every night upon the march they would arrange
themselves into a regularly constructed camp;
rather it is reasonable to conclude that this would
be done only when they had reached a spot where a
halt was to be made for some time. (e) In any
case, in the absence of more details as to how the
march was conducted, arithmetical calculations
are of little value and are not entitled to discredit
the truthfulness of the narrative.

(4) The victory over Midian —This has been
objected to on moral grounds which are not now
referred to. It is the supposed impossibility of
12,000 Israelites slaying all the male Midianites, cap-
turing all their women and children, including 32,000
virgins, seizing all their cattle and flocks, with all
their goods, and burning all their cities and castles
without the loss of a single man (81 49), which
occasions perplexity. Yet Scripture relates several
victories of a similar description, as e.g. that of
Abraham over the kings of the East (Gen 14 15),
in which, so far as the record goes, no loss was
incurred by the patriarch’s army; that of Gideon’s
300 over the Midianites at a later date (Jgs 7 22);
that of Samson single-handed over 1,000 Philis
(Jgs 16 15); and that of Jehoshaphat at the battle
of Tekoa (2 Ch 20 24), which was won without a
blow—all more or less miraculous, no doubt. But
in profane history, Tacitus (Ann. xiii.39) relates an
instance in which the Romans slaughtered all their
foes without losing a single man; and Strabo (xvi.
1128) mentions a battle in which 1,000 Arabs were
slain by only 2 Romans; while the life of Saladin
contains a like statement concerning the issue of
a battle (Havernick, Intro, 330). Hence Israel’s
victory over Midian does not afford sufficient ground
for challenging its historic credibility.

IV, Authorship.—Restricting attention to evi-
dence from Nu itself, it may be remarked in a gen-
eral way that the question of authorship is prac-
tically settled by what has been advanced on its
literary structure and historical credibility. For,
if the materials of the book were substantially the
work of one pen (whoever may have been thcir first
collector or last redactor), and if these materials
are upon the whole trustworthy, there will be little
room to doubt that the original pen was in the hand
of a contemporary and eyewitness of the incidents
narrated, and that the contemporary and eye-
witness was Moses, who need not, however, have
set down everything with his own hand, all that
is necessary to justify the ascription of the writing
to him being that it should have been composed
by his authority and under his supervision. In
this sense it is believed that indications are not
wanting in the book both against and for the Mo-
saic authorship; and these may now be considered.

(1) The alternating use of Divine names—This
usage, after forming so characteristic a feature in

’ Gen and largely disappearing in Ex

1. Against and Lev, reasserts itself in Nu, and
the Mosaic more particularly in the story of
Authorship Balaam. If chs 23 and 24 can be
: explained only as late documents
pieced together, because of the use of “God” in ch 23
and of “Lord” in ch 24, then Moses was not their
author. Butif the varying use of the Divine names
is susceptible of explanation on the assumption
that the two chapters originally formed one docu-


2169


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Numbers, Book of


ment, then most distinctly the claim of Moses to
authorship is not debarred. Now whether Balaam
was a false or a true prophet, it is clear that he
could hope to please Balak only by cursing Israel
in the name of Jeh, the Elohim of Israel; and so it
is always Jeh he consults or pretends to consult
before replying to the messengers of Balak. Four
times he did so (22 8.19; 23 3,15); and 3 t it was
Elohim who met him (22 9.20; 23 14), while every
time it was Jeh who put the word in his mouth.
Can any conclusion be fairer than that the historian
regarded Elohim and Jeh as the same Divine Being,
and represented this as it were by a double emphasis,
which showed (a) that the Jeh whom Balaam con-
sulted was Elohim or the supreme God, and (6)
that the God who met Balaam and supplied him
with oracles was Israel’s Lord? Thus explained,
the alternate use of the Divine names does not
require the hypothesis of two single documents
rolled into one; and indeed the argument from the
use of the Divine names is now generally abandoned.

(2) Traces of late authorship—Traces of late
authorship are believed to exist in several passages:
(a) 16 32-36 seems to imply that the writer was no
longer in the wilderness, which may well have been
the case, if already he was in the land of Moab.
(b) 20 5 suggests, it is said, that the people were
then in Canaan. But the language rather conveys
the impression that they were not yet come to
Canaan; and in point of fact the people were at
Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin. (c) In 21 14.15.
17.18.27-30, certain archaic songs are cited as if
the people were familiar with them, and the Arnon
is mentioned as the border of Moab long before
Israel reached the river. But that poets were
among the people at the time of the exodus and
probably long before, the song of Moses (Ex 15)
shows, and that a Book of the Wars of the Lord
was begun to be composed soon after the defeat of
Amalek is not an unreasonable hypothesis (Kx 17
14). As for the statement that “Arnon leaneth
upon the borders of Moab,” that may have been
superfluous as a matter of information to the con-
temporaries of Moses when they were about to
cross the stream (Strack, Finl, 25), but it was quite
in place in an old prophetic song, as showing that
their present position had been long before antici-
pated and foretold. (d) 24 7, according to criticism,
could not have been composed before the rise of the
monarchy; and certainly it could not, if prediction
of future events is impossible. But if reference to
a coming king in Israel was put into Balaam’s
mouth by the Spirit of God, as the narrator says,
then it could easily have been made before the
monarchy; and so could (e) 24 17.18 have been
written before the reign of David, though the con-
quest of the Edomites only then began (2 8 8 14;
1K 111; 1 Ch 18 12.13).

Examples such as these show that many, if not
most, of the like objections against the Mosaic
authorship of this book are capable of at least
possible solution; and that Kuenen’s caution
should not be forgotten: ‘(He who relics upon the
impression made by the whole, without interroga-
tion of the parts one by one, repudiates the first
principles of all scientific research, and pays homage
to superficiality” (Rel. of Israel, I, 11).

(1) Certain passages have the appearance of
having been written by Moses.—These are: (a) those
which bear evidence of having been
intended for a people not settled in
cities but dwelling in tents and camps,
as c.g. chs 1-4, describing the arrange-
ments for the census and the formation
of the camp; 6 24-26, the high-priestly benedic-
tion; 10 35.36, the orders for the marching and the
halting of the host; 10 1-9, the directions about


2. For the
Mosaic
Authorship


the silver trumpets; ch 19, the legislation which
obviously presupposes the wilderness as the place
for its observance (vs 3.7.9.14). If criticism allows
that these and other passages have descended
from the Mosaic age, why should it be necessary
to seek another author for them than Moses? And
if Moses could have composed these passages, a
presumption at least is created that the whole book
has proceeded from his pen. (b) The patriotic
songs taken from the Book of the Wars of the Lord
(ch 21), which some critics (Cornill, Kautzsch and
others) hold cannot be later than 750 BC, are by
equally competent scholars (Bleek, De Wette, E.
Meyer, Konig and others) recognized as parts of
Israel’s inheritance from the Mosaic age, when-
soever they were incorporated in Nu. (c) The list
of camping stations (ch 33) is expressly assigned to
him. Whether “by the commandment of the Lord”
should be connected with the “journeys”? (Konig)
or the ‘writing’? makes no difference as to the
authorship of this chaptcr, at least in the sense that
it is based on a Mosaic document (Strack). It is
true that even if this chapter as it stands was pre-
pared by Moses, that does not amount to conclu
sive evidence of the Mosaic authorship of the whole
book. Yet it creates a presumption in its favor
(Drechsler, Keil, Zahn). For why should Moses
have been specially enjomed to write so compara-
tively uninteresting and unprofitable a document
as a list of names, many of which are now incapable
of identification, if that was all? But if Moses
was already writing up a journal or history of the
wanderings, whether by his own hand or by means
of amanuenses, and whether by express command
or without it (not an unreasonable supposition),
there was no particular need to record that this was
so. If, however, Moses was not thinking of pre-
serving an itinerary, and God for reasons of His own
desired that he should do so, then there was need
for a special commandment to be given; and need
that it should be recorded to explain why Moses
incorporated in his book a list of names that in
most people’s judgment might have been omitted
without imperiling the value of the book. Looked
at in this way, the order to prepare this itinerary
rather strengthens the idea of the Mosaic author-
ship of the whole book.

(2) Acquaintance on the part of the author with
Egyptian manners and customs.—This points in the
direction of Moses. (a) The trial by jealousy
(5 11-31) may be compared with the tale of Set-
nau, belonging probably to the 3d cent. BC, but
relating to the times of Rameses II, in which Ptah-
nefer-ka, having found the book which the god
Thoth wrote with his own hand, copied it on a piece
of papyrus, dissolved the copy in water and drank
the solution, with the result that he knew all the
book contained (RP, IV, 188). (6) The conse-
cration of the Levites (8 7) resembled the ablutions
of the Egyp priests who shaved their heads and
bodies every 3d day, bathed twice during the day
and twice during the night, and performed a grand
ceremony of purification, preparatory to their
seasons of fasting, which sometimes lasted from 7
to 40 days and even more (WAZ, I, 181). (¢)
Uncleanness from contact with the dead (19 11)
was not unknown to the Egyptians, who required
their priests to avoid graves, funerals and funeral
feasts (Porphyry, De Abst. ii.50, quoted in Speaker's
Comm.). (d) The fish, cucumbers, melons, leeks,
onions and garlic referred to in 11 5 were articles ot
diet in Egypt (Herod. ii.93). (e) The antiquarian
statement about Hebron (18 22) fits in well with a
writer in Mosaic times. ‘‘A later writer could have
had no authority for making the statement and no
possible reason for inventing it’? (Pulpit Comm. on
Nu). Ona candid review of all the arguments pro


Numenius
Oak


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2170


and con, it is not too much to say that the pre-
ponderance of evidence lies on the side of the sub-
stantial Mosaicity of the Book of Numbers.


Lrreratrurs.—Comms. on Nu by Berthean (ET),
Knobel, Keil (ET), Dillmann, Strack, Lange (ET); in
Speaker's Comm., Pulpit Comm., ICC (Gray); Bib.
Intros of De Wette, Hengstenberg, Havernick, Bleek,
KGnig, Strack, Cornill, Driver; in encs, etc, RE, HDB,
ER, Sch-Herz; critical comms.: Reuss, Die Geschichte
der heiligen Schriften AT; Kuenen, The Religion of
Israel (ET); Wellhansen, Geschichte Israels and Pro-
legomena (ET); Klostermann, Der Pentateuch; Eerd-
mans, Alttest. Studien; Addis, Documents of Hexateuch;
Olford Hexateuch; EPC.

T. WHITELAW


NUMENIUS, ni-mé’ni-us (Novpivios, Nou-
ménios): The son of Antiochus, and Antipater were
the two ambassadors whom Jonathan sent to the
Romans, ‘‘to the Spartans, and to other places,” after
his victory in the plain of Hazor (Galilee) over the
princes of Demetrius (1 Macc 12 1 ff) about 144
BC. Their mission was to confirm and renew the
friendship and treaty which had existed from the
days of Judas (8 17 ff). They were well received
and successful, both at Rome (12 3f) and at
Sparta (12 19 ff; 14 22f). After the death of
Jonathan, the victories of Simon and the establish-
ment of peace, Simon sent. Numenius on a second
embassy to Rome (14 24), again to confirm the
treaty and present a golden shield weighing 1,000
minae—apparently just before the popular decree
by which Simon was created high priest, leader and
captain “for ever’ (1 Mace 14 27 ff), September,
141 BC. The embassy returned in 139 BC, bear-
ing letters from the senate to the kings of Egypt,
Syria and “all the countries,” confirming the integ-
rity of Jewish territory, and forbidding these kings
to disturb the Jews, and requiring them also to snr-
render any deserters (14 15 ff). See also Lucius;
Schiirer, Gesch. des juidischen Volkes (8d and 4th
edd), I, 236, 250 f. S. Ancus


NUN, noon (2, }): The 14th letter of the Heb
alphabet; transliterated in this Encyclopaedia as
n. It came also to be used for the number 50.
For name, etc, see ALPHABET.


NUN, nun (j13, nin, “fish,’’ derivative mean-
ing “fecundity’’): Father of Joshua (referred to
thus 29 t) (Ex 33 11; Nu 11 28, ete; 1 Ch 7 27,
m “Non’’; Sir 46 1, m ‘“‘Nave’’).


NURSE, nirs, NURSING, niirs’ing: ‘Nurse’? in
AV represents two different Heb words: In 8 pas-
sages (Gen 24 59; 35 8; Ex 2 7 bis.9; 2 K 11 2;
2 Ch 22 11; Isa 49 23) the word—noun or vb.—
renders some form of the vb. P22, yanak, “to suck.”
The fem. causative part. of this vb. is commonly
used to denote nurse or foster-mother. According
to Ex 2 7 Moses’ mother—‘‘a nurse of the Heb
women’’—became, at Pharaoh’s daughter’s request,
the foster-mother of the foundling. Joash, the son
of Ahaziah, was in charge of a nurse until he was
7 years old (2 K 11 2; 2 Ch 22 11). But it is
obvious that the term was used in a more general
way, c.g. of a lady’s maid or tire-woman. Rebek-
ah was accompanicd by her nurse when she left
home to be married (Gen 24 59; 35 8). In 5 pas-
sages (Nu 11 12; Ruth 4 16; 2S 4 4; Isa 49 23;
60 4 AV) “nurse” represents the Heb word, JAX,
’aman, “to support,” “be faithful,’ “nourish.”
The part. of this vb. denoted a person who had
charge of young children—a guardian or governess.
Naomi took charge of Ruth’s child “and became
nurse unto it” (Ruth 4 16). In Nu 11 12 Moses
asks whether he has to take charge of the Israelites
“ag a nursing-father ecarrieth the sucking child.”
The same word is found in 2 K 10 15 (AV “them
that brought up,” ie. guardians of the sons of


Ahab) and in Est 2 7 (AV “and he brought up,”
ie. he [Mordecai] adopted, his niece). Deutero-Isa
uses both terms together (49 23) to describe the
exalted position of Israel in the future when foreign
kings and qucens will offer their services and wait
upon the chosen people.

In the solitary passage in the NT where “nurse”
occurs, it renders the Gr word rpo¢és, trophés. In
this case the word does not mean a hired nurse,
but a mother who nurses her own children (1 Thess
2 7). T. Lewis


NURTURE, ntr’ttir: The word occurs in AV in
Eph 6 4 as the tr of ma:dela, paideia, but RV
changes to “chastening,” and uses “‘nurture’’ (vb.)
for AV “bring up” (é«rpédw, ektréphd) in the first
part of the verse. Paideia has the idea of training
and correction; in RV 2 Esd 8 12 for Lat erudio;
and cf AV Wisd 3 11; Sir 18 13 (paideid), etc.


NUTS, nuts:

(1) (MAN, 'Eghdz; wapta, kartia; Arab. jauz, “the
walnut” [Cant 6 11]): This is certainly the walnut
tree, Juglans regia, a native of Persia and the
Himalayas which flourishes under favorable condi-
tions in all parts of Pal; particularly in the moun-


Pistachio Nut (Pistacia vera).


tains. In such situations it attains the height of
from 60 to 90 ft. A grove of such trees affords the
most delightful shade.

(2) (2°2Q2, botnIm; repéB.vGo1, terébinthoi [Gen
43 11, m “pistachio nuts’’]): The Heb is perhaps
allied to the Arab. butm, the “terebinth,” which
is closely allied to the Pistacia vera, N.O. Anacar-
dioceoe, which produces pistachio nuts. These nuts,
known in Arab. as fistuk, are prime favorites with
the people of Pal. They are oblong, 2 in. long,
with green, oily cotyledons. They are eaten raw
and are also made into various sweets and confec-
tionery. They are a product of Pal, very likely to
be sent as a present to Egypt (Gen 43 11).

: E. W. G. Masrerman

NYMPHAS, nim’fas (Nupdas, Numphds; Lach-
mann, Tregelles [m], WH rcad Nipoa, Niimpha,
the name of a woman [Col 4 15]): A Christian
resident in Laodicea, to whom Paul sends saluta-
tions in the ep. which be wrote from Rome to the


2171


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Numenius
Oak


church in Colossae, the latter city being only a
very few miles distant from Laodicea. Indeed, so

near were they, that Paul directs that
1. A Chris- the Ep. to the Col be read also in
tian in Laodicea. Nymphas—or if Nympha
Laodicea be read, then it is a Christian lady

who is meant—was a person of out-
standing worth and importance in the church of
Laodicea, for he had granted the use of his dwelling-
house for the ordinary weekly mectings of the
church. The apostle’s salutation is a 3-fold one—
to the brethren that are in Laodicea, that is to
the whole of the Christian community in that
ay and to Nymphas, and to the church in his
ouse.


OABDIUS, 6-ab’di-us (A, ’QaP8los, Oabdios,
B, -etos, efos, Fritzsche, "IwaBStos, Jéabdios, om.
in AV): One of the sons of Ela who put away
eo “strange wives’ (1 Esd 9 27)=‘‘Abdi”’ of Ezr
0 26.


OAK, ok: Several Heb words are so tr4, but there
has always been great doubt as to which words
should be tr? “oak” and which “‘terebinth.” This
uncertainty appears in the LXX and all through
EV; in recent revisions “terebinth”’ has been in-
creasingly added in the m. All the Heb words are
closely allied and may originally have had simply the
meaning of “tree,’”’ but it is clear that, when the
OT was written, they indicated some special kind
of tree.

The words and references are as follows:

(1) TION, ‘alah (in LXX usually repefivOos, terébin-
thos, in Vulg terebinthus, or, More commonly, quercus)

(Gen 35 4; Jgs 6 11.19; 2.5 18 9.10.14;
1. Hebrew 1 K 13 14; 1 Ch 10 12; Isa 1 30; Ezk


6 13—in all these m ‘“‘terebinth"). In Isa
Words and § 13 (AV “teil tree’) and Hos 413 (AV
References ‘‘elms"’) the tr is “terebinths'' because of
the juxtaposition of ‘allén, tri “oaks.”
“Vale of Elah” (m “the Terebinth’’) is found in 1S
17 2.19; 21 9. The expression in Isa 1 30, ‘whose
leaf fadeth,"’ is more appropriate to the terehinth than
the oak (see below). .
(2) aby, ‘allah (terebinthas, quercus [Vulg]), appar-
aes 5
ently a slight variant for ’élah; only in Josh 24 26;
Gen 35 4 (élah) and in Jgs 9 6 (élon).

(3) BSN or pS , 'élim, perhaps pl. of "élah, occurs
in Isa 1 29 (m “‘terebinths”); 57 5, m ‘with idols,”
AV B dot Om “oaks”; 61.3, ‘trees’; Ezk 31 14
(text very doubtful),  height,”” AVm ‘upon themselves"’;
Sx, ‘él, in El-paran (LXX terebinthos) (Gen 14 6), prob-
ably means the ‘‘tree” or ‘‘terebinth” of Paran. Celsius
(Hierob. 1.34 ff) argues at length that the above words
apply well to the Terspintu (q.v.) in all the passages
in which they occur.

(4) FON. ‘elon (usually spis, drés, ‘“‘oak"’), in Gen
12 6: 18 18; 1413; 181; Dt 11 30; Josh 19 33;
Jgs 411; 9 637; 18 10 3 (AV “plain”); in all these
references m has ‘‘terebinth”’ or '‘terebinths.”” In Gen
12 6; Dt 11 30 we have “‘oak"’ or ‘‘oaks”’ “of the
teacher’? (Moreh); ‘‘oak in Zaanannim" in Jgs 4 11;
Josh 19 33; the “oak of Meonenim,” m “the augurs’
oak (or, terebinth)"’ in Jgs 9 37.

(5) PIR. ‘allan (commonly $pis, drts, or Bddavos,
bdlanos), in Gon 35 8 (cf ver 4); Hos 4 13; Isa 6 13, is
contrasted with alah, showing that’ allén and 'éléh cannot
b2 identical, sono marginal references occur; also in Isa
44 14: Am 2 9, but in all other passages, m ‘‘terebinth"’
or ‘‘terebinths’’ occurs. ‘'Oaks of Bashan"’ occurs in
Isa 2 13; Ezk 2% 6; Zec 11 2.


If (1) (2) (8) refer esp. to the ierebinth, then (4)
and (5) are probably correctly tr? “oak.”” If we
may judge at all by present conditions, “oaks’’ of
Bashan is far more correct than “‘terebinths” of
Bashan.


This fact, that the church met therc, also shows that
Nymphas was a person of some means, for a very small
house could not have accommodated the


2. The Christian men and women who gathered
Church in together on the first day of every week

3 for the purposes of Christian worship.
His House The church in Laodicea—judzing not only


from the Ep. to the Eph, which is really
Paul's Ep. to the Laodiccans, and which indicates that
the church in Laodicea had a numcrous membership, but
also from what issaid ofit in Rev 3 17 AV—must have
been large and influential: ‘Thou sayest, I am rich, and
Increased with goods, and have need of nothing.” The
house of Nymphas, therefore, must have possessed a large
room or saloon sufficiently commodious to allow the meet-
ing of anumerous company. Nymphas would be a per-
son both of Christian character and of generous feeling,
and of some amount of wealth. Nothing more is known
regarding him, as this is the only passage in which he is
named. Joun RuTHERFURD


There are, according to Post (Flora of Palestine,
787-41), no less than 9 species of oak (N.O. Cupu-
liferae) in Syria, and he adds to these

2. Varieties 12 sub-varieties. Many of these have
of Oak no interest except to the botanist. The
following species are widespread and

distinctive: (1) The ‘“Turkey oak,” Quercus cerris,
known in Arab. as Balldt, as its name implies,
abounds all over European Turkey and Greece
and is common in Pal. Under favorable conditions


Oak at Gilead, the Sindeeyan (Quercus coccifera).


it attains to great size, reaching as munch as 60 ft. in
height. It is distinguished by its large sessile
acorns with hemispherical cups covered with long,
narrow, almost bristly, scales, giving them a mossy
aspect. The wood is hard and of fine grain. Calls
are common upon its branches.

(2) Quercus lusttanica (or Ballota), also known in
Arab. as Balldt, like the last is frequently found
dwarfed to a bush, but, when protected, attains a
height of 30 ft. or more. The leaves are dentate
or crenate and last late into the winter, but are
shed before the new twigs are developed. The
acorns are solitary or few in cluster, and the cupules
are more or less smooth. Galls are common, and
a variety of this species is often known as Q. tnfec-
toria, on account of its liability to infection with

alls.

(3) The Valonica oak (Q. aegolops), known in
Arab. as Melldt, has large oblong or ovate deciduous
leaves, with deep serrations terminating in a bristle-
like point, and very large acorns, globular, thick
cupules covered with long reflexed scales. The


Oak s
Obadiah, Book of |THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2172


cupules, known commercially as valonica, furnish
one of the richest of tanning materials.

(4) The Evergreen oak is often classed under the
general name “lex oak” or Holm (i.e. holly-like)
oak. Several varieties are described as occurring
in Pal. @Q. ilex usually has rather a shrublike


1 a ey 2 Ya bel
“Joshua's Oak''—a Terebinth (Near Abord in Ephraim.
Supposed to Be the Largest Tree in Palestine).


growth, with abundant glossy, dark-green leaves,
oval in shape and more or less prickly at the mar-
gins, though somctimes entire. The cupules of the
acorns are woolly. It shows a marked predilection
for the neighborhood of the sea. The Q. coceifcra
(with var. Q. pseudococcifcra) is known in Arab.
as Sindidn. The leaves, like the last, usually are
prickly. The acorns are solitary or twin, and the
hemispherical cupulcs are more or less velvety. On
the Q. coccifera are found the insects which make
the well-known Ixermes dye. These evergreen
oaks are the common trecs at sacred tombs, and
the once magnificent, but now dying, ‘“Abraham’s

oak” at Hebron is one of this species.
Oaks occur in all parts of Pal, in spite of the
steady ruthless destruction which has been going on
for centuries. Allover Carmel, Tabor,


3. Oaks in around Banias and in the hills to the |


Modern
Palestine


W. of Nazareth, to mention well-
known localities, there are forests of
oak; great tracts of country, esp.in Gal-
ilee and E. of the Jordan, are covered by a stunted
brushwood which, were it not for the wood-cutter,
would grow into noble trees. Solitary oaks of
magnificent proportions occur in many parts of the
land, esp. upon hilltops; such trees are saved from
destruction because of their ‘‘sacred” character. To
bury beneath such a tree has ever been a favorite
custom (cf Gen 36 8; 1 Ch 10 12). Large trees
like thesc, seen often from great distances, are fre-
quently landmarks (Josh 19 33) or places of meet-
ing (cf “Oak of Tabor,” 1 8 10 3). The custom of
heathen worship bencath oaks or tcrebinths (Hos
4 18; Ezk 6 13, etc) finds its modern counterpart
in the cult of the Welyin Pal. The oak is sometimes
connected with some historical cvent, as e.g.
Abraham’s oak of Mamre now shown at Hebron,


and “the oak of weeping,” Allon bacuth, of Gen 35
8. E. W. G. MastTerMan


OAK OF TABOR (71am FON, elon tabhor):
Thus RV in 1 § 108 for AV “plain of Tabor’
(RVm “‘terebinth”’). Tabor was famous for its
groves of oak, but what ‘“oak’”’ is meant here is not
known. Ewald thinks that ‘Tabor’ is a different
pronunciation for “Deborah,” and connects with
Gen 35 8; but this is not likely. See Oax, 3.


OAR, or.


OATH, oth (AYIA, shebhi'ah, probably from
shebha'‘, ‘‘seven,’”’ the sacred number, which occurs


See Suirs anv Boars, II, 2, (8).


; frequently in the ritual of an oath; Spkos, hdrkos;


and the stronger word mex , alah, by which a curse
is actually invoked upon the oath-breaker [LXX
apa, ard]): In Mt 26 70-74 Peter first denies his
Lord simply, then with an oath (sh*bhw‘ah), then
invokes a curse (alah), thus passing through every
stage of assevcration.
The oath is the invoking of a curse upon one’s
self if one has not spoken the truth (Mt 26 74), or
if one fails to keep a promise (1 S 19
1. Law Re- 6; 2017; 28 15 21; 19 23). It
garding played a very important part, not only
Oaths in lawsuits (Hx 22 11; Lev 6 3.5)
and state affairs (Ani, XV, x, 4), but
also in the dealings of everyday life (Gen 24 37;
505; Jgs 215; 1K 1810; Ezr 105). The
Mosaic laws concerning oaths were not meant to
limit the widespread custom of making oaths, so
much as to impress upon the people the sacredness
of an oath, forbidding on the one hand swearing
falsely (Ex 207; Lev 19 12; Zec 8 17, etc),
and on the other swearing by false gods, which
latter was considered to be a very dark sin (Jer
12 16; Am 8 14). In the Law only two kinds
of false swearing are mentioned: false swearing of a
witness, and false asseveration upon oath regarding a
thing found or received (Lev 5 1; 6 2 ff; cf Prov 29
24). Both required a sin offering (Lev 5 1 ff). The
Talm gives additional rules, and lays down certain
punishments for false swearing; in the case of a
thing found it states what the false swearer must
pay (Makkoth 2:3; Shebha'oth 8 3). The Jewish
interpretation of the 3d commandment is that it is
not concerned with oaths, but rather forbids the
use of the name of Jeh in ordinary cases (so Dalman).
Swearing in the name of the Lord (Gen 14 22;
Dt 618; Jgs 217; Ruth 1 17, etc) was a sign
of loyalty to Him (Di 10 20; Isa
2. Forms 48 11; Jer 12 16). We know from
of Swearing Scripture (sce above) that swearing
by false gods was frequent, and we
learn also from the newly discovered Elephantine
papyrus that the people not only swore by Jahu
(=Jch) or by the Lord of Heaven, but also among
a certain class of other gods, e.g. by Herem-
Bethel, and by Isum. In ordinary intercourse it
was customary to swear by the life of the person
addressed (1S 1 26; 203; 2 K 2 2); by the
life of the king (1 S 17 55; 26 26; 28 11 11);
by one’s own head (Mt 5 36); by the carth (Mt
5 35); by the heaven (Mt 5 34; °23 22); by the
angels (BJ, II, xvi, 4); by the temple (Mt 23 16),
and by different parts of it (Mt 23 16); by Jerus
(Mt 6 35; cf Athabhoth 29). The oath “by
heaven” (Mt 5 34; 23 22) is counted by Jesus as
the oath in which God’s name is invoked. Jesus
does not mean that God and heaven are identical,
but He desires to rebuke those who paltecred with
an oath by avoiding a direct mention of a name of
God. He teaches that such an oath is a real oath
and must be considered as sacredly binding.


2173


Not much is told us as to the ceremonies observed
in taking an oath. In patriarchal times he who
took the oath put his hand under the
3. The thigh of him to whom the oath was
Formula taken (Gen 24 2; 47 29). The most
usual form was to hold up the hand to
heaven (Gen 14 22; Ex 6 8; Dt 32 40; Ezk 20
5). The wife suspected of unfaithfulness, when
brought before the priest, had to answer ‘Amen,
Amen”’ to his adjuration, and this was considered
to be an oath on her part (Nu 6 22). The usual
formula of an oath was either: ‘God is witness
betwixt me and thee’ (Gen 31 50), or more com-
monly: ‘As Jeh [or God] liveth” (Jgs 8 19; Ruth
3 13; 28 2 27; Jer 38 16), or “Jeh be a true and
faithful witness amongst us” (Jer 42 5). Usually
the penalty invoked by the oath was only suggested:
“Jch [or God] do so to me” (Ruth 1 17; 28 3 9.
35; 1 K 2 23; 2 K 6 31); in some cases the punish-
ment was expressly mentioned (Jer 29 22). Nowack
suggests that in general the punishment was not
expressly mentioned because of a superstitious fear
that the person swearing, although speaking the
truth, might draw upon himself some of the punish-
ment by merely mentioning it.

Philo expresses the desire (11.194) that the prac-
tice of swearing should be discontinued, and the
eee used no oaths (BJ, II, vill, 6; Ant, XV,
x, 4). .

That oaths are permissible to Christians is shown
by the example of Our Lord (Mt 26 63 f), and of

Paul (2 Cor 1 23; Gal 1 20) and
4. Oaths even of God Himself (He 6 13-18).
Permissible Consequently when Christ said, ‘Swear

not atall” (Mt 5 34), He was laying
down the principle that the Christian must not
have two standards of truth, but that his ordinary
speech must be as sacredly true as his oath.
In the kingdom of God, where that principle holds
sway, oaths become unnecessary.

_PauL LEVERTOFF

OBADIAH, 6-ba-di’a (AMY, ‘sbhadhyah, more
fully WW2y, ‘dbhadhyaha, ‘servant of Yahweh’’):

(1) The steward or prime minister of Ahab, who
did his best to protect the prophets of Jeh against
Jezebel’s persecution. He met Elijah on his return
from Zarephath, and bore to Ahab the news of
Elijah’s reappearance (1 K 18 3-16).

(2) The prophet (Ob ver 1). See OpantaH, Book
F


(3) A descendant of David (1 Ch 3 21).

(4) A chief of the tribe of Issachar (1 Ch 7 3).
(5) A descendant of Saul (1 Ch 8 38; 9 44).
(6) A Levite descended from Jeduthun (1 Ch 9
16), identical with Abda (Neh 11 17).

(7) A chief of the Gadites (1 Ch 12 9).

(8) A Zebulunite, father of the chief Ishmaiah
(1 Ch 27 19).

(9) One of the princes sent by Jehoshaphat to
teach the law in Judah (2 Ch 17 7).

(10) A Merarite employed by Josiah to oversee
the workmen in repairing the temple (2 Ch 34 12).

(11) The head of a family who went up with
Ezra from Babylon (Ezr 8 9).

(12) One of the men who sealed the covenant
with Nehemiah (Neh 10 5). "

(13) A gate-keeper in the days of Nehemiah
(Neh 12 25).

The name “Obadiah” was common in Israel from
the days of David to the close of the OT. An an-
cient Heb seal bears the inscription “Obadiah the
JoHn RicHaRp SAMPEY


ie)


servant of the King.’”’


OBADIAH, BOOK OF: Obadiah is the shortest,
book in the OT. The theme of the book is the de-
struction of Edom. Consequent upon the over-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Oak
Obadiah, Book of


throw of Edom is the enlargement of the borders of
Judah and the establishment of the kingship of Jeh.
Thus far all scholars are agreed; but on questions
of authorship and date there is wide divergence of
opinion.
(1) Jeh summons the nations to the overthrow
of proud Edom. The men of Esau will be brought
down from their lofty strongholds;
1. Contents their hidden treasures will be rifled;
of the Book their confederates will turn against
them; nor will the wise and the
mighty men in Edom he able to avert the crushing
calamity (vs 1-9). (2) The overthrow of Edom is
due to the violence and cruelty shown toward his
brother Jacob. The prophet describes the cruelty
and shameless gloating over a brother’s calamity,
in the form of earnest appeals to Edom not to do the
selfish and heartless deeds of which he had been
guilty when Jerus was sacked by foreign foes (vs
10-14). (3) The day of the display of Jeh’s retrib-
utive righteousness upon the nations is near.
Edom shall be completely destroyed by the people
whom he has tried to uproot, while Israel’s captives
shall return to take possession of their own land and
also to seize and rule the mount of Esau. Thus the
kingship of Jeh shall be established (vs 15-21).
The unity of Ob was first challenged by Eichhorn in
1824, vs 17-21 being regarded by him as an appendix
attached to the original exilic prophecy


2 Unity of in the time of Alexander Jannaeus (104-78
C). Ewald thought that an  exilic
the Book prophet, to whom he ascribed vs 11-14
and 19-21, had made use of an older
prophecy by Obadiah in vs 1-10, and in vs 15-18 of
material from another older prophet who was contem-
porary, like Ohadiah, with Isaiah. As the years went
on, the material assigned to the older oracle was limited
hy some to vs_1—-9 and by others to vs 1-6. Wellhausen
assigned to Obadiah vs 1-5.7.10.11.13.14.156, while all
else was regarded as a later appendix. Barton’s theory
of the composition of Ob is thus summed up by Bewer;
‘‘Vs 1-6 are a preéxilic oracle of Ob, which was quoted
by Jeremiah, and readapted with additions (vs 7-15) by
another Obadiah in the early post-exilic days; vs 16-21
form an appendix, probably from, Maccahean times"
(CC, 5). Bewer’'s own view is closely akin to Barton's.
He thinks that Obadiah, writing in the 5th cent. BC,
‘quoted vs 1-4 almost, though not quite, literally; that
he commented on the older oracle in vs 5-7, partly in the
words of the older prophet, partly in his own words, in
order to show that it had been fulfilled in his own day;
and that in vs 8.9 he quoted once more from the older
oracle without any show of literalness.’”” He ascribes to
Obadiah vs 10-14 and 15b. The appendix consists of
two sections, vs 15a.16-18 and vs 19-21, possibly by
different authors, ver 18 being a quotation from some
older prophecy. To the average Bible student all this
minute analysis of a brief prophecy must seem hyper-
critical. He will prefer to read the book asa oly and
in doing so will get the essence of the message it has for
the present day.


Certain preliminary problems require solution
before the question of date can be settled.

(1) Relation of Ob and Jer 49.—
(a) Did Obadiah quote from Jer?
Pusey thus sets forth the impossibility
of such a solution: “Out of 16 verses
of which the prophecy of Jeremiah against Edom
consists, four are identical with those of Obadiah;
a fifth embodies a verse of Obadiah’s; of the eleven
which remain, ten have some turns of expression
or idioms, more or fewer, which recur in Jer, either
in these prophecies against foreign nations, or in
his prophecies generally. Now it would be wholly
improbable that a prophet, sclecting verses out of
the prophecy of Jeremiah, should have selected
precisely those which contain none of Jeremiah’s
characteristic expressions; whereas it perfectly fits
in with the supposition that Jeremiah interwove
verses of Obadiah with his own prophecy, that in
verses so interwoven there is not one expression
which occurs elsewhere in Jer’ (Minor Prophets,
I, 347). (b) Did Jeremiah quote from Ob? It is
almost incredible that the vigorous and well-
articulated prophecy in Ob could have been made


3. Date of
the Book


Obadiah, Book of
Obedience of Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2174


by piecing together detached quotations from Jer;
but Jeremiah may well have taken from Ob many
expressions that fell in with his general purpose.
There are difficulties in applying this view to one or
two verses, but it has not been disproved by the
arguments from meter advanced by Bewer and
others. (c) Did both Obadiah and Jeremiah quote
from an older oracle? This is the favorite solution
among recent scholars, most of whom think that
Obadiah preserves the vigor of the original, while
Jeremiah quotes with more freedom; but Bewer in
ICC, after a detailed comparison, thus sums up:
“Our canclusion is that Obadiah quoted in vs 1-9 an
alder oracle, the original af which is better preserved in
Jer 49.” The student will do well to get his own
first-hand impression from a careful comparison of
the two passages. With Ob vs 1-4 ef Jer 49 14-
16; with Ob vs 5.6 cf Jer 49 9.10a; with Ob ver
8 cf Jer 49 7; with Ob ver 9a cf Jer 49 22). On
the whole, the view that Jeremiah, who often quotes
from earlier prophets, draws directly from Ob, with
free working over of the older prophets, seems still
tenable.

(2) Relation af Ob and Jocl.—There seems to be
in Joel 2 32 (Heb 3 5) a direct allusion to Ob
ver 17. If Joel prophesied during the minority
of the boy king Joash (c 8830 BC), Obadiah would
be, on this hypothesis, the earliest of the writing
prophets.

(3) What capture of Jerus is described in Ob vs 10-
14 ?—The disaster seems to have been great enough
to be called “destruction” (Ob ver 12). Hence
most scholars identify the calamity described by
Ob with the capture and destruction of Jerus by the
Chaldaeans in 587 BC. But it is remarkable, on
this hypothesis, that no allusion is made either in
Ob or Jer 49 7-22 to the Chaldaeans or to the
destruction of the temple or to the wholesale
transportation of the inhabitants of Jerus to Baby-
lonia. We know, however, from Ezk 36 1-15 and
Ps 137 7 that Edom rejoiced over the final de-
struction of Jerus by the Chaldaeans in 587 BC, and
that they encouraged the destroyers to blot out the
holy city. Certain it is that the events of 587
accord remarkably with the language of Ob vs 10-
14. Pusey indeed argues from the use of the form
of the direct prohibition in Ob vs 12-14 that Edom
had not yet committed the sins against which the
prophet warns him, and so Jerus was not yet de-
stroyed, when Obadiah wrote. But almost all
modern scholars interpret the language of vs 12~14
as referring to what was already past; the prophet
“speaks of what the Edomites had actually done as
of what they ought not to do.”’ The scholars who
regard Obadiah as the first of the writing prophets
locate his ministry in Judah during the reign of
Jehoram (c 845 BC). Both 2 K and 2 Ch tell of
the war of rebellion in the days of Jehoram when
Edom, after a fierce struggle, threw off the yoke of
Judah (2 K 8 20-22; 2 Ch 21 8-10). Shortly
after the revolt of Edom, according to 2 Ch 21 16f,
the Philis and Arabians broke into Judah, “and
carried away all the substance that was found in the
king’s house, and his sons also, and his wives; so
that there was never a son left him, save Jehoahaz,
the youngest of his sons.” Evidently the capital
city fell into the hands of the invaders. It was a
calamity of no mean proportions.

The advocates of a late date call attention to
three points that weaken the case for an early date
for Ob: (a) The silence of 2 K as to the invasion of
the Philis and Arabians. But what motive could
the author of Ch have had for inventing the story?
(b) The absence of any mention of the destructien
of the city by the Philis and Arabians. It must be
acknowledged that the events of 587 BC accord
more fully with the description in Ob vs 10-14,


though the disaster in the days of Jehoram must
have been terrible. (c) The silence as to Edom in
2 Ch 21 16f. But so also are the historic books
silent as to the part that Edom took in the destruc-
tion of Jerus in 587. It is true that exilic and post-
exilic prophets and psalmists speak in bitter denun-
ciation of the unbrotherly conduct of Edom (Lam
4 21.22; Ezk 25 12-14; 35 1-15; Ps 137 7; Mal
1 1-5; cf also Isa 34 and 63 1-6); but it is also
true that the earliest Heb literature bears witness
to the keen rivalry between Esau and Jacob (Gen
26 22f; 27 41; Nu 20 14-21), and one of the
earliest of the writing prophets denounces Edom
for unnatural cruelty toward his brother (Am 1
11 f; ef Joel 3 19 [Heb 4 19)]).

(4) The style of Ob—Most early critics praise
the style. Some of the more recent crities argue
for different authors on the basis of a marked differ-
ence in style within the compass of the twenty-
one verses in thelittle roll. Thus Selbie writes in
HDB: “There is a difference in style between the
two halves of the book, the first being terse, ani-
mated, and full of striking figures, while the second
is diffuse and marked by poverty of ideas and
trite figures.” The criticism of the latter part of
the book is somewhat exaggerated, though it may
be freely granted that the first half is more original
and vigorous. The Heb of the book is classic, with
scarcely any admixture of Aram. words or con-
structions. The author may well have lived in the
golden age of the Heb language and literature.

(5) Geagraphical and historical allusions —The
references to the different sections and cities in the
land of Israel and in the land of Edom are quite
intelligible. As to Sepharad (ver 20) there is con-
siderable difference of opinion. Schrader and some
others identify it with a Shaparda in Media, men-
tioned in the annals of Sargon (722-705 BC).
Many think of Asia Minor, or a region in Asia
Minor mentioned in Pers inscriptions, perhaps
Bithynia or Galatia (Sayce). Some think that the
mention of “the captives of this host of the children
of Israel” and “the captives of Jerus” (ver 20)
proves that both the Assyr captivity and the Bab
exile were already past. This argument has con-
siderable force; but it is well to remember that
Amos, in the first half of the 8th cent., describes
wholesale deportations from the land of Israel by
men engaged in the slave trade (Am 1 6-10). The
problem of the date of Ob has not been solved to
the satisfaction of Bib. students. Our choice must
be between a very carly date (c 845) and a date

shortly after 587, with the scales almost
4. Interpre- evenly balanced.
tation of Ob is to be interpreted as prediction
the Book rather than history. In vs 11-14
‘ there are elements of historic descrip-
tion, but vs 1-10 and 15-21 are predictive.

Lirerators.—Comms.: i i
ausgelegt, 1842; Pussy ie ieee PE a
Ewald, Comm. on the Prophets of the OT (ET), IT, 277
1875; Keil (ET), 1880; _T. T. Perowne (in Cambridge
Bible), 1889; von Orelli (ET), The Minor Prophels, 1893;
Wellhausen, Die Kleinen Propheten, 1898; G. A. Smith’
The Book of the Twelve Prophets, II, 163 ff, 1898: Nowack.
Die kleinen Propheten, 1903; Marti, Dodekaprophetan,
1903, Eiselen, The Minor Prophels, 1907; Bower, ICC.
Proataie 45 Ge teueoniol Deer milage tee hain
in HDB, III, 577-80; Barton in JE. LX, 309-70: Cheyne


in BB, \1i, 3455-62; Peckham, An Intro to the St
Ob, 1910; Kent, Students' OT, ILI, 1910. Seas


Joun Ricwarp SaMPrEy
OBAL, o’bal. See Expat, 1.


OBDIA, ob-di'a (A, ’OB8ta, Obdia, B, ‘OBBed,
Hobbeid): One of the families of usurping: priests
(1 Esd 6 38)=“Habaiah” of Exr 2 61; “Hobaiah”
of Neh 7 63.


2175


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Obadiah, Book of
Obedience of Christ


OBED, G’bed (7219 , TAY ,‘abhédh, “worshipper” ;
in the NT ’IoBas, abéd):

(1) Son of Boaz and Ruth and grandfather of
David (Ruth 4 17.21.22; 1Ch212; Mt 15;
Lk 3 32).

(2) Son of Ephlal and descendant of Sheshan, the
Jerahmeelite, through his daughter who was
married to Jarha, an Egyp servant of her father’s
(1 Ch 2 37.38). :

(3) One of David’s mighty men (1 Ch 11 47).

(4) A Korahite doorkeeper, son of Shemaiah,
and grandson of Obed-edom (1 Ch 26 7).

(5) Father of Azariah, one of the centurions who
took part with Jehoiada in deposing Queen Athaliah
and crowning Joash (2 Ch 23 1; cf 2 K 11 1-16).

Davip Francis Ropers

OBED-EDOM, 6’bed-é’dom (DYIN™I3Y [2 Ch
26 24), DINTTWY i128 6 10; 1 Ch 18 13.14; 15
25], but elsewhere without hyphen, ‘sbhédh-’édham,
“servant of [god] Edom’; so W.R. Smith, Religion
of Semites’, 42, and H. P. Smith, Samuel, 294,
though others explain it as=“‘servant of man’’):


In 28 6 10.11.12; 1 Ch 13 13.14 a Philistine of |


Gath and servant of David, who received the
Ark of Jeh into his house when David brought it
into Jerus from Miriath-jearim. Because of the
sudden death of Uzzah, David was unwilling to
proceed with the Ark to his citadel, and it remained
three months in the house of Obed-edom, “and
Jeh blessed Obed-edom, and all his house’ (2 8 6
11). According to! Ch 18 14 the Ark had a special
“house’’ of its own while there. He is probably
the same as the Levite of 1 Ch 16 25. In 1 Ch
16 16-21 Obed-edom is a “singer,’’ and in 1 Ch 16
24 a “doorkeeper,”’ while according to 1 Ch 26
4-8.15 he is a Korahite doorkeeper, to whose house
fell the overseership of the storehouse (ver 15),
while 1 Ch 16 5.38 names him as a “minister
before the ark,” a member of the house or perhaps
guild of Jeduthun (see 2 Ch 26 24).

Obed-edom_is an illustration of the service
rendered to Heb religion by foreigners, reminding
one of the Simon of Cyrene who bore the cross of
Jesus (Mt 27 32, ete). The Chronicler naturally
desired to think that only Levites could discharge
such duties as Obed-edom performed, and hence
the references to him as a Levite.

Davip Francis Roperts.

OBEDIENCE, 6-bé’di-ens, OBEY, 6-ba’ (YAW,
shdma‘; twaxot, hupakoé): In its simpler OT mean-

ing the word signifies ‘‘to hear,” ‘to
1. Meaning listen.”’ It carries with it, however,
of Terms the ethical significance of hearing with

reverence and obedient assent. In
the NT a different origin is suggestive of ‘‘hearing
under” or of subordinating one’s self to the person
or thing heard, hence, “‘to obey.”” There is another
NT usage, however, indicating persuasion from,
melBouat, peithomat.

The relation expressed is twofold: first, human,
as between master and servant, and particularly
between parents and children. “If a man have a
stubborn and rebellious son, that will not obey the
voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and,
though they chasten him, will not hearken unto
them; then shall his father and his mother lay hold
on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city,
and unto the gate of his place” (Dt 21 18.19; cf
Prov 15 20); or between sovereign and subjects,
“The foreigners shall submit themselves unto me:
as soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me”
(28 22 45; 1 Ch 29 23). Ee

The highest significance of its usage, however, is
that of the relation of man to God. Obedience is
the supreme test of faith in God and reverence for
Him. The OT conception of obedience was vital.


It was the one important relationship which must
not be broken. While sometimes this relation may

have been formal and cold, it neverthe-
2. The OT less was the one strong tie which held
Conception the people close to God. The signifi-

cant spiritual relation is expressed by
Samuel when he asks the question, “Hath Jeh as
great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in
obeying the voice of Jeh? Behold, to obey is better
than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams”
(1 8 15 22). It was the condition without which
no right relation might be sustained to Jeh. This
is most clearly stated in the relation between Abra-
ham and Jeh when he is assured “In thy seed shall
all the nations of the earth be blessed; because
thou hast obeyed my voice” (Gen 22 18).

In prophetic utterances, future blessing and
prosperity were conditioned upon obedience: ‘If
ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of
the land” (Isa 119). After surveying the glorics
of the Messianic kingdom, the prophet assures the
people that “this shall come to pass, if ye will
diligently obey the voice of Jeh your God” (Zec
6 15). On the other hand misfortune, calamity,
distress and famine are due to their disobedience
and distrust of Jeh. See DisopepiEnce.

This obedience or disobedience wag usually
related to the specific commands of Jeh as con-
tained in the law, yet they conceived of God as
giving commands by other means. Note esp. the
rebuke of Samuel to Saul: “Because thou obeyedst
not the voice of Jeh, .... therefore hath Jeh
done this thing unto thee this day” (1 S 28 18).

In the NT a higher spiritual and moral relation
is sustained than in the OT. The importance of

obedience is just as greatly empha-
3. The NT sized. Christ Himself is its one great
Conception illustration of obedience. He “hum-

bled himself, becoming obedient even
unto death, yea, the death of the cross” (Phil 2 8).
By obedience to Him we are through Him made
partakers of His salvation (He 5 9). This act ig
a supreme test of faith in Christ. Indeed, it is so
vitally related that they are in some cases almost
synonymous. ‘Obedience of faith’’ is a combina-
tion used by Paul to express this idea (Rom 1 5).
Peter designates believers in Christ as “children of
obedience” (1 Pet 1 14). Thus it is seen that the
test of fellowship with Jeh in the OT is obedience.
The bond of union with Christ in the NT is obedi-
ence through faith, by which they become identified
and the believer becomes a disciple.

. _ Watrer G. CLIPPINGER

OBEDIENCE OF CHRIST: The “obedience”
(vraxo#, hupakoé) of Christ ig directly mentioned
but 3 t in the NT, although many other passages
describe or allude to it: “Through the obedience
of the one shall the many be made righteous” (Rom
5 19); ‘He humbled himself, becoming obedient
even unto death, yea, the death of the cross”
(Phil 2 8); “Though he was a Son, yet learned
obedience by the things which he suffered” (He
6 8). In 2 Cor 10 5, the phrase signifies an aiti-
tude toward Christ: “every thought into cap-
tivity to the obedience of Christ.’’

His subjection to His parents (Lk 2 51) was a
necessary manifestation of His loving and sinless

character, and of His disposition and


1. As an power to do the right in any situation.
Element of His obedience to the moral law in
Conduct every particular is asserted by the
and NT writers: “without sin’ (He 4 15);
Character ‘who knew no sin’ (2 Cor 6 21);


“holy, guileless, undefiled, separated
from sinners’? (He 7 26), etc; and is affirmed by
Himself: “Which of you convicteth me of sin?”
(Jn 8 46); and implicitly conceded by His ene-


Obedience of Christ
Observe


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2176


mies, since no shadow of accusation against His
character appears. Of His ready, loving, joyful,
exact and eager obedience to the Father, mention
will be made later, but it was His central and most
outstanding characteristic, the filial at its highest
reach, limitless, ‘unto death.’ His usually sub-
missive and law-abiding attitude toward the
authorities and the great movements and religious
requirements of His day was a part of His loyalty to
God, and of the strategy of His campaign, the action
of the one who would set an example and wield
an influence, as at His baptism: ‘Thus it becometh
us to fulfil all righteousness’ (Mt 8 15); the
synagogue worship (Lk 4 16, ‘‘as his custom was’’);
the incident of the tribute money: ‘‘Therefore the
sons are free. But, lest we cause them to stumble,”
ete (Mt 17 24-27). Early, however, the necessi-
ties of His mission as Son of God and institutor
of the new dispensation obliged Him frequently
to display a judicial antagonism to current pre-
scription and an authoritative superiority to the
rulers, and even to important details of the Law,
that would in most eyes mark Him as insurgent,
and did culminate in the cross, but was the sublim-
est obedience to the Father, whose authority alone
He, as full-grown man, and Son of man, could
recognize.
Two Scriptural statements raise an important
question as to the inner experience of Jesus. He
5 8 states that “though he was a Son,
2. Its yet learned [he] obedience by the
Christologi- things which he suffered” (émathen
cal Bearing aph’ hin épathen tén hupakoén); Phil
26.8: “Existing in the form of God
.... he humbled himself, becoming obedient,
even unto death.” As Son of God, His will was
never out of accord with the Father’s will. How
then was it necessary to, or could He, learn obe-
dience, or become obedient? The same question
in another form arises from another part of the
passage in He & 9: “And having been made perfect,
he became unto all them that obey him the author
[eause] of eternal salvation’; also He 2 10: “It
became him [God]....to make the author
[captain] of their salvation perfect through suffer-
ings.’ How and why should the perfect. be made
perfect? Gethsemane, with which, indeed, He
5 8 is directly related, presents the same problem.
It finds its solution in the conditions of the Re-
deemer’s work and life on earth in the light of His
true humanity. Both in His eternal essence and
in His human existence, obedience to His Father
was His dominant principle, so declared through
the prophet-psalmist before His birth: He 10 7
(Ps 40 7), “Lo, Iam come (in the roll of the book
it is writteu of me) to do thy will, O God.” It was
His law of life: “I do always the things that are
pleasing to him. I do nothing of myself, but as
the Father taught me, I speak these things” (Jn
8 29.28); “I ean of myself do nothing. .... I
seek not mine own will, but the will of him that
sent me” (5 30). It was the indispensable process
of His activity as the “image of the invisible God,”
the expression of the Deity in terms of the phe-
nomenal and the human. He could be a perfect
revelation only by the perfect correspondence in
every detail, of will, word and work with the
Father’s will (Jn 5 19). Obedience was also His
life nourishment and satisfaction (Jn 4 34). It
was the guiding principle which directed the details
of His work: “I have power to lay it [life] down, and
J have power to take it again. This commandment
received I from my Father” (Jn 10 18); “The
Father that sent me, he hath given me a command-
ment, what I should say, and what I should speak”
(Jn 12 49; cf 14 31, etc). Butin the Incarnation
this essential and filial obedience must find expres-


sion in human forms according to human demands
and processes of development. As true man,
obedient disposition on His part must mect the
test of voluntary choice under all representative
conditions, culminating in that which was supreme-
ly hard, and at the limit which should reveal its
perfection of extent and strength. It must become
hardened, as it were, and confirmed, through a defi-
nite obedient act, into obedient human character.
The patriot must become the veteran. The Son,
obedient on the throne, must exercise the practical
virtue of obedience on earth. Gethsemane was the
culmination of this process, when in full view of the
awful, shameful, horrifying meaning of Calvary,
the obedient disposition was crowned, and the obe-
dient Divine-human life reached its highest mani-
festation, in the great ratifieation: ‘Nevertheless,
not my will, but thine, be done.” But just as
Jesus’ growth in knowledge was not from error to
truth, but from partial knowledge to completer, so
His “learning obedience’”’ led Him not from dis-
obedience or debate to submission, but from obe-
dience at the present stage to an obedience at ever
deeper and deeper cost. The process was necessary
for His complete humanity, in which sense He was
“made perfect,” complete, by suficring. It was
also necessary for His perfection as example and
sympathetic High Priest. He must fight the hu-
man battles under the human conditions. Having
translated obedient aspiration and disposition into
obedient action in the face of, and in suffering unto,
death, even the death of the cross, He is able to
lead the procession of obedient sons of God through
every possible trial and surrender. Without this
testing of His obedience He could have had the
sympathy of clear and accurate knowledge, for He
“knew what was in man,” but He would have lacked
the sympathy of a kindred experience. Lacking
this, He would have been for us, and perhaps also
in Himself, but an imperfect “captain of our salva-
tion,” certainly no ‘file leader’ going before us
in the very paths we have to tread, and tempted
in all points like as we are, yet without sin. It
may be worth noting that He ‘earned obedience”
and was “made perfect” by suffering, not the
results of His own sins, as we do largely, but alto-

gether the results of the sins of others.
In Rom 6 19, in the series of contrasts between
sin and salvation (‘‘Not as the trespass, so also is
the free gift’), we are told: “For as


3. In Its through the one man’s disobedience
Soterio- the many were made sinners, even so
logical through the obedience of the one shall
Bearings the many be made righteous.’ In-


terpreters and theologians, esp. the
latter, differ as to whether “obedience” here refers
to the specific and supreme act of obedience on the
cross, or to the sum total of Christ’s incarnate obe-
dicnce through His whole life; and they have made
the distinction between His “passive obedience,”
yielded on the cross, and His “active obedience”
in carrying out without a flaw the Father’s will at
all times. This distinction is hardly tenable, as
the whole Scriptural representation, esp. His own,
is that He was never more intensely active than in
His death: “T have a baptism to be baptized with;
and how am I straitened till it be accomplished”
(Lk 12 50); “I lay down my life, that I may take
it again. No one taketh it away from me, but I
lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it
down, and I have power to take it again” (Jn 10
17.18). “Who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without blemish unto God” (He 9 14), indi-
cates the active obedience of one who was both
priest and sacrifice. As to the question whether
1t was the total obedience of Christ, or His death
on the cross, that constituted the atonement, and


2177


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Obedience of Christ
Observe


the kindred question whether it was not the spirit
of obedience in the act of death, rather than the
act itself, that furnished the value of His redemp-
tive work, it might conceivably, though improbably,
be said that “the one act of righteousness” through
which “‘the free gift came’ was His whole life con-
sidered as one act. But these idcas are out of line
with the unmistakable trend of Scripture, which
everywhere lays principal stress on the death of
Christ itself; it is the center and soul of the two
ordinances, baptism and the Lord’s Supper; it
holds first place in the Gospels, not as obedience,
but as redemptive suffering and death; it is un-
mistakably put forth in this light by Christ Himself
in His few references to His death: “ransom,”’ “amy
blood,” ete. Paul’s teaching everywhere empha-
sizes the death, and in but two places the obedience;
Peter indeed speaks of Christ as an ensample, but
leaves as his characteristic thought that Christ
“suffered for sins once. ... put to death in the
flesh” (1 Pet 3 18). In He the center and signifi-
cance of Christ’s whole work is that He ‘put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself” (9 26); while John in
many places emphasizes the death as atonement:
“Unto him that... . loosed us from our sins by
his blood” (Rev 1 5), and elsewhere. The Scrip-
ture teaching is that “God set [him] forth to be a
propitiation, through faith, in his blood’? (Rom 3
25). His lifelong obedience enters in chiefly as
making and marking Him the “Lamb without
blemish and without spot,’’ who alone could be the
atoning sacrifice. If it enters further, it is as the
preparation and anticipation of that death, His life
so dominated and suffused with the consciousness
of the coming sacrifice that it becomes really a part
of the death. His obedience at the time of His
death could not have been atonement, for it had
always existed and had not atoned; but it was the
obedience that turned the possibility of atonement
into the fact of atonement. He obediently offered
up, not His obedience, but Himself. He is sct
forth as propitiation, not in His obedience, but in
His blood, His death, borne as the penalty of sin,
in His own body on the tree. The distinction is
not one of mere academic theological interest. It
involves the whole question of the substitutionary
and propitiatory in Christ’s redemptive work, which
is central, vital and formative, shaping the entire
conception of Christianity. The blessed and help-
ful part which Our Lord’s complete and loving
obedience plays in the working out of Christian
character, by His example and inspiration, must
not be underestimated, nor its meaning as indicating
the quality of the life which is imparted to the soul
which accepts for itself His mediatorial death.
These bring the consummation and crown of sal-
vation; they are not its channel, or instrument, or
price. See also ATONEMENT.

LitrratuRs.—DCG, art. “Obedience of_ Christ"';
Denney, Death of Christ, esp. pp. 231-33; Champion,
Living Atonement; Forsythe. Cruciality of the Cross, etc;
works on the Atonement; Comms., in loc.

Pmuip WENDELL CRANNELL

OBEISANCE, 6-ba’sans: Is used 9 t in AV in the
phrase “‘made [or did] obcisance’’ as a rendering of
the reflexive form of TUTW (shahah), and denotes the
bow or curtsey indicative of deference and respect.
The same form of the vb. is sometimes tr* ‘‘to
bow one’s self’? when it expresses the deferential
attitude of one person to another (Gen 33 6.7, etc).
Occasionally the vow of homage or fealty to a king
on the part of a subject is suggested. In Joscph’s
dream his brother’s sheaves made obeisance to his
sheaf (Gen 48 28; cf also2 S 16 5; 2 Ch 24 17).
But in a large number of instances the vb. denotes
the prostrate posture of the worshipper in the
presence of Deity, and is generally rendered, “‘to


worship” in AV. In all probability this was the
original significance of the word (Gen 24 26, etc).
Obeisance (=obedience) originally signified the
vow of obedience made by a vassal to his lord or a
slave to his master, but in time denoted the act of
bowing as a token of respect. T. Lewis


OBELISK, ob’é-lisk, ob’cl-isk: A sacred stone or
maccébhah. For maccebhah RV has used “pillar’’ in
the text, with “obelisk” in the m in many instances
(Ex 23 24; Lev 26 1; Dt 12 38; 1 K 14 23; Hos
3 4; 10 1.2, etc), but not consistently (e.g. Gen 28
18). Sce Pruvar.


OBETH, d’beth ?NBA9, Obéih, B, O8BAv, Oubén):
One of those who went up with Ezra (1 Esd 8 32)
=“Ebed” of Ezr 8 6.


OBIL, o’bil (7258, abhi, “camel driver”): An
Ishmaelite who was ‘over the camels” in David’s
palace (1 Ch 27 30).


OBJECT, ob-jekt’: Now used only in the sense
‘40 make opposition,’’ but formerly in a variety
of meanings derived from the literal sense ‘‘to throw
against.”” So with the meaning “to charge with”
in Wisd 2 12, AV “He objecteth to our infamy the
transgressing of our education” (RV “layeth to our
charge sins against our discipline’), or ‘‘to make
charges against”? in Acts 24 19, AV “who ought
to have been here before thee, and object, if they
had ought against me’’ (RV “and to make accusa-
tion”).


OBLATION, ob-la’shun: In Lev and Nu, AV
occasionally uses ‘‘oblation,” but generally “offer-
ing,” as a rendering of jJa°?, korbén—a general
term for all kinds of offering, but used only in Ezk,
Lev and Nu. RV renders consistently ‘“oblation.”
In Ezk (also Isa 40 20), “oblation’’ renders MOM,
tertimah, generally tr+ “heave offering.’ In some
cases (e.g. Isa 1 13; Dnl 9 21) “oblation” in AV
corresponds to M32, minhah, the ordinary word
for “gift,” in P “grain offering.” See SacriFice.


OBOTH, Sd’both, d’both (AN, ’dbhath, “water-
bags’’): Adesert camp of the Israelites, the 3d after
leaving Mt. Hor and close to the borders of Moab
(Nu 21 10.11; 33 43.44). See WanpERINGS oF
IsRAEL.


OBSCURITY, ob-ski'ri-ti: In modern Eng. gen-
erally denotes a state of very faint but still per-
ceptible illumination, and only when preceded by
some such adj. as “total” docs it imply the absence
of all light. In Bib. Eng., however, only the latter
meaning is found. So in Isa 29 18 GER, ophel,
“darkness’”’); 58 10; 59 9 (JWM, hoshekh, “dark- |
ness”); Ad Est 11 8 (yvédos, gnéphos, “darkness”’).
Cf Prov 20 20, AV “in obscure darkness,’”’ ERV
‘Gn the blackest darkness,”” ARV “in blackness of
darkness.”


OBSERVE, ob-zirv’ (representing various words,
but chiefly "2W, shdmar, ‘to keep,’’ “to watch,’
etc): Properly means ‘‘to take heed to,’’ as in Isa
42 20, ‘‘Thou seest many things, but thou observest
not,” and from this sense all the usages of the word
in EV can be understood. Most of them, indeed,
are quite good modern usage (as “observe a feast,”
Ex 12 17, etc; “observe a law,’ Lev 19 37, etc),
but a few are archaic. So Gen 87 11, AV “His
father observed the saying” (RV “kept the saying
in mind”); Hos 18 7, ‘‘As a leopard... . will
I observe them” (RV ‘watch’); Jon 28, “ob-


Observer of Times
Offence, Offend


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2178


serve lying vanities’ (RV “regard,’’? but “give
heed to’? would be clearer; cf Ps 107 43). Still
farther from modern usage is Hos 14 8, “I have
heard him, and observed him” (RV ‘will regard”’;
the meaning is “care for’); and Mk 6 20, ‘For
Herod feared John . . . . and observed him” (RV
“kept him safe’). In the last case, the AV editors
seem to have used “to observe” as meaning “‘to
give reverence to.”

Observation is found in Lk 17 20, ‘“The kingdom
of God cometh not with observation” (“era rapa-
Tapjcews, metd paratéréseds). The meaning of the
Eng. is, ‘so that it can be observed,” but the exact
foree of the underlying Gr (‘‘visibly”? “so that it
can be computed in advance’’?) is a matter of ex-
traordinary dispute at the present time. See
Kuncpom or Gop. Burton Scott Easton


OBSERVER, ob-ziir’vér, OF TIMES. See Drvi-
NATION,


OBSTINACY, ob’sti-na-si.


OCCASION, o-ka’zhun: The uses in EV are all
modern, but in Jer 2 24 “occasion” is employed
(both in Heb and Eng.) as a euphemism for “time
of conception of offspring.”


OCCUPY, ok’t-pi: Is in AV the tr of 7 different
words: (1) JD), nathan; (2) WO, sdhar; (3)
2719 , ‘arabh; (4) WY, ‘asch, either with or without
the added word, mba, milvkhah; (5) avamdn-
pody, anaplérain; (6) wepvmaretv, peripatein; (7)
mpayparetvev, pragmateicin. In almost every case
the meanings of “to occupy’? as used in AV in
harmony with the common usage of the time have
become obsolete. (1) In Ezk 27 16.19.22, nathan
meant “to trade,’ and RV reads “traded.” (2)
From sdhar, “to go about,’ was derived a des-
ignation of “merchants” (RV) (Ezk 27 21). (3)
‘Arabh (Ezk 27 9) signifies “to exchange” (ERV
and ARVm, but ARV ‘deal in’). (4) ‘dsah
(Ex 38 24) means simply ‘‘to use” (RV), and the
same word in Jgs 16 11, with m‘la’khah (‘work’)
added, signifies that work had been done (RV).
(5) In 1 Cor 14 16, “occupy,” the AV render-
ing of anapléroun, would still be as intelligible to
most as RV “fill.” (6) “Occupy” in He 13 9, in
the sense of “being taken up with a thing,” is the
tr (both AV and RV) of peripatein, lit. ‘to walk.”
Finally (7) pragmateuein (Lk 19 13) is rendered in
AV “occupy” in its obsolete sense of ‘trade’? (RV).

Davip Foster Estes

OCCURRENT, o-kur’ent (AV, ERV, 1 K 5 4):

An obsolete form of ‘‘occurrence’’ (so ARV).


OCHIELUS, 6-ki-é’lus (Oximdos, Ochiélos, B,
’Ofrfidos, Oziélos; AV Ochiel): One of the “cap-
tains over thousands’? who furnished the Levites
with much cattle for Josiah’s Passover (1 Esd 1 9)
=‘Jeiel’”’ of 2 Ch 35 9.


OCHRAN, ok’ran (77237, ‘okhraén, from ‘akhar,
“trouble”; AV Ocran): The father of Pagiel, the
prince of the tribe of Asher (Nu 1 13; 2 27; 7 72.
77; 10 26).


OCHRE, o’/kér, RED (Isa 44 13, ‘‘He marketh
it out with a pencil,” m “red ochre,” AV “line”;
IW, seredh, a word found only here, and of
unknown ctymology): Designates the implement
used by the carpenter to mark the wood after
measuring and before cutting. ‘Red ochre’ sup-
poses this to have been a crayon (as does “pencil’’),
but a scratch-awl is quite as likely. Ochre is a
clay colored by an iron compound.


See HarDENING.


OCIDELUS, os-i-dé@'lus, ok-i-dé’lus (A, ’OnelSy-
os, Okeidélos, B and Swete, MxalrynBSos, Okailédos,
Fritzsche, ‘Qxé8ydos, Okédélas; AV and Fritzsche
Ocodelus): One of the priests who had married
a “strange wife” (1 Esd 9 22); it stands in the
place of “Jozabad’” in Ezr 10 22 of which it is
probably a corruption.


OCINA, 6-si‘na, os‘i-na, ok’i-na (’Oxevd,
Okeind): A town on the Phoen coast 8. of Tyre,
mentioned only in Jth 2 28, in the account of the
campaign of Holofernes in Syria. The site is un-
known, but from the mention of Sidon and Tyre
immediately preceding and Jemnaan, Azotus and
Ascalon following, it must have been 8. of Tyre.
One might conjecture that it was Sandalium (Is-
kanderuna) or Umm ul-’Awamid, but there is
nothing in the name to suggest such an identifi-
cation.


OCRAN, ok’ran.


ODED, i’ded (THY [2 Ch 15], TY [elsewhere],
‘adhédh, “restorer’’):

(1) According to 2 Ch 15 1, he was the father
of Azariah who prophesied in the reign of Asa of
Judah (ec 918-877), but ver 8 makes Oded himself
the prophet. The two verses should agree, so we
should probably read in ver 8, “the prophecy of
Azariah, theson of Oded, the prophet,”’ or else “‘the
prophecy of Azariah the prophet.” See AzariaH.

(2) A prophet of Samaria (2 Ch 28 9) who lived
in the reigns of Pekah, king of the Northern King-
dom, and Ahaz, king of Judah. According to 2 Ch
28, Oded protested against the enslavement of the
captives which Pekah had brought from Judah and
Jerus on his return from the Syro-Ephraimitic
attack on the Southern Kingdom (735 BC). In
this protest he was joined by some of the chicfs of
Ephraim, apd the captives were well treated.
After those who were naked (i.e. those who had
scanty clothing; cf the meaning of the word “naked”
in Mk 14 51) had been supplied with clothing from
the spoil, and the bruised anointed with oil, the
prisoners were escorted to Jericho.

The narrative of ch 28 as a whole does not agree
with that of 2 IS 15 37; 16 5f, where the allied
armies of Rezin of Damascus and Pekah besieged
Jerus, but failed to capture it (cf Isa 7 1-17; 8
5-82). As Curtis points out (Chron, 459, where
he compares Ex 21 2ff; Lev 25 29-43; Dt 16
12-18), wholesale cnslavement of their fellow-
countrymen was not allowed to the Hebrews, and
this fact the passage illustrates. It seems to be a
fulfilment in spirit of Isa 61 1-2, a portion which
Our Lord read in the synagogue at Nazareth (Lk
4 16-20). Davio Francis Roperts


ODES, odz, OF SOLOMON. See Apocatypric
LitERATURE.


See OcHRAN.


ODOLLAM, é-dol’am ('O80AXGp, Odollém): The
a ioe of AputiaM (q.v.), found only in 2 Mace


ODOMERA, od-i-mé'ra (‘O8opypd, Odomérd, B,
’OSoaappys, Odoaarrés, Itala Odaren; AV Odonarkes,
m Odomarra): It is not certain whether Odomera
was an independent Bedouin chief, perhaps an ally
of the Syrians, or an officer of Bacchides. He was
defcated by Jonathan in his campaign against
Bacchides (1 Mace 9 66) in 156 BC.


ODOR, 6’dér: In the OT the rendering of nwa,
besem, ‘fragrance’ (2 Ch 16 14; Est 2 12; in
Jer 34 5,RV “burnings’’), and of one or two other


2179


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Observer of Times
Offence, Offend


words; in the NT of éon%, osmé (Jn 12 3; Phil 4
18; Eph 5 2 RV); in Rev 5 8; 18 13, of Ovplapa,
thumtama, where RV (with AVm in former passage)
has “incense.” See also Savor,


OF, ov: (1) In Anglo-Saxon, had the meaning
“from,” “away from’ (as the strengthened form
“off” has still), and was not used for genitive or
possessive relations, these being expressed by special
case-forms. In the Norman period, however, “of”
was taken to represent the French de (a use well de-
veloped by the time of Chaucer), and in the Eliza-
bethan period both senses of “of? sere in common
use. But after about 1600 the later force of the
word became predominant, and in the earlier seuse
(which is now practically obsolete) it was replaced
by other prepositions. In consequence AV (and
in some cases RV) contains many uses of “of” that
are no longer familiar—most of them, to be sure,
causing no difficulty, but there still bemg a few re-
sponsible for real obscurities. (2) Of the uses where
“of” signifies “from,” the most common obscure
passages are those where ‘of’ follows a vb. of
hearing. In modern Eng. “hear of” signifies ‘to
gaiu information about,” as it does frequently in
AV (Mk 7 25; Rom 10 14, etc). But more com-
monly this use of ‘of’? in AV denotes the source
from which the information is derived. So Jn 16
15, “all things that I have heard of my Father’’;
Acts 10 22, “to hear words of thee’; 28 22, “We
desire to hear of thee’; cf 1 Thess 2 13; 2 Tim
118; 2 2, etc (similarly Mt 11 29, “and learn of
me’; cf Jn 6 45). All of these are ambiguous
and in modern Eng. give a wrong meaning, so that
in most cases (but not Mt 11 29 or Acts 28 22)
RV substitutes “from.” A different example of the
same use of “of” is2 Cor 6 1, “a building of God”
(RV “from’’). So Mk 9 21, “of a child,” means
“from childhood” (“from a child,” RV, is dubious
Eng.). A still more obscure passage is Mt 23 25,
“full of extortion and excess.” ‘Full of” else-
where in AV (and even in the immediate context,
Mt 28 27.28) refers to the contents, but here the
“of” represents the Gr é«, ek, ‘out of,” and denotes
the saurce—“‘The contents of your cup and platter
have been purchased from the gains of extortion
and excess.”? RV again substitutes “from,” with
rather awkward results, but the Gr itself is unduly
compressed. In Mk 118, one of the changes
made after AV was printed has relieved an obscurity,
for where the ed of 1611 read ‘‘cut down branches
of the trees,” the modern edd have “off” (RV
“from”). For clear examples of this use of “of,”
without the obscurities, cf Jth 2 21, “they went
forth of Nineveh”; 2 Macc 4 34, “forth of the
sanctuary”; and, esp., Mt 21 25, “The baptism
of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men?”
Here “from” and “of” represent exactly the same
Gr prep., and the change iu Eng. is arbitrary (RV
writes “from” in both cases). (3) In a weakened
sense this use of “of” as “from’’ was employed
rather loosely to connect an act with its source or
motive. Such uses are generally clear enough, but
the Eng. today seems sometimes rather curious:
Mt 18 13, “rejoiceth more of that sheep” (RV
“over’); Ps 99 8, “vengeance of their inventions”
(so AV); 1 Cor 7 4, “hath not power of her own
body” (RV “over’’), etc. (4) A very common use
of “of” in AV is to designate the agent—a use com-
plicated by the fact that “by” is also employed for
the same purpose and the two interchanged freely.
So in Lk 9 7, “all that was done by him... . it
was said of some....,” the two words are used
side by side for the same Gr prep. (RV replaces
“of” by “by,” but follows a different text in the
first part of the verse). Again, most of the examples
are clear enough, but there are some obscurities.


So in Mt 19 12, “which were made cunuchs of
men,” the “of men” is at first sight possessive (RV
“by men’). Similarly, 2 Esd 16 30, ‘There are
left some clusters of them that diligently seek
through the vineyard” (RV “by them’). So 1 Cor
14 24, “He is convinced of all, he is judged of all,”
is quite misleading (RV ‘“‘by all” in both cases).
Phil 3 12, AV “I am apprehended of Christ Jesus,”
seems almost meaningless (RV “‘by’’). (5) Insome
cases the usage of the older Eng. is not sufficient
to explain “of” in AV. So Mt 18 23, ‘take account
of his servants,” is a very poor rendition of ‘‘make
a reckoning with his servants” (so RV). In Acts
27 5, the “sea of Cilicia” may have been felt to be
the “sea which is off Cilicia’ (cf RV), but there are
no other instances of this use. In 2 Cor 2 12, “A
door was opened unto me of the Lord” should be
‘Gn the Lord” (so RV). 28 21 4, ‘We will have
no silver nor gold of Saul, nor of his house,” is very
loose, and RV rewrites the verse entirely. In all
these cases, AV seems to have looked solely for
smooth Eng., without caring much for exactness.
In 1 Pet 111, however, “sufferings of Christ”
probably yields a correct sense for a difficult phrase
in the Gr (so RY, with “unto” in the m), but a
paraphrase is needed to give the precise meaning.
And, finally, in He 11 18, the Gr itself is ambiguous
and there 1s no way of deciding whether the prep.
employed (rpés, prés) means “‘to” (so RV) or “of”
(so AV, RVm; ef He 1 7, where “of” is necessary).
Burton Scott Hasron

OFFENCE, o-fens’, OFFEND, o-fend’ (203%,

mikhshél, DWS, dsham, NOT, hata’; ocxdvdarov,


skdndalan, cxavdaritw, skandaliza): “Offend” is
either trans or intrans. As trans it is primarily “‘to
strike against,” hence “to displease,” “‘to make


angry,” “to do harm to,” “to affront,”’ in Seripture,
“to cause to sin”; intrans it is ‘to sin,” ‘to cause
anger,” in Scripture, “to be caused to sin.” “Of-
fence’’ is either the cause of anger, displeasure, etc,
or asin. In Scripture we have the special signifi-
cance of a stumbling-black, or cause of falling, sin,
ete.

In the OT it is frequently the tr of ’asham, ‘‘to
be guilty,” “to transgress’”: Jer 2 3, RV “Shall be

held guilty”; 50 7, RV “not guilty”;
1. OT Ezk 26 12, “hath greatly offended’;
Usage Hos 415, RVm “become guilty”;
615, “till ens acknowledge their
offence,” RVm ‘“‘have borne their guilt”; 13 1, “He
offended in Baal,’ RVm “became guilty’; Hab 1
11, “He shall pass over, and offend, [imputing] this
his power unto his god,” RV “Then shall he sweep
by (as] a wind, and shall pass over [m “‘transgress’’],
and be guilty, [even] he whose might is his god.”

In 2 Ch 28 13, we have 'ashmath ‘al, lit. '‘the offence
against,’’ RV ‘'a trespass [m ‘'or guilt ‘'] against Jeh"’; we
have also hatda', '‘to miss the mark,’' ‘'to sin,’’ ‘‘to err”
(Gen 20 9, RV_''sinned against thee’; 40 1, ‘‘offended
their lord’; 2 K 18 14; Jer 37 18, RV ‘sinned against
thee’’); bdghadh, ‘‘to deal treacherously"' (Ps 73 15,
‘offend against the generation of thy children,” RV
‘dealt treacherously with"); habhal, '‘to act wickedly”
(Job 34 31); mikhshol, ‘'a stumbling block"' (Lev 19 14;
trdin Isa 8°14, ‘a rock of offence”; cf Ezk 14 3: 1 8 95
31; Ps 119 165, ‘‘nothing shall offend,” RV ''no occasion
of stumbling *'; cf Isa 57 14; Jer 6 21, etc); pdsha‘, ‘'to
he fractious,'' ‘to transgress"’ (Prov 18 19, ‘‘a brother
offended,’ RVm‘‘injured"). ‘Offence''is mikhshél (see
above, 1 S 25 31; Isa 8 14); hét', ‘‘sin,"’ ete (Eccl 10 4,
“Yielding ae great offences,’’ ARV ‘'Gentleness

€


[ERV “yielding"'’) allayeth," ARVm ‘‘Calmness [ERV
‘'ventleness"'] leaveth great sins undone”). ‘' Offender”
is hatta’ (1 21, m ‘Heb sinners’’; Isa_29 21, ‘that


maké’a man an_ offender for a word,’ ARV “that make
a man an offender in his cause,"' m ‘'make men to offend
by [their] words," or, ‘'for a word,"’ ERV ‘'in a cause,"’
m ‘‘make men to offend by [their] words"').

The NT usage of these words deserves special
attention. The word most frequently tr? “offend”
in AV is skandalizd (skandalon, “offence’”’), very


eae Offering ~THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2180


frequent in the Gospels (Mt 6 29, ‘if thy right
eye offend thee’; 5 30; 116; 18 6, “whoso shall

offend one of these little ones’; 13 41,
2. NT “all things that offend’; Lk 17 1, “Tt
Usage is impossible but that offences will
come,” etc; Rom 14 21; 16 17, “Mark
them which cause... . offences’; 1 Cor 8 13
bis, “if meat make my brother to offend,’’ etc).
Skandalon is primarily “a trap-stick,” “a bent-
stick on which the bait is fastened which the animal
strikes against and so springs the trap,’”’ hence it
came to denote a “snare,” or anything which one
strikes against injuriously (it is LXX for mokesh,
a “noose” or “snare,’’? Josh 28 13; 18 18 21);
“a, stumbling-block” (LXX for mikhshél [see above],
Lev 19 14). For skandalizé, skandalon, tr in AV,
“offend,”’ “offence,” RV gives ‘‘cause to stumble,”
“stumbling-block,” etc;' thus, Mt 5 29, “if thy
right eye causeth thee to stumble,” i.e. “is an
occasion for thy falling into sin’; Mt 16 23, “Thou
art a stumbling-block unto me,” an occasion of
turning aside from the right path; in Mt 26 31.33
bis, “‘offended”’ is retained, m 33 bis, ““Gr caused to
stumble” (same word in ver 31); Mk 9 42, ‘“‘who-
soever shall cause one of these little ones that be-
lieve on me to stumble,” to fall away from the faith,
or fallinto sin; Lk 17 1, “It is impossible but that
occasions of stumbling should come; but woe unto
him, through whom they come”; in Rom 14 21;
16 17; in 1 Cor 8, Paul’s language has the same
meaning, and we sce how truly he had laid to heart
the Saviour’s earnest’ admonitions—“weak breth-
ren’ with him answering to the master’s “little ones
who believe’; Rom 14 21, “It is good not to eat
flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do anything whereby
thy brother stumbleth,” i.e. ‘is led by your example
to do that which he cannot do with a good con-
science’; ver 20, ‘It is evil for that man who eateth
with offence [did proskémmatos],’ so as to place
a stumbling-block before his brother, or, rather,
‘without the confidence that he is doing right’;
ef ver 23, “He that doubteth is condemned if he eat,
because he eateth not of faith; and whatsoever is
not of faith is-sin”; so 1 Cor 8 13; Rom 16 17,
“Mark them that are causing the divisions and
occasions of stumbling, contrary to the doctrine,
[m “teaching’] which ye learned” (Is not the
“teaching” of Christ Himself implied here?). Every-
thing that would embolden another to do that which
would be wrong for him, or that would turn any-
one away from the faith, must be carefully avoided,
seeking to please, not ourselves, but to care for our
brother, ‘for whom Christ died,” “giving no occa-
sion of stumbling [proskopé] in anything” (2 Cor
6 3)


A préskopos, “not causing to stumble,” is trd ‘void of
offence" (Acts 24 16, ‘‘a conscience void of offence”;
1 Cor 10 32, RV “occasion of stumbling"; Phil 1 10,
‘void of offence’); hamartdné, ‘to miss the mark,” ‘to
sin,” “toerr,’’ is tr’offended” (Acts 25 8, RV "sinned"):
hamartia, '‘sin,” ‘error’ (2 Cor 11 7, RV “Did I com-
mit a sin?''); ptatd, ‘to stumble,” ‘‘fall" (Jas 2 10;
3 2 bis, offend,” RV ‘'stumble,"” ‘'stumbleth"); pard-
ptoma, *‘a falling aside or away," is tré ''offence” (Rom
4 25; § 15bis.16.17.18.20, in each case RV _" trespass”):
adikéé, ‘to be unrighteous" (Acts 25 11, RV “wrong-
doer,’ AV '‘offender’’).

In Apoc we have ‘‘offence’’ (skandalon, Ith 12 2),
RV ‘I will not eat thereof, lest there be an occasion of
stumbling”’; '' offend" (hamartané, Ecclus 7 7), RV “sin”;
“greatly offended” (prosochthiz6, 25 2); “offended” (skan-
dalizé, 32 15), RV ‘‘stumble.”

W. L. Waker

OFFER, of’ér, OFFERING, of’ér-ing. See Sac-
RIFICE.


OFFICE, of'is: In the OT the word is often use
in periphrastie renderings, e.g. ‘minister... . in
the priest’s office,” lit. act as priest (Ex 28 1, etc);
“do the office of a midwife,’’ lit. cause or help to


give birth (Ex 116). But the word is also used
as a rendering of different Heb words, e.g. }2, ken,
“pedestal,” , “place” (Gen 40 13, AV “place’’;
41 13); MTAZ, ‘dbhddhah, “labor,” “work” (1 Ch
6 32); MIPB, pkuddah, “oversight,” “charge”
(Ps 109 8); TAI, ma‘dmadh, lit. “standing,”
e.g. waiting at table (1 Ch 23 28); VAW, mish-
mar, “charge,” observance or service of the temple
(Neh 13 14 AY).

Similarly in the NT the word is used in peri-
phrastie renderings, e.g. priest’s office (Lk 1 8.9);
office of a deacon (éiaxovla, diakonta, 1 Tim 3
10); office of a bishop (értoxory, episkopé, 1 Tim
3 1). RV uses other renderings, e.g. ‘ministry’
(Rom 11 13); “serve as deacons” (1 Tim 3 10).
In Acts 1 20, RV has “office” (m “overseership’’)
for AV “bishoprick.”’ Lewis


OFFICER, of’i-sér: In AV the term is employed
to render different words denoting various officials,
domestic, civil and military, such as OD, saris,
“eunuch,” “minister of state’ (Gen 87 36); TPB,
pakidh, “person in charge,’ ‘overseer’? (Gen 41
34); 2°N3, n°gibh, ‘‘stationed,” “garrison,” “prefect”
(1 K 4 19); WOW, skater, “scribe” or “secretary”
(perhaps arranger or organizer), then any official or
overseer. In Est 9 3 for AV “officers of the king”
RV has (more literal) “they that did the king’s
business.”

In the NT “‘officer’’ generally corresponds to the
Gr word drnpérys, hupérétés, “servant,” or any
person in the employ of another. In Mt 6 25 the
term evidently means “bailiff” or exactor of the
fine imposed by the magistrate, and corresponds to
mpadxrap, préktor, used in Lk 12 58. T. Lewis


OFFICES OF CHRIST. See Curist, Orrices
OF.


OFFSCOURING, of’skour-ing: This strong and
expressive word occurs only once in the OT and
once in the NT. The weeping prophet uses it as
he looks upon his erstwhile fair and holy city, de-
spoiled, defiled, derided by the profane, the enemies
of God and of His people (Lam 3 45, "MQ, s°h7).
The favored people, whose city lies in heaps and
is patrolled by the heathen, are hailed and held up
as the scrapings, the offscouring, the offal of the
earth. They are humbled to earth, crushed into
the dust, carried away to be the slaves of licentious
idolaters. The haughty, cruel, cutting boastful-
ness of the victors covered Israel with contumely.

In1 Cor 4 13 the greatest of the apostles reminds
the prosperous and self-satisfied Corinthians that
they, the apostles, were “made as the filth of the
world, the offscouring of all things.’ In such con-
tempt were they held by the unbelieving world
and by false apostles. The strange, strong word
(weplynua, peripséma) should remind us what it cost
in former times to be a true servant of Christ.

G. H. Grersperpina

OFFSPRING, of’spring. See CHILpREN.


OFTEN, of’’n (uxvés, puknés, “thick,” “elose”’):
An archaic usage for “frequent”: ‘Thine often
infirmities” (1 Tim 6 23); cf “by often rumina-
tion” (Shakespeare, As You Like Ii, IV, i, 18);
“The often round” (Ben Jonson, The Forest, IIL);
“Of wrench’d or broken limb—an often chance”
(Tennyson, Gareth and Lynette).


OG (119 , ‘dgh; "Qy, Og): King of Bashan, whose
territory, embracing 60 cities, was conquered by
Moses and the Israelites immediately after the
conquest of Sihon, king of the Amorites (Nu 21


2181


33-85; Dt 3 1-12). The defeat took place at
Edrei, one of the chief of these cities (Nu 21 33;
Josh 12 4), and Og and his people were “utterly
destroyed” (Dt 3 6). Og is described as the last
of the REPHAM (q.v.), or giant-race of that district,
and his giant stature is borne out by what is told
in Dt 3 11 of the dimensions of his “bedstead of
iron” (‘eres barzel), 9 cubits long and 4 broad (134
ft. by 6 ft.), said to be still preserved at Rabbath of
Ammon when the verse describing it was written.
It is not, of course, necessary to conclude that Og’s
own height, though immense, was as great as this.
Some, however, prefer to suppose that what is in-
tended is “a sarcophagus of black basalt,” which
iron-like substance abounds in the Hauran. The
conquered territory was subsequently bestowed on
the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half-tribe of
Manasseh (Nu 32 33; Dt 83 12.13). Other ref-
erences to Og are Dt 1 4; 4 47; 31 4; Josh 2 10;
9 10; 13 12.30). The memory of this great con-
quest lingered all through the national history (Ps
135 11; 186 20). On the conquest, ef Stanley,
Lectures on the History of the Jewish Church, I,
185-87, and see ARGoB; BASHAN. JAMES ORR


OHAD, o’had (TON, ’Shadh, meaning unknown):
A son of Simeon, mentioned as third in order (Gen
46 10; Ex 6 15). The name is not found in the
list of Nu 26 12-14.


OHEL, d’hel OTN, ’dhel, “tent”): A son of
Zerubbabel (1 Ch 3 20).


OHOLAH, 6-ho'la (TEAS, *ohélah; AV Aholah):
The exact meaning is a matter of dispute. As
written, if seems to mean a tent-woman, or the
woman living ina tent. With a mappik iu the last
consonant it could mean “her tent.’”’ The term is
used symbolically by Ezekiel to designate Samaria
or the kingdom of Israel (Ezk 23 4.5.36.44). See
OHOLIBAH.


OHOLIAB, 6é-ha'li-ab (AN"2DN, ‘ohsli’abh,
‘father’s tent”; AV Aholiab): A Danite artificer,
who assisted Bezalel in the construction of the
tabernacle and its furniture (Ex 31 6; 35 34; 36
1f; 38 23).


OHOLIBAH, é6-hol’i-ba, 6-h6’li-ba (ADA
’ohdlibhah, “tent in her,” or “my tent is in her”):
An opprobrious and symbolical name given by
Ezekiel to Jerus, representing the kingdom of
Judah, because of her intrigues and base alliances
with Egypt, Assyria and Babylonia, just as the
name OHOLAH (q.v.) was given to Samaria or the
Northern Kingdom, because of her alliances with
Egyptand Assyria. There is a play upon the words
in the Heb which cannot be reproduced in Eng.
Both Oholah and Oholibah, or Samaria and Jerus,
are the daughters of one mother, and wives of Jeh,
and both are guilty of religious and political al-
liance with heathen nations. Idolatry is constantly
compared by the Heb prophets to marital unfaith-
fulness or adultery. W. W. Daviss


OHOLIBAMAH, 6-hol-i-ba’ma, 6-hol-i-bi’ma
Mapes, 'ohdlibhamah, “tent of the high place’):

(1) One of Esau’s wives, and a daughter of Anah
the Hivite (Gen 36 2.5). It is strange that she is
not named along with Esau’s other wives in either
Gen 28 9 or 26 30. Various explanations have
been given, but none of them is satisfactory. There
is probably some error in the text.

(2) An Edomite chief (Gen 36 41; 1 Ch
1 52).


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA (fer Offering


OLL, oil (JEW, shemen; traov, élaion):
1. Terms
2. Production and Storage
3. Uses

(1) As a Commodity of Exchange

(2) As a Cosmetic

As a Medicine

4) Asa Food
(5) As an INuminant
(6) In Religious Rites
(a) Consccration
e Offerings
c) Burials
4. Figurative Uses

Shemen, lit. “fat,’’ corresponds to the common
Arab. senin of similar meaning, although now ap-
plied to boiled butter fat. Another
Heb word, zayith (zéth), “olive,” occurs
with shemen in several passages (Ex 27
20; 30 24; Lev 24 2). The corresponding Arab.
zeit, a contraction of zeitun, which is the name for the
olive tree as well as the fruit, is now applied to oils
in general, to distinguish them from solid fats.
Zeit usually means olive oil, unless some qualifying
name indicates another oil. A corresponding use
was made of shemen, and the oil referred to so many
times in the Bible was olive oil (except Est 2 12).
Compare this with the Gr @dao», éloton, “oil,” a
neuter noun from édala, elata, “olive,” the origin of
the Eng. word ‘‘oil.””. "7X", yichar, lit. “glisten-
ing,’ which occurs less frequently, is used possibly
because of the light-giving quality of olive oil, or it
may have been used to indicate fresh oil, as the
clean, newly pressed oil is bright. MW}, m’shah, a
Chald word, occurs twice: Ezr 6 9; 7 22. édatov,
élaion, is the NT term.

Olive oi] has been obtained, from the earliest
times, by pressing the fruit in such a way as to

filter out the oil and other liquids from
2. Pro- the residue. The Scriptural references
duction correspond so nearly to the methods
practised in Syria up to the present
time, and the presses uncovered by excavators at
such sites as Gezer substautiate so well the simi-
larity of these methods, that a description of the
oil presses and modes of expression still being em-
ployed in Syria will be equally true of those in use
in early Israelitish times. :

The olives to yield the greatest amount of oil
are allowed to ripen, although some oil is expressed
from the green fruit. As the olive ripens it turns
black. The fruit begins to fall from the trees in
September, but the main crop is gathered after the
first rains in November. The olives which have
not fallen naturally or have not been blown off by
the storms are beaten from the trees with long poles
(cf Dt 24 20). The fruit is gathered from the
ground into baskets and carried on the heads of the
women, or on donkeys to the houses or oil presses.
Those carried to the houses are preserved for eating.
Those carried to the presses are piled in heaps until
fermentation begins. This breaks down the oil
cells and causes a more abundant flow of oil. The
fruit thus softened may be trod out with the feet
(Mic 6 15)—which is now seldom practised—or
crushed in a handmill. Such a mill was uncovered
at Gezer beside an oil press. Stone mortars with
wooden pestles are also used. Any of these methods
crushes the fruit, leaving only the stone unbroken,
and yields a purer oil (Ex 27 20). The method
now generally practised of crushing the fruit and
kernels with an edgerunner mill probably dates
from Rom times. These mills are of crude con-
struction. The stones are cut from native lime-
stone and are turned by horses or mules. Remains
of huge stones of this type are found near the old
Rom presses in Mt. Lebanon and other districts.

The second step in the preparation of the oil is


1. Terms


Oil
Old Prophet


the expression. In districts where the olives are
plentiful and there is no commercial demand for the
oil, the householders crush the fruit in a mortar,
mix the crushed mass with water, and after the
solid portions have had time to settle, the pure
sweet oil is skimmed from the surface of the water.


Ancient Oil Presses (Land and the Book).


This method gives a delicious oil, but is wasteful.
This is no doubt the beaten oil referred to in con-
nection with religious ceremonials (Ex 27 20).
Usually the crushed fruit is spread in portions on
mats of reeds or goats’ hair, the corners of which
are folded over the mass, and the packets thus
formed are piled one upon another between upright
supports. These supports were formerly two stone
columns or the two sections of a split stone cylinder
hollowed out within to receive the mats. Large
hollow tree trunks are still similarly used in Syria.
A flat stone is next placed on top, and then a heavy
log is placed on the pile in such a manner that one
end can be fitted into a socket made in a wall or |
rock in close proximity to the pile. This socket
becomes the fulcrum of a large lever of the second
class. The lever is worked in the same manner as
that used in the wine presses (see WINE Press).
These presses are now being almost wholly super-
seded by hydraulic presses. The juice which runs
from the press, consisting of oil, extractive matter
and water, is conducted to vats or run into Jars and
allowed to stand until the oil separates.. The oil |
is then drawn off from the surface, or the watery
fluid and sediment is drawn away through a hole
near the bottom of the jar, leaving the oil in the
container. (For the construction of the ancient oil]
presses, see The Excavations of Gezer, by Macalister.)
The oil, after standing for some time to allow further
sediment to settle, is stored either in huge earthen-
ware jars holding 100 to 200 gallons, or in under-
ground cisterns (cf 1 Ch 27 2S) holding a much
larger quantity. Some of these cisterns in Beirut
hold several tons of oil each (2 Ch 11 11; 32 28;
Neh 13 5.12; Prov 21 20). In the homes the
oil is kept in small earthen jars of various shapes,
usually having spouts by which the oil can be easily
poured (1 KR 17 12; 2K 42). In 158 16 13;
1 Kk 1 39, horns of oil are mentioned.

(1) As a commodity of exchange.—Olive oil when

properly made and stored will keep sweet for years,
hence was a good form of merchandise
3. Uses to hold. Oil is still sometimes given |
in payment (1 IX 6 11; Ezk 27 17;
Hos 12 1; Lk 16 6; Rev 18 13).

(2) As a cosmetic.—From earliest times oil was
used as a cosmetic, esp. for oiling the limbs and
head. Oil used in this way was usually scented |
(see OrnTMENT). Oil is still used in this manner
by the Arabs, principally to keep the skin and scalp
soft when traveling in dry desert regions where |
there is no opportunity to bathe. Sesamé oil has |


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2182


replaced olive oil to some extent for this purpose.
Homer, Pliny and other early writers mention 1ts
use for external application. Pliny claimed it was
used to protect the body against the cold. Many
Bib. references indicate the use of oil as a cosmetic
(Ex 25 6; Dt 28 40; Ruth 3 3; 28 12 20; 14 2;
Est 2 12; Ps 28 5; 92 10; 104 15; 141 5; Ezk
16 9; Mic 6 15; Lk 7 46).

(3) As a medicine—From early Egyp literature
down to late Arab. medical works, oil is mentioned
as a valuable remedy. Many queer prescriptions
contain olive oil as one of their ingredients. The
good Samaritan used oil mingled with wine to dress
the wounds of the man who fell among robbers
(Mk 6 13; Lk 10 34.)

(4) As a food—Olive oil replaces butter to a
large extent in the diet of the people of the Mediter-
ranean countries. In Bible lands food is fried in
it, it is added to stews, and is poured over boiled
vegetables, such as beans, peas and lentils, and over
salads, sour milk, cheese and other foods as a dress-
ing. A cake is prepared from ordinary bread dough


| which is smeared with oil and sprinkled with herbs


before baking (Lev 24). At times of fasting
oriental Christians use only vegetable oils, usually
olive oil, for cooking. For Bib. references to the
use of oil as food see Nu 11 8; Dt 7 13; 14 23;
32 13; 1K 17 12.14.16; 2K 4 2.6.7; 1 Ch 12
40; 2 Ch 2 10.15; Ezr 3 7; Prov 21 17; Ezk 16
13.18; Hos 2 5.8.22; Hag 2 12; Rev 6 6.

(5) As an illuminant—Olive oil until recent
years was universally used for lighting purposes
(see LAMP). In Pal are many homes where a most
primitive form of lamp similar to those employed
by the Israelites is still in use. The prejudice in
favor of the exclusive use of olive oil for lighting
holy places is disappearing. Formerly any other
illuminant was forbidden (cf Ex 26 6; 27 20; 35
8.14.28; 39 37; Mt 25 3.4.8).

(6) In religious rites —(a) Consecration of offi-
cials or sacred things (Gen 28 18; 35 14; Ex 29
7.21 ff; Lev 21ff; Nu 4 9ff; 15 10 1; 16 1.13;
28 121; 1K 139; 2 kK 91.3.6; Ps 89 20):
This was adopted by the early Christians in their
ceremonies (Jas 5 14), and is still used in the con-
secration of crowned rulers and church dignitaries.
(b) Offerings, votive and otherwise: The custom of
making offerings of oil to holy places still survives
in oriental religions. One may see burning before
the shrines along a Syrian roadside or in the churches,
small lamps whose supply of oil is kept renewed by
pious adherents. In Israelitish times oil was used
in the meal offering, in the consecration offerings,
offerings of purification from leprosy, ete (Ex 29 2;
409 ff; Lev 2 2 ff; Nu 4 9ff; Dt 18 4;1 Ch 9 29;
2 Ch 31 5; Neh 10 37.39; 13 5.12; Ezk 16 18.19;
46; 46; Mic 6 7). (c) In connection with the
burial of the dead: Egyp papyri mention this use.
In the OT no direct mention is made of the custom.
Jesus referred to it in connection with His own
burial (Mt 26 12; Mk 14 3-8; Lk 23 56; Jn 12
3-8; 19 40).

Abundant oil was a figure of general prosperity
(Dt 32 138; 33 24; 2 K 18 32; Job 29 6; Joel


? 2 19.24). Languishing of the oil in-
4. Figur- dicated general famine (Joel 1 10;
ative Hag 111). Joy is described as the


oil of joy (Isa 61 3), or the oil of glad-
ness (Ps 45 7; He 1 9). Ezckiel prophesies that
the rivers shall run like oil, ie. become viscous
(Ezk 32 14). ‘Words of deceit are softer than oil
(Ps 65 21; Prov 5 3). Cursing becomes a habit
with the wicked as readily as oil soaks into bones
(Ps 109 18). Excessive use of oil indicates waste
fulness (Prov 21 17), while the saving of it is a
characteristic of the wise (Prov 21 20). Oil was


2183


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA ou


Old Prophet


carried into Egypt, i.e. a treaty was made with that
country (Hos 12 1). Jamms A. Patcu


OIL, ANOINTING (“NWAN jaw, shemen ha-
mishhah): This holy oil, the composition of which
is described in Ex 30 22-33, was designed for use
in the anointing of the tabernacle, its furniture and
vessels, the altar and laver, and the priest, that
being thus consecrated, they might be “most
holy.” It was to be ‘‘a holy anointing oil” unto
Jeh throughout all generations (ver 31). On its
uses, cf Ex 37 29; Lev 8 12; 10 7; 21 10. The
care of this holy oil was subsequently entrusted to
Eleazar (Nu 4 16); in later times it seems to have
been prepared by the sons of the priests (1 Ch 9
30). There is a figurative allusion to the oil on
Aaron’s head in Ps 183 2. See Or; ANoINTING.

JAMES ORR

OIL, BEATEN (Ex 27 20; Lev 24 2; Nu 28 5).

See O1L; GoLpEN CANDLESTICK. :


OIL, HOLY. See O11; ANoINTING.
OIL, OLIVE. See O1L; OLtve TREE.
OIL PRESS. See Orn; Wine Press.
OIL-MAKING. See Crarts, II, 11.


OIL TREE, oil tré (VaW 72, ‘@e shemen [Isa 41
19], m “oleaster,”’ in Neh 8 15, tr4 ‘‘wild olive,” AV
“pine”; POW "LY, ‘ace shemen, in 1 K 6 23.31.32,
tr? “olive wood’’): The name “oleaster” used to be
applied to the wild olive, but now belongs to quite
another plant, the silver-berry, Eleagnus hartensis
(N.O. Hlaeagnaceae), known in Arab. as Zeizafan.
It is a pretty shrub with sweet-smelling white
flowers and silver-grey-green leaves. It is difficult
to see how all the three references can apply to this
tree; it will suit the first two, but this small shrub
would never supply wood for carpentry work such
as that mentioned in 1 K, hence the tr ‘‘olive wood.”
On the other hand, in the reference in Neh 8 15,
olive branches are mentioned just before, so the tr
“wild olive’ (the difference being too slight) is
improbable. Post suggests the tr of ‘é¢ shemen by
PINE (q.v.), which if accepted would snit all the
requirements. E. W. G. Masrerman


OINTMENT, oint’ment: The present use of the
word “ointment” is to designate a thick unguent of
buttery or tallow-like consistency. AV in frequent
instances translates shemen or m’shah (see Ex 30
25) “ointment’’ where a perfumed oil seemed to be
indicated. ARV has consequently substituted the
word “oil” in most of the passages. Merkahah is
rendered “ointment” once in the OT (Job 41 31
[Heb 41 23]). The well-known power of oils and
fats to absorb odors was made use of by the ancient
perfumers. The composition of the holy anointing
oil used in the tabernacle worship is mentioned


in Ex 30 23-25. Olive oil formed the base. This
was scented with ‘flowing myrrh... . sweet ein-
namon....sweetcalamus....and.... cas-


sia.” The oil was probably mixed with the above
ingredients added in a powdered form and heated
until the oi] had absorbed their odors and then
allowed to stand until the insoluble matter settled,
when the oil could be decanted. Olive oil, being a
non-drying oil which does not thicken readily, yielded
an ointment of oily consistency. This is indicated
by Ps 183 2, where it says that the precious oil ran
down on Aaron’s beard and on the collar of his outer
garment. Anyone attempting to make the holy
anointing oil would be cut off from his people (Ex
30 33). Thescented oils or ointments were kept in


jars or vials (not boxes) made of alabaster. These
Jars are frequently found as part of the equipment
of ancient tombs.

The word tr “ointment” in the NT is pupop,
miuron, “myrrh.” This would indicate that myrrh,
an aromatic gum resin, was the substance commonly
added to the oil to give it odor. [In Lk 7 46 both
kinds of oil are mentioned, and the verse might be
paraphrased thus: My head with common oil thou
didst not anoint; but she hath anointed my feet
with costly scented oil.

For the uses of scented oils or ointments see
ANOINTING; OIL, James A. Patcu


OLAMUS, ol’a-mus (‘OQA0p6s, Olamds): One of
the Israelites who had taken a “strange wife’’ (1 Esd
9 30)=‘‘Meshullam” of Ezr 10 29.


OLD, dld. See Acs, Oup.
OLD GATE. See JERUSALEM.


OLD MAN (rakatés, palaiés, “old,” ‘“ancient’’):
A term thrice used by Paul (Rom 6 6; Eph 4 22;
Col 3 9) to signify the unrenewed man, the natu-
ra] man in the corruption of sin, i.e. sinful human
nature before conversion and regeneration. It is
theologically synonymous with “flesh” (Rom 8
3-9), which stands, not for bodily organism, but
for the whole nature of man (body and soul) turned
away from God and devoted to self and earthly
things.

The old man is ‘Sn the flesh”; the new man “in
the Spirit.’’ In the former “the works of the flesh”
(Gal 5 19-21) are manifest; in the latter ‘the frnit
of the Spirit”? (vs 22.23). One is ‘corrupt accord-
ing to the deceitful lusts’; the other ‘created in
righteousness and true holiness” (Eph 4 22-24 AV).
See also Man, Natura; Man, New.

Dwicat M. Pratrr

OLD PROPHET, THE (]Pl TN 832, nabh7’
"ehadh zakén, ‘an old prophet” [1 K 13 11], 8°32
Ypis, ha-ndbh?’ ha-zdkén, “the old
prophet” [ver 29]): The narrative of
1 K 18 11-32, in which the old
prophet is mentioned, is part of a larger
account telling of a visit paid to Bethel by “a man
of God’’ from Judah. The Judaean prophet uttered
a curse upon the altar erected there by Jeroboam
I. When the king attempted to use force against
him, the prophet was saved by Divine intervention;
the king then invited him to receive royal hospi-
tality, but he refused because of a command of God
to him not to eat or drink there. The Judacan
then departed (vs 1-10). An old prophet who lived
in Bethel heard of the stranger’s words, and went
after him and offered him hospitality. This offer
too was refused. But when the old prophet resorted
to falsehood and pleaded a Divine command on the
subject, the Judaean returned with him. While at
table the old prophet is given a message to declare
that death will follow the southerner’s disobedience
to the first command. A lion kills him on his way
home. The old prophet hears of the death and
explains it as due to disobedience to God; he then
buries the dead body in his own grave and expresses
a wish that he also at death should be buried in
the same sepulcher.

There are several difficulties in the text. Inver11, AV


reads ‘‘his sons came"’ instead of ‘‘ one of his sons came,"
and tr ver 12: ‘And his sons shewed the
2. Critical


1. The
Narrative


way the man of God went.’’ There is a
gap in the MT after the word ‘‘table”’ in
ver 20; and ver 23 should be tr4, ‘‘And it
came to pass after he had eaten bread and drunk water,
that he saddled for himself the ass, and departed again”’
(following LXX, B with W. B. Stevenson, HDB, III,
594a, n.).


Old Testament
Olives, Mount of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2184


Benzinger (‘Die Bticher der Konige,’ Kurz.
Hand-Komm. zum AT, 91) holds that we have here
an example of a midrash, ie. according to LOT,
529, “an imaginative development of a thought or
theme suggested by Scripture, esp. a didactic or
homiletic exposition or an edifying religious story.”
2 Ch 24 27 refers to a “midhrash of the book of the
kings,” and 2 Ch 13 22 to a “midhrash of the
prophet Iddo.” In 2 Ch 9 29 we have a reference
to “the visions of Iddo the seer concerning Jeroboam
the son of Nebat.’”’ Jos names the Judaean prophet
Jadon (Ant, VIII, viii, 5), and so some would trace
this narrative to the midrash of Iddo, which would
be a late Jewish work. There is a trace of late
Heb in ver 3, and evidence in several places of
a later editing of the original narrative. Kittel
and Benzinger think it possible that the section may
be based on a historical incident. If the narrative
is historical in the main, the mention of Josiah by
name in ver 2 may be a later insertion; if not his-
torical, the prophecy there is ex eventu, and the
whole section a midrash on 2 K 23 15-20.

(1) Several questions are suggested by the narra-
tive, but in putting as well as in answering these
questions, it must be remembered that
the old prophet himself, as has been
pointed out, is not the chief character
of the piece. Hence it is a little point-
less to ask what became of the old prophet, or
whether he was not punished for his falsehood.
The passage should be studied, like the parables of
Jesus, with an eye on the great central truth, which
is, here, that God punishes disobedience even in
“a man of God.” It is not inconsistent with this
to regard the old prophet as an example of “Satan
fashioning himself into an angel of light” (2 Cor 11
14), or of the beast which “had two horns like unto
a lamb’ (Rev 13 11).

(2) It must also be remembered that the false
prophets of the OT are called prophets in spite of
their false prophecies. So here the old prophet in
spite of his former lie is given a Divine message
to declare that death will follow the other’s dis-
obedience.


(3) One other queen suggests itself, and demands an
answer. Why did the old prophet make the request that
at death he should be buried in the same grave as the
Judaean (ver 31)? |The answer is implied in ver 32, and
is more fully given in 2 K 28 15-20, where King Josiah
defiles the graves of the prophets at Bethel. On seeing a
“monument’’ or grave-stone by one of the graves, he
inquires what it is, and is told that it marks the grave of
the propbet from Judah. Thereupon he orders that his
bones be not disturhed. Witb these the bones of the old
prophet escape. Perhaps no clearer instance of @ certain
<ind of meanness exists in the OT. The very man who
has been the cause of anothor's downfall and ruin is base
enough to plan his own escape under cover of the virtues
of his victim. And the parallels in modern life are many.
AVID Francis RoBEeRTS


D
OLD TESTAMENT. See Text or THE OT.


OLD TESTAMENT CANON. Sce Canon oF
THE OT.


OLD TESTAMENT LANGUAGES. See Lan-
GUAGES OF THE OT.


OLEASTER, 6-lé-as’tér (Isa 41 19 RVm).
OL TREE.


OLIVE. Sce Oxtve Tres.
OLIVE BERRIES, ber’iz.


3. Central
Truths


Sec


Sec OLIvE TREE.
OLIVE, GRAFTED. Sec Ouive Tres.
OLIVE TREE, ol’iv tré (1, zayith, a word


occurring also in Aram., Ethiopic and Arab.; in the
last it means ‘‘olive oul,” and zaitin, “‘the olive


tree’; é\ala, elaia): The olive tree has all throngh
history been one of the most characteristic, most
valued and most usefnl of trees in Pal.
It is only right that it is the first named
‘“king”’ of the trees (Jgs 9 8.9). When
: the children of Israel came to the
land they acquired olive trees which they planted


1. The
Olive Tree


not (Dt 6 11; cf Josh 24 13). The cultivation
of the olive goes back to the earliest times in
Canaan. The frequent references in the Bible, the
evidences (see 4 below) from archaeology and the
important place the product of this tree has held in
the economy of the inhabitants of Syria make it
highly probable that this land is the actual home of
the cultivated olive. The wild olive is indigenous
there. The most fruitful trees are the product of
bare and rocky ground (cf Dt 32 18) situated prefer-
ably at no great distance from thesea. The terraced
hills of Pal, where the earth lies never many inches
above the limestone rocks, the long rainless summer
of unbroken sunshine, and the heavy “dews” of the
antumn afford conditions which are extraordinarily
favorable to at least the indigenous olive.

The olive, Olea Europaea (N.O. Oleaceae), isaslow-
growing tree, requiring years of patient labor before
reaching full fruitfulness. Its growth implies a
certain degree of settlement and peace, for a hostile
army can in a few days destroy the patient work of
two generations. Possibly this may have something
to do with its being the emblem of peace. Enemies
of a village or of an individual often today carry
out revenge by cutting away a ring of bark from
the trunks of the olives, thus killing the trees in a
few months. The beauty of this tree is referred
to in Jer 11:16; Hos 14 6, and its fruitfulness in
Ps 128 8. The characteristic olive-green of its
foliage, frosted silver below and the twisted and
gnarled trunks—often hollow in the center—are
some of the most picturesque and constant signs of
settled habitations. In some parts of the land large
plantations occur: the famous olive grove near
Beirit is 5 miles square; there are also fine, ancient
trees in great numbers near Bethlehem.

In starting an oliveyard the fellah not infrequently
plants young wild olive trees which grow plentifully
over many parts of the land, or he may grow from
cuttings. When the young trees are 3 years old
they are grafted from a choice stock and after
another three or four years they may commence
to bear fruit, but they take quite a decade more
before reaching full fruition. Much attention is,
however, required. The soil around the trees must
be frequently plowed and broken up; water must be
conducted to the roots from the earliest rain, and
the soil must be freely enriched with a kind of marl
known in Arab. as huwwarah. If neglected, the
older trees soon send up a great many shoots from
the roots all around the parent stem (perhaps the


OLIVE PRESS AT BANIAS NEAR DAN


2185


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Old Testament
Olives, Mount of


idea in Ps 128 3); these must be pruned away, al-
though, should the parent stem decay, some of these
may be capable of taking its place. Being, however,
from the root, below the original point of grafting,
they are of the wild olive type—with smaller, stiffer
leaves and prickly stem—and need grafting before
they are of use. The olive tree furnishes a wood
valuable for many forms of carpentry, and in modern
Pal is extensively burnt as fuel.
The olive is in flower about May; it produces
elusters of small white flowers, springing from the
axils of the leaves, which fall as
2. The showers to the ground (Job 16 33).
Fruit The first olives mature as early as
September in some places, but, in the
mountain districts, the olive harvest is not till
November or even December. Much of the earliest
fruit falls to the ground and is left by the owner un-
gathered until the harvest. The trees are beaten
with long sticks (Dt 24 20), the young folks often
climbing into the branches to reach the highest
fruit, while the women and older girls gather up the
fruit from the ground. The immature fruit left
after such an ingathering is described graphically
in Isa 17 6: “There shall be left therein gleanings,
as the shaking [m “‘beating’’] of an olive-tree, two or
three berries in the top of the uppermost bough,
four or five in the outmost branches of a fruitful
tree.” Such gleanings belonged to the poor (Dt


Olive (Olea Euronaea).


24 20), as is the case today. Modern villages in
Pal allow the poor of even neighboring villages to
glean the olives. The yield of an olive tree is very
uncertain; a year of great fruitfulness may be
followed by a very scanty crop or by 4 succession
of such. eee

The olive is an important article of diet in Pal.
Some are gathered green and pickled in brine, after
slight bruising, and others, the “black” olives, are
gathered quite ripe and are either packed in salt
or in brine. In both cases the salt modifies the
bitter taste. They are eaten with bread. — ;

More important commercially is the oil. This
is sometimes extracted in a primitive way by
erushing a few berries by hand in the hollow of a


stone (cf Ex 27 20), from which a shallow channel
runs for the oil. It is an old custom to tread them
by foot (Mic 6 15). Oil is obtained
3. Olive Oil on a larger scale in one of the many
varieties of oil mills. The berries are
carricd in baskets, by donkeys, to the mill, and
they are crushed by heavy weights. A better class
of oi] can be obtained by collecting the first oil to
come off separately, but not much attention is given
to this in Pal, and usually the berries are crushed,
stones and all, by a circular millstone revolving
upright round a central pivot. A plentcous har-
vest of cil was looked upon as one of God’s blessings
(Joel 2 24; 3 13). That the “labor of the olive”
should fail was one of the trials to faith in Jch
(Hab 3 17). Olive oil is extensively used as food,
morsels of bread being dipped into it in eating;
also medicinally (Lk 10 34; Jas 6 14). In ancient
times it was greatly used for anointing the person
(Ps 23 5; Mt 6 17). In Rome’s days of luxury it
was a common maxim that along and pleasant life
depended upon two fluids—“‘wine within and oil
without.’ In modern times this use of oil for the
person is replaced by the employment of soap, which
in Pal is made from olive oil. In all ages this oil
has been used for illumination (Mt 26 3).
Comparatively plentiful ag olive trees are today
in Pal, there is abundant evidence that the culti-
vation was once much more extensive.
4. Greater ‘The countless rock-cut oil- and wine-
Plenty of | presses, both within and without the
Olive Trees walls of the city [of Gezer], show that
in Ancient the cultivation of the olive and vine
Times was of much greater importance than
it is anywhere in Pal today. ....
Excessive taxation has made olive culture unprofit-
able” (‘“Gezer Mem,” PEF, 11, 23). A further
evidence of this is seen today in many now deserted
sites which are covered with wild olive trees, de-
scendants of large plantations of the
5. Wild cultivated tree which have quite dis-
Olives appeared. Many of these spring from
the old roots; others are from the
fallen drupes. Isolated trees scattered over many
parts of the land, esp. in Galilee, are sown by the
birds. Asa rule the wild olive is but a shrub, with
small leaves, a stem more or less prickly, and a
small, hard drupe with but little or no oil. That a
wild olive branch should be grafted into a fruitful
tree would be a proceeding useless and contrary
to Nature (Rom 11 17.24). On the mention of
“branches of wild olive’ in Neh 8 15, see O1L TREE.
E. W. G. MastTerman
OLIVE, WILD: Figuratively used in Rom 11
17.24 for the Gentiles, grafted into “the good olive
tree” of Israel. See Otive TREE.


OLIVE YARD, ol’iv yard. See Ouive Tree.


OLIVES, ol’ivz, MOUNT OF (ON, har
ha-zéthim [Zeo 14 4], DMI, macdleh ha-
zéethim, “the ascent of the mount of Olives’ [2 8
16 30, AV “‘the ascent of (mount) Olivet’’]; 16 dpos
tov édaLdy, i6 dros tén elaidn, ‘the Mount of Olives”
[Mt 21 1; 24 3; 26 30; Mk 11 1; 13 3; 14 26;
Lk 19 37; 22 39; Jn 8 1), Td Spos Td Kadrotpevoy
édatdv, 16 dros t6 kalotimenon elaién, “the mount
that is called Olivet’? [Lk 19 29; 21 37; in both
references in AV ‘‘the mount called (the mount) of
Olives’’|, Tod éXatvos, tov elaidnos [Acts 1 12, EV
“Olivet” lit. “olive garden’’]):

1. Names
2, Situation and Extent
3. OT Associations
Ss David's Escape from Absalom


2) The Vision of Ezekiel
(3) The Vision of Zechariah


Olives, Mountof THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2186


4, High Places

5. Olivet and Jesus

6. View of the City from Olivet

7. Churches and Ecclesiastical Traditions
LITERATURE


Olivet comes to us through the Vulg Olivetum,
“an oliveyard.”

Jos frequently uses the expression “Mount of
Olives” (e.g. Ant, VII, ix, 2; XX, vill, 6; BJ,
V, ii, 8; xii, 2), but later Jewish
writings give the name NNWAN AN,
har ha-mishhah, “Mount of Oil”; this
occursinsome MSS in 2 K 23 13, and the common
reading MMW AN , har ha-mashhith, “Mount of
Corruption,” m ‘“‘destruction,’’ may possibly be a
deliberate alteration (see below). In later ages the
Mount was termed “the mountain of lights,’ be-
cause here there used to be kindled at one time the
first beacon light to announce throughout Jewry the
appearance of the new moon.

To the natives of Pal today it is usually known
as Jebel et Tar (“mountain of the elevation,” or
“tawer’’), or, less commonly, as Jebel Tur ez zait
(“mountain of the elevation of oil”). The name
Jebel ez-zaitin (“Mount of Olives’) is also well
known. Early Arab. writers use the term Tér
Zait, “Mount of Oil.”

The mountain ridge which lies E. of Jerus leaves
the central range near the valley of Sha‘phat and

runs for about 2 miles due 5. After
2. Situation culminating in the mountain mass on
and Extent which lies the “Church of the Ascen-

sion,’ it may be considered as giving
off two branches: one lower one, which runs8§.8.W.,
forming the southern side of the Kidron valley,
terminating at the Wdady en Ndr, and another, higher
one, which slopes eastward and terminates a little
beyond el-‘Azar?yeh (modern Bethany). The main
ridge is considerably higher than the site of ancient
Jerus, and still retains a thick cap of the soft chalky
limestone, mixed with flint, known variously as
N@ri and Ka‘kilt, which has been entirely denuded
over the Jerus site (see JERUSALEM, II, 1). The
flints were the cause of a large settlement of paleo-
lithic man which occurred in prehistoric times on
the northern end of the ridge, while the soft chalky
stone breaks down to form a soil valuable for the
cultivation of olives and other trees and shrubs.
The one drawback to arboriculture upon this ridge
is the strong northwest wind which permanently
bends most trees toward the 8.E., but affects the
sturdy, slow-growing olive less than the quicker-
growing pine. The eastern slopes are more shel-
tered. In respect of wind the Mount of Olives is
far more exposed than the site of old Jerus.

The lofty ridge of Olivet is visible from far, a fact
now emphasized by the high Russian tower which
can be seen for many scores of miles on the E. of the
Jordan. The range presents, from such a point of
view particularly, a succession of summits. Taking
as the northern limit the dip which is crossed by the
ancient Anathoth (‘anété) road, the most northerly
summit is that now crowned by the house and
garden of Sir John Gray Hill, 2,690 ft. above sea-
level. This is sometimes incorrectly pointed out
as Scopus, which lay farther to the N.W. A second
sharp dip in the ridge separates this northern sum-
mit from the next, a broad plateau now occupied
by the great Kaiserin Augusta Victoria Stiftung and
grounds. The road makes a sharp descent into a
valley which is traversed from W. to E. by an im-
portant and ancient road from Jerus, which runs
eastward along the Waddy er Rawdbeh. 8. of this
dip lies the main mass of the mountain, that known
characteristically as the Olivet of ecclesiastical
tradition. This mass consists of two principal


1. Names


summits and two subsidiary spurs. The northern
of the two main summits is that known as Karem
es Sayydd, ‘the vineyard of the hunter,’ and also
as “Galilee,” or, more correctly, as Viri Galilaet
(see below, 7). It reaches a height of 2,723 ft.
above the Mediterranean and is separated from the
southern summit by a narrow neck traversed today
by the carriage road. The southern summit, of
practically the same elevation, is the traditional
“Mount of the Ascension,’ and for several years
has been distinguished by a lofty, though some-
what inartistic, tower erected by the Russians. The
two subsidiary spurs referred to above are: (1) a
somewhat isolated ridge running §.E., upon which
lies the squalid village of el ‘Azaréyeh—Bethany;
(2) a small spur running S., covered with grass,
which is known as ‘‘the Prophets,’”’ on account of
a remarkable 4th-cent. Christian tomb found there,
which is known as ‘‘the tomb of the Prophets’”— a
spot much venerated by modern Jews.

A further extension of the ridge as Batn el Hawa,
“the belly of the wind,’ or traditionally as “the
Mount of Offence” (cf 1 K 11 7; 2 K 23 18), is
usually included in the Mount of Olives, but its
lower altitude—it is on a level with the temple-
platform—and its position 8S. of the city mark
it off as practically a distinct hill. Upon its lower
slopes are clustered the houses of Silwdn (Siloam).

The notices of the Mount of Olives in the OT
are, considering its nearness to Jerus, remarkably
scanty.

(1) David fleeing before his rebellious son Ab-
salom (2 8 16 16) crossed the Kidron and ‘went

up by the ascent of the mount of
3. OT Olives, and wept as he went up; and
Associations he had his head covered, and went

barefoot: and all the people that were
with him covered every man his head, and they went
up, weeping as they went [ver 30]..... And it
came to pass, that, when David was come to the top
of the ascent, where he was wont to worship God,
{m], behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet him
with his coat rent, and earth upon his head [ver 32].
And when David was a little past the top of the
ascent, behold, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth
met him, with a couple of asses saddled, and upon
them two hundred loaves of bread, and a hundred
clusters of raisins, and a hundred of summer fruits,
and a bottle of wine” (16 1).

It is highly probable that David’s route to the
wilderness was neither by the much-trodden Ana-
thoth road nor over the summit of the mountain,
but by the path running N.E. from the city, which
runs between the Viri Galilaet hill and that sup-
porting the German Sanatorium and descends into
the wilderness by Wéddy er Rawabi. See Banurm.

(2) Ezekiel in a vision (11 23) saw the glory of
Jeh go up from the midst of the city and stand
“upon the mountain which is on the east side of the
city” (ef 43 2). In connection with this the Rabbi
Janna records the tradition that the shekhinah
stood 33 years upon Olivet, and preached, saying,
“Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye
upon him while he is near” —a strange story to come
from a Jewish source, suggesting some overt refer-
ence to Christ.

(3) In Zec 14 4 the prophet sees Jeh in that day
stand upon the Mount of Olives, ‘and the Mount of
Olives shall be cleft in the midst thercof toward the
cast and toward the west, and there shall be a very
great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove
toward the north, and half of it toward the south.”

In addition to these direct references, Jewish
tradition associates with this mount—this “mount
of Corruption’”—the rite of the red heifer (Nu 19);
and many authorities consider that this is also the


2187


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Olives, Mount of


mount referred to in Neh 8 15, whence the people
are directed to fetch olive branches, branches of
wild olive, myrtle branches, palm branches and

branches of thick trees to make their booths.
It is hardly possible that a spot with such a wide
outlook—esp. the marvelous view over the Jordan
valley and Dead Sea to the lands of


4. High Ammon and Moab—should have been

Places neglected in the days when Sem reli-
; gion crowned such spots with their

sanctuaries. ThereisOT evidence that there was a |


“high place” here. In the account of David's flight
mention is made of the spot on the summit “where
he was wont to worship God” (2 § 15 32m). This
is certainly a reference to a sanctuary, and there are
strong reasons for believing that this place may have
been Nop (q.v.) (see 1S 21 1; 22 9.11.19; Neh
11 32; but esp. Isa 10 32). This last reference
seems to imply a site more commanding in its out-
look over the ancient city than Ras el Mushdrif
proposed by Driver, one at least as far S. as the
Anathoth road, or even that from Wddy er Rawabi.
But besides this we have the definite statement
(1 K 11 7): “Then did Solomon build a high place
for Chemosh the abomination of Moab, in the
mount that is before [i.e. E. of] Jerus, and for Mo-
lech the abomination of the children of Ammon,”’
and the further account that the “high places that
were before [E. of] Jerus, which were on the right
hand [8.] of the mount of corruption [m “destruc-
tion’”’], which Solomon the king of Israel had builded
for Ashtoreth the abomination of the Sidonians,
and for Chemosh the abomination of Moab, and for
Milcom the abomination of the children of Ammon,
did the king [Josiah] defile’ (2 K 23 13). That
these high places were somewhere upon what is
generally recognized as the Mount of Olives, seems
clear, and the most probable site is the main mass
where are today the Christian sanctuaries, though
Graetz and Dean Stanley favor the summit known
as Viri Galilaei. It is the recognition of this which
has kept alive the Jewish name “Mount of Cor-
ruption” for this mount to this day. The term
Mons offensionis, given to the southeastern exten-
sion, S. of the city, is merely an ecclesiastical tradi-
dition going back to Quaresmius in the 17th cent.,
which is repeated by Burckhardt (1823 AD).
More important to us are the NT associations of
this sacred spot. In those days the mountain must
have been far different from its con-
5. Olivet dition today. Titus in his siege of
and Jesus Jerus destroyed all the timber here as
elsewhere in the environs, but before
this the hillsides must have been clothed with
verdure—oliveyards, fig orchards and palm groves,
with myrtle and other shrubs. Here in the fresh
breezes and among the thick foliage, Jesus, the
country-bred Galilean, must gladly have taken
Himself from the noise and closeness of the over-
crowded city. It is to the Passion Week, with the
exception of Jn 8 1, that all the incidents belong
which are expressly mentioned as occurring on the
Mount of Olives; while there would be a special
reason at this time in the densely packed city, it is
probable that on other occasions also Our Lord
preferred to stay outside the walls. Bethany
would indeed appear to have been His home in
Judaea, as Capernaum was in Galilee. Here we
read of Him as staying with Mary and Martha (Lk
10 38-42); again He comes to Bethany from the
wilderness road from Jericho for the raising of
Lazarus (Jn 11), and later He is at a feast, six
days before the Passover (Jn 12 1), at the house of
Simon (Mt 26 6-12; Mk 14 3-9; Jn 12 1-9). The
Mount of Olives is expressly mentioned in many
of the events of the Passion Week. He approached
Jerus, “unto Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount


of Olives” (Mk 11 1; Mt 21 1; Lk 19 29); over
a shoulder of this mount—very probably by the
route of the present Jericho carriage road—He
made His triumphal entry to the city (Mt 21;
Mk 11; Lk 19), and on this road, when probably
the full sight of the city first burst into view, He


Mount of Olives from the Golden Gate.
wept over Jerus (Lk 19 41). During all that week
“every day he was teaching in the temple; and every
night he went out, and lodged in the mount that is
called Olivet’’ (Lk 21 37)—the special part of the
mount being Bethany (Mt 21 17; Mk 11 11).
It was on the road from Bethany that He gave the
sign of the withering of the fruitless fig tree (Mt 21
17-19; Mk 11 12-14.20-24), and “as he sat on the
mount of Olives’ (Mt 24 3f; Mk 13 3f) Jesus
gave His memorable sermon with the doomed city
lying below Him.

On the lower slopes of Olivet, in the GARDEN oF
GETHSEMANE (q.v.), Jesus endured His agony, the
betrayal and arrest, while upon one of its higher
points—not, as tradition has it, on the inhabited
highest summit, but on the secluded eastern slopes
“over against Bethany” (Lk 24 50-52)—He took
leave of His disciples (cf Acts 1 12).

The view of Jerus from the Mount of Olives must
ever be one of the most striking impressions which

any visitor to Jerus carries away with
6. View of him. It has been described countless
the City times. It is today a view but of ruin
from Olivet and departed glory compared with

that over which Jesus wept. A
modern writer with historic imagination has thus
graphically sketched the salient features of that
sight:

“We are standing on the road from Bethany as it
breaks round the Mount of Olives and on looking north-
west this is what we sce..... There spreads a vast
stone stage, almost rectangular, some 400 yds. N. and
S. by 300 E. and W., held up above Ophel and the
Kidron valley by a high and massive wall, from 50 to
150 ft. and more in height, according to tho levels of the
rock from which it rises. Deep cloisters surround this

latform on the inside of the walls. .... Every gate

as its watch and other guards patrol the courts. The
crowds, which pour through the south gates upon the
platform for the most part keep to the right; the ex-
ceptions, turning westward, are excommunicated or in
mourning. But the crowd are not all Israclites. Num-
bers of Gentiles mingle with them; there are costumes
and colors from all lands. [n the cloisters sit teachers
with groups of disciples about them. On the open pave-
ment stand the booths of hucksters and moncy changers;
and from the N. sheep and bullocks are being driven
toward the Inner Sanctuary. This lies not in the center
of the great platform, but in the northwest corner. It
js a separately fortified, oblong enclosure; its high walls
with their 9 gates rising from a narrow terrace at a slight
elevation above the platiorm and the terrace encom-


Olives, Mount of
Omnipotence


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2188


passed hy a fence within which none but Israelites may
pass Upon its higher western end rises a house
‘like a lion broad in front and narrow hehind.’....
From the open porch of this house stone steps descend
to a great block of au altar perpetually smoking with
sacrifices... . . Off the N.W. of the Outer Sanctuary
a castle (the Antonia) dominates the whole with its 4
lofty towers. Beyond .... the Upper City rises in
curved tiers like a theater, while all the lower slopes to
the 8. are a crowded mass of houses, girded by the east-
ern wall of the city. Against that crowded hackground
the sanctuary with its high house gleams white and
fresh. But the front of the house, glittering with gold
plates, is ohscured hy a column of smoke rising from the
altar; and the Priests’ Court about the latter is colored
by the slaughterers and sacrifices—a splash of red, as our
imagination takes it, in the center of the prevailing
white. At intervals there are hursts of music; the
singing of psalms, the clash of cymhals and a great hlare
of trumpets, at which the people iu their court in the
Inner Sanctuary fall down and worship” (extracts from
G. A. Smith's Jerusalem, II, 518-20).


To the Bible student the NT ig the best guide
to Olivet; tradition and “sites”? only bewilder him.
Once the main hilltop was a mass of

7. Churches churches. There was the “Church of


and Eccle- the Ascension’? to mark the spot
siastical whereby tradition (contrary to the
Traditions direct statement of Luke) states that


the Ascension occurred; now the site
is marked by a small octagonal chapel, built in 1834,
which is in the hands of the Moslems. There a
‘footprint of Christ”? is shown in the rock. A
large basilica of Helena was built over the place
where it was said that Christ taught His disciples.
In 1869 the Princess de Latour d’Auvergne, learn-
ing that there was a Moslem tradition that this site
was at a spot called ef Batiantyeh south of the sum-
mit, here erected a beautiful church known as the
Church of the Pater Noster and around the court-
yard she had the Lord’s Prayer inscribed in 32
languages. When the church was in course of
erection certain fragments of old walls and mosaics
were found, but, in 1911, as a result of a careful
excavation of the site, the foundations of a more
extensive mass of old buildings, with some beautiful
mosaic in the baptistry, were revealed in the neigh-
borhood; there is little douht but that these founda-
tions helonged to the actual Basilica of Helena. It
is proposed to rebuild the church.

Mention has been made of the name Viri Gali-
laet or Galilee as given to the northern summit of
the main mass of Olivet. The name “Mount
Galilee’ appears to have been first given to this
hill early in the 4th cent. and in 1573 AD Rau-
wolf explains the name by the statement that here
was anciently a khan where the Galileans lodged
who came up to Jerus. In 1620 Quaresmius applies
the names “Galilee” and Viri Galilaei to this site
and thinks the latter name may be due to its having
been the spot where the two angels appeared and
addressed the disciples as ‘“Ye men of Galilee’
(Acts 111). Attempts have been made, without
much success, to maintain that this “Galilee” was
the spot which Our Lord intended (Mt 28 10.16)
to indicate to His disciples as the place of meeting.

The Russian inclosure includes a chapel, a lofty
tower—from which a magnificent view is obtain-
able—a hospice and a pleasant pine grove. Be-
tween the Russian buildings to the N. and the
Church of the Ascension lies the squalid village of
et Tar, inhabited by a peculiarly turbulent and
rapacious crowd of Moslems, who prey upon the
passing pilgrims and do much to spoil the sentiment
of a visit to this sacred spot. It is possible it may
be the original site of BETHPHAGE (q.v.).


Lirerature. PEF, Memoirs, ‘'Jerusalem’’ volume;
A. Smith, Jerusalem; Robinson, BRP, I, 1838;
Stanley, Sinai and Pal; Baedeker’s Pal and Syria
(by Socin and Bensinger); Tobler, Die Siloahquelle und
der Oelberg, 1852; Porter, Murray's Pal and Syria; R.
Hofmann, Galilaea auf dem Oelberg, Leipzig, 1896;
Schick, **The Mount of Olives,” PEFS, 1889, 174-84;


Warren, art. Mount of Olives,"’ in HDB; Gauthier, in
EB,s.v.; Vincent (Pére), ‘The Tombs of the Prophets,’’


Revue Biblique, 1901.
E. W. G. Masterman
OLIVET, ol’i-vet. See Otives, Mount oF.


OLYMPAS, 6-lim’pas (‘OAvpras, Olumpds): The
name of a Rom Christian to whom Paul sent greet-
ings (Rom 16 15). Olympas ; is an abbreviated
form of Olympiadorus. The joining in one salu-
tation of the Christians mentioned in ver 15 sug-
gests that they formed _by themselves a small com-
munity in the earliest Rom church.


OLYMPIUS, é-lim’pi-us ('OAtpmos, Ohimpias):
An epithet of Jupirer or Zeus (q.v.) from Mt.
Olympus in Thessaly, where the gods held court
presided over by Zeus. Antiochus Epiphanes,
“who on God’s altars dansed,” insulted the Jewish
religion by dedicating the temple of Jerus to Jupiter
Olympius, 168 BC (2 Mace 6 2; L Mace 1 54 ff).


OMAERUS, om-a-é’rus: AV=RV “Ismaerus”
(1 Esd 9 34).


OMAR, 6’mar (7A5N, ’Gmar, connected perhaps
with ’amar, “speak’’; LXX ’OQpév, Omdn, or ’Opdp,
Omdr): Grandson of Esau and son of Eliphaz in
Gen 36 11; 1 Ch 1 36; given the title ‘duke’
or “chief” in Gen 36 15.

OMEGA, 6’me-ga, 6-mé’ga, d6-meg’a. See ALPHA
AND Omzaa.

OMENS, 6’menz. See Aucury; Divination.

OMER, 6’mér cA, ‘Gmer): A dry measure,
the tenth of an ephah, equal to about 74 pints.
See WrieHts anp MrasuREs.


OMNIPOTENCE, om-nip’é-tens: The noun
“omnipotence” is not found in the Eng. Bible, nor
any noun exactly corresponding to it
in the original Heb or Gr.


The adj. “ omnipotent’’ occurs in Rev
19 6 AV; the Gr for this, tavtoxpdtwp, pan-
tokrdtér, occurs also in 2 Cor 6 18; Rev 1 8; 48: 11
17, 15 3; 16 7.14; 19 15; 21 22 (in all of which AV
and RV render ‘‘almighty"'). It is also found frequently
in LXX, esp. in the rendering of the Divine names Jeb
gebha’ oth and "El Shadday. In pantokrator, the element
of ‘authority,’ *‘sovereignty,’’ side by side with that of
‘‘power,’’ makes itself more distinctly felt than it does
to the modern ear in ‘‘omnipotent,’’ although it is meant
to he included in the latter also. Cf further 6 é¥varos,
ho dénatos,in Lk ] 49.


The formal conception of omnipotence as worked
out in theology does not occur in the OT. The
substance of the idea is conveyed in

2. Inherent various indirect ways. The notion of


1. Terms
and Usage


in OT “strength” is inherent in the OT con-
Names of ception of God from the beginning,
God being already represented in one of


the two Divine names inherited by
Israel from ancient Sem religion, the name ’E£l.
According to one etymology it is also inherent in the
other, the name ’H/ahim, and in this case the pl.
form, by bringing out the fulness of power in God,
would mark an approach to the idea of omnipotence.
See Gop, NAMEs oF,


In the patriarchal religion the conception of ‘might’
occupies a prominent place, as is indicated hy the name
characteristic of this period, Hl Shadday; cf Gen 17 1;
28 3; 35 11; 43 14; 48 3; 49 24.25; Ex 6 3. This
name, however, designates the Divine power as standing
in the service of His covenant-relatiou to the patriarchs,
as transcending Nature and overpowering it in the in-
terests of redemption.

, Another Divine name which signalizes this attribute
is Jeh gebha' oth, Jeh of Hosts. This name, characteristic


2189


Omnipotence


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Qlives, Mount of


_of the prophetic period, descrihes God as the King sur-
rounded and followed by the angelic hosts, and since the
might of an oriental king is measured by the splendor
of his retinue, as of great, incomparahle power, the King
* Omnipotent (Ps 24 10; Isa 212; 6 3.5; 8 18; Jer
46 18; Mal 1 14).

, Still another name expresslve of the same idea is
Abhir, ‘' Strong One,"’ compounded with Jacob or Israel
(Gen 49 24; Ps 182 2.5; Isa 1 24; 49 26; 60 16).
Further, ‘Hl Gibbér, ‘‘God-Hero”’ (Isa 9 6[of the Mes-
siah]; cf for the adj. gibbér, Jer 20 11); and the figurative
designation of God as Cur, ‘‘ Rock,’’ occurring esp. in the
address to God in the Psalter (Isa 30 29, AV ‘Mighty
One’’). The specific energy with which the Divine
nature operates finds expression also in the name ’EI
Hay, ‘Living God,"’ which God bears over against the
impotent idols (1 S 17 26.36; 2 K 19 4.16; Ps 18 46;
Jer 23 36; Dnl 6 20.26f). An anthropomorphic de-
scription of the power of God is in the figures of His
“hand,” His ‘‘arm,"’ His ‘‘finger."’ See Gon.


Some of the attributes of Jeh have an intimate
connection with His omnipotence. Under this
head esp. God’s nature as Spirit and

3. Other His holiness come under consideration.
Modes of The representation of God as Spirit in
Expression the OT does not primarily refer to the
incorporealness of the Divine nature,

but to its inherent energy. The physical element
underlying the conception of Spirit is that of air in


motion, and in this at first not the invisibility but |


the foree forms the point of comparison. The
opposite of “Spirit” in this sense is “flesh,”’ which
expresses the weakness and impotence of the crea-
ture over against God (Isa 2 22; 31 3).


The holiness of God in its earliest and widest sense
(not restricted to the ethical sphere) descrihes the majes-
tie, specifically Divine character of His being, that which
evokes in man religious awe. Itis not a single attrihute
coérdinated with others, but a peculiar aspect under
which all the attributes can be viewed, that which renders
them distinct from anything analogous in the creature
(1 8.2 2; Hos 11 9). In this way holiness hecomes
closely associated with the power of God, indeed some-
times becomes synonymous with Divine power =om-
nipotence (Ex 15 11; Nu 20 12), and_esp. in Ezk,
where God's ‘holy name" is often equivalent to His
renown for POW ers hence interchangeahle with His ‘great
name" (Ezk 36 20-24). The objective Spirit as a dis-
tinct hypostasis and the executive of the Godhead on
Its one side also represents the Divine power (Isa 32 15;
Mt 12 28; Lk 1 35; 4 14; Acts 10 38; Rom 1§ 19;
I Cor 2 4).


Tn all these forms of expression a great and specifi-
eally Divine power is predicated of Gad. State-
ments in which the absolutely un-


4. Unlimit- limited extent of this power is explicitly
ed Extent affirmed are rare. The reason, how-
of the ever, lies not in any actual restriction
Divine placed on this power, but in the con-
Power erete practical form of religious think-


ing which prevents abstract formula-
tion of the principle. The point to be noticed is
that no statement is anywhere made exempting
aught from the reach of Divine power. Nearest
to a general formula come such statements as
nothing is “too hard for Jeh” (Gen 18 14; Jer 32
17); or ‘I know that thou canst do everything,” or
“God... . hath done whatever he pleased’ (Ps
115 3; 136 6), or, negatively, no one ‘‘can hinder”
God in carrying out His purpose (Isa 48 13), or
God’s hand is not ‘‘waxed short”? (Nu 11 23); in
the NT: “With God all things are possible’ (Mt
19 26; Mk 10 27; Lk 18 27); “Nothing is impos-
sible with God” (RV ‘No word from God shall be
void of power,’”’ Lk 1 37). Indirectly the omnipo-
tence of God is implied in the effect ascribed to
faith (Mt 17 20: ‘Nothing shall be impossible unto
you”; Mk 9 23: “All things are possible to him
that believeth’), because faith puts the Divine
power at the disposal of the believer. On its sub-
jective side the principle of inexhaustible power
finds expression in Isa 40 28: God is not subject to
weariness. Because God is conscious of the un-
limited extent of His resources nothing is marvelous
in His eyes (Zec 8 6


It is chiefly through its forms of manifestation
that the distinctive quality of the Divine power
which renders it omnipotent becomes
5. Forms of apparent. The Divine power operates
Manifes- not merely in single concrete acts, but
tation is comprehensively related to -the world
‘ _ assuch. Both in Nature and history,
in creation and in redemption, it produces and
controls and directs everything that comes to pass.
Nothing in the realm of actual or conccivable things
is withdrawn from it (Am 9 2.3; Dnl 4 35); even
to the minutest and most recondite sequences of
cause and effect it extends and masters all details
of reality (Mt 10 30; Lk 12 7). There is no acci-
dent (18 6 9; ef with ver 12; Prov 16 33). It
need not operate through second causes; it itself
underlies all second causes and makes them what
they are.

It 1s creative power producing its effect through a mere
word (Gen 1 3ff; Dt 8 3; Ps 33 9; Rom 417; He
1 3; 11 30). Among the prophets, esp. Isaiah empha-
sizes this manner of the werking of the Divine power in
its immediateness and suddenness (Isa 9 8; 17 13; 18
4-6; 29 5). All the processes of Nature are ascribed to
the causation of Jeh (Joh 5 9 ff; 9 5 ff; chs 38 and 39;
Isa 40 12 ff; Am 4 13; § 8.9; 9 5.6); esp. God’s con-
trol of the sea is named _as illustrative of this (Ps 65 7;
104 9; isa 60 2; Jer § 22; 31.35). The OT seldom
says ‘‘it rains’ (Am 4 7), but usually God causes it to
rain (Lev 96.4;. Dt.1117; 18 1217; Job 36 27;
Pss 29 and 65; Mt § 45; Acts 14 17).

The same is true of the processes of history. God

sovereignly disposes, not merely of Israel, but of all
other nations, even of the most powerful, e.g. the
Assyrians, as His instruments for the accomplish-
ment of His purpose (Am 1—2 3; 9 7; Isa 10
5.15; 28 2; 45 1; Jer 26 9; 276; 43 10). The
prophets ascribe to Jeh not merely relatively greater
power than to the gods of the nations, but His
power extends into the sphere of the nations, and
the heathen gods are ignored in the estimate put
upon His might (Isa 31 3).
_ Even more than the sphere of Nature and history,
that of redemption reveals the Divine omnipotence,
from the point of view of the supernatural and
miraculous. Thus Ex 16 celebrates the power of
Jeh in the wonders of the exodus. It is God’s ex-
clusive prerogative to do wonders (Job 5 9; 9 10;
Ps 72 18); He alone can make “‘a new thing” (Nu
16 30; Isa 43 19; Jer 31 22). In the NT the
great embodiment of this redemptive omnipotence
is the resurrection of believers (Mt 22 29; Mk 12
24) and specifically the resurrection of Christ (Rom
4 17.21.24; Eph 1 19 ff); but it is evidenced in
the whole process of redemption (Mt 19 26; Mk
10 a Rom 8 31; Eph 3 7.20; 1 Pet 1 5; Rev
11 17).

The significance of the idea may be traced along
two distinct lines. On the one hand the Divine

omnipotence appears as a support of


6. Signifi- faith. On the other hand it is pro-
cance for ductive of that specifically religious
Biblical state of consciousness which Scripture
Religion calls “the fear of Jeh.”’ Omnipotence


in God is that to which human faith
addresses itself. In it lies the ground for assurance
that He is able to save, as in His love that He is
willing to save (Ps 65 5.6; 72 18; 118 14-16;
Eph 3 20).

As to the other aspect of its significance, the
Divine omnipotence in itself, and not merely for
soteriological reasons, evokes a specific religious
response. This is true, not only of the OT, where
the element of the fear of God stands comparatively
in the foreground, but remains true also of the NT.
Even in Our Lord’s teaching the prominence given
to the fatherhood and love of God does not preclude
that the transcendent majesty of the Divine nature,
including omnipotence, is kept in full view and


Omnipresence
Omniscience


made a potent factor in the cultivation of the reli-
gious mind (Mt 6 9). The beauty of Jesus’ teach-
ing on the nature of God consists in this, that He
keeps the exaltation of God above every creature
and His loving condescension toward the creature in
perfect equilibrium and makes them mutually
fructified by each other. Religion is more than the
inclusion of God in the general altruistic movement
of the human mind; it is a devotion at every point
colored by the conscionsness of that Divine unique-
ness in which God’s omnipotence occupies a fore-
most place.

Lirerarure.—Oehler, Theologie des AT%, 131, 139 ff;
Riehm, <Alétestamentliche Theologie, 250 ff; Dillmann,
Handbuch der alttestamentlichen Theologie, 244; Davidson,
OT Theology, 163 ff; Konig, Geschichte der alttestament-
lichen Religion, 127, 135 ff, 391, 475.

GEERHARDUS Vos

OMNIPRESENCE, om-ni-prez’ens: Neither the
noun ‘‘omnipresence” nor adj. ‘‘omnipresent”’ occurs

in Scripture, but the idea that God
1. Non- is everywhere present is throughont
Occurrence presupposed and sometimes explicitly
of the Term formulated. God’s omnipresence is
in Scripture closely related to His omnipotence and

omniscience: that He is everywhere
enables Him to act everywhere and to know all
things, and, conversely, throngh omnipotent action
and omniscient knowledge He has access to all
places and all secrets (cf Ps 189). Thns conceived,
the attribute is but the correlate of the mono-
theistic conception of God as the Infinite Creator,
Preserver and Governor of the universe, immanent
in His works as well as transcendent above them.

The philosophical idea of omnipresence is that
of exemption from the limitations of space, subject-

ively as well as objectively; subject-
2. Philo- ively, in so far as space, which is a
sophical necessary form of all created conscious-
and Popular ness in the sphere of sense-perception,


Ideas of is not thus constitutionally inherent
Omni- in the mind of God; objectively, in so
presence far as the actuality of space-relations


in the created world imposes no limit
upon the presence and operation of God. This
metaphysical conception of transcendence above
all space is, of course, foreign to the Bible, which
in regard to this, as in regard to the other tran-
scendent attributes, clothes the truth of revelation
in popular language, and speaks of exemption from
the limitations of space in terms and figures derived
from space itself. Thus the very term ‘‘omni-
presence”’ in its two component parts ‘‘everywhere”’
and “present”? contains a double inadequacy of
expression, both the notion of “everywhere”? and
that of “presence” being spacial concepts. Another
point, in regard to which the popular nature of
the Scriptural teaching on this subject must be kept
in mind, concerns the mode of the Divine omni-
presence. In treating the concept philosophically,
it is of importance to distinguish between its appli-
cation to the essence, to the activity, and to the
knowledge of God. The Bible does not draw these
distinctions in the abstract. Althongh sometimes
it speaks of God’s omnipresence with refcrence to
the pervasive immanence of His being, it frequently
contents itself with afhrming the universal extent
of God’s power and knowledge (Dt 4 39; 10 14;
Ps 139 6-16; Prov 15 3; Jer 23 23.24; Am 9 2).
This observation has given rise to the theories of a
mere omnipresence of power or omnipresence by an act
of will, as distinct from an omnipresence of

3. Theories


being. But it is plain that in this anti-
thetical form such a distinction is foreign


Denying to the intent of the Bih. statements in
Omni- question. The writers in these passages
resence content themselves with descrihing the
Pp 4 practical effects of the attrihute without
of Being reflecting upon the difference hetween this


and its ontological aspect; tho latter is
neither affirmed nor denied. That no denial of the omni-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2190


presence of heing is intended may he seen from Jer 23 24,
where in the former half of the verse the omnipresence of:
ver 23 is expressed in terms of omniscience, while in
the latter half the idea finds ontological expression.
Similarly, in Ps 139, cf ver 2 with vs 7 ff, and_vs 13 ff. .
As here, so in other passages the presence of God with
His being in all space is explicitly affirmed (1 K 8 27;
2 Ch 2 6; Isa 66 1; Acts 17 28).
Omnipresence being the correlate of monothelsm, the
presence of the idea in the earlier parts of the OT is de-
x nied by all those who assign the develop-
4. Denial ment of monotheism in the OT religion to
of the the prophetic period from the 8th cent.
onward. It is undoubtedly true that the
Presence of earliest’ narratives speak very anthropo-


the Idea in morphically of God's relation to space;
the Earlier they describe Him as coming and going
Pp. f in language such as might be used of a
arts 0 human person. But it does not follow
the OT from this that the writers who do so con-
ceive of God's being as circumscrihed hy

space. Where such forms of statement occur, not


the presence of God in general, but His visible pres-
ence in theophany is referred to. If from the local ele-
ment entering into the description God’s subjection
to the limitations of space were inferred, then one
might with equal warrant, on the basis of the physical,
sensual elements entering into the representation, im-
pute to the writers the view that the Divine nature is
corporeal.
The theophanic form of appearance does not disclose
what God is ontologically in Himself, but merely how He
condescends to appear and work for the
5. The redemption of His people. It establishes
Special a redemptive and revelatory presence in
Red ti definite localities, which does not, in the
€dempuve mind of the writer, detract from the Di-


and vine omnipresence. Hence, it is not con-
Revelatory fined to one place; the altars built in
Pp recognition of it are in patriarchal history

resenee erected in several places and coexist as
of God each and all offering access to the special


_ Divine presence. Jt is significant that
already during the patriarchal period these theophanies
and the altars connected with them are confined to the
Holy Land. This shows that the idea embodied in them
has nothing to do with a crude conception of the Deity
as locally circumscribed, hut marks the heginning of that
gradual restoration of the gracious presence of God to
fallen humanity, the completion of which forms the goal
of redemption. Thus God is said to dwell in the ark, in
the tabernacle, on Mt. Zion (Nu 10 35; 28 6 2; 2K
19 15; Ps 3 4; 99 1); in the temple (1 K 8; Ps 20
2; 26 8; 46 5; 48 2: Isa § 18; Joel 3 16.21; Am 1
2); in the Holy Land (1 8 26 19; Hos 9 3); in Christ
(Jn 114; 219; Col 29); in the church (Jn 14 23;
Rom 8 9.11; _1 Cor 3 16; 6 19; Eph 2 21.22; 3 11;
2 Tim 3 15; He 10 21; 1 Pet 25); in the eschatologi-
cal assembly of His people (Rev 21 3). In the light of
the same principle must be interpreted the presence of
God in heaven. This also is not to be understood as
an ontological presence, but as a presence of specific
theocratic manifestation (1 K 8 27; Ps 2 4; 11 4; 33
13 ff; 104 3; Isa 6 1 ff; 63 15; 66 1; Hab 2 20; Mt
5 34; 69; Acts 7 48; 17 28; Eph 1 20; He 1 3).
How little this is meant to exclude the presence of
God elsewhere may be seen from the fact that the
two representations, that of God's self-manifestation in
heaven and in the earthly sanctuary, occur side hy side
(1 K 8 26-53; _Ps 20 2-6; Am 96). It has’ heen
alleged that the idea of God's dwelling in heaven marks
a comparatively late attainment in the religion of Israel,
of which in the pre-prophetic period no trace can as yet
he discovered (so Stade, Bibl. Theol. des AT, £, 103, 104).
There are, however, a number of passages in the Pent
bearing witness to the early existence of this belief (Gen
11 1-9, 19 24; 21.17; 22 11; 28 12). Jeh comes,
according to the belief of the earliest period, with the
clouds (Ex 14 19.20; 199.18: 2415; Nu 1l 25;
12 5). That even in the opinion of the people Jeh's
local papal in an earthly sanctuary need not have
excluded Him from heaven follows also from the un-
hesitating belief in His simultancous presence in a plural-
ity of sanctuaries. If it was not a question of locally
circumscribed presence as hetween sanctuary and sanc-
tuary, it need not have been as between earth and
heaven (cf Gunkel, Gen, 157).


Both from a generally religious and from a specifi-
cally soteriological point of view the omnipresence
’ of God is of great practical importance

6. Religious for the religious life. In the former
Significance respect it contains the guaranty that
_ the actual nearness of God and a real
communion with Him may be enjoyed everywhere,
even apart from the places hallowed for such pur-
pose by a specific gracious self-manifestation (Ps
139 5-10). In the other respect. the Divine omni-
presence assures the believer that God is at hand


2191


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Qm™nipresence


Omniscience


to save in every place where from any danger or
foe His people need salvation (Isa 43 2).

Lireraturse.—Oehier, Theologie des AT?, 1741;
Riehm, Alttestamentliche Theologie, 262 ff; Dillmann,
Handbuch der alttestamentlichen Theologie, 246 ff; David-
son, OT Theology, 180 ff; Kénig, Geschichte der alttesta-
mentlichen Religion, 197 ff.


GEERHARDUS Vos
OMNISCIENCE, om-nish’ens: The term does
not occur in Scripture, cither in its nominal or in its
adjectival form.


In the OT it is expressed in connection with such words
as NYT, da‘ath, A779, binah, AIAN, webhunak, TWAIN,


hokhmah; also ‘‘seeing” and ‘‘ hearing,”

1. Words “the eye” and ‘‘the ear” occur as figures
and Usage for the knowledge of God, as “arm,”
g “hand,” ‘‘finger”’ serve to express His

power. In the NT are found yvéoxew,


ginéskein, yvaots, gnésis, ciSévat, etdénai, codta, sophia, in
the same connections.
Scripture everywhere teaches the absolute uni-
versality of the Divine knowledge. In the his-
torical books, although there is no
2. Tacit abstract formula, and occasional an-
Assumption thropomorphic references to God's
and Explicit taking knowledge of things occur (Gen
Affirmation 11 5; 18 21; Dt 8 3), none the less
the principle is everywhere presup-
posed in what is related about God’s cognizance
of the doings of man, about the hearing of prayer,
the disclosing of the future (1 5 16 7; 23 9-12;
1K 8 39; 2 Ch16 9). Explicit affirmation of
the principle is made in the Psalter, the Prophets,
the hokhmah literature and in the NT. This is due
to the increased internalizing of religion, by which
its hidden side, to which the Divine omniscience
corresponds, receives greater emphasis (Job 26 6;
28 24: 34 22; Ps 189 12; 147 4; Prov 16 3.11;
Isa 40 26; Acts 1 24; He 4 13; Rev 2 23).
This absolute universality is affirmed with refer-
ence to the various categories that comprise within
themselves all that is possible or ac-


3. Extends tual. It extends to God’s own being,
to All as well as to what exists outside of Him
Spheres in the created world. God has perfect


possession in consciousness of His own
being. The unconscious finds no place in Him
(Acts 15 18; 1 Jn 1 5). Next to Himself God
knows the world in its totality. This knowledge
extends to small as well as to great affairs (Mt 6
8.32; 10 30); to the hidden heart and mind of
man as well as to that which is open and manifest
(Job 11 11; 34 21.23; Ps 14 2; 17 2ff; 33 13-
18; 102 19f; 189 1-4; Prov 6 21; 15 3; Isa 29
15; Jer 17 10; Am 4 13; Lk 16 15; Acts 1 24;
1 Thess 24; He 4 13; Rev 2 23). It extends
to all the divisions of time, the past, present and
future alike (Job 14 17; Ps 56 8; Isa 41 22-24;
446-8; Jer 15; Hos 1312; Mal 3 16). It
embraces that which is contingent from the human
viewpoint as well as that which is certain (1 8 23
9-12; Mt 11 22.23). ;

Scripture brings God’s knowledge into connection

with His omnipresence. Ps 139 is the clearest
expression of this. Omniscience is the
4. Mode of omnipresence of cognition (Jer 23
the Divine 23 ff). It is also closely related to
Knowledge God’s eternity, for the latter makes
Him in His knowledge independent
of the limitations of time (Isa 43 8-12). God’s
creative relation to all that exists is represented as
underlying His omniscience (Ps 33 15; 97 9; 139
13; Isa 29 15). His all-comprehensive purpose
forms the basis of His knowledge of all events and
developments (Isa 41 22-27; Am 3 7).

This, however, does not mean that God’s knowl-
edge of things is identical with His creation of them,
as has been suggested by Augustine and others.
The act of creation, while necessarily connected with


the knowledge of that which is to be actual, is not
identical with such knowledge or with the purpose
on which such knowledge rests, for in God, as well
as in man, the intellect and the will are distinct
faculties. In the last analysis, God’s knowledge
of the world has its source in His self-knowledge.
The world is a revelation of God. All that is actual
or possible in it therefore is a reflection in created
form of what exists uncreated in God, and thus the
knowledge of the one becomes a reproduction of the
knowledge of the other (Acts 17 27; Rom 1 20).
The Divine knowledge of the world also partakes
of the quality of the Divine self-knowledge in this
respect, that it is never dormant. God does not
depend for embracing the multitude and complex-
ity of the existing world on such mental processes
as abstraction and generalization.

The Bible nowhere represents Him as attaining
to knowledge by reasoning, but everywhere as
simply knowing. From what has been said about
the immanent sources of the Divine knowledge, it
follows that the latter is not a posteriori derived
from its objects, as all homan knowledge based on
experience is, but is exercised without receptivity
or dependence. In knowing, as well as in all other
activities of His nature, God is sovereign and self-
sufficient. In cognizing the reality of all things
He needs not wait upon the things, but draws His
knowledge directly from the basis of reality as it
lies in Himself. While the two are thus closely con-
nected it is nevertheless of importance to distin-
guish between God’s knowledge of Himself and
God’s knowledge of the world, and also between
His knowledge of the actual and His knowledge of
the possible. These distinctions mark off the
theistic conception of omniscience from the panthe-
istic idea regarding it. God is not bound up in
His life with the world in such a sense as to have no
scope of activity beyond it.

Since Scripture includes in the objects of the
Divine knowledge also the issue of the exercise of

freewill on the part of man, the prob-


5. God’s lem arises, how the contingent char-
Omnis- acter of such decisions and the cer-
cience and tainty of the Divine knowledge can
Human coexist. It is true that the knowledge
Freewill of God and the purposing will of God


are distinct, and that not the former
but the latter determines the certainty of the out-
come. Consequently the Divine omniscience in
such cases adds or detracts nothing in regard to the
certainty of the event. God’s omniscience does not
produce but presupposes the certainty by which
the problem is raised. At the same time, precisely
because omniscience presupposes certainty, it ap-
pears to exclude every conception of contingency
in the free acts of man, such as would render the
latter in their very essence undetermined. The
knowledge of the issue must have a fixed point of
certainty to terminate upon, if it is to be knowledge
at all. Those who make the essence of freedom
absolute indeterminateness must, therefore, exempt
this class ef events from the scope of the Divine
omniscience. But this is contrary to all the testi-
mony of Scripture, which distinctly makes God’s
absolute knowledge extend to such acts (Acts 2 23).
It has been attempted to construe a peculiar form
of the Divine knowledge, which would relate to this
class of acts specifically, the so-called scientia media,
to be distinguished from the scicntia necessaria,
which has for its object God Himself, and the
scientia libera which terminates upon the certainties
of the world outside of God, as determined by His
freewill. This scientia media would then be based
on God’s foresight of the outcome of the free choice
of man. It would involve a knowledge of recep-
tivity, a contribution to the sum total of what God


Omri
On


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2192


knows derived from observation on His part of the
world-process. That is to say, it would be knowl-
edge a posteriori in essence, although not in point
of time. It is, however, difficult to see how such
a knowledge can be possible in God, when the out-
come is psychologically undetermined and unde-
terminable. The knowledge could originate no
sooner than the determination originates through
the free decision of man. It would, therefore, neces-
sarily become an a posterior] knowledge in time as
well as in essence. The appeal to God’s eternity
as bringing Him equally near to the future as to the
present and enabling Him to see the future deci-
sions of man’s free will as though they were present
cannot remove this difficulty, for when once the
observation and knowledge of God are made de-
pendent on any temporal issue, the Divine eternity
itself is thereby virtually denied. Nothing remains
but to recognize that God’s eternal knowledge of
the outcome of the freewill choices of man implies
that there enters into these choices, notwithstand-
ing their free character, an element of predetermi-
pate to which the knowledge of God can attach
itself.
Tne Divine omniscience is most important for
the religious life. The very essence of religion as
communion with God depends on His
6. Religious all-comprehensive cognizance of the
Importance life of man at every moment. Hence
jt is charactcristic of the irreligious
to deny the omniscience of God (Ps 10 11.12; 94
7-9, Isa 29 15; Jer 23 23; Ezk 812; 9 9).
Esp. along three lines this fundamental religious
importance reveals itself: (a) it lends support and
comfort. when the pious suffer from the misunder-
standing and misrepresentation of men; (6) it acts
as a deterrent to those tempted by sin, esp. secret
sin, and becomes a judging principle to all hypocrisy
and false security; (c) it furnishes the source from
which man’s desire for self-knowledge can obtain
satisfaction (Ps 19 12; 51 6; 189 23.24).


Literature. Oehler, Theologie des AT3, 876; Richm,
Alttestamentliche Theologie, 263; Dillmann, Handbuch der
alttestamentlichen Theologie, 249; Davidson, OT Theology,


GrererHarpus Vos

OMRI, om'ri ("AP , ‘omri; LXNX ’ApBpl, Ambri;
Assyr “Humri” and “Humria”):

(1) The 6th king of Northern Israel, and founder
of the JIId Dynasty which reigned for nearly 50
years. Omri reigned 12 years, c 887-876 BC. The
historical sources of his reign are contained in 1 K
16 15-28; 20 34, the M §, Assyr inscriptions, and
in the published accounts of recent excavations in
Samaria. In spite of the brief passage given to
Omri in the OT, he was one of the most important
of the military kings of Northern Israel.

O. is first mentioned as an officer in the army of
Elah, which was engaged in the siege of the Phili

town of Gibbethon. While O. was
1. His thus engaged, Zimri, another officer
Accession of Elah’s army, conspired against the
king, whom he assassinated in a
drunken debauch, exterminating at the same time
the remnant of the house of Baasha. The con-
spiracy evidently lacked the support of the people,
for the report that Zimri had usurped the throne
no sooner reached the army at Gibbethon, than the
people proclaimed O., the more powerful military
leader, king over Israel. O. lost not a moment, but
leaving Gibbethon in the hands of the Philis, he
marched to Tirzah, which he besieged and captured,
while Zimri perished in the flames of the palace to
which he had set fire with his own hands (1 K 16
18). ©., however, had still another opponent in
Tibni the son of Ginath, who laid claim to the
throne, and who was supported in his claims by his


brother Joram (1 K 16 22 LXX) and by a large
number of the people. Civil war followed this
rivalry for the throne, which seems to have lasted
for a period of four years (cf 1 K 16 15, with vs
23 and 29) before O. gained full control.

O.’s military ability is seen from his choice of
Samaria as the royal residence and capital of the
Northern Itingdom. This step may have been
suggested to O. by his own easy conquest of Tirzah,
the former capital. Accordingly, he purchased the
hill Shomeron of Shemer for two talents of silver,
about $4,352.00 in American money. The conical
hill, which rose from the surrounding plain to the
height of 400 ft., and on the top of which there was
room for a large city, was capable of easy defence.

The superior strategic importance of Samaria
is evidenced by the sieges it endured repeatedly

by the Syrians and Assyrians. It


2. The was finally taken by Sargon in 722,
Founding after the siege had lasted for 3 years.
of Samaria That the Northern Kingdom endured


as long as it did was due largely to the
streugth of its capital. With the fall of Samaria,
the nation fell.


Recent excavations in Samaria under the direction
of Harvard University throw new light upon the ancient
capital of Israel. The first results were the uncovering
of massive foundation walls of a large building, includ-
ing a stairway 80 ft. wide. This building, which is
Rom in architecture, is supposed to have been a temple,
the work of Herod. Under this Rom building was re-
covered a part of a massive Heb structure, believed to
be the palace of O. and Ahab. During the year 1910
the explorations revealed a building covering 13 acres of
ground. Four periods of construction were recognized,
which, on archaeological grounds, were tentatively as-
signed to the reigns of O., Ahab, Jehu, and Jeroboam II.
See Samaria and articles by David_G. Lyon in Harvard
LPheological Review, IV, 1911; JBL, V, xxx, Part I, 1911:
PEFS, 1911, 79-83.


Concerning O.’s foreign policy the OT is silent
beyond a siugle hint contained in 1 K 20 34.
Here we learn that he had to bow


3. His before the stronger power of Syria. It
Foreign is probable that Ben-hadad I besieged
Policy Samaria shortly after it was built,


; for he forced O. to make “streets” in
the city for the Syrians. It is probable, too, that
at this time Ramoth-gilead was lost to the Syrians.
Evidently O. was weakened in his foreign policy
at the beginning of his reign by the civil conflict
engendered by his accession. However, he showed
strength of character in his dealings with foreign
powers. At least he regained control over the
northern part of Moab, as we learn from the M &.
Lines 4-8 tell us that “Omri was king of Israel and
afflicted Moab many days because Chemosh was
angry with his land... .. Omri obtained pos-
session of the land of Medeba and dwelt therein
during his days and half the days of his son, forty
years,

O. was the first_king of Israel to pay tribute to
the Assyrians under their king Asurnacirpal III,


2193


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Omri
On


in 876 BC. From the days of Shalmaneser II
(860 BC) down to the time of Sargon (722 BC),
Northern Israel was known to the Assyrians as
“the land of the house of Omri.’”’ On Shalmaneser’s
black obelisk, Jehu, who overthrew the dynasty
of O., is called Ja’ua abal Humri, “Jehu son of Omri.”
O. entered into an alliance with the Phoenicians
by the marriage of his son Ahab to Jezebel, daughter
of Ethbaal, king of the Sidonians. This may have
been done as protection against the powers from the
East, and as such would have seemed to be a wise
political move, but it was one fraught with evil

for Israel.
Although O. laid the foundation of a strong
kingdom, he failed to impart to it the vitalizing
and rejuvenating force of a healthy


4. His spiritual religion. The testimony of
Religious 1 K 16 25.26, that he ‘‘dealt wickedly
Influence above all that were before him,”
and Death conpled with the reference to ‘the


statutes of Omri” in Mic 6 16, indi-

cates that he may have had a share in substituting
foreign religions for the worship of Jeh, and there-
fore the unfavorable light in which he is regarded
is justified. Upon his death, O. was succeeded
upon the throne by his son Ahab, to whom was left
the task of shaking off the Syrian yoke, and who
went beyond his father in making the Phoen influ-
ence along with Baalism of prime importance in
Israel, thus leading the nation into the paths that
hastened its downfall.

(2) A Benjamite, son of Becher (1 Ch 7 8).

(3) A Judahite, descendant of Perez, who lived
at Jerus (1 Ch 9 4).

(4) A prince of Issachar in the time of David
(1 Ch 27 18). S. K. Mosman


ON, on (PN, ’6n; Egyp An, Ant, Anni, prob-
ably pronounced Ax only, as this is often all that is
written, a “stone” or “stone pillars”): Later called
Heliopolis. The name Onoccurs only in Gen 41 45.
50; 46 20. It occurs in one other place in LXX
(Ex 1 11), where On is mentioned with Pithom
and Raamses as strong cities which the Israelites
built. Heb slaves may have worked upon fortifi-
cations here, but certainly did not build the city.
On is possibly referred to as ODN WY, ‘ir ha-heres,
in Isa 19 18 (see IR-HA-HERES). On may also he
mentioned by Jeremiah (43 13) under the name
Beth-shemesh. Ezekiel speaks of an Aven (78,
’awen) (Ezk 30 17), where it is mentioned with Pi-
beseth (Bubastis). Aven in this passage is almost
certainly the same as Onin Gen 41 45; 46 20, as the
letters of both words are the sameinthe Heb. Only
the placing of the vowel-points makes any differ-
ence. If there is a mistake, it is a mistake of the
Massoretes, not of the Heb writer.

There were two Ons in Egypt: one in Upper
Egypt, An-res (Hermonthis); the other in Lower

Egypt, An-Mcheet (Brugsch, Geogr.
1. Location Inschr., 254, 255, nos. 1217, a, 6, 1218,
and De- 8708, 1225). The latter is the On
scription referred to in the Bible. It lay ahont

20 miles N. of the site of old Memphis,
about 10 miles N.E. of the location of modern Cairo.
It has left until this time about 4 sq. miles of ruins
within the old walls. Little or nothing remains
outside the walls.

On was built at the edge of the desert, which has
now retreated some 3 or 4 miles eastward, the result
of the rising of the bed of the Nile hy sediment from
the inundation, and the broadening of the area of
infiltration which now carries the water of the Nile
that much to the E. The land around On has
risen about 10 ft., and the waters of infiltration at


the time of lowest Nile are now about 1} ft. above
the floor-level of the temple.

The history of On is very obscure, yet its very

great importance is in no doubt. No clear de-

scription of the ancient city or sanc-

2. History tuary has come down to us, but there

are so many incidental references, and

so much is implied in ancient records, that it stands


Obelisk at On.


out as of the very first importance, both as capital
and sanetuary. The city comes from the Ist
Dynasty, when it was the seat of government, and
indeed must have heen founded by the Ist Dynasty
or have come down to it from pre-historic time.
From the IlId to the VIth Dynasty the seat of gov-
ernment was shifted from On to Memphis, and in
the XIIth Dynasty to Diospolis. Thronghout
these changes On retained its religious importance.
It had been the great sanctuary in the time of the
Pyramid Texts, the oldest religious texts of Egypt,
and judging from the evident great development of
the temple of On at the time of the writing of the
texts, the city must have antedated them hy con-
siderable time (Budge, Hist of Egypt, II, 83, 84,
108; Breasted, Development of Religion and
Thought in Egypt, chs i, 11). The myth of Osiris
makes even the charge against Set for the murder
of Osiris to have been preferred at Heliopolis
(Breasted, op. cit., 34). This certainly implies a
very great age for the sanctuary at On. It con-
tained a temple of the sun under the name Ra, the
sun, and also Atum, the setting sun, or the sun of
the Underworld. There was also a Phoenix Hall
and a sacred object called a ben, probably a stone,
and the origin of the name An, a ‘‘stone”’ or “pillar”
(cf Breasted, op. cit., 76,11, and 71). Though the
XIIth Dynasty removed the capital to Diospolis,
Usertsen I (Senwesret) of that Dynasty erected a
great obelisk at On in front of the entranee to the
temple. Thesituation of this obelisk in the temple-
area indicates that the great temple was already
more than a half-mile in length as early as the
XIIth Dynasty. The mate of this obelisk on the
opposite side of the entrance seems not to have been


on THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Onias


erected until the XVIIIth Dynasty. Its founda-
tions were discovered in 1912 by Petrie. Some
scraps of the granite of the obelisk bear inscriptions
of Thothmes III. A great Hyksos wall, also dis-
covered by Petrie in 1912, exactly similar to that
of the fortified camp at Tel el Yehudiyeh, 4 miles N.,
makes it quite certain that these usurpers between
the Old Empire and the New fortified On as the
capital once more. The manifest subserviency of
the priests of On in the story of Joseph makes it
most probable that the old capital at On had already


been subjugated in Joseph’s time, and that within


this old fortification still existing Joseph ruled _as
prime minister of Egypt. Merenptah in his 5th
year began to fortify On. Sheshonk JII called
himself ‘divine prince of Annu,” and seems to have
made On one of the greatest sanctuaries of his long
reign. On still figured in Egyp history in the rebel-
lion against Ashurbanipal. The city has been
deserted since the Pers invasion of 525 BC. Tra-
dition makes the dwelling-place of Joseph and Mary
with the child Jesus, while in Egypt, to have been
near Heliopolis. :
The exploration of On was attempted by Schiap-
arelli, but was not carried out, and his work has not
been published. In 1912 Petrie began a systematic
work of excavation which, it is expected, will con-
tinue until the whole city has been examined. The
only great discovery of the first season was the
Hyksos wall of fortification. Its full import can
only be determined by the continuance of the
exploration. M. G. KyLe


ON (FIN, ’6n; Atv, Adin): A Reubenite, son of
Peleth, who took part with Dathan and Abiram
in their revolt against Moses (Nu 16 1).


ONAM, O’nam (O318, ’dném, “vigorous”; cf
ONAN):

(1) “Son” of Shobal “son”? of Seir the Horite
(Gen 36 23; 1 Ch 1 40).

(2) “Son” of Jerahmeel by Atarah; perhaps the
name is connected with Onan son of Judah (1 Ch
2 26.28).


ONAN, Od’nan (218%, 'dndn, “vigorous”; ef
Onam): A “son” of Judah (Gen 38 4.8-10; 46 12;
Nu 26 19; 1 Ch 2 3). “Thestory of the untimely
death of Er and Onan implies that two of the an-
cient clans of Judah early disappeared” (Curtis,
Chron, 84). See Skinner, Gen, 452, where it is
pointed out that in Gen 38 11 Judah plainly at-
tributes the death of his sons in some way to Tamar
herself. The name is allied to Onam.


ONE, wun.
ONESIMUS, 6-nes’i-mus (’Oviotpos, Onésimos,


lit. “profitable,” “helpful” [Col 4 9; Philem ver 10]):
QOnesimus was a slave (Philem ver 16)


See NuMBER.


1. With belonging to Philemon who was a
Paul in wealthy citizen of Colossae, and a prom-
Rome iment member of the church there. O.


was still a heathen when he defrauded
his master and ran off from Colossae. He found his
way to Rome, where evil men tended to flock as to
a common center, as Tacitus tells us they did at
that period. In Rome he came into contact with
Paul, who was then in his own hired house, in mili-
tary custody.

What bronght him into contact with Paul we do not
know. It may have been hunger; it may have been the
pangs of conscience. He could not forget that his
master's house in Colossae was the place where the
Christians met in_their hatte assemblies for the wor-
ship of Christ. Neither could he forget how Philemon
had many a time spoken of Panl, to whom he owed his


2194


conversion. Now that 0. was in Rome—what a strange
coincidence—Paul also was in Rome.

The result of their meeting was that O. was
converted to Christ, through the instrumentality
of the apostle (“my child, whom I have begotten
in my bonds,” Philem ver 10). His services had
been very acceptable to Paul, who would gladly
have kept O. with him; but as he could not do this
without the knowledge and consent of Philemon,
he sent O. back to Colossae, to his master there.

At the same time Paul wrote to the church in
Colossae on other matters, and he intrusted the

Ep. to the Col to the joint care of


2. Paul’s Tychicus and O. The apostle recom-
Epistles to mends O. to the brethren in Colossae,
Colossae as a “faithful and beloved brother,
and to who is one of you,” and he goes on
Philemon to say that Tychicus and O. will make


known to them all things that have
happened to Paulin Rome. Such a commendation
would greatly facilitate O.’s return to Colossae.

But Paul does more. He furnishes O. with a
letter written by himself to Philemon. Returning
to a city where it was well known that he had been
neither a Christian nor even an honest man, he
needed someone to vouch for the reality of the
change which had taken place in his life. And Paul
does this for him both in the Ep. to the Col and in
that to Philemon.

With what exquisite delicacy is O. introduced!
‘Receive him,’ says the apostle, ‘for he is my own
very heart’ (Philem ver 12), ‘The man whom the
Colossians had only known hitherto, if they knew him at
all, as a worthless runaway slave, is thus Commended to
them, as no more a slave but a brother, no more dis-
honest and faithless but trustworthy; no more an object
of contempt but of love” (Lightfoot’s Comm. on Col, 235).

(1) Onesimus profitable—The apostle accord-
ingly begs Philemon to give O. the same reception
as he would rejoice to give to himself. The past
history of O. had been such as to belie the meaning
of his name. He had not been “profitable’—far
from it. But already his consistent conduct in
Rome and his willing service to Paul there have
changed all that; he has been profitable to Paul,
and he will be profitable to Philemon too.

(2) Paul guarantees—O. had evidently stolen
his master’s goods before leaving Colossae, but in
regard to that the apostle writes that if he has
defrauded Philemon in anything, he becomes his
surety. Philemon can regard Paul’s handwriting
as a bond guaranteeing payment: “Put that to
mine account,” are his words, “I will repay it.”
Had Philemon not been a Christian, and had Paul
not written this most beautiful letter, O. might well
have been afraid to return. In the Rom empire
slaves were constantly crucified for smaller offences
than those of which he had been guilty. A thief
and a runaway had nothing but torture or death
to expect.

(3) The change which Christ makes.—But now
under the sway of Christ all is changed. The
master who has been defrauded now owns allegiance
to Jesus. The letter, which is delivered to him
by his slave, is written by a bound “prisoner of
Jesus Christ.” The slave too is now a brother in
Christ, beloved by Paul: surely he will be beloved
by Philemon also. Then Paul intimates that he
hopes soon to be set free, and then he will come
and visit them in Colossae. Will Philemon receive
him into his house as his guest?

(4) The result.—It cannot be imagined that this
appeal in behalf of O. wasin vain. Philemon would
do more than Paul asked; and on the apostle’s visit
to Colossae he would find the warmest welcome,
both from Philemon and from Onesimus.


Joan RutHerrurp


2195
ONESIPHORUS, 6-nésif’é-rus (’Ovnoldopos,
Onésiphoros, lit. “profit bringer’ [2 Tim 1 16;
4 19]): Onesiphorus was a friend of
1. The the apostle Paul, who mentions him
Friend of | twice when writing to Timothy. In
Paul the former of the two passages where


his name occurs, his conduct is con-
trasted with that of Phygellus and Hermogenes and
others—all of whom, like O. himself, were of the
province of Asia—from whom Paul might well
have expected to reccive sympathy and help.
These persons had “turned away”? from him.
acted in a different way, for “‘he oft refreshed me,
and was not ashamed of my chain; but, when he
was in Rome, he sought me diligently, and found
me.

O. was one of the Christians of the church in
Ephesus; and the second passage, where his name
is found, merely sends a message of greeting from
Paul, which Timothy in Ephesus is requested to
deliver to “‘the household of O.” (AV).

O. then had come from Ephesus to Rome. It
was to Paul that the church at Ephesus owed its

origin, and it was to him therefore that


2. Visits O. and the Christians there were in-
Paul in debted for all that they knew of Christ.
Rome O. gratefully remembered these facts,


and having arrived in Rome, and
learned that Paul was in prison, he ‘‘very diligently”’
sought for the apostle. But to do this, though it
was only his duty, involved much personal danger
at that particular time. For the persccution, in-
augurated by Nero against the Christians, had
raged bitterly; its fury was not yet abated, and
this made the profession of the Christian name a
matter which involved very great risk of persecu-
tion and of death.

Paul was not the man to think lightly of what his
Ephesian friend had done. He remembered too,
‘in how many things he ministered at Ephesus.’’
And, writing to Timothy, he reminded him that O.’s
kindly ministrations at Ephesus were already well
known to him, from his residence in Ephesus, and
from his position, as minister of the church there.

It should be observed that the ministration of O.
at Ephesus was not, as AV gives it, ‘‘to me,’’ that is,
to Paul himself. “To me’ is omitted in RV.
What O. had done there was a wide Christian min-
istry of kindly action; it embraced “many things,”
which were too well known—for such is the force
of the word—to Timothy to require repetition.

The visits which O. paid to Paul in his Rom
prison were intensely “refreshing.’’ And it was not
once or twice that he thus visited the chained pris-
oner, but he did so ofttimes.

Though O. had come to Rome, his household had
remained in Ephesus; and a last salutation is sent

to them by Paul. He could not write
3. His again, as he was nowready to be offered,
Household and his execution could not long be

delayed. But as he writes, he enter-
tains the kindest feelings toward O. and his house-
hold, and he prays that the Lord will give mercy to
the household of O.

He also uses these words in regard to O. himself:
“The Lord grant unto him to find mercy of the
Lord in that day.”’ It is not clear whether O. was
living, or whether he had died, before Pan! wrote
this ep. Different opinions have been held on the
subject.

The way in which Paul refers twice to ‘‘the house-
hold [RV “house”’] of Onesiphorus,’ makes it
possible that O. himself had died. If this is so—
but certainty is impossible—the apostle’s words
in regard to him would be a pious wish, which has
nothing in common with the abuses which have


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA On


Onias


gathered round the subject of prayers for the dead,
a practice which has no foundation in Scripture.
Joun RuTHERFURD
ONIARES, 6-ni’a-réz, 6-ni-a’réz: 1 Mace 12 19
AV=RYV Anitus (q.v.).


ONIAS, G-ni’as (Ovlas, Onias): There were 3
high priests of the name of Onias, and a 4th Onias
who did not become a high priest but was known
as the builder of the temple of Leontopolis (Jos,
Ant, XIII, iii, 1-3). Only two persons of the name
are mentioned in the Apoc—Onias I and Onias IIT.

(1) Onias I, according to Jos (Ant, XI, viii, 7),
the son of Jaddua and father of Simon the Just
(ib, XII, ii, 5; Sir 50), and, according to 1 Mace 12
7.20, a contemporary of Areus (Arius), king of
Sparta, who reigned 309-265 BC (Diod. xx.29).
This Onias was the recipient of a friendly letter from
Areus of Sparta (1 Mace 12 7; sce MSS readings
here, and 12 20). Jos (Ant, XI iv, 10) repre-
sents this letter as written to Onias ITI, which is
an error, for only two Areuses are known, and Areus
II reigned about 255 BC and died a child of 8 years
(Pans. ii1.6.6). The letter—if gennine—exists in
two copies (Jos, Ant, XII, iv, 10, and 1 Macc 12
20 ff) (see Schiirer, Hist of the Jewish People, 4th
ed, 1, 182 and 237).

(2) Onias III, son of Simon II (Jos, Ant, XII,
iv, 10), whom he succeeded, and a contemporary
of Seleucus TV and Antiochus Epiphanes (2 Macc
3 1; 4 7) and father of Onias IV. He was known
for his godliness and zeal for the law, yet was on
such friendly terms with the Seleucids that Seleucus
IV Philopator defrayed the cost of the “services
of the sacrifices.” He quarreled with Simon the
Benjamite, guardian of the temple, about the market
buildings (Gr aedileship). Being unable to get the
better of Onias and thirsting for revenge, Simon
went to Apollonius, governor of Coele-Syria and
Phoenicia, and informed him of the “untold sums
of money” ‘lodged in the treasury of the temple.
The governor told the king, and Seleneus dispatched
his chancellor, Heliodorus, to remove the money.
Onias remonstrated in vain, pleading for the ‘‘de-
posits of widows and orphans.” Heliodorus per-
sisted in the object of his mission. The high priest
and the people were in the greatest distress. But
when Helodorus had already entered the temple,
“the Sovereign of spirits, and of all authority caused
a great apparition,” a horse with a terrible rider
accompanied by two strong and beautifu)] young
men who scourged and wounded Heliodorus. At
the intercession of Onias, his life wasspared. Helio-
dorus advised the king to send on the same errand
any enemy or conspirator whom he wished punished.
Simon then slandered Onias, and the jealousy
having caused bloodshed between their followers,
Onias decided to repair in person to the king to
intercede for his country. Apparently before a
decision was given, Seleucus was assassinated and
Epiphanes succeeded (175 BC). Jason, the brother
of Onias, having offered the new king larger revenue,
secured the pricsthood, which he held until he
himself was similarly supplanted by Menelaus,
Simon’s brother (2 Macc 4 23; Jos, Ané, XII, v,
1, says Jason's brother). Menelaus, having stolen
golden vessels belonging to the temple to meet his
promises made to the king, was sharply reproved by
Onias. Menelaus took revenge by persuading
Andronicus, the king’s deputy, to entice Onias by
false promises of friendship from his sanctuary at
Daphne and treacherously slay him—an act which
caused indignation among both the Jews and the
Greeks (2 Macc 4 34ff). Jos (Ant, XII, v, 1)
says that “on the death of Onias the high priest,
Antiochus gave the high-priesthood to his brother
Jesus [Jason],” but the account of 2 Macc given


Onions
Ophir


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2196


above is the more probable. Some see in Dnl 9
26; 11 22 reference to Onias [II (Schiirer, 4th ed,
I, 194 ff; III, 144). 8S. ANcus


ONIONS, un’yunz covey, becalim; Kpdppvov,
krémmuon): One of the delicacies of Egypt for
which the children of Israel pined in the wilderness
(Nu 11 5). The onion, allium cepa (N.O. Liliaceae),
is known in Arab. as bugsal and is cultivated all over
Syria and Egypt; it appears to be as much a favor-
ite in the Orient today as ever.


ONLY BEGOTTEN, 6n’'li bé-got’’n (povoyevijs,
monogenés): Although the Eng. words are found
only 6 t in the NT, the Gr word appears 9 t, and
often in the LXX. It is used literally of an only
child: ‘the only son of his mother” (Lk 7 12); “an
only daughter’ (8 42); “mine only child” (9 38);
“Isaac... . his only begotten” (He 11 17). In
all other places in the NT it refers to Jesus Christ as
“the only begotten Son of God” (Jn 1 14.18; 3
16.18; 1 Jn 4 9). In these passages, too, it might
be tr4 as “‘the only son of God”; for the emphasis
seems to be on His uniqueness, rather than on His
sonship, though both ideas are certainly present.
He is the son of God in a sense in which no others
are. ‘“‘Monogenés describes the absolutely unique
relation of the Son to the Father in His Divine
nature; prdtétokos describes the relation of the
Risen Christ in His glorified humanity to man”
(Westcott on He 16). Christ’s uniqueness as it
appears in the above passages consists of two things:
(a) He reveals the Father: ‘““No man hath seen God
at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in the
bosom of the Father, he hath declared him” (Jn
118). Menthercfore behold His glory, “glory as
of the only begotten from the Father” (1 14). (6)
He is the mediator of salvation: ‘‘God hath sent
his only begotten Son into the world that we might
live through him” (1 Jn 4 9; Jn 3 16); “He that
believeth not [on him] hath been judged already”
(Jn 3 18). Other elements in His uniqueness may
be gathered from other passages, as His sinlessness,
His authority to forgive sins, His unbroken com-
munion with the Father, and His unique knowledge
of Him. To say that it is a uniqueness of nature
or essence carries thought no farther, for these terms
still need definition, and they can be defined only
in terms of His moral consciousness, of His reve-
lation of God, and esp. of His intimate union as
Son with the Father (see also BEGOTTEN; PERSON
or Curist; Son or Gop).

The reading “God only begotten” in Jn 1 18
RVm, though it has strong textual support, is im-
probable, and can well be explained as due to
orthodox zeal, in opposition to adoptionism. See
Grimm-Thayer, Lexicon; Westcott, ad loc.

ae T. REEs

ONO, 6/nd (WN, ’6nd; B, ’Avav, Ondn, A,
10va, Ond, and other forms): A town mentioned
along with Lod as fortified by certain Benjamites
(1 Ch 8 12). The Mish (‘Arakhin, ix.6) says that
Joshua fortified it, but there is no such early notice
of it in Scripture. It was occupied by Benjamites
after the return from exile (Ezr 2 33; Neh 7 37;
11 35). In one of the villages in the plain of Ono,
Sanballat and his friends vainly tried to inveigle
Nehemiah into a conference (6 2). It is represented


“Onus.” W. Ewine
ONUS, d’nus.
ONYCHA, on'i-ka (ren, sh*héleth; ef Arab.


Pea)


BLL, subdlat, “filings,” ‘“husks’”): “Onycha” is a


See Ono.


] its ”
also ‘‘onyx,’’ a precious stone.


transliteration of the LXX évvxa, énucha, ace. of
dévvu€, énuz, which means “nail,” “claw,” “hoof,” and
i The form “‘ouycha”’
was perhaps chosen to avoid confusion with “onyx,”
the stone. The Heb sh‘héleth occurs only in Ex 30
34 as an ingredient of the sacred incense. It is
supposed to denote the horny operculum found in
certain species of marine gasteropod molluscs. The
operculum is a disk attached to the upper side of
the hinder part of the “foot” of the mollusc. When
the animal draws itself into its shell, the hinder
part of the foot comes last, and_the operculum
closes the mouth of the shell. The operculum,
which may be horny or stony, is absent in some
species. The horny opercula when burned emit
a peculiar odor, and are still used in combination
with other perfumes by the Arab women of Upper
Egypt and Nubia. (See Sir 8. Baker, The Nile
Tributaries of Abyssinia, cited by_ EB, 38.v.
“Onycha.’’) ALFRED Exty Day


ONYX, on‘iks, o’niks. See Srongs, PREcIoUS.


OPEN, 6’p’n: In the OT represents chiefly MME,
pathah, but also other words, as m3, galah, ‘to
uncover”; of the opening of the eyes in vision, etc
(thus Balaam, Nu 22 31; 24 4; cf Job 33 16;
36 10; Ps 119 18; Jer 32 11.14). In the NT
the usual word is dvolyw, anoigd (of opening of
mouth, eyes, heavens, doors, etc). A peculiar word,
Tpaxyrlfouat, trachélizomat (lit. to have the ueck bent
back, to be laid bare), is used for ‘laid open” be-
fore God in He 4 138.


OPEN PLACE: (1) The “open place” of Gen
38 14 AV, iu which Tamar sat, has come from a
misunderstanding of the Heb, the translators
having taken b°phethah ‘énayim to mean “in an
opening publicly,” instead of “in an opening [i.e.
a gate] of Enaim” (cf Prov 1 21 in the Heb).
RV has corrected; sce Enarmm. (2) In 1 K 22 10
|| 2 Ch 18 9 RV relates that Ahab and Jehosha-
phat sat “each on his throne, arrayed in their
robes, in an open place [m “Heb a threshing-floor,”
AV “a void place’”’] at the entrance of the gate of
Samaria.’? The Heb here is awkward, and neither
the LXX nor the Syr seems to have read the present
text in 1 K 22 10, the former having ‘‘in arms,
at the gate of Samaria,” and the latter “an many-
colored garments.” Consequently various attempts
have been made to emend the text, of which the
simplest is the omission of b°ghdren, “in an open
place.” If, however, the text is right—as is not
impossible—the open place is a threshing-floor
close to the gate. See the commentaries.

Burton Scorr Easton

OPERATION, op-ér-a’shun (WPS, ma‘dseh,
‘“vork’’?; évépyeva, enérgeia, évépynua, enérgéma,
“conergy”’): Twice used in the OT of God’s creative
work (Ps 28 4.5; Isa 5 12). The Holy Spirit’s
tnworking and power are manifest in the bestowal
of spiritual gifts on individuals and on the church
(1 Cor 12 6 AV), and in the resurrection of Jesus
Christ, through which energy or operation of God
those dead in sins are, through faith, raised to
newness of life (Col 2 12 AV).


OPHEL, O'fel (DYN, ha-dphel [2 Ch 27 3;
33 14; Neh 3 26f; 11 21; and without article,
Isa 32 14 and Mic 4 8; also2 K 6 24)):


.There has been considerable divergence of opinion
with regard to the meaning of this name. Thus in all
the references given above with the art.,

1. Meaning RV has simply ‘‘Ophcl,"' but AV adds
of Nam in m “the tower’; in Isa 32 14, ‘tthe bill”
é with m ‘Ophel,”” but AV ‘the forts,” m

Ps “clifts’’; Mic 4 8, ‘‘the hill,""’ m ‘‘ Heb
Ophel,”’ but AV ‘the stronghold’; 2 K § 24, ‘the hill,”


2197


m ‘‘Heb Ophel,” but AV “the tower,” m “secret place.’’
It is trne that the other occnrrences of the werd in 1 S
5 9.12; 6 5 f, where it Is tra “tumors,” and Hab 2 4,
where a verbal form is trd “puffed up,” seem te
imply that one meaning assigned te the root may be
that of ‘‘swelling.’’ Recently Dr. Burney (PEF, Janu-
ary, 1911) has preduced streng arguments in faver of
e past: when used as the name ef a lecality, meaning
‘“fortress.”’


Three places are known to have received this
name: (1) A certain place on the east hill of Jerus,
S. of the temple; to this all the pas-
2. Three sages quoted above—except one—
Ophels refer. (2) The “Ophel,” trd “hill,”
situated apparently in Samaria (cf
2K 6 8), where Gehazi took his ill-gotten presents
from the hands of the servants of Naaman the
Syrian. The tr ‘tower’ would suit the sense at
least as well. It was some point probably in the
wall of Samaria, perhaps the citadel itself. (3)
The third reference is not Bib., but on the M S, an
inscription of Mesha, king of Moab, contemporary
with Omri. Hesays: “I built KRHH (? Karhab],
the wall of y‘drim, and the wall of ‘Ophel and
I built its gates and I built its towers.” In com-
paring the references to (1) and (8), it is evident
that if Ophel means a “hill,” it certainly was a
fortified hill, and it seems highly probable that it
meant some “artificial swelling in a fortification,
e.g. a bulging or rounded keep or enceinte’”’ (Bur-
ney, loc. cit.). Isa 32 14 reads, ‘The palace shall
be forsaken; the populous city shall be deserted;
the hill [Ophel] and the watch-tower shall be for
dens for ever.’ Here we have palace, city and
watch-tower, all the handiwork of the builder.
Does it not seem probable that the Ophel belongs
to the same category?
The situation of the Ophel of Jerus is very defi-
nitely described. It was clearly, from the refer-
ences (Neh 3 26.27; 2 Ch 27 3; 33


3. The 14), on the east hill 8. of the temple.
Ophel of Jos states (BJ, V, iv, 2) that the
Jerusalem eastern wall of the city ran from Si-


loam ‘‘and reaches as far as a certain
place which they called Ophlas when it was joined
to the eastern cloister of the temple.” In BJ, V,
vi, 1, it states that ‘John held the temple and the
parts thereto adjoining, for a great way, as also
‘Ophla,’ and the Valley called the ‘Valley of the
Cedron.’”’ It is noticeable that this is not identical
with the “‘Acra’”’ and “‘Lower City” which was held
by Simon. There is not the slightest ground for
applying the name Ophel, as has been so commonly
done, to the whole southeastern hill. In the days
of Jos, it was a part of the hill immediately S. of
the temple walls, but the OT references suit a locality
nearer the middle of the southeastern hill. In the
art. ZIon (q.v.) it is pointed out that that name does
not occur (except in reference to the Jebusite city)
in the works of the Chronicler, but that ‘‘theOphel,”’
which occurs almost alone in these works, is appar-
ently used forit. Mic 48 m seems to confirm this
view: “O tower of the flock, the Ophel of the
daughter of Zion.” Here the “tower of the flock”’
may well refer to the shepherd David’s stronghold,
and the second name appears to be a synonym for
the same place.

Ophel then was probably the fortified site which
in earlier days had been known as “Zion’’ or ‘‘the
City of David.” King Jotham “built much”
“on the wall of Ophel” (2 Ch 27 8). King
Manasseh “built an outer wall to the city of David,
on the west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to the
entrance at the fish gate; and he compassed Ophel
about with it, and raised it up to a very great
height”? (2 Ch 33 14). It was clearly a fortified
place of great importance, and its situation must
have been so near that of the ancient “Zion” that


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Onions
Ophir


scarcely any other theory is possible except that it
occupied the site of that ancient fortress.
E..W. G. Masterman,
OPHIR, 6’fér, o’fir (DIN [Gen 10 29], ADIN
{1 K 10 11], DR, ’dph7r): The 11th in order of
the sons of Joktan (Gen 10 29=1 Ch
1. Scrip- 1 23). There is a clear reference also
tural Refer- to a tribe Ophir (Gen 10 30). Ophir
ences js the name of a land or city some-
where to theS. orS.E. of Pal for which
Solomon’s ships along with Phoen vessels set out
from Ezion-geber at the head of the Gulf of Aka-
bah, returning with great stores of gold, precious
stones and “almug’-wood (1 K 9 28; 10 11; 2
Ch 9 10; 1 K 22 48; 2 Ch 818). We get a
fuller list of the wares and also the time taken by
the voyage if we assume that the same vessels are
referred to in 1 K 10 22, “Once every three years
came the navy of Tarshish, bringing gold, and silver,
ivory,and apes, and peacocks.” Theother products
may not have been native to the land of Ophir, but
it is certain that the gold at least was produced
there. This gold was proverbial for its purity, as
is witnessed by many references in the OT (Ps 45
9; Job 28 16; Isa 13 12; 1 Ch 29 4), and, in
Job 22 24, Ophir is used for fine gold itself. In
addition to these notices of Ophir, it is urged that
the name occurs also in two passages under the
form ‘Uphaz’’ (Jer 10 9; Dnl 10 5).
At all times the geographical position of Ophir
has been a subject of dispute, the claims of three
different regions being principally


2. Geo- advanced, namely (1) India and the
graphical Far East, (2) Africa, (3) Arabia.
Position (1) India and the Far Fast.—All the


wares mentioned are more or less
appropriate to India, even including the fuller list
of 1 K 10 22. “Almug”-wood is conjectured to
be the Indian sandal-wood. Another argument is
based on the resemblance between the LXX form
of the word (Sdpherd) and the Coptic name for
India (Sophir). A closer identification is sought
with Abhira, a people dwelling at the mouths of the
Indus. Snpara, an ancient city on the west coast
of India near the modern Goa, is also suggested.
Again, according to Wildman, the name denotes a
vague extension eastward, perhaps as far as China.

(2) Africa.—This country is the greatest. gold-
producing region of the three. Sofala, a seaport
near Mozambique on the east coast of Africa, has
been advanced as the site of Ophir, both on Iin-
guistic grounds and from the nature of its products,
for there all the articles of 1 K 10 22 could be
procured. But Gesenius shows that Sofala is
merely the Arab. form of the Heb sh*phélah. In-
terest in this region ag the land of Ophir was re-
newed, however, by Mauch’s discovery at Zim-
babye of great ruins and signs of old Phoen civiliza-
tion and worked-out gold mines. According to
Bruce (I, 440), a voyage from Sofala to Ezion-geber
would have occupied quite three years owing to
the monsoons.

(8) Arabia.—The claim of Southeastern Arabia
as the land of Ophir has on the whole more to sup-
port it than that of India or of Africa. The Ophir
of Gen 10 29 beyond doubt belonged to this region,
and the search for Ophir in more distant lands can
be made only on the precarious assumption that
the Ophir of K is not the same as the Ophir of
Gen. Of the various products mentioned, the only
one which from the OT notices can be regarded
as clearly native to Ophir is the gold, and according
to Pliny and Strabo the region of Southeastern
Arabia bordering on the Persian Gulf was a famous
gold-producing country. The other wares were
not necessarily produced in Ophir, but were prob-


Ophni
Ordain


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2198


ably brought there from more distant lands, and
thence conveyed hy Solomon’s merchantmen to
Ezion-geber. If the duration of the voyage (3
years) be used as evidence, it favors this location of
Ophir as much as that on the east coast of Africa.
It seems therefore the least assailahle view that
Ophir was a district on the Persian Gulf in South-
eastern Arabia and served in old time as an em-
porium of trade hetween the East and West.
A. 8. Futon

OPHNI, of’ni (2297, ha-‘ophni; *Agvh, Aphné):
A place in the territory of Benjamin (Josh 18 24).
The modern Jifneh, in a fine vale W. of the road to
Nablus and 24 miles N.W. of Bethel, might suit
as to position; but the change in the initial letter
from ‘ain to jim is not easy. This is the Gophna
of the rabhis (cf Jos, BJ, III, iii, 5).


OPHRAH, of’ra (IDI, ‘ophrah; B,’Adpa, Aphra,
A, *Ieppaéd, Jephrathd, etc):

(1) A town in the territory allotted to Benjamin
named hetween Parah and Chephar-ammoni (Josh
18 23). It is mentioned again in 15S 13 17.
The Philis who were encamped at Michmash sent
out marauding bands, one of which went westward,
another eastward, down “‘the valley of Zeboim
toward the wilderness”; the third “‘turned unto the
way that leadeth to Ophrah, unto the land of Shual.”
This must have been northward, as Saul commanded
the passage to the S. Onom places it 5 Rom miles
E. of Bethel. A site which comes near to fulfilling
these conditions is ef-Taiyebeh, which stands on a
conical hill some 5 miles N.E. of Bettin. This is
possibly identical with “Ephron” (2 Ch 13 19),
and ‘‘Ephraim’” (Jn 11 54).

(2) A city in the tribal lot of Manasseh W. of
Jordan. It is mentioned only in connection with
Gideon, whose native place it was, and with his son
Abimelech (Jgg 6 11, etc). It was, indeed, family
property, helonging to Joash the Abiezrite, the
father of Gideon. It was apparently not far from
the plain of Esdraelon (vs 33 f), so that Gideon and
his kinsmen smarted under the near presence of the
oppressing Midianites. Manasseh, of course, as
bordering on the southern edge of the plain, was in
close touch with the invaders. At Ophrah, Gideon
reared his altar to Jch, and made thorough cleansing
of the instruments of idolatry. After his great
victory, he set up here the golden ephod made from
the spoils of the enemy, which proved a snare to
himself and to his house (8 27). Here he was
finally laid to rest. It was at Ophrah that Abime-
lech, aspiring to the kingdom, put to death upon
one stone three score and ten of his brethren, es
possible rivals, Jotham alone escaping alive (9 5).
Apparently the mother of Abimelech belonged to
Shechem; this established a relationship with that
town, his connection with which does not therefore
mean that Ophrah was near it.

No quite satisfactory identification has yet been
suggested. Conder (PEFS, 1876, 197) quotes the
Samaritan Chronicle as identifying Ferata, which is
6 miles W. of Nablus, with an ancient Ophra, ‘‘and
the one that suggests itself as most probably identi-
cal is Ophrah of the Abiezerite.”’ But this seems
too far to the 8.

(3) A man of the tribe of Judah, son of Me-
onothai (1 Ch 4 14). Ewine


OPINION, é&-pin’yun (34, dé**, BIBI, s“tppim):
“Opinion” occurs only 5 +, thrice in Job (32 6.10.
17) as the tr of dé‘, “knowledge,” “opinion” (in the
address of Elihu), and onceof s“tppim, from sd‘aph,
“to divide or branch out,’’ hence division or party,
unsettled opinion (in the memorable appeal of
Elijah, ‘““How long halt ye between two opinions?”


1 K 18 21, ARV “How long go ye limping be-
tween the two sides?”). In Ecclus 3 24, we have,
“For many are deceived by their own vain opinion’
(hupélépsis, “a taking up,” “a hasty judgment”),
RV “The conceit of many hath led them astray.”
W. L. WaLkER
OPOBALSAMUM, op-o-bal’sa-mum: RVm
in Ex 80 34. See Sracre.


OPPRESSION, o-presh’un: Used in AV to trans-
late a variety of Heb words, all of which, however,
agree in the general sense of wrong done hy violence
toothers. Thereare a few cases where the reference
is to the oppression of Israel by foreigners, as by
their Egyp masters (Ex 3 9; Dt 26 7), or by Syria
(2 K 18 4), or by an unmentioned nation (1sa_ 30
20 AVm). In all these cases the Heb original is
ym, lahag. But in the vast number of cases the
reference is to social oppression of one kind or an-
other within Israel’s own body. It is frequently
the theme of psalmist and prophet and wise man.
The poor and weak must have suffered greatly at
the hands of the stronger and more fortunate. The
word lahag, various forms of the ¥ PpWY, ‘dshak,
and other words are used by the writers as they
express their sorrow and indignation over the
wrongs of their afflicted brethren. In his own
sorrow, Job remembers the suffering of the oppressed
(Job 35 9; 36 15); itis a frequent subject of song
in the Pss (Ps 12 5; 42 9; 48 2; 44 24; 55 3;
119 134); the preacher ohserves and reflects upon
its prevalence (Ecel 4 1; 5 8; 7 7 AV); the prophets
Amos (3 9), Isaiah (5 7; 59 13), Jeremiah (6 6;
22 17) and Ezekiel (22 7.29) thundered against it.
It was exercised toward strangers and also toward
the Israelites themselves, and was never wholly
overcome. In Jas 2 6, “oppress” is the rendering
of xataduvacretw, katadunastevs, “‘to exercise harsh
control over one,” ‘‘to use one’s power against one.”

Witiiam JosepH McGtLotTHiin

OR, 6r: The word is used once for either (1 8
26 10), and is still in poetic use in this sense; as in,
“Without or wave or wind” (Coleridge); “Or the
bakke or some hone he brekcth in his jouthe”
(Piers Plowman [B], VII, 938; cf Merchant of
Venice, III, 11,65). It is also used with ‘ever’ for
before (Ps 90 2; Ecclus 18 19), which ARV sub-
stitutes in Eccl 12 6 (ef vs 1.2); Cant 6 12; Dnl
6 24.


ORACLE, or’a-k’l: (1) A Divine utterance de-
livered to man, usually in answer to a request for
guidance. So in 28 16 23 for [2], dabhar
(‘‘word,” as in RVm). The use in this passage
seems to indicate that at an early period oracular
utterances were sought from Jeh by the Israelites,
but the practice certainly fell into disuse at the rise
of prophecy, and there are no illustrations of the
means employed (1 8S 14 18.19.36-42, ete, belong
rather to Divination [q.v.]). In RVm of such
passages as Isa 13 1, “‘oracle’’ is used in the titles
of certain special prophecies as a substitute for
BurvEn (q.v.) (RW, massa’), with considcrable
advantage (esp. in Lam 2 14). (2) In heathen
temples “oracle” was used for the chamher in which
the utterances were delivered (naturally a most
sacred part of the structure). This usage, coupled
with a mistake in Heb philology (connecting 37,
dbhir, “hinder part,’ with “3%, dibbér, ‘“speak’’),
caused EV to give the title “oracle” to the Most
Holy Place of the Temple, in 1 K 6 5, etc, follow-
ing the example of Aquila, Symmachus and Vulg.
But the title is very unfortunate, as the Most Holy
Place had nothing to do with the delivery of oracles,
and RV should have corrected (cf Ps 28 2m).


2199


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ophni
Ordain


(3) In the NT EV employs “oracle” as the tr of
Abytov, légion, “‘saying,’’ in four places. In all,
Divine utterances are meant, specialized in Acts
7 38 as the Mosaic Law (“living oracles” =“com-
mandments enforced by the living God’’), in Rom
3 2 as the OT in general, and in He 5 12 as the
revelations of Christianity (6 2.3). In1 Pet 4 11
the meaning is debated, but probably the command
ig addressed to those favored by a supernatural
“gift of speech.” Such men must kecp their own
personality in the background, adding nothing of
their own to the inspired message as it comes to
them. Burton Scorr Easton


ORACLES, SIBYLLINE, sib’i-lin, -lin. See Apoc-
ALYPTic Literature, V.


ORATOR, or’a-tér, ORATION, 6-ra’shun: The
word “‘orator’” occurs twice: (1) As AV rendering
of tnd , tahash; only Isa 3 3, ‘‘the eloquent orator,”
AVm “skilful of speech,’ where RV rightly sub-
stitutes “the skilful enchanter.’”’ The word lahash
is probably a mimetic word meaning “a hiss,” “a
whisper,” and is used in the sense of “incantation,”
“charm.” Hence n‘bhén lahash means ‘skilful in
incantation,” ‘expert in magic.”? See Divina-
TION; ENCHANTMENT. (2) As the rendering of
pyrwp, rhétGr, the title applied to Tertullus, who
appeared as the advocate of the Jewish accusers of
Paul before Felix (Acts 24 1). The proceedings,
as was generally the case in the provincial Rom
courts, would probably be conducted in Lat, and
under Rom modes of procedure, in which the parties
would not be well versed; hence the need of a pro-
fessional advocate. héér is here the equivalent
of the older Gr sunégoros, ‘‘the prosecuting counsel,”
as opposed to the suindikos, ‘‘the defendant’s advo-
cate. :

Oration occurs only in Acts 12 21: “Herod
: . made an oration unto them” (¢émunyépe
mpos adrovs, edémégéret prés autos), The vb.
démégoréé, ‘‘to speak in an assembly” (from démos,
“people,” agoretié, ‘to harangue’’), is often found in
classical Gr, generally in a bad sense (Lat con-
cionari); here only in the NT.

D. Mratu Evwarps

ORCHARD, ér’chérd: (1) OTE, pardés, from
Old Pers, “a walled-in inclosure’; wapddewos,
parddeisos, a word in classical Gr applied to the
garden of Babylon (Diodorus Siculus xi.10) and to
a game park (Xen. Anab. i.2, 7). See Neh 2 8,
“forest,” m “park”; Cant 4 13, “orchard,” m
“paradise” (of pomegranates); Eccl 2 5, “parks,”
AV “orchards”; see Paranise. (2) xfxos, képos,
“garden” or “orchard”: ‘a white thorn in an
orchard” (Bar 6 71).


ORDAIN, or-dan’, ORDINATION, 6r-di-na’-
shun (Lat ordinare, ‘‘to set in order,”’ “to arrange’;
in post-Augustan Lat “to appoint to office’; from
ordo, gen. ordinis, “order,” “arrangement”’): In
AV the vb. ‘‘to ordain” renders as many as 35
different words (11 Heb words in the OT, 21 Gr
words in Apoc and the NT, and 3 Lat words in
Apoc). This is due to the fact that the Eng. word
has many shades of meaning (esp. as used in the
time AV was made), of which the following are the
chief: (1) To set in order, arrange, prepare:

“All things that we ordainéd festival,


Turn from their office to black funeral."
—Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet, IV, v, 84.


This meaning is now obsolete. It isfound in AV of
Ps 132 17; Isa 30 33; He 9 6 (in each of which
eases RV or m substitutes “prepare’’); 1 Ch 17 9
(RV “appoint’’?); Ps 7 13 (RV maketh”); Hab 1
12 (also RV). (2) To establish, institute, bring into


being: ‘When first this order [i.c. the Garter] was
ordained, my Lord’? (Shakespeare). So in 1 K
12 32, “Jcroboam ordained a feast in the 8th month”
(ver 33); Nu 28 6; Ps 8 2.3; Isa 26 12; 2 Esd
6 49 AV (RV “preserve’); Sir 7 15; Gal 3 19.
(3) To decree, give orders, prescribe:
“And doth the power that man adorcs
Ordain their doom?"
—Byron.

So Est 9 27, “The Jews ordained ... . that they
would keep these two days according to the writing
thereof’; 1 Esd 6 34; 2 Esd 717; 8 14 AV;
Tob 1 6; 8 7 AV (RV “command”); Ad Est 14 9;
1 Mace 4 59; 7 49; Acts 16 4; Rom 7 10 AV;
1 Cor 2 7; 7 17; 9 14; Eph 2 1OAV. (4) Toset
apart for an office or duty, appoint, destine: ‘Being
ordained his special governor” (Shakespeare). Fre-
quent in EV. When AV has “ordain” in this sense,
RV generally substitutes “appoint”; e.g. “He [Jesus]
appointed [AV ‘‘ordained’’] twelve, that they might
be with him” (Mk 3 14). S02 Ch 11 15; Jer 1
5; Dnl 2 24; 1 Esd 8 49; 1 Mace 3 55; 10 20;
Jn 15 16; Acts 14 23; 1 Tim 27; Tit 15; He
6 1;8 3. RV substitutes “formedst” in Wisd 9 2,
“recorded” in Sir 48 10, “become” in Acts 1 22,
“written of? (m “set forth’’) in Jude ver 4, but
retains “ordain’’ in the sense of “appoint,” ‘set
apart,” in 2 K 23 5; 1 Ch 9 22; 1 Esd 8 23;
Ad Est 136; Acts 10 42; 13 48; 17 31; Rom
13 1. (5) Te appoint ceremonially to the minis-
terial or priestly office, to confer holy orders on.
This later technical or ecclesiastical sense is never
found in EV. The nearest approach is (4) above,
but the idea of formal or ceremonial setting-apart
to office (prominent in its modern usage) is never
implied in the word.

Ordination: The act of arranging in regular
order, esp. the act of investing with ministerial or
sacerdotal rank (ordo), the setting-apart for an
office in the Christian ministry. The word does
not occur in EV. The NT throws but little light
on the origin of the later ecclesiastical rite of
ordination. The 12 disciples were not set apart
by any formal act on the part of Jesus. In Mk 3
14; Jn 15 16, the AV rendering “ordain” is, in
view of its modern usage, misleading; nothing more
is implied than an appointment or election. In
Jn 20 21-23, we have indeed a symbolic act of
consecration (‘‘He breathed on them’’), but ‘“‘the
act is described as one and not repeated. The gift
was once for all, not to individuals but to the abid-
ing body” (Westcott, ad loc.). In the Apostolic
age there is no trace of the doctrine of an outward
rite conferring inward grace, though we have in-
stances of the formal appointment or recognition
of those who had already given proof of their
spiritual qualification. (1) The Seven were chosen
by the brethren as men already ‘full of the Spirit
and of wisdom,” and were then “appointed” by the
Twelve, who prayed and laid their hands upon
them (Acts 6 1-6). (2) The call of Barnabas
and Saul came direct from God (Acts 13 2,
“the work whereunto I have called them’; ver
4, they were “sent forth by the Holy Spirit’).
Yet certain prophets and teachers were instructed
by the Holy Spirit to ‘separate’ them (i.e. pub-
licly) for their work, which they did by fasting
and praying and laying on of hands (ver 3).
But it was utterly foreign to Paul’s point of view
to regard the church’s act as constituting him an
apostle (cf Gal 1 1). (3) Barnabas and Paul are
said to have “ordained,” RV “appointed” (xeipo-
rovjcavres, chetrotonésantes, “elect,” ‘‘appoint,”
without indicating the particular mode of appoint-
ment), elders or presbyters in every city with
prayers and fasting (Acts 14 23). So Titus was
instructed by Paul to “appoint elders in every


Order
Ornament


city’? in Crete (Tit 1 5). (4) The gift of Timothy
for evangelistic work scems to have been formally
recognized in two ways: (a) by the laying on of
the hands of the presbytery (1 Tim 4 14), (b) by
the laying on of the hands of Paul himself (2 Tim
16). The words “Lay hands hastily on no man”
(1 Tim 5 22) do not refer to an act of ordination,
but probably to the restoration of the penitent.
The reference in He 6 2 is not exclusively to
ordination, but to all occasions of laying on of
hands (see Hanns, ImposiTion oF). From the few
instances mentioned above (the only ones found in
the NT), we infer that it was regarded as advisable
that persons holding high office in the church should
be publicly recognized in some way, as by laying
on of hands, fasting, and public prayer. But no
great, emphasis was laid on this rite, hence “it can
hardly be likely that any essential principle was
held to be involved in it’ (Hort, The Christian
Ecclesia, 216). It was regarded as an outward
act of approval, a symbolic offering of intercessory
prayer, and an emblem of the solidarity of the
Christian community, rather than an indispensable
channel of grace for the work of the ministry. (For
the later ecclesiastical doctrine and rite see Edwin
Hatch’s valuable art. on “Ordination” in the Dect.
Christian Antiq.) D. Miatt Evwarps


ORDER, ér’'dér (J2Y, ‘Grakh, “to arrange’;
raccety, tdssein [> diatdssein, tdxis, tdgma]): ‘Order’
in Bib. phrases may indicate (1) arrangement in
rows, (2) sequence in time, (3) classification and
organization, (4) likeness or manner, (5) regula-
tion, direction or command, or (6) the declaring of
a will. In many passages it is difficult if not im-
possible to determine from the Eng. text alone in
which of these senses the word is used.

The fundamental idea suggested by the Heb, Gr
and Eng. words is that of arrangementinrows. Thus

“order” is used in the Bible of arrang-
1. Arrange- ing wood for an altar (Lev 17; 1K


ment in 18 33; cf Heb Gen 22 9; Isa 30 33);
Rows of laying out flax-stalks for drying

(Josh 2 6); of preparing offerings
(Lev 18.12; cf 6 5; Jgs 6 26); of arranging


lamps (Ex 27 21; 39 37; Lev 24 3.4; cf Ps 132
17); of placing the shewbread on the table (Ex 40
4.23; Lev 6 12; 24 8; 2 Ch 13 11); of drawing
up the battle array (1 Ch 12 38 [Heb 39, ‘adhar]);
and of arranging weapons in order for battle (Jer
46 3, ARV “prepare’”’). Asa vb. ‘“‘to order” in the
older VSS usually has the obsolete sense ‘‘to ar-
range’ and not the more usual Eng. meanings,
“to demand” or “to direct.” Thus: “In the tent
of meeting shall Aaron order it’? (Lev 24 4, ARV
“keep in order’); “Order ye the buckler and
shield” (Jer 46 3; cf Ps 119 133; Job 23 4,
ARV ‘set in order”; Jth 2 16; Wisd 8 1; 15 1;
Ecclus 2 6). The Heb pa‘'am (lit. “hoof-beat,’
“occurrence,” “repetition’”’) in the plural conveys
the idea of an architectural plan (Ezk 41 6). An-
other word, shdlabh, lit. “to join,” in connection
with the tabernacle, has in some VSS been tr4 as
including the idea of orderly arrangement (ix 26
17). The word “order” standing by itself may mean
orderly or proper arrangement (1 Esd 1 10; Wisd
7 29; 1 Macc 6 40; Col 2 5). Akin to the idea
of arranging things in a row is that of arranging
words (Job 33 5; 37 19; Ps 5 3), of recounting
things in order (Ilsa 44 7; Lk 1 1 AV [diatassein];
Lk 1 3; Acts 11 4 [kathexés]), of setting forth a
legal case (Job 23 4; 13 18; cf Ps 50 21). From
the idea of ranging in order for the purpose of com-
parison the Heb ‘drakh acquires the meaning “to
compare” (Isa 40 18; Ps 89 7). This is clearly
the meaning of ’én ‘drokh ’élekha (Ps 40 5 {Heb 6)]),
where “They cannot be set in order unto thee”


2200


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


must be interpreted to mean ‘‘There is nothing that
can be compared unto thee.”
As the fundamental meaning of ‘drakh is arrange-
ment in space, that of sddhar is order or sequence in
time. In later Heb sédher was used
2. Sequence in the sense of “program.” In Job
in Time 10 22 1a’ sedhdrim, absence of regular-
ity, in the description of the uncertain
period that follows death probably means ‘“‘con-
fusion in time.” (The LXX [¢éyyos, phéggos] sug-
gests, in the place of s*dhdr?m, a word for “light,”
possibly ¢ohdrayim.) In the NT we find “order”
used of time in connection with the resurrection of
the dead (1 Cor 16 23 [tagma]) and of a succession
of places visited (Acts 18 23 [kathexés]). The
phrase “‘in order unto” (Ps 119 38) expresses causal
sequence and hence purpose.
The idea of classification is present in the Heb
takan, tr’ “set in order,” with reference to a collec-
tion of proverbs (Eccl 12 9). The
3. Classi- same stem is used with reference to the
fication and arranging of singers before the altar
Organi- (Heb Ecclus 47 9). The  classifica-
zation tion of priests according to their serv-
ice is spoken of ag ‘‘ordering” (1 Ch
24 3.19, Heb pakadh). Next to the high priests
ranked priests of the second order (mishneh, 2 K 23
4; cf 26 18 || Jer 62 24). The related concept of
organization is present where the Heb kin (lit. “to
establish’’) is tr? “order”? (lsa 9 7 AV, “‘to estab-
lish” ARV; Ps 119 133; 2 Ch 29 35; cf 1 Mace
16 14). A similar use of the term “order” is found
in the NT in connection with the organization of the
affairs of the church (1 Cor 16 1 [diatassein]; Tit
1 5 [epidiorthéo]; 1 Cor 11 34).
“Order,” in the sense of likeness or manner, is used
in the phrase “after the order of Melchisedek”’ to
translate the Heb ‘al dtbh‘rath, or rather
4, Likeness the archaic form ‘al dibh‘ratht (Ps 110
or Manner 4), which in other passages is tr4 “be-
cause of” (cf Eccl 3 18; 7 14; 8 2).
This well-known phrase is rendered in LXX kaid tén
tdzin, a tr adopted in He 5 6.10; 6 20; 7 11.17,
where the passage from Ps is made the basis of an
extended argument, in the course of which “order”
is taken in the sense of “likeness” (He 7 16).
In the sense of regulation, we find “order” as a
tr of mishpat (which is lit. “the ruling of a shéphét,”
whether as a judicial decree or legis-
5. Regula- lative act) in connection with the con-


tion, Direc- duct of priests (1 Ch 6 32 [Heb
tion, Com- 17]; 2 Ch 3016; cf Lk 18; 1
mand Esd 1 6), and with reference to the


Nazirite regulations in the story of
Samson (Jgs 13 12, RV ‘“manner’”’), church serv-
ices (1 Gor 14 40) and, in the older Eng. VSS, with
reference to other ritual matters (1 Ch 15 13; 23
31; 2 Ch 8 14, ARV “ordinance”). The phrase
‘al yadh, lit. ‘‘according to the hand of,” tr in Ezr
3.10; 1 Ch 26 20.3.6 bis in various ways, means
“ander the direction of,” or “under the order of,”
as tr? in the last instance. The modern sense of
“command” is suggested here and in several other
instances (1 Esd 8 10; 1 Macc 9 55). He “that
ordereth his conversation aright’? (sam derekh, Ps
50 23) is probably one who chooses the right path
and directs his steps along it. ‘Who shall order the
battle?” (J K 20 14) is corrected in ARV: “Who
shall begin the battle?” (cf 2 Ch 13 3, Heb ’asar,
lit. “to bind,” hence “to join” or “begin”; cf
proelium committere).

The phrase ‘‘to set one’s house in order’ (Isa 38
1||2 K 20 1; 2 8 17 23), used of Hezekiah and
Ahithophel, in contemplation of death, means to
give final instructions to one’s household or to
make one’s will. The Heb ¢a@wah used in this
phrase is the stem found in the later Heb


2201


cawwa’ah, “a verbal will” (Babha’ Bathra’ 14a,

161b; BDB). Great moral weight was attached

y in Bib. times to the charges laid upon

6. Declar- a household by a deceased father or

ing of Last remoter ancestor, not only as to the

Will disposition of property but also as to

personal conduct. (Cf the case of the

Rechabites, where the same Heb expression is used,
ciwwah ‘aléni, Jer 36 6.) Natuan Isaacs


ORDINANCE, 6ér’di-nans: This word generally
represents MPM, hukkah, something prescribed,
enactment, usually with reference to
1. OT Use matters of ritual. In AV the same
word is frequently tr? by ‘‘statute” or
“statutes,’’ which is also the rendering of a similar
Heb word, viz. PM, hok. RV generally retains
“ordinance,” but sometimes substitutes ‘‘statute”’
(e.g. Ex 18 20; Ps 99 7). In one instance RV
renders ‘set portion” (Ezk 45 14). The word
generally has a religious or ceremonial significance.
It is used for instance in connection with the Pass-
over (Ex 12 48; Nu 9 14). According to Ex 12
14, the Passover was ‘‘an ordinance for ever,” i.e.
a permanent institution. In the pl. the word is
often employed, along with such terms as _com-
mandments, laws, etc, with reference to the different
prescriptions of the Deuteronomic and Priestly codes
(Dt 6 1.2; Lev 18 4).

In 11 passages (Ex 16 25; Josh 24 25; 18 30
25; 2K 17 34.37; 2 Ch 33 8; 36 15; Ps 119
91; Isa 68 2 bis; Ezk 11 20) “ordinance” is the
rendering of UEWA, mishpat, judgment, decision
or sentence by a judge or ruler. In the Book of
the Covenant (Ex 20 22—28 33) the term ‘“judg-
ments” denotes civil, as contrasted with ritual,
enactments. In2 K 17 34 AV employs ‘‘manners”’
and “ordinances” as renderings of this word. In
3 passages (Lev 18 30;,22 9; Mal 3 14) “ordi-
nance” is the tr of MAW, mishmereth, “charge,”
which RV restores. In one instance (Neh 10 32)
ordinance renders 1X7, micwah, ‘‘commandment,”
while in Ezr 3 10 AV the phrase ‘after the ordi-
nance of David’ represents a Heb phrase which
lit. means “upon the hands of David,” i.e. under
the guidance or direction of David.

In the NT, ‘ordinance’ renders different Gr words,
viz. (1) dikalwua, dikatdma, in Lk 1 6 and He 9

1.10. The word means lit. ‘‘anything
2. NT Use declared right’; but in these passages

ceremonial and religious regulation;
(2) dbyua, dégma, in Eph 2 15; Col 2 14. In the
NT this word always means a decree or edict (Acts
17 7); (3) wapddoows, parddosis, in 1 Cor 11 2 AV,
RV substitutes “traditions”; (4) «rlows, ktisis,
“setting up,’ “institution,” in 1 Pet 2 13. The
term is used exclusively of the action of God.
Peter implies that institutions, apparently human,
such as the family and the state, are of Divine
origin. The same doctrine is found in Rom 13 1.

; T. Lewis

ORDINANCES OF HEAVEN. See AstTRon-
omy, I, 1.

See OnrnDAIN,


ORDINATION, 6r-di-na’shun.


ORDINATION.


OREB, d’reb (ANN, 379, ‘drébh, “raven,” esp.
“erow”), and ZEEB, 2@’eb, zéb (ANT, 2” bh, “wolf’’)
(Jgs 7 25; 83; Ps 83 11, and Isa 10 26 [Oreb
only]): Two Midianite chieftains captured and be-
headed by the Ephraimites, who brought their
heads to Gideon.

As to the meaning of the two names, both words
are found in Arabic. Robertson Smith, Kinship,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Order
Ornament


ete (190 ff, 218 ff), says that the use of the names of
animals as names of persons is a rclie of totemism.
But Néldeke (Z2DMG, XL, 160 ff) and
1. Meaning others hold that such a use shows a
of Names desire that those so named should be
as disagrecable to their enemies as
the plant or animal which the name denoted.
Some again (e.g. Stade, Geschichte, 189 ff) maintain
that the two names here are borrowed from locali-
ties and not vice versa, as Jgs 7 25 implies. If 50,
we must take the names to be originally two places,
apparently in Ephraim, for the words “beyond
Jordan” in7 25 contradict 8 4, where it is said that
Gideon came to the Jordan and passedover. Moore
(Jgs, 214) suggests that the two localities were near
the junction with the Jordan of the stream that
comes from Wéddy Far‘ak. The construction of the
Heb allows of a tr ‘‘the rock [called] Oreb,”’ and “the
winepress [called] Zecb.”
The account of a battle here is corroborated by
Isa 10 26, a verse which mentions the ‘Tock of
Oreb,’’ and suggests that the great


2. The defeat of the Midianites took place
Battle of there (cf Isa 9 4). The passage in
Oreb Isa 10 24-26 is prose, however, and

is said to be late editing (see Cui:
Box, Isa, 65). In Ps 83 11 (Heb 12) there is a


prayer that God would make the “nobles”? among
the Psalmist’s enemies as Oreb and Zeeb.
Davin Francis RoBERTS
OREB: In 2 Esd 2 33 AV for Mr. Horses
(q.v.; so RV).


OREN, o’ren (Fas, ‘Oren; ’Apdp, Ardm, Alex.
Aran): A son of Jerahmeel, the firstborn of Hezron
(1 Ch 2 25).


ORGAN, 6ér’gan.


ORION, 6-ri’on: A brilliant constellation dedi-
cated to Nimrod or Merodach. See Astronomy,
Il, 11.


ORNAMENT, ér’na-ment ("T2, ‘ddhi, “adorn-
ment”): In common with all the Orientals, the
Hebrews were very fond of wearing ornaments,
and their tendency to extravagance of this kind
often met with stern prophetic rebuke (1sa 3 16-
24; Ezk 18 18-20). On this subject, little is said
in the NT apart from Jesns’ (Lk 7 25; 12 23) and
James’s (2 2) invectives against meretricious esti-
mates of moral character. Yet the employment of
attractive attire receives sanction in the Divine
example of Ezk 16 10-14.

Ornaments in general would include finely em-
broidered or decorated fabrics, such as the priest’s
dress or the high-priestly attire, and the richly
wrought veil, girdle and turban used by the wealth-
ier class. But the term may be limited here to the
various rings, bracelets and chains made of precious
metals and more or less Jeweled (cf Jer 2 32).

These latter, described in detail under their own
titles, may be summarized here as finger-rings,
particularly prized as seal-rings (Gen 38 18.25;
Jer 22 24); arm-rings or bracelets (Gen 24 22;
28110); earrings (Gen 35 4; Ex 32 2); nose-
rings (Gen 24 47; Ezk 16 12); anklets or ankle-
chains (Isa 3 16.18); head-bands or fillets or cauls
(referred to in Isa 3 18 only), and necklaces or
neck-chains (Gen 41 42; Ezk 16 11).

Figurative: The universal devotion to ornament
among the Orientals is the occasion for frequent
Bib. allusions to the beauty and splendor of fine
jewelry and attire. But everywhere, in Divine
injunctions, the emphasis of value is placed upon
the beauty of holiness as an inward grace rather
than on the attractions of outward ornament (Job


See Music.


Ornan
Ostrich


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2202


40 10; Ps 110 3; Joel 218; 1 Tim 2 9.10; 1 eeeeaure ospray was not numerous as were


Pet 3.4). In grievous sorrow, all ornament was

to be laid aside in token of mourning (Ex 33 4-6).
Lzeonarp W. DooLan

ORNAN, ér’nan (1 Ch 21 15). See ARnaunan.


ORPAH, ér’pé (BY, ‘orpdh; for meaning see
below): A Moabitess, wife of Mahlon, son of Elime-
lech and Naomi. Unlike her sister Ruth she re-
turned to her own people after escorting Naomi on
her way to Judah (Ruth 1 4ff). Her name is
supposed to be derived from the Heb word for
“neck” (77, ‘dreph), and so to mean “stiff-necked”
because of her turning back from following her
mother-in-law; others take it to mean ‘‘gazelle.”’


ORPHAN, ér’fan: This word occurs once only
in the OT (Lam 5 3, where it stands for DIM?,
yathom, elsewhere rendered ‘‘fatherless,”’ and in
LXX always ép¢arés, orphands); in the Apoc it
occurs 3 t (2 Esd 2 20; Tob 18; 2 Mace 8 28).
There is no clear case where it means the loss of
both parents. The Scriptures devote considerable
attention to the widow and orphan, and the idea
is that the child is fatherless. It is not fonnd in
AV of the NT; but the Gr word orphanos occurs
twice, Jn 14 18 (AV “comfortless,’’ RV “desolate,”
m “orphans”) and Jas 1 27 (‘‘fatherless’’). See
FATHERLESS. D. Mrati Enwarns


ORTHOSIA, 6r-thé-si’a (Op8worlas, Orthisias;
AV Orthosias): The city to which Tryphon fled
when he escaped from Dora, where he was be-
sieged by Antiochus Sidetes (1 Mace 16 37).
According to Pliny (NFA, v.17) it lay S. of the river
Elentherus, and N. of the city of Tripolis. The
Peutinger Tables place it 12 Rom miles N. of Tripolis
and 30 miles S. of Antaradus on the Phoen coast.
Porter would place it on the southern bank of Nahr
el- Barid.


OSAIAS, 6-za’yas, G-si’yas (OQeaias, Osaias;
B omits): In 1 Esd 8 48 a corruption of Jeshaiah
(ef Ezr 8 19).


OSEA, 6-zé@'a, 6-sé’a: In 2 Esd 13 40=Hosuea,
king of Israel (q.v.).


OSEAS, 6-zé’as, 6-sG’as: ‘“Osee’”’ in 2 Esd 1 39;
the prophet Hosea.


OSEE, 6'zé, G’sé (Qayé, Haseé): AV in Rom 9
25; the prophet Hosea (thus RV).


OSHEA, é-shé’a, d’sh@-a (RV “Hoshea”’ [Nu
13 8.16]): The original name of Joshua, the son
of Nun, changed by Moses (ver 16) from Hoshea
(hGshé", “help’”’) to Joshua (ychdshus', ‘help of Jeh’’).
Sec JosHuA.


OSNAPPAR, os-nap’ar (Ezr 4 10).
BANIPAL.


OSPRAY, os’pra (U2TY, ‘ozniyah; ddréderos,
halidetos; Lat Pandion haliaetus): A large hawk
preferring a diet of fish. The word is found in
the list of abominations only. See Lev 11 13; Dt
14 12. The ospray was quite similar in appearance
to some of the smaller eagles, and by some it is
thonght that the short-toed eagle is intended. But
the eagle and the gier-eagle had been specified, and
on account of the ospray plunging into water for
food and having fect bare to the lower leg-joint
and plumage of brighter and more distinctive mark-
ing, it seems very probable that it. was recognized
as a distinctive species, and so named separately.


Sec AsHUR-


other hawks and eagles. It was a bird that lived
almost wholly on fish, and these were not plentiful
in the waters of Pal. This would tend to make it
a marked bird, so no doubt the tr is correct as it
stands, as any hawk that lived on fish would have
been barred as an article of diet (see Tristram, Nat.
Hist of the Bible, 182; also Studers, Birds of North
America, p. and pl. 16).
GENE STRaATToN-PoRTER

OSSIFRAGE, os’i-fraj (O72, peres; yob, gps;
Lat Ossifraga): The great bearded vulture known
as the lammer-geier (Lev 11 13; Dt 14 12 AV,
RV “gier-eagle”). The Heb name peres means
“to break.’ Lat ossis, “bone,” and frangere, ‘‘to
break,’ indicate the most noticeable habit of the
bird. It is the largest of the vulture family,
being 33 ft. in length and 10 in sweep. It has a
white head, black beard on the chin, and the part
of the eye commonly called the ‘‘white”’ in most
animals, which is visible in but few birds, in this
family is pronounced and of a deep angry red, thus
giving the bird a formidable appearance. The
back is grayish black, the feathers finely penciled,
the shaft being white, the median line tawny. The
under parts are tawny white and the feet and talons
powerful. It differs from the vulture in that it
is not a consistent carrion feeder, but prefers
to take prey of the size captured by some of the
largest eagles. It took its name from the fact that
after smaller vultures and eagles had stripped a
carcase to the last shred of muscle, the lammer-
geier then carried the skeleton aloft aud dropped
it repeatedly until the marrow from the broken
bones could be eaten. It is also very fond of tor-
toise, the meat of which it secures in the same
manner. As this bird frequents Southern Europe,
it is thought to be the one that mistook the bald
head of Aeschylus, the poet, for a stone and let fall
on it the tortoise that caused his death. This bird
also attacks living prey of the size of lambs, kids
and hares. It is not numerous and does not flock,
but pairs live in deep gorges and rocky crevices.
1t builds an enormous nest, deposits one pinkish or
yellowish egg, and the young is black. It requires
two years to develop the red eyes, finely penciled
plumage and white head of the adult bird. It was
included among the abominations because of its diet
of carrion. GENE STRATTON-PoRTER


OSTRACA, os’tra-ka: The word ostracon (“pot-
sherd,” Heb heres) occurs in Job 2 8 (LXX), xat
fraBev Borpaxov, kai élaben dstrakon, “and he took
him a potsherd.”” Earthen vessels were in universal
nse in antiquity (they are twice mentioned in the
NT: cxevy dorpdxwa, skevié ostrdékina [2 Cor 4 7;
2 Tim 2 20]), and the broken fragments of them,
which could be picked up almost anywhere, were
made to serve various purposes. Upon the smooth-
est of these pieces of unglazed pottery the poorest
might write in ink his memoranda, receipts, letters
or texts. .

A fortunate discovery at Samaria (1910), made
among the ruins of Ahab’s palace, has brought to

light 75 Heb ostraca inscribed with ink,
1. Hebrew in the Phoen character, with accounts
Ostraca and memoranda relating to private
; matters and dating probably from the
time of Ahab. Their historical contribution, aside
from the mention of many names of persons and
places, is slender, but for ancient Heb writing and
to a less extent for Heb words and forms they are
of value, while the fact that in them we possess
documents actually penned in Israel in the 9th
cent. BC gives them extraordinary interest. The
nature of ostraca tends to their preservation under
conditions which would quickly destroy parchment,


2203


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ornan
Ostrich


skin or papyrus, and this discovery in Pal encourages
the hope of further and more significant finds.
f Gr ostraca in large quantities have been found in
Egypt, preserving documents of many kinds, chiefly
tax receipts. The texts of some 2,000
2. Greek of these have been published, princi-
Ostraca pally by Wilcken (Griechische Ostraka,
2 vols, 1899), and serve to illustrate in
unexpected ways the everyday Gr speech of the


PiveA akg


TH eet O


Ostracon with Lk 22 70f.


common people of Egypt through the Ptolemaic,
Rom and Byzantine periods. Like the papyri, they
help to throw light on NT syntax and lexicography,

as well as on ancient life in general.
It is said that Cleanthes the Stoic, being too
poor to buy papyrus, used to write on ostraca, but
no remains of classical lit. have been


3. New found on the ostraca thus far dis-
Testament covered. In some instances, however,
Ostraca Christian literary texts are preserved


upon ostraca. Some years ago Bou-
riant bought in Upper Egypt 20 ostraca, probably
of the 7th cent., inscribed with the Gr text of parts
of the Gospels. The ostraca are of different sizes,
and preserve among others one long continuous
passage (Lk 22 40-71), which runs over 10 of the
pieces. The ostraca contain from 2 to 9 verses
each, and cover Mt 27 31.32; Mk 5 40.41 (9 3);
9 17.18.22; 15 21; Lk 12 13-16; 22 40-71; Jn
1 1-9; 1 14-17; 18 19-25; 19 15-17. The texts
are in 3 different hands, and attest the interest of
the poor in the gospel in the century of the Arab
conquest. Another late ostracon has a rough
drawing labeled “St. Peter the evangelist,’’ perhaps
in allusion to the Gospel of Peter.

Coptic ostraca, too, are numerous, esp. from the
Byzantine period, and of even more interest for
Christian history than the Greek. A
Sa'idic ostracon preserves the pericope
on the woman taken in adultery
(Jn 7 53—8 11), which is otherwise
unattested in the Sa‘idie NT. A Christian hymn
to Mary, akin to the cantieles of Luke, and some
Christian letters have been found. The work of
W. E. Crum on the Coptic ostraca is of especial
importance. See, further, Deissmann, Light from
the Ancient East, 1910; Lyon, Harvard Theol.
Review, January, 1911. Encar J. GoopsPErep


4. Coptic
Ostraca


OSTRICH, os’‘trich (332, ya‘énah; arpovlds,
strouthés; Lat Struthio camelus): The largest bird
now living. The Heb words ya‘énah, which means
“preediness,’’ and bath ha-ya‘dnah, “daughter of
greediness,”’ are made to refer to the indiscrim1-
nate diet of the ostrich, to which bird they apply;


and again to the owl, with no applicability. The
owl at times has a struggle to swallow whole prey
it has taken, but the mere fact that it is a night
hunter forever shuts it from the class of greedy
and promiscuous feeders. The bodies of owls are
proverbially lean like eagles. Neither did the owl
frequent several places where older versions of Jer
and Isa place it; so the tr® are now correctly ren-
dered “ostrich.” These birds came into the Bible
because of their desert life, the companions they
lived among there, and because of their night cries
that were guttural, terrifying groans, like the roar-
ing of lions. The birds were brought into many
pictures of desolation, because people dreaded their
fearful voices. They homed on the trackless deserts
that were dreaded by travelers, and when they
came feeding on the fringe of the wilderness, they
fell into company with vulture, eagle, lion, jackal
and adder, and joined their voices with the night
hawks and owls. For these reasons no birds were
more suitable for drawing strong comparisons from.
They attained a height ranging from 6 to 8 it.,
and weighed from 200 to 300 lbs. The head was
small with large eyes having powerful

1. Physical vision, and protected by lashes. The
Peculiarities neck was long, covered with down, and
the windpipe showed, while large bites

could be seen to slide down the gullet. The legs
were bare, long, and the muscles like steel from the
long distances covered in desert travel. The foot
was much like the cloven hoof of a beast. The
inner toe was 7 in. long, with a clawlike hoof, the
outer, smaller with no claw. With its length and
strength of leg and the weight of foot it could strike
a blow that saved it from attack by beasts smaller
than a leopard. The wings were small, the muscles
soft and flabby. They would not bear the weight
of the bird, but the habit of lifting and beating
them proved that this assisted in attaining speed
in running (cf Xen. Anab. 1.5.2,3). The body was


Ostriches.


covered with soft flexible feathers, the wings and
tail growing long plumes, for which the bird has
been pursued since the beginning of time. These
exquisite feathers were first used to decorate the
headdress and shields of desert chieftains, then as
decorations for royalty, and later for hat and hair
ornaments. The badge of the Prince of Wales is
three white ostrich plumes. The females are
smaller, the colors gray and white, the males a
glossy black, the wing and tail plumes white. ‘The
ostrich has three physical peculiarities that stagger
scientists. Jt has eyelashes, developed no doubt
to protect the eyes from the dust and sand of
desert life. On the wings are two plumeless shafts
like large porcupine quills. These may be used in
resisting attack. It also has a bladder like a


Ostrich
Owl


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2204


mammal, that collects uric acid, the rarest organ

ever developed in a feathered creature.
These birds homed on the deserts of Arabia and
at the lower end of the great Salt Sea. Here the
ostrich left her eggs on the earth and


2. Eggs warmed them in the sand. That
and Care they were not hard baked was due
of Young to the fact that they were covered for


protection during the day and brooded
through the cooler nights. The eggs average 3 lbs.
weight. They have been used for food in the
haunts of the ostrich since the records of history
began, and their stout shells for drinking-vessels.
It is the custom of natives on finding a nest to take
a long stick and draw out an egg. If incubation
has advanced enough to spoil the eggs for use,
the nest is carefully covered and left; if fresh,
they are eaten, one egg being sufficient for a small
family. No doubt these were the eggs to which
Job referred as being tasteless without salt (Job 6
6). The number of eggs in the nest was due to
the fact that the birds were polygamous, one male
leading from 2 to 7 females, all of which deposited
their eggs in acommon nest. When several females
wanted to use the nest at the same time, the first
one to reach it deposited her egg in it, and the others
on the sand close beside. This accounts for the
careless habits of the ostrich as to her young. In
this communal nest, containing from 2 to 3 dozen
eggs, is is impossible for the mother bird to know
which of the young is hers. So all of them united
in laying the eggs and allowing the father to look
after the nest and the young. The bird first appears
among the abominations in Lev 11 16 RV, AV
“owl”; Dt 14 16, RV “little owl,” AV “owl.”
This must have referred to the toughness of grown
specimens, since there was nothing offensive in the
bird’s diet to taint its flesh and the young tender
ones were delicious meat. In his agony, Job felt
so much an outcast that he cried:


“T am a brother to jackals,
And a companion to ostriches" (Job 80 29).


Again he records that the Almighty discoursed to
him of the ostrich in the following manner:
“The wings of the ostrich wave proudly;
But are they the pinions and plumage of love ?"’ ete
39 13-18).
The ostrich history previously given explains all
this passage save the last two verses, the first of
which is a reference to the fact that
3. OT the Arabs thought the ostrich a stupid
References bird, because, when it had traveled
to exhaustion, it hid its head and
thought its body safe, and because some of its eggs
were found outside the nest. The second was due
to a well-known fact that, given a straight course,
the ostrich could outrun a horse. The birds could
attain and keep up a speed of 60 miles an hour for
the greater part of half a day and even longer, hence
it was possible to take them only by a system of
relay riders (Xen., op. cit.) When Isaiah predicted
the fall of Babylon, he used these words: ‘But wild
beasts of the desert sball lic there; and their houses
shall be full of doleful creatures; and ostriches shall
dwell there, and wild goats shall dance there” (Isa
13 21). Because this was to be the destruction of
a great city, located on the Euphrates River and
built by the fertility and prosperity of the country
surrounding it, and the ruins those of homes, the
bird indicated by every natural condition would be
the owl. The wild goats clambering over the ruins
would be natural companions and the sneaking
wolves—but not the big bird of daytime travel,
desert habitation, accustomed to constant pursuit
for its plumage. Exactly the same argument
applics to the next reference by the same writer


(34 13). “And the wild beasts of the desert shall
meet with the wolves, and the wild goat shall cry
to his fellow; yea, the night monster shall settle
there, and shall find her a place of rest” (34 14).
“The beasts of the field shall honor me, the jackals
and the ostriches; because I give waters in the
wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink
to my people, my chosen” (43 20). Here we find
the ostrich in its natural location, surrounded by
creatures that were its daily companions. The
next reference also places the bird at home and in
customary company: “Therefore the wild beasts
of the desert with the wolves shall dwell there, and
the ostriches [AV “owls’’] shall dwell therein: and
it shall be no more inhabited forever; neither shall
it be dwelt in from generation to generation” (Jer
50 39).
‘Even the jackals draw out the breast, they give suck
to their young ones:
The daughter of my people is become cruel, like the
ostriches in the wilderness” (Lam 4 3).
This reference is made to the supposed cruelty of
the ostrich in not raising its young.
GENE STRATTON-PORTER

OTHNI, oth’ni (IY , ‘othn?, meaning unknown):

Ason of Shemaiah, a Korahite Levite (1 Ch 26 7),


OTHNIEL, oth’ni-el (N°2NY, ‘othn7’ al): A hero
in Israel, son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother.
He conquered Kiriath-sepher, later known as Debir,
in the territory of Judah in the days of Joshua, and
was given the daughter of Caleb, Achsah, to wife
as a reward (Josh 15 17 || Jgs 113). He later
smote Cushan-rishathaim, king of Mesopotamia,
whom the children of Israel had served 8 years, and
thus not only saved the Israelites, but by reviving
national sentiment among them (cf Ant, V, iv, 3),
and reéstablishing government, became the first
of those hero-rulers known as “‘judges.”” The effects
of his victory lasted an entire generation (40 years,
Jgs 3 9-11). He had ason named Hathath (1 Ch
4 13) and probably another named Meonothai (cf
recensio Luciana of LXX, ad loc.). In the days of
David we find a family bearing the name of Othniel,
from which came Heldai the Metophathite, captain
of the twelfth month (1 Ch 27 15).

Naruan Isaacs

OTHONIAS, oth-é-ni’as (Oovlas, Othonias):
One of those who had taken “strange wives” (1 Esd
9 28)=“‘Mattaniah” of Ezr 10 27.


OUCHES, ouch’ez, -iz (MIZAWA, mishbecoth [Ex
28 11.13.14.25; 39 6.13.16.18]; ARV “settings,”
but in Ex 39 13, “Snelosings”): The secondary
meaning of this now archaic word is the gold or
silver setting of a precious stone. In Ex, where it
occurs 8 t, it is clear that the gold settings of the
engraved stones forming the breast-plate of the
high priest are intended; the onyx stones forming
the fibula or brooch for holding together the two
sides of the breast-plate being said to be “inclosed
in ouches [settings] of gold” (Ex 39 6). Not only
were these two onyx or beryl stones so set, but the
12 stones forming the front of the breast-plate were
“inclosed in gold in their scttings’ (Ex 28 20).
The same word occurs in Ps 45 13, where the
king’s daughter is said to have her clothing “‘in-
wrought with gold,” i.e. embroidered with gold
thread or wire. Ex 39 8 tells us how this wire
was produced. From this fact it may be inferred
that the settings of the breast-plate were not solid
pieces of gold, but were formed of woven wire
wreathed round the stones, in a sort of filigree.
See also Stones, Prectous.

W. Suaw Canprcorr

OUTCAST, out’kast: Represents some form of
MUTT, dahah, or 413, nadhah, both meaning “thrust


2205


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ostrich —
Owl


out.” In Jer 30 17 “outcast” means “thrust out
of society,” ‘‘degraded person’’; elsewhere it means
“exile” (Ps 147 2; Isa 16 3f; Jer 49 36).


OUTER, out’ér: This adj. is used 12 t by Ezekiel
of the outside court of the temple. In Mt we find
it 3+ (8 12; 22 13; 25 30) in “outer darkness”
(7d oxébros 7d e&wrepov, t6 skétos té exdteron), which
eee the utter darkness of the doom of the
ost.


OUTGOING, out’go-ing: In Ps 66 8, “Thou
makest the outgoings of the morning and evening
to rejoice,” the Heb is N¥12, méca’. The word
(from ydca@’, “to go forth’’) refers to the “going
forth” of the sun, and so means ‘east’? (as in Ps
75 6). The connection of mé¢d’ with “evening”
is therefore zeugmatic, but the meaning is clear
and there are extra-Bib. parallels (cf ‘the two
Orients”). In Josh 17 18, AV uses “outgoings”
for the Heb NINEWM, tdca’dth (also from yaga’),
where the meaning is “extremity” (RV “goings
out,’ as in Nu 384 5, etc). ‘Outwent’’ occurs in
Mk 6 33, Burton Scott Easton


OUTLANDISH, out-land’ish (Neh 18 26, AV
“Him did outlandish women cause to sin’’): ‘“Out-
landish” in modern Eng. is colloquial only and with
the sense ‘‘utterly extraordinary,” but AV uses it
in the lit. meaning “out of the land,” “foreign,”
ERV “strange women,’ ARV “foreign women,”
Heb "33, nokhri, “foreign.”


OUTRAGE, ovt’raj, OUTRAGEOUS, out-ra’jus:
The noun (from the Fr. oulre+-age, “that which goes
beyond’) only in the heading to Ps 10 AV; the adj.
in Prov 27 4, AV and ERV, for SQW, sheteph,
“flood.” “Anger is overwhelming” (ARV), is
much better.


OUTROADS, out’ridz (éodetw, erodetd, “to
go forth,” “to make a military expedition’; AV
and RV in 1 Macc 16 41, “horsemen... . that
they might make outroads upon the ways of Judah”;
1 Esd 4 23, RV “goeth forth to make outroads”’):
“Outroads” is obsolete, but its opposite, “inroads,”
is still good Eng.


OUTWARD, out’wérd, MAN (é€w, é2z6, “‘out-
side,” “without,” “out of doors’): The body, sub-
ject to decay and death, in distinction from the
inner man, the imperishable spiritual life which ‘‘is
renewed day by day” (2 Cor 4 16); also the body
as the object of worldly thought and pride in exter-
nal dress and adornment (1 Pet 3 3). See Man,
Naturat; Man, New.

OVEN, uv’n. See Brean; FuRNAcE.

OVERCHARGE, 6-vér-chirj’: Lk 21 34, “‘lest
haply your hearts be overcharged with drunken-
ness” (Sapirw, barind, “burden,’’ here with the
force “be occupied with’); 2 Cor 2 5, AV “that
I may not overcharge you’ (émBaptw, epibaré6,
“overload’”), RV “that I press not too heavily.”
See CHARGES.


OVERPASS, 6-vér-pas’: A special tr of the very
common vb. 129, ‘abhar, ‘to pass over,” found in
EV of Ps 67 1 and Isa 26 20 in the sense ‘‘to pass
by,” and in Jer 5 28 with the meaning ‘to over-


flow.”


OVERPLUS, 5’vér-plus: Lev 26 27, for a3,
‘ddhaph, “‘excess.”’


OVERSEER, 6-vér-sé’@r, or -sér’: One who
overlooks, inspects; in the OT from MX}, nacah
(2 Ch 2 18; in 2 Ch 34 13 RV changes to “set
forward’’), and IPB, pdkadh (Gen 39 4.5; 2 Ch
84 12.17; RV has this word for AV “officers” in
Gen 41 34, and for “rulers” in 1 Ch 26 32); in
the NT once for érlexoros, episkopos, in Acts 20
28, where RV has “bishops” (m “overseers”; cf
1 Pet 5 2). See Bisxop.


OWL, oul (F297 MA, bath ha-ya'dnah; Lat
Ulula): The name of every nocturnal bird of prey
of the N.O. Striges. These birds range from the
great horned ow! of 2 ft. in length, through many
subdivisions to the little screech-owl of 5 in. All
are characterized by very large heads, many have


ie


Owl (Athene meridionalis).


ear tufts, all have large eyes surrounded by a disk
of tiny, stiff, radiating feathers. The remainder
of the plumage has no aftershaft. So these birds
make the softest flight of any creature traveling
on wing. A volume could be written on the eye
of the owl, perhaps its most wonderful feature
being in the power of the bird to enlarge the iris
if it wishes more distinct vision. There is material
for another on the prominent and peculiar auditory
parts. With almost all owls the feet are so ar-
ranged that two toes can be turned forward and
two back, thus reinforcing the grip of the bird by
an extra toe and giving it unusual strength of foot.
All are night-hunters, taking prey to be found at
that time, of size according to the strength. The
owl was very numerous in the caves, ruined temples
and cities, and even in the fertile valleys of Pal.
It is given place in the Bible because it was con-
sidered unfit for food and because people dreaded
the cries of every branch of the numcrous family.
It appeared often, as most birds, in the early VSS
of the Bible; later translators seem to feel that it
was used in several places where the ostrich really
was intended (see Ostricw). It would appear to
a natural historian that the right bird could be se-
lected by the location, where the text is confusing.
The ostrich had a voice that was even more terri-
fying, when raised in the night, than that of the
owl. But it was a bird of the desert, of wide range
and traveled only by day. This would confine its
habitat to the desert and the greenery where it
joined fertile land, but would not bring it in very
close touch with civilization. The owl is a bird of


Owl, Great
Painfulness


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2206


ruins, that lay mostly in the heart of rich farming
lands, where prosperous cities had been built and
then destroyed by enemies. Near these locations
the ostrich would be pursued for its plumage, and
its nesting conditions did not prevail. The loca-
tion was strictly the owl’s chosen haunt, and it had
the voice to fit all the requirements of the text. In
the lists of abominations, the original Heb yanshiph,
derived from a root meaning twilight, is tr4 “great
owl” (see Lev 11 17 and Dt 14 16). It is prob-
able that this was a bird about 2 ft. in length, called
the eagle-owl. In the same lists the word kés (vux-
Tixopak, nuktikérax) refers to ruins, and the bird
indicated is specified as the ‘“‘little owl,” that is,
smaller than the great owl—about the size of our
barn owl. This bird is referred to as the ‘‘mother
of ruins,” and the tr® that place it in deserted
temples and cities are beyond all doubt correct.
Kippoz (eéxtvos, echinos) occurs once (1sa 34 15),
and is tr4 “great owl’ in former versions; lately
(in ARV) it is changed to ‘‘dart-snake’” (ERV
“arrowsnake”). In this same description lilith
(dvoxévravpos, onokéntauros), ‘‘a speeter of night,”
was formerly screech-owl, now it reads “night
monster,’’? whieh is more confusing and less sug-
gestive. The owls in the lists of abominations
(Lev 11 17.18; Dt 14 16) are the little owl, the
great owl and the horned owl. The only other ow]
of all those that produced such impressions of deso-
lation in the Books of Isa, Jer, Job and Mic is re-
ferred to in Ps 102 6:
‘*T am like a pelican of the wilderness;
I am become as an owl of the waste places."
Here it would appear that the bird habitual to the
wilderness and the waste places, that certainly
would be desert, would be the ostrieh—while in any
quotation referring to ruins, the owl would be the
bird indicated by natural conditions.
Gene SrraTron-PortTer

OWL, GREAT (S°W27, yanshtiph; LXX (Bis,
ibis, or etBis, cibis): A member of the Pal species
of the family Strigidae. The great owl mentioned
in the Bible was no doubt their largest speeimen
of the family, a bird fully 2 ft. in length, full feath-
ered, with unusually large head and long ear tufts.
It was a formidable and noble-appearing bird, with
resounding voice. It was abundant among the
ruins of temples, the tombs of Carmel, the caves of
Gennesaret, and among the ruined cities of South-
ern Judah. It is ineluded in the abomination lists
of Lev 11 17 and Dt 14 16. See Ow.

, GENE StTRATTON-PORTER

OWL, LITTLE (O13, kas;

tikéraz; Lat Athene meridionalis): A night bird


PAARAI, pi’a-ri (“IZB, pa'dray, “devotee of
Peor’”’): One of David’s 37 valiant men (2 8 28
35). Doubtless the ‘‘Naarai” of 1 Ch 11 37.


PACATIANA, pi-ka-ti-3’na, pak-a-ti’a-na (Ila-
katiavy, Pakatiané): About 295 AD, when the
province of Asia was broken up, two new provinees
were formed, Phrygia Prima (Pacatiana), of whieh
Laodicea was “the chicfest city” (subseription to
1 Tim AV), and Phrygia Secunda (Salutaris).
See Purycia, and HDB, III, 865.


PACE, pis (722, ca‘adh): A step in 2S 6 13,
hence about one yard.


PACHON, pa’kon (axev, Pachén): The name
of a month mentioned in 3 Macc 6 38.


vucrikdpag, nuk- |


of prey distinguished by a round head, and extreme-
ly large eyes. The little owl is left in RV only in
the lists of abominations (see Lev 11 17; Dt 14
16). See Ow1.


OWL, SCREECH. Sce Nicut Monster.


OWNER, on’ér. Sce Suips anv Boats, 111, 2.


OX. See ANTELOPE; CaTTLE; WILD Ox.


OX, oks ("ME, Ox): One of the ancestors of Judith
(Jth 8 1). The name is not Heb. Perhaps the
Itala Ozi and the Syr Uz point to the Heb Uzat.


OX-GOAD, oks’gid. See Goan.


OZEM, 6’zem (OEN, ’d¢em, meaning unknown):

(1) The 6th son of David (1 Ch 215), LXX
(“Acou, Asom) and Vulg suggest that the name
should be pointed DES, ’acam.

(2) A “son” of Jerahmeel (1 Ch 2 25).


OZIAS, 6-zi’as:

(1) (Ofelas, Ozetas, *Oftas, Ozias, B ab): The
son of Micah, a Simconite, one of the 3 rulers of
Bethulia in the days of Judith Jth 6 15.16; 7 23;
8 9ff; 10 6).

(2) (Ogelas, Ozeias, B and Swete; AV Ezias
[1 Esd 8 2], following A, ’Eglas, Hzias): An an-
cestor of Ezra (1 Esd 8 2; 2 Esd 1 2)=“Uazzi”
of Ezr 7 4; 1 Ch 6 51.

(3) Head of a family of temple-servants who re-
turned with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 6 31)=‘“Uzza”’ of
Ezr 2 49; Neh 7 51.

(4) Gr form of Uzzian (q.v.) in Mt 1 8.9 AV.
A king of Judah. S. ANGUS


OZIEL, 56’zi-el (OtemA, Ozeiél): An ancestor
of Judith (Jth 8 1); another form of the OT name
“Uazziel.”


OZNYI, 02’ni (ITN, ’ozn7, “my hearing,” or “my
ear’): A “son” of Gad (Nu 26 16)=“Ezbon”’ of
Gen 46 16 (cf 1 Ch 7 7).


OZNITES, oz’nits (with the art. "2780, ha-
’o2nt [collective], ‘the Oznites’): Of the clan of
Ozni (Nu 26 16). See Ozn1.


OZORA, G-25’ra. See Ezonra.


P


PADDAN, pad’an (Gen 48 7; AV Padan, pa-
dan). See next artiele.


PADDAN-ARAM, pad’an-a’ram or p.-Ar’am
(DIN JIB, paddan ’dram; LXX Mecororapla ris
Zvplas, Mesopotamia iés Surias; AV Padan-aram):
In Gen 48 7, Paddan stands alone, but as the LXX,
Sam, and Pesh read “Aram” also, it must in this
verse have dropped out of the MT. In the time of
Abraham, padanu oceurson the Bab contract-tablets
as a land measure, to which we may compare the
Arab. feddén or “ox-gang.” In the Assyr syl-
labaries it is the equivalent of cklu, “a field,” so
that Paddan-aram would mean “the field of
Aram,” and with this we may compare Hos 12 12
(Heb 12 13) and the use of the Heb sadheh in con-
| nection with Moab and Edom (Jgs 6 4; Ruth 1 6).


Furthermore, padanu and harranu are given as
synonyms with the meaning of ‘‘road.”’
Paddan-aram occurs only in the PC, but it cor-
responds to the “Haran” of the older documents.
The versions agree in translating both as Meso-
potamia, and identify with the home of the pa-
triarchs and the scene of Jacob’s exile the district
of Haran to the E. of the Upper Euphrates valley.
More in harmony with the length of Jacob’s flight,
as indicated by the time given (Gen 31 22.23), is
Harran-el-‘Awamid, an ancient site 10 miles to the
E. of Damascus, which satisfies all the demands
of history. See Aram. W. M. Curistie


PADDLE, pad”l (10, Dt 23 13
(Heb 14), RVm “shovel.”


yathedh) :


PADON, pa’don (JB, padhon, “redemption’”):
One of the Nethinim (see Nersinim) who returned
with Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 44; Neh 7 47); the
“Phaleas’” of 1 Esd 5 29 (m “Padon’’).


PAGIEL, pi’gi-el, pa'ji-el, pa-gi’el (ON[VAD,
pagh‘?’él, ‘“God’s intervention”): Son of Ocran, of
the tribe of Asher, among those enrolled by Moses
at the numbering of Israel (Nu 1 18; 2 27).
When the tabernacle was set up, the heads of the
families of Israel “brought their offerings” in rota-
tion, and Pagiel, as prince of his tribe, came on
the 11th day (Nu 7 72). Nu 7 72-77 describes his
offering. In the journeyings of Israel he was “‘over
the host of the tribe of the children of Asher” (Nu
10 26), and possibly standard-bearer (cf Nu 10
14.22.25). Henry WALLACE


PAHATH-MOAB, p3’hath-md’ab (ANTATHND,
pahath mo’ abh, “sheik of Moab’; in 1 Esd 6 11;
8 31, ‘“Phaath Moab”): A Jewish clan probably
named after an ancestor of the above title. Part
of the clan returned with Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 6;
cf Neh 7 11) under two family names, Jeshua and
Joab; and a part came back with Ezra (Ezr 8 4).
Hashub, a “son of Pahath-moab,” is named among
the repairers of both the wall and the “tower of the
furnaces” at Jerus (Neh 3 11). It is the name of
one of the signatories ‘‘sealing’’ the ‘sure cove-
nant” of Neh 9 88 (Neh 10 14). Some of the
sons of this name had taken “strange wives” (Ezr
10 30). Henry WALLACE


PAI, pai CYB, pat; Boysp, Phogér): The royal
city of Hadad or Hadar, king of Edom (1 Ch 1
50). The name is given as “Pau” (198, pa‘a) in
Gen 36 39. There is no indication of its position.
It is not identified.


PAIN, pan (097, hal, 57, hi, DAD, hebhel,
mon, halah, MOT, halhalah, IND, ka’zbh, 82,
ke’ abh, “ZB, mécar, AND, makh’abh, DAP, ‘ama,
“YX, cir; Bacavitw, basanizd, wévos, pdnos, ably,
édin): These words signifying various forms of
bodily or mental suffering are generally tr? “‘pain”’;
28 out of the 34 passages in which the word is used
are in the poetical or prophetical books and refer
to conditions of mental disquict or dismay due to
the punishment of personal or national sin. In
one instance only is the word used as a historic
record of personal physical pain: the case of the
wife of Phinehas (1 8 4 19), but the same word
cir is used figuratively in Isa 13 8; 21 3; Dnl 10
16, and tré “pangs” or “sorrows.” In other pas-
sages where we have the same comparison of con-
sternation in the presence of God’s judgments to
the pangs of childbirth, the word used is hebhel, as
in Isa 66 7; Jer 18 21; 22 23; 49 24. In some


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Owl, Great
Painfulness


of these and similar passages several synonyms are
used in the one verse to intensify the impression,
and are tr? “pain,” “pangs,” and “sorrows,” as in
Isa 13 8.


The word most commonly used by the prophets is
some form of hal or hil, sometimes with the addition
“as of a woman in travail,’’ as in Ps 48 6; Isa 26 18;
Jor 6 24; 22 23; Mic 4 10. This pain is referred to
the heart (Ps 55 4) or to the head (Jer 30 23; cf vs 5.6).
In Ezk 30 4, it is the penal affliction of Ethiopia, and
in ver 16, AV ‘‘Sin [Tanis] shall have great pain” (RV
“‘anguish"’); in Ilsa 23 5 Egypt is sorely paincd at the
news of the fall of Tyre. Before the invading host of
locusts the people are much pained (Joel 26 AV).
Pain in the sense of toil and trouble in Jer 12 13 is the
tr of halah, a word more frequently rendered grieving
or sickness, as in 1 K 14 1; Prov 23 35; Cant 2 5;
Jer § 3. The reduplicated form fhalhdidh is esp. used
of a twisting pain usually referred to the loins (Isa 21 3;
Ezk 30 4.9; Nah 2 10).

Pain in the original meaning of the word (as it has
come down to us through the Old Fr. from the Lat poena)
as a penalty inflicted for personal sin is expressed by
the words kda’ébh or ke’abh in Joh 14 22; 15 20, and in
the questioning complaint of the prophet (Jer 15 18).
As a judgment on personal sin pain is also expressed by
makh’ obh in Job 338 19; Jer 51 8, but this word is used
in the sense of afflictions in lsa 53 3 in the expression
**man of sorrows.’’ The Psalmist (Ps 25 18) praying
for deliverance from the afflictions which weighed heavily
on himin turn uses the word ‘dmal, and this word which
primarily means _‘'toil” or ‘‘labor,’’ as in Eccl 1 3, or
“ travail,”’ as in Isa 53 11, is trd ‘painful’ in Ps 73 16,
as expressing Asaph’s disquiet due to his misunderstand-
ing of the ways of Providence. The ‘pains of hell’’
(Ps 116 3 AV), which got hold of the Psalmist in his sick-
ness, is the rendering of the word_mécar; the same word
is tr¢ “distress” in Ps 118 5.. Most of these words
have a primary physical meaning of twisting, rubbing
or constricting.


In the NT ddin is tr? “pain’’ (of death, RV
“pang’”’) in Acts 2 24. This word is used to ex-
press any severe pain, such as that of travail, or
(as in Aeschylus, Chéephori, 211) the pain of intense
apprehension. The vb. from this, ¥ ddundémat,
is used by the Rich Man in the parable to describe
his torment (RV “anguish’”’) (Lk 16 24). The
related vb. sunédiné is used in Rom 8 22 and is
tr? “travailing in pain together.” In much the
same sense the word is used by Euripides (Helena,
727).

In Rev 12 2 the woman clothed with the sun
(basanizoméné) was in pain to be delivered; the
vb. (basaniz6) which means ‘‘to torture” is used both
in Mt 8 6 in the account of the grievously tor-
mented centurion’s servant, and in the description
of the laboring of the apostles’ boat on the stormy
Sea of Galilee (Mt 14 24). The former of these
seems to have been a case of spinal meningitis. This
vb. occurs in Thucydides vii.86 (viii.92), where it
means ‘‘being put to torture.” Inthe two passages
in Rev where pain is mentioned the word is ponos,
the pain which affected those on whom the fifth
vial was poured (16 10), andin the description of
the City of God where there is no more pain (21 4).
Theprimary meaning of this word seems to be “‘toil,”’
as in Iliad xxi.525, but it is used by Hippocrates
to express disease (A phorisma iv.44).

ALEX. MACALISTER

PAINFULNESS, pin’fodl-nes (p6x 80s, méchthos) :
In the summary of his missionary labors in 2 Cor
11 27 AV, St. Paul uses this word. RV renders
it “travail,” which probably now expresses its
meaning more closely, as in modern usage ‘‘pain-
fulness” is usually restricted to the condition of
actual soreness or suffering, although we still use
“nainstaking”’ in the sense of careful labor. The
Gr word is used for toil or excessive anxiety, as in
Euripides (Medea, 126), where it refers to that
care for her children which she had lost in her mad-
ness. Tindale uses “painfulness” in 1 Jn 4 18
as the tr of xédaois, kélasts, which AV renders
“torment”? and RV “punishment.”

ALEX. MACALISTER


Paint
Palestine


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2208


PAINT, pant (from Old Fr. peinctre, frequentative
of peindre, Lat pingo, ‘to paint”): (1) From Heb
vb. TW, mashah, “to smear,” “to anoint,” ‘to
paint,” describing the painting of interiors with
vermilion, perhaps resembling lacquer: ‘‘ceiled
with cedar, and painted with vermilion’” (Jer 22


14). The shields of the Ninevite soldiers were
red, presumably painted (Nah 2 3). (2) From
noun JB, pukh, “paint,” “antimony,” “stibium,”


“black mineral powder,” used as a cosmetic, to
lend artificial size and fancied beauty to the eye,
always spoken of asa meretricious device, indicating
light or unworthy character. Jezebel “painted her
eyes, and attired her head’ (2 KX 9 30, lit. “put
pukh into her eyes’). To the harlot city Jerus,
Jeremiah (4 30) says, ‘“‘deckest thee. ..., en-
largest thine eyes with paint” (pakh). AV renders
“rentest. thy face,” as if the stain were a cut, or
the enlarging done by violence. (3) From vb. Sm,
kadhal, “to smear,” ‘to paint.’’ Ezekiel says to
Oholah-Oholibah (Judah-Israel),“didst wash thy-
self, paint [kdhal] thine eyes,” as the adulteress
prepares herself for her paramour (Ezk 23 40).
The antimony, in an extremely fine powder (Arab.
kuhl, from kahal), is placed in the eye by means of
a very fine rod, bodkin, or probe, drawn between
the edges of the eyelids. This distends the eye,
and also increases its apparent size, the effect being
increased by a line of stain drawn from the corner,
and by a similar line prolonging the eyebrow. See
Evepraint; Coton. Puirip WENDELL CRANNELL


PAINTING, p&n’ting. See Crarrs, II, 12.


PAIR, p4r: The m of Cant 4 2 (but not of the
| 6 6) reads, “which are all of them in pairs,’’ while
the text has, “whereof every one hath twins.”
The Heb MIYANMNA, math’imath, is from a ¥ ta’am,
“be double,” and is perhaps susceptible of either
meaning. But the description is of sheep, and
the m gives no comprehensible figure, while the
text points to the exceedingly sleek and healthy
appearance. ‘Pairs’? seems to result from con-
fuging the figure with the thing figured—the teeth,
where each upper is paired with the corresponding
lower.


PALACE, pal’as: In Heb chiefly ]V278, ’arman,
in RV text tré ‘castle’ in 1 K 16 18; 2 K 15 25;
MWA, birah, bon, hékhal, the same word often
rendered ‘temple’; in Gr avy, aulé, in RV trd
“court” (Mt 26 3.58.69; Mk 14 54.66; Lk 11
21; Jn 1815). On the other hand, ‘‘palace’’
takes the place in RV of AV “common hall” or
“judgment hall” (praitérion, Mt 27 27; Jn 18 28.
33; 19 9; Acts 23 35). See Jupammnt, Hawi or.
A description of Solomon’s palace is given in 1 K
7 1-12 (see Tempie). Archaeology has brought
to light the remains of great palaces in Egypt,
Babylonia, Assyria (Sargon, Sennacherib, Assur-
banipal, etc), Susa, etc. See Houss.

James Orr

PALAESTRA, PALESTRA, pa-les’tra. See
Games, IT, 3, (4).


PALAL, pi’lal (bp, pala, “judge’): Son of
Uzai, and one of the repairers of the wall (Neh 3
25).


_ PALANQUIN, pal-an-kén’: In Cant 3 9 occurs
TODS, ’appiryon, a word that has no Sem cog-
nates and is of dubious meaning. In form, however,
it resernbles the Sanskrit paryafika, and still more
closely the Gr dopstor, phoreton, both of which mean
“litter bed.’ Hence RV ‘‘palanquin”’ (ultimately


derived from paryafika). The m “car of state’ -
and AV ‘‘chariot” are mere guesses.


PALESTINA, pal-es-ti’na (MDB, p'lesheth): Ex
15 14; Isa 14 29.31 AV; changed in RV to
PuiisTia (q.v.).


PALESTINE, pal’es-tin (OSD, p'lesheth; Sv-
Acorieip, Philistieim, ’AAASdvdor, Alldphulot; AV
Joel 3 4 [RV “Philistia”], ‘Palestina’; AV Ex 15
14; Isa 14 29.31; cf Ps 60 8; 83 7; 87 4; 108 9):


I. Puystcat Conpirions

. General Geographical Features

Water-Supply

Geological Conditions

. Fauna and Flora

. Climate
Rainfall
Drought and Famine

ALESTINE IN THE PENTATEUCH
Places Visited by Abraham
Places Visited by Isaac
Places Visited by Jacob
Mentioned in Connection with Judah
Review of Geography of Genesis
Exodus and Leviticus
Numbers
Deuteronomy

ALESTINE IN THE Historic Books or Tor OT

. Book of Joshua

. Book of Judges

. Book of Ruth

. Books of Samuel


II.


FO DOOR OND et eg 1. OF ONO rt


III.


Books of Kings
. Post-exilic Historical Books
IV. Pavestine IN THE Portic Books or tHE OT
1. Book of Job
2. Book of Psalms
3. Book of Proverbs
4. Song of Songs
V. PAaLeEstiNE IN THE PROPHETS
1. Isaiah
2. Jeremiah
3. Ezekiel
4. Minor Prophets
VI. PaLEsTINE IN THE APOCRYPHA
1. Book of Judith
2. Book of Wisdom
3. 1 Maccabees
4. 2 Maccabees
PALESTINE IN THE NT
1. Synoptic Gospels
2. Fourth Gospel
3. Book of Acts
LITERATURE


The word properly means ‘‘Philistia,” but appears


OnROne


VII.


_ to be first used in the extended sense, as meaning all


the “Land of Israel” or “Holy Land” (Zee 2 12),
by Philo and by Ovid and later Rom authors
(Reland, Pal Itlustr., I, 38-42).

I. Physical Conditions.—The Bible in general
may be said to breathe the air of Pal; and it is here
intended to show how important for sound criticism
is the consideration of its geography, and of the
numerous incidental allusions to the natural fea-
tures, fauna, flora, cultivation, and climate of the
land in which most of the Bible books were written.
With the later history and topography of Pal, after
70 AD, we are not here concerned, but a short
account of its present physical and geological con-
ditions is needed for our purpose.

Pal W. of the Jordan, between Dan and Beersheba,
has an area of about 6,000 sq. miles, the length from

Hermon southward being nearly 150


1. General miles, and the width gradually in-
Geo- creasing from 20 miles ou the N. to 60
graphical miles on the S. It is thus about the
Features size of Wales, and the height of the


Palestinian mountains is about the
same as that of the Welsh. E. of the Jordan an
area of about 4,000 sq. miles was included in the
land of Israel. The general geographical features
are familiar to all.

(1) The land is divided by the deep chasm of the
Jordan valley—an ancient geological fault con-
tinuing in the Dead Sea, where its depth (at the


2209


bottom of the lake) is 2,600 ft. below the Mediter-
ranean.

(2) W. of the valley the mountain ridge, which is
a continuation of Lebanon, has very steep slopes
on the E. and long spurs on the W., on which side
the foothills (Heb shephélah or “lowland’’) form
a distinct district, widening gradually southward,
while between this region and the sea the plains
of Sharon and Philistia stretch to the sandhills and
low cliffs of a harborless coast.

_ (3) In Upper Galilee, on the N., the mountain
ridge rises to 4,000 ft. above the Mediterranean.
Lower Galilee, to the 8., includes rounded hills less
than’ 1,000 ft. above the sea, and the triangular
pee of Esdraelon drained by the River Kishon
etween the Gilboa watershed on the E. and the
long spur of Carmel on the W.

(4) In Samaria the mountains are extremely
rugged, but a small plain near Dothan adjoins that
of Esdraclon, and another stretches E. of Shechem,
2,500 ft. above the level of the Jordan valley. In
Judaea the main ridge rises toward Hebron and
then sinks to the level of the Beersheba plains about
1,000 ft. above the sea. The desert of Judah forms
a plateau (500 ft. above sea-level), between this
ridge and the Dead Sea, and is throughout barren
and waterless; but the mountains—which average
about 3,000 ft. above the sea—are full of good
springs and suitable for the cultivation of the vine,
' fig and olive. The richest lands are found in the
sh°phélah region—esp. in Judaea—and in the corn
plains of Esdraelon, Sharon, and Philistia.

(5) E. of the Jordan the plateau of Bashan
(averaging 1,500 ft. above the sea) is also a fine
corncountry. S. of this, Gilead presents a mountain
region rising to 3,600 ft. above sea-level at Jebel
Osha‘, and sloping gently on the E. to the desert.
The steep western slopes are watered by the Jabbok
River, and by many perennial brooks. In North
Gilead esp. the wooded hills present some of the
most picturesque scenery of the Holy Land. S. of
Gilead, the Moab plateau (about 2,700 ft. above
sea-level) is now a desert, but is fitted for corn
culture, and in places for the vine. A lower shelf
or plateau (about 500 to 1,000 ft. above sea-level)
intervenes between the main plateau_and the
Dead Sea eliffs, and answers to the Desert of
Judah W. of the lake.

The water-supply of Pal is abundant, except in
the desert regions above noticed, which include
ouly a small part of its area. The
Jordan runs into the Dead Sea, which
has no outlet and which maintains
its level solely by evaporation, being
consequently very salt; the surface is nearly 1,300
ft. below the Mediterranean, whereas the Sea of
Galilee (680 ft. below sea-level) is sweet and full
of fish. The Jordan is fed, not only by the snows
of Hermon, but by many affluent streams from both
sides. There are several streams also in Sharon,
including the Crocodile River under Carmel. In
the mountains, where the hard dolomite limestone
is on the surface, perennial springs are numerous.
In the lower hills, where this limestone is covered
by a softer chalky stone, the supply depends on
wells and cisterns. Iu the Beersheba plains the
water, running under the surface, is reached by
scooping shallow pits—esp. those near Gerar, to be
noticed later.

The fertility and cultivation of any country depends


mainly on its geological conditions. These are com-
paratively simple in Pal, and have under-


2. Water-
Supply


3. Geo- gone no change since the age when man
is ical first appeared, or_since the days of the
Ogical | Heb patriarchs. Thecountry was first up-
Conditions heaved from the ocean in the Eocene age;


and, in the subsequent Miocene age, the
great crack in the earth's surface occurred, which formed
a narrow gulf stretching trom that of the ‘Akabah on the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Paint
Palestine


S. almost to the foot of Hermon. Further upheaval,


accompanied by volcanic outbreaks which covered the
plateaus of Golan, Bashan, and Lower Galilee with lava,
cut off the Jordan valley from the Red Sea, and formed
a long lake, the bottom of which continucd to sink on the
8. to ils present level during the Pleiocene and Pluvial
periods, after which—its peculiar fauna having devel-
oped meanwhile—the lake gradually dried up, till it
was represented only, as it now is, by the swampy Ha@leh,
the pear-shaped Sea of Galilee, and the Dead Sea.
These changes all occurred long ages before the appear-
ance of man. Tho beds upheaved include: (1) the
Nubian Sandstone (of the Greensand period), which was
sheared along the line of the Jordan fault E. of the river,
and which only appears on the western slopes of Hermon,
Gilead, and Moab; (2) the limestones of the Cretaceous
age, including the hard dolomite, and softer beds full of
characteristic fossils; (3) the soft Eocene limestone,
which appears chiefly on the western spurs and in the
foothills, the angle of upheaval being less steep than
that of the older main formation. On the shores of the
Mediterranean a yet later sandy limestone forms the
low cliffs of Sharon. See Geo.ocy or PaLestIne.

As regards fauna, flora and cultivation, it is suffi-
eient here to say that they are still practically the
same as described throughout the
Bible. The lion and the wild bull
(Bos primigenius) were exterminated
within historic times, but have left
their bones in the Jordan gravels, and in caves.
The bear has gradually retreated to Hermon and
Lebanon. The buffalo has been introduced since
the Moslem conquest. Among trees the apple has
fallen out of cultivation since the Middle Ages, and
the cactus has been introduced; but Pal is still a
land of eorn, wine and oil, and famous for its fruits.
Its trees, shrubs and plants are those noticed in the
Bible. Its woods have been thinned in Lower
Galilee and Northern Sharon, but on the other
hand the copse has often grown over the site of
former vineyards and villages, and there is no
reason to think that any general desiccation has
occurred within the last 40 centuries, such as
would affect the rainfall.

The climate of Pal is similar to that of other
Mediterranean lands, such as Cyprus, Sicily or

Southern Italy; and, in spite of the
5. Climate fevers of mosquito districts in the

plains, it is much better than that of
the Delta in Egypt, or of Mesopotamia. The
summer heat is oppressive only for a few days at a
time, when (esp. in May) the dry wind—deficient
in ozone—blows from the eastern desert. For
most of the season a moisture-laden sea breeze,
rising about 10 AM, blows till the evening, and
fertilizes all the western slopes of the mountains.
In the bare deserts the difference between 90° F.
by day and 40° F. by night gives a refreshing cold.
With the east wind the temperature rises to 105°
F., and the nights are oppressive. In the Jordan
valley, in autumn, the shade temperature reaches
120° F. In this season mists cover the mountains
and swell the grapes. In winter the snow some-
times lies for several days on the watershed ridge
and on the Edomite mountains, but in summer
even Hermon is sometimes quite snowless at 9,000
ft. above the sea. There is perhaps no country in
which such a range of climate can be found, from
the Alpine to the tropical, and none in which the
range of fauna and flora is consequently so large,
from the European to the African.

The rainfall of Pal is between 20 and 30 in. an-
nually, and the rainy season is the same as in other

Mediterranean countries. The ‘“form-
6. Rainfall er rains’? begin with the thunder-

storms of November, and the ‘latter
rains” cease with April showers. From December
to February—except in years of drought—the rains
are heavy. In most years the supply is quite suffi-
cient for purposes of cultivation. The ploughing
begins in autumn, and the corn is rarely spoiled
by storms in summer. The fruits ripen in autumn


4, Fauna
and Flora


Palestine


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2210


and suffer only from the occasional appearance of
locust swarms. There appears to be no reason to
suppose that climate or rainfall have undergone
any change since the times of the Bible; and a con-
sideration of Bible allusions confirms this view.
Thus the occurrence of drought, and of conse-
quent famine, is mentioned in the OT as occasional
in all times (Gen 12 10; 26 2; 41 50;
7. Drought Lev 26 20; 28 211; 1 KK 8 35;
and Isa 5 6; Jer 14 1; Joel 1 10-12; Hag
Famine 111; Zec 14 17), and droughts are
also noticed in the Mish (Ta‘dnith, i.
4-7) as occurring in autumn, and even lasting
throughout the rainy season till spring. Good
rains were a blessing from God, and drought was a
sign of His displeasure, in Heb belief (Dt 11 14;
Jer 5 24; Joel 2 23). A thunderstorm in harvest
time (May) was most unusual (1 8 12 17.18), yet
such a storm does still occur as a very exceptional
phenomenon. By “snow in harvest’? (Prov 26 13)
we are not to understand a snowstorm, for it is
likened to a “faithful messenger,” and the reference
is to the use of snow for cooling wine, which is still
usual at Damascus. The notice of fever on the
shores of the Sea of Galilee (Mt 8 14) shows that
this region was as unhealthy as it still is in summer.
The decay of irrigation in Sharon may have ren-
dered the plain more malarious than of old, but the
identity of the Palestinian flora with that of the
Bible indicates that the climate, generally speaking,
is unchanged.
II, Palestine in the Pentateuch.—The Book of
Gen is full of allusions to sites sacred to the memory
of the Heb patriarchs. In the time of


1. Places Abraham the population consisted of
Visited by tribes, mainly Sem, who came origi-
Abraham nally from Babylonia, imeluding

Canaanites (‘Jowlanders”’) between


Sidon and Gaza, and in the Jordan valley, and
Amorites (“highlanders’’) in the mountains (Gen
10 15-19; Nu 13 29). Their language was akin
to Heb, and it is only in Egypt that we read of an
interpreter being needed (Gen 42 23), while ex-
cavated remains of seal-cylinders, and other objects,
show that the civilization of Pal was similar to
that of Babylonia.

(1) Shechem.—The first place noticed is the
shrine or “station” (mdk6m) of Shechem, with the
Elon Moreh (LXX ‘high oak’’), where Jacob after-
ward buried the idols of his wives, and where Joshua
set up a stone by the “holy place’ (Gen 12 6; 35
4; Josh 24 26). Sam tradition showed the site
near Baldta (“the oak’) at the foot of Mt. Gerizim.
The “Canaanite was then in the land’”’ (in Abra-
ham’s time), but was exterminated (Gen 34 25)
by Jacob’s sons. From Shechem Abraham jour-
neyed southward and raised an altar between Bethel
(Beitin) and Hai (Haydn), I. of the town of Luz,
the name of which still survives hard-by at the
spring of Ldzeh (Gen 12 8; 13 3; 28 11.19; 35 2).

(2) The Negeb.—But, on his return from Egypt
with large flocks (12 16), he settled in the pastoral
region, between Beersheba and the western Kadesh
(138 1; 20 1), called in Heb the neghebh, “dry”
country, on the edge of the cultivated lands. From
E. of Bethel there is a fine view of the lower Jordan
valley, and here Lot “lifted up his eyes” (13 10),
and chose the rich grass lands of that valley for his
flocks. The “citics of the Plain” (kikkar) were
clearly in this valley, and Sodom must have been
near the river, since Lot’s journey to Zoar (19 22)
occupied only an hour or two (vs 15.23) through the
plain to the foot of the Moab mountains. These
cities are not said to have been visible from near
Hebron; but, from the hilltop E. of the city, Abra-
ham could have seen “the smoke of the Jand”
(19 28) rising up. The first land owned by him


was the garden of Mamre (13 18; 18 1; 23 19),
with the cave-tomb which tradition still points out
under the floor of the Hebron mosque. His tent
was spread under the “oaks of Mamre” (18 1),
where his mysterious guests rested ‘under the tree”
(ver 8). One aged oak still survives in the flat
ground W. of the city, but this tree is very uncom-
mon in the mountains of Judah. In all these inci-
dental touches we have evidence of the exact
knowledge of Pal which distinguishes the story of
the patriarchs.

(3) Campaign of Amraphel—Pal appears to
have been an outlying province of the empire of
Hammurabi, king of Babylon in Abraham’s time;
and the campaign of Amraphel] resembled those of
later Assyr overlords exacting tribute of petty kings.
The route (14 5-8) lay through Bashan, Gilead
and Moab to Kadesh (probably at Petra), and the
return through the desert of Judah to the plains
of Jericho. Thus Hebron was not attacked (see
ver 13), and the pursuit by Abraham and_his
Amorite allies led up the Jordan valley to Dan,
and thence N. of Damascus (ver 15). The Salem
whose king blessed Abraham on his return was
thought by the Samaritans, and by Jerome, to be
the city near the Jordan valley afterward visited
by Jacob (14 18; 33 18); but see JERUSALEM.

(4) Gerar—Abraham returned to the southern
plains, and “sojourned in Gerar’? (20 1), now
Umm Jerrér, 7 miles 8. of Gaza. The wells which
he dug in this valley (26 15) were no doubt shallow
excavations like those from which the Arabs still
obtain the water flowing under the surface in the
same vicinity (SWP, III, 390), though that at
Beersheba (21 25-32), to which Isaac added an-
other (26 23-25), may have been more permanent.
Three masonry wells now exist at Bir es Seba‘, but
the masonry is modern. The planting of a “tama-
risk” at this place (21 33) is an interesting touch,
since the tree is distinetive of the dry lowlands.
From Beersheba Abraham journeyed to “the land
of Moriah” (LXX “the high land’’) to sacrifice
Isaac (22 2); and the mountain, according to Heb
tradition (2 Ch 3 1), was at Jerus, but according
to the Samaritans was Gerizim near the Elon
Moreh—a summit which could certainly have been
seen “afar off” (ver 4) on “the third day.”

Isaac, living in the same pastoral wilderness, at
the western Isadesh (25 11) and at Gerar (26 2),

suffered like his father in a year of


2. Places drought, and had similar difficulties
Visited by with the Philis. At Gerar he sowed
Isaac corn (26 12), and the vicinity is still


capable of such cultivation. Thence
he retreated 8.E. to Rehoboth (Ruheibeh), N. of
Kadesh, where ancient wells like those at Beer-
sheba still exist (26 22). To Beersheba he finally
returned (ver 23).
When Jacob fled to Haran from Beersheba (28
10) he slept at the “place” (or shrine) consecrated
by Abraham’s altar near Bethel, and—


3. Places like any modern Arab visitor to a
Visited by shrine—erected a memorial stone (ver
Jacob 18), which he renewed twenty years


; later (35 14) when God appeared to
him “again” (ver 9).

(1) Haran to Suceoth—His return journey from
Haran to Gilead raises an interesting question.
The distance is about 350 miles from Haran to the
Galeed_ or ‘witness heap” (81 48) at Mizpah—
probably Sdéf in North Gilead. This distance
Laban is said to have covered in 7 days (31 23),
which would be possible for a force mounted on
riding camels. But the news of Jacob’s flight
reached Laban on the 3d day (ver 22), and some
time would elupse before he could gather his
“brethren.” Jacob with his flocks and herds must


2211


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Palestine


have needed 3 weeks for the journey.
able that the vicinity of Mizpah still presents an-
cient monuments like the “pillar” (ver 45) round
which the “memorial cairn” (yghar-séhddhitha)
was formed. From this place Jacob journeyed to
Mahanaim (probably Mahmah), S. of the Jabbok
river—a place which afterward became the capital
of South Gilead (Gen 82 1f; 1 K 4 14); but, on
hearing of the advance of Esau from Edom, he
retreated across the river (Gen 32 22) and then
reached Succoth (33 17), believed to be Tell
Der‘ala, N. of the stream.

(2) From the Jordan to Hebron—Crossing the
Jordan by one of several fords in this vicinity,
Jacob approached Shechem by the perennial
stream of Wddy Fér‘ah, and camped at Shalem
(Salim) on the east side of the fertile plain which
stretches thence to Shechem, and here he bought
land of the Hivites (88 18-20). We are not told
that he dug a well, but the necessity for digging
one in a region full of springs can only be explained
by Hivite jealousy of water rights, and the well
still exists E. of Shechem (cf Jn 4 5f), not far
from the Elon Moreh where were buried the
traphim (Gen 36 4) or “spirits” (Assyr tarpu)
from Haran (31 30) under the oak of Abraham.
These no doubt were small images, such as are so
often unearthed in Pal. The further progress of
Jacob led by Bethel and Bethlehem to Hebron (85
6.19.27), but some of his elder sons seem to have
remained at Shechem. Thus Joseph was sent later
from Hebron (37 14) to visit his brethren there,
but found them at Dothan.

(3) Dothan (87 17) Jay in a plain on the main
trade route from Egypt to Damascus, which crossed
the low watershed at this point and led down the
valley to Jezreel and over Jordan to Bashan. The
‘well of the pit” (SWP, U1, 169) is still shown at
Tell Dothan, and the Ishmaelites, from Midian and
Gilead, chose this easy caravan route (87 25.28)
for camels laden with the Gilead balm and spices.
The plain was fitted for feeding Jacob’s flocks. The
products of Pal then included also honey, pistachio
nuts, and almonds (48 11); and a few centuries
later we find notice in a text of Thothmes III of
honey and balsam, with oil, wine, wheat, spelt,
barley and fruits, as rations of the Egyptian troops
in Canaan (Brugsch, Hist Egypt, I, 332).

The episode of Judah and Tamar is connected
with aregion in the Sh*phélah, or low hills of Judaea.

Adullam (‘Aid-el-ma), Chezib (‘Ain
4. Men- Kezbeh), and Timnath (Tibneh) are
tionedin not far apart (Gen 38 1.5.12), the
Connection latter being in a pastoral valley where
with Judah Judah met his “sheep shearers.”
Tamar sat at ‘the entrance of Enaim”
(ef vs 14.22 ERV) or Enam (Josh 15 34), perhaps
at Kefr ‘Ana, 6 miles N.W. of Timnath. She was
mistaken for a k¢dhéshah, or votary of Ashtoreth
(Gen 38 15.21), and we know from Hammurabi’s
laws that such votaries were already recognized.
The mention of Judah’s signet and staff (ver 18)
also reminds us of Bab eustoms as described _by
Herodotus (1.195), and signet-cylinders of Bab
style, and of early date, have been unearthed in
Pal at Gezer and elsewhere (cf the “Bab garment,”
Josh 7 21).
i raphy of Gen presents
Fe eet owe aa tae tre ledee of the
country, while the allusions to natural
5. Review of products and to customs arein accord with
5 the results of scientific discovery. Only
Geography one difficulty needs notice, where Atad
of Genesis (50 10) on the way from Egypt to Hebron
is described as ‘‘beyond the Jordan."’ In
this case the Assyr language perhaps helps us, for in that
tongue Yaur-danu means “the great river,’ and the
reference may be to the Nile itself, wbich is called Yaur
in Heb (ye'dr) and Assyr alike.


{
It is remark-


Ex is concerned with Egypt and the Sinaitic
desert, though it may be observed that its simple
agricultural laws (chs 21-23), which


6. Exodus so often recall those of Hammurabi,
and would have been needed at once on
Leviticus the conquest of Gilead and Bashan,


before crossing the Jordan. In Lev
(ch 11) we have a list of animals most of which
belong to the desert—as for instance the ‘‘coney”
or hyrax (Lev 11 5; Ps 104 18; Prov 30 26),
but others—such as the swine (Lev 11 7), the
stork and the heron (ver 19)—to the ‘Arabah and
the Jordan valley, while the hoopoe (AV “‘lapwing,”
ver 19) lives in Gilead and in Western Pal. In Dt
(ch 14) the fallow deer and the roe (ver 5) are now
inhabitants of Tabor and Gilead, but the ‘‘wild
goat” (ibex), “wild ox” (buball), “pygarg’’ (addax)
and “chamois” (wild sheep), are found in the
‘Arabah and in the deserts.
In Nu the conquest of Eastern Pal is described,
and most of the towns mentioned are known (21
18-33); the notice of vineyards in
7. Numbers Moab (ver 22) agrees with the dis-
covery of ancient rock-cut wine presses
near Heshbon (SEP, I, 221). The view of Israel,
in camp at Shittim by Balaam (22 41), standing
on the top of Pisgah or Mt. Nebo, has been shown
to be possible by the discovery of Jebel Neba,
where also rude dolmens recalling Balak’s altars
have been found (SEP, I, 202). The plateau of
Moab (32 3) is described as a “land for cattle,’
and still supports Arab flocks. The camps in which
Israel left their cattle, women and children during
the wars, for 6 months, stretched (33 49) from
Beth-jeshimoth (Suweimeh), near the northeastern
corner of the Dead Sea over Abel-shittim (‘‘the
acacia meadow’’—a name it still bears) in a plain
watered by several brooks, and having good herb-
age in spring.
(1) Physical allusions—The description of the
“good land” in Dt (8 7) applies in some details
with special force to Mt. Gilead, which
8. Deuter- possesses more perennial streams than
onomy Western Pal throughout—‘‘a land of
brooks of water, of fountains and
springs, flowing forth in valleys and hills’; a land
also “of wheat and barley, and vines and fig-trees
and pomegranates, a land of olive-trees and honey”
is found in Gilead and Bashan. Pal itself is not a
mining country, but the words (ver 9), “a land
whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou
mayest dig copper,’’ may be explained by the facts
that iron mines existed near Beirit in the 10th
cent. AD, and copper mines at Punon N. of Petra
in the 4th cent. AD, as described by Jerome (Onom,
s.v. ‘‘Phinin’”’). In Dt also (11 29; ef 27 4; Josh
8 30) Ebal and Gerizim are first noticed, as beside
the ‘oaks of Moreh.” Ebal the mountain of
curses (3,077 ft. above sea-level) and Gerizim the
mountain of blessings (2,850 ft.) are the two highest
tops in Samaria, and Shechem lies in a rich valley
between them. The first sacred center of Israel
was thus established at the place where Abraham
built his first altar and Jacob dug his well, where
Joseph was buried and where Joshua recognized
a holy place at the foot of Gerizim (Josh 24 26).
The last chapters of Dt record the famous Pisgah
view from Mt. Nebo (34 1-3), which answers in all
respects to that from Jebel Neba, except as to Dan,
and the utmost (or ‘‘western’’) sea, neither of which
is visible. Here we should probably read “toward”
rather than “to,” and there is no other hill above
the plains of Shittim whence a better view can
be obtained of the Jordan valley, from Zoar to
Jericho, of the watershed mountains as far N. as
Gilbca and Tabor, and of the slopes of Gilead.
(2) Archaeology.—But besides these physical


Palestine


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2212


allusions, the progress of exploration serves to
illustrate the archaeology of Dt. Israel was com-
manded (12 3) to overthrow the Can. altars, to
break the standing stones which were emblems of
superstition, to burn the ’dshérah poles (or artificial
trees), and to hew down the graven images. That
these commands were obeyed is clear. The rude
altars and standing stones are now found only in
Moab, and in remote parts of Gilead, Bashan, and
Galilee, not reached by the power of reforming
kings of Judah. The ’dshérah poles have dis-
appeared, the images are found, only deep under the
surface. The carved tablets which remain at
Damascus, and in Phoenicia and Syria, representing
the gods of Canaan or of the Hittites, have no
counterpart in the Holy Land. Again when we
read of ancient “landmarks” (Dt 19 14; Prov
22 28; 23 10), we are not to understand a mere
boundary stone, but rather one of those monuments
common in Babylonia—as early at least as the 12th
cent. BC—on which the boundaries of a field are
minutely described, the history of its grant by the
king detailed, and a curse (cf Dt 27 17) pronounced
against the man who should dare to remove the
stone. (See illustration under NEBUCHADNEZZAR.)

I. Palestine in the Historic Books of the OT.—
Josh is the great geographical book of the OT;
and the large majority of the 600
names of places, rivers and mountains
in Pal mentioned in the Bible are to
be found in this book.

(1) Topographical accuracy—About half of this
total of names were known, or were fixed by Dr.
Robinson, between 1838 and 1852, and about 150
new sites were discovered (1872-78, 1881-82) in
consequence of the 1-in. trigonometrical survey of
the country, and were identified by the present
writer during this period; a few interesting sites
have been added by M. Clermont-Ganneau (Adul-
lam and Gezer), by Rev A. Henderson (Kirlath-
jearim), by Rev. W. F. Birch (Zoar at Tell esh
Shéghar), and by others. Thus more than three-
quarters of the sites have been fixed with more
or less certainty, most of them preserving their
ancient names. It is impossible to study this
topography without seeing that the Bible writers
had personal knowledge of the country; and it is
incredible that a Heb priest, writing in Baby-
lonia, could have possessed that intimate acquaint-
ance with all parts of the land which is manifest
in the geographical chapters of Josh. The towns
are enumerated in due order by districts; the
tribal boundaries follow natural lines—valleys and
mountain ridges—and the character of various
regions is correctly indicated. Nor can we suppose
that this topography refers to conditions subse-
quent to the return from captivity, for these were
quite different. Simeon had ceased to inhabit
the south by the time of David (1 Ch 4 24), and
the lot of Dan was colonized by men ef Benjamin
after the captivity (8 12.13; Neh 11 34.35).
Tirzah is mentioned (Josh 12 24) in Samaria,
whereas the future capital of Omri is not. Ai is
said to have been made ‘‘a heap for ever” (8 28),
but was inhabited apparently in Isaiah’s time (10
28=Aiath) and certainly after the captivity (Har
228; Neh 7 32; 11 31=Aija). At latest, the
topography seems to be that of Solomon’s age,
though it is remarkable that very few places in
Samaria are noticed in the Book of Josh.

(2) The passage of the_Jordan.—lIsrael crossed
Jordan at the lowest ford E. of Jericho. The river
was in flood, swollen by the melting snows of Her-
mon (Josh 8 15); the stoppage occurred 20 miles
farther up at Adam (ed-Damieh), the chalky cliffs
at a narrow place being probably undermined and
falling in, thus damming the stream. A Moslem


1. Book
of Joshua


writer asserts that a similar stoppage occurred in
the 13th cent. AD, near the same point. (See
JorDAN River.) The first camp was established
at Gilgal (Jilgd@lich),3 miles E. of Jericho, and a
“circle” of 12 stones was erected. Jericho was not
at the mediaeval site (er Rika) S. of Gilgal, or at
the Herodian site farther W., but at the great spring
‘Ain es Sultan, close to the mountains to which the
spies escaped (2 16). The great mounds were
found by Sir C. Warren to consist of sun-dried
bricks, and further excavations (see Mitteil. der
deutschen Orient-Gesell., December, 1909, No. 41)
have revealed little but the remains of houses of
various dates.

(3) Joshua's first campaign.—The first city in the
mountains attacked by Israel was Ai, near Haydn,
2 miles 8. E. of Bethel. It has a deep valley
to the N., as described (Josh 8 22). The fall of
Aiand Bethel (ver 17) seems to have resulted in the
peaceful occupation of the region between Gibeon
and Shechem (8 30—-9 27); but while the Hivites
submitted, the Amorites of Jerus and of the 8.
attacked Gibeon (el Jib) and were driven down the
steep pass of Beth-horon (Beit ‘Adr) to the plains
(10 1-11). Joshua’s great raid, after this victory,
proceeded through the plain to Makkedah, now
called el Mughdr, from the “eave” (cf 10 17), and
by Libnah to Lachish (Tell el Hesy), whence he
went up to Hebron, and “turned” 8. to Debir (edh
Dhéhertyeh), thus subduing the sh*phélah of
Judah and the southern mountains, though the
capital at Jerus was not taken. It is now very
generally admitted that the six letters of the Amor-
ite king of Jerus included in Am Tab may refer to
this war. The’ Abiri or Habiri are therein noticed
as a fierce people from Seir, who “destroyed all the
rulers,” and who attacked Ajalon, Lachish, Ash-
kelon, Keilah (on the main road to Hebron) and
other places (see Exonus, THE).

(4) The second campaign (11 1-14) was against
the nations of Galilee; and the Heb victory was
gained at “the waters of Merom” (ver 5). There
1s no sound reason for placing these at the Hdaleh
lake; and the swampy Jordan valley was a very
unlikely field of battle for the Can. chariots (ver 6).
The kings noticed are those of Madon (Madin),
Shimron (Semmunieh), Dor (possibly Tell Thorah),
“on the west,” and of Hazor (Hazztr), all in Lower
Galilee. The pursuit was along the coast toward
Sidon (ver 8); and Merom may be identical with
Shimron-meron (12 20), now Semmunieh, in which
case the ‘‘waters’? were those of the perennial
stream in Wédy el Melek, 3 miles to the N., which
flow W. to join the lower part of the Kishon.
Shimron-meron was one of the 31 royal cities of
Pal W. of the Jordan (12 9-24).

The regions left unconquered by Joshua (13 2-6)
were those afterward conquered by David and
Solomon, including the Phih plains, and the Sido-
nian coast from Mearah (el Mogheiriyeh) northward
to Aphek (Afka) in Lebanon, on the border of
the Amorite country which lay 8, of the “land of
the Hittites” (1 4). Southern Lebanon, from Gebal
(Jubeil) and the “entering into Hamath’ (the
Eleutherus Valley) on the W., to Baal-gad (prob-
ably at ‘Ain Judeideh on the northwestern slope of
Hermon) was also included in the “land” by David
(2 8 8 6-10). But the whole of Eastern Pal (13
7-82), and of Western Pal, excepting the shore
plains, was allotted to the 12 tribes. Judah and
Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh), being the strong-
est, appear to have occupied the mountains and
the sh*phélah, as far N. as Lower Galilee, before the
final allotment.

Thus the lot of Simeon was within that inherited by


Judah (19 1), and_ that of Dan seems to have been
partly taken from Ephraim, since Joseph's lot originally


2213


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Palestine


reached to Gezer (16 3); hut Benjamin appears to have
received its portion early (cf 15 5-11; 16 1.2; 18 1l-
28).. This lot was larger than that of Ephraim, and
Benjamin was not then the ‘smallest of the tribes of
Israel’ (1 8S 9 21), since the destruction of the trihe
did not occur till after the death of Joshua and Eleazar
(Jgs 20 28).

The twelve trihes were distributed in various regions
which may here briefly be descrihed. Reuhen held the
Moab plateau to the Arnon (Wddy Méjub) on the &.,
and to the ‘‘river of Gad" (Wédy Né'afr) on the N,,
thus including part of the Jordan valley close to the
Dead Sea. Gad held all the W. of Gilead, being sepa-
rated from the Ammonites by the upper course of the
Jabbok. All the rest of the Jordan valley E. of the
river was included in this lot. Manasseh held Bashan,
but the conquest was not completed till later. Simeon
had the neghebh plateau 8.ofBeersheha. Judah occupied
the mountains 8. of Jerus, with the sh®phéléA to thcir
W., and claimed Philistia 8. of Ekron. Benjamin had
the Jericho plains and the mountains hetween Jerus
and Bethel. The horder ran S. of Jerus to Rachel's
tomb (1 S 10 2), and thence W. to Kiriath-jearim
(Erma) and Ekron. Dan occupied the lower hills W.
otf Benjamin and Ephraim, and claimed the plain from
Ekron to Rakkon (Tell er Rakkeit) N. of Joppa. Manas-
seh had a large region, corresponding to Samaria, and
Including Carmel, Sharon and half the Jordan valley,
with the mountains N. of Shechem; but this tribe occupied
only the hills, and was unahle to drive the Canaanites out
of the plains (Josh 17 11.16). Ephraim also complained
of the smallness of its let (ver 15), which lay in rugged
mountains hetween Bethel and Shechem, including,
however, the corn plateau E. of the latter city. Issa-
char held the plains of Esdraelon and Dothan, with the
Jordan valley te the E., hut soon hecame subject to the
Canaanites. Zebulun_had the hills of Lower Galilee,
and the coast from Carmel to Accho. Naphtali owned
the mountains of Upper Galilee, and the rich plateau
between Tabor and the Sea ef Galilee. Asher had the
low hills W. of Naphtali, and the narrow shore plains
from Accho to Tyre. Thus each tribe possessed a pro-
portlon of mountain land fit fer cultivation of figs, olives
and vines, and of arable land fit fer cern. The areas
allotted appear to correspond to the density of popu-
lation that the various regions were fitted to support.


The Levitical cities were fixed in the various
tribes as centers for the teaching of Israel (Dt 33
10), but a Levite was not obliged to live in such a
city, and was expected to go with his course an-
nually to the sacred center, before they retreated
to Jerus on the disruption of the kingdom (2 Ch
1114). The 48 cities (Josh 21 13-42) include
13 in Judah and Benjamin for the priests, among
which Beth-shemesh (1 8 6 13.15) and Anathoth
(1 K 2 26) are early noticed as Levitical. The
other tribes had 3 or 4 such cities each, divided
among Kohathites (10), Gershonites (13), and
Merarites (12). The six Cities of Refuge were
included in the total, and were placed 3 each side
of the Jordan in the S., in the center, and in the N.,
namely Hebron, Shechem and Kedesh on the W.,
and Bezer (unknown), Ramoth (Reimtn) and
Golan (probably Sahem el Jauldn) E. of the river.
Another less perfect list of these cities, with 4
omissions and 11 minor differences, mostly clerical,
is given in 1 Ch 6 57-81. Each of these cities
had “suburbs,’”’ or open spaces, extending (Nu 36
4) about a quarter-mile beyond the wall, while the
fields, to about half a mile distant, also belonged
to the Levites (Lev 26 34).

(1) Early wars.—In Jgs, the stories of the heroes
who successively arose to save Israel from the

heathen carry us to every part of the
2. Book of country. ‘‘After the death of Joshua”
Judges (1 1) the Canaanites appear to have

recovered power, and to have rebuilt
some of the cities which he had ruined. Judah
fought the Perizzites (‘‘villagers’’) at Berek (Berkah)
in the lower hills W. of Jerus, and even set fire to
that city. Caleb attacked Debir (vs 12-15), which
is described (cf Josh 16 15-19) as lying in a “dry”
(AV “south’’) region, yet with springs not far away.
The actual site (edh Dhdheriyeh) is a village with
ancient tombs 12 miles 8.W. of Hebron; it has no
springs, but about 7 miles to the N.E. there is a
perennial stream with “upper_and lower springs.”
As regards the Phili cities (Jgs 1 18), the LXX


reading seems preferable; for the Gr says that
Judah ‘did not take Gaza’ nor Ashkelon nor
Ekron, which agrees with the failure in conquering
the “valley” (ver 19) due to the Canaanites having
“chariots of iron.’ The Can. chariots are often
mentioned about this time in the Am Tab and
Egyp accounts speak of their being plated with
metals. Manasseh, Ephraim, Zebulun, Asher and
Naphtali, were equally powerless against cities in
the plains (vs 27-33); and Israel began to mingle
with the Canaanites, while the tribe of Dan seems
never to have really occupied its allotted region,
and remained encamped in the borders of Judah
till some, at least, of its warriors found a new home
under Hermon (1 34; 18 1-30) in the time of
Jonathan, the grandson of Moses.

(2) Defeat of Sisera.—The oppression of Israel
by Jabin II of Hazor, in Lower Galilee, appears to
have occurred in the time of Rameses IJ, who, in
his 8th year, conquered Shalem (Sdlim, N. of
Taanach), Anem (‘Anin), Dapur (Debiirieh, at the
foot of Tabor), with Bethanath (‘Aintiha) in Upper
Galilee (Brugsch, Hist Egypt, UJ, 64). Sisera may
have been an Egyp resident at the court of Jabin
(Jgs 4 2); his defeat occurred near the foot of
Tabor (ver 14) to which he advanced ©. from
Harosheth (el Harathtyeh) on the edge of the sea
plain. His host “perished at Endor” (Ps 83 9)
and in the swampy Kishon (Jgs 6 21). The site
of the Kedesh in ‘the plain of swamps” (4 11) to
which he fled is doubtful. Perhaps Kedesh of
Issachar (1 Ch 6 72) is intended at Tell Kadeis,
3 miles N, of Taanach, for the eee is here swampy
in parts. The Can. league of petty kings fought
from Taanach to Megiddo (6 19), but the old identi-
fication of the latter city with the Rom town of
Legio (Lejjan) was a mere guess which does not
fit with Egyp accounts placing Megiddo near the
Jordan. The large site at Mugedd‘a, in the Valley
of Jezreel seems to be more suitable for all the OT
as well as for the Egyp accounts (SWP, II, 90-99).

(3) Gideon’s victory —The subsequent oppression
by Midianites and others would seem to have
coincided with the troubles which occurred in the
5th year of Minepthah (see Exopus, Tur). Gid-
eon’s home (Jgs 6 11) at Ophrah, in Manasseh, is
placed by Sam tradition at Fer‘ata, 6 miles W. of
Shechem, but his victory was won in the Valley of
Jezreel (7 1-22); the sites of Beth-shittah (Shatia)
and Abel-meholah (‘Ain Helweh) show how Midian
fled down this valley and S. along the Jordan plain,
crossing the river near Succoth (Tell Der‘ala) and
ascending the slopes of Gilead to Jogbehah (Ju-
bethah) and Nobah (8 4-11). But Oreb (‘‘the
raven’) and Zeeb (‘‘the wolf’) perished at ‘the
raven’s rock” and “‘the wolf’s hollow” (cf 7 25), W.
of the Jordan. It is remarkable (as pointed ont by
the present author in 1874) that, 3 miles N. of
Jericho, a sharp peak is now called “the raven’s
nest,’ and a ravine 4 miles farther N. is named
“the wolt’s hollows.” These sites are rather farther
S. than might be expected, unless the two chiefs
were separated from the fugitives, who followed
Zebah and Zalmunna to Gilead. In this episode
“Mt. Gilead” (7 3) seems to be a clerical error for
“Mt. Gilboa,’”’ unless the name survives in corrupt
form at ‘Ain Jdaldd (‘‘Goliath’s spring’), which is a
large pool, usually supposed to be the spring of
Harod (7 1), where Gideon camped, FE. of Jezreel.

Thestory of Abimelech takes us back to Shechem.
He was made king by the “‘oak of the pillar” (9 6),
which was no doubt Abraham’s oak already no-
ticed; it seems also to be called ‘the enchanter’s
oak’ (ver 37), probably from some superstition
connected with the burial of the Teraphim under it
by Jacob. The place called Beer, to which Jotham
fled from Abimelech (ver 21), may have been


Palestine


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2214


Beeroth (Bireh) in the lot of Benjamin. Thebez,
the town taken by the latter (ver 50), and where
he met his death, is now the village 7’2bds, 10 miles
N.E. of Shechem.

The Ammonite oppression of Israel in Gilead
occurred about 300 years after the Heb conquest
(11 26), and Jephthah the deliverer returned to
Mizpah (ver 29), which was probably the present
village Saf (already noticed),from his exile in the
‘land of Tob” (vs 3.6). This may have been near
Taiyibeh, 9 miles S. of Gadara, in the extreme N.
of Gilead—a place notable for its ancient dolmens
and rude stone monuments, such as occur also at
Mizpah. Jephthah’s dispute with the men of
Ephraim (12 1) indicates the northern position of
Mizpah. Aroer (11 33) is unknown, but lay near
Rabbath-ammon (Josh 13 25; 2 8 24 5); it is
to be distinguished from Aroer (‘Ar‘air) in the Arnon
ravine, mentioned in Jgs 11 26.

The scene of Samson’s exploits lies in the sh*phé-
lah of Judah on the borders of Philistia. His home
at Zorah (Sér‘ah) was on the hills N. of the Valley of
Sorek, and looked down on ‘‘the camp of Dan”
(13 25 m), which had been pitched in that valley near
Beth-shemesh. Eshtaol (Hshu‘a) was less than 2
miles E. of Zorah on the same ridge. Timnath
(14 1) was only 2 miles W. of Beth-shemesh, at the
present ruin Tibneh. The region was one of vine-
yards (ver 5), and the name Sorek (Sé@rik) still sur-
vives at a ruin 2 miles W. of Zorah. Sorek significd
a “choice vine,” and a rock-cut wine press exists at
the site (SWP, III, 126). These 5 places, all close
together, were also close to the Phili corn lands
(15 5) in a region of vines and olives. Samson’s
place of refuge in the “cleft of the rock of Etam”’
(see 15 8) was probably at Beit ‘Aldb, only 5
miles E. of Zorah, but rising with a high knoll above
the southern precipices of the gorge which opens
into the Valley of Sorek. In this knoll, under the
village, is a rock passage now called “the well of
refuge’’ (Bir el Hasitah), which may have been the
“eleft?? into which Samson ‘went down.” Lehi
(ver 9) was apparently in the valley beneath, and the
name (“the jaw’’) may refer to the narrow mouth
of the gorge whence, after conference with the Philis,
the men of Judah ‘“‘went down’”’ (ver 11) to the “cleft
of the rock of Etam” (SWP, III, 83, 187), which
was a passage 250 ft. long leading down, under the
town, to thespring. All of Samson’s story is con-
nected with this one valley (for Delilah also lived
in the ‘Valley of Sorek,’’ 16 4) excepting his visit


to Gaza, where he carried the gates to the ‘hill |


facing Hebron’ (16 3), traditionally shown (SWP,
III, 255) at the great mound on the E. side of this
town where he died, and where his tomb is (wrongly)
shown. Another tomb, close to Zorah, represents
a more correct tradition (16 31), but the legends
of Samson at this village are of modern Christian
origin.

The appendix to Jgs includes two stories con-
cerning Levites who both lived in the time of the
2d generation after the Heb conquest (18 30; 20
28), and who both ‘‘sojourned”’ in Bethlehem of
Judah (17 8; 19 2), though their proper city was
one in Mt. Ephraim. In the first ease Jonathan,
the grandson of Moses, founded a family of idola-
trous priests, setting up Micah’s image at Dan
(Tell el Kddi) beside the sources of the Jordan,
where ancient dolmen altars still exist. This
image may have been the cause why Jeroboam
afterward established a calf-temple at the same
place. It is said to have stood there till the “cap-
tivity of the ark” (St. Petersburg MS, Jgs 18 30),
“all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh”’
(ver 31)._ From this narrative we learn that the
tribe of Dan did not settle in its appointed lot
(18 1), but pitched in the “camp of Dan,” west of


Kiriath-jearim (ver 12). This agrees with the
former mention of the site (13 25) as being near
Zorah; and the open valley near Beth-shemesh is
visible, through the gorges of Lehi, from the site of
Kiriath-jearim at ‘Erma.

(4) Appendix: Defeat of Benjamin.—In the 2d
episode we trace the journey of the Levite from
Bethlehem past Jerus to Gibeah (Jeba‘), E. of
Ramah (er-Raém), a distance which could easily be
traversed in an afternoon (cf 19 8-14). Gibeah was
no doubt selected as a halting-place by the Levite,
because it was a Levitical city. The story of the
great crime of the men of Gibeah was well known
to Hosea (9 9). Israel gathered against them at
Mizpah (Tell en Nagbeh) on the watershed, 3 miles
to the N.W., and the ark was brought by Phine-
has to Bethel (cf 20 1.81; 18 26.27), 3 miles
N.E. of Mizpah. The defeat of Benjamin occurred
where the road to Gibeah leaves the main north
road to Bethel (ver 31), W. of Ramah. The sur-
vivors fled to the rock Rimmon (Rummén), 34 miles
E. of Bethel, on the edge of the “wilderness” which
stretches from this rugged hill toward the Jordan
valley. The position of Shiloh, 9 miles N. of this
rock, is very accurately described (21 19) as being
N. of Bethel (Beitin), and E. of the main road,
thence to Shechem which passes Lebonah (Lubban),
a village 3 miles N.W. of Seilan or Shiloh. The
“vineyards,”’ in which the maidens of Shiloh used
to dance (ver 20) at the Feast of Tabernacles, lay
no doubt where vineyards still exist in the little
plain S. of this site. It is clear that the writer of
these two narratives had an acquaintance with
Palestinian topography as exact as that shown
throughout Jgs. Nor (if the reading “captivity
of the ark” be correct) is there any reason to sup-
pose that they were written after 722 BC.

The Book of Ruth gives us a vivid picture of
Heb life “when the judges ruled” (1 1 AV), about a

century beforethebirthof David. Laws
3. Book as old as Hammurabi’s age allowed the
of Ruth widow the choice of remaining with

the husband’s family, or of quitting
his house (cf 1 8). The beating out of gleanings
(2 17) by women is still a custom which accounts
for the rock mortars found so often scooped out on
the hillside. The villager still sleeps, as a guard,
beside the heap of winnowed corn in the threshing-
floor (3 7); the head-veil, still worn, could well have
been used to carry six measures of barley (ver 15).
The courteous salutation of his reapers by Boaz
(2 4) recalls the common Arab. greeting (Allah
ma‘kim), “God be with you.’ But the thin wine
(ver 14) is no longer drunk by Moslem peasants,
who only “dip” their bread in oil.

(1) Samuel—The two Books of S present an
equally valuable picture of life, and an equally

real topography throughout. Sam-
4. Books of ucl’s father—a pious Levite (1 Ch
Samuel 6 27)—descended from Zuph who had

lived at Ephratah (Bethlehem; cf
18 9 4.5), had his house at Ramah (1 19) close to
Gibeah, and this town (er-Rdm) was Samuel’s home
also (7.17; 251). The family is described as
‘Ramathites, Zuphites of Mt. Ephraim’ (1 1), but
the term “Mt. Ephraim” was not confined to the
lot of Ephraim, since it included Bethel and Ramah,
in the land of Benjamin (Jgs 4 5). As a Levite,
Elkanah obeyed the law of making annual visits
to the central shrine, though this does not seem to
have been generally observed in an age when “ever
man did that which was right in his own eyes”
(Jgs 21 25). The central shrine had been removed
by Joshua from Shechem to the remote site of
Shiloh (Josh 22 9), perhaps for greater security,
and here the tabernacle (ver 19) was pitched (cf
1 $2 22) and remained for 4 centuries till the death


2215


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Palestine


of El. The great defeat of Isracl, when the ark
was captured by the Philis, took plaee not far from
Mizpah (4 1), within an easy day’s journey from
Shiloh (ef ver 12). Ekron, whence it was sent back
(6 16), was only 12 miles from Beth-shemesh (‘Ain-
shems), where the ark rested on a ‘great stone”
(LXX, ver 18); and Beth-shemesh was only 4 miles
W. of Kiriath-jearim (ver 21), which was in the
mountains, so that its inhabitants ‘“‘came down”
from ‘‘the hill’ (6 21; 7 1) to fetch the ark, which
abode there for 20 years, till the beginning of Saul’s
reign (14 18), when, after the war, it may have been
restored to the tabernacle at Nob, to which place
the latter was probably removed after Eli’s death,
when Shiloh was deserted. The exaet site of Nob
is not known, but probably (ef Isa 10 32) it was
close to Mizpah, whence the first glimpse of Jerus
is caught, and thus near Gibeon, where it was laid
up after the massacre of the priests (1 5 21 1;
22 9.18; 2 Ch 1 3), when the ark was again taken
to ISiriath-jearim (2 8 6 2). Mizpah (Tell en-
Nasbeh) was the gathering-place of Israel under
Samuel; andthe ‘stone of help’? (Eben-ezer) was
erected, after his victory over the Philis, ‘“between
Mizpah and Shen” (1 8 7 12)—the latter place
(see LXX) being probably the same as Jeshanah
(‘Ain Sinai), 6 miles N. of Mizpah which Samuel
visited yearly as a judge (ver 16).

(2) Saul’s search—The journey of Saul, who,
“seeking asses found a kingdom,” presents a topog-
raphy which has often been misunderstood. He
started (9 4) from Gibeah (Jeba’) and went first
to the land of Shalisha through Mt. Ephraim.
Baal-shalisha (2 K 4 42) appears to have been the
present Kefr Thilth, 18 miles N. of Lydda and 24
miles N.W. from Gibeah. Saul then searched the
land of Shalim—probably that of Shual (1 8 13
17), N.E. of Gibeah. Finally he went south beyond
the border of Benjamin (10 2) toa city in the “land
of Zuph,” which seems probably to have been
Bethlehem, whence (as above remarked) Samuel’s
family—descendants of Zuph—came_ originally.
If so, it is remarkable that Saul and David were
anointed in the same city, one which Samuel visited
later (16 1.2ff) to sacrifice, just as he did when
meeting Saul (9 12), who was probably known to
him, since Gibeah and Ramah were only 2 miles
apart. Saul’s journey home thus naturally lay on
the road past Rachel’s tomb near Bethlehem, and
along the Bethel road (10 2.3) to his home at
Gibeah (vs 5.10). It is impossible to suppose that
Samuel met him at Ramah—a common mistake
which creates great confusion in the topography.

(3) Saul’s coronation and first campaign.—Saul
concealed the fact of his anointing (10 16) till the
lot fell upon him at Mizpah. This public choice
by lot has been thought (Wellhausen, Hist Israel,
1885, 252) to indicate a double narrative, but to a
Hebrew there would not appear to be any dis-
crepancy, since ‘The lot is cast into the lap; but
the whole disposing thereof is of Jeh” (Prov 16
33). Even at Mizpah he was not fully accepted
till his triumph over the Ammonites, when the king-
dom was “renewed” at Gilgal (11 14). This cam-
paign raises an interesting question of geography.
Only 7 days’ respite was allowed to the men of
Jabesh in Gilead (11 3), during which news was
sent to Saul at Gibeah, and messengers dispatched
“throughout the borders of Israel’? (ver 7), while
the hosts gathered at Bezek, and reached Jabesh
on the 7th or 8th day (vs 8-10) at dawn. Bezek
appears to be a different plaee from that W. of
Jerus (Jgs 1 4) and to have been in the middle of
Pal at Ibztk, 14 miles N. of Sheehem, and 25 miles
W. of Jabesh, which probably lay in Wddy Yabis in
Gilead. The farthest distances for the messengers
would not have exceeded 80 miles; and, allowing


4


a day for the news to reach Saul and another for
the march from Bezek to Jabesh, there would have
been just time for the gathering of Israel at this
fairly central meeting-place.

The seene of the victory over the Philis at Mich-
mash is equally real. They had a ‘post’ in Geba
(or Gibeah, 18 3), or a governor (cf LXX), whom
Jonathan slew. They came up to Michmash
(Mukhmés) to attack Jonathan’s foree which held
Gibeah, on the southern side of the Michmash
valley, hard by. The northern eliff of the great
gorge was called Bozez (‘‘shining’’) in contrast to
the southern one (in shadow) which was named
Seneh or “thorn” (14 4). Jos (BJ, V, ii, 2) says
that Gibeah of Saul was by “the valley of thorns,”
and the ravine, flanked by the two precipitous cliffs
E. of Michmash, is still called Wady es Suweinit,
or “the valley of little thorn trees.” Jonathan
climbed the steep slope that leads to a smal) flat
top (1 S 14 14 AV), and surprised the Phili ‘past.’
The pursuit was by Bethel to the Valley of Aijalon,
down the steep Beth-horon pass (vs 23.31); but it
should be noted that there was no ‘‘wood’’ (vs
25.26) on this bare hilly ridge, and the word (cf
Cant 5 1) evidently means “honeycomb.” It is
also possible that the altar raised by Saul, for ful-
filment of the Law (Gen 9 4; Ex 20 25), was at
Nob where the central shrine was then established.

(4) David's early life —David fed his flocks in the
wilderness below Bethlehem, where many a silent
and dreadful ‘Valley of Shadows” (cf Ps 23 4)
might make the stoutest heart fail. The lion crept
up from the Jordan valley, and (on another occasion)
the bear eame down from the rugged mountains
above (1 S 17 34). No bears are now known §
of Hermon, but the numerous referenees (2 K 2
24; Isa 69 11; Hos 18 8; Prov 17 12; 28 15)
show that they must have been exterminated, like
the lion, in comparatively late times. The victory
over Goliath, described in the chapter containing
this allusion, oecurred in the Valley of Elah near
Shochoth (Shuweikeh); and this broad valley
(Wddy es Sunt) ran into the Phili plain at the
probable site of Gath (Tell es S4fi) to which the
pursuit led (1 S 17 1.2.52). The watercourse still
presents “smooth stones’’ (ver 40) fit for the sling,
which is still used by Arab shepherds; and_ the
valley still has in it fine “terebinths” such as those
from whieh it took its name Elah. The bronze
armor of the giant (vs 5.6) indicates an early stage
of culture, which is not contradicted by the men-
tion of an iron spearhead (ver 7), since iron is
found to have been in use in Pal long before David’s
time. The curious note (ver 54) as to the head of
Goliath being taken “‘to Jerus’’ is also capable of
explanation. Jerus was not conquered till at least
10 years later, but it was a general practice (as late
as the 7th cent. BC in Assyria) to preserve the heads
of dead foes by salting them, as was probably done
in another case (2 K 10 7) when the heads of
Ahab’s sons were sent from Samaria to Jezreel to
be exposed at the gate.

David’s outlaw life began when he took refuge
with Samuel at the “settlements”? (Naioth) near
Ramah, where the company of prophets lived. He
easily met Jonathan near Gibeah, which was only
2 miles E.; and the “stone of departure” (‘Ezel,”
1 S 20 19) may have marked the Levitical bound-
ary of that town. Nob also (21 1) was, as we have
seen, not far off, but Gath (ver 10) was beyond the
Heb boundary. Thence David retreated up the
Valley of Elah to Adullam (‘Aid-el-ma), which stood
on a hill W. of this valley near the great turn (south-
ward) of its upper course. An inhabited cave
still exists here (cf 22 1), and the site meets every
requirement (STVP, ITI, 311, 347, 361-67). Keilah
(23 1) is represented by the village Kila, on the east


Palestine


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2216


side of the same valley, 3 miles farther up; and
Hereth (22 5) was also near, but “in Judah’ (23
3), at the village Ahards on a wooded spur 7 miles
N.W. of Hebron. Thence David went “down”
(ver 4) to Keilah 2 miles away to the W. As there
was no safety for the outlaws, either in Philistia or
in Judah, they had to retreat to the wilderness of
Ziph (Tell ez Zif), 4 miles S.E. of Hebron. The
word ‘wood’ (héresh) may more probably be a
proper name, represented by the ruin of Ahoreisa,
rather more than a mile S. of Ziph, while the hill
Hachilah (ver 19) might be the long spur, over the
Jeshimon or desert of Judah, 6 miles E. of Ziph,
now called el Aéla. Maon (Af‘ain) lay on the edge
of the same desert still farther S., about 8 miles
from Hebron. En-gedi (23 29; 24 1.2) was on
the precipices by the Dead Sea. The ‘‘wild goats”
(ibex) still exist here in large droves, and the caves
of this desert are still used as folds for sheep in
spring (ver 3). The villagers 8. of Hebron are
indeed remarkable for their large flocks which—by
agreement with the nomads—are sent to pasture
in the Jeshimon, like those of Nabal, the rich man
of Carmel (Kurmul),a mile N. of Maon (25 2), who
refused the customary present to David’s band
which had protected his shepherds ‘‘in the fields’’
(ver 15) or pastures of the wilderness. In summer
David would naturally return to the higher ridge
of Hachilah (26 1) on the south side of which there
is a precipitous gorge (impassahle save by a long
détour), across which he talked to Saul (ver 13),
likening himself (ver 20) to the desert “‘partridge’’
still found in this region. ;

(5) Defeat and death of Saul—tThe site of Ziklag
is doubtful, but it evidently lay in the desert 8. of
Beersheba (Josh 16 31; 19 5; 1 Ch 4 30; 15
27 6-12), far from Gath, so that King Achish did
not know whether David had raided the 8S. of
Judah, or the tribes toward Shur. Saul’s power in
the mountains was irresistible; and it was for this
reason perhaps that his fatal battle with the Philis
occurred far N. in the plain near Jezreel. They
camped (1 8 28 4) by the fine spring of Shunem
(Salem), and Saul on Gilboa to the 8S. The visit to
Endor (Andiir) was thus a perilous adventure, as
Saul must have stolen by night round the Phili
host to visit this place N. of Shunem. He returned
to the spur of Gilhoa on which Jezreel stands (29 1),
and the spring noticed is a copious supply N. of the
village Zer‘in. Beth-shan (31 12) was at the mouth
of the valley of Jezrecl at Beisdén, and here the
bodies of Saul and his sons were burned by the
men of Jabesh-gilead; but, as the bones were pre-
served (ver 13; 2 S 21 13), it is possible that the
corpses were cremated in pottery jars afterward
buried under the tree. Excavations in Pal and in
Babylonia show that this was an early practice,
not only in the case of infants (as at Gezer, and
Taanach), but also of grown men. See PALESTINE
(Recent EXpLoration). The list of cities to
which David sent presents at the time of Saul’s
death (30 26-31) includes those near Ziklag and
as far N. as Hebron, thus referring to ‘‘all the places
where David himself and his nen were wont to
haunt.”


(6) Wellhausen's theory of a double narrative-—The
study of David's wanderings, it may he noted, and of the
climatic conditions in the Jeshimon desert, does not serve
to confirm Wellhausen's theory of a double narrative,
based on the secret unction and public choice of Saul,
on the double visit to Hachilah, and on the fact that the
gloomy king had forgotten the name of David's father.
The history is not a “ pious make-up” without ‘‘a word
of truth” (Wellhausen, Hist Israel, 248-49); and David,
as a‘'youth’’ of twenty years, may yet have been called
a ‘'man of war’; while ‘‘transparent artifice’’ (p. 251)
will hardly be recognized by the reader of this genuine
chronicle. Nor was there any ‘‘Aphek in Sharon”
(p. 260), and David did not ‘‘amuse himself by going
first toward the north" from Gibeah (p. 267); his visit


i


to Ramah does not appear to he a ‘‘ worthless anachronis-
tic anecdote"’ (p. 271); and no one who has lived in the
terrible Jeshimon could regard the meeting at Hachilah
asa''jest’’ (p. 265). Nor did the hill (‘the dusky top'"’)
“take its name from the circumstance,’’ but Wellhausen
probably means the Sela‘ha-mahl¢koth (‘cliff of slip-

ings '’ or of ‘‘slippings away’'), now Wddy Maidkeh near

Taon (cf 1 S 23 19.24.28), which lay farther S. than
Ziph.

(7) Early years af David's reign.—David, till the
8th year of his reign, was king of Judah only. The
first battle with Saul’s son occurred at Gibeon (2 S
2 13), where the ‘‘pool’”’ was no doubt the cave of
the great spring at el Jib; the pursuit was by the
‘desert Gibeon road’ (ver 24) toward the Jordan
valley. Gibeon itself was not in a desert, but in a
fertile region. Abner then deserted to David, but
was murdered at the “well of Sirah” (‘Ain Sérah)
on the road a mile N. of David’s capital at Hebron.
Nothing more is said about the Philis till David
had captured Jerus, when they advanced on the
new capital by the valley of Rephaim (6 22),
which apparently ran from 8. of Jerus to join the
valley of Elah. If David was then at Adullam
(“the hold,” ver 17 AV; cf 1 8 22 5), it is easy to
understand how he cut off the Phili retreat (2 8
5 23), and thus conquered all the hill country to
Gezer (ver 25). After this the ark was finally
brought from Baale-judah (Kiriath-jearim) to Jerus
(6 2), and further wars were beyond the limits of
Western Pal, in Moab (8 2) and in Syria (vs 3-12);
but for “Syrians” (ver 13) the more correct read-
ing appears to be Edomites (1 Ch 18 12), and the
“Valley of Salt” was probably S. of the Dead Sea.
Another war with the Syrians, aided by Aramaeans
from E. of the Euphrates, occurred E. of the Jordan
(2 § 10 16-18), and was followed by the siege of
Rabbath-ammon (‘Ammdédn), E. of Gilead, where we
have notice of the ‘‘city of waters” (12 27), or lower
town by the stream, contrasted, it seems, with the
citadel which was on the northern hill.

(8) Hebrew leiter-writing—In this connection
we find the first notice of a “letter”? (11 14) as
written by David to Joab. Writing is of course
noticed as early as the time of Moses when—as we
now know—the Canaanites wrote letters on clay
tablets in cuneiform script. These, however, were
penned by special scribes; and such a scribe is
mentioned early (Jgs 8 14). David himself may
have employed a professional writer (cf 2 S 8 17),
while Uriah, who carried his own fate in the letter,
was probably unable to read. Even in Isaiah’s
time the art was not general (Isa 29 12), though
Heb kings could apparently write and read (Dt 17
18; 2 KK 19 14); to the present day the accomplish-
ment is not gencral in the East, even in the upper
class. It should be noted that the first evidence of
the use of an alphabet is found in the early alpha-
hetic Pss, and the oldest dated alphabetic text yet
known is later than 900 BC. The script used in
the time of Moses may have been cuneiform, which
was still employed at Gezer for traders’ tablets in
649 BC. The alphabet may have come into use
first among Hebrews, through Phoen influence in
the time of David; and so far no script except this
and the cuneiform has been unearthed in Pal, unless
it is to be recognized in signs of the Hittite syllabary
at Lachish and Gezer. Another interesting point,
as regards Heb civilization in David’s time, is the
first mention of “mules” (2 S 13 29; 18 Oe CLG
1 33.38), which are unnoticed in the Pent. They
are represented as pack animals on an Assyr bas-
relief; but, had they been known to Moses, they
would prohably have been condemned as unclean.
The sons of David fled on mules from Baal-hazor
(Tell ‘Asr) “beside Ephraim” (now probably
ees N. of Bethel, where Absalom murdered

mnon.


2217


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BLBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Palestine


_ (9) Later years of David's reign.—On the rebel-
lion of Absalom David retreated to Mahanaim,
apparently by the road N. of the Mount of Olives,
if the Tg of Jonathan (2 S 16 5) is correct in placing
Bahurim at Almon (‘Almit), N.E. of Jerus. It is
not clear where the “wood of Ephraim,” in which
Absalom perished, may have been, but it was
beyond Jordan in Gilead (17 22; 18 6); and oak
woods are more common there than in Western Pal.
The latest revolt, after Absalom’s death, was in the
extreme north at Abel (Abil), in Upper Galilce
(20 14), after which Joab’s journey is the last inci-
dent to be studied in the Books of 8. For census
purposes he went E. of the Jordan to Aroer (per-
haps the city on the Arnon), to the “river of Gad”
(Wddy Né‘atr) near Jazer, and through Gilead.
Tahtim-hodshi (24 6) is believed (on the authority
of three Gr MSS) to be a corruption of “the Hit-
tites at Kadesh’”’ (Kades), the great city on the
Orontes (see Hirtires), which lay on the northern
boundary of David’s dominions, 8. of the kingdom
of Hamath. Thence Joab returned te Zidon and
Tyre, and after visiting all Judah to Beersheba
reached Jerus again within 10 months. The ac-
quisition of the temple-site then closcs the book.

(1) Solomon’s provinces—The Books of K con-
tain also some interesting questions of geography.

Solomon’s twelve provinces appear to
5. Books answer very closely to the lots of the
of Kings twelve tribes described in Josh. They
included (1 K 4 7-19) the following:
(a) Ephraim, (b) Dan, (c) Southern Judah (see Josh
12 17), (d) Manasseh, (ce) Issachar, (f) Northern
Gilead and Bashan, (g) Southern Gilead, (h) Naph-
tali, (4) Asher, (7) part of Issachar and probably
Zebulun (the text is doubtful, for the order of ver
17 differs in LXX), (&) Benjamin, (J) Reuben.
LXX renders the last clause (ver 19), ‘‘and one
Naseph [i.e. “officer’”] in the land of Judah’’—
probably superior to the other twelve. Solomon’s
dominions included Philistia and Southern Syria,
and stretched along the trade route by Tadmor
(Palmyra) to Tiphsah on the Euphrates (vs 21.24;
ef 9 18=Tamar; 2 Ch 8 4=Tadmor). Another
Tiphsah (now Tafsah) lay 6 miles 8.W. of Shechem
(2 K 16 16). Gezer was presented to Solomon’s
wife by the Pharaoh (1 K 9 16).

(2) Geography of the Northern Kingdom.—Jero-
boam was an Ephraimite (11 26) from Zereda,
probably Surdah, 2 miles N.W. of Bethel, but the
LXX reads ‘“‘Sarira,’’ which might be Sarra, 14
miles EK. of Shiloh. After the revolt of the ten tribes,
“Shishak king of Egypt’ (11 40; 14 25) sacked
Jerus. His own record, though much damaged,
shows that he not only invaded the mountains near
Jerus, but that he even conquered part of Galilee.
The border between Israel and Judah lay S. of
Bethel, where Jeroboam’s calf-temple was erected
(12 29), Ramah (er-Ram) being a frontier town with
Geba and Mizpah (16 17.22); but after the Syrian
raid into Galilee (ver 20), the capital of Israel was
fixed at Tirzah (ver 21), a place celebrated for its
beauty (Cant 6 4), and perhaps to be placed at
Teiasir, about 11 miles N.E. of Shechem, in ro-
mantic scenery above the Jordan valley. Omri
reigned here also for six years (16 23) before he
built Samaria, which remained the capital till 722
BC. Samaria appears to have been a city at least
as large as Jerus, a strong site 5 miles N.W. of
Shechem, commanding the trade route to its west.
It resisted the Assyrians for 3 years, and when it
fell Sargon took away 27,290 captives. Excava-
tions at the site will, it may be hoped, yield results
of value not as yet published. See next article.

The wanderings of Elijah extended from Zare-
phath (Surafend), S. of Sidon, to Sinai. The posi-
tion of the Brook Cherith (17 3) where—according


to one reading—“the Arabs brought him bread and
flesh’? (17 6)1s not known. The site of this great
contest with the prophets of the Tyrian Baal is
supposed to be at el Mahrakah (‘‘the place of burn-
ing’’) at the southeastern end of the Carmel ridge.
Some early king of Israel perhaps, or one of the


judges (cf Dt 33 19), had built an altar to Jch
above the Kishon (1 K 18 20.40) at Carmel; but,
as the water (ver 33) probably came from the
river, it is doubtful whether this altar was on the
‘top of Carmel,” 1,500 ft. above, from which Elijah’s
servant had full view of the sea (vs 42.43). Elijah
must have run before Ahab no less than 15 miles,
from the nearest point on Carmel (ver 46) to Jez-
reel, and the journey of the Shunammite woman
to find Elisha (2 K 4 25) was equally long. The
vineyard of Nahboth in Jezreel (1 K 21 1) was
perhaps on the east of the city (now Zer‘in), where
rock-cut wine presses exist. In the account of the
ascension of Elijah, the expression “went down to
Bethel” (2 K 2 2) is difficult, if he went “from
Gilgal” (ver 1). The town intended might be
Jiljilia, on a high hill 7 miles N. of Bethel. LXX,
however, reads “‘they came.”

(3) Places connected with Elisha—The home of
Elisha was at Abel-meholah (1 K 19 16) in the
Jordan valley (Jgs 7 22), probably at ‘Ain Helweh,
10 miles 8. of Beth-shan. If we suppose that Ophel
(2 K 6 24 RVm), where he lived, was the present
‘Afdleh, it is not only easy to understand that he
would often ‘pass by’? Shunem (which lay between
Ophel and Abel-meholah), but also how Naaman
might have gone from the palace of Jezreel to Ophel,
and thence to the Jordan and back again to Ophel
(vs 6.14.24), in the course of a single day in his
chariot. The road down the valley of Jezreel was
easy, and up it Jehu afterward drove furiously,
coming from Ramoth in Gilead, and visible afar
off from the wall of Jezreel (9 20). The ‘top of the
ascents’ (ver 13), at Ramoth, refers no doubt to the
high hill on which this city (Mow Reimén) stood as
a strong fortress on the border between Isracl and
the Syrians. The flight of Ahaziah of Judah, from
Jezreel was apparently N. by Gur (Wéra), 4 miles
W. of Ibleam (Yebla), on the road to “‘the garden
house” (Beit Jenn), and thence by Megiddo (Mu-
jedda‘) down the Jordan valley to Jerus (9 27.28).
Of the rebellion of Moab (2 K 11; 3 4) it is


Palestine


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2218


enough to point out here that King Mesha’s account
on the M S$ agrees with the OT, even in the minute
detail that ‘men of Gad dwelt in Ataroth from of
old” (cf Nu 32 34), though it lay in the lot of
Reuben.

The topographical notices in the books written after


the captivity require but short notice. The Benjamites
built up Lod (Ludd), Ono (Kefr ‘Ana) and


6. Post- Aijalon (Yalo), which were in the lot of
exilic Dan (1 Ch 8 12; Neh 11 35), and it is
Historical worthy of note that Lod (Lydda) is not

ISTOFIC to be regarded as a new town simply be-
Books cause not mentioned in the earlier books;


3 for Lod is mentioned (no. 64) with Ono
in the lists of Thothmes IL, a century hefore the Heb
conquest of Pal. The author of Ch had access to in-
formation not to he found elsewhere in the OT. His
list of Rehoboam’s fortresses (2 Ch 11 6-10) includes
14 towns, most of which were on the frontiers of the
diminished kingdom of Judah, some heing noticed
(such as Shoco and Adoraim) in the list of Shishak’s
conquests. He speaks of the ‘valley of Zephathah”’
(14 10), now Wédy Safieh, which is otherwise unnoticed,
and places it correctly at Mareshah (Mer‘ash) on the edge
of the Philiplain. He is equally clear about the topog-
raphy in describing the attack on Jehoshaphat by the
Ammonites, Moabites and Edomites. They camped at
En-gedi (‘Ain Jidi), and marched W. toward Tekoa
(Teku'a); and the thanksgiving assembly, after the
Heb victory, was in, the valley of Beracah (2 Ch 20
1.20.26), which retains its name as Breikat, 4 miles W.
of Tekoa.
IV. Palestine in the Poetic Books of the OT.—
In Job the scene is distinctively Edomite. Uz (Job
11; cf Gen 22 21 ERV; Jer 25 20;
1. Book Lam 4 21) and Buz (Job 32 2; cf
of Job Gen 22 21) are the Assyr Hazu and
Bazu reached by Esarhaddon in 673
BC §S. of Edom. Tema and Sheba (Job 6 19) are
noticed yet earlier, by Tiglath-pileser ITI, and Sar-
gon, who conquered the Thamudites and Naha-
taeans. We have also the conjunction of snowy
mountains and ice (Job 6 16) with notice of the
desert and the ‘Arabah valley (24 5), which could
hardly apply to any region except Edom. Again,
we have anomad population dwelling close to a city
(29 4-7)—perhaps Petra, or Mé‘an in Edom.
There were mines, not only in the Sinaitic desert,
but at Punon in Northern Edom (cf 28 2-11). The
white broom (30 4) is distinctive of the deserts of
Moab and Edom. The wild ass and the ostrich
(39 5.13) are now known only in the desert E. of
Edom; while the stork (39 13 RVm) could have
been found only in the ‘Arabah, or in the Jordan
valley. The wild ox (39 9 RV), or Bos primi-
genius, is now extinct (LXX “unicorn,” Nu 23 22;
Dt 33 17), though itsbones occur in Lebanon caves.
It was hunted about 1130 BC in Syria by Tiglath-
pileser I (ef Ps 29 6), and is mentioned as late as
the time of Isaiah (34 7) in connection with Edom;
its Heb name (r’’@m) is the Assyr rimu, attached
to a representation of the beast. As regards the
crocodile (“leviathan,” 41 1), it was evidently well
known to the writer, who refers to its strong, musky
smell (ver 31), and it existed not only in Egypt but
in Pal, and is still found in the Crocodile River, N.
of Caesarea in Sharon. Behemoth (40 15), though
commonly supposed to be the hippopotamus, is
more probably the elephant (on account of its
long tail, its trunk, and its habit of feeding in
mountains, vs 17.20.24); and the elephant was
known to the Assyrians in the 9th cent. BC, and was
found wild in herds on the Euphrates in the 16th
cent. BC. The physical allusions in Joh seem
clearly, as a rule, to point to Edom, as do the geo-
graphical names; and though Christian tradition
in the 4th cent. AD (St. Silvia, 47) placed Uz in
Bashan, the LXX (42 18) defines it as lying “on
the houndary of Edom and Arabia.” None of these
allusions serves to fix dates, nor do the peculiarities
of the language, though they suggest Aram. and
Arab. influences. The mention of Bubylonians (1
17) (Kasdim) as raiders may, however, point to


about 600 BC, since they could not have reached
Edom except from the N., and did not appear in
Pal between the time of Amraphel (who only reached
Kadesh-barnea), and of Nebuchadnezzar. It is at
least clear (24 1-12) that this great poem was
written in a time of gencral anarchy, and of Arab
lawlessness.


In the Pss there are many allusions to the natural
phenomena of Pal, but there is very little detailed topog-


raphy. ‘'The mountain of Bashan” (Ps 68

2. Book of 15) rises E. of the plateau to 5,700 ft. ahove
. sea-level; but Zalmon (ver 14) is an un-
Psalms known mountain (cf Zalmon, Jgs 9 48).


This Ps might well refer to David's con-
quest of Damascus (2 8 8 6), as Ps 72 refers to the
time of Solomon, being the last in the original collection
of ‘prayers of David'’ (ver 20). In Ps 83 (vs 6-8) we
find a confederacy of Edom, Ishmael, Moah and the
Hagarenes (or “ wanderers” E. of Pal; ef 1 Ch 5 18-22)
with Gehal (in Lebanon), Ammon, Amalek, and Tyre,
all in alliance with Assyria—a condition which first
existed in 732 BC, when Tiglath-pileser III conquered
Damascus. The reference to the ‘‘northern” (‘' hid-
den") trihes points to this date (ver 3), since this con-
queror made captives also in Galilee (2 K 15 29; 1 Ch
5 26; Isa 9 1).

In Prov the allusions are more peaceful, but not
geographical. They refer to agriculture (3 10; 11 26;

12 11; 25 13), to trade (7 16; 31 14.24)
3. Book of 2nd to flocks (27 23-27). e
Pp remarkable passage (26 8) reads literally,

roverbs ‘As he that packs a stone into the stone-
heap, so is he that giveth honor to @ fool.”
Jerome said that this referred to a superstitious custom;
and the erection of stone heaps at graves, or round a
pillar (Gen 31 45.46), is a widely spread and very an-
cient custom (still preserved by Arabs), each stone being
the memorial of a visitor to the spot, who thus honors
either a local ghost or demon, or_a dead man—a rite
which was foolish in the eyes of a Hehrew of the age in
bee this verse was written (see Expos T, VIII, 399,


The most


The geography of Cant is specially important to a
right understanding of this bridal ode of the Syrian
princess who was Solomon’s first bride.

4. Song of It is not confined, as some critics say
Songs it is, to the north, but includes the
whole of Pal and Syria. The writer

names Kedar in North Arabia (1 5) and Egypt,
whence horses came in Solomon’s time (1 9; 1 Ik
10 28.29). He knows the henna (AV “‘camphire”’)
and the vineyards of En-gedi (1 14), where vine-
yards still existed in the 12th cent. AD. He speaks
of the “rose” of Sharon (2 1), as wellas of Lebanon,
with Shenir (Assyr Saniru) and Hermon (4 8)
above Damascus (7 4). He notices the pastoral
slopes of Gilead (6 5), and the brown pool, full of
small fish, in the brook below Heshbon (7 4), in
Moab. The locks of the “peaceful one’ (6 13,
Vulg pacifica) are like the thick copses of Carmel;
‘the king is caught in the tangles’ (7 5). See
Gauiery. She is “beautiful as Tirzah [in Samaria],
comely as Jerus, terrible to look at” (6 4 AV). She
is a garden and a “paradise” (‘‘orchard’’) of spices
in Lebanon, some of which spices (calamus, cin-
namon, frankincense and myrrh) have come from
far lands (4 12-15). Solomon’s vineyard—another
emblem of the bride—(1 6; 8 11) was in Baal-
hamon, which some suppose to be Baal-hermon,
still famous for its vineyards. He comes to fetch
her from the wilderness (3 6); and the dust raised
hy his followers is like that of the whirlwind pillars
which stalk over the dry plains of Bashan in sum-
mer. The single word “paradise” (4 13 m) is hardly
evidence enough to establish late date, since—
though used in Pers—its etymology and origin are
unknown. The word for “nuts” (Heb ’éghdz) is
also not Pers (6 11), for the Arab, word go>\, jauz,


is Sem, and means a “pair,” applying to the’walnut
which abounds in Shechem. The “rose of Sharon”
(2 1), according to the Tg, was the white “narcis-
sus’; and the Heb word occurs also in Assyr
(habasillatu), as noted hy Delitzsch (quoting WAZ,
V, 32, no. 4), referring to a white bulbous plant.


2219


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Palestine


Sharon in spring is covered still with wild narcissi,
Arab. buseil (cf Isa 35 1.2). There is perhaps no
period when such a poem is more likely to have
been written than in the time of Solomon, when
Israel “dwelt safely, every man under his vine and
under his fig-tree’” (1 IK 4 25); when the roe and
the fallow deer (Cant 2 17; 1 K 4 23) abounded;
and when merchants (Cant 3 6) brought “powders”’
from afar; when also the dominion included Damas-
cus and Southern Lebanon, as well as Western Pal
with Gilead and Moab. See also Sonc or Songs.
__V. Palestine in the Prophets.—Isaiah (1 8)
likens Zion, when the Assyr armies were holding
; Samaria, Moab and Philistia, to ‘a
1. Isaiah = booth in a vineyard, a lodge in a
garden of cucumbers.” He refers no
doubt to a “tower” (Mt 21 33), or platform, such
as is to be found beside the rock-cut wine press in
the deserted vineyards of Pal; and such as is still
built, for the watchman to stand on, in vineyards
and vegetable gardens.
The chief topographieal question (10 28-32)


Stimich, 2 miles 8.W. of Heshbon (Hesbén)—is said
to have had vines reaching to Jazer (Sé‘adr, 6 miles
to the N.); and rock-cut wine presses still remain at
Sibmah (Isa 16 8; Jer 48 32). The Bozrah men-
tioned with Edom (Isa 34 6; 63 1; Jer 49 13.22;
Mic 2 12) is probably Buseirah, near the southern
border of Moab. In the last-cited passage there is
a play on the words bacraéh (“fortress’”’) and bogréh
for “sheepfold.”
In Jer (1 1), Anathoth (‘Andia) is mentioned as a
priests’ city (cf 1 K 2 26). The “place” or shrine
of Shiloh was deserted (Jer 7 12), but
2. Jeremiah the town seems still to have been in-
habited (41 5). The “pit” at Mizpah
(vs 6-9) may have been the great rock reservoir 8.
of Tell en-Nasbeh. The Moabite towns noticed
(48 1-5.20-24.31-45; 49 3) with Rabbah (Amman)
have been mentioned as occurring in the parallel
passages of Isa. The numerous petty kingsin Edom,
Moah, Philistia, Phoenicia, and Arabia (25 20-24)
recall those named in Assyr lists of the same age.
Lam 4 8 recalls Job 39 14 in attributing to the


Piterims BATHING IN THE JORDAN.


refers to the Assyr advance from the north, when
the outposts covered the march through Samaria
(whether in 732, 722, or 702 BC) to Philistia. They
extended on the left wing to Ai (Haydn), Michmash
(Mukhmés), and Geba, 8. of the Michmash valley
(Jeba‘), leading to the flight of the villagers, from
Ramah (er-Rém) and the region of Gibeah—which
included Ramah, with Geba (1 8 22 6) and Mi-
gron (1 8 14 2) or “the precipice.” They were
alarmed also at Gallim (Beit Jéla), and Anathoth
(‘Andta), near Jerus; yet the advance ceased at
Nob (cf Neh 11 32) where, as before noted, the
first glimpse of Zion would be caught if Nob was
at or near Mizpah (Tell en Nasbeh), on the main
north road leading W. of Ramah.

Another passage refers to the towns of Moab (Isa
15 1-6), and to Nimrim (Tell Nimrin) and Zoar (Tell
esh Shaghtr) in the valley of Shittim. The ascent
of Luhith (ver 5) is the present Tal‘at el Heith, on
the southern slope of Nebo (Jebel Neba). ‘The
curious term “a heifer of three years old” (cf Jer
48 34m) is taken from LXX, but might better be
rendered “a round place with a group of three”’ (see
ECLATH-SHELISHIYAH). Itis noticed with the “high
places” of Moab (Isa 16 2; Jer 48 35), and prob-
ably refers to one of those large and ancient stone
cireles, surrounding a central group of three rude
pillars, which still remain in Moab (SHP, I, 187,
903, 238) near Nebo and Zoar. Sibmah—probably


ostrich want of care for her young, because she
endeavors (like other birds) to escape, and thus
draws away the hunter from the-hest. This verse
should not be regarded as showing that the author
knew that whales were mammals, since the word
‘‘sea-monsters” (AV) is more correctly rendered
‘Jackals’ (RV) or ‘wild beasts.”
In Ezk (ch 27), Tyre appears as a city with a
very widespread trade extending from Asia Minor
to Arabia and Egypt, and from Assyria
8. Ezekiel to the isles (or ‘‘coasts’’) of the Medi-
terranean. The “oaks of Bashan”
(27 6; Isa 2 13; Zee 11 2) are still found in the
S.W. of that region near Gilead. Judah and Israel
then provided wheat, honey, oil and balm for
export as in the time of Jacob. Damascus sent
white wool and the wine of Helbon (Helbén), 18
miles N., where fine vineyards still exist. The
northern border described (47 15-18) is the same
that marked that of the dominions of David, running
along the Eleutherus River toward Zedad (Sudtid).
It is described alsoin Nu 34 8-11 as passing Riblah
(Riblah) and including Ain (el ‘Atn), a village on
the western slopes of the Anti-Lebanon, E. of Rib-
lah. In this passage (asin Ezk 47 18) the Hauran
(or Bashan plain) is excluded from the land of
Israel, the border following the Jordan valley,
which seems to point to a date carlier than the time
when the Havvoth-jair (Nu 32 41;.Dt 3 14; Josh


Palestine THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2220
13 30; Jgs 104; 1K 413; 1 Ch 2 23), in | of Judas Maccahaeus (2 15), where his brother Simon


Gilead and Bashan, were conquered or built—
possibly after the death of Joshua. The southern
border of the land is described by Ezekiel (47 19)
as reaching from Kadesh (-barnea)—probably Petra
—to Tamar, which seems to be Tamrah, 6 miles
N.E. of Gaza.

In the Minor Prophets there are fewer topo-
graphical notices. Hosea (12 11) speaks of the
altars of Gilead and Gilgal as being
“as heaps in the furrows of the fields.”
He perhaps alludes to the large dolmen-
fields of this region, which still charac-
terize the country E. of the Jordan. Healso perhaps
speaks of human sacrifice at Bethel (18 2). In Joel
(1 12) the apple tree (Heb tappa*h, Arab. tuffah)
is noticed (cf Cant 2 3.5; 8 5), and there seems
to be no reason to doubt that the apple was culti-
vated, since el Mukaddasi mentions ‘excellent
apples” at Jerus in the 10th cent. AD, though
it is not now common in Pal. The sycamore fig
(Am 7 14), which was common in the plains and
in the sh*phélah (1 K 10 27), grew alsonear Jericho
(Lk 19 4), where it is still to be found. In Mic
(1 10-15), a passage which appears to refer to Heze-
kiah’s reconquest of the sh¢phélah towns and attack
on Gaza before 702 BC (2 K 18 8; 2 Ch 28 18)
gives a list of places and a play on the name of each.
They include Gath (Tell es Safi), Saphir (es Séfir),
Lachish (Tell el-Hesy), Achzib (‘Ain Kezbeh), and
Mareshah (Mer‘ash): ‘the glory of Israel shall come
even unto Adullam” (‘Aid-el-ma) perhaps refers to
Hezekiah himself (Mic 115). After the captiv-
ity Philistia (Zec 9 5) was still independent. See
PuitisTINES. The meaning of the “mourning of
Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon”’ (Zec 12
11) is disputed. Jerome (see Reland, Pal /llustr.,
II, 891) says that the former of these names referred
to a town near Jezreel (Maximianopolis, now Rum-
méneh, on the western side of the plain of Esdra-
elon), but the mourning ‘“‘for an only son” was
probably a rite of the Syrian god called Hadad, or
otherwise Rimmon, like the mourning for Tammuz
(Ezk 8 14).

Vi._ Palestine in the Apocrypha.—The Bock of Jth is
regarded hy Renan (Evangiles, 1877, 29) as a Haggadha’


or jegend, written in Hebin 74 AD. It
that its geo-


4. Minor
Prophets


is remarkahle, however,
1. Book of graphical ailusions are very correct.
Judith Judith was apparently of the tribe of Ma-


nasseh (8 2.3); and her husband, who bore
this name, was buried hetween Dothaim (Tell Dothan)
and Balamon (in Wédy Belameh), E. of Dothan. Her
home at Bethulia was thus prohably at Mithilieh, on a
high hill (6 11.12), 5 miles 5S.E. of Dothan (SWP, II,
156), in the territory of Manasseh. The requirements
of the narrative are well met; for this village is supplied
only by welis (7 13.20), though there are springs at the
foot of the hill to the S. (7 7.12), while there is a good
view over the valley to the N. (10 10), and over the
plain of Esdraelon to Nazareth and Tabor. Other
mountains surround the village (15 3). The camp of
the invaders reached from Dothan to Belmaim (Balamon)
from W. to E., and their rear was at Oyamon (Tell
Keimtn), at the foot of Carmel. The Babylonians
were allied with trihes from Carmel, Gilead and Galilee
on the N. with the Samaritans, and with others from
Betaue (prohably Beth-anoth, now Beit ‘Ainin, N. of
Hehron), Chellus (Alalash—the later Elusa—s miles
S.W. of Beersheba), and Kades (Ain Aadis) on the way
to Egypt. Among Samaritan towns S. of Shechem,
Ekrehel (‘Akrabeh) and Chusi (Kézah) are mentioned,
with ‘'the brook Mochmur" (Wédy el Humr) rising N.
of Ekrehel and running E. into the Jordan.
The philosophical Book of Wisd has no references to
Pal; and in Ecclus the only allusions are to the palm of
En-gaddi (24 14), where palms still exist,


2. Book of 2nd to the “rose plaut in Jericho" (24 14;
an ci 39 13; 50 8); the description of the rose
Wisdom as ‘‘growing by the brook in the field”


suggests the rhododendron (Tristram,

NIIB, 477), which flourishes near the Jordan and grows
to great size beside the hrooks of Gilead.

Judas Maccabaeus.—The first Book of Macc is a val-

uable history going down to 135 BO, and its gcographical

allusions are somtimes important. Modin, the home


erected seven. monuments visible from the sea (9 19;
13 25-30), was above the plain in which
3. 1 Macca- Cedron (Katrah, 5 miles E. of Jamnia)

e stood (15 40.41 16 4.9), and is clearly

bees the present village el Midieh on the low

hills with a sea view, 17 miles from Jerus
and 6 miles E. of Lydda, near which latter Ensebius
(Onom s.v.‘*Modeim") places Modin. The first victory
of Judas (3 24) was won at Beth-horon, and the second
at Emmaus (‘Amwés) hy the Valley of Aijalon—the
scenes of Joshua's victories also.

The Greeks next attempted to reach Jerus from the
S. and were again defeated at Beth-zur (4 29), now
Beit-sar, on the watershed, 15 miles S. of Jerus, where the
road runs throngh a pass. Judas next (after cleansing
the temple in 165 BC) marched 8. of the Dead Sea, at-
tacking the Edomites at Arabattine (perhaps Akrahhim)
and penetrating to the Moab plateau as far N. as Jazar
(5 3-8). On his return to Judaea the heathen of Gilead
and Bashan rose against the Israelites of Tubias (ver
13) or Tob (Taiyibeh), and the Phoenicians against the
Galilean Hebrews who were, for a time, withdrawn to
Jerus until the Hasmoneans won complete independence
(11 7.59). In the regions of Northern Gilead and
Southern Bashan (§ 26.36.37) Judas conquered Bosor
(Busr), Alema (Kefr el-ma), Casphon (Khisfin), Maged
(perhaps el Mejd, N. of ‘Ammén), and Carnaim (Ash-
teroth-karnaim), now Tell ‘Ashterah. The notice of a
“‘brook'' at the last-named place (ver 42) is an interest-
ing touch, as a fine stream runs 8. from the west side of
the town. In 162 BC Judas was defeated at Bathzach-
arias (6 32), now Beit Skdéria, 9 miles S. of Jerus, but the
Cause was saved by a revolt in Antioch; and in the next
year he defeated Nicanor near Caphar-salama (perhaps
Selmeh, near Joppa), and slew him at Adasah (Adaseh),
8 miles S.E. of Beth-horon (7 31.40.45). The fatal
battle in which Judas was killed (9 5.15) was fought
also near Beth-horon. He camped at Eleasa (Il'asa),
close by, and defeated the Greeks on his right, driving
them to Mt. Azotus (or Beth-zetho, according to Jos
[Ant, XII, xi, 2]), apparently near Bitr-ez-Zeit, 4 miles
N.W. of Bethel; bnt the Greeks on his left surrounded
him during this rash pursuit.

On the death of Judas, Bacchides occupied Judaea
and fortified the frontier towns (9 50.51) on all sides.
Simon and Jonathan were driven to the marshes near the
Jordan, but in 159 BC the Greeks made peace with
Jonathan who returned to Michmash (ver 73) and 7
years later to Jerus (10 1.7). Three districts on the
southern horder of Samaria were then added to Judaea
(10 30; 11 34), namely Lydda, Apherema (or Ephraim)
now Tatyibeh, and Ramathem (er-Rém); and Jonathan
defeated the Greeks in Philistia (10 69; 11 6). Simon
was ‘‘captain’’ from the ‘‘Ladder of Tyre" (Rds en
Naktrah), or the pass N. of Accho, to the borders of
Egypt (11 59); and the Greeks in Upper Galilee were
again defeated by Jonathan, who advauced from Gen-
nesaret to the plain of Hazor (Hazzér), and pursued them
even to Kedesh Naphtali (Aedes), northward (vs 63.73).
He was victorious even to the borders of Hamath, and the
Eleutherus River (Nahr el Kebir), N. of Tripolis, and
defeated the Arabs, called Zabadeans (probably at Zeb-
dény in Anti-Lebanon), on his way to Damascus (12 25.
30.32). He fortified Adida (Haditheh) in the shephélah
(ver 38), W. of Jerus, wheré Simon awaited the Gr
usurper Tryphon (13 13.20), who attempted to reach
Jerus by a long détour to the S. near Adoraim (Déra),
but failed on account of the snow in the mountains.
After the treacherous capture of Jonathan at Accho, and


| his death in Gilead (12 48; 18 23), Simon hecame the


ruler of all Pal to Gaza (13 43), fortifying Joppa, Gezer
and Ashdod (14 34) in 140 BOC. Five years later he
won a final victory at Cedron (Katrah), near Jamnia
(Yebnah), but was murdered at Dok (16 15), near
Jericho, which site was a small fort at ‘Ain Dak, a spring
N. of the city.
The second Book of Macc presents a contrast to the
first in which, as we have seen, the geography is easily
understood. Thus the site of Caspis
4, 2 Macca- With its lake (12 13.16) is doubtful. It
b seems to be placed in Idumaea, and Charax
ees may be the fortress of Kerak in Moab
K (ver 17). Ephron, W. of Ashteroth-
karnaim (vs 26.27),is unknown; and Beth-shean is called
by its later name Scythopolis (ver 29), as in the LXX
(Jgs 1 27) and in Jos (Ant, XII, viii, 5: vi, 1). A cu-
rious passage (13 4~6) seems to refer to the Pers burial
towers (still used by Parsees), one of which appears to
have existed at Berea (Aleppo), though this was not a
Gr custom. See AsmMonEans.


VII. Palestine in the NT.—We are told that
Our Lord was born in ‘Bethlehem of Judaea”’; and
_ the theory of Neubauer, adopted by

1. Synoptic Griitz, that Bethlehem of Zebulun
Gospels (Josh 19 15)—which was the present
‘ Beit-Lahm, 7 miles N.W. of Nazareth—
is to be understood, is based on a mistake. The


2221


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Palestine


Jews expeeted the Messiah to appear in the home


of David (Mie 6 2); and the Northern Bethlehem |


was not called “of Nazareth,” as asserted by Rix
(Tent and Testament, 258); this was a conjectural
reading by Neubauer (@éog. du Talm, 189), but the
Talm (Talm Jerus, Mghillah 1 1) calls the place
Bethlehem-s‘ridh (or “of balm’’), no doubt from the
storax bush (Styraz officinalis) or stacte (Ex 30 34),
the Arab. ‘abhar, which still abounds in the oak
wood close by.

_ (1) Galilean scencry—The greater part of the
life of Jesus was spent at Nazareth in Zebulun, and
the ministry at Capernaum in Naphtali (ef Mt 4
13-15; Isa 9 1), with yearly visits to Jerus. The
Gospel narratives and the symbolism of the para-


—.,.._


Traditional Mount of the Precipitation near Nazareth.


bles constantly recall the characteristic features of
Galilean scenery and nature, as they remain un-
changed today. The ‘‘city set on a hill’ (Mt 6
14) may be seen in any part of Pal; the lilies of
the field grow in all its plains; the ‘foxes have
holes” and the sparrows are still eaten; the vine-
yard with its tower; the good ploughland, amid
stony and thorny plaees, are all still found through-
out the Holy Land. But the deep lake surrounded
by precipitous cliffs and subject to sudden storms,
with its shoals of fish and its naked fishers; the east
nets and drag nets and small heavy boats of the
Sea of Galilee, are more distinctive of the Gospels,
since the lake is but briefly noticed in the OT.

(2) Nazareth was a little village in a hill plateau
N. of the plain of Esdraelon, and 1,000 ft. above it.


Plowing near Nazareth.


The name (Heb nécarah) may mean “verdant,”
and it had a fine spring, but it is connected (Mt 2
23) in the Gospels with the prophecy of the “branch”
(nécer, Isa 11 1) of the house of David. Its popula-
tion was Hebrew, for it possessed a synagogue (Lk
4 16). The “brow of the hill whereon their city
was built” (4 29) is traditionally the “hill of the
leap” (Jebel Kafst), 2 miles to the 8.—a cliff over-
looking the plain. Nazareth was not on any great
highway; and so obscure was this village that it is


unnoticed in the OT, or by Jos, while even a Gali-
lean (Jn 1 46) could hardly believe that a prophet
could come thenee. Jerome (Onom s.v.) calls it a
“village”; hut today it is a town with 4,000 Chris-
tians and 2,000 Moslems, the former taking their
Arab. name (Nasdrah) from the home of their
Master.

(3) Capernaum (Mt 4 13; 9 1) lay on the shore
of the Sea of Galilec, apparently (Mt 14 34;
Jn 6 17) in the little plain of Gennesaret, which
stretches for 3 miles on the northwest side of the
lake, and which has a breadth of 2 miles. It may
have stood on a low cliff (though this is rendered
doubtful by the Sin. MS rendering of Mt 11 23—
“Shalt thou be exalted unto heaven?”’),and it was a
military station where taxes were levied (9 9), and
possessed a synagogue (Mk 1 21; Lk 4 33; Jn
6 59). Christian tradition, since the 4th cent. AD,
has plaeed the site at T’ell Him, where ruins of a
synagogue (probably, however, not older than the
2d cent. AD) exist; but this site is not in the plain
of Gennesaret, and is more probably K*phar ’Ahim
(Talm Bab, M¢ndhoth 86a). Jewish tradition
(Midhrash Koheleth, vii.20) connects Capernaum
with minim or “heretics’’—that is to say _Chris-
tians—whose name may yet linger at ‘Ain Minyeh
at the north end of the plain of Gennesaret. Jos
states (BJ, III, x, 8) that the spring of Caper-
naum watered this plain, and contained the catfish
(coracinus) which is still found in ‘Ain el Mudaw-
werah (“the round spring”), which is the prineipal
source of water in the Gennesaret oasis.

(4) The site of Chorazin (Kerdézeh) has never
been lost. The ruined village lies about 23 miles
N. of Tell {fim and possesses a synagogue of simi-
lar character. Bethsaida (‘‘the house of fishing’’)
is once said to have been in Galilee (Jn 12 21), and
Reland (Pal Illustr., 11, 553-55) thought that there
were two towns of the name. It is certain that the
other notices refer to Bethsaida, called Julias by
Herod Philip, which Jos (Ané, XVIII, ui, 1; iv,
6; BJ, III, x, 7) and Pliny (NH, v.15) place E.
of the Jordan, near the place where it enters the
Sea of Galilee. The site may he at the ruin ed
Dikkeh (“the platform”), now 2 miles N. of the lake,
but probably nearer of old, as the river deposit has
increased southward. There are remains of a syna-
gogue here also. The two miracles of feeding the
5,000 and the 4,000 are both described as occurring
E. of the Jordan, the former (Lk 9 10) in the desert
(of Golan) “helonging to the city called Bethsaida”’
(AV). The words (Mk 6 45 AV), “to go to the
other side before unto Bethsaida,’’ may he rendered
without any straining of grammar, “‘to go to the
side opposite to Bethsaida.” For the disciples are
not said to have reached that city; but, after a
voyage of at least 3 or 4 miles (Jn 6 17.19), they
arrived near Capernaum, and landed in Gennesaret
(Mk 6 53), about 5 miles 8.W. of the Jordan.

(5) The place where the swine rushed down a


| steep place into the lake (Mt 8 32; Mk 5 1; Lk 8


26) was in the country of the Gerasenes (see Vat.
MS), probably at Kersa on the eastern shore oppo-
site Tiberias, where there is a steep slope to the water.
It should be noted that this was in Deeapolis (Mk
6 20), a region of “‘ten cities’ which lay (except
Scythopolis) in Southwest Bashan, where a large
number of early Gr inscriptions have been found,
some of which (e.g. Vogiié-Waddington, nos. 2412,
2413) are as old as the Ist cent. AD. There was
evidently a Gr population in this region in the time
of Our Lord; and this accounts for the feeding of
swine, otherwise distinctive of “a far country” (Lk
16 13.15); for, while no Hebrew would have tended
the unclean beast in Pal, the Greeks were swine-
herds from the time at least of Homer.

(6) The site of Magadan-Magdala (A7ejdel) was


Palestine
Pal (Exploration )


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2222


on the west shore at the S.W. end of the Gen-
nesaret plain (Mt 15 39). In Mk 8 10 we find
Dalmanutha instead. Magdala was the Heb
mighd6l (“tower’’), and Dalmanutha may be re-
garded as the Aram. equivalent (D’almdaniitha)
meaning “‘the place of high buildings’’; so that there
1s no necessary discrepancy between the two ac-
counts. From this place Jesus again departed by
ship to “the other side,” and reached Bethsaida
(Mt 16 5; Mk 8 13.22), traveling thence up the
Jordan valley to Caesarea Philippi (Mt 16 13; Mk
8 27), or Banids, at the Jordan springs. There
can be little doubt that the “high mountain apart”
(Mt 17 1) was Hermon. The very name signifies
“separate,’’ applying to its solitary dome; and the
sudden formation of cloud on the summit seems to
explain the allusion in Lk 9 34.

(7) Other allusions in the Synoptic Gospels,
referring to natural history and customs, include
the notice of domestic fowls (Mt 28 37; 26 34),
which are never mentioned in the OT. They came
from Persia, and were introduced probably after
400 BC. The use of manure (Lk 18 8) is also un-
noticed in the OT, but is mentioned in the Mish
(Sheb7‘ith, 11.2), as is the custom of annually whiten-
ing sepulchers (Mt 28 27; Shvkalim, i.1). The
removal of a roof (Mk 2 4; cf Lk 5 19) at Caper-
naum was not difficult, if it resembled those of
modern Galilean mud houses, though the Third
Gospel speaks of ‘‘tiles’ which are not now used.
Finally, the presence of shepherds with their flocks
(Lk 2 8) is not an indication of the season of the
nativity, since they remain with them “‘in the field”
at all times of the year; and the “manger” (Lk 2
7) may have been (as tradition affirmed even in the
2d cent. AD) in a cave like those which have been
found in ruins N. and 8. of Hebron (SWP, III, 349,
369) and elsewhere in Pal.

(1) The topography of the Fourth Gospel is
important as indicating the writer’s personal knowl-
edge of Pal; for he mentions several
places not otherwise noticed in the NT.
Beth-abarah (Jn 1 28, RV “Bethany”;
10 40), or “the house of the crossing,”
was “beyond the Jordan.”’ Origen rejected the read-
ing ‘‘Bethania,” instead of Beth-abarah, common in
his time, and still found in the three oldest uncial
MSS in the 4th and 5th cents. AD. The place was
a day’s journey from Cana (cf Jn 1 29.35.43; 2 1),
which may have been at ‘Ain Kdnd, a mile N. of
Nazareth. It was two or three days’ distance from
Bethany near Jerus (Jn 10 40;
would thus lie in the upper part of the Jordan
valley where, in 1874, the surveyors found a ford
well known by the name ‘Abdrah, N. of Beisdn,
in the required situation. John, we are told,
baptized in “all the region round about the Jor-
dan” (Mt 3 5), including the waters of ‘Anon
near to Salim” (Jn 3 23). There is only one
stream which answers to this description, namely
that of Wddy Fér‘ah, N.E. of Shechem, on the
boundary of Judaea and Samaria, where there is
“much water.” Anon would be ‘Aindn, 4 miles
N., and Salim is Sdlim, 4 miles 8. of this perennial
affluent of the Jordan.

(2) The site of Sychar (Sam Iskar, Arab. ‘Askar)
near Jacob’s well (Jn 4 5.6) lay W. of Salim, and
just within the Sam border. The present village
is only half a mile N. of the well. Like the preceding
sites, it is noticed only in the Fourth Gospel, as is
Bethesda, while this Gospel also gives additional
indications as to the position of Calvary. The town
of Ephraim, ‘near to the wilderness” (11 54), is
noticed earlier (2 8 13 23; cf Ephraim, 2 Ch 13
19m), and appears to be the same as Apherema
(L Mace 11 34), and as Ophrah of Benjamin (Josh
18 23; I 8 13 17). Eusebius (Onom s.v.) places


2. Fourth
Gospel


11 3.6.17), and |


it 20 Rom miles N. of Jerus, where the village
Tatytbeh looks down on the desert of Judah.

In the Book of Acts the only new site, unnoticed
before, is that of Antipatris (23 31). This stood
at the head of the stream (Me-jarkon)
which runs thence to the sea N. of
Joppa, and it was thus the half-way
station between Jerus and the sea-
side capital at Caesarea. The site is now called
Ras el ‘Ain (“head of the spring’’), and a castle,
built in the 12th cent., stands above the waters.
The old Rom road runs close by (SWP, II, 258).
Cacsarea was a new town, founded by Herod the
Great about 20 BC (SWP, II, 138-29). It was even
larger than Jerus, and had’ an artificial harbor.
Thence we may leave Pal with Paulin60 AD. The
reader must judge whether this study of the country
does not serve to vindicate the sincerity and authen-
ticity of Bible narratives in the OT and the NT alike.


Literature.—Though the lit. connected with Pal
is enormous, and constantly increasing, the number of
really original and scientific sources of knowledge is
(as in other cases) not large. Besides the Bible, and Jos,
the Mish contains a great deal of valuable information
as to the cultivation_and civilization of Pal ahout the
ist and 2d cents. AD. The following 20 works are of
primary importance. The Onomasticon of Eusebius aud
Jerome shows intimate acquaintance with Pal in the
4th cent. AD, though the identification of Bible sites is
as often. wrong as right. The rabbinical geography is
discussed hy A. Neubauer (La géographic du Talmud,
1868), and the scattered notices hy Gr and Rom writers
were collected by H. Reland (Palaestina ex monumentis
veteribus illustrata, 2 vols, 1714). The first really scicn-
tific account of the country is that of Dr. E. Robinson

Bib, Researches, 1838, and Later Bib. Researches, 1852;
in 3 vols, 1856). The Survey of Western Pal (7 vols,
1883) includes the present writer's account of the natural
features, topography and surface remains of all agcs,
written while in command (1872-78) of the 1-inch
trigonometric survey. The Survey of Eastern Pal (1 vol,
1889) gives his account of Moab and Southern Gilead,
as surveyed in 1881-82. The natural history is to be
studied in the same series, and in Canon Tristram's
Natural History of the Bible, 1868. The geology is best
given by L. Lartet (Essai sur la géologie de la Palestine)
and in Professor Hull's Memoir on the Geol. and Geog.
of Arabia Petraea, etc, 1886. The Archaeological Re-
searches of M. Clermont-Ganneau (2 vols, 1896) include
his discoveries of Gezer and Adullam. Much informa-
tion is scattcred through the PE FQ (1864-1910) and in
ZDPV. G.Schumacher's Across ihe Jordan, 1885, Pella,
1888, and Northern’ Ajlan, 1890, give detailed informa-
tion for Northeast Pal; and Lachisk, by Professor
Flinders Petrie, is the memoir of the excavations which
he began at Tell el-Hesy (identified in 1874 by the present
writer), the full account being in A Mound of Many
Cities hy F. J. Bliss, 1894. Other excavations, at Gath,
ete, are described in Excavations in Pal (1898-1900), by
F. J. Bliss, R. A. S. Macalister, and Professor Wunsch;
while the mémoir of his excavations at Gezer (2 vols) has
recently been published by Professor Macalister. For
those who have not access to these original sources, The
Historical Geography of the Holy Land by Professor G.
A. Smith, 1894, and the essay (300 pp.) by Professor D.
F. Buhl (Geographie des alten Paldstina, 1896) will be
found useful. The best guide book to Pal is still that of
Baedeker, written by Dr. A. Socin and published in 18765,
1912. This author had personal acquaintance with the
principal routes of the country. Ouly standard works
of reference have been herein mentioned, to which French,
German, American, and British explorers aud scholars
have alike contributed. See JerusaLem.


3. Book
of Acts


C. R. Conprr
PALESTINE (RECENT EXPLORATION):
Preliminary Consideration
I. Era or PREPARATION
1. Outside of Palestine
2. In Palestine
(1) Early Christian Period
(2) Period of Cursory Observation
(3) Beginning of Scientific Observation
Era or Scientiric EXPLORATION
1. Period of Individual Enterprise
1) First Trained Explorers
(2) The Climax of Individual Exploration
2. Scientific Codperative Surface Exploration
3. Most Recent Results in Surface Exploration
Ill. Era or Scientiric Excavation
1. Southern Palestine
(1) Tell el-Hesy
(2) Excavations in Jerusalem
(3) Excavations in the Shephélah
(4) Painted ‘Tombs of Marissa”’


II.


2223


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Palestine


Pal (Exploration)


2. Northern Palestine
(1) Tell Ta'annek
(2) Tell el-Mutesellim
(3) Tell Ham

3. Eastern Palestine
Jericho

4, Central Palestine
{33 Jerusalem
(2) Samaria

(3) ‘Ain Shems

(4) Gezer


LITERATURE
Previous to the last century, almost the entire
stock of knowledge concerning ancient Pal, in-
cluding its races, laws, languages,
Preliminary history and manners, was obtained
Considera- from Jos and the Bible, with a few
tion bricf additional references given by
Gr and Rom authors; knowledge
concerning modern Pal was limited to the reports of
chance travelers. The change has been duc largely
to the compelling interest taken in sacred history
and the “Holy Oracles.” This smallest country
in the world has aroused the spirit of exploration
as no other country has or could. It has largely
stimulated many of the investigations carried on in

other lands.
I. Era of Preparation—Much direct information
concerning ancient Pal, absolutely essential to the
success of modern exploration in that
1. Outside land, has come throngh discoveries
of Palestine in other countries; but due in many
cases to Bib. influence. All the most
important Heb and Gr MSS and VSS of the Bible
and most of the Jewish Talm and apocryphal and
Wisdom books were found outside of Pal. The
pictures of its population, cities, fortresses and
armies give a color and perspective to its ancient
history far more vivid than can be found on any of
its own contemporary monuments. The records of
Thothmes IIT (15th cent. BC) describing the cap-
ture of Megiddo in the plain of Esdraelon with its
vast stores of ‘chariots wrought with gold,” bronze
armor, silver and ebony statues, ivory and ebony
furniture, etc, and of his further capture of 118 other
Can. towns, many of which are well known from the
Bible, and from which he takes an enormons tribute
of war materials, golden ornaments and golden
dishes, ‘too many to be weighed,” find no parallel
in any indigenous record—such records even if
written having been doomed to perish because of
the soil, climate and character of the rocks W. of the
Jordan. Soc 1400 BC, the Am Tab (discovered in
1887) mention by name many Bib. cities, and give
much direct information concerning the political
and social conditions at that period, with at least
6 letters from the governor of Jerus, who writes to
the Pharaoh news that the Egyp fleet has left the
coast, that all the neighboring cities have been lost
to Egypt, and that Jerus will be lost unless help
can be had quickly against the invasion of the
Khabiri. The literature of the XIXth Dynasty
contains many Heb names with much information
concerning Goshen, Pithom, Canaan, ete, while in
one huge stele of Menephtah the Israelites are
mentioned by name. Later Egyp Pharaohs give
almost equally important knowledge concerning
Pal, while the Assyr texts are even more direct.
The black obelisk of Shalmaneser II (9th cent.)
catalogues and pictures the tribute received from
Jehu; almost every king of the 8th cent. tells
something of his relations with the rulers of Jerus
or Damascus, throwing immense light on_ local
politics, and the later Bab records give vividly the
conditions previous to and during the exile, while
the edict of Cyrus gives the very decree by virtue
of which the Jews could return to their native land.
Later discoveries, like the CH at Susa (1901), the
Sendjirli and other Aram. texts from Northern
Syria (1890, 1908), and the Elephantine papyrt,


some of which are addressed to the “sons of San-
ballat” and describe a temple in Egypt erected to


_ Yahu (Jehovah) in the 5th cent. BC, may not give


direct information concerning Pal, but are important
to present explorers because of the light thrown upon
the laws of Pal in patriarchal times; upon the
thought and language of a neighboring Sem com-
munity at the time of the Monarchy; upon the
religious ritual and festivals of Nehemiah’s cay,
and upon the general wealth and culture of the
Jews of the 5th cent.; opening up also for the first
time the intimate relations which existed between
Jerus and Samaria and the Jews of the Dispersion.
So the vast amounts of Gr papyri found recently
in the Fayyim not only have preserved the “‘Logia?’
and “Lost Gospels” and fragments of Scripture
texts, early Christian Egyp ritual, etc, but have
given to scholars for the first time contemporaneous
examples of the colloquial language which the Jews
of Pal were using in the Ist cent. AD, and in which
they wrote the “memoirs” of the apostles and the
Gospels of Jesus.
(1) Early Christian period.—At this time, during
the first three or four centuries the ancient sitcs
and holy places were identified, giving
2. In some valuable information as to the
Palestine topographical memories of the earlier
church. By far the mast valuable
of these carefully prepared summaries of ancient
Bible places, with their modern sites, and the dis-
tances between them, was the Onomasticon of Euse-
bius, as it was enlarged by Jerome, which attempted
seriously the identification of some 300 holy places,
most of these being vitally important for the modern
student of the Bible. While some of these identifi-
cations were “curiously incorrect’? (Bliss) and the
distances even at the best only approximate, yet
few satisfactory additions were made to the list
for 1,500 years; and it was certainly a splendid
contribution to Palestinian topography, for the list
as a whole has been confirmed by the scientific con-
clusions of recent investigators.


(2) Period of cursory  observation.—The earliest
traveler who has left a record of his journey into Pal
was Sinuhit, who, perhaps a century after Abraham, men-
tions a number of places known to us from the Bible and
describes Canaan as a “land of figs and vines,....
where wine was more plentiful than water, ....
honey, and oil in abundance... . all kinds of fruit
upon its trees, barley and spelt in the fields, and cattle
beyond number''; each day his table is laden with
“bread, wine, cooked flesh and roasted fowl ... . wild
game from the hills and milk in every sort of cooked
dish” (Breasted, Ancient Records, I, 496). A few other
Egyp visitors (1300-1000 BC) add little to our knowl-
edge. The report of the Heb spies (Nu 18) records
important observations, although they can only humor-
ously be called ‘‘genuine explorers" (Bliss), and Joshua's
list of cities and tribes, although their boundaries are
carefully described (chs 13-21), are naturally excluded
from this review. he .

The record of early Christian travel begins with the
Bordeaux Pilgrim (332 AD), and during the next ti.o
centuries scores of others write out their observations in
the Holy Land, but for 1,000 years there is scarcely a
single visitor who looks at the country except through
the eyes of the monks. A woman traveler of the 4th
cent. reports some interesting facts about the early
ritual of the Jerus church and _ the catechumen teaching,
and surprises us by locating Pithom correctly (althoug
the site was totally forgotten and only recovered in
1883), and the Epitome of Eucherius (5th cent.) gives a
clear description of the holy places in Jerus; but almost
the only other significant sign that anyone at this era
ever made serious observations of value comes from the
very large, fine mosaic of the 5th ccnt. recently discov-
ered at Madeba, which gives a good impression of
ancient Jerus with its buildings, and a carcful bird's-
eye view of the surrounding country (see below II, 3).
By the middle of the 6th cent. the old ‘‘Holy Places"
were covered by churches, while new oncs were manu-
factured or discovered in dreams, and relics of mar-
tyrs' bones began to engross so much attention that no
time was left in which to mako any ordinary gco-
graphical or natural-history observations. A little Jocal
color and a few facts in regard to the plan of carly
churches and the persecution of Christians by Mos-
Jems constitute almost the sum total of value to be


Pal (Exploration)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2224


gathered from the multitude of pilgrims between the
6th and 12th cents. In the [2th cent. John of Wiirzburg
gives a few geographical notes of value: Theoderich
notices certain inscriptions and tombs, describes accu-
rately the churches and hospitals he visits, with their pic-
tures and decorations, and outlines intelligently the
boundaries of Judaea and the salient features of the moun-
tains encompassing Jerus; the Abhot Daniel notices
the wild beasts in the Jordan forests and the cus-
toms at church feasts, and his account is important be-
cause of the light it throws on couditions in Pal just
after its conquest hy the Crusaders, while in the 13th
cent. Burchard of Mt. Zion makes the earliest known
mediaeval map of Pal, mentions over 100 Scripture sites,
and shows unexpected interest in the plant and animal
life of the country—but this practically exhausts the
valuable information from Christian sources in these
centuries. The Moslem pilgrims and writers from the
9th to the 15th cents. show far more regard to geograph-
ical realities than the Christians. 1t is a Moslem,
Istakhri, who in the 10th cent. makes the first effort at
a systematic geography of Pal, and in the [0th and 13th
cents., respectively, Mukaddasi, after 20 years of prepa-
ration, and Yakut, in a ‘‘yast work,’ publish obser-
vations concerning climate, native customs, geographical
divisions, etc, which are yet valuable, while Nasir-i-
Khusran, in the 11th cent., also gave important informa-
tion concerning Palestinian botany, gave dimensions of
buildings and gates, and even noticed to some extent
the ancient arches and ruins—though in all these there are
pitiful inaccuracies of observation and induction. One
of the best Moslem writers thinks the water of Lake
Tiberias is not fit to drink because the city sewerage has
ceased to flow into it, and Christian writers from the
7th cent. down to modern times continually mention
the Jor and Dan as two fountains from which the Jor-
dan rises, and continually report the most ahsurd
stories about the Dead Sea and about its supernatural
saltness, never noticing the salt mountain near by and
the other simple causes explaining this phenomenon.
See Dean Sea.

In the {4th cent. Marino Sanuto gave a '‘ most com-
plete monograph”’ (Ritter) of Palestinian geography,
his maps being really valuable, though, according to
modern standards, quite inaccurate. The Jew, Estoai ben
Moses ha-Phorhi, in this same century advanced heyond
all Christian writers in a work of **real scientific knowl-
edge" (Bliss), in which he correctly identified Megiddo
and other ancient sites, though the value of his work was
not recognized for 400 years. The great name of the
15th cent. is that of the Dominican, Father Felix Fabri,
who in his large hook, Wanderings in the Holy Land, was
the first to notice monuments and ruins to which no
Bib. traditions were attached (Bliss), and who, within
a decade of the discovery of America, described most
vividly the dangers and miseries of the sea voyages of
that era, and In most modern fashion narrated his ad-
ventures among the Saracens; yet notwithstanding the
literary value of the book and his hetter method of
arranging his materials, Fabri actually explained the
saltness of the Dead Sea as due to the sweat which
flowed from the skin of the earth! In the 16th cent.
travelers showed more interest in native customs, but
the false traditional identification of sites was scarcely
questioned; the route of travel was always the same, as
it was absolutely impossible to get E. of the Jordan, and
even a short trip away from the caravan was dangerous.

(3) Beginning of scientific observation.—In the 17th
cent. Michal Nau, for 30 years a missionary in Pal, De
la Roque and Hallifix showed a truly scientific veracity
of observation and an increasing accuracy in the record-
ing and verification of their notes, and Maundrell ad-
vanced beyond all his predecessors in noticing the an-
tiquities on the seacoast, N. of Beirdt; hut all of these,
though possessing flne qualities as explorers, were forced
to travel hastily and limit their study to a very narrow
fleld.

Hl, Era of Scientific Exploration.—(1) First trained
explorers.—True scientific exploration opened with the

18th cent., as men began to think of this
1. Period of as itself an important life-work and not
Individual merely as a short cpisode in a life devoted
naividual — +9 more serious pursuits,
Enterprise Th. Shaw (1722) carefully fitted him-
self as a specialist in natural history and
physical geography, and scientifically reported a numher
of new facts, e.g. conditions and results of evaporation,
etc, in the Dead Sea.- Bishop Pococke (1738) had been
well trained, was free from the bondage of tradition, and
did for the antiquities of Pal what Maundrell had done
for those of Syria, making a large number of successful
ideutifications of sites and contributing much to the
general knowledge of Pal. Voluey (1783) was a brilliant
literary man, in full sympathy with the scientific spirit,
who popularized results and made a considerahle number
of origiual researches, esp. in the Lchanon. Sectzen
(1800-7) and Burckhardt (1810-12) are called by Bliss
‘veritahle pioneers in the exploration of the ruins of
Eastern and Southern Pal.’’ The former opcued Caes-
area Philippi to light, visited a large unexplored dis-
trict and made importaut observations in almost every
field of knowledge, zodlogy, meteorology, archacology:;


the Jatter, having become an Arah in looks and language,
was able to go into many places where no European had
ventured, one of his chief triumphs being the discovery
of Petra and the scientific location of Mt. Sinai. :

(2) The climaz of individual exploration The climax
of the era of scientific observation, unassisted by learned
societies, was reached by the American clergymau and
teacher, Edward Rohinson. He spent parts of two
years in Pal (1838 and 1852) and in 1856 published 3
vols of Biblical Researches. He strictly employed the
scientific method, aud showed such rare insight that
scarcely one of his conclusions has beeu found incorrect.
His knowledge was as extensive as minute, aud although
he gave, in all, only five months of steady labor to the
specific task of exploration, yet in that time he ‘‘recon-
structed the map of Pal’ (Bliss), and his conclusions
henceforth “formed the ground work of modern _ re-
search’ (Conder), He studied Jerus, heing the first to
show that the ancient fragment of an arch (now ‘' Robin-
son’s'') had heen part of the bridge connecting the temple
with Mt. Zion, and was the first to trace with accuracy
the windings of the tunnel] leading from the Virgin's
Fount to the Pool of Siloam. All Judaea, Galilee and
Samaria were very well covered by him. He was the
first to notice that the ruined building at Tell Him was
a synagogue; from the top of one hill he recognized
seven Bib. sites which had been lost for at least 1,500
years; he identified correctly at least 160 new sites,
almost all being Bib. places. Rohinson's results were
phenomenal in number and variety, yet necessarily
these have been constantly improved upou or added to
in each generation since, for no man can cover the entire
field or be a specialist in every department. W. M.
Thomson in his LB (new ed, 1910) and G. E. Post,
Flora of Syria, Pal, and Sinai (1896), gave a needed
popular résumé of the manners, customs and folklore of
the people, as these illustrated the Bible, and many hooks
and articles since have added to this material.

In 1848 the United States sent an expedition uuder
Lieutenant Lynch to the Dead Sea, which ascertained
the exact width, depth, currents, temperature, etc, and
many parties since have added to this knowledge (see
e.g. Deap Sea; and also PHFS, 1911, XII, 7). From
1854 to 1862 De Vogtié thoroughly examined the monu-
ments of Ceutral Syria and remained the sole authority
on this section down to the American Archaeological
Expedition of 1899. Tahbler (1845-63) scientifically de-
scribed Jerus aud_its environs, and the districts lying
between Jaffa and tho Jordan, and betweeu Jerus and
Bethel. Guérin who studied Pal during periods cover-
ing 23 years (1852-75), though limited by lack of funds,
covered topographically, with a minuteness never before
attempted, almost the whole of Judaea, Samaria and
Galilee, gathering also many new records of monuments
and inscriptions, the record of which was invaluable
because many of these had been completely destroyed
before the arrival of the next scieutific party. A most
sensational discovery was that of Rev. F. Klein in 1868,
when he found at Dibon the huge hasalt tablet set up
by Mesha, king of Moah (9th ceut. BC), on which in a
language closely resembling the Heh, he gave honor to
his god Chemosh by describing his successful revolt against
a successor of Omri, the latter being mentioued by name
with many well-known Bib. places. Instyle, thought and
vInEUUE this inscription greatly resembles the early OT
records.


With the foundation of the Palestine Exploration
Fund (1865) the work of exploration took on an
entirely new phase, since in this case,

2. Scientific not a single individual, but a large
Coéperative company of specialists entered the
Surface Ex- work, having behind them sufficient
ploration funds for adequate investigation in
each necessary line of research, aud

with the British War Office furnishing its expert
Royal Engineers to assist the enterprise. Under
the auspices of this society during the next 15 years
Jerus was explored as never before, and all Western
Pal was topographically surveyed (see below); a
geological survey (1883-84) of Sinai, Wady ‘Arabah
and the Dead Sea, and later of Mt. Seir (1885) was
accomplished uuder Professor Edward Hull: the
natural history of the country was treated with
great_thoroughness by several specialists; Palmer
and Drake in the dress of Syrian natives, without
servants, risked the dangerous journey through the
Desert of the Tih in order to locate so far as possible
the route of the Exodus; Clermont-Ganneau, who
had previously made the discovery of the Jewish
placard from the Temple, forbidding strangers to
enter the sacred enclosure, added greatly to archae-
ological knowledge by gathering and deeiphering
many ancient inscriptions, uncovering buried


2225


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Pal (Exploration)


cemeteries, rock-cut tombs and other monuments.
He also laid down important criteria for the age of
stone masonry (yet see PEFS, 1897, LX1); identi-
fied various sites including Adullam, found the
“stone of Bethphage,” ‘“Zoheleth,’’ ete, and made
innumerable plans of churehes, mosques, tombs, etc,
and did_an incredible amount of other important
work. Capt., afterward Col., C. R. Conder did an
equally important work, and as the head of the
archaeological party could finally report 10,000
place-names as having been gathered, and 172 new
Bible sites successfully identified, while the bound-
aries of the tribes had been practically settled and
many vitally important Bible locations for the first
time fixed. The excavations in Jerus under the same
auspices had meanwhile been carried out as planned.
After an introductory examination by Sir Charles
Wilson, including some little excavating, Sir Charles
Warren (1867-70) and, later, Col. Conder (1872-75)
made thorough excavations over a large area, sink-
ing shafts and following ancient walls to a depth of
80-150 ft. They uncovered the Temple-area from
its countless tons of débris and traced its approxi-
mate outline; examined underground rock eham-
bers; opened ancient streets; discovered many
thousand specimens of pottery, glass, tools, etc,
from Jewish to Byzantine periods; found the pier
in the Tyropceon Valley, where Robinson’s arch
had rested, and also parts of the ancient bridge;
traced the line of several important ancient walls,
locating gates and towers, and fixed the date of
one wall eertainly as of the 8th cent. BC, and prob-
ably of the age of Solomon (G. A. Smith), thus
accomplishing an epoch-making work upon which
all more recent explorers have safely rested—as
Maudslay (1875), in his masterly discovery and
examination of the Great Scarp, and Guthe (1881),
who made fine additional discoveries at Ophel, as
well as Warren and Conder in their work afterward
(1884), when they published plans of the whole
city with its streets, churches, mosques, ete, 25
in. to the mile, which in that direction remains a
basis for all later work. See JERUSALEM.

Perhaps, however, the greatest work of all done
by this society was the Topographical Survey (1881-
86), accomplished for Judaea and Samaria by Col.
Conder, and for Galilee by Lord Kitchener, result-
ing in a great map of Western Pal in 26 sheets, on
a scale of an inch to the mile (with several abridged
additions), showing all previous identifications of
ancient places. These maps, with the seven mag-
nificent vols of memoirs, etc, giving the other
scientific work done by the various parties, marked
such an epoeh-making advance in knowledge that
it has been called “the most important eontribution
to illustrate the Bible since its translation into the
vulgar tongue.”

In addition to the above the Palestine Explora-
tion Fund established a Quarterly Statement and
Society of Biblical Archaeology from which sub-
seribers could keep in touch with the latest Bib.
results, and published large quantities of tr* of
ancient texts and travels and of books reporting
discoveries as these were made. Altogether more
advance was made during these 15 years from 1865-
80 than in the 15 centuries before. :

The next ten years (1880-90) did not furnish as
mucb new material from Pal exploration, but in

1880 the Siloam Inscription (cf 2 K


8. Most 20 20; 2 Ch 32 30) was aecidentally
Recent found in Jerus, showing the aeeuracy
Results in with which the engineers of Hezekiah’s


Surface Ex- day could, at least oecasionally, cut
ploration long tunnels through the roek (see
also Clermont-Ganneau, Archaeological
Researches, 313); and in 1881-85 Conder and Schu-
macher attempted their difficult task of making a


—


scientific topographical map of Eastern Pal. In
1881 H. Clay Trumbull rediscovered and properly
described Kadesh-barnea, settling authoritatively
its location and thus making it possible to fix pre-
viously obseure places mentioned in the account
of the Exodus wanderings. Since 1890 continued
investigations in small distriets not adequately
described previously have taken place, new addi-
tions to the zodlogieal, botanical, geological and
meteorological knowledge of Pal have been fre-
quent; studies of irrigation and the water-supply
have been made, as well as investigations into the
customs, proverbs, folklore, etc, of the Arabs;
many distriets E. of the Jordan and through Petra
down into Sinai have yielded important results,
and many discoveries of surface tombs, ossuaries,
mosaies, seals and manuscripts have been made in
many parts of Pal. This has been done perhaps
chiefly by the Palestine Exploration Fund, but much
by individuals and some by the newly organized ex-
cavation societies (see below). The most surprising
diseoverics made by this method of surface explora-
tion (a method which can never become completely
obsolete) have been the finding at different times of
the four Boundary Stones of Gezer (1874, 1881,
1889) by Clermont-Ganneau, and, in 1896, of the
very large mosaic at Madeba by Father Cleopas,
librarian of the Greek Patriarch.
The latter proved to be part of the pavement of
a 6th-cent. basilica and is a ‘“‘veritable map of Pal,”
showing its chief cities, the boundaries of the tribes,
and esp. the city of Jerus with its walls, gates,
chief buildings, including the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre, and ehief streets, notably one long
straight street intersecting the city and lined
with colonnades. As Madeba lies near the foot
of Mt. Nebo, it is thought the artist may have in-
tended to represent ideally a modern (6th-cent.)
vision of Moses. George Adam Smith (HGHL,
7th ed, 1901); Jerusalem (2 vols, 1910), and E.
Huntington, Pal and Its Transformation (1911),
have given fine studies illustrating the supreme
importance of accurate topographical knowledge
in order to understand correctly the Bible narratives
and the social life and politics of the Hebrews.
Hl, Era of Scientific Excavation.—(1) Tell el-
Hesy (Palestine Exploration Fund).—Exploration
must always continue, but: excavation
1. Southern is a vast advance. The modern era
Palestine in Palestinian study begins with Petrie
at LacutsH (q.v.) in 1890. Though
Renan was actually the first man to put a spade
into the soil (1860), yet his results were practically
confined to Phoenicia. From Renan’s time to
1890 there had been no digging whatever, excepting
some narrow but thorough work in Jerus, and a
slight tickling of the ground at Jericho and at the
so-called Tombs of the Kings. Nothing was more
providential than this delay in beginning extensive
excavations in Pal, such as had been previously so
profitably conducted in Egypt and_ elsewhere.
The results could not have been interpreted even
two years earlier, and even when these excavations
were commenced, the only man living who could
have understood what he found was the man who
had been selected to do the work. Nearly two
centuries before, a traveler in Pal (Th. Shaw) had
suggested the possibility of certain mounds (‘“‘tells’’)
being artificial (cf Josh 8 28; Jer 30 18); but not
even Robinson or Guérin had suspected that these
were the cenotaphs of buried cities, but had be-
lieved them to be mere natural hills. The greatest
hour in the history of exploration in Pal, and per-
haps in any land, was that in which on a day in
April, 1890, W. M. Flinders Petrie climbed up the
side of Tell el-Hesy, situated on the edge of the
Phili plain, c 30 miles S.W. of Jerus, and 17 miles


Pal (Exploration) THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2226


N.E. from Gaza, and by examining its strata,
which had been exposed by the stream cutting
down its side, determined before sunset the fact,
from pieces of pottery he had seen, that the site
marked a city covering 1,000 years of history, the
limits of occupation being probably 1500 BC to
500 BC. This ability to date the several oceupa-
tions of a site without any inscription to assist him
was due to the chronological scale of styles of
pottery which he had originated earlier and worked
out positively for the Gr epochs at Naukratis a
year or two before, and for the epochs preceding
1100 BC at Illahun in the Fayydm only a month
or two before. The potsherds were fortunately
very numerous at Tell el-Hesy, and by the end of
his six weeks’ work he could date approximately
some eight successive occupations of the city, each
of these being mutually exclusive ‘in certain impor-
tant forms of pottery in common use. Given the
surface date, depth of accumulation and rate of
deposit as shown at Lachish, and a pretty sure
estimate of the history of other sites was available.
Not only was this pottery scale so brilliantly con-
firmed and elaborated at Tell el-Hesy that all
excavators since have been able accurately to date
the last settlement on a mound almost by walking
over it; but by observations of the methods of
stone dressing he was able to rectify many former
guesses as to the age of buildings and to establish
some valuable architectural signs of age. He
proved that some of the walls at this site were
built by ‘‘the same school of masons which built the
Temple of Solomon,” and also that the Ionic volute,
which the Greeks borrowed from the Asiatics, went
back in Pal at least to the 10th cent. BC, while on
one pilaster he found the architectural motif of the
“ram’s horn’ (cf Ps 118 27). He also concluded,
contrary to former belief, that this mound marked
the site of Lachish (Josh 10 31; 2 K 18 14), as
by a careful examination he found that no other
ruins near could fill the known historic conditions
of that city, and the inscription found by the next
excavator and all more recent research make this
conclusion practically sure. Lachish was a great
fortress of the ancient world. The Egyp Pharaohs
often mention it, and it is represented in a picture
on an Assyr monument under which is written,
“Sennacherib . . . . receives the spoil of Lachish”
(see 2 K 18 14). It was strategically a strong
position, the natural hill rising some 60 ft. above
the valley and the fortification which Sennacherib
probably attacked being over 10 ft. thick. The
débris lay from 50-70 ft. deep on top of the hill.
Petrie fixed the directions of the various walls, and
settled the approximate dates of each city and of
the imported pottery found in several of these.
One of the most unexpected things was an iron
knife dug up from a stratum indicating a period
not far from the time when Israel must have entered
Canaan, this being the earliest remnant of iron
weapons ever found up to this date (cf Josh 17 16).

The next two years of scientific digging (1891-
92), admirably conducted by Dr. F. G. Bliss on this
site, wholly confirmed Pctrie’s general inductions,
though the limits of each occupation were more
exactly fixed and the beginning of the oldest city
was pushed back to 1700 BC. The work was con-
ducted under the usnal dangers, not only from the
Bedawin, but from excessive heat (104° in the
shade), from malaria which at one time prostrated
8 of the 9 members of the staff, scarcity of water,
which had to be carried 6 miles, and from the
sirocco (see my report, PEFS, X XI, 160-70 and
Petrie’s and Bliss’s journal, X XI, 219-46; XXIII,
192, etc). He excavated thoroughly one-third of
the entire hill, moving nearly a million cubic feet
of débris. He found that the wall of the oldest


|
|


city was nearly 30 ft. thick, that of the next city
17 ft. thick, while the latest wall was thin and weak.
The oldest city covered a space 1,300 ft. sq., the
latest one only about 200 ft. sq. The oldest pot-
tery had a richer color and higher polish than the
later, and this art was indigenous, for at this level no
Phoen or Mycenaean styles were found. The late
pre-Israelitish period (1550-800 BC) shows such im-
portations and also local Cypriote imitations. In
the ‘Jewish’? period (800-300 BC) this influence
is lost and the new styles are coarse and ungraceful,
such degeneration not being connected with the
entrance of Israel into Canaan, as many have sup-
posed, but with a later period, most probably with
the desolation which followed the exile of the ten
tribes (Bliss and Petrie). In the pre-Israelite
cities were found mighty towers, fine bronze im-
plements, such as battle-axes, spearheads, brace-
lets, pins, needles, etc, a wine and treacle press, one
very large building ‘beautifully symmetrical,” a
smelting furnace, and finally an inscribed tablet
from Zimrida, known previously from the Am Tab to
have been governor of Lachish, c 1400 BC. Many
Jewish pit ovens were found in the later ruins and
large quantities of pottery, some containing potters’
marks and others with inscriptions. Clay figures of
Astarte, the goddess of fertility, were found in the
various layers, one of these being of the unique
Cypriote type, with large earrings, and many
Egyp figures, symbols and animal forms. See also
LaAcHIsH.

(2) Excavations in Jerus.—During 1894-97, not-
withstanding the previously good work done in
Jerus (see above) and the peculiar embarrassments
connected with the attempt to dig in a richly popu-
lated town, Dr. Bliss, assisted by an expert archi-
tect, succeeded in adding considerably to the sum
of knowledge. He excavated over a large area, not
only positively confirming former inductions, but
discovering the remains of the wall of the empress
Eudocia (450 AD), and under this the line of wall
which Titus had destroyed, and at a deeper level
the wall which surrounded the city in the Herodian
age, and deeper yet that which must probably be
dated to Hezekiah, and below this a construction
“exquisitely dressed, with pointed masonry,”
which must be either the remains of a wall of
Solomon or some other prcéxilic fortification not
later than the 8th cent. He found gates and an-
ciently paved streets and manholes leading to an-
cient sewer systems, and many articles of interest,
but esp. settled disputed questions concerning
important walls and the levels of the ancient hills,
thus fixing the exact topography of the ancient
city. H.G. Mitchell and others have also carefully
examined certain lines of wall, identifying Nehe-
miah’s Dung Gate, etc, and making a new survey of
certain parts of underground Jerus, the results of
the entire work being a modification of tradition
in a few particulars, but confirmatory in most.
The important springs and reservoirs, valleys and
hills of the ancient Jerus have been certainly iden-
tified. It is now settled that modern Jerus “still
sits virtually upon her ancient seat and at much
the same slope,” though not so large as the Jerus
of the kings of Judah which certainly extended
over the Southwestern Hill. Mt. Zion, contrary
to tradition which located it on the Southwestern
Hill where the citadel stands, probably lay on the
Eastern Hill above the Virgin’s Spring (Gihon).
On this Eastern Hill at Ophel lay the Temple, and
S. of the Temple on the same hill “above Gihon”
lay the old Jebusite stronghold (David’s City).
The ancient altar of burnt offering was almost surely
at es-Sakhra. The evidence has not been conclusive
as to the line of the second wall, so that the site of
Golgotha and the Holy Sepulchre cannot certainly


WHTVSOUEL 40 ITH NUALSVAHLAOS NO SNOILVAVOXG


2227


be determined (see George Adam Smith’s exhaust-
ive work, Jerus, 2 vols, 1907; Sir Charles Wilson,
Golgotha and the Holy Sepulchre, 1906; and cf Selah
Merrill, Ancient Jerus, 1908; C. R. Conder, City
os cf aa 1909; P. H. Vincent, Underground Jerus,

(3) Excavations in the Shephélah (Palestine Ex-
ploration Fund)—During 1898-1900 important
work was done by Bliss and Macalister at 4 sitcs
on the border land between Philistia and Judaea,
while five other small mounds were tunneled, but
without important results. The four chief sites
were Tell Zakariya, lying about midway between
Jerus and Tell el-Hesy; Tell es Safi, 5 miles W. of
Tell Zakariya, and Tell Sandahannah, about 10
miles 8.; while Tell ej-Judeideh lay between Tell
Zakariya and Tell Sandahannah. As Tell ej-
Judeideh was only half-exeavated and merely con-
firmed other results, not being remarkable except
for the large quantity of jar inscriptions found (37),
we omit further mention of it. (a) Tell Zakariya:
From this height, 1,214 ft. above the sea, almost all
Philistia could be seen. A_ pre-Israelitish town
was found under some 20 ft. of débris, containing
pre-Israelitish, Jewish and Seleucidan pottery.
Many vaulted cisterns, partly hewn from the rock,
were found in the lowest level. In later levels
Jewish pit ovens were found and inscribed jar-
handles with winged Egyp symbols, implements of
bronze, iron, bone and stone, and Egyp images of
Bes and the Horus eye, etc, besides a strange bronze
figure of a woman with a fish’s tail which seems to
represent Atargatis of Ashkelon. The ancient
rampart was strengthened, perhaps in Rehoboam’s
time, and towers were added in the Seleucidan era.
Only half of this site was excavated.


Saf: The camp was pitched near here in the Vale |


of Elah. From a depth of 21 ft. to the rock, was
found the characteristic pre-lsraelitish pottery and
much imported pottery of the Mycenaean type. A
high place was also found here, containing bones
of camels, sheep, cows, etc, and several monoliths
of soft limestone in situ, and near by a jar-burial.
In an ancient rubbish heap many fragments of the
goddess of fertility were found. Many old Egyp
and later Gr relics were also found, and four Ba

seals and the usual pottery from Jewish and later
periods. With strong probability this site was
identified as Gath.
was situated c 1,100 ft. above sea-level. The town
covered about 6 acres and was protected by an
inner and outer wall and occasional towers. The
strongest wall averaged 30 ft. thick. The work
done here “was unique in the history of Palestinian
excavation”? (Bliss). At Tell el-Hesy only one-
third of each stratum was excavated; at Teil
Zakariya only one-half; at Jerus the work was
confined to the enclosures of the temple, a few city
walls and a few churches, pools, streets, ete, but at
Tell Sandahannah ‘‘we recovered almost an entire
town, probably the ancient Mareshah [Josh 15
44], with its inner and outer walls, its gates, streets,
lanes, open places, houses, reservoirs, ctc’’ (Bliss).
Nearly 400 vessels absolutely intact and unbroken
were found. It was a Seleucidan town of the 3d
and 2d cent. BC, with no pre-Israelitish remains.
The town was built with thin brick, like blocks of
soft limestone, set with wide joints and laid in mud
with oceasionally larger, harder stones chisel-
picked. The town was roughly divided into blocks
of streets, some of the streets being paved. The
houses were lighted from the street and an open
court. Very few rooms were perfectly rectangular,
while many were of awkward shape. Many closets
were found and pit ovens and vaulted cisterns,
reached by staircases, as also portions of the old
drainage system. The cisterns had plastered floors,


{


(b) Tell es- |


(c) Tell Sandahannah: This |


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Pal (Exploration)


and sometimes two heavy coats of plaster on the
walls; the houses occasionally had vaulted roofs
but usually the ordinary roof of today, made of
boards and rushes covered with clay. No religious
building was found and no trace of a colonnade,
except perhaps a few fragments of ornament. An


Stamped Jar-Handles, Lamp and Iron Implements from
Tombs at Bett Jibrin.


enormous columbarium was uncovered (1906 niches).
No less than 328 Gr inscriptions were found on the
handles of imported wine jars. Under the Seleuci-
dan town was a Jewish town built of rubble, the
pottery of the usual kind including stamped jar-
handles. An Astarte was found in the Jewish or Gr
stratum, as also various animal forms. The Astarte
was very curious, about 11 in. high, hollow, wear-
ing a long cloak, but with breasts, body and part of
right leg bare, having for headdress a closely fitting
sunbonnet with a circular serrated top ornament in
front and with seven starsin relief. A most striking
find dating from about the 2d cent. AD was that
of 16 little human figures bound in fetters of lead,
iron, etc, undoubtedly representing “revenge dolls’
through which the owners hoped to work magic on
enemies, and 49 fragments of magical tablets in-
scribed in Gr on white limestone, with exorcisms,
incantations and imprecations. It ought to be
added that the four towns as a whole supplement
each other, and positively confirm former results.
No royal stamps were found at Tell el-Hesy, but 77
were found in these 4 sites, in connection with 2- or
4-winged symbols (Egyp scarabaeus or winged sun-
disk). Writing-materials (styli) were found in all
strata, their use being ‘‘eontinuous from the earliest
times into the Seleucidan period” (Bliss). From
the four towns the evolution of the lamp could be
traced from the pre-Israelite, through the Jewish to
the Gr period. Some 150 of the labyrinthine rock:
cut caves of the district were also examined, some
of which must be pre-Christian, as in one of these a
million cubie feet of material had been excavated,
yet so long ago that all signs of the rubbish had
been washed away.

(4) Painted “Tombs of Marissa.’—In 1902
John P. Peters and Hermann Thiersch discovered
at Beit Jibrin (adjoinmg Tell Sandahannah) an
example of sepulchral art totally different from any
other ever found in Pal. It was a tomb containing
several chambers built by a Sidonian, the walls
being brilliantly painted, showing a bull, panther,
serpent, ibex, crocodile with ibis (?) on its back,
hunter on horseback, ete, with dated inscriptions,
the earliest being 196 BC (see John P. Peters, Painted
Tombs in Necropolis of Marissa, 1905). The writer
(April 18, 1913) found another tomb here of similar
character, decorated with grapes, birds, two cocks
(life size), ete. Perhaps most conspicuous was a
wreath of beautiful flowers with a cross @ in its
center. Nothing shows the interrelations of that


Pal (Exploration) THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2228


age more than this Phoen colony, living in Pal,

using the Gr language but employing Egyp and
Libyan characteristics freely in their funeral art.

(1) Tell Ta‘annek (Austrian government and

Vienna Academy).—During short seasons of three

years (1902-4) Professor Ernst Sellin

2. Northern of Vienna made a rapid examination

Palestine of this town (Bib. Taanach), situated

in the plain of Esdraelon in Northern

Pal, on the ancient road between Egypt and


Interior of Tomb at Marissa.


Babylon. Over 100 laborers were employed and
digging was carried on simultaneously at several
different points on the mound, the record being
kept in an unusually systematic way and the
official reports being minute and exhaustive. Only
a general statement of results can be given, with an
indication of the directions in which the “findings”
were peculiar. The absence of Phoen and Myce-
naean influence upon the pottery in the earliest levels
(1000-1600 BC) is just as marked as at other sites,
the kind of pottery and the presence of Sem mag¢é-
bhoth (sce IMAGES) in the Jewish periods are just as
in previous sites, and the development in mason
work and in pottery is identically the same in this
first city to be excavated in Northern Pal as
in Southern Pal. ‘The buildings and antiques
might be interchanged bodily without any serious
confusion of the archaeological history of Pal.
.... Civilization over all Western Pal is thus
shown to have had the same course of development,
whether we study it N. or 8.” (Macalister). This
is by far the most important result of this excava-
tion, showing that, notwithstanding divergences
in many dircetions, an equivalent civilization,
proving a unity in the dominating race, can be
seen over all parts of Pal so far examined. Iron
is introduced at the same time (ec 1000 BC), and
even the toys and pottery decorations are similar,
and this continues through all the periods, including
the Jewish. “Yet foreign intercourse is common,
and the idols, even from the earliest period, “show
religious syncretism’ (Sellin). From almost the
oldest layer comes a curious seal cylinder containing
both Egyp and Bab features. On one pre-Israelite
tablet are pictures of Hadad and Baal. The
Astarte cult is not quite as prominent here as in
Southern Pal. No figures of the goddess come from
the earliest strata, but from 1600 BC to e 900-800
BC they are common; after this they cease.
The ordinary type of Astarte found in Babylonia
and Cyprus as well as in Pal—with crown, neck-
lace, girdle, anklets, and hands clasped on breasts—
is found most frequently; but from the 12th to
the 9th cent. other forms appear representing
her as naked, with hips abnormally enlarged, to
show her power of fecundity. One figure is of a


peculiarly foreign type, wearing excessively large
earrings, and this is in close connection with one
of the most unique discoveries ever made in Pal
—a hollow terra cotta Can. or Israelite (2 IKK 16 10)
altar (800-600 BC), having no bottom but with
holes in its walls which admitted air and insured
draft when fire was kindled below; in its ornamen-
tation showing a mixture of Bab and Egyp motives,
having on its right side winged animals with human
heads by the side of which is a man (or boy)
struggling with a serpent the jaws of which are
widely distended in anger; at its top two ram’s (?)


_ horns, and between them a sacrificial bow] in which


to receive the “drink offering”; on its front a tree
(of life), and on each side of it a rampant ibex.
A bronze serpent was found near this altar, as also
near the high place at Gezer. Continuous evidence
of the gruesome practice of foundation sacrifices,
mostly of little children, but in one case of an adult,
was found between the 13th and 9th cents. BC, after
which they seem tocease. In one house the skeletons
of a lady and five children were found, the former
with her rings and necklace of gold, five pearls, two
scarabs, etc. Many jar-burials of new-born infants,
16 inone place, were found, and, close to this deposit,
a rock-hewn altar with a jar of yellow incense (?).
Egyp and Bab images were found of different eras
and curious little human-looking amulets (as were
also found at Lachish) in which the parental parts
are prominent, which Sellin and Bliss believe to be
‘¢eraphim” (Gen 31 19.34; but see Driver, Modern
Research, 57, etc), such as Rachel, being pregnant,
took with her to protect her on the hard journey
from Haran to Pal (Macalister).

The high place, with one or more steps leading
up to it, suggesting “elevation, isolation and
mystery’? (Vincent), is represented here as in so
many other Palestinian ruins, and the evidence
shows that it continued long after the entrance of
Israel into Canaan. When Israel entered Pal, no
break occurred in the civilization, the art develop-
ment continuing at about the same level; so prob-
ably the two races were at about the same culture-
level, or else the Hebrew occupation of the land
was very gradual. In the 8th cent. there seems to
be an indication of the entrance of a different race,
which doubtless is due to the Assyr exile. A most
interesting discovery was that of the dozen cunei-
form tablets found in a terra cotta chest or jar (cf
Jer 32 14) from the pre-Israelite city.

These few letters cannot accurately be called ‘the first
library found in Pal’'; but they do prove that libraries
were there, since the personal and comparatively unim-
portant character of some of these notes and their easy
and flowing style prove that legal, business and literary
documents must have existed. These show that letter-
writing was used not only in great questions of state
between foreign countries, but in local matters between
little contiguous towns, and that while Pal at this period
(c 1400 BC) was politically dependent on Egypt, yet
Babylonia had maintained its old literary supremacy.
One of these letters mentions ‘‘ the finger of Ashirat,'' this
deity recalling the 'dshérah or sacred post of the OT (see
ImacGeEs); another note is written by Ahi-Yawi, a name
which corresponds to Heb Ahijah (‘‘Jeh is Brother’’),
thus indicating that the form of the Divine name was
then known in Canaan, though its meaning (i.e. the es-
sential name; cf Ex 6 3; 34 6; Neh 1.9; Jer 44 26),
may not have been known. Ahi-Yawi invokes upon
Ishtar-washur the blessing of the ‘‘ Lord of the Gods.”


On the same level with these letters were found
two subterranean cells with a rock-hewn chamber
in front and a rock-hewn altar above, and even
the ancient drain which is supposed to have con-
veyed the blood from the altar into the ‘chamber
of the dead” below. It may be added that Dr.
Sellin thinks the condition of the various walls of
the city is entirely harmonious with the Bible
accounts of its history (Josh 12 21; 17 11; Jgs
127;5 19-21;1K 412; 9 15; 1 Ch 7 29). So
far as the ruins testify, there was no scttled city life


2229


between ¢ 600 BC and 900 AD, ie. it became a
desolation about the time of the Bab captivity. An
Arab castle dates from about the 10th cent. AD.
(2) Tell el-Mutesellim (Megiddo, Josh 12 21; Jgs
5 19; 2 K 9 27).—This great commercial and mili-
tary center of Northern Pal was opened to the world
m 1903-5 by Dr. Schumacher and his efficient staff,
the diggings being conducted under the auspices of
His Majesty the Kaiser and the Ger. Pal Society.
The mound, about 5 miles N.W. from Ta‘anach,
stood prominently 120 ft. above the plain, the ruins
being on a plateau 1,020750 ft. in area. An
average of 70 diggers were employed for the entire
time. The débris was over 33 ft. deep, covering
some eight mutually excluding populations. The
surrounding wall, 3035 ft. thick, conformed itself
to the contour ofthetown. The excavations reached
the virgin rock only at one point; but the oldest
stratum uncovered showed a people living in houses,
having fire, cooking food and making sacrifices; the
next city marked an advance, but the third city,
proved by its Egyp remains to go back as far as the
20th cent. BC, showed a splendid and in some di-
rections a surprising civilization, building magnifi-
cent city gates (57 X36 ft.), large houses and tombs
with vaulted roofs, and adorning their persons with
fine scarabs of white and green steatite and other
jewelry of stone and bronze. It was very rich in
colored pottery and little objects such as tools,
seals, terra cotta figures and animals, including a
bridled horse, and some worked iron is also said to
have been found. In one pile of bodies were two
children wearing beautiful bronze anklets. The city
lying above this begins as early as the 15th cent.
BC, as is proved by a scarab of Thothmes ITI and
by other signs, although the scarabs, while Egyp in
form, are often foreign in design and execution.
Anubis, Bes, Horus and other Egyp figures appear,
also 32 scarabs in one pot, much jewelry, including
gold ornaments, and some very long, sharp bronze
knives. One tomb contained 42 vessels, and one
skeleton held 4 gold-mounted scarabs in its hand.
One remarkable fragment of pottery contamed a
colored picture of pre-Israelite warriors with great
black beards, carrying shields(?). A most interest-
ing discovery was that of the little copper (bronze ?)
tripods supporting lamps, on one of which is the
figure of a flute-player, being strikingly similar to
pictures of Delphic oracles and to representations
lately found in Crete (MNDPYV, 1906, 46). This
city was destroyed by a fearful conflagration, and
is separated from the next by a heavy stratum of
cinders and ashes. ‘The fifth city is remarkable for
a splendid palace with walls of stone from 3-5 ft.
thick. This city, which probably begins as early as
Solomon’s time, shows the best masonry. An oval,
highly polished seal of jasper on which is engraved a
Heb name in script closely resembling the M 8, sug-
gests a date for the city, and casts an unexpected
light upon the Heb culture of Pal in the days of the
monarchy. The seal is equal to the best Egyp or
Assyr work, clearly and beautifully engraved, and
showing a climax of art. In the center is the Lion
(of Judah), mouth wide open, tail erect, body tense.
Upon the seal is carved: “To Shema, servant of
Jeroboam.” This name may possibly not refer to
either of the Bib. kings (10th or 8th cent. BC), but
the stratum favors this dating. ‘The seal was evi-
dently owned by some Hebrew noble at a prosperous
period when some Jeroboam was In power, and so
everything is in favor of this being a relic from the
court of one of these kings, probably the latter
(Kautzsch, Mu. N, 1904, 81). | We have here, in
any case, one of the oldest Heb inscriptions known,
and one of the most elegant ever engraved (see
MNDPYV, 1906, 38). After seeing at the Sultan


took it from the museum into his own private col-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Pal (Exploration)


lection. A second seal of lapis lazuli, which Schu-
macher and Kautzsch date from about the 7th cent.
BC, also contains in Old Heb the name ‘Asaph’
(cf M u. N, 1906, 334; MNDPYV, 1904, 147). There
are several other remarkable works of art, as e.g.
a woman playing the tambourine, wearing an Egyp
headdress; several other figures of women besides
several Astartes, and esp. a series of six terra cotta
heads, one with a prominent Sem nose, another
with Egyp characteristics, another quite un-Egyp,
with regular features, vivacious eyes, curls falling
to her shoulders and garlanded with flowers.


_The slxth stratum might well be called the temple-
city, for here were found the ruins of a sanctuary built
of massive blocks in which remained much of the cere-
monial furniture—sacrificial dishes, a beautiful basalt pot
with three feet, a plate having a handle in the form of a
flower, etc. Seemingly conuected with the former town,
three religious stones were found covered by a fourth,
and one with a pyramidal top; so here several monoliths
were found which would naturally be thought of as
religious monuments—though, since they have been
touched with tools, this is perhaps doubtful (Ex 20 25).
One incense altar, carved out of gray stone, is so beautiful
as to be worthy of a modern Gr cathedral. The upper
dish rests on a support of carved ornamental Icaves
painted red, yellow and cobalt biue, in exquisite taste,
the colors still as fresh as when first applied. A hlack-
smith’s shop was found iu this stratum, containing many
tools, including iron plowshares, larger than the bronze
ones in the 3d and 4th layers. Allegorical figures were
found, which may possibly belong to the former town,
representing a man before an altar with his hands raised
in adoration, seemingly to a scorpion, ahove which are a
6-pointed. star, crescent moon, etc. Another most
wonderful seal of white hard stone is engraved with three
lines of symbols, iu the first a vulture chasing a rabhit;
in the second a conventional palm tree, with winged
creatures on each side; in the third a lion springing on
an ibex (?) under the crescent moon. Near hy was
found a cylinder of black jasper, containing hieroglyphs,
and much crushed pottery. The 7th city, which was
previous to the Gr or Rom eras, shows only a complex
of destroyed buildings. After this the place remains un-
occupied till the 11th cent. AD, when a poor Arab tower
was erected, evidently to protect the passing caravans.


These excavations were specially important in
proving the archaeological richness of Pal and the
elegance of the native works of art. They were
reported with an unexampled minuteness—various
drawings of an original design showing the exact
place and altitude where every little fragment was
found.

(3) Tell Him (Capernaum), ete—In April and
May, 1905, the German Oriental Society excavated
a Heb synagogue of the Rom era at Tell Him. It
was 78 ft. long by 59 ft. wide, was built of beautiful
white limestone, almost equal to marble, and was
in every way more magnificent than any other yet
found in Pal, that in Chorazin being the next finest.
Its roof was gable-shaped and it was surprisingly
ornamented with fine carvings representing ani-
mals, birds, fruits, flowers, etc, though in some cases
these ornamentations had been intentionally mu-
tilated. In January, 1907, Macalister and Master-
man proved that Khan Minyeh was not the ancient
Capernaum, as it contained no pottery older than
Arab time, thus showing Tell Him to be the ancient
site, so that the synagogue just excavated may be
the one referred to in Lk 7 5. At Samieh, 6 hours
N. of Jerus, two important Can. cemeteries were
discovered by the fellahin in 1906, consisting of
circular or oval tomb chambers, with roofs roughly
dome-shaped, as at Gezer (see below). A large
quantity of pottery and bronze objects, much of
excellent quality, was found (Harvard Theal. Rev.,
J, 70-96; Masterman, Studies in Galilee; Henson,
Researches in Palestine).

Jericho (German Oriental Society).—During
1908-9, Dr. E. Sellin, assisted by a specialist
in pottery, (Watzinger) and a professional archi-
tect (Langenegger), with the help of over 200 work-
| men, opened to view this famous Bib. city (Josh
1 6 1-24). Jericho was most strategically situated


Pal (Exploration) THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2230


at the eastern gateway of Pal, with an unlimited
water-supply in the ‘Ain es-Sultan, having complete

control of the great commercial high-
3. Eastern way across the Jordan and possessing
Palestine natural provisions in its palm forest

(Smith, HGHL). It was also set
prominently on a hill rising some 40 ft. above


Excavations at Jericho.


the plain. The excavations proved that from the
earliest historic time these natural advantages had
been increased by every possible artifice known to
ancient engineers, until it had become a veritable
Gibraltar. The oldest city, which was in the form
of an irregular ellipse, somewhat egg-shaped, with
the point at the 8.W., was first surrounded with a
rampart following the contour of the hill, a rampart
so powerful that it commands the admiration of
all military experts who have examined it.

The walls even in their rnins are some 28 ft.
high. They were built in three sections: (a) a
substratum of clay, gravel and small stones, making
a deposit upon the rock about 3 or 4 ft. deep, some-
what analogous to modern concrete; (b) a rubble
wall, 6 to 8 ft. thick, of large stones laid up to a
height of 16ft. upon this conglomerate, the lowest
layers of the stone being enormously large; (c) upon
all this a brick wall over 6 ft. thick, still remaining,
in places, 8 ft. high. Not even Megiddo, famous as
a military center throughout all the ancient world,
shows such workmanship (cf Josh 2 1; Nu 13 28).
“These were masters in stone work and masonry”
(The Builder); “Taken as a whole it may Fate
regarded as a triumph of engineering skill which a
modern builder, under the same conditions, could
searcely excel’’ (Langenegger); “lt is as well done
as a brilliant military engineer with the same ma-
terials and tools could do today” (Vincent). All
the centuries were not able to produce a natural
crevice in this fortification. At the N., which was
the chief point of danger, and perhaps along other
sections also, a second wall was built about 100 ft.
inside the first, and almost as strong, while still
another defence (“the citadel’), with 265 ft. of
frontage, was protected not only by another mighty
wall but by a well-constructed glacis. The old
pre-Israelite culture in Jericho was exactly similar
to that seen in the southern and northern cities,
and the idolatry also. In its natural elements
Can. civilization was probably superior to that of
the Hebrews, but the repugnant and ever-present
polytheism and fear of magic led naturally to brutal
and impure manifestations. It cannot be doubted
that, at least in some cases, the infants buried in
jars under the floors represent foundation sacrifices.
Some of the pottery is of great excellence, comparing
favorably with almost the best examples from
Egypt; a number of decorative figures of animals
in relief are specially fine; the bronze utensils are


also good; esp. notable are the 22 writing-tablets,
all ready to be used but not inscribed. Somewhere
near the 15th cent. the old fortifications were
seriously damaged, but equally powerful ones
replaced them. The German experts all believed
that a break in the city’s history was clearly shown
about the time when, according to the pottery,
Israel ought to have captured the city, and it was
confidently said that the distinctively Can. pot-
tery ceased completely and permanently at this
point; but further research has shown that at least
a portion of the old town had a practically contin-
uous existence (so Josh 16 7; Jgs 116; 3 13;
28105). No complete Israelitish house was
preserved, but the Israelitish quarter was located
close to the spring and no little furniture of the
usual kind was found, including dishes, pots, corn-
mills, lamps, etc, many iron instruments and terra
cotta heads of men and animals. The pottery is
quite unlike the old Canaanite, being closely allied
to the Gr-Phoen ware of Cyprus. It is noticeable
that, as in other Palestinian towns, in the Jewish
era, little Bab influence is discernible; the Aegean
and Egyp influence is not as marked as in the cities
dug up near the Mediterranean coast. One large
edifice (60 by 80 ft.) is so like the dwellings of the
7th cent. BC at Sendjirli that “they seem to have
been copied from Syrian plans” (Vincent). Abso-
Intely unique was the series of 12 Rhodian jar-
handles stamped in Aram., “To Jehovah” (Yah,
Yahu). Vincent has suggested that as during the
monarchy (7th to 6th cent.) ‘To the King” meant
probably “For His Majesty’s Service,” so in post-
exilic time the Divine name meant “For the
Temple” (Rev. biblique). After the exile the city had
about 3 centuries of prosperity; but disappears
permanently in the Maccabean era (MNDPYV,
1907; ee 1908-9; PEFS, 1910; Rev. biblique,
1907-9).

(1) Jerusalem.—See above, III, 1, (2).

(2) Samaria (Harvard Expedition).—Although
the ancient capital of the Northern Kingdom, yet
Samaria was centrally located, being
20 miles from the Mediterranean
coast and only about 30 miles N. of
Jerus. Ancient Samaria was very
famous in Israel for its frivolity and wealth, special
mention being made of its ointments, instruments
of music, luxurious couches, and its “ivory palace”
(Am 6 4-6; 1 K 16 24). Its history is known
so fully that the chronological sequences of the
ruins can be determined easily. The citadel and
town originated with Omri, e 900 BC (1 K 16 24);
the Temple of Baal and palace were constructions
of Ahab (1 K 16 32; 22 39); it continued pros-
perons down to the Assyr exile, 722 BC (1 K 22
to 2 K 17); Sargon and Esarhaddon established
a Bab colony and presumably fortified the town
(720-670 BC); Alexander the Great captured it in
331 BC, and established there a Syrio-Maccabean
colony; it was destroyed by John Hyrcanus in 109
BC, but rebuilt by Pompey in 60 BC, and again by
Herod (80-1 BC). All of these periods are identi-
fied in the excavations, Herod’s work being easily
recognized, and Josephus’ description of the town
being found correct; the Gr work is equally well
defined, so that the lower layers of masonry which
contained the characteristic Jewish pottery, and
which in every part of the ruin lay immediately
under the Bab and Gr buildings, must necessarily
be Heb, the relative order of underlying structures
thus being “beyond dispute’ (Reisner). During
1908-9 George A. Reisner with a staff of specialists,
including David G. Lyon of the Harvard Semitic
Musenm, G. Schumacher, and an expert architect,
undertook systematically and thoroughly to exca-
vate this large detached “tell” lying 350 ft. above


4. Central
Palestine


2231


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Pal (Exploration)


the valley and 1,450 ft. above sea-level, its location
as the only possible strategic stronghold proving
it to be the ancient Samaria. This was a “gigantic
enterprise’ because of the large village of 800
population (Sebastiyeh), and the valuable crops
which covered the hill. Some $65,000 were spent
during the two seasons, and the work finally ceased
before the site was fully excavated. The following
statement is an abridgment, in so far_as possible
in their words, of the official reports of Drs. Reisner
and Lyon to the Harvard Theol. Review: An
average of 285 diggers were employed the first season
and from 230-60 the second. undreds of Arabian
lamps, etc, were found close to the surface, and
then nothing more until the Rom ruins. Many
fine Rom columns still remained upright, upon the
surface of the hill. The road of columns leading
to the Forum and ornamental gate (oriented unlike


the older gates), the great outer wall ‘20 stadii.


in circuit” (Jos), the bippodrome, etc, were all
found with mscriptiong or coins and pottery of
the early Roman Empire. Even the old Rom
chariot road leading into the Forum was identified.
Adjoining the Forum and connected with it by a
wide doorway was a basilica, consisting of a large
open stone-paved court surrounded by a colonnade
with mosaic floor. An inscription in Greek on
an architrave in the courtyard dates this to 12-15
AD. The plan of the Herodian temple consisted
of a stairway, a portico, a vestibule and a cella
with a corridor on each side. The staircase was
about 80 ft. wide, composed of 17 steps beautifully
constructed, the steps being quite modern in style,
each tread overlapping the next lower by several
inches. The roof was arched and the walls very
massive and covered with a heavy coat of plaster
still retaining traces of color. A few Gr graffiti were
found near here, and 150 ‘‘Rhodian” stamped
amphora handles and many fragments of Lat in-
scriptions. A complete inscription on a large stele
proved to be a dedication from some Pannonian
soldiers (probably 2d or 3d cent. AD) to “Jupiter
Optimus Maximus.” Near this was found a torso
of heroic size carved in white marble, which is
much finer than any ever before discovered in Pal,
the work “bringing to mind the Vatican Augustus”
(Vincent), though not equal to it. Close to the
statue was a Rom altar (presumably Herodian)
ec 13 by 7 ft., rising in six courses of stone to a
height of 6 ft. Beneath the Rom city was a Seleu-
cid town (c 300-108 BC), with its fortifications,
gateway, temples, strects, and great public build-
ings and a complex of private houses, in connection
with which was a large bath house, with mosaic
floor, hot and cold baths, water closet, ete, which
was heated by a furnace. Underneath the Gr
walls, which were connected with the well-known
red-figured Gr ware of c 400 BC, were brick struc-
tures and very thick fortress walls built in receding
courses of small stones in the Bab style. In the
filling of the construction trench of this Bab wall
were found Israelite potsherds and a Heb seal with
seemingly Bab peculiarities, and one fragment of a
cuneiform tablet. Below these Bab constructions
“there is a series of massive walls beautifully built
of large limestone blocks founded on rock and form-
ing a part of one great building, which can be no
other than the Jewish palace.” It consisted of
“great open courts surrounded by small rooms,
comparable in plan and even in size with the Bab
palaces and is certainly royal in size and archi-
tecture.’ Its massive outlines which for the first
time reveal to the modern world the masonry of
an Israelite palace show that unexpected material
resources and technical skill were at the command
of the kings of Israel. An even greater discovery
was made when on the palace‘ hill was found an


alabastcr vase inscribed with the cartouche of
Osorkon II of Egypt (874-853 BC), Ahab’s con-
temporary; and at the same level, about 75 frag-
ments of pottery, not jar-handles but ostraca,
inscribed with records or memorials in ancient
Hebrew. The script is Phoen, and according to
such experts as Lyon and Driver, practically iden-
tical with that of the Siloam Inscription (c 700 BC)
and MS§ (¢c $50 BC). ‘The inscriptions are written
in ink with a reed pen in an easy flowing hand and
show a pleasing contrast to the stiff forms of Phoen
inscriptions cut in stone. The graceful curves
give evidence of a skill which comes only with long
practice’ (Lyon). The ink is well preserved, the
writing is distinct, the words are divided by dots
or strokes, and with two exceptions all the ostraca
are dated, the reigning king probably being Ahab.
The following samples represent the ordinary
memoranda: “In the llth year. From ’Abi‘ezer.
For’Asd4,’Akhemelek (and) Ba‘alaé. From’ElInathan
Onno a InSthyr. From Yasat. For ‘Abino‘am.
A jar of old wine... .. In lith yr. For Badyo.
The vineyard of the Tell.’ Baal and El form a
part of several of the proper names, as also the
Heb Divine name, the latter occurring naturally
not in its full form, YHWH, but as ordinarily in
compounds YW (Lyon, Harvard Theol. Rev., 1911,
136-43; cf Driver, PEFS, 1911, 79-83). In a
list of 30 proper names all but three have Bib.
equivalents. ‘They are the earliest specimens of
Heb writing which have been found, and in amount
they exceed by far all known ancient Heb inscrip-
tions; moreover, they are the first Palestinian
records of this nature to be found’’ (see esp. Lyon,
op. cit., I, 70-96; II, 102-13; III, 136-38; IV,
136-48; Reisner, ib, I1I, 248-63; also Theol. Litera-
turblatt, 1911, III, 4; Driver, as above; MNOP,
1911, 238-27; Rev. biblique, VI, 435-45).

(3) ‘Ain Shems (Beth-shemesh, 1 S 6 1-21;
2 K 14 11).—In a short but important campaign,
during 1911-12, in which from 36 to 167 workmen
were employed, Dr. D. Mackenzie uncovered a
massive double gate and primitive walls 12-15 ft.
high, with mighty hastions, and found in later de-
posits Egyp images, Syrian Astartes, imported
Aegean vases and a remarkable series of inscribed
royal jar-handles ‘dating from the Israelite mon-
archy” (Vincent), as also what seemed to be an
ancient Sem tomb with facade entrance. The
proved Cretan relations here are esp. important.
The town was suddenly destroyed, probably in the
era of Sennacherib (PHFS, 1911, LXIX, 172; 1912,
XII, 145).

(4) Gezer (Palestine Exploration Fund).—Tell
ej-Jezer occupies a conspicuous position, over 250
ft. above the plain, and 750 ft. above the sea, on a
ridge of hills some 20 miles N.W. of Jerus, over-
looking the plain toward Jaffa, which is 17 miles
distant. It is in plain sight of the two chief trade
caravan roads of Southern Pal which it controlled.
The ancient Gezer was well known from many refer-
ences to it on the Egyp records, the names of several
governors of Gezer being given in letters dating
from ec 1400 BC and Menephtah (ec 1200 BC) calling
himself ‘‘Binder of Gezer,” etc. The discovery of
the boundary stones of Gezer (see above) positively
identified it. It was thoroughly excavated by
R. A. Stewart Macalister in 1902-5, 1907-9, during
which time 10,000 photographs were made of oh-
jects found. No explorations have been so long
continued on one spot or have brought more unique
discoveries or thrown more light upon the develop-
ment of Palestinian culture and religion, and none
have been reported as fully (Hxcavations of Gezer,
1912, 3 vols; Hist of Civilization in Pal, 1912).
Ten periods are recognized as being distinctly
marked in the history of the mound—which broadly


Pal (Exploration) THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2232


speaking represents the development in all parts
of Pal: (a) pre-Sem period (c 3000-2500 BC), to
the entrance of the first Semites; (6) first Sem city
(c 2500-1800 BC), to the end of the XIIth Egyp
Dynasty; (c) second Sem city (e 1800-1400 BO),
to the end of the XVIIIth Egyp Dynasty; (d)
third Sem city (ec 1400-1000 BC), to the beginning
of the Heb monarchy; (e) fourth Sem city (c 1000-
550 BC), to the destruction of the monarchy
and the Bab exile; (f) Pers and Hel period
(550-100 BC), to the beginning of the Rom do-
minion; (g) Rom (100 BC-350 AD); (h) Byzantine
(350-600 AD); (i) and (j) early and modern
Arabian (850 AD to the present). The last four
periods have left few important memorials and may
be omitted from review.


(a) The aboriginal non-Sem iuhabitants of Gezer
were troglodytes (cf Gen 14 6) living in the caves which
honeycomb this district (cf ZDPV, 1909, VI, 12), modi-
fying these only slightly for home purposes. They were
a small race 5 ft. 4 in. to 5 ft. 7 in. in height, slender in
form, with rather broad heads and thick skulls, who
hunted, kept domestic animals (cows, sheep, goats);
had fire and cooked food; possessed no metals; made hy
hand a porous and gritty soft-baked pottery which they
decorated with red lines; and were capable of a rude
art—the oldest in Pal—in which drawings of various
animals are given. They prized certain bars of stone
(possibly phallic); they probably offered sacrifices;
they certainly cremated their dead, depositing with the
ashes a few food vessels. The crematory found was 31
ft. long by 24 wide, and in it the bodies were burned
whole, without regard to orientation. Many cup marks
in the rocks suggest possible religious rites: in close con-
nection with these markings were certain remains, in-
cluding bones of swine (cf Lev 11 7).

(b) The Semites who displaced this population were
more advanced in civilization, having bronze tools and
potter’s wheels, with finer and more varied pottery;
they were a heavier race, being 5 ft. 7 in. to 5 ft. 11 in.
tall, larger-boned, thicker-skulied, and with Jonger
faces. They did not burn hut buried their dead care-
lessly upon the floor of the natural caves. The grave
deposits are the same as before; occasionally some beads
are found withthe body. The former race had surround-
ed their settlement with a wall 6 ft. high and 8 ft. thick,
mostly earth, though faced with selected stones; but
this race built a wall of hammered stones, though irregu-
larly cut and laid, the wall being 10 ft. thick,and one
gateway being 42 ft. wide, flanked by two towers, While
huts were always the common residences (as in later
eras), yet some buildings of stone were erccted toward
the close of this period and one large palace was found,
built of stone and having a row of columns down the
center, and containing a complex of rooms, including one
rectangular hall, 40 ft. long by 25 ft. wide. Most
remarkable of all were their works of engineering. They
hewed enormous constructions, square, rectangular and
circular, out of the soft chalk and limestone rocks, one
of which contained 60 chambers, one chamber being
400 by 80 ft. The supreme work, however, was a tunnel
which was made c 2000 BC, passing out of use c 1450—
1250 BC, and_which shows the power of these early
Palestinians. It was 200-250 ft. long and consisted of
a roadway cut through the hill of rock some 47} ft. toan
imposing archway 23 ft. high and 12 ft. 10 in. broad,
which led to a long sloping passage of equal dimensions,
with the arch having a vaulted roof and the sides well
plumb. This led into a bed of much harder rock, where
dimensions were reduced and the workmanship was
poorer, but_ ultimately reached, about 130 ft. below the
present surface of the ground, an enormous living spring
of such depth that the excavators could not empty it
of the soft mud with which it was filled. A well-cut
but well-worn and battered stoue staircase, over 12 ft.
broad, connected the spring with the upper section of the
tunnel 94 ft. above. Beyond the spring was a natural
cave 80 by 25 ft. Dr. Macalister asks, ‘‘Did a Canaau-
ite governor plan and Canaanite workmen execute this
vast work? How did the ancient engineers discover
the spring ?’’ No one can answer; but certainly the
tunnel was designed to bring the entrance of the water
passage within the courtyard protected by the palace
walls.

Another great reservoir, 57 by 46 ft., at auother part
of the city was quarried in the rock to a depth of 29: ft.,
and helow this another one of equal depth but not so
large, aud narrowing toward the bottom. These were
covered with two coats of cement and surrounded by a
wall; they would hold 60,000 gals.

(c) The second Sem city, built on the ruins of the first,
was smaller, hut more luxurious. There were fewer
buildings but larger rooms. The potter's wheel was
worked hy the foot. Pottery becomes much finer, the
styles and decoration reaching a climax of grace and
refinement. Foreigu trade begins in this period and


almost or quite reaches its culmination. The Hyksos
scarabs found here prove that under their rule (XVIth
and XVIIith Dynasties) there was close intercourse with
Pal, and the multitudes of Egyp articles show that this
was also true before and after the Hyksos. The Cretan
and the Aegean trade, esp. through Cyprus, introduced
new art ideas which soon brought local attempts at
imitation. Scribes’ implements for writing in wax and
clay begin here and are found in all strata hereafter.


Interments in the Second Burial Cave at Gezer.


While the pottery is elaborately painted, it is but little
molded. The older ‘‘combed”’ ornament practically
disappears, while burnished ornament reaches high-water
mark. Animal figures are common, the eyes often being
elaborately modeled and stuck on; but it is infantile
art. Burials still occur in natural caves, but also in
those hewn artificially; the bodies are carelessly depos-
ited on the floor without coffins, generally in a crouching
position, and stones are laid around and over them
without system. Driuk offerings always and food offer-
ings generally are placed with the dead. Scarabs are
found with the skeletons, and ornaments of bronze and
silver, occasionally gold and beads, and sometimes
weapons. Lamps also hegin to be deposited, but in
small numbers.


(d) During this period Menephtah “spoiled
Gezer,”” and Israel established itself in Canaan.
The excavations have given no hint of Menephtah’s
raid, unless it be found in an ivory pectoral bearing
his cartouche. About 1400 BC a great wall, 4 ft.
thick, was built of large and well-shaped stones
and protected later by particularly fine towers,
perhaps, as Macalister suggests, by the Pharaoh
who captured Gezer_ and gave it as a dowry to his
daughter, wife of King Solomon. A curious fact,
which seemingly illustrates Josh 16 10,is the large
increase of the town shortly after the Heb invasion.
“The houses are smaller and more crowded and
the sacred area of the high place is built over.”
“There is no indication of an exclusively Israelite
population around the city outside” (Macalister,
v. Driver, Modern Research, 69). That land was
taken for building purposes from the old sacred
enclosure, and that new ideasin building plans and
more heavily fortified buildings were now intro-
duced have been thought to suggest the entrance
among the ancient population of another element
with different ideas. The finest palace of this
period with very thick walls (8-9 ft.) carefully
laid out at right angles, and certainly built near
“the time of the Heb invasion,’ was perhaps the
residence of Horam (Josh 10 33). At this period
seals begin (10 being found here, as against 28 in
the next period, and 31 in the Hellenistic) and also
iron tools; the use of the carpenter’s compass is
proved, the bow drill was probably in use, bronze
and iron nails appear (wrought iron being fairly com-
mon from ¢ 1000 BC); a cooking-pot of bronze was
found, and spoons of shell and bronze; modern meth-
ods of making buttons and button holes are finest
from this period, pottery buttons being introduced
in the next city. One incidental Bible reference to
the alliance between Gezer and Lachish (Josh 10
33) finds unexpected illustration from the fact that
a kind of pottery peculiar to Lachish, not having


2233


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Pal (Exploration)


been found in any other of the Southern Palestinian
towns, was found at Gezer. The pottery here in
general shows the same method of construction
as in the 3d stratum, but the decoration and shapes
deteriorate, while there is practically no molding.
Itshows much the same foreign influence as before,
the styles being affected from Egypt, Crete, the
Aegean, and esp. Cyprus. From this period come
218 scarabs, 68 from the period previous and 93
from the period following. Ornamental colored
specimens of imported Egyp glass also occur,
clear glass not being found till the next period.
Little intercourse is proved with Babylon at this
era: as against 16 Bab cylinders found in the
previous period, only 4 were found in this and 15
in the next period. There is no marked change
in the method of disposing of the dead, but the
food vessels are of smaller size and are placed in the
graves in great, numbers, most of these being broken
either through the use of poor vessels because of
economy or with the idea of liberating the spirit
of the object that it might serve the deceased in
the spirit world. Lamps are common now in every
tomb but there is a marked decrease in the quantity
and value of ornamental objects. Religious em-
blems occur but rarely. The worship of Astarte
(see ASHTORETH), the female consort of Baal, is
most popular at this era, terra cotta figures and
plaques of this goddess being found in many types
and in large numbers. It is suggestive that these
grow notably less in the next stratum. It is also
notable that primitive idols are certainly often
intentionally ugly (Vincent). So to this day
Arabs ward off the evil eye.

(e) This period, during which almost the entire
prophetic lit. was produced, is of peculiar interest.
Gezer at this time as at every other period was in
general appearance like a modern Arab village, a
huge mass of crooked, narrow, airless streets, shut
inside a thick wall, with no trace of sanitary con-
veniences, with huge cisterns in which dead men
could lie undetected for centuries, and with no
sewers. Even in the Maccabean time the only
sewer found ran, not into a cesspool, but into the
ground, close to the governor’s palace. The mor-
tality was excessively high, few old men being
found in the cemeteries, while curvature of the


spine, syphilis, brain disease, and esp. broken, |


unset bones were common. Tweezers, pins and
needles, kohl bottles, mirrors, combs, perfume boxes,
serapers (for baths) were common in this stratum
and in all that follow it, while we have also here
silver earrings, bracelets and other beautiful orna-
ments with the first sign of clear glass objects;
tools also of many kinds of stone, bronze and iron,
an iron hoe just like the modern one, and the first
known pulley of bronze. The multitude of Heb
weights found here have thrown much new light on
the weight-standards of Pal (see esp. Macalister,
Gezer, I], 287-92; E. J. Pilcher, PEFS, 1912; A.
R. S. Kennedy, Expos T, XXIV).

The pottery was poor in quality, clumsy and
coarse in shape and ornament, excepting as it was
imported, the local Aegean imitations being un-
worthy. Combed ornament was not. common,
and the burnished as a rule was limited to random
scratches. Multiple lamps became common, and
a large variety of styles in small jugs was intro-
duced. The motives of the last period survive,
but in a degenerate form. The bird friezes so
characteristic of the 3d Sem period disappear.
The scarab stamp goes out of use, but the impres-
sions of other seals “now become fairly common as
potter’s marks.’ These consist either of simple
devices (stars, pentacles, etc) or of names in Old
Heb script. These Heb-inscribed stamps were
found at many sites and consist of two classes,


(i) those containing personal names, such as
Azariah, Haggai, Menahem, Shebaniah, etc, (ii)
those which are confined to four names, often re-
peated—Hebron, Socoh, Ziph, Mamshith—in con-
nection with a reference to the king, e.g. ‘For [or
Of] the king of Hebron.” These latter date, accord-
ing to Dr. Macalister’s final judgment, from the


Stamped Jar-Handles Excavated at Gezer.


Pers period. He still thinks they represent the
names of various potters or potters’ guilds in Pal
(cf 1 Ch 2, 4, 5, and see esp. Bible Side-Lighis
from Gezer, 150, etc), but others suppose these names
to represent the local measures of capacity, which
differed in these various districts; others that these
represented different tax-districts where wine jars
would be used and bought. At any rate, we cer-
tainly have here the work of the king’s potters
referred to in 1 Ch 4 23. Another very curious
Heb tablet inscription is the so-called Zodiacal
Tablet, on which the signs of the Zodiac are figured
with certain other symbols which were at first
supposed to express some esoteric magical or reli-
gious meaning, but which seem only to represent
the ancient agricultural year with the proper
months indicated for sowing and reaping—being
the same as the modern seasons and crops except-
ing that flax was cultivated anciently. An even
more important literary memorial from this period
consists of two cuneiform tablets written about three-
quarters of a century after the Ten Tribes had been
carried to Assyria and foreign colonies had been
thrown into Israelite territory. This collapse of
the Northern Kingdom was not marked by any
local catastrophe, so far as the ruins indicate, any
more than the collapse of the Can. kingdom when
Israel entered Pal; but soon afterward we find an
Assyr colony settled in Gezer “using the Assyr
language and letters . . . . and carrying on busi-
ness with Assyr methods.’”’ In one tablet (649 BC),
which is a bill of sale for certain property, contain-
ing description of the same, appeared the name of the
buyer, seals of seller and signature of 12 witnesses,
one of whom is the Egyp governor of the new town,
another an Assyr noble whose name precedes that
of the governor, and still another a Western Asiatic,
the others being Assyrian. Itis a Hebrew “Netha-
niah,”’ who the next year, as the other tablet shows,
sells his field, his seal bearing upon it a lunar stellar
emblem. Notwithstanding the acknowledged it-
erary work of high quality produced in Pal during
this period, no other hint of this is found clear down
to the Gr period except in one neo-Bab tablet.

The burials in this period were much as pre-
viously, excepting that the caves were smaller and
toward the end of the period shelves around the
walls received the bodies. In one Sem tomb as
many as 150 vessels were found. Quite the most
astonishing discovery at this level was that of
several tombs which scholars generally agree to
be “Philistine.” They were not native Canaanite,
put certainly Aegean intruders with relations with
Crete and Cyprus, such as we would expect the
Philis to have (see Puristines). The tombs were


Pal (Exploration)
Palm Tree


2234


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


oblong or rectangular, covered with large hori-
zontal slabs, each tomb containing but a single
body, stretched out with the head to the E. or W.
One tomb was that of a girl of 18 with articles of
alabaster and silver about her, and wearing a
Cretan silver mouth plate; another was a man of


High Place of the Cave-Dwellers at Gezer.


40 with agate seal of Assyr design, a two-handled
glass vessel, etc; another was a woman surrounded
by handsome ornaments of hronze, lead, silver and
gold, with a basalt scarab between her knees. The
richest tomb was that of a girl whose head had been
severed from the body; with her was a hemispher-
ical bowl, ornamented with rosette and lotus pat-
tern, and a horde of beautiful things. The iron in
these tombs was noticeable (cf 18 17 7), and in
one tomb were found two ingots of gold, one of these
being of the same weight almost to a fraction as that
of Achan (Josh 7 21). The most impressive dis-
covery was the high place. This began as early
as 2500-2000 BC, and grew by the addition of
monoliths and surrounding buildings up to this
era. The eight huge uncut pillars which were found
standing in a row, with two others fallen (yet cf
Benzinger, Heb Archaeology, 320), show us the
actual appearance of this ancient worshipping-place
so famous in the Bible (Dt 16 22; 2 Kk 17 9.11;
23 8). The top of one of these monoliths had
been worn smooth by kisses; another was an im-
portation, being possibly, as has been suggested,
a captured ‘‘Aril”’; another stone, near by, had a
large cavity in its top, nearly 3 ft. long and 2 ft.
broad and 1 ft. 2 in. deep, which is differently inter-
preted as being the block upon which the ’dshérah,
so often mentioned in connection with the magc¢é-
bhoth, may have been erected, or as an altar, or per-
haps a laver for ritual ablutions. Inside the sacred
enclosure was found a small hronze cobra (2 K 18
4), and also the entrance to an ancient cave,
where prohably oracles were given, the excavators
finding that this cave was connccted with another
by a small, secret passage—through which pre-
sumably the message was delivered. In the
stratum undcrlying the high place was a cemetery
of infants buried in large jars. ‘That the sacri-
ficed infants were the firsthorn, devoted in the
temple, is indicated by the fact that none were
over a week old” (Macalister). In all the Sem
strata bones of children were also found in corners
of the houses, the deposits being identical with
infant burials in the high place; and examination
showed that these were not stillborn children. At
least some of the burials under the heuse thresholds
and under the foundation of walls carry with them
the mute proofs of this most gruesome practice.
In one place the skeleton of an old woman was
found in a corner where a hole had been left just
large enough for this purposc. A youth of about
1S had been cut in two at the waist and only the


upper part of his body deposited. Before the coming
into Pal of the Israelites, a lamp hegan to be placed


' under the walls and foundations, probably sym-


bolically to take the place of human sacrifice. A
lamp and bowl! deposit under the threshold, etc,
begins in the 3d Sem period, but is rare till the
middle of that period. In the 4th Sem period it
is common, though not universal; in the Hellenic
it almost disappears. Macalister suspects that
these bowls held blood or grape juice. In one
striking case a bronze figure was found in place of
a body. Baskets full of phalli were carried away
from the high place. Various types of the Astarte
were found at Gezer. When we see the strength
and popularity of this religion against which the
prophets contended in Canaan, ‘‘we are amazed at
the survival of this world-religion,” and we now see
‘why Ezra and Nehemiah were forced to raise the
‘fence of the law’ against this heathenism, which
did in fact overthrow all other Sem religions”
(George Adam Smith, PHF'S, 1906, 288).

(f) During the Maccabean epoch the people of
Gezer built reservoirs (one having a capacity of
4,000,000 gals.), used well-paved rooms, favored
complex house plans with pillars, the courtyard be-
coming less important as compared with the rooms,
though domestic fowls were now for the first time
introduced. The architectural decorations have


Lamp and Bowls Discovered at Gezer.


all been annihilated (as elsewhere in Pal) excepting
a few molded stones and an Jonic volute from a
palace, supposed to be that of Simon Maccabaeus
because of the references in Jos and because of
a scribbled imprecation found in the courtyard:
“May fire overtake [?] Simon’s palace.’’ This is
the only inscription from all these post-exilic cen-
turies, to which so much of the beautiful Bible lit.
is ascribed, excepting one grotesque animal figure
on which is scrawled a name which looks a little
like “Antiochus.” Only a few scraps of Gr bowls,
some Rhodian jar-handles, a few bronze and iron
arrow heads, a few animal figures and a fragment of
an Astarte, of doubtful chronology, remain from
these four centuries. The potsherds prove that
foreign imports continued and that the local potters
followed classic models and did excellent work.
The ware was always burnt hard; combed orna-
ment and burnishing were out of style; molded
ornament was usually confined to the rope design;
painted decorations were rare; potter’s marks were
generally in Gr, though some were in Heb, the letters
being of late form, and no names appearing similar
to those found in Scripture. The tombs were well-
cut square chambers, with shafts hewn in the rock
for the bodies, usually nine to each tomb, which
were run into them head foremost. The doorways
were well cut, the covers almost always being mov-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pal (Exploration)
Palm Tree


able flat slabs, though in one case a swinging stone
door was found—circular rolling stones or the
‘false doors” so often found in the Jerus tombs
being unknown here. Little shrines were erected
above the forecourt or vestibule. When the body
decayed, the bones in tombs having these kakhin,
shafts, were collected into ossuaries, the inscrip-
tions on these ossuaries showing clearly the transi-


tion from Old Heb to the square character. After |


the Maccabean time the town was deserted, though
a small Christian community lived here in the 4th
cent. AD. See also Guzen.


Lireratore.—Most important recent monographs:
Publications of Palestine Exploration Fund, esp. Survey
of Western Pal (9 vols, 1884); Survey of Eastern Pal (2
vols, 1889); '‘Pal Pilgrim’s Text Society’s Library"' (13
vols) and the books of W. M. Flinders Petrie, F. J. Bliss
and R. A. 8. Macalister; also Bliss, Development of Pal
Exploration (1906), and Macalister, Bible Side-Lights
from the Mound of Gezer (1906); Ernst Sellin, Tell Ta‘an-
nek (1904); Eine Nachlese auf dem Tell Tatannek (1905);
C. Steuernagel, Tell el-Muitesellim (1908); Mommert,
ae des alten Jerus (1902-7); H. Guthe, Bibelatlas

Most important periodicals: PEFS; ZDPV; Mittet-
lungen und Nachrichten des deutschen Paldstina-Vereins;
Paldstina-Jahrbuch (MNDPV): Revue Biblique.

Mostimportant general works: L. B. Paton, Early His-
tory of Syria and Pal (1902); Cninet, Syrie, Liban et
Pal (1896-1900); H. V. Hilprecht, Explorations in Bible
Lands during the 19th Cent. (1903): P. H. Vincent,
Canaan, d’aprés Uerploration récenie (1907); G. A.
Smith, Jerus (1908); S. Driver, Modern Research
as Illustrating the Bible (1909).


CampEN M. Copern


PALLU, pal’i, PALLUITES, pal’t-its (N7DB, |


pallid’, “distinguished’’):
46 9 [Phallu”]; Ex 614; Nu 265.8; 1 Ch 6
3). Perhaps Peleth of Nu 161 is the same.
Palluites, the patronymic, occursin Nu 26 5.


PALM, pim (OF THE HAND) (23, kaph): The
Heb word which is used in a variety of senses (see
Hanp; Paw) is usually tr? “hand” in EV, but the
tr ‘“‘palm”’ is found in 5 passages of the OT, in 3 of
which the Heb text adds the word 79, yddh (“hand,”
18 54; 2 Kk 9 35; Dn] 10 10). It would prop-
erly mean the “hollow hand” (root kaphaph, ‘‘to
bend,” ‘‘to curve’’), which reccives or grasps things.
It is therefore used in reference to filling the priest’s
hands with sacrificial portions (Lev 14 15.26).
The palms of the hands of Dagon are mentioned as
cut off, when the idol was found mutilated in the
presence of the ark of Jeh (1 S 6 4), from which
may be inferred that this idol probably was repre-
sented with hands spread out in blessing, as we find
in numerous Bab representations of divinities.

In a beautiful metaphor God answers the repent-
ant people of Jerus, who thought Jeh had forgotten
and forsaken them: ‘Behold, I have graven thee
upon the palms of my hands” (Isa 49 16; see also
Ecclus 18 3). Danicl is touched upon the palms of
his hands to wake him from sleep (Dnl 10 10).

In the NT we find the phrase, “‘to smite with the
palms of the hands,” as a tr of the Gr vb. paml{w,
rhayiz6 (Mt 26 67; sce also 6 39 and LXX Hos 11
4; 1 Esd 4 30), and, derived from the same vb.,
pamiopa, rhdépisma, a blow of the palm on the check,
etc (Mk 14 65; Jn 18 22; 19 3, where, however,
in EV the word “palm’”’ has not been given). The
marginal tr “‘to smite or strike with rods’ (Mt 26
67; Jn 18 22; 19 3) and “strokes of rods’ (Mk
14 65 m) docs not seem to be applicable to the Gr
text of the OT and NT, while it is a frequent mean-
ing of the words in classical language. It would
therefore be better to eliminate these marginal
additions. H. L. E. Loerine


A son of Reuben (Gen


PALM TREE, piim’tré (""OM, t@mar, same as
the Aram. and Ethiopic, but in Arab.=“date’;
dotué, phoiniz [Ex 16 27; Lev 23 40; Nu 33 9;


Dt 34 3; Jgs 116; 3 13; 2 Ch 2815; Neh 8
15; Ps 92 12; Cant 7 7f; Joel 1 12]; “War,
tomer, Deborah ‘“‘dwelt under the palm-
tree’ [Jgs 4 5]; “They are like a palm-
tree [m “pillar’’], of turned work” [Jer
10 5]; WYONM, timorah [only in pl.],
the palm tree as an architectural feature [1 K 6


1. Palm
Trees


Date Palm with Fruit (at Jaffa).


29.32.35; 7 36; 2 Ch 35; Ezk 40 16]; Gr only


Ecclus 60 12; Jn 12 138; Rev 79): The palm,
Phoenix dactylifera (N.O. Palmeae), Arab. nakhl,
is a tree which from the earliest times has been
associated with the Sem peoples. In Arabia the
very existence of man depends largely upon its
presence, and many authorities consider this to
have been its origina] habitat. It is only natural
that such a tree should have been sacred both there
and in Assyria in the earliest ages. In Pal the
palm leaf appears as an ornament upon pottery as
far back as 1800 BC (cf PHF, Gezer Mem., 11, 172).
In Egypt the tall palm stem forms a constant fea-
ture in early architecture, and among the Hebrews
it was extensively used as a decoration of the temple
(1 K 6 29.32.35; 7 36; 2 Ch 3.5). It is a sym-
bol of beauty (Cant 7 7) and of the righteous man:
‘The righteous shall flourish like the palm-tree:

He shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon.

They are pated in the house of Jehovah,

They shall flourish in the courts of our God.

They shall still bring forth fruit in old age;

They shall be full of sap and green'’ (Ps 92 12-14).

The palm tree or branch is used extensively on

Jewish coinage and most noticeably appears as a
symbol of the land upon the celebrated Judaea
Capta coins of Vespasian. A couple of centuries or
so later it forms a prominent architectural feature
in the ornamentation of the Galilean synagogues,
e.g.at Tell HQm(Capernaum). The method of arti-
ficial fertilization of the pistillate (female) flowers
by means of the staminate (male) flowers appears
to have been known in the earliest historic times.
Winged figures are depicted on some of the early
Assyr sculptures shaking a bunch of the male
flowers over the female for the same purpose as the
people of modern Gaza ascend the tall trunks of the
| fruit-bearing palms and_ tie among the female
| flowers a bunch of the pollen-hearing male flowers.


Palmer-Worm = THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Paphos


2236


In Pal today the palm is much neglected; there
are few groves except along the coast, e.g. at the
bay of Akka, Jaffa and Gaza; solitary


2. Their palms occur all over the land in the
Ancient courtyards of mosques (cf Ps 92 13)
Abundance and houses even in the mountains.


in Palestine Once palms
flourished

upon the Mount of
Olives (Neh 8 15), and
Jericho was long known
as the “city of palm-trees”
(Dt 34 3; Jgs 116; 3
138; 2 Ch 28 15; Jos,
BJ, IV, viii, 2-3), but
today the only palms are
searce and small; under
its name Hazazon-tamar
(2 Ch 20 2), En-gedi
would appear to have
been as much a place of
palms in ancient days as
we know it was in later history. A city, too, called
Tamar (‘date palm’’) appears to have been some-
where near the southwestern corner of the Dead Sea
(Ezk 47 19; 48 28). Today the numerous salt-
encrusted stumps of wild palm trees washed up all
along the shores of the Dead Sea witness to the
existence of these trees within recent times in some |
of the deep valleys around.

Branches of palms have been symbolically asso-
ciated with several different ideas. A palm branch

is used in lsa 9 14; 19 15 to signify

3. Palm the “head,” the highest of the people,
Branches _as contrasted with the rush, the “‘tail,”’
or humblest of the people. Palm
branches appear from early times to have been
associated with rejoicing. On the first day of the
Feast of Tabernacles the Hebrews were commanded
to take branches of palms, with other trees, and
rejoice before God (Lev 23 40; cf Neh 8 15; 2
Mace 10 7). The palm branch still forms the
chief feature of the lalabh carried daily by every
pious Jew to the synagogue, during the feast. Later
it was connected with the idea of triumph and vic-
tory. Simon Maccabaeus entered the Akra at
Jerus after its capture, “with thanksgiving, and
branches of palm trees, and with harps, and cymbals,
and with viols, and hymns, and songs: because there
was destroyed a great enemy out of Israel’? (1 Mace
13 51 AV; cf2 Macc 10 7). Thesame idea comes
out in the use of palm branches by the multitudes
who escorted Jesus to Jerus (Jn 12 13) and also
in the vision of the “great multitude, which no man
could number... . standing before the....
Lamb, arrayed in white robes, and palms in their
hands” (Rev 7 9). Today palms are carried in
every Moslem funcral procession and are laid on
the new-made grave.

See also Tamar as a proper name.

E. W. G. MasTermMan

PALMER-WORM, pim’ér-wirm (014, gdzaim;
LXX xéparn, kdmpé [Am 49; Joel 1 4; 2 25)):
“Palmer-worm’’ means “caterpillar,” but the in-
sect meant is probably a kind of locust. See In-
sEcT; Locust.


Coin of Vespasian Repre-
senting Judaea Mourning
for Her Captivity.


PALSY, pél’zi, PARALYSIS, pa-ral’i-sis (wapé- |
Aves, pardlusis): The Eng. werd ‘‘palsy” is derived |
from the OFr. peralesie, which in Middle Eng. was
shortened into palesie, the form in which it appears
in Wyclif’s version. In the 16th cent. it appears
as “palsy,” the form used in AV. This, however,
is seldom used at the present day, the Latinized Gr
form “paralysis” being more frequently employed,
both in modern literature and in colloquial Ing.
“Sick of the palsy” is the tr either of the adj. para-


lutikés or of the part. of the vb. paraliiomai. The
clisease is one characterized by extreme loss of the
power of motion dependent on some affection either
of the motor centers of the brain or of the spinal
cord. It is always serious, usually intractable, and
generally sudden in onset (1 Mace 9 55f). Miracu-
lous cures by Our Lord are related in general
terms, as in Mt 4 24; Acts 8 7. Aeneas (Acts 9
33) was probably a paralytic eight years bedridden.
Though the Lord addressed the paralytic let down
through the roof (Mt 9 6; Mk 2 3; Lk 6 18) as
“son,” it was not necessarily a proof that he was
young, and though He prefaces the cure by declaring
the forgiveness of sin, we need not infer that the
disease was the result of an evil life, although it
may have been. Bennett conjectures that the cen-
turion’s palsied servant grievously tormented was
suffering from progressive paralysis with respiratory
spasms (see Pain). The subst. paralusis is only
once used in the LXX in Ezk 21 10, but here it
refers to the loosing of the sword, not to the disease.
ALEX. MACALIsTER

PALTI, pal’ti cube, paltz, ‘“‘Jeh delivers’’):

(1) One of the “searchers” of Canaan sent by
Moses (Nu 18 9), representing Benjamin in the
expedition (ver 9).

(2) The man to whom Saul gave Michal, David’s
wife, after the estrangement (1 5 25 44). He is
“the captain of the people” of 2 Esd 5 16 (“Phal-
tiel,”’ m ‘Psaltiel’”’). In 2 8 3 15, he is named
“Phaltiel” (AV), “Paltiel” (RV), and is there men-
tioned in connection with David’s recovery of
Michal.


PALTIEL, pal’ti-el Oyen, pali? él, ‘“God’s
deliverance’):

(1) A prince of Issachar (Nu 34 26).

(2) Same as Pautt, (2) (q.v.).


PALTITE, pal’tit ((2B, palft [as Palti]; LXX
B, Kedtobel, Keldthet, A, Peddovel, Phelldnei): The
description occurs but once in this form and is then
applied to Helez, one of David’s 30 valiant men
(28 23 26). Helez’ name, however, occurs in
1 Ch 11 27 and 27 10 as the “Pelonite.”” Doubt-
less there is some confusion of words. The word
may be given as a patronymic of Palti, or it may
designate a native of the village of Beth-pelet
mentioned in Josh 15 27 and Neh 11 26 as being
in Lower Judah. Helez, however, is described as
“of the children of Ephraim” in 1 Ch 27 10.


PAMPRHYLIA, pam-fil'i-a (Tlapopudla, Pamphu-
lia): A country lying along the southern coast of
Asia Minor, bounded on the N. by

1. Physical Pisidia, on the E. by Isauria, on the
Features 5. by the Mediterranean Sea, and on
the W. by Lycia (Acts 2 10; 27 5).

In the earliest time Pamphylia was but a narrow
strip of low-lying land between the base of the
mountains and the sea, scarcely more than 20 miles
long and half as wide. A high and imposing range
of the Taurus Mountains practically surrounds it
upon three sides, and, jutting out into the sea,
isolates it from the rest of Asia Minor. Its two
rivers, the Cestrus and the Cataractes, are said by
ancient writers to have been navigable for several
miles inland, but now the greater part of their water
is diverted to the fields for irrigating purposes, and
the general surface of the country has been con-
stantly changed by the many rapid mountain
streams. The level fertile coast land is therefore
well watered, and the moist air, which is excessively
hot and enervating, has always been laden with
fever. Several roads leading from the coast up
the steep mountain to the interior existed in ancient


2237


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Palmer-Worm
Paphos


times; one of them, called the Kimax or the Ladder,
with its broad stair-like steps 2,000 ft. high, may
still be seen. Beyond the steps is the high land
which was once called ‘'Pisidia,’’ but which the
Romans, in 70 AD, made a part of Pamphylia.

Pamphylia, unless in pre-historic times, was never

an Independent kingdom; it was subject  suc-

cessively to Lydia, Persia, Macedonia,
2. Im- Pergamos and Rome. Because of its
portance hae ipolape Dosen, civi-
ization there was less developed than
in the neighboring countries, and the eniie in-
fluence was at most times stronger than the Gr.
As early as the 5th cent. BC a Gr colony settled
there, but the Gr language which was spoken in
some of its cities soon became corrupt; the Gr in-
scriptions, appearing upon the coins of that age,
were written in a peculiar character, and before
the time of Alexandcr the Great, Gr ceased to be
spoken. Perga then became an important city
and the center of the Asiatic religion, of which the
Artemis of Perga, locally known as Leto, was the
goddess. Coins were struck also in that city.
Somewhat later the Gr city of Attalia, which was
founded by Attalus III Philadelphus (159-138 BC),
ae Vo eboR ane and until Hee pas has aa

e chief port of entry on the southern coast o
Asia Minor. About the beginning of our era, Side
became the chief city, and issued a long and heauti-
ful series of coins, possibly to facilitate trade with
the pirates who found there a favorable market for
their booty. Pamphylia is mentioned as one of the
recipients of the “letters” of 1 Macc 15 23.

Christianity was first introduced to Pamphylia
by Paul and Barnabas (Acts 13 13, 14 24), but
eerie pees ee stay : ue aes a

; 0- rief, or because of the difficulty o
duction of communication with the neighboring
Christianity countries, eae of the peau

character of the population, it was slow
in being established. See also AtTTalIa; PERGA;
Sinz, the chief cities of peppy a an
. J. BANKS

PAN: Name of a utensil used in the preparation
or the serving of food, and representing several
words in the original. Passing over the use of the
word in connections like 1 Ch 9 31, “things baked
in pans,” where the Heb word hdbhitttm refers, not to
the pan itself, but to the cakes baked in the flat pan
or griddle which was called mahdbhath (see below),
and the “firepans” (mahtah) (Ex 27 3; 1 K 7 50,
etc) which seem to have been used to carry burning
coals, we note the following words: ’

(1) MBO, mahabhath, “pan” AV, {“baking-pan”?
RV, a dish of uncertain shape and size which was
used in the prepalaticn 0 Ba os oy ee
offering. See Lev 5 zi ; :
On Che basis of Ezk 4 3 it might be assumed that
the pan, was rectangular in shape and of good size.

(2) "PD, kiyyor, rendered ‘pan’ in 1 § 2 14.
The same word is used in the phrase, “pan of fire”’
RV. “hearth of fire’ AV (Zec 12 6); and it is also
tr “laver’’ in the descriptions of the furnishing of
tabernacle and temple (Ex 30 18; 1 K 7 30, etc).
As it held water and was uscd for boiling meat and
the like, it must have been a kind of pot or kettle.

(3) nw, masréth (2 8 13 9). The connection
gives no clue as to shape or size except that it must
have been small enough to serve food in, and of the
proper shape to hold a substance which could be
poured out. Some authorities suggest a connec-
tion with the root "NY, s”ér, “leaven,” and think
that this pan was like the kneading-trough in shape.

(4) "70, sir, rendered “pan”? in Ex 273 AV,
“pot”? RV (sce Pot).


(5) WB, paérdr, “pan” in Nu 11 8 AV, “pot”
RV (see Port).

(6) MMSE, célahah (2 Ch 36 13). Some kind
of dish or pot. Slightly different forms of the same
root are rendered ‘‘cruse’”’ (2 K 2 20 [¢lahith]),
“dish” (2 K 21 13 [eallahath]); and also in RV in
Prov 19 24; 26 15, instead of the probably in-
correct “bosom” of AV.

(7) r€Bqs, lébés, tet “pan” in 1 Esd 1 12 AV (RV
“cauldron’’).

(8) riyavor, téganon, 2 Macc 7 3.5, with the vb.
ryyavitw, téganizd, ver 5, is the usual Gr word for
‘frying-pan,” but here a large sheet of mctal must
be meant (cf 4 Mace 8 138; 12 10.20).

LireratuRrs.—Whitehouse, Primer of Hebrew Antiqui-
ties, 76, 77; Benzinger, Hebrdische Archdologie, 70, 71;
Nowack, Hebrdische Archdologte, I, 144.

Water R. BETTERIDGE

PANNAG, pan’ag (432, pannagh; xaela, kasia;
Ezk 27 17 m, “Perhaps a kind of confection’):
One of the articles of commerce of Judah and Israel.
The kasia of the LXX is said to be a shrub similar
to the laurel. Nothing is known of the nature
of pannag. Cheyne (#B, 3555) thinks the Heb
letters have got misplaced and should be 353,
gephen, “vine,’’ and he would join to it the W327,
d¢bhash, “honey,” which follows in the verse, giving
a tr “grape honey,” the ordinary dibbs of Pal—an
extremely likely article of commerce. See Honey.


PANOPLY, pan’o-pli: 1 Mace 13 29RVm. Sce
ARMOR.


PAP (%W, shadh, WU, shodh, “breast” [Ezk 23
21]; paords, mastés, “the breast” [Lk 11 27; 23 29;
Rev 1 13]): The Eng. word, which gocs back
to Middle Eng. “pappe” (see Skeat, Concise Ety-
mological Dict. of the Eng. Language, 327) and is now
obsolete, has been replaced in RV by “breast.”
The Heb word signifies the “female breast’’; the
Gr word has a wider signification, including the male
chest.


PAPER, pa’pér.
REED; WRITING.


PAPER REEDS, rédz:
“‘meadows’’).


See Crarts, II, 13; Papyrus;
In Isa 19 7 AV (RV


PAPHOS, pi’fos: The name of two towns, Old
(Takada Tddos, Palaid Pdphos, or Wardalradgos,
Palaipaphos) and New Paphos (Néa
Ilégos, Néa Pdphos), situated at the
southwestern extremity of Cyprus.
Considerable confusion is caused by the use of the
single name Paphos in ancient writers to denote
now one, now the other, of these cities. That re-
ferred to in Acts 13 6.13 is strictly called New
Paphos (modern Baffa), and lay on the coast about
a mile S. of the modern Ktima and some 10 miles
N.W. of the old city. The latter (modern Kouklia)
is situated on an eminence more than a mile from
the sea, on the left bank of the Didrrizo, probably
the ancient Bocarus.

It was founded by Cinyras, the father of Adonis,
or, according to another legend, by Aerias, and

formed the capital of the most impor-
2. History tant kingdom in Cyprus except that
of Old of Salamis. Its territory embraced
Paphos a considerable portion of Western

Cyprus, extending northward to that
of Soli, southward to that of Curium and eastward
to the range of Troddus. Among its last kings was
Nicocles, who ruled shortly after the death of Alex-
ander the Great. In 310 BC Nicocreon of Salamis,
who had been set over the whole of Cyprus by


1. Site


Paphos
Papyrus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2238


Ptolemy I of Egypt, was forced to put an end to
his life at Paphos for plotting with Antigonus (Dio-
dorus xx. 21, who wrongly gives the name as Nicocles;
see Athenische Mitteilungen, XXII, 203 ff), and
from that time Paphos remained under Egyp rule
until the Rom annexation of Cyprus in 58 BC.
The growth of New Paphos brought with it the
decline of the old city, which was also ruined by
successive earthquakes. Yet its temple still re-


tained much of its old fame, and in 69 AD Titus, -


the future emperor of Rome, turned aside on his
journey to Jerus, which he was to capture in the
following year, to visit the sacred shrine and to
inquire of the priests into the fortune which awaited

him (Tacitus Hist. ii2-4; Suetonius Titus 5).
New Paphos, originally the seaport of the old
town, was founded, according to tradition, by
Agapenor of Arcadia (Iliad 11.609;
Pausan. viii.5, 2). Its possession of a
good harbor secured its prosperity, and
it had several rich temples. Accord-
ing to Dio Cassius (liv.23) it was
restored by Augustus in 15 BC after a destructive
earthquake and received the name Augusta (Gr
Sebaste). Under the Rom Empire it was the ad-
ministrative capital of the island and the seat of the
governor. The extant remains all date from_ this
period and include those of public buildings, private

houses, city walls and the moles of the harbor.
But the chief glory of Paphos and the source of
itg fame was the local cult, of which the kings and
their descendants remained hereditary


3. History
of New
Paphos


4. The priests down to the Rom seizure of
Temple Cyprus. The goddess, identified with
and Cult the Gr Aphrodite, who was said to


have risen from the sea at Paphos, was
in reality a Natnre-goddess, closely resembling the
Bab Ishtar and the Phoen Astarte, a native deity
of Asia Minor and the Aegean Islands. Her cult
can be traced back at Paphos to Homeric times
(Odyssey viii.362) and was repeatedly celebrated
by Gr and Lat poets (Aeschylus Suppl. 555;
Aristoph. Lys. 833; Virgil Aen. 1.415; Horace
Odes i.19 and 30; iii.26; Statins Sdlvae 1.2, 101,
etc). The goddess was represented, not by a statue
in human form, but by a white conical stone (Max.
Tyr. vili.8; Tacitus Hist. ii.3; Servius Ad Aen.
i.724), of which models were on sale for the benefit
of pilgrims (Athenaens xv.18); her worship was
sensuous in character and she is referred to by
Athanasius as the deification of lust (Conira Gentes 9).
Excavation has brought to light at Old Paphos a
complex of buildings belonging to Rom times and
consisting of an open court with chambers or colon-
nades on three sides and an entrance on the E. only,
the whole forming a quadrilatcral enclosure with
sides about 210 ft. long. In this court may have
stood the altar, or altars, of incense (Homer speaks
of a single altar, Virgil of “a hundred altars warm
with Sabaean frankincense’); no blood might be
shed thereon, and although it stood in the open
it was “wet by no rain” (Tacitus, le.; Pliny,
NH, ii.210). On the south side are the ruins of
another building, possibly an earlicr temple, now
almost destroyed save for the western wall (Journal
of Hellenic Studies, IX, 193-224). But the fact
that no remains or inscriptions have been found hcre
earlier than the Rom occupation of Cyprus militates
against the view that the sanctuary stood at this
spot from prehistoric times. Its site may be sought
at Xylino, a short distance to the N. of Kouklia
(D. G. Hogarth, Times, August 5, 1910), or possibly
on the plateau of Rhantidi, some 3 miles 8.E. of the
village, where numerous inscriptions in the old
Cyprian syllabic script were found in the summer
of 1910 (M. Ohnefalsch-Richier, Times, July 29,
1910).


After visiting Salamis and passing through the
whole island, about 100 miles in length, Barnabas,
Paul and Mark reached Paphos, the


5. The residence of the Rom_ proconsul,
Apostles?’ Sergius Paulus (for the title see
Visit Cyprus). Here too they would doubt-


less begin by preaching in the syna-
gogue, but the governor—who is probably the same
Paulus whose name appears as proconsul in an in-
scription of Soli (D. G. Hogarth, Devia Cypria,
114)—hearing of their mission, sent for them and
questioned them on the subject of their preaching.
A Jew named Bar-Jesus or Elymas, who, as a
Magian or soothsayer, “was with the proconsul,”
presumably as a member of his suite, used all his
powers of persuasion to prevent his patron from
giving his adherence to the new faith, and was met
by Paul (it is at this point that the name is first
introduced) with a scathing denunciation and a
sentence of temporary loss of sight. The blindness
which at once fell on him produced a deep impres-
sion on the mind of the proconsul, who professed
his faith in the apostolic teaching. From Paphos,
Paul and his companions sailed in a northwesterly
direction to Perga in Pamphylia (Acts 13 6-13).
Paul did not revisit Paphos, but we may feel
confident that Barnabas and Mark would return
there on their 2d missionary journey (Acts 15 39).
Of the later history of the Paphian church we know
little. Tychicus, Paul’s companion, is said to have
been martyred there, and Jerome tells us that
Hilarion sought in the neighborhood of the decayed
and almost deserted town the quiet and retirement
which he craved (Vita Hilar. 42). The Acta
Barnabae speak of a certain Rhodon, who was
attached to the temple service at Old Paphos, as
having accepted the Christian faith.
LireRaTourEe.—Besides the works already referred to,
see Journal of Hellenic Studies, IX, 175-92 (citation of
passages from ancient authors relating to Old Paphos,
together with a list of mediaeval and modern authorities),
225-71 (inscriptions and tombs), and the bibliography
appended to art. Cyprus.
Marcus N. Top
PAPYRUS, pa-pi’rus (Cyperus papyrus; BbBros,
biiblos, BlBAos, biblos, whence BiBAlov, biblion, “a
roll,” ra BrBAla, td bibléa, “the Books’’=the Bible):
. Papyrus Paper
. Egyptian Papyri
. Aramaic Papyri
. Greek Papyri
Their Discovery
Glnesical Pap
NP Papyri i
. Theological Papyri
10. Documentary Papyri
11. Contribution to NT Study
12. Chief Collections
13. Coptic, Arabic and Other Papyri
A marsh or water plant, abundant in Egypt in
ancient times, serving many purposes in antiquity.
The papyrus tuft was the emblem of the Northern
Kingdom in Egypt. Like the lotus, it suggested
one of the favorite capitals of Egyp architecture.
Ropes, sandals, and mats were made from its
fibers (see Odyssey xxi.391; Herod. ii.37, 69), and
bundles of the long, light stalks were bound together
into light boats (Isa 18 2; Breasted, Hist Egyp-
titans, 91).
Most importantly, from it was made the tough
and inexpensive paper which was used from very
ancient times in Egypt and which
1. Papyrus became the common writing-matcrial
Paper of the ancient world. The white
cellular pith of the long triangular
papyrus stalk was stripped of its bark or rind and
sliced into thin strips. Two layers of these strips
were laid at right angles to cach other, pasted to-
gether (Pliny says with the aid of Nile water),
dried and smoothed. The sheets thus formed were


CONOR


AY .% ?
ete é ‘


a


8


ANCIENT MANI


3 ON PAPYRUS


2239


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Paphos
Papyrus


pester one 2 another a se a roll of any length
esired, e process and the product i

by Pliny the Elder (NZ, Seay a ee

Egyp papyrus rolls are in existence dating from

the 27th cent. BC, and no doubt the manufacture of

_ papyrus had been practised for cen-

2. Egyptian turies before. The Egyp rolls were

Papyri sometimes of great length and were

_ often beautifully decorated with

colored vignettes (Book of the Dead). Egyp docu-


Papyrus Antiquorum.


ments of great historical value have been preserved
on these fragile rolls. The Papyrus Ebers of the
16th cent. BC sums up the medical lore of the
Egyptians of the time of Amenhotep I. The
Papyrus Harris, 133 ft. long, in 117 columns, dates
from the middle of the 12th cent. BC and records
the benefactions and achievements of Ramses III.
For the XIXth, XXth and XXIst dynasties, in-
deed, papyti are relatively numerous, and their
contribution important for Egyp history, life and
religion. By the year 1000 BC, papyrus had doubt-
less come to be used for writing far beyond the
limits of Egypt. The Wenamon Papyrus (11th
cent.) relates that 500 rolls of papyrus were among
the gifts sent from the Delta to the Prince of Biblus,
but except in the rarest instances _papyTl have
escaped destruction only in Upper Egypt, where
climatic conditions esp. favored their preservation.
In very recent years (1898, 1904, 1907) several
Aram. papyri have been found on the Island of
Elephantine, just below the First Cat-

3. Aramaic aract, dating from 494 to 400 BC.
Papyri They show that between 470 and 408
BC a flourishing colony of Jews existed
there, doing business under Pers sway, and wor-
shipping their god Yahu, not in a synagogue, but
in a temple, in which they offered meal offerings,


incense and burnt offerings. In 408, the Egyptians
had destroyed their temple at Yeb, and the Jews
appealed for redress to the Pers governor. It is
well known that some Jews had taken refuge in
Egypt in 586 BC, taking the prophet Jeremiah with
them, and with some such band of refugees the Yeb
colony may have originated, although it may have
been much older (cf Jer 44 1.15; BW, XXI1X,
1907, 305 ff; XXX1, 448 ff; chief publications by
Euting, Sayce and Cowley, and esp. Sachau, Drei
aramdische Papyrusurkunden aus Elephantine, 2d
ed, 1908; Aramdische Papyrus und Ostraka, 1911).
With Alexander’s conquest of Egypt (332 BC),
and the subsequent Ptolemaic dynasty, Greeks
came more than ever before into
4. Greek Egypt, and from Gr centers like
Papyri Alexandria and Arsinoé in the Faydm
the Gr language began to_ spread.
Through the Ptolemaic (323-30 BC), Rom (30
BC-292/93 AD), and Byzantine periods (292/
938-640 AD), that is, from the death of Alexander
to the Arab conquest, Gr was much used in Upper
and Lower Egypt, and Gr papyri from these times
are now abundant, The 300 Aphrodito Gr and
Coptic papyri published by Bell and Crum (1910)
date from 698-722 AD, and show how Gr persisted
in the Arab period.
_ The first important discovery of Gr papyri made
in modern times was among the ruins of Hercu-
laneum, near Naples, where in 1752
6. Their in the ruins of the house of a phi-
Discovery losopher which had been destroyed
and buried by volcanic ashes from
Vesuvius (79 AD) a whole library of papyrus rolls
was found, quite charred by the heat. With the
utmost pains many of these have been unrolled and
deciphered, and the first part of them was published
in 1793. They consist almost wholly of works of
Epicurean philosophy. In 1778 the first discovery
of Gr papyri in Egypt was made. In that year
some Arabs found 40 or 50 papyrus rolls in an
earthen pot, probably in the Fayam, where Phila-
delphus settled his Gr veterans. One was pur-
chased by a dealer and found its way into the hands
of Cardinal Stefano Borgia; the others were de-
stroyed as of no worth. The Borgia Papyrus was
published 10 years later. It was a document of
little value, recording the forced labor of certain
peasants upon the Nile embankment of a given year.
In 1820 another body of papyri was found by
natives, buried, it was said, in an earthen pot, on the
site of the Serapeum at Memphis, just above Cairo.
These came for the most part from the 2d cent. BC.
They fell into various hands, and are now in the
museums of London, Paris, Leyden, Rome and
Dresden. With them the stream of papyri began
to flow steadily into the British and Continental
museums. In 1821 an Englishman, Mr. W. J.
Bankes, bought an Elephantine roll of the xxivth
book of the Iliad, the first Gr literary papyrus to be
derived from Egypt. The efforts of Mr. Harris
and others in 1847-50 brought to England con-
siderable parts of lost orations of Hyperides, new
papyri of the xviith book of the Iliad, and parts of
liad ii, iii, ix. In 1855 Mariette purchased a frag-
ment of Aleman for the Louvre, and in 1856 Mr.
Stobart obtained the funeral oration of Hyperides.
The present period of papyrus recovery dates
from 1877, when an immense mass of Gr and other
papyri, for the most part. documentary, not literary,
was found in the Faydm, on the site of the ancient
Arsinoé. The bulk of this collection passed into
the hands of Archduke Rainer at Vienna, minor
portions of it being secured by, the museums of
Paris, London, Oxford and Berlin. These belong
largely to the Byzantine period. Another great
find was made in 1892 in the Faydm; most of these


Papyrus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2240


went to Berlin, some few to the British Museum,
Vienna and Geneva. These were mostly of the
Rom period.

It will be seen that most of these discoveries were
the work of natives, digging about indiscriminately
in the hope of finding antiquities to sell to tourists
or dealers. By this time, however, the Egypt Ex-
ploration Fund had begun its operations in Egypt,
and Professor Flinders Petrie was at work there.
Digging among Ptolemaic tombs at Gurob in 1889-
90, Professor Petrie found many mummies, or
mummy-casings, adorned with breast-pieces and
sandals made of papyri pasted together. The sep-
aration of these was naturally a tedious and delicate


fell, the first of many important works in this field
from his pen.

With Arthur S. Hunt, of Oxford, Mr. Grenfell
excavated in 1896-97, at Behnesa, the Rom Oxy-
rhynchus, and unearthed the greatest mass of Gr
papyri of the Rom period thus far found. In 9
large quarto volumes, aggregating 3,000 pages,
only a beginning has been made of publishing these
Oxyrhynchus texts, which number thousands and
are in many cases of great importance. The story
of papyrus digging in Egypt since the great find of
1896-97 is largely the record of the work of Grenfell
and Hunt. At Tebtunis, in the Faytim, in 1900,
they found a great mass of Ptolemaic papyri, com:


per


apache


TimotHEus Papyrus.


task, and the papyri when extricated were often
badly damaged or mutilated; but the Petrie papyri,
as they were called, were hailed by scholars as the
most important found up to that time, for they
came for the most part from the 3d cent. BC.


Startling acquisitions were made about this time by |


representatives of the British Museum and the
Louvre. The British Museum secured papyri of
the lost work of Aristotle on the Constitution of
Athens, the lost Mimes of Herodas, a fragment of
an oration of Hyperides, and extensive literary
papyri of works already extant; while the Louvre
secured the larger part of the Oration against
Athenogenes, the masterpiece of Hyperides. In
1894 Bernard P. Grenfell, of Oxford, appeared in
Egypt, working with Professor Petrie in his exca-
vations, and securing papyri with Mr. Hogarth
for England. In that year Petrie and Grenfell
obtained from native dealers papyrus rolls, one
more than 40 ft. in length, preserving revenue
laws of Ptolemy Philadelphus, dated in 259-258
BC. These were published in 1896 by Mr. Gren-


]


parable in importance with their great discovery at
Oxyrhynchus. One of the most productive sources
of papyri at Tebtunis was the crocodile cemetery,
in which many mummies of the sacred crocodiles
were found rolled in papyrus. Important Ptole-
maic texts were found in 1902 at Hibeh, and a later
visit to Oxyrhynchus in 1903 produced results almost
as astonishing and quite as valuable as those of the
first excavations there. The work of Rubensohn
at Abusir in 1908 has exceptional interest, as it
developed the first considerable body of Alexandrian
papyri that has been found. The soil and elimate
of Alexandria are destructive to papyri, and only
to the fact that these had anciently been carried
off into the interior as rubbish is their preservation
due. Hogarth, Jouguet, Wilecken and other Con-
tinental scholars have excavated in Egypt for
papyri with varying degrees of success. The
papyri are found in graves a few feet below the
surface, in house ruins over which sand has drifted,
or occasionally in earthen pots buried in the ground.
Despite government efforts to stop indiseriminate


2241


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Papyrus


native digging, papyri in considerable quantities
have continued to find their way into the hands of
native dealers, and thence into English, Continental,
and even American collections.
Thus far upward of 650 literary papyri, great
and small, of works other than Bib eve becnioee:
: lished. The fact that about one-third
6. Classical of these are Homeric attests the great
Papyri popularity enjoyed by the Homeric
poems in Gr-Rom times, These are
now so abundant and extensive as to make an im-


é Sey tN
Ar ee 6 eee


a ees
RRA ES


Greek Papyrus Containing Mt 1 1-9.12,13.14-20.


portant contribution to the Homeric text. Rather
less than one-third preserve works of other ancient
writers which were already known to us through
later copies, mediaeval or modern. Among these
are works of Plato, Demosthenes, Isocrates, Thucyd-
ides, Euripides, Sophocles, Aeschines, Herodotus
and others. Rather more than one-third preserve
works, or fragments of works, which have been either
quite unknown or, oftener, regarded as lost. Such
are portions of Aleman and Sappho, fragments of
the comedies of Menander and the iambi of Callim-
achus, Mimes of Herodas, poems of Bacchylides,
parts of the lost Antiope and Hypsipyle of Euripides,
Aristotle On the Constitution of Athens, the Persae
of Timotheus (in a papyrus of the 4th cent. BC,
probably the oldest Gr book in the world), and six
orations, one of them complete, of Hyperides. In
1906 Grenfell and Hunt discovered at Oxyrhynchus
the unique papyrus of the lost Paeans of Pindar, in
380 fragments, besides the Hellenica of Theopom-
pus (or Cratippus?), whose works were believed to
have perished. ;

Of the Gr OT (LX‘X) more than 20 papyri have
been discovered. Perhaps the most important of


these is the Berlin Genesis (3d or 4th
7. Septua- cent.) ( 1) in a cursive hand, purchased
gint at Akhmim in 1906. Other papyri
Papyri preserving parts of Gen among the


British : ee ie
and Oxyrhynchus (4), papyri date from the or
4th ae oN Bodleian papyrus leaf (5) (7th or 8th
cent.) preserves Cant 1 6-9. An Amherst papyrus
(6) (7th cent.) contains Job 1 21f; 2 3. There
are several papyri of parts of the Pss. An Amherst


Amherst (2),


papyrus (7) (5th or 6th cent.) has Ps 6 6-12.
Brit. Mus. 37 (Fragmenta Londinensia, 6th or 7th
cent.) (8), of thirty leaves, contains Ps 10 2—18 6
and 20 14—-34 6. This was purchased in 1886
and is one of the longest of Bib. papyri. Brit. Mus.
230 (9) (8d cent.) preserves Ps 12 7—15 4. A
Berlin papyrus (10) contains Ps 40 26—41 4.
Oxyrhynchus papyrus 845 (11) (4th or 5th cent.)
contains parts of Pss 68, 70. Another Amherst
papyrus (12) (7th cent.) shows parts of Pss 108,
118, 135, 138-140. There is also a papyrus at
Leipzig (13) which contains part of the Pss. Of the
Prophets the chief papyrus is the Heidelberg codex
(14) (7th cent.), which contains Zec 4 6—Mal 4 5.


| Oxyrhynchus 846 (15) (6th cent.) contains Am 2.


A Rainer papyrus (16) (8d cent.) preserves Isa 38


a oe vt og 2"
Rare pe TTS Ph
pag ete eer ter
Gerona ce Ae
: KOM EMEP TCE TES
AAPL TELP ERY TI TES
dope adh at Cree TP TT
op eegenrel cre SERA,


3


New Sayings of Jcsus.


3-5.13-16, and a Bodleian (17) (3d cent.) shows
Ezk 6 12—6 3. The Rylands papyri include Dt
9, 3 (18) (4th cent.); Job 1, 6,6 (19) (6th or 7th
cent.); Ps 90 (20) (5th or 6th cent.). Recent
Oxyrhynchus volumes supply parts of Ex 21, 22,
40 (21, 22) (3d cent., O.P. 1074, 1075); and of Gen
16 (23) (3d cent., O.P. 1166), and 31 (24) (4th
cent., O.P. 1167). The great antiquity of some of


Papyrus
Parable


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2242


these documents gives especial interest to their
readings.
Twenty-three papyri containing parts of the Gr
NT have thus far been published, nearly half of
them coming from Oxyrhynchus (O.P.
8. NT 2, 208, 209, 402, 657, 1008, 1009, 1078,
Papyri 1079, 1170, 1171). The pieces range
in date from the 3d to the 6th cent.
Their locations, dates and contents are:


1. aerate) Pa. 3d or 4th cent. Mt 1 1-9.12.
ae)


13.14-20 (

2. Florence. 5th or 6th cent. Jn 12 12-15.

3. Vienna. 6th cent. Lk 7 36-45; 10 38-42.

4, Paris. 4th cent. Lk 1] 74-80; 5 3-8; 5 30—6 4.

5. Lendon. 3d or 4th cent. Jn 1 23-31.33-41,
20 11-17.19-25 (O.P. 208).

6. Strasshurg. ? cent. Jn 11 45.

7. Kiew. ? cent. Lk 4 1.2,
z 8. Berlin. 4th cent. Acts 4 31-37; 5 2-9; 6 1-6.
—15.

9. Cambridge, Mass. 4th or 5th cent. 1 Jn 4 1I-


13.15-17 (O.P 402).
10. Cambridge, Mass. 4th cent. Rom 1 1-7 (O.P.
5th cent. 1 Cor 1 17-20; 6 13.


12. Didlington Hall. 3dor4thcent. He 1 1.

13. Lendon. 4th cent. He 2 14—5 5; 10 8—11
13; 11 28—12 17 (O.P. 657). This is the mest con-
siderable papyrus of the NT, and doubly important
hecause Codex Vaticanus breaks off with He 9 14.
¥ Paiooe 5th cent. 1 Cor 1 25-27; 2 6-8; 3

15. Oxford. 4thcent. 1 Cor 7 18—8 4 (O.P. 1008).
Phil 3 9-17; 4 2-8 (O.P. 1009).

16. Manchester (Rylands). 6th or 7th cent.


3-8.
aes Manchester (Rylands). 3d cent. Tit 1 11-15;


18. Oxford. 4thcent. He 9 12-19 (O.P. 1078).

19. Oxford. 3dor 4thcent. Rev 1 4-7 (O.P. 1079).
20. Oxford. 5thcent. Mt 10 32—11 5 (O.P. 1170).
21. Oxford. 3d cent. Jas 2 19—8 2.4-9 (O.P. 1171).
22. Florence. 7thcent. Mt 25 12-15.20-23.

23. Florence. ? cent. Jn 3 14-18.31.32.

lee Pap. 13,269 (7th cent.) is a liturgical paraphrase
Lk


9).
11. St. Petersburg.
18; 7 3.4.10-14


Rom


of 14,
Further details as to nes. 1-14 may be found in
Gregory, Textkritik, 1084-92, and for nos. 1-23 in
Kenyon, Handbook to Text. Crit.4, or Milligan, NT
Documents, 249-54.


Among other theological papyri, the Oxyrhynchus
Sayings of Jesus (O.P. 1,654), dating from the 2d
and 3d cents., are probably the most


9. Theo- widely known (see Loa1a). Other
logical Oxyrhynchus pieces preserve parts of
Papyri the Apocalypse of Baruch (chs 12-


14; 4th or 5th cent.; O.P. 403); the
Gospel according to the Hebrews (? in its later
form, if at all; 3d cent.; O.P. 655); the Acts of
John (4th cent.; O.P. 850, ef 851); the Shepherd
of Hermas (3d or 4th cent.; O.P. 404); Irenaeus,
Adv. Haer., iii.9 (8d cent.; O.P. 405). Other small
fragments of the Shepherd and Ignatius are among
the Amherst and Berlin papyri. Early Christian
hymns, prayers and letters of interest have also
been found.
We have spoken thus far only of literary papyri,
classical and theological. The overwhelming ma-
jority of the papyrifound have of course


10. Docu- been documentary—private letters,
mentary accounts, wills, receipts, contracts,
Papyri leases, deeds, complaints, petitions,


notices, invitations, etc. The value of
these contemporary and original documents for the
illumination of ancient life can hardly be over-
estimated. The life of Upper Egypt in Ptolemaic
and Rom times is now probably better known to us
than that of any other period of history down to
recent times. Many papyrus collections have no
literary papyri at all, but are rich in documents.
Each year brings more of these to light and new
volumes of them into print. All this vast and
growing body of material coutributes to our knowl-
edge of Ptolemaic and imperial times, often in the
most intimate ways. Among the most important


.


of these documentary papyri from Ptolemaic times
are the revenue laws of Ptolemy Philadelphus (259
BC) and the decrees of Ptolemy Euergetes II, 47 in
number (118 BC, 140-139 BC). Very recently
(1910) a Hamburg papyrus has supplied the Con~
stitutio Antoniniana, by which Rom citizenship was
conferred upon the peregrint of the empire. The
private documents in ways even more important
illustrate the life of the common people under
Ptolemaic and Rom rule.


It is not necessary to point out the value of all
this for Bib. and esp. NT study. The papyri have
already made a valuable contribution to

11. Contri- textual materials of both OT and NT.
bution to For other early Christian lit. their
NT Study testimouy has been of surprising inter-
est (the Oxyrhynchus Logia and

Gospel fragments). The discovery of a series of
uucial MSS running through six centuries back of the
Codex Vaticanus bridges the gap between what
were our earliest uncials and the hand of the in-
scriptions, and puts us in a better position than ever
before to fix the dates of uncial MSS. Minuscule
or cursive hands, too, so common in NT MSS of the
10th and later cents., appear in a new light when it
is seen that such writing was not a late invention
arising out of the uncial, but had existed side by
side with it from at least the 4th cent. BC, as the
ordinary, as distinguished from the literary, or
book, hand. See Wririnc. The lexical contri-
bution of these documentary papyri, too, is already
considerable, and is likely to be very great. Like
the NT writings, they reflect the common as dis-
tinguished from the literary language of the times,
and words which had appeared exceptional or un-
known in Gr lit. are now shown to have been in
common use. The problems of NT syntax are
similarly illuminated. Specific historical notices
sometimes light up dark points in the NT, as in a
British Museum decree of Gaius Vibius Maximus,


i prefect of Egypt (104 AD), ordering all who are


out of their districts to return to their own homes
in view of the approaching census (cf Lk 2 1-5).
Most important of all is the contribution of the
papyri to a sympathetic knowledge of ancient life.
They constitute a veritable gallery of NT characters.
A strong light is sometimes thrown upon the social
evils of the time, of which Paul and Juvenal wrote
so sternly. The child, the prodigal, the thief, the
host with his invitations, the steward with his
accounts, the thrifty householder, the soldier on
service receiving his viaticum, or retired as a veteran
upon his farm, the Jewish money-lender, the hus-
bandman, and the publican, besides people in every
domestic relation, we meet at first hand in the
papyri which they themselves in many cases have
written. The worth of this for the historical inter-
pretation of the NT is very great.


The principal collections of Gr papyri with their
editors are Schow, Herculaneum Papyri; Peyron, Turin


Papyri; Leemans, Leyden Papyri; Wes-

12. Chief sely, Rainer and Paris Papyri; Kenyon
Collecti and Bell, British Museum Papyri; Ma-
oNecuons haffy and Smyly, Petrie Papyri: Grenfell


and Hunt, Oxyrhynchus, Amherst and
Hlhbeh Peeve (with Hogarth), FayOm Papyri, and (with
Smyly and Gocdspeed) Tehtunis Papyri; Hunt, Rylands
Papyri; Nicele, Geneva Papyri; Krebs, Wilcken, Viereck,
Schubart and others, Berlin Papyri; Meyer, Hamburg
and Giessen Papyri; Deissmann, Heidelberg Papyri; Vi-
telll and Comparetti, Flerence Papyri; Mitteis, eipzig
Papyri; Preisigke, Strassburg Papyri;: Reinach, Paris
Papyri; Jouguet and Lesquier, Lille Papyri; Ruhensohn,
Elephantine Papyri; Maspero, Cairo Papyri; Goodspeed,
Cairo and Chicago Papyri. The Munich papyri have
been described hy Wilcken. Milligan’s Gr Papyri, Ken-
yon's Palaeography of Gr Papyri, aud Deissmann’s Light
from the Ancient Hast are useful introductions to the
general suhject. Mayser has prepared a Grammatik der
Ptolemdischen Papyri.


Coptic, Arab., Heb and Demotic papyri are


2243


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


numerous; even Lat papyri are found. The Coptic
have already made important contributions to early
_ Christian literature. A considerable
13. Coptic, Coptic fragment of the Acts of Paul,
Arabic and and a Coptic (Akhmtmic) codex of 1
OtherPapyri Clement, almost complete, have re-
cently been published by Carl Schmidt.
Another much mutilated papyrus of 1 Clement,
with James, complete, is at Strassburg. A Coptic
text of Prov has been brought to Berlin from the
same source which supplied the Clement codex
(the White Convent, near Akhmim); indeed, Bib.
papyri in Coptic are fairly numerous, and patristic
ht. is being rapidly enriched by such discoveries of
Coptic papyri, e.g. the Dt, Jon, Acts papyrus, 1912
(ef Sahidic NT, Oxford, 1911).
_ Arab. papyri first began to appear from Egypt
in 1825, when three Arab. pieces were brought to
Paris and published by Silvestre de Sacy. Two
others, from the 7th cent., were published by him
in 1827. It was not until the great papyrus finds
of 1877-78, however, that any considerable number
of Arab. papyri found their way into Europe. The
chief collections thus far formed are at Vienna
(Rainer Collection), Berlin and Cairo. Becker
has published the Schott-Reinhardt Arab. papyri
at Heidelberg, and Karabacek has worked upon
those at Vienna. They belong of course to the
period after the Arab. conquest, 640 AD.
Epaar J. Goopspren
PAPYRUS, VESSELS OF. See Ssips anp
Boats, II, 2, (1).


PARABLE, par’a-b’!:
Name
Historical Data
Christ’s Use_of Parables
. Purpose of Christ in Using Parables
. Interpretation of the Parables
Doctrinal Value of the Parables
Etymologically the word “parable” (rapafdAdw,
parabdllé) signifies a placing of two or more objects
together, usually for the purpose of
a comparison. In this widest sense
of the term there is practically no
difference between parable and simile (see Thayer,
Dict. of NT Gr,s.v.). This is also what substan-
tially some of Christ’s parables amount to, which
consist of only one comparison and in a single
verse (cf Mt 18 33.4446). In the more usnal
and technical sense of the word, ‘“‘parable” ordi-
narily signifies an imaginary story, yet one that in
its details could have actually transpired, the pur-
pose of the story being to illustrate and inculcate
some higher spiritual truth. These features differ-
entiate it from other and similar figurative narra-
tives as also from actual history. The similarity
between the last-mentioned and a parable is some-
times so small that exegetes have differed in the
interpretation of certain pericopes. A character-
istic example of this uncertainty is the story of
Dives and Lazarus in Lk 16 19-31. The problem
is of a serious nature, as those who regard this as
actual history are compelled to interpret each and
every statement, including too the close proximity
of heaven and hell and the possibility of speaking
from one place to the other, while those who regard
it as a parable can restrict their interpretation to
the features that constitute the substance of the
story. It differs again from the fable, in so far
as the latter is a story that could not actually have
occurred (e.g. Jgs 9 8 ff; 2 K 14.9; Ezk 17 2 f).
The parable is often described as an extended meta-
phor. The etymological features of the word, as
well as the relation of parables to other and kindred
devices of style, are discussed more fully by Ed.
Koenig, in HDB, III, 660 ff.

Although Christ employed the parable as a means


OUR pot


1. Name


Papyrus
Parable


of inculcating His message more extensively and
more effectively than any other teacher, He did not
invent the parable. It was His custom
2. Histor- in general to take over from the re-
ical Data _ligious and linguistic world of thonght
in His own day the materials that
He employed to convey the higher and deeper
truths of His gospels, giving them a world of mean-
ing they had never before possessed. Thus e.g.
every petition of the Lord’s Prayer can be dupli-
cated in the Jewish liturgies of the times, yet on
Christ’s lips these petitions have a significance they
never had or could have for the Jews. The term
“Word” for the second person in the Godhead is an
adaptation from the Logos-idea in contemporaneous
religious thought, though not specifically of Philo’s.
Baptism, regeneration, and kindred expressions of
fundamental thoughts in the Christian system, are
terms not absolutely new (cf Deutsch, art. ‘“Tal-
mud,” Literary Remains). The parable was em-
ployed both in the OT and in contemporaneous
Jewish literature (cf e.g. 25 12 1-4; Isa 6 1-6;
28 24-28, and for details see Koenig’s art., l.c.).
Jewish and other non-Bib. parables are discussed
and illustrated by examples in Trench’s Notes on
the Parables of Our Lord, introd. essay, ch iv: ‘On
Other Parables besides Those in the Scriptures.”

The one and only teacher of parables in the NT is

Christ Himself. The Epp., although they often em-

ploy rhetorical allegories and similes,
3. Christ’s make absolutely no use of the parable,
Use of so’ common in Christ’s pedagogical
Parables methods. The distribution of these

in the Canonical Gospels is unequal,
and they are strictly confined to the three Synoptic
Gospels. Mark again has only one peculiar to this
book, namely, the Seed Growing in Secret (Mk 4
26), and he gives only three others that are found
also in Mt and Lk, namely the Sower, the Mustard
Seed, and the Wicked Husbandman, so that the
bulk of the parables are found in the First and the
Third Gospels. Two are common to Mt and Lk,
namely the Leaven (Mt 13 33; Lk 13 21) and
the Lost Sheep (Mt 18 12; Lk 15 3ff). Of the
remaining parables, 18 are found only in Lk and 10
only in Mt. Lk’s 18 include some of the finest, viz.
the Two Debtors, the Good Samaritan, the Friend
at Midnight, the Rich Fool, the Watchful Servants,
the Barren Fig Tree, the Chief Seats, the Great
Supper, the Rash Builder, the Rash King, the Lost
Coin, the Lost Son, the Unrighteous Steward, the
Rich Man and Lazarus, the Unprofitable Servants,
the Unrighteous Judge, the Pharisee and Publican,
and the Pounds. The 10 peculiar to Mt are the
Tares, the Hidden Treasure, the Pear] of Great
Price, the Draw Net, the Unmerciful Servant, the
Laborers in the Vineyard, the Two Sons, the Mar-
riage of the King’s Son, the Ten Virgins, and the
Talents. There is some uncertainty as to the exact
number of parables we have from Christ, as the
Marriage of the King’s Son is sometimes regarded
as a different recension of the Great Supper, and the
Talents of the Pounds. Other numberings are sug-
gested by Trench, Jilicher and others.

It is evident from such passages as Mt 13 10 ff
(cf Mk 4 10; Lk 8 9) that Christ did not in the
beginning of His career employ the
4. Purpose parable as a method of teaching, but


of Christ introduced it later. This took place
in Using evidently during the 2d year of His
Parables public ministry, and is closely con-


nected with the changes which about
that time He made in His attitude toward the people
in general. It evidently was Christ’s purpose at the
outset to win over, if possible, the nation as a whole
to His cause and to the gospel; when it appeared
that the leaders and the great bulk of the people


Parable
Paraclete


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2244


would not accept Him for what He wanted to be and
clung tenaciously to their carnal Messianic ideas
and ideals, Christ ceased largely to appeal to the
masses, and, by confining His instructions chiefly to
His disciples and special friends, saw the necessity
of organizing an ecclesiola in ecclesia, which was
eventually to develop into the world-conquering
church. One part of this general withdrawal of
Christ from a proclamation of His gospel to the
whole nation was this change in His method of
teaching and the adoption of the parable. On that
subject He leaves no doubt, according to Mt 13
11 ff; Mk 412; Lk 8 10. The purpose of the
parable is both to reveal and to conceal the truth.
It was to serve the first purpose in the case of the
disciples, the second in the case of the undeserving
Jews. Psychologically this difference, notwith-
standing the acknowledged inferiority in the train-
ing and education of the disciples, esp. as compared
with the scribes and lawyers, is not hard to under-
stand. A simple-minded Christian, who has some
understanding of the truth, can readily understand
figurative illustrations of this truth, which would be
absolute enigmas even to an educated Hindu or
Chinaman. The theological problem involved is
more difficult. Yet it is evident that we are not
dealing with those who have committed the sin
against the Holy Ghost, for whom there is no possi-
bility of a return to grace, according to He 6 4-10;
10 26 (ef Mt 12 31.32; Mk 3 28-30), and who
accordingly could no longer be influenced by an
appeal of the gospel, and we have rather before us
those from whom Christ has determined to with-
draw the offer of redemption—whether temporarily
or definitely and finally, remaining an open ques-
tion—according to His policy of not casting pearls
before the swine. The proper sense of these pas-
sages can be ascertained only when we remember
that in Mk 4 12 and Lk 8 10, the ta, hina, need
not express purpose, but that this particle is used
here to express mere result only, as is clear too from
the passage in Mt 13 13, where the 487i, héti, is
found. The word is to be withheld from these
people, so that this preaching would not bring about
the ordinary results of conversion and forgiveness
of sins. Hence Christ now adopts a method of
teaching that will hide the truth from all those who
have not yet been imbued by it, and this new method

is that of the parable.
The principles for the interpretation of the para-
bles, which are all intended primarily and in the
first place for the disciples, are fur-


§. Inter- —nished by the nature of the parable
pretation itself and by Christ’s own method of
of the interpreting some of them. The first
Parables and foremost thing to be discovered is


the scope or the particular spiritual
truth which the parable is intended to convey.
Just what this scope is may be stated in so many
words, as is done, e.g., by the introductory words
to that of the Pharisee and the Publican. Again
the scope may be learned from the occasion of the
parable, as the question of Peter in Mt 18 21 gives
the scope of the following parable, and the real pur-
pose of the Prodigal Son parable in Lk 15 11 ff is


not the story of this young man himself, but is set. |


over against the murmuring of the Pharisees be-
cause Christ received publicans and sinners, in vs
1 and 2,to exemplify the all-forgiving love of the
Father. Not the Son but the Father is in the fore-
ground in this parable, which fact is also the con-
necting link between the two parts. _Sometimes the
scope can be learned only from an examination
of the details of the parable itself and then may be
all the more uncertain.

A second principle of the interpretation of the
parables is that a sharp distinction must be made


between what the older interpreters called the body
(carpus) and the soul (anima) of the story; or, to
use other expressions, between the shell or bark
(cortex) and the marrow (medulla). Whatever
serves only the purpose of the story is the ‘“orna-
mentation” of the parable, and does not belong to
the substance. The former does not call for inter-
pretation or higher spiritual lesson; the latter does.
This distinction between those parts of the parable
that are intended to convey spiritual meanings and
those which are to be ignored in the interpretation
is based on Christ’s own interpretation _of the so-
called parabolae perfectae. Christ Himself, in
Mt 13 18ff, interprets the parable of the Sower,
yet a number of data, such as the fact that there
are four, and not more or fewer kinds of land, and
others, are discarded in this explanation as without
meaning. Again in His interpretation of the Tares
among the Wheat in Mt 13 36 ff, a number of
details of the original parable are discarded as
meaningless.

Just which details are significant and which are
meaningless in a parable is often hard, sometimes
impossible to determine, as the history of their
exegesis amply shows. In general it can be laid
down as arule, that those features which illustrate
the scope of the parable belong to its substance,
and those which do not, belong to the ornamentation.
But even with this rule there remain many exe-
getical cruces or difficulties. Certain, too, it is that
not all of the details are capable of interpretation.
Some are added of a nature that indeed illustrate
the story as a story, but, from the standpoint of
Christian morals, are more than objectionable.
The Unjust Steward in using his authority to make
the bills of the debtors of his master smaller may
be a model, in the shrewd use of this world’s goods
for his purpose, that the Christian may follow in
making use of his goods for his purposes, but the
action of the steward itself is incapable of defence.
Again, the man who finds in somebody else’s prop-
erty a pearl of great price but conceals this fact
from the owner of the land and quietly buys this
ground may serve as an exainple to show how much
the kingdom of God is worth, but from an ethical
standpomt his action cannot be sanctioned. In
general, the parable, like all other forms of figura-
tive expression, has a meaning only as far as the
tertium comparationis goes, that is, the third thing
which is common to the two things compared. But
all this still leaves a large debatable ground in many
parables. In the Laborers in the Vineyard does
the “penny” mean anything, or is it an ornament?
The history of the debate on this subject is long.
In the Prodigal Son do all the details of his suffer-
ings, such as eating the husks intended for swine,
have a spiritual meaning?

The interpreters of former generations laid down
the rule, thealogia parabelica non est argumentativa,

_ . ie. the parables, very rich in mission

6. Doctrinal thoughts, do not furnish a basis for
Value of the doctrinal argument. Like all figura-
Parables tive expressions and forms of thought,
the parables too contain elements of

doubt as far as their interpretation is concerned.
They illustrate truth but they do not prove or
demonstrate truth. Omnia similia claudicunt, “all
comparisons limp,” is applicable here also. No
point of doctrine can be established on figurative
passages of Scripture, as then all elements of doubt
would not be eliminated, this doubt being based on
the nature of language itself. The argumentative
or doctrinal value of parables is found in this, that
they may, in accordance with the analogy of Serip-
ture, illustrate truth already clearly expressed else-
where. Cf esp. Trench, introd. essay, in Notes on
the Parables of Our Lord, ch iii, 30-43; and Terry,


2245


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Parable
Paraclete


Biblical Hermencutics, Part II, ch vi: ‘‘Interpre-


tation of Parables,” 188-213, in which work a full
bibliography is given. Cf also art. “Parabel” in
RE. G. H. ScuoppE


PARACLETE, par’a-klét:
This word occurs 5 t in the NT, all in the writings


of John. Four instances are in the Gospel and one

in the First Ep. In the Gospel the
1. Where passages are 14 16.26; 16 26; 16 7;
Used in the Ep.,2 1. ‘‘Paraclete” is simply


the Gr word transferred into Eng.
The tr of the word in EV is “Comforter” in the
Gospel, and “Advocate” in the Ep. The Gr word
is tmapéxdyrTos, pardklétos, from the vb. wapaxadéw,
parakaléd6. The word for ‘‘Paraclete” is passive in
form, and etymologically signifies ‘called to one’s
side.” The active form of the word is rapaxd}rwp,
paraklétor, not found in the NT but fonnd in LXX in
Job 16 2 in the pl., and means ‘‘comforters,”’ in the
saying of Job regarding the ‘‘miserable comforters”’
who came to him in his distress.
In general the word signifies (1) a legal advocate,
or counsel for defence, (2) an intercessor, (3) a
helper, generally. The first, or tech-
2. General nical, judicial meaning is that which
Meaning predominates in classical usage, corre-
sponding to onr word ‘‘advocate,”
“counsel,” or “‘attorney.’”? The corresponding Lat
word is advocatus, ‘‘advocate,” the word applied to
Christ in EV in the tr of the Gr word paraklétos,
in 1 Jn 21. There is some question whether
the tr ‘Comforter’ in the passages of John’s Gos-
pel in AV and RV is warranted by the meaning
of the word. It is certain that the meaning “com-
forter” is not the primary signification, as we have
seen. It is very probably, however, a secondary
meaning of the word, and some of its cognates clearly
convey the idea of comfort in certain connections,
both in LXX and in the NT (Gen 37 35; Zec 1
13; Mt 5 4; 2 Cor 1 3.4). In the passage in 2
Cor the word in one form or another is used 5 t and
in each means “comfort.” In none of these in-
tances, however, do we find the noun ‘“Paraclete,”
which we are now considering.
Among Jewish writers the word ‘Paraclete’’
came to have a number of meanings. A good deed
was called a paraclete or advocate, and
3. Inthe a transgression was an accuser. Re-
Talmud and pentance and good works were called
Targums paracletes: “The works of benevo-
Jence and mercy done by the people
of Israel in this world become agents of peace
and intercessors [paracletes] between them and
their Father in heaven.” The sin offering is a
paraclete; the paraclete created by each good deed
is called an angel (Jew Enc, UX, 514-15, art.
‘“Paraclete’’).
Philo employs the word in several instances. Usually


he does not use it in the legal, technical sense. Joseph
is represented as bestowing forgiveness


4, As Em- on his brethren who had wronged him and

1 db declaring that they needed ‘'no one else
ployed by as ‘paraclete,”” or intercessor (De Joseph
Philo c. 40). Inhis Life of Moses, iii.14, is a re-


markable passage which indicates Philo’s
spiritualizing methods of interpreting Scripture as well
as reflects his philosophic tendency. At the close of a
somewhat elaborate account of the emblematic signifi-
cance of the vestments of the high priest and their jeweled
decorations, his words are: ‘‘ The twelve stones arranged
on the breast in four rows of three stones each, namely,
the logeum, being also an emblem of that reason which
holds together and regulates the universe, For it was
indispensable [évayxaior, anagkaton] that the man who
was consecrated to the Father of the world should have,
as a paraciete, his son, the being most perfect in all
virtue, to procure the forgiveness of sins, and a supply
of unlimited blessings.”’ ‘This is rather a striking verbal
or formal parallel to the statement in 1 Jn 2 1 where
Christ is our Advocate with the Father, although of
course Philo’s conceptions of the Divine “reason” and
“son” are by no means the Christian conceptions.


If now we raise the question what is the best tr
of the term ‘‘Paracletc” in the NT, we have a choice
of several words. Let us glance at
5. The Best them in order. The tr “Comforter”
Translation contains an element of the meaning of
the word as employed in the Gospels,
and harmonizes with the usage in connection with
its cognates, but it is too narrow in meaning to be
an adequate tr. Dr. J. Hastings in an otherwise
excellent article on the Paraclete in HDB says the
Paraclete was not sent to comfort the disciples,
since prior to His actual coming and after Christ’s
promise the disciples’ sorrow was turned into joy.
Dr. Hastings thinks the Paraclete was sent to cure
the unbelief or half-belief of the disciples. But this
conceives the idea of comfort in too limited a way.
No doubt in the mind of Jesus the comforting aspect
of the Spirit’s work applied to all their future sor-
rows and trials, and not merely to comfort for their
personal loss in the going of Christ to the Father.
Nevertheless there was more in the work of the Para-
clete than comfort in sorrow. ‘“Intercessor’’ comes
nearer the root idea of the term and contains an
essential part of the meaning. “Advocate” is a
closely related word, and is also suggestive of the
work of the Spirit. Perhaps there is no Eng. word
broad enough to cover all the significance of the
word ‘‘Paraclete’”’ except the word “Helper.” The
Spirit helps the disciples in all the above-indicated
ways. Of course the objection to this tr is that it is
too indefinite. The specific Christian conception is
lost in the comprehensiveness of the term. Our
conclusion, therefore, is that the term “‘Paraclete”’
itself would perhaps be the best designation of the
Spirit in the passage in John’s Gospel. It would
thus become a proper name for the Spirit and the
various elements of meaning would come to be asso-
ciated with the words which are found in the context
of the Gospel.

Christianity introduced many new ideas into the
world for which current terms were inadequate
media of expression. In some cases it is best to
adopt the Christian term itself, in our translations,
and let the word slowly acquire its own proper sig-
nificance in our thought and life. If, however,
instead of translating we simply transfer the word
“Paraclete” as a designation of the Holy Spirit in
the Gospel passages, we would need then to translate
it in the passage in the Ep. where it refers to Christ.
But this would offer no serious difficulty. For
fortunately in the Ep. the word may very clearly be
tr4 ‘Advocate’’ or ‘“Intercessor.”’

We look next at the contents of the word as em-
ployed by Jesus in reference to the Holy Spirit.

In Jn 14 16 the Paraclete is promised
6. Christ’s as one whois to take the place of Jesus.
Use of the It is declared elsewhere by Jesus that
Word it is expedient that He go away, for

unless He go away the Paraclete will
not come (Jn 16 7). Is the Paraclete, then, the
successor or the substitute for Christ as He is some-
times called? The answer is that He is both and
neither. He is the successor of Christ historically,
but not in the sense that Christ ceases to act in the
church. He is the substitute for Christ’s physical
presence, but only in order that He may make vital
and actual Christ’s spiritual presence. As we have
seen, the Paraclete moves only in the range of truths
conveyed in and through Christ as the historical
manifestation of God. A “Kingdom of the Spirit,”
therefore, is impossible in the Christian sense, save
as the historical Jesus is made the basis of the
Spirit’s action in history. The promise of Jesus
in 14 18, “I come unto,” is parallel and equivalent
in meaning with the preceding promise of the Para-
clete. The following are given as the specific forms
of activity of the Holy Spirit: (1) to show them the


Paradise
Parchment


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2246


things of Christ, (2) to teach them things to come,
(3) to teach them all things, (4) to quicken their
memories for past teaching, (5) to bear witness to
Christ, (6) to dwell in believers, (7) other things
shown in the context such as “greater works” than
those of Christ (see Jn 14 16.17), (8) to convict of
sin, of righteousness and judgment. It is possible
to range the shades of meaning outlined above
under these various forms of the Spirit’s activity.
As Comforter His work would come under (1), (2),
(3) and (6); as Advocate and Intereessor under (6),
(7), (8); as Helper and Teaeher under (1), (2), (3),
(4), (5), (6), (7), (8). :

The manner of the sending of the Paraclete is of
interest. In Jn 14 16 the Paraclete comes in
answer to Christ’s prayer. The Father will give
the Spirit whom the world cannot receive. In 14
26 the Father will send the Spirit in Christ’s name.
Yet in 15 26 Christ says, ‘I will send [him] unto
you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth,” and
in 16 7, “If I go, I will send him unto you.” See
Hoy Spirir.

It remains to notice the passage in 1 Jn 21
where the term ‘‘Paraclete” is applied to Christ:
“Tf any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous”; ver 2 reads: ‘‘and he is
the propitiation for our sins; and not
for ours only, but also for the whole
world.” Here the meaning is quite clear and spe-
cific. Jesus Christ the righteous is represented as
our Advocate or Intercessor with the Father. His
righteousness is set over against our sin. Here
the Paraclete, Christ, is He who, on the basis of
His propitiatory offering for the sins of men, inter-
cedes for them with God and thus averts from
them the penal consequences of their transgressions.
The sense in which Paraclete is here applied to
Christ is found nowhere in the passages we have
cited from the Gospel. The Holy Spirit as Paraclete
is Intercessor or Advocate, but not in the sense
here indieated. The Spirit as Paraclete convicts
the world of sin, of righteousness and judgment.
cae Christ as Paraelete vindicates believers before

od.

Literature. Grimm-Thayer,
the NT; Cremer, Biblico-Theol.
“ Paraclete’’; DCG, art. '' Paraclete’’; EB, art. ‘' Para-
clete’’; Jew Enc, art. *Paraclete’’; Hare, Mission of
the Comforter; Pearson, On the Creed; Taylor, Sayings


of the Jewish Fathers; various comms., Westcott, Godet
and others. See list of books appended to art. on Hoty


Spirit.
E. Y. Mottins
PARADISE, par’a-dis (O78, pardés; wapdSer-
eos, parddeisos): A word probably of Pers origin
meaning a royal park. See GarDEN.


7. As
Applied
to Christ


Gr-Eng. Lexicon of
Lexicon; HDB, art.


1. Origin The word ocecurs in the Heb Scriptures
and but 3+: Cant 4 13, where it is tr4
Meaning ‘an orchard’; Neh 2 8, where it is


tr? “a forest” (RVm “park’’); Eccl
2 5, where it is in the pl. number (AV “orchards,”
RV “parks”). But it was early introduced into
the Gr language, being made specially familiar by
Xenophon upon his return from the expedition of
Cyrus the Younger to Babylonia (see Anab.i.2, §
7; 4, §9; Cyrop. 1.3, §14). In LXX the word is of
frequent use in translating other terms of kindred
significance. The Garden of Eden became “the
paradise of pleasure or luxury” (Gen 2 15; 3 23;
Joel 2 3). The valley of the Jordan became ‘the
paradise of God’ (Gen 13 10). In Ezk 31 8.9,
aceording to LXX, there is no tree in the ‘paradise
of God’ equal to that which in the prophet’s vision
symbolizes the glory of Assyria. The figures in the
first 9 verses of this chapter may well have been
suggested by what the prophet had himself seen of
parks in the Pers empire.


In the apocryphal and pseudepigraphical lit. the
word is extensively used in a spiritual and symbolic
sense, signalizing the place of happi-
2. Usein ness to be inherited by the righteous
{| Jewish Lit- in contrast to Gehenna, the place of
erature punishment to which the wicked were
to be assigned. In the later Jewish lit.
“Sheol” is represented as a place where preliminary
rewards and punishments are bestowed previous to
the final judgment (see APocaLYPTIC LITERATURE;
EscHaToLoGy oF THE OT; and ef 2 Esd 2 19;
8 52). But the representations in this lit. are often
vague and conflicting, some holding that there were
4 divisions in Sheol, one for those who were martyred
for righteousness’ sake, one for sinners who on earth
had paid the penalty for their sins, one for the just
who had not suffered martyrdom, and one for sin-
ners who had not been punished on earth (En 102
15). But among the Alexandrian Jews the view
prevailed that the separation of the righteous from
the wicked took place immediately after death (see
Wisd 3 14; 4 10; & 5.17; Jos, Ant, XVIII, i, 3;
BJ, Il, viii, 14). This would seem to be the idea
underlying the use of the word in the NT where
it oeeurs only 3 t, and then in a sense remarkably
free from sensuous suggestions.
Christ uses the word but once (Lk 23 43), when
He said to the penitent thief, “To-day shalt thou be
with me in Paradise’ (see ABRA-
8. Used by uam’s Bosom [cf Hapss]). This was
Christ no time to choose words with dialectical
precision. The consolation needed by
the penitent thief suffering from thirst and agony
and shame was such as was symbolized by the pop-
ular conception of paradise, which, as held by the
Essenes, consisted of “habitations beyond the ocean,
in a region that is neither oppressed with storms
of rain, or snow, or with intense heat, but that
this place is such as isrefreshed by the gentle breath-
ing of a west. wind, that is perpetually blowing from
the ocean” (Jos, BJ, II, viii, 11). See Escuato.-
oGy oF THE NT.
Nowhere in His publie teaching did Christ use
the word ‘‘Paradise.”” He does indeed, when speak-
ing in parables, employ the figure of the


4, Other marriage supper, and of new wine, and
Forms and elsewhere of Abraham’s bosom, and of
Uses houses not made by hands, eternal in


_, the heavens; but all these references
are in striking contrast to the prevailing sensuous
representations of the times (see 2 Esd 2 19; 8


52), and such as have been introduced into Mo-
hammedan lit. Likewise St. Paul (2 Cor 12 4)
speaks of having been “caught up into Paradise’
where he “heard unspeakable words, which it is not
lawfu) for a man to utter.’ See Escuatotocy
or THE NT. But in ver 2 this is referred to more
vaguely as ‘the third heaven.” In Rev 2 7 it is
said to the members of the church at Ephesus
who should overcome, “I [will] give to eat of the
tree of life, which is in the Paradise of God,”
where the Eden of Gen 2 8 is made the symbol of
the abode of the righteous, more fully described


without the words in the last chapter of the
book. The reticence of the sacred writers respect-
ing this subject is in striking contrast to the pro-
fuseness and erudity both of rabbinical writers
before Christ and of apocryphal writers and
Christian commentators at a later time. ‘Where
the true Gospels are most reticent, the mythical
are most exuberant” (Perowne). This is esp.
noticeable in the Gospel of Nicodemus, the Acta
Philippi, the writings of Tertullian (De Idol. ec.
13; De Anim. c. 55; Tertullian’s treatise De


Paradiso is lost), Clement of Alexandria (Frag.
51), and John of Damascus (De Orthod. Fid., ii,
11). In modern lit. the conception of Paradise ig


2247


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Paradise
Parchment


effectually sublimated and spiritualized in Faber’s
familiar hymn:


“O Paradise, O Paradise,
I greatly long to seo
The special place my dearest Lord
Is destining for me;
Where loyal hearts and true
Stand ever in the light,
All rapture thro’ and thro’,
In God's most holy sight.’’
Lirerature.—The articles in the great Dicts., esp.
Herzog, RE; HDB; Alger, Critical Listory of the


Doctrine of a Future Life; Schodde, Book of En: Light- |


foot, Hor. Heb. on Lk 23 43;
Doctrine of Immortality, 346 1%. For a good account of
Jewish_and patristic speculation on Paradise, see Pro-
fessor Plumptre’s art. in Smith's DB, Ii, 704 ff.
G. F. Wricut

PARAH, para, par’a (TBO, ha-parah; B, Papé,
Phard, A, ’Aodp, Aphdr): A city named as in the
territory of Benjamin between Avvim and Ophrah
(Josh 18 23). It may with some confidence be
identified with Farah on Wddy Farah, which runs
into Wady Suweinit, about 3 miles N.E. of ‘Anata.


_ PARALYSIS, pa-ral’i-sis, PARALYTIC, par-a-
ht‘ik. See Pausy..


PARAMODR, par’a-méor (WISE, pilleghesh, “a
concubine,”’ mase. or fem.): A term applied in Ezk
a 20 to the male lover, but elsewhere tr? “concu-

ine.”’


PARAN, pa’ran, EL-PARAN (88, pd'ran,
IND Sn, él-pa’ran; Papav, Phardn):

(1) El-paran (Gen 14 6) was the point farthest
S. reached by the kings. LXX renders 5°8 by
repéBivOos, terébinthos, and reads, “unto the tere-
binth of Paran.”’ The evidence is slender, but it is
not unreasonable to suppose that this is the place
elsewhere (Dt 2 8; 1 K 9 26, etc) called Elath
or Eloth ‘eas with fem. termination), a seaport
town which gave its name to the Aelanitic Gulf
(modern Gulf of ‘Akaba), not far from the wilderness
of Paran (2).

(2) Many places named in the narrative of the
wanderings lay within the Wilderness of Paran
(Nu 10 12; 13 21; 27 14; cf 13 3.26, etc). It
is identified with the high limestone plateau of Et-
Tih, stretching from the 8.W. of the Dead Sea to
Sinai along the west side of the Arabah. This
wilderness offered hospitality to Ishmael when
driven from his father’s tent (Gen 21 21). Hither
also came David when bereaved of Samuel’s pro-
tection (1 S 25 1).

(3) Mount Paran (Dt 33 2; Hab 3 3) may be
either Jebel Makrah, 29 miles S. of ‘Ain Kadis
(Kadesh-barnea), and 130 miles N. of Sinai (Palmer,
Desert of the Exodus, 510); or the higher and more
imposing range of mountains W. of the Gulf of
‘Akaba. This is the more probable if El-paran is
rightly identified with Elath.

(4) Some place named Paran would seem to be
referred to in Dt 1 1; but no trace of such a city
has yet beenfound. Paranin1 K 11 18 doubtless
refers to the district W. of the Arabah.

W. Ewine

PARBAR, pir’bir (1272, parbar [1 Ch 26 18),
and DMB, parwarim, trt “precincts” [AV “sub-
urbs” in 2 K 23 11]; LXX dapovpelp, pharoureim):
In 1 Ch 26 18 reftrence is made to the position
of the gatekeepers, “for Parbar westward, four at
the causeway, and two at Parbar.” The word is
supposed to be of Pers origin, connected with Par-
war, meaning “possessing light,’ and hence the
meaning has been suggested of “‘colonnade” or
“portico,’”’ some place open to the light. In the pl.
form (2 K 23 11) the situation of the house of


Salmond, The Christian


“Nathan-melech” is described, and the tr, “in the
colonnades,”’ should, if the above origin is accepted,
be more correct than EV. It is difficult to under-
stand the occurrence of a Pers word at this time,
and it has been suggested (#8, col 3585) that the
word is a description of the office of Nathan-melech,
ba-parwaérim being a misreading for ba-p*radhim,
meaning ‘‘who was over the mules.”
E. W. G. MasterMan

PARCEL, piir’sel: Properly ‘‘a little part,’’ in
Klizabethan Eng. being used in almost any sense.
In AV of Gen 33 19; Josh 24 32; Ruth 4 3; 1Ch
11 13.14 it is the tr of MPM, helkah; In 4 5 of
xwplov, chirion—both the Gr and Heb words mean-
ing a “piece of land.” RV writes “plot” in 1 Ch
11 13.14, but if the change was needed at all, it
should have been made throughout.


PARCHED, parcht: Four different root words
have been tr@ ‘‘parched” in EV:

(1) mp, kalah, “roasted.” This word is applied
to corn or pulse. It is a common practice in Pal
and Syria to roast the nearly ripe wheat for eating
asadelicacy. A handful of heads of fully developed
grain, with the stalks still attached, are gathered
and bound together and then, holding the bunch
by the lower ends of the stalks, the heads are toasted
over a fire of straw or thorn bush. By the time
most of the sheaths are blackened the grain is
toasted, and, after rubbing off the husks between
the hands, is ready to eat (Lev 2 14). A form of
pulse is toasted in the same way and is more sought
after than the grain. In the larger towns and
cities, venders go about the streets selling bunches
of toasted chick-peas. The Bible references, how-
ever, are probably to another form of roasted grain.
The threshed wheat or pulse is roasted over a fire
on an iron pan or on a flat stone, being kept in
constant motion with a stirrer until the operation is
finished. The grain thus prepared is a marketable
article. Parched grain is not now so commonly
met with as the pulse, which either roasted or un-
roasted is called hommes (from Arab. “to roast” or
“narch’’). Parched pulse is eaten not only plain,
but is often made into confection by coating the
seeds with sugar. In Bible times parched wheat
or pulse was a common food, even taking the place
of bread (Lev 23 14; Josh 6 11; Ruth 2 14).
It was a useful food supply for armies, as it re-
quired no further cooking (1 8 17 17). It was
frequently included in gifts or hostages (1 S 25 18;
28 17 28).

(2) VIM, harér, “burned” or “parched”’ (cf Arab.
harik, ‘“‘burned”’), is used in the sense of dried up or
arid in Jer 17 6.

(3) TWIT, ciheh, is used in Isa 6 13, AV “dried
ap,” RV “parched”; ANIL, ¢hihah, in Ps 68 6,
AV “dry,” RV “parched.”

(4) a7, shardbh, rendered “parched” in AV, is
“slowing” in RV. The word implies the peculiar
wavy effect of the air above parched ground, usually
accompanied by mirages (cf Arab. serdb, ‘‘mirage’’)
(Isa 35 7; 49 10). In predicting a happy future
for Zion the prophet could have chosen no greater
contrast than that the hot glowing sands which
produce illusive water effects should be changed
into real pools. See Mirace. James A. Patcu


PARCHED, pircht, CORN. See Foon.


PARCHMENT, pirch’ment (pepBpdve, membrana
[2 Tim 4 13]): The word “‘parchment,” which occurs
only once (2 Tim 4 13), is derived from Lat, per-
gamena (Gr Tepyapyer}, Pergamené), te. pertaiming
to Pergamum, the name of an ancient city in Asia


Parchments
Parousia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2248


Minor where, it is believed, parehment was first
used. Parchment is made from the skins of sheep,
goats or young calves. The hair and fleshy portions
of the skin are removed as in tanning by first soaking
in lime and then dehairing, scraping and washing.
The skin is then stretched on a frame and treated
with powdered chalk, or other absorptive agent, to
remove the fatty substances, and is then dried. It
is finally given a smooth surface by rubbing with
powdered pumice. Parchment was extensively
used at the time of the early Christians for scrolls,
legal documents, etc, having replaced papyrus for
that purpose. It was no doubt used at even amuch
earlier time. The roll mentioned in Jer 36 may
have been of parchment. Scrolls were later re-
placed by codices of the same material. After the
Arabs introduced paper, parchment was still used
for centuries for the book bindings. Diplomas
printed on “sheepskins,” still issued by many uni-
versities, represent the survival of an ancient use
of parchment. See following article.
James A, PatcH

PARCHMENTS, parch’ments (pepBpdvar, mem-
brdnai, “membranes,’’ ‘“parchments,” ‘‘vellum’’):
The skins, chiefly of sheep, lambs, goats and calves,
pipes so as to be used for writing on (2 Tim

13).


In Gr and Rom times parchment was much employed
as a writing material. ‘‘At Rome, in the Ist cent. BC,
and the 1st and 2d conts. AD, there is evidence of the use
of vellum, but only for notebooks and for rough drafts or
inferior copies of literary works..... A fragment of a
vellum MS, which may helong to this period, is preserved
in Brit. Mus. Add. MS 34,478, consisting of twoleaves of
Demesthenes, De Fals. Leg.,in a small hand, which ap-
ee to ba of the 2d cent.’’ (F. G. Kenyonin HDB,IV,


Paul directs Timothy that, when he comes from
Ephesus to Rome, he is to bring ‘‘the books, esp.
the parchments.’”’ These, as well as the “cloak,”
which is also mentioned, had evidently been “left
at Troas with Carpus.” What were these parch-
ments? They are distinguished from “the books,”
which were probably a few choice volumes or rolls,
some portions of the Scriptures of the OT, some
volumes of the Law of Moses or of the Prophets or
of the Pss. Among “the books” there might also
be Jewish exegetical works, or heathen writings,
with which, as is made evident by references in his
Epp., Paul was well acquainted.

The parchments were different from these, and
were perhaps notebooks, in which the apostle had,
from time to time, written what he had observed
and wished to preserve as specially worthy of
remembrance, facts which he had gathered in his
study of the OT or of other books. These notes
may have been the result of many years’ reading
and study, and he wished Timothy to bring them to

im.

Various conjectures have ‘been made in regard
to the contents of ‘‘the parchments.” It has been
suggested by Kenyon (HDB, I, 673) that they
contained the OT in Gr; by Farrar, that the parch-
ments were a diploma of Paul’s Rom citizenship;
by Bull, that they were his commonplace books;
by Latham, that the parchments were a copy of the
Grundschrift of the Gospels, a volume containing
the all-important narrative of the Savionr’s life
and cross and resurrection. Workman (Perse-
cutton in the Early Church, 39) writes: “By tas
membranas J understand the proofs of his citizen-
ship.”


Whatever their contents may have been, they wero of
such value that Paul wished to have them with him in his
prison at Rome, so that, if life were spared for even a few
weeks or months, the books and parchments might be at


hand for referonce. Perhaps in the fact that the books
and the parchments and the cloak had been loft at Treas ;
with Carpus, there may be a hint that his final arrest by


the Rem authoritics took place at that city, and that it
was the suddenness of his arrest that caused him to be
unahle to carry his hooks and parchments and the cloak
with him. ‘Tho police had not even allowed him time to
find his overcoat or necessdry documents’’ (Workman,
op. cit., 39;see p. 1886, 14). f
Be this as it may, he desired to have them now. His
well-disciplined mind, even in the near prospect of death
by public execution, could find the most joyous lahor in
the work of the gospel, wherever his influence reached,
aud could also find relaxation among ‘'the books, esp. the


parchments.”’
JoHN RUTHERFURD


PARDON, par’d’n, piir’dun. See ForarvEness.

PARE, pir (THE NAILS) (AW, ‘asah, “to fix,”
“manipulate’’): The word, which in Heb has a very
wide range of application, and which is of very
frequent occurrence in the Heb Bible, is found in
the above meaning in but one passage of EV (Dt
21 12; see Nain). In asimilar sense it is found in
2 8 19 24, where it is used to express the dressing
of the feet and the trimming of the beard.

PARENT, par’ent. See CHILDREN; CRIMEs;
Epucation; Famity; PunisHMENTs.


PARK, park (O78, pardés; LXX wapabdecos,
parddeisos; cf Arab. Urgoy5s firdaus): “I made


me gardens and parks,” AV “orchards” (Eccl 2 5);
“Asaph the keeper of the king’s forest,” RVm
“park” (Neh 2 8). The same word occurs in
Cant 4 13, “Thy shoots are an orchard [RVm
“paradise’’] of pomegranates.’’ According to Lid-
dell and Scott, paradeisos occurs first in Xenophon,
who always uses it of the parks of Pers kings and
noblemen. Like many other quadriliterals the
word is undoubtedly of eastern origin. It seems to
connote an inclosure. It is used in LXX of the
Garden of Eden. Cf Lk 23 43; 2 Cor 12 4;
Rev 2 7. See Paravise. ALFRED Exiy Day


_ PARLOR, par’lér: This word in AV, occurring
in Jgs 3 20-25; 18 922; 1 Ch 28 11, is in
every instance changed in RV: in Jgs into “upper
room,” in 1 § into “guest-chamber,”’ in 1 Ch into
“chambers,” representing as many Heb words.
See House.


PARMASHTA, pir-mash’ta (RAWOAIB, par-
mashia’; LXX Mappaowd, Marmasimd, or Map-
paca, Marmasimnd): One of the sons of Haman
(Est 9 9).


PARMENAS, piir’mé-nas (Ilappevés, Parmends):
A Gr name, an abbreviated form of Parmenides.
Parmenas was one of “the seven’? chosen by the
people and appointed by the apostles to super-
intend the daily distribution to the Christian poor
of Jerus (Acts 6 5). Tradition states that he was
martyred at Philippi, in the reign of Trajan, but
his name does not appear again in Scripture,


PARNACH, par’nak (F278, parnakh, “gifted’’):
cae of Elizaphan, the prince of Zebulun (Nu 34


PAROSH, pi’rosh, par’osh (WY"B, par'dsh,
“flea” [leap]): A family that in part returned under
Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 3; Neh 7 8); and in part under
Ezra (Ear 8 8; there spelt “Pharosh,” AV). Some
of the family had foreign wives (Ezr 10 25).
One descendant, Pedaiah (sce Peparag, [3]), helped
to rebuild the city walls (Neh 3 25), and others
were among those who “sealed” the covenant of
Nehemiah (Neh 10 1.14). In 1 Esd 6 9; 8 30;
9 26, ‘‘Phoros.” ;


2249


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Parchments
Parousia


PAROUSIA, pa-réd’zhi-a:
I. Tus Apostouic Doctrine
Terms
. Data and Sources
. Consistenc
. Meaning of the Symbolism
HB TEACHING OF JESUS
. Critical Problems
. Summary
. Fall of Jerusalem
. Time
III. St. Joan's EvauvaTion
1. Solution of Problem
2. The Church a Divine Quantity
LITERATURE

I. The Apostolic Doctrine.—The Second Coming
of Christ (a phrase not found in the Bible) is ex-
pressed by the apostles in the following
special terms: (1) ‘‘Parousia’”’ (7a-
povola, parousia), a word fairly com-
mon in Gr, with the meaning “presence” (2 Cor
10 10; Phil 2 12). More esp. it may mean
“presence after absence,” ‘‘arrival” (but not ‘“‘re-
turn,” unless this is given by the context), as in
1 Cor 16 17; 2 Cor 7 6.7; Phil 1 26. And still
more partieularly it is applied to the Coming of
Christ in 1 Cor 16 23; 1 Thess 219; 3 13;
415; 6 23; 2 Thess 21.8; Jas 5 7.8; 2 Pet
116; 34.12; 1 Jn 2 28—in all 13 t, besides
2 Thess 2 9, where it denotes the coming of Anti-
ehrist. This word for Christ’s Second Coming
passed into the early Patristie lit. (Diognetus, vii.6,
e.g.), but its use in this sense ig not invariable. For
instance the word in Ignatius, Philadelphians, ix.2,
means the Inearnation. Or the Inearnation is
ealled the first Parousia, as in Justin, Trypho, xiv.
But in modern theology it means invariably the
Second Coming. Recent arehacological discoveries
have explained why the word received sueh general
Christian use in the special sense. In Hellenistic
Gr it was used for the arrival of a ruler at a place,
as is evideneed by inscriptions in Egypt, Asia
Minor, etc. Indeed, in an Epidaurus inscription
of the 3d cent. BC (Dittenberger, Sylloge?, No. 803,
34), “Parousia” is applied to a manifestation of
Aesculapins. Consequently, the adoption by the
Gr-speaking Christians of a word that already con-
tained full regal and even Divine concepts was per-
fectly natural. (The evidence is well summarized
in Deissmann, Light from the Ancient Kast®, 372-
78, Ger. ed, 281-87.) (2) ‘‘Epiphany” (émiddvea,
epiphaneia), “manifestation,” used of the Incarna-
tion in 2 Tim 1 10, but of the Second Coming in 2
Thess 28; 1 Tim 6 14; 2 Tim 4.1.8; Tit 2 13.
The word was used like Parousia in Hellenistie Gr
to denote the eeremonial arrival of rulers; ef Deiss-
mann, as above. (3) ‘‘Apoealypse” (droxd duis,
apokdlupsis), ‘revelation,’ denotes the Second
Coming in 1 Cor 17; 2 Thess 17; 1 Pet 1 7.
13; 413. (4) “Day of the Lord,” more or less
modified, but referring to Christ in 1 Cor 1 8;
65; 2 Cori 14; Phil 16.10; 2 16; 1 Thess
5 2; 2 Thess 2 2. The phrase is used of the
Father in the strict OT sense in Acts 2 20; 2 Pet
3 12; Rev 16 14, and probably in 2 Pet 3 10.
Besides, as in the OT and the intermediate lit.,
“day of wrath,” “last day,” or simply “day” are
used very frequently. See Day or THE Lorp.

Of the first three of the above terms, only Parousia
is found in the Gospels, 4 t, allin Mt 24 (vs 3.27.37.39),
and in the last three of these all in the set phrase ‘'so
shall be the Parousia of the Son of Man." As Christ
spoke in Aram., the use of ‘‘ Parousia’’ here is of course
due to Matthew's adoption of the current Gr word.

The last of the 4 terms above brings the apostolic
doctrine of the Parousia into eonnection with the

eschatology (Messianie or otherwise)
2. Dataandof the OT and of the intermediate
Sources writings. But the connection is far
eloser than that supplied by this single
term only, for nearly every feature in the apostolic


IN


ye


II.


PO


1. Terms


doctrine ean be paralleled direetly from the Jewish
sources. The following summary does not begin
to give complete references to even such Jewish
material as is extant, but enough is presented to
show how elosely allied are the esehatologies of
Judaism and of early Christianity.

The end is not to be expeeted instantly. There
are still signs to eome to pass (2 Thess 2 3), and
in especial the determined number of martyrs must
be filled up (Rev 6 11; ef 2 Esd 4 35.36). There
is need of patience (Jas 5 7, ete; cf 2 Esd 4 34;
Bar 83 4). But it is at hand (1 Pet 47; Rev
1 3; 22 10; cf 2 Fsd 14 17). “Yeta little while”
(He 10 37.25), “The night is far spent’? (Rom 13
12), “The Lord is at hand” (Phil 4 5). “We that
are alive” expect toseeit (1 Thess 4 15; 1 Cor 15
51; ef Bar 76 5); the time is shortened henceforth
(1 Cor 7 29; ef Bar 201; 2 Esd 4 26, and the
eomms. on 1 Cor). Indeed, there is hardly time
for repentance even (Rev 22 11, ironical), eer-
tainly there is no time left for self-indulgence
(1 Thess 6 3; 1 Pet 42; 2 Pet 311; Rev 3
3; ef Bar 83 5), and watchfulness is urgently de-
manded (1 Thess 5 6; Rev 3 3).

An outpouring of the Spirit is a sign of the end (Acts
2 17.18; ef XII P, Test. Levi 18 11; Sib Or 4 46,
always after the consummation in the Jewish sources).
But the world is growing steadily worse, for the godly
and intense trials are coming (passim), although
those esp. favored may be spared suffering (Rev
310; ef Bar 29 2). This is the beginning of
Judgment (1 Pet 417; ef En 9910). Iniquity
increases and false teachers are multiplied (Jude
ver 18; 2 Pet 3 3; 2 Tim 3, esp. ver 13; cf En
80 7; Bar 70 5; 2 Esd 6 9.10). Above all there
is to be an outburst of diabolic malevolence in the
Antichrist (1 Jn 2 18.22; 43; 2 Jn ver 7; 2
Thess 2 8-10; Rev 19 19; cf Bar 36 8-10; Sib Or
3 63-70, and see ANTICHRIST), who will gather all
nations to his ensign (Rev 19 19; 2 Thess 2 10
ef 2 Esd 13 5; En 56). Plagues fall upon men
(Rev, passim; ef esp. Philo, Hxecr.), and natural
portents oecur (Acts 2 19.20; Rev, passim; ef 2
Esd 6 4.5; En 80 5-8). But the conversion of the
Jews (Rom 11 26) is brought about by these plagues
(Rev 11 13; in the Jewish sources, naturally,
conversion of Gentiles, as in Sib Or 3 616-623;
En 10 21). Then Christ is manifested and Anti-
christ is slain or eaptured (2 Thess 2 8; Rev 19
20; ef 2 Esd 13 10.11). In Rev 20 3 the Mil-
lennium follows (cf 2 Esd 7 28; 12 34; Bar .40 3,
and often in rabbinical lit.; the “millennium” in
Slavie En, ch 33, is of very dubious existence), but
other traces of millennial doctrine in the NT are
of the vaguest (ef the comms. to 1 Cor 16 24, for
instance, esp. Sehmiedel, J. Weiss, and Lietzmann,
and see MILLENNIUM). The general resurreetion
follows (see Resurrection for details).

The Father holds the Judgment in He 10 30;
12 23; 134; Jas 411.12; TI Pet 117; Rev 14
7; 20 11, and probably in Jude vs 14.15. Christ
is Judge in Acts 10 42; 2 Cor 6 10; 2 Tim 4 1.
The two concepts are interwoven in Rom 14 9.10.
God mediates judgment through Christ in Acts 17
31; Rom 2 16, and probably in Rom 2 2-6; 3 6.
In 2 Thess Christ appears as the exeeutor of pun-
ishment. For similar uncertainties in the Jewish
schemes, ef, for instanee, 2 Esd 7 33 and En 46 3.
For the fate of the wicked see EscHatToLocy;
Het; St. Paul, rather euriously, has very little to
say about this (Rom 2 3; 1 Cor 3 17; 2 Thess
18.9). Then all Nature is renewed (Rorn 8 21;
En 46 4.5) or completely destroyed (1 Cor 7 31;
He 12 27; Rev 21 1; ef En 1 6; 2 Esd 7 30);
by fire in 2 Pet 3 10 (cf Sib Or 4 172-77), 50 as to
leave only the eternal veritics (He 12 27; cf 2 Esd
T 30(?]), or to be replaced with a new heaven aud


Parousia
Parthians


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2250


anewearth (Rev 21 1; cf SlavicEn 33 1-2). ul “Messianic work,’’ “coming of the Kingdom,’’ and


the righteous receive the New Jernus (Gal 4 26;
He 12 22; Rev 312; 212.10; cf Bar 4 2-6;
2 Esd 7 26).

It is of course possible, as in the older works on
dogmatics, to reconcile the slight divergences of
the above details and to fit them all
into a single scheme. But the pro-
priety of such an undertaking is more
than dubious, for the traditional
nature of these details is abundantly clear—a tradi-
tion that is not due solely to the fact that the Chris-
tian and the Jewish schemes have a common OT
basis. That the Jewish writers realized that the
eschatological details were merely symbolic is made
obvious by the contradictions that every apocalypse
contains—the contradictions that are the despair
of the beginner in apocalyptics. No writer seems
to have thought it worth while to reconcile his
details, for they were purely figures of dimly com-
prehended forces. And the Christian symbolism
must be interpreted on the same principle. No
greater injustice, for instance, could be done St.
Paul’s thought than to suppose he would have been
in the least disturbed by St. John’s interpretation
of the Antichrist as many persons and all of them
ordinary human beings (1 Jn 2 18.19).

The symbolism, then, in which the Parousia is
described was simply that held by the apostles in

their pre-Christian days. This sym-
4. Meaning bolism, to be sure, has been thoroughly
of the purified from such puerilities as the
Symbolism feast on Leviathan and Behemoth of

Bar 29, or the ‘“‘thonsand children” of
En 10 17, a fact all the more remarkable as 2d-
cent. Christianity has enough of this and to spare
(e.g. Irenaeus, v.33). What is more important is
that the symbolism of the Parousia is simply in the
Jewish sources the symbolism of the coming of the
Messiah (or of God in such schemes as have no
Messiah). Now it is to be observed that among
the apostles the Kingdom of God is almost uniformly
regarded as a future quantity (1 Cor 6 9.10; 15 50;
Gal 6 21; Eph 6 5; 2 Tim 4 1.18; 2 Pet 1 11;
Rev 11 15; 12 10), with a definitely present idea
only in Col 113. Remembering again that the
term ‘‘Messiah” means simply ‘“‘the Bringer of the
Kingdom,” the ease becomes entirely clear. No
apostle, of course, ever thought of Christ as any-
thing but the Messiah. But neither did they think
of His Messianic work as completed, or, if the most
exact terminology be pressed, of the strict Messianic
work as done at all. Even the Atonement belonged
to the preliminary acts, viewed perhaps somewhat
as En 39 6 views the preéxistent Messiah’s resi-
dence among the ‘‘church expectant.” This could
come to paas more readily as the traditions generally
were silent as to what the Messiah was to do before
He brought the Kingdom, while they all agreed
that He was not to be created only at that moment.
Into this blank, esp. with the aid of Isa 58, ete, Our
Lord’s earthly life and Passion fitted naturally,
leaving the fact of His Second Coming to be identi-
fied with the coming of the Messiah as originally
conceived.

Il. The Teaching of Jesus.—It will be found help-
ful, in studying the bitter controversies that have
raged around Christ’s teaching about
the future, to remember that the apos-
tolic idea of the word ‘‘Messiah” is the
only definition that the word has; that,
for instance, “Messiah” and “Saviour of the world”
are not quite convertible terms, or that a redefini-
tion of the Messiah as a moral teacher or an ex-
pounder of the will of God does not rest on a
“spiritualizing” of the term, but on a destruction of
itin favor of “‘prophet.’’ Now the three expressions,


3. Con-
sistency


1. Critical
Problems


“Parousia” are only three titles for one and the
same thing, while the addition of “Son of Man” to
them merely involves their being taken in the
most transcendental form possible. In fact, this is
the state of affairs found in the Synoptists. Christ
predicts the coming of the Kingdom. He claims the
title of its king (or Regent under the Father). The
realization of this expectation He placed on the
other side of the grave, i.e. in a glorified state.
And in connection with this evidence we find His
use of the title Son of Man. From all this the
doctrine of the Parousia follows immediately, even
apart from the passages in which the regular
apocalyptic symbolism is used. The contention
may be made that this symbolism in the Gospels
has been drawn out of other sources by the evan-
gelists (the so-called “Little Apocalypse” of Mk
13 7-9.14-20.24-27.30-31 is the usual point of
attack), but, even if the contention could be made
out (and agreement in this regard is anything but
attained), no really vital part of the case would be
touched. Of course, it is possible to begin with the
a priori assumption that ‘no sane man could con-
ceive of himself as an apocalyptic being walking the
earth incognito,” and to refer to later tradition
everything in the Gospels that contradicts this
assumption. But then there are difficulties. The
various concepts involved are mentioned directly
so often that the number of passages to be removed
grows alarmingly large. Then the concepts inter-
lock in such a way as to present a remarkably firm
resistance to the critical knife; the picture is much
too consistent for an artificial product. Thus there
are a number of indirect references (the title on the
Cross, the ‘‘Palm-Sunday” procession, etc) that
contradict all we know of later growths. And,
finally, the most undeterred critic finds himself
confronted with a last stubborn difficulty, the un-
wavering conviction of the earliest church that
Christ made the eschatological claims. It is con-
ceivable that the apostles may have misunderstood
Christ in other matters, but an error in this central
point of all (as the apostles appraised things) is
hardly in the realms of critical possibility. On the
whole, such an attempt to force a way through the
evidence of the documents would seem something
surprisingly like the violence done to history by the
most perverse of the older dogmatists.
The number of relevant passages involved is so
large and the critical problems so intricate that any
detailed discussion is prohibited here.
2. Summary Moreover, the symbolism presents
nothing novel to the student familiar
with the usual schemes. Forces of evil increase in
the world, the state of the righteous grows harder,
distress and natural portents follow, at the climax
Christ appears suddenly with His angels, bringing
the Kingdom of God, gathers the elect into the
Kingdom, and dismisses the wicked into outer
darkness (or fire). The Father is the Judge in Mt
10 32.33, but the Son in the || Lk 12 8.9, and in
Mt 13 41; 16 27; 26 32; probably in Mt 24 50
| Lk 12 46; Mk 8 38 and its || Lk 9 26 are un-
certain. At all events, the eternal destiny of each
man depends on Christ’s attitude, possibly with the
Father’s (invariable) ratification considered.
How far Christ connected the Parousia and the fall
of Jerus, it is not easy to say. Various sayings of
Christ about the future were certainly
3. Fall of grouped by the evangelists; cf Mt
Jerusalem 24 with Mk 13 and Lk 17 20-37;
f ; or Lk 17 31 with Mk 13 15.16 (not-
ing the inappropriateness of Lk 17 31 in its present
context). The eritical discussions of Mk 13 are
familiar and those of Lk 21 (a still more complex
problem) only less so. Remembering what the


2251


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Parousia
Parthians


fall of Jerus or its immediate prospect would have | quantity, through which a Divine Head works,


meant to the apostles, the tendency to group the
statements of Christ will be realized. Conse-
quently, not too much stress should be laid on the
connection of this with the Parousia, and in no case
ean the fall of Jerus be considered to exhaust the
meaning of the Parousia.
The most debated question is that of the time of
the Parousia. Here Mk 13 30]| Lk 21 32 || Mt 24
34 place it within Christ’s generation,
4. Time Mk 9 1 || Lk 9 27 || Mt 16 28 within
the lifetime of some of His hearers, Mt
10 23 before all the citics of Judaea are closed to
Christ’s apostles. (Only the first of these contains
any reference to the fall of Jerus.) Then there is
“ye shall see’ of Mk 14 62; Lk 13 35 || Mt 23
39. Agrecing with this are the exhortations to
watchfulness (Mk 13 33-37; Lk 12 40|| Mt 24
44, etc, with many parables, such as the Ten
Virgins). Now Mk 13 32 || Mt 24 36 do not
quite contradict this, for knowledge of the genera-
tion is quite consistent with ignorance of the day
and hour; “It will be within your generation, but
nothing more can be told you, so watch!’ The
real difficulty lies in Mk 13 10 || Mt 24 14, the
necessity of all Gentiles hearing the gospel (Lk 21
24 is hardly relevant). To leave the question here,
as most conservative scholars do, is unsatisfactory,
for Mk 13 10 is of no deep value for apologetic
service and this value is far outweighed by the real
contradiction with the other passages. The key,
probably, lies in Mt 10 18, from which Mk 13 10
differs only in insisting on all Gentiles, perhaps with
the apostles’ thought that ‘world’ and “Rom
Empire” were practically coextensive. With this
assumption the data yield a uniform result.
J. St. John’s Evaluation.—It appears, then,
that Christ predicted that shortly after His death an
event would occur of so transcendental
1. Solution a nature that it could be expressed
of Problem only in the terms of the fullest escha-
tological symbolism. St. John has
a clear interpretation of this. In place of the long
Parousia discourses in the Synoptists, we have,
in the corresponding part of the Fourth Gospel, chs
13-17, dealing not only with the future in general
but concretely with Christ’s coming and the Judg-
ment. Christ indeed came to His own (Jn 14 18),
and not He only but the Spirit also (14 16), and
even the Father (14 23). When the disciples are
so equipped, their presence in the world subjects
the world to a continual sifting process of judgment
(16 11). The fate of men by this process is to be
eternally fixed (3 18), while the disciples newly made
are assured that they have already entered into their
eternal condition of blessedness (11 25.26; 6 24;
10 28; 17 2.3). Equally directly the presence
of Christ. is conceived in Rev 3 20. SoinSt. Paul,
the glorified Christ has returned to His own to dwell
in them (Rom 8 9.10, etc), uniting them into a
body vitally connected with Him (Col 1 18), so
supernatural that it is the teacher of ‘angels’ (Eph
3 10), a body whose members are already in the
Kingdom (Col 1 13), who even sit already in
heavenly places (Eph 2 6). The same thought is
found in such synoptic passages (Lk 7 28 || Mt
1111; Lk 17 21[?]; see Kinanpom or Gon) as
represent the Kingdom as present. Already the
eschatological promises were realized in a small
group of men, even though they still lacked the
transforming influence of the Spirit. Compare
the continnous coming of Mt 26 64 (Lk 22 69).
It is on these lines of the church as a supernatural
quantity (of course not to be confused with any
particular denomination) that the immediate realiza-
tion of the Parousia promises is to be sought. Into
human history has been “injected” a supernatural


whose reaction on men settles their ctcrnal destiny,
and within which the life of heaven is


2. The begun definitely. The force in this
Church a__ body is felt at the crises of human his-
Divine tory, perhaps esp. after the catastrophe
Quantity that destroyed Jerus and sct Chris-


tianity free from the swaddling clothes
of the primitive community. This conception of
the church as a Divine quantity, as, so to speak,
a part of heaven extended into earth, is faithful
to the essentials of the predictions. Nor is it a
rationalization of them, if the idea of the church
itself be not rationalized. With this conception
all realms of Christian activity take on a tran-
scendental significance, both in life and (esp.) death,
giving to the individual the confidence that he is
building better than he knows, for even the apostles
could not realize the full significance of what they
were doing. Generally speaking, the details in
the symbolism must not be pressed. The purpose
of revelation is to minister to life, not to curi-
osity, and, in teaching of the future, Christ simply
taught with the formal language of the schools of
the day, with the one change that in the supernatural
process He Himself was to be the central figure.
Still, the end is not yet. ‘‘The hour cometh, in
which all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice”’
(Jn 5 28; ef 6 40; 21 23; 1 Jn 2 28). In Christ
human destiny is drawing to a climax that can be
expressed only in spiritual terms that transcend
our conceptions. Sec, further, EscHaToLoGy oF
Tus NT.


Literature.—This is overwhelming. For the pre-
suppositions, GJV4 (HJP is antiquated); Volz, Ja
dische Eschatologie; Bousset, Religion des Judentums?.
General discussions: Mathews, The Messianic Hope in
the NT (best in Eng.); Sanday, The Life of Christ in
Recent Research; Holtzmauu, Das messtanische Bewusst-
sein Jesu (a classic); von Dobschiitz, The Eschatology
of the Gospels (popular, but very sound). Eschatological
extreme: Schweitzer, The Quest of the Historical Jesus
(Von Reimarus zu Wrede),is quite indispeusable; Tyrrell,
Christianity at the Cross Roads (perverse, but valuable in
parts); Loisy, Gospel and the Church (cf his Evangiles
synoptiques). Anti-eschatological: Sharman, The Teach-
ing of Jesus about the Future (minute criticism, inadequate
premises, some astounding exegesis); Bacon, The Begin-
nings of Gospel Story (based on Wellhausen). For the
older literature see Schweitzer, Sanday, Holtzmann, as
above, and cf Fairweather, The Background of the Gospels,
and Brown, ‘' Parousia,"’ in HDB, I1I.

: Burron Scorr Easton

PARSHANDATHA, pir-shan-da’tha, par-shan’-
da-tha (NINTIWID, parshandatha’; LXX Papody,
Pharsdn, or Papraverrdv, Pharsanestin; perhaps
from the Pers fracna-data, “given by prayer’’):


One of the sons of Haman (Est 9 7).


PART, part: As a vb. is no longer in good use
(except in a few special phrases, cf Ruth 1 17), but
is obscure only in Prov 18 18, where the meaning
is “break up their quarrel’ (cf 28 146). RV
has not changed AV’s usage, except (strangely) in
1S 30 24, where “share” is written. For the
noun see Portion.


PARTHIANS, p§ar’thi-anz (Ilép@0, Pdrthoi): A
people mentioned in Acts 2 9 only, in connection
with other strangers present at Jerus

1. Country at Pentecost, from which we infer that
and Early they were Jews or proselytes from the
History regions included in the Parthian em-
pire. This empire stretched from the

Euphrates to the confines of India and the Oxus,
and for centuries was the rival of Rome, and more
than once proved her match on the battlefield.
The Parthians are not mentioned in the OT, but are
frequently in Jos, and they had an important con-
nection with the history of the Jews, on account of
the large colonies of the latter in Mesopotamia, and


Parthians
Partition


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2252


the interference of the Parthians in the affairs of
Judaea, once making it a vassal state.

Parthia proper was a small territory to the S.E.
of the Caspian Sea, about 300 miles long by 120
wide, a fertile though mountainous region, border-
ing on the desert tract of Eastern Persia. The


Parthian Horsemen.
(From the Triamphal Arch of Septimius Severus, Rome.)


origin of the Parthians is rather uncertain, though
the prevailing opinion is that they were of Scythic
stock or of the great Tartar race. We have no
reference to them earlier than the time of Darius the
Great, but they were doubtless among the tribes
subdued by Cyrus, as they are mentioned by Darius
as being in revolt. They seem to have remained
faithful to the Persians after that, and submitted

to Alexander without resistance.
They next came under the rule of the Seleucid
kings of Syria, but revolted about 250 BC, in the
reign of Antiochus II (Theos), and


2. The gained their independence under the
Seleucid lead of Arsaces I who established the
Kings dynasty of the Arsacidae, which con-


tinned for nearly 5 centuries. His
capital was Hecatompylos, but his reign continued
only about 3 years, and his brother Tridates suc-
ceeded him as Arsaces II and he consolidated the
kingdom. The war between the Seleucids and the
Ptolemies freed him from interference from that
quarter until 237 BC, when Selencus II (Callinicus)
marched against him, but was completely defeated,
and Parthian independence wassecured. Artabanus
I, who followed him, extended his dominions west-
ward to the Zagros Mountains, but Antiochus HI
would not permit such an encroachment with impu-
nity, and led an expedition against him, driving him
back and even invading his ancestral dominion. But
after a struggle of some years the Parthians remained
still unsubdued, and the difficulties of the contest led
Antiochus to conclude peace with him in which he
acknowledged the independence of Parthia. For
about a quarter of a century the king of Parthia
remained quiet, but Phraates I (181-174 BC) re-
commenced aggressions on the Seleucid empire
which were continued by Mithridates I (174-187),
who added to his dominions a part of Bactria, on
the E., and Media, Persia and Babylonia on the W.
This was a challenge to Demetrius II, of Syria, to
whose empire the provinces belonged, and he
marched against him with a large force, but was
defeated and taken prisoner. He remained in
Parthia some years, well treated by Phraates II,
whose sister he married, and, when Phraates wished
to ereate a diversion against Antiochus Sidetes, he
set Demetrius at liberty and sent him back to
Syria. Antiochus was at first successful, as_his
force of 300,000 men far outnumbered the Par-
thians, but he was at last defeated and slain in 129
BC and his army destroyed. This was the last


attempt of the Seleucid kings to subdue Parthia,
and it was acknowledged as the dominant power in
Western Asia. But Phraates fell in conflict with
the Scyths, whom he called in to aid him in his war
with Sidetes, and his successor likewise, and it was
only on the accession of Mithridates in 124 BC that
these barbarians were checked. The king then
turned his attention toward Armenia, which he
probably brought under his control, but its king
Tigranes recovered its independence and even at-
tacked the Parthians, and took from them two
provinces in Mesopotamia.
Not long after, the power of Rome came into con-
tact with Armenia and Parthia. In 66 BC when,
after subduing Mithridates of Pontus,
3. In Con- Pompey came into Syria, Phraates III
tact with made an alliance with him against
Rome Armenia, but was offended by the way
in which he was treated and thought
of turning against his ally, but refrained for the
time being. It was only a question of time when
the two powers would come to blows, for Parthia
had become an empire and could ill brook the in-
trusion of Rome into Western Asia. It was the
ambition and greed of Crassus that brought about
the clash of Rome and Parthia. When he took the
East as his share of the Rom world as apportioned
among the triumvirs, he determined to rival Caesar
in fame and wealth by subduing Parthia, and ad-
vanced across the Euphrates on his ill-fated expe-
dition in 53 BC. The story of his defeat and death
and the destruction of the army and loss of the
Rom eagles is familiar to all readers of Rom history.
It revealed Parthia to the world as the formidable
rival of Rome, which she continued to be for
nearly 3 centuries. After the death of Crassus, the
Parthians crossed the Euphrates and ravaged
Northern Syria, but retired the following year with-
out securing any portion of the country, and thus
ended the first war with Rome. In 40 BC, after the
battle of Philippi, Pacorus, who was then king, in-
vaded Syria a second time and took possession of it
together with all Pal, Tyre alone escaping subjec-
tion. He set Antigonus on the throne of Judaea,
deposing Hyrcanus for the purpose. Syria and Pal
remained in the hands of Parthia for 8 years, but
the coming of Ventidius gave a new turn to affairs.
He drove the Parthians out of Syria, and when
they returned the following year, he defeated them
agam and Pacorns was slain. Parthia had to
retire within her own borders and remain on the
defensive. Antony’s attempt to subdue them
proved abortive, and his struggle with Octavian
compelled him to relinquish the project. The
Parthians were unable to take advantage of the
strife in the Rom empire on account of troubles at
home. An insurrection led by Tiridates drove the
king Phraates IV from the throne, but he recovered
it by the aid of the Scyths, and Tiridates took
refuge in Syria with the youngest son of the king.
Augustus afterward restored him without ransom
and obtained the lost standards of Crassus, and thus
peace was established between the rival empires.
Each had learned to respect the power of the other,
and, although contention arose regarding the
suzerainty of Armenia, peace was not seriously dis-
turbed between them for about 180 years, or until
the reign of Trajan. Parthia was not at peace with
herself, however. Dynastic troubles were frequent,
and the reigns of the kings short. Artabanus Ill,
who reigned 16-42 AD, was twice expelled from his
kingdom and twice recovered his throne. In his
days occurred a, terrible massacre of Jewish colonists
in Mesopotamia, as narrated by Jos (Ant, XVIII,
ix). The contest with Rome over Armenia was
settled in the days of Nero in a manner satisfactory
to both parties, so that peace was not broken for


2253


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Parthians
Partition


50 years. The ambition of Trajan led him to dis-
regard the policy inaugurated by Augustus, adhered
to, for the most part, by succeeding emperors, not
to extend the limits of the empire. After the con-
quest of Dacia he turned his attention to the East
and resolved on the invasion of Parthia. The
Parthian king, Chosroés, endeavored to placate
Trajan by an embassy bearing presents and pro-
posals of peace, but Trajan rejected them and
carried out his purpose. He subdued Armenia,
took Upper Mesopotamia, Adiabéné (Assyria),
Ctesiphon, the capital, and reached the Pers Gulf,
but was obliged to turn back by revolts in his rear
and failed to reduce the fortress of Hatra. The
conquered provinces were restored, however, by
Hadrian, and the Parthians did not retaliate until
the reign of Aurelius, when they overran Syria, and
in 162 AD Lucius Verns was sent to punish them.
In the following year he drove them back and ad-
vanced into the heart of the Parthian empire, in-
flicting the severest blow it had yet received. It
was evident that the empire was on the decline, and
the Romans did not meet with the resistance they
had experienced in former times. Severus and
Caracalla both made expeditions into the country,
and the latter took the capital and massacred the
inhabitants, but after his assassination his successor,
Macrinus, fought a three days’ battle with the
Parthians at Nisibis in which he was worsted and
was glad to conclude a peace by paying an indem-
nity of some £1,500,000 (217 AD).

But this was the last achievement of the Parthians.
It is evident that Artabanus had suffered severely

in his conflict with the Romans, and
4. Fallof was unable to put down the revolt of
the Empire the Persians under the lead of Artaxer-

xes, who overthrew the Parthian em-
pire and established the dynasty of the Sassanidae
in its place (226 AD).

The Parthians were not a cultured people, but
displayed a rude magnificence, making use, to some
extent, of remains of Gr culture which
they found within the regions they
seized from the empire of Alexander.
They had no native lit., as far as known, but
made use of Gr in writing and on their coins. They
were familiar with Heb or Syro-Chaldaic, and the
later kings had Sem legends on their coins. Jos
is said to have written his history of the Jewish War
in his native tongue for Parthian readers. In their
method of government they seem to have left the
different provinces pretty much to themselves, so
long as they paid tribute and furnished the neces-
sary contingents. H. Porter


PARTICULAR, par-tik’t-lar, par-tik’t-lar, PAR-
TICULARLY: Theadverbial phrase ‘in particular’
occurs twice in AV (1 Cor 12 27, é spépous, ek
mérous, RV “severally,” RVm “each in his part’;
and Eph 5 33, ol xa@’ éva, hoi kath’ héna, RV “sever-
ally”); in both cases it has the obsolete meaning
of “severally,” ‘individually.’ The advb. “par-
ticularly’? occurs in the same sense in Acts 21 19
AV, xa’ & éxacrov, kath’ hén hékaston, RV “one by
one,” and He 9 5 AV, xard pépos, katé méros, RV
“severally.”’ We have the pl. noun in the sense of
“details”? in 2 Macc 2 30: “to be curious in particu-
lars”; 11 20 (AV “Of the particulars I have given
order,” RV “I have given order in detail”); and the
adj. “particular”? in the sense of “special” in the
first Prologue to Sirach (AV,'Vulg peculiares; the
whole section omitted in RV).

‘D. Miat, Evwarps

PARTITION, p§r-tish’un, par-tish’un, THE
MIDDLE WALL OF (16 peodrorxov tod hpaypod,
i6 mesétoichon to& phragmot (Eph 2 14]): What
Paul here asserts is that Christ is our peace, the


6. Culture


-


peace of both Jewish and gentile believers. He has
made them both to be one in Himself, and has
broken down the middle wall of parti-
1. The tion which divided them from one
Barrier in another. Then the apostle regards Jew
the Temple and Gentile as two, who by a fresh act
of creation in Christ are made into one
new man. In the former of these similes he refers
to an actual wall in the temple at Jerus, beyond
which no one was allowed to pass unless he were a
Jew, the balustrade or barrier which marked the
limit up to which a Gentile might advance but no
farther. Curiously, this middle wall of partition had
a great deal to do with Paul’s arrest and imprison-
ment, for the multitude of the Jews became infuri-
ated, not merely because of their gencral hostility to
him as an apostle of Christ and a preacher of the gos-
pel for the world, but specially because it was errone-
ously supposed that he had brought Trophimus the
Ephesian past this barricr into the temple (Acts 21
29), and that he had in this manner profaned the
temple (24 6), or, as it is put in 21 28, he had
‘brought Greeks into the temple and polluted this
holy place. In the assault which they thereupon
made on Paul they violently seized and dragged him
out of the temple—dragged him outside the balus-
trade. The Levites at once shut the gates, to prevent
the possibility of any further profanation, and Paul
would have been torn in pieces, had not the Rom
commander and his soldiers forcibly prevented.
In building the temple Herod the Great had Inclosed


a large area to form the various courts. The temple
io cose noe ae Eg divisions, the
’ oly Place, entered by the priests every
2. Herod’s Gay’ and the Holy of Holies into which
Temple; Its the ‘high priest entered alone once every
Divisions; year. Immediately outside the temple
the Courts there was the Court of the Priests, and in
it was placed the great altar of hurnt offer-
ing. Outside of this again was the Court
of the Sons of Israel, and beyond this the Court of the
Women. The site of the temple itself and the space
occupied hy the various courts already mentioned formed
a raised plateau or platform. ‘‘From }t you descended
at various points down 5 steps and through gates in a
lofty wall, to find yourself overlooking another large
court—the outer court to which Gentiles, who desired
to see something of the glories of the temple and to offer
gifts and sacrifices to the God of the Jews, were freely
admitted. Farther in than this court they were for-
hidden, on pain of death, to go, The actual boundary
line was not the high wal) with its gates, hut a low stone
barrier about 5 ft. in height, which ran round at the
bottom of 14 more steps” (J. Armitage Robinson, D.D.,
St. Paul's Ep. to the Eph, 59; see also Edersheim,
The Temple, lis Ministry and Services as They Were at
the Time of Jesus Christ, 46).


The middle wall of partition was called sdrégh,
and was built of marble beautifully ornamented.


The Court of the Gentiles formed the lowest and the
outermost inclosure of all the courts of the sanctuary.
t+ was paved with the finest variegated


3. The marble. Its name signified that it was
Court of the °P&2 to all, Jews or Gentiles alike. It

ourtor We was very large, and is said hy Jewish tra-
Gentiles dition to have formed a square of 750 ft.


It was in this court that the oxen and sheep
and the doves for the sacrifices were sold as in a market.
It was in this court too that there were the tables of the
money-changers, which Christ Himself overthrew when
He drove out the sheep and oxen and them that hought
and sold in His Father's house. The multitudes assem-
bling in this court must have been very great, esp. on
occasions such as the Passover and Pentecost and at the
other great feasts, and the din of voices must oftentimes
have been most disturbing. As already seen, beyond this
court no Gentile might go. See Tempe.

In the year 1871, while excavations were being made
on the site of the temple by the Palestine Exploration
Fund, M. Clermont-Ganneau discovered one of the
pillars which Jos describes as haying been erected upon
the very barricr or middle wall of partition, to. which
Paul refers. This pillar is now preserved in the Museum
at Constantinople and is inscrihed with a Gr inscription
in capital or uncial letters, which is translated as follows:

NO MAN OF ANOTHER NATION TO
ENTER WITHIN THE FENCE AND
ENCLOSURE ROUND THE TEMPLE,
AND WHOEVER I8 CAUGHT WILL
HAVE HIMSELF TO BLAME THAT
HIS DEATH ENSUES


Partridge
Passion, Passions


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2254


While Paul was writing the Ep. to the Eph at
Rome, this barrier in the temple at Jerus was still
standing, yet the chained prisoner of Jesus Christ
was not afraid to write that Christ had broken
down the middle wall of partition, and had thus
admitted Gentiles who were far off, strangers and
foreigners, to all the privileges of access to God
anciently possessed by Israel alone; that separation
between Jew and Gentile was done away with forever
in Christ. .

If Paul wrote the Ep. to the Eph in 60 or 61
AD, then the actual barrier of stone remained

in its position in the Court of the


4. The Gentiles not more than some 10 years,
Throwing for it was thrown down in the burning
Down of of the temple by the Romarmy. And
the Barrier out of those rnins a fragment has been


_ excavated in our own day, containing
the very inscription threatening death to the gentile


T


The first reference to it is found in 1 8 26 20:
“Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth
away from the presence of Jeh: for the king of
Israel is come out to seek a flea, as when one doth
hunt a partridge in the mountains.” David in this
dialogue with Saul clearly indicates that if he did
not hunt the partridge himself, he knew how it was
done. The birds were commonly chased np the
mountains and stunned or killed with “throw sticks.”
David knew how deft these birds were at hiding
beside logs and under dry leaves colored so like
them as to afford splendid protection; how swiftly
they could run; what expert dodgers they were;
so he compared taking them with catching a flea.
The other reference is found in Jer 17 11: ‘‘As the
partridge that sitteth on eggs which she hath not
laid, so is he that getteth riches, and not by right;
in the midst of his days they shall leave him, and
at his end he shall! be a fool.” If this reference is


Warning TaBLet or Herop’s Temp.e.


intruder, and reminding us that it is only in Christ


Jesus that we now draw nigh unto God, and that |


we are thus one body in Christ, one new man.
Christ has broken down the middle wall of parti-
tion, for He, in His own person, is our peace.
Joun RuUTHERFURD

PARTRIDGE, par’tri} (ROP, kor@; Lat per-
diz; LXX, 1 8 26 20, vucriuxdpag, nuktikdraz,
“owl,” Jer 17 11, wépSé, pérdiz): A bird of the
family Tetraonidae. The Heb word for this bird,
kore’, means “a caller,’ and the Lat perdiz is sup-
posed to be an imitation of its cry, and as all other
nations base their name for the bird on the Lat, it
becomes quite evident that it was originally named
in imitation of its call. The commonest partridge
of Pal, very numerous in the wilderness and hill
country, was a bird almost as large as a pheasant.
It had a clear, exquisite cry that attracted atten-
tion, esp. in the mating season. The partridge of
the wilderness was smaller and of beautifully marked
plumage. It made its home around the Dead Sea,
in the Wilderness of Judaea and in rocky caverns.
Its eggs were creamy white; its cry very similar
to its relatives’. The partridge and its eggs were
used for food from time immemorial.


supposed to indicate that partridges are in the habit
of brooding on the nest of their kind or of different
birds, it fails wholly to take into consideration the
history of the bird. Partridges select a location,
carefully deposit an egg a day for from 10 to 15
days, sometimes 20, and then brood, so that all the
young emerge at one time. But each bird knows
and returns to its nest with unfailing regularity.


‘It would require the proverbial “Philadelphia


lawyer’ to explain this reference to a “partridge
sitting on eggs she had not laid.” No ornithologist
ever could reconcile it to the habits or characteristics
of the birds. AV tr4 these lines, “As the partridge
sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not.” This was
easy to explain clearly. The eggs of the partridge
were delicious food, and any brooding bird whose
nest was discovered after only a few days of incu-
bation did not hatch, because she lost her eggs.
Also the eggs frequently fall prey to other birds or
small animals. Again, they are at the mercy of the
elements, sometimes being spoiled by extremely wet.
cold weather. Poultry fanciers assert that a heavy
thunder storm will spoil chicken eggs when hatching-
time is close; the same might be true with eggs of
the wild. And almost any wild bird will desert its


2255


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Sattridge


Passion, Passions


nest and make its former brooding useless, if the
location is visited too frequently by man or beast.
There is also a partridge reference in the Book of
Ecclus (11 29 ff RV): “Bring not every man into
thine house; for many are the plots of the deceitful
man. Asa decoy partridge in a cage, so is the heart


Partridge.


of a proud man; and as one that is aspy, he looketh
upon thy falling. For he leth in wait to turn
things that are good into evil; and in things that
are praiseworthy he will lay blame.” Thereference
is to confining a tame partridge in a hidden cage so
that its calls would lure many of its family within
range of arrows or “throw sticks’”’ used by concealed
hunters. GENE StratTon-PorTEeR


PARUAH, pa-roo’a (MI9B, parvizh, “blooming’’):
Father of Jehoshaphat, who was one of Solomon’s
twelve victualers or providers, and had charge in
Issachar of this function (1 K 4 17).


PARVAIM, par-va‘im (O7I"8, parwayim; LXX
Papovaip, Pharouaim): The word occurs only in
2 Ch 8 6, as the place from which Solomon ob-
tained gold for the decoration of his Temple. A
derivation is given from the Sanskrit pirva, “ecast-
ern,” so that the name might be a vague term for
the East (Gesenius, Thesaurus, 1125). Whether
there was such a place in Arabiaisdoubtful. Farwa
in Yemen has been suggested, and also Sak el
Farwain in Yemamah. Some have considered the
name a shortened form of S¢pharvéyim which occurs
in the Syr and Tg Jonathan for the “Sephar’ of
Gen 10 30. A. S. Futton


PASACH, pa’sak (FOB, pdsakh, “divider”’): Son
of Japhlet, descendant of Asher (1 Ch 7 33).


PAS-DAMMIM, pas-dam‘im. Sce Epuss-
DAMMIM.

PASEAH, pa-sé’a, pas’é-a (NOD, paseh, “limp-
ing’”’) 3


(1) A son of Eshton, descendant of Judah (1 Ch
4 12).

(2) The eponym of a family of Nethinim (Ezr 2
49; Neh 7 51, AV “Phaseah’’=“Phinoe”’ (1 Esd
5 31).

(3) Father of Joiada, who helped to repair the
old gate (Neh 3 6).


PASHHUR, pash’hur, PASHUR,
(MIME, pashhur, “splitter,” “cleaver’’):
name of several persons difficult to individuate:

(1) A priest, son of Immer, and ‘chief governor
in the house of the Lord’ (Jer 20 1), who perse-
cuted Jeremiah, putting him in “the stocks’ hard


pash’ur
The


by the “house of Jeh’” in the “gate of Benjamin”
(Jer 20 2). When released, Jeremiah pronounced
Divine judgment on him and the people. Future
captivity and an exile’s death are promised to
Pashur whose name he changed from its masterful
significance to a cowering one. ‘Terror on every
side’ (maghdr missabhibh) is to take the place of
“stable strength” (Jer 20 3 ff).

(2) Son of Melchiah, a prince of Judah, and one
of the delegation sent by Zedekiah, the king, to con-
sult Jeremiah (Jer 21 1). It looks like a larger
and later deputation, similarly sent, to which this
Pashur belongs, whose record is given in Jer 38
1-13. Accompanying them was one, Gedaliah, who
was a son of (3).

(3) Another Pashur (Jer 38 1), who may be the
person mentioned in 1 Ch 9 12; Neh 11 12.

(4) A priest, of those who “sealed’’ Nehemiah’s
covenant (Neh 10 1.3), who may, however, be the
same as (5).

(5) The chief of a priestly family called ‘sons of
Pashur” (Ezr 2 38; 10 22; Neh 7 41; 1 Esd 6
25 [“Phassurus,’’ m ‘‘Pashhur’’]; 9 22 [‘“Phaisur,”’
m ‘“Pashhur’]). Doubtless it is this Pashur, some
of whose sons had “strange wives” (Ezr 10 22).

Henry WALLACE

PASS, pas, PASSAGE, pas’4j, PASSENGER,
pas’en-jér: ‘“To pass’’ bears different meanings and
corresponds to various words in Heb and Gr. It
occurs frequently in the phrase “and it came to pass”
(lit. and it was). ‘This is simply a Heb idiom link-
ing together the different paragraphs of a contin-
uous narrative. As a rule ‘“‘pass’”’ renders the Heb
word "22, ‘abhar. This vb. has various meanings,
e.g. ‘to pass over’ a stream (Gen 31 21); ‘to
cross’”’ a boundary (Nu 20 17); ‘‘to pass through,”
or “traverse,” a country (Nu 21 22); ‘‘to pass on”
(Gen 18 5); ‘‘to pass away,’’ “‘cease to exist’”’ (Job
30 15). The word is used metaphorically, ‘‘to pass
over,” “overstep,”’ ‘‘transgress’” (Nu 14 41). In
the causative form the vb. is used in the phrase “to
cause to pass through fire’ (Dt 18 10; 2 K 16 8).
In AV “pass” sometimes has the force of ‘“‘surpass,”
“exceed,” e.g. 2 Ch 9 22, “King Solomon passed
all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom”;
cf also Eph 3 19, “the love of Christ which passeth
knowledge,” and Phil 4 7, “the peace of God, which
passeth all understanding.”

Passage in AV renders “222, ma‘dbhdr, or
™932'2, ma‘dbharah. The former word denotes
(1) the ford of a river (Gen 32 23 AVm); (2) the
pass of a mountain range (1 $ 13 23). In the
only other instance of the use of the shorter form
(Isa 80 32 m), AV renders ‘“‘where the grounded
staff shall pass.” A more correct tr would be, “and
every sweep [or stroke] of the appointed staff.”
The longer form bears both meanings, viz. ‘‘ford’’
(e.g. Josh 2 7; Jgs 3 28, etc) and ‘pass’ (158
14.4; Isa 10 29). In Josh 22 11, the rendering
‘towards the region opposite the children of Israel’
would be more correct than AV, “at the passage of
the children of Israel.” In EV of Nu 20 21 “pas-
sage’ seems to mean “Tight of way,” and renders
the infinitive of the Heb vb. In Jer 22 20 AV the
word rendered “passage” should be tr? “from
Abarim” (as in RV), a mountain range in Moab,
N.E. of the Dead Sea.

Passenger in AV means a “passer-by.” In Ezk
89 11.14.15 where the word occurs 4 t in AV, RV
translates ‘them that pass through.’ TT. Lewis


PASSING OF MARY, THE. Sce ApocrypHaL
GosPELs.


PASSION, pash’un, PASSIONS, pash’unz:
‘“‘Passion”’ is derived from Lat passte, which in turn


Passion, Gos. of
Passover


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2256


is derived from the vb. patior, with the v pat. The
Lat words are connected with the Gr y 7aé, path,
which appears in a large number of derivatives.
And in Gr, Lat, and Eng. (with other languages in
addition) words connected with this V pat, path,
are often susceptible of a great variety of meanings,
for which the dicts. must be consulted. For “pas-
sion,” however, as it appears in EV, only three of
these meanings need be considered. (1) Close to
what seems to be the primary force of the root is
the meaning “suffer,” and in this sense ‘‘passion”
ts used in Acts 1 3, “‘to whom he also showed him-
self alive after his passion.”’ This tr is a paraphrase
(Gr “after he had suffered’’), due to the Vulg (post
passtonem suam), and in Eng. is as old as Wycliff,
whom the subsequent EV has followed. This is the
only case in AV and RV where “passion” has this
meaning, and it can be so used in modern Eng. only
when referring (as here) to the sufferings of Christ
(cf “Passion play”). (2) “Suffering,” when applied
to the mind, came to denote the state that is con-
trolled by some emotion, and so “passion” was
applied to the emotion itself. This is the meaning
of the word in Acts 14 15, “men of like passions,”
and Jas 6 17, “a man of like passions,’’ Gr éuoo7a-
948, homotopathés; RVm “of like nature” gives
the meaning exactly: ‘‘men with the same emo-
tions as we.” (3) From “emotion” a transition
took place to ‘strong emotion,” and this is the
normal force of ‘passion’ in modern Eng. AV
does not use this meaning, but in RV “passion” in
this sense is the tr of wé#os, pdihos, in its three
occurrences: Rom 1 26 (AV “affection”’); Col 3
5 (AV “inordinate affection’); 1 Thess 4 5 (AV
“lust’’). It is used also for two occurrences of
réOnua, pdthéma (closely allied to pathos) in Rom
7 5 (AV “motions,” AVm “passions”) and in Gal
6 24 (AV “affection”). The fixing of the exact
force in any of these cases is a delicate problem fully
discussed in the comms. In Col 8 5 only does
“passion” stand as an isolated term. The context
here perhaps gives the word a slight sexual refer-
ence, but this must not be overstressed; the warning
probably includes any violent over-emotion that
robs a man of his self-control. See AFFECTION;
Motion. Burton Scorr Easton


PASSION, GOSPEL OF THE. Sce Apocry-
PHAL GOSPELS. ,


PASSOVER, pas’6-vér (MTD, pesah, from pasah,
“to pass” or “‘spring over” or “‘to spare” [Ex 12
13.23.27; cf Isa 31 5]. Other conjectures connect
the word with the “passing over” into a new year,
with Assyr paidéhu, meaning “‘to placate,” with
Heb pdsah, meaning “‘to dance,” and even with the
skipping motions of a young lamb; Aram. RUCB,
pasha’, whence Gr Idexa, Pdscha; whence Eng.
“paschal.” In early Christian centuries folk-
etymology connected pdscha with Gr pdsché, “to
suffer” [see Passion], and the word was taken to
refer to Good Friday rather than the Passover):

. Pesah and Maccoth
Pesah micrayim

. Pesah doroth

Maccéth

The ‘Omer

. Non-traditional Theories
The Higher Criticism

. Historical Celebrations:
. Historical Celebrations:
. The Jewish Passover


OT Times
NT Times


COONS R ONE


e


The Passover was the annual Heb festival_on the |


evening of the 14th day of the month of ’Abhibh
or Nisan, as it was called in later times. It was
followed by, and closely connected with, a 7 days’
festival of maceath, or unleavened bread, to which
the name Passover was also applied by extension


(Lev 23 5). Both were distinctly connected with
the Exodus, which, according to tradition, they
commemorate; the Passover being in


1. Pesah imitation of the last meal in Egypt,
and eaten in preparation for the journey,
Maccoth while Jeh, passing over the houses of


the Hebrews, was slaying the firstborn
of Egypt (Ex 12 12f; 13 2.12 ff); the maccath
festival being in memory of the first days of the
journey during which this bread of haste was eaten
(Ex 12 14-20).

The ordinance of pesah micrayim, the last meal
in Egypt, included the following provisions: (1)
the taking of a lamb, or kid without
blemish, for each household on the
10th of the month; (2) the killing of
the lamb on the 14th at even; (3) the
sprinkling of the blood on doorposts and lintels of
the houses in which it was to be eaten; (4) the
roasting of the lamb with fire, its head with its legs
and inwards—the lamb was not to be eaten raw
nor sodden (bdshal) with water; (5) the eating of
unleavened bread and bitter herbs; (6) eating in
haste, with loins girded, shoes on the feet, and staff
in hand; (7) and remaming in the house until the
morning; (8) the burning of all that remained; the
Passover could be eaten only during the night (Ex
12 1-23).

This service was to be observed as an ordinance
forever (Ex 12 14.24), and the night was to be lé
shimmitrim, “a night of vigils,” or, at
least, ‘‘to be much observed” of all the
children of Israel throughout their
generations (Ex 12 42). The details,
however, of the pesah dérath, or later observances
of the Passover, seem to have differed slightly from
those of the Egyp Passover (Mish, P*sdhim, ix.5).
Thus it is probable that the victim could be taken
from the flock or from the herd (Dt 16 2; ef Ezk 45
22). (3), (6) and (7) disappeared entirely, and
judging from Dt 16 7, the prohibition against
seething (Heb béshal) was not understood to apply
(unless, indeed, the omission of the expression ‘‘with
water” gives a more general sense to the Heb word
bashal, making it include roasting). New details
were also added: for example, that the Passover
could be sacrificed only at the central sanctuary
(Dt 16 5); that no alien or uncircumcised person,
or unclean person could partake thereof, and that
one prevented by uncleanness or other cause from
celebrating the Passover in season could do so a
month later (Nu 9 9 ff). The singing of the Hallel
(Pss 118-118), both while the Passover was being


2. Pesah
micrayim


3. Pesah
doroth


‘slaughtered and at the meal, and other details were


no coubt added from time to time.
Unleavened bread was eaten with the Passover
meal, just as with all sacrificial meals of later times
(Ex 23 18; 34 25; Lev 7 12), in-
4. Maccoth dependently perhaps of the fact that
the Passover came in such close prox-
imity with the Feast of Unleavened Bread (Ex 12
8). Jewish tradition distinguishes, at any rate,
between the first night and the rest of the festival
in that the eating of magcdth is an obligation on the
first night and optional during the rest of the week
(Psahim 120), although the eating of unleavened
bread is commanded in general terms (Ex 12 15.
18; 13 6.7; 23 15; 34 18; Lev 23 6; Nu 28 17).
The eating of leavened bread is strictly prohibited,
however, during the entire week under the penalty
of karéth, “excision” (Ex 12 15.19f; 183; Dt
16 3), and this prohibition has been observed tra-
ditionally with great care. The Ist and 7th days
are holy convocations, days on which no labor
could be done except such as was necessary in the,
preparation of food. The fcstival of magcath is
reckoned as one of the three pilgrimage festivals,


2257


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Passion, Gos. of
Passover


though strictly the pilgrimage wus connected with
the Passover portion and the first day of the festival.


During the entire weck additional sacrifices were
oifered in the temple: an offering made by fire and a
burnt offering, 2 young bullocks, 1 ram, 7 lambs of the
first year without blemish, togethcr with meal offerings
and drink offerings and a goat for a sin offering.


During the week of the magcath festival comes
the beginning of the barley harvest in Pal (Menahath
65b) which lasts from the end of March
5. The in the low Jordan valley to the begin-
‘Omer ning of May in the elevated portions.
The time of the putting-in of the sickle
to the standing corn (Dt 16 9) and of bringing
the sheaf of the peace offering is spoken of as the
morrow after the Sabbath (Lev 28 15), that is,
according to the Jewish tradition, the day after the
first day, or rest-day, of the Passover (M°nd. 65b;
M°g Ta‘an. 1; Jos, Ant, III, x, 5), and according
to Samaritan and Bocthusian traditions and the
modern ISarites the Sunday after the Passover. At
this time a wave offering is made of a sheaf, followed
by an offering of a lamb with a meal and drink
offering, and only thereafter might the new corn be
eaten. From this day 7 weeks are counted to fix
the date of Pentecost, the celebration connected
with the wheat harvest. It is of course perfectly
natural for an agricultural people to celebrate the
turning-points of the agricultural year in connection
with their traditional festivals. Indeed, the Jewish
liturgy of today retains in the Passover service the
Prayer of Dew (tal) which grew up in Pal on the
basis of the needs of an agricultural people.
Many writers, however, eager to explain the entire


festival as originally an agricultural feast (presumably
a Canaanitic one, though there is not a


6. Non- shred of evidence that the Canaanites
traditional had such a festival), have seized upon the

z ‘émer, or sheaf offering, as the basis of the
Theories hagh (festival), and have attempted to


explain the maccdth as bread hastily haked
in the busy harvest times, or as bread quickly baked
from the freshly exempted first-fruits. Wherein these
theories are superior to the traditional explanation so
consistently adhered to throughout the Pent it is diffi-
cult to see. In a similar vein, it has been attempted to
connect the Passover with the sacrifice or redemption of
the firstborn of man and beast (both institutions being
traditionally traced to the judgment on the firstborn
of Egypt, as in Ex 13 11-13; 22 29.30; 23 19: 34
19.20), so as to characterize the Passover as a festival
of pastoral origin. Excepting for the multiplication of
highly ingenious guesses, very little that is positive bas
been added to our knowledge of the Passover by this
theory.
The Pent speaks of the Passover in many contexts and
naturally with constantly varying emphasis. Thus in
the story of the Exodus it is natural to


7. The expect fewer ritual details than in a manual
Higher of temple services; again, according to

et z the view here taken, we must distinguish
Criticism —_—petween the pesah migrayim and the pesah


déroth. Neverthcless, great stress is laid
on the variations in the several accounts, hy certain
groups of critics, on the basis of which they seek to sup-
port their several theories of the composition of the
Pent or Hex. Without entering into this controversy,
it will be sufficient here to enumerate and classify all the
discrepancies said to exist in the several Passover passages,
together with such explanations as have been suggested.
These discrepancies, so called, are of three kinds: (1)
mere omissions, (2) differences of emphasis, and (3)
conflicting statements. The letters, J, E, D, P and H will
here be used to designate passages assigned to the various
sources by the higher criticism of today merely for the
sake of comparison. (1) There is nothing remarkable
about the omission of the daily sacrifices from all pas-
sages except Lev 23 8 (H) and Nu 28 19 (P), nor in
the omission of a specific reference to the holy convo-
cation on the first day in the contexts of Dt 16 8 and
Ex 18 6, nor even in the omission of reference to a cen-
tral sanctuary in passages other than Dt 16. Neither
can any significance be attached to the fact that the
precise day is not specified in Ex 23 (E) where the ap-
pointed day is spoken of, and in Lev 23 15 (H) where
the date can be figured out from the date of Pentecost
there given. (2) As to emphasis, it is said that the so-
called Elohist Covenant (E) (Ex 23) has no reference to
the Passover, as it speaks only of maccdth in ver 15,
in which this festival is spoken of together with the other


reghdlim or pilgrimage festivals. The so-called Jcho-
vistic source (J) (Ex 34 18-21.25) is said to subordinate
the Passover to maccath, the great feast. of the Jehovistic
history (JE) (Ex 12 21-27.29-36.38.39; 13 3-16); in
Dt (D) the Passover is said to predominate over mag¢ath,
while in Lev (P and H) itis said to be of first importance.
JE and _P emphasizo the historical importance of the
day. Whether these diffcrences in emphasis mean much
more than that the relative amount of attention paid
to the paschal sacrifice, as compared with mageath, de-
pends on the context, is of course the fundamental ques-
tion of the higher criticism; it is not answered by point-
ing out that the differences of emphasis exist.” (3) Of
the actual conflicts, we have already secn that the use of
the words ‘flock’ and “herd” in Dt and Heb bashal
are open to explanation, and also that the use of the
maccoth at the original Passover is not inconsistent with
the historical reason for the feast of maceath—it is not
necessary to aapL ee that maccdth were invented through
the necessity of the Hehrews on their journey. There
is, however, one apparent discrepancy in the Bib. narra-
tive that seems to weaken rather than help the position
of those critics who would ascribe very late dates to the
passages which we bave cited: Why does Ezekiel’s ideal
scheme provide sacrifices for the Passover different from
those prescribed in the so-called P ascribed to the same
period (Ezk 45 21)?


The children of Israel began the keeping of the
Passover in its due season according to all its ordi-
nances in the wilderness of Sinai (Nu


8. Histor- 9 5). In the very beginning of their
ical Cele- national life in Pal we find them cele-
brations: brating the Passover under the leader-
OT Times ship of Joshua in the plains of Jericho


(Josh 6 10). History records but few
later celebrations in Pal, but there are enough
intimations to indicate that it was frequently
if not regularly observed. Thus Solomon offered
sacrifices three times a year upon the altar which he
had built to Jeh, at the appointed seasons, including
the Feast of Unleavened Bread (1 K 9 25=2 Ch
8 13). The later prophets speak of appointed
seasons for pilgrimages and sacrifices (cf Isa 1 12-
14), and occasionally perhaps refer to a Passover
celebration (cf Isa 30 29, bearing in mind that the
Passover is the only night-feast of which we have
any record). In Hezekiah’s time the Passover had
fallen into such a state of desuetnde that neither
the priests nor the people were prepared for the
king’s urgent appeal to observe it. Nevertheless,
he was able to bring together a large concourse in
Jerus during the 2d month and institute a more
joyful observance than any other recorded since
the days of Solomon. In the 18th year of King
Josiah, however, there was celebrated the most
memorable Passover, presumably in the matter of
conformity to rule, since the days of the Judges
(2 K 28 21; 2 Ch 35 1ff). The continued ob-
servance of the feast to the days of the exile is
attested by Ezekiel’s interest in it (ézk 45 18).
In post-exilic times it was probably observed more
scrupulously than ever before (Ezr 6 19 ff).

Further evidence, if any were needed, of the
importance of the Passover in the life of the Jews
of the second temple is found in the


9. Histor- Talm, which devotes to this subject
ical Cele- an entire tractate, P’sahim, on which
brations: we have both Bab and Pal g°mérd’.
NT Times These are devoted to the sacrificial


side and to the minutiae of searching
out and destroying leaven, what constitutes leaven,
and similar questions, instruction in which the
children of Israel songht for 30 days before the
Passover. Jos speaks of the festival often (Ant, II,
xiv, 6; III, x, 5; LX, iv, 8; XIV, ii, 2; XVII, ix,
3; BJ,U1,i,3; V,iii, 1; V1,ix,3). Besides repeat-
ing the details already explained in the Bible, he
tells of the innumerable multitudes that came for
the Passover to Jerns out of the country and even
from beyond its limits. He estimates that in one
year in the days of Cestius, 256,500 lambs were
slanghtered and that at least 10 men were counted to
each. (This estimate of course includes the regular


Passover
Pastoral Epistles


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2258


population of Jerus. But even then it is doubtless
exaggerated.) The NT bears testimony, likewise, to
the coming of great multitudes to Jerus (Jn 11 55;
ef also 2 13; 6 4). At this great festival even the
Rom officers released prisoners in recognition of
the people’s celebration. Travel and other ordinary
pursuits were no doubt suspended (cf Acts 12 3;
20 6). Naturally the details were impressed on
the minds of the people and lent themselves to
symbolic and homiletic purposes (cf 1 Cor 5 7;
Jn 19 34-36, where the paschal lamb is made to
typify Jesus; and He 11 28). The best-known
instance of such symbolic use is the institution of
the Eucharist on the basis of the paschal meal.
Some doubt exists as to whether the Last Supper
was the paschal meal or not. According to the
Synoptic Gospels, it was (Lk 22 7; Mt 26 17;
Mk 14 12); while according to John, the Passover
was to be eaten some time following the Last
Supper (Jn 18 28). Various harmonizations of
these passages have been suggested, the most in-
genious, probably, being on the theory that when
the Passover fell on Friday night, the Pharisees
ate the meal on Thursday and the Sadducees on
Friday, and that Jesus followed the custom of the
Pharisees (Chwolson, Das letzte Passahmal Jesu,
2d ed, St. Petersburg, 1904). Up to the Nicene
Council in the year 325, the church observed Easter
on the Jewish Passover. Thereafter it took pre-
cautions to separate the two, condemning thcir

confusion as Arianism.
After the destruction of the temple the Passover
became a home service. The paschal lamb was no
longer included. Only the Samaritans


10. The have continued this rite to this day.
Jewish In the Jewish home a roasted bone is
Passover placed on the table in memory of the


rite, and other articles symbolic of the
Passover are placed beside it: such as a roasted
egg, said to be in memory of the free-will offering;
a sauce called Adrdseth, said to resemble the mortar
of Egypt; salt water, for the symbolic dipping (cf
Mt 26 23); the bitter herbs and the maccoth. The
sédher (program) is as follows: sanctification; wash~-
ing of the hands; dipping and dividing the parsley;
breaking and setting aside a piece of mag¢ah to be
distributed and eaten at the end of the supper;
reading of the haggadhah shel pesah, a poetic narra~
tive of the Exodus, in answer to four questions
asked by the youngest child in compliance with
the Bib. command found 3 ft in Ex and once in
Dt, “Thou shalt tell thy son on that day’; wash-
ing the hands for eating; grace before eating; tast-
ing the magcdh; tasting the bitter herbs; eating
of them together; the meal; partaking of the
maccah that had been set aside as ’éphikdmen or
dessert; grace after meat; Hallel; request that
the service be accepted. Thereafter folk-songs
are sung to traditional melodies, and poems recited,
many of which have allegorical meanings. A cup
of wine is used at the sanctification and another at
grace, in addition to which two other cups have
been added, the 4 according to the Mish (P*sahim
x.1) symbolizing the 4 words employed in Ex 6 6.7
for the delivery of Israel from Egypt. Instead of
eating in haste, as in the Egyp Passover, it is cus~
tomary to recline or lean at this meal in token of
Israel’s freedom. ‘ k
The prohibition against leaven is strictly ob-
served. ‘The searching for hidden leaven on the
evening before the Passover and its destruction
in the morning have become formal ceremonies
for which appropriate blessings and declarations
have been included in the liturgy since the days
when Aram. was the vernacular of the Jews. As
in the case of other festivals, the Jews have doubled
the days of holy convocation, and have added a


—


semi-holiday after the last day, the so-called ’issur
hagh, in token of their love for the ordained cele-
bration and their loathness to depart from it.
, NatuHan Isaacs

PASTOR, pas’tér (TP, ré'eh; wourqv, poimén;
lit. a helper, or feeder of the sheep [AV Jer 2 8;
3 15; 10 21; 12 10; 17 16; 22 22; 23 1.2, and
in Eph 4 11, AV and RV]): Besides the literal sense
the word has now a figurative meaning and refers
to the minister appointed over a congregation.
This latter meaning is recognized in the tr of AV.
See Ministry.


PASTORAL, pas’tor-al, EPISTLES, THE:


I. GENUINENESS
1. External Evidence
2. Gennineness Questiened
Tf. Apieeep DirricuLties aGAInsT PauLinE AUTHOR- _
SHIP
1. Relative to Paul's Experiences
(1) Data in 1 Tim
2 Data in 2 Tim
(3) Data in Tit
2. Subject-Matter Pest-Pauline :
(1) Difficulty Regarding Church Organization
(2) The Dectrinal Difficulty
3. Difficulty Relative te Language
4. The Christianity ef the Epistles Not Paul's
Ill. Dats anp OrpDER
1. Date of the Epistles
2. Their Order
Literature

The First and Second Epp. to Tim, and the
Ep. to Tit form a distinct group among the letters
written by Paul, and are now known as the Pastoral
Epp. because they were addressed to two Christian
ministers. When Timothy and Titus received these
epp. they were not acting, as they had previously
done, as missionaries or itinerant evangelists, but
had been left by Paul in charge of churches; the
former having the oversight of the church in
Ephesus, and the latter having the care of the
churches in the island of Crete. The Pastoral Epp.
were written to guide them in the discharge of the
duties devolving upon them as Christian pastors.
Such is a general description of these epp. In
each of them, however, there is a great deal more
than is covered or implied by the designation, ‘“Pas-
toral”—much that is personal, and much also that
is concerned with Christian faith and doctrine and
practice generally.

I, Genuineness.—In regard to the genuineness of
the epp. there is abundant external attestation.

Allusions to them are found in the
1. External writings of Clement and Polycarp. In
Evidence the middle of the 2d cent. the epp. were

recognized as Pauline in authorship,
and were freely quoted.

““Marcien indeed rejected them, and Tatian is snp-
posed to have rejected these to Timothy. But,as Jerome
states in the preface to his Comm. on Tit, these heretics
rejected the opp not. on critical grounds, but merely
because they disliked their teaching. He says they used
no argument, but merely asserted, This is Paul's, This is
not Paul's. It is ebvious that men holding such opinions
as Marcion and Tatian held, would not willingly ascribe
authority to epp. which cendemned asceticism. Se
far, then, as the early church can guarantee to us the
authenticity of writings ascribed to Paul, the Pastoral
Epp. are guaranteed"’ (Marcus Deds, Iniro to the NT, 167).


_ The external evidence is all in favor of the recep-
tion of these epp., which were known not only to
Clement and Polycarp, but_also to Irenacus, Ter-
tullian, the author of the Ep. to the churches of
Vienne and Lyons, and Theophilus of Antioch.
The evidence of Polycarp, who died in 167 AD, is
remarkably strong. He says, ‘The love of money is
the beginning of all trouble, knowing... . that
we brought nothing into the world, neither can
carry anything out” (cf 1 Tim 6 7.10). It would
be difficult to overthrow testimony of this nature.


The decision of certain critics to reject the Pastoral
Epp. as decuments not from the hand of Paul, ‘is not


2259


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Passover
Pastoral Epistles


reached on the external evidence, which is perhaps as
early an attestation as can be reasonably expected. They
are included in the Muratorian Canon, and
2. Genuine- quoted by Irenaeus and later writers as
ness Paul's" (A, 8. Peake, A Critical Intro to
A the NT, 60). This admission ls satis-
Questioned factory. In recent times, however, the
A authenticity of these epp. has been called
in question by Schmidt, Schlelermacher, Baur, Renan,
and many others. Baur asserted that they were written
for the purpese of combating the Gnosticism of the 2d
cent., and of defending the church from it by means of
ecclesiastical organization, and that the date of their
composition was about the year 150 AD.

il, Alleged Difficulties against Pauline Author-
ship.— Various difficultics have been alleged against
the reception of the Pastoral Epp. as Pauline. The
chicf of these are: (1) the difficulty of finding
any place for these letters in the life of Paul, as
that is recorded in the Acts and in the Pauline
Epp. written before the Pastorals; (2) the fact that
there are said to be in them indications of an eccle-
siastical organization, and of a development of doc-
trine, both orthodox and heretical, considerably in
advance of the Pauline age; (3) that the language
of the epp. is, to a large extent, different from that
in the accepted epp.; (4) the “most decisive’’ of all
the arguments against the Pauline authorship—
so writes Dr. A. C. McGiffert (A History of Chris-
tianity in the Apostolic Age, 402)—is that_“the
Christianity of the Pastoral Epp. is not the Chris-
tianity of Paul.”

Where can a place be found for these epp., in the
life of Paul? The indications of the date of their

composition given in the epp. them-
1. Relative selves are these.
to Paul’s (1) Data in 1 Tim.—In 1 Tim 1 3
Experiences Paul had gone from Ephesus to Mace-

donia, and had left Timothy in Ephesus
in charge of the church there. In the Acts and in
the previously written Pauline epp., it is impossible
to find such events or such a state of matters as will
satisfy these requirements. Paul had previously
been in Ephesus, on several occasions. His 1st
visit to that city is recorded in Acts 18 19-21. On
that occasion he went from Ephesus, not into Mace-
donia, but into Syria. His 2d visit was his 3
years’ residence in Ephesus, as narrated in Acts
19; and when he left the city, he had, previous to
his own departure from it, already sent Timothy
into Macedonia (19 22)—a state of matters exactly
the reverse of that described in 1 Tim 1 3. Tim-
othy soon rejoined Paul, and so far was he from being
left in Ephesus then, that he was in Paul’s company
on the remainder of his journey toward Jerus (Acts
204;2Cor11). | ; p :

No place therefore in Paul’s life, previous to his
arrest in Jerus, and his first Rom imprisonment, can
be found, which satisfies the requirements of the
situation described in 1 Tim 13. “It isimpossible,
unless we assume a second Rom imprisonment, to
reconcile the various historical notices which the
ep. (2 Tim] contains” (McGiffert, op. cit., 407).

In addition to this, the language used by the
apostle at Miletus, when he addressed the elders of
the Ephesian church (Acts 20 30) about the men
speaking perverse things, who should arise among
them, showed that these false. teachers had not
made their appearance at that time. There is, for
this reason alone, no place for the Pastoral Epp. in
Paul’s life, previous to his arrest in Jerus. But
Paul’s life did not end at the termination of his first
Rom imprisonment; and this one fact gives ample
room to satisfy all the conditions, as these are found
in the three Pastorals. , .

Those who deny the Pauline authorship of these
epp. also deny that he was released from what, in
this article, is termed his 1st Rom imprisonment.
But a denial of this latter statement is an assumption
quite unwarranted and unproved. It assumes that


Paul was not set free, simply because there is no
record of this in the Acts. But the Acts is, on the
very face of it, an incomplete or uufinished record;
that is, it brings the narrative to a certain point, and
then breaks off, evidently for the reason which Sir
W. M. Ramsay demonstrates, that Luke meant
to write a scquel to that book—a purpose, however,
which he was unable, owing to some cause now un-
known, to carry into execution. The purpose of
the Acts, as Ramsay shows (St. Paul the Traveller
and the Rom Citizen, 23, 308), is to lead up to the
release of Paul, and to show that the Christian faith
was not a forbidden or illegal religion, but that the
formal impeachment of the apostle before the su-
preme court of the empire ended in his being set at
liberty, and thus there was established the fact that
the faith of Jesus Christ was not, at that time, con-
trary to Rom law. “The Pauline authorship

... can be maintained only on the basis of a
hypothetical reconstruction, either of an entire
period subsequent to the Rom imprisonment, or of
the events within some period known to us’’ (Mc-
Giffert, op. cit., 410). The one fact that Paul was
set free after his Ist Rom imprisonment gives the
environment which fits exactly all the requirements
of the Pastoral Epp.

Attention should be directed to the facts and to
the conclusion stated in the art. PRAETORIUM (q.v.),
Mommseen having shown that the words, ‘“My bonds
became manifest in Christ throughout the whole
pretorian guard” (Phil 1 13), mean that at the
time when Pau] wrote the Ep. to the Phil, the case
against him had already come before the supreme
court of appeal in Rome, that it had been partly
heard, and that the impression made by the pris-
oner’ upon his judges was so favorable, that he
expected soon to be set free.

The indications to be drawn from other expres-
sions in three of the epp. of the Rom captivity—
Phil, Col and Philem—are to the same effect.
Thus, writing to the Philippians, he says that he
hopes to send Timothy to them, so soon as he sces
how matters go with him, and that he trusts in the
Lord that he himself will visit them shortly. And
again, writing to his friend Philemon in the city of
Colossae, he asks him to prepare him a lodging, for
he trusts that through the prayers of the Colossians,
he will be granted to them.

These anticipations of acquittal and of departure
from Rome are remarkable, and do not in any degree
coincide with the idea that Paul was not set free
but was condemned and put to death at that time.
“It is obvious that the importance of the trial is
intelligible only if Paul was acquitted. That he
was acquitted follows from the Pastoral Epp. with
certainty for all who admit their genuineness; while
even they who deny their Pauline origin must allow
that they imply an early belicf in historical details
which are not consistent with Paul’s journeys before
his trial, and must either be pure inventions or
events that occurred on later Journeys. .... lf
he was acquittcd, the issue of the trial was a formal
decision by the supreme court of the empire that
it was permissible to preach Christianity; the trial,
therefore, was really a charter of religious liberty,
and therein lies its immense importance. It was
indeed overturned by later decisions of the supreme
court; but its existence was a highly important
fact for the Christians’ (Ramsay, op. cit., 308).
“That he was acquitted is demanded both by the
plan evident in Acts and by other reasons well
stated by others” (ib, 360).

It should also be observed that there is the direct
and corroborative evidence of Paul’s release, afforded
by such writers as Cyril of Jerus, Ephrem Syr.,
Chrysostom and Theodoret, all of whom speak of
Paul's going to Spain. Jerome (Vir. Jil., 5) gives it as


Pastoral Epistles THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2260


amatter of personal knowledge that Paul traveled
as faras Spain. But there is more important cvi-
dence still. In the Muratorian Canon, |. 37, there
are the words, ‘“‘profectionem Pauli ab urbe ad
Spaniam proficiscentis” (‘the journey of Paul as he
journeyed from Rome to Spain’’). Clement also in
the ep. from the church in Rome to the church in
Corinth, which was written not Jater than the year
96 AD, says in reference to Paul, ‘Having taught
righteousness to the whole world, and having gone
to the extremity of the west [epi t6 térma tés diiseds
elthén] and having borne witness before the rulers, so
was he released from the world and went to the holy
place, being the greatest example of endurance.”
The words, “having gone to the extremity of the
west,’’ should be specially noticed. Clement was
in Rome when he wrote this, and, accordingly, the
natural import of the words is that Panl went to
the limit of the western half of the then known world,
or in other words, to the western boundary of the
lands bordering the Mediterranean, that is, to
Spain.

Now Paul never had been in Spain previous to
his arrest in Jerus, but in Rom 15 24.28 he had
twice expressed his intention to go there. These
independent testimonies, of Clement and of the
Muratorian Canon, of the fact that after Paul’s
arrest in Jerus he did carry into execution his pur-
pose to visit Spain, are entitled to great weight.
They involve, of course, the fact that he was ac-
quitted after his Ist Rom imprisonment.

Having been set free, Paul could not do other-
wise than send Timothy to Philippi, and himself
also go there, as he had already promised when he
wrote to the Philippian church (Phil 2 19.24).
As a matter of course he would also resume his
apostolic journeys for the purpose of proclaiming
the gospel. There is now ample room in his lif2
for the Pastoral Epp., and they give most interest-
ing details of hisfurther labors. The historical and
geographical requirements in 1 Tim are, in this way,
easily satisfied. It was no great distance to Ephe-
sus from Philippi and Colossae, where he had prom-
ised that he would ‘come shortly.”

(2) Data in 2 Tim.—The requirements in 2 Tim
are (a) that Paul had recently been at Troas, at
Corinth, and at Miletus, each of which he men-
tions (2 Tim 4 13.20); (6) that when he wrote
the epp. he was in Rome (1 17); (c) that he was
a prisoner for the cause of the gospel (1 8; 2 9),
and had once already appeared before the emperor's
shpreme court (4 16.17); (d) that he had then
escaped condemnation, but that he had reason to
believe that on the next hearing of his case the
verdict would be given against him, and that he
expected it could not be long till execution took
place (4 6); (e) that he hoped that Timothy
would be able to come from Ephesus to see him
at Rome before the end (4 9.21). These require-
ments cannot be made to agree or coincide with
the first Rom captivity, but they do agree per-
fectly with the facts of the apostle’s release and his
subsequent second imprisonment in that city.

(3) Data in Tit—The data given in the Ep. to
Tit are (a) that Paul had been in Crete, and that
Titus had been with him there, and had been left
behind in that island, when Paul sailed from its
shores, Titus being charged with the oversight of the
churches there (Tit 1 5); and (6) that Paul meant
to spend the next winter at Nicopolis (3 12). It is
simply impossible to locate these events in the
recorded life of Paul, as that is found in the other
epp., and in the Acts. But they agree perfectly
with his liberation after his first Rom imprisonment.
“As there is then no historical evidence that Paul
did not survive the year 64, and as these Pastoral
Epp. were recognized as Pauline in the immediately


succeeding age, we may Icgitimately accept them
us evidence that Paul did survive the year 64— that
he was acquitted, resumed his missionary labors,
was again arrested and bronght to Rome, and from
this second imprisonment wrote the Second Ep.
to Tim—his last extant writing’? (Dods, Intro to
the NT, 172).
The second difficulty alleged against the accept-
ance of these epp. as Pauline is that there are said
to exist in them indications of an
2. Subject- ecclesiastical organization and of a


Matter doctrinal development, both orthodox
Post- and heretical, considerably later than
Pauline those of the Pauline age.


(1) The first statement, that the
epp. imply an ecclesiastical organization in advance
of the time when Paul lived, is one which cannot be
maintained in view of the facts disclosed in the epp.
themselves. For directions are given to Timothy
and to Titus in regard to the mora] and other char-
acteristics necessary in those who are to be ordained
as bishops, elders, and deacons. In the 2d cent.
the outstanding feature of ecclesiastical organiza-
tion was the development ef monarchical episco-
pacy, but the Pastoral Epp. show a presbyterial ad-
ministration. The office held by Timothy in
Ephesus and by Titus in Crete was, as the epp.
themselves show, of a temporary character. The
directions which Paul gives to Timothy and Titus
in regard to the ordaining of presbyters in every
church are in agreement with similar notices found
elsewhere in the NT, and do not coincide with the
state of church organization as that existed in the
2d cent., the period when, objectors to the genuine-
ness of the epp. assert, they were composed.
“Everyone acquainted with ancient literature,
particularly the literature of the ancient church,
knows that a forger or fabricator of those times
could not possibly have avoided anachronisms”
(Zahn, Intro to the NT, II, 93). But the ecelesi-
astical arrangements in the Pastoral Epp. coincide
in all points with the state of matters as it is found
in the church in the time of the apostles, as that is
described in the Acts and elsewhere in the NT.

It seems an error to suppose, as has often been
done, that these epp. contain the germ of monarchi-
cal episcopacy; for the Christian church had already,
from the day of Pentecost, existed as a society with
special officers for the functions of extension, dis-
cipline and administration. The church in the
Pastoral Epp. is a visible society, as it always was.
Its organization therefore had come to be of the
greatest importance, and esp. so in the matter of
maintaining and handing down the true faith; the
church accordingly is described as “the pillar and
stay of the truth’ (1 Tim 3 15m), that is, the
immovable depository of the Divine revelation.

(2) The other statement, that the epp. show a
doctrinal development out of harmony with the
Pauline age is best viewed by an examination of
what the epp. actually say.

In 1 Tim 6 20, Paul speaks of profane and vain
babblings and oppositions of gnésis (RV “know]-
edge,” AV “science’’) falsely so called. In Tit 3
9, he tells Titus to avoid foolish questions and gene-
alogies and contentions and strivings about the
law. These phrases have been held to be allusions
to the tenets of Marcion, and to those of some of
the gnostic sects. There are also other expressions,
such as fables and endless genealogies (1 Tim 1
3.4; 6 3), words to no profit but the subverting of
the hearer (2 Tim 2 14), foolish and unlearned
questions which do gender strifes (2 Tim 2 23),
questions and strifes of words (1 Tim 6 4.5), dis-
cussions which lead to nothing but word-battles and
profane babbling. Such are the expressions which
Paul uses. These, taken with what is even more


2261


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Pastoral Epistles


clearly stated in the Ep. to the Col, certainly point
to an incipient Gnosticism. But had the writer
of the Pastoral Epp. been combating the Gnosticism
of the 2d cent., it would not have been phrases like
these that he would have employed, but others
much more definite. Godet, quoted by Dods
(Intro, 175), writes, ‘The danger here is of substi-
tuting intellectualism in religion for piety of heart
and life. Had the writer been a Christian of the 2d
eent., trying, under the name of Paul, to stigmatize
the gnostic systems, he would certainly have used
much stronger expressions to describe their character
and influence.”

It should be observed that the false teachers
described in 2 Tim 3 6-9.13, as well as in other
places in these epp., were persons who taught that
the Mosaic Law was binding upon all Christians.
They laid stress upon rabbinic myths, upon inves-
tigations and disputations about genealogies and
specific legal requirements of the OT. What they
taught was a form of piously sounding doctrine
assuming to be Christian, but which was really
rabbinism.


“For a pseudo-Paul in the pe poe age—when
Christians of Jewish hirth had hecome more and more
exceptions in the gentile Christian church—to have in-
vented a description of and vigorously to have opposed
the heterodiddskaloi, who did not exist in his own age, and
who were without parallel in the earlier epp. of Paul,
would have been to expose himself to ridicule without
apparent purpose or meaning’ (Zahn, Intro, II, 117).
“A comparison of the statements in these epp. about
various kinds of false dectrine, and of those pertions of
the same that deal with the organization and officers
of the church, with conditions actually existing in the
church, esp. the church of Asia Miner, at the heginning
and during the course of the 2d cent., proves, just as
clearly as does the external evidence, that they must
have heen written at latest before the year 100. But
they could not have been written during the first two
decades after Paul’s death, because of the character of
the references to persons, facts and conditions in Paul's
lifetime and his own persenal history, and hecause of the
Impossihility on this assumption of discovering a plausi-
ble motive fer their forgery. Consequently the claim
that they are post-Pauline, and contain matter which
is un-Pauline, is to he treated with the greatest sus-
picion”’ (Zahn, op. cit., IT, 118). | °
The third aumeoley ouemed against the Pauline author-
ship of the Pastoral Epp. is connected with the language
employed, which is said to he, to a large
3. Difficulty extent, different from that in the accepted


epp. The facts in regard to this matter
Connected are that in 1 Tim there are 82 words not
with the feund elsewhere in the NT; in 2 Tim there


are 53 such words, and in Tit there are
Language 33. “But, while the tetal of such words in
the three epp. is 168, this number, large
though it appears, may he compared with the words used
only once in the other Epp. of Paul. In Rom, 1 Cor,2 Cor,
Gal, Eph, Phil, Col, 1 Thess, 2 Thess and Philem, the
words of this description are 627 in number. So nothing
can be built upon the fact of the 168 peculiar words in
the Pastoral Epp., that can safely he alleged as proof
against their Pauline authership. The special subjects
treated in these epp. required adequate language, a re-
quirement and a claim which would not be refused in the
case of any ordinary author. | le
The ohjections to the Pauline authorship of the Pas-
torals, hased_upon the dissimilarity of diction in them
and in Eph, Phil and Col, cease to exist when the theory
is no longer persisted in, that the nucleus of the Pastoral
Epp. was composed during the Rom imprisonment,
which, according to this theory ended, not in the apostle’s
release, but in his execution. The fact that he was
writing to intimate and beloved friends, beth on personal
matters and on the subject of church organization, and
on that of incipient Gnosticism, which was troubling
the churches of Asia Minor, made it essential that he
should, to a large extent, use a different vocahulary.


The “most decisive” of all the arguments against
the Pauline authorship is that “the Christianity of
the Pastoral Epp. is not the Chris-

4. Is There tianity of Paul” (McGiffert, A History
“Another of Christianity, 402). ‘For the most
Gospel” in part,” Dr. McGiffert writes, “there
the Pas- is no trace whatever of the great
torals? fundamental truth of Paul’s gospel—
death unto the flesh and life in the


Spirit.” Now this is not so, for the passages which


Dr. McGiffert himself gives in a footuote (2 Tim
1 9-11; 2 11 ff; Tit 3 4-7), as well as other
references, do most certainly refer to this very
aspect of the gospel. For example, the passage in
2 Tim 2 contains these words, “If we died with
him [Christ], we shall also live with him.” Whatis
this but the great truth of the union of the Christian
believer with Christ? The believer is one with
Christ in His death, one with Him now as He lives
aud reigns. The objection, therefore, which is
“most decisive of all,’ is one which is not true in
point of fact. Dr. MeGiffert also charges the author
of the Pastoral Epp. as being “one who understood
by resurrection nothing else than the resurrection
of the fleshly body’ (p. 4380). The body of Our
Lord was raised from the dead, but how very unjust
this accusation is, is evident from such a passage
as 1 Tim 3 16, “And without controversy great is
the mystery of godliness;

He who was manifested in the flesh,

Justified in the Spirit,

Seen of angels,

Preached among the nations,

Believed ou in the world,

Received up in glory.”

Charges of this nature are unsupported by evi-
dence, aud are of the kind on which Dr. A. 8. Peake
(A Critical Intro to the NT, 71) bases his rejection
of the Pauline authorship—except for a Pauline
nucleus—that he ‘feels clear.’ More than an ipse
dixit of this sort is needed.

The theory that the Pastoral Epp. are based upou
genuine letters or notes of Paul to Timothy and
Titus is thus advocated by Peake, McGiffert,
Moffatt and many others. It bears very hard upon
1 Tim. “tn 1 Tim not a single verse can be indi-
cated which clearly bears the stamp of Pauline
origin” (Peake, op. cit., 70). ‘‘We may fairly con-
clude then in agreement with many modern scholars
that we have here, in the Pastoral Epp., authentic
letters of Paul to Timothy and Titus, worked over
and enlarged by another hand” (McGiffert, op. cit.,
405). In regard to 1 Tim he writes, “It is very
likely that there are scattered fragments of the origi-
nal ep. in 1 Tim, as for instance in ver 23. But it
is difficult to find anything which we can be con-
fident was written by Paul’ (p. 407).

Dr. McGiffert also alleges that in the Pastoral
Epp., the word “faith” “is not employed in its pro-
found Pauline sense, but is used to signify one of
the cardinal virtues, along with love, peace, purity,
righteousness, sanctification, patience and meek-
ness.” One of the Pauline epp., with which he
contrasts the Pastorals, is the Ep. to the Gal; and
the groundlessness of this charge is evident from
Gal 5 22, where “faith” is included in the list there
given of the fruit of the Spirit, along with love, joy,
peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, meek-
ness and self-control.


If the Pastoral EE. are the work of Paul, then, Dr.
McGiffert concludes, Paul had given up that form of the
gospel which he had held and taught throughout his life,
and descended from the lofty religious plane upen which
he had always meved, to the level of mere piety and
morality (op. cit., 404). But this charge is not just or
reasonable, in view of the fact that the apostle is in-
structing Timethy and Titus how to combat the views
and practices of immoral teachers. Or again, in such
a passage as 1 Tim 1 12-17 AV, the author of the ep.
has not descended from the lofty plane of faith to that of
mere piety and morality, when he writes, ‘The grace of
our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and love
which is in Christ Jesus. This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners; of whem I am chief.”

If such he the ‘'most decisive” objection against the
Pauline authorship, the other difficulties, as already seen,
need not cause alarm, for they resolve themselves inte
the equally groundless charges that the historical require-
ments of the epp. cannot be fitted into any part of Paul's
life, and that the doctrine and ecclesiastical organization


Pastoral Epistles
Patmos


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2262


do not suit the Apostolic age. These objections have


been already referred to.

The real difficulty, writes Dr. Peake (A Critical Intro,
68), is that ‘‘the old energy of thought and expression is
gone, and the greater smoothness and continuity in the
grammar is a poor compensation for the lack of grip and
of continuity in the thought." Dr. Peake well and truly
says that this statement does not admit of detailed proof.
Lack of grip and lack of continuity of thought are not
the characteristics of such passages as 1 Tim 1 9-17, a
passage which will bear comparison with anything in the
acknowledged Pauline Epp.; and there are many other
similar passages, e.g. Tit 2 11—8 7.

What must be said of the dulness of the intelli-
gence of Christian men and of the Christian church
as a whole, if they could thus let themselves be im-
posed upon by epp. which purported to be Paul’s,
but which were not written by him at all, but were
the enlargement of a Pauline nucleus? Can it be be-
heved that the ehurch of the 2d cent., the ehurch of
the martyrs, was in such a state of mental decrepi-
tude as to receive epp. which were spurious, so far
as the greater portion of their contents is coneerned?
And ean it be believed that this idea, so recently
originated and so destitute of proof, is an adequate
explanation of epp. which have been received as
Pauline from the earliest times?

When placed side by side with sub-apostolic
writings like the Didache, Clem. Rom., Polyearp
and Ignatius, “it is difficult to resist the idea whieh
returns upon one with almost every sentence that
.... the Pastorals are astonishingly superior’
(Moffatt, The Historical NT, 556). Godet, quoted
by R. D. Shaw (The Pauline Epp., 441), writes,
“When one has had enough of the pious amplifica~
tions of Clement of Rome, of the ridiculous inanities
of Barnabas, of the general oddities of Ignatius, of
the well-meant commonplaces of Polycarp, of the
intolerable verbiage of Hermas, and of the nameless
platitudes of the Didache, and, after this promenade
in the first decade of the 2d eent., reverts to our
Pastoral Epp., one will measure the distance that
separates the least striking products of the apostolic
literature from what has been preserved to us as
most eminent in the ancient patristic literature.”

In the case of some modern critics, the interpo-
lation hypothesis “‘is their first and last appeal, the
easy solution of any difficulty that presents itself
to their imaginations. Each writer feels free to
give the kaleidoscope a fresh turn, and then reeords
with blissful confidenee what are called the latest
results... .. The whole method postulates that
a writer must always preserve the same dull mono-
tone or always confine himself to the same transcen-
dental heights. . . . . He must. see and say every-
thing at once; having had his vision and his dream,
he must henceforth be like a star and dwell apart.
.... To be stereotyped is his only salvation.
.... On such priueiples there is not a writer of
note, and there never has been a man in public life,
or a student in the stream of a progressive seience,
large parts of whose sayings and doings could not
be proved to be by some one else” (Shaw, The Paul-
ine Epp., 483).

HII, Date and Order.—In regard to the date of
these epp., external and internal evidenee alike go

to show that they belong to practically
1. Date of the same period. The dates of their
the Epistles composition are separated from each

other by not more than three or four
years; and the dates of each and all of them must
be close to the Neronic persecution (64 AD). If
Paul was executed 67 AD (see Ramsay, Si. Paul,
396), there is only a short interval of time between
his release in 61 or 62, and his death in 67, that is
a period of some 5 or 6 years, during which his later
travels took place, and when the Pastoral Epp. were
written. ‘Between the three letters there is an
affinity of language, a similarity of thought, and a
likeness of errors combatcd, which prevents our


referring any of them to a period mueh earlier than
the others” (Zahn, Intro, II, 37).

The order in which they were written must have
been 1 Tim, Tit, 2 Tim. It is universally acknowl-
edged that 2 Tim is the very last of
Paul's extant epp., and the internal
evidence of the other two seems to
point out 1 Tim as earlier than Tit.

To sum up, the evidence of the early reception of
the Pastoral Epp. as Pauline is very strong. “The
eonfident denial of the genuineness of these letters—
which has been made now for several generations
more positively than in the case of any other Paul-
ine epp.—has no support from tradition. ....
Traces of their circulation in the church before Mar-
cion’s time are clearer than those which can be found
for Rom and 2 Cor’ (Zahn, op. cit., II, 85). The
internal evidence shows that all three are from the
hand of one and the same writer, a writer who makes
many personal allusions of a nature which it would
be impossible for a forger to invent. It is generally
allowed that the personal passages in 2 Tim 1 15-
18; 4 9-22 are genuine. But if this is so, then it
is not possible to cut and carve the epp. into frag-
ments of this kind. Objections dating only a cen-
tury back are all too feeble to overturn the consistent
marks of Pauline authorship found in all three epp.,
corroborated as this is by their reception in the
eburch, dating from the very earliest period. The
Pastoral Epp. may be used with the utmost con-
pene, as having genuinely come from the hand of

aul.


Lirerature.—R, D. Shaw, The Pauline Epp.; A. 9.
Peake, A Critical Intro to the NT; A. C. McGiffert, A
History of Christianity in the Apostolic Age; Theodor
Zabn, An Intro to the NT; Mareus Dods, Intro to the
NT; Weiss, Einlettung in das NT (ET); C. J. Ellicott,
A Critical and Grammatical Comm. on the Pastoral Epp.;
Patrick Fairbairn, The Pastoral Epp.; John Ed. Huther,
Critical and Exegetical Handbook of the Epp. of St. Paul
to Timothy and Titus; George Salmon, A Historical
Intro to the Study of the Books of the NT; James Moffatt,
The Historical NT; Intro to the Lit. of the NT; Adolf
Jiilicher, An Intro to the NT; Caspar René Gregory,
Canon and Text of the NT.

The ‘‘lives’’ of Paul may also be consulted, as_they
contain much that refers to these epp., i.e. those by Cony-
heare and Howson, Lewin, Farrar and others. See also
Ramsay's St. Paul the Traveller and the Rom Citizen.


JoHN RUTHERFURD
PASTURAGE, pas’tir-aj, PASTURE, pas’tir.
See SHEEP-TENDING.


PATARA, pat’a-ra (rd TIdrapa, id Pdtara): A
coast city of ancient Lycia, from which, according
to Acts 21 1, Paul took a ship for Phoenicia.
Because of its excellent harbor, many of the coast
trading ships stopped at Patara, which therefore
beeame an important and wealthy port of entry to
the towns of the interior. As early as 440 BC auton-
omous coins were struck there; during the 4th
and the 3d cents. the coinage was interrupted, but
was again resumed in 168 BC when Patara joined
the Lyeian league. Ptolemy Philadelphus enlarged
the city, and ehanged its name to Arsinoé in honor
of his wife. The city was celebrated not only as a
trading center, but esp. for its celebrated oracle of
Apollo which is said to have spoken only during the
six winter months of the year. Among the ruins
there is still to be seen a deep pit with circular steps
leading to a seat at the bottom; it is supposed that
the pit is the place of the oracle. In the history of
early Christianity, Patara took but little part, but
it was the home of a bishop, and the birthplace of
St. Nicholas, the patron saint of the sailors of the
E. Though born at Patara, St. Nicholas was a
bishop and saint of Myra, a neighboring Lycian
city, and there he is said to have been buried.
Gelemish is the modern name of the ruin. The
walls of the ancient city may still be traced, and the
foundations of the temple and castle and other


2. Their
Order


2263


public buildings are visible. The most imposing
of the ruins is a triumphal arch bearing the in-
scription: ‘Patara the Metropolis of the Lycian
Nation.” Outside the city walls many sarcophagi
may be seen, but the harbor, long ago choked by
sand, has been converted into a useless swamp.
See also Myra. E. J. Banxs


PATE, pat (1p 7p, kodhkodh): The word usually
tr? “crown,’’ “crown of the head’? (Gen 49 26;
Dt 28 35; 33 16.20; 28 14 25; Job 27; Isa
3 17; Jer 2 16; 48 45) and “scalp” (Ps 68 21)
is rendered “pate” in Ps 7 16 in agreement with
earlier Eing. translators since Coverdale: ‘His mis-
chief shall return upon his own head, and his violence
shall come down upon his own pate.’ The reason
for the choice of the word lies evidently in the desire
to make the Heb parallelism with “head” (ré’sh)
apparent. The same object has, however, been
achieved differently in another poetical passage
(Gen 49 26 || Dt 33 16), viz. by the juxtaposition
of “head” and “crown of the head.”

H. L. E. Lusrine

PATH, path, PATHWAY, path’wa (718, ’droh,
M32, nethibhah, etc; tplBos, tribos, tpoxid,
trochid):

(1) In the OT.—In addition to its obvious literal
sense (e.g. Gen 49 17), it has very frequently a
figurative meaning. (a) As applied to man, a course
or manner of life: @) man’s outward lot in life, his
career or destiny, whether of the just man (lsa 26
7) or of the ungodly (Job 8 13); (ii) frequently in
an ethical sense, of men’s conduct or inward life-
purpose, whether it be good or evil (e.g. Prov 2 15),
generally accompanied by a term defining the moral
quality of the conduct, either an abstract noun (e.g.
“the paths of uprightness,” Prov 2 13; 4 11; “the
paths of justice,’ Prov 2 8; Isa 40 14; “the paths
of life,’ Ps 16 11; Prov 2 19), or a concrete adj.
or noun (e.g. “crooked paths,” Isa 59 8; “the paths
of the righteous,” Prov 2 20; 418). (6) The
term is also applied-to God either (i) of the methods
of the Divine Providence, God’s dealings with men
(Ps 26 10; 66 11), or (ii) of the principles and
maxims of religion and morality Divinely revealed
to man (“Show me thy ways, O Jeh, teach me thy
paths,” Ps 26 4; cfIsa 2 3).

(2) In the Apoc we have the “‘paths” of Wisdom
(tribos, Bar 3 21.31); the ‘path’ shown to men
by the Law (semita, 2 Esd 14 22); and a man’s
“paths” (tribos, Tob 4 10).

(3) Inthe NT the word occurs only in Mt 3 3 and
|| passages Mk 1 3; Lk 3 4 (of the forerunner’s
work), and in He 12 13 (in the OT ethical sense).

Pathway occurs in Prov 12 28 (derekh n*thibhah)
and Wisd 6 10 (atrapés). See Way.

D. Miaty Epwarps

PATHEUS, pa-thé’us (IIa@ates, Pathaios, Pa-
@atos, Phathatos): One of the Levites who had
married a foreign wife (1 Esd 9 23)= ‘‘Pethahiah”’
of Ezr 10 23.


PATHROS, path’ros (OTWMB, pathrés; Egyp
Pata resii, the ‘South land’; LXX y TaGoupis,
gé Pathourés): The Heb form of the Egyp name for
tes (Isa 11 11; Jer 44 1.15; Ezk 29 14;
30 14).


PATHRUSIM, path-ro0’sim, path-ri’sim ("07MB ,
ethrust, “an inhabitant of Pathros’; LXX ot
frevpeseeis: hot Patrosénieim): The branch of the
Egyptians who came from Patsros (q.v.). They
are represented as begotten of Mizraim, “Mizraim
begat Zudim .. . . and Pathrusim” (Gen 10 131;
1 Ch 1 117).


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Aastoral Epistles


Patmos


PATIENCE, pa’shens (bropovh, hupomoné, pak-
pooupla, makrothumia): “Patience” implies suffer-
ing, enduring or waiting, as a determination of the
will and not simply under necessity. As such it is
an essential Christian virtue to the exercise of which
there are many exhortations. We need to “wait
patiently” for God, to endure uncomplainingly the
various forms of sufferings, wrongs and evils that
we meet with, and to bear patiently injustices which
we cannot remedy and provocations we cannot
remove.

The word “patience’’ does not occur in the OT,
but we have “patiently” in Ps 40 1 as the tr of
kdwah, “to wait,” “to expect,’? which word fre-
quently expresses the idea, esp. that of waiting on
God; in Ps 37 7, “patiently” (‘wait patiently”)
is the tr of hal, one of the meanings of which is ‘“‘to
wait” or ‘'to hope for” or “to expect” (cf Job 36
14); ‘“patient”’ occurs (Eccl 7 8) as the tr of ’erekh
rii*h, “long of spirit,’’ and (Job 6 11) “‘that I should
be patient” (ha’drikh nephesh). Cf “impatient’’
(Job 21 4),

“Patience” occurs frequently in the Apoc, esp. in
Ecclus, e.g. 2 14; 16 13; 17 24; 41 2 (hupomoné);
5 11 (makrothumia); 29 8 (makrothuméo, RV “long
suffering’); in Wisd 2 19, the Gr word is anezi-
kakia.

In the NT hupomoné carries in it the ideas of
endurance, continuance (Lk 8 15; 21 19; Rom 5
3.4, ARV “stedfastness”’; 8 25, etc).

In all places ARVm has ‘‘stedfastness,’’ except Jas
5 11, where it has ‘endurance’; mekrothumia is trd
“patience'’ (He 6 12; Jas § 10); makrothumeé, ‘‘to


bear long" (Mt 18 26.29; Jas § 7; see LonosurrERiNs);
the same vb. is tr4 ‘“‘be patient’’ (1 Thess § 14, R


‘“Jongsuffering’'; Jas 6 7.8, AV and RV ‘‘patient"’);
makrothimos, ‘‘patiently'’ (Acts 26 3); hupoméno
(1 Pet 2 aoe anextkakos is tra ‘‘patient’ (2 Tim 2
24, RV, AVm, ‘‘forbearing”); epretkés, ‘‘gentle’ (1


Tim 3 3, RV “gentle"): Aupomend (Rom 12 12, “pa-
tient in Se eeeacey: For “the patient waiting for
Christ"' (2 Thess 3 5), RV has ‘‘the patience of Christ."


Patience is often hard to gain and to maintain,
but, in Rom 16 5, God is called “the God of pa-
tience’ (ARVm “stedfastness”) as being able to
grant that grace to those who look to Him and de-
pend on Him for it. It is in reliance on God and
acceptance of His will, with trust in His goodness,
wisdom and faithfulness, that we are enabled to
endure and to hope stedfastly. See also Gon.

W. L. WaLKER

PATMOS, pat’mos (Ilarpos, Pdtmos; Ital. San
Giovanni di Patino): A Turkish island of the group
Sporades, 8.W. of Samos, mentioned once in the
Bible, Rev 1 9, “I, John . . . . was in the isle that
is called Patmos, for the word of God and the testi-
mony of Jesus” (da tov Adyor Tod Geod Kal Thy pap-
tuplay Inood, did tén légon tov theo kat tén marturian
Tésov). The island is 10 miles long, and about 6
broad along the northern coast. It is for the most
partrocky. The highest part is Mt. St. Elias, which
rises to a height of over 800 ft. As in Greece, and
in the adjacent mainland of Asia Minor, the land is
treeless. Near the city of Patmos there is a good
harbor, A famous monastery, St. Christodulos, was
founded on the island in 1088. Near this is a thriv-
ing school, attended by students from all parts of the
Archipelago. The population of the island numbers
3,000, almost entirely Gr. The ancient capital was
on an isthmus between the inlets of La Scala and
Merika. Many ruins can still be seen. The huge
walls of Cyclopean masonry, similar to those at
Tiryns, attest their great age. In Rom times
Patmos was one of the many places to which Rome
banished her exiles. In 95 AD, according to a tra-
dition preserved by Irenaeus, Eusebius, Jerome
and others, St. John was exiled here—in the 14th
year of the reign of Domitian—whence he returned
to Ephesus under Nerva (96 AD). The cave in


Patriarch
Paul, the Apostle


which he is said to have seen his visions is still
pointed out to the traveler. Only a small part of
the once valuable library in the monastery of St.
Christodulos is left. Just 100 years ago (1814)
Mr. E. D. Clark purchased here the manuscript of
Plato which is now in the Bodleian Library, the cele-
brated Clarkianus, a parchment written in the year
895, and admittedly the best of all for the Ist of the
2 vols into which the works of Plato were divided for
convenience.
(iii.33), by Pliny (NH, iv.23), and by Strabo (x.5).
See also JonN THE APOSTLE; REVELATION OF JOHN.


_LITERATURE.— Tozer, The Islands of the Aegean (1890),
178-95; Walpole, Turkey (London, 1820), II, 43: EB. D.


Clark, Travels (London, 1818), VI, 2: Ross, Reisen
(Stuttgart, 1840), II; Guérin, Description de UIle de
Patmos (Paris, 1856).

J. E. Harry


PATRIARCH, pa’tri-irk, PATRIARCHS (qa-
tptdpxys, patridrchés): The word occurs in the NT
in application to Abraham (He 7 4), to the sons of
Jacob (Acts 7 8.9), and to David (Acts 2 29).
In LXX it is used as the equivalent of the head of
the fathers’ house, or of a tribe (1 Ch 24 31; 27 32;
2 Ch 26 12). Commonly now the term is used of
the persons whose names appear in the genealogies
and covenant-histories in the periods preceding
Moses (Gen 6, 11, histories of Noah, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, etc; ef ‘patriarchal dispensation’).
The problems connected with the longevity ascribed
to the patriarchs in the genealogies and narratives
in Gen are dealt with in special articles. See ANTE-
DILUVIAN PatTriaRcHs; ANTEDILUVIANS; GENE-
ALOGY. JAMES ORR


PATRIARCHS, TESTAMENTS OF THE
TWELVE. See ApocaLyptic LiTERatuRE, IV, 1.


PATRIMONY, pat’ri-mé-ni (MINT, ha-’abhoth,
“the fathers’): A word occurring once in EV (Dt
18 8), meaning lit. ‘‘the fathers,’ which, however,
is obscure, probably by reason of abbreviation for
some phrase, e.g. ‘house of the fathers.” It may
indicate ‘‘some private source of income possessed
by the Levite [who has come up from a country
district to the central sanctuary] distinct from what
he receives as a priest officiating at the central
sanctuary” (Driver, ‘Dt,’ £CC, in loc.). Beyond
this one occurrence of the word the same idea is
conveyed often by other words or phrases: ‘‘He
divided unto them his living” (Lk 15 13); ‘'Teach-
er, bid my brother divide the inheritance with me”’
(Lk 12 13). Full and specific directions were given
in the Law for the division of the patrimony (Nu
27; Dt 21, ete) and for its redemption (Ruth 4
1-12). The idea was frequently used with figura-
tive and spiritual application: the land of Canaan
was Israel’s patrimony, being inherited from Jeh
(Ps 106 11); salvation because of its origin in
grace was the believer’s patrimony (Gal 3 26—4 7).
Contrariwise Israel was Jeh’s inheritance (Isa 19
25; 63 14; cf Ps 33 12); and the whole earth is
the Messiah’s patrimony, inherited from His Eter-
nal Father (Ps 2 8). See BrrtsariauHt; Famity;
INHERITANCE; PROPERTY. Epwarp Mack


PATROBAS, pat'ré-bas (IIatpéBas, Patrdbas):
The name of a member of the Christian community
at Rome to whom Paul sent greetings (Rom 16 14).
The name is an abbreviated form of ‘‘Patrobius.”
There was a wealthy freedman of Nero of the same
name who was put to death by Galba (Tac. Hist.
i149; 11.95). The Patrobas of St. Paul may have
been a dependent of his.


PATROCLUS, pa-tra’klus (IIdrpoxdos, Pdtro-
klos): The father of the Syrian general Nicanor
(2 Mace 8 9).


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2264


Patmos is mentioned by Thucydides |


PATTERN, pat’érn (MIAN, tabhnith, “model,”
MANWD, mar'eh, “a vision” or ‘‘view”’): The OT
words tr? “pattern” do not necessarily indicate a
drawing such as a modern constructor begins with,
or the patterns made from these drawings for the
guidance of workmen. In Ex 26 9.40 the word
‘Gdea’’ or “suggestion” would possibly indicate more
distinctly than “‘pattern’’ what Moses received in
regard to the building of the tabernacle, etc. It ig
doubtful if any architect’s drawing was ever made
of the temple. It is not the custom in Pal and
Syria today to work from any pattern more con-
crete than an idea. A man who wants a house calls
the builder and says he wants to build so many
rooms of such and such dimensions with, for ex-
ample, a court 10 drahs (arm’s lengths) wide and
15 drahs long, made of sandstone and plastered
inside and out. With these meager instructions the
builder starts. The details are worked out as the
building proceeds. When a piece of iron or brass
work is to be made, the customer by gestures with
his hands outlines the form the piece should take.
“T want it haik wa haik’’ (“thus and thus”’), he says,
and leaves the metal worker to conceive the exact
form. It is probable that directions similar to
these were given by David to Solomon. ‘Then
David gave Solomon his son the pattern [his con-
ception] of the porch of the temple,” ete (1 Ch 28
11). The above does not apply to Gr and Rom
work in Syria. Their workmen, probably mostly
native, were trained to work from models. Wil-
liams in the Architect, January, 1913, says of the
works at Baalbek and Palmyra, ‘There is a machine-
like resemblance betokening slavish copying.” At
the present time native workmen coming under
the influence of foreigners are beginning to work
from models and plans, but they show little tend-
ency to create models of their own.

Three Gr words have been tr4in the NT: ruros,
tupos, ‘type,’ occurs in Tit 2 7 and He 8 5. In
the first instance RV reads “ensample.’?  dzorv-
twos, hupotiposis, ‘outline,’ has been similarly
tri in 1 Tim 1 16, but “pattern” m 2 Tim 1 18.
In He 9 24 ARV 4vrirvros, antitupos, is rendered
‘like in pattern.”  dmddeyua, hupddeigma, AV
“pattern,” is tr?in ARV “copy” (He 8 5), “‘copies”’
(He 9 23). At the time of the tr of AV the word
“pattern” meant either the thing to be copied or
the copy. James A. Parco


PAU, pat. See Pat.
PAUL, pél, THE APOSTLE:


I, Sources
1. The Acts
2. The Thirteen Epistles
(1) Pauline Authorship
(2) Lightfoot’s Grouping
(a) First Group (1 and 2 Thess)
(b) Second Group (1 and 2 Cor, Gal, Rom)
(ce) Third Group (Phil, Philem, Col, Eph)
(d) Fourth Group (1 Tim, Tit, 2 Tim)
(3) Paul's Conception of His Epistles
(4) Development in Paul's Epistles
Ii, Mopern Tuerories apovur Pavut
1. Criticism Not Infallihle
2. The Tiihingen Theory
3. Protest against Baur's View
4, Successors to Baur
5. Appeal to Comparative Religion
6. The Eschatological Interpretation
III, CHRONOLOGY or Pavt's CAREER
1. Schemes zg
2. Crucial Points
(1) The Death of Stephen
(2) The Flight from Damascus
(3) The Death of Herod Agrippa I
(4) The First Mission Tour
(5) The First Visit to Corinth
(6) Paul at Troas according to Acts 20 6f
(7) Festus Succeeding Felix
IV. Equipment
1. The City of Tarsus
2. Roman Citizenship


—


2265


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Patriarch
Paul, the Apostle


. Hellenism
. The Mystery-Religions
. Judaism
. Personal Characteristics
o Personal Appearance
2) Natural Endowments
(3) Supernatural Gifts
7. Conversion
(1) Preparation
(2) Experience
(3) Effect on Paul
V. Work
1. Adjustment
2. Opposition
3. Waiting
4. Opportunity
5. The First Great Mission Campaign
o The Conflict at Jerusalem
8


ob co


. The Second Mission Campaign
. The Third Mission Campaign
9. Five Years a Prisoner
10. Further Travels
11. Last Imprisonment and Death
VI. GospeL
LITERATURE
f, Sources.—For discussion of the historical value
of the Acts of the Apostles see the art. on that sub-
ject. It is only necessary to say here
1. The Acts that the view of Sir W. M. Ramsay
in general is accepted as to the trust-
worthiness of Luke, whose authorship of the Acts
is accepted and proved by Harnack (Die Apostel-
geschichte, 1908; The Acts of the Apostles, tr by
Wilkinson, 1909; Neue Untersuch. zur Ap., 1911;
The Date of the Acts and of the Synoptic Gospels,
tr by Wilkinson, 1911). The proof need not be
given again. The same hand appears in the “we’’-
sections and the rest of the book. Even Moffatt
(Intro to the Lit. of the NT, 311) admits the Lukan
authorship though dating it in 100 AD instead of
60-62 AD, against Harnack. The Acta is written
independently of the Epp. of Paul, whether early or
late, and supplements in a wonderful way the inci-
dental references in the epp., though not without
lacunae and difficulties.
(1) Pauline authorship.—See the articles on each
ep. for detailed criticism. It is here assumed that
the Ep. to the He was not written by


2. The Paul, though Pauline in point of view.
Thirteen One cannot stop to prove every state-
Epistles ment in an article like this, else a large


book would be needed. Criticismis not
an infallible science. One can turn easily from the
Hatch-Van Manen art. on ‘Paul’ in BB (1902) to
the Maclean art. on ‘Paul the Apostle” in the 1-vol
HDB (1909). Van Manen’s part of the one denies
all the thirteen, while Maclean says: ‘We shall,
in what follows, without hesitation use the thirteen
epp. asgenuine.” Itis certain that Paul wrote more
epp., or “letters,” as Deissmann (Light from the
Ancient East, 225) insists on calling all of Paul’s
epp. Certainly Philem is a mere “letter,” but it is
difficult to say as much about Rom. Deissmann
(St. Paul, 22) admits that portions of Rom are like
“an epistolary letter.’ At any rate, when Moffatt
(Intro to the Lit. of the NT, 64-82) carefully justifies
the Pauline authorship of both 1 and 2 Thess, it is
clear that the case against them cannot be very
strong, esp. as Moffatt stands out against the genu-
ineness of Eph (op. cit., 393) and the Pastoral Epp.
(p. 414).

Bartlet, who was once at a loss to know what to do
with the Pastorals on the theory that Paul was not
released from the Rom imprisonment (Apostolic Age,
1899, 200), is now quite willing to face the new facts set
forth by Ramsay (Hzpos, VII, vili-ix, VIII, i), even
if it means the admission of a second Rom imprisonment,
a view that Bartlet had opposed. He now pleads for
“the fresh approach from the side of experience, by
men who are in touch with the realities of human nature
in all its variety, as well as at home in the historical
background of society in the early Rom empire, that has
renovated the study of them and taken it out of the old
ruts of criticism in which it has moved for the moe part
in modern times" (Expos, January, 1913, 29). Here
Bartlet, again, now eloquently presents the view of


common-sense criticism as seen hy the practical mission-
ary better than hy a life '‘spent amid the academic asso-
ciations of a professor's chair,'’ though he pauses to note
as au exception Professor P. Garduer's The Religious
Experience of St. Paul (1912). We may quote Bartlet
once more (E£zpos, January, 1913, 30): ‘*In the recovery
of a true point of view a vital element has been the newer
conception of Paul himself and so of Paulinism. Paul
the doctrinaire theologian, or at least the prophet of a
one-sided gospel repeated with fanatical uniformity of
eeipeels under all conditions, has largely given place
to Paul the missionary, full indeed of inspired insight
on the basis of a unique experience, but also of practical
instinct, the offspring of sympathy with living men of
other types of training. When the Pastorals are viewed


‘anew in the light of this idea, half their difficulties dis-


appear.'’ One need not adopt Deissmann's rather ar-
tificial insistence on “‘letters'' rather than “ epistles,”’ and
his undue depreciation of Paul's intellectual caliber and
culture as being more like Amos than Origen (St. Paul,
1912, 6), in order to see the force cf this contention for
proper understanding of the social environment of Paul.
Against Van Manen’s “historical Paul’? who wrote
nothing, he places ‘‘the historic Paul’’ who possibly wrote
all thirteen. ‘‘There is really no trouble except with the
letters to Timothy and Titus, and even there the diffi-
culties are perhaps not quite so great as many of our
specialists assume” (St. Paul, 15). See Pastrorau
PisTLEs. Deissmann denies sharply that Paul was an
“obscurantist'’ who corrupted the gospel of Jesus, ‘‘the
dregs of doctrinaire study of St. Paul, mostly in the tired
brains of gifted amateurs" (p. 4). But A. Schweitzer
holdly proclaims that he alone has the key to Paul and
Jesus. It is the “exclusively Jewish eschatological”
(Paul and His Interpreters, 1912, ix) conception of
Christ’s gospel that furnishes Schweitzer’s spring-hoard
(The Quest of the Historical Jesus). Thushe will be ahle
to explain ‘the Hellenization of the gospel’’ as mediated
through Paul. To do that Schweitzer plows his weary
way from Grotius to Holtzmann, and finds that they have
all wandered into the wilderness. He is positive that
his eschatological discovery will rescue Paul and some of
his epp. from the ruin wrought hy Steck and Van Manen,
to whose arguments modern criticism has nothing solid
to offer, and the meager negative crumbs offered hy
Schweitzer ought to he thankfully received (ih, 249).


(2) Lightfoot’s grouping (cf Bib. Essays, 224).—
There is doubt as to the position of Gal. Some
advocates of the South-Galatian theory make it the
very earliest of Paul’s Epp., even before the Jerus
Conference in Acts 15. So Emmet, Comm. on
Gal (1912),-ix, who notes (Preface) that his comm.
is the first to take this position. But the North-
Galatian view still has the weight of authority in
spite of Ramsay’s powerful advocacy in his various
books (see Hist. Comm. on Gal), as is shown by
Moffatt, Intro to the Lit. of the NT, 90ff. Hence
Lightfoot’s grouping is still the best to use.

(a) First Group: 1 and 2 Thess, from Corinth,
52-53 AD. Harnack’s view that 2 Thess is ad-
dressed to a Jewish Christian church in Thessalonica
while 1 Thess is addressed to a gentile church is
accepted by Lake (Earlier Epp. of St. Paul, 1911,
83 ff), but Frame ((C'C, 1912, 54) sees no need for
this hypothesis. Milligan is clear that 1 Thess
precedes 2 Thess (Comm., 1908, xxxix) and is the
earliest of Paul’s Epp. (p. xxxvi). The accent on
eschatology is in accord with the position of the
early disciples in the opening chapters of Acts.
They belong to Paul’s stay in Corinth recorded in
Acts 18.

(b) Second Group: 1 Cor, 2 Cor, Gal, Rom,
55-58 AD. This is the great doctrinal group, the
four chief epp. of Baur. They turn about the
Judaizing controversy which furnishes the occasion
for the expansion of the doctrine of justification by
faith in opposition to the legalistic contention of the
Judaizing Christians from Jerus (Acts 15 1-3;
Gal 2 1-10). The dates of these epp. are not per-
fectly clear. 1 Cor was written shortly before the
close of Paul’s 8 years’ stay at Ephesus (Acts 20
31; 1 Cor 16 8; Acts 20 1f). 2 Cor was written
a few months later while he was in Macedonia (2 13;
7 5.13; 8 16-24). Rom was written from Corinth
(16 23; Acts 20 2f) and sent by Phoebe of Cen-
chreae (Rom 161). The intcgrity of Rom is
challenged by some who deny in particular that
ch 16 belongs to the ep. Moffatt Untro, 134-88)


Paul, the Apostle


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2266


gives an able, but unconvincing, presentation of the |


arguments for the addition of the chapter by a later
hand. Deissmann (Si. Paul, 19) calls Rom 16 “a
little letter’”’ addressed to the Christians at Ephesus.
Von Soden (Hist of Early Christian Lit., 78)
easily justifies the presence of Rom 16 in the Ep.
to the Rom: ‘These greetings, moreover, were cer-
tainly intended by St. Paul to create bonds of
fellowship between the Pauline Christians and the
Rom community, and to show that he had not
written to them quite exclusively in his own name.”
A common-sense explanation of Paul’s personal ties
in Rome is the fact that as the center of the world’s
life the city drew people thither from all parts of
the earth. So today many a man has friends in
New York or London who has never been to either
city. A much more serious controversy rages as
to the integrity of 2 Cor. Semler took 2 Cor 10-
13 to be a separate and later ep., because of its
difference in tone from 2 Cor 1-9, but Hausrath
put it earlier than chs 1-9, and made it the letter
referred to in 2 4. He has been followed by many
scholars like Schmiedel, Cone, McGiffert, Bacon,
Moffatt, Kennedy, Rendall, Peake, Plummer.
Von Soden (Hist of Eorly Christian Lit., 50)
accepts the partition-theory of 2 Cor heartily: “It
may be shown with the highest degree of probability
that this letter has come down to us in 2 Cor 10
1—13 10.” But the unity of the ep. on the theory
that the change in tone is a climax to the disobe-
dient element of the church is still maintained with
force and_ justice by Klopper, Zahn, Bachmann,
Denney, Bernard, A. Robertson, Weiss, Menzies.
The place of the writing of Gal turns on its date.
Lightfoot (in loc.) argues for Corinth, since it was
probably written shortly before Rom. But Moffatt
(Intro, 102) holds tentatively to Ephesus, soon after
Paul’s arrival there from Galatia. So he gives the
order: Gal, 1 and 2 Cor, Rom. In so much doubt
it is well to follow Lightfoot’s logical argument.
Gal leads naturally to Rom, the one hot and passion-
ate, the other calm and contemplative, but both on
the same general theme.

(c) Third group: Phil, Philem, Col, Eph. Date
61-63, unless Paul reached Rome several years
earlier. This matter depends on the date of the
coming of Festus to succeed Felix (Acts 24 27).
It was once thought to be 60 AD beyond any doubt,
but the whole matter is now uncertain. See
“Chronology,” ITI, 2, (2), below. At any rate these
four epp. were written during the first Rom impris-
onment, assuming that he was set free.

But it must be noted that quite a respectable group of
scholars hold that_one or all of these epp. were written
from Caesarea (Schultz, Thiersch, Meyer, Hausrath,
Sabatier, Renss, Weiss, Haupt, Spitta, McPherson,
Hicks). But the arguments are more specious than
convincing. See Hert, Rom and Eph, 101-10. There
is a growing opinion that Philem, Col and Eph were
written from Ephesus during a possible imprisonment
in Paul's stay of 3 years there. So Deissmanu (Light
from the Ancient East, 229; St. Paul, 16); St. Lisco
(Vineula Sanctorum, 1900); M. Albertz (Theol. Studien
und Kritiken, 1910, 551 ff); B. W. Bacon (Journal of Bib.
Lit., 1910, 181 ff). The strongest argument for this posi-
tion is that_Paul apparently did not know personally the
readers of Eph (1 15); cf also Col 1 4. But this ob-
jection need not apply if the so-called Ephesiau Ep. was
a circular letter and if Paul did_not visit Colossae and
Laodicea during his 3 years at Ephesus. The theory is
more attractive at firsc than on reflection. Jt throws
this group before Rom—a difficult view to concede.


But even so, the order of these epp. is by no
means certain. It is clear that Philem, Col and
Eph were sent together. Tychicus was the bearer
of Col (4 7f) and Eph (6 21f). Onesimus bore
Philem (vs 10.13) and was also the companion of
Tychicus to Colossae (Col 4 9). So these three
epp. went together from Rome. It is commonly
assumed that Phil was the last of the group of four,
and hence later than the other three, because Paul is


balancing life and death (Phil 1 21 ff) and is ex-
pecting to be set free (1 25), but he has the same
expectation of freedom when he writes Philem (ver
22). The absence of Luke (Phil 2 20) has to be
explained on either hypothesis. Moffatt (Intro,
159) is dogmatic, ‘‘as Phil was certainly the last
letter that he wrote,” ruling out of court Eph, not
to say the later Pastoral Epp. But this conclusion
gives Moffatt trouble with the Ep. to the Laodi-
ceans (Col 4 16) which he can only call “the enig-
matic reference’? and cannot follow Rutherford
(St. Paul’s Epp. to Colossae and Laodicea, 1908)
in identifying the Laodicean Ep. with Eph, as
indeed Marcion seems to have done. But the
notion that Eph was a circular letter designed for
more than one church (hence without personalities)
still holds the bulk of modern opinion.

Von Soden (Hist of Early Christian Lit,, 294) is as dog-
matic as Wrede or Van Maneu: ‘All which has hitherto
been said concerning this ep., its form, its content, its
ideas, its presuppositions, absolutely_excludes the possi-
bility of a Pauline authorship.” He admits ‘‘verbal
echoes of Pauline epp.”’


Lightfoot puts Phil before the other three be-
cause of its doctrinal affinity with the second group
in ch 3 as a reminiscence, and because of its anti-
cipation of the Christological controversy with incip-
ient Gnosticism in ch 2. This great discussion is
centralin Coland Eph. At any rate, we have thus
a consistent and coherent interpretation of the
group. Philem, though purely personal, is won-
drously vital as a sociological document. Paul is in
this group at the height of his powers in his grasp
of the Person of Christ.

(d) Fourth group: 1 Tim, Tit, 2 Tim. The
Pastoral Epp. are still hotly disputed, but there is
a growing willingness in Britain and Germany to
make a place for them in Paul’s life. Von Soden
bluntly says: “It is impossible that these epp. as
they stand can have been written by St. Paul” (Hist
of Early Christian Lit., 310). He finds no room
for the heresy here combated, or for the details in
Paul's life, or for the linguistic peculiarities in Paul's
style. But he sees a “literary nicety’’—this group
that binds them together and separates them
from Paul. Thus tersely he puts the case against
the Pauline authorship. So Moffatt argues for the
“sub-Pauline environment’? and ‘‘sub-Pauline at-
mosphere” of these epp. with the advanced ecclesi-
asticism (Intro to the Lit. of the NT, 410 ff). Wrede
thrusts aside the personal details and argues that
the epp. give merely the tendency of early Chris-
tianity (Ueber Aufgabe und Methode der Sogen. NT
Theologie, 1897, 357). The Hatch-Van Manen art.
in EB admits only that “the Pastoral Epp. occupy
themselves chiefly with the various affairs of the
churches within ‘Pauline circles.’ ”


Moffatt has a vigorous attack on these letters in EB,
but he ‘almost entirely ignores the external evidence,
while he has nothing to say to the remarkable iuternal
evidence which immediately demands our attention”
(Knowling, Testimony of St. Paul to Christ, 3d ed, 1911,
129). Moffatt vee to the Lit. of the NT, 414) holds
that the Pastoral Epp. came from one pen, but the per-
sonality and motives are very vague to him. The per-
sonal detailsin 2 Tim 1 14-18; 4 9-22 are not ona par
with those in The Acts of Paul and Thekla in the 2d cent.
Many critics who reject the Panline authorship of the
Pastoral Epp. admit the personal details in 2 Tim, but
it is justin such matters that forgeries are Tecognizable.
To admit these fragments is logically to admit the whole
(Maclean in 1-vol HDB), as Moffatt sees (Intro, 414),
however much he seeks to tone down tho use of Pan!'s
name as *’a Christian form of suasoriae,”’ and ‘'a further
and inoffensive development of tho principle which
sought to claim apostolic sanction for the ex anding
institutions and doctrines of the early church" (ib, 415).
The objection against these epp. from differcnees in
diction has been grievously overdone. As a matter of
fact, each of the four groups has words peculiar to it, and
naturally so. Style is a function of the subject as well
as amark of the man. Besides, style changes with one's
growth. It would have been remarkable if all four


2267


groups had shown no change in vocahulary and style.
The case of Shakespeare is quite pertinent, for the vari-
ous groups of plays stand more or less apart. The
Pastoral Epp. belong to Paul's old age and deal with
personal and ecclesiastical matters In a more or less remi-
niscential way, with less of vehement energy than we get
in the earlier epp., but this situation is what one would
reasonably expect. The ‘‘ecclesiastical organization”’
argument has been greatly overdone. As a matter of
fact, ‘the organization in the Pastoral Epp. is not appar-
ently advanced one step beyond that of the church in
Philippi in 61 AD’’ (Ramsay, Ezpos, VII, viii, 17).
The “‘gnosis” met by these epp. (1 Tim 6 20; Tit 1
14) is not the highly developed type seen in the Ignatlan
Epp. of the 2d cent. Indeed, Bartlet (‘‘ Historlc Setting
of the Pastoral Epp.,’’Hzpos, January, 1913, 29) pointedly
says that, as a result of Hort’s '' Judaistic Christianity”
and ‘‘Christian Ecclesia’ and Ramsay's ‘' Historical
Comm. on the PE of Timothy'’ (Expos, VII, vii,
ix, VIII, i), *‘one feels the subject has been lifted to a
new level of reality and that much criticism between
Baur and Jiilicher is out of date and irrelevant.’ It
js now shown that the Pastoral Epp. are not directed
against Gnosticism of advanced type, hut even of a more
Jewish type (Tit 1 14) than that in Col. Ramsay
(Ezpos, VIII, i, 263) sweeps this stock criticism aside as

from the wrong point of view.'’ It falls to the ground.
Lightfoot ('‘ Note on the Heresy Combated in the Pastoral
Epp.,”’ Bib. Essays, 413) had insisted on the Jewish char-
acter of the Gnosticism attacked here. As a matter of
fact, the main objection to these epp. is that they do not
fit into the story in Acts, which breaks off abruptly with
Paulin Rome. Butit is a false premise to assume that
the Pastoral Epp. have to fit into the events in Acts.
Harnack turns the objection that Paul_in Acts 20 26
predicted that he would never see the Ephesian elders
again into a strong argument for the date of Luke's
Gospel before 2 Tim 4 21 (The Date of Acts and Synoptic
Gospels, 103). Indeed, he may not have revisited Ephe-
sus after all, but_ may have seen Timothy at Miletus also
(1 Tim 1 3). _Harnack frankly admits the acquittal
and release of Paul and thus free play for the Pastoral
Epp. Blass |(Acta Apostolorum, 24) acknowledges the
Pastoral Epp. as genuine. So also Findlay, art. **Paul,’”
in HDB; aclean in l-vol HDB; Denney in Standard
BD, Sanday (Inspiration, 364) comments on_the
strength of the external evidence for the Pastoral Epp.
Even Holtzmann (KinI3, 291) appears to admit echoes of
the Pastoral Epp. in the Ignatian Epp. Lightfoot (Bib.
Essays, ‘‘ Date of the Pastoral Epp.,’’ 399-437) justifies
completely the acceptance of the Pauline authorship.
Deissmann (St. Paul, 15) has.a needed word: ‘The
delusion is still current in certain circles that the scien-
tific distinction of a Bible scholar may he estimated in
the form of a percentage according to the proportion of
his verdicts of spuriousness. .. . . The extant letters of
St. Paul have been innocently obliged to endure again
a fair share of the martyrdom suffered by the historic
St. Paul.’ See further Pastorau EPIstLes.


(3) Paul's conception of his Epp. Assuming, there-
fore, the Pauline authorship of the thirteen epp.,
we may note that they reveal in a remarkable
way the growth in Paul’s apprehension of Christ
and Christianity, his adaptation to varied situations.
his grasp of world-problems and the eternal values
of life. Paul wrote other epp., as we know.

1 Cor & 9 there is a clear reference to a letter not
now known tous otherwise, earlierthan 1 Cor. The
use of “every epistle” in 2 Thess 3 17 naturally
implies that Paul had written more than two al-
ready. It is not certain to what letter Paul refers
in 2 Cor 2 4—most probably to one between 1 and
2 Cor, though, as already shown, some scholars
find that letter in 2 Cor 10-18. Once more Paul
(Col 4 16) mentions an ep. addressed to the church
at Laodicea. This ep. is almost certainly that
which we know as Eph. If not, here is another lost
ep. Indeed, at least two apocryphal Epp. to the
Laodiceans were written to supply this deficiency.
Asearly as 2 Thess 2 2 forgers were at work to palm
off epp. in Paul’s name, “or by ep. as from us,”
to attack and pervert Paul’s real views, whom Paul
denounces. It was entirely possible that this ‘‘nefa-
rious work” would be continued (Gregory, Canon
and Test of the NT, 1907, 191), though, as Gregory
argues, Paul’s exposure here would have a tendency
to put a stop to it and to put Christians on their
guard and to watch for Paul’s signature to the
epp. as a mark of genuineness (2 Thess 3 17; 1
Cor 16 21; Gal 6 11; Col 4 18). This was all
the more important since Paul evidently dictated


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Paul, the Apostle


his letters to amanuenses, as to Tertius in the case
of Rom (16 22). In the case of Philem (ver 19),
Paul probably wrote the whole letter. We may
be sure therefore that, if we had the other genuine
letters of Paul, they would occupy the same general
standpoint as the thirteen now in our possession.
The point to note here is that the four groups of
Paul’s Epp. fit into the historical background of the
Acts as recorded by Luke, barring the fourth group
which is later than the events in Acts. Each group
meets a Dea situation in a definite region or re-
gions, with problems of vital interest. Paul attacks
these various problems (theological, ecclesiastical,
practical) with marvelous vigor, and applies the
eternal principles of the gospel of Christ in such
fashion as to furnish a norm for future workers
for Christ. It is not necessary to say that
he was conscious of that use. Deissmann (St.
Paul, 12 f) is confident on this point: “That
a portion of these confidential letters should
be still extant after centuries, St. Paul can-
not have intended, nor did it ever occur to him
that they would be.” Be that as it may, and
granted that Paul’s Epp. are ‘survivals, in the sense
of the technical language employed by the historical
method” (ib, 12), still we must not forget that Paul
attached a great deal of importance to his letters
and urged obedience to the teachings which they
contained: “I adjure you by the Lord that this ep.
be read unto all the brethren’? (1 Thess 6 27).
This command we find in the very first one preserved
to us. Once more note 2 Thess 3 14: ‘And if
any man obeyeth not our word by this ep., note that
man, that ye have no company with him.” Evi-
dently therefore Paul does not conceive his epp. as
mere incidents in personal correspondence, but
authoritative instructions for the Christians to
whom they are addressed. In 1 Cor 7 17, “And
so ordain I in all the churches,” he puts his episto-
lary commands on a par with the words of Jesus
quoted in the same chapter. Some indeed at
Corinth (2 Cor 10 9f) took his “letters” as an
effort to “terrify” them, a thing that he was afraid
to do in person. Paul (ver 11) does not deny the
authority of his letters, but claims equal courage
when he comes in person (cf 2 Cor 13 2.10). That
Paul expected his letters to be used by more than
the one church to which they were addressed is
clear from Col 416: “And when this ep. hath
been read among you, cause that it be read also in
the church of the Laodiceans; and that ye also
read the ep. from Laodicea.” If the letter to La-
odicea is our Eph and 2 sort of circular letter (cf
Gal), that is clear. But it must be noted that Col,
undoubtedly a specific letter to Colossae, is likewise
to be passed on to Laodicea. It is not always ob-
served that in 1 Cor 1 2, though the ep. is ad-
dressed “unto the church of God which is at Cor-
inth,” Paul adds, “with all that call upon the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, their Lord
and ours.’’? Philem is, of course, a personal letter,
though it deals with a sociological problem of uni-
versal interest. The Pastoral Epp. are addressed
to two young ministers and have many personal de-
tails, as is natural, but the epp. deal far more with
the social aspects of church life and the heresies and
vices that were threatening the very existence of
Christianity in the Rom empire. Paul is eager that
Timothy shall follow his teaching (2 Tim 3 10 ff),
and “the same commit thou to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also” (2 2). It is this
larger view of the future of Christianity that con-
cerns Paul very keenly. The very conception of
his ministry to the Gentiles (Rom 15 16; Eph 3
7 ff) led Paul to feel that he had a right to spcak to
all, “both to Greeks and to Barbarians’ (Rom 1
14), and hence even to Rome (1 15f). It is a mis-


Paul, the Apostle THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2268


take to limit Paul’s Epp. to the local and temporary
sphere given them by Deissmann.

(4) Development in Paul’s Epp.—For Paul’s
gospel or theology see later. Here we must stress
the fact that all four groups of Paul’s Epp. are legiti-
mate developments from his fundamental experience
of grace as conditioned by his previous training and
later work. He met each new problem with the
same basal truth that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son
of God, revealed to Paul on the way to Damascus.
The reality of this great, experience must here be
assumed (see discussion later). It may be admitted
that the Acts does not stand upon the same plane
as the Pauline Epp. as a witness concerning Paul’s
conversion (Fletcher, The Conversion of St. Paul,
1910, 5). But even so, the Epp. amply confirm
Luke’s report of the essential fact that Jesus ap-
peared to Paul in the same sense that He did to the
apostles and 500 Christians (1 Cor 15 4-9). The
revelation of Christ to Paul and in Paul (é» éuol
en emoi, Gal 1 16) and the specific call connected
therewith to preach to the Gentiles gave Paul a place
independent of and on a par with the other apostles
(1 16f; 2 1-10). Paul’s first preaching (Acts 9
20) “proclaimed Jesus, that he is the Son of God.”
This “primitive Paulinism’” (Sabatier, The Apostle
Paul, 1893, 113) lay at the heart of Paul’s message
in his sermons and speeches in Acts. Professor P.
Gardner regards Luke as a “‘careless’’ historian
(“The Speeches of St. Paul in Acts,’ Cambridge
Bib. Essays, 1909, 386), but he quite admits the
central place of Paul’s conversion, both in the Acts
and the Epp. (ib; cf also The Religtous Experience
of St. Paul).

We cannot here trace in detail the growth of
Paulinism. Let Wernle speak (Beginnings of Chris-
tianity, 1903, I, 224) for us: ‘‘The decisive factor
in the genius of St. Paul’s theology was his personal
experience, his conversion on the road to Damas-
cus.”” This fact reappears in each of the groups of
the Epp. It is the necessary implication in the
apostolic authority claimed in 1 Thess 2 4-6; 2
Thess 2 15; 36.14. “We might have claimed
authority as apostles of Christ” (1 Thess 2 6).
For the second group we need only refer to 1 Cor
9 1f and 16 1-11, where Paul justifies his gospel
by the fact of having seen the risen Jesus. His self-
depreciation in ver 9 is amply balanced by the
claims in ver 10. See also 2 Cor 10-13 and Gal
1 and 2 for Paul’s formal defence of his apostolic
authority. The pleasantry in Rom 15 14 does not
displace the claim in 16 16.23f. In the third
group note the great passage in Phil 3 12-14, where
Paul pointedly alludes to his conversion: “I was
laid hold of by Jesus Christ,’’ as giving him the
goal of his ambition, “that I may lay hold’; “TI
count not myself yet to have laid hold.” This con-
centration of effort to come up to Christ’s purpose
in him is the key to Paul’s life and letters, “I press
on toward the goal.’”’ So the golden cord reappears
in Eph 3 2-13: “How that by revelation was made
known unto me the mystery, as I wrote before in
few words, whereby, when ye read, ye can perceive
my understanding in the mystery of Christ.” In
the fourth group he still recalls how Christ Jesus
took pity on him, the blasphemer, the persecutor,
the chief of sinners, and put him into the ministry,
“that in meas chief might Jesus Christ show forth
all his longsuffering, for an ensample of them that
should thereafter believe on him unto eternal life”
(1 Tim 1 16). He kept up the fight to the end
(2 Tim 4 6f), for the Lord Jesus stood by him (4
17), as on the road to Damascus. So the personal
note of experience links all the epp. together. They
reveal Paul’s growing conception of Christ. Paul
at the very start perceived that men are redeemed
by faith in Jesus as the Saviour from sin through


His atoning death, not by works of the Law (Acts
13 38f). In the first group there are allusions to
the “work of faith and labor of love and patience of
hope in our Lord Jesus Christ” (1 Thess 1 3). He
speaks of “election” (1 4) and “our gospel’ (1 5)
and the resurrection of Jesus (1 10). The Father,
Son and Spirit coéperate in the work of salvation
(2 Thess 2 13f), which includes election, belief,
sanctification, glorification. It is not necessary to

ress the argument for the conception of salvation
ie faith in Christ, grace as opposed to works, in the
second group. It is obviously present in the third
and the fourth. We seem forced to the view
therefore that Paul’s experience was revolutionary,
not evolutionary. “If we consider the whole his-
tory of Paul as it is disclosed to us in his letters,
are we not forced to the conclusion that his was a
catastrophic or explosive, rather than a slowly pro-
gressive personality?” (Garvie, Studies of Paul and
His Gospel, 1911, 32). ‘His gospel was included
in his conversion, and it was meditation that made
explicit what was thus implicit in his experience”
(ib). Thisis not to say that there was no “‘spiritual
development of St. Pau!” (Matheson, 1890). There
was, and of the richest kind, but it was a growth of
expression in the successive application of the funda-
mental Christian conception. The accent upon
this or that phase of truth at different stages in
Paul’s career does not necessarily mean that the
truth is a new one to him. It may simply be that
the occasion has arisen for emphasis and elabora-
tion.

In a broad generalization the first group of the
epp. is eschatological, the second sotenological, the
third Christological, and the fourth pastoral (Gar-
vie, Studies of Paul and His Gospel, 22). But one
must not get the notion that Paul did not have a
full gospel of salvation in the first group, and did not
come to the true motive of the person of Christ as
Lord till the second, or understand the pastoral
office till the fourth. See emphasis on Paul’s work
as pastor and preacher in 1 Thess 2 (first
group), and the Lordship of Christ also (1 Thess
11.3; 2 Thess 11; 213f), on a par with the
Father.

There was a change of accent in each group on
questions of eschatology, but in each one Paul
cherishes the hope of the second coming of Christ
up to the very end when he speaks of his own death
(2 Tim 4 8.18). Paul has a whole gospel of grace
in all his epp., but he presses home the special
phase of truth needed at the moment, always with
proper balance and modification, though not in
the form of a system of doctrine. In the first group
he relieves the minds of the Thessalonian Christians
from the misapprehension into which they had
fallen concerning his position on the immediate
coming of Christ. In the second group Paul vindi-
cates the gospel of grace from the legalistic addition
of the Judaizers who sought to rob the Gentiles of
their freedom by insisting that they become Jews
as well as Christians. This ringing battle is echoed
in Acts 15 and is the mightiest conflict of Paul’s
career. We hear echoes of it in Phil 3, but he had
won his contention. In the third group the battle
with error has shifted to the province of Asia, esp.
the Lycus Valley, where a mystic mixture of Juda-
ism (Essenism) and heathen mystery-religions and
philosophies (incipient Gnosticism) was so rife in
the 2d cent. (the various forms of Gnosticism which
combined with some aspects of Christianity). It
is possible also that Mithraism was already a foe
of Christianity. The central position and essential
deity of Jesus Christ was challenged by these new
and world-old heresies, and Paul attacks them with
marvelous skill in Col and Eph and works out in
detail his teaching concerning the person of Christ


2269


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Paul, the Apostle


with due emphasis on the soteriological aspects of
Christ’s work and on Christian life. Bruce (St.
Paul’s Conception of Christianity) conceives that
Paul gives us his entire conception of Christianity
in the four great epp. of the second group, while
B. Weiss (Bib. Theol. of the NT’) sees a more devel-
oped doctrine in the third group. He is in his
prime in both groups. In the fourth group the
same struggle lingers on with variations in Crete
and even in Ephesus. The Jewish phase of the
heresy is more decided (perhaps Pharisaic), and
recalls to some extent the Judaistic controversy in
the second group. Paul is older and faces the end,
and Christianity has enemies within and without.
He turns to young ministers as the hope of the
future in the propagation of the gospel of the happy
God. The fires have burned lower, and there is less
passion and heat. The tone is now fierce, now tender.
The style is broken and reminiscent and personal,
though not with the rush of torrential emotion in
2 Cor, nor the power of logic in Gal and Rom.
Each ep. fits into its niche in the group. Each
group falls into proper relation to the stage in Paul’s
life and justly reveals the changes of thought and
feeling in the great apostle. It is essential that one
study Paul’s Epp. in their actual historical order if
one wishes to understand the mind of Paul. Schol-
ars are not agreed, to be sure on this point. They
are not agreed on anything, for that matter. See
two methods of presenting Paul’s Epp. in Robert-
son, Chronological NT (1904), and Moffatt, Histort-
cal NT (1901).
Hf, Modern Theories about Paul.—Findlay
(HDB, “Paul’’) utters a needed warning when he
reminds us that the modern historical
1. Criticism and psychological method of study is
Not In- just as liable to prepossession and
fallible prejudice as the older categories of
scholastic and dogmatic theology.
“The focus of the picture may be displaced and
its colors falsified by philosophical no less than
by ecclesiastical spectacles” (ib). Deissmann (St.
Paul, 4{) sympathizes with this protest against the
infallibility of modern subjective criticism: ‘That
really and properly is the task of the modern stu-
dent of St. Paul: to come back from the paper St.
Paul of our western libraries, Germanized, dogma-
tised, modernized, to the historic St. Paul; to pene-
trate through the ‘Paulinism’ of our NT theologies
to the St. Paul of ancient reality.” He admits
the thoroughness and the magnitude of the work
accomplished in the 19th cent. concerning the liter-
ary questions connected with Paul’s letters, but it
is a “doctrinaire interest’”’ that “has gone farther
and farther astray.” Deissmann conceives of Paul
as a “hero of piety first and foremost,’’ not as a
theologian. ‘‘As a religious genius St. Paul’s out-
look is forward into a future of universal history.”
In this position of Deissmann we see a return
to the pre-Baur time. Deissmann would like to
get past all the schools of criticism, back to Paul
himself. :
Baur started the modern critical attitude by his
Pastoralbriefe (1835, p. 79), in which he remarked
that there were only four epp. of Paul


2. The (Gall and 2 Cor, Rom) which could be
Tiibingen accepted as genuine. In his. Paulus
Theory (1845) he expounded this thesis. He


also rejected the Acts. From the four
great epp. and from the pseudo-Clementine lit-
erature of the 2d cent., Baur argued that Paul and
Peter were bitter antagonists. Peter and the other
apostles were held fast in the grip of the legalistic
conception of Christianity, a sort of Christianized
Pharisaism. Paul, when converted, had reacted
violently against this view, and became the exponent
of gentile freedom. Christianity was divided into


two factions, Jewish Christians (Petrinists) and
gentile Christians (Paulinists). With this “key”
Baur ruled out the other Pauline epp. and Acts as
spurious, because they did not show the bitterness
of this controversy. He called them ‘‘tendency”
writings, designed to cover up the strife and to
show that peace reigned in the camp. This arbi-
trary theory cut a wide swath for 50 years, and be-
came a fetich with many scholars, but it is now
dead. ‘It has been seen that it is bad criticism to
make a theory on insecure grounds, and then to
reject all the hterature which contradicts it” (Mac-
lean in 1-vol HDB). Ramsay (The First Chris-
tian Cent., 1911, 195) contends that the perpetuation
of the Baur standpoint in Moffatt’s Intro to the Lit.
of the NT is an anachronism: ‘We are no longer
in the 19th cent. with its negations, but in the 20th
cent. with its growing power of insight and the
pane of belief that springs therefrom.” Van
anen (£8) calls the Baur view that of the “old
guard” of liberal theology in Germany, Switzer-
land, France, Holland, and, to some extent, in
Britain.
But even in Germany the older conservative view
of Paul has always had champions. The most con-
sistent of the recent opponents of Baur’s
3. Protest views in Germany is Th. Zahn (cf his
against Hinlin das NT, 2 vols, 1897-99; Intro
Baur’s View to the NT, 3 vols, 1910). In Britain
the true successor of Lightfoot as the
chief antagonist of the Ttbingen School is Sir W.
M. Ramsay, whose numerous volumes (Church in
the Rom Empire, 1893; Cities and Bishoprics of
Phrygia, 1895; Si. Paul the Traveller, 1896; Paul-
ine and Other Studies, 1906; Cities of St. Paul, 1908;
Luke the Physician and Other Studies, 1908; Pictures
of the Apostolic Church, 1910; The First Christian
Century, 1911) have given the finishing touches to
the overthrow of Baur’s contention.
But even so, already the Baur school had split
into two parts. The ablest representatives, like
H. J. Holtzmann, Pfleiderer, Harnack,
4. Succes- Jiilicher, Lipsius, von Soden, were
sorsto Baur compelled to admit more of Paul’s
Epp. as genuine than the four principal
ones, till there are left practically none to Cant over
but Eph and the Pastoral Epp. This progress elimi-
nated completely Baur’s thesis and approached very
nearly to the position of Lightfoot, Ramsay and
Zahn. Von Soden (Karly Christian Lit., 324) still
stands out against 2 Thess, but Harnack has de-
serted him on that point. But the old narrow view
of Baur is gone, and von Soden is eloquent in his
enthusiasm for Paul (ib, 119): ‘‘As we gaze upon the
great literary memorials of the Greeks we may well
question whether these Pauline letters are not equal
to them—indeed, do not surpass them—in spiritual
significance, in psychological depths and loftiness
of ideal, above allin the art of complete and forcible
expression.” The other wing of Baur's school
Findlay (HDB) calls “ultra-Baurians.” It is
mainly a Dutch school with Loman and Van
Manen as its main exponents, though it has sup-
port in Germany from Steck and Volter, and in
America from W.B. Smith. These writers do not
say that Paul is a myth, but that our sources
(Acts and the 13 epp.) are all legendary. It is a
relentless carrying of Baur’s thesis to a reductio ad
absurdum. Van Manen (EB) says of “the historical
Paul” as distinct from ‘the legendary Paul”: “It
does not appear that Paul’s ideas differed widely
from those of the other disciples, or that he had
emancipated himself from Judaism or had out-
grown the law more than they.” When one has
disposed of all the evidence he is entirely free to
reconstruct the pictures to suit himself. Quite
arbitrarily, Van Manen accepts the ‘we’’-sections


Paul, the Apostle THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2270


in Acts as authoritative. But these give glimpses
of the historical Jesus quite as truly as the Pauline
Epp., and should therefore be rejected by advocates
of the mythical Jesus. So the pendulum swings
back and forth. One school destroys the other,
but the fact of Paul’s personality remains. ‘The
new start is one of such importance that we must
distinguish the pre-Pauline from the post-Pauline
Christianity, or, what amounts to the same thing,
the Palestinian sect and the world-religion” (Wernle,

Beginnings of Christianity, I, 159).
In his Paulus (1904), Wrede finds the explana-
tion of Paul’s theology in late Jewish apocalyptic
views and in the oriental mystery-


5. Appeal religions. Bousset (Die Religion des
to Com- Judenthums im NT Zeitalter, 1903)
parative seeks to find in the “late Jewish apoc-
Religion alyptic’” “conceptions from the Bab


and the Irano-Zarathustrian religions”
(Schweitzer, Paul and His Interpreters, 173). Ac-
cording to Wrede’s view, Paul is one of the creators
of “Christ”? as distinct from the Jesus of history (cf
“Jesus or Christ,” HJ, suppl., January, 1909).
“Wrede’s object is to overthrow the view predomi-
nant in modern theology, that Paul loyally and con-
sistently expounded and developed the theology of
Jesus’ (J. Weiss, Paul and Jesus, 1909, 2). J.
Weiss in this book makes a careful reply to Wrede
as others have done; cf A. Meyer, Jesus or Paul
(1909), who concludes (p. 134) dramatically: “Paul
—Jjust one who points the way to Jesus and to God!”
See also Jiilicher, Paulus und Jesus (1907); Kaftan,
Jesus und Paulus (1906); JKdélbing, Die geistige
Einwirkung der Person Jesu und Paulus (1906).
The best reply to Wrede’s arguments about the
mystery-religion is found in articles in the Bxpos for
1912-13 (now in book form) by H. A. A. Kennedy
on “St. Paul and the Mystery-Religions.”” The
position of Wrede is carried to its logical conclusion
by Drews (Die Christus-Mythe, 1909), who makes
Paul the creator of Christianity. W.B.Smith (Der
vorchristliche Jesus, 1906) tries to show that ‘‘Jesus’’
was a pre-Christian myth or god. Schweitzer
(Paul and His Interpreters, 235) sums the matter
up thus: “Drews’s thesis is not merely a curiosity;
it indicates the natural limit at which the hypothe-
sis advanced by the advocates of comparative re-
ligion, when left to its own momentum, finally
comes to rest.”
Schweitzer himself may be accepted as the best
exponent of the rigid application of this view to
Paul (Paul and His Interpreters, 1912)


6. The that he had made to Jesus (The Quest
Eschatologi- of the Historical Jesus, 1910). He
calInter- glories in the ability to answer the
pretation absurdities of Steck, Loman and Van


Manen and Drews by showing that
the eschatological conceptions of Paul in his epp.
are primitive, not late, and belong to the Ist cent.,
not to the 2d (Paul and His Interpreters, 249). He
thus claims to be the true pupil of Baur, though


|


undoubtedly an element of truth in this contention
of Schweitzer, but he loses his case, when he insists
that nothing but eschatology must be allowed to
figure. “The edifice constructed by Baur has
fallen,” he proclaims (p. viii), but he demands that
in its place we allow the ‘exclusively Jewish-
eschatological” (p. ix) interpretation. There he
slips, and his theory will go the way of that of Baur.
C. Anderson Scott (“Jesus and Paul,’’ Cambridge
Bib. Essays, 365) admits that Paul has the same
eschatological outlook as Jesus, but also the same
ethical interest. It is not “either... . or,” but
both in each case. See a complete bibliography
of the “Jesus and Paul’ controversy in J
Machens’ paper on “Jesus and Paul” in Bib. and
Theol. Studies (1912, 547f). As Ramsay insists,
we are now in the 20th cent. of insight and sanity,
and Paul has come to his own. Even Wernle
(Beginnings of Christianity, I, 163) sees that Paul
is not the creator of the facts: ‘‘He merely trans-
mits historical facts. God—Christ—Paul, such
is the order.” Saintsbury (History of Criticism,
152) says: “It has been the mission of the 19th cent.
to prove that everybody’s work was written by
somebody else, and it will not be the most useless
task of the 20th to betake itself to more profitable
inquiries.”
Hl. Chronology of Paul’s Career.—There is
not a single date in the life of Paul that is beyond
dispute, though several are narrowed
1. Schemes to a fine point, and the general course
and relative proportion of events are
clear enough. Luke gave careful data for the
time of the birth of Jesus (Lk 2 1f), for the en-
trance of the Baptist on his ministry (3 1f), and
the age of Jesus when He began His work (3 23),
but he takes no such pains in the Acts with chro-
nology. But we are left with a number of inci-
dental allusions and notes of time which call for
some discussion. For fuller treatment see CHRo-
NoLocy or THE NT. Garvie (Life and Teaching of
Paul, 1910, 181) gives a comparative table of the
views of Harnack, Turner, Ramsay and Lightfoot
for the events from the crucifixion of Christ to the
close of Acts. The general scheme is nearly the
same, differing from one to four years here and
there. Shaw (The Pauline Epp., xi) gives a good
chronological scheme. Moffatt Untro to the Lit. of
the NT, 62) gives the theories of 23 scholars:
Turner, ‘‘Chronology,”” in. HDB; Neteler, Unter-
suchung NT Zeitverhditnisse, 1894; O. Holtzmann, NT
Zeitgeschichte, 1895, changed in 2d ed, 1906; Bartlet,
Apostolic Age, xiiif; Cornely (cf Laurent), NT Studien;
Harnack, Chron. d. alichristl. Lit. bis Eusebius, 233-39;
McGiffert, Apostolic Age, 164, 172; Zahn, Intro, IL.
450f; Ramsay, ‘‘The Pauline Chronology,” Pauline and
Other Studies, 3451; Lightfoot, Bib. Bssays, 213-33;
Wendt, Acts, 53-60, Meyer, Comm.; Renan, Si. Paul;
Bornemann, Thess, 17 f, Meyer, Comm.; Clemen, Paulus,
I, 411;_Giffert, Student's Life of Paul, 242-59; Weiss,
Intro, I, 1541; Sabatier, Paul, 13f; Jiilicher, Fini*, 31 f;
Findlay, ‘‘Paul'’ in HDB; Farrar, Paul, Appendix;


Belser, Theol. Quartalschrift; Steinmann, Abjassungszett d.
Gal, 169; Hoennicke, Die Chronologie des Paulus.


reaching conclusions utterly different. There is Let us look at the dates given by ten of this list:
= = = —
Har- . Light- ‘ Hoen-
Turner | Bartict nack McGiffert| Zahn |Ramsay foot Clemen |Findlay nicke
a a { if
Conversion. ..........4.. 35-36 {| 31-32 30 31-32 35 32 34 31 36 33-35
First visit to Jerusalem..... 38 34-35 33 34-35 38 34 37 34 39 36-38
Second visit to Jerusalem... 46 46 44 45 44 45 45 ue - 45-46
First missionary tour..... 47 47 45 | before 45| 50-51 | 46-48 48 46 46 49?
Conference at Jerusalem... . 49 49 46-47 45 52 50 51 48 49 50-52
Second missionary tour.... 49 49 46-47 46 52 50-53 51 49-52 49 oe
Third missionary tour..... 52 52 50 49 54 53-57 54 53-59 | = 53 Se
Arrest in Jerusalem....... 56 56 538-54 53 58 57 58 59 57 as
Arrival in Rome.......... 59 59 | 56-57 56 61 60 61 62 60 | 60-62
Death of Paul............ 64-65 ; 61-62 64 58 66-67 67 67 64 67 oe


2271


This table shows very well the present diversity
of opinion on the main points in Paul’s life. Before
expressing an opiniou on the points at issue it is
best to examine a few details. Paul himself gives
some notes of time. He gives “‘after 3 years” (Gal
1 18) as the period between his conversion and first
visit to Jerus, though he does not necessarily mean
3 full years. In Gal 2 1, Paul speaks of another
visit to Jerus “after the space of 14 years.”
Then again Luke quotes him as saying to the Ephe-
sian elders at Miletus that he had spent “3 years” at
Ephesus (Acts 20 31). These periods of time all
come before Paul’s last visit and arrest in Jerus,
and they do not embrace all the time between his
conversion and arrest. There is also another note
of time in 2 Cor 12 2, where he speaks in an enig-
matic way of experiences of his ‘14 years’ ago from
the writing of this ep. from Macedonia on the third
tour. This will take him back to Tarsus before
coming to Antioch at the request of Barnabas, and
so overlaps a bit the other “14” above, and in-
cludes the “3 years” at Ephesus. We cannot, there-
fore, add these figures together for the total. But
some light may be obtained from further details
from Acts and the Epp.

(1) The death of Stephen. —Saul is “a young man”
(Aets 7 58) when this event occurs. Like other

young Jews he entered upon his life
2. Crucial as a rabbi at the age of thirty. He
Points had probably been thus active several
years, esp. as he was now in a position
of leadership and may even have been a member of
the Sanhedrin (Acts 26 10). Pontius Pilate was not
deposed from his procuratorship till 36 AD, but
was in a state of uneasiness for a couple of years.
It is more probable, therefore, that the stoning of
Stephen would take place after his deposition in the
interregnum, or not many years before, when he
would be afraid to protest against the lawlessness
of the Jewish leaders. He had shown timidity at
the death of Jesus, 29 or 30 AD, but some of the
forms of law were observed. So nothing decisive
is here obtained, though 35 AD seems more prob-
able than 32 or 33.

(2) The flight from Damascus.—Paul locates this
humiliating experience (2 Cor 11 32f) when ‘‘the
governor under Aretas the king guarded the city
of the Damascenes.”’ Aretas the Arabian, and not
the Roman, has now control when Paul is writing.
The likelihood is that Aretas did not get possession
of Damascus till 37 AD, when Tiberius died and
was succeeded by Caligula. It is argued by some
that the expression “‘the city of the Damascenes”
shows that the city was not under the control of
Aretas, but was attacked by a Bedouin chieftain
who lay in wait for Paul before the city. That to
me seems forced. Jos (Ant, XVIII, v, 3; vi, 3)
at any rate is silent concerning the authority of
Aretas over Damascus from 35-37 AD, but no coins
or inscriptions show Rom rule over the city between
35 and 62 AD. Ramsay, however (‘‘The Pauline
Chronology,” Pauline and Other Studies, 364),
accepts the view of Marquardt (Rémische Staats-
alterth., I, 404f) that it was possible for Aretas to
have had possession of Damascus before 37 AD.
The flight from Damascus ‘s the same year as the
visit to Jerus, Paul’s first after his conversion (Acts
9 26; Gal 1 18). If we knew the precise year of
this event, we could subtract two or three years and
reach the date of his conversion. Lightfoot in his
Comm. on Gal gives 38 as the date of this first. visit
to Jerus, and 36 as the date of the conversion, taking
“after 3 years” in a free way, but in his Bib.
Essays, 221, he puts the visit in 37 and the conver-
sion in 34, and says ‘‘‘after 3 years’ must mean
three whole years, or substantially so.” Thus we
miss a sure date again.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Paul, the Apostle


(3) The death of Herod Agrippa I.—Here the
point of contact between the Acts (12 1-4.19-23)
and Jos (Ant, XIX, viii) is beyond dispute, since
both record and describe in somewhat similar vein
the death of this king. Jos says that at the time of
his death he had already completed the 3d year of
his reign over the whole of Judaca (Ant, XLX, viii,
2). He received this dignity soon after Claudius
began to reign in 41 AD, so that makes the date 44
AD. Hedied after the Passover in that year (44),
for Peter was imprisoned by him during that feast
(Acts 12 3). But unfortunately Luke sandwiches
the narrative about Herod Agrippa in between the
visit of Barnabas and Saul to Jerus from Antioch
(Acts 11 29f) and their return to Antioch (12 25).
He does not say that the evenis here recorded were
exactly synchronous with this visit, for he says
merely ‘‘about that time.” We are allowed therefore
to place this visit before 44 AD or after, just as the
facts require. The mention of “elders” in Acts
11 30 instead of apostles (cf both in 15 4) may mean
that the apostles are absent when the visit is made.
After the death of James (12 1f) and release of Peter
we note that Peter ‘‘went to another place” (12 17).
But the apostles are back again in Jerus in 15 4 ff.
Lightfoot (Bib. Essays, 216) therefore places the
visit “‘at the end of 44, or in 45.” Once more we
slip the connection and fail to fix a firm date for
Paul. It is disputed also whether this 2d visit to
Jerus according to Acts (9 26; 11 29f) is the same
as the “again” in Gal 2 1. Ramsay (St. Paul the
Traveller, 59) identifies the visit in Gal 2 1 with
that in Acts 11 29f, but Lightfoot (Bib. Essays,
221) holds that it ‘‘must be identified with the third
of the Acts” (15 4 ff). In Gal 1 and 2 Paul is not
recording his visits to Jerus, but showing his inde-
pendence of the apostles when he met them in Jerus.
There is no proof that he saw the apostles on the
occasion of the visit in Acts 11 29f. The point
of Lightfoot is well taken, but we have no point of
contact with the outside history for locating more
precisely the date of the visit of Gal 2 1 and Acts
15 4 ff, except that it was after the first missionary
tour of Acts 13 and 14.

(4) The first missionary tour —Sergius Paulus is
proconsul of Cyprus when Barnabas and Saul visit the
island (Acts 13 7). The proconsul Paulus is men-
tioned in a Gr inscription of Soloi (Hogarth, Devia
Cypria, 1889, 114) and Lucius Sergius Paulus in
CIL, VI, 31, 545, but, as no mention of his being
proconsul is here made, it is probably earlier than
that time. The Soloi inscription bears the date 53
AD, but Sergius Paulus was not proconsul in 51
or 52. Hence he may have been proconsul in 50
or the early part of 51 AD. It could not be later
and may have been earlier.

(5) The first visit to Corinth—The point to note
here is that Gallio becomes proconsul of Achaia
(Acts 18 12). Paul has been apparently in Corinth
a year and six months when Gallio appears on the
scene (Acts 18 11). Aquila and Priscilla had
“lately come from Italy” (18 2) when Paul arrived
there. They had been expelled from Rome by the
emperor Claudius (18 2). On the arrival of Gallio
the Jews at once aceuse Paul before him; he refuses
to interfere, and Paul stays on for a while and then
leaves for Syria with Aquila and Priscilla (18 18).
Deissmann (St. Paul, Appendix, I, ‘The Procon-
sulate of L. Junius Gallo’) has shown beyond
reasonable doubt that Gallio, the brother of Seneca,
became proconsul of Achaia about July, 51 AD (or
possibly 52). On a stone found at Delphi, Gallio is
mentioned as proconsul of Achaia according to the
probable restoration of part of the text. But the
stone mentions the fact that Claudius had been
acclaimed imperator 26 times. By means of an-
other inscription we get the 27th proclamation as


2272


imperator in connection with the dedication of an
aqueduct on August 1, 52 AD. So thus the 26th
time is before this date, some time in the earlier part
of the year. We need not follow in detail the turns
of the argument (see Deissmann, op. cit.). Once
more we do not get a certain date as tothe year. It
is either the summer of 51 or 52 AD, when Gallio
comes. And Paul has already been in Corinth a
year and a half. But the terminus ad quem for the
close of Paul’s two years’ stay in Corinth would be
the early autumn of 52 AD, and more probably 51
AD. Hence the 2 Thessalonian Epp. cannot be
later than this date. Before the close of 52 AD,
and probably 51, therefore must come the 2d mis-
sionary tour, the conference at Jerus, the first mis-
sionary tour, etc. Deissmann is justified in his
enthusiasm ou this point. He is positive that 51
AD is the date of the arrival of Gallio.

(6) Paul at Troas according to Acts 20 6 f—On
this occasion Luke gives the days and the time of
year (Passover). Ramsay figures (St. Paul the
Traveller, 289f) that Paul had his closing service
at Troas on Sunday evening and the party left early
Monday morning. Hence he argues back to the
Passover at Philippi and concludes that the days as
given by Luke will not fit into 56, 58, or 59 AD, but
will suit 57. If he is correct in this matter, then we
should have a definite year for the last trip to Jerus.
Lewin (Fasti Sacri, nos. 1856, 1857) reaches the
same conclusion. The conclusion is logical if Luke
is exact in his use of days in this passage. Yet
Lightfoot insists on 58 AD, but Ramsay has the
advantage on this point. See Pauline and Other
Studies, 352 f.

(7) Festus succeeding Felix ——When was Felix
recalled? He was appointed procurator in 52 AD
(Schiirer, Jewish People in the Time of Christ, I,
ni, 174). He was already ruler “many years” (Acts
24 10) when Paul appears before him in Caesarea.
He holds on “two years’? when he is succeeded by
Festus (Acts 24 27). But in the Chronicle of
Eusebius (Armenian text) it is stated that the recall
of Felix took place in the last year of Claudius, or
54 AD. But this is clearly an error, in spite of the
support given to it by Harnack (Chronologie d.
Paulus), since Jos puts most of the rule of Felix
in the reign of Nero (Ant, XX, viii, 1-9; BJ, II,
xii, 8-14), not to mention the “many years” of Paul
in Acts 24 10. But the error of Eusebius has now
been explained by Erbes in his Todestage Pauli und
Petri, and is made perfectly clear by Ramsay in
Pauline and Other Studies, 349 ff. Eusebius over-
looked the interregnum of 6 years between the death
of Herod Agrippa I in 44 AD and the first year of
Herod Agrippa II in 50 AD. Eusebius learned
that Festus came in the 10th year of Herod Agrippa
II. Counting from 50 AD, that gives us 59 AD as
the date of the recall of Felix. This date harmo-
nizes with all the known facts. ‘The great majority
of scholars accept the date 60 for Festus; but they
confess that it is only an approximate date, and
there is no decisive argument for it’? (Ramsay,
Pauline and Other Studies, 351). For minute dis-
cussion of the old arguments see Nash, art. ‘‘Paul”
in new Sch- Herz Ene; Schirer, Hist of the Jewish
People, I, ii, 182 ff. Butif Erbes and Ramsay are
correct, we have at last a date that willstand. So
then Paul sails for Rome in the late summer of 59
AD and arrives at his destination in the early spring
(“had wintered,” Acts 28 11) of 60 AD. He had
been “two whole years in his own hired dwelling”
(28 30) when Luke closes the Acts. On the basis
of his release in 63 or early 64 and the journeyings
of the Pastoral Epp., Paul’s death would come by
early summer of 68 before Nero’s death, and possibly
in 67. On this point see later. We can now count
buck from 59 AD with reasonable clearness to 57 as


the date of Paul's arrest in Jerus. Paul spent at
least a year and three months (Acts 19 8.10) in
Ephesus (called in round numbers three years m
Acts 20 31). It took a year for him to reach Jerus,
from Pentecost (1 Cor 16 8) to Pentecost (Acts
20 16). From the spring of 57 AD we thus get
back to the end of 58 as the time of his arrival in
Ephesus (Acts 19 1). We have seen that Gallio
came to Corinth in the summer of 51 AD (or 52),
after Paul had been there a year and a half (Acts
18 11), leaving ample time in either case for the
journeys from Corinth to Ephesus, to Caesarea, to
Jerus apparently (Acts 18 21f), and to Ephesus
(19 1) from the summer of 51 (or 52) we go back
two years to the beginning of the 2d missionary
tour (Acts 16 1-6) as 49 (or 50). The Jerus Con-
ference was probably in the same year, and the first
missionary tour would come in the two (or three)
preceding years 47 and 48 (48-49). The stay at An-
tioch (Acts 14 28) may have been of some length.
So we come back to the end of 44 or beginning of
45 for the visit to Jerus in Acts 11 29f. Before
that comes the year in Antioch with Barnabas (11
26), the years in Tarsus in Cilicia, the ‘‘three years”
after the conversion spent mostly in Arabia (Gal
1 17f), Paul’s first appearance at the death of
Stephen (Acts 7 58). These early dates are more
conjectural, but even so the facts seem to indicate
35 AD as the probable year of Saul’s conversion.
The year of his birth would then be between 1 and
5 AD, probably nearer 1. If so, and if his death
was in 67 or 68 AD, his age is well indicated. He
was ‘‘Paul the Aged” (Philem ver 9) when he wrote
to Philemon from Rome in 61-63 AD.

IV. His Equipment.—Ramsay chooses as the title
of ch ii, in his St. Paul the Traveller, the words ‘“The
Origin of St. Paul.’ It is not possible to explain
the work and teaching of Paul without a just con-
ception of the forces that entered into his life. Paul
himself ig still woefully misunderstood by some.
Thus A. Meyer (Jesus or Paul, 1909, 119) says:
“Tn spite of all that has been said, there is no doubt
that St. Paul, with his peculiar personality, with
his tendency to recondite gnostic speculation and
rabbinic argument, has heavily encumbered the
cause of Christianity. For many simple souls, and
for many natures that are otherwise constituted
than himself, he has barred the way to the simple
Christianity of Jesus.” That is a serious charge
against the man who claimed to have done more
than all the other apostles, and rightly, so far as we
can tell (1 Cor 16 10), and who claimed that his
interpretation of Jesus was the only true one (Gal
1 7-9). Moffatt (Paul and Paulinism, 1910, 70)
minimizes the effect of Paulinism: “The majority
of Paul’s distinctive conceptions were either mis-
understood, or dropped, or modified, as the case
might be, in the course of a few decades.” “Paul
inism as a whole stood almost as far apart from the
Christianity that followed it as from that which
preceded it” (ib, 73). “The aim of some scholars
seems to be to rob every great thinker of hig origi-
nality” (Garvie, Studies of Paul and His Gospel,
1). Ramsay (Pauline and Other Studies, 3 ff)
boldly challenges the modern prejudice of some
scholars against Paul by asking, “Shall we hear evi-
dence or not?” Every successive age must study
afresh the life and work of Paul (ib, 27) if it would
understand him. Deissmann (St. Paul, 3 f) rightly
sees that “St. Paul is spiritually the great power of
the apostolic age.” Hence ‘‘the historian, surveying
the beginnings of Christianity, sees St. Paul as
first after Jesus.” Feine (Jesus Christus und
Paulus, 1902, 298) claims that Paul grasped the
essence of the ministry of Christ ‘auf das tiefste.”’
I own myself a victim to “the charm of Paul,” to
use Ramsay’s phrase (Pauline and Other Studies,


2273


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Paul, the Apostle


27). In seeking to study “the shaping influences”
in Paul's career (Alexander, The Ethics of St. Paul,
1910, 27), we shall be in error if we seek to explain
everything by heredity and environment_and if we
deny any influence from these sources. He is what
he is because of original endowments, the world_of
his day, and his experience of Christ Jesus. He
had both essential and accidental factors in his
equipment (Fairbairn, Studies in Religion and
Theology, 1910, 469f). Let us note the chief factors
in his religious development.

Geography plays an important part in any life.
John the Baptist spent his boyhood in the hill

_ country of Judaea in a small town
1. The City (Lk 1 39) and then in the wilderness.
of Tarsus Jesus spent His boyhood in the town
of Nazareth and the country round.
Both John and Jesus show fondness for Nature in
all its forms. Paul grew up in a great city and
spent his life in the great cities of the Rom empire.
He makes little use of the beauties of Nature, but
he has a keen knowledge of men (cf Robertson,
Epochs in the Life of Paul, 12). Paul was proud
of his great city (Acts 21 39). He was not merely
a resident, but a “citizen” of this distinguished
city. This fact shows that Paul’s family had not
just emigrated from Judaea to Tarsus a few years
before his birth, but had been planted in Tarsus as
part of a colony with full municipal rights (Ramsay,
St. Paul the Traveller, 31f). Tarsus was the capital
of Cilicia, then a part of the province of Syria, but
it had the title of metropolis and was a free city,
urbs iibera (Pliny, NH, v.27). To the ancient
Gr the city was his “fatherland” (Ramsay, Cities
of St. Paul, 1908, 90). Tarsus was situated on the
river Cydnns, and in a wide plain with the hill
country behind and the snow-covered Taurus
Mountains in the distance. It was subject to ma-
laria. Ramsay (ib, 117 ff) from Gen 10 4f holds
that the early inhabitants were Greeks mingled
with Orientals. East and West flowed together here.
It was a Rom town also with a Jewish colony (ib,
169 ff), constituting a city tribe to which Paul's
family belonged. So then Tarsus was a typical city
of the Gr-Rom civilization.

The religions of the times all met there in this great
mart of business. But it was one of the great seats of
culture also. Strabo (xiv.6.73) even says that ‘Tarsus
surpassed all other universities, such as Alexandria and
Athens, in the study of philosophy and educational lit-
erature in general.’’ ‘‘Its great preéminence,"’ he adds,
“consists in this, that the men of learning here are all
natives."' Accordingly, he and others have made up a
long list of distinguished men who flonrished at Tarsus
in the late autumn of Gr learning: epiiloso phate oF the
Academy, of the Epicurean and Stoic scbools—poets,
grammarians, physicians. At Tarsus, one might say,
“you breathed the atmosphere of learning” (Lightfoot,
Bib. Essays, 205). But Ramsay (Cities of St. Paul, 2311)
cautions us not to misunderstand Strabo. It was not
even one of the three great universities of the world in
point of equipment, fame, students from abroad, or
general standing. It was not on a par with Athens and
Alexandria, except that ‘‘it was rich in what constitutes
the true excellence and strength of a university, intense
enthusiasm and desire for knowledge among the students
and great ability and experience among some at least of
the teachers” (ib, 233). Strabo was very fond of
Athenodorus, for instance. No students from abroad
came to Tarsus, but they went from Tarsus elsewhere.
But Philostratus represents Apollonius of Tyana_as
disgusted with the university and the town, and Dio
Chrysostom describes Tarsus as an oriental and non-
Hellenic town.


Ramsay speaks of Tarsus in the reign of Augustus
as “the one example known in history of a state ruled
by a university acting through its successive prin-
cipals.” “It is characteristic of the general tend-
ency of university life in a prosperous and peaceful
empire, that the rule of the Tarsian University was
marked by a strong reaction toward oligarchy and
a curtailment of democracy; that also belongs to the
oriental spirit, which was so strong in the city. But


the crowning glory of Tarsus, the reagon for its
undying interest to the whole world, is that it
produced the apostle Paul; that it was the one city
which was suited by its equipoise between the
Asiatic and the Western spirit to mold the char-
acter of the great Hellenist Jew; and that it
nourished in him a strong source of loyalty and
patriotism as the citizen of no mean city” (Ram-
say, op. cit., 235). The city gave him a schooling
in his social, political, intellectual, moral, and reli-
gious life, but in varying degrees, as we shall see.
It was because Tarsus was a cosmopolitan city with
“an amalgamated society” that it possessed the
peculiar suitability ‘to educate and mold the mind
of him who would in due time make the religion of
the Jewish race intelligible to the Gr-Rom world”
(ib, 88). Asa citizen of Tarsus Paul was a citizen
of the whole world.
It was no idle boast with Paul when he said,
“But I am a Roman born’ (Acts 22 28). The chief
captain might well be “afraid when he
2. Roman knew that he was a Roman, and be-
Citizenship cause he had bound him’ (22 29).
Likewise the magistrates at Philippi
‘feared when they heard that they were Romans”
(Acts 16 39), and promptly released Paul and Silas
and “‘asked them to go away from the city.” ‘To
the Roman his citizenship was his passport in dis-
tant lands, his talisman in seasons of difficulties
and danger. It shielded him alikefrom the caprice
of municipal law and the injustice of local magis-
trates” (Lightfoot, Bib. Essays, 203). As a citizen
of Rome, therefore, Paul stood above the common
herd. He ranked with the aristocracy in any pro-
vincial town (Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller, 31).
He would naturally have a kindly feeling for the
Rom government in return for this high privilege
and protection. In its pessimism the Rom empire
had come to be the world’s hope, as seen in the
Fourth Eclogue of Virgil (Ramsay, Cities of St.
Paul, 49). Paul would seize upon the Rom empire
as a fit symbol of the kingdom of heaven. ‘Our
citizenship is in heaven” (Phil 3 20); “Ye are no
more strangers and sojourners, but ye are fellow-
citizens with the saints” (Eph 2 19). So he inter-
prets the church in terms of the body politic as well
as in terms of the Israelite theocracy (Col 2 19).
“All this shows the deep impression which the Rom
institutions made on St. Paul” (Lightfoot, Bib.
Essays, 205). Ramsay draws a striking parallel
under the heading, ‘‘Paulinism in the Rom Empire”
(Cities of St. Paul, 70 ff). ‘A universal Paulinism
and a universal Empire must either coalesce, or
the one must destroy the other.’”’ It was Paul’s
knowledge of the Rom empire that gave him his
imperialism and statesmanlike grasp of the problems
of Christianity in relation to the Rom empire.
Paul was a statesman of the highest type, as Ram-
say has conclusively shown (Pauline and Other
Studies, 49-100). Moffatt (Paul and Paulinism,
66) does say: “His perspective was not imperial-
istic,” but he shows thereby a curious inability to
understand Paul. The vision of Paul saw that the
regeneration of the empire could come only through
Christianity. Ramsay strikingly shows how the
emperor dreaded the spiritual upheaval in Paulin-
ism and fought it steadily till the time of Constan-
tine, when ‘‘an official Christianity was victorious,
put Pauline Christianity had perished, and Paul was
now a mere saint, no longer Paul but St. Paul, for-
gotten as a man or a teacher, but remembered as a
sort of revivification of the old pagan gods” (Cities
of St. Paul, 78). But, as Ramsay says, “It was not
dead; it was only waiting its opportunity; it
revived when freedom of thought and freedom of
life began to stir in Europe; and it guided and
stimulated the Protestants of the Reformation.”


Paul, the Apostle THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2274


Suffer Ramsay once more (Pauline and Other
Studies, 100): ‘“Barbarism proved too powerful for
the Gr-Rom civilization unaided by the new reli-
gious bond; and every channel through which that
civilization was preserved or interest in it main-
tained, either is now or has been in some essential
part of its course Christian after the Pauline
form.” Paul would show the Rom genius for organ-
izing the churches established by him. Many of
his churches would be in Rom colonies (Antioch in
Pisidia, Philippi, Corinth, etc). He would address
his most studied ep. to the church in Rome, and
Rome would be the goal of his ministry for many
years (Findlay, HDB). He would show his conver-
sance with Rom law, not merely in knowing how to
take advantage of his rights as a citizen, but also in
the use of legal terms like “adoption” (Gal 4 5 f),
where the adopted heir becomes son, and heir and
son are interchangeable. This was the obsolete
Rom law and the Gr law left in force in the prov-
inces (cf Gal 3 15). But in Rom 8 16f the actual
revocable Rom law is referred to by which “heirship
is now deduced from sonship, whereas in Gal son-
ship is deduced from heirship; for at Rome a son
must be an heir, but an heir need not be a son (cf
He 9 15 ff which presupposes Rom law and the
revocability of a will)” (Maclean in l-vol HDB).
So in Gal 3 24 the tutor or pedagogue presents a
Gr custom preserved by the Romans. This per-
sonal guardian of the child (often a slave) led him
to school, and was not the guardian of the child’s
property in Gal 4 2. See Ramsay, Gal, 337-93;
Ball, St. Paul and the Rom Law, 1901, for further
discussion. As a Roman, Paul would have ‘‘nomen
and praenomen, probably taken from the Rom
officer who gave his family civitas; but Luke, a
Greek, had no interest in Rom names. Paulus, his
cognomen, was not determined by his nomen; there
is no reason to think he was an Amilius”’ (Ramsay,
St. Paul the Traveller, 31). It is probable, though
not certain, that Paul spoke Latin (see Souter, Hz-
pos, April, 1911). He was at any rate a “Roman
gentleman’ (Findlay, HDB), as is shown by the
dignity of his bearing before governors and kings
and the respect accorded him by the proconsul
Sergius Paulus, the procurator Porcius Festus, and
the centurion Julius, whose prisoner he was in the
voyage to Rome. His father, ag a Rom citizen,
probably had some means which may have come
to Paul before the appeal to Rome, which was ex-
pensive (Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller, 310 ff).
Though a prisoner in Rome, he made Rome “his
best vantage ground and his adoptive home,”’ and
it was here that he rose to “his loftiest conceptions
of the nation and destiny of the universal church”
(Findlay, HDB) as ‘an ambassador in chains”
(Eph 6 20). As a Rom citizen, according to tra-
dition, he was beheaded with the sword and not
subjected to crucifixion, the traditional fate of
Simon Peter. He saw the true pax Romana to be
the peace that passeth all understanding (Phil 4
7; cf Rostron, The Christology of St. Paul, 1912,
19). .

It is not possible “to specify all the influences that
worked on Paul in his youth” (Ramsay, Ctties of
St. Paul, 79). We do not know all
the life of the times. But he was
subject to all that life in so far as any
other Jewish youth was. ‘He was
master of all the education and the opportunities
of his time. He turned to his profit and to the ad-
vancement of his great purpose all the resources of
civilization” (Ramsay, Pauline and Other Studies,
285). Iheartily agree with this conception of Paul’s
ability to assimilate the life of his time, but one
must not be led astray so far as Schramm who, in
1710, wrote De stupenda eruditione Pauli (“On the


3. Hellen-
ism


Stupendous Erudition of Paul’). This is, of course,
absurd, as Lightfoot shows (Bib. Essays, 206).
But we must not forget Paul lived in a Gr city and
possessed Gr citizenship also (Ramsay, St. Paul
the Traveller, 33). Certainly the Gr traits of adapt-
ability, curiosity, alertness, the love of investi-
gation were marked features of his character, and
Tarsus afforded wide opportunity for the acquiring
of these qualities (The Ethics of St. Paul, 39). He
learned to speak the vernacular koiné like a native
and with the ease and swing displayed by no other
NT writer save Luke and the author of He. He has
a “poet’s mastery of language,” though with the
passion of 2 soul on fire, rather than with the arti-
ficial rules of the rhetoricians of the day (Deiss-
mann, Light from the Ancient Hast, 239f). Blass
(Die Rhythmen der asianischen und rémischen Kunst-
prosa, 1905) holds that Paul wrote “rhythmically
elaborated artistic prose—a singular instance of
the great scholar’s having gone astray” (Deissmann,
Light, etc, 64). But there is evidence that Paul was
familiar with the use of the diatribe and other com-
mon rhetorical devices, though he was very far from
being tinged with Atticism or Asianism. It is cer-
tain that Paul did not attend any of the schools of
rhetoric and oratory. Heinrici (Vorrede to 1 Cor
in Meyer’s Krit. exeget. Komm.) argues that Paul's
methods and expressions conform more nearly to
the cynie and Stoic diatribe than to the rabbinical
dialectic; cf also Wendland und Kern, Philo wu. d.
kynisch-stoische Diatribe, and Hicks, “St. Paul and
Hellenism” in Stud. Bib., IV. How extensive was
his acquaintance with Gr lit. is in doubt. Light-
foot says: ‘There is no ground for saying that St.
Paul was a very erudite or highly-cultivated man.
An obvious maxim of practical lite from Menander
(1 Cor 16 33), a religions sentiment of Cleanthes
repeated by Aratus, himself a native of Tarsus
(Acts 17 28), a pungent satire of Epimenides (Tit
1 12), with possibly a passage here and there which
dimly reflects some classical writer, these are very
slender grounds on which to build the supposition
of vast learning” (Bib. Essays, 206); but Lightfoot
admits that he obtained directly or indirectly from
contact with Gr thought and learning lessons far
wider and more useful for his work than a perfect
style or a familiar acquaintance with the classical
writers of antiquity. Even so, there is no reason
to say that he made his few quotations from hear-
say and read no Gr books (cf Zahn, Intro to the NT,
52). Certainly he knew the Gr OT and the Jewish
Apoc and apocalypses in Gr. Garvie is only willing
to admit that Paul had such knowledge of Gr lit.
and philosophy as any Jew, living among Grecks,
might pick up (Life and Teaching of Paul, 2), and
charges Ramsay with ‘overstating the influence of
the gentile environment on Paul’s development”
(Studies of Paul and His Gospel, 8). Ramsay holds
that it is quite ‘possible that the philosophical
school at Tarsus had exercised more influence on
Paul than is commonly allowed” (St. Paul the
Traveller, 354). Tarsus was the home of Atheno-
dorus. It was a stronghold of Stoic thought. “At
least five of the most eminent teachers of that. phi-
losophy were in the university” (Alexander, Ethics
of St. Paul, 47). It is not possible to say whether
Paul attended these or any lectures at the university,
though it is hard to conceive that a brilliant youth
like Saul could grow up in Tarsus with no mental
stimulus from such a university. Garvie (ib, 6)
asks when Paul could have studied at the univer-
sity of Tarsus. He was probably toa young before
he went to Jerus to study under Gamaliel. But it is
not probable that he remained in Jerns continuously
after completing his studies till we see him at the
death of Stephen (Acts 7 58). He may have
returned to Tarsus meanwhile and taken such


2275


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Paul, the Apostle


studies. Another possibility is that he took advan-
tage of the years in Tarsus after his conversion (Acts
9 30; Gal 1 21) to equip himself better for his
mission to the Gentiles to which he had been called.
There is no real difficulty on the score of time. The
world was saturated with Gr ideas, and Paul could
not escape them. He could not escape it unless
he was innocent of all culture. Ramsay sees in
Paul a love of truth and reality ‘wholly incon-
ceivable in a more narrow Hebrew, and wholly
inexplicable without an education in Gr philosophy”
(“St. Paul and Hellenism,” Cities of St. Paul, 34).
Paul exhibited a freedom and universalism that
he found in the Gr thought of the time which was not
so decayed as some think. For the discussion be-
tween Garvie and Ramsay see Expos, April and
December, 1911. Pfleiderer (Urchristenthum, Vor-
wort, 174-78) finds a “double root” of Paulinism, a
Christianized Hellenism and a Christianized Phari-
saism. Harnack is more nearly correct in saying
that “notwithstanding Paul’s Gr culture, his con-
ception of Christianity is, in its deepest ground, in-
dependent of Hellenism.’”’ The Helleuistic influence
on Paul was relative and subordinate (Wendland,
Die hel.-rém. Kultur in ihren Beziehungen zu Juden-
thum und Christenthum, 3te Aufl, 1912, 245), but it
was real, as Kéhler shows (Zum Verstdndnis des
Apostels Paulus, 9). He had a “Gr inheritance”
beyond a doubt, and it was not all unconscious or
subliminal as Rostron argues (Christology of St. Paul,
17). It is true that in Athens the Stoics and Epi-
cureans ridiculed Paul as a “picker up of learning’s
crumbs’ —Browning’s rendering (An Episile) of
orepuohoyos, spermolégos. Paul shows a fine scorn
of the sophistries and verbal refinements of the mere
philosophers and orators in 1 Cor 1 and 2, but all
the same he reveals a real apprehension of the true
significance of kuowledge and life. Dr. James
Adam (The Religious Teachers of Greece, 360) shows
instances of ‘the real kinship of thought between
Plato and St. Paul.” He docs not undertake to say
how it came about. He has a Platonic expression,
Td dia TOO gwparos, td did tov sématos, In 2 Cor 5
10, and uses a Stoic and cynic word in 2 Cor 9 8,
abrdpxear, autdrkeian. Indeed, there are so many
similarities between Paul and Seneca in language
and thought that some scholars actually predicate
an acquaintance or dependence of the one on the
other. It is far more likely that Paul and Seneca
drew upon the common phrases of current Stoicisnr
than that Seneca had seen Paul’s Epp. or knew him
personally. Lightfoot has a classic discussion of
the matter in his essay on ‘St. Paul and Seneca’’
in the Comm. on Phil (see also Carr, “St. Paul’s
Attitude to Gr Philosophy,” Expos, V, ix). Alex-
ander finds four Stoic ideas (Divine Immanence,
Wisdom, Freedom, Brotherhood) taken and glori-
fied by Paul to do service for Christ (Ethics of St.
Paul, 49-55). Often Paul uses a Stoic phrase with
a Christian content. Lightfoot boldly argues (Bib.
Essays, 207) that the later Gr lit. was a fitter hand-
maid for the diffusion of the gospel than the earlier.

Paul as the apostle to the Gr-Rom world had to
“understand the bearings of the moral and religious
life of Greece as expressed in her literature, and this
lesson he could learn more impartially and more fully
at Tarsus in the days of her decline than at Athens
in the freshness of her glory” (ib). Ramsay waxes
bold enough to discuss “‘the Pauline philosophy of
history” (Cities of St. Paul, 10-13). I confess to
sympathy with this notion and find it in all the Paul-
ine epp., esp.in Rom. Moffatt (Paul and Paulin-
ism, 66) finds ‘‘a religious philosophy of history’’ in
Rom 9-11, throbbing with strong personal emotion.
Paul rose to the height of the true Christian phi-
losopher, though not a technical philosopher of the
schools. Deissmann (St. Paul, 53) admits his lan-


guage assigns him “‘to an elevated class,” and yet
he insists that he wrote “large letters’? (Gal 6 11)
because he had “the clumsy, awkward writing of a
workman’s hand deformed by toil” (p. 51). I can-
not agree that here Deissmann understands Paul.
He makes ‘‘the world of St. Paul” on too narrow

a scale.
Was Paul influenced by Mithraism? H. A. A.
Kennedy has given the subject very careful and
thorough treatment in a series of pa-


4, The pers in Expos for 1912-13, already
Mystery- mentioned (see II, 5, above). His
Religions arguments are conclusive on the whole


, against the wild notions of W. B.
Smith, Der vorchristliche Jesus; J. M. Robertson,
Pagan Christs; A. Drews, Die Christus-Mythe;
and Lublinski, Die Entstehung des Christentums aus
der antiken Kultur. A magic papyrus about 300
AD has “I adjure thee by the god of the Hebrew
Jesu” (ll. 3019 f), but Deissmann (Light from the
Ancient East, 256) refuses to believe this line genu-
ine: “No Christian, still less a Jew, would have
called Jesus ‘the god of the Hebrews.’”’ Clemen
(Primitive Christianity and Its non-Jewish Sources,
1912, 336) indorses this view of Deissmann and says
that in the Ist cent. AD “one cannot speak of non-
Jewish influences on Christology.’’? One may dis-
miss at once the notion that Paul “deified” Jesus
into a god and made Him Christ under the influence
of pagan myths. Certainly pagan idelatry was
forced upon Paul’s attention at every turn. It
stirred his spirit at Athens to see the city full of
idols (Acts 17 16), and he caught eagerly at the
altar to an unknown god to give him an easy intro-
duction to the true God (17 23); but no one can
read Rom 1 and 2 and believe that Paul was carried
away by the philosophy of vain deceit of his time.
He does use the words “wisdom” and “mystery” often
in 1 Cor, Col, and Eph, and in Phil 4 12, “I [have]
learned the secret,’’ he uses a word employed in the
mystic cults of the time. It is quite possible that
Paul took up some of the phrases of these mystery-
rcligions and gave them a richer content for his own
purposes, as he did with some of the gnostic phrase-
ology (Pléréma, “fulness,” for instance). But
Schweitzer (Paul and His Interpreters, 191 1) deals
a fatal blow against the notion that the mystery-
religions had a formative influence on Paul. He
urges, with point, that it is only mm the 2d cent.
that these cults became widely extended in the Rom
empire. The dates and development are obscure,
but it “is certain that Paul cannot have known the
mystery-religions in the form in which they are
known to us, because in this fully developed form
they did not exist.””. Cumont (Les religions orientales
dans le paganisme romain, 2d ed, 1909 [ET)) insists
repeatedly on the difficulties in the way of assuming
without proof that Mithraism had any influence on
Paul. But in particular it is urged that Paul drew
on the ‘“mysteries’’ for his notions of baptism and
the Lord’s Supper as having magical effects. Ap-
peal is made to the magical use of the name of
Jesus by the strolling Jewish exorcists in Ephesus
(Acts 18 13 ff). Kirsopp Lake (Karlier Epp. of
St. Paul, 233) holds that at Corinth they all accepted
Christianity as a mystery-religion and Jesus as ‘‘the
Redeemer-God, who had passed through death to
life, and offered participation in this new life to those
who shared in the mysteries which He offered,” viz.
baptism and the Lord’s Supper. But Kennedy
(Expos, December, 1912, 548) easily shows how with
Paul baptism and the Lord’s Supper are not magi-
cal sacraments producing new life, but symbolic
pictures of death to sin and new life in Christ which
the believer has already experienced. The battle is
still raging on the subject of the mystery-religions,
but it is safe to say that so far nothing more than


Paul, the Apostle


illustrative material has been shown to be true of
Paul’s teaching from this source.


There is nothing incongruous in the notion that Paul
knew as much abont the mystery-religions as be did
about incipient Gnosticism. Indeed the two things may
have been to some extent combined in some places. A
passage in Col 2 18 has long bothered commentators:
“dwelling in the things which he hath seen,’’ or (m) ‘‘taking
his stand upon the things,”’ ete. Westcott and Horteven
suspected an early error in the text, but the same word,
euBaretw, embatetd, has been found by Sir W. M. Ramsay
as @ result of investigations by Makridi Bey, of the Turk-
ish Imperial Museum, in the sanctuary of Apollo at Claros,
a@ town on the Ionian coast. Some of the initiates bere
record the fact and say that being ‘‘enquirers, having
been initiated, they entered’’ (embateus). The word is thus
used of one who, having been initiated, enters into the
life of the initiate (cf Independent, 1913, 376). Clearly,
then, Paul uses the word in that sense in Col 2 18.

For further discussion see Jacoby, Die antiken Mys-
terienreligionen und das Christentum; Glover, Conflict of
Religions in the Early Rom Empire; Reitzenstein, Die
hell. Mystertenreligionen; Friedlander, Rom Life and
Manners under the Early Empire, III; Thorburn, Jesus
Christ, Historical or Mythical.


M. Briickner (Der sterbende und auferstehende
Goitheiland in den orientalischen Religionen und thr
Verhdlinis zum Christentum, 1908) says: ‘‘As in
Christianity, so in many oriental religions, a belief
in the death and resurrection of a Redeemer-God
(sometimes as His Son) occupied a central place in
the worship and cultus.” To this Schweitzer (Paul
and His Interpreters, 193) replies: ‘“What manipula-
tions the myths and rites of the cults in question
must have undergone before this general statement
could become possible! Where is there anything


abont dying and resurrection in Mithra?” There
we may leave the matter.
Paul was Gr and Rom, but not “pan-Bab,”


though he was keenly alive to all the winds of doc-
trine that blew about him, as we sce

6. Judaism in Col, Eph, and the Pastoral Epp.
But he was most of all the Jew, that

is, before his conversion. He remained a Jew,
even though he learned how to be all things to
all men (1 Cor 9 22). Even though glorying in
his mission as apostle to the Gentiles (Eph 3 8),
he yet always put the Jew first in opportunity
and peril (Rom 2 9f). He loved the Jews almost
to the point of death (Rom 9 3). He was proud
of his Jewish lineage and boasted of it (2 Cor 11
16-22; Acts 22 3ff; 26 4ff; Phil 3 4-6). “His
religious patriotism flickered up within his Chris-
tianity” (Moffatt, Paul and Paulinism, 66). Had
he not been a Rom citizen with some Gr culture
and his rich endowments of mind, he would prob-
ably not have been the “chosen vesscl’’ for the
work of Christ among the Gentiles (Garvie, Studies
of Paul and His Gospel, 15). Had he not becn
the thorough Jew, he could not have mediated
Christianity from Jew to Greek. “In the mind of
Paul a universalized Hellenism coalesced with a uni-
versalized Hebraism’”’ (Ramsay, Cities of St. Paul,
43). Ramsay strongly opposes the notion of Har-
nack and others that Paul can be understood ‘“‘as
urely a Hebrew.” So in Paul both Hebraism and
ellenism meet, though Hebraism is the main
stock. He isa Jew in the Gr-Rom world and a part
of it, not a mere spectator. He is the Hellenistic
Jew, not the Aram. Jew of Pal (cf Simon Peter’s
vision on the housc-top at Joppa, for instance).
But Paul is not a Hellenizing Jew after the fashion
of Jason and Menelaus in the beginning of the
Maccabean conflict. Findlay (HDB) tersely says:
“The Jew in him was the foundation of everything
that Paul became.” But it was not the narrowest
type of Judaism im spite of his persecution of the
Christians. He belonged to the Judaism of the
Dispersion. As a Rom citizen in a Gr city he had
departed from the narrowest lines of his people
(Ramsay, Cities of St. Paul, 47). His Judaism
was pure, in fact, as he givesit to usin Phil 3 5. He


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2276


was a Jew of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Ben-
jamin. He was a Hebrew, of the seed of Abraham
(2 Cor 11 22). He shared in full all the covenant
blessings and privileges of his people (Rom 9 1-5),
whose crowning glory was, that of them came Jesus
the Messiah. He was proud of the piety of his an-
cestors (2 Tim 1 3), and made progress as a student
of Judaism ahead of his fellows (Gal 1 14). His
ancestry was pure, Hebrew of the Hebrews (Phil
3 5), and so his family preserved the native Pales-
tinian traditions in Tarsus. His name Saul was a
proof of loyalty to the tribe of Benjamin as his
cognomen Paul was evidence of his Rom citizen-
ship. In his home he would be taught the law by
his mother (cf Gal 1 14), as was true of Timothy’s
mother and grandmother (2 Tim 1 5). In Tarsus
he would go to the synagogue also. We know little
of his father, save that he was a Rom citizen and
so a man of position in Tarsus and possibly of some
wealth; that he was a tent-maker and taught his
son the same trade, as all Jewish fathers did, what-
ever their rank in life; that he was a Pharisee and
brought up his sou as a Pharisee (Acts 23 6), and
that he sent the young Saul to Jerus to study at the
feet of Gamaliel (Acts 22 3). Paul always con-
sidered himself a Pharisee as distinct from the Sad-
ducaic scepticism (23 6). Many of the Pharisaic
doctrines were identical with those of Christianity.
That Paul did not consider himself a Pharisee in all
respects is shown later by his conflict with the Juda-
izers (Gal 2; Acts 15; 2 Cor 10-13). Paul says
that he was reared as a strict Pharisee (Acts 26 5),
though the school of Gamaliel (grandson of Hillel)
was not so hard and narrow as that of Shammai.
But all Pharisees were stricter than the Sadducees.
So Jerus played an important part in the training
of Saul (Acts 22 3), as Panl recognized. He was
known in Jerus as a student. He knew Aram. as
well as Gr (and Lat), and could speak in it so as to
attract the attention of a Jewish audience (Acts 22
2). Paul was fortunate in his great teacher Gama-
liel, who was liberal enough to encourage the study
of Gr lit. But his liberality in defending the apos-
tles against the Sadducees in Acts 5 34-39 must not
be misinterpreted in comparison with the perse-
cuting zeal of his brilliant pupil against Stephen
(7 58). Stephen had opened war on the Pharisees
themselves, and there is no evidence that Gamaliel
made a defence of Stephen against the lawless rage
of the Sanhedrin. It is common for pupils to go
farther than their teachers, but Gamaliel did not
come to therescue. Still Gamaliel helped Saul, who
was undoubtedly his most brilliant pupil and prob-
ably the hope of his heart for the future of Judaism.
Harnack (History of Dogma, I, 94) says: ‘““Pharisa-
ism had fulfilled its mission in the world when it
produced this man.” Unfortunately, Pharisaism
did not die; in truth hag never died, not even from
Christianity. But young Saul was the crowning
glory of Pharisaism. An effort has recently been
made to restore Pharisaism to its former dignity.
Herford (Pharisaism, Its Aim and Method, 1912)
undertakes to show that the Gospels have slandered
Pharisaism, that it was the one hope of the ancient
world, etc. He has a chapter on ‘“Pharisaism and
Paul,” in which he claims that Paul has not attacked
the rea] Pharisaism, but has aimed his blows at an
unreal creation of his own brain (p. 222). But, if
Paul did not understand Pharisaism, he did not
understand anything. He knew not merely the OT


in the Heb and the LXX tr, for he quotes from
both, though usually from the LXX, but he also


knew the Jewish Apoc and apocalypses, as is shown
in various ways in his writings (see arts. on these
subjects). Schweitzer (Paul and His Interpreters)
earries too far his idca that Paul and Jesus merely
moved in the circle of Jewish eschatology. -He


2277


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Paul, the Apostle


makes it explain everything, and that it cannot do.
But Paul does show acquaintance with some of
these books. See Kennedy, St. Paul’s Conception
of the Last Things (1904), for a sane and adequate
discussion of this phase of the subject. Pfleiderer
pursues the subject in his Paulinism, as does Ka-
bisch in his Eschatologie. So Sanday and Headlam
use this source in their Comm.on Rom. Paul knew
Wisd, also, a book from the Jewish-Alexandrian
theology with a tinge of Gr philosophy (see Good-
rick, Book of Wisd, 398-403; cf also Jowett’s essay
on “St. Paul and Philo” in his Epp. of St. Paul).
Paul knew how to use allegory (Gal 4 24) in accord
with the method of Philo. So then he knew how
to use the Stoic diatribe, the rabbinical diatribe
and the Alexandrian allegory. ‘In his cosmology,
angelology, and demonology, as well as eschatology,
he remains essentially Jewish” (Garvie, Studies of
Paul and His Gospel, 17). When he becomes a
Christian he will change many of his views, for
Christ must become central in his thinking, but his
method learned in the rabbinical schools remains
with him (Kohler, Zum Verstdndnis, etc, 7). Here,
then, is a man with a wonderfully rounded culture.
What of his mental gifts?
Much as we can learn about the times of Paul
(cf Selden, In the Time of Paul, 1900, for a brief
sketch of Paul’s world), we know some-
6. Personal thing of the political structure of the
Character- Rom world, the social life of the 1st
istics cent. AD, the religious condition of the
age, the moral standards of the time,
the intellectual tendencies of the period. New
discoveries continue to throw fresh light on the life
of the middle and lower classes among whom Paul
chiefly labored. And, if Deissmann in his brilliant
study (St. Paul, A Study in Social and Religious
History) has pressed too far the notion that Paul
the tent-maker ranks not with Origen, but with
Amos the herdman (p. 6, on p. 52 he calls it a mis-
take “to speak of St. Paul the artisan as a proleta-
rian in the sense which the word usually bears with
us’’), yet he is right in insisting that Paul is “a reli-
gious genius” and ‘‘a hero of piety” (p.6). Itis not
possible to explain the personality and work of a
man like Paul by his past and to refer with precision
this or that trait to his Jewish or Gr training (Alex-
ander, Ethics of St. Paul, 58). “We must allow
something to his native originality” (ib). We are
all in a sense the children of the past, but some men
have much more the power of initiative than others.
Paul is not mere “eclectic patchwork” (Bruce, Si.
Paul's Conception of Christ, 218). Even if Paul
was acquainted with Philo, which 1s not certain, that
fact by no means explains his use of Philo, the repre-
sentative Jew of the Hellenistic age. “Both are
Jews of the Dispersion, city-dwellers, with marked
cosmopolitan traits. Both live and move in the
LXX Bible. Both are capable of ecstatic and
mystical experiences, and have many points of con-
tact in detail. And yet they stand in very strong
contrast to one another, a contrast which reminds us
of the opposition between Seneca and St. Paul... . .
Philo is a philosopher, St. Paul the fool pours out
the vials of his irony upon the wisdom of the world”’
(Deissmann, St. Paul, 110). Deissmann, indeed,
cares most for “the living man, Paul, whom we hear
speaking and see gesticulating, here playful, gentle
as a father, and tenderly coaxing, so as to win the
hearts of the infatuated children—there thundering
and lightning with the passionate wrath of a, Luther,
with cutting irony and bitter sarcasm on his lips”’
(ib, 161), f
(1) Personal appearance——We have no reliable
description of Paul’s stature and looks. The Acts
of Paul and Thecla (§3) have a protraiture thus:
“Baldheaded, bowlegged, strongly built, a man


small in size, with mecting eyebrows, with a rather
large nose, full of grace, for at times he looked like
a man and at times he had the face of an angel,”
and Ramsay (Church in the Rom Empire, 32) adds:
“This plain and unflattering account of the apostle’s
personal appearance seems to embody a very early
tradition,” and in ch xvi he argues that this story
goes back to a document of the Ist cent. We may
not agree with all the details, but in some respects
it harmonizes with what we gather from Paul’s Epp.
Findlay (HDB) notes that this description is con-
firmed by “the lifelike and unconventional figure of
the Rom ivory diptych, ‘supposed to date not later
than the 4th cent.’” (Lewin’s Life and Epp. of St.
Paul, Frontispiece, and II, 211). At Lystra the
natives took Barnabas for Jupiter and Paul for
Hermes, ‘‘because he was the chief speaker” (Acts
14 12), showing that Barnabas had the more im-
pressive appearance, while Paul was his spokesman.
In Malta the natives changed their minds in the
opposite direction, first thinking Paul a murderer
and then a god because he did not die from the bite
of the serpent (Acts 28 4-6). His enemies at
Corinth sneered at the weakness of his bodily pres-
ence in contrast to the strength of his letters (2 Cor
10 9f). The attack was really on the courage of
Paul, and he claimed equal boldness when present
(vs 11f), but there was probably also a reflection
on the insignificance of his physique. The terrible
bodily sufferings which he underwent (2 Cor 11
23-26) left physical marks (o7lyuara, stigmata, Gal
6 17) that may have disfigured him to some extent.
Once his illness made him a trial to the Galatians
to whom he preached, but they did not scorn him
(Gal 4 14). He felt the frailty of his body as an
earthen vessel (2 Cor 4 7) and as a tabernacle in
which he groaned (5 4). But the effect of all this
weakness was to give him a fresh sense of depend-
ence on Christ and a new influx of Divine power
(2 Cor 11.30; 129). But even if Paul was un-
prepossessing in appearance and weakened by illness,
whether ophthalmia, which is so common in the
East (Gal 4 15), or malaria, or recurrent head-
ache, or epilepsy, he must have had a tough con-
stitution to have endured such hardship to a good
old age. He had one infirmity in particular that
came upon him at Tarsus (2 Cor 12 1-9) in con-
nection with the visions and revelations of the Lard
then granted him. The affliction seems to have
been physical (cxédop 77 capkl, skdlops té sarki, ‘a
stake in the flesh” or “for the flesh’’), and it con-
tinued with him thereafter as a messenger of Satan
to buffet Paul and to keep him humble. Some
think that this messenger of Satan was a demon
that haunted Paul in his nervous state. Others
hold it to be epilepsy or some form of hysteria
superinduced by the visions and revelations which
hehad had. Cf Krenkel, Bedtirige (pp. 47-125), who
argues that the ancients looked with such dread on
epilepsy that those who beheld such attacks would
“spit out’? so as to escape the evil (cf modern
‘knocking on wood”); cf qui sputatur morbus in
Plautus (Captivi, iii.4, 17). Reference is made to
Gal 4 14, o¥6e ékewrtcare, oudé exeptisate, “nor
did ye spit out,” as showing that this was the
affliction of Paul in Galatia. But epilepsy often
affects the mind, and Paul shows no sign of mental
weakness, though his enemies charged him with
insanity (Acts 26 24; 2 Cor 5 13; 12 11). It is
urged in reply that Julius Cacsar, Alfred the Great,
Peter the Great, and Napoleon all had epilepsy
without loss of mental force. It is difficult to
think headache or malaria could have excited the
disgust indicated in Gal 4 14, where some trouble
with the eyes seems to be indicated. The ministers
of Satan (2 Cor 11 15) do not meet the require-
ments of the case, nor mere spiritual sins (Luther),


Paul, the Apostle


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2278


nor struggle with lust (Roman Catholic, stimulus
carnis). Garvie (Studies of Pauland His Gospel, 65,
80) thinks it not unlikely that “it was the recurrence
of an old violent temptation,’ rather than mere
bodily disease. “Can there be any doubt that
this form of temptation is more likely to assail
the man of intense emotion and intense affection,
as Paul was?” But enough of what can never be
settled. “St. Paul’s own scanty hints admonish
to caution” (Deissmann, St. Paul, 63). It is a
blessing for ug not to know, since we can all cherish
a close bond with Paul. Ramsay (St. Paul the
Travelier, 37 ff) calls special attention to the look
of Paul. He “fastened his eyes on’? the man (Acts
13 9; 14 9). He argues that Paul had a pene-
trating, powerful gaze, and hence no eye trouble.
He calls attention also to gestures of Paul (Acts
20 24; 26 2). There were artists in marble and
color at the court of Caesar, but no one of them
cared to preserve a likeness of the poor itinerant
preacher who turned out to be the chief man of the
age (Deissmann, St. Paul, 58). ‘We are like the
Christians of Colossae and Laodicea, who had not
seen his face in the flesh” (Col 2 1).

(2) His natural endowments.—In respect to his
natural endowments we can do much better, for his
epp. reveal the mind and soul of the man. He is
difficult to comprehend, not because he conceals
himself, but because he reveals so much of himself
in his epp. He seems to some a man of contra-
dictions. He had a many-sided nature, and his
very humanness is in one sense the greatest thing
about him. There are “great polar contradictions”
in hig nature. Deissmann (St. Paul, 62 ff) notes
his ailing body and his tremendous powers for work,
his humility and his self-confidence, his periods of
depression and of intoxication with victory, his
tenderness and his sternness; he was ardently loved
and furiously hated; he was an ancient man of his
time, but he is cosmopolitan and modern enough for
today. Findlay (HBD) adds that he was a man
possessed of dialectical power and religious inspira-
tion. He was keenly imtellectual and profoundly
mystical (ef Campbell, Paul the Mystic, 1907). He
was a theologian and a man of affairs. He was a
man of vision with a supreme task to which he held
himself. He was a scholar, a sage, a statesman,
a seer, a saint (Garvie, Studies in Paul and His
Gospel, 68-84). He was a man of heart, of passion,
of imagination, of sensibility, of will, of courage, of
sincerity, of vivacity, of subtlety, of humor, of adroit-
ness, of tact, of genius for organization, of power
for command, of gift. of expression, of leadership—
“All these qualities and powers went to the making
of Jesus Christ’s apostle to the nations, the master-
builder of the universal church and of Christian
theology” (Findlay, HDB; see Lock, St. Paul the
Master Builder, 1905; and M. Jones, St. Paul the
Orator, 1910). :

I cannot agree with Garvie’s charge of cowardice
(Life and Teaching of Paul, 173) in the matter of the
purifying rites (Acts 21 23) and the dividing of the
Sanhedrin (23 6). The one was a mere matter of pru-
dence in a nonessential detail, the other was justiflahle
skill in resisting the attack of unscrupulous enemies. One
does not understand Paul who does not understand his
emotional nature. He was ‘‘quick, impetuous, stren-
uous, lmpassioned"’ (Bevan, St. Paul in the Light of To-
day, 1912, 26). His heart throhs through his epp., and
he loves his converts like a mother or a lover (Findlay,
HDB) rather than a pastor. We feel the surging emo-
tion of his great spirit in 1 Thess, 1 Cor, 2 Cor, Gal, Rom,
Phil, 2 Tim in particular. He had the spiritual temper-
ament and reaches his highest flights in his moments of
thapsody. He has elasticity, and rebound of spirit, and
comes up with the joy of victory in Christ out of the
severest trials and disappointments. His ambition is
great, but it is to serve Christ his Lord. He is a manof
faith and a man of prayer. For him to lve Is Christ.
He has a genius for friendship and binds men to him with
hooks of steel—men like Barnabas, Silas, Timothy,
Luke, Titus (Speer, The Man Paul, 1900, 111ff). He is


not afraid to oppose his friends when it is necessary for
the sake of truth, as with Peter (Gal 2 11 ff) and with Bar-
nabas (Acts 1§ 35ff). ‘‘While God made Paul like the
other apostles out of the clay whereof ordinary men are
fashioned, yet we may say that He took extraordinary
pains with his education"' (Fairbairn, Studies in Religion
and Theology, 471). If ever a man, full-blooded and
open-eyed, walked the earth, it was Paul. Itis a de-
batable question whether Paul was married or not._ He
certainly was not when he wrote (1 Cor 7 7; 9 5). But,

he was a member of the Sanhedrin when he cast his
vote against the Sec e (Acts 26 10), as his language
naturally means, then he had been married..

There is in Paul the gift of leadership in a marked
degree. He, though young, is already at the head of
the opposition to Stephen (Acts 7 58), and soon drives
the disciples out of Jerus.


(8) His supernatural gifts——He had his share of
them. Hehad all the gifts that others could boast
of at Corinth, and which he lightly esteemed except
that of prophecy (1 Cor 14 18-29). He had his-
visions and revelations, but would not tell what he
had seen (2 Cor 12 1-9). He did the signs of an
apostle (2 Cor 12 12-14). He had the power to
work miracles (1 Cor 4 19-21) and to exercise dis-
cipline (1 Cor 5 4f{; 2 Cor 13 1-3). But what
he cared for most of all was the fact that Jesus
had appeared to him on the road to Damascus and
had called him to the work of preaching to the
Gentiles (1 Cor 16 8).

No other element in the equipment of Paul is
comparable in importance to bis conversion.

(1) Preparation.—It was sudden,
7. Conver- and yet God had led Saul to the state
sion of mind when it could more easily
happen. True, Saul was engaged in the
very act of persecuting the believers in Jerus. His
mind was flushed with the sense of victory. He was
not conscious of any lingering doubts about the
truth of his position and the justice of his conduct
till Jesus abruptly told him that it was hard for
him to kick against the goad (Acts 26 14). Thus
suddenly brought to bay, the real truth would flash
upon his mind. _In later years he tells how he had
struggled in vain against the curse of the Law
(Rom 7 7f). It is probable, though not certain,
that Paul here has in mind his experience before
his conversion, though the latter part of the chapter
may refer to a period later. There is difficulty in
either view ag to the “body of this death” that made
him so wretched (Rom 7 24). The Christian keeps
up the fight against sin in spite of defeat (7 23), but
he does not feel that he is “carnal, sold under
sin” (7 14). But when before his conversion did
Paul have such intensity of conviction? We can
only leave the problem unanswered. His reference
to it at least harmonizes with what Jesus said about
the goad. The words and death of Stephen and
the other disciples may have left. a deeper mark
than he knew. The question might arise whether
after all the Nazarenes were right. Hig plea for
his conduct made in later years was that he was
conscientious (Acts 26 9) and that he did it igno-
rantly in unbelief (1 Tim 1 13). He was not wil-
fully sinning against the full light as he saw it. It
will not do to say with Holsten that Saul was half-
convinced to join the disciples, and only needed a
jolt to turn him over. He was “yet breathing
threatening and slaughter against the disciples of
the Lord” (Acts 9 1), and went to the high priest
and asked for letters to Damascus demanding the
arrest of the disciples there. His temper on the
whole is distinctly hostile to Christ, and the struggle
against his course was in the subconscious mind.
There a volcano had gathered ready to burst out.

It is proper to ask
in the Hesh, but it is. ee a TOE eee
Seal Pint aun aoa Puy ty Ee
boy of 12 visited the temple, ‘and Sencar Teen


the doctors. That could be true only in case Paul
was born 5 or 6 BC, which is quite unlikely. It is pos-


2279


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Paul, the Apostle


sible again that Panl may have remained in Jerus after
his graduation at the school of Gamalic] and so was
present in Jerus at the trialand death of Jesus. Some
of the ahlest of modern scholars hold that Paul knew
Jesus in the flesh. It will at once scem strange that
we have no express statement to this effect in tho let-
ters of Paul, when he shows undoubted knowledge of
various events in the life of Christ (cf Wynne, Frag-
mentary Records of Jesus of Nazareth, 1887). It is almost
certain, as J. Weiss admits (Paul and Jesus, 41), that in
1 Cor 9 1 Paul refers to the Risen Jesus, The passage
in 2 Cor § 16 is argued hoth ways: ‘‘Wherefore we
henceforth know no man after the flesh: even though we
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now we know him
so no more.” J. Weiss (ih, 41-55) argues strongly for
the view that he knew Jesus in the flesh. But in the
first clanse of the sentence ahove Panl means by ‘after
the flesh,"’ not acquaintance, hut standpoint, It is nat-
ural to take it in the same way as applied to Christ. He
has changed his viewpoint of Christ and so of all men.
Weiss pleads eae 40), at any rate, that we have no word
saying that “ Paul had not seen Jesus in person.’ It may
he said in reply that the fact that Jesus has to tell Paul
who He is (Acts 9 5) shows that Paul did not have per-
sonal acquaintance with Him. But the questlen may be
left in abeyance as not vitally important. He certainly
had not understood Jesus, if he knew Him.


(2) Experience—Space does not permit a dis-
-cussion of this great event of Paul’s conversion at
all commensurate with its significance. A literature
of importance has grown up around it besides the
lengthy discussions in the lives and theologies of
Paul (see e.g. Lord Lyttleton’s famous Observa-
tions on Saul’s Conversion, 1774; Fletcher’s A
Study of the Conversion of St. Paul, 1910; Gardner,
The Religious Experience of St. Paul, 1911; Maggs,
The Spiritual Experience of St. Paul). All sorts of
theories have been advanced to explain on natural-
istic grounds this great experience of Christ in the
life of Paul. It has been urged that Paul had an
epileptic fit, that he had a sunstroke, that he fell
off his horse to the ground, that he had a nightmare,
that he was blinded by a flash of lightning, that he
imagined that he saw Jesus as a result of his highly
wrought nervous state, that he deliberately re-
nounced Judaism because of the growing conviction
that the disciples were right. But none of these
explanations explains. Mere prejudice against the
supernatural, such as is shown by Weinel in_his
Paulus, and by Holsten in his able book (Zum
Evangelium d. Paulus und Petrus), cannot solve
this problem. One must be willing to hear the
.evidence. ‘There were witnesses of the bright light
(Acts 26 13) and of the sound (9 7) which only
Paul understood -(22 9), as he alone beheld Jesus.
It is claimed by some that Paul had a trance or
subjective vision, and did not see Jesus with his
eyes. Denney (Standard Bible Dict.) replies that
it is not a pertinent objection. Jesus (Jn 21 1)
“manifested” Himself, and Paul says that he “saw”
Jesus (1 Cor 9 1), that Jesus “appeared” (1 Cor
15 8) to him. Hence it was both subjective and
objective. But the reality of the event was as
clear to Paul as his own existence. The account is
given 3 t in Acts (chs 9,22, 26) m substantial
agreement, with a few varying details. In ch 9 the
historical narrative occurs, in ch 22 Paul’s defence
before the mob in Jerus is given, and in ch 26 we
have the apology before Agrippa. There are no
contradictions of moment, save that in ch 26 Jesus
Himself is represented as giving directly to Paul the
call to the Gentiles while in chs 9 and 22 it is con-
veyed through Ananias (the fuller and more accurate
account). ‘There is no need to notice the apparent
contradiction between 9 7 and 22 9, for the differ-
ence in case in the Gr gives a difference in sense,
hearing the sound, with the genitive, and not under-
standing the sense, with the accusative. Findlay
(HBD) remarks that the conversion of Paul is a
psychological and ethical problem which cannot be
accounted for save by Paul’s own interpretation of
the change wrought in him. He saw Jesus and
surrendered to Him.


_ (8) Effect on Paul—His surrender to Jesus was
instantaneous and complete: ‘‘What shall I do,
Lord?” (Acts 22 10). He could not see for the
glory of that light (22 11), but he had already seen
“the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ” (2 Cor 4 6). The ged of
this world could blind him no longer. He had seen
Jesus, and all else had lost charm for Paul. There
is infinite pathos in the picture of the blind Saul
led by the hand (Acts 9 8) into Damascus. All
the pride of power is gone, all the lust for vengeance.
The fierceness of the name of Saul is well shown in
the dread that Ananias has and the protest that
he makes to the Lord concerning him (9 10-14).
Ananias doubtless thought that the Lord had made
a strange choice of a vessel to bear the message of
Christ to the Gentiles, kings, and the children of
Israel (9 15), but there was hope in the promise of
chastisement to him (9 16). So he went, and calls
him “Brother Saul.’”’ Saul was filled with the Holy
Spirit, the scales fell from his eyes, he was baptized.
And now what next? What did the world hold in
store for the proud scion of Judaism who had re-
nounced power, place, pride for the lowly Naza-
rene? Hedared not go back to Jerus. The Jews
in Damascus would have none of him now. Would
the disciples receive him? They did. ‘And he
was certain days with the disciples that were at
Damascus” (9 19). Ananias vouched for him by
his vision. Then Saul took his courage in his hands
and went boldly into the synagogues and “pro-
claimed Jesus, that he is the Son of God” (9 20).
This was a public committal and a proclamation of
his new creed. There was tremendous pith and
point in this statement from Saul. The Jews were
amazed (Acts 9 21). This is the core of Paul’s
message as we see in his later ministry (Acts 13;
17 3). Itrests at bottom on Paul’s own experience
of grace. ‘‘His whole theology is nothing but the
explanation of his own conversion” (Stalker, Life
of St. Paul, 45). We need not argue (Garvie,
Studies of Paul and His Gospel, 51) that Paul under-
stood at once the full content of the new message,
but he had the heart of it right.
V. Work.—There was evidently a tumult in
Paul’s soul. He had undergone a revolution, both
intellectual and spiritual. Before he
1. Adjust- proceeded farther it was wise to think
ment through the most important implica-
tions of the new standpomt. Luke
gives no account of this personal phase of Paul’s
career, but he allows room forit between Acts 9 21
and 22. It is Paul who tells of his retirement to
Arabia (Gal 1 17) to prove his independence
of the apostles in Jerus. He did not go to them
for instruction or for ceclesiastical authority. He
did not adopt the merely traditional view of Jesus
as the Messiah. He knew, of course, the Christian
contention well enough, for he had answered it
often enough. But now his old arguments were
gone and he must work his way round to the
other side, and be able to put his new gospel
with clearness and force. He was done with call-
ing Jesus anathema (1 Cor 12 3). Henceforth
to him Jesus is Lord. We know nothing of
Paul’s life m Arabia nor in what part of Arabia
he was. He may have gone to Mt. Sinai and
thonght out grace in the atmosphere of law, but
that is not necessary. But it is clear that Paul
grew in apprehension of the things of Christ during
these years, as indeed he grew to the very end.
But he did not grow away from the first clear vision
of Christ. He claimed that God had revealed His
Son in him that he might preach to the Gentiles
(Gal 1 16). He claimed that from the first and
to the very last. The undoubted development in
Paul’s Epp. (see Matheson, Spiritual Development


Paul, the Apostle


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2280


of St. Paul, and Sabatier, The Apostle Paul) is,
however, not a changing view of Christ that nulli-
fies Paul’s “original Christian inheritance” (IXdéhler,
Zum Verstindnis des Apostels Paulus, 18). Pfleid-
erer (Influence of the Apostle Paul on the Develop-
ment of Christianity, 3d ed, 1897, 217) rejects Col
because of the advanced Christology here found.
But the Christology of Col is implicit in Paul’s
first sermon at Damascus.
escape the conclusion that the significance and
value of the Cross became clear to him almost


simultaneously with the certainty of the resurrec- |


tion and of the Messiahship of Jesus” (Garvie,
Studies, etc, 57). The narrow Jew has surrendered
to Christ who died for the sins of the world. The
universal gospel has taken hold of his mind and
heart, and it will work out its logical consequences in
Paul. The time in Arabia is not wasted. When he
reappears in Damascus (Acts 9 22) he has ‘‘devel-
oped faith” (Findlay, HDB) and energy that bear
instant fruit. He is now the slave of Christ. For
him henceforth to live is Christ. He is crucified
with Christ. He is in Christ. The union of Paul
with Christ is the real key to his life. It is far
more than a doctrine about Christ. It is real
fellowship with Christ (Deissmann, St. Paul, 123).
Thus it is that the man who probably never saw
Christ in the flesh understands him best (Wernle,
Beginnings of Christianity, I, 159).

Saul had “increased the more in strength, and
confounded the Jews that dwelt in Damascus,
proving that this is the Christ’? (Acts
9 22). Now he not merely “pro-
claims” as before (9 20); he ‘‘proves.”’
He does it with such marvelous skill
that the Jews are first confounded, then enraged
to the point of murder. Their former hero was now
their foe. The disciples had learned to run from
Saul. They now let him down in a basket through
the wall by night and he is gone (Acts 9 23 ff). This
then is the begmning of the active ministry of the
man who was called to be a chosen vessel to Gentiles,
kings, and Jews. There was no need to go back to
the wilderness. He had gotten his bearings clearly
now. He had his message and it had his whole
heart. He had not avoided Jerus because he de-
spised flesh and blood, but because he had no need
of light from the apostles since “the Divine reve-
lation so completely absorbed his interest and
attention” (Garvie, Life and Teaching of Paul, 33).
No door was open as yet among the Gentiles.
Sooner or later he must go to Jerus and confer with
the leaders there if he was to codéperate with them
in the evangelization of the world. Saul knew that
be would be an object of suspicion to the disciples
in Jerus. That was inevitable in view of the past.
It was best to go, but he did not wish to ask any
favors of the apostles. Indecd he went in particu-
lar “to visit Cephas”’ (m to “become acquainted
with,” Gal 118). They knew each other, of
course, as opponents. But Saul comes now with
the olive branch to his old enemy. He expressly
explains (Gal 1 19) that he saw no other apostle.
He did see James, the Lord’s brother, who was not
one of the Twelve. It seems that at first Peter and
James were both afraid of Saul (Acts 9 26), “not
believing that he was a disciple.’ If a report came
3 years before of the doings at Damascus, they had
discounted it. ATI had been quiet, and now Saul
suddenly appears in Jerus in a new rdéle. It was,
they feared, just a ruse to complete his work of old.
But for Barnabas, Saul might not have had that
visit of 15 dayswith Peter. Barnabas wasa Hellen-
ist of Cyprus and believed Saul’s story and stood
by him. Thus he had his opportunity to preach
the gospel in Jerus, perhaps in the very synagogues
in which he had heard Stephen, and now he is


2. Opposi-
tion


“Tt is impossible to |


taking Stephen’s place and is ‘disputing against the
Grecian Jews (Acts 9 29). He had days of
blessed fellowship (9 28) with the disciples, till the
Grecian Jews sought to kill him as Saul had helped
to do to Stephen (9 29). It was a repetition of
Damascus, but Saul did not wish to run again so
soon. He protested to the Lord Jesus, who spoke
in a vision to him, and recalls the fate of Stephen,
but Jesus bids him go: “For I will send thee forth
far heuce unto the Gentiles’ (Acts 22 17-21).
One martyr like Stephen is enough. So the breth-
ren took him down to Caesarea (Acts 9 30). It
was an ominous beginning for a ministry with so
clear a call. Where can he go now?

They “sent him forth to Tarsus’ (Acts 9 30).
Who would welcome him there? At Jerus he ap-

parently avoided Gamaliel and_ the
3. Waiting Sanhedrin. He was with the Chris-

tians and preached to the Hellenistic
Jews. The Jews regarded him as a turncoat, a
renegade Jew. There were apparently no Christians’
in Tarsus, unless some of the disciples driven from
Jerus by Saul himself went that far, as they did go
to Autioch (Acts 11 19f). But Saul was not idle,
for he speaks himself of his activity in the regions of
Syria and Cilicia during this “period of obscurity”
(Denney, Standard Bible Dict.) as a thing known to
the churches of Judaea (Gal 1 21f). He was not
idle then. The way was not yet opened for formal
eutrance upon the missionary enterprise, but Saul
was not the man to do nothing at home because of
that. If they would not hear him at Damascus
and Jerus, they would in the regions of Syria and
Cilicia, his home province. We are left in doubt
at first whether Paul preached only to Jews or to
Gentiles also. He had the specific call to preach to
the Gentiles, and there is no reason why he should
not have done so in this province, preaching to the
Jews first as he did afterward. He did not have the
scruples of Simon Peter to overcome. When he
appears at Antioch with Barnabas, he seems to take
hold like an old hand at the business. It is quite
probable, therefore, that this obscure ministry of
some 8 or 10 years may have had more results than
we know. Paul apparently felt that he had done
his work in that region, for outside of Antioch he
gives no time to it except that in starting out on the
second tour from Antioch “he went through Syria
and Cilicia, confirming the churches” (Acts 15 41),
churches probably the fruit of this early ministry
and apparently contaming Gentiles also. The let-
ter from the Jerus conference was addressed to “the
brethren who are of the Gentiles in Antioch and
Syria and Cilicia” (Acts 16 23). Cilicia was now
part of the Rom province of Syria. So then we
conclude that Saul had a gentile ministry in this
region. “Independently, under no human master,
he learned his business as a missionary to the
heathen” (Findlay, HDB). One can but wonder
whether Saul was kindly received at home by his
father and mother. They had looked upon him
with pride as the possible successor of Gamaliel,
and now he is a follower of the despised Nazarene
and a preacher of the Cross. It is possible that
his own exhortations to fathers not to provoke their
children to wrath (Eph 6 4) may imply that his
own father had cast him out at this time. Findlay
(HDB) argues that Saul would not have remained
in this region so long if his home relations had been
altogether hostile. Itis a severe test of character
when the doors close against one. But Saul turned
defeat to glorious gain.

Most scholars hold that the ecstatic experience
told by Paul in 2 Cor 12 1-9 took place before he
came to Antioch. If we count the years strictly, 14
from 56 AD would bring us to 42 AD. Paul had
spent a year in Antioch before going up to Jerus


2281


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Paul, the Apostle


(Acts 11 29f). Findlay (HDB) thinks that Paul
had the visions before he received the call to come
to Antioch. Garvie (Life and Teach-
ing of Paul, 41) holds he received the
callfirst. ‘Such a mood of exaltation
would account for the vision to which
he refers in 2 Cor 12 1-4.” At any rate he had
the vision with its exaltation and the thorn in
the flesh with its humiliation before he came to
Antioch in response to the invitation of Barnabas.
He had undoubtedly had a measure of success in
his work in Cilicia and Syria. He had the seal of
the Divine blessing on his work among the Gentiles.
But there was a pang of disappointment over the
attitude of the Jerus church toward his work. He was
apparently left alone to his own resources. “Only
such a feeling of disappointment can explain the
tone of his references to his relations to the apostles
(Gal 1 11-24)” (Garvie, Life and Teaching of Paul,
41). There is no bitterness in this tone—but puz-
zlied surprise. It seems that the 12 apostles are
more or less absent from Jerus during this period
with James the brother of the Lord Jesus as chief
elder. A narrow Pharisaic element in the church
was active and sought to shape the policy of the
church in its attitude toward the Gentiles. This
is clear in the treatment of Peter, when he returned
to Jerus after the experience at Caesarea with
Cornelius (Acts 11 1-18), There was acquies-
cence, but with the notion that this was an excep-
tional case of the Lord’s doing. Hence they show
concern over the spread of the gospel to the Greeks
at Antioch, and send Barnabas to investigate and
report (Acts 11 19-22). Barnabas wasa Hellenist,
and evidently did not share the narrow views of
the Pharisaic party in the church at Jerus (11 2), for
he was glad (11 23f) of the work in Antioch.
Probably mindful of the discipline attempted on
Simon Peter, he reframed from going back at once
to Jerus. Moreover, he believed in Saul and his
work, and thus he gave him his great opportunity
at Antioch. They had there a year’s blessed work
together (11 25 ff). So great was the outcome that
the disciples received a new name to distinguish
them from the Gentiles and the Jews. But theterm
“Christian” did not become general for a long time.
There was then a great Gr church at Antioch, possibly
equal in size to the Jewish church in Jerus. The
prophecy by Agabus of a famine gave Barnabas and
Saul a good excuse for a visit to Jerus with a gen-
eral collection—‘every man according to his
ability’—from the Gr church for the relief of the
poverty in the Jeruschurch. Barnabas had assisted
generously in a similar strain in the beginning
of the work there (Acts 4 36f), unless it was a
different Barnabas, which is unlikely. This con-
tribution would help the Jerus saints to understand
now that the Greeks were really converted. It was
apparently successful according to the record in
Acts. The apostles seem to have been absent,
since only “elders” are mentioned in 11 30.

The incidents in ch 12, as already noted, are probably
not contemporaneous with this visit, but either prior
or subsequent to it. However, it is urged by some
scholars that this visitis the same as that of Gal 2 1-10,
since Paul would not have cmitted it in his list cf visits
to Jerns. But then Paul is not giving a list of visits, but
is only showing his independence of the apestles. If
they were ahsent from Jerus at_that time, there would
be no occasion to mentionit. Besides, Luke in Acts 15
does recount the struggle in Jerus over the problem of
gentile liberty. If that question was an issne at the
visit in Acts 11 30, it is quite remarkable that he should
have passed it by, esp. if the matter caused as much heat
as is manifest in Gal 2, both in Jerus and Antioch. It
js much simpler to understand that in Acts 15 and Gal
2 1-10 we have the public and the private aspects of
the same issue, than te suppose that Luke has slurred
the whole matter overin Acts 11 30. Theidentification
of the visit of Gal 2 with that in Acts 11 30 makes it


possible to place Gal before the conference in Jerus in
Acts ]5 and implies the correctness of the South-


4, Oppor-
tunity


Galatian theory of the destination of the ep. and cf the
work cf Paul, a theory with strong advocates and argu-
ments, but which is by no means established (see below
for discussion at more length). So far as we can gather
from Luke, Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerus with
John Mark (Acts 12 25), when they had fulfilled their
ministration’' with satisfaction. The Pharisaic element
was apparently quiescent, and the cutlook for the future
work among the Gentiles seemed hopeful. Ramsay (Sé.
Paul the Traveller, 62 ff) argues strongly for identifying
the revelation menticned in Paul's speech in Acts 22
20 f with this visit in 1] 30 (12 25), rather than with the
enein Acts 9 29f. There is a textual problem in 12 25,
but I cannot concur in the solution of Ramsay.
Paul had already preached to the Gentiles im
Cilicia and Syria for some 10 years. The work was
not new to him. He had had his spe-
6. The cific call from Jerus long ago and had
First Great answered it. But now an entirely new
Mission situation arises.


His work had been

Campaign: individual in Cilicia. Now the Spirit
Acts 13 and specifically directs the separation of
14,47 and Barnabas and Saul to this work (Acts
48 AD 13 2). They were to go together, and
they had the sympathy and prayers

of a great church. The endorsement was prob-
ably not ‘‘ordination” in the technical sense, but a
farewell service of blessing and good will as the
missionaries went forth on the world-campaign
(18 3). No such unanimous endorsement could
have been obtained in Jerus to this great enterprise.
It was momentous in its possibilities for Christianity.
Hitherto work among the Gentiles had been spo-
radic and incidental. Now a determined effort was
to be made to evangelize a large section of the Rom
empire. ‘There is no suggestion that the church at
Antioch provided funds for this or for the two later
campaigns, as the church at Philippi came to do.
How that was managed this time we do not know.
Some individuals may have helped. Paul had
his trade to fall back on, and often had resort to it
later. The presence of John Mark ‘‘as their attend-
ant” (13 5) was probably due to Barnabas, his
cousin (Col 4 10). The visit to Cyprus, the home
of Barnabas, was natural. There were already
some Christians there (Acts 11 20), and it was near.
They preach first in the synagogues of the Jews at
Salamis (18 5). We are left to conjecture as to
results there and through the whole island till
Paphos is reached. There they meet a man of
great prominence and intelligence, Sergius Paulus,
the Rom proconsul, who had been_under the spell
of a sorcerer with a Jewish name—Elymas Bar-jesus
(cf Peter’s encounter with Simon Magus in Samaria).
In order to win and hold Sergius Paulus, who had
become interested in Christianity, Paul has to
punish Bar-jesus with blindness (13 10 ff) in the
exercise of that apostolic power which he afterward
claimed with such vigor (1 Cor 5 4f; 2 Cor 13
10). He won Sergius Paulus, and this gave him
cheer for his work. From now on it is Paul, not
Saul, in the record of Luke, perhaps because of this
incident, though both names probably belonged to
him from the first. Now also Paul steps to the
fore ahead of Barnabas, and it is ‘‘Paul’s company”
(13 13) that sets sail from Paphos for Pamphylia.
There is no evidence here of resentment on the part
of Barnabas at the leadership of Paul. The whole
campaign may have been planned from the start
by the Holy Spirit as the course now taken may
have been due to Paul’s leadership. John Mark
deserts at Perga and returns to Jerus (his home),
not to Antioch (13 13). Paul and Barnabas push
on to the tablelands of Pisidia. Ramsay (Si. Paul
the Traveller, 93) thinks that Paul had malaria down
at Perga and hence desired to get up into higher
land. That is possible. The places mentioned in
the rest of the tour are Antioch in Pisidia (13 14),
and Iconium (13 51), Lystra (14 8), and Derbe
(14 20), cities of Lycaonia. These terms are


2282


Paul, the Apostle THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


ethnographic descriptions of the southern divisions
of the Rom province of Galatia, the northern por-
tion being Galatia proper or North Galatia. So
then Paul and Barnabas are now at work in South
Galatia, though Luke does not mention that name,
using here only the popular designations. The work
is wonderfully successful. In these cities, on one
of the great Rom roads east and west, Paul is reach-
ing the centers of provincial life as will be his custom.
At Antioch Paul is invited to repeat his sermon on
the next Sabbath (13 42), and Luke records at length
the report of this discourse which has the charactcr-
istic notes of Paul’s gospel as we see it in his epp.
Paul may have kept notes of the discourse. There
were devout Gentiles at these services. These were
the first to be won, and thus a wider circle of Gentiles
could be reached. Paul and Barnabas were too
successful at Antioch in Pisidia. The jealous Jews
opposed, and Paul and Barnabas dramatically
turned to the Gentiles (13 45 ff). But the Jews
reached the city magistrate through the influential
women, and Paul and Barnabas were ordered to
leave (13 501). Similar success brings like results
in Iconium. At Lystra, before the hostile Jews
come, Paul and Barnabas have great success and,
because of the healing of the impotent man, are
taken as Mercury and Jupiter respectively, and
worship is offered them. Paul’s address in refusal
is a fine plea on the grounds of natural theology (14
15-18). The attempt on Paul’s life after the Jews
came seemed successful. In the band of disciples
that “stood round about him,” there may have
been Timothy, Paul’s son in the gospel. From
Derbe they retrace their steps to Perga, in order to
strengthen the churches with officers, and then sail
for Seleucia and Antioch. They make their report
to the church at Antioch. It is a wonderful story.
The door of faith is now wide open for the Gentiles
who have entered in great numbers (14 27). No
report was sent to Jerus. What will the Pharisaic
party do now?
The early date of Gal, addressed to these churches
of Pisidia and Lycaonia before the Conference in
Jerus does not allow time for a second
6. The visit there (Gal 4 13), and requires that
Conflict at the Judaizers from Jerus followed close
Jerusalem upon the heels of Paul and Barna-
Acts 15; ~ bas (Gal 1 6; 3 1) in South Galatia.
Gal 2,49 AD Besides, there is the less likelihood
that the matter would have been taken
a second time to Jerus (Acts 15 2f) if already the
question had been settled in Paul’s favor (Acts 11
30). Itis strange also that no reference to this pre-
vious conference on the same subject is made in
Acts 15, since Peter does refer to his experience at
Caesarea (15 9) and since Jamesin Acts 21 25 spe-
cifically (“we wrote’’) mentions the letter of Acts 15
in which full liberty was granted to the Gentiles.
Once more, the attack on the position of Paul and
Barnabasin Acts 16 | is given as a new experience,
and hence the sharp dissension and tense feeling.
The occasion for the sudden outbreak at Antioch
on the part of the self-appointed (Acts 15 24)
regulators of Paul and Barnabas lay m the reports
that came to Jerus about the results of this cam-
paign on a large scale among the Gentiles. There
was peril to the supremacy of the Jewish element.
They had assumed at first, as even Peter did who
was not a Judaizer (Acts 10), that the Gentiles
who became disciples would also become Jews.
The party of the circumcision had made protest
against the conduct of Peter at Caesarea (11 1 f)
and had reluctantly acquiesced in the plain work of
God (11 18). They had likewise yielded in the
matter of the Greeks at Antioch (11 19 ff) by the
help of the contribution (11 _29f). But they had
not agreed to a cumpaign to Iellenize Christianity.


The matter had to stop. So the Judaizers came
up to Antioch and laid down the law to Panl and
Barnabas. They did not wait for them to come to
Jerus. They might not come till it was too late (cf
Barnabas in Acts 11). Paul and Barnabas had not
sought the controversy. They _had_ both received
specific instructions from the [oly Spirit to make
this great campaign among the Gentiles. They
would not stultify themselves and destroy the lib-
erty of the Gentiles in Christ by going back and
having the Mosaic Law imposed on them by the
ceremony of circumcision. They saw at once the
gravity of the issue. ‘The very essence of the gospel
of grace was involved. Paul had turned away from
this yoke of bondage. He would not go back _to
it nor would he impose it on his converts. The
church at Antioch stood by Paul and Barnabas.
Paul (Gal 2 2) says that he had a revelation to go
to Jerus with the problem. Luke (Acts 15 3) says
that the church sent them. Surely there is no in-
consistency here. It is not difficult to combine the
personal narrative in Gal 2 with the public meetings
recorded in Acts 15. We have first the general
report by Paul and Barnabas to the church in Jerus
(Acts 15 4f) to which instant exception was made
by the Judaizing element. There seems to have
come an adjournment to prepare for the conflict,
since in ver 6 Luke says again that “the apostles
and the elders were gathered together to consider
of thismatter.’’ Between these two public meetings
we may place the private conference of Paul and
Barnabas with Peter, John and James and other
teachers (Gal 2 1-10). In this private conference
some of the timid brethren wished to persuade
Paul to have Titus, a Gr Christian whom Paul had
brought down from Antioch (a live specimen!),
offered as a sacrifice to the Judaizers (“false breth-
ren”) and circumcised. But Paul stood his ground
for the truth of the gospel and was supported by
Peter, John and James. They agreed all around
for Paul and Barnabas to go on with their work to
the Gentiles, and Peter, John and James would push
the work among the Jews (a division in sphere of
work, like home and forcign missions, not a denom-
inational cleavage). Here, then, for the first time,
Paul has had an opportunity to talk the matter over
with the apostolic teachers, and they agree. The
Judaizers will have no support from the apostles.
The battle was really won in their private confer-
ence. In thesecond public meeting (Acts 15 6-29)
all goes smoothly enough. Ample opportunity
for free discussion is offered. Then Peter shows
how God had used him to preach to the Romans,
and how the Jews themselves had to believe on
Christ in order to be saved. He opposed putting a
yoke on the Gentiles that the Jews could not bear.
There was a pause, and then Barnabas and Paul
(note the order here: courtesy to Barnabas) spoke
agam. After another pause, James, the president
of the conference, the brother of the Lord Jesus,
and a stedfast Jew, spoke. He cited Am 9 11f to
show that God had long ago promised a blessing
to the Gentiles. He suggests liberty to the Gentiles
with the prohibition of pollution of idols, of forni-
cation, things strangled, and blood. His ideas are
embodied in a unanimous decree which strongly
commends “our beloved Barnabas and Paul,” and
disclaims responsibility for the visit of the Judaizers
to Antioch. The Western text omits “things
strangled’’ from the decree. If this is correct, the
decree prohibits idolatry, fornication and murder
(Wilson, Origin and Aim of ihe Acts of the Apostles,
1912, 55). Atany rate, the decision is a tremendous
victory for Paul and Barnabas. If the other read-
ing 1s correct, Jewish feelings about things strangled
and blood are to be respected. The decision was
received with great joy in Antioch (Acts 15 30-35).


2283


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Paul, the Apostle


Some time later Peter appears at Antioch in the
fullest fellowship with Paul and Barnabas in their
work, and joins them in free social intercourse with
the Gentiles, as he had timidly done in the home of
Cornelius, till “certain came from James” (Gal 2
11 f), and probably threatened to have Peter up
before the church again (Acts 11 2) on this matter,
claiming that James agreed with them on the sub-
ject. This I do not believe was true in the light
of Acts 15 24, where a similar false claim is disered-
ited, since James had agreed with Paul in Jerus
(Acts 15 19 ff; Gal 2 9f). The new ground for
complaint was that they had not settled the ques-
tion of social relations with the Gentiles in the
Jerus conference and that Peter had exceeded the
agreement there reached. Peter quailed before
the accusation, ‘fearing them that were of the cir-
eumcision” (Gal 2 12). To make it worse, “even
Barnabas was carried away with their dissimulation”’
(2 13). Under this specious plea Paul was about to
lose the fruit of the victory already won, and charged
Peter to his face with Judaizing hypocrisy (2 11-14).
It was a serious crisis. Peter had not changed his
convictions, but had once more cowered in an hour
of peril. Paul won both Barnabas and Peter to his
side and took occasion to show how useless the
death of Christ was if men could be saved by mere
legalism (2 21). But the Judaizers had renewed
the war, and they would keep it up and harry the
work of Paul all over the world. Paul had the fight

of his life upon his hands.
The impulse to go out again came from Paul.
Despite the difference in Gal 2 13, he wished to go
again with Barnabas (Acts 15 36),


7. The but Barnabas insisted on taking along
Second John Mark, which Paul was not willing
Mission to do because of his failure to stick to
Campaign the work at Perga. So they agreed


Acts 15: 36 to disagree after “sharp contention”
—18:22; 1 (15 39f). Barnabas went with Mark
and 2 Thess, to Cyprus, while Paul took Silas,
49-51 (or “being commended by the brethren
62) AD to the, grace of the Lord.’ Luke

follows the career of Paul, and so Bar-
nabas drops out of view (cf later 1 Cor 9 6). Paul
and Silas go “through Syria and Cilicia, confirming
the churches” (Acts 15 41). They pass through
the Cilician gates to Derbe, the end of the first
tour, and go to Lystra. Here they pick up Timothy,
who more than takes Mark’s place in Paul’s life.
Timothy’s mother was a Jewess and his father a
Greek. Paul decided therefore to have him circum-
cised since, as a half-Jew, he would be esp. obnox-
ious to the Jews. This case differed wholly from
that of Titus,a Greek, where principle was involved.
Here it was a matter merely of expediency. Paul
had taken the precaution to bring along the decrees
of: the Conference at Jerus in case there was need
of them. He delivered them to the churches. It
has to be noted that in 1 Cor 8-10 and in Rom 14
and 16, when discussing the question of eating meats
offered to idols, Paul does not refer to these decrees,
but argues the matter purely from the standpoint
of the principles involved. The Judaizers anyhow
had not lived up to the agreement, but Paul is here
doing his part by the decision. The result of the
work was good for the churches (Acts 16 4).

When we come to Acts 16 6, we touch a crucial
passage in the Sonth-Galatian controversy. Ramsay
(Christianity in the Rom Empire, chs iii-vi; Hist and
Geography of Asia Minor; St. Paul the Traveller, chs v,
vi, viii, ix; Fxpos, IV, viii, ix, ‘replies to Chase"; ‘ Gala-
tia,”” HDB; Comm. on Gal; The Cities of St. Paul;
Expos T, 1912, 1913) has become by his ‘able advocacy
the chief champion of the view that Paul never went
to Galatia proper or North Galatia, and that he addressed
his ep. to South Galatia, the churches visited in the first
tour. For a careful history of the whole coutroversy in


detail, seo Moffatt, Intro to the Lit. of the NT, 90-106,
who strongly supports the view of Lightfoot, H. J. Holtz-


mann, Blass, Schiirer, Denney, Chase, Mommsen,
Steinmann, etc. There are powerful names with’ Ram-
say, like Thausrath, Zahn, Bartlet, Garvie, Weizsicker,
etc. The arguments are too varied and minute for com-
plete presentation here. The present writer sces some
very attractive foatures in the South-Galatian hypothe-
sis, bnt as a student of language finds himself unable to
overcome the syntax of Acts 16 6. The minor difficulty
is the dropping of xai, kat, between ‘Phrygia’ and
‘Galatic region’’ by Ramsay. It is by no means cer-
tain that this is the idea of Luke. It is more natural to
take the terms as distinct and coérdinated by fat. In
St. Paul the Traveller, 212, Ramsay pleads for the aorist
of subsequent time, but Moulton (Prolegomena, 133) will
havenoneofit. With thatI agree. Theaorist participle
must give something synchronous with or antecedent to
the pineipal verh. In Expos T for February, 1913,
220 f, Ramsay comes back to the ‘construction of 16 6."
He admits that the weight of authority is against the
TR and in favor of 6inAr@ov . . . . KwAvOdrres, diélthon
... .» kéluthéntes. He now interprets the language
thus: ‘Paul, having in mind at Lystra his plan of going
on to Asia from Galatia, was ordered by the Spirit not
to preachin Asia. He therefore made a tour throngh the
Phrygio-Galatic region, which he had_alrcady influenced
so profoundly from end to end (13 49)."" But there
is grave difficulty in acccpting this Interpretation as a
solution of the problem. Ramsay here makes the narra-
tive In ver 6 resumptive and takes us back to the stand-
oint of ver 1 at Lystra. The proper place for such a
orecast was in ver 1, or at most before ver 4, which
already seems to mark an advance beyoud Lystra to
Iconinm and Antioch in Pisidia: ‘‘and as they went on
their way through the cities.’’

Besides, ‘‘the Phrygio-Galatic region” lay between
Lystra and Asia, aud, according to Ramsay, after the
prohihition in Lystra, he weut straight on toward Asia.
This is certainly very artificial and unlike the usual pro-
cedure, According to the other view, Paul had already
visited the churches in Lycaonia and Pisidia on his
tormer visit. He wished to go on west into Asia, proh-
ably to Ephesus, but was forbidden by the Holy Spirit,
and as a result turned northward through Phrygia and
the regions of Galatia, usiug both terms in the ethno-
graphic sense. Paul was already in the province of Ga-
latia at Derbe and Lystra. The matter has many ‘‘ins
and outs" and caunot he argued further here. It is still
in debate, but the present interpretation is in harmony
with the narrative in Acts. See also GaLatTia; GaALa-
TIANS, EpPisTLE TO THE,


By this view Paul had not meant to stop in
Galatia proper and did so only because of an attack
of illness (Gal 4 13). It is possible that Luke may
have come to his rescue here. At any rate, he
finally pushes on opposite Mysia and Bithynia in
the extreme north and was forbidden by the Spirit
from going on into Bithynia. So they came down
to Troas (Acts 16 7f) when Luke (‘‘we,” 16 10)
appears on the scene and the Macedonian call comes
to Paul. Thus Paul is led out of Asia into Europe
and carries the gospel successively to Philippi,
Thessalonica, Beroea, Athens, and Corinth. The
gospel is finally planted in the great provinces of
Macedonia and Achaia. In Philippi, a Rom colony
and military outpost, Paul finds few Jews and has
to go out to a prayer-place to find a few Jewish
women to whom he can tell the story of Jesus. But
he gains a start with Lydia and her household, and
soon arouses the hostility of a company of men who
were making money out of a poor girl’s powers of
divination. But before Paul and Silas leave the
jail, the jailer is himself converted, and a good church
is established. At Thessalonica Paul has great
success and arouses the jealousy of the Jews who
gather a rabble and raise a disturbance and charge
it up to Paul. At Philippi appeal was made
to prejudice against Jews. At Thessalonica the
charge is made that Paul preaches Jesus as a rival
king to Caesar. In Beroea Paul and Silas have
even more success till the Jews come from Thessa-
jonica and drive Paul out again. Timothy, who
has come out from Philippi where Luke has re-
mained, and Silas stay in Beroea while Paul hurries
on to Athens with some of the brethren, who return
with the request for Timothy and Silas ‘‘to come
to him with all speed.’ Apparently Timothy did
come (1 Thess 3 1f), but Paul soon sent him back
to Thessalonica because of his anxiety about con-
ditions there. Left alone in Athens, Paul’s spirit


Paul, the Apostle THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2284


was stirred over the idolatry before his eyes. He
preaches in the synagogues and argues with the
Stoics and Epicureans iu the Agora who make light
of his pretensions to philosophy as a “babbler’’ (Acts
17 18). But curiostty leads them to invite him to
speak on the Areopagus. This notable address,
all alive to his surroundings, was rather rudely cut
short by their mdifference and mockery, and Paul
left Athens with small results for his work. He
goes over to Corinth, the great commercial city of
the province, rich and with bizarre notions of cul-
ture. Paul determined (1 Cor 2 1-5) to be trne
to the cross, even after his experience in Athens.
He gave them, not the flashy philosophy of the
sophists, but the true wisdom of God iu simple
words, the philosophy of the cross of Christ (1 Cor
1 17-3 4). In Corinth Paul found fellow-helpers
ia Aquila and Priscilla, just expelled from Rome
by Claudius. They have the same trade of tent-
makers and live together (Acts 18 1-4), and Panl
preached in the synagogues. Paul is cheered by
the coming of Timothy and Silas from Thessalonica
(18 5) with supplies from Philippi, as they had
done while in Thessalonica (Phil 4 15f). This
very success led to opposition, and Paul has to
preach in the house of Titus Justus. But the work
goes on till Gallio comes and a renewed effort is
made to have it stopped, but Gallio declines to
interfere and thus practically makes Christianity a
religio licita, since he treats it as a variety of Juda-
ism. While here, after the arrival of Timothy and
Silas, Paul writes the two letters to Thessalonica,
the first of his 13 epp. They are probably not very
far apart in time, and deal chiefly with a grievous
misunderstanding on their part concerning the
emphasis placed by him on the Man of Sin and
the Second Coming. Paul had felt the power of the
empire, and his attention is sharply drawn to the
coming conflict between the Rom empire and the
kingdom of God. He treats it in terms of apocalyp-
tic eschatology. When he leaves Corinth, it is to
go by Ephesus, with Aquila and Priscilla whom
he leaves there with the promise to return. He
goes down to Caesarea and “went up and saluted
the church” (Acts 18 22), probably at Jerus
(fourth visit), and “went down to Antioch.” If he
went to Jerus, it was probably incidental, and
nothing of importance happened. He is back once
again in Antioch after an absence of some 3 or 4
ears.
The stay of Paul at Antioch is described as “‘some


time” (Acts 18 23). Denney (Standard Bible

Dict.) conjectures that Paunl’s brief
8. The stay at Jerus (see above) was dne to
Third Mis- the fact that he found that the Juda-
sion Cam- izers had organized opposition there
paign, Acts against him in the absence of the
18:23—21: apostles, and it was so unpleasant that


14; land 2 hedid not stay. He suggests also that
Cor; Gal; the Judaizers had secured letters of
Rom, 62 (or commendation from the church for
63)-57 (or their emissaries (2 Cor 3 1) to Corinth
68) AD and Galatia, who were preaching “an-
other Jesus” of nationalism and nar-
rowness, whom Paul did not preach (Gal 1 6; 2 Cor
11 4). Both Denney and Findlay follow Neander,
Wieseler, and Sabaticr in placing here, before Paul
starts out agaiu from Antioch, the visit of certain
“from James’ (Gal 2 12), who overpowered Peter
for the moment. But I have put this incident as
mere probably before the disagreement with Bar-
nabas over Mark, and as probably contributing to
that breach at the beginning of the second tour.
It is not necessary to suppose that the Judaizers
remained acquiescent se long.
Paul seems to have set out on the third tour alone
—unless Timothy came back with him, of which there


is no evidence save that he is with Paul again in
Ephesus (Acts 19 22). What became of Silas?
Panl “went through the region of Galatia, and
Phrygia, in order, establishing all the disciples”
(Acts 18 23), the opposite order to 16 6, “through
the region of Phrygia and Galatia.’ According to
the North-Galatian view, here followed, he went
through the northern part of the province, passing
through Galatia proper and Phrygia on his way
west to Ephesus. Luke adds, ‘‘Paul having passed
through the upper country came to Ephesus”
(19 1). The ministry of Apollos in Ephesus (18
24-28) had taken place before Paul arrived, though
Aquila and Priscilla were still on hand. Apollos
passed over to Corinth and innoceutly became the
occasion of such strife there (1 Cor 1-4) that he
left and refused to return at Paunl’s request (1 Cor
16 12). Paul has a ministry of 3 years, in round
numbers, in Ephesus, which is full of excitement
and anxiety from the work there and in Corinth.
He finds on his arrival some ill-informed disciples
of John the Baptist who are ignorant of the chief
elements of John’s teaching about repentance,
Jesus, and the Holy Spirit (Acts 19 2-7), matters
of which Apollos had knowledge, though he learned
more from Priscilla and Aquila, but there is no evi-
dence that he was rebaptized as was true of the 12
disciples of John (Robertson, John the Loyal, 290-
303). The boldness of Paul in Ephesus led in 3
months to his departure from the synagogue to the
schoolhouse of Tyrannus, where he preached for 2
years (Acts 19 8-10) with such power that ‘‘all they
that dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord.” It
is not strange later to find churches at Colossae and
Hierapolis m the Lycus Valley (cf also Rev 1 11).
Paul has a sharp collision with the strolling Jewish
exorcists that led to the burning of books of magic
by the wholesale (19 11-20), another proof of the
hold that magic and the mysteries had upon the
Orient. Ephesus was the seat of the worship of
Diana whose wonderful temple was their pride. A
great business in the mannfacturc of shrines of Diana
was carried on here by Demetrius, and “this Paul”
had hurt his trade so much that he raised an insur-
rection under the guise of piety and patriotism and
might have killed Paul with the mob, if he could
have got hold of him (19 23-41). It was with
great difficulty that Paul was kept from going to
the amphitheater, asitwas. But here, as at Corinth,
the Rom officer (the town clerk) defended Paul
from the rage of his enemies (there the jealous Jews,
here the tradesmen whose business suffered). He
was apparently very ill anyhow, and came near death
(2 Cor 19). All this seems to have hastened his
departure from Ephesus sooner than Pentecost,
as he had written to the Corinthians (1 Cor 16 8).
His heart was in Corinth because of the discussions
there over him and Apollos and Peter, by reason of
the agitation of the Judaizers (1 Cor 1 10-17).
The household of Chloe had brought word of this
situation to Paul. He had written the church a
letter now lost (1 Cor 6 9). They had written
him a letter (1 Cor 7 1). They sent messengers
to Paul (1 Cor 16 17). He had sent Timothy to
them (1 Cor 4 17; 16 10), who seems not to have
succeeded in quieting the trouble. Panl wrote
1 Cor (spring of 56), and then sent Titus, who was
to meet him at Troas and report results (2 Cor 2
12f). He may also have written another letter
and sent it by Titus (2 Cor 2 3f). The sudden
departure from Corinth brought Paul to Troas
ahead of time, but he could not wait for Titns, and
so pushed on with a heavy heart into Macedonia,
where he met him, and he had good and bad news
to tell (2 Cor 2 12ff; 7 5-13). The effect on
Paul was instantaneous. He rebounded to hope
and joy (2 Cor 2 14 ff) in a glorious defence of the


2285


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Paul, the Apostle


ministry of Jesus (cf Robertson, The Glory of the
Ministry; Paul’s Exultation in Preaching), with a
message of cheer to the majority of the church that
had sustained Paul and with instructions (chs 8
and 9) abont the collection for the poor saints in
Jerus, which must be pushed to a completion by
Titus and two other brethren (possibly also Luke,
brother of Titus, and Erastus). Timothy and
Erastus had been sent on ahead to Macedonia from
Ephesus (Acts 19 22), and Timothy sends grectings
with Paul to the Corinthians in a letter (2 Cor) which
Paul now forwards, possibly by Titus. The latter
part of the ep. (ehs 10-13) deals with the stubborn
minority who still resist the authority of Paul as
an apostle. On the proposed treatment of these
chapters as a separate ep. see the earlier part of
this art. Paul seems to wait a while before going
on to Corinth. He wishes the opposition to have
time to repent. During this period he probably
went round about to Illyricum (Rom 15 19). He
spent three months in Greece (Acts 20 2f), prob-
ably the winter of 56 and 57.

We have placed Galin the early part of this stay in
Corinth, though it could have been written while at
Ephesus. Rom was certainly written while here, and
they both treat the same geueral theme of justification
by faith. Ramsay (Expos, February, 1913, 127-45) has
at last come to the conclusion that Gal belongs to the
date of Acts 15 1f. He bases this conclusion chiefly
on the ‘absolute independence" of his apostleship
claimed in Gal 1 and 2, which, he holds, he would not
have done after the conference in Acts 15, which was
‘a sacrifice of complete independence.’’ Thisisa curious
interpretation, for in Gal 2 1-10 Paul himself tells of
his recognition on terms of equality by Peter, John
aud James, and of his going to Jerus by ‘‘revelation,”’
which was just as much ‘‘a sacrifice of complete in-
dependence”’ as we find in Acts 15. Besides, in 2 Cor
11 5 and 12 11 Paul expressly asserts his equality (with
all humility) with the very chiefest aposties, and in 1 Cor

§ 10 he claims in so many words to have wrought more
than all the apostles. Perhaps messengers from Galatia
with the contributions from that region report the havoc
wrought there by the Judaizers. Gal is a tremendous
plea for the spiritual nature of Christianity as opposed
to Jewish ceremonial legalism.

Paul had long had it in mind to go to Rome. It
was his plan to do so while at Ephesus (Acts 19 21)
after he had gone to Jerus with the great collection
from the churches of Asia, Galatia, Achaia, and
Macedonia. He hoped that this collection would
have a mollifying effect on the Jerus saints as that
from Antioch had (Acts 11 29f). He had changed
some details in his plans, but not the purpose to go
to Jerus and then to Rome. Meanwhile, he writes
the longest and most important letter of all to the
Romans, in which he gives a fuller statement of his
gospel, because they had not heard him preach,
save his various personal friends who had gone there
from the east (ch 16). But already the shadow of
Jerus is on his heart, and he asks their prayers in his
behalf, as he faces his enemies in Jerus (Rom 15
30-32). He hopes also to go on to Spain (16 24),
so as to carry the gospel to the farther west also.
The statesmanship of Paul comes ont now in great
clearness. He has in his heart always anxiety for
the churches that consumes him (2 Cor 11 28 f).
He was careful to have a committee of the churches
go with him to report the collection (2 Cor 8 19 f).
Paul had planned to sail direct for Syria, but a plot
on his life in Corinth led him to go by land via
Macedonia with his companions (Acts 20 2-4).
He tarried at Philippi while the rest went on to
Troas. At Philippi Paul is joined again by Luke,
who stays with him till Rome 1s reached. ‘They
celebrate the Passover (probably the spring of 57)
in Philippi (Acts 20 6). We cannot follow the
details in Acts at Troas, the voyage through the
beautiful Archipelago, to Miletus. There Paul
took advantage of the stop to send for the elders
of Ephesus to whom he gave a wonderful address
(Acts 20 17-38). They change ships at Patara for


Phoenicia and pass to the right of Cyprus with its
memories of Barnabas and Sergius Paulus and stop
at Tyre, where Paul is warned not to go on to Jerus.
The hostility of the Judaizers to Paul is now com-
mon talk everywhere. There is grave peril of a
schism in Christianity over the question of gentile
liberty, once settled in Jerus, but unsettled by the
Judaizers. At Caesarea Paul is greeted by Philip
the evangelist and his four daughters (prophetesses).
At Caesarea Paul is warned in dramatic fashion by
Agabus (cf Acts 11 28) not to go on to Jerus (21
9 ff), but Paul is more determined than ever to go,
even if he die (20 13). He had had three pre-
monitions for long (20 22 ff), but he will finish his
course, cost what it may. He finds a friend at
Caesarea in Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple,

who was to be the host of Paul in Jerus (21 16).
Paul had hoped to reach Jerus by Pentecost
(Acts 20 16). He seems to have done so. Luke
gives the story of Paul in Jerus, Caes-


9. Five area, and the voyage to Rome in
Years a much detail. He was with him and
Prisoner, considered this period of his ministry
Acts 21:17 very important. The welcome from
— 28:31; the brethren in Jerus was surprisingly
Phil; Phi- cordial (Acts 21.17). On the very
lem; Col; next day Paul and his party made a
Eph, formal call on James and all the elders
57-62 (or (21 18f), who gave a sympathetic
63) AD hearing to the narrative of God’s deal-


ings with Paul and the Gentiles. He
presented the alms (collection) in due form (24 17),
though some critics have actually suggested that
Paul used it to defray the expenses of the appeal to
Caesar. Ramsay’s notion that he may have fallen
heir by now to his portion of his father’s estate is
quite probable. But the brethren wish to help
Paul set himself right before the rank and file of the
church in Jerus, who have been imposed upon by
the Judaizers who have misrepresented Paul’s real
position by saying that he urged the Jewish Chris-
tians to give up the Mosaic customs (21 21). The
elders understand Paul and recall the decision of the
conference at which freedom was guaranteed to the
Gentiles, and they have no wish to disturb that
(21 25). They only wish Paul to show that he does
not object to the Jewish Christians keeping up the
Mosaic regulations. They propose that Paul offer
sacrifice publicly in the temple and pay the vows of
four men, and then all will know the truth (21 23 f).
Paul does not hesitate to do that (21 26 ff). He
had kept the Jewish feasts (cf 20 6) as Jesus had
done, and the early disciples in Jerus. He was a
Jew. He may have had a vow at Corinth (18 18).
He saw no inconsistency in a Jew doing thus after
becoming a Christian, provided he did not make it
obligatory on Gentiles. The real efficacy of the
sacrifices lay in the death of Jesus for sin. Garvie
(Life and Teaching of Paul, 173) calls this act of
Paul “scarcely worthy of his courage as a man or his
faith in God.” JI cannot see it in that light. It is
a matter of practical wisdom, not of principle. To
have refused would have been to say that the charge
was true, and it was not. So far as the record goes,
this act of Paul accomplished its purpose in setting
Paul in a right light before the church in Jerus. It
took away this argument from the Judaizers. The
trouble that now comes to Paul does not come from
the Judaizers, but from “the Jews from Asia” (21
27). Tf it be objected that the Jerus Christians
seem to have done nothing to help Paul during his
years of imprisonment, it can be said that there was
little to be done in a legal way, as the matter was
before the Rom courts very soon. The attack on
Paul in the temple was while he was doing honor to
the temple, engaged in actual worship offering sac-
rifices. But then Jews from Ephesus hated him


Paul, the Apostle


so that they imagined that he had Greeks with him
in the Jewish court, because they had seen him one
day with Trophimus in the city (21 27 ff). It is
a splendid illustration of the blindness of prejudice
and hate. It was absolutely untrue, and the men
who raised the hue and cry in the temple against
Paul as the desecrator of the holy place and the Law
and the people disappear, and are never heard of
more (24 181). But it will take Paul five years or
more of the prime of his life to get himself out of the
tangled web that will be woven about his head.
Peril follows peril. He was almost mobbed, as
often before, by the crowd that dragged him out of
the temple (21 30f). It would remind Paul of
Stephen’s fate. When the Rom captain rescued
him and had him bound with two chains as a danger-
ous bandit, and had him carried by the soldiers to
save his life, the mob yelled ‘“Away with him” (21
36 f), as they had done to Jesus. After the captain,
astonished that ‘“‘Paul the Egyp assassin” can
speak Gr, grants him permission to stand on the
steps of the tower of Antonia to speak to the mob
that clamored for his blood, he held their rapt
attention by an address in Aram. (22 2) in which
he gave a defence of his whole career. This they
heard eagerly till he spoke the word “Gentiles,” at
which they raged more violently than ever (22 21 ff).
At this the captain has Paul tied with thongs, not
understanding his Aram. speech, and is about to
scourge him when Paul pleads his Rom citizenship,
to the amazement of the centurion (22 24 ff).
Almost in despair, the captain, wishing to know the
charge of the Jews against Paul, brings him before
the Sanhedrin. It is a familiar scene to Paul, and
it is now their chance for settling old scores. Paul
makes a sharp retort in anger to the high priest
Ananias, for which he apologizes as if he was so
angry that he had not noticed, but he soon divides
the Sanhedrin hopelessly on the subject of the resur-
rection (cf the immunity of the disciples on that
issue when Gamaliel scored the Sadducees in Acts
6). This was turning the tables on his enemies,
and was justifiable as war. He claimed to be a
Pharisee on this point, as he was still, as opposed
to the Sadducees. The result was that Pan! had
to be rescued from the contending factions, and the
captain knew no more than he did before (23 1-10).
That night ‘the Lord stood by him” and promised
that he would go to Rome (23 11). That was a
blessed hope. But the troubles of Paul are by no
means over. By the skill of his nephew he escaped
the murderous plot of 40 Jews who had taken a vow
not to eat till they had killed Paul (23 12-24).
They almost succeeded, but Claudius Lysias sent
Paul in haste with a band of soldiers to Caesarea to
Felix, the procurator, with a letter in which he
claimed to have rescued Paul from the mob, “having
learned that he was a Roman’ (23 26-30). At
any rate he was no longer in the clutches of the Jews.
Would Rom provincial justice be any better?
Felix follows a perfunctory course with Paul and
shows some curiosity about Christianity, till Paul
makes him tremble with terror, a complete reversal
of situations (cf Pilate’s meanness before Jesus).
But love of money from Paul or the Jews leads Felix
to keep Paul a prisoner for two years, though con-
vinced of his innocence, and to hand him over to
Festus, his successor, because the Jews might make
things worse for him if he released him (ch 24).
The case of the Sanhedrin, who have now made
it their own (or at least the Sadducean section),
though pleaded by the Rom orator Tertullus, had
fallen through as Paul calmly riddled their charges.
Festus is at first at a loss how to proceed, but he
soon follows the steps of Felix by offering to play
into the hands of the Jewish leaders by sending Paul
back to Jerus, whereupon Paul abruptly exercises


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2286


his right of Rom citizenship by appealing to Caesar
(25 1-12). This way, though a long one, offered
the only ray of hope. The appearance of Paul
before Agrippa and Bernice was simply by way of
entertainment arranged by Festus to relieve his
guests of ennui, but Paul seized the opportunity
to make a powerful appeal to Agrippa that put him
in a corner logically, though he wriggled out and
declined to endorse Christianity, though confirming
Paul’s innocence, which Festus also had admitted
(25 13—26 32). Paul was fortunate in the centu-
rion Julius who took him to Rome, for he was kindly
disposed to him at the start, and so it was all the way
through the most remarkable voyage on, record.
Luke has surpassed his own record in ch 27, in which
he traces the voyage, stage by stage, with change
of ship at Myra, delay at Fair Havens, Crete, and
shipwreck on the island of Malta. More is learned
about ancient seafaring from this chapter than from
any other source (see art. PHornix, and Smith,
Voyage and Shipwreck of St. Paul, 1866)._ In it all
Paul is the hero, both on the ships and in Malta.
In the early spring of 60 another ship takes Paul
and the other prisoners to Puteoli. ‘Thence they
go on to Rome, and enter by the Appian Way.
News of Paul’s coming had gone on before (his ep.
had come 8 years ago), and he had a hearty welcome.
But he is now an imperial prisoner in the hands of
Nero. He has more liberty in his own hired house
(28 16.30), but he is chained always to a Rom
soldier, though granted freedom to see his friends
and to preach to the soldiers. Paul is anxious to
remove any misapprehensions that the Jews in
Rome may have about him, and tries to win them to
Christ, and with partial success (28 17-28). And
here Luke leaves him a prisoner for 2 years more,
probably because at this point he finishes the Book
of Acts. But, as we have seen, during these years
in Rome, Paul wrote Phil, Philem, Col, and Eph.
He still has the churches on his heart. They send
messengers to him, and he writes back to them.
The incipient Gnosticism of the East has pressed
upon the churches at Colossae and Laodicea, and
a new peril confronts Christianity. The Judaizing
controversy has died away with these years (cf
Phil 3 1 ff for an echo of it), but the dignity and
glory of Jesus are challenged. In the presence of
the power of Rome Paul rises to a higher conception
than even that of the person of Christ and the glory
of the church universal. In due time Paunl’s case
was disposed of and he was once more set free. The
Romans were proverbially dilatory. It is doubtful
if his enemies ever appeared against him with formal
charges.
The genuineness of the Pastoral Epp. is here
assumed. But for them we should know nothing
further, save from a few fragments
10. Further in the early Christian writings. As it
Travels is, some few who accept the Pastoral
Epp. seek to place them before 64 AD,
so as to allow for Paul’s death in that year from the
Neronian persecution. In that case, he was not
released. There is no space here to argue the ques-
tion in detail. We can piece together the probable
course of events. He had expected when in Corinth
last to go on to Spain (Rom 15 28), but now_in
Rome his heart turns back to the east again. He
longs to see the Philippians (1 23 ff) and hopes to
see Philemon in Colossae (Philem ver 22). But he
may have gone to Spain also, as Clement of Rome
seems to imply (Clement ad Cor 5), and as isstated in
the Canon of Muratori. He may have been in Spain
when Rome was burned July 19,64 AD. There is
no evidence that Paul went as far as Britain. On
his return east he left Titus in Crete (Tit 15). He
touched at Miletus when he left Trophimus sick
(2 Tim 4 20) and when he may have met Timothy,


2287


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Paul, the Apostle


if he did not go on to Ephesus (1 Tim 1 3). He
stopped at Troas and apparently expected to come
back here, as he left bis cloak and hooks with Carpus
(2 Tim 4 13). He was on his way to Macedonia
(1 Tim 1 3), whence he writes Timothy in 65-67
a letter full of love and counsel for the future. Paul
is apprehensive of the grave perils now confronting
Christianity. Besides the Judaizers, the Gnostics,
the Jews and the Romans, he may have had dim
visions of the conflict with the mystery-religions.
It was_a syncretistic age, and men had itching
ears. But Paul is full of sympathy and tender
solicitude for Timothy, who must push on the work
and get ready for it. Paul expects to spend the
winter in Nicopolis (Tit 3 12), but is apparently
still in Macedonia when he writes to Titus a letter
on lines similar to those in 1 Tim, only the note is
sharper against Judaism of a certain type. e
catch another glimpse of Apollos in 3 13. Paul
hits off the Cretans in 1 10 with a quotation from
Eipimenides, one of their own poetic prophets.

When Paul writes again to Timothy he has had
a winter in prison, and has suffered greatly from the


cold and does not wish to spend another |


11. Last winter in the Mamertine (probably)
Imprison-_ prison (2 Tim 4 13.21). We do not
ment and know what the charges now are. They
Deathin may have heen connected with the
Rome, 68 burning of Rome. There were plenty
(or 67) AD of informers eager to win favor with


_. , Nero. Proof was not now nécessary.
Christianity is no longer a religio licita under the
shelter of Judaism. It is now a crime to he a Chris-
tian. It is dangerous to be seen with Paul now, and
he feels the desertion keenly (2 Tim 1 15 ff; 4 10).
Only Luke, the beloved physician, is with Paul
(4 11), and such faithful ones as live in Rome still
in hiding (4 21). Paul hopes that Timothy may
come and hring Mark also (4 11). Apparently
Timothy did come and was put into prison (He 13
23). Paul is not afraid. He knows that he will die.
He has escaped the mouth of the lion (2 Tim 4 17),
but he will die (4 18). The Lord Jesus stood by
him, perhaps in visible presence (4 17). The tra-
dition is, for now Paul fails us, that Paul, as a Rom
citizen, was heheaded on the Ostian Road just out-
side of Rome. Nero died June, 68 AD, so that Paul
was executed hefore that date, perhaps in the late
spring of that year (or 67). Perhaps Luke and
Timothy were with him. It is fitting, as Findlay
suggests, to let Paul’s words in 2 Tim 4 6-8 serve
for his own epitaph. He was ready to go to be
with Jesus, as he had Jong wished to be (Phil 1 23).

VI. Gospel.—I had purposed to save adequate
space for the discussion of Paul’s theology, but that
is not now possible. A bare sketch must suffice.
Something was said (see ahove on his epp. and equip-
ment) about the development in Paul’s conception
of Christ and his message ahout Him. Paul hada
gospel which he called his own (Rom 2 16). I
cannot agree with the words of Deissmann (St.
Paul, 6): “St. Paul the theologian looks backward
toward rabbinism. As a religious genius St. Paul’s
outlook is forward into a future of universal history.”
He did continue to use some rabbinical methods of
argument, but his theology was not rabbinical.
And he had a theology. He was the great apostle
and missionary to the heathen. He was a Christian
statesman with far-secing vision. He was the
loving pastor with the shepherd heart. He was the
great martyr for Christ. He was the wonderful
preacher of Jesus. But he was also “Paul the
theologian’ (Garvie, Life and Teaching of Paul,
ch v). There are two ways of studying his teaching.
One is to take it by groups of the epp., the purely
historical method, and that has some advantages (cf
Sabatier, The Apostle Paul), But at bottom Paul


has the same message in each group, though with
varying emphasis due to special exigencies. The
same essential notes occur all through. The more
common method, therefore, is to study his gospel
topically, using all the epp. for each topic. A
measure of historical development may still be ob-
served. Only the chief notes in Paul’s gospel can
be mentioned here. Even so, one must not turn to
his epp. for a complete system of doctrine. The
epp. are “occasional letters, piéces de circonstance”’
(Findlay, HDB), and they do not profess, not even
Rom, to give a full summary of Christian doctrine.
They are vital documents that throb with life.
There is no theological manualin them. But Paul’s
gospel is adequately stated repeatedly. Paul’s
message is Christocentric. Jesus as Messiah he
poche at once on his conversion (Acts 9 20.22).

e knew already the current Jewish Messianism
to which Jesus did not correspond. The accept-
ance of Jesus as He was (the facts about Him and
teachings) revolutionized his Messianic conceptions,
his view of God, and his view of man. ‘When he
takes and uses the Messianic phraseology of his
day, he fills it with a meaning new and rich” (Ros-
tron, Christology of St. Paul, 31). Paul was not
merely a new creature himself, but he had a new
outlook: “Wherefore we henceforth know no man
after the flesh: even though we have known Christ
after the flesh, yet now we know him so no more.
Wherefore if any man is in Christ, he is a new
creature: the old things are passed away; hehold,
they are hecome new. But all things are of God,
who reconciled us to himself through Christ, and
gave unto us the ministry of reconciliation; to wit,
that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not reckoning unto them their trespasses,
and having committed unto us the word of recon-
ciliation’” (2 Cor 5 16-19). Perhaps no_ single
passage in Paul’s Epp. tells us more than this one
of the change in Paul’s theological conceptions
wrought by his conversion. His view of Christ as
the revealer of God (God in Christ) and the mani-
festation of love for men (of God, who reconciled
us to Himself, reconciling the world to Himself) and
the means (through Christ) hy whom God is able
to forgive our sins (“not reckoning unto them their
trespasses’”’) on the basis of the atoning death of
Christ (‘‘wherefore”’; for this see vs 14 f just before
ver 16) with whom the believer has vital union (‘‘in
Christ’’) and who transforms the nature and views
of the believer, is here thoroughly characteristic.
Paul’s passion is Christ (2 Cor 5 14; Phil 1 21).
To gain Christ (8 8), to know Christ (3 10), to be
found in Christ (3 9), to know Christ as the mystery
of God (Col 2 2£), to be hid with Christ in God
(3 3)—this with the new Paul is worth while.
Thus Paul interprets God and man, by his doctrine
of Christ. To him Jesus is Christ and Christ is
Jesus. He has no patience with the incipient
Cerinthian Gnosticism, nor with the docetic Gnos-
ticism that denied the true humanity of Jesus.
The real mystery of God is Christ, not the so-called
mystery-religions. Christ has set_us free from the
bondage of ceremonial legalism. We are free from
the curse of the law (Gal 3 13). Grace is the dis-
tinctive word for the gospel (Rom 3-6), butit must
lead to sanctification (Rom 6-8), not license (Col
3). Paul’s Christology is both theocentric and
anthropocentric, but it is theocentric first. His
notion of redemption is the love of God seeking a
world lost in sin and finding love’s way, the only
way consonant with justice, in the atoning sacrifice
of Jesus Christ His Son (Rom 3 21-81). The
sinner comes into union with God in Christ by faith
in Christ as Redeemer and Lord. Henceforth he
lives to God in Christ by the help of the Holy
Spirit (Rom 8; Gal 6). Paul presents God as


Paul, the Apostle
Pauline Theology


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2288


Father of allin one sense (Eph 4 6), but in a special
sense of the believers in Christ (Rom 8 15f). Jesus
Christ is the Incarnation of the Pre-incarnate Son
of God (2 Cor 8 9; Phil 2 5~10), who is both God
and man (Rom 1 3f). With Paul the agent of
creation is Jesus (Col 1 15f), who is also the head
of the church universal (Col 118; Eph 1 22 f).
In the work of Christ Paul gives the central place
to the cross (1 Cor 1 17£;°2 2; Col 2 20; Eph
2 18-18). Sin is universal in humanity (Rom 1
18—3 20), but the vicarious death of Christ makes
redemption possible to all who believe (Rom 3
21 ff; Gal 3 6-11). The redeemed constitute the
kingdom of God or church universal, with Christ
as head. Local bodies (churches) are the chief
means for pushing the work of the kingdom. Paul
knows two ordinances, both_of which present in
symbolic form the death of Christ for sin and the
pledge of the believer to newness of life in Christ.
These ordinances are baptism (Rom 6 1-11) and
the Lord’s Supper (1 Cor 11 17-34). If he knew
the mystery-religions, they may have helped him
by way of illustration to present his conception
of the mystic union with Christ. Paul is animated
by the hope of the second coming of Christ, which
will be sudden (1 Thess 6 1-11) and not probably
at once (2 Thess 2), but was to be considered
as always imminent (1 Thess 5 2 if). Meanwhile,
death brings us to Christ, which is a glorious hope
to Paul (2 Cor 5 1-10; Phil 1 21; 2 Tim 4 18).
But, while Paul was a theologian in the highest. and
best sense of the term, the best interpreter of Christ
to men, he was also an ethical teacher. He did not
divorce ethics from religion. He insisted strongly on
the spiritual experience of Christ as the beginning
and the end of it all, as opposed to mere ritualistic
ceremonies which had destroyed the life of Judaism.
But all the more Paul demanded the proof of life
as opposed to mere profession. See Rom 6-8 in
particular. In most of the epp. the doctrinal sec-
tion is followed by practical exhortations to holy
living. Mystic as Paul was, the greatest of all
mystics, he was the sanest of moralists and had no
patience with hypocrites or licentious pietists or
idealists who allowed sentimentalism and emo-
tionalism to take the place of righteousness. His
notion of the righteousness demanded by God and
given by God included both sanctification and justi-
fication. In the end, the sinner who for Christ’s
sake is treated as righteous must be righteous.
Thus the image of God is restored in man by the
regenerating work of the Spirit of God (2 Cor 3
18). Paul sees God in the face of Christ (2 Cor
4 6), and the vision of Christ brings God to all who
see.

Lireratvre.—Out of the vast Pauline lit. the follow-
ing selections may be mentioned:

(1) General Works: Addis, Christianity and the Rom
Empire, 1893; Bartlet, The Apostolic Age, 1899; Bohlig,
Die Geisteskultur von Tarsos, 1913; Clemen, Primitive
Christianity and Its Non-Jewish Sources, 1912; Cumont,
Oriental Religions in Rom Paganism, 1911: Deissmann,
Light from_the Ancient East, 1910; Dewick, Primitive
Christian Eschatology, 1912; Déllinger, Gentile and Jew
in the Courts of the Temple of Christ, tr, 1862; Farrar,
Early Days of Christianity, 1882, Darkness and Dawn,
1893; Ferrero, Greatness and Decline of Rome, 1908;
Friedlander, Rom Life and_Manners under the Early
Empire; Glover, Conflict of Religions in the Early Rom
Empire, 1910; Gunkel, Zum_ religionsgeschichtlichen
Ferst. d. NT, 1903; Hausrath, Time of the Apostles, tr;
Neander, Planting and Training of the Christian Church,
tr; McGiffert, A Hist of Christianity in the Apostolic
Age, 1897; Ramsay, The Church in the Rom Empire,
1893, Cittes and Biskoprics of Phrygia, 1895, The First
Christian Cent., 1911; Reitzenstein, Die hellenistischen


Mysterienreligionen, 1910; Ropes, The Apostolic Age, 1906;
Schtirer, HJ P; Weizsacker, The Apostolie Age inthe Chris-
tian Church, 1894-95.

(2) Introductions: E. Burton, Chron of St. Paul's
Epp.;_Clemen, Die Chron der Paulinischen Briefe, 1893,
Die FEinhettlichkeit der Paulinischen Briefe, 1894:
Fiudlay, Epp. of Paul the Apostle, 1893; Gloag, Intro
to the Pauline Epp., 1876; Gregory, Canon and Text of


|


the NT, 1900; Hort, Prolegomena to Rom and Eph, 1895;
Harnack, The Acts of the Apostles, 1909, Date of the Acts
andthe Synoptic Gospels, 1911, History of Early Christian
Lit. until Eusebius, 1897; Holtzmann, Hinleitung’, 1892;
James, Genuineness and Authorship of the Pastoral
Epp., 1906; Jiilicher, Intro to the NT, 1903; Lake,
Earlier Epp. of St. Paul, 1911; Moffatt, Intro to the
Lit. of the NT, 1911; Peake, Critical Intro to the NT,
1909; Salmon, Intro to the NT, 1892; R. Scott, Epp. of
Paul, 1909; Shaw, The Pauline Epp., 1903; von Soden,
History of Early Christian Lit., 1906; B. Weiss, Present
State of the Inquiry Concerning the Genuineness of Paul's
Epp., 1897; Zahn, Intro tothe NT, 1909.

(3) Commentaries: For exegetical comms. on special
epp. see special arts. For the ancients_see Chrysostom
for the Greeks, and Pelagius for the Latins. For the
Middle Ages see Thomas Aquinas. For the later time
see Beza, Calvin, Colet, Estius, Grotius, Cornelius 4
Lapide, Wettstein, Bengel. Among the moderns note
Alford, Beet (Rem-Col), Boise, Bible for Home and
School, Cambridge Bible for Schools, Cambridge Gr Tes-
tament, New Cent. Bible; Drummond, Epp. of Paul, ENicott
(all but Rom and 2 Cor), Exzpositor's Bible, Expositor’s
Gr Testament; Holtzmann, Hand-Comm. zum NT; Jowett
(1 and 2 Thess, Rom, Gal), Lightfoot (Gal, Phil, Col,
Philem and Notes), Lietzmann, Handbuch zum NT;
Meyer (tr, revised Ger. edd), Zahn, Kommentar zum NT.

(4) Lives and Monographs: Albrecht, Paulus der
Apostel Jesu Chrisii, 1903; Bacon, The Story of Paul,
1904; Bartlet, art.in Enc Brit, Lith ed; Baring-Gould,
A Study of St. Paul, 1897; Baur, The Apostie Pauil?,
1845; Bevan, St. Paulin the Light of Today, 1912; Bird,
Paul of Tarsus, 1900; Campbell, Paul the Mystic, 1907;
Chrysostom, Homiliae in Laude S. Pauli, Opera, vol 11,
ed Montf. (more critically in Field's ed); Clemen, Pau-
lus, 1904; Cone, Paul the Man, the Missionary, 1898;
Cohu, St. Paul in the Light of Recent Research, 1910;
Conybeare and Howson, Life and Epp. of St. Paul
(many edd); Deissmann, St. Paul, 1912; Drescher, Das
Leben Jesu bet Paulus, 1900; Drury, The Prison Ministry
of St. Paul, 1910; Eadie, Paulthe Preacher, 1859; Farrar,
Life and Work of St. Paul (various edd): Erbes, Die
Todestage der Apostel Paulus und Petrus, 1899; Fletcher,
A Study of the Conversion of St. Paul, 1911; Forbes,
Footsteps of St. Paulin Rome, 1899; Fouard, St. Paul and
His Mission, 1894, Last Years of St. Paul, 1897; Gard-
ner, Religious Experience of St. Paul, 1911; Garvie, Life
and Teaching of St. Paul, 1909, Studies of St. Paul and
His Gospel, 1911; Gilbert, Student's Life of Paul, 1899;
Heim, Paulus, 1905; Hinnicke, Chronologie des Lebens
Pauli, 1904; Iverach, St. Paul, His Life and Time, 1890;
Johnston, The Mission of St. Paul to the Rom Empire,
1909; M. Jones, St. Paul the Orator, 1910; Kennedy,
St. Paul and the Mystery-Religions, 1913; Kohler, Zum
Verstindnis d. Apostels Paulus, 1908; Lewin, Life and
Epp. of St. Paul, 1875; Lock, St. Paul the Master
Builder, 1905; Lyttleton, Observations on Saul's Con-
version, 1774; Myers, Saint Paul (various edd); Mathe-
son, Spiritual Development of Si. Paul, 1891; Means,
St. Paul and the Ante-Nicene Church, 1903; Noesgen,
Paulus der_Apostel der Heiden, 1908; Paley, Horae
Paulinae, 1790; Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller, 1896,
Pauline and Other Studies, 1906, Cities of St. Paul, 1908,
Luke the Physician and Other Studies, 1908, Pictures
of the Apostolic Church, 1910; Renan, St. Paul, 1869:
A. T. Rohertson, Epochs in the Life of Paul, 1909, ‘The
Glory of the Ministry or Paul's Exultation in Preaching,
1911; Sabatier, The Apostle Paul, 1896; Selden, In the
Time of Paul, 1900; Schweitzer, St. Paul and His In-
terpreters, 1912; Smith, Voyage and Shipwreck of St.
Pauls, 1880; Speer, The Man Paul, 1900; Stalker, Life
of St. Paul, 1889; Taylor, Paul the Misstonary, 1882:
Underhill, Divine Legation of St. Paul, 1889; ‘Weinel,
Paul (tr, 1906); Whyte, The Apostle Paul, 1903; Wilkin-
son, Epic of Saul, 1891, Epic of Paul, 1897; Wrede,
Paulus’, 1907 (tr); Wright, Cittes of Paul, 1907: ‘Wynne,
Fragmentary Records of Jesus of Nazareth by a Contem-
porary, 1887.

(5) Teaching: A. B. D. Alexander, The Ethics of Si.
Paul, 1910; S. A. Alexander, Christianity of St. Paul,
1899; Anonymous, The Fifth Gospel, 1906; R. Allen,
Christology of St. Paul, 1912; M. Arnold, St. Poul and
Protestantism, 1897; Ball, St. Paul and the Rom Law,
1901; Breitenstein, Jésus et Paul, 1908; Bruce, St. Paul's
Conception of Christianity, 1898; Briickner, Die Ent-
stehung der Paulinischen Christologie, 1903; Bultmann,
Der Stil der Paulin. Predigt und die_kyn. Diatribe, 1910;
Chadwick, Social Teaching of St. Paul, 1907, Pastoral
Teaching of St. Paul, 1907; M. Dibelius, Die Geister welt
tm Glouben des Paulus, 1909; Dickie, Culture of the Sptr-
ttual Life, 1905; Dicksou, St. Paul’s Use of the Terms
Flesh and Spirit, 1883; Du Bose, Gospel according to St.
Paul, 1907; Dykes, Gospel according to St. Paul, 1888:
Everett, Gospel of Paul, 1893; Feine, Paul as Theologian
(tr, 1908); Greenough, Mind of Christin St. Paul: Goguel,
L’ Apétre Paul et Jésus Christ, 1904: Harford, The Gospel
according to St. Paul, 1912; Hicks, ‘St. Paul and Hel-
lenism,’” Stud. Bibl., IV; Holsten, Das Evangelium des
Paulus, 1898; Jiilicher, Peulus und Jesus, 1907; Kaftan,
Jesus und Paulus, 1906; Kennedy, St. Paul's Conceptions
of Last Things, 1904; Knowling, Testimony of St. Paul
to Christ (3d ed, 1911); A. Meyer, Jesus or Paul? 1909:


Moffatt, Paul and Puulinism, 1910; Montet, EBssat sur
la_christologie de Saint Paul, 1906; Nageli, Der Wort-
schniz des Apostels Paulus, 1905; Oehler, Paulus und
Jesus, 1908; Paterson, The Pauline Theology, 1903;
Pfleiderer, Paulinismus, 1873, Influence of the Apostle
Paul on the Development of Christianity, 1885; Prat, La
théologie de Saint Paul, 1907; Ramsay, The Teaching of
St. Paul in Terms of the Present Day, 1913; Reseh,
Paulinismus und die Logia Jesu, 1904; Rostron, The
Christology of St. Paul, 1912; Simon, Die Psychologie des
A postels Paulus, 1897; Somerville, St. Paul's Conception
of Christ, 1897; Stevens, The Pauline Theology, 1894;
Thackeray, Relation of St, Paul to Contemporary Jewish
Thought, 1900; J. Weiss, Paul and Jesus, 1909; Paul and
Justification, 1913; Williams, A Plea for @ Reconstruction
of St. Paul's Doctrine of Justification, 1912; Wustmann,
Jesus und Paulus, 1907; Zahn, Das Gesetz Gottes nach
der Lehre des Apostels Paulus?, 1892.
A. T. RoBERTSON
PAUL, VOYAGE AND SHIPWRECK OF. See


Pav. THE Apostie, V, 9; PHOENIX.


PAULINE, pél’in, -in, THEOLOGY:


I. THe PREPARATION
1. The Pharisee
2. Saul and Sin
3. Primitive Christianity
Il. Tut Conversion
1. Christ
2. The Spirit
3. The Unio Mystica
4. Salvation
5. Justification
III. Furtuer DeveLropmMents
1, Abolition of the Law
. Gentiles
. Redemption
Atonement
. Moral Example
. Function of the Law
IV. Spscrau Torics
1, The Church
2. The Sacraments


OP OT yp 69 bo


I. The Preparation.—In order to understand the
development of St. Paul’s theological system, it is
necessary to begin with his beliefs as a Pharisee.
The full extent of these beliefs, to be sure, is not
now ascertainable, for Pharisaism was a rule of
conduct rather than a system of dogmas, and great
diversity of opinions existed among Pharisees. Yet
there was general concurrence in certain broad
principles, while some of St. Paul’s own. state-
ments enable us to specify his beliefs still more
closely.

Saul the Pharisee believed that God wag One, the
Creator of all things. In His relation to His world

He was transcendent, and governed
1. The it normally through His angels. Cer-
Pharisee tain of these angelic governors had
been unfaithful to their trust and had
wrought evil, although God still permitted them to
bear rule for a time (Col 2 15; cf En 89 65). And
evil had come into humanity through the trans-
gression of the first man (Rom 5 12; cf 2 Esd 7
118). To lead men away from this evil God gave
His Law, which was a perfect revelation of duty
(Rom 7°12), and this Law was illumined by the
traditions of the Fathers, which the Pharisees felt
to be an integral part of the Law itself. God was
merciful and would pardon the offender against the
Law, if he completely amended his ways. But im-
perfect reformation brought no certain hope_ of
pardon, Toa few specially favored individuals God
had given the help of His Spirit, but this was not
for the ordinary individual. The great majority
of mankind (cf 2 Esd 7 49-57), including all
Gentiles, had no hope of salvation. In a very short
time the course of the world would be closed. With
God, from before the beginning of creation, there
was existing a heavenly being, the Son of man of
Dnl 7 13, and He was about to be made manifest.
(That Saul held the transcendental Messianic doc-
trine is not to be doubted.) As the world was
irredeemably bad, this Messiah would soon appear,
cause the dead to rise, hold the Last Judgment and


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Paul, the Apostle
Pauline Theology


bring from heaven the “Jerus that is above” (Gal 4
26), in which the righteous would spend a blessed
eternity. See PHarisers; Mrssiau; Parousia.
Rom 7 7~25 throws a further light on Saul’s
personal] beliefs. The OT promised pardon to the
sinner who amended his ways, but the
2. Saul acute moral sense of Saul taught him
and Sin that he could never expect perfectly
to amend his ways. The 10th Com-
mandment was the stumbling-block. Sins of deed
and of word might perhaps be overcome, but sins of
evil desires stayed with him, despite his full knowl-
edge of the Law that branded them as sinful.
Indeed, they seemed stimulated rather than sup-
pressed by the Divine precepts against them.
With the best will in the world, Saul’s efforts toward
perfect righteousness failed continually and gave
no promise of ever succeeding. He found himself
thwarted by something that he came to realize was
ingrained in his very nature and from which he
could never free himself. Human nature as it is,
the flesh (not “the material of the body’’), contains
a taint that makes perfect reformation impossible
(7 18; ef 8 3, etc). Therefore, as the Law knows
no pardon for the imperfectly reformed, Saul felt
his future to be absolutely black. What he longed
for was a promise of pardon despite continued sin,
and that the Law precluded. (Any feeling that
the temple sacrifices would bring forgiveness had
long since been obsolete in educated Judaism.)
There is every reason to suppose that Saul's experience
was not unique at this period. Much has been written in
recent years about the Jews’ confidence in God's mercy,
and abundant quotations are brought from the Talm
in support of this. But the surviving portions of the
literature of the Daniel-Akiba period (165 BC-135 AD)
give a different impression, for it is predominantly a
literature of penitential prayers and confessions of sin,
of pois regarding the world, the nation and one's
self. In 2 Esd, in particular, Saul's experience is closely


paralleled,and 2 Esd 7 (of course not in AY) is one of
the best comms. ever written on Rom 7%


Saul must have come in contact with Christianity
very soon after Pentecost, at the latest. Some
personal acquaintance with Christ is
3. Primitive in no way impossible, irrespective of
Christianity the meaning of 2 Cor 6 16. But no
one in Jerus, least of all a man like
Saul, could have failed to learn very early that there
was a new ‘‘party’” in Judaism. To his eyes this
“party” would have ahout the following appear-
ance: Here was a band of men proclaiming that the
Messiah, whom all expected, would be the Jesus
who had recently been crucified. Him the disciples
were preaching as risen, ascended and sitting on
God’s right hand. They claimed that He had sent
on all His followers the coveted gift of the Spirit,
and they produced miracles in proof of their claim.
A closer investigation would show that the death of
Jesus was being interpreted in terms of Isa 53, as
a ransom for the nation. ‘The inquirer would learn
also that Jesus had given teaching that found con-
stant and _ relentless fault with the Pharisees.
Moreover, He had swept aside the tradition of the
Fathers as worthless and had given the Law a
drastic reinterpretation on the basis of eternal spir-
itual facts.

This inwardness must have appealed to Saul and
he must have envied the joyous enthusiasm of the
disciples. But to him Pharisaism was Divine, and
he was in a spiritual condition that admitted of
no compromises. Moreover, the Law (Gal 3 13;
cf Dt 21 23) cursed anyone who had been hanged
on a tree, and the new party was claiming celestial
Messiahship for a man who had met this fate. The
system aroused Saul’s burning hatred; he appointed
himself (perhaps stimulated by his moral despera-
tion) to exterminate the new religion, and iz pursuit
of his mission he started for Damascus.


Pauline Theology THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2290


Saul must have gained a reasonable knowledge of
Christ's teachings in this period of antagonism. He
certainly could not have begun to persecute the faith
without learning what it was, and in the inevitable dis-
cussions with his victims he must have learned still more,
even against his will This fact is often overlooked.

Hl. The Conversion.—The immediate conient of
St. Paul’s conversion was the realization that the

celestial Messiah was truly Jesus of
1. Christ Nazareth. This was simply the belief

of the primitive church and was the
truth for which Christ had died (Mk 14 62). But
it involved much. It made Christ the Son of God
(Rom 8 32; Gal 44, etc), “firstborn of  [i.e.
“earlier than”] all creation” (Col 1 15), “existing
iu the form of God” (Phil 2 6) and “rich” (2 Cor
8 9). In the Messiah are ‘‘all the treasures of wis-
dom and knowledge hidden” (Col 2 3), to be mani-
fested at the end of time when the Messiah shall
appear as the Judge of all (2 Cor 5 10, etc), caus-
ing the resurrection of the dead (1 Cor 15 45, etc).
All this was given by St. Paul’s former beliefs and
had been claimed by Christ for Himself. That this
Messiah had become man was a fact of the immedi-
ate past (the reality of the manhood was no problem
at this period). As Messiah His sinlessness was
unquestioned, while the facts of His life proved this
sinlessness also. His teaching was wholly binding
(1 Cor 7 10.11; that the writer of these words
could have spared any effort to learn the teaching
fully is out of the question). The conversion ex-
perience was proof sufficient of the resurrection,
although for missionary purposes St. Paul used
other evidence as well (1 Cor 15 1-11).

Faith in this Messiah brought the unmistakable
experience of the Holy Spirit (Rom 8 2; Gal 3 2,
etc; ef Acts 9 17), demonstrating Christ’s Lordship
(1 Cor 12 3; cf Acts 2 33). So ‘the head of
every man is Christ’? (1 Cor 11 3; cf Col 1 18;
Eph 1 22; 4 15), with complete control of the
future (1 Cor 15 25), and all righteous men are
His servants (‘“‘slaves,”? Rom 1 1, etc). To Him
men may address their prayers (2 Cor 12 8; 1
Cor 1 2, etc; cf Acts 14 23).

Further reflection added to the concepts. As the
Lordship of Christ was absolute, the power of all
hostile beings must have been broken also (Rom 8
38; Phil 2 9-11; Col 2 15; Eph 1 21-238, etc).
The Being who had such significance for the present
and the future could not have been without sig-
nificance for the past. ‘In all things’? He must
have had “the preéminence”’ (Col 1 18). It was
He who ministered to the Israelites at the Exodus
(1 Cor 10 4.9). In fact He was not only ‘before
all things’ (Col 1 17), but ‘‘all things have beeu
created through him” (ver 16). Wisdom and
Logos concepts may have helped St. Paul in reach-
ing these conclusions, which in explicit statement
are au advance on Christ’s own words. But the
conclusions were inevitable.

Fitting these data of religious fact into the meta-
physical doctrine of God was a problem that occu-
pied the church for the four following centuries.
After endless experimenting the only conclusion
was shown to be that already reached by St. Paul
in Rom 9 5 (ef Tit 2 13, ERV, ARVm), that Christ
is God. To besure, St. Paul’s terminology, carried
over from his pre-Christian days, elsewhere reserves
“God” for the Father (and cf 1 Cor 15 28). But
the fact of this theology admits only of the conclusion
that was duly drawn. !

A second fact given directly by the conversion
was the presence of the Spirit, where the actual
experience transcended anything that
had been dreamed of. Primarily the
operation of the Spirit was recognized
in vividly supernatural effects (Rom
15 19; 1 Cor 12 5-11, etc; ef 2 Cor 12 12; Acts


2. The
Spirit


2 4), but St. Paul must at first have known the
presence of the Spirit through the assurance of
salvation given him, a concept that he never wearies
of expressing (Rom 8 16.23; Gal 4 6, etc). The
work of the Spirit in producing holiness in the soul
needs no comment (see Hoty Spirit; Sanctiri-
cation), but it is characteristic of St. Paul that it is
on this part of the Spirit’s activity, rather than on
the miraculous effects, that he lays the emphasis.
“The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,” etc
(Gal 6 22); the greatest miracles without love are
more than useless (1 Cor 13 1-3); in such sayings
St. Paul touched the depths of the purest teaching
of Christ. To be sure, in the Synoptic Gospels the
word “Spirit” is not often on Christ’s lips, but there
is the same conception of a life proceeding from a
pure center (Mt 6 22; 7 17, etc) in entire depend-
ence on God.

Further reflection and observation taught St.
Paul something of the greatest) importance for
Christian theology. In prayer the Spirit appeared
distinguished from the Father as well as from
the Son (Rom 8 26f; cf 1 Cor 2 10f), giving
three terms that together express the plenitude
of the Deity (2 Cor 13 14; Eph 1 3.6.13, etc),
with no fourth term ever similarly associated. See
TRINITY.

The indwelling of the Divine produced by the
Spirit is spoken of indifferently as the indwelling

of the Spirit, or of the Spirit of Christ,


3. The or of Christ Himself (all three terms in
Unio Rom 8 9-11; cf 1 Cor 212; Gal
Mystica 4 6; Eph 3 17, etc). The variations


are in part due to the inadequacy of
the old terminology (so 2 Cor 3 17), in part to the
nature of the subject. Distinctions made between
the operations of the persons of the Trinity on the
soul can never be much more than verbal, and the
terms are freely interchangeable. At all events,
through the Spirit Christ is in the believer (Rom 8
10; Gal 2 20; 419; Eph 3 17), or, what is the
same thing, the believer is in Christ (Rom 6 11;
81; 16 7, etc). “We have become united with
him” (Rom 6 5, stémphutoi, ‘‘grown together with’’)
in a union once and for all effected (Gal 83 27) and
yet always to be made more intimate (Rom 13 14).
The union so accomplished makes the man “a new
creature” (2 Cor 5 17).

St. Paul now saw within himself a dual per-

sonality. His former nature, the old man, still

persisted, with its impulses, liability
4. Salvation to temptation, and inertnesses. The

“flesh” still existed (Gal 6 17; Rom
8 12; 13 14; Eph 4 22; Phil 3 12, etc). On the
other hand there was fighting in him against this
former nature nothing less than the whole power of
Christ, and its final victory could not be uncertain
fora moment (Rom 6 12; 8 2.10; Gal 5 16, etc).
Indeed, it is possible to speak of the believer as
entirely spiritual (Rom 6 11.22; 8 9, etc), as
already in the kingdom (Col 1 18), as already
sitting in heavenly places (Eph 2 6). Of course
St. Paul had too keen an appreciation of reality to
regard believers as utterly sinless (Phil 3 12, etc),
and his pages abound in reproofs and exhortations.
But the present existence of remnants of sin had
no final terrors, for the ultimate victory over sin
was certain, even if it was not to be complete until
the last day when the power of God would redeem
even the present physical frame (Rom 8 11; Phil
3 21, etc).

As the first man to belong to the higher order, and
as the point from which the race could take a fresh start,
Christ could justly be termed a ncw Adam (1 Cor 15
45-49; cf Rom § 12-21). If Cor 15 46 has any rela-
tion to the Philonic doctrine of the two Adams, it is a


polemic against it. Such a polemic would not be
unlikely.


2291


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Pauline Theelogy


A most extraordinary fact, to the former Pharisee,
was that this experience had been gained without
conscious effort and even against con-
6. Justifi- scious effort (Phil 3 7f). After years
cation of fruitless striving a single act of self-
surrender had brought him an assur-
ance that he had despaired of ever attaming. And
this act of self-surrender is what St. Paul means by
“faith,” “faith without works.’ This faith is
naturally almost anything in the world rather than
a mere intellectual acknowledgment of a fact (Jas
2 19), and is an act of the whole man, too complex
for simple analysis. It finds, however, its perfect
statement in Christ’s reference to ‘receiving the
kingdom of God ag a little child’ (Mk 10 15). By
an act of simple yielding St. Paul found himself no
longer in dread of his sins; he was at peace with
‘God, and confident as to his future; in a word,
‘Justified.” In one sense, to be sure, “‘works’’ were
still involved, for without the past struggles the
result would never have been attained. A desire,
however imperfect, to do right is a necessary prepa-
ration for justification, and the word has no mean-
ing to a man satisfied to be sunk in complete selfish-
ness (Rom 6 2; 3 8, etc). This desire to do right,
which St. Paul always presupposes, and the content
given “faith” are sufficient safeguards against
antinomianism. But the grace given is in no way
commensurate with past efforts, nor does it grow out
of them. It isa simple gift of God (Rom 6 23).
Il, Farther Developments.—The adoption by
St. Paul of the facts given by his conversion (and
the immediate conclusions that followed from them)
involved, naturally, a readjustment and a reforma-
tion of the other parts of his belief. The process
must have occupied some time, if it was ever com-
plete during his life, and must have been affected
materially by his controversies with his former core-
ligionists and with very many Christians.
Fundamental was the problem of the Law. The
Law was perfectly clear that he—and only he—
who performed it would live. But
1. Abolition life was found through faith in Christ,
of the Law while the Law was not fulfilled.
There could be no question of compro-
mise between the two positions; they were simply
incompatible (Rom 10 5f; Gal 2 16; 3 11f; Phil
3 7). One conclusion only was possible: ‘Christ
is the end of the law unto righteousness to every
one that believeth’ (Rom 10 4). As far as con-
cerned the believer, the Law was gone. Two
tremendous results followed. One was the im-
mense simplification of what we call ‘Christian
ethics,” which were now to be determined by the
broadest general principles of right. and wrong and
no longer by an elaborate legalistic construing oi
God’s commands (Rom 18 8-10; Gal 5 22f, etc;
ef Mk 12 29-31). To be sure, the commandments
might be quoted as convenient expressions of moral
duty (Eph 6 2; 1 Cor 9 9, ete; ef Mk 10 19),
but they are binding because they are right, not
because they are commandments (Col 2 16). So,
in St. Paul’s moral directions, he trics to bring out
always the principle involved, and Rom 14 and
1 Cor 8 are masterpieces of the treatment of con-
crete problems by this method.
The second result of the abolition of the Law was
overwhelming. Gentiles had as much right to
Christ as had the Jews, barring per-
2. Gentiles haps the priority of honor (Rom 3 2,
etc) possessed by the latter. It is
altogether conceivable, as Acts 22 21 implies, that
St. Paul’s active acceptance of this result was long
delayed and reached only after severe struggles.
The fact was utterly revolutionary, and although
it was prophesied in the OT (Rom 9 251), yet ‘the
Messiah among you Gentiles’ remained the hidden


mystery that God had revealed only in the last
days (Col 1 26; Eph 3 3-6, etc). The struggles
of the apostle in defence of this principle are the
most familiar part of his carcer.

This consciousness of deliverance from the Law
came to St. Paul in another way. The Law was

meant for men in this world, but the
3. Redemp- union with Christ had raised him out
tion of this world and so taken him away

from the Law’s control. In the Epp.
this fact finds expression in an claboratcly reasoned
form. As Christ’s nature is now a vital part of our
nature, His death and resurrection are facts of our
past as well. ‘Ye died, and your life is hid with
Christ in God” (Col 3 3). But “the law hath
dominion over a man” only “for so long time as he
liveth” (Rom 7 1). ‘Wherefore, my brethren, ye
also were made dead to the law through the body
of Christ” (ver 4). Cf Col 2 11-13.20, where the
same argument is used to show that ritual observ-
ance is no longer necessary. In Rom 6 1-14 this
argument is made to issue in a practical exhortation.
Through the death of Christ, which is our death
(ver 4), we, like Him, are placed in a higher world
(ver 5) where sin has lost its power (ver 7), a world
in which we are no longer under Law (ver 14).
Hence the intensest moral effort becomes our duty
(ver 13; ef 2 Cor 6 14f).

This release from the Law, however, does not
solve the whole problem. Evil, present and past,
is a fact, Law or no Law (on Rom 4
15b; & 13b; see the comms.), and a
forbearance of God that simply ‘‘passes
over’ sins is disastrous for man as
well as contrary to the righteous nature of God
(Rom 3 25f). However inadequate the OT sac-
rifices were felt to have been (and hence, perhaps,
St. Paul’s avoidance of the Levitical terms except
in Eph 6 2), yet they offered the only help possible
for the treatment of this most complex of problems.
The guilt of our sins is ‘“‘covered”’ by the death of
Christ (1 Cor 15 3, where this truth is among those
which were delivered to converts ‘“‘first of all’; Rom
3 25; 4 25; 5 6, etc). This part of his theology
St. Paul leaves in an incomplete form. He was ac-
customed, like any other man of his day, whether
Jew or Gentile, to think naturally in sacrificial terms,
and neither he nor his converts were conscious of
any difficulty involved. Nor has theology since his
time been able to contribute much toward advan-
cing the solution of the problem. The fatal results
of unchecked evil, its involving of the innocent with
the guilty, and the value of vicarious suffering, are
simple facts of our experience that defy our attempts
to reduce them to intellectual formulas. In St.
Paul's case it is to be noted that he views the in-
centive as coming from God (Rom 3 25; 5 8; 8
32, etc), because of His love toward man, so that a
“gift-propitiation” of an angry deity is a theory the
precise opposite of the Paulinc. Moreover, Christ’s
death is not a mere fact of the past, but through the
“mystical union” is incorporated into the life of
every believer.


4. Atone-
ment


Further developments of this doctrine about Christ's
death find in it the complete destruction of whatever
remained of the Law (Col 2 14), esp. as the barrier
between Jew and Gentile (Eph 2 15f). The extension
of the effects of the death to the unseen world (Col 2
15; cf Gal 4 9; Eph 4 8) was of course natural.


The death of Christ as producing a subjective
moral power in the believer is appealed to fre-
quently (ef Rom 8 3; Gal 2 20; Eph
5 2.25; Phil 2 5, etc), while the idea
is perhaps present to some degree even
in Rom 3 26. From a different point
of view, the Cross as teaching the vanity of worldly
things is a favorite subject with St. Paul (1 Cor 1


5. Moral
Example


Pauline Theology
Peacemaker


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2292


22-25; 2 Cor 18 4; Gal & 11; 6 14, etc). These


aspects require no explanation.

There are, accordingly, in St. Paul's view of the death
of Christ at least three distinct lines, the ‘‘ mystical,”
the ‘‘juristic,"' and the “ethical."". But this distinction
is largely only genetic and logical, and the lines tend to
blend in all sorts of combinations. Consequently, it is
frequently an impossible exegetical problem to determine
which is most prominent in any given passage (e.g.
2 Cor § 14f).

Regarding the Law a further question remained,
which had great importance in St. Paul’s contro-

versies. If the Law was useless for
6. Function salvation, why was it given at all?
of the Law St. Paul replies that it still had its

purpose. To gain righteousness one
must desire it and this desire the Law taught (Rom
7 12.16; 2 18), even though it had no power to help
toward fulfilment. So the Law gave knowledge of
sin (Rom 3 20; 7 7). But St. Paul did not hesi-
tate to go beyond this. Familiar in his own expe-
rience with the psychological truth that a prohibi-
tion may actually stimulate the desire to transgress
it, he showed that the Law actually had the purpose
of bringing out all the dormant evil within us, that
grace might deal with it effectually (Rom & 20f;
7 8.25; ef 1 Cor 15 56). Thus the Law became
our paidagégés ‘to bring us unto Christ” (Gal 3 24;
see SCHOOLMASTER), and came in “besides” (Rom
5 20), i.e. as something not a primary part of God’s
plan. Indeed, this could be shown from the Law
itself, which proved that faith was the primary
method of salvation (Rom 4; ef Gal 3 17) and
which actually prophesied its owu repeal (Gal 4
21-31). With this conclusion, which must have
required much time to work out, St. Paul’s reversal
of his former Pharisaic position was complete.

IV. Special Topics.— As Christ is the central element
in the life of the believer, all believers have this element


in common and are so united with each
This is the basis of


1. The other (Rom 12 5).
‘h the Pauline doctrine of the church. The
Church use of the word ‘‘church” to denote the


whole body of believers is not attained
until the later Epp. (Col 1 18; Phil 3 6; Eph 1] 22, etc)
—hefore that time the word is in the pl. when describing
more than a local congregation (2 Thess 1 4; 1 Cor
7 17; Rom 16 16, etc)—but the idea is present from
the first. Indeed, the only terms in Judaism that were
at all adequate were ‘the nation" or ‘‘Israel."” St.
Paul uses the latter term (Gal 6 16) and quite constantly
expresses himself in a manner that suggests the OT
figures for the nation (e.g.cf Eph § 25 with Hos 2 19 f),
and time was needed in order to give ekklésta (properly
“assembly "') the new content. ‘

The church is composed of all who have professed
faith in Christ and the salvation of its members St. Paul
takes generally for granted (1 Thess ] 4; Rom 1 7:
1 Cor 1 8, etc), even in the case of the incestuous per-
son of 1 Cor 5 (cf 3 15; 11 32). To be sure, 1 Cor
§ 11-13 makes it clear that the excommunication of
grave sinners had been found necessary, and one may
doubt if St. Paul had much hope for the "false brethren”
of 2 Cor 11 26; Gal 24 (cf.1 Cor 3 17, etc). But
on the whole St. Paul's optimism has little douht that
every member of the church is in right relations with
God. These members, through their union with Christ,
form a corporate, social organism of the greatest possihle
solidarity (1 Cor 12 26, etc) and have the maximum of
responsibility toward one another (Rom 14 15; 1 Cor
8 11; 2 Cor 8 13-15; Gal 6 2; Eph 4 25; Coll 24,
etc). They are utterly distinct from the world around
them (2 Cor 6 14-18; 1 Cor 6 12, etc), although in
constant intercourse with it (1 Cor § 10; 10 27, etc).
It was even desirahle, in the conditions of the times,
that the church should have her own courtslike Jews in
gentile cities (1 Cor 6 5f). The right of the church
to discipline her members is taken for granted (1 Cor 5;
2 Cor 25-11). According to Acts 14 23 St. Paul made
his own appointments of church officers, but the Epp.
asa whole would suggest that this practice did not ex-
tend beyond Asia Minor. For further details see Cuurca
GovERNMENT; Ministry. A general ohedience to St.
Paul's own authority is presupposed throughout.

The church is, of course, the ohject of Christ's sancti-
fying hee (Eph § 25-30) and is so intimately united
with Him as to_be spoken of as His ‘‘body"’ (1 Cor 12
27; Col 1 18; Eph ] 23, etc), or as the ‘‘complement"”’
of Christ, the extension of His personality into the world
(Eph 1 22f). As such, its members have not only their
duty toward one another, but also the responsibility of


carrying Christ's message into the world (Phil 2 15f,
and presupposed everywhere). And to God shall ‘'be
the glory in the church and in Christ Jesus unto all gen-
cratious for ever and ever" (Eph 3 21).
As the union with Christ’s death is something more
than a subjective impression made on the mind hy the
fact of that death, the references to the
2. The


union with the death accomplished in
baptism in Rom 6 1-7 and Col 2 1l1f
Sacraments are not explained by supposing them to
describe a mere dramatic ceremony. That
St. Paul was really influenced by the mystery-religion
concepts has not been made out. But his readers cer-
tainly were so influenced and tended to conceive very
materialistic views of the Christian sacraments (1 Cor
10 5; 15 29). And historic exegesis is bound to construe
St. Paul's language in the way in which he knew his
readers would be certain to understand it, and no ordi-
nary gentile reader of St. Paul's day would have seen a
purely ‘‘symbolic’’ meaning in either of the baptismal
passages. Philo would have done so, but not the class of
men with whom St. Paul had to deal. Similarly, with
regard to the Lord’s Supper, in 1 Cor 10 20 St. Paul
teaches that through participation in a sacral meal it
is possible to be brought into objective relations with
demons of whom one is wholly ignorant. In this ight it
is hard to avoid the conclusion that through participa-
tion in the Lord's Supper the believer is objectively
brought into communion with the Lord (1 Cor 10 16),
a communion that will react for evil on the believer if
he approach it in an unworthy manner (1] 29-32): i.e.
the union with Christ that is the center of St. Paul's
theology he teaches to be established normally through
baptism. And in the Lord's Supper this union is further
Strengthened. That faith on the part of the believer is
an indispensable prerequisite for the efficacy of the sacra-
ments need not be said.
See, further, Gop; Parovusra; Prayer; Prepestina-
TION; PropitiaTion, etc.
Literature.—See under Pat.
BuRTON Scorr Easton
PAULUS, pd’lus, SERGIUS, siir’ji-us (Zépyvos
TIatdos, Sérgios Paiilos): The Rom “proconsul”
(RV) or “deputy” (AV) of Cyprus when Paul, along
with Barnabas, visited that island_on his first mis-
sionary journey (Acts 13 4.7). The official title
of Sergius is accurately given in Acts. Cyprus was
originally an imperial province, but in 22 BC it was
transferred by Augustus to the Senate, and was
therefore placed under the administration of pro-
consuls, as is attested by extant Cyprian coins of the
period. When the two missionaries arrived at
Paphos, Sergius, who was a ‘“‘prudent man” (AV)
or “man of understanding” (RV), i.e. a man of prac-
tical understanding, “sought to hear the word of
God” (Acts 13 7). Bar-Jesus, or Elymas, a sor-
cerer at the court of Sergius, fearing the influence of
the apostles, sought, however, ‘“‘to turn aside the
proconsul from the faith,” but was struck with blind-
ness (vs 8-11); and the deputy, “when he saw what
was done, believed, being astonished at the teaching
of the Lord” (ver 12). The narrative indicates that
not only the miracle but also the attention with
which Sergius listened to the teaching of Paul (ef
ver 7) conduced to his conversion (Bengel). At-
tempts have been made to trace some connection
between the name Sergius Paulus and the fact that
Saul is first called Paul in ver 9, but the joint occur-
rence of the two names is probably to be set down as
only a coincidence. C. M. Kerr


PAVEMENT, pav’ment: In the OT, with the
exception of 2 IX 16 17, the Heb word is MBS‘,
ri¢pah (2 Ch 7 3; Est 1 6; Ezk 40 17, ete); in
Sir 20 18 and Bel ver 19 the word is Zéaqgos, édaphos;
in Jn 19 13, the name “The Pavement” (Ac66orpu-
tos, lithéstrétos, “paved with stone’’) is given to
the place outside the Praetorium on which Pilate
sat to give judgment upon Jesus. Jis Heb (Aram.)
equivalent 1s declared to be Ganpatua (q.v.). The
identification of the place is uncertain.


PAVILION, pa-vil’yun: A covered place, booth,
tent, in which a person may be kept hid or secret
(J, sdkh, Ps 27 5; M30, sukkah—the usual term—
Ps 31 20), or otherwise be withdrawn from view.


2293


The term is used with reference to God (2 8 22 12;
Ps 18 11); to kings drinking in privacy (1 K 20
12.16); RV gives “pavilion” for AV “tabernacle”
in Job 36 29; Isa 4 6; while in Nu 26 8 it substi-
tutes this word, with m “alcove,” for AV “tent”
(kubbaéh), and Jer 43 10, for ‘royal pavilion”
(shaphrir), reads in m “glittering pavilion.”
James ORR

PAW, pé (89, kaph, lit. “palm,” 3, yadh, lit.
“hand”): The former (kaph) is applied to the soft
paws of animals in contradistinction to the hoofs
(Lev 11 27); the latter is thrice used in 1S 17 37:
“Jeh that delivered me out of the paw [yadh] of the
lion, and out of the paw [yadh] of the bear, he will
deliver me out of the hand [yddh] of this Philistine.”
The vb. “to paw” (DM, hdphar) is found in the
description of the horse: ‘He paweth [m ‘they
paw’’] in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength: he
goeth out to meet the armed men [m “the weapons’’]’’
(Job 39 21). The word is usually tr? ‘‘to delve
into,” “to pry into,” “to explore.”

a H. L. E. Luerine

PE, pa (8. DB, 0): The 17th letter of the Heb
alphabet; transhterated in this Encyclopaedia as p
with daghesh and ph (=f) without. It came also
to be used for the number 80. For name, etc, see
ALPHABET.


PEACE, pés (nidwi, shilim; eptvy, eiréné):
Is a condition of freedom from disturbance, whether
outwardly, as of a nation from war
1. Inthe or enemies, or inwardly, within the
OT soul. The Heb word is sha@lém (both
adj. and subst.), meaning, primarily,
“soundness,” “health,” but coming also to signify
“prosperity,” well-being in_ general, all good in
relation to both man and God. In early times, to a
people harassed by foes, peace was the primary
blessing. In Ps 122 7, we have “peace” and
“prosperity,”’ and in 36 27; 73 3, shalém is tr4
“prosperity.” In 28 117 AV, David asked of
Uriah “how Joab did” (m “of the peace of Joab”’),
“and how the people did [RV “fared,” lit. “of the
peace of the people’’], and how the war prospered”
(lit. “and of the peace [welfare] of the war’’).

(1) Shal6m was the common friendly greeting,
used in asking after the health of anyone; also in
farewells (Gen 29 6, “Is it well with him?” [Is
there peace to him?”’]; 43 23, ‘‘Peace be to you”;
ver 27, “Heasked them of their welfare [of their
peace]”’; Jgs 6 23, ‘‘Jeh said unto him, Peace be
unto thee’; 18 15 [AV “saluted him,” m “‘Heb asked
him of peace,” RV “‘of his welfare’]; 19 20, etc).
See also GREETING. (2) Peace from enemies (im-
plying prosperity) was the great desire of the nation
and was the gift of God to the people if they walked
in His ways (Lev 26 6; Nu 6 26, “Jeh lift up his
countenance upon thee, and give thee peace’; Ps
29 11; Isa 26 12, etc). To “die in peace” was
greatly to be desired (Gen 16 15; 1 K 2 6; 2 Ch
34 28, etc). (3) Inward peace was the portion of
the righteous who trusted in God (Job 22 21,
“Acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace
[shalam]”; Ps 4 8; 86 8, “He will speak peace unto
his people, and to his saints”; 119 165; Prov 3 2.
17; Isa 26 3, “Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace
[Heb ‘‘peace, peace”), whose mind is stayed ou thee;
because he trusteth in thee’; Mal 2 5); also out-
ward peace (Job 6 23.24; Prov 16 7, etc). (4)
Peace was to be sought and followed by the right-
eous (Ps 34 14, ‘“‘Seek peace, and pursue it’; Zec
8 16.19, “Love truth and peace’). (5) Peace should
be a prominent feature ae the Messianic times (Isa
24; 96, “Prince of Peace’; 11 6; Ezk 34 25;
Mic 4 2-4; Zec 9 10).

In the NT, where eiréné has much the same mean-
ing and usage as shalom (for which it is employed


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pauline Theology
Peacemaker


in the LXX; cf Lk 19 42, RV “If thou hadst


known .... the things which belong unto peace’’),

we have still the expectation of “peace”
2. Inthe through the coming of the Christ (Lk
NT 1 74.79; 12 51) and also its fulfilment


in the higher spiritual sense.

(1) The gospel in Christ is a message of peace
from God to men (Lk 2 14; Acts 10 36, “preach-
ing... . peace by Jesus Christ’). It is “peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,” in Rom
6 1; AV 10 15; peace between Jew and Gentile
(Eph 2 14.15); an essential element in the spiritual
kingdom of God (Rom 14 17). (2) It is to be
cherished and followed by Christians. Jesus ex-
horted His disciples, “Have salt in yourselves, and
be at peace one with another” (Mk 9 50); Paul ex-
horts, ‘‘Live in. peace: and_the God of love and
peace shall be with you” (2 Cor 13 11; cf Rom 12
18; 1 Cor 7 15). (8) God is therefore “the God of
peace,” the Author and Giver of all good (‘‘peace”’
including every blessing) very frequently (e.g. Rom 16
383; 16 20; 2 Thess 3 16, etc, ‘the Lord of peace”).
“Peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ” is a common apostolic wish or salutation
(ef 1 Cor 1 3; 2 Cor 1 2, etc). (4) We have also
“neace’”’ asa greeting (Mt 10 138; Lk 10 5); ‘“‘ason
ot peace’ (10 6) is one worthy of it, in sympathy
with it; the Lord’s own greeting to His disciples
was ‘‘Peace be unto you” (Lk 24 36; Jn 20 19.21.
26), and ere He left them He gave them specially
His blessing of ‘‘Peace’’ (Jn 14 27); we have also
frequently ‘“‘Go in peace’ (Mk 5 34; Lk 7 50).
In Lk 19 88, we have ‘‘peace in heaven” (in the ac-
clamation of Jesus on His Messianic entry of Jerus).
(5) The peace that Christ brought is primarily
spiritual peace from and with God, peace in the
heart, peace as the disposition or spirit. He said
that He did not come ‘'to send peace on the earth,
but a sword,” referring to the searching nature of
His call and the divisions and clearances it would
create. But, of course, the spirit of the gospel and
of the Christian is one of peace, and it is a Christian
duty to seek to bring war and strife everywhere to
an end. This is represented as the ultimate result
of the gospel and Spirit of Christ; universal and
permanent peace can come only as that Spirit rules
in men’s hearts.

“ Peace’ in the sense of silence, to hold one's peace,
etc, is in the OT generally the tr of kdrash, ‘‘to be still,
or silent"’ (Gen 24 21; 34 5; Job 11 3); also of ha-
shah, *‘to hush,” ‘‘to be silent"’ (2 K 2 3.5; Ps 39 2),
and of other words. In Job 29 10 (''The nobles held their
peace,’ AV), it is kél, ** voice."

In the NT we have siépdé, ‘to be silent,’ *‘to cease
speaking'’ (Mt 20 31; 26 63; Acts 18 9, etc); sigdé,
‘to be silent,’’ ‘not to speak" (Lk 20 26; Acts 12 17);
hésuchdéz6é, “to be quiet’’ (Lk 14 4; | Acts 11 18);
phimés, ''to muzzle or gag"’ (Mk 1 25; Lk 4 35).

In Apoc eiréné is frequent, mostly in the sense of peace
from war or strife (Tob 13 14; Jth 3 1; Ecclus 13 18;
1 Macc § 54; 6 49; 2 Macc 14 6, eustdtheia =“tranquil-
lity"’).

RY has “peace” for tongue” (Est 7 4; Job 6 24;
Am 6 10; Hab 1 13); ‘at peace with me” for "per-
fect” (Isa 42 19, m‘‘made perfect”’ or ''recompensed”’);
‘security’? instead of ‘‘peaceably’’ and ‘‘peace" (Dnl
8 25: 11 21.24); ‘‘came in peace to the city," for ‘‘came
to Shalem, a city"’ (Gen 33 18); ‘it was for my peace”
instead of ‘for peace’’ (Isa 38 17); ‘‘when they are in
peace,” for “and that which should have been for thelr
welfare’’ (Ps 69 22).

W. L. WALKER


PEACE OFFERING. See Sacririce.


PEACEMAKER, pés’mak-ér: Occurs only in the
pl. (Mt 5 9, ‘‘Blessed are the peacemakers [eiréno-
poioi|: for they shall be called sons of God” [who
is ‘the God of peace’’]).. We have also what seems
to be a reflection of this saying in Jas 3 18, ‘The
fruit of righteousness is sown in peace for [RVm
“by”] them that make peace’ (tois potovsin etré-
nén). Inclassical Gr a ‘‘peacemaker” was an ambas-


Peacock
Pekah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2294


sador sent to treat of peace. The word in Mt 5 9
would, perhaps, be better rendered ‘‘peace-workers,”’
implying not merely making peace between those
who are at variance, but working peace as that which
is the will of the God of peace for men.

W. L. WALKER

PEACOCK, pé’kok (ODM, tukktyzm [pl]; Lat
Pavo cristatus): A bird of the genus Pavo. Japan
is the native home of the plainer peafowl; Siam,
Ceylon and India produce the commonest and most.
gorgeous. The peacock has a bill of moderate size
with an arched tip, its cheeks are bare, the eyes not
large, but very luminous, a crest of 24 feathers 2
in. long, with naked shafts and broad tips of blue,
glancing to green. The neck is not long but proudly
arched, the breast full, prominent and of bright
blue green, blue predominant. The wings are short
and meffectual, the feathers on them made up of a
surprising array of colors. The tail consists of 18
short, stiff, grayish-brown feathers. Next is the
lining of the train, of the same color. The glory
of this glorious bird lies in its train. It begins on
the back between the wings in tiny feathers not over
6 in. in length, and extends backward. The quills
have thick shafts of purple and green shades, the
eye at the tip of each feather from one-half to 2 in.
across, of a deep peculiar blue, surrounded at the
lower part by two half-moon-shaped crescents of
green. Whether the train lies naturally, or is spread
In full glory, each eye shows encircled by a marvel of
glancing shades of green, gold, purple, blue and
bronze. When this train is spread, it opens like a
fan behind the head with its sparkling crest, and
above the wondrous blue of the breast. The bird
has the power to contract the muscles at the base
of the quills and play a peculiar sort of music with
them. It loves high places and cries before a storm
in notes that are startling to one not familiar with
them. The bird can be domesticated and will be-
come friendly enough to take food from the hand.
The peahen is smaller than the cock, her neck green,
her wings gray, tan and brown—but she has not the
gorgeous tram. She nests on earth and breeds with
difficulty when imported, the young being delicate
and tender. The grown birds are hardy when
acclimated, and live to old age. By some freak of
nature, pure white peacocks are at times produced.
Aristophanes mentioned peafowl in his Birds, 11.
102, 269. Alexander claimed that he brought them
into Greece from the east, but failed to prove his
contention. Pliny wrote that Hortensius was the
first to serve the birds for food, and that Aufidius
Lurco first fattened and sold them in the markets.
It was the custom to skin the bird, roast and re-
cover it and send it to the table, the gaudy feathers
showing.

The first appearance of the bird in the Bible occurs
in a summing-up of the wealth and majesty of
Solomon (1 K 10 22: “For the king had at sea
a navy of Tarshish with the navy of Hiram: once
every three years came the navy of Tarshish,
bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and pea-
cocks”). (Here LXX translates medexnroé [s.c. AlGor],
pelek@lot [tithoi]=“‘[stones] carved with an ax.’’)
The same statement is made in 2 Ch 9 21:
“For the king had ships that went to Tarshish
with the servants of Huram; ence every three
years came the ships of Tarshish, bringing gold,
and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks” (LXX
omits). There is no qucstion among scholars and
scientists but that these statements are true, as the
ships of Solomon are known to have visited the
coasts of India and Ceylon, and Tarshish was on the
Malabar coast of India, where the native name of
the peacock was tokei, from which tukkiyim un-
doubtedly was derived (see Goxp, and Expos T, IX,
472), The historian Tennant says that the Heb


names for “ivory” and “apes” were also the same a8
the Tamil. The reference to the small, ineffectual
wing of the peacock which scarcely will lift the
weight of the body and train, that used to be found
in Job, is now applied to the ostrich, and is no doubt
correct:

“The wings of the ostrich wave proudly;


But are they the pinions and plumage of love?"
(Job 39 13).


While the peacock wing seems out of proportion to
the size of the bird, it will sustain flight and bear the
body to the treetops. The wing of the ostrich is
useless for flight. GENE STRATTON-PoRTER

PEARL, pirl. See Stonxs, PREctous.

PECULIAR, pé-kil’yar: The Lat peculium means
“private property,” so that ‘peculiar’ properly
= “pertaining to the individual.”” In modern Eng.
the word has usually degenerated into a_half-
colloquial form for “extraordinary,” but in Bib.
Eng. it is a thoroughly dignified term for “esp. one’s
own”; ef the “peculiar treasure’ of the king in
Ecel 2 8 (AV). Hence “peculiar people” (AV Dt
14 2, etc) means a people esp. possessed by God and
particularly prized by Him. The word in the OT
(AV Ex 19 5; Dt 14 2; a 18; Ps 185 4; Ecel
2 8) invariably represents M239, s°ghullah, ‘“prop-
erty,” an obscure word which LXX usually rendered
by the equally obscure epiotvows, perionisios
(apparently meaning “superabundant’’), which in
turn is quoted in Tit 2 14. In Mal 8 17, how-
ever, LXX has wepirolyots, peripotésis, quoted in
1 Pet 2 9. ERV in the NT substituted ‘‘own pos-
session’’ in the two occurrences, but in the OT kept
“peculiar’’ and even extended its use (Dt 7 6; Mal
3 17) to cover every occurrence of s¢ghullah except
in 1 Ch 29 3 (‘treasure’). ARV, on the contrary,
has dropped “peculiar” altogether, using “treasure”
in 1 Ch 29 3; Eccl 2 8, and “own possession”
elsewhere. AV also has “peculiar commandments”
(t.0s, idios, “particular,” RV ‘several’”) in Wisd
19 6, and RV has “peculiar” where AV has “special”
in Wisd 3 14 for ékxdexr7, eklekté, “chosen out.”

Burton Scott Easton

PEDAHEL, ped’a-hel, pé-di/el (NTR, pt
dhah’al, “whom God redeems”): A prince of Naph-
tali; one of the tribal chiefs who apportioned the
land of Canaan (Nu 34 28; ef ver 17).


PEDAHZOUR, pé-di/aur (WEIR, pedhahear):
Mentioned in Nu 1 10; 2 20; 7 54.59; 10 23 as
the father of Gamaliel, head of the tribe of Manasseh,
at the time of the exodus. See Expos T, VIII, 555 ff.


PEDAIAH, pi-di’ya, pé-di'a GMB, prdha
yahu, ‘“‘Jeh redeems’’):

(1) Father of Joel, who was ruler of Western
Manasseh in David’s reign (1 Ch 27 20). Form
MNIE, pedhayah (see above).

(2) Pedaiah of Rumah (2 K 23 36), father of
Zebudah, Jehoiakim’s mother.

(3) A son of Jeconiah (1 Ch 8 18); in ver 19
the father of Zerubbabel. Pedaish’s brother,
Shealtiel, is also called father of Zerubbabel (Ezr
3 2; but in 1 Ch 3.17 AV spelled “Salathiel”).
There may have been two cousins, or even different
individuals may be referred to under Shealticl and
Salathiel respectively.

(4) Another who helped to repair the city wall
(Neh 3 25), of the family of Parosy (q.v.). Per-
haps this is the man who stood by Ezra at the read-
ng Na Law (Neh 8 4; 1 Esd 9 44, called “Phal-

eus’’).


(5) A “Levite,” appointed one of the treasurers


2295


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Peacock
Pekah


ae the “treasuries” of the Lord’s house (Neh 13
(6) A Benjamite, one of the rulers residing in
Jerus under the “return” arrangements (Neh 11 7).
Henry WALLACE
PEDESTAL, ped’es-tal (73, kén): In two places
(1 K 7 29.31) RV gives this word for AV “base”
(in Solomon’s “‘Sea’’).


PEDIAS, ped’i-as, pé-di’as (IleSlas, Pedias, A,
TIabelas, Paidetas; AV by mistake Pelias): One
of those who had taken ‘‘strange wives” (1 Esd 9
34) =“Bedeiah” of Ezr 10 35.


PEDIGREE, ped’i-gré 2m, hithyallédh, “to
show one’s birth’’); The Eng. word “pedigree” occurs
only once in the Bible, according to the eoneordance.
In Nu 1 18, it is said: ‘They deelared their pedi-
grees”; that is, they enrolled or registered them-
selves according to their family connections. The
same idea is expressed frequently, employing a
different term in the Heb, by the common phrase of
Ch, Ezr and Neh, “to reckon by genealogy,” ‘‘to
give genealogy,” ete (cf 1 Ch 7 5.9; Ezr 2 62 ff;
Neh 7 64). These last passages indicate the im-
portance of the registered pedigree or genealogy, esp.
of the priests in the post-exilic community, for the
absence of the list of their pedigrees, or their genea-
logical records, was sufficient to cause the exclu-
sion from the priesthood of certain enrolled priests.

Water R. Berreripce
PEEL, pél, PILL, pil: ‘Pill’ (Gen 30 37.38;
Tob 11 13 [RV “‘scaled’’]) and “peel” (Isa 18 2.7
AV and RVm]; Ezk 29 18 [AV and ERV]) are
properly two different words, meaning “to remove
the hair” (pilus) and “to remove the skin’’ (peilis),
but in Elizabethan Eng. the two were confused. In
Isa 18 2.7, the former meaning is implied, as the
Heb word here (O73, mdrat) is rendered “pluck off
the hair” in Ezr 9 8; Neh 18 25; Isa 60 6. The
word, however, may also mean ‘make smooth” (so
RVm) or “bronzed.’”’ This last, referring to the
dark skins of the Ethiopians, is best here, but in
any case AV and RVm areimpossible. In the other
cases, however, ‘remove the skin” (cf ‘‘scaled,”
Tob 11 13 RV) is meant. So in Gen 30 37.38,
Jacob “peels” (so RV) off portions of the bark of
his rods, so as to give alternating colors (cf ver 39).
And in Ezk 29 18, the point 1s Nebuchadrezzar’s
total failure in his siege of Tyre, although the sol-
diers had carried burdens until the skin was peeled
from their shoulders (cf ARV ‘‘worn’’).
Burton Scotr Easton

PEEP, pép (SDE, caphaph; AV Isa 8 19; 10 14
[RV “chirp’]): In 10 14, the word describes the
sound made by a nestling bird; in 8 19, the ehanged
(ventriloquistic?) voice of necromancers uttering
sounds that purported to come from the feeble dead.
The modern use of “peep” =‘‘look” is found in Sir
21 23, as the tr of tapaximrw, parakipto: ‘A foolish
man peepeth in from the door of another man’s
house.”


PEKAH, pé’ka (MP8, pekah, “opening” [of the
eyes] [2 K 15 95-31]; Péxee, Phikee): Son of
Remaliah, and 18th king of Israel.
1. Accession Pekah murdered his predecessor, Peka-
hiah, and seized the reins of power
(ver 25). His usurpation of the throne is said to
have taken place in the 52d year of Uzziah, and his
reign to have lasted for 20 years (ver 27). His
accession, therefore, may be placed in 748 BC
(other chronologies plaee it later, and make the
reign last only a few years).
Pekah came to the throne with the resolution of
assisting in forming a league to resist the westward


advance of Assyria. The memory of defeat by
Assyria at the battle of Karkar in 753, more than
100 years before, had never dicd out.
2. Attitude Tiglath-pileser II] was now ruler of
of Assyria Assyria, and in suecessive campaigns
since 745 had proved himself a resist-
less conqueror. His lust for battle was not yet satis-
fied, and the turn of Philistia and Syria was about to
come. In 735, a coalition, of which Pekah was a
prominent member, was being formed to check his
further advance. It comprised the princes of
Comagene, Gebal, Hamath, Arvad, Ammon, Moab,
Edom, Gaza, Samaria, Syria, and some minor po-
tentates, the list being taken from a roll of the sub-
ject-princes who attended a court and paid tribute
after the fall of Damascus. Ahaz likewise attended
as a voluntary tributary to do homage to Tiglath-
pileser (2 K 16 10).
While the plans of the allies were in eourse of
formation, an obstacle was met with which proved
insurmountable by the arts of diplo-
3. Judah macy. This was the refusal of Ahaz,
Recalcitrant then on the throne of David, to join the
eonfederacy. Arguments and threats
having failed to move him, resort was had to force,
and the troops of Samaria and Damascus moved
on Jerus (2 K 16 5). Great alarm was felt at the
news of their approach, as seen in the 7th and 8th
chapters of Isa. The allies had in view to dis-
possess Ahaz of his crown, and give it to one of their
own number, a son of Tabeel. Isaiah himself was
the mainstay of the opposition to their projects.
The policy he advocated, by Divine direction, was
that of complete neutrality. This he urged with
passionate earnestness, but with only partial suc-
cess. Isaiah (probably) had kept back Ahaz from
joining the coalition, but eould not prevent him from
sending an embassy, laden with gifts to Tiglath-
pileser, to secure his intervention. On the news
arriving that the Assyrian was on the march, a hasty
retreat was made from Jerus, and the blow soon
thereafter fell, where Isaiah had predicted, on Rezin
and Pekah, and their kingdoms.
The severely eoncise manner in which the writer
of K deals with the later sovereigns of the Northern
Kingdom is, in the case of Pekah,


4. Chron- supplemented in Ch by further facts
icles Ancil- as to this campaign of the allies. The
lary to Chronicler states that ‘a great multi-


Kings tude of captives” were taken to Da-
mascus and many others to Samaria.
These would be countrymen and women from the
ontlying districts of Judah, which were ravaged.
Those taken to Samaria were, however, returned,
unhurt, to Jericho by the advice of the prophet
Oded (2 Ch 28 5-15).
The messengers sent from Jernus to Nineveh
appear to have arrived when the army of Tiglath-
pileser was already prepared to march.
5. Fall of | The movements of the Assyrians being
Damascus; expedited, they fell upon Damascus
Northern before the junction of the allies was
and Eastern accomplished. Rezin was defeated
Palestine in a decisive battle, and took refnge
Overrun in his capital, which was elosely in-
vested. Another part of the invading
army descended on the upper districts of Syria and
Samaria. Serious resistance to the veteran troops
of the East could hardly be made, and city after
eity fell. A list of districts and cities that were
overrun is given in 2 Ix 15 29. It comprises
Gilead beyond Jordan—already partly depopulated
(1 Ch 5 26); the tribal division of Naphtali, lying
to the W. of the lakes of Galilee and Merom, and all
Galilee, as far 8. as the plain of Esdraelon and the
Valley of Jezreel. Cities particularly mentioned are
Ijon (now ‘Ayiin), Abel-beth-maacah (now ‘Abi),


Pekahiah


Pen


TUE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2296


Janoah (now Ydnin), Kedesh (now Kados) and
Hazor (now fHadireh).
These places and territories were not merely at-
tacked and ‘plundered. Their inhabitants were
removed, with indescribable loss and
6. Deporta- suffering, to certain districts in Assyria,
tion of the given as Halah, Habor, Hara, and both
Inhabitants sides of the river Gozan, an affluent
of the Euphrates. The transplanta-
tion of these tribes to a home beyond the great river
was a new experiment in political geography, de-
vised with the object of welding the whole of Western
Asia into a single empire. It was work of immense
difficulty and must have taxed the resources of
even so great an organizer as Tiglath-pileser. The
soldiers who had conquered in the field were, of
course, employed to escort the many thonsands of
prisoners to their new locations. About two-thirds
of the Sam kingdom, comprising the districts of
Samaria, the two Galilecs, and the trans-Jordanic
region, was thus denuded of its inhabitants.
Left with but a third of his kingdom—humbled
but still defiant—Pekah was necessarily unpopular
with his subjects. In this extremity
7. Death of —the wave of invasion from the N.
Pekah having spent itseli—the nsual solution
occurred, and a plot was formed by
which the assassination of Pekah should be secured,
and the assassin should take his place as a satrap of
Assyria. <A tool was found in the person of Hoshea,
whom Tiglath-pileser claims to have appointed to
the throne. The Bib. narrative does not do more
than record the fact that ““Hoshea the son of Elah
made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of Rema-
liah, and smote him, and slew him, and reigned in
his stead” (2 K 16 30). The date given to this
act is the 20th year of Jotham. As Jotham’s reign
lasted but 16 years, this number is evidently an
error.
For the first time, the historian makes no refer-
ence to the religious conduct of a king of Israel.
The subject was beneath notice. The


8. Refer- second section of Isaiah’s prophecies
ences in (7 1—10 4) belongs to the reign of
Isaiah Ahaz and thus to the time of Pekah,


both of whom are named init. Pekah
is named in 7 1, and is often, in this and the next
chapter, referred to as “‘the son of Remaliah.” His
loss of the territorial divisions of Zebulun and
Naphtali is referred to in 9 1, and is followed by a
prophecy of their future glory as the earthly home
of the Son of Man. The wording of Isa 9 14 shows
that it was written before the fall of Samaria, and
that of Isa 10 9-11 that Damascus and Samaria
had both fallen and Jerus was expected to follow.
This section of Isaiah may thus be included in the
literature of the time of Pekah.
W. Saaw CaLpecorr
PEKAHIAH, pek-a-hi’a, pé-ka’ya (MIB,
ptkahyah, “Jeh hath opened” [the eyes] [2 K 15
: 23-26]; Paxeolas, Phakesias, A, Paxel-
1. Accession as, Phakeias): Son of Menahem,
and 17th king of Israel. He is said
to have succeeded his father in the ‘50th year
of Azariah” (or Uzziah), a synchronism not free
from difficulty if his accession is placed in 750-749
(see MenauEM; Uzztan). Most date lower, after
738, when an Assyr inscription makes Menahem
pay tribute to Tiglath-pileser (ef 2 IKK 15 19-21).
Pekahiah eame to the throne enveloped in the
danger which always accompanies the successor of
an exceptionally strong ruler, in a
2. Regicide country where there is not a settled
in Israel law of succession. Within two years
of his accession he was fonlly murdered
—the 7th king of Israel who had met his death
by violence (the others were Nadab, Elah, Tibni,


Jehoram, Zechariah and Shallum). The chief
conspirator was Pekah, son of Remaliah, one of
his captains, with whom, as agent in the crime,
were associated 50 Gileadites. These penetrated
into the palace (RV ‘‘castle’’) of the king’s house,
and put Pekahiah to death, his bodyguards, Argob
and Arieh, dying with him. ‘The record, in its close
adherence to fact, gives no reason for the king’s
removal, but it may reasonably be surmised that
it was connected with a league which was at this
time forming for opposing resistance to the power
of Assyria. This league, Pekahiah, preferring his
father’s policy of tributary vassalage, may have
refused to join. If so, the decision cost him his life.
The act of treachery and violence is in accordance
with all that Hosea tells us of the internal condition
of Jsracl at this time: ‘‘They ... . devour their

judges; all their kings are fallen’”’ (Hos 7 7).
The narrative of Pekahiah’s short reign contains
but a brief notice of his personal character. Like
his predecessors, Pekahiah did not


3. Peka- depart from the system of worship
hiah’s introduced by Jeroboam, the son of
Character Nebat, ‘“‘who made Israel to sin.”


Despite the denunciations of the
prophets of the Northern Kingdom (Am 6 21-27;
Hos 8 1-6), the worship of the calves remained,
till the whole was swept away, a few years later, by
the fall of the kingdom.
After Pekahiah’s murder, the throne was seized
by the regicide Pekah. W. Saaw Catpscotr


PEKOD, pé‘kod (T1PB, pekddh): A name ap-
pliedin Jer 50 2land Ezk 23 23 to the Chaldaeans.
EVm in the former passage gives the meaning as
“visitation.”


PELAIAH, pé-la’ya, pé-li’a (INDE, p'la’yah):

(1) A son of Elioenai, of the royal house of Judah
(1 Ch 3 24).

(2) A Levite who assisted Ezra by expounding
the Law (Neh 8 7), and was one of those who
sealed the covenant with Nehemiah (10 10). He
is called ‘‘Phalias” in 1 Esd 9 48 (RV).


PELALIAH, pel-a-li’a (M7228, p'lalyah, “Jeh
judges’’): A priest, father of Jeroham, one of the
“workers” in the Lord’s house (Neh 11 12).


PELATIAH, pel-a-ti’a (mgd, platyah, ‘“Jeh
delivers’’):

(1) One who “sealed” the covenant (Neh 10 22).

(2) A descendant of Solomon, grandson of
Zerubbabel (1 Ch 3 21).

(3) A Simeonite, one of the captains who cleared
out the Amalekites and dwelt on the captured land
(1 Ch 4 42.48).

(4) A prince of the people whom Ezekiel (in
Babylon) pictures as ‘devising mischief’ and giving
‘wicked counsel’ in Jerus. He is represented as
falling dead while Ezekiel prophesies (Ezk 11 1.13).
His name has the 1, a, ending.


PELEG, pé'leg (338, pelegh, ‘“‘watercourse,”
“division’”’): A son of Eber, and brother of Joktan.
The derivation of the name is given: “for in his days
was the earth divided” (niphl’ghah) (Gen 10 25;
ef Lk 3 35, AV “Phalec”). This probably refers
to the scattering of the world’s population and the
confounding of its language recorded in Gen 11
1-9. In Aram. p*lagh and Arab. phalaj mean
“division”; in Heb pelegh means “watercourse.”
The name may really be due to the occupation
by this people of some well-watered (furrowed),
district (e.g in Babylonia), for these patronymics
represent races, and the derivation in Gen 10 25 is
a later editor’s remark. 8. F. Hunter


2297


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pekahiah
Pen


PELET, pé'let (028, pelet, “deliverance”):
(1) Son of Iahdai (1 Ch 2 47).
(2) Son of Azmaveth, one of those who resorted


to David at Ziklag while he was hiding from Saul
(1 Ch 12 3).


PELETH, pé‘leth (mop, peleth, “swiftness’’):
(1) Father of On, one of the rebels against Moses
and Aaron (Nu 16 1); probably same as Pau


(q.v.).
(2) A descendant of Jerabmecl (1 Ch 2 38).


PELETHITES, pel’é-thits, p@'lethits Cn>B,
piléthi): A company of David’s bodyguard, like the
CuEreraites (q.v.) (2 S 8 18; 15 18); probably
a corrupt form of “Philistines.”


PELIAS, pé-li’as: AV=RV “Pedias.”


PELICAN, pel’i-kan (MNP, ka’ath; Lat Pelecanus
onocrotalus [LNX reads weAekdv, pelekdn, in Lev
and Pss, but has 3 other readings, that are rather
confusing, in the other places]): Any bird of
the genus Pelecanus. The Heb &?’ means “to
vomit.” The name was applied to the bird because


Pelican (Pelecanus onocrotalus).


it swallowed large quantities of fish and then dis-
gorged them to its nestlings. In the performance
of this act it pressed the large beak, in the white
species, tipped with red, against the crop and
slightly lifted the wings. In ancient times, people,
seeing this, believed that the bird was puncturing
its breast and feeding its young with its blood.
From this idea arose the custom of using a pelican
with lifted wings in heraldry or as a symbol of
Christ and of charity. (See Fictitious Creatures in
Art, 182-86, London, Chapman and Hall, 1906.)
Pal knew a white and a brownish-gray bird, both
close to 6 ft. long and having over a 12 ft. sweep of
wing. They lived around the Dead Sea, fished
beside the Jordan and abounded in greatest numbers
in the wildernesses of the Mediterranean shore.
The brown pelicans were larger than the white. Each
of them had a long beak, peculiar throat pouch and
webbed feet. They built large nests, 5 and 6 ft.
across, from dead twigs of bushes, and laid two or
three eggs. The brown birds deposited a creamy-
white egg with a rosy flush; the white, a white egg
with bluish tints. The young were naked at first,
then covered with down, and remained in the nest
until fullfeathered and able to fly. This compelled
the parent birds to feed them for a long time, and
they carried such quantities of fish to a nest that
the young could not consume all of them and many


were dropped on the ground. The tropical sun
soon made the location unbearable to mortals.
Perching pelicans were the ugliest birds imaginable,
but when their immense brown or white bodies
swept in a 12 ft. spread across the land and over
sea, they made an impressive picture. They are
included, with good reason, in the list of abomina-
tions (see Levy 11 18; Dt 14.17). They are next
mentioned in Ps 102 6:


“Tam like a pelican of the wilderness;
Iam become as an ow! of the waste places.”


Here David from the depths of affliction likened
himself to a pelican as it appears when it perches
in the wilderness. See Isa 34 11: “But the pelican
and the porcupine shall possess it; and the owl and
the raven shall dwell therein: and he will stretch
over it the line of confusion, and the plummet of
emptiness.” Here the bird is used to complete the
picture of desolation that was to prevail after the
destruction of Edom. The other reference concerns
the destruction of Ninevch and is found in Zeph
2 14: “And herds shall lie down in the midst of her,
all the beasts of the nations: both the pelican and
the porenpine shall lodge in the capitals thereof;
their voice shall sing in the windows; desolation
shall be in the thresholds: for he hath laid bare the
eedar-work.”’ Gene Srratron-PortTEeR


PELISHTIM, pel’ish-tim, pe-lish’tim (DImwes ,
plishtim [RVm of Gen 10 14]). See Puiuistinas.


PELONITE, pel’é-nit, po’lé-nit, pé-lo’nit (455,
plant, a place-name): Two of David’s heroes are
thus described: (1) ‘“Helez the Pelonite”’ (1 Ch 11
27) (see PattiTE); and (2) “Ahijah the Pelonite’
(1 Ch 11 36).


PEN, (OY, ‘ét, DWT, heret; wédapos, kdlamos):
The first writing was done on clay, wax, lead or
stone tablets by scratching into the material with
some hard pointed instrument. For this purpose
bodkins of bronze, iron, bone or ivory were used
(Job 19 24; Isa 81; Jer 171). In Jer 171
a diamond is also mentioned as being used for the
same purpose. In Jer 36 Baruch, theson of Neriah,
declares that he recorded the words of the prophet
with ink in the book. In ver 23 it says that the
king cut the roll with the penknife (lit. the scribe’s
knife). This whole scene can best be explained if
we consider that Baruch and the king’s scribes were
in the habit of using reed pens. These pens are
made from the hollow jointed stalks of a coarse grass
growing in marshy places. The dried reed is cut
diagonally with the penknife and the point thus
formed is carefully shaved thin to make it flexible
and the nib split as in the modern pen. The last
operation is the clipping off of the very point so that
it becomes a stub pen. The Arab scribe does this
by resting the nib on bis thumb nail while cutting,
so that the cut will be clean and the pen will not
scratch. The whole procedure requires consider-
able skill. The pupil in Heb or Arab. writing
learns to make a pen as his first lesson. A scribe
earries a sharp knife around with him for keeping
his pen in good condition, hence the name penknife.
The word used in 3 Jn ver 13 is kalamos, “recd,”
indicating that the pen described above was used in
John’s time (cf kalam, the common Arab. name for
pen). See Ink; InK-Horn; WRITING.

Figurative: “Written with a pen of iron,” ie.
indelibly (Jer 17 1). “My tongue is the pen of
a ready writer” (Ps 45 1; cf Jer 36 18). As
the trained writer records a speech, so the
Psalmist’s tongue impresscs or engraves on his
hearers’ minds what he has conccived.

James A. PatcH


Pence, Penny
Pentateuch


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2298


PENCE, pens, PENNY. See Money.
PENCIL, pen’sil (Isa 44 13, m ‘“‘red ochre,”
AV “line’”). See Line; Ocures, Rep.


PENDANT, pen’dant (from Fr. from Lat pendeo,
“to hang’): Not in AV. Twice in RV. (1)
MDD}, nftphath (AV “‘collars”), ornaments of the
Midianites captured by Gideon (Jgs 8 26). (2)
MIU, n*tiphoth (AV “‘chains’’), an article of femi-
nine apparel (Isa 3 19). The reference seems to
be (Cheyne, “Isaiah” Polychrome Bible [HDB, III,
739]) to ear-drops, pearl or gald ornaments
resembling a drop of water, fastened, probably, to
the lobe of the ear.


PENIEL, pé-ni'el, pen’i-el, pé’ni-el (ON™ED pen? al,
“face of God’; Etéos Got, Eidos theoti): This is
the form of the name in Gen 32 30. In the next
verse and elsewhere it appears as ‘“‘Penuel.” The
name is said to have been given to the place by
Jacob after his night of wrestling by the Jabbok,
because, as he said, “‘I have seen God face to face,
and my life is preserved.” It was a height evidently
close by the stream over which Jacob passed in the
morning. Some have thought it might be a promi-
nent cliff, the contour of which resembled a human
face. Such a cliff on the seashore to theS. of Trip-
oli was called theoki présdpon, “face of God’
(Strabo xvi.2.15f). In later times a city with a
strong tcwer stood upon it. This lay in the line
of Gideon’s pursuit of the Midianites. When he
returned victorious, he beat down the place because
of the churlishness of the inhabitants (Jgs 8 8.9.17).
It was one of the towns “built” or fortified by Jero-

. boam (1 K 12 25). Merrill would identify it with
Telal edh-Dhahab, “hills of gold,” two hills with
ruins that betoken great antiquity, and that speak
of great strength, on the 8. of the Jabbok, about 10
miles E. of Jordan (for description see Merrill,
East of the Jordan, 390 ff). A difficulty that seems
fatal to this identification is that here the banks of
the Jabbok are so precipitous as to be impassable.
Conder suggests Jebel Osha. The site was clearly
not far from Succoth; but no certainty is yet pos-
sible. W. Ewine


PENINNAH, pé-nin’a (W322, p’ninnah, “coral,”
“nearl’): Second wife of Elkanah, father of Samuel
a8 12.4).


PENKNIFE, pen‘nif (Jer 36 23). See PEN.


PENNY, pen’i (8yvdpiov, démuirion; Lat de-
narius [q.v.]): ARV (Mt 18 28; 20 2.9.10.13, etc)
renders it by “shilling” except in Mt 22 19; Mk 12
15 and Lk 20 24, where it retains the original term
as it refers to a particular coin. See DrENnarius;
Money.


PENSION, pen’shun (1 Esd 4 56, AV ‘“‘and he
commanded to give to all that kept the city pensions
and wages’; «Arpos, kléros, “allotted portion,”
usually [here certainly] of lands [RV “lands’’]):
Literally means simply “payment,” and AV seems
to have used the word in order to avoid any special-
ization of kléros. ‘There is no reference to payment
for past services. Sec Lor.


PENTATEUCH, pen’ta-tik:


I. Trrve, Division, Conrents
Il, AvrTuorsuip, Composition, Date
1. The Current Critical Scheme
2. The Evidence for the Current Critical Scheme
(1) Astruc’s Clue
2) Signs of Post-Mosaic Dato
5) Narrative Discrepancies


(4) Douhlets
(5) The Laws
(6) The Argument from Style ;
(7) Props of the Development Hypothesis
3. The Answer to the Critical Analysis
(1) The Veto of Textual Criticism
(2) Astruc’s Clue Tested ‘ r
(3) The Narrative Discrepancies and Signs of
Post-Mosaic Date Examined
(4) Ene: Argument from the Doublets Exam-
ine
(5) The Critical Argument from the Laws
(6) The Argument from Style
(7) Perplexities of the Theory
(8) Signs of Unity
(9) The Supposed Props of the Development
Hypothesis
4, The Evidence of Date f
(1) The Narrative of Genesis
(2) Archaeology and Genesis y
(3) The Legal Evidence of Genesis
(4) The Professedly Mosaic Character of the
Legislation i. :
(5) The Historical Situation Required by P
(6) The Hierarchical Organization in P
(7) The Legal Evidence of P
(8) The Evidence of D
(9) Later Allusions
(10) Other Evidence aed oe
5. The Fundamental Improbahilities of the Criti-
cal Case ¢
(1) The Moral and Psychological Issues
(2) The Historical Improbability
(3) The Divergence between the Laws and
Post-exilic Practice ae
(4) The Testimony of Tradition
6. The Origin and Transmission of the Pentateuch
III. Soms Lirerary Points
1. Style of Legislation
2. The Narrative
3. The Covenant
4. Order and Rhythm
IV. Tus Pentareocna as History
. Textual Criticism and History
. Hehrew Methods of Expression
. Personification and Genealogies
. Literary Form
. The Sacred Numhers
Hahits of Thought
. National Coloring
How Far the Pentateuch Is Trustworthy
(1) Centemporanecus Information
(2) Character of Our Informants
(3) Historical Genius of the People
(4) Good Faith of Deuteronomy
(5) Nature of the Events Recorded
(6) External Corroborations___
9. The Pentateuch as Reasoned History
V. Tue CHarRactTser OF THE PENTATEUCH
1. Hindu Law Books
2. Differences
3. Holiness
4. The Universal Aspect
5. The National Aspect


LivERATURE

I. Title, Division, Contents (1M), torah, “law”
or “teaching”’).—It has recently been argued that
the Heb word is really the Bab tertu, ‘divinely
revealed law’ (e.g. Sayce, Churchman, 1909, 728 ff),
but such passages as Lev 14 54-57; Dt 17 11
show that the legislator connected it with TT,
horah (from yarah), “to teach.”’ Also called by the
Jews VIR WDA NWN, Admishshah himesht
térah, “the five-fifths of the law’’: 6 véuos, ho némos,
“the Law.’ The word ‘“‘Pentateuch”’ comes from
mevrdrevxos, pentiéteuchos, lit. “5-volumed [sc. book].”
The Pent consists of the first five books of the Bible,
and forms the first division of the Jewish Canon, and
the whole of the Sam Canon. The 5-fold division is
certainly old, since it is earlier than the LXX or the
Sam Pent. How much older it may be is unknown.
It has been thought that the 5-fold division of the
Psalter is based on it.

The five books into which the Pent is divided are
respectively Gen, Ex, Lev, Nu, and Dt, and the
separate arts. should be consulted for information
as to their nomenclature.

The work opens with an account of the Creation,
and passes to the story of the first human couple.
The narrative is carried on partly by genealogies
and partly by fuller accounts to Abrahum, Then


BNATBWN


2299


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pence, Penny
Pentateuch


comes a history of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the
collateral lines of descendants being rapidly dis-
missed. The story of Joseph is told in detail, and
Gen closes with his death. The rest of the Pent
covers the oppression of the Israclites in Egypt, their
exodus and wanderings, the conquest of the trans-
Jordanic lands and the fortunes of the people to the
death of Moses. The four concluding books con-
tain masses of legislation mingled with the narrative
(for special contents, see arts. on the several books).
Hl. Authorship, Composition, Date.—The view
that Moses was the author of the Pent, with the
exception of the concluding vs of Dt,


1. The was once held universally. It is still
Current believed by the great mass of Jews
Critical and Christians, but in most univer-
Scheme sities of Northern Europe and North


; America other theories prevail. An
application of what is called ‘higher’ or ‘docu-
mentary criticism’’ (to distinguish it from lower or
textual criticism) has led to the formation of a num-
ber of hypotheses. Some of these are very widely
held, but unanimity has not been attained, and
recent investigations have challenged even the con-
clusions that are most generally accepted. In the
Eng.-speaking countries the vast. majority of the
critics would regard Driver’s LOT and Carpenter
and Harford-Battersby’s Hexateuch as fairly repre-
sentative of their position, but on the Continent of
Europe the numerous school that holds some such
position is dwindling alike in numbers and influence,
while even in Great Britain and America some of the
ablest critics are beginning to show signs of being
shaken in their allegiance to cardinal points of the
higher-critical case. However, at the time of writ-
ing, these latter critics have not put forward any
fresh formulation of their views, and accordingly
the general positions of the works named may be
taken as representing with certain qualifications the
general critical theory. Some of the chief stadia in
the development of this may be mentioned.


After attention had been drawn by earlier writers to
various signs of post-Mosaic date and extraordinary
perplexities in the Pent, the first real step toward what
its advocates have, till within the last few years, called
“the modern position'"’ was taken by J. Astruc (1753).
He propounded what Carpenter terms ‘the clue to the
documents,"’ i.e. the difference of the Divine appellations
in Gen as a test of authorship. On this view the word
‘Elohim (‘'God"’) is characteristic of one principal source
and the Tetragrammaton, i.e. the Divine name YH WH
represented by the '‘Lorp" or Gop” of AV and RV,
shows the presence of another. Despite occasional
warnings, this clue was followed in the main for 150
years. It forms the starting-point of the whole current
critical development, but the most recent investigations
have successfully proved that it is unreliable (see below,
3, (2]). Astruc was followed by Eichhorn (1780), who
made a more thorough examination of Gen, indicating
numerous differences of style, representation, etc.

Geddes (1792) and Vater (1802-5) extended the
method applied to Gen to the other books of the Pent.

In 1798 Biden: distinguished two Elohists in Gen, but
this view did not find followers for some time. The next
step of fundamental importance was the assignment of
the bulk of Dt to the 7th cent. BC. This was due to
De Wette (1806). Hupfeld (1853) again distinguished
a second Elohist, and this has been accepted by most
critics. Thus there aro four main documents at least:
D (the bulk of Dt), two Elohists (P and EB) and one docu-
ment (J) that uses the Tetragrammaton in Gen, From
1822 (Bleek) a series of writers maintained that the Book
of Josh was compounded from the same documents as
the Pent (see HexaTewvcn). 7

Two other developments call for notice: (1) there has
heen a tendency to subdivide these documents further,
regarding them as the work of schools rather than of indi-
viduals, and resolving them into different strata (P,, Ps,
P,, etc, J,, Je, etc, or in the notation of other writers Jj
Je, etc); (2) a particular scheme of dating has found wide
acceptance. In the first period of the critical develop-
ment it was assumed that the principal Elohist (P) was
the earliest document. A succession of writers of whom
Reuss, Graf, Kuenen and Wellhausen are the most promi-
nent have, however, maintained that this is not the first
but the last in point of time and should be referred to the
exile or later. On this view the theory is in outline as
follows: J and E (so called from their respective Divine


appellations)—on the relative dates of which oplnions
diffcr—were composed probably during the early mon-
archy and subsequently combined by a redactor (Rie)
into a single document JE. In the 7th cent. D, the bulk
of Dt, was composed. It was published in the 18th year
of Josiah's reign. Later it was combined with JE into
JED, by a redactor (Ried). P or PC, the last of all
(originally the first Elohist, now the PC) incorporated
an earlier code of uncertain, date which Consists
in the main of most_of Lev 17-26 and is known as
the Law of Holiness (H or Ph). P itself is largely post-
exilic, Ultimately it was joined with JED bya priestly
redactor (Itp) into substantially our present Pent. As
already stated, the theory is subject to many minor
variations. Moreover, it is admitted that not all its
yee are equally well supported. The division of

E into J and_E is regarded as less certain than the
separation of P. Again, there are variations in the
analysis, differences of opinion as to the exact dating of
the documents, andsoforth. Yet the view just sketched
has been held by a very numerous and influential school
during recent years, nor is it altogether fair to lay stress
on minor divergences of opinion. It is in the abstract
conceivable that the main positions might be true, and
that yet the data were inadequate to enable all the minor
details to be determined with certainty (see Criticism
OF THE BIBLE).


This theory will hereafter be discussed at length
for two reasons: (1) while it is now constantly losing
ground, it is still more widely held than any other;
and (2) so much of the modern lit. on the OT has
been written from this standpoint that no intelli-
gent use can be made of the most ordinary books of
reference without some acquaintance with it.

Before 1908 the conservative opposition to the
dominant theory had exhibited two separate tend-
encies. One school of conservatives rejected the
scheme in toto; the other accepted the analysis with
certain modifications, but sought to throw back the
dating of the documents. In both these respects
it had points of contact with dissentient critics (e.g.
Delitzsch, Dillmann, Baudissin, Kittel, Strack,
Van Hoonacker), who sought to save for conserva-
tism any spars they could from the general wreck-
age. The former school of thought was most
prominently represented by the late W. H. Green,
and J. II. Raven’s OT Intro may be regarded as a
typical modern presentation of their view; the
latter esp. by Robertson and Orr. The scheme put
forward by the last named has found many adher-
ents. He refuses to regard J and E as two separate
documents, holding that. we should rather think
(as in the case of the || Pss) of two recensions of one
document marked by the use of different. Divine
appellations. The critical P he treats as the work
of a supplementer, and thinks it never had an inde-
pendent existence, while he considers the whole
Pent as early. He holds that the work was done
by “original composers, working with a common
aim, and toward a common end, in contrast with the
idea of late irresponsible redactors, combining, alter-
ing, manipulating, enlarging at pleasure” (POT,

While these were the views held among OT critics,
a separate opposition had been growing up among
archaeologists. This was of course utilized to the
utmost by the conservatives of both wings. In
some ways archaeology undoubtedly has confirmed
the traditional vicw as against the critical (see
ARCHAEOLOGY AND Criticism); but a candid sur-
vey leads to the belief that it has not yet dealt a
mortal blow, and here again it must be remembered
that the critics may justly plead that they must
not be judged on mistakes that they made in their
earlier investigations or on refutations of the more
uncertain portions of their theory, but rather on
the main completed result. It may indeed be said
with confidence that there are certain topics to
which archacology can never supply any conclusive
answer. If it be the case that the Pent contains
hopelessly contradictory laws, no archaeological dis-
covery can make them anything else; if the num-
bers of the Israclites are original and impossible,


Pentateuch


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2300


archaeology cannot make them possible. It is fair
and right to lay stress on the instances in which
archaeology has confirmed the Bible as against the
critics; it is neither fair nor right to speak as if
archaeology had done what it never purported to do
and never could effect.

The year 1908 saw the beginning of a new critical
development which makes it very difficult to speak
positively of modern critical views. Kuenen has
been mentioned as one of the ablest and most emi-
nent of those who brought the Graf-Wellhausen
theory into prominence. In that year B. D. Eerd-
mans, his pupil and successor at Leyden, began the
publication of a series of OT studies in which he
renounces his allegiance to the line of critics that had
extended from Astruc to the publications of our
own day, and entered on a series of investigations
that were intended to set forth a new critical view.
As his labors are not yet complete, it is impossible
to present any account of his scheme; but the vol-
umes already published justify certain remarks.
Eerdmans has perhaps not converted any member
of the Wellhausen school, but he has made many
realize that their own scheme is not the only one
possible. Thus while a few years ago we were con-
stantly assured that the “main results” of OT
criticism were unalterably settled, recent writers
adopt a very different tonc: e.g. Sellin (1910) says,
“We stand in a time of fermentation and transition,
and in what follows we present our own opinion
merely as the hypothesis which appears to us to be
the best founded” (Finleittung, 18). By general
consent Eerdmans’ work contains a number of
isolated shrewd remarks to which criticism will
have to attend in the future; but it also contains
many observations that are demonstrably unsound
(for examples see BS, 1909, 744-48; 1910, 549-51).
His own reconstruction is in many respects so faulty
and blurred that it does not seem likely that it will
ever secure a large following in its present form.
On the other hand he appears to have succeeded
in inducing a large number of students in various
parts of the world to think along new lines and in
this way may exercise a very potent influence on the
future course of OT study. His arguments show
increasingly numerous signs of his having been in-
fluenced by the publications of conservative writers,
and it seems certain that criticism will ultimately be
driven to recognize the essential soundness of the
conservative position. In 1912 Dahse (TMH, I)
began the publication of a series of volumes attack-
ing the Wellhausen school on textual grounds and
propounding @ new pericope hypothesis. In his
view many phenomena are due to the influence of
the pericopes of the synagogue service or the form
of the text and not to the causes generally
assigned.

The examination of the Graf-Wellhausen theory
must now be undertaken, and attention must first

be directed to the evidence which is
2. Evidence adduced in its support. Why should


for the it be held that the Pent is composed
Current mainly of excerpts from certain docu-
Critical ments designated as J and E and P
Scheme and D? Why is it belicved that these


documents are of very late date, in one
case subsequent to the exile?


(1) Astruc’s clue.—It has been said above that Astruc
propounded the use of the Divine appellations in Gen
as a clue to the dissection of that book. This is based
on Ex 6 3, ‘And I appeared unto Abraham, unto
Isaac, and unto Jacob, as 'Kl Shadday [God Almighty];
but hy my name YHWH I was not known to them.' In
numcrous passages of Gen this name is represented as
known, c.g. 4 26, where we read of men beginning to call
onitin the days of Enosh. The discrepancy here is very
obvious, and in the view of the Astruc school can be sat-
Isfactorily removed by postulating different sources.
This clue, of course, fails after Ex 6 3, but other diffi-


culties are found, and moreover the sources already dis-
tinguished in Gen are, it is claimed, marked by separate
styles and other characteristics which enable them to be
identified when they occur in the narrative of the later
books (see Criticism or tHE Biss). F

(2) Signs of post-Mosaie date.—Close inspection of the
Pent shows that it contains a number of passages which,
it is alleged, conld not have proceeded from the pen of
Moses in their present form. Probably the most familiar
instance is the account of the death of Moses (Dt 34).
Other examples are to be found in seeming allusions to
post-Mosaic events, e.g.in Gen 22 we hear of the Monnt
of the Lord in the land of Moriah; this apparently refers
to the Temple Hill, which, however, would not have
been so designated before Solomon. So too the list of
kings who reigned over Edom "‘before there reigned any
king over the children of Israel” (36 31) presumes the
existence of the monarchy. The Canaanites who are
referred to as being ‘‘then in the land’' (Gen 12 6; 13
7) did not disappear till the time of Solomon, and, accord-
ingly, if this expression means ‘then still” it cannot
antedate his reign. Dt 3 11 (Og’s bedstead) comes
unnaturally from one who had vanquished Og but a few
weeks previonsly, while Nu 21 14 (AV) contains a refer-
ence to ‘‘the hook of the Wars of the Lord ”’ which would
hardly have been quoted in this way by a contemporary.
Ex 16 35 refers to the cessation of the manna after the
death of Moses. These passages, and more like them,
are cited to disprove Mosaic anthorship; but the main
weight of the critical argument does not rest on them.


- (3) Narrative discrepancies—While the Divine
appellations form the starting-point, they do not
even in Gen constitute the sole test of different
documents. On the contrary, there are other nar-
rative discrepancies, antinomies, differences of style,
duplicate narratives, etc, adduced to support the
cues theory. We must now glance at some of
these.

In Gen 21 14 f Ishmael is a boy who can be car-
ried on his mother’s shoulder, but from a comparison
of 16 3.16; 17, it appears that he must have been
14 when Isaac was born, and, since weaning some-
times occurs at the age of 3 in the East, may have
been even as old as 17 when this incident happened.
Again, ‘We all remember the scene (Gen 27) in
which Isaac in extreme old age blesses his sons;
we picture him as lying on his deathbed. Do we,
however, all realize that according to the chronol-
ogy of the Book of Gen he must have been thus
lymg on his deathbed for eighty years (cf 25 26;
26 34; 35 28)? Yet we can only diminish this
period by_extending proportionately the interval
between Esau marrying his Hittite wives (26 34)
and Rebekah’s suggestion to Isaac to send Jacob
away, lest he should follow his brother’s example
(27 46); which, from the nature of the case, will not
admit of any but slight extension. Keil, however,
does so extend it, reducing the period of Isaac’s
final illness by 43 years, and is conscious of no in-
congruity in supposing that Rebekah, 30 years after
Esau had taken his Hittite wives, should express
her fear that Jacob, then aged 77, will do the same”
(Driver, Contemporary Review, LVII, 221).

An important instance occursin Nu. According to
33 38, Aaron died on the 1st day of the 5th month.
From Dt 1 3 it appears that 6 months later Moses
delivered his speech in the plains of Moab. Into
those 6 months are compressed one month’s mourn-
ing for Aaron, the Arad campaign, the wandering
round by the Red Sca, the campaigns against Sihon
and Og, the missions to Balaam and the whole epi-
sode of his prophecies, the painful occurrences of
Nu 25, the second census, the appointment of
Joshua, the expedition against Midian, besides other
events. It is clearly impossible to fit all these into
the time.

Other discrepancies are of the most formidable
character. Aaron dies now at Mt. Hor (Nu 20 28;
33 38), now at Moserah (Dt 10 6). According to
Dt 1; 2 1.14, the children of Israel left Kadesh-
barnea in the 3d year and never subsequently
returned to it, while in Nu they apparently remain
there till the journey to Mt. Hor, where Aaron
dies in the 40th year. The Tent of Meeting per-


2301


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pentateuch


haps provides some of the most perplexing of the
discrepancies, for while according to the well-known
scheme of Ex 26 ff and many other passages, it
was a large and heavy erection standing in the
midst of the camp, Ex 88 7-11 provides us with
another Tent of Meeting that stood outside the
camp at a distance and could be carried by Moses
alone. The vbs. used are frequentative, denoting
a regular practice, and it is impossible to suppose
that after receiving the commands for the Tent of
Meeting Moses could have instituted a quite differ-
ent tent of thesame name. Joseph again is sold, now
by Ishmaelites (Gen 37 27.285; 39 1), anon by
Midianites (87 284.36). Sometimes he is impris-
oned in one place, sometimes apparently in another.
The story of Korah, Dathan and Abiram in Nu 16
is equally full of difficulty. The enormous numbers
of the Israelites given in Nu 1-4, etc, are in conflict
with passages that regard them as very few.

(4) Doublets—Another portion of the critical
argument is provided by doublets or duplicate
narratives of the same event, e.g. Gen 16 and 21.
These are particularly numerous in Gen, but are
not confined to that book. “Twice do quails
appear in connection with the daily manna (Nu 11
4-6.31 ff; Ex 16 13). Twice does Moses draw
water from the rock, when the strife of Israel begets
the name Meribah (‘strife’) (Ex 17 1-7; Nu 20
1-13)” (Carpenter, Hexateuch, I, 30).

(5) The laws.—Most stress is laid on the argument
from the laws and their supposed historical setting.
By far the most important portions of this are ex-
amined in Sancruary and Prizsts (q.v.). These
subjects form the two main pillars of the Graf-
Wellhausen theory, and accordingly the arts. in
question must be read as supplementing the present
article. An illustration may be taken from the
slavery laws. It is claimed that Ex 21 1-6; Dt 15
12 ff permit a Hebrew to contract for life slavery
after 6 years’ service, but that Lev 25 39-42 takes
no notice of this law and enacts the totally different
provision that Hebrews may remain in slavery only
till the Year of Jubilee. While these different
enactments might proceed from the same hand if
properly coérdinated, it is contended that this is
not the case and that the legislator in Lev ignores
the legislator in Ex and is in turn ignored by the
legislator in Dt, who only knows the law of Ex.

(6) The argument from style —The argument from
style is less easy to exemplify shortly, since it de-
pends so largely on an immense mass of details.
Tt is said that each of the sources has certain char-
acteristic phrases which either occur nowhere else
or only with very much less frequency. For in-
stance in Gen 1, where ’£16him is used throughout,
we find the word “create,” but this is not employed
in 2 45ff, where the Tetragrammaton occurs.
Hence it is argued that this word is peculiarly
characteristic of P as contrasted with the other
documents, and may be used to prove his presence
in eg. 5 1f. f

(7) Props of the development hypothesis.—While
the main supports of the Graf-Wellhausen theory
must be sought in the arts. to which reference has
been made, it is necessary to mention briefly some
other phenomena to which some weight is attached.
Jer displays many close resemblances to Dt, and
the framework of K is written in a style that has
marked similarities to the same book. Ezk again
has notable points of contact with P and esp. with
H; either he was acquainted with these portions of
the Pent or else he raust have exercised considerable
influence on those who composed them. Lastly
the Chronicler is obviously acquainted, with the
completed Pent. Accordingly, it is claimed that
the literature provides a sort of external standard
that confirms the historical stages which the differ-


ent Pentateuchal sources are said to mark. Dt
influences Jer and the subsequent literature. It is
argued that it would equally have influenced the
earlier books, had it then existed. So too the com-
pleted Pent should have influenced K as it did Ch,
if it had been in existence when the earlier history

was composed.
(1) The veto of textual criticism.—The first great
objection that may be made to the higher criticism
is that it starts from the Massoretic


8. Answer text (MT) without investigation. This
to the is not the only text that has come down
Critical to us, and in some instances it can be
Analysis shown that alternative readings that


have been preserved are superior to
those of the MT. A convincing example occurs
in Ex 18. According to the Heb, Jethro comes to
Moses and says “I, thy father-in-law .... am
come,” and subsequently Moses goes out to meet his
father-in-law. The critics here postulate different
sources, but some of the best authorities have pre-
served a reading which (allowing for ancient differ-
ences of orthography) supposes an alteration of a
single letter. According to this reading the text
told how one (or they) came to Moses and said
“Behold thy father-in-law .... is come.’”’ As
the result of this Moses went out and met Jethro.
The vast improvement in the sense is self-evident.
But in weighing the change other considerations
must be borne in mind. Since this is the reading of
some of the most ancient authorities, only two views
are possible. Either the MT has undergone a cor-
ruption of a single letter, or else a redactor made a
most improbable cento of two documents which gave
anarrative of the most doubtful sense. LFortunately
this was followed by textual corruption of so happy
a character as to remove the difficulty by the change
of a single letter; and this corruption was so wide-
spread that it was accepted as the genuine text by
some of our best authorities. There can be little
doubt which of these two cases is the more credible,
and with the recognition of the textual solution the
particular bit of the analysis that depends on this
corruption falls to the ground. This instance illus-
trates one branch of textual criticism; there are
others. Sometimes the narrative shows with cer-
tainty that in the transmission of the text trans-
positions have taken place; e.g. the identification
of Kadesh shows that it was S. of Hormah. Con-
sequently a march to compass Edom by way of the
Red Sea would not bring the Israelites to Hormah.
Here there is no reason to doubt that the events
narrated are historically true, but there is grave
reason to doubt that they happened in the present
order of the narrative. Further, Dt gives an ac-
count that is parallel to certain passages of Nu; and
it confirms those passages, but places the events in
a different order. Such difficulties may often be
solved by simple transpositions, and when trans-
positions in the text of Nu are made under the guid-
ance of Dt they have a very different probability
from guesses that enjoy no such sanction. Another
department of textual criticism deals with the re-
moval of glosses, i.e. notes that have crept into the
text. Here the ancient VSS often help us, one or
other omitting some words which may be proved
from other sources to be a later addition. Thus in
Ex 17 7 the Vulg did not know the expression, “and
Meribah” (one word in Heb), and calls the place
“Massah” simply. This is confirmed by the fact
that Dt habitually calls the place Massah (6 16;
9 22; 33 8). The true Meribah was Kadesh (Nu
20) and a glossator has here added this by mistake
(sce further [4] below). Thus we can say that a
scientific textual criticism often opposes a real veto
to the higher critical analysis by showing that the
arguments rest on late corruptions and by explain-


Pentateuch


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2302


ing the true origin of the difficulties on which the
critics rely.

(2) Astruc’s clue tested —Astruc’s clue must next
be examined. The critical case breaks down with
extraordinary frequency. No clean division can
be effected, i.e. there are cases where the MT of
Gen makes P or E use the Tetragrammaton or
J ’Elohtm. In some of these cases the critics can
suggest no reason; in others they are compelled to
assume that the MT is corrupt for no better reason
than that it is in conflict with their theory. Again
the exigencies of the theory frequently force the
analyst to sunder verses or phrases that cannot be
understood apart from their present contexts, e.g.
in Gen 28 2] Carpenter assigns the words “and
Jeh will be my God” to J while giving the begin-
ning and end of the verse to E; in ch 31, ver 3 goes
to a redactor, though E actually refers to the state-
ment of ver 3 in ver 5; in ch 32, ver 30 is torn from
a J-context and given to H, thus leaving ver 31 (J)
unintelligible. When textual criticism is applied,
startling facts that entirely shatter the higher
critical argument are suddenly revealed. The
variants to the Divine appellations in Gen are very
numerous, and in some instances the new readings
are clearly superior to the MT, even when they
substitute ’“#léhim for the Tetragrammaton. Thus,
in 16 11, the explanation of the name Ishmael
requires the word’ léhim, as the name would other-
wise have been Ishmayah, and one Heb MS, a re-
cension of the LXX and the Old Lat do in fact pre-
serve the reading ’Llohitm. The full facts and ar-
guments cannot be given here, but Professor
Schlégl has made an exhaustive examination of the
various texts from Gen 1 1 to Ex 3 12. Outofa
total of 347 occurrences of one or both words in the
MT of that passage, there are variants in 196 in-
stances. A very important and detailed discussion,
too long to be summarized here, will now be found
in TMH,J. Wellhausen himself has admitted that
the textual evidence constitutes a sore point of the
documentary theory (Expos T, XX, 563). Again in
Ex 6 3, many of the best authorities read “LI was
not made known”’ instead of “I was not known’’—
a difference of a single letter in Heb. But if this
be right, there is comparative evidence to suggest
that to the early mind a revelation of his name
by a deity meant a great deal more than a
mere knowledge of the name, and involved rather
a pledge of his power. Lastly the analysis may
be tested in yet another way by inquiring whether
it fits in with the other data, and when it is
discovered (see below 4, [1]) that it involves
ascribing, e.g. a passage that cannot be later
than the time of Abraham to the period of the
kingdom, it becomes certain that the clue and the
method are alike misleading (see further # PC, ch i;
Expos T, XX, 378, 473-75, 563; TMH, 1; PS,
49-142; BS, 1913, 145-74; A. Troelstra, The Name
of God, NKZ, XXIV [1913], 119-48; Haxpos, 1913).

(3) Narrative discrepancies and signs of post-
Mosaic date—Septuagintal MSS are providing very
illuminating material for dealing with the chrono-
logical difficulties. It is well known that the LXX
became corrupt and passed through various recen-
sions (see SrpruaGinT). The original text has not
yet been reconstructed, but as the result of the great
variety of recensions 1t happens that our various
MSS present a wealth, of, alternative readings.
Some of these show an intrinsic superiority to the
corresponding readings of the MT. Take the case
of Ishmacl’s age. We have seen (above, 2, [3]) that
although in Gen 21 14f he is a boy who can be


carried by his mother even after the weaning of
Isaac, his father, according to 16 3.16, was 86 years
old at the time of his birth, and, according to ch |


17, 100 yéars old when Isaac was born. In 17 25
we find that Ishmael is already 13 a year before
Isaac’s birth. Now we are familiar with marginal
notes that set forth a system of chronology in many
printed Eng. Bibles. In this case the Septuagintal
variants suggest that something similar 1s respon-
sible for the difficulty of our Heb. Two MSS,
apparently representing a recension, omit the words,
“sfter Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of
Canaan” in 16 3, and again, ver 16, while in 17 25
there is a variant making Ishmael only 3 years old.
If these readings are correct it is easy to see how the
difficulty arose. The narrative originally contained
mere round numbers, like 100 years old, and these
were not intended to be taken literally. A com-
mentator constructed a scheme of chronology which
was embodied in marginal notes. Then these crept
into the text and such numbers as were in conflict
with them were thought to be corrupt and under-
went alteration. Thus the 3-year-old Ishmael
became 13. :

The same MSS that present us with the variants
in Gen 16 have also preserved a suggestive reading
in 36 28, one of the passages that are responsible
for the inference that according to the text of Gen
Isaac lay on his deathbed for 80 years (see above,
2, [8]). According to this Isaac was not 180, but
150 years old when he died. It is easy to see that
this is a round number, not to be taken literally,
but this is not the only source of the difficulty. In
27 41, Esau, according to EV, states ‘The days of
mourning for my father are at hand; then will I
slay my brother Jacob.””. This isa perfectly possible
rendering of the Heb, but the LXX tr4 the text
differently, and its rendering, while grammatically
correct, has the double advantage of avoiding Isaac’s
long lingering on a deathbed and of presenting
Esau’s hatred and ferocity far more vividly. It
renders, ‘May the days of mourning for my father
approach that J may slay my brother Jacob.”
Subsequent translators preferred the milder version,
but doubtless the LXX has truly apprehended the
real sense of the narrative. If we read the ch with
this modification, we see Isaac as an old man, not
knowing when he may die, performing the equiva-
lent of making his will. It puts no strain on our
credulity to suppose that he may have lived 20 or
30 years longer. Such episodes occur constantly
in everyday expericnce. As to the calculations
based on 26 26 and 26 34, the numbers used are 60
and 40, which, as is well known, were frequently
employed by the ancient Hebrews, not as mathe-
matical expressions, but simply to denote unknown
or unspecified periods. See NumBrr.

The other chronological difficulty cited above
(viz. that there is not room between the date of
Aaron’s death and the address by Moses in the
plains of Moab for all the events assigned to this
period by Nu) is met partly by a reading preserved
by the Pesh and partly by a series of transpositions.
In Nu 33 38 Pesh reads “first” for “fifth” as the
month of Aaron’s death, thus recognizing a longer
period for the subsequent events. The transposi-
tions, however, which are largely due to the evidence
of Dt, solve the most formidable and varied diffi-
culties; e.g. a southerly march from Kadesh no
longer conducts the Israelites to Arad in the north,
the name Hormah is no longer used (Nu 14 45)
before it is explained (21 3), there is no longer an
account directly contradicting Dt and making the
Israchites spend 38 years at Kadesh immediately
after receiving a Divine command to turn “to-
morrow” (Nu 14 25). A full discussion is impos-
sible here and will be found in EPC, 114-38. ‘The
order of the narrative that emerges as probably
original is as follows: Nu 12; 20 1.14-21; 21 1-3;
13; 14; 16-18; 20 2-13.22a; 21 46-9, then some


2303


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pentateuch


missing vs, bringing the Israelites to the head of
the Gulf of Akabah and narrating the turn north-
ward from Elath and Ezion-geber, then 20 22b-29;
21 4a, and some lost words telling of the arrival at
the station before Oboth. In Nu 33, ver 40 is a
gloss that is missing in Lagarde’s LXX, and vs
365-374 should probably come earlier in the chapter
than they do at present.

Another example of transposition is afforded by
Ex 33 7-11, the passage relating to the Tent of
Meeting which is at present out of place (see above
2, [3]). It is supposed that this is E’s idea of the
Tabernacle, but that, unlike P, he places it outside
the camp and makes Joshua its priest. This latter
view is discussed and refuted in Prissts, 3, where
it ig shown that Ex 33 7 should be rendered “And
Moses used to take a [or, the] tent and pitch it for
himself,” etc. As to the theory that this is E’s
account of the Tabernacle, Ex 18 has been over-
looked. This chapter belongs to the same E but
refers to the end of the period spent at Horeb, i.c.
it is later than 33 7-11. In vs 13-16 we find Moses
sitting with all the people standing about him be-
canse they came to inquire of God; i.e. the business
which according to ch 33 was transacted in solitude
outside the camp was performed within the camp
in the midst of the people at a later period. This
agrees with P, e.g. Nu 27. If now we look at the
other available clues, it appears that 33 11 seems
to introduce Joshua for the first time. The passage
should therefore precede 17 8-15; 24 13; 32 17,
where he is already known. Again, if Ex 18 refers
to the closing scenes at Horeb (as it clearly does),
Ex 24 14 providing for the temporary transaction
of judicial business reads very strangely. It ought
to be preceded by some statement of the ordinary
course in normal times when Moses was not absent
from the camp. Ex 33 7 ff provides such a state-
ment. The only earlier place to which it can be
assigned is after 18 22, but there it fits the context
marvelously, for the statements as to the pillar of
cloud in 83 9f attach naturally to those in 13 21 f.
With this change all the difficulties disappear.
Immediately after leaving Egypt Moses began the
practice of carrying a tent outside the camp and try-
ing cases there. This lasted till the construction of
the Tabernacle. “And there I will meet with thee,
and 1 will commune with thee” (Ex 25 22). After
its erection the earlier tent was disused, and the
court sat at the door of the Tabernacle in the center
of the camp (sce, further, EPC, 93-102, 106 f).

Some other points must be indicated more briefly.
In Nu 16 important Septuagintal variants remove
the main difficulties by substituting “company of
Korah” for ‘dwelling of Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram” in two vs (see EPC, 143-46). Similarly
in the Joseph-story the perplexities have arisen
through corruptions of verses which may still be
corrected by the versional evidence (PS, 29-48).
There is evidence to show that the numbers of the
Israclites are probably due to textual corruption
(EPC, 155-69). Further, there are numerous pas-
sages where careful examination has led critics
themselves to hold that particular verses are later
notes. In this way they dispose of Dt 10 6f
(Aaron’s death, etc), the references to the Israel-
itish kingdom (Gen 36 31) and the Canaanites as
being “then” in the land (12 6; 13 7), the bedstead
of Og (Dt 3 11) and other passages. In Gen 22,
“the land of Moriah” is unknown to the VSS which

resent the most diverse readings, of which ‘the
and of the Amorite” is perhaps the most probable;
while in ver 14 the LXX, reading the same Heb con-
sonants as MT, translates ‘‘In the Mount the Lord
was seen.” This probably refers to a view that God
manifested Himself esp. in the mountains (cf 1 Ik
20 23.28) and has no reference whatever to the


Temple Hill. The Massoretic pointing is presum-
ably due to a desire to avoid what seemed to be an
anthropomorphism (sce further PS, 19-21). Again,
in Nu 21 14, the LXX knows nothing of ‘a book
of the Wars of Jeh” (see Field, Hexapla, ad loc.).
It is dificult to tell what the original reading was,
esp. as the succeeding words are corrupt in the Heb
but it appears that no genitive followed ‘‘wars” an
it is doubtful if there was any reference to a “book
of wars.”

(4) The argument from the doublets exramined.—
The foregoing sections show that the documentary
theory often depends on phenomena, that were ab-
sent from the original Pent. We are now to exam-
ine arguments that rest on other foundations. The
doublets have been cited, but when we examine the
instances more carcfully, some cnrions facts emerge.
Gen 16 and 21 are, to all apnearance, narratives of
different events; so are Ex 17 1-7 and Nu 20 1-13
(the drawing of water from rocks). In the latter
case the critics after rejecting this divide the pas-
sages into 5 different stories, two going to J, two to
E and oneto P. If the latter also had a Rephidim-
narrative (cf Nu 33 14 P), there were 6 tales. In
any case both J and E tell two stories each. It is
impossible to assign any cogency to the argument
that the author of the Pent could not have told two
such narratives, if not merely the redactor of the
Pent but also J and E could do so. The facts as
to the manna stories are similar. As to the flights
of quails, it is known that these do in fact occur
every year, and the Pent places them at almost
exactly a year’s interval (see EPC, 104f, 109 f).

(5) The critical argument from the laws.—The
legal arguments are due to a variety of miscon-
ceptions, the washing out of the historical back-
ground and the state of the text. Reference must
be made to the separate articles (esp. SANCTUARY;
Priests). As the slave laws were cited, it may be
explained that in ancient Israel as in other com-
munities slavery could arise or slaves be acquired
in many ways: e.g. birth, purchase (Gen 14 14;
17 12, etc), gift (20 14), capture in war (14 21;
34 29), kidnapping (Joseph). The law of Ex and
Dt applies only to Heb slaves acquired by purchase,
not to slaves acquired in any other way, and least
of all to those who in the eye of the law were not
true slaves. Lev 25 has nothing to do with Heb
slaves. It is concerned merely with free Israelites
who become insolvent. “If thy brother be waxed
poor with thee, and sell himself” it begins (ver 39).
Nobody who was already a slave could wax poor
and sell himself. The law then provides that these
insolvent freemen were not. to be treated as slaves.
In fact, they were a class of free bondmen, i.e. they
were full citizens who were’compelled to perform
certain dutics. A similar class of free bondmen
existed in ancient Rome and were called next. The
Egyptians who sold themselves to Pharaoh and
became serfs afford another though less apt parallel.
In all ancient socicties insolvency led to some limi-
tations of freedom, but while in some full slavery
ensued, in others a sharp distinction was drawn
between the slave and the insolvent freeman (sce
further SBL, 5-11).

(6) The argument from style—Just as this argn-
ment, is too detailed to be set out in a work like the
present, so the answer cannot be given with any
degree of fulness. It may be said generally that
the argument too frequently neglects differences of
subject-matter and other sufficient reasons (such as
considerations of euphony and slight variations of
meaning) which often provide fur more natural
reasons for the phenomena observed. Again, the
VSS suggest that the Bib. text has been heavily
glossed. Thus in many passages where the fre-
quent recurrence of certain words and phrases is


Pentateuch


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2304


supposed to attest the presence of P, versional evi-
dence seems to show that the expressions in ques-
tion have been introduced by glossators, and when
they are removed the narrative remains unaffected
in meaning, but terser and more vigorous and
greatly improved as a vehicle of expression. To
take a simple instance in Gen 23 1, ‘‘And the life
of Sarah was a hundred and seven and twenty years:
. . .. the years of the life of Sarah,’’ the italicized
words were missing in the LXX. When they are
removed the meaning is unaltered, but the form of
expression is far superior. They are obviously a
mere marginal note. Again the critical method is
perpetually breaking down. It constantly occurs
that redactors have to be called in to remove from
a passage attributed to some source expressions that
are supposed to be characteristic of another source,
and this is habitually done on no other ground than
that the theory requires it. One instance must
be given. It is claimed that the word “create” is
a P-word. It occurs several times in Gen 1 1—
2 4a and 3 t in Gen 5 1.2, but in 6 7 it is found in
a J-passage, and some critics therefore assign it to a
redactor. Yet J undoubtedly uses the word in Nu
16 30 and D in Dt 4 32. On the other hand, P
does not use the word exclusively, even in Gen 1
1—2 4, the word “make” being employed in 1 7.
25.26.31; 2 2, while in 2 3 both words are com-
bined. Yet all these passages are given unhesi-
tatingly to P.

(7) Perplexities of the theory—The perplexities
of the critical hypothesis are very striking, but a
detailed discussion is impossible here. Much ma-
terial will, however, be found in POT and Herd. St.
A few general statements may be made. The criti-
cal analysis repeatedly divides a straightforward
narrative into two sets of fragments, neither of
which will make sense without the other. A man
will go to sleep in one document and wake in an-
other, or a subject will belong to one source and the
predicate to another. No intelligible account can
be given of the proceedings of the redactors who at
one moment slavishly preserve their sources and at
another cut them about without any necessity, who
now rewrite their materia] and now leave it un-
touched. Even in the ranks of the Wellhausen
critics chapters will be assigned by one writer to the
post-cxilic period and by another to the earliest
sources (e.g. Gen 14, pre-Mosaic in the main ac-
cording to Sellin [1910], post-exilic according to
others), and the advent of Eerdmans and Dahse has
greatly increased the perplexity. Clue after clue,
both stylistic and material, is put forward, to be
abandoned silently at some later stage. Circular
arguments are extremely common: it is first alleged
that some phenomenon is characteristic of a par-
ticular source; then passages are referred to that
source for no other reason than the presence of that
phenomenon; lastly these passages are cited to prove
that the phenomenon in question distinguishes the
source. Again the theory is compelled to feed on
itself; for J, E, P, ete, we have schools of J’s, E’s,
etc, subsisting side by side for centuries, using the
same material, employing the same ideas, yet re-
maining separate in minute stylistic points. This
becomes impossible when viewed in the light of the
evidences of pre-Mosaic date in parts of Gen (see
below 4, [1] to [8]).

(8) Signs of unity.—It is often possible to pro-
duce very convincing internal evidence of the unity
of what the critics sunder. A strong instance of
this is to be found when one considers the characters
portrayed. The character of Abraham or Laban,
Jacob or Moses is essentially unitary. There is
but one Abraham, and this would not be so if we
really had a ccnto of different documents repre-
senting the results of the labor of various schools


during different centuries. Again, there are some-
times literary marks of unity, e.g. in Nu 16, the
effect of rising anger is given to the dialogue by the
repetition of “Ye take too much upon you” (vs 3.7),
followed by the repetition of ‘Is it a small thing
that” (vs 9.13). This must be the work of a single
literary artist (see further SBL, 37 f).

(9) Supposed props of the development hypothesis.
—When we turn to the supposed props of the devel-
opment hypothesis we see that there is nothing
conclusive in the critical argument. Jer and the
subsequent lit. certainly exhibit the influence of
Dt, but a Book of the Law was admittedly found
in Josiah’s reign and had lain unread for at any rate
some considerable time. Some of its requirements
had been in actual operation, e.g. in Naboth’s case,
while others had become a dead letter. The cir-
cumstances of its discovery, the belief in its un-
doubted Mosaic authenticity and the subsequent
course of history led to its greatly influencing con-
temporary and Jater writers, but that really proves
nothing. Ezk again was steeped in priestly ideas,
but it is shown in Prissts, 50, how this may be
explained. Lastly, Ch certainly knows the whole
Pent, but as certainly misinterprets it (see Prizsts).
On the other hand the Pent itself always repre-
sents portions of the legislation as being intended
to reach the people only through the priestly teach-
ing, and this fully accounts for P’s lack of influ-
ence on the earlier literature. As to the differences
of style within the Pent itself, something is said in
III, below. Hence this branch of the critical argu-
ment really proves nothing, for the phenomena are
susceptible of more than one explanation.

(1) The narrative of Genesis —Entirely different
lines of argument are provided by the abundant

internal evidences of date. In Gen
4. Evidence 10 19, we read the phrase ‘as thou
of Date goest toward Sodom and Gomorrah,

and Admah and Zeboiim” in a defi-
nition of boundary. Such language could only
have originated when the places named actually
existed. One does not define boundaries by refer-
ence to towns that are purely mythical or have
been overthrown many centuries previously. The
consistent tradition is that these towns were de-
stroyed in the lifetime of Abraham, and the pas-
sage therefore cannot be later than his age. But
the critics assign it to a late stratum of J, i.e. to
a period at least 1,000 years too late. This sug-
gests several comments. First, it may reasonably
be asked whether much reliance can be placed ou
a method which after a century and a half of the
closest investigation does not permit its exponents
to arrive at results that are correct to within 1,000
years. Secondly, it shows clearly that in the com-
position of the Pent very old materials were incor-
porated in their original language. Of the historical
importance of this fact more will be said in IV; in
this connection we must observe that it throws
fresh light on expressions that point to the presence
in Gen of sources composed in Pal, e.g. “the sca”
for “the West” indicates the probability of a Pal-
estinian source, but once it is proved that we have
materials as old as the time of Abraham such ex-
pressions do not argue post-Mosaic, but rather pre-
Mosaic authorship. Thirdly, the passage demol-
ishes the theory of schools of J’s, ete. It cannot
seriously be maintained that there was a school
of J’s writing a particular style marked by the
most delicate and subjective criteria subsisting
continuously for some 10 or 12 centuries from the
time of Abraham onward, side by side with other
writers with whom its members never exchanged
terms of even such common occurrence as “hand-
maid.”

Gen 10 19 is not the only passage of this kind.


ae


2305


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pentateuch


In 2 14 we read of the Hiddekel (Tigris) as flowing
E. of A8Sur, though there is an alternative reading
“in front of.” If the tr “east’’ be correct, the pas-
sage must antedate the 13th cent. BC, for ASsur,
the ancient capital, which was on the west bank of
the Tigris, was abandoned at about that date for
Kalkhion the E.

(2) Archaeology and Genesis —Closely connected
with the foregoing are cases where Gen has pre-
served information that is true of a very early time
only. Thus in 10 22 Elam figures as a son of Shem.
The historical Elam was, however, an Aryan people.
Recently inscriptions have been discovered which
show that in very early times Elam really was in-
habited by Semites. ‘‘The fact,” writes Driver,
ad loc., ‘is not one which the writer of this verse is
likely to have known.” This contention falls to
the ground when we fiud that only three verses off
we have material that goes back at least as far as
the time of Abraham. After all, the presumption
is that the writer stated the fact because he knew it,
not in spite of his not knowing it; and that knowl-
edge must be due to the same cause as the note-
worthy language of ver 19, i.e. to early date.

This is merely one example of the confirmations
of little touches in Gen that are constantly being
provided by archaeology. For the detailed facts
see the separate arts., e.g. AMRAPHEL; JERUSALEM,
and cf IV, below.

From the point of view of the critical question
we note (a) that such accuracy is a natural mark of
authentic early documents, and (6) that in view of
the arguments already adduced and of the legal
evidence to be considered, the most reasonable ex-
planation is to be found in a theory of contemporary
authorship.

(3) The legal evidence of Genesis —The legal evi-
dence is perhaps more convincing, for here no
theory of late authorship can be devised to evade
the natural inference. Correct information as to
early names, geography, etc, might be the result of
researches by an exilic writer in a Bab library; but
early customs that are confirmed by the universal
experience of primitive societies, and that point to a
stage of development which had long been passed
in the Babylonia even of Abraham’s day, can_be
due to but one cause—genuine early sources. The
narratives of Gen are certainly not the work of com-
parative sociologists. Two instances may be cited.
The law of homicide shows us two stages that are
known to be earlier than the stage attested by Ex
21 12 ff. Inthestory of Cain we have one stage;
in Gen 9 6, which docs not yet recognize any dis-
tinction between murder and other forms of homi-
cide, we have the other.

Our other example shall be the unlimited power
of life and death possessed by the head of the family
(38°24; 42 37, etc), which has not yet been limited
in any way by the jurisdiction of the courts as in
Ex-Dt. In both cases comparative historical juris-
prudence confirms the Bible account against the
critical, which would make e.g. Gen 9 6 post-exilic,
while assigning Ex 21 toa muchearlicr period. (On
the whole subject see further OP, 135 ff.)

(4) The professcdly Mosaic character of the legis-
lation —Coming now to the four concluding books
of the Peut, we must first observe that the legisla-
tion everywhere professes to be Mosaic. Perhaps
this is not always fully realized. In critical edi-
tions of the text the rubrics and an occasional phrase
are sometimes assigned to redactors, but the repre-
sentation of Mosaic date is far too closely inter-
woven with the matter to be removed by such
‘devices. If e.g. we take such a section as Dt 12,
we shall find it full of such phrases as “for ye are not
as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance,” etc;
hen ye go over Jordan,” “the place which the


Lord shall choose’ (AV), etc. It is important to
bear this in mind throughout the succeeding dis-
cussion,

(5) The historical situation required by P—What
do we find if we ignore the Mosaic dress and seek
to fit P into any other sct of conditions, particularly
those of the post-exilic period? The general his-
torical situation gives a clear answer. The Israel-
ites are represented as being so closely concentrated
that they will always be able to keep the three pil-
grimage festivals. One exception only is con-
templated, viz. that ritual uncleanness or a journey
may prevent an Israelite from keeping the Pass-
over. Note that in that case he is most certainly
to keep it one month later (Nu 9 10f). How
could this law have been enacted when the great
majority of the people were in Babylonia, Egypt,
etc, so that attendance at the temple was impossible
for them on any occasion whatever? With this
exception the entire PC always supposes that the
whole people are at all times dwelling within easy
reach of the religious center. How strongly this
view is embedded in the code may be seen esp. from
Lev 17, which provides that all domestic animals
to be slaughtered for food must be brought to the
door of the Tent of Meeting. Are we to suppose
that somebody deliberately intended such legislation
to apply when the Jews were scattered all over the
civilized world, or even all over Canaan? If so, it
means a total prohibition of animal food for all save
the inhabitants of the capital.

In post-exilic days there was no more pressing
danger for the religious leaders to combat than
intermarriage, but this code, which is supposed to
have been written for the express purpose of bring-
ing about their action, goes out of its way to give
a fictitious account of a war and incidentally to
legalize some such unions (Nu 31 18). And this
chapter also contains a law of booty. What could
be more unsuitable? How and where were the Jews
£8 elles conquests and capture booty in the days of

ZA £

“Or again, pass to the last chapter of Nu and con-
sider the historical setting. What is the complaint
urged by the deputation that waits upon Moses?
Itis this: If heiresses ‘be married to any of the sons
of the other tribes of the children of Israel, then shall
their inheritance be taken awuay from the inheritance
of our fathers, and shall be added to the inheritance
of the tribe whereunto they shall belong.’ What a
pressing grievance for a legislator to consider and
redress when tribes and tribal lots had long since
ceased to exist for ever!’ (OP, 121 f).

Perhaps the most informing of all the discrepan-
cies between P and the post-exilic age is one that
explains the freedom of the earlier prophets from
its literary influence. According to the constant
testimony of the Pent, including P, portions of the
law were to reach the people only through priestly
teaching (Lev 10 11; Dt 24 8; 33 10, etc). Ezra
on the other hand read portions of P to the whole
people.

(6) The hierarchical organization in P—Much of
what falls under this head is treated in Primsts, 2,
(a), (6), and necd not be repeated here. The follow-
ing may be added: “Urim and Thummim were not
used after the Exile. In lieu of the simple condi-
tions—a small number of priests and a body of
Levites—we find a developed hicrarchy, priests,
Levites, singers, porters, Nethinim, sons of Solo-
mon’s servants. The code that ex hypothesi was
forged to deal with this state of affairs has no ac-
quaintance with them. The musical services of the
temple are as much beyond its line of vision as the
worship of the synagogue. Even such an organi-
zation as that betrayed by the refercnce in 1 8 2
36 to the appointment by the high priest to positions


Pentateuch


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2306


carrying pecuniary emoluments is far beyond the
primitive simplicity of P’” (OP, 122).

(7) The legal evidence of P—As this subject is
technical we can only indicate the line of reason-
ing. Legal rules may be such as to enable the his-
torical inquirer to say definitely that they belong
to an early stage of society. Thus if we find ele-
mentary rules relating to the inheritance of a farmer
who dies without leaving sons, we know that they
cannot be long subsequent to the introduction of
individual property in land, unless of course the
law has been deliberately altered. It is an every-
day occurrence for men to die without leaving sons,
and the question what is to happen to their Jand in
such cases must from the nature of the case be
raised and settled before very long. When there-
fore we find such rules in Nu 27, etc, we know that
they are either very old or else represent a deliberate
change in the law. The latter is really out of the
question, and we are driven back to their antiquity
(see further OP, 124 ff). Again in Nu 36 we find
an elaborate struggle to express a general principle
which shall distinguish between two kinds of homi-
cide. The earlier law had regarded all homicide as
on the same level (Gen 9). Now, the human mind
only reaches general principles through concrete
cases, and other ancient legislations (e.g. the Ice-
landic) bear witness to the primitive character of
the rules of Nu. Thus an expert like Dareste can
say confidently that such rules as these are ex-
tremely archaic (see further SBL and OP, passim).

(8) The evidence of D.—The following may be
quoted: ‘‘Laws are never issued to regulate a state
of things which has passed away ages before, and
can by no possibility be revived. What are we to
think, then, of a hypothesis which assigns the code
of Dt to the reign of Josiah, or shortly before it,
when its injunctions to exterminate the Canaanites
(20 16-18) and the Amalekites (26 17-19), who
had long since disappeared, would be as utterly out
of date as a law in New Jersey at the present time
offering a bounty for killing wolves and bears, or a
royal proclamation in Great Britain ordering the
expulsion of the Danes? A law contemplating
foreign conquests (20 10-15) would have been
absurd when the urgent question was whether Judah
could maintain its own existence against the en-
croachments of Babylon and Egypt. A law dis-
criminating against Ammon and Moab (23 3.4),
in favor of Edom (vs 7.8), had its warrant in the
Mosaic period, but not in the time of the later kings.
Jeremiah discriminates precisely the other way,
promising a future restoration to Moab (48 47)
and Ammon (49 6), which he denies to Edom (49
17.18), who is also to Joel (3 19), Ob, and Isa (63
1-6), the representative foe of the people of God.
.... Theallusions to Egypt imply familiarity with
and recent residence in that land... . . And how
can a code belong to the time of Josiah, which, while
it contemplates the possible selection of a king in
the future (Dt 17 14 ff), nowhere implies an actual
regal government, but vests the supreme central
authority in a judge and the priesthood (17 8-12;
19 17); which lays special stress on the require-
ments that the king must be a native and not a for-
eigner (17 15), when the undisputed line of suc-
cession had for ages been fixed in the family of David,
and that he must not ‘cause the people to return
to Egypt’ (ver 16), as they secmed ready to do on
every grievance in the days of Moscs (Nu 14 4),
but which no one ever dreamed of doing after they
were fairly established in Canaan?” (Green, Moses
and the Prophets, 63f). This too may be supple-
mented by legal evidence (c.g. 22 26 testifies to the
undeveloped intellectual condition of the people).
Of JE it is unnceessary to speak, for Ex 21f are
now widely regarded as Mosaic in critical circles.


| Wellhausen (Prolegomena®, 392, n.) now regards their
main elements as pre-Mosaic Canaanitish law.

(9) Later allustons—These are of two kinds.
Sometimes we have references to the laws, in other
eases we find evidence that they were in operation.
(a) By postulating redactors evidence can be ban-
ished from the Bib. text. Accordingly, reference will
only be made to some passages where this procedure
is not followed. Ezk 22 26 clearly knows of a law
that dealt with the subjects of P, used its very
language (cf Lev 10 10f), and like P was to be
taught to the people by the priests. Hos 4 6 also
knows of some priestly teaching, which, however,
is moral and may therefore be Lev 19; but in 8
11-13 he speaks of 10,000 written precepts, and here
the context points to ritual. The number and the
subject-matter of these precepts alike make it cer-
tain that he knew a bulky written law which was not
merely identical with Ex 21-23, and this passage
cannot be met by Wellhausen who resorts to the
device of translating it with the omission of the im-
portant word “write.” (6) Again, in dealing with
institutions the references can often be evaded. It
is possible to say, ‘Yes, this passage knows such and
such a law, but this law does not really come into
existence with D or P, but was an older law incor-


porated in these documents.” That argument
would apply, e.g. to the necessity for two witnesses
in the case of Nahoth. That is a law of D, but
those who assign Dt to the reign of Josiah would
assert that it is here merely incorporating older
material. Again the allusions sometimes show
something that differs in some way from the Pent,
and it is often impossible to prove that this was a
development. The critics in such cases claim that
it represents an earlier stage, and it frequently
happens that the data are insufficient either to
support or refute this view. ‘But fortunately there
are in P certain institutions of which the critics defi-
nitely assert that they are late. Accordingly, ref-
erences that prove the earlier existence of such in-
stitutions have a very different prohative value.
Thus it is alleged that before the exile there was
but one national burnt offering and one national
meal offering each day: whereas Nu 28 demands
two. Now in 1 K 18 29.36, we find references to
the offering of the evening oblation, but 2 K 8 20
speaks of ‘the time of offering the oblation’ in
connection with the morning. Therefore these two
oblations were actually in existence centuries before
the date assigned to P—who, on the critical theory,
first introduced them. So 2 K 16 15 speaks of
‘the morning burnt-offering, and the evening meal-
offering .... with the burnt-offering of all the
people of the land, and their meal-offering’” This
again gives us the twa burnt offerings, though, on
the hypothesis, they were unknown to preéxilic
custom. Similarly in other eases: Jer 32 shows
us the land laws in actual operation; Ezekiel is
familiar with the Jubilce laws—though, on the
critical hypothesis, these did not yet exist. Jero-
boam was acquainted with P’s date for Tabernacles,
though the eritics allege that the date was first fixed
in the Exile” (OP, 182 f).

(10) Other evidence-—We can only mention certain


other branches of evidence. There is stylistic evi-
dence of early date (see e.g. Lias, BS, 1910, 20-46,
299-334). Further, the minute accuracy of the
narrative of Ex-Nu to local conditions, ete (noticed
below, IV, 8, [6]), affords valuable testimony. It
may be said generally that the whole work—laws
and narrative—mirrors early conditions, whether
we regard intellectual, economic or purely legal
development (see further below, IV, and OP,
passim).

(1) Moral and psychological issues —The great
fundamental improbabilities of the critical view


2307


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pentateuch


have hitherto been kept out of sight in order that
the arguments for and against the detailed case

might not be prejudiced by other con-
5. Funda- siderations. We must now glance at
mental Im- some of the broader issues. The first
probabilities that occurs is the moral and psycho


of the logical incredibility. On theory two
Critical great frauds were perpetrated—in each
Case ease by men of the loftiest ethical


; principles. Dt was deliberately written
in the form of Mosaic speeches by some person
or persons who well knew that their work was
not Mosaic. P is a make-up—nothing more. All
its references to the wilderness, the camp, the
Tent of Meeting, the approaching occupation of
Canaan, etc, are so many touches introduced for
the purpose of deceiving. There canbe no talk of lit-
erary convention, for no such convention existed in
Isracl. The prophets all spoke in their own names,
not in the dress of Moses. David introduced a new
law of booty in his own name; the Chronicler re-
Reedly refers temple ordinances to David and
Solomon; Samuel introduced a law of the kingdom
in hisown name. Yet we are asked to believe that
these gigantic forgeries were perpetrated without
reason or precedent. Is it credible? Consider the
principles inculcated, e.g. the Deuteronomie denun-
ciations of false prophets, the prohibition of adding
aught to the law, the passionate injunctions to teach
children. Can it be believed that men of such
principles would have been guilty of such conduct?
Nemo repente fit turpissimus, says the old maxim;
can we suppose that the denunciations of those who
prophesy falsely in the name of the Lord proceed
from the pen of one who was himself forging in that
name? Or can it be that the great majority of
Bible readers know so little of truth when they meet
it that they cannot detect the ring of unquestion-
able sincerity in the references of the Deuterono-
mist to the historical situation? Or can we really
believe that documents that originated in such a
fashion could have exercised the enormous force for
righteousness in the world that these documents
have exercised? Ex nihilo nihil. Are literary
forgeries a suitable parentage for Gen 1 or Lev or
Dt? Are the great monotheistic ethical religions
of the world, with all they have meant, really rooted
in nothing better than folly and fraud?

(2) The historical improbability——-A second fun-
damental consideration is the extraordinary his-
torical improbability that these frauds could have
been successfully perpetrated. The narrative in
K undoubtedly relates the finding of what was re-
garded as an authentic work. King and people,
priests and prophets must have been entirely de-
ceived if the critical theory be true. It is surely
possible that Huldah and Jeremiah were better
judges than modern critics. Similarly in the case
of P, if e.g. there had been no Levitical cities or no
such laws as to tithes and firstlings as were here
contemplated, but entircly different provisions on
the subjects, how came the people to accept these
forgeries so readily? (See further POT, 257f,
294-97.) It is of course quite easy to carry this
argument too far. It cannot be doubted that the
exile had meant a considerable break in the his-
torical continuity of the national development; but
yet once the two views are understood the choice
cannot be difficult. On the critical theory elaborate
literary forgeries were accepted ag genuine ancient
laws; on the conservative theory laws were accepted
because they were in fact genuine, and interpreted
as far as possible to meet the entirely different re-
quirements of the period. This explains both the
action of the people and the divergence between
preéxilic and post-exilic practice. The laws were
the same but the interpretation was different. ~


(3) Divergence between the laws and post-exilic
practice.—Thirdly, the entire perversion of the true
meaning of the laws in post-exilie times makes the
eritical theory incredible. Examples have been
given (see above, 4, [5], [6], and Prizsts, passim).
It must now suffice to take just oue instance to
make the argument clear. We must suppose that
the author of P deliberately provided that if Levites
approached the altar both they and the priests
should die (Nu 18 3), because he really desired
that they should approach the altar and perform
certain services there. We must further suppose
that Ezra and the people on reading these pro-
visions at once understood that the legislator meant
the exact opposite of what he had said, and pro-
ceeded to act accordingly (1 Ch 23 31). This is
only one little example. It is so throughout P.
Everybody understands that the Tabernacle is
really the second Temple and wilderness conditions
post-exilic, and everybody acts accordingly. Can
it be contended that this view is credible?

(4) The testimony of tradition —Lastly the uni-
form testimony of tradition is in favor of Mosaic
authenticity—the tradition of Jews, Samaritans
and Christians alike. The national consciousness
of a people, the convergent belief of Christendom
for 18 centuries are not lightly to be put aside. And
what is pitted against them? Theories that vary
with each fresh exponent, and that take their start
from textual corruption, develop through a con-
fusion between an altar and a house, and end in
misdating narratives and laws by 8 or 10 centuries!
(see above 8 and 4; Sancruary; Priests).

Ui anything at all emerges from the foregoing
discussion, it 1s the impossibility of performing any

such analytical feat as the critics


6. Origin attempt. No critical microscope can
and Trans- possibly detect with any reasonable
mission of degree of certainty the joins of vari-
the Penta- ous sources, even if such sources really
teuch exist, and when we find that laws


and narratives are constantly mis-
dated by 8 or 10 centuries, we can only admit that
no progress at all is possible along the lines that
have been followed. On the other hand, certain
reasonable results do appear to have been secured,
and there are indications of the direction in which
we must look for further light.


First, then, the Pent contains various notes by later
hands. Sometimes the VSS enable us to detect and
remove those notes, but many are pre-versional. Ac-
cordingly, it is often impessible to get beyond probable
conjectures en which different minds may differ.

Secondly, Gen contains pre-Mosaic elements, but we
eannot determine the scepe of these or the number and
character of the sources employed, or the extent of the
author's work.

Thirdly, the whole body of the legislation is (subject
only to textual criticism) Mosaic. But the laws of Dt
carry with them their framework, the speeches which
eannot be severed from them (see SBL, 11). The
speeches of Dt in turn carry with them large porticns of
the narrative of Ex-Nu which they presuppose. They
do not necessarily carry with them such passages as Ex
35-39 or Nu I-4, 7, 26, but Nu 1-4 contains internal
evidence of Mosaic date.

At this point we turn to examine certain textual
poene that throw light en cur problem. It may

e said that roughly there are twe great classes of tex-
tual corruption—that which is due to the ordinary proc-
esses of copying, perishing, annotating, ete, and that
which is due to a conscious and systematic effort to fix
or edit a text. In the case of ancient authors, there
comes a time sooner or later when scholarship, realizing
the corruption that has taken place, makes a systematic
attempt to preduce, so far as possible, a correct stand-
ard text. Instances that will occur to many are to be
found in the work of the Masseretes on the Heb text,
that of Origen and others on the LXX, and that of the
eommission ef Peisistratos and subsequently of the
Alexandrian critics on Homer. There is evidence that
such revisions tock place in the ease of the Pent. A very
important instance is to be found in the chronology
of certain portions of Gen of which three different
VSS survive, the Masseretic, Sam and Septuagintal.
Another instance cf even greater consequence fer the


Pentateuch


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2308


matter in hand is to be found in Ex 35-39. It is well
known that the LXX preserves an entirely different edi-
tion from that of MT (supported in the main hy the
Sam and other VSS). Some other examples have been
noticed incidentally in the preceding discussion; one
other that may be proved by further research to possess
enormous importance may be mentioned. It appears
that in the law of the kingdom (Dt 17) and some other
passages where the Massoretic and Sam texts speak of
a hereditary king, the LXX knew nothing of such a
person (see further PS, 157-68). The superiority of the
LXX text in this instance appears to be attested by 1
8, whichis unacquainted with any law of the kingdom.

Thus we know of at least three recensions, the M, the
Sam and the Sept. While there are many minor read-
ings (in cases of variation through accidental corruption)
in which the two last-named agree, it is nevertheless
true thatin a general way the Sam belongs to the same
family as the M, while the LXX in the crucial matters
represents a different textual tradition from the other
two (see Erpos, Septemher 1911, 200-219). How is
this to be explained? According to the worthless story
preserved in the letter of Aristeas the LX X was trd
from MSS brought from Jerus at a date long subse-
quent to the Sam schism. The fact that the LXX pre-
serves a recension so different from hoth Sam and MT
(i.e. from the most authoritative Palestinian tradition
of the 5th cent. BC and its lineal descendants) suggests
that this part of the story must be rejected. If so, the
LXX douhtless represents the text of the Pent prevalent
in Egypt and descends from a Heb that separated from
the ancestor of the M before the Sam schism, At this
point we must recall the fact that in Jer the LX X differs
trom MT more widely than in any other Bib. book, and
the current explanation is that the divergence goes back
to the times of Jeremiah, his work having been preserved
in two editions, an Egyp and a Bah. We may be sure
that if the Jews of Egypt had an edition of Jer, they also
had an edition of that law to which Jer refers, and it is
probable that the main differences between LXX and
MT (with its allies) are due to the two streams of tra-
dition separating from the time of the exile—the Egyp
and the Bab. The narrative of the finding of the Book
of the Law in the days of Josiah (2 K 22), which prob-
ably refers to Dt only, suggests that its text at that time
depended on the single MS found. The phenomena
presented by Gen-Nu certainly suggest that they too
were at one time dependent on a single damaged MS, and
that conscious efforts were made to restore the original
order—in some cases at any rate on a wrong principle
(see esp. EPC, 114-38; BS, 1913, 270-90). In view of
the great divergences of the LXX in Ex 35-39, it may
be taken as certain that in some instances the editing
went to considerable lengths.


Thus the history of the Pent, so far as it can be
traced, is briefly as follows: The backbone of the
book consists of pre-Mosaic sources in Gen, and
Mosaic narratives, speeches and legislation in Ex-
Dt. To this, notes, archaeological, historical, ex-
planatory, etc, were added by successive readers.
The text at one time depended on a single MS which
was damaged, and one or more attempts were made
to repair this damage by rearrangement of the ma-
terial. It may be that some of the narrative chap-
ters, such as Nu 1-4, 7, 26, were added from a
separate source and amplified or rewritten in the
course of some such redaction, but on this head
nothing certain can be said. Within a period that
is attested by the materials that survive, Ex 35-39
underwent one or more such redactions. Slighter
redactions attested by Sam and LXX have affected
the chronological data, the numbers of the Israel-
ites aud some references to post-Mosaic historical
events. Further than this it is impossible to go on
our present materials.

IH. Some Literary Points.—No general estimate
of the Pent as literature can or need be attempted.
Probably most readers are fully sensible to its lit-
erary beauties. Anybody who is not would do well
to compare the chapter on Joseph in the Koran (12)
with the Bib. narrative. A few words must be
said of some of the less obvious matters that
would naturally fall into a literary discussion, the
aim being rather to draw the reader’s attention
to points that he might overlook.

Of the style of the legislation no sufficient estimate
can now be formed, for the first requisite of legal
style is that it should be clear and unambignous to
contemporaries, and today no judgment can be
offered on that head. There is, however, one fea-


ture that is of great interest eveu now, viz. the
prevalence in the main of three different styles,

each marked by its special adaptation
1. Style of to the end in view. These styles are
Legislation (1) mnemonic, (2) oratorical, and (8)
; procedural. The first is familiar in
other early legislations. It is lapidary, terse in the
extreme, pregnant, and from time to time marked
by a rhythm that must have assisted the retention
in the memory. Occasionally we meet with paral-
lelism. This is the style of Ex 21 ff and occasional
later passages, such as the judgment in the case of
Shelomith’s son (Lev 24 10ff). No doubt these
laws were memorized by the elders.

Secondly, the legislation of Dt forms part of a
speech and was intended for public reading. Ac-
cordingly, the laws here take on a distinctly oratori-
cal style. Thirdly, the bulk of the rest of the legis-
lation was intended to remain primarily in the
custody of the priests who could certainly write
(Nu 6 23). This was taken into account, and the
style is not terse or oratorical, but reasonably
full. It was probably very clear to those for whom
the laws were meant. There are minor varieties
of style but these are the most important. (On
the whole subject see esp. P'S, 170-224.) :

What holds good of the laws is also true with
certain modifications of the narrative. The style
varies with the nature of the subject,
oceasion and purpose. Thus the itin-
erary in Nu 33 is intentionally com-
posed in a style which undoubtedly
possesses peculiar qualities when chanted to an
appropriate tune. The census lists, etc, appear to
be written in a formal official manner, and something
similar is true of the lists of the spies in Nu 13.
There is no ground for surprise in this. In the an-
cient world style varied according to the genre of
Hee composition to a far greater extent than it does
today.

A literary form that is peculiar to the Pent de-
serves special notice, viz. the covenant document

as a form of literature. Many peoples
3. The have had laws that were attributed
Covenant to some deity, but it is only here that
laws are presented in the form of sworn
agreements entered into with certain formalities
between the nation and God. The literary result
is that certain portions of the Pent are in the
form of a sort of deed with properly articulated
parts. This deed would have been ratified by oath
if made between men, as was the covenant between
Jacob and Laban, but in a covenant with God this
is inapplicable, and the place of the jurat is in each
case taken by a discourse setting forth the rewards
and penalties attached by God to observance and
breach of the covenant respectively. The cove-
nant conception and the idea that the laws acquire
force because they are terms in an agreement be-
tween God and people, and not merely because they
were commanded by God, is one of extraordinary
importance in the history of thought aud in theology,
but we must not through absorption in these aspects
of the question fail to notice that the conception
found expression in a literary form that is unknown
elsewhere and that it provides the key to the com-
prehension of large sections of the Pent, including
almost the whole of Dt (see in detail SBL, ch ii).

Insufficient attention has been paid to order and

rhythm generally. Two great principles must be borne

in mind: (1) in really good ancient prose
4. Order the at cieh apes oo oe ae i paeny Ayer
and Rhythm ana ere well as ReneS are given

to a great extent by the order of the words.
The figures of the old Gr rhetoricians play a considerable
part. Thus the figure called kuklos, “the circle,” Is
somctimes used with great skill. In this the clause or


sentence begins and ends with the same word, which de-
notes alike the sound and the thought. Probably the


2. The
Narrative


2309


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pentateuch


most effective instance—heightened hy the meaning,
the shortness and the heavy boom of the word—is to be
found in Dt 4 12, where there is an impressive ‘‘circle’’


with Pres kl, '' voice’’—the emphasis conveyed by the


sound being at least as marked as that conveyed by the
sense. This is no isolated instance of the figure; cf e.g.
in Nu 82 1, the ‘‘circle” with ‘cattle’; 14 2 that with

would that we had died.” Chiasmus isa favorite figure,
and assonances, plays on words, etc, are not uncommon.
Such traits often add force as well as beauty to the narra-
tive, as may be seen from instances like Gen 1 2:
Way VAD, toh wa-bhoha, “waste and void"; 4 12:
Ph 22> na wa-nadh,‘‘a fugitive and a wanderer”; 9 6:
TR at DyN3 DING DI yEw, shophékh dam ha-
‘ddham, ba-ddham daimé, yishshaphekh, lit. ‘shedding
blood-of man, by-man his-blood shall-he-shed""; Nu 14
45: ninds DAD", wayyakkim wayyakk*thum, ‘and
smote them and beat them down."

The prose of the Pent, except in its more formal and
official parts, is closcly allied to poetry (cf e.g. the Aes-
chylean ‘Sin coucheth at the door’ [Gen fu: “The
fountains of the great deep [were] broken up, and the
windows of heaven were opened” [% 11]; ‘‘how I bare
you on eagles’ wings’’ [Ex 19 4]).. In the oratorical
prose of Dt we find an imagery and a poetical imagi-
nation that are not common among great orators. Its
thythm is marked and the arrangement of the words is
extraordinarily forcible, esp. in such a chapter as ch 28.
It is difficult to convey any idea of how much the book
Joses in EV from the changes of order. Occasionally
the rendering does observe the point of the original,e.g.
in Dt 4 36: ‘Out of heaven he made thee to hear his
voice," and if we consider how strikingly this contrasts
with the flat “He made thee to hear his voice out of
heaven,’’ some notion may perhaps be formed of the im-
Ponbance of retaining the order. More frequently,

owever, the Eng. is false to the emphasis and spirit of
the Heh. Sometimes, but not always, this is duo to the
exigencies of Eng. idiom. This is the cardlnal fault of
AV, which otberwise excels so greatly.


IV. The Pentateuch as History.—Beyond all
doubt, the first duty of any who would use the Pent
for historical purposes is to consider


1. Textual the light that textual criticism throws
Criticism upon it. So many of the impossi-
as History bilities that are relied upon by those


who seek to prove that the hook is
historically worthless may be removed by the
simplest operations of scientific textual criticism,
that a neglect of this primary precaution must lead
to disastrous consequences. After all, it is common
experience that a man‘who sets out to produce a
history—whether by original composition or com-
pilation—does not intentionally make, e.g., a south-
ward march lead to a point northward of the start-
ing-place, or a woman carry an able-bodied lad of 16
or 17 on her shoulder, or a patriarch linger some 80
years on a deathbed. When such episodes are
found, the rudiments of historical judgment require
that we should first ask whether the text is in order,
and if the evidence points to any easy, natural and
well-supported solutions of the difficulties, we are
not justified in rejecting them without inquiry and
denying to the Pent all historical value. It is a
priori far more probable that narratives which have
come down to us from a date some 3,000 years back
may havesuffered slightly in transmission than that
the Pent was in the first instance the story of a his-
torical wonderland. It is far more reasonable, e.g.,
to suppose that in a couple of verses of Ex a cor-
ruption of two letters (attested by Aquila) has
taken place in the MT than that the Pent contains
two absolutely inconsistent accounts of the origin
of the priesthood (see Priests). Accordingly, the
first principle of any scientific use of the Pent for
historical purposes must be to take account of
textual criticism.
Having discovered as nearly as may be what the
author wrote, the next step must be to consider what he
Fee eaters asi eerneulec): moans
2. Hebrew mo :
Methods of Poe juices put for the fact ‘that it is s0
Expression often disregarded, to say that the whole of


a narrative must be carefully read in order
to ascertain the anthor’s meaning; eg. how often we


hear that Gen 14 represents Abram as having inflicted
adefeat on the enemy with only 318 men (ver 14), whereas
from ver 24 (cf ver 13) it appears tbat in addition to these
his allics Aner, Esbcol and Mamro (i.e. as we shall see,
the inhabitants of certain localities) had accompanled
him! Sometimes the clue to the precise meaning of a
story is to he found ncar the end: e.g. in Josh 22 we do
not see clearly what kind of au altar the trans-Jordanic
tribes had erected (and conscquently why their conduct
was open to objection) till ver 28, when we learn that
this was an altar of the pattern of the altar of hurnt
offering, and so hore not tbe slightest resemhlance to
such lawful altars as those of Moses and Joshua (see
Aurar; Sancruary). Nor is this the only instance in
which the methods of expression adopted Cause trouble
to some modern readers; e.g. the word ‘‘all’’ is some-
times used in a way that apparently presents difficulties
to some minds. Thusin Ex 9 6itis possihle to interpret
all” in the most sweeping sense and then see a contra-
diction in vs 19.22, etc, which recognize that some cattle
still existed. Or again the term may he regarded as
limited by ver 3 to all the cattle in the ficld (sce Att).


At this point two further idiosyncrasies of the
Sem genius must be noted-—the habits of personi-
fication and the genealogical tendency;
3. Personi- e.g.in Nu 20 12-21, Edom and Israel
fication and are personified: “thy brother Israel,”
Genealogies ‘Edom came out against him,” etc.
ee Nobody here mistakes the meaning.
Similarly with genealogical methods of expression.
The Semites spoke of many relationships in a way
that is foreign to occidental methods. Thus the
Heb for “30 years old” is “son of 30 years.” Again
we read “He was the father of such as dwell
in tents” (Gen 4 20). These habits (of personi-
fication and genealogical expression of relation-
ships) are greatly extended, e.g. ‘And Canaan
begat Zidon his first-born” (1015). Often this leads
to no trouble, yet strangely enough men who will
grasp these methods when dealing with ch 10 will
claim that ch 14 cannot be historical because locali-
ties are there personified and grouped in relation-
ships. Yet if we are to estimate the historical
value of the narrative, we must surely be willing to
apply the same methods to one chapter as to an-
other if the sense appears to demand this. See,
further, GENEALOGIES.


A further consideration that is not always heeded is
the exigency of literary form; e.g. in Gen 24 there
occurs a dialogne. Strangely enough, an
attack has been made on the _historical
character of Gen on this ground. It can-
not be supposed—so runs the argument—
that we have here a literal report of what
was said. This entirely ignores the practice of allliterary
artists. Such passages are to be read as giving a literary
presentation of what occurred; they convey a far truer
and more vivid idea of what passed than could an actual
literal report of the mere words, divorced from the ges-
tures, glances and modulations of the voice that play
such an important part in conversation.


Another matter is the influence of the sacred
numbers on the text; eg. in Nu 33 the journeys
seem designed to present 40 stations


4. Literary
Form


6. The and must not be held to exclude camp-
Sacred ing at other stations not mentioned;
Numbers Gen 10 probably contained 70 names


in the original text. Thisisa technical
consideration which must be borne in mind, and so,
too, must the Heb habit of using certain round num-
bers to express an unspecified time. When, for
instance, we read that somebody was 40 or 60 years
old, we are not to take these words literally. ‘Forty
years old” often seems to correspond to “after he
had reached man’s estate’ (see NUMBER).
Still more important is it to endeavor to appre-
ciate the habits of thought of those for whom the
Pent was first intended, and to seek
6. Habits of to read it in the light of archaic ideas.
Thought One instance must suffice. Of the
many explanations of names few are
philologically correct. It is certain that Noah is
not connected with the Heb for “to comfort’’ or
Moses with “draw out’—even if Egyp princesses


Pentateuch


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2310


spoke Heb. The etymological key will not fit.
Yet we must ask ourselves whether the narrator
ever thought that it did. In times when names were
supposed to have some mystic relation to their
bearers they might be conceived as standing also
in some mystic relation to events either present or
future; it is not clear that the true original meaning
of the narratives was not to suggest this in literary
form. How far the ancient Hebrews were from
regarding names in the same light as we do may be
seen from such passages as Ex 23 20f; Isa 30 27;
see further HPC, 47 ff; see also Namus, Proper.

The Pent is beyond all doubt an intensely national
work. Its outlook is so essentially Israelitish that

no reader could fail to notice the fact,
7. National and it is therefore unnecessary to cite
Coloring, proofs. Doubtless this has in many

mstances led to its presenting a view
of history with which the contemporary peoples
would not have agreed. It is not to be supposed
that the exodus was an event of much significance
in the Egypt of Moses, however important it may
appear to the Egyptians of today; and this sug-
gests two points. On the one hand we must admit
that to most contemporaries the Pentateuchal nar-
ratives must have seemed out of all perspective;
on the other the course of subsequent history has
shown that the Mosaic sense of perspective was in
reality the true one, however absurd it may have
seemed to the nations of his own day. Conse-
quently in using the Pent for historical purposes
we must always apply two standards—the con-
temporary and the historical. In the days of Moses
the narrative might often have looked to the ont-
sider like the attempt of the frog in the fable to
attain to the size of an ox; for us, with the light of
history upon it, the values are very different. The
national coloring, the medium through which the
events are secn, has proved to be true, and the seem-
ingly insignificant doings of unimportant people
have turned out to be events of prime historical
importance.

There is another aspect of the national coloring
of the Pent to be borne in mind. If ever there was
a book which revealed the inmost soul of a people,
that book is the Pent. This will be considcred in
V, below, but for the present we are concerned with
its historical significance. In estimating actions,
motives, laws, policy—all that goes to make his-
tory—character is necessarily a factor of the utmost
consequence. Now here we have a book that at
every point reveals and at the same time grips the
national character. Alike in cont nts and in form
the legislation is adapted with the utmost nicety
to the nature of the people for which it was pro-
mulgated.

When due allowance has been made for all the
various matters enumerated above, what can be

said as to the trustworthiness of the
8. How Far Pentateuchal history? The answer
the Penta- is entirely favorable.
teuch Is (1) Contemporaneous information.—
Trustworthy In the first place the discussion as

to the dating of the Pent (above, II,
4) has shown that we have in it documents that are
in many cases certainly contemporaneous with the
matters to which they relate and have been pre-
served in a form that is substantially original.
Thus we have seen that the wording of Gen 10 19
cannot be later than the age of Abraham and that
the legislation of the last. four books is Mosaic.
Now contemporaneousness is the first essential of
credibility.

(2) Character of our informants —Given the fact
(guaranteed by the contemporancousness of the
sources) that our informants had the means of
providing accurate information if they so desired,


we have to ask whether they were truthful and
able. As to the ability no doubt is possible;
genius is stamped on every page of the Pent.
Similarly as to truthfulness. The conscience of the
narrators is essentially ethical. This appears of
course most strongly in the case of the legislation
(cf Lev 19 11) and the attribution of truthful-
ness to God (Ex 34 6), but it may readily be de-
tected throughout; e.g. in Gen 20 12 the narrative
clearly shows that truthfulness was esteemed as a
virtne by the ancient Hebrews. Throughout, the
faults of the dramatis personae are never minimized
even when the narrator’s sympathy is with them.
Nor is there any attempt to belittle the opponents
of Israel’s heroes. Consider on the one hand the
magnanimity of Esau’s character and on the other
the very glaring light that is thrown on the weak-
nesses Of Jacob, Judah, Aaron. If we are taught
to know the Moses who prays, ‘And if not, blot me,
I pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast writ-
ten’? (Ex 32 32), we are also shown his frequent
complaints, and we make acquaintance with the
hot-tempered manslayer and the lawgiver who dis-
obeyed his God.

(3) The historicol genius of the people —Strangely
enough, those who desire to discuss the trust-
worthiness of the Pent often go far afield to note the
habits of other nations and, selecting according to
their bias peoples that have a good or a bad reputa-
tion in the matter of historical tradition, proceed to
argue for or against the Pentateuchal narrative on
this basis. Such procedure is alike unjust and un-
scientific. It is unscientific because the object of
the inquirer is to obtain knowledge as to the habits
of this people, and in view of the great divergences
that may be observed among different races the
comparative method is clearly inapplicable; it is
unjust becanse this people is entitled to be Judged
on its own merits or defects, not on the merits or
defects of others. Now it is a bare statement of
fact that the Jews possess the historical sense to a
preéminent degree. Nobody who surveys their
long history and examines their customs and _prac-
tices to this day can fairly doubt that fact. This is
no recent development; it is most convincingly
attested by the Pent itself, which here, as elsewhere,
faithfully mirrors the spirit of the race. What is
the highest guaranty of truth, a guaranty to which
unquestioning appeal may be made in the firm as-
surance that it will carry conviction to all who hear?
“Remember the days of old, Consider the years of
many generations: Ask thy father and he will show
thee; Thine elders, and they will tell thee’ (Dt 32
7). “For ask now of the days that are past, which
were before thee, since the day that God created
man upon the earth,” ete (Dt 4 32). Conversely,
the dne handing down of tradition is a religions
duty: “And it shall come to pass, when your chil-
dren shall say unto you, What mean ye by this serv-
ice? that ye shall say,” ete (Ex 12 26f). “Only
take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently,
lest thou forget the things which thine eyes saw,
and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of
thy life; but make them known unto thy children,
and thy children’s children’ (Dt 4 9). It is need-
less to multiply quotations. Enough has been said
to show clearly the attitude of this people toward
history.

(4) The good faith of Deuteronomy —Closely con-
nected with the preceding is the argument from the
very obvious good faith of the speeches in Dt. It
is not possible to read the references to events in
such a chapter as ch 4 without realizing that the
speaker most fully believed the truth of his state-
ments. The most unquestionable sincerity is im-
pressed upon the chapter. The speaker is referring
to what he believes with all the faith of which he is


2311


capable. Even for those who doubt the Mosaic
authenticity of these speeches there can be no doubt
as to the writer’s unquestioning acceptance of the
historical consciousness of the people. But once
the Mosaic authenticity is established the argu-
ment becomes Bawa: How could Moses
have spoken to people of an event so impressive
and unparalleled as having happened within their
own recollection if it had not really occurred?

(5) Nature of the events recorded—Another very
important consideration arises from the nature of
the events recorded. No nation, it has often been
remarked, would gratuitously invent a story of its
enslavement to another. The extreme sobriety of
the patriarchal narratives, the absence of miracle,
the lack of any tendency to display the ancestors
of the people as conquerors or great personages, are
marks of credibility. Many of the episodes in the
Mosaic age are extraordinarily probable. Take
the stories of the rebelliousness of the people, of
their eomplaints of the water, the food, and so on:
what could be more in accordance with likelihood?
On the other hand there is another group of nar-
ratives to which the converse argument applies.
A Sinai cannot be made part of a nation’s con-
sciousness bya elever story-teller or a literary forger.
The unparalleled nature of the events narrated was
recognized quite as clearly by the ancient Hebrews
as it is today (see Dt 4 32 ff). It is incredible
that such a story could have been made up and
snecessfully palmed off on the whole nation. A
further point that may be mentioned in this con-
nection is the witness of subsequent history to the
truth of the narrative. Such a unique history as
that of the Jews, such tremendous consequences as
their religion has had on the fortunes of mankind,
require for their explanation causal events of sufh-
cient magnitude.

(6) External corroborations —All investigation
of evidence depends on a single principle: ‘The
coincidences of the truth are infinite.’ In other
words, a false story will sooner or later become
involved in conflict with ascertained facts. The
Bib. narrative has been subjected to the most rigor-
ons cross-examination from every point of view
for more than a century. Time after time confi-
dent assertions have been made that its falsehood
has been definitely proved, and in each ease the Pent
has come out from the test triumphant. The de-
tails will for the most part be found enumerated or
referred to under the separate articles. Here it
must suffice just to refer to a few matters. It was
said that the whole local coloring of the Egyp scenes
was entirely false, e.g. that the vine did not grow in
Egypt. Egyptology has in every instance vindi-
cated the minnte accuracy of the Pent, down toeven
the non-mention of earthenware (in which the dis-
colored Nile waters can be kept clean) in Ex 7 19
and the very food of the lower classes in Nu 11 5.
It was said that writing was unknown in the days
of Moses, but Egyptology and Assyriology have
utterly demolished this. The historical character
of many of the names has been strengthened by
recent discoveries (see e.g. JERUSALEM; AMRA-
PHEL), From another point of view modern ob-
servation of the habits of the quails has shown that
the narrative of Nu is minutely accurate and must
be the work of an eyewitness. From the ends of
the earth there comes confirmation of the details
of the evolution of law as depicted in the Pent.
Finally it is worth noting that even the details of
some of the covenants in Gen are confirmed by his-
torical parallels (Churchman, 1908, 17 f).

It is often said that history in the true sense was
invented by the Greeks and that the Heb genius
was so intent on the Divine guidance that it neg-
lected secondary causes altogether. There is a large


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pentateuch


measure of truth in this view; but so far as the
Pent is concerned it can be greatly overstated.

One great criticism that falls to be
9. The made ig entirely in favor of the
Pentateuch Hebrew as against some Greeks, viz.
as Reason- the superior art with which the causes
ed History are given. A Thueydides would have

stated the reasons that induced Pha-
raoh to persecute the Israelites, or Abraham and Lot
to separate, or Korah, Dathan and Abiram and their
followers to rebel; but every reader would have
known precisely what he was doing and many who
can read the material passages of the Pent with
delight would have been totally unable to grapple
with his presentation of the narrative. The andi-
ence is here more unsophisticated and the material
presented in more artistic form. In truth, any
historian who sat down to compose a philosoph-
ical history of the period covered by the Pent
would in many instances be surprised at the lavish
material it offered to him. A second criticism is
more obvious. The writer clearly had no knowl-
edge of the other side of the case. For example,
the secondary causes for the defeat near Hormah
are plain enongh so far as they are internal to
the Israelites—lack of morale, discipline and leader-
ship, division of opinion, disconragement produced
by the Divine disapproval testified by the absence
from the army of Moses and the Ark, and the
warnings of the former—but the secondary causes
on the side of the Amalekites and Canaanites are
entirely omitted. Thus it generally happens that
we do not get the same kind of view of the events
as might be possible if we eould have both sides.
Naturally this is largely the case with the work
of every historian who tells the story from one
side only and is not peculiar to the Pent. Thirdly,
the object of the Pent is not merely to inform, but
to persuade. It is primarily statesmanship, not
literature, and its form is influenced by this fact.
Seeking to sway conduct, not to provide a mere
philosophical exposition of history, it belongs to a
different (and higher) category from the latter, and
where it has occasion to use the same material puts
it in a different way, ¢.g. by assigning as motives
for obeying laws reasons that the philosophic his-
torian would have advanced as causes for their en-
actment. To some extent, therefore, an attempt
to criticize the Pent from the standpoint of philo-
sophic history is an attempt to express it in terms
of something that is incommensurable with it.

V. Character of the Pentateuch.—The following
sentences from Maine’s Early Law and Custom form
a shggestive introduction to any consideration of
the character of the Pent:

“The theory upon which these schools of learned men


worked, from the ancient, perhaps very ancient, Apas-
tamba and Gautama to the late Manu


1. Hindu sue ene still later Nera: is eras still
S € y some persons of earnest religious
Law Books convictions, but in time now buricd it


affected, every walk of thought. The
fundamental assumption is that a sacred or inspired lit.
heing once believed to exist, all knowledge is contained
in it. The Hindu way of. putting it was, and is, not
simply that the Scripture is true, but that everything
which is true is contained in the Scripture... .. It is
to be observed that such a theory, firmly held during the
infancy of systematic thought, tends to work itself into
fact. As the human mind advances, accumulating
observation and accumulating reficction, nascent phi-
losophy and dawning science are read into the sacred
literature, while they are at the same time limited by the
ruling ideas of its priestly authors. But as the mass of
this literature grows through the additions made to it
hy successive expositors, it gradually specializes itself,
and subjects, at first mixed together under vague gen-
eral conceptions, become separated from one another
and isolated. In the history of law the most important
early specialization is that which separates what 4 man
ought to do from what he ought to know, A great part
of the religious literature, including the Creation of the
Universe, the structure of Heaven, Hell, and the World


Pentateuch
Pent, Samaritan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2312


or Worlds, and the nature ef the Geds, falls under the
last head, what a man ought to knew. Law-beoks first
appear as a subdivision of the first branch, what a man
should do. Thus the most ancient beeks of this class
are short manuals of conduct fer an Aryan Hindu who
would lead a perfect life. They contain much mere
ritual than law, a great deal mere about the impurity
caused by teuching impure things than abeut crime, a
great deal mere about penances than about punishments"
(pp. 16-18).


It is impossible not to sce the resemblances to
the Pent that these sentences suggest. Particularly
interesting is the commentary they provide on the
attitude of Moses toward knowledge: ‘The secret
things belong unto Jeh our God; but the things
that are revealed belong unto us and to our
children for ever, that we may do all the words of
this law’ (Dt 29 29).

But if the Pent has significant resemblances to
other old law books, there are differences that are
even more significant.


“By an act that is unparalleled in histery a God tock
te Himself a peeple by means ef a swern agreement.
Seme words quae are Ler pees
: vd purpose must be quote rom the offer;
2. Differ Now thetefore, if ye will ehey my veice
ences indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye
shall be mine own pessession from among
all peoples: for all the earth is mine: and ye shall
be unte me a kingdom ef priests and a hely
nation.’ The views here expressed deminate tbe legis-
lation. Holiness—the correlative holiness to which the
Israelites must attain becansc the Lord their Ged ts
hely—embraces much that is not germane to our
subject, but it also covers the whole fleld of national
and individual righteousness. Tbe duty to God that
is laid upen the Israclites in these words is a duty
that has practical consequences in every phase of
secial life. I bave already quoted a sentence from
Sir Henry Maine in which he speaks of tbe unifermity
with which religion and law are implicated in archaic
legislation. There is a stage in human development
where life is generally seen whole, and it is to this
stage that the Pent belongs. But no_ other legislation
so takes up one department of man’s life after anether
and impresses on them all the relationship of Ged and
peeple. Perhaps nething will so clearly bring out my
meaning as a statement of some of the mere fundamental
differences between the Pentateuchbal legislation and the
old Indian law-heeks which often previde excellent par-
allels te it. These to which I desire to draw particular
attention are as follows: The Indian law-books have no
idea of national (as distinct trom individual) righteous-
ness—acenceptien that entered the world with the Mesaic
legislation and has perhaps not made very much progress
there since. There is no personal God: hence His per-
sonal interest in righteousness is lacking: hence, tcoe,
there can he no relationship hetween Ged and peeple:
and while there is a supernatural elcment in the centem-
plated results of human actions, tbere is nothing that can
in the slightest degree compare with the Persenal Divine
intervention that is se eften premised in the Penta-
teuchal laws. The caste system, like Hammaurahi's
class system, leads te distinctions that are always in-
equitable. The cenception of leving one’s neighbour
and one's sejourner as oneself are alike lacking. The
systematic provisions for peor relicf are absent, and the
legislation is generally on a lower ethical and moral level,
while some of the penalties are distinguished by the mest
perverted and barbarous cruelty. All these points are
embraced in the special relationship of the One Ged and
the peculiar treasure with its resulting need for national
and individual holiness” (PS, 330f).


These sentences indicate some of the most inter-
esting of the distinguishing features of the Pent—
its national character, its catholic view

3. Holiness of life, its attitude toward the Divine,
and some at any rate of its most pe-

culiar teachings. It is worth noting that Judaism,
the oldest of the religions which it has influenced,
attaches particular importance to one chapter,
Lev 19. The keynote of that chapter is the com-
mand: ‘Holy shall ye be, for holy am I the Lord
your God’—to preserve the order and emphasis of
the original words. This has been called the Jew’s
imitatio Dei, though a few moments’ reflection shows
that the use of the word ‘‘imitation’”’ is here inac-
curate. Now this book with this teaching has
exercised a unique influence ou the world’s history,
for it must be remembered that Judaism, Chris-
tianity and Islam spring ultimately from its teach-


ings, and it is impossible to sever it from the history
of the “people of the book”—as Mohammed called
them. It appears then that it possesses in some
unique way both an intensely national and an in-
tenscly universal character and a few words must

be said as to this.
The great literary qualities of the work have un-
doubtedly been an important factor. All readers
have felt the fascination of the stories


4, The of Gen. The Jewish character has
Universal also counted for much; so again have
Aspect the moral and ethical doctrines, and


the miraculous and unprecedented
nature of the events narrated. And yet there is
much that might have been thought to militate
against the book’s obtaining any wide influence.
Apart from some phrases about all the families of
the earth being blessed (or blessing themselves) in
the sced of Abraham, there is very little in its direct
teaching to suggest that it was ever intended to be
of universal application. Possibly these phrases
only mean that other nations will use Israel as a
typical example of greatness and happiness and
pray that they may attain an equal degree of glory
and prosperity. Moreover, the Pent provides for a
sacrificial system that has long ceased to exist, and
a corpus of jural law that has not been adopted by
other peoples. Of its most characteristic require-
ment—holiness—large elements are rejected by
all save its own people. Wherein then lies its
universal element? How came this the most in-
tensely national of books to exercise a world-wide
and ever-growing influence? The reason lies in the
very first sentence: “In the beginning God created
the heavens and the earth.’ This doctrine of the
unity of an Almighty God is the answer to_our
question. Teach that there is a God and One Only
All-powerful God, and the book that tells of Him
acquires a message to all His creatures.

Of the national character of the work something
has already been said. It is remarkable that for its
own people it has in very truth con-


5. The tained life and length of days, for it
National has been in and through that book
Aspect that the Jews have maintained them-


selves throughout their unique his-
tory. If it be asked wherein the secret of this
strength lies, the answer is in the combination of the
national and the religious. The course of history
must have been entirely different if the Pent had
not been the book of the people long before the Jews
became the people of the book.


Lirerarorse.—the current critical view is set forth
in vast numbers of hooks. The following may be men-
tioned: LOT; Cornill's Intro to the Canonical Books of
the OT; Carpenter and Harford-Battershy’s Hexateuch
(a 2d ed of tbe Intre without the text has been pub-
lished as The Composition of the Hexateuch); the vols
of the ICC, Westminster Comms. and Century Bible.
Slightly less _theroughgoing views are put, forward
in the Ger. Intres of Kénig (1893), Baudissin (1901),
Sellin (1910); and Geden, Outlines of Intro to the Heb
Bible (1909); Kittel, Scientific Study of the OT (ET,
1910); Herdm. St. has entircly divergent critical views;
POT; TMH, I, and W. Méller, Are the Critics Right?
and Wider den Bann der Quellenscheidung; Robertson,
Early Religion of Israel; Van Heenacker, Lieu du culte,
and Sacerdoce lévitigue are all much more conserv-
ative and valuable. J. H. Raven, OT Intro, gives a
good presentation of the most conservative case. The
views taken in this article are represented hy SBI,
EPC, OP, PS, Troelstra, The Name of God, and in some
matters, TMH, I.


Harotp M. Wrener —
PENTATEUCH, THE SAMARITAN, sa-mar'’-
tan:
I. Know.epes or SAMARITAN PENTATEDCH
1, In Older Times
2. Revived Knowledge
II. Copicres anp Scripr
1. Nahlds Rell
2. The Script
8. Peculiarities of Writing


2313


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pentateuch
Pent, Samaritan


4. The Tarikh
5. Pronunciation
6. Age of the N&ablas Roll
III. Revarion or ton SAMARITAN RECENSION TO THE
MT anv To raze LXX
1. Relation to MT: Classification of Differences
(1) Accidental Variations
(2) Due to Sight
2 Hearing
c) Deficient Attention
(2) Intentional
(a) Grammatical
(b) Logical
(c) Doctrinal
2. Relation to LXX
(1) Statement of Hypotheses
(2) Review of Hypotheses
IV. Ow Pentarrucran Criticism
V. Taroums anv Curonicin
Literature


The existence of a Sam community in Nablds is
gencrally known, and the fact that they have a
recension of the Pent which differs in some respects
from the Massorctic has been long recognized as
important.

I. Knowledge of the Samaritan Pentateuch.—Of
the Gr Fathers Origen knew of it and notes two

insertions which do not appear in
1. In Older the MT—Nu 13 1 and 21 12, drawn
Times from Dt 1 2 and 2 18. Eusebius of
Caesarea in his Chronicon compares
the ages of the patriarchs before Abraham in the


Samaritan High Priest with Scroll.


LXX with those in the Sam Pent and the MT.
Epiphanius is aware that the Samaritans acknowl-
edged the Pent alone as canonical. Cyril of Jerus
notes agreement of LXX and Sam in Gen 4 8.
These are the principal evidences of knowledge of
this recension among the Gr Fathers. Jcrome
notes some omissions in the MT and supplics them
from Sam. The Talm shows that the Jews retained
a knowledge of the Sam Pent longer, and speaks
contemptuously of the points in which it differs
from the MT. Since the differences observed by
the Fathers and the Talmudists are to be sccn in


| only on the “hair’’ side.


the Sam Pent before us, they afford evidence of its
authenticity.
After nearly a millennium of oblivion the Sam
Pent was restored to the knowledge of Christendom
by Pietro de la Valle who in 1616 pur-
2. Revived chased a copy from the Sam com-
Knowledge munity which then existed in Damas-
cus. This copy was presented in 1623
to the Paris Oratory and shortly after published in
the Paris Polyglot under the editorship of Morinus,
a priest of the Oratory who had been a Protestant.
He emphasized the difference between the MT and
Sam Pent for argumentative reasons, in order to
prove the necessity for the intervention of the
church to settle which was Scripture. A fierce
controversy resulted, in which various divines,
Protestant and Catholic, took part. Since then
copies of this recension have multiplied in Europe
and America. All of them may he regarded as
copics ultimately of the Nablts roll. These copies
are in the form, not of rolls, but of codices or bound
volumes. They are usually written in two columns
to the page, one being the T¢ or interpretation and
this is sometimes in Aramaic and sometimes in
Arabic. Some codices show thrce columns with
both Tgs. There are probably nearly 100 of these
codices in various librarics in Europe and America.
These are all written in the Sam script and differ
only by scribal blunders.
Il. Codices and Script.—The visitor to the Sa-
maritans is usually shown an ancient roll, but only
rarely is the most ancient exhibited,
1. The and when so exhibited still more rarcly
Nablis Roll is it in circumstances in which it may
be examined. Dr. Mills, who spent
three months in the Sam community, was able to
make a careful though interrupted study of it. His
description (Nablis and the Modern Samaritans,
312) is that ‘the roll is of parchment, written in
columns, 13 in. deep, and 73 in. wide. The writing
is in a fair hand, rather small; each column contains
from 70 to 72 lines, and the whole roll contains 110
columns. The name of the scribe is written in a
kind of acrostic, rnnning through these columns, and
is found in the Book of Dt. The roll has the ap-
pearance of very great antiquity, but is wonder-
fully well preserved, considering its venerable age.
It is worn out and torn in many places and patched


| with re-written parchment; in many other places,


where not torn, the writing is unreadable. It
seemed to me that about two-thirds of the original
is still readable. The skins of which the roll is
composed are of equal size and measure each 25
in. long by 15 in. wide.” Dr. Rosen’s account
on the authority of Kraus (Zeiischr. der deultsch-
morgenl. Gesellsch., XVIII, 582) agrees with this,
adding that the “breadth of the writing is a line
and the space between is similar.” Both observers
have noted that the parchment has been written
It is preserved in a silk
covering inclosed in a silver case embossed with
arabesque ornaments.

The reader on opening one of the codices of the
Sam Pent recognizes at once the difference of the
writing from the characters in an ordi-
nary Heb Bible. The Jews admit
that the character in which the Sam
Pent is written is older than their
square character. It is said in the Talm (Sanhe-
dhrin 21b): ‘The law at first was given to Israel
in ‘tbhrt letters and in the holy tongue and again by
Ezra in the square [’déshirith] character and the
Aram. tongue. Israel chose for themselves the
dshtrith character and the holy tongue: they left
to the hedhydtath (“auncultured”| the “br? character
and the Aram. tongne—‘the Cuthaeans are the hedh-
yatath,’ said Rabbi Hasda.”’ When Jewish hatred of


2. The
Script


Pent, Samaritan THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2314


the Samaritans, and the contempt of the Pharisees
for them are remembered, this admission amounts
to a demonstration. The Sam script resembles that
on the Maceabean coins, but is not identical with it.
It may be regarded as between the square character
and the angular, the latter as is seen in the MS
and the Siloam inscription. Another intermediate
form, that found on the Assouan papyri, owes the
differences it presents to having been written with a
reed on papyrus. As the chronology of these scripts
is of importance we subjoin those principally in
question.


Samaritan Name
Moabite Stone 850 BC
Siloam 706 BC
Assouan 400 BC
Muccabean 100 BC
Square 200 AD


Hebrew Name


Alaf


Bit


Gaman


Dalath


-G4I- -fFsyru zg


Yud


u


G
ov


Kaf
Labad


Mim


Nun


us
—_—e


Simeat


Nv
3
7T
g
z
*
os
as
9
YY
a
es
sd,
iG
2
°
D
Peri
Be
ce)
N


—j “\ w&
OG lle te


Table Showing Script of Semitic Languages.


The study of these alphabets will confirm the
statement above made that the Sam alphabet is,
in evolution, between the square character and the
angular, nearer the latter than the former, while the
characters of the Assouan papyri are nearer the
former than the latter. Another point to be ob-
served is that the letters which resemble each other
in one alphabet do not always resemble in another.
We can thus, from comparison of the Jetters liable
to be confused, form a guess us to the script in
which the document containing the confusion was


written.


In inseriptions the lapidary had_no hesitation, irre-
spective of syllables, in completing in the next line any
word for which he had not sufficient room.


iar- Thus the beginnings and endings of lines

a cae were directly under each other, as on the
sR¢su M 8. In the papyri the words are not
Writing divided, but the scrihe was not particular
to have the ends of lines directly under

each other. The scribe of the square character by use


of literae dilatabiles secured this without dividing the
words. The Samaritan secured this end by wider spacing.
The first letter or couple of letters of each line are placed
directly under the first letter or letters of the preceding
line—so with the last letters—two or three—of the line,
while the other words are spread out to fill up the space.
The only exception to this is a paragraph ending. Words
are separated from each other hy dots; sentences hy a
sign like ourcolon. The Torah is divided into 966 kisam
or paragraphs. The termiuation of these is shown by
the colon having a dot added to it, thus :. Sometimes
this is reinforced by a liue and an angle—<. These
kisam are often enumerated on the margin; sometimes,
in later MSS in Arab. numerals. A blank space some-
times separates one of these kisam from the next. ‘
When the scrihe wished to inform the reader of his
personality and the place where he had written the MS
he made use of a peculiar, device. In


4. The copying he left a space vacant in the middle
nas of acolumu. ‘The space thus left is every
Tarikh now and then bridged by a single letter.


These letters read down the column form
words and sentences which convey the information. In
the case of the Nablds roll this tarikh occurs in Dt and
occupies three columns. In this it is said, ‘‘I Abishua,


son of Pinhas [Phinehas], son of Eleazar, son of Aharun


[Aaron] the priest, have written this holy book in the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation in Mt. Geri-
zim in the 13th year of the rule of the children of Israel
in the land of Canaan." Most of the codices in the
libraries of Europe and America have like information
given in a similar manner. This tarikh is usually Heh,
but sometimes it is in Sam Aramaic. Falsification of
the date merely is practically impossible; the forgery
must he the work of the first scrihe.

Not only has the difference of script to he considered,
but also the different values assigned to the letters. The
names given to the letters differ consid-
erahly from the Heh, as may he seen


5. The ahove. There are no vowel points or
Mode of signs of reduplication. Only B and P of
Pronun- the BeGaDH-KePHaTH letters are as-
ciation pirated. The most singular peculiarity


is that none of the gutturals is pronounced
at all—a peculiarity which explains some
of the names given to the letters. This characteristic
appears all the more striking when it is remembered how
prominent gutturals are in Arab., the everyday language
of the Samaritans. The first 5 verses of Gen are sub-
joined according to the Sam_ pronunciation, as taken
down by Petermann (Versuch einer hebr. Formenlehre,
161), from the reading of Amram the high priest: Ba-
rashet bara Eluwém it ashshamém wit aareg. Waare¢
ayata-te'u ube'u waashek alfani....tum uru Eluwem


amra, efet al fani ammem waya'mer Eluwém ya'i or


way'at or wayeré Eluwem tt a’ or ki tov wayabdel Eluwem
bin aor ubin aashek uyikra Eluwém la'or yom ula ‘ashek
kara lila. Uyat ‘erex uyai bekar yom a'ad.
There is no doubt that if the inscription given
above is really in the MS it is a forgery written on
the skin at the first. Of its falsity
6. The Age also there is no doubt. The Am Tab
of the Na- sent from Canaan and nearly con-
blas Roll temporary with the Israelite conquest
of the land were impressed with cunei-
form characters and the language was Bab. Neg-
lecting the tarikh, we may examine the matter inde-
pendently and come to certain conclusions. If it
is the original from which the other MSS have been
copied we are forced to assume a date earlier at
least than the 10th cent. AD, which is the date of
the earliest Heb MS. The script dates from the
Hasmoneans. The reason of this mode of writing
being perpetuated in copying the Law must be
found in some special sanctity in the document
from which the copies were made originally. Dr.
Mills seems almost inclined to believe the authen-
ticity of the tarikh. His reasons, however, have
been rendered valueless by recent discoveries. Dr.
Cowley, on the other hand, would date it somewhere
about the [2th cent. AD, or from that to the 14th.
With all the respect due to such a scholar we venture
to think his view untenable. His hypothesis is
that an old MS was found and the tar7kh now seen


2315


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pent, Samaritan


in it was afterward added. That, however, is im-
possible unless a new skin—the newness of which
would be obvious—had been written over and in-
serted. Even the comparatively slight change
implied in turning Ishmael into Isracl in the tarikh
in the Nablis roll necessitates a great adjustment of
lines, as the letters of the tartkh must read hori-
zontally as well as perpendicularly. If that change
were made, the date would then be approximately
650 AD, much older than Cowley’s 12th cent.
There is, however, nothing in this to explain the
sanctity given to this MS. There is a tradition
that the roll was saved from fire, that it leaped out
of the fire in the presence of Nebuchadnezzar. If
it were found unconsumed when the temple on Mt.
Gerizim was burned by John Hyrcanus I, this would
account for the veneration in which it is held. It
would account also for the stereotyping of the
script. The angular script prevailed until near the
time of Alexander the Great. In it or in a script
akin to it the copy of the Law must have been written
which Manasseh, the son-in-law of Sanballat,
brought to Samaria. The preservation of such a
copy would be ascribed to miracle and the script
consecrated.

HI. Relation of the Samaritan Recension to the
MT and LXX.—While the reader of the Sam

Pent will not fail to observe its prac-
1. Relation tical identity with the MT, closer study
to MT: reveals numerous, if minor, differ-
Classifi- ences. These differences were classi-
cation of fied by Gesenius. Besides being illogi-
Differences cal, his classification is faulty, as

founded on the assumption that the
Sam Pent text is the later. The same may be said
of Kohn’s. We would venture on another classi-
fication of these variations, deriving the principle
of division from their origin. These variations
were due either to (1) accident or (2) intention.
(1) The first of these classes arose from the way in
which books were multiplied in ancient days. Most
commonly one read and a score of scribes, probably
slaves, wrote to this dictation. Hence errors might
arise (a2) when from similarity of letters the reader
mistook one word for another. (6) If the reader’s
pronunciation was not distinct the scribes might
mis-hear and therefore write the word amiss. (c)
Further, if the reader began a sentence which opened
in a way that generally was followed by certain
words or phrases, he might inadvertently conclude
it, not in the way it was written before him, but in
the customary phrase. In the same way the scribe
through defective attention might also blunder.
Thus the accidental variations may be regarded as
due to mistakes of sight, hearing and attention. (2)
Variations due to intention are either (a) gram-
matical, the removal of peculiarities and conforming
them to usage, or (b) logical, as when a command
having been given, the fulfilment is felt to follow as
a logical necessity and so is narrated, or, if narrated,
is omitted according to the ideas of the acribe; (c)
doctrinal changes introduced into the text to suit
the doctrinal position of one side or other. Ques-
tions of propriety also lead to alterations—these
may be regarded as quasi-doctrinal.

(1) Examples of accidental variations.—(a) Due
to mistakes of sight: The cause of mistakes of sight
is the likeness of differing letters. ‘These, however,
differ in different scripts, as may be proved by con-
sideration of the table of alphabets. Some of these
mistakes found in connection with the Sam Pent
appear to be mistakes due to the resemblance of
lettersin the Samscript. Most of these are obvious
blunders; thus in Gen 19 32, we have the mean-
ingless tabhinu instead of ’abhinu, “our father,”
from the likeness of X, t, to 0%, a. In Gen 26


29 we have ¢azedh instead of yazedh, ‘to seethe,”
because of the likencss of VHT, ¢, to AY, y or
4. These, while in Blayney’s transcription of
Walton’s text, are not in Petermann or the Sam
Tg. The above examples are mistakes in Sam
MSS, but there are mistakes also in the MT. In
Gen 27 40 the RV rendering is ‘“When thou shalt
break loose, thou shalt shake his yoke from off thy
neck.” This rendering does violence to the sense
of both vbs. and results in a tautology. In the
Hiphil the first vb. rudh ought to mean “‘to cause
to wander,” not “to break Joose,” and the second
vb. pérak means ‘‘to break,” not “to shake off.”
The Sam has “When thou shalt be mighty, thou
shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.””’ The MT
mistake may be due to the confounding of %,
a, with bY , ¢, and the transposition of  , d, and
&,b. The vb. ’adhar, “to be strong,” is rare and
poetic, and so unlikely to suggest itself to reader
or scribe. The renderings of the LXX and Pesh
indicate confusion. There are numerous cases,
however, where the resembling letters are not in
the Sam script, but sometimes in the square char-
acter and sometimes in the angular. Some char-
acters resemble each other in both, but not in the
Samaritan. The cases in which the resemblance
is only in letters in the square seript may all be
ascribed to variation in the MT. Cases involving
the confusion of waéw and ydédh are instances in
point. It may be said that every one of the in-
stances of variation which depends on confusion of
these letters is due to a blunder of a Jewish scribe,
e.g. Gen 26 13, where the Jewish scribe has written
nbhith instead of n’bhdyéth (Nebaioth) as usual;
36 5, where the Jewish scribe has y*‘tsh instead of
y‘tish (Jeush), as in the Keré. In Gen 46 30, by
writing r°’ ath? instead of ra’tthi, the Jewish scribe in
regard to the same letters has made a blunder which
the Sam scribe has avoided. When d and r are
confused, it must not be ascribed to the likeness in
the square script, for those letters are alike in the
angular also. As the square is admitted to be later
than the date of the Sam script, these confusions
point to a MS in angular. There are, however,
confusions which apply only to letters alike in angu-
lar. Thus binyémim, invariably in the Sam Pent
Benjamin, binyaémin, is written Benjamin; also in
Ex 1 11 pithin instead of pithdm, but m and n
are alike only in the script of the Siloam inscription.
In Dt 12 21, the Sam has j20?, lshakken, as
the MT has in 12 11, whereas the MT has CW),
lasiim. A study of the alphabets on p. 2314 will
show the close resemblance between wéw and kaph
in the Siloam script, as well as the likeness above
mentioned between m and n. This points to the
fact that the MSS from which the MT and the Sam
were transcribed in some period of their history
were written in angular of the type of the Siloam
inscription, that is to say of the age of Hezekiah.


(b) Variations due to mistakes of hearing: The great
mass of these are due to one of two sources, either on the
one hand the insertion or omission of waw and yéddh, so
that the vowel is written plenum or the reverse, or, on
the other hand, to the mistake of the gutturals. Of the
former class of variations there are dozens in every
chapter. The latter also is fairly frequent, and is due
doubtless to the fact that in the time when the originals
of the present MSS were transcrihed the gutturals were
not pronounced at all. Gen 27 36 shows & and ™
interchanged, 7 and 7] in Gen 41 45, 7 for 7 in Gen
49 7, and & and Y in Gen 23 18, in many Sam MS3s,
put the result is meaningless. This inability to pro-
nounce the gutturals points to a date considerahly before
the Arab domination. Possibly this avoidance of the
gutturals became fashionable during the Rom rule, when
the language of law was Lat, a language without gut-
turals. A parallel instance may be seen in Aquila, who
does not transliterate any gutturals. This loss of the
gutturals may be connected with the fact that in Assyr
‘aléph is practically the only guttural. The colonists


Pent, Samaritan THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2316


from Assyria might not unlikely be unahle to pronounce
the gutturals.

(c) Changes due to deficient attention: Another cause
of variation is to he found in reader or scrihe not attend-
ing sufficiently to the actual word or sentence seen or
heard. This is manifested in putting for a word its
equivalent. In Gen 26 31 the Sam has [¢re'ehi, ‘to his
triend,” instead of as the MT? dhiw, ‘‘to his brother,’’ and
in Ex 2 10 Sam has na‘ar for yeledh in MT. In such
cases it is impossible to determine which represents the
original text. We may remark that the assumption of
Gesenius and of such Jewish writers as Kohn that the
MT is always correct is due to mere prejudice. More
important is the occasional interchange of YHWH and
‘Elohim, as in Gen 28 4, where Sam has YHWH and
the MT ‘Elohim, and Gen 7 1 where it has 'Eléhim
against YHWH in the MT. This last instance is the
more singular, in that in the 9th verse of the same chap-
ter the MT has ’Elshimand the Sam YHWH. Another
class of instances which may be due to the same cause is
the completion of a sentence hy adding a clause or, it
may be, dropping it from failure to observe it to be in-
complete, as Gen 24 45. If the MT he the original
text, the Sam adds the clause ‘‘a little water from thy
pitcher’; if the Sam, then the MT has dropped it.


(2) Changes due io intention.—(a) Grammatical:
The variations from the MT most frequently met
with in reading the Sam Pent are those necessary
to conform the language to the rules of ordinary
grammar. In this the Sam frequently coincides
with the Keré of the MT. The Kethibh of the MT
has no distinction in gender between hu’ in the 3d
personal pronoun sing.—in both masc. and fem. it
is ha’. The Sam with the K¢ré corrects this to h7’.
So with na‘ar, ‘a youth’’—this is common in the
Kethibh, but in the Keré when a young woman is in
question the fem. termination is added, and so the
Sam writers also. It is a possible supposition that
this characteristic of the Torah is late and due to
blundering peculiar to the MS from which the
Massoretes copied the K*thibh. That it is sys-
tematic is against its being due to blunder, and as
the latest Heb books maintain distinction of gender,
we must regard this as an evidence of antiquity.
This is confirmed by another set of variations be-
tween the Sam and the MT. There are, in the
latter, traces of case-endings which have dis-
appeared in later Heb. These are removed in the
Sam. That case terminations have a tendency to
disappear is to be seen in Eng. and Fr. The sign of
the accusative, ’éth, frequently omitted in the MT,
is generally supplied in Sam. A short form of the
demonstrative pronoun pl. (’é instead of ’élah) is
restricted to the Pent and 1 Ch 20 8. The syntax
of the cohortative is different in Sam from that in
the Massoretic Heb. It is not to be assumed that
the Jewish was the only correct or primitive use.
There are cases where, with colloquial inexactitude,
the MT has joined a pl. noun to a singular vb., and
vice versa; these are corrected in Sam. Conju-
gations which in later Heb have a definite meaning
in relation to the root, but are used in the MT of the
Torah in quite other senses, are brought in the Sam
Pent into harmony with later use. It ought in
passing to be noted that these pentateuchal forms
do not occur in the Prophets; even in Josh 2 15
we have the fem. 3d personal pronoun; in Jgs 19 3
we have na‘drah.

(b) Logical: Sometimes the context or the circum-
stances implied have led to a change on one side or another.
This may involve only the change of a word, as in Gen
9 2, where the Sam has ‘‘sixth’’ instead of ‘‘seventh"
(MT), in this agreeing with the LXX and Pesh, the
Jewish scribe thinking the ‘'sixth day’ could only he
reckoned ended when the ‘'seventh’’ had begun. In
Gen 4 8, after the clause, ‘And Cain talked with [said to]
Abel his brother,’’ the Sam, LX-X and Pesh add, “' Let us
go into the field." From the evidence of the VSS, from
the natural meaning of the vb. ‘amar, “to say,’’ not ‘to
speak,’ from the natural meaning also of the preposition
‘el, to,” not ‘with"' (see Gesenius), it is clear that the
MT has dropped the clause and that the Sam represents
the true text. IR£f this is not the case, itis a case of logical
completion on the part of the Sam. Another instance is


the addition to each name in the genealogy in Gen 11
10-24 of the sum of the years of his life. In the case of


the narrative of the plagues of Egypt a whole paragraph
is added frequently. What has heen commanded Moses
and Aaron is repeated as history when they obcy.

(c) Doctrinal: There are cases in which the text so
suits the special views of the Samaritans concerning the
sanctity of Gorizim that alteration of the original in that
direction may he supposed to be the likeliest explanation.
Thus there is inserted at Gen 20 67 a passage from Dt
27 2 slightly modified: Gerizim being put for Ebal, the
Object of the addition being to give the consecration of
Gerizim the sanction of the Torah. Kennicott, however,
defends the authenticity of this passage as against the
MT. Insertion or omission anncar to be the result of
doctrinal predilection. In u 25 4.5 the Sam_har-
monizes the command of Jeh with the action of Moses.
The passage removed has a bloodthirsty Moloch-like
look that might seem difficult to defend. On the other
hand, the Jewish hatred of idolatry might express itself
in the command to ‘'take all the heads of the people and
hang them up hefore the Lord against the sun,"’ and so
might be inserted. There are cases also where the
language is altered for reasons of propriety. In these
cases the Sam agrees with the Keré of the MT.


These variations are of unequal value as evi-
dences of the relative date of the Sam _recenston
of the Pent. The intentional are for this purpose
of little value; they are evidence of the views
prevalent in the northern and southern districts of
Pal respectively. Only visual blunders are of real
importance, and they point to a date about the
days of Hezekiah as the time at which the two re-
censions began to diverge. One thing is obvious,
that the Sam, at least as often as the MT, repre-
sents the primitive text.

(1) Statement of hypotheses.—The frequency with
which the points in which the Sam Pent differs from

the MT agree with those in which the
2. Relation LXX also differs has exercised scholars.
of Samari- Castelli asserts that there are a thou-
tan Recen- sand such instances. It may be noted
sion to LXX that in one instance, at any rate, a pas-

sage in which the Sam and the LXX
agree against the MT has the support of the NT.
In Gal 3 17, the apostle Paul, following the Sam
and LXX against He MT, makes the ‘430, years’
which terminated with the exodus begin with
Abraham. As arule the attention of Bib. scholars
has been so directed to the resemblances between
the Sam and the LXX that they have neglected the
more numerous points of difference. So impressed
have scholars been, esp. when Jews, by these resem-
blances that they have assumed that the one was
dependent on the other. Frankel has maintained
that the Sam was tr? from the LXNX. Against this
is the fact that in all their insulting remarks against
them the Talmudists never assert that the “Cu-
thaeans” (Samaritans) got their Torah from the
Greeks. Further, even if they only got the Law
through Manasseh, the son-in-law of Sanballat,
and even if he lived in the time of Alexander the
Great, yet this was nearly half a century before the
earliest date of the LXX. Again, while there are
many evidences in the LXX that it has been tr4
from Heb, there are none in the Sam that it has
been tr? from Gr. The converse hypothesis is
maintained by Dr. Kohn with all the emphasis of
extended type. His hypothesis is that before the
LXX was thonght of a Gr tr was made from a
Sam copy of the Law for the benefit of Samaritans
resident in Egypt. The Jews made use of this at
first, but when they found it wrong in many points,
they purposed a new tr, but were so much influ-
enced by that to which they were accustomed that
it was only an improved edition of the Sam which
resulted. But itis improbable that the Samaritans,
who were few and who had comparatively little
intercourse with Egypt, should precede the more
numerous Jews with their huge colonies in Egypt,
in making a Grtr. It is further against the Jewish
tradition as preserved to us by Jos. It is against
the Sam tradition as learned by the present writer
from the Sam high pricst. According to him, the


2317


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pent, Samaritan


Samaritans had no independent tr, beyond the fact
that five of the LXX were Samaritan. Had there
been any excuse for asserting that the Samaritans
were the first translators, that would not have dis-
appeared from their traditions.

(2) Review of these hypotheses ——The above un-
satisfactory explanations result from deficient ob-
servation and unwarranted assumption. That
there are many cases where the Sam variations
from the MT are identical with those of the LXX
isindubitable. It has, however, not been observed
by those Jewish seholars that the cases in which the
Sam alone or LXX alone, one or other, agrees with
the MT against the other, are equally numer-
ous. Besides, there are not a few cases in which
all three differ. It ought to be observed that the
cases in which the LXX differs from the MT are
much more numerous than those in which the Sam
differs from it. One has only to compare the Sam,
LXX and MT of any half a dozen consecutive chap-
ters in the Pent to prove this. Thus neither is
dependent on the others. Further, there is the un-
warranted assumption that the MT represents the
primitive text of the Law. If the MT is compared
with the VSS, it is found that the LXX, despite the
misdirected efforts of Origen to harmonize it to the
Palestinian text, differs in very many cases from the
MT. Theodotion is nearer, but still differs in not
afew cases. Jerome is nearer still, though even the
text behind the Vulg is not identical with the MT.
It follows that the MT is the result of a process
which stopped somewhere about the end of the 5th
cent. AD. The origin of the MT appears to have
been somewhat the result of accident. A MS which
had acquired a special sanctity as belonging to a
famous rabbi is eopied with fastidious accuracy,
so that even its blunders are perpetuated. This
supplies the Kethibh. Corrections are made from
other MSS, and these form the Keré. If our hy-
pothesis as to the age of the Nablus roll is correct,
it is older than the MT by more than half a millen-
nium, and the MS from which the LXX was tr4
was nearly a couple of centuries older still. So far
then from its being a reasonable assumption that
the LXX and Sam differ from the MT only by
blundering or wilful corruption on the part of the
former, the converse is at least as probable. The
conclusion then to which we are led is that of Ken-
nicott (State of Heb Text Diss., I], 164) that the
Sam and LXX being independent, “each copy is
invaluable—each copy demands our pious vener-
ation and attentive study.” It further ought to
be observed that though Dr. Kohn points to certain
cases where the differenee between the MT and the
LXX is due to confusion of letters only possible in
Sam character, this docs not prove the LXX to
have been tr’ from a Sam MS, but that the MSS
of the MT used by the LXX were written in that
script. Kohn also exhibits the relation of the Sam
to the Pesh. While the Pesh sometimes agrees
with the Sam where it differs from the MT, more
frequently it supports the MT against the Sam.

IV. Bearing an the Pentateuchal Question.—
Jos (Ant, X1, viii, 2) makes Sanballat contemporary
with Alexander the Great, and states that his son-
in-law Manasseh came to Samaria and beeame the
high priest. Although it is not said by Jos, it is
assumed by critics that he brought the completed
Torah with him. This Manasseh is according to
Jos the grandson of Eliashib the high priest, the
contemporary of Ezra and Nehemiah, and there-
fore contemporary with Artaxerxes Longimanuns.
Nehemiah (13 28) mentions, without naming him,
a grandson of Eliashib, who was son-in-law of San-
ballat, whom he chased from him. It is clear that
Jos had dropped a eentury out of his history, and
that the migration of Manasseh is to be placed not


c 335 BC, but e 485 BC. Ezra is reputed to he, if
not the author of the PC in the Pent, at all events
its introdueer to the Palestinians, and to have edited
the whole, so that it assumed the form in which we
now have it. But he was the contemporary of
Manassch, and had been, by his denunciation of
foreign marriages, the cause of the banishment of
Manassch and his friends. Is it probable that he,
Manasseh, would reecive as Mosaic the enactments
of Ezra, or convey them to Samaria? The date of
the introduction of P, the latest portion of the Law,
must aecordingly be put considerably earlier than
it is placed at present. We have seen that there
are visual blunders that can be explained only on the
assumption that the MS from which the mother
Sam roll was copied was written in some variety
of angular script. We have seen, further, that the
pecuharities suit those of the Siloam inscription
executed in the reign of Hezekiah, therefore ap-
proximately contemporary with the priest sent by
Esarhaddon to Samaria to teach the people ‘‘the
manner of the God of the land.” As Amos and
Hosea manifest a knowledge of the whole Pent
before the eaptivity, it would seem that this “Book
of the Law” that was “read [Am 4 5 LXX] with-
out,” which would be the source from which the
priest sent from Assyria taught as above ‘‘the
manner of the God of the land,” would contain all
the portions—J, E, D, and P—of the Law. If so,
it did not contain the Book of Josh; notwith-
standing the honor they give the conqueror of Ca-
naan, the Samaritans have not retained the book
which relates his exploits. This is confirmed by
the fact that the archaisms in the MT of the
Pent are not found in Josh. It is singular, if the
Prophets were before the Law, that in the Law
there should be archaisms which are not found in the
Prophets. From the way the Divine names are
interehanged, as we saw, sometimes ’Eldh7m in the
Sam represents YHWH in the MT, sometimes
vice versa, it becomes obviously impossible to lay
any stress on this. This conclusion is confirmed by
the yet greater frequency with which this inter-
change occurs in the LXX. The result of investi-
gation of the Sam Pent is to throw very consider-
able doubt on the validity of the eritical opinions
as to the date, origin and structure of the Pent.

V. Targums and Chronicle.—AS above noted, there
are two Tgs or interpretations of the Sam Pent, an Ara-
maicandan Arabic. The Aram. isa dialect related to the
Western Aram.; in which the Jewish Tgs were written,
sometimes called Chaldee. It has in it many strange
words, some of which may he due te the language of the
Assyr colonists, but many are the result of blunders of
copyists ignorant of the language. It is pretty close to
the original and is little given to paraphrase. fuch the
same may be said of the Arab. Tg. It is usually attrib-
uted to Abu Said of the 13th cent., hut_according to Dr.
Cowley only revised hy him from the Tg of Abulhassan
of the 11th cent. There is reference occasionally in the
Fathers to a Samaritikon which has bcen taken to mean
a Gr version. No induhitable quotations from it sur-
vive—what seem to be so heing really trs of the text of
the Sam recension. Thereis in Arab. a wordy chronicle
called ‘The Bock of Joshua.’’ It has heen edited hy
Juynboll. It may he dated in the 13th cent. More
recently a ‘‘ Book of Joshua”’ in Heb and written in Sam
characters was alleged to be discovered. It is, however,
a manifest forgery; the characters in which it is written
are very late. It is partly borrowed from the canonical
Josh, and_ partly from the older Sam Book of Joshua
with fabulous additions. The Chronicle of Ahulfatah
is a tolerably accurate account of the history of the
Pema after Alexander the Great to the 4th cent.


LiteRATuRE.—The text_in the Sam script is found in
the polyglots—Paris and London. Walton's text in the
London Polyglot is transcribed_in square characters by
Blayney, Oxford, 1790. The Eng. works of importance
of recent times are Mills, Nablus and the Samaritans,
London, 1864; Nutt, Fragments of a Sam Tg, Lon-
don, 1874; Montgomery, The Samaritans, Philadelphia,
1907 (this has a very full bibliography which in-
cludes articles in periodicals); Iverach Munro, The
Sam Pent and Modern Criticism, 1911, Lenden. In
Germany, Gesenius’ dissertation, De Pentateucht Samari-


Pentecost ©
Peraea


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2318


tant origine, etc, Jena, 1815, has not quite lost its valne;
Kohn, De Peniateucho Samaritano, Leipzig, 1865; Peter-
mann, Versuch einer hebr. Formenlehre nach der Aussprache
der heutigen Samaritaner, Leipzig, 1868. There are he-
sides arts. on this in the various Bib. Dicts. and Encs.
In the numerous religions and theological periodicals
there have been arts. on the Sam Pent of varying worth.
The Aram. Tg has been transcribed in square characters
and edited by Britill (Frankfort, 1875).
2 J. E. H. Taomson _
PENTECOST, pen’tékost: As the name indi-
cates (revrnxogry}, pentékosté), this second of the
great Jewish national festivals was


1. In the observed on the 50th day, or 7 weeks,
OT from the Paschal Feast, and therefore

in the OT it was called “the feast
of weeks.”’ It is but once mentioned in the his-


torical books of the OT (2 Ch 8 12.13), from
which reference it is plain, however, that the
people of Israel, in Solomon’s day, were perfectly
familiar with it: “offering according to the com-
mandment of Moses, on the sabbaths, and on the
new moons, and on the set feasts, three times
in the year, even in the feast of unleavened bread,
and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of
tabernacles.”” The requirements of the three great
festivals were then well understood at this time,
and their authority was founded in the Mosaic
Law and unquestioned. The festival and its
ritual were minutely described in this Law. Every
male in Israel was on that day required to appear
before the Lord at the sanctuary (Ex 34 22.23).
It was the first of the two agrarian festivals of Israel
and signified the completion of the barley-harvest
(Lev 23 15.16; Dt 16 9.10), which had begun at
the time of the waving of the first ripe sheaf of the
first-fruits (Lev 23 11). Pentecost, or the Feast
of Weeks, therefore fell on the 50th day after this
occurrence. The wheat was then also nearly every-
where harvested (Ex 23 16; 34 22; Nu 28 26),
and the genera] character of the festival was that
of a harvest-home celebration. The day was ob-
served as a Sabbath day, all labor was suspended,
and the people appeared before Jeh to express their
gratitude (Lev 23 21; Nu 28 26). The central
feature of the day was the presentation of two loaves
of leavened, salted bread unto the Lord (Lev 23
17.20; Ex 34 22; Nu 28 26; Dt 1610). The
size of each loaf was fixed by law. It must contain
the tenth of an ephah, about three quarts and a
half, of the finest wheat flour of the new harvest
(Lev 23 17). Later Jewish writers are very
minute in their description of the preparation of
these two loaves (Jos, Ant, III, x, 6). According
to the Mish (M¢nahaoth, xi.4), the length of the loaf
was 7 handbreadths, its width 4, its depth 7 fingers.
Lev 23 18 describes the additional sacrifices re-
quired on this occasion. It was a festival of good
cheer, a day of joy. Free-will offerings were to be
made to the Lord (Dt 16 10), and it was to be
marked by a liberal spirit toward the Levite, the
stranger, and orphans and widews (Dt 16 11.14).
Perhaps the command against gleaning harvest-
fields has a bearing on this custom (Lev 23 22).

The OT does not give it the historical significance
which later Jewish writers have ascribed to it.
The Israelites were admonished te remember their
bondage on that day and to reconsecrate themselves
to the Lord (Dt 16 12), but it does not yet com-
memorate the giving of the Law at Sinaior the birth
of the national existence, in the OT conception
(Ex 19). Philo, Jos, and the earlier Talm are all
ignorant of this new meaning which was given
to the day in later Jewish history. It originated
with the great Jewish rabbi Maimonides and has
been copied by Christian writers. And thus a
view of the Jewish Pentecost has been originated,
which is wholly foreign to the scope of the ancient
institution.


The old Jewish festival obtained a new signifi-
cance, for the Christian church, by the promised
outpouring of the Holy Spirit (Jn 16
7.13). The incidents of that memor-
able day, in the history of Christianity,
are told in a marvelously vivid and dra-
matic way in the Acts of the Apostles. The old ren-
dering of sumplérotsthai (Acts 2 1) by “was fully
come” was taken by Lightfoot (Hor. Heb.) to signify
that the Christian Pentecost did not coincide with
the Jewish, just as Christ’s last meal with His dis-
ciples was considered not to have coincided with the
Jewish Passover, on Nisan 14. The bearing of the
one on the other is obvions; they stand and fall
together. RV translates the obnoxious word simply
“was now come.” Meyer, in his commentary on the
Acts, treats this question at length. The tradition
of the ancient church placed the first Christian
Pentecost on a Sunday. According to John, the
Passover that year occurred on Friday, Nisan 14
(18 28). But according to Mt, Mk and Lk, the
Passover that year occurred on Thursday, Nisan
14, and hence Pentecost fell on Saturday. The
Karaites explained the shabbath of Lev 23 15 as
pointing to the Sabbath of the paschal week and
therefore always celebrated Pentecost on Sunday.
But it is very uncertain whether the custom existed
in Christ’s day, and moreover it would be impossible
to prove that the disciples followed this custom, if
it could be proved to have existed. Meyer follows
the Johannic reckoning and openly states that the
other evangelists made a mistake in their reckoning.
No offhand decision is possible, and it is but candid
to admit that here we are confronted with one of the
knottiest problems in the harmonizing of the Gos-
pels. See Caronotocy or Tup NT.

The occurrences of the first pentecostal day after
the resurrection of Christ set it apart as a Christian
festival and invested it, together with the com-
memoration of the resurrection, with a new mean-
ing. We will not enter here upon a discussion of
the significance of the events of the pentccostal
day described in Acts 2. That is discussed in
the article under Toncuss (q.v.).. The Lutherans,
in their endeavor to prove the inherent power of the
Word, claim that ‘‘the effects then exhibited were
due to the Divine power inherent in the words of
Christ; and that they had resisted that power up
to the day of Pentecost and then yielded to its in-
fluence.’ This is well described as “an incredible
hypothesis’ (Hodge, Systematic Theol., III, 484).
The Holy Spirit descended in answer to the explicit
promise of the glorificd Lord, and the disciples had
been prayerfully waiting for its fulfilment (Acts 1
4.14). The Spirit came upon them as ‘‘a power from
on high.” God the Holy Spirit proved on Pente-
cost His personal existence, and the intellects, the
hearts, the lives of the apostles were on that day
miraculously changed. By that day they were
fitted for the arduous work that lay before them.
There is some difference of opinion as to what is
the significance of Pentecost for the church as an
institution. The almost universal opinion among
theologians and excgetes is this: that Pentecost
marks the founding of the Christian church as an
institution. This day is said to mark the dividing
line between the ministry of the Lord and the min-
istry of the Spirit. The later Dutch theologians
have advanced the idea that the origin of the church,
as an Institution, is to be found in the establish-
ment of the apostolate, in the selection of the
Twelve. Dr. A. Kuyper holds that the church as
an mstitution was founded when the Master se-
lected the Twelve, and that these men were “quali-
fied for their calling by the power of the Holy
Spirit.” He distinguishes between the institution
and the constitution of the church. Dr. H. Bavinck


2. In the
NT


2319


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pentecost
Peraea


says: “Christ gathers a church about Himself, rules
it directly so long as He is on the earth, and appoints
twelve apostles who later on will be His witnesses.
The institution of the apostolate is an esp. strong
proof of the institutionary character which Christ
exe to His church on the earth” (Geref. Dogm., IV,
Whatever we may think of this matter, the fact
remains that Pentecost completely changed the
apostles, and that the enduement with the Holy
Spirit enabled them to become witnesses of the
resurrection of Christ as the fundamental fact in
historic Christianity, and to extend the church
according to Christ’s commandment. Jerome has
an esp. elegant passage in which Pentecost is com-
pared with the beginning of the Jewish national life
on Mt. Sinai (Ad Tabiol, § 7): “There is Sinai,
here Sion; there the trembling mountain, here the
trembling house; there the flaming mountain, here
the flaming tongues; there the noisy thunderings,
here the sounds of many tongnes; there the clangor
of the ramshorn, here the notes of the gospel-
trumpet.” This vivid passage shows the close
analogy between the Jewish and Christian Pentecost.
In the post-apostolic Christian church Pentecost
belonged to the so-called ‘“‘SSemestre Domini,” as
distinct from the ‘‘Semestre Ecclesiae,”
3. Later the church festivals properly so called.
Christian As yet there was no trace of Christmas,
Observance which began to appear about 360 AD.
Easter, the beginning of the pente-
costal period, closed the ‘“Quadragesima,’’ or
“Lent,” the entire period of which had been marked
by self-denial and humiliation. On the contrary,
the entire pentecostal period, the so-called ‘‘Quin-
quagesima,”’ was marked by joyfulness, daily com-
munion, absence of fasts, standing in prayer, ete.
Ascension Day, the 40th day of the period, ushered
in the climax of this joyfulness, which burst forth
in its fullest volume on Pentecost. It was highly
esteemed by the Fathers. Chrysostom calls it “the
metropolis of the festivals’? (De Pentec., Hom. ii);
Gregory of Nazianzen calls it ‘‘the day of the
Spirit” (De Pentec., Orat. 44). All the Fathers
sound its praises. For they fully understood, with
the church of the ages, that on that day the dis-
pensation of the Spirit was begun, a dispensation
of greater privileges and of a broader horizon and of
greater power than had hitherto been vonchsafed
to the church of the living God. The festival
“Octaves,’’ which, in accordance with the Jewish
custom, devoted a whole week to the celebration
of the festival, from the 8th cent., gave place to a
two days’ festival, a custom still preserved by the
Roman church and such Protestant bodies as follow
the ecclesiastical year. The habit of dressing in
white and of seeking baptism on Pentecost gave it
the name “Whitsunday,” by which it is popularly
known all over the world. Hrnry E. Doskrr
PENUEL, pé-nii’el, pen’t-el. See PENIEL.
PENOURY, pen’t-ri (W102, mahsér): In Prov
14 23, with sense of “poverty,” “want”: “The talk
of the lips tendeth only to penury.” In the NT
the word in Lk 21 4 (terépqya, hustéréma) is in
RV trd “want”? (of the widow’s mites).


PEOPLE, pé’p’1!: In_ EV represents something
over a dozen Heb and Gr words. Of these, in the
OT, BY, ‘am, is overwhelmingly the most common
(some 2,000 t), with Don}, le’ dm, and "a, gay, next
in order; but the various Heb words are used with
very little or no difference in force (e.g. Prov 14
28; but, on the other hand, in Ps 44 contrast vs
12 and 14). Of the changes introduced by RV the


only one of significance (cited explicitly in the Pref-
ace to ERV) is the frequent use of the pl. ‘“peoples”’
(strangely avoided in AV except Rev 10 11; 17
15), where other nations than Israel are in question.
So, for instance, in Ps 67 4; Isa 55 4; 60 2, with
the contrast marked in Ps 33 10 and 12; Ps 77
14 and 15, ete. In the NT, Ados, ddos, is the most
common word, with 8xos, échlos, used almost as
often in AV. But in RV the latter word is almost
always rendered ‘multitude,’ ‘people’ being
retained only in Lk 7 12; Acts 11 24.26; 19 26,
and in the fixed phrase “the common people’ (6
modvs 8ydos, ho polis échlos) in Mk 12 37; Jn 12
9.12 m (the retention of ‘people’? wonld have been
better in Jn 11 42, also), with “crowd” (Mt 9 23.
25; Acts 21 35). The only special use of ‘“‘people’”’
that calls for attention is the phrase “people of
the land.” This may mean simply “inhabitants,”
as Ezk 12 19; 33 2; 39 13; but in 2 K 11 14,
etc, and the parallel in 2 Ch, it means the people
as contrasted with the king, while in Jer 1 18, etc,
and in Ezk 7 27; 22 29; 46 3.9, it means the com-
mon people as distinguished from the priests and the
aristocracy. A different usage is that for the hea-
then (Gen 23 7.12.13; Nn 149) or half-heathen
(Ezr 91.2; 10 2.11; Neh 10 28-31) inhabitants
of Pal. From this last use, the phrase came to be
applied by some rabbis to even pure-blooded Jews,
if they neglected the observance of the rabbinic
traditions (ef Jn 7 49 AV). For ‘people of the
East”’ see CHILDREN OF THE East.
= Burton Scott Easton

PEOR, pé’or (WET, ha-pdr; Poydp, Phogér):

(1) A mountain in the land of Moab, the last of the
three heights to which Balaam was guided by Balak
in order that he might curse Israel (Nu 23 28).
It is placed by Onem on the way between Livias
and Heshbon, 7 Rom miles from the latter. Buhl
would identify it with Jebel el-Mashakkar, on which
are the ruins of an old town, between Wddy A‘yin
Misa and Wédy Hesban.

(2) A town in the Judaean uplands added by
LXX (@ayep, Phagér) to the list in Josh 15 9. It
may be identical with Khirbet Faghir to the S. of
Bethlehem.

(3) Peor, in Nu 26 18; 31 16; Josh 22 17, is
a Divine name standing for ‘‘Baal-peor.”’

(4) In Gen 86 39, LXX reads Phogér for “Pau”
(MT), which in 1 Ch 1 50 appears as ‘‘Pai.”

W. Ewina

PERAEA, pé-ré’a, (xj Tlepaia, he Peraia, Tepaios,
Peratos, Tlepatrys, Peraités): This is not a Scrip-
tural name, but the term used by Jos
to denote the district to which the
rabbis habitually refer as ‘“‘the land
beyond Jordan.” This corresponds
to the NT phrase péran tot Iorddnou (Mt 4 15;
19 1, etc). The boundaries of the province are
given by Jos (BJ, 111, iii, 3). In length it reached
from Pella in the N. to Machaerns in the 8., and
in breadth from the Jordan on the W. to the
desert on the E. We may take it that the southern
boundary was the Arnon. The natural boundary
on the N. would be the great gorge of the Yarmik.
Gadara, Jos tells us (BJ, IV, vii, 3, 6), was capital
of the Peraea. But the famous city on the Yarmak
was a member of the Decapolis, and so could hardly
take that position. More probably Jos referred
to a city the ruins of which are found at Jedur—
a reminiscence of the ancient name—not far from
es-Salt. The northern Gadara then holding the
land on the southern bank of the Yarmuk, the
northern boundary of the Peraea would run, as
Jos says, from Pella eastward. For the description
of the country thus indicated see GrLEap, 2.

In the time of the Maccabees the province was
mainly gentile, and Judas found it necessary to


1. The
Country


Perazim
Perfume


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2320


remove to Judaea the scattered handful of Jews to
secure their safety (1 Macc 6 45). Possibly under

Hyrcanus Jewish influence began to
2. History prevail; and before the death of Jan-

nacus the whole country owned his
sway (HJP, I, i, 297, 306). At the death of Herod
the Great it became part of the tetrarchy of An-
tipas (Ané, XV1], vii, 1). The tetrarch built a
city on the site of the ancient Beth-haram (Josh
13 27) and called it Julias in honor of the emperor’s
wife (Ant, XVIII, ii, 1; BJ, II, ix, 1). Here
Simon made his abortive rising (Ant, XVII, x, 6;
BJ, II, iv, 2). Claudius placed it under the gov-
ernment of Felix (BJ, II, xii, 8). It was finally
added to the Rom dominions by Placidus (BJ, IV,
vii, 83-6). Under the Moslems it became part of
the province of Damascus.

Peraea, ‘‘the land beyond Jordan,” ranked along
with Judaea and Galilee as a province of the land
of Israel. The people were under the same laws
as regarded tithes, marriage and property.

Peraea lay between two gentile provinces on the
E., as Samaria between two Jewish provinces on the
W. of the Jordan. The fords below Beisan and
opposite Jericho afforded communication with
Galilee and Judaea respectively. Peraea thus
formed a link connecting the Jewish provinces, so
that the pilgrims from any part might go to Jerus
and return without setting foot on gentile soil.
And, what was at least of equal importance, they
could avoid peril of hurt or indignity which the
Samaritans loved to inflict on Jews passing through
Samaria (Lk 9 52f; Ant, XX, vi, 1; Vita, 52).

It seems probable that Jesus was baptized within
the boundaries of the Peraca; and hither He came
from the turmoil of Jerus at the Feast of the Dedi-
cation (Jn 10 40). It was the scene of much quiet
and profitable intercourse with His disciples (Mt
19; Mk 10 1-31; Lk 18 15-30). These passages
are by many thought to refer to the period after
His retirement to Ephraim (Jn 11 54). It was
from Peraea that He was summoned by the sisters
at Bethany (ver 3). ;

Peraea furnished in Niger one of the bravest men
who fought against the Romans (BJ, II, xx, 4;
Iv, vi, 1). From Bethezob, a village of Peraea,
came Mary, whose story is one of the most appall-
ing among the terrible tales of the siege of Jerus
(BJ, VI, iii, 4). Jos mentions Peraea for the last
time (BJ, VI, v, 1), as echoing back the doleful
groans and outcries that accompanicd the destruc-
tion of Jerus. Ewine


PERAZIM, per’a-zim, pé-ra’zim, MOUNT ("3
DEI, har-p*rdcim): “Jeh will rise up as in mount
Perazim”’ (Isa 28 21). It is usually considered to
be identical with Baat-prrazim (q.v.), where
David obtained a victory over the Philis (2S 5
20; 1 Ch 14 11).


PERDITION, pér-dish’un (Gmédeaa, apéleia,
‘Tuin” or “‘loss,”’ physical or eternal): The word
“perdition” occurs in the Eng. Bible 8 t (Jn 17
12; Phil 1 28; 2 Thess 23; 1 Tim69; He
10 39; 2 Pet 37; Rev 17 11.18). In each of
these cases it denotes the final state of ruin and
punishment which forms the opposite to salvation.
The vb. apolliein, from which the word is derived,
has two meanings: (1) to lose; (2) to destroy.
Both of these pass over to the noun, so that apdleia
comes to signify: (1) loss; (2) ruin, destruction.
The former occurs in Mt 26 8; Mk 14 4, the
latter in the passages cited above. Both meanings
had been adopted into the religious terminology of
the Scriptures as early as the LXX. “To be lost”
in the religious sense may mean ‘‘to be missing” and
“to be ruined.” The former meaning attaches to


it in the teaching of Jesus, who compares the lost
sinner to the missing coin, the missing sheep, and
makes him the object of a seeking activity (Mt 10
6; 15 24; 1811; Lk 16 4.6.8.24.32;° 19 10).
“To be lost” here signifies to have become estranged
from God, to miss realizing the relations which man
normally sustains toward Him. It is equivalent to
what is theologically called ‘spiritual death.”
This conception of “Joss’’ enters also into the de-
scription of the eschatological fate of the sinner as
assigned in the judgment (Lk 9 24; 17 33), which
is a loss of life. The other meaning of “ruin” and
“destruction” describes the same thing from a
different paint of view. Apdleia being the oppo-
site of sdtéria, and sdléria in its technical usage de-
noting the reclaiming from death unto life, apoleia
also acquires the specific sense of such ruin and
destruction as involves an eternal loss of life (Phil
1 28; He 10 39). Perdition in this latter sense
is equivalent to what theology calls ‘‘eternal death.”’
When in Rev 17 8.11 it is predicated of “the
beast,’”’ one of the forms of the world-power, this
must be understood on the basis of the OT pro-
phetic representation according to which the com-
ing judgment deals with powers rather than
persons.

The Son of Perdition is a name given to Judas
(Jn 17 12) and to the Antichrist (2 Thess 2 3).
This is the well-known Heb idiom by which a person
typically embodying a certain trait or character or
destiny is called the son of that thing. The name
therefore represents Judas and the Antichrist (see
Man oF Sin) as most irrecoverably and completely
devoted to the final apaleia. GrBRHARDUS Vos

PERES, pé’rez. See MENE.

PERESH, pi'resh (WB, peresh, “dung’’): Son
of Machir, grandson of Manassch through his
Aramitish concubine (1 Ch 7 14.16).


PEREZ, pé'rez, PHAREZ, fa’rez (718, peree,
“breach’’): One of the twins born to Judah by
Tamar, Zerah’s brother (Geu 38 29.30). In AV
Mt 1 3 and Lk 3 33, he is called ‘Phares,’ the
name in 1 Esd 5 5. He is “Pharez’”’ in AV Gen
46 12; Nu 26 20.21; Ruth 4 12.18; 1 Ch 2 4.5;
41; 94. In AV and RV 1 Ch 27 3; Neh 11
4.6, he is “Perez.’”’ He is important through the
fact that by way of Ruth and Boaz and so through
Jesse and David his genealogy comes upward to the
Saviour. The patronymic ‘“Pharzite’’ occurs in
Nu 26 20 AV.

Perezites (Nu 26 20, AV “Pharzites’’).
patronymic of the name Perez.


Henry Wa.iacp
PEREZ-UZZA, pé-rez-uz’za. See Uzza.


The


PERFECT, pdr’fekt, PERFECTION, pér-fck’-
shun (Bey, shalém, DOTA, tamim; rédevos, téleios,
tehevotys, teleidtés): “Perfect” in the
OT is the tr of shalém, ‘finished,’
“whole,” “complete,” used (except
in Dt 25 15, “perfect weight’) of
persons, e.g. a ‘‘perfect heart,” i.e. wholly or com-
pletely devoted to Jch (1 K 8 61, etc; I Ch 12
38; Isa 38 3, etc); tamim, “complete,” “perfect,”
“sound or unblemished,” is also used of persons and
of God, His way, and law (“Noah was a just man
and perfect,” RVm “blameless” [Gen 6 9]; ‘As
for God, his way is perfect”’ [Ps 18 30]; “The law
of Jch is perfect” [Ps 19 7], ete); tam, with the same
meaning, occurs only in Job, except twice in Pss
(Job 11.8; 23, ete; Ps 37 37; 64 4);  kalil,
onpey and various other words are tr? “per-
ect.


1. In the
OT


2321


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Perazim
Perfume


Perfection is the tr of various words so tr4 once only:
kalii (ham 2 15); mikhlal, ** completeness" (Ps 50 2);
minleh, ‘‘possession”’ (Job 15 29, AV ‘neither shall_he
prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth,'’ ARV
“uelther shall their possessions be cxtended ou_the
earth,"’ m_‘‘their produce bend to the earth"; ERV
reverses this text_and_ m); tikhlah, ‘completeness,”
or ‘perfection’? (Ps 119 96); takhlith (twice), ‘‘end,”’
‘completeness (Job 11 7, ‘‘Canst thou find out the
Almighty unto perfection ?"’ 28 3, ‘“‘searcheth out all

erfection,’’ AV, RV ‘‘to the furthest bound"; cf 26 10,

V ‘‘unto the confines of light and darkness"); ¢tém,
“ perfect,'' ‘‘completeness’’ (Isa 47 9, AV ‘‘They shall
come upon thee in their perfection,"' RV “in their full
measure'’). RVm gives the meanlng of ‘tthe Urim
aud the Thummim" (Ex 28 30, etc) as ‘‘the Lights and
the Perfections."’


In the NT “perfect”’ is usually the tr of teleios,
primarily, “having reached the end,” “term,”
4e75.


limit,” hence “complete,” “full,”
2. Inthe “perfect”? (Mt 5 48, “Ye therefore
NT shall be perfect, as your heavenly

Father is perfect” ; Mt 19 21, “if
thou wouldst be perfect’; Eph 4 13, AV “till we
all come... . unto a perfect man,” RV “full-
grown’; Phil 3 15, “as many as are perfect,”


ARVm “full-grown”; 1 Cor 2 6; Col 1 28, “per-
fect in Christ”; 4 12; Jas 3 2 m, etc).


Other words are teleié6, ‘‘to perfect,’’ ‘to end,"’ ‘‘com-
plete’ (Lk 13 32, ‘The third day I am perfected,"" RVm
“end my course’; Ju 17 23, ‘‘perfected into oue’’;
2 Cor 12 9; Phil 3 12, RV ‘‘made perfect’; He 2 10,
etc); also epiteléd, ‘‘to bring through to an end"' (2 Cor
7 1, “perfecting holiness in the fear of God'’; Gal 3 3,
“Are ye now made perfect by the flesh?'’ AV, RV "'per-
fected in the flesh,"’ m '‘Do ye now make an end in the
flesh ?"'); katartizd, ‘to make quite ready,'’ ‘‘to make
complete,’’ is tré ‘‘perfect,"' ‘to perfect’’ (Mt 21 16,
“perfected praise’'; Lk 6 40, ‘Every one when he is per-
fected shalf be as his teacher"'; 1 Cor 1 10; 2 Cor 13
11, ‘'be perfected"; 1 Thess 3 10; 1 Pet § 10, RVm
“restore’'); akribés, ‘‘accurately,”’ ‘‘diligently,’’ is tr4
“perfect'’ (Lk 1 3, ‘‘ having had perfect understanding,"
RV ‘‘having traced ... . accurately"; Acts 18 26 AV,
RV ‘more accurately"’). We have also drtios, ‘‘fitted,"
“nerfected'' (2 Tim 3 17, RV complete’); pléréd, ‘'to
fill,’’ “to make full’ (Rev 3 2, ARV “’perfected,"" ERV


‘fulfilled ''); katartismés, ‘‘complete adjustment,"’
“perfecting'’ (Eph 4 12, “for the perfecting of the
saints").


Perfection is the tr of katdrtists, ‘‘thoroughadjustment,”
‘“fitness"’ (2 Cor 138 9, RV “perfecting''); of teletdsis
(He 7 11); of telecétés (He 6 1, RVm “full growth'’);
it is trd ‘’perfectness"’ (Col 3 14); “perfection” in Lk
8 14 is the tr of telesphoréé, ‘‘to bear on to completion
or perfection.” In Apoc ‘'perfect,’’ ‘‘ perfection," etc,
are for the most part the tr of words from ¢élos, "the
end,” e.g. Wisd 4 13; Ecclus 34 8; 44 17; 46 8,
suntéleia, ‘‘fullend''; 24 28; 50 11.

RV has ‘ perfect" for ‘upright’ (2 8 22 24.26 bis);
tor “‘sound’’ (Ps 119 80); for “perform” (Phil 1 6);
for “undefiled’”’ (Ps 119 1, m_ “upright in way y for
“perfect peace, and at such a time" (Ezr 12),
‘perfect and so forth’’; for ‘‘He maketh my way per-
tect’ (2 8S 22 33), ‘'He guideth the perfect in his way,"
m “or, ‘setteth free.'. According to another reading,
‘guideth my way iu perfectness’ ''; “shall himself perfect.”
m “restore,"’ for ‘‘make you perfect’ (1 Pet 5 10);
“nerfecter’’ for ‘‘finisher’’ (He 12 2); ‘‘perfectly”’ is
omitted in RV (Mt 14 36); ‘set your hope perfectly
on" for AV “hope to the end for'’ (1 Pet 1 13)


Perfection is the Christian ideal and aim, but
inasmuch as that which God has set before us is
infinite—‘Ye therefore shall be per-


3. The fect, as your heavenly Father is per-
Christian fect’? (Mt 5 48)—absolute perfection
Ideal must be forever beyond, not only any


human, but any finite, being; it is a
Divine ideal forever shining before us, calling us
upward, and making endless progression possible.
As noted above, the perfect man, in the OT phrase,
was the man whose heart was truly or wholly de-
voted to God. Christian perfection must also
have its seat in such a heart, but it implies the whole
conduct and the whole man, conformed thereto as
knowledge grows and opportunity arises, or might
be found. There may be, of course, a relative per-
fection, e.g. of the child_as a child compared with
that of the man. The Christian ought to be con-
tinually moving onward toward perfection, looking


to Him who is able to “make you perfect in every
good thing [or work] to do his will, working in us
that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ; to whom be the glory for ever and
ever. Amen” (He 13 21). W. L. WaLKER


PERFORM, pér-férm’ (Fr. parfournir, “to furnish
completely,’ “to complete,” ‘finish entirely’’):
In modern Eng., through a mistaken connection
with “form,” “perform” usually suggests an act in
its continuity, while the word properly should em-
phasize only the complction of the act. AV seems
to have used the word in order to convey the proper
sense (cf Rom 15 28; 2 Cor 811; Phil 1 6,
where RV has respectively “accomplish,” ‘‘com-
plete,” “perfect”’), but usually with so little justi-
fication in the Heb or Gr that ‘‘do” would have
represented the original even better. RV_ has
rarely changed the word in the OT, and such changes
as have been made (Dt 23 23; Est 1 15, etc)
seem based on no particular principle. In the NT
the word has been kept only in Mt 5& 33 and Rom
4 21, but in neither verse does the Gr accent the
completion of the act, in the former case apodiddmi
lit. “to give back,’’ in the latter poiéd, “‘to make,’
“to do,” being used.

_ Performance is found in AV Sir 19 20 (RV “‘do-
ing’); 2 Mace 11 17 (inserted needlessly and
omitted by RV); Lk 145 (RV “fulfilment’’);
2 Cor 8 11 (RV “completion’’).

Burton Scorr Easton

PERFUME, pir’fim, pér-fiim’, PERFUMER
(NVUP , ktoreth, WP, katar, lit. “incense’”’): The
ancients were fond of sweet perfumes of all kinds
(Prov 27 9), and that characteristic is still esp.
true of the people of Bible lands. Perfumed oils
were rubbed on the body and feet. At a feast in
ancient Egypt a gnest was anointed with scented
oils, and a sweet-smelling water lily was placed in
his hand or suspended on his forehead. In their
religious worship the Egyptians were lavish with
their incense. Small pellets of dried mixed spices
and resins or resinous woods were burned in special
censers. In the preparation of bodies for burial,
perfumed oils and spices were used. Many Bib.
references indicate the widespread use of perfumes.
Cant 7 8 suggests that the breath was purposely
scented; clothing as well as the body was perfumed
(Ps 45 8; Cant 3 6; 411); couches and beds
were sprinkled with savory scents (Prov 7 17);
ointments were used in the last rites in honor of
the dead (2 Ch 16 14; Lk 241; Jn 19 39).
The writer has in his collection a lump of prepared
spices and resins taken from a tomb dating from the
1st or 2d cent. AD, which was apparently fused and
run into the thoracic cavity, since an impression of
the ribs has been made on the perfume. Its odor
is similar to that of the incense used today, and it
perfumes the whole case where it is kept. The
above collection also contains a small glass vial in
which is a bronze spoon firmly held in some solidi-
fied ointment, probably formerly perfumed oil.
Perfumes were commonly kept in sealed alabaster
jars or cruses (Lk 7 38). Thousands of these
cruses have been unearthed in Pal and Syria.

Perfumes were mixed by persons skilled in the
art. In AV these are called “apothecaries” (MP1,
rakkah). The RV “perfumer’’ is probably a more
correct rendering, a3 the one who did the com-
pounding was not an apothecary in the same sense
as is the person now so designated (Ex 30 25.35;
37 29; Eccl 10 1).

Today incense is used in connection with all
religious services of the orienta] Christian churches.
Although there is no direct mention of the uses of
incense in the NT, such allusions as Paul’s “a sac-


Perfume-Making
Persecution


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2322


rifice to God for an odor of a sweet smell” (Eph 6 2;
Phil 4 18) would seem to indicate that it was used
by the early Christians.

The delight of the people of Syria in pleasant
odors is recorded in their literature. The attar of
roses (from Arab. ‘itr, “‘a sweet odor’’) was a well-
known product of Damascus. The guest in a
modern Syrian home is not literally anointed with
oil, but he is often given, soon after he enters, a
bunch of aromatic herbs or a sweet-smelling flower
to hold and smell. During a considerable portion
of the year the country air is laden with the odor of
aromatic herbs, such as mint and sage. The Arab.
phrase for taking a walk is shemm el-hawo’, lit. “smell
the air.’ See INCENSE; OIL; OINTMENT.

James A. PatcH

PERFUME-MAKING. See Crarts, II, 14.


PERGA, ptir’ga (Tlépyn, Pérgé): An important
city of the ancient province of Pamphylia, situated
on the river Cestris, 12 miles N.E. of
1. Location Attalia. According to Acts 13 13,
and History Paul, Barnabas and John Mark visited
the place on their first missionary
journey, and 2 years later, according to Acts 14
24.25, they may have preached there. Though
the water of the river Cestris has now been diverted
to the fields for irrigating purposes, in ancient times
the stream was navigable, and small boats from the
sea might reach the city. It is uncertain how an-
cient Perga is; its walls, still standing, seem to come
from the Seleucidan period or from the 3d cent. BC.
It remained im the possession of the Seleucid kings
until 189 BC, when Rom influence became strong
in Asia Minor. A long series of coins, beginning in
the 2d cent. BC, continued until 286 AD, and upon
them Perga is mentioned as a metropolis. Though
the city was never a stronghold of Christianity, it
was the bishopric of Western Pamphylia, and several
of the early Christians were martyred there. Dur-
ing the 8th cent. under Byzantine rule the city de-
clmed; in 1084 Attalia became the metropolis, and
Perga rapidly fell to decay. While Attalia was the
chief Gr and Christian city of Pamphylia, Perga
was the seat of the local Asiatic goddess, who cor-
responded to Artemis or Diana of the Ephesians,
and was locally known as Leto, or the queen of
Perga. She is frequently represented on the coins
as a huntress, with a bow in her hand, and with
sphinxes or stags at her side.
The ruins of Perga are now called Murtana. The
walls, which are flanked with towers, show the city
to have been quadrangular in shape.
2. The Very broad streets, running through
Ruins the town, and intersecting each other,
divided the city into quarters. The
sides of the streets were covered with porticos, and
along their centers were water channels in which a
stream was always flowing. They were covered
at short intervals by bridges. Upon the higher
ground was the acropolis, where the earliest city was
built, but in later times the city extended to the 8.
of the hill, where one may sce the greater part-of the
ruins. On the acropolis is the platform of a large
structure with fragments of several granite columns,
probably representing the temple of the goddess
Leto; others regard it as the ruin of an early church.
At the base of the acropolis are the ruins of an im-
mense theater which seated 13,000 people, the
agora, the baths and the stadium. Without the
walls many tombs are to be seen. E. J. Banks


PERGAMOS, _piir’ga-mos, or PERGAMUM,
par’ga-mum (4 Tlépyapos, hé Pérgamos, or rd Tlép-
yopov, 26 Pérgamon): Pergamos, to which the
ancient writers also gave the neuter form of the
name, was a city of Mysia of the ancient Rom


province of Asia, in the Caicus valley, 3 miles from
the river, and about 15 miles from the sea. The

Caicus was navigable for small native
1. History craft. Two of the tributaries of the

Caicus were the Selinus and the
Kteios. The former of these rivers flowed through
the city; the latter ran along its walls. On
the hill between these two streams the first city
stood, and there also stood the acropolis, the chief
temples, and the theaters of the later city. The
early people of the town were descendants of Gr
colonists, and as early as 420 BC they struck
coins of their own. Lysimachus, who possessed
the town, deposited there 9,000 talents of gold.
Upon his death, Philetaerus (283-263 BC) used
this wealth to found the independent Gr dynasty
of the Attalid kings. The first of this dynasty to
bear the title of king was Attalus I (241-197 BC),
a nephew of Philetaerus, and not only did he adorn
the city with beautiful buildings until it became
the most wonderful city of the East, but he added
to his kingdom the countries of Mysia, Lydia,
Caria, Pamphylia and Phrygia. Eumenes II (197-
159 BC) was the most illustrious king of the
dynasty, and during his reign the city reached
its greatest height. Art and literature were en-
couraged, and in the city was a library of 200,000
volumes which later Antony gave to Cleopatra.
The books were of parchment which was here
first used; hence the word “parchment,’’ which is
derived from the name of the town P. Of the
structures which adorned the city, the most re-
nowned was the altar of Zeus, which was 40
ft. in height, and also one of the wonders of the
ancient world. When in 133 BC Attalus III, the
last king of the dynasty, died, he gave his kingdom
to the Rom government. His son, Aristonicns,
however, attempted to seize it for himself, but in
129 he was defeated, and the Rom province of Asia
was formed, and P. was made its capital. The
term Asia, as here employed, should not be confused
with the continent of Asia, nor with Asia Minor.
It applied simply to that part of Asia Minor which
was then in the possession of the Romans, and
formed into the province of which P. was the capi-
tal. Upon the establishment of the province of
Asia there began a new series of coins struck at P.,
which continued into the 3d cent. AD. The mag-
nificence of the city continued.

There were beautiful temples to the four great
gods Zeus, Dionysus, Athena and Asklepios. To

the temple of the latter, invalids from
2. Religions all parts of Asia flocked, and there,

while they were sleeping in the court,
the god revealed to the priests and physicians by
means of dreams the remedies which were necessary
to heal their maladies. Thus opportunities of de-
ception were numerous. There was a school of
medicine in connection with the temple. P. was
chiefly a religious center of the province. A title
which it bore was “Thrice Neokoros,”’ meaning that
in the city 3 temples had been built to the Rom
emperors, in which the emperors were worshipped
as gods. Smyrna, a rival city, was a commercial
center, and as it increased in wealth, it gradually
became the political center. Later, when it became
the capital, P. remained the religious center. AS
in many of the towns of Asia Minor, there were at
P. many Jews, and in 130 BC the people of the city
passed a decrce in their favor. Many of the Jews
were more or less assimilated with the Greeks, even
to the extent of bearing Gr names.

Christianity reached P. early, for there one of the
Seven Churches of the Book of Rev stood, and
there, according to Rev 2 13, Antipas was mar-
tyred; he was the first Christian to be put to
death by the Rom state. The same passage speaks


2323


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Perfume-Making
Persecution


of P. as the place “where Satan’s throne is,’
probably referring to the temples in which the Rom

emperors were worshipped. During
3. Chris- the Byzantine times P. still continued
tianity as a religious center, for there a bishop
lived. However, the town fell into
the hands of the Seljuks in 1304, and in 1336 it was
taken by Suleiman, the son of Orkhan, and became
Turkish.

The modern name of the town, which is of con-
siderable size, possessing 15 mosques, is Bergama,
the Turkish corruption of the ancient name. One
of its mosques is the early Byzantine church of St.
Sophia. The modern town is built among the ruins
of the ancient city, but is far less in extent. From
1879 to 1886 excavations among the ruins were
conducted by Herr Humann at the expense of the
German government. Among them are still to be
seen the base of the altar of Zeus, the friezes of
which are now in the Pergamon Museum, Berlin;
the theater, the agora, the gymnasium and several
temples. In ancient times the city was noted for
its ointments, pottery and parchment; at present
the chief articles of trade are cotton, wool, opium,
valonia, and leather. Banks


PERIDA, pé-ri’da (NPD, peridha’, “recluse’’):
A family of “Solomon’s servants” (Neh 7 57). In
Ezr 2 55, a difference in the Heb spelling gives
“Peruda”’ for the same person, who is also the
“Pharida” of 1 Esd 6 33.


PERIZZITE, per'i-zit, pe-riz'It OTB, prizzi;
epetatos, Pherezaios): Signifies “‘a villager,” and
so corresponds with the Egyp fellah. Hence the
Perizzite 1s not included among the sons of Canaan
in Gen 10, and is also coupled with the Canaanite
(Gen 13 7; 34 30; Jgs 14). We hear, accord-
ingly, of Canaanites and Perizzites at Shechem
(Gen 34 30), at Bezek in Judah (Jgs 1 4) and,
according to the reading of LXX, at Gezer (Josh
16 10). In Dt 3 5 and 1S 6 18, where AV has
“unwalled towns” and “country villages,” LXX
has “Perizzite,”’ the lit. tr of the Heb being “cities
of the Perizzite”’ or “villager” and ‘‘village of the
Perizzite.”’ The same expression occurs in Est 9
19, where it is used of the Jews in Elam. In Josh
17 15.18, where the Manassites are instructed to
take possession of the forest land of Carmel, ‘‘Periz-
zites and Rephaim’’ are given as the equivalent of
“Canaanite.” A. H. Saycr


PERJURY, ptr’ji-ri.


1SHMENTS.


See Crimes; OaTH; Pun-


PERPETUAL, pér-pet’ti-al, PERPETUALLY,
pér-pet’t-al-i, PERPETUITY, par-péti'i-ti (0257,
‘aldm, TI¥2, necah, TAT, tamidh):

Perpetual is usually the tr of ‘dlém, properly, “a
wrapping up” or “‘hiding,”’ used often of time indefi-
nitely long, and of eternity when applied to God;
hence we have, “for perpetual generations” (Gen
9 12); “the priesthood by a perpetual statute” (Ex
29 9: cf 31.16; Lev 317; 24 9, etc); “placed
the sand for the bound of the sea, by a perpetual
decree, that it cannot pass it” (Jer 6 22, RVm “an
everlasting ordinance which it cannot pass’);
“sleep a perpetual sleep” (Jer 51 39.57); ‘Moab
shall be . . . . a perpetual desolation” (Zeph 2 9),
etc; necah, ‘“‘preéminence,” “perpetuity,” “eternity”
(often tr “for ever,” Ps 9 6), is tr4 “perpetual”
(Ps 74 3; Jer 15 18); ndcah (part.) (Jer 8 5);
taémidh, “continuance,” generally rendered ‘“con-
tinually,” but sometimes ‘‘perpetual” or ‘‘perpetu-
ally” (Ex 30 8; Lev 6 20).


Perpetually is the rendering of ‘adh, properly “prog-
ress," ‘“‘duration,’' hence long or indefinite time, eter-
nity (usually in AV rendered ‘for ever"), in Am 1 11,
“His anger did paar Por pomallye and of kél ha-yamim,

all the days’’ (1 9 3;_2 Ch 7 16, “my heart shall
be there perpetually''; cf Mt 28 20, pdsas tas héméras,
lit. ‘‘ail the days"'),

Perpetuity occurs in RV of Lev 25 23.30, “The land
shall not be seld in perpetuity,"’ “The house... . shall
be made sure in perpetuity.”

Perpetual is frequent in Apec, mest often as the tr of
aiénios and kindred words, ¢.g. Jth 13 20, ‘‘a perpetual

raisc’'; Wisd 10 14, ‘perpetual glory,'' RV ‘‘eternal";
Ecclus 11 33, ‘‘a perpetual blot,"’ RV ‘blame fer ever":
1 Macc 6 44, ‘“‘a perpetual name,"’ RV ‘everlasting’;
aénaos, ‘‘ever-flowing,'' occurs in Wisd 11 6 (o RV);
ee “constant'’ (Ecclus 41 6, “perpetual re-
preac

For “ perpetual” (Jer 50 5; Hab 3 6) RV has ‘‘ever-
lasting "3 for ‘‘the old hatred’ (Ezk 25 15), ‘‘pernetual
enmity'’; for ‘‘ perpetual deselation” (Jer 25 12), ‘ deso-


late fer ever,'’ m ‘Heb ‘everlasting deselations.’ ’’


W. L. WALKER
PERSECUTION, pdr-sé-ki’shun (Swypds, didg-
més [Mt 13 21; Mk 4 17; 10 30; Acts 8 1; 13 50;
Rom 8 35; 2 Cor 12 10; 2 Thess 1 4; 2 Tim 3
11)}):
1. Persecution in OT Times
. Between the Testaments
. Feretold by Christ
. A Test of Discipleship
A Means of Blessing
. Various Forms
In the Case of Jesus
. Instigated by the Jews
Stephen
. The Apostles James and Peter
. Gentile Persecution
Christianity at First Net a Forbidden Religion
12. The Neronic Persecution
(1) Testimony of Tacitus
(2) Reference in 1 Pet
(3) Tacitus’ Narrative
(4) NT References
13. Persecutien in Asia
14. Rome as Persecutor
15. Testimony of Pliny, 112 AD
16. 2d and 3d Centuries
17. Best Emperors the Most Cruel Persecutors
18. Causes of Persecution
19. 200 Years of Persecution
20. Persecution in the Army
21. Tertullian’s Apology
22. ‘The Third Race"
23. Hatred against Christians
24. The Decian Persecution
25. Libellt
26. The Edict of Milan
27. Results of Persecution


The importance of this subject may be indicated
by the fact of the frequency of its occurrence, both
in the OT and NT, where in AV the words “‘per-
secute,” “persecuted,” ‘persecuting” are found
no fewer than 53 t, “persecution” 14 t, and ‘‘per-
secutor” 9 t.

It must not be thought that persecution existed
only in NT times. In the days of the OT it existed


POOMNOM BUD


ind


too. In what Jesus said to the Phari-
1. Perse- sees, He specially referred to the mno-
cution in cent blood which had been shed in
OT Times those times, and told them that they


were showing themselves heirs—to use
a legal phrase—to their fathers who had persecuted
the righteous, “from the blood of Abel the righteous
unto the blood of Zachariah” (Mt 23 35).
In the period between the close of the OT and
the coming of Christ, there was much and protracted
suffering endured by the Jews, because
2. Between of their refusal to embrace idolatry,
the Testa- and of their fidelity to the Mosaic Law
ments and the worship of God. During that
time there were many patriots who
were true martyrs, and those heroes of faith, the
Maccabees, were among those who “know their God
.... and do exploits” (Dnl 11 32). ‘We have no
need of human help,’ said Jonathan the Jewish high
priest, ‘having for our comfort the sacred Scriptures
which are in our hands’ (1 Mace 12 9).
In the Ep. to the He, persecution in the days of
the OT is summed up in these words: “Others had


Persecution


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2324


trial of mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover
of bonds and imprisonment: they were stoned, they
were sawn asunder, they were tempted, they were
slain with the sword: they went about in sheep-
skins, in goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, ill-
treated (of whom the world was not worthy)” (He
11 36-38).

Coming now to NT times, persecution was

frequently foretold by Christ, as certain to come to
those who were His true disciples and
3. Foretold followers. He forewarned them again
by Christ and again that it was inevitable. He
said that He Himself must suffer it
(Mt 16 21; 17 22.23; Mk 8 31).
It would be a test of true discipleship. In the
parable of the Sower, He mentions this as one of the
causes of defection among those who
4. A Test are Christians in outward appearance
of Disciple- only. When affliction or persecution
ship ariseth for the word’s sake, immedi-
ately the stony-ground hearers are
offended (Mk 4 17).

It would be a sure means of gaining a blessing,

whenever it came to His loyal followers when they

were in the way of well-doing; and He
5. A Means thus speaks of it in two of the Beati-
of Blessing tudes, ‘‘Blessed are they that have been

persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven”; ‘Blessed are ye
when men shall reproach you, and persecute you
.... for my sake” (Mt 6 10.11; see also ver 12).

It would take different forms, ranging through

every possible variety, from false accusation to the

infliction of death, beyond which, He
6. Various pointed out (Mt 10 28; Lk 12 4),
Forms persecutors ‘are unable to go. The

methods of persecution which were
employed by the Jews, and also by the heathen
against the followers of Christ, were such as these:
(1) Men would revile them and would say all man-
ner of evil against them falsely, for Christ’s sake
(Mt 611). (2) Contempt and disparagement:
“Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and
hast a demon?” (Jn 8 48); “If they have called
the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more
them of his household!’ (Mt 10 25). (8) Being,
solely on account of their loyalty to Christ, forcibly
separated from the company and the society of
others, and expelled from the synagogues or other
assemblies for the worship of God: ‘Blessed are
ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall
separate you from their company, and reproach
you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of
man’s sake” (Lk 6 22); “They shall put you out
of the synagogues” (Jn 16 2). (4) Illegal arrest
and spohation of goods, and death itself.

All these various methods, used by the perse-
cutor, were foretold, and all came to pass. It was
the fear of apprehension and death that led the
eleven disciples to forsake Jesus in Gethsemane
and to flee for their lives. Jesus often forewarned
them of the severity of the persecution which they
would need to encounter if they were loyal to Him:
“The hour cometh, that whosoever killeth you shall
think that he offereth service unto God” (Jn 16 2);
“T send unto you prophets... .some of them
shall ye kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye
scourge In your synagogues, and persecute from
city to city’ (Mt 23 34).

_ In the case of Christ Himself, persecution
took the form of attempts to entrap Him in
His speech (Mt 22 15); the question-


7. Inthe ing of His authority (Mk 11 28);
Case of illegal arrest; the heaping of every
Jesus insult upon Him as a prisoner; false


accusation; and a violent and most
cruel death.


After Our Lord’s resurrection the first attacks |
against His disciples came from the high priest and
his party. The high-priesthood was


8. Insti- then in the hands of the Sadducees,
gated by and one reason which moved them to
the Jews take action of this kind was their ‘sore


trouble,’ because the apostles ‘pro-


claimed in Jesus the resurrection from the dead”
(Acts 4 2; 5 17). The gospel based upon the
resurrection of Christ was evidence of the untruth
of the chief doctrines held by the Sadducees, for
they held that there is no resurrection. But instead
of yielding to the evidence of the fact that the resur-
rection had taken place, they opposed and denied
it, and persecuted His disciples. For a time the
Pharisees were more moderate in their attitude
toward the Christian faith, as is shown in the case
of Gamaliel (Acts 5 34); and on one occasion they
were willing even to defend the apostle Paul (Acts
23 9) on the doctrine of the resurrection. But
gradually the whole of the Jewish people became
bitter persecutors of the Christians. Thus in the
earliest of the Pauline Epp., it is said, “Ye also
suffered the same things of your own countrymen,
even as they [in Judaea] did of the Jews; who both
killed the Lord Jesus and the prophets, and drove
out us, and please not God, and are contrary to all
men” (1 Thess 2 14.15).
Serious persecution of the Christian church began
with the case of Stephen (Acts 7 1-60); and his
lawless execution was followed by “a
9. Stephen great persecution” directed against
the Christians m Jerus. This “great
persecution” (Acts 8 1) scattered the members of
the church, who fled in order to avoid bonds and
imprisonment and death. At this time Saul sig-
nalized himself by his great activity, persecuting
“this Way unto the death, bmding and delivering
into prisons both men and women” (Acts 22 4).
By and by one of the apostles was put to death—
the first to suffer of ‘the glorious company of the
apostles” —James the brother of John,
10. The who was slain with the sword by Herod
Apostles Agrippa (Acts 12 2). Peter also was
James and imprisoned, and was delivered only
Peter by an angel (12 7-11).
During the period covered by the
Acts there was not much purely gentile persecution:
at that time the persecution suffered by the Chris-
tian church was chiefly Jewish. There
11. Gentile were, however, great dangers and risks
Persecution encountered by the apostles and by
all who proclaimed the gospel then.
Thus, at Philippi, Paul and Silas were most cruelly
persecuted (Acts 16 19-40); and, even before that
time, Paul and Barnabas had suffered much at
Iconium and at Lystra (Acts 14 5.19). On the
whole the Rom authorities were not actively hostile
during the greater part of Paul’s lifetime. Gallio,
for instance, the deputy of Achaia, declined to go
into the charge brought by the Jews at Corinth
against Paul (Acts 18 14.15.16). And when Paul
had pleaded in his own defence before King Herod
Agrippa and the Rom governor Festus, these two
judges were agreed in the opinion, “This man doeth
nothing worthy of death or of bonds” (Acts 26 31).
Indeed it is evident (see Ramsay, St. Paul the
Traveller and the Rom Citizen, 308) that the purpose
of Paul’s trial being recorded at length in the Acts
is to establish the fact that the preaching of the
gospel was not forbidden by the laws of the Rom
empire, but that Christianity was a religio licita, a
lawful religion.


Christianity, at first, not a forbidden religion.—This
Icgality of the Christian faith was illustrated and en-
forced by the fact that when Paul's case was heard and
decided by the supreme court of appeal at Rome, he was


2325


set free and resumed his missionary labors, as these are
recorded or referred to in the Pastoral Epp. ‘One
thing, however, is clear from a comparison of Phil with
2 Tim. There had been in the interval a complcte
change in the policy toward Christianity of the Rom
government. This change was due to the great fire
of Rome (July, 64). As part of the persecution which
then broke out, orders were given for the imprisonment
of the Christlan leaders. Poppaea, Tigellinus and their
Jewish friends were not likely to forget the prisoner of
two years hefore. At the time St. Paul was away from
Rome, but steps were instantly taken for his arrest.
The apostle was brought hack to the city in the autumn
or winter of 64... . . That he had a trial at all, instead
of the summary puulshment of his brethren, wituesses
to the importance attached by the government to a show
of legality in the persecution of the leader’ (Workman,
Persecution in the Early Church, 38). See Pasrorau
Eristues; Pau, trop ApostiE.


The legal decisions which were favorable to the
Christian faith were soon overturned on the occa-
sion of the great fire in Rome, which
12. The occurred in July, 64. The public
Neronic feeling of resentment broke out against
Persecution the emperor to such a degree that, to
avoid the stigma, just or unjust, of
being himself guilty of setting the city on fire, he
made the Christians the scapegoats which he
thought he needed. Tacitus (Annals xv.44) relates
all that occurred at that time, and what he says is
most interesting, as being one of the very earliest
notices found in any profane author, both of the
Christian faith, and of Christ Himself.


(1) Testimony of Tacitus.—What Tacitus says is that
nothing that Nero could do, either in the way of gifts to
the Pepuiace or in that of sacrifice to the Rom deities,
could make the people helieve that he was innecent of
causing the great fire which had consumed their dwellings.
Hence to relieve himself of this infamy he falsely accused
the Christians of being guilty of the crime of setting the
city on fire. Tacitus uses the strange expression ‘‘the
persons commonly called Christians who were hated for
their enormities.’"' This is an instance of the saying of
all manner of evil against them falsely, for Christ's sake.
The Christians, whose lives were pure and virtuous and
beneacent, were spoken of as being the offscouring of the
earth.

(2) References in 1 Pet.—The First Ep. of Peter is one
of the parts of the NT which seem to make direct refer-
ence to the Nerenic persecution, and he uses words (1
Pet 4 12ff) which may he compared with the narrative
of Tacitus: ‘‘Beloved, think it not strange concerning
the fiery trial among you, which cometh upen you to
prove you, as though a strange thing happened uuto
you: but insomuch as ye are partakers of Christ's suffer-
ings, rejoice. ... . If ye are reproached for the name of
Christ, blessed are ye; because the Spirit of glery and
the Spirit of God resteth upon you. ‘or let none of you
suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or an evil-doer, or as a
meddler in other men’s Matters: but if a man suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify
God in this name. For the time is come for judgment
to hegin at the house of God. .... Wherefore let them
also that suffer according to the will of God commit their
souls in well-doing unto a faithful Creator." ;

(3) Tacitus’ narrative-— How altogether apposite and
suitable was this comfortiug exhortation to the case of
those who suffered in the Neronic persecution. The
description which Tacitus gives is as follows: ‘‘ Christus,
the founder of that name, was put to death as a criminal
hy Pontius Pilate, procurator in the reign of Tiberius.
But the pernicious superstition, repressed for a time,
broke out again not only through Judaea, where the
mischief originated, but t. oe the city of Reme alse,
whither all things horrible and disgraceful fiow from all
quarters as to a common sink, and where they are en-
couraged. Accordingly, first, those were seized who con-
fessed they were Christians; next, on their information,
a vast multitude were convicted, not so much on the
charge of setting the city on fire, as of hating the human
race. And in their deaths they were made the subject
of sport, for they were covered with the skins of wild
beasts and were worried to death hy dogs, or nailed to
crosses, or set fire to, and when ae declined were
burned to serve for nocturnal lights. ero offered his
own gardens for that spectacle, and exhibited circus
games, indiscriminately mingling with the common people
dressed as a charioteer, or else standing in his chariot.
Whence a feeling of compassion arose toward the sufferers,
though guilty aud deserving to be made examples of hy
capital punishment, because they seemed not to be cut
off for the public good, but to be victims to the ferocity
of one man." See Nero.


(4) NT references.—Three of the books of the
NT bear the marks of that most cruel persecution


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Persecution


under Nero, the Second Ep. to Timothy, the First
Ep. of Peter—already referred to—and the Rev
of John. In 2 Tim, Paul speaks of his impending
condemnation to death, and the terror inspired by
the persecution causes “all” to forsake him when
he is brought to public trial (2 Tim 4 16).

The “fiery trial’ is spoken of in 1 Pet, and Chris-
tians are exhorted to maintain their faith with pa-
tience; they are pleaded with to have their “conver-
sation honest’? (1 Pet 2 12 AV), so that all accu-
sations directed against them may be seen to be
untrue, and their sufferings shall then be, not for
ill-doing, but only for the name of Christ (8 14.16).
“This important cp. proves a general persecution
(1 6; 4 12.16) in Asia Minor N. of the Taurus
(1 1; note esp. Bithynia) and elsewhere (6 9). The
Christians suffer ‘for the name,’ but not the name
alone (4 14). They are the objects of vile slanders
(2 12.15; 3 14-16; 4 4.15), ag well as of consider-
able zcal on the part of officials (6 8 [Gr 3 15)).
As regards the slanders, the Christians should be
circumspect (2 15.16; 3 16.17; 4 15). The per-
secution will be short, for the end of all things is at
hand (4 7.13; & 4)’’ (Workman, Persecution in the
Early Church, 354).

In Rev the apostle John is in ‘Patmos, for the
word of God and the testimony of Jesus” (Rev 1

9). Persecution has broken out among


18. Perse- the Christians in the province of Asia.
cution in At Smyrna, there is suffering, imprison-
Asia ment and prolonged tribulation; but


the sufferers are cheered when they are
told that if they are faithful unto death, Christ will
give them the crown of life (Rev 2 10). At Perga-
mum, persecution has already resulted in Antipas,
Christ’s faithful martyr, being slain (2 13). At
Ephesus and at Thyatira the CHrSHiae are com-
mended for their patience, evidently indicating
that there had been persecution (2 2.19). At
Philadelphia there has been the attempt made to
cause the members of the church to deny Christ’s
name (8 8); their patience is also commended, and
the hour of temptation is spoken of, which comes to
try all the world, but from which Christ promised
to keep the faithful Christians in Philadelphia.
Strangely enough, there is no distinct mention of
persecution having taken place in Sardis or in Lao-
dicea.
As the book proceeds, evidences of persecution
are multiplied. In 6 9, the apostle sees under the
altar the souls of them that were slain
14. Rome as for the word of God and for the testi-
Persecutor mony which they held} and those
souls are bidden to rest yet for a little
season “until their fellow-servants also and their
brethren, who should be killed even ag they were,
should have fulfilled their course’ (6 11). The
meaning is that there is not yet to be an end of
suffering for Christ’s sake; persecution may con-
tinue to be as severe as ever. Cf 20 4, “I saw
the souls of them that had been beheaded for the
testimony of Jesus, and for the word of God, and
such as worshipped not the beast,’’ for the perse-
cution had raged against all classes indiscriminately,
and Rom citizens who were true to Christ had suf-
fered unto death. It is to these that reference is
made in the words “had been beheaded,’ decapi-
tation being reserved as the most honorable form
of execution, for Rom citizens only. So terrible
does the persecution of Christians by the imperial
authorities become, that Rome is “drunken with
the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the
martyrs of Jesus’ (17 6; 16 6; see also 18 24;
19 2)


Paul’s martyrdom is implied in 2 Tim, through-
out the whole ep., and esp. in 4 6.7.8. The martyr-
dom of Peter is also implied in Jn 21 18.19, and in


Persecution


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2326


2 Pet 1 14. The abiding impression made by
these times of persecution upon the mind of the
apostle John is also seen in the defiance of the world
found throughout his First Ep. (2 17; 6 19), and
in the rejoicing over the fall of Babylon, the great
persecuting power, as that fall is described in such
passages as Rev 14 8; 15 2.3; 17 14; 18 24.

Following immediately upon the close of the NT,
there is another remarkable witness to the continu~
ance of the Rom persecution against the Christian
church. This is Pliny, proconsu! of Bithynia.

In 111 or 112 AD, he writes to the emperor Trajan
a letter in which he descrihes the growth of the Christian


faith. He goes on to say that ‘‘many of
all ages and of all ranks and even of both


16. Testi- Sexes are being called into danger, and will
mony of continue to he so. In fact the contagion
Pliny, of this superstition is not confined to the
112 AD cities only, hut has spread _to the villages


and country districts.'"’ He proceeds to
narrate how the heathen temples had been
deserted and the religious rites had been abandoned for
so long a time: even the sacrificial food—that is, the
flesh of the sacrificial victims—could scarcely find a
purchaser.

But Pliny had endeavored to stem the tide of the ad-
vancing Christian faith, and he tells the emperor how he
had succeeded in bringing back to the heathen worship
many professing Christians. That is to say, he had used
persecuting measures, and had succeeded in forcing some
of the Christians to abandon their faith. He tells the
methods he had used. ‘'The method I have observed
toward these who have been brought before me as Chris-
tlans is this. I asked them whether they were Chris-
tians. If they admitted it, I repeated the question a
second and _a third time, and threatened them with pun-
ishment. If they persisted I ordered them to be pun-
ished. For I did not doubt, whatever the nature of that
which they confessed might be, that a contumacious and
inflexible obstinacy ought to be punished. There were
others also, possessed with the same infatuation, whom,
because they were Rom citizens, I ordered to be sent
to Rome. But this crime spreading, as is usually the
case, while it was actually under legal prosecution, several
cases occurred. An anonymous information was laid
before me, containing the names cof many persons. Those
who denied that they were Christians, or that they had
ever bcen so, repeated after me an invocation of the gods,
and offered prayer, with wine and incense, to your
statue, which Phad ordered to he brought in for this very
purpose, along with the statues of the gods, and they
even reviled the name of Christ; whereas there is no
forcing, it is said, those who are really Christians into
any of these compliances: 1 thought it proper to dis-
charge them. Others who were accused by a witness
at first confessed themselves Christians, but afterward
denied it. Some owned indeed that they had been Chris-
tians formerly, hut had now, some for several years, and
a few above 20 years ago, renounced it. They all wor-
shipped your statue and the images of the gods. ....
I forbade the meeting cf any assemblies, and therefore
I judged it to be so much the more necessary to endeavor
to extort the real truth by putting to the torture two
female slaves, who were called deaconesses, yet I found
nothing but an absurd and extravagant superstition.”’

In Trajan’s reply to Pliny he writes, ‘‘They [the
Christians] cought not to be searched for. If they are
brought before you and convicted, they should be pun-
ished, hut this should be done in such a way, that he
who denies that he is a Christian, and when his state-
ment is poe by his invoking our deities, such a person,
although suspected for past conduct. must nevertheless
be forgiven, because of his repentance.”’


These letters of Pliny and Trajan treat state-
persecution as the standing procedure—and this not
a generation after the death of the apostle John.
The sufferings and tribulation predicted in Rev 2
10, and in many other passages, had indeed come to
pass. Some of the Christians had denied the name
of Christ and had worshipped the images of the em-
peror and of the idols, but multitudes of them had
been faithful unto death, and had received the
martyr’s crown of life.

Speaking generally, persecution of greater or less
severity was the normal method employed by the

Rom empire against the Christian


16. 2dand church during the 2d and the 3d
3d Cen- cents. It may be said to have come
turies to an end only about the end of the


3d or the beginning of the 4th cent.,
when the empire became nominally Christian.


When the apostolic period is left, persecution be-
comes almost the normal state in which the church
is found. And persecution, instead of abolishing
the name of Christ, as the persecutors vainly im-
agined they had succeeded in doing, became the
means of the growth of the Christian church and of
its purity. Both of these important ends, and
others too, were secured by the severity of the means
employed by the persecuting power of the Rom
empire. '
Under Trajan’s successor, the emperor Hadrian,
the lot of the Christians was fullof uncertainty: per-
secution might break out at any moment. At the
best Hadrian’s régime was only that of unauthorized
toleration. :
With the exception of such instances as those of
Nero and Domitian, there is the surprising fact to
notice, that it was not the worst em-


17. Best perors, but the best, who became the
Emperors most violent persecutors. One reason
the Most probably was that the ability of those
Cruel emperors led them to see that the


Persecutors religion of Christ is really a divisive

factor in any kingdom in which civil
government and pagan religion are indissolubly
bound up together. The more that such a ruler
was intent on preserving the unity of the empire,
the more would he persecute the Christian faith.
Hence among the rulers who were persecutors, there
are the names of Antoninus Pius, Marcus Aurelius
the philosopher-emperor, and Septimius Severus
(died at York, 211 AD).

Persecution was no accident, which chanced to

happen, but which might not have occurred at all.

It was the necessary consequence of
18. Causes the principles embodied in the heathen
of Per- Rom government, when these came
secution into contact and into conflict with the

essential principles of the Christian
faith. The reasons for the persecution of the Chris-
tian church by the Rom empire were (1) political;
(2) on account of the claim which the Christian
faith makes, and which it cannot help making, to
the exclusive allegiance of the heart and of the life.
That loyalty to Christ which the martyrs dis-
played was believed by the authorities in the state
to be incompatible with the duties of a Rom citizen.
Patriotism demanded that every citizen should
unite in the worship of the emperor, but Christians
refused to take part in this worship on any terms,
and so they continually lived under the shadow of a
great hatred, which always slumbered, and might
break out at any time. The claim which the Chris-
tian faith made to the absolute and exclusive loyalty
of all who obeyed Christ was such that it admitted
of no compromise with heathenism. To receive
Christ into the pantheon as another divinity, as one
of several—this was not the Christian faith. To
every loyal follower of Christ compromise with other
faiths was an impossibility. An accommodated
Christianity would itself have been false to the only
true Ged and Jesus Christ whom He had sent, and
would never have conquered the world. To the
heathen there were lords many and gods many, but
to the Christians there was but one God the Father
and one Lord Jesus Christ, the Saviour of the world
(1 Cor 8 5.6). The essential absoluteness of the
Christian faith was its strength, but this was also
the cause of its being hated.

“By a Correct instinct i -
cerned in the infant church their. only phe ooo wala
the new Hercules was yet in the cradle, they sent their
snakes to kill him. But Hercules lived to cleanse out
the Augean stables” (Workman, op. cit., 88).

‘For 200 years, to become a Christian meant the
great renunciation, the joining a despised and persecuted
sect, the swimming against the tide of popular prejudice,
the coming under the ban of the Empire, the possibility
at any moment of imprisonment and death under its


2327


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Persecution


most fearful forms. For 200 years he that would follow


Christ must count the cost, and be prepared to pay the

same with his liberty rah life. ‘or 200
19. 200 years the mere profcssion of Christianity
Years of was itself a crime. Christianus sum was


: almost the one plea for which there was
Persecution no forgiveness, in itself all that was neces-

sary as a ‘title’ on the back of the con-
demned. He who made it was allowed neither te present
apology, nor callin the aid ofa pleader. ‘Public hatred,’
writes Tertullian, ‘asks but one thing, and that not in-
vestigation into the crimes charged, but simply the con-
fession of the Christian name.’ For the name itself in
periods of stress, not a few, meant the rack, the blazing
shirt of pitch, the lion, the panther, or_in the case of
maidens an infamy worse than death’’ (Workman, 103).


_ Service in the Rom army involved, for a Christian,
increasing danger in the midst of an organized and
aggressive heathenism. Hence arose


20. Perse- the persecution of the Christian soldier
cution in who refused compliance with the idola-
the Army trous ceremonies in which the army


engaged, whether those ceremonies
were concerned with the worship of the Rom deities
or with that of Mithraism. “The invincible sav-
jour,’ as Mithra was called, had become, at the
time when Tertullian and Origen wrote, the special
deity of soldiers. Shrines in honor of Mithra were
erected through the entire breadth of the Rom
empire, from Dacia and Pannonia to the Cheviot
Hills in Britain. And woe to the soldier who re-
fused compliance with the religious sacrifices to
which the legions gave their adhesion! The Chris-
tians in the Rom legions formed no inconsiderable
proportion of “the noble army of martyrs,” it being
easier for the persecuting authorities to detect a
Christian in the ranks of the army than else-
where.
In the 2d and 3d cents. Christians were to be found
everywhere, for Tertullian, in an oftentImes_quoted
assage in his Apology, writes, ‘‘We live
21. Tertul- beue you in the world, making use of the
lian’ same forum, market, bath, shop, inn, and
8 all other places of trade. We sail with
Apology


you, fight shoulder to shoulder, till the


soil, and traffic with you'’; yet the very


existence of Christian faith, and its profession, continued
to bring the greatest risks. ‘‘ With the best will in the
world, they remained a peculiar people, who must be pre-
pared at any moment to meet the storm of hatred’’
(Workman, 189). For them it remained true that in one
way or another, hatred on the part of the world inevi-
tably fell to the lot of those who walked in the footsteps
of the Master; “All that would live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution ’’ (2 Tim 3 12).
The strange title, ‘the third race,” ppeapaply invented
by the heathen, but willingly accepted by the Christians
without demur, showed with what a bitter
22. “The


spirit the heathen regarded the faith of

° », Christ. ‘The first race’' was indifferently
Third Race” calied the Roman; Greek, or Gentile.
“The second race’'. was the Jews; while

“the third race’’ was the Christian. The cry in_the


circus of Carthage was Usque quo genus tertium ? ‘‘How
long must we endure this third race?”


But one of the most powerful causes of the hatred
entertained by the heathen against the Christians
was, that though there were no citizens
293. Hatred so loyal as they, yet in every case in
against which the laws and customs of the
Christians empire came into conflict with the will
of God, their supreme rule was loy-
alty to Christ, they must obey God rather than
man. To worship Caesar, to offer even one grain
of incense on the shrine of Diana, no Christian
would ever consent, not even when this minimum
of compliance would save life itself. ;

The Rom empire claimed to be a kingdom of
universal sway, not only over the bodies and the
property of allits subjects, but over their consciences
and their souls. It demanded absolute obedience

_to its supreme lord, that is, to Caesar. This obe-
dience the Christian could not render, for unlimited
obedience of body, soul and spirit is due to God
alone, the only Lord of the conscience. Hence it
was that there arose the antagonism of the govern-


ment to Christianity, with persecution as the inevi-
table result.


_ These results, hatred and persccution, were, in such
circumstances, inevitable; they were ‘‘ the outcome of the
fundamental tenet of primitive Christianity, that the
Christian ceased to be his own master, ceased to have
his old environment. ceased to hold his old connections
with the state; in everything he became the bond-servant
of Jesus Christ, in everything owing supreme allegiance
and fealty to the new empire and the Crucified Head.
‘We engage in these conflicts,’ said_Tertullian,‘as men
whose very lives are not our own. We have no master
but God’ "’ (Workman, 195).


The persecution inaugurated by the emperor
Decius in 250 AD was particularly severe. There
was hardly a province in the empire
24, The where there were no martyrs; but
Decian there were also many who abandoned
Persecution their faith and rushed to the magis-
trates to obtain their libelli, or certifi-
cates that they had offered heathen sacrifice.
When the days of persecution were over, these per-
sons usually came with eagerness to seek readmission
to the church. It was in the Decian persecution
that the great theologian Origen, who was then in
his 68th year, suffered the cruel torture of the rack;
and from the effects of what he then suffered he
died at Tyre in 254,


Many _ libelli bave been discovered in recent exca-

vations in Egypt. In_ the Expos T for January, 1909,
p. 185, Dr. George Milligan gives an ex- -

25. Libelli ample, and prints the Gr text of one of

- belt these recently discovered Egyp libelli.
These libelli are most interesting, illus-
trating as they do the account which Cyprian gives of
the way in which some faint-hearted Christians during
the Decian persecution obtained certificates—some of
these certificates being true to fact, and others false—
to the effect that they had_ sacrificed in the heathen
manner. The one which Dr, Milligan gives is as fellews:
*“To those chosen to superintend the sacrifices at the
village of Alexander Island, from Aurelius Diogenes, the
son of Satabus, of the village of Alexander Island, being
about 72 years old, a scar on the right eyebrow. Not
only have I always continued sacrificing to the gods, but
now also in your presence, in accordance with the decrees,
I have sacrificed and poured l\bations and tasted the
offerings, and I request you to countersign my statement.
May good fortune attend you. I, Aurelius Diogenes,
have made this request.’’

(2d Hand) ‘‘I, Aurelius Syrus, as a participant, have
certified Diogenes as sacrificing along with us."’

(ist Hand) ‘‘The first year_of the Emperor Caesar
Gaius Messius Quintus Trajan Decius Pius Felix Augus-
tus, Epiph. 2'' (= June 25, 250 AD).


Under Valerian the persecution was again very
severe, but his successor, Gallienus, issued an edict
of toleration, in which he guaranteed freedom of
worship to the Christians. Thus Christianity
definitely became a religio licita, a lawful religion.
This freedom from persecution continued until the
reign of Diocletian.

The persecution of the Christian church by the
empire of Rome came to an end in March, 313 AD,

when Constantine issued the document


26. The known as the “Edict of Milan,” which
Edict of assured to each individual freedom of
Milan religious belief. This document marks


an era of the utmost importance in the

history of the world. Official Rom persecution had

done its worst, and had failed; it was ended now;
the Galilean had conquered.

The results of persecution were: (1) It ralsed up wlt-

nesses, true witnesses, for the Christian faith. Men and


women and even children were among the
27. Results martyrs whom no cruelties, however re-


#P fined and protracted, could terrify into
of Per- denial of their Lord. 1t is to a large ex-
secution tent owing te persecution that the Chris-


tian church possesses the testimony of men
like Quadratus and Tertullian and Origen and Cyprian
and many others. While those who had adopted the
Christian faith in an external and formal manner only
generally went hack from their profession, the true
Christian, as even the Rom proconsul Pliny testifies,
could not be made to do this. The same stroke which
crushed the straw—such is a saying of Augustine’s—
separated the pure grain which the Lord had chosen.


Persecution
Persian Language


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2328


(2) Persecution showed that the Christian faith is im-
mortal even in this world. Of Christ’s kingdom there
shall be no end. ‘‘Hammer away, ye hostile bands, your
hammers break, God's altar stands." Pagan Rome,
Bahylon the Great, as it is called by the apostle John
in the Apocalypse, tried hard to destroy the church of
Christ; Babylon was drunk with the blood of the saints.
God allowed this tyranny to exist for 300 years, and the
blood of His children was shed like water. Why was it
necessary that the church should have so terrible and so
prolonged an experience of suffering? It was in order
to convince the world that though the kings of the earth
gather themselves against the Lord and against His
Christ, yet all that they can do is vain. God is in the
midst of Zion; He shall help her, and that right early.
The Christian church, as if suspended between heaven
and earth, had no need of other help than that of the un-
seen but Divine hand, which at every moment held it up
and kept it from falling. Never was the church more
free, never stronger, never more flourishing, never more
extensive in its growth, than in the days of persecution.

And what became of the great persecuting power, the
Rom empire? It fell hefore the barbarians. Rome is
fallen in its ruins, and its idols are utterly aholished,
while the barbarians who overwhelmed the empire have
become the nominally Christian nations of modern
Europe, and their descendants have carried the Christian
faith to America and Australia and Africa and all over
the world.

(3) Persecution hecame, toa large extent, an important
means of preserving the true doctrines of the person and
of the work of Christ. It was in the ages of persecution
that Gnosticism died, though it died slowly. It was in
the ages of persecution that Arianism was overthrown.
At the Council of Nicea in 325 AD, among those who
were present and took part in the discussion and in the
decision of the council, there were those who “hore in
their hodies the branding-marks of Jesus,'’ who had
suffered pain and loss for Christ's sake.

Persecution was followed hy these important results,
for Godin His wisdom had seen fit to permit these evils
to happen, in order to change them into permanent good;
and thus the wrath of man was overruled to praise God,
and to effect more ultimate good, than if the persecutions
had not taken place at all. What, in a word, could he
more Divine than to curb and restrain and overrule evil
itself and change it into good? God lets iniquity do
what it pleases, according to its own designs; but in per-
mitting it to move on one side, rather than on another,
He overrules it and makes it enter into the order of His

rovidence. So He lets this fury against the Christian
aith he kindled in the hearts of persecutors, so that they
afflict the saints of the Most High. But the church
remains safe, for persecution can work nothing but ul-
timate good in the hand of God. ‘‘The hlood of the mar-
tyrs is the seed of the church."’ So said Tertullian, and
what he said is true.

Persecution has permanently enriched the history of
the church. It has given us the noble heritage of the
testimony and the suffering of those whose lives would
otherwise have been unrecorded. Their very names
as well as their careers would have heen unknown had
not persecution “dragged them into fame and chased them
up to heaven.”’


Persecution made Christ very near and very pre-
cious to those who suffered. Many of the martyrs
bore witness, even when in the midst of the most
cruel torments, that they felt no pain, but that
Christ was with them. Instances to this effect
could be multiplied. Persecution made them feel
how true Christ’s words were, that even as He was
not of the world, so they also were not of it. If
they had been of the world, the world would love
its own, but because Christ had chosen them out of
the world, therefore the world hated them. They
were not greater than their Lord. If men had per-
secuted Jesus, they would also persecute His true
disciples. But though they were persecuted, they
were of good cheer, Christ had overcome the world;
He was with them; He enabled them to be faithful
unto death. He had promised them the crown of
life.

Browning's heautiful lines describe what was a com-
mon experience of the martyrs, how Christ ‘‘in them’!
and ‘‘with them,"’ ‘‘quenched the power of fire,” and
made them more than conquerors:

“T was some time in heing hurned,
But at the close a Hand came through
The fire ahove my head, and drew
My soul to Christ, whom now I see.
Sergius, a hrother, writes for me


This testimony on the wall—
For me, I have forgot it all.”


JOHN RUTHERFURD


.ATOALS,


PERSEPOLIS, pér-scp’é-lis (2 Mace 9 2; Tlepeé-
Persépolis, Tlepratwokts, Persaipolis, in
Ptolemy Ilepoéarodts, Persépolis; orig-
1. Location inal Pers name unknown; Pahlavi
Stakhr, now Istakhr and Chihil Minar,
“Forty Turrets’): The ruins of Persepolis lie about
35 miles N.E. of Shiraz and some 40 miles 8. of the
ruins of Pasargadae. oa
The magnificent palace of which such striking
remains are still visible (Takht i Jamshid) was built
by Darius and Xerxes of white marble
2. History and black stone. The city was cap-
tured, pillaged and burnt by Alex-
ander in 324 BC, most of the inhabitants being
massacred or enslaved. Much of the treasure of
the Pers kings was found there. Curtius says the
palace was never rebuilt. Antiochus Epiphanes
(166 BC) tried but failed to plunder the temple
(of Anaitis, Andhita?) there (2 Macc 9 2; per-
haps this is the incident referred to in 1 Mace
6 1ff, and Polyb. xxxi.ll). At Persepolis were the
sepulchers of the Achaemenian kings (except
Cyrus). Long and important inscriptions of Darius
and Xerxes are found at Persepolis and the neigh-
boring Nagsh i Rustam, in cuneiform characters
and in the Achaemenian Pers, Assyr and neo-
Susian tongues (published by Spiegel, Rawlinson
and Weisbach). Clitarchus first among Europeans
mentions the city. The writer of this article visited
itin 1892. Not now inhabited.


LireraturRe.— Inscriptions (as above), Arrian, Curtius,
Polybius, Pliny, Diod. Siculus, mediaeval and modern
travelers.

W. Sr. Crarr TrspaLu

PERSEUS, par’sis, ptir’sé-us (Ilepoeds, Persetis):
In 1 Mace 8 5 the conquest of ‘Perseus, king of the
Citims’” (RV “king of Chittim’’) was part of the
‘fame of the Romans” which reached the ears of
Judas. This Perseus, the son and successor of
Philip III of Macedonia, came to the throne in 178
BC and was the last king of Macedonia. In 171
BC began the war with Rome which ended in his
disastrous defeat and capture at Pydna, 168 BC
(to which 1 Macc 8 5 refers), by L. Aemilius Pau-
lus. Macedonia soon became a Rom province.
Perseus was led to Rome to grace the triumph of
his conqueror, by whose clemency he was spared,
and died in captivity at Rome (Polyb. xxix.17;
Livy xliv. 40 ff).

Kittim or Chittim, properly of the people of the town
of Citium in Cyprus, then signifying Cyprians, and ex-
tended by Jewish writers (Gen 10 4; Nu 24 24; Isa
93 1; Jer 2 10; Ezk 27 6; Dnl 11 30; Jos, Ant, I, vi)
to include the coasts of Greece generally, is here applied


to Macedonia. In I Macc 1 I Macedonia (or Greece)
is called ‘‘the land of Chittim.”’
S. Ancus


PERSEVERANCE, pir-sé-vér’ans: The word
occurs only once in AV (Eph 6 18), where it refers
quite simply to persistence in prayer. In theology
(esp. in the phrase “final perseverance’) the word
has come to denote a special persistency, the undying
continuance of the new life (manifested in faith and
holiness) given by the Spirit of God to man. It is
questioned whether such imparted life is (by its
nature, or by the law of its impartation) necessarily
permanent, indestructible, so that the once regen-
erate and believing man has the prospect of final
glory infallibly assured. This is not the place to


| trace the history of a great and complex debate.


It is more fitting here to point to the problem as
connected with that supreme class of truths in which,
because of our necessary mental limits, the entire
truth can only be apprehended as the unrevealed but
certain harmony of seeming contradictions. Scrip-
ture on the one hand abounds with assurances of
“perseverance”’ as a fact, and largely intimates that
an exulting anticipation of it is the intended ex-
perience of the believer (see Jn 10 28 above all,


2329


and cf among other passages Rom 8 31-37; 1 Pet
18.9). On the other hand, we find frequent and
urgent warnings and cautions (see e.g. 1 Cor 8
11; 9 27). The teacher dealing with actual cases,
as in pastoral work, should be ready to adopt both
classes of utterances, each with its proper appli-
cation; applying the first, e.g., to the true but timid
disciple, the latter to the self-confident. Mean-
while Scripture on the whole, by the manner and
weight of its positive statements, favors a humble
belief of the permanence, in the plan of God, of the
once-given new life. It is as if it laid down ‘‘perse-
verance” as the Divine rule for the Christian,
while the negative passages came in to caution
the man not to deceive himself with appearances,
nor to let any belief whatever palliate the guilt
and minimize the danger of sin. In the biog-
raphies of Seripture, it is noteworthy that no person
appears who, at one time certainly a saint, was later
certainly a castaway. The awful words of He 6
4-6; 10 26.27 appear to deal with cases (such as
Balaam’s) of much light but no loving life, and so
are not precisely in point. Upon the whole sub-
ject, it is important to make “the Perseverance of
the Saviour” our watchword rather than “the Per-
severance of the saint.” Hanpitey DuneLtm


PERSIA, pit’sha,-zha (O72, pdras; Tlepois,
Persis; in Assyr Parsu, Parsua; in Achaemenian
Pers Parsa, modern Fars): In the Bible (2 Ch 36
20.22.23; Ear 1 1.8; Est 1 3.14.18; 10 2; Ezk 27
10; 38 5; Dnl 8 20; 10 1; 11 2) this name denotes
properly the modern province of Fars, not the whole
Pers empire. The latter was by its people called
Airyana, the present Irin (from the Skt. word drya,
‘noble’); and even now the Persians never call
their country anything but Iran, never ‘‘Persia.”
The province of Persis lay to the B. of Blam (Susi-
ana), and stretched from the Pers Gulf to the Great
Salt Desert, having Carmania on the 8.E. Its
chief cities were Persepolis and Pasargadae. Along
the Pers Gulf the land is low, hot and unhealthy,
but it soon begins to rise as one travels inland.
Most of the province consists of high and steep
mountains and plateaus, with fertile valleys. The
table-lands in which lie the modern city of Shiraz
and the ruins of Persepolis and Pasargadae are well
watered and productive. Nearer the desert, how-
ever, cultivation grows scanty for want of water.
Persis was doubtless in early times included in Elam,
and its population was then either Semitic or allied
to the Accadians, who founded more than one state
in the Bab plain. The Aryan Persians seem to
have occupied the country in the 8th or 9th cent.
BC. W. St. Cuarr Tispann


PERSIAN, ptr’shan, -zhan, LANGUAGE AND
LITERATURE (ANCIENT):


J. Lanevace (Introductory)
Dialects
II. Ovp Persian INscriPTions
Ill. Mepic Diavect |
1. Ordinary Avestic
2. Gathic
IV. ZoRoastER
1. His Date, etc
2. Date of Avesta
3. Divisions of the Present Avesta
(1) The Yasna
3} The Vispered
3) The Vendiddd
(4) The Yashts
(5) The Khorda Avesta
Vv. Pauvavi
1. Literature
2. Comparison
LitERATURE


I. Language (Introductory).—The Perslanguage,
ancient and modern alike, is an Aryan tongue. In
its ancient forms it is more closely connected with
Vedic Sanskrit than with any other language except


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Persecution
Persian Language


Armenian. Most of its roots are to be found also in
pene, Gr, Lat and other tongues of the same
stock.

There were two main dialects in the ancient lan-
guage of Iran (Airyanem), (1) that of the Persians
proper, and (2) that of the Medes.
The former is known to us from the
inscriptions of the Achaemenian kings,
the latter from the Avesta, and a few Median words
preserved for us by Herodotus and other Gr writers.

i. Old Persian Inscriptions.—These fall between
550 and 330 BC, and contain about 1,000 lines and
400 words. They are carved upon the rocks in


Dialects


Ayton’.
aes
Lab.


Part of Rock of Behistan.


a cuneiform character, simplified from that of the
neo-Susian, which again comes from the neo-
Bab syllabary. In Old Pers inscriptions only 44
characters are employed, of which 7 are ideographs
or contractions. The remaining 37 phonetic signs
are syllabic, each consisting of an open syllable and
not merely of asingle letter, except in case of separate
vowels. Thesyllabary, though much simpler than
any other cuneiform system, does not quite attain
therefore to bemg an alphabet. It was written from
left to right, like the other cuneiform syllabaries.
Of Cyrus the Great only one Pers sentence has been
found: Adam Kurush Khshdyathiya Hakhamani-
shiya, “I am Cyrus the King, the Achaemenian.”
Darius I has left us long inscriptions, at Behistan
(Besitiin), Mt. Alvand, Persepolis, Naqsh 1 Rustam,
etc, and one at Suez, the latter mentioning his con-
quest of Egypt and the construction of the first (?)
Suez canal:

Adam niyashtayam imam yuviyam kafitanaiy hacd
Pirdva nama rauta tya Mudrayaty danauratity abiy daraya
tya hacd Parsd aiti,

(‘Lcommanded to dig this canal from the river named


the Nile, which flows through Egypt, to the sca which
comes from Persia.’’)


We have also inscriptions of Xerxes at Persepolis
and many short ones of Artaxerxes 1, Artaxerxes
Mnémon, and Artaxcrxes Ochus. From them. all
taken together we learn much concerning the his-
tory and the religion of the Achacmenian period.


Persian Language
Persian Religion


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2330


It is from Achaemenian or Old Pers, and not from
the Medic or Avestic, that modern Pers has sprung
through Pahlavi and Dari as intermediate stages.
This is probably due to the political supremacy
which the Persians under the Achaemenides gained
over the Medes. The few words in the inscriptions
which might otherwise be doubtful can be under-
stood through comparison with Armenian and even
with the modern Pers, e.g. yuviya in the above in-
scription is the modern vulgar Pers jib.

I, Medic Dialect.—The Medic dialect is repre-
sented in literature by the Avesta or sacred books


of the Zoroastrians (Parsis). The
1. Ordi- word Avesta docs not occur in the
nary book itself and is of uncertain meaning
Avestic and signification. It is probably the


Abashta of Beh. Inscr., IV, 64, and
means either (1) an interview, meeting (Skt. avashta,
“appearance before a judge’; Av. ava-std, “to
stand near’), or (2) a petition (Pahl. apastan,
‘petition’; Arm. apastan, “refuge,” “asylum’’),
in either case deriving its name from Zoroaster’s
drawing near to Ahura Mazda in worship.


Yezdikhast.


This dialeet represents a much greater decadence in
grammar and vocabulary than does the Old Pers.
Many of its consonants and most of its vowels are weak-
ened. Its verbs have almost entirely lost the augment;
its declensional system shows extreme confusion. It
stands to Old Pers grammatically somewhat as Eng. does
to Ger. Its alphahet, consisting of 43 letters, is derived
from the Syr (propane the Estrangela), and is written
trom right to left. As a specimen of the language of
most of the Avesta we give the following extract (Yasna
LXIV, 15(61}):

Daidi mot, yé gam tashé apasca urvaresca
Ameretaid, haurvati, Spénista Mainytt Mazda,
Tévishi, utayuiti, Manahhad Vohi, sénhé.

(‘Give me, O thou who didst make the bull {earth},
and the waters and the plants, immortality, health—
most Bountiful Spirit, Mazda—strength, might, through
V6éhu Mano, I say.’’)

There is a sub-dialect of Medic (Avestic) known as the
Gatha-dialect, from the fact that the Gathas, or ‘‘Hymns”

(Yasna XXVILI-XXXIV, XLII-L, LII),
2. Gathic and also the prayers (Yathd Aha Vairyé,
Y Ashem_V6hu, Atryamad Ishyé, and origi-
nally Venhé Hdtam, and a tew scattered
passages elsewhere) are composed in it. This represents,
speaking generally, an older form of the Avestic. It is
probahly the old language of Bactria or of Margiana.
Gatha I, 2, runs thus:
Yé 05, Mazdé Ahuré, patrijasai Vaha Mananha,
Maibyo davoi ahvd (astvatasca hyatca mananho)
Ayaptd Ashat hacd, yais rapenhté daidit hvathra.

('To me, O Ahura Mazda, who approach you two
through Vohu Mano, grant the benefits from Asha,
[those] of both worlds, both of the material [world] and
of that which is of the spirit, through which (benefits}
may [Asha] place in glory those who please him."')

The meter of the Gathds, like that of the other Avestic
poems, is hased on the number of syllahles in a line, with
due regard to the caesura. But the condition of the
text is such that there is great diffieulty in recovering
the original reading with sufficlent accuraey to enable
us to lay down rules ou the subject with any certainty.


The first Géthé is composed of strophes of 3 lines each
(as above). Each line contains 16 syllables, with a
caesura after the 7th foot.


IV. Zoroaster.—Many of the Gathds are gener-~
ally ascribed to Zoroaster himself, the rest to his
earliest disciples. They compose the
most ancient part of the Avesta. It
is now becoming a matter of very
great probability that Zoroaster lived
at earliest in the middle of the 7th cent. BC, more
probably a century later. The Arta Viraf Namak
says that his religion remained pure for 300 years,
and connects its corruption with the alleged de-
struction of much of the Avesta in the palace burned
by Alexander at Persepolis, 324 BC. This tradi-
tional indication of date is confirmed by other evi-
dence. Zoroaster’s prince Vishtdspa (in Gr_Hus-
tdéspés) bears the same name as the father of Darius
I, and was probably the same person. Vishtdspa’s
queen Hutaosa, who also protected and favored
Zoroaster, bears the same name (in Gr_ Atéssa) as
Cambyses’ sister who afterward married Darius,
and probably belonged to the same family. Zoro-
astrianism comes to the fore under Darius, whereas
Cyrus in his inscriptions speaks as a decided poly-
theist. Hence we conclude that the earliest part
of the Avesta belongs to c 550 BC. Of Zoroaster
himself we learn much from the Avesta, which traces
his genealogy back for 10 generations. It mentions
his wife’s name (Hv6vi), and tells of his 3 sons and
3 daughters. His first disciple was Frashaotra, his
wife’s natural uncle. His own name means ‘‘Owner
of the yellow camel,” and has none of the higher
meanings sometimes assigned to it by those who
would deny his existence. Tradition says he was
born at Ragha (Raga, Rat), about 54 miles S. of
the present Tehran, though some think his native
place was Western Atropatene (Azarbaijan). Re-
jected by his own tribe, the Magi, he went to Vish-
taspa’s court in Bactria. The faith which he
taught spread to the Pers court (very naturally, if
Vishtaspa was identical with Darius’ father) and
thence thronghout the country. Tradition ( Yasht
XIX, 2, etc) says that the Avesta was revealed to
Zoroaster on Mt. Ushi-darena (“intellect-holding”)
in Sistan. But it is not the composition of one
man or of one age.

Herodotus makes no mention of Zoroaster, but
speaks of the Magi (whom he calls a Median tribe

[i.101]) as already performing priestly
2. Date of functions. His description of their
Avesta repetition of charms and _ theological

compositions (i.132) would agree very
well with recitation of the Gdthés and Yasna.
Mention of controversies with Gautama, Buddha’s
disciples (Yasht XIII, 16) who probably reached
Persia in the 2d cent. BC, is another indication of
date. The fact that in both the Yasna and the Vendi-
dad heretics (zafida) are mentioned who preferred the
comm. (za7id) on the Avesta to the Avesta itself, is a
sign of late date. Names of certain persons found
in the Avesta (e.g, Atare-pata, a Dastir who lived
under Hormuad 1, 273 AD, and Rastare-Yagheiriti,
whom the Dinkart identifies with the chicf Mobed
of Sapor II, 309-379 AD, Aderpad Marespand, and
who, according to the Patzt, §28, “purified”? the
revelation made to Zoroaster, i.e, revised the text
of the earlier parts of the Avcsta) enable us to prove
that certain portions of the work as we now have it
were composed as late as near the end of the 4th
cent. of our era. It is said that the text was in
confusion in the time of Vologases I (51-78 (?] AD).
A recension was then begun, and continued with
much zcal by Ardashir Paipakin, 226-40 AD.
According to Geldner (Prolegomena, xlvi) the final
recension took place some considerable time after
Yezdigird III (overthrown 642 AD). In the times


1. His
Date, etc


- the Zoroastrian heaven.


2331


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Persian Language
Persian Religion


of the Sasanides there were, it is said, 21 Naskas
or volumes of the Avesta, and the names of these
are given in the Dinkart (Book IX). Of these we
now possess only one entire Naska, the Vendiddd,

and portions of three others.
The present Avesta is divided into 5 parts: (1)
The Yasna (¥v yaz, Skt. yaj, ‘to invoke,” “to
praise’) contains 72 chapters of hymns


3. Divi- for use at sacrifices, etc, including the
sions of the “Older Yasna’ or Gathds. (2) The
Present Vispered (vispa, ‘“‘every,” “all,” and
Avesta radha, “a lord?”) is divided into 24

chapters in Geldner’s edition; it is
supplementary to the Yasna. (3) The Vendiddd
(van+daéva+data, “law for vanquishing — the


demons’) contains 22 chapters. The first chapter
contains the Iranian myth about the order in which
the provinces of the Iranian world_were created by
Ahura Mazda. It tells how the Evil Spirit, Atro
Mainyus, created plagues, sins and death, to de-
stroy the good creatures of the Good Spirit. The
greater part of the book contains ceremonial laws
and formulae, some of them loathsome and all
rather petty and superstitious in character. (4)
The Yashts, 21 m all, are hymns, telling many
mythological tales about Mithra, Tishtriya, ete.
(5) The Khorda Avesta (‘Little Avesta’’) consists
of a number of short compositions, hymns, etc,
compiled by the Aderpid Marespand (Adharpadh
Mahraspand, Atarobit M]4ansarspendan) already
mentioned, in Sapor II’s reign.

Much of the Avesta is said to have been de-
stroyed by the Khalifah ‘Umar’s orders when Persia
was conquered by the Arabs after_the battle of
Nahavand (642 AD). Certainly ‘Umar ordered
the destruction of Pers libraries, as we learn from
the Kashfu'z Zuniin (p. 341).

V. Pahlavi.—Under ancient Pers literature may he
classed the Pahlavi (a) inscriptions of Sapor at Hajzabad

and elsewhere, (b) legends on Sasanian
1. Litera- coins, (c) translations of certain_parts of
. the Avesta, made under the Sasanides
ture for the most part, (d) such books as the
Arta Virdf Namak, the Zdd Sparam, Din-
kart, Ormazd Yasht, Patét, Bindihishnih, etc. These are
mostly of religiousimport. The ArtdViraf Nadmak givesa
description of the visit of the young dastar Arta Viraf, to
ir The Bindihishnih (“creation”)
tells how Ormazd and Ahriman came into being, and
treats of the 9,000 years’ struggle between them. Pah-
lavi, aS written (the so-called Huzvaresh), contains an
immense number of Aram. words, but the Pers termina-
tions attached to these show that thcy were read as
Pers: thns yehabint-ano is written, and ddt-ano (‘'to
give’’) is read. Pahlavi works that are no longer extant
are the sources of the Vis a@ Radmin, Zardtusht Namah,
Shahndmah, etc.


In order to understand the relation in which the
Pers dialects and stages in the history of the lan-
guage stand to one another, it may be
well to subjoin a list of words in Old
Pers, Avestic, Pahlavi and modern
Pers. It will be seen that Avestic is
not the source of the Aryan part of the present
tongue.


2. Com-
parison


Meaning | Avestic | Old Pers | Pahlavi |Mod. Pers
Fricnd...| zusta daushta dost dist
Hand....| zasta dasta dast dast
Bactria...| Bdakhdhi Bakhtri Bahr Balkh
Straight..| drva(sta)t | duru- drust durust

va (Sta)
Greatest .| mazistaT mathishta | mahist mahin
Most :
right ..| raziztat rasta rast rast
Ahode....| nmdana miantya man (man-dan
(Gathic Heztote
demdna) remain’’)
{


+ Superlatives

Lirerature.—Achaemenian inscriptions, Korsowitz,
Spiegel, Rawlinson: Geiger and Kuhn (editors), Grundriss
der iranischen Philologie; Darmesteter, Etudes iraniennes;


|


Spiegel, Hranische Altertumskunde; Néldcke, Aufsdtze
zur persischen Geschichte; W. Gelger, Ostiranische Kultur
im Altertum; Geldner's ed of Avesta; Professor Browne,
Literary History of Persia; De Harlez, Manuel de la langue
del’ Avesta, Manuel de la langue Pehlevie, and Intro to the
Avesta; Hang, Book of Aria Virdf; Cook, Origins of
Religion and Language.
W. Sr. Crairn Tispaun


PERSIAN RELIGION (ANCIENT):


I. Brrore ZOROASTER

1, Early Aryan Religion

2. Avesta and Rig-Veda

3. The Creator
ZOROASTRIANISM

1. Leading Principle

2. Not Monotheistic

on Darius and Xerxes

(2) Ahura Mazda
3. Objects of Worship
4. Anro Mainyus and His Creatures
5. Production versus Destruction
Fertility om
6. Contest hetween Ormazd and Ahriman
7. Ethics
8. Sacred Thread
9. Early Traditions
10. The Earth
i Heaven and Hell

13

14

15

16

17


Il.


« Interment

- Worship

. The Magi

. Eschatology

. Hehrew and Christian Influence
. No Virgin Birth

LITERATURE


I. Before Zoroaster.—There are clear indications
in the Avesta that the religion of the Medes and
Persians before Zoroaster’s time agreed


1. Early in most respects with that of the In-
Aryan dian Aryans, and in_a less degree with
Religion the beliefs of the Aryans in general.


All the Aryan tribes in very ancient
times showed great respect for the dead, though
they carefully distinguished them from the gods (cf
Rig-Veda X, 56, 4). The latter were principally
the powers of Nature, the wind, fire, water, the sky,
the sun, the earth, and a host of personifications.
The procreative powers in Nature, animate and
inanimate, seeming to be the source of animal and
vegetable life, received adoration, which ultimately
led to unspeakable corruption. Herodotus tells us
that the Persians in his time worshipped the sun,
moon, sky, earth, fire, wind and water (i.131).
Offerings to the gods were laid on a mass of pome-
granate twigs (baresman, Skt. barhis), and the flesh
of victims was boiled, not burnt. Libations of
haoma-juice were poured out, just as in India the
sama was the drink of both gods and their wor-
shippers.

A comparison between the spiritual beings men-
tioned in the Avesta and those spoken of in the

Rig-Veda is most instructive in two


2. Avesta ways. It shows that the origmal re-
and Rig- __ ligion of the Iranians and of the Indian
Veda Aryans agreed very closely; and it


also enables us to realize the immensity
of the reformation wrought by Zoroaster. Many
of the names of supernatural beings are practically


| thesame; e.g. Indra (Indra, Andra), Mitra (Mithra),


Aryaman (Airyaman), Asura (Ahura), Apim Napat
(Apim Napat), Tvashtri (? Tishtrya), Rama (Ra-
man), Vayu (Vayu), Vata (Vita). So are many
words of religious import, as S6ma (Haoma), Mantra
(Mathra), Hétra (Zaotar). The Yama of India
is the Yima of Persia, and the father of the oneis
Vivasvat and that of the other Vivathat, which is
the same word with dialectic change. The Holy
River of the Avesta, Aredhvi Stra, the Unstained
(Anihita), is represented by the Sarasvati, the
Ganga (Ganges) and other sacred streams wor-
shipped in India. In Persia Atar (or Fire) is a son
of Ahura Mazda (Yasna LXIV, 46-53), as Agni
(=Ignis) is of Tvashtri in the Rig-Veda. Armaiti
is Ahura Mazda’s daughter, as Saranyu in the Rig-


Persian Religion THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2332


Veda is the daughter of Tvashtri, the “Creator.”
The use of goméz (bovis urina) for purification is
common to both India and Persia. Though the
soma-plant is not now the same as the haoma, the
words are the same, and no doubt they at one time
denoted one and the same plant. Many of the
myths of the Avesta have a great resemblance to
those of the Rig-Veda. This comparison might be
extended almost indefinitely.

Iu another respect also there is an important
agreement between the two. Though some 33
deities are adored in the Vedic Hymns, yet, in spite
of polytheism and low ideas of the Divine, traces of
something higher may be found. Varuna, for in-
stance, represents a very lofty conception. In the
closest connection with him stands Asura, who is a
being of great eminence, and whose sons are the
gods, esp. the Adityas.

Tvashtri again is creator of heaven and earth and
of all beings, though his worship was ultimately in
Vedic times displaced by that of Indra.
It is clear then that the Indian Aryans
were worshippers of the Creator and
that they knew something of Him long
before they sank into polytheism. In the Avesta
and in the Pers cuneiform inscriptions alike, Ahura
Mazda occupies much the same position as Varuna,
Asura (the same word as Ahnra), or Tvashtri in the
Rig-Veda, or rather in the ancient belief of which
traces are retained im the latter work. Hence, as
the Avesta teaches, Zoroaster was not for the first
time preaching the existence of Ahura Mazda, but
he wags rather endeavoring to recall his people to
the belief of their ancestors, the doctrine which
Ahura Mazda had tanght Yima in primeval time
in his first revelation (Vendiddd II, 1-16,42). The
great truth of the existence of the Creator, testified
to by tradition, reason and conscience, undoubtedly
contributed largely to Zoroaster’s success, just as a
similar proclamation of the God Most High (Allah
Ta‘ala'), worshipped by their ancestors, helped the
thoughtful among the Arabs in later years to accept
Muhammad’s teaching. The consciousness in each
case that the doctrine was not new but very ancient,
materially helped men to believe it true.

Hl, Zoroastrianism.—The reformation wrought
by Zoroaster was a great one. He recognized—as

Euripides in Greece did later—that
1. Leading “if the gods do aught shameful, they
Principle are not gods.’ Hence he perceived
rf that many of the deities worshipped
in Iran were unworthy of adoration, being evil
in character, hostile to all good and therefore to
the “All-Wise” Spirit (Ahura Mazda) and to men.
Hence his system of dualism, dividing all beings,
spiritual or material, into two classes, the creatures
of Ahura Mazda and those of the “Destroying
Mind” (Atré Mainyu’). So many of the popular
deities were evil that Zoroaster used the word daéva
(the same as deva, dews, and Aram. dt) to denote
henceforth an evi! spirit, just as Christianity turned
the Gr daimones and daiménia (words used in a
good sense in classical authors) into “demons.”
Instead of this now degraded word daéva, he em-
ployed baga (Old Pers; Av. bagha, Vedic bhaga,
“distribution,” “patron,” “lord’’) for “God.”

But it must be remembered that Zoroaster did
not teach monotheism. Darius says that ‘Aura-

mazda and the other gads that there


3. The
Creator


2. Not are’ brought him aid (Beh. Inser., 1V,
Mono- 60-63), and both he and Xerxes speak
theistic of Auramazda as “‘the greatest of the


gods.” So, even in the first Gatha,
Zoroaster himself invokes Asha, V6hu-Mané, Ar-
maiti, Sraosha, and even GéuS-urvan (“the Soul
of the Bull”), as well as Ahura Mazda.


| troness of virtuous matrons.


(1) Darius and Xerxes—Darius mentions the
“clan-gods,’’ but does not name any of them. He
and Xerxes ascribe the creation of heaven and earth
to Auramazda, and say that the latter, “Who made
this earth, who made yon sky, who made man, who
made happiness for man,” has appointed each of
them king. It is “by the grace of Auramazda”
(vashnd Auramazdaha) that Darius conquers his
enemies. _But both Artaxerxes Mnémoén and Ar-
taxerxes Ochus couple Mithra and Andhata (An4-
hita) with Auramazda (Ahura Mazda) im praying
for the protection of the empire.


we


.., +
(Wisse es Quilts


Ahura Mazda.


(2) Ahura Mazda.—tIn the Avesta, Ahura Mazda
is one of the seven Amesha Spefitas or “Bountiful
Immortals.” He is the father of one of them,
Spefita Armaiti, who is also his spouse. He is
primus inter pares among them, their chief, but by
no means the only god. Monotheism is distinctly
taught in later Zoroastrian works, for instance, in
the Zardtusht-Ndmah, composed 1278 AD, but. it
is due to Christian and Islamic mfluence.

The modern Zoroastrian view, clearly stated in the
Dasdatir « Asmani and elsewhere, that all the good

creatures of Ormazd (Ahura Mazda)
3. Objects are entitled to adoratiou, undoubtedly
of Worship rests upon the Avesta. There we

find, in the first place, the Amesha -
Spefitas, who occupy in regard to Mazda the same
position as do the Vedic Adityas toward Varuna,
though not one of the Adityas is identical with any
of the Amesha Spefitas.


The names of these are: (1) Ahura Mazda (otherwise
called Spefito Mainyus or ‘' Bountiful Mind"'); (2) Vohu
Mano (“Good Mind"); (3) Asha Vahista (‘‘ Best Right-
eousness"’); (4) Khshathra Vairya (‘‘ Excellent Ruler'’);
(5) Spefita Armaiti (‘‘Bounteous Piety"'); (6) Haurvatat
(‘ Health”); (7) Ameretat (‘‘Immortality”). Each has
a special province: thus Armaiti is the general spirit of
earth and presides over its fruitfulness. She is the pa-

ul 0 lxhshathra is the guardian
of metals. Vohn Man6d guards sheep and cattle and
introduces to Ahura Mazda the spirits of the just. Next
in rank come the Yazatas (‘‘ Worshipful Ones"), of whom
there are a large number. Three of them, Mithra,
Rashnu aud Sraosha, preside at the judgment of the
dead on the 4th day from death. Rashuu holds the
scales in which a man's deeds are weighed. Sraosha
guards the soul during the first three nights after death.
Airyaman Ishya (‘the longed-for comrade") is the pro-
tector of mankind, the bestower of peace and happiness.
On one occasion (Vend., Farg. XXII, 23-29) Ahura
Mazda sends his messenger Nairyo Sabha (‘male In-
structor”) to ask his aid against overwhelming odds.
Raman Hvastra, the bosom friend of Mithra, presides
ovor the atmosphere and also gives its taste to food.
Mithra is the genins of truth, possessed of 1,000 ears,
and riding in a single-wheeled chariot (the sun), while
darting golden darts and driving flery steeds. Tishtrya,
identified with the dog-star Sirius, sends rain and is by
Ahura Mazda endowed with his own power and dignity
(Yasht VIII, 52 ff). This is true of Mithra also (Yasht
X, 1), Atar (‘ Fire”), Vayu (‘Air’), Vata (“Wind”),
Verethraghna (‘‘Mars’’), Saoka (‘‘Prosperity"), Aré-
tat (genius of Justice), Vazista (‘ Lightning’'), Fradat-
fshu (the guardian of cattle), Berejya (genius of corn),


2333


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Persian Religion


Cisté and Daéna_(‘‘ Knowledge" and ‘‘ Religion’), who

are others of the Yazatas. Ali these are entitled to wor-

ship at the hands of the true adorer of Mazda (Mazda-

vee ae to Daévayasna, or worshipper of the
emo.s),


In opposition to the creatures of Ahura Mazda
are those of Anrd Mainyu&, who is the source of all
moral and material evil. The first


4, Anré chapter of the Vendiddd tclls how he
Mainyu created something bad in opposition
and His to everything good made by Ahura
Creatures Mazda,


A demon istheadversary of each Amesha
Spefita: Aka Mano ("Evil Mind") that of Vou Mano,
and so in order: Indra (or Andra, '‘demon of untruth-
fulness’'), Saurva (‘evil government"), Nanhaithya
(‘‘discoutent’’), Tauru (‘who poisons water'') and Zairi
C‘poison”), being antagonistic to the other Bountiful
Immortals. Aéshma-Daéva (‘‘Demon of Wrath'’)—the
Asmodeus of Tob 8 8—is the special foe of Sraosha, the
genius of obedience. Apaosha, demon of drought, is the
enemy of Tishtrya. Buiti (or Buidhi) teaches men to wor-
ship idols, and also causes death. _Biishyasta is the demon
ofsloth. Vidhatus or Astuvidhotus causes death by de-
stroying the body. Other evil beings, Drujes, Pairikas,
Jainis, Yatus, are so numerous in the later parts of the
Avesta that a pious Zoroastrian must have lived in con-
tinual dread of their assaults. He had even to conceal
the parings of his nails, lest they should be used as darts
to his injury by these his spiritual foes.


Combat between King and Evil Spirit.


Holiness does not enter into Zoroaster’s concep-
tion of the Divine nature. This is a point to which
attention has not yet been properly
6. Produc- directed, though its importance can
tion v. hardly be exaggerated. ‘The epithet
Destruction Spefita, often applied to Ahura Mazda
and mistranslated “Holy,” is by the
Zoroastrians themselves im Pahlavi rendered
afzinik, i.e. “that canses increase.” Its ¥ span or
spén=Skt. Svi, ‘to swell,” “to grow,” “‘to increase.”
The opposite to this is the term anrd (afigro, from
u afigh; ef Ger. eng, “narrow’’) applied to the Evil
pirit, and denoting “narrowing,” “decreasing,”
“destroying.”” Hence, as the Destroyer, he is
styled pourumahrka, “full of death.”


_, Fertility.—Ahura Mazda and his assistants promote
life, fertility in man, beast and plant, agriculture, in-
crease; while Ahrd Mainyus and his creatures cause
destruction and death. Atar (‘‘Fire’), also styled
Apdm Napdt ("Offspring of the Waters’’), is the vital
flame and the male energy in the world; Aredhvi Stra
Anahita is the female. As a river the latter flows from
Mt. Hukairya, a peak in the Elburz Range (Yasna
LXIV), inte the Caspian Sea (VOurukasha) in the midst
of which grows the tree Hvdpa (‘well watered”’), which
bears the seeds of all plants. Andhita means ‘‘unde-
filed,"’ but it is applied to purity of water (to dofile any
of the four ‘‘elements” was, for later Zoroastrians, 2
grievous sin) and not to any moral purity in the goddess,
Her association with Mithra was close, even in Herod-
otus’ time, for he falls into the mistake of saying (i.131)
that the Persians called Aphrodite Mithra, when he
should have said Anaitis (Anahita). Though god of
truth and righteousness Mithra Is not associated with
moral purity (chastity). On the contrary, he was said
to fertilize the earth with his rays, as sun-god, and
Anahita as goddess of fruitfulness represented the female
rinciple in conjunction with him. The vileness which
ed to the identification of Anahita with the Bab My-
litta was doubtless of later date than Zoroaster’s time,
yet there was little or nothing in Zoroastrianism to check
it. Something similar asserts itself in Armenia, as well
as in Iran, and in fact in all Nature-worship everywhere.
Associated with this was the form of incest known as
next-of-kin marriage (Av. Hvaéiva-datha, Pahl. Ahvét-
ukdas), which permitted and encouraged marriages
between brothers and sisters.


According to later Zoroastrian belief, the contest
between Ormazd (Ahura Mazda) and Ahriman
Aird Mainyu’), after continuing for


6. Contest 9,000 years, is to be decided in favor
between of the former only through his possess-
Ormazd ing foreknowledge and Ahbriman’s
and lacking it (Band., I). Both came into
Ahriman existence Independently in limitless


time (Av. Zrvana Akarana; Vend.,
Farg, XIX, 13; Pahl. Daman 7 Akanarakhom-
and, Bund., I), which, personified in the Vendi-
dad, is called “Self-created,” and is there by Ahura
Mazda’s command invoked by Zoroaster in con-
junction with Vayu, the Air, the Winds, ‘the
bountiful, beauteous daughter of Ahura Mazda”
(Armaiti), the Earth, and other objects of worship
(loc. cit.). No creature of Ahriman is to be wor-
shipped; hence Indra, though in later Vedic times
rising in India to a leading position in the Pantheon,
is in the Avesta accounted a fiend, the very imper-
sonation of the Lie which the Avesta so firmly de-
nounces and which Darius mentions as the cause
of all the rebellions, which produced so much blood-
shed in his time. No virtue was valued so highly
as truth in ancient Iran, as Herodotus agrees with
the Avesta in testifying.
Avestic morality encourages the destruction of
all hurtful things, as being of Anrd Mainyu’’
creation, and the propagation of every-
7. Ethics thing good. Hence agriculture is esp.
commended, together with the rearing
of cattle and sheep. Somewhat later the whole
duty of man was said to consist in good thoughts,
good words, good deeds. Fierce opposition to every
other religion was enjoined as a religious duty, and,
under the Sasanides esp., this led to fearful and
repeated persecutions of Christians throughout the
empire.
The Sacred Thread (Av. Aiwywnrhana; Skt.
Upavitam, etc, now by the Parsis styled the Kushtt)
plays as important a part in Zoroas-


8. Sacred trianism as in Hindiism. So do
Thread charms, maihras (Skt. mantras), con-

sisting in repctitions of the verses of
the Avesta. The latter is even adored.


The first thing created by Ahura Mazda was a
Bull, which may represent the earth, and reminds
us of the Cow Audhumla in the Edda

9. Early (Gylfaginning V1). This was killed
Traditions by Anrd Mainyu (in a later version,
by Mithra). His spirit (Géus Urvan)
went to heaven and became the guardian of cattle.


Persian Religion
Persians


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2334


The first man was Gaya-maretan (‘Mortal Life’);
hence the phrase Haca Gayat Marethnat & Saash-
yantat, “from Gaya-maretan [Gaydmard, Kayo-
marth] to Saoshyant” (Yasna XXVI, 10;
XIII, 145), means “from the beginning to the end
of the world.”” From the Airyanem Vaéjé (‘Aryan
germ’’), thefirst home of the Iranians, men were com-
pelled to migrate because Ahrd Mainyn§ so altered
the climate that the winter became ten months long
and the summer only two.
the Brilliant,’ Pers Jamshid), son of Vivahhat,
though he tavice refused Ahura Mazda’s commission
to guard his creatures, and though by three lies he
lost the “Royal Light” (Hvarenéd Kavaém) which he
originally possessed, was yet directed to prepare a
very extensive inclosure (VGra), in which he pre-
served ‘‘the seeds of sheep and cattle, of men, of
dogs, of birds, and of red, glowing fires” from some
terribly severe winters which came upon the earth
(Vendidad II; Yasht XIX). The Béundihishnih
tale of a flood differs from this, preserving an indc-
pendent narrative. Ahura Mazda’s law was
preached to men within Yima’s inclosure.

The earth consists of seven divisions, called
Karshvares (cf the Skt. dvtpas). Only one of these,
Hvaniratha, is inhabited by men; the
others are separated from it by im-
passable abysses. Sun, moon, and
stars revolve round Mt. Taéra, a peak
in the Elburz Mountains (Demavend?). A later
legend says that the Elburz Range surrounds the
earth.

Each god and man possesses a fravashi, which has
been compared to a guardian spirit and seems to

differ from the soul (urvan). After
11. Heaven judgment by Mithra, Rashnu and
and Hell Sraosha, the souls of the.dead must

cross the Chinvat-bridge (“Bridge of
the Judge’’), which is guarded by two dogs and is
narrow and difficult for the unjust, but wide and
easy for the just. The righteous man then advances
throngh three Paradises, those of Good Thoughts,
Good Words and Good Works (Humata, Hukhia,
Hoarsta: Yasht XVI; Arta Viraéf Naémak, VIU-
IX), until, led by Sraosha, Atar, and Vohn Mano,
he finally reaches Ahura Mazda’s abode of light and
glory, Gard-nmdna (in Gathés, Géro-demana; Pahl.
Garétman), where Ahura Mazda himself receives
him with the words: “Greeting to thee; well hast
thou come; from that mortal world hast thou come
to this pure, bright place” (A. V. Namak, X1,8, 9).
But the soul of the wicked man, passing through
regions of Evil Thoughts, Evil Words and Evil
Deeds, finally reaches a dark and gloomy Hell
(Duzhanh). In later times it was believed that
those not yet fit for heaven waited in Misvand Gatui,
an intermediate place where the extra merits of
the just were stored up for the benefit of the less
fortunate (Vend., Farg. XIX). A later name was
Hamistakan. But De Harlez is of the opinion that
this idea was borrowed from mediaeval Christianity.

In primeval times the Persians buried or burned


10. The
Earth


Yasht |


Yima Khshaéta (‘‘Yima |


their dead. Zoroastrianism may have introduced |


the dakhma (Vendidad, passim) or
Tower of Silence, on which bodies are
exposed to be eaten by vultures.
Those of which the ruins have been
discovered at Al Hibbah are very ancient. But in
Herodotus’ time it was usual, after permitting the
flesh to be devoured by dogs and birds, to cover the
bones with wax and hury them (Herod. 1.140).
This was done to prevent them from coming in
contact with and so polluting the earth. The cus-
tom of burial is proved by the tombs of the Achae-
menian kings near Persepolis, and that of Cyrus, a
stone chamber raised high above the ground, at
Pasargadae.


12. Inter-
ment


Zoroastrianism permits no idol-worship and no
temples, fire-altars only being used. These were
served by Atharvans or fire-priests,

13. Worship who fed the fire with costly wood and
poured into it libations of Aaoma-

juice, taking care to cover their mouths with a cloth


Fire Altars.


(paiti-dhadna) to keep the sacred fire from being pol-
luted by their breath. Sacrifices were often offered
on the tops of the highest mountains under the open
sky (Herod. i.1382; Xen. Cyrop. viii).
The Magi doubtless owed their monopoly of
priestly functions to their being Zoroaster’s own
tribe. They are not mentioned as
14. The priests in the Pers cuneiform imscrip-
Magi tions. Only once does the word
“Magus” occur in the Avesta, and
then in composition (Afaghu-tbish, a Magus-hater,
Yasna LXV, 7). It is not necessary to trace to
Bab influence the decay of Zoroastrianism and its
degradation in late Achaemenian times. This was
at least in large measure due to a revival of the
ideas and practices forbidden by Zoroaster, which
reassert themselves in some parts of the Avesta,
and which afterward gave rise to Mithraism.
The Avesta states that, 1,000 years after Zoro-
aster’s death, a prophet named Ukhshyat-ereta
will arise from his secd to restore his
15. Escha- religion. After another 1,000 years


tology another, Ukhshyat-nemanh, will ap-
pear for the same purpose. The end
of the world will come 1,000 years later. Then a


third prophet, Saoshyaft, will be born, and will
usher in the Restoration (frashé-kereti) of the world
to its primitive happiness and freedom from the evil
creatures of Anro Mainyu’. This process will be
completed in 57 years, during which 6 other proph-
ets will perform in the other 6 AKarshvares the work
which will here be accomplished by Saoshyafit.
But mention of this Restoration occurs only in very
late parts of the Avesta (e.g. Vend., Farg. XVIII,
51). It does not mean Resurrection, as De Harlez
has shown. Later still, something of the kind was
believed, and in the Bindihishnih (ch v) and the
Patét (§ 28) we have the word ristdkhiz (from Av.
trista, “departed,” and Avis, “to rise’), which does
mean “rising of the dead.” But it can hardly be
doubted that the doctrine is due to Heb and Chris-

tian influence, esp. when we consider
16. Hebrew the late and uncertain date of the


and Chris- books in which the idea oceurs. Israel-
tian In- ites settled in Media in large numbers
fluence in or about 730-728 BC under Sargon

(2 IX 17 6), long before Zoroaster’s
birth. It is possible that his reformation may have


owed much therefore to Heb influence.


See, further,
ZOROASTRIANISM,


The idea of virgin birth has been asserted to occur in
Zoroastrianism, both with reference to Zoroaster him-
self and to the last three great prophets of whom mention
has been made. This is anerror. The Avesta and all
later Zoroastrian books speak of Zoroaster’s birth as


2335


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Persian Religion
Persians


quite natural, his father being Pourushaspa. Nor is
virgin birth referred to in the case of Saoshyafit and
the rest. (Mater cutusque ex its, sese in


17. No lacu quedam ae Zoreastris ae illic
nee A reposite gravida facta filium pariet: Vend.,
Virgin Birth Forg. XIX, 4-6; Yasht XIIT, 128, 142:


Bind., XXXII, 8, 9.) Virginity is not
highly esteemed in the Avesta, though fornication is
condemned.

Lireraturr.—Geldner’s ed of text of Avesta; De
Harlez, Avesta; Achaemenian Inscriptions; Sacred
Books of the East, vols IV, XXIII, XX XI; Grassmann,
Worterbuch zum Rig Veda; Haug and West, Arta Viraf
Némak; Spiegel, Binleittung in die trad. Schriften der
Parsen; Eranische Altertumskunde; Darmesteter, Btudes
traniennes; Haug, Essays on .... Religion of Parsis;
De Harlez, Manuel du Pehlavi; Cook, Origins of Religion
and Language. See also ZoROASTRIANISM.

Sr. Cuan Tispauu

PERSIANS, par’shanz, -zhanz (0°22, paras, also
= Persia, Persis [q.v.]; adj. "O78, parsi, Heb, and
“OB, parsay, Aram.; Iépra:, Pérsai, adj. only in
Neh 12 22; Dn] 6 28; Achaem. Pers Parsa, name
of both country and people; doesnot occurin Avesta) :

I. AFrrinity

1. Three Classes
2. Tribal and Clan Divisions
3. Achaemenian Dynasty

II. Civinization
1, Writing
2. Institutions and Customs
History
Cyrus
Capture of Babylon
Cambyses
Pseudo-Smerdis
Darius I
Darius' Suez Canal
Xerxes I
Artaxerxes II
. Xerxes EI

10. Later Persian Kings
IV. First MEntTION 1nN INSCRIPTIONS
LITERATURE


The Persians are not mentioned in the Bible until
the exilic books (2 Ch 36 20.22.23; Ezr 1 1.2.8;
37; Est 119, ete; Dnl 6 28; 6 8.12.15.28),
being previously included under the Medes (Gen
10 2), as they were by Thucydides, and even by
Xenophon often.


Ill.


ONO Orie Go


1


Achaemenes (Hakhamanish)


Teispés (onaisppist Sispis)


as Persis (modern Fars), including probably part
of Elam.

The Avesta shows that the Medo-Pers com-
munity was divided into 3 classes (zajitu): the
Athravans or fire-priests, the Rath-
aéstars or charioteers, and the Vdstrya-
fshuyans or cattle-rearers (cf the three
original Hindi castes, the Brahmans,
the KAshattriyas and the Vatsyas). A 4th class,
the artisans or Hditis, came later. But these were
classes, not castes.

They were also divided into tribes, clans (Achaem.
vith; Av. vis; cf vicus) and families or households

(Achaem. taumd; Av. nmédna). Herod-


1. Three
Classes


2. Tribal _otus (1.125) mentions ten Pers tribes,
and Clan the chief being the Pasargadac, to
Divisions which belonged the Achaemenian clan


(ppitpn, phrétré) which included the
royal family. This dynasty traced its origin_ to
Achaemenes (Hakhdmanish) according to Da-

rius and Herodotus. The following


8. Achae- scheme will serve to show the descent
menian of the line of Pers kings mentioned
Dynasty in the Bible and in secular history


up to the time of the fall of the

dynasty in 331 BC.
Il. Civilization.—The Persians had indulged less
in luxury than the Medes, until their conquest of
Media and other’ lands under Cyrus
1. Writing .the Great gave them the opportunity,
which they were not slow to embrace,
being famed for their readiness to adopt foreign


customs. Writing was introduced from Babylonia

through Elam. This cuneiform char-
2. Institu- acter was afterward superseded by one
tions and = derived from Syria, from which came
Customs the Avestic writing, which, in its cor-


rupt Pahlavi form, lasted until the
Arabian conquest imposed the Arab. character on
the people. The Achaemenian kings probably bor-
rowed from Babylon and further devcloped their
system of royal posts (Est 8 14) or messengers


|
Cyrus


Ariaramnés (Ariyaramna)
Cambyses Arsamés (Arshama)
Cyrus the Great Hystaspés (Vishtaspa)
Cambyses Darius I
Xerxes I (Ahasuerns)
7 Artaxerxes f (Longimanus)
Xerxes 11 aoeanns Harte Il


(Nothos, Ochos)


Artaxerxes at (Mném6n)


|
Artaxerxes III (Ochos)


Arsés


I. Affinity.—Being of the same stock as the
Medes they shared the name Aryans (Achaem.
Griya; Av. airya; Skt. Grya, “noble’”’); cf the
Nagsh i Rustam Inscription, where Darius I calls
himself “a Persian, son of a Persian, an Aryan, of
Aryan descent” (Il. 13, 14). Tradition assigns as
their earliest known habitat the so-called <Airya-
nem Vaéjé (“Aryan germ”), a district between the
Jaxartes and the Oxus (Vendiddd 1), whence they
migrated gradually to what was afterward known


(Sisygambis, a

daughter)
Darius II{f (Codomannus)
[Nch 12 22; 1 Mace 1 1]
(and even the words &yyapo, dggaroi, and dardvda,
asténdai, used to denote them, are almost cer-
tainly Babylonian). Of these men’s pace it was
said, ‘‘No mortal thing is quicker.’’ The custom
of showing special honor to the ‘Benefactors of
the King”’ (Herod. viii.85: épocdyyar, orosdggat = Av.
uru+sanh, “widely renowned’’) is referred to in
Est 6 1.2.3, and that of covering the (head and)
face of a criminal condemned to death (with a large
black cap) (Est 7 8.9) occurs in the Shdahnamah
also.


Persians
Person


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2336


(1) The king was an arbitrary ruler with un-
limited power, the council of seven princes who stood
nearest to the throne (Est 1 14; cf Herod. iw.
70-84) having no share in the government.

(2) The army—As soldiers, the Persians were
famous as archers and javelin-throwers; they


Persian Warriors.


were also skilled in the use of the sling, and above
all in riding. Boys were taken from the women’s
into the men’s part of the house at the age of 5, and
were there trained in “riding, archery and speaking
the truth” until 20 years old. In Darius’ inscrip-
tions, as well as in the Avesta, lymg is regarded as a
great crime.

(3) Marriage—The Persians practised polygamy,
and marriages between those next of kin were ap-
proved of. Pride and garrulity are mentioned as
distinctive of the Pers character.

Ill, History.—Pers history, as known to us,
begins with Cyrus the Great. His ancestors, for
at least some generations, seem to
have been chiefs or “kings” of Anshan,
a district in Persia or Elam. Cyrus
himself (VAI, V, plate 35) gives his genealogy up
to and including Téispés, entitling all his ancestors
whom he mentions, kings of Anshan. Phraortés,
king of the Medes, is said to have first subjugated
the Persians to that kingdom about 97 years before
Cyrns (Herod. 1.102). Cyrus himself headed his
countrymen’s revolt against Astyages, who ad-
vanced to attack Pasargadae (549 BC). His army
mutinied and surrendered him to Cyrus, whom the
Greeks held to be his grandson on the mother’s
side. Cyrus, becoming supreme ruler of both
Medes and Persians, advanced to the conquest of
Lydia. He defeated and captured Croesus, over-
ran Lydia, and compelled the Greek -colonies in
Asia Minor to pay tribute (547 BC).

He overthrew the Sute (Bedawin) across the
Tigris the following year, and was then invited by a

a large party in Babylonia to come to
2. Capture their help against the usurper Nabn-
of Babylon n&hid, whose religious zeal had led him

to collect as many as possible of the
idols from other parts of Babylonia and remove
them to Babylon, thereby increasing the sacredness
and magnificence of that city but inflicting jury
on neighboring and more ancient sanctuarics.
Defeating Nabunahid’s army and capturing the
king, Cyrus sent his own forces under Gobryas
(Gubaru, Gaubaruva) to take possession of Baby-
lon. This he did in June, 538, ‘‘without opposi-
tion and without a battle.” The citadel, however,
where Belshazzar ‘the king’s son” was in command,
held out for some months, and was then taken in
a night attack in which “‘the king’s son” was slain.


1. Cyrus


Cyrus made Gobryas viceroy of Chaldaea, and he |


“appointed governors in Babylonia’ (Cyrus’
“Annalistie Tablet”). When Gobryas died within
the year, Cyrus’ son Cambyses was made viceroy
of the country, now become a province of the Pers
empire. Cyrus restored the gods to their sanc-


| Smerdis


tuaries, and this doubtless led to permission being
given to the Jews to return to Jerus, taking with
them their sacred vessels, and to rebuild their
temple. Cyrus was killed in battle against some
frontier tribe (accounts differ where) in 529 BC.
His tomb at Murghab, near the ruins of Pasargadae,

is still standing.
Cyrus’ son and successor, Cambyses, invaded
Egypt and conquered it after_a great battle near
Pelusium (525 BC). During his ab-


3. Cam- sence, a Magian, Gaumita, who pre-
byses tended to be Smerdis (Bardiya),

Cambyses’ murdered brother, seized
the throne. Marching against him, Cambyses


committed suicide. After a reign of 7 months,

the usprper was overthrown and slain
4, Pseudo- by Darins and his 6 brother-nobles
(their names in Herod. 111.70 are con-
firmed with one exception in Darius’
Besitin Inscription, col. iv, 80-86). Darius _be-
came king as the heir of Cambyses (521 BC). But

in nearly every part of the empire
5. DariusI rebellions broke out, in most cases

headed by real or pretended descend-
ants of the ancient kings of each country. After
at least 3 years’ struggle Darius’ authority was
firmly established everywhere. He then divided
the empire into satrapies, or provinces (dahydva),
of which there were at first 23 (Beh. Inscription,
col, i, 138-17), and ultimately at least 29 (Naqsh 1
Rustam Inscription, 22-30). Over these he placed
satraps of noble Pers or Median descent, instead of
representatives of their ancient kings. His empire
extended from the Indus to the Black Sea, from the
Jaxartes to beyond the Nile.


Tomb of Cyrus.


Darius united the latter river with the Red Sea by a
canal, the partly obliterated inscription commemorating
which may perhaps be thus restored and


6. Darius’ rendered: ‘‘I am a Persian; with Persia
Suez I seized Egypt. I commanded to_dig
Canal this_canal from the river named the Nile

ana. {Pirava], which flows through Egypt, to


, this sea which comes from Persia. Theu
this canal was dug, according as I commanded. And I
said, ‘Come ye from the Nile through this canal to
Persia.’ "’

Darius’ expedition into Scythia, his success in
subduing the rebellion among the Asiatic Greeks,
his attempts to conquer Greece itself and his over-
throw at Marathon (499-490 BC) are part of the
history of Greece. A rebellion in Egypt had not
been repressed when Darius died in 485 BC.

Xerxes I, who succeeded his father, regained
Egypt, but his failure in his attempts to conquer

Greece largely exhausted his empire.
7. XerxesI In 464 BC he was murdered. Hig
son Artaxerxes I, surnamed “the long-
armed,” sueceeded him, being himself succeeded in
424 BC by his son Xerxes Hl, who was murdered


2337


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Persians
Person


the following year. This ended the legitimate
Achacmenian line, the next king, Darius II
(styled Nothos, or “bastard,’’ as well
as Ochos), being one of Artaxerxes’
legitimate sons (we pass over Sog-
dianus’ brief reign), Artaxerxes II,
Mnémin, succeeded his father and left the throne
to his son Artaxerxes III, Ochos. The latter was

murdered with all his sons but the
9. Xerxes II youngest, Arsés, by an Egyp eunuch

Bagias, probably in revenge for Ar-
taxerxes’ conduct in Egypt (338 BC). Arsés was
murdered by Bagéas 3 years Inter, when Darius I11,

Codomannus, the son of Sisygambis,


8. Arta-
xerxes I


10. Later daughter of Artaxerxes II, and her
Persian husband, a Pers noble, ascended the
Kings throne. Darins was completely over-


thrown by Alexander the Great in the
battle of Gaugamela or Arbela, 331 BC, and shortly
after fell by an assassin’s hand. This ended the
Pers empire of the Achaemenides, the whole of the
lands composing it becoming part of the empire of
Macedon.

IV. First Mention in Inscriptions.—Persia (Par-
sua) is first mentioned as a country in an inscription
of Rammanu Nirfari III (WAI, I, plate 35, no. 1,
1. 8), who boasts of having conquered it and other
lands (he reigned from 812 to 783 or from 810 to
781 BC).

Lirsrature.—Besides the main authorities mentioned
in the text, we learn much from Spiegel, Die Altper-
sischen Keilinschriften, Arrian, Thucydides, Polybius,
Strabo, Curtius.

W. Sr. Crarr TispaLn

PERSIS, ptir’sis (Ilepets, Persis): The name of
a female member of the Christian community at
Rome, to whom Paul sent greetings (Rom 16 12).
Paul designates her ‘“‘the beloved, who labored
much in the Lord.’’ The name is not found in in-
scriptions of the imperial] household, but it occurs
as the name of a freedwoman (CJL, VI, 23, 959).


PERSON, pir’sun, pir’s’n, PERSONALITY, par-
sun-al’j-ti (WP2, nephesh, WR, ish, ODN, ’ddham,
DD, pdnim; wpéconov, présdpon, tréeracts, hupd-
stasis): The most frequent word for ‘“‘person’”’ in the
OT is nephesh, “‘sou)’’ (Gen 14 21, “Give me the
persons, and take the goods’; 36 6, AV “‘all the
persons’; Nu 6 6, AV “that person,” etc); ‘zsh,
a man,” “an individual,” is also used (Jgs 9 2,
“threescore and ten persons’; 1 § 16 18, ‘a comely
person,” etc); ’ddhdm, “a man,” “a human being”
(Nu 31 28, “of the persons, and of the oxen”;
Prov 6 12, “‘a worthless person,’ etc); ’éndsh, “‘a
man,” “a weak, mortal man,” occurs twice (Jgs
9 4, AV “vain and light persons’; Zeph 3 4); baal,
“owner,” “lord,” is once tr¢ “person” (Prov 24
8, AV “amischievous person’’), and m*thim, “men,”
once (Ps 26 4, AV “vain persons”); pdnim, “face,”
is frequently tr4 “person” when the reference is to
the external appearance, as of persons in high places,
rich persons who could favor or bribe, etc, chiefly
in the phrases eee person,’’ “accepting
the person” (Dt 10 17; Mal 1 8).

In the NT prosépon, ‘face,’ “countenance,”
stands in the same connection (Mt 22 16, ‘Thou
regardest not the person of men”; Gal 2 6, ‘God
accepteth not man’s person’; Acts 10 34, ‘‘God
is no respecter of persons”; Rom 2 11, ‘“‘there is no
respect of persons with God”; Eph 6 9; Col 3
25; Jas 2 1.9); in 2 Cor 1 11 we have “persons”
(pros6pon), absol. as in the later Gr, “the gift
bestowed ... . by many persons,’’ the only occur-
rence in the NT; in 2 10 prosépon may stand for
“presence,” as RV “in the presence of Christ,” but
it might mean ‘as representing Christ”; in He
1 3, AV hupostasis, “that which lies under,” sub-


stratum, is rendered ‘‘person,” “the express image
of his person,” i.e. of God, which RV renders “‘the
very image of his substance,” m ‘‘the impress of his
substance,” i.e. the manifestation or expression of
the imvisible God and Father. “Person”? is also
frequently supplied as the substantive implied in
various adjs., etc, e.g. profane, perjured, vile.

In the Apoc we have prosdpon tr? “person” (Jth
7 15, RV “face”; Eeclus 10 5, etc); the “accept-
ing of persons’ 1s condemned (Wisd 6 7; Ecclus
4 22.27; 76; 20 22, RV “by a foolish counte-
nance’; 36 13; 42 1; “With him [God] is no respect
of persons,” Ecclus 35 12).

RV has “‘soul’' for ‘‘person"’ (Nu 5 6), ‘‘face" (Jer
52 25), ‘‘man" (Mt 27 24); “reprobate"' for *‘vile per-
son”’ (Ps 15 4), ARV, ERVm “fool” (Isa 32 5.6); ARV

men of falsshood" for ‘vain persons"’ (Ps 26 4); for
‘‘a, wicked person,’’ RV has ‘‘an evil thing’’ (Ps 101 4);
“back to thee in his own person" (autdén, different text)
for ‘‘again thou therefore receive him" (Philem ver 12);
‘‘take away life" for ‘‘respect any person” (2 S 14 14):
‘‘with seven others" for ''the eighth person" (2 Pet 2
5); ‘‘false swearers'' for ‘‘perjured persons" (1 Tim 1 10);
‘seven thousand persons” for ‘‘of men seven thousand”
(Rev 11 13).

Personality is that which constitutes and charac-
terizes a person. The word ‘‘person” (Lat persona)
is derived from the mask through which an actor
spoke his part (per-sona). “‘From being applied to
the mask, it came next to be applied to the actor,
then to the character acted, then to any assumed
character, then to anyone having any character or
station”; lastly, it came to mean an individual, a


: feeling, thinking and acting being. For full person-


ality there must be self-conscitousness, with the
capability of free thought and action—self-deter-
mination—hence we speak of personal character,
personal action, etc. A person is thus a respon-
sible being, while an animal is not. Personality is
distinctive of man. The personality is the unit of
the entire rational being, perhaps most clearly
represented by ‘‘the will”; it is that which is deep-
est in.man, belonging, of course, not to the realm
of space or the region of the visible, but existing as
a spiritual reality in time, with a destiny beyond it.
it is the substance (hupostasis) of the being, that
which underlies all its manifestations; hence the
rendering “the express image of his person” in He
13 AV. Hupostasis was employed by the early Gr
Fathers to express what the Latins intended by per-
sona; afterward prosépon was introduced.

Recent psychology has brought into prominence
elements in the subconscious realm, the relation
of which to the personality isobscure. There seems
to be more in each individual than is normally ex-
pressed in the personal consciousness and action.
The real, responsible personality, however, is some-
thing which is always being formed. The phe-
nomenon of double personality is pathological, as
truly the result of brain disease as is insanity.

In the Bible man is throughout regarded as per-
sonal, although it was only gradually that the full
importance of the individual ag distinct from the
nation was realized. The use of prosdpon for ‘‘per-
son” indicates also a more external conception of
personality than the modern. With the Hebrews
the nephesh was the seat of personality, e.g. ‘“Thou
wilt not leave my soul [nephesh] to Sheol” (Ps 16
10); ‘‘Thou hast brought up niy soul from Sheol”
(Ps 80 3). God is also always regarded as personal
(who has created man in His own image), and
although the representations seem often anthro-
pomorphic they are not really such. The Divine
personality could only be conceived after the
analogy of the human, as far as it could be definitely
conceived at all; but God was regarded as tran-
scending, not only the whole of Nature, but all that
is human, e.g. ‘‘God is not a man, that he should lie”
(Nu 23 19; 1 S 15 29); “Canst thou by searching


Person of Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2338


find out God?” (Job 11 7; Isa 40 28; ef Eccl 3 11;
8 17, ctc). In the NT the personality of God is,
on the warrant of Jesus Himself, conceived after the
analogy of human fatherhood, yet as transcending
all our human conceptions: ‘“How much more?”
(Mt 7 11); “Who hath known the mind of the
Lord ? or who hath been his counsellor?’ (Rom 11
34). Man is body, soul and spirit, but God in
Himself is Spirit, infinite, perfect, ethical Spirit
(Mt 6 48; Jn 4 24). He is forever more than all
that is created, “For of him, and through him, and
unto him, are all things” (Rom 11 36). The human
personality, being spiritual, survives bodily disso-
Jution and in Christ becomes clothed again with a
spiritnal body (Phil 3 21; 1 Cor 15 44).


W. L. WaLkKER
PERSON OF CHRIST:


Method of the Article
I. Tracaine oF Pauu
1. Phil 2 5-9
(1) General Drift of Passage
(2) Our Lord’s Intrinsic Deity
(3) No Exinanition
(4) Our Lord’s Humanity
2. Other Pauline Passages
II. Tsacuino oF THE EpistLe To THE HEBREWS
He 21ff
(1) Background of Express Deity
(2) Completeness of Humanity .
(3) Continued Possession of Deity
TII. Teacuine or OrTHsr Episties
IV. Txsacuine or Joun
1. The Epistles
2. Prologue to the Gospel
(1) The Being Who Was Incarnated
(2) The Incarnation
(3) The Incarnated Person
3. The Gospel
V. Teracuine or THE Synoptic GosPELs
TEACHING OF JESUS
1. The Johaunine Jesus
(1) His Higher Nature
(2) His Humiliation
2. The Synoptic Jesus
(1) His Deity
(a) Mk 13 32
(b) Other Passages: Son of Man and Son
of God
(c) Mt 11 27; 28 19
(2) His Humanity
(3) Unity of the Person
VIL. Tae Two Natures EVERYWHERE PRESUPPOSED
VIII. Formotation oF THE Doctrine
LITERATURE
It is the purpose of this article to make as clear
as possible the conception of the Person of Christ,
in the technical sense of that term,
Method of which lies on—or, if we prefer to say
the Article so, beneath—the pages of the NT.
Were it its purpose to trace out the
process by which this great mystery has been re-
vealed to men, a beginning would need to be taken
from the intimations as to the nature of the person
of the Messiah in OT prophccy, and an attempt
would require to be made to discriminate the exact
contribution of each organ of revelation to our
knowledge. And were there added to this a desire
to ascertain the progress of the apprehension of this
mystery by men, there would be demanded a further
inquiry into the exact degree of understanding
which was brought to the truth revealed at each
stage of its revelation. The magnitudes with which
such investigations deal, however, are very
minute; and the profit to be derived from them is
not, in a case like the present, very great. It is, of
course, of importance to know how the person of the
Messiah was represented in the predictions of the
OT; and it is a matter at least of interest to note,
for example, the difficulty experienced by Our
Lord’s immediate disciples in comprehending all
that was involved in His manifestation. But, after
all, the constitution of Our Lord’s person is a matter
of revelation, not of human thought; and it is pre-
eminently a revelation of the NT, not of the OT.
And the NT is all the product of a smgle movement,


at a single stage of its development, and therefore
presents in its fundamental teaching a common
character. The whole of the NT was written
within the limits of about half a century; or, if we
except the writings of John, within the narrow
bounds of a couple of decades; and the entire body
of writings which enter into it are so much of a piece
that it may be plansibly represented that they all
bear the stamp of a single mind. In its funda-
mental teaching, the NT lends itself, therefore, more
readily to what is called dogmatic than to what is
called genetic treatment; and we shall penetrate
most surely into its essential meaning if we take our
start from its clearest and fullest statements, and
permit their light to be thrown upon its more inci-
dental allusions. This is peculiarly the case with
such a matter as the person of Christ, which is dealt
with chiefly incidentally, as a thing already under-
stood by all, and needing only to be alluded to
rather than formally expounded. That we may
interpret these allusions aright, it is requisite that
we should recover from the first the common con-
ception which underlies them all.

I. The Teaching of Paul.—(1) General drift of
passage—We begin, then, with the most didactic of

the NT writers, the apostle Paul, and
1. Phil 2: with one of the passages in which he
5-9 most fnlly intimates his conception
of the person of his Lord, Phil 2 5-9.
Even here, however, Paul is not formally expound-
ing the doctrine of the Person of Christ; he is only
alluding to certain facts concerning His person and
action perfectly well known to his readers, in order
that he may give point to an adduction of Christ’s
example. He is exhorting his readers to unselfish-
ness, such unselfishness as esteems others better
than ourselves, and looks not only on our own things
but also on those of others. Precisely this un-
selfishness, he declares, was exemplified by Our
Lord. He did not look upon His own things but
the things of others; that is to say, He did not stand
upon His rights, but was willing to forego all that
He might justly have claimed for Himself for the
good of others. For, says Paul, thongh, as we all
know, in His intrinsic nature He was nothing other
than God, yet He did not, as we all know right well,
look greedily on His condition of equality with God,
but made no account of Himself, taking the form of
a servant, bemg made in the likeness of men; and,
being found in fashion as a man, humbled Himself,
becoming obedient up to death itself, and that, the
death of the cross. The statement is thrown into
historical form; it tells the story of Christ’s life
onearth. But it presents His life on earth as a life
in all its elements alien to His intrinsic nature, and
assumed only in the performance of an unselfish
purpose. On earth He lived as a man, and sub-
jected Himself to the common lot of men. But He
was not by nature a man, nor was He in His own
nature subject to the fortunes of human life. By
nature He was God; and He would have naturally
lived as became God—‘on an equality with God’
He became_man by a voluntary act, ‘taking no
account of Himself,’ and, having become man, He
voluntarily lived ont His human life under the con-
ditions which the fulfilment of His unselfish purpose
imposed on Him.

(2) Our Lord’s intrinsic Deity—The terms in
which these great affirmations are made deserve
the most careful attention. The language in which
Our Lord’s intrinsic Deity is expressed, for example,
is probably as strong as any that could be devised.
Paul does not say simply, “He was God.’ He
says, ‘‘He was in the form of God,” employing a turn
of specch which throws emphasis upon Our Lord’s
possession of the specific quality of God. “Form”
is a term which expresses the sum of those char-


2339


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA _ Person of Christ


acterizing qualities which make a thing the precise
thing that it is. Thus, the “form” of a sword (in
this case mostly matters of external configuration)
is all that makes a given piece of metal specifically
a sword, rather than, say, a spade. And ‘the form
of God” is the sum of the characteristics which make
the being we call “God,” specifically God, rather
than some other bemg—an angel, say, or a man.
When Our Lord is said to be in “the form of God,”
therefore, He is declared, in the most express man-
ner possible, to be all that God is, to possess the
whole fulness of attributes which make God God.
Paul chooses this manner of expressing himself here
instinctively, because, in adducing Our Lord as
onr example of self-abnegation, his mind is natu-
rally resting, not on the bare fact that He is God, but
on the richness and fulness of His being as God.
He was all this, yet He did not look on His own
things but on those of others.

It should be carefully observed also that in making
this great affirmation concerning Our Lord, Paul
does not throw it distinctively into the past, as if
he were describing a mode of being formerly Our
Lord’s, indeed, but no longer His because of the
action by which He became onr example of un-
selfishness. Our Lord, he says, “being,” “existing,”
“subsisting” ‘in the form of God’’—as it is vari-
ously rendered. The rendering proposed by RVm,
“being originally,’ while right in substance, is
somewhat misleading. The vb. employed means
“strictly ‘to be beforehand,’ ‘to be already’ so and
go” (Blass, Grammar of NT Greek, ET, 244), “‘to
be there and ready,” and intimates the existing
circumstances, disposition of mind, or, ag here,
mode of subsistence in which the action to be de-
scribed takes place. It contains no intimation,
however, of the cessation of these circumstances or
disposition, or mode of subsistence; and that, the
less in a case like the present, where it is casi in a
tense (the imperfect) which in no way suggests that
the mode of subsistence intimated came to an end
in the action described by the succeeding vb. (cf
the |\’s, Lk 16 14.23; 23 50; Acts 2 30; 3 2;
2 Cor 8 17; 12 16; Gal 1 14). Panl is not tell-
ing us here, then, what Our Lord was once, but
rather what He already was, or, better, what in
His intrinsic nature Heis; he is not describing a past
mode of existence of Our Lord, before the action
he is adducing as an example took place—although
the mode of existence he describes was Our Lord’s
mode of existence before this action—so much as
painting in the background upon which the action
adduced may be thrown up into prominence. He
ig telling us who and what He is who did these
things for us, that we may appreciate how great the
things He did for us are.

(3) No exinanition—And here it is important
to observe that the whole of the action adduced is
thrown up thus against this backgronnd—not only
its negative description to the effect that Our Lord
(althongh all that God is) did not look greedily on
His (consequent) being on an equality with God;
but its positive description as well, introduced by
the “but... .” and that in both of its elements,
not merely that to the effect (ver 7) that ‘he took
no account of himself’ (rendered not badly by AV,
He “made himself of no reputation’; but quite
misleading by RV, He “emptied himself”), but
equally that to the effect (ver 8) that “he humbled
himself.” It is the whole of what Our Lord is de-
scribed as doing in vs 6-8, that He is described as
doing despite His “subsistence in the form of God.”
So far is Paul from intimating, therefore, that Our
Lord laid aside His Deity in entering upon His life
on earth, that he rather asserts that He retained His
Deity throughout His life on earth, and in the whole
course of His humiliation, np to death itself, was


”


consciously ever exercising self-abnegation, living a
life which did not by nature belong to Him, which
stood in fact in direct contradiction to the life which
was naturally His. Itis this underlying implication
which determines the whole choice of the language
in which Our Lord’s earthly life is described. It is
because it is kept in mind that He still was “in the
form of God,” that is, that He still had in possession
all that body of characterizing qualities by which
God is made God, for example, that He is said to
have been made, not man, but “in the likeness of
man,’ to have been found, not man, but ‘“‘in
fashion as a man’; and that the wonder of His
servanthood and obedience, the mark of servant-
hood, is thought of as so great. Though He was
truly man, He was much more than man; and Paul
would not have his readers imagine that He had
become merely man. In other words, Paul does not
teach that Our Lord was once God but had become
instead man; he teaches that though He was God,
He had become also man.

An impression that Paul means to imply, that in
entering upon His earthly life Our Lord had laid
aside His Deity, may be created by a very prevalent
misinterpretation of the central clause of his state-
menit—a misinterpretation unfortunately given cur-
rency by the rendcring of ERV: “counted it not a
prize to be on an equality with God, but emptied
himself,” varied without improvement in ARV to:
“connted not the being on an equality with God
a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself.’ The
former (negative) member of this clause means just:
He did not look greedily upon His being on an
equality with God; did not “set supreme store” by
it (see Lightfoot on the clause). The latter (posi-
tive) member of it, however, cannot mean in an-
tithesis to this, that He therefore ‘‘emptied himself,”
divested Himself of this, His being on an equality
with God, much less that, He ‘“‘emptied himself,”
divested Himself of His Deity (“form of God”’) itself,
of which His being on an equality with God is the
manifested consequence. The vb. here rendered
“emptied”’ is in constant use in a metaphorical sense
(so only inthe NT: Rom 4 14; 1 Cor 1 17; 9 15;
2 Cor 9 3) and cannot here be taken _ literally.
This is already apparent from the definition of the
manner in which the “emptying” is said to have
been accomplished, supplied by the modal clause
which is at once attached: by “taking the form of a
servant.” You cannot “empty” by ‘taking’—
adding. It is equally apparent, however, from the
strength of the emphasis which, by its position, is
thrown upon the “himself.” We may speak of Our
Lord as ‘emptying Himself”’ of something else, but
scarcely, with this strength of emphasis, of His
“emptying Himself” of something else. This
emphatic “Himself,’”’ interposed between the pre-
ceding clanse and the vb. rendered ‘‘emptied,”
builds a barrier over which we cannot climb back-
ward in search of that of which Our Lord emptied
Himself. The whole thought is necessarily con-
tained in the two words, “emptied himself,” in
which the word “emptied” must therefore be taken
in a sense analogous to that which it bears in
the other passages in the NT where it occurs.
Paul, in a word, says here nothing more than
that Our Lord, who did not look with greedy eyes
upon His estate of equality with God, emptied
Himself, if the language may be pardoned, of Him-
self; that is to say, in precise accordance with the ex-
hortation for the enhancement of which His example
is adduced, that He did not look on His own things.
‘He made no account of Himself,’ we may fairly
paraphrase the clanse; and thus all question of
what He emptied Himself of falls away. What
Our Lord actually did, according to Paul, is ex-
pressed in the following clauses; those now before


Person of Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2340


us express more the moral character of His act. He
took “the form of a servant,” and so was “made
in the likeness of men.” But His doing this showed
that He did not set overweening store by His state
of equality with God, and did not account Himself
the sufficient object of all the efforts. He was not
self-regarding: He had regard for others. Thus He
becomes our supreme example of self-abnegating
conduct. See also Kenosis.

(4) Our Lord’s humanity.—The language in which
the act by which Our Lord showed that He was
self-abnegating is described, requires to be taken in
its complete meaning. He took “the form of a
servant, being made in the likeness of men,” says
Paul. The term ‘“form’’ here, of course, bears the
same full meaning as in the preceding instance of
its occurrence in the phrase “‘the form of God.” It
imparts the specific quality, the whole body of char-
acteristics, by which a servant is made what we
know as a servant. Our Lord assumed, then, ac-
cording to Paul, not the mere state or condition or
outward appearance of a servant, but the reality;
He became an actual “servant” in the world. The
act by which He did this is described as a ‘“‘taking,”
or, as it has become customary from this description
of it to phrase it, as an “assumption.” What is
meant is that Our Lord took up into His personality
a human nature; and therefore it is immediately
explained that He took the form of a servant by
“being made in the likeness of men.’ That the
apostle does not say, shortly, that He assumed a
human nature, is due to the engagement of his
mind with the contrast which he wishes to bring
out forcibly for the enhancement of his appeal to
Our Lord’s example, between what Our Lord is by
nature and what He was willing to become, not
looking on His own things but also on the things of
others. This contrast is, no doubt, embodied in the
simple opposition of God and man; it is much more
pungently expressed in the qualificative terms,
‘form of God” and “form of a servant.” The Lord
of the world became a servant in the world; He
whose right it was to rule took obedience as His
life-characteristic. Naturally therefore Paul em-
ploys here a word of quality rather than a word of
mere nature; and then defines his meaning in this
word of quality by a further epexegetical clause.
This further clause—‘‘being made in the likeness of
men’’—does not throw doubt on the reality of the
human nature that was assumed, in contradiction
to the emphasis on its reality in the phrase ‘‘the
form of a servant.’ It, along with the succeeding
clause—“‘and being found in fashion as a man”—
owes its peculiar form, as has already been pointed
out, to the vividness of the apostle’s consciousness,
that he is speaking of one who, though really man,
possessing all that makes a man a man, is yet, at
the same time, infinitely more than a man, no less
than God Himself, in possession of all that makes
God God. Christ Jesus is in his view, therefore
(as In the view of his readers, for he is not instruct-
ing his readers here as to the nature of Christ’s
person, but reminding them of certain elements
in it for the purposes of his exhortation), both God
and man, God who has “assumed”? man into per-
sonal union with Himself, and has in this His as-
sumed manhood lived ont a human life on earth,

The elements of Paul’s conception of the person
of Christ are brought before us in this suggestive

passage with unwonted fulness. But


2. Other they all receive endless illustration
Pauline from his occasional allusions to them,
Passages one or another, throughout his Epp.


The leading motive of this passage, for
example, reappears quite perfectly in 2 Cor 8 9,
where we are exhorted to imitate the graciousness
of Our Lord Jesus Christ, who became for our sakes


(emphatic) poor—He who was (again an imper-
fect participle, and therefore without suggestion of
the cessation of the condition described) rich—that
we might by His (very emphatic) poverty be made
rich. Here the change in Our Lord’s condition at
a point of time perfectly understood between the
writer and his readers is adverted to and assigned
to its motive, but no further definition is given of
the nature of either condition referred to. We are
brought closer to the precise nature of the act by
which the change was wrought by such a passage
as Gal 4 4, We read that ‘When the fulness of the
time came, God sent forth his Son, born of a woman,
born under the law, that he might redeem them that
were under the law.’”? The whole transaction 1s
referred to the Father in fulfilment of His eternal
plan of redemption, and it is described specifically
as an incarnation: the Son of God is born of a
women—He who is in His own nature the Son of
God, abiding with God, is sent forth from God in
such a manner as to be born a human being, subject
to law. The primary implications are that this
was not the beginning of His being; but that before
this He was neither a man nor subject to law. But
there is no suggestion that on becoming man and
subject to law, He ceased to be the Son of God or
lost anything intimated by that high designation.
The uniqueness of His relation to God as His Son
js emphasized in a kindred passage (Rom 8 3) by
the heightening of the designation to that of God's
“own Son,” and His distinction from other men is
intimated in the same passage by the declaration
that God sent Him, not in sinful flesh, but only ‘‘in
the likeness of sinful flesh.”’ The reality of Our
Lord’s flesh is not thrown into doubt by this turn of
speech, but His freedom from the sin which is asso-
ciated with flesh as it exists in lost humanity is
asserted (cf 2 Cor 5 21). Though true man,
therefore (1 Cor 15 21; Rom 5 21; Acts 17 31),
He is not without differences from other men; and
these differences do not concern merely the condition
(as sinful) in which men presently find themselves;
but also their very origin: they are from below, He
from above—‘the first man is from the earth, earthy;
the second man is from heaven’ (1 Cor 16 47).
This is His peculiarity: He was born of a woman
like other men; yet He descended from heaven
(cf Eph 4 9; Jn 3 13). It is not meant, of course,
that already in heaven He was a man; what is
meant is that even though man He derives His
origin in an exceptional sense from heaven. Paul
describes what He was in heaven (but not alone in
heaven)—that is to say before He was sent in the
likeness of sinful flesh (though not alone before this)
—in the great terms of ‘“God’s Son,” “God's own
Son,” “the form of God,” or yet again in words
whose import cannot be mistaken, ‘God over all’
(Rom 9 5). In the last cited passage, together
with its parallel earlier in the same ep. (Rom 1 3),
the two sides or elements of Our Lord’s person are
brougbt into collocation after a fashion that can
leave no doubt of Paul’s conception of His twofold
nature. In the earlier of these passages he tells us
that Jesus Christ was born, indeed, of the seed of
David according to the flesh, that is, so far as the
human side of His being is concerned, but was power-
fully marked out as the Son of God according to
the Spirit of Holiness, that is, with respect to His
higher nature, by the resurrection of the dead, which
in a true sense began in His own rising from the dead.
In the later of them, he tells us that Christ sprang
indeed, as concerns the flesh, that is on the human
side of His being, from Israel, but that, despite this
earthly origin of His human nature, He yet is and
abides (present participle) nothing less than the
Supreme God, “God over all [emphatic], blessed
forever.” Thus Paul teaches us that by His coming


2341


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA _ Person of Christ


forth from God to be born of woman, Our Lord,
assuming a human nature to Himself, has, while
remaining the Supreme God, become also true and
perfect man. Accordingly, in a context in which
the resources of language are strained to the utmost
to make the exaltation of Our Lord’s being clear—
in which He is described as the image of the invisible
God, whose being antedates all that is created, in
whom, through whom and te whom all things have
been created, and in whom they all subsist—we
are told not only that (naturally) in Him all the ful-
ness dwells (Col 1 19), but, with complete expli-
cation, that ‘all the fulness of the Godhcad dwells
in him bodily’ (Col 2 9); that is to say, the very
Deity of God, that which makes God God, in all its
completeness, has its permanent home in Our Lord,
and that in a “bodily fashion,’’ that is, it isin Him
clothed with a body. He who looks upon Jesus
Christ sees, no doubt, a body and a man; but as
he sees the man clothed with the body, so he sees
God Himself, in all the fulness of His Deity, clothed
with the humanity. Jesus Christ is therefore God
“manifested in the flesh” (1 Tim 3 16), and His
appearance on earth is an “‘epiphany’’ (2 Tim 1 10),
which is the technical term for manifestations on
earth of a God. Though truly man, He is never-
theless also our “great God” (Tit 2 13).

Il. Teaching of the Epistle to the Hebrews.—
The conception of the person of Christ which under-
lies and finds expression in the Ep. to the He is
indistinguishable from that which governs all the
allusions to Our Lord in the Epp. of Paul. To
the author of this ep. Our Lord is above all else the
Son of God in the most eminent sense of that word;
and it is the Divine dignity and majesty belonging
to Him from His very nature which forms the funda-
mental feature of the image of Christ which stands
before his mind. And yet it is this author who,
perhaps above all others of the NT writers, empha-
sizes the truth of the humanity of Christ, and
dwells with most particularity upon the elements
of His human nature and experience.

(1) Background of express Deity.—The great
Christological passage which fills ch 2 of the Ep.

to the He rivals in its richness and ful-
He 2:1ff | ness of detail, and its breadth of im-
plication, that of Phil 2. It is thrown
up against the background of the remarkable expo-
sition of the Divine dignity of the Son which occu-
pies ch 1 (notice the “therefore” of 2 1). There the
Son had been declared to be ‘‘the effulgence of his
(God’s) glory, and the very image of his substance,’’
through whom the universe has been created and
by the word of whose power all things are held in
being; and His exaltation above the angels, by
means of whom the Old Covenant had been mau-
gurated, is measured by the difference between the
designations “ministering spirits” proper to the one,
and the Son of God, nay, God itself (1 8.9), proper
to the other. The purpose of the succeeding state-
ment is to enhance in the thought of the Jewish
readers of the ep. the value of the salvation wrought
by this Divine Saviour; by removing from their
minds the offence they were in danger of taking at
His lowly life and shameful death on earth. This
earthly humiliation finds its abundant justification,
we are told, in the greatness of the end which it
sought and attained. By it Our Lord has, with
His strong feet, broken out a pathway along which,
in Him, sinful man may at length climb up to the
high destiny which was promised him when it was
declared he should have dominion over all creation.
Jesus Christ stooped only to conquer, and He
stooped to conquer not for Himself (for He was in
His own person no less than God), but for us.

(2) Completeness of humanity—The language
in which the humiliation of the Son of God is m the


first instance described is derived from the context.
The establishment of His Divine majesty in ch 1
had taken the form of an exposition of His infinite
exaltation above the angels, the highest of all crea-
tures. His humiliation is deseribed here thercfore
as being ‘‘made a little lower than the angels”’ (2 9).
What is meant is simply that He became man; the
phraseology is derived from Ps 8 AV, from which
had just been cited the declaration that God had
made man (despite his insignificance) “but a little
lower than the angels,” thus crowning him with glory
and honor. The adoption of the language of the
psalm to describe Our Lord’s humiliation has the
secondary effect, accordingly, of greatly enlarging the
reader’s sense of the immensity of the humiliation
of the Son of God in becoming man: He descended
an infinite distance to reach man’s highest con-
ceivable exaltation. As, however, the primary
purpose of the adoption of the language is merely
to declare that the Son of God became man, 80 it is
shortly afterward explained (2 14) as an entering
into participation in the blood and flesh which are
common to men: ‘‘Since then the children are
sharers in flesh and blood, he also himself in like
manner partook of the same.” The voluntariness,
the reality, the completeness of the assumption of
SD, by the Son of God, are all here empha-
sized.

The proximate end of Our Lord’s assumption of
humanity is declared to be that He might die; He was
“made a little lower than the angels . . . . because
of the suffering of death” (2 9); He took part in
blood and flesh im order “that throughdeath ... .”
(2 14). The Son of God as such could not die;
to Him belongs by nature an ‘“‘indissoluble life’
(7 16m). If He was to die, therefore, He must
take to Himself another nature to which the ex-
perience of death were not impossible (2 17). Of
course it is not meant that death was desired by
Him for its own sake. The purpose of our passage
is to save its Jewish readers from the offence of the
death of Christ. What they are bidden to observe
is, therefore, Jesus, who was made a little lower
than the angels because of the suffering of death,
‘crowned with glory and honor, that by the grace
of God the bitterness of death which he tasted
might redound to the benefit of every man’ (2 9),
and the argument is immediately pressed home that
it was eminently suitable for God Almighty, in
bringing many sons into glory, to make the Captain
of their salvation perfect (as a Saviour) by means of
suffermg. The meaning is that it was only through
suffering that these men, being sinners, could be
brought into glory. And therefore in the plainer
statement of ver 14 we read that Our Lord took part
in flesh and blood in order “that through death he
might bring to nought him that had the power of
death, that is, the devil; and might deliver al! them
who through fear of death were all their lifetime
subject to bondage’; and in the still plainer state-
ment of ver 17 that the ultimate object of His
assimilation to men was that He might ‘‘make pro-
pitiation for the sins of the people.” It is for the
salvation of sinners that Our Lord has come into the
world; but, as that salvation can be wrought only
by suffering and death, the proximate end of His
assumption of humanity remains that He might
die; whatever is more than this gathers around
this.

The completeness of Our Lord’s assumption of human-
ity and of His identification of Himself with it receives
strong oraphasis in this passage. He took part in the
flesh and blood which is the common heritage of men,
after the same fashion that other men participate in it
2 14); and, having thus become a man among men,

e shared with other mcn the ordinary circumstances
and fortunes of lifo, ‘in all things'’ (2 17). The stress


is laid on trials, sufferings, death; but this is due to the
actual course in which His life ran—and that it might


Person of Christ THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2342


run in which He became man—and is not exclusive of
other human experiences. What is intended is that He
hecame truly a man, and lived a truly human life, sub-
ject to all the experiences natural to a man in the par-
ticular circumstances in which He lived.


(3) Continued possession of Deity—It is not im-
plied, however, that during this human life—‘‘the
days of his flesh” (5 7)—He had ceased to be God,
or to have at His disposal the attributes which be-
longed to Him as God. That is already excluded
by the representations of ch 1. The glory of this
dispensation consists precisely in the bringing of its
revelations directly by the Divine Son rather than
by mere prophets (1 1), and it was as the effulgence
of God’s glory and the express image of His sub-
stance, upholding the universe by the word of His
power, that this Son made purification of sins (i 3).
Indeed, we are expressly told that even in the days
of the flesh, He continued still a Son (6 8), and that.
it was precisely in this that the wonder lay: that
though He was and remained (imperfect participle)
a Son, He yet learned the obedience He had set
Himself to (cf Phil 2 8) by the things which He
suffered. Similarly, we are told not only that,
though an Israelite of the tribe of Judah, He pos-
sessed ‘‘the power of an indissoluble life” (7 16 m),
but, describing that higher nature which gave Him
this power as an “eternal Spirit” (cf “spirit of
holiness,” Rom 1 4), that it, was through this
eternal Spirit that He could offer Himself without
blemish unto God, a real and sufficing sacrifice, in
contrast with the shadows of the Old Covenant
(9 14). Though a man, therefore, and truly man,
sprung out of Judah (7 14), touched with the feel-
ing of human infirmities (4 15), and tempted like as
we are, He was not altogether like other men. For
one thing, He was “without sin” (4 15; 7 26), and,
by this characteristic, He was, in every sense of the
words, separated from sinners. Despite the com-
pleteness of His identification with men, He_re-
mained, therefore, even in the days of His flesh
different from them and above them.

Ul. Teaching of Other Epistles.——It is only as we carry
this conception of the person of Our Lord with us-—the
conception of Him as at once our Supreme Lord, to
whom our adoration is due, and our fellow in the expe-
riences of a human life—that unity is induced in the
multiform allusions to Him throughout, whether the
Epp. of Paul or the Ep. to the He, or, indeed, the other
epistolary literature of the NT. For in this matter
there is no difference hetween those and these. There
are no doubt a few passages in these other letters in
which a plurality of the elements of the person of Christ
are brought together and given detailed mention. In
1 Pet 3 18, for instance, the two constitutive clements
of His person are spoken of in the contrast, familiar from
Paul, of the ‘‘ flesh’ and the ''spirit.’". But ordinarily we
meet only with references to this or that element sepa-
rately. Everywhere Our Lord is spoken of as having
lived out His life as a man; but everywhere also He is
spoken of with the supreme reverence which is due to
God alone, and the very name of God is not withheld
from Him. In 1 Pet 1_11 His preéxistence is taken
for granted; in Jas 2 1 He is identified with the She-
kinah, the manifested Jeh—'our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Glory’; in Jude ver 4 He is ‘‘our only Master
[Despot] and Lord’'; over and over again He is the
Divine Lord who is Jeh (e.g. 1 Pet 2 3.13; 2 Pet 3
2.18); in2 Pet 1 1, He isroundly called ‘our God and
Saviour.'’ There is nowhere formal inculcation of the
entire doctrine of the person of Christ. But everywhere
its elements, now one and now another, are presupposed
as the common property of writer andreaders. It is only
in the Epp. of John that this easy and unstudied pre-
sunpeiiien of them gives way to pointed insistence upon
them.


IV. Teaching of John.—In the circumstances in
which he wrote, John found it necessary to insist
upon the elements of the person of
Our Lord—His true Deity, His true
humanity and the unity of His person
—in a manner which is more didactic
in form than anything we find in the other writings
of the NT. The great depository of his teaching on
the subject is, of course, the prologue to his Gospel.


1. The
Epistles


But it is not merely in this prologue, nor in the
Gospel to which it forms a fitting introduction, that
these didactic statements are found. The full em-
phasis of John’s witness to the twofold nature of the
Lord is brought out, indeed, only by combining what
he says in the Gospel and in the Epp. “In the
Gospel,” remarks Westcott (on Jn 20 31), “the
evangelist shows step by step that the historical
Jesus was the Christ, the Son of God (opposed _to
mere ‘flesh’); in the Ep. he reaffirms that the Christ,
the Son of God, was true man (opposed to mere
‘spirit’; 1 Jn 4 2).” What John 1s concerned to
show throughout is that it was “the true God’
(1 Jn 5 20) who was “made flesh” (Jn 1 14); anl
that this ‘only God’ (Jn 1 18, RVm ‘‘God only
begotten’’) has truly come “in... . flesh’ (1 Jn
4 2). In all the universe there is no other being of
whom it can be said that He is God come in flesh
(cf 2 Jn ver 7, He that ‘cometh in the flesh,” whose
characteristic this is). And of all the marvels
which have ever occurred in the marvelous history
of the universe, this is the greatest—that ‘what
was from the beginning’ (1 Jn 2 13.14) has been
heard and gazed upon, seen and handled by men
(i Jn 1 1).

From the point of view from which we now ap-

proach it, the prologue to the Gospel of John may
be said to fall into three parts. In the
2. Prologue first, of these, the nature of the Being
to the who became incarnate in the person
Gospel we know as Jesus Christ is described;
in the second, the general nature of the
act we call the incarnation; and in the third, the
nature of the incarnated person. See JOHANNINE
THeooey, III; Joun, Gosprt or, IV, 1, (3), 2.

(1) The Being who was incarnated.—John here
calls the person who became incarnate by a name
peculiar to himself in the NT—the ‘‘Logos” or
“Word. According to the predicates which he
here applies to Him, he can mean by the “Word”
nothing else but God Himself, ‘‘considered in His
creative, operative, self-revealing, and communi-
cating character,” the sum total of what is Divine
(C. F. Schmid). Iu three crisp sentences he de-
clares at the outset His eternal subsistence, His
eternal intercommunion with God, His eternal
identity with God: ‘In the beginning the Word
was; and the Word was with God; and the Word
was God’ (Jn 11). ‘In the beginning,” at that
point of time when things first began to be (Gen 1
1), the Word already “was.’”’ He antedates the
beginning of all things. And He not merely ante-
dates them, but it is immediately added that He ig
Himself the creator of all that is: ‘All things were
made by him, and apart from him was not made one
thing that hath been made’ (1 3). Thus He is
taken out of the category of creatures altogether.
Accordingly, what is said of Him is not that He was
the first of existences to come into being—that ‘in
the beginning He already had come into being’—
but that ‘in the beginning, when things began to
come into being, He already was.’ It is express
eternity of being that is asserted: “the imperfect
tense of the original suggests in this relation, as far
as human language can do so, the notiou of abso-
lute, supra-temporal existence’ (Westcott). This,
His eternal subsistence, was not, however, in iso-
lation: ‘‘And the Word was with God.” The lan-
guage is pregnant. Jt is not merely coexistence
with God that is asserted, as of two beings standing
side by side, united in a local relation, or even in a
common conception. What is suggested is an active
relation of intercourse. The distinct personality
of the Word is therefore not obscurely intimated.
From all eternity the Word has been with God as a
fellow: He who in the very beginning already “was,”


“was” also in communion with God. Though He


2343


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA | Person of Christ


was thus in some sense a second along with God, He
was nevertheless not a separate being from God:
_ “And the Word was’’—still the eternal ‘‘was’’—
“God.” In some sense distinguishable from God,
He was in an equally true sense identical with God.
There is but one eternal God; this eternal God, the
Word is; In whatever sense we may distinguish
Him from the God whom He is ‘‘with,” He is yet
not another than this God, but Himself is this God.
The predicate ‘‘God” occupies the position of em-
phasis in this great declaration, and is so placed
in the sentence as to be thrown up in sharp contrast
with the phrase “with God,” as if to prevent inade-
quate inferences as to the nature of the Word being
drawn even momentarily from that phrase. John
would have us realize that what the Word was in
eternity was not mercly God’s cocternal fellow, but
the eternal God’s self.
_ (2) The tncarnation.—Now, John tells us_that
it was this Word, eternal in His subsistence, God’s
eternal fellow, the eternal God’s self, that, as ‘come
in the flesh,” was Jesus Christ (1 Jn 4 2). ‘‘And
the Word became flesh” (Jn 1 14), he says. The
terms he employs here are not terms of substance,
but of personality. The meaning is not that the
substance of God was transmuted into that substance
which we call “flesh.’? ‘The Word” is a personal
name of the eternal God; “flesh” is an appropriate
designation of humanity in its entirety, with the
implications of dependence and weakness. The
meaning, then, is simply that He who had just been
described as the eternal God became, by a voluntary
act in time, a man. The exact nature of the act
by which He “became’”’ man lies outside the state-
ment; it was matter of common knowledge be-
tween the writer and the reader. The language em-
ployed intimates merely that it was a definite act,
and that it involved a change in the life-history of
the eternal God, here designated “the Word.”
The whole emphasis falls on the nature of this
change in His life-history. He became fiesh. That
is to say, He entered upon a mode of existence in
which the experiences that belong to human beings
would also be His. The dependence, the weakness,
which constitute the very idea of flesh, in contrast
with God, would now enter into His personal ex-
perience. And it is precisely because these are the
connotations of the term “flesh” that John chooses
that term here, instead of the more simply denota-~
tive term ‘‘man.’? What he means is merely that
the eternal God became man. But he elects to
say this in the language which throws best up to
view what it is to become man. The contrast be-
tween the Word as the eternal God and the human
nature which He assumed as flesh, is the hinge of
the statement. Had the evangelist said (as he
does in 1 Jn 4 2) that the Word ‘came in flesh,’
it would have been the continuity through the
change which would have been most emphasized.
When he says rather that the Word became flesh,
while the continuity of the personal subject is, of
course, intimated, it is the reality and the complete-


ness of the humanity assumed which is made most |


prominent.

(8) The incarnated person —That in becoming flesh
the Word did not cease to be what He was before
entering upon this new sphere of experiences, the
evangelist does not leave, however, to mere sug-
gestion. The glory of the Word was so far from
quenched, in his view, by His becoming flesh, that he
gives us at once to understand that it was rather as
“trailing clouds of glory” that He came. ‘And the
Word became flesh,” he says, and immediately adds:
“and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory,
glory as of the only begotten from the Father), full
of grace and truth” (1 14). The language is colored
by reminiscences from the Tabernacle, in which the


Glory of God, the Shekinah, dwelt. The flesh of
Our Lord became, on its assumption by the Word,
the Temple of God on earth (cf Jn 2 19), and the
glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord. John
tells us expressly that this glory was visible, that it
was precisely what was appropriate to the Son of
God as such, “And we beheld his glory,” he says;
not divined it, or inferred it, but perceived it. It
was open to sight, and the actual object of obser-
vation. Jesus Christ was obviously more than
man; He was obviously God. His actually ob-
served glory, John tells us further, was a “glory as
of the only begotten from the Father.” It was
unique; nothing like it was ever seen in another.
And its uniquencss consisted precisely in its con-
sonance with what the unique Son of God, sent
forth from the Father, would naturally have; men
recognized and could not but recognize in Jesus
Christ the unique Son of God. When this unique
Son of God is further described as “full of grace and
truth,”’ the elements of His manifested glory are not
to be supposed to be exhausted by this description
(ef 2.11). Certain items of it only are singled out
for particular mention. The visible glory of the
incarnated Word was such a glory as the unique
Son of God, sent forth from the Father, who was full
of grace and truth, would naturally manifest.

That nothing should be lacking to the declaration
of the continuity of all that belongs to the Word as
such into this new sphere of existence, and its full
manifestation through the veil of His flesh, John
adds at the close of his exposition the remarkable
sentence: ‘As for God, no one has even yct seen
him; God only begotten, who is in the hosom of the
Father—he hath declared him’ (1 18m). It is the
inearnate Word which is here called ‘only begotten
God. The absence of the article with this desig-
nation is doubtless due to its parallelism with the
word “God” which stands at the head of the cor-
responding clause.. The effect of its absence is to
throw up into emphasis the quality rather than the
mere individuality of the person so designated.
The adj. “only begotten” conveys the idea, not of
derivation and subordination, but of uniqueness and
consubstantiality: Jesus is all that God is, and He
alone is this. Of this ‘only begotten God’ it is
now declared that He ‘‘is’’—not ‘‘was,” the state
is not one which has been left behind at the incarna-
tion, but one which continues uninterrupted and
unmodified—‘‘into”—not merely ‘in”—“‘the bosom
of the Father’’—that is to say, He contmues in the
most intimate and complete communion with the
Father. Though now incarnate, He is still ‘with
God” in the full sense of the external relation inti-
mated in11. This being true, He has much more
than seen God, and is fully able to ‘interpret’? God
to men. Though no one has ever yet seen God, yet
he who has seen Jesus Christ, “God only begotten,”
has seen the Father (cf 14 9; 12 45). In this re-
markable sentence there is asserted in the most
direct manner the full Deity of the incarnate Word,
and the continuity of His life as such in His inear-
nate life; thus He is fitted to be the absolute revela-
tion of God to man.

This condensed statement of the whole doctrine
of the incarnation is only the prologue to a his-

torical treatise. The historical treat-
3. The ise which it introduces, naturally, is
Gospel written from the point of view of its
prologue. Its object is to present
Jesus Christ in His historical manifestation, as
obviously the Son of God in flesh. “These are
written,” the Gospel testifies, “that ye may believe
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God” (20 31);
that Jesus who came as a man (1 30) was thor-
oughly known in His human origin (7 27), con-
fessed Himself man (8 40), and died as a man dies


Person of Christ THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2344


(19 5), was, nevertheless, not only the Messiah, the
Sent of God, the fulfiller of all the Divine promises
of redemption, but also the very Son of God, that
God only begotten, who, abiding in the bosom of
the Father, is His sole adequate interpreter. From
the beginning of the Gospel onward, this purpose
is pursued: Jesus is pictured as ever, while truly
man, yet manifesting Himself as equally truly God,
until the veil which covered the eyes of His followers
was wholly lifted, and Heis greeted as both Lord and
God (20 28). But though it is the prime purpose
of this Gospel to exhibit the Divinity of the man
Jesus, no obscuration of His manhood is involved.
It is the Deity of the man Jesus which is insisted on,
but the true manhood of Jesus is as prominent in
the representation as in any other portion of the
NT. Nor is any effacement of the humiliation of
His earthly life involved. For the Son of man to
come from heaven was a descent (3 13), and the
mission which He came to fulfil was a mission of
contest and conflict, of suffering and death. He
brought His glory with Him (1 14), but the glory
that was His on earth (17 22) was not all the glory
which He had had with the Father before the world
was, and to which, after His work was done, He
should return (17 5). Here too the glory of the
celestial is one and the glory of the terrestrial is
another. In any event, John has no difficulty in
presenting the life of Our Lord on earth as the life
of God in flesh, and in insisting at once on the glory
that belongs to Him as God and on the humiliation
which is brought to Him by the flesh. It is dis-
tinctly a duplex life which he ascribes to Christ, and
he attributes to Him without embarrassment all
the powers and modes of activity appropriate on
the one hand to Deity and on the other to sinless
(Jn 8 46; cf 14 30; 1 Jn 3 5) human nature. In
a true sense his portrait of Our Lord is a dramatiza-
tion of the God-man which he presents to our con-
templation in his prologue.

V. Teaching of the Synoptic Gospels.—The
same may be said of the other Gospels. They are all
dramatizations of the God-man set forth in thetical
exposition in the prologue to John’s Gospel. The
Gospel of Luke, written by a known companion of
Paul, gives us in a living narrative the same Jesus
who is presupposed in all Paul’s allusions to Him.
That of Mark, who was also a companion of Paul,
as also of Peter, is, as truly as the Gospel of John
itself, a presentation of facts in the life of Jesus with
a view to making it plain that this was the life of
no mere man, human as it was, but of the Son of
God Himself. Matthew’s Gospel differs from its
fellows mainly in the greater richness of Jesus’ own
testimony to His Deity which it records. What is
characteristic of all three is the inextricable inter-
lacing in their narratives of the human and Divine
traits which alike marked the life they are depicting.
It is possible, by neglecting one series of their
representations and attending only to the other,
to sift out from them at will the portrait of either a
purely Divine or a purely human Jesus. It is im-
possible to derive from them the portrait of any
other than a Divine-human Jesus if we surrender
ourselves to their guidance and take off of their
pages the portrait they have endeavored to draw.
As in their narratives they cursorily suggest now
the fulness of His Deity and now the completeness
of His humanity and everywhere the unity of
Hig person, they present as real and as forcible a
testimony to the constitution of Our Lord’s person
as uniting in one personal life a truly Divine and a
truly human nature, as if they announced this fact
in analytical statement. Only on the assumption
of this conception of Our Lord's person as under-
lying and determining their presentation, can unity
be given to their representations; while, on this


supposition, all their representations fall into their
places as elements in one consistent whole. Within
the limits of their common presupposition, each
Gospel has no doubt its own peculiarities in the dis-
tribution of its emphasis. Mark lays particular
stress on the Divine power of the man Jesus, as
evidence of His supernatural being; and on the
irresistible impression of a veritable Son of God, a
Divine being walking the earth as a man, which He
made upon all with whom He came into contact.
Luke places his Gospel by the side of the Ep. to the
He in the prominence it gives to the human devel-
opment of the Divine being whose life on earth it is
depicting and to the range of temptation to which
He was subjected. Matthew’s Gospel is notable
chiefly for the heights of the Divine self-conscious-
ness which it uncovers in its report of the words of
Him whom it represents as nevertheless the Son of
David, the Son of Abraham; heights of Divine
self-consciousness which fall m nothing short of
those attained in the great utterances preserved for
us by John. But amid whatever variety there may
exist in the aspects on which each lays his particular
emphasis, it is the same Jesus Christ which all three
bring before us, a Jesus Christ who is at once God
and man and one individual person. If that be not
recognized, the whole narrative of the Synoptic
Gospels is thrown into confusion; their portrait of
Christ becomes an insoluble puzzle; and the mass of
details which they present of His life-experiences is
transmuted into a mere set of crass contradictions.
See also GosPELs, THE SYNOPTIC.

VI. Teaching of Jesus.—The Gospel narratives

not only present us, however, with dramatizations

of the God-man, according to their
1. The authors’ conception of His composite
Johannine person. They preserve for us also a
Jesus considerable body of the utterances of

Jesus Himself, and this enables us to
observe the conception of His person which underlay
and found expression in Our Lord’s own teaching.
The discourses of Our Lord which have been selected
for record by John have been chosen (among other
reasons) expressly for the reason that they bear
witness to His essential Deity. They are accord-
ingly peculiarly rich in material for forming a judg-
ment of Our Lord’s conception of His higher nature.
This conception, it is needless to say, is precisely
that which John, taught by it, has announced in the
prologue to his Gospel, and has illustrated by his
Gospel itself, compacted as it is of these discourses.-
It will not be necessary to present the evidence for
this in its fulness. It will be enough to point to a
few characteristic passages, in which Our Lord’s
conception of His higher nature finds esp. clear
expression.

(1) His higher nature—That He was of higher
than earthly origin and nature, He repeatedly
asserts. ‘Ye are from beneath,” he says to the
Jews (8 23), “I am from above: ye are of this
world; I am not of this world” (cf 17 16). There-
fore, He taught that He, the Son of Man, bad “‘de-
scended out of heaven” (3 18), where was His true
abode. This carried with it, of course, an assertion
of preéxistence; and this preéxistence is explicitly
affirmed: ‘What then,” Heasks, ‘“‘if yeshould behold
the Son of man ascending where he was before ?”
(6 62). It is not merely preéxistence, however, but
eternal preéxistence which He claims for Himself:
“And now, Father,” He prays (17 5), “glorify thou
me with thine own self with the glory which I
had with thee before the world was” (cf ver 24);
and again, as the most impressive language possible,
He declares (8 58 AV): “Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Before Abraham was, I am,” where He claims
for Himself the timeless present of eternity as His


mode of existence. In the former of these two last-


2345


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Person of Christ


¢ (1) His Deity—(a) Mk 13 32: The same is


cited passages, the character of His preéxistent life
is intimated; in it He shared the Father’s glory
from all eternity (“before the world was’’); He
stood by the Father’s side as a companion in His
glory. He came forth, when He descended to
earth, therefore, not from heaven only, but from the
very side of God (8 42; 17 8). Even this, how-
ever, does not express the whole truth; He came
forth not only from the Father’s side where He had
shared in the Father’s glory; He came forth out of
the Father’s very being—“‘I came out from the
Father, and am come into the world’ (16 28; cf
8 42). ‘The connection described is inherent and
essential, and not that of presence or external fellow-
ship” (Westcott). This prepares us for the great
assertion: ‘TI and the Father are one” (10 30), from
which it is a mere corollary that “He that hath seen
me hath seen the Father” (14 9; cf 8 19; 12 45).
(2) His- humiliation —In all these declarations
the subject of the affirmation is the actual person
speaking: it is of Himself who stood before men and
spoke to them that Our Lord makes these immense
assertions. Accordingly, when He majestically de-
clared, ‘‘I and the Father are”’ (plurality of persons)
“one” (neuter singular, and accordingly singleness
of being), the Jews naturally understood Him to be
making Himself, the person then speaking to them,
God (10 33; cf 5 18; 19 7). The continued same-
ness of the person who has been, from all eternity
down to this hour, one with God, is therefore fully
safeguarded. His earthly life is, however, distinctly
represented as a humiliation. Though even on
earth He is one with the Father, yet He “descended”
to earth; He had come out from the Father and
out of God; a glory had been left behind which
was yet to be returned to, and His sojourn on earth
was therefore to that extent an obscuration of His
proper glory. There was a sense, then, in which,
because He had “‘descended,’’ He was no longer
equal with the Father. It was in order to justify
an assertion of equality with the Father in power
(10 25.29) that He was led to declare: ‘I and my
Father are one’ (10 30). But He can also declare
“The Father is greater than I” (14 28). Obviously
this means that there was a sense in which He had
ceased to be equal with the Father, because of the
humiliation of His present condition, and in so far
as this humiliation involved entrance into a status
lower than that which belonged to Him by nature.
Precisely in what this humiliation consisted can be
gathered only from the general implication of many
statements. In it He was a “man”: ‘a man who
hath told you the truth, which [ have heard from
God? (8 40), where the contrast with ‘““God” throws
the assertion of humanity into emphasis (cf 10 33).
The truth of His human nature is, however, every-
where assumed and endlessly illustrated, rather than
explicitly asserted. He possessed a human soul
(12 27) and bodily parts (flesh and blood, 6 53 ff;
hands and side, 20 27); and was subject alike to
physical affections (weariness, 4 6, and thirst, 19 28,
suffering and death), and to all the common human
emotions—not merely the love of compassion (13 34;
14 21; 15 8-13), but the love of simple affection
which we pour out on “friends” (11 11; cf 16 14.
15), indignation (11 33.38) and joy (16 11; 17 13).
He felt the perturbation produced by strong ex-
citement (11 33; 1227; 18 21), the sympathy
with suffering which shows itself in tears (11 35),
the thankfulness which fills the grateful heart (6 11.
23; 11 41; 16 27). Only one human character-
istic was alien to Him: He was without sin: “the
prince of the world,’ He declared, “hath nothing
in me” (14 30; cf 8 46). Clearly Our Lord, as
reported by John, knew Himself to be true God
and true man in one indivisible person, the common
subject of the qualities which belong to each.


true of His self-consciousness as revealed in His
sayings recorded by the synoptists.


2. The Perhaps no more striking illustration
Synoptic of this could be adduced than_ the
Jesus remarkable declaration recorded in


Mk 18 32 (cf Mt 24 36): ‘But of that
day or that hour knoweth no one, not even the
angels in heaven, nor yet the Son, but the Father.’
Here Jesus places Himself, in an ascending scale of
heing, above “the angels in heaven,’’ that 1s to say,
the highest of all creatures, significantly marked here
as supramundane. Accordingly, He presents Him-
self elsewhere as the Lord of the angels, whose be-
hests they obey: ‘‘The Son of man shall send forth
his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom
all things that cause stumbling, and them that do
iniquity” (Mt 13 41), “And he shall send forth his
angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they
shall gather together his elect from the four winds,
from one end of heaven to the other’ (Mt 24 31;
ef 18 49; 25 31; Mk 8 88). Thus the “‘angels of
God” (Lk 12 8.9; 16 10) Christ designates as
His angels, the “kingdom of God” (Mt 12 28;
19 24; 21 31.43; Mk and Lk often) as His King-
dom, the “elect of God” (Mk 13 20; Lk 18 7;
ef Rom 8 33; Col 3.12; Tit 1.1) as His elect.
He is obviously speaking in Mk 13 22 out of a Di-
vine self-consciousness: ‘‘Only a Divine being can
be exalted above angels” (B. Weiss). He therefore
designates Himself by His Divine name, ‘‘the Son,”
that is to say, the unique Son of God (9 7; 111),
to claim to be whom would for a man be blasphemy
(Mk 14 61.64). But though He designates Him-
self by this Divine name, He is not speaking of what
He once was, but of what at the moment of speaking
He is: the action of the vb. is present, “‘knoweth.”
He is claiming, in other words, the supreme designa-
tion of ‘‘the Son,” with all that is involved in it, for
His present self, as He moved among men: He is,
not merely was, “the Son.’ Nevertheless, what He
affirms of Himself cannot be affirmed of Himself
distinctively as “the Son.’”’ For what He affirms of
Himself is ignorance—‘‘not even the Son”’ knows it;
and ignorance does not belong to the Divine nature
which the term “the Son” connotes. An extreme
appearance of contradiction accordingly arises from
the use of this terminology, just as it arises when
Paul says that the Jews “crucified the Lord of
glory” (1 Cor 2 8), or_exhorts the Ephesian elders
to “feed the church of God which he purchased with
his own blood” (Acts 20 28m); or John Keble
praises Our Lord for ‘‘the blood of souls by Thee
redeemed.” It was not the Lord of Glory as such
who was nailed to the tree, nor have either ‘“‘God”
or “souls” blood to shed. .

We know how this apparently contradictory mode of
speech has arisen in Keble’s case. He is speaking of
men who are composite beings, consisting of souls and
hodies, and these men come to be designated from oue
element of their composite personalities, though what
is affirmed by them belongs rather to the other; we may
speak, therefore, of the ‘‘hlood of souls" meaning that
these ‘‘souls,"* while not having blood as such, yet
designate persons who have hodies and therefore blood.
We know equally how to account for Paul's apparent
contradictions. e know that he conceived of Our
Lord as a composite person, uniting in Himself a Divine
and a human nature. In Paul's view, therefore, though
God as such has no blood, yet Jesus Christ, who is God
has blood because He is also man. He can justly speak,
therefore, when speaking of Jesus Christ, of His blood
as the blood of God. When preciscly the same phe-
nomenon meets us in Our Lord's spcech of Himself, we
must presume that it is the outgrowth of precisely the
same state of things. When He spcaks of ‘the Son
(who is God) as ignorant, we must understand that He
Is designating Himseif as ‘‘the Son" because of His
higher nature, and yet has in mind the ignorance of His
jower nature; what He means is that the person properly
designated ‘‘the Son” is ignorant, that is to say with
respect to the human nature which is as intimate an
element of His personality as is His Deity.


Person of Christ THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2346


When Our Lord says, then, that ‘the Son knows
not,’’ He becomes as express a witmess to the two natures
which constitute His person as Paul is when he speaks
of the blood of God, or as Keble is a witness to the two-
fold constitution of a human being when he speaks of
souls shedding blood. In this short sentence, thus, Our
Lord bears witness to His Divine nature with its suprem-
acy above all creatures, to His human nature with its
creaturely limitations, and to the unity of the subject
possessed of these two natures.

(b) Other passages: Son of Man and Son of God:
All these elements of His personality find severally
repeated assertions in other utterances of Our Lord
recorded in the Synoptics. There is no need to in-
sist here on the elevation of Himself above the kings
and prophets of the Old Covenant (Mt 12 41 ff),
above the temple itself (Mt 12 6), and the ordi-
nances of the Divine Law (Mt 12 8); or on His
accent of authority in both His teaching and action,
His great “I say unto you” (Mt 5 21.22), ‘Ef will;
be cleansed’ (Mk 1 41; 2 5; Lk 7 14); or on His
separation of Himself from men in His relation to
God, never including them with Himself in an “Our
Father,” but consistently speaking distinctively of
‘my Father” (e.g. Lk 24 49) and “your Father’
(e.g. Mt 5 16); or on His intimation that He is not
merely David’s Son but David's Lord, and that
a Lord sitting on the right hand of God (Mt 22 44);
or on His parabolic discrimination of Himself a
Son and Heir from all “servants” (Mt 21 33 ff); or
even on His ascription to Himself of the purely
Divine functions of the forgiveness of sins (Mk 2 8)
and judgment of the world (Mt 25 31), or of the
purely Divine powers of reading the heart (Mk 2 8;
Lk 9 47), omnipotence (Mt 24 30; Mk 14 62) and
omnipresence (Mt 18 20; 28 10). These things
illustrate His constant assumption of the possession
of Divine dignity and attributes; the claim itself
is more directly made in the two great designations
which He currently gave Himself, the Son of Man
and the Son of God. The former of these is His
favorite self-designation. Derived from Dnl 7
13.14, it intimates on every occasion of its employ-
ment Our Lord’s consciousness of being a supra-
mundane being, who has entered into a sphere of
earthly life on a high mission, on the accomplishment
of which He is to return to His heavenly sphere,
whence He shall in due season come back to earth,
now, however, in His proper majesty, to gather
up the fruits of His work and consummate all things.
It is a designation, thus, which implies at once a
heavenly preéxistence, a present humiliation, and a
future glory; and He proclaims Himself in this
future glory no less than the universal King seated
on the throne of judgment for quick and dead (Mk
8 31; Mt 26 31). The implication of Deity im-
bedded in the designation, Son of Man, is perhaps
more plainly spoken out in the companion desig-
nation, Son of God, which Our Lord not only ac-
cepts at the hands of others, accepting with it the
implication of blasphemy in permitting its appli-
cation to Himself (Mt 26 63.65; Mk 14 61.64;
Lk 22 29.30), but persistently claims for Himself
both, in His constant designation of God as His
Father in a distinctive sense, and in His less fre-
quent but more pregnant designation of Himself
as, by way of eminence, “the Son.” That His con-
sclousness of the peculiar relation to God expressed
by this designation was not an attainment of His
mature spiritual development, but was part of His
most intimate consciousness from the beginning, is
suggested by the sole glimpse which is given us
into His mind as a child (Lk 2 49). The high
significance which the designation bore to Him
is revealed to us in two remarkable utterances
preserved, the onc by both Matthew (11 27 ff)
and Luke (10 22 ff), and the other by Matthew

28 19).
\ G) Me 11 27; 28 19: In the former of these


utterances, Our Lord, speaking in the most solemn
manner, not only presents Himself, as the Son, as
the sole source of knowledge of God and of blessed-
ness for men, but placcs Himself in a position, not
of equality merely, but of absolute reciprocity and in-
terpenetration of knowledge with the Father. ‘No
one,” He says, “‘knoweth the Son, save the Father;
neither doth any know the Father, save the Son
....? varied in Luke so as to read: “No one
knoweth who the Son is, save the Father; and who
the Father is, save the Son... .” as if the being
of the Son were so immense that only God could
know it thoroughly; and the knowledge of the Son
was so unlimited that He could know God to per-
fection. The peculiarly pregnant employment
here of the terms “Son” and ‘Father’ over against
one another is explained to us in the other utter-
ance (Mt 28 19). It is the resurrected Lord’s
commission to His disciples. Claiming for Himself
all authority in heaven and on earth—which implies
the possesston of omnipotence—and promising to
be with His followers ‘alway, even to the end of
the world’—which adds the implications of omni-
presence and omniscience—He commands them to
baptize their converts ‘in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.’ The pre-
cise form of the formula must be carefully observed.
It does not read: ‘In the names’ (plural)—as if
there were three beings enumerated, each with its
distinguishing name. Nor yet: ‘In the name of
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,’ as if there were
one person, going by athreefoldname. Itreads: ‘In
the name [singular] of the Father, and of the
[article repeated] Son, and of the [article repeated]
Holy Ghost,’ carefully distinguishing three persons,
though uniting them all under one name. The
name of God was to the Jews Jeh, and to name
the name of Jeh upon them was to make them
His. What Jesus did in this great injunction was
to command His followers to name the name of God
upon their converts, and to announce the name of
God which is to be named on their converts in the
threefold enumeration of “the Father’ and ‘the
Son” and ‘the Holy Ghost.’ As it is unquestionable
that He intended Himself by ‘‘the Son,’”’ He here
places Himself by the side of the Father and the
Spirit, as together with them constituting the one
God. It is, of course, the Trinity which He is de-
scribing; and that is as much as to say that He
announces Himself as one of the persons of the
Trinity. This is what Jesus, as reported by the
Synoptics, understood Himself to be. See Trinity.

(2) His humanity—tIn announcing Himself to
be God, however, Jesus does not deny that He ig
man also. If all His speech of Himself rests on His
consciousness of a Divine nature, no less does all
His speech manifest His consciousness of a human
nature. He easily identifies Himself with men (Mt
44; Lk 4 4), and receives without protest the
imputation of humanity (Mt 1119; Lk 7 34).
He speaks familiarly of His body (Mt 26 12.26;
Mk 14 8; 14 22; Lk 22 19), and of His bodily
parts—His feet and hands (Lk 24 39), His head
and feet (Lk 7 44-46), His flesh and bones (Lk
24 39), His blood (Mt 26 28; Mk 14 24; Lk 22
20). We chance to be given indeed a very express
affirmation on His part of the reality of His bodily
nature; when His disciples were terrified at. His
appearing before them after His resurrection, sup-
posing Him to be a spirit, He reassures them with
the direct declaration: “See my hands and my feet,
that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit
hath not flesh and bones, as ye behold me having”
(Lk 24 39). His testimony to His human soul is
Just as express: ‘My soul,” says He, “is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death” (Mt 26 38; Mk 14
34). He speaks of the human dread with which


2347


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Person of Christ


He looked forward to His approaching death (Lk
12 50), and expresses in a poignant cry His seuse of
desolation on the cross (Mt 27 46; Mk 16 34).
He speaks also of His pity for the weary and hunger-
ing people (Mt 16 32; Mk 8 2), and of a strong
human desire which He felt (Lk 22 15). Nothing
that is human is alien to Him except sin. He never
ascribes imperfection to Himself and never betrays
consciousness of sin. He recognizes the evil of
those about Him (Lk 11 18; Mt 711; 12 34.
39; Lk 11 29), but never identifies Himself with
it. It is those who do the will of God with whom
He feels kinship (Mt 12 50), and He offers Himsclf
to the morally sick as a physician (Mt 9 12). Ke
proposes Himself as an example of the highest virtues
(Mt 11 28 ff) and pronounces him blessed who shall
find no occasion of stumbling in Him (Mt 11 6).

(3) Unity of the Person—These manifestations
of a human and Divine consciousness simply stand
side by side in the records of Our Lord’s self-expres-
sion. Neither is suppressed or even qualified by
the other. If we attend only to the one class we
might suppose Him to proclaim Himself wholly
Divine; if only to the other we might equally
easily imagine Him to be representing Himself as
wholly human. With both together before us we
perceive Him alternately speaking out of a Divine
and out of a human consciousness; manifesting
Himself as all that God is and as all that man is;
yet with the most marked unity of consciousness.
He, the one Jesus Christ, was to His own appre-
hension true God and complete man in a unitary
personal life.

VII. The Two Natures Everywhere Presupposed.
—There underlies, thus, the entire literature of the
NT a single, unvarying conception of the consti-
tution of Our Lord’s person. From Mt where He
is presented as one of the persons of the Holy Trinity
(28 19)—or if we prefer the chronological order of
books, from the Ep. of Jas where He is spoken of as
the Glory of God, the Shekinah (2 1)—to the Apoc-
alypse where He is represented as declaring that He
is the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last,
the Beginning and the End (1 8.17; 22 13), He
is consistently thought of as in His fundamental
being just God. At the same time from the Synop-
tic Gospels, in which He is dramatized as a mau
walking among men, His human descent carefully
recorded, and His sense of dependence on God so
emphasized that prayer becomes almost His most
characteristic action, to the Epp. of John in which
it is made the note of a Christian that He confesses
that Jesus Christ has come in flesh (1 Jn 4 2) and
the Apocalypse in which His birth in the tribe of
Judah and the house of David (6 5; 22 16), His
exemplary life of conflict and victory (3 21), His
death on the cross (11 8) are noted, He is equally
consistently thought of as true man. Neverthe-
less, from the beginuing to the end of the whole
series of books, while first one and then the other
of His two natures comes into repeated prominence,
there is never a question of conflict between the two,
never any confusion in their relations, never any
schism in His unitary personal action; but He is
obviously considered and presented as one, com-
posite indecd, but undivided personality. In this
state of the case not only may evidence of the con-
stitution of Our Lord’s person properly be drawn
indifferently from every part of the NT, and passage
justly be cited to support and explain passage with-
out reference to the portion of the NT in which
it is found, but we should be without justification
if we did not employ this common presupposition
of the whole body of this literature to illustrate and
explain the varied representations which meet us
cursorily in its pages, representations which might
easily be made to appear mutually contradictory


were they not brought into harmony by their rela-
tion as natural component parts of this one unitary
conception which underlies and gives consistency
to them all. There can scarcely be imagined a
better proof of the truth of a doctrine than its power
completely to harmonize a multitude of statements
which without it would present to our view only
a mass of confused inconsistencies. A key which
perfectly fits a lock of very complicated wards can
scarcely fail to be the true key.

VII. Formulation of the Doctrine.-—Meanwhile
the wards remain complicated. Even in the case
of our own composite structure, of soul and body,
familiar as we are with it from our daily experience,
the mutual relations of elements so disparate in a
single personality remain an unplumbed mystery,
and give rise to paradoxical modes of speech which
would be misleading, were not their source in our
duplex nature well understood. We may read, in
careful writers, of souls being left dead on battle-
fields, and of everybody’s immortality. The mys-
teries of the relations in which the constituent
elements in the more complex personality of Our
Lord stand to one another are immeasurably greater
than in our simpler case. We can never hope to
comprehend how the infinite God and a finite hu-
manity can be united in a single person; and it is
very easy to go fatally astray in attempting to ex-
plain the interactions in the unitary person of
natures so diverse from one another. It is not sur-
prising, therefore, that so soon as serious efforts
began to be made to give systematic explanations
of the Bib. facts as to Our Lord’s person, many one-
sided and incomplete statements were formulated
which required correction and complementing before
at length a mode of statement was devised which
did full justice to the Bib. data. It was accordingly
only after more than a century of controversy,
during which nearly every conceivable method of
construing and misconstruing the Bib. facts had
been proposed and tested, that a formula was
framed which successfully guarded the essential
data supplied by the Scriptures from destructive
misconception. This formula, put together by the
Council of Chalcedon, 451 AD, declares it to have
always been the doctrine of the church, derived from
the Scriptures and Our Lord Himself, that Our
Lord Jesus Christ is ‘truly God and truly man, of
a reasonable soul and body; consubstantial with
the Father according to the Godhead, and consub-
stantial with us according to the manhood; in all
things like unto us, without sin; begotten before all
ages of the Father according to the Godhead, and
in these latter days, for us and for our salvation,
born of the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, accord-
ing to the manhood; one and the same Christ, Son,
Lord, Only-begotten, to be acknowledged in two
natures inconfusedly, uuchangeably, indivisibly,
inseparably; the distinction of natures being by
no means taken away by the union, but rather the
property of each nature being preserved, and con-
curring in one Person and one subsistence, not parted
or divided into two persons, but one and the same
Son, and Only-begotten, God, the Word, the Lord
Jesus Christ.’’ There is nothing here but a careful
statement in systematic form of the pure teaching
of the Scriptures; and therefore this statement has
stood ever since as the norm of thought and teach-
ing as to the person of the Lord. As such, it has
been incorporated, in one form or another, into the
ereeds of all the great branches of the church; it
underlies and gives their form to all the allusions to
Christ in the great mass of preaching and song which
has accumulated during the centuries; and it has
supplied the background of the devotions of the
untold multitudes who through the Christian ages
have been worshippers of Christ.


Personality
Peter, Simon


2348


_ Liverature.—The appropriate sections in the treat-
ises on the Bib. theology of the NT; also A. B. Bruce,
The Humiliation of Christ, 2d ed, Edinburgh, 1881; R.
L. Ottley, The Doctrine of the Incarnation, London,
1896; H. C. Powell, The Principle of the Incarnation,
London, 1896; Francis J. Hall, The Kenotie Theory,
New York, 1898; C. A. Briggs, The Incarnation of the
Lord, New York, 1902; G. 8. Streatfeild, The Self-
Interpretation of Jesus Christ, London, 1906; B. B. War-
fleld, The Lord of Glory, New York, 1907; James Denney,
Jesus and the Gospel, London, 1909; M. Lepin, Christ and
the Gospel: or, Jesus the Messiah and Son of God, Phila-
delphia, 1910; James Stalker, The Christology of Jesus,
New York, 1899; D. Somerville, St. Paul’s Conception of
Christ, Edinburgh, 1897; E. H. Gifford, The Incarnation:
a Study of Phit 2 6-11, London, 1897; S. N. Rostron,
The Christology of St. Paul, London, 1912; E. Digges La
Touche, The Person of Christ in Modern Thoughts,
London, 1912.

{Note.—In this art. the author has usually given his
own translation of quotations from Scripture, and not
that of any particular VS.]

BensamMin B. WaRFIELD


PERSONALITY. See Person.


PERSUADE, pér-swid’, PERSUASION, pér-swa’-
zhun: (1) In the older Eng. ‘‘persuade’’ need not
mean “convince” (although this is its usual sense
in the AV: Mt 27 20, etc), but may mean only
“attempt to convince,” “argue with.” This is well
brought out iu Acts 26 28, where the Gr is lit. “In
little thou ‘persuadest’ [7el@ets, peitheis] to make
me a Christian.” AV took peitheis as “convinec”’
(“almost thou persuadest me... .’), but this is
impossible, and so the RV rendered peitheis by “thou
wouldest fain.” To keep something of the language
of AV, “persuasion” was supplied after “little,’’
but it should have bcen italicized, for it is merely
conjectural, as ARVm recognizes by giving “time”
as an alternative for ‘persuasion.’ The text of the
passage, however, is suspected. See ALmosy,
Similazly in Acts 13 43, RV replaces “persuade”
by “urge,” and the same change should have been
made also in 2 K 18 32 and |’s. (2) The “popular
persuasions’’ of 1 Esd 6 73 are ‘‘efforts to persuade
the people” (uncertain text, however). Acts 19 8
AV writes “persuading the things” (RV “as to the
things’’) for ‘present the things persuasively.”” And
in Gal 1 10 (ERV and AV, not in ARV) and 2 Cor
5 11, there is a half-ironic force in the word: St.
Paul’s enemies have accused him of using unworthy
persuasion in making his conversions.

Burton Scorr Easton

PERUDA, pe-rd0'da (NTU"B, peradha’). See Pz-
RIDA.


PERVERSE, pér-virs’: The group “perverse,
-ly, -ness,”’ “act perversely” in AV represents nearly
20 Heb words, of which, however, most are deriva-
tives of the stems MY, ‘awah, TI, luz, WPpy, ‘dkash.
RV has made few changes. In Job 6 30, RV
“mischievous” is better for the taste of a thing, and
in Isa 59 3 greater emphasis is gained by RV
“wickedness.” In Ezk 9 9, ‘“wresting of judgment”’
is perhaps too concrete, and ‘“‘perverseness”’ is kept
in them (inverted in AV). RVm “headlong” in Nu
22 32 is over-literal, but in 23 21 ARVm’s “trouble”
is a distinct improvement.


PESTILENCE, pes’ti-lens (131, debher; Aowpds,
loimés): Any sudden fatal epidemic is designated
by this word, and in its Bib. use it generally indi-
cates that these are Divine visitations. ‘The word
is most frequently used in the prophetic books, and
it occurs 25 t in Jer and Ezk, always associated with
the sword and famine. In 4 other passages it’ is
combined with noisome or evil beasts, or war. In
Am 4 10 this judgment is compared with the
plagues of Egypt, and in Hab 3 5 it is a concomi-
tant of the march of God from the Arabian moun-
tain. There is the same judicial character asso-
ciated with pestilence in Ex 5 3; 9 15; Lev 26


12; Ezk 14 19.21. )
Solomon, a special value is besought for such peti-
tions against pestilence as may be presented toward
the temple (2 Ch 6 28). Such a deliverance is
promised to those who put their trust in God (Ps
91 6). Here the pestilence is called noisome, a
shortened form of “annoysome,”’ used in the sense
of “hateful” or that which causes trouble or distress.
In modern Eng. it has acquired the sense of loath-
some. ‘‘Noisome’”’ is used by Tindale where AV
and RV have “hurtful” in 1 Tim 69. |

The Lat word pestilentia is connected with pestis,
“the plague,” but pestilence is used of any visita-
tion and is not the name of any special disease;
debher is applied to diseases of cattle and is tr? “‘mur-

a ted

In the NT pestilence is mentioned in Our Lord’s
eschatological discourse (Mt 24 7 AV; Lk 21 11)
coupled with famine. The assonance of loimds and
limés in these passages (loimos is omitted in the
RV passage for Mt) occurs in several classical pas-
sages, e.g. Herodotus vii.171. The pestilence is
said to walk in darkness (Ps 91 6) on account of its
sudden onset out of obscurity unassociated with
any apparent cause. ALEX. MACALISTER


PESTLE, pes”] oy, ‘élt): A rounded implement
of wood or stone used for pounding, bruising, or
powdering materials in a mortar. Used only in
Prov 27 22. See Mortar.


PETER, pé’tér (SIMON, si’mon):
1. Name and Early Career
2. First Appearance in Gospel History
3. Life-Story |
(1) First Period
(2) Second Period
4, Character
5. Writings
(1) First Epistle
(2) Second Epistle
6. Theology.
(1) Messianic Teaching
(2) Justification
(3) Redemption
(4) Future Life
(5) Holy Scripture
(6) Apostasy and Judgment
(7) Second Coming of Christ
LiTERATURE
The data for this article are found chiefly in the
four Gospels; in Acts, chs 1-15; in Gal 1 and 2;
and in the two Epp. of Peter.
Simon (or Simeon) was the original name of
Peter, the son of Jonas (or John), and brother of
Andrew, a disciple of John the Baptist,
1. Name as Peter also may havebeen. A fisher-
and Early man by occupation, he was an inhabit-
Career ant of Bethsaida on the Sea of Galilee,
though subsequently he dwelt with
his family at Capernaum (Mi 4 18; 8 14; 10 2;
16 16.17; 17 25; Mk 1 16.29.30.86; Lk 6 3.4.
5.8.10; 22 31; 24 34; Jn 1 40-44).
His first appearance in Gospel history is in Jn 1
35-42, when Andrew, having discovered Jesus to
be the Messiah, “‘first findeth his own
2. First brother Simon,” and “brought him unto
Appearance Jesus”; on which occasion it was that
in Gospel _ the latter, beholding him, said, ‘“Thou
History shalt be called Cephas,” an Aram. sur-
yname whose Gr synonym is Petrés, or
Peter, meaning ‘a rock” or “stone.” At this time
also he received his first eall to the discipleship of
Jesus, although, in common with that of others of
the Twelve, this call was twice repeated. See Mt 4
19; Mk 1 17; Lk 6 8 for the second call, and Mt
102; Mk 3 14.16; Lk 6 18.14 for the third.
Some interpret the second as that when he was
chosen to be a constant companion of Jesus, and the
third when he was at length selected as an apostle.


2349


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Personality
Peter, Simon


The life-story of Peter falls into two parts: first,
from his call to the ascension of Christ; secondly,
from that event to the close of his
3. Life- earthly career.
Story (1) The first period again may be
F conveniently divided into the events
prior to the Passion of Christ and those following.
There are about ten of the former: the healing of his
wife’s mother at Capernanm (Mt 8 14 ff); the
great draught of fishes, and its effect in his self-
abasement and surrender of his all to Jesus (Lk 6
1-11); his call to the apostolic office and his spiritual
equipment therefor (Mt 10 2); his attachment
to his Master, as shown in his attempt to walk upon
the waves (Mt 14 28); the same attachment as
shown at a certain crisis, in his inquiry “Lord, to
whom shall we go?” (Jn 6 68); his noble confession
of Jesus as the Christ, the Son of the living God,
and, alas, the rebuke that followed it (Mt 16 13-
23); the exalted privileges he enjoyed with James
and John as witness of the raising of Jairus’ daughter
(Mk 6 37) and the transfiguration of his Lord (Mt
17 1-5); and finally, the incident of the tribute
money, found only in Mt 17 24.

The events beginning at the Passion are more
easily recalled, because to so large an extent are they
found in all the Gospels and about in the same order.
They commence with the washing of his feet by the
Master at the time of the last, Passover, and the two
mistakes he made as to the spiritual import of that
act (Jn 13 1-10); the first of his presumptuous
boastings as to the strength of his devotion to his
Master, and the warning of the latter as to Satan’s
prospective assault upon him (Lk 22 31-84), twice
repeated before the betrayal in Gethsemane (Mt
26 31-35); the admission to the garden to behold
the Saviour’s deepest distress, the charge to watch
and pray, and the failure to do so through sleepi-
ness (Mt 26 36-46); the mistaken courage in
severing the ear of Malchus (Jn 18 10-12); the
forsaking of his Lord while the latter was being led
away as a prisoner, his following Him afar off, his
admission into the high priest’s palace, his denial
“before them all,” his confirmation of it by an oath,
his remembrance of the warning when “the Lord
turned and looked upon Peter,” and his tears of
bitterness as he went out (Mt 26 56-58; Mk 14
66-72; Lk 22 54-62; Jn 18 15-27).

It will be seen that the story of Peter’s fall is thus
related by all the evangelists, but, to quote another,
“None have described it in a more heinous light
than Mark; and if, as is generally supposed, that
Gospel was reviewed by Peter himself and even
written under his direction, this circumstance may
be considered as an evidence of his integrity and
sincere contrition.” }

Nothing more is heard of Peter until the morning
of the resurrection, when, on the first tidings of the
event, he runs with John to see the tomb (Jn 20
1-10); his name is esp. mentioned to the women
by the angel (Mk 16 7); and on the same day he
sees Jesus alive before any of the rest of the Twelve
(Lk 24 34; 1 Cor 15 5). Subsequently, at the Sea
of Tiberias, Peter is given an opportunity for a
threefold confession of Jesus whom he had thrice
denied, and is once more assigned to the apostolic
office; a prediction follows as to the kind of death
he should die, and also a command to follow his
Lord (Jn 21). E

(2) The second period, from the ascension of
Christ to the conversion of Paul, is more briefly
sketched. After the ascension, of which Peter was
doubtless a witness, he “stood up in the midst of
the brethren” in the upper room in Jerus to counsel
the choice of a successor to Judas (Acts 1 15-26).
On the day of Pentecost he preaches the first gospel
sermon (Acts 2), and later, in company with John,


instrumentally heals the lame man, addresses the
people in the Temple, is arrested, defends himself
before the Sanhedrin and returns to his ‘‘own
company” (Acts 3, 4). He is again arrested and
beaten (ch 5); after a time he is sent by the church
at Jerus to communicate the Holy Ghost to the
disciples at Samaria (ch 8). Returning to Jerus
(where presumably Paul visits him, Gal 1 18), he
afterward journeys ‘throughout all parts,” heals
Aeneas at Lydda, raises Dorcas from the dead at
Joppa, sees a vision upon the housetop which in-
fluences him to preach the gospel to the gentile
centurion at Caesarea, and explains this action
before ‘‘the apostles and the brethren that were in
Judaea” (9 32-41; ch 11).

After a while another persecution arose against
the church, and Herod Agrippa, having put James
to death, imprisons Peter with the thought of exe-
cuting him also. Prayer is made by the church on
his behalf, however, and miraculous deliverance is
given him (ch 12). Retiring for a while from public
attention, he once more comes before us in the
church council at Jerus, when the question is to be
settled as to whether works are needful to salvation,
adding his testimony to that of Pau] and Barnabas
in favor of justification by faith only (ch 16).

Subsequently he is found at Antioch, and having
fellowship with gentile Christians until ‘that cer-
tain came from James,” when ‘“‘he drew back and
separated himself, fearing them that were of the cir-
cumcision,” for which dissembling Paul “resisted
se oe face, because he stood condemned” (Gal

Little more is authentically known of Peter, ex-
cept that he traveled more or less extensively, being
accompanied by his wife (1 Cor 9 5), and that he
wrote two epp., the second of which was penned as
he approached the end of his life (2 Pet 1 12-15).

The tradition is that he died a martyr at Rome
about 67 AD, when about 75 years old. His Lord
and Master had predicted a violent death for him
(Jn 21 18.19), which it is thought came to pass by
crucifixion under Nero. It is said that at his own
desire he was crucified head downward, feeling him-
self unworthy to resemble his Master in his death.

It should be observed, however, that the tradi-
tion that he visited Rome is only tradition and
nothing more, resting as it does partly upon a mis-
calculation of some of the early Fathers, “who
assume that he went to Rome in 42 AD, immedi-
ately after his deliverance from prison” (cf Acts 12
17). Schaff says this “is irreconcilable with the
silence of Scripture, and even with the mere fact
of Paul’s Ep. to the Rom, written in 58, since the
latter says not a word of Peter’s previous labors in
that city, and he himself never built on other men’s
foundations” (Rom 15 20; 2 Cor 10 15.16).

The character of Peter is transparent and easily
analyzed, and it is doubtless true that no other ‘“‘in

Scriptural history is drawn for us more
4. His clearly or strongly.” He has been
Character styled the prince of the apostles, and,
indeed, seems to have been their leader
on every occasion. He is always named first in
every list of them, and was their common spokes-
man. He was hopeful, bold, confident, courageous,
frank, impulsive, energetic, vigorous, strong, and
loving, and faithful to his Master notwithstanding
his defection prior to the crucifixion. It is true
that he was liable to change and inconsistency, and
because of his peculiar temperament he sometimes
appeared forward and rash. Yet, as another says,
‘His virtues and faults had their common root in
his enthusiastic disposition,” and the latter were
at length overruled by Divine grace into the most
beautiful humility and meekness, as evinced in his
two Epp.


Peter, Simon
Peter, First Ep. of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2350


The leadership above referred to, however, should
not lead to the supposition that he possessed any
supremacy over the other apostles, of which there
is no proof. Such supremacy was never conferred
upon him by his Master, it was never claimed by
himself, and was never conceded by his associates.
See in this connection Mt 23 8-12; Acts 15 13.14;
2 Cor 12 11; Gal 2 11.

It is true that when Christ referred to the mean-
ing of his name (Mt 16 18), He said, ‘Upon this
rock J will build my church,” but He did not intend
to teach that His church would be built upon Peter,
but upon Himself as confessed by Peter in ver 16
of the same chapter. Peter is careful to affirm this
in the first of his two Epp. (2 4-9). Moreover,
when Christ said, “I will give unto thee the keys of
the kingdom of heaven,” ete (Mt 16 19), He in-
vested him with no power not possessed in common
with his brethren, since they also afterward received
the same commission (Mt 18 18; Jn 20 23). A
key is a badge of power or authority, and, as many
Protestant commentators have pointed out, to
quote the language of one of them, ‘‘the apostolic
history explains and hmits this trust, for it was
Peter who opened the door of the gospel to Israel
on the day of Pentecost (Acts 2 38-42) and to the
Gentiles in the house of Cornelius (Acts 10 34-46).”’
Some, however, regard this authority as identical
with the great commission (Mt 28 19). See Krys,
PowER OF THE.

The two Epp. of Peter were written presumably
late in life, as appears esp. of the Second (1 12-15).

Both were addressed to the same class
5. His of persons, chiefly Jewish Christians
Writings scattered abroad in the different prov-
inces of Asia Minor, among whom
Paul and his associates had planted the gospel (1
Pet 11.2; 2 Pet 31). The First was written
at Babylon (1 Pet 5 13), doubtless the famous
Babylon on the Euphrates, which, though destroyed
as a great capital, was still inhabited by a small
colony of people, principally Jews (see Weiss, 7NT,
IJ, 150; but see also Peter, First Eprstusr oF).

(1) First Epistle—The theme of the First Ep.
seems to be the living hope to which the Christian
has been begotten, and the obligations it lays upon


him. The living hope is expounded in the earlier |


part of the first chapter down to ver 13, where the
obligations begin to be stated, the first group includ-
ing hope, godly fear, love to the brethren, and praise
(4 13—2 10).

The writer drops his pen at this point, to take it
up again to address those who were suffering per-
secution for righteousness’ sake, upon whom two
more obligations are impressed, submission to
authority, and testimony to Christ (2 11—4 6).
The third group which concludes the book begins
here, dealing with such themes as spiritual hos-
pitality in the use of heavenly gifts, patience in
suffering, fidelity in service, and humility in min-
istering to one another. The letter was scnt to
the churches “by Silvanus, our faithful brother,” the
author affirming that his object in writing was to
exhort and testify concerning “the true grace of
God” (6 12).

The genuineness of this First Ep. has never becn
doubted, except of course by those who in these
latter days have doubted everything, but the same
cannot be said of the Second. It 1s not known to


whom the Jatter was intrusted; as a matter of fact |


it found no place in the catalogues of the NT Scrip-
tures of the 2d and 3d cents. The first church em-
ploying it was at Alexandria, but subsequently the
church at large became satisfied from internal evi-
dence of its genuineness and inspiration, and when
the Canon was pronounced complete in the 4th
cent., it was without hesitancy received.


(2) Second Epistle—The Second Ep. claims to
have been written by Peter (1 1; 3 1.2), to doubt
which would start more serious difficulties than can
be alleged against its genuineness, either because of
its late admission to the Canon or its supposed di-
versity of style from Peter’s early writing. See
Prrer, SECOND EpIsTLeE or. \

His object is the same in both Epp., to “stir up
your sincere mind by putting you in remembrance”
(3 1). Like Paul in his Second Ep. to Tim, he
foresees the apostasy in which the professing church
will end, the difference being that Paul speaks of
jt in its last stage when the laity have become in-
fected (2 Tim 8 1-5; 4 3.4), while Peter sees it in
its origin as traceable to false teachers (2 Pet 2
1-3.15-19). Asin the First Ep. he wrote to exhort
and to testify, so here it israther to caution and warn.
This warning was, as a whole, against falling from
grace (3 17.18), the enforcement of which warning is
contained in I 2-11, the ground of it in 1 12-21,
and the occasion of it in the last two chapters. To
speak only of the occasion: This, as was stated, was
the presence of false teachers (2 1), whose eminent
success is predicted (2 2), whose punishment is
certain and dreadful (2 8-9), and whose descrip-
tion follows (2 10-22). The character of their false
teaching (ch 3) forms one of the most interesting
and important features of the Ep., focusing as it
does on the Second Coming of Christ. ,

The theology of .Peter offers an interesting field
of study because of what may be styled its fresh-

ness and variety in comparison with
6. Theology that of Paul and John, who are the
great theologians of the NT.

(1) Messianic teaching—In the first place, Peter
is unique in his Messianic teaching as indicated in
the first part of the Acts, where he is the chief per-
sonage, and where for the most part his ministry is
confined to Jerus and the Jews. The latter, already
in covenant relations with Jch, had sinned in reject-
ing Jesus as the Messiah, and Peter’s preaching was
directed to that point, demanding repentance or a
change of mind about Him. The apparent failure
of the OT promises concerning the Davidic king-
dom (Isa 11 10-12; Jer 28 5-8; Ezk 87 21-28)
was explained by the promise that the kingdom
would be set up at the return of Christ (Acts 2
25-31; 15 14-16); which return, personal and cor-
poreal, and for that purpose, is presented as only
awaiting their national repentance (Acts 3 19-26).
See Scofield, Reference Bible, at the places named.

(2) Justification —But Peter’s special ministry
to the circumcision is by no means in conflict with
that of Paul to the Gentiles, as demonstrated at the
point of transition in Acts 10. Up until this time
the gospel had been offered to the Jews only, but
now they have rejected it in the national sense, and
“the normal order for the present Christian age”’ is
reached (Acts 18 44-48). Accordingly, we find
Peter, side by side with Paul, affirming the great
doctrine of justification by faith only, in the words,
“We believe that through the grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ we [Jews] shall be saved, even as they
[Gentiles]” (Acts 15 11 AV). Moreover, it is clear
from Peter’s Second Ep. (1 1) that his conception
of justification from the Divine as well as the human
side is identical with that of Paul, since he speaks of
justifying faith as terminating on the righteousness
of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ. As we under-
stand it, this is not the righteousness which God
is, but the righteousness which God gives (cf Rom
116.17; 3 21-25; 2 Cor 6 20.21).

(3) Redemption.—Passing from his oral to his
written utterances, Peter is particularly rich in his
allusions to the redemptive work of Christ. Limit-
ing ourselves to his First Ep., the election of the
individual believer is scen to be the result of the


2351


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Peter, Simon
Peter, First Ep. of


sprinkling of Christ’s blood (1 1); his obedience and
godly fear are inspired by the sacrifice of the “lamb
without blemish and without spot: Who verily was
foreordained before the foundation of the world”
(1 17-20 AV). But most interesting are the man-
ner and the connection iu which these sublime truths
are sometimes set before the reader. For example,
an exhortation to submission on the part of house-
hold slaves is the occasion for perhaps the most
concise and yet comprehensive interpretation of
Christ’s vicarious sufferings auywhere in the NT
(2 18-25, esp. the last two verses; cf also in its
context 3 18-22).

(4) Future life—Next to the redemptive work of
Christ, the Petrine teaching about the future life
claims attention. The believer has been begotten
again unto “‘a lively [or living] hope” (1 Pet 1 3);
which is “an inheritance’ “reserved in heaven”
(1 4); and associated with “praise, and glory and
honor at the revelation [Second Coming] of Jesus
Christ”’ (1 7.18; 418; 6 4.10; 2 Pet 1 11.16;
3 13, etc). This “hope” or “inheritance’’ is so real
and so precious as to cause rejoicing even in times of
heaviness and trial (1 Pet 1 6); to stimulate to
holiness of living (1 13-16); to patience in perse-
cution (4 12.13); fidelity in service (5 1-4); sted-
fastness against temptation (6 8-10); and growth
in grace (2 Pet 110.11). It is a further pecul-
iarity that the apostle always throws the thought of
the present suffering forward into the light of the
future glory. It is not as though there were merely
an allotment of suffering here, and an allotment of
glory by and by, with no relation or connection
between the two, but the one is seen to be incident
to the other (cf 1 Pet 17.11; 4138; 61; 2 Pet
3 12.13). It is this circumstance, added to others,
that gives Peter the title of the apostle of hope, as
Paul has been called the apostle of faith, and John
the apostle of love.

(5) Holy Scripture —Considering their limitations
as to space, Peter’s Epp. are notable for the em-
phasis they lay upon the character and authority
of the Holy Scriptures. 1 Pet 1 10-12 teaches a
threefold relation of the Holy Spirit to the Holy
Word as its Author, its Revealer, and its Teacher or
Preacher. The same chapter (vs 22-25) speaks of
its life-giving and purifying power as well as its
eternal duration. Ch 2 opens with a declaration
of its vital relation to the Christian’s spiritual
growth. In4 11, it is shown to be the staple of the
Christian’s ministry. Practically the whole of the
Second Ep. is taken up with the subject. Through
the “exceeding great and precious promises”’ of that
Word, Christians become “partakers of the divine
nature’ (1 4 AV); that they may be kept “always
in remembrance” is Peter’s object in writing (vs 12—
15 AV); the facts of that Word rest on the testi-
mony of eyewitnesses (vs 16-18); its origin is alto-
gether Divine (vs 20.21); which is as true of the NT
as of the OT (8 2); including the Epp. of Paul (vs
15.16).

ee and judgment—This appreciation
of the living Word of God finds an antithesis in the
solemn warning against apostate teachers and teach-
ing forming the substance of 2 Pet 2 and 3. The
theology here is of judgment. It is swift and “‘lin-
gereth not” (2 1-3); the Judge is He who ‘‘spared
not” in olden time (vs 4-7); His delay expresses
mercy, but He “will come as a thief” (3 9.10); the
heavens “shall pass away,” the earth and its works
shall be burned up (ver 10); ‘What manner of per-
sons orght ye to be in all holy living and godliness?”
ver 11).

(7) Second Coming of Christ—Peter’s theology
concerning judgment is a further illustration of the
Messianic character of his instruction. For example,
the Second Coming of Christ of which he speaks in


the closing chapter of the Second Ep. is not that
aspect of it associated with the translation of His
church, and of which Paul treats (1 Thess 4 13-18),
but that pertaining to Israel and the day of Jeh
spoken of by the OT prophets (Isa 2 12~22; Rev
19 11-21, etc).


Literaturs.—tThe history of Peter is treated more or
less at length in the intros to the comms. on his Epp.,
and in works on the life of Christ. But particular refer-
ence is made to the following: F. W. Farrar, Early
Days of Christianity, London, 1882; J.S. Howson, Studies
in the Life of St. Peter, London, 1883; H. A. Birks, Life
and Character of St. Peter, London, 1887; W. M. Ramsay,
The Church tn the Rom Empire, London, 1893: Mason
Gallagher, Was Peter Ever at Rome? Philadelphia, 1895;
A. C. McGiffert, The Apostolic Age, New York, 1897;
W. H._Grifflth Thomas, The Apostle Peter, London,
1904; G. Matheson, Representative Men of the NT, Lon-
don, 1905; A.J. Southonuse, The Making of Simon Peter,
New York, 1906; A. C. Gachelein, The Gospel of Matthew,
New York, 1907; The Acts of the Apostles, New York,
1912; Edmundson, Church in Rome in the Ist Cent., 1913;
Smith, The Days of His Flesh, New York, 1911.

On the theology of Peter, consult the subject in works
on Systematic or Bib. Theology, and see also R. W. Dalc,
The Atonement, 97-148, London, 1875; C. A. Briggs,
Messiah of the Apostles, 21-41, New York, 1895; Sco-
field, Reference Bible, where pertinent.

Among comms. on 1 and 2 Pet may be mentioned:
Brown, 3 vols, Edinburgh, 1848-56; Demarest, 2 vols,
New York, 1851-65; Leighton, republished, Philadelphia,
1864; Lillie, New York, 1869, G. F. C. Fronmiiller, in
Lange’s Comm., ET, New York, 1874; Plumptre, Cam-
bridge Bible, 1883; Spitta, Der zweite Brief des Petrus,
Halle, 1885; F. B. Meyer, London, 1890; Lumhy, £:-
positor's Bible, London, 1894; J. H. Jowett, London,
1905; Bigg, ICC, 1901.

James M. Gray

PETER, APOCALYPSE OF. See ApocryPHaL
Gospets, II, 4; Liveraturse, Sus-aposro.ic


(Intro).


PETER, GOSPEL ACCORDING TO. See
APOCRYPHAL GosPELS; LITERATURE, SUB-APOS-
TOLIC.


PETER, THE FIRST EPISTLE OF:


I. Canonicity or 1 Prerer
1. External Evidence
2. Internal Evidence
II, Tue Appress
Silvanus
ILI. Puacz anp TimME or ComposiTion
1. Babylon: Which?
2. Bahylon Not Rome
IV. Dessien
1. Persecution
2. Example of Christ
3. Relation to State
V. CnaractEeristic FEATURES OF THE EPISTLE
1. Freedom in Structure
2. Hope.
3. Inheritance
4, Testimony of Prophets
(1) Salvation '
(2) Spirit of, Christ
(3) Prophetic Study
5. The Christian Brotherhood
6. Spirits in Prison
VI. ANALyYsIs
LITERATURE


Simon Peter was a native of Galilee. He was
brought to the Saviour early in His ministry by his
brother Andrew (Jn 1 40.41). His call to the office
of apostle is recorded in Mt 10 14; Mk 3 13-16.


He occupied a distinguished place among the Lord’s
disciples. 1n the four lists of the apostles found in the
NT his name stands first (Mt 10 2-4; Mk 8 16-19;
Lk 6 14-16; Acts 1 13). He is the chief figure in the
first twelve chapters of the Acts. It is Peter that
preaches the first Christian sermon (Acts 2), he that
opens the door of the gospel to the gentile world in the
house of the Rom soldier, Cornelius, and has tho exquisite
delight of witnessing scenes closely akin to those of
Pentecost at Jerus (Acts 10 44-47). 1t was given him
to pronounce the solemn sentence on the guilty pair,
Ananias and Sapphira, and to rebuke in the power of the
Spirit the profane Simon Magus (Acts § 1-11; 8 18-23).
In these and the like instances Peter exhihited the
authority with which Christ had invested him (Mt 16
19)—an authority bestowed upon all the disciples (Jn
20 22.23)—the power to hind and to loose.


Two Epp. are ascribed to Peter. Of the Second


Peter, First Ep. of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2352


doubt and uncertainty have existed from the early
ages to the present. The genuineness and authen-
ticity of the First are above suspicion.

I, Canonicity of 1 Peter.—The proof of its integ-
rity and trustworthiness is ample and altogether sat-

isfactory. It falls into parts: external
1. External and internal. The historical attesta-
Evidence tion to its anthority as an apostolic

document is abundant. Polycarp, dis-
ciple of the apostle John, martyred in 156 AD at
86 or more years of age, refers to the Ep. in unmis-
takable terms. Irenaeus, a man who may well be
said to represent both the East and the West, who
was a disciple of Polycarp, quotes it copiously, we
are assured. Clement of Alexandria, born ec 150
AD, died ¢ 216 AD, cites it many times in his
Stromata, one passage (4 8) being quoted five times
by actual count. “The testimony of the early
church is summed up by Eusebius (HE, IN, xxiii,
3). He places it among those writings about which
no question was ever raised, no doubt ever enter-
tained by any portion of the catholic church”
(Professor Lumby in Bible Comm.).

The internal evidence in favor of the Ep. is as

conclusive as the external. The writer is well

acquainted with Our Lord’s teaching,
2. Internal and he makes use of it to illustrate and
Evidence enforce his own. The references he

makes to that teaching are many, and
they include the four Gospels. He is familiar like-
wise with the Epp., particularly Jas, Rom, and Eph.
But what is esp. noteworthy is the fact that 1 Pet
in thought and language stands in close relation
with the apostle’s discourses as recorded in Acts.
By comparing 1 Pet 1 17 with Acts 10 34; 1 21
with 2 32-36 and 10 40.41; 2 7.8 with 4 10.11; 2 17
with 10 28, and 3 18 with 3 14, one will perceive
how close the parallel between the two is. The
inference from these facts appears legitimate, viz.
1 Pet in diction and thought belongs to the same
period of time and moves in the same circle of truth
as do the other writings of the NT. The writer
was an apostle, and he was Simon Peter.

II, The Address.—Peter writes to the “elect
who are sojourners of the Dispersion.”’ James
employs the term ‘Dispersion’? to designate be-
lieving Hebrews of the Twelve Tribes who lived
outside the land (1 1). The Jews ineluded in it
the whole body of Israelites scattered among the
gentile nations (Jn 7 35). But we must not con-
clude from this that the Ep. is directed to Christian
Jews alone. Gentile believers are by no means
excluded, as 1 14.18.20; 2 10; 3 6; 4 3.4 abun-
dantly attest. Indeed, the gentile element in the
churches of Asia Minor largely predominated at the
time. The term “sojourners’’ represents a people
away from home, strangers in a strange land; the
word is tr? “pilgrims” in 2 11 and He 11 138—an
appropriate name for those who confess that they


have here no continuing city, but who seek one to |


come. While no douht Peter had believing Israel-
ites in mind when he wrote, for he never forgot that
his ministry belonged primarily to the circumcision
(Gal 2 7.8), he did not neglect the more numerous
gentile converts, and to these he speaks as earnestly
as to the others; and these also were “‘sojourners.”’

Three of the four provinces Peter mentions, viz.
Pontus, Cappadocia, and Asia, had representatives
at the memorable Pentecost in Jerus (Acts 2 9;
1 Pet 11). Many of these ‘“sojourners of the
Dispersion’? may have believed the message of the
apostle and accepted salvation through Jesus Christ,
and returned home to tell the good news to their
neighbors and friends. This would form a strong
bond of union between them and Peter, and would
open the way for him to address them in the familiar
and tender manner of the Ep.


| 2. Babylon


Silvanus appears to have been the bearer of the letter
to the Christians of Asia Minor: ‘‘By Silvanus, our
faithful brother, as I account him, I have
written unto you briefly’' (§ 12). It is
an assumption to assert from these words
that Silvanus was employed in the compo-
sition of the letter. The statement denotes rather the
bearer than the writer or secretary. Silvanus was Paul's
companion in the ministry to the Asiatic churches, and
since we do not read of him as going with Paul to Jerus
or to Rome, it is probable he returned from Corinth
(Acts 18 5) to Asia Minor and labored there. He and
Peter met, where no one knows, though not a few think
in Rome; as likely a guess perhaps is in Pal. At any
rate, Silvanus gave Peter an account of the conditions
in the provinces, the afflictions and persecutions of be-
lievers, and the deep need they had for sympathy and
counsel. He would, accordingly, be of the greatest
assistance to the apostle. This seems to account for the
peculiarity of language which Peter uses: ‘ By Silvanus,
our faithful brother, I have written unto you,” as if he
had some share in furnishing the contents of the Ep.

Il. Place and Time of Composition.—According
to 6 13 the Ep. was written in Babylon. But what

place ismeant? Two cities having this
1. Babylon: name were known in apostolic times.
Which ? One was in Egypt, probably on or near

the present site of Cairo, and we are
told that it was a “‘city of no small importance.”
Epiphanius calls it “great Babylon” (Zahn). The
absence, however, of all tradition that would tend
to identify this place with the Babylon of the Ep.
seems to shut it out of the problem. Babylon on
the Euphrates is regarded by many as the place here
designated. Jews in considerable numbers still
dwelt in Babylon, notwithstanding the massacre of
thousands in the reign of Claudius, and the flight of
multitudes into other countries. There ig much to
be said in favor of this city as the place meant, and
yet the absence of tradition im its support is a very
serious difficulty. A third view regards it as sym-
bolical of Rome. Roman Catholics thus interpret
it, and not a few Protestants so understand it.
Tradition which runs back into the first half of the
2d cent. appears to favor it, though much uncer-
tainty and obscurity still surround the earliest ages
of our era, in spite of the unwearied researches of
modern scholars. Papias, bishop of Hierapolis,
who lived in the first half of the 2d cent., appears to
have had no doubt that Peter was martyred in
Rome, and that the Babylon of the Ep. designates
the Imperial City. There are very serious objec-
tions to this interpretation. One is, that it is
totally out of keeping with Peter’s manner of
writing. Preéminently he is direct and matter-of-
fact in his style. The metaphorical language he
employs is mostly drawn from the OT, or, if from
himself, it is so common of use as to be well under-
stood by all readers. It is altogether improbable
that this man, plain of speech almost to bluntness,
should interject in the midst of his personal ex-
planations and final salutations such a mystical
epithet with no hint of what he means by it, or why
he employs such a mode of speech.

Besides, there is no evidence that Rome was called
Babylon by the Christians until the Book of Rev was
published, i.e. c 90-96 AD. But if 1 Pet
is dependent on the Apocalypse for this
name of Babylon as Rome, Peter could not
have been its author, for he died years
before that date. The Ep. was written
about 64 AD, at the time when persecutions under the
infamous Nero were raging, at which time also the apostle
himself bore his witness and went to his heavenly home,
even as his Master had forewarned him (Jn 21 1819).
While not unmindful of the great difficulties that beset
the view, nevertheless we are inclined to the opinion that
the Bahylon of 5 13 is the ancient city on the Euphrates.
See Peter (Simon).

IV. Design.—The apostle had more than one
object in view when he addressed the ‘elect’? in
Asia Minor. The Lord Jesus had charged him,

Feed my lambs’”—“Tend my sheep’—‘‘Feed my
sheep” (Jn 21 15-17). His two Epp. certify how
faithfully he obeyed the charge. With loving and


Silvanus


Not Rome


2353


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Peter, First Ep. of


tender hand he feeds the lambs and tends the whole |


flock, warns against foes, guards from danger, and
leads them into green pastures and beside still
waters. He reminds them of the glorious inherit-
ance they are to possess (1 3-9); he exhorts them
to walk in the footsteps of the uncomplaining
Christ (2 20-25); to be compassionate, loving,
tender-hearted, humble-minded, and circumspect
in their passage through this unfriendly world (3
8-12). He sums up the main duties of Christian
life in the short but pregnant sentencos, ‘Honor all
men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor
the king” (2 17). But his supreme object is to
comfort and encourage them amid the persecutions
and the sufferings to which they were unjustly
subjected, and to fortify them against the heavier
trials that were impending.

From the beginning the Christian church was the
object of suspicion and of hatred, and many of its
adherents had suffered even unto
death at the hands of both hostile
Jews and fanatical Gentiles. But
these afflictions were generally local
and sporadic. There were churches of large mem-
bership and wide influence which were unmolested
(1 Cor 4 8-10), and which seem to have been able
to get fair treatment in heathen courts (1 Cor 6
1-6). But the condition brought to view in 1 Pet
is altogether different. Trials and afflictions of the
severest sort assail them, and an enmity and hos-
tility, bent on their destruction, pursue them with
tireless energy. The whole Christian body shared
in the persecutions (6 9). The trial was a surprise
(4 12), both in its intensity, for Peter calls it
“fiery,” and for its unexpectedness. The apostle
represents it as a savage beast of prey, aroaring lion,
prowling about them to seize and devour (6 8.9).

A variety of charges were brought against the
Christians, but they were calumnies and slanders,
without any foundation in fact. They were spoken
against as evil-doers (2 12—kakopoién; malefict,
Tacitus calls them). Their adversaries railed
against them (3 9); reviled them (3 16); spake evil
of them (4 4); reproached them for the name of
Christ (4 14). These are ugly epithets. They
show how bitter was the hatred and how intense the
hostility felt by the heathen toward the Christians
who dwelt among them. If there had been any jus-
tification for such antagonism in the character and
the conduct of Christ’s people, if they were evil-doers,
“haters of the human race,” to be classed with
thieves and murderers and meddlers in other men’s
matters (4 14-16), as they were accused of being
and doing, we could understand the fierce opposi-
tion which assailed them and the savage purpose to
suppress them altogether, but the only ground for
the enmity felt against them was the refusal of the
Christians to join their heathen neighbors in their
idolatries, their feasts, winebibbings, revelings,
carousings, lasciviousness and lusts in which once
they freely shared (4 2-4). The Asian saints had
renounced all such wicked practices, had separated
themselves from their old companions in riotous
living and revolting debaucheries; they were wit-
nesses against their immoralities, and hence became
the objects of intense dislike and persecuting ani-
mosity. Peter bears testimony to the high char-
acter, the purity of life and the self-sacrificing de-
votion of these believers. In all Asia Minor no
better company of men and women could be found
than these disciples of Jesus Christ; none more sub-
missive to constituted authority, none more ready
to help their fellow-men in their distress and trouble.
The head and front of their offending was their
separation from the ungodly world about them, and
their solemn witness against the awful sins done
daily before their eyes.


1. Perse-
cution


How mightily does the apostle minister to his
suffering friends! He bids them remember the un-
complaining Christ when He was un-
2. Example justly afflicted by cruel men (2 19-25).
of Christ He tells them how they may effectively
put to silence their accusers, and refute
the calumnies and the slanders that are so cruclly
circulated against them, namely, by living such pure
and godly lives, by being so meck, docile, patient,
stedfast, true and faithful to God, that none can
credit the false accusations (2 1-5; 2 13-17; 3
8.9.13-17; 5 6-11). :


There is little or no evidence in the Ep. that the per-
seeutions were inflicted by imperial authority or that the
state was dealing with the Christians as
3. Relation enemies who were dangerous to the peace
to Stat of society. In the provinces to which the
0 state letter was sent there seems to have heen
: complete absence of formal trial and pun-
ishment through the courts. Peter does not speak of legal
proceedings against the Christians by the magistrates.
On the contrary, he urges them to be subject to every ordi-
nance of man for the Lord’s sake: whether to the king
as supreme; or unto governors, as sent by him for ven-
geance on evil-doers and for praise to them that do well
(2 ee They are to honor all men, to honor the kin;
(2 17). This submission would scareely be pressed i
the state had already proscribed Christianity and de-
creed its total suppression. This the imperial govern-
ment did later on, but there is no evidence furnished by
the apostle that in 64 AD—the date of the Ep.the
government formally denounced Christians and deter-
mined to annihilate them.


Peter exhorts his fellow-believers to silence their
persecutors by their upright conduct (2 15); they
are thus to put them to shame who falsely accuse
them (3 16); and they are not to combat evil
with evil nor answer reviling with reviling, but con-
trariwise with blessing (3 9). The antagonism here
indicated obviously springs from the heathen popu-
lace; there is no hint of arraignment before mag-
istrates or subjection to legal proceedings. It is
unbelievers who revile and slander and denounce
the people of God in the provinces.


Everything in the Ep. points to the time of Nero, 64
AD, and not to the time of Domitian or Trajan, or even
Titus. In Rome vast multitudes of Christians were put
to death in the most brutal fashion, so Tacitus relates,
but the historian asserts that there was a sinister report
to the effect that Nero himself instigated the burning of
the city (July 19, 64), and ‘‘he [Nero] falsely diverted the
charge on to a set of people to whom the vulgar gave
the name of Christians (or Chrestians), and who were
detested for the abominations which they _perpetrated.”’
See Nero. Certain facts are clear from Tacitus’ state-
ments, viz. that at the time the Christians were well
known as a distinct sect; and that they were subjected
to the dreadful sufferings inflicted upou them because
they were Christians; and the perseeutions at the time
were instigated by the fear and the brutality of the ty-
rant. Peter likewise recognizes the fact that believers
were disliked and calumniated hy their heathen neighhors
for the same reason—they were Christians: ‘‘If ye are
reproached for the name of Christ, hlessed are ye'’ (4
14); “But if a man suffer as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed; but let him glorify God in this name” (4 16).
But the imperial government at the time does not appear
to have taken formal action for the overthrow of Chris-
tianity as a system inimieal to the empire. Of course,
where direct charges of a criminal nature were made
against Christians, judicial inquiry into them would he
instituted. Butin the Ep. what believers had to endure
and suffer were the detraction, the vituperation, the
opprobrium and the vile and malignant slanders with
which the heathen assailed them.


V. Characteristic Features of the Epistle—It
has certain very distinct marks, some of which may
be noticed.

It does not observe a close logical sequence in its
structure, as those of Paul so prominently display.

There is truth in Dean Alford’s state-


1. Free- ment, although perhaps he pushes it
dom in rather far: ‘The link between one idea
Structure and another is found, not in any prog-


ress of unfolding thought or argument,
but in the last word of the foregoing sentence which
is taken up and followed out in the new one” (see
1 5.6.7.9.10, etc). This peculiarity, however, does


Peter, First Ep. of
Peter, Second Ep.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2354


not interfere with the unity of the ep., it rather
adds to it, and it gives to it a vividness which it
otherwise might not possess.
It isthe ep. of hope. How much it makes of this
prime grace! Peter seems never to grow weary of
describing it and exalting its radiant
2. Hope beauty and desirableness. He calls
it a living hope (1 3). It is born by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, and
it calmly awaits the glorious inheritance that soon
will be enjoyed. It is a hope that will be perfected
at the advent of Christ (1 13), and it is set on God,
hence cannot fail (1 21). Withsickly, dying hope we
are quite familiar. The device which a certain state
(South Carolina) has inscribed on its Great Seal is,
dum spiro spero (‘‘while I live I hope’). Such a
hope may serve for a commonwealth whose exist-
ence is limited to this world, but a man needs some-
thing more enduring, something imperishable. “It
is a fearful thing when a man and his hopes die
together” (Leighton). A Christian can confidently
write, ‘when I am dying I hope,” for his is a living
hope that fills and thrills the future with a blessed
reality.
The Christian’s glorious inheritance (1 3-5) is
depicted in one of the most comprehensive and sug-
gestive descriptions of the believer’s


3. Inherit- heritage found in the Bible. It is
ance declared to be “incorruptible.” The

word points to its substance. It is
imperishable. In it there is no element of decay.


It holds in its heart no germ of death. Like its
author, the living God, it is unchangeable and
eternal. It is “undefiled.” Jt is not stained by
sin nor polluted by crime, either in its acquisition
or its possession. Human heritages generally are
marred by human wrongs. There is hardly an acre
of soil that is not tainted by frand or violence. The
coin that passes from hand to hand is in many in-
stances soiled by guilt. But this of Peter is abso-
lutely pure and holy. It “fadeth not away.” It
never withers. Ages do not impair its beauty or
dim its luster. Its bloom will remain fresh, its
fragrance undiminished, forever. Thus our in-
heritance ‘‘is glorious in these respects: it is in its
substance, incorruptible: in its purity, undefiled: in
beauty, unfading”’ (Alford).

Now why does the apostle in the very opening of
his Ep. give so lofty a place to the saints’ inherit-
ance? He does so in order to comfort and encour-
age his fellow-believers with the consolations of the
Lord Himself, that they may bear stedfastly their
manifold sufferings and triumph over their weighty
afflictions. Hence he writes: “Wherein ye greatly
rejoice, though now for a little while, if need be, ye
have been put to grief in manifold trials, that the
proof of your faith ....may be found unto
praise and glory and honor at the revelation of
Jesus Christ” (1 6-9). He lifts their thoughts and
their gaze up far above the troubles and distresses
around them to Him whose they are, whom they
serve, who will by and by crown them with immortal
bliss.

The prophets and their study are described in
1 10.11: “Concerning which salvation the prophets

sought and searched diligently, who


4, Testi- prophesied of the grace that should
mony of come unto you,” ete. With Peter
Prophets and his fellow-apostles the testimony

of the prophets was authoritative and
final. Where they had a clear word from the OT


Scriptures, they felt that every question was settled
and controversy ‘was at an end.

(1) Salvation.—The burden of the prophetic
communications was salvation. The prophets
spoke on many subjects; they had to exhort, rebuke
and entreat their wayward contemporaries; to de-


_ Christian


nounce sin, to announce judgment on the guilty
and to recall them to repentance and reformation.
But ever and anon their vision was filled with the
future and its blessedness, their voices would swell
with rapture as they saw and foretold the great sal-
vation to be brought to the world and the grace
that would then so copiously go out unto men; for
the Messiah was to appear and to suffer, the just
for the unjust, that He might bring us to God.

(2) Spirit of Christ—The prophet’s messages
were the messages of the Spirit of Christ. It was
He who testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ
and the glories that should follow. The prophets
always disclaim any part in the origination of their
messages. They affirm in the most positive and
solemn manner that their predictions are not their
own, but God’s. Hence they are called the Lord’s
“spokesmen,” the Lord’s “mouth” (Ex 4 15.16;
7 1.2; 2 Pet 1 21).

(3) Prophetic study —They “sought and searched
diligently.’ These terms are strong and emphatic.
They pored over the predictions which the Spirit
had revealed through themselves; they scrutinized
them with eager and prolonged inquiry. Two points
engaged their attention: “What time or what man-
ner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them
did point unto.” The first ‘“what’’ relates to the
time of the Messiah’s advent; the second ‘‘what”
to the events and circumstances which would attend
His appearing—a fruitful theme, one that engages
the ingniry of nobler students—‘‘which things angels
desire to look into.”

The Christian brotherhood is described in 2 9.10:
“But ye are an elect race, a royal priesthood, a holy
nation, a people for God’s own pos-
session, that ye may show forth the
excellencies of him who called you out
Brotherhood of darkness into his marvellous light.”

The brotherhood is the new Israel.
The apostle describes it in terms which were applied
to the old Israel, but which include more than the
ancient Israel ever realized. The exalted concep-
tion is by one who was a strict Jew, the apostle of
the circumcision, and who held somewhat closely
to the Mosaic institutions to the end of his life. All
the more significant on this account is his testimony.
The descriptive titles which he here gathers together
and places on the brow of the Christian brotherhood
are of the most illustrious sort. A distinguished
man, a noble, a general, a statesman, will sometimes
appear in public with his breast covered with re-
splendent decorations which mark his rank or his
achievements. But such distinctions sink into
insignificance alongside of this dazzling cluster.
This is the heavenly nobility, the royal family of
the Lord of glory, decorated with badges brighter
far than ever glittered on the breast of king or em-
peror. But even in this instance Peter reminds
Christians of the glorious destiny awaiting them that
they may be strengthened and stimulated to sted-
fastness and loyalty in the midst of the trials
ae SH Be to which they are subjected (2
1.

A study of 1 Pet 3 18-20—“preached unto the
spirits in prison”—should here follow in the present
cursory review of the characteristic
features of the Ep., but anything like
an adequate examination of this diffi-
cult passage would require more space
than could be given it. Suffice it to quote a sen-
tence from Professor Zahn (NT, U1, 289) with which
the writer agrees: ‘That interpretation of 1 Pet 3
19 is in all probability correct, according to which a
preaching of Christ at the time of the Flood is re-
ferred to, ie. a preaching through Noah, so that
Noah is here represented as a preacher of righteous-
ness, as in 2 Pet 2 5.” See Prison, Sprrits 1n.


5. The


6. Spirits
in Prison


2355


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Peter, First Ep. of
Peter, Second Ep.


VI. Analysis——A very general analysis of the
Ep. is the following:

(1) Christian privileges, 1—2 10.

(2) Christian duties, 2 11—4 11.

(3) Persecutions and trials, 4 12—5 11.

(4) Personal matters and salutations, 5 12-14.

The chief doctrines of Christianity are found in
1 Pet. The vicarious suffering and death of the
Lord Jesus Christ (2 24; 3 18); the new birth
(1 3.23); redemption by the blood of Christ (1,18.
19), faith, hope, pationt endurance under unjust
suffering, and holiness of life, are all pressed upon
Christians with great earnestness and force.

Literature.—Bible Dicts., DB, HDB, Davis, DB,
EB, Sch-Herz, vol VIII; Intros: Westcott, Salmon,
Zahn; Vincont, Word Studies; Comms.: Bible Comm.,
Cambridge Bible for Schools; Lillio, Jameson, Fausett
and Brown, Alford, Bigg, Mayor (on 2 Pet), Johnstone


(homiletical), New York, 1888; Hort, 1 (+ 11-2 17,
New York, 1898. : i ie ?


Wituam G. MoorrngaD
PETER, THE SECOND EPISTLE OF:
qT:


Ex@erNat Evipence in Favor or Irs AposTouic
AUTHORITY
1. Ancient Opinion
2. Modern Opinion
3. Dr. Chase's View
II. Internat Evipence in Support or Its Apos-
ToLic AUTHORITY
. Style and Diction
. Reason of Dissimilarities
- Claim to Petrine Authorship
. Christian Earnestness
- Relation to Apostles
. Antobiographical Allusions
- Quoted by Jude
III. Docrrinay TeacuHInNes oF THE Epistie
1. Saving Knowledge
(1) Basis
(2) Growth
(3) Inerrancy of Sources
2. The Three Worlds
(1) The Old World
(2) The Present World
(3) The New World
The Second Ep. of Peter comes to us with less
historical support of its genuineness than any other
.book of the NT. In consequence, its right to a
place in the Canon is seriously doubted by some and
denied by others. There are those who confidently
assign it to the Apostolic age_and to the apostle
whose name it bears in the NT, while there are
those who as confidently assign it to post-apostolic
times, and repudiate its Petrme authorship. It is
not the aim of this article to trace the history of the
two opinions indicated above, nor to cite largely the
arguments employed in the defence of the Ep., or
those in opposition to it; nor to attempt to settle
a question which for more than a thousand years
the wisest and best men of the Christian church
have been unable to settle. Such a procedure
would in this case be the height of presumption.
What is here attempted is to point out as briefly
as may be some of the reasons for doubting its
canonicity, on the one band, and those in its sup-
port, on the other. ;
I. External Evidence in Favor of Its Apostolic
Authority—It must be admitted at the very outset
that the evidence is meager. The
1. Ancient first writer who mentions it by name is


NO oup Gob


Opinion Origen (c 240 AD). In his homily on
Josh, he speaks of the two Epp. of
Peter. In another place he quotes 2 Pet 1 4:


“partakers of the divine nature,” and gives it the
name of Scripture. But Origen is careful to say
that its authority was questioned: ‘Peter has lett
one acknowledged Ep., aud perhaps a second, for
this is contested.”’ Eusebius, bishop of Caesarea,
regarded it with even more suspicion than did
Origen, and accordingly he placed it among the
disputed books (Antilegomena). Jerome kuew the
scruples which many entertained touching the Ep.,
but notwithstanding, he included it in his Vulg
Version.


about it he states to be “difference of style from
1 Pet.” He accounts for the difference by sup-
posing that the apostle ‘made use of two different
interpreters.” As great teachers and scholars as
Origen, Eusebius, aud Jerome, e.g. Athanasius,
Augustine, Epiphanius, Rufinus and Cyril, received
it as genuine. At the Reformation Erasmus re-
jected 2 Pet; Luther seems to have had no doubt
of its genuineness; while Calvin felt some hesitancy
because of the “discrepancies between it and the
First.” In the 4th cent., two church councils
(Laodicea, c 372, and Carthage, 397) formally recog-
nized it and placed it in the Canon as equal in
authority with the other books of the NT.
_ The opinion of modern scholars as to references
in post-apostolic literature to 2 Pet is not only di-
vided, but in many instances antago-
2. Modern nistic. Salmon, Warfield, Zahn and
Opinion others strougly hold that such refer-
ences are to be found in the writings
of the 2d cent., perhaps in one or two documents
of the Ist. They insist with abundant proof in
support of their contention that Irenaeus, Justin
Martyr, the Shepherd of Hermas, and the Didache,
and Clement of Rome, were all acquainted with the
Ep. and made allusions to it in their writings.
Weighing as honestly and as thoroughly as one can
the citations made from that literature, one is
strongly disposed to accept the evidence as legiti-
mate and conclusive.
On the other side, Professor Chase (HDB) has
subjected all such references and allusions in the
primitive writings to a very keen and


3. Dr. searching criticism, and it must be
Chase’s frankly confessed that he has reduced
View the strength of the evidence and argu-


ment very greatly. But Professor
Chase himself, from the remains of the ancient lit-
erature, and from the internal evidence of the Ep.
itself, arrives at the conclusion that 2 Pet is not at
all an apostolic document, that it certainly was not
written by Peter, nor in the ist cent. of our era, but
about the middle of the 2d cent., say 150 AD. If
this view is aceepted, we must pronounce the Ep.
a forgery, pseudonymous and __pseudepigraphic,
with no more right to be in the NT than has the
Apocalypse of Peter or the romance of the Shepherd
of Hermas.
Hf. Internal Evidence in Support of Its Apostolic
Authority. At first sight, this seems to be not al-
together reassuring, but looking deeper
1. Style and into the letter itself we arrive at a
Diction satisfactory conclusion. Difference of
style between the two Epp. attributed
to Peter is given as one prominent reason for ques-
tioning the validity of the Second. It is mainly if
not entirely on this ground that Jerome, Calvin and
others hesitated to receive it. It is noteworthy
that in the earlier times objectious were not urged
because of its relation to Jude—its borrowing from
Jude, as is often charged in our days. Its alleged
dissimilarity to 1 Pet in diction, structure, and
measurably in its coutents, explains why it was
discredited. Admitting that there is substautial
ground for this criticism, nevertheless there are not
a few instances in which words rarely found in
the other Bib. books are common to the two Epp.
Some examples are given in proof: “precious” (1 Pet
1 7.19; 2 Pet 1 1) (a compound), occurring often
in Rev, not often in other books; “virtue” (1 Pet
2 9AVm; 2 Pet 1 3), found elsewhere only in Phil
4 8; “supply” (1 Pet 4 11; 2 Pet 1 5), rarein other
books; “love of brethren” (1 Pet 1 22; 2 Pet 1
7 m), only in three places besides; “behold” (1 Pet
2 12; 3 2[verbalform]; 2 Pet 1 16) (eyewitnesses),
not found elsewhere in the NT; “without blemish,”


The main reason for Jerome’s uncertainty | ‘without spot” (1 Pet 119; 2 Pet 3 14) (order


Peter, Second Ep.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2356


a


of words reversed); also positive side (2 Pet 2 13),
“spots and blemishes”; the words do not occur else-
where; “ungodly” (1 Pet 4 18; 2 Pet 2 5; 3 7)
occurs in but three other places, except Jude, which
has it three times.

Besides, there are many striking similarities in
thought and diction in the two Epp. Two instances


are given. In the First the saved are
2. Reason described as the “elect” (1 1), and as
of Dissimi- “called” (2 21). In the Second, the
larities two great truths are brought together

(1 10). Likewise, m both stress is
laid upon prophecy (1 Pet 1 10-12; 2 Pet 1
19-21). Now, all this tends to prove that the


writer of the Second Ep. was well acquainted with
the peculiarity of diction employed in the First, and
that he made use purposely of its uncommon terms,
or, if the Second was written by another than the
apostle, he succeeded surprisingly well in imitating
his style. The latter alternative does not merit
discussion. The differences arise mainly out of the
subjects treated in the two, and the design which
the writer seems to have kept constantly in view.
In the First, he sought to comfort, strengthen and
sustain his persecuted brethren; this is his supreme
aim. In the Second he is anxious to warn and to
shield those whom he addresses as to impending
dangers more disastrous and more to be feared than
the sufferings inflicted by a hostile world. In the
First, judgment had begun at the house of God
(4 17.18), and believers were to arm, not to resist
their persecutors, but for martyrdom (4 1). But
in the Second, a very different condition of things
is brought to view. Ungodly men holding de-
grading principles and practising shocking immoral-
ities were threatening to invade the Christian
brotherhood. Evil of a most vicious sort was de-
tected by the watchful eye of the writer, and he
knew full well that if suffered to continue and grow,
as assuredly it would, utter ruin for the cause he
loved would ensue. Therefore he forewarns and
denounces the tendency with the spirit and energy
of a prophet of God.


2 Pet opens with the positive statement of Peter's


authorship: ‘Simon ["Symeon," Nestle, Weymouth]
Peter, a servant....of Jesus Christ.”

3. Claim to The insertion of '‘Symeon,"’ the old Heb
Petri name, in the forefront of the document is
etrime _ significant. lf a forger had been writing
Authorship in Poter’s name he would have begun his


letter almost certainly by cepying the
First Ep. and simply written, ‘' Peter, an apostle of Jesus
Christ." Note also that ‘‘servant" is introduced into
the Second Ep., but is absent from the First. He desig-
nates himself as a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ.
"Although several pseudonymous writings appear in
early Christian literature, there is no Christian docu-
ment of value written by a forger who uses the uame of an
apostle'’ (Dods, SBD). If this important statement is
accepted at its full worth, it goes far to settle the question
of authorship. Both ‘‘servant'’ and ‘‘apostle’’ appear
in the opening sentence, and the writer claims both for
himself.
Furthermore, the writer is distinctively a Christian;
he addresses those who ‘'have obtained a like precious
pea ee the LS al on our
Hatt od an e Saviour Jesus ist’? (1 1).
4, Christian His is the same precious faith which all the
Earnestness saints enjoy; his also the exceeding great
and precious promises of God, and he ex-
pects with all other helievers te he made a partaker of
the Divine nature (1 3.4). Isit at all probable that one
with such a faith and such expectations would deliber-
ately forge the name of Simon Peter, an apostle of Jesus
Christ? The writer is unsparing in his denuuciations
of false teachers, corrupters of others, and perverters of
the truth. He instances the fall ef the angels, the de-
struction of Sodom, the rebuke of Balaam, as examples
of the doom of those who know the truth and yet live
in shameful sin and crime. Would a Christian and
servant of Jesus Christ be at all likely to commit in the
most flagrant manner the things he so vehemeutly con-
demns? If the writer was not the apostle Peter, he was
a false teacher, a corrupter of others, aud a hypocrite,
which seems incredible to us.
Moreover, he associates bimself with the other apostles
(3 2), is in full sympathy with Paul and is acquainted


with Paul's Epp. (3 15.16), and he holds and teaches the
same fundamental truth. An apostolic spirit breathes
through this document such as is generally
6. Relation ahseut from spurious writings and such as
e a forger does not exhibit. He is anxiously
to Apostles Concerned for the purity of the faith and
for the holiness and fidelity of believers.
He exhorts them to give “diligence that ye may be found
in peace, without spot and blameless in his sight,’’ and
that they ‘'grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ’? (3 14.18). All this and
much more of like devout teaching is apostolic in tone
and betokens genuineness and reality.


Still further, the writer appeals to certain facts
in the life of Peter that are almost autobiographical.
For example, he speaks of ‘‘putting
6. Auto- off of my tabernacle... . even as
biographical our Lord Jesus Christ signified unto
Allusions me” (1 13.14). The reference un-
doubtedly is to Jn 13 36; 21 18.19.
He claims to have been a witness of the Trans-
figuration (1 16-18). He indirectly claims the
inspiration without which true prophecy is im-
possible (1 19-21). He asserts that this is his
“second epistle’ (8 1). This testimony on the part
of the writer is personal, emphatic and direct. It
reads much like Peter’s plain way of speaking of
himself at the Council of Jerus, ‘“Ye know that a
good while ago God made choice among you, that
by my mouth the Gentiles should hear the word of
the gospel, and believe” (Acts 15 7).


Once more, Jude appears to quote from 2 Pet (see


Jupz). The question of the priority of the two Epp. is
by no means settled. Many recent writers

7. Quoted give the precedence to Jude, others to
b d Peter. One of the highest authority,
y Jude Zahn (NT, I, 238 ff), argues with great


force in suppert of the view that Peter's is
the older and that Jude cites from it. The arguments in
faver of this latter belief are here only summarized:
(1) Jude cites from writings other than Scripture, as the
apocryphal Book of En and perhaps also from the As-
sumption of Moses. Peter scarcely quotes from any
source. The former would be more likely to cite 2 Pet
2—3 3 than the latter from Jude vs 4-16. The re-
semblance between these two sections of the Epp. is so
close that one must have drawn both thoughts and
language from the other, or both availed themselves of
the same documentary source. Of this latter supposi-
tion antiquity furnishes no hint. The differences are
as marked as the resemblances, and hence the one who
cites from the other is noservile copyist. The real differ-
ence between the two is that between prediction and ful-
filment. (2) Peter_predicts the advent of the ‘false
teachers”’ 1). His principal vbs. are in the future
tense (2 1.2.3.12.13). He employs the present tense
indeed in describing the character and the conduct of the
libertines (2 17.18), but their presence and their dis-
astrous teaching he puts in the future (2 13.14). The
deadly germs were there when he wrote, the rank growth
would speedily folow. Jude, on the contrary, through-
out his short letter, speaks of the same corrupters as
already come; his objects are present, they are in the
midst of the people of God and actively doing their
deadly work. (3) Jude twice refers to certain sources
of information touching these enemies, with which his
readers were acquainted and which were designed to
warn them of the danger and keep them from hetrayal.
The two sources were (a) a writing that spoke of ‘'un-
godly men, turning the grace of our God into lasclvious-
ness, aud deuying our only Master and Lord, Jesus
Christ," ver 4; (b) the prediction of Peter that ‘‘in the
last days mockers shall come with mockery, walking
after their own lusts’' (2 Pet 3 3). Jude urges his
readers to remember the words which the apostles of
Christ had before spoken, and then he cites this predic-
tion of Peter in almost the exact terms: ‘‘In the last
time there shall be mockers, walking after their ungodly
lusts.’" He applies the prediction to the libertines then
and there practising their unholy deeds: ‘‘ These are they
who make separations, sensual, having uot the Spirit.”
The conclusion is inevitable. Jude quotes from Peter.
(4) Chronology gives the priority to Peter. The apostle
died between 63-67 AD, probably in 64 AD. The vast
majority of recent interpreters datc the Ep. of Jude at
75-80 AD. Thero is no doubt but that it was written
after the destruction of Jerus, 70 AD. Accordingly, It
is later than Peter's death by from 5 to 10 years. Jude
quoted from 2 Pet. This being so, it fellows that his
Ip. endorses that of Peter as being apostolic aud likewise
canonical, for he recognizes Petcr as an apostle and gifted
with the prophetic spirit. See Jupr; Prerer (Simon).


If, Doctrinal Teachings of the Epistle-—Only
some of the more important features of the Ep. are


2357


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Peter, Second Ep.


here noticed. If all were treated as they deserve
to be, this article would expand into the proportions
of a commentary.

The key-word of 1 Pet is Hope; of 2 Pet Knowl-
edge. The apostle gives to this gift of grace a

. prominent place (1 2.3.5.6.8; 2 20.21;
1. Saving 318). The term he uses is largely in
Knowledge the intensified form, viz. “full knowl-
edge’; that is, knowledge that rests
on fact, knowledge that comes to the believer as
something supernatural, as being communicated
by the Spirit of God, and therefore is true and eom-
plete. The grace and peace Peter asks for the saints
should issue in the knowledge of God and of Jesus
Our Lord, who has granted unto us all things that
pertain unto life and godliness through the knowl-
edge of Him (1 2.3).

(1) The basis of saving knowledge rests on the
“exceeding great and precious promises” which He
has made us, and which become ours by faith in
Him. It leads us into acquaintance ‘with the
righteousness of God, into the realization of our
calling as saints, and of the glorious destiny that
awaits them who know and trust God (1 2-4 AV).

(2) The growth in true knowledge (1 5-11): “In
your faith supply virtue,” etc. He does not ask
that faith be supplied, that these believers already
had. But starting with faith as the foundation of
all, let the other excellencies and virtues be richly
and abundantly furnished. The original word for
“supply” is derived from the Gr “ehorus,” in behalf
of the members of which the manager supplied
all the equipments needed. And Peter appro-
priating that fact urges Christians to give all dili-
gence to furnish themselves with the gifts and grace
he mentions, which are far more needful to the
Christian than were the equipments for the ancient
ehorus. See Suprry.

What a magnificent cluster Peter here gives! Each
springs out of the other; each is strengthened by the
other. ‘‘In your faith supply virtue,” or fortitude,
manliness; and let virtue supply ‘‘knowledge.”’ Knowl-
edge by itself tends to puff up. But tempered by the
others, by self-control, by patience, by godliness, by love,
it becomes one of the most essential and powerful forces
in the Christian character. Panl begins his list of the
“fruits of the Spirit’? with love (Gal 5 22); Peter ends
his with love. It is like a chain, each link holds fast to
its fellow and is a part of the whole. It matters little
at which end of the chain we hegin to count, for the
links form a unity, and to touch one is to touch all. God
freely gives what we need and all we need; we are to‘‘add
all diligence”’ to supply the need richly.

(3) Inerrancy of the sources of saving knowledge
(1 16-21). The apostle rests his teaching on two
trustworthy facts: (a) the fact and meaning of the
Saviour’s Transfiguration; (6) the fact of the in-
spiration of the Holy Spirit. Taken together these
two facts invest his teaching with infallible cer-
tainty. ‘For we did not follow cunningly devised
fables, when we made known unto you the power
and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were
eyewitnesses of his majesty.” Pagan mythology,
so widely prevailing at the time in Asia Minor,
indeed over the whole heathen world, was composed
of “myths” (Peter’s word) skilfully. framed and
poetically embellished. Jewish eabalism, and the
wild vagaries springing up in the Christian brother-
hood itself had no place in the gospel message nor
in apostolie teaching. What Peter and his fellow-
disciples taught was the very truth of God, for at
the Transfiguration they saw the outshining glory
of the Son of God, they heard the Divine Voice, they
beheld the two visitants from the unseen world,
Moses and Elijah. Of the majestic seene they were
eyewitnesses. Peter adds, “And we have the word
of prophecy made moresure.”” The Transfiguration
has confirmed what the prophets say touching the
future and God’s purpose to fill the earth with His
glory; every word He has spoken is to be made good.


Moreover, the apostle appeals to the inspiration of
the prophets in confirmation of his teaching: ‘No
eae of scripture is of private interpretation. For
no prophecy ever came by the will of man: but men
spake from God, being moved by the Holy Spirit... He
recognizes this as primary truth; that prophecy is not of
one’s own origination, nor is it to he tied up to the times
of the prophet. The prophecy was hrought to him, as
it is brought to us. Peter and his fellow-helievers did
not follow “cunningly devised fablos’’: they were borne
along in thelr prophetic utterances hy the Spirit.


Of course in 8 5-13, where the three worlds are
spoken of, three globes are not meant, but three
vast epochs, three enormous periods in


2. The earth’s history. The apostle divides
Three its history into three clearly defined
Worlds sections, and mentions some of the


characteristic features of each.

(1) The old world—The world that then was”
(3 6): this is his first world. It is the antediluvian
world that is meant, the world which the Flood
overwhelmed. Scoffers in Peter’s time asked, no
doubt with a sneer, “Where is the promise of his
coming? for, from the day that the fathers fell
asleep, all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the creation” (8 4). This is a sur-
prisingly modern inquiry. Mockers then as now
appealed to the continuity of natural processes, and
to the inviolability of Nature’s laws. Nature keeps
her track with unwavering preeision. ‘There is no
sign of any change; no catastrophe is likely, is
possible. The promise of His coming fails. Peter
reminds the skeptics that a mighty cataclysm did
once overwhelm the world. The Flood drowned
every living thing, save those sheltered within the
ark. As this is a historical fact, the query of the
mockers is foolish.

(2) The present world.—Peter’s second world is
“the heavens that now are, and the earth” (3 7).
It is the present order of things in sky and earth
that is meant. He asserts that this world is “stored
up for fire, being reserved against the day of judg-
ment and destruction of ungodly men.” The mar-
gin reads, “stored with fire,” i.e., it eontains within
itself the agency by which it may be consumed.
The world that now is, is held in strict. custody,
reserved, not for a second deluge, but for fire. The
advent of Christ and the judgment are associated
in Scripture with fire: “Our God shall eome, and
shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before him,
and it shall be very tempestuous round about him”
(Ps 50 3 AV; cfIsa 66 15.16; Dnl 7 10.11). Nor
is the NT silent on this point: ‘‘the revelation of
the Lord Jesus from heaven with the angels of his
power in flaming fire’ (2 Thess 1 7).

Ample materials are stored up in the earth for its con-
sumption by fire. The oils and the gases so inflammahle
and destructive in their energy can, when it may please
God to release these forces, speedily reduce the present
order of thingstoashes. Peter’s language does not signify
earth’s annihilation, nor its dissolution as an_ organic
body, nor the end of time. He speaks of cosmical con-
vulsions and physical revolutions of both sky and earth,
sneh as shall transform the planet into something glo-
rious and beautiful.


(3) The new world—The third world is this:
“But, according to his promise, we look for new
heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth right-
eousness”’ (3 13). This is Paradise restored. We
have sure ground for the expectancy; the last two
chapters of Rev contain the prophetie fulfilment:
“And I saw a new heaven and a, new earth: for the
first heaven and the first earth are passed away;
and the sea is no more.” The accomplishment of
these sublime predictions will involve a fundamental
change in the constitution of the globe. Life would
be impossible if the sea was no more. But He who
made the world can surely recreate it, clearing it of
every vestige of sin and misery and imperfection,
fitting it for the dwelling of perfect beings and of


Pethahiah
Pharaoh Hophra


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2358


His supreme glory. Immanuel will dwell with the
holy inhabitants of the new earth and in the new
Jerus which is to descend into the glorified planet.
John is bidden, ‘‘Write, for the predictions are faith-
ful and true; they shall not fail to come to pass.”


“Barth, thou grain of sand on the shore of the Universe


On Wee has thie Lord a great work to complete."”
LiveratTure.—See at end of Perzr, First Epistis OF;
Prerer (Simon).
Wititiam G. MoorrHEeap
PETHAHIAH, peth-a-hi’a (SNE, pthahyah,
“Jeh opens up’’):
ae Chief of the 19th course of priests (1 Ch 24


).

(2) One of the Levites having “foreign wives”
(Ezr 10 23; Neh 9 5; “Patheus’” in 1 Esd 9 28).

(3) Son of Meshezabeel, descendant of Judah,
who was “at the king’s hand in all matters con-
cerning the people” (Neh 11 24).


PETHOR, pé’thor (WIND, p*thar; Ba®odpa, Pha-
thovira, BaSotpa, Bathaira): The dwelling-place of
Balaam, situated on “the river” (the

1. Possibly Euphrates) (Nu 22 5). In Dt 28 4, it
the Assyr- is further described as being in Meso-
ian Pitru potamia (Aram-naharaim). Pethor is
identified with the Pedru(i) of the
geographical lists of Thothmes III (¢ 1500 BC)
and the Pitru (Pithru) of the Assyr king Shalman-
eser II, who states that in his 3d year (857 BC)
he took the city Ana-ASSur-utir-asbat (meaning:
“T founded [it] anew for ASSur’’), which the Hattda
(Hittites) called Pitru. He says that it lay on the
farther (western) bank of the Euphrates, by the
Sagurru or Sagira River, the modern Sajur. The
importance of Pitru is indicated by the fact that he
received there the tribute of the kings of Car-
chemish, Comagene, Melitene and other districts.
As Pitru is about 400 miles from Moab, this
meant for Balaam a three or four weeks’ journey,
but the messengers sent to fetch him,


2. Difficul- though they had to travel that dis-
ties of tance twice, could naturally, by press-
Identifi- ing their mounts, have performed it
cation in much less time. Doubt may hke-


wise be entertained as to the identity
of Pethor with Pitru by the absence in the latter
of the 4, which would lead one to expect rather the
Assyr form Pit(h)dru. Shalmaneser, however,
says that Pitru was the Hittite name, and that may
account for it. With regard to the derivation,
nothing can at present be said, except that, as a
Hittite name, Tomkins (Recards of the Past, V [Lon-
don, 1891], 38) has compared the name Pitru with
the Pteria of Herodotus 1.76 (identified with Bog-
haz-keui, the great Hittite capital in Cappadocia,
anciently called Hattu). T. G. PINCHES


PETHUEL, péthi’el ONIMB, pthi'él, “God’s
opening”): Father of Joel the prophet (Joel 1 1).


PETITION, pé-tish’un: Used in EV only as a
noun, usually as representing the Heb TENU,
sh’aah (Ps 20 5, M282, mish’alah), from the
common vb. SNU, sha@al, “to ask.’ The noun,
consequently, has no technical meaning, and may
be used indifferently in the active (Est 7 2) or
passive (1 S 1 27) sense, or for a petition addressed
to either God (1 § 1 17) or man (1 K 2 16), while
in Jgs 8 24; Job 6 8; Ps 106 15, it is rendered
simply “request.” Otherwise ‘‘petition’”’ repre-
sents the Aram. 193, baa (Dnl 6 7.13), the Gr
alrnua, aitéma (1 Jn 6 15), and dénous, déésis
(1 Mace 7 87, RV “supplication’’), and the Lat
oratio (2 Esd 8 24). Burton Scotr Easton


PETRA, pé’tra. See Sera.

PEULTHAI, pé-ul’thi, PEULLETHAI, pé-ul’é-
thi Onbdyp, pulltthay, ‘‘Jeh’s seed”): One of the
“norters,” Sth son of Obed-edom (1 Ch 26 5).


PHAATH MOAB, f4’/ath mo’ab (A, Baad Moa,
Phadth Madb, B followed by Swete, PeadepwaB,
Phthaleimadb [1 Esd 6 11]; 1 Esd 8 31 [AV ‘“Pa-
hath Moab”, B followed by Swete reads Maapwa8,
Maathmadb; Fritzsche in both places reads Baad
M48): One of the families, part of which, consisting
“of the sons of Jesus and Joab 2,812,” went up out
of captivity with Zerubbabel and Joshua (1 Esd
5 11), and part of which, viz. ‘“Eliaonias the son of
Zaraias and with him 200 men,” went up with Ezra
(1 Esd 8 31=‘Pahath-moab” of Ezr 2 6; 8 4;
{10 30]; and Neh 7 11 [8 11; 10 14]). As the
name of a Jewish clan or family the name Phaath
or Pahath Moab presents difficulties of which ex-
planations are offered, though none is convincing.
It is generally taken as “ruler of Moab,” which may
refer to the Israelite conquest of Moab in which this
family may have distinguished itself, or it may
have arisen from the settlement and incorporation
of a Moabite family in Heb territory, or from the
settlement of an Israelite family in Moabite terri-
tory (cf 1 Ch 4 22); or it may be the corruption
of some unknown word or name. Instances of such
corruption are quite common in these apocryphal
Heb proper names. See PanatH-Moas.

S. ANeus

PHACARETH, fak’a-reth (Paxapé6, Phakaréth,
but B followed by Swete correctly reads &. ZaPer,
Sabeié, together, A followed by AV reading “‘sons
of Sabie,” as a distinct family, 1 Esd 6 34): The
same as ‘‘Pochereth-hazzebaim” of Ezr 2 57.


PHAISOR, fa'sur, fa-i/sur (B, Parcotp, Phaisaiir,
A, Bawot, Phaisow): Head of one of the families
of priests some of whom had taken “strange wives”
(1 Esd 9 22)=‘‘Pashhur”’ of Ezr 10 22; styled
“Phassurus”’ in 1 Esd 5 25.


PHALDEUS, fal-dé’us (A [Fritzsche], PadSaios,
Phaldatos, B [Swete], PadraSatos, Phaladaias; AV
Phaldaius): One of those who stood on Ezra’s left
hand when he expounded the Law (1 Esd 9 44)=
“Pedaiah” of Neh 8 4.


PHALEAS, fa-lé’as (Padalas, Phalaias): A family
of “‘temple-servants’” who went up with Zerubbabel
from Babylon (1 Esd 5 29)=‘‘Padon” of Ezr 2 44.


PHALEC, fa’lek (Padé, Phalék, WH, Pade,
ae AV; Gr form of ‘‘Peleg” (thus RV) (Lk


PHALIAS, fa-li’as (Padlas, Phalias, A, Pidbas,
Phidthas; AV Biatas, following Aldine Brdras,
Bidtas): One of the Levites who read and explained
the Law to the multitude (1 Esd 9 48) =‘‘Pelaiah”
of Neh 8 7.


PHALLU, fal’oo (NB, See Pawo.
PHALTI, fal’ti (5B, palti). See Parts.


PHALTIEL, fal’ti-cl (ON"Q2B, palti’al; Syr
“Psaltiel’’; Vulg and AV Salathiel): ‘‘The captain
of the people’’ who came to Esdras between his first
and second vision (2 Esd 6 16). Fritzsche (Libri
Apoc vet. test.) reads ‘‘Phalthiel.’’ See Pattie.


2 Beane, fan-t’el, fan’t-el ONR, pend’él,
vision of God”; PavovfA, Phanouél): P. t of
Anna (Lk 2 36).’ See PENIEL, ee


pallw’).


2359


PHARAKIM, far’a-kim (Papaxelp, Pharakeim,
B, Papaxéy, Pharakém; AV Pharacim): One of the
families of temple-servants who returned with
Zerubhabel (1 Esd 6 31; not found in Ezr or Neh).


PHARAOH, fad, fa/rd-0 (TID, par'dh;
Papae, Pharad; Egyp per aa, “great house’):
Many and strange differences of opin-


1. Use of ion have been expressed concerning
Name in the use of this name in Egypt and else-
Egypt where, because of its importance in


critical discussions (see below). HEB
says “‘a name given to all Egyp kings in the Bible’;
it also claims that the name
could not have been received
by the Hebrews before 1000
BC. HDB (III, 819) says
that a letter was addressed to
Amenhotep as ‘Pharaoh, lord
of,” ete. According to Winek-
ler’s theory of a North
Arabian Musri, it was the
Hebrews alone in ancient
times who adopted the term
Pharaoh from the Egyptians,
the name not being found
even in the Am Tab or any-
Bite sbesn eauelige, liter- i
ature for the king of Egypt. (J i!
Such a result is obtained ac- FEE
cording to Winckler’s theory
by referring every reference
in cuneiform to “Pir‘n, king of
Musri” to the North Arabian
country.

In Egyp inscriptions the
term “Pharaoh” occurs from
the Pyramid inscriptions on-
ward. At first it is used
with distinct reference to its
etymology and not clearly as
an independent title. Pha-
raoh, “great house,” like Sub-
lime Porte, was applied first
as a metaphor to mean the
government. But asin such
an absolute monarchy as
Egypt the king was the
government, Pharaoh was,
by a figure of speech, put
for the king. Its use in
Egypt clearly as a title de-
noting the ruler, whoever he
might be, as Caesar among
the Romans, Shah among
Persians, and Czar among
Russians, belongs to a few
dynasties probably beginning with the XVIIIth,
and certainly ending not later than the XXIst,
when we read of Pharaoh Sheshonk, but the Bible
does not speak so, but calls him “Shishak king of
Egypt” (1 K 14 25). This new custom in the use
of the title Pharaoh does not appear in the Bible
until we have ‘“Pharaoh-necoh.” Pharaoh is cer-
tainly used in the time of Rameses II, in the “Tale
of Two Brothers” (Records of the Past, 1st series, II,
137; Recueil de Travaux, XXI, 13, 1.1). ;

It appears from the preceding that Bib. writers
use this word with historical accuracy for the various

periods to which it refers, not only for


Pharaoh.


2. Signifi- the'time of Necoh and Hophra, but for
cance of the time of Rameses II, and _use the
Use inthe style of the time of Rameses IT for the
Bible time of Abraham and Joseph, concern-


ing which we have not certain knowl-
edge of its use in Egypt. It is strongly urged that
writers of the 7th or 5th cent. BC would not have


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pethahiah
Pharaoh Hophra


been able to make such historieal use of this name,
while, to a writer at the time of the exodus, it would
have been perfectly natural to use Pharaoh [or the
king without any further name; and_ historical
writers in the time of the prophets in Pal would
likewise have used Pharaoh-necoh and Pharaoh
Hophra. This evidence is not absolutely conclusive
for an early authorship of the Pent and historical
books, but is very difficult to set aside for a late
authorship (ef Gen 12 14-20; 41 14; Ex 1 11;
311; 1K 31; 14 25; 2 Ik 23 29; Jer 44 30;
also 1 KK 1119; 2 K 18 21; 1 Ch 4 18).
M. G. Kyte
PHARAOH HOPHRA, hof’ra (Y2DN TB,
par’oh hophrat; Otadph, Mouaphré): He isso
called in Seripture (Jer 44 30); He-


1. Sole rodotus calls him Apries (ii.169). He
King, 689— is known on the monuments as Uah ‘ab
570 BC ‘ra, He was theson of Psammetichus


II, whose Gr mercenaries have left in-
scriptions upon the rocks of Abu-Sim-bel, and the
grandson of Pharaoh-necoh. He reigned alone from
589 BC to 570 BC, and jointly, by compulsion of his
people, with his son-in-law Aahmes (Gr Amasis) for
some years longer. Nosooner had he mounted the
throne than he yielded to the overtures of Zedekiah
of Judah, who thought Hophra’s accession a good op-
portunity for throwing off the yoke of Babylon. So,
as Ezekiel says (17 15), “he rebelled against him
[Nebuchadrezzar] in sending his ambassadors into
Egypt, that they might give him horses and much
people.” Zedekiah had entered into the intrigue

against the advice of Jeremiah, and
2. Alliance it proved fatal to Zedekiah and the
with kingdom. Nebuchadrezzar was not
Zedekiah slow to punish the disloyalty of his

_ vassal, and in a brief space his armies
were beleaguering Jerus. The Egyptians did
indeed march to the relief of their allies, and the
Chaldaeans drew off their forces from Jerus to meet
them. But the Egyptians returned without at-
tempting to meet the Chaldaeans in a pitched battle,
and Jerus was taken, the walls broken down and the
temple burnt up with fire.
When Jerus had fallen and Nebuchadrezzar’s
governor, Gedaliah, had been assassinated, the dis-
pirited remnant of Judah, against the


3. Recep- advice of Jeremiah, fled into Egypt,
tion of carrying the prophet with them. They
Jeremiah — settled at Tahpanhes, then Daphnae
and Jewish (modern Tell Defenneh), now identified
Captives with a mound bearing the significant


name of Kacr Bint el Yahudi, “the
palace of the Jew’s daughter.”’ Here Pharaoh had
a palace, for Jeremiah took great stones and hid
them in mortar in the brickwork “which is at the
entry of Pharaoh’s house at Tahpanhes,’”’ and
prophesied that Nebuchadrezzar would spread his
royal pavilion over them (Jer 43 8-13). The
Pharaoh of that day was Hophra, and when the
fortress of Tahpanhes was discovered and cleared
in 1886, the open-air platform before the entrance
was found. ‘Here the ceremony described by Jere-
miah took place before the chiefs of the fugitives
assembled on the platform, and here Nebuchadrezzar
spread his royal pavilion. The very nature of the
site is precisely applicable to all the events” (Flin-
ders Petrie, Nebesheh and Defenneh, 51). _It was in
568 BC that the prophecy was fulfilled when Nebu-
chadrezzar marched into the Delta.
More recently, in 1909, in the course of excava-
tions carried on by the British School of Archae-
ology in Egypt, the palace of King
4. Palace Apries, Pharaoh Hophra, has been
at Memphis discovered on the site of Memphis,
the ancient capital of Egypt. Under
the grey mud hill, close to the squalid Arab village


Pharaoh-necoh
Pharisees


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2360


of Mitrahenny, which every tourist passes on the
way to Sakkhara, had lain for centuries Hophra’s
magnificent palace, 400 ft. long by 200 ft., with
a splendid pylon, an immense court, and stone-
lined halls, of which seven have been found intact.
With many other objects of value there was found
a fitting of a palanquin of solid silver, decorated
with a bust of Hathor with a gold face. It is
said to be of the finest workmanship of the time
of Apries, a relic of the fire, which, Jeremiah pre-
dicted at Tahpanhes, the Lord of Hosts was to
kindle ‘in the houses of the gods of Egypt” (Jer
43 12).

Pharaoh Hophra, as Jeremiah prophesied (44 29f),
became the victim of a revolt and was finally
strangled.


Lirerature.—Flinders Petrie, History of Egypt, III,
344 f; Wiedemann, Geschichte von Alt-Aegypten, 190 fT:
Flinders Petrie and J. H. Walker, Memphis, I, II (‘The
Palace of Apries"); Herodotus ii.161—-69.


. .T. Nico.
PHARAOH-NECOH, né’ko (M13) MY7B, par'oh
nkhoh, also ID}, n*kha; Nexad, Nechad [2 K 28 29.
33.34; 2 Ch 36 22; 36 4, AV Necho,
1. Pharaoh- RV NECO; Jer 46 2; 2 Ch 35 20,
Necoh, 610- AV Necho, RV NECO]): Nekau II of
694 BC the monuments—Gr Nekds—was the
2d king of the XXVIth Dynasty, being
the son of Psammetichus I, famous in Gr contem-
porary history, whose long reign has left so many
memorials both in Upper and Lower Egypt (Herod.
11.153, 158,169). The great event of his reign (610-
594 BC) was his expedition across Syria to secure
for himself a share in the decaying empire of
Assyria. In the days of Esarhaddon and Ashur-
banipal, Egypt had been tributary to Assyria, and,
when it began to break up, Egypt and other sub-
ject kingdoms saw their opportunity to throw off
its yoke. Psammetichus had turned back the
Scythian hordes which had reached his border on
their western march, and now his son Necoh was
to make a bold stroke for empire.
On his expedition toward the East, he had to pass
through the territory of Judah, and he desired
to have Josiah its king as an ally.
2. Battle of Whatever may have been his reasons,
Megiddo, Josiah remained loyal to his Assyr
608 BC suzerain, declined the Egyp alliance,
and threw himself across the path of
the invader. The opposing armies met on the
battlefield of Megiddo, 608 BC, where Josiah was
mortally wounded and soon after: died amid the
lamentations of his people. Necoh marched north-
ward, captured Kadesh, and pressed on to the Eu-
phrates. Not having met an enemy there, he seems
to have turned back and established himself for a
time at Riblah in Syria. To Riblah he summoned
Jehoahaz whom the people had anointed king in
room of his father Josiah, deposed him after a brief
reign of 3 months, and set his brother Jehoiakim
on the throne as the vassal of Egypt. Jehoiakim
paid up the tribute of a hundred talents of silver and
a talent of gold which Necoh had imposed upon the
land, but he recovered it by exactions which he
made from the people (2 KK 23 35).
The Egyp monarch still kept some hold upon
Syria, and his presence there had attracted the
attention of the newly established
3. Battle of powcr at Babylon. The Chaldaeans
Carchemish, under Nebuchadrezzar set out for the
604 BC Euphrates, and, mecting the army of


Pharaoh-necoh at Carchemish, inflicted |


upon him a signal defeat. The Chaldaeans were
now undisputed masters of Western Asia, and the
sacred historian relates that “the king of Egypt
came not again any more out of his land; for the
king of Babylon had taken, from the brook of


Egypt unto the river Euphrates, all that pertained
to the king of Egypt” (2 K 24 7).
While Pharaoh-necoh II was ambitious to extend
his empire, he was bent also upon the commercial
development of Egypt. For this he
4. Com- set himself to collect a navy. He had
mercial De- two fleets built, composed of triremes,
velopment one of them to navigate the Mediter-
of Egypt ranean, the other to navigate the Red
Sea. In order to secure a combina-
tion of his fleets, he conceived the idea of reopening
the canal between the Nile and the Red Sea which
had been originally constructed by Seti I and
Rameses II, two Pharaohs of the days of the Israel-
ite oppression, but had become silted up by desert
sands. He excavated this old canal, following the
line of the former cutting, and widening it so that
two triremes might meet and pass each other in it.
According to Herodotus he was obliged to desist
from the undertaking in consequence of the mortal-
ity among the laborers, and it was left to Darius
to complete. He also resolved to try whether it
was possible to circumnavigate Africa, and, man-
ning his ships with Phoenician sailors, he sent them
forth with instructions to keep the coast of Africa
on their right and to return to Egypt by way of the
Mediterranean. They succeeded, and, rounding the
Cape of Good Hope from the East, anticipated by
two millenniums the feat which Vasco da Gama
accomplished from the West. The enterprise took
more than two years, and the result of it was of no
practical value. Herodotus, when he visited Egypt
in 450 BC, saw still remaming the docks which
Necoh had built for the accommodation of his
fleet.
Literaturse.—Flinders Petrie, History of Egypt, III,
335 ff; Wiedemann, Geschichte von Alt-Aegypten, 179-—


90; Rawlinson, Egypt (‘Story of the Nations'’), 354 ff;
Herodotus ii.158, 159.


. TT. Nrcou

PHARAOH’S DAUGHTER (FI"BN3, bath-
par‘ch): The princess who rescued Moses (Ex 2 5-
10; He 11 24). This is probably a title as well as
an appellation, indicating not only one of the daugh-
ters of a Pharaoh, but also some very distinguished
rank, thought to be most probably that of the heir to
the throne by birth; though she was debarred from
reigning by reason of sex, she still possessed the right
to entail the scepter and crown to her oldest son.
Positive identification of the ““Pharaoh’s daughter”
mentioned in the Bible is not possible yet. All
attempts toward identification are, of course, guided
by the particular theory of the oppressor accepted.
If the Pharaoh of the Oppression was Rameses II,
as is most likely, then Pharaoh’s daughter was prob-
ably the daughter of Seti I, an older sister of
Rameses II. If, as many think, the Pharaoh of
the Oppression was Thothmes III, then Pharaoh’s
daughter was some unknown princess. Some have
thought she was Hatshepsut, the “Queen Elizabeth
of Egypt.” M. G. Kye


PHARATHON, far’a-thon (Sapa0dv, Pharathan):
One of the strong cities of Judaea fortified by Bac-
chides during the Maccabean war (1 Mace 9 50).
LXX reads “Thamnatha-pharathon” as the name
of one city. Jos, however (Ant, XIII, i, 3), and
Syr supply the “and’’ between them. The name
represents a Heb pir‘athén. If it is to be taken
strictly as in Judaean territory, it cannot be identi-
fied with Prratuon (q.v.) of Jgs 12 15. In that
case we should probably seek for it with Dr. G. A.
Smith in some fortress covering the top of Wddy
Far‘ah. W. Ewina


PHARES, fa’réz (@apés, Pharés): AV; Gr form
of “Perez’’ (thus RV) (Mt 1 3; Lk 3 33).


ANCIENT PAINTING OF AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS


2361


PHAREZ, fa'réz (AV 1 Esd 5 9; 8 30): The
same as RV Puoros (q.v.).


PHARIDA, fa-ri’da (Papedd, Phareidd, A, Pa-
pid, Pharidd; AV Pharira): The clan name of one
of the families of ‘‘the servants of Solomon” who
came up from Babylon with Zerubbabel (1 Esd
poeaeg cue’ of Ezr 2 55=‘'Perida”’ of Neh


PHARIRA, fa-ri’ra: AV=RV Puarina (q.v.).


PHARISEES, far'i-séz (DMWINB, p*riishim; ape-
gator, Pharisatoi):
1. Name and General Character
2. Authorities—Josephus—NT—Talmud
I. History or THE Sect
1. Associated at First with Hasmoncans, but Later
Abandon Them
2. Change of Name
3. Later Fortunes of the Sect
4. In NT Times
5. In Post-apostolic Times
II. Docrrines or THE PHARISEES
1. eae eats of Josephus Colored by Greck
eas
. Conditional Reincarnation
. NT Presentation of Pharisaic Doctrines—Angels
and Spirits—Resurrection
. Traditions Added to the Law
. Traditional Interpretaticns (Sahbath, ctc)
. Students of Scripture
(1) Messianic Hopes
(2) Almsgiving
III. OrGanizaTion oF THE Puarisaic Party
The hdbhérim—Pharisaic Brotherhoods
IV. CnraractErR OF THE PHARISEES
1. Pharisees and People of the Land
. Arrogance toward Other Jews
. Regulations for the habhér
. The NT Account
(1) Their Scrupulosity
(2) Their Hypocrisy
5. Talmudic Classification of the Pharisees
V. Our Lorp's REvaTION To TRE PHRARISEES
1. Pharisaic Attempts to Gain Christ Over
2. Reasons for Pharisaic Hatred of Christ
3. Our Lord's Denunciation of the Pharisees
LITERATURE
A prominent sect of the Jews. The earliest notice
of them in Jos occurs in connection with Jonathan,
the high priest. Immediately after
1. Nameand the account of the embassy to the
General Lacedaemonians, there is subjoined
Character (Jos, Ant, XIII, v, 9) an account of
the Pharisees, Sadducees and Essenes,
therefore implying that then and in this connection
they had been prominent, although no notice of
any of these parties is to be found that confirms
that view. Later (XIII, x, 5), the Pharisees are
represented as envious of the success of John Hyr-
canus; Eleazar, one of them, insults him at his own
table. From the fact that earlier in the history the
Assidaeans occupy a similar place to that occupied
later by the Pharisees, it may be deduced that the
two parties are ina measureone. See Hasipazans;
AsmMoNnEANS. It would_seem that not only the
Pharisees, but also the Essenes, were derived from
the Assidaeans or hdsidhim. 7
In considering the characteristics and doctrines
of the Pharisees we are in some difficulty from the
nature of our authorities. ‘The writers
2. Authorities of the NT assume generally that the
character and tenets of the Pharisees
are well known to their readers, and only lay stress
on the points in which they were in antagonism to
Our Lord and His followers. The evidence of Jos, a
contemporary and himself a Pharisee, is lessened in
value by the fact that he modified his accounts of his
people to suit the taste of his Rom masters. The
Pharisees, with him, are a philosophic sect, and not
an active political party. Their Messianic hopes
are not so much as mentioned. Although the
Talm was written, both Mish and Gemara, by the


Oop wr


Pooh


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pharaoh-necoh
Pharisees


descendants of the Pharisees, the fact that the
Gemara, from which most of our information is
derived, is so late renders the evidence deduced
from Talmudic statements of little value. Even
the Mish, which came into being only a century
after the fall of the Jewish state, shows traces of
exaggeration and modification of facts. Still,
taking these deficiencies into consideration, we may
make a fairly consistent picture of the sect. The
name means “separatists,’”’ from W12, parash, “‘to
separate’’—those who carefully kept themselves
from any legal contamination, distinguishing them-
selves by their care in such matters from the com-
mon people, the ‘am ha-’drec, who had fewer scruples.
Like the Puritans in England during the 17th cent.,
and the Presbyterians in Scotland during the same
period, the Pharisees, although primarily a religious
party, became ere long energetically political. They
were a closely organized society, al] the members
of which called each other hdbhérim, ‘‘neighbors”’;
this added to the power they had through their
influence with the people. <
I. History of the Sect.—The Assidaeans (hést-
dhim) were at first the most active supporters of Judas
Maccabaeus in his struggle for religious freedom.
A portion of them rather than fight retired to the
desert to escape the tyranny of Epiphanes (1 Macc
2 27f). The followers of these in later days became
the Essenes. When Judas Maccabaeus cleansed the
temple and rededicated it with many sacrifices, it
is not expressly said, either in the Books of Mace
or by Jos, that he acted as high priest, but the prob-
ability is that he did so. This would be a shock to
the Assidaean purists, as Judas, though a priest,
was not a Zadokite; but his actions would be
tolerated at that time on account of the immi-
nent necessity for the work of reconsecration and
the eminent services of Judas himself and his
family.
When Bacchides appeared against Jerus with
Alcimus in his camp, this feeling against Judas took
shape in receiving the treacherous


1. Asso- Alcimus into Jerus and acknowledging
ciated at him as high priest, a line of action which
First with soon showed that it was fraught with
Has- disaster, as Alcimus murdered many
moneans, of the people. They had to betake
but Later themselves anew to Judas, but this
Abandon desertion was the beginning of a sepa-
Them rating gulf which deepened when he

made a treaty with the idolatrous
Romans. As is not infrequently the case with reli-


gious zealots, their valor was associated with a mystic
fanaticism. The very idea of alliance with heathen
powers was hateful to them, so when Judas began
to treat with Rome they deserted him, and he sus-
tained the crushing defeat of Eleasa. Believing
themselves the saints of God and therefore His
peculiar treasure, they regarded any association
with the heathen as taithlessness to Jeh. Their
attitude was much that of the Fifth Monarchy men
in the time of Cromwell, still more that of the
Cameronians in Scotland at the Revolution of 1688
who, because William of Orange was not a “cove-
nanted”’ king, would have none of him. As the
later Hasmoneans became more involved in worldly
politics, they became more and more alienated
from the strict Assidaeans, yet the successors of
Judas Maceabaeus retained their connection with
the party in a lukewarm fashion, while the Sad-
ducean sect was gaining in influence.

About this time the change of name seems to
have been effected. They began to be called
Pharisees, p'rishim, instead of hdsidhim—sepa-
ratists’’? instead of saints. A parallel instance is
to be found in the religious history of England.


Pharisees


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2362


The Puritans of the 17th cent. became in the 19th
“Non-conformists.’”” The earliest instance of the
Pharisees’ intervening in bistory is that
referred to in Jos (Ant, XIII, x, 5),
where Eleazar, a Pharisee, demanded
that John Hyrcanus should lay down
the high-priesthood because his mother had been a
captive, thus insinuating that be—Hyrcanus—
was no true son of Aaron, but the bastard of some
nameless heathen to whom his mother had surren-
dered herself. This unforgivable insult to himself
and to the memory of his mother led Hyrcanus to
break with the Pharisaic party definitely. Heseems
to have left them severely alone.

The sons of Hyrcanus, esp. Alexander Jannaeus,
expressed their hostility in a more active way.

Alexander crucified as many as 800 of
3. Later the Pharisaic party, a proceeding that
Fortunes of seems to intimate overt acts of hos-
the Sect tility on their part which prompted

this action. His whole policy was the
aggrandizement of the Jewish state, but his ambi-
tion was greater than his military abilities. His re-
peated failures and defeats confirmed the Pharisees
in their opposition to him on religious grounds. He
scandalized them by calling himself king, although not
of the Davidic line, and further still by adopting the
heathen name ‘‘Alexander,” and having it stamped
in Gr characters on his coins. Although a high
priest was forbidden to marry a widow, he married
the widow of bis brother. Still further, he incurred
their opposition by abandoning the Pharisaic tra-
dition as to the way in which the libation water was
poured out. They retaliated by rousing his people
against him and conspiring with the Syrian king.
On his deathbed he advised his wife, Alexandra
Salome, who succeeded him on the throne, to make
peace with the Pharisees. This she did by throw-
ing herself entirely into their hands. On her death
a struggle for the possession of the throne and the
high-priesthood began between her two sons, John
Hyreanus II and Aristobulus II. The latter, the
more able and energetic, had the support of the
Sadducees; the former, the elder of the two brothers,
had that of the Pharisees. In the first phase of the
conflict, Hyrcanus was defeated and compelled to
make a disadvantageous peace with his brother,
but, urged by Antipater, the Idumaean, he called
in Aretas, who inclined the balance at once to
the side of Hyrcanus. The Romans were appealed
to and they also, moved partly by the astuteness
of Antipater, favored Hyrcanus.
ultimately in the supremacy of the Herodians,
who through their subservience to Rome became
inimical to the Pharisees and rivals cf the Sad-
ducees.

When the NT records open, the Pharisees, who
have supreme influence among the people, are also
strong, though not predominant, in the
Sanhedrin. The Herodians and Sad-
ducees, the one by their alliance with
the Rom authorities, and the other by
their inherited skill in political intrigue, held the
reins of government. If we might believe the Tal-
mudie representation, the Pharisees were in the
immense majority in the Sanhedrin; the nasi’, or
president, and the ’abh-b0th-din, or vice-president,
both were Pharisees. This, however, is to be put
to the credit of Talmudic imagination, the relation
of which to facts is of the most distant kind.

Recently Biichler (Das grosse Synedrion in Jerus)
has attempted to harmonize these Talmudic fables with
the aspect of things appearing in the NT and Jos. He
assumes that there were two Sanhedrins, onc civil, having
to do with matters of government, in which the Sad-
ducees aero vere nel ely predominant, and the other
scholastic, in which the Pharisces were cqually pre-
dominant—the one the Senate of the nation, like the


2. Change
of Name


4, In
NT Times


All this resulted '


Senate of the United States, the other the Senate of a
university, let us say. of Jerus. Although followed
by Rabbi Lauterbach in the Jew Enc, this attempt
cannot be regarded as successful. There is no evidence
for this dual Sanhedrin either in the NT or Jos, on the
one hand, orin the Talm on the other.


Outside the Sanhedrin the Pharisees are ubi-
quitous, in Jerus, in Galilee, in Peraea and in the
Decapolis, always coming in contact with Jesus.
The attempts made by certain recent Jewish writers
to exonerate them from the guilt of the condem-
nation of Our Lord has no foundation; it is contra-
dicted by the NT records, and the attitude of the
Talm to Jesus.

The Pharisees appear in the Book of Acts to be
in a latent way favorers of the apostles as against
the high-priestly party. The personal influence
of Gamaliel, which seems commanding, was exer-
cised in their favor. The anti-Christian zeal of
Saul the Tarsian, though a Phurisee, may have
been to some extent the result of the personal feel-
ings which led him to perpetuate the relations of
the earlier period when the two sects were united
in common antagonism to the teaching of Christ.
He, a Pharisee, offered himself to be employed by
the Sadducean high priest (Acts 9 1.2) to carry
on the work of persecution in Damascus. In this
action Saul appears to have been in opposition to a
large section of the Pharisaic party. The bitter
disputes which he and the other younger Pharisees
bad carried on with Stephen had possibly infiu-
enced him.

When Paul, the Christian apostle, was brought
before the Sanhedrin at Jerus, the Pharisaic party

were numerous in the Council, if they
5. In Post- did not even form the majority, and
apostolic they readily became his defenders
Times against the Sadducees.

From Jos we learn that with the out-
break of the war with the Romans the Pharisees
werethrust into the backgroundby the more fanatical
Zealots, Simon ben Gioras and John of Gischala
(BJ, V,i). The truth behind the Talmudic state-
ments that Gamaliel removed the Sanhedrin to
Jabneh and that Johanan ben Zakkai successfully
entreated Vespasian to spare the scholars of that city
is that the Pharisees in considerable numbers made
peace with the Romans. In the Mish we have the
evidence of their later labors when the Sanhedrin
was removed from Jabneh, ultimately to Tiberias
in Galilee. There under the guidance of Jehuda
ha-Kadhish (‘‘the Holy”) the Mish was reduced to
writing. It may thus be said that Judaism became
Pharisaism, and the history of the Jews became
that of the Pharisees. In this later period the
opposition to Christianity sprang up anew and
became embittered, as may be seen in the Talmudic
fables concerning Jesus.

_Hf. Doctrines of the Pharisees.—The account
given of the doctrines of the Pharisees by Jos is
clearly influenced by his desire to


1. Jo- parallel the Jewish sects with the
sephus’ Gr philosophical schools. He directs
Statements especial attention to the Pharisaic
Colored by opinion as to fate and free will, since
Greek on this point the Stoic and Epicurean
Ideas sects differed very emphatically. He


regards the Pharisaic position as mid-~
way between that of the Sadducees, who denied fate
altogether and made human freedom absolute, and
that of the Essenes that ‘all things are left in the
hand of God.” He says ‘‘The Pharisees ascribe all
things to fate and God, yet allow that to do what
is right or the contrary is principally in man’s own
power, although fate codperates in every action.”
It is to be noted that Jos, in giving this statement
of views, identifies “fate” with “God,” a process
that is more plausible in connection with the Lat


2363


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pharisees


fatum, “something decreed,” than in relation to the
impersonal moira, or heimarméné, of the Greeks.
As Jos wrote in Gr and used only the second of
these terms, he had no philological inducement to
make the identification; the reason must have been
the matter of fact. In other words, he shows that
the Pharisees believed in a personal God whose will

was providence.
In connection with this was their doctrine of a
future life of rewards and punishments. The phrase
which Jos uses is a peculiar one:


2. Condi- “They think that every soul is immor-
tional Re- tal; only the souls of good men will
incarnation pass into another body, but the souls


of the evil shall suffer everlasting
punishment” (aidia timérid koldzesthai). From
this it has been deduced that the Pharisees held the
transmigration of souls. In our opinion this is a
mistake. We believe that really it is an attempt
of Jos to state the doctrine of the resurrection of
the body in a way that would not shock Hellenic
ideas. The Gr contempt for the body made the
idea of the resurrection abhorrent, and in this, as
in most philosophical matters, the Romans followed
the Greeks. It would seem that Jos regarded the
Pharisees as maintaining that this resurrection
applied only to the righteous. Still even this re-
striction, though certainly the natural interpreta-
tion, is not absolutely necessary. This is confirmed
by the corresponding section in the Antiqutties
(XVIII, i, 3): “They also believe... . that
under the earth there will be rewards or punish-
ments, according as they have lived virtuously or
viciously in this life, and the latter are to be de-
tained in an everlasting prison, but that the former
shall have power to revive and live again.” Jos
also declares the Pharisees to be very attentive
students of the law of God: “they interpret the
law with careful exactitude.”
Nothing in the Gospels or the Acts at all militates
against any part of this representation, but there is
much to fill it out. They believed in
3. NT Pres- angels and spirits (Acts 23 8). From
entation of the connection it is probable that the
Pharisaic present activity of such beings was the
Doctrines question in the mind of the writer. In
that same sentence belief in the resur-
rection is ascribed to the Pharisees.
Another point is that to the bare letter of the
Law they added traditions. While the existence of
these traditions is referred to in the
4, Tradi- | Gospels, too little is said to enable us
tions Added to grasp their nature and extent (Mt
to the Law 16 2ff; 16 5ff; Mk 7 1-23). The
evangelists only recorded these tradi-
tional glosses when they conflicted with the teaching
of Christ and were therefore denounced by Him.
We find them exemplified in the Mish. The Phari-
saic theory of tradition was that these additions to
the written law and interpretations of it had been
given by Moses to the elders and by them had been
transmitted orally down through the ages. The
classical passage in the Mish is to be found in
Pirké’Abhath: ‘Moses received the [oral] Law from
Sinai and delivered it to Joshua and Joshua to the
elders, and the elders to the prophets and the
prophets to the men of the great synagogue.”
Additions to these traditions were made by prophets
by direct inspiration, or by interpretation of the
words of the written Law. All this mass, as related
above, was reduced to writing by Jehuda ha-
Kadhosh in Tiberias, probably about the end of the
2d cent. AD. Jehuda was born, it is said, 185 AD,
and died somewhere about 220 AD.
The related doctrines of the immortality of the soul,
the resurrection of the body, and the final judgment


with its consequent eternal rewards and punish-

ments formed a portion and a valuable portion of
; this tradition.

5. Tradi- Less valuable, at times hurdensome and


tional Tnter- hurtful, were the minute refinements they
pretation of introduced into the Law. Sometimes the


the Law by ingenuity of the Pharisaic doctors was
Phari directed to lighten the burden of the pre-
ariseeS cept as in regard to the Sabbath. Thns


@ person was permitted to go much far-
ther than a Sabbath day's journey if at some time previ-
ous he had deposited, within the legal Sabhath day's
journey of the place he wished to reach, bread and
water; this polnt was now to be regarded as the limit
of his house, and consequently from this all distances
were to be ceremonially reckoned (Jew Enc, s.v.‘‘Erub"”).
The great defect of Pharisaism was that it made sln so
purely external. An act was right or wrong according
as some external condition was present or absent; thus
there was a difference in bestowing alms on the Sab-
bath whether the beggar put his hand within the door
of the donor or the donor stretched his hand beyond
his own threshold, as oe he seen _in the first Mish in
the Tractate Shabbath. ¢ man did not break the Sab-
hath rest of his ass, though he rode on it, and hence did
not break the Sabhath law, but if he carried a switch
with which to expedite the pace of the heast he was
guilty, because he had laid a burden upon it.


Along with these traditions and traditional inter-
pretations, the Pharisees were close students of the
sacred text. On the turn of a sentence
6. Close they suspended many decisions. So
Students of much so, that it is said of them later
the Text of that they suspended mountains from
Scripture hairs. This is esp. the case with
regard to the Sabbath law with its
burdensome minutiae. At the same time there was
care as to the actual wording of the text of the Law;
this has a bearing on textual criticism, even to the
present day. A specimen of Pharisaic exegesis
which Paul turns against their followers as an
argumentum ad hominem may be seen in Gal 3 16:
“He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of
one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.”

(1) Messianic hopes—It is also to be said for
them, that they maintained the Messianic hopes of
the nation when their rivals were ready to sacrifice
everything to the Romans, in order to gain greater
political influence for themselves. Their imagina-


| tion ran riot in the pictures they drew of these


future times, but still they aided the faith of the
people who were thus in a position to listen to the
claims of Christ. They were led by Rabbi Akiha
in the reign of Hadrian to accept Bar-Cochha about
a century after they had rejected Jesus. They were
fanatical in their obedience to the Law as they under-
stood it, and died under untold tortures rather than
transgress.

(2) Almsgiving.—They elevated almsgiving into
an equivalent for righteousness. This gave poverty
a very different place from what it had in Greece or
among the Romans. Learning was honored, al-
though its possessors might be very poor. Thestory
of the early life of Hillel brings this out. He is
represented as being so poor as to be unable some-
times to pay the small daily fee which admitted
pupils to the rabhinic school, and when this hap-
pened, in his eagerness for the Law, he is reported
to have listened on the roof to the words of the
teachers. This is probably not historically true,
but it exhibits the Pharisaic ideal. ~

HI, Organization af the Pharisaic Party.—We
have no distinct account of this organization, either
in the Gospels, in Jos, or in the Talm. But the
close relationship which the members of the sect
sustained to each other, their habit of united action
as exhibited in the narratives of the NT and of Jos
are thus most naturally explained. The Talmudic
account of the hdbhérim affords confirmation of this.
These were persons who primarily associated for the
study of the Law and for the better observance of
its precepts. No one was admitted to these hd-


Pharisees
Phassurus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2364


bhurdth without taking an oath of fidelity to the
society and a promise of strict observance of Leviti-
cal precepts.

One of the elements of their promise has to be noted.


The habhéer promised not to pay ma‘dsréth, *‘tithe,’’ or
terimah, * heave offering,'’ to a priest who


Pharisaic was not a kabhér. They were only per-
Brother- mitted to take this oath when their asso-

ciates in the brotherhood certified to their
hoods character. Even then the candidate had


to pass through a period of probation of
30 days, according to the ‘‘house of Hillel,’’ of a year, ac-
cording to the “ house of Shammai.'’ Thislatter element,
being quite more Talmudico, may be regarded as doubtful.
Association with any not helonging to the Pharisaic
society was put under numerous restrictions. It is at
least not improhahle that when the lawyer in Lk 10 29
demanded “Who is my neighbor?" he was minded to
restrict the instances of the command in Lev 19 18 to
those who were, like himself, Pharisees. A society
which thus had brotherhoods all over Pal and was sepa-
rated from the rest of the community would naturally
wield formidable power when their claims were supported
hy the esteem of the people at large. It is to he observed
that to be_a habhér was a purely personal thing, not
heritable like ‘priesthood, and women as well as men
might be members. In this the Pharisees were like the
Christians. In another matter also there was a resem-
blance between them and the followers of Jesus; they,
unlike the Sadducees, were eager to make proselytes.
‘“Ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte’”’ (Mt
23 15). Many members of Rom society, esp. women,
were proselytes, as, for instance, Poppaea Sahina.


IV. Character of the Pharisees.—Because the
ideal of the Pharisees was high, and because they


reverenced learning and _ character
1. Phari- above wealth and civil rank, they had a
seesand tendency to despise those who did not
People of agree with them. We see traces of
the Land this in the Gospels; thus Jn 7 49:


“This multitude that~kneweth-mot
the law are accursed.’ The distinction between
the Pharisees, the Puritans and the ‘am hé-Grec,
“the people of the land,”’ began with the distinction
that had to be kept between the Jews and the
Gentiles who had entered the land as colonists or
intruders. These would, during the Bab captivity,
almost certainly speak Western Aram., and would
certainly be heathen and indulge in heathen prac-
tices. ‘They were ‘“‘the people of the land” whom the
returning exiles found in possession of Judaea.
Mingled with them were the few Jews that had
neither been killed nor deported by the Baby-
lonians, nor carried down into Egypt


2. Arro- by Johanan, the son of Kareah. As
gance they had conformed in a large measure
toward to the habits of their heatben neigh-


Other Jews bors and intermarried with them, the
stricter Jews, as Ezra and Nehemiah,
regarded them as under the same condemnation as
the heathen, and shrank from association with them.
During the time of Our Lord’s life on earth the name
was practically restricted to the ignorant Jews whose
conformity to the law was on a broader scale than
that of the Pharisees. Some have, however, dated
the invention of the name later in the days of the
Maccabean struggle, when the ceremonial precepts
of the Law could with difficulty he observed. Those
who were less carcful of these were regarded as
‘am ha-’Greg.
The distinction as exhihited in the Talm shows
an arrogance on the part of the Pharisaic habhér
that must have heen galling to those
8. Regula- who, though Jews as much as the
tions for the Pharisces, were not Puritans like them.
habher A hdbhé, that is a Pharisce, might not
: eat at the table of a man whose wife
was of the ‘om hd-’Grec, even though her husband
might be a Pharisee. If he would be a full habhar,
a Pharisee must not sell to any of the ‘am hé-’Gre¢
anything that might readily be made unclean. If
a woman of the ‘am ha-’Gre¢ was Icft alone in a room,
all that she could touch without moving from her |


place was unclean. We must, however, bear in

mind that the evidence for this is Talmudic, and
therefore of but limited historical value.

(1) Their scrupulosity—We find traces of this

scrupulosity in the Gospels. The special way in

which the ceremonial sanctity of the

4. The NT Pharisees exhibited itself was in tith-


Account ing, hence the reference to their tithing
“mint and anise and cummin” (Mt 23
23). In the parable of the Pharisee and the Publi-


can, one of the things that the Pharisee plumes him-
self on is that he gives tithes of all he possesses
(Lk 18 12). He is an example of the Pharisaic
arrogance of those “who trusted in themselves that
they were rightcous and set all others at nought.’
Their claiming the first seats in feasts and syna-
gogues (Mt 23 6) was an evidence of the same spirit.

(2) Their hypocrisy.—Closely akin to this is the
hypocrisy of which the Pharisees were accused by
Our Lord. When we call them “hypocrites,” we
must go back to the primary meaning of the word.
They were essentially “actors,” poseurs. Good
men, whose character and spiritual force have im-
pressed themselves on their generation, have often
peculiarities of manner and tone which are easily
imitated. The very respect in which they are held
by their disciples leads those who respect them to
adopt unconsciously their mannerisms of voice and
deportment. A _ later generation unconsciously
imitates, ‘‘acts the part.” In a time when religion
is persecuted, as in the days of Antiochus Epiphanes,
or despised as it was in the Hellenizing times which
preceded and succeeded, it would be the duty of
religious men not to hide their convictions. The
tendency to carry on this public manifestation of
religious acts after it had ceased to be protest
would be necessarily great. The fact that they-
gained credit by praying at street corners when the
hour of prayer came, and would have lost eredit
with the people had they not done so, was not recog-
nized by them as lessening the moral worth of the
action. Those who, having lived in the period of
persecution and contempt, survived in that when
religion was held in respect would maintain their
earlier practice without any arriére-pensée. The
succeeding generation, in continuing the practice,
consciously “acted.” They were poseurs. Their
hypocrisy was none the less real that it was reached
by unconscious stages. Hypocrisy was a new sin,
a sin only possible in a spiritual religion, a religion
in which morality and worship were closely related.
Heathenism, which lay in sacrifices and ceremonies
by which the gods could be bribed, or cajoled into
favors, had a purely casual connection with morality;
its worship was entirely a thing of externals, of act-
ing, “posing.” Consequently, a man did not by the
most careful attention to the ceremonies of religion
produce any presumption in favor of his trustworthi-
ness. There was thus no sinister motive to prompt
to religion. The prophets had denounced the in-
sincerity of worship, but even they did not denounce
hypocrisy, i.e. religion used as a cloak to hide treach-
ery ordishonesty. Religion had become more spirit-
ual, the connection between morality and worship
more intimate by reason of the persecution of the
Seleucids.


The Talm to some extent confirms ‘the representation
of the Gospels. There were said to he seven classes of


ear Isees ae Ne ae cates Pharisee,
7, Who wears his good deeds on his shonlders
5. Talmudic and obeys the precept of the Law, not from
Classifica- principle, but from expediency; (2) the
tion of the ‘‘wait-a-little’’ Pharisee, who hegs for
Pharisees time in order to perform a meritorious


action; (3) the ‘‘hleeding’”’ Pharisee, who
in his eagerness to avoid looking on a
woman shuts his cyes and so bruises himself to hleeding
by stumbling against a wall; (4) the ‘painted’ Phari-
sce, who advertises his holiness lest any one should touch


2365


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pharisees
Phassurus


him so that he should he defiled; (5) the “reckoning”
Pharises, who is always saying “What duty must I do
to balance any unpalatable duty which it have neg-
lected ?"'; (6) the “fearing'' Pharlsee, whose relation to
God is one merely of trembling awe; (7) the Pharisce
from “‘love.”” In all but the last there was an element
of “acting,” of hypocrisy. It is to be noted that the
Talm denounces ostentation; but unconsciously that
coot of the error lies in the externality of their right-
eousness; it commands an avoidance of ostentation which
Involves equal “posing.”


V. Our Lord’s Relationship to the Pharisees.—
The attitude of the Pharisees to Jesus, to begin
with, was, as had been their attitude to


1. Phari- John, critical. They sent representa-
sees’ tives to watch His doings and His
Efforts to sayings and report. They sccm to


Gain Christ have regarded it as possible that He
to Their might unite Himself with them, al-
Side though, as we think, His affinities
rather lay with the Essenes. Grad-
ually their criticism became opposition. This op-
position grew in intensity as He disregarded their
interpretations of the Sabbatic law, ridiculed their
refinements of the law of tithes and the distinctions
they introduced into the validity of oaths, and de-
nounced their insincere posing. At first there seems
to have been an effort to cajole Him into compliance
with their plans. If some of the Pharisees tempted
Him to use language which would compromise Him
with the people or with the Rom authorities, others
invited Him to their tables, which was going far
upon the part of a Pharisee toward one not a habhé
Even when He hung on the cross, the taunt with
which they greeted Him may have had something
of longing, lingering hope in it: “If he be the King
of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and
we will believe him” (Mt 27 42 AV). If He would
only give them that sign, then they would acknowl-
edge Him to be the Messiah.
The opposition of the Pharisees to Jesus was in-
tensified by another reason. They were the demo-
cratic party; their whole power lay in
2. Reasons the reputation they had with the peo-
for Phari- ple for piety. Our Lord denounced
saic Hatred them as hypocrites; moreover He had
of Christ secured a deeper popularity than theirs.
At length when cajolery failed to win
Him and astute questioning failed to destroy His pop-
ularity, they combined with their opponents, the
Sadducees, against Him as against a common enemy.
On the other hand, Jesus denounced the Pharisees
more than He denounced any other class of the


people. This seems strange when we
3. Our remember that the main body of the
Lord’s De- religions people, those who looked for
nunciation the Messiah, belonged to the Pharisees,
of the and His teaching and theirs had a
Pharisees strong external resemblance. It was


this external resemblance, united as
it was with a profound spiritual difference, which
made it incumbent on Jesus to mark Himself off
from them. All righteousness with them was ex-
ternal, it lay in meats and drinks and divers wash-
ings, in tithing of mint, anise and cummin. He
placed religion on a different footing, removed it
into another region. With Him it was the heart
that must be right with God, not merely the ex-
ternal actions; not only the outside of the cup and
platter was to be cleansed, but the inside first of all.
It is to be noted that, as observed above, the Phari-
sees were less antagonistic to the apostles when their
Lord had left them. The after-history of Phari-
saism has justified Our Lord’s condemnation.

—Hiistories rael: Eewald, V, 365 ff,
Bre tenfold, TL 354 ‘ft: seste 1 197 ff; Gratz, V, 91 47;
Derenbourg, 75-78, 117-44, 452-54; Holtzmann, II,
124 ff; Renan, V, 42 ff; Stanley, [1I, 376 ff; Cornill,
145 ff, ET; Schiirer, Il, ii, 4 #, ET (@7V4, II, 447 ff);
Kuenen, III, 233 ff, ET.


Life and Times of Christ: Hausrath, I, 135 ff, ET;
Edersheim, I, 310 ff; Lange, I, 302 ff, ET; Farrar, II,
494 ff; Geikie, II, 223 ff; Keim, I, 250 ff; Thomson,
Books Which Influenced Our Lord, 50 ff; Weiss, I, 285 ff,
ET; de Pressensé, 116 ff.

Arts. in Encs, Bible Dicts., Lexicons, etc: Ersch and
Gruber, Allg. Ene (Daniel); Winer, Realwérterbuch;
Herzog, RE, ed 1 (Reuss), edd 2, 3 (Sieffert); Hamburger,
Realenc.; Smith’s DB (Twislcton); Kitto’s Cyclopaedia
of Bib. Lit. (Ginsburg); HDB (Eaton); FB (Cowley,
Prince); Schenkel, Brbel-Lericon (Hausrath); Jew Ene
(Kohler); Temple Dict. of the Bible (Christie); Hastings,
DCG (Hugh Scott, Mitchell).

Monographs: Wellhausen, Montet, Geiger, Baneth,
Miller, Hanne, Davaine, Herford; Weher, System der
altsynagogen Palestinischen Theologie, 10 ff, 44 ff; Keil, Bib.
Archaeology, II, 1680; Ryle and James, Pss of Solomon,
xliv ff: Nicolas, Doctrines religieuses des juifs, 48 ff.


J. E. H. THomson
PHAROSH, fa’rosh (WI7B, par'dsh). See
ParosH.


PHARPAR, fir’par (AEB, parpar; LXX B,
*Agapod, Apharphd, A, Papdapd, Pharphard): A
river of Damascus, mentioned in 2 K 5 12, along
with the Abana or Amana. See ABANA,


PHARZITES, far’zits CXE"BO, ha-parsi).
PEREZ,


PHASEAH, fa-sé’a, PASEAH, pa-sé’a (MDB,
paséeh, “lame’’):

CF A descendant of Judah, son of Eshton (1 Ch
4 12). ;

(2) Name of a family of Nethinim (Ezr 2 49;
Neh 7 51 [AV “Phaseah”’]; ‘“Phinoe” of 1 Esd
5 31 RV).

(3) Father of Joiada (AV “Jehoiada’’), the re-
pairer of the “old gate” in Jerus (Neh 3 6).


PHASELIS, fa-sé'lis (Pdondts, Phdsélis): A city
of Lycia in Southern Asia Minor, on the seacoast,
near the boundary of Pamphylia, to which country
some ancient writers have assigned it. Situated
on the extreme end of a promontory which pro-
jected into the sea, and with high mountains in the
rear, it was separated both politically and geo-
graphically from the rest of Lycia. Hence it may
be understood how it early became the favorite
haunt of pirates. Already in the 6th cent. BC,
when trade was carried on with Egypt, the city
struck coins of its own; upon them the prow and
the stern of a war galley were commonly represented.
The coinage ceased in 466 BC, but it was resumed
about 400 BC, when the city again became prac-
tically independent. For a time Phaselis was under
the control of the Seleucid kings of Syria, but in
190 BC it again regained its independence or con-
tinued as a member of the league of Lycian cities
(1 Mace 15 23). Before the beginning of the
Christian era it had lost considerable of its earlier
importance, yet it was still famed for its temple of
Athene in which it was said that the sword of
Achilles was preserved, and also for the attar of
roses which was produced there. It figures little
in early Christian history, yet in Byzantine times
it was the residence of a bishop. Its site, now
marked by the ruins of the stadium, temples and
theater, bears the Turkish name of Tekir Ova.
See also Lycta. E. J. Banks


PHASIRON, fas‘i-ron (A, Pacipdv, Phasirén,
B, Paceapav, Phaseirén, V, Papirdv, Pharisdn):
The name of an unknown Arab tribe whom Jona-
than overcame in the wilderness near Bethbasi; or
possibly the name of an Arab chicf (1 Macc 9 66).


PHASSARON, fas’a-ron: AV=RV Puassurus
(q.v.).


PHASSURUS, fas-sit’‘rus, fas’ti-rus (farcovpos,
Phdssauras, B, Padewopos, Phdssaros; AV Phassaron,


See


Phebe
Philip


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2366


after Aldine): The name of one of the families
which went up from exile with Zerubbabel (1 Esd
5 25)=“Pashhur” of Ezr 2 38; Neh 7 41; accord-
ing to Ezr and Neh and RV numbering, 1,247;
according to AV following A, 1,047.


PHEBE, {fe’bé (PolBn, Phoidé).
PHENICE, fé-ni'sé.


PHENICIA,
See PHOENICIA.


PHERESITES, fer’é-sits: AV=RV “Pherezites”
(1 Esd 8 69; 2 Esd 1 21)=“‘Perizzite.”’


PHEREZITE, fer’é-zit: AV form in Jth 5 16 for
RV ‘‘Perizzite’” and both AV and RV in 2 Esd 1
21 for ‘“‘Perizzite’; one of the Canaanitish tribes.


PHI-BESETH, fi’béseth, fib’é-seth (MOI5,
pi-bheseth). See Pi-BESETH.


PHICOL, fikol (92°, pibhal; ud, Phikol;
AV Phichol): The captain of the host of the Phili
king Abimelech of Gerar (Gen 21 22; 26 26).


PHILADELPHIA,  fil-a-del’fi-a  (Biraderdia,
Philadelphia): A city of ancient Lydia in Asia
Minor on the Cogamus River, 105 miles from
Smyrna. It stood upon a terrace 650 ft. above the
sea. Behind it are the volcanic cliffs to which the
Turks have given the name of Devitt, or “ink-
wells’; on the other side of the city the land is
exceedingly fertile, and there was produced a wine
of whose excellence the celebrated Rom poet Virgil
wrote. Philadelphia is not so ancient as many of
the other cities of Asia Minor, for it was founded
after 189 BC on one of the highways which led to
the interior. Its name was given to it in honor of
Attalus II, because of his loyalty to his elder
brother, Eumenes IT, king of Lydia. Still another
name of the city was Decapolis, because it was con-
sidered as one of the ten cities of the plain. A
third name which it bore during the Ist cent. AD
was Neo-kaisaria; it appears upon the coins struck
during that period. During the reign of Vespasian,
it was called Flavia. Its modern name, Ala-shehir,
is considered by some to bea corruption of the Turk-
ish words Allah-shehir, “the city of God,” but more
likely it is a name given it from the reddish color
of the soil. In addition to all of these names it
sometimes bore the title of ‘‘Little Athens’ because
of the magnificence of the temples and other public
buildings which adorned it. Philadelphia quickly
became an important and wealthy trade center,
for as the coast cities declined, it grew in power, and
retained its importance even until late Byzantine
times. One of the Seven Churches of the Book of
Rev (Rev 8 7 ff) was there, and it was the seat of
abishop. Asin most Asia Minor cities, many Jews
lived there, and they possessed a synagogue. Dur-
ing the reign of Tiberius the city was destroyed by
an earthquake, yet it was quickly rebuilt. Fred-
erick Barbarossa entered it while on his crusade
in 1190. Twice, in 1306 and 1324, it was besieged
by the Seljuk Turks, but it retained its independence
until after 1390, when it was captured by the com-
bined forces of the Turks and Byzantines. In 1403
Tamerlane captured it, and, it is said, built about
it a wall of the corpses of his victims.

Ala-shehir is still a Christian town; one-fourth
of its modern population is Greek, and a Gr bishop
still makes hishomethere. One of the chief modern
industries is a liquorice factory; in the fields about
the city the natives dig for the roots. On the
terrace upon which the ancient city stood, the ruins


See PHOEBE.
See PHognicia; PHOENIX.
Phoiniké).


fé-nish’i-a (Povi«n,


of the castle and the walls may still be seen, and
among them is pointed out the foundation of the
early church. The place may now best be reached
by rail from Smyrna. E. J. Banks


PHILARCHES, fi-lar’kéz.


PHILEMON, fi-lé’mon, fi-lé’mun (PAqpev,
Philémoén): Among the converts of St. Paul, per-
haps while at Ephesus, was one whom he calls a
‘fellow-worker,”’ Philemon (Philem ver 1). He
was probably a man of some means, was celebrated
for his hospitality (vs 5-7) and of considerable im-
portance in the ecclesia at Colossae. It was at his
house (ver 2) that the Colossian Christians met as a
center. It 1s more than probable that this was a
group of the Colossian church rather than the en-
tire ecclesia. His wife was named Apphia (ver 2);
and Archippus (ver 2) was no doubt his son. From
Col 4 17 we learn that Archippus held an office of
some importance in Colossae, whether he was a
presbyter (Abbott, CC), or an evangelist, or per-
haps the reader (Zahn), we cannot tell. He is
called here (ver 2) St. Paul’s “‘fellow-soldier.”’

The relation between the apostle and Philemon
was so close and intimate that St. Paul does not
hesitate to press him, on the basis of it, to forgive
his slave, Onesimus, for stealing and for running
away. See PHILEMON, EPISTLE To,

Tradition makes Philemon the bishop of Colassae
(Apos Const, vii, 46), and the Gr Martyrology
(Menae) for November 22 tells us that he together
with his wife and son and Onesimus were martyred
by stoning before Androcles, the governor, in the
days of Nero. With this the Lat Martyrology
agrees (cf Lightfoot, St. Ignatius, I], 535). This
evidence, however, is unsatisfactory and cannot be
trusted as giving unquestionable facts as to Phile-
mon. The only sure information is that in the ep.
bearing his name. Cuar.es Suite Lewis


PHILEMON, EPISTLE TO: This most beautiful
of all St. Paul’s Epp., and the most intensely human,
is one of the so-called Captivity Epp. of which Eph,
Col, and Phil are the others. Of these four PHruip-
PIANS (q.v.) stands apart, and was written more
probably after the other three. These are mutually
interdependent, sent by the same bearer to churches
of the same district, and under similar conditions.

There is some diversity of opinion as to the place
from which the apostle wrote these letters. Cer-

tain scholars (Reuss, Schenkel, Weiss,
1. Place of Holtzmann, Hilgenfeld, Hausrath and
Writing Meyer) have urged Caesarea in oppo-

sition to the traditional place, Rome.
The arguments advanced are first that Onesimus
would have been more likely to have escaped to
Caesarea than to Rome, as it Is nearer Colossae than
Rome is, to which we may reply that, though Caes-
area is nearer, his chance of escape would have been
far greater in the capital than in the provincial city.
Again it is said that as Onesimus is not commended
in Eph, he had already been left behind at Colossae;
against which there are advanced the precarious
value of an argument from silence, and the fact
that this argument assumes a particular course
which the bearers of the letters would follow, viz.
through Colossae to Ephesus. A more forcible
argument is that which is bascd on the apostle’s
expected visit. In Phil 2 24 we read that he ex-
pected to go to Macedonia on his release; in Philem
ver 22 we find that he expected to go to Colossae.
On the basis of this latter reference it 1s assumed that
he was to the south of Colossae when writing and so
at Caesarea. But it is quite as probable that he
would go to Colossae through Philippi as the reverse;
and it 1s quite possible that even if he had intended


See PHYLARCHES.


2367


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Phebe
Philip


to go direct to Colossae when he wrote to Philemon,
events may have come about to cause him to change
his plans. The last argument, based on the omis-
sion of any reference to the earthquake of which
Tacitus (Ann. xiv.27) and Eusebius (Chron., Ol,
207) write, is of force as opposed to the Rom origin
of the letters only on the assumption that these
writers both refer to the same event (by no means
sure) and that the epp. were written after that
event, and that it was necessary that St. Paul
should have mentioned it. If the early chronology
be accepted it falls entirely, as Tacitus’ earlier date
would be after the epp. were written. In addition
we have the further facts, favorable to Rome, that
St. Paul had no such freedom in Caesarea as he is
represented in these epp. as enjoying; that no
mention is made of Philip who was in Caesarea and
a most important member of that community (Acts
21 8), and finally that there is no probability that
so large a body of disciples and companions could
have gathered about the apostle in his earlier and
more strict imprisonment, at Caesarea. We may
therefore conclude that the Captivity Epp. were
written from Rome, and not from Caesarea.

The external evidence for the ep. is less extensive
than that of some of the other epp., but it is abun-

dantly strong. The play on the word
2. Authen- Onesimus which St. Paul himself uses
ticity (Philem ver 11) is found in Ignat.,
Eph, i. This may not mean neces-
sarily a literary connection, but it suggests this.
The ep. is known to Tertullian, and through
him we know that Marcion accepted it (Adv.
Marc., v.21). It is in the list in the Murato-
rian Fragment (p. 106, 1. 27), and is quoted by
Origen as Pauline (Hom. in Jer., 19) and placed by
Eusebius (HZ, III, xxv) among the acknowledged
books.

It has twice been the object of attack. In the 4th and
5th cents. it was opposed as unworthy of St. Paul's mind
and as of no value for edification. This attack was met
successfully by Jerome (Comm.in Philem, praef.), Chry-
sostom (Argum. in Philem) and Theodore of Mopsuestia
(Spicil. in Solesm, I, 149),and the ep. was finally estab-
lished in its earlier firm position. The later attack by
Baur was inspired by his desire to break down the_cor-
roborative value of Philem to the other Captivity Epp.,
and has been characterized by Weiss as one of Baur's
worst blunders. The suggestions that it is interpolated
(Holtzmann), or allegorical (Weizsacker and Pfleiderer),
or based on the letter of Pliny (Ep. TX, 21) to Sabinianus
(Steck), are interesting examples of the vagaries of their
authors, but ‘deserve only to be mentioned" (Zahn).
In its language, style and argument the letter is clearly
Pauline.

The date will, as is the case with the other Cap-
tivity Epp., depend on the chronology. If the
earlier scheme be followed 1t may be
dated about 58, if the later about 63,
or 64.

The apostle writes in his own and Timothy’s
name to his friend PuiteMon (q.v.) in behalf of

Onesimus, a runaway slave of the
4. Argu- latter. Beginning with his usual
ment thanksgiving, here awakened by the
report of Philemon’s hospitality, he
intercedes for his ‘son begotten in his bonds’ (ver
10), Onesimus, who though he is Philemon’s run-
away slave is now “a brother.” It is on this ground
that the apostle pleads, urging his own age, and
friendship for Philemon, and his present bonds.
He pleads, however, without. belittling Onesimus’
wrongdoing, but assuming himself the financial
responsibility for the amount of his theft. At the
same time the apostle quietly refers to what Phile-
mon really owes him as his father in Christ, and begs
that he will not disappoint him in his expectation.
He eloses with the suggestion that he hopes soon to
visit him, and with greetings from his companions
in Rome.


3. Date


The charm and beauty of this ep. have been
universally recognized. Its value to us as giving
a glimpse of St. Paul’s attitude
6. Value toward slavery and his intimacy with
a man like Philemon cannot be over-
estimated. One of the chief elements of value in
it is the picture it gives us of a Christian home in the
apostolic days; the father and mother well known
for their hospitality, the son a man of position and
importance in the church, the coming and going of
the Christian brethren, and the life of the brother-
hood centering about this household.
LiteERATURE.—Lightfoot, Col and Philem; Vincent,


“Phil'' and ‘‘Philem" (ICC); von Soden, Hand Com-
mentar; Alexander,in Speaker's Comm.


Cuarues SurrH Lewis
PHILETUS, fi-lé’tus, f1-lé’tus (Pyros, Philéos
[2 Tim 2 17]): This person is mentioned by Paul,
who warns Timothy against him as


1. The well as against his associate in error,
Nature of Hymenaeus. The apostle speaks of
His Error Hymenaeus and Philetus as instances


of men who were doing most serious
injury to the church by their teaching, and by what
that teaching resulted in, both in faith and morals.
The specific error of these men was that they denied
that there would be any bodily resurrection. They
treated all Scriptural references to such a state, as
figurative or metaphorical. They spiritualized it
absolutely, and held that the resurrection was a
thing of the past. No resurrection was possible,
so they taught, except from ignorance to knowledge,
from sin to righteousness. There would be no day
when the dead would hear the voice of Christ and
come forth out of the grave. The Christian, know-
ing that Christ was raised from the dead, looked
forward to the day when his body should be raised
in the likeness of Christ’s resurrection. But this

faith was utterly denied by the teach-
2. HowIt ing of Hymenaeus and Philetus.
Overthrew This teaching of theirs, Paul tells us,
Faith had overthrown the faith of some. It

would also overthrow Christian faith
altogether, for if the dead are not raised, neither is
Christ risen from the dead, and “‘ye are yet in your
sins” (1 Cor 165 17).

The denial.of the resurrection of the body,
whether of mankind generally or of Christ, is the
overthrow of the faith. It leaves nothing to cling
to, no living Christ, who saves and leads and com-
forts His people. The apostle proceeds to say that
teaching of this kind ‘‘eats as doth a gangrene,” and
that it inercases unto more ungodliness. As a
canker or gangrene eats away the flesh, so does such
teaching eat away Christian faith. Paul is careful
to say, more than once, that the teaching which
denies that there will be a resurrection of the dead
leads inevitably to ‘“‘ungodliness” and to “iniquity.”
See HyMENAEUS. Joun RUTHERFURD


PHILIP, fil’ip (Piduwros, Philippos, “lover of
horses’):

(1) The father of Alexander the Great (1 Mace
1 1; 6 2), king of Macedonia in 359-336 BC. His
influence for Greece and for mankind in general lay
in hastening the decadence of the Gr city-state and
in the preparations he left to Alexander for the
diffusion throughout the world of the varied phases
of Gr intellectual life.

(2) A Phrygian left by Antiochus Epiphanes as
governor at Jerus (c 170 BC) and described in 2
Macc 6 22 as “more barbarous” than Antiochus
himself, burning fugitive Jews who had assembled
in caves near by “to keep the sabbath day secretly”
(2 Mace 6 11) and taking special measures to check
the opposition of Judas Maccabaeus (2 Macc 8 8).
There is some ground for identifying him with—


Philip
Philippi


(3) A friend or foster-brother of Antiochus (2
Mace 9 29), appointed by Antiochus on his death-
bed as regent. Lysias already held the office of
regent, having brought up the son of Antiochus
from his youth, and on the death of his father set
him up as king under the name of Eupator. The
accounts of the rivalries of the regents and of the
fate of Philip as recorded in 1 Mace 6 56; 2 Maec
9 29; Jos, Ant, XII, ix, 7, are not easily recon-


ciled.

(4) Philip V, king of Macedonia in 220-179 BC.
He is mentioned in 1 Macc 8 5 as an example of
the great power of the Romans with whom Judas
Maceabaeus made a league on conditions described
(op. cit.). The conflict of Philip with the Romans
coincided in time with that of Hannibal, after whose
defeat at Zama the Romans were able to give undi-
vided attention to the affairs of Macedonia. Philip
was defeated by the Romans under Flaminius, at
Cynoseephalae (197 BC), and compelled to accept
the terms of the conquerors. He died in 179, and
was succeeded by his son Perseus, last king of
Macedonia, who lost his crown in his contest with
the Romans. See PERSEUS. J. HurcHison


PHILIP (@fdirwos, Philippos): One of the Twelve


Apostles. Philip belonged to Bethsaida of Galilee
(Jn 1 44; 12-21). Along with An-
1. NT drew and other fellow-townsmen, he


References had journeyed to Bethany to hear the
teaching of John the Baptist, and there
he received his first call from Christ, ‘Follow me”
(Jn 1 48). Like Andrew, Philip immediately won
a fresh follower, Nathanael, for Jesus (Jn 1 45).
It is probable that he was present at most of the
events recorded of Jesus’ return journey from
Bethany to Galilee, and that the information relat-
ing to these was supplied to St. John by him and
St. Andrew (cf AnpREW). His final ordination to
the Twelve is recorded in Mt 10 3; Mk 3 18;
Lk 6 14; Acts 1 13. At the feeding of the 5,000,
Philip was asked the question by Jesus, ‘“‘Whence
are we to buy bread, that these may eat?” (Jn 6 5-7).
He was appealed to by the Greeks when they desired
to interview Jesus at the Passover (Jn 12 20-33).
During the address of Jesus to His disciples after
the Last Supper, Philip made the request, “Lord,
show us the Father, and it sufficeth us” (Jn 14 8).
According to the “Genealogies of the Twelve
Apostles,” Philip was of the house of Zebulun (cf
Budge, Contendings of the Apostles, I,


2. Apocry- 50). Clement of Alexandria (Sirom.,
phal Ref- iii. 4, 25, and iv.9, 73) gives the tradi-
erences tion identifying him with the unknown


disciple who asked permission to go and
bury his father ere he followed Jesus (cf Mt 8 21;
Lk 9 59), and says that he died a natural death.
Owing to confusion with Philip the evangelist, there
is much obscurity in the accounts of Apoc lit. con-
cerning the earlier missionary activities of Philip
the apostle. The “Acts of Philip” tell of a religious
controversy between the apostle and a Judaean
high priest: before the philosophersof Athens. Later


Lat documents mention Gaul (Galatia) as his field. |


As to his sending Joseph of Arimathaea thence to
Britain, see JosEPpH OF ARIMATHAEA. The evidence
seems conclusive that the latter part of his life was
spent in Phrygia. This is supported by Polyerates
(bishop of Ephesus in the 2d cent.), who states that
he died at Hierapolis, by Theodoret, and by the
parts of the Contendings of the Apostles dealing
with Philip. Thus according to “The Preaching
of St. Philip and St. Peter” (cf Budge, Contendings
of the Apostles, II, 146), Phrygia was assigned to
Philip as a mission field by the risen Christ when He
appeared to the disciples on the Mount of Olives,
and “The Martyrdom of St. Philip in Phrygia”


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2368


(Budge, II, 156) tells of his preaching, miracles and
erueifixion there.

Philip was regarded in early times as the author of
“The Gospel of Philip,” a gnostic work of the 2d cent.,
part of which was preserved by Epiphanius (cf Hennecke,
Neutestamentliche Apokryphen, 40,41). See APOCRYPHAL
GosPELs.


As with Andrew, Philip’s Gr name implies he had
Gr connections, and this is strengthened by the fact
that he acted as the spokesman of the
Greeks at the Passover. Of a weaker
mold than Andrew, he was yet the
one to whom the Greeks would first
appeal; he himself possessed an inquirer’s spirit
and could therefore sympathize with their doubts
and difficulties. The practical, strong-minded An-
drew was naturally the man to win the impetuous,
swift-thinking Peter; but the slower Philip, versed
in the Scriptures (ef Jn 1 45), appealed more to the
eritical Nathanael and the cultured Greeks. Cau-
tious and deliberate himself, and desirous of sub-
mitting all truth to the test of sensuous experience
(cf Jn 14 8), he concluded the same eriterion would
be acceptable to Nathanael also (ef Jn 1 46). It
was the presence of this materialistic trend of mind
in Philip that induced Jesus, in order to awaken in
His disciple a larger and more spiritual faith, to put
the question in Jn 6 6, seeking “‘to prove him.”
This innate diffidence which affected Philip’s reli-
gious beliefs found expression in his outer life and
conduet also. It was not merely modesty, but also
a certain lack of self-reliance, that made him turn
to Andrew for advice when the Greeks wished to see
Jesus. The story of his later life is, however, suffi-
cient to show that he overcame those initial defects
in his character, and fulfilled nobly the charge that
his risen Lord laid upon him (ef Mt 28 16-20).


C. M. Kerr
PHILIP (“tetrarch,’’ Lk 3 1).


See Heron.

PHILIP, THE EVANGELIST: One of “the
seven’’ chosen to have the oversight of “‘the daily
ministration” of the poor of the Christian com-
munity in Jerus (Aets 6 5). Whether Philip, bear-
ing a Gr name, was a Hellenist, is not known, but
his missionary work reveals to us one free from the
religious prejudices of the strict Hebrew.

The martyrdom of Stephen was the beginning of
a systematie persecution of the church in Jerus, and
all except the apostles were scattered over Judaca
and Samaria (Acts 8 1), and even as far as Phoeni-
cia, Cyprus and Antioch (11 19). Thus the in-
fluence of the new teaching was extended, and a be-
ginning made to the missionary movement. The
story of Philip’s missionary labors is told in Aets 8
5 ff. He went to the chief city of Samaria, called
Sebaste in honor of Augustus (Gr Sebastés). The
Samaritans, of mixed Israelitish and gentile blood,
had, in consequence of their being rigidly excluded
from the Jewish church sinee the return from exile,
built on Mt. Gerizim a rival sanetuary to the temple.
To them Philip proclaimed the Christ and wrought
signs, with the result that multitudes gave heed,
and “‘were baptized, both men and women.’’ They
had been under the influence of a eertain sorcerer,
Simon, who himself also believed and was baptized,
moved, as the sequel proved, by the desire to learn
the secret of Philip's ability to perform miracles
(see Simon Macus). The apostles (Acts 8 14) at
Jerus sanctioned the admission of Samaritans into
the church by sending Peter and John, who not only
confirmed the work of Philip, but also themselves
preached in many Samaritan villages.

The next incident recorded is the conversion of
a Gentile, who was, however, a worshipper of the
God of Israel, a eunuch under Candace, queen of
the Ethiopians. As he was returning from wor-


3. Char-
acter


2369


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Philip
Philippi


shipping in the temple at Jcrus, he was mct by Philip
on the road to Gaza. Philip expounded to him that
portion of Isa 63 which he had been reading aloud
as he sat in his chariot, and preached unto him
Jesus. It is another sign of Philip’s insight into the
universality of Christianity that he baptized this
eunuch who could not have been admitted into full
membership in the Jewish church (Dt 23 1). See
Eruiorian Eunucu.

After this incident Philip went to Azotus (Ash-
dod), and then traveled north to Caesarea, preach-
ing in the citics on his way. There he settled, for
Luke records that Paul and his company abode in
the house of Philip, ‘‘the evangelist,’’ ‘one of the
seven,” for some days (Acts 21 8 ff). This occurred
more than 20 years after the incidents recorded in
Acts 8. Both at this time and during Paul’s im-
prisonment at Caesarea, Luke had the opportunity
of hearing about Philip’s work from his own lips.
Luke records that Philip had 4 daughters who were
preachers (Acts 21 9).

The Jewish rebellion, which finally resulted in the
fall of Jerus, drove many Christians out of Pal, and
among them Philip and his daughters. One tradi-
tion connects Philip and his daughters with Hierap-
olis in Asia, but in all probability the evangelist
is confounded with the apostle. Another tradition
represents them as dwelling at Tralles, Philip being
the first bishop of the Christian community.

S. F. Hunter

PHILIP, THE GOSPEL OF. See ApocryPHaL
GosPe.s; Pump THE EVANGELIST.


PHILIPPI, fi-lip'i (@Avure, Philippoi, ethnic
Purianqevws, Philippésios, Phil 4 15): city
of Macedonia, situated in 41° 5’ N.

1. Position lat. and 24°16’ E. long. It lay on the
and Name Egnatian Road, 33 Rom miles from
Amphipolis and 21 from Acontisma,

in a plain bounded on the E. and N. by the moun-
tains which lie between the rivers Zygactes and
Nestus, on the W. by Mt. Pangaeus, on the 8. by
the ridge called in antiquity Symbolum, over which
ran the road connecting the city with its seaport,
Neapouis (q.v.), 9 miles distant. This plain, a
considerable part of which is marshy in modern, as
in ancient, times, is connected with the basin of the
Strymon by the valley of the Angites (Herodotus
vii.113), which also bore the names Gangas or
Gangites (Appian, Bell. Civ. iv.106), the modern
Anghista. The ancient_name of Philippi was
Crenides (Strabo vii.331; Diodorus xvi.3, 8; Appian,
Bell. Civ, iv.105; Stephanus Byz. s.v.), 80 called
after the springs which feed the river and the marsh;
but it was refounded by Philip II of Macedon, the
father of Alexander the Great, and received his
name.
Appian (Bell. Civ. iv.105) and Harpocration say


that Crenides was afterward called Daton, and that |


this name was changed to Philippi,
2. History but this statement is open to question,

since Daton, which became proverbial
among the Greeks for good fortune, possessed, as
Strabo tells us (vii.331 fr. 36), “admirably fertile
territory, a lake, rivers, dockyards and productive
gold mines,” whereas Philippi lies, as we have seen,
some 9 miles inland. Many modern authorities,
therefore, have placed Daton on the coast at or near
the site of Neapolis. On the whole, it seems best
to adopt the view of Heuzey (Mission archéologique,
35, 62 ff) that Daton was not originally a city, but
the whole district which lay immediately to the
E. of Mt. Pangaenus, including the Philippian plain
and the seacoast about Neapolis. On the site of
the old foundation of Crenides, from which the Gr
settlers had perhaps been driven out by the Thra-
cians about a century previously, the Thasians in


360 BC founded their colony of Daton with the aid
of the exiled Athenian statesman Callistratus, in
order to exploit the wealth, both agricultural and
mineral, of the neighborhood. To Philip, who
ascended the Macedonian throne in 359 BC, the
possession of this spot seemed of the utmost im-
portance. Not only is the plain itself well watered
and of extraordinary fer-
tility, hut astrongly forti-
fied post planted here
would secure the natural
land-route from Europe
to Asia and protect the
eastern frontier of Macc-
donia against Thracian
inroads. Ahove all, the
mines of the district
might meet his most pressing need, that of an abun-
dant supply of gold. The site was therefore seized
in 358, the city was enlarged, strongly fortified, and
renamed, the Thasian settlers either driven out or
reinforced, and the mines, worked with character-
istic energy, produced over 1,000 talents a year
(Diodorus xvi.8) and enahled Philip to issue a gold
currency which in the West soon superseded the
Pers darics (G. F. Hill, Historical Greek Coins, 80 ff).
The revenue thus obtained was of inestimable value
to Philip, who not only used it for the development,
of the Macedonian army, but also proved himself
a master of the art of bribery. Mis remark is well
known that no fortress was impregnable to whose
walls an ass laden with gold could be driven. Of
the history of Philippi during the next 3 centuries
we know practically nothing. Together with the
rest of Macedonia, it passed into the Rom hands
after the battle of Pydna (168 BC), and fell in the
first of the four regions into which the country was
then divided (Livy xlv.29). In 146 the whole of
Macedonia was formed into a single Rom province.
But the mines seem to have been almost, if not quite,
exhausted by this time, and Strabo (vii.331 fr. 41)
speaks of Philippi as having sunk by the time of
Caesar to a “small settlement’? (karockla pixpd,
katoikta mikrd), In the autumn of 42 BC it wit-
nessed the death-struggle of the Rom republic.
Brutus and Cassius, the leaders of the band of con-
spirators who had assassinated Julius Caesar, were
faced by Octavian, who 15 years later became the
Emperor Augustus, and Antony. In the first en-
gagement the army of Brutus defeated that of
Octavian, while Antony’s forces were victorious
over those of Cassius, who in despair put an end to
his life. Three weeks later the second and decisive
conflict took place. Brutus was compelled by his
impatient soldiery to give battle, his troops were
routed and he himself fell on his own sword. Soon
afterward Philippi was made a Rom colony with the
title Colonia Iulia Philippensis. After the battle of
Actium (31 BC) the colony was reinforced, largely
by Ital. partisans of Antony who were dispossessed
in order to afford allotments for Octavian’s veter-
ans (Dio Cassius li.4), and its name was changed to
Colonia Augusta Iulia (Victriz) Philippensium. It re-
ceived the much-coveted ius [lalicum (Digest L. 15, 8,
8), which involved numerous privileges, the chief of
which was the immunity of its territory from taxation.
In the course of his sccond missionary journey
Paul set sail from Troas, accompanied by Silas
(who bears his full name Silvanus in


Coin of Philippi.


3. Paul’s 2 Cor 119; 1 Thess 11; 2 Thess
First Visit 1 1), Timothy and Luke, and on the

following day reached Neapolis (Acts
16 11). Thence he journeyed by road to Philippi,


first. crossing the pass some 1,600 ft. high which
leads over the mountain ridge called Symbolum
and afterward traversing the Philippian plain.

his experiences there we have in Acts 16 12-40 a


Philippi


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2370


singularly full and graphie account. On the Sab-
bath, presumably the first Sabbath after their ar-
rival, the apostle and his companions went out to the
bank of the Angites, and there spoke to the women,
some of them Jews, others proselytes, who had come
together for purposes of worship.

One of these was named Lydia, a Gr proselyte from
Thyatira, a city of Lydia in Asia Minor, to the church of
which was addressed the message recorded in Rev 2
18-29. She is described as a‘'seller of purple’ (Acts 16
14), that is, of woolen fabrics dyed purple, for the mann-
facture of which her native town was famous. Whether
she was the agent in Philippi of some firm in Thyatira
or whether she was carrying on her trade independently,
we cannot say; her name suggests the possibility that
she was a freedwoman, while from the fact that we hear
of her household and her house (ver 15, cf ver 40),
though no mention is made of her hushand, it has been
conjectured that she was a widow of some property.
She accepted the apostolic message and was baptized
with her household (ver 15), and insisted that Panl and
his companions should accept her hospitality during the
rest of their stay in the city (see further Lrpra).


All seemed to be going well when opposition arose
from an unexpected quarter. There was in the
town a girl, in all probability a slave, who was re-
puted to have the power of oracular utterance.
Herodotus tells us (vit.111) of an oracle of Dionysus
situated among the Thracian tribe of the Satrae,
probably not far from Philippi; but there is no
reason to connect the soothsaying of this girl with
that worship. In any case, her masters reaped a
rich harvest from the fee charged for consulting her.
Paul, troubled by her repeatedly following him and
those with him crying, ‘““These men are bondservants
of the Most High God, who proclaim unto you a way
of salvation” (Acts 16 17 m), turned and commanded
the spirit in Christ’s name to come out of her. The
immediate restoration of the girl to a sane and nor-
mal condition convinced her masters that all pros-
pect of further gain was gone, and they therefore
seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the
forum before the magistrates, probably the duwm-
virt who stood at the head of the colony. They
accused the apostles of creating disturbance in the
city and of advocating customs, the reception and
practice of which were illegal for Rom citizens.
The rabble of the market-place joined in the attack
(ver 22), whereupon the magistrates, accepting
without question the accusers’ statement that Paul
and Silas were Jews (ver 20) and forgetting or
ignoring the possibility of their possessing Rom
citizenship, ordered them to be scourged by the
attendant lictors and afterward to be imprisoned.
In the prison they were treated with the utmost
rigor; they were confined in the innermost ward,
and their feet put in the stocks. About midnight,
as they were engaged in praying and singing hymns,
while the other prisoners were listening to them, the
building was shaken by a severe earthquake which
threw open the prison doors. The jailer, who was
on the point of taking his own life, reassured by Paul
regarding the safety of the prisoners, brought Paul
and Silas into his house where he tended their
wounds, set food hefore them, and, after hearing
the gospel, was baptized together with his whole
household (vs 23-34).

On the morrow the magistrates, thinking that by
dismissing from the town those who had been the
cause of the previous day’s disturbance they could
best secure themselves against any repetition of the
disorder, sent the lictors to the jailer with orders to
release them. Paul refused to accept a dismissal
of this kind. As Rom citizens he and Silas were
legally exempt from scourging, which was regarded
as a degradation (1 Thess 2 2), and the wrong was
aggravated by the publicity of the punishment, the
absence of a proper trial and the imprisonment
which followed (Acts 16 37). Doubtless Paul had
declared his citizenship when the scourging was in-


flicted, but in the confusion and excitement of the
moment his protest had been unheard or unheeded.
Now, however, it produced a deep impression on the
magistrates, who came in person to ask Paul and
Silas to leave the city. They, after visiting their
hostess and encouraging the converts to remain
firm in their new faith, set out by the Egnatian
Road for Thessalonica (vs 38-40). How long they
had stayed in Philippi we are not told, but the fact
that the foundations of a strong and flourishing
church had been laid and the phrase “for many
days” (ver 18) lead us to believe that the time must
have been a longer one than appears at first sight.
Ramsay (St. Paul the Traveller, 226) thinks that
Paul left Troas in October, 50 AD, and stayed at
Philippi until nearly the end of the year; but this
chronology cannot be regarded as certain.

Several points in the narrative of these incidents
call for fuller consideration. (1) We may notice,
first, the very small part played by Jews and Juda-
ism at Philippi.


There was no synagogue here, as at Salamis in Cyprus
(Acts 13 5), Antioch in Pisidia (13 14.43), Iconium
(14 1), Ephesus (18 19.26; 19 8), Thessalonica (17 1),
Beroea (17 10), Athens (17 17) and Corinth (18 4).
The number of resident Jews was small, their meetings
for prayer took place on the river's hank, the worship-
pers were mostly or wholly women (16 13), and among
them some, perhaps a majority, were proselytes. Of
Jewish converts we hear nothing, nor is there any word of
Jews as either inciting or joining the mob which dragged
Paul and Silas hefore the magistrates. Further, the
whole tone of the ep. to this church seems to prove that
here at least the apostolic teaching was not in danger of
heing undermined by Judaizers. True, there is one
passage (Phil 3 2-7) in which Paul denounces ‘‘the
concision,”’ those who had ‘‘confidence in the flesh"’;
hut it seems ‘’that in this warning he was thinking of
Rome more than of Philippi; and that his indignation
was aroused rather by the vexatious antagonism which
there thwarted him in his daily work, than hy any actual
errors already undermining the faith of his distant con-
verts"’ (Lightfoot).


(2) Even more striking is the prominence of the
Rom element in the narrative. We are here not in
a Gr or Jewish city, but in one of those Rom colonies
which Aulus Gellius describes ag ‘‘miniatures and
pictures of the Rom people”’ ( Noctes Atticae, xvi.13).


In the center of the city is the forum (ayopd, agord, ver
19), and the general term ‘'magistrates'' (apxovtes,drchon-
tes, EV ‘‘rulers,"’ ver 19) is exchanged for the specific title
of praetors (orparnyot, stratégot, HV ‘‘magistrates,’’ vs 20.
22.35.36.38); these officers are attended hy _ lictors
(paBdovxor, rhabdotichot, EV “‘sergeants,’’ vs 35.38) who
bear the fasces with which they scourged Paul and Silas
(paBdicw, rhabdiz6, ver 22). The charge is that of dis-
turbing public order and introducing customs opposed
to Rom law (vs 20.21), and Paul's appeal to his Rom
civitas (ver 37) at once inspired the magistrates with
fear for the consequences of their action and made them
conciliatory and apologetic (vs 38.39). The title of
praetor borne hy these officials has caused some difficulty.
The supreme magistrates of Rom colonies, two in num-
her, were called duovirt or duumviri (furi dicundo), and
that this title was in_use at Philippi is proved hy three
inscriptions (Orelli, No. 3746; Heuzey, Mission archéo-
logique, 15, 127). The most probable explanation of the
discrepancy is that these magistrates assumed the title
of praetor, or that it was commonly applied to them, as
was certainly the case in some parts of the Rom world
(Cicero De lege agraria ii.34; Horace Sat. i.5, 34; Orelli,
No. 3785).


(8) Ramsay (St. Paul the Traveller, 200 ff) has
brought forward the attractive suggestion that Luke
was himself a Philippian, and that he was the “man
of Macedonia” who appeared to Paul at Troas with
the invitation to enter Macedonia (Acts 16 9).


In any case, the change from the 3d to the 1st person
in ver 10 marks the point at which Luke joined the
apostle, and the same criterion Jeads to the conclusion
that Luke remained at Philippi hetween Paul's first and
his third visit to the city (see below). Ramsay's hy-
pothesis would explain (a) the fulness and vividness of
the narrative of Acts 16 11-40; (b) the emphasis laid
on the importance of Philippi (ver 12); and (c) the fact
that Paul recognized as a Macedonian the man whom he
saw in his vision, although there was nothing either in
the language, features or dress of Macedonians to mark
them out from other Greeks. Yet Luke was clearly not


2371


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Philippi


a householder at Philippi (ver 15), and early tradition
refers to him as an Antiochene (see, however, Ramsay,
op. Cit. 389 f).


(4) Much discussion has centered round the de-
setiption of Philippi given in Acts 16 12. The
reading of € AC, ete, followed by WH, RY, ete, is:


ris eotiv mpdtn THs weptSos Maxedovias méAts KoAwvia, hélis
estin prété tés meridos Makedontas polis kolonta. But it
is doubtful whether Makedonias is to he taken with the
word which precedes or with that which follows, and
further the sense derived from the phrase is unsatis-
factory. For proté must mean either (1) first in political
importance and rank, or (2) the first which the aposcle
reached. But the capital of the province was Thessa-
lonica, and if ts meridos he taken to refer to the eastern-
most of the 4 districts into which Macedonia had heen
divided in 168 BC (though there is no evidence that that
division survived at this time), Amphipolis was its
capital and was apparently still its most important city,
though destined to he outstripped by Philippi somewhat
later. Nor is the other rendering of proté (adopted, e.g.
by Lightfoot) more natural. It supposes that Luke
reckoned Neapolis as helonging to Thrace, and the
houndary of Macedonia as lying between Philippi and
its seaport; moreover, the remark is singularly pointless:
the use of estin rather than én is against this view, nor is
proté found in this sense without any qualifying phrase.
Lastly, the tés in its present position is unnatural; in
B it is placed after, instead of hefore, meridos, while D
(the Bezau reviser) reads xepady ras Maxedovias, kephalé
tés Makedonias. Of the emendations which have heen
suggested, we may notice three: (a) for meridos Hort
has suggested Pieridos, ''a chief city of Pierian Mace-
donia’’; (b) for prété t2s we may read prétés, ‘which
helongs to the first region of Macedonia’: (c) meridos
may be regarded as a later insertion and struck out of
the text, in which case the whole phrase will mean,
“which is a city of Macedonia of first rank” (though
not necessarily the first city).


Paul and Silas, then, probably accompanied by
Timothy (who, however, is not expressly mentioned
in Acts between 16 1 and 17 14), left

4. Paul’s Philippi for Thessalonica, but Luke
Later Visits apparently remained behind, for the
“we’’ of Acts 16 10-17 does not appear

again until 20 5, when Paul is once more leaving
Philippi on his last journey to Jerus. The presence
of the evangelist during the intervening 5 years may
have had much to do with the strength of the Philip-
pian church and its stedfastness in persecutiou
(2 Cor 8 2; Phil 1 29.30). Paul himself did not
revisit the city until, in the course of his third mis-
sionary journey, he returned to Macedonia, pre-
ceded by Timothy and Erastus, after a stay of over
2 years at Ephesus (Acts 19 22; 20 1). We are
not definitely told that he visited Philippi on this
occasion, but of the fact there can be little doubt,
and it was probably there that he awaited the
coming of Titus (2 Cor 2 13; 7 5.6) and wrote his
2d Ep. to the Corinthians (8 1 ff; 9 2-4). After
spending 3 months in Greece, whence he intended
to return by sea to Syria, he was led by a plot
against his life to change his plans and return
through Macedonia (Acts 20 3). The last place
at which he stopped before crossing to Asia was
Philippi, where he spent the days of unleavened
bread, and from (the seaport of) which he sailed in
company with Luke to Troas, where seven of his
companions were awaiting him (20 4-6). It seems
likely that Paul paid at least one further visit to
Philippi in the interval between his first and second
imprisonments. That he hoped to do so, he himself
tells us (Phil 2 24), and the journey to Macedonia
mentioned in 1 Tim 1 3 would probably include a
visit to Philippi, while if, as many authorities hold,
2 Tim 4 13 refers to a later stay at Troas, it may
well be connected with a further and final tour in
Macedonia. But the intercourse between the
apostle and this church of his founding was not
limited to these rare visits. During Paul’s first
stay at Thessalonica he had received gifts of money
on two occasions from the Philippian Christians
(Phil 4 16), and their kindness had been repeated
after he left Macedonia for Greece (2 Cor 11 9;


Phil 4 15). Again, during his first imprisonment
at Rome the Philippians sent a gift by the hand of
one of their number, Epaphroditus (Phil 2 25;
4 10.14-19), who remained for some time with the
apostle, and finally, after a serious illness which
nearly proved fatal (2 27), returned home bearing
the letter of thanks which has survived, addressed
to the Philippian converts by Paul and Timothy
(1 1). The latter intended to visit the church
shortly afterward in order to bring back to the im-
prisoned apostle an account of its welfare (2 19.23),
but we do not know whether this plan was actually
carried out or not. We cannot, however, doubt
that other letters passed between Paul and this
church besides the one which is extant, though the
only reference to them is a disputed passage of Poly-
carp’s Epistle to the Philippians (iii.2), where he
speoks of “letters’’ (émisrodal, epistolat) as written
a them by Paul (but see Lightfoot’s note on Phil

1).

After the death of Paul we hear but little of the
church or of the town of Philippi. Early in the 2d

cent. Ignatius, bishop of Antioch, was
5. Later condemned as a Christian and was
History of taken to Rome to be thrown to the
the Church wild beasts. After passing through

Philadelphia, Smyrna and Troas, he
reached Philippi. The Christians there showed
him every mark of affection and respect, and after
his departure wrote a letter of sympathy to the
Antiochene church and another to Polycarp, bishop
of Smyrna, requesting him to send them copies of
any letters of Ignatius which he possessed. This
request Polycarp fulfilled, and at the same time sent
a letter to the Philippians full of encouragement,
advice and warning. From it we judge that the
condition of the church as a whole was satisfactory,
though a certain presbyter, Valens, and his wife
are severely censured for their avarice which belied
their Christian profession. We have a few records
of bishops of Philippi, whose names are appended
to the decisions of the councils held at Sardica (344
AD), Ephesus (431) and Chaleedon (451), and the
see appears to have outlived the city itself and to
have lasted down to modern times (Le Quien,
Oriens Christ., 11,70; Neale, Holy Eastern Church,
I, 92). Of the destruction of Philippi no account
has come down to us. The name was perpetuated
in that of the Turkish hamlet Felibedjik, but the
site is now uninhabited, the nearest village being
that of Raktcha among the hills immediately to the
N. of the ancient acropolis. This latter and the
plain around are covered with ruins, but no sys-
tematic excavation has yet been undertaken. Of
the extant remains the most striking are portions
of the Hellenic and Hellenistic fortification, the
scanty vestiges of the theater, the ruin known among
the Turks as Derekler, “the columns,” which perhaps
represents the ancient thermae, traces of a temple of
Silvanus with numerous rock-cut reliefs and in-
scriptions, and the remains of a triumphal arch
(Kiemer).

Lirzrature.—The fullest account_of the site and
antiquities is that of Heuzey and Daumet, Mission
archéologique de Macédoine, chs i-v and Plan A; Leake,
Travels in Northern Greece, \II, 214-25; Cousinéry,
Voyage dans la Macédoine, Il, 1 ff; Perrot, ‘* Daton.
Néapolis. Les ruines de Philippos,”’ in Revue archéologique,
1860; aud Hackett, in Bible Union Quarterly, 1860, may
also be consulted. For the Latin inseriptions see CIL,
III, 1, nos. 633-707; III, Suppl., nos. 7337-7358; for
coins, B. V. Head, Historia Numorum, 192; Catalogue of
Coins in the British Museum: Macedonia, etc, 96. For
the history of the Philippian church and the narrative of
Acts 16 12-40 see Lightfoot, St. Paul's Ep. to the Philip-
pians, 47-65; Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller and the Rom
Citizen, 202-26; Conyheare and Howson, Life and Epp.
of St. Paul, chix; Farrar, Life and Work of St. Paul, ch
xxv; and the standard comms. on the Acts—esp. Blass,
Acta A postolorum—and on Philippians.

M.N. Top


Philippians, Ep.to THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2372


PHILIPPIANS, fi-lip'i-anz, THE EPISTLE TO:


- PauL anp tar Cuurca at Pauper
II. CHaracteristics oF THE CaurRcH AT PHivipPr
TI], CrHaracteristics or Tae Eristie
1. A Letter
2. A Letter of Love
3. A Letter of Joy
4. Importance Theologically
IV. Genvineness or THE Epistie
. Puace, Date anv Occasion oF WRITING
VI. Contents or THE EPistLE
LITERATURE
I. Paul and the Church at Philippi.—Paul was
on his second missionary journey in the year 52 AD.
He felt that he was strangely thwarted in many
of his plans. He had had a most distressing illness
in Galatia. The Spirit would not permit him to
preach in Asia, and when he essayed to enter Bi-
thynia the Spirit again wonld not suffer it. Baffled
and perplexed, the apostle with his two companions,
Silas and Timothy, went on to the seacoast and
stopped in Troas. Here at last his leading became
clear. A vision of a man from Macedonia con-
vinced him that it was the will of God that he should
preach in the western continent of Europe. The
way was opened at once. The winds were favor-
able. In two days he came to Neapolis. At once
he took the broad paved way of the Via Egnatia
up to the mountain pass and down on the other side
to Philippi, a journey of some 8 miles. There was
no synagogue at Philippi, but a little company of
Jews gathered for Sabbath worship at ‘a place of
prayer” (mpocevxy, proseuché, Acts 16 13), about
a mile to the W. of the city gate on the shore of the
river Gangites (see Prosrucnua). Paul and his
companions talked to the women gathered there,
and Lydia was converted. Later, a maid with the
spirit of divination was exorcised. Paul and Silas
were scourged and thrown into prison, an earth-
quake set them free, the jailer became a believer,
the magistrates repented their treatment of men
who were Rom citizens and besought them to leave
the city (Acts 16 6-40). Paul had had his first
experience of a Rom scourging and of lying in the
stocks of a Rom prison here at Philippi, yet he went
on his way rejoicing, for a company of disciples
had been formed, and he had won the devotion of
loyal and loving hearts for himself and his Master
(see Puitrer1). That was worth all the persecution
and the pain. The Christians at Philippi seem to
have been Paul’s favorites among all his converts.
He never lost any opportunity of visiting them and
refreshing his spirit with their presence in the after-
years. Six years later he was resident in Ephesus,
and having sent Titus to Corinth with a letter to the
Corinthians and being in doubt as to the spirit in
which it would be received, he appointed a meeting
with Titus in Macedonia, and probably spent the
anxious days of his waiting at Philippi. If he
met Titus there, he may have written 2 Cor in that
city (2 Cor 213; 7 6). Paul returned to Ephesus,
and after the riot in that city he went over again into
Macedonia and made his third visit to Philippi.
He probably promised the Philippians at this time
that he would return to Philippi to.celebrate the
Easter week with his beloved converts there. He
went on into Greece, but in 3 months he was back
again, at the festival of the resurrection in the year
58 AD (Acts 20 2.6). We read in 1 Tim 1 3 that
Paul visited Macedonia after the Rom imprison-
ment. He enjoyed himself among the Philippians.
They were Christians after his own heart. He
thanks God for their fellowship from the first day
until now (Phil 1 5), He declares that they are
his beloved who have always obeyed, not in his
presence only, but much more in his absence (2 12).
With fond repetition he addresses them as his
brethren, beloved and longed for, his joy and crown,
his beloved (4 1). This was Paul’s favorite church,


and we can gather from the ep. good reason for this
fact.

Il. Characteristics of the Charch at Philippi.—
(1) 1t seems to be the least Jewish of all the Pauline
churches. There were few Jews in Philippi. No
Heb names are found in the list of converts in this
church mentioned in the NT. The Jewish oppo-
nents of Paul seem never to have established them-
selves in this community. (2) Women seem to be
unusually prominent in the history of this church,
and this is consistent with what we know concern-
ing the position accorded to woman in Macedonian
society. Lydia brings her whole family with her
into the church. She must have been a very influ-
ential woman, and her own fervor and devotion and
generosity and hospitality seem to have been con-
tagious and to have become characteristic of the
whole Christian community. Euodia and Syn-
tyche are mentioned in the ep., two women who were
fellow-laborers with Paul in the gospel, for both of
whom he has great respect, of both of whom he is
sure that their names are written in the book of life,
but who seem to have differed with each other in
some matter of opinion. Paul exhorts them to be
of the same mind in the Lord (4 2). The promi-
nence of women in the congregation at Philippi or
the dominance of Lydia's influence among them may
account for the fact that they seem to have been
more mindful of Paul’s comfort than any of his
other converts were. They raised money for Paul’s
support and forwarded it to him again and again.
They were anxious that he should have all that was
needful. They were willing to give of their time
and their means to that end. There seem to have
been no theological differences in their company.
That may testify to the fact that the most of them
were women. (3) There were splendid men in the
church membership too. Some of them were
Macedonians and some of them were Rom veterans.

Hausrath declares that the Macedonians represented
the ‘noblest and scundest part of the ancient world.
. ... Here was none of the shuffling and the indecision
of the Asiatics, none of the irritable vanity and the un-
certain levity of the Gr communities. .... They were
men of sterner mold than could be found in Asia Miner
or langucrous Syria. The material was harder to work
in, and offered more stubborn resistance; but the work,
once done, endured. A new Macedonian phalanx was
formed here, a phalanx of Pauline Christians... ..
Manliness, loyalty, firmness, their characteristics in gen-
eral history, are-equally their characteristics in the his-
tory of the Christian church..... They were always
true to Paul, always obedient, always helpful’ (Time
of the Apostles, III, 203-4).


Paul rejoiced in them. They were spirits con-
genial with his own. The Rom veterans had been
trained in the Rom wars to hardness and discipline
and loyalty. They were Rom citizens and proud
of the fact. In the ep. Paul exhorts them to behave
as citizens worthy of the gospel of Christ (1 27),
and he reminds them that though they were proud
of their Rom citizenship, as was he, they all had
become members of a heavenly commonwealth, citi-
zenship in which was a much greater boon than
even the jus Italicum had been. In 3 20 Paul
states the fact again, ‘Our citizenship is in heaven”;
and he goes on to remind them that their King is
seated there upon the throne and that He is coming
again to establish a glorious empire, for He has
power to subject all things unto Himself.

It is to these old soldiers and athletes that Paul ad-
dresses his military and gymnastic figures of speech.
He informs them that the whole praetorian guard had
heard of the gospel through his imprisonment at Rome
(1 13). Hesends them egrceting from the saints that are
in Caesar's househeld ‘a 22). He prays that he may
hear of them that they stand fast like an immovable
phalanx, with one soul striving athletically for the faith
of the gospel (1 27). He knows that they will he fearless
and brave, in nothing affrighted by the adversarics
(1 28). He speaks of his own experience as a wrestling-
match, a conflict or contest (1 30). He joys in the


2373


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Philippians, Ep. to


sacrifice and service of their faith (2 17). He calls
Epaphroditus not only his fellow-worker but his fellow-
soldier (2 25). He likens the Christian life to a race in
which he presses on toward the goal unto the prize (8 14).
He asks the Philippians to keep even, soldiorly step with
him in the Christian walk (3 16). These metaphors
have their appeal to an athletic and military race, and
they bear their testimony to the high regard which Paul
had for this type of Christianity and for those in whose
lives it was displayed. We do not know the names of
many of these men, for only Clement and Epaphrodi-
tus are mentioned here; but we gather much concerning
their spirit from this ep., and we are as sure as Paul
Hea their names are all written in the hook of
ife 3


(4) If the constituent elements of the church at
Philippi fairly represented the various elements of
the population of the city, they must have been
cosmopolitan in character. Philippi was an_old
Macedonian city which had been turned into a Rom
colony. It was both Gr and Rom in its character-
istics. Christianity had been introduced here by
two Jews, who were Rom citizens, and a Jewish son
of a gentile father. In the account given of the
foundmg of the church in Acts 16 three converts
are mentioned, and one is a Jewish proselyte from
Asia, one a native Greek, and one a Rom official.
The later converts doubtless represented the same
diversity of nationality and the same differences in
social position. Yet, apart from those two good
women, Euodia and Syntyche, they were all of one
mind in the Lord. It is a remarkable proof of the
fact that in Christ all racial and social conditions
may be brought into harmony and made to live
together in peace. (5) They were a very liberal
people. They gave themselves to the Lord and to
Paul (2 Cor 8 5), and whenever they could help
Paul or further the work of the gospel they gave
gladly and willingly and up to the limit of their
resources; and then they hypothecated their credit
and gave beyond their power (2 Cor 8 8). Even
Paul was astonished at their giving. He declares
that they gave out of much affliction and deep
poverty, that they abounded in their bounty, and
that they were rich only in their liberality (2 Cor
8 2).

Surely these are unusual encomiums. The Philippians
must have been a very unusual people. If the depth of
one’s consecration and the reality of one’s religion are to
be measured by the extent to which they affect the dis-
position of one's material possessions, if one measure of
Christian love is to be found in Christian giving, then the
Philippians may well stand supreme among the saints
in the Pauline churches. Paul seems to have loved
them most. He loved them enough to allow them to
contribute toward his support. Elsewhere he refused
any help of this sort, and stedfastly adhered to his plan
of self-support while he was preaching the gospel. He
made the single exception in the case of the Philippians.
He must have heen sure of their afection and of their
confidence. Four times they gave Paul pecuniary aid.
Twice they sent him their contrihutions just after he
had left them and gone on to Thessalonica (4 15.16).
When Paul had proceeded, to Corinth and was in want
during his ministry there his heart was gladdened hy the
visitation of brethren from Philippi, who supplied the
measure of his want (2 Cor 11 8.9). It was nota first
enthusiasm, forgotten as soon as the engaging person-
ality of the apostle was removed from their sight. It
was not merely a personal attachment that prompted
their gifts. They gave to their own dear apostle, hut
only that he might minister to others as he had min-
istered to them. He was their living link with the work
in the mission fleld.


Eleven years passed by, and the Philippians heard
that Paul was in prison at Rome and again in need
of their help. Eleven years are enough to make
quite radical changes in a church membership, but
there seems to have been no change in the loyalty
or the liberality of the Philippian church in that
time. The Philippians hastened to seud Epaphro-
ditus to Rome with their contributions and their
greetings. It was like a bouquet of fresh flowers in
the prison cell. Paul writes this ep. to thank them
that their thought for him had blossomed afresh at
the first opportunity they had had (4 10). No


wonder that Paul loved them and was proud of
them and made their earnestness and sincerity and
affection the standard of comparison with the love
of others (2 Cor 8 8).
Hl. Characteristics of the Epistle —It is a letter.
It is not a treatise, as Rom, He, and 1 Jn are. It is
not an encyclical full of general ob-
1. A Letter servations and exhortations capable of
application at any time and anywhere,
as the Ep. to the Eph and the Ep. of James and the
Epp. of Peter are. It is a simple letter to personal
friends. It has no theological discussions and no
rigid outlme and no formal development. It
rambles along just as any real letter would with per-
sonal news and personal feelings and outbursts of
personal affection between tried friends. It is the
most spontaneous and unaffected of the Pauline
Epp. It is more epistolary than any of the others
addressed to the churches.
It is a letter of love. All of the other epp. have
mixed feelings manifest in them. Sometimes a feel-
ing of grief and of indignation is domi-
2. ALetter nant, as in 2 Cor. Sometimes the
of Love uppermost desire of Paul in his writing
seems to be the establishment of the
truth against the assault of its foes, as in Gal and
Rom. Always more or less fault is suggested i the
recipients of the warnings and the exhortations Paul
feels compelled to write'to them. In Philippi alone
there is no fault to be found. The only suggestion
of such a thing is in the reference to the difference
of opinion between Euodia and Syntyche, and while
Pau] thinks this ought to be harmonized, he does
not seem to consider it any very serious menace to
the peace of the church. Aside from this Paul has
nothing but praise for his beloved brethren and
prayer that their love may abound yet more and
more in knowledge and all discernment (1 9). He
is full of thankfulness upon all his remembrance of
them (1 3). He rejoices in the privilege of being
offered upon the sacrifice and service of their faith
(2 17). The church at Philippi may not have been
conspicuous in charisms as the church at Corinth
was, but it had the fruits of the Spirit in rich meas-
ure. Paul seems to think that it needed only to
rejoice in its spiritual possessions and to grow-in
grace and in the mind of Christ. His heart is full
of gratitude and love as he writes. He rejoices as
he thinks of them. His peace and his hope are tri-
umphant over present affliction and the prospect of
persecution and death. If this is his Jast will and
testament to his beloved church, as Holtzmann
calls it, he has nothing to bequeath them but his
unqualified benediction. Having loved them from
the first, he loves them to the end.
It is a letter of joy. It was Bengel who said,
Summa epistolae: gaudeo, gaudete, ‘The sum of the
ep. is, I rejoice; rejoice ye.’ Paul
3. A Letter was a man whose spirits were un-
of Joy daunted m any circumstances. He
might be scourged in one city and
stoned in another and imprisoned in a third and
left for dead in a fourth, but as long as he retained
consciousness and as soon as he regained conscious-
ness he rejoiced. Nothing could dampen his ardor.
Nothing could disturb his peace. In Philippi he had
been scourged and cast into the inner prison and his
feet had been made fast in the stocks, but at mid-
night he and Silas were singing hymns of praise to
God. He is in prison now in Rome, but he is still
rejoicing. Some men would have been discouraged
in such circumstances. Wherever Paul had gone his
preaching had been despised, and he had been perse-
cuted. The Jews had slandered him and harassed
him, and so many of his converts had proved to be
fickle and false. The years had gone by and the
breach between him and his brethren had widened


Philippians, Ep.to THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2374


rather than lessened, and at last they had succeeded
in getting him into prison and keeping him there for
years. Prison life is never pleasant, and it was far
less so in that ancient day than it is now.


Paul was such an ardent spirit. It was more difficult
for him to be confined than it would be for a more indo-
lent man. He was a world-missionary, a restless cos-
mopolite ranging up and_dewn through the continents
with the message of the Christ. It was like putting an
eagle into a cage to put him into prison. Many eagles
mope and die iu imprisonment. Paul was not moping.
He was writing this Ep. to the Phil and saying to them,
“The things which happened unto me have fallen out
rather unto the progress of the gospel... . therein
I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice’ (1 12.18). His enemies
were free to do and to say what they pleased, and they
were making the most of the opportunity. He could no
longer thwart or hinder them. Some men would have
broken out into loud lamentations and complaints.
Some men would have worried ahout the conditions and
would have become nerveus about the outcome of the
cause. The faith of even John the Baptist failed in prison.
He could not helieve that things were going right if he
were not there to attend to them. Paul's faith never
wavered. His hope never_waned. His joy was inex-
haustible and perennial. He was never anxious. Did
he hear the sentry's Biep pacing up and down the corridor
before his prison door It reminded him of the peace
of God which passeth all understanding, guarding his
heart and his thoughts in Christ Jesus (4 7), standing
sentry there night and day. The keynote of this ep. is
rcice in the Lord always: again I will say, Rejoice”
(4 4).


Paul is old and worn and in prison, but some 20 t
in the course of this short letter to the Philippians
he uses the words, joy, rejoice, peace, content, and


thanksgiving. It is a letter full of love and full of
joy.

Itis of great importance theologically. Itis one of the
paradoxes to which we become almost accustomed_in

Paul's writings that this simplest of his
4. Impor- letters, most epistolary and most personal
tance Theo- throughout, should yet contain the fullest
: and most important putting of the theology
logically of the incarnation and exaltation that came
from his pen. He has only a practical end
in view. He is exhorting the Philippians to humility,
and he says to them, ‘Have the mind which wasin Christ
who emptied himself and then was exalted’ (2 5-11). It
is the most theological passagein the ep._ Itisone ofthe
most doctrinally importantin the NT. Itis Paul's final
contribution to the solution of the great mystery of the
coming of the Saviour and the economy of salvation.
It is his last word, at any length, on this subject. He
states plainly the fact of the kenosis, the morale of the
redemption, the certainty of the exaltation, and the sure
hope of the universal adoration in the end. The most
vital truths of Christology are here clearly stated and
definitely formulated for all time. Jesus was a_real
man, not grasping at any of the attributes of Deity
which would be inconsistent with real and true humanity,
but in whole-hearted surrender of sacrifice submitting
to all the disabilities and limitations necessary to the
incarnate conditions. He was equal with God, but He
emptied Himself of the omnipotence and the omniscience
and the omnipresence of His pre-incarnate state, and was
found in form as a_man, a genuine man obedient to God
in all His life. He always maintained that attitude
toward God which we ought to maintain and which we
can maintain in our humanity, in which He was on an
equality with us. We ought to have the mind which was
in Christ. He humbled Himself and became obedient.
He was obedient through life and obedient unto death,
yea, even unto the death of the cross. It is a great pas-
sage, setting forth profoundest truths in the tersest
manner. Itis the crowning revelation concerning Jesus
in the Pauline Epp. It represents Paul’s most mature
thought upon this theme. See Kenosis.

IV. Genuineness of the Epistle.—The genuineness of
the ep. is very generally admitted today. _ It was in the
Canon of Marcion. Its name occurs in the list on the
Muratorian Fragment. It is found in both the Pesh
and the Old Lat VSS. __It is mentioned by Polycarp and
quoted in the letter of the churches of Lyons and Vienne,
in the Ep. of Diognetus, and in the writings of Irenaeus
and Clement of Alexandria. Baur made a determined
attack uponitsauthenticity. Hedeclared that it was not
doctrinal and Hoe like the other Pauline Epp., but
that it was full of shallow imitations of these. We said
it had no apparent motive and no connected argument
and no depth of thought. He questioned some of the
historical data and suspected gnostic inftuence in certain
passages. Bleek said of Baur’s arguments that they were
partly derived from a perverted interpretation of certain

assages in the ep.; they partly rested upon arbitrary
Historical presuppositions, and some of them were really
so weak that it was hard to believe that he could have


}


attached any importance to them himsclf. It is not
surprising that few critics have been found_willing to
follow Baur's leadership at this point. Biederman,
Kneucker, Hinsch, Hitzig, Hoekstra, and Holsten may be
mentioned among them. The genuineness of the ep.
has been defended by Weizsicker, Weiss, Pfteiderer,
Jiilicher, Klépper, Schéenkel, Reuss, Hilgenfeld, Harnack,
Holtzmann, Mangold, Lipsius, Renan, Godet, Zahn,
Davidson, Lightfoot, Farrar, McGiffert, and practically
all of the Eng. writers on the subject. Weizsdicker says
that the reasons for attributing the ep. to the apostle
Paul are ‘‘overwhelming.’’ McGiffert declares: ‘‘It
is simply inconceivable that anyone else would or could
have produced in his name a letter in which no doctrinal
or ecclesiastical motive can be discovered, and in which
the personal element so largely predominates and the
character of the man and the apostle is revealed with so
great vividness and fidelity. The ep. deserves to rank
alongside of Gal, Cor, and Rom as an undoubted product
of Paul's pen, and as a codrdinate standard by which to
test the genuineness of other and less certain writings”
(The Apostolic Age, 393). This is the practically unani-
moous conclusion of modern scholarship.


V. Place, Date and Occasion of Writing.—This
is one of the prison epp. (see PuiLEmMon). Paul
makes frequent reference to his bonds (1 7.13.14.17).
He was for 2 years a prisoner in Caesarea (Acts 24
27). Paulus and others have thought that the ep.
was written during this imprisonment; but the ref-
erences to the praetorian guard and the members of
Caesar’s household have led most critics to conclude
that the Rom imprisonment was the one to which the
ep. refers. Philem, Col and Eph were also written
during the Rom imprisonment, and these three form
a group by themselves. Phil is evidently separated
from them by some interval. Was it written
earlier or later than they? Bleek, Lightfoot, San-
day, Hort, Beet and others think that the Ep. to
the Phil was written first. We prefer, however, to
agree with Zahn, Ramsay, Findlay, Shaw, Vincent,
Jiilicher, Holtzmann, Weiss, Godet, and_ others,
who argue for the writing of Phil toward the close
of the Rom imprisonment.


Their reasons are as follows: (1) We know that some
considerable time must have elapsed after Paul's arrival
at Rome before he could have written this ep.; for the
news of his arrival had heen carried to Philippi and a
contribution to his needs had been raised among his
friends there, and Epaphroditus had carried it to Rome.
In Rome, Epaphroditus had become seriously sick and
the news of this sickness had been carried back to Philip-
pi and the Philippians had sent back a message of sym-
je to him. At least four trips between Rome and

hilippi are thus indicated, and there are intervals of
greater or less length between them. The distance
between the two cities was some 700 miles. Communi-
cation was easy by the Appian Way and Trajan's Way
to Brundusium aud across the narrow straits there to
the Egnatian Way, which led directly to Philippi. There
were many making the trip at all times, but the journey
would occupy_@ month at least, and the four journeys
suggested in the ep. were not_in direct succession. (2)
Paul says that through him Christ had become known
throughout the whole praetorian guard (1 13). It must
have taken some time for this to become possihle. (3)
The conditions outside the prison, where Christ was
being preached, by some in a spirit of love, and by others
in a spirit of faction, cannot be located in the earliest
months of Paul's sojourn in Rome (1 15-17). They
must belong to a time when Christianity had developed
in the city and parties had been formed in the church.
(4) Luke was well known at Philippi. ‘Yet he sends no
salutation to the Philippians in thisep. He would surely
haye done so if he had heen with Paul at the time of its
writing. He was with the apostle when he wrote to the
Colossians, and so was Demas (Col 4 14). | In this ep.
Paul promises to send Timothy to Philippi, and says,
“T have no man likeminded, who will care truly for

our state” (2 20). This must mean that Aristarchus,

yemas and Luke were all gone. They had all been with
him when he wrote the other epp. (5) His condition as
a prisoner seems to have changed for the worse. He had
enjoyed comparative liberty for the first 2 years of his
imprisonment at Rome, living in his own hired house and
accessible to all his friends. He had now been removed,
posirly to the guardroom of the praetorian cohort.

ere he was in more rigorous confinement, in want and
alone. (6) Paul writes as if he thought that his case
would be decided soon (2 23.24). He seems to be facing
his final trial. He is not sure of its outcome. He may
die a martyr’s death, but he expects to be acquitted and
then to be at liberty to do further missionary work.
This was not his immediate expectation when he wrote
the other epp., and therefore they would seem to be earlier


2375


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Philippians, Ep. to


than this. (7) The ep. is addressed to all the saints in
Philippi, with the bishops and deacons (1 1). These
official titles do not occur in any earlier epp., but they
are found in the Pastoral Epp., which were written still
later. Therefore they link the Ep. to the Phil with the
later rather than the earlier epp.

From these indications we conclude that this is
the last of Paul’s Epp. to the churches. Hilgenfeld
calls this the swan song of the great apostle. In it
Paul has written his last exhortations and warnings,
his last hopes and_prayers for his converts to the
Christian faith. Its date must be somewhere
toward the close of the Rom imprisonment, in the
year 63 or 64 AD. Epaphroditua had brought the
contribution of the Philippians to Paul in Rome.
He had plunged into the work there in rather reck-
less fashion, risking his life and contracting a mala-
rial fever or some other serious sickness; but his life
had been spared in answer to the prayers of Paul
and his friends. Now Pan] sends him back to
Philippi, though he knows that he will be very
lonely without him; and he sends with him this
letter of acknowledgment of their gift, filled with
eu aaton and encouragement, gratitude and
love.

VI. Contents of the Epistle—The ep. is not
capable of any logical analysis. Its succession of
thought may be represented as follows: (1) Address
(1 1.2), (2) Thanksgiving and prayer (1 3-11):
Paul is thankful for their fellowship and confident
of their perfection. He longs for them and prays
that their love may be wise to discriminate among
the most excellent things and that they may be able
to choose the very best, until they are filled with the
fruits of righteousness, which are through Jesus
Christ, unto the glory and the praise of God. (3)
Information concernmg his own experience (1 12-


30): (a) His evangelism (vs 12-14): Everything .


had turned out well. Paul is in prison, but he has
been indefatigable in his evangelism. He has been
chained to a soldier, but that has given him many
an opportunity for personal and private and pro-
longed conversation. When the people have
gathered to hear, the guard has listened perforce;
and when the crowd was gone, more than once the
soldier has seemed curious and interested and they
have talked on about the Christ. Paul has told his
experience over and over to these men, and his story
has been ¢arried throngh the whole camp. (6) His
tolerance (vs 15-18): Not only has the gospel found
unexpected furtherance inside the prison walls, but
through the whole city the brethren have been em-
boldened by Paul’s success to preach Christ, some
through faction and envy and strife, and some
throughfove. Paul rejoices that Christ is preached,
whether by his enemies or by hisfriends. He would
much prefer to bave the gospel presented as he him-
self preached it, but he was great-souled and broad-
minded enough to tolerate differences of opinion and
method among brethren in Christ. ‘In every way,
whether in pretence or in truth, Christ is proclaimed;
and therein I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice” (1 18).
This is one of the noblest utterances of one of the
greatest of men. Paul is sorry that everybody does
not see things just exactly as he does, but he re-
joices if they glorify Christ and would not put the
least hindrance in their way. (c) His readiness for
life or death (vs 19-26): Paul says, Give me liberty
or give me death; it will be Christ either way. ‘To
live is to work for Christ; to die is to be with Christ.
“To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.” Here is
Paul’s soliloquy in the face of possible martyrdom
or further missionary labors.

We are reminded of Hamlet's soliloquy in Shake-
speare. ‘To be or not to be'—that is the question with
both Hamlet and Paul. Hamlet_ weighs evils against
evils and chooses the lesser evils in sheer cowardice in


the end. Paul weighs blessings against blessings, the
blessings of life for Christ and the blessings of death with


i


Christ, and chooses the lesser blessings in pure unself-

Ishness In the end. They hoth choose life, but the mo-

tives of their choice are radically different; and Paul

lives with rejoicing while Hamlet lives in despair and in
shame. The aged apostle would rather die than live,

aut he would rather live than die before his work was
one.


(d) His example (vs 27-30): Paul was a Rom
citizen and so were they. He tried to live worthy
of his citizenship and so must they. He had a still
higher ambition, that he and they might live as
citizens worthy of the gospel of Christ. He fought
as a good soldier. He stood fast in the faith. He
wag in nothing affrighted by the adversaries. Let
them follow his example. They were engaged in
the same conflict. To them it had been granted to
believe and to suffer in the behalf of Christ. Their
faith was not of themselves; it was the gift of God.
Their suffering was not self-chosen; it too was a
giftof God. (4) Exhortation to follow the example
of Christ (2 1-18): Let the Philippians have the
mind and spirit of Jesus, and Paul will rejoice to
pour out his life as a libation upon the sacrifice and
service of their faith. (5) Reasons for sending Tim-
othy and Epaphroditus to them (2 19-30). (6)
Paul’s example (3 1-21):


(a) In the repudiation of all confidence in the flesh
(vs 1-7): There are certain dogs and evil workers who
helong to the old Jewish persuasion who glory in the
fiesh. Paul does not. He glories in Christ Jesus and
has no confidence iu the flesh. He has much reason to
he proud of his past, for he would rank high on his record
among them. He was of the stock of Israel, the prince
withGod. Hebelonged to the race of those who wrestled
with God and got the victory. He was of the tribe of
Benjamin, the only one of the patriarchs born in the
Chosen Land. The first king of Israel had beeu chosen
from this trihe. It alone had heen faithful to the house
of David at the time of the Great Schism. It held the
place of honor in the militant host of the Israelites (Jgs
5 14; Hos § 8). It was a matter of pride to helong
to this singly faithful and signally honored tribe. He
was a Hebrew of Hebrews, and he helonged to that sect
among the Hebrews that was notorious for its scrupulous
observance of all the religious ritual, for its patriotism
and zeal, for its piety and devotion. Among these
Pharisees he was conspicuous for his enthusiasm. He
was the chosen instrumeut of the Sanhedrin to persecute
and anuihilate the Christian church. _No one could find
fault with his legal righteousness. He claimed to he
hlameless as judged by their standard. That was his
record. Who has any better one, iu pedigree or in piety ?
All of these things Paul counts hut loss for Christ. (6)
In the maintenance and pursuit of spiritual perfection
(vs 8-16): The word_” perfect’' is used twice in this para-
graph. Weread: “ Not that I have already obtained, or
am already made perfect: hut I press on.'' Many of
the authorities quote these words as indicative of Paul’s
humility in disclaiming any present perfection of char-
acter while he avows his purpose to strive on toward
perfection as long as _he lives. Such an interpretation
is wholly aside from Paul's thought. He is not talking
about perfection in patience and peace and devotion
and character. _That perfection he claims for himself
and for the Philippians in this paragraph toward the
close: *' Let us therefore, as many as are perfect, be thus
minded."’ The perfection of which he speaks earlier is
the perfection possible in the resurrection life of the
saiuts in bliss. e has not attained unto the resurrection
from the dead and is not perfect with the perfection of
heaven. That is the goal of his endeavor. He presses
ontothat mark. Inthe meantime he maintains that per-
fection of consecration and of faith that results in
present Christian perfection of character and which is
the only guaranty of that perfection to he revealed to
those who attain unto the resurrection from the dead.
(c) In heavenly citizenship (vs [7-21): Paul walks with
his mind on heavenly things. There are those who
mind earthly things. ‘They are enemies of the cross, but
he has sworn eternal allegiance to the cross. Their end
is perdition, while his end is sure salvation. Their god
is the helly, while his goal is the perfection of the spirit.
Their glory is in their shame, while his glory is in Christ
alone. ‘'Brethren, be ye imitators together of me, and
mark them that so walk even as ye have us for an en-
sampie."" Then ''The Lord... . shall fashion anew the
body of our humiliation,'' the body of our earthly pilgrim-
age. the hody that so often fails the racer to the goal
and cannot keep up with the desire of his spirit, and will
conform it ‘to the body of his glory,"’ the perfect hody
of those who have attained to the resurrection of the
dead. It is not ‘our vile hody” that is to he changed.
That gives a false sense in modern Eng. The body is
not vile, and the Bihle nowhere says that it is. It was


Philistia
Philistines


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2376


Manichean or neo-Platonic heresy that matter was evil
and the hody vile. Plotinus hlushed that he had a
hody; Jesus never did. ‘The Christian_will honor the
hody as the temple of the Holy Spirit. It was the vehi-
cle of the incarnation, and he honors it for that. Yet
the hody prepared for Jesus was the hody of His humili-
ation. It bound Him to the earth. It wearied when He
was most anxious to work. It failed Him when He most
needed strength. Paul says that our hodies are like the
hody of Jesus of Nazareth now, and they shall be like the
hody of our risen Lord in due time.


(7) A series of short exhortations (4 1-9): This
series ends with the command, ‘‘The things which ye
both learned and received and heard and saw in me,
these things do: and the God of peace shall be with
you.” All these exhortations, then, are based upon
his own conduct and experience and example. They
had seen the embodiment of these things in him.
They were to be imitators of him in their obedience
to them. Therefore as we read them we have side-
lights thrown upon the character of the apostle who
had taught and preached and practised these things.


What do they tell us concerning the apostle Paul?
(a) His stedfastness and his love for his friends (ver i):
He had a genius for friendship. He hound his friends to
him with cords of steel. They were ready to sacrifice
anything for him. The reason for that was that he sac-
rificed everything for them, and that he had such an
overflowing love for them that his love hegot love in
them. They could depend upon him. (6) His sym-
pathy with all good men and all good women and his
desire that they live in peace (vs 2.3): The true yoke-
fellow mentioned here cannot he identified now. He
has heen variously named by the critics, as Epaphrodi-
tus, Barnabas, Luke, Silas, Timothy, Peter, and Christ.
There may be a proper name in the phrase, either Geni-
sius or Syzygus. We are wholly ignorant as to whom
Paul meant. (c) His constant rejoicing in the Lord (ver
4). (d) His sweet reasonableness (‘‘moderation,” AV,
RV ‘‘forhearance,’’ ver 5): So Matthew Arnold translates
the Gr noun here. Tindale called it courtesy. It is a
combination of forbearance and graciousness, of modesty
and courtesy, of consideration and esteem snch as was
eharacteristic of Christ. Paul had it. There was a
sweet reasonableness ahout him that made his person-
aHty a most winning and attractive one. (e) His free-
dom from anxiety (vs 6.7): Paul's fearless confidence
was horn on the one hand from his assurance that the
Lord was near, and on the other from his faith in prayer.
It passed all understanding how Paul was kept from all
anxiety. It was the power of prayer that did it. It
was the peace of God that did it. It was the Lord at
hand who did it. (f) His hahitual high thinking (ver 8):
All that was worthy in the ideals of the Gr philosophers
Paul made the staple of his thought. He delighted in
things true and honorahle and just and pure and lovely
and of good report. He knew that virtue was in these
things and that all praise belonged to them. He had
learned that while his mind was filled with these things
he lived in serenity and peace.


_ (8) Thanks for their gift (4 10-20). (9) Saluta-
tions (4 21.22). (10) Benediction (4 23). This is
not a theological ep. and therefore it is not an esp.
Christological one. Yet we count the name of
Christ 42 t in this short letter, and the pronouns
referring to Him are many more. Paul cannot
write anything without writing about Christ. He
ends: ‘“The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with
your spirit.” The spirit of Christ and the grace of
Christ are in the entire ep.

Lireratvre:—Works on Introduction: Zahn, Weiss,
Jiilicher, Salmon, Dods, Bacon, Bennett and Adeney:
McClymont, The NT and Its Writers; Farrar, The
Messages of the Books; Fraser, Synoptical Lectures on
Books of the Holy Scripture; Godet, Studies on the Epp.
Works on the Panline Epp.: Findlay, Shaw. Comms.:
Lightfoot, Vincent, Weiss, Beet, Ellicott, Hanpt, Moule.
Devotional studics: Moule, Meyer, Jowctt, Noble.

_._,  Doremus Aumy Hayes

PHILISTIA, fi-lis’ti-a: The country is referred to
under various designations in the OT: viz. mobp,
p‘lesheth (Philistia) (Ps 60 8 [Heb 10]; 87 4),
pombbp TR, lereg p'lishtim, “land of the Philis-
tines” (Gen 21 32.34), D°MWEm mba, glath ha-
plishtim; LXX gé tin Phulistieim, “the regions of
the Philistines’ (Josh 13 2). The Egyp monu-
ments have Puirsatha, Pulsath (Budge), Peleset
(Breasted) and Purasati (HGHL), according to the


mace


different veweling of the radicals; the Assyr form
is Palastu or Pilistu, which corresponds very closely
to the Egyp and the Heb. The extent of the land
is indicated in Josh 13 2 as being from the Shihor,
or Brook of Egypt (RV), te the border of Ekron,
northward. The eastern border was along the
Judaean foothills on the line of Beth-shemesh (1 8
6 9) with the sea on the W. It was a very small
country, from 25 to 30 miles in length and with an
average width of about half the length, but it was
fertile, being an extension of the plain of Sharon, ex-
cept that along the coast high sand dunes encroached
upon the cultivated tract. It contained many towns
and villages, the most important being the five so
often mentioned in Scripture: Gaza, Ashdod, Ash-
kelon, Gath and Ekron. The population must
have been large for the territory, which enabled
them to contend successfully with the Israelites,
notwithstanding the superiority of position in the
hills to the advantage of the latter. H. PorTER


PHILISTIM, fi-lis’tim, fil’is-tim (D°MW2D, prlish-
tim [Gen 10 14 AV]). See Poiiistines.


PHILISTINES, fi-lis’tinz, fil’is-tinz, fil’is-tinz
(ONS, plishtim; Puvrdrv98 rely, Phulistieim, &dr6-
bvror, alldphulot):

I. OT Notices

i. Race and Origin
. Religion
. Individual Philistines Mentioned
. Title of Ruler and Circumcision
. History in the OT to Death of Saul
. History Continued to Time of Ahaz
. Later Notices
MonumentaL Notices
1. Palestinian Excavations
2. Egyptian Monuments
3. Assyrian Texts
THe Cretan THEORY
i. Cherethim and Kretes
2. Caphtor and Keft
IV. Davip's Guarps
i. The ‘‘Cherethi'’ and the “ Pelethi’’ Not Mer-
cenaries
2. Meaning of These Terms
3. Native Hebrews
4. Review
LirERATURB


I. OT Notices.—The Philis were an uncircum-
cised people inhabiting the shore plain between
Gezer and Gaza in Southwestern Pal

1. Race (see Putuistia). The name Pal itself
and Origin (Heb p%lesheth) refers to their country.
he word means ‘‘migrants,” and they

came from another country. They are noticed 286 t
in the OT, and their country 8t. The question of
their race and origin is of great importance as affect-
ing the genuine character and reliability of the Bible
notices. In Gen 10 14 (1 Ch 1 12) they are.
reckoned with other tribes in Mizraim (Egypt) as
descendants of Ham, and as cousins of the old
inhabitants of Babylonia (ver 6). They are said
to be a branch of the Casluhim—an unknown people
—or, according to LXX, of the Casmanim, which
would mean “shavers of the head’’—a custom of the
Phoenicians (forbidden to Hebrews as a rule), as
known from a picture of the time of Thothmes III
in the 16theent. BC. They are also connected with
the Caphtorim or people of Caphtor, whence indeed
they are said to have come (Jer 47 4; Am 9 7).
Caphtor was a “shoreland,” but its position is doubt-
ful (gee Dt 2 23); the Caphtorim found an earlier
race of Avim living in ‘enclosures’ near Gaza, and
destroyed them. In the LXX of this passage (and
in Am 9 7) Cappadocia stands for Caphtor (Kaph-
tor), and other VSS have the same reading. Cappa-
docia was known to the Assyrians as kat-pat-uka
(probably an Akkadian term—‘“land of the Kati’),
and the Kati were a people living in Cilicia and
Cappadocia, which region had a Sem population


Noob op


II.


2377


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Philistia
Philistines


side by side with Mongols (see Hirtrrss) at least
as early as the time of Moses. It is very likely
therefore that this reading is correct.


According to the OT and monuments alike, the Philis
were a Sem people, and they worshipped two Bab gods,
Dagon (1 S 5 2) and Ashtaroth (31 10),
both of whom were adored very early in
Babylonia, both, however, having names
of Akkadian and not of Sem origin. In
Sem speech Dagon meant ‘‘corn,’”’ and was so under-
stood in the time of Philo of Gebal, a Gr-Phoen writer
who attributes the art of corn-growing to this deity.
But the original name was Da-gan, and In Akkadian
dais ‘‘the upper part of a man,’’ and gan (Turkish kaan)
probably means ‘‘a large fish.’ The now man deity
was well known to the Assyrians, and is represented in
connection with Sennacherib’s worship of Ea, the sea-god,
when he embarked on the Pers Gulf.
probably a title of Ha (‘the water spirit"’), called by
Berosus Oannes (u-ha-na, ‘‘lord of the fish’’), and said
to have issned from this same gulf. We consequently
read that when the statue of Dagon at Ashdod fell (1 8
5 4), its head and hands were broken off, and only “the
great fish” was left. In 1874 the present writer found
a seal near Ashdod representing a bearded god (as in
Babylonia) with a fish tail (see Dagon). As to Ash-
toreth, who was adored in Philistia itself, her name is
derived from the Akkadian Istar (‘light maker’’), a
name for the moon-goddess and—later—for the planet
Venus (see ASHTORETH).


The Philis had reached Gerar by the time of
Abraham, and it was only in the age of the Hyksos
rulers of the Delta that Can. tribes


2. Religion


3. Indi- could be described as akin, not only to
vidual Babylonians, but also to certain tribes
Philistines in Egypt, a circumstance which favors
Mentioned the antiquity of the ethnic chapter,

Gen 10. We have 9 Phili names in
the OT, all of which seem to be Sem, including


Abimelech—“Moloch is my_ father’’—(Gen 20
2-18; 21 22-32; 26 8-11) at Gerar, S.E. of Gaza,
Ahuzzath (‘‘possession,’”? Gen 26 26), and Phicol
(of doubtful meaning), with Delilah (‘‘delicate,”
Jgs 16 4), Goliath (probably the Bab galu,
“great’”’), and Saph (2 8 21 18), perhaps meaning
“Merease.”?” These two brothers were sons of
Raphah (‘‘the tall”); but Ishbi-benob (ver 16), an-
other of the family, perhaps only means ‘‘the dweller
in Nob” (Beit Niba, N. of Gezer). The king of
Gath in David’s time was Achish (“the gift’’ in
Bab), who (1 S 27 2) was the son of Maoch, “‘the
oppressor.” According to LXX, Jonathan killed
a Phili named Nasib (1 8 13 3.4, where AV reads
“9 garrison’’). If this is correct the name (meaning

“a pillar”) would also be Sem.
Besides these personal names, and those of the
cities of Philistia which are all Sem, we have the
title given to Phili lords, seren, which


4. Title of LXX renders “satrap” and “ruler,”
Ruler and = and which probably comes from a Sem
Cireum- root meaning “to command.” It con-
cision stantly applies to the rulers of Gaza,


Ashdod, Ashkelon, Gath and Ekron,
the 5 chief cities of Philistia. The fact that the
Philis were uncircumcised does not prove that they
were not a Sem people. Herodotus (ii.104) says
that the Phoenicians acknowledged. that they took
this custom from the Egyptians, and the Arabs
according to this passage were still uncircumcised,
nor is it known that this was a custom of the Baby-
lonians and Assyrians. The LXX translators of
the Pent always render the name Phulistieim, and
this also is found in 8 passages of Josh and Jgs, but
in the later books the name is tr? as meaning
“strangers” throughout, because they were not the
first inhabitants of Philistia.

The Philis conquered the “downs” (g‘l7léth, Joel
3 4) near the seacoast, and were so powerful at
the time of the Heb conquest that none of their
great towns were taken (Josh 13 3; Jgs 3 3). By
the time of Samson (about 1158 BC) they appear
as oppressors of Israel for 40 years (Jgs 13 1;


Thus Dagon was |


|


15 20), having encroached from their plains into
the Sh*phélah (or low hills) of Judah, at the foot
of the mountains. Delilah was a Phili


5. History woman, living in the valley of Sorek,
in the OT close to Samson’s home. In the last
to Death of year of Eli(1 S 4 1) we find the Philis
Saul attacking the mountains near Mizpeh,


where they captured the ark. Samuel
drove them back and plaeed his monument of vic-
tory between Mizpeh and Jeshanah (Shen; see
LXX; 18 7 12) on the mountain ridge of Benja-
min. He even regained towns in the Sh¢phélah as
far as Ekron and Gath (ver 14); but at the opening
of Saul’s reign (10 5) the Philis had a “garrison” at
Gibeah—or a chief named Hasib according to LXX.
They raided from this center (18 17-23) in all
directions, and prevented the Hebrews from arm-
ing themselves, till Jonathan drove them from
Michmash (14 1-47). David’s victory (17 2) was
won in the Valley of Elah E. of Gath, and the pur-
suit (ver 52) wasasfaras Ekron. We here read that
the Phili champion wore armor of bronze (vs 4-7),
his spear head being of iron. They still invaded the
Shephélah after this defeat, robbing the threshing-
floors of Keilah (23 1) near Adullam at the foot of
the Hebron Mountains (see 28 27; 24 1). David’s
band of outlaws gradually increasing from 400 to
600 men (22 2; 27 2), being driven from the Heb
lands, accompanied him to Gath, which is usually
placed at Tell es-Safi, at the point where the Valley
of Elah enters the Phili plain. It appears that
Achish, king of Gath, then ruled as far 8S. as Ziklag
(Josh 15 31; 1S 27 6) in the Beersheba plains;
but he was not aware of the direction of David's
raids at this distance. Achish supposed David to
be committed vo his cause (27 12), but the Phili
lords suspected him and his Heb followers (29 3)
when going up to Jezreel.
After they had killed Saul, we hear no more of
them till the 8th year of David, when, after taking
Jerus, he apparently went down to


6. History Adullam (28 5 17) and fell upon
' Continued them in their rear as they advanced
to Time on his capital. He then destroyed
of Ahaz their supremacy (8 1) as far as Gezer


(1 Ch 20 4), and the whole of Philistia
was subject to Solomon (1 K 4 21), though not
long after his death they seem to have held the
town of Gibbethon (15 27; 16 15) in the hills of
Dan. Hezekiah smote the Philis as far as Gaza
(2 K 18 8) before 702 BC, in which year (accord-
ing to the Taylor cylinder) Sennacherib made Heze-
kiah deliver up Padii, king of Ekron, who had been
carried prisoner to Jerus. The accounts in Ch refer
to David’s taking Gath (1 Ch 18 1), which was
recovered later, and again taken by Uzziah (2 Ch
26 6). The Philis sent gifts to Jehoshaphat (17 11),
but invaded the Sh*phélah (28 18) in the time of
Ahaz.

In this age the “lords” of the 5 cities of Philistia
are called ‘kings,’ both in the Bible and on Assyr


monuments. Isaiah (2 6) speaks of
7. Later Phili superstitions, Ezekiel (25 15.16)
Notices connects them with the Cherethim


on the seacoast. They still held Gath
in the time of Amos (6 2), and Gaza, Ashdod and
Ekron in that of Zephaniah (2 5), who again men-
tions the Cherethim with Philis, as inhabitants of
Canaan or the “lowlands.’’ The last notice (Zec
9 6) still speaks of kings in Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron
and Ashdod at a time when the Jonians had become
known in Judah (ver 13); but the Philis are un-
noticed by Ezra or Nehemiah, unless we suppose
that the “speech of Ashdod” (Neh 13 24) was their
old dialect, which appears—like the language of
the Canaanites in general in earlier times—to have
resembled that of the Babylonians and Assyrians,


Philistines


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2378


and to have thus differed—though Sem—from the
Hebrews.

Their further history is embraced in that of the
various cities to which reference can be made under
the articles pertaining to them.

Il. Monumental Notices.—These are of great
importance, because they confirm the OT state-

ments from a time at least as early as


1. Pales- that of Moses, and down to 670 BC.
tinian Ex- Recent excavations at Gezer show the
cavations carly presence of two races at this


Phili city, one being Sem, the other
probably Egyp. Scarabs as old as the XIIth Dy-
nasty were found, and in the [5th cent. BC Gezer was


held by Amenophis HII. At Lachish also seals of this
king and his queen have been found, with a cunei-
form letter to Zimridi, who was ruler of the city
under the same Pharaoh. At Gaza a temple was
built by Amenophis II. The names of places in
Philistia noticed yet earlier by Thothmes III are
all Sem, including Joppa, Saphir, Gerar, Gezer,
etc. Inthe Am Tab we have also (about 1480 BC)
letters from chiefs subject to Amenophis III at
Joppa, Ashkelon, Gezer, Lachish and Keilah which
show us a Sem population, not only by the language
of these letters, but also by the names of the writers.
In the case of Ashkelon esp. the Sem rulers are found
to have worshipped Dagon; and, though the name


Philistine Wagons.


“Philistine” does not occur, the race was clearly the
same found by the Assyrians in 800 BC in the land
of Palastan beside the Great Sea. These names
include Yamir-Dagén (“Dagon sees’), Dagdan-
takala (“Dagon is a protection”) and Yadaya (the
“orateful’) at Ashkelon; Bia (‘asked for’), son
of the woman Gulata, at Joppa; Yabnilu (“God
made’), at Lachish, with Zimridi—a name found
also in Sabaean Arab.; while, at Gezer, Yapa’a rep-
resents the Bib. Japhia (Josh 10 3), and Milkilu
(“Moloch is king’) the Heb Malchiel. Others
might be added of the same character, but these
examples are enough to show that, in the time of
Moses and Joshua, the population of Philistia was
the same that is noticed in the OT as early as
Abraham’s age.

When therefore scholars speak of the Philis as
being non-Sem—and probably Aryan—invaders of
the country, arriving about 1200 BC, they appear
not only to contradict the Bible, but also to contra-


diet the monumental evidence of the earlier exist-
ence of Sem Dagon-worshippers at Ashkelon. In
this later age Rameses III was at-
2. Egyptian tacked, in Egypt, by certain northern
Monuments tribes who came by sea, and also by
land, wasting first the country of the
Hittites and Amorites. Among them were the
Danau, who were probably Gr Danai. They were
exterminated in the Delta, and in the subsequent
advance of Rameses III to the Euphrates. Ona
colored picture they are represented as fair people;
and two of the tribes were called Pdrsiau and
Takarri, whom Chabas supposed to be Pelasgi (since
land rare not distinguished in Egyp) and Teucrians.
These two tribes wear the same peculiar headdress.
Brugsch supposed the former to be Philis (Geag.,
I, 10), but afterward called them Purasata (Hist
Egypt, II, 148). The inscriptions accompanying
the picture on the temple walls say that they came
from the north, and ‘‘their home was in the land
of the Pirstau, the Takarri,” etc. There is thus
no reason at all to suppose that they were Philis,
nor did they ever settle in Philistia. :
The Assyr texts agree with those already men-
tioned in making the inhabitants of Philistia Semitic.
Rimmon-nirari, about. 800 BC, was the
3. Assyrian first Assyr conqueror in Palastau (‘‘by
Texts the great sea”). In 734 and 727 BCG,
Tiglath-pileser attacked the Pilist7,
and mentions a king of Ashkelon named Mitinti
(‘my gift”), and his son Rukuftt whose name re-
sembles that of the Kenite called Rechab in the OT.
The name of the king of Gaza was Hanun, or
“merciful.” In 711 BC Sargon took Ashdod, and
speaks of its king Azuri, whose name recalls the
Amorite Aziru, and of Ahimiti (‘‘a brother ts sent’’),
and the usurper Yamanwu (‘‘stedfast”’), who fled
before him. Sennacherib, in 702 BC, gives the
names of cities in Philistia (including Eltekeh
and Beneberak near Joppa) which are Sem. He
notices Sidka (Zadok) of Ashkelon, and also Sar-
ludart (‘the Lord be praised’’), son of Rukubti in
the same city, with Afitintt of Ashdod, and Padi
(‘redeeming’) of Ekron, while Si-b’cl (‘Baal is a
protection”) was king of Gaza. In 679 BC Esar-
haddon speaks of Silli-b’el (“Baal is my protection’)
of Gaza, with Afitintt of Ashkelon, Ika-samsu (‘‘the
sun-god is manifest’’) of Ekron, and Abi-milki of
Ashdod, who bore the ancient Phili name Abimc-
lech. In 670 BC, when Assur-bani-pal set up
many tributary kings in Egypt, we find again the
name Sarludart applied to a ruler of Pelusium, who
may have been a Philistine. It is thus abundantly
clear that the monumental notices all agree with the
OT as to the names and nationality of the Phillis,
and as to their worship of Baal and Dagon; the
conjecture that they were Aryan foreigners, arriving
in 1200 BC, is not based on any statement of the
monuments, but merely rests on a guess which
Brugsch subsequently abandoned. It resembles
many other supposed discrepancies between Bib.
and contemporary records due to the mistakes of
modern commentators.
Hl. The Cretan Theory.—This strange theory,
which is apparently of Byzantine origin, would
make the Philis come from Crete. It


1. Chere- still finds supporters, though it does
thim and not rest on any Bib: or monumental
Kretes evidence. The Cherethim (Ezk 26

16; Zeph 2 5) were a Sem people


named with the Philis in Canaan. The LXX
renders the word Kralés or Krétai; and, about
1770 AD, Michaélis (Spicil., 1, 292-308) argued
that this meant “Cretans,” and that the Philis
therefore came from Caphtor, which must be
Crete. The passages, however, refer to Philistia
and not to any island, and the LXX translators, as


2379


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Philistines


we have seen, placed Caphtor in Cappadocia. The
Cherethi—in the singular—is mentioned (1 8 30
14) as a people of Philistia (ver 16), near Ziklag,
and their name probably survives at the present
town called Kerattyeh in the Phili plain.

Yet, many theories are founded on this old idea about
the Cherethites. Some suppose that Tacitus confused
the Jews with the Philis as having come from Crete; but
what he actually says (Hist. v.11) is that ‘‘the Jews ran
away trom Crete,’’ aud ‘‘the inhabitants are named
Idaci [from Mt. Ida], which, with a barbarous augment,
becomes the uame of the Judaei.’"’ This absurd deri-
vation shows at least that Tacitus did not mean the
Philis. Stephen of Byzantium said that the god Marna
at Gaza was like the Cretan Jove. Probably he had
seen the huge statue of a scated Jove found near Gaza,
and now at_Constantinople, but this is late Gr work, and
the name Marna (‘‘our lord’’) is Sem. Stephen also
thought that Minois—the port of Gaza—was named
from the Cretan Minos, but it-is an Arab. word Méneh,
for ‘‘harbor,”’ still applying to the same place.


No critical student is likely to prefer these later
speculations to our present monumental information,
even without reference to the contra-
2. Caphtor diction of the Bible. Yet these
and Keft blunders have given rise to the suppo-
sition that Caphtor is to be identified
with a region known to the Egyptians as Keft, with
inhabitants called AKefau. The latter are repre-
sented in a tomb of the XVIIIth Dynasty near
Thebes. They are youths of brown color, with long
black hair, and the same type is found in a Cypriote
figure. They are connected with islanders of the
“oreen sea,’’ who may have lived in Arvad or in
Cyprus; but there is no evidence in any written
statement that they were Cretans, though a figure
at Knossos in Crete somewhat resembles them.
There are many indications that this figure—
painted on the wall of the later palace—is not older
than about 500 BC, and the Sidonians had colonies
in Crete, where also pottery is found just like that
marked by a Phoen inscription in Cyprus. ‘The
Kefau youths bring vases as presents, and these—
in all their details—are cee the same as those
represented in another picture of the time of Thoth-
mes III, the bearers in this case being Harri from
North Syria, represented with black beards and
Sem features. Moreover, on the bilingual inscrip-
tion called the Decree of Canopus (238 BC), the
Keft region is said to be “Phoenicia,” and the Gr
translator naturally knew what was meant by his
Egyp colleague. eft in fact is a Sem word for
“palm,” occurring in Heb (Isa 9 14; 19 15), and
thus applicable to the “palm’’-land, Phoenicia.
Thus, even if Keft were related to Caphtor, the evi-
dence would place the Phili home on the Phoen
shores, and not in Crete. There is indeed no evi-
dence that any European race settled near the coasts
of Pal before about 680 BC, when Hsarhaddon
speaks of Gr kings in Cyprus. The Cretan theory
of Michaélis was a literary conjecture, which has
been disproved by the results of exploration in
Asia.
IV. David’s Guards.—Another strange theory,
equally old, represents David as being surrounded
with foreign mercenaries—Philis and


1. The Carians—as Rameses II employed
“Cherethi” mercenaries called Shairianau from
and the Asia Minor. The suggestion that the
“Pelethi” | Cherethites were of this race is scarcely
Not Mer- worth notice, since the Heb kaph
cenaries is never represented by sh in Egyp.


David’s band of Heb exiles, 400 in
number, followed him to Gath where 200 Gittites
joined him (2 S 15 18). In later times his army
consisted of “the Cherethi” (k*réh2, in sing.) and
“the Pelethi” (p*lé#hz), commanded by the Heb
leader Benaiah, son of Jehoiada (28 8 18; 15
18; 20 7; 1 IK 1 38.44), together with the Gittites
under Ittai of Gath. These guards are never said


to have been Philis, but “‘the Cherethi’’ is supposed
to mean one of the Cherethim tribe, and ‘the Pelethi”
to be another name for the Philistine. As regards
the Gittites, the fact that they came from Gath
does not prove that they were Philis, any more than
was David himself because he came back from this
city. David calls Ittai an “enemy” and an “exile,”
but it is probable that he was the same hero, so
named (2 8 23 29), who was the son of Ribai from
Gibeah of Benjamin. He had himself not long
joined David, being no doubt in exile at Gath, and
his tribe at first opposed David, taking the side of
their tribesman Saul. Even when Ittai’s men
joined the Cherethi and Pelethi against Absalom,
they were naturally suspected; for David still had
enemies (2 § 15 5-13) among Benjamites of Saul’s
house. It is also surely impossible to suppose that
David would have left the ark in charge of a Phili;
and Obed-edom the Gittite (28 6 10) was a Levite,
according to a later account (1 Ch 16 18), hearing
a Heb name, meaning pethaps “servant of men,” or
“humble worshipper.” It seems equally unlikely
that, in later times, a pious priest like Jehoiada
(2 K 11 4) would have admitted foreign mer-
cenaries into the temple. In this passage they are
called kdr?, aa also in 2S 20 23, where LXX has
Cherethi. The suggestion of Wellhausen that they
were Carians does not seem probable, as Carians
ee not even reached Egypt before about 600


The real explanation of these various words for
soldiers seems simple; and David—heing a very
popular king—is not likely to have
2. Meaning needed foreign mercenaries; while the
of These Philis, whom he had so repeatedly
Terms smitten, were very unlikely to have
formed trusty guards. The word ‘‘Che-
rethi” (keréthz2) means a “‘smiter’”’ or a “destroyer,”
and “Pelethi” (p°léh?) means ‘‘a swift one” or ‘‘pur-
suer.”’ In the time of Joash the temple-guards are
called kart? (2 K 11 4.19, Carites), which LXX
treats as either sing. or pl., and raécim or “runners”
(seel S 22 17; 1 K 14 27.28; 2 K 10 25), these
two bodies perhaps answering to the Cherethi and
Pelethi of David's time; for kart means ‘‘stabber.”
The term racim, or ‘‘runners,” is however of general
application, since Jehu also had troops 50 called
(2 K 10 25). Evidently we have here two classes
of troops—as among the Romans—the heavier
regiment of ‘‘destroyers,’ or “stabbers,’’ being
armed with swords, daggers or spears; while the
“swift ones” or ‘runners’ pursued the defeated foe.
Thus in Egypt we find, yet earlier, the ax-man sup-
ported by the bow-man in regular regiments; and
in Assyria the spear-man with heavy shields defend-
ing the bow-man. We have also a picture of the
time of Tiglath-pileser II representing an Assyr
soldier on acamel. The Pelethi or ‘‘pursuers’’ may
have been “runners” on foot, but perhaps more
probably mounted on camels, or on horses like the
later Assyrians; for in the time of Solomon (1 K 4
28) horses and riding camels were in use—the
former for chariots. It is clear that David’s band,
leaving the vicinity of Jezreel (1 S 29 1; 30 1),
could not have reached Ziklag ‘‘on the third day”
(a distance of 120 miles) on foot; so that the
camel corps must have existed even before the
death of Saul.

These considerations seem to make it evident that
David’s guards were native Hebrews, who had been
with him as exiles and outlaws at
Adullam and Gath, and that the Che
rethi or “destroyer” only accidentally
had a title like that of the Phili tribe
of “destroyers” or Cherethim, who were not Cre-
tans, it would seem, any more than the “stabbers”
were Carians.


3. Native
Hebrews


Philistines, Lords
Philo Jndeus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2380


The general result of our inquiry is, that all
monumental notices of the Philis agree with the
T statements, which make them to
4. Review be a Sem people who had already mi-
grated to Philistia by the time of
Abraham, while the supposed discrepancies are
caused by the mistakes made by a commentator of
the 18th cent., and by archaeologists of later times.
Literature—Paton, Early History of Syria_and Pal;
Smith, HGHL; Budge, History of Egypt; Breasted,
History of Egypt; Rawlinson. Ancient _ Monarchies;
Herodotus with most histories of Egypt, Babylon, and
Assyria for the period from the 13th cent. BC to the
time of Alexander.
C. R. ConpER
PHILISTINES, LORDS OF THE. Sce Pur-


LISTIA.


PHILISTINES, SEA OF THE (Ex 23 31).
MEDITERRANEAN SEA.


See


PHILO, f1’l56, JUDAUS, joo-dé’us:
. His Life
Importance of the Period
The Task of Philo
Changes and New Problems
Three Subjects of Inquiry
(1) The Conception of God
(2) God's Relation to the World
(3) Doctrine of Man
6. Philo’s Works
LITERATURE
Born probably in the first decade of Augustus
Caesar, who became emperor in 27 BC. He died
ossibly in the last years of Claudius
1. His Life (41-54 AD), more likely in the early
years of Nero (54-65 AD). We have
no exact information about either date. He was
a native of Alexandria, Egypt. His relatives were
wealthy and prominent, probably sacerdotal, Jews.
He received the best Jewish education, and was
trained also in gentile learning—grammar, rhetoric,
philosophy, geometry, poetry, music. Enjoying
ample means, he was enabled to devote his career
to scholarship. The Alexandrian Jews wielded
great influence in the contemporary Rom empire,
and the prominence of Philo’s family is attested by
the fact that his brother, Alexander Lysimachus,
was Alabarch of Alexandria. The single date in
Philo’s life which we know accurately is connected
with their leadership. In the winter of 39-40 AD,
he was spokesman of the deputation sent to Rome
to protest against imposition of emperor-worship
upon fellow-citizens of his faith. The mission failed,
Philo, with his two colleagues, meeting rebuff, even
insult. It was little likely that Caligula would heed
grievances which included specifically dissent from
worship of himself. Philo records his distaste for
political activity, and, so far as we know, the Rom
incident excepted, he devoted himself principally to
letters. As a young man probably, he had under-
taken a journey to Jerus, almost in the nature of a
pilgrimage to the ancient shrine of his religion. He
paid a second visit to Rome possibly after 50 AD,
at all events, in the reign of Claudius. For the rest,
our knowledge of his life is scanty and, sometimes,
legendary.
The period covered by his career coincides with
one of the most momentous epochs in history. For
it witnesses, not only the foundation


aan


2. Impor- of the Rom imperial system, but also
tance of the beginning of the end of ancient
the Period classical civilization in its dominant


ideas, and the plantation of Christian-
ity. Preéminently an era of transition, it was
marked by significant displacements in culture, the
effects of which continue to sway mankind even yet.
Minor phenomena aside, three principal movements
characterized the time: the Pagan reaction, or
reversion to forms of religion that had sufficed the


{


peoples of the Rom empire hitherto—this mani-
fested itself strongly with Augustus, and entered its
decline perhaps with the death of Plutarch (c 120
AD); the appearance of Christianity; and what is
known as Syncretism, or interfusion between the
conceptions of different races, esp. in religion, phi-
losophy and morals—a circumstance which affected
the fortunes of Christianity deeply, found its chief
exponent in Philo, and maintained itself for several
centuries in the theosophical systems of the Gnostics
and neo-Platonists. Thus, to understand Philo, and
to realize his importance, it is essential to remem-
ber the internal spirit of his age. The ‘“universal-
ism” of the Rom empire has been so named because,
within the political framework, various peoples and
divergent civilizations commingled and came event-
ually to share something of a common spirit, even
of a common language. Philo’s prominence as a
figure in the world of thought, and as an authority
for the general culture of NT times, is out of all pro-
portion to the fragmentary information available
about his external career. Contemporary currents,
subtle as they were, perplexing as they still remain,
met and fused in his person. Hence his value as an
index to the temperament of the period cannot well

be overrated.
A Jew by nature and nurture, an oriental mystic
by accident of residence, a Gr humanist by higher
education and professional study, an


3. The ally of the Rom governing classes,
Task of familiar with their intellectual per-
Philo spective, Philo is at once rich in sug-


gestion and blurred in outline. ore-
over, he addressed himself to two tasks, difficult to
weld into a flawless unity. On the one hand, he
wrote for educated men in Gr-Rom society, attempt-
ing to explain, often to justify, his racial religion
before them. The ancient state religion having
fallen upon inanition, he enjoyed unusual oppor-
tunity to point the merits of the Jewish faith as the
“desire of all nations,” the panacea of which the
need was everywhere felt. On the other hand, he
had to confront his orthodox coreligionists, with
their separatist traditions and their contempt for
paganism in all its works. He tried to persuade
them that, after all, Gr thought was not inimical to
their cherished doctrines, but, on the contrary, in-
volved similar, almost identical, principles. He
thus represented an eclectic standpoint, one in which
Gr philosophy blended with historical and dogmatic
deductions from the Jewish Scriptures. The result
was Philo’s peculiar type of theosophy—we cannot
callitasystem. Taking the OT for text, he applied
the “allegorical” method, with curious consequences.
He taught that the Scriptures contain two meanings:
a ‘lower’? meaning, obvious in the literal statements
of the text; and a “higher,” or hidden meaning,
perceptible to the “initiate” alone. In this way he
found it possible to reconcile Gr intellectualism with
Jewish belief. Greek thought exhibits the “hidden”
meaning; it turns out to be the clucidation of the
“allegory”? which runs through the OT like a vein
of gold. Moses, and the rest, are not merely his-
torical figures, the subjects of such and such vicissi-
tudes, but representative types of reason, righteous-
ness, the virtues, and so forth. The tendency to
fusion of this kind was no new thing. It is trace-
able for some three centuries before Philo, who may
be said to complete the process. It had been
familiar to the rabbis, and to the Hellenistic phi-
losophers, particularly the Stoics, who applied this
method to the Gr poetical myths. Philo reduces it
to an expert art, and uses it as an instrument to
dissipate all difficulties. He believed himself to
be thoroughly true to the OT. But, thanks to his
method, he rendered it malleable, and could thus
adjust its interpretation to what he considered to be


2381


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Philistines, Lords
Philo Judeus


the intellectual necessities of his generation. Nay
more, he felt that, when at his best in this process,
he became a vehicle of Divine possession. He says,
“Through the influence of Divine inspiration I have
become excited profoundly ... . then I have been
conscious of a richness of interpretation, an enjoy-
ment of light, a most penetrating sight, a most mani-
fest energy in all that was to be done.”” Again, “I
am irradiated with the light of wisdom,” and, “all
intellect is a Divine inspiration.’ Little wonder,
then, that we have a strange mixture of philosophy
and religion, of rationalism and piety, of clear
Gr intellectualism with hazy oriental mysticism.
Hence, too, the philosophy of Philo is subordinate
to his explanation of the Scriptures, and compromise,
rather than logical thinking, marks his leading
positions.
After the death of Cicero (43 BC) a change,
long preparing, asserted itself in ancient thonght.
Mixture of national, or racial, char-
4. Changes acteristics was consummated, and
and New thoughtful men, irrespective of race~
Problems origin, became persons to each other.
A reorganization of standards of ethical
judgment was thus rendered inevitable, and Judaism
came to interfuse more freely with Gr philosophy
as one consequence. While it is trne that “reason”
preserved its traditional supremacy as the means to
solve all problems, the nature of the chief quest
underwent transformation. The old association of
man with Nature gave way to a dualism or opposi-
tion between the world-order and another existence
lying behind it as its originator or sustainer. The
system of Nature having disappointed expectation,
thinkers asked how they could escape it, and assure
themselves of definite relations with the Divine
Being. They songht the desiderated connection
within their own souls, but as a distant ideal. This
was the problem that confronted Philo, who attacked
it from the Jewish side. Now Judaism, like Gr
thought, had also experienced a change of heart.
Jeh had been the subject of an idealizing process,
and tended, like the Stoic deity, to lose specific
relation with the world and man, Accordingly, a
new religious question was bringing the philosophy
and the faith into closer contact. Could they join
forces? Philo’s consequent embarrassment rooted,
not simply in this fresh problem, but in the diffi-
culties inseparable from the adjustment of his avail-
able methods and materials.
Messiah had passed over into the Gr Logos, the two
systems preserved their separation in no small
measure, Philo being the most conspicuous mediator.
He was familiar with the mystic, transcendent con-
cept of Deity extracted, thanks to long misin-
terpretation, from Plato’s cosmogonic dialogue,
Timaeus. Here God was elevated above the world.
His conception of the presence, or immanence, of the
Deity in the world came from the Stoics. The
Jewish religion gave him the doctrine of a righteous
(pure) Deity, whose moral mwardness made rela-
tions with men possible. Moreover, contemporary
angelology and demonology enabled him to devise
a scheme whereby the pure Deity could be linked
with the gross world, notwithstanding its ineradi-
cable evil. Little wonder, then, that he compassed
an amalgamation only, and this in consonance with
the theosophical drift of the age. Nevertheless, he
counteracted the deistic tendencies of rabbinical
speculation by reference to Hellenistic pantheism,
and, at the same time, counteracted this pantheism
by the inward moralism of his national faith. The
logical symmetry of the Gr mind was reinforced by
Hebraic religious intuition. The consequence was
a ferment rather than a system, but a ferment that
cast up the clamant problem in unmistakable
fashion. The crux was this: Man must surmount


For, while the Jewish |


his own fragmentary experience and rise to an abso-
lute Being; but, its absoluteness notwithstanding,
this Being must be brought into direct contact with
the finite. Philo was unable to reconcile the two
demands, because he could not rise above them;
but the effort after reconciliation controls all his
thonght. As a result, he concentrated upon three
main subjects of inquiry: (1) the conception of God;
(2) the manner of God’s relation to the world; (3)
human nature.

(1) Philo’s doctrine of God, like that of the neo-
Platonic school, which he heralded, is thoronghly

dualistic. No doubt, it is determined
5. Three largely by certain human analogies.
Subjects of For example, God’s existence is neces-
Inquiry sary for the control of the world, just

in the same way as man’s mind must
exist to furnish the principle of all human action;
and, as matter is not self-determined, a principle,
analogous to mind, is demanded, to be its first cause.
Further, as the permanent soul remains unchanged
throughout the vicissitudes of a human life, s0,
behind the ceaseless play of phenomena, there must
reside a self-existent Being. Nevertheless, the
human analogy never extends to God in His actual
Being. No human traits can attach to the Deity.
Language may indicate such parallelism, nay the
Scriptures are full of instances, but we must view
them as concessions to mortal weakness. These
accommodations eliminated, it becomes evident that
man can never know God positively.. Any adjective
used to describe Him can do no more than point
the contrast between His relationless Being and the
dependence of finite things. That God is, Philo is
fully persuaded; what He is, no man can ever tell.
He is one and immutable, simple and immeasurable
and eternal, just as man is not. ‘For he is un-
changeable, requiring nothing else at all, so that all
things belong to Him, bunt He, speaking strictly,
belongs to nothing.’? This doctrine of the tran-
scendence of Deity was an essential postulate of
Philonic thought. For, seeing that He expels all
the imperfections of the world, God is precisely in
that condition of Being for which the whole creation
then yearned. In a word, the dualism, so far from
being a bar to salvation, was rather a condition
without which the problem of salvation could neither
be stated nor solved. Men stood in necessary
relation to this Being, but, as yet, He stood in no
relation whatever to them. Yet, men must return
to God, but He abides so remote, in the realm of pure
contemplation and completion, that He cannot
approach them. Philo’s familiarity with logical
Gr thought debarred him from surmounting the
difficulty after the manner of Jewish religion. An
otiose reference to “‘God’s choice,” as distinct from
His nature, could not suffice a mind trained in
Hfellenic methods. The question therefore was,
How could mediation be effected?

(2) God’s relation to the world—At this point
Philo’s thought assumes a phase of great interest
to readers of the NT. God, being above created
things, is incomprehensible and immaterial. Ac-
cordingly, He cannot he connected with the world
directly. Therefore He created it and sustains it
by intermediate powers. These agencies were sug-
gested to Philo by the Platonic Ideas. But he
personalized them more or less and, as a character-
istic addition, mcluded them in the Logos. He
substitnted the term ‘‘Logos’”’ for the Platonic term
“Tdea”’ on the basis ef the Scripture phrase, ‘‘Word
of God.” The conception was influenced further
by his Hellenistic psychological notion, that a word
is a “shadow” of a deed. Accordingly, the Logos
is the “shadow of God’’—God being the “deed”
whereby the “shadow” is cast. As a direct issue,
the Logos presents two aspects. On the one side


Philo Judzus
Philosophy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2382


it is internal and indwelling; on the other, it is ex-
ternal and mediating. The scope of this distinction
is indicated very well by the epithets which Philo
applies to each aspect respectively. The internal
Logos is the “Firstborn,” the ‘Second God,” the
“Mediator,” the “Ransom,” the “Image of God,’
“Member of the Trinity,” “High Priest.” The
external Logos “abides in man,” is the ‘‘Prophet,’’
“Shepherd,” ‘‘Ambassador,” ‘‘Artist,’’ ‘Elder,’
“Interpreter,” “Shadow of God.” The former rep-
resents Philo’s conception of the unity of the Logos
with God, the latter his provision for the mani-
festation of the Logos in created things. He thus
tries to preserve the transcendence of God equally
with His immanence. No doubt, in previous times,
the mysteriousness of the Divine nature had im-
pressed itself upon men with at least as much force
asnow. But with one of two consequences. Either
the particular finites and the Deity were mixed in
inextricable confusion, as by oriental pantheism, or
God was banished from the world, as by the extreme
developments within Gr dualism. Philo attempted
to combine the two tendencies, and was able con-
sequently to face the obvious contradiction between
the idea of an absolute Being and the cloudy con-
ception of a multiplicity of phenomena in which
this Being ought to be present somehow, despite
transcendence. He demands a God who, in His
exaltation, shall be a worthy Deity; this is the Jew in
him. But he also demands a definite relation be-
tween this God and His creation; this is the Greek
and, in part, the Oriental, in him. Thanks to the
former, he could not be satisfied with mere natural-
ism; thanks to the latter, no fable or picture could
suffice. A real mediator was required, who would
link the world and its heart’s desire. But Philo
could not surmount one difficulty peculiar to con-
temporary thought. He was unable to connect
God directly with creation and preserve His purity
unsullied. Hence the obscurity which surrounds
his conception of the Logos, likewise his vacillation
with respect to its personality. So we find the
different intellectual forces which he inherited play-
ing upon him—now one, now another. Sometimes
the Platonic theory of Ideas dominates him;
sometimes he leans to Stoicism, with its immanent
world-reason; and here he even seems to foreshadow
the doctrine of the Trinity; again, the ramifications
of rabbinical lore cause him to bestow upon the Logos
a priestly function or an atoning office. No single
aspect achieves supremacy, although on the whole
mystical Platonism may be said to predominate.
Thus, ‘‘The world of Ideas has its place in the Divine
Logos, just as the plan of a city is in the soul of the
master-builder.”’ Accordingly, God’s thought may
take its place in the world by being impressed upon
things; yet, on account of its subjective nature, it
must be apprehended subjectively, that is, by one
who is capable of entering this sphere. The Logos
thus seems to exist entirely in the same realm as
Deity; thus it can mediate between Him and creation
only if an element proper to Deity be discernible
in mundane things. In other words, the Logos
mediates between God and the world, but partakes
of the Divine nature only. This, m any case, is
the inner logic of Philo’s view. It accounts for
creation, but has no power to persuade man to over-
pass the limitations placed upon him by his bodily
prison. Thus the question of the personality of the
Logos is never cleared. In so far as Philo needs
Logos to connect God with the world, he inclines
to a doctrine of personality. In so far as he makes
it the principle of all activities within the world, he
inclines away from personality. In short, we have
a “world-soul.”” And, as a consequence, there is
an inherent tendency to reduce all finite being to
illusion. Indeed, one might term the Logos a reply


in some sort to Aristotle’s question—which of the
Platonic Ideas could connect the other Ideas with
sensible things? Salvation is conceived as wrought
out, not by a person, but by an abstract essence
flowing from Deity, an essence that found due ex-
pression rather in the cosmic order than in a
person. While, therefore, Philo thinks in a cul-
tural perspective akin to that characteristic of the
author of the Fourth Gospel, two vast differences
sway his doctrine. On the one hand, it is specu-
lative, not ethically personal. On the other hand,
it fails completely to determine the nature of
his mediator in itself, vacillating in a manner
which shows how vague and fluid the conception
really was.

(3) Doctrine of man—This appears further m
the doctrine of man. Following current interpre-
tations of Plato, Philo makes man partake in the
rational nature of God, but denies that he embodies
the highest species of reason, That is, the ideal
man and the man known to us in common experience
are distinguished. The former is rational as God
is. The latter is partly rational, partly irrational.
The body vitiates the origina] angelic purity of the
soul and, similarly, reason is alloyed. And yet,
although the higher nature becomes more and more
debased as the years lapse, a seed of Divinity is
present, ready to burst forth. Thus man must
crush the flesh and its desires. At this point we
note the effect of the Stoic ideal of imperturbability.
When he has attained this apathy, man can enjoy
the life of contemplation. This, m its turn, cul-
minates in ecstasy, when the human_soul] attains
sudden and momentary union with the Divine. For
a “fair moment”? man escapes the thraldom of sense.
Yet the doctrine remains intellectual even here.
He “who escapes from his own mind flies to the
mind of the universe, confessing that all the things
of the human mind are vain and unreal, and attrib-
uting everything to God.” Philo’s anthropology
therefore ends in contempt for this life, which is in
no wise worth while, and in a counsel of perfection
available only for a select élite. Accordingly, the
conclusion of the whole matter is, that he never saw
how the Divine and the human can be united,
although he stated the factors of the problem with
great clearness, and felt profoundly the urgency of
a solution. His gospel was for the children of cul-
ture. He saw the eternal in the temporal, and
hoped that good might lurk in evil. But he never
understood that “love for a Divine Person’”’ might
be so diffused throughout a human soul as to render
evil and unreality the means to the attainment of
good and to the revelation of truth. The salvation
he contemplated was from self, not in self. Hence,
as he asserts himself, harmony with God “is an
incomprehensible mystery to the multitude, and
is to be imparted to the instructed only.’ Nor is
this wonderful. For a God who is the reasonable
“form”? of the world; a ‘matter’ which begins as
an indistinguishable mass and ends as a “second
principle’; and objects of sense rendered apparent
by the operation of many curious intermediate
forces, ranging from “angel-words”’ to the human
soul, constitute a combination beyond the reach of
any save the “initiate.” More practicable is Philo’s
conception of the moral life—as a warfare of the soul
against passion, pleasure and sensuality. Yet,
even this contest is hopeless unless it be waged
with the equipment of the “philosopher athlete.”
Escape from the “prison-house” of flesh would
seem to be consequent only upon prefound knowl-
edge.

The probability is that Philo's works were written
previous to his Rom embassy. They show how he tried


to apply oh piilowo pico! conceptions to Jewish beliefs,
history, and usages exclusively. The voluminous re-


2383


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Philo Judeus
Philosophy


mains which have come down to us appear to belong to
three Commentaries on the Pent and the Mosaic Law.
In all likelihood, they are portions of Phi-


6. Philo’s 10's popular presentation, written for the
Work Instruction and Information of educated
Orgs Hellenistic circles rather than for the trained


‘initiate.”’ The treatises most Important
for Philo’s religio-philosophical views are as follows: On
the Creation of the World; Onthe Allegories of the Sacred
Laws; On the Unchangeableness of God; On the Confusion
of Languages; On the Migration of Abraham; Onthe Meet-
ing for the Sake of Receiving Instruction; On the Life of
the Wise Man Made Perfect by Instruction; The Unwritten
Law; Abraham; On_ Special Laws; On Rewards and
Punishments; That Every Man Who Is Virtuous Is Also
Free; Concerning the World; and the Fragments. Some
8 works attributed to Philo are in dispute. Most con-
spicuous of these is Concerning the Contemplative Life,
with its ascetic view of morality, and its description of
the ideal community of the Therapeutao.

Literature.—E. Schiirer, A History of the Jewish
People in the Time of Jesus Christ, div I1, vol III, pp.
321 f (Edinburgh, 1886); E. Schiirer, ‘“‘Philo" in HB;
James Drummond, Philo Judaeus, or, The Jewish-Alex-
ondrian Philosophy tn Its Development and Completion
(2 vols, London, 1888); R. M. Wenley, Socrates and
Christ: a Study in the Philosophy of Religion, chs vii,
vill (Edinburgh, 1889); H. Ewald, The History of Israel,
VII, 194f (Loudon, 1885); A. Hausrath, A History of
NT Times, div II, vol I, chs iv—vi (London, 1885);
H,. Graetz, History of the Jews from the Earliest Times to
the Present Day, II, 183f, 206f (London, 1891); 3
Caird, The Evolution of Theology in the Gr Philosophers,
II, lects_xx—xxi, xxvii_(Glasgow, 1904); art. ‘‘Philo”’
in Jew Enc; Ernest F. Scott, The Fourth Gospel, Its
Purpose_and Theology, 54f, 145f (2d ed, Edinburgh,
1908); F. C. Conybeare, Philo: About the Contemplative
Life (Oxford, 1895). An Eng. tr has been made by C.
D. Yonge in the Bohn Library (London, G. Bell & Sons).
The text cited usually is that of T. Mangey. The best
modern text is that of Cohn and Wendland.

R. M. Weniey

PHILOLOGUS, fi-lol’ 6-gus (@iAddoyos, Phild-
logos, ‘fond of learning,” “learned’”’): The name of
a Rom Christian to whom St. Paul sent greetings
(Rom 16 15). His name is coupled with that of
Julia, who was probably his wife or sister. Phi-
lologus and those united with him in this salutation
formed by themselves one of the “house churches”
or groups in the Christian community. The name
is found in inscriptions connected with the imperial
household, with reference to one of which Bishop
Lightfoot has the following note: “It has been
supposed that the name Philologus was given by
the master to the freedman mentioned in this in-
scription, as being appropriate to his office [Fried-
lander I, 89, 160]... .. _If so, some light is thrown
on the probable occupation of the Philologus of St.
Paul” (Phil, 177, n. 1). S. F. Hunrer

PHILOMETOR, fil-o-m@’tor. See ProLemy VI.

PHILOSOPHY, fi-los’é-fi (pircorodia,
phia):

I. Definition and Scope

(1) Intuitive Philosophy

(2) Speculative Philosophy
2. Greek Philosophy
3. aay in OT and Judaism

(1) Of Nature

(2) Of History

(3) Post-exilic

(4) Alexandrian
4, Philosophy in the NT r

1) The Teaching of Jesus Christ
33 Apostolic Teaching |
(3) Attitude of NT Writers toward Philosophy


LITERATURE
Only found in Col 2 8; lit. the love and pursuit
of wisdom and knowledge. In its technical sense,
the term is now used for the conscious
1. Defi- endeavor of thought, by speculative
nition and process, to interpret the whole of
Scope human experience, a8 a consistent and
systematic unity, which would be the
ultimate ae of all that may be known. The
term is also used, in a wider sense, of all interpreta-
tions of experience, or parts of experience, however
obtained, whether by revelation, intuition or un-


philoso-


conscious speculation. No hard-and-fast line can
be drawn between the two kinds of philosophy.
Some of the ruling conceptions of speculation, such
as God, spirit, order, causation, true and false, good
and evil, were not discovered by reason, but given
in experience.

(1) Intuitive philosophy is universal. The human
mind has always and everywhere furnished itself
with some kind of explanation of the universe.
From the lowest animism and fetichism up to the
higher religions, ideas are found which served men
as explanations of those features of experience
which attracted their attention. They were often
regarded as given by vision, intuition or some other
method of revelation. In the higher religions, the
mind reflected upon these ideas, and elaborated
them into systems of thought that bear some re-
semblance to the speculative theories of western
thought. In China, both Confucianism and Taoism
developed theories of human life and destiny that
bear some resemblance to Stoicism. The religions
of Assyria and Babylonia enshrined in their legends
theories of the world and of man and his institutions.
In India, men’s belief in the Nature-gods gradually
developed into pantheistic Brahmanism, which
reduced the multiplicity of experience into one
ultimate being, Brahma. But the desire for moral
salvation and the sense of pain and evil produced
a reaction, and led to the pessimistic and nihilistic
philosophy of Buddhism. In Persia, the moral
consciousness awoke earlier, and the attempt to
systematize the multiplicity of polytheism issued
in the dualistic philosophy of later Zoroastrianism.
The whole realm of being was divided into two
kingdoms, created and ruled by two lords: Ahura
Mazda, the creator of light and life, law, order and
goodness, and Anr6d Mainyu8, the author of darkness,
eviland death. Each was surrounded by a court of
spiritual beings kindred to himself, his messengers
and agents in the world (see Persian Reicion
[ANcrENT]). Of all these religious philosophies,
ouly those of Assyria and Babylonia, and of Persia,
are likely to have come into any contact with Bib.
thought. The former have some affinity with the
accounts of creation and the flood in Gen; and the
influence of the latter may be traced iu the dualism
and angelology and demonology of later Judaism,
and again in the gnostic systems that grew up in the
Christian church, and through both channels it was
perpetuated, as a dualistic influence, in the lower
strata of Christian thought down through the
Middle Ages.


(2) Speculative philosophy belongs mainly to western
thought. It arose in Greece about the beginning of the
6th cent. BC. It began with the problem of the general
nature of being, or ontology. But it was soon forced to
consider the conditions of knowing anything at all, or
to epistemology. These two studies constitute meta-
physics, a term often used as synonymous with phi-
LosoDEy in the stricter sense. Speculation about ideal
truth again led to inquiries as to the ultimate nature of
the kindred ideas of the good (ethics) and the beautiful
(aesthetics). And as these ideas were related to society
as well as to the individual, the Greeks developed theories
of the ideal organization of society on the basis of the
true, the good and the beautiful, or politics and peda-
gogics. The only branch of speculation to which the
Greeks made no appreciable contribution was the phi-
losophy of religion, which is a modern devclopment.

The progress of philosophy in history divides itself
naturally into three main periods: (a) ancient, from the
6th cent. BC to the 3d cent. AD, when it is almost ex-
clusively Gr, with some practical adaptations of Gr
thought by Rom writers; (b) mediaeval, from the 3d to
the 16th cent., where some of the ruling conceptions of
Gr thought were utilized for the systematization of Chris-
tian dogma, but speculation was mainly confined within
the limits of ecclesiastical orthodoxy; there were, how-
ever, some independent Arahian and Jewish speculations;
(c) modern, from the 16th cent. to the present time, in
which thought becomes free again to speculate upon all
the problems presented by experience, though it only
reales? its liberty fully in the hands of Locke, Hume
and Kant.


Philosophy
Phlegon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2384


Gr philosophy was the only speculative system that
could have had any influence upon Bih. thought. Its
main development was contemporaneous


2. Greek with the later OT writers, but the two
Phil h peoples were in every way so remote from
OSOpnhy one another that no interchange of ideas


was probable.


During the last two centuries BC, Gr thought
spread so widely that it came to dominate the cul-
tured thought of the world into which Christianity
entered, and it would have been strange if no
trace of its influence were found in the NT. In
the first stage of its development, from Thales to
Socrates, it was concerned almost entirely with at-
tempts to explain the nature of reality by reducing
the phenomenal world into some one of its elements.
Socrates changed its center of gravity, and definitely
raised the problems of morality and knowledge to the
position of first importance. His principles were
developed by Plato into a complex and many-sided
system which, more than any other, has influenced
all subsequent thought. He united ultimate reality
and the highest good into one supreme principle or
idea which he called the Good, and also God. It
was the essence, archetype and origin of all wisdom,
goodness and beauty. It communicated itself as
intermediary archetypal ideas to produce all in-
dividual things. So that the formative principles
of all existence were moral and spiritual. But it
had to make all things out of preéxisting matter,
which is essentially evil, and which therefore was
refractory and hostile to the Good. That is why
it did not make a perfect world. Plato’s system
was therefore rent by an wreconcilable duahsm of
mind and body, spirit and matter, good and evil.
And his mediating ideas could not bridge the gulf,
because they belonged only to the side of the ideal.
Aristotle was Plato’s disciple, and he started from
Plato’s idealistic presuppositions, but endeavored to
transcend his dualism. He thus applied himself to a
closer and more accurate study of actual experience,
and added much to the knowledge of the physical
world. He organized and classified the methods
and contents of knowledge and created the science
of logic, which in the Christian Middle Ages be-
came the chief instrument of the great systematic
theologians ofthe church. He tried to bring Plato’s
ideas “down from heaven,’”’ and to represent them
as the creative and formative principles within the
world, which he conceived as a system of develop-
ment, rising by spiritual gradations from the lower
to the higher forms, and culminating in God, who is
the uncaused cause of all things. But underneath
ali the forms still remained matter as an antithetical
element, and Aristotle rather concealed than solved
the dualism of Plato.

Meanwhile, the moral principles of Socrates were
being developed with a more directly ethical interest,
by the Cyrenaics and Epicureans, into a system of


Hedonism, and, by the Cynics and Stoics, into a |


doctrine of intuitive right and duty, resting incon-
sistently upon a pantheistic and materialistic view
of the universe. But the spiritual and ethical ele-
ments in Stoicism became only second to Platonism
in the preparation of the Gr world for Christianity.
During the last two and a half centuries BC, Gr
philosophy showed signs of rapid decline. Ou the
one hand, Pyrrho and his school propounded a thor-
oughgoing skepticism which denied the possibility
of all knowledge whatsoever. On the other hand,
the older schools, no longer served by creative minds,
tended to merge their ideas into a common eclecti-
cism which its teachers reduced into an empty and
formal dogmatism. The most fruitful and fateful
product of Gr thought in this period was its amal-
gamation with Jewish and oriental ideas in the
great cosmopolitan centers of the Gr world. There
are evidences that this process was going on in the


cities of Asia, Syria and Egypt, but the only ex-
tensive account of it_remaining is found in the
works of Philo, the Jewish philosopher of Alex-
andria (see Puito Jupmus). He tried to graft
Plato’s idealism upon Heb monotheism.

fle starts with Plato’s two principles, pure being or
God, and preéxisting matter. In his endeavor to bridge
the gulf between them, he interposed between God and
the world the powers of God, goodness and justice; and
to gather these into a final unity, he created his concep-
tion of the Logos of God. In the formation of this con-
ception, he merged together the Platonic idea of the good,
the Stoic world-reason, and a number of Jewish ideas,
the glory, the word, the name, of God, the heavenly
man and the great high priest, and personified the whole
as the one mediator between God and the world. | Chris-
tian thought laid hold of this idea, and employed it as its
master-category for the interpretation of the person of
Christ (see Logos).


There is no speculative philosophy in the OT nor
any certain trace of its influence. Its writers and
actors never set themselves to pursue
knowledge in the abstract and for its
OT and own sake. They always wrought for
in Judaism moral purposes. But moral activity

proceeds on the intellectual presuppo-
sitions and interpretations of the experiences within
which it acts. Hence we find in the OT accounts
of the origin and course of nature, a philosophy of
history and its institutions, and interpretations of
men’s moral and religious experiences. They all
center in God, issue from His sovereign will, and
express the realization of His purpose of righteous-
ness in the world (see Gop).

(1) All nature originated in God’s creative act
(Gen 2) or word (Gen 1). In later literature the
whole course and order of Nature, its beauty and
bounty, as well as its wonders and terrors, are repre-
sented as the acts of God’s will (Isa 40-45; Pss 8
19, 29, 50, 65, 68, 104, etc). But His action in
Nature is always subordinated to His moral ends.

(2) Similarly, the course and events of the history
of Israel and her neighbors are the acts of Jeh’s will
(Am 1; 2; Isa 41 2; 43 3; 45 9.10.14). In the
historical books of § and K, and still more of Ch, all
the events of history are represented as the acts of
God’s moral government. In a more general way,
the whole of history is set forth as a series of cove-
nants that God, of His free grace, made with man
(see Covenant). The Noachic covenant fixed
the order of Nature. The covenant with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob accounted for the origin and
choice of Israel. The covenants with Moses and
Aaron established the Law and the priesthood, and
that with David, the kingship. And the hope of the
future lies in the new covenant (Jer 31 31-35).
God’s covenants were all acts of His sovereign and
gracious will.

(3) In post-exilic times, new experiences, and
perhaps new intellectual influences, drove the Jews
to probe deeper into the problem of existence.
They adhered to the cardinal principle of Heb
thought, that God’s sovereign will, working out His
purpose of righteousness, was the first cause of
all things (see Ricurrousness). But they found
it difficult to coérdinate this belief with their other
ideas, in two ways. Ethical monotheism tended to
become an abstract deism which removed God
altogether out of the world. And the catastrophes
that befell the nation, in the exile and after, raised
the problem of suffering and evil over against God’s
goodness and righteousness. Therefore in the Wis-
dom lit. we find some conscious speculation on
these subjects (see Wispom).

(a) The Book of Job discusses the problem of evil, and
repudiates the idea that life and history are the proc-
ess of God's rewards and punishments. (b) Eccl comes
to the conclusion that all phenomenal experience is


vanity. Yet its ultimate philosophy is not pessimistic,
for it finds an abiding reality and hope in the fear of God


3. In the


2385


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Philosophy
Phlegon


and in the moral life (12 13.14). The same type of
thonght appears in Ecclus. Both books have been
attributed to the circle of the Sadducees, Some would
find_in them traces of the influence of Epicureanism.
(c) In Prov a more optimistic side prevails. Wisdom
is gathered up into a conception or personification which
is at once God’s friend, His agent in creation, His vice-
gerent in the world, and man's instructress and guide
(ch 8). (d) The teaching of the Pharisees osp. reveals
the tendency to dualism or deism in later Judaism;
they intcrposed between God and the world various
agents of mediation, the law, the word, the name, the
glory of God and a host of angels, good and bad. They
also fostered_a new hope of the future, under the double
form of the Messianic kingdom, and of resurrection and
immortality. How far these tendencies were due to
the influence of Pers dualism cannot here be considered.
(e) Essenism represents another effort to get from the
world to God by a crude kind of mysticism and ascetl-
cism, combined with an extensive angelology.

(4) Among the Hellenistic Jews in Alexandria, Aris-
tobulus, the authors of Wisd and 4 Macc, and _ preémi-
nently Philo, all deal with the two chief problems of
Judaism, dualism and evil. But they approach them
under the direct influence of Gr thought. The Heb idea
of wisdom was merged into the Gr conception of the
Logos, and so it becomes the mediator of God’s thought
and activity in the world.


Philosophy appears in the NT as intuitive, specu-
lative and eclectic. (1) Jesus Christ came to fulfil
the law and the prophets, and, out of
4. Inthe His filial consciousness of God, He
NT propounded answers to the practical
demands of His time. His doctrine
of God the Father was a philosophy of Nature and
life which transcended all dualism. In the king-
dom of heaven, the good would ultimately prevail
over the evil. The law of love expressed the ideal
of conduct for man as individual, and in his relation
to society and to God, the supreme and ultimate
reality. This teaching was given in the form of
revelation, without any trace of speculation.

(2) The apostolic writings built upon the teach-
ing and person of Jesus Christ. Their ruling ideas
are the doctrines which He taught and embodied.
In Paul and John, they are realized as mystical
experiences which are expressed in doctrines of uni-
versal love. But we may also discover in the apos-
tolic writings at least three strands of speculative
philosophy. (@) Paul employed arguments from
natural theology, similar to those of the Stoics
(Acts 14 15-17; 17 22-31; Rom 1 19 ff), which
involved the principles of the cosmological and
teleological arguments. (b) John employs the
Philonic term “Logos” to interpret the person of
Christ in His universal relation to God, man and
the world; and the main elements of Philo’s scheme
are clearly present in his doctrine, though here it'is
no abstract conception standing between God and
man, but a living person uniting both (Jn 1 1-18).
Although the term ‘‘Logos” is not mentioned, in this
sense, in Paul or He, the Philonic conception has
been employed by both writers (Rom & 8; 8 29;
1 Cor 16 24.25; 2 Cor 6 18.19; Phil 2 6; Col
1 15-17; .2 9.10; He 1 1-3.5.6). Paul also
expresses his conception of Christ as the mani-
festation of God under the category of wisdom
(1 Cor 1 20; 2 7; Eph 1 8; Col 2 3). (c) Both
in Paul and He appear original speculations designed
to interpret individual experience and human his-
tory as they culminate in Christ. Paul's interpre-
tation consists of a series of parallel antitheses,
flesh and spirit, sin and righteousness, law and grace,
works and faith, Adam and Christ. But the author
of He adopts the Platonic view that the world
of history and phenomena is but the shadow or
suggestion of the spiritual and eternal reality which
lies behind it, and which partially expresses itself
through it. :

(3) In the one place in which the term philosophy


appears in the NT (Col 2 8), it seems to mean


“subtle dialectics and profitless speculation... .
combined with a mystic cosmogony and angelology”


(Lightfoot, ad loc.), the first beginnings of Gnosti-
cism in the Christian church. Paul warns his
readers against it, as he also does the Corinthians
against the ‘‘wisdom’”’ of the Greeks (1 Cor 1 19 ff;
2 5.6). A similar tendency may be in view in the
warning to Timothy against false doctrines (1 Tim
14; 43; 2 Tim 1 14.16ff), But with the true
spirit of philosophy, as the pursuit of truth, and
the endeavor to express more fully and clearly the
nature of reality, the spirit and work of the NT
writers were in complete accord.


Literature.—Intros to phlore phy by Kiilpe, Panl-
sen, Héftding, Watson and Mackenzie. Hists of Gr
philosophy by Ritter and Preller, Burnet, and Zeller,
and of general philosophy by Erdmanu, Ueberweg,
Windelband and Rogers; E. Caird, The Evolution of
Theology in the Gr Philosophies; Hists of the Jews by
Schtirer, Graetz and Kent; OT Theologies by Schultz
and Davidson; NT Theologies by Beyschlag and Weinel;
Philo’s works and_treatises thereon by Dahne, Gfrorer
and Drummond; Harnack, What Is Christianity? Bigg,
The Christian Platonists of Alexandria; Lightfoot, Col.
T. Ress
PHINEES, fin’é-es (Puveés, Phineés, B [Swete],


Pewveds, Pheineés [1 Esd 8 2]):

(1) Phinehas, son of Eleazar, son of Aaron (1 Esd
5 5; 8 2.29; 2 Esd 1 2; 1 Macc 2 26; Sir 46 23).

(2) The father of Achias and son of Heli (Eli), a
descendant of (1), and one of Ezra’s progenitors
(2 Esd 1 2); but this link is not found in Ezra’s
genealogy (1 Esd 8 1f), nor in Ezr 7 1 ff; 1 Ch
6, and its insertion in 2 Esd 1 2 is a mistake, since
Ezra’s descent was from Eleazar, while this Phinees
(Phinehas) was a descendant of Ithamar, the young-
est son of Aaron,

(3) A Levite, the father of Eleazar (1 Esd 8 63)
=“Phinehas” of Ezr 8 33. But it is just possible
that the well-known Eleazar (1) is referred to here,
and so not another and different Phinees.

(4) AV=RV “Phinoe” (1 Esd 6 31).

8. ANeus

PHINEHAS, fin’é-as, -az, fin’é-has, -haz (O25,
pinchas, “mouth of brass’’):

(1) Son of Eleazar and grandson of Aaron (Ex
6 25; cf 1 Ch 6 4; Ezr 7 5, where he is seen to
be an ancestor of Ezra). He took a leading part
in cleansing Israel from whoredom at Shittim. He
there punished the brazen licentiousness of Zimri,
prince of Simeon, by slaying both him and the Mid-
lanite woman he had brought into camp (Nu 26
6-18). This incident is referred to in Ps 106 30.31
(cf 1 Macc 2 26.54; Sir 45 23.24). As priest he
accompanied the expedition sent by Moses against
Midian (Nu $1 6). He was chief of the Korahite
Levites (1 Ch 9 20), and succeeded his father as
high priest. While he was in that office the civil
war with Benjamin occurred, and it was he who de-
livered the oracle’s decision to fight Benjamin (Jgs
20 28 ff). His faithful services secured to his house
the succession of the priesthood (Nu 26 11-13).
He was sent as ambassador to inquire into the re-
ported idolatry of Reuben, Gad and part of Manasseh
(Josh 22 13 ff.30-32). According to LXX he was
buried with his father in Ephraim on the hill Gibeah
Phinehas (see Josh 24 33). His character was
marked with strong moral indignation and fine in-
tegrity.

(2) The younger son of Eli(1 8 1 3; 2 Esd 1 2,
‘‘Phinees’’), See Hopni anp PHINEHAS.

(3) Father of a priest named Eleazar (Ezr 8 33; ef
ver 2; 1 Esd 8 63, ‘““Phinees”). Henry WaLuacr


PHINOE, fin’6-& (@ivée, Phinde; AV Phinees):
Name of one of the families of temple-servants who
went up from Babylon with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 6
31)=“Paseah” of Ezr 2 49; Neh 7 51.


PHLEGON, flé’gon, fleg’on (#déywv, Phlégon):
The name of a Rom Christian to whom Paul


Phoebe
Phoenicia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2386


sent greetings (Rom 16 14). Of him nothing is


known.


PHOEBE, f@’bé (PolBy, Phoibé; AV Phebe):
Described by St. Paul as (1) ‘‘our sister,’ (2) ‘who
is a servant of the church that is at Cenchreae,”’
(3) ‘‘a helper of many, and of mine own self” (Rom
16 1.2). (1) “Our [Christian] sister’: Paul calls
the believing husband and wife “the brother or the
sister” (1 Cor 7 15), and also asks, ‘Have we no
right to lead about a wife that is a sister?’”’ (1 Cor
95m). The church was a family. (2) The Gr
word tr? “servant” is didkonos. ‘“Servant’’ is
vagne, and “deaconess’’ is too technical. In the
later church there was an order of deaconesses for
special work among women, owing to the peculiar
circumstances of oriental life, but we have no reason
to believe there was such an order at this early
period. If Phoebe had voluntarily devoted herself
“to minister nnto the saints’ by means of charity and
hospitality, she would be called diakonos. (8) The
Gr word prostdtis tr4 “helper”’ is better ‘“patroness.”’
The mase. is ‘‘the title of a citizen in Athens who
took charge of the interests of clients and persons
without civic rights’ (Denney). Many of the early
Christian communities had the appearance of
clients under a patron, and probably the community
of Cenchreae met in the house of Phoebe. She also
devoted her influence and means to the assistance
of “brethren” landing at that port. Panl was
among those whom she benefited. Gifford thinks
some special occasion is meant, and that Paul refers
to this in Acts 18 18. The vow “seems to point


to a deliverance from danger or sickness’ in which |


Phoebe may have attended on him.

it is generally assumed that this letter was taken
to Rome by Phoebe, these verses introducing her
to the Christian community. {In commending her,
Paul asks that the Rom Christians “‘receive her in
the Lord,” i.e. give her a Christian welcome, and
that they “assist her in whatsoever matter she may
have need” of them (Rom 16 1.2).


5S. F. Hunter
PHOENICE, Phoiniz). See
PHOENIX.


PHOENICIA, fé-nish’i-a, PHOENICIANS, fé-


nish’anz:


fé-ni’sé (Potvé,


1, The Land 6. Language and Culture
2. The Colonies 7. Religion

3. The People 8. History

4. Arts and Manufactures LITERATURE


5, Commerce and Trade


The term ‘‘Phoenicia” is Gr (Gowlen, Phointké,
“land of dates, or palm trees,’’ from phoiniz, “the


date-palm’’). It occurs in the Bible
1. The only in Acts (11 19; 15 3; 21 2), the
Land land being generally designated as the


“coast” or “borders of Tyre and Sidon”
(Mt 15 21; Mk 7 24.31; Lk 617). In the OT
we find it included in the land belonging to the
Canaanites or to Sidon (Gen 10 19; 49 13; Josh
11.8; 1 K 179). The limits of P. were indefinite
also. It is sometimes used by classic writers as
including the coast line from Mt. Cassius on the N.
to Gaza or beyond on the S., a distance of some 380
miles, or about 400 miles if we include the sweep of
indentations and bays and the ontstretching of the
promontories. But in the stricter sense, it did
not extend beyond Gabala (modern Jebleh) on the
N., and Mt. Carmel on the S., or some 150 miles.
The name was poe) first applied to the region
opposite Cyprus, from Gabala to Aradus and Mara-
thus, where the date-palm was observed, and then,
as it was found in still greater abundance farther
8., it was applied to that region also. The palm
tree is common on the coins of both Aradus and


Tyre, and it still grows on the coast, though not in
great abundance. The width of the land also was
indefinite, not extending inland beyond the crest
of the two ranges of mountains, the Bargylus
(Nusairi Mountains) and the Lebanon, which run
parallel to the coast and leave but little space be-
tween them and the sea for the greater portion of
their length. It is doubtful whether the Phoenicians
occupied the mountain tracts, but they must have
dommated them on the western slopes, since they
derived from them timber for their ships and
temples. The width of the country probably did
not exceed 25 or 30 miles at the most, and in many
places it was much less, a very small territory, in
fact, but one that played a distinguished rdéle in
ancient times.

There are few harbors on the whole coast, none
in the modern sense, since what few bays and inlets
there are afford but slight shelter to modern ships,
but those of the ancients found sufficient protection
in a number of places, esp. by means of artificial
harbors, and the facility with which they could be
drawn out upon the sandy beach in winter when
navigation was suspended. The promontories are
few and do not project far into the sea, such ag
Theu-prosopon 8. of Tripolis, Ras Beirit and the
broad projection §. of Tyre including Ras el-‘Abyadh
and Ras en-Nakéra and Ras el-AMusheirifeh (see
Lapper or Tyre). The promontory of Carmel
is rather more marked than the others, and forms
quite an extensive bay, which extends to Acre. The
promontory rises to a height of 500 ft. or more near
the sea and to more than double that elevation in
its course to the S.E.

Mt. Lebanon, which forms the background of P.
for about 100 miles, is a most striking feature of the
landscape. It rises to a height of 10,200 ft. in the
highest point, E. of Tripolis, and to 8,500 in Jebel
Sunnin, E. of Beirit, and the average elevation is
from 5,000 to 6,000 ft. It is rent by deep gorges
where the numerous streams have cut their way to
the sea, furnishing most varied and picturesque
scenery. It was originally heavily wooded with
cedar, oak, and pine trees, which are still found in
considerable numbers, but by far the larger part of
the mountain has been denuded of forests, and the
slopes have been extensively terraced for the culti-
vation of vines and fruit trees and the mulberry for
silk culture. The plains along the coast are not
extensive, but generally very fertile and bear abun-
dant crops of wheat, barley and other cereals, where
not given to the culture of the mulberry, orange,
lemon, fig, apricot and other small fruits. In its
greatest extent P. included the broad plain of Sharon
and that of Acre, between Carmel and that city,
and a portion of the region watered by the Kishon,
but the plams of P., strictly speaking, are much
more restricted. They are: the plain of Tyre, long
but narrow, extending from Ras el-‘Abyadh to Sa-
repta; the plain of Sidon extending from Sarepta
to the Bostrenns (Nahr el-’Auly); the plain of
Beirdt (Beryius) between the extensive sand dunes
lone the shore and the rocky cape on the W. and
the foot of Lebanon, 10 or 12 miles long but only
one or two wide, containing one of the largest olive
groves in Syria; the very small plain of Tripolis,
including that city and its port; and, the most ex-
tensive of all, the plain of Marathus, extending from
Arka to Aradus or even beyond, including the river
Eleutherus (Nahr el-Kebir). These plains fur-
nished only a portion of the food needed by the
inhabitants who were more or less dependent on
their neighbors for it (1 K 5 11; Acts 12 20).

The rivers of P. are comparatively short and
small; the Litany rises in the Buka’, between Leba-
non and Anti-Lebanon, and finds its way in a deep
and narrow gorge between Lebanon and Mt. Her-


2387


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Phoebe
Phoenicia


mon to the §., and finally turns westward and
reaches the sea a few miles N. of Tyre, where it is


called the Kasimiyeh. About 12 miles N. of Beirfit |


is the Dog River (Lycus), a very short stream but
noted for the famous pass at its mouth, where Egyp,
Assyr and Bab kings engraved their monuments;
and a few miles 8. of Jebail (Gebal) is the Adonis
(Nahr Ibrahim), which eomes down from ‘Afka
(Apheea=Aphek, Josh 13 4), noted for the rites of
Venus and Adonis (see Tammuz); and the Eleu-
therus, already mentioned, which runs through the
valley between Bargylus and Lebanon and provides
the pass between these two mountains into the in-
terior. The other rivers are very short, but furnish
2 perennial water-supply to the eoast dwellers.

The products of the Jand, as well as the climate,
are very varied on account of the difference in ele-
vation of the tracts suitable to culture, ranging in
temperature from the semi-tropical to Alpine. How
far the ancients cultivated the mountain sides we
do not know, but they certainly profited largely by
the forests of cedar and pine, esp. the former, which
was the most valuable for shipbuilding and archi-
tectural purposes, and was highly prized, not only
by the Phoenicians, but by Egyptians, Assyrians
and Babylonians, who transported it to their own
countries for buildings. The mineral] products are
few, and the Phoenicians depended on their colonies
and other lands for what they needed of these.

The narrowness of the land and the difficulty of ex-


pansion on account of the lofty mountain ranges and the
hostility of the tribes of the interior led


9. The the Phoenicians to turn seaward for an
Coloni outlet to their increasing population. We
olonies have only one instance of their attempt to


> colonize the Hinterland, and that ended
in disaster (Jgs 18). Hiram, king of Tyre, was not
pleased with Solomon's gift of 20 cities in Galilee, proh-
ably not desiring to assume responsihility for their de-
fence. The people early hecame mariners, and the
dominion of the sea was more inviting to them,and they
found room for expansion in the islands and on the coast
of the Mediterranean, where they established colonies
far and wide. Their first over-sea possessions were in
Cyprus. the coasts of which they occupied in the 2d
millennium BC, prohahly ahout 1500. n the southern
coast they planted various colonies, such as Citium
eee: Amathus, Curium and Paphos, and on the
eastern, Salamis, Ammachosta and Soli, and, in the in-
terior, Idalium_ and Golgi, hesides other less important
settlements. The evidences of the Phoen occupation
of Cyprus are numerous. The southern portion of Asia
Minor also attracted them at an early date, esp. the rich
plains of Cilicia, and Tarsus hecame the most important
of their colonies there. Its coins hear Phoen types and
legends, among which Baal is conspicuous. Other
points along the coast were occupied, and the island of
Rhodes as well as certain ports on the south coast of
Crete, and most of the islands of the Aegean. Their
resence in Attica is vouched for hy inscriptions, and
leeenal connects Thehes with them in the person of Cad-
mus, the reputed son of Agenor, king of P. But it is
douhtful whether they really colonized the mainland of
Greece. They were more attracted hy the lands farther
to the W. : f
The greatest of their colonies was in Africa. They
occupied Utica first, prohably in the 12th cent. BC, and
others in the same region until in the 9th cent. Great
Carthage was founded, which was destined to become
the richest and most powerful of all and the dreaded riva)
of Rome. All are familiar with the story of Elisa, or
Dido, the reputed Tyrian queen who led her followers
to the place and founded the city. The story is perhaps
legendary. but that Carthage was a colony of Tyre there
is no reason to douht. Other colonists occupied portions
of Sicily, such as Motya, Erix, Soli_and Panormus
(Palermo). They also crossed over to Sardinia and the
Balearic Isles, and planted colonies on the south coast of
Spain and the northwestern coast of Africa, within and
beyond the straits of Gibraltar. Of their settlements
in Spain Gades (Cades) and Tartessus were the most
noted, the latter heing probably the Tarshish of Scrip-
ture (1 K 10 22). Malaca (Malaga) and  Abdera,
within the straits, were likewise important settlements,
and there were others of less note. he
‘ “Phe colonial enterprise of the Phoenicians was remark-
able for the age, and was only surpassed in ancient times
by the Greeks who came later, the former being the
pioneers. The energy and daring of the Phoenicians in
pushing out into unknown seas, with the imperfect
means at their disposal, is evidence of the enterprise of
this people. Their chief object, however, was trade.


Their colonies were mostly factories for the exchange of
their manufactured articles for the products of the lands
they visited. They cared little ahout building up new
states or for exteuding their civilization and molding
barbarous tribes and imparting to them their culture.
In this they were far surpassed hy the Greeks whose
colonies profouudly modified the peoples and lands with
which they came in contact.

The Phoenicians were the same as the Canaanites,
under which name they are known in the OT, as

well as Sidonians (Gen 10 19; Nu
3. The 13 29). They were of Sem stock, if
People we may judge by their language and
characteristics. It is true that in
Gen 10 6 Canaan is called a son of Ham, but it is
also true that the language of Canaan is identified
with Heb (Isa 19 18). If the early Phoenicians
spoke a different tongue, they entirely lost it before
their contact with the Hebrews. Their writings
and all the references to them in ancient authorities
show that their language was purely Sem. As
to their origin and the time of their migration to the
Syrian coast, it is more difficult to determine.
Herodotus (1.2; vii.89) says that they lived at first
on the Erythraean Sea, which is identified with the
Pers Gulf, and modern authorities have not found
evidence to refute the statement. It is quite certain
that they were not the aborigines of the country,
and must have come in with some of the various
migrations from the E., which we know, from Egyp
and Bab monuments, occurred in the 3d, perhaps in
the 4th, millennium BC. Semites are found in Syria
as early as the I1Vth Egyp Dynasty, about 3000 BC,
and we may fairly conjecture that the Canaanites
were in possession of the seacoast as early as 2500
BC. Itis possible that they were among the Hyksos
invaders of Egypt (Paton, Syria and Pal, 67).

That the Phoenicians took to the sea at a very
early date and became the most skilful mariners
of the ancient world is certain. Their enterprise
in this direction is attested by classic writers, and
the references to it in the OT are numerous. This
was coupled with great industry and skill in the
manufacture of the various articles which furnished
the materials of their extended commerce. They
exhibited a boldness and audacity in braving the
perils of the sea in their little ships, which, for the
age, demands our admiration. They were the first
who dared to push out of sight of Jand in their voy-
ages and sail beyond the Pillars of Hercules into the
ocean. But in their commercial dealings they were
often unscrupulous, and their greed of gain often
led them to take unfair advantage of the barbarous
raees with whom they came in contact. The pur-
chase of the land on which the citadel of Carthage
was built may illustrate the opinion of the ancients
regarding them, but we ought to remember that
trickery and deceit are charged against them by their
enemies, who alone have handed down accounts of
them. The Heb prophets speak of their pride and
vanity (Ezk 28 17), and violence (ver 16), and
Amos hints at a traffic in captives taken im war, but
whether of Hebrews or not is not clear (Am 1 9).
Slaves were among the articles of merchandise in
which they traded (Ezk 27 13; Joel 3 6), but this
could hardly be charged against them as a great sin
when slavery was universal. The chief reason for
their being denounced by the prophets was their
corrupt praetices in worship and the baleful influ-
ence of the Baal and Astarte cult introduced by
them into Israel through Ahab’s marriage with
Jezebel (1 K 16 31-33). This evil influence was
felt even after the captivity when the rites of the
Phoen Tammuz were practised in Jerus (Ezk 8 14).
But the earlier relations of the Phoenicians with
Israel in the days of David and Solomon were
friendly and mutually beneficial. On the whole the
judgment of history assigns to this people a high


Phoenicia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2388


position for their enterprise and skill in carrying
on their trade, and in being the pioneers of civili-
zation in many of the Mediterranean lands, esp.
by their introduction of alphabetical writing, which
was by far the most valuable of all their contribu-
tions to the culture of the ancient world.

(1) The Phoenicians were celebrated for their
textile fabrics of silk, wool, linen and cotton. The

materials of the last three were ob-
4, Arts and tained from Syria and Egypt, but the
Manufac- silk came from the Far East through
tures Persia. The dyeing of these fabrics

was by a process invented by the
Phoenicians, and the luster and permanence of color
were unequaled by the ancients and made the
Tyrian purple famous throughout the world. The
finer qualities of it were so precious that only the
very wealthy, or kings and princes, could obtain it,
and it became at last a synonym of royalty. This
dye was obtained from the shell-fish which was
abundant in the Mediterranean, esp. along the
Phoen coast, species of the Murer and the Buc-
cinum. The mode of manufacture is not definitely
known and was probably kept a secret by the
Phoenicians. At least they had a monopoly of the
business.

(2) Glass was another well-known product of the
country, and although not invented by the Phoeni-
cians as formerly supposed, it was made in large
quantities and exported to all countries about the
sea. See Grass.

(3) Pottery was also an article of manufacture
and export, and some of the examples of their work
found in Cyprus show considerable skill in the art
of decoration as well as making. In this, however,
they were far surpassed by the Greeks.

(4) Bronze was a specialty of the Phoenicians, and
they were for centuries the leading producers, since
they controlled the sources of supply of the copper
and tin used in its manufacture. The remains of
their bronze manufactures are numerous, such ag
arms for offence and defence, knives, toilet articles,
axes, sickles, cups, paterae, and various other house-
hold utensils. Articles for artistic purposes are not
of high value, although the pillars named Jachin
and Boaz, the molten sea, the bases, lavers and
other articles cast by Hiram of Tyre for the temple
of Solomon must have exhibited considerable
artistic merit. Their bronze was of good quality
and was tempered so as to serve well for edged tools.
The composition was about 9 parts copper to 1 of
tin. They seem also to have made iron (2 Ch 2
14), and some specimens have come down te us, but
we cannot judge from their scarcity as to the extent
of their manufactures in this metal, since most of
the articles have perished by corrosion.

Aesthetic art among the Phoenicians was of low grade,
as it was among the Semites generally, and where we find
some works of moderate merit they undoubtedly mani-
fest the influence of Gr art, such as those found in Cyprus
by General Di Cesnola and others. In Phoenicia proper
very little of artistic value has come to light that can be
ascribed to native artists. In sculpture the style is stiff
and conventional, much of it exceedingly rude, and lacks
expression. The animal forms are generally grotesque,


often absurd, reminding one of children’s attempts at
plastic art. The anthropoid_sarcophagi discovered at


Sidon were modeled after the Egyp, and the magnificent |


ones, of differcnt design, from the same place, now in
the Museum of Constantinople, were certainly the work
of Gr artists of the age of Alexander the Great.

The architecture of the Phoenicians was characterized
by massiveness, rather thanelegance. The substructures
of some of their temples and castles are cyclopean, like
those of the temple at Jerus (1 K 7 10), and other ex-
amples are found at Sidon, Gebal, Marathus and other
places in Phoenicia itself. Their work seems lacking in
symmetry and grace, showing a want of aesthetic taste.


Trade was the very life of Phoenicia. The con-


tracted limits of the land forbade any extensive
agriculture, and the people were forced to get their


living by other means. They applied themselves to
industrial arts, and this led them to seek the means
for distributing their wares. Trade


5. Com- was essential to them, and they sought
merce and outlets for it by sea and land. Their
Trade position was esp. favorable for com-


merce. In the very center of the
ancient world, with the great rich and populous
nations of antiquity at their back and on either side,
they faced the young, vigorous and growing nations
of the West, and they served them all as carriers
and producers. Their caravans threaded all the
well-beaten routes of the East, the deserts of Arabia
and the mountain defiles of Armenia and Asia
Minor, and their ships pushed boldly out to sea and
explored the Mediterranean and the Euxine and
did not hesitate to brave the unknown dangers of
the Atlantic and perhaps even penetrated to the
Baltic, emulating the mariners of a later day in their
zeal for discovery and search for new avenues of
trade. Could we find a detailed account of their
voyages and discoveries, it would be a most inter-
esting document, but we have little except what
others have written about them, which, however,
gives us a pretty fair idea of the extent of their com-
mercial enterprise. The prophet Ezekiel has given
us a remarkable catalogue of the wares of Tyre and
of the countries with which she traded (Ezk 27).
There we have mention of nearly all the regions of
Western Asia, Egypt, Greece and the islands, and
Spain, indicated by the names of races, tribes and
countries. The materials of their traffic include
the most important known to the ancient world, the
products of agriculture, such as wool, linen, oil,
balm, spices, frankincense, wine, corn, etc; of metals,
such as gold, silver, copper (brass), tin, iron, lead,
etc; precious stones and the articles of manufacture,
the “multitude of handiworks,” which they were so
skilful in producing. They traded in animals also,
horses, mules, lambs, rams and goats, and, what is
less to their credit, in the persons of men (ver 13).
The range of their trade was much wider than is
indicated by Ezekiel. We know they reached the
Scilly Isles in Britain, and probably the Baltic,
whither they went for amber, though this might
have been brought overland to the Adriatic and
received into their ships there. They passed along
the western coast of Africa as far as Cape Non, and
perhaps farther, for Herodotus tells us that Pharaoh-
necoh dispatched a crew of Phoen sailors to circum-
navigate Africa, which they accomplished in 3 years.

We know that they had a fleet. in the Red Sea .
sailing from Elath or Ezion-geber (1 K 9 26.27),
and it is quite possible that they were allowed by
some of the kings of Egypt to avail themselves of
ports on the other branch of the Red Sea. They
must have visited the eastern shore of Africa and
perhaps struck across the Indian Ocean, after skirt-
ing the coast of Arabia, and thus carried on trade
with India. The Ophir mentioned in connection
with these voyages has not been definitely located,
but was perhaps in Southern Arabia, though possibly
in Southeast Africa (see Gop). :

The ships in which the Phoenicians made these voy-
ages were small as compared with the great vessels of thie
present day, but the largest known in their age, as we
may infer from the long voyages they made. Their
superiority is testified to by classical writers. In tho
famous expedition of Xerxes to Greece the Phoen ships
excelled all others in speed, and the king chose one of
them when he embarked upon the sea (Herod. vii.100).


These ships were impelled both by sails and oars, as we
know from illustrations upon the coins (see Corns).


The ancients attributed the invention of the
alphabet to the Phoenicians. This is now regarded
as doubtful, and there are no reliable data for de-
termining what people first analyzed speech to its
ultimate elements, but to the Phoenicians belongs


2389


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Phoenicia


the merit of bringing the invention to the knowledge
of the western world. It is quite certain that the

alphabets of Western Asia and those
6. Language of Europe were derived from the Phoen
and Culture characters. This is what we should

have expected from their wide commer-
cial relations. The alphabetic writing was in fact
one of their exports and was by far the most im-
portant of them all. The world owes a great debt
to this people for this invaluable aid to literature,
science and culture (see ALPHABET).


_ The Phoen alphahet comprises 22 letters and is defi-
cient in signs to indicate vowels, which were left to he
supplied hy the reader. This defect is common to the
Sem alphahets, but was soon remedied when the Greeks
adopted the Phoenician. Some of the letters have to
serve for two sounds, such as the signs for s and sh, for
p and ph, for tand ¢h; besides, there is a redundant sign
for the sound of s. Also the sounds of y and w are
uurepresented.

_ The origin of the letters is prohably to be found in the
hieroglyphic signs for words and syllables used hy the
Egyptians aud others, since the similarity of some of
them to these signs is evident, hut iu some cases it is more
likely that the Phoenicians adopted hieroglyphics of
their own. Thus the first letter, 'dleph, which means
‘ox,’’ was evidently derived from the picture of an ox’s
head and then reduced to a conventional form.


The Phoen alphabet and language were common
to the Canaanitish tribes and the Hebrews, as we
know from the many inscriptions found in Western
Asia. The MS testifies to their use E. of the Jor~
dan, and the Siloam Inscription likewise for Israel,
and the same characters have heen found in North
Syria. This would be natural, for people of these
regions had become largely Sem by the 9th cent.
BC, when we suppose that the Phoen alphabet was
in general use.

It is strange that the Phoenicians, who had an alpha-
bet so early, and made it so widely known to the world,
made so little use of it for literature. The remains of
their language are very scanty, mostly inscriptions, and
these generally very brief. The longest ones in Phoen
proper are those from Sidon, the most famous of which
is that of Esmunazer, king of Sidon, comprising 298
words. Some few others, eine to the same dy-
nasty, have heen discovered in tombs and on the walls
of the temple of Asmun, and show the Phoen character
and style in its hest form. Only two works of any length
are known to us hy tr or references in Gr authors. The
first is the Phoen’ History of Sanchoniathon, of Beirtt,
which Philo of Byhlus claims to have tr4 from the Phoen
original. This, however, is douhted, and hoth the
author and the history are suspected to he mythical.
The other work is genuine; the short account of the
voyage of a Carthaginian king heyond the Pillars of Her-
cules, called the Periplus of Hanno, is not without merit
as a narrative, and indicates that tha Carthaginian
branch of the Phoen race, at least, may have had a lit.
of some value, but it is unfortunately lost. We cannot
suppose, however, that it was very extensive or very
important, as more of it would then have heen preserved.
The conclusion is natural that the Phoenicians were so
ahsorhed in commercial enterpriso and the pursuit of
wealth that they neglected the nohler uses of the invalu-
able instrument of culture they had found in alphahetic
writing.

A very prominent réle was assigned to religion in
the life of the Phoenicians. As a Sem people, such

a characteristic was but natural and
7. Religion they seem to have possessed it in large

measure. Their religious ideas are
important on account of the influence they had on
the Hebrews, which is so apparent in the OT. The
worship of the Canaanitish Baal and Ashtoreth, or
Astarte, led the Israelites astray and produced most
disastrous results. , st

There can be little doubt that the chief deities
of the Phoenicians, as well as the forms of their cult,
were derived from Babylonia, brought with them
probably when they migrated to the W., but after-
ward modified by eontact with Egypt and Greece.
Some regard the earliest conception of the deity
among the Semites to have been monotheism, and
we find traces of this in the attributes ascribed by
the Phoenicians to their chief god. He is Baal,


“Jord” or “master”; Baal-samin, “lord of heaven”;
Ehun, “supreme,” etc. These terms imply either
one God or one who is supreme among the gods and
their ruler, But this belief was changed before the
Phoenicians came into contact with the Hebrews,
and polytheism took its place, though their gods
were less numerous than among most polytheistie
races. One of the most corrupting tendencies we
notice was the ascription of sexual eharacteristics
to the ehief deities of their pantheon, such as Baal
and Ashtoreth, which led to licentious rites of the
most abominable character.

Baal (Phoen 593, ba‘al) was the chief deity and
was universally worshipped, being usually desig-
nated by the locality in each place: Baal of Tyre
or Baal-Tsur, Baal-Sidon, Baal-Tars (Tarsus),
Baal-bek, etc. He was regarded as the god of the
generative principle in Nature, and his statues were
sometimes flanked by bulls. He was identified with
Zeus, and he appears on the coins under the Gr
type of Zeus, seated on a throne, holding an eagle
in the outstretched right hand and a seepter in the
left. Sometimes his head is eneireled with rays
showing him to be the sun-god.

Ashtoreth (Phoen MWIMWY, ‘ashtireth) was the
great Nature-goddess, the Magna Mater, queen of
heaven (Jer 7 18), and as Baal was the solar deity,
so she was often represented under the lunar aspect,
Ashteroth-kamaim, ‘“Ashteroth of the two horns”
(Gen 14 5). Sometimes she is represented holding
the dove, the symbol of fecundity, of which she was
the goddess. She was commonly identified with
Aphrodite or Venus. She, like Baal, had temples
everywhere, and kings were sometimes her high
priests, and her worship was too often accompanied
with orgies of the most corrupt kind, as at Apheca
(see ASHTORETH; TAMMUZ).

Among the other gods we may mention: EI, or
TOS , él), originally the designation of the supreme
God, but afterward a subordinate deity who became
the special divinity of Byblus (Gebal), and was
regarded by the Greeks as the same ag Kronos.
Melkarth (nap>a , melkarth, “king of the city”) origi-
nally was the same as Baal, representing one aspect
of that god, but later a separate deity, the patron
god of Tyre whose head appears on many of its
coins, as well as his symbol, the cluh, since he was
identified with Herenles. Herodotus descrihes his
temple at Tyre to which he attributes great an-
tiquity, 2,300 years before his time. Dagon
(fla, daghdn) seems to have been the tutelary
deity of Aradus, his head appearing on the early
autonomous coins of that city. He seems to have
been regarded as the god of agriculture by the
Phoenicians, rather than of fishing as generally sup-
posed. Adonis (jT8, ’adhon, “lord”) was re-
garded as the son of Cinyras, a mythic king of Gebal
and the husband of Ashtoreth. The myth of his
death by the wild boar led to the peculiar rites
celebrating it, instituted by the women of Gebal at
Apheea and on the river named after him (see Tam-
muz). Esmun (JOU, ’esmin) one of the sons of
Siddik, the father of the Cabiri, was esp. honored at
Sidon and Beirfit. At Sidon a great temple was
built in his honor, the ruins of which have been
recently explored and various inscriptions found
dedicating it to him. His name signifies “the
eighth,” i.e. the eighth son of Siddik, the others
being the Cabiri, or Great Ones, who were regarded
as presiding over ships and navigation, and as such
were worshipped in many places, although their
special seat was Beirdt. Although they were ealled
“Great” they are represented as dwarfs, and an
image of one of them was placed on the prow, or


Phoenicia
Phoenix


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2390


stern, of each Phoen war galley. The goddess
Tanith (M30, tanith) occupied a lofty place in the
pantheon, since in inscriptions she takes the prece-
dence over Baal when the two names occur together.
She was esp. honored at Carthage and to her most
exalted names are given, such as “the parent of all’;
“the highest of the gods’’; “the mistress of the ele-
ments,” etc. Besides some other gods of less note
originally worshipped by the Phoenicians, they in-
troduced some foreign deities into their pantheon.
Thus Poseidon appears frequently on the coins of
Beirtit and became its patron deity in Rom times;
Isis and her temple at Gebal are likewise represented
on its coins, the Dioscuri or their symbols on those
of Tripolis and Beirit, etc.

The corrupt nature of the Phoen worship has
been referred to. It was also cruel, the custom of
human sacrifices being common and carried to an
extent unheard of among other peoples, such as the
horrible sacrifice of 200 noble youths at Carthage
when besieged by Agathocles. The sacrifice was by
burning, the victim being placed in the arms of the
statue of the god, heated for the purpose. In P.
this god was Melkarth, or Molech, and the custom is
denounced in the OT (Lev 20 2-5), but other gods
were also honored in this way. The religious feeling
of the Phoenicians was undoubtedly deep, but sadly
corrupt and depraved.

The political history of P. is that of the towns
and cities belonging to it. The country as a whole

had no centralized government, but
8. History the chief towns exercised a sort of
hegemony, at times, over some of the
lesser ones. This was esp. the case with Sidon and
Tyre, but every city had its king and its local govern-
ment. The land is never referred to in ancient
documents, but the people are designated by their
cities. Thus we find in Gen 10 17f the mention
of Sidon, the Arvadite, the Arkite, etc, and, in Josh
13 4, the Gebalites and the Sidonians in connection
with the land of the Canaanites. In the same way
the inscriptions of Egypt, Babylonia and Assyria
refer to the people of the different cities, but not
to the land as a political unit, which it never was.

The cities first come into notice in the period of
the Egyp domination, beginning in the 16th cent.
BC under Thothmes III. This king subdued most
of the Phoen cities, or received their submission, in
his numerous campaigns to Syria, and the Egyp
rule continued with more or less interruption until
the decline of Egypt under the XXth Dynasty, or
about 300 years. During this time Arvad seems
to have exercised the hegemony in the N., and Sidon
in the S., with Gebal controlling the middle region.
The Am Tab reveal many facts concerning the con-
dition of things while the Egyp power was declining
in the latter part of the XVITIth Dynasty, esp. in
the reign of Amenhotep IV (Ikhnaton). The rise
of the Amorite and Hittite power in the N. threat-
ened these cities, which were under Egyp governors,
and they called upon their suzerain for aid, which
was not given, and they fell, one after another, into
the hands of the enemy. Rameses II restored
Egyp rule, but his successors of the XXth Dynasty
could not maintain it, and the invasion of tribes from
the W. and N., called the Peleset, or Philis, by land
and sea, though repelled by Rameses III, continued
to increase until the Egyp domination was broken,
and the coast towns resumed their independence
about the middle of the 12th cent. BC. Sidon came
to the front as the chief city of P., and it is referred
to by Joshua as “Great Sidon” (Josh 11 8).
Homer also mentions Sidon frequently, but makes
no reference to Tyre. The latter city was certainly
in existence in his day, but had not come to the
front as the leading city in the mind of the Greeks.
Yet it was a fortified city in the time of Joshua (19


29), and the king of Tyre is among the correspond-
ents mentioned in the Am Tab. It seems to have
taken precedence of Sidon when the latter was
attacked by the Philis of Askelon, and the inhabit-
ants were compelled to flee for safety to Tyre. At
all events Tyre exercised the hegemony in P. by
the time David came to the throne, and had prob-
ably obtained it a century or two before, and held
it until P. became subject to Assyria in the 9th cent.
BC. Asshur-nazir-pal first came into contact with
P., which submitted to tribute, between 877 and
860 BC, and this subjection continued until the
downfall of Assyria in the latter part of the 7th cent.
BC. The subjection wags nominal only for more
than a century, the cities retaining their kings and
managing their own affairs with no interference
from the Assyrians as long as they paid the tribute.
But with the advent of Tiglath-pileser in Syria,
about 740 BC, conditions changed, and the Phoen
towns were subjected to severe treatment, and some
of the dynasts were driven from their cities and
Assyr governors appointed in their places. Their
oppression caused revolts, and Elulaeus of Tyre
united Sidon and the cities to the S. in a league to
resist the encroachments of Tiglath-pileser and his
successor Shalmaneser IV, whom he successfully
resisted, although the Assyrian gained over to his
side Sidon, Acre, and some other towns and had the
assistance of their fleets to make an attack upon
the island city. The attack failed completely, and
Shalmaneser left Elulaens to his independence,
which he maintained for a quarter of a century,
regaining control of the towns that had fallen away
and also of Cyprus. Sargon (722-705 BC) let P.
alone, but Sennacherib (705-681) determined to
punish the king of Tyre and prepared an army of
200,000 men for the war with P. Elnlaens was
afraid and fled to Cyprus, but his towns dared to
resist and Sennacherib had to reduce them one
after another, but did not succeed in taking Tyre
itself. He set over the conquered territory a certain
Tubaal, probably a Phoen, who paid him tribute.
He also took tribute from Gebal and Aradus, which
indicates that all of P. was subject to him, as these
two cities probably controlled all that was not under
Tyre. In the reign of Esarhaddon (681-668) Sidon
revolted under Abd-Melkarth, who was canght and
beheaded, the city sacked, and the inhabitants either
killed or carried into captivity, and it was re-
peopled by captives from the E. At a later date
(672), when Esarhaddon was preparing to invade
Egypt, Baal, the vassal king of Tyre, revolted and
refused to aid him, but afterward submitted either
to Esarhaddon or to bis son Asshur-bani-pal and
assisted the latter in his invasion of Egypt, 668 BC.
Four years later, however, we find the Assyr king
besieging Tyre and punishing Baal by making him
give bis daughter to be a member of the Assyrian’s
harem. Baal himself was left on his throne. The
same fate was the lot of the king of Aradus, and
Accho (Acre) was also punished.

The frequent rebellions of the Phoen towns show
their love of independence and a sturdy resistance
to oppression. They became freed from the yoke
of Assyria probably about 630 BC, when the Medes
attacked Nineveh and the Scythic hordes overran
all Western Asia. The Phoen cities were fortified
and did not suffer very much from the barbarian
invasion, and, as Assyria was broken, they resumed
their independence. In the struggle which followed
between Egypt and Babylon for the mastery of
Syria, P. fell, for a time, under the sway of Egypt,
but was not oppressed, and her towns prospered,
and it was in this period that Tyre attained great
wealth and renown as reflected in the Book of Ezk.
When Nebuchadnezzar laid siege to it, a resistance
of 13 years showed its strength and resources, and


2391


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Phoenicia
Phoenix


although the town on the mainland was destroyed,
it is doubtful whether the king of Babylon took the
island city, but it must have submitted to pay
tribute (585 BC). P. remained subject to Babylon
until that empire fell into the hands of the Persians
(538), and then accepted the yoke of the latter in
the days of Cambyses, if not earlier, but the Pers
king does not seem to have used force to gain the
adherence of the Phoenicians. He needed their
fleets to assist in the attack upon Egypt and secured
them without difficulty. They aided him in the
conquest of Egypt, but when he asked them to pro-
ceed against Carthage they refused, and he had to
desist. The navy of P. was too necessary for him
to run any risk of alienating it.

_ This navy was the strongest sea power of the Per-
sians in all their coming wars with Greece. With-
out its assistance Darius and his successors could
with difficulty have invaded that country or held
in subjection the western coasts of Asia Minor. P.
remained faithful to her Pers rulers about 150 years,
but when the general revolt of the western satraps
occurred in 362 BC, P. seems to have favored them,
but no open rebellion broke out until 351, when
Sidon, under her king Tabnit IL (Tennes), boldly
declared her independence and induced most of the
Phoen cities to do the same. The Pers garrisons
were massacred or driven out. Ochus, the king of
Persia, marched with an army of 300,000 infantry
and 30,000 horse to punish the rebels, and Tabnit, in
cowardly alarm, betrayed Sidon into his hands, but
the citizens set fire to the city and destroyed them-
selves rather than fall into the hands of Ochus, who,
as treacherous as Tabnit, slew the traitor (see
Sipon). The other cities then submitted, and P.
remained subject to Persia until the time of Alex-
ander the Great. When this conqueror invaded
the dominions of Persia and had defeated Darius
at Issus, 333 BC, he demanded the submission of
the Phoen towns, and all yielded save Tyre. Alex-
ander was obliged to lay siege to it, which cost him
7 months of the severest labor, such was the valor
and skill of the Tyrians. The capture of Tyre is
reckoned as one of the greatest exploits of this
mighty conqueror who stained his record by his
cruel treatment of the brave defenders. He mas-
sacred the male prisoners and sold the remainder
of the inhabitants, to the number of 30,000, into
slavery (see Tyre). After the death of Alexander
the Phoen cities were subject to the Ptolemies of
Egypt and the Seleucids of Syria, the latter finally
obtaining control of all by the victory of Antiochus
JII over Scopas in 198 BC. From this time on P.
formed a part of the Seleucid kingdom until it passed,
together with Syria and Pal, into the hands of the
Romans. Its cities became the home of many
Greeks and its language became largely Gr, as in-
scriptions and coins testify. The Romans had also
much to do in modifying the character of the people,
and some towns, Berytus, esp., became largely
Roman. P. ean hardly be said to have had a sepa-
rate existence after the Gr invasion.


Lrrerarvre.—Rawlinson, Hist of Phoenicia; Ken-
rick, Phoenicia; Movers, Phénizier; Breasted, Hist of
Egypt, and Ancient Records; Budge, Hist of Egypt; Raw-
linson, Ancient Monarchies; Rogers, Babylonia and
Assyria; Bevan, House of Seleucus; Am Tab; Perrot and
Chipiez, Art in Phoenicia.


H. Porter
PHOENIX, fé’niks (@olwuké, Phoinixz; AV
Phenice): A harbor in Crete (Acts 27 12). The


Alexandrian corn ship carrying St. Paul and the
author of Acts, after it left Myra in Lycia, was pre-
vented by adverse winds from holding a straight
course to Italy, and sailed under the lee of Crete,
off the promontory of Salmone («ard Zadrpwvny,
katé Salménéen). The ship was then able to make
her way along the S. shore of Crete to a harbor


ealled Fair Havens (Kadol Aiuéves, Kaloi Liménes),
near a city Lasea (Aagala, Lasaia). Thence, in spite
of St. Paul’s advice to winter in Fair Havens, it
was decided to sail to Phoenix (els Polvexa, Améva
ras Kpirns) Brérovra xara Ba Kal Kara xOpov
(eis Phoinika, liména tés Krétés) bléponta katd liba
kat katd chéron, a description which has been tr4
in two ways: (1) “looking toward the 8.W. wind
and toward the N.W. wind, ie. looking S.W. and
N.W.”; (2) “looking down the 8.W. wind and down
the N.W. wind, i.e. looking N.E. and 8.E.” On the
way thither, they were struck by a wind from the
N.E., called Euraquilo, and ran before it under the
lee of an island, called Cauda or Clauda (Kadéa,
Katda (X°BG@], Kraida, Klaida [R*A, etc]) in
Acts 27 7-17. It will be convenient to discuss
those places together. The following account is
based on Smith’s elaborate study in his Voyage and
Shipwreck of St. Paul, which has been followed by
all later writers.

The ship, when it left Myra, was obviously making
for Italy (Puteoli or Ostia) by the shortest route,
round Cape Malea, but off Cnidus it encountered
a N.W. wind and had to sail for shelter under the
lee of Crete. Salmone, now called Cape Sidero, was
the promontory which forms the N.E. corner of the
island. Thence along the 8. shore of Crete, as far
as Cape Matala, a sailing ship is sheltered by the
mountains from the violence of the N.W. wind; W.
of Cape Matala, where the coast turns toward the
N.W., there is no such shelter. Fair Havens must
therefore be looked for to the E. of Cape Matala,
and there is a harbor, lying 6 miles E. of Cape
Matala, which is called Fair Havens by the modern
Greek inhabitants of the island. There is no doubt
that this is the harbor in which the Alexandrian
ship took shelter. It is sheltered only from the N.
and N.W. winds.

The ruins of a city which has been identified with
Lasea have been found 5 miles E. from Fair Havens,
and 12 miles S. of the important city of Gortyna.
It has been suggested that St. Paul’s desire to winter
at, Fair Havens (Acts 27 10) may have been due
to its proximity to Gortyna, and the opportunity
which the latter city afforded for missionary work.
There were many Jews in Gortyna. See CRETE.

From Fair Havens, against the advice of St. Paul,
it was decided to sail to Phoenix, there to pass the
winter. While the ship was on its way thither, it
was struck by a violent N.E. wind from the moun-
tains, called Euraquilo, and carried under the lee of
an islet called Cauda or Clauda. When this hap-
pened, the ship was evidently crossing the Bay of
Messariah, and from this point a N.E. wind must
have carried her under the lee of an island now called
Gaudho in Greek and Gozzo in Italian, situated
about 23 miles S.W. of the center of the Gulf of
Messariah. The modern name of the island shows
that Cauda (Candas in the Notitiae Episcopatuwm),
and not Clauda is the true ancient form.

The writer of Acts never saw Phoenix, which
must have been a good harbor, as the nautical ex-
perts decided to winter there (Acts 27 11). Now
the only safe harbor on the 8. coast of Crete in which
a ship large enough to carry a cargo of corn and 268
souls could moor is the harbor beside Loutro, a
village on the S. coast of Crete, directly N. of Cauda.
All the ancient authorities agree in placing Phoenix
in this neighborhood. The harbor at Loutro
affords shelter from all winds, and its identification
with Phoenix seems certain. But a serious difficulty
arises on this view. The words describing the
harbor of Phoenix ordinarily mean “looking toward
the S.W. and the N.W.,” but the harbor_beside
Loutro looks eastward. This led Bishop Words-
worth to identify Phoenix with an open roadstead
on the western side of the isthmus on which Loutro


cai a THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2392
stands. But this roadstead is not a suitable place | Twice he entered Phrygia in Asia, but on his 2d


for wintering in, and it is better either to take the
words to mean, in sailor’s language, “looking down
the 8.W. and N.W. winds’—a description which
exactly fits the harbor at Loutro—or to assume that
the reporter of the discussion referred to in Acts 27
10-12 or the writer of Acts made a mistake in de-
scribing a place which he had never seen. An
inscription belonging to the reign of Trajan found
at Loutro shows that Egyp corn ships were wont
to lie up there for the winter. W. M. Caper


PHOROS, fd’ros (Popés, Phords, B [Swetel,
Papés, Pharés [1 Esd 8 30, where AV Pharez]):
Name of one of the families, part of whom went up
from the exile with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 5 9) and part
with Ezra (8 30 RV)=‘Parosh” of Ezr 2 3; 8 8,
and some members of which had taken “strange
wives” (1 Esd 9 26).


PHRURAI, fri’ri, fri’ra-i (P@povpal, Phrourat;
al. in 8 and A, Ppovpaia, Phrouraia, and Ppovplp,
Phrourim; AV Phurim): In Ad Est 11 1, ‘‘the ep.
of Phrurai’ means the preceding Book of Est. See
Purm™.


PHRYGIA, frij’i-a (Ppvyie, Phrugia): A large
ancient country of Central Asia Minor, very moun-
tainous and with table-lands reaching 4,000 ft. in
height. Its name is derived from Phryges, a tribe
from Thrace, which in early times invaded the
country and drove out or absorbed the earlier
Asiatic inhabitants, among whom were the Hittites.
Thus the Phrygians borrowed much of oriental
civilization, esp. of art and mythology which they
transferred to Europe. To define the boundaries of
Phrygia would be exceedingly difficult, for as in the
case of other Asia Minor countries, they were always
vague and they shifted with nearly every age. The
entire country abounds with ruins of former cities
and with almost countless rock-hewn tombs, some
of which are of very great antiquity. Among the
most interesting of the rock sculptures are the beau-
tiful tombs of the kings bearing the names Midas
and Gordius, with which classical tradition has
made us familiar. It seems that at one period the
country may have extended to the Hellespont, even
including Troy, but later the Phrygians were driven
toward the interior. In Rom times, however, when
Paul journeyed there, the country was divided into
two parts, one of which was known as Galatian
Phrygia, and the other as Asian Phrygia, because
it was a part of the Rom province of Asia, but
the line between them was never sharply drawn.
The Asian Phrygia was the larger of the two di-
visions, including the greater part of the older
country; Galatian Phrygia was small, extending
along the Pisidian Mountains, but among its im-
portant cities were Antioch, Iconium and Apollonia.
About 295 AD, when the province of Asia was no
longer kept together, its different parts were known
as Phrygia Prima and Phrygia Secunda. That part
of Asia Minor is now ruled by a Turkish wali or
governor whose residence is in Konia, the ancient
Iconium. The population consists not only of
Turks, but of Greeks, Armenians, Jews, Kurds and
many small tribes of uncertain ancestry, and of
peculiar customs and religious practices. The
people live mostly in small villages which are scat-
tered throughout the picturesque country. Sheep
and goat raising are the leading industries; brigand-
age is common. According to Acts 2 10, Jews
from Phrygia went to Jerus, and in Acts 18 23 we
learn that many of them were influential and per-
haps fanatical. According to Acts 16 6, Paul
traversed the country while on his way from Lystra
to Iconium and Antioch in Galatian Phrygia.


journey he was forbidden to preach there. Chris-
tianity was introduced into Phrygia by Paul and
Barnabas, as we learn from Acts 13 4; 16 1-6;
18 23, yet it did not spread thererapidly. Churches
were later founded, perhaps by Timothy or by John,
at Colossae, Laodicea and Hierapolis.

E. J. Banxs


PHURAH, fi’ra (2, pura&h, “branch’’). See
Purau.

PHUT, fut (O55, pat). See Pur.

PHUVAH, fti'va. See Puan.

PHYGELUS, fi-jé’lus (@vyeAXos, Phuigellos;


Tischendorf and WH, with others, read iyedos,
Phigelos, Phygellus or Phygelus [2 Tim 1 15]; AV
Phygellus, fi-jel’us): One of the Christians who de-
serted Paul at the time of his 2d imprisonment at
Rome. Paul mentions him, slong with Hermogenes,
as being among those “that are in Asia,’’ who
turned away from him then. What is meant may
be that Phygelus and Hermogenes, along with
other native Christians from proconsular Asia, were
in Rome when he was brought before the emperor’s
tribunal the second time, and that they had not
merely taken no measures to stand by and support.
him, but that they had deserted him.

The meaning, however, may be that the turning
away of Phygelus and Hermogenes from Paul took
place, not in Rome, but in Asia itself.

The times during and immediately following the
Neronic persecution were more dreadful than can easily
be conceived, and the temptation was strong to forsake
the Christian name, and to do so in a wholesale fashion.
A great community like the Christian church in Ephesus
or in Rome felt the terrihle pressure of those times,
when for a mcre word—a word, however, denying the
Lord who bought them—men were at once set free from
persecution, from the loss of property or of home, and
from death. 1 Pet records how the aftermath of the
Neronic persecution had extended far indeed from Rome,
where it had originated. Peter asks the Christians not
to give way under ‘‘the fiery trial’ which is trying them
(1 Pet 4 12), and those whom he thus addresses were
the memibers of the church throughout Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia (1 Pet 11). The epp.
to the seven churches in Asia in the Apocalypse also show
how sorely persecution had raged throughout that
province. See PersecuTion.

But in addition to the temptation to deny Christ's
name and to go hack to heathenism or to Judaism, there
was also another which pressed upon some of the
churches, the temptation to repudiate the authority of
Paul. Many passages in the NT show how the name of
Paul was sometimes very lightly esteemed, and how his
authority was repudiated, e.g. by persons in Corinth, and
In the churches of Galatia.

What is said here is, that among the Christians
of proconsular Asia, i.e. of Ephesus and the churches
in the valley of the Cayster, there was a widespread
defection from that loyalty to Paul which was to
be expected from those who owed to him all that
they possessed of the knowledge of Christ’s salva-
tion. ‘All that are in Asia turned away from me;
of whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes.”’ On the
whole, all the necessary conditions of these words
are satisfied by a reference to Rome and to Paul’s
environment there, and perhaps this is the more
probable meaning. See HeRMoGENEs.

JoHN RUTHERFURD

PHYLACTERY, fi-lak’tér-i (pvdaxripiov, phu-
laktérion, “guard’’): This word is found only in Mt

: 23 5 in Our Lord’s denunciation of the

1. Bible Pharisees, who, in order that their
References works might “be seen of men,” and
in their zeal for the forms of religion,

‘Take broad their phylacteries and enlarge the
borders of their garments.” The corresponding


word in the OT, mppin, tolaphoth (Kennedy in
ADB suggests pointing as the segholate fem. sing.,


2393


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Phoros
Physician


totepheth), is found in three passages (Ex 13 16;
Dt 6 8; 11 18), where it is tr¢ “frontlets.”” This
rendering, however, is not at all certain, and may
have been read into the text from its later interpre-
tation. In Ex 13 9 the corresponding word to
the {6{aphath of ver 16 is 2ikkarén, “memorial” or
“reminder”; and in the || clauses of both verses
the corresponding word is ’dth, “a sign’? upon the
hand, also used for the “sign” which Jeh appointed
for Cain (Gen 4 15). It may be rendered then as
a mark or ornament or jewel, and used figura-
tively of Jeh’s Law as an ornament or jewel to the
forehead of the Israelite, a reference to the eharm
or amulet worn by the pagan. The word used in
the Talm for the phylactery is mpDM, iephillah,
“prayer,” or ‘“prayer-band” (pl. ¢phillin), indi-
cating its use theoretically as a reminder of the Law,
although practically it might be esteemed as an
automatic and ever-present charm against evil: an
aid within toward the keeping of the Law, a guard
without against the approach of evil; a degradation
of an OT figurative and idealistic phrase to the ma-
terialistic. and superstitious practices of the pagans.
The phylactery was a leathern box, cube shaped,
closed with an attached flap and bound to the person
by a leather band. There were two

2. De- kinds: (1) one to be bound to the
scription inner side of the left arm, and near
the elbow, so that with the bending
of the arm it would rest over the heart, the knot


Phylacteries for Head and Arm.


fastening it to the arm being in the form of the letter
yodh (7), and the end of the string, or band, finally
wound around the middle finger of the hand, ‘‘a sign
upon thy hand” (Dt 6 8). This box had one com-
partment containing one or all of the four passages
given above. The writer in his youth found one of
these in a comparatively remote locality, evidently


lost by a Jewish peddler, which contained only the |


2d text (Ex 13 11-16) in unpointed Heb. (2)
Another was to be bound in the center of the fore-
head, “between thine eyes” (Dt 6 8), the knot of
the band being in the form of the letter daleth (7),
with the letter shin (W) upon each end of the box,
which was divided into four compartments with one
of the four passages in each. These two Heb letters,
with the » of the arm-phylactery (see [1] above),
formed the Divinename "70, shadday, ‘‘Almighty.”’
Quite elaborate ceremonial accompanied the “‘lay-
ing” on of the phylacteries, that of the arm being
bound on first, and that of the head next, quotations
from Scripture or Talm being repeated at each stage
of the binding. They were to be worn by every male
over 13 years old at the time of morning prayer,
except on Sabbaths and festal days, such days being
in themselves sufficient reminders of ‘‘the command-
ment, the statutes, and the ordinances” of Jeh (Dt
6 1).

The passages on which the wearing of the phy-
lacteries is based are as follows: ‘It fi.e. the feast
of unleavened bread] shall be for a sign unto thee
upon thy hand, and for a memorial between thine


eyes, that the law of Jeh may be in thy mouth”
(Ex 13 9); “And it fie. sacrifiee of the firstborn]

shall be for a sign upon thy hand, and
3. Interpre- for frontlets between thine eyes’ (13
tation of OT 16); ‘‘thou shalt bind them [i.e. the
Passages words of Jeh] for a sign upon thy

_hand, and they shall be for frontlets
between thine eyes’ (Dt 6 8); “therefore shall
ye lay up these my words in your heart and in
your soul; and ye shall bind them for a sign
upon your hand, and they shall be for frontlets
between your eyes” (11 18). It is evident that
the words in Ex are beyond all question used
figuratively; a careful reading of the verses in
Dt in close relation to their contexts, in which are
other figures of speech not to be taken literally, is
sufficient proof of their purely figurative intention
also. Only the formalism of later ages eould distort
these figures into the gross and materialistic prac-
tice of the phylactery. Just when this practice
began cannot accurately be determined. While
the Talm attempts to trace it back to the primitive,
even Mosaic, times, it probably did not long ante-
date the birth of Christ. In conservative Jewish
circles it has been maintained through the centuries,
and at present is faithfully followed by orthodox
Judaism. Every male, who at the age of 13 be-
comes a ‘‘son of the Law” (bar migwah), must wear
the phylactery and perform the accompanying
ceremonial.

In the NT passage (Mt 23 5) Our Lord rebukes
the Pharisees, who make more pronounced the un-
Scriptural formalism and the crude literalism of the
phylacteries by making them obtrusively large,
as they also seek notoriety for their religiosity De
the enlarged fringes, or “borders.” See FRINGEs;
FronTLets; PHARISEES.

Literature.—The various comms. on Ex and Dt;
tractate Tephillin; the comprehensive art. by A. R. 8.
Kennedy in HDB; arts. in EB and Jew Enc.

Epwarp Mack

PHYLARCH, fi'lark (vAdpxns, phuldrchés):
Given in AV of 2 Macc 8 82 as a proper name
“Philarches,”’ but in RV “the phylarch of Timo-
theus’s forces’; “probably the captain of an irregu-
Cs auxiliary force’ (RVm), rather than a cavalry
officer.


PHYLARCHES, fi-lar’kéz (AV Philarches).
PHYLARCH.


PHYSICIAN, fi-zish’an (ND, rophi’; tarpés,
iatrés): To the pious Jew at all times God was the
healer (Dt 32 39): “It was neither herb nor molli-
fying plaister that cured them, but thy word, O
Lord, which healeth all things” (Wisd 16 12). The
first physicians mentioned in Scripture are those of
Egypt. Long before the sojourn of the Hebrews
in that land, Egypt had a priestly class of physicians
(snu) and a god of healing (/mhtp). From the
ancient medical papyri which have been preserved,
the largest of which is the Papyrus Ebers, we know
that the medical knowledge of these physicians was
purely empirical, largely magical and wholly un-
scientific. In spite of their ample opportunities
they knew next to nothing of human anatomy,
their descriptions of diseases are hopelessly crude,
and three-fourths of the hundreds of prescriptions
in the papyri are wholly inert. Even their art of
embalming was so imperfect that few of their mum-
mies would have remained in any other climate
than that of Egypt. Physicians of this kind who
were Joseph’s servants embalmed Jacob (Gen 50
2) and Joseph (ver 26). It wasnot until the founda-
tion of the School of Alexandria, which was purely
Greek, that Egypt became a place of medical edu-
cation and research.


See


Physician
Pigeon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2394


There is no evidence that at any time the priests
of Israel were reputed to be the possessors of medi-
cal knowledge or tradition. In the ceremonial law
they had explicit instructions as to the isolation of
those suffering from skin eruptions, so that they
might recognize certain obstmate and infectious
forms which caused ceremonial uncleanness, but
with this duty as sanitary police their function ended,
and they used no means to cure these diseases.
There is, as far as I know, no record or tradition of
a priest-physician in Bible times. The records of
cure by the prophets, esp. Elisha, are mostly re-
corded as miracles, not as cures by treatment.
The salt which cured the noxions water at Jericho
and the meal by which the poisonons gourds were
rendered innoxious, like the manipulation of the
Shunammite’s son, can scarcely be regarded as ade-
quate remedies. There is an implied reference to a
healer of wounds in Ex 21 19, as also in Isa 8 7,
and it is recorded in P*sahim, iv.9 that there was
in existence in the time of the monarchy a book of
cures, sépher r°phi’ath, supposed to have been
written by Solomon, but withdrawn from public
use by Hezekiah. The first specific mention of Heb
physicians is 2 Ch 16 12, but Asa is obviously re-
garded by the Chronicler as reprchensible in trust-
ing to their skill. In 2 K 8 29 Joram, king of
Israel, is said to have gone to Jezreel to be healed.
Not far from this, across the Jordan, was Gilead,
which possibly may also have been a place resorted
to by those needing medical treatment, as indicated
by Jeremiah’s query: “Is there no balm in Gilead?
is there no physician there?” (Jer 8 22). Job,
irritated by the platitudes of his friends, calls them
pbysicians of no value (13 4).

In the NT Our Lord’s saying, ‘They that are
whole have no need of a physician,” etc, shows that
there were physicians in Galilee (Mt 9 12; Mk 2
17; Lk 6 81), and in Nazareth He quotes what
seems to have been a proverb: “Physician, heal thy-
self’ (Lk 4 23). There were physicians in Galilee
who received fees from the woman of Caesarea
Philippi who had the issue of blood (Mk 6 26; Lk
8 43). Of her there is a curious story told in Euse-
bius (VII, 18).

There are several Talmudic references to physi-
cians; in Shekdlim 5 1, it is said that there was a
physician at the temple to attend to the priests.
A physician was appointed in every city (Gittin
126) who was required to have a license from the
local authorities (Babha’ Bathr@ 21a). . The familiar
passage in Ecclus 38 1-15 RV in praise of the
physician gives him but Limited credit for his
skill: “There is a time when in their very hands
is the issue for good,” and later, ‘‘He that sinneth
before his Maker, Let him fall into the hands of the
physician.”

Luke, called “the beloved physician” in Col 4
14, is said by Eusebins to have been a native of
Antioch and a physician by profession. According
to Origen he was the unnamed ‘brother whose
praise in the gospel is spread through all the
churches” (2 Cor 8 18). There are evidences of
his professional studies in the language of his writ-
ings, though of this probably more has been made
by Hobart and others than it really merits. Had
we not known of his profession it is doubtful whether
it could have been conjectured from his choice of
words. Sir W. Ramsay calls attention to the two
words used of the healings at Melitain Acts 28 8-10:
for the cure of Publius’ father the word used is
idsato, but for the healing of those who came later
it is etherapetiionto, which he renders “received medi-
cal treatment.” From this he infers that Luke
helped Paul with these (Ramsay, Luke the Physi-
cian, 1908). ALEX. MacaLister


PI-BESETH, pi-bé’seth (MOA™B, pi-bheseth;
LXX BvBdoros, Bubdstos; Egyp Pi-Bdsht, ‘“‘the
house of Basht,’’ the cat-headed goddess; the Egyp
form is usually Ha-Basht; it is doubtiulif the form
Pi-Basht has yet been found): A city of ancient
Egypt. The only occurrence of the name of this
place in the OT is in Ezk 30 17; where it is coupled
with Aven, i.e. On (Heliopolis). ;

Pi-beseth was on the western bank of the Pelnsiac
branch of the Nile, abont 40 miles N. of Memphis,

about 15 miles N.E. of On. Herod-
1. Location otus found the city of Bubastis very

beautiful in his day. The annual
festival of the goddess, Basht, was celebrated here
with revolting license, similar to that of the festival
of Syyid cl-Bedawer now kept in Tanta.

Pi-beseth was explored by Professor Naville under
the Egyp Exploration Society in 1887-90. There
were uncovered ruins of Egypt from
the IVth Dynasty of the Old Empire,
from the Middle Empire, an important
Hyksos settlement, and ruins from the
New Empire down to the end, and even from Rom
times. The most unique discovery at Pi-beseth, one
of the most unique in all Egypt, is the cemetery of
cats. These cats, tbe animal sacred to Basht, were
mummified at other places in Egypt, but at Pi-
beseth they were burned and the ashes and bones
gathered and buried in great pits lined with brick
or hardened clay. Bones of the ichnenmon were
also found mixed with those of the cats in these
pits (Egypt Exploration Fund Report, 1891).

M. G. Kyrie

PICTURE, pik’tir: This word (in the pl.) is
found 3 t in AV, viz. Nu 33 52; Isa 2 16; Prov
265 11. In Nu and Prov “pictures” represents the
Heb word 302A, maskith, “showpiece,” ‘“fignre.”
The context in Nu suggests that the “pictures” or
“carved figures” (RV “figured stones’) which the
Israelites were to destroy were symbols of Can.
worship and therefore foreign to the religion of Jeh.
In Prov for AV “pictures of silver,” ERV has
“baskets [ARV “‘network’’] of silver,” but a more
probable tr is “carvings of silver.’ ‘‘Pictures”
stands for a slightly different word (but from the
samc root) in Isa, viz. NVIW, skhiysth; RV renders
‘Imagery” (RVm ‘‘watchtowers’). The prophet
probably alludes to carved figures (of gods in animal
or human shapes) on the prows of vessels.

T. Lewis

PIECE, pés: In AV the word (sing. and pl.)
represents a large number of different Heb words,
many of which have more or less the same signifi-
cance, e.g. picce of meat or flesh (Gen 16 10; 2S
6 19, Ezk 24 4); of bread or cake (1S 2 36;
30 12; Jer 37 21); of ground or land (2 8 23 11);
of wall (Neh 3 11.19 ff); of an ear (Am 3 12); of
cloth or garment (1 K 11 30); of millstone (Jgs 9
53). It is used frequently in paraphrastic render-
ings of various Heb vbs.: “break,”’ “tear,’’ “cut,”
etc, in pieces (Gen 44 28, etc).

In the NT “picce” renders érésrnua, epibléma,
“piece” or “patch of cloth’ (Mt 9 16; Mk 2 21;
Lk 6 36). It is also found in paraphrastic render-
ings—broken in pieces (Mk 6 4), pulled in pieces
(Acts 23 10). T. Lewis


2. Explo-
ration


_ PIECE OF GOLD: The word “pieces” is supplied
in 2 K 6 5 (story of Naaman), ‘6,000 pieces of
gold,” where RVm more correctly suggests “‘shekels”’
(cf 1 IK 10 16). See Money.


PIECE OF MONEY: Two words are thus ren-
dered in AV (TQ°WP, kesilah; orarip, statér), RV
gives only the first this rendering (Job 42 11).


2395


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Physician
Pigeon


ow

It is supposed to be from Arab. {a..5, kassat, “to
divide equally by weight,” and hence something
weighed; a plece of silver weighed for money, and
perhaps stamped with its weight. The stater is the
well-known Gr weight and coin (Mt 17 27 AV,
™m stater, RV “shekel’’). In gold it was equal to
about a guinea or five dollars, but in silver only to
about 66 cts.


PIECE OF SILVER: Two words are thus ren-
dered in the OT (RODS, raccé-khdseph, and
MO WP, ksitah) and two in the NT (dpytpioy,
argurion, and dpaxu%, drachmé). The first ex-
pression means pieces of silver broken off from bars
or larger pieces (Ps 68 30). The second is used
for money in Josh 24 32, and is so rendered in RV.
The pieces were not coins, but perhaps bore a stamp.
See Money. In other passages of the OT where
pieces of silver are mentioned, the Heb has simply
a numeral joined with keseph, “silver,” as in the
account of the selling of Joseph (Gen 37 28). In
Isa 7 23 the word silverlings means small pieces
of silver, and they were no doubt shekels. In the
NT the Gr dpypa, argiria (Mt 26 15; 27 3-9),
is tr’ as pieces of silver, but probably means shekels.
In Acts 19 19 the same word occurs, but in this
case the reference is probably to the denarius or
drachma (cf Lk 15 8f). Thus the 30 pieces of
Mt would be equal to about £4 or $20, and the
50,000 of Acts to about £2,000 or $10,000.

H. Porter

PIETY, pi’e-ti: Only in 1 Tim 6 4: ‘Let them
learn first to show piety towards their own family,”
where “let them show piety” represents a single
Gr vb. (evceBéw, eusebéd), in its only other occur-
rence (Acts 17 23) being rendered ‘‘worship.” In
Elizabethan Eng. “picty’ (like the Lat pietas)
could be used of devotion to one’s parents (as still
in the phrase “‘ilial piety”), as well as of devotion
to God. Hence there is no explicit statement here
that filial devotion is one form of Divine worship.


PIGEON, pij/un (7317, ydnah; weprotepd, peris-
terd; Lat pipire): A bird of the family Columbidae.
See Dove. The Heb ydnéh seems to be tr? either
pigeon or dove, yet almost
every reference made to
these birds proves that
there were distinct
branches of the family
recognized, and one or
the other or both are
designated. On the other
hand, some of the tr* read
doves, where the remain-
der of the text makes it
very clear that pigeons
were the birds intended.
The Lat pipire means ‘‘to
cheep,”’ and refers to the
unusually eclamorous ,
young in the nest. The old birds coo, moan and wail
as doves. The birds are almost 12 in. long, have full,
plump bodies that are delicious food, and beautifully
marked and shaded plumage. They feed_princi-
pally on grain, seeds, small buds and fruit. Beyond
question wild pigeons were the first birds domesti-
cated and taught to home withman. They appeared
in a state of sach complete domestication, that they
flew free, yet homed and bred in places provided by
man at the time of the very first attempts at keep-
ing records of history. At the time the earliest Bib.
accounts were written, pigeons were so domesticated
that in all known countries of the East they were
reckoned when an estimate was made of a man’s
wealth.


Pigeons.


The rich provided large and expensive cotes of

molded pottery for their birds, each section big
enough for the home of one pair of birds, the regular
tows of openings resembling lattice work, so that
Isaiah refers to them as “windows” (60 8). LXX
reads ov vosgols, stin nossois, lit. “with young” or
“‘fledglings” (see below). The middle classes
modeled cotes of oven-baked clay, and the very
poor cut holes in the walls, over the doors, and
allowed the birds to enter and live with the family.
_ In wild estate, rock and wood pigeons swarmed
m countless numbers through rocky caves and
caverns and over the plains of Gennesaret, the
forests of Gilead and the woody slopes of Carmel.
They remained throughout the season, breeding at
alltimes. The doves were migratory, and were kept
in confinement only as caged pets or to be held for
sale for sacrifice. F or these purposes, it appears
that the dove was slightly preferred. When only
oue bird was to be used, a dove is always specified;
where two, almost in every case the dove is men-
tioned first. Where oue or the other will suffice, the
dove scems to have been given preference. This
may have been because it required greater effort to
procure a dove, and so it was considered a greater
sacrifice. Everyone having a home of any sort had
pigeons they could use, or they could be taken wild
at any time. The dove is first mentioned in Gen
15 9: ‘And he said unto him, Take me a heifer
three years old, and a she-goat three years old, and
aram three years old, and a turtle-dove, and a young
pigeon.”
_ At will he observed that the dove is mentioned first, and it
is specified that the pigeon was to he young. Itis proh-
ahle that the people protected their domesticated pigeons
hy using the wild for sacrifice, whenever possible. “Young
hirds could be taken from a nest at almost any time.
The old birds, among the wild, were shy creatures and
far more difficult to capture in nets or snares than doves
that came close to cities and villages to live, and exhibited
much less fear of man than the wild pigeons. ‘The next
reference is in Lev § 7: ‘And if his means suffice not
for a lamb, then he shall bring his trespass-offering for
that wherein he hath sinned, two turtle-doves, or two
young pigeons, unto Jeh; one fora sin-offering, and tho
other for a burnt-offering.'' Here two birds of each
kind were to he offered, if the person making the sacrifice
could not affordalamh. Againin Lev 12 6: '*And when
the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or for a
daughter, she shall hring a lamb a year old for a burnt-
offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtle-dove, for a sin-
offering, unto the door of the tent of meeting, unto the
pricst.”” Here is a raro instance where the text or the
translators place the pigeon first.


“And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtle-
doves, or two young pigeons, to the priest, to the
door of the tent of meeting” (Nu 6 10). In Cant
2 14:

““O my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock,
In the covert of the steep place,
Let me see thy countenance,
Let me hear thy voice;
For sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is
comely."


Here the text reads ‘‘dove,’”’ but the description of
the location and the implication of the text prove
the bird to have been a rock pigeon—a tender,
loving thing, yet shy and timid, that peeps with
eyes of bright concern over the rocks of its chosen
home, down at the intruder. Isa 60 8: “Who are
these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their
windows?” Here is another place where the wrong
bird isused. Doves were wild and migratory. They
had no ‘‘windows.” But the tile pots massed in
one diamond-shaped cote appeared at a little dis-
tance, like latticed windows. This should read
“pigeons” instead of “doves.” For the same
reason see Jer 48 28: “O ye inhabitants of Moab,
leave the cities and dwell in the rock; and be like
the dove that maketh her nest over the mouth of
the abyss.” Again the bird intended is the rock
pigeon. Lk 2 24: “A sacrifice according to that


Pi-Hahiroth
Pilate, Pontius


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2396


which is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of
turtledoves, or two young pigeons.” This describes
the sacrifice offered in the temple by Mary following
the birth of Jesus. Gene Strarron-PoRTER


PI-HAHIROTH, pi-ha-hi’roth (NIN 1D, pi-
ha-hiroth [Ex 14 2-9; Nu 83 7-8]): Nothing is
known of the meaning of the name
1. Meaning Pi-H. Some attempts toward an
of Name Egyp etymology for it have been
made, but without much success.
Since the meaning of the name is unknown and no
description of the place or its use is given, it is im-
possible to determine anything concerning the char-
acter of Pi-H., whether a city, a sanctuary, a for-
tress, or some natural feature of the landscape.
Neither Pi-H. nor any other place mentioned
with it can be exactly located. A recent discovery
of manuscripts in Egypt furnishes a
2. Location mention of this place, but affords
very little assistance in locating it,
nothing comparable to the account in the Bible
itself. If any one of the places mentioned in con-
nection with the crossing of the Red Sea could be
located approximately, all the others could, also,
be similarly located by the description given in the
account in Ex. The route beyond the Sea has
heen made out with almost positive certainty. A
journey along the way is so convincing that hardly
anything can shake the conviction which it produces.
This identification of the route of the exodus beyond
the Sea requires the place of the crossing to be within
3 days’ journey of Marah, which puts it somewhere
near the modern Suez. It may be anywhere within
10 miles of that point. This approximately locates
all the other places mentioned in connection with
the crossing: Migdol must be Ras ’Atakah, or some
other high point in the mountains of the western
deserts, where might be placed a watchtower. Pi-H.
is between this point and the Sea and Baal-zephon
near the opposite eastern shore. This puts Pi-H. at
some point along the old shore line of the Sea with-
in 10 miles of the site of modern Suez.
M. G. Kris
PILATE, ACTS OF. See following art., 4, and
APOCRYPHAL GOSPELS.


PILATE, pi'lét, pi’lat, PONTIUS, pon’shi-us
(IIévries TleXaros, Péntios Peildtos):
[. Name and Office
2. Pilate’s Procuratorship
3. Pilate and Jesus Christ
4. Pilate in Tradition and Legend
5. Character of Pilate
LITERATURE

The zomen Pontius indicates the stock from which
Pilate was descended. it was one of the most
famous of Samnite names; it was a
Pontius who inflicted on a Rom army
the disgrace of the Caudine Forks.
The name is often met with in Rom
history after the Samnites were conquered and ab-
sorbed. Lucius Pontius Aquila was a friend of
Cicero and one of the assassins of Julius Caesar.
The cognomen Pilatus indicates the familia, or
branch of the gens Pontius, to which Pilate be-
longed. It has been derived from pileus, the cap
worn by freedmen; this is improbable, as Pilate
was of equestrian rank. It has also been derived
from pilum, a spear. Probably the name was one
that had descended to Pilate from his ancestors,
and had long lost its meaning. The praenomen is
nowhere mentioned. Pilate was 5th procurator
of Judaea. The province of Judaea had formerly
been the kingdom of Archelaus, and was formed
when he was deposed (6 AD). Speaking roughly,
it took in the southern half of Pal, including Sa-


1. Name
and Office


maria. Being an imperial province (i.e. under the
direct control of the emperor), it was governed by
a procurator (see Procurator; Province). The
procurator was the personal servant of the emperor,
directly responsible to him, and was primarily con-
cerned with finance. But the powers of procura-
tors varied according to the appointment of the
emperor. Pilate was a procurator cum potestaie,
i.e. he possessed civil, military, and criminal juris-
diction. The procurator of Judaea was in some way
subordinate to the legate of Syria, but the exact
character of the subordination is not known. As
a rule a procurator must be of equestrian rank and
a man of certain military experience. Under his
rule, the Jews were allowed as much _self-govern-
ment as was consistent with the maintenance of
imperial authority. The Sanhedrin was allowed
to exercise judicial functions, but if they desired to
inflict the penalty of death, the sentence had to be
confirmed by the procurator. ;

We have no certain knowledge of Pilate except
in connection with his time of rule in Judaea. We

know nothing of his birth, his origin, or
2. Pilate’s hisearlier years. Tacitus, when speak-
Procurator- ing of the cruel punishments inflicted
ship by Nero upon the Christians, tells us

that Christ, from whom the name
“Christian” was derived, was put to death when
Tiberius was emperor by the procurator Pontius
Pilate (Annals xv.44). Apart from this reference
and what is told us in the NT, all our knowledge of
him is derived from two Jewish writers, Jos the his-
torian and Philo of Alexandria. . :

Pilate was procurator of Judaea, in succession
to Gratus, and he held office for 10 years. Jos tells
(Ant, XVIII, iv, 2) that he ruled for 10 years; that
he was removed from office by Vitellius, the legate
of Syria, and traveled in haste to Rome to defend
himself before Tiberius against certain complaints.
Before he reached Rome the emperor had passed
away. Jos adds that Vitellius came in the vear 36
AD to Judaea to be present at Jerus at the time of
the Passover. It has been assumed by most
authorities (so HDB and EB) that Pilate had de-
parted before this visit of Vitellins. They accord-
ingly date the procuratorship of Pilate as lasting
from 26 to 86 AD. As against this view, von Dob-
schiitz points out (RE s.v. ‘Pilate”’) that by this
reckoning Pilate must_have taken at least a year
to get to Rome; for Tiberius died on March 16,
37 AD. Such delay is inconceivable in view of the
circumstances; hence von Dobschiitz rightly dates
the period of his procuratorship 27-37 AD. The
procurator of Judaea had no easy task, nor did Pilate
make the task easier by his actions. Me was not
careful to conciliate the religious prejudices of the
Jews, and at times this attitude of his led to violent
collisions between ruler and ruled.

On one occasion, when the soldiers under his command
came to Jerus, he caused them to bring with them their
ensigns, upon which were the usual images of the em-

eror. The ensigns were brought in privily by night,

ut their presence was soon discovered. Immediately
multitudes of excited Jews hastened to Caesarea to peti-
tion him for the removal of the obnoxious ensigns. For
five days he refused to hear them, hut on the sixth ho
took his place on the judgment seat, and when the Jews
were admitted he had them surrounded with soldiers
and threatened them with instant death unless they
ceased to trouble him with the matter. The Jews there-
upon flung themselves on the ground and bared their
necks, declaring that they preferred death to the vio-
lation of their laws. Pilate, unwilling to slay so many,
yielded the point and removed the ensigns (Jos, Ant,
XVII, iii, 1; BJ, II, ix, 2,3).

At another time he used the sacred treasure of the
temple, called corban (korban), to pay for bringing water
into Jerus hy an aqueduct. A crowd came together
and clamored against him; but he had caused soldiers
dressed as civilians to mingle with the multitude, and
at a given signal they fell upon the rioters and beat them
so severely with staves that the riot was quelled (Jos,
Ant, XVIII, iii, 2; BV, II, ix, 4).


2397


Philo tells us (Legatio ad Catum, xxxviii) that on an-
other occasion he dedicated some gilt shields in the palace
of Herod in honor of the emperor. On_these shields
there was no representation of any forbidden thing, but
simply an inscription of the name of the donor and of
him in whose honor they were set up. The Jews peti-
tioned him to have them removed; when he refused,
they appealed to Tiberius, who sent an order that they
should be removed to Caesarea.

Of the incident, mentioned in Lk 13 1, of the
Galileans whose blood Pilate mingled with their
sacrifices, nothing further is known.

Jos (Ant, XVIII, iv, 1,2) gives an account of the
incident which led to Pilate’s downfall. A religious
pretender arose in Samaria who promised the
Samaritans that if they would assemble at Mt.
Gerizim, he would show them the sacred vessels
which Moses had hidden there. A great multitude
assembled in readiness to ascend the mountain, but
before they could accomplish their aim they were
attacked by Pilate’s cavalry, and many of them were
slain. The Samaritans thereupon sent an embassy
to Vitellius, the legate of Syria, to accuse Pilate of
the murder of those who had been slain. Vitellius,
who desired to stand well with the Jews, deposed
Pilate from office, appointed Marcellus in his place,
and ordered Pilate to go to Rome and answer the
charges made against him before the emperor.
Pilate set out for Rome, but, before he could reach
it, Tiberius had died; and it is probable that, in
the confusion which followed, Pilate escaped the
inquisition with which he was threatened. From
this point onward history knows nothing more of
Pilate.

The shortest and simplest account of Pilate’s deal-
ings with Jesus Christ is given in the Gospel of Mk.

There we are told that Jesus was de-


3. Pilate livered to Pilate; that Pilate asked
and Jesus Him if He was the king of the Jews,
Christ receiving an affirmative answer; that,


to Pilate’s surprise, Jesus answered
nothing to the accusations of the chief priests;
that Pilate tried to release Jesus according to an
ancient custom; that the multitude, in spite of the
protest of Pilate, demanded the release of Barabbas,
and cried out that Jesus should be crucified; that
Pilate scourged Jesus and delivered Him to be cruci-
fied; and that Jesus, when He had been scourged
and mocked, was led away to be crucified. Mk tells
further how Joseph of Arimathaea begged of Pilate
the body of Jesus. Pilate was surprised that Jesus
died so quickly, and questioned the centurion about
it. Pilate’s surprise and question are peculiar to
Mk. Being satisfied on this point, Pilate granted
the body to Joseph. Mt adds the dream and mes-
sage of Pilate’s wife (27 19); it also tells how Pilate
washed his hands before the people, disclaiming
responsibility for the death of Jesus, and how the
people accepted the responsibility (27 241); also
how Pilate granted a guard for the tomb (27 62-66).
Lk alone narrates the sending of Jesus to Herod
(23 6-12), and reports Pilate’s three times repeated
asseveration that. he found no fault in Jesus (23
4.14.22). Jn gives by far the fullest narrative,
which forms a framework into which the more
fragmentary accounts of the Synoptics can be fitted
with perfect ease. Some critics, holding that Mk
alone is trustworthy, dismiss the additional inci-
dents given in Mt and Lk as apologetic amplifi-
cations; and many dismiss the narrative of Jn as
wholly unworthy of credence. Such theories are
based on preconceived opinions as to the date,
authorship and reliability of the various Gospels.
The reader who holds all the Gospels to be, in the
main, authentic and trustworthy narratives will
have no difficulty in perceiving that all four narra-
tives, when taken together, present a story con-
sistent in all its details and free from all difficulty.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pj-Hahiroth
Pilate, Pontius


See Gospets. It should be noted that John evi-
dently had special opportunities of obtaining
exacter knowledge than that possessed by the
others, as he was present at every stage of the trial;
and that his narrative makes clear what is obscure
in the accounts of the Synoptics.


The parts may be fitted together thus: Jesus is brought
to Pilate (Mt 27 2; Mk 151; Lk 231; Jn 18 28).
Pilate asks for a specific accusation (Jn 18 29-32).
Pilate enters the practorium, questions Jesus about His
alleged kingship, and receives the answer that He rules
over the kingdom of truth, and over the hearts of men who
acknowledge the truth. Pilate asks: ‘‘ What is truth?’
torericd briefly in Mt 27 11; Mk 15 2; Lk 23 3,
and with more detail Jn 18 33-38). Pilate brings Him
forth (this is the only detail that needs to be supplied
in order to make the harmony complete, and in itself
it is probable enough), and many accusations are made
against Him, to which, to_Pilate's surprise, He makes
no reply (Mt 27 12-14; Mk 15 3-5). Pilate affirms
His innocence, but the charges are repeated (Lk 23 4 f).
Pilate sends Him to Herod. who in mockery clothes
Him in shining raiment, and sends Him back (Lk 23
6-12). Pilate declares that neither Herod or himself
can find any fault in Him, and offers to scourge Him and
let Him go (Lk 23 13-16; Jn 18 380). Pilate offers
to release Jesus in accordance with an ancient custom
(Mt 27 15-18; Mk 15 6-10; Jn 18 39). Pilate’s wite
sends him a message warning him not to harm Jesus
because she has suffered many things in a dream because
of Him (Mt 27 19). The people, persuaded thereto
by the chief priests and elders, choose Barahbas, and,
in spite of the repeated protests of Pilate, demand that
Jesus shall be crucified (Mt 27 20-23; Mk 15 11-14;
Lk 23 18-23; Jn 18 40). Pilate washes his hands
before the people, and they take the guilt of the deed
upon themselves and their children (Mt 27 24f).
Pilate releases Barabbas and orders Jesus to be scourged
(Mt 27 26; Mk 15 15; Lk 23 24f). Jesus isscourged
and mocked, buffeted and spit upon (Mt 27 27-31a;
Mk 15 16-20¢; Jn 19 1-3). Pilate again declares the
innocence of Jesus, brings Him out, and says: ‘‘ Behold
the man!’’ The chief priests_and officers cry out:
‘“‘Crucify him!'' They accuse Him of making Himself
the Son of God. Pilate, becoming more afraid at this
saying, once more interviews the prisoner in the praeto-
rium. He again tries to release Him, but is accused
of treachery to the emperor. Overborne by this, Pilate
sits on the judgment seat (see GasBatHa), and says:
‘Behold, your King!"’ Again the cry goes He “* Away with
him, crucify him!” Pilate says: ‘Shall I crucify your
King ?"' The chief priests answered with a final renun-
ciation of allthat God had given them, saying: ‘‘ We have
no king but, Caesar” (Jn 19 4-15). Pilate sentences
Jesus and gives Him up to be crucified, and_He is led
away (Mt 27 318; Mk 15 20); Lk 23 26a; Jn 19 nde
Pilate writes a title for the cross, and refuses to alter it
(Jn 19 19-22). The Jews ask of Pilate that the legs
of the three who were crucified might be broken (Jn 19
31). _Joseph of Arimathaea begs the body of Jesus
from Pilate (Mt 27 57.582; Mk 1§ 42f; Lk 23 50-52;
Jn 19 38a). Pilate is surprised that Jesus has died
so soon, and questions the centurion (Mk 15 44). He
gives up to Joseph the body of Jesus (Mt 27 586; Mk
15 45; Jn 19 38). Theo chief priests and the Pharisces
obtain permission from Pilate to take precautions
against any theft of the body of Jesus (Mt 27 62-66).


Pilate is mentioned three times in Acts: in a
specch of Peter (3 13), in a thanksgiving of the church
(4 27), and in a speech of Paul (13 28). He is also
mentioned in 1 Tim (6 13) as the one before whom
Christ Jesus witnessed the good confession.

Eusebius, who lived in the 4th cent., tells us
(HE, II) on the authority of certain Gr historians

that Pilate fell into such calamities
4. Pilate that he committed suicide. Various
in Tradition apocryphal writings have come down
and Legend to us, written from the 3d to the 5th

cents., with others of a later date, in
which legendary details are given about Pilate. In
all these a favorable view is taken of his character;
hence the Coptic church came to believe that he
became a Christian, and enrolled him among the
number of its saints. His wife, to whom tradition
gives the name of Claudia Procula, or Procla, is
said to have been a Jewish proselyte at the time of
the death of Jesus, and afterward to have become
a Christian. Her name is honored along with
Pilate’s in the Coptic church, and in the calendar
of saints honored by the Gr church her name is
found against the date October 27.


Pilate, Pontius
Pining Sickness


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2398


We find not unkindly references to Pilate in the re-
cently discovered fragment of the Gospel of Peter, which
was composed in the 2d cent. In the so-called Gospel
of Nicodemus, which belongs to the 4th or 5th cent.,
we find in the first part, called the Acts of Pilate, a long
account of the trial of Jesus. It tells how the standards
in the hall of judgment bowed down before Jesus, in
spite of the efforts of the standard-bearers, and others
who attempted it, to hold them erect. It tells also how
many of those who had heen healed by Jesus bore testi-
mony to Him at the trial (see ApocrypHaL GospPELs).
There has also come down to us, in various forms (e.g. in
the Acts of Peter and Paul), a letter, supposed to be the
report of Pilate to Tiberius, narrating the proceedings
of the trial, and speaking of Jesus in the highest terms of
praise. Eusebius, when be mentions this letter, avers
that Tiberius, on perusing it, was incensed against the
Jews who had sought the death of Jesus (HE, II, 2).
Elsewhere (HE, IX, 5) he recounts that under Maximiu
forged Acts of Pilate, containing blasphemies against
Christ, were circulated with consent of the emperor.
None of these, if they ever existed, have come down to us.
In the Paradosis Pilati we read that Caesar, being angry
with Pilate for what he had done, brought him to Rome
as a prisoner, and examined him. When the Christ was


named, all the gods in the senate-chamber fell down and |


were broken, Caesar ordered war_to be made on the
Jews, and Pilate, after praying to Jesus, was beheaded.
The head was taken away by an angel, and Procla, see-
ing this, died of joy. Another narrative, of late date,
recounts that Pilate, at his trial, wore the seamless robe
of Jesus; for this reason Caesar, though filled with anger,
could not so much as say a harsh word to Pilate; but
when the robe was taken off, he condemned Pilate to
death. On hearing this, Pilate committed suicide. The
body was sunk in the Tiber, but such storms were raised
by demons on account of this that it was taken up and
sunk in the Rhone at Vienne. The same trouble recurred
there, and the hody was_finally buried in the territory of
Losania (Lausanne). Tradition connects Mt. Pilatus
with his name, although it is probable that the deriva-
tion is from pileatus, i.e. the mountain with a cloud-cap.


Philo ( Legatio ad Caium, xxxvili) speaks of Pilate
in terms of the severest condemnation. According
to him, Pilate was a man of a very


5. The inflexible disposition, and very merci-
Character less as well as obstinate. Philo calls
of Pilate him a man of most ferocious passions,


and speaks of his corruption, his acts
of insolence, his rapine, his habit of insulting people,
his cruelty, his continual murders of people untried
and uncondemned, and his never-ending and most
grievous inhumanity. This is very highly colored
and probably much exaggerated; certainly the
instances given do not bear out this description of
the man. Much of what he says of Pilate is in
direct opposition to what we learn of him in the
Gospels. There he appears to us as a man who, in
spite of many undoubted faults, trics hard to con-
duct the trial with fairness. Pilate had the ethics
of his class, and obviously tried to act up to the
standard which he had formed. There was in him,
however, no deep moral basis of character, as is
shown by the utter skepticism of his question,
“What is truth?” When he found that the doing of
strict justice threatened to endanger his position,
he reluctantly and with a great deal of shame gave
way to the demands of the Jews. He sent Jesus
to the cross, but not before he had exhausted every
expedient for saving Him, except the simple and
straightforward one of dismissing the case. He had
the haughtiness of the dominant race, and a pro-
found contempt for the people over which he rnled.
This contempt, as we have seen, continually brought
him into trouble. He felt deeply humiliated at
having to give way to those whom he utterly de-
spised, and, in the manner of a small mind, revenged
himself on them by calling Christ their king, and
by refusing to alter the mocking inscription on the
cross. It is certain that Pilate, in condemning
Jesus, acted, and knew that he acted against his
conscience. He knew what was right, but for self-
ish and cowardly reasons refused to do it. He was
faced by a great moral emergency, and he failed.
We rest on the judgment of Our Lord, that he was


guilty, but not so guilty as the leaders of the chosen |


people.


1


LireRATURE.—The Gospels; Philo, Legatio ad Catum;
Jos, Ant and BJ; the Annals of Tacitus; Eusebius,
HE; Walker, Apocryphal Gospels, Acts, and Revelations
in the ‘‘Ante-Nicene Christian Library,’’ and for the
Gospel according to Peter, vol IX of the same series. Orr,
NT Apocryphal Writings (‘Temple Bible Series"), gives the
text of the Gospel of Nicodemus and the Gospel of Peter.

There is a great mass of literature on the subject, but
there is no Eng. monograph on Pontius Pilate. In Ger-
man there is G. A. Miller, Pontius Pilatus der fiinfie
Prokurator von Judda (Stuttgart, 1888). See also the
various articles on Pilate in books of reference on the
NT, notably RE (von Dobschiitz), HDB (G. T. Purves),
DCG (A. Souter), and EB (W. J. Woodhouse). For
the name of Pilate see arts. on ‘Pontius Pilatus et les
Pontii’' by Ollivierin Rev. Bib., vol V.. For the Apocryphal
Gospels see art. on “’ Gospel of Nicodemus’' in HDB, also
art. “Apocrypha! Gospels,"’ in the supplementary volume
of HDB; Orr, NT Apocryphal Writings; Zahn, Geschichte
des NT Kanons; Harnack, Altchristliche Litteraturge-
schichte. For the trial of Jesus see Lives of Christ hy
Keim, Edersheim, Stalker, Andrews and others; Taylor
Innes, Trial of Jesus Christ, a Legal Monograph, 1899; and
for the historical hackground, Schiirer, HJ P. ‘

J. Macartney WiLson

PILDASH, pil’dash (wy, pildash, “‘steely’’):


Nephew of Abram (Gen 22 22).


PILE, pil (1172, m*dhitirah, from dar, “heap
up”): Isa 30 33, ‘The pile thereof is fire and much
wood”; Ezk 24 9.10, “I also will make the pile
great. Heap on the wood, make the fire hot.”
Isa 30 33 may be paraphrased, ‘the pyre thereof is
of much wood, burning fiercely.” See TorHETH.


PILEHA, pil’é-ha, pi/lé-ha.


PILGRIM, pil’grim, PILGRIMAGE, pil’grim-
aj: “Pilgrim” in EV for waperlényos, parepidémos
(He 11 13; 1 Pet 211). ‘Pilgrimage’ for 13°92,
méaghér (Gen 47 9 [RVm “sojournings’]; Ps 119
54; and [AV] Ex 6 4 [RV “sojournings’’]). Both
the Heb (see Grr) and Gr words contain the idea
of foreign residence, but it is the residence and not
travel that is implied. Consequently “‘pilgrim’’ is
a poor tr, and “sojourner,” “sojourning” should
have been used throughout. In the NT passages
heaven is thought of as the contrasted permanent
dwelling-place, while the OT usages seem to be
without a contrast definitely in mind.


PILHA, pil’ha (S98, pilha’, “ploughman”; AV
Pileha): One of those who signed Nehemiah’s cove-
nant (Neh 10 24).


PILL. See PEEL.


PILLAR, pil’ar (T33, macccbhadh, TWA? , ‘am-
midh; oxtdos, stiles): In a good many cases RV
substitutes “‘pillars’’ for AV “images” (maccebhath,
Ex 8413; Dt 75; 1 I< 14 23, etc). In Gen
19 26, where “pillar of salt’’ is given, the word is
necibh; in 1 8 2 8 itis macwk; while in most other
single uses RVm gives variant renderings, as in Jgs
9 6 (muccdbh), RVm “garrison”; in 1 Ix 10 12
(mis‘ddh), RVm ‘‘‘a railing,’ Heb ‘a prop’’’; in 2 IX
18 16 Comnoth), RVm “doorposts.”’ The maceé-
bhoth were (1) memorial pillars, as in the “pillars”
of Jacob at Bethel (Gen 28 18.22; cf 31 13; 35 14),
in covenant with Laban (31 45ff), at Rachel’s
grave (35 20); Absalom’s pillar (2 S 18 18). Such
pillars were legitimate (the theory of a fetishistic
character is ungrounded); it is predicted in Isa 19
19 that sueh a pillar would be set up to Jeh at the
border of Egypt. (2) Idolatrous pillars, in Canaan-
itish and other heathen worships. These were to be
ruthlessly broken down (AV “images,” see above;
Ex 23 24; 3413; Dt 75, etc; cf Lev 26 1).
See Imaczs. The other word, ‘ammidh, is used of
the pillar of cloud and fire (see below); of the pillars
of the tabernacle and temple (see s.v.); of the two
| pillars JAcHIN AND Boaz (q.v.); poetically of the


See Pra.


2399


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pilate, Pontius
Pining Sickness


“pillars” of heaven, of earth (Job 9 6; 26 11; Ps
75 3; 99 7), ete. In the few instances of the word
in the NT, the use is figurative. James, Cephas
and John ‘‘were repnted to be pillars” of the church
at Jerus (Gal 2 9); the church is “the pillar and
ground of the truth” (1 Tim 3 15); he that over-
comes is made “‘a pillar’’ in the temple of God (Rev
10 43 a strong angel had feet ‘‘as pillars of fire”


Pillar of Cloud and Fire: The visible manifestation of


the Divine presence in the journeyings of Israel at the
time of the xodus. Jch, itis narrated, went before the
people “by day in sepia of cloud, to lead them the way,
and by night in a pillar of fire, to givo them light... . .
The pillar of cloud by day, and the pillar of fire by night,
departed not_from before the people’? (Ex 13 21.22;
ef 14 19.24; Nu 14 14). When the congregation was
at rest, the cloud abode over the tabernacle (Ex 40 36;
Nu 9 17; 14 14). When Jch wished to communicate
His will to Moses, the pillar descended to the door of the
Tent of Meeting (Ex 33 9-11; Nu 12 5; Dt 31 15).
These descriptions are not to be rationalistically ex-
plained; what is depicted is a true theophany. Criti-
cism has sought to establish discrepancies hetween the
allusions to the cloud in the JE and the P parts of the
narrative, but these are not made out without straining;
e.g. it is not the case that JE alone represents Jeh as
speaking with Moses in the cloud at the door of the
tahernacle. The same representation is found in Ex
29 42.43, ascribed to P. An acute discussion of the
alleged discrepancies may be seen in H. M. Wicner,
Essays in Pentateuchal Criticism, 82 ff.


JAMES ORR
PILLAR OF SALT. See Sturm; Lot.


PILLAR, PLAIN OF THE. See Prain or THE
PILLAR.


i PILLARS OF THE EARTH. Sce Astronomy,
eos


PILLOW, pil’d. See Botster; CusHion.


PILOT, pi'lot.


PILTAI, pil’ti, pil-ta’1 (*22B, piltay, prohably
“Jeh delivers’): One of the priests, described as
“the chiefs of the fathers,” in the days of Joiakim
(Neh 12 17).


PIN (GM", yathedh, from yathadh, “to drive in
a peg’’[?]): A cylindrical piece of wood or metal
(e.g. brass, Ex 27 19) such as that used hy weavers
in beating up the woof in the loom (Jgs 16 14,
where Delilah fastened Samson’s hair with the
“pin”); or as a peg for hanging (Ezk 16 3; cf Isa
22 231; Ezr 9 8); or as a tent-pin, such as those
used in the tabernacle (Ex 27 19; 35 18; 388 20.
31; 3940; Nu 3 37; 4 32; Jgs 4 21, where
AV translates ‘‘nail,’’ RV ‘“‘tent-pin’”; cf 5 26, where
Heb has the same word, EV “‘nail’”’). The tent-pin,
like that of today, was probably sharpened at one
end (Jgs 4 21) and so shaped at the other as to per-
mit the attaching of the cords so frequently men-
tioned in the same connection (Ex 35 18; 39 40;
Nu 3 37; 4 32; cf Isa 83 20). From the acts of
driving in the tent-pin (éka‘) and_pulling it out
(nds@’) are derived the technical Heb terms for
pitching a tent and for breaking camp. See also
Crispine Prn (Isa 3 22, RV “satchels”); Stake.

Naruan Isaacs

PINE, pin. See Prine Sickness.


See Suirs AND Boats.


PINE TREE, pin tré: (1) 7QW 7%, ‘é shemen, tr4
RV “wild olive,” AV “pine” (Neh 8 15); RV “‘oil-
tree,’ m “oleaster” (Isa 41 19); ‘“‘olive-wood”
(1 K 6 23.31-33). See Om Trev. (2) TK,
lidhhar (Isa 41 19,m “plane”; 60 13); mevxn, pevké,
‘fir.’ Lagarde, from similarity of tidhhar to the
Syr deddar, usually the ‘“‘elm,”’ considers this the best
tr. Symmachus also tr? tidhhdr (Isa 41 19) by
mrehéa, pteléa, the “elm.” The elm, Ulmus eampes-


tris, is rare in Pal and the Lebanon, though it is
found today N. of Aleppo. Post G72D8, IT1, 592-
93) considers that (1) should be tr4 as “‘pine,’”’ which
he describes as a ‘fat wood tree’; it is perhaps as
probably a correct tr for (2), but great uncertainty
remains. Two species of pine are plentiful in the


eA f


Pine Forcst at Beirdt.


Lebanon and flourish in most parts of Pal when
given a chance. These are the stone pine, Pinus
pinea, and the Aleppo pine, P. halepensis; all the
highlands looking toward the sea are suited to their
growth. E. W. G. MastERMAN


PINING, pin'ing, SICKNESS, sik’nes: In the
account of the epileptic boy in Mk 9 18 it is said
that “he pineth away.”” The vb. used here (énpatvw,
xéraind) means ‘to dry up,” and is the same which
is used of the withering of plants, but seldom used
in this metaphorical sense. The Eng. word is from
the AS pinian and is often found in the Eliza-
bethan literature, occurring 13 t in Shakespeare.
In the OT it is found in Lev 26 39 (bis) and in
Ezk 24 23 and 33 10. In RV it replaces ‘‘con-
sume” in Ezk 4 17. In all these passages it is the
rendering of the Heb ma@kak, and means expressly
being wasted on account of sin. In Lev 26 16
‘pine away” is used in RV to replace ‘‘cause sorrow
of heart,” and is the tr of the Heb dabh; and in Dt
28 65 “sorrow of mind” is also replaced in RV by
‘pining of soul,”’ the word so rendered being d°’’abhon,
which in these two passages is expressive of home-
sickness. In Isa 24 16 the reduplicated exclama-
tion, ‘my leanness,” of AV is changed into “T pine
away,” the word being ra@z?. The starving people
in Lam 4 9 are said to pine away, the word so tr?
being zibh. All these Heb words have a general
meaning of to dry or to waste or wear away, or to
be exhausted by morbid discharges.

Pining sickness in Isa 38 12 AV is a mistrans-
lation, the word so rendered, dallé&h, meaning here
the thrum by which: the web is tied to the loom.
The figure in the verse is that Hezekiah’s life is
heing removed from the earth by his sickness as
the web is removed from the loom by having the
thrums cut, and being then rolled up. Both AVm
and RVm have the correct reading, “from the
thrum.” LXX has éplOou éyyifovens éxreuetv, crithou
eggizousts ektemein, and Vulg dum adhue ordirer,
suecidit me. The other reading is due to another
interpretation of the word which in a few passages,
as Jer 62 15, likeits ¥ dal, means something small,
poor, and decaying or weak, such as the lean kine
of Pharach’s dream (Gen 41 19).

ALEX. MACALISTER


Pinion
Pithom


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2400


PINION, pin’yun (138, ’ébher, WAIN, 'ebhrah):
RV has tr? these Heb words uniformly by “pinion,”
where AV uses either “wing” or “feathers,” with
which words they stand in parallelism in all passages.
The shorter Heb word is found only once, in Jeh’s
parable to Ezekiel: ‘‘A great eagle with great wings
and long pinions [AV “longwinged”’], full of feathers,
which had divers colors, came unto Lebanon, and
took the top of the cedar’ (Ezk 17 3). The fem.
form (‘ebhrah) is used of the wings of the dove (Ps
68 13), of the ostrich (Job 39 13) and of the eagle
(Dt 32 11). Once (Ps 91 4) it stands in a figura-
tive expression for the protective care of Jeh, which
is bestowed on those that trust in Him.

H. L. E. Luerine

PINNACLE, pin’a-k’] (atepiyov, plertigion
(Mt 45; Lk 49, RVm “wing’’]): ‘‘The pinnacle
of the temple” is named as the place to which the
devil took Jesus, and there tempted Him to cast
Himself down. It is not known what precise ele-
vated spot is meant, whether a part of the roof of
the temple itself, or some high poimt in the adjacent
buildings overlooking the deep ravine. It was more
probably the latter.


PINON, pi‘non (j2°B, pindn, ‘‘darkness’’): One
of the “chiefs of Edom” (Gen 36 41; 1 Ch 1 52).


PIPE, pip. See CanpLestick; Lamp; Music.


PIRA, pi'ra (ot é« Ilepds, hot ek Peirds [1 Esd
5 19]): Thought to be a repetition of CaPHira
(q.v.) earlier in the verse.


PIRAM, pi’ram (ON, pir’am, “indomitable’”’):
King of Jarmuth, one of the five Amorite kings who
leagued themselves against Joshua’s invasion (Josh
10 3 ff).


PIRATHON, pir’a-thon, PIRATHONITE, pir’a-
thon-it (PMID, pir'athon, NIB, pir'athoni; B,
Sapabdpn, Pharathém, A, Ppaaiay, Phraathém, Papa-
®uveirns, Pharathuneités): The home of Abdon the
son of Hillel the Pirathonite (Jgs 12 13 ff AV),
where also he was buried, ‘‘in the land of Ephraim
in the mount of the Amalekites.”” The latter name
may have clung to a district which at some former
time had been held by the Amalekites. From this
town also came Benaiah, one of David’s chief cap-
tains (2 8 23 30; 1 Ch 11 31; 27 14). Itis prob-
ably to be identified with Fer‘atd, about 6 milesS.W.
of Nablus. A possible rival is Fir‘en, 15 miles W.
of Nablus. G. A. Smith suggests a position at the
head of Wédy Far‘ah (HGHLD, 355). Moore thinks
it may have been in Benjamin, Abdon bcing a Ben-
jamite family (1 Ch 8 23.30; 9 36). It is just pos-
sible that the place may be identical with Pharathon,
one of the towns fortified by Bacchides (1 Mace
9 50). W. Ewina


PISGAH, piz’ga (MADE, ha-pisgah; Pacyd,
Phasgd, 18 d«dakevpévov, té lelaxeuménon, h da€-
evt4, h2 laxeuté): This name, which has always the
definite art., appears only in combination either
with ré’sh, “head,” “top,” or ’ashdoth, not tr? in
AV save in Dt 4 49, where it is rendered “springs,”
RV uniformly “slopes,” RVm “springs.”

Pisgah is identified with Nebo in Dt 84 1; ef
8 27. “The top of Pisgah, which looketh down
upon the desert’? marks a stage in the march of the
host of Israel (Nu 21 20). Hither Balak brought
Balaam to the field of Zophim (23 14). Here
Moses obtained his view of the Promised Land, and
died. See Neso. Many scholars (e.g. Buhl, GAP,
122; Gray, “Numbers,” [CC, 291) take Pisgah as the
name applying to the mountain range in which the


Moab plateau terminates to the W., the “top” or
“head” of Pisgah being the point in which the ridge
running out westward from the main mass cul-
minates. The summit commands a wide view,
and looks down upon the desert. The identifica-
tion is made surer by the name Tal‘at es-Sufa
found here, which seems to correspond with the
field of Zophim.

’ Ashdéth is the constr. pl. of ’ashédhah (sing. form
not found), from ’eshedh, “foundation,” “bottom,”
‘Jower part” (slope); cf Assyr ishdu, “foundation.”
Some would derive it from Aram. ’ashadh, “‘to
pour,’ whence “fall” or “slope’ (OHZ, s.v.).
Ashdoth-pisgah overlooked the Dead Sea from the
E. (Dt 3 17; 449; Josh 12 38; 13 20). There
can be no reasonable doubt that Ashdoth-pisgah
signifies the steep slopes of the mountain descend-
ing into the contiguous valleys.

It is worthy of note that LXX does not uniformly
render Pisgah by a proper name, but sometimes by
a derivative of lareid, “to hew” or “to dress stone”
(Nu 21 20; 23 14; Dt 327; 449). Jerome
(Onom, s.v. Asedoth) gives abscisum as the Lat equiv-
alent of Fasga. He derives Pisgah from pdsagh,
which, in new Heb, means “‘to split,” ‘to cut off.”
This suggests a mountain the steep sides of which
give it the appearance of having been “cut out.”
This description applies perfectly to Jebel Nebé as
viewed from the Dead Sea. W. Ewine


PISHON, pi’shon (jWW"B, pishin; AV Pison,
pi’son): A river of Even (q.v.), said to compass
the whole land of Havilah where there is gold,
bdellium and onyx stone (Gen 2 11), most probably
identified with the Karun River which comes down
from the mountains of Media and formerly emptied
into the Pers Gulf.


PISIDIA, pi-sid’i-a (rhy Toiav, tén Pisidian
[Acts 14 24]; in Acts 138 14, NABC give ’Av-
midxeaav thy TTioSlav, Antidcheian tén Pisidian,
“the Pisidian Antioch,” the other MSS, ?Avridxetav
tis Tlo8las, Antiécheian tés Pisidias, ‘“‘Antioch
of Pisidia.”? The former, but not the latter, read-
ing correctly describes the condition of affairs at
the time when St. Paul traveled in the country; see
below):

Pisidia, as a strict geographical term, was the
name given to the huge block of mountain country

stretching northward from the Taurus
1. Situation range where the lattcr overlooked the
and History Pamphylian coast land, to the valleys

which connected Apamea with An-
tioch, and Antioch with Ieonium. It was bound-
ed by Lycia on the W., by the Phrygian country on
the N., and by Isauria on the E.; but there is no
natural boundary between Pisidia and Isauria, and
the frontier was never strictly drawn. The name
is used in its geographical sense in the Anabasis of
Xenophon, who informs us that the Pisidians were
independent of the king of Persia at the end of the
5th cent. BC. Alexander the Great had difficulty
in reducing the Pisidian cities, and throughout
ancient history we find the Pisidian mountains de-
scribed as the home of a turbulent and warlike
people, given to robbery and pillage. The task of
subjugating them was intrusted by the Romans to
the Galatian king Amyntas, and, at his death in 25
BC, Pisidia passed with the rest of his possessions
into the Rom province Galatia. Augustus now
took seriously in hand the pacification of Pisidia and
the Isaurian mountains on the E. Five military
colonies were founded in Pisidia and the eastern
mountains—Cremna, Comama, Olbasa, Parlais
and Lystra—and all were connected by military
roads with the main garrison city Antioch, which
lay in Galatian Phrygia, near the northern border of


2401 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA bance
Pisidia. An inscription discovered in 1912 shows PISPA, pis’pi (NBOB, pispa’, “dispersion,” AV


that Quirinins, who is mentioned in Lk 2 2 as gov-
ernor of Syria in the year of Christ’s birth, was an
honorary magistrate of the colony of Antioch; his
connection with Antioch dates from his campaign
against the Homonades—who had resisted and
killed Amyntas—about 8 BC (sce Ramsay in Expos,
November, 1912, 385 ff, 406). The military system
set up in Pisidia was based on that of Antioch, and
from this fact, and from its proximity to Pisidia,
Antioch derived its title “the Pisidian,” which served
to distinguish it from the other cities called Antioch.
It is by a mistake arising from confusion with a later
political arrangement that Antioch is designated
“of Pisidia” in the majority of the MSS.

Pisidia remained part of the province Galatia
till 74 AD, when the greater (southern) part of it
was assigned to the new double province Lycia-
Pamphylia, and the cities in this portion of Pisidia
now ranked as Pamphylian. The northern part
of Pisidia continued to belong to Galatia, until, in
the time of Diocletian, the southern part of the
province Galatia (including the cities of Antioch
and Iconium), with parts of Lycaonia and Asia,
were formed into a province called Pisidia, with
Antioch as capital. Antioch was now for the first
time correctly described as a city “of Pisidia,”
although there is reason to believe that the term
“Pisidia’”’ had already been extended northward
in popular usage to include part at least of the
Phrygian region of Galatia. This perhaps explains
the reading “Antioch of Pisidia’’ in the Codex
Bezae, whose readings usually reflect the conditions
of the 2d cent. of our era in Asia Minor. This use
of the term was of course political and adminis-
trative; Antioch continued to be a city of Phrygia
in the ethnical sense and a recently discovered in-
scription proves that the Phrygian language was
spoken in the neighborhood of Antioch as late as
the 3d cent. of onr era (see also Calder in Journal
of Rom Studies, 1912, 84).

St. Paul crossed Pisidia on the journey from Perga
to Antioch referred to in Acts 13 14, and again on

the retnrn journey, Acts 14 24. Of
2. St. Paul those journeys no details are recorded
in Pisidia in Acts, but it hag been suggested by

Conybeare and Howson that the “‘perils
of rivers” and ‘perils of robbers” mentioned by St.
Paul in 2 Cor 11 26 refer to his journeys across
Pisidia, and Ramsay has pointed out in confirmation
of this view that a considerable number of Pisidian
inscriptions refer to the armed policemen and soldiers
who kept the peace in this region, while others refer
to a conflict with robbers, or to an escape from
drowning in a river (The Church in the Rom Empire,
23 f; ef Journal of Rom Studies, 1912, 82f), Adada,
a city on St. Paul’s route from Perga to Antioch, is
called by the Turks Kara Baulo; “Baulo” is the
Turkish pronunciation of “Paulos,” and the name
is doubtless reminiscent of an early tradition con-
necting the city withSt. Paul. Pisidiahad remained
unaffected by Hellenic civilization, and the Rom
occupation at the time of St. Paul was purely
military. It is therefore unlikely that St. Paul
preached in Pisidia. Except on the extreme N.W.,
none of the Christian inscriptions of Pisidia—in
glaring contrast with those of Phrygia—date before
the legal recognition of Christianity under Con-
stantine.

Lirerature.—Murray, Handbook of Asia Minor,
150 ff; Ramsay, The Church in the Rom Empire, 18 ft;
Lanckoronski, Stddte Pamphyliens und Pisidiens; Ster-
ett, Epigraphical Journey and Wolfe Expedition. A
few inscriptions containing Pisidian names with native
inflections have been published by Ramsay in Revue des
universités du midi, 1895, 353 ff.

W. M. Caper


PISON, pi’son. See PisHon.


Pispah): A son of Jether, an Asherite (1 Ch 7 38).


PIT: The word translates different Heb words
of which the most important are: (1) VB, bar,
“pit” or “cistern,” made by digging (Gen 37 20);
hence ‘‘dungeon” (Jer 38 6, m “pit”’); (2) "NF,
b°ér, “pit” or “well” made by digging (Gen 21 25);
(3) Sku, sh ol, generally rendered “hell” in AV (see
Hex); (4) MMW, shahath, a pit in the ground to
catch wild animals. (1), (2) and (4) above are
used metaphorically of the pit of the “grave” or of
“sheol”’ (Ps 28 1; 30 3; Job 33 24). AV some-
times incorrectly renders (4) by “‘corruption.”’ (5)
MMB, pahath, “pit,” literally (2 S 17 9), and fig-
uratively (Jer 48 43). In the NT “pit” renders
Bbbuves, béthunos (Mt 15 14), which means any
kind of hole in the ground. In the corresponding
passage Lk (14 5 AV) has ¢péap, phréar, “well,”
the same as (2) above. For “bottomless pit’’ (Rev
9 1, AV, etc) see Ayss, T. Lewis


PITCH, pich: The tr of the noun 123, kdpher,
and the vb. 122, kaphar, in Gen 6 14 and of the
noun MPT, zepheth, in Ex 2 3; Isa 34 9. In Gen
6 14 the words are the ordinary forms for ‘‘cover-
ing,” “cover,’’ so that the tr “pitch”’ is largely guess-
work, aided by the LXX, which reads &c¢ahros,
dsphaltos, “bitumen,” here, and by the fact that
pitch is a usual ‘“‘eovering” for vessels. The mean-
ing of zepheth, however, is fixed by the obvious Dead
Sea imagery of Isa 34 9-15—the streams and land
of Edom are to become burning bitumen, like the
sites of Sodom and Gomorrah. In Ex 2 3 zepheth
is combined with hémdr, which also means bitumen
(Gen 14 10; see Strmg), and the distinction be-
tween the words (different consistencies of the same
substance?) is not clear. Burton Scorr Easton


PITCHER, pich’ér (3, kadh; xepdprov, kerd-
mion): The word is found chiefly in the OT in the
story of Rebekah in Gen 24 13 ff; but Gideon’s
men also had their lamps in pitchers (Jgs 7 16.19).
Eecl speaks of the pitcher broken at the fountain
(12 6). Thesingle usein the NT isin Mk 14 13 ||
Lk 22 10. The pitcher was an earthenware vessel
(ef Lam 4 2, nébhel), with one or two handles, used
for carrying water, and commonly borne upon the
head or shoulder (cf Gen 24).


PITHOM, pi’thom (OME, pithdm; Ile0d, Peithd

[Ex 1 11]): Champollion (Gesenius, Lez., s.v.) con-

sidered this name to mean “a narrow

1. Meaning place” in Coptic, but it is generally

of Name explained to be the Egyp Pa-tumm, or

“city of the setting sun.” It was one

of the cities built by the Hebrews (see RAAMSEs),

and according to Wessel was the Thoum of the
Antonine Itinerary.

Brugsch (Hist Egypt, 1879, II, 343) says that it was
jdentical with ‘‘Heracleopolis Parva, the capital of the
Sethroitic nome in the age of the Grecks and Romans
.... half-way on the great road from Pelusium to Tanis
(Zoan), and this indication given on the anthority of the
jtineraries furnishes the scle means of fixing its position.”
This is, however, disputed. Tum was wershipped at
Thebes, at Zoan, and properly at Bubastis, while Heliop-
olis (Brugsch, Geogr., I, 254) was also called Pa-tum.

There were apparently several places of the name;
and Herodotus (ii.158) says that the Canal of Darius
began a little above Bubastis, ‘‘near the Arahian city
Patoumos,”’ and reached the Red Sea.

(1) Dr. Naville’s theory —In 1885 Dr. E. Naville
discovered a Rom milestone of Maximian and
Severus, proving that the site of Heroopolis was at
Tell el Mahdtah (‘the walled mound”) in Waddy
Tumeildt. The modern name he gives as Tell el


Pithon
Plagues of Egypt


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2402


Maskhitah, which was not that heard by the present
writer in 1882. This identification had long been

supposed probable. Excavations at
2. Situation the site laid bare strong walls and

texts showing the worship of Tum.
None was found to be older than the time of
Rameses [I—who, however, is well known to have
defaced older inscriptions, and to have substituted
his own name for that of earlier builders. A statne
of later date, bearing the title ‘Recorder of Pithom,”
was also found at this same site. Dr. Naville con-
cluded that this city must be the OT Pithom, and
the region round it Suecoth—the Egyp T-k-u (but
see SuccoTtH). Brugsch, on the other hand, says
that the old name of Heroopolis was Kes (see
GosHEN), which recalls the identification of the LXX
(Gen 46 28); and elsewhere (following Lepsius)
he regards the same site as being ‘‘the Pa-Khetam


of Rameses IT’ (see Erna), which Lepsius believed |


to be the OT Rameses (see RAamMses) mentioned
with Pithom (Brugsch, Geogr., I, 302, 262). St.
Silvia in 385 AD was shown the site of Pithom near
Heroopolis, but farther E., and she distinguishes
the two; but in her time, though Heroopolis was a
village, the site of Pithom was probably conjectural.
In the time of Minepthah, son of Rameses II
(Brugsch, Hist, II, 128), we have a report that cer-
tain nomads from Aduma (or Edom) passed through
“the Khetam [or fort] of Minepthah-Hotephima,
which is situated in 7'-k-u, to the lakes [or canals}
of the city Pi-tum of Minepthah-Hotephima, which
are situated in the land of ,T-k-u, in order to feed
themselves and to feed their herds.”

(2) Patoumos of Herodotus —These places seem
to have been on the eastern border of Egypt, but
may have been close to the Bitter Lakes or farther
N. (see Succotu), whereas Tell el Mahiitah is about
12 miles W. of Jsm’ailieh, andof Lake Timsah. The
definition of the Pithom thus noticed as being that
of Minepthah suggests that there was more than
one place so called, and the Patoumos of Herodotus
seems to have been about 30 miles farther W. (near
Zagazig and Bubastis) than the site of Heroopolis,
which the LXX indentifies with Goshen and not
with Pithom. The latter is not noticed as on the
route of the Exodus, and is not identified in the OT
with Succoth. In the present state of our knowl-
edge.of Egyp topography, the popular impression
that the Exodus must have happened in the time
of Minepthah, because Pithom was at Heroopolis
and was not built till the time of Rameses II, must
he regarded as very hazardous. See Exopus. The
Patoumos of Herodotus may well have been the
site, and may still be discovered near the head of
Wady Tumetlat or near Bubastis.

A . R. Conver

PITHON, pi’thon (JIMS, pithdn): A grandson
of Meribbaal, or Mephibosheth (1 Ch 8 35; 9 41).


PITIFUL, pit’i-fool: As found in Scripture, means
“full of pity’; it is expressed by 2°90, rahdmani,
from rahkdmim (pl. of raham), “bowels,” ‘‘compas-
sion” (Lam 4 10 AV, its only occurrence in the OT),
“The hands‘of the pitiful women have sodden their
own children.” In Jas 6 11, we have the beautiful
saying, ‘The Lord is very pitiful (RV ‘‘full of pity’”’]
and of tender mercy,” where ‘‘very pitiful’ is the tr
of poltisplagchnos, lit. “of many bowels,” a word
which docs not occur elsewhere; it might be trd
“large-hearted” or ‘‘tender-hearted.” In Eeclus
2 11, we have ‘‘The Lord is... . very pitiful”
(oiktirmén); eisplagchnos, “well-hearted,” “compas-
sionate,” “‘full of pity,” occurs in 1 Pet 3 8, ‘Love
as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous,” RV “loving
as brethren, tenderhearted, hamble-minded.” The
word is found in Pr Man 7; XII P, Zeb 8 2.

W. L. Waker


PITY, pit’i ON, kamal, OW, has; deéw, eleéd):
“Pity,” probably contracted from “piety,” is a
tender feeling for others in misery or distress. It is
allied to compassion (q.v.), but differs in respect of
the object that causes the distress (or feeling). The
feeling of pity is excited chiefly by the weakness,
miserable or degraded condition of the object; com-
passion by his uncontrollable and_ inevitable mis-
fortunes: ‘(We pity a man of weak understanding
who exposes his weakness; we compassionate the
man who is reduced to a stateof beggary and want”
(Crabb, English Synonymes). Pity often becomes
allied to contempt; “‘a pity” issomething to be re-
egretted. See Prmrur. In the OT “pity” is closely
akin to “mercy.” It is most frequently the tr of
hémal, ‘‘to pity,”’ “to spare,”’ e.g. in Nathan’s parable
of the poor man’s one lamb, it is said that the rich
man was worthy to die because he had “‘no pity”
(28 12 6).

In Jer 13 14 we have, *‘I will not pity nor spare, nor
have mercy,” RV ‘‘compassion"; cf 21 7; Lam 2 2;
Ezk 5 11; 7 4, in all of which passages ‘' pity” stands
in a negative connection; we have it positively attrib-
uted to God in Ezk 86 21, ‘‘I had pity for mine holy
name,"’ RV ‘regard’; Joel 2 18; hus, probably mean-
ing, primarily, ‘to cover,” ‘‘protect;’’ hence to pity,
to spare, is tra ‘‘pity’’ (Dt 7 16; 13 8; Ezk 16 5, ete,
all negative; Jon 4 10, positive: ‘‘Thou hast had pity
on the gourd [RV ‘regard for'’] and should not I spare
[RV ‘‘have regard for,” has] Nineveh," etc); fanan, *‘to
incline toward,” ‘‘be gracious,” ‘ pity,”’ is thrice ren-
dered ‘‘pity” (Job 19 21, ‘*Have pity npon me, have
pity upon me”; Prov 19 17; 28 8, ‘‘he that hath pity
upon the poor”); raham,‘'to feel warm,"’ ‘‘to love,”
twice (Ps 103 13, “like asa father pitieth his children'’;
Isa 13 18, ‘‘no pity’’); once in pl. rahdmim (Am 1 11);
other words once so tré are hemilah, ‘‘pity’’ (Isa 63 9);
hesedh, *loving-kindness”’ (Job 6 14, RV ‘‘kindness”’);
mahmal,’' object of pity’’ (Ezk 24 21); nidh, ‘to move,”
‘“*bemoan'' (Ps 69 20). In the NT ‘pity’ oceurs once
only as the tr of eleed, ‘‘to be kind,” “tender”? (Mt 18
33, RV "‘mercy"’). In 2 Mace 3 21 we have (AV and
RV) “pitied’’ in the obsolete sense of exciting pity,
“Then it would have pitied [eleein] a man to see the
multitude,” etc.

_RV has ‘'pity’’ for “mercy” (Prov 14 21); ‘have
pity on’’ for ‘‘spare”’ (Ps 72 13); for ‘favour’? (Ps
109 12; 102 13.14), ‘‘Have pity upon her dust.’’ See


Mercy; Compassion.
W. L. WaLkER

PLACE, plas: Normally for D1P, makom, OT,
and rémos, iépes, NT, but in AV “place” represents
a great number of Heb and Gr words, often used
with no difference in force (e.g. 2 Ch 85 10.15).
RV has made few changes, but occasionally has
attempted to specialize the meaning (Gen 40 13;
Job 37 8; Acts 8 32; Jas 3 11, etc).


PLACE, BROAD; HIGH. See Crry, II, 3, 2;
Hicu Puace; Oran Piacer.


PLAGUE, plig (932, negha‘, 13'2, makkah, ODI,
maggéphah; pdoré, mdstiz, whnyh, plégé): This
word which occurs more than 120 t is applied, like
pestilence, to such sudden outbursts of disease as
are regarded in the light of Divine visitations. It is
used in the description of leprosy about 60 t in Lev
13 and 14, as well as in Dt 24 8. In the poetical,
prophetic and eschatological books it occurs about
20 t in the general sense of a punitive disaster. The
Gospel references (Mk 3 10; 5 29.34; Lk 7 21)
use the word as a synonym for disease.

The specific disease now named ‘‘plague” has
been from the earliest historic times a frequent
visitant to Pal and Egypt. Indeed in the S8.E.
between Gaza and Bubastis it has occurred so fre-
quently that it may almost be regarded as endemic.
The suddenness of its attack, the shortness of its
incubation period and the rapidity of its course
give it the characters which of old have been asso-
ciated with manifestations of Divine anger. In the
early days of an epidemie it is no infrequent occur-
rence that 60 per cent of those attacked die within


2403


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pithon
Plagues of Egypt


three days. I have seen a case in which death took
place ten hours after the first symptoms. In the
filthy and insanitary houses of eastern towns, the
disease spreads rapidly. In a recent epidemic in
one village of 534 inhabitants 311 died within 21
days, and I once crossed the track of a party of
pilgrims to Mecca of whom two-thirds died of
plague on the road. Even with modern sanitary
activity, it is very difficult to root it out, as our recent
experiences in Hong Kong and India have shown.

Of the Bib. outbreaks that were not improbably
bubonic plague, the first recorded is the slaughter
of the firstborn in Egypt—the 10th plague. We
have too little information to identify it (Ex 11 1).
The Philis, however, used the same name, negha*‘,
for the Egyp plagues (1 S 4 8) as is used in Ex.
The next outbreak was at Kibroth-hataavah (Nu
11 33), This was synchronous with the phenome-
nal flight of quails, and if these were, as is probable,
driven by the wind from the plague-stricken Ser-
bonian region, they were equally probably the car-
riers of the infection. Experience in both India and
China has shown that animals of very diverse kinds
can carry germs of the disease. A third visitation
fell on the spies who brought back an evil report
(Nu 14 37). A fourth destroyed those who mur-
mured at the destruction of Korah and his fellow-
rebels (Nu 16 47). These may have been recrudes-
eences of the infection brought by the quails. The
fifth outbreak was that which followed the gross
religious and moral defection at Baal-peor (Nu 25
8.9.18; 26 1; 31 16; Josh 22 17; Ps 106 29.30).
Here the disease was probably conveyed by the
Moabites.

A later epidemic, which was probably of bubonic
plague, was that which avenged the capture of the ark
(1 S § 6). We read of the tumors which were probably
the glandular enlargements characteristic of this disease;
also that at the time there was a plague of rats (6 5)
—' mice,"’ in our version, but the word is also used as the
name of the rat. The cattle scem to have carried the
plague to Beth-shemesh, as has been observed in more
than one place in China (6 19). Concerning the three
days’ pestilence that_followed David's census (2 8 24
15; 1 Ch 21 12), see Jos, Ant, VII, xiii, 3. The destruc-
tion of the army of Sennacherib may have been a sudden
outbreak of plague (2 K 19 35; Isa 37 36). It is per-
haps worthy of note that in Herodotus’ account of the de-
struction of this army (ii.141) he refers to the incursion of
swarms of mice.

One of the latest prophetic mentions of plague is
Hos 13 14, where the plague (debher, LXX diké)
of death and the destruction (fafabh, LAX kéntron)
of the grave are mentioned. From this passage
Paul quotes his apostrophe at the end of 1 Cor 15
55, but the apostle correlates the sting (kéntron)
with death, and changes the diké into nikos.

: ALEX. MacaLisTER

PLAGUES, pligz, OF EGYPT (MDP, niph-
le’ ath, “wonders,” from NDB , pala’, ‘to be Separate,”
i.e. in a class by themselves; also called 93),
negheph, “plague,” from "32, ndghaph, “to smite”
{Ex 9 14], and 933, negha‘, “a stroke,” from 233,
nagha‘, “to touch” [Ex 11 1; ef Josh 24 10]):
INTRODUCTION

NatTurRAL PHENOMENA
1. Water Turned to Blood
Frogs
Lice
Flies


PONE Ene LoDw
jevi
°o
=
n


. Darkness
10. Death ef the Firstborn
II. Mirracu.ous Use or Tum PHENOMENA
1. Inteusification
. Prediction
. Discrimination ;
. Orderliness and Increasing Severity
. Arraugement to Accomplish Divine Moral Pur-
pose


Cum obo


Ill. Divine Moray Purpose
1. Diserediting of the Gods of Egypt
2, Pharaoh Made te Kuow Jehovah Is Lord
3. Revelation of Ged_as Saviour
4, Exhibition of the Divine Use of Evil
LITERATURE

The Heb words are so used as to give the name

“plagues” to all the “wonders” God did against
Pharaoh. Thus it appears that the
Introduction language in the account in Ex puts
_ forward the wondrous character of
these dealings of Jeh with Pharaoh. The account
of the plagues is found in Ex 7 8—12 31; Ps 78
42-51; 105 27-36. These poetical accounts of the
plagues have a devotional purpose and do not give
a full historical narrative. Ps 78 omits plagues
4, 6, 9; Ps 105 omits plagues 5 and 6. Both pss
change the order of the plagues. Account of the
preparation which led up to the plagues is found in
the narrative of the burning bush (see Burwina
Busy), the meeting of Aaron with Moses, the
gathering together of the elders of Israel for in-
struction and the preliminary wonders before
Pharaoh (Hx 3,4). This preparation contemplated
two things important to be kept in view in consider-
ing the plagues, namely, that the consummation of
plagues was contemplated from the beginning (Ex
4 22.23), and that the skepticism of Israel concern-
ing Moses’ authority and power was likewise an-
ticipated (Ex 4 1). It was thus manifestly not an
age of miracles when the Israelites were expecting
such “wonders” and ready to receive anything
marvelous as a Divine interposition. This skepti-
cism of Israel is a valuable asset for the credibility
of the account of the “‘wonders.” The immediate
occasion of the plagues was the refusal of Pharaoh
to let the people have liberty for sacrifice, together
with the consequent hardening of Pharaoh’s heart.
No indication of any localizing of the plagues is
given except in Ps 78 12.43, where the “‘field of
Zoan”’ is mentioned _as the scene of the contest be-
tween Jeh and the Egyptians. But this is poetry,
and the “field of Zoan’”’ means simply the territory
of the great capital Zoan. ‘This expression might
be localized in the Delta or it might extend to the
whole of Egypt. Discussion of the plagues has
brought out various classifications of them, some of
which are philosophical, as that of Philo, others
fanciful, as that of Origen. Arrangements of the
order of the plagues for the purpose of moralizing
are entirely useless for historical consideration of
the plagues. The only order of any real value is
the order of Nature, ie. the order in which the
plagues occurred, which will be found to be the
order of the natural phenomena which were the
embodiment of the plagues.

Much elaborate effort has been made to derive from
the description of the plagues evidence for different
documents in the narrative. It is pointed out that
Moses (E) declared to Pharach that he would smite the
waters (Ex 7 17), and then the account, as it preceeds,
tells us that Aaron smote the waters (7 19.20). But this
is quite in accord with the preceding statement (4 16)
that Aaron was to be the spokesman. Mloses was to
deal with God, Aaron with Pharach. Again it is noticcd
that some of the plagues are ascribed to the immediate
agency of Jeh, some are represented as coming through
the mediation of Moses, and still others through the
mediation of Moses and Aaren. Certainly this may be
an exact statement of facts, and, if the facts were just so,
the record of the facts affords no evidence of different
documents.


An examination of the account of the plagues as
it stands will bring them before us in a most graphic
and eounected story.

I. The Natural Phenomena.—Al] the ‘‘wonders”’
represented anywhere in Scripture as done by the
power of God are intimately associated with natural
phenomena, and necessarily so. Human beings
have no other way of percciving external events
than through those senses which only deal with


Plagues of Egypt THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2404


natural phenomena. Accordingly, all theophanies
and miraculous doiugs are embodied in natural
events.

The presence of Jeh with the sacrifice by Abraham was
manifested by the passing of a ‘‘smoking furnace and
a burning lamp” between the pieces of the offerings
(Gen 15 17 AV). Theo majesty and power of God at Sinai
were manifested in the ‘‘cloud’’ and the “brightness,”
the ‘‘ voice’’ and the ‘‘sound of a trumpet”’ (He 12 19).
The Holy Spirit descended ‘‘as a dove" (Mt $3 16).
The Deity of Jesus was attested on the mountain by a
“voice” (17 5). Jesus Himself was ‘‘God ... . mani-
fest in the flesh’”’ (2 Tim 316 AV). He was ‘‘found in
fashion as aman’ (Phil 2 8). And all the miracles of
Jesus were coupled with sensible phenomena: He spoke
to the sea and it was calm; He touched the leper and
he was clean: He called to Lazarus and he came forth.


Yet in all these natural events, the miraculous
working of God was as clearly seen as the natural
phenomena. It is thus to be expected that the
“wonders” of God in the land of Pharaoh should
also be associated with natural events as well as
manifest miraculous elements. The “blood” in
the river, the “‘frogs’’ hopping about on the land,
the “‘lice,”’ the “flies,” the ‘‘murrain,” the ‘‘boils,”’
the “hail,” the “locusts,” the “darkness,’”’ and the
“pestilence” are all named as natural phenomena.
Long familiarity with the land of Egypt has made
it perfectly plain to many intelligent people, also,
that nearly, if not quite, all the plagues of Egypt
are still in that land as natural phenomena, and
occur, when they do occur, very exactly in the order
in which we find them recorded in the narrative in
Ex. But natural events in the plagues as in other
‘svonders” of God embodied miraculous doings.

The first of the plagues (OJ, dam, from D8,
’adham, ‘“‘to be red’? [Ex 7 19-25]) was brought

about by the smiting of the water with


1. Water the rod in the hand of Aaron, and it
Turned to consisted in the defilement of the water
Blood so that it became as “‘blood.’’ The


waters were polluted and the fish died.
Even the water in vessels which had been taken
from the river became corrupt. The people were
forced to get water only from wells in which the
river water was filtered through the sand. There
are two Egyp seasons when, at times, the water
resembles blood. At the full Nile the water is
sometimes of a reddish color, but at that season the
water is quite potable and the fish do not die. But
a similar phenomenon is witnessed sometimes at the
time of the lowest Nile just before the rise begins.
Then also the water sometimes becomes defiled
and very red, so polluted that the fish die (Bib.
Sacra, 1905, 409). This latter time is evidently
the time of the first plague. It would be some time
in the month of May. The dreadful severity of the
plague constituted the “wonder” in this first plague.
The startling character of the plague is apparent
when it is remembered that Egypt is the product
of the Nile, the very soil being all brought down
by it, and its irrigation being constantly dependent
upon it. Because of this it became one of the ear-
liest and greatest of the gods (Breasted, Development
of Religion and Thought in Egypt, 3-47; ‘Hymn to
the Nile,” Hecords of the Past, New Series, II1, 46—-
54). The magicians imitated this plague with their
enchantments. Their success may have been by
means of sleight of hand or other devices of magic,
ag may be seen in the East today, with claim of
supernatural aid, and as used in western lands for
entertainment, as mere cleverness. Or it may be,
as has been suggested, that they counted upon the
continuance of the plague for at least a time, and
so took advantage of the materials the ‘‘wonder”
had provided.
Frogs (OP TWIDE, ¢*phard*‘im, probably ‘“marsh-
leapers” [Ex 8 1-15]) are very abundant just after
the high Nile when the waters begin to recede.


Spawn in the mud is hatched by the sun, and the
marshes are filled with myriads of these crea-


tures. The frog was the hieroglyph
2. The for myriads. The frogs usually remain
Plague of in the marshes, but in this case they
Frogs came forth to the horror and disgust


of the people. ‘Frogs in the houses,

frogs in the beds, frogs baked with the food in
the ovens, frogs in the kneading troughs worked
up with the flour; frogs with their monotonous
croak, frogs with their cold slimy skins, everywhere
—from morning to night, from night to morning—
frogs.” The frog was also associated with Divinity,
was the symbol of Heqt, a form of Hathor, and seems
also at times to have been worshipped as divinity.
This plague created such horror that thus early
Pharaoh came to an agreement (8 8-10). A time
was set for the disappearance of the frogs that he
might know that ‘there is none like unto Jeh our
God,” but when the frogs were dead, Pharaoh hard-
ened his heart (8 15). In this plague ‘“‘the magi-
cians did in like manner with their enchantments”
(8 7). Frogs were plentiful, and it would notseem to
be difficult to claim to have produced some of them.
It is impossible to determine what particular
troublesome insect pest of Egypt is meant by the 3d


plague, whether body-lice or mos-
3. The quitoes or sandflies or ticks or fleas
Plague of (033, kinnim, “gnats” [Ex 8 16}).
Lice Those who have experience of these


pests in Egypt are quite ready to ac-
cept any of them as adequate for the plague. _ Lice
seem rather to be ruled out, unless different kinds
of lice were sent, as there is no one kind that tor-
ments both man and beast. All the other insect
pests appear in incredible numbers out of the “dust’”’
when the pools have dried up after the receding of
the waters. The assertion that the account of this
plague is not complete, because it is not recorded
that Pharaoh asked its removal or that Moses se-
cured it, is amazing. Perhaps Pharaoh did not, in
fact, ask its removal. There seems also at this
time some difficulty in Moses having access to
Pharaoh after this plague (8 20). Perhaps the
plague was not removed at all. The Egyptians
are disposed to think it was not! Certainly that
season of the year spent in Egypt, not in a dahabiyeh
on the Nile, but in a native village, will furnish very
satisfying evidence that stinging and biting insects
are a very real plague in Egypt yet. The magicians
failed with their enchantments and acknowledged
that Divine power was at work, and seem to have
acknowledged that Jeh was supreme (8 19), but
Pharaoh would not heed them.
As the seasons pass on, after the recession of the
waters, the flies (212, ‘drobh, “swarms,” probably
of flies [Ex 8 20-32]) become more
4. The and more numerous until they are
Plague of almost a plaguc every year. The in-
Flies creased severity of this plague, and
the providential interference to sepa-
rate between Israel and the Egyptians, drove
Pharach and his people to such desperation that
Pharaoh gave a half-promise of liberty for Israel
to sacrifice ‘“‘in the land.” This called out the
statement that they would sacrifice the ‘“‘abomina-
tion of the Egyptians.” This may have referred
to the sacrifice of sheep, which were always held
in more or less detestation by Egyptians, or it
may have had reference to the sacrifice of heifers,
the cow being the animal sacrcd to the goddess
Hathor. The new element of separation between
the Israelites and the Egyptians introduced into
this plague was another step toward establishing
the claims of Jch to be the God of all the earth
and to have taken Israel under His especial care.


2405


In addition to the separation established between
Israel and the Egyptians, a definite time is now set
for the coming of the 5th plague. It


5. The is to be noticed also that diseases of
Plague of cattle ("2°J, debher, “destruction”
Murrain {Ex 9 1~7]) and of men follow quickly


after the plague of insects. This is in
exact accord with the order of Nature as now thor-
oughly understood through the discovered relation
of mosquitoes and flies to the spread of diseases.
Rinderpest is still prevalent at times in Egypt, so
that beef becomes very scarce in market and is
sometimes almost impossible to obtain. It is a
fact, also, that the prevalence of cattle plague, the
presence of boils among men (see 6, below) and the
appearance of bubonic plague are found to be closely
associated together and in this order. The mention
of camels as affected by this plague is interesting.
It is doubtful if any clear indication of the presence
of the camel in Egypt so early as this has yet been
found among the monuments of Egypt. There is
in the Louvre museum one small antiquity which
seems to me to be intended for the camel. But
Professor Maspero does not agree that it is so. It
would seem likely that the Hyksos, who were Bed-
ouin princes, princes of the desert, would have
introduced the beasts of the desert into Egypt. If
they did so, that may have been sufficient reason that
the Egyptians would not picture it, as the Hyksos
and all that was theirs were hated in Egypt.


In the plague of boils (JW, shehin, and MVAPAN,
*dbha‘bu‘dth, “boils” [Ex 9 8-17]) ashes were used,
probably in the same way and to the


6. The same end as the clay was used in open-
Plague of ing the eyes of the blind man (Jn 9 6),
Boils i.e. to attract attention and to fasten


the mind of the observer upon what
the Lord was doing. This plague in the order of
its coming, immediately after the murrain, and in
the description given of it and in the significant
warning of the “pestilence” yet to come (Ex 9 15),
appears most likely to have been pestis minor, the
milder form of bubonic plague. Virulent rinder-
pest among cattle in the East is regarded as the
precursor of plague among men and is believed to
be of the same nature. It may well be, as has been
thought by some, that the great aversion of the
ancient Egyptians to the contamination of the soil
by decaying animals was from the danger thereby
of starting an epidemic of plague among men (Dr.
Merrins, Bib. Sacra, 1908, 422-23).
Hail (72, barddh, “hail” [Ex 9 18-35]) is rare
in Egypt, but isnot unknown. The writer has him-
self seen a very little, and has known


7. The of one instance when a considerable
Plague of quantity of hail as large as small
Hail marbles fell. Lightning, also, is not


as frequent in Egypt as in many semi-
tropical countries, yet great electric storms some-
times occur. This plague is quite accurately dated
in the seasons of the year (9 31.32). As the first
plague was just before the rising of the Nile, so this
one is evidently about 9 months later, when the
new crops after the inundation were beginning to
mature, January-February. This plague also marks
another great step forward in the revelation of Jeh
to Israel and to the Egyptians. First only His
power was shown, then His wisdom in the timing of
the plagues, and now His mercy appears in the
warning to all godly-disposed Egyptians to save
themselves, their herds and their servants by keep-
ing all indoors (9 19-21). Pharaoh also now dis-
tinetly acknowledged Jeh (9 27).
The plague of locusts (28, ’arbeh, “locust”
[Ex 10 1-20]) was threatened, and so frightened
were the servants of Pharaoh that they persuaded


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Plagues of Egypt


him to try to make some agreement with Moses,
but the attempt of Pharaoh still to limit in some
way the going of Israel thwarted the


8. The plan (Ex 10 7-10). Then devouring
Plague of | swarms of locusts came up over the
Locusts land from the eastern desert between


the Nile and the Red Sea. They de-

voured every green thing left by the hail. The
desperate situation created by the locusts soon
brought Pharaoh again to acknowledgment of Jeh
(10 16). This was the greatest profession of re-
pentance yet manifested by Pharaoh, but he soon
showed that it was deceitful, and again he would
not let the people go. When the wind had swept
the locusts away, he hardened his heart once more.
The progress of the seasons has been quite marked
from the first plague, just before the rising of the
waters, on through the year until now


9. The the khamsin period (Tr, héshekh,
Plague of “darkness” from any cause [Ex 10
Darkness 21-29]) has come. When this dread-


ful scotirge comes with its hot sand-
laden breath, more impenetrable than a London fog,
it isin very truth a ‘darkness which may be felt,’
The dreadful horror of this monster from the desert
can hardly be exaggerated. Once again Pharaoh
said “Go,” but this time he wished to retain the
flocks and herds, a hostage for the return of the
people (10 24). Upon Moses’ refusal to accept this
condition, he threatened his life. Why had he not
done so ere this? Why, indeed, did he let this man
Moses come and go with such freedom, defying
him and his people in the very palace? Probably
Moses’ former career in Egypt explains this. If,
as is most probable, he had grown up at court with
this Merenptah, and had been known as “the son
of Pharaoh’s daughter,” heir to the throne and
successor to Rameses II, instead of Merenptah,
then this refugee had undoubtedly many friends still
in Egypt who would make his death a danger to the
reigning Pharaoh.

No intimation is given of the exact character of
the death inflicted on the firstborn (WID3, bekhér,

“firstborn,” ‘chief’? or “best”; cf
10. Death Job 18 13; Isa 14 30 [Ex 11—12 36])
of the by the angel of the Lord, or its ap-
Firstborn pearance. But it is already foretold

as the ‘‘pestilence” (9 15). The pestis
major or virulent bubonic plague corresponds most
nearly in its natural phenomena to this plague. It
culminates in a sudden and overwhelming virulence,
takes the strongest and best, and then subsides with
startling suddenness.

Thus it appears that probably all the plagues
were based upon natural phenomena which still
exist in Egypt in the same order, and, when they do
occur, find place somewhere during the course of
one year.

HI. Miraculous Use of the Phenomena.—The
miraculous elements in the plagues are no less dis-
tinctly manifest than the natural phenomena
themselves.

There was an intensification of the effect of the
various plagues so much beyond all precedent as
to impress everyone as being a special
Divine manifestation, and it was so.
There was national horror of the blood-
like water, disgust at the frogs, in-
tolerable torture by the stinging insects and flies,
utter ruin of the farmers in the loss of the cattle,
the beating down of the crops by the hail, and the
devouring of every green thing by the locusts, the
sufferings and dread of the inhabitants by reason
of the boils, the frightful electric storm, the suffo-
cating darkness and, finally, the crushing disaster
of the death of the firstborn. All these calamities


1. Intensi-
fication


Plagues of Egypt
Plaster


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2406


may be found in Egypt to the present day, but never
any of them, not to say all of them, in such over-
whelming severity. That all of them should come
in one year and all with such devastation was
plainly a Divine arrangement. Merely natural
events do not arrange themselves so systematically.
In this systematic severity were seen miracles of
power.

The prediction of the plagues and the fulfilment
of the prediction at the exact time to a day, some-
times to an hour (as the cessation of
the thunder and lightning): There
was first a general prediction (Ex 3
19.20; 7 3; 9 14.15) and an_ indi-
cation as the plagues went on that the climax would
be pestilence (9 15). Then several of the plagues
were specifically announced and a time was set for
them; e.g. the flies (8 23), the murrain (9 5), the
hail (9 18), the locusts (10 4), the death of the
firstborn (11 4). In some cases a time for the re-
moval of the plague was also specified: e.g. the
frogs (8 10), the thunder and lightning (9 29). In


2. Predic-
tion


every instance these predictions were exactly ful- |


filled. In some instances careful foresight might
seem to supply in part this ability to predict. Per-
haps it was by means of such foresight that the
magicians “did so with their enchantments’” for
the first two plagues. The plague being in exist-
ence, foresight might safely predict that it would
continue for a little time at least, so that, if the
magicians sought for bloody water or called for
frogs, they would seem to be successful. But the
evidence which Jeh produced went beyond them,
and, at the third plague, they were unable to do
anything. These things postulate, on the part of
Moses and Aaron, knowledge far beyond human
ken. Not only magicians could not do so with
their enchantments, but modern science and dis-
coveries are no more able so to predict events.
Even meteorological phenomena are only predicted
within the limits of reasonable foresight. Such
wonders as the plagues of Egypt can in no wise be
explained as merely natural. The prediction was
a miracle of knowledge.

The discrimination shown in the visitation by the

plagues presents another miraculous element more

significant and important than either
3. Discrimi- the miracles of power or the miracles
nation of knowledge. God put a difference

between the Egyptians and the Israel-
ites, beginning with the plague of flies and continu-
ing, apparently, without exception, until the end.
Such miracles of moral purpose admit of no possible
explanation but the exercise of a holy will. Merely
natural events make no such regular, systematic
discriminations.

The orderliness and gradually increasing severity
of the plagues with such arrangement as brought

“judgment upon the gods of Egypt,”
4. Order- vindicating Jeh as Ruler over all, and
liness educating the people to know Jeh as
Lord of all the earth, present an aspect
of events distinctly non-natural. Such method
reveals also a Divine mind at work.

Last of all and most important of all, the plagues
were so arranged as to accomplish in particular a
great Divine moral purpose in the
revelation of God to the Israelites, to
the Egyptians and to all the world.
This is the distinctive mark of every
real miracle. And this leads us directly to the con-
sideration of the most important aspect of the
plagues.

II. The Divine Moral Purpose.—This discredit-
ing of the gods of Egypt is marked at every step of
the progress of the plagues, and the accumulated
effect of the repeated discrediting of the gods must


5. Moral
Purpose


have had, and, indeed, had, a great influence upon
the Egyptians. The plagues did ‘execute judgment
against the gods of Egypt’ (12 12), and
1. Discred- the people and princes brought great
iting of the pressure to bear upon Pharaoh to let
Gods of the people go (10 7). The magicians
Egypt who claimed to represent the gods of
Egypt were defcated, Pharaoh himself,
who was accounted divine, was humbled, the great
god, the Nile, was polluted, frogs defiled the temples
and, at last, the sun, the greatest god of Egypt, was
blotted out in darkness.
Pharaoh was made to know that Jeh is Lord,
and acknowledged it (9 27; 10 16). To this end
the issne was clearly drawn. Pharaoh


2. Pharaoh challenged the right of Jeh to com-
Made to mand him (6 2), and God required him
Know Je- then to “stand”’ to the trial until the
hovah Is evidence could be fully presented, in
Lord accordance with the fundamental prin-


ciple that he who makes a charge is
bound to stand to it until either he acknowledges
its utter falsity or affords opportunity for full pres-
entation of evidence. So we see God made Pharaoh
to “stand” (9 16) (while the Bible, which speaks in
the concrete language of life, calls it the hardening
of Pharaoh’s heart) until the case was tried out (cf
Lamb, Miracle of Science, 126-49).

A more blessed and gracious moral purpose of the

plagues was the revelation of God as ihe Saviour

of the world. This began in the reve-
3. Revela- lation at the burning bush, where God,
tion of God in fire, appeared in the bush, yet the
as Saviour bush was not consumed, but saved.

This revelation, thus given to the
people, was further evidenced by the separation be-
tween Israel] and the Egyptians; was made known
even to the Egyptians by the warning before the
plague of hail, that those Egyptians who had been
impressed with the power of God might also learn
that He is a God that will save those who give heed
unto Him; and, at last, reached its startling climax
when the angel of the Lord passed over the blood-
marked door the night of the death of the firstborn
and the institution of the Passover.

Last of all, the plagues had a great moral purpose
in that they embodied the Divine use of evil in the

experience of men in this world. As
4. Divine the experience of Job illustrates the
Use of Evil use of evil in the life of the righteous,

so the plagues of Egypt illustrate the
same great problem of evil in the lot of the wicked.
In the one case, as in the other, the wonders of God
are so arranged as “to justify the ways of God to
men.”

The minutely accurate knowledge of life in
Egypt displayed by this narrative in the Book of
Ex is inconceivable in an age of so little and diffi-
cult intercommunication between nations, except
by actual residence of the author in Egypt. This
has an important bearing upon the time of the com-
position of this narrative, and so upon the question
of its author.


Litrrature.—The literature of this subject is almost
endless. It will suffice to refer the reader _to all the
general comms., and the special comms. on Ex, for dis-
cussion of doctrinal and critical questions. Two _ad-
mirable recent discussions of the plagues, in English,
are Lamb, Miracle of Science, and Merrins, ‘‘The Plagues
of Egypt,” in Bibliotheca Sacra, 1908, July and October.

G. KYLe


PLAIN, plan ([1] 2D, kikkar, Ugiveles’ “talent,”
or “round loaf”; [2] “VW, mishér, from “WH,
yashar, ‘to be level’’; cf Arab. A
“that which is easy”; [3] MPa, bik‘ah; cf Arab.


“ue


Kets, bak‘at, “a plot of ground,” or “a wet


or a
, maistr,


2407


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Plagues of Egypt


Plaster


——


meadow’; [4] M22, ‘drabhah; [5] moPw, sh¢phé-
lah; [6] rémos meBwés, i6pos pedinds [Lk 6 17];
[7] FON, valan; cf TON, 'alah, and PS, ‘allan,
“oak” [Gen 35 4.8, ete]; also MON, 'éah, “Elah”
{1 S 17 2]; [8] DAN, ’abhal): See NaruraL FEA-
TURES,

(1) Kikkar, when meaning “plain” usually refers
to the alluvial plain about Jericho near the north
end of the Dead Sea: ‘Plain [RVm “circle’’] of the
Jordan” (Gen 13 10.11; 1 K 7 46; 2 Ch 4 17);
“Plain of the valley of Jericho” (Dt 34 3); “cities
of the Plain” (Gen 18 12; 19 29); “all the Plain”
(Gen 19 17.25); “by the way of the Plain” (2 8
18 23); but “the plain round about Jerus’ (Neh
12 28). See Ciccar; Circie.

(2) Mishor, EV “plain,’ RVm usually “table-
land,” clearly refers in most places to the highlands
of Gilead and Moab, E. of the Jordan and the Dead
Sea; e.g. Josh 13 9, ‘the plain [RVm ‘‘table-land”’]
of Medeba.”

(38) Bik‘ah is more often tr4 “valley” (q.v.).

(4) Ardbhah is in RV often tr? “the Arabah,”’
denoting the whole Jordan-Dead-Sea-Arabah de-
pression= Arab. Ghaur (Ghér). In Dt 11 30, AV
has “‘champaign” (q.v.). The “plains of Moab”
(Nu 22 1; 26 3.63; 3112; 33 48.49.50; 36 1;
36 13; Dt 341.8; Josh 13 32) and “plains of


Jericho” (Josh 4 13; 5 10; 2 K 25 5; Jer 39 5;,


52 8) are the low plain or ghaur N. of the Dead
Sea. ‘Arabhéh is here equivalent to kikkar (see
above). Note the distinction between mishor used
of the highlands, and kikkar and ‘érabhah used of the
ghaur. See ARABAH.

(5) Sh*phélah is by RV throughout tr? “lowland”
(q.v.), and includes the western slopes of the Judaean
hills and the maritime plain.

(6) Topos pedinos occurs only in Lk 6 17.

(7) ’Elén is tri ‘plain’ in AV: “plain of Moreh”
(Gen 12 6; Dt 11 30); “plain [or plains] of
Mamre” (Gen 13 18; 14 13; 18 1); “plain of
Zaanaim” (Jgs 4 11); ‘plain of the pillar” (Jgs
9 6); “plain of Meonenim” (Jgs 9 37); “plain of
Tabor’ (1 8 10 8). RV has throughout ‘oak,’
RVm “terebinth”’; cf ‘oak’? (Gen 35 4.8, etc)
and “vale of Blah” (1 8 17 2.19; 21 9).

(8) ’Abhél kerémim (Jgs 11 33) is in AV “the
plain of the vineyards,’ RV “Abel-cheramim,”
RVm ‘‘the meadow of vineyards.’’ Elsewhere in
EV ’abhél is “Abel” or “Abel-.”’ See ABBL-CHER-
amMiM; Mpapow. ALrrepD E1y Day


PLAIN, plan, PLAINLY, plan’li: In Gen 25 27,
AV “plain” represents DE, tam. If a contrast
between the vocations of Jacob and Esau is meant,
RV (‘‘quiet,” m “harmless’”) may be right. But
elsewhere (Job 1 1; Ps 37 37, etc) the word means
“perfect,” and so probably here; the failings of the
great patriarch did not detract from the general
estimate of him (Mt 8 11). In Ear 4 18 “trans-
lated” (RVm) is better than “plainly read.”


PLAIN, CITIES OF THE. See Cities of THE
Pian.


PLAIN OF MOAB: In Dt 1 1, 2 8, “plain” is
trd in RV “Arabah,’’? and explained, ‘‘the deep
valley running N. and 8. of the Dead Sea.” It was
here that Moses delivered his last addresses. Usu-
ally the word is pl. (M27, ‘arebhath), the “plains”
or steppes of Moab (Nu 22 1, etc; Dt 34 138).
An interesting description is given in an article on
“The Steppes of Moab” by Professor G. B. Gray
in Expos, January, 1905. See Moas.


PLAIN OF THE PILLAR (32'9 fs, lin muc-
cGbh; B reads wpés ri Badave rq ebper] ris ora-
ews Tis év Lixlwous, prés 16 baldnd té heureté tés
sliseds tés en Sikimois; A omits r4 ebperq, and the
second tis}: With RVm we must read “‘terebinth
of the pillar,’’ the place where the men of Shechem
and Beth-millo made Abimelech king (Jgs 9 6).
This was one of the sacred trees of which there seem
to have been several near Shechem. See Mron-
ENIM, Oak oF. “The pillar’? may possibly have
been the great stone which Joshua set up “under
the oak that was by the sanctuary of Jeh” (Josh
24 26). W. Ewina


PLAIN OF THE VINEYARDS. See ABEL-
CHERAMIM.

PLAISTER, plas‘tér. See PLASTER.

PLAITING, plat’ing, plat’ing (from OFr. pleit,
from Lat plicatum, “fold’’): An interweaving,
braiding, knot; an elaborate gathering of the hair
into knots; ¢urho«}, emploké, “outward adorning
of plaiting the hair’ (1 Pet 3 3). Compare
“platted” (crown of thorns) (Mt 27 29]|Mk 15
17; Jn 19 2). See BRaipep, Braipina.

PLANE, plan (Isa 44 13). See Toous.

PLANE TREE, plan’tré (VO, ‘armdn; whd-
ravos, pldtanos [Gen 30 37], éddrn, eldté [‘‘pine’”’ or
“fir’] [Ezk 31 8]; AV
chestnut): ‘Armén is sup-
posed to be derived from
vy DIY, ‘dram, meaning
“to be bare’ or “naked”;
this is considered a suit-
able term for the plane,
which sheds its bark annu-
ally. The chestnut of AV
is not an indigenous tree,
but the plane, Planus
ortenialis, is one of the
finest trees in Pal, flourish-
ing esp. by water courses
(cf Eeclus 24 14).


PLANETS, plan’ets (M57, mazzalath).
Astro.oey, II, 3.


Plane (Planus orientalis).


See


PLANK, plank: Thick beams or pieces of wood,
for which several Heb words are used. RV changes
“planks” (of fir) into “boards” in 1 IK 6 15, and
in a few instances substitutes “planks’? where AVY
has “boards” (Ex 27 8; 38 7, the altar; Ezk 27 5).
So in the NT in Acts 27 44, for cavis, sanis. See
Surps anD Boars, II, 2, (3).


PLANT, PLANTS. See Botany.


PLASTER, plas’tér (10, sidh): In Egypt, now
as anciently, the buildings are plastered inside and
out. The poor quality of the stone commonly used
makes this necessary if a smooth attractive sur-
face is desired. Among the poorer classes, clay
mixed with straw is used. In Pal and Syria, where
there is a rainy season, the coating on the outside
walls, if of clay, must be frequently renewed. In
Egypt burnt gypsum, and in Pal and Syria burnt
limestone (lime) are the commonest materials for
making mortar. For the first coat of plastering
the lime is mixed with “fat’’ red sand or with the
ash from the bathhouse fires, and the finishing
coat is composed of white sand and slaked lime
with or without chopped flax straw. The plaster
on some of the ancient Egyp ruins seems to indicate


Plaster
Plow


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2408


that milk or some similar substance was added to
the mortar to give a better surface.

The ancients preferred plastered surfaces for
decorating, and even the finest granite was covered
with stucco on which to paint or carve the decora-
tions (Dt 27 2; Dn) 6 5). Columns were often
first stuecoed and then painted.

The Arab. word for mortar is fin, which really
means ‘‘clay.”” The Heb “7, sidh, lit. ‘to boil
up,” refers to the boiling of the water with which the
lime is slaked, because of the heat generated during
the slaking process. In Dn] 5 5 oceurs "3, gir,
ie. “burned in a kiln,” which might mean either
lime or gypsum. In Lev 14 42 occurs 10, tah,
“to smear.” James A. Patcu


PLASTER, plas’tér (2, ma@rah): Only used
in Isa 38 21 of the application of the cake of figs
to the boil from which Hezekiah suffered. In
Papyrus Ebers, figs are used as the ingredient in a
plaster (xxxv, Ixxix, ]xxxili). Dioscorides also rec-
ommends figs with other substances as a poultice
in some skin diseases.


PLASTERING, plas’tér-ing. See Crarrs, II, 15.


PLATE, plat: A term seemingly not used in the
Bible for a dish as it is so commonly used at present,
but always for a tablet or sheet of metal. (1) PX,
cig (Ex 28 36; 39 30; Lev 8 9), a plate of gold on
the front of the mitre of the high priest. The name
seems to have been given because of the radiance
of the object. (2) MB, pah (Ex 39 3; Nu 16 38),
of plates or sheets of meta] produced by hammering.
(3) 17>, lath, used for tablets or tables of stone (Ex
24 12, etc), but in 1 K 7 36 for the metal plates
on the bases of the lavers in the temple. The
word J19, seren, is rendered “plate” in 1 K 7 30
AV, manifestly incorrectly, RV ‘‘axle.”

Water R. BETTERIDGE

PLATTER, plat’ér: (1) (WP, k‘arah, ‘‘a deep
dish” (Nu 7 13 £.84.85). In AV and ERV
“charger,’”” ARV “platter” (cf Ex 25 29; 37 16);
LAX 7pvsrov, triblion, and m the NT rendere
“dish”? (Mt 26 23; Mk 14 20). In Ezr 1 9, ARV
SUTIN, *dghartal, rendered “platter,” AV and ERV
“chargers”; probably a deep dish or basin used in
sacrificial slaughter. (2) rapowls, paropsts, origi-
nally a side dish, for relishes, entrées, but of dishes
for food, in general, esp. meats, fish, etc, used with
noTyptor, potérion, ‘cup’ or ‘drinking vessel’? (Mt
23 251); also rivaé, pinaz, originally a large wooden
dish or plate (Lk 11 39); rendered ‘charger’ in
Mt 14 8.11 AV, and Mk 6 25.28 AV and ERV.

Enwarp Bacspy PoLuarn

PLAY, pli. Sec Gamss.

PLEAD, pléd: In modern non-legal Eng. is a


synonym of ‘‘pray” or “beseech,” but in legal


phraseology “plea,” ‘plead,’ and “pleading” have |


a great variety of technica] meanings, with “present
a case before the court” as the idea common to all.
All the uses of “plead” in EV are connected with
this legal sense, so that outside of the set phrase
“plead a cause’ (15 24 15, etc) there is hardly
a use of the word in AV, ERV, or ARV that is clear
modern Eng. The most obscure instances are due to
AV’s employment of ‘‘plead”’ to translate the Niphal
of DEW, shaphat. Shaphat means “judge,” go its
Niphal means “‘bring one’s self into a case to be
judged,” “enter into controversy with,’’? and so
“ylead’’ in the legal sense. Hence “None pleadeth
in truth” (Isa 69 4) means “‘None of their lawsuits
are honest.” Accordingly, when God is said to
“plead with” man (Isa 66 16 AV, ERV, ete), the


meaning is that God states His side of the case and
not at all that He supplicates man to repent. And
this statement by God isa judicial act that of course
admits of no reply. Hence RV has changed “plead
with” into ‘enter into judgment with” in Jer 2 35,
and ARV has carried this change into all the other
passages (Jer 25 31; Ezk 17 20; 20 35.36; 38 22),
with “execute judgment” in Isa 66 16; Joel 3 2.
The same vb.-form occurs also in Isa 43 26: “Let
us plead together,’’ where “Let us present our
arguments on both sides’’ would be a fair para-
phrase. Otherwise ‘“‘plead’”’ usually represents
377, ribh, for which RV gives “strive’’ in place
of “plead” in Ps 35 1, and “contend” in Job
13 19; 23 6 (ARV also in Jgs 6 31.32; Isa 3 13;
Jer 2.9; 12 1; Hos 2 2, retaining ‘‘plead’’ only in
Isa 1 17 and in the phrase “plead a cause’). 2%,
yakhah, is rendered “plead” in Job 19 5 (“plead
against me my reproach,”’ where the meaning is
“convict me of’), m Mic 6 2AV and ERV (ARV
“contend”’), and Job 16 21AV (RV “maintain
the right’’). ‘‘Plead” is used also for "I, din, in
Jer 30 13 and Prov 319 AV (RV “minister jus-
tice to’’), and Jer 5 28 RV (AV ‘judge’; cf 22 16,
AV and RV “judge’’). RV would have done vastly
better if the use of ‘‘plead’”’ had been avoided alto-
gether.

Pleadings (i.e. “arguments”’) occurs in Job 13 6
(for r2bh), and “‘plea” (din, in a specific legal sense)
in Dt 17 8. AV uses “‘implead” in Acts 19 38 for
éyxahéw, eghaléd, RV “accuse,” lit. ‘call into court”;
ef also “pleaded the cause’ in 2 Macc 4 44 (lit.
“argued the case”) and ver 47, RV “pleaded’’ (lit.
“spoken,” AV ‘‘told their cause’’).

Burton Scorr Easton

PLEASURE, plezh’ir (72M, héphec, J1E4,
rdcon; esSoxla, eudokia, ndovq, hédoné): “Pleasure”
is the tr of various Heb words, chiefly of héphee,
“inclination,” hence “pleasure,” ‘delight’? (Job 21
21, ‘‘What pleasure hath he in his house?” ARV
“what careth he for”; 22 3, “Is it any pleasure to
the Almighty?”; Ps 111 2; Eccl 6 4; 121; in
Isa 44 28; 46 10; 48 14; 58 10, it has the sense
of will or purpose, ‘‘He shall perform all my pleas-
ure,” etc); of rdcdn, “delight,” “acceptance,” “good
will” (Ezr 10 11; Nch 9 37; Est 18; Ps 61 18;
103 21, ete); nephesh, “soul,” ‘desire,’ is tr?
“pleasure” (Dt 23 24; Ps 105 22; Jer 34 16).

In the NT “pleasure” is the tr of eudokia, “good
thought or will,” “good pleasure’ (Lk 2 14 RVm;
Eph 1 5.9; Phil 213; 2 Thess 1 11, RV “every
desire of goodness,’? m “‘Gr ‘good pleasure of good-
ness.’ Cf Rom 10 1’’).

‘To take or have pleasure” is eudokéé (2. Cor 12 10;
2 Thess 2 12; He 10 6.8.38); eudoked is once tré
“good pleasure’ (Lk 12 32, “It is your father’s good
pleasure to give you the kingdom"’); the neuter participle
of dokés, *‘to think,’ etc—meaning ‘it seems good to
me''— 6 dokotn, is trd ‘‘pleasure™ (He 12 10, ‘‘after
their pleasure,”” RV ‘‘as seemed good to them"); hé-
doné, ‘‘sweetness,"’ ‘‘pleasure,’’ occurs in Lk 8 14; Tit

>; 2 Pet 2 13 (referring to_the lower pleasures of
life); théléma, ‘*wish,"’ ‘‘ will’ (Rev 4 11, RV ‘‘ because
of thy will’); chéris, ‘‘favor’’ (Acts 24 27; 25 9, RV
‘‘favor’’); spataldo, “to live voluptuously’’ (1 Tim §
6, RV ‘‘she that giveth herself to pleasure’); suneudoké6,
“to think well with,"’ ''to take pleasure with others’
(Rom 1 32, RV ‘'conseut with"); truphds, “to live
luxuriously’ (Jas § 5, RV ‘lived delicately’’).

The vb. ‘‘to pleasure"’ occurs in 2 Macc 2 27 as the
tr_of eucharistta, RV ‘gratitude’; 12 11, éphelésein,


RV ‘‘to help.”
W. L. WaLKER

PLEDGE, plej (vbs. 52, habhal (10 t], 222,
‘arabh [2 K 18 23=Isa 36 8]; nouns 220, hdbhal
[Ezk 18 12.16; 33 15], M230, habholah [Ezk 18
7), MBW, ‘drubbah [1 8 17 18], PIW, ‘erabhon
[Gen 38 17.18.20]; also BAY, ‘abhat [Dt 24 10-13]
and [RV only] O°DA3Y, ‘abhtzt [Hab 2 6]): All these


2409


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Plaster
Plow


words have about the same meaning. (1) The
“pledge” is, as in modern Eng., security given for
future payment (Gen 38 17-24) or conduct (Hab
2 6, where the conquered nations have given guar-
anties of their subserviency to the Chaldaeans;
AV’s “thick clay” here rests on a misreading of the
Heb). In 2 K 18 23 (=l1sa 36 8) the “pledge”
is a wager (so RVm). Rabshakeh mockingly dares
Hezekiah to stake a “pledge” that he can produce
2,000 men for the defence of Jerus, although the
mighty Assyr host has that number of horses alone.
The general point of the obscure passage Prov 20
16 (= 27 18) is that he who guarantees strangers
needs a guaranty himself. 1 8 17 18 is uncertain
and the text may be corrupt. If not, the ‘pledge”
is some (prearranged?) token of the welfare of
David’s brethren. (2) Most of the occurrences of
“pledge,” however, deal with the debts of the very
poor, who had no property that they could spare
even temporarily. Consequently, the exaction of
a pledge from such persons worked genuine hard-
ship, and to take a pledge at all was a cruel act
(Job 24 3), although of course the dishonesty of
withholding a pledge (Ezk 18 7; 33 15) was worse.
Lowest in the scale was the creditor who took the
garment the borrower was wearing (Am 2 8; Job
22 6; 24 9m), and special legislation controlled
this practice. A garment (the outer “cloak’’—see
Dress—not worn while doing manual labor) so
taken must be restored at night (Ex 22 26; Dt
24 12.13), for it was the usual covering of the sleep-
er. (Apparently, though, the creditor regained
custody of it in the daytime until the debt was paid.)
A widow’s clothing, however, was entirely ex-
empt (Dt 24 17), as was the handmill used for
bread-making (24 6). The lender had no right of
entry into the borrower’s house to obtain the pledge
(24 10.11), but it is not said that he could not dic-
tate what he would accept; indeed, the contrary is
inconceivable. (3) ARV gives “pledge” for AV
and ERV “faith’’ in 1 Tim 5 12. See also Ear-
NEST. Burton Scotr Easron


PLEIADES, pli’a-déz, plé’ya-déz, plé’a-déz. See
AstroLoay, 10; Astronomy, IT, 10.

PLEROMA, plé-rd’ma. See Funness.

PLOW, plou (WD, hdrash; apotpisw, arotrido):
No implement of the Bible is more frequently
illustrated today than the plow. This is partly
because there is every reason to believe that the
plows still used throughout Egypt, Pal, and Syria
are counterparts of the ancient ones. The first
plows were probably an adaptation of the an-
cient Egyp hoe, where the handle was lengthened
in order that animals might be hitched to 1t. To
make it easier to break up the ground, it was pointed,
and handles were added by which it could be
guided. The ancient plow probably varied in
type in different sections of the country, as it does
today. In one form a young tree of oak or other
strong wood of a diameter of 3 or 4 in. is cut off
just below a good-sized branch and again 15 or
30 in. above. The upper end of the severed trunk
is pointed and forms the share. Between this
and the side branch is fitted a brace. The branch
is cut off 10 or 12 ft. from the trunk and forms
the pole. A lighter stick, about 3 ft. long, projects
upward from the share and forms the handle.
The plow used in Syria is of slightly different
construction. The handle and share are one con-
tinuous piece, so cut that there is a slight bend at
the middle. The share is pointed and is used
bare in the plains, or in more stony regions is shod
with iron. The pole is of 2 pieces joined end to
end. The thicker end of the pole is notched, so


that it may be attached firmly to the share. The
whole plow is so light that it can be easily carried
on a man’s shoulder. These plows literally scratch
the soil, as the Heb word implies. They do not
turn over the ground as the modern implement does.
The plowman guides the plow with one hand, and


Syrian Plow, Yoke and Pick.


with the other sometimes goads the oxen, and at
other times with the chisel end of his goad breaks
away the lumps of earth or other material which
impedes the progress of his plow. See Yowe.

In addition to the words which are found above,
the following terms occur: 729, ‘abhadh (lit. ‘to
serve’), “worked” or “plowed”? (Dt 21 4); mp,
palah (lit. “to break open,’’ Ps 141 7).

One special law is mentioned in connection with
plowing, namely that an ox and an ass should not
be yoked together (Dt 22 10), a prohibition which
is utterly disregarded today. Principally oxen
were used for plowing (Job 1 14). Often several
yokes of oxen followed each other plowing parallel
furrows across the field, a sight still common on
the plains of Syria (1 K 19 19). Plowing was done
by bond servants (Lk 17 7; cf ‘abhadh, Dt 21 4).
Plowing cannot be done before the rains (Jer 14
4); on the other hand the soil is too sticky to plow
in the winter time (Prov 20 4). The law requiring
one day of rest in every seven included plowing
time (Ex 34 21).

Figurative: ‘“The plowers plowed upon my back”
typified deep affliction (Ps 129 3; cf 141 7). “Plow
iniquity” is urged in the sense of ‘‘plant iniquity.”
Domg evil was sure to bring evil consequences
(Job 4 8; cf Mic 3 12). As surely as planting
comes after plowing, so surely will Jeh carry out
His decree of destruction (Isa 28 23-25). ‘Judah
shall plow,” i.e. become enslaved (Hos 10 11); cf
“Foreigners shall be your plowmen’’ (Isa 61 5).
“Will one plow there with oxen?” (Am 6 12),
‘neither plowing nor harvest’? (Gen 45 6) are
figures of desolation. Zion plowed as a field, ie.
utterly destroyed (Jer 26 18). The plowman shall
overtake the reaper, i.e. the soil shall be so fertile
as to require no rest—typical of great abundance
(Am 9 13). No opportunity to plow because of
lack of rain is a desolate picture of drought (Jer
14 4). As the plowman expects to share in the
fruits of the harvest, so might an apostle expect his
temporal needs to be provided for (1 Cor 9 10).
“Tf ye had not plowed with my heifer,” i.e. used my
wife, was Samson’s reply to those who had secured
the answer to his riddle from her (Jgs 14 18).
“Beat their swords into plowshares” (or hoes) (Isa
24; Mic 4 3) typified peace; “beat your _plow-
shares into swords’—war (Joel 3 10). “Having
put his hand to the plow, and looking back,” i.e.
longing for evil things when one has set his face
toward doing what is right, unfits a man for the
kingdom of God (Lk 9 62; cf Gen 19 26; Phil
3 13). James A. PatcH


Plucking, Hair
Poetry, Hebrew


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


PLUCKING, pluk’ing, OFF THE HAIR. See
Harr, 7; PUNISHMENTS.


PLUMB-LINE, plum’lin, PLUMMET, plum’et,
plum‘it. See Toots.


POCHERETH-HAZZEBAIM, pok’é-reth, pd’ké-
reth, pé-ké’reth, -ha-zé-ba’im (DIAM MADE, pa-
khereth haggbhayim (Ezr 2 57], or DMANO "D. p.
ha-¢‘bhayim [Neh 7 59], “binder [fem.] of the
gazelles’”): Name of the head of a post-exilic
family. The first word is a fem. participle Kal;
ef kdheleth (“preacher’’), the Heb title of the
Book of Eccl. BDB suggests that the fem. is
that of office. AV has ‘“Pochereth of Zebaim”’ in
Ezr, but Ryle (Cambridge Bible, 235) notes that
“of” is not in the 1611 ed.


POET, pd’et (Grounrys, potétés, “a maker’):
Occurs in this sense only in Acts 17 28, where St.
Paul quotes from the general expression of Gr
mythology. The quotation if intended to be exact
is probably from Aratus, as the words of St. Paul
in his speech at Athens precisely agree with the
opening words of the Phaenomena by Aratus. A
like but not identical expression is found in the
Hymn to Zeus by Cleanthes. Aratus in his poem
endeavors to posit Jupiter as the father and con-
troller of all things, and worthy to be worshipped.
In both his poem and that of Cleanthes, but esp.
in the latter, there is a true and lofty note of
spiritual devotion. St. Paul takes this praise and
devotion offered by the Gr poets to their un-
known or fictitious gods and bestows it upon the
one true God whom he declared unto the people
of Athens. C. E. Scuenxk


POETRY, pd’ct-ri, HEBREW:


I. Is Toere Poetry in tHe OT?
Poetry Defined:
1. In Matter Concrete and Imaginative
2. In Form Emotional and Rhythmical
II. Necusct or Hesrew Poetry: Causes
II. Cuaracteristics or Heprew Poetry, ExtTernau
AND INTERNAL
1. External or Formal Characteristics
(1) Vocabulary
(2) Grammar
(3) Rhythm
(4) Parallelism
(5) Other Literary Devices
(6) Units of Hehrew Poetry
(7) Classification of Stichs or Verses
2. Internal or Material Characteristics
(1) Themes of Hebrew Poetry
(2) Species of Hebrew Poetry
IV. Poegrica, Writincs of tar OT
1. The Poetical Books in the Narrow Sense
2. Customary Division of the Poetical Books
3. Poetry in Non-poetical Books
LireRATURE


By Heb poetry in the present article is meant
that of the OT. There is practically no poetry in
the NT, but in the OT Apoc Sir is largely poetical
and Wisd only less so. Post-Bib. Heb poetry could
not be discussed here.

I. Is There Poetry in the OT?—It is impossible
to answer this quesgion without first of all stating
what poetry really is. The present writer submits
the following as a correct definition: ‘Poetry is
verbal composition, imaginative and concrete in
matter, and emotional and rhythmic in form.”
This definition recognizes two aspects of poetry,
the formal and the material. The substance of
poetry must be conercte—it is philosophy that deals
with the abstract; and it has to be the product
more or less of the creative imagination. It is of
the essence of poetry that, like music, it should be
expressed in rhythmical but not necessarily in
metrical form. Morcover, the language has to be
such as will stir up the aesthetic emotions. Adopt-


2410


ing this account of poetry as criticism, it may un-
hesitatingly be affirmed that the Heb Scriptures
contain a goodly amount of genuine poetry; cf the
Pss, Job, Cant, etc. It is strange but true that
poetical is older than prose written composition.
An examination of the literature of the ancient
Indians, Babylonians, Hebrews, Greeks and Arabs
makes this quite certain.

Hl. Neglect of Hebrew Poetry: Causes.—Not-
withstanding the undoubted fact that poetry is
largely represented in the Bible, it is noteworthy
that this species of Bible literature was almost wholly
ignored until the 18th cent. Wemay perhaps ascribe
this fact mainly to two causes: (1) Since the Bible
was regarded as preéminently, if not exclusively, a
revelation of the Divine mind, attention was fixed
upon what it contained, to the neglect of the literary
form in which it was expressed. Indeed it was
regarded as inconsistent with its lofty, Divine
function to look upon it as literature at all, since in
this last the appeal is made, at least to a large extent,
to the aesthetic and therefore carnal man. The
aim contemplated by Bible writers was practical—
the communication of religious knowledge—not
literary, and still less artistic. It was therefore
regarded as inconsistent with such a high purpose
that these writers should trouble themselves about
literary embellishment or beautiful language, so long
as the sense was clear and unambiguous. It was
in this spirit and animated by this conception that
toward the middle of the 19th cent. Isaac Taylor of
Ongar (The Spirit of Heb Poetry, 1861, 56 ff) and
Keil of Dorpat (Intro to the OT, 1881, I, 487) denied
on a priori grounds the presence of epie and dra-
matic poctry in the Bible. How, they exclaimed,
could God countenance the writing of fiction which
is untruth—and the epic and the drama have both?
Matthew Arnold rendered invaluable service to the
cause of Bible science when he fulminated against
theologians, Jewish and Christian, for making the
Bible a mere collection of proof texts, an arsenal
whence religious warriors might get weapons with
which to belabor their opponents. ‘The language
of the Bible is fluid . . . . and literary, not rigid,
fixed, scientific” (Preface to 1st ed of Literature and
Dogma). The Bible contains literature, poetical
and prose, equa] as literature to the best, as Matthew
Arnold, Carlyle, and Froude (on Job) held. The
neglect of this aspect of the Scriptures made theo-
logians blind to the presence and therefore ignorant
of the character of Bible poetry. (2) Another
factor which led to the neglect of the poetical ele-
ment in the OT is the undoubted fact that Bib. Heb
poets were less conscious as poets than western
poets, and thought much less of the external form
in which they expressed themselves. Bible poetry
lacks therefore such close adherence to formal rules
as characterizes Gr, Arab. or Eng. poetry. The
authors wrote as they felt and because they felt,
and their strong emotions dictated the forms their
words took, and not any objective standards set
up by the schools. Heb poetry is destitute of meter
in the strict sense, and_ also of rhyme, though this
last occurs in some isolated cases (sce below, III,
1, [4], cand e). No wonder then that western schol-
ars, missing these marks of the poetry which they
knew best, failed for so long to note the poetry which
the OT contains.

Mf, Characteristics of Hebrew Poetry: External
and Internal——The definition of poctry accepted
in I, above, implies that there are marks by which
poetry can be distinguished from prose. “This is
equally true of Heb poctry, though this last lacks
some of the features of the poetry of western nations.

(1) Vocabulary.—There are several Heb words which


occur most frequently and in some cases exclusively in
poetry. In the following list the corresponding prose


2411


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Plucking, Hair
Peetry, Hebrew


word ls putin parenthesis: mn, millah, werd" (="\35,
dabhar); WAIN, "éndsh, “man (= WX, ish); TAN,
‘drah, “way” (=v derekh); am. ha-


1. Exter 2

or ae 2ah, ‘‘to see” (= MIN). ra’ah): the prepe-
Character- Sitions "DN, *dz,‘to," SY, ‘éahe, “unto,”
istics "29, ‘dé, “upon,” and "pQ, mini,


“from,'' instead of the shorter ferms
—x, ‘él, WD, ‘adh, by. ‘al, and 74. min. The pronoun


NJ. zd, rare in prose, has in poetry the double function
of a demenstrative and a relative prenoun in both gen-


ders. The negative Dio, bal, is used for x, le’. For


the inseparable prepositions b, &, I (‘'in,” ‘'as,"' to")
the separate forms hemé, kemd and lemé are employed.
(2) Grammar.—(a) Accidence: The pronominal snf-
fixes have peculiar forms in_ poetry. ‘or m, am, em
(‘their,” ‘‘them"') we find the longer forms m3, émé,
émé. For the pl. ending of nouns 7 (in) takes the place
of m (im), as In Aram. (cf Job 4 2; 12 11), and fre-
qnently obsolete case endings are preserved, but their
functions are wholly lost. Thus we have the old nomi-
native ending 6 in Ps 50 10, etc; the old genitive end-
ing tin Isa 1 21, and the accusative ah in Ps
_ (0) Syntax: The article, relative pronoun, accusative
sing. ‘éth and also the ‘‘waw-consecutive"’ are frequently
omitted for the sake of the rhythm. There are several
examples of the last in Ps 112 12ff. The construct
state which by rule immediately precedes nouns has often
a preposition after it. The jussive sometimes takes the
place of the indicative, and the pl. of nouns occurs for
the singular.
_, 3) Rhythm.—Rhythm (from pvuds, rhuthmés) in
literary composition denotes that recurrence of accented


and unaccented syllables in a regular order which we |


have in poetry and rhetorical proso. Man is a rhythmic
animal; he hreathes rhythmically, and his blood cir-
culates—outward and inward—rhythmically. It may
be dhe to these reflex rhythms that the more men are
swayed by fecling and the less hy reflection and reason-
ing, the greater is the tendency to do things rhythmically.
Man walks and dances and sings and poetizes by the
repetition of what corresponds to metrical feet: action
is followed by reaction. "We meet with a kind of rhythm
in elevated and passionate prose, like that of John Rus-
kin and other writers. Preachers when mastered by their
theme unconsciously express themselves in what may
be called rhythmic sentences. Though, however,
rhythm may be present in prose, it is only in poetry as
in music that it recurs at intervals more or less the same.
In iambic poetry we get a repetition of a short and long
syllable, as in the following lines:
‘With ravished ears

The monarch hears,

Assumes the gods,

Affects the nods."'

—Dryden.

(4) Parallelism.—What is so called is a case of
logical rhythm as distinguished from rhythm that
is merely verbal. But as this forms so important
a feature of Bible poetry, it must be somewhat fully
discussed. What since Bishop Lowth’s day has
been called parallelism may be described as the
recurring of symmetrically constructed sentences,
the several members of which usually correspond
to one another. Lowth (d. 1787), in his epoch-
making work on Heb poetry (De Sacra poesi Hebrae-
orum prelectiones, ET by G. Gregory), deals with
what he (following Jebb) calls Parallelismus mem-
brorum (ch x). And this was the first serious at-
tempt to expound the subject, though Rabbi
Asariah (Middle Ages), Ibn Ezra (d. 1167 AD), D.
Kimhi (d. 1232) and A. de Rossi (1514-1578) called
attention to it. Christian Schoettgen (d. 1751) (see
Horae Hebraicae et Talmudicae) anticipated much
of what Lowth has written as to the nature, func-
tion and value of parallelism. The first to use the
word itself in the technical sense was Jebb (Sacred
Iit., 1820). For the same thing Ewald used the
expression Sinnrhythmus, i.e. sense rhythm, a not
unsuitable designation. _ we had

(a) Kinds of parallelism: Lowth distinguished
three principal species of parallelism, which he called
synonymous, antithetic and synthetic. ees

(i) The synonymous: In this the same thing is
repeated in different words, e.g. Ps 36 5:

‘Yahwe, (a2) Thy lovingkindness [reaches] to the


heavens,
(8) Thy faithfulness [reaches] to the clouds.’


Omitting ‘‘Yahwe,”’ which belongs alike to both
members, it will be seen that the rest of the two
half-lines corresponds word for word: “thy loving-
kindness” corresponding to ‘thy faithfulness,” and
“to the heavens” answering to “to the clouds”
a He 16 1; 24 1-3; 26 5; 18 187; Isa 6 4;

7).

(i) Antithetic parallelism: in which the second


member of a line (or verse) gives the obverse side
of the same thought, e.g. Prov 10 1:

‘A wise son gladdens his father,

But a foolish son grieves his mother’
(see Prov 11 3; Ps 37 9; ef Prov 10 1 ff; Ps 20
8; 30 6; lsa 54 7 ff). Sometimes there are more
than two corresponding elements in the two mem-
bers of the verse, as in Prov 29 27; cf 10 5; 16
9; 27 2.

(iii) Synthetic parallelism: called also con-
structive and epithetic. In this the second member
adds something fresh to the first, or else explains it,
eg. Ps 19 Sf:

“The precepts of Yahwe are right, rejoicing the heart:

The commandments of Yahwe are pure, enlighten-
ing the eyes.
The fear of Yahwe is clean, enduring for ever:
The judgments of Yahwe are true and righteous
altogether.
More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than
much fine gold;
Sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb’
(see Prov 1 7; cf 3 5.7; Ps 13; 15 4). In addi-
tion to the three principal species of parallelism
noticed above, other forms have been traced and
described.

(iv) Introverted parallelism (Jebb, Sacred Lit.,
53): In which the hemistichs of the parallel mem-
bers are chiastically arranged, as in the scheme ab
ba. Thus Prov 23 15f:

(a) ‘My son, if thy heart be wise

(b) My heart shail be glad, even mine:

{b) Yea, my reins shall rejoice

(a) When thy lips speak right things’
(cf Prov 10 4.12; 13 24; 21.17; Ps 61 3).

(v) Palilogical parallelism: in which one or more
words of the first member are repeated as an echo,
or as the canon in music, in the second. Thus
Nah 1 2:

‘Yahwe is a jealons God and avenges:
Yahwe avenges and is full of wrath;
Yahwe takes vengeance on his adversaries,
And he reserves wrath for his enemies‘
(ef Jgs 6 3.6f.114.15 £.23.27; Ps 72 2.12.17; 121;
124; 126; Isa 2 7; 24 5; Hos 6 4).

(vi) Climactie or comprehensive parallelism: In
this the second line completes the first. Thus Ps
29 1:


**Give unto Yahwe, O ye mighty ones,
Give unto Yahwe glory and strength"


(see Ex 15 6; Ps 29 8).

(vii) Rhythmical parallelism (De Wette, Franz
Delitzsch): thus Ps 138 4: ;

‘All the kings of the earth shall glve thee thanks ....
For they have heard the words of thy mouth."

See Prov 15 3; ef 16 7.10; 17 13.15; 19 20; 21

23.25.

Perfect parallelism is that in which the number
of words in each line is equal. When unequal, the
parallelism is called imperfect. Ewald (see Die
poetischen Biicher des alten Bundes, 1, 57-92; Die
Dichier des alten Bundes, I, 91 ff, 2d ed of the
former) aimed at giving a complete list of the rela-
tions which can be expressed by parallelism, and he
thought he had succeeded. But in fact every kind
of relation which can be indicated in words may be


expressed in two or more lines more or less parallel.
| On the alleged parallelism of strophes see below.


Poetry, Hebrew THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


(b) Parallelism as an aid to exegesis and textual criti-
cism: If in Lowth's words parallelism imphes that '*in two
lines or members of the same period things for the most
part shall answer to things, and words to words,’’ we
should expect obscure or unknown words to derive some
light from words corresponding to them in parallel mem-
bers or clauses. In not a few cases we are enabled by
comparison of words to restore with considerable con-
fidence an original reading now lost. The formula is in
a general way as follows: ab: cr. We know what a, 6
and c mean, butare wholly iu the dark as to the sense of x.
The problem is to find out what z means. We have an
illustration in Jgs § 28, which may be thus literally
translated:

“Through the window she looked,
And Sisera’s mother z through the z."'
Here we have two unknown, each, however, corre-
sponding to known terms. The Heb vb. accompanying
‘‘Sisera’s mother "is JAM), watteyabbébh, EV ‘'and....


cried."". But no such vb. (yabhabh) is known, for the
Talm, as usually, follows the traditional interpretation.
We want a vb. with a meaning similar to ‘‘looked."’ If


we read QAM 1, wattabbét, we have a form which could ,


easily be corrupted into the word in the MT, which gives
@ suitahle sense and moreover has the support of the
Tgs of Onkelos and Jonathan, and even of the LXX
(A and Luc.). What ahout the other Heb word untrans-
lated above (35WN, 'eshndbh)? This occurs in but one
other passage (Prov 7 6), where it stands as in the
present passage in parallelism with yen , hallén, “ win-
dow" (probably Prov 7 6 is dependent). We get no
help from etymology or in this case from the VSS, but
Parallelism had suggested to our translators the meaning
“lattice,” a kind of Eastern window, and something of
the kind must he meant. The vb. shanabh, '‘to be cool,"
may possibly suggest the rendering “window,” i.e. a
hole in the wall to secure coolness in the house. Glass
windows did not exist in Pal, and are rare even now.
There are innumerable other examples in the OT of the
use of parallelism in elucidating words which occur hut
once, or which are otherwise difficult to understand, and
frequently a textual emendation is suggested which is
otherwise supported.


(c) Prevalence and value of parallelism: Two
statements anent parallelism in the OT may be
safely made: (i) That it is not a characteristic of
all OT poetry. Lowth who had so much to do
with its discovery gave it naturally an exaggerated
place in his scheme of Heb poetry, but it is lacking
in the largest part of the poetry of the OT, and it is
frequently met with in elevated and rhetorical prose.
(ii) That it pervades other poetry than that of the
OT. It occurs in Assyria (see A. Jeremias, Die
bab-assyr. Vorstellung vom Leben nach dem_Tode),
in Egypt (Georg Ebers, Nord wu. Stid, I), in Finnish,
Ger. and Eng. Indeed, A. Wuttke (Der deutsche
Volks-Aberglaube der Gegenwart, 1869, 157) and
Eduard Norden (Die antike Kunstprosa, 1898, I,
813) maintain that parallelism is the most primitive
form of the poetry of all nations. It must never-
theless be admitted that in the OT parallelism has
in proportion a larger place than in any other litera-
ture and that the correspondence of the parts of
the stichs or verses is closer.

_ (5), Other literary devices —OT poetry has addi-
tional features which it shares with other oriental
and with western poetry. Owing to lack of space
these can be hardly more than enumerated.

(a) Alliteration: e.g. *‘Round and round the rugged
rocks.'’ We have good examples in the Heb of Ps 6 8
and 2% 17. (b) Assonance: e.g. ‘‘dreamy seamy"’
(see for Bible examples the Heb of Gen 49 17; Ex 14
14; Dt 3 2). _(c) Rhyme: There are so few examples
of this in the Heh Scriptures that no one can regard it
as a feature in Heh poetry, though in Arab. and even
In post-Bih. Heb poetry it plays a great part. We have
Bih. instances in the Heb text of Gen 4 23; Job 10
8-11; 16 12. (d) Acrostics: In some poems of the OT
half-verses, verses. or groups of verses begin with the
successive letters of the Heb alphabet. We have such
alphabetical acrostics in Pss 9f, 34, 87; Prov 31
10 ff; Lam 1-4; cf ch_5, where the number of verses


agrees with that of the Heh alphabet, though the letters
of that alphabet do not introduce the verses.


(e} Meter: The view of the present writer may
be stated as follows: That the poetry of the Heb is


not in the strict sense metrical, though the writers
under the influence of strong emotion express them-


2412


selves rhythmically, producing often the phenomena
which came later to be codified under metrical rules.
Thinking and reasoning and speaking preceded
psychology, logic, and grammar, and similarly
poetry preceded prosody. In the OT we are in the
region of the fact, not of the law. Poets wrote
under strong impulse, usually religious, and without
recognizing any objective standard, though all the
time they were supplying data for the rules of
prosody. Those who think that OT poets had in
their minds objective rules of meter have to make
innumerable changes in the text. Instead of basing
their theory on the original material, they bring
their a priori theory and alter the text to suit it. It
can be fearlessly said that there is not a single poem
in the OT with the same number of syllables, or
feet, or accents in the several stichs or hemistichs,
unless we introduce violent changes into the MT,
such as would be resented in classical and other an-
cient literature. It is important, before coming to
any definite conclusion, to take into consideration
the fact that the poetry of the OT belongs to periods
separated by many centuries, from the Song of
Deborah (Jgs 5), the earliest Heb poem, down to the
last hymns in the Psalter. In the oldest specimens
of Heb poetry there is a naive simplicity which
excludes the idea of conscious art. In the latest
the poet is much more conscious, and his poetry
more artistic. It would be manifestly unfair to

ropound a theory of poetry based on the poetry of
feeats and Tennyson and to apply it to the produc-
tions of Anglo-Saxon and Old Eng. poetry. Bound
up in the one volume called the Bible there is a lit-
erature differing widely in age, aim and authorship,
and it needs care in educing a conception of Heb
poetry that will apply to all the examples in the OT.
The later pss-acrostic, ete, many of them made up
of bits of other pss, seem to have sprung from a more
conscious effort at imitation. If, however, there
were among the ancient Hebrews, as there was
among the ancient Greeks, a code of prosody, it is
strange that the Mish and Gemar®’ should be wholly
silent about it. And if some one system underlies
our Heb Bible, it is strange that so many systems
have been proposed. It should be remembered too
that the oldest poetry of every people is non-
metrical.

ane following is a brief statement of the views advo-
cated:

(i) Philo and Josephus, under the influence of Gr
models and desiring to show that Heb was not inferior
to pagau literature, taught that Heb poetry had meter,
but they make no attempt to show what kind of meter
this poetry possesses.

di) Calmet, Lowth and Carpzov held that though in
the poetry of the Heb Bible as originally written aud
read there must have been metrical rules which the
authors were conscious of following, yet, through the
corruption of the text and our ignorance of the sounds
and accentuation of primitive Heb, it is now impossible
to ascertain what these metrical rules were.

(iii) In their scheme of Heb meter Bickell and Merx
reckon syllables as is done in classical poetry, and they
adopt the Syr law of accentuation, placing the tone on
the penultimate. These writers make drastic changes
in the text in order to bolster up their theories.

(iv) The dominant and by far the least objectionable
theory is that advocated by Ley, Briggs, Duhm, Buhl,
Grimme, Sievers, Rothstein and most modern scholars,
that in Heb prosody the accented syllables were alone
counted. If this principle is applied to Job, it will ho
found that most of the Bib. verses are distichs having two
stichs, each with three main accents. See, for an illustra-
tion, Job 12 16: Tatan anw 45: mpm Ty day
Cimmo' ‘6z wethiishiyah: 16 shéghégh umashgeh’: ‘ Strength
and effectual working belong to (hit. '‘are with'’] him, he
that errs and he that causes to err’). Man's rhythmical
instincts are quite sufficient to account for this phe-
nomenon without assuming that the poet had in mind
an ohjective standard. Those who adopt this last view
and apply it rigidly make numerous textual changes.
For an examination of the metrical systems of Huhert
Grimme, who takes account of quantity as well as accent,


aud of Eduard Sievers who, though no Heh scholar, came
to the conclusion after examining small parts of the Heb


2413


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Poetry, Hebrew


B H


ible that Heb poetry is normally anapaestic, seo W. H.
Cobb, Criticism of Systems of Heb Metre, 152 ff, 169 ff.
Herder, Do Weitte, Hupfeld, Keil, Nowack, Budde,
Déller, and Toy reject all the systems of Heb meter
hitherto proposed, though Budde has a leaning toward
Ley’s system.

(f) Budde’s kinah measure: Though Budde takes
up in general a negative position in regard to Heb
meter, he pleads strenuously for the existence of one
specific meter with which his name is associated.
This is what he calls the kinah measure (from 7)"P,
kinah, “a lamentation’’). In this each stich is said
to consist of one hemistich with three beats or stress
syllables and another having two such syllables,
this being held to be the specific meter of thedirge (sce
Lam 1 1, etc). Ley and Briggs call it “pentam-
eter” because it is made up of five (8+2) feet (a
foot in Heb prosody being equal to an accented
syllable and the unaccented syllables combined with
it). See Budde’s full treatment of the subject in
ZATW, 60, 152, “Das heb. Klagelied.” It must,
however, be borne in mind that even Herder (d.
1803) describes the use in elegics of what he calls,
anticipating Ley and Briggs, the ‘‘pentameter”’
(see Geist der ebrdischen Poesie, 1782, 1, 832f, ET
The Spirit of Heb Poetry, 1833, I, 40). But the
present writer submits the following criticisms:
(i) Budde is inconsistent in rejecting all existing
theories of meter and yet in retaining one of his
own, which is really but part of the system advo-
cated by Bellermann, Ley and Briggs. (ii) He
says, following Herder, that it is the measure adopted
by mourning women (Jer 9 16), but we have ex-
tremely few examples of the latter, amd his state-
ment lacks proof. (ii) There are dirges in the OT
not expressed in the kinah measure. David's
lament over Saul and Jonathan is more hexametric
and tetrametric than pentametric, unless we proceed
to make a new text (2S 1 19ff). (Gv) The kinah
measure is employed by Heb poets where the theme
is joyous or indifferent; see Ps 119, which is a
didactic poem.

(6) Units of Hebrew poetry—in western poetry
the ultimate unit is usually the syllable, the foot
(consisting of at least two syllables) coming next.
Then we have the verse-line crowned by the stanza,
and finally the poem.

According to the theory of Heb poetry adopted
by the present writer, the following are the units,
beginning with the simplest:

(a) The meter: This embraces the accented
(tone) syllable together with the unaccented syllable
preceding or succeeding it. This may be called a
“rhythmic foot.”

(6) The stich or verse: In Job and less regularly
in Pss and Cant and in other parts of the OT (Nu
23 19-24) the stich or verse consists commonly of
three toned syllables and therefore three meters
(see above for sense of “‘meter”). It is important
to distinguish between this poetical sense of ‘‘verse”’
and the ordinary meaning—the subdivision of a
Bible chapter. The stich in this sense appears in a
separate line in some old MSS.

(c) Combinations of stichs (verses): In Heb
poetry a stich hardly ever stands alone. We have
practically always a distich (couplet, Job 18 5),
a tristich (triplet, Nu 6 24-26), a tetrastich (Gen
24 23), or the pentastich. ;

(d) Strophe: Kosters (Stud. Krit., 1831, 40-114,
“Die Strophen,” etc) maintained that all poems in
the Heb Scriptures are naturally divisible into
strophes (stanzas) of similar, if not equal, length.
Thus Ps 119 is arranged in strophes named after
the letters of the Heb alphabet, each one containing
eight Scripture verses, or sixteen metrical verses
or stichs, most of the stichs having three meters or
rhythmical feet. But though several Bib. poems are
composed in strophes, many are not.


(e) Song: This (WWW, shtrah) is made up of a
series of verses aud in some cases of strophes..

(f) Pocm: We have examples of this (170, shir)
in the books of Job and Cant which consist of a
combination of the song.


(7) Classification of stichs or verses.—Stichs may be
arranged as follows, according to the number of meters
(or feet) which they contain: (a) the trimeter or tripod
with three meters or feet; Bickell holds that in Job this
measure is alone used; (6) the tetrameter or tetrapod,
a stich with four meters or feet; (c) the pentameter or
pentapod, which has five meters or feet: this is Budde’s
kinah measure (see ILf, 1, [4]); (d) the hexameter or
hexapod: this consists of six meters or feet, and is often
hard to distinguish from two separate trimeters (or
tripods).

Our first and most original authority on the internal
characteristics of Hebrew poetry is that great German

ypeolo ae zag oe of ure G. et

6 pastor and friend of Goethe and Schil-

eee r at Weimar. In his Vom Geist der
aracteris~ ebraischen  Poeste, 1782 (The Spirit of


tics of Poetry, triby James Marsh, U.S.A., 1833),
Hebrew he discusses at length and with great fresh-

ness those internal aspects of the poetry
Poetry of the OT (love of Nature, folklore, etc)


which impressed him as a literary man. Ref-
erence may be nrade also to George Gilfillian’s Bards of
the Bible, 1851 (popular), and Isaac Taylor's Sptrit of Heb
Poetry. It is a strange but striking and_ significant
coincidence that not one of these writers professed much
if any knowledge of the Heb language. ey studied the
poetry of the OT mainly at least in translations, and were
not therefore diverted from the literary and logical
aspects of what is written by the minutiae of Heb
grammar and textual criticism, though only a Heb
scholar is able to enter into full possession of the rich
treasures of Heb poetry.


(1) Themes of Hebrew poetry.—It is commonly said
that the poetry of the ancient Hebrews is wholly
religious. But this statement is not strictly correct.
(a) The OT does not contain all the poetry composed
or even written by the Hebrews in Bible times, but
only such as the priests at the various sanctuaries
preserved. We do not know of a literary caste
among the Hebrews who concerned themselves with
the preservation of the literature as such. (8)
Within the Bible Canon itself there are numerous
poems or snatches of poems reflecting the everyday
life of the people. We have love songs (Cant), a
wedding song (Ps 45), a harvest song (Ps 65),
parts of ditties sung on discovering a new well (Nu
21 17 f), on drinking wine, and there are references
to war songs (Nu 21 14; Josh 10 138; 2S 1 18).

(2) Species of poetry —Bib. poetry may be sub-
sumed under the following heads: (a) folklore, (8)
prophetical, (c) speculative, (d) lyrical.

(a) Folklore: “Poetry,” said J. G. Hamann (d.
1788), ‘is the mother tongue of the human race.”
In both folk-music and folk-poetry, each the oldest
of its class, the inspiration is immediate and spon-
taneous. We have examples of folk-songs in Gen
i1 1-9; 19 24f.

(b) Prophetic poetry: This poetry is the ex-
pression of the inspiration under which the seer
wrote. One may compare the oracular utterances
of diviners which are invariably poetical in form as
wellasin matter. But one has to bear in mind that
the heathen diviner claimed to have his messages
from jinns or other spirits, and the means he em-
ployed were as a rule omens of various kinds. The
OT prophet professed to speak as he was imme-
diately inspired by God (see Divination, VIII).
Duhm thinks that the genuine prophecies of Jere-
miah are wholly poetical, the prose parts being
interpolations. But the prophet is not merely or
primarily a poet, though it cannot be doubted that
a very large proportion of the prophecies of the OT
are poetical in form and substance. :

(c) Philosophical poetry: This expression is in-
tended to include such poetry as is found in the
Wisdom literature of the OT and the Apoc (see
Wispom Lirerature). The so-called didactic


Poetry, Hebrew
Poll


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2414


poetry, that of the proverhs or parables ow,
mashal), also comes in here.

(d) Lyrical poetry: This includes the hymns of
the Psalter, the love songs of Cant and the many
other lyrics found in the historical and prophetical
writings. In these lyrics all the emotions of the
human soul are expressed.

Does the OT contain specimens of epic and
dramatic poetry? The answer must depend on
which definition of both is adopted.

(a) Hpie poetry: The present writer would define
an epic poem as a novel with its plot and develop-
ment charged, however, with the passion and set
out in the rhythmic form of poetry. There is no
part of the OT which meets the requirements of this
definition, certainly not the Creation, Fall and
Deluge stories, which De Wette (Beiirdge, 228 ff,
Finleitung, 147) and R. G. Moulton (Literary Study
of the Bible, ch ix) point to as true epics, and which
Ewald (Dichter des alten Bundes, I, 87 ff) held rightly
e have in them the stuff of epics, though not the
orm.

(b) Dramatic poetry: Defining dramatic poetry
as that which can be acted on a stage, one may with
confidence say that there is no example of this in the
OT. Even the literary drama must have the general
characteristics of that which is actable. Franz
Delitzsch and other writers have pointed to Job and
Cant as dramatic poems, but the definition adopted
above excludes both.

IV. Poetical Writings of the OT.—According to
the Massoretes or editors of our present Heh Bible,

there are but three poetical books in


1. The the OT, Job, Prov, and Pss, known in
Poetical Jewish circles by the mnemonic abbre-
Books in  viation MON, ’émeth, the three conso-


the Narrow nants forming the initial letters of the
Sense Heb names of the above books. These
three books have been supplied by the
Massoretes with a special system of accents known
as the poetical accents, and involving a method of
intoning in the synagogue different from that fol-
lowed when the prose books are read. But these
accentual marks cannot be traced farther back than
the 7th or 8th cent. of our era.
It is customary to divide the poetical books of the
OT into two classes, each containing three books:
(1) those containing lyrical poetry
2. Custom- (WW, shir, or TPD, shirah), i.e. Pss,
ary Di- Cant, Lam; (2) those containing
vision for the most part didactic poetry
(St), mashal), i.e. Job, Prov, Eccl.
There is a large amount of poetry in the OT out-
side the books usually classed as poetical: (a)
poetry in the praphetical books (see


3. Poetry above, IIT, 2); (b) poetry in the his-
in Non- torical hooks including the Pent (see
poetical Michael Heilprin, The Historical Poet-
Books ry of the Hebrews, 2 vols, 1879-80).

We have examples in Gen 4 23 f; 49;
Ex 15; Nu 21 14f.27-30 (JE); 23f (Balaam’s


songs); Dt 32f (song and blessing of Moses);
Josh 10 12-14 (JE); Jgs 5 (Deborah’s Song);
9 8-15; 1 S 2 1-10; 2S 1; 3 33f; 23 (=Ps 18),
etc.

LITERATURE.—The most important books and articles
on the subject have been mentioned in the course of the
foregoing article. There is a full list of works dealing
with Heb meter in W. H. Cobb, Criticism of Systems of
Heb Metre, 19 ff. The first edition of Ewald’s still val-
uable ‘‘Essay on Heb Poetry” prefixed to his comm. on
tho Pss was published in Eng. in the Journal of Sacred
Literature (1848), 74 ff, 295 ff. In 1909 J. W. Rothstein
issued a suggestive treatise on Heb rhythm (Grundzige
des heb. Rhythmus ... . neost lyrischen Tezten mit
kritischem Kommentar, 8V0 +vi+398), reviewed by the
present writer in Review of Theol. and Philos. (Edin-
burgh), October, 1911. Early Religious Poetry of the
Hebrews by BE, G. King (Cambridge University Press)


‘(1 Cor 15 33).


contains a good, bricf, popular statement of the subject,
though it makes no pretense to originality. In The
Poets of the OT, 1912, Professor A. R. Gordon gives an
excellent popular account of the poetry and poetical
literature of the OT.

T. Witton Davizs


POETRY, NEW TESTAMENT: No one ques-
tions the presence of poetry of a high order in the
OT. The study of the OT as the literature of
the ancient Hebrews has been critically made, and
the attention of even the ordinary reader of the
Scriptures called to the beauty and wealth of its
poetic passages. The message of the NT is so
vitally spiritual and concerned with religion that
but little attention has been paid to it as literature.
Naturally it would be strange if the poetic inspira-
tion which runs like a tide through the prophetic
and post-exilic periods of the OT should altogether
cease under the clearer spiritual dispensation of the
NT. The fact is that it does not cease, but that
under every fundamental rule for poetic utterance,
save that of rhyme, the NT is seen to be rich in
imaginative vision, in religion touched by emotion,
and in poetic expression. The Gospels, the Paul-
ine Epp., and the Ep. of Jas, all afford examples of
lofty poetic utterance, while the message of Jesus is
saturated with words which readily lend themselves
to song. In fact it is thought by some that Jesus
was no less careful of the form than of the content
of His message, and that all the finer types of Heb
poetry found in the OT can be matched from His
sayings, even when tested by the same rules.

Tn the Gospels that of St. Luke gives us our best
examples of’ poetry. ‘No sooner have we passed
through the vestibule of his Gospel than we find
ourselves within a circle of harmonies” (Burton, in
Expositor’s Bible). From the poetic utterances
of Mary, Elisabeth, Zacharias, Simeon, and the
Angels, the church gains her Magnificat, Beatitude,
Benedictus, Nunc Dimittis and Glorias.

The utterances of John the Baptist are filled with a
rugged desert vision and an expression which reveals
a form of poesy in nowise to be mistaken for prose.

St. Paul presents many of his ideas in harmonious
and beautiful forms. He knew the secular poets of
his day, and has immortalized Cleanthes’ Hymn
to Zeus (Acts 17 28). He also quotes from Epi-
menides and the Athenian dramatist Menander
St. Paul knew the poetry of the
Hebrews, and enriches his own message with many

uotations from it. He was acquainted with the

hristian hymnology of his own times, as is seen in
Eph 5 14and1 Tim 3 16. He offers also original
flashes of poetie inspiration and utterance, a good
example of which is found in Rom 8 31-37.

Who could doubt the poetic imagery of St. James?
He might almost be called the poet of social justice
and of patient waiting under affliction for the will
of God to come to men.

When one comes to the words of Jesus he dis-
covers that in a very true sense His speech answers
to the requirements for Heb poetry. Examples
of synonymous, antithetic, synthetic and causal
parallelism are the rule rather than the exception
in the utterances of Jesus. For the synonymous
form see Mt 10 24; for the antithetic see Lk 6
41; for the synthetic and causal forms see Lk 9 23
and Mt 67. Not alone are these forms of Heb
poetry found in the words of Jesus, but also the
more involved and sustained poetic utterances
(Lk 7 31-32).

No one can question the deep emotional quality,
the vivid imagination and spiritual idealism of
Jesus. That the form of His speech is adequately
set to poetic inspiration and conforms to the laws
for Hcb poetry has not been so freely acknowl-
edged. Independently of the theory advanced
in Did Jesus Write His Own Gospel? (William Pitt


2415


MacVey), every student of the literature of the
NT must be grateful for the chapter on ‘The
Poems of Jesus.”

Spirituality and poetry have a kinship, and the in-
terpretation of any message is aided by the adequate
knowledge of its form. When the NT has thus been
carefully studied as literature, it will be seen, not
only that Jesus was a poet, but that the entire NT,
if not as rich as the OT in poetic passages, is
sufficiently poetic to receive treatment as such in
religious encyelopaedias. See also Farraruu Say-
Incs; Poetry, Hesrew. C. BE. Scuenx


POINTS, points: The word occurs in Eccl 6 16,
“In all points (VOY, ‘ummdah] as he came, so shall
he go’”’—a man leaves the world in all regards as
helpless as he entered it, no matter what he may
have gained or accomplished during his life.

Also in He 4 15, “In all points [kara rdvra,
katdé pdnta, ‘in all things,” as in His human nature
(2 14), so in His human experience (cf 2 17.18)]
tempted like as we are, yet without sin.”’ He suc-
cessfully resisted temptation at all points of His
nature, in body, soul, and spirit. See Tempration
or Curist. Westcott (in loc.) thinks that the
reference is not so much to Christ issuing cut of all
His trials without the least stain of sin, as to ‘a
limitation of His temptation. Man’s temptations
come in many cases from previous sin. Sueh temp-
tations had necessarily no place in Christ. He was
tempted as we are, sharing our nature, yet with this
exception, that there was no sin in Him to become
the spring of trial.’ Whichever interpretation is
adopted there is profound insight into the things of
the soul in joining sinlessness with fulness of expe-
rience of temptation. M. O. Evans


POISON, poi’z’n (MAN, hémah, WN, ro’sh;
Oupds, thumds, lés, tés): Residents in Pal must,
from the first, have been acquainted with venomous
serpents. Six species of these are widely diffused
in the land, and at least three of them are fairly
common in places. Besides, there are scorpions,
centipedes and the large spider, which are as much
dreaded by the fellahin as are the serpents, not to
speak of the minor but very serious discomforts of
mosquitoes, sandflies and ticks, some of which were
credited with lethal powers. In Wisd 16 9 RV we
read that “the bites of locusts and flies did slay, and
there was not found a healing for their life.”” There
are also many poisonous plants, such as belladonna,
henbane, thorn apple, and the cpium poppy. None
of theseis mentioned in the Bible; the only names
found there are the hemlock (Conium maculatum)
of Hos 10 4, the poisonous gourd (Citrullus colo-
cynthis) of 2 K 4 89, and the grapes of gall, prob-
ably the fruit of Calotropis procera, the apples of
Sodom of Jos (BJ, IV, viii, 4). Some, however,
believe that these are poppyheads. Poisonous
waters are referred to at Marah (Ex 16 23) and
Jericho (2 K 2 19). There are no direct records
of any person dying of poison except in 2 Macc 10
13, where the suicide of Ptolemy Macron is related.
Our Lord’s promise in the appendix to Mk 16 18
shows, however, that poisons were known and might
be administered by way of ordeal, as was the
unknown “water of jealousy’? (Nu 6 17). In this
connection the story in Eusebius (H £, III, 39) is in-
teresting, that ‘Justus surnamed Barsabbas, though
he drank a deadly poison, suffered no injury,
through the grace of the Lord.” The passages in
which poisonous serpents are mentioned are Dt 32
24, where serpents (RV “crawling things’’) of the
dust, probably Cerastes hasselguistti, the little
horned vipers, are mentioned, and in ver 33: “‘poison
of serpents, and the cruel venom of asps.’’ The


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA oetry, Hebrew


asp may be the eobra Nata haje, not uncommon on
the borders of the wilderness to the 8. Ps 58 4
mentions the poison of serpents. Ps 140 3, ‘“They
have sharpened their tongue like a serpent; adders’
poison is under their lips,” indicates, what is still
a common belief, that the forked tongue of the snake
is the poison-bearer. This is referred to in Jas 3 8.
That it was the fang and not the tongue which
carried the poison was known to Pliny (xi.62).
This verse of Ps 140 is given in St. Paul’s composite
quotation in Rom 3 13. There may be a reference
to the giving of an intoxicant poison in Hab 2 15,
where RV reads “that addest thy venom.” The
prophets speak in several places of God’s wrath as
a cup of trembling (RV “staggering”), e.g. Isa 51
17.22, probably suggested by the fact that hemdah
primarily means “fury’’ and is used in that sense in
more than a hundred passages. In Zee 12 2
Jerus is to be such a “cup of reeling unto all the
peoples round about.”
_ The s*mdmith, “lizard” (AV “spider’’), mentioned
in Prov 30 28 (LXX kalabétés) was formerly re-
garded as poisonous and it is still much disliked by
the fellahin, as they believe that it makes mocking
gestures mimicking them at their prayers. They are
really not poisonous. It is doubtful whether the
lizard mentioned by Agur is really this stellion; the
description better fits the gecko.
ALEX. MAcALISTER

POLE, pol: Nu 21 8.9 AV for 03, nés, RV

“standard.”


POLICY, pol‘i-si: Lit. “method of government,”
and so “ability to manage affairs.” In a bad sense,
“cunning,” “craft,” in Dnl 8 25 O20, sekhel,
‘“understanding”’); in a good sensein 1 Mace 8 4
(BovAy, boulé, “counsel’’); also in AV 2 Mace 18
18; 14 29.31 (udfodos, méthodos, erpariynua, strate-
géma, orparyyéw, stratégé6), where RV has ‘‘strata-
gem.” Policies occursin Jth 11 8 AV for wavotp-
ynua, panoirgéma, lit. “readiness for anything,”
here in a good sense; RV “subtil devices.”

POLISHED, pol’isht. See CorNER-sTONE, (2).

POLL, pol: The word (on the derivation of which
see Skeat, Concise Etym. Dict. of the Eng. Language,
360) has been eliminated as a vb.in ARV. In AV
and ERV it represents the Heb vbs. DOD, kasam,
lit. “to shear” (Ezk 44 20), TIA, gdzaz, lit. “to pull
out,” “to uproot,” thence ‘to shear the sheep,”
figuratively, “to destroy an enemy” (Mic 1 16),
ma, galah, in Piel, lit. “to make bald or round-
headed” (2 S 14 26) and PEP, kacag, “to cut off”
(Jer 9 26; 25 23; 49 32). The Heb noun is
mb524, guigdleth. As will be seen from the above
enumeration, the Heb vbs. differ considerably in
etymology, while RV has not tried to distinguish.
In Mic 1 16 we have a reference to the oriental
custom of cutting or tearing one’s hair as a
sign of mourning for one’s relatives. “Make
thee bald, and cut off thy hair [AV and ERV
“poll thee,’ Heb gdzaz] for the children of
thy delight: enlarge thy baldness as the eagle
[m ‘‘vulture”’]; for they are gone into captivity
from thee.’ The priests, the sons of Zadok,
are instructed to abstain from outward resemblance
to heathen patterns of priesthood: ‘Neither shall
they shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to
grow long; they shall only cut off the hair [AV and
ERV “poll,” Heb kasam] of their heads” (Ezk 44
20). The Piel form of gélah is employed in the
description of the annual hair-cutting of Absalom
(2 8 14 26). Thrice we find the vb. ‘‘to poll” as
the tr of Heb kacac, where ARV materially im-


Pollution
Pomegranate


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2416


proves the tr by adopting the marginal version of | destruction of the Hurons by the Iroquois.


AV (Jer 9 26; 25 23; 49 32). See Hair.

The noun (gulgéleth, lit. “head”) is tr4 “poll” in
the phrase “by the poll,” “by their polls” (Nu 1 2.
18.20.22; 3 47; I Ch 23 3.24). The expression
has its origin in the numbering of persons by their
heads, in the same way in which we speak of head-
tax, etc. H. L. E. Luerine


POLLUTION, po-li’shun ONS, g@al, “to pol-
lute”; aXloynpa, alisgéma, contamination’): In
Mal 1 7, “Ye offer polluted bread,” i.e. not actually
unclean, but worthless, common (cf Ezr 2 62),
bread here being used metonymically for sacrificial
offerings generally (cf Lev 21 6; Mt 6 11). The
phrase in Acts 15 20, ‘‘the pollutions of idols,” is
explained in ver 29 by “things sacrificed [AV “meats
offered’’] to idols.”


POLLUX, pol’uks.


POLYGAMY, pé-lig’a-mi:

. Meaning of the Term 4. Polygamy Unnatural

. Origin of Polygamy The Eunuch

OT and Polygamy 5. Weakness of Polygamy

Polygamy has been and is the open blazon by the
human race of sex vice. The very term is a misno-

mer. Since man became moralized he
1. Meaning has apprehended that the proper mar-
of the Term riage relation between the sexes is mo-
nogamy. Whatever may have been
the practice, since man could ask himself, What is
right? he has known that dz’ dpxfs, ap’ archés
(“from the beginning,” Mt 19 4), au fond, at bot-
tom, marriage is the choice of one man and one
woman of each other for a life family relation. La
Rochefoucauld said: “Hypocrisy is a sort of homage
which vice pays to virtue.” There is hypocrisy
beneath the word polygamy. It is an attempt to
cover up by the term ‘plural marriage” what is not
marriage and cannot be marriage. There is no
particular need of defining what the condition is, so
long as we can look upon it as a violation and nega-
tion of the marriage relation. The very use of the
term from any language covering a like condition is
attempt—
“To steal the livery of the court of heaven
To serve the Devil in."

Polygamy is a general term and might mean a
multiplicity of partners in the family relation by one
of either sex. But it does not. Polygamy prac-
tically means exactly “polygyny” (yuri, guné), i.e.
it describes a many-wived man. ‘The correlative
term “polyandry” describes the condition of a
woman who has many men in family relation with
herself. They are all husbands to her, as in polyg-
amy all the women are wives to one man. But
polyandry in historic times has had so little illus-
tration that it may be dismissed as so exceptional
as to be worthy of no further notice here.

Why polygamy has captured the whole position
philologically covered by polygyny is readily appar-
ent. The might of the physically strongest has
dictated the situation. Man has on the average
one-fourth more muscular force than woman.
When it comes to wrong in sex relation, man has
that advantage, and it has given him the field
covered by the word “polygamy.” There he is
master and woman is the victim.

It is plainly evident that polygamy is primarily
largely the outcome of tribal wars. When men had

: separated into clans and had taken up
2. Origin of different places of abode, collisions
Polygamy would soon occur between them. What

would happen in such cases would be
what we know did happen in North America soon
after its first settlement by Europeans, to wit, the


See Castor anp Poriux.


COL


The
great majority of the men were massacred; the
women and children, driven to the abode of the
conquerors, disappearing there mainly im concu-
binage and slavery. What shall be done with this
surplus of women? Here again the might of the
strongest comes to the front. The chief or the most
heroic fighter would assert his right to choice of
captives, and thus concubinage or what_is the same
thing—polygamy—would be set up. Successes in
further wars come and add other women to be dis-
tributed. Of course to the sheik or king there soon
comes the seraglio and the harem. Polygamous
practices will come in in other ways. The prisoner
of war becomes property and passes from hand to
hand by gift or sale. So woman—the weaker
party—endures what comes to her as slave, con-
cubine. We have now no longer the ‘“helpmeet”
originally destined for man—‘‘bone of my bones and
flesh of my flesh”—for whom he would “leave his
father and his mother” and to whose single self he
would ‘‘cleave” for life (Gen 2 18.24; Mt 19 5.6).
Monogamy, with its unity in labor, thought and
feeling, with its immeasurable modifying influences
of moral, ideal and spiritual cast, is gone. Woman
is reduced to the position of ministrant to man’s
unmodified sensuality.

The complications introduced into morals by
polygamy are not often considered. But the Bible

sets them forth in plainness. The
3. The OT marriage of Abraham and Sarah seems
and Po- to have been an original love match,
lygamy and even to have preserved something

of that character through life. Still
we find Sarah under the influence of polygamous
ideas, presenting Abraham with a concubine. Yet
afterward, when she herself had a son, she induced
Abraham to drive out into the wilderness this con-
cubine and her son. Now Abraham was humane
and kind, and it is said ‘‘The thing was very grievous
in Abraham’s sight’? (Gen 21 11). But he was
in the toils of polygamy, and it brought him pain
and retribution. A Divine direction may be hard
to bear.

The conditions of Jacob’s marriages were such
that it is hard to say whether any of his children
were of any other than of polygamous origin (Gen
35 22-26). Where the family idea and affection
went, in such mixed condition, is evidenced by the
unblushing sale, for slavery in Egypt, of one of the
brothers by the others (37 28).

David was a singer of sweet and noble songs and
wanted to be a righteous man with his whole heart.
Yet, probably in common with all the military
leaders and kings of the earth of his day, he had a
polygamous career. His retributions ran along an
extended line. There was a case of incest and
murder among his children (2 8 18). The son in
whom he had most hope and pride organized treason
against. his throne, and lost his life in the attempt.
David left his kingdom to Solomon, of whom much
might be said, but of whom this can be said—evi-
dently originally a man bright, keen-witted, wise,
yet in his old age he went to pieces by the wiles of
the women with whom he had loaded his harem.
Partly by his extravagance in his polygamous life,
and partly in attempt to build temples in distant
places for the religions represented hy the inmates
of his harem, he bankrupted his nation. As a con-
sequence his kingdom was divided at his death, and
there was never again a united Israel (I K 11 12).
Polygamy may be justly charged with these un-
toward results.

It can be demonstrated scientifically, even mathe-
matically, that polygamy is a moral wrong. Sta-
tistics show that births are substantially equally
divided between the sexes. Excess seems slightly


2417


on the side of males. When this fact is considered
and also the fact of the wide prevalence of polyg-
amy, it would seem that polygamy
4. Polygamy (polygyny) is a greater crime against
Unnatural Nature than polyandry. To put out
F of view for a moment the wrong to
woman in denying to her the rights and privileges
of monogamous marriage, the interference with the
rights of man to such marriage looms up in vast
proportion. Every harem is the denial to men of
the right to seek among its inmates wives accord-
ing to the dictates of their own hearts.

The eunuch.—But we are not done with the crime
against man. Given a harem, and he who set it
up has made, or there brought, the eunuch. The
lord of the harem must be served by emasculated
men. A search in history will reveal an amount of
this wickedness that is past belief. The eunuch
has been everywhere among all nations and peoples
and tongues. They have not only been servitors
to women in harems, but they have acquired such
influence with their masters that they have some-
times even dictated the policy of government.
They have been the secret cabinet that has had the
last. word in public affairs. They have sometimes
held public positions and shown therein astonish-
ing ability. Witness Narses, the brilliant general
of the emperor Justinian. See Eunuca.

Gibhon noticed the fact that nations hegan to decline


in power when their policies were dictated and managed
hy ennuchs. But that is taking a symp-


65. Weak- tom for the disease. There are weaknesses

ess of hehind that weakness. We have found
n woman in muscular strength equal to three-
Polygamy fourths of a man. If we claim nothing


more for woman than that ratio through
the whole scale of her potencies: what would he thonght
of a nation that should try to reduce that three-fourths
of potency as nearly to zero as it could? This is what
polygamy has done—reduced woman as nearly to a
cipher as it could in all the departments of her being.
She has heen held to the lowest and most primitive indus-
trial pursuits. She has been deprived of intellectual
development. She has heen debarred from society, per-
mitted to look at it only through a home lattice, or, if
abroad, through a swathed face. The harem of sheik or
sultan has fixed the condition of woman in province or
nation—set the hounds to her life. The highest office
assigned her has heen breeder of children, and for one-
half of them—the daughters—she could have no possible
hope or amhition (see Woman).

Where in such degradation is the ‘'helpmeet”’ for man
in all his problems? This condition is reflected back
over man. What possible appeal can there be to him
for thought and energy except to repeat the same dull
round exhibited in his daily life? Polygamous nations
have never heen industrial inventors, have contrihuted
little to science. They have usually ruined the fertility
of the lands they have occupied. They have heen
heavily weighted with the lethargy of a system that
appeals to nothing but the most primitive instincts and
vices of man.

The monogamous have been the forceful nations.
Rome conquered the world while she was menogamous,
aud lost control of it when she dropped to the moral level
of the scx corruption of the peoples she had conquered.
The Teuton trundled into and over Europe in ox-carts
mounted on solid wood trucks. _ But his cart carried one
wife, and now all polygamy is held under the trained guns
of the Teuton. , 4

There may scem to be two exceptions—the establish-
ment of the Mogul empire in India and the subjugation
of Western Asia and Eastern Europe hy the Turk. That
in both cases there was great success in war is granted.
They were authorized by their religion to exhibit the
frenzy of bloodshed and indnige in lust. Indeed, enjoy-
ment of the latter was a bright hope for the life to come.
But when they had possession of a country, and mas-
sacres and ravishing were over, what then For what
is mankind indebted to them? :

‘A lyric—A lyric has been put in the hand of the
present writer by a friend who wrote it at the last date of
the title. It is one of the lyrics of the centuries in its
synthesis of history and in its insight into the forces
physical, moral and immoral at work in the Mogul
empire of India. Notice the dates. The text will show
what took place between.


Tue Mocut 1525-1857


A war steed coursed ont the wind-swept north,
Jarring the crags with hoofs of fire,
Snuffing far battle with nostril wide,
Neighing the joy of flerce desire.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pollution
Pomegranate


The crisping herbage of arid plains

Had toughened his sinews like hands of steel;
The snow-fed waters of Zarafshan

Had nerved the might of a northern will.


The war steed grazed in the fertile meads,
Drinking the waters of indolent streams:
He rested at eve on bloom-dight heds,
Toyed with by maidens in the goldening gleams.


They charmed his ear with dalliant song:
They closed his eyes in witchery’s glee:

They fed him the vineyards’ wildering draught—
He slept in the breath of the lotus tree.


White bones lie strewn on the flowering mead,
In flesh-rank grass grown high and dark.
The carrion bird hath flown—hath died—
Riseth the war-horse? Neigheth? Hark!
—Josiag Torrey Reape, Amherst, 1856.


The ahove lyric may be taken as the epitaph of any
polygamous nation. The last words are significant—
“Neigheth? Hark!"’ Would the old war steed arise?
“Hark!” The Sepoy rehellion was on! We ‘‘hark-
ened,’ but the rebellion went te pieces and an end was
put to the Mogul empire. We have listened for half a
century and heard no sound. We hear mutterings now,
but the end will be as hefore—even if the '‘war-horse’’
riseth and is victorious. He will then again lie down in
‘' flesh-rank grass grown high and dark,” and the ‘‘carrion
hird”’ will fly from his ‘t white bones.'’ Streams cannot
rise higher than their fountains. The causes remain-
ing, the same effects willfollow. See Divorce; Famity;
MarRIAGE.

C. Caverno


POMEGRANATE, pom’gran-it, pom-gran‘at,
pum/gran-at (7181, rimmén [tree and fruit]; the
Heb name is similar to the Arab.,


1. ATree Aram. and Ethiopic; 660, rhda): One
Character- of the most attractive and most char-
istic of acteristic of the fruit trees of Syria,
Palestine probably indigenous to Persia, Af-


ghanistan and the neighborhood of the
Caucasus, but introduced to Pal in very ancient


ES |
alii:


Pomegranate.


times. The spies brought specimens of figs and
pomegranates, along with grapes, from the Vale of
Eshcol (Nu 13 23). Vines, figs and pomegranates
are mentioned (Nu 20 5) as fruits the Israelites
missed in the wilderness; the promised land was
to be one “of wheat and barley, and vines and fig-
trees and pomegranates’ (Dt 8 8), a promise


Pommel
Pool, Pond


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2418


renewed in Hag 2 19. In the lamentation in Joel
1 11.12 we have the pomegranate, the palm tree
and the apple tree represented as withered, ‘for
joy is withered away from the sons of men.”

The pomegranate tree, Punica granatum (N.O.
Granateae) oecurs usually as a shrub or small tree
10-15 ft. high, and is distinguished by
its fresh green, oval leaves, which fall
in winter, and its brilliant scarlet
blossoms (cf Cant 7 12).
of an orchard of pomegranates is referred to in Cant
4138. The fruit which is ripe about September
is apple-shaped, yellow-brown with a blush of red,
and is surmounted by a crown-like hard calyx; on
breaking the hard rind, the white or pinkish, trans-
lucent frnits are seen tightly packed together inside.
The juicy seeds are sometimes sweet and sometimes
somewhat .acid, and need sugar for eating. The
juice expressed from the seeds is made into a kind
of syrup for flavoring drinks, and in ancient days
was made into wine: “I would cause thee to drink
of spiced wine, of the juice [m ‘‘sweet wine’’] of my
pomegranate” (Cant 8 2). The beauty of a cut
section of pomegranate—or one burst open naturally,
when fully ripe—may have given rise to the com-
parison in Cant 4 3; 6 7: “Thy temples are like
a piece of a pomegranate.” The rind of the pome-
granate contains a very high percentage of tannic
acid, and is employed both as a medicine and for
tanning, particularly in making genuine morocco
leather.

Whether the pomegranate tree in Migron under
which Saul is said (1 8 14 2) to have abode with
his 600 men was really a tree or a place, Rimmon, is
doubtful. See Rimaon.

A large number of references to the pomegranate
are to the use of the form of the fruit in ornamenta-

tion, in which respect it appears among
3. The the Hebrews to have something of the
Pomegran- position of the lotus bud as a decora-
atein Art tive motive in Egypt. It was em-

broidered in many colors on the skirts
of Aaron’s garments, together with golden bells
(Ex 28 33f; 39 24-26; ef Ecclus 45 9). Hiram
of Tyre introduced the pomegranate into his brass
work ornamentation in the temple: ‘‘So he made the
pillars; and there were two rows round about upon
the one network, to cover the capitals that were
upon the top of the pillars” (m “So the Syr. The
Heb has ‘pomegranates’”’) (1 IX 7 18). “And the
pomegranates were two hundred, in rows round
about upon the other capital’ (ver 20; cf also ver
42; 2 K 25 17; 2 Ch 8 16; 4 13).

E. W. G. MastermMan

POMMEL, pum’el (2 Ch 4 12.13): RV reads

“bowl” (q.v.).


POND. See CisterNn; Poou.


PONDER, pon’dér: Occurs in AV 5 t in the
Book of Prov and nowhere else in the OT. In
each case it means “‘to consider carefully,” “to
weigh mentally.’ In Prov 4 26 and 56 21, RV
substitutes ‘make level.” In Prov 5 6, it drops
out entirely in RV. In Prov 21 2 and 24 12,
“weigh” is substituted for “ponder.” The one NT
passage is Lk 2 19; here RV has “pondering”
where AV has ‘‘and pondered.”


2. The
Fruit


PONTIUS, pon’shi-us, pon’'ti-nus. See Prats.
PONTODS, pon'tus (IIévres, Péntos): Was an
important province in the northeastern part of
Asia Minor, lyimg along the south shore of the Black
Sea. The name was geographical, not ethnical, in
origin, and was first used to designate that part of
Cappadocia which bordered on the ‘‘Pontus,” as


The beauty .


the Euxine was often termed. Pontus proper ex-
tended from the Halys River on the W. to the
borders of Colchis on the E., its interior boundaries
meeting those of Galatia, Cappadocia and Armenia.
The chief rivers besides the Halys were the Iris,
Lyeus and Thermodon. The configuration of the


country included a beautiful but narrow, riparian
margin, backed by a noble range of mountains
parallel to the coast, while these in turn were broken
by the streams that forced their way from the
interior plains down to the sea; the valleys, narrower
or wider, were fertile and productive, as were the
wide plains of the interior such as the Chiliokomon
and Phanarcea. The mountain slopes were origi-
nally clothed with heavy forests of beech, pine and
oak of different species, and when the country was
well afforested, the rainfall must have been better
adequate than now to the needs of a luxuriant
vegetation.

The first points in the earliest history of Pontus
emerge from obscurity, much as the mountain peaks
of its own noble ranges lift their heads above a fog
bank. Thus we catch glimpses of Assyr culture
at Sinope and Amisns, probably as far back as the
3d millennium BC. The period of Hittite domina-
tion in Asia Minor followed hard after, and there
is increasing reason to suppose that the Hittites
occupied certain leading city sites in Pontus, con-
structed the artificial mounds or tumuli that fre-
quently meet the eyes of modern travelers, hewed
out the rock tombs, and stamped their character
upon the early conditions. The home of the
Amazons, those warrior priestesses ef the Hittites,
was located on the banks of the Thermodon, and the
mountains rising behind Terme are still called the
“Amazon Range’; and the old legends live still
in stories about the superior prowess of the modern
women living there. See ARCHAEOLOGY OF ASIA
Minor.

As the Hittite power shrunk in extent and force,
by the year 1000 BC bands of hardy Gr adventurers
appeared from the W. sailing along the Enxine
main in quest of lands to exploit and conquer and
colonize. Cape Jason, which divides the modern
mission fields of Trebizond and Marsovan, preserves
the memory of the Argonauts and the Golden Fleece.
Miletus, ‘greatest of the Ionic towns,” sent out its
colonists, swarm after swarm, up through the
Bosphorus, and along the southern shore of the
Black Sea. They oceupied Sinope, the northern-
most point of the peninsula with the best harbor and
the most commanding situation. Sinope was in
Paphlagonia, but politically as well as commercially
enjoyed intimate relations with the Pontic cities.
Settlers from Sinope, reinforced by others from
Athens direct, pressed on and founded Amisus, the
modern Samsoun, always an important commercial


2419


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pommel
Pool, Pond


city. Another colony from Sinope founded Trebi-
zond, near whieh Xenophon and the Ten Thousand
reached the sea again after they had sounded the
power of Persia and found it hollow at Cunaxa.
Among the cities of the interior, picturesque Amasia
in the gorge of the Iris River witnessed the birth of
Strabo in the 1st cent. BC, and to the geographer
Strabo, more than to any other man, is due our
knowledge of Pontus in its early days. Zille, “built
upon the mound of Semiramis,’”’ contained the
sanctuary of Anaitis, where sacrifices were per-
formed with more pomp than in any other place.
Comana, near the modern Tokat, was a city famous
for the worship of the great god Ma. Gr culture
by degrees took root along the coast; it mixed with,
and in turn was modified by, the character of the
older native inhabitants.
_ When the Persians established their supremacy
in Asia Minor with the overthrow of Lydia, 546
BC, Pontus was loosely joined to the great empire
and was ruled by Pers satraps. Ariobarzanes,
Mithradates and Pharnaces are the recurring names
in this dynasty of satraps which acquired inde-
pendence about 363 and maintained it during the
Macedonian period. The man that first made
Pontus famous in history was Mithradates VI,
surnamed Eupator. Mithradates was a typical
oriental despot, gifted, unscrupulous, commanding.
Born at Sinope 136 BC and king at Amasia at the
age of twelve, Mithradates was regarded by the
Romans as ‘‘the most formidable enemy the Repub-
lie ever had to contend with.” By conquest or
alliance he widely extended his power, his chief ally
being his son-in-law Dikran, or Tigranes, of Ar-
menia, and then prepared for the impending struggle
with Rome. The republic had acquired Pergamus
in 133 BC and assumed control of Western Asia
Minor. There were three Rom armies in different
parts of the peninsula when war broke out, 88 BC.
Mithradates attacked them separately and over-
threw them all. He then planned and executed a
general massaere of all the Romans in Asia Minor,
and 80,000 persons were eut down. Sulla by patient
effort restored the fortunes of Rome, and the first
war ended in a drawn game; each party had taken
the measure of its antagonist, but neither had been
able to oust the other. The second war began in
the year 74, with Lucullus as the Rom general.
Lucullus took Amisus by siege, chased Mithradates
to Cabira, modern Niksar, scattered his army and
drove the oriental sultan out of his country. Sub-
sequently on his return to Rome, Lucullus carried
from Kerasoun the first cherries known to the west-
ern world. In the third war the hero on the Rom
side was the masterful Pompey, appointed in 66
BC. As a result of this war, Mithradates was
completely vanquished. His dominions were finally
and permanently incorporated in the territories
of the Rom republic. The aged king, breathing out
wrath and forming impossible plans against his
lifelong enemies, died in exile in the Crimea from
poison administered by his own hand. |

Most of Pontus was for administrative purposes
united by the Romans with the province of Bithynia,
though the eastern part subsisted as a separate king-
dom under Polemon and his house, 36 BC to 63
AD, and the southwestern portion was incorporated
with the province of Galatia. herr

It was during the Rom period that Christianity
entered this province. There were Jews dwelling
in Pontus, devout representatives of whom were in
Jerus on the Day of Pentecost (Acts 2 9). _ Paul’s
associates, Aquila and Priscilla, were originally
from here (Acts 18 2). The sojourners of the Dis-
persion are included in the address of the first Ep.
of Peter together with the people of four other
provinces in Asia Minor (1 Pet 1 1). Local tra-


ditions connect the apostles Andrew and Thaddeus
with evangelistic labors in this region. They are
said to have followed the great artery of travel lead-
ing from Caesarea Mazaca to Sinope. Pliny,
governor of Bithynia and Pontus 111-13 AD,
found Christians under his authority in great num-
bers (see Bitnynta), and Professor Ramsay argues
that Pliny’s famous letters, Nos. 96 and 97, written
to the emperor Trajan on the subject of the treat-
ment of Christians under his government (see Prr-
SECUTION), were composed _in view of conditions
in Amisus (Church in Rom Empire, 224, 225).

The Rom empire in the East was gradually
merged into the Byzantine, which is still known to
the Socal inhabitants as the empire of ‘“Roum,”’ i.e.
Rome. Pontus shared the vicissitudes of this
rather unfortunate government until, in 1204, a
branch of the Byzantine imperial family established
in Pontus a separate small state with its capital at
Trebizond. Here the house of the Grand Com-
neni, sheltered between the sea and the mountain
ranges, maintained its tinsel sovereignty to and
beyond the fall of Constantinople. In 1461 Treb-
izond was taken by Mohammed the Conqueror.
since which date Pontus, with its conglomerate
population of Turks, Armenians, Greeks and frag-
ments of other races, has been a part of the Otto-
man empire. G. E. Waite


POOL, péol, POND, pond, RESERVOIR, rez’ér-
vwar, rez'ér-vwar ((1] M27A, berékhah, “pool”; cf


Arab. RT, birkat, “pool”; ef M272, berakhah,

“blessing,’’? and Arab. RSS >, barakat, “blessing”;

[2] DIN, ’dgham, “pool,” “marsh,” “reeds”; cf
é


Arab. : {, ’ajam, “thicket,” ‘jungle’; [3]
Mpa, mikwah, “reservoir,” AV “ditch” [Isa 22
11]; [4] MIP, mikweh, “pond,” AV “pool” [Ex 7
19]; DYAN MP4, mikwéh ha-mayim, EV “gather-
ing together of the waters” [Gen 1 10]; DTA Tp '2,
mikwéeh-mayim, ‘a gathering of water,’’ AV “plenty
of water” [Lev 11 36]; [5] koAvpBy9pa, kolumbéthra,
“pool,” lit. “a place of diving,’’ from KoAvpBdo,
kolumbd6, “to dive’’): Lakes (q.v.) are very rare in
Syria and Pal, but the dry climate, which is one
reason for the fewness of lakes, impels the inhabit-
ants to make artificial pools or reservoirs to eollect
the water of the rain or of springs for irrigation and
also for drinking. The largest of these are made
by damming water courses, in which water flows
during the winter or at least after showers of rain.
These may be enlarged or deepened by excavation.
Good examples of this are found at Dibén and
Médeba in Moab. Smaller pools of rectangular
shape and usually much wider than deep, having
no connection with water courses, are built in towns
to receive rain from the roofs or from the surface of
the ground. These may be for common use like
several large ones in Jerus, or may belong to par-
ticular houses. These are commonly excavated to
some depth in the soil or rock, though the walls
are likely to rise above the surface. Between these
and cylindrical pits or cisterns no sharp line can be
drawn.

The water of springs may be collected in large or
small pools of masonry, as the pool of Siloam (Jn
9 7). This is commonly done for irrigation when
the spring is so small that the water would be lost
by absorption or evaporation if it were attempted to
convey it continuously to the fields. The pool
(Arab. birkat) receives the trickle of water until it
is full. The water is then let out in a large stream
and conducted where it is needed. (In this way by


Pools of Solomon
Porcupine


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2420


patient labor a small trickling spring may support
much vegetation.)

’Agham does not seem to be used of artificial
pools, but rather of natural or accidental depressions
containing water, as pools by the Nile (Ex 7 19;
8 5), or in the wilderness (Ps 107 35; 114 8; Isa
14 23; 35 7; 41 18; 42 15). In Isa 19 10 the
rendering of AV, ‘‘all that make sluices and ponds
for fish,’’ would be an exception to this statement,
but RV has “all they that work for hire shall be
grieved in soul.” Mikweh occurs with ’dgham in
Ex 7 19 of the ponds and pools by the Nile.
Berekhah is used of ‘‘the pool of Gibeon” (2 S 2 13),
“the pool in Hebron” (2 8 4 12), ‘the pool of
Samaria” (1 K 22 38), ‘‘the pools in Heshbon”’
(Cant 7 4), “the pool of Shelah,” AV “Shiloah”
(Neh 3 15); ef “the waters of Shiloah” (Isa 8 6).
We read in Eccl 2 6, ‘‘I made me pools of water, to
water therefrom the forest where trees were reared.”
There is mention of ‘the upper pool’ (2 K 18 17;
Isa 7 3; 36 2), “the lower pool” (Isa 22 9), “‘the
king’s pool”? (Neh 2 14). Isa 22 11 has, “Ye made
also a reservoir [mikwah] between the two walls for
the water of the old pool [b*rékhah].” Kolum-
béthra is used of the pool of Bethesda (Jn 5 2.4.7)
and of the pool of Siloam (Jn 9 7.11). See also
CisteRN; NaturaL Features; BJ, V, iv, 2.

ALFRED Ey Day

POOLS, poolz, OF SOLOMON. See CistERn;

Poo.


POOR, poor GMA, 'ebhydn, 21, dal, "22, ‘ani,
WIN, rush; wroxés, ptochds):

I. Inthe OT.—The poor have great prominence
in the Bible; it is said, indeed, that there should be
no poor among the Hebrews because Jeh should so
greatly bless them (Dt 15 4 RV and AVm); but
this was only to be realized on certain conditions
of obedience (ver 5), and in ver 11 it is said, “The
poor will never cease out of the land”; but they
were to see to it that none was left in destitution.
The very foundation of the Heb religion was God’s
pity on a poor and oppressed people.


The words for ‘‘poor"’ are chiefly 'ebhydn, '‘ desirous,”


‘needy,’ ‘‘poor'' (Ex 23 6, etc); dal, ‘moving,”

“‘swaying,’’ hence, weak, poor, lowly
1. The (Ex 23 3,etc); dallah, ‘poverty,"' “ weak-
Terms ness" (2 K 25 12, ete); réshk, perhaps
e ‘to shake,” ‘‘tremble,"’ ‘to be poor,”
Employed “impoverished” (1.8 18 23, etc); ‘ani,

also ‘dndw, “poor,” ‘‘oppressed,"’ from
‘anah, “to bend" or ‘'bow down” (Ex 22 25, etc);
‘¢néh, Aram. (Dnl 4 27), hélekhah, '‘ wretchedness"


(Ps 10 8.14 AV); _ydrash, ‘to make poor" (1 S 2 7);
mahsor, ‘'want'' (Prov 21 17); miskén, ‘‘a needy one”
(Eé¢l 4 13; 9 155%s.16).

(1) Generally—God (Jeh and ’£lahim) is rep-
resented as having a special care for “the poor,”
which was illustrated in the deliver-
ance of the nation from Egyp poverty
and bondage and was never to be for-
gotten by them (Dt 24 22); as pun-
ishing the oppressors of the poor and rewarding those
who were kind to them; God Himself was the Pro-
tector and Saviour of the poor (Ex 22 23): “If
thou afflict them at all, and they cry at all unto me,
I will surely hear their ery; and my wrath shall wax
hot,” ete (Dt 16 9; 24 15; 18 2 8; Job 31 16;
Ps 9 18; 12 5; Prov 19 17; Isa 26 4; Eccl 5 8,
“one higher than the high regardeth,” etc).

(2) Liberality to the poor is specially enjomed
(Dt 15 7f), and they were to beware of self-
deception and grudging in this (vs 9.10).

(3) Special provisions were made on behalf of
the poor: (a) Every third year a tithe was to be
given “unto the Levite, to the sojourner, to the
fatherless and to the widow” that Jeh might bless
them (Dt 14 28.29; 26 12 f); (b) the poor were
to have the free use of all that grew spontaneously


2. Repre-
sentations


in field or vineyard during the Sabbatic year (Ex
23 10f; Lev 26 5.6); (c) each year the gleanings of
the fields and vineyards should belong to the poor,
the corners of ficlds were to be left for them, and if
a sheaf was forgotten it should remain (Lev 19 9.
10; 23 22; Dt 24 19); (d) fruit and ripe grain in a
field might be eaten by any hungry person, but none
should be carried away (Dt 23 24.25); (e) in the
Feast of Weeks the poor were to participate (Dt 16
9-12); (f) every seventh year there should be a
“release” of debts (Dt 15 1f); in the seventh year
of servitude the Heb bond-servant should go free
(Ex 21 2), or in the Jubilee, if that came first, on
which occasion—the fiftieth year—property that
had been sold returned to its owner or his family
(Lev 25 8-17); (g) they were to lend readily to the
poor, and no interest or increase was to be taken
from their brethren (Ex 22 25; Lev 26 35-37;
Dt 15 71); in Lev 25 39, no poor Hebrew was to
be made a bond-servant, and, if a hired servant,
he was not to be ruled with rigor (ver 43); his
hire was to be given him daily (Lev 19 13; Dt
24 15); no widow’s raiment was to be taken in
pledge (Dt 24 17), nor the handmill, nor the
upper millstone so essential for daily life (ver 6),
a man’s garment should be returned to him before
sundown, and no house should be entered to seize
or fetch any pledge (vs 10-13); breach of these laws
should be sin and their observance righteousness
(Dt 24 13.15, ete; see Aums, Atmscivine); (h)
justice was to be done to the poor (Ex 23 6; Dt
27 19, “Cursed be he that wresteth the justice
due to the sojourner, fatherless, and widow’’);
(i) offerings were graduated according to means
(Lev 5 7; 12 8).

(4) Definite penalties were not always attached
to those laws, and the prophets and psalmists have
many complaints of the unjust treatment and op-
pression of the poor, contrary to the will of God, and
frequent exhortations to justice and a due regard
for them (Ps 10 2.9; 12 5; 14 6, etc; Isa 3 14.15;
Jer 2 34; Ezk 16 49, “the iniquity of ....
Sodom’; 18 12.17; 22 29; Am 27; 41; Hab 3
14; cf Job 20 19; 24 9.14, etc; Prov 14 31).

(5) The duty of caring for the poor is frequently
and strongly set forth and Divine promises attached
to its fulfilment (Ps 41 1; 72 12 ff; Prov 17 5;
229; 28 3.27; Isa 58 7; Jer 22 16; Ezk 18 17;
Dnl 4 27; Zec 7 10, etc; cf Job 29 12.16; 30
25; 31.19; Ps 112 9).

(6) The day of the Divine manifestation, the times
of the Messiah, should bring deliverance and re-
joicing to the poor (Ps 72 12-15; Isa 11 4, “With
righteousness shall he judge the poor,”’ etc; 14 30;
29 19; 61 1 RVm).

(7) The equality of rich and poor before God and
the supertority of the righteous poor to the ungodly
rich, etc, are maintained (Prov 19 1.22; 22 1.2;
Eccl 4 18). S

(8) Ways in which men can wilfully make them-
selves poor are mentioned (Prov 6 11; 10 4; 12 24;
13 4.18; 14 23; 20 13; 21 5.17; 23 21; 28 19).

The chief words given above all mean oor,
literally, but ‘ani (rendered also “‘afflicted”) may

also denote Israel as a nation in its
3. The afflictions and low estate, e.g. Ps 68
Godly Poor 10; Isa 41 17; 49 13; 51 21; 54 11;

in Zeph 3 12, it is ‘‘the ideal Israel
of the future.”’? Dr. Driver remarks (art. ‘‘Poor,”
HDB) that such passages show that ‘an7 (as also
its frequent parallel ’ebhyon, and, though somewhat
less distinctly, dal) came gradually “to denote the
godly poor, the suffering righteous, the persons who,
whether ‘bowed down’ or ‘needy’ or ‘reduced,’ were
the godly servants of Jeh.”” The humble poor
became in fact distinguished as the line in which
faithfulness to Jeh was maintained and spiritual


2421


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pools of Solomon
Porcupine


religion developed. The less frequent word ‘andw,
often tr4 ‘‘meek,” “humble,” is regarded (see Driver
in loc.) as having from the first a moral and religious
significance. It is used of Moses (Nu 12 3) and
occurs in Ps 10 12.17; 22 26; 25 9, etc; Prov
3 34; 1619; Isa 29 19; 32 7; 611; Am 2 7;
Zeph 2 3.

I, In the NT.—In the NT ptéchos, “trembling,”
“poor,” “beggar,’’ is almost exclusively the word
tr? “poor.” It does not occur very frequently, but
we see the same regard for the poor maintained as
we have in the OT; besides, the new principle of love
and the example of Him who “though he was rich,
yet for your sakes . . . . became poor” (plicheué,
2 Cor 8 9) necessarily carry in them this regard even
more fully than in the OT. Jesus announced His
mission (Lk 4 18) by quoting Isa 61 1, ‘‘to preach
good tidings [AV “the gospel’’] to the poor” (or
meek or humble); He gave as a proof of His Mes-
siahship the fact that ‘‘the poor have the gospel
for good news of the Kingdom] preached to them”
(Mt 11 5; Lk 7 22); according to Lk 6 20, He
pronounced a beatitude on the pious “‘poor” because
the kingdom of God was theirs; in Mt 6 3 it is ‘the
poor in spirit” (the humble); we have the injunc-
tion to ‘‘give to the poor” (Mt 19 21; Mk 10 21;
Lk 18 22) who are “always with you” (Mt 26 11;
Mk 14 7; Jn 12 8), which does not mean that
there must always be “the poor,” but that, in con-
trast with Himself who was soon to leave them, the
poor should remain and kindness could be shown
to them at any time, which was His own practice
(Jn 18 29); we are enjoined to call not the rich
or well-to-do to our entertainments, but the poor
(Lk 14 13; ef ver 21); Zacchaeus cited in his favor
the fact that he gave ‘half of his goods to the poor’
(Lk 19 8); special notice was taken by Jesus of the
poor widow’s contribution (Lk 21 3). The first
church showed its regard for the poor in the distri-
bution of goods ‘according as any man had need”
(Acts 2 45; 4 32; 61); when the council at
Jerus freed the Gentiles from the yoke of Judaism,
they made it a condition, Paul says, “that we
should remember the poor; which very thing I was
also zealous to do” (Gal 2 10); contributions were
accordingly made “for the poor among the saints
that are at Jerus’” (Rom 16 26), and it was in
conveying such contributions that Paul got into
the circumstances that led to his arrest. God’s
ability and will to provide for those who give to the
poor is quoted from Ps 112 9 (2 Cor 9 9); James
specially rebukes certain Christians of his day for
their partiality for the rich and their dishonor of the
poor (Jas 2 5-9), and John asks how, in the man
who “hath the world’s goods, and beholdeth his
brother in need, and shutteth up his compassion
from him,” the love of God can dwell (1 Jn 3 17.
18).
ae is trd “beggar” (Lk 16 20.22) and ‘‘heg-
garly” (Gal 4 9); pénés, “one who works for his
daily bread,” “a poor man,” is the word in 2 Cor
9 9: the poor widow of Mk 12 42 is deseribed in
Lk 21 2 as penichrés, “very poor.”

—In the Apoc the poor_are
ea EL Sear ae eke el for Rone cneclus 21 5
{ptochos]; 35 12.13); their oppression and wrongs (Wisd
810 [penés]; Ecclus 13 3.19.23 [ptochos]; Bar 6 28);
the duty of care for and of giving to the poor (Tob 4 7
[ptéchos]; Ecclus 29 8 [tapeinds].9 [penés]; 34 20-22); o
justice and kindness to such (Ecclus 4 1.5.8; 7 32; 10 23
pléchos]); ‘poor’ in the sense of pitiable occurs in 2

ace 447 (talatparos), RV ‘‘hapless."" | »

IV. RV Changes.—For ‘the poor of this world" (Jas
25) RV has “them that are poor as to the world"’; for
“The poor... . shall trust in it’’ (Isa 14 32), ‘In her
shall the afflicted ... . take refuge’; instead of
"Whereas also he that is born in his kingdom becometh
poor’’ (Eccl 4 14), “Yea, even in his kingdom he was
born poor’; ‘poor for_ ‘humble’ (Ps 9 12; 10 12,
m ‘meek"'), for “‘lowly'' (Prov 16 19, m “‘meek"’).

W. L. WALKER


POPLAR, pop'lar (mpa>, libhneh, ‘‘whiteness”’ ;
oTupaKevos, sturdkinos, “storax’’ [Gen 30 37], Aev«n,
leuké, “poplar’’ (Hos 4 13] [libhneh is so similar to the
Arab. libna, the storax, that the latter certainly has
the first claim to be the true tr]): “Jacob took him
rods of fresh poplar,’’ m “storax tree’ (Gen 30 37).
“They .... burn incense upon the hills, under
oaks and poplars and terebinths, because the
shadow thereof is good’? (Hos 4 13). In the latter
reference the conjunction of the shrub, storax, with
two great trees like the oak and terebinth—even
though they all grow in the mountains—is strange.
The storax cannot give a shade comparable with
these trees. Had we other evidence of the storax
being a sacred tree among the Hebrews, it might
explain the difficulty.

The storax, Styrax officinalis (N.O. Styraceae), is
a very common shrub in Pal which occasionally
attains the height of 20 feet. The under surfaces
of its oval leaves are covered with whitish hairs, and
it has many beautiful pure-white flowers like orange
blossoms—hence its name ‘‘whiteness.”’

The poplar, the traditional tr in Hos 4 13,
flourishes in many parts of Pal. The white poplar,
Populus alba, Arab. Haur, is eommon everywhere;
Euphratica occurs esp. in the Jordan valley; the
black poplar, P. nigra, and the Lombardy poplar,
P. pyramidalis—probably an importation—are both
plentiful in the plain of Coele-Syria, around Da-
mascus and along the river banks of Svria.

E. W. G. MasTerMan

PORATHA, pé-ra’tha, por’a-tha (RNB, péra-
thé’): One of the sons of Haman (Est 9 8). The
etymology is uncertain; perhaps from the Pers
purdata, “given by fate.”


PORCH, porch: Chiefly in the OT DOIN, “alam,
used of the temples of Solomon and Ezekiel (sce
TEMPLE); once misd’rén, a “vestibule,” in Jgs 3 23.
In the NT, the word occurs in connection with the
high priest’s palace (Mt 26 71, pulén; Mk 14 68,
proailion), and as the rendering of o7od, stod, a
“portico,” in Jn 6 2 (pool of Bethesda); and Jn
10 23; Acts 3 11; 5 12. See Porcu, Portico,
SoLomon’s.


PORCH, PORTICO, por'ti-ks, SOLOMON'’S
(fh orod f kadoupévyn DodopGvras, hé stod hé kalou-
méné Soloméntos): This important element of
Herod’s temple, preserving in its name a traditional
connection with Solomon, is thrice referred to in the
NT, viz. in Jn 10 23; Acts 3 11, “the porch that
is called Solomon’s’; and Acts 6 12. In these
passages the Gr word stoa is tr¢ “porch,” but in
RVm of Acts 3 11 more correctly ‘“portieo.”’ In
architecture a “porch” is strictly an exterior struc-
ture forming a covered approach to the entrance of a
building; a “portico” is an ambulatory, consisting
of a roof supported by columns placed at regular
intervals—a roofed colonnade. The portico bear-
ing Solomon’s name was that running along the
eastern wall in the Court of the Gentiles of Herod’s
temple. It had double columns, while that on the
S. known as the Royal Portico had four rows (cf
Jos, Ant, XV, xi, 3; BJ, V, v, and see Tmnr iy,
Herop’s). The portico was the seene of Christ’s
teaching at the Feast of the Dedication (Jn 10 23),
and was flocked to by the multitude after the heal-
ing of the lame man (Acts 3 11). There the apos-
tles preached and wrought other miracles (Acts 5
12). W. Suaw Ca.pEecotr


PORCIUS, pér’shus (FESTUS).


PORCUPINE, pér’kt-pin (TEP, kippadh [Isa 14
23: 34 11; Zeph 2 14], AV “bittern,” RV “porcu-


See Frstus.


Porphyry
Potter, Pottery


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2422


pine’; LXNX éxtvos, echinos, “hedgehog’’; TDP,

kippoz [Isa 34 15), AV “great owl,” ERV ‘‘arrow-

snake,” ARV “dart-snake”’; LXX echinos; cf Arab.
tu 2


3 909
RAS, kunfud, or ARAS, kunfudh, “hedgehog” or
“porcupine.” “IEP, kippadh, is referred to ¥ TDP,
kaphadh, “to draw one’s self together” or “to roll
one’s self up,” while TIEP is referred to ¥ TDP,
képhaz, and v VPP, kaphac, “to draw together
in order to spring.”’ The resemblance between all


209
these words, including the Arab. W243, is obvions,
and it is to he noted that LXX has echinos in all
the places cited):

The Gr echinos is the hedgehog. ‘The Arab. kunfudh is
used in some localities for the hedgehog and in others for
the porcupine, which is also called nis. The hedgehog
is also called kibbdbat-ush-shauk, or ‘‘ball of spines.”
These two animals are both found in Syria and Pal, and,
while hoth have spines, they are very different animals,
though often confounded. The hed


edgehog, Hrinaceus
europeus, is one of the Insectivora. It eats not only in-


sects but also snakes and other small animals, as well as
fruits and roots. It is about 10 in. long, covered with
short spines, and rolls itself into a ball when, attacked.
It inhabits the countries bordering the Mediterranean.
The porcupine, Hystriz cristata, is a rodent, about 26 in.
loug, having long spines. It is herbivorous. It backs
rapidly at its foes, thrusting its sharp spines into their
flesh, not shooting its spines, as is often stated. It in-
habits most of Europe and Asia. Itis very different from
the Canadian porcupine, Hrethizon dorsatus, as well as
from the tree porcupines of Mexico and Central and
South America.


As to the rendering “‘bittern” for kippodh (Isa
14 23; 34 15; Zeph 2 14), while the etymology
favors “hedgehog,” the context favors a bird, esp.
in Isa 34 11, though it cannot he said that in any
of the passages the context makes “hedgehog” an
impossible rendering.

In Isa 34 15, for kippdz, most modern authorities
(cf RV) have some sort of serpent, referring to the
Arab. ¥ kafaz, “‘to spring.’”’ (See notes ahove on
kdphaz and kaphag.) In this passage also the con-
text is not unfavorable to a hird (ef AV “great owl’).
See Bitrern; Ow .; SERPENT.

ALFRED Exy Day

PORPHYRY, pér’fi-ri (in Est 1 6, RVm has
“porphyry”? [AVm “porphyre”] for UTZ, bahat,
EV “red [marble]’’; LX X has cpapay8lrns, smarag-
dités, which was a green stone): Porphyry is an
igneous rock containing distinct crystals of feldspar
in a feldspathic matrix. It may be purple or of
other colors, as green. ‘Porphyry’ is from 7rop-
gupeos, porphireos, ‘“purple.’’


PORPOISE, pér’pus (RVm has “porpoise-skin”
for UIK VW, ‘dr tahash, RV “sealskin,’”? AV
“badgers’ skins” [Ex 25 5; 26 14; 35 7.23; 36 19;
39 34; Nu 4 6.8.10.11.12.14.25; Ezk 16 10]): The
word denotes leather used in the furnishings of
the tabernacle (for shoes in Ezk 16 10), and was
probably the skin of the dugong, Halichore dugong,


Arab. , wa, tukhas, which is found in the Red
Sea. See BancEr.


PORT, port, PORTER, pér’tér: ‘‘Port’’ in the
sense of ‘“gate’’ (of a city or building) is chsolete
in modern Eng., and even in the AV is found only
in Neh 2 13. ‘‘Porter,” as ‘“gate-keeper,” how-
ever, is still in some use, but ‘‘porter’ now (but
never in EV) generally means a burden-earrier. In
the OT, except in 2S 18 26; 2 K 7 10.11, the
porter (ZW, shd‘ér) isa sacred officer of the temple
or tabernacle, belonging to a particular family of the
Levites, with a share in the sacred dues (Neh 13 5;
12 47). The “porters” are mentioned only in Ch,
Ezr and Neh, and Ch has an especial interest in


them, relating that their duties were settled as far
back as the time of David (1 Ch 26 1-19), and
that the office extended further to the first settle-
ment of Pal and even to Moses’ day (1 Ch 9 17-
26). The office was evidently one of some dignity,
and the “chief-porters” (1 Ch 9 26) were impor-
tant persons. For some inscrutable reason RV
renders sho‘ér by ‘‘doorkeeper” in 1 Ch 15-26, but
not elsewhere. See DooRKEEPER.
Burton Scotr Easton

PORTION, por’shun, PART: As far as a dis-
tinction between these words is possible in Eng., it
lies in the fact that a “portion” is a ‘‘part” about
whose destiny something is implied (Ps 142 5, etc).
The Heb has no two synonyms similarly related,
and in consequence the use of the words in EV is
settled either by rather arbitrary considerations
(M2, ménah, is always “portion” in RV, but is
“part”? in AV, Ex 29 26; Lev 7 33; 8 29) or by
the context, irrespective of the Heb word used.
So “part” and “portion”? both represent 727,
dabhar, 1 K 6 38; Neh 12 47; “1B, peh, Zec 13
8; Dt 21 17; D320, hebhel, Josh 17 5 (RV); Ezk
47 13; pépos, méros, Lk 11 36; 12 46. And in the
vast majority of cases in the OT hoth words
represent simply some derivative of pon, hdalak,
normally the noun pen, hélek.

Burton Scotr HasTon

POSIDONIUS, pos-i-do’ni-us (lwci8auos, Pasi-
dénios, al. Tloct8évi0s, Posidénios dnd Hocebdav,
Poseidén): One of the three envoys sent hy the
Syrian general Nicanor to treat with the Jews under
Judas during his invasion of Judaea, 161 BC (2
Macc 14 19). In 1 Macc 7 27 ff, proposals are
sent by Nicanor to Judas, but no envoys are named,
and it is there asserted in contradiction to 2 Macc
that Judas broke off the negotiation because of the
treacherous designs of Nicanor.


POSSESS, po-zes’, POSSESSION, po-zesh’un:
“Possess”? in modern Eng. means normally only
“keep in one’s possession.” But in Elizabethan
Eng. it means also “take into possession,” and, in
fact, the word in the OT always represents Heb
vbs. with the latter as their primary meaning
(W32, ydrash, in nearly all cases, otherwise om},
néhal, Mp, kandh, TR, ’ahaz; Aram. jOU, hdsan).
Consequently, in almost every case ‘‘take possession
of”? could be substituted advantageously for “‘pos-
sess,” hut RV has not thought the change worth
earrying through. In the Apoc and NT, however,
the distinction has been made, AV’s ‘‘possess”’ heing
retained for caréxw, katéchd, in 1 Cor 7 30; 2 Cor
6 10, but the same tr for xrdouat, ktdéomai, is
changed into ‘take us for a possession” (Jth 8 22),
“get?? (Lk 18 12), “win” (Lk 21 19), and ‘“pos-
sess himself of” (1 Thess 4 4, a very obscure pas-
sage). In the noun possession, on the other hand,
no such ambiguity exists, and attention need he
called only to the following passages. In Dt 11 6,
AV has, “all the substance that was in their pos-
session,”’ Heh “all that subsisted at their feet,” RV
“every living thing that followed them.’”’ AV uses
“nossession” loosely in Acts 28 7 for xwplov,
chérton, RV “lands.”? epirolyots, peripotésis,
from peripoiéd, ‘cause to remain over,” ‘“gain,’’ is
rendered ‘‘God’s own possession” in Eph 1 14 RV
(AV “possession’’) and 1 Pet 2 9 (AV “‘peculiar,’”’
AVm ‘“purchased”). ‘“God’s own” is a gloss but
is implied in the context.

Burton Scotr Easton

POSSESSION, DEMONIACAL, dé-mé-ni’a-kal
(Mt 4 24; 8 16, etc). See Drmon, DeEmontac,
DEMONOLOGY.


2423


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Porphyry
Potter, Pottery


POST, post (710, rie, “to run,’ O84, racim, |


“runners’’): ‘The “runners” formed the royal
guard (18 2217; 1K 1427; 2K 11 4.13;
see GuarD). From them were chosen the couriers


who carried royal letters and dispatches through-
out the kingdom (2 Ch 306.10; Est 3 13.15;
Jer 51 31). In the Pers service they were mounte
on the swiftest horses (Est 8 10.14; cf Xenophon,
Cyrop. vili.6.17; Herodotus viii.98). They had the
right to command the service of either men or
animals in order to expedite their progress (cf Mt
6 41; Mk 16 21, “compel,” “impress’’).

Used in Job 9 25 and AV Wisd 6 9 (dyyeNla,
aggelia, RV ‘“‘message’”’) of the swift passage of time.
See also Houss, II, 1, (4), (7). M. O. Evans


POT, pot: A term used as the tr of a number of
Heb and Gr words whose fundamental meaning
seems to describe them as intended for the most
part to hold liquid or semi-liquid substances, but
the pots of Ex 27 3 are intended to hold ashes.
(1) “8, str, the most common word for “pot.” It
designates most frequently some household utensil,
probably a pot or kettle for boiling. So 2 K 4
38 ff; Ex 16 3; Jer 1 13 AV; Ezk 11 3.7.11, “cal-
dron”’; 24 3.6 AV; Mic 8 3; Zec 14 21, etc. It
is also used as the name of some vessel of the
sanctuary. So Ex 27 8, where the context shows
it was intended to hold ashes; 1 K 7 45; 2 Ch
416; 2 K 25 14. In Ps 60 8; 108 Q, it is a pot
for washing. (2) "1D, pardr (Nu 11 8; 1S 2 14),
a vessel for boiling; in Jgs 6 19, a vessel for holding
broth. (3) Tit, dadh, rendered “pot” in Ps 81
6 in AV, “basket” in RV; “pot” both AV and RV
in Job 41 20. (4) MQX3%, cingeneth (Ex 16 33),
the jar in which the manna was placed. This jar
or pot is mentioned in He 9 4 under the name
orduvos, stdmnos. (5) JION, ’dsdn (2 K 4 2), some
kind of jar for holding oil. (6) féorys, xéstés (Mk
7 4), some kind of household utensil. Mention
may also be made of the word rendered ‘‘pot’’ in
Lev 6 28 AV, where RV renders more correctly
by the general term “vessel”; for AV “pots” (Ps
68 13) RV substitutes “sheepfolds.’”’ The root
is uncertain. Those who render “sheepfolds” con-
nect with the related root in Gen 49 14; Jgs 5 16.
Others render ‘fireplaces’ or “ash heaps.” See
also ‘range for pots” in Lev 11 35; “pots,” Jer
35 5 AV, correctly “bowls” RV; “refining pots”
in Prov 17 3; 27 21. See also Foon.

Watter R, BerreripcE

POTENTATE, pd’ten-tat (8vvdorns, dundstés,
“mighty one,” from S%vape., dinamai, “to be
able’): A person who possesses great power and
authority. Only in 1 Tim 6 15, “the blessed and
only Potentate’ (=God). The same Gr word is
used of Zeus in Sophocles (Ant. 608), and of God in
Apoe (e.g. Sir 46 5; 2 Macc 15 3.23). It is used
of menin Lk 1 52 (AV “‘the mighty,” RV “‘princes’’)
and Acts 8 27 (‘‘of great authority’).


POTIPHAR, pot'i-far ((D"O1P, patiphar; cf
Egyp Potiphera [Gen 39 1 f]): A high Egyp offi-
cial who became the master of Joseph. It is par-
ticularly mentioned that he was an Egyptian, i.e.
one of the native Egyp officials at the Hyksos court.


POTI-PHERA, po-tif’e-ra (JD "DO, pati phera';
Egyp Padipara, “the [one] given of the sun-god”;
cf Heb Nathaniel, “the gift of God,’ Gen 41 45.50;
46 20): There is no certain evidence from Egypt
that this name was in existence until the XXIId
Dynasty, about 950 BC. But names of the Hyksos
period, and, indeed, any kind of Hyksos inscrip-
tions, are so scarce on account of the destruction
of Hyksos monuments by the Egyptians of later


times that the absence of such names is really no
evidence on the subject. The fact that this name
has not been discovered earlier than 950 BC does
not give any warrant for the claim that the narra-
tive is of a late date. G. KYLE


POTSHERD, pot’shtird (WWJ, heres): A piece
of earthenware (Job 2 8; Ps 22 15; Isa 45 9).
RV renders the word in Prov 26 23, “an earthen
vessel,” and in Job 41 30 substitutes ‘‘sharp pot-
sherds” for ‘“‘sharp stones.” Sir 22 7 refers to the
art of “gluing a potsherd [derpaxov, déstrakon]
together.” See Harsira; Osrraca.


POTSHERD GATE (Jer 19 2).
GaTE.


POTTAGE, pot’aj.
POTTER, pot’ér, POTTERY, pot’ér-1:


See Harsita


See Foon, III.


1. Historical Development

2. Forms

3. Methods of Production

4. Uses

5. Biblical Terms

6. Archaeological Significance
LITERATURE


(1) Prehistoric—The making of pottery ranks
among the very oldest of the crafts. On the rocky
plateaus of Upper Feypt, overlooking


1. Histori- the Nile valley, are found the polished
cal De- red earthenware pots of the pre-
velopment historic Egyptians. These are buried


in shallow oval graves along with the
cramped-up bodies of the dead and their chipped
flint weapons and tools. These jars are the oldest
examples of the potter’s art. It is inconceivable
that in the country of Babel, Egypt’s great rival
in civilization, the ceramic arts were less developed
at the same period, but the difference in the nature
of the country where the first Mesopotamian settle-
ment probably existed makes it unlikely that relics
of the prehistoric dwellers of that country will ever
be recovered from under the débris of demolished
cities and the underlying deposits of clay and silt.

(2) Babylonia.—The oldest examples of Bab
ceramics date from the historical period, and consist,
of baked clay record tablets, bricks, drainage pipes,
household shrines, as well as vessels for holding
liquids, fruits and other stores. (See Perrot and
Chipiez, History of Art in Chaldaea and Assyria,
I, figs. 159, 160, Ii, figs. 168, 168.) Examples of
pottery of this early period are shown in the accom-
panying figures. By the 9th to the 7th cent. BC
the shaping of vessels of clay had become well de-
veloped. Fragments of pottery bearing the name
of Esarhaddon establish the above dates.

(3) Egypt.—With the close of the neolithic period
in Egypt and the beginning of the historical or
dynastic period (4500-4000 BC) there was a decline
in the pottery art. The workmanship and forms
both became bad, and not until the [Vth Dynasty
was there any improvement. In the meantime
the process of glazing had been discovered and the
art of making beautiful glazed faience became one
of the most noted of the ancient Egyp crafts.
The potter’s wheel too was probably an invention of
this date.

(4) Palestine —The making of pottery in the
land which later became the home of the children of
Israel began long before this people possessed the
land and even before the Phoenicians of the coast
cities had extended their trade inland and brought
the earthenware vessels of the Tyrian or Sidonian
potters. As in Egypt and Babylonia, the first ex-
amples were hand-made without the aid of the
wheel.


Potter, Pottery THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2424
T


It is probable that Jewish potters learned their | the water until all have disintegrated and a thin
art from the Phoenicians. They at least copied | slimy mud or “slip”? has been formed. In coast
Phoen and Mycenaean forms. During their wander- | cities the potteries are all near the sea, as the sea-
ings the children of Israel were not likely to make | water is considered better for the “slipping”’ process.
much use of earthenware vessels, any more than the | The slip is drawn off into settling tanks. All
Arabs do today. Skins, gourds, wooden and metal | stones and lumps remain behind. When the clay
vessels were less easily broken. has settled, the water is drawn off and the plastic
material is worked by treading with the feet (cf


To illustrate this, a party, of which the writer was a :
member, took on a desert trip the earthenware water | Isa 41 25; Wisd 15 7). The clay used on the


jars specially made for travel, preferring them to the skin | Syrian coast is usually a mixture of several earths,


bottles such as the Arab guides carried, for the bottles : d 3
taint the water. At the end of six days only one out | Which the potters have learned by experience gives


of eight carthenware jars was left. One accident or | the right consistency. The prepared clay is finally
another had broken all the others. packed away and allowed to stand another six


When the Israelites became settled in their new | months before using, during which time the quality,
surroundings they were probably not slow in adopt- | esp. the plasticity, 1s believed to improve.
ing earthenware vessels, because of their advantages, Before the invention of the potter’s wheel the
and their pottery gradually developed distinctive | clay was shaped into vessels by hand. In all of the
though decadent types known as Jewish. countries previously mentioned the specimens rep-

Toward the close of the
Heb monarchy the pot-
tery of the land again
showed the effect of out-
side influences. The red
and black figured ware of
the Greeks was intro-
duced, and still later the
less artistic Rom types,
and following these by
several centuries came the
crude glazed vessels of the
Arab. or Saracenic period
—forms which still per-
sist.


It is not within the limits
of this article to describe
in detail one
characteristics

2. Forms of the pottery
of the various

periods. The accompanying
illustrations taken from pho-
tographs of pottery in the
Archaeological Museum_ of
the Syrian Protestant Col-
lege, Beirfit, give a general
idea of the forms. Any at-
tempt at classification of
Palestinian pottery must be _ i
considered more or less provisional, due to the uncer- resenting the oldest work are all hand-made.


tainty of origin of many forms. The classification of
pre-Rom pottery here used is that adopted by Bliss and Chopped straw was usually added to the clay of these


Macalister and based upon Dr. Petrie’s studies. early specimens. This material is omitted in the

(1) Early pre-Israelite, called also ‘‘ Amorite” (before
1600 BC).—Most of the vessels of this period are hand-
made and often irregular in shape. A coarse clay,
turning red or black when burned, characterizes many
specimens. Some are brick red. Specimens with a
polished or burnished surface are also found.

(2) Late pre-Israelite or Phoenician (1500-1000 BC).—
From this period on, tbe pottery is all wheel-turned.
The clay is of a finer quality and burned to a brown or
red. The ware is thin and light. Water jars with
pointed instead of flat bases appear. Some are deco-
rated with bands or lines of different colored meshes.
Cypriote ware with its incised decorations was a like
development of the period.

(3) Jewish (1000-300 BC).—Forcign influence is lost.
The types which survive degenerate. New forms are
introduced. Ordinary coarse clay burning red is used.
Cooking pots are most characteristic. Many examples
peer Heb stamps, the exact meaning of which is uncer-
ain.

(4) Seleucitdan.—Foreign influence again appears. Gr
and other types are imported and copied. Ribbed sur-
faces are introduced. The old type of burnishing disap-

ears.
. (5) Roman and Saracenic.—Degenerate forms per-
slsting till the present time.

(6) Present-day pottery.


The clay as found in the ground is not suitable for Potter's Wheel Still Used in Patestine and Syria.

use. It is dug out and brought to the vicinity of «t, table; b, fovtrest; ¢, socket for pivot of wheel; d, slanting seat against
the pottery (the “potter's field,” Mt Sennen dee @, upper wheel on which jar is shaped; /, lower wheel

3. Methods 27 7) and allowed to weather for :

of Pro- weeks. The dry material is then | wheel-shaped objects. In a Mt. Lebanon village

duction dumped into a cement-lined tank or | which is noted for its pottery the jars are still made
wooden trough and covered with water. | by hand. Throughout the country the clay stoves

When the lumps have softened they are stirred in ! are shaped by hand out of clay mixed with straw.


Potters at Work (Egyptian).


LEVEL OF FLooR


Seleucidan Period, 300 BC
Note appearance of ‘‘ combing ’’


Cypriote Pottery
1, 2 and 3, incised ware of pre-bronze
period before 2000 BC


4 and 5, of Phoenician Period,
1500 BC


ANCIENT POTTERY


Greco-Roman Period
1, red and black figured, hefore 320 BC
2and %, Cyprian of 310 BC


4, 5 and 6, Roinan pottery from Beirit
Note characteristic ‘‘combing '*


Jewish Period
Blackening on 3 duo to nse over fire


Pre-Israelite Period
1, hand-made throughout
1, 2 and 3, of varly period or Amorito


4,5, Gand 7, of late period or Phoenician


4, 6 and 7 are burnished


2425


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA _ Potter, Pottery


The shaping of vessels is now done on wheels, the
use of which dates back to earliest history. Prob-
ably the Egyptians were the first to use such a
machine ([Vth Dynasty). In their original form
they were stone disks arranged to be turned by
hand on a vertical axis. The whecl stood only a
few inches above the ground, and the potter sat or
squatted down on the ground before it as he shaped
his object (see Wilkinson, Ancient Egypt, II, fig.
397). The wheels used in Pal and Syria today
probably differ in no respect from those used in the
potter’s house visited by Jeremiah (Jer 18 1-6).
The wheel or, to be more exact, wheels (cf Jer 18
3) are fitted on a square wooden or iron shaft about
3 ft. long. The lower disk is about 20 in. in
diameter, and the upper one 8 in. or 12in. The


dross, which comes from the parting of silver, for
glazing their jars (cf Prov 26 23).

In firing pottery there are always some jars which
come out imperfect. In unpacking the kiln and
storing the product others get broken. As a con-
sequence the ground in the vicinity of a pottery
is always strewn with potsherds (sce also separate
article). The ancient poticries can frequently be
located by these sherds. The potter’s field men-
tioned in Mt 27 7.10 was probably a ficld near a
pottery strewn with potsherds, thus making it use-
less for cultivation although uscful to the potter as
a place in which to weather his clay or to dry his
pots before firing.

Pottery was used anciently for storing liquids, such
as winc or oil, fruits, grains, ete. The blackened bot-


InreRiIoR oF Porrery.


lower end of the shaft is pointed and fits into a stone
socket or bearing in which it rotates. A second
bearing just below the upper disk is so arranged
that the shaft inclines slightly away from the potter.
The potter leans against a slanting seat, bracing
himself with one foot so that he will not slide off,
and with the sole of his other foot he kicks the
upper face of the lower wheel, thus making the
whole machine rotate. The lower wheel is often
of stone to give greater momentum. With a
marvelous dexterity, which a novice tries in vain
to imitate, he gives the pieces of clay any shape
he desires.

After the vessel is shaped it is dried and finally
fired in a furnace or kiln. The ancient Egyp kiln
was much smaller than the one used today (Wilkin-
son, II, 192). Most of the kilns are of the crudest
form of the “up-draught” variety, i.e. a largecham-
ber with perforated bottom and a fireplace beneath.
The fire passes up through the holes, around the
jars packed in tiers in the chamber, and goes out
at the top. An interesting survival of an early Gr
form is still used in Rachiyet-el-Fakhar in Syria.
In this same village the potters also use the lead


toms of pots of the Jewish period show that they were
used for cooking. Earthenware dishes were also used
for boiling clothes. Every one of these
4. Uses uses still continues. To one living in
Bible lands today it seems inconceivable
that the Hebrews did not readily adopt, as some
writers disclaim, the porous earthen water jars which
they found already in use in their new country. Such
jars were used for carrying live coals to start a fire,
and not only for drawing water, as they are today,
but for cooling it (lsa 30 14). The evaporation of
the water which oozes through the porous material
cools down the contents of a Jar, whereas a metal or
leathern vessel would leave it tepid or tainted. They
were also used for holding shoemaker’s glue or wax;
for filling up the cracks of a wall before plastering;
ground up they are used as sand in mortar.
Only a few of the Heb words for vessels of different


sorts, which in all probability were made of pottery,
have been trd by terms which indicate that


5. Biblica] fact. (For wan: heres, and ae yacar,


Terms see Eartnen Vessets; Osrraca.)
“2, kadh, is tri ‘‘pitcher"’ in Gen 24


14 ff: Jgs 716 ff; Eccl 12 6 (cf xepduior, kerdmion, Mk


Potter, Pottery
Pretorian Guard


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2426


14 18; Lk 22 10); ‘‘jar’’ in 1 K 17 12 (ef vépia, hudrta,
Jn 4 28). The kedh corresponded in size and use to
the Arab. jarrah (cf Eng. deriv. ‘‘jar’’). The jarrah
is used for drawing and storing water and less frequently
for holding other liquids or solids. It is used as an ap-
proximate standard of measure. For example, a man
estimates the capacity of a cistern in jirdr (pl.of jarrah).

DADS, bakbuk, ‘‘a bottle,” usually leathern, butin Jer


19 1.10 of pottery. This may bave been like the Arab.
Liar! , ibrik, which causes a gurgling sound when
liquid is turned from it. Bakbuk is rendered ‘'cruse”’ in
1K 143.

"2D, keli, “‘vessel,’’ was of wood, metal or earthen-
ware in Lev 6 28; Ps 2 9; $1 12; Isa 30 14; Jer 19
11, ete; cf ootpakivos, ostrdkinos, 2 Cor 4 7, etc.

q_- pakh, is trd ‘vial’ in 1 $101; 2K 91
so-called pilgrim bottles.

OD, &és, also MUP» kadsah, ‘‘cup” or ‘'bowl,”” tr¢

a £
“cup” in many passages, like Arab. S, ka’s, which


| of Modern Discoveries;
see |


Figurative: The shaping of clay into pottery
typified the molding of the eharacters of individuals
or nations by a master mind (Jer 18 1-6; Isa 29
16; 459; 648; Rom 9 20ff); eommonplaee
(Lam 4 2; 2 Tim 2 20); frailness (Ps 2 9; Isa
30 14; Jer 19 11; Dnl 2 41; 2 Cor 47; Rev
2 27).

Literature.—Publications of PEF, esp. Bliss and
Macalister, Excavations in Pal; Excavations of Gezer;
Bliss, A Mound of Many Cities; Flinders Petrie, Teil
el-Hesy; Bliss and Dickie, Excavations at Jerus; Perrot
and Chipiez, History of Art (i) in Chaldaea and Assyria,
(ii) Sardinia and Judaea, (ili) Cyprus and Phoenicia, (iv)
Egypt; King and Hall, Egypt and Western Asia in Light
8. Birch, History of Ancient
Pottery; Wilkinson, The Ancient Egyptians; PEFQ; EB;
HDB.


James A. Parco
POTTER’S, pot’érz, FIELD. See AceLpama.


POUND, pound (722, mdneh; pvd, mnd, Altpa,


Exrerion oF Porrary.


was formerly used for drinking instead of modern cups.
DAG, gabhi2, trad “bowl” in Jer 35 5.
“Ab. périr, trd “pots” in Nu 11 8; cf Jgs 6 19;
18 2 14; ef xvrpa, chutra, which is similar to Arab.
2


?


M5, kidr, commonly used for cooking today.
AST, ‘ecedh, “pot,” Jer 22 28 ARV.


The chemical changes wrought in clay by weath-
ering and firing render it practically indestructible
when exposed to the weather and to the

6. Arehaeo- action of moisture and the gaseous
logical Sig- and solid compounds found in the soil.
nificance When the sun-baked briek walls of a
Palestinian city crumbled, they buried,

often intaet, the earthenware vessels of the period.
In the eourse of time, perhaps after deeades or
centuries, another city was built on the débris of
the former. The brick walls required no digging
for foundations, and so the substrata were left
undisturbed. After long periods of time the de-
struction, by conquering armics or by neglect, of
sueeceding cities, produeed mounds rising above the
surrounding eountry, sometimes to a height of 60
or 100 ft. A typical example of such a mound is
Tellel-Hesy (? Laehish). Dy. Flinders Petrie, as
a result of the study of the various strata of this
mound, has formed the basis of a classification of
Palestinian pottery (see 2, above). With a knowl-
edge of the forms of pottery of each period, the ex-
ecavator has a guide, though not infallible, to the
date of the ruins he finds. See also Crarrs, 11, 4.


litra; Lat libra): Pound does not eorreetly represent
the Heb maneh, whieh was more than a pound (see
Maneu). The litra of Jn 12 3 and 19 39 is the
Rom pound (libra) of 4,950 grains, whieh is less than
a pound troy, being about 10} oz. In a monetary
sense (its use in Lk 19 13-25) it is the mna, or
méineh, whieh was either of silver or gold, the former,
whieh is probably the one referred to by Luke, being
equal to £6.17, or about $33; the latter £102.10 or
$510. See WEIGHTS AND MasurREs.

Figurative: ‘Pound,” like “talent,” is used in
the NT for intellectual gifts and spiritual endow-
ments, as in the passage given above.

H. Porrsr

POVERTY, pov’ér-ti: This word, found but onee
in the OT (Gen 45 11) outside of the Book of Prov

in which it oeceurs 11 t (6 11; 10 15;
1. OT 11 24. AV; 13 18; 20 13; 23.21; 24
References 34} 28 19.22 AV; 80 8; 31 7), isatr

of WD, yiwwarésh, “to be poor,” “to
come to poverty” (Gen 45 11). Four different Heb
words are used in the 11 references in Prov, all
bearing the idea of being in need of the neces-
sities of life, although a distinction is made between
being in want and being in extreme want. Prov
18 23 well illustrates the general meaning of “pov-
erty” as found in this book: “The poor [W™, rash,
“to be impoverished,” ‘“destitute”] useth entreaties;
but the rich answereth roughly.”

“Poverty” oeeurs 8 t in the NT (2 Cor 8 2.9;


2427


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Potter, Pottery
Pretorian Guard


Rev 2 9) and is the tr of rrwxela, ptdcheia, “to be
reduced to a state of beggary or pauperism.”
The teaching of the Bible on this
2. NT subject would, however, be incomplete
References unless all the references to the “poor”
were considered in this connection.
Indeed the word for “poverty” has its root in the
word for ‘poor’ (rrwxés, pidchés; "2Y, ‘ant, or at
dal). See Poor.
At least two degrees of poverty are recognized.
The OT does not distinguish between them as
clearly as does the NT. The NT, for


3. Two example, by its use of two words for
Degrees of ‘poor’ sets forth this distinction. In
Poverty 2 Cor 9 9, “he hath given to the


’ poor,” the word used is tévys, pénés,
which does not indicate extreme poverty, but simply
a condition of living from hand to mouth, a bare and
scant livelihood, such as that made by the widow
who cast her two mites into the treasury (Lk 21 2);
while in such passages as 2 Cor 6 10: “As poor,
yet making many rich,” and Lk 6 20: “Blessed
are ye poor” (rrwxol, pldchot), a condition is indi-
cated of abject beggary, pauperism, such as that in
which we find Lazarus who was laid at the gate of
the rich man’s palace, begging even the crumbs
which fell from the table of the rich man (Lk 16 20.
21). It was into this latter condition that Christ
voluntarily entered for our sakes: “For ye know
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor [a
mendicant, a beggar], that ye through his poverty
might become rich” (2 Cor 8 9). Between 30
and 40 t in the NT this latter word is used.

The causes of poverty are failure of harvest and
poor crops (Neh 6 1-3); devastation caused by
enemies sweeping through the land;
the oppression of the people by their
own rulers (Isa 5 8); excessive inter-
est, usury (Neh 5 1-5); persecution
because of the faith (2 Cor 6,8). Widows and
orphans by reason of their desolate condition were
in a special sense subject to poverty. Gluttony
brings poverty (Prov 23 21), as does indolence
(28 19).


4, Causes
of Poverty


God commanded His people to care for the poor. The
exhortations to relieve poverty are numerous, esp ms the
indness


oor by restoring to them any possessions which they,
E ieee ‘a overty, had been compelled to deed
over to their creditors (Lev 25 25-54; Dt 15, 12-15).
God required certain tithes from His people which were
to be devoted to the helping of the poor and needy
(Dt 14 28; 26 12.13). So in the NT the apostles lay
special emphasis upon remembering the poor inthe
matter of offerings. Paul, esp., inculcated this duty
upon the churches which he had founded (Rom 15 26;
Gal 2 10). The attitude of the early Christian church
toward its poor is amply illustrated in that first attempt
at communism in Acts 2, 4. James, in his Ep., sting-
ingly reminds his readers of the fact that they had grossly
neglected the important matter of caring for the poor
(ch 2). Indeed, so strong is he in his plea for the caro of
the poor that he claims that the man who wilfully neg-
lects the needy therehy proves that the love of God has
no place in his heart, and that he has consequently no
real faith in God (vs 14-26). _ Christians are exhorted to
ahound in the grace of hospitality, which, of course, is
nothing less than kindness to_ those in need (Rom 12 13;
1 Tim 6 18; 1 Jn 3 17). See Poor.


The happiest mother and the noblest and holiest
son that ever lived were among the poor. Jesus
was born of poor parents, and had not where to lay
His head (Mt 8 20), no money with which to pay
tribute (Mt 17 27), no home to call His own (Jn


7 53; cf 8 1), and was buried in a borrowed grave
(Mt 27 57-61).

Figurative: Of course there is also a spiritual
poverty indicated by the use of this word—a poverty
in spiritual things: ‘Blessed are the poor in spirit.”
By this is meant, Blessed are they who feel that
they have no seltf-righteousness, no worth of their
own to present to Christ as a ground of their salva-
tion, who feel their utter bankruptcy of spirit, who
say “Nothing in my hand I bring.” It is to this
state of spirit that Christ refers in Rev 3 17:
“Because thou sayest, I am rich, and have gotten
riches, and have need of nothing; and knowest not
that thou art the wretched one and miserable and
poor and blind and naked.”’ Wiriam Evans

POWDERS, pou'dérz (029 MPa, ’abhrkath
rokhél): The ‘“‘powders of the merchant’ in Cant
3 6 were probably perfumes, as they are associated
with myrrh and frankincense in the account of the
festal procession of the litter of Solomon. They
may have been some sweet-scented wood in powder,
or else some form of incense.


POWER, pou’ér: This word, indicative of might,
strength, force, is used in the OT to render very
many Heb terms, the tr in numerous instances
being varied in RV to words like ‘‘valor,” “rule,”
“strength,” “might,” “dominion.” The principal
words for “power” in the NT are duvayus, diinamis,
and éfovela, exousia. In the latter case RV fre-
quently changes to “authority” (Mk 3 15; 6 7;
Eph 1 21, etc) or “right” (Rom 9 21; 1 Cor 9
6; 2 Thess 3 9, etc). Power is attributed pre-
eminently to God (1 Ch 29 11; Job 26 14; Ps
66 7; 145 11; Rev 7 12, etc). On this attribute
of power of God, see OmNIpOTENCE. The supreme
manifestation of the power, as of the wisdom and
love of God, is in redemption (1 Cor 1 18.24).
The preaching of the gospel is accompanied by the
power of the Holy Spirit (1 Cor 2 4; 1 Thess 1 5,
etc). Miracles, as “mighty works,” are denoted
by the term “powers” (so Mt 11 21.23 RVm, etc).
The end of all time’s developments is that God
takes to Him His great power and reigns (Rev
11 17). Jamres ORR


POWER OF KEYS. See Krys, Powsr or.


PRETORIAN, pré-td’ri-an, GUARD: “My bonds
in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and in all
other places’ (Phil 113 AV). This verse is tré in
RV, “My bonds became manifest in Christ through-
out the whole pretorian guard, and to all the rest,”
and is noteworthy.

It has been usual to connect the words, ‘the soldier
that guarded him,” Acts 28 16, with this statement

in Phil 1 13, that the apostle’s bonds


1. Pre- were manifest in the whole pretorium,
torium in and to understand that the former was
Phil— the cause of the latter; that the result
Usual View of Paul’s making the gospel known in


his own hired house to those soldiers to
one of whom he was chained by the wrist day and
night, was that it became known in all the prato-
rian regiment that his bonds were endured for
Christ’s sake, that it was for conscience’ sake that
he was suffering wrongfully, that he was no wrong-
doer but a prisoner of Jesus Christ. In this way
the gospel would spread through the whole of the
pretorian guard in that regiment’s headquarters
which were situated in a permanent camp estab-
lished by Tiberius in Rome, outside the Colline Gate,
at the NE. of the city. This verse would also
mean that the gospel had been proclaimed in the
same way to those members of the pretorian guard


Pretorian Guard
Praise


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2428


who were on duty as the bodyguard of the emperor
and who were lodged in one of the buildings which
adjoined the emperor’s palace on the Palatine
oill.
Thus Lightfoot, discussing the meaning of the phrase
“in the whole prastorium'’ (Comm. on Phil, 99 ff), revicws
the different interpretations which have
2. Lightfoot been given of the word, and shows (1) that
on Int re- 2° instance is to be found of its signifying
Ly erpre- Nero's palace on the Palatine Hill; (2)
tations that there is no authority for the interpre-
tation which would make it mean the
pretorian barracks on the Palatine; (3) that neither is
there any authority for making it mean the pretorian
camp outside the walls of Rome. In Lightfoot’s words
(op. cit., 101), ‘All attempts to give a local sense to
‘praetorium' thus fail for want of evidence.” Lightfoot
accordingly defends the interpretation, ‘‘the pretorian
guard,” and RV, ahove cited, follows him in this.


One of the meanings of “preetorium” is a coun-
eil of war, the officers who met in the general’s
tent (see Prawrorium). Lightfoot is
3. View of very decided in interpreting ‘“prato-
Mommsen rium” to mean the pretorian regi-
and Ramsay ment, the imperial guards, and he
adds, ‘‘in this sense and in this alonc
can it be safely affirmed that the apostle would
hear the word preetorium used daily,” and that
this sense is in all respeets appropriate. But the
other meaning, though not appropriate here, viz.
a eouneil of war composed of the officers and their
general, is much nearer to that which is now ae-
cepted by such authorities as Mommsen and Sir
W. M. Ramsay, who hold that im this passage
“preetorium’? means a council, not of war, however,
but the couneil of judgment, the emperor’s court of
appeal in whieh he was assisted by his legal asses-
sors (see Mommsen, Berlin Akad. Sttzungsber., 1895,
501; Ramsay, Sé. Paul the Traveller and the Rom
Citizen, 357; Workman, Persecution in the Early
Church, 35). Over this court there presided the
emperor or his delegate, the prefect of the pra-
torian guard, and associated with him were twenty
assessors seleeted from the senators. Formerly
their votes were taken by ballot, but Nero preferred
to receive from each a written opinion and on the
next day to deliver his judgment in person. Such,
it is now believed, is the preetorium to which Paul
refers.

The meaning, therefore, of the words, ‘““My bonds
in Christ are manifest in the whole pretorium,” will
be that when Paul wrote the Ep. to the Phil his first
Rom trial was already so far advaneed that he had
been ahle to impress upon his judges, the twenty
assessors and their president, the fact that he was
no evildoer, but that the sole eause of his imprison-
ment was his loyalty to Christ. It was manifest
to all the members of the emperor’s court of appeal
that Paul was enduring his long imprisonment,
suffering wrongfully, but only for the sake of Jesus
Christ.

Tho important bearing will be seen which this sig-
nification of ‘‘preterium”’ in this passage has on the


question of the order in which Eph, Phil,
Col and Philem—the epp. of Paul's cap-


4. Bearing tivity in Rome—were written. On suh-
on Paul’s jective evidence Lightfoot concludes that
Captivity Phil is the earliest of them, basing his
and Trial opinion largely on the resemblance which


exists In many particulars between the
thoughts and expressions in Phil and in
the Ep. to the Rom, making Phil, as it werc, a connecting
link hetween Paul’s earlier and his later epp. See
Lightfoot, Philippians, 42f; he writes: ‘These resem-
blances suggest as early a date for the Ep. to the Phil as
circumstances will allow,’’ earlier, that is, than Col and
Eph. But Lightfoot's argument is set aside by the new
light which has been thrown upon the real meaning
of “pretorium."’ Sir W. M. Ramsay (St, Paul the
Traveller, 8357) writes: ‘' The trial seems to have occurred
toward the end of AD 61. _ Its earlicst stages were over
before Paul wrote to the Philippians, for he says, ‘The
things which happened unto me have fallen out rather
unto the progress of the Good News;so that my bonds
became manifest in Christ in the whole Pretorium, and


to all the rest; and that most of the Brethren in the Lord,
being confident in my bonds, are more abundantly bold
to speak the word of God without fear.’ This passage
has been generally misconeeived and connected with the
period of imprisonment; and here again we are indehted
to Mommsen for the proper interpretation. The Pre-
torium is the whole hody of persons connected with the
sitting in judgment, the supreme Imperial Court, doubt-
less in this case the Prefect or hoth Prefects of the Pre-
torian Guard, representing the emperor in his capacity
as the fountain of justice, together with the assessors and
high officers of the court. The expression of the chapter
as a whole shows that the trial is partly finished, and the
issue as yet is so favorable that the Brethren are em-
boldened hy the success of Paul's courageous and free-
spoken defence and the strong impression which he evi-
dently produced on the court; but he himself, being
entirely occupied with the trial, is for the moment
revented from preaching as he had been doing when
he wrote to the Colossians and the Asian churches

generally.”
Thus the correct meaning of ‘‘ preetorium"’ enables us
to fix the date of the Ep. to the Phil as having been
written close to the end of Paul's first


5. Bearing Rom imprisonment. That this inference

Date of is correct is confirmed by various other
on" ate o facts, such as his promise to visit that city,
Epistle and the fact that in Phil 2 20f AV he says


regarding Timothy, ‘‘I have no man like-
minded, who will naturally care for your state. For
all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's."
We could not conceive of Paul writing like this if Mark,
Tychicus, Aristarchus, and esp. if Luke had been with
him then, and yet we know (Col 4 7.10.14) that each
and all of these companions of the apostle were with him
in Rome when he wrote the Ep. to the Col. They had
evidently, along with others, heen sent on missions to
Asia or other places, so that Paul now had only Timothy
‘‘likeminded“’ when he wrote to Philippi. See Pau, THE
ApostLeE; Pariippians, EpisTLE To THE.


All these facts and considerations confirm us in
aecepting the signification of ‘“‘preetorium” as the
emperor’s supreme eourt of appeal, before which
Paul when he wrote the Ep. to the Phil had so
conducted his defence as to produce a most favor-
ahle impression, from which he inferred that he
might soon be liberated from imprisonment. And
his liberation, as the event proved, soon fol-
lowed. JoHN RUTHERFURD


PRETORIUM, pré-t’ri-um (rpardpiov, praité-
rion, Mt 27 27 [AV “common hall]; Mk 16 16;
Jn 18 28.33; 19 9 [in all m “palace,” and in the last
three AV “judgment hall’’]; Acts 23 35, [Herod’s]
“palace,” m “Pretorium,”’ AV “judgment hall’;
Phil 1 13, “pretorian guard’”’ [m ‘Gr ‘in the whole
Pretorium,’’’ AV “‘palace,’”’ m ‘‘Cesar’s court’’}):

The Pretorium was originally the headquarters
of a Rom camp, but in the provinces the name

became attached to the governor's


1. Govern- official residence. In order to provide
or’s Offi- _residenees for their provincial govern-
cial Resi- ors, the Romans were accustomed to
dence seize and appropriate the palaces


which were formerly the homes of the
princes or kings in conquered countries. Such a
residence might sometimes be in a royal palace, as
was probably the case in Caesarea, where the proc-
urator used Herod’s palace (Acts 23 35).
The Preetorium where Jesus was brought to trial
has been traditionally located in the neighborhood
of the present Turkish barracks where


2. In Gos- once stood the Antonia and where was
pels stationed a large garrison (cf Acts 21
Herod’s 32-35), but the statements of Jos make
Palace it almost certain that the headquarters


_ of the procurator were at Herod’s pal-
ace. This was a building whose magnificence Jos
can hardly sufficiently appraise (Wars, I, xxi, 1; V,
iv, 4). It was in this palace that “Florus, the proc-
urator took up his quarters, and having placed
his tribunal in front of it, held his sessions and the
chief priests, influential persons and notables of the
city appeared before the tribunal’ (Wars, II, xiv,
8). Later on, “Florus . . . . brought such as were
with him out of the king’s palace, and would have


2429


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Pretorian Guard
Praise


compelled them to get as far as the citadel [Antonia];
but his attempt failed” (11, xv, 5). The word tr
“palace” here is aulé, the same word ag is tr@
“court” in Mk 15 16, “the soldiers led him away
within the court [aulé], which is the Pretorium.”
There is no need to suppose that Herod Antipas
was in the same palace (Lk 28 4 ff); it is more
probable he went to the palace of the Hasmoneans
which lay lower down on the eastern slope of this
southwest hill, where at a later time Jos expressly
states that Herod Agrippa II and his sister Bernice
were living (Wars, Il, xvi, 8).

The palace of Herod occupied the highest part
of the southwest hill near the northwest angle of
the ancient city, now traditionally called Zion, and
the actual site of the Pretorium cannot have been
far removed from the Turkish barracks near the
so-called “Tower of David.” It is interesting to
note that the two stations of the Turkish garrison
of Jerus today occupy the same spots as did the
Rom garrison of Christ’s time. It is needless to
point ont how greatly this view of the situation of
the Pretorium must modify the traditional claims
of the “Via Dolorosa,” the whole course of which
depends on the theory that the “Way of Sorrow’
began at the Antonia, the Pratorium of late ecclesi-
astical tradition. See also GABBATHA.

With regard to the expression év dA Tg mpaitupin, en héla
16 praitérié,in Phil 1 13, there is now a general consensus

ROC teS Se ae hen mipenaiepeecerian
3. Phil 1:13 ey Hen thowsanil in Sb which
was instituted by Augustus. St. Paul was
allowed to reside in his private house iu the custody of_a
pretorian soldier. As these were doubtless constantly


changed, it must have become ‘‘manifest’' to the whole
guard that his bonds were for the sake of Christ. See


also preceding article.
E. W. G. MasrermMan
PRAISE, praz (M2m, thillah, “psalm,”
“praise,” nnn, todhah, “confession,” ‘‘thanks-
giving,” MAW, shabhah, “to praise,”


1. Its “glorify,” “Wat, zamar, TT, yadhah,
Meaning ‘to stretch out the hand,” “confess”;

alvéw, ainéd, éravéw, epainéd, trarvos,
épaines): The word comes from the Lat pre-


tium, “price,” or “value,” and may be defined
generally as an ascription of value or worth. Praise
may be bestowed upon unworthy objects or from
improper motives, but true praise consists in a
sincere acknowledgment of a real conviction of
worth. Its type may be seen in the representa-
tion given in the Apocalypse of the adoration of
God and of the Lamb, which is inspired _by a
sense of their worthiness to be adored (Rev 4
11; 5 12). ; ;
Man may be the object of praise, and may receive
it either from God or from his fellow-men. In the
former case (Rom 2 29; 1 Cor 4 5)
2. With the praise is inevitably just, as resting
Man as Its on a Divine estimate of worth; in the
Object latter case its value depends upon
the grounds and motives that lie
behind it. There is a praise which is itself a con-
demnation (Lk 6 26), an honor which seals the
eyes in unbelief (Jn 6 44), a careless use of the
epithet “good” which is dishonoring to God_ (Lk
18 19). This is the “praise of men” which Jesus
warned His followers to shun as being incompatible
with the ‘praise of God” (Mt 6 1-4; cf Jn 12
43; Gal 1 10; 1 Thess 2 6). On the other hand,
there is a praise that is the instinctive homage
of the soul to righteousness (Lk 23 47), the
acknowledgment given to well-doing by just gov-
ernment (Rom 13 3; 1 Pet 2 14), the tribute of
the churches to distinguished Christian service
(2 Cor 8 18). Such praise, so far from being in-
compatible with the praise of God, is a reflection


of it in human consciousness; and so Paul associ-
ates praise with virtue as an aid and incentive
to holy living on which the mind should dwell
(Phil 4 8).

In the Bible it is God who is esp. brought before

us as the objeet of praise. His whole creation
; praises Him, from the angels of heaven
3. With (Ps 103 20; Rev 5 11) to those lower
God as Its existences that are unconscious or
Object even inanimate (Ps 19 1-4; 148 1-
‘ 10; Rev 6 18). But it is with the
praises offered to God by man, and with the human
duty of praising God, that the Scriptures are prin-
cipally concerned. Iu regard to this subject the
following points may be noticed:

(1) The grounds of praise—Sometimes God is
praised for His inherent qualities. His majesty
(Ps 104 1) or holiness (Isa 6 3) fills the mind, and
He is “glorified as God’ (Rom 1 21) in view of
what He essentially is. More frequently He is
praised for His works in creation, providence, and
redemption. References may be dispensed with
here, for the evidence meets us on almost every
page of the sacred literature from Gen to Rev, and
the Book of Ps in partienlar, from beginning to
end, is occupied with these themes. When God’s
operations under these aspects present themselves,
not simply as general effects of His power and
wisdom, but as expressions of His personal love
to the individual, the nation, the church, His
works become benefits, and praise passes into
blessing and thanksgiving (Pss 34, 103; Eph 1 3;
1 Pet 1 3).

(2) The modes of praise.-—True praise of God, as
distinguished from false praise (Isa 29 13; Mt 16
8), is first of all an inward emotton—a gladness and
rejoicing of the heart (Ps 4 7; 33 21), a musie of
the soul and spirit (Ps 108 1; Lk 1 46f) which
no language can adequately express (Ps 106 2;
2 Cor 9 15). But utterance is natural to strong
emotion, and the mouth instinctively strives to ex-
press the praises of the heart (Ps 51 15 and passim).
Many of the most moving passages in Scripture
come from the inspiration of the spirit of praise
awakened by the contemplation of the Divine
majesty or power or wisdom or kindness, but above
all by the revelation of redeeming love. Again,
the spirit of praise is a social spirit calling for social
utterance. The man who praises God desires to
praise Him in the hearing of other men (Ps 40 10),
and desires also that their praises should be joined
with his own (84 3). Further, the spirit of praise
is a spirit of song. It may find expression in other
ways—in sacrifice (Lev 7 13), or testimony (Ps
66 16), or prayer (Col 1 3); but it finds its most
natural and its fullest utterance in lyrical and
musical forms. When God fills the heart with
praise He puts a new song into the mouth (Ps 40
3). The Book of Ps is the proof of this for the OT.
And when we pass to the NT we find that, alike for
angels and men, for the church on earth and the
church in heaven, the higher moods of praise express
themselves in bursts of song (Lk 2 14; Eph & 19;
Col 8 16; Rev 5 9; 14 3; 15 3). Finally, both
in the OT and NT,.the spirit of song gives birth to
ordered modes of public praise. In their earlier ex-
pressions the praises of Israel were joyful outbursts
in which song was mingled with shouting and
dancing to a rude accompaniment of timbrels and
trumpets (Ex 15 20 ff; 28 6 5.14ff). In_ later
times Israel had its sacred Psalter, its guilds of
trained singers (Ezr 2 41; Neh 7 44), its skilled
musicians (Pss 42, 49, etc); and the praise that
waited for God in Zion was full of the solemn beauty
of holiness (Ps 29 2; 969). In the NT the
Psalter is still a manual of social praise. The


Prayer
Prayers of Jesus


“hymn” which Jesus sang with His disciples after
the Last Supper (Mt 26 30) would be a Hebrew
psalm, probahly from the Hallel (Pss 113-118)
which was used at the Passover service, and various
references in the Epp. point to the continued em-
ployment of the ancient psalms in Christian worship
(1 Cor 14 26; Eph 6 19; Col 3 16; Jas 6 13).
But the Psalter of the Jewish church could not
suffice to express the distinctive moods of Christian
feeling. Original utterance of the spirit of Chris-
tian song was one of the manifestations of the gift
of tongues (1 Cor 14 15-17). Paul distinguishes
hymns and spiritual songs from psalms (Eph 6 19;
Col 3 16); and it was hymns that he and Silas
sang at midnight in the prison of Philippi (Acts 16
25 RV). But from hymns and songs that were the
spontaneous utterance of individual feeling the
development was natural, in NT as in OT times, to
hymns that were sung in unison by a whole congre-
gation; and in rhythmic passages like 1 Tim 3 16;
Rev 15 3f, we seem to have fragments of a primi-
tive Christian hymnology, such as Pliny hears wit-
ness to for the early years of the 2d cent., when he
informs Trajan that the Christians of Bithynia at
their morning meetings sang a hymn in alternate
strains to Christ as God (Hp. x.97). See Prrsx-
CUTION.

(3) The duty of praise-—Praise is everywhere
represented in the Bible as a duty no less than a
natural impulse and a delight. To fail in this duty
is to withhold from God a glory that helongs to
Him (Ps 50 23; Rom 1 20f); it is to shut one’s
eyes to the signs of His presence (Isa 40 26 ff), to be
forgetful of His mercies (Dt 6 12), and unthankful
for His kindness (Lk 6 35). If we are not to fall
into these sins, but are to give to God the honor and
glory and gratitude we owe Him, we must earnestly
cultivate the spirit and habit of praise. From holy
men of old we learn that this may be done hy arous-
ing the soul from its slothfulness and sluggishness
(Ps 57 8; 103 1), by fixing the heart upon God
(67 7; 108 1), by meditation on His works and
ways (77 11 ff), by recounting His benefits (103 2),
above all, for those to whom He has spoken in His
Son, by dwelling upon His unspeakable gift (2 Cor
9 15; cf Rom 8 31ff; 1 Jn 3.1). See also Wor-
SHIP. J. C. Lampert


PRAYER, prdr (6énots, déésis, mpocevyh, pros-
euché, tvtevius, énteuxis; for an excellent discussion
of the meaning of these sce Thayer’s Lexicon, p.
126, s.v. 5éqots; the chief vbs. are edxopar, evichomat,
mporevxyopnat, prosevichomat, and Séopo1, déomai, esp.
in Lk and Acts; alréw, aitéd, “to ask a favor,”
distinguished from épwrtde, erdtdd, “to ask a ques-
tion,” is found occasionally): In the Bible “prayer”
is used in a simpler and a more complex, 2 narrower
and a wider signification. In the former case it is
supplication for benefits either for one’s self (peti-
tion) or for others (intercession). In the latter it is
an act of worship which covers all the attitudes of the
soul in its approach to God. Supplication is at the
heart of it, for prayer always springs out of a sense
of need and a belief that God is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek Him (He 11 6). But adora-
tion and confession and thanksgiving also find a
place, so that the suppliant becomes a worshipper.
Jt is unnecessary to distinguish all the various terms
for praycr that are employed in the OT and the NT.
But the fact should be noticed that in the Heh and
Gr alike there are on the one hand words for prayer
that denote a direct petition or short, sharp ery of
the heart in its distress (Ps 30 2; 2 Cor 12 8),
and on the other “prayers” like that of Hannah
(1 § 2 1-10), which is in reality a song of thanks-
giving, or that of Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2430


in which intercession is mingled with doxology (Eph
3 14-21).

The history of prayer as it meets us here reflects

various stages of experience and revelation. In the

patriarchal period, when ‘men began
1. Inthe to call upon the name of the Lord’
OT (Gen 4 26; ef 12 8; 21 33), prayer

is naive, familiar and direct (16 2 ff;
17 18; 18 23 ff; 24 12). It is evidently associated
with sacrifice (12 8; 13 4; 26 25), the underlying
idea probably being that the gift or offering would
help to elicit the desired response. Analogous to
this is Jacoh’s vow, itself a species of prayer, in which
the granting of desired henefits becomes the condi-
tion of promised service and fidelity (28 20ff). In
the preéxilic history of Israel prayer still retains
many of the primitive features of the patriarchal
type (Ex 3 4; Nu 11 11-15; Jgs 6 13 ff; 11 30f;
18111; 28 15 8; Ps 66 13f). The Law has
remarkably little to say on the subject, differing here
from the later Judaism (see Schiirer, HJ P, II, 1, 290,
index-vol, p. 98; and ef Mt 6 5ff; 23 14; Acts
3 1; 16 18); while it confirms the association of
prayer with sacrifices, which now appear, however,
not as gifts in anticipation of benefits to follow, but
as expiations of guilt (Dt 21 1-9) or thank offerings
for past mercies (26 1-11). Moreover, the free,
frank access of the private individual to God is
more and more giving place to the mediation of the
priest (21 5; 26 3), the intercession of the prophet
(Ex 32 11-13; 18S 7 5-13; 12 23), the ordered
approach of tabernacle and temple services (Ex 40;
1 K 8). The prophet, it is true, approaches God
immediately and freely—Moses (Ex 34 34; Dt 34
10) and David (2S 7 27) are to be numbered
among the prophets—but he does so in virtue of his
office, and on the ground esp. of his possession of the
Spirit and his intercessory function (ef Ezk 2 2;
Jer 14 15).

A new epoch in the history of prayer in Israel was
brought about by the experiences of the Evile.
Chastisement drove the nation to seek God more
earnestly than hefore, and as the way of approach
through the external forms of the temple and its
sacrifices was now closed, the spiritual path of
prayer was frequented with a new assiduity. The
devotional hahits of Ezra (Ezr 7 27; 8 23), Ne-
hemiah (Neh 2 4; 4 4.9, ete) and Daniel (Dnl 6
10) prove how large a place prayer came to hold in
the individual life; while the utterances recorded
in Ezr 9 6-15; Neh 1 5-11; 9 5-38; Dnl 9 4-19;
Isa 63 7—64 12 serve as illustrations of the lan-
guage and spirit of the prayers of the Exile, and
show esp. the prominence now given to confession
of sin. In any survey of the OT teaching the
Psalms occupy a place hy themselves, both on
aceount of the large period they cover in the his-
tory and because we are ignorant in most cases as
to the particular circumstances of their origin.
But speaking generally it may be said that here
we sce the lofticst flights attained hy the spirit of
prayer under the old dispensation—the intensest
craving for pardon, purity and other spiritual bless-
ings (51, 130), the most heartfelt longing for a
ao communion with God Himself (42 2; 63 1;

Here it will be convenient to deal separately
with the material furnished by the Gospel narra-

tives of the life and teaching of Christ
2. Inthe and that found in the remaining books.
NT The distinctively Christian view of
prayer comes to us from the Christ of
the Gospels. We have to notice His own habits in
the matter (Lk 3 21; 6 12; 9 16.29; 22 32.39-
46; 23 34-46; Mt 27 46; Jn 17), which for all
who accept Him as the revealer of the Father and
the final authority in religion immediately dissi-


2431


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Prayer
Prayers of Jesus


pate all theoretical objections to the value and cffi-
cacy of prayer. Next we have His general teaching
on the subject in parables (Lk 11 5-9; 18 1-14)
and incidental sayings (Mt 5 44; 6 5-8; 7 7-11;
9 38; 17 21: 18 19; 21 22: 24 20; 26 41 and
’s), which presents prayer, not as a mere energiz-
ing of the religious soul that is followed by bene-
ficial spiritual reactions, but as the request of a
child to a father (6 8; 7 11), subject, indeed, to
the father’s will (7 11; cf 6 10; 26 39.42; 1 Jn
5 14), but secure always of loving attention and
response (Mt 7 7-11; 21 22). In thus teaching
us to approach God as our Father, Jesus raised
prayer to its highest plane, making it not less rever-
ent than it was at its best in OT times, while far
more intimate and trustful. In the Lorp’s Praypr
(q.v.) He summed up His ordinary teaching on the
subject in a concrete example which serves as a
model and breviary of prayer (Mt 6 9-13; Lk 11
2-4). But according to the Fourth Gospel, this
was not His final word upon the subject. On the
night of the betrayal, and in full view of His death
and resurrection and ascension to God’s right hand,
He told His disciples that prayer was henceforth to
be addressed to the Father in the name of the Son,
and that prayer thus offered was sure to be granted
(Jn 16 23.24.26). The differentia of Christian
prayer thus consists in its being offered in the name
of Christ; while the secret of its success lies on the
one hand in the new access to the Father which
Christ has secured for His people (17 19; cf He
4 14-16; 10 19-22), and on the other in the fact
that prayer offered in the name of Christ will be
prayer in harmony with the Father’s will (15 7; cf
1 Jn 3 22f; 6 13f).

In the Acts and Epp. we see the apostolic church
giving effect to Christ’s teaching on prayer. It was
m a praying atmosphere that the church was horn
(Acts 1 14; cf 2 1); and throughout its early his-
tory prayer continued to be its vital breath and
native air (2 42; 31; 6 4.6 and passim). The
Epp. abound in references to prayer. Those of
Paul in particular contain frequent allusions to his
own personal practice in the matter (Rom 1 9;
Eph 1 16; Phil 1 9; 1 Thess 1 2, etc), and many
exhortations to his readers to cultivate the praying
habit (Rom 12 12; Eph 6 18; Phil 4 6; 1 Thess
5 17, etc). But the new and characteristic thing
about Christian prayer as it meets us now is its
connection with the Spirit. It has become a spirit-
ual gift (1 Cor 14 14-16); and even those who have
not this gift in the exceptional charismatic sense
may “pray in the Spirit” whenever they come to the
throne of grace (Eph 6 18; Jude ver 20). The
gift of the Spirit, promised by Christ (Jn 14 16 ff,
etc), has raised prayer to its highest power by se-
curing for it a Divine codperation (Rom 8 15.26;
Ga] 4 6). Thus Christian prayer in its full NT
meaning is prayer addressed to God as Father, in
the name of Christ as Mediator, and through the
enabling grace of the indwelling Spirit. See
PRAYERS OF JESUS. J. C, Lampert


PRAYER, HOURS OF. See Hours or Prayer.
PRAYER, LORD'S. Sce Lorp’s Prayer, THE.


PRAYER OF HABAKKUK. See Hasaxxux;
Beru-Horon, BATTLE OF.


PRAYER OF JOSEPH.
OF.


See JoserH, PRAYER


PRAYER OF MANASSES. See Manasszs,
PRAYER OF.


PRAYERS, prirz, OF JESUS:


1. The Lord's Prayer

2. Christ's Doetrine of Praycr
Saeredness, Poa Conditions

3. Prayers Offered by Christ

(1) Tho High-priestly Prayer

le The Prayer in Gethsemane

3) The Prayers on the Cross

(4) Prayer after the Resurrection

(5) General Conclusions


In the history and doctrine of prayer, nothing is
more important than the light shed upon the subject
by the prayers of Jesus. These are to be studied in
connection with His teaching concerning prayer
found in the model of the Lord’s Prayer, and gen-
eral statements and hints to His disciples.

This model of prayer is given in two forms (Mt
6 9-13; Lk 11 2-4). The differences of form show

that exactness of similarity in words is


1. The not essential. The prayer includes
Lord’s adoration, supplication for the King-
Prayer dom, for personal needs, for forgive-


ness, for deliverance from temptation

and the ascription of glory. It is at once individual

and universal; it sets the recognition of Divine

things first, and yet clearly asserts the ethical and
social relations of life. See Lorp’s Prayer, THE.

That men should pray is taken for granted (Mt


6 5). Its sacredness is involved in the command
for privacy (Mt 6 6); its importunity
2. Christ’s (Lk 11 5-9; 18 1-8); its necessary


Docirine of conditions of humility, absence of seli-
Prayer righteousness (Lk 18 9-14), of dis-

play and repetition (Mt 6 7); neces-
sity of faith and a forgiving spirit (Mk 11
24-26); of agreement in social prayer (Mt 18 19);
submission to the will of Christ, “in my name”
(Jn 14 13).

InMt 11 25.26AV, Christ thanks God: “Thou

hast hid these things from the wise and prudent,

and hast revealed them unto bahes.
3. Prayers Even so, Father: for so it seemed good
Offered by in thy sight.” This language shows
Christ the essence of prayer to be not the

mere expression of need and request
for what is required, but resort to God. The prayer
gives us insight into the deeper experience of the
Son with the Father, and His perfect submission
to the Father’s will, with thanksgiving even for
what might seem inexplicable. It thus illustrates
the truth that the highest form of prayer is found
in the serenity of the soul.

Mt 14 23 narrates the retirement of the Lord
to a “mountain apart to pray.’ No word of what
the prayer was is given, but the record is suggestive.
Following a day of severe toil and probably excite-
ment, Jesus betakes Himself to prayer. Thereality,
the true humanity of the Christ, are here revealed.
The former prayer may almost be regarded as that
of the Son of God addressed to the Father in the
sublime communion of the Godhead. This passage
emphatically is a prayer-scene of the Son of Man.
The association of this incident of prayer in Christ’s
life with the miracle of walking on the sea (an ex-
ample of miracle in the person of the Lord Himself,
and not performed on another) opens up an inter-
esting question of the relation of the supernatural
and the natural. Here perhaps lies an explanation
of the true significance of the miraculous. The
communion of the Lord with a supreme Father had
filled the physica] nature of Jesus with spiritual
forces which extended the power of the spirit over
the material world beyond the limits by which man
is bound in his normal and sinful condition (see
Lange, Comm. on Mt; Mt 15 36; cf 14 19).
Christ’s recognition of God as the Giver of food, in
thanks at the meal, or “asking a blessing,” should
be noted as an example which in modern times is


Prayers of Jesus
Preacher


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2432


largely ignored or followed as a mere formality.
But it is significant; it expresses that intense and
all-compelling sense of the Divine which ever dwelt
in Him; of which prayer is an expression, and which
is evoked so naturally and becomingly at a social
meal. In Mt 17 21, Our Lord’s reference to
prayer as a necessary condition of miraculous power,
in the light of Mk 7 34, where “looking up to
heaven, he sighed, and saith unto him [the deaf
man], Ephphatha,” may imply His own prayer in
connection with the exercise of miraculous energy.
This is apparently indicated in Jn 11 41.42, al-
though, as above, it is the expression of the intimate
relation between Christ and the Father, which is
the essence of prayer, and in which relation He ever
exercised the fullest power of God Himself. Mt
19 13 records that little children were brought
to Him that He should put His hands on them and
pray. That He prayed is not related, but ver 15
relates that He laid His hands on them and, pre-
sumably, with the imposition, prayed. The scene
is most suggestive, in the light of Our Lord’s words.
In ver 14 and in Mt 26 26 Our Lord blesses the
bread or gives thanks at the institution of the Sup-
per, and has set the mode of celebration univer-
sally adopted, even giving the term Eucharist
(“giving of thanks’’) to the service.

(1) The high-priestly prayer—This prayer (Jn
17) is the special prayer of the Lord, and may be
regarded as the sole example furnished by the
evangelists of Our Lord’s method of prayer. The
thanksgiving in Mt 11 25 is the only other in-
stance of any extent in the report of the prayers of
Jesus, but even that is brief compared to what is
here furnished. The fulness of this prayer clearly
shows that it was uttered in the hearing of the dis-
ciples. Their relation to it isremarkable. Auditors,
they yet could not share in it. At the same time,
it was a profound revelation to them both of the
relation of the Master to God, and the character
of the work which He had come to perform, and
the part which they were to take in it. John gives
us no hint as to the place in which it was spoken;
14 31 indicates a departure from the upper room.
But apparently the prayer was offered where the
discourses of chs 15 and 16 were delivered. It has
been suggested by Westcott that some spot in the
temple courts was the scene of chs 15, 16 and 17.
It has been generally supposed that the ornament
of the Golden Vine would naturally suggest the
figure of the Vine and Branches which Our Lord
employs. Ju 181 shows that the prayer was
offered before the Lord and His disciples had passed
over the brook Kidron. The determination of the
exact spot is certainly impossible, except the prob-
ability that the words were spoken in the vicinity
of the temple.

The first part of the prayer (Jn 17 1~5) is an expres-
sion of profound communion between the Son and the
Father, and the prayer that the Father should glorify the
Son, hut with the supreme end of the Father’s own glory.
The absolutely unique character of Christ’s relation to
God is the calm assertion of ver 4. Its consciousness
of completeness in the work which He had received from
God, impossihle for the children of men, marks the su-
preme nature of the Son of God.

In the second_part of the prayer (Jn_17 6-19), Our
Lord prays for His disciples, to whom He has revealed
Himself and His relation to God (vs 7.8). He prays
that they may be kept by the Father, and for their unity.
Their separation from the world is declared (ver 14), and


Our Lord prays that they may he kept from the evil that
is in the world, which is alien from them as it is from


Him.

In the third portion of the prayer Christ’s relation to
His ultimate followers is referred to. Their unity is
sought, not an external unity, but the deep, spiritual
unity found hy the indwelling of Christ in them and God
in Christ. The prayer closes by the declaration that
Christ’s knowledge of the Father is revealed to His
people, and the end and crown of all is to he the
indwelling of God's love in man by the dwelling of
Christ in him.


This prayer is unique, not merely among the
prayers of Our Lord, but also among the prayers of
humanity. While it is distinctly a petition, it is
at the same time a communion. In one or two
places Our Lord expresses His will, thus setting
Himself upon a level with God. The fact of this
prayer of triumph in which every petition is vir-
tually a declaration of the absolute certainty of its
realization, immediately preceding the prayer of
Gethsemane, is both difficult and suggestive. The
anomaly is a powerful argument for the historic
reality. The explanation of these contrasted moods
is to be found in the depth of Our Lord’s nature,
and esp. in the complete consistency of His dual na-
ture with the spheres to which each nature belongs.
He is most Divine; He is most human. In the
fulness of the reach of the prayer and its calm con-
fidence, the believer may find a ceaseless and inex-
haustible source of comfort and encouragement.
Attention might be called to the remarkable fore-


‘cast of the history and experience of the church


which the prayer furnishes.

(2) The prayer in Gethsemane.—This is recorded
by the three Synoptics (Mt 26 36-44; Mk 14
22-40; Lk 22 39-46), and is probably referred to
in He 6 7. Brief though the prayer is, it exhibits
most clearly recognition of God’s infinite power, a
clear object sought by the prayer, and perfect sub-
mission to God’s will. All the elements of prayer,
as it can be offered by man, are here except the
prayer for forgiveness. It is to be noted that the
prayer was three times repeated. This is not to be
regarded as inconsistent with Our Lord’s prohibi-
tion of repetition. It was vain repetition which
was forbidden. The intensity of the prayer is ex-
pressed by its threefold utterance (cf Paul’s prayer
In regard to the thorn in 2 Cor 12 8).

(3) The prayers an the cross —In Mt 27 46; Mk
15 34, Christ uses the prayer of Ps 22 1. In the
moment of complete desolation, the Sufferer claimed
His unbroken relationship with God. This is the
victory of the atoning sacrifice. Lk 23 34 records
the prayer of intercession for those who crucified
Him; in ver 46 is the calm committal of His spirit
to the Father. Prayer here again assumes its high-
est form in the expression of recognition and trust.
Thus the three prayers on the cross not only reveal
the intimate relation of Our Lord to the Father, but
they also illustrate prayer such as man may offer.
They represent supplcation, intercession, com-
munion. Prayer thus expresses our relation to God,
to others, to ourselves; our trust, our love, our
need. In all things He was made like unto His
brethren, except without sin (see Pornts). His
prayers on the cross illustrate His high-priestly
office. It rises at that intense crisis to its supreme
manifestation and activity.

(4) Prayer after the resurrection —It is to be ob-
served that after His resurrection there is no record
of any prayer offered by Christ. In the supper at
Emmaus He “blessed” the bread (Lk 24 30); and
the ascension took place in the midst of blessing
(Lk 24 51), suggestive of the course of the church
as ever beneath the benediction of the Lord, to be
ended only at the final consummation. The act of
eating the fish and honeycomb (Lk 24 43) seems to
have been unaccompanied by any act of specifically
religious form. Mk, with characteristic regard to
details, records Christ’s “looking up to heaven” (Mk
6 41; 7 34); Jn 11 41 refers to 4 similar act, and
adds the Lord’s words of thanksgiving that God had
heard Him (see also Jn 17 1). The gesture was
usual in association with Christ’s prayers; it is ap-
propriate and suggestive. Lk narrates that Christ
prayed at His baptism (Lk 3 21); that He spent a
night in prayer before choosing the Twelve (Lk 6
12.13); that the transfiguration was preceded by


2433


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Prayers of Jesus
Preacher


prayer (Lk 9 29); and records the prayer in the
garden (Lk 22 41-45). The third evangelist thus
in addition to the notes of Our Lord’s prayers in
retirement, which the other evangelists record, adds
these instances of the special relation of prayer to
events of critical importance.

(5) General conclusions.—The following conclu-
sions as to prayer may be drawn from the records
of Christ’s prayers: (1) Prayer is the highest ex-
ercise of man’s spiritual nature. (2) It is natural
to the soul even in perfect accord with God. (8) It
is not only the expression of need, the supply of
which is sought of God, but by the example of Christ
it is the highest expression of trust, submission and
union with God. (4) It isto be used both in solitude
and in society; it is personal and intercessory. (5) It
may be accompanied by the plea of Christ’s name,
and for Christ’s sake. These are the laws which
should direct it; that is to say, it shonld be based
upon the merit and the intercession of Christ, and
should be addressed to God under the limitations
of the Kingdom of the Lord and His purposes
for good, both for the interest of the supplant and
others, under the conditions of the interest of the
whole Kingdom. Lu. D. Bevan


PREACHER, préch’ér, PREACHING, préch’ing
(MemP, koheleth, “preacher” [Eccl 1 1], W2,
basar, “to bring or tell good tidings” [Ps 40 9; Isa
61 1), NUP, kara’, “to call,” “proclaim” [Neh 6 7;
Jon 3 2], WNP, kervah, “cry,” “preaching” [Jon
3 2]; waApvt, kéruz, “crier,” “herald” [1 Tim 2 7],
Kynptoow, kérissd, “to cry or proclaim as a herald”
[Mt 3 1; Rom 10 14], ebayyeAAlLw, euaggellizd, “to
announce good news” [Mt 11 5]):

Definition

. The Preacher’s Limitations

A Man with a Message

Preaching a Necessary Agency

Biblical Terms and Their Meanings

The Hebrew Prophets

Christ as a Preacher

The Apostles as Preachers

Fundamental Postulates

(1) Preach the Word

(2) “We Are Ambassadors”

In the NT sense a preacher is a man who has the

inner call from the Holy Ghost and the external call
from the church, the witnessing body

1. Defini- of Christ on earth, and has been duly

tion set apart as an accredited and qualified

teacher of the Christian religion. His

vocation is that of addressing the popnlar mind and

heart on religious truth, as that trnth is set forth

in the sacred Scripture, for the spiritual profit of the

hearer as its end. The preacher, recognized as

such by the church, speaks as a personal witness of

God’s saving truth, explaining it and applying it

as the circumstances of the people and the time may

require. The gravity and importance of this vo-

cation, as set forth in the sacred Scriptures and

amply illustrated in the history of the church, sur-

pass those of any other calling among men. Luther

said, “The devil does not mind the written word,

but he is put to flight whenever it is preached

aloud.” ; ae :

The preacher, in the sense indicated above, is
with all other Christians a sharer in the freedom
that isin Christ. But as a recognized
teacher and leader of the church, he
Preacher’s is not an unattached and entirely un-
Limitations restricted teacher. He is not to speak

as hig own, but as the mouthpiece of
the church whose apprehension of the gospel he has
voluntarily confessed. The faith of the church is,
by his own assent, his faith, and her doctrine
is his doctrine. He is not expected to give his
own, as distinct from or opposed to the faith of


PION 91). g0 bo ms


2. The


the church in whose name he has been set apart
to proclaim the gospel. Both the personal and
the representative or official are united in him and
his preaching.
His work is always to be related to the OT and
NT. His sermon is under the creed of his church
as the creed is under the word. The
3. A Man preacher is a man with a message, and
with a the preacher who has no message of the
Message _ particular kind indicated above is in no
truesense a preacher. It has been well
expressed in one of the valuable Yale series of lec-
tures on the subject, “Every living preacher must
receive his communication direct from God, and
the constant purpose of his life must be to receive
it uncorrupted and to deliver it without addition
or subtraction.”” When he presents the message of
his Divinely appointed ambassadorship in its in-
tegrity, he speaks with that peculiar kind of “au-
thority” which has been pronounced “the first and
indispensable requisite’ in giving a message from
God. He manifests thereby a “high celestial dog-
matism,” and “human weakness becomes immor-
tal strength.’ The true preacher preaches from a
Divine impulsion. He says with Paul, “Necessity
is laid upon me; for woe is unto me, if I preach not
the gospel” (1 Cor 9 16; ef Jer 20 9). He says
with Peter, “Whether it is right in the sight of God
to hearken unto you rather than unto God, judge
ye: for we cannot but speak the things which we
saw and heard” (Acts 4 19.20). The message of
the preacher is greater than the man, because it is
from God. It largely makes the man who preaches
it in its fulness and power. Whatever be his own
gifts or whatever the alleged gift conferred in the
laying on of hands, without the sense of the message
he is not chosen of God to proclaim His word.
Destitute of that, he does not have the sustaining
impnlse of his vocation to enlist his entire person-
ality in his work and give him mastery over the
minds and hearts of men.
No agency of religion is older than preaching.
It is as old as the Bible itself (2 Pet 2 5). It is
a necessary adjunct of a religion that


4. Preach- is communicated to man by means of
ing a an objective and authoritative reve-
Necessary lation, such as we have in the sacred
Agency Scriptures. It is an entirely natural


agency of the forms of religion revealed
in the OT and NT. It is strictly in harmony with
those ideas that obtain in both testaments regarding
the method of propagating the faith, set forth
through the agency of holy men who spake as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost. That faith is dis-
seminated by means of teaching through argument,
explanation, motive and exhortation. The agency
for the spread of a religion of persuasion must be
preaching.
In the Bib. usage of the terms which have refer-
ence to the subject, preaching means the proclama-
tion of religious truth. It is that
6. Biblical continuous and public testimony which


Terms and the church is always giving, through
Their discourses, by men set apart for such
Meanings work, to her own living faith as that


faith is rooted in and sustained by the
written word of God. In this sense “to call,”
“proclaim,” “cry aloud” are used frequently of the
prophetic message under the various aspects of
denunciation, as in Jon 1 2; of the relation of the
Divine, as in Jer 11 6, and of Messianic promise, as
in Isa 61 1. The term for “preaching’’ is also used
to designate a political propagandism set forth by
the prophet (Neh 6 7). In two passages (Ps 68
11, “publish”; Isa 61 1) another word for preaching
means ‘‘to declare good news.” In the case of
Jonah’s preaching at Nineveh, the word used to


Preacher
Predestination


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2434


designate what it was means strictly ‘“proclama-
tion” and corresponds to the NT word used to
define Our Lord’s ‘proclamation’ as a herald of
the advent of the Kingdom of God (Mt 4 17),
which in its initial stages particularly was closely
associated with the preaching of John the Baptist
(Mt 3 1.2).

Thus while preaching helongs esp. to Christianity, it


has well-defined antecedents in the OT. Under both the
old and the new dispensations the subject


6. The takes the church for granted and utters
Hebrew the testimony, not simply of a solitary

believer, but of a Divinely founded so-
Prophets ciety, whether it he of Jews or Christians.


The older books in the Canon have in
them the beginnings and some of the features of the
reacher’s office and of the high function of preaching.
n them we find a special class of men set apart and
separated unto that particular work, as we find in the
Christian church, from its beginnings, the same Di-
vinely instituted office. The Heh prophet had a mes-
sage direct from God, which frequently came with super-
natural knowledge in the power of prediction. he
mission of the prophet, however, was not simply or
chiefly to forecast the future, hut to declare a present
message from the Lord to the people. The prophet
of the OT was the forerunner in office and the proto-
type of the amhassador of Christ. With _the develop-
ment of the synagogue as the center of Heb worship,
application as well as interpretation of the Law became
essential. :
Moses, the most commanding figure in Heb history,
was a prophet, and no messages in the are more
imbued with power, suhlimity and pathos than those
uttered hy the great lawgiver. He became the guide of
Israel, not so much by his rod as by the word he de-
livered to the people. There are numerous indications
that after Moses there was a continuous class of religious
teachers whose work it was to instruct men and inspire
the people, as is indicated in the cases of Joshua, in the
history of Deborah and Barak, and in the days of solemn
assembly which are inconceivable without men who
spoke and other men who listened. In the time of Sam-
uel there was a distinct advance made in the work of the
prophets, and the prophetic office had hecome a fixed
institution. There were schools of the prophets at
Bethel, Jericho and Gilgal, the very seats of heathen
idolatry. Under the OT dispensation the whole course
of progress was toward presenting Divine truth in its
simplicity and power, by bringing it to bear upou the
popular miud and heart. One of the marks of the new
era beginning with John the Baptist was a revival of
prophetic preaching (Mt 11 9), which again resumed
its old character and meaning. See ProrpuEecy anp
PROPHETS.


The words meaning “to proclaim as a herald”
and “preaching,” are frequent in the NT. The
mission of Our Lord was essentially
7. Christ as one of proclaiming good tidings con-
a Preacher cerning the Kingdom of God (Mt 4
17). He at once, on His entrance
upon His ministry, gave to preaching a spiritual
depth and practical range which it never had before.
At that time preaching had manifestly become a
fixed part of the syuagogue worship, and was made
one of the chief instruments in the spread of the
gospel. Our Lord constantly taught in the syna-
gogue (Mt 4 23; Mk 1 21; Ju 6 59). He thus
read and interpreted and applied the Law and the
Prophets (Mk 1 39; Lk 4 16). Christ’s  testi-
mony about Himself was that He came “‘to bear wit-
ness to the truth.’ The spoken word became His
great power in His life and ministry. Throughout
His life Jesus was above all things a preacher of the
truths of His kingdom. ‘Telling men what He was
in Himself, what in His relation to man and his
salvation and what to God the Father, formed a
large part of His public work.
The preaching of the apostles was essentially
prophetic in character, and bore testimony concern-
ing the resurrection of Jesus and His


8. The early return to judgment (Acts 2
Apostles as 24.32.36; 1 Cor 15 15). The sermons
Preachers of the apostles which are reported with


much fulness are those of Peter on
the Day of Pentecost (Acts 2), his address in the
house of Cornelius at Caesarea (Acts 10), and the


counsels of James to the brethren at Jerus, as to
what ordinances should be imposed on gentile
Christians. In the early church preachers were first
of all witnesses to what Jesus had said and done,
and to the significance to be attached to the great
facts of the redemptive history. With the spread
of the gospel and the passing of time, this office
was taken up by others, esp. such as were endued
with “the word of wisdom” and “of knowledge”

(1 Cor 12 8).
Upon the hasis of what is taught in the word of
God there are two fundamentally important postu-
lates concerning preaching and the


9. Funda- preacher.
mental (1) Preach the word.—The first note
Postulates of preaching is that it be the word of


God (2 Tim 4 2). Out of the Bible
must the life of every generation of Christians be
fed. To Holy Scripture, therefore, ought the pulpit
to ahide faithful, for out of its treasures the preacher
fulfils his double office of edifying believers and sub-
jugating the world to Christ. There must always
be an organie connection between the word in the
text and the sermon.

(2) “We are ambassadors.’’—The work of preach-
ing is the fulfilment of a Divinely instituted ambas-
sadorship (2 Cor 5 20). The gospel is put into
the hands of men for a distinct purpose, and is to
be administered in accordance with the plan of its
author. The preacher is in a very distinct sense
a trustee. “But even as we have heen approved of
God to be intrusted with the gospel, so we speak;
not as pleasing men, but God who proveth our
hearts” (1 Thess 2 4). Those who have accepted
the responsibility imposed upon them by this Di-
vine commission are enjoined to exercise their
office so as to warrant the approbation of Him who
has appointed them to a specific work. The homiletic
practice of taking the theme of every sermon from
a passage of Holy Writ has been an almost invariahle
rule in the history of the church. It is the husiness
of the preacher to present the truth embodied in the
text in its integrity. In the exercise of his Divinely
appointed ambassadorship he is to administer God’s
word revealed to Christian faith, not human opin-
ions or speculations. Davin H. Bausiin


PRECEPT, pré’sept: A commandment, an
authoritative rule for action; in the Scriptures
generally a Divine injunction in which man’s obli-
gation is set forth (Lat praeceptum, fr. praecipere,
‘to instruct”).

Four words are so rendered in AV: (1) mix. mic-


wah, very frequently (168 t) tra "‘commandment,” but 4 t
precept"' (in RV only Jer 35 18; Dnl 9 5); (2) from
the same root is ZY, caw, or YX. cow (Isa 28 10.13); (3)


D'TIPD. pikkudhim, only in the Pss ‘(21 tin Ps 119, 0g.


vs 4.15.27; also RV Ps 19 8; 103 18; 111 7); (4) in
the NT, évroAy, entolé, generally in AV trad ‘“com-
mandment" (68 t), but twice “precept (Mk 10 5;


He 9 19; in hoth cases RV substitutes ‘‘commandment’’).
See CoMMANDMENT.


D. Mratt Epwarps

PRECIOUS, presh’us (stands for 17 different
words, chief of which are V2, yakar; tlyos,
timios): (1) Generally in the literal sense, ‘‘of great
price,” “costly,” “expensive,” of material things
(eg. Prov 113; Jer 20 5; Mk 14 3 AV), esp.
of precious stones (2 8 12 30; 2 Ch 3 6; 1 Cor 3
12 AV, etc). (2) Sometimes “of great moral [non-
material] value.” “Precious in the sight of Jeh is
the death of his saints” (Ps 116 15); “his precious
and exceeding great promises” (2 Pet 14); cf
Ps 139 17; 2 Pet 1.1. The literal and the moral
senses are hoth involved in the expression, “know-
ing that ye were redeemed, not with corruptible
things, . . . . but with precious blood” (1 Pet 1


2435 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Preacher
18.19). ‘Preciousness’” (7iu4, timé) occurs in | hath chosen us in Christ “before the foundation of


I Pet 2 7 ARV, ERV, for AV “precious.”
D. Miatu Enwarps
PRECIOUS STONES. See Stones, Precious.


PRECIPITATION, pré-sip-i-ta’shun. See Pun-
IsHMENTS, ITI, (5).


PREDESTINATION, pré-des-ti-na’shun (3pd-
Gerts, prothesis, mpdyvwcts, prégnisis, mpoopicpds,
proérismés) :


. Predestination as a Biblical Question
Importance of the Subject for Our Time

. Nature of Predestination

The Doctrine in Scripture

. Historic Rise and Devclopment of the Doctrine
. The Doctrine in the Middle Ages
Predestination in the Reformed Theology
. Predestination in Lutheranism

. The Arminian View

. Wesleyanism on Predestination

11. Present Needs and Values of the Doctrine
LirERATURE


pa
SCOWNORMARWNE


Predestination can be, and has sometimes been,
regarded as a philosophical question rather than
a Biblical one. It is with predesti-


1. Asa nation as a Biblical question, however,
Biblical that we are here mainly concerned.
Question It is possible to urge, and it has been


urged, that the philosophical question
—whether all that occurs is foreordained—is not
discussed and decided by Scripture. Theology,
starting from God in its interpretation of all things,
has arrived at universal foreordination by a species
of deductive reasoning. But we must not argue
the matter from any abstract principles, but deal
with the actual facts as set forth in Scripture
and as found, inductively, in the experience of
man.
It must first be asserted, however, in view of
much loose modern thinking, that predestination
is a category of religious thought of


2. Its fundamental importance. No cate-
Funda- gory of religious thought could go
mental Im- deeper, for it reaches down to the In-
portance finite Will in relation to the universe


of finite wills, and Jays stress on will
as the core of reality. The philosophy of our time
may be said to have received, from the time of
Schopenhauer, an impact toward will-emphasis,
alike in respect of will in the universe and in man.
But the relation of the Absolute Will to the universe,
and to mankind, is precisely that with which we are
concerned in predestination. ney:
Predestination is that aspect of foreordination
whereby the salvation of the believer is taken to be
effected in accordance with the will of
3. Nature God, who has called and elected him,
of Pre- in Christ, unto life eternal. The
destination Divine plan of salvation must certainly
be conceived under this aspect of indi-
vidual reference. To understand and set forth the
nature, and ethically justifiable character, of such
a foreordaining to life eternal, is our purpose. For
the doctrine has need to be purged of the historic
inconsistencies, and fatal illogicalities, with which,
in its older forms of presentation, it was often in-
fected. This, esp., in order that the doctrine may
appear as grounded in reason and righteousness, not
in arbitrariness and almighty caprice.
To begin with, it must be said that there seems
to be no evading the doctrine of an election by
grace, as found both in the letter and
4. The the spirit of Scripture. The idea of
Doctrine in predestination is set forth, with great
Scripture power and clearness, in Rom 8 29.30,
and with its elements or parts articu-
lated in natural and striking form. The idea recurs
in Eph 1, where it is finely said (vs 4.5) that God


the world,” having predestinated or ‘foreordained
us unto adoption as sons through Jesus Christ”;
and where it is said, further, that our salvation
imports ‘‘the mystery of his will, according to his
good pleasure’ (ver 9), which He purposed in
Christ. This “eternal purpose” to save men
through Christ is again referred to in Eph 8 11.
This helpful mode of viewing predestination as in
Christ, and never outside Him, had a place in reli-
gious thought at the Reformation time, as the famous
“Formula of Concord,” to be referred to below,
shows. The predestined certainty of God’s gra-
cious work in Christ was not meant to perplex men,
but to encourage and reassure all who trust in His
grace. In Rom 9 14~—25, the absolute sovereignty
of God is put in a form whereby election is made
to originate in the Divine will apart from all
human merit, whether actual or foreseen. But
from this assertion of God’s free supremacy we
can derive no concrete theodicy, or do more than
infer that God is just and wise in His exercise of
free grace, even when His doings are most perplex-
ing to us.
The needful thing is to understand, so far as may
be, the nature of the codperation that takes place
between the Divine and the human
5. Historic factors or elements, which latter fac-


Rise and _ tors include natural capacity, dispo-
Develop- sition and development, working under
ment of the grace. It must be carefully observed
Doctrine that nothing in Scripture points to any


personal and inexorable predestination
to reprobation, in any sense corresponding to the
personal election to salvation just spoken of. A
non-election there may be, of course, but not in
any sense that annuls full personal responsibility
for coming short of life everlasting. The appeal
of Scripture from first to last is to men as free.
Calvin’s strange way of putting the matter was,
“Man therefore falls, God’s Providence so ordaining,
but he falls by his own fault.” This idea of repro-
bation was first introduced by Gottschalk, a monk
of the 9th cent., long after the predestination doc-
trine had received its first full and positive exposi-
tion by Augustine. Augustine, following upon the
indecision shown by the fathers in the first three
centuries of the church, made the doctrine of a
special predestination his foundation for special
grace, in opposition to Pelagius. Augustine gave
new prominence in his theory to the absolute will
of God: he made Divine grace the only ground of
man’s salvation; it was to him the irresistible power
working faith within the heart, and bringing freedom
as its result. It was to him God’s absolute predes-
tination that determined who were believers. But
Augustine held predestination as an inference from
his conception of the Fall and of grace, rather than
as a metaphysical principle.
In the Middle Ages, Anselm, Peter Lombard, and
Aquinas, followed the Augustinian views only to a
certain extent. Aquinas admits that
6. The predestination implies a relation to
Doctrine in grace, but holds that grace is not of
the Middle the essence of predestination. Pre-
Ages destination is, to Aquinas, a part of
Providence, and it presupposes elec-
tion in the order of reason. Though Divine good-
ness in general be without election, Aquinas thinks
the communication of a particular good cannot be
without election. Predestination has, for him, its
foundation in the goodness of God, which is its
reason. Aquinas thinks predestination most surely
takes effect, but not as from necessity; the effect
takes place under the working of contingency.
From such views we are recalled to the idea of a
rigorous predestination, by Thomas Bradwardine


Predestination
Presbyter


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2436


and John Wyclif, in pre-Reformation times. We
are thus brought up to the decretal system—so
called from Calvin’s making predestination con-
sist of the eternal decree of God—which became,
in its metaphysical principle, the fundamental posi-
tion of the whole Reformed theology after the
Reformation.
The theology of the Reformed church adopted
the Calvinistic doctrine of the decree of predesti-
nation and election. Calvin, however,
7. Predesti- simply carried the Angustinian theory


nationin to its logical and necessary conclusion,
the Re- and he was the first to adopt the doc-
formed trine as the cardinal point or primor-
Theology dial principle of a theological system.


Zwingli, it must be remembered, was,
even before Calvin, of consistent deterministic
leanings, as part of his large speculative views,
which were not without a tendency to universalism.
Salvation was, to Calvin, the execution of a Divine
decree, which was supposed to fix the extent and
conditions of such salvation.

(1) Calvin’s definition—Reprobation was, for
Calvin, involved in election, and Divine fore-
knowledge and foreordination were taken to be
identical. Calvin’s mode of defining predestination
was as the eternal decree of God, by which He has
decided with Himself what is to become of each and
every individual. For all, he maintains, are not
created in like condition; but eternal life is fore-
ordained for some, eternal condemnation for others.
Calvin confesses that this is a “horrible decree,”
and it is not surprising to find competent theologians
in our time denying such a form of predestinarianism
any place in the teachings of St. Paul, who never
speaks of reprobation.

(2) Theology advanced by Calvin.—It is generally
overlooked, however, that the theological advance
registered by Calvin is to be seen by stndy of the
views of the Middle Ages, and on to the Reforma-
tion, not by viewing Calvinism in our post-Refor-
mation lights. It was love—‘‘the fatherly love of
God,” as he terms it—the efficiency of saving love—
which Calvin insisted upon, above all, in his teach-
ing about God. But Calvin also heightened men’s
ideas as to the certitude of personal salvation. It
is but fair to Calvin to remember—for superficial
acquaintance with his teachings is far from rare—
that he, in the strongest manner, maintained Divine
sovereignty to be that of Divine wisdom, righteous-
ness, and love, and expressly rejected the notion of
absolute power as, in this connection, a heathenish
idea. The Calvinistic doctrine was not absolute,
pat mediated in Christ, and conditioned upon
aith.

Luther and the Lutheran church at first shared
the doctrine of predestination and election, Luther

in his treatment of free will repro-
8. Predesti- ducing the Augustinian form of the


nation in doctrine in a strict manner. The
Lutheran- predestination of Luther and Melanch-
ism thon proceeded, not from their con-


ception of God, but rather from the
doctrine of sin and grace. Melanchthon was less
disposed than Luther to press the doctrine of ab-
solute predestination, and, in his “synergistic”
tendencies, laid increasing stress on human free-
dom, until he at length rejected the doctrine of
absolute predestination. He was blamed by strict
Lutheranism for yielding too much to Pelagianism.
But the Lutheran “Formula of Concord,” prepared
in 1577, was not a very logical and consistent pre-
sentation of the case, for, opposed at points to
Augustinianism, it fell back, in the end, on election
in the Angustinian spirit. Or, to put the matter
in another form, the “Formula of Concord”? may be
said to have held with Augustinianism, but to have


differed by maintaining a universal call along with
a particular election, and it rejected the decree of
reprobation. Later Lutheranism adopted a moder-
ate form of the doctrine, whercin predestination
was often identified with prescience. But Luther-
anism ought not, in strictness, to be identified, as is
sometimes done, with the Arminian theory. The
Lutheran doctrine of predestination was further
developed by Schleiermacher, who emphasized the
efficiency of grace, while adopting its universality
in the Lutheran sense.

Arminianism, in its earliest assertion, main-
tained simply universal grace and conditional elec-


tion. But in the five Articles it
9. The formulated its opposition to Calvin-
Arminian ism, although Arminius does not
View appear to have been more than moder-


ately Calvinistic, as we would account
it. Arminius gave grace supreme place, and made
it, when welcome, pass into saving grace. He
made election depend on faith, which latter is the
condition of universal grace. Arminianism rejects
the so-called common grace of the predestination
theory, and its effectual grace for the elect, for, in
the Arminian view, saving grace can in no case be
missed save by resistance or neglect. Arminianism
holds the awakened human will to coéperate with
Divine grace, in such wise that it rests with the
human will whether the Divine grace is really ac-
cepted or rejected. It is the claim of Arminianism
to do more justice than Calvinism to faith and
repentance, as conditions of personal salvation, and
precedent thereto. The Arminian standpoint ad-
mits the foreknowledge of God, but denies fore-
ordination, though it mnst seem difficult to reduce
the foreknowledge of God to such a bare knowledge
of the future. But it is, of course, freely to be
granted that foreknowledgein God, simply as knowl-
edge, does not carry any causal energy or efficiency
with it. But it may still be doubted whether the
prescience of God can be nothing more fruitful and
creative than such a position implies, and whether
its relation to predestination may not be a more
necessary one. The theory seems to fail of giving
satisfactory account of the Divine activity in its
relation to human activity, in the sphere of grace.
The shortcoming of Arminianism lies in its failing
also to do justice to the spirit of Scripture with its
emphatic assertion of the doctrine of God as the
one absolute will, which, in its expression, is the
sole originative power of the universe. See also
PROVIDENCE.
Wesleyanism, or Methodist Arminianism, main-
tains, like Calvinism, the will of God to be supreme.
But it distinguishes between the desires
10. Wesley- and the determinations of God. It


anism on takes Divine foreknowledge to pre-
Predes- cede the Divine volitions. It makes
tination God’s prescience purely intuitional,


and regards that which He knows as
nowise necessitated by such knowledge, a concep-
tion of God which differentiates the Wesleyan type
of thought from Calvinism. God is held to have
left events in the moral sphere contingent, in an
important sense, upon the human will. Hence
human probation is based upon this position, as to
man’s free choice. Influence of God upon man’s
will is postulated, for its right guidance and diree-
tion, but not in any coercive sense, as Augustin-
ianism seems to Wesleyanism to imply. Thus it is
hoped to preserve just balance, and maintain proper
responsibility, between the Divine and the human
factors in this spiritual codperation.

When we come to the present needs and values of
the predestination doctrine, we have to remark the
primal need of a thoroughly cthicized conception
of God. The past few decades have witnessed


2437


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Predestination
Presbyter


a lessened interest in this doctrine, largely because
of the increasingly ethical conceptions of Deity.

That is to say, the doctrine of the
11. Present sovereignty of God’s will has ceased to
Needs and be taken, as often in the older pres-


Values entations, as mere almightiness, or
of the arbitrary and resistless will. Calvin
Doctrine expressly taught that no cause or


ground but God’s unconditioned will
was to be sought; but he feebly tried to save
Divine will from sheer omnipotence by saying that
God is law to Himself; and the notion of sov-
ereignty continued to be presented in ways quite
absolute and irresponsible. But God we now re
gard as the absolute and cternal reason, no less
than the supreme will, and as both of these in
the one indivisible and absolute personality. We
have passed from an abstract  predestinationism
to maintain God in living and ethical relations
to the world and to man. Such an ethical sov-
ereignty we hold to be necessary, over against
that lax humanitarian spirit, which, in its recoil
from the older Calvinism, invests the Deity with
no greater powers of moral determination than
may be implied in His love, when viewed as a
mere golden haze of good will. See Eection;
FOREORDINATION.

LiveratuRE.—The relative works of Augustine,
Aquinas, Zwingh, Calvin, Luther, Melanchthon, Ar-
minius, Wesley, Rothe, Dorner, Luthardt; W. Cun-
ningham, The Reformers, and the Theology of the Refor-
mation, 1862; James Orr, art. ‘‘Calvinism,” in Hastings,
Enc of Religion and Ethics; and the various Histories
of Christian Doctrine.

- James Linpsay

PREEMINENCE, pré-em‘i-nens: Superiority,
esp.in noble or excellent qualities. The word stands
for: (1) WV, méthar, “what is over and above,”
“excellence”; “Man hath no preéminence above
the beasts” (Eccl 3 19); (2) mpwredw, proteio,
“to befirst’’; ‘That in all things he [= Christ] might
have the preéminence”’ (Col 1 18); (8) 6 pcAompu-
reiwv, ho philopriteion, is tr4 “who loveth to have
the preéminence,” lit. “who loveth to be first” (of
Diotrephes, 3 Jn ver 9).


PREFER, pré-fiir’: Does not always have the
general meaning “‘to choose before another.” In
Ps 137 6, it does have this sense and the two VSS
agree; in Est 2 9, RV has ‘‘removed” where AV
has “preferred”; in Dnl 6 3, “distinguished” takes
its place; in Jn 1 15.30, “become” is substituted
for “preferred’’; in ver 27, “preferred” drops out
entirely; in Rom 12 10, the VSS agree.


PREPARATION, prep-a-ri’shun: The concord-
ances indicate that the word “preparation” oc-
curs only twice in the OT, once in 1 Ch 22 5,
where it is used in the ordinary sense “to make
preparation,” and once in Nah 2 3, “in the day
of his preparation,” both of them translating the
same Heb root and requiring no special elucida-
tion. In Eph 6 15 the apostle speaks of the
equipment of the Christian as including the “feet
shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace,’
which means, according to Thayer, “with the
promptitude and alacrity which the gospel pro-
duces.” .

The word occurs with technical significance (‘‘the
Preparation’) in the gospel narratives of the cruci-
fixion, translating the Gr rapackev}, paraskeué (Mt
27 62; Mk 16 42; Lk 23 54; Jn 19 14.31.42).
It is used as a technical term indicating the day of
the preparation for the Sabbath, that is, the evening
of Friday. This is its use in Jos, Ant, XVI, vi, 2,
and presumably in the Synoptics. Later its use
seems to have been extended to denote regularly


the 6th day (Friday) of each week. So in Did., viii
and the Martyrdom of Polycarp, vii.

The addition of the phrase 700 rdcxa, tov pdscha,
“of the passover,” in Jn 19 14, and of the phrase
“for the day of that sabbath was a high day,” in
19 31, seems to indicate that the author of the
Fourth Gospel regarded the Passover as occurring
on the Sabbath in the year of the crucifixion. This
is clearly the natural interpretation of the words of
John’s Gospel, and if it were not for the seeming
contradiction to the narrative of the Synopties it
is very doubtful whether any other interpretation
would ever have been put upon them. This ques-
tion is discussed in the articles on the date of the
crucifixion and the Lord’s Supper, and it will be
necessary only to allude to it here.


It is possible that the phrase the '' Preparation of the
asso VCE in Jn 19 14 may mean it was the preparation

ay (Friday) of the Passover week (see Andrews, Life
of Our Lord, 451 ff; and most recently Zahn, Das Evange-
lium des Johannes, 1908, 637 ff). This method of har-
monizing seems to the present writer to be forced, and
it therefore seems wiscr to give to the words of Jn 19 14
their natural interpretation, and to maintain that,
according to the author of the Fourth Gospel, the Pass-
over bad not been celcbrated at the time of the cruci-
fixion. There seems to be reason to believe that the
ordinary view that the Lord’s Supper was instituted in
connection with the Passover, based upon the narrative
in Mark (14 12 ff),does not have the unanimous support
of the Synoptic Gospels.

LiteERATURE.—In addition to references in the body
of the article, the comms., esp. Plummer, Cambridge
Bible, ** St. John," Appendix A; Allen, TCC, “St. Mat-
thew,”’ 270-74; Godct, Comm. on the NT; Gospel of
St. John, ET, New York, 1886, II, 378, 379; and the
significant articles on the interpretation of Lk 22 15.16
by. Burkitt and Brooke, Journal of Theological Studies,
IX, 569 ff, and by Box, ib, X, 106.

Water R, BetreripGE

PRESBYTER, prez’bi-tér, pres’bi-tér (mpeo-
Birepos, presbuteros), PRESBYTERY, prez’bi-ter-i,

pres’bi-ter-i (rpecBurépwov, presbuléri-


1. Words on): This latter word occurs in the
Used in NT once (1 Tim 4 14), so rendered in
the NT both AV and RV. But the original Gr


occurs also in Lk 22 66, in RV tr@
“the assembly of the elders,” in AV simply ‘‘the
elders’; and in Acts 22 5, trdin EV “‘the estate of
the elders”; in both of which occurrences the word
might more accurately be tr4 “‘the presbytery,” just
ag itigin 1 Tim 4 14. Besides these three occur-
rences of the neuter sing. presbuterion, the masc. pl.
presbiteroi, always tr’ ‘‘elders,’”’ is often used to
indicate the same organization or court as the
former, being applied earlier in NT history to the
Jewish Sanhedrin (Mt 27 1; 28 12; Lk 9 22; Acts
4 5.8), and later in the development of the church
to its governing body, either in general (Acts 15
2.4.6.22f), or locally (Acts 14 23; 16 4; 20 17;
1 Tim 5 17; Tit 1 5, etc). It is sometimes used
of the body, or succession, of religious teachers and
leaders of the nation’s past (Mt 15 2; He 11 2).
The word “presbyter’’ has been contracted by later
ecclesiastical usage into the title “priest,” although
in the NT they are by no means identical, but on the
contrary are often explicitly distinguished (Mk 14
43; Acts 23 14).
The local synagogue of the Jewish church was
under the care and control of a body of representa-
tive men called “‘the elders” (Lk 7 3).
2. Based Naturally the Christian church, be-
on Syna- ginning at Jerus and formed on the
gogue Plan lines of the synagogue, took over the
eldership into its own organization
(Acts 11 30; 15 2; 1 Pet 6 1, etc); so also in
all the cities in which the missionary activities of
the apostles made church organization necessary,
the local synagogues readily suggested and supplied
a feasible plan for such organization (Acts 14 23;
Tit 15). The mother-church at Jerus, formed
after the pattern of the synagogue, might well have


Presence
Priest


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2438


offered to the churches formed elsewhere under
apostolic preaching the only conceivable plan.
We do not know from the NT passages how these
elders were selected; we must infer that they were
elected by the membership of the churches, as under
the synagogue plan; they were then installed into
their office by apostles (Acts 14 23), or by apostolic
helpers (Tit 1 5), or by “‘the presbytery” (1 Tim
4 14), or by both together (2 Tim 1 6; cf 1 Tim
4 14). So early as the Pauline letters the office of
presbyter seems already to have borne the dis-
tinction of two functions: teaching and ruling
(1 Tim 6 17; cf Acts 20 17.28; 1 Thess 5 12.
13; 1 Pet 5 2).

In the NT history and epp. it does not appear

that the various churches of a district were already

organized into an ecclesiastical body
3. Principle known as ‘‘the presbytery,” having
Foundin some basis of representation from the
the NT constituent churches. But the ab-

sence of such mention is far from being
final proof that such district organizations did not
exist; little dependence can be placed on mere nega-
tive arguments. Moreover, the council of apostles
and elders in Jerus, to which Paul and Barnabas
appealed (Acts 15), is positive evidence of the
principle of representation and central authority.
The various district organizations would quickly
follow as administrative and judicial needs de-
manded; such development came early in the
growth of the church, so early that it is unmis-
takably present in the post-apostolic age.

In Rev the 24 elders occupy a conspicuous place
in the ideal church (Rev 4 4.10; 5 6, ete), sitting
for those they represent, as an exalted presbytery,
close to the throne of the Eternal One. ‘The four
and twenty elders occupying thrones (not seats)
around the throne are to be regarded as representa-
tives of the glorified church; and the number, twice
twelve, seems to be obtained by combining the
number of the patriarchs of the OT with that of the
apostles of the NT” (Milligan on Rev 4 4 in
Expositor’s Bible).

Presbytery is the court, or representative body, in the


Presbyterian Church next above the Session of the local
church. The Session is composed of the


4, In the ruling elders, elected by the membership
Presbyte- of a particular church, with the minister
M as moderator or presiding officer. The


rian Church Presbytery is composed of all the ordained
ministers, or teaching elders, and one
ruling elder from the Session of each church in a given
district or community. To it now, as in NT times
(1 Tim 4 14), is committed the power of ordination;
as also of installation and removal of ministers. It has
supervision of the affairs which are general to the churches
In its jurisdiction, and the power of review in all matters
concerning the local churches (see Form of Gov., Presb.
Church in U.S.A., ch_x). Tho Presbytery elects the
representatives composing the General Assembly, which

is the highest court of the Presbyterian Church.
In ecclesiastical architecture the preshytery is that
part of the church structure which is set apart for the
. clergy, usually the space between altar
6. In Archi- and apse; sometimes used of the whole
tecture choir space, but ordinarily the word is
more restricted in its meaning. See fur-

ther, Bisnop; Cuurcu; ELpmr; GovERNMENT,

Epwarp Mack

PRESENCE, prez’ens: In the OT nearly always
the rendition of B22, pdnim, “face” (Gen 3 8; Ex
33 14f; Ps 95 2; Isa 63 9, ete); occasionally of
PY, ‘ayin, “eye” (Gen 23 11; Dt 25 9; Jer 28
1.11, etc); and in 1 K 8 22; Prov 14 7, “the pres-
ence of” represents the prep. 13), neghedh, “before”;
ef also Aram. DUP, kédham, in Dnl 2 27 AV (RV


“before”). In Gr, “presence” has an exact equiva-
lent in mapovela, parousia, but this word is ren-
dered “‘presence” only in 2 Cor 10 10; Phil 2 12;
RV Phil 1 26 (AV “coming’”’). Elsewhere jpa-
rousia is rendered “coming,” but always with
“presence” in the m. Otherwise in the NT “pres-


ence’ represents no particular word but is intro-

duced where it seems to suit the context (cf eg.

Acts 3 13 AV and 3 19). See Parousta.
Burron Scorr Easton

PRESENT, prez’ent. See Girt.

PRESENTLY, prez’ent-li: The strict meaning is
of course “at the present moment,” “instantly,”
and the modern force ‘after .a short interval” is due
simply to the procrastinating habits of mankind;
hence RV modifications of the AV use of the word
into ‘immediately’ (Mt 21 19), “even now” (Mt 26
53), and “forthwith” (Phil 2 23). In Prov 12 16,
the uncertainty of the meaning (m “openly,” Heb
“in the day’’) has led to the retention of the AV
word.


PRESIDENT, prez‘i-dent (F219, sdrakh): Used
only in Dn] 6 2-7. Probably a Pers derivative
from sar, “head,” and the Aram. equivalent for
Heb shétér. The meaning is self-evident and refers
to the appointment of Daniel by Darius to be one
of the three princes who had rule over the satraps
of the empire.


PRESS, pres: As a vb. is used in RV as a tr of
no less than 13 Gr and Heb words (rather more in
AV). All the RV uses are modern. In AV may
be noted Wisd 17 11, “pressed with conscience”
(RV ‘pressed hard by’); 2 Mace 14 9, “pressed
on every side” (RV “surrounded by foes’); Acts
18 5, “pressed in the spirit”’ (RV ‘constrained by’’).
As a noun, AV uses “press” in Mk 2 4 for 8xos,
ochlos, “crowd” (soRV). For wine press see VINE;
WINE.


PRESSFAT, pres‘fat (Hag 2 16 AV, ERV “wine-
fat,” ARV “wimevat’’). See Winer.


PRESUME, pré-ziim’, PRESUMPTUOUS, pré-
zump’ti-us, PRESUMPTUOUSLY, pré-zump’ti-
us-li: “To presume” (“‘to take or go beforehand’’)
is to speak or act without warrant or proudly. In
the OT the words are for the most part the tr of
INT, zddh, and “"T, zidh, ‘‘to boil up” (as water),
and derivatives; hence to act proudly, to speak
unauthorizedly, ete (Dt 18 20.22, of the prophet;
Ex 21 14; Dt 143: 17 12.13: Ps 19 13, “pre-
sumptuous sins” [zédh, “proud”]; ef Ps 86 14;
119 21, etc; Prov 21 24, etc). Other words are
male’, “to fill,” “to be full” (Est 7 5, ‘“presume’”’);
‘dphal, ‘“‘to lift oneself up’ (Nu 14 44); beyadh
ramah, “with a high hand” (Nu 16 30, RV “with
a high hand”); in 2 Pet 2 10 tolmétés, “bold,”
“daring,” is tr? “presumptuous,” RV “daring”;
in 2 Mace 3 24; 5 15 we have katatolmdd; thrasis,
is rendered “presumption” in 2 Macc 6 18, RV
“daring deed.” W. L. WALKER


PREVENT, pré-vent’ (DIP, kddham,; wpop@dva,
prophthind, 6%4ve, phthdnd): ‘Prevent’? oceurs in
AV in the literal but obsolete sense of “to come or
go before,” “to anticipate,” not in the sense of ‘“‘to
hinder.” It is the tr of kddham, “to be sharp,” “‘to
be in front,” “to be beforehand” (2 8 22 6.19,
RV “came upon”; Job 3 12, RV ‘receive’; 30 27,
“are come upon”; 41 11, “firstgiven”’; Ps 18 5.18,
“came upon”; 21 3, ARV ‘‘meetest”’; 59 10, ARV
“meet”; 79 8, ARV “meet’’; 88 13, “come before”;
119 147.148, ARV “anticipated”; Isa 21 14, ‘did
meet’; Am 910, ARV ‘“mect”). In the NT
prophthané, with same meaning, is tr? ‘“prevent”
(Mt 17 25, ‘Jesus prevented him,” RV “spake
first to him”); phthand (1 Thess 4 15, “shall not
prevent,” RV “shall in no wise precede”). ‘‘Pre-
vent” in the above sense occurs in Wisd 6 13, RV


2439


“forestalleth” (phthand); 16 28, “we must prevent
the sun to give thee thanks,” RV “rise before.”
W. L. WaLkEr
PREY, pra (13, baz, DQ, fereph, DoW, shalal):
Prey” is frequent in the OT, chiefly as the tr of


baz, “spoil,” “plunder” (Nu 14 3.31; Dt 1 39;
Isa 10 6, etc); of tereph, “prey of wild beasts,
“torn thing” (Gen 49 9; Nu 23 24; Job 4 11,
etc); of matkoth, “a taking” (Nu 31 11, etc; Isa
49 24.25); of shaldl, “spoil” or “booty” (Jgs 5 30
bis; 8 24.25; Isa 10 2, etc). Mahér-shaldl-hash-
baz (RVm “The spoil speedeth, the prey hasteth’’)
was the symbolical name given to a son of Isaiah
(Isa 8 1.3). “Prey” does not occur in the NT,
but is found in the Apoc: 1 Esd 8 77, “for our
sins .... were given up....for a prey”
(pronomé); Jth 9 4; 16 5; 1 Macc 7 47; Ecclus
27 10 (théra); Jth 5 24 (kaidbroma).

In RV shalal is generally tr4 “spoil” (Jgs 5 30;
8 24.25; Isa 10 2, etc), while, conversely, “prey
(noun and vb.) is occasionally substituted for
“spoil,” “booty” (Nu 81 32, etc). See Boory;
Spor. W. L. Waker


PRICE, pris: Represents various words in the
OT; 74, témé, is the usual Gr word for “price” in
the NT. “Of great price’ is rod’riuos, poliitimos,
in Mt 13 46, and rodvredys, polutelés, in 1 Pet 3
4. The vb. occurs in Zee 11 13 AV and ERV as
The spelling “prized” in ARV and some

‘or


“prised.”
edd of AV is due to a confusion with “prize.”
“price of a dog” (Dt 23 18 AV) see Doa.


PRICK, prik: As a noun (=any slender pointed
thing, a thorn, a sting) it translates two words:
(1) JW, sékh, a “thorn” or ‘‘prickle.” Only in Nu
83 55, ‘‘those that ye let remain of them be as
pricks in your eyes,”’ 1.e. “shall be a source of painful
trouble to you.” (2) xévrpov, kéntron, ‘‘an iron goad”
for urging on oxen and other beasts of burden: “It
is hard for thee to kick against the pricks’? (AV of
Acts 9 5, where RV omits the whole phrase, follow-
ing the best MSS, including NABCE; AV of Acts
26 14,where RV has “goad,” m “Gr ‘goads’ ’’), i.e. to
offer vain and perilous resistance. See Goan. As
a vb. (=“‘to pieree with something sharply pointed,”
“to sting’), it occurs once in its literal sense: “a
pricking brier” (Ezk 28 24); and twice in a fig-
urative sense: ‘I was pricked in my heart” (Ps 73
21); “They were pricked in their heart” (Acts 2
37, xataviccw, katanissd, Vulg compungo; ci Eng.
word “compunction’”). D. Mratu Epwarps


PRIEST, prést qm, kohen, “priest,” “prince,”
‘minister’; lepets, hieretis, &pxtepets, archierets;
for tepeds péyas, hieretis mégas, of He 10 21, see
Thayer’s Lexicon, s.v. tepets):

I. Narore or THE PrisstLy OFFICE

1. Implies Divine Choice
2, Implies Representation
3. Implies Offering Sacrifice
4. Implies Intercession
Il. Tue Two Great Priests oF THE OT

Melchizedek and Aaron

III. Prrestry FUNCTIONS AND CHARACTER
1, A Strictly Religious Order
2. Priestism Denied ' 2
3. The High Priest's Qualifications
4. Symbolism of Aaron's Rod

IV. Gonsecration or Aaron AND His Sons
1. Symbolism of Consecration
2. Type and Archetype

LITERATURE

A priest is one who is duly authorized to minister
in sacred things, particularly to offer sacrifices at
the altar, and who acts as mediator between men
and God. In the NT the term is applied to priests
of the Gentiles (Acts 14 13), to those of the Jews
(Mt 8 4), to Christ (He 6 5.6), and to Christians


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Presence
Priest


(1 Pet 29; Rev 16). The office of priest in
Israel was of supreme importance and of high rank.
The high priest stood next the monarch in influence
and dignity. Aaron, the head of the priestly order,
was closcly associated with the great lawgiver,
Moses, and shared with him in the government and
guidance of the nation. It was in virtue of the
priestly functions that the chosen people were
brought into near relations with God and kept
therein. Through the ministrations of the priest-
hood the people of Israel were instructed in the doc-
trine of sin and its expiation, in forgiveness and wor-
ship. In short, the priest was the indispensable
source of religious knowledge for the people, and
the channel through which spiritual life was com-

municated. .
I. Nature of the Priestly Office. —The Scriptures
furnish information touching this pomt. To them
we at once turn. Priesthood implies


1. Implies choice. Not only was the office of
Divine Divine institution, but the priest him-
Choice self was Divinely appointed thereto.


“For every high priest, being taken
from among men, is appointed for men in things
pertaining to God... .. And no man taketh the
honor unto himself, but when he is called of God,
even as was Aaron” (He 6 1.4). The priest was
not elected by the people, much less was he self-
appointed. Divine selection severed him from those
for whom he was to act. Even our Great High
Priest, Jesus Christ, came not into the world unsent.
He received His commission and His authority from
the fountain of all sovereignty. At the opening of
His earthly ministry He said, ‘He anointed me.
.... He hath sent me’ (Lk 4 18). He came
bearing heavenly credentials.

It implies the principle of representation. The
institution of the office was God’s gracious pro-
vision for a people at a distance from


2. Implies Him, who needed one to appear in the
Repre- Divine presence in their behalf. The
sentation high pricst was to act for men in things


pertaining to God, “to make propitia-
tion for the sins of the people” (He 2 17). He was
the mediator who ministered for the guilty. ‘The
high priest represented the whole people. All
Israelites were reckoned as being in him. The pre-
rogative held by him belonged to the whole of them
(Ex 19 6), but on this account it was transferred
to him because it was impossible that all Israelites
should keep themselves holy as became the priests
of Jeh’” (Vitringa). That the high priest did rep-
resent the whole congregation appears, first, from
his bearing the tribal names on his shoulders in the
onyx stones, and, second, in the tribal names en-
graved in the twelve gems of the breastplate. The
Divine explanation of this double representation of
Israel in the dress of the high priest is, he “‘shall bear
their names before Jeh upon his two shoulders
for a memorial” (Ex 28 12.19). Morcover, his com-
mitting heinous sin involved the people in his guilt:
“Tf the anointed priest shall sin so as to bring guilt
on the people” (Lev 4 3). The LXX reads, “If
the anointed priest shall sin so as to make the people
sin.” The anointed priest, of course, is the high
priest. When he sinned the pcople sinned. His
official action was reckoned as their action. The
whole nation shared in the trespass of their repre-
sentative. The converse appears to be just as true.
What he did in his official capacity, as prescribed
by the Lord, was reckoned as done by the whole


congregation: ‘‘Everyhigh priest . . . . 1s appointed
for men” (He 6 1).
It implies the offering of sacrifice. Nothing is


clearer in Scripture than this priestly function. It
was the chicf duty of a priest to reconcile men to
God by making atonement for their sins; and this


Priest
Priest, High


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2440


he effected by means of sacrifice, blood-shedding
(He 5 1; 8 3). He would be no priest who should
have nothing to offer. It was the high
priest who carried the blood of the sin
offering into the Most Holy Place and
who sprinkled it seven times on and
before the mercy-seat, thus symboli-
cally covering the sins of the people from the eyes
of the Lord who dwelt, between the cherubim
(Ps 80 1). It was he also who marked the same
blood on the horns of the altar of burnt offering in
the Court of the Tabernacle, and on those of the
golden altar, that the red sign of propitiation might
thus be lifted up in the sight of Jeh, the righteous
Judge and Redeemer.
It implies intercession. In
the priestly ministry of Aaron
and his sons this
4. Implies function is not so
Intercession expressly set forth
as are some of their
other duties, but if is certainly
included. For intercession is
grounded in atonement. There
can be no effective advocacy on
behalf of the guilty until their
guilt is righteously expiated.
The sprinkling of the blood on
the mercy-seat served to cover
the guilt from the face of God,
and at the same time it was
an appeal to Him to pardon and
accept His people. So we read
that after Aaron had sprinkled
the blood he came forth from
the sanctuary and blessed Israel
(Lev 9 22-24: Nu 6 22-27).
Il. The Two Great Priests of
the OT.—These were Melchize-
dek and Aaron.


3. Implies
Offering
Sacrifice


Mel- No others that
chizedek ever bore the name
and Aaron or discharged the


office rank with
these, save, of course, the Lord
Jesus Christ, of whom they were
distinguished types. Of the
two, Melchizedek was the
greater. There are two reasons
why they are to be considered chiefs: first, because
they are first in their respective orders. Melchize-
dek was not only the head of his order, but he
had no successor. The office began and termi-
nated with him (He 7 3). The ordinary priests and
the Levites depended for their official existence on
Aaron. Apart from him they would not be priests.
Seeond, the priesthood of Christ was typified by
both. The office is summed up and completed in
Him. They were called and consecrated that they
might be prophecies of Him who was to come and
in whom all priesthood and offering and intercession
would find its ample fulfilment. Jn the Ep. to the
He the priesthood of both these men is combined
and consummated in Christ. But let it be noted
that while He is of the order of Melchizedek He
exercises the office after the pattern of Aaron. He
perfects all that Aaron did typically, because He
is the true and the real Priest, while Aaron is but
a figure.
I. Priestly Fanctions and Character.—These
are minutely prescribed in the Law. In the insti-
tution of the office the Lord’s words to
1. A Strictly Moses were, ‘“‘Take thou unto thee
Religious Aaron thy brother, and his sons with
Order him, from among the children of Israel,
that he may minister unto ine in the
priest’s office” (ix 28 IT AV). Their duties were


strictly religious. They had no political power con-
ferredupon them. Their services, their dependent
position, and the way in which they were sustained,
i.e. by the free gifts of the people, precluded them
from exercising any undue influence in the affairs of
the nation. It is true that in process of time the
high office degenerated, and became a thing of
barter and sale in the hands of unscrupulous and
corrupt men, but as originally appointed the priest-
hood in Israel was not a caste, nor a hierarchy,
nor a political factor, but a Divinely appointed
medium of communication between God and the
people.

The Heb priests in no wise interfered with the
conscience of men. The Heb worshipper of his own


Dress of Egyptian Priests.


free will laid his hand on the head of his sacri-

fice, and confessed his sins to God alone. His
conscience was quite free and un-

2. Priestism trammeled.

Denied There were certain duties which
were peculiar to the high priest. He

alone could wear the “garments for glory and for


beauty.” To him alone it pertained to enter the

Most Holy Place and to sprinkle the
3. The blood of the sin offering on the mercy-
High seat. To him alone it pertained to
Priest’s represent the congregation before the
Qualifi- Lord as mediator, and to receive the
cations Divine communications. He was to


be ceremonially pure and holy. He
must be physically perfect. Any defect or de-
formity disqualified a member of the priestly family
from performing the duties of the office (Lev 21 17-
21). The Law spoke with the utmost precision
as to the domestic relations of the high priest.
He could marry neither a widow, nor a divorced
woman, nor one polluted, nor a harlot; only a
virgin of his own people, a Hebrew of pure ex-
traction, could become his wife (Lev 21 14.15).
Nor was he to come in contact with death. He
must not rend his clothes, nor defile himself, even
for his father or his mother (Lev 21 10.11). His
sons might defile themselves for their kin, but the


2441


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Priest
Priest, High


high priest must not. For he was the representa-
tive of life. Death did not exist for him, in so far
as he was a priest. God is the Ever-Living, the
Life-Giving; and His priest, who had “the crown
of the anointing oil of his God upon him,” had to
do with life alone.
_ Adolph Saphir believes there is deep significance
in the miracle of Aaron’s rod that budded and bare
almonds (Nu 17). It was a visible
4. Symbol- sign of the legitimacy of Aaron’s
ism of priesthood and a confirmation of it,
Aaron’s Rod and a symbol of its vitality and fruit-
fulness. The twelve rods of the tribes
were dead sticks of wood, and remained dead;
Aaron’s alone had life and prodnced blossoms and
fruit. It was the emblem of his office which corre-
lated itself with life, and had nothing to do with
death.

IV. Consecration of Aaron and His Sons (Ex
29; Lev 8).—The process of the consecration is
minutely described and is worthy of a more de-
tailed and careful study than can here be given it.
Only the more prominent features are noticed.

(1) Both the high priest and his sons were to-
gether washed with water (Ex 29 4). But when
this was done, the high priest parted company with
his sons. (2) Next, Aaron was arrayed in the holy
and beautiful garments, with the breastplate over
his heart, and the holy crown on his head, the mitre,
or turban, with its golden plate bearing the signifi-


eant inscription, “Holy to Jehovah.” This was
Aaron’s investiture of the high office. (3) He was
then anointed with the precious oil. It is note-


worthy that Moses poured the oil on his head.
When he anointed the tabernacle and its furniture
he sprinkled the oil, but in Aaron’s case there was
a profusion, an abundance in the anointing (Ps
133 2). (4) After the anointing of the high priest
the appointed sacrifices were offered (Ex 29 10 ff).
Up to this point in the ceremony Aaron was the
principal figure, the sons having no part save ia the
bathing. But after the offerings had been made the
sons became prominent participants in the cere-
monies, sharing equally with the high priest therein.
(5) The blood of the offering was applied to the
person of father and sons alike (Ex 29 20.21). On
the tip of the right ear, on the thumb
1. Symbol- of the right hand, and on the great
ism of Con- toe of the right foot was the conse-
secration crating blood-mark set.

The significance of this action should
not escape the reader. The whole person and career of
the priest were thus brought under power of the hlocd.
He had a blood-stained ear that he might hear and ohey
the Divine injunctions, that he might understand the
word of Jeh and interpret it to the people. _His will was
brought into snbjection to the will of His Lord that he
might he a faithful minister in things pertaining to God.
He had a blocd-stained hand that he might execute, rightly
and efficiently, the services of the sanctuary and the duties
of his great office. He had likewise a hlood-stained foot
that he might walk in the statutes and commandments
of the Lord blameless, and tread the courts of the Lord's
house as the obedient servant of the Most High. Sacri-
ficial blood, the blood of atonement, is here, as every-
where else, the foundation for saints and sinners, for
priests and ministers alike, in all their relations with God.

The priests of Israel were but dim shadows, ob-
scure sketches and drafts of the one Great Priest of
God, the Lord Jesus Christ. Without

2. Type and drawing out at length the parallelism
Archetype between the type and the archetype,
we may sum up in a few brief sentences

the perfection found in the priestly character of
Christ: (1) Christ as Priest is appointed of God
(He 5 5). (2) Heis consecrated with an oath (He
7 20-22). (3) He is sinless (He 7 26). (4) His
priesthood is unchangeable (He 7 23.24). (5) His
offering is perfect and final (He 9 25-28; 10 12).
(6) His intercession ig all-prevailing (He 7 25). (7)


As God and man in one Person He is a perfect
Mediator (He 1, 2). See Curist, Orrices or, V.
Lrrerature.—Smith, DB; HDB; P. Fairbairn, Typol-
ogy of Scripture, II; Soltau, Exposition of the Tabernacle;
the Priestly Garments and the Priesthood; Martin, Atone-


ment; A. B. Davidson, Hebrews; Moorehead, Mosaic
Institutions.


Wiuiam G. Moorgtapap
PRIEST, CHRIST AS. See Curisr, Orricns or.


PRIEST, HIGH (]71570, ha-kohen, 6 iepets, ho
hiercis; TOWAD PDN, ha-kéhén ha-mashirh,
6 iepets 6 xpurrés, ho hierevis ho christés; |D0
Sean, ha-kéhén ha-gadhol, & tepeds 6 péyas, ho
hiereis ho mégas; WNW IND, kohén ha-ra'sh, 6
icpeds yotpevos, ho hiereiis héigotimenos; NT
Apxvepets, archicrets):

I. Institution or tae Hicu-PrizstuHoop

1. The Family
. The Consecration
. The Dress
The Duties of High-Priesthood
3 Bpeciay Regulations

The Emoluments
. Importance of the Office
II. History or THE Hicu-Prirstuoop 1n (sRaEL

1. In the OT


2. In the NT
LiteraTuRE


I. Institution of the High-Priesthood.—Temples
with an elaborate ritual, a priesthood and a high
priest were familiar to
Moses. Fora millennium
or two before his time
these had flourished in
Egypt. Each temple had
its priest or priests, the
larger temples and centers
having a high priest. For
centuries the high priest
of Amon at Thebes stood
next to the king in power
and influence. Many
other high-priesthoods of
less importance existed.
Moses’ father-in-law was
priest of Midian, doubt-
less the chief or high
priest. In founding a
nation and _ establishing
an ecclesiastical system,
nothing would be more
natural and proper for
him than to institute a priestly system with a high
priest at the head. The records give a fairly full
account of the institution of the high-priesthood.

Aaron, the brother of Moses, was chosen first to
fill the office. He was called “the priest” (ha-

kéhén) (Ex 31 10). As the office was
1. The to be hereditary and to be preserved
Family in perpetuity in the family of Aaron
(Ex 29 9.29), he is succeeded by his
son Eleazar (Nn 20 28; Dt 10 6), and he in turn
by his son Phinehas (Nu 25 11). In his time the
succession was fixed (Nu 26 12.13). In Lev 4
8.5.16; 6 22 he is called “the anointed priest.”
Three times in the Pent he is spoken of as “great
priest”’ or “high priest”? (Lev 21 10; Nu 35 25.28).
The first of these passages identifies him with the
anointed priest.


High Priest (Egyptian).


The ceremonies hy which he was installed in his office
are recorded in Ex 29 29ff. Seven days of special
solemnities were spent. The first conse-

2. The Con- cration was by Moses; it is not said who
é a performed the others. There was special
secration washing and anointing with oil (Ps 133 2).
Each new high pee must wear the holy
garments, as well as be specially anointed (Lev 21 10).
Every day a bulleck for a sin offering must he offered for
atonement; the altar also must be cleansed, atoned for,


Priest, High


THE INTERNATILONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2442


and anointed, the high priest offering a sacrifice or min-
hak for himself (Lev 6 24 ff). 2

Besides the regularly prescribed dress of the priests,

the high priest must wear the rohe of the ephod, the

ephod, the hreastplate and the mitre or

The rohe of the


3. The headdress (Lev 8 7-9). t
D ephod seems to have been a sleeveless tunic,
ress made of hlue, fringed with alternate hells


and pomegranates (Ex 28 31-35; 89 22—
26). The ephod seemed to be a variegated dress of the
four colors of the sanctuary, blue, purple, scarlet and fine
linen interwoven with gold (Ex 28 6-8; 39 2-5). This dis-
tinguishing ephod of the high priest was fastened at the
shoulders by two clasps of shdham stone, upon each of
which was engraved the names of six trihes of Israel
(Ex 28 9-14; 89 6.7). Over the ephod and upon his
hreast he wore the hreastplate, a four-cornered héshen
suspended by little chains. Set in this in four rows
were twelve precious stones, having engraved upon them
the names of the twelve trihes of Israel. This hreast-
plate must have contained a pocket of some kind inside,
for in it were deposited the Urim and Thummim, which
seemed to he tangible objects of some kind (Ex 28 15-30;
39 8-21). The mitre or headdress was of fine linen, the
plate of the crown of pure gold, and inscribed upon it
the words, ‘‘ Holy to Jehovah”’ (Ex 28 36-38; 39 30.31).
When entering the Holy of Holies he must he dressed
wholly in linen, hut in his ordinary duties in the dress of
the priests; only when acting as high priest he must
wear his special rohes. See Priest.


In addition to his regular duties as a priest, the
high priest was to enter the Holy of Holies on the
Day of Atonement (Lev 16 3.15.33.

4. Duties 34). He must also officiate at the
of the High- ceremony of the two goats, when one
Priesthood is sent into the wilderness to Azazel,
and the other slain to make atonement

for the sanctuary (Ex 80 10; Lev 16 8-10). He
alone could make atonement for the sins of the
people, the priests and his own house (Lev 4 3 ff;
9 8 ff; 16 6; Nu 15 25). He must offer the regu-
lar meal offering (Lev 6 14.15). He must share
with the priests in the caring for the lamp that
burned continually (Ex 27 21). He must assist
in arranging the shewbread (Ex 25 30). When he
carried the breastplate with the names of the tribes
inscribed thereon he acted as mediator between
Israel and God (Ex 28 29). He alone could con-
sult the Urim and Thummim before Jeh, and ac-
cording to his decision [srael must obey (Nu 27 21).


An office so important required certain special regu-


lations. He must he free from every bodily defect
(Lev 21 16-23). He must marry only
5. Special a_ virgin of Israel, not a widow, nor a
divorecd woman, nor a profane one (Lev


Regulations 21 14). Hemust not observe the external

signs of mourning for any person, and not
leave the sanctuary when news came of the death of
even a father or mother (vs 10-12). He must not
defile himself by contact with any dead hody, even
father or mother (ver 11); and is forhidden to let his
hair grow long or rend his clothes as a sign of mourn-
ing (ver 10). If he should bring guilt upon the people,
he must present a special offering (uev 4 3 ff). Sins
affecting the priesthood in general must he expiated hy
the other priests as well as himself (Nu 18 1). He must
eat nothing that died of itself or was torn hy beasts (Lev
22 8). He must wash his feet and hands when he went
to the tahernacle of the congregation and when he came
near to the altar to minister (Ex 30 19-21). At first
Aaron was to burn incense on the golden altar every
morning when he dressed the lamps and every evening
when he lighted them (Ex 27 21), but in later times the
common pricsts performed this duty. He must abstain
from holy things during his uncleanness (Ley 22 1-3),
or if he should become leprous (vs 4.7). He was to eat
the people’s meat offering with the inferior priests in tho
holy place (Lev 6 16). He must assist in judging the
leprosy in the human hody and garments (Lev 18 2-59),
and in adjudicating legal questions (Dt 17 12). When
there was no Divincly inspired leader, the high priest
was the chief ruler till the time of David and again after
the captivity. See Priest; Prisestuoop.


The emoluments were not much greater than


those of the priests in general. He received no more
inheritance among the tribes than any


6. The other Levite, but he and his family
Emolu- were maintained upon certain fees,
ments dues and perquisites which they en-


joyed from the common fund. In
Nu 18 28 the priests were to receive a tithe of the


tithe paid in to the Levites. Jos says this was a
common fund (Ant, IV, iv, 4), but the high priest
was probably charged with the duty of distribut-
ing it. In general the family of the high priest
was well-to-do, and in the later period became very
wealthy. The high priest and his family were
among the richest people of the land in the time of
Christ, making enormous profits out of the sacri-
fices and temple business.

The importance of the high priest’s office was
manifest from the first. The high pricst Eleazar
is named in the first rank with Joshua,
the prince of the tribes and successor of


7. Impor-
Z He


tance of the Moses (Nu 34 17f; Josh 14 1).


Office with others officiated in the distribu-
tion of the spoils of the Midianites (Nu
31 21.26). His sins were regarded as belonging to


the people (Lev 4 3.22). He acted with Moses in
important matters (Nu 26 1; 31 29). The whole
congregation must go or come according to his
word (Nu 27 20ff). His death was a national event,
for then the manslayer was free to leave the City of
Refuge (Nu 35 25.28). He had no secular author-
ity, but was regarded generally as the leading reli-
gious authority. Later, he became also the leading
secular as well as religious authority.
I. History of the High-Priesthood in Israel.—
In general the present writer accepts the historical
records of the OT as true and rejects
1. Inthe the critical views of a fictitious or
OT falsified history. Such views have only
subjective reasons to support them
and are based upon a naturalistic evolutionary view
of the development of Israel’s religion. As Moses
was the founder of the high-priesthood in Israel he
anticipated a perpetuation of the office throughout
the history (Dt 26 3). The high priest appears
frequently. Eleazar officiated with Joshua in the
division of the land among the twelve tribes (Josh
14 1). The law of the manslayer shows that he
was an important personage in the life of Israel
(Josh 20 6), He seemed to have the power to
distribute the offices of the priests to those whom he
would, and poor priests would appeal to him for
positions (1 S 2 36). The office seems to have
remained in the family of Eleazar until the days
of Eli, when, because of the wickedness of his sons,
the family was destroyed and the position passed
into the family of Ithamar (1 8S 2 31-36). A
descendant of that family officiated at Nob in the
times of Saul, whose name was Ahimelech (1 § 21
2; 22 11). His son, Abiathar, escaped from the
slaughter, and later seems to have succeeded his
father and to have been chief priest’ throughout
David’s reign (1 8 22 20-23; 23 9; 307). Zadok
seems to have had almost equal privilege (2 8 8 17;
1 Ch 18 16; 24 6 almost certainly by copyist’s error,
transpose Abiathar and Ahimelech; Mk 2 26 may
be based on this reading. See Aniatuar, etc).
Because he joined the party of Adonijah rather
than that of Solomon, Abiathar was deposed and
banished to Anathoth, where he spent the rest of
his days (1 K 2 26.27). Zadok was put in his
place (ver 35). Heseems to have been a descendant
of Eleazar. Under Jehoshaphat, Amariah was high
priest (2 Ch 19 11) and was the leading authority
in all religious matters. In the time of Athaliah,
during the minority of Joash and almost his entire
reign Jehoiada was high priest and chief adviser.
He seems to have been the most influential man in
the kingdom for more than half a century (2 K
11 4 ff; 12 2-16; 2 Ch 24 passim). Azariah of-
ficiated in the days of Uzziah and Hezekiah (2 Ch
26 20; 31 10); Urijah in the reign of Ahaz (2 K 16
10-16), and the latter priest seems to have been a
friend of Isaiah (Isa 8 2). Hilkiah held the office
in the days of Josiah when the Book of the Law


2443


was discovered (2 K 22 4f; 23 4; 2 Ch 34 9);
Zephaniah in the time of Jeremiah (Jer 29 25f);
Seraiah in the days of Zedekiah, who was put to
death at Riblah by Nebuchadnezzar (2 K 25 18f;
Jer 52 24). At the time, mention is made of a
priest of the second rank (2 K 23 4; 25 18) and
Zephaniah fills that office (Jer 52 24). It is doubt-
ful whether this is the same Zephaniah mentioned
in Jer 29 25. ‘This “second priest’? was doubtless
a deputy, appointed to take the high priest’s place
in case anything should prevent his performing the
duties of the office. Lists of high priests are given
in 1 Ch 6 1-15; 6 50-53. The first of these gives
the line from Levi to Jehozadak who was carried
away in the captivity under Nebuchadnezzar. The
second traces the line from Aaron to Ahimaaz, and
is identical so far with the first list.

There could have been no place for the functions
of the high priest during the captivity, but the
family line was preserved and Joshua the son of
Jehozadak was among those who first returned
(Ezr 3 2). From this time the high priest becomes
more prominent. The monarchy is gone, the civil
authority is in the hands of the Persians, the Jews
are no longer independent, and hence the chief
power tends to center in the high-priesthood.
Joshua appears to stand equal with Zerubbabel
Re 11.12.14; 22.4; Zee 31.8; 414; 6 11-

He is distinctly known as high priest (ha-kdhén ha-
gadhél). He takes a leading part in establishing the
ecclesiastico-civil system, particularly the bullding of
the temple. In the vision of Zechariah (Zec 3 1-5)
Satan accuses the high priest who is here the represent-
ative proper of the nation. The consummation of the
Messianic age cannot be completed without the co-
operation of the high priest who is crowned with Zerub-
babel, and sits with him on the throne (Zec 6 13). The
prophet also describes Joshua and his friends as
“men of the sigu,’’ alluding to the coming Messiah
under whom the sin of the land was te be taken away in
one day (Zec 38 9f). The promise is made to Joshua
that if he will walk in Jeh’s ways and keep His house,
he shall judge Jeh’s house, i.e. Israel, keep His court aud
have a place te walk among those who stand before Jeh
(3 7). eis anointed equally with the prince of the royal
line, for the two sous of oil (4 14) almost certainly refer
to the royal Zerubbabel and priestly Joshua who are to be
joint inspirers of Israel in rebuilding the temple.

This exaltation of the high priest is very different
from the state of things pictured by Ezekiel (Ezk
40-42). In that picture no place is left for a high
priest; the prince seemed to be the chief personage
in the ecclesiastical system. Ezekiel’s vision was
ideal, the actual restoration was very different, and
the institutions and conditions of the past were
carried out rather than the visions of the prophet.
In the time of Nehemiah, Eliashib was high priest
(Neh 3 1.20). For abusing his office by using a
temple chamber in the interests of his family he was
reprimanded (13 4-9). The list of high priests
from Jeshua to Jaddua is given in Neh 12 10.
According to Jos (Ant, XI, viii, 5) Jaddua was
priest at the time of Alexander the Great (332
BC), but it is practically certain that it was Jad-
dna’s grandson, Simon, who was then priest (see
W. J. Beecher, Reasonable Bib. Criticism, ch xviii).
Thus is preserved the unbroken line from Aaron to
Jaddua, the office still being hereditary. No essen-
tial change can be found since the days of Ezra.
The Book of Ch, compiled some time during this
period, uses the three names, ha-kohén, ha-kohén
ha-ré’sh, ha-kohén ha-gadhol. The word naghidh
(‘prince”’) is also used, and he is called “the ruler
of the house of God” (1 Ch 9 11). This seems to
imply considerable power invested in him. Usually
the Chronicler in both Ch and Neh uses the term
“the priest.” ’ ;

The line of Eleazar doubtless continued until
the time of the Maccabees, when a decided change
took place. The Syrian Antiochus deposed Onias


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Priest, High


II! and put his brother Jason in his place (174 BC),
who was soon displaced by Menelaus. About 153
BC Jonathan the Hasmonean was appointed by
King Alexander, and thus the high-priesthood
passed to the priestly family of Joiarib (1 Mace 10
18-21). Whether the family of Joiarib was a
branch of the Zadokites or not cannot be deter-
mined, After the appointment of Jonathan, the
office became hereditary in the Hasmonean line,
and continued thus until the time of Herod the
Great. The latter set up and deposed high priests
at his pleasure. The Romans did the same, and
changed so frequently that the position became
almost an annual appointment. Though many
changes were thus made, the high priest was always
chosen from certain priestly families. From this
group of deposed priests arose a class known as
“chief priests.” The anointing prescribed in the
law of Moses was not always carried out in later
times, and in fact was generally omitted. The
Mish speaks of high priests who were installed in
office simply by clothing them with their special
robes (Schiirer, II, i, p. 217, note 24).
In NT times the high priest was the chief civil
and ecclesiastical dignitary among the Jews. He
was chairman of the Sanhedrin, and
2. Inthe head of the political relations with the
NT Rom government. It is not clear just
how far he participated in the cere-
monies of the temple. No doubt he alone entered
the Holy of Holies once a year on the Day of Atone-
ment, and also offered the daily offerings during
that week. What other part he took in the work
was according to his pleasure. Jos says that he
officiated at the Sabbath, the New Moon and
yearly festivals. The daily minhah (Lev 6 12 ff)
which he was required to offer was not always
offered by the high priest in person, but he.was
required to defray the expense of it. This was a
duty which, according to Ezekiel’s vision, was to
be performed by the prince. The Jews had many
contentions with the Romans as to who should keep
the garments of the high priest. When Jerus fell
into the hands of the Romans, the robe of state
also fell into their hands.


In the time of Christ, Annas and Caiaphas were high
priests (Lk 3 2), though, as appears later in the Gospel,
Caiaphas alone acted as such. nas had probably been
deposed, yet retained much of his influence among the
priestly families. For particulars see Annas; AIA-
PHas; Jesus CHRIST. hese two were also the chief
conspirators against Jesus. As president of the council
Caiaphas deliberately advised them to put Jesus to
death to save the nation (Jn 11 51). He was also chair-
man of the council which tried and condemned Jesus
(Mt 26 57.58.63.65;, Mk 14 53.60.61.63; Lk 22 54;
Jn 18 12-14.19.24.28). They were also leaders in the
persecution of the apostles and disciples after Pente-
cost (Acts 4 6; 5 17.21); Saul sought letters from the
high priest to Damascus to give him authority to bring

Ghristians he might find there bound to Jerus (Acts
9 2). He presided at the council which tried Paul (Acts
22 5: 23 4). See Pau, THE APOSTLE.

In the Ep. to the He the doctrine of the priesthood
of Jesus is fully and carefully elaberated. Jesus is here
called the great High Priest, as well as priest. The
opening words of the Ep. contain the essential thought:
‘“‘wheu he had made purification of sins” . The
title of high priest is first introduced in 2 17, ‘‘a merciful
and faithful high priest in things pertaining te Ged’’; also
in 3 1, ‘‘the Apestle and High Priest of our confession.”
Having thus fairly introduced his great theme, the writer
strikes the keynote of his great argument: ‘Having
then a great high priest," ete (4 14.15). From 4 14
to 7 28 the argument deals with the high-priestly work
of Jesus. His qualifications are not only those which
distinguish all priesthood, but they are alse unique. He
is uamed after the order of Melchizedek. The general
qualifications are: (1) He is appointed by God to His
office (5 1). (2) He is well fitted for the office by His
experiences and participation in human temptations (5
2-6; 2.18). (3) He undergoes a Divine preparation 6
8.9). The special qualifications of His priesthood are:
It is after the order of Melchizedek (5 10). This is an
eternal one (6 20); royal or kingly (7 1-3); independent
of birth or family (ver 3); it is timeless (ver 8); superior


Priesthood
Priesthoodin NT


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2444


to that of Levi (vs 4-10); new and different from that of
Aaron (vs 11.12). Itis also indissoluble (ver 16); immu-
table (ver 21); inviolable (ver 24). Thus with all these
general and special qualifications He is completely fitted
for His work (7 26). That work consists in offering up
Himself as a sacrifice for the sins of the people (ver 27);
entering within the veil as a forerunner (6 20); present-
ing the sacrificial blood in heaven itself (8 3:9 7.24); thus
obtaining eternal redemption (9 12); ratifying the new
Covenant (vs 15-22), The result of this high-priestly
work is a cleansing from all sin (9 23); a possibility of
full consecration to God and His service (10 10); an
ultimate perfection (10_ 14); and full access to the throne
of grace (10 21.22). See Curist, Orrices or; PRiEst;
PRIESTHOOD IN THE

Lirsratrurs.—Articles on the priesthood in general,
with references to the high priest in HDB, HCG, EB,
Jew Enc, Kxitto, Smith, Fallows, Schaff-Herzog, etc;
no article on ‘High Priest’’ only. For the history,
Breasted, History of Egypt; Schiirer, History of the Jewish
People in the Time of Jesus Christ, II, i, 207-99; Jos, Ant,
XV, XVIII, XX. For works on the priesthood from
the radical viewpoint, see Graf, 8. I. Curtiss, Jost, Graetz,
Kautzsch, Budde, Baentsch, Benzinger, Biichler, Meyer,
Wellhausen. For amore moderate position see Baudissin,
Die Geschichte des alttestamenilichen Priesterthums unter-
sucht. For a more conservative position seo A. Van
Hoonacker, Le sacerdoce lévitique dans la loi et dansl histoire
des Hébreuz. On the high-priesthood subsequent to the
return from Babylon, see B. Pick, Lutheran _ Church
Review, 1898, I, 127-41; Il, 370-74; ILL, 555-56; IV, 655—
64; and the comms. on the passages cited.

James Josiang Rezvu
PRIESTHOOD, prést’hoddd:

. Priesthood an Office
. In the OT
. Hereditary Priesthood
. Inthe NT
. Conclusions
LiveratTurRB

All worship is based on priesthood, for the priestly
office is an essential part of salvation. Christianity
itself has its glorious Priest, the Lord Jesus Christ,
and it is through His one supreme offering that we
are brought into saved relations with God and enjoy
fellowship with Him. The priesthood of Christ and
its mighty effects in sacrifice and intercession on
behalf of the people of God are the chief and funda-
mental theme of the Ep. to the He.


Priesthood is a real office, definite and specific. It is
needful to insist on this fact, for the noble word "* priest.”
has been misappropriated and misapplied,


te CODD bet


1. Priest- so that its intrinsic import has been im-
hood paired. There is a certain literary slang

00 indulged in by some who talk ‘of the
an Office “priests of science,’’ ‘‘ priests of art,’’ and


similar absurdities. The idea of  priest-
hood, if priesthood is to have any definite meaning, can
have no place in literature or science or art or in any-
thing of the kind. For it belongs to the realm of grace,
presupposing as it_ does sin and the Divine purpose to
remove it. ugh Martin writes that he ‘‘ would as soon
think of transferring the language of geometry and of
algebra to botany and talk of the hypothenuse of a
flower and the square root of a tree, or the differential
coefficient of a convolvulus, as to speak of the priest-
hood of nature or letters.'’’ Priesthood is an office,
embracing very specific duties and functions.
Priesthood in some form appears to have existed
from the earliest times, even from the beginning
of the history of our race. In patriar-
2. Inthe chal times the office was held and its
OT duties were discharged by those who
A occupied some sort of headship, and
particularly by the father or the chief of the family
and of the tribe. Thus Noah in his capacity of
priest and in behalf of his household “builded an
altar unto Jeh, and took of every clean beast, and
of every clean bird, and offered burnt-offerings on
the altar” (Gen 8 20). Abraham offered the ram
“for a burnt-offering in the stead of his son” (Gen
22 13). In like manner Job offered burnt offerings
for his children, and likewise by Divine direction
for the three “comforters” when the great trial had
passed (Job 15; 42 8). In these and the like
instances there was priestly action no less certainly
than in that of Aaron or of any regularly appointed
priest in Israel. Mclchizedek was “priest of God
Most High’ (Gen 14 18). Isane “builded an
altar there and called upon the name of Jeh”’ (Gen


26 25), as did Jacob (Gen 33 20). In these cases
priestly acts were performed by the patriarchs in
their capacity as fathers of the family or heads of
clans. From the beginning, priesthood with its
acts of expiation and of worship was thus recog-
nized as a Divinely instituted office. But in pre-
Mosaic times there was no special class of priests
recognized. : ; :

Regular priestly succession in a single family was
established by’ Moses (Ex 28 1-3). From _ this

point of time onward the priesthood
3. Heredi- in Israel was confined to the family
tary Priest- of Aaron. No hereditary priesthood
hood seems to have prevailed in patriarchal

times. According to the Ep. to the
He, Melchizedek, a priest of the highest rank, had
neither predecessor nor successor in his great office.
By Divine direction Moses designated the Aaronic
family as the priestly family in Israel, and he pre-
scribed the garments they should wear, the sacri-
fices they should offer both for themselves and for
the congregation, their maintenance, their domes-
tic relations, and their conduct toward their fellow-
Hebrews. .

In the appointment of the priesthood there is no
trace of Egyp influence. Yet we know that Joseph
married the daughter of the priest of On (Gen 41
50). But this fact had no bearing on the selection
of Israel’s priestly family. The Aaronic priesthood
had nothing in common with that of Egypt; it
claimed to be of Divine origin, and its duties, func-
tions and powers in no way contradict the claim.
The witness of an Egyp archaeologist (Dr. M. G.
Kyle) may be here introduced touching one essen-
tial element in the duties of the priestly office, viz.
sacrifice: “The entire absence from the offerings of
old Egyp religion of any of the great Pentateuchal
ideas of sacrifice, substitution, atonement, dedi-
cation, fellowship, and indeed of almost every essen-
tial idea of real sacrifice, as clearly established by
recent very exhaustive examination of the offering
scenes, makes for the element of revelation in the
Mosaic system by delimiting the field of rational-
istic speculation on the Egyp side. Egypt gave
nothing to that system, for it had nothing to give.”
As much may be said respecting the priesthood;
Israel took little or nothing of its powers and func-
tions from Egyp sources.

Although the office was limited to the Aaronic
family, nevertheless in certain exigencies and
emergencies others beside the regular priest offered
sacrifices to the Lord and were accepted by Him.
Thus did Gideon in a time of great straits in Israel
(Jgs 6 24.26); thus the men of Beth-shemesh (1 S
6 14.15); the prophet Samuel (1 S 7 9); David
(28 6 13.17); Elijah (1 K 18 23.32-88), ete.
The chosen people appear to have felt free to offer
sacrifices and to engage in priestly functions when
occasion required, until the central sanctuary was
established on Mt. Moriah. When the Temple
was built and dedicated, priestly action was con-
fined to Jerus and to the regular priestly household.
When Pharisaism, with its rigid legalism, with its
intolerable burdens, became dominant, all liberty
of worship and spontaneous service largely dis-
appeared. The religious life of Israel stiffened into
a dreadful monotony.


All priesthood reaches its climax in that of the Lord
Jesus Christ. It is because of the perfection of His
priesthood that the office as represented

4. Inthe NT by Melchizedek and Aaron was effective,
* and fulfilled the end for which it was ap-
,pointed. The one answers to the other as

type and autitype, as prediction and fulfilment. Christ’s
priesthood is opened to us in the Ep. to the He (2 14—
18; 4 14-16; 5 1-10; 7 9.10.18). Two fundamental
truths touching His priesthood are made very promi-
nent in the Ep. to the He. These are its order and its
duties. By the order is meant the rank or grade of the
Priest, and by the duties the various functions of His


2445


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Priesthood
Priesthood in NT


ministry. Christ's order as Priest is that of Melchizedek,
not at all that of Aaron; He 7 makes this fact perfectl
clear. Like Melchizedek, and infinitely above Mel-
chizedek, He is Priest, having no predecessor in the great
office, and no successor; hercin He stands absolutely
alone, peerless and perfect forever. He executes the
duties or functions of it after tho pattern of Aaron, as
He 9 clearly exhibits. These two priestboods, Mel-
chizedek's and Aaron’s, are gloriously accomplished in
the peor and work of Jesus Christ.

_. The point is raised and discussed with some kcenness
in our day, Did Christ execute the office of priest during
His sojourn on earth, or does He exercise the office only
in heaven? A full discussion of this interesting subject
would bo inappropriate. However, let it be noted (1)
that the Lord Jesus was appointed a Priest no less cer-
tainly than was Aaron (He 6 4.5). In the words, “Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee,"’ there appears
to be a reference both_to His incarnation (Lk 1 32;
He 1 5) and also to His resurrection (Acts 13 33).
In He 2 17 we are told that it ‘‘behooved him in all
things to be made like unto bis brethren, that he might
become a merciful and faithful high priest in things per-
taining to God, to make propitiation for the sins of the
people. The assumption of human nature was needful
that He might be such a priest. John the Baptist saw
this truth, and said, ‘‘Behold the Lamb of God, that
taketh away the sin of the world” (Jn 1 29).

There was certainly pricstly action in His death.
Twice we are told that He ‘offered up himself’’ (He
7 27), ‘For this he did once for all, when he offered up
himself.” This strong term, ‘'offered,’’ is sacrificial
and points to His dcath as an offering made for the sins
of the people. His own action in it must not be over-
looked; it was He Himself who presented the offering;
He was not, therefore, a struggling victim, a martyr, who
could not escape the doom that came upon Him—nay,
He voluntarily offered Himself.

In He 9 14 we find these significant words: ‘How
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the
eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish nnto God,
cleanse your conscience from dead works to serve the
living God?” It was as Priest that He made this stu-
pendeus offering, and this He did when still on earth.

e was at once both sacrifice and priest. Never was He
more active than when He offered Himself to God.

It is worth while to remind ourselves that the words
employed in Scripture to express the act of His.dying
are never used to denote the death of a creature, a man.
Matthew has, He ‘yielded up [dismissed] his spirit’
(Mt 27 50). John has, He ‘‘gave up his spirit’ (Jn
19 30); Mk 15 37 and Lk 23 46 both have the same
words: He ‘‘gave up the ghost.'’ He died, not because
He was mortal as we are, nor becanse He could not de-
liver Himself, but because He gave Himself for our sins
that we might be forgiven and saved (Jn 10 17.18).
The voluntariness of His offering is the very essence of
His priestly atonement. See Curist, Orrices or, V;
PRIESTHOOD IN THE NT.


Priesthood springs out of the deepest need of the
human soul. Men universally feel that somchow
they have offended the Power to whom
5. Con- they are responsible, to whom they
clusions must give account of their deeds.
They long to appease their offended
Lord, and they believe that one who is authorized
and qualified to act in their behalf may secure for
them the abrogation of penalty and the pardon they
seek. Hence priesthood connects itself most closely
with sin, with guilt and its removal. The heart
craves the intervention and intercession on their
behalf of one who has liberty of access to God, and
whose ministry is acceptable. In short, the priest
is the representative of the sinner in things pertain-
ing to God. He is the mediator whose office it is
to meet and satisfy the claims of God upon those
for whom he acts, and who secures the pardon and
the favor which the offender must have, if he is to
enjoy fellowship with God. And this, and more
than this, we have in our Great High Priest, the
Lord Jesus Christ.


Lrrerature.—P. Fairbairn, Typology of Scripture,
II: Soltau, Exposition of the Tabernacle, the Priestly
Garments and the Priesthood; Martin, Atonement; Moore-
head, Mosaic Institutions, art. ** Priest."'

Witiiam G. MooreHEAp


PRIESTHOOD IN THE NT:


1. The Jewish Priesthood ; .
2) The Priesthood and High-Priesthood of Jesus Christ
3. The Priesthood of Believers

In the NT lepdrevua, hierdteuma (1 Pet 2 5.9),
“priesthood,” is not found with reference to the


Jewish priesthood, but lepevs, hiereiis, and dpxiepeds,
archiereus, “high priest,” frequently occur. As until
the fall of Jerus the activities of the
1. The priests were carried on in careful ac-
Jewish cordance with the prescriptions of the
Priesthood OT, there naturally is nothing new or
striking in the numerous NT references
to their work. Perhaps the information of the
greatest interest is found in Lk 1 5-9 to the
effect that Zacharias was of the course of Abijah,
the 8th of the 24 courses into which the priests
were divided (cf 1 Ch 24 7-18), and that in these
courses the priests divided their work by lot. In
the Gospels the archiereis are mentioned oftener
than are the hiereis, the power of the priesthood
seeming to have been absorbed by a sort of
priestly aristocracy. As under the political pres-
sure of that time the office of high priest could
seldom be retained until the death of the holder,
there might even be several living at the same time
who had for a longer or shorter time held this office
which made a man the head of the nation, not only
ritually, but also politically, since the high priest
was ex officio presiding officer of the Sanhedrin.
Not only would these ex-high priests naturally
retain the title belonging to their former dignity,
but probably the name had come to include as well
other members of the same families or of families
of equal position, so that it seems that “chief
priests” is a more exact tr of archiereis than high
priests. In the sing., however, the reference of
archiereus is usually, if not invariably, to the indi-
vidual who at the time given was holding the unique
office of high priest. The word hiereus is of course
employed in its ordinary signification on the rare
occasions when reference is made in the NT to
corresponding ministers of other religions, as to the
priest ones (Acts 14 18) and also to Melchizedek
(He 7 1).
Only in He is the activity of Jesus set forth as
priestly and high-priestly, but in this Ep. great
emphasis is laid on these aspects of


2. The His work. Interpreters seldom dis-
Priesthood tinguish between these two aspects
and High- of His work, and it is plain that some-
Priesthood times at least the author himself made
of Jesus no effort sharply to distinguish them.
Christ But certain considerations make it


probable that they were not really
confused or combined in the mind of the author
himself. For example, it is to be noted that the
priesthood of Jesus is declared to be after the order
of Melchizedek, and consequently radically unlike
that of the Levitical priests. On the other hand, the
Aaronic high-priesthood is regarded as having been
analogous to that of Jesus, so that in spite of its
inferiority, comparison is frequently made with it.
It is readily seen that the work of the high priest,
both because of his entry into the Most Holy Place
and because he bore the names of the children of
Israel in the breastplate of judgment for a memorial
before Jeh continually, far more suitably than that
of the ordinary priests typified the atoning and
intercessory work of Jesus (Ex 28 12.15).
Attempting then to treat separately the priestly
and high-priestly functions of Jesus, we note that.
most of what is said of the priestly functions is in-
volved in the declaration that He is a priest after
the order of Melchizedek, and this thought is
handled in He 7 in such a way as to make plain the
superiority of a priesthood after the order of Mel-
chizedek, and thus to confirm the superiority of
Christianity over Judaism, the great theme of the
book. Historically the blessing bestowed upon
Abraham and the reception of tithes from him prove
the superiority of Melchizedek to Levi, and still
more to the priestly descendants of Levi (7 4-10).


Priesthood in NT
Priests, Levites


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA .


2446


Further, Jesus became priest not on the ground of
a “carnal commandment,” i.e. in an order based on
descent and inheritance, but by ‘the power of an
endless life’ (7 16), of which fact Melchizedek
reminds us, since Scripture is silent alike as to his
birth and his death. Again, unlike the Levitical
priests, Christ is inducted into His office by the oath
of God (7 20.21; cf Ps 110 4). Finally, while
the priests of the Levitical line were hindered from
permanence in office by their death, Jesus holds His
priesthood untransmitted and untransmissible (7
23.24). This discussion of the priesthood of Christ
“after the order of Melchizedek” occupies almost
all of ch 7, but at ver 26 His high-priesthood is
suddenly introduced, and after that point, while
His work is more than once contrasted with that of
the temple priests (8 4.5; 9 6; 10 11 £), no further
reference is in any way made to Melchizedek.

After having twice merely given the title of high
priest to Jesus (2 17; 3 1), the writer of the Ep.
to the He at 4 14 begins a statement of the resem-
blance between Jesus and the Jewish high priest,
such “as was Aaron,” finding the resemblance to
reside (1) in His Divine appointment to His work
(5 4.5), (2) in His experience of suffering (6 7.8;
ef 4 15; 5 2), and (3) in His saving work suggested
by the sacrificial activity of the ordinary high priest
(6 9), which, however, it far transcends in value
and effect. But (4) later the work of the high priest
and that of Jesus are contrasted as to place where
done, the high priest going into the second taber-
nacle, i.e. the Holy of Holies (9 7), while Christ
passes through the greater and more perfect taber-
nacle, “heaven itself” (9 11.24). A similar con-
trast is (5) drawn between the sacrifices respectively
offered, the ancient sacrifices being the blood of
goats and calves (9 12), Christ’s being “himself”
(9 14), “his own blood” (9 12), ‘‘the blood of Christ,
who through the eternal Spirit offered himself
without blemish unto God” (9 14). The author
also accepts and urges without argument or even
explanation (6) the truly sacrificial character of this
self-immolation of Jesus. Nor is this fact nullified
by the emphasis which once is laid on doing God’s
will in an antithesis copied from the Ps (10 5-9;
ef Ps 40 6 ff), for here the contrast drawn is not
between sacrifice on one side and obedience on the
other, but rather between the sacrifice of animals
dying involuntarily and wholly unconscious of the
sacrificial significance of their death, and the offer-
ing of Himself on the part of Jesus in intelligent
purpose to carry out the will of God, by which will
the body of Jesus Christ is the only acceptable
offering (10 10). Further the author urges (7)
the actual effectiveness of Christ’s work, his argu-
ment being that it would already have been repeat-
edly performed if this single offering had not been
sufficient for all time, ‘‘once for all” (7 27; 9 26).
Finally is asserted (8) the intercessory work of
Christ, which, though not explained, seems to be a
figurative presentation of his idea that men are
blessed because Christ died, i.e. that this was an
indispensable condition of God’s manifestation of
His merciful love, and that the grace consequent
on the death of Christ does not merely grow ont of
a fact, but that the Divine love and providence for
believers are exercised, neither automatically or
impersonally, but in virtue of a constant personal
sympathy for varying temptations and needs, a
sympathy intensified by the earthly experience,
temptation, suffering of Him who had been and is,
not only the Divine Son, but also the Son of Man.
Thus the salvation of the believer is certain and
complete, and the priestly and high-priestly work
of Jesus reaches its consummation.

The priesthood of believers is an idea which finds
formal expression less frequently in the NT than


has been the case in Protestant theology. But it
does not follow that there has been a corresponding
divergence from the thought of the
3. The apostles. It only shows that a thought
Priesthood which according to apostolic concep-
of Believers tion was one of the invariable privi-
leges of every Christian, and which
found, if not constant, yet sufficiently clear ex-
pression in this figurative’ fashion, has come, in
consequence of errors which have developed, to re-
ceive in the controversies of later centuries stronger
emphasis than it did at first. It may well be noted
first that this conception of the priesthood of be-
lievers, standing by itself, is in no way related to the
various priestly activities which are also figuratively
attributed to them. The writer of the Ep. to the
He, who does not speak of the priesthood of be-
lievers, knowing no Christian priesthood but that
of Jesus Himself, yet calls “praise,” ‘‘to do good
and to communicate,” sacrifices (13 15.16). So
Paul bids the Romans present their bodies “a
living sacrifice’ (Rom 12 1), and Peter calls Chris-
tians ‘‘a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sac-
rifices” (1 Pet 25). But this figurative usage is
entirely distinct from the subject of the present
paragraph. Also the conception of the Christian
priesthood never in the NT attaches itself merely
to the ministry of the Christian church, whatever
may be held as to its orders or tasks. In no sense
has the church or any church an official priesthood.
Nor is it any part of the NT conception of the priest-
hood of believers that any individual should act
in any respect for any other. Though the inter-
cessory supplication of believers in behalf of other
persons has of late often been represented as a
priestly act, as being, indeed, that activity which is
essential to any real priesthood of believers, the NT
thought is quite different, and is to be thus con-
ceived: In ancient times it was held that men in
general could not have direct access to God, that
any approach to Him must be mediated by some
member of the class of priests, who alone could
approach God, and who must accordingly be em-
ployed by other men to represent them before Him.
This whole conception vanishes in the light of Chris-
tianity. By virtue of their relation to Christ all
believers have direct approach to God, and conse-
quently, as this right. of approach was formerly a
priestly privilege, priesthood may now be predi-
cated of every Christian. That none needs another
to intervene between his soul and God; that none
can thus intervene for another; that every soul
may and must stand for itself in personal relation
with God—such are the simple elements of the NT
doctrine of the priesthood of all believers. (Consult
treatises ou NT theology, and comms. on the Ep.
to the Hebrews.) Davin Foster Estes


PRIESTS AND LEVITES qne, kohén, “priest”;
nothing is definitely known as to the origin of the
word; a) , léwi, “Levite,” on which see Levi):


I. Dirrerenr Views or top History
1. The Old View
2. The Graf-Wellhausen View
3. Mediating Views
4. An Alternative View
II. Tus Dara or Pin tHE Penrarnuca
1. The Levites
2. Aaron and His Sons
Tue Oraer Portions or THE PENTATEUCH
IV. From Mosss ro Mabacur
1. The Sources Other than Ezekiel
(1) The Custody of the Ark
(2) On Its Return from the Philistines
(3) In Abinadab’s Honse
2. Ezekiel
V. Ezra, Newemian, CHRONICLES
1. Estimates of the Chronicler
2. His Data
VI. Leear Provisions
LiteRaTuRBS


2447


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Priesthood in NT
Priests, Levites


—


In some Minaean inscriptions found at El-‘Ola,
dating back about 1200-800 BC (Hommel in Hil-
precht, Explorations in Bible Lands, 719), certain
“priests and priestesses of the god Wadd are des-
ignated by the term éawi, fem. lawt‘at” (op. cit.,
749). It is not known whether this is due to Israel-
itish influence.

I. Different Views of the History.—There are
great divergences of opinion among modern writers

as to the true course of history and the
1. The Old dating of the different documents. It
View will therefore be best to sketch these

views in rough outline, and then give
the evidence of the various authorities, together
with the reasons that in each case arise naturally
from the consideration of that evidence.

The old belief was that the whole of the Penta-
teuchal laws were the work of Moses, that the
account of the subsequent history given in the Books
of Ch was correct, that Ezekiel’s vision, if taken
literally, could not be reconciled with the other
known facts and was inexplicable, and that in the
case of all other discrepancies harmonistic explana-
tions should be adopted.

The modern critical school have traversed every
one of these doctrines. ‘The Chronicler is declared

to be in constant and irreconcilable


2. The conflict with the older authorities,
Graf-Well- harmonistic explanations are uniformly
hausen rejected, the Pent is denied to Moses
View and split up into a variety of sources


of different ages, and Ezk gains a place
of honor as representing a stage in a continuous and
normal development. The subject is thus inex-
tricably linked with the Pentateuchal problem, and
reference must be made to the art. PENTATEUCH
for an explanation of the supposed documents and
a consideration of the analysis with its nomen-
elature. On the other hand the present article and
the art. Sanctuary (q.v.) explain and discuss the
most widely held theory of the historical develop-
ment into which the history of the supposed Penta-
teuchal sources has been fitted.

The dominant theory is that of Wellhausen.
According to this, ‘‘Levite’ was originally a term
denoting professional skill, and the early Levites
were not members of the tribe of Levi, but pro-
fessional priests. Anybody could sacrifice. “For
a simple altar no priest was required, but only for
a house which contained a sacred image; this
demanded watching and attendance” (Wellhausen,
Prolegomena, 130). ‘The whole Levitical Law was
unknown and the distinction between priests and
Levites unheard of. There were a few great sanc-
tuaries and one influential priesthood, that of
Shiloh (afterward at Nob). With the monarchy
the priesthood became more important. The royal
priests at Jerus grew in consequence and influence
until they overshadowed all the others. Dt recog-
nized the equal priestly right of all Levites, and
Josiah’s reformation placed the sons of Zadok, who
were the priests of Jerus and not descendants of
Aaron, in a position of decisive superiority. Then
Ezk drew a new and previously unknown distinc-
tion between “the priests the Levites, the sons of
Zadok” who are “keepers of the charge of the
altar,” and the other Levites who were made ‘“‘keep-
ers of the charge of the house’’ as a punishment for
having ministered in the high places. The PC
takes up this distinction and represents it as being
of Mosaic origin, making of the sons of Zadok ‘“‘sons
of Aaron.” ‘In this way arose as an illegal con-
sequence of Josiah’s reformation, the distinction
between priests and Levites. With Ezk this dis-
tinction is still an innovation requiring justification
and sanction; with the PC it is a ‘statute forever,
although even yet not absolutely undisputed, as


appears from the priestly version of the story of
Korsh’s company. For all Judaism subsequent to
Ezra, and so for Christian tradition, the PC in this
matter also has been authoritative. Instead of the
Deuteronomic formula ‘the priests the Levites,’ we
henceforward have ‘the priests and the Levites,’
particularly in Ch” (op. cit., 147). From that time
onward the priests and Levites are two sharply dis-
tinguished classes. It is an essential part of this
theory that the Chronicler meant his work to be
taken as hteral history, correctly representing the
true meaning of the completed law. See Criticism.
There have becn various attempts to construct
less thoroughgoing theories on the same data. As
a rule these views accept in some form
3. Medi- the documentary theory of the Pent
ating Views and seek to modify the Wellhausen
theory in two directions, either by
attributing earlier dates to one or more of the
Pentateuchal documents—esp. to the PC—or else
by assigning more weight to some of the statements
of Ch (interpreted literally). Sometimes both these
tendencies are combined. None of these views has
met with any great measure of successin the attempt
to make headway against the dominant Wellhausen
theory, and it will be seen later that all alike make
shipwreck on certain portions of the evidence.
The independent investigations on which the
present article is based have led the writer to a view
that diverges in important particulars
4. An from any of these, and it is necessary
Alternative to state it briefly before proceeding to
View the evidence. In one respect it differs
from all the rival schemes, not merely
in result, but also in method, for it takes account
of versional evidence as to the state of the texts.
Subject to this it accepts the Mosaic authenticity
of all the Pentateuchal legislation and the clear and
consentient testimony of the Law and the Prophets
(i.e. of the two earlier and more authoritative por-
tions of the Heb Canon), while regarding Ch as
representing a later interpretation, not merely of
the history, but also of the legal provisions. In
outline the story of the priesthood is then as follows:
Moses consecrated Aaron and his sons as the priests
of the desert tabernacle. He purified the rest of
the tribe of Levi as a body of sacred porters for the
period of wanderings, but in the legislation of Nu
he made no provision whatever for their performing
any duties after the sanctuary obtained a permanent
location. At the same time he gave a body of
priestly teaching requiring for its administration in
settled conditions a numerous and scattered body
of priests, such as the house of Aaron alone could
not have provided immediately after the entry into
Canaan. To meet this, Dt—the last legislative
work of Moses—contains provisions enlarging the
rights and duties of the Levites and conferring on
them a priestly position. The earlier distinction
was thus largely obliterated, though the high-
priestly dignity remained in the house of Aaron
till the time of Solomon, when it was transferred
from the house of Eli to that of Zadok, who, accord-
ing to Ezekiel’s testimony, was a Levite (but see
below, IV, 1). So matters remained till the exile,
when Ezekiel put forward a scheme which together
with many ideal elements proposed reforms to in-
sure the better application of the Mosaie principle
of the distinction between holy and profane to
greatly. altered circumstances. Taking his in-
spiration from the wilderness legislation, he insti-
tuted a fresh division in the tribe of Levi, giving to
the sons of Zadok a position similar to that once held
by the sons of Aaron, and degrading all other
Levites from the priesthood conferred on them by
Dt to a lower rank. The duties now assigned to
this class of “keepers of the charge of the house”’


Priests, Levites


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2448


were never even contemplated by Moses, but
Ezekiel applies to them the old phrases of the Pent
which he invests with a new significance. As a
result of his influence; the distinction between
priests and Levites makes its appearance in post-
exilic times, though it had been unknown to all
the writers of the second division of the Heb Canon.
At the same time a meaning was read into the pro-
visions of the Law which their original author could
not have contemplated, and it was this interpreta-
tion which is presented (at any rate to some extent)
in Ch, and has given us the current tradition.
Many of the Chronicler’s statements are, however,
not meant to be taken literally, and could not have

beeu so taken by his original public.
Il, The Data of P in the Pentateuch.—To arrive
at an objective conclusion it is necessary, in the
first instance, to examine the facts


1. The without such bias as any view put
Levites forward by any other. author, ancient

or modern, sacred or profane, might
impart. Every legislator is entitled to be judged


on his own language, and where he has, so to speak,
made his own dictionary, we are compelled to read
his meaning into the terms used. The very first
of the material references to the Levites drives this
truth home. ‘But appoint thou the Levites over
the tabernacle of the testimony, and over all the
furniture thereof” (Nu 1 50). It is necessary to
consider whether such expressions are to be read in
a wide or a narrow sense. We learn from 18 3 that
death would be the result of a Levite’s touching any
of these vessels, and it therefore appears that these
words are meant to be construed narrowly. “They
shall bear the tabernacle, and all the furniture there-
of; and they shall minister unto it,’ are the next
words (1 50); but yet we read later of the Kohathites
who were to bear it that, “they shall not touch the
sanctuary, lest they die’ (4 15). This shows that
the service in question is strictly limited to a service
of porterage after the articles have been wrapped up
by. Aaron and his sons. By no possibility could
it include such a task as cleaning the vessels. It is
then further directed that the Levites are to take
down and set up the dwelling and camp round about
it. All these are desert services and desert services
only. Then we read that “the Levites shall keep
the charge of the tabernacle [dwelling] of the tes-
timony.”” This concludes the first material pas-
sage (Nu 1 50-53). The other passages of Nu
only amplify these directions; they never change
them. But some phrases are used which must be
more particularly considered.

(1) Technical phrases —We hear that the Levites
are “to serve the service of the tent of meeting,”
and this looks as if it might refer to some general
duties, but the context and the kindred passages
always forbid this interpretation. Nu 7 5ff is
an admirable instance. Six wagons are there as-
signed to the Levites for this service, two to the
Gershonites and four to the Merarites. “But unto
the sons of Kohath he gave none, because the serv-
ice of the sanctuary belonged unto them; they
bare it upon their shoulders.” Here service is
transport and nothing else. Again we read of the
charge of the Levites in the tent of meeting, eg.
4 25f. If we look to see what this was, we find
that it consisted of transporting portions of the
tent that had been packed up. The “in” of EV
does not represent the meaning of the Hebrew fairly;
for the context makes it clear that the legislator
means “in respect to.” “But they shall not go iu
to see the sanctuary even for a moment, lest they
die” (4 20). In Eng. idiom we cannot speak of the
transport of portions of a dismantled tent as service
in that tent. One other expression requires notice,
the phrase ‘‘keep the charge’”’ which is distinguished


in 8 26 from ‘‘doing service.” The exact meaning
cannot be determined. It appears to denote some-
thing kindred to service, but of a less exacting nature,
perhaps the camping round the tent and the guard-
lanship of the articles on the march. We shall see
hereafter by comparisou with other books that in
P it does not bear the same meaning as elsewhere.

(2) Other legal provisions —The Levites were to
act under the orders of Aaron and _his sons, who
were to assign to each man his individual functions
(Nu 3,4, etc). They were to undergo a special
rite of purification (Nu 8), but not of consecration.
They were takeu in place of the firstborn (Nu 8).
The age for beginning service is given in ch 4 as 30
years, but in 8 24 as 25, if the text be sound. The
age for ceasing to serve was 50. In many passages
the VSS suggest that a good many phrases are textu-
ally doubtful, and it is probable that when a eriti-
cal text of the Pent is formed on scientific principles,
a good many superfluous expressions will be found
not to be original; but there is no reason to suppose
that any real difference in the meaning of the pas-
sages would be revealed by such a text.

The story of Korah is easily misunderstood. It
appears from Nu 16 3 that his real object was to
put himself on an equality with Moses and Aaron,
and this is the ‘‘priesthood” referred to in ver 10.
Nu 18 reinforces the earlier passages. It is note-
worthy as showing that in the conception of the
legislator the Levites were not to come near the
vessels or the altar (ver 3). The penalty is death
for both Levites and priests. f

(3) Contrast with Ezk and Ch—The impression as
to the meaning of P which may be gathered from
an examination of its statements is powerfully rein-
forced when they are tested by reference to Ezk
and Ch. Ezk 44 9-14 seems to demand of the
Levites some service as gatekeepers, the slaying of
burnt offering and sacrifice for the people and a
keeping of ‘the charge of the house, for all the serv-
ice thereof,”’ which in the light of vs 7f appears to
mean in his terminology, not a service of transport,
but an entry into the house and the performance
of certain duties there. P, on the contrary, knows
nothing of gatekeepers, regards the slaying of the
burnt offering and sacrifice as the duty of the indi-
vidual sacrificant (Lev 1, 3), and—if, as Wellhansen
thinks, it refers to the temple—it would have
visited with death a Levite who was present in
the places in which Ezk requires him to minister.
Similarly with the Chronicler. For instance, he
speaks of the Levites being ‘for the service of the
house .... in the courts and over the chambers,
and over the cleansing of every holy thing’ (1 Ch
23 28), but P knows nothing of any chambers,
would not have allowed the Levites to touch (much
less clean) many of the holy things, and regarded
service simply as porterage. In 1 Ch 23 31 the
Levites are to offer burnt offerings on certain occa-
sions; in P their approach to the altar would have
meant death both to themselves and the priests
(Nu 18 3). Other instances will be found in PS,
288 f.

(4) What the foregoing proves.—In view of these
facts it is impossible to hold that the Levites in P
represent a projection of the Levites of the second
temple or any post-Mosaic age into the desert period.
To P they are a body of sacred porters. The temple
of course could not be carried about, and it cannot
be held that in this respect the legislation mirrors
later circumstances. “Secondly, the net result of
such a scheme would be to create a body of Levites
for use during the period of wanderings and never
thereafter. As soon as the desert age was over the
whole tribe would find their occupation gone. How
can we conceive that any legislator deliberately
sat down and invented such a scheme centuries


2449


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Priests, Levites


accurate reflection in Ch. The facta are such as
to enable us to say definitely that P is not in line
with them. It is impossible to assume that he
appointed the death penalty for certain acts if
performed by Levites because he really wished the
Levites to perform those acts” (PS, 241 f).

P also speaks of Aaron the priest and the sons of
Aaron the priest. It is doubtful whether the ex-


pression “the sons of Aaron the
2. Aaron _priests,’’ which occurs frequently in the
and His MT, is ever original; the Massoretic
Sons expression is nowhere supported by all


the authorities. ‘The phrase ‘Aaron
the high priest’ is entirely unknown to P. Where
the high priest’s name is given the only qualifying
apposition possible in his usage is ‘the priest.’”
Aaron and his sons, unlike the Levites, were con-
secrated, not merely purified.

At this point two features only of the legislation
need be noticed: the inadequacy of the staff to post-
conquest conditions and the signs of date. For ex-
ample, the leprosy laws (Lev 13f) postulate the pres-
ence of priests to inspect and isolate the patient.
“Remembering that on the critical theory P assumes
the capital at Jerus as self-evident, we must ask
how such provisions were to work after the con-
quest. During the desert period nothing could
have been simpler, but what was to happen when
the Israelites dwelt all over Canaan from Beersheba
to Dan?” (PS, 246). The difficulty is immensely
increased if we postulate an exilic or post-exilic
date, when the Jewish center of gravity was in
Babylonia and there were large colonies in Egypt
and elsewhere. And ‘‘What are we to say when
we read of leprous garments (Lev 13 47 ff)? Was
a man to make the pilgrimage from Babylonia
to Jerus to consult a priest about a doubtful gar-
ment? And what about the leper’s offerings in
ch 14? Could they conceivably have been meant
to apply to such circumstances?” (PS, 247). The
case is no better with the law of leprous houses,
which is expressed to apply to the post-conquest
period (Lev 14 33-53). The notification to the
priest and his inspections require a priesthood
scattered all over the country, i.e. a body far more
numerous than the house of Aaron at the date
of the conquest. Such instances could easily be
multiplied from the legislation; one more only will
be cited on account of its importance to the history
of the priesthood, According to Lev, the indi-
vidual sacrificant is to kill the victims and flay the
burnt offerings. How could such procedure be
applied to such sacrifices as those of Solomon ([ K
8 63)? With the growth of luxury the sacrifices
would necessarily become too large for such a ritual,
and the wealthy would grow in refinement and
object. to performing such tasks personally. This
suggests the reason for later abuses and for the
modifications of Ezk and the representations of the
Chronicler. .

Result of the evidence—Thus the evidence of P
is unfavorable alike to the Wellhausen and the
mediating views. The indications of date are con-
sistently Mosaic, and it seems impossible to fit the
laws into the framework of any other age without
reading them in a sense that the legislator can be
shown not to have contemplated. On the other


hand P is a torso. It provides a large body of
Levites who would have nothing to do after the
conquest, and a corpus of legislation that could not
have been administered in settled conditions by the
house of Aaron alone.

Hl. The Other Portions of the Pentateuch.—In
Ex 19 22.24 we read of priests, but a note has come
down to us that in the first of those verses Aquila
had “elders,” not “priests,” and this appears to be
the correct reading in both places, as is shown by
the prominence of the elders in the early part of the
chapter. In Hebrew the words differ by only two
letters. It is said by Wellhausen that in Ex 33
7-11 (E) Joshua has charge of the ark. This rests
on a mistranslation of x 33 7, which should be
rendered (correcting EV), ‘And Moses used to take
a [or the] tent and pitch it for himself without the
camp.’ It is inconceivable that Moses should
have taken the tent of the ark and removed it to
a distance from the camp for his private use, leaving
the ark bared and unguarded. Moreover, if he had
done so, Joshua could not have becn in charge of
the ark, seeing that he was in this tent while the
ark (ex hypothesi) remained in the camp. Nor had
the ark yet been constructed. Nor was Joshua in
fact a pricst or the guardian of the ark in E: (1) in
the Book of Josh E knows of priests who carry the
ark and are quite distinct from Joshua (3 ff); (2) in
Dt 31 14 (E) Joshua is not resident in the tent
of meeting; (3) in E Aaron and Eleazar are priests
(Dt 10 6), and the Levitical priesthood is the only
one recognized (Dt 33 10); (4) there is no hint
anywhere of Joshua’s discharging any priestly duty
whatsoever. The whole case rests on his presence
in the tent in Ex 33 7-11, and, as shown in the art.
PENTATEUCH (q.v.), this passage should stand after
Ex 13 22.

Then it is said that in Ex 4 14; Jgs 17 7,
“Levite’’ denotes profession, not ancestry. In the
latter passage the youth whom Micah made a priest
was of Levitical descent, being the grandson of
Moses (Jgs 17 13), and the case rests on the phrase,
“of the family of Judah.” Neither of the Septua-
gintal translations had this text (Field, Hezxapla,
ad loc.), which therefore cannot be supported, since
it cannot be suggested that Moses belanged to the
tribe of Judah. As to Ex 4 14, the phrase “Aaron
thy brother the Levite” is merely an adaptation
of the more usual, “Aaron, son of Amram, the
Levite,” rendered necessary by the fact that his
brother Moses is the person addressed. The Well-
hausen theory here is shown to be untenable in
PS, 250 and RE’, XT, 418.

Ex 32 26-29 foreshadows the sacred character of
Levi, and Dt 10 6 (EK) knows the hereditary Aaronic
priesthood. In D the most important passage is
Dt 18 6-8. In ver 7 three Septuagintal MSS
omit the words ‘‘the Levites,” and if this be a gloss,
the whole historic sense of the passage is changed.
Jt now contains an enactment that any Levite coming
to the religious capital may minister there ‘as all
his brethren do, who stand there,” etc, i.¢. like the
descendants of Aaron. ‘‘The Levites’”’ will then
be the explanation of a glossator who was imbued
with the latest post-exilic ideas, and thought that
“his brethren” must mean those of his fellow-
Levites who were not descended from Aaron. The
passage is supplemented by 21 5, giving to the
Levites judicial rights, and 24 8 assigning to them
the duty of teaching the leprosy regulations. To-
gether with 33 10 (E), ‘they shall teach thy judg-
ments to Jacob and thy law to Israel: they shall
put incense in thy nostrils and whole burnt-offering
on thine altar,’ these passages complete the pro-
visions of P in giving to the Levites an occupation
in place of their transport duties, and providing
the necessary staff for administering the legislation


Priests, Levites THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2450


when the Israelites were no longer massed together
in a single camp, but scattered over the country.
We shall see in the next section that this view of
the meaning of the Law was taken by every writer of
the second part of the Canon who touches on the
subject. Everywhere we are confronted with the
legitimacy of a Levitical priesthood; nowhere is
there any mention of an exclusive Aaronic right.
Smaller points which cannot be discussed here are
examined in PS. It only remains to notice that
these provisions fully explain the frequent Deuter-
onomie locution, ‘the priests the Levites.” One
other remark must be made. Though it is not
expressly stated, we may assume that consecration
would be necessary in the case of any Levite acting
on the provisions of Dt 18 6-8, and was not
mentioned because in Heb antiquity it went with-
out saying that every priest must be consecrated

(cf Jgs 17).
IV. From Moses to Malachi.—Josh adds bunt
little to our information. In 18 7 the priesthood is
called the inheritance of the Levites,


1. The and it is singular that the Wellhausen
Sources critics attribute this to a priestly
Other than redactor, though such a writer should
Ezekiel ex hypothesi have been jealous to

withhold the priesthood from the
Levites. It is very interesting to find that in Josh


3, 4, all the different critical documents speak in
exactly the same terms of “the priests that bare the
ark.” The priestly writer ought, on the Well-
hausen theory, to have said “the Levites.’’ The
expression “‘the priests the Levites’’ is found alter-
nating with the expression “‘the priests.” All this
points to the construction put upon the provisions
of the Law in the preceding section, and finds fresh
confirmation in Jgs, where we see Micah rejoicing
at having a Levite as a priest (17 13), thus showing
that the sacred character of the tribe was recognized
in the earliest post-Mosaic times. The lay sacri-
fices in this and the following books are explained
under Sanctuary; Sacririce (q.v.).

The period of the early kings shows us kings
blessing the people (e.g. 2.5 6 18). It is claimed
that this is the priestly blessing, but without evi-
dence, and there seems no more reason to see special
priestly rights here than in David’s blessing his
household (2 S 6 20), or the frequent blessings of
the Bible (e.g. Gen_ passim, esp. “in thee will
Israel bless,’ Gen 48 20), while in 1 K 8 55 ff
we actually have the words of the blessing delivered
on_one of these occasions by Solomon, and_it is
quite unlike the blessing of the priests (Nu 6
22 ff).

Textual criticism disposcs of the supposed priesthood
of certain non-Levitical persons. In 2S 8 18 the
MT makes David's sons ‘priests,’ but this reading
was unknown to the LXX, Symmachus and Theo-
dotion (Field, ad loc.).. The LXX has ‘‘aularchs,’’ i.e.
chamberlains. That this represents a different Hebrew
word is proved by the Septuagintal list of 3 K 2 46 (not
extant in Heh), where we read that Benaiah, son of
Jchoiada, was ‘‘over the aularchy and over the brick-
making.’”’ It cannot be suggested that this represents
an original Heb ‘over the priesthood and over the brick-
making,’"' and accordingly we must concede the exist-
ence of some secular court office which was rendered by
this Gr phrase. Hitzig and Cheyne conjecture that
D350, sdkhenim, should be read for OTD kéhdnim.
This word gives the sense required (see Isa 32 15, RVm
“steward"). In 2 8 20 26 we read that Ira, 533,
ha ya@iri (the Jairite"'), was a priest, but the Syr sup-
ported by Lucian and 23 38reads “93974, ha-yattiri (“the
Jattirite’’). Jattir was a priestly city. In 1 K 45
Nathan's son is described as ‘priest friend of the king,’
but LXX reads only ‘friend of the king"’ (cf esp. 1 Ch
27 331; 2 8 15 32), and_at another period Nathau’s
son held the kindred secular office of kiug’s counsellor
(LXX 3 K 2 46, a fact that is certainly unfavorable
to the view that he ever held priestly office). There
can therefore be no doubt that the word ‘‘priest,’’ yn.
kohén, has arisen through dittography of the preceding
word wna. nathan, Nathan.


Various dealings with the ark in the age of Samuel
require notice. As a boy Samuel himself is given
into the service of Eli. ,1t has been argued that he
really officiated as a priest, though probably (if
the Chronicler’s data be rejected) not of Levitical
descent. The answer is to be found in his age.
Weaning sometimes took place at as late an age as
three, and accordingly the boy may have been as
much as four years old when he was taken to Shiloh
(1 8 1 24). His mother used to bring him a little
cloak (1 S 2 19) every year, and this notice also
shows his extreme youth. In view of this it cannot
seriously be contended that he performed any
priestly service. He must have been a sort of page,
and he performed some duties of a porter, opening
the door-valves of the temple at Shiloh (1 S 3 15).

(1) The custody of the ark.—When the ark was
captured by the Philis, it was in the charge of priests.
When David brought it to Jerns, it was again placed
in priestly custody, but there is an interregnum of
some 20 years (1 8 T 2).


It must be remembered that whatever may have hap-
pened during this period of great national confusion, the
practice of all the rest of history, extending over some 600
or 700 years, is uniform and would far outweigh any
irregularities during so short and troubled _a period. |

(2) On its return from the Philistines.—The first diffi-
culty arises on 18 6 14.15. In the second of these
verses the Levites come up after the Beth-shemites have
finished, and, in Wellhausen’'s words, ‘‘proceed as if
nothing had happened, lift the ark from the now no
longer existent cart, and set it upon the stone on which
the sacrifice is already hurning'’ (Prolegomena, 128).
1t is therefore suggested that ver 15isagloss. But there
is difficulty in ver 14 which tells of the breaking up of the
cart, etc, without explaining what happened to the ark.
The trouble may he met by a slight transposition thus:
‘14a Aud the cart came into the field, .... and
stood there, and there was there a great stone: 15¢ and
the Levites took down the ark, etc, and put them on the
great stone: 14b and clave the wood of the cart,’ ete,
followed by 155. This makes perfect sense.

(3) In Abinadab's house-—The second difficulty is
made by 1S 7 1, where we read that the ark was
brought to the house of Abinadab ‘and Eleazar his son
they sanctified to guard’ it. Its old abode, the house
at Shiloh, had apparently been destroyed (Jer 7 12.14;
26 6.9). There it enjoyed considerable importance, for
Pocls is unquestionably right in identifying the Gibeah
of God (1 8 10 5) with the Gibeah (hill) of the ark.
Thus there was a high place there and a Phili garrison
(ef 1S 18 3, where LXX and Tg have ‘‘Gibeah’’).
There remains the difficulty caused by the guardianship
of Eleazar. Poels may he right in reading 5353) MN
srydy , we'eth bené'el'azdr, ‘‘and the sonsof Eleazar,”’ for
Soa “TOR MN, we'cth vel'azar bens, “and Eleazar
his son"’; but in the entire absence of information, alike
as to Eleazar’s functious and as to his tribe, nothing
definite can_be said. The narratives of the slaughter
among the Beth-shemites and the fate of Uzzah make it
certain that Eleazar’s custody of the ark kept him at a
respectful distance from it.

When David at the end of this period removed the
ark, it was first taken iu a cart. This proved fatal to
Uzzah, and the ark was deposited in the house of Obed-
edom the Gittite. The text of S knows nothiug of any
guardianship of the ark hy Obed-edom. Probably he
took very good care not to go near it in view of Uzzah's
fate. Then it was transported to Jerus by bearers (2 8
6 13)—presumably of Levitical descent. No further
irregularities are urged.


More important is the change of priesthood;
1 8 2 27-36 clearly threatens Eli, whose house had
been chosen in Egypt, with a transference of the
high-priesthood to another line. Careful compari-
son with 1 K 2 27 makes it certain that the
prophecy was fulfilled when Zadok was placed by
Solomon in the place of Abiathar. Who was
Zadok? According to Ch (1 Ch 6 8.53; 24 3;
27 17) be was descended from Aaron through
Eleazar, and this is accepted by Orr, Van Hoonacker
and many others, who take Ch in a literal sense.
According to Ezk he was a Levite (40 46, etc), It
is noteworthy that throughout the prophetical books
we always hear of the Levitical priesthood, not the
Aaronic (see esp. 1 K 12 31; Jer 33 18-22; Mal
2), and the “father’s house” of 1 S 2 27-36 that
was chosen in Egypt could only be the house of


2451


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Priests, Levites


Aaron, not of Ithamar, if the passage is to be taken
in its naturalsense. On this view Zadok’s appoint-
ment could only have fulfilled the prophecy if it
termimated the Aaronic succession. H+ would seem
therefore that the high-priesthood was transferred
to a family of non-Aaronic Levites. For the alter-
native view see ZADOK.

The prophet’s speech in 1 8 2 27-36 is also im-
portant for the light it throws on the organization
of the priesthood. The high priest has in his gift
a number of priestly offices with pecuniary and
other emoluments. This postulates a far more
advanced hierarchy than that of P.

The reference to ‘the priests and the Levites’’ in
1 K 8 4 was unknown to the LXX, but in other
passages the Books of K show further advances in
hierarchical organization. There is not merely the
high priest—generally like Aaron in P called “the
priest,”’ but sometimes the high priest—but also
the second priest (2 K 2618; Jer 62 24; 2K
23 4, according to the Tg), three keepers of the
threshold (ubi supra, and 2 K 12 10) and “elders
of the priests’ (2 K 19 2; Isa 87 2; perhaps also
Jer 19 1). Sce also Jer 20 1f; 29 26 for priestly
organization and jurisdiction in the temple pre-
cincts. All this contrasts strikingly with the sim-
plicity of the Pentateuchal organization.

Ezekiel is entirely in line with the other sources
for this period, but he seeks to institute certain

reforms. He writes, ‘Her priests
2. Ezekiel have done violence to my law, and

have profaned my holy things: they
have made no distinction between the holy and the
common, neither have they caused men to discern
between the unclean and the clean,” ete (Ezk 22
26). If these words have any meaning they signify
that he was acquainted with a law which followed
the very words of Lev 10 and other passages of P,
and was intended to reach the people through the
teaching of the priests. In chs 40-48, there is a
vision of the future which stands in the closest
relation to the Pent. Three views have been held
of this. The old view was that Ezk could not be
reconciled with tbe Pent at all, and that the diffi-
culties presented were insoluble. Wellhausen and
his followers maintain that the prophet is prior
to P, and here introduces the distinction between
priests and Levites for the first time. The third
alternative is to hold that Ezekiel was familiar with
P and drew from it the inspiration to make a fresh
division among the Levites, giving the sons of
Zadok a position similar to that occupied by the
sons of Aaron in the wilderness period, and reénact-
ing with slight modifications the legislation appli-
cable to the sons of Aaron, this time applying it to
the sons of Zadok. The crucial passage 1s 44 6-16,
from which it clearly appears that in Solomon’s
temple aliens had performed sundry tasks that
should have been executed by more holy persons,
and that Ezekiel proposes to degrade Levites who
are not descended from Zadok to perform such
tasks in the future as a punishment for their minis-
trations to idols in high places. Either of the two
latter views would explain the close connection that
evidently exists between the concluding chapters of
Ezk and P, and, accordingly, in choosing between
them, the reader must consider four main points:
(1) Is P shown on the internal evidence to be early
or late? Is it desert legislation, or is it accurately
reflected in Ch? This point has already been dis-
cussed in part and is further treated in PENTATEUCH
(q.v.). (2) Is the theory of the late composition
of P psychologically and morally probable? On
this see PenratEucn and POT, 292-99. (3) Is it
the case that the earlier history attests the exist-
ence of institutions of P that are held by Well-
hausen and his followers to be late—e.g. more


national offerings than the critics allow? On this
see HPC, 200 ff, and passim; POT, 305-15, and
passim; SBL and OP passim, and art. PENTATEUCH.
(4) Does Ezekiel himself show acquaintance with
P (e.g. in 22 26), or not? On this too see SBL, 96;
PS, 281 f.

With regard to the non-mention of the high-priest-
hood and certain otherinstitutions in Ezekiel’s vision,
the natural explanation is that in the case of these
the prophet did not desire to institute any changes.
It is to be noted that Ezekiel does not codify and
consolidate all existing law. On the contrary, he is
rather supplementing and reforming. In his ideal
temple the prince is to provide the statutory na-
tional offerings (45 17), i.e. those of Nu 28, 29.
Apparently the king had provided these earlier
(2 K 16 13). But in addition to these there had
grown up a “‘king’s offering,’’ and it is probably to
this only that 45 22 ff; 46 2-15 relate. In 46 13
LXX, Syr, Vulg, and some Heb MSS preserve the
reading “he” for “thou.”

V. Ezra, Nehemiah, Chronicles.—Whatever the
course of the earlier history, there is general agree-
ment that in these books a distinction between
priests and Levites is established (see e.g..Neh 10
37 f (88 f]; 12 1f). We also find singers and por-
ters (Neh 13 5, etc), Nethinim and the sons of
Solomon’s servants (Ezr 7 7.24; 10 23f; Neh 10
28 [29]; 11 3, etc). It must not be assumed that
these classes were new. The story of the Gibeon-
ites (Josh 9) gives us the origin of some of these
grades, and the non-mentiou of them in many of
the earlier books is easily explained by the character
of those books. We know from such passages as
Am 6 23 that there were musical services in far
earlier times (cf Neh 12 42).

Ch presents an account of the earlier history of
the priests and Levites that in many respects does

not tally with the older sources.


1. Esti- Many modern writers think that the
mates author’s views of the past were colored
of the by the circumstances of his own day,
Chronicler and that he had a tendency to carry


back later conditions to an earlier
period. On the other hand it is impossible to deny
fairly that he used some sources which have not
been preserved to us elsewhere. Again, there is
evidence to show that his work was not intended
to be taken for history and would not have been
so regarded by his contemporaries. Talmudical
authorities held some such view as this. The his-
torical value of his work has yet to be appraised in
a more critical and impartial spirit than is exhibited
in any of the current discussions. For the present
purpose it is only possible to notice the effect of
some of his statements, if interpreted literally. As
there are passages where he has clearly substituted
Levites for the less holy personages of the older
sources (contrast e.g. 2 K 11 4-12 with 2 Ch 23
1-11), it may be that Levites have also been sub-
stituted by him for other persons in notices of which
no other version has survived.
David and Solomon recognized the hierarchy.
The former king instituted the musical services
(1 Ch 6 3ff; 164 ff; 26). The Le-
2. His Data vites were divided into courses (1 Ch
23 6) and were rendered liable to
service from the age of twenty by his enactment
(ver 27). There were also 24 courses or divisions
of priests, 16 of the sons of Eleazar and 8 of the sons
of Ithamar (ch 24). The courses were divided by
lot. In Neh 12 1-7 we read of “chiefs of the
priests,” but these are only 22 in number, while
vs 12-21 give us 21 in the time of Joiakim (ver 26).
But not much importance can be attached to such
lists, as names could easily fall out in transmission.
According to 1 Ch 9 26 the four chief porters were


Priests, Levites
Prince


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2452


Levites, and Levites were also over the things baked
in pans and the shewbread (vs 31f). This of course
is not in accordance with the Law, but is found else-
where in Ch. In 1 Ch 23 the Levites from 30
years old and upward number 38,000, of whom
24,000 oversee the work of the house of the Lord,
6,000 were officers and judges, 4,000 were door-
keepers and 4,000 were musicians. David altered
the age of beginning service to 20, and an account
of their functions is given in 1 Ch 23 27-32 (see,
further, Muste). All these arrangements were
confirmed and enforced by Solomon (2 Ch 8 14 ff).
There is often uncertainty as to whether the Chroni-
cler identifies priests and Levites in particular cases
or not, e.g.in 2 Ch 30 27, “the priests the Levites”
bless the people according to the ordinary text, but
many authorities read ‘“‘the priests and the Levites.”’
Hezekiah appears to have undertaken some reor-
ganization (2 Ch 29-31), but the details are not
clear. Jehoshaphat established in Jerus a court
composed partly of Levites and priests (19 8-11).
Previously he had sent priests and Levites and
others to teach the Law in Judah (ch 17). In 29
34 it is clearly the duty of the priests to flay burnt
offerings (contrast Lev 1). It is impossible to draw
any consistent picture from the Chronicler because
he gives different data for different periods; it is
doubtful whether he meant his statements to be
taken as historical, e.g. in 1 Ch 25 we find Levites
whose names Giddalti (= “I have magnified’), ete,
are really words forming part of a prayer, and it is
difficult to believe that either the Chronicler or his
public intended this chapter to be interpreted in
any but a spiritual sense (see PS, 284-86).

In Ezr 2 40 the number of Levites who returned
with Zerubbabel is given as 74, as against 973 priests
(ver 36), 128 singers (ver 41), 139 children of the
porters (ver 42), 392 Nethinim and children of Solo-
mon’s servants (ver 58), and the figures are the same
in Neb 7, except that there the singers number 148
(ver 44) and the porters 138 (ver 45). When Ezra
went up, he was at first joined by no Levites (8 15),
but subseqnently gathered 38 Levites and 220
Nethinim (vs 18-20). We get glimpses of the
organization im Neh 12 44-47 and 13 10ff. It
appears that in this period genealogies were care-
fully serntinized in the case of doubtful claims to
priestly descent (Ezr 2 61 ff; Neh 7 63 ff). In
Ezr 6 19 ff the Levites are represented as killing
the Passover.

Of these books no satisfactory account can be
given in the present state of textual criticism and
Bib. science generally. Some writers, e.g., hold
that the Chronieler had before him a source to
which the Levites were entirely unknown, others
that he invented freely, others again that he repro-
duces trustworthy preéxilic information. The
student has only an assortment of theories from
which to choose. The bedrock fact is that the
statements of these books, if taken in their natural
meaning, convey an entirely different impression
from the statements of the earlier books construed
similarly. Modern research has not yet been
seriously addressed to the question whether all the
statements were really intended to be interpreted
as mere history.

VI. Legal Provisions.—Aaron and his sons under-
went consecration to fit them for their duties.
Ex 28f prescribes their garments and consecration
(see Dress; BreastpLatTe; ErHop; RoBE; Coat;
Mitre; Grrpte; Urim anp THumMim), and the
account of the latter may be read in Lev 8f. In
individual sacrifices brought to the religious capital
the priests performed the part of the ritual which
related to the altar (sprinkling, burning, ete) (Lev
1-4). See Sacrirics. A principal function was
the duty of teaching the people the law of God


(Lev 10 11; 14 54-57; Dt 24 8; 33 10; ef Ezk
44 23; Hos 4 1-6; Hag 2 11 ff, and many pas-
sages in the Prophets). : ;

The priests were subject to special laws designed
to maintain their purity (Lev 21 f; ef Ezk 44).
The rules aim at preventing defilement through
mourning (save in the case of ordinary priests for
a near relation) and at preventing those who were
physically unfitted from performing certain func-
tions, and those who were for any reason unclean
from approaching the holy things. See further
STRANGER. They performed several semi-judicial
functions (Nu 5 5 ff.11 ff, ete; see JupcE). They
also blessed the people (Nu 6 22; cf Dt 10 8,
etc). See Buessinc. On their dunes see Sacni-
FIcE; TrrHes; Frrstuines; First-Fruits; Levir-
icaL Crimes; AGRARIAN Laws; see _ further
CuEmMARIM; NetHiIniM; Sons or Sotomon’s SERv-
ANTS; SINGERS; DooRKEEPERS; SERVING-WoMEN;
JUDGE.

Literature.—Wellhausen, Prolegomena, ch iv, for the
Graf-Wellhausen view; Wiener, PS, 230-89, for the view
taken above; 8. I. Curtiss, Levitical Priests, for the con-
servative view. This writer afterward changed to the
critical view. James Orr, POT; A. Van Hoonacker, Le
sacerdoce lévitique (important); W. Baudissin, art. ‘‘ Priests
and Levites"' in HDB,IV, for mediating views. The best
account in Eng. of the details of the priestly duties is
contained in Baudissin’s art., where a further bibliography
will be found.

Harotp M. WIENER

PRIMOGENITURE, pri-mé-jen'i-ttr (22,
bekhéradh, from b*khér, “firstborn,” from bakhar,

“to act early”; mpwrordkia, préto-


1. Recog- tékia): The right of the firstborn to
nition of inherit the headship of the family,
Doctrine carrying with it certain property rights


and usually such titles as those of the
high-priesthood or kingship. The writings of the
Hebrews take for granted the recognition of a doc-
trine of primogeniture from the earliest times. In
the most ancient genealogies a distinction is drawn
between the firstborn and the other son (Gen 10
15; 22 21; 25 18; 35 23; 36 15). In the be-
stowal of parental blessings in patriarchal times
ent importance was attached to preferring the
rstborn (Gen 25 31; 27 29; 48 18; 49 3). The
feud between Jacob and Esau (Gen 27 1—28 21)
grew out of the stealing of the firstborn’s blessing
by the younger brother. Josepb was displeased
when, in his blessing, Jacob seemed to prefer Eph-
raim to Manasseh, his firstborn (Gen 48 18).
The father in such cases seems to have had the
right to transfer the birthright from one son to
another, from the days of Abraham in the case of
Ishmael and Isaac, through those of Jacob in the
matter of Reuben and Joseph and in the matter
of Ephraim and Manasseh, down to the days of
David iu the selection of a successor to ‘the king-
ship. Nevertheless the Mosaic code, which declared
(rather than enacted) the law of primogeniture, pro-
hibited the abuse of this parental privilege in the
3) of a younger son by a favorite wife (Dt 21
The manner of acknowledging the firstborn inci-
dentally referred to in Dt is “by giving him a double
portion of all that he hath” (Dt 21


2. The 17), that is to say, double the share
Double of each of the other brothers. Jewish
Portion tradition (Bekhé. 46a, 47b, Gla, 51);


Babh# Bathrd@ 122a, 1226, 123a, 124a,
142b) accepts and elaborates on this right of the
firstborn son. Thus, it applies only to the first-
born and not the eldest surviving son; it does not
apply to daughters; it has reference only to the
paternal estate, and not to the inheritance left by a
mother or other relative, nor to improvements or
poems made to an estate after the death of the
ather.


2453


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Priests, Levites
Prince


The object of the doctrine may be that the eldest
son might be enabled to preside over the affairs of
family with proper dignity, or that

3. Reasons he might assume additional responsi-


for the bilities, such as the support of unmar-
Custom ried sisters. Hence one’s birthright

could be waived or sold (Gen 26 381.
34). On the other hand it may be based in the


ultimate analysis on the primitive feeling of favorit-
ism for the firstborn reflected in the disappointment
of Jacob, when he speaks of Reuben as his first-
born, his might, and the beginning of his strength
(ré’shith ’on, Gen 49 3; cf Dt 21 17). This
theory would be in accord with the right of the
parent to transfer the right to a younger son. The
suggestion of favoritism conveyed by the Heb
bekhér is manifested in its figurative use: of Israel
(Ex 4 22), of Ephraim (Jer 31 9), of one dearly
beloved (Zec 12 10); (cf figurative usage in the

NT: Rom 8 29; He 12 23; 16; Rev 1 5).
Light is thrown on the attitude of the ancient
world toward the firstborn, and hence on the his-
tory of primogeniture, by the language


4, The used in connection with the plague of
Firstborn the firstborn: ‘from the first-born of
in Ancient Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne,
Society; even unto the first-born of the maid-
Sacrifice servant that is behind the mill” or
and Re- “the captive that was in the dungeon.”
demption Apparently no more dreadful catas-


trophe for all classes of society could
be thought of than this slaying of the firstborn
(Ex 11 5; 12 29). The misguided fervor of the
aucient Semites who offered their firstborn as the
thing most dearly beloved as a sacrifice to their
gods must be considered in this light, whether it
appears among the Moabites, the Phoenicians or
the Hebrews themselves (Jer 82 35; Ezk 20 26.
31; 2 Ch 28 3). It is dificult to predicate a con-
nection between the basis of the doctrine of primo-
geniture and that of the Redemption of the First-
born, other than that both are ultimately based on
the importance of a firstborn son and the fond-
ness of his parents for him. It is interesting to
note, however, that the tradition of redemption
and the law of primogeniture are kept so distinct
that, while the latter has reference only to the
firstborn of a father, the former has reference only
to the firstborn of a mother (B°khé., viui.l, 46a;
cf peter rehem, “whatsoever openeth the womb,”
Ex 18 2). In a polygamous society such as that
presupposed in Dt 21 it is natural to suppose that
the distinction between paternal and maternal
primogeniture would he clearly before the minds
of the people. See BrataricHT; FirsTBorn.

NatHaNn Isaacs

PRINCE, prins: This word occurs quite fre-
quently in our Eng. Bible, mostly intheOT. While
it is never used to denote royal parentage (cf 1 Ch
29 24), it often indicates actual royal or ruling
power, together with royal dignity and authority.
As atule, the name is given to human beings; in
a few instances it is applied to God and Christ, the
angels and the devil. ; ‘

In Mt 2 6 the word rendered “princes” might
be tr4 “princely cities’; at least, this seems to be
implied. Here the term treudr, hégemén, “leader,”
“ruler,” “prince,” is used, undoubtedly to hint at
the fact that Bethlehem was the native city of a
great prinee. In the other NT passages the word
Epywr, archon, “a potentate,” “a person in author-
ity,” “a magistrate,” occurs most frequently (cf
Mt 9 34; 12 24; 20 25 [RV ‘ruler”]; Mk 3 22,
Jn 12 31; 14 30; 16 11; 1 Cor 268AV; Eph
22; Rev 15 (RV “ruler’]). In most of these
instances the term “prince” refers to the devil.

In Acts 3 15; 5 31, the word 4pxvvés, archégés,


‘Jeader,’’ is employed referring 10 Christ as the
author of life and salvation (cf He 12 2, where the
term archégos is rendered “author” [RV] or “‘cap-
tain” [RVm]).

The OT contains a number of different words
mostly rendered ‘‘prince” or “princes” in the EV.

(1) WW, sar: In Josh 6 14 the mysterious armed
stranger seen by Joshua near Jericho calls himself
the “prince of the host of Jeh”: a high military
title applied to a superhuman being. In Isa 9 6,
the name is given to the child representing the
future Messiah. The term ‘‘Prinee of Peace’ de-
notes the eminent position and the peaceful reign
of the Messianic king: the highest human title in
its most ideal sense. Dnl 8 11: here, again, as in
Josh 6 14, occurs the phrase “prince of the host.”
In Dnl 8 25 “the prince of princes” refers to God
Himself: the highest human title in its absolute
sense applied to God. Dnl 10 21: ‘Michael your
prince.” Michael the archangel is here called the
prince of the Jewish people. He is the princely
representative of God’s people in the sight of God,
a royal title suggesting high power and alliance with
God in the great struggle going on between Him
and the powers of darkness. Dnl 12 1: here
Michael is called ‘“‘the great prince’? who standeth
for the children of Israel; supplementing Dnl 10
21. In Dnl 10 13: “the prince of the kingdom of
Persia’”’ (cf ver 20, ‘‘the prince of Persia,” “the
prinee of Greece”), the expression is used in the
same general sense as in Dnl 10 21. Each indi-
vidual nation is represented as guided by a spiritual
being that may or may not be an ally of God in His
combat with the devil. In the majority of cases,
though, the term sar is applied (a) to men _exer-
cising royal or ruling power: Prov 8 16: “By me
princes [m ‘‘or rulers’’] rule’; Isa 32 1: ‘Behold,
a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall
rule im justice.” Judicial power is included (cf Ex
2 14: ‘Who made thee a prince and a judge over
us?” and Ps 148 11: “princes and all judges of the
earth”). In some passages the word sar, having
been rendered ‘prince,’ stands for ‘chief’; so
Jgs 7 25: ‘‘They took the two princes of Midian”
(of Jgs 8 14; 1S 29 4; 28 10 3, etc). (b) To
royal officers of a high rank: Gen 12 15: ‘‘the
princes of Pharaoh” (ef 2 K 24 14: ‘‘Jerus and
all the princes’; 1 Ch 29 24; 2 Ch 24 23; Jer
36 21; 52 10; Hos 6 10, etc). ‘Ambassadors’
(Jer 86 14); “governors” (t K 20 14: “By the
young men [m “or, servants’’] of the princes of the
provinces”; cf Est 1 3.14, ‘the seven princes’);
“the chief of the eunuchs” (Dnl 1 7); a ‘‘quarter-
master” (Jer 61 59: ‘Seraiah was chief ehamber-
lain” [m “or, quartermaster’’]). AV renders it “a
quiet prince,” ic. a prince having rest, instead of
procuring rest (MI WW, sar mntihah, “a sar


of rest’). In post-exilic times: Ezr 9 1: ‘The
princes drew near unto me.’”’ They were the po-
litical leaders of the people (cf Ezr 10 8: “the


princes and the elders’; Neh 9 38: “our princes,
our Levites, and our priests’; Neh 11 1: ‘The
princes of the people dwelt in Jerus”; Neh 12 31:
“the princes of Judah”). Of course, they were all
subject to the authority of the Pers kings. (ce) To
the priesthood: 1 Ch 24 5: “princes of the sanc-
tuary, and princes of God” (cf Isa 48 28). (d) On
account of great achievements: 2 8S $ 38: “Ixnow
ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen
this day in Israel?’”’—an honorary title. Generally
speaking, a prince is a wealthy man (cf Job 34 19:
“That respecteth not the persons of princes, nor
regardeth the rich more than the poor’), and he is a
prominent man embodying true, although mortal,
manhood (cf Ps 82 7: ‘Nevertheless ye shall die
like men, and fall like one of the princes).


Prince
Prisca


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2454


(2) NW), nasi’: usually derived from NW}, nasa’,
“to lift,”’ hence ‘‘exalted’”’; otherwise: a ‘“‘speaker.”’
(a) An honorary title (ef Gen 23 6: “Thou art a
prince of God among us.” The distinction is con-
ferred upon Abraham by the children of Heth).
(6) A name given to the heads of the Israelitic tribes,
families and fathers’ houses: Nu 3 24: “the prince
of the fathers’ house of the Gershonites” (ef vs 30.
35); 3 32: “Eleazar ... . shall be prince of the
princes of the Levites, and have the oversight of
them that keep the charge of the sanctuary”; Nu 4
34: “the princes of the congregation.” They seem
to be identical with the “rulers of thousands, rulers
of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens’
(ef Ex 18 21; Nu 16 2). Nu 7 2: “the princes
of Israel, the heads of their fathers’ houses... .
the princes of the tribes” (cf 17 2.6; 34 18; Josh
22 14; 1 Ch 4 88). (c) Equivalent to chief or
king: Gen 17 20: ‘Twelve princes shall he beget”
(ef 25 16); Gen 34 2: “Shechem the son of Hamor
the Hivite, the prince of the land’; Nu 25 18:
“Cozhi, the daughter of the prince of Midian” (cf
Josh 13 21); 1K 11 34: “I will make him
prince all the days of his life.” This was said of
Solomon, which shows the term equivalent to king.
Of special interest is the use of the word nds?’ in
Ezk. The name is given to the Jewish king (ef
12 10: ‘This burden concerneth the prince in
Jerus’”’). Then, again, it is applied to the future
theocratic king (cf 84 24; 37 25, cte, and esp. chs
45,46). It is also used of foreign potentates and
high officers (cf 26 16: ‘‘the princes of the sea’’;
28 2: “the prince of Tyre”; 30 13: ‘a prince from
the land of Egypt’’); 32 29: ‘Edom, her kings and
all her princes’; and, likewise, of high Jewish ofh-
cers (21 12). (d) A title bestowed upon Shesh-
bazzar (Kar 1 8).

(3) AQ, nadhtbh: 1 S 2 8: “To make them sit
wilh princes” (cf Ps 113 8). The original mean-
ing of the term is willing or obliging; then gener-
ous (‘liberal”; cf Prov 19 6: “Many will entreat
the favor of the liberal man’; yet, it might safely
be rendered here “prince” [m]) or noble-minded;
a gentleman, a nobleman, a person of rank, a prince.
Job 12 21: ‘He poureth contempt upon princes”
(ef Ps 107 40); Job 21 28: “Where is the house
of the prince? And where is the tent whereiu the
wicked dwelt?’ The context here suggests the
thought of a wicked prince, a tyrant. Ps 47 9:
“The princes of the peoples are gathered together”
(cf Ps 118 9; 146 3; Prov 17 7; 26 7; Cant 7 1).

(4) W933, ndghidh: According to Gesenius, this
term denotes originally either a high-minded person
(cf the preceding word, nédhibh) or a speaker, a
spokesman; then a prince, a king. 18 13 14:
“Jeh hath appointed him to be prince over his
people” (cf 2.8 6 2: “Thou shalt be prince [RVm
“Ieader”] over Israel’; 6 21; 78; 1K 1 85;
147; 162; Job 299; 31.37; Ps 76 12; Prov
28 16; Ezk 23 2: “prince of Tyre’; Dnl 9 25:
“the anointed one, the prince,” AV the ‘Messiah
the Prince’; Dnl 9 26: ‘the prince that shall
come’ [the Rom emperor?]; 11 22: “the prince
of the covenant” [either a high priest or some Egyp
king, Ptolemacus Philometor?]).

(5), (6) PT), razdn, and JIM, rézén, “a high
official,” “‘a prince,” usually associated with the
word “king” or “judge.” Prov 14 28: “In the
multitude of people is the king’s glory; but in the
want of people is the destruction of the prince”
(razon); Jgs 6 3: “Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O
ye princes” (rdz°n?m); Prov 8 15: “By me kings
reign, and princes [rdz‘nim] decree justice” (cf
31.4; Hab 110); Isa 40 23: “that bringeth
princes [rdz°ntm] to nothing; that maketh the judges
of the earth as vanity.”


(7) JO, ndgtkh, derived from JO}, ndsakh, “to
install a king” (ef Ps 2 6); hence a prince: Josh
13 21: “the princes of Sihon’ (cf Ps 83 11);
Ezk 32 30: “the princes of the north’; Mic 5 35:


RV “principal men,’ RVm “princes among
men’; Dnl 11 8: RV ‘molten images,” RVm
“princes.”


(8) TEP, kdcin, “a judge,” “a military leader,”

a prince’; Dnl 1118: “A prince [RVm “cap-
tain”] shall cause the reproach... . to cease’
(probably a Rom consul; a Rom general?).

(9) woe, shdlish: The usual explanation, ‘‘one
of the three men on a war-chariot” is highly im-
probable; Gesenius suggests that it is a loan-word,
and renders it “hero.” Ezk 23 15: ‘“‘All of them
princes to look upon” (‘picked men,’’ Gesenius).

(10) D340, hashmannim: Ps 68 31: ‘Princes
shall come out of Egypt.’ LXX renders it mpéo-
Bes, présbeis, “ambassadors,” Vulg legati. But
the meaning is uncertain. See also GovEeRNoR,
1, (8). Wrti1amM Baur


PRINCES, prin’sez, -siz, THE SEVEN. See
Prince, (1), (0). :


be


PRINCESS, prin’ses: The Heb term is 7,
s@rah (cf sar, prince, and ‘“Sarah’’); it means
(1) a queen (Isa 49 23, AV and RV both “queen’’);
(2) the consort of a king contrasted with his con-
cubines (1 Ix 11 3, “He had seven hundred wives,
princesses, and three hundred concubines’); (3)
the wife of a prince (Est 1 18: the ‘princesses of
Persia and Media’); (4) it is metaphorically used
of the city of Jerus (Lam 1 1).


PRINCIPAL, prin’si-pal: Appcars in AV as a
tr of nine Heb words (fewer in RV), m one case
(Isa 28 25) being used quite wrongly and in 2 K
25 19 (Jer 62 25); 1 Ch 24 31 gives a wrong
sense (all corrected iu RV). In 1K 4 5, “prin-
cipal officer” (ARV “chief minister”) is an arbi-
trary tr of kéhén to avoid “priest” (so ERV; cf
25S 8 18).


PRINCIPALITY, prin-si-pal'i-ti: In the OT the
word occurs but once (Jer 13 18, “your principali-
ties shall come down”). Here AVm “‘head tires’
is properly preferred by RV for MVNA, mra-
’dshoth (from WS, rd'sh, “head”’), “head-parts.”

In the NT “principality” oceurs for dpx%,
arché, “rule,” generally in the pl., referring (a) to
men in authority (Tit 3 1, “Put them in mind to be
subject [AV; “‘in subjection,’ RV] to principalities
[AV; “rulers,” RY], and powers” [AV; “to author-
ities,” RV}); (b) to superhuman agencies, angelic
or demonic (Rom 8 38; Eph 3 10; 6 12; Col 1
16; 2 10.15). Paul was keenly sensible of the
dualism of mind and body and of the law in his
members warring against the law of his mind (Rom
7 23), and of the temporary victory of the evil,
residing in the flesh, over the good of the spirit (vs
14 ff). This dualism was objectified in Zoroastrian-
ism, and among the Babylonians the several hcaven-
ly bodies were regarded as ruled by spirits, some
good, some evil. The same belief, appropriated
by the Jews during the captivity, appears also in
Gr thought, as c.g. in Plato and later in the Stoics.
The higher spheres, which hold the even tenor of
their way, were in general regarded as ruled by good
spirits; but in the sublunar sphere, to which the
earth belongs, ill-regulated motions prevail, which
must be due to evil spirits. The perversities of
human conduct, in particular, thwarting, as was
thought, the simple, intclligible Divine plan, were
held to be subject to rebellious powers offering de-


2455


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Prince
Prisca


fiance to God. While Paul clearly recognized a
hierarchy of such powers (Col 1 16, “thrones or
dominions or principalities or powers’), it is not
certain that he had elaborated a system of aeons
to serve the purposes of metaphysical theology and
ethies, such as appears among the Gnostics, although
they evidently believed they were developing his
thought. In 1 Cor 2 6 he repudiates the wisdom
of this world (aién) and of the rulers of this world
aién), and declares (Eph 6 12) that the Christian
has to contend with ‘the world-rulers of this dark-
ness,” and proclaims the triumph of Christ over
“the principalities and the powers” in the forgive-
ness of sins (Col 2 15). The same personification
of such agencies or powers appears also in another
passage, where the rendering of EV obscures it
(Eph 1 20.21: ‘when he raised him [Christ] from
the dead, and made him to sit at his right hand iu
the heavenly places, far above all [read “every”’]
tule [RV; “principality,’’ AV], and authority, and
power, and dominion, and every name that is named
not only in this world [aién], but also in that which
is to come’). Not the least interesting passage is
Eph 3 10, where the church is said to be the means
of revealing to “the principalities and the powers
in the heavenly places” “the manifold wisdom of
God.” One naturally inquires what was the pur-
pose of this revelation. Was it to effect a redemp-
tion and reconciliation of these demonic powers to
God? To this question Paul supplies no answer.
See ANGEL; SATAN. Winuiam ArtHuR Heme


PRINCIPLES, prin’si-p’lz: Found twice (He 6
12; 61). The Gr word (crorxetor, stoicheton) is
also tr? in AV as ‘“‘clements” and “rudiments.” As
rendered in He, its meaning is clearly related to
the elementary knowledge of Christian truth or
doctrine. See ELements; Rupiments.


PRINT, print, PRINTING, prin’ting, PRINTED,
prin’ted: Printing is the art of multiplying records
—the “art of writing with many pens” (Jew Enc,
X11, 295), or wholesale writing.

The art of making original records is writing.
This, however, isa slow process. It involves tracing
each letter and part of a letter through from be-
ginning to end by the moving point of chisel, pen,
or other instrument, and this process must be re-
peated with every copy. As soon, therefore, as
occasion arose for frequently repeating the record,
many ways were devised to save the labor of form-
ing each symbol separately. All these ways in-
volve making a character or a series of characters
on a single surface and transferring as a whole to
another surface. Neither “‘pressure,”’ as some say,
nor “ink,” as others, is essential to the process, for
printing from a photographic negative takes, no
pressure, and printing for the blind takes no ink.
Any process which transfers a whole surface is
printing.

The earliest use of printing seems to have been
for painting the face or hody with ownership, tribal,
trophy, or ceremonial marks for worship, war,
mourning, etc. This paint might be temporary
or pricked in by the tattoo process. Tattooing
itself is rather a writing than a printing process, but
may be either, according as the color js laid on b
drawing or by the “pintadera.”’ The “pintadera’”’
or “stamp used to impress patterns upon the skin”
is best known from the Mexican and South American
examples, but in recent years it has been found in
deposits all over the Mediterranean region (North
Italy, Austria, Hungary, Mycenae, Crete, Egypt)
and in Borneo at least. Many of these specimens
are from the Neolithic or Copper age. Both in
South America and in Neolithic Liguria, some of
these stamps were cylindrical and ‘were used like


a printer’s roller’ (Mosso, The Dawn of Mediter-
ranean Civilization, 254-61, with many illustrations,
and Frobenius, Childhood of Man, fig. 31, ‘“Dayak
block for painting the body’’).

_ The injunction of Lev 19 28, which is tr4 “print,”
is commonly, and probably rightly, in view of the
Heb word, supposed to refer to the permanent
marks of tattooing which may or may not have
been made by this printing process. Job 13 27
AV, which speaks of printing upon the heels or soles
of the feet, has been quite changed in RV, and, if
the idea is one of printing at all, it refers rather to
branding than stamping with color.

The use of the inkhorn in setting the mark upon
the forehead (Ezk 9 3.4.6) certainly points to mark-
ing with color rather than branding. See INK-
HoRN. This may, of course, have been drawing
rather than printing, but, on the other hand, the
sealing of the servants of God on their foreheads
(Rev 7 4; 9 4) necessarily means printing rather
than drawing, and probably printing rather than
branding, for the use of the seal with color had long
been common. The marks of the beast upon the
forehead and upon the hand in Rev 18, 14, 16, 16,
19 and 20, more likely refer to branding, as the Gr
word points more or less in this direction, while the
stigmata of Gal 6 17 may also point to branding.
Branding was at all events also a common method
of printing characters on the flesh in Bib. times
(Isa 3 24; perhaps Ex 21 25; a branding on the fore-
head, CH §127; branding of a slave §§ 226, 227).
The reference in Jn 20 25 is, of course, to the
clearly visible marks or scars left by the nails in the
hands. See Marx.

The use of seals is a true printing process, whether
they are used with color, as they were both in Crete
and Egypt almost from the beginning of history,
or impressed on clay, wax, or other plastic sub-
stances. Mention of seals is frequent in the Bible
(see SzaL). A new interest has been given to this
aspect of the matter by the sealings discovered in
Ahab’s palace and other excavations throughout
Pal, which are forming one of the most useful classes
of modern inscriptions.

Both stamp and seal were used throughout the
Middle Ages, the latter abundantly, and the stamp
at least occasionally, for stamping the capital letters
in Bib. and other MSS, as well as for various other
purposes.

Modern printing begins with the carving of whole
pages and books on blocks of wood (xylography), or
metal plates for printing (chalcography). This
method was quite early practised by the Chinese,
and began to be common in Europe in the early
15th cent., most of the books printed by it having
to do with Bib. topics (Biblia pauperum, etc).

It was only with the invention of movable type
about the middle of the 15th cent. that the multi-
plying of books by writing began to come to an
end. The printing with movable type is also closely
associated with Bib. study, the Gutenberg Psalter
and the Gutenberg Bible standing with most for
the very beginning of modern printing.

For the printed edd of the Heb and Gr originals,
and the various VSS, see arts. on TextTuau Criti-
cism and allied topics in this encyclopaedia, with
their literature. The art. on “Typography” in
Jew Enc is of unusual excellence, and the general
literature of printing given in Enc Brit, at. the
end of the first part of the art. on “Typography,”
is full and good. Compare also Book in_ this
encyclopaedia and its literature, esp. Hortz-
schansky, supplementing the bibliography of Kne


Brit. E. C. Rictarpson
PRISCA, pris’ka, PRISCILLA, pri-sil’a. See
AQUILA.


Prison, Prisoner
Procurator


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2456


PRISON, priz’’n, PRISONER, pria’'n-ér, priz’-
which are


nér (there are various Heb words
rendered ‘‘prison” in AV, among them:
Freebrew [1] “WO, sdkar, “round house,” “for-


tress” [8 t in Gen], [2] NDD, kele’,
“restraint,” “confinement” [12 t: in historic books,
Isa, Jer, with “house”’], [3] ™1Q%, mattarah,
“guard,” “sentry” [13 t in Jer and Neh], [4]
M2209, mah*phekheth, “distorting,” i.e. stocks or
pillory [4 t], [5] “ON, ’ésér, “bond,” “fetters” [Eecl
414; Jer 37 15]; ‘‘ward” in AV is usually the
rendering for WWW), mishmar):

The earliest occurrence of the word “prison” in
AV is found in the narrative of Joseph’s life in

Egypt (J). The term used, viz.
2. In Early séhar, means perhaps ‘round house’”’
Times or “tower.’’? It seems probable that

among the Hebrews there were no
special buildings erected as “jails” in the pre-
monarchical period, and perhaps not before the
post-exilic period, when the adoption of the civic
institutions and customs of surrounding nations
prevailed. In Egypt and Assyria, on the contrary,
there were probably public buildings corresponding
to our modern jails. Among the Hebrews, rooms
in connection with the royal palace or the residence
of prominent court officials would be used for the
purpose.

According to one narrative (J) in Gen the prison
in which Joseph was confined had a ‘‘keeper,” while
according to another narrative (E)
the offending members of the royal
household, viz. the royal butler and
the royal baker, were placed ‘in ward”
with the ‘captain of the guard” in charge, i.e. in
some part of the royal palace. This is still more
probable if, instead of “captain of the guard,” we
should translate “chief of the cooks,” 1.e. super-
intendent of the royal kitchen.

It was often necessary to restrict the liberty of
individuals who for various causes were a menace

to those in authority, without inflict-
4. Causes ing any corporal punishment, e.g.
of Im- Joseph’s brethren were kept “in ward”
prisonment three days (Gen 42 19); Shimei was

forbidden to pass beyond the boundary
of Jerus (1 K 2 36); the person who was caught
gathering sticks on the Sabbath was put ‘in ward”
pending his trial (Nu 16 34). In the monarchical
period, prophets who criticized the throne were put
in prison, e.g. Micaiah by Ahab (1 Ix 22 27),
Hanani by Asa (2 Ch 16 10). Hoshea, after his
abortive effort to institute an alliance with So or Seve,
king of Egypt, was shut up in prison by Shalmaneser
(2 K 17 4); ef also 2 K 25 27 (Jehoiachin in
Babylon); Jer 52 11 (Zedekiah in Babylon).

The Book of Jer throws considerable light on
the prison system of Jerus in the later monarchical
period. The prophet was put “in


3. Joseph
in Egypt


6. Under the stocks that were in the upper gate
the of Benjamin, which was in the house
Monarchy of Jeh” (20 2). Mere imprisonment


was not adequate punishment for the
prophet’s announcement of Judah’s doom; it was
necessary to have recourse to the pillory. During
the siege of Jerus Jeremiah was confined in the
“court of the guard, which was in the king of
Judah’s house’ (32 2, etc). The ‘court of the
guard” was evidently the quarters of the sentry who
guarded the royal palace. According to the narra-
tive of ch 37, the prophet was arrested on a charge
of treachery and put in prison “in the house of
Jonathan the scribe” (87 15). This verse does not
necessarily mean that a private house was used as
a prison. The words are capahle of another inter-


pretation, viz. that a building known as the “house
of Jonathan the scribe’ had been taken over by
the authorities and converted into a jail. We read
in the following verse that the house had a ‘“‘dun-
geon’”’ (lit. ‘house of the pit’’) and “cabins” or “cells.”

The data are not sufficient to enable us to give
any detailed description of the treatment of pris-

oners. This treatment varied accord-
6. The ing to the character of the offence
Treatment which led to incarceration. Samson
of Prisoners during the period of his imprisonment

was compelled to do hard labor (Jgs
16 21). Grinding was the occupation of women,
and marked the depth of Samson’s humiliation.
Dangerous persons were subjected to various kinds
of pbysical mutilation, e.g. Samson was deprived of
his sight. This was a common practice in Assyria
(2 K 26 7). The thumbs and great toes of
Adonibezek were cut off to render him incapable of
further resistance (Jgs 1 6).

Various forms of torture were in vogue. Hanani
the seer was put into the pillory by Asa (for “in a
prison house” we should render ‘‘in the stocks”;
see RVm). In Jer 29 26 for ‘‘prison,” we should
render “stocks” (so RV) or “pillory,” and for
“stocks,” ‘collar’ (as in RVm). AV renders a
different Heb word by “stocks” in Job (13 27; 33
11). There was a special prison diet (1 K 22 27),
as well as a prison garb (2 K 26 29).

There are other Heb words rendered ‘‘prison’’ (some-


times incorrectly)in AV. In Ps 142 7, the word which is
tra‘ prison"’ means a ‘‘ place of execution,"*


7. Other and is derived from a root which denotes,
Heb for instance, the isolation of the leper (Lev

CLE: 13 5; cf Isa 24 22: 42 7). In Isa 63 8
Words “oppression” not ‘‘prisan” is the correct


tr, whilein lsa 61 1 the Heb denotes “ open-
ing of the eyes,’’ rather than ‘‘opening of the prison.”
Prisoners are promised ‘‘light after darkness, gleam after
gloom."


In the NT “prison” generally oceurs for the Gr
word vAaxy, phulaké, which corresponds to the
Heb word WW, mishmar, referred
to above (Mt 5 25; Mk 6 17; Lk 3 20;
Acts 5 19; 1 Pet 3 19). In Rev 18
2, AV renders this word by two dif-
ferent words, viz. “hold” and “cage”; RV employs
“hold” in each case (RVm “prison”). In one
passage ‘‘ward’’ is the rendering in AV (Acts 12 10).
In connection with the imprisonment of John the
term used is despwr%piov, desmodtérion, “place of
bonds” or “fetters’” (Mt 11 2); the same word is
used in the case of Peter and John (Acts 5 21.23),
and of Paul and Silas (Acts 16 26). But the more
common term is also found in these narratives.
In Acts 12 17 “prison” renders a Gr word which
means “dwelling.” In Acts 5 18 AV, “prison’’ is
the rendering for another Gr word, viz. TApyocs,
lérésis, “watching” or “ward” (RV ‘“ward”’). In
Acts 4 3, AV employs “hold” as the rendering for
the same word. This would correspond to the
modern “police station” or “lockup.’’ See also
PUNISHMENTS. Lewis


PRISON GARMENTS. See preceding article.


8. In the
NT


PRISON, SPIRITS IN: The phrase occurs in
the much-disputed passage, 1 Pet 3 18-20, where
the apostle, exhorting Christians to endurance
under suffering for well-doing, says: ‘Because
Christ also suffered for sins once, the righteous for
the unrighteous, that he might bring us to God;
being put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the
spirit; in which also he went and preached unto
the spirits in prison, that aforetime were disobedi-
ent, when the longsuffering of God waited in the
days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, where-
in few, that is, eight souls, were saved through


2457 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Prison, Prisoner
water.” It is plain that in this context “the spirits | victor in the Gr games, consisting of a garland of
in prison” (tots éy gudaxy rvredpaccv, tots en | bay, olive, or pine; so called because it was given


phulaké pnetimasin) denote the generation who
were disobedient in the days of Noah, while the
words “spirits” and ‘in prison”’ refer to their present
disembodied condition in a place of judgment in
the unseen world (cf 2 Pet 2 4-9). The crucial
point in the passage lies in what is said of Christ’s
preaching to these spirits in prison. The interpre-
tation which strikes one most naturally is that
Christ, put to death in the flesh, and made alive
again in the spirit, went in this spiritual (disem-
bodied) state, and preached to these spirits, who
once had been disobedient, but are viewed as now
possibly receptive of His message. This is the idea
of the passage taken by the majority of modern
exegetes, and it finds support in what is said in
1 Pet 4 6, “For unto this end was the gospel
preached even to the dead, that they might be
judged indeed according to men in the flesh, but
live according to God in the spirit.” On this basis
is now often reared a mass of doctrine or conjecture
respecting ‘‘second probation,’ “restoration,”
etc—in part going back to patristic times—for which
the passage, even so taken, affords a very narrow
foundation (see on this view, Plumptre, The Spirits
in Prison; Dorner, System of Christian Doctrine,
IV, 130-32; E. White, Life in Christ, ch xxii). It
must be admitted, however, that, on closer exam-
ination, the above plausible explanation is com-
passed with many difficulties. A preaching of
Christ in Hades is referred to in no other passage of
Scripture, while Peter appears to be speaking to
his readers of something with which they are famil-
iar; it seems strange that these antediluvians
should be singled out as the sole objects of this
preaching in the spiritual world; the word “made
alive” does not exegetically refer to a disembodied
state, but to the resurrection of Christ in the body,
ete. Another line of interpretation is therefore
preferred by many, who take the words “in which
also he went,” to refer, not to a disembodied mani-
festation, but to the historical preaching to the
antediluvian generation through Noah while they
yet lived. In favor of this view is the fact that the
apostle in 1 11 regards the earlier prophetic preach-
ing as a testifying of “the Spirit of Christ,” that
God’s long-suffering with Noah’s generation is de-
scribed in Gen 6 5, which Peter has doubtless in
his mind, as a striving of God's Spirit, and that in
2 Pet 2 5 there is another allusion to these events,
and Noah is described as “‘a preacher of righteous-
ness.” The passage, 1 Pet 4 6, may have the more
general meaning that Christians who have died are
at no disadvantage in the judgment as compared
with those who shall be alive at the Parousia, (cf
1 Thess 4 15-18). (For an exposition of this view,
with a full account of the interpretations and litera-
ture on the subject, cf Salmond’s Christian Doe-
irine of Immortality, 4th ed, 364-87.) See also
EscuaToLocy or THE NT. JAMES ORR


PRIVY, priv’i, PRIVILY, priv‘i-li: These words
are obsolete in modern Eng. and are replaced by
“secret,” “secretly,” rather than by the cognates
“private,” “privately.” RV usually has _ not
altered AV’s use of the word, but in Ps 11 2 has
substituted “in darkness’ and in Jgs 9 31 uses
“eraftily,” m “in Tormah”’ (see Torman). In Ezk
21 14,AV “entereth into their privy chambers,
“privy” is a gloss, omitted in RV. ‘To be privy
to a thing’ (1 I< 2 44; Acts 5 2) is simply “‘to
know” it; in Wisd 8 4, RV has changed the phrase
into “be initiated into.”


PRIZE, priz: Two Gr words are so rendered in
EV: (1) Gpafeiov, brabeion, the award to the


by the Spafets, brabctis, the adjudicator who as-
signed the prize at the games (Vulg braviwm, from
which may be derived the Eng. “brave’’ = originally
gaily dressed, handsome). Used lit. in 1 Cor 9
24, and figuratively of the heavenly reward for
Christian character in Phil 3 14. (2) dprayuds,
harpagmés, in ERV of Phil 2 6, “counted it not a
prize to be on an equality with God.” The termi-
nation -pos, -mos, would lead us to expect the active
sense: “an act of grasping,” “plundering” (AV
“robbery”’), which would imply that Christ did not
deem it an act of usurpation to claim equality with
God, for such equality was His inherent right. But
the context demands a reference “not to the right
which He claimed, but to the dignity which He
renounced” (Lightfoot); hence the majority of
modern expositors take the word in a passive sense
(=dprayua, hdrpagma): “a thing to be_ seized,
prized, retained at all costs as a booty” (ERV “a
prize,” ARV “a thing to be grasped’’), implying that
Christ did not regard equality with God as a thing
to be clutched greedily, but waived His rights (see
Lightfoot on Phil 2 6). The vb. “to prize” occurs
only in Zee 11 18. See Grasp; HumriiaTion oF
Curist; KENOoSIS. D. Mratt Epwarps


PROBATION, prié-ba’shun, SECOND, sek’und.
See EscuaToLtoay or Tur NT.


PROCHORUS, prok’é-rus (IIpéxopos, Préehoras):
One of ‘“‘the seven” chosen by the Christian com-
munity in Jerus to superintend the dispensing of
charity to the widows and other poor (Acts 6 5).
The name is Gr, and he may have been a Hellenist.
According to tradition he became bishop of Nico-
media and died a martyr at Antioch.


PROCONSUL, pré-kon’sul (avOvTaros, anthiipatos
[Acts 13 7; 18 12]; AV deputy). Sce Provinca.


PROCURATOR, prok’t-ri-tér (éritpomos, epi-
tropos): This word signified in a general sense a
steward or bailiff of a private estate, or a financial
agent with power of attorney, and the development
of the special usage of the word to denote an impe-
rial functionary or official is characteristic of the
origin of many departments of administration under
the Roman Empire which sprang from the emperor's
household. At the time of Augustus, when the
domestic quality of these offices had not been
entirely lost, the procurators were mostly imperial
freedmen. But after the systematic organization
of the administration in the 2d cent., the title of
procurator was reserved for functionaries of the
equestrian class. In fact, the term is so intimately
connected with the sphere of official activity of the
Rom knights that the expressions “procuratorial
career’ and “equestrian career’ are used synony-
mously (cf Hirschfeld, Die kaiserlichen Verwaltungs-
beamten bis auf Dioelettan, 410-65).

During the last century of the Republic, the class
of knights (equttes) embraced in general all citizens
of wealth who were not magistrates or members of
the senate. The Roscian Law (67 BC) established
400,000 sesterces (about $18,000 or £3,600) as the
minimum census rating for membership in this class.
The gold ring, tunic with narrow purple border, and
privilege of sitting in the first 14 rows at the theater
were the tokens of knighthood. Augustus added
to these the public horse which was conferred hence-
forth by the emperor and recalled the original mili-
tary significance of the order. From the time of
Augustus the first three dceuriae of jurors (judices),
each containing 1,000 persons, were filled with
knights.


Precurator
Prophecy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2458


Under the Republic the influence of the equestrian
class was chiefly exerted in the financial transactions
of the companies which farmed the variable reve-
nues. The importance of the publicani was greatly
reduced under the Empire, but the emperors
reconipensed the knights for this loss of oppor-
tunity by intrusting them with a great variety of
administrative functions. Military service as pre-
fect. or tribune was the preliminary step in the offi-
cial equestrian career. The highest positions held
by members of the equestrian class were called
prefectures, and included the prefecture of the
guard, of Egypt, of the grain-supply, of the watch-
men in Rome, and of the fleet. But between these
extremes the title procurator was applied generally
to the functionaries whose positions were of imperial
origin.

The administration of the fiscus or imperial treas-
ury at Rome and of the finances in the imperial
provinces, as well as the collection of fiscal revenues
m the senatorial provinces, was in the hands of
procurators. They occupied many positions which,
on account of their intimate relationship with the
person of the monarch, could be safely intrusted
only to those whose limited prestige precluded
inordinate ambition (Friedlaender, Sittengeschichte
Roms, 7th ed, Part I, 182-43). Finally, several
provinces, where the conditions were unfavorable
to the introduction of the ordinary administrative
system and Rom public law, were governed as im-
perial domains by officials of the equestrian class as
the emperor’s representatives. In Egypt the title
prefect. (praefectus) was employed permanently as
the appellation of the viceroy, and while the same
term may have been used originally to denote the
governors of this class generally, when their mili-
tary outweighed their civil functions, yet the desig-
nation procurator became at an early date the term of
common usage to designate them (Hirschfeld, 382).

Mauretania, Rhaetia, Noricum, Thrace, Cappa-
docia, Judaea and some smaller districts were all,
for a time at least, governed by procurators (Taci-
tus Hist.i.11; Dio Cassius Ivii.17).

The question concerning the original title of the
Rom governors of Judaea has arisen because the
NT employs the word hégemén (Mt 27 2.11.14.15.
21.27; 28 14; Lk 3 1; 20 20; Acts 23 24; 24 1;
26 30), which corresponds with the Lat term
praeses, Which might be considered synonymous
with either procurator or praefectus (Hirschfeld,
384). There is no inscriptional evidence to estab-
lish the nomenclature of the rulers of Pal before
the time of Vespasian, and Hirschfeld is of the
opinion that a certain passage in Tacitus (Ann.
xv.44) where Pilate is called procurator is not suffi-
cient proof in view of this writer’s carelessness in
details of this sort. Josephus (Ant, XX, i, 2),
however, employs epitropos (procurator) for the
time of Clandius, and it is convenient to follow
common usage and assume that this title was current
from the first.

It was evidently the intention of Augustus that
membership in the equestrian class shonld bea
necessary qualification for the procurators who were
appointed to govern provinces. But Claudius


appointed a freedman, Antonius Felix, brother of.


the famous minister of finance, Pallas, as procurator
of Judaea (Suetonius Claud. xxviii; Tacitus Hist.
v.9). This remained, however, an isolated instance
in the annals of Pal (Hirschfeld, 380), and it is
probable, moreover, that Felix was raised to eques-
trian rank before the governorship was conferred
upon him.

The following list of the procurators of Judaea is
based on Marquardt (Rémische Staatsverwaltung,
I, 409, 412) and Schiirer (Geschichte des jiidischen


Volkes', 1, 485-585):


Coponius (6 AD te c 10 AD)

M. Amhbibulus (¢ 10-13)

Annius Rufus (c 13-15)

Valerius Gratus (c 15-26)

Pentius Pilatus (26-35)

Marcellus (prehably 35-38)

Maryllus (38-44)

C. Cuspius Fadus (44-46)

Tiberius Alexander (46-48)

Ventidius Cumanus (48-52)

M. Antonius Felix (52-60 or 61)

Notre.—Marquardt gives his name as Claudius Felix,
supposing that he was a freedmau of Claudius aud
therefore tock his nomen (Suetenius Claud. xxviii;
Victer, epitome iv, 8); but there is stronger evidence in
support of the belief that Felix was a freedman of An-
tenia, Claudius’ mether, like his hbrether Pallas (Tacitus
Ann. xii.54; Jes, Ant, XVIII, vi, 4; XX, vii, 1, 2;
XX, viii, 9; BJ, II, xii, 8), and accordingly had received
the praenomen and nomen ef Antenia'’s father (Jos, Ant,
XVIII, vi, 6

Portius Festus (61)

Alhinus (62-64)

Gessius Florus (65-66)


See, further, Governor. Grorcs H. ALLEN


PROFANE, pré-fan’ (vb. 537, halal, adj. 23m,
halal, 5H, hal; BePydSw, bebaléd, BeBndos, bébélos):
From profanus, “before [i.e. outside] the temple,”
therefore unholy, polluted, secular, is of frequent
occurrence (vb. and adj.) in both the OT and the
NT. It occurs as the tr of Al in AV only in Ezk
(22 26, RV “common”; 42 20; 44 23; 48 15,
RV “for common use’’); as the tr of halal in Lev
21 7.14, RVm “polluted”; and Ezk 21 25, where,
for AV “thou profane wicked prince of Israel,”
RV has ‘“‘thou, O deadly wounded wicked one, the
prince of Israel.’”’ “To profane’ (halal) is seen in
Lev 18 21; 19 8; Neh 18 17.18; Ps 89 39; Isa
43 28; Ezk 22 8.26, ete. ‘“Profaneness” in Jer
23 15 (hdnuppdah) is in ARV “‘ungodliness.” In the
NT “profane” occurs in the sense of unholy, godless,
regardiess of God and Divine things (1 Tim 1 9;
47; 6 20; 2 Tim 2 16; He 12 16), and ‘to pro-
fane,” or violate, in Mt 12 5; Acts 246. The
vb. is frequent in Apoe in 1 Mace (1 43.45.63; 2
34, etc; alsoin 2 Mace 8 2; 10 5; ef 2 Esd 16 8;
Jth 4 3.12; 1 Mace 1 48; 2 Mace 4 13). In nv-
merous cases RV substitutes “profane”? for other
words and phrases in AV, as for “to prostitute”
(Lev 19 29), ‘‘an hypocrite” (Isa 9 17), “pollute”
(Nu 18 32; Ezk 7 21), ete. W. L. Waker


PROFESS, pré-fes’, PROFESSION, pro-fesh’un
(Al, ndghadh; épodoyéw, homologéd, spodoyla,
homologia): ‘Profess’” means lit. “to own before,”
hence to make open or public announcement; it
oceurs only once in the OT as the tr of naghadh, “to
put before,” often “‘to tell,” “to show,” “to declare”
(Dt 26 3); in the NT it is the tr of homologed, “‘to
speak or say together in common,” “‘to assent,”
“to confess publicly” (Mt 7 23, “Then will [ pro-
fess unto them, I never knew you”; 1 Tim 6 12,
RV “didst confess the good confession’; Tit. 1 16,
“They profess that they know God”); of epaggél-
lomai, ‘to announce one’s self,” ‘to make profes-
sion” (1 Tim 2 10; 6 21); of phdskd, “to say,”
“to assert”? (Rom 1 22). ‘Profession’ is the tr
of homologia (2 Cor 9 13; 1 Tim 6 12; He 3 1,
AV “the High Priest of our profession’’ [of our pro-
fessed faith]; 4 14; 10 23; in each instance RV
has ‘‘confession’”’). “Profess’’ occurs in AV of
Ecclus 3 25, but the verse is omitted by RV; m
“Most authorities omit verse 25.”

W. L. WaLKER

PROGNOSTICATORS, prog-nog’ti-ka-térz,
MONTHLY. See Astrouoey, 6.


PROLOGUE, prd’log, prol’og (wpdsAsyos, prdlogos,
“foreword,” “preface,” “introduction’”’): The word
oecurs in the preface to Ecelus (Sir), and is com-


2459


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Procurator
Prophecy


monly applied to Jn 1 1-18. See Eccizsiasticus;
JoHN, GosruE. of,


PROLONG, pré-long’ (TN, ‘arakh, JU,
mashakh): ‘Prolong,’ “prolonged” are the tr® of
’arakh, ‘to stretch,’ “to make long’ (Dt 4 26,
and frequently, “prolong days’; 4 40, etc; Job
611 AV; Prov 28 16; Eccl 7 15; 8 13; Isa
53 10); of mdshakh, “to draw out’ (Isa 13 22;
Ezk 12 25.28 AV); of ydsaph, “to add,” ‘‘to in-
crease’ (Ps 61 6; Prov 10 27); of natah, “‘to
streteh out,” ‘‘to incline to’? (Job 15 29, “neither
shall he prolong the perfection thereof upon the
earth,”” ARV “neither shall their possessions be
extended on the earth,” m “their produce bend to
the earth’; ERV reverses text and margin); of
’arekha@h (Aram.) (Dnl 7 12, “Yet their lives were
prolonged,’ AVm ‘‘A prolonging in life was given
them’’). “Prolong” occurs in Ecclus 29 5, “prolong
the time” (paretkus); 38 14, “prolong life,” RV
“maintenance of life’ (embidsis); 30 22, “prolongeth
his days,’ RV “length of days” (makroéméreusis) ;
37 31, RV “shall prolong” (prostithémi).

W. L. WaLker

PROMISE, prom’is (most frequently in the OT
123, dabhar, “speaking,” “speech,” and "37,
dabhar, ‘to speak,’’ also VAN, ’amar, ‘to say,” once
in Ps 77 8, ’dmer, “speech”; in the NT éwayyeAla,
epaggelia, and the vbs. ,émayyé\Aopar, epaggéllomat,
and compounds): Promise holds an important place
in the Scriptures and in the development of the reli-
gion that culminated in Christ. The Bible is indeed
full of ‘precious and exceeding great promises’
(2 Pet 1 4), although the word “promise” is not
always used in connection with them. Of the more
outstanding promises of the OT may be mentioned:
(1) the proto-evangelium (Gen 3 15); (2) the prom-
ise to Noah no more to curse the ground, ete
(Gen 8 21.22; 9 1-17); (3) most influential, the
promise to Abraham to make of him a great nation


in whom all families of the earth should be blessed,:


to give to him and his seed the land of Canaan
(Gen 12 2.7, etc), often referred to in the OT (Ex
12 25; Dt 1 8.11; 6 3; 9 28, ete); (4) the promise
to David to continue his house on the throne (2 S
7 12.13.28; 1 K 2 24, etc); (5) the promise of res-
toration of Israel, of the Messiah, of the new and
everlasting kingdom, of the new covenant and ont-
pouring of the Spirit (Isa 2 2-5; 4 2; 55 5; 66 13;
Jer 31 31-34; 32 37-42; 33 14; Ezk 36 22-31;
37 11f; 39 25f, etc). Inthe NT these promises are
founded on, and regarded as having their true fulfil-
ment in, Christ and those who are His (2 Cor 1 20;
Eph 3 6). The promise of the Spirit is spoken of
by Jesus as “the promise of my Father” (Lk’24 49;
Acts 1 4), and this was regarded as fulfilled at
Pentecost. The promise of a Saviour of the seed of
David is regarded as fulfilled in Christ (Acts 13 23.
32, 26 6; Rom 1 2; 4 13; 9 4). Panlargues that
the promise to Abraham that he should be “‘heir of
the world,” made to him before circumcision, is not
eonfined to Israel, but is open to all who are children
of Abraham by faith (Rom 4 13-16; cf Gal 3 16.
19.29). In like manner the writer to the Hebrews
goes back to the original promises, giving them a
spiritual and eternal significance (4 1; 6 17; 11 9,
etc). The NT promises include manifold bless-
ings and hopes, among them “life,” “eternal life”
(1 Tim 4 8; 619; 2 Tim 11; Jas 1 12), the
“kingdom” (Jas 2 5), Christ’s “coming” (2 Pet 3 9,
ete), ‘new heavens and a new earth” (2 Pet 3 13),
ete. For “promise” and “promised” in AV, RV has
frequently other terms, as ‘word’ (Ps 105 42),
“spake,” “spoken” (Dt 10 9; Josh 9 21; 22 4;
23 5.15, etc), “consented” (Lk 22 6), etc. Refer-
ences to the promises occur repeatedly in the Apoe


(Bar 2.34; 2 Mace 2 18; Wisd 12 21; ef 2 Esd
3.15; 5 29). W. L. WaLKER


PROPER, prop’ér: For AV “proper” (child),
in He 11 23, RV substitutes “goodly”; in 1 Ch
29 3; 1 Cor 7 7, RV “own” is employed, and for
the too emphatic “their proper tongue” in Acts 1
19 “their language” is written. But none of the
AV forms are really obsolete.


PROPER NAMES. See Namus, Proper.


PROPERTY, prop’ér-ti. See Agrarian Laws;
JuBiLeE; Poor; Portion; PRimocENITURE; WEALTH.


PROPHECY, prof’é-si, prof’e-si, PROPHETS,
prof’ets:
I. Tue Ivrea or Bisiican Propuecy
1. The Scer and Speaker of God
2. Prophotical Inspiration
3. Relation to Dreams
4. Freedom of Inspiration
5. Supernatural Visions of the Future
6. The Fulfilment


II. HistorircaL DEVELOPMENT OF THE PROPHETIC
OFrrice


2. Moses

3. Period of the Judges

4, Schools of Prophets

5. Period of the Kings

6. Literary Prophets, Amos, Hosea
7. Poetical Form of Prophecy

8. Prophets of Judah, Isaiah, and Others Down
- to Jeremiah


. During the Exile, Ezekiel,
Daniel


10. After the Exile, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi
11. Cessation of Prophecy
12. Prophecy in the NT
III. Historicat DEVELOPMENT orf PROPHECY
. Contents of Prophecy
Conception of the Messiah
Before the Exile (through Judgment to De-
liverance)
Analogous Ideas among Heathen Peoples
During the Exile (Ezekiel, Deutero-Isaiah)
After the Exile (Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi)
Contemporaneous Character of Prophecy
. Partial Character of Prophecy
. Perspective Character of Prophecy
IV. AwaLtocous PHENOMENA AMONG THE GENTILES
1. Necromancy and Technical Witchcraft
2. The Mantic Art
3. Contents of Heathen Oracles
L1ITERATURE


I. The Idea of Biblical Prophecy.—According to
the uniform teaching of the Bible the prophet is a
speaker of or for God. His words are

1. The Seer not the production of his own spirit,
and Speak- but come from a higher source. For
er of God he is at the same time, also, a seer, who
sees things that do not lie in the do-

main of natural sight, or who hears things which
human ears do not ordinarily receive; cf 1S 9 9,
where na@bhi’, “speaker,” and ré’ch, “seer,” are used
as synonymous terms. Jer 23 16 and Ezk 13 2f
are particularly instructive in this regard. In these
passages a sharp distinction is made between those
persons who only claim to be prophets but who
prophesy “out of their own heart,’’ and the true
prophets who declare the word which the Lord has
spoken to them. In the latter case the contents of
the prophecy have not originated in their own re-
flection or caleulation; and just as little is this
prophecy the product of their own feelings, fears
or hopes, but, as something extraneons to man and
independent of him, it has with a Divine certainty
entered the soul of the prophet. The prophet has
seen that which he prophesies, although he need not
have seen it in the form of a real vision. He can
also ‘‘see’”’ words with his inner eyes (Isa 2 1, and
often). It is only another expression for this when
it is frequently said that God has spoken to the
prophet. In this case too it is not necessary that


Dentero-Isaiah,


SO OO Ue Or are Ce


Prophecy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2460


there must have been a voice which he could hear
phonetically through his natural ear. The main
thing is that he must have been able sharply to
distinguish the contents of this voice from his own
heart, i.e. from his personal consciousness. Only in
this way is he capable of speaking to the people
in the name of God and able to publish his word as
that of Jeh. In this case he is the speaker of Jeh
(nabhi’), or the mouth of the Lord (cf Ezk 7 1 with
4 16). Under these conditions he then regards it
as absolute compulsion to speak, just as a person
must be filled with fear when he hears a lion roar
nearby (Am 3 8). The words burn in his soul until
he utters them (Jer 20 7.9).

The Divine power, which comes over a human

being and compels him to see or to hear things

which otherwise would be hidden from
2. Pro- him, is called by various terms express-
phetical In- ive of inspiration. It is said that the
spiration Spirit of God has come over someone
(Nu 24 2); or has fallen upon him
(Ezk 11 5); or that the hand of Jeh has come over
him and laid hold of him (2 K 3 15; Ezk 1 3;
3 14.22, and often); or that the Holy Spirit has
‘een put on him as a garment, i.e. has been incor-
porated in him (1 Ch 12 18; 2 Ch 24 20); or
that the Spirit of revelation has permanently de-
scended upon him (Nu 11 25f; 2 K 2 15; Isa
11 2; 61 1); or that God has given this Spirit of
His (Nu 11 29; Isa 42 1); or pours Him out upon
man (Joel 2 28f [Heb 3 1f]). But this inspiration is
not such that it suppresses the human consciousness
of the recipient, so that he would reccive the word of
God in the state of sleep or trance. But rather the
recipient is in possession of his full conscionsness,
and is able afterward to give a clear account of
what happened. Nor is the individuality of the
prophet eliminated by this Divine inspiration; un-
consciously this individuality codperates in the
formal shaping of that which has been seen and
heard. In accordance with the natural peculiarity
of the prophet and with the contents of the message,
the psychological condition of the recipient may be
that of intense excitement or of calmness. As a
rule the inspiration that takes possession of the
prophets is evidenced also by an exalted and poetical
language, which assumes a certain rhythmical
character, but is not bonnd to a narrow and mechani-
cal meter. It is, however, also possible that pro-
phetical utterances find their expression in plain
prose. The individual peculiarity of the prophet
is a prime factor also in the form in which the
revelation comes to him. In the one prophet we
find a preponderance of visions; another prophet
has no visions. But the visions of the future
which he sees are given in the forms and the
color which have been furnished by his own con-
sciousness. All the more the form in which the
prophet gives expression to his word of God is de-
termined by his personal talents and gifts as also
by his experiences.

In a certain respect the dream can be cited as an
analogous phenomenon, in which also the ideas that
are slumbering in the soul uninvited
put in their appearance without being
controlled by consciousness and reason.
On the other hand, prophecy differs
specifically from dreams, first, because the genuine
prophetical utterance is received when the prophet
18 clearly conscious, and, secondly, because such an
utterance brings with it a much greater degree of
certainty and a greater guaranty of its higher origin
than is done even by a dream that scems to be
prophetical. In Jer 23 25ff it is declared that
these two are entirely dissimilar, and the relation
between the two is compared to straw and wheat.
The Moslem Arabs also put a much lower estimate


3. The
Dream


on the visionary dream than on the prophetic vision
in a waking condition. ’
Because this Spirit of God acts with full freedom,
He can select His organs at will from among every
station, age or sex. The Spirit is not
4. Freedom confined to any priestly class or organi-
of In- zation. It indeed was the case at
spiration times that a prophet gathered dis-
ciples around himself, who could
themselves in turn also be seized by his spirit,
although the transmission of this spirit was a diffi-
cult matter (2 K 2 10). Yet genuine prophecies
continued to be at all times a free gift of the sov-
ereign God. Amos (7 14f) appeals expressly to
this fact, that he did not himself choose the prophet’s
calling nor was the pupil of a prophetic school, but
that he had been directly called by Jeh from his
daily occupation as a shepherd and workman. In
the same way we indeed find prophets who belonged
to the priestly order (Jeremiah, Ezekiel and others),
but equally great is the number of those who cer-
tainly did not so belong. Further, age made no
difference in the call to the prophetic office. Even
in his earliest youth Samuel was called to be a
prophet (1 S 3 1 ff), and it did not avail Jeremiah
anything when he excused himself because of his
youth (Jer 1 6). Then, too, a woman could be
seized by this Spirit. From time to time prophet-
esses appeared, although the female sex is by no
means so prominent here as it is in the sorcery of
the heathen. See PropHETess. As an exceptional
case the Spirit of God could lay hold even of a per-
son who inwardly was entirely estranged from Him
and could make an utterance through him (cf Saul,
1S 10 11; 19 24; Balaam, Nu 23f; Caiaphas,
Jn 11 51). As a rule, however, God has selected
such prophetic organs for a longer service. These
persons are called and dedicated for this purpose
by Him through a special act (cf Moses Ex 3 1 ff;
1 K 19 16.19ff; Isa 6; Jer 1; Ezk 1). This
moment was decisive for their whole lives and con-
stituted their authorization as far as they them-
selves and others were concerned. Yet for each
prophetic appearance these men receive a special
enlightenment. The prophet does not at all times
speak in an inspired state; cf Nathan (2 8 7 3 ff),
who afterward was compelled to take back a word
which he had spoken on his own authority. Char-
acteristic data on the mental state of the prophets
in the reception and in the declaration of the Di-
vine word are found in Jer 15 16f; 20 7ff. Origi-
nally Jeremiah felt it as a joy that Jeh spoke to him
(ef Ezk 3 3), but then he lost all pleasure in life
and would have preferred not to have uttered this
word, but he could not do as he desired.
The attempt has often been made to explain
prophecy as a natural product of purely human


factors. Rationalistic theologians re-
5. Super- garded the prophets as enthusiastic
natural teachers of religion and morals, as
Visions of warm patriots and politicians, to whom
the Future they ascribed nothing but a certain


ability of gucssing the future. But
this was no explanation of the facts in the case.
The prophets were themselves conscious of this,
that they were not the intellectual authors of their
higher knowledge. This consciousness is justified
by the fact that they were in a condition to make
known things which lay beyond their natural hori-
zon and which were contrary to all probability.
Those cases are particularly instructive in this
respect which beyond a doubt were recorded by the
prophets themselves. Ezekiel could indeed, on the
basis of moral and religious reflections, reach the
conviction that Zedekiah of Jerus would not escape
his punishment for his political treachery and for
his disobedience to the word of Jeh; but he could


2461


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Prophecy


—


never from. this source have reached the certainty
that this king, as the prophet describes the case in
12 8 ff, was to be taken captive while trying to
escape from the besieged city and was then to be
blinded and taken to Babylon. Just as little could
he in Babylon know the exact day when the siege
of Jerus began (24 2). If this prophet had learned
of these things in a natural way and had afterward
clothed them in the form of prophecy, he would
have been guilty of a deception, something unthink-
able in the case of so conscientious a preacher of
morality. But such cases are frequently met. with.
Jeremiah predicts to Hananiah that he would die
during the year (28 16), but it is not only such
matters of detail that presuppose an extraordinary
vision of the prophet. The whole way also in which
Jeremiah predicts the destruction of Jerus as in-
evitable, in direct contrast to the hopes of the
Jerusalemites and to the desires of his own heart,
shows that he was speaking under Divine compul-
sion, which was more powerful than his own re-
flections and sympathies. On any other presup-
position his conduct would have been reprehensible
cowardice. The case of Isaiah is exactly the same.
When he gives to Ahaz the word of God as a guar-
anty that the Syrians and the Ephraimites would not
capture Jerus (7 4 ff), and when he promises Hez-
ekiah that the Assyrians would not shoot an arrow
into the city, but would return without having ac-
complished their purpose (87 22.33), these things
were so much in contradiction to all the prob-
abilities of the course events would take that he
would have been a frivolous adventurer had he not
received his information from higher sources.
Doubtless it was just these predictions which es-
tablished and upheld the influence of the prophets.
Thus in the case of Amos it was his prediction of a
great earthquake, which did occur two years later
(11); in the case of Elijah, the prediction of the
long dearth (1 K 17 1); in the case of Elisha, the
undertakings of the enemies (2 K 6 12), and in
other cases. It is indeed true that the contents of
the prophetic discourses are not at all confined to
the future. Everything that God has to announce
to mankind, revelations concerning His will, ad-
monitions, warnings, He is able to announce through
the mouth of the prophet. But His determinations
with reference to the future as a rule are connected
with prophetical utterances of the latter kind. The
prophets are watchmen, guardians of the people,
who are to warn the nation, because they see the
dangers and the judgments approaching, which
must put in their appearance if the Divine will is
disregarded. The prophets interpret also for the
people that which is happening and that which
has occurred, e.g. the defeats which they have
suffered at the hands of their enemies, or the grass-
hopper plague (Joel), or a famine. They lay bare
the inner reason for external occurrences and explain
such events in their connection with the provi-
dential government of God. This gives to prophecy
a powerful inner unity, notwithstanding the great
differences of times and surrounding circumstances.
It is prophecy which the Heb people must thank for
their higher conception of history. This people
know of a Highest Author of all things and of a
positive end, which all things that transpire must
serve. God’s plan has for its purpose to bring
about the complete supremacy of His will among
the children of men. ‘ 2
In genuine prophecy, according to Bib. concep-
tions, the fulfilment constitutes an integral part.
This is set up by Dt 18 21f as a
6. The Ful- proof of the genuineness of a prophetic
filment utterance. The prophetic word “‘falls
to the ground” (1 8 3 19) if it is not
‘raised up? (D°pm, Aekim, “fulfil,” for which we


more rarely find X27, millé’, but regularly in the
NT rAnpode@at, pléroisthat, “being fulfilled’) by the
course of events. It would remain an empty word
if it did not attain to its full content through its
realization. In fact, in the word spoken by the
prophet itself there dwells a Divine power, so that
at the moment when he speaks the event takes
place, even if it is not yet visible to man. This
realization is also not infrequently represented
symbolically by the prophet in confirmation of his
prediction. Thus ina certain sense it is the prophet
himself who through his word builds up and pulls
down, plants and roots out (Jer 110; 25 15 ff).
But the fulfilment can be judged by the contem-
poraries in the sense of Dt 18 22 only when this
fulfilment refers to the near future and when special
emphasis is Inid on external events. In these cases
the prediction of certain events assumes the sig-
nificance of a “sign” (cf Jer 28 16; Isa 8 1 ff;
87 30, and elsewhere). In other cases it is only
later generations who can judge of the correctness
of a prediction or of a threat. In this way in Zec 1
6 the fulfilment of a threat is declared, and in the
NT often the fulfilment of a promise is after a long
time pointed out. But it is not the case that a
genuine prophecy must be fulfilled like an edict of
fate. Such prophecy is not an inevitable decree of
fate, but is a word of the living God to mankind,
and therefore conditioned ethically, and God can,
if repentance has followed, withdraw a threat (Jer
18 2ff; case of Jonah), or the punishment can be
mitigated (1 K 21 29). A prediction, too, Jeh
can recall if the people prove unworthy (Jer 18 9 f).
A favorable or an unfavorable prediction can also
be postponed, as far as its realization is concerned,
to later times, if it belongs to the ultimate counsels
of God, as e.g. the final judgment and deliverance
on the last day. This counsel also may be realized
successively. In this case the prophet already col-
lects into one picture what is realized gradually in
a longer historical development. The prophet in
general spoke to his hearers in such a way as could
be understood by them and could be impressed on
them. It is therefore not correct to demand a fulfil-
ment pedantically exact in the form of the historical
garb of the prophecy. The main thing is that the
Divine thought contained in the prophecy be en-
tirely and completely realized. But not unfre-
quently the finger of God can be seen in the entirely
literal fulfilment of certam prophecies. This is
esp. the case in the NT in the appearance of the Son
of Man, in whom all the rays of OT prophecy have
found their common center.
IL. Historical Development of the Prophetic
Office.—It is a characteristic peculiarity of the
religion of the OT that its very ele-
1. Abraham mentary beginnings are of a propheti-
cal nature. The fathers, above all
Abraham, but also Isaac and Jacob, are the recipi-
ents of visions and of Divine revelations. Esp. is
this true of Abraham, who appeared to the for-
eigners, to whom he was neither kith or kin, to
be indeed a prophet (na@bhi’) (Gen 20 7; cf Ps 105
15), although in his case the command to preach
the word was yet absent. Above all, the creative
founder of the Israelitish national religion, Moses,
is a prophet in the eminent sense of
the word. His influence among the
people is owing neither to his official
position, nor to any military prowess, but solely
and alone to the one circumstance, that since his
call at the burning bush God has spoken to hin.
This intercourse between God and Moses was ever
of a particularly intimate character, While other
men of God received certain individual messages
only from time to time and through the mediation
of dreams and visions, Jeh spoke directly and “face


2. Moses


Prophecy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2462


to face’ with Moses (Nu 12 6 ff; Dt 34 10; ef
Ex 33 11). Moses was the permanent organ
through whom Jeh brought about the Egyp plagues
and through whom He explained what these meant
to His people, as also through whom He led and
ruled them. The voice of Moses too had to explain
to them the Divine signs in the desert and com-
municate to them the commandments of God. The
legislation of Moses shows that he was not only
filled with the Spirit of God occasionally, bnt that
he abode with God for longer periods of time and
produced something that is a well-ordered whole.
A production such as the Law is the result of a con-

tinuous association with God.
Since that time revelation through prophecy was
probably never entirely wanting in Israel (Dt 18
15). But this fountain did not always


3. Period flow with the same fulness or clearness. |


of the During the period of the Judges the

Judges Spirit of God urged the heroes who |
served Jeh rather to deeds than to

words. Yet Deborah enjoyed a high rank as a


prophetess, and for a long time pronounced de-
cisions of justice in the name of the Lord before she,
through her prophetical utterances, aroused the
people to rise up against their oppressors. What is
said in 1 S 3 1 concerning the times of Eli can be
applied to this whole period, namely that the word
and vision of the prophet had become rare in the
land. All the more epoch-making was the activity
of Samuel, who while yet_a boy received Divine
revelations (1 S 3 1ff). He was by the whole
people regarded as a ‘‘seer’”’ whose prophecies were
always fulfilled (8 19f). The passage 9 6 ff shows
that the people expected of such a man of God that
he should also as a clairvoyant come to the assist-
ance of the people in the troubles of life. Such a
professional clairvoyant, indeed, Samuel was not,
as he was devoted entirely to the service of his God
and of his people and obeyed the Divine Spirit, even
in those cases when he was compelled to act con-
trary to his personal inclinations, as was the case
when the kingdom was established in Israel (8 6 ff).
Since the days of Samuel we hear of schools of
prophets, or “sons of prophets.” These associa-
tions probably originated in this way,

4. Schools that an experienced prophet attracted
of Prophets to himself bands of youths, who sought
to receive a measure of his spirit.

These disciples of the prophets, together with their
families, lived in colonies around the master. Pos-
sibly Samuel was the first who founded such a school
of prophets. For im or near the city of Ramah we
first find nayéth, or colonies of such disciples (1 8
19 18f; 20 1). Among these pupils is found to a
much greater extent than among the teachers a
certain ecstatic feature. They arouse their feel-
ings through music and induce a frantic condition
which also affects others in the same way, in which
state they “prophesy” and, throwing off their gar-
ments, fall to the ground. In later times too we
find traces of such ecstatic phenomena. Thus e.g.
in Zec 138 6; 1 K 20 37.38, the “wounds” on the
breast or on the forehead recall the self-mutilation
of the priests of Baal (1 K 18 28). The deeds,
suggestive of what the dervishes of our own day do,
probably were phenomena quite similar to the action
of the prophets of the surrounding tribes. But that
prophecy in Israel was not, as is now not infrequent-
ly claimed, merely a less crude form of the heathen
prophetic institution, is proved by such men as
Moses and Samuel, who even in their times repre-
sent something much higher. Also in the colonies
of prophets there was assuredly not to be found
merely an enthusiasm without the Spirit of God.
Proof for this is Samuel, the spiritual father of this
colony, as Elijah was for the later colonies of this


| brethren of Israel (1 K 12 21,


kind. These places were rather the centers of a
religious life, where communion with God was
sought by prayer and meditation, and where the
recollection of the great deeds of God in the past
seemcd to prepare for the reception of new reve-
lations. From such centers of theocratic ideas and
ideals without a doubt there came forth also corre-
sponding influences that affected the people. Per-
haps not only was sacred music cultivated at these
places but also sacred traditions, which were handed
down orally and in writing. Certain it is that at
these colonies the religion of Jeh prevailed. | ;
During the period of the kings prophetically in-
spired men frequently appeared, who demanded
even of the kings that they should
5. Period of submit to their Divinely inspired


the Kings word. Saul, who refused such sub-
mission, perished as the result of this
conflict. David owed much to the support of the


prophets Samuel, Nathan, Gad (1 § 16 1ff; 25
7; 2 Ch 29 25, and elsewhere). But David also
bowed in submission when these prophets rebuked
him because of his transgression of the Divine com-
mands (2 8 12,24). Hisson Solomon was educated
by the prophet Nathan. But the destruction of his
kingdom was predicted by the prophet Abijah, the
Shilonite (1 K 11 29 ff). Since Jeh, as the su-
preme Sovereign, has the right to enthrone or to
dethrone kings, this is often done through the
mouths of the prophets (cf 1 K 14 7 ff; 16 1 ff).
After the division of the kingdom we find Shemaiah
forbidding Rehoboam to begin a war with his
ef 2 Ch 11 2ff;
cf another mission of the same prophet, 2 Ch 12
5 ff). On the other hand in the Northern Kingdom
the prophetic word is soon turned against the un-
theocratic rule of Jeroboam (1 K 13,14). It is
in this very same Northern Kingdom that the
prophets unfolded their full activity and generally
in opposition to the secular rulers, although there
was no lack of accommodating “prophets,” who
were willing to sanction everything that the king
wanted. The opposition of the true prophets to
these false representatives of prophecy is illustrated
in the story of Micaiah, the son of Imlah (1 IX 22).
But a still higher type of prophecy above the ordi-
nary is found in Elijah, whose historic mission it was
to fight to the finish the battle between the follow-
ers of Jch and the worship of the Tyrian Baal. He
was entirely a man of action; every one of his words
is a deed on a grand scale (cf concerning Elijah and
Elisha the art. ReLIGiIon oF IsraEL). His suc-
cessor Elisha inherited from him not only his mantle,
but also a double measure of his spiritual gifts. He
exhibits the prophetic office more from its loving
side. He is accustomed to visit the schools of
prophets found scattered throughout the land, calls
the faithful together around himself on the Sabbaths
and the new moons (2 K 4 23), and in this way
establishes centers of a more spiritual culture than
was common elsewhere among the people. We
read that first-fruits were brought to him as to the
priests (2 KX 4 42). But while the activity of Elijah
was entirely in antagonism to the ruling house in
the kingdom, this feature is not entirely lacking in
the work of Elisha also. He has even been charged
with wicked conspiracies against the dynasty of
Omri and the king of Syria (2 K 8,9). His con-
duct in connection with these events can be excused
only on the ground that he was really acting in the
name of a higher Master. But in general it was
possible for Elisha, after the radical change in pub-
lic sentiment that had followed upon the work of
Elijah, in later time to assume a more friendly atti-
tude toward the government and the people. He
often assisted the kings in their arduous contests
with the Syrians (cf 6 8 ff; 13 14 ff). His deeds


2463


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Prophecy


are generally of a benevolent character. In con-
nection with these he exhibits to a remarkable degree
the gift of prophetic foresight (2 K 4 16; 5 26;
6 S8ff; 7 1ff; 81012; 9 6ff; 1319). Jonah,
too, the son of Amittai, had at that time a favor-
eve age for the Northern Kingdom (2 IK
However, the flourishing condition of the king-
dom under Jeroboam II had an unfavorable in-
fluence on its spiritual development.
6. Amos, Soon Amos and Hosea were compelled
Hosea and to announce to this kingdom its im-
the Literary pending destruction throngh a great
Prophets world-power. These two prophets have
, left us books. To put prophetic utter-
ances into written form had already been introduced
before this. At any rate, many scholars are of
the conviction that the prophecies of Obadiah and
Joel belong to an earlier period, although others
place them in the post-exilic period. In any case,
the expectation of a day of settlement by Jeh with
His people was already in the days of Amos common
and current (6 18 ff). As the writing of individual
prophecies (Ilsa 8 1f; 308; Hab 2 2f) had for
its purpose the preserving of these words in per-
manent authentic form and later to convince the
reader of their wonderful fulfilment, thus too the
writing down of larger collections of prophecies had
for its purpose to intensify the power of the prophetic
word and to secure this as a permanent possession
of the people (Jer 30 2; 36 1/f). Pupils of the
prophets assisted them in this writing and in pre-
serving their books (ef Jer 36 4; Isa 8 16).
It is to this custom that we owe our knowledge
of the very words of the utterances of many of the
prophets of a later period. In addi-


7. Poetical tion to the larger books of Isa, Jer,
Form of Ezk, we have a number of smaller
Prophecy prophetical books, which have been

united into the Book of the Twelve
Prophets. These utterances as a rule exhibited


an elevated form of language and are more or less
poetical. However, in modern times some scholars
are inclined to go too far in claiming that these
addresses are given in a carefully systematized
metrical form. Hebrew meter as such is a freer
form of expression than is Arabic or Sanskrit meter,
and this is all the more the case with the discourses
of the prophets, which were not intended for musi-
cal rendering, and which are expressed in a rhyth-
mically constructed rhetoric, which appears now in
one and then in another form of melody, and often
changes into prose.
In the kingdom of Judah the status of the
prophets was somewhat more favorable than it was
in Ephraim. They were indeed forced
8. Prophets in Jerus also to contend against the


in Judah injustice on the part of the ruling
classes and against immorality of all
kinds. But in this kingdom thcre were at any rate


from time to time found kings who walked more in
the footsteps of David. Thus, Asa followed the
directions of the prophet Azariah (2 Ch 16 1 ff).
It is true that the prophet Hanani censured this
king, but it was done for a different reason. Je-
hoshaphat. also regularly consulted the prophets.
Among those who had dealings with him Elisha is
also mentioned (2 K 3 14), as also some other
prophets (cf 2 Ch 19 2; 20 14-37). The greatest
among the prophets during the period of the Assyr
invasions was Isaiah, who performed the duties of
his office for more than 40 years, and under the
kings Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, and possibly too
under Manasseh, through his word exercised a
powerful influence upon the king and the nation.
Although a preacher of judgments, he at critical
times appeared also as a prophet of consolation.


Nor did he despise external evidences of his pro-
phetic office (cf 7 11; 38 22.8). His contemporary
Micah is in full agreement with him, although he
was not called to deal with the great of the land, with
kings, or statesmen, as was the mission of Isaiah.
Nahum, Zephaniah and Habakkuk belong rather
to the period of transition from the Assyr to the
Chaldaean periods. In the days of Josiah the
prophetess Huldah had great influence in Jerus
(2 IX 22 14). Much more important under this
same king was the prophet Jeremiah, who was
called by God for a great mission. This prophet
during the siege and destruction of Jerus and after
that time spoke as an unyielding yet deeply feeling
exponent of God, and was compelled again and
again to dash to the ground the false hopes of the
patriots, whenever these arose. Not so firm was
ae contemporary and fellow-sufferer Uriah (Jer
6 20).
In the time of the exile itself we find the period of
the activity of Ezckiel. It was significant that this
prophet became the recipient of Di-
9. Inthe vine revelations while on Bab terri-
Exile tory. His work was, in accordance
with the condition of affairs, more
that of a pastor and literary man. He seems also
to have been a bodily sufferer. His abnormal con-
ditions became symbolical signs of that which he
had to proclaim. Deutero-Isaiah, too (Isa 40 ff),
spoke during the Bab period, namely at its close,
and prepared for the return. The peculiar prophe-
cies of Daniel are also accorded to a prophet living
during the exile, who occupied a distinguished posi-
tion at the court of the heathen rulers, and whose
apocalyptic utterances are of a kind different from
the discourses of the other prophets, as they deal
more with the political condition of the world and
the drama of history, in so far as this tends toward
the establishment of the supremacy of Jeh. These
prophecies were collected in later times and did not
receive their final and present form until the Gr
period at the beginning of the 2d cent. BC.
After the return from Babylon the Jews were
exhorted by Haggai and Zechariah to rebuild their
temple (about 520 BC). At that time
10. After there were still to be found prophets
the Exile who took a hostile attitude to the men
of God. Thus Nehemiah (Neh 6
6-14) was opposed by hostile prophets as also by
a prophetess, Noadiah. In contrast with these,
Malachi is at all times in accord with the canonical
prophets, as he was an ardent advocate for the
temple cultus of Jeh, not in the sense of a spiritless
and senseless external worship, but as against
the current indifference to Jeh. His style and his
language, too, evidence a late age. The lyrical
form has given way to the didactic. This is also
probably the time when the present Book of Jonah
was written, a didactic work treating of an older
tradition.
Malachi is regarded by the Jews as the last really
canonical prophet. While doubtless there was not
a total lack of prophetically endowed


11. Cessa- seers and speakers of God also in the
tion of closing centuries of the pre-Christian
Prophecy era, nevertheless the general convic-


tion prevailed that the Spirit of God
was no longer present, e.g. in the times of the Macca-
bees (cf 1 Macc 4 46; 9 27; 14 41). It is true
that certain modern critics ascribe some large sec-
tions of the Book of Isa, as well as of other prophets,
even to a period as late as the Gr. But this is re-
futed by the fact mentioned in Eeclus (beginning of
the 2d cent. BC) that in the writer’s time the pro-
phetical Canon appeared already as a closed col-
lection. Dnl is not found in this collection, but the
Book of the Twelve Minor Prophets is. It was


Prophecy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2464


during this period that apocalyptic literature began
to flourish, many specimens of which are found
among the Apoc and the Psendepigrapha. These
books consist of eschatological speculations, not
the product of origina) inspiration, but emanating
from the study of the prophetic word. The very
name Pseudepigrapha shows that the author issued
his work, net under his own name, but under the
pseudonym of some man of God from older times,
such as Enoch, Ezra, Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Baruch, and others. This fact alone proves the
secondary character of this class of literature. See
ApocaLypric LITERATURE.

Malachi finds a successor in John the Baptist,
whose coming the former had predicted. John is
the greatest of the prophets, because
he conld directly point to Him who
completed the old covenant and ful-
filled its promises. All that we know
in addition concerning the times of
Jesus shows that the prophetical gift was yet
thought of as possibly dwelling in many, but that
prophecy was no longer the chief spiritual guide of
the people (cf e.g. Jos, Ant, XIII, xi, 2; XV, x, 5,
among the Essenes, or in the case of Hyrcanus, op.
cit.,, XIII, x, 7). Jos himself claims to have had
prophetic gifts at times (cf BJ, III, viii, 9). He is
thinking in this connection chiefly of the prediction
of some details. Such “prophets” and ‘‘prophet-
esses’”’ are reported also inthe NT. In Jesus Christ
Himself the prophetic office reached its highest
stage of development, as He stood in a more inti-
mate relation than any other being to His Heavenly
Father and spoke His word entirely and at all times.
In the Christian congregation the office of prophecy
is again found, differing from the proclamation of
the gospel by the apostles, evangelists, and teachers.
In the NT the terms mpop%rns, prophétés, wpopy-
tela, prophéteia, mpopynteiw, prophéteid, signify
speaking under the extraordinary influence of
the Holy Ghost. Thus in Acts 11 27f (prophecy
of a famine by Agabus); 21 10f (prediction of the
sufferings of Paul); 13 1{ (exhortation to mission
work); 21 9 ff (prophetical gift of the daughters of
Philip), Paul himself also had this gift (Acts 16
6 ff; 18 9; 22 17 ff; 27 23f). In the public serv-
ices of the church, prophecy occupied a prominent
position (see esp. I Cor 14). A prophetical book
In a special sense is the Apocalypse of St. John.
The gift of prophecy was claimed by many also in
later times. But this gift ceased more and more,
as the Christian church more and more developed
on the historical basis of revelation as completed in
Christ. Esp. in spiritually aroused eras in the his-
tory of the church, prophecy again puts in its appear-
ance. It has never ceased altogether, but on
account of its frequent misnse the gift has become
discredited. Jesus Himself warned against false
prophets, and during the apostolic timesit was often
found necessary to urge the importance of trying
spirits (1 Jn 4 1; 1 Cor 12 10; 14 29).

HI. Historical Development of Prophecy.—The
contents of prophecy are by no means merely pre-

dictions concerning the fntnre. That
1. Contents which is given by the Spirit to the
of Prophecy prophet can refer to the past and to

the present as well as to the future.
However, that which is revealed to the prophet
finds its Inner unity in this, that it all aims to es-
tablish the supremacy of Jeh. Prophecy views
also the detailed events in their relation to the Di-
vine plan, and this latter has for its purpose the
absolute establishment of the supremacy of Jeh in
Israel and eventnally on the entire earth. We are
accustomed to call those utterances that predict
this final purpose the Messianic prophecies. How-
ever, not only those that speak of the person of the


12. Proph-
ecy in
the NT


Messiah belong to this class, but all that treat of
the coming of the kingdom of God.
The beginnings of the religion of Israel, as also
the chief epoch in its development, emanated from
prophetical revelations. The prophet
2. The Idea Moses elevated the tribal religion into
of the a national religion, and at the same
Messiah time taught the people to regard the
religion of the fathers more ethically,
spiritually and vitally. Samuel crowned the earthly
form of the concrete theocracy by introducing an
“Anointed of Jeh’’ in whom the covenant relation
between Jeh and Israel was concentrated personally.
The Anointed of the Lord entered into a much more
intimate relationship to Jeh as His Son or Servant
than it was possible for the whole people of Israel
to do, althongh as a people they were also called
the servant or the son of God (cf Ps 2 7f; 110).
The Pss of David are a proof of this, that this high
destiny of the kingdom was recognized. David
himself became a prophet in those hymns in which
he describes his own unique relation to Jeh. But
the actnal kings of history as a rnle corresponded
too imperfectly to this idea. For this reason the
word “prophetic” already in David's time directs
to the future, when this relationship shall be more
perfectly realized (25 7 12ff; cf David’s own
words, 2 8 28 4 ff). See Mzssiau.
Solomon completed the external equipment. of
the theocracy by the erection of the temple. But
it was just his reign that constituted
3. Before the turning-point, from which time on
the Exile the prophets begin to emphasize the
judgment to come, i.e. the dissolution
of the external existence of the kingdom of Jeh.
Yet prophecy at al] times does this in such a manner,
that a kernel of the Divine establishment on Zion
remains intact. The Divine establishment of the
sanctuary and the kingdom cannot be destroyed;
all that is necessary is that they be restored in
greater purity and dignity. This can be seen also
in Amos, who predicts that the fallen tabernacle of
David shall be raised up again (Am 9 11 ff), which
shall then be followed by a condition of undis-
turbed blessing. The same is fonnd in Hosea, who
sees how al] Israel is again united under ‘‘David”
the king of the last times, when between God and
the people, between heaven and earth, an unbroken
covenant of love shall be made (Hos 2 11.18 ff);
and also in Isaiah, who predicts that during the
time of the conquest and subjection of the country
by the Gentiles a Son of David shall be born ina
miraculous manner and attain supremacy (Isa 7 14;
9 2ff; 11 1 ff), and who speaks constantly of that
Divine establishment on Zion (cf the quiet waters of
Shiloah, 8 6), the foundation stone that has been laid
by Jeh (28 16, etc). Micah, his contemporary, does
the same, and in an entirely similar manner predicts
that the radical judgment of destruction which shall
come over the temple and the royal palace shall be
followed by the wondrous King of Peace from Beth-
lehem (6 1ff). Possibly even at a somewhat earlier
date Zee 9 9 described this future ruler in similar
terms. In general it is not probable that Isaiah and
Micah were the first to speak so personally of this
King. They seem to presuppose that their con-
temporaries were acquainted with this idea.
In recent times scholars have pointed to the fact
that in the old Orient, among the Egyptians, the
Babylonians and elsewhere, the ex-


4. Analo- pectation of a miraculously born King
gous Ideas of the future, who was to bring to His
among own people and to all nations salvation
Heathen and peace, was entertained at an early
Peoples period. Yet so much is certain, that


Isaiah and Micah did not base their
hopes on the vague dreams of the gentile world, but


2465


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Prophecy


upon the prophetic establishment of a Divine sanc-
tuary and kingdom of Zion. The personal figure of
this Son of David is not so much in the foreground
in the other prophets down to the period of the exile.
These prophets mention only casnally the Good
Shepherd, ase.g. Jer 23 1ff; 33 12 ff; Ezk 34 23 f.
But after that time this Messianic expectation be-
came a permanent element in the hopes of Israel.
_In the meanwhile, prophecy had thrown much
light on the ways of God, which prepare for His
kingdom onearth. Even long before Amos (6 18 ff)
the idea of a “day of Jeh,”” which was to be a day of
revelation, on which God makes a settlement with
the nations, must have been generally known, since
Amos is already compelled to protest against the
abuse of this expectation. But hand in hand with
this settlement we find also and at all times the ex-
pectation of the exaltation and of the salvation of
Israel. Yet the prophets have all emphasized that
Israel and Judah must first be thoroughly purified
by a judgment, before the land could, through God’s
grace, be glorified and richly blessed. The judgment
which the preéxilic prophets are continually pre-
dicting is, however, only a means to an end. This
judgment is not the final word of the Lord, as Amos,
Hosea, Isaiah, Micah and Habakkuk constantly
teach. They announce that return to Jeh and
obedience to His commandments is the way to sal-
vation (Hos 6 1; Isa 118; Jer 4 1, and often).
However, the prophets know that the people will not
turn again to God, but that first the Jewish state
must be entirely overthrown (Isa 6). It is par-
ticularly deserving of notice, that believing trust in
Jeh ig regarded as the positive means for deliver-
ance (Isa 7 9; 3015; Hab 24). It is through
this that the “remnant” of the faithful, “the kernel”
of the people, issaved. Also in the case of Jeremiah,
whose work it was to predict the immediate de-
struction of Judah, there is not absent a kind of
an esoteric book of consolation. His battle cry
for the future is “Jeh our righteousness” (23 6;
33 16), In his case we find a rich spiritualization
of religion. The external customs, circumcision
and the like, he declares, do no good, if the true
state of the heart is lacking. Even the ark of the
covenant is unnecessary and is discarded in the
enlargement of the sanctuary. Ezekiel, who lays
more stress on the external ordinances, nevertheless
agrees with Jeremiah in this, that Jerus together
with the temple must fall. Only after this de-
struction the prophet in his spirit builds the sanc-
tnary again; notwithstanding the external character
of his restoration, there is yet found in his picture
a further development of its spiritual character.
The ethical rights and the responsibility of the indi-
vidual are strongly emphasized (chs 18,33). The
land becomes transformed; the Gentiles are re-
ceived into the covenant of God. i
Deutero-Isa (Isa 40-66), during the time of the
Bab captivity, enriches prophecy in an extraordi-
nary manner, through the figure of the
true “Servant of Jeh,’’ who in a peace-
fol way, through his words of instruc-
tion and esp. through his innocent
sufferings and his vicarious deeds, converts Israel,
the undeserving servant, and also wins over the
gentile world to Jeh. It was not possible that the
picture of a suffering man of God, who through his
death as a martyr attains to exaltation, should be
suggested to the Jews by the altogether different
figure of a death and resurrection of a Bab god
(Thammuz-Adonis!). Since the unjust persecu-
tions of Joseph and David they were acquainted
with the sufferings of the just, and Jeremiah’s life
as a prophet was a continuous martyrdom. But
the writer of the second part of Isaiah had before
his eyes a vision that far excelled all of these types


5. During
the Exile


in purity and in greatness to such a degree as did
David’s Son in Isa and Mic surpass His great an-
cestor. He brings to a completion the kingdom of
God through teaching, suffering and death, and
attains to the glory of rnlership. In this way He
unites the offices of prophet, priest and king.
After the exile prophecy continues its work. The
Messianic expectations, too, are developed further
Haggai, and still more by Zecha-
6. After the riah. Malachi announces the advent
Exile of the Day of Jch, but expects before
this a complete purification of the
people of God. God Himself will come, and His
angel will prepare the way for Him. The visions
of Daniel picture the transformation of the world
into a kingdom of God. The latter will mark the
end of the history of the world. It comes from
above; the earthly kingdoms are from below, and
are pictured as beasts; the Ruler of the kingdom of
God is a Son of man. The latter comes with the
clouds of the heaven to take possession of His king-
dom (Dnl 7 13 ff). Then the judgment of the
world will take place and include also each human
being, who before this will bodily arise from the
dead, in order to enter upon blessedness or con-
demnation. Here we find indicated a universal
expansion of the kingdom of God extending over the
whole world and all mankind.
If we survey this prophecy of the kingdom of God
and its Divinely blessed Ruler, the Messiah, from
a Christian standpoint, we find that
7. Con- a grand Divine unity connects its
tempora- different’ elements. The form of this
neous Char- prophecy is indeed conditioned by the
acter of views and ideas of the time of utter-
Prophecy ance. The prophets were compelled
to speak so that their hearers could
understand them. Only gradually these limitations
and forms become spiritualized, e.g. the kingdom of
God is still pictured by the prophets as established
around the local center of Zion. Mt. Zion is in a
concrete manner exalted, in order to give expression
to its importance, etc. It is the NT fulfilment that
for the first time gives adequate form to Divine
revelation. At least in the person of Jesus Christ
this perfection is given, although the full unfolding
of this kingdom is yet a matter of the future.
Asecond characteristic feature of prophecy is the
partial nature of the individual prophetical utter-
ances and prophetical pictures. One
8. Partial picture must be supplemented by the
Character others, in order not to be misunder-
of Prophecy stood. Thus, e.g. according to Isa
11 14; Zec 9 13 ff, we might expect
that the kingdom of God was to be established by
force of arms. But the same prophets show in
other utterances (Isa 9 6f; Zec 9 9f) that these
warlike expressions are to be understood figura-
tively, since the Messianic Xing is more than all
others a Prince of Peace.
A third feature that deserves attention is the
perspective character of prophecy. The prophet
sees together and at once upon the


9. Per- surface of the pictures things which
spective are to be fulfilled only successively and
Character gradually. Thus, e.g. Deutero-Isa sees


of Prophecy in the near future the return from
captivity, and directly connected with
this a miraculous glorification of the city of God.
The return did as a matter of fact take place soon
afterward, but the glorification of the city in which
Jeh Himself had promised to dwell was yet in the
distant future. The succeeding prophets, Haggai
and Zechariah, predict that this consummation
shall take place in the future.
Also in the predictions concerning the future
made by Jesus and in the Apocalypse of St. John,


Prophecy
Proselyte


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2466


these characteristics of prophecy, its contempo-
raneous and perspective and at times symbolical
features, are not disregarded. The firm prophetic
word is intended to give the congregation certain
directive lines and distinctive work. But an ade-
quate idea of what is to come the Christian church
will become compelled to form for itself, when the

fulfilment and completion shall have taken place.
IV. Analogous Phenomena among Gentiles.—
The uniqueness of Bib. prophecy is grasped fully
only when we try to find analogies


1. Necro- among the gentile peoples. Here we
mancy and find everywhere indeed the art of sooth-
Technical saying, the headquarters for which was
Witcheraft Babylon. But with this art the proph-


ecy. of the OT stands ont in bold con-
trast (cf the prohibitions in Lev 19 26.31; 20 6.27;
Dt 18 10ff, prohibitions that refer to necromancy
for the purpose of discovering the future). This
art was practised through a medium, a person who
had an ’obh (Bab ubt), ic. a spirit that brought forth
the dead in order to question them. The spirits
were thought to speak in murmurings or piping
sounds (Isa 8 19), which could be imitated by the
medium (ventriloquist). According to the Law,
which forbade this under penalty of death, Saul
had tried to destroy those who practised incanta-
tions, who generally were women (1 8S 28 9).
This practice, however, continued to flourish. In
addition, the Babylonians and other peoples had also
a developed art of interpretation in order to find
omens for the future. Esp. was the examination of
intestines practised by them. The liver of sacrificial
animals particularly was carefully examined, and,
from this, predictions, good or bad, were inferred
(cf Ezk 21 21). See Divination. This art passed
over from the Babylonians to the seafaring Etrus-
cans, and through these came to the Romans. But
other phenomena also were hy the different na-
tions interpreted as prophetically significant and
were by those skilled in this art interpreted accord-
ingly. Among these were miscarriages by human
beings and animals, the actions of hens, horses,
the flight of birds, earthquakes, forms of the clouds,
lightning, and the like. Further, mechanical con-
trivances were used, such as casting of lots, stones,
sticks, ete.
More spiritual and popular was the interpretation


of dreams. It also was the case that mediums in-
tentionally would convert themselves
2. The into @ semi-waking trance. In this


Mantic Art way the suitable mediums attained to
a certain kind of clairvoyance, found
among various peoples. This approaches the con-
dition of an ecstatically aroused pseudo-prophet,
of whom mention is made above. In Greece, too,
oracles were pronounced by the Pythian prophetess,
who by vapors and the like was aroused to a prac-
tice of the mantic art. In Dodonait was the voice
of the divinity in Nature, which they sought to
read in the rustling of the trees and the murmuring
of the water. How uncertain these sources were
was well known to heathen antiquity. The ancients
complain of the enigmatical character of the Sibyl-
line utterances and the doubtful nature of what was
said. See Greece, Revicion or. In contrast to
this, Israel knows that it possesses in prophecy a
clear word (Nu 23 23).
But the contents also of the Bib. prophecies are
unique through their spiritual uniformity and great-
ness. The oracle at Delphi, too, at
3. Contents times showed a certain moral eleva-


of Extra- tion and could be regarded as the con-
Biblical science of the nation. But how in-
Oracles significant and meager was that which


it offered to those who questioned it,
in comparison with the spontaneous utterances of


the prophets of Israel!


Also what has in recent
times been said concerning the “prophetical texts”
from ancient Egypt (Gressmann, Texte und Bilder,
I, 20 ff) may indeed show some external similarity
to the prophecies of Israel; but they lack the spirit-
ual and religious depth and the strictly ethical
dignity of the prophets of the Scriptures, as also the
consistency with which these from century to cen-
tury reveal the thoughts of God and make known
with constantly increasing clearness their purposes
and goal.

LITERATURE.—Witsius, De prophetis et prophetia, 1731;
Chr. A. Crusius, Hypomnemata ad theologiam propheticam,
Part I, 1764; A. Knobel, Der Prophetismus der Hebréer,
1837; F. B. Koester, Die Prophcten des AT und NT,
1838; B. Duhm, Die Theologie der Propheten; Kuenen,
The Prophets and Prophecy in Israel; F. E. Koenig, Der
Offenbarungsbegrif des AT, 1882; C. von Orelli, Die
alttestamentliche Weitssagung von der. Voliendung des
Gottesreiches, 1882; W. Robertson Smith, The Prophets
of Israel and Their Place in History, 1882; E. Riehm,
Die messianische Weissagung, ET, 1885; Delitzsch,
Messianic Prophecy, 1891; A. T. Kirkpatrick, The Doc-
trine of the Prophets, 1892; G. Fr. Oehler, Theologie
des AT, 1891; Ed. Koenig, Das Berufungsbewusstsein der
alitestamentlichen Propheten, 1900; H. Woods, The
Hope of Israel, > R. Kraetzschmar, Prophet und
Seher im alten Israel, 1902; A. B. Davidson, OT Proph-
ecy, 1903; Eb. Schrader, Die Keilinschriften und das
AT, 1902; C. von Orelli, Allgemeine Religionsgeschichte;
M. Jastrow, Die Religion Babyloniens und Assyriens,
1903; Gressmann, Ursprung der israelitisch-jiidischen
Eschatologie, 1905; W.J. Beecher, The Prophets and the
Promise, 1905; O.S. Mactarland, Jesus and the Prophets,
1905; G. G. Findlay, The Books of the Prophets in Their
Historical Suecession, 1906-7: Gressmann, Alt-orienta-
“sche Texte und Bilder zum AT, 1909; Selwyn, Christian
Prophets.

. VON ORELLI


Cc
PROPHECY, GIFT OF. See Spririruay Girts.


PROPHESYINGS, prof’é-si-ingz, FALSE: The
distinction between the true and the false prophecy
and prophets is very difficult to state. Broadly
speaking, the false prophesying related itself to the
national ideal independently of any spiritual quality,
while the true prophesying ever kept uppermost the
spiritual conception of the national hfe. Among
those given to false prophesying were the ones who
spoke after “the deceit of their own heart” (Jer
14 13.14); those who without real prophetic gift
borrowed a message and assumed the speech of
prophecy (Jer 23 28.31); and those who sought
the prophet’s réle in order to gain the material gifts
which came from the people to their prophets (Mic
3 5). These, when discovered, were counted
worthy of punishment and even death. There
were, however, false prophesyings from men who
honestly believed themselves to have a message
from Jeh. These prophecies from self-deceived
prophets often led the people astray. The dream
of national greatness was substituted for the voice
of Jeh. It was against such prophesying that the
true prophets had to contend. The only test here
was the spiritual character of the utterance, and
this test demanded a certain moral or spiritual
sense which the people did not always possess.
Consequently, in times of moral darkness the false
prophets, predicting smooth things for the nation,
independent of repentance, consecration and the
pursuit of spiritual ideals, were honored above the
true prophets who emphasized the moral greatness
of Jeh and the necessity of righteousness for the
nation. In NT times false prophesying did much
injury in the church. See PRopuHecy.

C. E. Scumnx
. PROPHET, THE OLD. See Oup PropaHet,
IE.


PROPHETESS, prof’et-e3 (M823, nbhi’ah;
tpopitis, prophélis): Women were not excluded
from the prophetic office in the OT, and were
honored with the right of prophetic utterance in the


2467 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Reestat
NT. It should be noted, however, that women | to be kindly disposed. The Gr terms lack the


like Miriam (Ex 15 20), Deborah (Jgs 4 4) and
Huldah (2 IX 22 14) were not credited with the
seer’s insight into the future, but were called
prophetesses’’ beeause of the poetieal inspiration
of their speech. Among others mentioned as having
the prophetic gift we find Hannah (1 8 2 1),
Anna (Lk 2 36) and the four daughters of Philip
(Aets 21 8.9). See Propuer. C. E. Scoenx


_ PROPITIATION, pro-pish-i-a’shun: The word
is Lat and brings into its Eng. use the atmosphere of
heathen rites for winning the favor,


1. Terms or averting the anger, of the gods._In
and — the OT it represents a number of Heb
Meaning words—ten, ineluding derivatives—


which are suffieiently discussed under
ATONEMENT (q.v.), of which propitiation is one
aspect. It represents in LXX the Gr stems tdack-,
hilask- (ide-, hile-), and xaradday-, katallag-, with
derivatives; in the NT only the latter, and is rarely
used. Propitiation needs to be studied in eonnection
with reconeiliation, which is used frequently in some
of the most strategic sentences of the NT, esp. in the
newer VSS. In He 2 17, ERV and ARV have both
changed “Treconeiliation” of AV to_“propitiation,”
to make it correspond with the OT use in con-
nection with the saerifice on the Day or ATONE-
MENT (q.v.). Lk 18 13 (‘‘God, be thou merciful
{m “be propitiated’”’] to me the sinner” [ARVm]);
He 8 12 (quoted from LXX); and Mt 16 22 (an
idiomatic asseveration like Eng. “mercy on us”) will
help in getting at the usage in the NT. In LXX
hilastérion is the term for the “mercy-seat”’ or “lid
of the ark” of the covenant which was sprinkled
with blood on the Day of Atonement. It is em-
ployed in exaetly this sense in He 9 5, where later
VSS have in m “‘the propitiatory.”

Elsewhere in the NT this form is found only in
Rom 8 25, and it is here that difficulty and differ-
ence are found extensively in interpreting. Greek
fathers generally and prominent modern seholars
understand Paul here to say that God appointed
Christ Jesus to be the ‘‘merey-seat” for sinners.
The reference, while primarily to the Jewish cere-
monial in tabernacle and temple, would not depend
upon this reference for its comprehension, for the
idea was general in religious thought, that some
place and means had to be provided for securing
friendly meeting with the Deity, offended by man’s
sin. In He partieularly, as elsewhere generally,
Jesus Christ is presented as priest and_ sacrifice.
Many modern writers (cf Sanday and Headlam),
therefore, object that to make Him the “merey-
seat” here complicates the figure still further, and
so would understand hilastérion as “‘expiatory sac-
rifice.’ While this is not impossible, it is better to
take the word in the usual sense of ‘“merey-seat.”’
It is not necessary to complicate the illustration by
bringing in the idea of priest at all here, since Paul
does not do so; mercy-seat and sacrifice are both in
Christ. dacs, hilasmés, is found in the NT only
in 1 Jn 2 2; 4 10. Here the idea is aetive grace,
er merey, or friendliness. The teaching corre-
sponds exaetly with that in Rom. ‘Jesus Christ
the righteous” is our ‘‘Advoeate [m “Helper’’] with
the Father,” beeause He is aetive mercy concerning
(rept, pert) our sins and those of the whole world.
Or (4 10), God “loved us, and sent his Son to be
the propitiation for [active mercy concerning] our
sins.’ This last passage is parallel with Rom 3
25, the one dealing with the abstract theory, and so
Christ is set forward as a “merey-seat,” the other
dealing with experience of grace, and so Christ is
the mercy of God in conerete expression.

The basal idea in Heb terms is that of covering
what is offensive, so restoring friendship, or eausing


physieal reference to eovering but introduce the

idea of friendliness where antagonism
2. Theo- would be natural; hence graciousness.
logical Naturally, therefore, the idea of expia-
Implication tion entered into the concept. It is esp.

to be noted that all provisions for this
friendly relation as between God and offending
man find their initiation and provision in God and
are under His direction, but involve the active re-
sponse of man. All heathen and unworthy con-
ceptions are removed from the Christian notion of
propitiation by the fact that God Himself proposed,
or “set forth,” Christ as the ‘“merey-seat,’’ and that
this is the supreme. expression of ultimate love.
God had all the while been merciful, friendly, ‘‘pass-
ing over’ man’s sins with no apparently adequate,
or just, ground for doing so. Now in the blood of
Christ sin is condemned and expiated, and God is
able to establish and maintain His character for
righteousness, while He continues and extends His
dealing in gracious love with sinners who exercise
faith in Jesus. The propitiation originates with
God, not to appease Himself, but to justify Himself
in His uniform kindness to men deserving harsh-
ness. Cf also as to reconeiliation, as in Rom 6
1-11; 2 Cor 6 18 ff. See also Jonannine THEOL-
oay, V, 2.

Lirrerature.—Besides the comms., the literature is
the same as for ATONEMENT, torccent works on whichadd
Stalker, The Atonement; Workman, At Onement, or Recon-
ctliation with God; Moberly, in Foundations, Christian
Belief in Terms of Modern Thought.

Wiii1am OwENn CaRVER

PROPORTION, pré-por’shun: Oceurs once in
the sense of “space” as the tr of WY2, ma‘ar, “void
or open space” (1 K 7 36, AVm “Heb ‘nakedness,’”
RV “space”’); onee in the obsolete sense of ‘‘form”
as the tr of ‘erekh, ‘‘array,” or “row” (Job 41 12,
RV ‘‘frame’); and onee in the sense of ‘“‘measure”’
as the tr of analogia, ‘‘proportion,” ‘equality”
(Rom 12 6, ‘the proportion of faith,” RV “the
proportion of our faith’’). ‘‘Proportionally” occurs
in Wisd 13 5, analdgds, RV “in like proportion,”
m “eorrespondently.”’


PROSELYTE, pros’é-lit (wpowfAuvtos, prosé-
lutos, from prosérchomai, ‘TI approach’): Found 4 t
inthe NT. In the LXX it often oecurs as the tr of
"4, gér. The Heb vb. gar means “to sojourn”;
ger aceordingly means a stranger who has come to
settle in the land, as distinguished on the one hand
from ’ezrah, ‘‘a homeborn” or ‘“native,’”’ and on the
other from nokhri or ben-nékhar, which means a
stranger who is only passing through the country.
Yet it is to be noted that in 2 Ch 2 17 those of the
native tribes still living in the land as Amorites,
Hittites, ete, are also ealled gértm. In two places
(Ex 12 19; Isa 14 1) LXX uses g[e]ééras, which is
derived from giyér, the Aram. equivalent for gér.
LXX uses pdroikos (the Gr equivalent for Heb
toshabh, “‘a settler’) for gér when Israel or the pa~
triarchs are indieated (Gen 16 13; 23 4; Ex 2 22;
18 3; Dt 23 7; 1 Ch 29 15; Ps 39 12; 119 19;
Jer 14 8), and ina few other cases. In Talmudieal
lit. g@r always stands for proselyte in the NT sense,
ie. a Gentile who has been converted to Judaism.
Onkelos, who was himself a proselyte, always trans-
lates the word in this way.

No difficulties were put in the way of those
strangers who wished to settle down in the land of


Israel. All strangers, the third gen-
1. Gerin ration of Egyptians and Edomites
the OT ineluded, and only Ammonites and


Moabites excluded, could enter ‘‘the
congregation of God’? without circumcision and
without the obligation to keep the eeremonial law.


Proselyte
Proverb


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2468


‘The stranger within the gate’ was free to cat meat
which was prohibited to the Israelite (Dt 14 21).
If, however, the stranger wished to take part in the
Passover, a feast permeated with national ideals,
he must be circumcised. The keeping of the Sab-
bath and other feasts was regarded rather as a
privilege than as a duty (Ex 23 12; Dt 16 11.14);
but according to Lev 16 29 the gér was obliged to
keep the fast of Atonement. He was forbidden
on pain of death to blaspheme (Lev 24 16) or to
offer children to Molech (Lev 20 2). If he de-
sired to bring a burnt offering, the same law applied
to him as to the Israelites (Lev 17 8; 22 18).
Though the law of circumcision was not forced upon
the gér, it seems that the Mosaic Law endeavored
to bring him nearer to the cult of Israel, not from
ahy proselytizing motives, but in order to preserve
the theocracy from admixture of foreign elements,
which would speedily have proved fatal to its
existence.

Though the God of Israel, when He is thought
of only as such, ceases to be God; though Israel
was chosen before all nations for all nations; though
Israel had been again and again reminded that the
Messiah would bring a blessing to all nations; and
though there were instances of pagans coming to
believe in Jeh, yet it did not belong to the economy
of OT religion to spread the knowledge of God
directly among the Gentiles (the Book of Jon is au
exception to this). There was certainly no active
propagandism. ‘Though we read in Neh 10 28 of
those who ‘separated themselves from the peoples
of the lands unto the law of God” (cf Isa 56 3,
“the foreigner, that hath joined himself to Jeh’’—
the only and exact description of a proselyte proper
in the OT), the spirit of exclusiveness prevailed;
the doubtful elements were separated (Ezr 4 3);
mixed marriages were prohibited by the chiefs, au
were afterward disapproved of by the people (Ezr
9, 10; Neh 13 23 ff). Direct proselytism did not
begin till about a century later.

The preaching of the gospel was preceded and’
prepared for by the dispersion of the Jews, and a
world-wide propagandism of Judaism.
In the 5th cent. BC the Jews had a
temple of their own at Syene. Alex-
ander the Great settled 8,000 Jews
in the Thebais, and Jews formed a third of the
population of Alexandria. Large numbers were
brought from Pal by Ptolemy I (320 BC), and they
gradually spread from Egypt along the whole
Mediterranean coast of Africa. After the perse-
cution of Antiochus Epiphanes (170 BC) they seat-
tered themselves in every direction, and, In the
words of the Sibylline Oracles (c 160 BC), “crowded
with their numbers every ocean and country.”
There was hardly a seaport or a commercial center
in Asia Minor, Macedonia, Greece, or the Islands
of the AZgean, in which Jewish communities were
not to be found. Jos (Ant, XIV, vii, 2) quotes
Strabo as saying: “It is hard to find a place in the
habitahle earth that hath not admitted this tribe
of men, and is not possessed by them.” Thus, in
spite of the hatred and contempt which Judaism
everywhere excited, its lofty, austere and spiritual
religious aspirations and conceptions became known
to the pagan world and exercised a profound at-
traction upon many souls that were deeply dis-
satisied with contemporary religions. Judaism
was at that period filled with missionary zeal and
aspired to world-mastery. Many books on Juda-
ism (e.g. the Sibylline Oracles) were written anony-
mously by Jews in order to influence pagan readers.
The synagogue, which had become the center of
Jewish worship, now opened its doors widely to the
pagan world (cf Acts 16 21), and many of the ser-
mons delivered there were directly aimed at the


2. Prose-
lytizing


conversion of pagans. The Jews began to feel that
they were ‘‘a guide of the blind, a light of them that
are in darkness” (Rom 2 19). Ps

Not only Jos (CAp, I; BJ, VIL, iii, 3), but also
Seneca (Apud Aug. De Civit. Dei vi.11), Dio Cassius
(xxxvii.17), Tacitus (Ann. ii.85; Hist. v.5), Horace
(Sat. 1.4, 142), Juvenal (Sat. xiv.96 fi), and other Gr
and Rom writers testify to the widespread effects of
the proselytizing propaganda of the Jews.

Many gladly frequented the synagogues and kept
some of the Jewish laws and customs. Among
those were to be found the ‘‘men who feared God,”
spoken of in Acts. They were so called to distin-
guish them from full proselytes; and it was probably
for this class that tablets of warning in the temple
were inscribed in Gr and Lat. y

Another class kept practically all the Jewish laws
and customs, but were not circumcised. Some
again, though not. circumcised, had their children
circumcised (Juvenal Sat. xiv.96 ff). Such Jewish
customs as fasting, cleansings, abstaining from pork,
lighting the candles on Friday evening, and keeping
the Sabbath (Jos, CAp, II, 29, etc) were observed
by these gentile sympathizers. Schiwer holds that
there were congregations of Greeks and Romans in
Asia Minor, and probably in Rome, which, though
they had no connection with the synagogue, formed
themselves into gatherings after the pattern of the
synagogue, and observed some of the Jewish customs.

Among the converts to Judaism there were prob-
ably few who were circumcised, and most of those
who were circumcised submitted to the rite in order
to marry Jewesses, or to enjoy the rights and privi-
leges granted to the Jews by Syrian, Egyp and Rom
rulers (Jos, Ant, XIV, vii, 2; XX, vii, 1; ef XVI,
vii, 6). It would appear from Christ’s words (Mt
23 15, “one proselyte’”’) that the number of full
proselytes was not large. Hyrcanus forced the
Edomites to adopt Judaism by circumcision (129
BC); and on other occasions the same policy of
propagandism by force was followed. Jos tells an
interesting story (Ané, XX, ii, 1) of the conversion
of Queen Helena of Adiabene and her two sons.
The conversion of the sons was due to the teaching
of a merchant called Ananias, who did not insist
ou circumcision. Later, another Jew, Eliezer of
Galilee, told the young princes that it was not
enough to read the Law, but that they must keep it
too, with the result that both were circumcised.
From this it is evident that Jewish teachers of the
gentile converts varied in the strictness of their
teaching.

The word ‘“‘proselyte”’ occurs 4 t iu the NT; once
in Mt (23 15), where Our Lord refers to the pros-

elytizing zeal of the Pharisees, and


3. Prose- to the pernicious influence which they
lytes in exerted on their converts; and 38 t in
the NT Acts. Proselytes were present at Pen-


tecost (Acts 2 10); Nicolas, one of the
deacous appointed by the primitive church at
Jerus, was a proselyte (6 5); and after Paul had
spoken in the synagogue at Antioch of Pisidia, many
devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas
(13 43). It is to be noted in this last case that the
proselytes are called sebémenot, a word generally
reserved for another class. Certain people are
spoken of iu Acts as phobotimenoi ton theon, “fearing
God” (10 2.22.35; 13 16.26), and as sebémenoi tén
thedn, “reverencing God,’ or simply sebémenot
(13 50; 16 14; 17 4.17; 18 7). These seem (as
against Bertholet and #B) to have been sym-
pathizers with Judaism, who attended the worship
of the synagogue, but were not circumcised. It
was among this class that the gospel made its first
converts among the Gentiles. Those who were
fully prosclytes were probably as fanatical oppo-
nents of Christianity as were the Jews.


2469


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Proselyte
Proverb


From the old strict Pharisaic-Palestinian point
of view, circumcision, with the addition of baptism
and the offering of sacrifice, was in-


4. Ger dispensable (so to Paul every circum-
in the cised person was a Jew; cf Gal 6 3);
Talmud and thus their converts had to submit


ey to the whole burden of the Mosaic and
traditional Law. The rabbinic distinction between
ger toshabh, “‘a settler,” and gér cedhek, “‘a proselyte
of righteousness,” is, according to Schirer, only
theoretical, and arose at alater date (Babha’ Mect'a’
5 6.9.12; Makkoth 23; Negha'tm 31, et al.).

While the gér gedhek (or gér ha-brith, “proselyte
of the covenant’’) was considered as being in every
respect a “perfect Israelite,” the gér téshabh (or
ger sha‘ar, “proselyte of the gate’; cf Ex 20 10)
only professed his faith in the God of Israel, and
bound himself to the observance of the 7 Noachic
precepts, abstinence from blasphemy, idolatry,
homicide, fornication, robbery, eating the flesh of an
animal] that had died a natural death, and disobe-
dience to (Jewish) authority (Sanh. 56a; cf Acts
16 20.29; 21 25). He was considered more of
a Gentile than a Jew.

Three things were required for the admission of
a proselyte, circumcision, baptism, and the offering
of sacrifice (Ber. 47b; Y*bham. 46), 46a, 48b, 76a;
*Abhoth 67a, et al.). In the case of women only
baptism and the offering of sacrifice were required;
for that reason there were more women converts
thanmen. Jos (BJ, II, xx, 2) tells how most of the
women of Damascus were addicted to the Jewish
religion. Doubt has been expressed as to the neces-
sity of proselytes being baptized, since there is no
mention of it by Paul or Philo or Jos, but it is prob-
able that a Gentile, who was unclean, would not
be admitted to the temple without being cleansed.

The proselyte was received in the following man-
ner. He was first asked his reason for wishing to
embrace Judaism. He was told that Israel was in a
state of affliction; if he replied that he was aware
of the fact and felt himself unworthy to share these
afflictions, he was admitted. Then he received
instruction in some of the “light”? and “heavy”
commandments, the rules concerning gleaning and
tithes, and the penalties attached to the breach of
the commandments. If he was willing to submit
to all this, he was circumcised, and after his recovery
he was immersed without delay. At this Jatter
ceremony two “disciples of the wise’ stood by to
tell him more of the “light” and “heavy’’ com-
mandments. When he came up after the immer-
sion, those assembled addressed him saying: ‘Unto
whom hast thou given thyself? Blessed art thou,
thou hast given thyself to God; the world was
created for the sake of Israel, and only Israelites
are called the children of God. The afflictions, of
which we spoke, we mentioned only to make thy
reward the greater.” After his baptism he was
considered to be a new man, “‘a little child newly
born” (Y°bham. 22a, 47a, 48b, 97b); a new name was
given him; either he was named “Abraham the son
of Abraham,” or the Scriptures were opened at
hazard, and the first name that was read was given
to him. Thenceforth he had to put behind him
all his past; even his marriage ties and those of
apn no longer held good (cf Y'bhdm. 22a; Sanh.
58d).

Although he was thus juridically considered a
new man, and one whose praises were sung in the
Talmudical literature, he was yet on the whole
looked down on as infcrior to a born Jew (Kidd.
47; Shebhi'oth 10 9, et al.). Rabbi Chelbo said:
“Proselytes are as injurious to Israel as a scab”
(Y°bham. 47; Kidd. 70b; cf Phil 3 5). See also
STRANGER.


LiteratTure.—See articles on ‘*Proselyte’’ and ‘' Gér”’
In EB, HDB, Jew Ene, and RE; Slevogt, De proselytis
Judaecorum, 1651; A. Bertholet, Die Stellung der Israeli-
ten und der Juden zu den Fremden, 1896; Schiircr, HJP,
1898; Huidekoper, Judaism at Rome, 1887; Harnack,
Mission und Ausbrettung dea Christentums, 1906, ET;
Allen, ‘On the Meaning of prosélutos in the Septuagint,”
Expos, 1894; A. B. Davidson, ‘‘They That Fear the
Lord,” Expos T, III (1892), 491 ff.

: _ _Paut LeverTorr
_PROSEUCHE, pré-sti’ké, PROSEUCHA, pri-
si’ka (rpocevyh, proseuché): “A place in the open
air where the Jews were wont to pray, outside of
those cities where they had no synagogue,” Acts
16 13.16 (Thayer, Lexicon of the NT). See Putuiprr.


PROSTITUTION, pros-ti-ti’shun.
Har.ot; Punisumenrs.


PROSTRATION, pros-tra’shun.


Sec Crimus;


See ATTITUDES.


PROTEVANGELIUM, pro-té-van-jel’ium, OF
JAMES. See Arocrypuan Gospsxs, III, 1, (a).


PROVE, proov (02, bahan, 02, ndsah; Som-
pate, dokimdzd, wepétw, peirdzd): Means (1) to
test or try; (2) to establish, demonstrate; (3) to
find by experience. It is for the most part in the
first (original) sense that the word is found in
Scripture. In the OT it is most frequently the tr
of nasdh, primarily “‘to lift,’ hence to weigh (Gen
42 15.16, etc). God is said to “prove’’ His people,
i.e. to test or try them for their good (Gen 22 1;
Ex 16 25; Dt 8 16, etc). The Psalmist prays
that God may prove him (Ps 26 2). The word is
frequently rendered “tempt.’’ See Trempr. The
word bahan, primarily “to try by heat,” has a
similar meaning (Ps 17 3, the heart, like metal,
purified from dross; cf Job 23 10; Ps 79; Mal
3 2, etc). In the NT the word most frequently
rendered “prove” (sometimes “‘try’’) is dokimaz6é
(Lk 1419; Rom 122; 2 Cor 88.22; 13 5;
Eph 6 10; 1 Thess 6 21). Peirazd, “to tempt,”
“to prove,” used in both a good and a bad sense,
frequently tr? “tempt” (q.v.), is rendered “prove”
in Jn 6 6, ‘This he said to prove him.” Both Gr
words occur frequently in Apoc (Wisd and Ecclus).
RV has “prove” for ‘tempt’? (Gen 22 1); for
“make” (Job 24 25; Gal.2 18); for ‘manifest”
(Eccl 3 18); for “examine” (1 Cor 11 28); for
“try” (1 Cor 3 13; 1 Jn 4 1), etc.

W. L. WaLKER

PROVENDER, prov’en-dér ([1] 8120, mispd’,
from obs. ¥ N2O, sdapha’, “to feed,” fodder
for cattle in general [Gen 24 25.32; 42 27; Jgs
19 19.21]; [2] D°53, bell, from y O32, balal, “to
mix”: ‘‘Loweth the ox over his fodder?” [Job 6
5]; YraT pits belal hadmig: ‘The young asses that
till the ground shall eat savory [Heb “salted’’]
provender”’ [Isa 30 24]; this is fodder mixed with
salt or aromatic herbs): The ordinary provender
in Pal, besides fresh pasturage, is tibn, i.e. straw
broken on the threshing floor, kursenneh (Vetch,
Vicia ervilia), given esp. to camels and milch cows;
bran, for fattening and esp. in cold weather; and,
occasionally, hay made from the dried mixed grass
and herbs which spring up luxuriously after the
rains. The Circassian colonists KE. of the Jordan
are teaching their neighbors the value of this food,
so long neglected. E. W. G. MasrerMan


PROVERB, prov’érh (502, madshal, “IN,
hidhah; wapaBod4, parabolé [Lk 4 23], Tapoipla,
paroimia [Jn 16 25.29]):

I. Fork Meanine ano Usp

1. The Primitive Sense


2. The Communal Origin
3. Animus of Proverbs


Proverb
Proverbs, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2470


II. ULrrerary DEVELOPMENT OF THE PROVERB
1. Discovery of Literary Value
2. The Differentiation
III. As Unit or 4 Strain or LIreratTuReE
1. From Detachment to Continuity
2. The Conception of Wisdom
3. In Later Time
By this term mainly, but sometimes by the term
“parable” (e.g. Nu 23 7.18; 24 3.15; Job 27 1;
29 1), is tr? the Heb word mashal (2°), which
designates the formal unit or vehicle of didactic
discourse. The mdshGl was an enunciation of
truth, self-evident and_self-illustrative, in some
pointed or concentrated form adapted to arrest
attention, awaken responsive thought, and remain
fixed in memory. Its scope was broader than that
of our word “proverb,” taking in subject-matter
as well as form. The mdshdl broadened indeed in
the course of its history, until it became the char-
acteristic idiom of Heb philosophy, as distinguished
from the dialectic method of the Greeks. The Heb
mind was not inductive but intuitive; it saw and
asserted; and the word méshal is the generic term
for the form in which its assertion was embodied.
I, Folk Meaning and Use.—The miéshal, nearly
in our sense of proverb, traces back to the heart and
life of the common folk; it is a native


1. The form reflecting in a peculiarly intimate
Primitive way the distinctive genius of the Heb
Sense people. As to the primitive sense of


the word, it is usually traced to a root
meaning ‘likeness,’ or “comparison,” as if the
first sense of it were of the principle of analogy
underlying it; but this derivation is a guess. The
word is just as likely to be connected with the vb.
mashal, ‘‘to rule’ or ‘‘master”’; so by a natural
secondary meaning to denote that statement which
gives the decisive or final verdict, says the master
word. The idea of how the thing is said, or by
what phrasing, would be a later differentiation,
coming in with literary refinement.
The earliest cited proverb (1 8 10 12, repeated
with varied oceasion, 1 8 19 24) seems to have
risen spontaneously from the pcople’s
2. The observation. That Saul the son of
Communal Kish, whose very different tempera-
Origin ment everybody knew, should be sus-
ceptible to the wild ecstasy of strolling
prophets was an astonishing thing, as it were a dis-
covery in psychology; ‘‘Therefore it became a
proverb, Is Saul also among the prophets?” A
few years later David, explaining his clemency in
sparing the life of the king who has become his
deadly foe, quotes from a folk fund of proverbs:
18 24 13, “As saith the proverb of the ancients,
Out of the wicked cometh forth wickedness; but
my hand shall not be upon thee.” The prophet
Ezekiel quotes a proverb which evidently embodies
a popular belief: ‘‘The days are prolonged, and
every vision faileth”; which he corrects to, “The
days are at hand, and the fulfilment of every vision”
(Ezk 12 22.23). Both Ezekiel and Jeremiah (Ezk
18 2; Jer 31 29) quote the same current proverb,
“The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the
children’s teeth are set on edge,” in order to an-
nounce that the time has come for its discontinu-
ance. These last two examples are very in-
structive. They show how the body of the people
put the inwardness of their history into proverb
form, as it were a portable lesson for the times;
they show also how the prophets availed themselves
of these floating sayings to point their own message.
Ezekiel seems indeed to recognize the facility with
which a situation may bring forth a proverb: Ezk
16 44, ‘‘Every one that useth proverbs shall use
this proverb against thee (lit. every one that mda-
shals shall mdshal against thee], saying, As is the
mother, so is her daughter.”


One element of the proverb, which a wide-awake
people like the Hebrews would soon discover, was
its adaptability for personal portrayal
8. Animus or satire, like a home thrust. Hence
of Proverbs the popular use of the name mashal
came to connote its animus, generally
of sarcasm or scorn. The taunting verse raised
against Heshhon, Nu 21 27-30, is attributed to
them “that speak in proverbs” (m*shdlim); and
Isaiah’s taunt in his burden of Babylon (Isa 14
4-20) is composed in the proverb measure: ‘“Thou
shalt take up this parable [mashal, AV ‘‘proverb”’]
against the king of Babylon.” Answering to this
prevailing animus of proverbs was a corresponding
susceptibility to their sting and rankle; they were
the kind of utterance that most surely found the
national and individual self-consciousness. To be
a proverb—to be in everybody’s mouth as a subject
of laughter, or aga synonym for some awful atrocity
—was about the most dreadful thing that could
befall them. To be ‘‘a reproach and a proverb, a
taunt and a curse” (Jer 24 9) was all one. That
this should be the nation’s fate was held as a threat
over them by lawgiver and prophet (Dt 28 37;
1 K 9 7); and in adversities of experience, both
individual and collective, the thing that was most
keenly felt was to have become a byword (mdashal)
(Ps 44 14; 69 11).
Il, Literary Development of the Proverb.—The
rank of proverb was by no means attributed to
every popular saying, however the


1. Dis- people might set store by it. If its
covery of application was merely local (e.g. 2 §
Literary 20 18; Gen 22 14) or temporary (note
Value how Jeremiah and Ezckiel announce


popular sayings as obsolete), it re-
mained in its place and time. About the proverb,
on the other hand, there was the sense of a value
universal and permanent, fitting it for literary
immortality. Nor was the proverb itself a run-
wild thing, at the shaping of the crowd; from the
beginning it was in the hands of “those who speak
in m'shélim,” whose business it was to put it into
skilful wording. The popular proverb, however,
and the literary proverb were and continued two
different things. There came a time, in the lit-
erary development of Israel, when the value of the
mdashal as a vehicle of instruction came to be recog-
nized; from which time a systematic cultivation
of this type of discourse began. That time, as
seems most probable, was the reign of King Solo-
mon, when in a special degree the people awoke to
the life and industry and intercourse and wealth
of the world around them. The king himself was
‘Iarge hearted’ (1 IX 4 29), versatile, with liter-
ary tastes; “spake three thousand proverbs; and
his songs were a thousand and five”; and his whole
generation, both in Israel and surrounding nations,
was engaged in a vigorous movement of thought
and “wisdom” (see the whole passage, I K 4 29-
34). For the unit and vehicle of this new thought
the old native form of the mdashal or proverb was
chosen; it became the recognized medium of popu-
lar education and counsel, esp. of the young; and
the ma@shal itself was molded to the classic form,
condensed, pointed, aphoristic, which we see best
exemplified in the Book of Prov 10—22 16—
probably the earliest collection of this kind of
literature. In this body of proverbs we see also
that instead of retaining the unbalanced single
assertion of the popular proverb, as it appears in
1 8 10 12; 24 13, these composers of literary
proverbs borrowed the poetic parallelism, or
couplet, which in two lines sets two statements
over against each other by antithesis or repeti-
tion, and cultivated this to its most condensed and
epigrammatic construction. Thus the mdshdl took


2471


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Proverb
Proverbs, Book of


to itself a literary self-consciousness and became
a work of art.
Up to the time of this literary development a
proverb was recognized simply as a proverb, with
___ little sense of its various phases, cxcept
2. The Dif- that there was a strong popular tend-
ferentiation ency to identify it with satire, and with
less thought of the clements of its life
and power. With the refinement of form, however,
came a recognition of its inwardness. Under the
generic term mdshal, certain elements were differ-
entiated; not, however, as we are wont to distin-
guish—parable, fable, apologue, allegory—these
remamed undifferentiated. The most funda-
mental distinction of classes, perhaps, is given in
Prov 1 6: “To understand a proverb, and a figure,
the words of the wise, and their dark sayings.”
Here it seems the word “proverb” (mdshdl) and
“words of the wise,” paired off with each other, are
the generic terms; the other two, the differentiating
terms, name respectively the two fundamental di-
rections of the mdshal, toward the clear and toward
the enigmatic. Both are essential elements. The
word tr4 “figure” cmap , mélicah) is rather ‘“‘inter-
pretation,’’ and seems to refer to the illuminative
element of the mashdal, and this was mainly analogy.
Natural objccts, phases of experience, contrasts
were drawn into the méshal to furnish analogies
for life; Solomon’s use of plants and animals in
his discourses (1 K 4 33) was not by way of
natural history, but as analogies to illustrate his
m'shalim. The word tr? “dark sayings” (NIT,
hidhoth) is the word elsewhere tr® “riddle” (Sam-
son’s riddle, for instance, was a hidhdh, Jgs 14
13.14), and refers to that quality of the proverb
which, by challenging the hearer’s acumen, gives it
zest; it is due to an association of things so indi-
rectly related that one must supply intermediate
thoughts to resolve them. All of this of course
goes to justify the proverb as a capital vehicle for
instruction and counsel; it has the elements that
appeal to attention, responsive thought, and
memory, while on the other hand its basis of anal-
ogy makes it illuminative.

I. As Unit of a Strain of Literature.—Until
it reached its classic perfection of phrasing, say

during the time from Solomon to
1. From Hezekiah, the formal development of
Detachment the proverb was concentrative; the
to Con- single utterance disposed of its whole
‘tinuity subject, as in a capsule. But the de-

velopment of the mashal form from the
antithetic to the synonymous couplet gave rise to
a proverb in which the explanatory member did
not fully close the case; the subject craved further
elucidation, and so a group of several couplets was
sometimes necessary to present a case (cf: g. about
the sluggard, Prov 26 13-16). From this group
of proverbs the transition was easy to a continuous
passage, in which the snappy parallelism of the
proverb yields to the flow of poetry; see e.g. Prov
27 23-27, - This is due evidently to a more pene-
trative and analytic mode of thinking, which can
no longer satisfy its statement of truth in a single
illustration or maxim. :

As the store of detached utterances on various
phases of practical life accumulated and the task
of collecting them was undertaken, it
was seen that they had a common
suffusion and bearing, that in fact they
constituted a distinctive strain of lit-
erature. The field of this literature
was broad, and recognized (see Prov 1 1-5) as
promotive of many intellectual virtues; but the
inclusive name under which it was gathered was
Wisdom (MOT, hokhmah). Wisdom, deduced


- 2. The
Conception
of Wisdom


thus from a fund of maxims and analogies, became
the Heb equivalent for philosophy. With the
further history of it this article is not concerned,
except to note that the mdshdal or proverb form held
itself free to expand into a continuous and extended
discourse, or to hold itself in to the couplet form.
As to illustrative quality, too, its scope was liberal
enough to include a fully developed parable; see
for mstance Ezk 17 1-10, whcre the prophet is
bidden to “put forth a riddle, and speak a parable
[lit. ma@shal a mashdil] unto the house of Israel.”
The existence of so considerable a body of prov-
erbs is a testimony to the Heb genius for senten-
tious and weighty expression, a virtue
3. In Later of specch which was held in special
Time esteem. From the uses of practical
wisdom the méshél form was bor-
rowed by the later scribes and doctors of the law;
we sce it for instance in loose and artificial use in
such books as Pirké ’Abhdth, which gives the im-
pression that the uttcrance so grandly represented in
the Solomonic proverbs had become decadent. It
is in another direction rather that the virtues of the
mashal reach their culmination. In the phrasal
felicity and illustrative lucidity of Our Lord’s dis-
courses, and not less in His parables, employed that
the multitude “may see and yet not see’ (Mk 4
12), we have the values of the ancient mdshdl in
their perfection, in a literary form so true to its ob-
ject that we do not think of its artistry at all. See
also Gaus, I, 6. Joun FRanKLIN GENUNG


PROVERBS, prov’érbz, BOOK OF:


I. Tue Boor's Account or Irsetr
1. Title and Headings
2. Authorship or Literary Species?
Ii. Tue Successive ComPiLtations
. The Introductory Section
- The Classic Nucleus
. A Body of Solicited Counsel
. Some Left-over Precepts
The Hezekian Collection
. Words of Agur
. Words of King Lemuel
8. An Acrostic Eulogy of Woman
III. Movement towarp A Puitosopyuy
1. Liberation of the mashal
2. Emergence of Basal Principles
3. The Conception of Wisdom
IV. ConstpErations OF AGE AND Literary Kinsnip
1. Under the Kings
2. The Concentrative Point
3. Its Stage in Progressive Wisdom


The Scripture book which in both the Heb and
the Gr arrangements of the OT Canon immediately
succeeds the Pss. In the Heb Canon it stands
second in the final or supplementary division called
kethiibhim (LXX Mapoiwlar, Paroimiat), “writings”;
placed there probably because it would be most
natural to begin this section with standard col-
lections nearest at hand, which of course would be
psalms and proverbs. This book is an anthology
of sayings or lessons of the sages on life, character,
conduct; and as such embodies the distinctively
educative strain of Heb literature.

I. The Book’s Account of Itself.—At the begin-
ning, intended apparently to cover the whole work,

stands the title: ‘The proverbs of
1. Title and Solomon the son of David, king of
Headings Israel.” It seemed good to the com-

pilers, however, to repeat, or perhaps
retain an older heading, “The proverbs of Solo-
mon” at ch 10, as if in some special] sense the col-
lection there beginning deserved it; and at ch 25
still another heading occurs: “These also are prov-
erbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king
of Judah copied out.’’ All these ascribe the prov-
erbs to Solomon; but the heading (80 1), ‘“The
words of Agur the son of Jakeh; the oracle,” and
the heading (31 1), ‘“The words of king Lemuel;
the oracle which his mother taught him,” indicate


SIO OTR CODD


Proverbs, Bookof THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2472


that authorship other than that of Solomon is rep-
resented; while the mention of ‘‘the words of the
wise” (1 6; 22 17), as also the definite heading,
“These also are sayings of the wise” (24 23), ascribe
parts of the book to the sages in general. The
book is confessedly a series of compilations made at
different times; confessedly, also, to a considerable
extent at least, the work of a number, perhaps a

whole guild, of writers.
It is hazardous to argue either for or against a
specific authorship; nor 1s it my intention to do so.
The question naturally arises, however,


2. Author- in what sense this book, with its com-
ship or posite structure so outspoken, can lay
Literary claim to being the work of Solomon.
Species? Does the title refer to actual personal


authorship, or does it name a species
and type of literature of which Solomon was the


originator and inspirer—as if it meant to say “‘the |


Solomonic proverbs’? We may work toward the
auswer of this question by noting some literary
facts.


Outside of the prophets only three of the OT books are
provided in the original text with titles; and these three
are all associated with Solomon—two of them, Prov and
the Song of Songs, directly; the third, Eccl, by au as-
sumed name, which, however, personates Solomon.
This would seem to indicate in the composition of these
books an unusual degree of literary finish and self-con-
sciousness, a sense on the part of writers or compilers
that literature as an art has its claims upon them. The
subject-matter of the books, too, hears this out; they
are, relatively speaking, the secular hooks of the Bible
and do not assume Divine origin, as do law and prophecy.
For the original impulse to such literary culture the his-
tory directs us to the reign of King Solomon; see 1 K 4
29-34, where is portrayed, on the part of king and court,
an intense intellectual activity for its own sake, the like
of which occurs nowhere else in Scripture. The forms
then esp. impressed upon the literature were the mashal
(proverh) and the song, in hoth of which the versatile
young king was proficient; cf 1 K 4 32. For the cul-
tivation of the mashal these men of letters availed them-
selves of a favorite native form, the popular proverb;
but they gave to it a literary mold and finish which
would thenceforth distinguish it as the Solomonic mashal
(see Provers). This then was the literary form in
which from the time of Solomon onward the sages of the
nation put their counsels of life, character, conduct; it
became as distinctively the mold for this didactic
strain of literature as was the heroic couplet for a similar
strain in the age of Dryden and Pope.


It is reasonable therefore to understand this title
of the Book of Prov as designating rather a literary
species than a personal authorship; it names this
anthology of Wisdom in its classically determined
phrasing, and for age and authorship leaves a field
spacious enough to cover the centuries of its cur-
rency. Perhaps also the proverb of this type was
by the term “of Solomon” differentiated from
mdshals of other types, as for instance those of
Balaam and Job and Koheleth.

Il. The Saccessive Compilations.— That the Book
of Prov is composed of several collections made


at different times is a fact that lies |


1. The In- on the surface; as many as eight of
troductory these are clearly marked, and perhaps
Section subdivisions might be made. The


book was not originally conceived as
the development of a theme, or even as a unity;
whatever unity it has was an afterthought. That
it did come to stand, however, for one homogeneous
body of truth, and to receive a name and a degree
of articulation as such, will be maintained in a later
section (see III, below). Meanwhile, we will take
the sections in order and note some of the salient
characteristics of each. The introductory section,
chs 1-9, has the marks of having been added later
than most of the rest; and is introductory in the
sense of concentrating the thought to the concept
of Wisdom, and of recommending the spiritual atti-
tude in which it is to be received. Its style—and
in this it is distinguished from the rest of the book


—is hortatory; it is addressed to “my son” (1 8
and often) or “my sons” (4 1; 5 7; 7 24; 8 32),
in the tone of a father or a sage, bringing stores of
wisdom and experience to the young. The first
six verses are prefatory, giving the purpose and use
of the whole book. Then ver 7 lays down as the
initial point, or spiritual bedrock of Wisdom, the
fear of Jeh, a principle repeated toward the end
of this introductory section (9 10), and evidently
regarded as very vital to the whole Wisdom sys-
tem; ef Job 28 28; Ps 111 10; Sir 114. The
effect of this prefatory and theme-propounding
matter is to launch the collection of proverbs much
after the manner of modern literary works, and the
rest of the section bears this out fairly well. The
most striking feature of the section, besides its
general homiletic tone, is its personification of
Wisdom. She is represented as calling to the sons
of men and commending to them her ways (1 20-33;
8 1-21.32-36); she condescends, for right and
purity’s sake, to enter into rivalry with the “strange
woman,” the temptress, not in secret, but in open
and fearless dealing (7 6—8 9; 9 1-6.13-18); and,
in a supremely poetic passage (8 22-31), she describes
her relation from the beginuing with God and with
the sons of men. It represents the value that the
Heb mind came to set upon the human endowment
of Wisdom. The Heb philosopher thought not in
terms of logic and dialectics, but in symbol and per-
sonality; and to this high rank, almost like that of
a goddess, his imagination has exalted the intel-
lectual and spiritual powers of man. See Wis-

DOM.
The section 10 1—22 16, with the repeated head-
ing “The proverbs of Solomon,” seems to have
been the original nucleus of the whole


2. The collection. All the proverbs in this,
Classic the longest section of the book, are
Nucleus molded strictly to the couplet form


(the one triplet, 19 7, being only an
apparent exception, due probably to the loss of a
line), each proverb a parallelism in condensed
phrasing, in which the second line gives either some
contrast to or some amplification of the first. This
was doubtless the classic art norm of the Solomonic
mashal.


The section seems to contain the product of that
period of proverb-culture during which the sense of the
model was a little rigid and severe, not venturing yet
to limber up the form. Signs of a greater freedom,
however, begin to appear, and possibly two strata of
compilation are represented. In chs 10-15 the prevail-
ing couplet is antithetic, which emhodies the most selt-
closed circuit of the thought. Out of 184 proverbs only
19 do not contain some form of contrast, and 10 of these
are inch 15. In 16—22 16, on the other hand, the pre-
vailing form is the so-called synonymous or amplified
couplet, which leaves the thought-circuit more open
to illustrative additions. Out of 191 proverbs only 18
aro antithetic, and these contain contrasts of a more
subtle and hidden suggestion. As to subject-matter,
the whole section is miscellaneous; in the first half,
however, where the antithesis prevails, are the great
elemental distinctions of life, wisdom and folly, righteous-
ness and wickedness, industry and laziness, wise speech
and reticence, and the like; while in the second half
there is a decided tendency to go farther aficld for subtler
and less obvious distinctions. Inu this way they seem to
reflect a growing and refining literary development, the
gradual shaping and accumulation of materials for a
philosophy of life; as yet, however, not articulated or
reduced to unity of principle.


In the short section 22 17—24 22, the proverb
literature seems for the first time to have become as
it were self-conscious—to regard itself

3. A Body as astrain of wise counsel to be reck-
of Solicited oned with for its cducative value.
Counsel The section is introduced by a preface
(22 17-21), in which these ‘words of

the wise’ are recommended to some person or
delegation, “that thou mayest carry back words of
truth to them that send thee’ (22 21), The


2473


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Proverbs, Book of


counsels seem intended for persons in responsible
position, perhaps attached to the court (cf 23 1-3),
who, as they are to deal officially with men and
affairs, need the prudence, purity, and temperance
which will fit them for their duties. As to form, the
detached couplet appears only occasionally; the
favorite form is the quatrain; but proverbs of a
greater number of lincs are freely used, and one, the
counsel on wine drinking (23 29-35), runs to 17
lines. In tone and specific counsel the section hag
many resemblances to the introductory section
{chs 1-9), and provokes the conjecture that this
latter section, as the introduction to a compiled
body of Wisdom, was composed not long after it.
The little appendix (24 23-34) is headed, ‘These
.also are sayings of the wise.”” They refer to wise


intercourse and_ ordered industry.
4. Some The little poem on the sluggard (24
Left-over 30-34), with its refrain (vs 33.34), is
Precepts noteworthy as being apparently one


; stanza of a poem which is completed
with the same refrain in the introductory section
(6 6-11). The stauzas are of the same length and
structure; and it would seem the latter named was
either discovered later or composed as a supple
ment to the one in this section.

The long section (chs 25-29) is headed, “These
also are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of

Hezekiah king of Judah copied out.”


5. The The collection claims to be only a
Hezekian compilation; but if, as already sug-
Collection gested, we understand the term “prov-


erbs of Solomon” as equivalent to
“Solomonic proverbs,” referring rather to species
than personal authorship, the compilation may have
been made not merely from antiquity, but from the
archives of the Wisdom guilds. If so, we have
a clue to the state of the Wisdom literature in
Hezekiah’s time. The collection as a whole, unlike
secs. 3 and 4, returns predominantly to the classic
form of the couplet, but with a less degree of com-
pression and epigram. There is a tendency to
group numbers of proverbs on like subjects; note
for instance the group on the king (25 2-7). The
most striking feature of the collection is the preva-
lence of simile and analogy, and in general the
strong figurative coloring, esp. in chs 25-27; it
reads like a new species of proverb when we note
that in all the earlier Solomonic sections there are
only two clearly defined similes (10 26; 11 22).
In chs 26-27 are several proverbs of three, four, or
five lines, and at the end (27 23-27) a charming
little poem of ten lines on husbandry. Chs 28, 29
are entirely of couplets, and the antithetic proverb
reappears in a considerable number. As to subject-
matter, the thought of this section makes a rather
greater demand on the reader’s culture and think-
ing powers, the analogies being less obvious, more
subtle. It is decidedly the reflection of a more
literary age than that of sec. 2.

Ch 80 is taken up with ‘the words of Agur the
son of Jakeh,” a person otherwise unknown, who
disclaims expert knowledge of Wisdom
lore (30 3), and avows an agnostic
attitude toward theological specula-
tions, yet shows a tender reverence
before the name and unplumbed mystery of Jeh
(vs 6.9.32). His words amount to a plea against
a too adventurous, not to say presumptuous, spirit
in the supposed findings of human Wisdom, and as
such supply a useful makeweight to the mounting
pride of the scholar. Yet over this peculiar plea


is placed the word ‘“Massa’”’ (NOT, ha-mass@ ),
“burden” or “oracle,” the term used for prophetic
disclosures; and the word for “said’”’ (“the man


said,’”’ 12213 DX), num ha-gebher) is the word else-


6. Words
of Agur


where used for mystic or Divine utterance. This
seems to mark a stage in the self-consciousness of
Wisdom when it was felt that its utterances could
be ranked by the side of prophecy as a revelation
of truth (ef what Wisdom says of herself, 8 14),
and could claim the authoritative term “oracle.”
For the rest, apart from the humble reverence with
which they are imbued, these words of Agur do not
rise to a high level of spiritual thinking; they tend
rather to the riddling element, or “dark sayings”
(cf 16). The form of his proverbs is peculiar,
verging indeed on the artificial; he deals mostly in
the so-called numerical proverb (“three things
-... yea, four’), a style of utterance paralleled
elsewhere only in 6 16-19, but something of a
favorite in the later cryptic sayings of the scribes,

as may be seen in Pirké ’Abhath.
31 1-9 (possibly the whole chapter should be
included) is headed, ‘‘The words of king Lemuel;
the oracle which his mother taught


7. Words him.’ Here occurs again the mys-
of King terious word “oracle,’’ which would
Lemuel seem to be open to the same interpre-


tation as the one given in the previous
paragraph, though some would make this other-
wise unknown monarch a king of Massa, and refer
to the name of one of the descendants of Ishmael
(Gen 25 14), presumably a tribal designation.
The Heb sages from the beginning were in rivalry
and fellowship with the sages of other nations (cf
1 K 4 30.31); and in the Book of Job, the supreme
reach of Wisdom utterance, all of the sages, Job
included, are from countries outside of Pal. King
Lemuel, if an actual personage, was not a Jew; and
probably Agur was not. The words of Lemuel are
a mother’s plea to her royal son for chastity, tem-
perance and justice, the kingly virtues. The form
is the simple Heb parallelism, not detached couplets,
but continuous.
The Book of Prov ends in a manner eminently
worthy of its high standard of sanity and wisdom.
Without any heading (it may possibly


8. An belong to the “oracle” that the mother
Acrostic of Lemuel taught her son) the last 22
Eulogy of verses (31 10-31) constitute a single
Woman poem in praise of a worthy woman,


extolling esp. her household virtues.
In form these verses begin in the origina] with the
successive 22 letters of the Heb alphabet; a favorite
form of Heb verse, as may be seen (in the original)
in several of the pss, notably Ps 119, and inchs 1-4
of the Book of Lam.

HL. Movement toward a Philosophy.—It has been
much the fashion with modern critics to deny to the
Hebrews a truly philosophic mind; this they say
was rather the distinctive gift of the Greeks; while
for their solution of the problem-of life the Hebrews
depended on direct revelation from above, which
precluded that quasi-abeyance of concepts, that
weighing of cosmic and human elements, involved
in the commonly received notion of philosophy.
This criticism takes account of only one side of the
Heb mind. It is true they believed their life to be
in direct contact with the will and word of Jeh, re-
vealed to them in terms which could not be ques-
tioned; but in the findings and deliverance of their
own intellectual powers, too, they had a reliance
aud confidence which merits the name of an authen-
tic philosophy. But theirs was a philosophy not
of speculative world-making, but of conduct and the
practical management of life; and it was intuitive
and analogical, not the result of dialectical reason-
ing. Hence its name wisdom, the solution itself,
rather than philosophy, the love of wisdom, the
search for solution. This Book of Prov, beginning
with detached maxims on the elements of conduct,
reveals in many suggestive ways the gradual emer-


Proverbs, Book of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2474


gence of a philosophy, a comprehensive wisdom, as
it were, in the making; it is thus the pioneer book
of that Heb Wisdom which we see developed to
maturer things in the books of Job and Eccl. Some
of its salient stages may here be traced.

We may first note it, or the literary preparation for it,


in the opening up of the mashal, or proverh unit, toward
added elements of illustration, explana-


1. Libera- tion, amplitude, a development that be-
tion of th gins to appear, in the oldest section (the

on oF the = Glassic nucleus, sec. 2)ataboutch 16. The
mashal primitive antithetic mdshal contrasted


two aspects of truth in such a way as to
leave the case closed; there was nothing for it but te
go on te a new subject. This had the good effect of
setting over against each other the great elemental
antagonisms of life: righteeusness and wickedness, obedi-
ence and lawlessness, teachableness and perversity, in-
dustry and laziness, prudence and presumption, reti-
cence and prating, etc, and so far forth it was a mas-
terly analysis of the essentials cf individual and social
conduct. As soon, however, as the synonymous and
illustrative mashal prevails, we are conscions of a limber-
ing up and greater penetrativeness of the range of
thought; it is open to subtler distinctions and remoter
discoveries, and the analogies tend to employ the less
direct relationships of cause and effect. This is in-
creased as we go on, esp. hy the greater call upon the
imagination in the figurative tissue of the Hezekian
section, and by the decidedly greater tendency te the
riddling and paradox element. The mdshal increases in
length and amplitude, heth by the greuping of similar
subjects and_by the enlargement from the couplet te the
quatrain and the developed pcem. All this, while not
aeE a self-conscious philosophy, is a step on the way
thereto.


One solid presupposition of the sages, like an


axiom, was never called in question: namely, that
righteousness and wisdom are identical,


2. Emer- that wickedness of any sort is folly.
gence of This imparts at once a kind of pro-
Basal phetic coloring to the Wisdom precepts,
Principles well represented by the opening prov-


erb in the original section (after the
prefatory one about the wise son), ‘Treasures
of wickedness profit nothing; but righteousness
delivereth from death” (Prov 10 2). Thus from
the outset is furnished an uncompromising back-
ground on which the fascinating allurements of vice,
the crooked ways of injustice and dishonesty, the
sober habits of goodness and right dealing, show
for what they are and what they tend to. The
sages thus put themselves, too, in entire harmony
with what is taught by priests and prophets; there
is no quarrel with the law or the word; they simply
supply the third strand in the threefold cord of in-
struction (ef Jer 18 18). From this basal presump-
tion other principles, scarcely less axiomatic, come
in view: that the fount and spring of wise living is
reverence, the fear of Jeh; that the ensuring frame
of mind is teachableness, the precluding attitude
perverseness; that it is the mark of wisdom, or
righteousness, to be fearless and above board, of
wickedness, which is folly, to be crooked and secret-
ive. These principles recur constantly, not as a
system, but in numerous aspects and applications
in the practical business of life. For their sanctions
they refer naively to the Heb ideal of rewards on the
one hand—wealth, honor, long life, family (cf Prov
11 31)—and of shame and loss and destruction on
the other; but these are emphasized not as direct
bestowments or inflictions from a personal Deity,
rather as in the law of human nature. The law
that evil works its own destruction, good brings its
own reward, is forming itself in men’s reason as one
of the fundamental concepts out of which grew the
Wisdom philosophy.

From times long before Solomon sagacity in
counsel, and skill to put such counsel into maxim or
parable, gave their possessor, whether man or
woman, a natural leadership and repute in the
local communities (cf 2 S 14 2; 20 16); and Solo-
mon’s exceptional endewment showed itself not
merely in his literary tastes, but in his ability,


much esteemed among Orientals, to determine the
merits of cases brought before him for judgment

(1 K 8 16-28), and to answer puzzling
3. The questions (1 K 10 1.6.7). It was from
Conception such estimate of men’s intellectual
of Wisdom powers, from the recognition of mental

alertness, sagacity, grasp, in_ their
application to the practical issues of life (cf, Prov
1 1-5), that the conception of Wisdom in its
larger sense arose. As, however, the cultivation
of such sagacity of utterance passed beyond the
pastime of a royal court (cf 1 K 4 29-84) into the
hands of city elders and sages, it attained to greatly
enhanced value; note how the influence of such a
sage is idealized (Job 29 7-25). The sages had a
definite calling and mission of their own, more.
potent perhaps than belonged to priests and
prophets; the frequent reference to the young and
the “simple” or immature in the Book of Prov would
indicate that they were virtually the schoolmasters
and educators of the nation. As such, working as
they did in a fellowship and collaboration with
each other, the subject-matter with which they dealt
would not remain as casual and miscellaneous max-
ims, but work toward a center and system of doctrine
which could claim the distinction of an articulated
philosophy of life, and all the more since it was so
identified with the great Heb ideal of righteousness
and truth. We have already noted how this sense
of the dignity and value of their calling manifested
itself in the body of precepts sent im response to
solicitation (3 above), with its appendix (4 above)
(Prov 22 17—24 34). It was not long after this
stage of Wisdom-culture, I think, that a very sig-
nificant new word came into their vocabulary, the
word tashiyah (TMD, a puzzle to the translators,
variously rendered “sound wisdom,” ‘effectual
working,’ and called by the lexicographers ‘a
technical term of the Wisdom literature,” BDB,
s.v.). Its earliest appearance, and the onlyone ex-
cept in the introductory section (Prov 18 1), is where
the man who separates himself from others’ opinions
and seeks his own desire is said to quarrel with all
tushiyah. The word seems to designate Wisdom in
its subjective aspect, as an authentic insight or
intuition of truth, the human power to rise into the
region of true revelation from below, as distinguished
from the prophetic or legal word spoken directly
from above. Outside of Prov and Job the word
occurs only twice: once in Mic 6 9, and once in
Isa 28 29, in which latter case the prophet has
deliberately composed a passage (vs 23-29) in the
characteristic mdshal idiom, and attributed that
strain of insight to Jeh. Evidently there came a
time in the culture of Wisdom when its utterances
attained in men’s estimate to a parity with utter-
ances direct from the unseen; perhaps this explains
why Agur’s and Lemuel’s words could be boldly
ranked as oracles (see above, 6 and 7). At any
rate, such a high distinction, an authority derived
from intimacy with the creative work of Jeh (8
30.31), is ascribed to Wisdom (hokhmah, ™Q3T)
in the introductory section; ‘counsel is mine,”
Wisdom is made to say, ‘and téshiyah” (8 14).
Thus the Book of Prov reveals to us a philosophy,
as it were, in the making and from scattered coun-
sels attaining gradually to the summit where the
human intellect could place its findings by the side
of Divine oracles.

IV. Considerations of Age and Literary Kin-
ship.—To get at the history of the Book of Prov,
several inquiries must be raised. When were the
proverbs composed? The book, like the Book of
Ps, is confessedly an anthology, contaiming various
accumulations, and both by style and maturing
thought bearing the marks of different ages. When
were the successive compilations made? And,


2475


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Proverbs, Book of


finally, when did the strain of literature here repre-
sented reach that point of self-conscious unity and
coérdination which justified its being reckoned with
as a strain by itself and choosing the comprehen-
sive name Wisdom? What makes these inquiries
hard to answer is the fact that these proverbs are
precepts for the common people, relating to ordinary
affairs of the village, the market, and the field, and
move in lines remote from politics and dynastic vicis-
situdes and wars. They are, to an extent far more
penetrative and pervasive than law or prophecy,
the educative literature on which the sturdy rank
and file of the nation was nourished. ‘Where there
is no vision, the people let loose,’ says a Hezekian
proverb (Prov 29 18); but so they are also when
there is no abiding tonic of social convention and
principle. Precisely this latter it is which this Book
of Prov in a large degree reveals; and in course of
time its value was so felt that, as we have seen,
it could rank itself as an asset of life by the side of
vision. It represents, in a word, the human move-
ment toward self-directiveness and _ self-reliance,
without supine dependence on ruler or public senti-
ment (cf Prov 29 25.26). When and how was this
sane and wholesome communal fiber developed ?
When Solomon and his court made the mdshal
an elegant fad, they builded better than they knew.
They gave to the old native form of the
1. Under proverb and parable, as reduced to
the Kings epigrammatic mold and polish, the
éclat of a popular literature. This
was done orally at first (Solomon spoke his proverbs,
1 K 4 32.33); but the recording of such carefully
expressed utterances could not be long delayed;
perhaps this brief style coupé was the most natural
early exercise in the new transition from the un-
wieldly cuneiform to the use of papyrus and a more
flexible alphabet, which probably came in with
the monarchy. At any rate, here was the medium
for a practical didactic literature, applied to the
matters of daily life and intercourse to which in
Solomon’s time the nation was enthusiastically
awake. There is no valid reason for denying to
Solomon, or at least to his time, the initiation of the
Solomonic mdshal; and if, as has been suggested,
the name “proverbs of Solomon” designates rather
literary species than personal authorship, the title
of the whole book (1 1), as well as the headings of
sections (10 1; 25 1), may be given in entire good
faith, whatever the specific time or personal author-
ship of the utterances. Nor is there anything either
in recorded history or the likelihood of the case to
make improbable that the activity of the “men of
Hezekiah” meang just what is said; these men of
letters were adding this supplementary collection
(Prov 25-29) to a body of proverbs that already
existed and were recognized as Solomon’s. This
would put the composition of the main body of the
proverbs (chs 10-29) prior to the reign of Hezekiah.
They represent therefore the chief literary in-
struction available to the people in the long period
of the Kings from Solomon onward, a period which
otherwise was very meagerly supplied. The Mo-
saic Law, as we gather from the finding of the Law
in the time of Josiah (2 K 22), was at best a se-
questered thing in the keeping—or neglect—of
priests and judges; the prophetic word was a specific
message for great national emergencies; the accu-
mulations of sacred song were the property of the
temple and the cultus; what then was there for the
education of the people? There were indeed the
folk-tales and catechetical legends of their heroic
history; but there were also, most influential of all,
these wise sayings of the sages, growing bodies of
precept and parable, preserved in village centers,
published in the open places by the gate (cf Job 29
7), embodying the elements of a common-sense


religion and citizenship, and representing views of
life which were not only Hebrew, but to a great
extent international among the neighbor kingdoms.
Understood so, these Solomonic proverbs furnish
incomparably the best reflection we have of the re-
ligious and social standards of the common people,
during a period otherwise meagerly portrayed.
And from it we can understand what a sterling fiber
of character existed after all, and how well worth
preserving for a unique mission in the world, in
spite of the idolatrous corruptions that invaded the
sanctuaries, the self-pleasing unconcern of the rulers
and the pessimistic denunciations of the prophets.
For the point in the Heb literary history when
these scattered Solomonic proverbs were recog-


nized ag a homogeneous strain of
2. The thought and the compilations were
Concentra- made and recommended as Wisdom,
tive Point we can do no better, J think, than to


name the age of Israel’s literary prime,
the age of Hezekiah. The ‘men of Hezekiah’’ did
more than append their supplementary section


(chs 25-29); the words “these also” (FPRODS, gam
*élleh) in their heading imply it (see H»znxian,
Tue MEN or).


I apprehend the order and nature of their work some-
how thus: Beginning with the classic nucleus (L0O—22
16) (see ahove, II, 2), which may have come to them in
two subsections (chs 10-15; 16—22 16), they pnt these
together as the proverbs most closely associated with
Solomon, without much attempt at systematizing, sub-
stantially as these had accumulated through the ages in
the rough order of their developing form and thought;
compiling thus, in their zeal for the literary treasures of
the past, the hody of educational literature which lay
nearest at hand, a body adapted especially, though not
exclusively, to the instruction of the young and imma-
ture. This donc, there next came to their knowledge a
remarkahle body of '' words of the wise’”’ (22 17—24 22),
which had evidently heen put together hy request as a
vade mecum for some persons in responsible position, and
which were prefaced by a recommendation of them as
‘words of truth’ designed to promote ‘trust in Jeh"’
(22 19-21)—-which latter, as we know from Isaiah, was
the great civic issue of Hezekiah’s time. With this sec-
tion naturally goes the little appendix of ‘sayings of the
wise” (24 23-34), added probahly at ahout the same
time. ‘These two sections, which seem to open the col-
lection to matter beyond the distinctive Solomonic
mashal, are, heyond the rest of the book, in the tone of
the introductory section (chs 1-9), which latter, along
with the Hezekian appendix (chs 25-29), was added,
partly as a new_composition, partly as incorporating
some additional findings (cf for instance the completion
of the poem on the sluggard, 6 6-11). Thus, by the
addition of this introductory section, the Book of Prov
was recognized as a unity, provided with a preface and
jnitial proposition (1 1-6.7), and launched with such
hortatory material as had already, on a smaller scale,
introduced the third section. This part not only con-
tains the praise of Wisdom as a human endowment,
sharing in the mind and purpose of the Divine (8 22-31),
but it has become aware also of the revelatory value of
tishiyah (2 7; 8 21; 8 14), or chastened intuition
(see above, III, 3), and dares to aspire, in its righteous
teachahleness, to the intimacy or secret friendship of


Jeh (40. sédhs, 3 32). All this indicates the holy
self-conscioushess to which Wisdom has attained.


I see no cogent reason for postponing the sub-
stantial completion of the Book of Prov beyond the
time of Hezekiah. The words of Agur and of King
Lemuel, with the final acrostic poem, may be later
additions; but their difference in tone and work-
manship is just as likely to be due to the fact that
they are admitted, in the liberal spirit_of the com-
pilers, from foreign stores of wisdom. For spiritual
clarity and intensity they do not rise to the height
of the native Heb consciousness; and they incline
to an artificial structure which suggests that the
writer’s interest is divided between sincere téshtyah
and literary skill. For the sake of like-minded
neighbors, however, something may be forgiven.

It is too early in the history of Wisdom to regard
this Book of Prov as an articulated and coérdinated
system. It is merely what it purports to be, a col-


Proverbs, Book of
Providence


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2476


lected body of literature having a common bearing
and purpose; a literature of reverent and intelligent

self-culture, moving among the ordi-
3. Its Stage nary relations of life, and not assuming
in Progres- to embody any mystic disclosures of
sive truth beyond the reach of human
Wisdom reason. As such, it has a vocabulary

and range of ideas of its own, which dis-
tingnishes it from other strains of literature. This
is seen in those passages outside of the Book of
Prov which deliberately assume, for some specific
purpose, the Wisdom dialect. In Isa 28 23-29,
the prophet, whom the perverse rulers have taunted
with baby-talk (vs 9.10), appeals to them with the
characteristic Wisdom call to attention (ver 23),
and in illustrations drawn from husbandry proves
to them that this also is from Jeh of hosts, ‘who is
transcendent in counsel, preéminent in fishityah’
(ver 29)—teaching them thus in their own vaunted
idiom. In Mic 6 9-15, similarly, calling in tashi-
yah to corroborate prophecy (‘the voice of Jeh,”
mim Dap, kel Yahweh, MIB, wthashiyah, 6 9),
the prophet speaks of the natural disasters that
men ought to deduce from their abuse of trade re-
lations, evidently appealing to them in their own
favorite strain of thinking. Both these passages
seem to reflect a time when the Wisdom dialect was
prevalent and popular, and both are concerned to
call in sound human intuition as an ally of prophecy.
At the same time, as prophets have the right to do,
they labor to give revelation the casting vote; the
authentic disclosure of truth from Jeh is their ob-
jective, not the mere luxury of making clever ob-
servations on practical life. AJ] this coincides, in
the Wisdom sphere, with what in Isaiah’s and
Micah’s time was the supreme issue of state, namely
trust in Jeh, rather than in crooked human devices
(cf Isa 28 16; 29 15); and it is noteworthy that
this is the venture of Wisdom urged by the editors
of Prov in their introductory exhortations (cf 22 19;
3 5-8). In other words, these editors are con-
cerned with inducing a spiritual attitude; and so
in their literary strain they make their book an
adjunct in the movement toward spirituality which
Isaiah is laboring to promote. As yet, however,
its findings are still in the peremptory stage, stated
as absolute and unqualified truths; it has not
reaehed the sober testing of fact and interrogation
of motive which it must encounter in order to be-
come a seasoned philosophy of life. Its main per-
vading thesis—that righteousness in the fear of
God ts wisdom and bound for success, that wicked-
ness is fatuity and bound for destruction—is eter-
nally sound; but is must make itself good in a world
where so many of the enterprises of life seem to
come out the other way, and where there is so little
appreciation of spiritual values. Nor is the time
of skepticism and rigid test long in coming. Two
psalms of this period (as I apprehend) (Pss 73 and 49)
concern themselves with the anomaly of the success
of the wicked and the trials of the righteous; the
latter pointedly adopting the Wisdom or mdshal
style of utterance (Ps 49 3.4), both laboring to
induce a more inward and spiritual attitude toward
the problem. It remains, however, for the Book of
Job to take the momentous forward step of setting
wisdom on the unshakable foundation of spiritual
integrity, which it does by subjecting its findings
to the rigid test of fact and its motives to a drastic
Satanic sifting. It is thus in the Book of Job,
followed later by the Book of Eccl, that the Wisdom
strain of literature, initiated by the Proverbs of
Solomon, finds its OT culmination.

JoHN FRANKLIN GENUNG


PROVIDENCE, prov’i-dens:


I. Provivencs Derinep
TI. DrirreRent SPHERES OF PROVIDENTIAL ACTIVITY
DIsTINGUISHED
Ill. BisricsL PRESENTATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF
PROVIDENCE 4 i
1. The Doctrine of Providence in the OT
(1) The Pentateuch
(2) The Historical Books
(3) The Psalms _
4) The Wisdom Literature
{3 The Book of Job____,
(6) The Prophetical Writings
2. The Doctrine of Providence in the NT
(1) The Synoptic Gospels
(2) The Johannine Writings ‘ ne
(3) The eater and Other Historical Writings of


the N
(4) The Pauline Epistles
(5) The Petrine Epistles, and Other NT
Writings ; ;
3. OT and NT Doctrines of Providence Com-


ared
tai The New Emphasis on the Fatherhood and
Love of God 5 ee
(2) The Place of Christ and the Holy Spirit in
Providence nye
(3) The New Emphasis upon Moral and Spirit-
ual Blessings
IV. Discussion or THE CONTENTS OF THE BisBLicaL
Doctrine <
1. Different Views of Providence Compared
(1) The Atheistic or Materialistic View
(2) The Pantheistic View
(3) The Deistic View |. .
(4) The Theistic or Biblical View
(5) The Divine Immanence | A
2. The Divine Purpose and Final End of Provi-
dence
3. Special Providence i
(i) Spiritual, Not Material, Good to Man the
End Sought in Special Providence
(2) Special Providence and _‘‘ Accidents”
(3) aera Providence as Related to Piety and
rayer
(4) Special Providence as Related to Human
Coéperation i
(5) General and Special
Equally Divine ‘
4, Divine Providence and Human Free Will |.
(t) Divine Providence as Related to Willing


~~


Providence Both


Wills u
(2) Divine Providence as Related to Sinful
Free Will
. Divine Providence as Related to Natural and
Moral Evil


. Evil Providentially Overruled for Good
. Interpreting Providence
8. Conclusion

LITERATURE

I. Providence Defined.—The word ‘‘provide”
(from Lat providere) means etymologically ‘“‘to
foresee.” The corresponding Gr word, tpdvoia, pré-
nota, means ‘“forethought.”’? Forethought and fore-
sight imply a future end, a goal, and a definite pur-
pose and plan for attaining that end. The doctrine
of final ends is a doctrine of final causes, and means
that that which is last in realization and attainment
is first in mind and thought. The most essential
attribute of rational beings is that they act with refer-
ence to an end; that they act not only with thought
but with forethought. As, therefore, it is character-
istic of rational bemgs to make preparation for every
event that is foreseen or anticipated, the word
“providence” has come to be used less in its origi-
nal etymological meaning of foresight than to
signify that preparation, care and supervision which
are necessary to secure a desired future result.
While all rational beings exercise a providence pro-
portioned to their powers, yet it is only when the
word is used with reference to the Divine Being
who is possessed of infinite knowledge and power
that it takes on its real and true significance. The
doctrine of Divine providence, therefore, has refer-
ence to that preservation, care and government
which God exercises over all things that, He has
created, in order that they may accomplish the ends
for which they were created.

‘‘Providence is the most comprehensive term in the


language of theology. It is the background of all the
several departments of religious truth, a background


NO Oo


2477


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Proverbs, Book of
Providence


mysterious in its commingled brightness and darkness.
It penetrates and fills the whole compass of the relations
of man with his Maker. It connects the unseen God
with the visible creation, and the visible creation with the
work of redemption, and redemption with personal sal-
vation, and personal salvation with the end of all things.
It carries our thonghts back to the supreme purpose
which was In the beginning with God, and forward to the
foreseen end and consummation of all things, while it
includes between these the whole infinite variety of the
dealings of God with man” (W. B. Pope, Compendium
of Christian Theology, I, 456).

I. Different Spheres of Providential Activity
Distinguished.—The created universe may be con-
veniently divided, with reference to Divine provi-
dence, into three departments: first, the inanimate
or physical universe, which is conserved or governed
by God according to certain uniform principles
called the laws of Nature; secondly, animate exist-
ence, embracing the vegetable and animal world,
over which God exercises that providential care
which is necessary to sustain the life that He
created; and thirdly, the rational world, composed
of beings who, in addition to animate life, are pos-
sessed of reason and moral frec agency, and are
governed by God, not necessitatively, but through
an appeal to reason, they having the power to obey
or disobey the laws of God according to the decision
of their own free wills. This widespread care and
supervision which God exercises over His created
universe is commonly designated as His general
providence, which embraces alike the evil and the
good, in addition to which there is a more special
and particular providence which He exercises over
and‘in behalf of the good, those whose wills are in
harmony with the Divine will.

Hf, Biblical Presentation of the Doctrine of
Providence.—The word “providence” is used only
once in the Scriptures (Acts 24 2), and here it
refers, not to God, but to the forethought and work
of map, in which sense it is now seldom used. (See
also Rom 13 14, where the same Gr word is tr4
“provision.’’) While, however, the Bib. use of the
word calls for little consideration, the doctrine indi-
cated by the term “providence” is one of the most
significant in the Christian system, and is either dis-
tinctly stated or plainly assumed by every Bib.
writer. The OT Scriptures are best understood
when interpreted as a progressive revelation of God’s
providential purpose for Israel and the world.
Messianic expectations pervade the entire life and
lit. of the Heb people, and the entire OT dispensa-
tion may not improperly be regarded as the moral
training and providential preparation of the world,
and esp. of the chosen people, for the coming Mes-
siah. In the apocryphal “Book of Wisdom” the
word “providence” is twice used (14 3; 17 2) in
reference to God’s government of the world. Rab-
binical Judaism, according to Jos, was much occu-
pied with discussing the relation of Divine provi-
dence to human free will. The Sadducees, he tells
us, held an extreme view of human freedom, while
the Essenes were believers in absolute fate; the
Pharisees, avoiding these extremes, believed in both
the overruling providence of God and in the free-
dom and responsibility of man (Ant, XIII, v, 9;
XVIII, i, 3; BJ, Il, viii, 14). See Puanrisezs.
The NT begins with the announcement that the
“4cingdom of heaven is at hand,” which declaration
carries along with it the idea of a providential pur-
pose and design running through the preceding dis-
pensation that prepared for the Messiah’s coming.
But the work of Christ is set forth in the NT, not
only as the culmination of a Divine providence that
preceded it, but as the beginning of a new provi-
dential order, a definite and far-reaching plan, for
the redemption of the world, a forethought and plan
so comprehensive that it gives to the very idea of
Divine providence a new, larger and richer mean-


ing, both intensively and extensively, than it ever
had before. The minutest want of the humblest
individual and the largest interests of the world-
wide kingdom of God are alike embraced within the
scope of Divine providence as it is set forth by

Christ and the apostles.
(1) Providence in the Pentateuch—The opening
sentence of the Scriptures, ‘In the beginning God
created the heaven and the earth,” is


1. Divine a noble and majestic affirmation of
Providence God’s essential relationship to the
in the OT origin of all things. It is followed by
Scriptures numerous utterances scattered through-


out the sacred volume that declare that
He who created also preserves and governs all that
He created, But the Israelitish nation was from the
beginning of its history, in the Heb conception, the
special object of God’s providence and care, thongh
it was declared that Jeh’s lordship and government
extended over all the earth (Ex 8 22). The Deu-
teronomist (10 14) uses language which implies that
Divine possession of all things in heaven and earth
carries along with it the idea of Divine providence
and control; and he also regards Israel as Jeh’s
peculiar possession and special care (82 8).

This special providence that was over the elect nation
as a whole was also minute and particular, in that special
individuals were chosen to serve a providential purpose
in the making of the nation, and were Divinely guided
in the accomplishment of their providential mission.
Thus Abraham's providential place in history is set forth
in Neh 9 7.8. acob acknowledges the same_provi-
dential hand in his life (Gen 31 42; 48 15). The life
of Joseph abounds in evidences of a Divine providence
(Gen 45 5.7; 50 20). The whole life-history of Moses
as it is found in the Pent is a study in the doctrine of
Divine providence. Other lives as set forth in these
early narratives may be less notable, but they are not
less indebted to Divine providence for what they are and
for what they accomplish for others. Indeed, as Pro-
fessor Oehler remarks, '‘The whole Pentatenchal history
of revelation is nothing but the activity of that Divine

rovidence which, in order to the realization of the

ivine aim, is at once directed to the whole, and at the
same time proves itself efficacious in the direction of the
life of separate men, and in the guiding of all circum-
stances’ (OT Theology).


(2) The historical books of the OT.—In a sense
all the books of the OT are historical in that they
furnish material for writing a history of the people
of Israel. See Isranxt, History or THE PEOPLE.
The Pent, the Poetical Books, the Wisdom Lit., the
Prophets, all furnish material for writing OT his-
tory; but there is still left a body of hterature,
including the books from Josh to Est, that may
with peculiar fitness be designated as historical.
These books are all, in an important sense, an inter-
pretation and presentation of the facts of Heb his-
tory in their relation to Divine providence. The
sacred historians undertake to give something of
a Divine philosophy of history, to interpret in a
religious way the facts of history, to point out the
evils of individual and national sin and the rewards
and blessings of righteousness, and to show God’s
ever-present and ever-guiding hand in human his-
tory—that He is not a silent spectator of human
affairs, but the supreme moral Governor of the uni-
verse, to whom individuals and nations alike owe
allegiance. To the Heb historian every event in the
life of the nation has a moral significance, both
because of its relation to God and because of its
bearing on the providential mission and testing of
Israel as the people of God. The Book of Jgs,
which covers the “dark ages” of Bible history, and
is an enigma to many in the study of God’s hand
in history, shows how far God must needs conde-
scend at times in His use of imperfect. and even
sensual men through whom to reveal His will and
accomplish His work in the world. While therefore
He condescends to use as instruments of His provi-
dence such men as Samson and Jephthah, it is never


Providence


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


24.78


through these that He does His greatest work, but
throngh an Abraham, a Joseph, a Moses, an Isaiah,
through men of lofty moral character. And this
is one of the most notahle lessons of OT history if
it be studied as a revelation of God’s providential
methods and instrumentalities. Among these his-
torical writers none has given clearer and stronger
expression to God’s providential relation to the
physical world as its preserver and to the moral
world as its Divine Governor than the author of
Nehemiah. ‘Thou, even thon, art Lord alone; thou
hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all
their host, the earth, and all things that are therein,
the seas, and all that is therein, and thou preservest
them all..... Yet thou in thy manifold mercies
forsookest them not in the wilderness: the pillar
of the cloud departed not from them by day, to
lead them in the way; neither the pillar of fire by
night, to shew them light, and the way wherein they
should go. Thou gavest also thy good spirit to in-
struct them” (9 6.19.20 AV). His words reflect the
views that were entertained by all the OT histo-
rians as to God’s hand in the government and guid-
ance of the nation. Heb history, because of the
Divine promises and Divine providence, is ever
moving forward toward the Messianic goal.

(3) The Psalms—The poets are among the
world’s greatest religious teachers, and the theology
of the hest poets gencrally represents the highest
and purest faith that is found among a people.
Applying this truth to the Heb race, we may say
that in the Pss and the Book of Job we reach the
high-water mark of the OT revelation as to the
doctrine of Divine providence. The Psalmist’s
God is not only the Creator and Preserver of all
things, but is a prayer-hearing and prayer-answering
God, a Being so full of tender mercy and loving-
kindness that we cannot fail to identify Him with
the God whom Christ taught us to call “our Father.”
Nowhere else in the entire Scriptures, except in the
Sermon on the Mount, can we find such a full and
clear exhibition of the minute and special providence
of God over His faithful and believing children as
in the Pss—notably such as Pss 91, 103, 104 and 139.
Ps 105 traces God’s hand in providential and gra-
cious guidance through every stage of Isracl’s
wondrous history. Thanksgiving and praise for
providential mercies and blessings abound in Pss
44, 66, 78, 85, 135. While the relation of God’s
power and providence to the physical universe and
to the material and temporal blessings of life is
constantly asserted in the Pss, yet it is the connec-
tion of God’s providence with man’s ethical and
spiritual nature, with righteousness and faith and
love, that marks the highest characteristic of the
Psalmist’s revelation of the doctrine of providence.
That righteousness and obedience are necessary
conditions and accompaniments of Divine provi-
dence in its moral aspects and results is evidenced
by numerous declarations of the psalmists (1 6;
3119.20; 7412; 8411; 911; 125 2). This
thought finds happiest expression In Ps 87 23 AV:
“The steps of a good man are ordered of the Lord,
and he delighteth in his way.” The inspired poets
make it plain that the purpose of Divine providence
is not merely to meet temporal wants and bring
earthly blessings, but to secure the moral good of
individuals and nations.

(4) The Wisdom Literature-—The doctrine of
providence finds ample and varied expression in the
Wisdom Lit. of the OT, notably in the Book
of Prov. The power that preserves and governs
and guides is always recognized as inseparable from
the power that creates and commands (Prov 3 21-
26; 16 4). Divine providence does not work inde-
pendently of man’s free will; providential blessings
are conditioned on character and conduct (Prov 26


10 AV; 2 7.8; 12 2.21). There cannot be, in OT
terms of faith, any stronger statement of the doc-
trine of Divine providence than that given by the
Wise Men of Israel in the following utterances
recorded in the Book of Prov: “In all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he will direct thy paths”
(3 6); “A man’s heart deviseth his way, but Jeh
directeth his steps” (16 9); “The lot is cast into
the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of Jeh”
(16 33); “A man’s goings are of Jeh” (20 24);
“The king’s heart is in the hand of Jeh as the
waterconrses: He turneth it whithersoever he will”
(21 1); “The horse is prepared against the day of
battle; but victory is of Jeh” (21 31). See also
3 21-26; 12 2.21. The conception of providence
that is presented in the Book of Eccl seems to reflect
the views of one who had had experience in sin and
had come into close contact with many of life’s ills.
All things have their appointed time, but the real-
ization of the providential purposes and ends of
creaturely existence is, wherever human free agency
is involved, always conditioned upon man’s exer-
cise of his free will. The God of providence rules
and overrules, but He does not by His omnipo-
tence overpower and override and destroy man’s
trne freedom. Things that are do not reflect God’s
perfect, providence, hut rather His providence as
affected hy human free agency and as marred by
man’s sin (Eccl 3 1-11). “I know that there is
nothing better for them, than to rejoice, and to do
good so long as they live. And also that every man
should eat and drink, and enjoy good in all his lahor,
is the gift of God’ (vs 12.13; see also ver 14);
“The righteous, and the wise, and their works, are
in the hand of God” (9 1); ‘‘The race is not to the
swift, nor the hattle to the strong” (9 11). The
same conclusion that the author of Eccl reached
as to how human life is affected by Divine provi-
dence and man’s sin has found expression im the
oft-quoted lines of the great poet:
“There's a Divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will.”

(5) The Book of Job.—The greatest of all the in-
spired contributions to the Wisdom Lit. of the
OT, the Book of Job, demands special considera-
tion. It is the one book in the Bible that is de-
voted wholly to a discussion of Divine providence.
The perplexities of a thoughtful mind on the subject
of Divine providence and its relation to human suf-
fering have nowhere in the literature of the world
found stronger and clearer expression than in this
inspired drama which bears the name of its unique
and marvelous hero, Job. Job represents not only
a great sufferer, but an honest doubter: he dared to
doubt the theology of his day, a theology which he
had himself doubtless believed until experience, the
best of all teachers, tanght him its utter inadequacy
to explain the deepest problems of human life and of
Divine providence. The purpose of this book in the
inspired volume seems to be to correct the prevailing
theology of the day with regard to the subject of sin
and suffering in their relation to Divine providence.
There is no more deplorable and hurtful error that
a false theology could teach than that all suffering
in this world is a proof of sin and a measure of one’s
guilt (see AFFLICTION). It is hard enough for the
innocent to suffer. To add to their suffering by
teaching them that it is all because they are awful
sinners, even though their hearts assure them that
they are not, is to lay upon the innocent a burden
too grievous to be borne. The value in the inspired
Canon of a book written to reveal the error of such
a misleading doctrine as this cannot easily be over-
estimated. The invaluable contribution which this
book makes to the Bib. doctrine of providence is
to be found, not in individual and detached sayings,


2479


Providence


striking and suggestive as some of these may be,
but rather in the book as a whole, Statements
concerning God’s general providence abound in
this inspired drama—such as these, for example:
“Who knoweth not in all these, that the hand of
Jeh hath wrought this, in whose hand is the soul of
every living thing, and the breath of all mankind?”
(Job 12 9.10); ‘Who hath given him a charge over
the earth? or who hath disposed the whole world?
. .... He shall break in pieces mighty men without
awe and set others in their stead” (84 13.24
But the special contribution of the Book of Job
to the doctrine of Divine providence, as already
indicated, is to set forth its connection with the
fact of sin and suffering. Perplexed souls in all
ages have been asking: If God be all-powerful and
all-good, why should there be any suffering in a
world which He created and over which He rules?
If He eannot prevent suffering, is He omnipotent?
If He can, but will not prevent suffering, is He in-
finitely good? Does the book solve the mystery?
We cannot claim that it does. But it does vindi-
cate the character of God, the Creator, and of Job,
the moral free agent under trial. It does show the
place of suffering in a moral world where free agents
are forming character; it does show that perfect
moral character is made, not by Divine omnipo-
tence, but by trial, and that physical suffering
serves a moral end in God’s providential govern-
ment of men and nations. While the book does not
clear the problem of mystery, it does show how on
the dark background of a suffering world the lumi-
nous holiness of Divine and human character may
be revealed. The picture of this suffering man of
Uz, racked with bodily pains and irritated by the
ill-spoken words of well-meaning friends, planting
himself on the solid rock of his own conscious recti-
tude, and defying earth and hell to prove him guilty
of wrong, and knowing that his Vindicator liveth and
would come to his rescue—thaé is an inspired picture
that will make every innocent sufferer who reads
it stronger until the end of time. See also Jon,
Book oF.

(6) The prophetical writings—Nowhere in all
literature is the existence and supremacy of a moral
and providential order in the world more clearly
recognized than in the writings of the OT prophets.
These writings are best understood when inter-
preted as the moral messages and passionate appeals
of men who were not only prophets and preachers
of righteousness to their own times, but students
and teachers of the moral philosophy of history for
all time, seers, men of vision, who interpreted all
events in the light of their bearing on this moral
and providential order, in which Divine order the
Israelitish nation had no small part, and over which
Israel’s God was sovereign, doing ‘according to his
will in the army of heaven and among the inhabit-
ants of earth.” While each prophetic message
takes its coloring from the political, social and moral
conditions that called it forth, and therefore differs
from every other message, the prophets are all one
in their insistence upon the supremacy and Divine
authority of this moral order, and in their looking
forward to the coming of the Messiah and the
setting up of the Messianic kingdom as the provi-
dential goal and consummation of the moral order.
They all deseribe in varying degrees of light and
shade a coming time when One born of their own
oppressed and down-trodden race should come in
power and glory, and set up a kingdom of righteous-
ness and love in the earth, into which kingdom all
nations shall be ultimately gathered; and of His
kingdom there shall be no end. God’s providential
government of the nation was always and every-
where directed toward this Messianic goal. The


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


language which an inspired writer puts into the
mouth of Nebuchadnezzar, the heathen king, is an
expression, not so much of the gentile conception of
God and His government, as it is of the faith of a
Heb prophet concerning God’s relationship to men
and nations: ‘He doeth according to his will in the
army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the
earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him,
What doest thou?” (Dnl 4 35). The providential
blessings which the prophets promise to the people,
whether to individuals or to the nation, are never
a matter of mere omnipotence or favoritism, but
are inseparably connected with righteous conduct
and holy character. The blessings promised are
mainly spiritual, but whether spiritual or material,
they are always conditioned on righteousness.
The Book of Isa is esp. rich in passages that empha-
size the place of moral conduct and character in
God’s providential government of the world, the
supreme purpose and end of which are to establish
a kingdom of righteousness in the earth (Isa 33
13-16; 35 8-10; 43 2; 46 4; 54 14-17). Divine
providence is both personal and national, and of
each it is declared in varying terms of assurance
that ‘“Jeh will go before you; and the God of
Israel will be your rearward” (52 12). Each of
the major and minor prophets confirms and reén-
forces the teachings of this greatest and most truly
representative of all the OT prophets.

(1) The Synoptic Gospels —The Synoptic Gospels
furnish the richest possible material for a study of

the doctrine of Divine providence.
2. Divine They recognize in the advent of Christ
Providence the fulfilment of a long line of Messi-
in the NT anic prophecies and the culmination of

providential purposes and plans that
had been in the Divine mind from the beginning
and awaited the fulness of time for their revelation
in the Incarnation (Mt 1 22; 2 5.15; 3.3). In
His private and personal life of service and prayer
Christ is a model of filial trust in the providence of
the heavenly Father (Mt 11 25; 26 39; Mk 1 35;
6 46; Lk 3 21; 111). His private and public
utterances abound in declarations concerning God’s
ever-watchful and loving care for all His creatures,
but above all for those creatures who bear His own
image; while His teachings concerning the King-
dom of God reveal a Divine providential plan for
the world’s redemption and education extending
of necessity far into the future; and still beyond
that, in His vision of Divine providence, comes a
day of final judgment, of retribution and reward,
followed by a new and eternal order of things, in
which the destiny of every man will be determined
by his conduct and character in this present life
(see Our Lord’s parables concerning the Kingdom:
Mt 13 24-50; Mk 4 26ff; Lk 14 16ff; also Mt 24
and 25). The many familiar utterances of Our
Lord, found in the Synoptic Gospels, contain the
most essential and precious of all the NT revela-
tions concerning the providence of the heavenly
eeu (Mt 6 45; 6 26-34; 10 29-31; Lk 21
16-18).

(2) The Johannine writings.—St. John’s Gospel
differs from the Synoptic Gospels in its mode of
presenting the doctrine of providence chiefly in that
it goes back to the mind and purpose of Ged in the
very beginning (Jn 1 1-5), whereas the Synoptic
Gospels simply go back to the Messianic prophecies
of the OT. Both the Gospel and the Epp. of John
in their presentation of Divine providence place
the greatest possible emphasis on Divine love and
filial trust, the latter rising in many places to the
point of positive assurance. The Book of Rev
is a prophetic vision, in apocalyptic form, of God’s
providential purpose for the future, dealing not so
much with individuals as with nations and with


Providence


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2480


the far-reaching movements of history extending
through the centuries. God is revealed in St.
John’s writings, not as an omnipotent and arbitrary
Sovereign, but as an all-loving Father, who not only
cares for His children in this life but is building for
them in the world to come a house of many man-
sions (Jn 14 1-20).

(3) The Book of Acts and other NT history —
The historical portions of the NT, as contained in
the Acts, and elsewhere, while not eliminating or
depreciating the element of human freedom in mdi-
viduals and nations, yet recognize in human life
and history the ever-present and _all-controlling
mind of that God in whom, it is declared, ‘we live,
and move, and have our being” (Acts 17 28). The
career of the first distinctive NT character begins
with these words: ‘‘There came a man, sent from
God, whose name was John” (Jn 1 6). But not
only John, the forerunner, but every other indi-
vidual, according to the NT conceptions, is a man
“sent from God.’ The apostles conceive them-
selves to be such; Stephen, the martyr, was such;
Paul was such (Acts 22 21). NT biography is a
study in providentially guided lives, not omitting
references to those who refuse to be so guided—for
such is the power of human free agency, many who
are “sent from God” refuse to go upon their Di-
vinely appointed mission. The Day of Pentecost
is the revelation of a new power in history—a revela-
tion of the place and power which the Divine-
human Christ and the Holy Spirit are to have hence-
forth in making history—in making the character
of the men and the nations whose deeds are to make
history. The most potent moral force in history
is to be, from the day of Pentecost on, the ascended
incarnate Christ, and He is to be all the more in-
fluential in the world after His ascension, when His
work shall be done through the Holy Spirit. This
is the historical view of providence as connected
with the person of Christ, which the NT historians
present, and which we, after 19 centuries of Chris-
tian history, are warranted in holding more confi-
dently and firmly even than the Christians of the
1st cent. could hold it; for the Christian centuries
have proved it true. What God is in Nature Christ
is in history. All history is becoming Christian
history, thus realizing the NT conception of Divine
providence in and through Christ.

(4) The Pauline writings—No character of
whom we have any account in Christian literature
was providentially prepared for his life-work and
providentially guided in accomplishing that life-
work more truly than was the apostle Paul. We
find, therefore, as we would antecedently expect,
that Paul’s speeches and writings abound in proofs
of his absolute faith in the overruling providence
of an all-wise God. His doctrine of predestination
and foreordination is best understood when inter-
preted, not as a Divine power predetermining hu-
man destiny and nullifying the human will, but as
a conception of Divine providence as the eternal
purpose of God to accomplish an end contemplated
and foreseen from the beginning, viz. the redemp-
tion of the world and the creation in and through
Christ of a new and holy humanity. Every one
of the Pauline Epp. bears witness to the author’s
faith in a Divine providence that overrules and
guides the life of every soul that works in harmony
with the Divine will; but this providence is working
to secure as its chief end, not material and temporal
blessings, but the moral and spiritual good of those
concerned. Paul’s teachings concerning Divine
providence as it concerns individuals and is condi-
tioned on character may be found summed up in
what is perhaps the most cemprchensive single sen-
tence concerning providence that was ever written:
“And we know that all things work together for


good to them that love God, to them who are the
called according to his purpose’ (Rom 8 28 AV).
Any true exposition of the NT doctrine of Divine
providence that may be given can only be an un-
folding of the content of this brief but comprehen-
sive statement. The greatest of the Pauline Epp.,
that to the Rom, is a study in the divine phi-
losophy of history, a revelation of God’s providential
purpose and plan concerning the salvation, not
merely of individuals, but of the nations. These
purposes, as Paul views them, whether they concern
individuals or the entire race, are always associated
with the mediatorial ministry of Christ: “For of
him, and through him, and unto him, are all things.
To him be the glory for ever” (Rom 11 36).

(5) The Petrine Epp. and other NT writings.—
The Epp. of Peter, James, and Jude, and the Ep.
to the He, are all in entire accord with the teach-
ings of the other NT writings already considered.
St. Peter, who at first found it so hard to see how
God's providential purpose in and for the Messiah
could be realized if Christ should suffer and die,
came later to see that the power and the glory of
Christ and His all-conquering gospel are inseparably
connected with the sufferings and death of the
Messiah (1 Pet 1 11.12). No statement con-
cerning God’s providence over the righteous can
be clearer or stronger than the following utterance
of Peter: ‘“The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, And his ears unto their supplication:
But the face of the Lord is upon them that do evil.
And who is he that will harm you, if ye be zealous of
that which is good?” (1 Pet 3 12.13). The purpose
and end of Divine providence as viewed in the Ep.
of Jas are always ethical: as conduct and character
are the end and crown of Christian effort, so they
are the end and aim of Divine providence as it co-
operates with men to make them perfect (Jas 1 5.
17.27; 2 5; 5 7). The apologetic value of the Ep.
to the He grows out of the strong proof it presents
that Christ is the fulfilment, not only of the Mes-
sianic prophecies and expectations of Israel, but of
the providential purposes and plans of that God
who at sundry times and in divers manners had
spoken in times past unto the fathers by a Jong line
of prophets (He 1 1.2; 11 7-40; 13 20.21). It
would be difficult to crowd into one short chapter
a more comprehensive study of the lessons of his-
tory that illustrate the workings and the retribu-
tions of the moral Jaw under Divine providence
than is found in the Ep. of Jude (see esp. vs 5.7.11.
14.15.24).

From this brief survey of the teachings of the
OT and NT Scriptures concerning the doctrine

of Divine providence, it will be seen


3. OT and that, while the NT reaffirms in most
NT Doc- particulars the doctrine of Divine
trines of providence as set forth in the OT
Pravidence Scriptures, there are three particu-
Compared lars in which the points of emphasis


are changed, and by which new and
changed emphasis the doctrine is greatly enriched
in the NT.

(1) The fatherhood and love of God in providence.
—The God of providence in the OT is regarded as a
Sovereign whose will is to be cbeyed, and His lead-
ing attributes are omnipotence and holiness, where-
as in the NT God is revealed as the heavenly Father,
and His providence is set forth as the forethought
and care of a father for his children. His leading
attributes here are love and holiness—His very
omnipotence is the omnipotence of love. To teach
that God is not only a righteous Ruler to be feared
and adored, but a tender and loving Father who is
ever thinking of and caring for His children, is to
make God lovable and turn His providence into an
administration of Almighty love-


2481


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Providence


(2) The place of Christ and the Holy Spirit in provi-
dence.—The doctrine of providence in the NT is con-
nected with the person of Christ and the administration
of the Holy Spirit, in a manner that distinguishes it from
the OT presentation of providence as the work of the
one God who was there revealed in the simple unity of
His nature without distinction of persons. Tt it he true,
as some theologians have taught, that '‘God the Father
plans, God the Son executes, and God the Holy Ghost
applies,’ then it would follow that providence Is the
work exclusively of Christ and the Holy Spirit; but this
theological formula, while it has suggestive value, cannot
he accepted as an accurate statement of Bih. doctrine
with reference to Divine providence. Christ constantly
refers creation and providence to the Father. But He
also said, ‘My Father worketh even until now, and I
work"’ (Jn § 17),and the NT writers attribute to Christ
the work both of creation and providence. Thus Paul:
“For by him were all things created, that are in heaven
and that are in earth, visible and invisihle, whether pee
he thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all
things were created hy him, and for him: and he is
hefore all things, and hy him all things consist’? (Col 1
16.17 AV). Although this and other passages refer to
Christ’s relation to general providence, including tho
government of the physical universe, yet it is only when
the Divine government is concerned with the redemption
of a lost world and the estahlishment of the Kingdom of
God in the hearts and lives of men, that the full extent
of Christ's part in Divine providence can he realized.
The saving and perfecting of men is the supreme purpose
of providence, if it he viewed from the NT standpoint,
which is that of Christ’s mediatorial ministry.


(3) The new emphasis upon moral and spiritual
blessings.—The NT not only subordinates the ma-
terial and temporal aspects of providence to the
spiritual and eternal more than does the OT, but
Christ and the apostles, to an extent that finds no
parallel in the OT, place the emphasis of their
teaching concerning providence upon man’s moral
needs and eternal interests, and upon the Kingdom
of God and His righteousness, the establishment of
which in the hearts and lives of men is the one great
object for which both the heavenly Father and His
children are ceaselessly working. To be free from
sin, to be holy in heart and useful in life, to love and
obey God as a Father, to love and serve men as
brothers—this is the ideal and the end for which,
according to the NT, men should work and pray,
and this is the end toward which God is working
by His ceaseless coéperative providence.

IV. Discussion of the Contents of the Biblical
Doctrine.—There are four distinct conceptions of

providence as it concerns God’s rela-
1. Different tion to the ongoing of the world and
Views of to man, the rational and moral free
Providence agent whom He has placed upon it,

viz. the atheistic, the deistic, the pan-
theistic, and the theistic or Bib. view. See also
Gop, I, 4. The last named view can best, be under-
stood only when stated in comparison and contrast
with these opposing views.


(1) Atheism, or materialism, stands at one extreme,
affirming that there is no Ged, that the material universe
is eternal, and that from material atoms, eternally en-
dowed with certain a aN there have come, by a
process of evolution, all existing forms of vegetable,
animal and rational life. As materialism denies the
existence of a personal Creator, it of course denies any
and every doctrine of Divine providence.

(2) Pantheism stands at the other extreme from
atheism, teaching that God is everything and everything
jis God. The created universe is ‘‘the living garment’!
of God—God is the soul of the world, the universe His
existence form. Bunt God is an infinite It, not a personal
Being who can_express His existence in terms of self-
consciousness—I, Thou, He. Providence, according to

antheism, is simply the evolution of impersonal deity,
Riffering from materialism only in the name which it gives
to the infinite suhstance from which all things flow.

(3) Deism teaches that there is a God, and that He
created the world, but created things do not need His
presence and the exercise of His power in order to con-
tinue in existence and fulfil their functions. The mate-
rial world is placed under immutable law; while man, the
rational and moral free agent, is left to do as he wills.
Ged sustains, according to deism, very much the same
relation to the universe that the clock-maker does to
his timepiece. Having made his clock, and wound it up.
be does not interfere with it, and the longer it can run
without the maker's intervention the greater the evi-


dence of wisdom and skill on the part ef the maker. God
according to delsm has never wrought a miracle nor made
a supernatural revelation to man. The only religien that
is possible to man is natural religion; he may reason from
Nature up to Nature's God. The enly value of prayer
is its subjective influence; it helps us to answer our own
ee to become and be what we are praying to be.

ft the Divine Being is a prayer-hearing Ged, He is at
least not a prayer-answering God. The laws of Nature
constitute God's general providence; but there is no other
personal and special providence than this, according to
deism. God, the deists affirm, is too great, too distant,
too transcendent a Being to concern Himself with the
details of creaturely existence.

(4) The theistic or Biblical conception of provi-
dence teaches that God is not only the Creator but
the Preserver of the universe, and that the preser-
vation of the universe, no less than its creation,
imphes and necessitates at, every moment of time
an omnipotent and omnipresent personal Being.
This world is not “governed by the laws of Nature,”
as deism teaches, but it is “governed by God, accord-
ing to the laws of Nature.” ‘Law,’ in itself, is an
impotent thing, except as it is the expression of a
free will or person back of it; “the laws of Nature”
are meaningless and impotent, except as they are
an expression of the uniform mode, according to
which God preserves and governs the world. It is
customary to speak of the laws of Nature as if they
were certain self-existent forces or powers govern-
ing the world. But shall we not rather say that
there is no real cause except personal will—either
the Divine will or created wills? If this be true,
then it is inconsistent to say that God has committed
the government of the physical universe to “second-
ary causes’—that is, to the laws of Nature—and
that these laws are not immediately dependent
upon Him for their efficiency. The omnipresent
and ever-active God is the only real force and power
and cause in the universe, except as created wills
may be true and real causes within their limited
bounds. This view of God’s relation.to the created
universe serves to distinguish the Bib. doctrine of
Divine providence from the teachings of material-
ists and deists, who eliminate entirely the Divine
hand from the ongoing of the universe, and in its
stead make a god of the “laws of Nature,” and
hence have no need for a Divine preserver. Bib.
theism makes ample room for the presence of the
supernatural and miraculous, but we must not be
blind to a danger here, in that it is possible to make
so much of the presence of God in the supematural
(revelation, inspiration, and miracle) as to over-
look entirely His equally important and necessary
presence in the natural—which would be to en-
courage a deistical conception of God’s relation to
the world by exaggerating His transcendence at
the expense of His immanence. That is the true
theistic doctrine of providence which, while not
undervalning the supernatural and miraculous, yet
stedfastly maintains that God is none the less present
in, and necessary to, what is termed the “natural.”

(5) The Divine Immanence.—This idea of God’s
essential relation to the continuation of all things in
existence is perhaps best expressed by the term ‘“‘im-
manence.”’ Creation emphasizes God’s transcend-
ence, while providence emphasizes His immanence.
Pantheism affirms God’s immanence, but denies His
transcendence. Deism affirms His transcendence,
but denies Hisimmanence. Bib. theism teaches that
God is both transcendent and immanent. By the
term ‘transcendence,’ when applied to God, is
meant that the Divine Being is a person, separate and
distinct from Nature and above Nature—“Nature”
being used here in its largest signification as including
all created things. By the Divine Immanence is
meant that God is in Nature as well as over Nature,
and that the continuance of Nature is as directly
and immediately dependent upon Him as the origin
of Nature—indeed, by some, God’s preservation of


Providence


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2482


the created universe is defined as an act of “con-
tinuous creation.”?’ By the Divine Immanence is
meant something more than omnipresence, which
term, in itself alone, does not affirm any causal
relation between God and the thing to which He is
present, whereas the term “immanence” does affirm
such causal relation. By asserting the Divine Im-
manence, therefore, as the mode of God’s providen-
tial efficiency, we affirm that all created things are
dependent upon Him for continued existence, that
the laws of Nature have no efficiency apart from
their Creator and Preserver, that God is to be
sought and seen in all forms and phases of creaturely
existence, in the natural as well as the supernatural
and miraculous, that He is not only omnipresent
but always and everywhere active both in the natu-
ral and the spiritual world, and that without Him
neither the material atom, nor the living organism,
nor the rational soul could have any being. He not
only created all things, but “by him all things con-
sist,” that is, by Him all things are preserved in
being.

What, then, let us ask, do the Scriptures teach
as to the purpose and end of God’s providential
government of the world? Back of
this question is another: What was
the ivine motive and supreme
thought in the creation of the uni-
verse, and what the final canse and
end of all things in the mind and pur-
pose of God? Tf we can think God’s thoughts after
Him and discover this “final cause” of creation,
with even approximate accuracy, then we shall find
a principle that will illuminate at least, if it does not
fully explain, the methods and mysteries of provi-
dence. We venture to affirm that the controlling
thought in the mind of God in establishing this
order of things, of which we are a conscious part,
was to create a race of beings who should find their
highest happiness by being in the highest degree
holy, and who should, in proportion as they attain
their highest holiness and happiness, thereby in the
highest degree glorify their Creator. The Creator’s
highest glory can be promoted only by such beings
as are at once rational, moral, free, holy. There
are unconscious, unthinking, unmoral forms of ex-
istence, but the motive and meaning of the universe
is to be found, not in the lower, the physical and
animal, but in the highest, in the rational and moral.
The lower exists for the higher, the material and
animal for the spiritual and moral. A being whose
character is formed under the conditions and laws
of intellectual and moral freedom is higher than
any being can be that is what it is necessitatively,
that is, by virtue of conditions over which it has no
control. Character that is formed freely under
God’s government and guidance will glorify the
Creator more than anything can which is made to
be what it is wholly by Divine omnipotence. These
things being true, it follows that God’s providence
in the world will be directed primarily and cease-
lessly toward developing character in free moral
agents, toward reducing sin to the minimum and
developing the maximum of holiness, in every way
and by every means compatible with perfect moral
freedom in the creature.

The possibility of sin in a world of free agents
and in a state of probation is unavoidable, but to
say that sin is possible does not mean that it is
necessary. See CuHoicE; Wii. The final cause
and end, the purpose and motive, of Divine provi-
dence, then, are not the temporal, material and
earthly happiness ef men, but the highest ultimate
moral good of free beings whose highest happiness
is secured through their highest holiness—which
means first, their obedience to the holy will of God
as their Father, and secondly, loving and self-


2. Purpose
and Final
End of
Providence


sacrificing service to their fellow-men. This ever-
present and all-dominating moral purpose of Divine
providence determines its methods and explains, in
part at least, what would otherwise be its mysteries.
With this conception of Divine providence the
general trend of Bib. thought is in entire accord.
In the light of Christ’s revelation of God as a holy
and loving Father who regards all men as His
children and whose chief concern is to develop holi-
ness and love in those whom He loves, we may
define Divine providence as Infinite Wisdom, using
infinite power to accomplish the ends of infinite
holiness and love. The originating and determining
cause of Divine providence is, in the NT conception
of it, always to be fonnd in the love of God, while
the final cause is the glory of the Father as realized
in the holiness and happiness of His children.

By the doctrine of special providence, according to the


best use of that term in theological literature, is meant
as already indicated, that minute care


3. Special and ever-watchful supervision which God
pacts exercises over His chedient and helieving
Providence children in things, both small and great,


i which are designed to secure their ever-
iucreasing holiness and usefulness. God's general provi-
dence is and must be special, in that it descends to par-
ticulars—to the minute details of creaturely existence—
and is always and everywhere active. But the Scrip-
tures teach that there is a more special care over and
ordering of the lives of the spiritually good than pertains
to the wicked, who have not the fear of God hefore their
eyes. The following Scriptures set forth in unmistakable
terms the doctrine of a special providence exercised by
the heavenly Father over and in hehalf of the righteous:
‘A man’s goings are established of Jeh; and he delight-
eth in his way” (Ps 37 23); ‘'In all thy ways acknowl-
edge him, and he will direct thy paths” (Prov 3 6):
‘'There shall no mischief ages to the righteous '’ (Prov
12 21); ‘' But seek ye first his kingdom, and his righteous-
ness; and _ all these things shall he added unto you” (Mt
6 33); ‘To them that love God all things work together
for good"’ (Rom 8 28). The following points seem to he
plainly involved in any statement of the doctrine of special
providence that can claim to he faithful to the teachings
of the Scriptures:

(1) Spiritual, not material, good to man the end sought
tn special providence.—A mistaken and hurtful notion
has long been prevalent to the effect that special provi-
dence is designed to secure the secular and earthly good,
the material and temporal prosperity, of God’s children.
Nothing could he farther from the truth. Material bless-
ings may indeed come as a special providence to the child
of God (Mt 6 33 etal.), but that ‘‘good" which all things
work ee to secure for them that love God is mainly
spiritual good, and not financial, or social, or intellect-
ual, or temporal good, except as these may secure ulti-
mate spiritual good. Indeed, God's special providence
may take away wealth and hring poverty in its stead in
order to impart the ‘‘true riches."’ It may defeat rather
than further one’s worldly hopes aud_ ambitions; may
bring sickness rather than health, and even death in-
stead of life—for sometimes a Christian can do more good
by sickness or death than by health or continued life—
and when that is the case, his sickuess or death may well
he interpreted as a special providence. “Every branch
that heareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may hring forth
more fruit.” Many of the OT promises do, it is true,
seem to have special reference to material and temporal
blessings, but we should remember that the hest inter-
pretation of these is to he found in the NT, where they are
(as, for example, when quoted by Christ in the Tempta-
tion) interpreted as having mainly a spiritual significance.
When Our Lord speaks of the very hairs of our heads
being numhered, and declares that if a sparrow cannot
fall to the ground without the Father's notice, surely we,
who are of more value than many sparrows, cannot drift
heyond His love and care, His words might he inter-
preted as teaching that God will save us from physical
suffering and death; but such Is not His meaning, for
in the ely, same context He speaks of how they to whom
He thus pledges His love and care shall be persecuted and
hated for His name's sake, and how some of them shall
he put to death; and yet His promise was true. God
was with them in their physical sufferings, but the great
hlessing wherewith He blessed them was not physical, .
but moral and spiritual.

(2) Special providence and “accidents.’'"—Another still
more mistaken and hurtful notion concerning special
providence is the association of it with, and the limitation


| of it largely to, what are called ‘‘ accidents,” those irregu-


lar and occasional occurrences which involve more than
ordinary danger and risk to life. The popular notion of
special providence associates it with a happy escape from
visible dangers and serious injury, as when the house
catches on fire, or the horses run away, or the train is


2483


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


wrecked, or the ea encounters an awful storm, or one
comes in contact with contagious disease or the terrible
pestilence that walketh in darkness. A happy escape
from injury and death on such an occasion is popularly
designated as a ‘special providence,” and this regardless
of whether the individual thus escaping is a saint or a
sinner. We cannot too strongly emphasizo tho fact that
God's special providence is not a capricious, occasional,
and irregular intervention of His love and power in behalf
of His children, but involves ceascless—yea infinite—
thought and care for those that love Him, everywhere and
in all the expcriences of life.

(3) Special providence as related to piety and prayer.—
God's special providence is conditioned upon piety and
prayer, though it far transcends, in the blessings it brings,
the specific requests of His children. While we may
properly pray for things pertaining to our temporal and
physical life with the assnrance that God will answer such
prayers in so far as He decms hest, yet the Scriptures
encourage us to make spiritual hlessings the main object
of our prayers. ‘Seek ye first his kingdom, and his
righteousness,"' 1s the essence of the NT teaching on
this subject; but we should not overlook the fact that
this Divine injunction is both preceded and followed by
the strongest assurances of the most minute and ceaseless

rovision for all our temporal and physical wants by the
loving heavenly Father. ‘‘Therefore take no thonght
saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or,
Wherewithal shall we be clothed? .... For your
heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these
things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto
you,” AV. In keeping with this Scripture, the poet has
written:
‘Make you His service your delight:
Your wants shall be His care.”


But while it is true that God has promised to make our
wants His care, we should remember that He has prom-
ised this only to that devout and godly number of pious,
proses souls who ‘seek first the kingdom of God, and

is righteousness.’’ His general providence is alike to
all, by which ‘‘he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and
on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the un-
just.’’ But it is only “to them that love God”’ that it
is promised that ‘‘all things work together for good ’'—
and the proof of love is not in one’s profession, but in
his obedience and service.

(4) Special providence as related to human coéperation.
—The words of Christ concerning the heavenly Father's
watchful and loving providence do not mean that the
children of Ged are not in any sense to take thought for
food and raiment, and lahor daily to ohtain the necessi-
ties of life. Labor, both mental and physical, is as much
a duty as prayer. The prayer, ‘‘Give us this day our
daily bread,” does not render it wnnecessary that they
who offer it should work for their own daily bread.
Nothing could be more hurtful to healthful Christian
activity than to interpret Our Lord’s insistence, in the
Sermon on the Mount and elsewhere, upon trust in the
heavenly Father’s watchful providence as a justification
of thoughtlessness, idleness, and improvidence; seeing
that its purpose is simply to warn us against that need-
less and hurtful anxiety about the future which is not
only inconsistent with trust in God, but which is utterly
destructive of man’s best efforts in his own behalf.


(5) Genéral and special providence both equally
Divine—While the Scriptures appear to us to make
a real and true distinction between God’s natural
and His supernatural order, and between His general
and His special providence, yet to truly pious and
wisely diseerning souls all is alike Divine, the natu-
ral as well as the supernatural, general as well as
special providence. So far as God’s faithful and
loving children are concerned, general and special
providence blend into one. The only real and im-
portant distinetion between the two is that made
by the free wills of men, by virtue of which some
are in loving accord with the Divine plans concern-
ing them, and others are at enmity with God and
oppose the purpose of His love concerning them.
If all men were, and had always been, alike trustful
and loving children of the heavenly Father, there
would perhaps never have been any occasion for
making a distinction between the general and the
special providence of God. The only distinction
we should have needed to recognize in that case
would have been as to the varicties of Divine provi-
dence, in view of the fact that the all-loving Father
would cause widely different events to happen to
His different children. If anyone, therefore, is m-
clined to deny the distinction which we have here
made between general and special providence, and


Providence


prefers to affirm that there is but one general provi-


dential order over mankind in the world, that the
distinction is in man and not in God’s providence,
his position cannot: be seriously objected to, pro-
vided he does not thereby mean that the world is
governed by impersonal and immutable laws, but
will affirm with elearness and confidence that the
world is governed by the all-loving, all-wise, omni-
present, and everywhere-active God. For, mdeed,
the only thing that is really “special” and out of
order is the limitation which sin imposes upon the
workings of Divine providence in so far as the self-
will and opposition of men prevent the realization
of the providential purposes of God concerning
them. But, unfortunately, sin is now, and has
long been, so prevalent and dominant in the world
that we have come to regard God’s providence as
affected and limited by it, as that which is regular
and general, and His more perfect and complete
providence in behalf of and over the good as the
exceptional and special. But whether we call
Divine providence, as related to believers, ‘‘general”’
or “special,” is of little consequence, provided we
believe that “the steps of a good man are ordered
by the Lord” (Ps 37 23 AV), that “all things work
together for [spiritual] good to them that love God,”
and that to those who, duly subordinating the
temporal to the spiritual, seek “first the kingdom of
God and his righteousness,” all things needful
“shall be added”’ by the heavenly Father.

The problem of Divine providence has its utmost

significance, not in its bearing on the laws of physi-

cal nature, but in that phase of it
4. Divine which concerns God’s dealings with
Providence moral agents, those creatures who
and Human may, and often do, act contrary to
Free Will His will. God governs men as a

father governs his children, as a king
governs his free subjects; not as a machinist works
his machine, or a3 a hypnotist controls his mesmer-
ized victims. A father in his family and a sovereign
in his realm may each do as he pleases within
certain limits, and God infinitely more: ‘He
doeth according to his will in the army of heaven,
and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none
ean stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest
thou?” (Dnl 4 35). He setteth up one and putteth
down another. Nevertheless, even God acts within
limits; He limited Himself when He created free
agents. As a mere matter of power God can pre-
determine man’s volitions and necessitate his acts,
but He can do so only by making of him a kind of
rational machine, and destroying his true freedom.
But Scripture, reason and consciousness all unite
in teaching man that he is morally free, that he is
an agent, and not something merely acted on.
God’s providential government of men, therefore, is
based on their freedom as rational and moral beings,
and consists in such an administration and guidance
by the Holy Spirit of the affairs of men as shall en-
courage free moral agents to virtue, and discourage
them from sin. God’s providence must needs work
upon and with two kinds of wills—willing wills and
opposing wills.

(1) Divine providence as related to willing wills.—The
apostle declares that God works in believers ‘‘both to will
and to do of his gocd pleasure.’’ If God's special provi-
dence over and in behalf of His children may involve an
intervention of His Divine power within the realm of
physical law, much more, it would seem, will it involve
a similar intervention within the realm of the human
mind and the human will. Spiritual guidance is one
of the most precious privileges of believers, but it Is
difficult to conceive how the Holy Spirit can effectually
guide a believer without finding some way of controlling
his will and determining his volitions that is compatible
with free agency. While most of man’s thonghts, emo-
tions and volitions are self-determined in their origin,


being due to the free and natural workings of bis own
mind and heart and will, yet there are also thoughts,


Providence
Province


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2484


emotions and volitions that are Divinely produced. Even
a sinner under conviction of sin has thoughts and emo-
tions that are produced by the Holy Ghost. Much more
has the believer Divinely produced thoughts and feelings;
and if Divinely produced thoughts and fcelings, there
may he, in like manner, it would seem, Divinely produced
volitions. Does this seem irreconcilable with the fact
of moral free agency? We think not; itis no more sub-
versive of human free agency for God to influence effect-
ively a man’s volitions and secure a certain course of
action than it is for one man effectively to influence
another. No volition that is Divinely necessitated can
be a free moral volition; for moral volitions are such as
are put forth freely, in view of motives and moral ends.
The element of necessity and compulsion would destroy
all true freedom in, and moral accountahility for, any
particular volition, so that it could not he either virtuous
or vicious. But—and here is the crucial point—-when a
man, hy an act of his own will, freely commits the order-
ing of his life to God, and prays God to choose for him
what is best, working in him hoth to will and to do, that
act of self-commitment to God involves the very essence
of moral freedom, and is the highest exercise of free
agency. ‘‘Our wills are ours to make them Thine,”’
the poet has truly said. In other words, the highest
moral act of man's free will is the surrender of itself to
the Divine will; and whatever control of man’s will on
God's part results from and follows this free act of self-
surrender is entirely consistent with perfect moral free-
dom, even though it should involve Divinely produced
volitions. Does a perplexed child cease to be free when
in the exercise of his freedom he asks a wise and loving
father to decide a matter for him, and he his guide in
attaining a certain desired end? Surely not; and this
intervention of parental wisdom and love is none the less
effective if it should work, as far as possible, through the
mind and will of the child, rather than allow the child
to he entirely passive. So God works effectually through
the mind and will of every soul who unreservedly commits
himself to the Divine will—commits himself not once
simply, but continually. God cannot under the Divinely
appointed laws of freedom work in and through the
sinner ‘‘hoth to will and to do,”’ hecause the sinner'’s will
is bent on evil, and hence opposed to the Divine will.
God's will ean work, not with, but only against, a sinful
will; and if it should so work and necessitate his voli-
tions, éhat would destroy his true freedom. But, if God
should work in and through an ohedient and acqniescent
will that is secking Divine guidance, that would he an
exercise of Divine power in no way incompatible with
the true moral freedom of men. Such is the influence,
as we conceive it, of the Divine upon the human will in
providence. God's providence works effectively only
through willing wills.

(2) Divine providence as related to sinful free will.
But God's providence encounters opposing as well as
willing wills. Not every unconverted man, however,
represents an equally antagonistic will—there are differ-
ent degrees of opposition. That God’s gracious and
special providence in behalf of an individual often ante-
dates his forsaking sin and his acceptance of Christ as a
personal Saviour is manifest to every student of Christian
hiography. Much of the hest training that many a
‘‘chosen vessel’’ ever receives for his life-work turns out
to he that unconscious provident preparation which
he was receiving under a Father's guidance before he con-
sciously consecrated himself to his Divine Master. ‘‘T
girded thee, thongh thou hast not known me,” said God to
Cyrus—and on this text Horace Bushnell preached one
of the greatest of modern sermons on Divine providence,
taking as his theme, ‘‘Every man’s life a plan of God.”
If this he true of a Christian man, that even hefore his
conversion the Holy Spirit was seeking him, and even

_ preparing him, as far as was then possible, for fulfilling
the ‘‘ plan of God"’ in his life, is it notin all prohahility
equally true that the Holy Spirit and the good provi-
dence of God were working in hehalf of other sinners who
persisted to the end in rehellion against God? Such is
the power of moral free agency with which God has en-
dowed man that the created free agent can defeat the
plan of Infinite Love concerning his life, and frustrate
the workings of providence in his hehalf (Jer 18).
Whether a free moral agent, then, shall allow God's
providential plans to he wrought out for him or not,
depends upon his own free will. Itis said of the Divine
Christ that He could not do many mighty works in a
certain city hecauso of their unhelicf and opposition.
In like manner Divine poowadedes is conditioned and
limited by a sinful free will.


That the Bib. writers do not regard the existence
of evil as a valid objection to Divine providence is
evident to every student of the Scriptures. Indeed,
it is in working good out of what the world accounts
evil that Divine providence accomplishes many of
its most salutary and beneficent ends in behalf of
the good. That natural or physical evil (poverty,
sickness, suffering, etc) is one of the mightiest
agencies in the hands of God for restraining and


correcting moral evil and for working ont moral
and spiritual good to fallen and sinful men, admits
of easy demonstration. For the exist-


5. Divine ence in the world of moral evil (sin),
Providence man, the moral free agent, is wholly
as Related responsible. God could prevent moral
to Natural free agents from sinning only by not
and Moral creating them, or else by placing
Evil their wills under irresistible Divine re-


straint and compulsion. But the lat-
ter method of controlling them would virtually
destroy their real and true freedom; and if this were
done, then not only all sin, but all virtue and holiness
as attributes of free beings would be thereby rendered
impossible in men; for only such beings can put
forth free holy volitions as can put forth free sinful
volitions. If man had never sinned, there would
probably have never been such a large providential
use of natural or physical evil as at present prevails;
and this becanse of the fact that an unfallen and
holy race of beings would not have needed the
presence of natural evil to secure their highest moral
development. But a fallen and sinful race does
need such an agency to bring it back to God and to
develop holy character and the highest moral
service. It is not true that sin is now always or
even generally the immediate cause of an indi-
vidual’s suffering physical evil, or that extraor-
dinary suffering is a proof of extraordinary sin.
“Master, who didsin,”’ asked the disciples, ‘‘this man,
or his parents, that he was born blind? Jesus
answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his
parents: but that the works of God should be made
manifestinhim” (Jn 9 2.3 AV). Human snfferingis
for man’s spiritual good and for the Divine glory,
as shown in working good out of evil—this is the
explanation which the Master gives as to why natn-
ral evilis permitted orsentby God. Itisnotonlya
powerful, a in a world like ours, a necessary agency
for the correction and cure of moral evil and for the
spiritual development of fallen man. “Before I
was afflicted I went astray; but now I observe thy
word..... It is good for me that I have been
afflicted; that I may learn thy statutes’ (Ps 119
67.71); ‘Every branch that beareth fruit, he
cleanseth it, that it may bear more fruit” (Jn 15 2).
The saintly and eminently useful men and women
of history have, as a rule, had to undergo a severe
discipline and to endure many and severe trials,
and were made perfect only by their sufferings.
Divine providence thus turns much of the world’s
natural and physical evil into moral good.


Many of the things that hefall the children of God are
directly due to the sins of other men. That good men,
even the very hest of men, suffer many


6. Evil things at the hands of wicked men admits
Pp; sd of no question; and yet these ills are
roviden= among the ‘‘all things” which are declared


tially Over- hy the apostle to work together for good


to them that love God. The good that
ules for may ensue to good men from the evil con-


duct of the wicked is certainly not due to
the intrinsic power in sin to work good to
those against whom it is maliciously directed; it can
only he due to the fact that God overrules it for the
good of the innocent. ‘‘As for you,” said Joseph, ‘‘ye
meant evil against me; but God meant it for good”
(Gen_50 20) ; “The things which happened unto me,”’
said Paul, ‘‘have fallen out rather unto the progress of
the gospel’’ (Phil 1 12). God, though foreknowing the
evil that wicked men are planning to work against His
children, may not prevent it; and this because Ho can and
will overrule it for His glory and for their good, if they
ahide faithful. But, suppose a good man is not simply
injured, hut killed by the wicked, as in the ease of the
martyrs that died at the stake—does the principle still
hold good? It docs, we answer; the saint who dies in
the discharge of duty and hecause of his fidelity to duty
is not only assured, hy all the promises of revelation, of
a happy immortality, hut he has the rare privilege of
serving to advance the kingdom of God hy his death as
well as by his life. God's kingdom is advanced iu mani-
fold ways hy the death of good men. Is not ‘‘the blood
of the martyrs the secd of the church"? But we need


2485


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Providence
Province


here again to remark that it is not material and tem-
poral, but_moral and spiritual good, that God has gnar-
anteed to His holy, loving and faithfui children. If sin
had an intrinsic power to work good, they would be right
who maintain that ‘the end justifies the means, and one
may do evil when good wili come of it’? (cf Rom 3 8);
and they also would be right who malntain that God is
the author of evil, seeing that evil is, on that supposition,
only disguised good—propositions which are thoroughi
vicious and subversive of all that is good in man or God.
The Scriptures, rightly interpreted, nowhere lend them-
selves to such false and misleading ethics (cf Isa 45 7).

To what extent may we, having studied God's provi-
dential methods as revealed in the Scriptures, in Nature,

in human history, and in personai expe-

q. Interpret- rience, venture to interpret providence as
ing Provi- it applies to current events in our own lives
A and in the lives of others? Experience and

ence observation will warn us both against haste
7 and against too great confidence in our in-
terpretations of providence. Hasty misinterpretations of
providence in its bearing on present passing events fre-
quently become fruitful sources of skepticism for the
future. Some people are much given to interpreting
providence. Certain ills or misfortunes come to a bad
man; they are quick to assert that it is a Divine judg-
ment sent upon him in view of his sin. Certain blessings
come to a good man; they are sure the blessings are
heaven-sent in view of his extraordinary piety. A
whiskey merchant's store burns down: it is, say they,
a Divine judgment,in view of his ill-gotten gains. But
presently the BlOHer ty. of all unquestionably pious and
consecrated man_is swept away by the flames: where
now is the providence? The ‘‘oracies’’ fail to explain;
and so they do in innumerable other cases: as, for ex-
ample, when two men, a saint and a sinner, are prostrated
on beds of sickness. The former, in spite of prayer and
piety, continues to grow worse, and perhaps dies; while
the other, without piety or prayer, is restored to health.
God has not made us interpreters of His providences
except for ourselves; and even much of that which we
sincerely believe comes to us in a graciously providential
manner we can well afford to keep as a sacred secret he-
tween ourselves and our God, seeing that God has not
furnished us with any means of absolutely proving that
what has happened to us might not have happened, under
similar circumstances, even to sinful men. Many a
Christian man comes to see that the ill that has happened
to him—the loss of property, the terrible spell of sick-
ness, and the like—things that, at the time, he would
not interpret as providentiai—are among the best things
that were ever sent upon him, in that they made him
holier and more useful (cf Jn 13 7).

‘Blind unbelief is sure to err,
And scan His work in vain;
God is His own interpreter
And He will make it plain.’’

There are, however, many evident truths ''writ large’
on the pages of history, in the rise, decline and fall of
kingdoms and nations, which he who runs may read.
And to him who truly believes in the God and Father of
Our Lord Jesus Christ and who will guy. consider all the
facts and lessons of life, in himself and others, in indi-
viduals and in nations, and not for a day merely but
patiently as the years come and go, it will be made plain
that ‘God's in His heaven—All's right with the world,”
and that all things work together for the spiritual good of
those who love God and who prove their love for Him by
serving their fellow-men.


We conclude, then, that there is, according to the
Scriptures, an ever-watchful providence exercised
the heavenly Father over His
faithful and loving children, which is
ceaselessly working to secure their
ever-increasing holiness and usefulness
here, and their perfect happiness in a future state of
existence. To prepare rational and immortal free
agents through holiness and usefulness here for
happiness hereafter is the aim and end of this all-
embracing providence of God, which includes within
its loving care every human being except such as
exclude themselves therefrom by their own wilful
and persistent sinning. And in the accomplish-
ment of this end, what the world counts as the mis-
fortunes and ills of life often contribute far more
than what, in the estimation of men, are accounted
the greatest earthly blessings. There is no provi-
dential highway to a state here that is free from life's
ills, and that abounds in temporal and earthly
blessings to the good. But there isa royal and holy
highway, along which moves a providential pillar
of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night, leading
the children of the covenant, through lives of loving


8. Conclu-
sion


service and sacrifice, to a holy land of promise, the
goal of a gracious providence; and they who journey
along this highway bear this seal: ‘The Lord
knoweth them that are his: And, Let every one that
nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity”
(2 Tim 2 19AV). They who bear this seal are the
Divinely chosen instruments and agents of that
larger and wider providence that is ever working
to establish a perfect, kingdom of righteousness in
the whole earth, that kingdom of God, to inangurate
which, in its Messianic form, Our Lord became
incarnate, and to consummate which, in its final
and perfect form, He reigns from heaven and will
continue to reign until, having “put all enemies
under his feet,”’ He shall ‘deliver up the kingdom to
God, even the Father’’—when the poet’s vision
shall be realized of
“That God who ever lives and loves;
One God, one law, one element,


And one far-off Divine event,
To which the whole creation moves."


LivERATURE.—James Orr, The Christian View of God
and the World; A. B. Bruce, The Providential Order of
the World; James McCosh, The Method of Divine Gov-
ernment; James Hinton, The Mystery of Pain; John _Tel-
ford, Man's Partnership with Divine Providence; W.N.
Clarke, The Christian Doctrine of God and An Outline
of Christian Theology; W. B. Pope, Compendium. of
Christian Theology; A. L. Lilley, Adventus Regni; Oehler,
Theology of the OT; Wendt, The Teaching of Jesus;
George B. Stevens, The Pauline Theology; E. P. Gould,
The Bib. Theology of the NT; T. Jackson, The Provi-
dence of God Viewed tn_the Light of the Holy Scripture;
H. M. Gwatkin, The Knowledge of God; Lux Mundi:
Preparation in History for Christ; J. Flavell, Divine
Conduct, or the Mystery of Providence; O. D. Watkins,
The Divine Providence; Borden P. Bowne, The Imma-
nence of God.

Witpor F. Titterr

PROVINCE, prov’ins (13°79, m*dhinah, “juris-
diction’; érapxta, eparchta [EV province] [Acts 23
34; 26 1):

1. Meaning of the Term

2. Roman Provincial Administration
3 First Period

2) Second Period

3) Third Period

3. Division of Provinces

4. Provinee of Judaea

5. Revenue

LITERATURD


Province (provincia) did not originally denote a
territorial circumscription in Rom usage, since the
employment of the word was much
1. Meaning more ancient than any of the_con-
of the Term quests of the Romans outside of Italy.
In the most comprehensive official
sense it signified a magistrate’s sphere of adminis-
trative action, which in one instance might be the
direction of jurisdiction at Rome, in another the
management of military operations against a par-
ticular hostile community. When the imperium
was conferred upon two consuls at the beginning
of the Republic, and upon a praetor in 367 BC, and
finally upon a second praetor in 241 BC, it became
necessary in practice to define their individual com-
petence which was unlimited in theory. When the
Romans extended their control over lands situated
outside of Italy, it became expedient to fix terri-
torial limits to the exercise of authority by the
magistrates who were regularly sent abroad, so
that provincia signified henceforth in an abstract
sense the rule of the governor, and in a concrete
sense the specified region intrusted to his care; and
with the development and consolidation of the
Rom system of administration, the geographical
meaning of the word became more and more sig-
nificant,

The history of Rom provincial administration
in the more definite sense commences in 227 BC,
when four praetors were elected for the first time,
of whom two were assigned to the government of


Province
Psalms, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2486


the provinces. Three periods may be distinguished
in the history of the system of provincial adminis-
tration: (1) from 227 BC to Sulla, (2)


2. Roman from Sulla to Augustus, and (3) the
Provincial Empire.

Adminis- (1) First period —During the first
tration period, provision was made for the


government of the provinces by means
of special praetors, or, in exceptional circumstances,
by consuls, during their term of office. Accord-
ingly, the number of praetors was increased from
four in 227 BC to eight at the time of Sulla.

(2) Second period—In accordance with the re-
forms of Sulla all the consuls and praetors remained
at Rome during their year of office, and were in-
trusted with the administration of provinces a sub-
sequent year with the title proconsul (pro consule)
or propraetor (pro praetore). The proconsuls were
sent to the more important provinces. The senate
determined the distinction between consular and
praetorian provinces and generally controlled the
assignment of the provinces to the ex-magistrates.
Julius Caesar increased the praetors to sixteen, but
Augustus reduced them to twelve.

(3) Third period.—In 27 BC, Augustus as com-
mander-in-chief of the Rom army definitely assumed
the administration of all provinces which required
the presence of military forces and left the other
provinces to the control of the senate. There were
then twelve imperial and ten senatorial provinces,
but all provinces added after 27 BC came under
imperial administration. The emperor adminis-
tered his provinces through the agency of personal
delegates, legati Augusti of senatorial, and prae-
fectt or procuratores of equestrian, rank. The term
of their service was not uniform, but continued
usually for more than a single year. The sena-
torial administration was essentially a continuation
of the post-Sullan, republican régime. The sena-
torial governors were called proconsuls generally,
whether they were of consular or praetorian rank;
but Africa and Asia alone were reserved for ex-
consuls, the eight remaining senatorial provinces
being attributed to ex-praetors. The financial
administration of each imperial province was in-
trusted to a procurator, that of cach senatorial
province to a quaestor.

The provinces were divided into smaller circum-
scriptions (civitates) for the purposes of local govern-

ment. In the older provinces these
3. Division districts corresponded generally with
of Provinces the urban communities which had been

the units of sovereignty before the
advent of the Romans. Under Rom rule they were
divided into different classes on the basis of their
dignity and prerogatives, as follows:

(1) Coloniae: Rom or Lat colonies established after
the model of the Italian commonwealths.

(2) Civitates foederatae: Communitics whose independ-
ence had been guaranteed _by a formal treaty with Rome.

(3) Civttates liberae: Communities whose independ-
ence the Romans respected, although not bound to do so
by a formal obligation.

(4) Civitates stipendiartae: Communities which had
surrendered to the discretion of the Romans and to
which limited powers of local government were granted
by the conquerors as a matter of convenience.

The civitates stipendiariae, and in some cases the col-
onies, paid taxes to thc Rom government, the greater
part of which was in the form either of a certain propor-


tion of the annual products of the soil, sucb as a fifth or
tenth, or a fixed annual payment in money or kind.


Judaca became a part of the province of Syria
in 63 BC, but was assigned in 40 BC as a kingdom
to Herod the Great, whose sovereignty

4. Province hecame effective three years later.
of Judaea The provincial régime was reéstab-
lished in 6 AD, and was broken only

during the years 41-44 AD, when Herod Agrippa
was granted royal authority over the land (Jos,


Ant, XIX, viii, 2). The Rom administration was
in the hands of the procurators (see PRocURATORS)
who resided at Caesarea (Jos, BJ, Il, xv, 6; Acts
23 23.33; 25 1) in the palace of Herod the Great
(Acts 23-35). The procurators of Judaea were
subject to the authority of the imperial governors
of Syria, as is evident from the deposition of Pontius
Pilate by Vitellius (Jos, Ant, XVIII, iv, 2; Tac.
Ann. vi.32). The precurator was competent to
exercise criminal jurisdiction over the provincials
in cases involving a capital sentence (Jos, BJ, II,
viii, 1), but he was bound to grant an appeal by
Rom citizens for trial at Rome (Acts 26 11). A
death sentence by the Sanhedrin required the sanc-
tion of the procurator, as appears in the process
against the Saviour. Under Rom rule cities like
Caesarea, Sebaste, and Jerus became organs for
local government, like the urban communities in
other parts of the Empire.

The revenue of Pal under Claudius is said to
have been 12,000,000 denarii (about $2,400,000, or

£500,000; cf Jos, Ant, XIX, viii, 2).
5. Revenue In addition to the ground tax, the

amount of which is not known, a variety
of indirect contributions were collected on auctions,
salt, highways, bridges, etc, which constituted, no
doubt, the field of activity in which the publicans
gained their unenviable reputation.

LitTERATURE.—The reader may be directed to Mar-
quardt, Rémische Staatsverwaltung, I, 497-502, 517-57,
for a general discussion of the Rom system of provincial
administration, and to the same volume, pp. 405-12, for
the provincial government of Pal.

GrorcEe H. ALLEN

PROVOCATION, prov-é-ka’shun, PROVOKE,
pré-vok’: “Provoke,”’ lit. ‘‘to call forth,” hence to
excite or stir up, whether in a good or bad sense,
appears frequently in the OT as the tr of Piel, or
Hiph. of B25, ka‘as (noun, SY3, ka‘as), in the sense
of “to make angry” (Dt 4 25; 9 18; 1 K 14 9.15,
etc); sometimes of 172, marah (Isa 3 8), and of
other words. In the NT we have sapatnAdw,
parazél6d, “to make jealous” (Rom 10 19; 11 11.
14); wapopyl{w, parorgizd, ‘‘to make angry” (Eph
6 4; ef Col 3 21); with mapamipaivw, para-
pikratnd, “to embitter” (He 3 16; cf in 1 Esd 6
15), and other Gr words. ‘‘Provocation” in He 3
8.15 (quoting Ps 96 8) is paroptkrasmés, LXX for
Heb meribhah. An example of the good sense of the
word is in He 10 24, ‘‘Consider one another to pro-
voke[lit. ‘‘to the provoking,”’ here paroxusmés] unto
love and good works.”

For ‘‘provoke'' RV has ‘despise’? (Nu 14 11; Dt
31 20), ‘‘rebel_against’’ (Ps 78 40); for '‘provoked,”
“despised’’ (Nu 14 23; 16 30; Isa 1 4), ‘*moved”
(Dt 32 16; 1 Ch 21 1), ‘rebelled against’' (Ps 78 56),
“were rebellious” (106 33.43); for ‘‘provoking"™ (Ps
78 17), ‘‘to rebel against”; for ‘‘ provoked" (2 Cor 9
2), ‘stirred up”'’; ‘provoked within"’ for ‘‘stirred in"
(Acts 17 16); ‘‘provoked"' for ‘‘limited"’ (Ps 78 41m,
limited"); “provoketh" for ‘‘emboldeneth" (Job 16
3); instead of ‘tProvoke not your cbildren to anger’
(Cal 3 21), ‘Provoke not your children."

. L. WALKER

PRUDENCE, proo’dens, PRUDENT, prod’dent:
In the OT “prudence” is the tr of MOT, ‘ormah


(Prov 8 12); also in AV of Sow, sekhel (2 Ch 2 12,
RV “diseretion”’); and “prudent” is the trof BIW,
‘gram, “subtle” (Prov 12 16.23; 13 16, etc; ef
Gen 3 1; Job & 12), and of 3, bin (1 S 16 18,
RVm “skilful”; Prov 16 21; 18 15; Isa 5 21;
10 13, ARV “understanding,” etc), with other
words. In the NT “prudence” occurs once as the
tr of ¢pérnois, phrénésis (Eph 18); “prudent”
is in AV the tr of cuverés, sunctés, changed in RV
to “understanding” (Mt 11 25; Acts 13 7); in
1 Cor 1 19, ARV has ‘‘the discerning,” ERV retains
“prudent.”’ In its etymological sense of seeing be-
forehand (contraction of “providence”), “prudence”


2487


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Province
Psalms, Book of


docs not occur in the NT. As forethought, fore-
sight, prudence was reckoned one of the cardinal
virtues by the ancient ethical writers. See the re-
marks of Coleridge on its lower and higher character
in his Aids to Reflection, Aphor. 29.
W. L. WaLKER

PRUNING-HOOK, proon'ing-hook. See Hoox,

(3); VINE.


PSALMS, simz, BOOK OF (morn, thillim,
“praises,” DXSM WO, sépher tehillim, “book of
praises’; Wodpol, Psalmot, Vadrhpiov, Psaltérion):

I. Intropuctory Topics

1. Title
2. Place in the Canon
3. Number of Pss
4. Titles in the Hebrew Text
TI. AvutHorsuip ano AGE OF THE Pss
1. David as a Psalmist
2. Psalmody after David
III. Growrts or THe Psatter
1. Division into Five Books
_ 2. Smaller Groups of Pss
IV. Poetry or tHe Psatter
. THE SPEAKER IN THE Pss
Vil. Tse GospEL IN THE PSALTER
. The Soul’s Converse with God
2. The Messiah
Problem of Sin
. Wrestling with Doubts
. Out of the Depths
. Ethical Ideals
. Praying against the Wicked
. The Future Life
LITERATURE

I. Introductory Topics.—The Heb title for the
Psalter is sépher t*hillim, “book of praises.”” When
we consider the fact that more than
20 of these poems have praise for their
_ keynote, and that there are outbursts
of thanksgiving in many othcrs, the fitness of the
Heb title dawns upon us. As Ker well says, ‘“The
book begins with benediction, and ends with praise
—first, blessing to man, and then glory to God.”
Hymns of praise, though found in all parts of the
Psalter, become far more numerous in Books IV
and V, as if the volume of praise would gather itself
up into a Hallelujah Chorus at the end. :

In the Gr version the book is entitled in some
MSS Psalmoi, in others Psaltérion, whence come
our Eng. titles “Psalms,” and ‘Psalter.’ The Gr
word psalmos, as well as the Heb mizmér, both of
which are used in the superscriptions prefixed to
many of the separate pss, indicates a poem sung to
the accompaniment of stringed instruments. The
title mizmor is found before 57 pss. The Psalter
was the hymnal of the Jewish nation. To indi-
vidual pss other titles are sometimes prefixed, such
as shir, “song”; thillah, “praise”; i*phillah, “pray-
er,” etc. The Psalter was both prayerbook and
hymnal to the Jewish people. _ It was also a manual
for the nurture of the spiritual life in private as well
as public worship.

The Pss were placed in the kethibhim or “ Writings,””


the third group of the Heb Scriptures. As the chief
i peek of the kethabhim, the Psalter appears


_


BONO ond wo


1. Title


2. Place first in the great majority of German MSS,
re though the Spanish MSS place Pss after
in the Ch, and the Talm puts Ruth before Pss.
Canon There has never been any serious question


as to the right of the Psalter to a place
in the Canon of Scripture. The book is possibly more
highly esteemed among Christians than by the Jews.
1f Christians were permitted to retain only one book in
the OT, they would almost certainly choose Pss. aye
100 BC, and probably at a much earlier date, the Boo
of Pss was completed and recognized as art of the
Hagtographa, the 3d_ division of the Heb Bible.
According to the Heb text, followed by modern VSS,
there are 150 separate poems in the Psalter. | The Gr
version has an additional ps, in which


3. The David describes his victory over Goliath;

3 g but this is expressly said_to be “outside
Number o the number.” The LXX, followed by
Psalms Vulg, combined Pss 9 and 10, and also 114


and 115, into a single ps. On the other
hand, they divide Pss 116 and 147 each into two poems.


Thus for the greater part of the Psaltcr the Heb enumera-
Dre one number in advance of that in the Gr aud Lat
__ The existing division in the Heb text has been called
in question at various points. Pss 42 and 43 are almost
certainly one poem (sce refrain in 42 5.11; 43 5); and
it is probable that Pss 9 and 10 were originally one, as
in LXX. On the other hand, it is thought by some that
certain pss were composed of two originally separate
oems. We may cite as examples Ps 19 1-6.7—-14;
4 1-6.7-10; 27 1-6.7-14; 36 1-4.5-12. It is evident
that such comhinations of two different poems into one
may have taken place, for we have an example in Ps
108, which is composed of portions of two other pss
(57 7-11; 60 5-12).

(1) Value of the superscriptions.—It is the fashion

among advanced critics to waive the titles of the

pss out of court as wholly worthless
4, Titlesin and misleading. This method is as
the Hebrew thoroughly unscientifie as the older
Text procedure of defending the super-

scriptions as part of an inspired text.
These titles are clearly very old, for the LXX, in
the 2d cent. BC, did not understand many of them.
The worst that can be said of the superscriptions
is that they are guesses of Heb editors and scribes
of a period long prior to the Gr version. As to
many of the musical and liturgical titles, the best
learning of Heb and Christian scholars is unable to
recover the original meaning. The scribes who pre-
fixed the titles had no conceivable reason for writing
nonsense into their prayerbook and hymnal. These
superscriptions and subscriptions all had a worthy
meaning, when they were first placed beside indi-
vidual pss. This indisputable fact of the great
antiquity of these titles ought forever to make it
impossible for scientific research to ignore them
Grant, for the sake of argument, that not one of
them came from the pen of the writers of the Pss,
but only from editors and compilers of exilic or
post-exilic days, it would still be reasonable to give
attention to the views of ancient Heb scholars,
before considering the conjectures of modern critics
on questions of authorship and date. Sources of
information, both oral and written, to which they
had access, have long since perished. In estimating
the value of their work, we have a right to use the
best critical processes known to us; but it is un-
scientific to overlook the fact that their proximity
to the time of the composition of the Pss gave them
an advantage over the modern scholar. If it be
said by objectors that these ancient scribes formed
their conclusions by the study of the life of David
as portrayed in the historical books of K and Ch,
the reply is ready that several historical notices
in the titles cannot be thus explained. Who was
Cush? Who was Abimelech? (Pss 7 and 34). A
careful weighing of the facts concerning the super-
scriptions will make it seem highly improbable that
the earliest of these titles does not reach back into
preéxilic times. We almost certainly have in them
the results of the labors of Heb scribes and compilers
stretching over several centurics. Some of the
titles may have been appended by the psalmists
themselves.

Weare far from claiming that the titles are always
intelligible to us, or that, when understood, they
are always correct. The process of constructing
titles indicative of authorship had not ceased in
the 2d cent. BC, the LXX adding many to pss that
were anonymous in the Heb. The view expressed
nearly 50 years ago by Perowne is eminently sane:
“The inscriptions cannot always be relied on. They
are sometimes genuine, and really represent the
most ancient tradition. At other times, they are
due to the caprice of later editors and collectors,
the fruits of conjecture, or of dimmer and more un-
certain traditions. In short, the inscriptions of the
Pss are like the subscriptions to the Epp. of the NT.
They are not of any necessary authority, and ther


Psalms, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2488


j


value must be weighed and tested by the usual |
eritical processes.” {


(2) Thirtle’s theory.—J. W. Thirtle (The Titles of the |
Pss, 1904) advances the hypothesis that both super-
scriptions and subscriptions were incorporated in the |
Psalter, and that in the process of copying the Pss by
hand, the distinction between the superscription of a
given ps and the suhscription of the one immediately
preceding it was finally lost. When at length the differ-
ent pss were separated from one another, as in printed
edd, the subscriptions and_superscriptions were all set
forth as superscriptions. Thus it came ahout that the
musical subscription of a given ps was prefixed to the
literary superscription of the ps immediately following
it. The prayer of Hahakkuk (Hab $) was taken by
Thirtle as a model or normal ps; and in this instance the
superscription was literary, ‘'A prayer of Habakkuk the
prophet upon Shigionoth,’’ while the subscription is
musical, ‘'For the Chief Musician, on my stringed in-
struments.” The poem of Hezekiah in celebration of his
recovery (Isa 38 9-20) seems to support Thirtle’s thesis,
the superscription stating the authorship and the occa-
sion that gave hirth to the ps, while ver 20 hints at the
musical instruments with which the ps was to be accom-
panied in public worship. If now the musical notes he
separated from the notes of authorship and date that
follow them, the musical notes being appended as sub-
scriptions, while the literary notes are kept as real super-
scriptions, the outcome of the separation is in many in-
stances a more intelligihle nezus between title and poem.
Thus the suhscript to Ps 55, ‘'The dove of the distant
terebinths,’’ becomes @ pictorial title of vs 6-8 of the ps.
The application of the rule that the expression ''for the
Chief Musician” is always a suhscript removes the
difficulty in the title of Ps 88. The superscription of
Ps 88, on Thirtle’s hypothesis, becomes ‘'Maschil of
Heman the Ezrahite.” Ps 87 thus has a subscript that
repeats the statement of its superscription, but with an
addition which harmonizes with the content of the poem.
“Mahalath Leannoth,” with a slight correction in vocali-
zation, probahly means “ Dancings with Shoutings,’’ and
ver 7 of Ps 87 speaks of both singing and dancing. The
tone of Ps 87 is eka ty cheerful; but Ps 88 is the
saddest in the entire Psalter. The application of
Thirtle’s hypothesis also leaves Ps 88 with a consistent
literary title, whereas the usual title ascribes the ps first
to the sons of Korah and then to Heman the Ezrahite.

(3) Meaning of the Hebrew titles—Scholars have not
been able to come to agreement as to the meaning and
application of a goodly number of words and phrases
found in the titles of the Pss. We append an alphaheti-
cal list, together with hints as to the prohahle meaning:

(a) ’Ayeleth ha-Shahar (Ps 22) means ''the hind of
the morning,"’ or possibly ‘‘the help of the morning.”
Many think that the words were the opening line of some
familiar song.

(b) ‘dlamoth (Ps 46) means ‘'maidens.’”” The common
view is that the ps was to be sung by seprano voices.
Some speak of a female choir and compare 1 Ch 15 20;
Ps 68 11.24f. According to Thirtle, the title is a sub-
script to Ps 45, which describes the marriage of a prin-
cess, @ function at which it would be quite appropriate
to have a female choir.

(c) 'Al-tashhéth (Pss 57-59; 75) means ‘'destroy not,”
and is quite suitable as a subscript to Pss 56-58 and
74 (cf Dt 9 26)._ Many think this the first word of a
vintage song (cf Isa 65 8).

(d) ‘‘Ascents, Song of’ (Pss 120-134): RV translates
the title to 15 pss ‘‘ A Song of Ascents,’’ where AV has ‘'A
Song of Degrees.’" The most probable explanation of the
meaning of the expression is that these 15 pss were sung
by bands of pilgrims on their way to the yearly feasts in
Jerus (Ps 122 4). Pss 121-23, 125, 127, 128 and 132-
34 are well suited for use on such occasicns (sce, how-
ever, Expos T, XII, 62).

(e) ‘For the Chief Musician’’: 55 pss are dedicated
to the precentor or choir leader of the temple. ‘'To
the Chief Musician’’ might mean that the precentor
was the author of certain pss, or that there was a col-
lection of hymns compiled by him for use in temple wor-
ship, or that certain pss were placed in his hands, with
suggestions as to the character of the poems and the
music which was to accompany them. It is quite likely
that there was an official collection of pss for public
worship in the custody of the choir master of the temple.

(f) “Dedication of the House’’ (Ps 30): The title
probably refers to the dedication of Jeh's house; whether
in the days of David, in connection with the removal
of the ark to Jerus, or in the days of Zerubbabel, or in
the time of Judas Maccabaeus, it is impossible to say
positively. If Ps 30 was used on any one of these widely
separated occasions, that fact might acconnt for the
ineeEO of the caption, ''a Song at the Dedication of the

couse.

(9) ‘'Degrees’’: see “* Ascents”’ above.

(h) Gittith (Pss 8, 81, 84) is commonly supposed to
refer to an instruinent invented in Gath or to a tune that
was used in the Phili city. Thirtle emends slightly to
giitéth, ‘‘ wine presses,”’ and connects Pss 7, 80 and 83
with the Feast of Tabernacles.


(i) Higgdyon: This word is not strictly a title, but


occurs in connection with Seldh in Ps 9 16. RV translates
the word in Ps 92 3, ‘‘a solemn sound,” and in Ps 19
14, ‘‘meditation.” It is probably a musical note equiva-
lent to largo. :

G). Yedhaithin: In the title of Ps 39, Jeduthun might
well be identical with the Chief Musician. 1n Pss 62
and 77 RV renders ‘‘after the manner of Jednthun.”
We know from 1 Ch 16 41; 25 3 that JepuTHun (q.v.)
was a choir leader in the days of David. He perhaps
introduced a method of conducting the service of song
which ever afterward was associated with his name.

(k) Yénath ‘élem rehokim (Ps 56): We have already
called attention te the fact that as a subscript to Ps 55
“the dove of the distant terebinths,”’ or ‘'the silent dove
of them that are afar off,’ would have a point of contact
with Ps 55 6-8.

() Mahdlath (Ps 53). Mahdlath l'annédth (Ps 88):
Perhaps Thirtle’s vocalization of the Heb consonants
as meholéth, ‘‘dancings,’’ is correct. As a subscript to
Ps 87, mekalath may refer to David's Joy at the bringing
of the ark to Zion (2 S 6 14.15).

(m) Maskil (Pss 32, 42-45, 52-55, 74, 78, 88, 89,
142): The exact meaning of this common term is not
clear. Briggs suggests “a meditation,’’ Thirtle and
others ‘‘a ps of instruction,’’ Kirkpatrick ‘‘a cunning
ps." Some of the 13 pss bearing this title are plainly
didactic, while others are scarcely to be classed as pss
of instruction.

(n) Mikhtam (Pss 16, 56-60): Following the rabbinical
guess, some translate ‘‘a golden poem.’ The exact
meaning is unknown.

(0) Muth labben: The title is generally supposed to
refer to a composition entitled ‘Death of the Son.”
Possibly the melody to which this composition was sung
was the tune to which Ps 9 (or 8) was to be sung.
Thirtle translates ‘'The Death of the Champion,”’ and
regards it as a subscription to Ps 8, in celehration of the
victory over Goliath.

(p) On" Neghinath” occurs 6 t (Pss 4, 6, 54, 55, 67, '76),
and means ‘with stringed instruments."’ N®ghinath
(Ps 61) may be a slightly defective writing for Néghindth.
Perhaps stringed instruments alone were used with pss
having this title. According to Thirtie’s hypothesis,
ae ae Pile originally a subscript to Pss 3, 5, 53, 54,

1, 66, 75.

(9) Nehiléth (Ps §), possibly a subscript to Ps 4, is
supposed by some to refer to ‘wind instruments,"’
pessibly flutes.

(r) Selah, though not strictly a title, may well be dis-
cussed in connection with the superscriptions. It occurs
71 tin the Pss and 3 tin Hab. 1t is almost certainly a
technical term whose meaning was well known to the
precentor and the choirinthetemple. The LXX always,

ymmachus and Thecdotion generally, render did-
psalma, which probably denotes aninstrumental interlude.
The Tg Aquila and some other ancient VSS render ‘‘for-
ever.” Jerome, following Aquila, translates it ‘‘ always.”
Many moderns derive Selah from a root meaning ‘‘to
raise,’ and suppose it to be a sign to the musicians to
strike up with a louder accompaniment. Possibly the
singing ceased fora moment. A few think it is a litur-
gical direction te the congregation to ‘lift up" their
voices in benediction. It is unwise te dogmatize as to
the meaning of this very common word. See Sean.

(s) Sh@minith (Pss 6, 12), meaning ‘'the elghth,”
probably denotes the male choir, as distinguished from
‘dlamoth, the maidens’ choir. That both terms are musi-
cal notes is evidentfrom 1 Ch 15 19-21.

(t) Shiggagyén (Ps 7) is probably a musical note.
Some think it denotes ‘a dithyrambic poem in wild
ecstatic wandering rhythms, with corresponding music.”

(u) Shéshannim (Pss 45, 69) means “lilies.” Shdshan-
nim ‘édhith (Ps 80) means ‘“‘lilies, a testimony.”’ Shi-
shan ‘édhith (Ps 60) may be rendered '‘the lily of testi-
mony.”  Thirtle represents these titles as subscripts to
Pss 44, 59, 68, 79, and associates them with the spring
festival, Passover. Others regard them as _ indicating
the melody to which the various pss were to be sung.

(») "Song of Loves” (Ps 45) is appropriate as a lit-
erary title te a marriage song.

_ (4) Testimony of the titles as to authorship.—(a) Ps 90
is ascribed to Moses. (6) To David 73 pss are ascribed,
chiefly in Books I and II. (c) Two are assigned to
Solomon (Pss 72,127). (d) 12 are ascribed to Asaph
(Pss 50, 73-83). (e) 11 are assigned to the sons of
Korah (Pss 42-49, 84, 85, 87). (f) Ps 88 is attributed
to Heman the Ezrahite. (9) Ps 89 bears the name of
Ethan the Ezrahite. In most cases it is plain that the
editors meant to indicate the authors or writers of the
pss. It is possible that the phrase “to David” may
sometimes have been prefixed to certain pss, merely to
indicate that they were found in a collection which con-
tained Davidic pss. It is also possible that the titles
“to Asaph" and ‘to the sons of Korah"’ may have
criginally meant that the pss thus designated belonged
to a collection in the custody of these temple singers.
Ps 72 may also be a prayer for Solomon rather than a ps
by Solomon. At the same time, we must acknowledge,
in the light of the titles describing the occasion of com-
position, that the most, natural interpretation of the
various superscriptions is that they indicate the sup-
posed authors of the various poems to which they are


2489


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Psalms, Book of


prefixed. Internal evidence shows conclusively that
some of these titles are incorrect. Each suporscription
should be tested by a careful study of the ps to which
it is appended.


(5) Titles describing the occasion of writing.—There

are 13 of these, all bearing the name of David. (a) Pss
7, 59, 56, 34, 52, 57, 142, 54 are assigned to the pelted
of his persecution by Saul. (6) During the period of
his reign over all Israel, Dayid is credited with Pss 18,
60, 51, 3 and 68.
_ 4. The Authorship and Age of the Pss.—Ps 90
is ascribed to Moses. It is the fashion now to deny
that Moses wrote anything. A careful study of
Ps 90 has brought to light nothing inconsistent
with Mosaic authorship. The dignity, majesty
and pathos of the poem are worthy of the great
lawgiver and intercessor.

(1) The age of David offered fruitful soil for the
growth of religious poetry.—(a) The political and

F religious reforms of Samuel created a
1. David as new sense of national unity, and kin-
a Psalmist dled the fires of_ religious patriotism.
(6) Music had a large place in the life
of the prophetic guilds or schools of the prophets,
and was used in public religious exercises (1 S 10
5f). (c) The victories of David and the internal
expansion of the life of Israel would inevitably
stimulate the poetic instinct of men of genius; cf
the Elizabethan age and the Victorian era in Eng.
literature. (d) The removal of the ark to the new
capital and the organization of the Levitical choirs
would stimulate poets to compose hymns of praise
to Jeh (2 8 6; 1 Ch 165, 16, 26).

It_is the fashion in certain critical circles to blot out
the Mosaic era as unhistoric, all accounts of it heing
considered legendary or mythical. It is easy then to
insist on the elimination of all the higher religious teach-
ing attributed to Samuel. This leaves David ‘‘a rnde
king in a semi-barbaric age,’’ or, as Cheyne puts it, ‘‘the
versatile condottiere, chieftain, and king.” It would
seem more reasonable to accept as trustworthy the
uniform tradition of Israel as to the great leaders, Moses,
Samuel and David, than to rewrite Israel's history out
of the tiny fragments of historical material that are ac-
cepted by skeptical critics as credible. It is often said
that late writers read into their accounts of early heroes
their own ideas of what would he fitting. James Robert-
son's remark in reply has great weight: ‘This hahit of
explaining the early as the backward projection of the
late is always liable to the objection that it leaves the
late itself without explanation’’ (Poetry and Religion of
the Psa, 332).


(2) David’s qualifications for composing pss.—
(a) He was a skilful musician, with a sense of rhythm
and an ear for pleasing sounds (1 8 16 15-23).
He seems to have invented new instruments of
music (Am 6 5). (0) He is recognized by critics
of all schools as a poet of no mean ability. The
genuineness of his elegy over Saul and Jonathan
(2 8 1 19-27) is commonly accepted; also his
lament over Abner (3 33f). In the elegy over
Saul and Jonathan, David displays a magnanimity
and tenderness that accord with the representations
of S as to his treatment of Saul and of Jonathan.
No mere rough border chieftain could have com-
posed a poem full of the tenderest sentiment and
the most exemplary attitude toward a persecutor.
The moral elevation of the elegy has to be accounted
for. If the author was a deeply religious man, a
man enjoying the friendship of God, it is easy to
account for the moral dignity of the poem. Surely
it is only a step from the patriotism and magna-
nimity and devoted friendship of the elegy to the reli-
gious fervor of the Pss. Moreover, the poetic skill
displayed in the elegy removes the possible objection
that literary art in the days of David had not at-
tained a development equal to the composition of
poems such as the Pss. There is nothing more
beautiful and artistic in the entire Psalter.

Radical critics saw the David of the Bible asunder.
They contrast the rongh border chieftain with the pious


Psalmist. Though willing to helieve every statemeut
that reflects upon the moral character of David, thcy


consider the references to David as a writer of hymns
and the organizer of the temple choirs as the pions
imaginings of late chroniclers. Robertson well says:
“This habit of refusing to admit complexity in the ca-
pacities of Bib. characters is exceedingly hazardous and
unsafe, when history is so full of instances of the com-
hination in one person of qualities the most diverse.
We not only have poets who can harp upon more than
one string, hut we have religious leaders who have united
the most fervent piety with the exercise of poorly devel-
oped virtue, or the practice of very questionahle policy.
A critic, if he has not a single measure of large enough
capacity for a historical character, should not think
himself at liberty to measure him out in two half-
bushels, making one man of each” (Poetry and Religion
of the Pss, 332). Among kings, Charlemagne and Con-
stantine the Great have been likened to David; and
among poets, Robert Burns. Thcre were contradictory
elements in the moral characters of all these gifted men.
Of Constantine it has been said that he '' was by turns
the docile believer and the cruel despot, devotee and
murderer, patron saint and avenging demon.’ David
was a many-sided man, witha character often at war with
itself, a man with conflicting impulses, the flesh lusting
against the spirit and the spirit against the flesh. Men
of flesh and blood in the midst of iife’s temptations have
no difficulty in understanding the David of the Bible.


(c) David was a man of deep feeling and of im-
perial imagination. Think of his love for Jonathan,
his grateful appreciation of every exploit done in
his behalf by his mighty men, his fondness for
Absalom. His successful generalship would argue
for imagination, as well as the vivid imagery of the
elegy. (d) David was an enthusiastic worshipper of
Jeh. All the records of his life agree in represent-
ing him as devoted to Israel's God. In the midst
of life’s dangers and disappointments, “David
strengthened himself in Jeh his God’’ (1 8 30 6).
We should have been surprised had no trace of
religious poetry come from his pen. It would be
difficult. to imagine Milton or Cowper or Tennyson
as confining himself to secular poetry. “Comus,”
‘John Gilpin,” and the ‘‘Charge of the Light Bri-
gade’’ did not exhaust their genius; nor did the elegy
over Saul and Jonathan and the lament over Abner
relieve David’s soul of the poetry that clamored for
expression. The known facts of his life and times
prepare us for an outburst of psalmody under his
leadership. (¢) The varied experiences through
which David passed were of a character to quicken
any latent gifts for poetic expression.

James Robertson states this argument clearly, and
yet with peooraine. caution: ‘The vicissitudes and situ-
ations in David's life presented in these narratives are
of such a nature that, though we may not he ahle to say
precisely that such and such a ps was composed at such
and such a time and place, yet we may confidently say,
Here is a man who has passed through certain expe-
riences and horne himself in such wise that we are not
surprised to hear that, being a poet, he composed this
and the other pss. It is very doubtful whether we should
tie down any lyric to a precise set of circumstances, the
poet being like a painter, who, having found a fit land-
scape, sits down to transfer it to canvas. I do not think
it likely that David, finding himself in some great per-
plexity or sorrow, called for writing materials in order
to describe the situation or record his feelings. But I
do think it probable that the vicissitudes through which
pose made such an impression on his sensitive heart,
and hecame so inwrought into an emotional nature, that
when he soothed himself in his retirement with his lyre,
they came forth spontaneously in the form of a psalm
or song or prayer, according as the recollection was sad
or joyful, and as his singing mood moved him” (Poetry
and Religion of the Pss, 343 f).


The Bib. writers, both early and late, agree in
affirming that the Spirit of Jeh rested upon David,
empowering him for service of the highest order (1 5
16 13; 25 23 1-3; Mt 22 43; Acts 2 29-31).
The gift of prophetic inspiration was bestowed
upon Israel’s chief musician and poct.

(3) External evidence for Davidic pss.—(a) In
the NT David is named as the author of certain
pss. Thus Ps 110 is ascribed to David by Jesus in
His debate with the Pharisees in the Temple (Mt
22 41-45; Mk 12 35-37; Lk 20 41-44). Peter
teaches that David prophesied concerning Judas
(Acts 1 16), and he also refers Pss 16 and 110 to


Psalms, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2490


David (Acts 2 25-34). The whole company of
the disciples in prayer attribute Ps 2 to David
(Acts 4 25f). Paul quotes Pss 32 and 69 as
Davidic (Rom 4 6-8; 11 9f). The author of He
even refers Ps 95 to David, following the LXX
(He 4 7). From the last-named passage many
scholars infer that any quotation from the Pss might
be referred to David as the chief author of the Pss.
Possibly this free and easy method of citation, with-
out any attempt at rigorous critical accuracy, was
in vogue in the Ist cent. AD. At the same time, it
is evident that the view that David was the chief
author of the Pss was accepted by the NT writers.
(b) In2 Macc 2 13 (RV), in a letter purporting to
have been written by the Jews of Pal to their brethren
in Egypt, about 144 BC, occurs the following: “And
the same things were related both in the public
archives and in the records that concern Nehemiah;
and how he, founding a library, gathered together
the books about the kings and prophets, and the


books of David, and letters of kings about sacred |
We do not know the exact date of 2 Macc,


gifts.”
but it was almost certainly in the Ist cent. BC.
The author regards David as the author of books in
the sacred library gathered together by Nehemiah.
(c) Jesus the Son of Sirach, who wrote not later
than 180 BC, and possibly a good deal earlier, thus
describes David’s contribution to public worship:
“In every work of his he gave thanks to the Holy
One Most High with words of glory; with his whole
heart he sang praise, and loved him that made
him’ (Ecelus 47 8{ RV). David’sfameasa psalmist
and the organizer of choirs for the sanctuary was
well known to Ben Sira at the beginning of the 2d
cent. BC. (d) The author of Ch, writing not later
than 300 BC, and probably much earlier, represents
David as making provision for a service of song
before the ark of God and in connection with its
removal to the city of David (1 Ch 15, 16). It
seems to be imagined by some scholars that the
Chronicler, whose historical accuracy is severely
attacked by certain critics, is responsible for the
idea that David was a great writer of hymns. On
the contrary, he has less to say about David as a
poet and psalmist than the author of 8. Only in
2 Ch 29 30 is there explicit mention of David as
the author of praisesto Jeh. The Chronicler speaks
repeatedly of the instruments of David and of his
organization of the choirs. And so in the kindred
books of Ezr and Neh there is mention of the style
of worship introduced by David (Ezr 3 10; Neh
12 24.36). The author of the Book of K refers re-
peatedly to David as a model king (1 K 11 4; 2 K
14 3; 20 5f, etc). He becomes a witness for the
high reputation of David for uprightness and reli-
gious zeal. (e) Amos refers incidentally to David’s
great skill as an inventor of musical instruments
(Am 6 5). The same prophet is a witness to the
fact that songs were sung in worship at Bethel to the
accompaniment of harps or viols (Am 5 23). (f)
The earliest witness, or witnesses, if the narrative be
composite, we find inl and28. David is described
as a wonderful musician and as one on whom the
Spirit of Jeh rested mightily (1 S 16 13-23). He
is credited with the beautiful elegy over Saul and
Jonathan (2 § 1 17-27) and the brief lament over
Abner (2 8S 3 83f). Heissaid to have danced with
joy before the ark, and to have brought it up to
Jerus with shouting and with sound of trumpet
(28 6 12ff). He is credited with the pious wish
that hemight build a temple for Jeh and the ark, and
is said to have poured forth a prayer of thanksgiving
to Jeh for the promise of a perpetual throne (2 8 7).
David dedicated to Jeh much wealth taken from his
enemies (28 8 11). Both the good and the bad
in David’s life and character are faithfully set forth
in the vivid narrative.


We come next to two statements that would settle
the question of David’s pss, if critics would only accept
them as the work of an author living within a generation
or so of the time of David. Unfortunately 2 S 21-94
is regarded hy most critical scholars as an appendix to
the early narrative of David's career. There is no
agreement as to the exact date of the composition of
these chapters. Naturally the burden of proof is on the
critic who tries to disintegrate a document, and sus-
picion of bias is inevitable, if by the disintegration he is
able to escape the force of a disagreeahle argument.
Happily, we live in a free country, every man having
a right to hold and to express his own opinion, for what-
ever it may be worth. It seems to the present writer
that 2 S 21-24 may well have come from the pen of the
early narrator who told the story of David's reign in
such a masterly fashion. Even if these chapters were
added hy a later editor as an appendix, there is no suffi-
cient reason for putting this writer so late as the exile.
His statements cannot be set aside as unreliable, simply
because they run counter to the current theory as to the
date of the Pss. 2 S 22 purports to give the words ofa
song which David spake to Jeh, when he had heen delivered
from Saul and from all his enemies. Ps 18 is evidently
a different recension of the same poem. The differences
between 2 S 22 and Ps 18 are not much greater than
the differences in the various edd of ‘‘Rock of Ages.’”
Only the most advanced critics deny that David wrote
this glorious song. 2 S 23 1-7 must not he omitted,
for here David claimed prophetic inspiration as the sweet
Psalmist of Israel. This original and striking poem is
worthy of the brilliant royal hard. (g) The titles of the
Pss are external evidence of real value for determining
the date and authorship of the Pss; and these ascrihe
73 to David. A sweeping denial of all the forms of
external evidence for Davidic pss ought to be buttressed
by convincing arguments from internal evidence. Un-
verified conjectures will not answer.


(4) Internal evidence for Davidic pss-—The fact
that many of the pss ascribed to David correspond
in tone and temper and in historical allusions with
incidents in his life, while not in itself convincing
proof that David wrote them, certainly reénforces
the external evidence in favor of Davidic pss. We
must refer the reader to the commentaries of De-
litzsch, Kirkpatrick, Perowne and others for the
evidence discovered in individual pss. In many
pss the evidence is strongly in favor of the super-
scriptions, in which David is named as the writer.
See esp. Pss 18, 23, 32, 3.


(5) Number of Davidic pss—Opinion varies among
conservative scholars all the way from 3 or 4 to 44 or 45.
It has come to pass that a critic who acknowledges even
Ps 18 to he David's is called conservative. In fact,
the more radical critics regard a scholar as conservative
if he assigns even a small group of pss to the period before
the exile. We must not allow ourselves to be deterred
from ascribing to David any ps that seems to us, on the
hasis of hoth external and internal evidence, to come
fromhis pen. Delitzsch and I<irkpatrick are safer guides
than Cheyne and Duhm. Miaclareu also has made a
close and sympathetic study of David's life and character,
and accepts the results of sane criticism. W. T. Davi-
son (HDB, IV) speaks out clearly and strongly for
Davidic authorship of Pss 7, 11, 17, 18, 19 (first half),
24 and a few other pss or parts of pss, though he makes
large concessions to the present tendency to bring down
the pss to a later date. He stands‘ firmly for a large
hody of preéxilic P's Ewald assigned to David Pss
3, 4, 7, 8, 11,18, 19, 24, 29, 32, 101; also 60 8-11 and 68
14-19. Hitzig ascribed to David’ Pss 8-19, with the
exception of 5,6 and 14. If one follows the titles in the
Heh text, except where internal evidence clearly contra- °
dicts the superscriptions, it will he easy to folow De-
litzsch in attributing 44 or 45 pss to David.


(1) Pss of Asaph (73-83, also 50).—The pro-
phetie spirit throbs in most of the pss ascribed
to AsapH (q.v.). God is pictured as a

2. Psal- righteous Judge. He is also pictured as
mody after the Shepherd of Israel. Ps 73 holds
David fast to God’s righteous rule of mankind,
_ in spite of the prosperity of the wicked.

Ps 50, which is assigned by many to the time of
Hosea and Isaiah, because of its powerful prophetic
message, may well have come from Asaph, the con-
temporary of David and of Nathan. Some of the
Asaph group, notably 74 and 79, belong to the
period of the exile or later. The family of Asaph
continued for centuries to lead in the service of
song (2 Ch 35 15; Neh 7 44). Inspired poets
were raised up from age to age iu the Asaph guild.


2491


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Psalms, Book of


(2). Pss of the sons of Korah (42-49, 84, 85, 87). |
—This family of singers was prominent in the
temple-worship in the days of David and afterward.
Several of the most beautiful poems in the Psalter
are ascribed to members of this guild (see Pss 42,
43, 45, 46, 49, 84). We are not to think of these
poems as having been composed by a committee of
the sons of Korah; no doubt each poem had an
individual author, who was willing to sink his per-
sonality in the ps he was composing. The privi-
leges and blessings of social worship in the sanctuary
are greatly magnified in this group of pss.

_ (8) Pss of Solomon (72, 127).—Even conserva-
tive critics are in doubt as to the Solomonic author-
ship of the two pss ascribed to him by the titles. Per-
haps assurance is not attainable in the present state
of inquiry. Delitzsch well says: ‘Under Solomon
psalmody already began to decline; all the produc-
tions of the mind of that period bear the stamp of
thoughtful contemplation rather than of direct feel-
ing, for restless yearning for higher things had given
place to sensuous enjoyment, national concentration
to cosmopolitan expansion.”

(4) The era of Jehoshaphat.—Delitasch and others
regard the period of Jehoshaphat as one of literary
productivity. Possibly Pss 75 and 16 celebrate
the deliverance from the great eastern invasion
toward the close of Jehoshaphat’s reign. j

(5) The era of Hezekiah.—The latter half of the
8th cent. BC was one of literary vigor and expansion,
esp. in Judah. Perhaps the great deliverance from
Sennacherib’s invasion is celebrated in Pss 46 and


48.

(6) The period of Jeremiah—KEhrt and some
other scholars are inclined to attribute to Jeremiah
a considerable number of pss. Among those which
have been assigned to this prophet may be named
Pss 31, 35, 38, 40, 55, 69,71. ‘Those who deny the
Davidic authorship of Ps 22 also assign this great
poem to Jeremiah. Whether we are able to name
definitely any pss of Jeremiah, it seems thoroughly
reasonable that he should have been_the author of
certain of the plaintive poems in the Psalter.

(7) During the exile—Ps 102 seems to have been
composed during the exile. The poet pours out
his complaint over the present distress, and reminds
Jeh that it is time to have pity upon Zion. Ps 137
pictures the distress of the captives by the rivers of
Babylon. The fire and fervor of the poem bespeak
an author personally involved in the distress. No
doubt other pss in our collection were composed
during the captivity in Babylon. :

(8) Post-exilic pss.—As specimens of the joyous
hymns composed after the return from exile, we
may name Pss 85 and 126. Many of the liturgical
hymns in the Psalter were no doubt prepared for
use in the worship of the second temple. Certain
recent critics have extended this class of hymns so as
to include the greater part of the Psalter, but that is
surely an_extreme view. No doubt, the stirring
times of Ezra and Nehemiah stimulated poets in
Jerus to pour forth thanksgiving and praise to
Israel’s God. Ewald taught that the latest pss
in our collection were composed at this time.

(9) Are there Maccabean pss?—Calvin assigned Pss
44, 74 and 79 to_the Maccahean period. If there are
Maccabean pss, Calvin has perhaps hit upon three of
them. Hitzig assigns to the Maccahean period all the
pss from 73 to 150, together with a few pss in the
earlier half of the Psalter. Among moderns, Duhm
puts practically the whole Psalter in the period from
170 to 70 BC. Gesenius, Ewald, Hupfeld aud Dillmann,
four of the greatest names in OT criticism, oppose the
view that the Psalter contains Maccabean pss. Most
recent students admit the possibility of Maccahean pss.
The question may well be left open for further inves-
tigation.


Il. The Growth of the Psalter.—In the Heb text


as well as in RV, the Pss are grouped into five books,


as follows: Book I, Pss 1-41; Book II, Pss 42~
72; Book III, Pss 73-89; Book IV, Pss 90-106;
Book V, Pss 107-50.


1. Division
It is possible that this division into five


into Five hooks may have been already made before
Books the Chronicler composed his history of


Judah (cf 1 Ch 16 36 with Ps 106 48).
At the end of Book II appears a subscript which is sig-
niflcant in the history of the Psalter. t is said in Ps
72 20: ‘‘The prayers of David the son of Jesse are
ended.’ It would seem from this note that the editor
who appended it meant to say that in his collection he
had included all the pss of David known to him. Singu-
larly enough, the subscript is attached to a ps ascrihed
to Solomon. Pss 51-70, however, lie near at hand, all
of which are attributed to David. Ps 71 is anonymous,
and Ps 72 might possibly be considered a prayer for
Solomon. ‘There is a further difficulty in the fact that
the Second Book of Pss opens with nine poems ascribed
to the sons of Korah and to Asaph. It is a very natural
conjecture that these nine pss were at one time united
with Pss 73-83. ‘With these removed, it_would he pos-
sible to unite Pss 51-70 with Book I. Then the suh-
script to Ps 72 would be a fitting close to a roll made up
oft pss ascribed to David. It is impossible at this ijate
date to trace fully and accurately the history of the
formation of the Psalter.


Within the Psalter there lie certain groups of pss
which have in a measure retained the form in which
they probably once circulated sepa-
2. Smaller rately. Among these groups may be
Groups of named the Psalms of Ascents (Pss
Psalms 120-34), the Asaph group (Pss 73-
83), the sons of Korah groups (Pss
42-49, 84-87, except 86), a Mikhtam group (Pss
56-60), a group praising Jeh for His character and
deeds (Pss 93-100), to which Pss 90-92 form a
fitting introduction. Pss 103-7 constitute an-
other group of praise pss, and Pss 145-50 make a
closing Hallelujah group.

The Psalter has had a long and varied history.
No doubt the precentor of the temple choir had his
own collection of hymns for public worship. Small
groups of pss may have been issued also for private
use in the home. As time went on, collections were
made on different organizing principles. Sometimes
hymns attributed to a given author were perhaps
brought into a single group. Possibly pss of a
certain type, such as Maskil and Mikhiam pss,
were gathered together in small collections. How
these small groups were partly preserved and partly
broken up, in the history of the formation of our
present Psalter, will, perhaps, never be known.

IV. The Poetry of the Psalter.—For general dis-
cussion of the form of Heb poetry, see Portry. In
the Pss almost all known varieties of poetic paral-
lelism are exemplified. Among moderns, C. A.
Briggs has made extensive research into the poetical
structure of the Pss. In summing up the result of
his study of the various measures employed in the
Pss, he classes 89 pss or parts of pss as trimeters,
that is, the lines have three main accents; 22 pss
or parts he regards as tetrameters, each of the lines
having four accented syllables; 25 pss or portions
are classed as pentameters, and an equal number as
hexameters. e recognizes some variety of meas-
ure in certain pss. There is coming to be agreement
among Heb scholars that the rhythm of Heb poetry
is largely determined by the number of accented
syllables to the line. Some critics insist rigorously
on perfect regularity, and therefore are compelled
to resort to conjectural emendation. See Portry,
HEBREW. .

Nine pss are known as alphabetical poems, viz.
Pss 9, 10, 25, 34, 37, 111, 112, 119, 145. The most
elaborate of these is Ps 119, which is divided into
22 sections of 8 vs each. Each letter of the Heb
alphabet occurs 8 t in succession as the initial letter
of the verses in its section. :

As to strophical structure or stanza formation,
there is evidence in certain pss of such organization
of the poems. The refrains with which strophes


Psalms, Book of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


often close form an easy guide to the strophical
divisions in certain pss, such as Pss 42,43, 46, 107.
Among Eng. commentators, Briggs pays most
attention to strophical structure. There is some
evidence of antiphonal singing in connection with
the Psalter. It is thought by some that Pss 20 and
21 were sung by responsive choirs. Pss 24 and
118 may each be antiphonal. ;

V. The Speaker in the Pss.—Smend, in ZATY,
1888, undertook to establish the thesis that the
speaker in the Pss is not an individual, but a per-
sonification of the Jewish nation or church. At first
he was inclined to recognize an individual speaker
in Pss 3, 4, 62 and 73, but one year later he inter-
preted these also as collective. Thus at one stroke
individual religious experience is wiped out of the
Psalter. A few scholars have accepted Smend’s
thesis; but the great majority of critics of every
school have withheld their assent, and some of the
best commentators have shown that the theory is
wholly untenable.

Perhaps the hest monograph on the subject, for the
Ger. student, is one hy Emil Balla, Das Ich der Psalmen.
Balla’s thesis is that the ‘‘I‘’ pss, hoth in the Psalter
and in the other books of the OT, are always to be under-
stood as individual, with the exception of those in which


from plain data in the text another interpretation of the
“FE is necessary. f 100 pss in which ‘I’ occurs,


' Balla classes 80 as easy to interpret; in the remaining 20


there might be reasonable room for difference of opinion
whether the ps was individual or collective.


Personification is largely used in all parts of the
OT. There is no room for doubt that Ps 129,
though using “I,” “my” and ‘‘me,” is the langnage
of Israel as a people. The same is trne of Ps 124.
The author of Ps 126 likewise associates himself
with his brethren. The author of Ps 122, however,
is evidently speaking for himself individually, when
he says in ver 8, ‘‘For my brethren and companions’
sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee.” The
intelligent reader usually has no difficulty in de-
ciding, after a careful reading of a ps, whether the
“J? refers to an individual Israelite or to the con-
gregation of Israel. Sane views on this subject are
important, Inasmuch as Smend’s theory does vio-
lence to the strength and power of the individual
religious experience of OT believers. In many por-
tions of the OT, national duties are urged, and Israel
is addressed asa whole. At the same time, it would
be easy to exaggerate the relatively small place that
individual religion occupies in the prophetic writings
and in the Law. The Psalter absolutely refuses to
be shut up in the molds of a rigid nationalism.

VI. The Gospel in the Pss.—Christians love the
Psalter as much as the ancient Jew could possibly
have done. On every page they discover elements
of religious life and experience that are thoronghly
Christian. Jn this respect the earlier dispensation
came nearer to the perfection of Christian standards
than in political and social organization. Along
with the NT, the aged Christian saint desires a
copy of the Pss. He passes easily from the Gospels
to the Psalter and back again without the sense of
shifting from one spiritual level to another. Reli-
gious experience was enjoyed and was portrayed by
the ancient psalmists so well that no Christian
book in the apostolic period was composed to dis-
place the Psalter.

(1) The psalmists are always reverent in thetr
approach to Deity—Jeh is infinitely holy (Ps 99

3.5.9). Pss 95-100 are models of adora-


1. The tion and worship.

Soul’s (2) Thirsting for God—Psg 42 and
Converse 48, which were originally one ps, voice
with God the longing of the individual soul


for God as no other human composi-
tion has been able to express it. Ps 63 is a worthy
companion ps of yearning after God.


2492


(3) Praising God—More than 20 pss have for
their keynote praise to God. See esp. Ps 8 1.9;
67 7-11; 71 22-24; 95 1-7. The first three vs of
Pss 33, 34, 40, 92 and 106 reveal a rich vocabulary
of praise for stammering human lips.

(4) Joy in God’s house—Pss 84 and 122 are
classic hymns expressive of joy in public worship
in the sanctuary. Religions patriotism has never
received a more striking expression than is found in
Ps 187 5f.

(5) Practising the presence of God.—In Pss 91

and 23 the worshipping saint delights his soul with
the sense of God’s protecting presence. The Shep-
herd, tender and true, is ever present to shield and
to comfort. The shadow of the Almighty is over
the saint who dwells in the secret place of the Most
High.
(6) God in Nature—The Psalmist did not go
“through Nature up to Nature’s God”; for he found
God immanent in all things. He heard God’s voice
in the thunder; felt His breath in the twilight
breeze; saw the gleam of His sword in the light-
ning’s flash, and recognized His hand in every pro-
vision for the wants of man and the lower animals.
See Ps 104, “Hymn of Creation”; Ps 29, ‘‘Jeh,
the God of the storm’’; and the first half of Ps 19,
“the heavens are telling.”

(7) Love for God’s word—Ps 119 is the classic
description of the beauty and power and helpful-
ness of the Word of God. The second half of Ps
19 is also a gem. Ps 119 was happily named by
one of the older commentators “‘a holy alphabet for
Zion’s scholars.” The Psalmist sings the glories
of God’s Word as a lamp to guide, as a spring of
comfort, and as a fountain of hope.

(8) God’s care of oll things—Faith in Divine
Providence—both general and special—was a
cardinal doctrine with the psalmists; yea more,
the very heart of their religion. Ps 65 sings of
God’s goodness in sunshine and shower, which
clothes the meadows with waving grain. The river
of God is always full of water. Ps 121, “Jeh thy
Keeper,’ was read by David Livingstone at family
worship on the morning when he left home to go ont
to Africa as a missionary.

(9) God our refuge—The psalmists were fond of
the figure of ‘taking refuge in God.” Jeh was to
them a rock of refuge, a stronghold, a high tower,
an impregnable fortress. Pss 46, 61 and 62 exalt
God as the refuge of His saints. His help is always
easy tofind. The might and wisdom of God do not
overwhelm the inspired singers, but become a
theme of devout and joyous contemplation.

Our Lord Jesus found in the Pss prophecies con-
cerning Himself (Lk 24 44-47).

(1) The suffering Saviour —While
2. The hanging on the cross, the mind of Our
Messiah Lord turned to the Psalter. He voiced
the terrible anguish of His soul in the
opening words of Ps 22, and breathed ont His
spirit at the end with the trustful words of Ps 31 5.
He also invited the fulfilment of a Messianic pre-
diction in Ps 69 21 by saying, “I thirst.’ Isa and
the Pss did not fail Him in the hour of His shame,
when reproach broke His heart, and there was none
to comfort Him. Only Isa 52 13—53 12 surpasses
Ps 22 as a picture of Calvary and an interpretation
of the significance of the cross. Whether Ps 22 is
a direct. prophecy of Christ, or only a typically
Messianic ps, is in dispute. Every sentence can be
applied to Jesus without straining its meaning. If
David or some other sufferer took up his harp to sing
of his own sorrows, the Spirit of God guided him to
describe those of a greater.

Rationalistic critics insist that 10 apply part of a ps


to David and part to Christ introduces confusion. They
ridicule the theory of a ‘‘double sense,’ and contend


2493


that the language refers to the Psalmist and to him alone,
and that the application of certain vs to Our Lord Jesus
ls only by way of accommodation. This theory ignores
the presence and activity of the Holy Spirit altogether;
and when men talk of “psychological impossibilities,’’
they may be talking nonsense; for who of us can under-
stand fully the psychological experience of men while
receiving revelations from_God? The real author of
Inspired prophecies is the Holy Spirit. His meaning is
that which the reverent interpreter most delights to
find; and we have evidence that the OT writers did not
fully comprehend their own predictions concerning
Christ (1 Pet 1 10-12). We ought not to be surprised
that we should be unable to explain fully the method of
the Holy Spirit’s activity in guiding the thought of
prophets and psalmists in their predictions of the suffer-
ings of Christ and the glories that should follow them.


(2) The conquering King.—Psa 2 and 110 (with
which Ps 72 may be compared) describe the Mes-
siah as Jeh’s Son, a mighty Conqueror, who shall
overwhelm all foes and reign supported by Jeh.
Some will oppose the Messiah, and so perish; others
will enter His army as volunteers, and in the end
will enjoy the fruits of victory. ‘Jt is better to
sit on His throne than to be His footstool.”

(3) The growing kingdom.—There is room in the
earth for no god other than Jch, the Creator and
Redeemer of mankind. Pss 47, 67, 96-100 and
117 are proofs of the glorious missionary outlook of
the Psalter. All nations are exhorted to forsake
idols and worship Jeh. Ps 47 closes with a picture
of the whole world united in the worship of the God
of Israel. Ps 67 is a bugle call to all nations to
unite in the worship of the true God. Pss 96-100
paint the character of Jeb as a basis of appeal to all
nations to turn from idols and worship the God of
Abraham. Pss 96 and 98 exalt His righteousness;
Ps 97 His power and dominion; Ps 99 His holiness
and His fidelity to Israel, while Ps 100 tells of His
goodness. Idols will finally go down before a God
worthy of men’s reverence and love.

The Psalter deals with man asasinner. Seven of
the best known poems in the collection are so

charged with a sense of sin and of its


3. The deadly fruits that they have been
Problem known for centuries as the Penitential
of Sin Pss (6, 32, 38, 51, 102, 130, 143). Be-


sides these poems of penitence and
confession, there are many passages elsewhere in the
Psalter which depict the sinfulness of men. And
yet there are assertions of personal innocence and
righteousness in the Psalter that sound like the
claims of self-righteous persons (7 3-9; 17 1-5;
18 20-24; 35 11-17; 44 17-22). The psalmists
do not mean to affirm that they are sinless before
God, but rather that they are righteous in compari-
son with their foes who are seeking to destroy them.
Sometimes they plead for mercy in the same con-
text. The honest exegete does not find the Phari-
saic temper in these noble hymns, though he is quite
willing to admit that the Christian cannot well
employ some of the expressions concerning his own
experiences. Jesus requires a humility deeper than
that which was attained in OT times.

(1) Confessing sin —(a) Individual confession:
Ps$ 32 and 61 are notable examples of individual
confession. The cries of the penitent in Ps 61 have
been repeated by thousands on bended knee as the
best expression of their own sense of sin and yearn-
ing for forgiveness. (b) National confession (see
esp. 78, 95 and 106). Ps 106 celebrates the praises
of Jch for His unfailing kindness to Israel; 106 tells
the tale of Israel’s repeated rebellion. ;

(2) Seeking forgiveness.—Ps 51 is the penitent’s
ery for mercy. Never did the soul of man plead
more powerfully for forgiveness. God cannot
despise a heart broken and crushed with the sense
of sin and pleading like a lost child for home and
mother. . ¢

(3) Conquering sin.—Ps 130 begins with a cry


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA _ Psalms, Book of


out of the depths and ends with a note of joy over
redemption from sin. The plenteous redemption
of which the poet speaks includes triumph over sin
in one’s heart and life. The cries of the OT saints
for victory over sin were not unbeeded (139 23f;
19 13; 119 133). The author of Ps 84 truthfully
depicts the life of Jeh’s worshippers, “They go from
strength to strength.’ Victory over sin 1s sure in
the end.
The ancient Hebrew seems to have had no temp-
tation to atheism or pantheism. The author of
Eccl felt the pull of agnosticism and
4. Wres- materialism (Eccl 3 19-21; 9 2-10),
tling with but in the end he rejected both (12
Doubts 7.13f). The ancient Hebrew found
in the world about him one difficulty
which seemed almost insuperable. He believed in
the wisdom and power and justice of God. How
then could it be possible, in a world over which a
wise and just God presides, that the wicked should
prosper and the righteous suffer? This is the
question which is hotly debated by Job and his
three friends. A partial solution of the difficulty
may be seen in Ps 37, the theme of which is ‘the
brevity of godless prosperity, and the certainty that
well-doing will lead to well-being.’ A better solu-
tion is attained in Ps 73, which depicts God’s atti-
tude toward the wicked and toward the righteous.
The wicked will be suddenly overthrown, while the
righteous will live forever in the enjoyment of com-
munion with God. Not even death can sever him
from God. The fleeting pleasures of proud scoffers
pale into insignificance before the glories of ever-
lasting fellowship with God.
(1) Out of the depths of persecution and slander
the author of Ps 31 climbed into his refuge, as
he exclaimed, “In the covert of thy
5. Out of — presence wilt thou hide them from the
the Depths plottings of man: Thou wilt keep them
secretly in a pavilion from the strife
of tongues.” (2) Ps 77 is a stairway out of the
depths of suspense and anxiety. The experience
of the author well illustrates Maclaren’s epigram,
“Tf out of the depths we cry, we shall cry ourselves
out of the depths.’ (8) The author of Ps 116
looked into the jaws of death. Perhaps no other ps
has so much to say of physical death. The singer
is filled with gratitude as he reviews the deadly peril
from which Jeh has saved him. (4) Ps 88 is
unique, because it is sad and plaintive from begin-
ning toend. Thesinger has long cried for deliver-
ance from bodily weakness and from loneliness. (5)
Out of the depths of disaster and defeat the authors
of Pss 60, 74, 79 and 89 cry to God. The Bab exile
was a sore trial to patriotic Jews. They mourned
over the destruction of their beautiful temple and
the holy city in which their fathers had worshipped.
The author of Ps 60 closes with hope and confi-
dence (60 12).
“Unquestionably in the Pss we reach the high-
water mark of OT practical piety, the best that
the OT can exhibit of heart-religion.”’
6. Ethical (1) What sort of man, then, would
Ideals the Pss acclaim as good?—Ps 1 opens
with a vivid contrast between the
righteous and the wicked. Ps 15 is the most com-
plete description of a good man to be found in the
Psalter. The picture is drawn in answer to the
question, What sort of man will Jeh receive as an
acceptable worshipper? The morality of the Bible
ig rooted in religion, and the religion of the Bible
blossoms and bears fruit in the highest ethics known
to man. Ps 131 makes humility a prime quality
in real goodness. Ps 1383 magnifies the spirit of
brotherly love. The social virtues had_a large
place in the psalmists’ ideals of goodness. Humility
and brotherly love are a guaranty of peace in the


Psalms, Book of
Psychology


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2494


home, the church and the nation. Ps 24 4 is a
compend of ethics in a single senteuce.

(2) The ethics of speech—Even a casual reading
of the Pss must impress one with the fact that the
psalmists felt very keenly the lies and slanders and
boastings of the wicked. Stirred with righteous
indignation, they call upon God to awake and con-
front the blatant foes of truth and righteousness
(see esp. Pss 12, 52 and 120).

(3) Ministering to the needy.—Bible readers are
familiar with the ideal of the good man in Job 29
12-16; 31 13-22. Ps 82 is a plea for justice.
Venal judges are one day to confront the great
Judge. Men need fair play first. Perhaps there
will then be no occasion for the exercise of alms-
giving. Ps4lis a pleaforkindness. The Christian
reader is reminded of the words of Jesus, ‘‘Blessed
are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.”
The Ideal Ruler is both just and beneficent (Ps 72
2.12-14).

To be a good lover one must know how to hate.
The excitement of battle throbs in many of the Pss.

The enemics of righteousness are vic-
7. Praying torious and defiant. Their taunts
against the drive the psalmists to importunate
Wicked prayer. Jeh’s honor is at stake and

His cause in peri]. More than 20 pss
contain prayer for the defeat and overthrow of the
wicked. Warlike imagery of the boldest kind is
found in many of the imprecatory pss. To the
Christian reader some of the curses pronounced
against the wicked are startling and painful. Many
are led to wonder how such imprecations ever found
a place in the Bible. The most severe curses are
found in Pss 35, 69 and 109. Mlaclaren’s words
are well worth reading as an introduction to Ps
109: ‘For no private injuries, or for those only in
so far as the suffering singer is a memberof the com-
munity which represents God’s cause, does he ask
the descent of God’s vengeance, but for the insults
and hurts inflicted on righteousness. The form of
these maledictions belongs to a lower stage of
revelation; the substance of them, considered as
passionate desires for the destruction of evil, burn-
ing zeal for the triumph of truth, which is God’s
cause, and unquenchable faith that He is just, is a
part of Christian perfection.’ Two remarks may
be made, as suggestions to the student of the Psalter:
(1) We ought to study the pss of imprecation in the
light of their origin. They are poetry and not
prose; and De Witt reminds us that the language
of oriental poetry is that of exaggerated passion.
Some of these imprecations pulse with the throb of
actual battle. Swords are drawn, and blood is
flowmng. The champion of Jeh’s people prays for
the overthrow of His foes. The enemies cursed
are men who break every moral law and defy God.
The Psalmist identifies himself with Jeh’s cause.
“Do not I hate them, O Jeh, that hate thee? And
am not I grieved with those that rise up against
thee? Ihate them with perfect hatred: They are
become mine enemics’” (Ps 189 21f). Thus the
psalmists pray with God's glory in view. (2) We
ought to use the imprecatory pss in the light of Our
Lord’s teaching. We cannot pronounce curses on
our personal cnemics. This heavenly artillery may
be turned upon the saloon, the brothel and the
gambling hell, though we must not forget to pray
for the conversion of the persons who are engaged
in these lines of business.

“Tf a man die, shall he live again??? What
answer do the Pss give to Job’s cry for light? There

are expressions in the Psalter which
8. The seem to forbid hope of a blessed im-
Future Life mortality (Ps 6 5; 309; 89 13; 115
17). The psalmists are tempted to
fear that fellowship with God would cease at


death. Let this fact, however, be borne in mind,
that not one of the poets or prophets of Israel settled
down to a final denial of immortality. Some of
them had moments of joyous assurance of a blessed
life of fellowship with God m the world to come.
Life everlasting in the presence of Jeh is the pros-
pect with which the author of Ps 16 refreshes him-
self (16 8-11). The vision of God’s face after the
sleep of death is better than worldly prosperity
(17 18-15). The anthor of Ps 73 wins rest for
his distressed mind in the assurance of a fellowship
with God that cannot be broken (73 23-26). God
will finally take the smger to Himself. It has been
well said that Ps 49 registers the high-water mark
of OT faith im a future life. Death becomes the
shepherd of the wicked who trusted in riches, while
God redeems the righteous from the power of Sheol
and takes the believing soul to Himself.

Literature.—One of the most elahorate and inform-
ing articles on the history of the exposition of the Pss
is found in the Intro to Delitasch’s Comm. (pp. 64-87,
ET). Among the Fathers, Jerome, Chrysostom and
Augustine are most helpful. Among the Reformers,
Calvin, the prince of expositors, is most valuahle.
Among modern commentators, Ewald and Delitzsch
are_scholarly_and sane. Their comms. are accessihle
in Eng. tr. Hupfeld is strong in grammatical exegesis.
Baethgen (1904) is very thorough. Among recent Eng.
and American commentators, the most helpful are
Perowne (6th ed, 1866), Maclaren in Exposiror's Bible
(1890-92), and Kirkpatrick in Cambridge Bible (1893-
95). Briggs in ICC (1906) is learned; Davison, New
Century Bible, is bright and attractive. Spurgeon,
Treasury of David, is a valuable compilation, chiefly from
the Puritan divines. Cheyne, The Book of Pss (1888)
and The Origin and Religious Contents of the Psalter (1891),
is quite radical in his critical views. Binnie, The Pss:
Their Origin, Teachings and Use (1886), is a fine intro-
duction to the Psalter. Robertson, The Poetry and Re-
ligion of the Pss (1898), constructs an ahle argument
against recent radical views.

Joun Ricwarp SamMpey

PSALMS, IMPRECATORY, im’pré-ka-té-ri, im-

pré-ka'tér-i. See Psavms, VI, 7.


PSALTER, sél’tér (PSALMS), OF SOLOMON.
See Apocatyptic Lirrrature, III, 1; BerwEen
THE TESTAMENTS, IV, 1, (1), (0).


PSALTERY, sél'tér-i.


PSALTIEL, sél’ti-el: Syr and RVm= ‘'Phaltiel”
of 2 Esd 5 16.


PSEUDO-MATTHEW, sii‘dé-math’t, GOSPEL
OF. See ApocrypHat Gospgts, ITI, 1, (0d).


PSYCHOLOGY, si-kol’é-ji:


1. Introduction: Scope of Biblical Psychology
2. Nature and Origin of the Soul

3. False Theories

4. Creationism and Traducianism

5. Trichotomy
6
7
8


See Mustc.


. Scriptural Terms
. Pauline Expressions
. Monism and Other Theories
9. The Fall of Man
10. Effects of the Fall
11. Death as a Problem
12. Immortality of the Soul
LivERATURE


The extravagant claims made by some writers
for a fully developed system of Bib. psychology has
brought the whole subject into dis-


1. Intro- repute. So much so, that Hofmann
duction: (Schriftbeweis) has boldly asserted that
Scope of “a system of Bib. psychology has
Biblical been got together withont any justi-
Psychology fication for it in Scripture.” At the


outset, therefore, it must be borne in
mind that the Bible docs not present us with a
systematized philosophy of man, but gives in popu-
lar form an account of human nature in all its
various relationships. A reverent study of Scrip-
ture will undoubtedly lead to the recognition of a


2495


well-defined system of psychology, on which the
whole scheme of redemption is based. Great truths
regarding human nature are presupposed in and
accepted by the OT and the NT; stress is there
laid on other aspects of truth, unknown to writers
outside of revelation, and presented to us, not in the
language of the schools, but in that of practical
life. _ Man is there described as fallen and degraded,
but intended by God to be raised, redeemed, re-
newed. From this point of view Bib. psychology
must be studied, and our aim should be “to bring
out the views of Scripture regarding the nature, the
life and life-destinies of the soul, as they are de-
termined in the history of salvation” (Delitzsch,
Bibl. Psych., 15).

As to the origin of the soul, Scripture is silent.
It states very clearly that life was inbreathed into
man by God (MBE™, wayytppah;
LXX éveptoncer, enephisésen; Vulg
inspiravit). The human being thus
inspired by Ged was thereby consti-
tuted a nephesh hayyah (“living soul’),
because the nishmath hayyim (“breath of lives’’)
had been imparted to him (Gen 27). Beyond
this the first book of the Bible does not go. In
later books the dectrine is taught with equal clear-
ness. Thus in the Book of Job: “The Spirit of
God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty
giveth me life’ (Job 38 4). The difference in
expression should be carefully noted. The “living
soul” (LXX psuché z6sa) is made to depend upon,
as it has its origin in, the “breath of lives’ (LXX
pnoé zoés). The n*shamah (“breath’’) is character-
istic of man—though it is very rarely, if ever, at-
tributed to animals; man is described as a being
‘in whose nostrils is but a breath’ (n°shémah) (Isa
2 22). That “breath” is ‘God's breath in man’
(Job 32 8; 34 14), or, as it is represented in Prov
20 27, ‘The spirit of man [nishmath] is the lamp of
Jeh.” In the NT Paul evidently refers to this view
of man’s origin in the statement that ‘‘the first man
Adam became a living soul. Thelast Adam ....
a life-giving [quickening] spirit’? (I Cor 15 45).
This too agrees with what Christ has said: “It is the
spirit that giveth life [quickeneth]’ (Jn 6 63),
and with what Paul himself has stated elsewhere
in the Ep. to the Rom (8 2): ‘‘The Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus made me free from the law of sin and
of death.”

Scripture therefore repudiates all doctrines of
emanation, by which is meant a natural, forth-flewing
life from God into the human sphere;
it teaches a doctrine of creation, where-
by it declares that the Almighty acts
with deliberation and design, in free
choice, and not of necessity. ‘Let us make man”
is the sublime utterance of Divine wisdom and
power. Nor does Scripture teach the preézistence
of the soul—a dectrine found in the extra-canonical,
platonically inspired Book of Wisd (8 19.20), “For
J was a child of parts, and a good soul fell to my
lot; nay rather, being good, ] came into a body
undefiled.”” This doctrine was well known to Jewish
writers, and was taught in Talm and Kabbalah.

‘‘ All souls were, according to the Talm, created and
kept in secret froma the first moment of creation. As
creatures of the highest sphere they are omniscient; but
at the moment of birth in a human hody an angel touches
the lips of the child, so that he forgets whatever has been”’
(Emanuel Deutsch, The Talmud). The doctrine, how-
ever, must be a later importation into Jewish theology
through Plato and Philo. It reminds us of Vergil (4neid
vi.713), who makes the souls—destined by the Fates to
inhabit new bodies on earth—drink of the waters of
Lethe (forgetfulness), so as to remove all remembrance
of the joys of Elysinm:

“The souls that throng the flood, r

Are those to whom by Fate are other bodies owed;


In Lethe's lake they long chlivion taste
Of future life secure, forgetful of the past.


2. Nature
and Origin
of the Soul


3. False
Theories


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Psalms, Book of
Psychology


According to the Kabbalah, souls are supposed to have an
ideal as well as a real preéxistence: ‘‘ideal as emanations
from the s*phiréth, which are themselves emanations from
the infinite real, as having been ‘created’ at a definite
time" (cf Eric Bischof!, De Kabbala).


The doctrine with some modifications passed into
the Christian church, was accepted by Justin
Martyr, Thecdoretus, Origen and others of the
church Fathers, but became chsclete by the latter
part of the 4th cent. (cf Shedd, Hist of Christian
Doctrine, II, 9). It was formally condemned by a
syned held at Constantinople in the 6th cent. In
later times it was accepted in modified form by
Kant, Schelling and ethers, and was specially de-
fended by Julius Miller, who held that the soul
had a timeless preéxistence and underwent a fall
before the final act, whereby it was united in time
te the body as its temporary home (fin ausser-
zeitlicher Urzustand und Urfall). Reference is
sometimes made te Jer 1 5, where Jeh addresses
His servant: ‘Before I formed thee in the belly I
knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of
the womb IJ sanctified thee; I have appointed thee
a prophet unto the nations.’ But this text gives
no warrant to the doctrine as taught by the writers
mentioned. All that may be conceded is, what
Delitasch has termed “an ideal preéxistence,’’ i.e.
“a, preéxistence, not only of man as such, but also
of the individual and of all: a preéxistence in the
Divine knowledge, which precedes the existence in
the individual consciousness” (Bibl. Psych., 46).

A new question arises at this point, viz. Is the soul a


special creation? Is it derived from the parents?
Opinions are_and have been divided on


‘ this point. Many have supported the

4. Creation- theory of Creationism, by which is meant
ism and pnee ae yy eee vgn new indi-
Traducian- vidual comes into being a soul is specially
. iad oan created by God, de nihilo, to inhahit the
18 new-formed body. This’ view of the
soul's birth found great favor in the early

church. It was dominant in the East and was advo-


cated in the West. ‘‘Jerome asserts that God quotidie
fabricatur_animas, and cites Scripture in proof’ (Shedd,
op. cit., II, 11). Scholastic theologians in the Middle
Ages, Roman Catholic divines, Reformed orthodoxy
upheld the theory. Though finding little support in
Scripture, they appealed to such texts as _the following:
“He fashioneth their hearts alike’' (Ps 38 15 AV);
Jeh ‘‘formeth the spirit of man within him” (Zee 12 1):
““The spirit returneth unto God who gave it" (Eccl 12
7:, cf Nu 16 22; He 129); ‘‘God, the God of the
spirits of all flesh’ (Nu 27 16)—of which Delitzsch

eclared: ‘‘There can hardly be @ more classical proot-
text for creationism’ (Bibl. Psych., 137).

Traducianism again has found equal support in the
Christian church. It declared that the parents were
responsible, not merely for the bodies, but also for the
souls of their offspring— per traducem vel per propaginem
(i.e. by direct derivation, in the ordinary way of propa-
gation). Tertullian was a strong supporter of this view:
“The soul of man, like the shoot of @ tree, is drawn out
(deducta) into a physical progeny from Adam, the
parent stock"’ (Shedd, Hist of Doctrine, II, 14). Jerome
remarked that in his day it was adopted by mazima pars
oceidentalium (‘the large majority of western theolo-
gians''). Leo the Great (d. 461) asserted that ‘‘the
Catholic faith teaches that every man with reference to
the substance of his soul as well as of his body is formed
in the womb"’ (Shedd). Augustine, however, though
doctrinally inclined to support the claims of Traducian-
ists, kept an open mind on the subject: ‘‘You may
blame, if you will, my hesitation,’’ he wrote, ‘‘ hecause
I do not venture to affirm or deny that of which 1 am
ignorant.'’ And, perhaps, this is the safest attitude to
assume; for there is little Scriptural warrant for cither
theory. Birth is a mystery which baffics investigation,
and Scripture throws no light upon that mystery. Yet
some who have discussed this subject have tried actually
to calculate the very day on which the soul is created
or infused into the body, as it is being formed in the
mother’s womb—in boys on the 40th day after preg-
nancy and in girls on the 80th. This indeed is the
reductio ad absurdum of Creationism. — i

Whichever theory we accept, the difficulties are great
either way. For if God ercates a soul, that soul must be
pure and sinless and stainless at birth. How then can
it he said that man is ‘‘conceived” as well as “born in
sin’? If the impure, sin-stained body contaminates the
pure, unstained soul by contact, why cannot the stainless
soul disinfect the contaminated body? And _ again, if
every individual soul is a special creation hy direct


Psychology


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2496


interposition of the Almighty, what hecomes of the
unity and solidarity of the race? Is its connection with
Adam then purely one of physical or corporeal genera-
tion? Creationism cannot account for the birth of the
soul. Norcan Traducianism. For it can account neither
for the origin, nor for the hereditary taint of the soul.
It lands us in a hopeless dilemma. In the one case we
fall back upon Creationism with its difficulties; in the
other, we plunge into a materialism which is equally
fatal to the theory (cf Bavinck, Gereformeerde Dog matiek,
Il, 626). Perhaps the words of Petrus Lomhardus,
though frequently misunderstood and misapplied, throw
most light on the subject—a light, however, which is
little more than ‘‘darkness visible’’—creando infundit
eas Deus, et infundendo creat (‘in creating God infused
[the soul]; and in infusing He creates'’). The problem
is and remains insoluble.

Passing allusion may be made to another very curions
theory, to which reference is made by Martensen
(Christliche Ethik, I, 107). It bears upon human indi-
viduality, as impressed not only upon the soul, but also
upon the hody. The soul and the body are represented
as arising at the same moment, but the latter (not in
regard to its physico-chemical composition, but in other
respects) is the resultant of soul-influences, whatever
these may be. The soul therefore exercises a formative
influence upon the body, with which it is united. This
theory is attributed by Martensen to G. E. Stahl, who
died in Berlin in 1734, as physician to the royal family.
We are here in a region where the way is barred—‘‘a
palpable obscure" without the light of day.


The next important question which has occupied
many minds is equally difficult of solution—the
theory of Tripartition. Is man com-


5. Tri- posed of ‘‘body” and “‘soul’’ (dichot-
chotomy omy) only, or 1s a third to be added

to the two, so that “‘spirit”’ is another
element in the constitution of human nature


(trichotomy)? Either theory is supposed to be
supported by Scripture, and both have had their
defenders in all ages of the church. Where the
tripartite division has found favor, soul and spirit
have been distinguished from each other, as man’s
lower is distinguished from his higher nature;
where dichotomy prevailed, soul and spirit were
represented as manifestations of the same spiritual
essence. Under theinfluenceof Platonic philosophy,
trichotomy found favor in the early church, but
was discredited on account of the Apollinarian
heresy. The threefold division of human nature
into séma (“body”), psuché (‘soul’), pnetima
(“spirit”) had been accepted by many when
Apollinaris, bishop of Laodicea (d. 382), attempted
to explain the mystery of Christ’s person by teach-
ing that the Logos (or second person of the Trinity)
had taken the place of the rational soul in Christ,
so that the person of Christ on earth consisted of
the Divine Logos, a human body, and a soul (psuché)
as the link between the two.

For the tripartite division of human nature two
texts are specially brought into the discussion:
viz. 1 Thess 5 23, “May your spirit and sou] and
body be preserved entire, without blame’’—a text
which is papularly interpreted as conveying that
“soul” stands for “our powers natural—those we
have by nature,” and that by “spirit” is meant
“that life in man which in his natural state can
scarcely be said to exist at all, but which is to
be called out into power and vitality by regenera-
tion” (F. W. Robertson, Sermons). There is very
little warrant in Scripture for such interpretation.
“The language does not require a distinction of
organs or substances, but may be accounted for
by a vivid conception of one substance in different
relations and under different aspects. The two
terms are used to give exhaustive expression to the
whole being and nature of man” (Davidson, OT
Theology, 135). There is evidently no distinction
of essence here—viz. of a soul distinct from the
spirit, and a body distinct from either. In his
“fervid desire for the complete and perfect sancti-
fication of his disciples, the apostle accumulates
these terms”’ in order to emphasize the doctrine of
an entire renewal of the whole man by the working


of the Holy Spirit. It has been pointed out (A.
Kuyper, Het werk v. d. Heiligen Geest, I11, 101)—
and this must be carefully borne in mind—that
“the apostle does not use the word holomereis, ‘in
all your parts,’ and then summarize these parts in
body, soul and spirit, but holoteleis, a word that has
no reference to the parts, but to the télos, the end
or aim. Calvin interprets ‘soul’ and ‘spirit’ here
as referring to our rational and moral existence, as
thinking, willing beings, both modes of operation
of the one, undivided soul.”

The next text to which an appeal is made is He
4 12: “The word of God is living, and active, and
sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing
even to the dividing of soul and spirit, of both
joints and marrow, and quick to discern the thoughts
and intents of the heart.’’ Here spirit, soul and
heart are brought into close correspondence, with
heart evidently as the center of personality, mani-
festing itself in soul and spirit. The only question
is, whether the dividing which takes place by the
piercing word of God is one within the soul and
spirit, causing a complete exposure of the inner man,
a cutting asunder of all that composes his nature,
or one between the soul and spirit, causing a di-
vision between them as separate parts of human
nature. The probability lies with the first of these
two contradictory views. The writer evidently
meant that, as a sharp two-edged sword pierces to
the very marrow in its sundering process, so the
sword of the spirit cuts through all obstacles,
pierces the very heart, lays bare what hitherto was
hidden to all observers, even to the man himself,
and ‘discerns’ the ‘thoughts and intents,” which
in the unity of soul and spirit have hitherto been
kept in the background. ‘The meaning is rather,
that the word of God pierces and dissects both the
soul and spirit, separates each into its parts, subtle
though they may be, and analyzes their thoughts
and intents’? (Davidson, op. cit., 187). At any
rate, to found a doctrine of Trichotomy on an iso-
lated, variously interpreted text is dangerous in the
extreme. The language of metaphor is not the
language of literal speech; and here evidently we
are in the region of metaphor.

The ground is now cleared for a fuller investiga-
tion of the meaning of these terms:


(1) The terms are used inter-
6. Scrip- changeably, though they are not
tural Terms synonymous. Lébhdbh (‘‘heart’’),


nephesh (“soul’’), rath (“spirit’’) are
very closely connected in the OT. The heart is
there represented as “the organ, the spirit as the
principle, the soul as the subject of life’’ (Cremer,
Lexicon). Hence we read that ‘‘out of it [the heart]
are the issues of life’ (Prov 4 23). Dying is rep-
resented as the surrender of soul (Gen 35 18; Job
11 20), but also of spirit (Ps 31 5; 146 4). The
dead are called souls (Rev 6 9; 20 4), and also
spirits (He 12 23; 1 Pet 319). In the last
mentioned text the “spirits in prison”’ are also called
“souls.”’ The living are described as “disturbed”
or “grieved” in soul (Jgs 10 16), “vexed” (Jgs 16
16), ‘‘discouraged’ (Nu 21.4), “weary” (Zec 11
8); but also as in “anguish of spirit’? (Ex 6 9),
‘impatient in spirit’ (Job 21 4, in the Heb),
‘straitened in spirit? (Mic 2 7). At death the
“spirit”? departs (Ps 146 4, in the Heb), but also
the ‘‘soul” (Gen 36 18). As in the OT so in the
NT, Our Lord “sighed,” or ‘was troubled in the
spirit’ (Jn 18 21); but we also read that His
soul was “exceeding sorrowful,’”’ or troubled (Mt
26 38; Jn 12 27). See Spirit; Soun; Heart.
(2) And yet there is a distinction, whatever the
real nature of it may be. In Mary’s Magnificat,
e.g., we find the two combined in an interesting
manner: ‘‘My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my


2497


spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour” (Lk 1
46.47), the one clause “referring to the personal
emotions of Mary, to her feelings as a woman and
a mother, all of which find an outlet in adoration,”
the second clause “appearing to indicate the mo-
ment when, in the profoundest depths of her being,
by the touch of the Divine spirit, the promise of the
angel was accomplished in her” (Godet, in loc.).
A like contrast meets us in the story of Gethsemane.
The Master was ‘exceeding sorrowful in soul’ (i.e.
the emotional, sensitive center of His being was in
deep sorrow), the disciples were ‘willing in spirit,’
but ‘weak in the flesh’ (Mt 26 38.41). In the OT
we find that when a man dies his “soul” departs,
and when he is restored to life his “soul” returns
(1 K 17 22); but when consciousness. or life-
power returns to one not dead, “spirit” is used
(Gen 45 27; Jgs 16 19; 1.8 36 12; 1K 10 5).
Even in popular language the distinction is recog-
nuzed: we speak of so many “souls,” not. “spirits,’’
as having perished.

(3) From all this it would appear that philo-
sophic distinction or scientific acchracy of expression
is not met with in Scripture. Man is there repre-
sented as a unity, and the various terms employed
to indicate that unity in its diversity of activities
or passivities do not necessarily imply the existence
of different essences, or of separate organs, through
which these are realized. Psychical action is some-
times ascribed to the body, as well as to the soul,
for soul and body are inseparably united to each
other. It is the possession of a soul which makes
the body what it is; and on the other hand, a soul
without a body is unthinkable. The resurrection
of the body therefore is no mere figment of the
creeds. The body is God’s work (Job 10 8), in-
separable from the life of thesoul. In the NT it is
spoken of as ‘‘the house on earth” (epigeios oikia),
the ‘‘tabernacle” or tent prepared for the occupant
(skénos) (1 Cor 12 18; 2 Cor 47; 5 1). In the
OT ‘we have such metaphorical expressions ag
‘houses of clay’; or, as in post-Bib. writings,
‘earthly tabernacle.’ In the latest, we have words
which suggest a hollow, a framework, or a sheath,
favoring the Gr idea of the body as the husk or
clothing of the soul” (Laidlaw). Hencein Scripture,
spirit and soul are interchangeably used with body
for human nature in general, not as though indi-
cating three separate entities, but as denoting a
parallelism which brings out the full personality of
man. Soul and body are threatened with destruc-
tion (Mt 10 28); body without spirit is a corpse
(Jas 2 26); soul and spirit are interchangeably
united: ‘Stand fast in one spirit, with one soul
striving,” ete (Phil 1 27).

(4) Gathering all together, the Scriptural posi-
tion seems to be as follows: The Divine Spirit is
the source of all life, and its power is communicated
in the physical, intellectual and moral sphere.
That Spirit, as the spiritus spirans, the inspiring
spirit, by its very breath makes man a living soul:
“The spirit [or breath] of God is in my nostrils”
(Job 27 3); “Thou takest away their breath
[ra*h, “‘spirit’’], they die, and return to their dust”’
(Ps 104 29). Hence God is called “God of the
spirits of all flesh’? (Nu 16 22; 27 16).

Soul, though identical with spirit, has shades of
meaning which spirit has not; it stands for the in-
dividual. ‘Man is spirit, because he is dependent
upon God. Man is soul, because, unlike the
angels, he has a body, which links him to earth.
He is animal as possessing anima, but he is a reason-
ing animal, which distinguishes him from the brute’”’
(Bavinck, Ger. Dogm., II, 628). :

(5) In_this connection stress may he laid upon
some of Paul’s expressions. Ue exhorts the Philip-
pians to “stand fast in one spirit [pneima], with


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Psychology


one soul [psuché] striving for the faith’ (Phil 1
27). He exhorts them to be “of the same mind”

(stimpsuchoi, Phil 2 2); he hopes to
7. Pauline be “of good comfort?’ (cupsuchd, Phil 2
Expressions 19); he knows of ‘no man likeminded,

[esépsuchon], who [would] care truly
for [their] state’ (Phil 2 20). Everywhere there-
fore we have “soul”? in various combinations to
indicate the mental attitude, which in the “fellow-
ship of the Spirit”? he would assume toward his
readers, and his readers would adopt toward him-
self. There cannot be therefore that subtle dis-
tinction which men have found in the terms “spirit”
and “soul,” as though two separate essences were
housed in one body. The text in Job (33 4), ‘The
Spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the
Almighty giveth me life,” is the key to the whole
problem. ‘The spiritus spirans becomes the Spiritus
spiratus—the inspiring spirit becomes in man the
life which is expired, outbreathed by man, in both
soul and spirit. “Soul,” therefore, may well stand
for the personal, living, animated being—the suffer-
ing, acting, thinking, reasoning, dying creature,
“whose breath is in his nostrils.” Christ gave His
‘soul’ (psuché) for His sheep (Jn 10 11). On the
cross He Himself exclaimed: ‘Into thy hands I
commend my spirit’ (pneumo) (Lk 28 46). Spirit
may therefore indicate the all-embracing power,
guiding the inward and the outward life—princi-
pium tllud internum ex quo fluunt actiones, is Bengel’s
comment on Eph 22 (cf Lk 9 55 AV; 4 36).
Hence by an easy gradation it may stand for the
abysmal depths of personality; while “soul” would
express man’s individuality in general. See Sovn;
SPIRIT.

Pauline phraseology has somewhat confused the
issue; at any rate, new meanings, not obvious to the
reader, have been assigned to various terms. Paul
contrasts the psychical and the pneumatic, the man
under the influence of the Divine pnewma, and the
Inan as influenced by his own psuché. The psy-
chical man is man in his natural, unregenerate state,
psychical in this connection being almost equivalent
to carnal; while the pneumatic man would be the
man guided and directed by the Spirit from on high.
Nature and grace are contrasted in the two terms
as the first and second Adam are contrasted in 1 Cor
15 45—the first Adam being described as a living
psuché (‘‘soul’’), the second as a life-giving pneuma
(“spirit”). Even so the psychical body is the body
intended, fitted to bear the psuché, while the pneu-
matic body is evidently the body capable of bearing
the pneuma. Hence the one is corruptible and
weak, the other incorruptible and full of power.
The soul confined to the carnal body uses it as an
organ, till it falls into decay and no longer lends
itself to such use. The spirit, in constant fellow-
ship with the Divine Spirit, communicates its
energy to a body fitted to be the bearer of this
renewed life, spiritualizes that organ, makes that
body its docile instrument, enables the body to fulfil
its wishes and thoughts, with inexhaustible power of
action, “as we even now sce the artist using his
voice or his hand with marvelous freedom and thus
foreshadowing the perfect spiritualizmg of the
body.’

Osler questions call for discussion here: they may
be briefly touched upon. Scripture acknowledges

a dualism, which recognizes the sepa-
8. Monism rate existence of soul and body. It re-
and Other jects a monism, which makes man but
Theories ‘a doublefaced unity” (Bain); or con-

siders mind and body as equally un-
real, and as “aspects,” “appearances,” “sides” of one
and the same reality (scientific monism). It knows
nothing of mere tdealism, which makes mind the
only reality, of which matter is but a manifestation,


Psychology
Ptolemy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2498


nor of materialism, which considers matter as that | the evolutionary theory as so presented. For primitive


which alone is substantial, while mind is a2 mere
product of the brain (Haeckel). It does not sup-
port the theory of harmonia praestabilita—pre-
established harmony, whereby


“Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting,”


because soul and body were united in harmonious
action before the individual was called into active
being, body and soul acting in harmony after
creation like two clocks accurately regulated, point-
ing to the same hour on the dial plate, though driven
by different springs (Leibnitz). Scripture has no
theory. It deals with facts and facts only in so far
as they bear upon the history of man’s sin and man’s
redemption. It throws no light on many problems
raised by science or philosophy. It does not dis-
cuss origins—the origin of evil, of matter, of mind.
“All is of God” is the Scriptural answer to many
questions. Thus the relation of mind to body is
and remains a mystery—as great as the relation
between the forces in Nature, to which the names
of light and electricity have been given. Science
has attempted to explain that mystery and has
fuiled. The words of Shenstone (Cornhill Maga-
zine, 1907) may be applied to all psychical prob-
lems, outside of Holy Writ, which by him were
applied to those scientific questions which remain
unanswered in spite of all our efforts at solution:
“We are still very far from knowing definitely that
atoms are composed entirely of electrons or that
electrons are nothing else than electric charges; and
though electrons have been shown to exhibit electric
inertia, 1b has not been proved that the inertia of
atoms also is electrical.’ The mystery of matter is
great; that of soul is greater still.


The next question which falls to be discussed is the
influence of the fall of man upon his soul. Scripture is
clear upon the point. Man’s fall from a
9. The Fal] Primeval state of innocence is there told
- In unambiguous terms, though the word
of Man itself is not found in the narrative, except
perhaps in Rom 1] 11.12, where allusion
is made to the fall (pardpiéma) of Israel. With the
oriyin of evil Scripture apparently does not concern
itself, though it clearly states that man’s sinful condition
stands in direct connection with the transgression of
Adam, as in Rom § 12, where the introduction of sin
(hamartia) into the world (késmos) is spoken of as tha
act of one man (s.c. Adam), Aamartia being evidently
taken_as a power of evil working in the world of men.
The OT allusion in Hos 6 7 can hardly he referred to
Adam's transgression; at any rate the reference is
donhtful. AV renders the passage: ‘‘They like men
have transgressed the covenant,’’ though the revisers
have tré: '*But they like Adam have transgressed the
covenant.’’ The German and Dutch VSS give the same
interpretation to the verse: ‘like Adam.” The LXX
takes the term as an appellative (hés dnthrépos, “‘asman"’),
but the Vulg refers the transgression to Adam (sicué
‘ldam transgressi sunt). The other allusions in the OT
to this event are slight, as in Joh 31 33; Ezk 28 13.15.
In the NT, however, the references are much more fre-
quent, esp. in the writings of John and of St. Paul (cf
Jn 8 44; 1 Jn 3 8; 2 Cor11 3; 1 Tim 2 14). The
strong parallelism between Adam and Christ in Rom 5
12-21, the obedience of the one bringing freedom, while
that of the other brought woe, and the contrast in 1 Cor
15 22 between Adam and Christ throw sufficient light
on_the question at issue.

Modern science, under tho influence of the evolution-
ary hypothesis, has eliminated or at least has attempted
to climinate the factor of the Fall. That ‘fall’ has
been interpreted as a ‘‘rise,’’ the ‘‘descent” is supposed
to have heen a real “ascent.” Far down the ages,
millenniums ago, ‘‘a miscrahle, half-starved, naked
wretch, just emerged from the bestial condition, torn
with fierce passions, and fighting his way among his
compeers with low-browed cunning’? (Orr, Christian
View of Ged, 180) must have emerged somehow out of
darkness into light. “We are no longer,’’ says Professor
J. A. Thomson, ''as those who look back to a paradise
in which man fell; we are as those ‘who, rowing hard
against the stream, see distant gates of Eden gleam, and
do not dream it is a dream’’’ (Bible of Nature, 226).
If science definitely teaches that man has arisen by slow,
insensible gradations from the brute, and no further
word may he said on the subject, then indeed the prob-
lem of human sin is utterly inexplicahle. There can
then be no agreement between the Bib. conception and


man’s transgression would under such circumstances
be but the natural expression of brute passion, to which
the name of sin in the Christian sense can hardly be
applied. But if for ‘‘minute"” and ‘‘insensihle’’ grada-
tions in the evolutionary process be substituted the
“mutations,” ‘‘leaps’’ or *'lifts,”’ to which an increasing
number of evolutionists are appealing; if primitive man
he not pictured as a semi-animal, subject to brutish
jmpulse and passion; if with man a new start was made,
a ‘lift’? occurred in the process of development under
the guiding and directing influence of Almighty power,
the prohlem assumes a different shape. A sinless crea-
ture, transgressing the moral law, is then not an un-
scientific assumption; conscience asserting itself as the
voice Divine within the human soul is then not only
possihle, hut actual and real, in the history of man’s
earliest progenitors. The Bib. narrative will after all
remain as the most reasonable explanation of man's
original condition and his terrible fall. In that narra-
tive will be found enshrined the ‘‘shadowing tradition”
of a real, historic event, which has influenced the hnman
raco through all the ages. Professor Driver, writing
under the strong influence of the evolutionary theory,
and accepting as ‘‘the law stamped upon the entire
range of organic nature, progress, gradual advance from
lower to higher, from the less perfect to the more perfect,”
has wisely remarked that ‘‘man failed in the trial to
which he was exposed, that sin has entered into the
world... . and that through the whole course of the
race it has been attended by an element of moral dis-
order, and thus it has heen marred, perverted, impeded
or drawn hack” (Driver, Genesis, 57). See Fauu, Tue.


An equally serious question arises as to the
effects of thefallofman. Shame, corruption, death is
the answer given by the OT and NT.


10. Effects “In the day that thou eatest thereof
of the thou shalt surely die” (Gen 2 17)
Fall was the judgment pronounced upon


man. By this was evidently meant
“death” as a physical and as a spiritual fact. Man
was doomed. The posse non mori, which accord-
ing to older theologians was man’s privilege, was
lost and was succeeded by a punishment of which
the non posse non mort was the doom, t.e. the possi-
bility of immortal life was followed by the impossi-
bility of not suffering death. Not as though im-
mortality was absolutely Jost; for with sin came
decay, degeneration, death, not of the mbreathed
spirit, but of the body into which the soul was
breathed by God. But even the body is imperish-
able. It undergoes change, but not extinction.
The resurrection-body has become a possibility
through the atonement and resurrection of Christ.
The tabernacle is removed, but renewed. The
body is not a prison house, but a temple; not an
adjunct but an integral part of the human being.
The Bible teaches not only a resurrection-body, but
a transformed body (Rom 12 1). It speaks not
only of a sonl to be saved, but of a body to be re-
deemed. Scripture alone accounts for death and
explains it.
With modern evolutionists death is an unsolved
problem. Weissmann (ssays on Heredity) main-
tains on the one hand that “death is
11. Death not an essential attitude of matter”
asa (p. 159), and on the other, ‘4t is only
Problem from the point of view of utility that
we can understand the necessity of
death” (p. 23), and again “death is to be looked
upon as an occurrence which is advantageous to
the species as a concession to the outer conditions
of life, and not as an absolute necessity, essentially
inherent in life.” He even speaks of “the immor-
tality of the protozoa,” because ‘fan Immense num-
ber of the lower organisms” are not subject to
death (ib, 26). Death therefore according to him
has been “acquired secondarily as an adaptation,”
and must in a certain sense be unnatural. It is
indeed “one of the most difficult problems in the
whole range of physiology.” If this be so, we
may safely turn to Scripture for an explanation of
the problem, which has a value peculiarly its own.
“By man came death” is the authoritative declara-


2499


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Psychology
Ptolemy


tion, because by man came sin.
because through Adam came sin. Here we may
safely leave the problem, because “by man” will
come “resurrection from the dead.’’? See Deartu.

But if the body is mortal, is the soul immortal?
On this point the NT gives no uncertain sound, and

though the doctrine be not as clearly
12. Immor- expressed in the OT, yet even there
tality of kinship with God is man’s guaranty
the Soul for everlasting communion with Him

/ (ef Ps 73). Job longed for such fellow-
ship, which to him and to the OT saints before and
after him was life. In memorable words he gave
utterance to the hope which was in him: ‘I know
that my Redeemer liveth . . . . and after my skin
[read “‘body”’] . . . . has been destroyed, yet from
my flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for my-
self, and mine cyes shall behold and not another’
(Job 19 25). Hosea, the mourncr, is responsible
for that sublime utterance, which in its NT form is
recited at the graveside of those who die in the
Lord: “I willransom them from the power of Sheol;
I will redeem them from death: O death, where
are thy plagues? O Sheol, where is thy destruc-
tion?’ (13 14). Reference may also be made to
the words of Isaiah (26 19): “Thy dead shall live;
my dead bodies shall arise. Awake and sing, ye
that dwell in the dust.” Still clearer is the note
sounded by Daniel (12 2.3): “Many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt. And they that are wise shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament; and they that
turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever
and ever.” In one word, the OT saint based all
his hope and fellowship on God. That hope
strengthened his soul when he shuddered at the
darkness of Sheol. “It overleaps Sheol in the vigor
of his faith.” In the Pss we find the same hope
expressed on almost every page: “As for me, I
shall behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be
satisfied, when I awake, with beholding thy form”
(AV “with thy likeness,’ Ps 17 15); and again:
“Thou wilt not leave my soul to Sheol; neither
wilt thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption.
.... In thy presence is fulness of joy; in thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore’ (16
10.11). Whatever the ultimate verdict of science
may be regarding the “utility” of death in regard
to the human race, Scripture considers it abnormal,
unnatural, a punishment, an infliction, the result
of man’s wrongdoing and his transgression of the
law of God. But death in Holy Writ is not a hope-
less separation of body and soul. The NT sounds
a note even clearer than the OT; for Christ has
brought ‘life and immortality to light.” ‘We
know,” says Paul, “that we have a building from
God,” after the dissolution of our tabernacle (2 Cor
5 1); and that is but the necessary corollary to
Christ’s great utterance: “I AM THE RESURRECTION,
AND THE Lire” (Jn 11 25).

LireraturRe.—Beck, Umriss der biblischen Seelen~
lehre, ET; Hofmann, Schrifibeweis; Delitasch, System
of Bib. Psychology; Oehler, OT Theology; Wendt, Die
Begriffe Fleisch u. Geist, etc; Dickson, Si. Paul's Use
of the Flesh and Spirit; Cremer, Bibl.-theol. Wérterbuch,
etc; Herzog, RE, arts. ‘‘Geist’’ and ‘'Seele’’; Laid-
law, Bible Doctrine of Man; Orr, God’s Image in Man;
Davidson, OT Theology.

J. 1. Marais


PTOLEMAIS, tol-é-ma’is (IIroAcpats, Piolemais) :
Same as “Acco” in Jgs 1 31. Ptolemais was the
most prominent town on the Phoen seacoast in
Maccabean times (1 Maec 6& 15.55; 10 1.58.60;
12 48), and is once mentioned in the NT in Acts
21 7 as a seaport at which Paul landed for one
day, visiting the “brethren” in the place. See
Acco; PHOENICIA.


|
“In Adam all die,” |


PTOLEMY, 1ol’&mi (Tlrodcpaies, Plolematos,
but usually called Ptolemy—‘‘the Warlike’”):
The name Ptolemy is rather common from the days
of Alexander the Great, but is best known as the
dynastic name of the 13 (14) Macedonian kings of
Egypt (323-43 BC) (as Pharaoh in the OT). Those
of interest to the Bib. student are:

(1) Ptolemy I, surnamed Soter (Zwrip, Sétér,
“Savior”), called also Ptolemy Lagi, was born c
366 BC, the son of Lagus and Arsinoé, a concubine
of Philip of Macedon. He was prominent among
the officers of Alexander the Great, whom he accom-
panied in his eastern campaigns. On the death of
Alexander, Ptolemy seized the satrapy of Egypt
as his share (1 Mace 1 6 ff). Now commenced
the long hostilities between Egypt and Syria,
Ptolemy on more than one occasion invading Syria.
In 316 he joined in a war against Antigonus during
which Coele-Syria and Phoenicia were lost, but in
312 regained from Demetrius the son of Antigonus.
It was most probably in this year (312) that Ptolemy
captured Jerus on aSabbath day (Jos, Ant, XII, i, 1),
and by force or persuasion induced many Jews to
accompany him to Egypt as colonists or merce-
naries. His kind treatment of them induced others
to leave Syria for Egypt. In 306 Ptolemy was
defeated in the great naval fight off Salamis in
Cyprus by which Cyprus was lost to Egypt.
About this date Ptolemy assumed the title of ‘‘king,”
following the example of the Syrian ruler. In
305-304 he defended the Rhodians against Deme-
trius Poliorcetes, forcing the latter to raise the siege
—hence the title ‘‘Savior.” In 285 BC Ptolemy
abdicated in favor of his youngest son Philadel-
phus—the son of his favorite wife Berenice—and
died in 283 BC. According to the usual interpre-
tation this Philadelphus is ‘‘the king of the south”
in Dn! 11 5. This Ptolemy shares with his son and
successor the honor of founding the famous Alex-
andrian Museum and Library.

(2) Ptolemy II, surnamed Philadelphus (®Ad-
deXgos, Philddelphos, ‘“Brother|sister?]-loving”’), the
youngest son of Ptolemy
I; b. 309 BC in Cos;
succeeded his father in
285 BC and d. 247. Like
his father, he was actively
engaged in two Syrian
wars until peace was made
about 250 BC, Berenice,
the daughter of Philadel-
phus, being given in mar-
riage to Antiochus II. This Ptolemy planted
numerous colonies in Egypt, Syria and Pal, among
which were several of the name of Arsinoé (his
sister-wife), Philadelphia on the ruins of old Rabbah,
Philotera south of the Sea of Galilee, and Ptolemais
on the site of Acco. He devoted great attention to
the internal administration of his kingdom, endowed
the Museum and Alexandrian Library in which his
father had taken much interest; in general he fol-
lowed his father’s example as a liberal patron of
art, science and literature. According to one tra-
dition it was Philadelphus who was instrumental in
beginning the LXX tr (see Sepruacintr). At any
rate, he was favorably disposed toward his Jewish
subjects, and in his reign Jewish wisdom and Gr
philosophy began to blend. Philadelphus is sup-
posed to be ‘‘the king of the south” of Dnl 11 6,
whose daughter ‘“‘shall come to the king of the north
to make an agreement.”

(3) Ptolemy III, surnamed Euergetes (Evep-
yérns, Euergélés, Benefactor’), son of Philadel-
phus, whom he succeeded in 247 BC. In 246 he
was provoked to a Syrian war to avenge the murder
of his sister Berenice at Antioch; in the course of
this campaign he met with remarkable success,


Octodrachm (Egyptian
Talent) of Ptolemy II.


Ptolemy
Punishment


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2500


overran Syria, plundered Susa and Babylonia,
penetrated to the shores of India and captured the
important stronghold of Seleucia (1 Macc 11 8).
Euergetes was, however, prevented from reaping
the fruits of his victories by being recalled by inter-
nal troubles in Egypt. He brought back with him
from the East the Egyp gods that Cambyses had
carried away 300 years before, thus earning from the
Egyptians the title of ‘Benefactor.”’ Two tradi-
tions obtain as to his death: the more probable is
that of Polybius (ii.71), according to which he
died a natural death (222 BC), or, according to
another (Justin xxix.1), he was murdered by his
son. Some regard this king as the Euergetes men-
tioned in the Prologue to Sir, but the reference must
rather be to Euergetes II (Ptolemy VII). The
“shoot” who “shall enter into the fortress of the
king of the north” and prevail is Euergetes I (Dnl
11 7-9), ver 8 referring to the act by which he won
his title.

(4) Ptolemy IV, surnamed Philopator (®dAord-
twp, Philopdtor, ‘Lover of his father’), or Tryphon
(Tptgwyr, Triphin), the eldest son of Euergetes
whom he succeeded in 222 BC. Antiochus the
Great of Syria declared war against Egypt about
219 BC, but, after conquering Coele-Syria and
Phoenicia, he was defeated by Philopator at the
battle of Raphia near Gaza (217 BC). On his vic-
torious return to Alexandria, Philopator assumed
a very anti-Jewish attitude, and indeed caused dis-
content generally among his subjects. In spite of
the victory of Raphia, Egypt began to decline under
his weakness. He was as dissolute as Nero, while
his domestic tragedies are as dark as those of Herod
the Great. He died in 205 BC. Dnl 11 10-12
refers to the reign of Philopator. He was most
probably the oppressor of 3 Mace.

(5) Ptolemy V, surnamed Epiphanes (Emidaris,
Epiphanés, ‘Tllustrious’). He was only 5 years
old when his father Philopator died. Taking ad-
vantage of the king’s minority, Antiochus the Great
leagued with Philip of Macedon against Egypt.
Philip took the Cyclades and some cities in Thrace,
while Antiochus defeated the Egyp general Scopas
at Paneas on the Jordan in 198 BC, and thus Pal
passed to the Seleucid dynasty. The Romans now
interfered to make Antiochus surrender his con-
quests. Not daring to disobey Rome, Antiochus
compromised by making peace with Ptolemy and
betrothing to him his daughter Cleopatra, who was
to receive as her dower the revenues of the con-
quered provinces Coele-Syria, Pal and Phoenicia
(Jos, Ant, XII, iv, 1; Polyb. xxviii.17), but the
control of these provinces seems to have been re-
tained by Antiochus. The marriage took place
in 193 BC. After the dismissal of his faithful
minister, Aristomenes, Epiphanes’ character and
reign deteriorated. At last he bestirred himself
to recover the lost provinces from Seleucus, the suc-
cessor of Antiochus, but was poisoned before his
plans materialized, in 182 (181) BC (Jos, Ané, XII,
iv, 11). Dnl 11 14-17 is to be interpreted as re-
ferring to the relations between Ptolemy V and
Antiochus III, ‘the Great.”

(6) Ptolemy VI, surnamed Philometor (®:op7-
twp, Philomélor, ‘Fond of his mother’’), elder son
of Ptolemy V whom he succeeded in 182 (181) BC.
For the first 7 years of his reign his mother Cleopatra
acted as queen-regent, and peace was maintained
with Syria till 173 BC. Antiochus IV Epiphanes
then invaded Egypt, defeated the Egyptians at
Pelusium and secured the person of Philometor,
whom he spared, hoping to employ him as a tool
to gain the ascendancy over Egypt. Philometor’s
brother was now proclaimed king by the Alexan-
drians, with the title of Euergetes (II). When
Antiochus retired, Philometor made peace with his


brother, conceding him a share in the government
(170 BC). This displeased Autiochus, who marched
against Alexandria, but was stopped beneath the
walls by a Rom embassy (168 BC), in obedience to
which he withdrew. The brothers quarreled again,
and Philometor, expelled by Euergetes, went to
Rome to scek assistance (164 BC). The Romans
seated him again on his throne, assigning Cyrenaica
to Euergetes. The next quarrel was about Cyprus.
Philometor this time secured his brother as a pris-
oner, but sent him back to his province. Philo-
metor was later drawn into Syrian politics in the
conflict between Alexander Balas and Demetrius.
The Egyp king espoused the cause of the former, to
whom he also betrothed his daughter Cleopatra.
But on discovering Balas’ treachery, he took away
his daughter from him and gave her to his oppo-
nent, Demetrius Nikator, whom he now supported
against Balas. Balas was defeated in a decisive
battle on the Oenoparas and killed, but Ptolemy
himself died in 146 BC from the effects of a fall
from his horse in the battle (1 Macc 1 18; 10 51 ff;
2 Mace 1 10; 4 21). Dnl 11 25-30 refers to the
events of this reign. Philometor seems to have
taken a friendly attitude toward the Jews. In his
reign the Jewish temple of Leontopolis near Heliop-
olis was founded in 154 BC (Jos, Ant, XIII, iii, 1 f),
and two Jewish generals, Onias and Dositheus,
were at the head of his armies and had a large share
in the government (Jos, CAp, II, 5). The Jewish-
Alexandrine philosopher Aristobulus probably lived
in this reign.

(7) (On the death of Philometor his young son
was proclaimed king as Ptolemy Eupator [‘‘of a
noble father’’], but after reigning but a few months
was put to death by his uncle Euergetes II [Just.
xxxvili.8]. His reign being so brief he need hardly
be numbcred among the Ptolemics.)

(8) Ptolemy VII (VIII), surnamed Euergetes
(II) and called also Physcon (®icxwv, Phiskén,
“Big-paunch”), became sole ruler in succession to
his brother Philometor (or to his murdered nephew)
in 146 BC, and reigned till 117 BC. His reign was
characterized by cruelty, tyranny and vice, so that
he was hated by his subjects, esp. by the people of
Alexandria, who on one occasion expelled him during
an insurrection. It is uncertain whether Physcon
was an enemy and persecutor of the Jews or their
patron. Some authorities refer the persecutions
mentioned in 3 Macc to this reign, but most modern
authorities are disposed to date them in the reign
of the anti-Jewish Ptolemy IV Philopator. The
statement, “in the 38th year of King Euergetes,”
in the Prologue to Sir refers to Physcon Euergetes
II and=132 BC, since he dated his reign from
ae year of joint kingship with his brother (170
‘ The other Ptolemies of Egypt require no mention

ere.

The following are the apocryphal Ptolemies:

(1) Ptolemy Macron. See Macron.

(2) Ptolemy, son of Abubus, son-in-law of Simon
the Maccabee. He treacherously assassinated
Simon and two of his sons in the stronghold of Dok
near Jericho, 135 BC (1 Macc 16 15).

(3) Ptolemy, the father of Lysimachus (Apoc)
(Ad Est 11 1).

(4) Ptolemy, son of a Dositheus; he and his
father were bearers of the “‘epistle of Phrurai” (Ad
Est 11 1).

_ Lirsraturs.—y. P. Mahaffy, Empire of the Ptolemies,
is the best account for Eng. readers. A long list of
Ptolemies will be found, e.g. in Smith’s Classical Dict.
The ancient authorities are Josephus, Polybius, Justin,


Pausanias, Plutarch (Cleom.), Livy, Diodorus, Jerome
(Comm, to Dnl 11).


S. Aneus


2501


PUAH, pii’a, PUVAH, pi''va:

(1) MB, patch: One of the Heb midwives
whom the king of Egypt commanded to kill all male
children of the Hebrews at birth. The midwives,
fearing God, refused to obey, pretending that the
children of the Heb women were usually born before
they arrived. Their act is spoken of as being
meritorious in the eyes of the Lord, who is said to
have rewarded them by making “‘houses” for them
(Ex 1 15-20). In the Midhrash, Ex Rabba’, Puah
is identified with Miriam, and Shiphrah, the other
midwife, with her mother Jochebed. According to
another tradition Puah was a proselyte.

(2) TRAD, pi'ah, in 1 Ch 71; “3B, puwwah,
in Gen 46 13; Nu 26 23; written also “Pua” AV,
and “Puvah” RV: Second son of Issachar, ancestor
of the Punites, enumerated in the desert census taken
by Moses and Eleazar.

(3) TURD , pu’ah: Member of the tribe of Issachar,
mentioned (Jgs 10 1) as the son of Dodo and the
father of Tola, the judge. Enzta Davis Isaacs


PUBLICAN, pub’li-kan.


PUBLIUS, pub’li-us (IIdérdws, Péplios, from
the Lat praenomen Publius, derived from populus,
“popular”; according to Ramsay it is the Gr form
of the Lat nomen Popilius; the Gr title meaning
“first,”’ applied to Publius in Acts 28 7, was an
official one, and has been found on an inscription
from the island of Gaulus near Malta [cf Béckh,
CIG, no. 5, 754]): Publius held office under the
governor of Sicily. As the leading official in Malta,
he was responsible for any Rom soldiers and their
prisoners who might land there, but the account in
Acts 28 7 implies that he displayed more than ordi-
nary solicitude for Paul and his shipwrecked com-
pany, for, according to the writer, he ‘received us,
and lodged us three days courteously” (AV). The
Apocryphal ‘‘Acts of St. Paul” (see APocRYPHAL
Acts, B, I) states also that “he did for them many
acts of great kindness and charity” (cf Budge, Con-
ltendings of the Aposiles, II, 605). On this occasion
Paul miraculously healed the father of Publius,
who “lay sick of fever and dysentery” (Acts 28 8).
The exactitude of the medical terms here employed
forms part of the evidence that the writer of Acts
was a physician. Tradition relates that Publius
was the first bishop of Malta and that he afterward
became bishop of Athens. Cc KERR


See Tax, Taxina.


PUDENS, pi’denz, pi’dens (Ilotéys, Pordés,
lit. “bashful” [2 Tim 4 21]): One of the Chris-
tians in Rome who remained loyal to
1. Faithful Paul during his second and last im-
to Paul prisonment there, when most of the
members of the church ‘‘forsook him.”
The pressure under which they acted must have been
very great, as the apostle’s final trial before the
supreme court of the empire followed quickly after
the Neronic persecution. Their defection from
their loyalty to Paul must not be taken as implying
that they had also proved untrue to Christ. At
this time, however, there were some of the Chris-
tians who risked their earthly all, and their lives
too, in order to prove their adherence to Paul, and
Pudens was one of these.
Writing the last of all his letters, the Second Ep. to


Tim, Paul sends greeting from ‘‘all the brethren” who
were then with him. Among these he
2. Pudens


names Pudens. There are three other

’ names associated by the apostle with that

and Claudia of pudens: Eubulus, Linns and Clandia.
There is an interesting conjecture regard-

Ing Pudens and Claudia, that_they were hushand and
wife, and that Claudia was of British birth, a daughter
of a British king, called Cogidunus. King Cogidunus


was an ally of the Romans, and assumed the name of the
emperor Tiberius Clandius, who was his patron. In this


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ptolemy
Punishment


way his daughter would be named Claudla. But this
identificatlon of the British princess wlth the Claudla
who sends salutation to Timothy 1s only a supposition;
it lacks both evidenco and proof. See Cuaupia and
CH (St. P), ch xxvil.

In modern Rome, however, the tourist is stlll shown
a building, which is called the honse of Pudens, in the same
way as ‘Paul's hired house’ is also shown. The
authenticlty in both cases is lacking.


Pudens is not mentioned elsewhere in the NT.


JoHN RUTHERFURD
PUHITES, pi’hits (MIB, pathi). See Pu-
THITES.


PUL, pul:
(1) An Assyr king (2 K 16 19).
PILBSER.


(2) An African country and people (Isa 66 19).
See Pur.


PULPIT, podl’pit: Neh 8 4, ‘‘Ezra the scribe
stood upon a mighdél of wood.” Mighdal is one of
the commonest words in the OT and means simply
a high object—here a scaffolding or platform
(Bijva, béma, 1 Esd 9 42). “Tower” (so RVm)
gives an entirely wrong picture.


PULSE, puls (DIP, zérs‘tm [Dnl 1 12m,
“herbs” ], O72Y"7, zér**anim [Dnl 1 16]; cf JIM,
zeru*’, “sowing seed” [Lev 11 37], and DAT,
zéru‘im, ‘things sown’ [Isa 61 11}): (1) In Dnl1
12.16, it must mean herbs or vegetables grown from
seeds; a vegetable diet is what is implied. (2) In 2
S$ 17 28, “pulse” after “parched”’ is not in the origi-
nal, but is probably more correct than the tr in (1),
as “‘pulse’”’ usually implies leguminous plants, peas,
beans, etc.


PUNISHMENT, pun’‘ish-ment, EVERLASTING:


I. Previminary AssuMPTIONS

1. Survival after Death

2. Retribution for Sin

3. Conscious Suffering In Future

II. Scriptruray Support

1. OT and Jewish Conceptions

2. NT Teaching
(1) ‘'Eternal"’
re Equivalent Expressions
(3) The Last Judgment

3. Teaching of Analogy

III. Dirricutties anp Rivat HypoTHEsEs

1. Universal Salvation

2. Annihilation

8. Second Probation

IV. Natures, Conpbitions aNpD Issues

1. Mystery of the Future

2. Nature of Punishment

3. Range of Divine Mercy,

4. Gradation of Punlshment

5. God ‘Allin All”

LitTERaATURE


See T1qLaTu-


I. Preliminary Assumptions.— (For ‘‘everlast-
ing,” where used in AV as the rendering of aldnos,
aiénios, RV substitutes “‘eternal.”) It is assumed
in this art. that Scripture teaches the survival of
the soul after death, the reality of retribution and
of judgment to come, and a shorter or longer period
of suffering for sin in the case of the unredeemed
in the world beyond. Only a few words need be
said, therefore, in preliminary remark on these
assumptions.

Whatever view may be taken of the develop-
ment of the doctrine of immortality in the OT (see

EscuaToLtoGy oF THE OT), it will
1. Survival scarcely be doubted that it is through-
after Death out assumed in the NT that the sowls

of men, good and bad, survive death
(see IMmorTaLiTy). Two passages only need be
referred to in proof: one, Christ’s saying in Mt 10
28: “Be not afraid of them that kill the body, but
are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him
who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell’


Punishment


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2502


(Gehenna); the other, the parable of the Rich
Man and Lazarus in Lk 16 19-31: Lazarus is
carried by the angels to Abraham’s bosom; the rich
man lifts up his eyes in Hades, being in torments.
The whole doctrine of the future judgment in the
NT presupposes survival after death.
Retribution for sin is a cardinal point in the teach-
ing of both the OT and NT. The doctrine of judg-
ment, again, in the NT, with Chnist as
2. Retribu- judge, turns on this point. Thefollow-
tion for Sin ing passages are decisive: Isa 3 10.11;
Mt 11 22.24; 12 41.49; Rom 2 5.12:
2 Cor 6 10; Gal 6 7.8, etc (see RerriBuTion).
The conscious endurance of punishment for sin
in the future state is already implied in the pre-
ceding. The parable of the Rich Man


3. Con- speaks of it as following immediately
scious on death in Hades; all the descrip-
Suffering tions of the judgment imply pain and
in Future anguish as the result of condemnation


(cf Rom 2 5.12). This does not settle
the nature or duration of the punishment; but it
excludes the idea that physical death is the ex-
tinction of being, or that annihilation follows im-
mediately upon death or judgment.

These things being assumed, the questions that
remain are: Is the period of suffering for sin eternal,
or is it terminable? May it be cut short by re-
pentance or by annihilation? Is there any final
solution of the discord it implies in the universe?
It is maintained here that the punishment of sin,
in the case of the finally impenitent, is everlasting.

If. Scriptural Support.—The doctrine that the
punishment of sin 1s everlasting is sustained by
many plain testimonies of Scripture.

The doctrine of future punishment is not promi-
nent in the OT, where rewards and punishments

are chiefly connected with the present
1. OT and life. In a few passages (Ps 49 14.15;
Jewish 73 18.19; cf Isa 24 21.22; 66 24),
Conceptions Dr. Charles thinks that ‘‘Sheol appears

as the place of punishment of the
wicked’”’ (Eschatology, 73-76, 156). If so, there is
no suggestion of escape from it. Iu Dnl 12 2,
some that sleep in the dust are represented as awak-
ing to “shame and everlasting contempt” (the word
for “everlasting” is the usual one, ‘é/@m). In the
Jewish literature of the century before Christ,
“Sheol is regarded,” says Dr. Charles, ‘as the place
of final eternal punishment, that is, it has become
hell” (op. cit., 236; see EscHaToLoGy or THE OT).

In the NT, the strongest language is used by
Jesus and the apostolic writers on the certainty and

severity of the punishment of sin in
2. NT the future state, and always in a man-
Teaching ner which suggests that the doom is


nal.

(1) “#ternal.’—The word ‘eternal’ (aiénios)
is repeatedly applied to the punishment of sin, or
to the fire which isitssymbol. A principal example
is Mt 26 41.46, “eternal fire,” ‘eternal punish-
ment” (kélasis aiénios). Here precisely the same
word is applied to the punishment of the wicked
as to the blessedness of the righteous. Other in-
stances are Mt 18 8; Jude ver 7; cf Rev 14 11;
19 3; 20 10. In 2 Thess 1 9, we have, “eternal
destruction.” The kindred word aidios, ‘“ever-
lasting,” is in Jude ver 6 applied to the punishment
of the fallen angels.

The reply made by Maurice (Theological Essays,
442 ff) that aiduios in such passages denotes quality,
not duration, cannot be sustained. Whatever else
the term includes, it connotes duration. More
pertinent is the criticism of other writers (e.g. Cox,
Salvator Mundi, 96 ff; Farrar, Eternal Hope, Pref.,
xxxiv, pp. 78 ff, 197 tf; cf his Mercy and Judgment,
passim) that aiénios does not necessarily mean


“eternal” (according to Cox it does not mean this
at all), but is strictly “age-long,” is therefore com-
patible with, if it does not directly suggest, a ter-
minable period. Cox allows that the term 1s “‘sat-
urated through and through with the element of
time” (p. 100), but he denies its equivalence with
“everlasting.” The sense, no doubt, is to be de-


_termined by the context, but it can hardly be


questioned that “the aeons of the aeons” and simi-
lar phrases are the practical NT equivalents for
eternity, and that aidnios in its application to God
and to life (“eternal life’) includes the idea of un-
ending duration (cf Jn 10 28.29 for express asser-
tion of this). When, therefore, the term is applied
in the same context to punishment and to life (Mt
25 46), and no hint is given anywhere of limitation,
the only reasonable exegesis is to take the word in
its full sense of ‘‘eternal.’”’ .

(2) Equivalent expressions.—The meaning ‘‘eter-
nal’ is confirmed by the use of equivalent expressions
and of forms of speech which convey in the strong-
est manner the idea of finality. Such are the ex-
pressions, “the unquenchable fire,” the “worm”
that “dieth not” (Mt 3 12; Mk 9 43-48; cf Mt
13 42.50), with those numerous references to
“death,” “destruction,” “second death,” ou which
the advocates of conditional immortality build
their arguments for final extinction. Such is the
dictum of Jesus: ‘He that obeyeth not the Son
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth
[remains] on him” (Jn 3 36; the opposite of ‘‘life”’
is “perishing,” ver 16); or that in Rev 22 11, ‘He
that is unrighteous, let him do unrighteousness
still: and he that is filthy, let him be made filthy
still.” Finality is the note in all Christ’s warnings
—‘‘the outer darkness’? (Mt 8 12; 22 13); ‘The
door was shut .... I know you not” (Mt 26
10.12; cf 7 23), as in those of the Epp. (e.g.
He 23; 668; 1027.31; 12 25.29). Jesus
speaks of the blasphemy against the Spirit as a sin
which shall not be forgiven, ‘neither in this world,
nor in that which is to come” (Mt 12 32; not as
implying that other sins, unforgiven in this life,
may be forgiven in the next), a passage which Mk
gives in the remarkable form, “hath never forgive-
ness, but is guilty of an eternal sin” (Mk 3 29).
The Rich Man in Hades found an impassable gulf
fixed between himself and Lazarus (Lk 16 26).
See Gutr. It adds to the terribleness of these say-
ings that, as before remarked, there is nothing to
put against them; no hint or indication of a termi-
nation of the doom. Why did Jesus not safeguard
His words from misapprehension, if behind them
there lay au assurance of restoration and mercy?
One may ask with Oxenham, in a reply to Jukes,
“whether if Christ had intended to teach the doc-
trine of eternal punishment, He could possibly have
taught it in plainer terms.”’

(3) The last judgment.—The NT doctrine of the
last judgment leads to the same conclusion. Two
things seem plainly taught about this judgment: the
first, that it proceeds on the matter of the present
life—‘‘the things done in the body” (Mt 25 31-46; 2
Cor 5 10; Rev 20 12); and the second, that it is
decisive in its issues. Not a single suggestion is
given of a reversal of its decisions in any future age.
Such silence is inexplicable if the Scriptures meant
to teach what the opponents of this doctrine so
confidently maintain.

In corroboration of this Scriptural view analogy
might be pleaded. How constantly even in this

life is the law illustrated of the tend-
3. Teaching ency of character to fixity! The
of Analogy present is the seasou of grace (2 Cor
6 2), yet what powers of resistance to
God and goodness are seen to lie in human nature,
and how effectually, often, does it harden itself


2503


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Punishment


under the influences that seem most fitted to break
down its rebellion! What likelihood is there that
eternity will alter this tendency, or make conversion
more easy? Eternity ean hardly be thought of as
more really a scene of grace than time is for those
to whom the gospel has already come. Its charac-
teristie mark is said to be “judgment” (He 9 27).
Like the photographer’s bath, may its effect not be
to develop and fix existing character, rather than to
change it? Ifso, the state in which judgment finds
the soul may be presumed to be one that will remain.
Tl. Difficulties and Objections—Rival Hypothe-
ses.—What, it will now be asked, of the tremendous
difficulties which inhere in this doctrine, with their
undeniable effect in alienating many generous
minds from it and from Christianity? The lurid
rhetorical picturings of the sufferings of the lost, too
frequent in the teaching of the past, may be dis-
counted; it is not necessary to go beyond the in-
expressibly solemn words of Christ Himself and
His apostles. But even with this limitation, does
it not seem as if, by this doctrine, a reflection was
cast on the righteousness and mercy of God in
creating such multitudes of the human race, as, on
any showing, are outside the pale of Christ’s salva-
tion—the countless generations of the heathen,
with the masses even in Christian lands who have
not received or do not obey the light—only to doom
them to endless misery? Before attempting a posi-
tive answer, it is proper that a glance be taken at the
rival theories put forth in alleviation of the difficulty.
_ The most. comprehensive solution propounded
is that of universal salvation—of a final restitution
of all souls to God’s favor and to bless-

1. Universal edness. This tempting speculation—
Salvation for it is no more—advocated by Origen
in the early church, by Schleiermacher

in the last century, has been urged by many writers
in modern times. One of its best known advocates
was Samuel Cox, in his book Salvator Mundi. It
is noticeable that not a few who favor this theory
(e.g. Maurice, Farrar) decline to commit themselves
to it as more than a “hope,” and admit the possi-
bility of human souls continuing to resist God end-
lessty (Maurice, Theological Essays, 476; Farrar,
Eternal Hope, Pref., xv, xvi; Mercy and Judgment,
I, 485, ‘In this sense there may be for some souls
an endless hell’’). It must, however, be evident
that, be the number greater or smaller—and who
shall give assurance of its smallness?—if there are
any such souls, the difficulty in principle remains,
and the passages alleged as teaching universal
restoration are equally contradicted. The deeper
objection to this theory is that, springing, not from
real knowledge, but from men’s hopes and wishes,
it has, as already shown, the tremendous stress of
Scripture testimony against it; nor do the passages
commonly adduced as favoring it really bear the
weight put upon them. We read, e.g., of a “res-
toration of all things’—the same that Christ calls
the palingenesia—but, in the same breath, we are
told of those who will not hearken, and will be de-
stroyed (Mt 19 28; Acts 3 21.23). We read of
Christ drawing all men unto Him (Jn 12 32); but
we are not less clearly told that at His coming Christ
will pronounce on some a tremendous condemna-
tion (Mt 7 23; 25 41); we read of all things being
gathered, or summed up, in Christ, of Christ sub-
duing all things to Himself, etc; but representative
exegetes like Meyer and Weiss show that it is far
from Paul’s view to teach an ultimate conversion
or annihilation of the kingdom of evil (cf Meyer
on 1 Cor 16 21.28 and Eph 1 10; Weiss, Bib.
Theol., 11, 723, 107, 109, ET). We confess, how-
ever, that the strain of these last passages does seem
to point in the direction of some ultimate unity, be


it through subjugation, or im some other way, in


which active opposition to God's kingdom is no
longer to be reckoned with.

The view favored by another class is that of the
annihilation of the finally impenitent. The type

of doctrine called ‘conditional im-
2. Anni- mortality” includes other elements
hilation which need not here be discussed (see
IMMORTALITY). The annihilation
theory takes different forms. So far as the anni-
hilation is supposed to take place at death, it is con-
tradicted by the Scriptures which support the soul’s
survival after death; so far as it is believed to take
place after a longer or shorter period of conscious
suffering (which 1s White’s theory), it involves its
advocates in difficulties with their own interpreta-
tions of “‘death,” “destruction,” “perishing,” seeing
that in Scripture this doom is uniformly represented
as overtaking the ungodly at the day of judgment,
and not at some indefinite period thereafter. The
theory conflicts also with the idea of gradation of
punishment, for which room has to be sought in the
period of conscious suffering, and rests really on an
unduly narrewed conception of the meaning of the
Scriptural terms ‘‘life” and “death.” Life is not
bare existence, nor is “death” necessarily extinction
ofbeing. Assaid earlier, thelanguage of many parts
of Scripture implies the continued existence of the
subjects of the Divine wrath.

It is significant that on the side alike of the advo-
cates of restoration and of those of annihilation
(e.g. E. White), refuge from the diffi-
culties is frequently sought in the
hypothesis of an extended probation
and work of evangelization beyond
death. This theory labors under the drawback
that, in marked contrast with Scripture, it throws
immensely the larger part of the work of salvation
into the future state of being. It is, besides, apart
from the dubious and limited support given to it by
the passage on Christ’s preaching to ‘‘the spirits in
prison” (I Pet 3 19.20), destitute of Scriptural sup-
port. It has already been pointed out that the final
judgment is uniformly represented as proceeding on
the matter of this life. The theory is considered
elsewhere (see EscuaTroLocy or rHe NT, X).

IV. Nature, Conditions and Issues—While dog-
matisms like the above, which seem opposed to

Scripture, are to be avoided, it is
1. Mystery equally necessary to guard against
of the dogmatisms of an opposite kind, as
Future if eternity must not, in the nature of

the case, have its undisclosed mysteries
of which we here in time ean frame no conception.
The difficulties eonnected with the ultimate des-
tinies of maukind are truly enormous, and no serious
thinker will minimize them. Scripture does not
warrant it in negative, any more than in positive,
dogmatisms; with its uniformly practical aim, it
does not seek to satisfy an idle curiosity (cf Lk 13
23.24). Its language is bold, popular, figurative,
intense; the essential idea is to be held fast, but
what is said cannot be taken as a directory to all
that is to transpire in the ages upon ages of an un-
ending duration. God’s methods of dealing with
sin in the eternities may prove to be as much above
our present thoughts as His dealings now are with
men in grace. In His hands we must be content
to leave it, only using such light as His immediate
revelation yields.

As respects the nature of the punishment of sin,
it cannot be doubted that in its essence it is spiri-

wal. Everything can be adopted here
2. Nature which is said by Maurice and others
of Punish- —‘The eternal punishment is the
ment punishment of being without the
knowledge of God, who is love, and
of Jesus Christ who has manifested it; even as


3. Second
Probation


Punishment
Punishments


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2504


eternal] life is declared to be the having the know!-
edge of God and of Jesus Christ’’ (Theological
Essays, 450). The supreme penalty of sin is un-
questionably the loss of God’s life and love—the
being sinful. Environment, indeed, may be ex-
pected to correspond with character, but the hell
is one the sinner essentially makes for himself, and,
like the kingdom of God, is within. The fire, the
worm, the stripes, that figure its severity, are not
physical. Even should the poena sensus (were
that conceivable) be utterly removed, the poena
damni would eternally remain.
It is a sound principle that, in His dealing with
sin in the world to come, God’s mercy will reach as
far as ever it can reach. This follows
3. Range of from the whole Scriptural revelation
Divine of the character of God. What may
Mercy be included in it, it is impossible for
anyone to say. It should be noticed
that those of whom it is said that they shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abideth on them, are
those who “obey not” the truth (Jn 3 36)—who
actively and consciously disregard ard oppose it.
But all do not belong to this class. It may be
assumed that none will be lost who can in consist-
ency with holiness and love be saved. The most
germinal goodness, which is the implantation of His
own Spirit, God will acknowledge and develop.
The problem of undeveloped character may receive
a solution we do not wot of with the entrance into
the eternal light—not in change of character, but
rather, as said before, in the revelation of char-
acter’s inmost bent. In this sense, the entrance
into eternity may be to many the revelation of a
love and grace which had not been understood or
appreciated as it should have been on earth, but
with which it is in essential kinship. There are at
least many shades and degrees of character, and
God may be intrusted to take the most just, yet
most merciful, account of all.
The fullest weight must further be given to what
the Scripture so expressly says of gradation of
punishment, even of the unsaved. It
4, Grada- 1s not the case that the lot of all who
tion of fail of the eternal life in Christ is all
Punishment of one grade. There are the “few
stripes” and the “‘many stripes” (Lk
12 47.48); those for whom it will be “more toler-
able’ than for others in the day of judgment (Mt
11 20.24). Even “Sodom and her daughters” will
be mercifully dealt with in comparison with others
(Ezk 16 48.49.53.55.61). There will be for every-
one the most exact weighing of privilege, knowledge
and opportunity. There is a vast area here for the
Divine administration on which no light at all is
afforded us.
There remain those passages already alluded to
which do seem to speak, not, indeed, of conversion
or admission into the light and fellow-
5. God “‘All ship of Christ’s kingdom, but still of a
in All” final subjugation of the powers of evil,
to the extent, at least, of a cessation
of active opposition to God's will, of some form of
ultimate unification and acknowledgment of Christ
as Lord. Such passages are Eph 110; Phil 2
9-11; above all, 1 Cor 16 24-28. God, in this
final ‘vision, has become “all in all.” Here, again,
dogmatism is entirely out of place, but it is per-
missible to believe that these texts foreshadow such
a final persuasion of God’s righteousness in His judg-
ment and of the futility of further rebellion as shall
bring about an outward pacification and restoration
of order in the universe disturbed by sin, though it
can never repair that eternal loss accruing from
exclusion from Christ’s kingdom and glory.


Lirveraturnn.—Against: Maurice, Theological Es-
says, “Eternal Life and Eternal Death’’; S. Cox, Sal-


vator Mundi; F. W. Farrar, Eternal Hope; Mercy and


Judgment; A. Jukes, The Second Death and the Resti-
tution of All Things; E. White, Life in Christ; H. Con-
stable, Duration and Nature of Future Punishment. For:
Pusey, What Is of Faith as to Everlasting Punishment?
H. N. Oxenham, Catholic Eschatology; C. Clemance,
Future Punishment; Edersheim, Life and Times of Jesus,
the Messiah, Appendix, xix, ‘‘On Eternal Punishment,
according to tbe Rabbis and the NT”; The Future Life,
A Defence of the Orthodox View, by tbe Most Eminent
American Scbolars; S. D. F. Salmond, The Christian Doc-
trine of Tmmortality, Book VI; Orr, Christian View of God,
lecture ix; Luthardt, Saving Truths (ET), lecture x. See
also the various works on Dogmatic and Bib. Theology.


JAMES ORR
PUNISHMENTS, pun‘ish-ments (VP ; ‘awon,
‘fault, ” “iniquity,” ‘punishment for iniquity,”
“sin? TGen 418; Lev 26 41; Job 19 29; Ps 149
7; Lam 4 22; Ezk 14 10 m; Am 1 3.69.11. 13;
2 1.4.6], wey, ‘énesh, “tribute,” “fine,” “punish-
ment” [Lam 3 39], myDT, hat@ah, or MNO,
hatta@’th, “‘sin”’ and its retribution, ‘‘penalty,” “‘ex-
piation” [Zec 14 19]; KéAacts, Aédlasis, “punish-
ment,” “torment” [Mt 25 46], émurupla, epitimta,
“poll tax,” hence “penalty” [2 Cor 2 6], tepwpla,
timérta, “vindication,” hence “penalty” [He 10
29), e&Slkyows, ekdikésis, ‘vindication,’ “retri-
bution” [1 Pet 2 14 AV]): A court could inflict
for a crime against the person, a sentence of (1)
death in the form of stoning, burning, beheading,
or strangling, etc; (2) exile to one of the cities of
refuge in case of manslaughter (Nu 35); or (8)
stripes, not to exceed 40, in practice 39 or less (Dt
25 3; 2 Cor 11 24). Offences against property
(theft, fraudulent conversion of deposit, embezzle-
ment, robbery) were punished by exacting more than
the value of the things taken (Lk 19 8), the excess
going to the injured party, thus differing from a
fine, which goes into the treasury of the community.
The housebreaker was lable to be slain with im-
punity (Ex 22 2). A fine in the modern sense is
unknown in the Scriptures, unless Lev 5 6-19 be
interpreted as referring to such.
The earliest theory of punishment seems to have
been that of retaliation—‘‘blood for blood’”—and
to some extent this principle appears


1. History even in the Law of Moses (Lev 24 19.
of the He- 20; Mt 5 38). Early in the history
brew Law of the race, punishment was admin-
concerning istered for sin and crime. Adam and
Punish- Eve were driven from the Garden, and
ment Cain, the first murderer, though not


executed in retaliation for his deed,
had a mark set on him. The words of Lamech
(Gen 4 24) indicate that death was regarded as
the fitting punishment for murder, and the same
thought apparently was in the minds of the brethren
of Joseph (42 21). Judah, as head of his family,
seems to have had power of life and death (38 24),
and Abimelech threatens his people with the extreme
punishment in case they injure or insult Isaac or his
wife (26 11). Similar power is ascribed to Pharaoh
(41 18).
Under the Law of Moses, the murderer was to be
put to death without mercy. Even if he took
refuge at the altar in a sanctuary or in
2. The an asylum city, he would not be im-
Mosaic Law mune from arrest and execution, and
concerning the same principle was applied in the
Punishment case of an animal (Ex 21 12.14.23.
28.36 ||). But punishment under the
Mosaic Law was not to be entailed or transmitted
(Dt 24 16), as was the case among the Chaldaeans
oe 24) and the kings of Israel (1 K 21; 2 K


It has been noted that capital punishment is
extensively prescribed by the Mosaic Law, and
undoubtedly the Law was carried out. This cir-
cumstance has been explained by reference to the


2505


fact that the nation consisted of newly emancipated
slaves, and therefore required harsh measures to
keep them in check.

Under the Mosaic Law, the offences that made
one liable to the punishment of death were: (1)
striking or reviling a parent (Ex 21 15.17); (2)
blasphemy (Lev 24 14.16.28; 1K 2110; Mt
26 65.66); (3) Sabbath-breaking (Ex 31 14; 36
2; Nu 16 32-36); (4) witchcraft and false pre-
tension to prophecy (Ex 22 18; Lev 20 27; Dt
13 5; 18 20; 1S 28 9); (5) adultery (Lev 20
10; Dt 22 22); (6) unchastity: (a) before mar-
riage, but detected afterward (Dt 22 21), (b) in
case of a woman with someone other than her be-
trothed (Dt 22 23), (c) in a priest’s daughter (Lev
21 9); (7) rape (Dt 22 25); (8) incestuons and
unnatural connections (Ex 22 19; Lev 20 11.14.
16); (9) man-stealing (Ex 21 16); (10) idolatry,
actual or virtual, in any form (Lev 20 2; Dt i3
6; 17 2-7); (11) false witness in capital cases (Dt
19 16.19).

A large number of offences come under the law
of punishment by cutting off from the people, the
meaning of which expression has led to some con-
troversy. It may signify excommunication or
death, and occurs in connection with the following
offences: (1) breach of morals, such as wilful sin
in general (Nu 16 30.31); incestuous or unclean
connections (Lev 18 29; 20 9-21); (2) breach of
covenant, brought about through nncircumcision
(Gen 17 14; Ex 4 24), neglect of Passover (Nu
9 13), Sabbath-breaking (Ex 31 14), neglect of
Atonement Day (Lev 23 29), work done on the
Atonement Day (Lev 283 30), children offered to
Molech (Lev 20 3), witchcraft (Lev 20 6), anoint-
ing an alien with holy oil (Ex 30 33); (3) breach of
ritual, committed by eating leavened bread during
Passover (Ex 12 15.19), eating fat of sacrifices
(Lev 7 25), eating blood (Lev 7 27; 17 14), eat-
ing sacrifices while unclean (Lev 7 20.21; 22 3.4.
9), offering too late (Lev 19 8), making holy oint-
ment for private use (Ex 30 32.33), making per-
fume for private use (Ex 30 38), general neglect
of purification (Nu 19 13.20), not bringing offering
after slaying a beast for food (Lev 17 9), slaying
the animal at a place other than the tabernacle
door (Lev 17 4), touching holy things illegally
(Nu 4 15.18.20).

Of capital punishments that are properly re-
garded as of Hebrew origin, we note:

(1) Stoning, which was the ordinary mode of
execution (Hx 19 13; Lev 20 27; Josh 7 25; Lk
“20 6; Acts 7 58; 14 5). The witnesses, of whom
there were at least two, were required to cast
the first stone (Dt 13 91; Jn 8 7). If these failed
to cause death, the bystanders proceeded to com-
plete the sentence, wherenpon the body was to
be suspended until sunset (Dt 21 23).

(2) Hanging is mentioned (Nu 26 4; Dt 21
22), probably not as a mode of execution, but
rather of exposure after death. It may have been
a Canaanitish punishment, since it was practised
by the Gibeonites on the sons of Saul (2 5 21 6.9).

(3) Burning, before the age of Moses, was the
punishment of unchastity (Gen 38 24). The Law
prescribes it as a punishment in the case of a priest’s
daughter (Lev 21 9), and in case of incest (Lev
20 14), but it is also mentioned as following death
by other means (Josh 7 25), and some believe it
was never used excepting after death. That it was
sometimes used as a punishment on living persons
among the heathen is shown by Dnl 3.

(4) The sword or spear as an instrument of pun-
ishment is named in the Law (Ex 19 13; 32 27;
Nu 26 7 ff). It occurs frequently in monarchic
and post-Bab times (Jgs 9 5; 15 15 33; 25 20
22; 1 K 19 1; Jer 26 23; Mt 14 8.10), but among


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Punishment
Punishments


these cases, there are some of assassination rather
than of punishment.

(5) Strangling as a form of punishment has no
Scripture authority, but according to tradition was
frequently employed, and is said to have been per-
formed by immersing the convict in clay or mud, and
then strangling him by a cloth tied around the neck.

Besides these, which are to be regarded as the
ordinary capital punishments, we read of some that

were either of foreign introduction or of


3. Punish- an irregular kind, such as: (1) cru-
ments of cifixion (q.v.); (2) drowning (Mt 18
Foreign 6 ||); (3) sawing asunder or crushing
Origin (2 § 12 31; He 11 37); (4) tortur-


ing (1 Ch 20 3; He 11 35); (5) pre-
cipitation (2 Ch 26 12; Lk 4 29); (6) suffocation
(2 Macc 18 4-8). The Persians are said to have
filled a high tower a great way up with ashes,
and then to have thrown the criminal into it, and
continually stirred up the ashes by means of a
wheel till he was suffocated (Rawlinson, Ancient
Monarchy, III, 246). See also Heron, II, 100.

Secondary forms of punishment not heretofore
mentioned are to be noted as follows:

(1) Blinding or putting out of eyes in the case of
captives (Jgs 16 21; 1 S 11 2; 2 K 26 7).

(2) Chaining by means of manacles or fetters of
copper or iron, similar to our handcuffs fastened on
the wrists and ankles and attached to each other by
a chain (Jgs 16 21; 25 3 34; 2 K 25 7); also
alluded to in the life of Paul (Acts 28 20; Eph 6
20; ; Tim 1 16); and in the case of Peter (Acts
12 6).

(3) Confiscation of property that had fallen under
the ban, i.e. had been singled out for destruction by
the special decree of Jeh, as in Nu 21 2; Josh 6
17; or had been reserved for the use of the army
(Dt 2 35; 20 14; Josh 22 8); or given over to the
priesthood (Josh 6 19). The term may be ex-
tended to include all things vowed or sanctified and
those irrevocably devoted or consecrated to God
(Lev 27 21.28). The idea is applied with special
emphasis to those things which, because of their
uncleanness, must not be used by the Israelites,
though, through their warfare with the heathen,
they might have come
into possession of them
(Dt 7 26; 15 16 16-23).

(4) Dashing in pieces
(Ps 2 9; Isa 13 18).

(5) Divine visitation.
See VISITATION.

(6) Exposure to wild
beasts (Lev 26 22; 15
17 46; Dnl 6).

(7) Flaying (Rawlinson,
Ancient Monarchy, I, 478;
Nineveh and Babylon;
mentioned figuratively in
Mic 3 3).

(8) Forfeiture (Ezr 10


(9) Gallows in the mod-
ern sense probably were
unknown to the ancients.
Where the word occurs in
Est (6 14; 6 4; 7 9.10; |
9 13.25), it probably re- |
fers to a beam or pole on
which the body was im-
paled and then elevated :
to a height of 50 cubits as an object of warning to
the people (see ‘‘Hanging’’). :

(10) Imprisonment is frequently referred to in
both the OT and the NT, indicating that this was
a common mode of punishment among both the
Israelites and other nations (Gen 40 3; 42 17;


i)


Hanging.
Aasyrian Sculptures (Brit. Mus.).


Punites
Purity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA ; 2506


Lev 24 12; Nu 15 34; 1 I< 22 27; Jer 87 15.21;
Lk 3 20; Acts 4 3.10; 28 10; and the Epp. of
Paul). See Prison.

(11) Indignities—In this term may be included
all those outbursts of vengeance or other evil dis-
positions that were practised in times or under cir-
cumstances when liberties with the prisoner were
permitted on the part of bystanders or those who
had charge beyond the execution of the judicial
decree. Instances are found in the life of Christ
(Mt 26 59.67; Lk 22 63ff; Jn 18 22); also in
the life of Paul (Acts 23 2).

(12) Alutilation (Jgs 16.7; Ezk 23 25; 2 Macc
7).—The Law was opposed to thus treating any
Israelite, and Samuel, when referring to the arbi-
trary power of the future king (1 8 8 10 ff), does
not say that he would thus treat ‘‘their sons.” It
was a barbarous custom of the East (see EUNUCHS;
PoryGaMy), evidently regarded, among the He-
brews, as a heinous practice (Dt 23 1). The only
act authorizing mutilation (except in retaliation) is
mentioned in Dt 25 11.

(13) Plucking off the hair is alluded to as a mode
of punishment in Neh 18 25; Isa 60 6.

(14) Prison garments were in vogue to mark the
convicts (Jer 62 33).

(15) Restitution has been alluded to in the general
introduction to this topic.

(16) Retaliation was recognized by Moses as a
principle, but the application of it was left to the
judge (Lev 24 19-22). A fine example of it is
found in the law of Dt 19 19.

(17) Scorpions, chastising with—Probably the
use of thongs armed with pointed pieces of lead
or other metal (1 K 12 11; 2 Ch 10 14). See
Scorpions.

(18) Scourging. See separate article.

(19) Slavery. See separate article.

(20) Stocks. See Prison.

Frank E. Hirscu

PUNITES, ptnits CIB, pani, probably ‘“‘dark”’):
Descendants of Puvah, of the tribe of Issachar
(Nu 26 23; cf Gen 46 138; Jgs 10 1; 1 Ch 7 1).


PUNON, pi’non (j2°5, pundn): A desert camp
of the Israelites, the second after leavmg Mt. Hor
(Nu 33 42.43). Eusebius (Onom 299 85; 123 9)
mentions an Idumaean village, N. of Petra, in the
desert, where convicts were mining copper, called
Phin6n or Phaindn. These are doubtless identical.
See WANDERINGS OF ISRAEL.


PUR, pur (Est 3 7; 9 26).


PURAH, pi'ra (AB, purah, “branch’’): Gideon's
“servant,” lit. ‘‘young man,” i.e. armor-bearer
(Jgs 7 10f, AV “Phurah”’).


PURCHASE, pfir’chis:
acquire by payment,” in Elizabethan Eng., “to
acquire’ by any means. In the OT, AV has used
“purchase” to represent. 3p , kdéndh, and its deriv-
atives (vb. and naun), except in Lev 25 33, where
the word is Sua, g@al (RV “redecm”). Inthe NT
the noun does not occur and the vb. is used for
kTdopnat, kidomai, in Acts 1 18; 8 20, and mem-
roiéw, peripoiés, in Acts 20 28; 1 Tim 3 13. But
none of these words connotes the payment of a price,
so that RV has kept the word only in Acts 20 28
(m “‘acquired”’), changing it into ‘‘obtain” in Acts
118; 8 20, and “gain” in 1 Tim 3 13. In the
OT, RVm has “gotten” in Ex 15 16 and ARV has
(very properly) introcluced the sanie word into the
text of Ps 74 2; 78 54.

Burton Scott Easton


See Purim.


In modern Eng., “to |


PURE, pir, PURELY, pir’li, PURITY, pw’ri-ti:
This group of words has in the OT and the NT an
almost exclusively ethical siguificance, though the
word ‘“‘pure” is of course used also in its literal sense
of freedom from alloy or other alien matter (Ex 26
11, etc). “Pure” in the OT represents many Heb


words, most frequently IQ, féhor; “purely,”


occurs once only in AV, as the tr of "2, bdr, properly
“that which cleanses” (cf Job 9 30, RVm ‘Heb
‘cleanse my hands with lye,’”’ i.e. alkali for soap)
in Isa 1 25, RV “thoroughly [m “as with lye,”
AV “purely”] purge away thy dross’; ‘‘pureness”
is the AV tr of the same word in Job 22 30, RV
“cleanness.” In the NT ‘pure’ is the tr chiefly
of xaGapés, katharés (Mt 5 8, “Blessed are the pure
in heart,” ete), but also of dyvés, hagnés (Phil 4
8; 1 Tim 6 22; Jas 317; 1 Jn 3 3—always in
an ethical sense). A different word (eilikrinés) is
used in 2 Pet 31, RV_ “sincere.” “Purity”
(hagneia) occurs only in AV in 1 Tim 4 12; 6 2;
in RV in 2 Cor 11 3 (as the tr of tés hagnédtétos).
See CLEAN; PURITY. W. L. WALKER


PURGE, pirj: A number of words in both the
OT and the NT are so rendered in AV and RV,
although frequently in RV the older Eng. word
“purge” is displaced by the more applicable modern
terms “cleanse” and ‘“‘purify,” since the emphatic
and medical senses of the word, as we now use it,
are not justified by some of the Heb and Gr originals.
In older Eng. the word was broader in meaning,
today it is specific. Occurrences in AV, with the
changes made in RV, are as follows:

(1) WTO , fahér, lit. ‘to be clean,”’ used of the putting-
away of idolatry from Judah by Josiah (2 Ch 34 3.8),

is trd '‘purge”’ in all VSS, but, in Ezk 24

13, ARV changes to ‘‘cleanse."’ (2) NOM
1. In the Sas cate ene ‘ arate at
OT hata’, lit. ‘to make a sin offering” (Ps 51
7); is changed without improvement to

“purify'’ in ARV, while “purge” is re-
tained in ERV. (3) “D>, kaphar, ‘to cover” or ‘‘to
make atonement,” occurs in Ps 65 3;_ 79 9; Ezk 48
20.26; in the two passages in Pss, RV has ‘“‘forgive"
(the ‘‘expiate’’ of m is still better), and in Ezk the even
more accurate ‘‘make atonement.'’ In both (4) ats,
cdraph, ‘‘to refine’ (Isa 1 25), and (5) mm, duh,
lit. ‘‘to rinse" (Isa 4 4), ‘‘purge”’ is well retained in
RV. (6) WB, darar, lit. *‘to be shining,’ RV retains
in Ezk 20 38, but in Dnl 11 35 changes to “purify.”
(7) PPT . zakak, ‘‘to pour down" as molten metal (Mal


3 3), also becomes “purify” in RV.


These occurrences are all in the figurative sense,
and apply to sin, uncleanness, idolatry, etc. Most
noteworthy is the ARV change of the familiar Ps
61 7.

The Gr words rendered ‘‘purge’’ in AV of the Apoc
and NT are xaéalpu, kathairé, and xabapl{w, katharizo,

and their compounds and derivatives.


2. Inthe In all passages except four, RV more
NT properly translates ‘cleanse’ (Mt 3 12;

Mk 719; Lk 317; Jn 15 2; He 9 14.22;
10 2). In He 1 8 “when he had by himself purged


our sins” is changed to “had made purification of.”
But in the case of the vb. compounded with the
preps. dé, apd, and é«, ek, ie. apokathairé and
ekkathair6 (Job 12 9; 1 Cor & 7; 2 Tim 2 21),
with strong signification to “cleanse out,” RV
properly retains “purge.” Most worthy of note
is the change of the familiar verse in Jn, ‘Every
branch, that beareth fruit, he purgeth” to “Every
branch . ... hecleanseth” (15 2).
Epwarp Mack

PURIFICATION, pi-ri-fi-ka’shun. See PurRGE;

Purity; UNcLEAN.


PURIM, pt’rim (2°, purim, “lots’; LAX
Ppovpal, Phrourai), PUR, pir: The name of a


2507


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Punites
Purity


Jewish festival celebrated on the 14th and 15th days
of the month Adar, the final month of the Bib. year,
corresponding to February-March. The
1. Scripture origin of the festival is narrated in the
References Book of Est, and indeed is the motive
_of the book, as the time, reason and
manner of its celebration are given in detail (Est
37; 9 24ff). Reference also is made to it in
apocryphal literature (Ad Est 10 10-13; 2 Macc
16 36) and in Jos (Ant, X1, vi, 13). No reference
is made to this feast in the NT, as it was celebrated
locally, and is therefore not to be connected with
any of the festal pilgrimages to Jerus. For this
reason the supposition of some that the feast of Jn
5 1 was Purim is to be rejected, mention of it being
immediately followed by the words, ‘And Jesus
went up to Jerus.”
For the complete account of the institution. of
Purim reference must be made to the Book of Est.
Only a brief statement is possible here.
2. History Haman, son of Hammedatha the
of Insti- AGaaiTs (q.v.; ef 1 8 16 8.32), who had
tution been made prime minister by King
Ahasuerus (Xerxes), bitterly hated
the Jews, some of whom, as Mordecai, were rising
to prominence in the empire. After Queen Vashti
had been put away from her royal position for cause
(1 9-12), a Jewess named Esther, kinswoman and
adopted daughter of Mordecai, was chosen to be-
come the royal consort. This only increased the
hatred of Haman, who in his jealous fury soon
began to seek an opportune day to work his hate
upon Mordecai and the whole Jewish people, and
therefore resorted to the casting of the lots for the
auspicious time: “They cast Pur, that is, the lot,
before Haman from day to day, and from month to
month, to the twelfth month, which is the month
Adar” (3 7). Beginning with the Ist month, all
the days and months were tried with unfavorable
result, until the last. AtHaman’s request Ahasuerns
caused his scribes to send into all the realm on the
13th day of the 1st month a decrée that all Jews
should be put to death on the 13th day of the
12th month (3 12 ff). As the narrative shows, the
wisdom of Mordecai, Esther’s heroism, and fasting
and prayer availed to foil the dastardly scheme of
Haman, who had already built the gallows on which
his hated rival should be hanged. Haman was
himself hanged on this gallows, while Mordecai
was honored yet more (7 10; 8 1.2). A second
decree was issued on the 23d day of the 3d month
that on the 13th day of the 12th month (8 9.12),
the day appointed in the first decree for their
extermination, the Jews should gather together and
defend themselves against their foes. On that
fateful day not only did the Jews successfully resist
the malice of their enemies, but the public officials
also, secing that the royal favor was with the Jews,
espoused their cause. In Shushan, the royal city,
a second day, the 14th, was granted the Jews for
vengeance on their foes (9 11-16). In view of so
great a deliverance “Mordecai wrote these things
~... unto all the Jews .... to enjoin them
that they should keep the fourteenth day of the
month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same,
yearly, as the days wherein the Jews had rest from
their enemies” (9 20-22).
Already as early as the times of the Maccabees
(2 Mace 15 36), the festival was observed, the
14th day being called ‘Mordecai’s
3. Manner day.” Jos refers to it as continuously
of Ob- and widely observed down to his time:
servance “For this cause the Jews still keep the
forementioned days, and call them days
of Purim” (Ant, XI, vi, 13). In succeeding cen-
turies as the Jews have passed from one civilization
or empire to another, so many causes have arisen


to remind them of the persecutions of Haman as to
make the festival of a triumph over such persecu-
tions both attractive and most significant to them.
Experiences in Syria, Egypt, Rome, Russia and
elsewhere have not been lacking in suggestion of the
original occasion of Purim. The 13th day has been
observed by fasting in commemoration of Esther's
prayer and fasting before she approached the king;
in the evening, at the beginning of the 14th day, the
Jews repair to the synagogues where the Book of
Est, one of the m*ghilléth, 1s read with interpreta-
tions, execrations bursting out at the reading of
Haman’s name, accompanied by noise of rattles
and stamping of feet, other persecutors and foes also
sometimes coming in for a share of execration. The
names of Mordecai and Esther receive blessings.
On the following morning of the 14th synagogue
services are again held, at which, in addition to the
repetition of the Est reading, Ex 17 8-16, which
records the destruction of the Amalekites (cf Est
3 1), is also read as the lesson from the Law, pres-
ents are given to the poor and to friends, and the
rest of the day, as also the 15th, observed with
feasting and rejoicing, even excesses being condoned
in the exuberance of national spirit.


Many attempts have been made to trace the origin
of Purim in pagan or cosmic festivals, but to the present
time without success, without approach
4. Theories even to probability. Supposed connec-
p noe tions with nature myths, national festivals,
of Origin polytheistic legends have all found advo-
cates. The word itself has suggested the
possibility of identification with words of similar form
or sound in other languages. But the ease of finding
such similarities for any word casts douht upon the reli-
ability of any identification. (1) It has been traced to
the Assyr pura, and identified with the Assyr New
Year when officials entered upon their term of service.
(2) The Bab pukru, new year festival, has also been
claimed as the origin of Purim; Mordecai becomes
Marduk, Esther is Ishtar, while Haman, Vashti and
Zeresh are Median gods. (3) The most popular attempts
at identification are in the Pers field, where bahr, “' lot,’”
is claimed as the source of Pur, or purdighd@n, ‘new year,”
or farwardighan, the feast of departed souls. (4) Origin
also in a Gr hacchanalian occasion has been sought.
(5) Others suggest origin in other Jewish experiences
than that claimed by the Book of Est itself, snch as a
captivity in Edom, or a persecution under the Ptolemies
in Egypt, or the victory of Judas Maccabaeus over
Nicanor in 161 BC (1 Macc 7 49). Noone ofall these
theories has sufficient probability to secure for itself
anything like general acceptance; the Book of Est
remains as the most reasonable account; the difficulties
met in it are not so great as those of the explanations
sought in other languages and religions.
Lirerature.—Bible dicts., esp. HDB, EB and Jew
Or comm. on ‘Est’’ in ICC, particularly pp.
—94.
Epwarp Mack
PURITY, pi’ri-ti: The Bible bears witness to the
long struggle over and in man to secure physical,
mental, and,moral cleanliness. The various forms
of purity have relation to each other.


We have a common proverb that '‘cleanliness is akin
to godliness.”” Cleanliness and aesthetics are certainly
nigh neighbors. But cleanliness and ethics do not
dwell farther apart. When one realizes that by un-
cleanness of person or property he may endanger the
health or life of family, or even of society about him—
as in keeping conditions that devclop typhoid fever—he
hegins to realize that there is a close tie between clean-
liness and morals. ‘'Ought’’ comes in on the sphere of
cleanliness, and then the whole realm of ethics is open.
So near are the departments of physical and ethical
cleanliness that now if one hears the word ‘‘slum”’ with-
out explanation, be cannot tell whether it relates to filth
or sin.


The perception of this relationship is of very
ancient date. Though it is Isaiah who says (52
11), “Cleanse yourselves, ye that bear the vessels
of Jeh,” and Mk 7 3.4, ‘All the Jews, except they
wash their hands diligently, eat not, holding the
tradition of the elders; and when they come from
the marketplace, except they bathe themselves,
they eat not; and many other things there are,
which they have received to hold, washings of cups,


sae THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2508
and pots, and brasen vessels,” yet such statements | prophets were passionate monotheists. They


are but summaries of directions distributed here
and there throughout the whole Levitical Law. We
can read therein what sounds like the hygienic
orders of a general to his soldiers on the march, or
like the rules of the board of health to preserve a
city from pestilence. And these Levitical direc-
tions for cleanliness are connected inseparably with
the worship of Jeh, as though physical purity were
to that an essential. The Psalmist blends these
two elements, the physical and the ethical, in the
familiar question and answer (24 3-5), ‘“‘Who shall
ascend into the hill of Jeh? and who shall stand in
hisholyplace? He that hath clean hands, and a pure
heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto false-
hood, and hath not sworn deceitfully. He shall
receive a blessing from Jch, and righteousness from
the God of his salvation.”

The ceremonial cleansings called for.by the Law
had meaning and influence. They were interpre-
tative of something spiritual—were a parable way
of illustrating the necessity of purity of heart in
order to gain acceptance with God. If in after-days
the thing symbolized was forgotten in the symbol,
that was owing to “blindness of mind.” The
darkness was not necessary.

But the main subject in respect to which we shall
in this art. seek light on purity from the Bible will

not be hygiene or aesthetics, but morals.
1. The Sex When we turn to that department
Relation we shall at once realize the fact that,

the sex relation is the most primitive
and comprehensive of all the human relations.

The family —The attitude of the Bible in respect
to that relation is unmistakable. From the vision
of the Garden of Eden to that of the New Jerusalem,
the Bible rings true to the ideal of purity in family
life and in the relations of the sexes to each other.
This is remarkable, for it is a vast history over
which its narrative sweeps, and in it every species
of literature is represented. It sets forth the acts
and views of a people in all the stages of civiliza-
tion, from wandering nomads to dwellers in cities
embellished by architecture and every device of
man to set forth riches and splendor. It sets forth
their crime, shame and sin, as well as their virtues,
but its tone is approbative of the virtues and repro-
bative of the crime, shame and sin. _ In the Magna
Charta of the Heb people—the Ten Command-
ments—there stands in equal rank with any other
principle, ‘“Thou shalt not commit adultery.” The
sanction of religion and law was thus given to the
integrity and purity of family life. The minute
regulations against marriage with relatives, and
the severe punishments inflicted for disregard of
the restrictions (Lev 18 and 20), were a powerful
force in the same direction. The adultery of mar-
ried persons was to be punished by the death of
both the parties (Lev 20 10; Dt 22 22).


Such laws may sometimes seem severe. Doubtless
they are primitive and date from the time of nomadism.
In primitive conditions, penalties for infraction of law
are to he severe and swift. Pioneers the world over and
through time, for very self-preservation’s sake, could
show little favor or tolerance to lawlessness. Be these
laws severe, thoy show the intense earnestness of a people
to have a pure family life in which children born should
be genuine toit. These Levitical restrictions upon inter-
marriage with relatives fit the sense of propriety and
right of civilized people, even to this day.


There is no question about the attitude of the
prophets on purity. They were in harmony with
the Law. They had no tolerance for


2. The corrupt morals or manners leading to
Prophets impurity or suggesting it. An illus-

tration sometimes has the light of the
suninit. What it is that is illustrated is frequently


best seen by looking at the illustration itself. The


wanted above all things that Israel should be true
to Jeh and to Him alone. To-the prophets, wor-
ship of other gods was treason to Jeh. One prophet
after another, and over and over again, illustrates
this highest of crimes by infidelity in the marriage
relation. That shows in what estimate the family
was held. To put any other in the place of Jeh was
“to go a-whoring after other gods,” or ‘‘to play the
harlot.’ That shows as nothing else could how
deep in the heart was sunk regard for pure family
life. Infidelity was high treason there, or it never
would have furnished language to describe high
treason to God.

Prov 5 and 7 indicate the attitude of the book on
purity. We may let the book make its own case.
The wiles of ‘‘the strange woman” and
the stupid folly and destruction of her
victim are specially set forth in the
chapters mentioned. In the last chap-
ter of the book we have a portraiture of a ‘‘virtuous
woman” in whom domesticity in purity has reached
a high stage. ‘Let her own works praise her in
the gates.”


3. The
Proverbs


It is pleasant to turn from the tense severity of law,
since it must deal largely with crime and sin, to the
idealism of poetry. In the Pss and the

4, The Song Prophets the relation of husband and wife,
: of bridegroom and bride, of lover and loved


of Songs are always treated with tenderness and
reverence. Here is familiar Scripture
(Ps 19): ‘‘The heavens declare the glory of God; and


the firmament showeth his handiwork. .... In them
hath he set a tabernacle for the sun, which is as a bride-
groom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a
strong man to run his course.'’ That does not hetray
any lack of sympathy with the exuberant spirit of a
lover. So Isa 62 4.5: ‘For Jeh delighteth in thee, and
thy land shall he married. For as a young man marrieth
a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee; and as the bride-
groom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice
over thee.’ Language cannot more clearly disclose
delight in the joy of those who are adjusting themselves
under the ‘primal eldest'’ rule over sex: ‘Therefore
shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
glee, unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh’’ (Gen


It is sometimes thought strange that the Song of
Songs should be in the Scripture Canon. But why
should there be such doubt? It is but a more par-
ticular elaboration of what is boldly brought to
notice in the quotations above. There is no more
necessity of reading impurity into it than there is of
reading it into the quotations above. The poem is
illustrative of an experience as widely known as
any in the life of the human race—an experience
in which sin is no necessity. One must go out of
his way who imputes sin to a single act or thought
that comes to expression in the poem. The maiden
is guileless and the lover is manly. The poem is
said to be erotic. But the eros is idealized. It
may be sensuous, but it is not sensual. It is not
selfish. The passion of each finds expression in care-
ful thoughtfulness for the other. It does not turn
back to itself in coarse brute craving of lust for its
own self-indulgence. The refrain of the poem is—


“Tadjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem


That ye stir not up, nor awake my love.’

—Cant 27; 35; 8 4.
The watchfulness is as tender as that for an infant.
Where will the law lay its indictment of sin against
such thoughts and feelings? The lovers are under
the charm that has been and is to be from everlast-
ing to everlasting with the human race upon the
earth.

Christ at His strictest did not set Himself against the
charm of love. Ho said it should be eternally single and
true in spirit. The maiden in the song goes forth in the
night, iu the simplicity of her heart, to find her heloved
(32 ff). In the same simplicity, Evangelino wandered
all the night of her life to find the object of her affection.


2509


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Purity
Purple


From the same charm in the beginning came the faith-
fulness of Enoch Arden. Out of the love that springs
from purity has come the iutegrity that has endured to
theend. The exuberance of the charm, like every other
spring of life and action, needs regulation, but the charm
itself is not to be treated as sin.


Paul has said, ‘Ye are not under law, but under
grace’ (Rom 6 14). But that depends upon the
conditions to which it is applied.
6. Christ © We may not be under the Levitical,
and Purity ceremonial Law, but we are under the
wide realm of ethical law always, even
when we are under grace. What grace does is to
idealize and spiritualize and make attractive and
beautiful what. before was perhaps hard, repellent
statute and rule. Christ is sometimes thought to
have relaxed the severity of “the reign of law.”
But six times even in the Sermon on the Mount
He added to its strictness. Take the idea of the
purity of the family as secured by its unity. Under
the Mosaic legislation, certain not onerous forms
of legal proceeding intervening, the termination
of marriage might be said to be optional with
the parties. All this liberty is swept away in one
sentence: “I say unto you, Whosoever shall put
away his wife, except for fornication, and shall
marry another, committeth adultery” (Mt 19 9).
That isa law sentence. It was uttered in the realm
of law. It was intended to have effect in law. No
wonder, considering the liberty that had been
allowed in the Law up to that time, that the dis-
ciples as soon as they got breath said, “If the case
of a man is so with his wife, it is not expedient to
marry.” They knew that a new law for Christ’s
disciples was put over marriage. Even the ex-
ception confirmed His rule. If the exception is not
allowed, polyandry or polygamy is established.
No other sentence of human speech has done more
for the purity of family life (see Divorce). But
Christ did not stop with the utterance of law pro-
tective of purity physically; He went behind all
acts and laid down law for the thoughts and intents
of the heart: ‘‘But I say unto you, that every one
that looketh on a woman to lust after her hath com-
mitted adultery with her already in his heart”
(Mt 5 28).


Sometimes it may be thought that there is a look of
moral indifference about the way in which Jesus disposed
of the woman's case who was taken in adultery (Jn 8
J-11): ‘‘Did no man_condemn thee? And she said,
No man, Lord. And Jesus said, Neither do I condemn
thee; go thy way; from henceforth sin no more.” But
it must first be remembered that it was not her case but
that of her accusers that was puadiotelye pare the
mind of Jesus. They brought her before Him to trap
Him, but He turned and put them on trial. He made
their moral condition the main issue. Hers was but an
incident. But then, Jesus did not leave her without
impressing on her mind that she was a sinner. The last
words left Hineine in her ears were, ''Sin no more. And
she was left, as all in sin are left, to wrestle out adjustment
with the Holy Spirit who leaves no soul without con-
viction of ‘‘sin, righteousness and judgment.” The
words of Jesus no more than the words of anyone else
can explain all things at once. They can cover a point
in view, but much must always be left to the under-
standing that comes from known experlence under the
moral government of God. 3

The subsequent psychology of a sinner after the words
of Scripture leave him is of deepest interest. Psy-
chological action he must have had; what is it? The
question arises, Had the prodigal son completed his
repentance till he had asked the forgiveness of his mother
and his elder brother? What is the subsequent psy-
chology of a sinner as he disappears from our view ? We
can interpret here by what we know to be the operations
of the Holy Spirit in the soul; just as we know a materlal
object that disappears from view is still under the law
of gravitation. ew who have thought on this subject
have expressed the truth so well as Whittier in Our
Master,” or in ''John Underhill’' in these words:


“ And men took note of his gloomy air
The shame in his eye, the halt in his prayer,
The signs of a battle lost within, |
The pain of a soul in the coils of sin.


Into the desert alone rode he,

Alone with the Infinite Purity;

And bowing his soul to its tender rebuke,
As Peter did to the Master's look,

He measured his path with prayer of pain
For peace with God and nature again.”


There Is a recognition of the burning with fire that 1s
infolded in the word ‘‘purlty.’’


Paul is like his Master. He secks for purity in
this relation after marriage as, well as before—
purity of mind. ‘In 1 Cor 7 we see
how carefully and kindly Paul dis-
F coursed about all the complications
in matters pertaining to sex. Then again, if Paul
has exhorted wives to obedience to husbands, he
has also called for equal self-surrender on the part
of husbands (Eph 5 22-32): ‘‘Husbands, love your
wives, even as Christ. also loved the church, and gave
himself up for it.” Can there be any self-surrender
greater than that which Christ made? Here let
attention rest on the fact that in his catalogue of
the fruits of the Spirit (Gal 5 22), if he has put
“love’’ in the first place of emphasis among the nine,
he has put ‘‘self-control” in the last.


We have only space for a glance at a few departments
of action and thought to see what the world has gained in
purity from the religion of the Bible. The age of
chivalry ought to have a word put to its credit. The
knights took the vow of chastity before the tribunals of
the church. Take art—compare a Venus and a Ma-
donna. Not only spirituality, but even intellectuality
is wanting in a Venus. There is not a suggestion in a
Venus that does not inhere in flesh and seuse. Of what
would she or could she speak if she were to open her
mouth? To judge from her appearance, the utterance
would be so ‘‘flat, stale and unprofitable” that even the
charm of her physical beauty would disappear. In
the Madonna you scarce see the physical. If she were
to speak, her words would picture the peace and calm
joy of a heavenly realm. If her countenance is suggest-
ive of something far away, it is of something far ahove.

But art is not dead, and spiritual art did not die
with the creation of the Madonna. Take St. Gaudens’
‘*Puritan.’’ Compare that with an Apollo. Again we
have the contrast there is between a Madonna and a
Venus. We have the physical and the aesthetic In an
Apollo, but there is not a gleam of the intellectual.
That Apollo thinks is not indicated, much iess what he
might be thinking about. There is not the faintest sug-
gestion of the ethical. ‘There is no intent and purpose
in him. But in the Puritan there is intent and purpose.
He means much. He is ethical. That determined
bearing can only come from a spirit alive with the sense
of right. When it comes to that, you will warrant that
the Puritan carries more physical guns than the Apollo,
and that if they were to clinch in a tug of wrestling
Apollo would fall underneath. That ethical intent and
purpose is masterly. You may look through a whole
pantheon of Greek gods and meet not a trace of the force
concentrated in the Puritan. He is forceful because
right makes might. He is in the majority because he
knows Who is with him. He is constious of power be-
cause he has subdued the kingdom within. He has won
the greatest of all victories—self-control.


6. Paul


. CAVERNO
PURLOINING, pdr-loin’ing: Lit. “for far off,”
hence to carry away or steal; the word is the tr
of vor pliouat, nosphizomat, “to take away for one’s
self,”’ ‘‘to secrete,” “‘to steal,” a word appropriate
to those in the position of slaves in a master’s
service (Tit 2 10, ‘“‘not purloining”’).


PURPLE, ptr’p’l (JQ2°98, ‘argémdn; Chald


- ook
PAW, 'argewan [2 Chea i; ef Arab. ley!


wipe)! , arghawdn,; wopdipa,
porphira, topdbpeos, porphireos [LXX and NT]):


Purple dye was manufactured by the Phoenicians from
a marine mollusk, Murex trunculus. The shell was
broken in order to give access to a small gland which was
removed and crushed. ‘The crushed gland gives a milky
fluid that becomes red or purple on exposure to the air.
Piles of these broken shells still remain on the coast at
Sidon and Tyre. The purple giand is found in various
species of Murex and aiso of Purpura.


Purple cloth was used in the furnishings of the
tabernacle (Ex 26 4, etc) and of Solomon’s temple


‘urjuwdn, and Pers


Purpose of God PH INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Python


2510


(2 Ch 2 14; 3 14); in the palanquin of Solomon
(Cant 3 10); and in the hangings of the palace of
Ahasuerus (Est 1 6). The kings of Midian had
purple raiment (Jgs 8 26); the worthy woman of
Prov 31 22 has clothing of fine linen and purple.
Mordecai was clothed with purple by Ahasuerus


Shells of Murex trunculus (the Broken Ones from a
Large Shell Heap at Sidon).


(Est 8 15); Jesus by the Rom soldiers (Mk 15
17.20; Jn 19 2.5). The rich man of Lk 16 19
and the scarlet woman of Rev 18 12.16 were ar-
rayed in purple. In Cant 7 5 the bride has hair
like purple. Purple is in the merchandise of Baby-
lon (Rev 18 12). It is surprising that Ezekiel
speaks of the Tyrians as obtaining purple from the
isles of Elishah (Ezk 27 7) and from Syria (Ezk
27 16). See Cotors; Dys, Dyeina.
ALFRED Exry Day

PURPOSE, ptr’pus, OF GOD (mpééects, prothe-
sis [Rom 9 11; Eph 1 11]): The word “purpose”
seems to be an equivalent of the word ‘decree’ as
used in regard to man’s relation to eternity. More
correctly stated, it softens the word “decree” and
refers back to the cause of the decree as lodged in
an intelligent design and forward to an aim con-
sistent with the character of God. See Forzor-
DINATION; PREDESTINATION.


PURSE, pirs. See Bag.


PURSLAIN, pdrs’laén, JUICE, j6s, jis. See
JUICE.


PURTENANCE, piir’té-nans: With the sig-
nificance of “belongings,” this word occurs in AV
of Ex 12 9 as the tr of ADP, kerebh, “within,” “in-
ward,” “roast . . . . with the purtenance thereof,”
RV “inwards” (ef Lev 1 9; 3 3, ete).


PUT, put (CAD, put; 008, Photid, in Gen and Ch,

variant for Gen Pott, Phout, for Ch, bot@, Phouth):

In consequence of the identification

1. Render- at the time, the prophets have ‘Libya”’

ings (Afgves, Libues), except Nah 3 9,

where the Gr renders the word as ¢vy%,

phugé, “flight.” The Vulg has “Phut,” “Phuth,”

and in the Prophets “Libyes’’ and “Libya”; AV
“Phut.”

In the “Table of Nations” Put is the third son
of Ham (Gen 10 6), the first and second being
Cush and Misraim, and the fourth
Canaan. Put is the only one of the
sons of Ham who is not credited with
descendants.

In the Prophets, warriors from Put are referred
to, principally in connection with the forces of


2. Son of
Ham


Egypt. They appear as shield-bearers (Jer 46 9:
“Cush and Put, that handle the shield; and the
Ludim, that handle and bend the
3. As Na- bow’). See also Ezk 30 5, where the
tionality order in the Heb is Cush, Put and
Lud. In Nah 3 9 Put is the helper
of No-amon (Thebes in Egypt), and in Ezk 27 10
Put appears with Persia and Lydia (Lud) as being
in the army of Tyre. :
The common identification of Put is the Egyp
Punt (or Pwent) proposed by Ebers. The assimi-
lation of n to a following consonant


4. Identi- is common in the Sem languages, and
| fied with would occasion no difficulty if the
| Punt vocalization be found to agree. The


final ¢ of Punt, however, seems to be

the Egyp fem. ending, whereas the { of Put is
radical. :

Nevertheless, the district would seem to be rightly

identified with the tract to the E. of Abyssinia

(Somaliland), and as it is described


5. Somali- as being on both sides of the sea (the
| landand Red Sea), Yemen would seem to he
Yemen included. In eonnection with this,


it is worthy of note that a fragment of
a Bab tablet referring to Nebuchadrezzar’s cam-
paign in Egypt in his 37th year mentions, as though
in the neighborhood, the city (here, apparently,
standing for the district) of Putu-yaman—probably
not “Ionian [Gr] Put’ (Lesbos, according to Winck-
ler), but ‘Put of Yemen.” If this be in contra-
distinction to the district of Put (Punt) on the
African mainland, the latter would be the Piutu
referred to in the Pers inscription of Nagqsh-i-
Rustem, which mentions, among the tributary-
countries, Kushiya, Putiya and Masiya, in Baby-
lonian (mdt) Pita, [(mét) K]asu, (mat) Massii(?),
“the land Put, the land Kush (Ethiopia), the land
Massti(?).””. The soldiers of Put in the army of
Tyre may have been either from the African or
the Yemenite Put, in which case there was no north-
ern tract of that name, unless settlements had been
made at any time from the original district. See
W. Max Miller, Asien und Europa, Leipzig, 1893,
106 ff. T. G. PIncHEs


PUTEOLI, pii-té’6-li (TIortodot, Potioloi, “sul-
phur springs” [Acts 28 13, WH], the modern Poz-
zuoli): A maritime city of Campania, which occu-
pied a central position on the northern shore of a
recess in the Gulf of Naples, protected on the W.
by the peninsula of Baiae and Cape Misenum. It
was originally a colony of the neighboring Gr city
Cumae.

The earliest event in the history of Puteoli which
can be dated definitely was the repulse of Hannibal
before its walls by a Rom garrison in 214 BC. The
design of the Carthaginian to secure a seaport as
base of supplies and communication was thus
thwarted (Livy xxiv.7, 12, 13). A Rom colony
was established here in 194 BC, and Puteoli thus
became the first Rom port on the Gulf of Naples
(Livy xxxiv.45; Strabo v.245; Velleius, i.15). Its
subsequent remarkable prosperity and eommercial
activity are to be attributed to the safety of the
harbor and the inhospitable character of the coast
nearer Rome. For Puteoli became the chief sea-
port of the capital before the ereation of an arti-
ficial harhor at Portus Augusti by Claudius, and
before Trajan made the mouth of the Tiber the
principal converging point for the over-sea earrying
trade. The imports at Puteoli consisted mainly
of Egyp grain and oriental wares, dispatched from
Alexandria and other eities of the Levant (Cicero
Pro Rabirio 40; Suetonius Aug. 98; Strabo xvii.
793; Cicero Pro Caclio 10). The eastern element
in the population was very numerous (Petronius 81;


2511


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Purpose of God
Python


CIL, X, 1797). The harbor was rendered doubly
safe by a mole, which is known to have been at
least 418 yds. in length, consisting of massive piers
connected by means of arches constructed in solid
masonry (Strabo v.245). Extensive remains of
this mole still exist. The shore line devoted to
purposes of commerce (emporium) extended for a
distance of about 14 miles westward from the mole.
At the height of its prosperity under Claudius and
Nero, the town is thought to have contained a
population of nearly 100,000.

The region in which the town was situated is of
volcanic formation, the name Puteoli being due to
the odor of the sulphureous springs or to the wells
of a volcanic nature which abound in the vicinity.
The volcanic dust, called pozzolana today, was
mixed with lime to form a cement of the greatest
durability, which was proof against the influence of
seawater.

Extensive remains of an amphitheater, whose
axes measure 160 and 126 yds. across the space
inclosed by the outer facade and 75 and 45 yds.
within the arena, bear testimony to the former
affluence of Puteoli.

The region about Putcoli together with Baiae
became the favorite resort of the Rom nobility, and
the foundations of many ancient villas are still
visible, although partly covered by the sea. Cic-
ero’s villa in the territory of Puteoli (Cicero Ad
Fam. v.15, 2; Ad Att. xiv.16, 1; 20, 1) was after-
ward selected as the place of burial of Hadrian
(Spartianus Had. 25). The portion of the bay
between Puteoli and Baiae was the scene of the
attempt made at the instigation of Nero upon
the life of his mother by means of a vessel so con-
trived that it was to break to pieces while convey-
ing Agrippina toward her villa near the Lucrine
Lake (Tacitus Annals xiv.8). See Nmro.

The apostle Paul found a Christian community
at Puteoli, when he arrived there on his way to
Rome, and stopped 7 days with them (Acts 28 13.
14). At that time the ordinary route to Rome,
following the Via Appia from Capua, was 155 Rom,
or about 142} Eng., miles (Nissen, [talische Landes-
kunde, II, 739). Later, Domitian reduced the dis-
tance to 139 Rom miles (about 129 Eng.) by laying
out the Via Domitia along the coast, joining the Via
Appia at Sinuessa (Geog. Raven., 1V, 32; Itin. Ant.,
122; Tab. Peut.). Grorce H. ALLEN


PUTHITES, pi'thits CHD , path, “simple”; AV
Puhites): One of the families of Kiriath-jearim,
grandchildren of Caleb (1 Ch 2 50.53).


PUTIEL, pi’ti-el (NOB, puli’él, “contemned
by El”): Father of the wife of Eleazar, Aaron’s son,
and thus grandfather of Phinehas, Eleazar’s son
(Ex 6 25). See Poineuas, (3).


PUVAH, pii’va.
PYGARG, pi'gdrg (JU, dishin; LXX wbyap-


yos, pugargos; cf proper nouns, “Dishon” and
“Dishan’” [Gen 36 21-30; 1 Ch 1 38-42]; accord-


See Puan.


ing to BDB, Hommel, Sdugethiere, derives os from
wx, dash, Arab. elo: dds, “to tread,” and


ef Assyr dashshu, “mountain-goat’’): Dishén as
the name of an animal occurs only in Dt 14 5 in
the list of clean beasts. Both AV and RV have
“nygarg,” which is not the recognized name of
any animal whatever. The LXX pugargos (from
muy}, pugé, “rump,” and dpyés, argés, “white’’)
was used hy Herodotus (iv.192) as the name of an
antelope. A white rump is a very common feature
of deer and antelopes, and is commonly explained
as enabling the flecing herd easily to keep in sight
of its leaders. It has been used as a specific name
of Cervus pygargus, the Tartarian roe, and Bubalis
pygargus, a small South African antelope. The
Arabic Bible has ri’m, ‘‘a white gazelle,” a kindred
word to r’ém, AV “unicorn,” RV ‘wild-ox.”
Tristram, NHB, considers dishén to be the addax,
Antilope addax or Addax nasomaculatus, There
is excellent reason, however, for believing that the
range of this African antelope does not extend into
Pal, Sinai or Arabia. For a discussion of the ani-
mal names in Dt 14 4.5, see ZoéLoey.
Aurrep Evy Day

PYRAMID, pir’a-mid (rvpapls, puramis): Pyr-
amids are mentioned in connection with the splendid
monument reared by Simon Maccabaeus in mem-
ory of his parents and brethren at Modin (1 Mace
13 28; ef Ant, XIII, vi, 6). Jos describes them
as “very surprising, both for their largeness and
beauty.” There is nothing to show how the pyra-
mid allotted to each was distinguished, whether by
difference in size or by inscriptions. It is remark-
able that in Scripture there is no allusion to the
giant structures in Egypt; but these may have
supplied the suggestion to Simon’s mind.

W. Ewine

PYRRHOS, pir’us (Tlippos, Piirros, ‘“‘fiery-red’’):
The name is inserted in the text of RV in Acts 20 4
as that of the father of SopaTEr (q.v.).


PYTHON, pi’thon: Occurs only in Acts 16 16,
where RV reads, ‘‘a certain maid having a spirit of
divination {m “a spirit, a Python’] met us.”
Tlv@wv, Pithén, or Ives, Puthd, is the oldest name
of Delphi (or the country about Delphi), in which
was situated the famous Delphic Oracle. Conse-
quently ‘Pythian spirit’ came to be the generic
title of the supposed source of inspiration of di-
viners, including the slave-girl of the account in
Acts. Exactly what facts underlie the narrative
it is rather hard to say, but it is evident that the
girl was sincere in her conviction that she spoke
with Pythian inspiration. Probahly she represents
some hysterical type, of none too strong mentality,
whose confused utterances were taken as coming
from some supernatural power. Impressed by &t.
Paul’s personality, she followed him about, and,
when his command came, was in a state of mind
that had prepared her to ohey it. The narrative,
incidentally, gives an interesting sidelight on a
society in which a girl with hysteria had a greater
commercial value than she had after her cure. See
DiVINATION. Burton Scorr Easton


ou Mother JHE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2512


QOPH, kéf (P, k).


QUAIL, kwal aby, slaw; odprvyopArpa, ortu-
gométra; Lat Coturniz vulgaris): A game bird of
the family Coturniz, closely related to ‘‘partridges”’
(q.v.). Quail and partridges are near relatives, the
partridge a httle larger and of brighter color. Quail
are like the gray, brown and tan of earth. Their
plumage is cut and penciled by markings, and their
flesh juicy and delicate food. Their habits are very
similar. They nest on the ground and brood on
from 12 to 20 eggs. The quail are more friendly


See Kora.


birds and live in the open, brooding along roads
and around fields. They have a longer, fuller wing
than the partridge and can make stronger flight.
In Pal they were migratory. They are first. men-
tioned in Ex 16 13: ‘And it came to pass at even,
that the quails came up, and covered the camp:
and in the morning the dew lay round about the
camp.”’ This describes a large flock in migration,
so that they passed as a cloud. Nu 11 31-33:
“And there went forth a wind from Jeh, and brought
quails from the sea, and let them fall by the camp,
about a day’s journey on this side, and a day’s
journey on the other side, round about the camp,
and about two cubits above the face of the earth.
And the people rose up all that day, and all the
night, and all the next day, and gathered the quails:
he that gathered least gathered ten homers: and
they spread them all abroad for themselves round
about the camp”; cf Ps 78 26-30:
“He caused the east wind to blow in the heavens;
And by his power he guided the south wind.
He rained flesh also upon them as the dust,
d winged birds as the sand of the seas:

And he let it fall in the midst of their camp,

Round about their hahitations.

So they did eat, and were well filled;

And he gave them their own desire.”
Again the birds are mentioned in migration. Those
that fell around the camp and the bread that was
sent from heaven are described in Ps 105 39-42.
Commentators have had trouble with the above
references. They cause the natural historian none
—they are so in keeping with the location and the
laws of Nature. First the Heb s‘law means “to be
fat.” That would be precisely the condition of the
quail after a winter of feeding in the S. The time
was early spring, our April, and the quail were
flocking from Africa and spreading in clouds—even
to Europe. They were birds of earth, heavy feed-
ers and of plump, full body. Migration was such


an effort that when forced to cross a large body of
water they always waited until the wind blew in the
direction of their course, lest they tire and fall.
Their average was about 16 birds to each nest.
If half a brood escaped, they yet multiplied in such
numbers as easily to form clouds in migration.
Pliny writes of their coming into Italy in such
numbers, and so exhausted with their long flight,
that if they sighted a sailing vessel they settled
upon it by hundreds and in such numbers as to sink
it. Taking into consideration the diminutive
vessels of that age and the myriads of birds, this
does not appear incredible. Now compare these
facts with the text. Israelites were encamped on
the Sinai Peninsula. The birds were in migration.
The quail followed the Red Sea until they reached
the point of the peninsula where they selected the
narrowest place, and when the wind was with them
they crossed the water. Not far from the shore
arose the smoke from the campfires of the Israelites.
This bewildered them, and, weary from their jour-
ney, they began to settle in confused thousands
over and around the camp. Then the Israelites
arose and, with the ever-ready “throw sticks,”
killed a certain number for every soul of the camp
and spread the bodies on the sand to dry, just as
Herodotus (ii.77) records that the Egyptians
always had done (see Rawlinson, Herod, II, for an
illustration of catching and drying quail). Nature
and natural history can account for this incident,
with no need to call in the miraculous.
GENE STRATTON-PORTER

QUARREL, kwor’el: Originally (1) “a com-
plaint”’ (cf “querulous’’), or (2) “a cause of com-
plaint,” and so (3) “a contention.” (1) In AV
Mk 6 19 (RV “set herself’; the colloquial “had
it in for him” is an exact tr) and Col 3 13 (uoudt,
momphé, “complaint”; so RV). (2) In2K57
(FDS, ’anah, “be opportune,’ RVm “an occasion”).
(3) In AV Lev 26 25 (loose tr of OP?, nakam,
“vengeance”; so RV). Cf Sir 3129 AV (RV
“conilict”) and Prov 20 8 RV (AV “meddling”).


QUARRIES, kwor’iz cor>-op , psilim [Jgs 3
19.26, “graven images”’], D°I2W, shebharim [Josh
7 ‘5, “Shebarim,” RVm “the quarries”’]):

Pesilim is elsewhere trd ‘graven images’ (Dt 7 5;
Ps 78 58; Isa 10 10; Mic 5 13, etc) and is a pl. form
of pesel, ‘graven image’' (Ex 20 4, etc), from pasal, ‘to
carve.”’ It occurs in the story of Ehud and Egfon and
refers to images or hewn stones in the vicinity of Gilgal.
Shebharim is pl. of shébher, ‘‘ breach,” ‘fracture,’ more
often "destruction" (e.g. Prov 16 18), from shabhar,
“to break.’ The form shebhdrim is also found in Job

1 25, “consternation,” AV ‘“breakings.'' In Josh 7
5 Shebarim is the point to which the Israelites wero
chased after their first attack upon Ai. See SHEBARIM.


Quarries in Pal are not usually very deep because
there is plenty of good stone to be found at the
surface. The quarryman seeks a thick stratum of
firm limestone which has a favorable exposure.
The vertical joint-planes divide the stratum into
large blocks which the quarryman dislodges with
the aid of crowbars. These great blocks he skil-
fully cleaves by inserting several wedges in a line
in holes made by a pick, and driving the wedges in
with a heavy hammer. In these days gunpowder
is occasionally used, esp. when there are not favor-
able joint-planes producing blocks capable of being
moved by the crowbar.

Another method, which is employed where stones
of great size are wanted, is to carve the stones out
of the rock by cutting channels around them with


2513


the pick. In the limestone quarries of Ba'albek
and the granite quarries of Aswén at the first
cataract of the Nile, enormous stones may be seen
which were abandoned while in process of being
removed by this method. The ehannels are wide
enough to admit the body of the workman, and the
marks of the picks on the sides of the ehanncls are
plainly visible. : Aurrep Exy Day


QUARTER, kwor'tér: Lit., of course, “the fourth
part,”’ and so of the four “ends” (Zp, kagah) in
Jer 49 36, and AV of the four “corners” (so RV,
ywvla, gonia) in Rev 20 8. Henee, “any part”
and in this sense used freely for various words by
AV. RV has usually dropped “quarter,” but un-
fortunately has retained it in Nu 34 3; Josh 15 5;


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Qoph
Queen Mother


in his cell between two soldiers, “bound with two
chains,” his left hand ehained to one and his right
to the other. The other two soldiers of the quater-
nion mounted guard before the door, and are
spoken of as “‘the first and the second guard” (ver
10) whom St. Peter and his angel guide had to pass
on the way to liberty. The Gr word thus rendered
is not found in LXX or anywhere else in the NT.
T. Nicou
QUEEN, kwén: The Bible applies this term:
(1) To the wife of a king (‘‘queen consort’’) (m2>%9,
malkéh). In the Book of Est it is the title given to
Vashti (1.9) and Esther (2 22); ef Cant 6 8f.
Another Heb word for queen consort is 7723,
gbhirah, lit. “mistress” (cf 1 K 11 19, the wife of
Pharaoh; 2 K 10 13, “the children of the king and


STonE IN QUARRIES AT Ba‘ aLBEK.


18 14,15, and introduced it in Josh 18 12.14.20
for TNS, pée’ah, usually rendered “side.” The
result is very obscure. Elsewhere in RV only_in
the phrase “from every quarter” (Gen 19 4; Isa
66 11; Mk 1 45). Cf Borvmr; Coast.


QUARTUS, kwér’tus (Kovapros, Kowiartos): A
Christian in Corinth who with ‘Erastus the treas-
urer of the city” sent greetings to the Christian
community in Rome (Rom 16 23). He is known
to Paul only as a Christian, ‘the brother.”


QUATERNION, kwa-tdr’ni-un (terpddvov, letrd-
dion): The name given to a company of four
soldiers of Herod’s army (Acts 12 4). To four
such companies St, Peter had been handed over,
who would take their turn of acting as guard over
the prisoner, each of the four watches of the night
aecording to Rom reckoning, which Herod Agrippa I
would follow. In the castle of Antonia St. Peter
was thus closely secured, in order that Herod, who
had already killed James, the brother of John, with
the sword (12 2), might, after the solemnities of the
Passover, make sure of his death likewise. On the
night before his intended execution he was sleeping


the children of the queen”). In Neh 2 6 and Ps 46
9 we find the expression Saw, shéghal, which some
trace back to Sov, shdghal, “to ravish,” a rather
doubtful derivation. Still another term is M7,
sarah, lit. “princess” (Isa 49 23): The LXX some-
times uses the word faclttooa, basilissa; ef Ps 45
9. (2) To a female ruler or sovereign (“queen
regnant’’). The only instances are those of the
queen (malkah) of Sheba (1 K 10 1-13; ef 2 Ch
9 1-12) and of Candace, the queen (basilissa) of
the Ethiopians (Acts 8 27). In Mt 12 42 (cf Lk
11 31) Christ refers to the queen of the south
(Bacldtcoa vbrou, basilissa nétou), meaning, of course,
the queen of Sheba. (3) To a heathen deity,
pvawn no, mélekheth ha-shamayim, “the queen’
of heaven” (Jer 7 18; 44 17 ff). See QuEEN oF
HEAVEN.

(4) Metaphorically, to the city of Babylon
(Rome) (Rev 18 7): an expression denoting
sovereign contempt and imaginary dignity and
power. WILLIAM Baur


QUEEN MOTHER (M7733, g‘bhirah, lit. “mis-
tress,” then a female ruler, and sometimes simply


Queen of Heaven
Quotations, NT


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2514


the wife of a king [‘qucen,” 1 K 11 19]; in Dnl |


5 10 the term xm2> 2, malktha’, “queen,” really
means the mother of the king): It stands to reason
that among a people whose rulers are polygamists
the mother of the new king or chief at once becomes
a person of great consequence. The records of the
Books of Ik prove it. The g*bhirah, or queen mother,
occupied a position of high social and political im-
portance; she took rank almost with the king.
When Bath-sheba, the mother of Solomon, desired
“to speak unto him for Adonijah,” her son ‘rose
up to meet her, and bowed himself unto her, and
sat down on his throne, and caused a throne to be
set for the king’s mother; and she sat on his right
hand” (1 K 219). And again, in 2 K 24 15, itis
expressly stated that Nebuchadnezzar carried away
the king’s mother into captivity; Jeremiah calls her
gbhirah (29 2). The king was Jehoiachin (Jeco-
niah, Jer 29 2), and his mother’s name was Nehushta
(2 K 24 8). This was the royal pair whose im-
pending doom the prophet was told to forecast (Jer
13 18). Here again the queen mother is mentioned
with the king, thus emphasizing her exalted position.
Now we understand why Asa removed Maacah
his (grand?) mother from being queen (queen
mother), as we are told in 1 K 15 13 (cf 2 Ch 16
16). She had used her powerful influence to
further the cause of idolatry. In this connection
Athalish’s coup détat may be briefly mentioned.
After the violent death of her son Ahaziah (2 K
9 27), she usurped the royal power and reigned for
some time in her own name (2 K 11 38; cf 2 Ch
22 12). This was, of course, a revolutionary under-
taking, being a radical departure from the usual
traditions.

And finally, the political importance of the g*-
bhirah is illustrated by the fact that in the Books of
Kx, with two exceptions, the names of the Jewish
kings are recorded together with those of their
respective mothers; they are as follows: Naamah,
the Ammonitess, the mother of Rehoboam (1 kK
14 21; cf ver 31, and 2 Ch 12 13); Maacah, the
danghter of Abishalom (1 Kk 15 2) or Absalom
(2 Ch 11 20), the mother of Abijah; Maacah, the
daughter of Abishalom, the mother (grandmother?)
of Asa (1 K 15 10; cf 2 Ch 15 16); Azubah, the
daughter of Shilhi, the mother of Jehoshaphat
(1 KK 22 42; cf 2 Ch 20 31); Athaliah, the grand-
daughter of Omri, the mother of Ahaziah (2 K 8
26; ci 2 Ch 22 2); Zibiah of Beersheba, the
mother of Jehoash (2 KK 121; cf 2 Ch 24 1);
Jehoaddin (Jehoaddan, 2 Ch 25 1) of Jerus, the
mother of Amaziah (2 IX 14 2); Jecoliah (Jechi-
liah, 2 Ch 26 3) of Jerus, the mother of Azariah
(2 K 15 2) or Uzziah @ Ix 15 13.30, ete; ef 2
Ch 26 3); Jerusha (Jerushah, 2 Ch 27 1), the
daughter of Zadok, the mother of Jotham (2 Is 15
33); Abi (Abijah, 2 Ch 29 1), the daughter of
Zechariah, the mother of Hezekiah @ Ix 18 2);
Hephzibah, the mother of Manasseh (2 Kk 21 1);
Meshullemeth, the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah,


the mother of Amon (2 Ix 21.19); Jedidah, the |


daughter of Adaiah of Bozkath, the mother of
Josiah (2 K 22 1); Hamutal, the daughter of
Jeremiah of Libnah, the mother of Jehoahaz (2 K
23 31); Zebidah, the daughter of Pedaiah of Ru-
mah, the mother of Jchoiakim (2 KK 23 36);
Nehushta, the daughter of Elnathan of Jerus, the
mother of Jehoiachin (2 K 24 8); Hamutal


(Hamital), the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah, the |


mother of Zedekiah (2 KK 24 18). The exceptions
are Jehoram and Ahaz. Wituam Baur


QUEEN OF HEAVEN (272870 125%, m:lekheth
ha-shamayim, although there is another reading,
npn, méle’kheth, “worship” or ‘“goddess’”):


Occurs only in two passages: Jer 7 18; 44 17-
19.25, where the prophet denounces the wrath
of God upon the inhabitants of Judah and Jerus
who have given themselves up to the worship
of the host of heaven. This is no doubt a part of
the astral worship which is found largely developed
among the Jews in the later period of their history
in Canaan. It is first mentioned in 2 K 17 16 as
practised by the men of the Northern Kingdom
when Samaria had fallen and the ten tribes were
being carried away into captivity. Moses is rep-
resented as warning the Israelites against the wor-
ship of the sun and moon and stars and all the host
of heaven, practised by the people of Canaan (Dt
4 19; 17 3), and the existence of such worship
among the Canaanites and neighboring nations 1s
attested from an early period (cf Job 31 26-28).
The worship of the heavenly bodies was widely
spread in the East and in Arabia; and the Bab
pantheon was full of astral deities, where each
divinity corresponded either to an astral phenome-
non or to some circumstance or occurrence in
Nature which is connected with the course of the
stars (Jeremias, The OT in the Light of the Ancient
East, 1, 100). From the prophets we gather that
before the exile the worship of the host of heaven
had become established among all classes and in all
the towns of Israel (Jer ubi supra; Ezk 8 16). In
that worship the queen of heaven had a conspicu-
ous place; and if, as seems probable from the
cakes which were offered, she is to be identified with
the Assyr Ishtar and the Canaanite Astarte, the
worship itself was of a grossly immoral and debasing
character. That this Ishtar cult was of great
antiquity and widely spread in ancient Babylonia
may be seen from the symbols of it found in recent
excavations (see Nippur, II, 236). How far the
astral theorists like Winckler and Jeremias are
entitled to link up with this worship the mourning
for Josiah, the lamentations over Tammuz, thestory
of Jephthah’s daughter, and even the narrative
of the misfortunes and the exaltation of Joseph, is
questionable. But that the people of Judah in the
days before the exile had given themselves over to
the worst and vilest forms of heathen worship and
incurred the grievous displeasure of Jeh is made
clear by the denunciation of the worship of the
queen of heaven by Jeremiah. T. Nicou


QUEEN OF SHEBA, shé’ba (1 K 10 1-18:
2 Ch 9 1-12, called in Mt 12 42; Lk 11 31, ‘‘the
queen of the south” [Bartiiocoa vérov, basilissa
nétou]):

The two OT accounts of the coming of the queen of


Sheha (see Saesa) to Solomon differ slightly from one
another, and, of the two, that in 1 K is the


1. OT older. (1) The words ‘‘concerning the
A t name_of Jeh'’ (1 K 10 1) are wanting
ecountS jin2 Ch; while LXX in 1 K has ‘and the


name of Jeh,’' apparently a correction of
the MT. (2) For 1 K 10 9, “because Jeh loved Israel
for ever,’’ 2 Ch 9 8 has ‘‘because thy God loved Israel,
to establish them for ever"; LXX in 1 K has ‘' because
Jeb loved Israel, to establish it for ever.’' (3) In the last
verse of each account, we find another difference: 2 Ch
9 12 says that Solomon gave to the queen all her desire,
‘‘hesides that which she had brought unto the king,"
ie. according to some, besides the equivalent of what
she had brought to him; 1 IX 10 13 mhas “besides that
which he gave her according to the hand of king Solo-
mon," i.e. besidcs gifts commensurate with his own
wealth and power (SBOT), or hesides gifts which he
gave her qué king.


The narrative tells of the queen of Sheba, on
hearing of Solomon’s great wisdom, coming to
test him with perplexing questions or
riddles (cf Jgs 14 12). She brought
presents to the king, and interviewed
him: ‘And when the queen of Sheba
had seen all the wisdom of Solomon, and the house
that he had built” (i.e. the palace, not the temple) as


2. The
Narrative


2515


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Queen of Heaven
Quotations, NT


well as its arrangements, “and his burnt-offering
which he offered in the house of Jeh [so read and
translate with RVm in 1 K 10 5, and also in 2 Ch
9 4]; there was no more spirit in her”: the half of
Solomon’s wisdom had not been told her. “Happy,”
she said to him, “are thy wives [so read with LXX,
Syr and Old Lat VSS], happy are these thy serv-
ants.” She then exchanged gifts with him and
returned to her own land.

The narrative is a complement of that in 1 K 3
16-28, where the king’s justice is exemplified: here
his wisdom.

The narrative is referred to by Jesus in Mt 12
42; Lk 11 31, where He refuses to accede to the

request of the scribes and Pharisccs


3. Em- for a sign from Him. He tells them
ployed by that no sign will be given them ex-
Jesus cept that of Jonah, whose sign was his


_ preaching, one that proved sufficient
to the Ninevites; and ‘behold something greater
than Jonah is here.’ The men of Nineveh will be
a living condemnation of them “in the judgment”
(cf Lk 16 31); and so will the ‘‘queen of the south”
who came from the ends of the earth after hearing
of Solomon’s wisdom, ‘and behold something greater
than Solomon is here.’ The only sign to be given is
that of the wisdom of Jesus, a wisdom far greater
than that of Solomon (sce D. Smith, Days of His
Flesh, 176 ff).

Eastern lit. has much to say about the queen of Sheba.
The Arabs called her Bilkis. Abyssinian legend de-
clares that she came from Ethiopia, her


4. Eastern 18me being Makeda, and that she had a
Literat son by Solomon.’ See Delitzsch, Iris, 116—
Aterawure 97; ZDMG, X, 19f; J Pr T, VI, 524 ff
(1880). Gressmann (in Schriften des AT,


II, 1, 203) has further references to Wilhelm Hertz, Gesam-
melte Abhandlungen, 1905, 413 ff; Bezold, Kebra Nagast,
1905, and also ZD MG, 60, 666 ff. For the Mohammedan
story, see Koran xxvii, with notes in Sale’s tr.
Davin Francis Rosperts
QUENCH, kwench, kwensh: Where the word is
used of fire or of thirst it has the usual meaning: ‘‘to
allay,”’ “to extinguish,” “to suppress,’’ “to cool.”
in the OT it is frequently applied to the affections
and passions (see 2 K 22 17; Cant 8 7; Isa 42 3;
Jer 4 4; 21 12). Quenching the coal or the light
of Israel may mean slaying a dear one or a brilliant
leader. In the NT it is also used figuratively, as
in Eph 6 16 the shield of faith quenches the fiery
darts of the evil one. In Mk 9 48, oBévvum,
sbénnumi, and its derivative are applied with refer-
ence to Gehenna (tr “hell’’). The same word is
also used of resisting the gifts of the Holy Spirit
in 1 Thess 6 19. G. H. GerBerpine


QUESTION, kwes’chun: The noun for "27,
dabhar, “word,” in 1 Kk 10 3] 2 Ch 9 2, with
“hard question” for W7N, hidhah, “dark saying,”
“riddle,” in 1 K 101] 2 Ch 91. Inthe NT for
firnua, zéléma, the synonym (Arnos, zétésis (and
1 Tim 1 4, éxgirnows, ekzétésis), being rendered
“questionings’ by RV (AV does not distinguish).
In Mk 11 29 for dAdyos, logos, ‘‘word” (so RVm).
The vb. in the sense “‘ask a question” in 2 Ch 31 9
for WIJ, darash, and Lk 2 46; 23 9 for éwepwrdw,
eperbida (cf ARV, ERVm Jn 16 23). Elsewhere
the vb. is for cvgnréw, suzéetéd, “dispute” (Mk 1 27,
ete; ef Acts 6 9; 9 29). “Called in_ question,”
Acts 19 40 AV, represents éyxadéw, egkaléd, “call
into court,” but in 23 6; 24 21, “I am called in
question” is for xplvopar, krinomat, “1 am being
judged.” Burton Scorr Easton


QUICK, kwik, QUICKEN, kwik’n: Translates
in AV four different words: (1) MJ, hayah, (2)
m2, mihyah, (3) TV, rath, and (4) sdw, 2do.
Of these words (1) and (4) had simply the sense of


life, aud this idea was in 1611 adequately given by
the word “quick,” although this sense of the word
has long been somewhat obscured. As the tr of rah
(Isa 11 3) “quick” as found in AV signified “acute.”
In this passage RV substitutes “delight” for “quick
understanding.” In Lev 13 10.24 RV retains the
rendering “quick,” although originally the word
mihyah must in some way have involved the con-
ception of life, which no longer belongs to the Eng.
word “quick.” It is not clear exactly in what
sense the flesh in the sore or scar was thought of as
living, esp. as it was plainly regarded as in an
unhealthy condition. Possibly the condition under
consideration resembled what is sometimes idio-
matically, styled in Eng. “proud flesh,” and was
thought of as a peculiar manifestation of life.

To quicken also means a reviving, a refreshing,
an increasing of life (Ps 71 20; 85 6; 119 37.40.
88; Isa 567 10). Itoften has reference to the resur-
rection from the dead (1 Cor 15 36) and is so used
in many placesin AV. Where it refers to the giving
of spiritual life ARV has changed it in every case
(Eph 2 1.5; Col 2 13; cf Jn 5 21).

Davip Foster Estes

QUICKSANDS, kwik’sandz. Sec Syrmis.


QUIET, kwi’et: Vb. or adj. only in EV, ‘‘quiet-
ness” being used for the noun. No special Heb or
Gr words are represented, but in the OT usually
for some form or derivative of UPW, shakat, “be
undisturbed” (Jgs 18 7; cf Prov 1 33, “XU,
sh@ ar, ‘‘to loll,” “be at ease’; Eecl 9 17, M3,
nahath, ‘‘quiet,” “be set on”). For ‘‘them that are
quiet in the land” in Ps 35 20, see MrrK; Poor.
For “quict prince’ in Jer 51 59, RV substitutes
“chief chamberlain,’ m “quartermaster.” “Jacob
was a quiet (DT, tam, “gentle’] man” (Gen 26 27,
AV “plain”). In the NT, it is the tr of Aovydtu,
hésuchdzé, “to refrain from gossip or meddlesome-
ness”: “that ye study to be quict” (1 Thess 4 11),
and of fovxios, hésiichios, ‘gentle’: “a meek and
quiet spirit” (1 Pet 3 4; cf 1 Tim 2 2).

M. O. Evans

QUINTUS MEMMIUS, kwin’tus mem’i-us. See
Memmivs, Quintus.


QUIRINIUS, kwi-rin'i-us. See CHRoNOLOGY oF
THE NT, I, 1, (2); Luxe, Gospen or, 5.


QUIT, kwit: Same derivation as “‘quiet,” so that
“to be quit” (Ex 21 19.28; Josh 2 20 AV) is ‘‘to
be relieved of responsibility,” Jp), nakah, "Pp,
naki, “guiltless” (so RV Josh 2 20). Hence ‘to
quit one’s self’? means “to be freed by discharging
a duty.” The phrase in EV, however, is a gloss,
for in 18 4 9 it is used for A, hayah, “‘to be,”
while in 1 Cor 16 13 dvépl{oua, andrizomai, means
‘40 behave like a man.”


QUIVER, kwiv’ér (BUN, vashpah, "2R, eli;
apérpa, pharétra [Sir 26 12]): A case or sheath
for carrying arrows, a part of the ordinary equip-
ment of the warrior, both foot-soldier and charioteer
(Job 39 23; Isa 22 6), and also of the huntsman
(Gen 27 3). Figuratively of a group in passages
where children (Ps 127 5) or prophets of Jeh (Isa
49 2) are spoken of as arrows. Arrows are called
bené ’ashpah, ‘sons of the quiver’ (Lam 3 13).
By identifying the arrows with the death they pro-
duce, the quiver is likened to an open sepulcher
(Jer 5 16).


QUOTATIONS, kwé-ta’shunz, NEW TESTA-
MENT:


I. Inrropuctory F :
Limitation of the Discussion


Quotations, NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2516


Constructive Principtes or NT QuorTaTION

1. Unity of the Two Dispensations

2. Biblical Movement Planned from the Beginning
8. The OT Accepted as Authoritative

4. Issue Involved in Foregoing Principles of Ref-


II.


erence
IlI. Tyricau Instances or NT Quoration
1. Introductory Formulas
2. Unity of the Two Dispensations
8. Prevision of Christianity in the OT
4, Argumentative Quotations
5. Catena of Passages, Illustrating Principles of
Quotation
LITERATURE
I. Introductory.—There are, all told, approxi-
mately 300 direct quotations from the OT in the
NT. The presence of so many cita-
Limitation tions, each one of which involves an
of the interpretation of the passage given a
Discussion new context in quotation, opens many
avenues of discussion and propounds
many difficult and far-reaching problems. In
every separate instance, in the long list of NT
quotations, the principle of accommodation (see
AccoMMODATION) in some form is involved, and,
consequently, the question of historical and exe-
getical accuracy 1s unavoidably raised. In the
present article we shall concentrate attention upon
that which is of far greater importance than the
question whether the writer is incidentally correct,
according to modern scientific principles, in any
specific citation. This more important and vital
issue we take to be the general, guiding principles
adopted by the NT writers in their use of the
book of the older covenant. A review of these
principles, together with certain outstanding and
typical instances in which these principles are
used and applied, will form the substance of the
discussion.
Il. Constructive Principles of NT Quotation.—
In the first place, the NT writers regard the Chris-
tian religion as having its roots in the


1. Unity of OT. From the call of Abraham to the


the Two founding and expansion of the Chris-
Dispensa- tian church the men of the NT recog-
tions nize a single organic movement. In


their use of the ancient oracles in new
setting they constantly and confidently rely upon
the unity of the two dispensations, that recorded in
the OT and that in which they themselves were
participants. Such a unity, taking for granted its
existence, would remove to a degree the very dis-
tinction umplied in the terms Old and New Testa-
ments, and would involve a definite and organic
relationship of all the books to each other. There
are no longer two separate groups of books standing
apart from each other and having bonds of union
only within the group, but, on the contrary, two
related sub-groups outwardly corresponding to con-
trasted phases of the historical movement, but in-
wardly conformed to the deep-lying principles which
make the entire movement one. According to this
idea the Book of Gen is as really related to the
Gospel of Mt as it is to the Book of Ex. On the
surface, and historically speaking, the Book of Gen
leads immediately to the Book of Ex, which is its
companion volume and complement, but go more
deeply into Gen and just as really and just as di-
rectly it leads to Mt, which is also its fellow and
complement. And so throughout. The unifying
medium is, of course, the history which is one in
that it involves the same organic principles applied
to successive areas of human experience. The
books of the Bible are, therefore, like any group of
books on a common subject, phases of each other,
contrasted and yet intimately cognate. In quoting
from the OT the NT writers were simply obeying
an impulse common to all thoughtful writers and
accounting for all quotations, seeking for diversi-
fied expression of the same truths,


The second great constructive principle of NT
| quotation, and manifestly in close harmony with
the first one, is that the movement


2. Biblical from Abraham to Christ was not only


Movement organically one, but that it was from
Planned the beginning planned and prepared
from the for. The Bible is one because the
Beginning history out of which it grew is one.


The history is one because God is in
the history and God is one. According to the
writers of the NT in this history as a whole we have
the unfolding of an all-embracing plan of God,
stretching out into the remotest future and coming
to its culmination in the person and the kingdom of
the Messiah. They maintain also that this plan
was disclosed in part beforehand, by way of antici-
pation and preparation, in order that men might
intelligently codperate with God in the fulfilment of
His purpose. This is the idea involved in prophecy
and its fulfilment, and in the closely related idea of
promise and its realization. One mind, one will,
and one central purpose are operating throughout
the entire history which is, on the Divine side, the
fulfilment of a plan complete in thought before it
takes shape in events. On the basis of this con-
ception, of the foreseen plan of God and its gradual
revelation to men through messages of hope and
warning set in the key of the great future and
pointing the way thither, the greater part of the
structure of NT quotation is reared.
A third principle which really involves a com-
bination of the other two and is prominently brought
forward in the use of quotation for
3. The OT purposes of argument is the recog-
Accepted as nition and acceptance of the OT as
Authorita- authoritative, a real Word of God, in
tive form occasional, but essentially appli-
cable to all experiences, and hence good
for all time. It is evident that the belief in the
continued authority of the Scripture of the old
covenant over the men of the new, rests upon the
unity of the two dispensations and the acceptance of
the same Divine mind and will as operating through-
out all outward and historical changes. This is
admirably expressed by Paul when he speaks of
‘the mystery of his will, according to his good pleas-
ure which he purposed in him unto an economy of
the fulness of the periods, to sum up all things in
Christ’ (Eph 1 9.10), and by the author of He
when he says: ‘God, having of old spoken unto the
fathers in the prophets by various portions and in
various ways, hath at the end of these days spoken
unto usin his Son’ (1 1.2).
The justification of these accepted principles of
reference on the part of the NT writers lies beyond
the scope of the present discussion.
4, Issue In- It is sufficient to emphasize the fact


volvedin that any detailed discussion of NT
Foregoing quotations seriatim is meaningless and
Principles futile except upon the basis of an ex-
of Ref- plicit and consistent determination
erence of these antecedent questions. To the


present writer the validity of these
principles is beyond question. The denial of any
one of the three involves one in difficulties of inter-
pretation, both critical and historical, from which
there is no escape. It is to be noted, therefore,
that the establishment of the principles, in accord-
auce with which the NT writers quote, carries with
it in a general way the justification of their usage.
HII, Typical Instances of NT Quotation.—With
these constructive principles in mind we are pre-
pared to pass in review typical instances in which
general principles are embodied. At this point we
shall be greatly assisted in the analysis and distri-
bution of the complex material before us by giving
careful heed to the formulas, more or less fixed and


2517


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Quotations, NT


uniform, by which the writers introduce quotations
and indicate their sense of the value and _signifi-
cance of that which is quoted. While


1. Intro- these formulas exhibit certain verbal
ductory variations, they are practically re-
Formulas ducible to three, which correspond


_ With substantial accuracy to the three
constructive principles already noted: the unity of
the OT and NT; the prevision of the NT in the
OT; the authority of the OT as the Word of God
intended for all time.

The unity of the two dispensations is asserted in
all those passages introduced by a formula, in which
: fulfilment is asserted as a fact, and in

2. Unity of which the operation of identical prin-


the Two ciples in two or more separate events in
Dispensa- the field of history is implied. A sug-
tions gestive example isin Mt 13 14, where


Our Lord asserts, in connection with the
parable of the Sower, that in the unbelief of the
people of His day ‘the prophecy of Isaiah” is ful-
filled. The prophetic words here quoted (Isa 6
9.10) are not predictive in any immediate sense,
but are susceptible of repeated application and
realization because of the general principle which
they contain. They apply to the prophet’s own
day; they also apply—and in that sense are ful-
filled—to the time of Jesus, and by a legitimate ex-
tension of meaning, to stubborn unbelief in any age
(ef Jn 6 45).

Another passage in which the same formula is
used in a very exceptional way clearly sets forth
the fundamental principle upon which this usage
rests. Jas 2 23 asserts that the justification of
Abraham in the offering of Isaac “fulfilled” the
passage which affirms that his belief was counted
to him for righteousness (Gen 15 6). This passage
is not predictive in any sense, nor is there in the
narrative any hint of a connection between the
passage and the episode on Mt. Moriah. This use
of the formula of fulfilment by James involves the
principle that any event which realizes the mean-
ing and truth of a Scriptura] statement fulfils it.
A vast number of quotations in the NT come under
this head. Persons, events, doctrines, illustrate
and confirm, or embody and _ concretely realize,
principles which are taught in the OT or implied in
its history. We are warned by this passage and
many others like it against a too rigid and literal
interpretation of any formula implying fulfilment.
While it may certainly be intended to imply literal
prediction and an equally literal fulfilment, it may,
on the contrary, be intended to intimate nothing
more than a harmony of principle, fitting the passage
to the person or event with which it is connected.
In this connection it is to be remembered that a
harmony of principle may extend all the way from
a comparatively superficial illustrative resemblance
to a profound assonance of thought. Not a few
OT quotations were made for purposes of illustration
and literary embellishment. Herein lies the sig-
nificance of Matthew’s use (2 17f) of Jer 31 15. A
glance at this quoted passage indicates that it 1s a
figurative and poetic expression in which Rachel
(already for many years in her tomb) is represented
as weeping for her exiled children and refusing to
be comforted except by their return. There is no
strictly predictive element in the passage, save only
the promise of return, which is not used by Matthew.
Its applicability to the massacre of the children of
Bethlehem lies in its poetical appositeness, and
there alone. Once again the voice of wailing
motherhood is heard in Israel. The tender and
beautiful imagery is applicable in this sense and is
used with true insight, but with no intention of
justifying a claim of prediction and fulfilment in
the literal sense.


The prevision of events in the life of Jesus and in
the history of Christianity is involved im all the
: quotations in which a necessary con-
3. Previ- nection between the passage as pre-
sion of dictive and the event is asserted, or
Christianity in which a prophet is said to have been
inthe OT speaking or writing concerning the
iad Ss event or person in question. An ex-
amination of the OT without reference to its use
in the NT seems to justify the conclusion that its
bearing upon the future may be particularized undcr
four heads, which in turn with sufficient accuracy
and exhaustiveness will classify the pertinent NT
quotations.

(1) The prophetic teaching of Israel embodied
not only in the messages of the prophets, but also
in laws, institutions, and rites, has a twofold dis-
pensational application. Reference is made here
only to those explicit references to a future era of
especial blessing. For example, in Acts 2 17ff
Peter interprets the Pentecostal experience in the
terms of prophecy, referring to Joel (2 28 fi), who
promises an outpouring of God’s Spirit in a “great
and notable day” of the Lord. The promise
through Joel is an undeniable prediction (every
promise is such), which in a measure would be ful-
filled in any exceptional manifestation of God’s
Spirit among men. The only question which can
possibly be raised in connection with Peter’s use
of this passage is whether the Pentecostal outpour-
ing was the climactic realization of the promise: that
is, the establishment of the era of blessing foretold
by the prophet. Later in the same book (3 20-26)
the same apostle sweeps the whole field of prophecy
as centering in certain promises fulfilled in Christ
and the Christian community.

He instances two, the prophet like Moses (Dt
18 15) and the promised inclusive blessing through
Abraham (Gen 12 3). He also includes (Acts 3
26) a hint of the Servant passages of Isa. This
identification of the NT movement through two
specific predictive promises is wholly justified by
the prophetic character of Jesus, the range and rich-
ness of the blessings brought from Abraham through
Him, and by the fact elsewhere emphasized that no
other has measured up to the standard of the ideal
servant. Negatively, it may be urged that if these
promises were not fulfilled in Christ, history affords
no possibility of discovering any fulfilment meas-
urably adequate, either in the past or future. In
He (8 8-12) reference is made to the promise of a
new covenant in Jer (31 31 ff) as a justification for
believing that the OT dispensation was not com-
plete in itself and that in its very constitution it
pointed forward to Christianity as its fulfilment.
Combining this passage with that quoted above
(Acts 2 17 ff) taken from Joel, the strength of the
case for this use of the OT is at once seen. Dis-
tinctively Jeremiah’s ‘new covenant” was to be
inward and gracious rather than outward and legal.
The promise through Joel is an awakening of
prophecy through the free outpouring of God's
Spirit. The distinctive feature of the gospel is
its idea of justification by faith, through grace
revealed in Christ and imparted by the Holy Spirit
given according to promise at Pentecost. ‘The
“new covenant” foretold by Jeremiah was estab-
lished at Pentecost through the outpouring of the
Spirit promised through Joel. To deny_this as
fulfilment is to nullify the meaning of Christian
history and to erase both promises from the page
of credible prophecy.

(2) Contemporary persons or institutions are
sometimes interpreted, not in the terms of present
actuality, but on the basis of the deal not revealed
or realized until the coming of Christ. One strik-
ing example of this method is to be found in the


Quotations, NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2518


so-called “Immanuel passage” (Mt 1 23, quoting
Isa 7 14). Undoubtedly the message of the
prophet to Ahaz had an immediate and contem-
porary significance. But, like many another
notable prophetic message. it is set in the key of
the Messianic King whose unworthy predecessor
Ahaz was. “The Messiah comes, but the wilful-
ness of Ahaz has rendered His reign impossible”
(G. A. Smith, “Isa,’’ Hzpositor’s Bible, I, 134).

In Acts 2 24-36, passages representative of
many others quoted, both the resurrection and
ascension of Jesus are interpreted in the light of two
quotations from the Pss (16 8 ff; 110 1) as prede-
termined and therefore certain events in the plan
and purpose of God. In both instances the argu-
ment is that the promises nominally made to David,
or claimed by him, were couched in terms too vast
to find fulfilment in his own experience, but were
spoken of the greater King who was to come and
in whose experience alone they were realized. In
the former instance, a triumph over death was
anticipated_with assurance which not the Psalmist
but only Christ attained; in the latter a royal
ascendancy was promised that only Christ’s ascen-
sion to the place of power could satisfy. An ex-
amination of the passages shows that Peter’s inter-
pretation is justified not merely by the wording of
the promises, which point to a fulness of experience
not realized by any OT man, but still more clearly
by the descriptive titles which identify the person
who is the subject of the experience. In the first
instance he is spoken of as Jeh’s ““Holy One,” in the
second as “My Lord.” The triamph over death
which the speaker anticipates is grounded in a unity
of purpose and will with God—a holiness which was
ideal and still unrealized until Christ came. The
logic of the ps is: God’s ‘Holy One’ must not see
corruption. The logic of history is: Christ is God’s
Holy One and He did not see corruption. The
principle that triumph over death is the logical issue
of holiness found its justification and proof not
directly in the experience of the singer who first
glimpsed it asa truth, but in the career of Christ
who first realized it as a fact.

Nore.—The argument here_is not affected if one
accepts the variant reading ‘‘Holy Ones’ for the pre-
ceding passage.

The second passage is particularly interesting
because Onr Lord Himself first pointed out its
implications as to the place and work of the Messiah.
Such a passage as this entire ps (110) would have
been impossible had not the powers and respon-
sibilities of the Davidie King been keyed from the
beginning at the Messianic level. The logic here
is the same as in Ps 16. The Messianic kingdom
over all nations awaited the coming of the true
Messianic King. The long-delayed triumph fol-
lowed hard upon the coming of the long-expected
King (cf Ps 2 1.2; Acts 13 32-34).

The same principle is involved in Our Lord’s use
of the Servant passage (Isa 61 1 ff) in His sermon
at Nazareth. Here the issue as to Messianic
prophecy is fairly joined at the center. It is central
because it occurs in the Lord’s own teaching and
also because it concerns, not any external or inci-
dental happenings in the life of Jesus, but the whole
trend and movement of prophetic thought, together
with the entire meaning and interpretation of His
career.

Interpreted altogether apart from the NT, the
passage has an unmistakable bearing upon the
future. As one of the series concerned with the
Servant (Isa 42 1 ff), the quoted passage focuses
attention upon the mission of Israel to the world,
still to be carried out. “Ye are my witnesses, saith
Jeh, and my servant whom I have chosen” (43 10),
“Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant, and Israel,


whom I have chosen” (44 1). It also involves the
entire scope and meaning of the prophetic office
through which Jeh’s will was made known to Israel
and through Israel to the world. Both these con-
siderations sweep out into the prophet’s future and
both point unerringly to Christ as the historical
fulfilment of Israel’s mission and as the actual reali-
zation of the ideal and ministry of prophethood.
The very ambiguity of the reference in this chapter
(ch 61), whether to the Servant or to the prophet,
and the questions raised as to whether Israel ideal-
ized is referred to or some person or personification,
serve to make more clear and unmistakable the
central fact that only in Christ is the conception
embodied in the entire series of passages altogether
realized. It thus becomes for sober thought a
distinct revelation and portraiture in advance of
what Jesus was in His person and work.

(3) In the course of Israel’s training to receive
the Messiah, certain external items were given as
bearing upon the identification of Him when He
should come. We shall instance three items,
closely related to each other, and each intensely
interesting in itself. These three items are (a) His
sonship to David (Acts 2 30.31), (6) His birth from
a Virgin (Mt 1 22f), (c) His birth at Bethlehem
(Mt 2 5). Objection is offered at once to the inter-
pretation of these OT passages as predictive, and
to the alleged fulfilments in the life of Jesus, on the
ground mainly that being definite events (cf Mt
2 15) they are not included within the legitimate
scope of prediction; and, secondarily, that being
items of this external kind it would be an easy matter
to invent fulfilments. It may be granted at once
that incidents of this kind could be indefinitely mul-
tiplied by fabricating coincidences, but the fact
remains that, in the absence of any visible check
upon invention, very few such instances are alleged
by NT writers. Furthermore, there are suggestive
variations between the events recorded and the
natural interpretations of the OT passages con-
nected with them; that is, the fulfilments arrive
by such devious routes as to make it difficult to
suppose them to be due to the imaginative stimu-
lation of the passages. For example, the birth at
Bethlehem was brought about by circumstances
not at all to the liking of Jewish patriots, and was
obscured to contemporaries by the previous and
subsequent residence at Nazareth. The kinship
of Jesus to the house of David was made adoptive
(unless Mary was of that house) by the virgin
birth. The interpretation of Isa 7 14 as inti-
mating a virgin birth was not compulsory to one
familiar with the Heb text of the passage and
would have been thought of in that connection
only by one assured of the fact. The virgin birth
(see IMMANUEL; VirGIN Brrru) is not an ety-
mological but a providential commentary on Isa
7 14. One other consideration of primary impor-
tance remains. In the one point where the identi-
fication of Jesus with the Messiah by His followers
can be tested most severely, they are most com-
pletely triumphant. It would be comparatively
easy to invent incidents suggested by OT proph-
ecies, and to take dignities and titles wholesale
from the same source—but given all these, to find
one capable of realizing and fulfilling the expecta-
tions so aroused is the chief problem. Here fabri-
cation is impossible. And here too the NT meets
and answers the challenge of truth. In view of
these considerations it is safe to assert that even
in matters of historical detail the career of Jesus was
foreseen and predicted. Such passages belong to
the philosophy of preparation as a whole and should
be studied in that connection.

_ (4) In certain instances the original passage and
its reappearance in guotation indicate a process


2519


which is continuous throughout all history. For
example, the use of Zec 13 7 (Mk 14 27) sug-
gests a deeper view of the connection between
prophecy and history, immediate and more remote,
than we are often aware of. Ou the face of them
such passages as those concerning the Smitten
Shepherd and the scattered sheep are predictions,
and the life of Christ stands as fulfilment. It simply
cannot be contended that such passages as these
do not find fulfilment and explanation in the career
of Jesus as nowhere else in the history. Neverthe-
less, the connection is far deeper than mere fore-
sight of an isolated event and its occurrence. We
may well say that, in a sense, the event is foreseen
because it is already a fact. The allegory of the
Smitten Shepherd is, as has well been said, “a sum-
mary of the history of Israel.” But it is more than
that. The relationship of God with Isracl, which
involved a dealing of Divine grace with men, their
rejection of it and the consequent vicarious immo-
lation of the Divine Friend and Shepherd, which
came to its climax in the tragedy of the cross, was
established in all essential factors in the early days.
Therefore, Christ. can say, as the outcome of the
profoundest insight into the meaning of history,
‘That which concerneth me hath fulfilment’ (cf Lk
24 44). He was more deeply concerned in the
doings of an earlier time than being there foreseen.
In a real sense, “the Lamb” was “‘slain from the
foundation of the world” (Rev 13 8). In this alle-
gory of the rejected Shepherd and in the successive
delineations of the Servant, passages, we have the
portrait of the Christ as He was—not merely as He
was to be. In these quotations deep answers to
deep. The only satisfactory interpretation of the
tragedy of the cross is that in accordance with
principles long operative in human history, “it must
needs be.” The only satisfactory interpretation of
the passages cited is that they disclose the actual
operation of the forces which in their culmination
issued in the tragedy of the cross. This brings the
passages in the original and in quotation into the
framework of the same course of events. Peter in
his sermon in Solomon’s porch thus sums up the
whole process: ‘‘But the things which God fore-
showed by the mouth of all the prophets, that his
Christ should suffer, he thus fulfilled” (Acts 3 18).
The argumentative use of the OT involves exactly
the same principles which have been dealt with
in the foregoing discussion. These


4. Argu- principles coalesce in the conception of
mentative the OT as authoritative. k
Quotations (1) Throughout the NT, in the


teaching of Our Lord Himself and in

the apostolic writings, a clear-cut distinction is
drawn between the temporary and permanent
offices of the OT. It is recognized that in essential
principles the OT is for all time, while in its out-
ward form and iu its actualization of underlying
and essential truths it is preliminary and prepara-
tory. There are different dispensations, but one
economy. Whenever Our Lord uses the OT for
purposes of argument (see Mt 4 4.7; 12 17 ff; 19
18f; Mk 10 19; Lk 19 46) it is on the basis of
essential truth which is permanent and unchanging
(Mt 6 17-19). On_ the other hand, He never
hesitates to annul that which had a merely tem-
porary or preliminary value (Mt 6 21.33.38;
ef by way of contrast ver 27). He came not to
destroy, but to fulfil, but fulfilment implies a new
era—a new and higher stage in the delivery of truth.
(2) In like manner Paul and the other NT writers
argue on the basis of an identity of principle which
binds the two eras together. Paul contends for
three great principles, the Messiahship of Jesus,
justification by faith, the inclusion of the Gentiles
in the plan of salvation (the doctrine of election is


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Quotations, NT


a detail of this last argument; see Rom 9 7.9.12.
13.15.17). We shall consider typical examples of
Paul’s use of the OT in argumentation. Choice
has been made of those which have provoked ad-
verse criticism. Among these is the use of Gen 13
15; 17 8in Gal 3 16. This is a leading example of
Paul’s alleged ‘rabbinical’ method: “He saith
not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And
to thy seed, which is Christ.”’ The Heb word
“seed” as applied to offspring (771, zera‘) is
singular, This, of course, means that a man’s
descendants are looked upon as organically one,
inasmuch as they continue his life. The word
would apply to any one of the family, but only by
virtue of his belonging to the family. Etymologi-
cally Paul’s argument would apply to Isaac as well
as to Jesus—provided only the promise is looked
upon as being fulfilled in him. But the promise
which was fulfilled in Isaac, was fulfilled in a larger
way in Israel as a whole, and was fulfilled in the
largest way of all in Christ. .The use of the sing.
word indicates that Abraham's children were looked
upon as one in him—they are also one in Christ.
The true children of Abraham are such in Christ.
Historically the argument is fully justified. ‘The
personality of Christ is in some sense coextensive
with the fulfilment of the promise to Abraham”
(Beet). “Christ isthe organ of fulfilment” (Meyer).

The classical passage in the discussion of justi-
fication based upon an OT quotation is Rom 1 17,
quoting Hab 2 4. The quoted passage seems to
fail the argument because the literal tr would
appear to be that “‘the righteous shall live by their
faithfulness.” A deeper view, however, amply
justifies the quotation; first, because the stedfast-
ness demanded by the prophet is a persistent trust
in God in view of the delay of the promised vision;
second, the deepest principle common to the OT and
NT is that stability of character has its root in
trust in Jeh (1sa 28 16; cf 26 1-3). Nothing
could be more foreign to the thought of the OT than
that a man could be righteous without trust in God.


One further quotation argumentatively used by Paul
may fitly close this section of our discussion. 1n Rom
11 26.27 he quotes Isa 59 20.21 as indicating the Di-
vine purpose _to include the Gentiles within the scope of
salvation. This passage is doubly significant because
it is attacked by Kuenen (Prophets and Prophecy in
Israel) on the ground that it is uncritically taken from
the LXX version which in this instance does not cor-
rectly represent the Heh text, It may be remarked that
a large percentage of the NT quotations are taken from
the LXX. (For estimates of the number see Johnson,
Quotations of the NT, chi.) This prevalent hahit 1s
amply justifiable by, and in large consideration of, the
fact that the NT was written for the purpose of being
read and understood by those to whom the LXX was
often the only version available, and the familiarity of
that version was ample compensation for any slight loss
in verbal accuracy. The only reasonable qualification
of this general statement is that we should call in ques-
tion any deviation which is depended upon for a point
in argument. Kuenen, the severest critic of the NT
writers in this particular, alleges very few instances, and
Professor Johnson has satisfactorily dealt with these in
detail (as above). In the case immediately hefore us
the deviations in the version used by Paul do not in the
least modify, in the way of strengthening, the reference
to the Gentiles (beginning in ver 19 and continuing
throughout) which is the point upon which Paul is laying
stress. It is not too much to say that Paul's argument
would be unimpaired had he used the Heb text, upon
which our RV rests (cf He 2 6-8). In gencral, it may
be premised that no stringent rule of verbal accuracy
should be considered binding upon writers who address a
popular audience beyond that which guards the suh-
stantial cogency of their argument. From. the fair
application of this reasonable rule the NT writers have
nothing to fear.

For the most part the NT writers confine their quo-
tations to the OT. In a single instance an extra-
canonical saying of Jesus (Acts 20 35), and, in at least
two instances (Jude vs 9.14), non-canonical books are
referred to. In addition to this Paul uses in the letter
to Titus (1 12) and in his sermon at Athens (Acts 17
28) lines from native poets to illustrate and enforce his
discussion (see Portry, New Testament). In these
latter instances the difference in usage from his ordi-


Sebi THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2520
nary habit of quoting authoritative Scripture is suffi- | 9 13; 19 4.18; 21 13.16.42; 22 24.31.32.43; Mk 4 12;
ciently obvious. In the case of the EAsine attributed 7 10; 10 19; ‘1117; 12 193 Lk 2 pees 10; 19 46;
to Christ, it is enough to say that it is so obviously | Acts 15 16.17; Rom 1 17; 4 3.7.8; 9 25.26; 10 5.6—
Christhke that we need not hesitate to accept it as | S8.11.18.16; 12 19; 15 21; 1 Cor 119 (identity of prin-
genuine, while in the ease of Jude nothing is made to | eciple).31; 15 45; 2 Cor 4 13, 6 2 16; 8 15; _ Gal 3
depend upon the quotations except certain accepted Chris- 6.8.10.11.12.13. 16; 4 27; Eph 4 8; 62 1 Tim 5 18.
tian truths (see Plummer, £rpositor's Bible, ‘' James and Sce also CHRONICLES, Books or, 5, 10.
Jude,” 434 f). LiteraTure—The lit. is yoluminons. Beside the
(1) Based on unity of pispeace ons 2 18; 18 14; | standard comms. and dicts., the reader will do_well to
27:9; Mk 76, Lk 421; 2017; Jn 437; 6 45: | consult C. H. Toy, Quotations in the NT; Franklin
7 38; 12 bere Acts 2 31.39; 3 25; : 25; Johnson, Quotations of the NT; Cambridge Bib. Essays
5. Catena of 8,23.32f; 13 2232.33.34; 28 26.27; 1 Cor (“Our Lord's Use of the OT” by MeNeile); Westeott,
Passages 15 54.55; He 8 8-12; Jas 2 23. Intro to the Study of the NT, Appendix A.
(2) Based on prevision.—_Mt 1 22; 2 Lovis MattHews SWEET
Illustrating 5. ae 4, a Wee re le 35: 36 can
7; ; Jn ;
Principles of 305.0 13 18; 15°25; 19 24.28.36;
Quotation 20 0; heist 208 suse 28; 325; 4°11.


25.26; 13 33-34.
(3) Based on authority of the OT.—Mt 4 4; 5 38.43;


RAAMA, ra’a-ma (87977), ra‘ma’): Thus spelled
only in 1 Ch 1 9; elsewhere ‘““Raamah” (MAP),
ra‘mah). A son of Cush and father of Sheba and
Dedan (Gen 10 7=1 Ch 19). In Ezekiel’s la-
ment over Tyre (Ezk 27 22) the tribe of Raamah
is mentioned along with Sheba as a mercantile
people who provided the inhabitants of Tyre with
spices, precious stones and gold. It has generally
been identified with Regma, mentioned by Ptolemy
and Steph. Byzantr. as a city in Southeastern
Arabia on the shores of the Pers Gulf. The LXX
(‘Peyud, Rhegmsd) itself supposes this site. But the
Arab. name of the city here indicated is spelled with
ag and so gives rise to a phonological difficulty. A
more probable identification has been found in the
Sabaean ranah in Southwestern Arabia near Afe‘tn
in the north of Marib. JMe‘tn was the capital of
the old Minaean kingdom. A. 8. Foiron


RAAMIAH, ri-a-mi’a (W994, ra‘amyah; B,
Naaped, Naamid, A, “Peedpa, Rheelmd): One of
the leading men who returned with Zerubbabel
from captivity (Neh 7 7). In the corresponding
passage in Ezr 2 2, where the same list is named,
a slight variation in form is given. ‘‘Reelaiah’’ is
the name found in this passage. One is doubtless
a corruption of the other. Both have the same
root meaning.


RAAMSES, ri-am’séz (Ex 1 11), RAMESES,
ram’é-séz (Gen 47 11; Ex 12 37; Nu 33 3.5)
(SOO71, ra'm’sés, TBL1, ra‘amsés;
1. Meaning ‘PapeooA, Rhamesst; Egyp Ra-mes-
of “Store- su, “Ra created him” [or ‘“‘it’’]): One
Cities” of the two “settlements” (Gnisk*nath)
built, or ‘‘built up,” by the Hebrews
for the Pharaoh, the other being Pithom, to
which the LXX acds a third, namely, “On which
is Heliopolis,” a town near Cairo (Ex 1 11).
The Heb term misk*ndth comes from a root mean-
ing ‘‘to settle down” (Arab. sakan, “settlement,”
Assyr sakanit or shakanu, “to set’), but it is ren-
dered “strong cities’? in LXX, “treasure cities’ in
AV, and (incorrectly) “‘store-cities’ in RV. The
“land of Rameses,’”’ where Jacob and his sons
settled, was apparently the ‘“‘field of Zoan’’ (see
ZoaNn), thus lying in the Delta E. of the Bubastic
branch of the Nile.
It is often assumed that no city called Rameses
would have existed before the time of Rameses II,
or the 14th cent. BC, though even
2. Meaning before ‘Rameses J the name occurs as
of Name that of a brother of Horemhib under
the XVIIIth Dynasty. The usual
tr ‘Child of Ra” is grammatically incorrect in
Egyp, and as Ra was an ancient name for the “sun”


it seems possible that a town may have borne the
title ‘Ra created it’ very early. The mention of
Rameses in Gen (47 11) is often regarded as an
anachronism, since no scholar has supposed that
Jacob lived as late as the time of Rameses II. This
would equally apply to the other notices, and at
most would serve to mark the age of the passages
in the Pent where Rameses is mentioned, but even
this cannot be thought to be proved (see Exopvs).
According to De Rougé (see Pierret, Vocab. Hiéro-
glyph., 1875, 143) there were at least three towns in
Lower Egypt that bore the name Pa Iames-ses
(“city of Rameses’”’); but Brugsch supposes that
the place mentioned in the OT was Zoan, to which
Rameses II gave this name when making it his
eapital in the Delta. Dr. Budge takes the same
view, while Dr. Naville and others suppose that the
site of Raamses has still to be found.

There appears to have been no certain tradition
preserving the site, for though St. Silvia (about

3885 AD) was told that it lay 4 miles
3. Situation from the town of Arabia (see GosHEN),

she found no traces of such a place.
Brugsch (“A New City of Rameses, 1876,” Aegyp-
tische Zeitschrift, 69) places one such city in the
southern part of Memphis itself. Goodwin (Ree.
of Past, Old Series, VI, 11) gives an Egyp letter
describing the “city of Rameses—Miamun,” which
appears to be Zoan, since it was on the seacoast.
It was a very prosperous city when this letter was
written, and a pa-khennu or “palace city.” It had
canals full of fish, lakes swarming with birds, fields
of lentils, melons, wheat, onions and sesame, gardens
of vines, almonds and figs. Ships entered its har-
bor; the lotus and papyrus grew 1n its waters. The
inhabitants greeted Rameses II with garlands of
flowers. Besides wine and mead, of the “‘eon-
queror’s city,” beer was brought to the harbor from
the Kati (in Cilicia), and oil from the “Lake
Sagabi.”” There is no reason to suppose that Zoan
was less prosperous in the early Hyksos age, when
the Hebrews dwelt in its plain, whatever be the
conclusion as to the date when the city Rameses
received that name. The description above given
agrees with the OT account of the possession given
by Joseph to his family “in the best of the land, in
the land of Rameses”’ (Gen 47 11).

C. R. ConpER

RABBAH, rab’a:

(1) (M21, rabbah; ‘PaBBd, Rhabbd, ‘PapBd0, Rhab-
bdth, ‘PaBBdv, Rhabbdn. The full name is "22 M3)
VO? , rabbath bene ‘amman; } dxpa ray vidy’ Auudy,
hé dkra tan huién Ammén, ‘PaBBd0 vidy *Appdy,
Rhabbith huién  Ammén, “Rabbah of the children
of Ammon’): This alone of the cities of the Am-


monites is mentioned in Scripture, so we may take


2521


it as the most important. It is first named in
connection with the “bed” or sarcophagus of Og,
king of Bashan, which was said to be found here
(Dt 3 11). It lay E. of the territory assigned to
Gad (Josh 13 25). Whatever may have been its
history in the interval, it does not appear again in
Scripture till the time of David. This mouarch
sent an embassy of sympathy to King Hanun when
his father Nahash died. The kindness was met by
wanton insult, which led to the outbreak of war.
The Ammonites, strengthened by Aramaean allies,
were defeated by the Israelites under Joab, and took
refuge in Rabbah. After David’s defeat of the
Aramaeans at Helam a year later, the Ammonites
were exposed alone to the full force of Israel, the
ark of the covenant being carried with the troops.
The country was ravaged and sicge was laid to


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Raama
Rabbah


Peraea. In the 4th cent. AD, it ranked with
Bostra and Gerasa as one of the great fortified cities
of Cocle-Syria (Ritter, Erdkunde, XV, ii, 1154 f).
It became the seat of a bishop. Abulfeda (1321
AD) says that Rabbah was in ruins at the time of
the Moslem conquest.

Rabbah is represented by the modern ‘Amman,
a ruined site with extensive remains, chiefly from
Rom times, some 14 miles N.E. of Heshbon, and
about 22 miles E. of the Jordan. It lies on the
northern bank of Wédy ‘Amman, a tributary of
the upper Jabbok, in a well-watered and fruitful
valley. Possibly the stream which rises here may
be “the waters” referred to in 2 8 12 27. An-


cient Rabbah may have stood on the hill now occu-
pied by the citadel, a position easy of defence be-
cause of its precipitous sides.


The outer walls of


Rabbah. It was during this siege that Uriah the
Hittite by David’s orders was exposed ‘‘in the fore-
front of the hottest battle’ (2 8 11 15), where,
treacherously deserted by his comrades, he wasslain.
How long the siege lasted we do not know; probably
some years; but the end was in sight when Joab
captured ‘‘the city of waters” (25 12 27). This
may mean that he had secured control of the water
supply. In the preceding verse he calls it the
“royal city.” By the chivalry of his general, David
was enabled in person to enjoy the honor of taking
the city. Among the booty secured was the crown
of Melcom, the god of the Ammonites. Such of the
inhabitants as survived he treated with great
severity (2 S 12 26-31; 1 Ch 20 1 ff).

Tn the utterances of the prophets against Ammon,
Rabbah stands for the people, as their most impor-
tant, or perhaps their only important, city (Jer 49
2.3; Ezk 21 20; 26 5; Am1 14). Jer 49 4 speaks
of the “flowing valley’”—a reference perhaps to the
abundance of water and fruitfulness—and the treas-
ures in which she gloried. Ezk 21 21 represents
the king of Babylon at “the head of the two ways’
deciding by means of the divining arrows whether
he should march against Jerus or against Rabbah.
Amos seems to have been impressed with the
palaces of Rabbah. : :

The city retained its importance in later times.
It was captured by Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-
247 BC), who called it Philadelphia. It was a
member of the league of ten cities. Antiochus the
Great captured it by means of treachery (Polyb.
v.71). Jos (BJ, I, iti, 3) names it as lying E. of


RUINS AT ‘Amma@n—FACADE OF THEATER.


the citadel appear to be very old; but it is quite
impossible to say that anything Ammonite is now
above ground. The citadel is connected by means
of an underground passage with a large cistern or
tank to the N., whence probably it drew its water-
supply. This may be the passage mentioned in the
account of the capture of the city by Antiochus.


Colonnade at ‘Amman.


“Tt is,” says Conder (Heth and Moab, 158), ‘one
of the finest Rom towns in Syria, with baths, a
theater, and an odeum, as well as several large pri-
vate masonry tombs built in the valley probably in
the 2d cent. The fortress on the hill, now surround-
ing a considerable temple, is also probably of this
same date. The church with two chapels farther
N., and perhaps some of the tombs, must belong to
a later age, perhaps the 4th cent. The fine mosque
and the fine Moslem building on the citadel hill


Rabbi
Rachel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2522


cannot be earlier than the 7th, and are perhaps as
late as the 11th cent.; and we have thus relics of
every building epoch except the Crusading, of which
there appears to be no indication.”

The place is now occupied by Arabs and Cir-
cassians who profit by the riches of the soil. It is
brought into contact with the outside world by
means of the Damascus-Hejaz Railway, which has
a station here.

(2) (IAW, hé-rabbah; B, Zw6nBa, Sathébd, A,
"Ape8Bd, Arebbi): An unidentified city of Judah
named along with Kiriath-jearim (Josh 15 60).

W. Ewine

RABBI, rab'1, rab’i (727, rabbi; paBBl, rhabbi,
or paBBel, rhabbet): A term used by the Jews of
their religious teachers as a title of respect, from
3°), rabh, “great,’’ so “my great one” (cf Lat
magister), once of masters of slaves, but later of
teachers (Mt 23 7); therefore tré by diddexaros,
diddskalos, ‘teacher’ (Mt 23 8; Jn 1 38; cf ver 49).
In AV frequently rendered “Master” (Mt 26 25.49;
Mk 95; 11 21; 14 45; Jn 431; 92; {1 8).
John the Baptist (Jn 3 26), as well as Christ, is
addressed with the title (Jn 1 49; 6 25), both by
disciples and others. Jesus forbade its use among
His followers (Mt 23 8). Later (Galilean) form of
same, RaBBoNI (q.v.). For Rabbinical literature
see TALMUD. Epwarp Bacpy PoLtarp


RABBITH, rab’ith (N°271, Ad-rabbith; B, AaBe-
pav, Dabeirén, A, ‘PaBBae, Rhabbéth): A town
in the territory of Issachar (Josh 19 20) which is
probably represented today by Raba, a village in
the southern part of the Gilboa range and N. of
Ibzak. The hd is, of course, the def. art.


RABBLE, rab”1: This word is not found in AV.
RV has it once as the tr of éyopatos, agoraios
(lit. “lounger in the market place’), in Acts 17 5,
where it replaces ‘“baser sort” of AV. It has the
common meaning of an unruly, lawless set who are
ready to join a mob.


RABBONI, rab-d'ni, rab-d’ni (paBBovl, rhabboni,
“my great master” [Mk 10 51]; paBBouvl [WH -vel],
rhabbouni [-net] [Jn 20 16]). See Razer.


RAB-MAG, rab’mag (42°37, rabh-mdgh; LXX
as proper noun, ‘Pafapaé, Rhabamdth): The name
of one of the Bab princes who were present at the
destruction of Jerus by Nebuchadnezzar, during the
reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah (Jer 39 3.13).
The word is a compound, the two parts seemingly
being in apposition and signifying tautologically
the same thing. The last syllable or section of the
word, magh, was the designation among the Medes,
Persians and Babylonians for priests and wise men.
Its original significance was “great” or “powerful”;
Gr zéyas, mégas, Lat magis, magnus. The first
syllable, rabh, expresses practically the same idea,
that of greatness, or abundance in size, quantity, or
power. Thus it might be interpreted the “all-
wise”’ or “all-powerful” prince, the chief magician or
physician. It is, therefore, a title and not a name,
and is accordingly put in appositive relations to the
proper name just preceding, as “Nergal-sharezer,
the Rab-mag,” tr¢ fully, ‘““Nergal-sharezer the chief
prince or magician.” See NERGAL-SHAREZER.

In harmony with the commonly accepted view,
the proper rendering of the text should be, “All the
princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in
the middle gate, to wit, Nergal-sharezer, Samgar-
nebo, Sarsechim, [the] Rab-saris, N ergal-sharezer,
[the] Rab-mag”’ (Jer 39 3); and “so Nebuzaradan
the captain of the guard sent, and Nebushazban,
(the] Rab-saris, and Nergal-sharezer, [the] Rab-mag,


and all the chief officers of the king of Babylon”
(39 13). Water G. CiipPpINGER


RAB-SARIS, rab’sa-ris (O°1Q07A1, rabh-sdris):
As with Rab-mag, which is not regarded as a name,
but a title, so this is to be regarded as a descriptive
title for the person whose name precedes it (see
Ras-mac). The first part, rabh, signifies “great”
or ‘‘chief,’’ the second, saris, is the title for eunuch or
chamberlain. The tr then would be chief eunuch or
the chief of the eunuchs (or chamberlains).

The oriental custom was for the king to surround him-
self with a number of eunuchs, who performed varied
kinds of services, both menial and dignified. They
usually had charge of his harem: sometimes they occu-
pied court positions. Frequently they superintended
the education of the youth. The term itself was
sometimes used to designate persons in places of trust
who were not emasculated. The above title describes
the highest or chief in rank of these eunuchs. See
Eunuca.

The full title is used 3 t, once in connection with
the titles of other important officers who were sent
by the king of Assyria with a large army to demand
the surrender of Jerus. The passage would be tr4
properly, ‘And the king of Assyria sent the Tartan
and the Rab-saris (the chief eunuch) and the Rab-
shakeh from Lachish to king Hezekiah’ (2 K 18 17).
Again, it refers to a Babylonian whose real name
was Sarsechim, who with the other Bab princes
sat in the middle gate during the capture of Jerus.
This event is described as having oceurred in the
llth year of Zedekiah, king of Judah (Jer 39 3).
The third use is in connection with the name Ne-
bushazban, who, with the other chief officers of the
king of Babylon, sent and took Jeremiah out of the
court of the guard and committed him to Gedaliah,
who was to take him home to dwell with his own
people (Jer 39 13).

Thus it is seen that based upon this accepted
theory the three titles would be in their connee-
tions as follows: (1) simply “the chief eunuch,”
(2) Sarseehim, the Rab-saris (or chief eunuch), and
(3) Nebushazban, the Rab-saris (or chief eunuch).
See also Assyria, X. WaLtTerR G. CLIPPINGER


RABSHAKEH, rab’sha-ke, rab-sha’ke (MPD21,
rabhshakéh): A compound word, the first part,
rabh, indicating “head”’ or “chief” (see RaB-maa;
Ras-saris). The second part, which in the Aram.,
probably meant ‘“cupbearer,” had in this connection
and elsewhere, according to later discoveries, an ex-
tended significance, and meant chief officer, i.e.
chief of the heads or captains.

R. was one of the officers sent by Sennacherib,
the king of Assyria, with the Tartan and the Rab-
saris to demand the surrender of Jerus, which was
under siege by the Assyr army (2 K 18 17.19.26.27.
28.37; 19 4.8; Isa 36 2.4.11.12.13.22.; 37 4.8).
The three officers named went: from Laehish to
Jerus and appeared by the conduit of the upper
pool. Having called upon King Hezekiah, his
representatives Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, Sheb-
nah, the scribe, and Joah, the recorder, appeared.
R. sent through them a message to the king in which
he represented himself as the spokesman for the
king of Assyria. He derided King Hezekiah in an
insolent fashion in representing his trust in Egypt
as a bruised reed which would pierce the hand.
Likewise his confidence in Jeh was vain, for He also
would be unable to deliver them. Then the officers
of the king replied, requesting him to speak in the
Syrian language which they understood, and not in
the Jews’ language which the people on the wall
understood. This he refused to do, speaking still
more loudly in order that they might hear and be
persuaded. By bribery and appeal, by promise
and by deception he exhorted them to turn traitor


2523


‘THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Rabbi
Rachel


to Hezekiah and surrender to him. The people,
however, true to the command of Hezekiah (2 K
18 36), “held their peace, and answered him not a
word.” Afterward R. returned and “found the
king of Assyria warring against Libnah” (2 K 19
8). From this description it is inferred that R.
was a man of considerable literary attainment, being
able, in all probability, to speak in three languages.
He had, in addition to his official power, dauntless
courage, an insolent spirit and a characteristic ori-
ental disregard for veracity.
Wautrer G. CLIPPINGER

RACA, ra‘ka, ra-ka’ (paxd, rhakd, WH with codd.
NX°BE, etc; paxd, rhachd, Tisch. with N* D; Aram.
RP), réka’, from P™), rék, “empty”’): Vain or
worthless fellow; a term of contempt used by the
Jews in the time of Christ. In the Bible, it occurs
in Mt 5 22 only, but John Lightfoot gives a num-
ber of instances of the use of the word by Jewish
writers (Hor. Heb., ed by Gandell, Oxford, 1859, II,
108). Chrysostom (who was acquainted with Syr as
spoken in the neighborhood of Antioch) says it was
equivalent to the Gr o%, si, thou,” used contemptu-
ously instead of a man’s name. Jerome rendered
It tnanis aut vacuus absque cerebro. It is generally
explained as expressing contempt for a man’s in-
tellectual capacity (=“you simpleton!’), while
pwpé, moré (tr? “thou fool’), in the same verse is
taken to refer to a man’s moral and religious char-
acter (=‘‘you rascal!’ “you impious fellow!’’).
Thus we have three stages of anger, with three cor-
responding grades of punishment: (1) the inner
feeling of anger (épy:féuevos, orgizémenos), to be
punished by the local or provincial court (79 xploe,
té krisei, “the judgment”); (2) anger breaking
forth into an expression of scorn (faca), to be pun-
ished by the Sanhedrin (79 cuvedply, t6 sunedria,
“the council’); (3) anger culminating in abusive
and defamatory language (Mare), to be punished by
the fire of Gehenna. This view, of a double climax,
which has been held by foremost Eng. and Ger.
commentators, seems to give the passage symmetry
and gradation. But it is rejected among others by
T. K. Cheyne, who, following J. P. Peters, rear-
ranges the text by transferring the clause ‘“‘and
whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be
in danger of the council” to the end of the preceding
verse (ZB, IV, cols. 4001 {). There certainly does
not seem to be trustworthy external evidence to
prove that the terms ‘‘the judgment,” ‘‘the council,”
“the Gehenna of fire”? stand to each other in a rela-
tion of gradation, as lower and higher legal courts,
or would be so understood by Christ’s hearers.
What is beyond dispute is that Christ condemns
the use of disparaging and insulting epithets as a
supreme offence against the law of humanity, which
belongs to the same category as murder itself. It
should be added, however, that it is the underlying
feeling and not the verbal expression as such that
constitutes the sin. Hence Our Lord can, without
any real inconsistency, address two of His followers
as “foolish men” (Lk 24 25, dvéyro., andétoi,
practically equivalent to Raca, as is also James’s
expression, ‘‘O vain man,” Jas 2 20).

, D. Mrauu Enwarps

RACAL, ra‘kal (939, rdakhal, ‘“‘trader’): A
place in Judah, enumerated among ‘“‘the places
where David himself and his men were wont to
haunt,” to the elders of which he sent a share of his
spoils (1 S 30 29). The LXX reading “Carmel”
has been adopted, by many, because of the simi-


larity of the words in Heb (O27 and S173) and
because there was a Carmel in the neighborhood of
Hebron (Josh 15 55; 18 15 12), which figures
in the story of David’s adventures when pursued
by Saul (1 S 25) in a manner that makes it im-


probable that he would overlook the place in his
good fortune (AV ‘“Rachal’’), Nataan Isaacs


RACE, ris (yin, méric; &yav, agdn, Spdpos,
drémos). See Gamus, I, 2; II, 3.

RACES, ras‘iz. See Tass or Nations.

RACHAB, ra’kab (Paxdf, Rhachdb): AV; Gr
form of ‘“‘Rahab” (thus Mt 1 5 RV).


RACHAL,


RACHEL, ra’chel (3107, rahél, “ewe’; ‘Paya,
Rhachél [Gen 29 6; Jer 31 15, AV “‘Rahel’’]): Anan-
cestress of Israel, wife of Jacob, mother
of Joseph and Benjamin. Rachel was
the younger daughter of Laban, the
Aramaean, the brother of Jacob’s
mother; so Rachel and Jacob were cousins. They
met for the first time upon the arrival of Jacob at
Haran, when attracted by her beauty he imme-
diately fell in love with her, winning her love by
his chivalrous act related in Gen 29 10 ff. Accord-


ra‘/kal. See Racau.


1. Biog-
raphy


_ ing to the custom of the times Jacob contracted with


Laban for her possession, agreeing to serve him 7
years as the stipulated price (29 17-20). But
when the time had passed, Laban deceived Jacob
by giving him Leah instead of Rachel. When
Jacob protested, Laban gave him Rachel also, on
condition that Jacob serve 7 years more (29 21-29).
To her great dismay “Rachel was barren” (Gen 29
30.31), while Leah had children. Rachel, envious
of her sister, complained to Jacob, who reminded
her that children are the gift of God. Then Rachel
resorted to the expedient once employed by Sarah
under similar circumstances (16 2 ff); she bade
Jacob take her handmaid Bilhah, as a concubine,
to “obtain children by her” (30 3). Dan and
Naphtali were the offspring of this union. The evil
of polygamy is apparent from the dismal rivalry
arising between the two sisters, each seeking by
means of children to win the heart of Jacob. In her
eagerness to become a mother of children, Rachel
bargained with Leah for the mandrakes, or love-
apples of her son Reuben, but all to no avail (30 14).
Finally God heard her prayer and granted her her
heart’s desire, and she gave birth to her firstborn,
whom she named Joseph (30 22-24).

Some years after this, when Jacob fled from
Laban with his wives, the episode of the theft of
the teraphim of Laban by Rachel, related in 31 19.
34.35, occurred. She hoped by securing the house-
hold gods of her father to bring prosperity to her
own new household. Though she succeeded by
her cunning in concealing them from Laban, Jacob
later, upon discovering them, had them put away
(35 2-4). In spite of all, she continued to be the
favorite of Jacob, as is clearly evidenced by 33 2,
where we are told that he assigned to her the place
of greatest safety, and by his preference for Joseph,
her son. After the arrival in Canaan, while they
were on the way from Beth-el to Ephrath, i.e. Beth-
lehem, Rachel gave birth to her second son, Benja-
min, and died (35 16 ff).

In a marked manner Rachel’s character shows the
traits of her family, cunning and covetousness, so
evident in Laban, Rebekah and Jacob.
Though a believer in the true God
(30 6.8.22), she was yet given to the
superstitions of her country, the wor-
shipping of the teraphim, ete (31 19). The futility
of her efforts in resorting to self-help and super-
stitious expedients, the love and stronger faith of
her husband (35 2-4), were the providential means
of purifying her character. Her memory lived on


2. Char-
acter


Raddai
Rain


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA —


2524


in Israel long after she died. In Ruth 4 11, the
names of Rachel and Leah occur in the nuptial bene-
diction as the foundresses of the house of Israel.
Rachel’s Tomb Onn Map MAL A, magcebheth
kebhurath rahél): In Gen 35 20 we read: “Jacob
set up a pillar upon her grave: the same is the


Rachel's Tomb.


Pillar of Rachel’s grave unto this day,” i.e. the time
of the writer. Though the pillar, i.e sepulchral
monument, has long disappeared, the spot is marked
until this day, and Christians, Jews and Moham-
medans unite in honoring it. The present tomb,
which, apparently, is not older than the 15th cent.,
is bnilt in the style of the small-domed buildings
raised by Moslems in honor of their saints. It is
a rough structure of four square walls, each about
23 ft. long and 20 ft. high; the dome rising 10 it.
higher is used by Mohammedans for prayer, while
on Fridays the Jews make supplication before the
empty tomb within. It is doubtful, but probable,
that it marks the exact spot where Rachel was
buried. There are, apparently, two traditions as
to the location of the place. The oldest tradition,
based upon Gen 85 16-20; 48 7, points to a place
one mile N. of Bethlehem and 4 miles from Jerus.
Mt 2 18 speaks for this place, since the evangelist,
reporting the slaughter of the innocents of Beth-
lehem, represents Rachel as weeping for her chil-
dren from her neighboring grave. But according to
1S 10 2ff, which apparently represents another
tradition, the place of Rachel’s grave was on the
“border of Benjamin,” near Beth-el, about 10 miles
N. of Jerus, at another unknown Ephrath. This
location, some believe, is corroborated by Jer 31
15, where the prophet, in relating the leading away
of the people of Ramah, which was in Benjamin,
into captivity, introduces Rachel the mother of
that tribe as bewailing the fate of her descendants.
Those that believe this northern location to be the
place of Rachel’s grave take the words, “the same
is Beth-lehem,” in Gen 35 19; 48 7, to be an in-
correct gloss; but that is a mere assumption lack-
ing sufficient proof.

Mr. Nathan Strauss, of New York City, has purchased
the land surrounding Rachel's grave for the purpose of
erecting a Jewish university in the Holy Land.

S. D. Press

RADDAI, rad’a-i, ra-da’l ("3"1, radday, ‘beating
down’’{?]): The 5th of the 7 sons of Jesse, father of
David, according tol Ch 2 14 (LX'N Alex, “Rhad-
dai”; Luc., ‘“Rhedai’”’; others, ‘‘Zaddai”).


RADIANT, ra’di-ant (133, nahar, “to sparkle,”
ie. [fig.] be cheerful; hence [from the sheen of a


running stream], to flow, i.e. [fig.] assemble; flow
[together], be lightened): ARV substitutes the
active “radiant” for the passive ‘‘were lightened”
in Ps 34 5; Isa 60 5 (ERV, AV “‘flow together”).
As the earth and moon, both being dark, face a com-
mon sun and lighten each other, they are not only
lightened, butradiant. So with the believers, ‘“They
looked unto him [Jeh], and were radiant.” Thus
nahar combines the two ideas of being lightened and
flowing together. This appears, also, in a different
connection, in Isa 60 5, ‘‘Then thou shalt see and
be radiant.” “It is liquid light—light that ripples
and sparkles and runs across the face; .... the
light which a face catches from sparkling water”
(G. A. Smith, Isaiah, IT, 480). M. O. Evans


RAFT, raft. See Sarps anp Boats, IT, 1, (2).
RAFTER, raf’tér (Cant 117). See Ga.iERy;
Housk.


RAG: PI. in Prov 23 21, ‘‘Drowsiness will clothe
aman with rags” (D°P 4p, kra‘tm, “torn garment”;
ef 1 K 11 30), and figuratively in Isa 64 6 AV, “All
our righteousnesses are as filthy rags,’’ in the sense of
“tattered clothing” (332, beghedh, RV “garment”).
In Jer 38 11.12 ARV translates MAM , sthabhah, as
‘vag’ (AV, ERV “old cast clout’’), while AV, ERV
use “rotten rag” for M2, melah (ARV ‘worn-out
garment”). Both shabha@h and melah mean ‘‘worn
out.”


RAGAN, ra’g6 (‘Payot [WH], ‘Paya, Rhagat):
AV; Gr form of “Reu” (thus RV) (Lk 3 35).


RAGES, ra’jéz, RAGAU, ri’g6 (“Rages,” Tob
114; 41.20; 55; 69.12; 92; ‘Ragau,” Jth
15.15; ‘Payal, Rhagat, ‘Pdya, Rhdga,
1. Location ‘Péyn, Rhdgé, ‘Payat, Rhagawi; in Da-
rius’ Behistun Inscriptions, IJ, 71,72,
Raga, a province; in Avesta, Vend. 1, 15, Ragha, city
and province; perhaps, ‘the excellent”): In Hastern
Media, one forced march from Caspian Gates, 11
days’ journey from Ecbatana, 53 miles S. of present,
Tehran; the capital of the province of the same
name, though by Ptolemy called Rhagiana. :
_ (1) Ancient—A very ancient city, the_tradi-
tional birthplace of Zoroaster (Zarathustra; Pahlavi
Vendidad, Zad sparad XVI, 12, and
2. History Dabistén t Mazahib). In Yasna XIX,
18, of the Avesta, it is thus mentioned:
“The Zoroastrian, four-chief-possessing Ragha, hers
are the royal chicfs, both the house-chief, the
village-chief, and the town-chief: Zoroaster is the
fonrth.” In Vend. I, 15: “As the tenth, the best
of both districts and cities, I, who am Ahura Mazda,
did create Ragha, which possesses the three class-
es,” i.e. fire-priests, charioteers, husbandmen.
Later it was the religious center of magism. A
large colony of captive Israelites settled there.
Destroyed in Alexander’s time, it was rebuilt by
Scleucus Nicator (c 300 BC), who named it Europos.
Later, Arsaces restored it and named it Arsacia.

(2) Mediaeval—tIn the early Middle Ages Ragha,
then called Rai, was a great literary and often political
center with a large population. It was the birthplace
of Hariin‘al Rashid (763 AD). It was seized and plun-
dered (1029 AD) by Sultan Mahmiid, but became Tugh-
ril’s capital. In the Vis o Ramin (c 1048 AD) it is an
important place, 10 days’ journey across the Kavir
desert from Merv. It was a small provincial town in
about 1200 AD. It was sacked by Mongols In 1220
AD and entirely destroyed under Ghazan Khan c 1295.
A Zoroastrian community lived there in 1278 AD, one
of whom composed the Zardtusht-Nadmah.

(3) Present. condition.—Near the ruins there now
stands the village of Shah‘ Abdu’l ‘Azim, connected with
Tehran by the only railway in Persia (opened in 1888).

Litzerature.—Ptolemy, Diodorus Siculus, Pliny,
Strabo; Ibnu'l Athir, Jami'u 't Tawartkh, Tarikhi


2525


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Raddai
Rain


Jahan-gusha Ydgit; Justi, Iranisches Namenbuch; E.
G. Browne, Literary Hist of Persia; modern travelers.
. St. Cuarr TisDALL
RAGUEL, ra-gii’el (‘PayounA, Rhagouél): “The
friend of God,’’ of Ecbatana, the husband of Edna,
father of Sarah, and father-in-law of Tobias (Tob
3 7.17; 6 10; 7 2f; 14 12). In 7 2 he is called
cousin of Tobit, and in Tob 6 10 AV he is erro-
neously represented as ‘‘cousin’’ of Tobias= “‘kins-
man” in RV. In En 20 4 Raguel appears as one
of the archangels, perhaps by confusion for Raphael
an 3.17). Another form of the name is REVEL
q.v.).


RAGUEL, ra-gi’el, rag’t-el (ONIN, r'wal;
LXX Rhagauél): The Midianite hdthén, i.e. either
father-in-law or brother-in-law of Moses (Nu 10 29
AV, RV “Reuel’’), the father of Hobab, called a Ken-
ite, who is likewise described as a Adthén of Moses
(Jgs 411). See Renationsurps, Famity. Moses’
wite’s father is called re‘#’élin Ex 2 18 where Lucian
reads “Tothor” and EV ‘‘Reuel,”’ which translitera-
tion is adopted in RV in Nu 10 29 also. In other
passages the Aathén of Moses is called ‘“‘Jether’’ or
“Jethro.””’ Among the harmonizations suggested
the followmg are worthy of consideration: (a) that
all are names or perhaps titles of one man (Rashi);
(b) that Reuel was the father of Hobab and Jethro,
that Jethro was the father-in-law of Moses, and
that the word ‘father’ is used for grandfather in
Ex 2 18; (ec) that Reuel was the father-in-law and
Jethro and Hobab brothers-in-law; (d) that either
Reuel or Hobab is to be identified with Jethro.
None of these views is free from difficulty, nor is
the view of those who would give Jethro as the
name in E and Reuel as that in J andJE. Seealso
REVEL. Natuan Isaacs


RAHAB, ra‘hab:

(1) (AM, ra@habh, “broad”; in Jos, Ant, V, i,
2, 7, ‘PéxaB, Rhdchab; He 11 31 and Jas 2 25,
‘Pdaf, Rhdab): A zandh, that is either a “harlot,”
or, according to some, an ‘innkeeper’ in Jericho
(LXX wéprn, porné, “harlot”). The two spies sent
by Joshua from Shittim came into her house and
lodged there (Josh 2 1). She refused to betray
them to the king of Jericho, and when he demanded
them, she hid them on the roof of her house with
stalks of flax that she had laid inordertodry. She
pretended that they had escaped before the shutting
of the gate, and threw their pursuers off their track.
She then told the spies of the fear that the coming
of the Israelites had caused in the minds of the
Canaanites—‘Our hearts did melt .... for Jeh
your God, he is God in heaven above, and on earth
beneath’’—and asked that the men promise to
spare her father, mother, brothers and sisters, and
all that they had. They promised her to spare
them provided they would remain in her house and
provided she would keep their business secret.
‘Thereupon she let them down by a cord through the
window, her house being built upon the town wall,
and gave them directions to make good their
escape (Josh 2 1-24). True to their promise, the
Israelites under Joshua spared Rahab and her family
(Josh 6 16f AV); ‘‘And,” says the author of
Josh, “she dwelleth in Israel even unto this day.”
Her story appealed strongly to the imagination
of the people of later times. He 11 31 speaks of
her as having been saved by faith; James, on the
other hand, in demonstrating that a man is justified
by works and not. by faith only, curiously chooses
the same example (Jas 2 25). Jewish tradition
has been kindly disposed toward Rahab; one hy-
pothesis goes so far as to make her the wife of
Joshua himself (Jew Enc, 8.v.). Naturally then
the other tr of zdndh, deriving it from zdn, ‘‘to feed,”


instead of zdndh, ‘to be a harlot,” has been pre-
ferred by some of the commentators.

(2) (Pdxa8, Rhdchab): Jos, Ant, V, 1, 2, 7, so
spells the name of (1) (LXX and NT contra). The
wife of Salmon and mother of Booz (Boaz) accord-
ing to the genealogy in Mt 15. Query, whether
there was a tradition identifying (1) and (2); see
Lightfoot, Horae Hebon Mt 1 5.

(3) (AN, rahabh, lit. ‘storm,’ “arrogance’’):
A mythical sea-monster, probably referred to in
several passages where the word is tr’ as a common
noun “pride’ (Job 9 13), “the proud” (Job 26 12;
cf Ps 89 10). Itis used in parallelism with tannin,
“the dragon” (lsa 51 9). It is most familiar as
anemblem of Egypt, ‘the boaster that sitteth still’
(Isa 30 7; Ps 87 4; cf 89 10). The Talm in
Babha’ Bathré’ speaks of rahabh as sar ha-yadm,
“master of the sea.’ See also ASTRONOMY.

Natuan Isaacs

RAHAM, ra’ham (OD, raham, “pity,” “love’’):

Son of Shema, and father of Jorkeam (1 Ch 2 44).


RAHEL, ra’hel (Jer 31 15 AV). See Racwet.
RAID, rad (1 8 27 10). See War, 3.


RAIL, ral, RAILING, ral’ing, RAILER, rl’ér:
To “rail” on (in modern usage ‘‘against’”’) anyone
is to use insolent or reproachful language toward
one. It occurs in the OT as the tr of D7, hdraph
(2 Ch 32 17, “letters to rail on Jeh’’), and of DY,
‘tt ( S 26 14, of Nabal, “the railed at them,”
ERV “flew upon them,” m ‘railed on’). In the
NT “to rail’ is the tr of Bracdnpuéw, blasphéméa
(Mk 15 29; Lk 23 39; “railing,” 1 Tim 6 4;
2 Pet 211; Jude ver 9). The word loidoria,
rendered ‘railing’ in 1 Pet 3 9 AV, is in RV ‘‘re-
viling,” and loidaros, “railer,” in 1 Cor 5 11 is in


RV “reviler.’ SeealsoRaca. W. L. WALKER
RAIMENT, ra’ment.


RAIMENT, SOFT (padaxés, malakés): In Mt 11
8 EV, where Jesus, speaking of John the Baptist,
asks ‘‘What went ye out to see? a man clothed
in soft raiment ?” where ‘‘raiment,’’ though implied,
is not expressed in the best text, but was probably
added from Lk 7 25 ||. It is equivalent to ‘‘ele-
gant clothing,” such as courtiers wore, as shown by
the words following, ‘Behold, they that wear soft
raiment are in kings’ houses.” John had bravely
refused to play courtier and had gone to prison for
it. In the early days of Herod the Great some
scribes who attached themselves to him laid aside
their usual plain clothing and wore the gorgeous
raiment of courtiers (Jost, in Plumptre).

Geo. B. Eacer


RAIN, ran (VQ), mataér, Arab.


, matar,
“rain,” DWA, geshem, “heavy rain,” MV, méreh,
“early rain,’ ‘T]1, ydareh, “former


See Dress.


1. Water- rain,” wipen, malkésh, “latter rain”;
Supply in Ppéxw, bréchd, terds, huetds): In
Egypt and Egypt there is little or no rainfall, the
Palestine water for vegetation being supplied


in great abundance by the river
Nile; but in Syria and Pa! there are no large rivers,
and the people have to depend entirely on the fall
of rain for water for themselves, their animals and
their fields. The children of lsrael when in Egypt
were promised by Jeh a land which “drinketh
water of the rain of heaven” (Dt 11 11). Springs
and fountains are found in most of the valleys, but
the flow of the springs depends direetly on the fall
of rain or snow in the mountains.


Rain
Ramah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2526


The cultivation of the land in Pal is practically
dry farming in most of the districts, but even then
some water is necessary, so that there


2. Impor- may be moisture in the soil. In the
tance of summer months there is no rain, so
Rain in that the rains of the spring and fall
Season seasons are absolutely essential for


starting and maturing the crops. The

lack of this rain in the proper time has often been
the cause of complete failure of the harvest. A
small difference in the amount of these seasonal
rains makes a large difference in the possibility of
growing various crops without irrigation. Ells-
worth Huntington has insisted on this point with
great care in his very important work, Pal and Its
Transformation. The promise of prosperity is
given in the assurance of “rain in due season”
(Lev 26 4 AV). The withholding of rain according
to the prophecy of Elijah (1 K 17 1) caused the
mountain streams to dry up (1 K 17 7), and cer-
tain famine ensued. A glimpse of the terrible
suffering for lack of water at that time is given us.
The people were uncertain of another meal (1 K
17 12), and the animals were perishing (1 K 18 5).
Pal and Syria are on the borderland between the
sea and the desert, and besides are so mountainous,
that they not only have a great range


3. Amount of rainfall in different years, but a |


of Rainfall great variation in different parts of the
country.


The amount of rain on the western slopes is compar-
ahle with thatin England and America, varying from 25
to 40 in. per annum, but it falls mostly in the four
winter months, when the downpour is often very heavy,
giving oftentimes from 12 to 16 in. in a month. On the
eastern slopes it is much less, varying from 8 to 20
in. per annum. The highest amount falls in the
mountains of Lebanon where it averages ahout 50 in.
In Beirfit_ the yearly average fs 35.87 in. As we go
8. from Syria, the amount decreases (Haifa 27.75,
Jaffa 22.39, Gaza 17.61), while in the Sinaitic Penin-
sula there is little or none. Going from W. to E. the
change is much more sudden, owing to the mountains
which stop the clouds. In Damascus the average is
less than 10 in. In Jerus the average for 50 years is
26.16 in., and the range is from 13.39 in 1870 to 41.62
In 1897. The yearly records as given hy J. Glaisher
and A. Datzl in PEFQ from 1861 to 1910, 50 years, are
given in the accompanying tahle.


RAINFALL IN JERUSALEM IN INCHES


Amount|}} Year |Amount|! Year {Amount
27.30 1878. 32.21 || 1895. 23.25
21.86 1879 18.04 |) 1896. 32.90
26.54 1880. 32.11 1897 41.62
15.51 1881. 16.50 1898...) 28.66
18.19 1882. 26.72 || 1899. 22.43
18.55 1883 31.92 1900...) 21.20
29.42 1884. 23.96 1901. 17.42
29.10 1885. 29.47 1902. 25.51
18.61 1886. 31.69 1903. 18.04
13.39 1887. 29.81 1904...) 34.48
23.57 1888. 37.79 |} 1905. 34.22
22.26 1889. 13.56 1906. 28.14
22.72 1890...} 35.51 1907. 27.22
29.75 || 1891...) 34.72 1908. 31.87
27.01 1892...) 31.23 1909. 21.13
14.41 1893. 30.54 1910 24.64
26.00 1894. 35.38


The amount of rainfall in ancient times was
probably about the same as in present times, though
it may have been distributed somewhat differently
through the year, as suggested by Huntington.
Conder maintains that the present amount would
have been sufficient to support the ancient cities
(Tent-Work in Pal).
fewer now, but meteorologists agree that trees do
not produce rain.

The rainfall is largely on the western slopes of the
mountains facing the sea, while on the eastern
slopes there is very little. The moisture-laden air
comes up from the sea with the west and southwest


Trees are without doubt |


wind. When these currents strike the hills they
are thrown higher up into the cooler strata, and

the moisture condenses to form clouds
4, Dry and and rain which increases on the higher
Rainy Sea- levels. Having passed the ridge of the
sons hills, the currents descend on the other

side to warmer levels, where the mois-
ture is easily held in the form of vapor so that no
rain falls and few clouds are seen, except in the
cold mid-winter months.

The summer months are practically rainless, with
very few clouds appearing in the sky. From May
1 to the middle of October one can be sure of no
rain; ‘‘The winter is past; the rain is over’ (Cant
2 11), so many sleep on the roofs of the houses or
in tents of leaves and branches in the fields and vine-
yards throughout the summer. The continuous
hot droughts make the people appreciate the springs
and fountains of fresh running water and the cool
shade of rock and tree.

The rainy season from October to May may be
divided into three parts, the former, the winter,
and the latter rains, and they are often referred to
under these names in the OT.

The “former rains” are the showers of October
and the first part of November. They soften the
parched ground so that the winter grain may be
sown before the heavy continuous rains set in.
The main bulk of the rain falls in the months of
December, January and February. Although in
these months the rains are frequent and heavy, a
dark, foggy day is seldom seen. The “latter rains”
of April are the most highly appreciated, because
they ripen the fruit and stay the drought of summer.
They were considered a special blessing: Jeh ‘will
come .... as the latter rain that watereth the
earth” (Hos 6 8); “They opened their mouth wide
as for the latter rain” (Job 29 23); and as a reason
for worshipping Jeh who sent them, “Let us now
fear Jeh our God, that giveth rain, both the former
and the latter, in its season” (Jer 5 24).

The rain storms always come from the sea with
a west or southwest wind. The east wind is a hot
wind and the “north wind driveth away rain”
(Prov 25 23 AV). ‘Fair weather cometh out of
the north” (Job 37 22 AV).

The Psalmist recognizes that the “showers that
water the earth” (Ps 72 6) sre among the choicest

blessings from the hand of Jeh: ‘‘The
5. Biblical early rain covereth it with blessings”
Uses (Ps 84 6). The severest punishment

of Jeh was to withhold the rain, as in
the time of Ahab and Elijah, when the usual rain
did not fall for three years (1 K 17); “the anger
of Jeh be kindled against you, and he shut up the
heavens, so that there shall be no rain, and the land
shall not yield its fruit; and ye perish quickly”
(Dt 11.17). Too much rain is also a punishment,
as witness the flood (Gen 7 4) and the plague of
rain and hail (Ezr 10 9). Sending of rain was a
reward for worship and obedience: ‘‘Jeh will open
unto thee his good treasure, the heavens, to give
the rain of thy land in its season, and to bless all
the work of thy hand” (Dt 28 12). Jeh controls
the elements and commands the rain: “He made a
decree for the rain” (Job 28 26); “For he saith
to the snow, Fall thou on the earth; likewise to
the shower of rain” (Job 37 6).

LiItERATURE.—PEFQ; meteorological observations
from the Dead Sea, Jerus, Jaffa and Tiberias; various
observers; Zeitschrift des deutschen Paldstina-Vereins;
H. Hilderscheid, Die Niederschlagsverhdltnisse Paldstinas
in alier and neuer Zeit; O Conder, Tent-Work in
Pal; Edward Hull, Mount Seir, Sinai and Western Pal;
Ellsworth Huntington, Pal and Its Transformation; hul-


letin of the Syrian Protestant College Ohservatory,
Meteorological Observations in Beirut and Syria.


ALFRED H. Joy


2527


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Rain
Ramah


RAINBOW, ran’bé (MUP, kesheth, trd “a bow”;
tps, iris, “rainbow’’): As most of the rainfall in
Pal is in the form of short heavy showers it is often
accompanied by the rainbow. Most beautiful
double bows are often seen, and occasionally _the
moon is bright enough to produce the bow. It is
rather remarkable that there are so few references
to the rainbow in the Bible. The Heb kesheth is
the ordinary word for a bow, there being no special
word for rainbow.

_ The interpretation of the significance of the bow
in the sky is given at the close of the story of the
flood, where it is called ‘‘the token of the covenant”
of Jeh with Noah that there should be no more flood:
“Tdoset my bow inthe cloud, ..... andthe waters
shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh”
(Gen 9 13.15). This addition to the story of the
flood is not found in other mythical accounts. The
foundation for the interpretation of the bow in this


way seems to be that while His bow is hung in the |


sky God must be at peace with His people. The
glory of God is likened to ‘‘the appearance of the
bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain” (Ezk 1
28). The rainbow forms a striking part of the
vision in Rev 43: “And there was a rainbow round
about the throne.” Atrrep H. Joy


RAISE, raz: “To raise’ in the OT is most fre-
quently the tr of the Hiphil form of DAP, kam, “to
cause to arise,” e.g. raising up seed (Gen 38 8),
a prophet (Dt 18 18), judges (Jgs 2 16.18), etc;
also of “19, “dr, “to awake,” “stir up’ (zr 1 5
AV; Isa 41 2, etc), with other words. In the NT
the chicf words are éyelpw, egeird, “to awaken,”
“arouse” (Mt 3 9; Lk 1 69; 3 8, etc), frequently
of raising the dead; and dvlornm, anistémi (Mt 22
24; Jn 6 39, ete; Acts 2 24 [30 AV], ete), with
compounds of the former. Among the RV changes
may be noted, ‘to stir the fire” for “from raising’


(Hos 7 4); “raiseth high his gate” for “exalteth |


his gate’ (Prov 17 19); ARV, ‘‘can it be raised
from the roots thercof” for ‘pluck it up by the
roots thereof” (Ezk 17 9 AV and ERV); “raised
up” for “rise again” (Mt 20 19; cf Mt 26 32;
Rom 8 34; Col 3 1). W. L. WaLKER


RAISIN-CAKES, ra’z’n-kaks: RV gives this
rendering for AV “foundations” in Isa 16 7 (Heb
‘dshishah from ’dshash, ‘‘to found,’ “make firm,”
press”). The trade in these would cease through
the desolation of the vineyards. For AV “‘flagons of
wine” in Hos 3 1, RV gives “cakes of raisins,”
such as were offercd to the gods of the land, the
givers of the grape (cf Cant 25). See next article.


RAISINS, ri’z'nz: (1) D "PIAL, cimmakim; o7a-
plies, slaphides, tr’ “dried grapes,’ Nu 6 3;
mentioned in all other references as a portable
food for a mareh or journey. Abigail supplied
David with “a hundred clusters of raisins,’’ among
other things, in the wilderness of Paran (1 S 26
18); David gave two clusters of raisins to a
starving Egyp slave of the Amalekites at Besor
(30 12); raisins formed part of the provision
brought to David at Hebron for his army (1 Ch
12 40); Ziba supplied David, when flying from
Absalom, with a hundred clusters of raisins (28
16 1). (2) TMUPWS, 'dshishah, something “pressed
together,” hence a “cake.” In Hos 3 1, mention
is made of DIA7D "WWN, 'dshishé ‘dnabhim (wéu-
para pera otapidos, pémmaia meld staphidos),
“cakes of raisins’: “Jch loveth the children of
Israel, though they turn unto other gods, and love
{m “or them that love’] cakes of raisins.” These
are supposed to have been cakes of dried, com-
pressed grapes offered to false gods. Gratz con-


siders that the Heb words are a corruption of
dshérim and hammanim (“sun images”). Cflsa 17
8; 27.9. In other passages ‘cakes’ stands alone
without “raisins,” but the tr ‘cakes of raisins’’ is
given in 28619; 1Ch 163; Cant 25 (AV
“flagons’”’); Isa 16 7m “foundations.”

Raisins are today, as of old, prepared in con-
siderable quantities in Pal, esp. at es-Salt, E. of the
Jordan. The bunches of grapes are dipped in a
strong solution of potash before being dried.

E. W. G. MastTErMAN

RAKEM, ra’kem (O)7, rakem, the pausal form
of OP, rekem): The cponym of a clan of Machir
(1 Ch 7 16). Sce Rexem.


RAKKATH, rak’ath (NP, rakkath; B, ‘OQpada-
Saxé0, Omaihadakéth, A, ‘Pexxd®, Rhekkdth): The
Gr is obviously the result of confusing the two
names Rakkath and Hammath, taking r in the
former for d. Rakkath was one of the fortified
cities in Naphtali (Josh 19 35). It is named be-
tween Hammath and Chinnereth. Hammath is
identified with the hot baths to the S. of Tiberias.
There are traces of ancient fortifications here.
The rabbis think that Tiberias was built on the site
of Rakkath. Certain it is that Herod’s town was
built upon an ancient site, the graves of the old
inhabitants being disturbed in digging the new
foundations (Neubauer, Géog. du Talm, 208).

: W. Ewine

RAKKON, rak’on (7PM), ha-rakkan; ‘lepdkwv,
Hierdkin). See Mr-JarKxon.


RAM, ram (05%, ram, “high,” ‘“exalted’’):

(1) An ancestor of David (Ruth 4 19 ['Appd»,
Arrdn]; Mt 13.4 [Apdu, Ardm]); in 1 Ch 2 9
he is called the “brother,” but in ver 25, the ‘“‘son of
Jerahmeel” (cf ver 27). Ram as the son of Hezron
appears more likely than Ram the son of Jerahmeel,
since, according to the narratives of 1 and 2 §,
David cannot have been a Jerahmcelite.

(2) Name of Elihu’s family (Job 32 2). It is an
open question as to whether Ram should be taken
as a purely fictitious name, invented by the author
of the Elihu speeches, or whether it is that of some
obscure Arab tribe. In Gen 22 21 Aram is a
nephew of Buz (cf Elihu the Buzite), and the con-
jecture was at one time advanced that Ram was a
contraction of Aram; but this theory is no longer
held to be tenable. The suggestion that the initial
a (&) has been changed by a scribal error into h
(73) is more acceptable. Rashi, the rabbinical com-
mentator, takes the quaint position that Ram is
identical with Abraham. Horace J. Woir


RAM, ram: (1) The a word is 8 , ayil,
which is remarkably near to 2°8%, ’ayydl, ‘deer’
(cf Lat caper, capra, “goat,”’ and capreolus, “wild
goat” or “roe-buck”; also Gr dopxds, dorkds,
“roe-buck” or “gazelle’). (2) 2%, d*khar, lit.
“male” (Ezr 6 9.17; 717). (8) 2, kar, ‘“bat-
tering ram” (Ezk 4 2; 21 22); elsewhere “lamb”
(Dt 32 14, etc). (4) TAY, ‘atétidh, properly “‘he-
goat” (“ram,”’ Gen 31 10.12 AV). Sce Suner.


RAM, BATTERING. Sec Since.


RAMA, ra’ma (‘Papé, Rhamd): AV; Gr form of
Raman (q.v.) (Mt 2 18).


RAMAH, ra’ma (M000, hé-rdmah, without the
def. art. only in Neh 11 33; Jer 31 15): Thename
denotes height, from root D1, .rdm, “to be high,”
and the towns to which it applied seem all to have
stood on elevated sites.


Ramah
Ramoth-Gilead


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2528


(1) B,’Apayr, Araél, A, ‘Paud, Rhamd: A fenced
city in the lot assigned to Naphtali (Josh 19 36).
Only in this passage is the place referred to. It is
probably identical with the modern er-Rameh, a
large Christian village on the highway from Safed
to the coast, about 8 miles W.8.W. of that city.
To the N. rises the mountain range which forms the
southern boundary of Upper Galilee. In the valley
to the S. there is much rich land cultivated by the
villagers The olives grown here are very fine, and
fruitful vineyards cover many of the surrounding
slopes. No remains of antiquity are to be seen
above ground; but the site is one likely to have
been occupied in ancient times.

(2) ‘Pawd, Rhamd: A city that is mentioned only
once, on the boundary of Asher (Josh 19 29).
The line of the boundary cannot be followed with
certainty; but perhaps we may identify Ramah
with the modern Ramiyeh, a village situated on a
hill which rises in the midst of a hollow, some 13
miles §.E. of Tyre, and 12 miles E. of the Ladder
of Tyre. To the 8.W. is a marshy lake which dries
upinsummer. Traces of antiquity are found in the
cisterns, a large reservoir and many sarcophagi.
To the W. is the high hill Belat, with ancient ruins,
and remains of a temple of which several columns
are still in situ.

(3) B, ‘Paud, Rhamd, A, "lazd, Tamd, and other
forms: A city in the territory of Benjamim named
between Gibeon and Beeroth (Josh 18 25). The
Levite thought of it as a possible resting-place for
himself and his concubine on their northward jour-
ney (Jgs 19 13). The palm tree of Deborah was
between this and Bethel (Jgs 4 5). Baasha, king
of Samaria, sought to fortify Ramah against Asa,
king of Judah. The latter frustrated the attempt,
and carried off the materials which Baasha had
collected, and with them fortified against him Geba
of Benjamin and Mizpah (1 K 15 17; 2 Ch 16
5). Here the captain of Nebuchadnezzar’s guard
released Jeremiah after he had been carried in bonds
from Jerus (Jer 40 1). 1t figures in Isaiah’s picture
of the Assyrians’ approach (10 29). It is named
by Hosea in connection with Gibeah (5 8), and
is mentioned as being reoccupied after the exile
(Ezr 2 26; Neh 7 30). It was near the traditional
tomb of Rachel (Jer 31 15; ef1 8 10 2; Mt 2 18,
AV “Rama’’).

From the passages cited we gather that Ramah
lay some distance to the N. of Gibeah, and not far
from Gibeon and Beeroth. The first is identified
with Tell el-Fil, about 3 miles N. of Jerus. Two
miles farther N. is er-Ram. Gibeon (el-Jib) is
about 3 miles W. of er-Radm, and Beeroth (el-
Bireh) is about 4 miles to the N. Onom places
Ramah 6 Rom miles N. of Jerus; while Jos (Ant,
VIII, xii, 3) says it lay 40 furlongs from the city.
All this points definitely to identification with er-
Ram. The modern village crowns a high limestone
hill to the 8. of the road, a position of great strength.
W. of the village is an ancient reservoir. In the
hill are cisterns, and a good well to the S.

(4) "Apapataiu, Aramathaim: The home of
Elkanah and Hannah, and the birthplace of Sam-
uel (1 8 119; 2 1i, etc). In1§ 1 1 it is called
“Ramathaim-zophim” ("DW DN, ha-rama-
thayim-cophim). The phrase as it stands is
grammatically incorrect, and suggests tampering
with the text. It might possihly be tr4 ‘Rama-
thaim of the Zuphites.” It was in Mt. Ephraim,
within accessible distance of Shiloh, whither Sam-


uel’s parents went up from year to year to wor- |


ship and to sacrifice (1 3). From Ramah as a
center Samnel went ou circuit annually, to judge
Israel, to Bethel, Gilgal and Mizpah (7 16f). It
is very probable that this is the city in which,


guided by his servant, Saul first made the ac-
quaintance of Samuel (9 6.10), where there was a
high place (ver 12). Hither at all events came the
elders of Israel with their demand that a king should
be set over them (8 4f). After his final break with
Saul, Samuel retired in sorrow to Ramah (15 34f).
Here, in Naioth, David found asylum with Samuel
from the mad king (19 18, etc), and hence he fled
on his ill-starred visit to Nob (20 1). In his native
city the dust of the dead Samuel was laid (26 1;
28 3). In 1 Macc 11 34 it is named as one of the
three toparchies along with Aphaerema and Lydda,
which were added to Judaea from the country of
Samaria in 145 BC. Onom places it near Diospolis
(Euseb.) in the district of Timnah (Jerome).

There are two serious rivals for the honor of
representing the ancient Ramah. (@) Bett Rima,
a village occupying a height 18 miles E.N.E. of
Lydda (Diospolis), 12 miles W. of Shiloh, and about
the same distance N.W. of Bethel. This identifi-
cation has the support of G. A. Smith (HGHL,
254), and Buhl (GAP, 170). (6) Ramallah, a large
and prosperous village occupying a lofty position
with ancient remains. It commands a wide pros-
pect, esp. to the W. It lies about 8 miles N. of
Jerus, 3 W. of Bethel, and 12 8.W. of Shiloh. The
name meaning ‘‘the height” or “high place of God”
may be reminiscent of the high place in the city
where Sau] found Samuel. In other respects it
agrees very well with the Bib. data.

Claims have also been advanced on behalf of
Ramleh, a village 2 miles S.W. of Lydda, in the
plain of Sharon. This, however, is out of the
question, as the place did not exist before Arab
times. Others support identification with Neby
Samwil, which more probably represents the an-
cient M1zpPaH (q.v.).

(5) Ramah of the South, AV “Ramath of the
South”: Ramath is the construct form of Ramah
(Josh 19 8) (242 MONT, ra’math neghebdh; Baued
xara Ba, Bameth katd liba). A city in that part of
the territory of Judah which was allotted to Simeon.
It stands here in apposition to Baalath-beer,
and is probably a second name for the same place.
It seems to correspond also with ‘‘Ramoth [pl.] of
the South” (1 S 30 27), a place to which David
sent a share of the spoil taken from the Amalekites.
In this passage LXX retains the sing. form, Rhamdé
notou. Identification has been suggested with
Kubbet_et-Baul about 37 miles 8. of Hebron; and
with Kurnub a little farther 8. There is no sub-
stantial ground for either identification.

(6) B, ‘Peuuw?, Rhemméth, A, ‘Pauw, Rhaméth:


| Ramah in 2 Kk 8 29; 2 Ch 22 6, is a contraction


of Ramoth-gilead. W. Ewrna
RAMATH, ra’math, OF THE SOUTH (Josh 19
8 AV). See Ramag, (5).


RAMATH-LEHI, ra/math-lé’ht (> M07, ra-
math lehi, “the hill” or “height of Lehi’; "Avalpeors
ciayovos, Anairesis siagénos): So the place is said
to have been called where Samson threw away
the jaw-bone of an ass, with which he had slain
1,000 Philis (Jgs 15 17). LXX seems to have
supposed that the name referred to the ‘“‘heaving”
or throwing up of the jaw-bone. The Heb, how-
ever, corresponds to the form used in other place-
names, such as Ramath-mizpeh, and must be read
as “Ramah of Lehi.” The name Lehi may have
been given because of some real or imagined like-
ness in the place to the shape of a jaw-bone (Jgs
16 9.14.19). 1t may have heen in Wédy es-Sarar,
not far from Zorah and Timnath; but the available
data do not permit of certain identification. See
Jaw-BoNE; LEHI. W. Ewine


2529


Ramoth-Gilead


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Ramah


RAMATH-MIZPEH, ri’math-miz’pe (M27
“BLOM, ramath ha-micpeh; B, “ApaBa® kara tiv
Maconpa, Arabdth katd tén Masséphd, A, Papobd
.... Macda, Rhamdth .... Masphd): A place
mentioned in Josh 13 26 in a statement of the
boundary of Gad, between Heshbon and Betonim.
It may possibly be identical with Mizpag, (1).


RAMATHAIM, ra-ma-tha’im (1 Macc 11 34;
AV Ramathem, ram/a-them). See Raman, (4).


RAMATHAIM-ZOPHIM, r4-ma-thi’im-zd’fim.
See Ramauy, (4).


RAMATHITE, ri’math-it ("NON, hd-rdmathi;
B, 6 & ‘Pana, ho ek Rhaél, A, 6 ‘Papabaios, ha Rha-
mathaios): So Shimei is called who was set by David
over the vineyards (1 Ch 27 27). There is nothing
to show to which Ramah he belonged.

RAMESES, ram’é-séz, ra-mé’séz. See Raamses.

RAMIAN, ra-mi’a (TIMDI, ramyah, “Jeh hath
loosened” or ‘‘Jch is high’): One of the Israelites,
of the sons of Parosh, mentioned in the register of
those who had offended in the matter of foreign
marriages (Ezr 10 25). The form of the name in
1 Esd (9 26), ““Hiermas,” presupposes a Heb form
yrremyah or possibly yirm’yah = ‘‘Jeremiah.”’


RAMOTH, ri‘moth:

(1) MVAN7, ra’math; 4 ‘Pauses, hé Rhamdth: A
city in the territory of Issachar assigned to the
Gershonite Levites (1 Ch 6 73), mentioned be-
tween Daberath and Anem. It seems to corre-
spond to “Remeth” in ‘Josh 19 21, and to “Jar-
muth” in 21 29, and is possibly identical with
er-Rameh about 11 miles 8.W. of Jenin.

(2) Ramoth of the South. See Ramang, (5).

(3) Ramoth in Gilead. See RAMOTH-GILEAD.


RAMOTH, ri’moth (M101, rémoth, Keré for
yremah [Ezr 10 29 AV]; RVm K*thibh makes
the name similar to those in vs 26.27): One of
the offenders in the matter of foreign marriages.
ERV and ARV, adopting K°¢thibh, read JerEMoTH


(q.v.).


RAMOTH (Job 28 18 AVm).
CIOUS.


See STonzEs, PRE-


RAMOTH-GILEAD, ra’moth-gil’é-ad (n’a7
495%, ramith gil'adh; B, ‘Peppad Tadadd, Rhemmdth
Galadd, A, ‘Pappo8, Rhamméth, and other forms):
A great and strong city IE. of the Jordan in the terri-
tory of Gad, which played an important part in
the wars of Israel. It is first mentioned in con-
nection with the appointment of the Cities of Refuge
(Dt 4 43; Josh 20 8). It was assigned to the
Merarite Levites (Josh 21 38; 1 Ch 6 80). In
these four passages it is called “Ramoth in Gilead”
(a9293 '", ramath ba-gil‘ddh). This form is given
wrongly by AV in 1 K 22 3. In all other places
the form “Ramoth-gilead” is used.

Here Ben-geber was placed in charge of one
of Solomon’s administrative districts (1 Ix 4 13),

which included Havvoth-jair and “the
1; History region of Argob, which is in Bashan.

The city was taken from Omri by the
Syrians under Ben-hadad I (Ané, VIIL, xv, 3 ff), and
even after the defeat of Ben-hadad at Aphek they
remained masters of this fortress. In order to
recover it for Israel Ahab invited Jehoshaphat of
Judah to accompany him in a campaign. Despite


the discouragement of Micaiah, the royal pair set
out on the disastrous enterprise. In their attack
on the city Ahab fought in disguise, but was mor-
tally wounded by an arrow from a bow drawn “at
a venture’ (1 K 22 1-40; 2 Ch 18). The at-
tempt was renewed by Ahab’s son Joram; but his
father’s ill fortune followed him, and, heavily
wounded, he retired for healing to Jezreel (2 K 8
28 ff; 2 Ch 22 5f). During the king’s absence
from the camp at Ramoth-gilead Jehu was there
anointed king of Israel by Elisha (2 IX 9 1 ff;
2 Ch 22 7). He proved a swift instrument of ven-
geance against the doomed house of Ahab. Accord-
ing to Jos (Ant, LX, vi, 1) the city was taken before
Joram’s departure. This is confirmed by 2 Kk 9
14 ff. The place is not mentioned again, unless,
indeed, it be identical with ‘‘Mizpeh” in 1 Macc
6 35.

It is just possible that Ramoth-gilead corre-


| sponds to Mizpau, (1), and to RamMaTH-mizpru.


The spot where Laban and Jacob
parted is called both Galeed and
Mizpah. Ramath may become Ra-
moth, as we see in the case of
Ramah of the South.

Merrill identifies the city with Jerash, the splen-
did ruins of which lie in Wéddy ed-Deir, N. of the
Jabbok. He quotes the Bab Talm (Makkath 9b)
as placing the Cities of Refuge in pairs, so that
those on the E. of the Jordan are opposite those on
the W. Shechem, being the middle one of the three
W. of the Jordan, should have Ramoth-gilead nearly
opposite to it on the E., and this would place its
site at Gerasa, the modern Jerash (HDB, s.v.).
But the words of the Talm must not be interpreted
too strictly. It seems very probable that Golan
lay far 8. of a line drawn due E. from Kedes (Ke-
desh-naphtali). No remains have been discovered
at Jerash older than Gr-Rom times, although the
presence of a fine perennial spring makes occupa-
tion in antiquity probable. The place could be
approached by chariots along Wddy ‘Ajlin, and
the country adjoining was not unsuitable for
chariot evolutions.

Conder and others have suggested Reimtin, an
ancient site to the W. of Jerash. The absence of
any source of good water-supply is practically fatal
to this identification. Buhl (GAP, 261 ff) favors
el-Jil‘ad, a ruined site on a hill S. of the Jabbok;
see GILEAD, (1). Eusebius and Jerome (Onom,
s.v.) contradict each other, the former placing
Ramoth-gilead 15 miles W., and the latter 15 miles
E. of Philadelphia. It is clear, however, that this
is a mere slip on Jerome’s part, as both say it is
near the Jabbok. Many have identified it with
es-Sall, which is indeed 15 miles W. of ‘Amman
(Philadelphia), but it is 10 miles 8. of the Jabbok,
and so can hardly be described as near that river.
It is also no place for chariot warfare. The case
against identification with Ramoth-gilead is con-
gusty stated by Rev. G. A. Cooke in Driver’s

ty RRs

In suggesting these sites sufficient attention has
not been given to what is said in 1 Kk 4. The
authority of the king’s officer in Ramoth-gilead
extended over the land of Argob in Bashan, as well
as over the towns of Jair in Gilead. A situation
therefore to the N. of Mahanaim must be sought.
Guthe would find it at er-Remtheh, on the pilgrim
road, about 10 miles S. of Alezérib (cf HGHL, 586
ff). Cheyne’s suggestion of Salkhad, away on the
crest of the mountain of Bashan, is out of the
question. Rev. Caleb Hauser (PEFS, 1906, 3041)
argues in favor of Beit Ras, over 11 miles 8.E. of
Gadara, a position commanding all Northern Gilead
and as favorably situated as Jerash for chariot
warfare and communication with the W. of Jordan.


2. Identi-
fication


Rampart
Ransom


“Here we have the heights of Northern Gilead.
Ramoth, Capitolias, and Beit Ras are in their
respective languages idiomatic equivalents. It is
improbable that a large city like Capitolias should
have superseded anything but a very important
city of earlier times.’ We must be content to
leave the question open meantime. W. Ewina


RAMPART, ram’péirt (Lam 2 8; Nah 3 8).


See ForTIFICATION.
RAM’S HORN. See Music.


RAMS’ SKINS: The skin of the sheep, roughly
tanned with all the wool on, is the common
winter jacket of the shepherd or peasant, the ram’s
being considered esp. desirable (cf He 11 37).
Hence the appropriateness of these skins in the
covering of the tabernacle (Ex 25 5, etc). See
TABERNACLE; Dyx, DYEING.


RANGE, rinj: ‘‘Range’”’ and “rank” have the
same derivation, and in the sense of a “row” (ofmen, |
etc) they were formerly interchangeable. ‘‘Range’’
with this meaning is found in 2 K 118.15 AV
|2 Ch 23 14 (RV “rank”; TIT, s*dhérah, “‘row’’).
Hence “‘to range” is ‘‘to set in a line” (Jth 2 16;
2 Mace 12 20, diatdssd) or ‘‘to move in a line” or,
simply, “‘to roam,’’ whence “‘a ranging bear” (Prov
28 15; PpW, shakak, “runtoandfro”). A cooking
“range” is a stove on which pots, ete, can be set in
a row, but the kirayim (A’D) of Lev 11 35 isa
much more primitive affair, composed, probably,
of two plates (kirayim is a dual). In Job 39 8 |
“range of the mountains” is good modern use, but
"Mm", ythr, should be pointed yathar (not y*thur
as in MT) and connected with tur, “search.” So
translate ‘‘He searcheth out the mountains as his
pasture.” Burton Scott Easton


RANK, rank: (1) TS, ’drah, used in Joel 2 7
of the advance of the locust army which marched |
in perfect, order and in straight lines, none crossing
the other’s track. (2) MD9Z2, ma‘drakhah, “battle
array” (tf Ch 12 38 AV; cf 18 4 16; 17 22.48).
See Ary.


RANKS, ranks (mpaowd, prasid, “a square plot
of ground,’’ “a, garden-bed’’): ‘They sat down in
ranks’? (Mk 6 40); the several reclining ranks
formed, as it were, separate plots or “garden-beds.”’


RANSOM, ran’sum (the noun occurs in the
Eng. Bible 12 t [Ex 21 30 AV, JGR, pidhydn,;
30 12; Job 33 24; 36 18; Prov 6 35; 18 8; 21
18; Isa 43 3, NBD, kdpher; Mt 20 28; Mk 10 45,
Aotpov, liitron; 1 Tim 2 6, avrlAvtpov, antilutron];
the verbal form occurs 4 t [Isa 35 10; Hos 13 14,
MIB, padhah; Isa 61 10 AV; Jer 31 11, 583, ga’al;
these two Heb vbs. are generally rendered in other
passages by the Eng. “‘redecm’’]):


1. Usage by Christ.
2, OT Usage—the Law
(1) General Cases
(2) Redemption Money—the Firsthorn
(3) Connection with Sacrifice
(4) Typical Reference to the Messiah
3. The Pss and Job
. Apostolic Teaching
. To Whom Was the Ransom Paid?
(1) Not to Satan —
(2) To Divine Justice :
(a) Redemption by Price
(b) Redemption by Power
LITERATURE


The supremely important instance is the utter-
ance of the Lord Jesus Christ as reported by Matthew


oe


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2530


and Mark (Mt 20 28; Mk 10 45), and in look-
ing at it we shall be able, by way of illustration,
to glance at the OT passages. The
context refers to the dispute among
the disciples concerning position in the
Kingdom, with their misconception of
the true nature of Christ’s Kingdom. Christ makes
use of the occasion to set forth the great law of
service as determining the place of honor in that
Kingdom, and illustrates and enforces it by show-
ing that its greatest exemplification is to be found
in His own mission: ‘For the Son of man also came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister’? (Mk 10
45). His ministry, however, was to pass into the
great act of sacrifice, of which all other acts of self-
sacrifice on the part of His people would be but a
faint reflection—“‘and to give his life [soul] a ran-
som for many” (ib). He thus gives a very clear
intimation of the purpose and meaning of His
death; the clearest of all the intimations reported
by the synoptists. The word He uses bears a
well-established meaning, and is accurately rendered
by our word “ransom,’’ a price paid to secure the
freedom of a slave or to set free from liabilities
and charges, and generally the deliverance from
calamity by paying the forfeit. The familiar vb.
lita, “to loose,” “to set free,’’ is the root, then di-
tron, that which secures the freedom, the payment
or forfeit; thence come the cognate vb. lutrdd, “to
set free upon payment of a ransom,” ‘‘to redeem”;
litrdsis, ‘‘the actual setting free,’’ “the redemption,”
and lutrétés, ‘‘the redeemer.’”’ The favorite NT
word for “redemption’’ is the compound form,

apolutrdsis.
The word lutron was common in Gr classical lit.,
constantly bearing the sense of “ransom price,” and
was frequently connected with ritual


1. Usage
by Christ


2. OT usage, with sacrifice and_ expiation.
Usage— But for the full explanation of Our
the Law Lord’s great thought we have to look


to the OT usage. The two leading
Heb vbs. tr¢ in our version by “redeem,’”’ are gen-
erally rendered in the LXX by lutrod, and deriva-
tives of these words conveying the idea of the
actual price paid are tr? by this very word lutron.


(1) General cases.—In Ex 21 30 we have the law
concerning the case of the person killed by an ox; the
ox was to be killed and the owner of it was also liable to
death but the proviso was made, ‘‘1f there be laid on
him a sum of money, then he shall give for the ransom
of his life whatsocver is laid upon him'"’ (AV). The
Heb for ‘‘sum of money” is kdpher, lit. ‘‘atonement”’
(RV “ransom'"’); the word for ‘‘ransom’’ (RV ‘‘re-
demption”') is pidhyén (from padhah); the LX X renders
both hy lutron (rather by the pl. form lutra). In Lev
25, among the directions in relation to the Jubilee, we
have the provision (ver 23) that the land was not to be
sold ‘tin perpetuity,'’ but where any portion has been
sold, opportunity is to be given for re-purchase: ‘‘ Ye
shall grant a redemption for the land" (ver 24). The
Heh is ge’ullah, a derivative of ga'al, the LXX lutra. In
vs 25.26, the case is mentioned of a man who throngh
poverty has sold part of his land; if a near kinsman is
ahle to redeem it he shall do so; if there is no one to act
this brotherly part, and the man himself is able to re-
deem it, then a certain scale of price is arranged. In the
Heb it is again ga'al thatis used with the cognate gaa
for ‘‘kinsman.'’ The last clause rendered in AV, ‘‘and
himself he able to redeem it'’ (in RV ‘‘and he be waxed
rich and find sufficient to redeem it''), is lit. “and his
hand shall acquire and he find sufficient for its redemp-
tion"; LXX has the vh. lutrod in the first part, and
renders the clause pretty literally, ‘‘and there be fur-
nished to his hand and there be found with him the suffi-
cient price {lutra}] of it." In vs 51.52, in reference to the
med@mnpuon. of the Jew sold into slavery, we have twice
in the Heb the word ge'ulladh, rendered in Eng. accurately
“the price of his redemption"’; and by LXX with equal
accuracy, in both cases, lutra, ‘‘the ransom-price.’"" In
Lev 27 31 AV, the phrase “if a man will at all redeem
aught of his tithes’’ is intended to represent the em-
phatic Heb idiom, “if a man redeeming will redeem,”
which is rendered by LXX edn dé lutrétat liutro dnthropos.


(2) Redemption money—the firstborn —But per-
haps the most important passage is the law concern-


2531


ing the half-shekel to be paid by every Israelite
from 20 years old and upward when a census was
taken. It was to be the same for rich and poor,
and it was called “atonement money,” “to make
atonement for their souls.’ In the opening words
of the law, as given in Ex 30 12 (AV), we read
Then shall they give every man a ransom for his
soul unto the Lord’’—the Heb kopher; the LXX
rendering is litra tés psuchés autoti, ‘‘a ransom price
for his soul.’’ All the people were thus considered
as doomed and needing atonement, and it is sig-
nificant that this atonement moncy paid at the
first census furnished the silver for the sockets of
the tabernacle boards, intimating that the typical
tabernacle was built upon atonement. The same
thought, that the pcople’s lives were forfeited,
comes out in the provision for the consecration of
the Levites, recorded in full in Nu 3 40-51. The
firstborn represented the people. God claimed all
the firstborn as forfcited to Himself, teaching that
Israel deserved the same punishment as the Egyp-
tians, and was only spared by the grace of Jeh, and
in virtue of the sprinkled blood. Now He takes to
Himself for His services the Levites as the equiva-
lent of the firstborn, and when it was found that
the number of the firstborn exceeded the number of
the Levites, equivalence was maintained by ran-
soming at a certain price the surplusage of the first-
born males. In the LXX account, lutra occurs 4 t
twice for the phrase “those to be redeemed,” an
twice for “redemption money.” Thus the idea of
ransom for the forfeited life became familiar to the
people as educated by the typical system, and re-
demption expressed the sum total of their, hopes for
the future, however faulty might be their concep-
tion of the nature of that redemption.

(3) Connection with sacrifice.—It is also clear in the
typical teaching that sacrifice and ransom were closely
related. Even in classical Gr, as we have noted, the
two conceptions were connected, and it is not surprising
to find it so in the OT. Képher, we have seen, is lit.
“atonement’’ and comes from k4@phar, lit. ‘‘to cover,”
and thence by covering to make atonement, or to cover
by making atonement; and so it is in the Piel form, the
most common and technical Heb word for making atone-
ment, or expiation, or propitiation, and is frequently
rendered in the Gr by hildskomat, often too by the com-
pound exzildskomai. In Ex 21 30, képher, we noted, is
used interchangeably with pidhyén, both being repre-
sented in the LXX by lutra, and so in Ex 30 12; Nu
35 31.32; the Heb kopher is lutra in the Gr. In the
latter place, where it is twice stated that no satisfaction
shall bo taken for the life of a murderer, the Heh is
kopher, UXX lutra, RV “transom,” AV “‘satisfaction.””


(4) Typical reference to the Messiah.—Sacrifice
was thus linked with ransom. Sacrifice was the
Divinely appointed covering for sin. The ransom
for the deliverance of the sinner was to be by sacri-
fice. Both the typical testimony of the Law and
the prophetic testimony gave prominence to the
thought of redemption. The Coming One was to
be a Redeemer. Redemption was to be the great
work of the Messiah. The people seem to have
looked for the redemption of the soul to God alone
through the observance of their appointed ritual,
while redemption, in the more general sense of de-
liverance from all enemies and troubles, they linked
with the advent of the Messiah. It required a
spiritual vision to see that the two things would
coincide, that the Messiah would effect redemption
in all its phases and fulness by means of ransom, of
sacrifice, of expiation.

Jesus appeared as the Messiah in whom all the
old economy was to be fulfilled. He knew _per-
fectly the meaning of the typical and prophetic
testimony; and with that fully in view, knowing
that His death was to fulfil the OT types and ac-
complish its brightest prophetic anticipations, He
deliberately uses this term lutron to describe it
(Mt 20 28); in speaking of His death as a ransom,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Rampart
Ransom


He also regarded it as a sacrifice, an expiatory offer-
ing. The strong preposition used intensifies the
idea of ransom and expiation, even to the point of
substitution. It is anti, “instead of,” and the idea
of exchange, equivalence, substitution cannot be
removed from it. In Nu 8 45, ‘Take the Levites
instead of all the first-born,” the LXX uses anti,
which, like the Eng. “instead of,” exactly repre-
sents the Heb iehath; and all three convey most
unmistakably the idea of substitution. And as the
Levites were to be substituted for the firstborn, so
for the surplus of the firstborn the “‘ransom moncy”
was to be substituted, that idea, however, being
clearly enough indicated by the use of the genitive.
Indeed the simpler way of describing a ransom would
be with the genitive, the ransom of many; or as
our version renders, ‘‘a ransom for many”; but
just because the ransom here is not simply a money
payment, but is the actual sacrifice of the life, the
substitution of His sou] for many, He is appropri-
ately said “to give his soul a ransom instead of
many.” The Kingdom of God which Christ pro-
claimed was so diverse in character from that
which Salome and her sons anticipated that, so far
from appearing in dazzling splendor, with distin-
guished places of power for eager aspirants, it was
to be a spiritual home for redeemed sinners. Men
held captive by sin needed to be ransomed that they
might be free to become subjects of the Kingdom,
and so the ransom work, the sufferings and death
of Christ, must lie at the very foundation of that
Kingdom. The need of ransom supposes life for-
feited; the ransom paid secures life and liberty;
the life which Christ gives comes through His
ransoming death.

Besides the passages in the Pent which we have
noted, special mention should be made of the two

great passages which bear so closely
3. The Pss upon the necd of spiritual redemption,
and Job and come into line with this great

utterance of Christ. Ps 49 7.8, ‘‘None
of them can by any means redeem [pdadhah;
lutroé) his brother, nor give to God a ransom
[kopher; exilasma] for him (for the redemption of
their life is costly, and it faileth for ever).” (The
Heb gives pidhydn for “redemption”; the Gr has
“the price of the redemption of his soul.’’) No
human power or skill, no forfeit in money or service
or life can avail to ransom any soul from the doom
entailed by sin. But in the same ps (ver 15) the
triumphant hope is expressed, “But God will re-
deem [padhah; lutrod}] my soul from the power of
Sheol.”” In Job 33 24, ‘Deliver him from going
down to the pit, I have found a ransom’: God is
the speaker, and whatever may be the particular
exegesis of the passage in‘its original application, it
surely contains an anticipation of the gospel re-
demption. This Divine eureka is explained in the
light of Christ’s utterance; it finds its realization
through the cross: “I have found a ransom,’ for
“the Son of Man” has given “his soul a ransom for
many.”

This great utterance of the Saviour may well
be considered as the germ of all the apostolic teach-

ing concerning redemption, but it is
4. Apostolic not for us to show its unfolding beyond
Teaching noting that in apostolic thought the

redemption was always connected with
the death, the sacrifice of Christ.

Thus Paul (Eph 1 7), ‘In whom we have our redemp-
tion through his blood.’’ Thus Peter (1 Pet ] 18.19),
“Ye were redeemed, not with corruptible things... .
but with precious blood, as of a lamb without blemish
and without spot, even the blood of Christ.'' So in He
9 12 it is shown that Christ ‘‘through his own blood,
entered in once for all into the holy place, having ob-
tained eternal redemption"; and in the Apocalypse
(Rev 5 9) the song is, ‘‘“Thou wast slain, and didst pur-
chase unto God with thy blood men of every tribe,'’ etc.


Ransom
Razor


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA :


2532


In all but the last of these passages there is an echo of
the very word used by Christ, apolutrésis and lutrosis,
both being connected with lutron. In 1 Tim 2 5.6 Paul
has a still closer verbal coincidence when he says, ‘' Christ
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all" (antilutron).
The word usedin the Apocalypse is agaréz4, to buy in the
open market, and is frequently used of the redeeming
work of Christ (Rev 14 3.4; 2 Pet 2 1; 1 Cor 6 20;
7 23). In the two places where Paul uses it he adds the
means of purchase; ‘‘Ye were bought with a price,”
which from his point of view would be equivalent to
ransom, In the passage in Gal 3 13; 4 5, Panl uses
the compound ezagordz6, which is equivalent ‘to ‘'re-
deem, buy oif, deliver by paying the price."

The question ‘Who receives the ransom?”’ is not
directly raised in Scripture, but it is one that not

unnaturally occurs to the mind, and
5. To theologians have answered it in vary-
Whom Was ing ways.
the Ransom (1) Not to Satan.—The idea enter-
Paid? tained by some of the Fathers (Ire-

naeus, Origen) that the ransom was
given to Satan, who is conceived of as having
through the sin of man a righteous claim upon him,
which Christ recognizes and meets, is grotesque,
and not in any way countenanced by Scripture.

(2) To Divine justice—But in repudiating it,
there is no need to go so far as to deny that there
is anything answering to a real ransoming trans-
action. All that we have said goes to show that,
in no mere figure of speech, but in tremendous real-
ity, Christ gave “his life a ransom,” and if our mind
demands an answer to the question to whom the
ransom was paid, it does not seem at all unreason-
able to think of the justice of God, or God in His
character of Moral Governor, as requiring and
receiving it. In all that Scripture asserts about
propitiation, sacrifice, reconciliation in relation to
the work of Christ, it is implied that there is wrath
to be averted, someone to be appeased or satisfied,
and while it may be enough simply to think of the
effects of Christ’s redeeming work in setting us free
from the penal claims of the Law—the just doom of
sin—it does not seem going beyond the spirit of
Scripture to draw the logical inference that the
ransom price was paid to the Guardian of that holy
law, the Administrator of eternal justice. “Christ
redeemed us from the curse of the law, having
become a curse for us’? (Gal 3 13). This essential,
fundamental phase of redemption is what theolo-
gians, with good Scripture warrant, have called
redemption by blood, or by price, as distinguished
from the practical outcome of the work of Christ
in the life which is redemption by power.

(a) Redemption by price: As to Satan’s claims, Christ
by paying the ransom price, having secured the right
to redeem, exercises His power on behalf of the believing
sinner. He does not recognize the right of Satan. He
is the “strong man” holding his captives lawfully, and
Christ the ‘‘stronger_ than he’? overcomes him and
spoils him, and sets his captives free (Lik 11 21.22).
In one sense men may be said to have sold themselves
to Satan, hut they had no right to sell, nor he to buy,
and Christ ignores that transaction and brings ‘‘te
nought him that had the power of death, that is, the
devil'’ (He 2 14), and sois ahle to ‘deliver all them who
through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to
bondage" (He 2 15).

(b) Redemption by power: Many of the OT pas-
sages about the redemption wrought on behalf of
God’s people illustrate this redemption by power,
and the redemption by power is always founded on
the redemption by price; the release follows the
ransom. In the case of Israel, there was first the
redemption by blood—the sprinkled blood of the
Paschal Lamb which sheltered from the destroying
angel (Ex 12)—and then followed the redemption
by power, when by strength of hand Jeh brought
His people out from Egypt (Ex 13 14), and in His
mercy led forth the people which He had redeemed
(Ex 16 18).

So under the gospel when “he hath visited and


wrought redemption for his people’ (Lk 1 68), He
can ‘grant unto us that we being delivered out of
the hand of our enemies should serve him without
fear’ (Lk 1 74). It is because we have in Him
our redemption through His blood that we can be
delivered out of the power of darkness (Col 1 13.
14). See further, Rrepremer, REDEMPTION.
LirERATURE.—See works on NT Theology (Weiss,
Schmid, Stevens, etc); arts.in HDB; DCG.
ArcHIBALD M’CalIaG


RAPE, rap. See Crimes; PUNISHMENTS.


. RAPHA, RAPHAH, ra’fa (RPT, rapha’):

(1) In RVm these names are substituted for ‘‘the
giant” in 1 Ch 20 4.6.8 and in 2 § 21 16.18.20.22.
The latter passage states that certain champions of
the Philis whe were slam by David’s warriors had
been born to the raéphah in Gath. The text, is cor-
rupt; Raphah is probably an eponym. Originally
the name of one of the Philis who was of the body
“Rephaites’’ stood in the text. The plural of this
word, or at least a plural of this stem, is REPHAiM
(q.v.).

(2) Raphah (AV “Rapha’’), a descendant of
Saul (1 Ch 8 37). See RepHaran.

Horace J. Wor

RAPHAEL, raf’a-el, ra/fa-el OND, repha él,
from rapha’ ’él, “God has healed”; ‘Padanad, Rha-
phaél): The name of the angel who, as Azarias,
guides Tobias to Ecsarana and Races (q.v.).
The purpose of his mission is, in accordance with
his name, to cure Tobit of blindness, and to deliver
Sarah, the daughter of Raguel, from the power of
the evil spirit Asmodaeus (Tob 3 8; 12 14).
Later, in addition, when he reveals himself (12 15),
he declares that he is ‘‘one of the seven holy angels,
which present the prayers of the saints, and go in
before the glory of the Holy One.’”? These seven
angels are derived, according to Dr. Kohut, from the
seven Am-shaspands (Amesha-spentas) of Zoro-
astrianism (cf Rev 4 5). At the head of the
elaborate angelology of the Enoch books there are
“four presences,” and Raphael is one of them (En
40 9; 54 6). In the first of these passages Raphael
is the healer; in the second, he with Michael,
Gabriel and Phanuel lead the wicked away to pun-
ishment. These four presences seem related to
the four “living creatures” of Ezk (1 5) and of the
Apocalypse (Rev 4 6). While this is the general
representation of Raphael’s position in Ein, in 20 3
he is named among the angels who “watch,”
whose number according to the Gr text is seven.
Raphael shared in the function assigned to the
archangels, in the Oracula Sibyllina, of Jeading souls
to the judgment seat of God (II, 215, Alexandre’s
text). He occupies a prominent place in Jewish
mediaeval writings; he with Michael and Gabriel
cured Abraham (Yémd’ 87a); according to the
book Zohar, Raphael conveyed to Adam a book con-
taining 72 kinds of wisdom in 670 writings. The
painters of the Renaissance frequently depicted
Raphael. J. E. H. THomson


RAPHAIM,, raf’i-im, ra-f3’im (B omits; Nand A
ae a tv, Rhapholelin): An ancestor of Judith
Jt :


RAPHON, ra’fon (‘Padedv, Rhapheién): The
place where in his campaign E. of Jordan Judas
inflicted disastrous defeat on the host of Timotheus,
the fugitives fleeing for refuge to the temple at Car-
naim (1 Mace 6 37ff; Ant, XII, viii, 4). Thesame
place is doubtless referred to by Pliny as ““Raphana”
(NH, v.16). It may possibly be represented by
the modern Rafeh, on the E. of the pilgrimage road,
about 17 miles N. of Der‘ah, and 11 miles N.E. of


2533


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ransom
Razor


Tell el-‘Ash‘ary. It isa mile and a half N. of Wddy
Kanawat, which would thus be the “brook” men-
tioned in the narrative. Lt is perhaps far enough
away from Carnaim, if this is rightly placed at
Tell el-‘Ash‘ary. W. Iiwina


RAPHOU, ra‘fi (NID, ra@pha’, “one healed”):
The father of Palti, the spy selected from the tribe
of Benjamin (Nu 13 9).


- RASSES, ras’éz (NS, “Paaccels, Rhaasseis, AB,
Paccels, Khasseis; Vulg Tharsis; Old Lat Thiras
et Rasis): The children of Rasses are mentioned
with Put, Lud and the children of Ishmael as having
been subdued by Holofernes (Jth 2 23).

Their identity is a mattor of conjecture only. Some
think Vulg Tharsis (=Tarsus) is meant, others Rosh
(Ezk 38 2.3; 39 1), others Rhosos, a mountain range
and city S. from Anunus, on the Gulf of Issus. Most
probably a district, not a town, is named, situated in the
eastern part of Asia Minor.

8. F. Hunter


RATHUMUS, ra-thi’mus (Péévupos, Rhdthumes):
One of those who joined in writing a letter to pro-
test to Artaxerxes against the Jews (1 Esd 2 16 ff).
In2 17 he is styled “story-writer,” RVm “recorder”
(6 Ta mrpocrirtovra gc. yptgdur, ho td prospiplonta
lgrdphén))=‘“‘Rehum the chancellor’ of Ezr 4 8
Rathumus being a Gr form of Rehum. In 1 Es
2 16 his title appears as an independent proper
name, BrrLtteTamus (q.v.) (here AVm_ gives
“Bahumus,” a misprint), and in 2 25 R. and Beel-
tethmus are given as distinct persons.


RAVEN, ra’v’n (379, ‘Grébh; wépak, kéraz; Lat
Corvus eoraz): A large family of the smaller birds
of prey belonging to the genus Corvus coraz. A
bird of such universal distribution that it is known


Raven (Corvus coraz).


from Iceland to Japan, all over Asia, Europe and
Africa, but almost extinct and not of general dis-
tribution in our own country. In no land is it
more numerous than in Pal. In general appearance
it resembles the crow, but is much larger, being
almost two feet long, of a glossy black, with whisk-
ers around the beak, and rather stiff-pointed neck
feathers. A bird exhibiting as much intelligence
as any, and of a saucy, impndent disposition, it
has been an object of interest from the begin-
ning. It has been able to speak sentences of a few
words when carefully taught, and by its uncanny acts
has made itself a bird surrounded by superstition,
myth, fable, and is connected with the religious
rites of many nations. It is partially a carrion
feeder, if offal or bodies are fresh; it also eats the
young of other birds and very small animals and


seeds, berries and fruit, having as varied a diet


as any bird. It is noisy, with a loud, rough,
emphatic cry, and its young are clamorous at
feeding time.

Aristotle wrote that ravens drovo their young from
their location and forced them to care for themselves
from the time they left the nest. This is doubtful.
Bird habits and characteristics change only with slow
ages of evolution. Our ravens of today are, to all intents,
the same hirds as those of Pal in the time of Moses, and
ours follow the young afield for several days and feed
them until the cawing, flapping youngsters appear
larger than the parents. In Pliny’s day, ravens had
heen taught to speak, and as an instance of their cunning
he records that in time of drought a raven found a bucket
containing a little water heside a sepulcher and raised
it to drinking Icvel by dropping in stones.


Pal has at least 8 different specics of ravens.
This bird was the first sent out by Noah in an effort
to discover if the flood were abating (Gen 8 6-8).
Because it partially fed on carrion it was included
among the abominations (see Lev 11 15; Dt 14
14). On 1 K 17 4-6, see Exisau and the present
writer’s Birds of the Bible, 401-3. Among the
marvels of creation and providence in Job 38 41,
we have this mention of the raven,

‘*Who provideth for the raven his prey,


When his young ones cry unto God,
And wander for lack of food?"


The answer to this question is in Ps 147 9:


“He giveth to the beast his food,
And to the young ravens which cry.”


Both these quotations point out the fact that the
young are peculiarly noisy. In Prov 30 17 it is
indicated that the ravens, as well as eagles, vultures
and hawks, found the eye of prey the vulnerable
point, and so attacked it first. The Heb ‘érébh
means “black,” and for this reason was applicd to
the raven, so the reference to the locks of the bride-
groom in the Song of Solomon becomes clear (Cant
6 11), The raven is one of the birds indicated to
prey upon the ruins of Edom (Isa 34 11). The last
reference is found in Lk 12 24: “Consider the
ravens, that they sow not, neither reap; which
have no store-chamber nor barn; and God feedeth
them.” This could have been said of any wild bird
with equal truth. Gene Stratrron-PorTER


RAVEN, rav’’n, RAVIN, rav’in: ‘““Raven’’ (vb.) is
from “rapine,” ‘violent plundering,” used for 170,
taraph, in Gen 49 27; Ps 22 13; Ezk 22 25.27,
while “ravin’’ (noun) is the object ravened, in Nah
212 the torn carcases (MDVD, tréphah). Soa
“ravenous bird” (Isa 46 11; Ezk 39 4) is a bird
of prey (not a “hungry bird”), OY, ‘ayit, lit. “a
sereecher.”’ ‘Ravenous beast” in Isa 35 9 is for
YB, parig, “violent one.” In the NT éprat,
hdrpaz, “rapacious,” is tr? “ravening” in Mt 7 15,
while for the cognate dpray7, harpagé (Lk 11 39),
AV gives “ravening,” RV ‘‘extortion.”


RAZIS, ra’/zis (‘Pafels, Rhazeis): ‘An elder of
Jerus,” “lover of his countrymen,” and for his good
will toward them called ‘‘father of the Jews,”
accused before the Syrian general Nicanor as an
opponent of Hellenism. In order to escape falling
into the hands of Nicanor’s soldiers he committed
suicide with the greatest determination in a rather
revolting manner (2 Macc 14 37 ff), in his death
calling upon “the Lord of life’ in the hope of a
resurrection. His suicide—contrary to Jewish
sentiment—was regarded with approbation by the
author of 2 Macc (14 42.48).


RAZOR, ra’zér (AIM, ta‘ar, “knife” [Nu 6 5;


Ps 622; Isa 720; Ezk 6 1), MDM, morah,
“razor” [Jgs 18 5; 16 17; 151 11]). See Bar-
BER; Harr.


Reading
Rechab


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2534


READING, réd’ing (N7P%, mikra’; avdyvoors,
andgnésis): As a noun occurs once iu the OT (Neh
8 8) and 3 tin the NT (Acts 13 15; 2 Cor 3 14;
1 Tim 4 13), each time with reference to the public
reading of the Divine Law. The vb. “‘to read”
(NW, kara; dvayiweoxw, anagindsko) occurs fre-
quently both in the OT and in the NT: (1) often
in the sense of reading aloud to others, esp. of the
public reading of God's Law or of prophecy, as by
Moses (Ex 24 7), Ezra (Neh 8 3.18), Jesus in the
synagogue at Nazareth (Lk 4 16), of the regular
reading of the Law and the Prophets in the syna-
gogues (Acts 13 27; 15 21), and of the reading of
apostolic epp. in the Christian church (Col 4 16;
1 Thess 5 27); (2) also iu the sense of reading to
one's self, whether the Divine word in Law or
prophecy (Dt 17 19; Acts 8 28-30, etc), or such
things as private letters (2 K 5 7; 19 14; Acts
23 34, etc). D. Mrauu Enwarps


READY, red’i (1°72, mahir): Occurs twice in
the sense of apt, skilful (Ezr 7 6; Ps 45 1). RV
gives “ready”’ for “‘fit’”? (Prov 24 27), for “‘asketh”’
(Mic 7 8), for “prepared” (Mk 14 15), for ‘not
be negligent” (2 Pet 1 12).


REAIAH, ré-a’ya, ré-1’a (FTN, r’ayah, “Ich has
seen”; LXX B, ‘Pabd, Rhadd, A, ‘Pad, Rheid):

(1) The eponym of a Calebite family (1 Ch 4 2).
The word ‘‘Reaiah”’ should probably be substituted
for ‘‘Haroeh” in 1 Ch 2 52, but both forms may
be corruptions.

(2) A Reubenite (1 Ch 5 5, AV ‘‘Reaia’’). See
JOEL.

(3) The family name of a company of Nethinim
(Ezr 2 47; Neh 7 50=1 Esd 6 31).


REAPING, rép’ing (TEP , kagar; Septtw, therizd):
Reaping in ancient times, as at present, consisted
in either pulling up the grain by the roots or cutting
it with a sickle (see StckLe), and then binding the


Reaping and Binding Sheaves.


stalks into bundles to be carried to the threshing-
floor. If the Egyp sculptures are true to life, reap-
ing was sometimes divided into two operations, the
heads of grain and the stalks being reaped separately.
In Pal and Syria both pulling and cutting are still
practised, the former when the ground is stony
and the spears scarce. Even where the sickle is
used, much of the grain comes up by the roots,
owing to the toughness of the dried stalks or the
dullness of the sickle. The reaper sometimes wears
pieces of cane on the fingers of the hand which
gathers the grain in order to protect them from
injury by the sharp grasses or the sickle. There
were definite laws established by the Hebrews in
regard to reaping (Lev 19 9; 23 10; 25 5.11; Dt
16 9). Samuel mentions the task of reaping the
harvest as one of the requirements which would be
made by the king for whom the people were clamor-
ing (1 8 8 12).

Figurative: The certainty of the consequences
of good and evil doing were often typificd by the
sowing and the reaping of harvests (Job 4 8; Prov
228; Hos 87; 10 12.13; 2 Cor 96; Gal 6
7.8). “They that sow in tears shall reap in joy”


is found in the liberated captives’ song (Ps 126 5).
“He that regardeth the clouds shall not reap,’ i.e.
a lack of faith in God’s care will be punished (Eccl
11 4); cf also the lesson of trust drawn from the
birds (Mt 6 26; Lk 12 24). Sowing and not
reaping the harvest is mentioned as a punishment
for disobedience (Job 31 8; Jer 12 13; Mic 6 15).
Reaping where he sowed not, showed the injustice
of the landlord (Mt 25 26), as did also the with-
holding of the reapers’ wages (Jas § 4). In God's
Kingdom there is a division of labor: ‘“Hethat soweth
and he that reapeth may rejoice together’ (Jn 4


36-38). In John’s vision he saw an angel reap the
earth (Rev 14 15.16). See AGRICULTURE; GLEAN-
ING. James A. Parca


REARWARD, rér’wird (FON, 'dsaph, “to gather,”
Nu 10 25; Josh 6 9 [AVm ‘gathering host”]; Isa
§2 12). See Army; Dan, Tris or; War, 3.

Agee


REASON, ré’z’n, REASONABLE, ré/z’n-a-b’l,
REASONING, ré’a’n-ing (2), yakhah, etc; Xoyos,
légos, Svadoyltopar, -opds, dialogizomat, -ismés, etc):
‘Reason,’ with related terms, has a diversity
of meanings, representing a large number of Heb
and Gr words and phrases. In the sense of
“cause” or “occasion”? it stands in 1 K 9 15 for
dabhar, “a, word” (RVm “account”), but in most
cases renders prepositional forms as “from,” “with,”
“because of,” ‘‘for the sake of,” ete. As the ground
or argument for anything, it is the tr of ta‘am (Prov
26 16, RVm “answers discreetly”), of yakhah, as
inIsa 1 18, “Come now, and let us reason together”
(ef Job 138 3; 15 3); in 18 12 7, the word is
sha@phat, RV “that I may plead,” ete. The prin-
cipal Gr words for ‘‘reason,” “‘reasoning,”’ are those
given above. The Christian believer is to be ready


to give a reason (logos) for the hope that is in him
(1 Pet 315 AV). “Reason” as a human faculty
or in the abstract_sense appears in Apoc in Wisd
17 12 (logismés); Ecclus 37 16, ‘‘Let reason [logos]
go before every enterprise,’ RV ‘‘be the beginning
of every work.” In Acts 18 14, “reasou would” is
lit. kata légon, ‘‘according to reason’’; in Rom 12 1,
for “reasonable [logikés] service,” RV has ‘“‘spir-
itual,’’ and in m “Gr ‘belonging to the reason.’”’ In
RV “reason,’’ etc, occurs much oftener than in AV
(ef Lev 17 11; Dt 28 47; Jgs 5 22; Job 20 2; 23
7, ete; Lk 3 15; 12 17; Acts 17 17, ete).
W. L. WaLKER

REBA, ré’ba (32°), rebha‘, “fourth part”; LXX
B, ‘Pope, Rhdbe, A, “PéBex, Rhébek): One of the five
chieftains of Midian who were slain by the Israel-
ites, under Moses (Nu 31.8; Josh 13 21). Like
his comrades, he is termed a ‘‘king”’ in Nu, but a
“chief” or “prince” in Josh.


REBEKAH, ré-bek’a (P37, ribhkah; LXX and
NT ‘PeBéxxa, Rhebékka, whence the usual Eng.
spellng Rebecca): Danghter of Bethune! and an
unknown mother, granddaughter of Nahor and
Mileah, sister of Laban, wife of Isaac, mother of
Esau and Jacob. i


Her name is usually explained from the Arab., KQ3,,


rabkat, ‘‘a tie-rope for animals,” or, rather, ‘‘a noose" in
such a rope; its application would then by figure suggest
the beauty (?) of her that bears it, by means of which men
are snared or bound. The root is found in Heb only in
the noun meaning ‘‘hitching-place"’ or ‘stall,'' in the
familiar phrase ‘‘fatted calf’’ or ‘calf of the stall,"’ and
in view of the meaning of such names as Rachel and
Eglah the name Rebekah might well mean (concrete
for abstract, like map , rikmah, VIO, hemdah, etc)


a ‘‘tied-up calf" (or “lamb” ?), one therefore peculiarly
choice and fat.


Rebekah is first mentioned in the genealogy of the
| descendants of Nahor, brother of Abraham (Gen


2535


22 20-24). In fact, the family is there carried
down just so far as is necessary in order to introduce
this woman, for whose subsequent appearance and
réle the genealogy is obviously intended as a prepa-
ration. All this branch of the family of Terah
had remained in Aram when Abraham and Lot had
migrated to Canaan, and it is at Haran, ‘‘the city of
Nahor,” that we first meet Rebekah, when in ch 24
she is made known to Abraham’s servant at the
well before the gate.

That idyllic narrative of the finding of a bride for
Isaac is too familiar to need rehearsal and too
simple to require comment. Besides, the substance
both of that story and of the whole of Rebekah’s
eareer is treated in connection with the sketches of
the other actors in the same scenes. Yet we note
from the beginning the maiden’s decision of char-
acter, which appears in every line of the narrative,
and prepares the reader to find in subsequent chapters
the positive, ambitious and energetic woman that
she there shows herself.

Though the object of her husband’s love (Gen 24
67), Rebekah bore him no children for 20 years
(25 20.26). Like Sarah, she too was barren, and
it was only after that score of years and after the
speeial intercession of Isaac that God at length
granted her twin sons. ‘‘The purpose of God ac-
cording to election,’’ as Paul expresses the matter
in Rom 9 11, was the cause of that strange oracle
to the wondering, inquiring parents, ‘“The elder shall
serve the younger” (Gen 25 23),

Whether beeause of this oracle or for some other
reason, it was that younger son, Jacob, who became
the object of his mother’s special love (Gen 25 28).
She it was who led him into the deception practised
upon Isaac (Gen 27 5-17), and she it was who de-
vised the plan for extricating Jacob from the danger-
ous situation into which that deception had brought
him (vs 42-46). When the absence of Jacob from
home became essential to his personal safety, Re-
bekah proposed her own relations in Aram as the
goal of his journey, and gave as motive the desira-
bility of Jacob’s marrying from among her kindred.
Probably she did not realize that in sending her
favorite son away on this journey she was sending
him away from her forever. Yet such seems to
have been the case. Though younger than Isaac,
who was still living at an advanced age when Jacob
returned to Canaan a quarter of a century later,
Rebekah seems to have died during that term. We
learn definitely only this, that she was buried in the
cave of Machpelah near Hebron (Gen 49 31).

Outside of Gen, Rebekah is alluded to in Scrip-
ture only in the passage from Rom (9 10-12)
already cited. Her significance there is simply
that of the wife of Isaae and the mother of two sons
of such different character and destiny as Esau and
Jacob. And her significance in Gen, apart from this,
lies in her contribution to the family of Abraham of
a pure strain from the same eastern stock, thus
transmitting to the founders of Israel both an un-
mixed lineage and that tradition of separateness
from Can. and other non-Heb elements which has
proved the greatest factor in the ethnological
marvel of the ages, the persistence of the Heb
people. J. Oscar Born


REBUKE, ré-buk’: As a vb. “rebuke” is in the OT
the tr of 7A , g@ar and M2, yakhah; another word,
ribh, in Neh 5 7, is in RV tr¢ “contended with.”
“Rebuke” (noun) is most frequently the tr of gdrah;
also in AV of herpah (Isa 25 8; Jer 16 15, RV
“reproach’’), and of a few other words signifying
reproach, etc. ‘‘Rebuker’” (misdr, lit. “correction,”
“chastisement’) in Hos 5 2 has RVm “Heb
Sebuke.”’’ Inthe NT “to rebuke” is most often the
tr of éririudw, epitimdd (Mt 8 26; 16 22; 17 18,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Reading
Rechab


etc); also in AV of éd¢yxw, elégchd, always in RV
rendered “reprove”’ (1 Tim 5 20; Tit 1 13; 2 15;
He 12 5; Rev 3 19). Another word is epipléito
(once, 1 Tim 6 1); “without rebuke” in Phil 2
15 isin RV “without blemish.”’ On the other hand,
RV has “rebuke” for several words in AV, as for
“reprove’ (2 K 19 4; Isa 37 4), “reproot”’ (Job
26 11; Prov 17 10), “charged” (Mk 10 48). In
Isa 2.4; Mic 4 3, ERV has “reprove” for ‘‘re-
buke,” and in m “decide concerning,” which is text
in ARV. In Ecclus 11 7 we have the wise counsel:
“Understand first, and then rebuke” (epitimad).
W. L. WALKER
RECAH, ré’ka (MP4, rékhah; B, ‘PnxéB, Rhé-
chdb, A, ‘Pydé, Rhéphd; AV Rechah): In 1 Ch 4
12 certain persons are described as ‘“‘the men of
Recah,” but there is absolutely no information
either about the place or its position.


RECEIPT, ré-sét’, OF CUSTOM. See Custom.


RECEIVER, ré-sév’ér: Found in AV (Isa 33


18); but RV substitutes “he that weighed the
tribute.” The Heb is shkokél, which means ‘‘one
who weighs,” ‘‘a weigher.”


RECHAB, ré’kab, RECHABITES, rek’a-bits
(321, rékhabh, D[AD), rékhabhim): Rechab is the
name of two men of some prominence in the OT
records:

(1) A Benjamite of the town of Beeroth, son of
Rimmon (28 4 2); he and his brother Baanah
were “‘captains”’ of the military host of Ish-bosheth.
On the death of Abner (2 8 3 30) the two brothers
treacherously entered [sh-bosheth’s house, when
at noon he was resting and helpless, beheaded him,
and eseaped with the head to David at Hebron
(4 6-8). They expected to receive reward and
honor from David for the foul deed, which left him
without a rival for the throne of all Israel. But
the just and noble-minded king ordered their im-
mediate execution (4 9-12), as in the case of the
Amalekite, who asserted that he had killed Sanl
(28 1). For some reason the Beerothites left
their own town and fled to Gittaim, another town
in Benjamin, where they were still living when the
Books of 8S were written (2 8 4 3).

(2) The more prominent of the men bearing this
name was a Kenivre (q.v.), a descendant of Ham-
math (1 Ch 2 55). A part of the Kenite tribe
joined the Israelites during the wilderness wander-
ings (Nu 10 29-32; Jgs 116; 4 17), becoming
identified with the tribe of Judah, although Heber
and Jael his wife were settled in Northern Pal (Jgs
4 17). Rechab was the ancestor or founder of a
family, or order, in Israel known as the Rechabites,
who at various times were conspicuous in the reli-
gious life of the nation. The most notable membcr
of this family was Jehonadab (2 K 10 15 ff.23),
or Jonadab, as he is called in Jer 35. Jehonadab
was a zealous Jeh-worshipper and took part with
Jehu in the extirpation of Baal-worship and the
house of Ahab. He set for his descendants a vow
of asceticism: that they should drink no wine, ner
plant fields or vineyards, nor build nor live in houses
throughout their generations (Jer 35 6.7). That
must have been a singular feature in Palestinian
life: the simple, nomadic life of this family from
generation to gencration in the midst of settled
agricultural and industrial conditions! They fol-
lowed this simple life in order to guard against the
enervating tendencies of sensualism, and as a cove-
nant of fidelity to Jeh, to whom thcy wholly de-
voted themselves when they joined themselves to
Israel. Jeremiah used the Rechabites, who had
been driven into Jerus by Nebuchadnezzar’s invest-
ment of the land, as an object-lesson to covenant-


Rechah
Reconcile


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2536


breaking Judah. The Rechabites, hungry and
thirsty, refused wine when it was set before them,
because of the command of their ancestor Jonadab
(Jer 35 8-10}; but Judah refused to heed Jeh’s
commands or to keep His covenant (vs 14.15).

If the Rechab of Neh 3 14 is the same as this Kenite,
then his descendant Malchijah, whe assisted Nehemiah
in rebuilding the wall of Jerus, may have abandoned


the vow of his ancestors, for he was ‘‘ruler of the dis-
trict of Beth-haccherem”’ (i.e. ‘house of the vineyard’’).


Epwarp Mack
RECHAH, ré’ka (937, rtkhah). See Recau.


RECLINING, ré-klin’ing (Jn 13 23). See Muazs,
III; Triciinrum.


RECONCILE, rek’on-sil, RECONCILIATION,
rek-on-sil-i-a’shun (katadAdoow, katalldssd, karad-
Aayy, Katallagé, also the compound form doka-
tadhdoow, apokatalldsso; once the cognate 8.aA-
Adooopat, dialldssomat is used in Mt 6 24):

1. The Terms

(1) NT Usage

(2) OT Usage

(3) Special Passage in 1 S 29 4

(+) Usage in the Apocrypha
. Non-doctrinal Passage—Mt 5 24
. Doctrinal Passages

(1) Rom 5

(2) 2 Cor § 18-20

{3) Eph 2 16

(4) Cel 1 20-22
LITERATURE

(1) NT usage.—In the last case, Mt 5 24, the
word is not used in a doctrinal sense, though its

use is very helpful in considering the
1. The force of the other terms. Al! the other
Terms instances are in Paul’s Epp. (Rom 6
10; 1 Cor 7 11; 2 Cor 6 18-20, the
vb.; Rom 6 11; 11 15; 2 Cor 5 18.19, the noun;
Eph 2 16; Col 1 22, the compound). The word
“reconcile” has a double meaning and usage,
and the context must in each case determine
how it is to be taken. The great doctrine is the
reconciliation of God and men, but the question
to be decided is whether it is God who is reconciled
to men, or men who are reconciled to God, and
different schools of theology emphasize one side
or the other. The true view embraces both aspects.
The word ‘to reconcile’ means literally to ex-
change, to bring into a changed relationship. Some
maintain that it is only a change in the sinner that
is intended, a laying aside of his enmity, and coming
into peaceful relations with God. But that mani-
festly does not exhaust the meaning, nor is it in the
great Pauline passages the primary and dominant
meaning.

(2) The OT usage does not materially help in the
elucidation of the NT terms, for though the word
occurs in a number of passages in AV, it is in RV
generally changed to ‘‘atonement,” which more
accurately represents the Heb kéa@phar, which is
generally rendered by ‘‘atonement,” and by hilds-
komat or exildskomat in the Gr. (In one passage
of the NT (He 2 17], the phrase “to make recon-
ciliation” represents the Gr hilaskomai, and is
better rendered in RV by “to make propitiation.’’)
The making atonement or propitiation is the basis
of the reconciliation, the means of its accomplish-
ment, and the fact that the translators of AV some-
times rendered kaphar by ‘reconcile’ shows that
they understood reconciliation to have the Godward
aspect. Whatever may be said of the nature of the
atonement or propitiation in the old dispensation,
it was something contemplated as appeasing or
satisfying, or at least in some way affecting God
so as to make Him willing, or render it possible for
Him, to enter into, or abide in, gracious relations
with men. In one passage in the OT where “recon-
ciliation” occurs (2 Ch 29 24) it represents a differ-


wh


ent Heb word, but here RV has changed it into
“sin-offering,”’ which is in harmony with the general
meaning and usage of the Heb.


(3) Special passage in 1 S 29 4.—Thereis yet another
Heb word rendered ‘“reconcile”’ in 1 8S 29 4, and inas-
much as this passage in the LX-X has as the equivalent
of the Heb the Gr word dialldsso, it is of some importance
in guiding to the NT meaning. On one eccasion_when
the Philis gathered together to battle against Isracl,
David and his band of men accompanied Achish king of
Gath to the muster-place. ‘‘The princes of the Philis’’
did not at all appreciate the presence of ‘' these Hebrews,”’
and although Achish testified in favor of David’s fidelity,
they were very indignant, and demanded that David
aud his men be sent hack, ‘‘lest in the battle he become
an adversary to us: for wherewith should this fellow
reconcile himself unto his lord ? should it not be with the
heads of these men?’’ The Heb is ra¢ahk, which means
‘‘to be pleased with"’ or ‘‘to accept favorably,”’ and the
Hithpael form here used is ‘‘to make himself pleasing
or acceptable," ‘‘to reconcile himself.'’ But assuredly
the Philistines’ idea of David reconciling himself to Saul
was not that he should lay aside his enmity against Saul,
and so become friends with him. The enmity was on
Saul's side, and the thought ef the princes was that
David by turning against them in the battle would
poe Saul, and lead him to lay aside his enmity against

avid.

(4) Usage in the Apocrypha.—It may be noted that
in 2 Macc 5 20, katallagé is used evidently of the God-
ward side: ‘And the place which was forsaken in the
wrath of the Almighty was, at the reconciliation of the
great Sovereign, restored again with all glory."’ The
vb. occurs in 2 Macc 1 5 when again the Godward side
seems intended, though not perhaps so certainly: ‘* May
Ged... . hearken to your supplications, and _be recon-
ciled with you,"’ and in 7 33: ‘If for rebuke and chasten-
ing our living Lord has beeu angered a little while, yet
shall he again be reconciled with his own servants,’’ and
8 29: ‘‘They besought the merciful Lord to be wholly
reconciled with his servants.'’ In these two, esp. the
last, it is unquestionably the laying aside of the Divine
displeasure that is meant.

Before passing on to look at the great utterances in the
Epp., we may now look at the non-dectrinal passage

referred to at the beginning. There is,
2. Non- indeed, another non-dectrinal instance in
: 1 Cor 7 11, where the wife who has de-


doctrinal parted from her husband is enjoined either
Passage— to ‘‘remain unmarried, or else be. recon-
Mt 5:24 ciled te her husband.’’ But as it is inde-

3 terminate whether the wife or the husband


is the offending party, and so which is the
one to be influenced, the passage does not help us much.
But Mt 5 24 is a very illuminating passage. Here as
in the passage from 1 S, the werd used is diallassé, but
it is practically identified in meaning with katallassé.
The injunction is given by Christ to the one who is at
variance with his brother, net te complete his offering
until first he has been reconciled to his brother. But
the whele statement shows that it is not a question of the
one who is offering the gift laying aside his enmity
against his brother, but the reverse. Christ says, ‘'If
therefore thou art offering thy gift at the altar, and there
rememberest [not that thou hast a grudge against thy
brother but] that thy brother hath aught against thee”
~—the brother was the offended one, he is the one to he
brought round—“leave there thy gift before the altar,
and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and
then come and offer thy gift.’’ Plainly it means that
be should do something to remove his brother’s dis-
pleasure and so bring about a reconciliation.


(1) Rom 5.—Turning now to Rom 6, how stands
the matter? Paul has been speaking of the blessed
results of justification; one of these
3. Doctrinal results is the shedding abroad of the
Passages love of God in the heart. Then he
dwells upon the manifestation of that
love in the death of Christ, a love that was dis-
played to the loveless, and he argues that if in our
sinful and unloving state we were embraced by the
love of God, a fortiori that love will not be less now
that it has already begun to take effect. If He loved
us when we were under His condemnation sufficient-
ly to give His Son to die for our salvation, much
more shall His love bestow upon us the blessings
secured by that death. ‘Much more then, being
now justified by his blood, shall we be saved from
the wrath of God through him” (6 9).

(a) The fact of Divine wrath: It is well to note,
then, that there is ‘wrath’? on the part of God
against sin and sinners. One of the key-thoughts
of the apostle in this ep. is that “the wrath of God


2537


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Rechah
Reconcile


is revealed from heaven against. all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men” (1 18), and the coming
day of judgment is “the day of wrath and revela-
tion of the righteous judgment of God” (2 5). And
because of this stern fact, the gospel is a revelation
not only of love, but specifically ‘a righteousness
of God” (1 17). And he shows that the essence of
the gospel is found in the propitiatory death of the
Lord Jesus Christ (3 24.25.26), through whom alone
can men who have been “brought under the judg-
ment of God” (3 19) find justification, salvation,
deliverance from the wrath of God (4 25; 5 1-6).
Of course it is not necessary to add that the wrath
of God is not to he thought of as having any un-
worthy or capricious clement in it—it is the settled
opposition of His holy nature against sin.

(6) Reconciliation, Godward, as well as man-
ward: The apostle proceeds (ver 10): ‘For if,
while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God
through the death of his Son, much more, being
reconciled, shall we he saved by his life.” Now
if, as many maintain, it is only the reconciliation
on the manward side that is meant, that the mani-
fested love led to the sinner laying aside his enmity,
it would entirely reverse the apostle’s argument.
He is not arguing that if we have begun to love
God we may reckon upon His doing so and so for
us, but because He has done so much, we may ex-
pect Him to do more. The verse is parallel to the
preceding, and the being reconciled is on the same
plane as being justified; the being justified was
God’s action, and so is the reconciling. Justifi-
eation delivers from ‘the wrath of God’; recon-
ciliation takes effect upon enemies.

(c) The meaning of the word “enemies”: The
word “enemies” is important. By those who
take the manward aspect of reconciliation as the
only one, it is held that the word must be taken
actively—those who hate God. But the passive
meaning, ‘hatred of God,’”’ seems far the prefer-
able, and is indeed demanded by the context. Paul
uses the vb. echthroi, ‘enemies,’ in Rom 11 28,
in antithesis to “beloved” of God, and that is the
consistent sense here. The enemies are those who
are the objects of the wrath of the previous verse.
And when we were thus hated of God, the objects of
His just displeasure on account of our sin, “we were
reconciled to God hy the death of his Son.” God
laid aside His enmity, and in the propitiatory death
of Christ showed Himself willing to receive us into
His favor. * : Dede

(d) The manward side: By this propitiation,
therefore, the barrier was removed, and, God having
assumed a gracious attitude toward the sinner, it
is possible for the sinner now, influenced by His
love, to come into a friendly relationship with God.
And so in the second phrase, the two meanings, the
Godward and the manward, may coalesce: “being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.’ The
reconciliation becomes mutual, for there is no kind
of doubt that sinners are enemies to God in the
active sense, and require to Jay aside their hostility,
and so be reconciled to Him. _ But the first step is
with God, and the reconciliation which took place
in the death of His Son could only be the Godward
reconciliation, since at that time men were still
uninfluenced by His love. But, perhaps, just
because that first reconciliation is brought about
through the Divine love which provides the pro-
pitiation, the apostle avoids saying ‘God is recon-
ciled,”’ but uses the more indirect form of speech.
The manward aspect is emphasized in the next
verse, although the Godward is not lost sight of:
“We also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, through whom we have now received the
reconciliation” (5 11). It is therefore something
that comes from God and does not proceed from


man. God is the first mover; He makes the reeon-
ciliation as already indicated, and then the fruit of
it is imputed to the helieving sinner, and the very
fact that our receiving the reconciliation, or being
brought into a state of reconciliation, follows the
being reconciled of ver 10, shows that the other is
Divine reconciliation as the basis of the human.

(2) 2 Cor 5 18-20.—(a) The Godward aspect
primary: In the same way the great passage in
2 Cor 6 18-20 cannot be understood apart from the
conception that there is a reconciliation on the
Divine side. There is unquestionably reference to
the human side of the matter as well, but, asin Rom
the Godward aspect is primary and dominating: “Al
things are of God, who reconciled us to himself
through Christ, and gave unto us the ministry of
reconciliation.”?” It might be possible to argue
from AV that this describes the process going on
under gospel influences, men being brought into
gracious relations with God, but the aorist of the
Gr rightly rendered by RV, “who reconciled us to
himself,” points back to the historic time when
the transaction took place. It cannot be simply
the surrender of the sinner to God that is meant,
though that comes as a consequence; it is a work
that proceeds from God, is accomplished hy God,
and because of the accomplishment of that work it
is possible for a ministry of reconciliation to be
intrusted to men. To make this mean the human
aspect of the reconciliation, it would be necessary
unduly to confine it to the reconciliation of Paul
and his fellow-workers, though even then it would
be a straining of language, for there is the other
historic act described, ‘and gave unto us the min-
istry of reconciliation.”” The plain meaning is that
through Jesus Christ, God established the basis of
agreement, removed the harrier to the sinner’s
approach to Himself, accomplished the work of
propitiation, and, having done so, He intrusts His
servants with the ministry of reconciliation, a min-
istry which, basing itself upon the great propitia-
tory, reconciling work of Christ, is directed toward
men, secking to remove their enmity, to influence
them in their turn to be reconciled with God. This
is more clearly set forth in the verse which follows,
which in explaining the ministry of reconciliation
says: ‘To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling
the world unto himself, not reckoning unto them
their trespasses.’”’ Here there can be no question
that the historic Incarnation is meant, and the
reconciling of the world can be nothing other than
the objective work of atonement culminating in
the cross. And in that transaction there can be
no thought of the sinner laying aside his hostility
to God; it is God in Christ so dealing with sin that
the doom lying upon the guilty is canceled, the
wrath is averted, propitiation is made.

(b) The manward side also prominent: God, in
a word, enters into gracious relations with a world
of sinners, becomes reconciled to man. This being
done, gracious influences can he brought to bear
upon man, the chief of which is the consideration
of this stupendous fact of grace, that God has in
Christ dealt with the question of sin. This is the
substance of the ‘‘word of reconciliation” which is
preached by the apostle. So he continues, “We
are ambassadors therefore on behalf of Christ, as
though God were entreating by us: we beseech you
on behalf of Christ, be ye reconciled to God.”
Here is the human side. The great matter now is
to get the sinner to lay aside his enmity, to respond
to the gracious overtures of the gospel, to come into
harmony with God. But that is only possible
because the reconciliation in the Godward aspect
has already been accomplished. If the first recon-
ciliation, “the reconciliation of the world unto
himself,” had been the laying aside of human


Record
Red Sea


enmity, there could now be no point in the exhor-
tation, ‘Be ye reconciled to God.”

(3) Eph 2 16.—The two passages where the com-
pound word occurs are in complete harmony with
this interpretation. Eph 2 16: ‘And might recon-
cile them both [Jew and Gentile] in one body unto
God through the cross, having slain the enmity
thereby,” is the outcome of Christ ‘making peace”
(2 15), and the reconciling work is effected through
the cross, reconciliation both Godward and man-
ward, and, having made peace, it is possible for
Christ to come and preach peace to them that are
far off—tfar off even though the reconciling work of
the cross has been accomplished.

(4) Col 1 20-22.—So in Col 1 20, “And through
him to reconcile all things unto himself, having
made peace through the blood of his cross;
through him, J say, whether things upon the earth,
or things in the heavens.’”’ Here the thought of the
apostle trembles away into infinity, and there seems
a parallel to the thought of He 9 23, that according
to the typical teaching even “the things in the
heavens’’ in some way stood in need of cleansing.
May it be that the work of Christ in some sense
affected the angelic intelligence, making it possible
for harmony to be restored between redeemed sin-
ners and the perfect creation of God? In any ease,
the reconciling all things unto Himself is not the
laying aside of the creaturely hostility, but the
determining of the Divine attitude. Then comes
the specific reference to the human side, ‘“‘And you,
being in time past alienated and enemies in your
mind in your evil works, yet now hath he recon-
ciled in the body of his flesh through death”;
there, as in Rom, the two phases coalescing, God
appearing gracious through the work of Christ,
sinners coming into gracious relation with Him.
“Having made peace through the blood of his
cross,’ the ground of peace has been established.
Christ bas done something by His death which
makes it possible to offer peace to men. God has
laid aside His holy opposition to the sinner, and
shows Himself willing to bring men into peace with
Himself. He has found satisfaction in that great


work of His Son, has been reconciled, and now calls |


upon men to be reconciled to Him—to receive the
reconciliation. See ATONEMENT; PROPITIATION;
WRatTH.

Lirerature.—See the works on NT Theology of


Weiss, Schmid, Stevens, etc; Denney, Death of Christ;
arts. on ‘‘ Reconciliation '' in HDB, DCG, etc.


ARCHIBALD M’Caia

RECORD, rek’ord, rek’érd: (1) The Eng. word,
where it occursin the OT and the NT in the sense
of testimony, is tr? in RV “witness’’ (Dt 80 19; 31
28; Jn 1 19.32; 8 13.14; Rom 10 2, etc). See
Witness. But in Job 1619 for AV “my record,”
RV has ‘‘he that voucheth for me.” (2) In Ezr 4
15; 6 2 (dokhran, dikhrén), and Est 6 1 (zikkdrén),
the word denotes Pers state chronicles; cf 1 Macc


14 23; 2 Mace 2 1.


RECORDER, ré-kér’dér (""27', mazkir; RVm
“chronicler’’): A high functionary in the court of


the Jewish kings, part of whose duty seems to have |


been to chronicle the events of the reign, but who
also occupied a position corresponding with that of
the modern vizier (2 5 8 16; 20 24; 1 Ch 18 15,
etc). His high rank is shown by the facts that,
with other officers, he represented Hezekiah in
speaking with Rabshakeh (2 KX 18 18), and, in the
reign of Josiah, superintended the repairs of the
temple (2 Ch 84 8).


RECOVER, ré-kuv’ér: “Recover” has (1) the
transitive meaning of “to retake” or “regain” (any-
thing); and (2) the intransitive sense of ‘‘to regain


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2538


ae: ea


health” or “become well.”’ In Jth 14 7 it means
“restore to consciousness.” In the former sense it
is in the OT the tr of 233, ndgal, ‘‘to snatch away”’
(Jgs 11 26; 1 S 30 8.22; in Hos 2 9, RV “pluck
away’); also of 21W, shabh (Kaland Hiph. 1 8 30
19 AV; 2S 8 3, etc), and of various other words in
single instances. In 2 K 5 3.6.7.11, ‘‘to restore
to health” is HON, ’dsaph. In its intransitive sense
“recover’is chiefly the tr of TI, hayah, “‘to live,”
“revive” (2 K 1 2, etc; Isa 38 9.21). ‘Recover’
appears only twice in AV of the NT; Mk 16 18
(for kalés héxousin) and 2 Tim 2 26 (from anané-
phd, RVm “Gr ‘return to soberness’”’); but RV has
“recover” for ‘‘do well’ in Jn 11 12 (sdthésetai:
m “Gr ‘be saved’”). ‘Recovering’ (of sight)
(andblepsis) occurs in Lk 4 18. W. L. WaLKER


RED. See Cotors, (10).
RED DRAGON. See REvsLATION oF JOHN.
RED HEIFER. See Herrsr, RED.


RED HORSE. See Horss, Rep; REvVeLATION
oF JOHN.


RED SEA (S307D?, yam-siph [Ex 10 19 and
often], but in many passages it is simply D237, ha-
yam, “the sea”; LXX with 2 or 3 exceptions renders
it by } épvOpa Oddacca, he eruthrd thdlassa, “the
Red Sea’’; Lat geographers Mare Rubrum):


. Name
. Peculiarities
OT References
. Passage of, by Israelites
Objections
(1) Steep Banks of the Channel
(2) Walls Formed by the Water
3} The East Winds
(4) The Miraculous Set Aside
LITERATURE


The Heb name yam-siph has given rise to much con-
troversy. Yam is the’general word for sea, and when
standing alone may refer to the Mediter-
Tanean, the Dead Sea, the Red Sea, or the
Sea of Galilee. In several places it des-
lgnates the river Nile or Euphrates. Siph
means @ rush or seaweed such as abounds in the
lower portions of the Nile and the upper portions of the
Red Sea. It was in the siph on the brink of the river
that the ark of Moses was hidden (Ex 2 3.5). But as
this word does not in itself mean red, and as that is not
the color of the b sh, authorities are much divided
as to the reason for this designation. Some have sup-
posed that it was called red from the appearance of the
mountains on the western coast, others from the red
color given to the water by the presence of zoéphytes, or
red coral, or some species of seaweed. Others still, with
considerable probability, suppose that the name origi-
nated in the red or copper color of the inhabitants of
the bordering Arabian peninsula. But the name yam-
suiph, though applied to the whole sea, was esp. used
with reference to the northern part, which is alone men-
tioned in the Bible, and to the two gulfs (Suez and
autre which border the Sinaitic Peninsula, esp. the

of Suez.


The Red Sea has a length of 1,350 miles and an
extreme breadth of 205 miles. It is remarkable
that while it has no rivers flowing

2. Pecu- into it and the evaporation from its
liarities surface is enormous, it is not much
salter than the ocean, from which it
is inferred that there must be a constant influx of
water from the Indian Ocean through the Straits
of Bab-el-Mandeb, together with an outflow of the
more saline water beneath the surface. The deep-
est portion measures 1,200 fathoms. Owing to the
lower land levels which prevailed in recent geo-
logical times, the Gulf of Suez formerly extended
across the lowland which separates it from the
Bitter Lakes, a distance of 15 or 20 miles now
traversed by the Suez Canal, which encountered no
elevation more than 30 ft. above tide. In early


Powe


1. Name


2539


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Record
Red Sea


historic times the Gulf ended at Ismailia at the head
of Lake Timsah. North of this the Jand rises to a
height of more than 50 ft. and for a long time
furnished a road leading from Africa into Asia. At
a somewhat earlier geological (middle and late
Tertiary) period the depression of the land was such
that this bridge was also submerged, so that the
Red Sea and the Mediterranean were connected
by a broad expanse of water which overflowed the
whole surface of Lower Egypt.


The evidence of the more recent depression of the land
surface in all Lower Egypt is unmistakable. Raised
beaches containing sbells and corals still living in the
Red Sea are found at various levels up to morc than 200
ft. above tide. One of the most interesting of these is
to be seen near the summit of the ‘‘Crow’s Nest,"’ a
half-mile S. of the great pyramids, where, near the
summit of the eminence, and approximatcly 200 ft.
above tide, on a level with the base of the pyramids,
there is a clearly defined recent sea beach composed of
water-worn pebbles from 1 in. to 1 or 2 ft. in diameter,
the interstices of which are filled with small shells loosely
cemented together. These are identified as belonging
to a variable form, Alectryonia_cucullatae Born, which
lives at the present time in the Red Sea. On the oppo-
site side of the river, on the Mokattam Hills 8. of Cairo,
at an elevation of 220 ft. above tide, similar deposits
are found containing numerous -shells of recent date,
while the rock face is penetrated by numerous borings
of lithodomus mollusks (Pholades rugosa Broc.).. Other
evidences of the recent general depression of the land
in this region come from various places on the eastern
shores of the Mediterranean. According to Lartet at
Ramleb, near Jaffa, a recent beach occurs more than 200
tt. above sea-level containing many shells of Pectunculus
violascens Lamk, which is at the present time the most
abundant mollusk on the shore of the adjoining Medi-
terranean. A similar beach has been described by Dr.
Post at Lattakia, about 30 miles N. of Beirfit; while
others, according to Hull, occur upon the island of
Cyprus. Further evidence of this depression is also
seen in the fact that the isthmus between Suez and the
Bitter Lakes is covered with recent deposits of Nile mud,
holding modern Red Sea shells, showing that, at no very
distant date, there was an overflow of the Nile through
an eastern branch into this slightly depressed level. The
line of this hranch of the Nile overflow was in early
times used for a canal, which has recently been opened
to furnish fresh water to Suez, and the depression is fol-~
lowed by the railroad. According to Dawson, large sur-
taces of the desert N. of Suez, which are now above sca~
level, contain buried in the sand ‘recent marine shells in
such a state of preservation that not many centuries may
have elapsed since they were in the bottom of the sea”
(Egypt and Syria, 67).

The Red Sea is connected with the children of
Israel chiefly through the crossing of it recorded in Ex

(see 4, below); but there are a few refer-
3. OT ences to it in later times. Solomon is
References said (1 K 9 26) to have built a navy

at “Ezion-geber, which is beside Eloth,
on the shore of the Red Sea, in the land of Edom.”’
This is at the head of the Gulf of Akabah, the east-
ern branch of the Red Sea. Here his ships were
manned by Hiram king of Tyre with “shipmen that
had knowledge of the sea” (ver 27). And (ver 28)
“they came to Ophir, and fetched from thence
gold.” But Eloth was evidently lost to Israel when
Edom successfully revolted in the time of Joram
(2 K 8 20). For a short time, however, it was
restored to Judah by Amaziah (2 K 14 22); but
finally, during the reign of Ahaz, the Syrians, or
more probably, according to another reading, the
Edomites, recovered the place and permanently
drove the Jews away. But in 1 K 22 48 Jehosha-
phat is said to have “made ships of Tarshish to go
to Ophir for gold: but they went not; for the ships
were broken at Ezion-geber’; while in 2 Ch 20
36 Jehoshaphat. is said to have joined with Ahaziah
“to make ships to go to Tarshish; and they made
the ships in Ezion-geber.”

Unless there is some textual confusion bere, “ships
of Tarshish’’ is simply the name of the style of the ship,
like East Indiaman,” and Tarshish in Ch may refer to
some place in the East Indies. This is the more likely,
since Solomon’s ‘‘navy” that went to Tarshish once every
3 years came " bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes,


and peacocks,” which could hardly have come from any
other place than India. See Snips anp Boars, II, 1, (2).


Until in recent times it was discovered that the
Gulf of Suez formerly extended 30 miles northward
to the site of the present Ismailia and
4, Passage theancient Pithom, thescene of the Bib.
of, by miracle was placed at Suez, the present
Israelites head of the Gulf. But there is at Suez
no extent of shoal water sufficient for
the east wind mentioned in Scripture (Ex 14 21)
to have opened a passage-way sufficiently wide to
have permitted the host to have crossed over in a
single night. The bar leading from Suez across,
which is now sometimes forded, is too insignificant
to have furnished a passage-way as Robinson sup-
posed (BR, I, 56-59). Besides, if the children of
Israel were 8. of the Bitter Lakes when there was
no extension of the Gulf N. of its present limits,
there would have been no need of a miracle to open
the water, since there was abundant room for both
them and Pharaoh’s army to have gone around the
northern end of the Gulf to reach the eastern shore,
while S. of Suez the water is too deep for the wind
anywhere to have opened a passage-way. But
with an extension of the waters of the Gulf to the
Bitter Lakes and Lake Timsah, rendered probable
by the facts cited in the previous paragraph, the
narrative at once so perfectly accords with the
physical conditions involved as to become not only
easily credible, but self-evidencing.


The children of Israel were at Rameses (Ex 12 37) in
the land of Goshen, a place which has not been certainly
identified, but could not have been far from the modern
Zagazig at the head of the Fresh Water Canal leading
from the Nile to the Bitter Lakes. One day's journey
eastward along Wdédy Tumilat, watered by this canal,
brought them to Succoth, a station probably identical
with Thuket, close upon the border line separating Egypt
from Asia. Through the discoveries of Naville in 1883
this has been identified as Pithom, one of the store-cities
built by Pharaoh during the period of Heb oppression
(Ex 1 11). Here Naville uncovered vast store pits for
holding grain built during the reign of Rameses II and
constructed according to the description given in Ex 1:
the lower portions of brick made with straw, the middle
with stuhble, and the top of simple clay_without even
stubble to hold the brick together (see Naville, ‘‘ The
Store-City Pithom and the Route _of the Exodus,”
Eoyp Exploration Fund, 1885; M. G. Kyle, ''A Reéxami-
nation of Naville’s Works,'" Records of the Past, VIII,
1901, 304-7). The next day's journey brought them to
Etham on the ‘‘edge of the wilderness'' (Ex 13 20; Nu
33 6), prohably in the vicinity of the modern Ismailia
at the head of Lake Timsah. From this point the natural
road to Pal would have been along the caravan route on
the neck of land referred to above as now about 50 ft.
above sea-level. Etham was about 30 miles S.E. of
Zoan or Tanis, the headquarters at that time of Pharaoh,
from which be was watching the movements of the host.
If they should go on the direct road to Pal, his army
could easily execute a flank movement and intercept
them in the desert of Etham. But by Divine command
(Ex 14 2) Moses turned southward on the west side of
the extension of the Red Sea and camped ‘before Pi-
hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, before Baal-
zephon"’ (Ex 14 2; Nu 33 5-7). At this change of
course Pharaoh was delighted, seeing that the children
of Israel were ‘‘entangled in the land’’ and ‘the wilder-
ness" had ‘‘shut them in.” Instead of issuing a flank
movement upon them, Pharaoh's army now followed them
in the rear and “‘overtook them encamping by the sea,
beside Pi-hahiroth,” the location of which is essential to
a proper understanding of the narrative which follows.

n ver 2 Pi-hahiroth is said to be'' between Migdol and
the sea, before Baal-zephon.”” Now though Migdol
originally meant ‘‘ watch-tower,’’ it is hardly supposable
that this can he its meaning here, otherwise the children
of Israel would have been moving directly toward a
fortified place. Most probably, therefore, Migdol was the
tower-like mountain peak marking the northeast corner
of Jebel Geneffeh, which runs parallel with the Bitter
Lakes, only a short distance from their western border.
Baal-zephon may equally well be some of_the mountain
peaks on the border of the Wilderness of Paran opposite
Cheloof, midway between the Bitter Lakes and Suez.
In the clear atmosphere of tbe region this line of, moun-
tains is distinctly visible throughout tbe whole distance
from Ismailia to Suez. There would seem to be no ob-
jection to this supposition, since all authorities are in dis-
agreement concerning its location. From the signifi-
cance of the name it would seem to be the seat of some
form of Baal worship, naturally a mountain. Brugsch
would identify it with Mt. Cassius on the northern shore
of Egypt. Naville (see Murray’s Illustrated Bible Dict.,
‘Red Sea, Passage of") would connect it with the hill


Red Sea
Redeemer


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2540


called Tiisstm E. of Lake Timsah, where there is a shrine
at the present day visited every year about July 14 by
thousands of pilgrims to celebrate a religious festival;
but, as this is a Mohammedan festival, there seems no
reason to connect it with any sanctuary of the Canaanites.
Dawson favors the general location which we _ have
assigned to Pi-hahiroth, but would place it beside the
narrow southern portion of the Bitter Lakes.

Somewhere in this vicinity would be a most
natural place for the children of Israel to halt, and
there is no difficulty, such as Naville supposes, to
their passing between Jebel Geneffeh and the Bitter
Lakes; for the mountain does not come abruptly
to the lake, but leaves ample space for the passage
of a caravan, while the mountain on one side and
the lake on the other would protect them from a
flank movement by Pharaoh and limit his army
to harassing the rear of the Israelitish host. Pro-
tected thus, the Israelites found a wide plain over
which they could spread their camp, and if we
suppose them to be as far 8S. as Cheloof, every
condition would be found to suit the narrative
which follows. Moses was told by the Lord that
if he would order the children of Israel to go for-
ward, the sea would be divided and the children
of Israel could cross over on dry ground. And
when, in compliance with the Divine command,
Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, ‘“Jeh
caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind
all the night, and made the sea dry land, and
the waters were divided. And the children of
Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry
ground: and the waters were a wall unto them on
their right hand, and on their left. And the
Egyptians pursued, and went in after them ito the
midst of the sea, al] Pharaoh’s horses, his chariots,
and his horsemen” (Ex 14 21-30). But when the
children of Israel were safely on the other side the
waters returned and overwhelmed the entire host
of Pharaoh. In the Song of Moses which follows,
deseribing the event, it is said that the waters were
piled up by the “blast of thy [God’s] nostrils” (Ex
15 8), and again, ver 10, “Thou didst blow with
thy wind, the sea covered them.” Thus 3 t the
wind is mentioned as the means employed by God
in opening the water. The competency of the
wind temporarily to remove the water from the
passage connecting the Gulf of Suez with the Bitter
Lakes, provided it was only a few feet deep, is
amply proved by facts of recent observation.
Major General Tullock of the British army (Proc.
Victoria Inst., XXVIII, 267-80) reports having wit-
nessed the driving off of the water from Lake
Menzaleh by the wind to such an extent as to lower
the level 6 ft., thus leaving small vessels over the
shallow water stranded for a while in the muddy
bottom. According to the report of the Suez
Canal Co., the difference between the highest and
the lowest water at Suez is 10 ft. 7 in., all of which
must be due to the effect of the wind, since the tides
do not affect the Red Sea. The power of the wind
to affect water levels is strikingly witnessed upon
Lake Erie in the United States, where according
to the report of the Deep Waterways Commission
for 1896 (165, 168) it appears that strong wind from
the 8.W. sometimes lowers the water at Toledo,
Ohio, on the western end of the lake to the extent
of more than 7 ft., at the same time causing it to
rise at Buffalo at the eastern end a similar amount;
while a change in the wind during the passage of a
single storm reverses the effect, thus sometimes
producing a change of level at either end of the
lake of 14 ft. in the course of asingleday. It would
require far less than a tornado to lower the water
at Cheloof sufficiently to lay bare the shallow chan-
nel which we have supposed at that time to separate
Egypt from the Sinaitic Peninsula. See Exopvus,
THE.


Several objections to this theory, however, have
been urged which should not pass without notice.
(1) Some have said that the children of Israel
would have found an insuperable obstacle to their
advance in the steep banks on either side of the
supposed channel. But there were no steep banks
to be encountered. A gentle sag leads down on
one side to the center of the depression and a corre-
spondingly gentle rise leads up on the other.
(2) Much has also been made of the statement (Ex
14 22) that “the waters were a wall unto them on
their right hand, and on their left’; but when we
consider the rhetorical use of this word “wall” it
presents no difficulty. In Prov 18 11 we are told
that “The rich man’s wealth is his strong city,
And as a high wall in his own imagination.” In
Isa 26 1 we are told that God will appoint salvation
“for walls and bulwarks.” Again Nahum (3 8)
says of Egypt that her “rampart was the sea [m
“the Nile”), and her wall was of the sea.” The
water upon either side of the opening served the
purpose of a wall for protection. There was no
chance for Pharach to intercept them by a flank
movement. Nor is there need of paying further
attention to the poetical expressions in the Song of
Moses, where among other things it is said ‘that
the deeps were congealed in the heart of the sea,”
and that the “earth [instead of the water] swallowed
them.” (3) Again it is objected that an east wind
does not come from the right direction to produce
the desired result. On the other hand it is an east
wind only which could have freed the channel from
water. A north wind would have blown the water
from the Bitter Lakes southward, and owing to the
quantity of water impounded would have inereased
the depth of the water in the narrow passage from
the southern end of Suez. An east wind, however,
would have pressed the water out from the channel
both ways, and from the contour of the shore lines
would be the only wind that could have done so.
(4) Again, it is objected that this explanation
destroys the miraculous character of the event.
But it should be noted that little is said in the
narrative about the miraculous. On the other
hand, it is a straightforward statement of events,
leaving their miraculous character to be mferred
from their nature. On the explanation we have
given the transaction it is what Robinson felicitously
calls a mediate miracle, that is, a miracle in which
the hand of Ged is seen in the use of natural forces
which it would be impossible for man to command.
If anyone should say that this was a mere coinci-
dence, that the east wind blew at the precise time
that. Moses reached the place of crossing, the
answer is that such a coincidence could have been
brought about only by supernatural agency. There
was at that time no weather bureau to foretell the
approach of a storm. There are no tides on the
Red Sea with regular ebb and flow. It was by a
miracle of prophecy that Moses was emboldened to
get his host into position to avail themselves of the
temporary opportunity at exactly the right time.
As to the relation of the Divine agency to the event,
speculation is useless. The opening of the sea
may have been a foreordained event in the course
of Nature which God only foreknew, in which
case the direct Divine agency was limited to those
influences upon the human actors that led them to
place themselves where they could take advantage
of the natural opportunity. Or, there is no a priori
difficulty in supposing that the east wind was
directly aroused for this occasion; for man himself
produces disturbances among the forces of Nature
that are as far-reaching in their extent as would be
a storm produced by direct Divine agency. But
in this case the disturbance is at once seen to be
beyond the powers of human agency to produce.


2541


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Red Sea
Redeemer


It remains to add an important word concerning
the evidential value of this perfect adjustment of the
nayrative to the physical conditions involved. So per-
fect is this conformity of the narrative to the obscure
physical conditions involved, which only recent inves-
tigations have made clear, that the account becomes
self-evidencing. It is not within the power of man
to invent a story so perfectly in accordance with
the vast and complicated conditions involved. The
argument is as strong as that for human design
when a key is found to fit a Yale lock. This is not
a general aceount which would fit into a variety of
circumstances. There is only one place in all the
world, and one set of conditions in all history,
which would meet the requirements; and here they
are all met. This is scientific demonstration. No
higher proof can be found in the inductive sciences.
The story is true. It has not been remodeled hy
the imagination, either of the original writers or of
the transcribers. It is not the product of mythologi-
cal fancy or of legendary accretion.

Lirerature.—Dawson, Egypt and Syria; Hull, Mt.
Seir, Sinat_and Western Pal; Naville, ‘The Store-City
Pithom and the Route of the Exodus,"’ Egyp Exploration
Fund, 1885; Kyle, ‘‘Bricks without Straw at Pithom:
A Reéxamination of Naville’s Works,'’ Records of the


Past, VIII, 1901, 304-7; Wright, Scientific Confirmations
of OT Hist, 83-117.


GEORGE FREDERICK WRIGHT
REDEEMER, ré-dém’ér, REDEMPTION, ré-
demp’shun (P18 , parak, ‘‘to tear loose,” “to rescue,”
MIB, padhah, OMA, ga’al; ayopatw, agordzd, refer-
ring to purchase, Avtposyar, lutroumai, from Abtpov,
lutron, “a ransom’’):


. Gradual Moralizing of Idea of Redemption
. Redemption as Life in Individual


a


2
3. Redemption as Social

4. Redemption as Process

5. Moral Implications in Scriptural Idea of Redeemer
6. Uniqueness of Son of God as Redeemer

LITERATURE

The idea of redemption in the OT takes its start
from the thought of property (Lev 25 26; Ruth
4 4 ff). Money is paid according to law to buy back
something which must be delivered or rescued (Nu
3.51; Neh 6 8). From this start the word “re-
demption’”’ throughout the OT is used in the general
sense of deliverance. God is the Redeemer of Israel
in the sense that He is the Deliverer of Israel (Dt
9 26; 2 8 7 23; 1 Ch 17 21; Isa 52 3). Theidea
of deliverance includes deliverance from all forms
of evil lot, from national misfortune (Isa 52 9;
63 9; cf Lk 2 38), or from plague (Ps 78 35.52), or
from calamity of any sort (Gen 48 16; Nu 26 4.9).
Of course, the general thought of the relation of
Israel to God was that God had both a claim upon
Israel (Dt 16 15) and an obligation toward Israel
(1 Ch 17 21; Ps 26 22). Israel belonged to Him,
and it was by His own right that He could move
into the life of Israel so as to redeem Israel. On
the other hand, obligation was upon Him to redeem
Israel.

In the NT the idea of redemption has more a
suggestion of ransom. Men are held under the curse
of the law (Gal 3 13), orof sin itself (Rom 7 23f).
The Redeemer purchases their deliverance by offer-
ing Himself as payment for their redemption (Eph
17; 1 Pet 1 18). ‘

Throughout both the OT and the NT there is to
be observed a gradual moralizing of the meaning of
redemption. The same process of
moralizing has continued throughout
all the Christian ages. Starting with
the idea of redemption price, conceived
almost in material terms, religious
thought has advanced to conceptions entirely moral
. and spiritual. Through the Scriptures, too, the idea
of redemption becomes more specific with the prog-
ress of Christian revelation. In the begmning


1. Gradual
Moralizing
of Idea


God is the Redeemer from distresses of all kinds.
He redeems from calamity and from sorrows. This
general idea, of course, persists throughout the
revelation and enters largely into our thinking of
today, but the growing moral discernment of the
Bib. writers comes to attaeh more and more im-
portanee to sin as the chief disturber of man’s wel-
fare. We would not minimize the force of the
Scriptural idea that God is the Deliverer from all
misfortune to which man falls heir, but the Scrip-
tural emphasis moves more and more to deliverance
from sin. Paul states this deliverance as a deliver-
ance from the law which brings sin out into ex-
pression, but we must not conceive his idea in any
artificial fashion. He would have men delivered
not only from the law, but also from the conse-
quences of evil doing and from the spirit of evil
itself (Rom 8 2).

In trying to discern the meaning of redemption

from sin, toward which the entire progress of Bib.

and Christian thought points, we may
2. Redemp- well keep in mind the Master’s words
tion as Life that He came that men might have
in Indi- life and might have it more abundantly
vidual (Jn 10 10). The word “life” seems

to be the final NT word as a statement
of the purpose of Christ. God sent His Son to
bring men to life. The word “life,” however, is
indefinite. Life means more at one period of the
world’s history than at another. It has the ad-
vantage, nevertheless, of always being entirely in-
telligible in its essential significance. Our aim must
be to keep this essential significance in mind and
at the same time to provide for an increasing ful-
ness and enlargement of human capacity and en-
deavor. The aim of redemption can only he to
bring men to the fullest use and enjoyment of their
powers. This is really the conception implicit
even in the earliest statements of redemption. The
man redeemed by money payment comes out of the
prison to the light of day, or he comes out of slavery
into freedom, or he is restored to his home and
friends. The man under the law is redeemed from
the burden and curse of the law. Paul speaks of his
experience under the law as the experience of one
chained to a dead body (Rom 7 24). Of course,
relief from such bondage would mean life. In the
more spiritual passages of the NT, the evil in men’s
hearts 1s like a blight which paralyzes their higher
activities (Jn 8 33-51).

In all redemption, as conceived of in Christian
terms, there is a double element. There is first
the deliverance as from a curse. Something binds
a man or weights him down; redemption relieves
him from this load. On the other hand, there is the
positive movement of the soul thus relieved toward
larger and fuller life. We have said that the Bib.
emphasis is always upon deliverance from sin as the
essential in redemption, but this deliverance is so
essential that the life cannot progress in any of its
normal activities until it is redeemed from evil.
Accordingly in the Scriptural thought all manner
of blessings follow deliverance. The man who seeks
first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness finds
all other things added unto him (Mt 6 33). Mate-
rial, intellectual and social blessings follow as
matters of course from the redemption of the inner
spirit from evil. The aim of redemption, to heget
in men’s hearts the will to do right, once fulfilled,
leads men to seek suecessfully along all possible
avenues for life. This, of course, does not mean
that the redeemed life gives itself up to the culti-
vation of itself toward higher excellencies. It
means that the redeemed life is delivered from every
form of selfishness. In the unselfish seeking of life
for others the redeemed life finds its own greatest
achievement and happiness (Mt 16 25).


Redeemer


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2542


Just as the idea of redemption concerned itself
chiefly with the inner spirit, so also it concerns itself
with the individual as the object of

3. Redemp- redemption. But as the redemption


tion as of the inner spirit leads to freedom in
Social all realms of life, so also the redemption

of the individual leads to large social
transformations. It is impossible to strike out of


the Scriptures the idea of a redeemed humanity.
But humanity is not conceived of in general or class
terms. The object of redemption is not humanity,
or mankind, or the masses. The object of redemp-
tion is rather men set in relation to each other as
members of a family. But it would do violence to
the Scriptural conception to conceive of the indi-
vidual’s relations in any narrow or restricted fashion
(1 Cor 12 12-27).

An important enlargement of the idea of redemp-
tion in our own time has come as men have cou-
ceived of the redemption of individuals in their
social relationships. Very often men have thought
of redemption as a snatching of imdividuals from
the perils of a world in itself absolutely wicked.
Even the material environment of men has at times
been regarded as containing something inherently
evil. The thought of redemption which seems most
in line with Scriptural interpretation would seem
to be that which brings the material and social
forces within reach of individual wills. Paul speaks
of the whole creation groaning and travailiug in
pain waiting for the revelation of the sons of God
(Rom 8 22). This graphic figure sets before us
the essentially Christian conception of the redemp-
tion of the forces in the midst of which men are
placed. Those redeemed for the largest life, by
the very force of their life, will seize all powers of
this world to make them’ the servants of Divine
purposes. The seer saw a great multitude which
no man could number, of every kindred and nation
and tongue, shouting the joys of salvation (Rev 7 9),
yet the implication nowhere appears that these
were redeemed in any other fashion than by sur-
rendering themselves to the forces of righteousness.

We have said that the aim of redemption is to
bring men to the largest and fullest life. We have

also said that “life’’ is a general term.
4. Redemp- To keep close to the Scriptural cou-
tion as ceptions we would best say that the
Process aim of redemption is to make men like

Christ (Rom 8 9). Otherwise, it
might be possible to use the word ‘life’ so as to
imply that the riotous exercise of the faculties is
what we mean by redemption. The idea of re-
demption, as a matter of fact, has been thus inter-
preted in various times in the history of Christian
thinking. Life has been looked upon as sheer
quantitative exuberance—the lower pleasures of
sense being reckoned as ahout on the same plane
with the higher. We can see the moral and spirit-
ual anarchy which would thus be brought about.
In Christ’s words to His disciples He once used the
expression, ‘‘Ye are clean because of the word which
I have spoken unto you” (Ja 15 3). In this par-
ticular context the idea does not seem to be that of
an external washing. Christ seems rather to mean
that His disciples are cleansed as a vineyard is
cleansed by pruning away some of the branches
that others may hear fruit. In other words, the
redemption of life is to be interpreted so that stress
is laid upon the qualitative rather than the quanti-
tative. Christ indeed found place in His instruc-
tions and in His own life for the normal and healthy
activities of human existence. He was not an as-
cetic; He went to feasts and to weddings, but His
emphasis was always upon life conceived ‘of in the
highest terms. We can say then that the aim of re-
demption is to beget in men life like that in Christ.


Moreover, redemption must not be conceived of
in such fashion as to do away with the need of re-
sponse upon the part of the individual
5. Moral will. The literal suggestion of ransom
Implications has to do with paying a price for a
in Scrip- man’s deliverance, whether the man is
tural Idea willing to be delivered or not. Of
course, the assumption in the mind of
the Bib. writers was that any man in prison or in
slavery or in sickness would be overjoyed at being
redeemed; but in dealing with men whose lives are
set toward sin we cannot always make this assump-
tion. The dreadfulness of sin is largely in the love
of sinning which sinning begets. Some thinkers
have interpreted redemption to mean almost a
seizing of men without regard to their own will.
It is very easy to see how this conception arises.
A man who himself hates sin may not stop to real-
ize that some other men love sin. Redemption, to
mean anything, must touch this inner attitude of
will, We cannot then hold to any idea of redemp-
tion which brings men under a cleansing process
without the assent of their own wills. If we keep
ourselves alive to the growing moral discernment
which moves through the Scriptures, we must lay
stress always upon redemption as a moral process.
Not only must we say that the aim of redemption
is to make men like Christ, but we must say also
that the method of redemption must be the method
of Christ, the method of appealiug to the moral will.
There is no Scriptural warrant for the idea that men
are redeemed by fiat. The most we can get from
the words of Christ is a statement of the persistence
of God in His search for the lost: ‘(He goeth] after
that which is lost, until he finds it’? (Lk 15 4).
Some would interpret these words to mean that the
process of redemption continues until every man is
brought into the kingdom. We cannot, in_the
light of the NT, limit the redeeming love of God;
but we cannot, on the other hand, take passages
from figurative expressions in such sense as to limit
the freedom of men. The redemption must be
conceived of as respecting the moral choices of
men. In our thought of the Divine search for the
coutrol of inner human motive we must not stop
short of the idea of men redeemed to the love of
righteousness on its own account. This would do
away with the plan of redeeming men by merely
relieving them of the consequences of their sins.
Out of a changed life, of course, there must come
changed consequences. But the Scriptural teach-
ing is that the emphasis in redemption is always
moral, the turning to life because of what life is.
Having thus attempted to determine, at least in
outline, the content of the Christian idea of redemp-
tion, it remains for us to point out some implica-
tions as to the work of the Redeemer. Through-
out the entire teaching on redemption in the
Scriptures, redemption is set before us primarily
as God’s own affair (Jn 3 16). God redeems His
people; He redeems them out of love for them.
But the love of God is not to be conceived of as mere
indulgence, partiality, or good-humored affection.
The love of God rests down upon moral foundations.
Throughout the Scriptures, therefore, we find im-
plied often, if not always clearly stated, the idea
that God is under obligations to redeem His people.
The progress of later thinking has expanded this
implication with sureness of moral discernment.
We have come to see the obligations of power. The
more powerful the man the heavier his obligations
in the discharge of this power. This is a genuinely
Christian conception, and this Christian conception
we apply to the character of God, feeling confident
that we are iu line with Scriptural teaching. Hence
we may put the obligations of God somewhat as
follows: God is the most obligated being in the uni-


2543


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Redeemer


verse. If a man is under heavy obligations to use
anght the power of controlling the forces already at
work in the world, how much heavier must be the
obligations on the Creator who started these forces!
The obligation becomes appalling to our human
thought when we think that creation includes the
calling of human beings into existence and endowing
them with the unsolicited boon of freedom. Men
are not in the world of their own choice. Vast
masses of them seem to be here as the outworking
of impulses almost blind. The surroundings of
men make it very easy for them to sin. The tend-
encies which at least seem to be innate are too
often tragically inclined toward evil. Men seem,
of themselves, utterly inadequate for their own
redemption. If there is to be redemption it must
come from God, and the Christian thought of a
moral God would seem to include the obligation
on the part of God to redeem those whom He has sent
into the world. Christ has made clear forever the
absolutely binding nature of moral considerations.
If the obligation to redeem men meant everything
to Christ, 1t must also mean everything to the God
of Christ. So we feel in line with true Christian
thinking in the doctrine that redemption comes first
as a discharge of the obligations on the part of God
Himself.

If we look for the common thought in all the Christian
statements of God's part in redemption we find it in this:
that in all these statements God is conceived of as doing
all that He can do for the redemption of man. If in
earlier times men conceived of the human race as under
the dominion of Satan, and of Satan as robbed of his
due by the deliverance of man and therefore entitled to
some compensation, they also conceived of God Himself
as paying the ransom to Satan. If they thought of God
as a feudal lord whose dignity had been offended by sin,
they thought of God as Himself paying the cost due to
offended dignity. If their idea was that a substitute for
sinners must be furnished, the idea included the thought
of God as Himself providing a substitute. If they con-
ceived of the universe as a vast system of moral laws—
broken by sin—whose dignity must be upheld, they
thought of God Himself as providing the means for maiu-
taining the dignity of the laws. If they conceived of
men as saved by a vast moral influence set at work, they
thought of this influence as proceeding, not from man,
hut from God. The common thought in theories of _re-
demption then, so far as concerns God's part, is that God
Himself takes the initiative and does all He can in the
discharge of the obligation upon Himself. Each phras-
ing of the doctrine of redemption is the attempt of an
age of Christian thinking to say in its own way that God
has done all that He can do for men.

It is from this standpoint that we must approach
the part played by Christ in redemption. ‘This is

not the place for an attempt at formal
6. Unique- statement, but some elements of
ness of Son Christian teaching are, at least in out-
of Godas line, at once clear. The question 1s,
Redeemer first, to provide some relation between

God and Christ which will make the
redemptive work of Christ really effective. Some
have thought to find such a statement in the con-
ception that Christ is a prophet. They would
empty the expression, “Son of God,” of any unique
meaning; they would make Christ the Son of God
in the same sense that any great prophet could be
conceived of as a son of God. Of course, we would
not minimize the teaching of the Scripture as to the
full humanity of Christ, and yet we may be per-
mitted to voice our belief that the representation
of Christ as the Redeemer merely in the same sense
in which a prophet is a redeemer does not do justice
to the Scripture teaching; and we feel, too, that
such a solution of the problem of Christ would be
inadequate for the practical task of redemption.
If Christ is just a prophet giving us His teaching
we rejoice in the teaching, but we are confronted
with the problem as to how to make the teaching
effective. If it be urged that Christ is a prophet
who in Himself realized the moral ideal, we feel
constrained to reply that this really puts Christ


at a vast distance from us. Such a doctrine of
Christ’s person would make Him the supreme reli-
gious genius, but the human genius stands apart
from the ordinary mass of men. He may gather
up into Himself and realize the ideals of men; He
may voice the aspirations of men and realize those
aspirations; but He may not be able to make men
like unto Himself. Shakespeare is a consummate
literary genius. He has said once and for all many
things which the common man thinks or half
thinks. When the common man comes upon a
phrase of Shakespeare he feels that Shakespeare
has said for all time the things which he would him-
self have said if he had been able. But the appre-
ciation of Shakespeare does not make the ordinary
man like Shakespeare; the appreciation of Christ
has not proved successful in itself in making men
like unto Christ.

If, on the contrary, without attempting formal
theological construction, we put some real meaning
into the idea of Christ as the Son of God and hold
fast to a unique relationship between Christ and
God which makes Christ the greatest gift that God
can give us, we find indeed that Christ is lifted up
to essentially Divine existence; but we find also
that this divinity does not estrange Him from us.
Redemption becomes feasible, not merely when we
have a revelation of how far up man can go, but
when we have also a revelation of how far down
God can come. If we can think of God as having
in some real way come into the world through His
Son Jesus Christ, that revelation makes Christ the
Lord who can lead us to redemption.

Such a conception furnishes the dynamic which we
must have in any real process of redemption. We
need not only the ideal, but we need power by
which to reach the ideal. If we can feel that the
universe is under the sway of a moral God, a God
who is under obligations to bear the burdens of
men, and who willingly assumes these obligations,
we really feel that moral life at its fullest and best
is the greatest fact in the universe. Moreover, we
must be true to the Scriptures and lift the entire
conception of redemption beyond the realm of
conscience to the realm of the heart. What the
conscience of God calls for, the love of God willingly
discharges. The Cross of Christ becomes at once
the revelation of the righteousness of God and the
love of God. Power is thus put back of human
conscience and human love to move forward toward
redemption (Rom 8 35-39).

The aim of the redemption in Christ then is to
lift men out of death toward life. The mind is to
be quickened by the revelation of the true ideals of
human life. The conscience is to be reénforced by
the revelation of the moral God who carries on all
things in the interests of righteousness. The
heart is to be stirred and won by the revelation of
the love which sends an only begotten Son to the
cross for our redemption. And we must take the
work of Christ, not as a solitary incident or a mere
historic event, but as a manifestation of the spirit.
which has been at work from the beginning and
works forever. The Lamb was slain from the
foundation of the world (Rev 13 8); the spirit of
God revealed in the cross of Christ is the same yes-
terday, today and forever. We have in the cross
a revelation of holy love which, in a sense, over-
powers and at the same time encourages. The
cross is the revelation of the length to which God
is willing to go in redemption rather than set aside
one jot or tittle of His moral law. He will not
redeem men except on terms which leave them men.
He will not overwhelm them in any such manner
as to do away with their power of free choice. He
will show men His own feeling of holiness and love.
In the name of a holy love which they can forever


Redness of Eyes
Refuge, Cities of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2544


aspire after, but which they can never fully reach,
men call to Him for forgiveness and that forgiveness
men find forever available.

It remains to add one further item of Scriptural
teaching, namely that redemption is a contmuous
process. If we may again use the word “life,”
which has been the key to this discussion, we may
say that the aim of redemption is to make men
progressively alive. There are not limits to the
development of human powers touched by the
redemptive processes of God. The cross is a reve-
lation of Divine willingness to bear with men who
are forever being redeemed. Of course, we speak
of the redeemed man as redeemed once and for all.
By this we mean that he is redeemed once and for
all in being faced about and started in a right di-
rection, but the progress toward full life may be
faster or slower according to the man and the cir-
cumstances in the midst of which he is placed.
Still the chief fact is the direction in which the man
is moving. The revelation of God who aids in
redemption is of the God who takes the direction
as the chief fact rather than the length of the stride
or the rate of the movement. Every man is ex-
pected to do his best. If he stumbles he is supposed
to find his way to his feet; if he is moving slowly, he
must attempt to move faster; if he is moving at a
slower rate than he can attain, he must strive after
the higher rate, but always the dynamic force is
the revelation of the holy love of God.

The Scriptures honor the prophets in whatever
land or time they appear. The Scriptures welcome
goodness under any and all circumstances. They
have a place for a “light that lighteneth every man
that cometh into the world,” but they still make
it clear that the chief force in the redemption of men
ig the revelation of holy love in Jesus Christ. The
redemption, we repeat, is never conceived of in
artificial or mechanical terms. If any man hath
not the spirit of Christ he does not belong to Christ
(Rom 8 9). The aim of redemption is to beget
this spirit, and this spirit is life.

Literature.—H,. C. Sheldon, Systematic Theology;
Clarke, Outline of Christian Theology; Brown, Christian
Theology in Outline; Mackintosh, Doctrine of Person of


Christ; Bowne, Studies in Christianity; Tymms, The
Christian Atonement.


Francis J. McConnetu
REDNESS, red’nes, OF EYES. See Drunx-
ENNEss, IT.


REDOUND, ré-dound’ (from re, “back,” and
undare, “to surge as a wave’): To be sent back as
a reaction, to overflow; occurs only as the tr of
mepioetw, perisseud, ‘‘to be over and above,” “to
superabound” (frequent in the NT); in 2 Cor 4 15,
“might through the thanksgiving of many redound
to the glory of God,” RV ‘‘may cause the thanks-
giving to abound.”


REED, réd: (1) 148, aha, tr4 “reed-grass’”’ (Gen
41 2.18; Job 8 Ilm). See Fuac. (2)T3N, ’ébheh,
tr? “swift,” m “reed” (Job 9 26). The “ships of
reed” are the light skiffs made of plaited reeds used
on the Nile; ef ‘‘vessels of papyrus” (Isa 18 2).
(3) DBR, ’dghammim, tr? “reeds,” m “marshes,”
Heb ‘pools’ (Jer 51 32); elsewhere “pools”
(Ex 719; 85; Isa 14 23, etc). See Poots.
(4) NY, ‘aroth; dx, dchi, trd “meadows,” AV
‘“naper reeds’ (Isa 19 7). Sce Mapows. (5)
Mp, kdneh; xddapos, kdlamos (the Eng. “cane”
comes from Heb via Lat and Gr canna), “stalk”
(Gen 41 5.22); “shaft”? (ix 37 17, etc); “reed,”
or “reeds” (1 K 1415; 2 K 18 21; Isa 36 6;
42 3; Ps 68 30, AV “spearman”); ‘‘calamus”
(Ex 30 23; Cant 4 14; Ezk 27 19); ‘sweet cane,”
m “ealamus’’ (Isa 43 24; Jer 6 20); “bone”


(Job 31 22); used of the cross-beam of a “‘balance”’
(Isa 46 6); “a measuring reed” (Ezk 40 3); ‘‘a staff
of reed,” 1.¢. a walking-stick (Isa 36 6; Ezk 29 6);
the “branches” of a candlestick (Ex 37 18). (6)
kédapos, kdlamos, ‘‘a reed shaken with the wind”
(Mt 11 7; Lk 7 24); “a bruised reed” (Mt 12
20); they put “a reed in his right hand” (Mt 27
29.30); “They smote his head with a reed” (Mk 15
19); “put it on a reed” (Mt 27 48; Mk 15 36);
“a “measuring reed” (Rev 111; 24 15.16); “a
pen” (3 Jn ver 13). 2

It is clear that kadneh and its Gr equivalent
kalamos mean many things. Some refer to differ-
ent uses to which a reed is put, e.g. a cross-beam of
a balance, a walking-stick, a measuring rod, and a
peu (see above), but apart from this kaneh is a word
used for at least two essentially different things:
(1) an ordinary reed, and (2) some sweet-smelling
substance.


Reed (Arundo donaz).


(1) The most common reed in Pal is the Arundo
donax (N.O. Gramineae), known in Arab. as kasab-
farasi, “Persian reed.” It grows in immense
quantities in the Jordan valley along the river and
its tributaries and at the oases near the Dead Sea,
notably around ‘Ain Feshkhah at the northwest
corner. It is a lofty reed, often 20 ft. high, of a
beautiful fresh green in summer when all else is dead
and dry, and of a fine appearance from a distance
in the spring months when it is in full bloom and
the beautiful silky panicles crown the top of every
reed. The “covert of the reed” (Job 40 21) shelters
a large amount of animal and bird life. This reed
will answer to almost all the requirements of the
above references. -

(2) Kaneh is in Jer 6 20 qualified 2100 “3p,
kaneh ha-tobh, “sweet” or “pleasant cane,” and in
Ex 30 23, OWA MIP, knzh bhdsem, “sweet calamus,”
or, better, a “cane of fragrance.” Cant 4 14; Isa
43 24; Ezk 27 19 all apparently refer to the same
thing, though in these passages the kaneh is unquali-
fied. It was an ingredient of the holy oil (Ex 30
23); it was imported from a distance (Jer 6 20;


2545


Ezk 27 19), and it was rare and costly (Isa 43 24).
lt may have been the ‘‘scented calamus” (Azorus
calamus) of Pliny (NH, xii.48), or some other
aromatic scented reed or flag, or, as some think,
some kind of aromatic bark. The sweetness refers
to the scent, not the taste. See also BuLRUSH;
Papyrus. E. W. G. Masterman


REED-GRASS (Gen 41 2.18; Job 811m). See
Fuaa, (2); Resp, (1).


REED, MEASURING, mezh'ir-ing ("JOO T3p,
keneh ha-middah): In Ezekiel’s vision of the temple
a “man” (an angel) appears with a ‘measuring
reed” to measure the dimensions of the temple
(Ezk 40 3 ff; 42 16 ff). The reed is described as
6 cubits long, ‘of a cubit and a handbreadth each,”
ie. the cubit nsed was a handbreadtbh longer than
the common cubit (see Cunit; WEIGHTS AND
Measures; Tempe). In the Apocalypse this
idea of a measuring reed reappears for measuring
the temple (Rev 11 1) and the holy city (21 15.16,
“a, golden reed’). The thought conveyed is ex-
actitude in the dimensions of these edifices, symbolic
of the symmetry and perfection of God’s church.

JAMES ORR

REELAIAH, ré-cl-A’ya, ré-el-’a (TOI, re‘al-
yah): One of the 12 chiefs who returned with
Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 2 || Neh 7 7). In the passage
in Neh the name is “Raamiah” (S92, rd‘amyah),
and in 1 Esd 6 8 ‘Resaias.”” Which is the origi-
nal, it is almost impossible to decide; ‘‘Reelaiah’”’
seems preferable.


REELIAS, ré-el‘i-as (A, ‘Peé&Atas, Rhecélias
[Fritzsche], B, followed by Swete, Bopodelas,
Boroleias; AV Reelius): One of the “leaders” with
Zerubbabel in the return from exile (1 Esd 5 8,
w “Reelaiah”). It occupies the place of ‘‘Bigvai”
in Ezr 2 2; Neh 7 7, but in form it must be the
equivalent of ‘“Reelainh” of Ezr and “Raamiah”
of Neh. It is perhaps a duplicate of ‘‘Resaias.”


REESAIAS, ré-é-sii’yas, AV; RV
RESAIAS (q.v.).


REFINER, ré-fin’ér, REFINING, ré-fin’ing: Two
Heb words have been tr4 “refine”: (1) U2, ¢araph,
lit. to ‘fuse’ (Zec 13 9; Isa 48 10; Mal 3 2.3,
etc). The same word is rendered also “‘tried”’
(Ps 66 10); “melt” (Jer 6 29 AV); “purge” (Isa 1
25). (2) Ppl, 2akak, lit. to “strain” or “sift.” In
the case of silver and gold the term probably re-
ferred to some washing process in connection with
refining, a8 in Mal 3 3 both ¢draph and zakak are
used (1 Ch 28 18; 29 4; Job 28 1). The same
word in Isa 25 6 referred to the straining of wine.
Gr vpéw, purdd, in the passive, lit. “to be ignited,”
is tr¢ “refined,” in Rev 1 15; 3 18.

The ancient process of refining gold has already
been described under Meratiuray (q.v.). Most
of the Bible references are
to the refining of silver
(Prov 25 4; Zec 13 9;
Isa 48 10). The silver
used by the ancients was
probably obtained by
smelting lead sulphide
ore, rich in silver (argen-
tiferous galena). After the
ore had been reduced to
a metallic condition, the ; ’
lead was separated from the silver by blowing hot
air over the surface of the melted metal. The lead
was thus changed to lead oxide which, in a pow-
dered condition, was driven away by the air blast.


ré-é-si’as:


i
Blowpipe and Small Fur-
a ee Th obese


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Redness of Eyes
Refuge, Cities of


The resulting lead oxide, called in the Bible silver
dross, wus used for glazing pottery (Prov 26 23), a
use to which it is still put by Syrian potters. The
description of refining in Ezk 22 18-22 may indi-
cate that a flux (cf ‘as with lye,” Isa 1 25 ARVm)
was sometimes added to the melted metal to dis-
solve the oxides of copper, lead, tin and iron as
they formed, thus leaving the silver pure. Crude
processes similar to those described above are used
in the Taurus Mountains today.

Figurative: In the various Bible references the
refining of precious metals is used fig. to illustrate
the kind of trial God’s children are called upon to
go through. If they are of the right metal the
dross will finally be blown away, leaving pure, clear,
shining silver. If of base metal they will be like
the dross described in Jer 6 29.30. The refiner
may blow fiercely, but in vain, for nothing but lead
dross appears. James A. Patcu


REFORM, ré-férm’ (107, ydsar): The word in
RV is found only in Lev 26 23, in the phrase “‘ye
will not be reformed.’ The meaning is, ‘‘to be
instructed,” or, more fully, “to let one’s self be
chastened,” i.e. by God’s discipline to learn the
lessons of this chastening.

The Heb word is the same in _a similar connection in
Jer 6 8, where it is rendered, ‘‘ Be thou instructed,”’ and
in 31 18, ‘‘T was chastised.’’ Ps 2 10 (‘‘instructed'');
Prov 29 19 (‘‘corrected"’) use the Heb term of admoni-
tion by the words of man.

AV also has ‘“‘reform'’ in 2 Esd 8 12; Wisd 9 18.


REFORMATION, ref-or-ma’shun: The word
is found only in He 9 10, being the tr of didp6wors,
diérthésis, in its only occurrence. This Gr word
means etymologically ‘‘making straight,’’ and was
used of restoring to the normally straight condition
that which is crooked or bent. In this passage it
means the rectification of conditions, setting things
to rights, and is a description of the Messianic
time.


REFRESH, ré-fresh’, REFRESHING, ré-fresh’-
ing: “Refresh” occurs a few times in the OT as the
tr of WD], nadphash, ‘to take breath,” figurative
“to be refreshed” (Ex 23 12; 31 17; 2 8 16 14);
of MI, rdwah, “to have room” (1 8 16 23; Job
32 20, m “find relief,’ AVm ‘‘may breathe’’); of
YQ, saadh, “to support” (1 K 13 7); and in the
NT as the tr of dvaratw, anapatd, “to give rest”
(1 Cor 16 18; 2 Cor 7 13; Philem vs 7.20; in com-
pound middle, Rom 16 32 AV); also of dvapiyy,
anapstché, ‘to invigorate,” ‘revive’ (2 Tim 1 16),
and other words. ‘Refreshing’ isin Isa 28 12 mar-
ge‘ah, “rest” or “quiet’’; and in Acts 3 19, dvdyuiss,
andpsuxis, “seasons of refreshing,” through the
coming of Jesus, the Christ; cf 2 Esd 11 46 and
AV Sir 43 22 (iAapéw). W. L. Waker


REFUGE, ref‘aj: A place of resort and safety.
The principal words in the OT are NOW. , mahseh
(Ps 14 6; 46 1; 62 7.8; Isa 4 6, etc), and 0129,
mands (28 22 3; Ps 69 16, etc), both applied
chicfly to God as a “refuge’’ for His people. For
AV “refuge” in Dt 33 27, RV has “‘dwelling-place,”’
and iu Ps 9 9, “high tower.” Conversely, RV
has ‘refuge’ for AV “shelter” in Ps 61 3, and
“hope” in Jer 17 17.


REFUGE, CITIES OF (o>pan WY , Gré ha-mik-
lat; wédes TOV hvyadeuryplwv, pdlets tin phugadeu-
terion [cf 1 Muce 10 28], and other

1. Location forms): Six cities, three on each side of
the Jordan, were set apart and placed in

the hands of the Levites, to serve as places of asylum
for such as might shed blood unwittingly. On the


Refuse
Regeneration


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2546


E. of the Jordan they were Bezer in the lot of Reu-
ben, Ramoth-gilead in the tribe of Gad, and Golan
in the territory of Manasseh. On the W. of the
Jordan they were Hebron in Judah, Shechem in
Mt. Ephraim, and Kedesh in Naphtali (Nu 35 6.
14; Josh 20 2.7 ff; 21 13.21.27.32.38; Bezer is
named in ver 36, but not described as a City of
Refuge). An account of these cities is given in
separate arts. under their names. Dt 19 2 speaks
of three cities thus to be set apart, referring appar-
ently to the land W. of the Jordan.

From time immemorial in the East, if a man were
slain the duty of avenging him has Jain as a sacred

obligation upon his nearest relative.
2. Purpose In districts where more primitive con-

ditions prevail, even to this day, the
distinction between intentional and unintentional
killing is not too strictly observed, and men are
often done to death in revenge for what was the
purest accident. To prevent such a thing where
possible, and to provide for a right administration
of justice, these cities were instituted. Open high-
ways were to be maintained along which the man-
slayer might have an unobstructed course to the
city gate.

The regulations concerning the Cities of Refuge are
found in Nu 35; Dt 19 1-13; Josh 20. Briefly,
everything was to be done to facilitate
the flight of the manslayer, lest the
avenger of blood, i.e. the nearest of
kin, should pursue him with hot heart,
and, overtaking him, should smite him mortally.
On reaching the city he was to be received by the
elders and his case heard. If this was satisfactory,
they gave him asylum until a regular trial could
be carried out. They took him, apparently, to
the city or district from which he had fled, and
there, among those who knew him, witnesses were
examined. If it were proved that he was not a
wilful slayer, that he had no grudge against the
person killed, and had shown no sign of purpose to
injure him, then he was declared innocent and con-
ducted back to the city in which he had taken
refuge, where he must stay until the death of the
high priest. Then he was free to return home in
safety. Until that event he must on no account
go beyond the city boundaries. If he did, the
avenger of blood might slay him without blame.
On the other hand, if he were found guilty of de-
liberate murder, there was no more protection for
him. He was handed over to the avenger of blood
who, with his own hand, took the murderer’s life.
Blood-money, i.e. money paid in compensation for
the murder, in settlement of the avenger’s claim,
was in no circumstances permitted; nor could the
refugee be ransomed, so that he might ‘come again
to dwell in the land” until the death of the high
priest (Nu 35 32).

A similar right of refuge seems to have been recog-
nized in Israel as attaching to the altar in the temple
at Jerus (1 IX 1 50; 2 28; ef Ex 21 12f). This
may be compared with the right of asylum connected
with the temples of the heathen. W. Ewine


3. Regu-
lations


REFUSE, ré-ftz’: Formerly used with the addi-
tional meaning “‘reject,’”’ and hence the change from
AV to RV in 18 167; Ezk 5 6; 1 Tim 4 4;
1 Pet 2 7, ete.


REFUTE, ré-fut’: Only in Jude ver 22, ARVm
“And some refute while they dispute with you,”
where RV in the text reads ‘And on some have
mercy, who are in doubt.”

The Gr text of vs 22.23 is very uncertain, heing given
very differently in the varions MISS. RY text follows


the two oldest MSS, % and B. Instead of éacare, eledte,
“have merey,”’ the reading ¢Aéyxere, elégchete, “refute.”


“‘convict,”’ has the powerful support of A C, the best cur-
sives, Vulg, Memphitic, Armenian and Ethiopian VSS,
and is placed in the text by Lachmann, Tischendorf and
Tregelles (WH in list of ‘Suspected Readings” says:
‘*Some primitive error prohable: perhaps the first éAeare
an interpolation’’). Cf ver 15, where the same Gr word
oecurs in the same sense (AV ‘convince,’ RV ‘'con-
vict"”); cf also 1 Tim § 20; Tit 1 9, where the same
idea of refuting the sinful occurs.
D. Mirai Epwarps

REGEM, ré’gem (837, reghem, “friend’’ [?]):
A Calebite, the son of Jahdai (1 Ch 2 47), men-
tioned as the eponym of a Calebite family or clan.


REGEM-MELECH, ré’gem-mé'lek, -mel’ek (539
722, reghem melekh): One of a deputation sent
to inquire concerning the propriety of continuing
the commemoration of the destruction of the
temple by holding a fast (Zec 7 2). The text
of the passage is in disorder. The name may mean
‘friend of the king’; hence some have sought to
remove the difficulty by interpreting reghem melekh
as a title, not a personal name, reading the clause,
“They of Beth-el had sent SHAREZER [q.v. (2)], the
friend of the king.”


REGENERATION, ré-jen-ér-4’shun, ré-:


I. Tue Turm Expuainep
1. First Biblical Sense (Eschatological)
2. Second Bihlical Sense (Spiritual)
II. Tse Bisurcat Doctrine oF REGENERATION
1. In the OT
2. In the Teaching of Jesus
3. In Apostolic Teaching
Later DEVELOPMENT OF THE DocTRINE
PRESENT SIGNIFICANCE
LiTERATURE


I. The Term Explained.—The theological term
“regeneration” is the Lat tr of the Gr expression
wahwyeveola, palingenesta, occurring twice in the NT
(Mt 19 28; Tit 3 5). The word is usually written
mwadvyyeveria, paliggenesia, in classical Gr. Its mean-
ing is different in the two passages, though an easy
transition of thought is evident.

In Mt 19 28 the word refers to the restoration
of the world, in which sense it is synonymical to

the expressions droxardoracis wdvrwy,


III.
IV.


1. First apokatdstasis pdntdn, “restoration of
Biblical all things” (Acts 3 21; the vb. is
Sense (Es- found in Mt 17 11, droxaracrice
chatologi- mdvra, apokatastései pdnta, “shall re-
cal) store all things’’), and dvdyvéis, and-


psucis, “refreshing’”’ (Acts 3 19), which
signifies a gradual transition of meaning to the
second sense of the word under consideration.
It is supposed that regeneration in this sense
denotes the final stage of development of all crea-
tion, by which God’s purposes regarding the same
are fully realized, when “all things [are put] in
subjection under his feet’? (1 Cor 15 27). This
is a ‘regeneration in the proper meaning of the word,
for it signifies a renovation of all visible things
when the old is passed away, and heaven and earth
are become new’ (cf Rev 21 1). To the Jew the
regeneration thus prophesied was inseparably con-
nected with the reign of the Messiah.


We find this word in the same or very similar senses
in profane literature. It is used of the renewal of the
world in Stoical philosophy. Jos (Ant, XI, iii, 9) speaks
of the andktésis kat paliggenesia tés patridos, ‘‘a new
foundation and regeneration of the fatherland,’ after the
return from the Bab captivity. Philo (ed. Mangey, li.
144) nses the word, speaking of the post-diluvial epoch of
the earth, as of anew world, and Marcus Aurelius Antoni-
nus (xi.1), of a periodical restoration of all things, laying
stress upon the constant recurrence and uniformity of all
happenings, which thought the Preacher expr hy
“There is no new thing under the sun” (Eccl 1 9). In
most places, however, where the word occurs in philo-
sophical writings, it is used of the ‘treincarnation’’ or
“subsequent hirth”’ of the individual, asin the Buddhistic
and Pythagorean doctrine of the transmigration of souls
(Plut., ed. Xylander, ii.998c; Clem. Alex., ed. Potter,
539) or else of a revival of lite (Philo 1.159). Cicera uses


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Refuse
Regeneration


the word in his letters to Atticus ae metaphorically of
his return from exile, as a new lease of life granted to him.
See Escuatro.tooy or rue NT, UX.


‘This sense is undoubtedly included in the full
Bib. conception of the former meaning, for it is
unthinkable that a regeneration in the


2. Second eschatological sense can exist without
Biblical a spiritual regeneration of humanity
Sense or the individnal. It is, however,
(Spiritual) quite evident that this latter concep-


; tion has arisen rather late, from an
analysis of the former meaning. It is found in Tit
3.5 which, withont absolute certainty as to its
meaning, is generally interpreted in agreement with
the numerous nouns and vbs. which have given the
dogmatical setting to the doctrine of regeneration
in Christian theology. Clem. Alex. is the first to
differentiate this meaning from the former by the


addition of the adj. mvevmarixy, pneumatike,
“spiritual” (cf anapsuxis, Acts 3 20; see Re-
FRESHING). In this latter sense the word is typi-


cally Christian, though the OT contains many adum-
brations of the spiritual process expressed thereby.
il. The Biblical Doctrine of Regeneration.—It
is well known that in the earlier portions of the OT,
and to a certain degree all through the
OT, religion is looked at and spoken
of more as a national possession, the
benefits of which are largely visible
and tangible blessings. The idea of regeneration
here occurs therefore—though no technical expres-
sion has as yet been coined for the process—in the
first meaning of the word elucidated above. Whether
the Divine promises refer to the Messianic end of
times, or are to be realized at an earlier date, they
all refer to the nation of Israel as such, and to indi-
viduals only as far as they are partakers in_the
benefits bestowed upon the commonwealth. This
is even true where the blessings prophesied are only
spiritual, asin Isa 60 21.22. The massof the people
of Israel are therefore as yet scarcely aware of the fact
that the conditions on which these Divine promises
are to he attained are more than ceremonial and ritual
ones. Soon, however, great disasters, threatening
to overthrow the national entity, and finally the
captivity and dispersion which caused national
functions to be almost, if not altogether, discon-
tinued, assisted in the growth of a sense of indi-
vidnal or personal responsibility before God. The
sin of Israel is recognized as the sin of the individual,
which can be removed only by individual repent-
ance and cleansing. This is best seen from the
stirring appeals of the prophets of the exile, where
frequently the necessity of a change of attitude
toward Jeh is preached as a means to such regen-
eration. This cannot be understood otherwise
than as a turning of the individual to the Lord.
Here, too, no ceremony or sacrifice is sufficient, but
an interposition of Divine grace, which is repre-
sented under the figure of a washing and sprinkling
from all iniquity and sin (Isa 1 18; Jer 13 23). It
is not possible now to follow in full the development
of this idea of cleansing, but already in Isa 62 15
the sprinkling of many nations 1s mentioned and is
soon understood in the sense of the “baptism”
which proselytes had to undergo before their recep-
tion into the covenant of Israel. It was the symbol
of a radical cleansing like that of a ‘new-born babe,
which was one of the designations of the proselyte
(cf Ps 87 5; see also the tractate Y*bhamoth 62a).
Would it be surprising that Israel, which had been
guilty of many sins of the Gentiles, needed a similar
baptism and sprinkling? This is what Ezk 36 25
suggests: “I will sprinkle clean water upon yon,
and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and
from all your idols, will I cleanse you.” In other
passages the cleansing and refining power of fire is


1. In the
OT


alluded to (e.g. Mat 3 2), and there is no doubt
that John the Baptist found in such passages the
ground for his practice of baptizing the Jews who
came to him (Jn 1 25-28 and ||’s).

The turning of Israel to God was necessarily
meant to be an inward change of attitude toward
Him, in other words, the sprinkling with clean
water, as an outward sign, was the emblem of a pure
heart. It was Isaiah and Jeremiah who drew atten-
tion to this (Isa 67 15; Jer 24 7; 31 33-35; 32
38-40, ef passim). Here again reference is made to
individuals, not only to the people in general (Jer
31 34). This promised regeneration, so lovingly
offered by Jeh, is to be the token of a new covenant
between God and His people (Jer 31 31; Ezk 11
19-21; 18 31.32; 37 23.24).

The renewing and cleansing here spoken of is in
reality nothing else than what Dt 30 6 had prom-
ised, a circumcision of the heart in contradistinction
to the flesh, the token of the former (Abrahamic)
covenant (of circumcision, Jer 4 4). As God takes
the initiative in making the covenant, the conviction
takes root that human sin and depravity can be
effectually eliminated only by the act of God Himself
renewing and transforming the heart of man (Hos 14
4). This wesee from the testimony of some of Israel’s
best sons and daughters, who also knew that this
grace was found in the way of repentance and
humiliation before God. The classical expression
of this conviction is found in the prayer of David:
“Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a
right [m “stedfast”] spirit within me. Cast me
not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy
Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation; and uphold me with a willing spirit”
(Ps 61 10-12). Jeremiah puts the following words
into the month of Ephraim: ‘‘Turn thou me, and
I shall be turned” (Jer 31 18). Clearer than any
passages of the OT, John the Baptist, forerunner of
Christ and last flaming torch of the time of the
earlier covenant, spoke of the baptism, not of water,
but of the Holy Spirit and of fire (Mt 3 11; Lk 3
16; Jn 1 33), leading thus to the realization of OT
foreshadowings which became possible by faith in
Christ.

In the teaching of Jesus the need of regeneration
has a prominent place, though nowhere are the

reasons given. The OT had suc-


2. Inthe ceeded—and even the gentile con-
Teaching science agreed with it—in convincing
of Jesus the people of this need. The clearest


assertion of it and the explanation of
the doctrine of regeneration is found in the conver-
sation of Jesus with Nicodemus (Jn 3). It is based
upon (1) the observation that man, even the most
punctilious in the observance of the Law, is dead
and therefore unable to ‘live up’? to the demands
of God. Only He who gave life at the beginning
can give the (spiritual) life necessary to do God’s
will. (2) Man has fallen from his virginal and
Divinely appointed sphere, the realm of the spirit,
the Kingdom of God, living now the perishing
earthly hfe. Only by having a new spiritual nature
imparted to him, by being “born anew” (Jn 3 3,
RVm “from above,’ Gr évwéev, dndthen), by being
“born of the Spirit’ (8 6.8), can he live the spiritual
life which God requires of man.

These words are a NT exegesis of Ezekiel’s vision
of the dead bones (87 1-10). It is the “breath from
Jeh,” the Spirit of God, who alone can give life to
the spiritually dead. :

But regeneration, according to Jesus, 1s more
than life, it is also purity. As God is pure and sin-
less, none but the pure in heart can see God (Mt 5
8). This was always recognized as impossible to
mere hnman endeavor. Bildad the Shuhite de-
clared, and his friends, each in his turn, expressed


Regeneration


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2548


very similar thoughts (Job 417; 14 4): “How
then can man be just with God? Or how can he be
clean that is born of a wonian? Behold, even the
moon hath no brightness, and the stars are not
pure in his sight: how much less man, that is a worm!
and the son of man, that is a worm!” (25 4-6).

To change this lost condition, to impart this
new life, Jesus claims as His God-appointed task:
“The Son of man came to seek and to save that
which was lost’? (Lk 19 10); ‘I came that they
may have life, and may have it abundantly” (Jn
10 10). This life is eternal, imperishable: ‘I give
unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish,
and no one shall snatch them out of my hand” (Jn
10 28). This life is imparted by Jesus Himself:
“Tt is the spirit that giveth life; the flesh profiteth
nothing: the words that I have spoken unto you
are spirit, and are life’ (Jn 6 63). This life can
be received on the condition of faith in Christ or
by coming to Him (Jn 14 6). By faith power is
received which enables the sinner to overcome sin,
to ‘sin no more” (Jn 8 11).

The parables of Jesus further illustrate this doc-
trine. The prodigal is declared to have been ‘‘dead”’
and to be ‘alive again” (Lk 15 24). The new life
from God is compared to a wedding garment in the
parable of the Marriage of the King’s Son (Mt 22
11). The garment, the gift of the inviting king,
had been refused by the unhappy guest, who, in
consequence, was ‘cast out into the outer darkness’
(Mt 22 13).

Finally, this regeneration, this new life, is ex-
plained as the knowledge of God and His Christ:
“And this is life eternal, that they should know thee
the only true God, and him whom thou didst send,
even Jesus Christ’? (Jn 17 3). This seems to be
an allusion to the passage in Hos (4 6): “My
people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: be-
cause thon hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject
thee, that thou shalt be no priest to me.”

It may be said in general that the teaching of the
apostles on the subject of regeneration is a develop-

ment of the teaching of Jesus on the


3. In lines of the adumbrations of the OT.
Apostolic Considering the differences in the per-
Teaching sonal character of these writers, it is


remarkable that such concord of views
should exist among them. St. Paul, indeed, lays
more stress on the specific facts of justification and
sanctification by faith than on the more compre-
hensive head of regeneration. Still the need of it
is plainly stated by St. Paul. It is necessary to
salvation for all men. ‘‘The body is dead because
of sin” (Rom 8 3-11; Eph 2 1). The flesh is at
enmity with God (Eph 2 15); al! mankind is
“darkened in their understanding, alienated from
the life of God” (4 18). Similar passages might be
multiplied. Paul then distinctly teaches that thus
is a new life in store for those who have been spirit-
ually dead. To the Ephesians he writes: “And
you did he make alive, when ye were dead through
your trespasses and sins” (2 1), and later on: “God,
being rich in mercy, . . . . made us alive together
with Christ’? (2 4.5). A spiritual resurrection has
taken place. This regeneration causes a complete
revolution in man. He has thereby passed from
under the law of sin and death and has come under
“the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus’? (Rom
8 2). The change is so radical that it is possible
now to speak of a “new creature’ (2 Cor 5 17;
Gal 6 15, m “new creation’’), of a ‘new man, that
after God hath been created in righteousness and
holiness of truth” (Eph 4 24), and of “the new man,
that is being renewed unto knowledge after the
image of him that created him” (Col 3 10). All
“old things are passed away; behold, they are
become new” (2 Cor 5 17).


j


St. Paul is equally explicit regarding the author
of this change. The “Spirit of God,” the “Spirit
of Christ’? has been given from above to be the
source of all new life (Rom 8); by Him we are
proved to be the “sons” of God (Gal 4 6); we have
been adopted into the family of God (vioGecta,
huiothesia, Rom 8 15; Gal 45). Thus St. Paul
speaks of the “second Adam,” by whom the life of
righteousness is initiated in us; just as the “first,
Adam” became the leader in transgression, He is ‘‘a
life-giving spirit?’ (1 Cor 15 45). St. Paul him-
self experienced this change, and henceforth ex-
hibited the powers of the unseen world in his life of
service. “It is no longer J that live,” he exclaims,
“but Christ liveth in me: and that life which I now
live in the flesh I live in faith, the faith which is in
the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself
up for me” (Gal 2 20).

Regeneration is to St. Paul, no less than to Jesus,
connected with the conception of purity and know!l-
edge. We have already noted the second NT
passage in which the word “regeneration” occurs
(Tit 3 5): “According to his mercy he saved us,
through the washing [m ‘‘laver’’] of regeneration
and renewing of the Holy Spirit, which he poured
out upon us richly, through Jesus Christ our Sav-
iour.”?’ In 1 Cor 12 13 such cleansing is called
the baptism of the Spirit in agreement with the oft-
repeated promise (Joel 2 28 [in the Heb text 3 1];
Mt 311; Mk 18; Lk 3 16; Acts 15; 11 16).
There is, of course, in these passages no reference
to mere water-baptism, any more than in Ezk 36
25. Water is but the tertium comparationis. As
water cleanseth the outer body, so the spirit puri-
fies the inner man (cf 1 Cor 6 11; 1 Pet 3 21).

The doctrine that regeneration redounds in true
knowledge of Christ is seen from Eph 3 15-19 and
4 17-24, where the darkened understandmg and
ignorance of natural man are placed in contradis-
tinction to the enlightenment of the new life (see
also Col 3 10). The church redeemed and regen-
erated is to be a special “possession,” an “‘heritage”
of the Lord (Eph 1 11.14), and the whole creation
is to participate in the final redemption and adoption
(Rom 8 21-23).

St. James finds less occasion to touch this subject
than the other writers of the NT. His Ep. is rather
ethical than dogmatical in tone, still his ethics are
based on the dogmatical presuppositions which
fully agree with the teaching of other apostles.
Faith to him is the human response to God’s desire
to impart His nature to mankind, and therefore the
indispensable means to be employed in securing the
full benefits of the new life, i.e. the sin-conquering
power (1 2-4), the spiritual enlightenment (1 5)
and purity (1 27). There seems, however, to be
little doubt that St. James directly refers to regen-
eration in the words: ‘Of his own will he brought
us forth by the word of truth, that we should be a
kind of firstfruits of his creatures” (1 18). It is
supposed by some that these words, being addressed
“to the twelve tribes which are of the Dispersion”
(1 1), do not refer to individual regeneration, but
to an election of Israel as a nation and so to a
Christian Israel. In this case the aftermath would
be the redemption of the Gentiles. I understand
the expression ‘‘first-fruits” in the sense in which we
have noticed St. Paul’s final hope in Rom 8 21-32,
where the regeneration of the believing people of
God (regardless of nationality) is the first stage in
the regeneration or restoration of all creation. The
‘Qmplanted [RVm “inborn’”’] word” (Jas 1 21; ef
1 Pet 1 23) stands parallel to the Pauline expres-
sion, ‘aw of the Spirit” (Rom 8 2).

St. Peter uses, in his sermon on the day of Pente-
cost, the words “refreshing” (Acts 3 19) and
“restoration of all things’? (8 21) of the final com-


2549


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Regeneration


pletion of God’s plans concerning the whole creation,
and accordingly looks here at God’s people as a
whole. In a similar sense he says in his Second
Ep., after mentioning “the day of God”: ‘‘We look
for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth
righteousness” (2 Pet 3 13). Still he alludes very
plainly to the regeneration of individuals (1 Pet
1 3.23). The idea of a second birth of the believ-
ers is clearly suggested in the expression, ‘‘newborn
babes” (1 Pet 2 2), and in the explicit statement
of 1 Pet 1 23: “having been begotten again, not
of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, through
the word of God, which liveth and abideth.” It is
in this sense that the apostle calls God ‘‘Father”
(1 17) and the believers ‘children of obedience”
(1 14), i.e. obedient children, or children who ought
to obey. We have seen above that the agent by
which regeneration is wrought, the incorruptible
seed of the word of God, finds a parallel in St. Paul’s
and St. James’s theology. All these expressions go
back probably to a word of the Master in Jn 15 3.
We are made partakers of the word by having re-
ceived the spirit. This spirit (cf the Pauline “‘life-
giving spirit,’ 1 Cor 15 45), the “mind” of Christ
(1 Pet 4 1), is the power of the resurrected Christ
active in the life of the believer. St. Peter refers
to the same thought in 1 Pet 3 15.21. By regen-
eration we become “‘an elect race, a royal priesthood,
a holy nation, a people for God’s own possession,”
in whom Divine virtues, “the excellencies of him
who called you” (1 Pet 2 9), are manifested. Here
the apostle uses well-known OT expressions fore-
shadowing NT graces (Isa 61 6; 66 21; Ex 19 6;
Dt 7 6), but he individualizes the process of regen-
eration in full agreement with the increased light
which the teaching of Jesus has brought. The
theology of St. Peter also points out the contact of
regeneration with purity and holiness (1 Pet 1
15.16) and true knowledge (1 14) or obedience
(1 14; 3 16). It is not surprising that the idea
of purity should invite the OT parallel of “cleansing
by water.’”’ The flood washed away the iniquity of
the world “in the days of Noah,” when “eight souls
were saved through water: which also after a true
likeness [RVm ‘‘in the antitype”] doth now save
you, even baptism, not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, but the interrogation [RVm ‘‘n-
quiry,” “‘appeal’”’] of a good conscience toward God,
through the resurrection [-life] of Jesus Christ”
(1 Pet 3 20.21). ;

The teaching of St. John is very closely allied
with that of Jesus, as we have already seen from the
multitude of quotations we had to select from St.
John’s Gospel to illustrate the teaching of the
Master. It is esp. interesting to note the cases
where the apostle didactically elucidates certain
of these pronouncements of Jesus. The most
remarkable apostolic gloss or commentary on the
subject is found in Jn 7 39. Jesus had spoken of
the change which faith in Him (‘‘coming to him’)
would cause in the lives of His disciples; how Di-
vine energies like “rivers of water” should issue
forth from them; and the evangelist continues in
explanation: ‘But this spake he of the Spirit, which
they that believed on him were to receive: for the
Spirit was not yet given; because Jesus was not
yet glorified.” This recognition of a special mani-
festation of Divine power, transcending the expe-
rience of OT believers, was based on the declaration
of Christ, that He would send ‘‘another Comforter
[RV “advocate,” “helper,” Gr Paraclete], that he
may be with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth’
(Jn 14 16.17). ‘ oe

In his Epp. St. John shows that this Spirit be-
stows the elements of a Godlike character which
makes us to be “sons of God,” who before were
“children of the devil” (1 Jn 3 10.24; 4 13, ete).


This regeneration is “eternal life’ (1 Jn 5 13) and
moral similarity with God, the very character of
God in man. As “God is love,” the children of
God will love (1 Jn 5 2). At the same time it is
the life of God in man, also called fellowship with
Christ, victorious life which overcomes the world
(1 Jn & 4); it is purity (1 Jn 3 3-6) and knowl-
edge (1 Jn 2 20).

The subject of regeneration lies outside of the
scope of the Ep. to the He, so that we look in vain for
a clear dogmatical statement of it. Still the ep. does
in no place contradict the dogma, which, on the
other hand, underlies many of the statements made.
Christ, “the mediator of a better covenant, which
hath been enacted upon better promises” (8 6),
has made “purification of sins’ (1 3). In contra-
distinction to the first covenant, in which the people
approached God by means of outward forms and
ordinances, the “new covenant” (8 13) brought an
“eternal redemption” (9 12) by means of a Divine
cleansing (9 14). Christ brings “‘many sons unto
glory” and is ‘author of their salvation” (2 10).
Immature Christians are spoken of (as were the
proselytes of the OT) as babes, who were to grow
to the stature, character and knowledge of “full-
grown men” (6 13.14).

III, Later Development of the Doctrine.—Very soon
the high spiritual meaning of regeneration was ohscured
by the development of priestcraft within the Christian
church. When the initiation into the church was thought
of as accomplished by the mediation of ministers thereto
appointed, the ceremonies bereby employed became
means to which magic POWCTS were of necessity ascrihed.
This we see plainly in the view of baptismal regeneration,
which, based upon half-understood passages of Scrip-
ture quoted above, was taught at an early date. While
in the post-apostolic days we frequently find traces of a
poe appreciation of an underlying spiritual value in

aptism (cf Didache, vii) many of the expressions used
are highly misleading. Thus Gregory Nazianzen (Ora-
tions, xi.2) calls baptism the second of the three births
a child of God must experience (the first is the natural
birth, tbe third the resurrection). This birth is ‘of the
day, free, delivering from passions, taking away every
veil of our nature or birth, i.e. everything hiding the
Divine image in which we are created, and leading up
to the life above’ (Ullmann, Gregor v. Nazienz, 323).
Cyril of Jerus (Cat., xvii, c. 37) ascribes to baptism the
power of absolution from sin and the power of endow-
ment with heavenly virtues. According to Augustine
haptism is essential to salvation, though the baptism of
blood (martyrdom) may take the place of water-baptism,
as in the case of the thief at the cross (Aug., De Animaet
Bius Origine, i.11,¢. 9; ii.14, ¢. 10; ii.16,c. 12). Leo
the Great compares the spirit-filled water of baptism with
the spirit-filed womb of the Virgin, in which tbe Holy
Spirit engenders a sinless child of God (Serm. xxiv.3;
xxv.5; see Hagenhach, Dogmengeschichte, § 137).

In general this is still tbe opinion of pronounced sacra-
mentarians, while evangelical Christianity has gone
back to the teaching of the NT.

IV. Present Significance.—Although a clear dis-
tinction is not always maintained between regen-
eration and other experiences of the spiritual life,
we may summarize our belief in the following
theses: fern Le

(1) Regeneration implies not merely an addition
of certain gifts or graces, a strengthening of certain
innate good qualities, but a radical change, which
revolutionizes our whole being, contradicts and
overcomes our old fallen nature, and places our
spiritual center of ca wholly outside of our own
powers in the realm of God’s causation.

(2) It is the will of God that all men be made
partakers of this new life (1 Tim 2 4) and, as it is
clearly stated that some fall short of it (Jn 5 40),
it is plain that the fault thereof lies with man. God
requires all men to repent and turn unto Him (Acts
17 30) before He will or can effect regeneration. °
Conversion, consisting in repentance and faith in
Christ, is therefore the human response to the offer
of salvation which God makes. This response
gives occasion to and is synchronous with the Di-
vine act of renewal (regeneration). The Spirit of
God enters into union with the believing, accept-


Regeneration
Rehoboam


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2550


ing spirit of man.
(Rom 8 10; 1 Cor 6 17; 2 Cor 5 17; Col 3 3).

(3) The process of regeneration is outside of our
observation and beyond the scope of psychological
analysis. It takes place in the sphere of subcon-
sciousness. Recent psychological investigations
have thrown a flood of light on the psychic states
which precede, accompany and follow the work of
the Holy Spirit. “He handles psychical powers;
He works upon psychical energies and states; and
this work of regeneration lies somewhere within the
psychical field.’ The study of religious psychology
is of highest value and greatest importance. The
facts of Christian experience cannot he changed,
nor do they lose in value by the most searching
psychological scrutiny.

Psychological analysis does not eliminate the direct
workings of the Holy Spirit. Nor can it disclose its
process; the ‘‘underlying lahoratory where are wrought
radical remedial processes and structural changes in the
psychical being as portrayed in explicit scriptural utter-
ances: ‘Createin mea clean heart’ (Ps §1 10); ‘Yemust
be horn again’ (Jn 8 7 AV); ‘lf any man he in Christ,
he is anew creature: old things are passed away; hehold
all things are hecome new’ (2 Cor § 17 AV), is in the
region of subconsciousness. To look in the region of
consciousness for this Person or for His work is fruitless
and an effort fraught with endless confusion. Christian
psychology thus traces to its deep-lying retreat the Di-
vine elahoration of the regenerated lite. Here God works
in the depths of the soul as silently and securely as if
on the remotest world of the stellar universe’’ (H. E.
Warner, Psychology of the Christian Life, 117).

(4) Regeneration manifests itself in the conscious
soul by its effects on the will, the intelligence and
the affections. At the same time regeneration
supplies a new life-power of Divine origin, which
enables the component parts of human nature to
fulfil the law of God, to strive for the coming of
God’s kingdom, and to accept the teachings of
God’s spirit. Thus regenerate man is made con-
scious of the facts of justification and adoption.
The former is a judicial act of God, which frees
man from the law of sin and absolves him from the
state of enmity against God; the latter an endue-
ment with the Spirit, which is an earnest of his in-
heritance (Eph 1 14). The Spirit of God, dwelling
in man, Witnesses to the state of sonship (Rom 8
2.15.16; Gal 4 6).

(5) Regeneration, being a new birth, is the
starting-point of spiritual growth. The regenerated
man needs nurture and training. He receives it
not merely from outside experiences, but from an
immanent power in himself, which is recognized as
the power of the life of the indwelling Christ (Col 1
26.27). Apart from the mediate dealings of God
with man through word and sacraments, there is
therefore an immediate communication of life from
God to the regenerate.

(6) The trnth which is mentioned as the agent
by whom regeneration is made possible (Jn 8 32;
Jas 118; 1 Pet 1 23), is nothing else than the
Divine Spirit, not only the spoken or written word
of God, which may convince people of right or
wrong, but which cannot enable the will of man
to forsake the wrong and to do the right, but He
who calls Himself the Truth (Jn 14 6) and who has
moe the motive power of regenerated life (Gal
2 20).

(7) Recent philosophy expressive of the reaction
from the mechanical view of bare materialism, and
also from the depreciation of personality as seen in
socialism, has again brought into prominence the
reality and need of personal life. Johannes Miiller
and Rudolf Eucken among others emphasize that
a new life of the spirit, independent of outward
conditions, is not only possible, but necessary for
the attainment of the highest development. This
new life is not a fruit of the free play of the tend-
encies and powers of natural life, but is in sharp


This is fellowship with Christ -


conflict with them. Man as he is by nature stands
in direct contrast to the demands of the spiritual
life. Spiritual life, as Professor Eucken says, can
be implanted in man by some superior power only
and must constantly be sustained by superior life.
It breaks through the order of causes and effects;
it severs the continuity of the outer world; it makes
impossible a rational joining together of realities;
it prohibits a monistic view of the immediate con-
dition of the world. This new life derives its power
not from mere Nature; it is a manifestation of
Divine life within us (Hauptprobleme der Re-
ligionsphilosophie, Leipzig, 1912, 17 ff; Der Kampf
um einen geistigen Lebensinhalt, Leipzig, 1907;
Grundlinien einer neuen Lebensanschauung, Leipzig,
1907; Johannes Miller, Bausteine fiir persdnliche
Kultur, 3 vols, Mimchen, 1908). Thus the latest
development of idealistic philosophy corroborates
in a remarkable way the Christian truth of regen-
eration. See also CONVERSION.

LiveRATURE.—NT Theologies by Weiss, Beyschlag,
Holtzmaun, Schlatter, Feine, Stevens, Sheldon, Weinel.
Texthooks on Systematic Theology: arts. ‘‘Bekehrung"’
hy R. Seeherg; ‘‘ Wiedergehurt’’ by O. Kirn in Hauck-
Herzog RE:; *‘ Regeneration” by J. V. Bartlett in HDB;
“Conversion” hy J. Strachan in ERE; George Jackson,
The Fact of Conversion, London, 1908; Newton H.
Marshall, Conversion; or, the New Birth, London, 1909;
J. Herzog, Der Begriff der Bekehrung, Giessen, 1903;
P. Feine, Bekehrungim NT und in der Geyenwart, Leipzig,
1908; P. Gennrich, Die Lehre von der Wiedergeburt, Leipzig,
1907. Psychological: W.James, Varieties vf Religious Ex-
perience, 189-258; G. Stanley Hall, Advlescence, II, 281-
362; G. A. Coe, The Spiritual Life, New York, 1900; E.
D. Starhuck, Psychology of Religion, New York, 1911;
G. B. Cutten, Psychological Phenomena of Christianity,
London, 1909; H . Warner, The Psychology of the
Christian Life, New York, 1910; H. W. Clark, The
Philosophy of Christian Experience, London, 1906; Harold
Beghie, Broken Earthenware, or Twice-Born Afen, London,
1909; M. Scott Fletcher, The Psychology of the NT,
London, 1912.

JoHwn L. NugELSEN

REGENERATION, BAPTISMAL. See Bap-


TISMAL REGENERATION,


REGION, réjun: A “‘district,’? as m modern
Eng. The word “region” is used by EV inter-
changeably with “country,” “coasts,” ete, for
various Heb and Gr terms, but “region round
about”’ is usually in AV and invariably in RV the
tr of meptywpos, perichoros, “surrounding country.”
For a possible technical use of ‘‘region’”’ in Acts 16
6 and RV 18 23; see GauaTia.


REGISTER, rej’is-tér.
RINIUS.


See GmeNnEALOGY; Qui-


REHABIAH, ré-ha-bi’a (7304, rhabhyah,
WV, rhabhyahi, “Jeh is wide’): Son of Eliezer,
and grandson of Moses. Eponym of a Levitical
family (1 Ch 23 17; 24 21; 26 25).


REHEARSE, ré-hirs’ (OW, sam, AI, dabhar,
Ta}, ndghadh, 1M, tanadh; avayy&dAw, anaggélld):
Usually means simply “to relate,” “to tell,” “to
declare’ (Ex 17 14; Jgs 56 11; 1S 8 21; 17 31;
Acts 14 27); with “rehearse from the beginning”
in Acts 11 4 for dpxopat, drchomat, “begin” (so RV).
RV has preserved uniformity by translating anaggelld
by “rehearse” also in Acts 15 4, and has mtroduced
“rehearse’’ as the tr of éEyyéouat, exégéomai, through-
out (Lk 24 35; Acts 10 8; 16 12.14; 21 19), except
in Jn 1 18 (‘declare’). Sir 19 7, AV has “rehearse”
for devrepbw, deuterdd, “‘repeat’’ (so RV).


REHOB, ré‘hob (255, rehobh; ‘PosB, Rhodb,
‘Paap, Rhadb):

(1) Etymologically the word means “broad”
and might he applied either to a road or a plain.
Rehob is given (Nu 18 21) as the northern limit


2551


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Regeneration
Rehoboam


of Israel as reached by the spies. This agrees with
the position assigned to Beth-rehob in the narrative
of the settlement of the Danites (Jgs 18 28). It
is mentioned again along with the kingdom of
Zobah in connection with the wars of Saul (1 S 14
47 LXX Lag.), and as having been associated with
Zobah and Maacah against David in the Ammon-
ite war and as having been defeated by him (2 8
10 6). Robinson sought to identify it with Hunin,
but it hardly suits the references. Buhl (GAP,
240) following Thomson (LB, II, 547) seeks it at
Paneas (modern Bénias). This would suit all the
requirements of the capital, Beth-rehob, which
might then be the second Rehob, assigned as part of
the territory of Sidon to the tribe Asher (Josh 19
28.30; Jgs 18 28). We must, however, assign
to the kingdom of Rehob a territory extending
from the settlements of the Danites to the ‘“enter-
ing in of Hamath” or to Libo (modern Leboue),
ie. the Great Plain of Coele-Syria bounded by
Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon and within the limits
indicated.

(2) Two separate towns belonging to Asher
(Josh 19 28; 19 80). One of them was given to
the Gershonite Levites (Josh 21 31), and one is
mentioned as remaining in the hands of the Canaan-
ites (Jgs 1 31).

(3) Father of Hadadezer, king of Aram Zobah,
who was overwhelmed by David at the Euphrates
(28 8 3.12).

(4) One of the Levites who sealed Nehemiah’s
covenant on the 24th Tishri, 444 BC (Neh 10 11).

W. M. Curisnis

REHOBOAM, ré-hi-bé’am (OF3I39, rhabh‘am,
“the people is enlarged,’ or perhaps ‘‘Am is wide’’;
‘PoBoap, Rhobodm; ‘“Roboam,” Mt 1 7 AV):

The Disruption of the Kingdom
Cad eee of Disruption
Shemaiah Forhids Civil War
Rehoboam’s Prosperity


Shishak’s Invasion
His Death


The son and successor of Solomon, the last king
to claim the throne of old Israel and the first king
of Judah after the division of the kingdom. He
was born c 978 BC. His mother was Naamah, an
Ammonitess. The account of his reign is contained
in 1 K 14 21-31; 2 Ch 10-12. The incidents
leading to the disruption of the kingdom are told
in 1 K 11 43—12 24; 2 Ch 9 31—11 4.

R. was 41 years old (2 Ch 12 13) when he began
to reign (LXX 1 K 12 24a says 16 years). He

ascended the throne at Jerus imme-
1. The Dis- diately upon his father’s death with


a ie


ruption apparently no opposition. North
of the Israel, however, was dissatisfied, and
Kingdom the people demanded that the king


meet them in popular assembly at
Shechem, the leading city of Northern Israel. True,
Israel was no longer, if ever, an elective monarchy.
Nevertheless, the people claimed a constitutional
privilege, based perhaps on the transaction of
Samuel in the election of San] (1 8 10 25), to be
a party to the conditions under which they would
serve a new king and he become their ruler. David,
in making Solomon his successor, had ignored this
wise provision, and the people, having lost. such
a privilege by default, naturally deemed their neg-
ligence the cause of Solomon’s burdensome taxes
and forced labor. Consequently, they would be
more jealous of their rights for the future, and R.
accordingly would have to accede to their demand.
Having come together at Shechem, the people agreed
to accept R. as their king on condition that he
would lighten the grievous service and burdensome
taxes of his father. R. asked for three days’ time in
which to consider the request. Against the advice


|


of men of riper judgment, who assured him that he
might win the people by becoming their servant,
he chose the counsel of the younger men, who were
of his own age, to rule by sternness rather than by
kindness, and returned the people a rough answer,
saying: “My father made your yoke heavy, but I
will add to your yoke: my father chastised you with
whips, but I will chastise yon with scorpions”
dK 12 14). R., however, misjudged the temper
of the people, as well as his own ability. The
people, led by Jeroboam, a leader more able than
himself, were ready for rebellion, and so force lost
the day where kindness might have won. The
threat of the king was met by the Marscillaise of
the people: “What portion have we in David?
neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse:
to your tents, O Israel: now see to thine own house,
David” (1 K 12 16). Thus the ten tribes de-
throned R., and elected Jeroboam, their champion
and spokesman, their king (see Jeropoam). R.,
believing in his ability to carry out his threat (1 Kk
12 14), sent Adoram, his taskmaster, who no doubt
had quelled other disturbances, to subdue the popu-
lace, which, insulted by indignities and enraged
by R.’s renewed insolence, stoned his messenger to
death. Realizing, for the first time, the seriousness
of the revolt, R. fled ignominiously back to Jerus,
king only of Judah and of the adjacent territory of
the tribe of Benjamin. The mistake of R. was the
common mistake of despots. He presumed too
much on privilege not earned by service, and on
power for which he was not willing to render ade-
quate compensation.


It is a mistake, however, to see in the disruption the
shattering of a kingdom that had long been a harmonious


wee o ETO (ae earliest tings the con-
ederation of tribes was imperfectly cement-
2. Underly- cq.” ‘They seldom united against their com-
ing Causes mon foe. No mention is made of Judah
of Disrup- in the list of tribes who fought with Deh-
tion orah against Sisera. A chain of cities held


hy the Canaanites, stretching across the
country from E. to W., kept the North
and the South apart. Different physical characteristics
produced different types of life in the two sections. Old
jealousies repeatedly fanned into new flame intensified
the divisions due to natural and artificial causes. David
labored hard to break down the old antagonisms, but
even in his reign Israel rehelled twice. Northern Israel
had produced many of the strongest leaders of the
nation, and it was not easy for them to suhmit to a
ruler from the Judaean dynasty. Solomon, following
David's policy of unification, drew the tribes closely
together through the centralization of worship at Jerus
and through the general splendor of his reign, but he,
more than any other, finally widened the gulf hetween
the North and the South, through his unjust discrimi-
nations, his heavy taxes, his forced labor and the gen-
eral extravagances of his reign. The religion of Jeh
was the only bond capable of holding the nation together.
The apostasy of Solomon severed this bond. The
prophets, with their profound knowledge of religious
ane political values, saw_less danger to the true wor-
ship of Jeh in a divided kingdom than in a united
nation ruled over by R., who had neither political
sagacity nor an adequate conception of the greatness of
the religion of Jeh. Accordingly, Ahijah openly en-
courased the revolution, while Shemaiah gave it passive
support.


Immediately upon his return to Jerus, R. col-
lected a large army of 180,000 men (reduced to
120,000 in LXX B), for the purpose


3. She- of making war against Israel. The
maiah expedition, however, was forbidden
Forbids by Shemaiah the prophet on the
Civil War ground that they should not fight


against their brethren, and that the
division of the kingdom was from God. Notwith-
standing the prohibition, we are informed that
“there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam
continually” (1 K 14 80; 2 Ch 1215). |
R. next occupied himself in strengthening the
territory which still remained to him by fortifying
a number of cities (2 Ch 11 5-12). These cities
were on the roads to Egypt, or on the western hills


Rehoboth
Rekem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2552


of the Judaean Shephelah, and were doubtless forti-
fied as a protection against Egypt. According to
2 Ch 11 13-17, Rehoboam’s prosperity


4. Reho- was augmented by an immigration of
boam’s priests and Levites from Israel, who
Prosperity came to Jerus because of their opposi-


tion to the idolatrous worship insti-
tuted by Jeroboam. All who were loyal to Jeh
in the Northern Kingdom are represented as follow-
ing the example of the priests and Levites in going
to Jerus, not simply to sacrifice, but to reside there
permanently, thus strengthening R.’s kingdom.
In view of the fact that R. added to the innovations
of his father, erected pillars of Baal in Jerus long
before they were common in Northern Israel, and
that he permitted other heathen abominations and
immoralities, it seems that the true worship of Jeh
received little encouragement from the king him-
self. As a further evidence of his prosperity, Ch
gives an account of R.’s family. Evidently he was
of luxurious habit and followed his father in the
possession of a considerable harem (2 Ch 11 18-23).
He is said to have had 18 wives and 60 concubines,
(2 Ch 11 21; LXX B and Jos, Ant, VIII, x, 1
give ‘30 concubines’’).
One of the direct results of the disruption of the
kingdom was the invasion of Pal by Shishak, king
of Egypt, in the 5th year of R. Shi-


5. Shi- shak is Sheshonk IJ, the first king of
shak’s the XXIId or Bubastite Dynasty. He
Invasion is the same ruler who granted hospi-


tality to Jeroboam when he was obliged
to flee from Solomon (1 K 11 40). The LXX
(1 K 12 24e) informs us that Jeroboam married Ano,
the sister of Shishak’s wife, thus becoming brother-
in-law to the king of Egypt. It is therefore easy
to suppose that Jeroboam, finding himself in straits
in holding his own against his rival, Rehoboam,
called in the aid of his former protector. The results
of this invasion, however, are inscribed on the
temple at Karnak in Upper Egypt, where a list of
some 180 (Curtis, “Chronicles,” 1CC) towns cap-
tured by Shishak is given. These belong to North-
ern Israel as well as Judah, showing that Shishak
exacted tribute there as well as in Judah, which
seems scarcely reconcilable with the view that he
invaded Pal as Jeroboam’s ally. However, the
king of Israel, imploring the aid of Shishak against
his rival, thereby made himself vassal to Egypt.
This would suffice to make his towns figure at Kar-
nak among the cities subjected in the course of tbe
campaign. The Chronicler saw in Shishak an
instrument in the hand of God for the punishment
of R. and the people for the national apostasy.
According to 2 Ch 12 3, Shishak had a force of
1,200 chariots and 60,000 horsemen to which Jos
adds 400,000 foot-soldiers, composed of Lubim,
Sukkiim and Ethiopians. No resistance appears
to have been offered to the advance of the invading
army. Not even Jerus seems to have stood a siege.
The palace and the temple were robbed of all their
treasures, including the shields of gold which Solo-
mon had made. For these R. later substituted
shields of brass (vs 9.10). R. died at the age of
fifty-eight, after having reigned in Jerus for 17


years. His son Abijah became his
6. His successor. He was buried in Jerus.
Death Jos says that in disposition he was a


proud and foolish man, and that he

“despised the worship of God, till the people them-
selves imitated his wicked actions” (Ant, VITI, x, 2).

8. K. Mosman

REHOBOTH, ré-hd’both, ré-ho’both (niahn,
rehobhoth, “broad places”; Hvipvxwela, Furuchiria):
One of the wells dug by Isaac (Gen 26 22). It is
probably the Rubuta of the Am Tab (Petrie, nos.


256, 260; see also Expos T, XI, 239 [KG6nig], 377
[Sayce]), and it is almost certainly identical with the
tuin Ruhaibeh, 8 hours 8.W. of Beersheba. Reobin-
son (BR, I, 196-97) describes the ruins of the an-
cient city as thickly covering a “level tract of 10
to 12 acres in extent’; “many of the dwellings had
each its cistern, cut in the solid rock’’; ‘once this
must have been a city of not less than 12,000 or
15,000 inhabitants. Now it is a perfect field of
Tuins, a scene of unutterable desolation, across
which the passing stranger can with difficulty find
his way.” Huntington (Pal and Its Transforma-
tion, 124) describes considerable remains of a sub-
urban population extending both to the N. and to
the 8. of this once important place.
E. W. G. MasTerman

REHOBOTH BY THE RIVER (17020 riahn,
rhabhoth ha-ndhar; B, ‘PowBo0 [PwBoe in Ch]
i rapa worapev, Rhodbith [RAdbdth] hé pard potamon,
A, ‘PoBe0, Rhdbdth): This city is mentioned_only
as the residence of Shaul, one of the rulers of Edom
(Gen 36 37; 1 Ch 1 48). There is nothing to
guide us with certainty as to the situation of the
city. Onom places it m Idumaea (Gebalene), but
no trace of a name resembling this has been found
in the district. ‘The river’ usually means the
Euphrates. If the city could have been so far from
Edom, it might be identified with Rahaba on the
W. of the river, 8 miles 8. of its confluence with the
Khabir. Winckler thinks it might possibly be on
the boundary between Pal and Egypt, ‘‘the river”
being Wédy el-‘Arish, ‘‘the brook of Egypt’? (Nu 34
5; Josh 15 4, etc). W. Ewine


REHOBOTH-IR,r.-t1,r-ir(W9 MAM, rhobhoth
Gr, “Rehoboth City”; LXX 4 ‘PowPbs [PowB0]
wodts, hé Rhodbds [Rhodbéth] polis,
1. Probably “the city Rhodbds, Rhodbdth”): The
Rébit second of the cities built by Asshur
Ninua (RV by Nimrod) in Assyria (Gen 10
11.12). Unlike the other three, the
exact equivalent of this name is not found in Assyr
lit. Fried. Delitzsch points out (Wo lag das Para-
dies? 260f) that rehdbhath is the equivalent of the
Assyr rébite, “‘streets,” and suggests that the site
referred to may be the Rébit Ninua, “‘streets of
Nineveh,” mentioned by Sargon of Assyria in con-
nection with the peopling of Maganubba (IXhorsa-
bad or Dir-Sarru-kin; see NINEVEH); and it was
through this tract that Esar-haddon, his grandson,
caused the heads of the kings of Kundi and Sidon
to be carried in procession when he returned from
his expedition to the Mediterranean.
Though the probabilities in favor of Rébit Ninua
are great, it is doubtful whether a suburb could
have been regarded as a foundation
2. Or, Pos- worthy of a primitive ruler, and that


sibly, the a very important city, ASSur, the old
Old Capi- capital of Assyria, would rather be
tal, ASSur expected. One of the groups express-


< ing its name is composed of the char-
acters Sag-uru, or, dialectically, Sab-eri, the second
element being the original of the Heb ‘ir. As the
“center-city,” Assur may have been regarded as the
city of broad spaces (r¢hdbhdth)—its ruins are of
considerable extent. The German explorers there
have made many important discoveries of temples,
temple-towers, palaces and streets, the most pictur-
esque anciently being the twin tower-temples of Anu
(the sky) and Adad (Hadad). The ruins lie on the
Tigris, about 50 miles 8. of Nineveh. It practically
ceased to be the capital about the middle of the 8th
cent. BC. See Ninsven. T. G. PincHes


REHOUM, rée’hum (050, rham, or BM, rehum):
(1) One of the twelve heads of the Jewish com-


2553


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Rehoboth
Rekem


munity returning from captivity with Zerubbabel
(Ezr 22; Neh 7 7 [by a copyist’s error “Nehum’’];
12 3; 1 Esd 5 8, ‘‘Roimus’”’).
_ (@) A Pers officer of high rank (lit. “master of
judgment, taste, reason”) who with others wrote
a letter against Jerus to King Artaxerxes (Ezr 4
8.9.17.23).

(3) Son of Bani, a Levite, one of the wall-builders
under Nehemiah (Neh 3 17).


oe One of the signers of the covenant in Neh


(5) In Neh 12 3 (omitted in LXX) one Rehum
is mentioned with those who went up with Zerub-
babel. It is probable that we should read here
‘Harim” (OV for DAM of 12 15).

W._N. Stearns

REI, ré1 (1, réi, “friendly”; ‘Pyoel, Rhéset):
Rei, Shimei and the Gibbérim who belonged to
David are listed among those who did not join
Adonijah in his attempt on the throne (1 K 1 8).
The name is very uncertain. Winckler (Geschichte,
II, 247) identifies him with Ira, the Jairite, who was
a “priest to David’ (2 S 20 26 RVm); he tries
to prove that this Ira (or Jair) was a priest of Beth-
lehem. Stade (GVI, I, 293, n. 1) holds that Shi-
mei and Rei were two officers of David’s body-
guard. Jos (Ant, VII, xiv, 4) has 6 Aaouldov fos,
ho Daouidou philos, thus making Shimei a “friend,”
the courtier of 2 8 15 37; 16 16, and omitting
Rei entirely. This would call for an original read-
ing JOT M1, re" ha-melekh, or F2QI API, rach
ha-melekh, and is too wide a variant from the MT.
Assnming that Rei belongs in the text, it is safe
to conjecture that he was an officer of the royal
guard. Horace J. WouF


REIGN, ran: The Heb word MID, malekhith,


may be rendered “kinghood,’’ “royal dignity,”
“kingdom,” “government” (“reign”). The vb. is
72, madlakh, ‘to be king” (‘to reign as king’),
“to become king,’ ‘‘to accede to the throne,” ‘“‘to
assume royal power publicly” and, generally speak-
ing, ‘‘to become powerful.” In the NT qyeuovla,
hégemonia, Bacrrela, basileia, Baciredew, bas-
iletiein. he word is used, either as a noun or as
a vb., of Jeh (God), the Messiah (Christ) and men
(kings, etc); then of such terms as sin, death,
grace; of the woman in Rev and, conditionally, of
the Christians; once, ironically, of the Corinthians.
“Reign” as a noun referring to the time of reign-
ing occurs in 1K 61 (Solomon), 2 K 24 12
(Nebuchadnezzar); 1 Ch 4 31 (David; ef 1 Ch 29
30); 2 Ch 36 20 (“until the reign of the kingdom
of Persia”); Neh 12 22 (Darius); Est 2 16
(Ahasuerus); Lk 31 (Tiberius Caesar). _ More
often occurs the vb. “‘to reign,’’ mdlakh, basileuein.
It is applied to: (1) Jeh at the close of the song of
Moses (Ex 15 18); ‘“Jeh reigneth” (1 Ch 16 31;
ef Ps93 1; 9610; 991; Rev 19 8); God
reigneth over the nations” (Ps 47 8); Jeh of
hosts will reign in mount Zion” (Isa 24 rae ef Mic
47); “Thy God reigneth” (Isa 62 7); Thou hast
taken thy great power, and didst reign” (Rev 11 17,
meaning, probably, “thou didst assume thy might”);
(2) the Messiah (Christ) as a just and righteous
king (Jer 23 5); an eternal king (Lk 1 33; ef
Rev 11 15); punishing and subduing His enemies
(Lk 19 14.27; 1 Cor 16 28).


(18 13 1;cf11 12); of Saul's son Ish-hosheth (2 8 2 10);
of David (2 8 5 4f;cf 3 21); of Adonijah (1 1 11.24;
ef 2 15); of Solomon (1 K 1 13); quite pouuently of the
kings of Judah and Israel (in the Books of K and Ch); of
the kings of Edom (Gen 36 31); of Jabin, king of Canaan,
in Hazor (Jgs 4 2); of Abimelech, Jeruhhaal's son, in
Jotham’s fahle (Jgs 9 8-15); of Hanun, king of the Am-
monites (2 8 10 1); of Rezon and his men in Damascus
(1 K 11 24); of Hazacl and Ben-hadad, kings of Syria
2K 8 15 and 13 24); of Esar-haddon, king of Assyria
2 K 19 37); of Ahasuerus, king of Persia (Est 1 1); of
Archelaus (Mt 2 22).


(4) In the NT the term basileuein, “to reign,”
is used to illustrate and emphasize the power of
sin, death and grace (Rom 5 14.17.21 and 6 12).
Sin, the vitiating mental factor, is to be looked upon
as being constantly and resolutely bent on main-
taining or regaining its hold upon man, its power
being exercised and reinforced by the lusts of the
body. Death, the logical outcome of sin, at once
testifies to the power of sin and its inherent corrup-
tion, while grace is the restoring spiritual factor
following up and combating everywhere and always
the pernicious influence of sin. It strives to de-
throne sin, and to establish itself in man as the only
dominating force. (5) In describing the future
glorious state of the believers, the NT uses the
expression of those who endure (in faith; ef 2 Tim
2 12); of those ‘purchased unto God with the
blood of the Lamb’ (Rev 5 10); of those partaking
in the first resurrection (Rev 20 6); of the servants
of God, “‘they shall reign for ever and ever’ (22 5);
on the other hand, it teaches us not to anticipate
the privileges of heaven, while our Christian life is
anything but satisfactory (1 Cor 4 8), and Rev 17
18 shows us the terrible fate of the woman, the
great city (the corrupt church), “which reigneth
over the kings of the earth.” See further Krne,
Kunepom. WituiamM Baur


REINS, ranz (23, kilyah; vebpés, nephros,
words promiscuously tr’ “‘heart,”’ “inward parts,”
“kidneys” or “reins.”’ The latter word, which is
derived from Lat renes through OFr. reins, has
given place in modern Eng. to the word “kidneys”
[see Skeat, Concise Etymological Dictionary of the
Eng. Language, 398]. RV has, however, retained
the older word, at least in the m, in all passages in
which it is found in AV): According to Heb psy-
chology the reins are the seat of the deepest emo-
tions and affections of man, which God alone ean
fully know. Thus RV has substituted “heart” for
‘ eins” in the text of Job 19 27; Ps 7 9; 16 7;
26 2; 73 21; Prov 23 16; Jer 11 20; 12 2; 17
10; 20 12; the tr “inward parts” is found but
once (Ps 139 13). In one passage AV has tr the
Heb hale (“loins’’) with ‘reins’ (Isa 11 5), where
the RV has rightly substituted “waist” (q.v.). The
Gr word nephros (which is etymologically allied to
the Middle Eng. nere, Ger. Niere; see Skeat, ibid,
231, s.v. ‘“Kidney’’) is found in 1 Mace 2 24; Rev
2 23. See Kipneys. H. L. BE. Luserina


REKEM, ré’kem (OP7, rekem, ‘“friendship’’):

(1) One of the five kings of Midian slain by the
Israelites under Moses (Nu 31 8; Josh 13 21
(B, ‘Péfox, Rhdébok, A, ‘Péxop, Rhékom]). Like his
companions, he is called a “king” in Nu, but a
“prince” or “chieftain” in the passage in Josh.
The two references are hardly related; both are
based on an earlier tradition.

(2) Eponym of a Calebite family (1 Ch 2 43
(‘Péxou, Rhékom]). Probably a town in Southern
Judah. A town of this name is given as belonging
to Benjamin (Josh 18 27).

(3) _A city of Benjamin, mentioned with Irpeel
and Taralah (Josh 18 27); the site is unknown.
See also RaKEM. Horace J. Wour


Relationships


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2554


RELATIONSHIPS, ré-la’shun-ships, FAMILY:


I. ConsaNGuINITY
1. In General
2. Parents and Children
3. Brothers and Sisters
4. Uncles, Aunts, Cousins, Kinsmen


II. A¥FFiniry
1. Husband and Wife
2. Father-in-Law, etc
3. Brother-in-Law, etc
III. Orner Domestic Reiations
1. Foster-Father
2. Master and Servants
3. Host and Guest
4, The Dependent Stranger

The family or domestic relations of the Bible in-
clude (1) those of consanguinity or blood relation-
ship, (2) affinity or marriage relationship, and (3)
legal convention. Those of consanguinity may be
divided into lineal and collateral groups; the former
are those of parents and children, grandparents and
grandchildren, and ancestors and descendants in
general; the latter are those of brothers and sisters,
uncles and aunts in relation to nephews and nieces,
consins of various degrees, including mere tribes-
men and even remoter kinsfolk. The relations of
affinity include besides that of husband and wife
or concubine, the relations among rival wives, and
their children, those of father-in-law and mother-
in-law in relation to son-in-law and daughter-in-
law, and those of brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law.
The domestic relations based on legal convention
are either legal fictions or the results of agreement:
among the former we must include those of foster-
father or mother and foster-children; among the
latter the relations between master and the various
classes of servants and slaves held by the ancient
Hebrews, those between host and guest, esp. where
they became covenant brothers, and between the
citizen and the stranger who bad attached himself
to him for his protection.

I. Consanguinity.—Genealogies were carefully
kept by the ancient Hebrews (cf those of Gen, Nu,
Ch, Ezr, Neh, Mt, Lk), not only be-
cause they formed the basis of a man’s
title to his property (Nu 27 8-11;
exceptional case, 36 1-12), but also
because on one’s pedigree depended the right of his
family to Intermarry with the priestly caste. De-
scent was traced through the father; a man’s closest
association was therefore with his father’s family,
and he was ordinarily referred to as the son of his
fatber, thus Isaac the son of Abraham (Gen 26 19),
Joshua the son of Nun, Caleb the son of Jephunneh
(Nu 14 6). Still there are instances of men named
for their mothers (Joab the son of Zeruiah), and a
man’s relation with his mother’s family was fully
recognized in the laws forbidding incest. No lineal
relatives were permitted to mtermarry (Lev 18
7.10). The relations of ancestors and descendants
were considered so close that the ordinary terms of
relationship between children and parents are used
constantly in relation to grandparents and remoter
ancestors. The wishes of a great-grandfather are
respected long after his death as the wishes of a
father (Jer 35 16).

The father (AR , ?abh; wathp, patér) was the
head of the family (mishpahah) or household (ba-

yith), which was _a religious (1 § 20
2. Parents 6.29; Ex 12 3; Job 15) as well as
and a social and political unit, consisting
Children usually of a combination of families

in themodern sense. As long as polyg-
amy prevailed a family would include at least the
several groups of children of the wives and concu-
bines. The Bible represents the Ifcb father as
commanding (Gen 50 16; Jer 35 6 ff; Prov 6 20),
instructing (Prov 18; 4 1), and rebuking (Gen
37 10; Nu 12 14); at the same time, as loving


1. In
General


(Gen 26 28; 387 4; 44 20), pitying (Ps 103 i2),
and blessing his household (Gen 27 41), rejoicing
over its triumphs (Prov 10 1; 15 20), or grieving
over its misfortunes (Gen 37 35). The mother,
too (DN, ’ém; wirnp, métér), naturally displays love
and care (Gen 25 28; Prov 4 3; Isa 49 15; 66
13). To the Heb woman childlessness was con-
sidered the greatest of misfortunes (1 8 1 10 ff,
of Hannah; Gen 30 23, of Rachel). Children were
looked upon as a blessing from God (Ps 127 3) and
the defenders of the home (vs 4.5). In early life
a child was more directly under the control of the
mother than the father; the mother was its first
teacher (Prov 1 8). Thereafter the father was ex-
pected to direct the training of the son (ja, bén;
ulés, huids, téxvov, téknon) (Gen 18 19; Ex 12
26; 13 8.14.15; Dt 6 7), while the daughter (M23,
bath; Ovydrnp, thugdtér) probably remained with
the mother until her marriage (Mic 7 6). Both
parents are looked upon in the Law as objects of
honor (Ex 20 12 || Dt 5 16 [the Fifth Command-
ment]; Ex 21 15; Lev 209; Dt 27 16; Prov
20 20; Ezk 22 7; Mic 7 6), obedience (Gen 28
7; Lev 193; Dt 21 18ff; Prov 18; 30 17)
and love (1 K 19 20; Prov 28 24; 30 11). The
control of parents was so great as to include the
right to sell daughters in marriage, but not, without
restrictions, into slavery (Ex 21 7-i1; cf 22 16 ff;
Neh 65 5), and never into a life of shame (Lev 19
29); they could chastise children (Dt 8 5; 21 18;
Prov 13 24; ef Ecclus 30 1-13), and in the early
days even exerted the power of life and death over
them (Gen 22; Jgs 11 39; Lev 18 21; 20 2-5;
2 K 23 10; cf Mt 164). This power, at least
for sacrificial purposes, was entirely removed by the
Law, and changed, even for punishment, in the case
of astubborn, rebellious, gluttonous and disobedient
son to a mere right of complaint to the proper au-
thorities (Dt 21 18-21), who were to put him to
death. Infanticide by exposure, such as was com-
mon among other ancient peoples, seems never
to have been practised by the Hebrews. That the
children were nevertheless the chattels of the parents
seems to be attested from the fact that they could
be seized for the debts of the father (2 K 4 1).
The father could annul the vows of his daughter
(Nu 30 3-5), and damages for wrongs done to her
were paid to him, as in Eng. law ‘for loss of serv-
ices” (Dt 22 29). A widowed or divorced daughter
could return to her father (Gen 88 11; Lev 22 13;
Ruth 1 15). At his death the mother would be-
come the actual, if not the legal, head of the house-
hold (2 Kk 8 1-6, the Shunammite woman; Tob
1 8, Tobit’s grandmother; cf the position of the
mother of Jesus). This was esp. true of the queen
mother (g*bhirah), whose name is usually given in
the accounts of the kings of Judah (i K 1 11;
2 19, where a throne at the king’s right hand was
set for the king’s mother; 11 26; 14 21.31; 15 2.10.
13; 22 42; 2 K 8 26; 10 13; 14 2; 16 2.33; 18
2; 211.19; 22 1; 23 31.36; 24 8.12.15.18; 2 Ch
22 2; Jer 13 18; 22 26; see QueEN Moruer).
While it is true that the position of the widowed
mother depended to some extent on the will of her
son (1 K 2 18 ff), it must be remembered that the
sense of filial duty was highly developed among all
classes in Pal (Josh 2 13.18; 6 23; 1S 22 3;258
19 87; 1 K 19 20). The rebellion of children
marked the acme of social degeneration (Mic 7 6;
Prov 30 11); on the other hand the “great day”
according to Malachi (4 5 [Heb 3 23]) is one of
conciliation of parents and children.

The terms “brother” (ON, ’ah; d8eAgds, adel-
phés) and “sister” (MN , ’ahdth; 456%, adelphé)
apply io children of the same father and mother
(Gen 4 2), and also to children of one father (Gen


2555


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Relationships


20 12) or of one mother (Gen 43 7; Lev 18 9; 20
17). The brother as well as the father was the
natural protector of the honor of his

3. Brothers sister; thus, the sons of Jacob speak of
and Sisters Dinah as “‘our daughter” (Gen 34 17).
_ Absalom feels more deeply aggrieved

over the crime against Tamar than does David him-
self (2 8 13 21). Thebrother’s other duties toward
a sister were very much like those of a father (Cant
8 8). The Law strictly forbids the intermarriage of
brother and sister, whether of the same father and
mother or not, whether born at home or born
abroad, as a “disgraceful thing” (hesedh, a different
word from hegedh, “kindness” (Lev 18 9.11; 20
17). In carher times marriage between half-brother
and sister was allowable (Gen 20 12; cf 2S 18
13). In fact, we are expressly told that the laws
against incest were not obeyed by the Egyptians or
the Canaanites (Lev 18 3 ff; 20 23). Brotherly
sentiment was highly developed (Gen 24 60; Josh
2 13; Prov 17 17; cf Lev 26 35; Dt 16 11f; 25
3); the dwelling of brothers together in unity is
considered good and pleasant (Ps 133 1). Brothers
were cver ready to protect or avenge each other
(2 S 3 27). Indeed, it is part of the unwritten,
common law, recognized though not necessarily
approved in the Bible, that the brother or next of
kin, the g’él, is expected to avenge a death (Nu 35
19ff; Dt 19 6; Josh 20 38; 2S 14 11), and no
punishment is meted out to prevent such self-help,
unless it occurs in a refuge-city. A brother was
also expected to ransom a captive or slave (Lev 26
48; Ps 49 7). Half-brothers were of course not
so near as brothers of the full blood (cf Joseph and
his brothers), and it is not surprising to find the sons
of a wife despising and driving out the son of a
harlot (Jgs 11 1, Jephthah). The words “brother’’
and “sister” are used frequently of more distant
relationships (see below) and figuratively of a friend.
The Heb "7%, dédh (Lev 10 4, “uncles”; Nu
36 11, ‘cousins’; 15 14 50), coming from a
primitive caressing word, possibly in-


4. Uncles, dicating ‘‘dandle,” “fondle,” “ove,”
Aunts, ? means both “uncle” and “beloved.”
Cousins, It is used of the father’s and also of the
Kinsmen Mother’s brother, and the correspond-


ing fem. form (TIT), dodhdh) is used
of the father’s sister (Ex 6 20; cf Nu 26 59) and
even of the father’s brother’s wife (Lev 18 14; 20
20). Intermarriage between nephew and aunt
(ie. father’s sister, mother’s sister, or father’s
brother’s wife, or, in general, uncle’s wife) was pro-
hibited (Lev 18 12.13.14; 20 19.20), though
nothing is said of intermarriage between uncle and
niece nor between cousins (cf Nu 36 11). On the
relations between uncle and nephew compare the
Bible accounts of Jacob and Laban, Abraham and
Lot, David and Joab, etc. In a more general sense
the word dadh is used of kinsmen, Am 6 10 (where
the dédh, ‘‘even he that burneth him” [m*sar°phé,
perhaps “maternal uncle”; Jew Enc, s.v. “Crema-
tion”), takes charge of a dead body); ben dodh is
used of cousin (cf ben ’éht ’immod, “son of the
brother of his mother,” etc) and bath dodh of a female
cousin. For other relations of this and remoter de-
grees the word for brother is loosely used (e.g. of
nephews, Gen 18 8; 14 14, etc; of tribesmen, Lev
21 10; and of more distant relatives, Dt 2 4.8;


7). A
I Affinity. —The husband (U"8, ‘ish; cf bya,
ba‘al, Hos 2 16; ap, anér), though in a sense
leaving father and mother for his wife
1. Husband (TWN, Vishshah; yur}, guné) (Gen 2
and Wife 24), under normal conditions remained


a member of his father’s family. If
such passages as Gen 2 24; 21 10; 24 5.67; 30 3;


31 31; Jgs 4 17 ff; 65 24ff; 8 19; 9 3, indicate
the existence in pre-Bib. times of a matriarchate,
the allusions are at least too vague to justify the
predication of its persistence in Bib. times. The
wife was “taken” by her husband, or “given” by her
father or, in the case of a servant, by her master or
mistress (Gen 2 22; 16 3; 34 9.21), and although
the contract was between the men (Gen 29; 34 16;
Ex 22 16; Dt 22 29; Ruth 4 10) or the parents
(Gen 21 21; 24), it is probable that the consent
of the girl was usually asked (Gen 24 58). Love
between the young people was given due consid-
eration (as in the case of Samson, Shechem, Jacob
and Rachel (Gen 29 18], David and Michal [1 8
18 20]); at least it developed among married people,
so that Hosea could compare the attitude of hus-
band toward wife to that of Jeh toward Israel. As
a matter of legal right, it is probable that throughout
the Orient long before the events narrated in the
Book of Est, every man did “bear rule in his own
house” (Est 1 22). In fact a precedent for the
Pers decree has been traced as far back as the first
human pair (Gen 3 16). Nevertheless, we find
many instances in which the wife seems to take the
lead in the affairs of the household, as in the case of
Samson’s parents (Jgs 18 23), of the Shunammite
woman (2 K 4), of Jael (Jgs 4 18 ff; 5 24 ff), of
Achsah (Josh 15 18f; Jgs 1 12f), and in less
pleasant matters of Jezebel (1 K 18 4; 21), Sap-
phira (Acts 6 2), and Zeresh (Est & 14), who were
at least consulted in the affairs of their several
households. Abraham is even commanded by the
voice of God, ‘Tn all that Sarah saith unto thee,
hearken unto her voice” (Gen 21 12). That most
women were not so fortunate is probably best at-
tested by the fact that at least in the earlier times
the best of them had to resort to stratagem to ac-
complish their purposes (as in the cases of Rebekah
[Gen 27 6 ff], Rachel [Gen 31 34], Leah [Gen 30
16] and Abigail [1 S 25 18 ff], and even to get
information as to their husband’s affairs [Sarah,
Gen 18 10; Rebekah, Gen 27 5]). Perhaps their
humbler sisters in later days accomplished their
ends by being so contentious as to attract the notice
of two proverb-collectors (Prov 219; 25 24).
Though we have no instance of the exercise of the
right of life and death over the wife by the husband,
and though it is clear that the Heb husband had no
power of sale (cf Ex 21 8), it is frequently asserted
on the basis of the one-sided divorce doctrine of the
OT (Dt 24 1), and on the basis of analogy with
other ancient laws, as well as because the wife is
spoken of in conjunction with property (Ex 20 17)
and because the husband exercised the right to
annul the wife’s vows (Nu 30 6), that the wife
occupied in the ordinary Heb home a very subordi-
nate position. It must not be forgotten, however,
that the husband owed duties to the wife (Ex 21
10). It must also be borne in mind that great di-
vergence existed at different times and places, and
in different stations of society. Most of our OT
evidence pertains to the wealthier classes. The
two extremes of the women that are “at ease in
Zion” (Isa 32 9-20; cf Am 4 1 ff; 6 1 ff) and the


‘busy ‘good wife’ described in Prov 31 10 ff are


hardly exceeded in the most complex society today.
The latter probably gives the fairer as well as the
more wholesome picture of the functions of the wife
in the home, and it is significant that her husband as
well as her sons are expected to call her blessed
(Prov 31 28).

It is difficult to estimate the extent to which
polygamy and concubinage were practised in ancient
Pal, but it is clear that the former practice was dis-
couraged even among kings (Dt 17 17), and the
latter, an outgrowth of slavery, was not held in
high repute (cf Dt 21 10-14). The position of a


Relationships
Renew


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2556


less-favored wife (Dt 21 15, “hated’’) was natu-
rally unpleasant, and her relations with other wives
of her husband decidedly bitter—they were called
each other's ¢aréth, lit. ‘“‘vexers”’ (RV “rivals,” Lev
18 18; 18 16, AV “adversary”; ef Ecelus 37
11)—even when they were sisters (as in the case of
Rachel and Leah, Gen 30 1). Hence the Law
forbade the marrying of two sisters (Lev 18 18).
On the other hand so strong was the desire of a Heb
mother for children that the childless wife welcomed
the children of a maidservant born to her husband
as her own (Gen 30 1-12, etc).
In normal Heb society, for reasons already ex-
plained, the relations of a family with the husband’s
parents (OM, ham, from MAM, hamodth)
2. Father- were closer than those with the wife’s
in-Law, ete parents (JN, hodthén, fem. MDM,
hotheneth; mevGepds, -4, pentherds, -d).
Where nnder special conditions a man remained with
his wife’s tribe after marriage, as in the case of
Jacob, serving out his mdhar, or Moses fleeing from
the wrath of the Egyptians, or the sons of Elime-
lech sojourning in the land of Moab because of the
famine in Pal, his identity with his own tribe was
not destroyed, and at the first opportunity thenatu-
ral impulse was to return to his own country. The
bride, on the other hand, leaving her people, would
become a member of her husband’s family, with all
the rights and duties of a daughter (Mic 7 6).
Thus Judah can order Tamar burned for violation
of the obligations of a widow (Gen 38 24). No
doubt the position of the daughter-in-law varied
in the Heb home between the extremes of those
who vexed their parents-in-law unto the death
(Gen 26 35; 27 46; 28 8) and the one who said
to her mother-in-law, ‘“Jeh do so to me.... if
aught but death part thee and me” (Ruth 1 17).
Parents-in-law and children-in-law were considered
too closely related to intermarry (Lev 18 15;
20 12.14).
A woman’s brother acting in loco parentis might
perform all the offices of a father-in-law and possibly
be called hothén (Gen 24 50.55; 34
3. Brother- 11 ff). Naturally, brothers-in-law and
in-Law, ete sisters-in-law would be considered too
closely related to intermarry (Lev 18
16.18; 20 21). Nevertheless the husband’s brother
(EA2, yabham) was expected to marry the childless
widow to establish the name of the deceased on his
inheritance (Dt 26 5-10). This custom dated
back to Canaanitic practice (Gen 38 8), and from
the connection between marrying the childless
widow and the redemption of land may be called a
part of the land law of Pal (Ruth 4 1-12; ef Jer
32 6 ff). In practice the Levirate was probably
considered more in the nature of a moral duty than
a privilege (Dt 26 7; Ruth 4 6), and devolved
not only on the brother, but on other members of a
deceased husband’s family in the order of the near-
ness of their relationship to him (Ruth 3 12). In
the Heb family brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law
would form part of the same household. In this
relation as in others we find both ideal friendship
(David and Jonathan, 1S 18 8; 28 1 26) and
hoe jealousies (in the matter of Moses’ wife, Nu
Al


III, Other Domestic Relations.—The Heb 7S,
"amen, fem. NPN, *dmeneth (participle of ’aman),
lit. “nourishing,” is tr4 “nursing father”
(Nu 11 12; Isa 49 23), ‘nursing
mother” (Isa 49 23), “nurse” (Ruth
416; 25 44), or simply as the
equivalent of “bringing up” (2 K 10 1.5; Est 2 7).
In the case of Esther and of Ahab’s children, and
possibly in the other instances referred to, the rela-
- tion of foster-parents is suggested. The foster-


1. Foster-
Father


children under such conditions obeyed the words
of the foster-father as the words of a father (Est
2 20). Michal isspoken of as the mother of Merab’s
two children (2 8 21 8) because she reared them
(Sanhedhrin 19b). Adoption in the Rom sense was,
however, hardly to be expected in a polygamous
society where the childless father could remarry.
Nevertheless, Jacob adopts Manasseh and Ephraim
(Gen 48 5), and thereby makes them the fathers of
tribes. According to Jos, while Abraham was child-
less he adopted Lot (Ant, F, vii, 1), and the daughter
of Pharaoh adopted Moses (Ant, H, ix, 7; of Ex
210). In NT times the notion of adoption was so
familiar that Paul uses the word figuratively of
conversion (vloferta, huiothesia, Rom 8 15; 9 4;
Gal 4 5; Eph 1 5).
The “family” as the word is used of ancient
peoples included dependents. The Heb mishpadhah
is connected with the word shtphhah,
2. Master ‘“‘maidservant,” as the Lat familia
and is connected with famulus, ‘‘servant.”
Servants For a discussion of the various classes
of servants and slaves, Heb and foreign,
male and female, see SLAVERY.
When Lot protested against betraying his visitors
to the men of Sodom, forasmuch as they had come
under the shadow of his roof, and he
3. Host even preferred to give his daughters to
and Guest the mob rather than fail in his duties as
ahost (Gen 19 8), he was acting on the
ancient principle of guest-friendship (cf Gr xenia),
which bound host and guest by sacred ties. In
the light of this principle the act of Jael, who receives
Sisera as a guest, and then betrays him, becomes
startling and capable of explanation only on the
basis of the intense hatred existing at the time, and
justifiable, if at all, only on the theory that all is
fair in war (Jgs 4 18-21; 5 24-27). The nomads
of ancient times and even the post-exilic Hebrews, like
the Arabs of today, were bound by a temporary
covenant whenever there was ‘‘salt between them,”
that is, in the relation of host and guest (Ear 4 14;
ef the expression “‘covenant of salt,’ 2 Ch 13 5;
Nu 18 19). In the early Christian church break-
ing bread together served as a sort of a b*rith ’ahim,
or covenant of brothers. In large households such
as those of a king, those that ate at the table were
members of the household (2 8 9 11, compared
to sons; cf also 2 8 9 7.10.13; 19 28; 1 Kk 2 7;
4 27, 18 19). See Hospirariry.
The gér or stranger (as indicated by the expres-
sion ‘“‘thy stranger’ [Ex 20 10; Lev 26 6; Dt 5
14; 29 11; 31 12; cf Dt 1 16], Heb
4. The De- géré, lit. “his stranger’) attached
pendent himself to an influential Hebrew for
Stranger protection. Thus we read of a ‘‘so-
journer of the priest’s’ (Lev 22 10,
téshabh; cf 25 6) who was in many respects a de-
pendent, but stillto be distinguished from a serv-
ant (Lev 22 11). The Mosaic Law commands
that such strangers be treated with consideration
(Ex 12 49; 20 10; 22 21 ff; 239; Lev 19 33;
Dt 1 16; 10 18; 14 21, ete; Ps 146 9) and even
with love (Dt 16 14; Lev 19 34). See SrraNcER.
NatHan Isaacs anD ELLA Davis Isaacs
RELEASE, ré-lés’: (1) The forgiveness of a debt
(MDEW , shemittah [Dt 15 1.2.9; 31 10; see JuBiLen
YeEAR]), with vb. shamat, ‘‘to release,” vs 2.3. (2)
To exempt from taxation or military service
(WIN, hdndhah, “release,” ‘rest?’ [Est 2 18]).
Some would render “granted a holiday.” (3) To
set a prisoner or slave at liberty (droddw, apolud, “to
let go free” [Mt 27 15 || Jn 19 10], etc).


_ RELIGION, ré-lij’un: ‘Religion’ and “religious”
in Elizabethan Eng. were used frequently to denote


2557


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Relationships
Renew


the outward expression of worship. This is the
force of Opyoxela, thrésketa, ix? “religion” in Acts
26 5; Jas 1 26.27 (with adj. thréskos, “religious’’),
while the same noun in Col 2 18 is rendered “wor-
shipping” (“cult” would give the exact meaning).
And in the same externa] sense “religion” is used
by AV for Aarpela, latreta, “worship” (so RV), in
1 Mace 1 43; 2 19.22. Otherwise ‘Jews’ re-
ligion”’ (or “religion of the Jews’’) appears in 2 Mace
81; 14 38 (RV bis); Gal 1 13.14 (Tovdaiouds,
Toudaismés, “Judaism"); and “an alien religion”
in 2 Mace 6 24 (addAopuarcuds, allophulismés, “that
belonging to another tribe’). The neglect of the
external force of “religion” has led to much reckless
misquoting of Jas 1 26.27. Cf Acts 17 22 and
see SUPERSTITION, Burton Scotr Easton.


RELIGION, COMPARATIVE. See Compara-
TIVE RELIGION.


RELIGION, SCIENCE OF. See Comparative
. RELIGION.


REMAINDER, ré-man’dé (407, ydthar, ‘‘to
be left,’ MIINW, sk arith, “remnant’”’): In 2S 14
7 “residue” would have been clearer (cf Ps 76 10),
but the changes of RV in Lev 6 16; 7 16.17 are
pointless (contrast Ex 29 34).


REMALIAH, rem-a-li’a aman, remalyahi,
“whom Jeh has adorned”): The father of Pekah
(2 K 16 25 ff; Isa 7 4ff; 8 6). The contemptuous
allusion to Pekah as “the son of Remaliah” in Isa
7 4 (similarly “the son of Kish,’ 1 8 10 11) may
be a slur on Remaliah’s humble origin.


REMEMBER, ré-mem’bir, REMEMBRANCE,
ré-mem’brans: ‘‘Remember’’ is mostly the tr, in
the OT, of N21, zakhar, and in the NT of uvdopas,
mndomat (Mt & 23; 26 75; Jn 2 17, etc), and of
prnpovebw, mnémonetd (Mt 169; Mk 8 18; Lk
17 32, etc), and “remembrance”’ the tr of deriva-
tives ‘of these (zekher, andmnésis, etc). There
are a few other words. ‘To remember” is used of
God in remembering persons (Gen 8 1; 19 29,
etc), His covenant (Gen 9 15; Ex 2 24; Ezk 16
60, etc), in answering prayer (Jgs 16 28; Neh 13
14,22; Ps 20 3, etc), and in other ways. Men are
exhorted to “remember” God’s dealings with them,
His commandments (Dt 8 2.18; Jgs 8 34; 1 Ch
16 12, etc), the Sabbath (Ex 20 8), etc. A spe-
cially solemn command is that relating to the Lord’s
Supper in Lk 22 19; 1 Cor 11 24.25, “This do
in remembrance of me.” ‘“Remembrancer”’ (writer
of chronicles) occurs in AVm of 2 8 8 16; 20 24;


1K 43; 1 Ch 1815 (text “recorder,” RVm
“chronicler”’). In Isa 62 6, RV_ reads, “ye that
are Jeh’s remembrancers.” RV has frequent


changes on AV text, as “have marked” (1 S 16 2);
“make mention of” (Ps 20 7; 77 11; Cant 1 4);
“remember” for “be ye mindful of” (1 Ch 16 15);
“memorial” for ‘remembrance’ (Isa 67 8); in
ARV, “to his holy memorial name’’ (Ps 30 4; 97
12, ERV “to his holy name,” m ‘‘Heb ‘memorial’”’);
in 2 Tim 1 5, “having been reminded of” for AV
“call to remembrance,” etc. W. L. WaLKER


REMETH, ré’meth, rem’eth (79), remeth; B,
‘Peppds, Rhemmds, A, ‘Papa’, Rhamdth): A place
in the territory of Issachar named with En-gannim
(Josh 19 21). It is probably identical with Ra-
moth of 1 Ch 6 73, and Jarmuth of Josh 21 29.
It is represented today by the village er-Ramch,
gituated on a hill which rises abruptly from the
green plain about 11 miles S.W. of Jenin (En-
gannim). While the southern boundary of Isga-


char was, roughly, the southern edge of the plain of
Eisdraelon, the possessions of the tribes seem some-
times to have overlapped. See JaRMuTH; Ramoru.


REMISSION, ré-mish’un, OF SINS (adects,
dphesis, wapeois, paresis): The two Gr words, of
which the latter occurs only in Rom 8 25, were
tr? by the same Eng. word in AV. In RV, paresis
is tr’ “passing over.” It is contrasted with the
other term as pretermission with remission. Re-
mission is exemption from the consequences of an
offence, forgiveness; pretermission is the suspen-
sion of the penalty (Philippi, Ellicott, Trench
[Synonyms, XXIII], Weiss; cf Acts 17 30).
Cremer (Lexicon of NT Gr) regards the meaning
of the two words as identical, except that the one
refers to the OT and the other to the NT. Sins
are remitted when the offender is treated as though
the offence had never been committed. Remission
is restricted to the penalty, while forgiveness refers
more particularly to the person, although it may
be used also of the sin itself. Remission also is
used of offences against God’s law; forgiveness,
against either Divine or human law. See ABso-
LUTION; FoRGIVENESS. H. E. Jacons


REMMON, rem’on (an, rimmén, Josh 19 7).
See Rimmon.


REMMON-METHOAR, rem’on-meth’6-ar, rem’-
on-mé-tho’ér (ANNI PAI, rimmin ha-m¢thd ar
[Josh 19 13]). See Rimmon, (8).


REMNANT, rem’nant: Remnant is the tr of
“nM, yether, “what is left over” (Dt 3 11; 28 54;
Josh 12 4, etc); of (NW, sh’ Gr, “the rest” (Ezr
3 SAV; Isa 10 20.21.22; 11 16, etc; Zeph 1 4);
more frequently of M°INW, sh” arith, “residue,” etc
(2 K 19 4.31; 2 Ch 34.9; Ezr 9 14; Isa 14 30,
etc). As the tr of the last-mentioned two words,
“remnant” has a special significance in the proph-
ecies of Isaiah, as denoting “a holy seed,’ or
spiritual kernel, of the nation which should survive
impending judgment and become the germ of the
people of God, being blessed of God and made a
blessing (cf Mic 2 12; 4 7; 6 7.8; 7 18; also
Zeph 27; 3 13; Hag 112.14; Zec 8 6; Joel 2
32). Paul, in Rom 9 27, quotes from Isa 10 22f,
“the remnant [katdleimma, “what is left over’]
shall be saved”’; cf also Rom 11 5 (where the word
is leimma) with 2 K 19 4. Several other Heb
words are less frequently tr? “remnant”: ’dhar,
“after; ydathar, ‘to be left over,” etc; in the NT
(AV) we have also loipéds, “‘left,’’ “remaining” (Mt
22 6; Rev 11 13, etc).

for ‘remnant’ RV has ‘overhanging part" (Ex 26
12), ‘“‘rest'’ (Lev 14 18, etc); on the other hand, gives


“remnant’’ for ‘‘posterity'’ (Gen 45 7), for ‘rest"'
(Josh 10 20; 1 Ch 4 43; Isa 10 19), for ‘‘residne”


(Hag 2 2; Zee 8 11), ete.
W. L. WaLKER
REMPHAN, rem’fan. See Repuan.


RENDING, ren‘ding, OF GARMENTS. See
Buriat, IV; Dress.


RENEW, ré-ni’: The word is used in various
senses: (1) of material things, e.g. Ps 104 30; here
it means to give a new appearance, to refresh, to
restore the face of the earth; (2) in 18 11 14,
to establish more firmly the kingdom by reinstalling
King Saul; (3) in 2 Ch 16 8, to rebuild or repair
the broken altar; (4) in Lam 6 21, “renew our
days,” restore the favors of former days; (5) in
Isa 41 1, ‘let them gather together, or marshal their
strongest arguments for answer’; (6) in Ps 108 5;


Repair
Rephaim


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2558


Isa 40 31, it refers to the restoring of spiritual
strength; (7) in the NT it invariably refers to spirit-
ual renewal, e.g. Rom 12 2; 2 Cor 4 16; Eph 4 23;
Col 8 10; Tit 3 5; He 6 6; all derivatives of xawds,
kainds, “new.” G. H. Gerperpina


REPAIR, ré-pdr’ (MOM, mahseh, “‘refuge’’):
In Joel 3 16, for AV “The Lord will be the hope
of his people’ AVm renders “‘place of repair,’’ or,
“harbour’=haven of repair. RV gives “refuge.”
Other words are PIN, hazak, “to strengthen,” “har-
den,” “fix” (2 I< 12 5 and often; Neh 3); XD7,
rapha@’, “to heal’ (1 K 18 30); TAY, ‘amadh, “to
cause to stand still” (Ezr 9 9); TJ, hayah, ‘‘to
revive’ (1 Ch 11 8); "30, sdghar, ‘to close up”
(1 Kk 11 27).

In RV Apoc for dropparta, huporrd pté, ‘to patch up”
(Sir 50 1); émoxevagw, episkeudzo, ''to get ready’ (1 Macc


12 37). In 1 Macc 14 34 occurs “reparation’’ (modern
Eng. “repairs'') for énavdépéwars, epandrthosis, ‘‘straighten-


ing up. M. 0. Evans
REPENTANCE, ré-pen’tans:
I. OT Terms
1. To Repent—" to Pant,’ '‘to Sigh”


2. To Repent—" to Turn" or ‘ Return”
Il. NT Terms
1. Repent—''to Care," ‘*Be Cancerned”
2. Repent—‘‘to Change the Mind"
3. Repent—"to Turn Over" or ‘* Unto”
III. Tue Psycuourocicar Evements
1. The Intellectual Element
2. The Emotional Element
3. The Volitional Element
LITERATURE
To get an accurate idea of the precise NT mean-
ing of this highly important word it is necessary to
consider its approximate synonyms in the original
Heb and Gr. The psychological elements of re-
pentanee should be considered in the light of the
general teaching of Scripture.
f, OT Terms.—The Heb word O19), naham, isan
onomatopoetic term which implies difficulty in
breathing, hence “‘to pant,’’ ‘to sigh,”


1. Repent, “to groan.’ Naturally it came to
“to Pant,” signify “to lament” or “to grieve,”
“to Sigh’? and when the emotion was produced


by the desire of good for others, it
merged into compassion and sympathy, and when
incited by a consideration of one’s own character
and deeds it means “‘to rue,” “‘to repent.” To
adapt language to our understanding, God is
represented as repenting when delayed penalties
are at last to be inflicted, or when threatened
evils have been averted by genuine reformation
(Gen 6 6; Jon 3 10). This word is tr4 “repent’’
about 40 t in the OT, and in nearly all cases it
refers to God. The principal idea is not personal
relation to sin, either in its experience of grief
or in turning from an evil course. Yet the re-
sults of sin are manifest in its use. God’s heart
is grieved at man’s iniquity, and in love He bestows
His grace, or in justice He terminates His mercy.
It indicates the aronsed emotions of God which
prompt Him to a different course of dealing with the
people. Similarly when used with reference to
man, only in this case the consciousness of personal
transgression 1s evident. This distinction in the
application of the word is intended by such declara-
tions as God ‘4s not a man, that he should repent”
(1 S$ 15 29; Job 42 6; Jer 8 6).
The term 3°W, shibh, is most generally employed
to express the Scriptural idea of genuine repentance.
It is used extensively by the prophets,
2. Repent, and makes prominent the idea of a
“to Turn” radical change in one’s attitude toward
or “Return” sin and God. It implies a conscious,
moral separation, and a personal de-
cision to forsake sin and to enter into fellowship
with God. It is employed extensively with refer-


ence to man’s turning away from sin to righteous-
ness (Dt 4 30; Neh 19; Ps 712; Jer 3 14).
It quite often refers to God in His relation to man
(Ex 32 12; Josh 7 26). It is employed to mdi-
cate the thorough spiritual change which God alone
can effect (Ps 85 4). When the term is tr? by
“return” it has reference either to man, to God, or
to God and man (1 S 7 3; Ps 90 13 [both terms,
na@ham and shibh]; Isa 21 12; 56 7). Both terms
are also sometimes employed when the twofold
idea of grief and altered relation is expressed, and
are tr? by “repent” and ‘return’ (Ezk 14 6; Hos
12 6; Jon 3 8).
iI, NT Terms.—The term perapéddopuar, _ meta-
mélomai, literally signifies to have a_ feeling or
: care, concern or regret; like ndham,
1. Repent, it expresses the emotional aspect of
“to Be repentance. The feeling indicated by
Careful” or the word may issue in genuine repent-
“Concerned ance, or it may degenerate into mere
With” remorse (Mt 21 29.32; 27 3). Judas
repented only in the sense of regret,
remorse, and not in the sense of the abandonment
of sin. The word is used with reference to Paul’s
feeling concerning a certain course of conduct, and
with reference to God in His attitude toward His
purposes of grace (2 Cor 7 8 AV; He 7 21).
The word peravodw, metanoéé, expresses the true
NT idea of the spiritual change implied in a sinner’s
return to God. The term signifies


2. Repent, “to have another mind,” to change
“to Change the opinion or purpose with regard to
the Mind” sin. It is equivalent to the OT word

“turn.” Thus it is employed by John


the Baptist, Jesus, and the apostles (Mt 8 2;
Mk 1 15; Acts 2 38). The idea expressed by the
word is intimately associated with different aspects
of spiritual transformation and of Christian life,
with the process in which the agency of man is
prominent, as faith (Acts 20 21), and as conver-
sion (Acts 3 19); also with those experiences and
blessings of which God alone is the author, as re-
mission and forgiveness of sin (Lk 24 47; Acts 6
31). It is sometimes conjoined with baptism,
which as an overt public act proclaims a changed
relation to sin and God (Mk 1 4; Lk 8 3; Acts
13 24; 19 4). As a vital experience, repentance
is to manifest its reality by producing good fruits
appropriate to the new spiritual life (Mt 3 8).
The word ériorpégw, epistréphd, is used to bring
out more clearly the distinct change wrought in
repentance. It is employed quite
frequently in Acts to express the posi-


3. Repent,
tive side of a change involved in NT


“to Turn


Over” or repentance, or to indicate the return
“Upon,” to God of which the turning from sin
“Unto” is the negative aspect. The two con-


ceptions are inseparable and comple-
mentary. The word is used to express the spiritual
transition from sin to God (Acts 9 35; 1 Thess 1
9); to strengthen the idea of faith (Acts 11 21);
and to complete and emphasize the change required
by NT repentance (Acts 26 20).

There is great difficulty in expressing the true
idea of a change of thought with reference to sin
when we translate the NT “‘repentance” into other
languages. The Lat version renders it ‘exercise
penitence” (poentientiam agere). But “penitence”
etymologically signifies pain, erief, distress, rather
than a change of thought and purpose. Thus Lat
Christianity has been corrupted by the pernicious
error of presenting grief over sin rather than aban-
donment of sin as the primary idea of NT repent-
ance. It was easy to make the transition from
penitence to penance, consequently the Romanists
represent Jesus and the apostles as urging people
to do penance (poenitentiam agite). The Eng.


2559


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Repair
Rephaim


word ‘‘repent’’ is derived from the Lat repoenitere,
and inherits the fault of the Lat, making grief the
principal idea and keeping in the background, if
not altogether out of sight, the fundamental NT
conception of a change of mind with reference to
sin. But the exhortations of the ancient prophets,
of Jesus, and of the apostles show that the change
of mind is the dominant idea of the words cm-
ployed, while the accompanying gricf and conse-
quent reformation enter into one’s experience from

the very nature of the case.
Il. The Psychological Elements.—Repentance
is that change of a sinner’s mind which leads him
to turn from his evil ways and live.


1. The In- The change wrought in repentance is
tellectual so deep and radical as to affect the
Element whole spiritual nature and to involve


the entire personality. The intellect
must function, the emotions must be aroused, and
the will must act. Psychology shows repentance
to be profound, personal and all-pervasive. The
intellectual element is manifest from the nature of
man as an intelligent being, and from the demands
of God who desires only rational service. Man
must apprehend sin as unutterably heinous, the
Divine law as perfect and inexorable, and himself
as coming short or falling below the requirements of
a holy God (Job 42 5.6; Ps 61 3; Rom 3 20).
There may be a knowledge of sin without turning
from it as an awful thing which dishonors God and


ruins man. The change of view may
2. The lead only to a dread of punishment
Emotional and not to the hatred and abandon-
Element ment of sin (Ex 9 27; Nu 22 34;


Josh 7 20; 1S 1624: Mt 27 4).
An emotional element is necessarily involved in
repentance. While feeling is not the equivalent of
repentance, it nevertheless may be a_ powerful
impulse to a genuine turning from sin. A penitent
cannot from the nature of the case be stolid and
indifferent. The emotional attitude must be altered
if NT repentance be experienced. There is a type
of grief that issues in repentance and another which
plunges into remorse. There is a godly sorrow and
also a sorrow of the world. The former brings life;
the latter, death (Mt 27 3; Lk 18 23; 2 Cor 7
9.10). There must be a consciousness of sin in its
effect on man and in ita relation to God before there
can be a hearty turning away from unrighteousness.
The feeling naturally accompanying repentance
implies a conviction of personal sin and sinfulness
and an earnest appeal to God to forgive according
to His mercy (Ps 61 1.2.10-14).
The most prominent element in the psychology
of repentance is the voluntary, or volitional. ‘This
aspect of the penitent’s experience is


3. The Vo- expressed in the OT by “turn,” or
litional “return,” and in the NT by “repent,”
Element or “turn.” The words employed in


the Heb and Gr place chief emphasis
on the will, the change of mind, or of purpose,
because 2 complete and sincere turning to God m-
volves both the apprehension of the nature of sin
and the consciousness of personal guilt (Jer 25 5;
Mk 115; Acts 238; 2 Cor 79.10). The de-
mand for repentance implies free will and individual
responsibility. That men are called upon to repent
there can be no doubt, and that God is represented
as taking the initiative in repentance 18 equally
clear. The solution of the problem belongs to the
spiritual sphere. The psychical phenomena have
their origin in the mysterious relations of the human
and the Divine personalitics. There can be no
external substitute for the internal change. Sack-
cloth for the body and remorse for the soul are not
to be confused with a determined abandonment
of sin and return to God. Not material sacrifice,


but a spiritual change, is the inexorable demand of
God in both dispensations (Ps 61 17; Isa 1 11;
Jer 6 20; Hos 6 6).

Repentance is only a condition of salvation and
not its meritorious ground. The motives for
repentance are chiefly found in the goodness of God,
in Divine love, in the pleading desire to have sinners
saved, in the inevitable consequences of sin, in the
universal demands of the gospel, and in the hope of
spiritual life and membership in the kingdom of
heaven (Ezk 33 11; Mk 115; Lk 13 1-5; Jn
3 16; Acts 17 30; Rom 2 4; 1 Tim 2 4). The
first four beatitudes (Mt 6 3-6) form a heavenly
ladder by which penitent souls pass from the do-
minion of Satan into the Kingdom of God. A con-
sciousness of spiritual poverty dethroning pride, a
sense of personal unworthiness producing grief, a
willingness to surrender to God in genuine humility,
and a strong spiritual desire developing into hunger
and thirst, enter into the experience of one who
wholly abandons sin and heartily turns to Him who
grants repentance unto life.


LirgerRaTuRE.—Various theological works and comms.
Note esp. Strong, Systematic Theology, III, 832-36;
Broadus on Mt 3 2, American Comm.; art. ‘’Busse”’


(Penance), PRE.
Byron H. DrMent

REPETITIONS, rep-é-tish’unz: In Mt 6 7 only,
“Use not vain repetitions,” for Barradoyéw, bat-
talogéd (so 8B), a word found nowhere else and
spelled variously in the MSS, battologed in KLM,
etc, batologed in FG, blattologed in D (probably
influenced by the Lat blatero, “‘talk idly’’); pre-
sumably connected with farrapi{w, battarizd,
“stammer,” and perhaps formed under the influence
of the Aram. b%a’, “speak carelessly,” or bé¢él,
“useless.” Whether, however, batialoged means
the constant repetition of the same phrase or the
mechanical recitation of a long series of obscure or
meaningless formulas (if, indeed, a distinction
between the acts was thought of) cannot be deter-
mined. Either practice is abundantly evidenced as
a “heathen” custom of the day, and either can be
classed as ‘much speaking.”’ See PRAYER.

: Burton Scorr Easton

REPHAEL, ré’fi-cl, ref’i-el (OND, repha’al, “God
has healed’; ‘PagatA, Rhaphaél): The eponym of a
family of gatekeepers (1 Ch 26 7). The name
occurs in Tob and En (‘‘Raphael’”’); it probably
belongs to a group of late formations. Sec Gray,
HPN, 225, 311.


REPHAH, ré’fa (MD), rephah [the form is cor-
rupt|; ‘Padn, Rhdphé): The eponym of an Ephraim-
ite family (1 Ch 7 25).


REPHAIAH, ré-fa’ya, ré-fi'a (TMD, rphayah,
probably ‘‘Jeh is healing’; LXX ‘Padatdls], Rha-
phaid[s]):

a In David’s family, LXX also Rhaphdl (1 Ch
3 21).

(2) A captain of Simeon (1 Ch 4 42).

(3) A grandson of Issachar, LXX also Rhaphard
(1 Ch 7 2).

(4) A descendant of Saul (1 Ch 9 43; in 8 37
called ‘“Raphah” [M27]; LXX also Raphat).

(5) One of the repairers of the wall under Ne-
hemiah (Neh 3 9).


REPHAIM, ref’a-im, ré-fa/im (D°XP, r’pha’tim,
from ND), répha’, “a terrible onc,” hence “giant,” as
in 1Ch 20 4, RDA 9, y'lidhé ha-rapha’, “sons
of the giant”; AV Rephaims): A racc of aboriginal
or early inhabitants E. of the Jordan in Ashteroth-
karnaim (Gen 14 5) and in the vale of Rephaim
S.W. of Jerus (Josh 165 8). They associated with


Rephaim, Vale of
Restoration


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2560


other giant races, as the Emim and Anakim (Dt
210.11) and the Zamzummim (ver 20). It is
probable that they were all of the same stock, being
given different names by the different tribes who
came in contact with them. The same Heb word
is rendered “the dead,” or “the shades” in various
passages (Job 26 5m; Ps 88 10m; Prov 2 18m;
918m; 21 16m; Isa 149m; 26 14.19m). In
these instances the word is derived from 1), rapheh,
‘weak,’ “powerless,” ‘a shadow” or “shade.”


H. Porter
REPHAIM, VALE OF (O°N8D"7 play, ‘émek
rph@im; «owrds ‘Padacp, koilds Rhaphaeim,


Korkds Tov Titdvev, koilds tén Titéndn}: This was
a fertile vale (Isa 17 5), to the S.W. of Jerus (Josh
15 8; 18 16; AV “Valley of the Giants’), on the
border between Judah and Benjamin. Here David
repeatedly defeated the invading Philis (2 8 6 18.
22; 23 13; 1 Ch 11 15; 14 9). It is located by
Jos between Jerus and Bethlehem (Ant, VII, iv, 1;
xii, 4). It corresponds to the modern el-Bika‘, which
falls away to the 8.W. from the lip of the valley of
Hinnom. The name in ancient times may perhaps
have covered a larger area, including practically all
the land between Jerus and Bethlehem, where the
head-waters of Nahr Rubin are collected.
W. Ewino

REPHAN, ré’fan: A name for Chiun, the planet

Saturn. See AsTro.oey, 7; Curun.


REPHIDIM, ref‘i-dim (DMD, rephidhim,
“rests”; ‘PagiSlv, Rhaphidin): A station in the
Wanderings, between the wilderness of Sin and the
wilderness of Sinai (Ex 17 1.8; 19 2; Nu 33 14).
The host expected to find water here; to their dis-
tress the streams were dry, and water was miracu-
lously provided. Palmer (Desert of the Exodus,
158 ff) states cogent reasons for identifying Rephi-
dim with Wédy Feirdn. It is the most fertile
part of the peninsula, well watered, with a palm
grove stretching for miles along the valley. Palmer
speaks of passing through the palm grove as a
“most delightful” walk; “the tall, graceful trees
afforded a delicious shade, fresh water ran at our
feet, and, above all, bulbuls flitted from branch to
branch uttering their sweet notes.”’ His camp was
pitched at “the mouth of Wddy ‘Aleydt, a large
open space completely surrounded by steep, shelving
mountains of gneiss, the fantastic cleavage of which
added greatly to the beauty of the scene. Palms
and tamarisks were dotted all around, and on every
knoll and mountain slope were ruined houses,
churches, and walls, the relics of the ancient mo-
nastic city of Paran. Behind our tents rose the
majestic mass of Serbal, and beneath the rocky wall
opposite ran a purling brook, only a few inches in
depth, but still sufficiently cool, clear, and refresh-
ing.

Such a place as this the Amalekites would natu-
rally wish to preserve for themselves against an
invading people. For these desert dwellers, in-
deed, the possession of this watered vale may well
have been a matter of life and death.

If this identification is correct, then Jebel Tahu-
neh, ‘Mount of the mill,” a height that rises on the
N. of the valley, may have been the hill from which
Moses, with Aaron and Hur, viewed the battle.

W. Ewine

REPROBATE, rep’ré-bat: This word occurs in
the Eng. Bible in the following passages: Jer 6 30
(RV “refuse’); Rom 1 28; 2 Cor 13 5.6.7; 2
Tim 3 8; Tit 1 16. In all these cases the Gr has
addxiyos, adédkimos. The same Gr word, however,
is found with other renderings in Isa 1 22 (‘‘dross’’);
Prov 25 4 (‘dross’); 1 Cor 9 27 (“castaway,”
RV “rejected’). The primary meaning of ado-


i kimos is ‘‘not-received,” “‘not-acknowledged.” This


is applied to precious metals or money, in the
sense of “not-current,” to which, however, the
connotation ‘“not-genuine” easily attaches itself.
It is also applied to persons who do not or ought
not to receive honor or recognition. This purely
negative conception frequently passes over into
the positive one of that which is or ought to be
rejected, either by God or men. Of the above
passages 1 Cor 9 27 uses the word in this meaning.
Probably Rom 1 28, “‘God gave them up unto a
reprobate mind,’’ must be explained on the same
principle: the nods of the idolatrous heathen is per-
mitted by God to fall into such extreme forms of
evil as to meet with the universal rejection and
reprobation of men. Wettstein’s interpretation,
“an unfit mind,” i.e. incapable of properly per-
forming its function of moral discrimination, has
no linguistic warrant, and obliterates the word-
play between “they refused to have God in their
knowledge [ouk edokimasan],” and ‘God gave them
up to a reprobate [=unacknowledged, adokimos}
mind.” Even Tit 1 16, “unto every good work
reprobate,’ affords no instance of the meaning
“unfit,’”’ but belongs to the following rubric.

The close phonetic resemblance and etymological
affinity of dokimos to the vb. dokimdzé, ‘to try,”
“test,” has caused the notion of ‘being tested,”
“tried,” and its opposite of “being found wanting
in the test” to associate itself more or less distinctly
with the adjs. dokimos and adokimos. Thus the
more complex meaning results of that which is
acknowledged or rejected, because it has approved
or not approved itself in testing. This connotation
is present in2 Cor 13 5.6.7; 2 Tim 3 8; Tit 1 16;
He 6 8. In the first two of these passages the word
is used of Christians who ostensibly were in the true
faith, but either hypothetically or actually are
represented as having failed to meet the test.
“Reprobate unto every good work” (Tit 1 16) are
they who by their life have disappointed the ex-
pectation of good works. The “reprobate [rejected]
land” of He 6 8 is land that by bearing thorns and
thistles has failed to meet the test of the husband-
man. It should be noticed, however, that adoki-
mos, even in these cases, always retains the mean-
ing of rejection because of failure in trial; cf in
the last-named passage: “rejected and nigh unto
cursing.”

LiteRATURE.—Cremer, Biblisch-iheologisches Worter-
buch der neutestamentlichen Grdcitdt!, 356-57.

GEERHARDUS Vos

REPROOF, ré-prdof’, REPROVE, ré-prodv’:
“Reprove” in Elizabethan Eng. had a varicty of
meanings (“reject,” “disprove,” ‘“convinee,” “re-
buke”), with “put to the proof” (see 2 Tim 4 2
RVm) as the force common to all, although in
modern Eng. the word means only “rebuke” (with
a connotation of deliberateness). AV uses the
word chiefly (and RV exclusively, except in 2 Esd
12 32; 1413; 2 Macc 4 33) for MD%, ydkhah,
and éd¢yxw, elégchd, words that have very much
the same ambiguities of meaning. Hence a fairly
easy rendition into Eng. was possible, but the
result included all the ambiguities of the original,
and to modern readers such a@ passage as ““But your
reproof, what doth it reprove? Do ye think to
reprove words” (Job 6 25.26 ARV) is virtually
incomprehensible. The meaning is, approximately:
‘What do your rebukes prove? Are you quibbling
about words?” In Jn 168 no single word in
modern Eng. will translate elegchd, and “reprove”’
(AV), “convince” (AVm), and “convict”? (RV)
are all unsatisfactory. The sense is: ‘The Spirit
will teach men the true meaning of these three
words: sin, righteousness, judgment.”

Burton Scort Easton


2561


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Rephaim, Vale of
Restoration


REPTILE, rep’til, -til: Vulg in Mie 7 17 has
replilis for zohdlé, “crawling things,’ ARV “worms
of the earth,” AVm “creeping things.’ See LEvia-
THAN; Lizarp; SERPENT; TorRTOISE.


REPUTATION, rep-i-ta’shun: AV uses “repu-
tation” where modern Eng. would use “repute,”
as connoting prominence rather than moral char-
acter. Hence RV’s change to “repute” in Gal 2
2 (for doxéw, dokéé, “seem,” perhaps with a slightly
sarcastic touch). RV’s alteration of “reputation”
into “have in honor’ (Acts 6 34; Phil 2 29) is to
secure uniformity of tr for the derivatives of r1«1,
timé, “honor,” but RV retains “reputation” in
Sus ver 64. AV’s “made himself of no reputation’’
in Phil 2 7 is a gloss. See Kenosis. On Eccl
10 1 see the commentaries.


REQUIRE, ré-kwir’: ‘Require’ meant origi-
nally “seek after,” whence “ask,” and so (as in
modern Eng.) “demand.” All meanings are com-
mon in AV (e.g. 18 21 8; Eeel 3 15; Ear 8 22;
1 Cor 4 2), and RV has made little change.


REREWARD, rér’woérd. See Rearwanp.


RESAIAS, ré-sa’yas, ré-si’as (Pyralas, Rhésatas;
AV Reesaias): One of the “leaders” with Zerub-
babel in the return (1 Esd 6 8)=‘“Reelaiah” in
Ezr 2 2, “Raamiah”’ in Neh 7 7. The name is
apparently duplicated in 1 Esd 6 8 in the form
“Reelias.’””


RESEN, ré’sen ({97, resen; LXX Adoev, Ddsen,


Adoep, Ddsem): The Gr forms show that the LXX
translators had 7, d, for 1, r, but the


1. The reading of the M T is to be preferred.
Nameand Resen—the last of the four cities
Its Native mentioned in Gen 10 11.12 as having
Equivalent been founded by Nimrod (AV by


Asshur)—probably represents the Assyr
pronunciation of the place-name Ré5-éni, ‘“fountain-
head.” The only town so named in the inscriptions
is one of 18 mentioned by Sennacherib in the Bavian
inscription as places from which he dug canals con-
necting with the river Khosr—in fact, it was one of
the sources of Nineveh’s water supply. It probably
lay too far N., however, to be the city here intended.
Naturally the name ‘“Resen’’ could exist in any
place where there was a spring.

As the Bib. text requires a site lying between
Nineveh and Calah (Kouyunjik and Nimroud), it
is generally thought to be represented
2. Possibly by the ruins at Selamiyeh, about 3
the Modern miles N. of the latter city. it is note-
Selamiyeh worthy that Xenophon (Anab. iii.4)
mentions a ‘‘great”’ city called Larissa
as occupying this position, and Bochart has sug-
gested that it is the same place. He supposes that
when the inhabitants were asked to what city the
ruins belonged, they answered la Resen, “‘to Resen,”
which was reproduced by the Greeks as Larissa.
Xenophon describes its walls as being 25 ft. wide,
100 ft. high, and 2 parasangs in circuit. Except
for the stone plinth 20 ft. high, they were of brick.
He speaks of a stone-built pyramid near the city—
possibly the temple-tower at  Nimroud. See
CauaH; NInEvEs, 10. T. G. PincuEs


RESERVOIR, rez’ér-vwor, -vwar (MIP, mik-
wah; AV ditch [Isa 22 11]). See Ditcu; Cisrern;
Poot.


RESH, resh, rash (11): The 20th letter of the Heb
alphabet; transliterated in this Encyclopaedia as
r. It came also to be used for the number 200.
For name, etc, see ALPHABET.


RESHEPH, ré’-shef (2W7, resheph, “flame’’ or
“fire-bolt”): Personal name found in Phoen as a
divine name. Inthe OT the name of a descendant
of Ephraim, the eponym of an Ephraimite family
or clan (1 Ch 7 25).


RESIDUE, rez'i-di. See Remnant.


RESPECT, ré-spekt’, OF PERSONS: The phrase
DBD NW), nasa’ phanim, means lit. “lift up the
face,” and, among other tr’, is rendered indifferently
“aeeept” or “respect the person’? in AV (contrast
Prov 18 5 and 24 23). As applied to a (prostrate)
suppliant, the phrase means “receive him with
favor,’ and is so used in 1 S 26 35; Mal 1 8.9
(cf Gen 19 21, etc). By ashift in force the phrase
came to mean “accept the person instead of the
cause’ or “show partiality’ (Job 13 8.10 ARV),
and is so used commonly. A literal tr into Gr gave
apBdvw mpbcwror, lambdnd présdpon (Sir 36 13
(32 16]; Lk 20 21; Gal 26), with the noun
tpocwrohnyyla, prosdpolémpsia, ‘“face-taking’ (Rom
211; Eph 6 9; Col 3 25; Jas 2 1), rendered
uniformly “respect of persons” in EV. A noun
TposwTohiprTys, prosopolémptés, ‘“‘respecter of per-
sons,” and a vb. tpocwrodnumtéw, prosdpolempléd,
are found Acts 10 34; Jas 2 9. God’s judgment
rests solely on the character of the man and
will be influenced by no worldly (Eph 6 9) or
national (Rom 2 11) considerations. See also
ACCEPT. Burton Scorr Easton


REST (73, nich, TMI, menihah, “cessation
from motion,” “peace,” “quiet,” ete; dvamavois,
andpausis, katadmavots, kaldpausis): ‘Rest’ in the
above sense is of frequent occurrence, and is the tr
of several words with various applications and
shades of meaning, chiefly of the words given above.
It is applied to God as ceasing from the work of
creating on the 7th day (Gen 2 2); as having His
place of rest in the midst of His people in the
temple (1 Ch 28 2; Ps 132 8.14); as resting in
His love among His people (Zeph 3 17, RVm ‘‘Heb,
‘be silent’’’). The 7th day was to be one of rest
(Ex 16 23; 31 15; see SaspBaru); the land also
was to have its rest in the 7th year (Lev 26
4f). Jeh promised His people rest in the land
He should give them; this they looked forward to
and enjoyed (Dt 12 9; Josh 11 23). “To rest
on” often means to come upon to abide, as of the
Spirit of Jeh (Nu 11 25f; Isa 11 2), of wisdom
(Prov 14 33), of anger (Eccl 7 9). There is again
the “rest” of the grave (Job 3 13.17.18; Isa 57
2; Dnl 12 13). Rest is sometimes equivalent to
trust, reliance (2 Ch 14 11, RV “rely”). Hencerest,
in Jeh (Ps 37 7, ete); “rest’’ in the spiritual sense
is not, however, prominent in the OT. Inthe NT
Christ’s great offer is rest to the soul (Mt 11 28).
In He 4 1 ff, it is argued from God’s having prom-
ised His people a “‘rest’’—a promise not realized in
Canaan (ver 8)—that there remains for the people
of God “a Sabbath rest” (sabbatismés, ver 9). For
“rest’’ RV has ‘solemn rest” (Ex 16 23; 31 15, ete),
“resting-place” (Ps 132 8.14; Isa 11 10), ‘peace’
(Acts 9 31), “relief” (2 Cor 2 13; 7 5), ete. See
also REMNANT. W. L. WaLKER


RESTITUTION, res-ti-ta’shun, RESTORATION.
See PUNISHMENTS.


RESTORATION, res-té-ra’shun: The idea of a
restoration of the world had its origin in the preach-
ing of the OT prophets. Their faith in the unique
position and mission of Israel as the chosen people
of God inspired in them the conviction that the
destruction of the nation would eventually be fol-


Resurrection


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2562


lowed by a restoration under conditions that would
insure the realization of the original Divine purpose.
When the restoration came and passed without
fulfilment of this hope, the Messianic era was pro-
jected into the future. By the time of Jesus the
conception became more or less spiritualized, and
the anticipation of a new order in which the conse-
quences of sin would no longer appear was a promi-
nent feature of the Messianic conception. In the
teaching of Jesus and the apostles such a restora-
tion is taken for granted as a matter of course.

In Mt 17 11 (cf Mk 9 12), the moral and spirit-
ual regeneration preached by John the Baptist is
described as a restoration and viewed as a fulfil-
ment of Mal 4 6. It is to be observed, however,
that the work of John could be characterized as a
restoration only in the sense of an inception of the
regeneration that was to be completed by Jesus.
In Mt 19 28 Jesus speaks of a regeneration (radiv-
yeverla, palingenesia) of the world in terms that
ascribe to the saints a state of special felicity. Per-
haps the most pointed expression of the idea of a
restoration as a special event or crisis is found in
the address of Peter (Acts 3 21), where the restora-
tion is described as an droxardoracts rdvrwr, apo-
katdstasis pdntdn, and is viewed as a fulfilment of
prophecy.

In all the passages cited the restoration is assumed
as a matter with which the hearers are familiar,
and consequently its nature is not unfolded. The
evidence is, therefore, too limited to justify any
attempt to outline its special features. Under such
circumstances there is grave danger of reading into
the language of the Scriptures one’s own conception
of what the restoration is to embody. We are
probably expressing the full warrant of the Scripture
when we say that the reconstruction mentioned in
these passages contemplates the restoration of mah,
under the reign of Christ, to a life in which the
consequences of sin are no longer present, and that
this reconstruction is to include in some measure
a regeneration of both the physical and the spirit-
nal world.

Whether the benefits of the restoration are to
accrue to all men is also left undefined in the Scrip-
tures. In the passages already cited only the dis-
ciples of Christ appear in the field of vision. Cer-
tain sayings of Jesus are sometimes regarded as
favorable to the more inclusive view. In Jn 12
32 Jesus speaks of drawing all men to Himself, but
here, as in Jn 3 14.15, it is to be observed that
while Christ’s sacrifice includes all men in its scope,
its benefits will doubtless accrue to those only who
respond willingly to His drawing power. The
saying of Caiaphas (Jn 11 52) is irrelevant, for
the phrase, “‘the children of God that are scattered
abroad,” probably refers only to the worthy Jews of
the dispersion. Neither can the statements of Paul
(Rom 11 32; 1 Cor 16 22; Eph 1 9.10; Col 1 20;
1 Tim 2 4; 4 10; Tit 2 11) be pressed in favor
of the restorationist view. They affirm only that
God’s plan makes provision for the redemption of
all, and that His saving willis universal. But men
have wills of their own, and whether they share in
the benefits of the salvation provided depends on
their availing themselves of its privileges. The
doctrine of the restoration of all can hardly be
deduced from the NT. See also PonisHMent,
EVERLASTING. Russet BensJAMIN Miner


RESURRECTION, rez-n-rek’shnn (in the NT
dvdoraris, jndstasis, with vbs. deme anistemi,
“stand up,” and tyelpe, egeiré, ‘raise.’ There is
no technical term in the OT, but in Isa 26 19 are
found the vbs. “37, hayah, “live,” DIP, kum,
“rise,” PP, kig, dawake”):


I. Israey aNp IMMORTALITY
1. Nationalism

2. Speculation

3. Religious Danger

4. Belief in Immortality
5. Resurrection

6. Greek Concepts
RESURRECTION IN THE OT ano INTERMEDIATE
LITERATURE

1. The OT

2. The Righteous

3. The Unrighteous

4. Complete Denial
TEACHING or CHRIST

1. Mk 12 18-27

2. In General

Tue Arostotic DoctRINE
1. References

2. Pauline Doctrine

3. Continuity

4. 2Cor 5

SuMMARY

1. NT Data

2. Interpretation
LITERATURE

I. Israel and Immortality.—It is very remark-
able that a doctrine of life after death as an essential
part of religion was of very late de-
velopment in Israel, although this
doctrine, often highly elaborated, was
commonly held among the surrounding
nations. The chief cause of this lateness was that
Israel’s religion centered predominantly in the ideal
of a holy nation. Consequently the individual
was a secondary object of consideration, and the
future of the man who died before the national
promises were fulfilled either was merged in the
future of his descendants or else was disregarded
altogether.

Much speculation about life after death evidently
existed, but it was not in diréct connection with
the nation’s religion. Therefore the
OT data are scanty and point, as might
be expected, to non-homogeneous con-
cepts. Still, certain ideas are clear.
The living individual was composed of ‘flesh’ and
nephesh, or ruth (a trichotomy appears to be post-
Bib., despite 1 Thess 5 23; see Psycnotocy). In
the individual nephesh and rath seem to be fairly
synonymous words, meaning primarily “breath,”
as the animating principle of the flesh (so for the
lower animals in Ps 104 29.30). But nephesh came
to be used to denote the “inner man” or “self”
(Dt 12 20, ete; see Hearn), and so in EV is
usually rendered “soul.” But there are only a very
few cases where nephesh is used for the seat of the
personality after death (Ps 30 3; ef 16 10; Isa
38 17; Job 33 18, ete), and nearly all of such
passages seem quite late. Indeed, in some 13 cases
the nephesh of a dead man is unmistakably his
corpse (Lev 19 28; Nu 5 2; Hag 2 13, etc). It
seems the question of what survives death was
hardly raised; whatever existed then was thought
of as something quite new. On the one hand the
dead man could be called a ‘‘god” (1 S 28 13), a
term perhaps related to ancestor-worship. But
more commonly the dead are thought of as “shades,”
r*pha’im (Job 26 5 m, etc), weak copies of the origi-
nal man in all regards (Hizk 82 25). But, what-
ever existence such “shades” might have, they had
passed ont of relation to Jeh, whom the “dead
praise not” (Ps 116 17.18; Isa 38 18.19), and
there was no religious interest in them.

Indeed, any interest taken in them was likely
to be anti-religious, as connected with necromancy,

etc (Dt 141; 26 14; Isa 819; Ps
3. Religious 106 28, etc; ‘see SoRcERY), or as con-
Danger nected with foreign religions. Here,

probably, the very fact that the sur-
rounding nations taught immortality was a strong
reason for Israel’s refusing to consider it. That
Egypt held an elaborate doctrine of individual
judgment at death, or that Persia taught the resur-


II.


III.


IV.


1. Nation-
alism


2. Specu-
lation


2563


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Resurrection


rection of the body, would actually tend to render
these doctrines suspicious, and it was not until the
danger of synerctism seemed past that such beliefs
could be considered on thcir own merits. Hence
it is not surprising that the prophets virtually dis-
regard the idea or that Eccl denies any immortality
doctrine categorically.

None the less, with a fuller knowledge of God,
wider experience, and deeper reflection, the doctrine

was bound to come. But it came
4. Beliefin slowly. Individualism reaches ex-
Immortality plicit statement in Ezk 14, 18, 33
: (cf Dt 24 16; Jer 31 29.30), but the
national point of view still made the rewards
and punishments of the individual matters of this
world only (Ezk 14 14; Ps 87, etc), a doctrine
that had surprising vitality and that is found as
late as Sir (1 13; 11 26). But as this does not
square with the facts of life (Job), a doctrine of im-
mortality, already hinted at (11, 1, below), was inevi-
table. It appears in full force in the post-Macca-
bean period, but why just then is hard to say;
perhaps because it was then that there had been
witnessed the spectacle of martyrdoms on a large
scale (1 Mace 1 60-64).

Resurrection of the body was the form immor-
tality took, in accord with the religious premises.
As the saint was to find his happiness
in the nation, he must be restored to
the nation; and the older views did not
point toward pure soul-immortality.
The “shades” led a wretched existence at the best;
and St. Paul himself shudders at the thought of
“nakedness” (2 Cor 6 3). The nephesh and rath
were uncertain quantities, and even the NT has
no consistent terminology for the immortal part of
man (‘“‘soul,” Rev 6 9; 20 4; “spirit,” He 12
23; 1 Pet 3 19; St. Paul avoids any term in 1 Cor
15, and in 2 Cor 6 says: “I”’). In the Talm a
common view is that the old bodies will receive
new souls (Ber. R.2 7; 6 7; Vayy. R. 12 2; 16 1,
etc; cf Sib Or 4 187).

Where direct Gr influence, however, can be
predicated, pure soul-immortality is found (cf

Wisd 8 19.20; 9 15 [but Wisd’s true
6. Greek teaching is very uncertain]; En 102
Concepts 4—105; 108; Slav En; 4 Mace; Jos,
and esp. Philo). According to Jos
(BJ, II, viii, 11) the Essenes held this doctrine,
but as Jos graecizes the Pharisaic resurrection into
Pythagorean soul-migration (LI, viii, 14; contrast
Ant, XVIII, i, 3), his evidence is doubtful. Note,
moreover, how Lk 6 9; 9 25; 12 4.5 has reworded
Mk 3 4; 8 36; Mt 10 28 for Gr readers. In a
vague way even Palestinian Judaism had something
of the same concepts (2 Esd 7 88; 2 Cor 4 16;
12 2), while it is commonly held that the souls in
the intermediate state can enjoy happiness, a state-
ment first appearing in En 22 (Jub 23 31 1s hardly
serious).
° IL Resurrection in the OT and Intermediate
Literature.—For the reasons given above, refercnces

in the OT to the resurrection doctrine
1. The OT are few. Probably it is to be found

in Ps 17 15; 16 11; 49 15; 73 24,
and in each case with increased probability, but
for exact discussions the student must consult the
comms. Of course no exact dating of these Ps
passages is possible. With still higher probability
the doctrine is expressed in Job 14 13-15, 19 25-
29, but again alternative explanations are Just
possible, and, again, Job is a notoriously hard book to
date (see Jos, Book or). The two certain passages
_ are Isa 26 19 m and Dnl 12 2. In the former
(to be dated about 332(?]) it is promised that the
“dew of light” shall fall on the earth and so the
(righteous) dead shallrevive. But this resurrection


5. Resur-
rection


is confined to Pal and does not include the unright-
eous. For Dnl 12 2 sec below.

Indeed, resurrection for the righteous only was
thought of much more naturally than a general


resurrection. And still more naturally
2. The a resurrection of martyrs was thought
Righteous of, such simply receiving back what


they had given up for God. So in
En 90 33 (prior to 107 BC) and 2 Macc 7 9.11.
23; 14 46 (only martyrs are mentioned in 2 Macc);
cf Rev 20 4. But of course the idea once given
could not be restricted to martyrs only, and the in-
termediate lit. contains so many references to the
resurrection of the righteous as to debar citation.
Early passages are En 91 10 (perhaps pre-Mac-
cabean); XII P, Test. Judah 25 4 (before 107).
A very curious passage is En 265 6, where the risen
saints merely live longer than did their fathers, i.e.
resurrection does not imply immortality. This pas-
sage seems to be unique.
For a resurrection of unrighteous men (Dnl 12 2;
En 22 11; XIIP, Test. Benj. 10 7.8, Armenian text
—in none of these cases a general resur-
3. The Un- rection), a motive is given in En 22
righteous 13: for such men the mere condition
of Sheol is not punishment enough.
For a general resurrection the motive is always
the final judgment, so that all human history may
be summed up in one supreme act. The idea is
not very common, and X11 P, Test. Benj. 10 7.8
(Gr text); Bar 60 2; En 61 1; Sib Or 4 178-90;
Life of Adam (Gr) 10, and 2 Esd 6 45; 7 32;
14 35 about account for all the unequivocal pas-
sages. It is not found in the earliest part of the
Talm. XII P, Test. Benj. 10 7.8 (Gr) has two
resurrections.
Finally, much of the lit. knows no immortality
at all. Eccl, Sir and 1 Mace are the most familiar
examples, but there are many others.
4. Complete It is esp. interesting that the very
Denial spiritual author of 2 Esd did not think
it. worth while to modify the categori-
cal denial in the source used in 13 20. Of course,
the Jewish party that persisted most in a denial
of any resurrection was the Sadducees (Mt 22 23
and ||’s; Acts 23 8), with an extreme conservatism
often found among aristocrats.
Hl. Teaching of Christ.—The question is dis-
cussed explicitly in the familiar passage Mk 12
18-27 || Mt 22 23-33 || Lk 20 27-38.
1. Mk 12: The Sadducees assumed that resurrec-
18-27 tion implics simply a resuscitation to
a resumption of human functions, in-
cluding the physical side of marriage. Their error
lay in the low idea of God. For the Scriptures
teach a God whose ability and willingness to care
for His creatures are so unlimited that the destiny
He has prepared for them is caricatured if con-
ceived in any terms but the absolutely highest.
Hence there follows not only the truth of the resur-
rection, but a resurrection to a state as far above
the sexual sphere as that of the angels. (The possi-
bility of mutual recognition by husband and wife
is irrelevant, nor is it even said that the resurrection
bodies are asexual.) Luke (20 36) adds the explana-
tion that, ag there are to be no deaths, marriage
(in its relation to births) will not exist. It may
be thought that Christ's argument would support
equally well the immortality of the soul only, and,
as a matter of fact, the samc argument is used for
the latter doctrine in 4 Macc 7 18.19; 16 25.
But in Jerus and under the given circumstances
this is quite impossible. And, moreover, it would
seem that any such dualism would be a violation
of Christ’s teaching as to God’s care.
However, the argument seems to touch only the
resurrection of the righteous, esp. in the form given


Resurrection
Res. of Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2564


in Lk (cf Lk 14 14). (But that Luke thought of
so limiting the resurrection is disproved by Acts

24 15.) Similarlyin Mt 8 11 || Lk 13
2. In Gen~ 28; Mk 13 27 || Mt 24 31. But, asa
eral feature in the Judgment, the resur-

rection of all men is taught. Then
the men of Sodom, Tyre, Nineveh appear (Mt 11
22.24; 12 41.42 || Lk 10 14; 11 32), and those cast
into Gehenna are represented as having a body
(Mk 9 43-47; Mt 5 29.30; 10 28; 18 8.9). And
at the great final assize (Mt 25 31-46) all men
appear. In the Fourth Gospel a similar distine-
tiou is made (6 39.40.44.54; 11 25), the resur-
rection of the righteous, based on their union with
God through Christ and their present possession
of this union, and (in 5 28.29) the general resur-
rection to judgment. Whether these passages
imply two resurrections or emphasize only the ex-
treme difference in conditions at the one cannot be
determined.

The passages in 4 Macc referred to above read:
“They who care for piety with their whole heart, they
alone are able to conquer the impulses of the flesh, be-
lieving that like our patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, Jacoh,
they do not die to God but live to God" (7 18.19);
and ‘‘They knew that dying for God they would live
to God, even as Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all
the patriarchs'’ (16 25). It is distinctly possible that
Our Lord's words may have been known to the author
of 4 Macc, although the possibility that Christ approved
and hroadened the tenets of some spiritually-minded
few is not to be disregarded. More possihle is it that
4 Macc influenced Luke’s Gr phraseology. See Mac-
caBegs, Boox or, IV.

IV. The Apostolic Doctrine.—For the apostles,
Christ’s victory over death took the resurrection
doctrine out of the realm of specula-
tive eschatology. Henceforth it is a
fact of experience, basic for Chris-
tianity. Direct references in the NT
are found in Acts 4 2; 17 18.32; 23 6; 24 15.21;
Rom 4 17; 5 17; 6 5.8; 8 11; 11 15; 1 Cor 6
14; 15; 2 Cor1 9; 4 14; 5 1-10; Phil 3 10.
11.21; Col 1 18; 1 Thess 4 13-18; 2 Tim 2 18;
He 6 2; 11 19.35; Rev 20 4.5 (martyrs only);
20 12.13. Of these only Acts 24 15; Rev 20 12.
13, refer to a general resurrection with absolute
unambiguity, but the doctrine is certainly con-
tained iu others and in 2 Tim 4 1 besides.

A theology of the resurrection is given fully by


1. Refer-
ences


St. Paul. Basic is the conception of the union of

the believer with Christ, so that our
2. Pauline resurrection follows from His (esp.
Doctrine Rom 6 5-11; Phil 3 10.11). Every


deliverance from danger is a foretaste
of the resurrection (2 Cor 4 10.11). Indeed so
certaiu is it, that it may be spoken of as accom-
plished (Eph 2 6). From another standpoint, the
resurrection is simply part of God’s general redemp-
tion of Nature at the consummation (Rom 8 11.
18-25). As the believer then passes into a condi-
tion of glory, his body must be altered for the new
conditions (1 Cor 16 50; Phil 3 21); it becomes
a “spiritual” body, belonging to the realm of the
spirit (noé “spiritual” in opposition to “material’’).
Nature shows us how different ‘bodies’? can be—
from the “body” of the sun to the bodies of the
lowest animals the kind depends merely on the
creative will of God (1 Cor 15 38-41). Nor is the
idea of a change in the body of the same thing un-
familiar: look at the difference in the “body” of
a grain of wheat at its sowing and after it is grown!
(ver 37). Just so, I am “sown” or sent into the
world (probably not “buried’’) with one kind of
body, but my resurrection will see me with a body
adapted to my life with Christ and God (vs 42-44).
If I am still alive at the Parousia, this new body
shall be clothed upon my present body (vs 53.54;
2 Cor 5 2-4). otherwise I shall be raised in it


(ver 52). This body exists already in the heavens
(2 Cor 5 1.2), and when it is clothed upon me the
natural functions of the present body will be abol-
ished (1 Cor 6 13). Yet a motive for refraining
from impurity is to keep undefiled the body that
is to rise (1 Cor 6 13.14).

The relation of the matter in the present body
to that in the resurrection body was a question St.
Paul never raised. In 1 Cor 6 13.14
it appears that he thought of the body
as something more than the sum of
its organs, for the organs perish, but
the body is raised. Nor does he discuss the even-
tual fate of the dead body. The imagery of 1 Thess
4 16.17; 1 Cor 15 52 is that of leaving the graves,
and in the case of Christ’s resurrection, the type of
ours, that which was buried was that which was
raised (1 Cor 15 4). Perhaps the thought is that
the touch of the resurrection body destroys all
things in the old body that are unadapted to the
new state; perhaps there is an idea that the essence
of the old body is what we might call ‘‘non-material,”
so that decay simply anticipates the work the resur-
rection will do. At all events, such reflections are
“beyond what is written.”

A partial parallel to the idea of the resurrection
body being already in heaven is found in Slav

in 22 8.9, where the soul receives
clothing laid up for it (cf Ase Isa 7
22.23 and possibly Rev 6 11). But
Christ also speaks of a reward being
already in heaven (Mt 5 12). A more important
question is the time of the clothing in 2 Cor 5 1-5.
A group of scholars (Heinrici, Schmiedel, Holtz-
mann, Clemen, Charles, etc) consider that St. Paul
has here changed his views from those of 1 Cor;
that he now considers the resurrection body to be
assumed immediately at death, and they translate
vs 2.3 ‘we groan [at the burdens of life], longing to
be clothed upon with our habitation which is from
heaven’: because, when we shall be clothed with it,
we shall have no more nakedness to experience”
(Weizsdcker’s tr of the NT). But 2 Cor would have
been a most awkward place to announce a change of
views, for it was written in part as a defence against
inconsistency (1 17, etc). The willingness to be ab-
sent from the body (5 8) loses all its point if another
and better body is to be given at once. The gram-
matical reasons for the interpretation above (best
stated by Heinrici) are very weak. And the tr given
reads into the verse something that simply is not
there. Consequently it is far better to follow the
older interpretation of Meyer (B. Weiss, Bousset,
Lietzmann, Bachmann, Menzies, etc; Bachmann is
esp. good) and the obvious sense of the passage:
St. Paul dreads being left naked by death, but finds
immediate consolation at the thought of being with
Christ, and eventual consolation at the thought of
the body to be received at the Parousia. (In Phil
1 21-24 this dread 1s overcome.) :

Of a resurrection of the wicked, St. Paul has little
to say. The doctrine seems clearly stated in 2 Cor
5 10 (and in2 Tim 4 1, unless the Pauline anthor-
ship of 2 Tim is denied). But St. Paul is willing
to treat the fate of the unrighteous with silence.

V. Summary.—The points in the NT doctrine
of the resurrection of the righteous, then, seem to be

these: The personality of the believer
1. NT survives after death aud is with Christ.
Data But it is lacking in something that will
be supplied at the consummation, when
a body will be given in which there is nothing to
hinder perfect intercourse with God. The connec-
tion of this body with the present body is not dis-
cussed, except for saying that some connection
exists, with the necessity of a transformation for
those alive at the end. In this state nothing remains


3. Conti-
nuity


4. 2 Cor,
Ch 6


2565


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Resurrection
Res. of Christ


that is inconsistent with the height to which man |
is raised, and in particular sexual relations (Mk 12 |
25) and the processes of nutrition (1 Cor 6 13)
cease. For this end the whole power of God is
available. And it is insured by the perfect trust
the believer may put in God and by the resurrection
of Christ, with whom the believer has become inti-
mately united. The unrighteous are raised for the
final vindication of God’s dealings in history. Two
resurrections are found in ‘Rev 20 5.13 and quite
possibly in 1 Thess 4 16; 1 Cor 15 23.24. Hence
the phrase first resurrection; see Last JUDGMENT.

Into the ‘‘blanks"’ of this scheme the believer is natu-


rally entitled to insert such matter as may seem to him
best_compatible with his other concepts


_. of Christianity and of philosophy. As
Ee, is so often the case with passages in the
100 Bible, the student marvels at the way


os the sacred writers were restralned from
committing Christianity to metaphysical schemes that
growth in hnman knowledge might afterward show to
be false. But the theologian must take care to distin-
guish between the revealed facts and the interpretation
given them in any system that he constructs to make the
doctrine conform to the ideas of his own time or circle—
a distinction too often forgotten_in the past and some-
times with lamentable results. Esp. is it well to remem-
her that such a phrase as ‘‘a purely spiritual immortality"
rests on a metaphysical dualism that is today obsolete,
and that such a phrase is hardly less naive than the
expectation that the resurrection body will contain
identically the material of the present Wada We are
still quite in the dark as to the relations of what we call
“soul” and ‘‘body," and so, naturally, it is quite im-
possible to dogmatize. A.Meyerin his RGG art. (‘ Anf-
erstebung, dogmatisch’’) has some interesting sugges-
tions. For anidealistic metaphysic, where soul and body
are only two forms of Ged’s thought, the resurrection
offers no difficulties. If the bedy be regarded as the
web of forces that proceed from the soul, the resurrection
would take the form of the return of those forees to their
center at the consummation. If ‘‘body"’ be considered
to embrace the totality of effects that proceed from the
individual, at the end the individual will find in these
effects the exact expression of himself (Fechner's theory).
Or resurrection may be_considered as the end of evo-
lution—the reunion in God of all that has been differ-
entiated and so evolved and enriched. Such lines must
be followed cautiously, but may be found to lead to
results of great value.

In recent years the attention of scholars has been
directed to the problem of how far the teachings of other
religions assisted the Jews in attaining a resurrection
doctrine. Practically only the Pers system comes into
qnestion, and here the facts seem to be these: A belief
among the Persians in the resurrection of the body is
attested for the pre-Christian period by the fragments
of Theopompus (4th cent. BC), pee by Diogenes
Laertius and Aeneas of Gaza. That this doctrine was
taught by Zoroaster himself is not capable of exact

root, but is probable. _But on the precise details we are
m great uncertainty. In the Avesta the doctrine is not
tound in the oldest part (the Gathas), but is mentioned
in the 19th Yasht, 2 document that has certainly under-
gone post-Christian redaction of an extent that is not
determinable. The fullest Pers source is the Bunda-
hesh (30), written in the 9th Christian eent. It certainly
contains much very ancient matter, but the age of any
given passage in it is always a problem. Consequently
the sources must be used with great caution. It may be
noted that late Judaism certainly was affected to some
degree by the Pers religion (see Tob, esp.), but there are
so many native Jewish elements that were leading to a
resurrection doctrine that familiarity with the Pers
belief could have been an assistance only. Esp. is it to
be noted that the great acceptance of the doctrine lies
in the post-Maceabean period, when direct Pers infin-
ence is becale: to be thought of. See ZorossTRIaANisM.

Lirrrature.—tThe older works suffer from a defective
understanding of the presuppositions, but Salmond,
Christian Doctrine of Immortality, is always useful.
Brown, The Christian Hope, 1912, is excellent and con-
tains a full bibliography. Charles, Hschatology, and art.
“Eschatology” in #B are invaluable, bunt must be used
critically by the thorough student, for the opinions
are often individualistic. Wotherspoon’s art. ‘‘Resur-
rection'' in DCG is gaod; Bernard's in HDB is not_so
ood. On ti Cor, Findlay or (better) Edwards; on 2 Cor

enzies. In German the NT Theologies of Weiss,
Holtzmann, Feine; Schaeder's ‘‘Auterstehung"' in PRES.
On 1 Cor, Heinrici and J. Weiss in Meyer (eds 8 and
9); on 2 Cor, Bachmann in the Zahn series.. On both


Cor epp. Bousset in the Schriften des NT of J. Weiss
(the work of an expert in eschatology), and Lietzmann in
his Handbuch. See Bopy: EseuatroLtocr (OT and NT);
Fiesq; Sout; Sririt.


Burton Scott Easton


RESURRECTION, GOSPEL OF THE. See
APOCRYPIAL GOSPELS.


RESURRECTION OF JESUS CHRIST, THE:


1. First Proof: Tho Life of Jesus

2, Second Proof: The Empty Grave

3. Third Proof: Transformation of the Disciples

4. Fourth Proof: Existence of the Primitive Church
5. Fitth Proot: The Witness of St. Paul

6. Sixth Proof: The Gospel Record

7. Summary and Conelusion

8. Theology of the Resurrection

LivERATURE


The Resurrection has always beeu felt to be
vital in connection with Christianity. As a con-
sequence, opponents have almost always concen-
trated their attacks, and Christians have centered
their defence, upon it. It is therefore of the utmost
importance to give attention to the subject, as it
appears in the NT. There are several converging
lines of evidence, and none can be overlooked.
Each must have its place and weight. The issues
at stake are so serious that nothing must be omitted.

The first proof is the life of Jesus Christ Himself.
It is always a disappointment when a life which

commenced well finishes badly. We
1. First have this feeling even in fiction;
Proof: The instinct demands that a story should
Life of end well. Much more is this true
Jesus of Jesus Christ. A perfect life char-

acterized by Divine claims ends in
its prime in a cruel aud shameful death. Is that
a fitting close? Surely death could not end every-
thing after such a noble career. The Gospels give
the resurrection as the completion of the picture
of Jesus Christ. There is no real doubt that Christ
anticipated His own resurrection. At first He used
only vague terms, such as, “Destroy this Temple,
and in three days I will raise it up.” But later on
He spoke plainly, and whenever He mentioned His
death, He added, ‘The Son of man... . must
be raised the third day.’ These references are too
numerous to be overlooked, and, in spite of diffi-
culties of detail, they are, in any proper treatment
of the Gospels, an integral part of the claim made
for Himself by Jesus Christ (Mt 12 38-40; 16 21;
17 9.23; 20 19; 27 63; Mk 8 31; 9 9.31; 10 34;
14 58; Lk 9 22; 18 33; Jn 2 19-21). His ve-
racity is at stake if He did not rise. Surely the
word of such a One must be given due credence.
Weare therefore compelled to face the fact that the
resurrection of which the Gospels speak is the resur-
rection of no ordinary man, but of Jesws—that is of
One whose life and character had been unique, and
for whose shameful death no proper explanation
was conceivable (Denney, Jesus and the Gospel,
122f). Is it possible that, in view of His perfect
truthfulness of word and deed, there should be such
an anti-climax as is involved in a deuial of His assur-
ance that He would rise again (C. H. Robinson,
Studies in the Resurrection, 30)? Consider, too, the
death of Christ iu the light of His perfect life. If
that death was the close of a life so beautiful, so
remarkable, so Godlike, we are faced with au iusol-
uble mystery—the permanent triumph of wrong
over right, and the impossibility of believing in
truth or justice in the world (C. H. Robinson, op.
cit., 36). So the resurrection is not to be regarded
as an isolated event, a fact in the history of Christ
separated from all else. It must be taken in close
connection with what precedes. The true solution
of the problem is to be found iu that estimate of
Christ which ‘most entirely fits in with the totality
of the facts’ (Orr, The Resurreetion of Jesus, 14).

Another line of proof is the fact of the empty
grave aud the disappearance of the body. That
Jesus died and was buried, and that on the third
morning the tomb was empty, is not now seriously


Res. of Christ


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2566


challenged. The theory of a swoon and a recovery
in the tomb is impossible, and to it Strauss “practi-

cally gives its deathblow” (Orr, op.
2. Second cit., 43). At Christ’s burial a stone
Proof: The was rolled before the tomb, the tomb
Empty was sealed, and a guard was placed
Grave before it. Yet on the third morning

the body had disappeared, and the
tomb was empty. There are only two alternatives.
His body must have been taken out of the grave by
human hands or else by superhuman power. If the
hands were human, they must have been those of
His friends or of Hisfoes. If His friends had wished
to take out His body, the question at once arises
whether they could have done so in the face of the
stone, the seal and the guard. If His foes had con-
templated this action, the question arises whether
they would seriously have considered it. It is ex-
tremely improbable that any effort should have been
made to remove the body out of the reach of the dis-
ciples. Why should His enemies do the very thing
that would be most likely to spread the report of
Hisresurrection? As Chrysostom said, “If the body
had been stolen, they could not have stolen it naked,
because of the delay in stripping it of the burial
clothes and the trouble caused by the drugs adhering
to it”? (quoted in Day, Evidence for the Resurrection,
35). Besides, the position of the grave-clothes
proves the impossibility of the theft of the body
(see Gr of Jn 20 6.7; 11 44; Grimley, Temple of
Humanity, 69, 70; Latham, The Risen Master; Ex-
pos T, XIII, 293 £; XIV, 510). How, too, is it pos-
sible to account for the failure of the Jews to dis-
prove the resurrection? Not more than seven weeks
afterward Peter preached in that city the fact that
Jesus had been raised. What would have been
easier or more conclusive than for the Jews to have
produced the dead body and silenced Peter forever?
“The silence of the Jews is as significant as the
speech of the Christians’ (Fairbairn, Studies in the
Life of Christ, 357).

The fact of the empty tomb with the disap-
pearance of the body remains a problem to be faced.
It is now admitted that the evidence for the empty
tomb is adequate, and that it was part of the primi-
tive belief (Foundations, 134,154). It is important
to realize the force of this admission, because it is a
testimony to St. Paul's use of the term “third day”
(see below) and to the Christian observance of the
first day of the week. And yet in spite of this we
are told that a belief in the empty tomb is impossible.
By some writers the idea of resurrection is inter-
preted to mean the revival of Christ’s spiritual
influence on the disciples, which had been brought
to a close by His death. It is thought that the
essential idea and value of Christ’s resurrection
ean be conserved, even while the belief in His bodily
rising from the grave is surrendered (Orr, The
Resurrection of Jesus, 23). But how can we believe
in the resurrection while we regard the basis of the
primitive belief in it as a mistake, not to say a
fraud? The disciples found the tomb empty, and
on the strength of this they believed He had risen.
How can the belief be true if the foundation be
false? Besides, the various forms of the vision-
theory are now gradually but surely being regarded
as inadequate and impossible. They involve the
change of almost every fact in the Gospel history,
and the invention of new scenes and conditions of
which the Gospels know nothing (Orr, op. cit., 222).
It has never been satisfactorily shown why the
disciples should have had this abundant experience
of visions; nor why they should have had it so soon
after the death of Christ and within a strictly limited
period; nor why it suddenly ceased. The disciples
were familiar with the apparition of a spirit, like
Samuel’s, and with the resuscitation of a body, like


Lazarus’, but what they had not experienced or
imagined was the fact of a spiritual body, the com-
bination of body and spirit in an entirely novel way.
So the old theory of a vision is now virtually set
aside, and for it is substituted the theory of a real
spiritual manifestation of the risen Christ. The
question at once arises whether this is not prompted
by an unconscious but real desire to get rid of any-
thing like a physical resurrection. Whatever may
be true of unbelievers, this is an impossible position
for those who believe Christ is alive.

Even though we may be ready to admit the reality
of telepathic communication, it is impossible to ar-
gue that this is equivalent to the idea of resurrec-
tion. Psychical research has not proceeded far
enough as yet to warrant arguments being built
on it, though in any case it is difficult, if not im-
possible, to obtain material from this quarter which
will answer to the conditions of the physical resur-
rection recorded in the NT. ‘The survival of the
soulisnotresurrection.”’ ‘‘Whoever heard of a spirit
being buried?’’ (Orr, The Resurrection of Jesus, 229).

In view of the records of the Gospels and the gen-
eral testimony of the NT, it is impossible to be

“agnostic” as to what happened at the grave of
Jesus, even though we are quite sure that He who
died now lives and reigns. It is sometimes said
that faith is not bound up with holding a particular
view of the relations of Christ’s present glory with
the body that was once in Joseph’s tomb, that faith
is to be exercised in the exalted Lord, and that
belief in a resuscitation of the human body is no
vital part of it. It is no doubt true that faith today
is to be exercised solely in the exalted and glorified
Lord, but faith must ultimately rest on fact, and it
is difficult to understand how Christian faith can
really be “agnostic” with regard to the facts about
the empty tomb and the risen body, which are so
prominent in the NT, and which form an essential
part of the apostolic witness. The attempt to set
faith and historical evidence in opposition to each
other, which is so marked a characteristic of much
modern thought, will never satisfy general Christian
intelligence, and if there is to be any real belief in
the historical character of the NT, it is impossible
to be “agnostic” about facts that are writ so large
on the face of the records. When once the evidence
for the empty tomb is allowed to be adequate, the
impossibility of any other explanation than that
indicated in the NT is at once seen. The evidence
must be accounted for and adequately explained.
And so we come again to the insuperable barrier of
the empty tomb, which, together with the apostolic
witness, stands impregnable against all the attacks
of visional and apparitional theories. It is becom-
ing more evident that these theories are entirely
inadequate to account for the records in the Gospels,
as well as for the place and power of those Gospels
in the early church and in all subsequent ages. The
force of the evidence for the empty grave and the
disappearance of the body is clearly seen by the
explanations suggested by various modern writers
(those of Oscar Holtzmann, K. Lake, and A. Meyer
can be seen in Orr, The Resurrection of Jesus, ch
viii, and that of Reville in C. H. Robinson, Studies
in the Resurrection of Christ, 69; see also art. by
Streeter in Foundations). Not one of them is
tenable without doing violence to the Gospel story,
and also without putting forth new theories which
are not only improbable in themselves, but are
without a shred of real historical or literary evidence.
The one outstanding fact which baffles all these
writers is the empty grave.

Others suggest that resurrection means a real
objective appearance of the risen Christ without
implying any physical reanimation, that ‘‘the resur-
rection of Christ was an objective reality, but was


2507


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Res. of Christ


not a physical resuscitation’? (C. H. Robinson,
Studies in the Resurrection of Christ, 12). But the
difficulty here is as to the meaning of the term
“resurrection.” If it means a return from the dead,
a rising again (re-), must there not have been some
identity between that which was put in the tomb
and the “objective reality’ which appeared to the
disciples? Wherein lies the essential difference
between an objective vision and an objective appear-
ance? If we believe the apostolic testimony to
the empty tomb, why may we not accept their
evidence to the actual resurrection? They evi-
dently recognized their Master, and this recogni-
tion must have been due to some familiarity with
His bodily appearance. No difficulty of conceiving
of the resurrection of mankind hereafter must be
allowed to set aside the plain facts of the record
about Christ. It is, of course, quite clear that the
resurrection body of Jesus was not exactly the same
as when it was put in the tomb, but it is equally
clear that there was definite identity as well as
definite dissimilarity, and both elements must be
faced and accounted for. There need be no insuper-
able difficulty if we believe that in the very nature
of things Christ’s resurrection must be unique, and,
since the life and work of Jesus Christ transcend
our experience (as they certainly should do), we
must not expect to bring them within the limita-
tions of natural law and human history. How
the resurrection body was sustained is a problem
quite outside our ‘ken, though the reference to
“flesh and bones,’? compared with St. Paul’s words
about “flesh and bloed’’ not heing able to enter the
kingdom of God, may suggest that while the resur-
rection body was not constituted upon a natural
basis through blood, yet that it possessed ‘all
things appertaining to the perfection of man’s
nature” (Church of England Article TV). We may
not be able to solve the problem, but we must hold
fast to all the facts, and these may be summed up
by saying that the body was the same though differ-
ent, different though the same. The true descrip-
tion of the resurrection seems to be that “it was an
objective reality, but that it was not merely a
physical resuscitation.” We are therefore brought
back to a consideration of the facts recorded in the
Gospels as to the empty tomb and the disappearance
of the body, and we only ask for an explanation
which will take into consideration all the facts
recorded, and will do no violence to any part of
theevidence. ‘To predicate a new resurrection body
in which Christ appeared to His disciples does not
explain how in three days’ time the body which
had been placed in the tomb was disposed of. Does
not this theory demand a new miracle of its own
(Kennett, Interpreter, V, 271)? ; ;

The next line of proof to be considered is the
transformation of the disciples caused by the resur-


rection. They had seen their Master
3. Third die, and through that death they lost
Proof: all hope. Yet hope returned three
Trans- days after. Ou the day of the cruci-
formation fixion they were filled with sadness;
of the Dis- on the first day of the week with glad-
ciples ness. At the crucifixion they were


hopeless; on the first day of the week
their hearts glowed with certainty. When the
message of the resurrection first came they were
incredulous and hard to be convinced, but when
once they became assured they never doubted again.
What could account for the astonishing change in
these men in so short a time? The mere removal
of the body from the grave could never have trans-
formed their spirits and characters. Three days
are not enough for a legend to spring up which
should so affect them. Time is needed for a process
of legendary growth. There is nothing more strik-


ing in the history of primitive Christianity than
this marvelous change wronght in the disciples by
a belicf in the resurrection of their Master. It is
a psychological fact that demands a full explana-
tion. The disciples were prepared to believe in the
appearance of a spirit, but they never contemplated
the possibility of a resurrection (see Mk 16 11).
Men do not imagine what they do not believe, and
the women’s intention to embalm a corpse shows
they did not expect His resurrection. Besides, a
hallucination involving five hundred people at once,
and repeated several times during forty days, is
unthinkable.
__From this fact of the transformation of personal
life in so incredibly short a space of time, we pro-
ceed to the next line of proof, the


4. Fourth existence of the primitive church.
Proof: “There is no doubt that the church of
Existence _ the apostles believed in the resurrection
of the of their Lord” (Burkitt, The Gospel
Primitive History and Its Transmission, 74).

Church It is now admitted on all hands that


the church of Christ came into exist-
ence as the result of a belief in the resurrection of
Christ. When we consider its commencement, as
recorded in the Book of the Acts of the Apostles, we
see two simple and incontrovertible facts: (1) the
Christian society was gathered together by preach-
ing; (2) the substance of the preaching was the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ was put
to death on a cross, and would therefore be rejected
by Jews as accursed of God (Dt, 21 23). Yet mul-
titudes of Jews were led to worship Him (Acts 2 41),
and a great company of priests to obey Him (Acts
6 7). The only explanation of these facts is God’s
act of resurrection (Acts 2 36), for nothing short of
it could have led to the Jewish acceptance of Jesus
Christ as their Messiah. The apostolic church is
thus a result of a belief in the resurrection of Jesus
Christ. The early chapters of Acts bear the marks
of. primitive documents, and their evidence is un-
mistakable. It is impossible to allege that the
early church did not know its own history, that
myths and legends quickly grew up and were
eagerly received, and that the writers of the Gospels
had no conscience for principle, but manipulated
their material at will, for any modern church could
easily give an account of its history for the past
fifty years or more (Orr, The Resurrection of Jesus,
144). And it is simply absurd to think that the
earliest church had no such capability. In reality
there was nothing vague or intangible about the
testimony borne by the apostles and other members
of the church. “As the church is too holy for a
foundation of rottenness, so she is too real for a
foundation of mist’? (Archbishop Alexander, The
Great Question, 10).
One man in the apostolic church must, however, be
singled out as a special witness to the resurrection. The
conversion and work of Saul of Tarsus is
6. Fifth our next line of proof. Attention is first
K called to the evidence of his life and_writ-
Proof: The ings to the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
Witness of Some years ago an article appeared (E.
St, Paul edley, Expos, V, iv, 359), imquiring as
2 to the conception of Christ which would
be suggested to a heathen inquirer by a
perusal of Paul's earliest extant writing (1 Thess). me
point at least would stand out clearly-——that Jesus Christ
was killed (2 15; 4 14) and was raised from the dead
(4 14). As this Ep. is neat dated about 51 AD—that
is, only about 22 years after the resurrection—and as the
same Ep. plainly attributes to Jesus Christ the functions
of God in relation to men (1 1.6; 2 14; 3 11), we can
readily see the force of this testimony to the resurrection.
Then a few years later, in an ep. which is universally
accepted as one of St. Paul’s, we have a much fuller refer-
ence to the event. In the well-known chapter (1 Cor 15)
where he is concerned to prove (not Christ's resurrection,
but) the resurrection of Christians, he naturally adduces
Christ's resurrection as his greatest evidence, and so gives
a list of the various appearances of Christ, ending with one
to himself, which he puts on an exact level with the others:


Res. of Christ
Retention of Sins


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2568


Last of all he was seen of me also.” Now it is essential
to give special attention to the nature and particularity
of this testimony. ‘I delivered unto you first of all
that which also I received: that Christ died for our sins
according to the scriptures; and that he was huried; and
that he hath been raised on the third day according to
the scriptures'' (1 Cor 15 3f). This, as it has often
been pointed out, is our earliest authority for the appear-
auces of Christ after the resurrection, and dates from
within 30 years of the event itself. But there is much
more than this: ‘‘He affirms that within 5 years of the
crucifixion of Jesus he was taught that ‘Christ died for
our sins according to the Scriptures: and that he was
buried, and that he rose again the third day according
to the Scriptures'’’ (Kennett, Interpreter, V, 267).
And if we seek to appreciate the full bearing of this act
aud testimony we have a right to draw the same con-
clusion; ‘' That within a very few years of the time of the
crucifixion of Jesus, the evidence for the resurrection of
Jesus was, in the mind of at least one man of education,
absolutely irrefutable '’ (Kennett, op. cit., V, 267). -

Besides, we find this narrative includes one small but
significant statement which at once recalls a very definite
feature of the Gospel tradition—the mention of ‘the
third day.’' A reference to the passage in the Gospels
where Jesus Christ spoke of His resurrection wil! show
how prominent and_ persistent was this note of time.
Why, then, should St. Paul have introduced it in his
statement? Was it part of the teaching which he had
“received'’? What is the significance of this plain
emphasis on the date of the resurrection? Is it not that
it bears absolute testimony to the empty tomb? From
all this it may he argued that St. Paul helieved the story
of the empty tomb at a date when the recollection was
fresh, when he could examine it for himself, when he
could make the fullest possihle inquiry of others, and
when the fears aud opposition of enemies would have
made it impossihle for the adherents of Jesus Christ to
make any statement that was not absolutely true.
“Surely common sense requires us to believe that that for
which he so suffered was in his eyes established heyond
the possibility of doubt’’ (Kennett, op. cit., V, 271).

In view, therefore, of St. Paul's personal testimony to
his own conversion, his interviews with those who had
seen Jesus Christ on earth before and after His resurrec-
tion, and the prominence given to the resurrection in
the apostle’s own teaching, we may challenge attention
afresh to this evidence for the resurrection. It is well
known that Lord Lyttelton and his friend Gilbert West
left Oxford University at the close of one academic
year, each determining to give attention respectively
during the long vacation to the conversion of St. Paul
and the resurrection of Christ, in order to prove the
haselessness of both. They_met again in the autumn
and compared experiences. Lord Lyttelton had hecome
convinced of the truth of St. Paul's conversion, and
Gilbert West of the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Ii,
therefore, Paul's 25 years of suffering and service for
Christ were a reality, his conversion was true, for
everything he did hegan with that sudden change.
And if his conversion was true, Jesus Christ rose from
the dead, for everything Paul was and did he attributed
to the sight of the risen Christ.


The next line of proof of the resurrection is the
record in the Gospels of the appearances of the risen
Christ, and it is the Zast in order to


6. Sixth be considered. By some writers it is
Proof: The put first, but this is in forgetfulness
Gospel of the dates when the Gospels were
Record written. The resurrection was believed


in by the Christian church for a number
of years before our Gospels were written, and it is
therefore impossible for these records to be our
primary and most important evidence. We must
get behind them if we are to appreciate fully the
force and variety of the evidence. It is for this
reason that, following the proper logical order, we
have reserved to the last our consideration of the
appearances of the risen Christ as given in the
Gospels. The point is one of great importance
(Denney, Jesus and the Gospel, 111).


Now, with this made clear, we procecd to consider
the evidence afforded by the records of the post-resurrec-
tion appearances of Christ. Modern criticism of the
Gospels during recent years has tended to adopt the
view that Mk is the earliest, and that Mt and Lk are
dependent onit. This is said to be '‘the one solid result’
W.C. Allen, “St. Matthew,"' ICC, Pretace, vii; Burkitt,

he Gospel History, 37) of the literary criticism of the
Gospels. If this is so, the question of the records of the
resurrection hecomes involyed in the difficult problem
about the supposed lost ending of Mk. which, according
to modern criticism, would thus close without any record
of an appearance of the risen Christ. On this point,
however, two things may be said at the present juncture:


(1) There are some indications that the entire question
of the criticism of the Gospels is to he reopened (Ramsay,
St. Luke the Physician, ch ii; see also Orr, The Resurrec-
tion of Jesus, 63ff). (2) Even if the current theory be
accepted, it would not seriously weaken the intrinsic
force of the evidence for the resurrection, because, after
all, Mark does not invent or ‘doctor’ his material,
but embodies the common apostolic tradition of his
time (Orr, The Resurrection of Jesus, 62).

We may, therefore, meanwhile examine the record
of the appearances without finding them essentially
affected by any particular theory of the origin and
relations of the Gospels. There are two sets of
appearances, one in Jerus and the other in Galilee,
and their number, and the amplitude and weight
of their testimony should be carefully estimated.
While we are precluded by our space from éxamin-
ing each appearance minutely, and indeed it is
unnecessary for our purpose to do so, it is impossible
to avoid calling attention to two of them. No one
can read the story of the walk to Emmaus (Lk 24),
or of the visit of Peter and John to the tomb
(Jn 20), without observing the striking marks of
reality and personal testimony in the accounts. As
to the former incident: ‘It carries with it, as
great literary critics have pointed out, the deepest
mward evidences of its own literal truthfulness.
For it so narrates the intercourse of ‘a risen God’
with commonplace men as to set natural and super-
natural side by side in perfect harmony. And to
do this has always been the difficulty, the despair of
imagination. The alternative has been put reason-
ably thus: St. Luke was either a greater poet, a
more creative genius, than Shakespeare, or—he
did not create the record. He had an advantage
over Shakespeare. The ghost in Hamlet was an
effort of laborious imagination. The risen Christ
on the road was a fact supreme, and the Evangelist
did but tell it as it was” (Bishop Moule, Meditations
for the Church’s Year, 108). Other writers whose
attitude to the Gospel records is very different
bear the same testimony to the impression of truth
and reality made upon them by the Emmaus narra-
tive (A. Meyer and K. Lake, quoted in Orr, The
Resurrection of Jesus, 176 f).

It is well known that there are difficulties con-
nected with the number and order of these appear-
ances, but they are probably due largely to the
summary character of the story, and certainly are
not sufficient to invalidate the uniform testimony to
the two facts: (1) the empty grave, (2) the appear-
ances of Christ on the third day. These are the
a facts of the combined witness (Orr, op. cit.,
212).

The very difficulties which have been observed
in the Gospels for nearly nineteen centuries are a
testimony to a conviction of the truth of the narra-
tives on the part of the whole Christian church.
The church has not been afraid to leave these
records as they are because of the facts that they
embody and express. If there had been no diffi-
culties men might have said that everything had
been artificially arranged, whereas the differences
bear testimony to the reality of the event recorded.
The fact that we possess these two sets of appear-
ances—one in Jerus and one in Galilee—is really
an argument in favor of their credibility, for if it had
been recorded that Christ appeared in Galilee only,
or Jerus only, it is not unlikely that the account
might have been rejected for lack of support. It is
well known that records of eyewitnesses often vary
in details, while there is no question as to the events
themselves. Thevariousbooksrecording thestory of
the Indian mutiny, or the surrender of Napoleon III
at Sedan are cases in point, and Sir William Ramsay


_ has shown the entire compatibility of certainty as to


the main fact with great uncertainty as to precise
details (Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller, 29). We
believe, therefore, that a careful examination of these


2569


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


‘ appearances will afford evidence of a chain of cir-
‘ cumstances extending from the empty grave to the
day of the ascension.
_ When we examine carefully all these converging
lines of evidence and endeavor to give weight to all
the facts of the case, it seems impossible
7. Summary to escape from the problem of a physi-
and Con- cal miracle. That the prima facie
clusion view of the evidence afforded by the
NT suggests a miracle and that the
apostles really believed in a true physical resurrec-
tion are surely beyond all question. And yet very
much of present-day thought refuses to accept the
miraculous. The scientific doctrine of the untform-
ity and continuity of Natnre bars the way, so that
from the outset it is concluded that miracles are
impossible. We are either not allowed to believe
(see Orr, The Resurrection of Jesus, 44), or else we
are told that we are not required to believe (C. H.
Robinson, Studies in the Resurrection of Christ, ch ii),
in the reanimation of a dead body. If we take this
view, ‘‘there is no need, really, for investigation of
evidence: the question is decided before the evi-
dence is looked at”’ (Orr, op. cit., 46).

We challenge the tenableness of this position.
It proves too much. Weare not at all concerned b
the charge of believing in the abnormal or nasal:
New things have happened from the beginning of
the present natural order, and the Christian faith
teaches that Christ Himself was a ‘‘new thing,”’
and that His coming as ‘‘God manifest in the flesh”
was something absolutely unique. If we are not
allowed to believe in any Divine intervention which
we may call supernatural or miraculous, it is im-
possible to acconnt for the Person of Christ at all.
‘(A Sinless Personality would be a miracle in time.”
Arising out of this, Christianity itself was unique,
inaugurating a new era in humanaffairs. No Chris-
tian, therefore, can have any difficulty in accepting
the abnormal, the unusual, the miraculous. Ifit be
said that no amount of evidence can establish a
fact which is miraculous, we have still to account
for the moral miracles which are really involved
and associated with the resurrection, esp. the decep-
tion of the disciples, who conld have found out the
truth of the case; a deception, too, that has proved
so great a blessing to the world. Surely to those
who hold a true theistic view of the world this a
priori view is impossible. Are we to refuse to allow
to God at least as much liberty as we possess our-
selves? Is it really thinkable that God has less
spontaneity of action than we have? We may like
or dislike, give or withhold, will or not will, but the
course of Nature must flow on unbrokenly. Surely
God cannot be conceived of as having given such a
constitution to the universe as limits His power to
intervene if necessary and for sufficient purpose
with the work of His own hands. Not only are
all things of Him, but all things are through Him, and
to Him. The resurrection means the presence of
miracle, and “there is no evading the issue with
which this confronts us” (Orr, The Resurrection of
Jesus, 53). Unless, therefore, we are prepared to
accept the possibility of the miraculous, all explana-
tion of the NT evidence is a pure waste of time.

h heen made to account
for Hen en eare eridew derived from Bah
and other Eastern sources. It is argued that mythology

rovides the key to the problem, that not only analogy
eat derivation is to be found. But apart from the
remarkable variety of conclusions of Bab archaeologists
there is nothing in the way of historical proof worthy of
the name. The whole idea is arbitrary and baseless, and
prejudiced by the attitude to the supernatural. There


is literally uo link of connection hetween these oriental
cults and the Jewish and Christian beliefs in the resur-


rection.
And so we return to a consideration of the various
lines of proof. Taking them singly, they must be


Res. of Christ
Retention of Sins


admitted to be strong, but taking them altogether,
the argument is cumulative and sufficient. Every
effect must have its adequate cause, and the only
proper explanation of Christianity today is the
resurrection of Christ. Thomas Arnold of Rugby,
no mean judge of historical evidence, said that the
resurrection was the ‘“‘best-attested fact in human
history.”’ Christianity welcomes all possible sifting,
testing, and use by those who honestly desire to
arrive at the truth, and if they will give proper
attention to all the facts and factors involved, we
believe they will come to the conclusion expressed
years ago by the Archbishop of Armagh, that the
resurrection is the rock from which all the hammers
of criticism have never chipped a single fragment
(The Great Question, 24).
The theology of the resurrection is very impor-
tant and calls for special attention. Indeed, the
prominence given to it in the NT
8. Theology affords a strong confirmation of the


of the fact itself, for it seems incredible that
Resurrec- such varied and important truths
tion should not rest on historic fact. The


doctrine may briefly be summarized:
(1) evidential: the resurrection 1s the proof of the
atoning character of the death of Christ, and of His
Deity and Divine exaltation (Rom 1 4); (2)
evangelistic: the primitive gospel included testi-
mony to the resurrection as one of its characteristic
features, thereby proving to the hearers the assur-
ance of the Divine redemption (1 Cor 15 1-4;
Rom 4 25); (3) spiritual: the resurrection is
regarded as the source and standard of the holiness
of the believer. Every aspect of the Christian life
from the beginning to the end is somehow associ-
ated therewith (Rom 6); (4) eschatological: the
resurrection is the guaranty and model of the
believer’s resurrection (1 Cor 15). As the bodies
of the saints arose (Mt 27 52), so ours are to be
quickened (Rom 8 11), and made like Christ’s
glorified body (Phil 3 21), thereby becoming
spiritual bodies (1 Cor 15 44), that is, bodies ruled
by their spirits and yet bodies. These points
offer only the barest outline of the fulness of NT
teaching concerning the doctrine of the resurrection
of Christ.


Literatoure.—Orr, The Resurrection of Jesus, 1908;
W. J. Sparrow Simpson, The Resurrection and Modern
Thought; Westcott, The Historic Faith aud The Gospel
ofthe Resurrection. Very full literary references in Bowen,
The Resurrection tn the NT, 1911, which, although nega-
tlve In its own conclusious, contains a valuable refuta-
tlon of many negative arguments.

W. H. Grirrita THomas


RETAIN, ré-tan’: Several Heb words are thus
tri: PIT], hazak, “to hold fast’? (Jgs 7 8; 19 4;
Job 2 9 AV [RV “hold fast’”’]; Mic 7 18); “2P,
‘agar, “‘to shut up” (only in Dnl 10 8.16; 11 6);
JOM, tamakh, “to hold” (Prov 3 18; 4 4; 11 16
AV [RV “‘obtain’’]); in one case kala’ (Eccl 8 8).
In the NT xparéw, kratéd, is used in Jn 20 23 of
the “retaining” of sins by the apostles (see REren-
TION OF Sins); in Rom 1 28, RV has “refused to
have,’ m “Gr, ‘did not approve,’’’ for AV “did not
like to retain’ (échd); and in Philem ver 13, substi-
tutes “fain have kept” for “retained” (katéchd). Sir
41 16 has “retain” for diaphuldssé, ‘‘keep.”


RETALIATION, ré-tal-i-a’shun, ré-. See Law in
THE NT; Punisuments; RerriBurtion.


RETENTION, ré-ten’shun, OF SINS (xparés,
kraiés, “to lay fast hold of” [Jn 20 23]): The
opposite of “the remission of sins.’ Where there
was no evidence of repentance and faith, the
community of believers were unauthorized to
give assurance of forgiveness, and, therefore, could
only warn that the guilt of sin was retained, and


Retribution


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2570


that the sinner remained beneath God’s judg-
ment.


While such retention has its place in connection with
all preaching of the gospel, since the offers of grace are
conditional, it is esp. exercised, like the absolution, in the
personal dealing of a pastor with a communicant, pre-
paratory to the reception of the Lord’s Supper. As the
absolution is properly an assurance of individual for-
giveness, so the retention is an assurance of individual
non-forgiveness. That the retention is exercised hy the
ministry, not as an order, but as the representatives of
the congregation of believers to which Christ gave the
power of the keys, is shown by Alford, Gr Test., on above


passage. See also Melanchthon, Appendix to the
“Schmalkald Articles.”’
H. E. Jacozs
RETRIBUTION, ret-ri-ba’shun:
1. NT Terms
2. A Revelation of Wrath as Well as Grace
3. Witness of Natural Theology
4, Retribution the Natural Consequence of Sin
5. Also the Positive Infliction of Divine Wrath
6. Instances of Use of orgé and thumés
7. Instances of Use of Greek Words for ‘' Vengeance”’
8. Words Meaning *’Chastisement’’ Not Used of the
Impenitent
9. Judgment Implies Retribution
10. Moral Sense Demands Vindication of God's Right-
eousness ~
11. Scripture Indicates Certainty of Vindication


LITERATURE


The word as applied to the Divine administration
is not used in Scripture, but undoubtedly the idea
is commonly enough expressed. The
words which come nearest to it are
dey, orgé, and Ouués, thumds, wrath
attributed to God; éxdiuéw, ekdikéd,
exdlxnots, ekdikésis, éxduxos, ékdikos, and diy, diké,
all giving the idea of vengeance; xédacis, kélasis,
and Tiuwpla, timdria, “punishment’’; besides xplyw,
krind, and its derivatives, words expressive of
judgment.

Rom 2 is full of the thought of retribution. The
apostle, in vs 5.6, comes very near to using the word

itself, and gives indeed a good descrip-


1. NT
Terms


2. A Reve- tion of the thing: the day of wrath and
lation of revelation of the righteous judgment
Wrath as_— of God, “who will render to every man
Well as according to his works.” It is well
Grace in approaching the subject to remind


ourselves that there is undoubtedly,
as the apostle says, a Revelation of wrath. We are
30 accustomed to think of the gracious revelation
which the gospel brings us, and to approach the
subject of the doom of the impenitent under the
influence of the kindly sentiments engendered there-
by, and with a view of God’s gracious character as
revealed in salvation, that we are apt to overlook
somewhat the sterner facts of sin, and to miscon-
ceive the Divine attitude toward the impenitent
sinner. It is certainly well that we should let the
grace of the gospel have full influence upon all our
thinking, but we must beware of being too fully
engrossed with one phase of the Divine character.
It is an infirmity of human nature that we find it
difficult to let two seemingly conflicting concep-
tions find a place in our thought. We are apt to
surrender ourselves to the sway of one or the other
of them according to the pressure of the moment.
Putting ourselves back into the position of those
who have only the light of natural theology, we
find that all deductions from the per-
3. Witness fections of God, as revealed in His
of Natural works, combined with a consideration
Theology of man’s sin and want of harmony with
the Holy One, lead to the conclusion
announced by the apostle: ‘The wrath of God is
revealed from heaven agninst all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men’ (Rom 118). Wrath
implies punishment, punishment is decreed, pun-
ishment is denounced. The word of God but con-
firms the verdict which conscience forecasts, Na-


|


| ture teaches that punishment, retribution, must


follow sin. Within the sphere of physical law this
is clearly exemplified. No breach of the so-called
laws of Nature is tolerated. Strictly speaking, the
laws of Nature cannot be broken, but let a man fail
to keep in harmony with them, and the natural
consequences will be trouble, punishment, retri-
bution. Harmony with law is blessing; collision
with law is loss. Thus law in Nature “worketh
wrath” to the neglecters of it. Punishment neces-
sarily results. So we may well expect that in the
higher sphere, God’s moral laws cannot be neg-
lected or violated with impunity, and Scripture fully
justifies the expectation and shows that sin must
be punished. All things considered, the fact of
punishment for sinners need not surprise; the fact
of pardon is the surprising thing. The surprise of
pardon has ceased to surprise us because we are 80
familiar with the thought. We know the “how”
of it because of the revelation of grace. Grace,
however, saves on certain conditions, and there is
no such thing known in Scripture as indiscriminate,
necessary, universal grace. It is only from_the
Bible that we know of the salvation by grace. That
same revelation shows that the grace does not come
to all, in the sense of saving all; though, of course,
it may be considered as presented to all. Those
who are not touched and saved by grace remain
shut up in their sins. They are, and must be, in
the nature of the case, left to the consequences of
their sins, with the added guilt of rejecting the
offered grace. ‘Except ye believe that I am he,”
said Incarnate Grace, ‘‘ye shall die in your sins”

(Jn 8 24).
Another conclusion we may draw from the gen-
eral Scriptural representation is that the future
retribution is one aspect of the natural


4. Retribu- consequence of sin, yet it is also in
tion the another aspect the positive infliction
Natural of Divine wrath. It is shown fo be the
Conse- natural outcome of sin in such pas-
quence of sages as ‘‘Whatsoever a man soweth,
Sin that shall he also reap” (Gal 6 7);


“He that soweth unto his own flesh
shall of the flesh reap corruption” (Gal 6 8). It
is not without suggestiveness that the Heb word
‘@won means both iniquity and punishment, and
when Cain said “My punishment is greater than I
can bear’ (Gen 4 13), he really said “My iniquity
is greater than I can bear’’; his iniquity became his
punishment. A due consideration of this thought
goes a long way toward meeting many of the ob-
jections brought against the doctrine of future
punishment.

The other statement, however, remains true and
must be emphasized, that there is an actual in-
fliction of Divine wrath. All the great

5. Also the statements about the Divine judgment


Positive imply this, and while it is wrong not
Infliction to take account of the natural work-
of Divine ing out of sin in its terrible conse-
Wrath quences, it is equally wrong, perhaps


more so, to refuse to recognize this
positive Divine infliction of punishment. This,
indeed, is the outstanding feature of retribution as it
assumes form in Scripture. Even the natural con-
sequences of sin, rightly viewed, are part of the
Divine infliction, since God, in the nature of things,
has conjoined sin and its consequences, and part
of the positive infliction is the judicial shutting up
of the sinner to the consequences of his sin. So
in the case of Cain, his iniquity became his punish-
ment, inasmuch as God sentenced him to bear the
consequences of that iniquity. On the other hand,
we might say that even the terribly positive out-
pourings of God’s wrath upon the sinner are the
natural consequences of sin, since sin in its very


2571


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Retribution


nature calls down the Divine displeasure. Indeed,
these two phases of future punishment are so very
closely connected that a right view of the matter
compels us to keep both before us, and no full ex-
planation of the punishment is possible when either
phase is ignored.

_ The terms in Scripture applied to the doom of
sinners all imply Divine displeasure, punitive action,


retribution. The two outstanding Gr
6. In- words for “wrath,” org@ and thumos,
stances of are both freely applied to God. Orgé
Use of indicates settled displeasure, whereas
orgé and  thumos is rather the blazing out of the
thumos anger. Theformer is, as we should ex-


pect, more frequently applied to God,
and, of course, all that is capricious and reprehen-
sible in human wrath must be eliminated from the
word as used of God. It indicates the settled oppo-
sition of His holy natureagainstsin. It was an affec-
tion found in the sinless Saviour Himself, for “he
looked round about on them with anger” (Mk 3 5).
In the Baptist’s warning “‘to flee from the wrath to
come” (Mt 37; Lk 3 7), it is unquestionably
the wrath of God that is meant, the manifestation
of that being further described as the burning of the
chaff with unquenchable fire (Mt 3 12). In Jn
3 36 it is said of the unbeliever that ‘the wrath of
God” abideth on him. In Rom it is used at least
9 t in reference to God, first in Rom 1 18, the great
passage we have already quoted about “the wrath
of God revealed from heaven.” The connection
is a suggestive one and is often overlooked. In
the passage Paul has quite a chain of reasons; he
is ready to preach the gospel at Rome for he is not
ashamed of the gospel; he is not ashamed of the
gospel for it is the power of God unto salvation; it
is the “power of God’ for therein is revealed the
righteousness of God by faith; and this salvation
by faith is a necessity “for the wrath of God is re-
vealed,” ete. Thus the Divine wrath on account
of sin is the dark background of the gospel message.
Had there been no such just wrath upon men, there
had been no need for the Divine salvation. The
despising of God’s goodness by the impenitent
means a treasuring up of “wrath in the day of
wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of
God” (Rom 2 3-5). God “visiteth with wrath”
3 5).
In Rom 4 15 the apostle shows that “the law
worketh wrath” (i.e. brings down the Divine dis-
pleasure), while in 6 9 he shows that believers are
saved from wrath—undoubted wrath of God. The
other two instances are in 9 22. Men are “by
nature children of wrath’? (Eph 2 3); surely not
“wrathful children,” but liable to the wrath of
God, and because of evil deeds cometh ‘‘the wrath
of God upon the sons of disobedience” (Eph 5 6;
Col 3 6). Christ “delivereth us from the wrath
to come” (1 Thess 1 10); wrath has come upon the
opposing Jews (2 16); but believers are not ap-
pointed unto wrath (6 9). With all these specific
passages in view, to say nothing of the general
teaching of the apostle on the question of coming
judgment and punishment, it is utterly impossible
to eliminate the idea of the Divine displeasure
against sinners, and His consequent retributive
action toward them. Even Ritschl, who absolutely
denies the great principle of retribution, of positive
displeasure, admits that Paul teaches it; hence the
only way for him out of the difficulty is to reject
Paul's teaching as unauthoritative. Other referen-
ces to the “wrath of God” are in He 3 11; 4 3;
and 6 passages in the Apocalypse—Rev 6 16f; 11
18; 14 10;16 19; 19 15. Two of these refer to the
“wrath of the Lamb,” one of the most terrible
phrases in the whole of the NT. Thumos 1s only
used in the Apocalypse concerning God (Rev 14


10-19; 15 1-7; 16 1-19; 19 15). In each case
it refers to the manifestation, the blazing forth of
the wrath; in the last two passages it is used in
combination with orgé, and is rendered ‘“‘fierceness,”’
the fierceness of His wrath.


Ekdiked, which means to avenge, is twice used of God
(Rev 6 10; 19 2); and ekdikésts, ‘vengeance, 6 t
ore aie om 12 19; eee 1 fe

e F n e first two Instances it

7. Greek Use is used by Jesus concerning the Divine


of Words action; ckdikos, “avenger,” occurs once
for‘'Ven- in application to God (1 Thess 4 6);
geance” diké, '‘judgment”’ or '‘ vengeance” is twice


used of God (2 Thess 1 9; Jude ver 7).
f The use of these terms shows that the pun-
ishment Inflicted on sinful men is strictly punishment of
the vindicatory sort, the vindication of outraged justice,
the Infliction of deserved penalty. Very significant is
the passage in 2 Thess 1 6, ‘It is a righteous thing with
God to recompense affliction to them that afflict you."
There Js no question of bettering the offender.

It ls very remarkahle that the terms in Gr which
would carry the meaning of punishment for the good of
the offender are never used in the NT of the


8. Words nei cuion: which Comes, upon ene jmpent:
A ent; ese are paideta an paidets,
Meaning and they are frequently used of the ‘‘chas-
Chastise- tisement"’ of believers, but not of the im-
ment’? Not penitent. It is often claimed that the


Used of the word kolasis used in Mt 25 46 carries the
‘ meaning of chastisement for the improve-
Impenitent ment of the offender, but although Aris-
totie, in comparing it with t¢mdria, may
seem to suggest that it is meant_for the improve-
ment of the offender (what he reaily says is that It
is tod pdschontos héneka, ‘‘on account of the one suffer-
Ing it," ‘thas the punished one in view,’’ whereas
timdria is toé poiountos, ‘‘on account of the one inflict-
ing'’ ‘‘that he may be satisfied”), the usage even in
classicai Gr is predominantiy against making the SUBS
osed distinction. Both words are used interchangeably
y the leading classical authors, including Aristotle
himself, and kolasis is continually employed where no
thought of betterment can be in question, while all admit
that in Hellenistic Gr the distinction is not maintained,
and in any case timoria is also used of the punishment of
the sinner (He 10 29).


All the representations of the coming day of
judgment tell of the fact of retribution, and Christ
Himself distinctly asserts it. Apart


9. Judg- from His great eschatologica] dis-
ment courses, concerning which criticism
Implies still hesitates and stammers, we have
Retribu- the solemn close of the Sermon on the
tion Mount, and the pregnant statement of


Mt 16 27, ‘The Son of man shall come
in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then
shall he render unto every man according to his
deeds,” and all the apostolic teaching upon the
solemn theme is but the unfolding of the same great
thought.

The conception of God asa perfect moral governor

demands that His righteousness shall be fully vindi-

cated. Looking at the course of his-

10. Mora] tory as it unfolds itself before us, we

Sense De- cannot fail to be struck with the anom-
mands Vin- alies which are presented.


Right-
dication of eousness does not always triumph,


God’s goodness is often put to shame,
Righteous- wickedness appears to be profitable,
ness and wicked men often prosper while


good men are under a cloud. Some-
times signal Divine interpositions proclaim that
God is indeed on the side of righteousness, but too
often it seems as if He were unmindful, and men
are tempted to ask the old question, “How doth
God know? And is there knowledge in the Most
High?” (Ps 73 11), while the righteous say in
their distress, “Jeh, how long shall the wicked, how
long shall the wicked triumph?” (Ps 94 3). The
moral sense cries out for some Divine vindication,
and the Scriptures, in harmony with this feeling,
indicate that the final judgment will bring suc
vindication.
In the OT it is frequently presented as the solu-
tion of the baffling problems which beset the ethical


Reu
Revelation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2572


sphere, as for instance in that fine utterance of re-
ligious philosophy in Ps 73; the Psalmist has before
him all the puzzling elements of the


11. Serip- problem; the prosperity, the insolent
ture Indi- and aggressive prosperity of the wicked,
cates Cer- the non-success, the oppression, the
tainty of misery of the righteous; he is well-nigh
Vindication overwhelmed by the contemplation,


and nearly loses his footing on the
eternal verities, until he carries the whole problem
into the light of God’s presence and revelation, and
then he understands that the end will bring the
trne solution.

So too the somber ruminations of the Preacher
upon the contradictions and anomalies and mysteries
of human life, ‘‘under the sun,”’ close in the reflection
which throws its searchlight upon all the blackness:
Fear God, and
keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty
of man. For God will bring every work into judg-
ment, with every hidden thing, whether it be good,
or whether it be evil” (Eccl 12 13f). In the light
of the same truth, the apostles labored, believing
that when the Lord comes He “will both bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and make mani-
fest the counsels of the hearts” (1 Cor 4 5). The
more fully the subject is considered, the more we
must feel that for the vindication of righteousness,
the justification of the Divine procedure, the recti-
fication of wrongs, the explanation of mysteries,
the reward and triumph of the righteous and the
confession and punishment of the wicked, a great
final, retributive judgment is Scriptural, reasonable,
necessary.

Lirerature.—See arts. on PunisaMEnt, EvERLAST-
ine; JupamMENT; SHEOL, etc, and works cited there.

ARCHIBALD M’CalG

REV, ré’t, rd0 (194, ra; ‘Payot, Rhagai): A
son of Peleg, a descendant of Shem (Gen 11 18 ff;
1 Ch 1 25; Lk 3 35).


REUBEN, roo’ben, ri’ben (J23N%, r’ubhén;
‘PouBiyv, Rhoubén): The eldest son of Jacob, born
to him by Leah in Paddan-aram (Gen
1. Jacob’s 29 32). This verse seems to suggest
Eldest Son two derivations of the name. As it
stands in MT it means “‘behold a son’’;
but the reason given for so calling him is ‘The Lord
hath looked upon my affliction,” which in Heb is
ra’ah bony, lit. ‘He hath seen my affliction.” Of
his boyhood we have only the story of the man-
drakes (Gen 30 14). As the firstborn he should
really have been leader among his father’s sons.
His birthright was forfeited by a deed of peculiar
infamy (35 22), and as far as we know his tribe
never took the lead in Israel. It is named first,
indeed, in Nu 1 5.20, but thereafter it falls to the
fourth place, Judah taking the first (2 10, etc). To
Reuben’s intervention Joseph owed his escape
from the fate proposed by his other brethren (Gen
37 29). Some have thought Reuben designed to
set him free, from a desire to rehabilitate himself
with his father. But there is no need to deny to
Renben certain noble and chivalrous qualities.
Jacob seems to have appreciated these, and, per-
haps, therefore all the more deeply lamented the
lapse that spoiled his life (Gen 49 3f). It was
Reuben who felt that their perils and anxieties in
Egypt were a fit recompense for the unbrotherly
conduct (42 22). To assure his father of Benja-
min’s safe return from Egypt, whither Joseph
required him to be taken, Reuben was ready to
pledge his own two sons (ver 37). Four sons born
to him in Canaan went down with Renben at the
descent of Israel into Egypt (46 § f).
The incidents recorded are regarded by a certain
school of OT scholars as the vague and fragmentary


traditions of the tribe, wrought into the form of a
biography of the supposed ancestor of the tribe.
This interpretation raises more difficulties than it
solves, and depends for coherence upon too many
assumptions and conjectures. The narrative as it
stands is quite intelligible and _ self-consistent.
There is no good reason to doubt that, as far as it
goes, it is an authentic record of the life of Jacob’s
son.

At the first census in the wilderness Reuben
numbered 46,500 men of war (Nu 1 21); at the

second they had fallen to 43,730; see
2. Tribal Numsers. The standard of the camp
History of Reuben was on the south side of the
tabernacle; and with him were Simeon
and Gad; the total number of fighting men in this
division being 151,450. Tg Pseudojon says that
the standard was a deer, with the legend “Hear O
Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord.” On the
march this division took the second place (Nu 2
10 ff). The prince of the tribe was Elizur ben
Shedeur, whose oblation is described in 7 30ff.
The Reubenite among the spies was Shammna ben
Zaccur (13 4). It is possible that the conspiracy
against Moses, organized by the Reubenites Dathan
and Abiram, with the assistance of Korah the Levite
(Nu 16), was an attempt on the part of the tribe to
assert its rights as representing the firstborn. It is
significant that the children of KXorah did not perish
(26 11). May not the influence of this incident on
Moses’ mind be traced in his “blessing,’’ wishing
for the continuance of the tribe, indeed, but not in
great strength (Dt 33 6)? This was a true fore
cast of the tribal history.

When the high plateau E. of the Dead Sea and
the Jordan fell into the hands of the Israelite in-
vaders, these spacious pastoral uplands irresistibly
attracted the great flock-masters of Reuben and
Gad, two tribes destined to be neighbors during
sueceeding centuries. At their earnest request
Moses allowed them their tribal possessions here
subject to one condition, which they loyally ac-
cepted. They should not “sit here,’ and so dis-
courage their brethren who went to war beyond
the Jordan. They should provide for the security
of their cattle, fortify cities to protect their little
ones and their wives from the inhabitants of the
land, and their men of war should go before the
host in the campaign of conquest until the children
of Israel should have inherited every man his in-
heritance (Nu 32 1-27). Of the actual part they
took in that warfare there is no record, but per-
haps ‘‘the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben” (Josh
15 6; 18 17) marked some memorable deed of valor
by a member of the tribe. At the end of the cam-
paign the men of Reuben, having eared the grati-
tude of the western tribes, enriched by their share of
the spoils of the enemy, returned with honor to their
new home. Along with their brethren of Gad they
felt the dangers attaching to their position of isola-
tion, cut off from the rest of their people by the great
cleft of the Jordan valley. They reared therefore the
massive altar of Ed in the valley, so that in the very
throat of that instrument of severance there might
be a perpetual witness to themselves and to their
children of the essential unity of Israel. The western
tribes misunderstood the action and, dreading re-
ligious schism, gathered in force to stampitout. Ex-
planations followed which were entirely satisfactory,
and a threatening danger was averted (Josh 22).
But the instincts of the eastern tribes were right,
as subsequent history was to prove. The Jordan
valley was but one of many causes of sundering.
The whole circumstances and conditions of life on
the E. differed widely from those on the W. of the
river, pastoral pursuits and life in the open being
contrasted with agricultural and city life.


2573


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Reu
Revelation


The land given by Moses to the tribe of Reuben
reached from the Arnon, Wddy el-Majib, in the S.,
to the border of Gad in the N. In Nu 82 34
cities of Gad are named which lay far 8,, Aroer being
on the very lip of the Arnon; but these are probably
to be taken as an enclave in the territory of Reuben.
From Josh 13 15 ff it is clear that the northern
border ran from some point N. of the Dead Sea in
a direction E.N.E., passing to the N. of Heshbon.
The Dead Sea formed the western boundary, and
it marched with the desert on the E. No doubt
many districts changed hands in the course of the
history. At the invasion of Tiglath-pileser, e.g.,
we read that Aroer was in the hands of the Reuben-
ites, “and eastward .. .. even unto the entrance
of the wilderness from the river Euphrates” (1 Ch
5 8f). Bezer the city of refuge lay in Reuben’s
territory (Josh 20 8, etc). A general description
of the country will be found under Moas; while the
cities of Reuben are dealt with in separate articles.

Reuben and Gad, occupying contiguous districts,
and even, as we have seen, to some extent over-
lapping, are closely associated in the history.
Neither took part in the glorious struggle against
Sisera (Jgs 5 15 ff). Already apparently the sun-
dering influences were taking effect. They are not
excepted, however, from “all the tribes of Israel”
who sent contingents for the war against Benjamin
(Jgs 20 10; 21 5), and the reference in 6 15 seems
to show that Reuben might have done great things
had he been disposed. The tribe therefore was still
powerful, but perhaps absorbed by anxieties as to
its relations with neighboring peoples. In guarding
their numerous flocks against attack from the S.,
and sudden incursions from the desert, a warlike
spirit and martial prowess were developed. They
were “valiant men, men able to bear buckler and
sword, and to shoot with bow, and skilful in war’
(1 Ch 6 18). They overwhelmed the Hagrites
with Jetur and Naphish and Nodab, and greatly
enriched themselves with the spoil. In recording
the raid the Chronicler pays a compliment to their
religious loyalty: ‘They cried to God in the battle,
and he was entreated of them, because they put
their trust in him’ (6 19 ff). Along with Gad and
Manasseh they sent a contingent of 120,000 men
“with all manner of instruments of war for the
battle, ....men of war, that could order the
battle array,’’ men who “‘came with a perfect heart
to Hebron, to make David king” (12 37f). Among
David’s mighty men was Adina, ‘‘a chief of the
Reubenites, and thirty with him” (11 42). In the
40th year of David’s reign overseers were set over
the Reubenites ‘for every matter pertaining to God,
and for the affairs of the king” (26 32). Perhaps
in spite of the help given to David the Reubenites
* had never quite got over their old loyalty to the
house of Saul. At any rate, when disruption came
they joined the Northern Kingdom (1 K 11 31).

The subsequent history of the tribe is left im
much obscurity. Exposed as they were to hostile
influences of Moab and the East, and cut off from
fellowship with their brethren in worship, in their
isolation they probably found the descent into
idolatry all too easy, and the once powerful tribe
sank into comparative insignificance. Of the im-
mediate causes of this decline we have no knowl-
edge. Moab established its authority over the
land that had belonged to Reuben; and Mesha,
in his inscription (M S), while he speaks of Gad,
does not think Reuben worthy of mention. They
had probably become largely absorbed in the north-
ern tribe. "They are named as suffering in the
invasion of Hazael during the reign of Jehu (2 K 10
321). That “they trespassed against the God of
their fathers, and played the harlot after the gods
of the peoples of the land” is given as the reason for


|


the fate that befell them at the hands of Pul, king of
Assyria, who carried them away, ‘‘and brought them
unto Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and to the river
of Gozan” (1 Ch 6 25f).

_The resemblance of Reuben’s case to that of
Simeon is striking, for Simeon also appears to have
been practically absorbed in the tribe of Judah.
The prestige that should have been Reuben’s in
virtue of his birthright is said to have passed to
Joseph (1 Ch 6 1). And the place of Reuben and °
Simeon in Israel is taken by the sons of Joseph, a
fact referred to in the blessing of Jacob (Gen 48 5).

Ezekiel finds a place for Reuben in his picture of
restored Israel (48 6). He appears also—in this
case preceded by Judah only—in Rev 7 5.

W. Ewine

REUBENITES, roo’ben-its CiDWIW, ha-r’a-
bhéni; Sfpor “PovByv, démoi Rhoubén): Members
of the tribe of Reuben (Nu 26 7, etc). Adina, one
oe ee mighty men, was a Reubenite (1 Ch 11


REUEL, réo‘el (ONITT, rewel, “God is his
friend”; LXX “PayoufA, Rhagouél):

(1) In the genealogical system Reuel is both a
son of Esau by Basemath (Gen 36 4.10.13.17; 1
Ch 1 35.37) and the father of the father-in-law of
Moses, Hobab (Nu 10 29). In the account of the
matriage of Zipporah to Moses (Ex 2 16-21)
Jethro seems to be called Reuel (cf Hopas). The
various names of Jethro perplexed the Talmudists,
too; some held that his real name was ‘‘Hohab,”
and that Reuel was his father. Reuel is probably
a clan name (Gray, ‘Nu,’ [CC}, and Hobab is a
member of the clan (‘‘son’’) of Reuel (Nu 10 29
AV reads ‘‘Raguel’’).

(2) The father of Eliasaph, the prince of Gad
(Nu 2 14), called (by some copyist’s mistake)
“Deuel’” in 114; 7 42.47; 10 20. LXX has
uniformly Rhagouél.

(3) A Benjamite (1 Ch 9 8).

Horace J. Wour

REUMAH, r00'ma (MAN, r’timah): The con-
cubine of Nahor (Gen 22 24).


REVELATION, rev-é-la’shun:


i. Tue Natore or REVELATION
1. The Religion of the Bible the Only Supernatural
Religion
2. General and Special Revelation
(1) Revelation in Eden
(2) Revelation among the Heathen
Tue Process OF REVELATION
1. Place of Revelation among the Redemptive
Acts of God
2. Stages of Material Development
Ill. Tur Moves or REVELATION
. The Several Modes of Revelation
. Equal Supernaturalness of the Several Modes
. The Prophet God's Mouthpiece
. Visionary Form of Prophecy
. ''Passivity’’ of Prophets
. Revelation by Inspiration
. Complete Revelation of God in Christ
IV. Brpuicat TERMINOLOGY
1. The Ordinary Forms
2. ‘Word of the Lard" and ‘‘ Torah”
3. ‘The Scriptures”
LITERATURE


I. The Nature of Revelation.—The religion of the
Bible is a frankly supernatural religion. By this
is not meant merely that, according


II.


ND OUP Oo Oe


1. The to it, all men, as creatures, live, move
Religion of and have their being in God. It is
the Bible meant that, according to it, God has
the Only intervened extraordinarily, in the
Supernatu- course of the sinful world’s develop-
rai Re- ment, for the salvation of men other-
ligion wise lost. in Eden the Lord God had


been present with sinless man in such
a sense as to form a distinct element in his social


Revelation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2574


environment (Gen 3 8). This intimate association
was broken up by the Fall. But God did not there-
fore withdraw Himself from concernment with
men. Rather, He began at once a series of inter-
ventions in human history by means of which man
might be rescued from his sin and, despite it,
brought to the end destined for him. These inter-
ventions involved the segregation of a people for
Himself, by whom God should be known, and whose
' distinction should be that God should be “nigh
unto them” as He was not to other nations (Dt 4
7; Ps 145 18). But this people was not permitted
to imagine that it owed its segregation to anything
in itself fitted to attract or determine the Divine
preference; no consciousness was more poignant
in Israel than that Jeh had chosen it, not it Him,
and that Jeh’s choice of it rested solely on His
gracious will. Nor was this people permitted to
imagine that it was for its own sake alone that it
had been singled out to be the sole recipient of the
knowledge of Jeh; it was made clear from the
beginning that God’s mysteriously gracious dealing
with it had as its ultimate end the blessing of the
whole world (Gen 12 2.3; 17 4.5.6.16; 18 18; 22
18; cf Rom 4 13), the bringing together again of
the divided families of the earth under the glorious
reign of Jeh, and the reversal of the curse under
which the whole world lay for its sin (Gen 12 3).
Meanwhile, however, Jeh was known only in Israel.
To Israel God showed His word and made known
His statutes and judgments, and after this fashion
He dealt with no other nation; and therefore none
other knew His judgments (Ps 147 19f). Accord-
ingly, when the hope of Israel (who was also the de-
sire of all nations) came, His own lips unhesitatingly
declared that the salvation He brought, though
of universal application, was “from the Jews” (Jn
4 22). And the nations to which this salvation
had not been made known are declared by the chief
agent in its proclamation to them to be, mean-
while, “far off,” “having no hope” and “without
God in the world” (Eph 2 12), because they were
aliens from the commonwealth of Israel and
strangers from the covenant of the promise.

The religion of the Bible thus announces itself,
not as the product of men’s search after God, if
haply they may feel after Him and find Him, but
as the creation in men of the gracious God, forming
a people for Himself, that they may show forth His
praise. In other words, the religion of the Bible
presents itself as distinctively a revealed religion.
Or rather, to speak more exactly, it announces itself
as the revealed religion, as the only revealed reli-
gion; and sets itself as such over against all other
religions, which are represented as all products, in
a sense in which it is not, of the art and device of
man.

It is not, however, implied in this exclusive
claim to revelation—which is made by the religion
of the Bible in all the stages of its history—that
the living God, who made the heaven and the
earth and the sea and all that in them is, has left
Himself without witness among the peoples of the
world (Acts 14 17). It is asserted indeed, that
in the process of His redemptive work, God suffered
for a season all the nations to walk in their own
ways; but it is added that to none of them has He
failed to do good, and to give from heaven rains and
fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and
gladness. And not only is He represented as thus
constantly showing Himself in His providence not
far from any one of them, thus wooing them to seek
Him if haply they might feel after Him and find
Him (Acts 17 27), but as from the foundation of
the world openly manifesting Himself to them in
the works of His hands, in which His everlasting
power and Divinity are clearly seen (Rom 1 20).


That men at large have not retained Him in their
knowledge, or served Him as they ought, is not due
therefore to failure on His part to keep open the
way to knowledge of Him, but to the darkening of
their senseless hearts by sin and to the vanity of
their sin-deflected reasonings (Rom 1 21 ff), by
means of which they have supplanted the truth of
God by a lie and have come to worship and serve
the creature rather than the ever-blessed Creator.
It is, indeed, precisely because in their sin they have
thus held down the truth in unrighteousness and
have refused to have God in their knowledge (so it
is intimated); and because, moreover, in their sin,
the revelation God gives of Himself in His works of
creation and providence no longer suffices for men’s
needs, that God has intervened supernaturally in
the course of history to form a people for Himself,
through whom at length all the world should be
blessed.

It is quite obvious that there are brought before us
in these several representations two species or stages

of revelation, which should be dis-
2. General criminated to avoid confusion. There
and Special is the revelation which God continu-
Revelation ously makes to all men: by it His

power and Divinity are made known.
And there is the revelation which He makes exclu-
sively to His chosen people: through it His saving
grace is made known. Both species or stages of
revelation are insisted upon throughout the Scrip-
tures. They are, for example, brought signifi-
cantly together in such a declaration as we find in
Ps 19: “The heavens declare the glory of God
.... their line is gone out through all the earth”
(vs 1.4); “The law of Jeh is perfect, restoring the
soul” (ver 7). The Psalmist takes his beginning
here from the praise of the glory of God, the Creator
of all that is, which has been written upon the very
heavens, that none may fail to see it. From this
he rises, however, quickly to the more full-throated
praise of the mercy of Jeh, the covenant God, who
has visited His people with saving instruction.
Upon this higher revelation there is finally based
a prayer for salvation from sin, which ends in a
great threefold acclamation, instinct with adoring
gratitude: “O Jeh, my rock, and my redeemer’
(ver 14). ‘The heavens,’’ comments Lord Bacon,
“indeed tell of the glory of God, but not of His will
according to which the poet prays to be pardoned
and sanctified.” In so commenting, Lord Bacon
touches the exact point of distinction between the
two species or stages of revelation. The one is
adapted to man as man; the other to man as sinner;
and since man, on becoming sinner, has not ceased
to be man, but has only acquired new needs requir-
ing additional provisions to bring him to the end of
his existence, so the revelation directed to man as
sinner does not supersede that given to man as man,
but supplements it with these new provisions for
his attamment, in his new condition of blindness,
helplessness and guilt induced by sin, of the end of
his being.

These two species or stages of revelation have
been commonly distinguished from one another
by the distinctive names of natural and super-
natural revelation, or general and special revelation,
or natural and soteriologica! revelation. Each
of these modes of discriminating them has its par-
ticular fitness and describes a real difference between
the two in nature, reach or purpose. The one is
communicated through the media of natural phe-
nomena, occurring in the course of Nature or of
history; the other implies an intervention in the
natural course of things and is not merely in source
but in mode supernatural. The one is addressed
generally to all intelligent creatures, and is there-
fore accessible to all men; the other is addressed to


2575"


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Revelation


a special class of sinners, to whom God would make
known His salvation, The one has in view to
meet and supply the natural need of creatures for
knowledge of their God; the other to rescue broken
and deformed sinners from their sin and its con-
sequences. But, though thus distinguished from
one another, it is important that the two species
or stages of revelation should not be set in oppo-
sition to one another, or the closeness of their
mutual relations or the constancy of their inter-
action be obscured. They constitute together a
unitary whole, and each is incomplete without the
other. In its most general idea, revelation is
rooted in creation and the relations with His
intelligent creatures into which God has brought
Himself by giving them being. Its object is to
realize the end of man’s creation, to be attained
only through knowledge of God and perfect and
unbroken communion with Him. On the entrance
of sin into the world, destroying this communion
with God and obscuring the knowledge of Him
derived from Nature, another mode of revelation
was necessitated, having also another content,
adapted to the new relation to God and the new
conditions of intellect, heart and will brought about
by sin. It must not be supposed, however, that this
new mode of revelation was an ex post focto expe-
dient, introduced to meet an unforeseen contin-
gency. The actual course of human development
was in the nature of the case the expected and the
intended course of human development, for which
man was created; and revelation, therefore, in
ats double form was the Divine purpose for man
from the beginning, and constitutes a unitary pro-
vision for the realization of the end of his creation
in the actual circumstances in which he exists. We
may distinguish in this unitary revelation the two
elements by the coéperation of which the effect is
prodneed; but we should bear in mind that only by
their coéperation is the effect produced. Withont
special revelation, general revelation would be for
sinful men incomplete and ineffective, and could
issue, as in point of fact it has issued wherever it
alone has been accessible, only in leaving them
without excuse (Rom 1 20). Without general
revelation, special revelation would lack that basis
in the fundamental knowledge of God as the mighty
and wise, righteous and good maker and ruler of
all things, apart from which the further revelation
of this great God’s interventions in the world for
the salvation of sinners could not be either intelli-
gible, credible or operative.

ey Revelation in Eden.—Only in Eden has general
revelation been adequate to the needs of man. Not
being a sinner, man in Eden had no need of that grace of
God itself hy which sinners are restored to communion
with Him, or of the special revelation of this grace of
God to sinners to enahle them to live with God. And
not heing a sinner, man in Eden, as he contemplated the
works of God, saw God in the unclouded mirror of his
mind with a clarity of vision, and lived with Him in the
untroubled depths of his heart with a trustful intimacy
of association, inconceivable to sinners. Nevertheless,
the revelation of God in Eden was not merely ‘natural.’
Not only does the prohibition of the forhidden fruit
involve a positive commandment (Gen 2 16), but the
whole history implies an immediacy of intercourse with
God which cannot easily be set to the credit of the pictur-
esque art of the narrative, or be fully accounted for by
the vividness of the perception of God in His works
proper to sinless creatures. The impression is strong
that what is meant to be conveyed to us is that man
dwelt with God in Eden, and enjoyed with Him imme-
diate and not merely mediate communion. In that
case, we may understand that if man had not fallen, he
would have continued to enjoy immediate intercourse
with God, and that the cessation of this immediate in-
tercourse is due to sin. It is not then the supernatural-
ness of special revelation which is rooted in sin, hut, if
we may he allowed the expression, the specialness of
supernatural revelation. Had man not fallen, heaven
would have continued to lie about him through all his
history, as it Jay about his infancy; every man would
have enjoyed direct vision of God and immediate speech
with Him. Man having fallen, the cherubim and the


flame of a sword, turning evcry way, keep the path;
and God breaks His way in a round-about fashion into
man's darkened heart to reveal there His redemptive love.
By slow steps and gradual stages He at once works out
His saving purpose and molds the world for its recep-
tion, choosing a people for Himself and training it
through long and weary ages, until_at last when the
fulness of time has come, He hares His arm and sends
pus nae proclamation of His great salvation to all the
earth.


(2) Revelation among the heathen.—Certainly,
from the gate of Eden onward, God’s general reve-
lation ceased to be, in the strict sense, supernatural.
It is, of course, not meant that God deserted His
world and left it to fester in its iniquity. His
providence still ruled over all, leading steadily on-
ward to the goal for which man had been created,
and of the attainment of which in God’s own good
time and way the very continuance of men’s exist-
ence, under God’s providential government, was
a pledge. And His Spirit still everywhere wrought
upon the hearts of men, stirring np all their powers
(though created in the image of God, marred and
impaired by sin) to their best activities, and to such
splendid effect in every department of hnman
achievement as to command the admiration of all
ages, and in the highest region of all, that of con-
duet, to call out from an apostle the encomium that
thongh they had no law they did by nature (observe
the word “nature”’) the things of the law. All
this, however, remains within the limits of Nature,
that is to say, within the sphere of operation of
Divinely directed and assisted second causes. It
illustrates merely the heights to which the powers
of man may attain under the guidance of provi-
dence and the influences of what we have learned
to call God’s “common grace.” Nowhere, throngh-
out the whole ethnic domain, are the conceptions of
God and His ways put within the reach of man,
through God’s revelation of Himself in the works of
creation and providence, transcended; nowhere is
the slightest knowledge betrayed of anything con-
cerning God and His purposes, which conld be
known only by its being supernaturally told to men.
Of the entire body of “saving truth,” for example,
which is the burden of what we call “special reve-
lation,” the whole heathen world remained in total
ignorance. And even its hold on the general truths
of religion, not being vitalized by supernatural
enforcements, grew weak, and its knowledge of the
very nature of God decayed, until it ran out to the
dreadful issue which Panl sketches for us in that
inspired philosophy of religion which he incorpo-
rates in the latter part of the first chapter of the Ep.
to the Rom.

Behind even the ethnic development, there lay, of
course, the supernatural intercourse of man with God
which had ohtained hefore the entrance of sin into the
world, and the supernatural revelations at the gate of
Eden (Gen 3 8), and at the second origin of the human
race, the Flood (Gen 8 21.22; 9 1-17). How long the
tradition of this pe revelation lingered in nooks
and corners of the heathen world, conditioning and
vitalizing the natural revelation of God always accessible,
we have no means of estimating. Neither is it easy to
measure the effect of God's special revelation of Himself
to His people upon men outside the bounds of, indeed,
but coming into contact with, this chosen people, or
sharing with them a common natural inheritance. Lot
and Ishmael and Esau can scarcely have been wholly
ignorant of the word of God which came to Abraham
and Isaac and Jacoh; nor could the Egyptians from
whose hands God wrested His people with a mighty arm
fail to learn something of Jeh, any more than the mixed
woultitudes who witnessed the ministry of Christ could
fail to infer something from His gracious walk and
mighty works, It js natural to infer that no nation
which was intimately associated with Israel's life could
remain entirely unaffected by Israel's revelation. But
whatever impressions were thus conveyed reached ap-
eset individuals only: the heathen which surrounded

srael, even those most closely affiliated with Israel,
remained heathen; they had no revelation. In the
sporadic instances when God visited an alien witb a super-


natural communication—such as the dreams sent to
Abimelech (Gen 20) and to Pharaoh (Gen 40, 41) and


Revelation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2576


to Nebuchadnezzar (Dn) 2 1 ff) and to the soldier in the
camp of Midian (Jgs 7 13)—it was in the interests, not of
the heathen world, but of the chosen people that they were
sent; and these instances derive their significance wholly
from this fact. There remain, no doubt, the myste-
rious figure of Melchizedek, perhaps also of Jethro, and
the strange apparition of Balaam, who also, however,
appear in the sacred narrative only in connection with
the history of God's dealings with His people and in
their interest. Their unexplained appearance cannot
in any event avail to modify the general fact that the
life of the heathen peoples lay outside the supernatural
revelation of God. The heathen were suffered to walk
in their own ways (Acts 14 16).

Il. The Process of Revelation.—Meanwhile, how-
ever, God had not forgotten them, but was prepar-
ing salvation for them also through the super-
natural revelation of His grace that He was making
to His people. According to the Bib. represen-
tation, in the midst of and working confluently
with the revelation which He has always been
giving of Himself on the plane of Nature, God was
making also from the very fall of man a further
revelation of Himself on the plane of grace. In
contrast with His general, natural revelation, in
which all men by virtue of their very nature as
men share, this special, supernatural revelation
was granted at first only to individuals, then pro-
gressively to a family, a tribe, a nation, a race,
until, when the fulness of time was come, it was
made the possession of the whole world. It may
be difficult to obtain from Scripture a clear account
of why God chose thus to give this revelation of
His grace only progressively; or, to be more ex-
plicit, through the process of a historical develop-
ment. Such is, however, the ordinary mode of
the Divine working: it is so that God made the
worlds, it isso that He creates the human race itself,
the recipient of this revelation, it is so that He builds
up His kingdom in the world and in the individual
soul, which only gradually comes whether to the
knowledge of God or to the fruition of His salvation.
As to the fact, the Scriptures are explicit, tracing
for us, or rather embodying in their own growth,
the record of the steady advance of this gracious
revelation through definite stages from its first
faint beginnings to its glorious completion in Jesus
Christ.

So express is its relation to the development of
the kingdom of God itself, or rather to that great

series of Divine operations which are
1. Place of directed to the building up of the
Revelation kingdom of God in the world, that it is
among the sometimes confounded with them or
Redemptive thought of as simply their reflection
Acts of God in the contemplating mind of man.

Thus it is not infrequently said that
revelation, meaning this special, redemptive reve-
lation, has been communicated in deeds, not in
words; and it is occasionally elaborately argued
that the sole manner in which God has revealed
Himself as the Saviour of sinners is just by perform-
ing those mighty acts by which sinners are saved.
This is not, however, the Bib. representation.
Revelation is, of course, often made throngh the
instrumentality of deeds; and the series of His
great redemptive acts by which He saves the world
constitutes the preéminent revelation of the grace
of God—so far as these redemptive acts are open to
observation and are perceived in their significance.
But revelation, after all, is the correlate of under-
standing and has as its proximate end just the
production of knowledge, though not, of course,
knowledge for its own sake, but for the sake of sal-
vation. The series of the redemptive acts of God,
accordingly, can properly be designated “revelation”
only when and so far as they are contemplated as
adapted and designed to produce knowledge of God
and His purpose and methods of grace. No bare
series of unexplained acts can be thought, however,


adapted to produce knowledge, esp. if these acts be,
as in this case, of a highly transcendental character.
Nor can this particular series of acts be thought to
have as its main design the production of knowledge;
its main design is rather to save man. No doubt
the production of knowledge of the Divine grace is
one of the means by which this main design of the
redemptive acts of God is attained. But this only
renders it the more necessary that the proximate
result of producing knowledge should not fail; and
it is doubtless for this reason that the series of re-
demptive acts of God has not been left to explain
itself, but the explanatory word has been added
to it. Revelation thus appears, however, not as
the mere reflection of the redeeming acts of God in
the minds of men, but as a factor in the redeeming
work of God, a component part of the series of His
redeeming acts, without which that series would
be incomplete and so far inoperative for its main
end. Thus the Scriptures represent it, not con-
founding revelation with the series of the redemp-
tive acts of God, but placing it among the redemp-
tive acts of God and giving it a function as a sub-
stantive element in the operations by which the
merciful God saves sinful men. It is therefore not
made even a mere constant accompaniment of the
redemptive acts of God, giving their explanation
that they may be understood. It occupies a far
more independent place among them than this,
and as frequently precedes them to prepare their
way as it accompanies or follows them to interpret
their meaning. It is, in one word, itself a redemp-
tive act of God and _by no means the least impor;
tant in the series of His redemptive acts.

This might, indeed, have been inferred from its
very nature, and from the nature of the salvation
which was being wrought out by these redemptive
acts of God. One of the most grievous of the
effects of sin is the deformation of the image of
God reflected in the human mind, and there can
be no recovery from sin which does not bring with
it the correction of this deformation and the re-
flection in the soul of man of the whole glory of the
Lord God Almighty. Man is an intelligent being;
his superiority over the brute is found, among other
things, precisely in the direction of all his life by
his intelligence; and his blessedness is rooted in
the true knowledge of his God—for this is life
eternal, that we should know the only true God
and Him whom He hassent. Dealing with man as
an intelligent being, God the Lord has saved him
by means of a revelation, by which he has been
brought into an ever more and more adequate
knowledge of God, and been led ever more and
more to do his part in working out his own salvation
with fear and trembling as he perceived with ever
more and more clearness how God is working it out
for him through mighty deeds of grace.

This is not the place to trace, even in outline,
from the material point of view, the development

of God’s redemptive revelation from


2. Stages its first beginnings, in the promise
of Material given to Abraham—or rather in what
Develop- has been called the Protevangelium
ment at the gate of Eden—to its comple-


tion in the advent and work of Christ
and the teaching of His apostles; a steadily ad-
vancing development, which, as it lies spread out
to view in the pages of Scripture, takes to those who
look at it from the consummation backward, the
appearance of the shadow cast athwart preceding
ages by the great figure of Christ. Even from the
formal point of view, however, there has been
pointed out a progressive advance in the method
of revelation, consonant with its advance in con-
tent, or rather with the advancing stagcs of the
building up of the kingdom of God, to subserve


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Revelation


which is the whole object of revelation. Three
distinct steps in revelation have been discriminated
from this point of view. They are distinguished
precisely by the increasing independence of revelation
of the deeds constituting the series of the redemptive
acts of God, in which, nevertheless, all revelation
is a substantia] clement. Discriminations like this
must not be taken too absolutely; and in the
- present instance the chronological sequence cannot
be pressed. But, with much interlacing, three
generally successive stages of revelation may be
recognized, producing periods at least character-
istically of what we may somewhat conventionally
call theophany, prophecy and inspiration. What
may be somewhat indefinitely marked off as the
Patriarchal age is characteristically “the period of
Outward Manifestations, and Symbols, and Theoph-
anies’”’: during it “God spoke to men through their
senses, in physical phenomena, as the burning bush,
the cloudy pillar, or in sensuous forms, as men,
angels, etc..... In the Prophetic age, on the
contrary, the prevailing mode of revelation was by
means of inward prophetic inspiration’: God spoke
to men characteristically by the movements of the
Holy Spirit in their hearts. ‘‘Prevailingly, at any
rate from Samuel downwards, the supernatural
revelation was a revelation in the hearts of the
foremost thinkers of the people, or, as we call it,
prophetic inspiration, without the aid of external
sensuous symbols of God” (A. B. Davidson, OT
Prophecy, 1908, p. 148; cf pp. 12-14, 145 ff). This
internal method of revelation reaches its culmination
in the NT period, which is preéminently the age of
the Spirit. What is esp. characteristic of this age is
revelation through the medium of the written word,
what may be called apostolic as distinguished from
prophetic inspiration. The revealing Spirit speaks
through chosen men as His organs, but through
these organs in such a fashion that the most inti-
mate processes of their souls become the instruments
by mieans of which He speaks His mind. Thus at
all events there are brought clearly before us three
well-marked modes of revelation, which we may
perhaps designate respectively, not with perfect dis-
crimination, it is true, but not misleadingly, (1) ex-
ternal manifestation, (2) internal suggestion, and
(3) coneursive operation.
Il, Modes of Revelation.—Theophany may be
taken as the typical form of “external manifesta-
tion’; but by its side may be ranged
1. Modes of all of those mighty works by which
Revelation God makes Himself known, including
express miracles, no doubt, but along
with them every supernatural intervention in the
affairs of men, by means of which a better under-
standing is communicated of what God is or what
are His purposes of grace to a sinful race. Under
‘Gnternal suggestion” may be subsumed all the
characteristic phenomena of what is most properly
spoken of as “prophecy’’: visions and dreams, which,
according to a fundamental passage (Nu 12 6), con-
stitute the typical forms of prophecy, and with
them the whole “prophetic word,”’ which shares its
essential characteristic with visions and dreams,
since it comes not by the will of man but from God.
By “coneursive operation” may be meant that form
of revelation illustrated in an inspired psalm or
epistle or history, in which no human activity—
not even the control of the will—is superseded, but
the Holy Spirit works in, with and through them all
in such a manner as to communicate to the product
qualities distinctly superhuman. There is no age
in the history of the religion of the Bible, from that
of Moses to that of Christ and His apostles, in which
all these modes of revelation do not find place.
One or another may seem particularly characteris-
tic of this age or of that; but they all occur in every


age. And they occur side by side, broadly speak-
ing, on the same level. No discrimination is drawn
between them in point of worthiness as modes of
revelation, and much less in point of purity in the
revelations communicated through them. The
circumstance that God spoke to Moses, not by
dream or vision but mouth to mouth, is, indeed,
adverted to (Nu 12 &) as a proof of the peculiar
favor shown to Moses and even of the superior dig-
nity of Moses above other organs of revelation: God
admitted him to an intimacy of intercourse which
He did not accord to others. But though Moses
was thus distinguished above all others in the deal-
ings of God with him, no distinction is drawn be-
tween the revelations given through him and those
given through other organs of revelation in point
either of Divinity or of authority. And beyond this
we have no Scriptural warrant to go on in contrast-
ing one mode of revelation with another. Dreams
may seem to us little fitted to serve as vehicles of
Divine communications. But there is no sugges-
tion in Scripture that revelations through dreams
stand on a lower plane than any others; and we
should not fail to remember that the essential char-
acteristics of revelations through dreams are shared
by all forms of revelation in which (whether we
should call them visions or not) the images or ideas
which fill, or pass in procession through, the con-
sciousness are determined by some other power
than the recipient’s own will. It may seem natural
to suppose that revelations rise in rank in propor-
tion to the fulness of the engagement of the mental
activity of the recipient in their reception. But
we should bear in mind that the intellectual or
spiritual quality of a revelation is not derived from
the recipient but from its Divine Giver. The
fundamental fact in all revelation is that it is from
God. This is what gives unity to the whole proc-
ess of revelation, given though it may be in divers
portions and in divers manners and distributed
though it may be through the ages in accordance
with the mere will of God, or as it may have suited
His developing purpose—this and its unitary end,
which is ever the building up of the kingdom of God.
In whatever diversity of forms, by means of what-
ever variety of modes, in whatever distinguishable
stages it is given, it is ever the revelation of the
One God, and itis ever the one consistently devel-
oping redemptive revelation of God.

On a prima facie view it may indeed seem likely that


a difference in the quality of their supernaturalness
would inevitahly ohtain hetween revela-


2. Equal tions given through such divergent modes.
The completely supernatural character of
Supernatu- revelations given in theophanies is obvious.
ralness of He who plac oe Hee God speaks to
man, to make known His gracious pur-

the Several pone toward him, has no other recourse
Modes ere than to pronounce the stories legend-


ary. The ohjectivity of the mode of com-
munication which is adopted is intense, and it is thrown up
to observation with the greatest emphasis. Intothe natu-
ral life of man God intrudes in a purely supernatural
manner, hearing a purely supernatural communication.
In these communications we are given accordingly just a
series of ‘naked messages of God." But not even in the
Patriarchal age were all revelations given in theophanics
or ohjective appearances. There were dreams, and
visions, and revelations without explicit intimation in
the narrative of how they were communicated. And
when we pass on in the history, we do not, indeed, leave
hehind us theophanies and objective appearances. It is
not only made the very characteristic of Moses, the
greatest figure in the whole history of revelation except
only that of Christ, that he knew God face to face (Dt
34 10), and God spoke to him mouth to mouth, even
manifestly, and not in dark speeches (Nu 12 8); hut
throughout the whole history of revclation down to the
appearance of Jesus to Paul on the road to Damascus,
God has shown Himself visibly to His scrvants wheneyer
lt has seemed good to Him to do so and has spoken with
them in ohjective speech. Nevertheless, it is expressly
made the characteristic of the Prophetic age that God
makes Himself known to His seryants ‘‘in a vision,” ‘in
a dream’? (Nu 12 6). And altnongh throughout its
entire duration, God, in fulfilment of His promise (Dt


Revelation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2578


18 18), put His words in the mouths of His prophets
and gave them His commandments to speak, yet it would
seem inherent in the very employment of men as instru-
ments of revelation that the words of God given through
them are spoken by human mouths; and the purity of
their supernaturalness may seem so far obscured. And
when it is not merely the mouths of men with which
God thus serves Himself in the delivery of His messages,
but their minds and hearts as well—the play of their
religious feelings, or the processes of their logical reason-
ing, or the tenacity of their memories, as, say, in a psalm
or in au epistle, or a history—the supernatural] element
in the communication may easily seem to retire still
farther into the background. 1t can scarcely be a
matter of surprise, therefore, that question has been
raised as to the relation of the natural and the super-
natural in such revelations, and, in many current man-
ners of thinking and speaking of them, the completeness
of their supernaturalness has been limited and curtailed
in the interests of the natural instrumentalities em-
ployed. The plausibility of such reasoning renders it
the more necessary that we should observe the unvary-
ing emphasis which the Scriptures place upon the abso-
lute supernaturalness of revelation in all its modes alike.
In the view of the Scriptures, the completely super-
natural character of revelation is in no way lessened hy
the circumstance that it has heen given through the in-
strumentality of men. They affirm, indeed, with the
greatest possible emphasis that the Divine word de-
livered through men is the pure word of God, diluted
with no human admixture whatever.


We have already been led to note that even on
the occasion when Moses is exalted above all other
organs of revelation (Nu 12 6 ff), in


3. The point of dignity and favor, no sug-
Prophet gestion whatever is made of any in-
God’s feriority, in either the directness or


Mouthpiece the purity of their supernaturalness,

attaching to other organs of revelation.
There might never afterward arise a prophet in
Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face
to face (Dt 34 10). But each of the whole series
of prophets raised up by Jeh that the people might
always know His will was to be like Moses in
speaking to the people only what Jeh commanded
them (Dt 18 15.18.20). In this great promise,
securing to Israel the succession of prophets, there
is also included a declaration of precisely how Jeh
would communicate His messages not so much to
them as through them. “I will raise them up a
prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee,”
we read (Dt 18 18), “and I will put my words in
his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that
I shall command him.” The process of revelation
through the prophets was a process by which Jeh
put His words in the mouths of the prophets, and
the prophets spoke precisely these words and no
others. So the prophets themselves ever asserted.
“Then Jeh put forth his hand, and touched my
mouth,” explains Jeremiah in his account of how
he received his prophecies, “and Jeh said unto me,
Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth” (Jer
1 9; cf 6 14; Isa 61 16; 69 21; Nu 22 35; 23 5.
12.16). Accordingly, the words “with which” they
spoke were not their own but the Lord’s: “And
he said unto me,” records Ezekiel, ‘Son of man,
go, get thee unto the house of Israel, and speak
with my words unto them” (Ezk 3 4). It is a
process of nothing other than “dictation”? which is
thus described (2 5 14 3.19), though, of course,
the question may remain open of the exact processes
by which this dictation is accomplished. The
fundamental passage which brings the central fact
before us in the most vivid manner is, no doubt,
the account of the commissioning of Moses and
Aaron given in Ex 4 10-17; 7 1-7. Here, in
the most express words, Jeh declares that He who
made the mouth can be with it to teach it what to
speak, and announces the precise function of a
prophet to be that he is ‘a mouth of God,” who
speaks not his own but God’s words. Accordingly,
the Heb name for “prophet” (nabhi’), whatever
may be its etymology, means throughout the
Scriptures just “spokesman,” though not ‘“spokes-


man” in general, but spokesman by way of emi-
nence, that is, God’s spokesman; and the character-
istic formula by which a prophetic declaration is
announced is: ‘The word of Jeh came to me,”’ or
the brief ‘saith Jeh” (TW END, n’wm Yahweh).
In no case does a prophet put his words forward
as his own words. That he is a prophet at all is
due not to choice on his own part, but to a call of
God, obeyed often with reluctance; and he prophe- *
sies or forbears to prophesy, not according to his
own will but as the Lord opens and shuts his mouth
(Ezk 3 26f) and creates for him the fruit of the
lips (Isa 57 19; cf 6 7; 50 4). In contrast with
the false prophets, he strenuously asserts that he
does not speak out of his own heart (‘‘heart” in Bib.
Janguage includes the whole inner man), but all
that he proclaims is the pure word of Jeh. _

The fundamental passage does not quite leave
the matter, however, with this general declaration.

It deseribes the characteristic manner
4. Prophecy in which Jeh communicates His mes-
in Vision- sages to His prophets as through
Form the medium of visions and dreams.

Neither visions in the technical sense
of that word, nor dreams, appear, however, to have
been the customary mode of revelation to the
prophets, the record of whose revelations has come
down to us. But, on the other hand, there are
numerous indications in the record that the uni-
versal mode of revelation to them was one which
was in some sense a Vision, and can be classed only
in the category distinctively so called.

The whole nomenclature of prophecy presupposes,
Indeed, its vision-form. Prophecy is distinctively a
word, and what is delivered by the prophets is pro-
claimed as the ‘word of Jeh.’" That it should he an-
nounced by the formula, ‘‘Thus saith the Lord,” is,
therefore, only what we expect; and we are prepared
for such a description of its process as: ‘'The Lord Jeh
. . +. Wwakeneth mine ear to hear,"' He ‘hath opened
mine ear’ (Isa 50 4.5). But this is not the way of
speaking of their messages which is most usual in the
prophets. Rather is the whole body of prophecy cur-
sorily presented as a thing seen. Isaiah places at the
head of his book: ‘The vision of Isaiah . . .. which


he saw"’ (cf Isa 29 10.11; Ob ver 1); and then proceeds
to set at the head of subordinate sections the remarkable


words, ''The word that Isaiah ... . saw’(2 1); _ ‘‘the
burden {m "‘oracle"’] . . . . which Isaiah .. .. did see”
(13 1). Similarly there stand at the head of other prophe-


cies: ‘‘the words of Amos... . which he saw" (Am
1 1); ‘the word of Jeh that came to Micah... . . which
he saw” (Mic 1 1); ‘the oracle which Habakkuk the
rophet did see’? (Hab 11m); and elsewhere such
anguage occurs as this: “the word that Jeh hath
showed me” (Jer 38 21);| “the prophets have seen
»... oracles” (Lam 2 14); ‘‘the word of Jeh came
.... and I looked, and, behold'' (Ezk 1 3.4); ‘‘ Woe
unto the foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit,
and have seen nothing'’ (Ezk 18 3); “I .... will
look forth to see what he will speak with me,....
Jeh .... said, Write the vision” (Hab 2 1f). It is
an inadequate explanation of such language to suppose
it merely a relic of a time when vision was more pre-
dominantly the form of revelation. There is no proof
that vision in the technical sense ever was more pre-
dominantly the form of revelation than in the days of
the great writing prophets; and such language as we
have quoted too obviously represents the living point ot
view of the prophets to admit of the supposition that it
was merely conventional on their lips. The prophets,
in a word, represent the Divine communications which
they received as given to them in some sense in visions.

It is possible, no doubt, to exaggerate the significance
of this. It is an exaggeration, for example, to insist that
therefore all the Divine communications made to the
prophets must have come to them in external appear-
ances and objective speech, addressed_to and received
by means of the bodily eye and ear. This would be to
break down the distinction between manifestation and
revelation, and to assimilate the mode of prophetic
revelation to that granted to Moses, though these are
expressly distinguished (Nu 12 6-8). It is also an
exaggeration to insist that therefore the prophetic state
must be conceived as that of strict ecstasy, involving
the complete abeyance of all mental life on the part of
the prephes (amentia), and possibly also accompanying
physical effects. It is quite clear from the records
which the prophets themselves give us of their revela-
tions that their intelligence was alert in all stages of their
reception of them. The purpose of both these extreme


2579


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Revelation


views is the good one of doing full justice to the objec-
tivity of the revelations vouchsafed to the prophets. If
these revelations took place entirely ares to the
prophet, who merely stood off and contemplated them,
or if they were implanted in the prophets by a process
so violent as not only to supersede their mental activity
but, for the time being, to annihilate it, it would be quite
clear that they came from a source other than the
prophets’ own minds. It is undouhtedly the funda-
mental contention of the prophets that the revelations
given throngh them are not their own but wholly God's.
The significant language we have just quoted from Ezk
13 3: “ Woe unto the foolish prophcts, that follow their
own spirit, and have seen nothing,” is a typical utter-
ance of their sense of the complete objectivity of their
Inessages. What distinguishes the false prophets Is
precisely that they ‘‘prophcsy out of their own heart”
(Ezk 13 2-17), or, to draw the antithesis sharply, that
“they speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of
the mouth of Jeh” (Jer 23 16.26; 14 14). But these
extreme views fail to do justice, the one to the equally
important fact that the word of God, given through the
prophets, comes as the pure and unmixed word of God
not merely to, but from, the prophets; and the other
to the equally obvious fact that the intelligence of the
prophets is alert throughout the whole process of the
reception and delivery of the revelation made through
them (see InsriraTIoN: PRopHecy).


That which gives to prophecy as a mode of reve-
lation its place in the category of visions, strictly
so called, and dreams is that it shares with them
the distinguishing characteristic which determines
the class. In them all alike the movements of the
mind are determined by something extraneous to
the subject’s will, or rather, since we are speaking
of supernaturally given dreams and vi.ions, extra-
neous to the totality of the subject’s own psychoses.
A power not himself takes possession of his con-
sciousness and determines it according to its will.
That power, in the case of the prophets, was fully
recognized and energetically asserted to be Jeh
Himself or, to be more specific, the Spirit of Jeh
(1 S 10 6.10; Neh 9 30; Zec 7 12; Joel 2 28.29).
The prophets were therefore ‘men of the Spirit’
(Hos 9 7). What constituted them prophets was
that the Spirit was put upon them (Isa 42 1) or
poured out on them (Joel 2 28.29), and they were
consequently filled with the Spirit (Mic 3 8), or,
in another but equivalent locution, that ‘the
hand” of the Lord, or “the power of the hand”
of the Lord, was upon them (2 K 3 15; Ezk 1 3;
3 14.22; 33 22; 37 1; 40 1), that is to say, they
were under the Divine control. This control is
represented as complete and compelling, so that,
under it, the prophet becomes not the “mover,” but
the “moved” in the formation of his message. The
apostle Peter very purely reflects the prophetic
consciousness in his well-known declaration: ‘No
prophecy of scripture comes of private interpre-
tation; for prophecy was never brought by the
will of man; but it was as borne by the Holy Spirit
that men spoke from God’ (2 Pet 1 20.21).

What this language of Peter emphasizes—and
what is emphasized in the whole account which the

prophets give of their own conscionus-
6. “Passiv- ness—is, to speak plainly, the passivity
ity” of the of the prophets with respect to the
Prophets _ revelation given through them. This

is the significance of the phrase: ‘it was
as borne by the Holy Spirit that men spoke from
God.’ To be “borne” (¢épev, phérein) is not the
same as to be led (dye, dgein), much less to be
guided or directed (édnyeiv, hodégein): he that is
“borne” contributes nothing to the movement in-
duced, but is the object to be moved. The term
“passivity” is, perhaps, however, liable to some
misapprehension, and should not be, overstrained.
It is not intended to deny that the intelligence of
the prophets was active in the reception of their
message; it was by means of their active intelli-
gence that their message was received: their in-
telligence was the instrument of revelation. It is
intended to deny only that their intelligence was


active in the production of their message: that it
was creatively as distinguished from receptively
active. For reception itself is a kind of activity.
What the prophets are solicitous that their readers
shall understand is that they are in no sense co-
authors with God of their messages. Their mes-
sages are given them, given them entire, and given
them precisely as they are given out by them. God
speaks through them: they are not merely His
messengers, but “His mouth.’ But at the same
time their intelligence is active in the reception,
retention and announcing of their messages, con-
tributing nothing to them but presenting fit instru-
ments for the communication of them—instruments
capable of understanding, responding profoundly
to and zealously proclaiming them.


There is, no doubt, a not unnatural hesitancy abroad
in thinking of the prophets as exhibiting only such merely
receptive activities. In the interests of their personalities,
we are asked not to represent God as dealing mechani-
cally with them, pouring His revelations into their souls
to be simply received as in so many buckets, or violently
wresting their minds from their own proper action that
He may do His own thinking with them. Must we not
rather suppose, we are asked, that all revelations must
be ‘‘psychologically mediated,”” must he given ‘‘after
the mode of moral mediation,’ and must be made first
of all their recipients’ ‘‘own spiritnal possession’? And
is not, in point of fact, the personality of each prophet
clearly traceable in his message, and that to such an
extent as to compel us to recognize him as in a true
sense its real author? The plausibility of such question-
ings should not be permitted to obscure the fact that
the mode of the communication of the prophetic mes-
sages which is suggested by them is directly contra-
dicted by the prophets’ own representations of their
relations to the revealing Spirit. In the prophets’ own
view they were just instruments throngh whom God
gave revelations which came from them, not as their
own product, but as the pnre word of Jeh. Neither
should the plausihility of such questionings blind us to
their speciousness, ‘They exploit subordinate consid-
erations, which are not without their validity in their
own place and under their own limiting conditions, as
if they were the determining or even the sole consid-
erations in the case, and in ne iecy of the really deter-
mining considerations. Godis Himself the author of the
instruments He employs for the communication of His
messages to men and has framed them into precisely
the instruments He desired for the exact communication
of His message. There is just ground for the expectation
that He will use all the instrnments He employs accord-
ing to their natures; intelligent beings therefore as in-
telligent beings, moral agents as moral agents. But
there is no just ground for asserting that God is inca-
pahle of employing the intelligent heings He has Himself
created and formed to His will, to proclaim His messages
purely as He gives them to them; or of making truly
the possession of rational minds conceptions which they
have themselves had no part in creating. And
there is no ground for imagining that God is unable
to frame His own message in the language of the organs
of His revelation without its thereby ceasing to be, he-
cause expressed in a fashion natural to these organs,
therefore purely His message. One would suppose it
to lie in the very nature of the case that if the Lord
makes any revelation to men, He would do it in the lan-
guage of men; or, to individualize more explicitly, in
the language of the man He employs as the organ of His
revelation; and that naturally means, not the language
of his nation or circle merely, but his own particular
language, inclusive of all that gives individuality to his
self-expression. We may speak of this, if we will, as
“the accommodation of the revealing God to the several
prophetic individualties.”” But we should avoid think-
ing of it externally and therefore mechanically, as if the
revealing Spirit artificially phrased the message which
He gives through each prophet in the particnlar forms
of speech proper to the individuality of each, so as to
create the illusion that the message comes out of the
heart of the prophet himself. Preciscly what the
prophets affirm is that their messages do not come out
of their own hearts and _ do not represent the workings
ot their own spirits. Nor is there any illusion in the
phenomenon we are contemplating; and it is a much
more intimate, and, we may add, a much more inter-
esting phenomenon than an external '‘accommodation”’
of speech to individual habitudes. It includes, on the
one hand, the “accommodation” of the prophet, through
his total preparation, to the speech in which the revela-
tion to be given through him is to be clothed; and on the
other involves little more than the consistent carrying
into detail of the broad principle that God uses the instrn-
ments He employs in accordance with their natures.


No doubt, on adequate occasion, the very stones
might cry out by the power of God, and dumb


Revelation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2580


beasts speak, and mystcrious voices sound forth
from the void; and there have not been lacking
instances in which men have been compelled by
the same power to speak what they would not, and
in languages whose very sounds were strange to
their ears. But ordinarily when God the Lord
would speak to men He avails Himself of the serv-
ices of a human tongue with which to speak, and
He employs this tongue according to its nature as a
tongue and according to the particular nature of the
tongue which He employs. Itis vain tosay that the
message delivered through the instrumentality of
this tongue is conditioned at least in its form by the
tongue by which it is spoken, if not, indeed, limited,
curtailed, in some degree determined even in its
matter, by it. Not only was it God the Lord who
made the tongue, and who made this particular
tongue with all its peculiarities, not without regard
to the message He would deliver through it; but
His control of it is perfect and complete, and it is as
absurd to say that He cannot speak His message by
it purely without that message suffering change from
the peculiarities of its tone and modes of enunciation,
as it would be to say that no new truth can be an-
nounced in any language because the elements of
speech by the combination of which the truth in
question is announced are already in existence with
their fixed range of connotation. The marks of the
several individualities imprinted on the messages
of the prophets, in other words, are only a part of
the general fact that these messages are couched
in human language, and in no way beyond that
general fact affect their purity as direct commu-
nications from God.

A new set of problems is raised by the mode of
revelation which we have called ‘‘concursive opera-


tion.” This mode of revelation differs
6. Revela- from prophecy, properly so called,
tion by precisely by the employment in it,
Inspira- as is not done in prophecy, of the


tion total personality of the organ of revela-
tion, as a factor. It has been com-
mon to speak of the mode of the Spirit’s action in
this form of revelation, therefore, as an assistance,
a superintendence, a direction, a control, the mean-
ing being that the effect aimed at—the discovery
and enunciation of Divine truth—is attained through
the action of the human powers—historical re-
search, logical reasoning, ethical thought, religious
aspiration—acting not by themselves, however,
but under the prevailing assistance, superintend-
ence, direction, control of the Divine Spirit. This
manner of speaking has the advantage of setting
this mode of revelation sharply in contrast with
prophetic revelation, as involving merely a deter-
mining, and not, as in prophetic revelation, a super-
cessive action of the revealing Spirit. We are
warned, however, against pressing this discrimi-
nation too far by the inclusion of the whole body
of Scripture in such passages as 2 Pet 1 20f in the
category of prophecy, and the assignment of their
origin not to a mere “leading” but to the “bearing”
of the Holy Spirit. In any event such terms as
assistance, superintendence, direction, control, in-
adequately express the nature of the Spirit’s action
in revelation by “concursive operation.” The Spirit
is not to be conceived as standing outside of the
human powers employed for the effect in view, ready
to supplement any inadequacies they may show
and to supply any defects they may manifest, but
as working confluently in, with and by them, ele-
vating them, directing them, controlling them, ener-
gizing them, so that, as His instruments, they rise
above themselves and under His inspiration do
His work and reach His aim. The product, there-
fore, which is attained by their means is His prod-
uct through them. It 1s this fact which gives to


the process the right to be called actively, and to
the prodnet the right to be called passively, a reve-
lation. Although the circumstance that what is
done is done by and through the action of human
powers keeps the product in form and quality in a
true sense human, yet the confluent operation of
the Holy Spirit throughout the whole process
raises the result above what could by any possi-
bility be achieved by mere human powers and con-
stitutes it expressly a supernatural product. The
human traits are traceable throughout its whole
extent, but at bottom it is a Divine gift, and the
langnage of Paul is the most proper mode of speech
that could be applied to it: ‘‘Which things also we
speak, not in words which man’s wisdom teacheth,
but which the Spirit teacheth” (1 Cor 2 18); ‘“The
things which I write unto you... . are the com-
mandment of the Lord” (1 Cor 14 37). See In-
SPIRATION.
It is supposed that all the forms of special or
redemptive revelation which underlie and give its
content to the religion of the Bible
7. Complete may without violence be subsumed un-
Revelation der one or another of these three modes
of God —external manifestation, internal sug-
in Christ gestion, and concursive operation.
All, that is, except the culminating
revelation, not through, but in, Jesus Christ. As
in His person, in which dwells all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily, He rises above all classification
and is sui generis; so the revelation accumulated
in Him stands outside all the divers portions and
divers manners in which otherwise revelation has
been given and sums up in itself all that has been
or can be made known of God and of His redemp-
tion. He does not so much make a revelation of
God as Himself is the revelation of God; He does
not merely disclose God’s purposeof redemption, He
is unto us wisdom from God, and righteousness and
sanctification and redemption. Thetheophaniesare
but faint shadows in comparison with His manifesta-
tion of God in the flesh. The prophets could
prophesy only as the Spirit of Christ which was in
them testified, revealing to them as to servants one
or another of the secrets of the Lord Jeh; from Him
as His Son, Jeh has no secrets, but whatsoever the
Father knows that the Son knows also. Whatever
truth men have been made partakers of by the
Spirit of truth is His (for all things whatsoever
the Father hath are His) and is taken by the
Spirit of truth and declared to men that He may
be glorified. Nevertheless, though all revelation
is thus summed up in Him, we should not fail to
note very carefully that it would also be all sealed up
in Him—so little is revelation conveyed by fact
alone, without the word—had it not been thus
taken by the Spirit of truth and declared unto men.
The entirety of the NT is but the explanatory word
accompanying and giving its effect to the fact of
Christ. And when this fact was in all its meaning
made the possession of men, revelation was com-
pleted and in that sense ceased. Jesus Christ is
no less the end of revelation than He is the end of
the law.
IV. Biblical Terminology.—There is not much
additional to be learned concerning the nature and
processes of revelation, from the terms


1. The currently employed in Scripture to
Ordinary express the idea. These terms are
Forms ordinarily the common words for dis-


closing, making known, making mani-
fest, apphed with more or less heightened signifi-
cance to supernatural acts or effects in kind. In
the Eng. Bible (AV) the vb. “reveal” occurs about
51 t, of which 22 are in the OT and 29 in the NT.
In the OT the word is always the rendering of a


2581


Heb term mba, galah, or its Aram. equivalent
mba , lah, the root meaning of which appears to be
“nakedness.”” When applied to revelation, it seems
to hint at the removal of obstacles to perception
or the uncovering of objects to perception. In the
NT the word “reveal’’ is always (with the single
exception of Lk 2 35) the rendering of a Gr term
droxahinrw, apokalipia (but in 2 Thess 17; 1
Pet 4 13 the corresponding noun droxddvyis, apokd-
lupsis), which has a very similar basal significance
with its Heb parallel. As this Heb word formed no
substantive in this sense, the noun “revelation” does
not occur in the Eng. OT, the idea being expressed,
however, by other Heb terms variously rendered.
It occurs in the Eng. NT, on the other hand, about.
a dozen times, and always as the rendering of the
substantive corresponding to the vb. rendered
“reveal’’ (apokalupsis). On the face of the Eng.
Bible, the terms “reveal,” “revelation” bear there-
fore uniformly the general sense of “disclose,” ‘“‘dis-
closure.” The idea is found in the Bible, however,
much more frequently than the terms “reveal,”
“revelation” in EV. Indeed, the Heb and Gr
terms exclusively so rendered occur more frequently
in this sense than in this rendering in the Eng. Bib.
And by their side there stand various other terms
which express in one way or another the general
conception.

Inthe NT the vb. ¢avepdw, phaneréa, with the gen-
eral sense of making manifest, manifesting, is the
most common of these. It differs from apokalupta
as the more general and external term from the
more special and inward. Other terms also are
occasionally used: émipdvea, epiphdneia, “mani-
festation” (2 Thess 2 8; 1 Tim6 14; 2 Tim1 10;
41; Tit 2 18; cf émipalw, epiphaind, Tit 2 11;
34); dexww, deikniad (Rev 11; 171; 22 1.6.8;
ef Acts 9 16; 1 Tim 4 15); éfnyéoua, exégéomai
(Jn 1 18), of which, however, only one perhaps—
xpnuatitw, chrémaliza (Mt 2 12.22; Lk 2 20;
Acts 10 22; He 8 5; 11 7; 12 25); xpnuartiopds,
chrématismés (Rom 11 4)—calls for particular no-
tice as in a special way, according to its usage, ex-
pressing the idea of a Divine communication.

In the OT, the common Heb vb. for “seeing’’
(AN, ra ah) is used in its appropriate stems, with
God ag the subject, for ‘appearing,’ “showing’’:
“the Lord appeared unto... .”; “the word which
the Lord showed me.” And from this vb. not only
is an active substantive formed which supplied the
more ancient designation of the official organ of
revelation: MN", ra’eh, ‘seer’; but also objective
substantives, MINT, mar’ah, and TW, mar’eh,
which were used to designate the thing seen in a
revelation—the ‘‘vision.” By the side of these
terms there were others in use, derived from a root
which supplies to the Aram. its common word for
“seeing,’’ but i Heb hag a somewhat more pregnant
meaning, MIM, hazah. Its active derivative, an,
hazeh, was a designation of a prophet which remained
in occasional use, alternating with the more cus-
tomary N72}, ndbhi’, long after TN, 7a’eh, had be-
come practically obsolete; and its passive deriva-
tives hazan, hizedydn, haziith, mahdzeh provided
the ordinary terms for the substance of the reve-
lation or “vision.” The distinction between the
two sets of terms, derived respectively from ra ah
and hazah, while not to be unduly pressed, seems to
lie in the direction that the former suggests external
manifestations and the latter internal revelations.
The ra’eh is he to whom Divine manifestations, the
hazeh he to whom Divine communications, have
been vouchsafed; the mar’eh is an appearance, the
hazan and its companions a vision. It may be of
interest to observe that mar’ah is the term employed


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Revelation


in Nu 12 6, while it is hazin which commonly
occurs in the headings of the written prophecies to
indicate their revelatory character. From this it
may possibly be inferred that in the former passage
it is the mode, in the latter the contents of the reve-
lation that is emphasized. Perhaps a like distinc-
tion may be traced between the hazdn of Dnl 8 15
and the mar’eh of the next verse. The ordinary
vb. for “knowing,” ¥, yadha‘, expressing in its
causative stems the idea of making known, inform-
ing, is also very naturally employed, with God as
its subject, in the sense of revealing, ond that, in
accordance with the natural sense of the word, with
a tendency to pregnancy of implication, of reveal-
ing effectively, of not merely uncovering to obser-
vation, but making to know. Accordingly, it is
paralleled not merely with my, gdlah (Ps 98 2:
‘The Lord hath made known his salvation; his
righteousness hath he displayed in the sight of the
nation’), but also with such terms as 03), lamadh
(Ps 25 4: ‘Make known to me thy ways, O Lord:
teach me thy paths’). This vb. yddha‘ forms no
substantive in the sense of “revelation” (cf MYT,

da‘ath, Nu 24 16; Ps 19 3).
The most common vehicles of the idea of “‘reve-
lation’ in the OT are, however, two expressions
which are yet to be mentioned. These


2. “Word are the phrase, “word of Jeh,” and
of Jeho- the term commonly but inadequately
vah” and rendered in the EV by “law.” The
“Torah” former (d*bhar Yahweh, varied to d*bhar


’Filahim or d¢bhar ha-’ Elahim; cf n’um
Yahweh, massa’ Yahweh) occurs scores of times and
is at once the simplest and the most, colorless desig-
nation of a Divine communication. By the latter
(taraéh), the proper meaning of which is “instruction,”
astrong implication of authoritativeness is conveyed;
and, in this sense, it becomes what may be called
the technical designation of a specifically Divine
communication. The two are not infrequently
brought together, as in Isa 1 10: “Hear the word
of Jeh, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law
[m ‘‘teaching’’] of our God, ye people of Gomorrah”;
or Isa 2 8m; Mic 4 2: “For out of Zion shall go
forth the law [m “‘instruction’’], and the word of Jeh
from Jerus.” Both terms are used for any Divine
communication of whatever extent; and both came
to be employed to express the entire body of
Divine revelation, conceived as a unitary whole.
In this comprehensive usage, the emphasis of the
one came to fall more on the graciousness, and of
the other more on the authoritativeness of this body
of Divine revelation; and both passed into the NT
with these implications. ‘The word of God,’ or
simply ‘‘the word,” comes thus to mean in the NT
just the gospel, “the word of the proclamation of
redemption, that is, all that which God has to say
to man, and causes to be said’’ looking to his sal-
vation. It expresses, in a word, precisely what we
technically speak of as God’s redemptive revelation.
“The law,” on the other hand, means in this NT use,
just the whole body of the authoritative instruction
which God has given men. It expresses, in other
words, what we commonly speak of as God's super-
natural revelation. The two things, of course, are
the same: God’s authoritative revelation is His
gracious revelation; God’s redemptive revelation
is His supernatural revelation. The two terms
merely look at the one aggregate of revelation from
two aspects, and each emphasizes its own aspect
of this one aggregated revelation.

Now, this aggregated revelation lay before the
men of the NT in a written form, and it was im-
possible to speak freely of it without consciousness
of and at least occasional reference to its written
form. Accordingly we hear of a Word of God that


Revelation
Revelation of John


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2582


is written (Jn 15 25; 1 Cor 16 54), and the Divine
Word is naturally contrasted with mere tradition,

as if its written form were of its very
3. “The idea (Mk 7 10); indeed, the written
Scriptures” body of revelation—with an empha-

sis on its written form—is designated
expressly ‘the prophetic word’ (2 Pet 1 19). More
distinctly still, ‘the Law” comes to be thought of
as a written, not exactly, code, but body of Divine-
ly authoritative instructions. The phrase, “It is
written in your law’ (Jn 10 34; 165 25; Rom 3
19; 1 Cor 14 21), acquires the precise sense of,
“It is set forth in your authoritative Scriptures, all
the content of which is ‘law,’ that is, Divine in-
struction.’ Thus ‘the Word of God,” ‘“‘the Law,”
came to mean just the written body of revelation,
what we call, and what the NT writers called, in
the same high sense which we give the term, ‘“‘the
Scriptures.” These “Scriptures” are thus identi-
fied with the revelation of God, conceived as a well-
defined corpus, and two conceptions rise before us
which have had a determining part to play in the
history of Christianity—the conception of an
authoritative Canon of Scripture, and the concep-
tion of this Canon of Scripture as just the Word of
God written. The former conception was thrown
into prominence in opposition to the gnostic heresies
in the earliest age of the church, and gave rise to a
richly varied mode of speech concerning the Scrip-
tures, emphasizing their authority in legal language,
which goes back to and rests on the Bib. usage of
“Law.” The latter it was left to the Reformation
to do justice to in its struggle against, on the one
side, the Romish depression of the Scriptures in
favor of the traditions of the church, and on the
other side the Enthusiasts’ supercession of them
in the interests of the ‘inner Word.’ When
Tertullian, on the one hand, speaks of the Scrip-
tures as an ‘‘Instrument,’’ a legal document, his
terminology has an express warrant in the Scrip-
tures’ own usage of torah, “law,’’ to designate their
entire content. And when John Gerhard argues
that “between the Word of God and Sacred Scrip-
ture, taken in a material sense, there is no real differ-
ence,” he is only declaring plainly what is definitely
implied in the NT use of ‘the Word of God” with
the written revelation in mind. What is important
to recognize is that the Scriptures themselves repre-
sent the Scriptures as not merely containing here
and there the record of revelations—‘‘words of God,”
tordth—given by God, but as themselves, in all their
extent, a revelation, an authoritative body of gracious
instructions from God; or, since they alone, of all
the revelations which God may have given, are ex-
tant—rather as the Revelation, the only ‘‘Word of
God” accessible to men, in all their parts “law,”
that is, authoritative instruction from God.


LITERATURE.—Herman Witsius, ‘‘De Prophetis et
Prophetia"’ in Afiscell. Sacr., I, Leiden, 1736, 1-318:
G. F. Oehler, Theology of the OT, ET, Edinburgh, 1874,
I, part I (and_the appropriate scctions in other Bib.
Theologies); H. Bavinck, Gereformeerde Dogmatiek?,


I, Kampen, 1906, 290-406 (and the appropriate sec-
tions in other dogmatic treatises); H. Voigt, Fun-
damentaldogmatik, Gotha, 1874, 173 ff; A. Kuyper,


Encyclopaedia of Sacred Theology, ET, New York, 1898,
div. III, ch ii; A. E. Krauss, Die Lehre von der Offen-
barung, Gotha, 1868; C. F. Fritzsche, De revelationis
notione biblica, Leipzig, 1828; E. W. Hengstenberg,
The Christology of the OT, ET?, Edinburgh, 1868, IV,
Appendix 6, pp. 396-444; E. Konig, Der Offenbarungs-
begrif des AT, Leipzig, 1882; A. B. Davidson, OT
Prophecy, 1903; W.J. Beecher, The Prophets and the
Promise, New York, 1905; James Orr, The Christian
View of God and the Worid, 1893, as per Index, *' Revela-
tion,”’ and Revelation and Inspiration, London and New
York, 1910. Also: T. Christlicb, Afodern Doubt and
Christian Belief, ET, New York, 1874; G. P. Fisher,
The Nature and Method of Revelation, New York, 1890;
C. M. Mead, Supernatural Revelation, 1889; J. Quirm-
bach, Die Lehre des h. Paulus von der natirlichen Gottes-
erkenntnis, etc, Freiburg, 1906.
BENJAMIN B,. WarrieLp


REVELATION OF JOHN:


I. Tiris anv Generar Cuaractrer or Boor
1. Title
2. Uniqueness and Reality of Visions
II. Canonicity aND AUTHORSHIP
1. Patristic Testimony
2. Testimony of Book Itself
3. Objections to Johannine Authorship—Relation
to Fourth Gospel
Ill. Dare anv Unity or tHe Boox
1. Traditional Date under Domitian
2. The Nero-Theory A
3. Composite Hypotheses—Babylonian Theory
IV. Pran anp ANALYs18 OF THE Book
1. General Scope
2. Detailed Analysis
V. Principles oF INTERPRETATION |
1. General Scheme of Interpretation
2. The Newer Theories
3. The Book a True Prophecy
VI. Turo.tocy or THE Book
LITERATURE


The last book of the NT. It professes to be the
record of prophetic visions given by Jesus Christ
to John, while the latter was a prisoner, “for the
word of God and the testimony of Jesus’’ (1 9), in
Patmos (q.v.), a small rocky island in the Aegean,
about 15 miles W. of Ephesus. Its precursor in the
OT is the Book of Dnl, with the symibolic visions
and mystical numbers of which it stands in close
affinity. The peculiar form of the book, its relation
to other “apocalyptic” writings, and to the Fourth
Gospel, likewise attributed to John, the interpreta-
tion of its symbols, with controverted questions of
its date, of worship, unity, relations to contem-
porary history, etc, have made it one of the most
difficult books in the NT to explain satisfactorily.

I. Title and General Character af Baak—‘‘Reve-
lation’? answers to droxdAvyis, apokdlupsis, in ver 1.

The oldest form of the title would seem
1. Title to be simply, ‘Apocalypse of John,”
the appended words “the Divine”
(GeodSyos, theoldgos, i.e. ‘“‘theologian”) not being
older than the 4th cent. (cf the title given to Gregory
of Nazianzus, “Gregory the theologian’). The
book belongs to the class of works commonly named
“apocalyptic,” as containing visions and revelations
of the future, frequently in symbolica] form (e.g.
the Book of En, the Apocalypse of Bar, the Apoca-
lypse of Ezr; see ApocaLyptic LITERATURE), but
it is doubtful if the word here bears this technical
sense. The tendency at present is to group the
NT Apocalypse with these others, and attribute to
it the same kind of origin as theirs, viz. in the un-
bridled play of religious phantasy, clothing itself
in unreal visiona] form.

But there is a wide distinction. These other
works are pseudonymous—fictitious; on the face

of them products of imagination;


2. Unique- betraying that this is their origin in
ness and __ their crude, confused, unedifying char-
Reality of acter. The Apocalypse bears on it
Visions the name of its author—an apostle


of Jesus Christ (see below); claims to
rest on real visions; rings with the accent of sin-
cerity; is orderly, serious, sublime, purposeful, in
its conceptions; deals with the most solemn and
momentous of themes. On the modern Nero-
theory, to which most recent expositors give ad-
herence, it is a farrago of baseless phantasies, no one
of which came true. Onits own claim it is a prod-
uct of true prophecy (1 3; 22 18f), and has or
will have sure fulfilment. Parallels here and there
are sought between it and the Book of En or the
Apocalypse of Ezr. As a rule the resemblances
arise from the fact that these works draw from the
same store of the ideas and imagery of the OT. It
is there the key is chiefly to be sought to the sym-
bolism of John. The Apocalypse is steeped in the
thoughts, the images, even the language of the OT
(cf the illustrations in Lightfoot, Gal, 361, where it


2583


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Revelation
Revelation of John


is remarked: ‘‘The whole book is saturated with
illustrations from the OT. It speaks not the lan-
guage of Paul, but of Isaiah and Ezekiel and
Daniel”). These remarks will receive elucidation
in what follows.
_d. Canonicity and Authority.—The two ques-
tions of canonicity and authorship are closely con-
nected. Eusebius states that opinion
1. Patristic in his day was divided on the book, and
Testimony he himself wavers between placing it
ae among the disputed books or ranking
it with the acknowledged (homologotimena). ‘Among
these,” he says, ‘if such a view seem correct, we
must place the Apocalypse of John” (H&, III, 25).
That it was rightly so placed appears from a survey
of the evidence. The first to refer to the book ex-
pressly is Justin Martyr (¢ 140 AD), who speaks
of it as the work of “a certain man, whose name
was John, one of the apostles of Christ’ (Dial, 81).
Irenaeus (c 180 AD) repeatedly and decisively
declares that the Apocalypse was written by John,
a disciple of the Lord (Adv. Haer., iv.20, 11; 30,
4; v.26, I; 35, 2, etc), and comments on the number
666 (v.30, I). In his case there can be no doubt
that the apostle John is meant. Andreas of Cappa-
docia (5th cent.) in a Comm. on the Apocalypse
states that Papias (c 130 AD) bore witness to its
credibility, and cites a comment by him on Rev
12 7-9. The book is quoted in the Ep. on the
martyrs of Vienne and Lyons (177 AD); had a
commentary written on it by Melito of Sardis (c 170
AD), one of the churches of the Apocalypse (Euseb.,
HE,1V, 26); was used by Theophilus of Antioch (c
168 AD) and by Apollonius (c 210 AD; HE, V,
25)—in these cases being cited as the Apocalypse
of John. It is included as John’s in the Canon of
Muratori (c 200 AD). The Johannine authorship
(apostolic) is abundantly attested by Tertullian
(c 200 AD; Adv. Mar., ili.14, 24, etc); by Hippo-
lytus (c 240 AD), who wrote a work upon it; by
Clement of Alexandria (c 200 AD); by Origen (c
230 AD), and other writers. Doubt about the
authorship of the book is first heard of in the ob-
scure sect of the Alogi (end of 2d cent.), who, with
Caius, a Rom presbyter (c 205 AD), attributed it
to Cerinthus. More serious was the criticism of
Dionysius of Alexandria (c 250 AD), who, on inter-
nal grounds, held that the Fourth Gospel and the
Apocalypse could not have come from the same pen
(Euseb., HE, VII, 25). He granted, however, that
it was the work of a holy and inspired man—an-
other John. The result was that, while ‘‘in the
Western church,” as Bousset grants, “the Apoca-
lypse was accepted unanimously from the first”
(EB, I, 193), a certain doubt attached to it for a
time in sections of the Gr and Syrian churches. It
is not found in the Pesh, and a citation from it in
Ephraim the Syrian (f 373) seems not to be genu-
ine. Cyril of Jerus (¢ 386 AD) omits it from his
list, and it is unmentioned by the Antiochian writers
(Chrysostom, Theodore of Mopsuestia, Theodoret).
The Canon attributed to the Council of Laodicea
(c 360 AD) does not name it, but it is doubtful
whether this document is not of later date (cf West-
cott; also Bousset, Die Offenb. Joh., 28). On the
other hand, the book is acknowledged by Methodius,
Pamphilus, Athanasius, Gregory of Nyssa, Cyril
Alex., Epiphanius, etc. oe
The testimony to the canonicity, and also to the
Johannine authorship, of the Apocalypse is thus
exceptionally strong. In full accord-
ance with it is the claim of the book
itself. It proclaims itself to be the
work of John (1 1.4.9; 22 8), who
does not, indeed, name himself an
apostle, yet, in his inspired character, position of
authority in the Asian churches, and selection as


2. Testi-
mony of
Book Itself


the medium of these revelations, can hardly be
thought of as other than the well-known John of
the Gospels and of consentient church tradition.
The alternative view, first suggested as a possibility
by Eusebius, now largely favored by modern writers,
is that the John intended is the “presbyter John”
of a well-known passage cited by Eusebius from
Papias (HE, ITI, 39). Without entering into the
intricate questions connected with this “presbyter
John’’—whether he was really a distinet person from
the apostle (Zahn and others dispute it), or whether,
if he was, he resided at. Ephesus (sce Jonn, GosPEL
oFr)—it is cnough here to say that the reason al-
ready given, viz: the importance and place of
authority of the author of the Apocalypse inthe Asian
churches, and the emphatic testimony above cited
connecting him with the apostle, forbid the attri-
bution of the book to a writer wholly unknown to
church tradition, save for this casual reference to
him in Papias. Had the assumed presbyter really
been the author, he could not have dropped so com-
pletely out of the knowledge of the church, and had
his place taken all but immediately by the apostle.
One cause of the hesitancy regarding the Apoca-
lypse in early circles was dislike of its millenarian-
ism; but the chief reason, set forth


3. Objec- with much critical skill by Dionysius
tions to of Alexandria (Euseb., H#, VII, 25),
Johannine was the undoubted contrast m char-
Authorship acter and style between this work and
—Relation the Fourth Gospel, likewise claiming
to Fourth to be from the pen of John. Two
Gospel works so diverse in character—the Gos-


pel calm, spiritual, mystical, abound-
ing in characteristic expressions as “life,” “light,”
“love,’’ etc, written in idiomatic Gr; the Apocalypse
abrupt, mysterious, material in its imagery, in-
exact and barbarous in its idioms, sometimes em-
ploying solecisms—could not, it was argued, pro-
ceed from the same author. Not much, beyond
amplification of detail, has been added to the force
of the arguments of Dionysius. There were three
possibilities—either first, admitting the Johannine
authorship of the Apocalypse, to assail the genu-
ineness of the Gospel—this was the method of the
school of Baur; or, second, accepting the Gospel,
to seek a different author for the Apocalypse—
John the presbyter, or another: thus not a few
reverent, scholars (Bleek, Neander, etc); or, third,
with most moderns, to deny the Johannine author-
ship of both Gospel and Apocalypse, with a leaning
to the “presbyter” as the author of the latter (Har-
nack, Bousset, Moffatt, etc). Singularly there
has been of late in the advanced school itself a
movement in the direction of recognizing that this
difficulty of style is less formidable than it looks—
that, in fact, beneath the surface difference, there
is a strong body of resemblances pointing to a close
relationship of Gospel and Apocalypse. This had
long been argued by the older writers (Godet,
Luthardt, Alford, Salmon, etc), but it is now more
freely acknowledged. As instances among many
may be noted the use.of the term “Logos” (19 13),
the image of the ‘‘Lamb,”’ figures like ‘water of
life,” words and phrases as ‘‘true,”’ “he that over-
cometh,” “keep the commandments,” etc. A
striking coincidence is the form of quotation of Zec
12 10 in Jn 19 87 and Rev 17. If the Gr in
parts shows a certain abruptness and roughness, it
is plainly evidenced by the use of the correct con-
structions in other passages that this is not due to
want of knowledge of the language. ‘“‘The very
rules which he breaks in one place he observes in
others” (Salmon). There are, besides, subtle
affinities in the Gr usage of the two books, and some
of the very irregularities complained of are found in
the Gospel (for ample details consult Bousset, op.


Revelation of John


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2584


cit.; Godet, Comm. on Jn, I, 267-70, ET; Alford, Gr
Test., 1V, 224-28; Salmon, Intro to the NT, 233~43,
2d ed; the last-named writer says: “I have pro-
duced instances enough to establish decisively that
there is the closest possible affinity between the
Revelation and the other Johannime books”).
Great differences in character and style no doubt
still remain. Some, to leave room for these, favor
an early date for the Apocalypse (68-69 BC; on
this below); the trend of opinion, however, now
seems, as will be shown, to be moving back to the
traditional date in the reign of Domitian, in which
case the Gospel will be the earlier, and the Apoca-
lypse the later work. This, likewise, seems to yield
the better explanation. The tremendous experiences
of Patmos, bursting through all ordinary and calmer
states of consciousness, must have produced startling
changes in thought and style of composition. The
“rapt seer” will not speak and write like the self-

collected, calmly brooding evangelist.
Ill. Date and Unity of the Book.—Eusebius, in
summing up the tradition of the Churchon this sub-
ject, assigns John’s exile to Patmos,


1. Tradi- and consequently the composition of
tional Date the Apocalypse, to the latter part of
under the reign of Domitian (81-96 AD).
Domitian Irenaeus (c 180 AD) says of the book,


“For it was seen, not a long time ago,
but almost in our own generation, at the end of the
reign of Domitian” (Adv. Haer., v.30, 3). This
testimony is confirmed by Clement of Alexandria
(who speaks of ‘‘the tyrant’’), Origen, and later
writers. Epiphanius (4th cent.), indeed, puts (Haer.,
]i.12, 238) the exile to Patmos in the reign of Clau-
dius (41-54 AD); but as, in the same sentence, he
speaks of the apostle as 90 years of age, it is plain
there is a strange blunder in the name of the
emperor. The former date answers to the conditions
of the book (decadence of the churches; widespread
and severe persecution), and to the predilection of
Domitian for this mode of banishment (cf Tacitus
Hist. 1.2; Euseb., HE, III, 18).

This, accordingly, may be regarded as the tradi-
tional date of composition of the Apocalypse,
though good writers, influenced partly


2. The by the desire to give time for the later
Nero- composition of the Gospel, have sig-
Theory nified a preference for an earlier date


(e.g. Westcott, Salmon). It is by no
means to be assumed, however, that the Apocalypse
is the earlier production. The tendency of recent
criticism, it will be seen immediately, is to revert
to the traditional date (Bousset, etc); but for a dec-
ade or two, through the prevalence of what may be
called the ‘‘Nero-theory” of the book, the pendulum
swung strongly in favor of its composition shortly
after the death of Nero, and before the destruction
of Jerus (held to be shown to be still standing
by ch 11), ic. about 68-69 AD. This date was
even held to be demonstrated beyond all question.
Reuss may be taken as an example. According to
him (Christian Theology of the Apostolic Age, I,
369 ff, ET), apart from the ridiculous preconcep-
tions of theologians, the Apocalypse is “the most
simple, most transparent book that prophet ever
penned.” ‘There is no other apostolical writing
the chronology of which can be more exactly fixed.”
“It was written before the destruction of Jerus,
under the emperor Galba—that is to say, in the
second half of the year 68 of our era.” He proceeds
to discuss ‘the irrefutable proofs’? of this. The
proof, in brief, is found in the beast (not introduced
till ch 13) with seven heads, one of which has been
mortally wounded, but is for the present healed
(13 3). “This is the Rom empire, with its first
7 emperors, one of whom is killed, but is to live again
as Antichrist”’ (cf 17 LOf). The key to the whole


T


book is said to be given in 13 18, where the number
of the beast is declared to be 666. Applying the
method of numerical values (the Jewish Gematria),
this number is found to correspond with the name
“Nero Caesar’ in Heb letters (omitting the yédh).
Nero then is the 5th head that is to live again; an
interpretation confirmed by rumors prevalent at
that time that Nero was not really dead, but only
hidden, and was soon to return to claim his throne.
As if to make assurance doubly sure, it is found that
by dropping the final » in ‘“Neron,” the number
becomes 616—a number which Irenaeus in his com-
ments on the subject (v.30.1) tells us was actually
found in some ancient copies. The meaning there-
fore is thought to be clear. Writing under the
emperor Galba, the 6th emperor (reckoning from
Augustus), the author anticipates, after a short
reign of a 7th emperor (17 10), the return of the
Antichrist Nero—an 8th, but of the 7, with whom
is to come the end. Jerus is to be miraculously
preserved (ch 11), but Rome is to perish. This is
to happen within the space of 33 years. ‘“The
final catastrophe, which was to destroy the city and
empire, was to take place in three years and a half.
.... The writer knows... . that Rome will
in three years and a half perish finally, never to rise
again.” It does not matter for this theory that
not one of the things predicted happened—that
every anticipation was falsified. Nero did not
return; Jerus was not saved; Rome did not perish;
33 years did not see the end of all things. Yet the
Christian church, though the failure of every one
of these predictions had been decisively demon-
strated, received the book as of Divine inspiration,
apparently without the least idea that such things
had been intended (see the form of the theory in
Renan, with a keen criticism in Salmon’s Intro to
the NT, lect xiv).
What is to be said with reference to this ‘‘Nero-
theory’? belongs to subsequent sections: mean-
while it is to be observed that, while
3. Com- portions of the theory are retained,
posite significant changes have since taken
Hypotheses place in the view entertained of the
| —Babylo- book as a whole, and with this of the
nian Theory date to be assigned to it. First, after
1882, came a flood of disintegrating
hypotheses, based on the idea that the Apocalypse
was not a unity, but was either a working up of one
or more Jewish apocalypses by Christian hands, or
at least incorporated fragments of such apoca-
lypses (Vélter, Vischer, Weizsicker, Weyland,
Pfleiderer, Spitta, etc). Harnack lent his influ-
ential support to the form of this theory advocated
by Vischer, and for a time the idea had vogue.
Very soon, however, it fell into discredit through
its own excesses (for details on the different views,
see Bousset, or Moffat’s Intro to the NT, 489 ff), and
through increasing appreciation of the internal evi-
dence for the unity of the book. Gunkel, in his
Schépfung und Chaos (1895), started another line
of criticism in his derivation of the conceptions of
the book, not from Jewish apocalypse, but from
Bab mythology. He assailed with sharp criticism
the “contemporary history” school of interpretation
(the ‘‘Nero-theory”’ above), and declared its “bank-
ruptey.” The number of the beast, with him,
found its solution, not in Nero, but in the Heb name
for the primeval chaos. This theory, too, has failed
in general acceptance, though elements in it are
adopted by most recent interpreters. The modified
view most in favor now is that the Apocalypse is, in-
deed, the work of a Christian writer of the end of the
Ist cent., but embodies certain sections borrowed
from Jewish apocalypse (as 7 1-8, the 144,000;
ch 11, measuring of the temple and the two wit-
| nesses; esp. ch 12, the woman and red dragon—


2585


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA | Revelation of John


this, in turn, reminiscent of Bab mythology). These
supposed Jewish sections are, however, without
real support in anything that is known, and the
symbolism admits as easily of a Christian interpre-
tation as any other part of the book. We are left,
therefore, as before, with the book as a unity, and
the tide of opinion flows back to the age of Domitian
as the time of its origin. Moffatt (connecting it
mistakenly, as it seems to us, with Domitian’s
emphasis on the imperial cultus, but giving also
other reasons) goes so far as to say that “any earlier
date for the book is hardly possible’ (Expos Gr
Test., V, 317). The list of authorities for the
Domitianic date may be seen in Moffatt, [niro, 508.
IV. Plan and Analysis of the Book.—The
method of the book may thus be indicated. After
an introduction, and letters to the
1. General seven churches (chs 1-3), the properly
Scope prophetic part of the book commences
with a vision of heaven (chs 4, 5),
following upon which are two series of visions of
the future, parallel, it would appear, to each other—
the first, the 7 seals, and under the 7th seal, the 7
trumpets (chs 6-11, with interludes in ch 7 and
again in 10; 11 1-12); the second, the woman and
her child (ch 12), the 2 beasts (ch 13), and, after
new interludes (ch 14), the bowls and 7 last
plagues (chs 16,16). The expansion of the last
judgments is given in separate pictures (the scarlet
woman, doom of Babylon, Har-Magedon, chs 17-
19); then come the closing scenes of the millennium,
the last apostasy, resurrection and judgment (ch
20), followed by the new heavens and new earth,
with the descending new Jerus (chs 21,22). The
theme of the book is the conflict of Christ and His
church with anti-Christian powers (the devil, the
beast, the false prophet, 16 13), and the ultimate
and decisive defeat of the latter; its keynote is in
the words, ‘‘Come, Lord Jesus” (22 20; cf 1 7);
but it is to be noticed, as characteristic of the book,
that while this ‘coming’ is represented as, in a
manner, ever near, the end, as the crisis approaches,
is again always postponed by a fresh development
of events. Thus, under the 6th seal, the end seems
reached (6 12-17), but a pause ensues (ch 7), and
on the opening of the seventh seal, a new series
begins with the trumpets (8 2ff). Similarly, at
the sounding of the 6th trumpet, the end seems at
hand (9 12-21), but a new pause is introduced
before the last sounding takes place (11 15 ff).
Then is announced the final victory, but as yet only
in summary. A new series of visions begins, open-
ing into large perspectives, till, after fresh inter-
Indes, and the pouring out of 6 of the bowls of judg-
ment, Har-Magedon itself is reached; but though,
at the outpouring of the 7th bowl, it 1s proclaimed,
“Tt is done” (16 17), the end is again held over till
these final judgments are shown in detail. At
length, surely, in ch 19, with the appearance of the
white horseman—“The Word of God” (ver 13)—
and the decisive overthrow of all his adversaries
(vs 18-21), the climax is touched; but just then,
to our surprise, intervenes the announcement of the
binding of Satan for 1,000 years, and the reign of
Jesus and His saints upon the earth (the interpre-
tation is not here discussed), fallowed by a fresh
apostasy, and the general resurrection and judg-
ment (ch 20). Precise time-measures evidently
fail in dealing with a book so constructed: the 33
years of the Nero-interpreters sink into insignifi-
cance in its crowded panorama of events. The
symbolic numbers that chiefly rule in the book are
“seven,” the number of completeness (7 spirits,
seals, trumpets, bowls, heads of beasts); “ten,”
the number of worldly power (10 horns); “four,
the earthly number (4 living creatures, corners of
earth, winds, etc); 34 years—42 months—“time,


and times, and half a time’ (12 14)=1,260 days,
the period, borrowed from Dnl (7 25; 12 7), of
anti-Christian ascendency.


The following is a more detailed analysis:
I. InrropuctTion
a qaule ere oer oO, Te -
i . Vision of Jesus an essage to the
a: Beene Seven Churches of the Province of Asia
malysis (vs 9-20)
3. The Letters to the Seven Churches (chs


2,
(1) Ephesus (2 1-7)
(2) Smyrna (vs 8-11)
(3) Pergamos (vs 12-17)
(4) Thyatira (vs 18-29)
(5) Sardis (3. 1-6)
(6) Philadelphia (vs 7-13)
(7) Laodicea (vs 14-22)
Il. Tre Tuines tro Comes. Finst Series or VISIONS:
Tue Seats anD TRUMPETS
1. The Vision of Heaven
3 Adoration of the Creator (ch 4)
2) The 7-Sealed Book; Adoration of God and
the Lamb (ch 5)
2. Opening of Six Seals (ch 6)
(1) The White Horse (vs 1.2)
(2) The Red Horse (vs 3.4)
i The Black Horse (vs 5.6)
4) The Pate Horse (vs 7.8)
(5) Souls under the Altar (vs 9-11)
(6) The Wrath of the Lamb (vs 12-17)
3. Interludes (ch 7)
(1) Sealing of 144,000 on Earth (vs 1-8)
(2) Triumphant Multitude in Heaven (vs 9~17)
4. Opening of Seventh Seal: under This Seven
Trumpets, of Which Six Now Sounded (chs


8, 9)
(1) Hail and Fire on Earth (8 7)
(2) Burning Mountain in Sea (vs 8.9)
(3 Hates Star on Rivers and Fountains (vs
(4) One-third Sun, Moon, and Stars Darkened
(ver 12). '‘Woe''—Trumpets (ver 13)
(5) The Fallen Star-Locusts (9 1-11)
(6) Angels Loosed from Euphrates—the Horse-
Maan (vs 12-21)
5. InterIndes—
(1) Angel with Little Book (ch 10)
(2) Measuring of Temple and Altar—the Two
Witnesses (11 1-13)
6. Seventh Trumpet Sounded—Final
(vs 14-19)

lll. Seconp Series or Visions: THe WOMAN AND THE
Rep Dragon; THE Two Beasts; THE Bows
AND Lasr PLacueEs
1. The Woman and Child; the Red Dragon and

His Persecutions (ch 12)
2. The Beast from the Sea, Seven-headed, Ten-
porned (13 1-10); the Two-horned Beast (vs


11-18)
3. Interludes (ch 14)
(1) The Lamb on Mt. Zion;


wy oS


Victory


gus the 144,000 (vs
(2) any Angel with ‘“‘an Eternal Gospet”’ (vs


(3) Second Angei—(Anticipatory) Proclama-
tion of Fall of Babylon (ver 8)
(4) Third Angelt—Doom of Worshippers of the
Beast (vs 9-12)
(5) Blessedness of the Dead in the Lord (ver 13)
(6) The Son of Man and the Great Vintage
(vs 14-20)
4. The Seven Last Plagues—the Angels and Their
Bowls:_ the Preparation in Heaven (ch 15)
—the Ontpouring (ch 16)
(1) On Earth (16 2)
(2) On Sea (ver 3)
(3) On Rivers and Fountains (vs 4-7)
On Sun (vs 8.9)
vs 10.11)


i) On Seat of Beast
ar-Magedon (vs_ 12-16)


wv


(6) On Euphrates —
(7) In the Air—Victory and Fall of Bahylon
(vs 17-21)

IV. Expansion or Last Jupements (chs 17-19)

1. eee Woman on Beast—Her Judgment
€

. Doom of Babylon and Lament over Her (ch 18)

. Interlude—Announcement of Marriage of the
Lamb (19 1-10)

. Rider on White Horse (‘The Word of God")
and His Armies—Last Battle and Doom of
ree False Prophet, and Their Followers (vs

—21)
V. Tue MiLtvennium—New Heavens and New
Earra (chs 20-22)
1. Satan Bound; First Resurrection and Reign of
Saints for 1,000 Years (20 1-6)
2. Loosing of Satan and Final Conflict--Doom of
Adversaries and of the Devil (vs 7—10)
3. ee Resurrection and Last Judgment (vs
15)


- Ch


Revelation of John
Reward


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2586


4. New Heavens and New Earth
(1) The New Jerus from Heaven (21 1-9)
(2) Description of the City (vs 10-27)
(3) Blessedness of Its Citizens (22 1-7)
(4) Epilogue (vs 8-21)
V. Principles of Interpretation-—As a book in-
tended for the consolation of the church under
present and future afflictions, the
1. General Apocalypse is meant by its author to
Scheme of be understood (1 3; 22 7). He must
Interpre- have heen aware, however, that, while
tation its general scope might be apprehended,
mystery must rest upon many of its
symbols, till the time of their actual fulfilment.
The book relates to “things which must shortly
come to pass’ (1 1)—in their beginnings at least—
and the divers interpretations since put upon its
prophecies are the best evidence of the difficulties
attaching to them. Schemes of interpretation
have generally been grouped into praeterist (the
prophecies being regarded as already fulfilled),
futurist (the fulfilment being thrown wholly into the
future), and the historical (the fulfilment being
looked for in the continuous history of the church
from John’s day till the end). (1) The older prae-
terist view may be taken as represented by Moses
Stuart, who finds the fulfilment of chs 6-11 in the
destruction of Jerus (Comm., 520 ff), and of chs 13—
19 in the reign of Nero (690 ff). Even he, however,
has to interpret the chapter on the last things of
the future. (2) The futurist view connects the
whole with the times of the second advent and the
millennium. The beast is an individual who shall
then appear as Antichrist. This rejects the plain
intimations of the book that the events predicted
lay, in their beginnings at least, immediately in the
future of the writer. (3) The historical view connects
the various symbols with definite occurrences—
as the invasions which overthrew the Rom Empire
(the first 4 trumpets), the Saracens (first. woe-trum-
pet), the Turks (second woe-trumpet), the papacy
(the beast, ch 13; the scarlet woman, ch 17), etc.
A day-year principle is applied to the periods (1,260
days—1,260 years). As representatives of this
view may be mentioned Mede, Vitringa, Sir Isaac
Newton, Elliott in Harae Apocalypticae, A. Barnes.
These older schemes are largely put out of date
by the newer theories, already alluded to, in which
the Apocalypse is explained out of


2. The contemporary conditions, the legend of
Newer the returning Nero, Jewish apoca-
Theories —lypse, and Bab mythology. These are


praeterist theories also, but differ
from the older in that in them all real prophecy is
denied. A mainstay of such theories is the declara-
tion of the book that the events announced are close
at hand (1 1.8; 22 20). When, however, it is
remembered that, on any view, this nearness in-
cludes a period of 1,000 years before the judgment
and descent of the new Jerus, it will be felt that it
will not do to give these expressions too restricted
a temporal significance. The horizon is wider.
The coming of Christ is ever near—ever approach-
ing—yet it is not to be tied down to “times and
seasons”; it is more of the nature of a process and
has anticipatory exemplifications in many crises
and providential events forecasting the end (see
above). The “coming,” e.g. to the church at
Ephesus (2 5), or to the church at Pergamos (2 16)
—contingent events—can hardly exhaust the full
meaning of the Parousia. The Nero-theory de-
mands a date at latest under Galba, but that date
we have seen to be generally abandoned. Those
who place it under Vespasian (omitling three short
reigns) sacrifice the advantage of datmg the book
before the destruction of Jerus, and have to fall
back on a supposititious Jewish fragment in ch 11,


which those who incorporated it must have known
had never been fulfilled. The attempt to give a
“contemporary historical’? interpretation to the
symbols of the successive churches, as Gunkel has
acutely shown, completely breaks down in practice,
while Gunkel’s own attempt at a Bab explanation
will be judged by most to be overstrained. ‘‘Drag-
on’’ in the OT and elsewhere may be associated with
widespread oriental ideas, but the definite symbol-
ism of the Apocalypse in ch 12 has no provable con-
nection with Bab myths. There is the widest dis-
agreement in the theories of “composite” origin
(from Jewish apocalypse)... What seems simple and
demonstrable to one has no plausibility to others.
A form of “Nero Caesar,” indeed, yields the mystic
666, but so do 1,000 other names—almost any name,
with proper manipulation (cf Salmon, lect xiv).
Lastly, the returning-Nero legend yields no satis-
factory explanation of the language in 13 3.12.14;
17 11. Thetheory is that these words allude to the
belief that Nero would return from the dead and
become Antichrist (see above). Tacitusattests that
there were vague rumors that Nero had not really
died (Hist. 11.8), and later a pretender arose in
Parthia taking advantage of this feeling (Suet. Nero.
57). The idea of Nero returning from the dead is
categorically stated in Sib Or 5 363-70 (c 120 AD);
cf Sib Or 4 119-22 (ce 80 AD). Augustine mentions
the idea (City of God, xx.19, 3), but without con-
nection with the Apocalypse. By Domitian’s time,
however, it was perfectly certain that Nero had
not returned, and there was no longer, on this in-
terpretation, any appositeness in speaking of a
“head” the “‘deathstroke” of which was healed (13
3), which became the “eighth head’ of 17 11—
if, indeed, the apostle could be conceived capable
of being influenced by such vagaries. The events
predicted lay, evidently, still inthe future. It may
be added that neither [renaeus, nor any early inter-
preter, seems to have heard of the connection of 666
with “Nero.” Jrenaeus himself suggests the solu-

tion Lateinos (cf Salmon, ut supra).
It is not proposed here to attempt the lines of a
positive interpretation. If it is once recognized
that the Apocalypse is a book of true


3. The prophecy, that its symbols stand for
Book a something real, and that its perspective
True is not to be limited to a brief period
Prophecy like 34 years, the way is opened, not,


indeed, for a reading into it of a series
of precise historical occurrences, but still for doing
justice to the truth which lies at the basis of the
historical interpretation, viz. that there are here pre-
figured the great crises in the age-long conflict of
Christ and His church with pagan and anti-
Christian adversaries. Events and tendencies may
be grouped, or under different forms may relate to
the same subject (e.g. the 144,000 sealed on earth—
a spiritual Israel—in 7 1-8, and the triumphant
multitude in heaven, vs 9-17); successions of events
may be foreshortened; different pictures may
overlap; but, shining through the symbols, great
truths and facts which have historical realization
appear. There is no need for supposing that, in a
drama of this range, the “heads” of the beast of
chs 13 and 17 (behind whom is the Dragon-enemy,
Satan, of ch 12) stand, in contrariety to the ,
analogy of Dnl, for seven individual emperors, and
that “the image of the beast,’’ which has life given
to it and “speaks” (13 14.15), is the statue of the
emperor; or that such tremendous events as the fall
of the Rom Empire, or the rise of the papacy—with
which, however, must be combined al! ecclesiastical
anti-Christianism—or the false prophecy of later
intellectual anti-Christianism have no place in the
symbolism of the book. Sane, reverent thought
will suggest many lines of correspondence with the


2587


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Revelation of John
Reward


a


course of God’s providence, which may serve to
illuminate its dark places. More than this need not
be said here.

VI. Theology of the Book.—On this it is hardly
necessary to dwell, for expositors are now well
agreed that in its great doctrines of God, Christ,
man, sin, redemption, the teaching of the Apoca-
lypse does not vary essentially from the great types
in the Epp. The assonances with John’s mode
of thinking have already been alluded to. It is
granted by all writers that the Christology is as
high as anywhere in the NT. “It ought unhesi-
tatingly to be acknowledged,” says Reuss, ‘that
Christ is placed in the Apocalypse on a par with
God” (op. cit., I, 397-98; cf Rev 1 4.17; 2 8;
5 12-14; 22 13, etc). Not less striking are the
correspondences with the teaching of Paul and of
Peter on redemption through the blood of Christ
(1 5; 5 9; 7 14; 14 4, etc). The perverted con-
ception of the school of Baur that we have in the
book an anti-Pauline manifesto (thus also Pflei-
derer; cf Hibbert Lectures, 178), is now practically
dead (see the criticism of it by Reuss, op. cit., I,
308-12). The point in which its eschatology differs
from that of the rest of the NT is in its introduction
of the millennium before the final resurrection and
judgment. This enlarges, but does not necessarily
contradict, the earlier stage of thought.


LireratuRe.—Moses Stuart, Comm.on Apocalypse; Al-
ford, Gr Test., IV, ‘' The Revelation"; 8. Davidson, Intro
tothe NT (3d ed), 176 ff; G. Salmon, Introtothe NT (2d
ed), lects xiii, xiv; Elliott, Horae Apocalypticae, with
lit. there mentioned; Farrar, Early Days of Christianity,
ch xxviii; Milligan, Discussions on the Apocalypse; H.
Gunkel, Schépfung und Chaos; W. Bousset, Die Offen-
barung Johannis, and art. ‘‘Apocalypse’’ in £B, I;
C. Anderson Scott, "Revelation" in Century Bible; J.
Moffatt, Intro to Lit. of the NT (with notices of lit.);
also ‘' Revelation" in Expositor's Bible; Trench, Epp.
to the Seven Churches; W. M. Ramsay, Letters to the
Seren Churches; H. B. Swete, The Apocalypse of St.

onan,


James ORR
REVELLINGS, rev’el-ingz (xépos, k6mos): The
word is found both in AV and in RV in Wisd 14
23 (RV “revels,” orgiastic heathen worship is in
point); 2 Macc 64; Gal 6 21; 1 Pet 43. In
Gal 6 21 it is classed with fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, etc, as one of the works of the flesh.
In 1 Pet 4 3 it is spoken of the Gentiles and is
classed with drunkenness and carousings and such
like. In Rom 13 13 RVhas “revelling” instead of
AV “rioting,’”’ and in 2 Pet 2 13, “revel” replaces
“riot”? Similarly in Am 6 7, “revelry’’ replaces
“banquet.” The obvious meaning of the word is
excessive and boisterous intemperance and lustful

indulgence. G. H. GERBERDING


REVENGE, ré-ven}’, REVENGER, ré-venj’ér:
The same Heb and Gr words are used to express
the idea of “to avenge” and “to revenge” (OP2,
nakam, or derivative; ¢xé:xéw, ekdikéd, or derivative).
In Eng. these words are synonymous in that they
are both used to express the infliction of punishment
upon the wrongdoer, but “to take revenge” may
also imply a spiteful, wrong or malignant spirit.
In the latter case RV preserves ‘‘revenge” (cf Jer 20
10; Ezk 26 15; 26 17 is an anthropomorphism),
but, wherever it is synonymous with “avenge,” this
word is used (cf Nn $1 2.8; Ps 79 10; Nah 1 2;
Jth 18 20; Rom 13 4; 2 Cor 7 11; 106 RV;
AV has “revenge’’ in all these cases). In Dt 32 42,
AV “revenge” is a wrong tr. Read with RV “from
the head of the leaders of the enemy” or RVm “‘the
hairy head of the enemy.” Cf AveNcr, AvmNGER;
Boop; Gor.. A. L. Bresiicu


REVENUE, rev’é-ni: (1) DMeN, appthom,
“revenue or income” (Ezr 4 13 AV); (2) “NAM,
itbhi’ah, “increase,” “revenue’’ (Prov 8 19; 15 6;


Isa 23 3; Jer 12 13); mpdc080s, présodos, “income”
(2 Mace 3 3; 4 8 [RV “fund’]; 9 16).


REVERENCE, rev’ér-ens: In the OT, “rever-
ence” occurs as the tr of two Heb words, ydré’ and
shahah. The root idea of the former is “fear.’’ It
is used to express the attitude toward God Himself,
as in Ps 89 7 AV; or toward His sanctuary, as in
Lev 19 30; 26 2. So the group of ideas there would
be ‘‘fear,’”’ ‘‘awe,’’ ‘reverence.’ The root idea of
the second is “falling down,” as prostration of
the body. It is used to express the bearing toward
another who is considered superior, as in 2 8 9 6
AV; 1K 131 AV; Est 3 2.5. The group of
ideas here, therefore, is ‘honor,’ “obeisance,”
“reverence.”

In the NT ‘‘reverence”’ occurs as the tr of three
Gr words, aidés, phobéomat, and entrépomat. In
the first, the idea is ‘modesty’? (He 12 28; cf
1 Tim 2 9). In thesecond, ‘fear’ (Eph 6 33 AV),
though here it is used to set forth the attitude of
proper subjection on the part of a wife toward
her husband (cf 1 Pet 3 2.5). In the third, the
idea is that of the “self-valuation of inferiority,”
and so sets forth an attitude toward another of
doing him honor (Mt 21 37; Mk 12 6; Lk 20
13; He 12 9). ‘

In the Apoc entrepomai occurs in Wisd 2 10;
Sir 4 22. In addition, proskunéd, ‘make obei-
sance,”’ occurs in Jth 10 23; 14 7; thaumdzd,
“wonder,” Sir 7 29, and aischtinomai, ‘‘be ashamed,”
Bar 4 15.

Reverend occurs in the OT in Ps 111 9, of the
name of God (ydré’), and in the Apoc in 2 Mace 15
12, “a man reverend [aidémén, ‘‘modest’’] in bear-
ing,” andin the NT RV has “reverent in demeanor’
(hieroprepés) in Tit 2 3 and “reverend” in Phil
4 8m (semnés). E. J. Forrester


REVILE, ré-vil’. See Crimes; PuNIsHMENTS.


REVIVE, ré-viv’, REVIVING, ré-viv’ing: ‘‘To
revive” is the tr of 1°] , haydh, ‘to live,” “cause to
live,’ used of restoration to life (Gen 45 27; Jgs
16 19, etc); of rebuilding (Nch 4 2); of restora-
tion to well-being (Ps 86 6 [RV ‘‘quicken’’]; 138 7;
Isa 57 15; Hos 6 2; 14 7); of Jeh’s gracious work
for His people (Hab 3 2, “revive thy work in the
midst of the years,” etc); ‘“reviving’’ is the tr of
m2, mihyah, “preservation,” or “means of life”
(Ezr 9 8.9). ‘Revive’ occurs in the NT as the
tr of dvafdu, anazdé, ‘to live again’ (Rom 7 9, and
14 9, AV “Christ both died, and rose, and revived,”
RV [omitting “and rose’’] ‘Christ died and lived
again,’’ 2d6).

In 1 Mace 13 7 RV we have “And the spirit of
the people revived,” dvafwrupéw, anazopuréd, ‘to
stir or kindle up as a fire,”’ the same word as in 2
Tim 1 6, RV “stir up the gift of God, which is in
thee,” m ‘‘Gr ‘stir into flame.’”’

In view of the frequent modern use of ‘revive"’ and
“revival,” it is worthy of notice that it is te Timothy
himself the exhortation is addressed. We too often
merely pray for ‘‘revivals,"” forgetting that it is for us
to ‘‘stir into flame"' the gift of the Spirit_which we have


already received of God. It is ours from Him, but we let
it lie dormant, as a slumbering ember merely.


W. L. WaLKER

REWARD, ré-wérd’: In modern Eng. (except
when influenced by the Bib. forms) a “reward”’ is
something given in recognition of a good act. In
EV, however, “reward” is used quite generally for
anything given, and the term covers the recompense
of evil (Ps 91 8), wages (1 Tim 6 18 AV), bribes
(Mic 7 3), and gifts (Jer 40 5 AV). RV_ has
specialized the meaning in a number of cases (Ps
942; Ezk 16 34; Jer 40 5, etc), but not sys-
tematically.


Rezeph
Rhodes


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2588


REZEPH, ré’zef (9X), receph; B, ‘Paes, Rhd-
pheis, ‘Pages, Rhdphes, A, thy ‘P&ed, tén Rhdpheth
[2 K 19 12], BQ™ ‘Paded, NQe'Pades,
1. Forms of A, ‘Pades [Isa 87 12]; Vulg Roseph
the Name (2 I< 19 12], Reseph [Isa 37 12]): One
of the places referred to by Sen-
nacherib’s Rabshakeh when delivering that king’s
message to Hezekiah demanding the surrender of
Jerus. The names which precede are Gozan and
Haran; and “the children of Eden that were in
Telassar” follows.
It is now represented by Rusafa, E. of Tipsah
and N.E. of Hamath, and is regarded as the
‘Pyodda, (Rhésdpha) of Ptolemy (v.15).


2. Now It was for some time under Assyr do-
Called minion, and appears in a geographical
Rusafa list (2 R53, 37a) preceded by Arrapha


(Arrapachitis) and Halahbu (Halah),
and followed by Tamnunu, under the form of Ra-
sappa (elsewhere Ragapi).

From the Eponym Canons, Ninip-kibsi-usur was,
it appears, prefect in 839 BC, Uras-ere3 from 804

to 775 BC, Sin-Sallimanni in 747, and
3. Its Bél-émuranni in 737 BC. Judging
Assyrian from their names, all these were
Govemors Assyrians, but a seemingly native gov-

ernor, Abda’u (or Abda’i), possibly
later than the foregoing, is mentioned in a list of
officials (K. 9921). Yabutu was Sani (deputy-
governor?) of Rezeph in 673 BC. Its mention in
the Assyr geographical lists implies that Rezeph
was an important trade-center in OT times.
T. G. Pincues

REZIA, ré-zi’a. See Riza.

REZIN, r@zin (PR4, rein; ‘Paarodv, Rhaas-
son): The last of the kings of Syria who reigned in
Damascus (2 K 16 37; 16 5-10; Isa 71; 8 4-7).
Along with Pekah, the son of Remaliah, who reigned
20 years over Israel in Samaria, he joined in the
Syro-Ephraimitic war against Ahaz, the king of
Judah. Together they laid siege to Jerus, but
were unsuccessful] in the effort to take it (2 K 16 5;
Isa 7 1). It was to calm the fears, and to restore
the fainting spirits of the men of Judah, that Isaiah
was commissioned by the Lord to assure them that
the schemes of “‘these two tails of smoking fire-
brands” (Isa 7 4) were destined to miscarry. It
was then, too, that the sign was given of the virgin
who should conceive, and bear a son, and should
call his name Immanuel. Rezin had to content
himself on this campaign to the 8. with the capture
of Elath from the men of Judah and its restoration
to the men of Edom, from whom it had been taken
and made a seaport by Solomon (2 K 16 6, where
it is agreed that ‘Syria’ and “Syrians” should be
read “Edom” and “Edomites,” which in the Heb
script are easy to be mistaken for one another,
and are in fact often mistaken). Rezin, however,
had a more formidable enemy to encounter on his
return to Damascus. Ahaz, like kings of Judah
before and after him, placed his reliance more on the
arm of flesh than on the true King of his people,
and appealed to Tiglath-pileser III, of Assyria,
for help. Ahaz deliberately sacrificed the inde-
pendence of his country in the terms of his offer
of submission to the Assyrian: “I am thy servant
and thy son” (2 K 16 7). Tiglath-pileser had
already carried his arms to the W. and ravaged the
northern border of Israel; and now he crossed the
Euphrates and hastened to Damascus, slaying
Rezin and carrying his people captive to Kir (2 K
16 9). In the copious Annals of Tiglath-pileser,
Rezin figures with the designation Rasunuini), but
the tablet recording his death, found and read by
Sir Henry Rawlinson, has been irrecoverably lost,


and only the fact of its existence and loss remains
(Schrader, COT, I, 252, 257). With the death of
Rezin the kingdom of Damascus and Syria came
to an end.

Rezin, Sons of: Mentioned among the Nethinim
(Ezr 2 48), who returned to Jerus with Zerubbabel
from captivity (cf Neh 7 50).

Lirerature.—Schrader, COT, as above;
Authority, 99 ff.

T. Nico,


REZON, ré’zon (JW, rzén; ‘Pétov, Rhdzon):
Son of Eliadah, and a subject of Hadadezer,
king of Zobah (1 K 11 23). The name appears to
be given as JIM, hezydn; ‘Afelv, Hazein (1 K
15 18; see Hezion), where he is the father of Tab-
rimmon, whose son Ben-hadad J is known through
his league with Asa, king of Judah. When David
conquered Zobah, Rezon renounced his allegiance to
Hadadezer and became powerful as an independent
chief, capturing Damascus and setting up as king.
Along with Hadad, the noted Edomite patriot, he
became a thorn in the side of Solomon, the one mak-
ing himself obnoxious in the S., the other in the N.,
of the kingdom of Israel, both being animated with
a bitter hatred of the common foe. It is said of
Rezon that he “reigned over Syria” (1 K 11 25),
and if the surmise adopted by many scholars is
correct that he is the same as Hezion (1 K 15
18), then he was really the founder of the dynasty
of Syrian kings so well known in the history
of this period of Israel; and the line would run:
ee Tabrimmon, Ben-hadad I, and Ben-hadad


Driver,


Lirerators.—Burney on 1 K 11 23 and 15 18 in
Notes on Heb Text of Books of Kings; Winckler, Alitest.
Uniersuchungen, 60 ff.

T. Nicon


RHEGIUM, ré‘ji-um: This city (Piycor, Rhégion
[Acts 28 13], the modern Reggio di Calabria) was
a town situated on the east side of the Sicilian
Straits, about 6 miles S. of a point opposite Messana
(Messina). Originally a colony of Chalcidian
Greeks, the place enjoyed great prosperity in the
5th cent. BC, but was captured and destroyed by
Dionysius, tyrant of Syracuse, in 387 BC, when all
the surviving inhabitants were sold into slavery
(Diodorus xiv.106-8, 111, 112). The city never
entirely recovered from this blow, although it was
partially restored by the younger Dionysius. On
the occasion of the invasion of Italy by Pyrrhus, the
people of Rhegium had recourse to an alliance with
Rome (280 BC) and received 4,000 Campanian
troops within their walls, who turned out to be
very unruly guests. For, in imitation of a similar
band of mercenaries across the strait in Messana,
they massacred the male inhabitants and reduced
the women to slavery (Polybius i.7; Orosius iv.3).
They were not punished by the Romans until 270
BC, when the town was restored to those of itsformer
inhabitants who still survived. The people of
Rhegium were faithful to their alliance with Rome
during the Second Punic War (Livy xxiii.30; xxiv.1;
xxvi.12; xxix.6). At the time of the Social War
they were incorporated with the Rom state,
Rhegium becoming a municipality (Cicero Verr.
v.60; Pro Archia, 3).

The ship in which Paul sailed from Melita to
Puteoli encountered unfavorable winds after leaving
Syracuse, and reached Rhegium by means of tack-
ing. It waited at Rhegium a day for a south wind
which bore it to Puteoli (Acts 28 13), about 180
miles distant, where it probably arrived in about
26 hours. Grorce H. ALLEN


RHESA, ré’sa (‘Pynod, Rhésd): A son of Zerub-
babel in the genealogy of Jesus according to St.
Luke (Lk 3 27).


2589


_ RHINOCEROS, ri-nos’ér-os: This word is found
in AVm to Isa 34 7 (“rhinocerots’’) for DMR,
r’émim, AV “unicorns,” RV “wild-oxen.” The
word is quite inappropriate to the passage, which
refers to the land of Edom. The one-horned rhi-
noceros, Rhinoceros unicornis, is confined to India.
Other rhinoceroses are found in India and in equa-
torial Africa, but it is hardly to be presumed that
these animals were meant by the Heb writers. See
Unicorn.


_ RHODA, ri’da (Pé8y, Rhddé, “rose’’): A maid
in the house of Mary the mother of John Mark.
She came to answer when Peter knocked at Mary’s
door after his miraculous release from prison. On
recognizing his voice, she so forgot herself with joy
that she neglected to open the door, but ran in to tell
the others the glad news. They would not believe
her, thinking she was mad; and when she persisted
in her statement they said it must be his angel.
The Jewish belief was that each man had a guardian
angel assigned to him. Peter continued knocking,
and was ultimately admitted (Acts 12 12 ff).
S. F. Hunter

RHODES, rodz (‘Pé80s, Rhddos): An island (and
city) in the Aegean Sea, W. of Caria, rough and
rocky in parts, but well watered and productive,
though at present not extensively cultivated.
Almost one-third of the island is now covered with
trees in spite of earlier deforestation. The highest
mountains attain an altitude of nearly 4,000 ft.
The older names were Ophiusa, Asteria, Trinacria,
Corymbia. The capital in antiquity was Rhodes,
at the northeastern extremity, a strongly fortified
city provided with a double harbor. Near the
entrance of the harbor stood one of the seven won-
ders of the ancient world—a colossal bronze statue
dedicated to Helios. This colossus, made by
Chares about 290 BC, at a cost of 300 talents
($300,000), towered to the height of 104 ft.

In the popular mind—both before and after Shake-
speare represented Caesar as bestriding the world like a
colossus—this gigantic figure is conceived as an image
of a human beiug of monstrous size with legs spread
wide apart, at the entrance of the inner harbor, so huge
that the largest ship with sails spread could move in
under it; hut the account on which this conception is
based seems to have no foundation.

The statue was destroyed iu 223 BC by an earthquake.
It was restored by the Romans. In 672 AD the Sara-
cens sold the ruins to a Jew. The quantity of metal
was so great that it would fill the cars of a modern freight
train (900 camel loads).

The most ancient cities of Rhodes were Ialysus,
Ochyroma, and Lindus. The oldest inhabitants
were immigrants from Crete. Later came the
Carians. But no real advance in civilization was
made before the immigration of the Dorians under
Tlepolemus, one of the Heraclidae, and (after the
Trojan war) Aethaemanes. Lindus, Jalysus and
Camirus formed with Cos, Cnidus and Halicarnassus
the so-called Dorian Hexapolis (Six Cities), the
center of which was the temple of the Triopian
Apollo on the coast of Caria. Rhodes now founded
many colonies—in Spain (Rhode), in Italy (Par-
thenope, Salapia, Sirus, Sybaris), in Sicily (Gela),
in Asia Minor (Soli), in Cilicia (Gagae), and in
Lycia (Corydalla). ‘The island attained no po-
litical greatness until the three chief cities formed
a confederation and founded the new capital
(Rhodes) in 408 BC. In the beginning of the
Peloponnesian war, Rhodes sided with the Athe-
nians, but, after 19 years of loyalty to Athens, went
over to the Spartans (412 BC). In 394, when
Conon appeared with his fleet before the city, the
island fell into the hands of the Athenians again.
A garrison was stationed at. Rhodes by Alexander
the Great. After his death this garrison was driven
out by the Rhodians. It is at this time that the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Rezeph
Rhodes


really great period of the island’s history begins.
The inhabitants bravely defended their capital
against Demetrius Poliorceteg in 304 BC—the
same Demetrius who two years before had won a
naval victory and had coins stamped with a “Vic-
tory” that is the counterpart of the “Winged Vic-


" Coin of Rhodes.


tory’’ which commands the unbounded admiration
of the modern world—and extended their dominion
over a strip of the Carian coast, as well as over
several of the neighboring islands, and for the first
time in the history of the world established an inter-
national maritime and commercial law. The arts
and sciences now began to flourish in the fair island
in the southeastern Aegean. Aeschines, the
famous orator of Athens, fled to Rhodes after his
defeat by Demosthenes, and founded a school of
oratory, which was attended by many Romans.
Rhodes became the faithful ally of Rome after the
defeat of Antiochus in 189 BC. As a reward for
her loyalty she received Caria. In 168, however,
only a small portion of this territory remained under
Rhodian sway (Peraea, or the Chersonesus). In
42 BC the island was devastated by Cassius.
Later it was made a part of the Rom province of
Asia (44 AD). Strabo says that he knows no
city so splendid in harbor, walls and streets. When
the Rom power declined, Rhodes fell into the hands
of Caliph Moawijah, but later was taken by the
Greeks, from whom at a later date the Genoese
wrested the island. In 1249 John Cantacuzenus
attempted to recover Rhodes, but in vain. Finally,
however, success crowned the efforts of the Greeks
under Theodoros Protosebastos. In 1310 the
Knights of St. John, who had been driven from Pal,
made Rhodes their home. After the subjugation of
the island by Sultan Soliman in 1522 the Knights
of St. John removed to Malta, and Rhodeg has
remained uninterruptedly a possession of the Sub-
lime Porte down to the recent war between Turkey
and the Balkan allies, forming, with the other
islands, the province of the “Islands of the White
Sea” (Archipelago). It has a Christian governor
whose seat, though mostly at Rhodes, is sometimes
at Chios. The population of the island has greatly
diminished by emigration. In 1890 the total num-
ber of inhabitants was 30,000 (20,000 Greeks, 7,000
Mohammedans, 1,500 Jews). The chief products
of Rhodes are wheat, oil, wine, figs and tropical
fruits. A very important industry is the exporta-
tion of sponges. The purity of the air and the
mildness of the climate make Rhodes a most de-
lightful place to live in during the fall, winter and
early spring. The city, built in the shape of an
amphitheater, has a magnificent view toward the
sea. It contains several churches made out of old
mosques. The once famous harbor is now almost
filled with sand. The inhabitants number nearly
12,000 (all Turks and Jews). Rhodes is mentioned
in the NT only as a point where Paul touched on
his voyage southward from the Hellespont to
Caesarea (Acts 21.1); but in 1 Macc 16 23 we
are informed that it was one of the states to which
the Romans sent letters in behalf of the Jews.


Rhodocus
Righteousness


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2590


LireRATuURE.—Berg, Die Insel Rhodes (Braunschweig,
1860-62); Schneiderwirth, Geschichte der Insel Rhodes
(Heiligenstadt, 1868); Guérin, L'tle de Rhodes, 2d ed,
Paris, 1880; Biliotti and Cottrel, L'tle de Rhodes (Paris,
1881); Torr, Rhodes in Anctent Times (Cambridge, 1885)
and Rhodes tn Modern Times (1887).

J. E. Harry


RHODOCUS, rod’é-kus (‘PéSoxos, RAddokos):
A Jewish traitor who disclosed the plans of Judas
to Antiochus (Eupator) (2 Mace 13 21) 162 BC.
Of his fate nothing more is known.


RIB (VOY, céla’, MPSS, cal'ah; Aram. DP,
‘dla‘): The Heb words designate the ‘‘side,”’
“flank,” thence the “ribs.” They are found thus
tr? only in connection with the creation of Eve:
“He [Jeh] took one of his [Adam’s] ribs, and closed
up the flesh instead thereof: and the rib, which Jeh
God had taken from the man, made he [m ‘builded
he into’’] a woman” (Gen 2 21.22). The Aram.
word is only found in Dnl 7 5.

Twice the RV uses the word “rib” in a figurative
sense of two heams or rafters built into the ark of the
covenant and the altar of incense, on which the golden
rings were fastened, which served to carry ark and altar
by means of staves (Ex 30 4; 87 27).

A curious mistr has crept into AV, which here
follows Jewish commentators or etymologists, in
four passages in 28 (2 23; 3 27; 46; 20 10),
where the “fifth rib’? is mentioned as the place of
the body under which spears or swords are thrust,
so as to cause lethal wounds. The Heb word
hémesh, which indeed means “fifth,” is here a noun,
derived from a root meaning “‘to be staunch,”’
“stalwart,” “stout,” “fleshy,’”’ “obese” (cf WAT,
hamush, “armed,’’ “equipped soldier’; Arab.

Ae {, el khamis [el hamis], “the army,” which,
however, Arab. lexicographers explain as meaning
“fivefold,” viz. vangnard, right and left wing,
center and rear guard). The word is to be tr?


“abdomen,” ‘belly.’ RV renders correctly “into
the body.” H. L. BE. Lurrine


RIBAI, ri’ba-i, ri’bi (92, ribhay; LXX ‘Pea,
Rheibd, with variants): A Benjamite, the father of
Irtar (q.v.), one of David’s “mighty men” (2 8
23 29 | 1 Ch 11°31).


RIBBAND, rib’and, rib’an (2°NB, pathil [Nu 15
38 AV]). See Coxor, (2); Corp, (4).


RIBLAH, rib’la (M92%, ribhlah; “PeBAa0d, Rhe-
blathd, with variants):

(1) Riblah in the land of Hamath first appears
in history in 608 BC. Here Pharaoh-necoh, after
defeating Josiah at Megiddo and destroying Kady-
tis or Kadesh on the Orontes, fixed his headquarters,
and while in camp he deposed Jehoahaz and cast
him into chains, fixed the tribute of Judah, and
appointed Jehoiakim king (2 K 23 31-35). In
588 BC Nebuchadnezzar, at war with Egypt and
the Syrian states, also established his headquarters
at Riblah, and from it he directed the subjugation
of Jerus. When it fell, Zedckiah was carried pris-
oner to Riblah, and there, after his sons and his
nobles had been slain in his presence, his cyes were
put out, and he was taken as a prisoner to Babylon
(2 K 25 6.20; Jer 39 5-7; 62 8-11). Riblah
then disappears from history, but the site exists
today in the village of Ribleh, 35 miles N.E. of Baal-
bck, and the situation is the finest that could have
been chosen by the Egyp or Bab kings for their
headquarters in Syria. An army camped there
had abundance of water in the control of the copious
springs that go to form the Orontes. The Egyptians
coming from the 8. had behind them the command
of the rich corn and forage lands of Coele-Syria,


while the Bab army from the N. was equally fortu-
nate in the rich plains extending to Hamath and the
Euphrates. Lebanon, close by, with its forests,
its hunting grounds and its snows, ministered to the
needs and luxuries of the leaders. Riblah com-
manded the great trade and war route between
Egypt and Mesopotamia, and, besides, it was at the
dividing-point of many minor routes. It was in
a position to attack with facility Phoenicia, Damas-
cus or Pal, or to defend itself against attack from
those places, while a few miles to the S. the moun-
tains on each side close in forming a pass where a
mighty host might easily be resisted by a few. In
every way Riblah was the strategical point between
North and South Syria. Riblah should probably
be read for Diblah in Ezk 6 14, while in Nu 34 11
it does not really appear. See (2).

(2) A place named as on the ideal eastern bound-
ary of Israel in Nu 34 11, but omitted in Ezk 47
15-18. The MT reads ‘“‘Hariblah’”’; but the LXX
probably preserves the true vocalization, accord-
ing to which we should tr “to Harbel.’”’ It is said
to be to the east of ‘Ain, and that, as the designa-
tion of a district, can only mean Merj ‘Ayun, so that
we should seek it in the neighborhood of Hermon,
one of whose spurs Furrer found to be named Jebel
‘Arbel. W. M. Caristie


RICHES, rich’ez, rich’iz: Used to render the
followmg Heb and Gr words: (1) ‘Osher, which
should, perhaps, be considered the most general
word, as it is the most often used (Gen 31 16;
Eccl 4 8; Jer 9 23). It looks at riches simply as
riches, without regard to any particular feature.
Alongside this would go the Gr mdcdros, plovtos
(Mt 18 22; Eph 2 7). (2) Hodsen (Prov 27 24;
Jer 20 5), n*khdsitm and rekhish (Gen 36 7; Dnl
11 13.24 AV) look at riches as things accumu-
lated, collected, amassed. (3) Hén looks upon
riches as earnings, the fruit of toil (Ps 119 14;
Prov 8 18; Ezk 27 27). (4) Hamén regards riches
in the aspect of being much, this coming from the
original idea of noise, through the idea of a
multitude as making the noise, the idea of
many, or much, being in multitude (Ps 37 16
AV). (5) Hayil regards riches as power (Ps 62
10; Isa 8 4; 1014). (6) Yithrah means ‘“run-
ning over,” and so presents riches ag abundance
(Jer 48 36 AV). Along with this may be placed
shi’, which has the idea of breadth, and so of
abundance (Job 36 19 AV). (7) Kinydn regards
riches as a creation, something made (Ps 104 24;
ef m); (8) xpjua (chréma) looks at riches as useful
(Mk 10 23f ||). Like the NT, the Apoc uses only
ploutos and chréma.

Material riches are regarded by the Scriptures
as neither good nor bad in themselves, but only
according as they are properly or improperly
used. They are transitory (Prov 27 24); they are
not to be trusted in (Mk 10 23; Lk 18 24; 1 Tim
6 17); they are not to be gloricd in (Jer 9 23);
the heart is not to be set on them (Ps 62 10); but
they arc made by God (Ps 104 24), and come from
God (1 Ch 29 12); and they are the crown of the
wise (Prov 14 24). Material riches are used to
body forth for us the most precious and glorious
realities of the spiritual realm. See, e.g., Rom 9 23;
11 33; Eph 2 7; Phil 4 19; Col 1 27. Cf Man-
mon; TREASURE; WEALTH. EK. J. Forrester


RID, rid, RIDDANCE, rid’ans: ‘‘Rid” originally
meant ‘‘rescue” (AV Gen 37 22; Ex 6 6; Ps 82
4; 144 7.11), whence the meaning “remove” or
“clean out’’ (Lev 26 6 AV, with “riddance” in Lev
23 22; Zeph 1 18). The word occurs in ARV and
in ERVin Ex 6 6.


2591


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Rhodocus
Righteousness


RIDDLE, rid”] (V7, hidhdh; alvypa, ainig-
ma). See GAmgs.


RIE, ri (AV, Ex 9 32; Isa 28 25). See SpErr.


RIGHT, rit (WW, yashar, DEW, mishpat;
Stkatos, dikaios, ed0ts, euthtis): Many Heb words
are tr? “right,’’ with different shades of meaning.
Of these the two notcd are the most important:
yasha@r, with the sense of being straight, direct, as
“right in the sight” of Jch (Ex 16 26; Dt 12 25
etc), in one’s own cyes (Jgs 17 6), “right words’
(Job 6 25 AV, ydsher), “right paths’ (Prov 4 11
AV); and mishpat, “judgment,” “cause,” etc, a
forensic term, as “Shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right?” (Gen 18 25). In Job 34 17, RV
has ‘justice’ (ver 6, “right”’), etc. The words ¢edhek,
ecdhakah, ordinarily tr’ “righteousness,’’ are in a
few cases rendered “right”? (2 8 19 28; Neh 2 20;
Ps 9 4; 17 1; 119 75; Ezk 18 5, etc). In the
NT the chief word is dikaios, primarily ‘‘even,”
“equal” (Mt 20 4; Lk 12 57, etc); more generally
the word is rendered “just’? and_ “righteous.”
Euthus, used by LXX for yashar (1 8 12 23; Hos
14 9), occurs a few times (Acts 8 21; 13 10; 2 Pet
2 15); 50 orthés, “straight,” “upright” (Lk 10 28).

“Right-hand” or ‘side’ represents Heb yaémin
and kindred forms (Gen 48 13.14.17; Ex 15 6,
oy the Gr, in this sense, is dexids (Mt 6 3; 20 21,
etc).

RV, among other changes, has “right” for AV
‘Gudgment” in Job 27 2; 34 5, and for “right” in
AV substitutes “straight” in Ezr 8 21, “skilful”
in Eccl 4 4, m “successful,” etc. In Jn 1 12 RV
reads, “the right to become children of God’’ for
AV “the power” (ezousia); in Mt 20 7.15 “right”
is omitted, with the larger part of the verse. In 2
Tim 2 15 “rightly dividing” (orthotoméé) is changed
to “handling aright,’ with m “holding a straight
course in the word of truth. Or, rightly dividing
the word of truth.” W. L. WALKER


RIGHTEOUSNESS, ri’chus-nes (P™IX, caddik,
adj., “righteous,” or occasionally “just”; PTY,
cedhek, noun, occasionally = “righteousness,” occa-
sionally =“justice’’; Slkavos, dikaios, adj., Sikarordvn,
dikaiosing, noun, from 8l«n, diké, whose first mean-
ing seems to have heen ‘‘custom’’; the general use
suggested conformity to a standard: righteousness,
“the state of him who is such as he ought to be”
[Thayer]):

. Double Aspect of Righteousness:

Permanent

Social Customs and Righteousness '

: Changing Conception of Character of God: Obliga-

tions of Power

. Righteousness as Inner

. Righteousness as Social é

| Righteousness as Expanding in Content with Growth
in Ideals of Human Worth

LITERATURE


In Christian thought the idea of righteousness


contains both a permanent and a changing element.
The fixed element is the will to do


Changing and


OOF Wh


1. Double right; the changing factor is the
Aspect of conception of what may be right at
Righteous- different times and under different. cir-
ness cumstances. Throughout the cntire


course of Christian revelation we dis-
cern the emphasis on the first factor. To be sure,
in the days of later Pharisaism righteousness came
to be so much a matter of externals that the inner
intent was often lost sight of altogether (Mt 23 23);
but, on the whole and in the maim, Christian thought
in all ages has recognized as the central clement in
righteousness the intention to be and do right.
This common spirit binds together the first wor-
shippers of God and the latest. Present-day con-


ceptions of what is night differ by vast distances
from the conceptions of the earlicr Hebrews, but the
intentions of the first worshippers are as discernible
as are those of the doers of righteousness in the

present day.
There seems but little reason to doubt that the
content of the idea of rightcousness was determined
in the first instance by the customs


2. Social of social groups. There are some, of
Customs course, who would have us believe that,
and Right- what we expericnce as inner moral
eousness sanction is nothing but the fear of con-


sequences which come through dis-
obeying the will of the social group, or the feeling
of pleasure which results as we know we have acted
in accordance with the social demands. At least
some thinkers would have us believe that this is all
there was in moral feeling in the beginning. If a
social group was to survive it must lay upon its indi-
vidual members the heaviest exactions. Back of
the performance of religious rites was the fear of
the group that the god of the group would be dis-
pleased if certain honors were not rendered to him.
Merely to escape the penalties of an angry deity
the group demanded ceremonial religious observ-
ances. From the basis of fear thus wrought into the
individuals of the group have come all our loftier
movements toward righteousness.

Tt is not necessary to deny the measure of truth
there may be in this account. To point out its
inadequacy, however, a better statement would be
that from the beginning the social group utilized
the native moral feeling of the dividual for the
defence of the group. The moral feeling, by which
we mean a sense of the difference between right and
wrong, would scem to be a part of the native fur-
nishing of the mind. Itis very likely that in the be-
ginning this moral feeling was directed toward the
performance of the rites which the group looked
upon as important (see ALMs).

As we read the earlier parts of the OT we are
struck by the fact that much of the early Heb moral-
ity was of this group kind. The righteous man was
the man who performed the rites which had been
handed down from the beginning (Dt 6 25). The
meaning of some of these rites is lost in obscurity,
but from a very early period the characteristic of
Heb righteousness is that 1t moves in the direction
of what we should call today the enlargement of
humanity. There seemed to be at work, not merely
the forces which make for the preservation of the
group, not merely the desire to please the God of the
Hebrews for the sake of the material favors which
He might render the Hebrews, but the factors which
make for the betterment of humanity as such. As
we examine the laws of the Hebrews, even at so
late a time as the completion of the formal Codes,
we are indeed struck by traces of primitive survivals
(Nu 6 11-31). There are some injunctions whose
purpose we cannot well understand. But, on the
other hand, the vast mass of the legislation had to
do with really human considerations. There are
rules concerning sanitation (Lev 13), both as it
touches the life of the group and of the individual;
laws whose mastery begets emphasis, not mercly
upon external consequenees, but upon the inner
result in the life of the individual (Ps 61 3); and
prohibitions which would indicate that morality,
at least in its plainer decencics, had come to be
valued on its own account. If we were to seek for
some cluc to the development of the moral life of
the Hebrews we might well find it in this emphasis
upon the growing demands of human life as such.
A suggestive writer has pointed out that the appar-
ently meaningless commandment, ‘Thou shalt not
boil a kid in its mother’s milk’? (Ex 23 19), has
back of it a real human purpose, that there are some


Righteousness
Rimmon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2592


things which in themselves are revolting apart from
any external consequences (see also Lev 18).

An index of the growth of the moral life of the

people is to be found in the changing conception

of the character of God. We need not

3. Changing enter into the question as to just where

Conception on the moral plane the idea of the God


of Char- of the Hebrews started, but from the
acter of very beginning we see clearly that the
God Hebrews believed in their God as one


passionately devoted to the right
(Gen 18 25). It may well be that at the start the
God of the Hebrews was largely a God of War, but
it is to be noticed that His enmity was against the
peoples who had little regard for the larger human
considerations. It has often been pointed out that
one proof of the inspiration of the Scriptures is to
be found in their moral superiority to the Scriptures
of the peoples around about the Hebrews. If the
Heb writers used materia] which was common
property of Chaldaeans, Babylonians, and other
peoples, they nevertheless used these materials with
a moral difference. They breathed into them a
moral life which forever separates them from the
Scriptures of other peoples. The marvel also of
Heb history is that in the midst of revoltingly im-
moral surroundings the Hebrews grew to such ideals
of human worth. The source of these ideals is to
be found in their thought of God. Of course, in
moral progress there is a reciprocal effect; the
thought of God affects the thought of human life
and the thought of human life affects the thought
of God; but the Hebrews no sooner came to a fresh
moral insight than they made their moral discovery
a part of the character of God. From the begin-
ning, we repeat, the God of the Hebrews was a God
directed in His moral wrath against all manner of
abominations, aberrations and abnormalities. The
purpose of God, according to the Hebrews, was to
make a people “‘separated” in the sense that they
were to be free from anything which would detract
from a full moral life (Lev 20 22).

We can trace the more important steps in the
growth of the Heb ideal. First, there was an in-
creasingly clear discernment that certain things are
to be ruled out at once as immoral. The primitive
decencies upon which individual and social life de-
pended were discerned at an early period (cf pas-
sages in Lev cited above). Along with this it
must be admitted there was a slower approach to
some ideals which we today consider important,
the ideals of the marriage relations for example
(Dt 24.1.2). Then there was a growing sense of
what constitutes moral obligation in the discharge
of responsibilities upon the part of men toward their
fellows (Isa 6 8.23). There was increasing reali-
zation also of what God, as a moral Being, 1s obli-
gated to do. The hope of salvation of nations and
He rests at once upon the righteousness of

od.

By the time of Isaiah the righteousness of God
has come to include the obligations of power (Isa
63 1). God will save His people, not merely be-
cause He has promised to save them, but because
He must save them (42 6). The must is moral.
If the people of Israel show themselves unworthy,
God must punish them; but if a remnant, even a
small remnant, show themselves faithful, God must
show His favor toward them. Moral worth is not
conceived of as something that is to be paid for by
external rewards, but if God is moral He must not
treat the righteous and the unrighteous alike. This
conception of what God must do as an obligated
Being influences profoundly the Heb interpretation
of the entire course of history (10 20.21).

Upor this ideal of moral obligation there grows
later the thought of the virtue of vicarious suffering


(ch 53). The sufferings of the good man and of
God for those who do not in themselves deserve
such sufferings (for them) are a mark of a still higher
righteousness (see Hosra, Book or). The move-
ment of the Scriptures is all the way from the
thought of a Ged who gives battle for the right to
the thought of a God who receives in Himself the
heaviest shocks of that battle that others may have
opportunity for moral] life.

These various lines of moral development come,
of course, to their crown in the NT in the life
and death of Christ as set before us in the Gospels
and interpreted by the apostles. Jesus stated
certain moral axioms so clearly that the world
never will escape their power. Hesaid some things
once and for all, and He did some things once and
for all; that is to say, in His life and death He
set on high the righteousness of God as at once
moral obligation and self-sacrificing love (Jn 3 16)
and with such effectiveness that the world has not
escaped and cannot escape this righteous influence
(Jn 12 32). Moreover, the course of apostolic
and subsequent history has shown that Christ put
a winning and compelling power into the idea of
righteousness that it would otherwise have lacked
(Rom 8 31.32).

The ideas at work throughout the course of Heb
and Christian history are, of course, at work today.

Christianity deepens the sense of obli-


4, Right- gationtodoright. It makes the moral
eousness spirit essential. Then it utilizes every
as Inner force working for the increase of human


happiness to set on high the meaning
of righteousness. Jesus spoke of Himself as “‘life,’’
and declared that He came that men might have
life and have it more abundantly (Jn 10 10). The
keeping of the commandments plays, of course, a
large part in the unfolding of the Efe of the righteous
Christian, but the keeping of the commandments is
not to be conceived of im artificial or mechanical
fashion (Lk 10 25-37). With the passage of the
centuries some commandments once conceived of
ag essential drop into the secondary place, and other
commandments take the controlling position. In
Christian development increasing place is given for
certain swift insights of the moral spirit. We be
lieve that some things are righteous because they
at once appeal to us as righteous. Again, some
other things seem righteous because their conse-
quences are beneficial, both for society and for the
individual. Whatever makes for the largest life
is in the direction of righteousness. In interpreting
life, however, we must remember the essentially
Christian conception that man does not live through
outer consequences alone. In all thought of con-
sequences the chief place has to be given to inner
consequences. By the surrender of outward hap-
piness and outward success a man may attain inner
success. The spirit of the cross is still the path
to the highest rightcousness.
The distinctive note in emphasis upon righteous-
ness in our own day is the stress laid upon social


service. This does not mean that
6. Right- Christianity is to lose sight of the
eousness worth of the individual in himself.
as Social Wehave come pretty clearly to see that
the individual is the only moral end
in himself. Righteousness is to have as its aim the


upbuilding of individual lives. The commandments
of the righteous life are not for the sake of society
as a thing in itself. Society is nothing apart from
the individuals that compose it; but we are coming
to see that individuals have larger relationships
than we had once imagined and greater responsi-
hilities than we had dreamed of. ‘The influence of
the individual touches others at more points than
we had formerly realized. We have at times con-


2593


demned the system of things as being responsible
for much human misery which we now see can be
traced to the agency of individuals. The employer,
the day-laborer, the professional man, the public
servant, all these have large responsibilities for the
lifeof those around. The unrighteous individual has
a power of contaminating other individuals, and his
deadliness we have just begun to understand. All
this is receiving new emphasis in our present-day
preaching of righteousness. While our social rela-
tions are not ends in themselves, they are mighty
means for reaching individuals in large numbers.
The Christian conception of redeemed humanity
is not that of society as an organism existing on its
own account, but that of individuals knit very
closely together in their social relationships and
touching one another for good in these relationships
(1 Cor 1 2; Rev 79.10). If we were to try to
point out the line in which the Christian doctrine of
righteousness is to move more and more through
the years, we should have to emphasize this element
of obligation to society. This does not mean that
a new gospel is to supersede the old or even place
itself alongside the old. It does mean that the
righteousness of God and the teaching of Christ
and the cross, which are as ever the center of Chris-
tianity, are to find fresh foree in the thought of the
righteousness of the Christian as binding itself, not
merely by commandments to do the will of God in
society, but by the inner spirit to live the life of
God out into society.

In all our thought of righteousness it must be

borne in mind that there is nothing in Christian

revelation which will tell us what
6. Expand- righteousness calls for in every particu-
ing in lar circumstance. The differences be-
Content tween earlier and later practical stand-

ards of conduct and the differences
between differing standards in different circum-
stances have led to much confusion in the realm of
Christian thinking. We can keep our bearing,
however, by remembering the double element in
righteousness which we mentioned in the beginning;
on the one hand, the will to do right, and, on the
other, the difficulty of determining in a particular
circumstance just what the right is. The larger
Christian conceptions always have an element of
fluidity, or, rather, an element. of expansiveness.
For example, it is clearly a Christian obligation to
treat all men with a spirit of good will or with a
spirit of Christian love. But what does love call
for in a particular case? We can only answer the
question by saying that love seeks for whatever is
best, both for him who receives and for him who
gives. This may lead to one course of conduct in
one situation and to quite a different course in
another. We must, however, keep before us always
the aim of the largest life for all persons whom we
can reach. Christian righteousness today is even
more insistent upon material things, such as sani-
tary arrangements, than was the Code of Moses.
The obligation to use the latest knowledge for the
hygienic welfare is just as binding now as then, but
“the latest knowledge” is a changing term. Mate-
rial progress, education, spiritual instruction, are
all influences which really make for fulllife. _

Not only is present-day righteousness social and
growing; it is also concerned, to a large degree, with
the thought of the world which now is. Righteous-
ness has too often been conceived of merely as the
means of preparing for the life of some future King-
dom of Heaven. Present-day emphasis has not
ceased to think of the life beyond this, but the life
beyond this can best be met and faced by those who
have been in the full sense righteous in the life that
now is. There is here no break in true Christian
continuity. The seers who have understood Chris-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Righteousness
immon


tianity best always have insisted that to the fullest
degree the present world must be redeemed by the
life-giving forces of Christianity. We atill insist
that all idea of earthly righteousness takes its start
from heavenly righteousness, or, rather, that the
righteousness of man is to be based upon his con-
ception of the righteousness of God. Present-day
thinking concerns itself largely with the idea of the
Immanence of God. God is in this present world.
This does not mean that there may not be other
worlds, or are not other worlds, and that God is
not also in those worlds; but the immediate reve-
lation of God to us is in our present world. Our
present world then must be the sphere in which the
righteousness of God and of man is to be set forth.
God is conscience, and God is love. The present
sphere is to be used for the manifestation of His
holy love. The chief channel through which that
holy love is to manifest itself is the conscience and
love of the Christian believer. But even these
terms are not to be used in the abstract. There is
an abstract conscientiousness which leads to barren
living: the life gets out of touch with things that
are real, There is an experience of love which ex-
hausts itself in well-wishing. Both conscience and
love are to be kept close to the earth by emphasis
een the actual realities of the world in which we
ive.


Litrrature.—G. B. Stevens, The Christian Doctrine
of Salvation; A. E. Garvie, Handbook of Christian A polo-
getics; Borden P. Bowne, Principles of Ethics; Newman
Smyth, Christian Ethies; A. B. Bruce, The Kingdom of
God; W. N. Clarke, The Ideal of Jesus; H. C. King,
The Ethics of Jesus.


RIMMON, rim’on: 5

(1) The rock Rimmon (7729 950, sela‘ rimnmén;
4 wérpa ‘Peuudy, hé pétra Rhemmén): The place of
refuge of the 600 surviving Benjamites of Gibeah
(Jeba‘) who ‘‘turned and fled toward the wilderness
unto the rock of Rimmon, and abode in the rock
of Rimmon four months’ (Jgs 20 45.47; 21 13).
Robkinson’s identification (RB, J, 440) has been
very generally accepted. He found a conical and
very prominent hill some 6 miles N.N.E. of Jeba*
upon which stands a village called Rummdn. This
site was known to Eusebius and Jerome (OS 146 6;
287 98), who describe it as 15 Rom miles from Jerus.
Another view, which would locate the place of
refuge of the Benjamites in the Mughdret el jai, a
large cavern on the south of the Wddy Suweinit,
near Jeba‘, is strongly advocated by Rawnsley and
Birch (see PEF, III, 187-48). The latter connects
this again with 1 S$ 14 2, where Saul, accompanied
by his 600, “abode in the uttermost part of Gibeah”
under the pomegranate tree (Rimmon).

(2) (JVOI, rimmon; Epeupav, Eremmon, or ‘Pep-
ud, Rhemméth): A city in the Negeb, near the
border of Edom, ascribed to Judah (Josh 15 32)
and to Simeon (19 7; 1 Ch 4 32, AV ‘“Remmon’’).
In Zec 14 10 it is mentioned as the extreme 8. of
Judah—‘“‘from Geba to Rimmon, 8. of Jerus.” In
the earlier references Rimmon occurs in close asso-
ciation with ‘Ain (a spring), and in Neh 11 29,
what is apparently the same place, ‘Ain Rimmon, is
called En-rimmon (q.v.). )

(3) (WO, rimmén [Josh 19 13], A224, rim-
monah, in some Heb MSS 73'0"}, dimnah [see Dim-
Naw] (Josh 21 35], and 137", rimm6nd[1 Ch 6 77}):
In AV we have “Remmon-methoar” in Josh 19 18,
but RV translates the latter as “which stretcheth.”
This was a city on the border of Zebulun (Josh 19
13) allotted to the Levites (Josh 21 35, “Dimnah”;
1 Ch 677). The site is now the little village of
Rummaneh on a low ridge 8. of the western end of the
marshy plain e? Batfuuf in Galilee; there are many
rock-cut tombs and cisterns. It is about 4 miles


Francis J. McConnetn


Rimmon
Robbers of Temples


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2594


N. of ef Afesh-hed, usually considered to be the site
of Gath-hepher. See PEF, 1, 363, Sh VI.
’ E. W. G. Masterman

RIMMON (7724, rimmdn, “pomegranate”; see
RIMMON-PEREZ):

(1) A Syrian god. Naaman the Syrian leper
after being cured is troubled over the fact that he
will still have to bow down in the house of the
Syrian god, Rimmon, when his master goes into
the house to worship leaning on his hand (2 K 6
18). Elisha answers him ambiguously: “Go in
peace.” Judging from Naaman’s position and this
incident, R. must have been one of the leading gods
of the Syrians worshipped in Damascus. He has
been identified with Rammanu, the Assyr god of
wind, rain and storm. The name appears in the
Syrian personal names Hapaprimmon and Tas-
RIMMON (q.v.) and its meaning is dubious (ramdmu,
“to thunder” [?])

(2) A Benjamite of Beeroth, whose sons Baanah
and Rechab assassinated Ish-bosheth (2 8 4 2.5.9).

Naruan Isaacs

RIMMON-PEREZ, r.-pé'réz (P18 TO, rim-
mén_perec; AV Rimmon-parez): A desert camp of
the Israelites (Nu 33 19 f), unidentified. Gesenius
translates rimmén as “pomegranate,’’ the place
deriving its name from the abundance of pome-
granates. But Conder derives it from rémam, “to
be high,” and translates it “cloven height.’ Sce
WANDERINGS OF ISRAEL.


RIMMON, ROCK OF. Sce Rimmon, (1).


RIMMONAH, rim-mé’/na, RIMMONO,
m6’no. See Riarmion, (8).


RING (AS ring, “ring’’): The word renders
(ARV) two Heb words (in AV and ERV three) and
two Gr words. MY2D, tabba'ath, the principal Heb
word, is from VAD , fabho', “sink,” either because the
ring is Something “cast’’ or molded, or, more prob-


rim-


O
!


Egyptian Signet Rings and Impressions Made
from Them,


ably, since the principal use of the ring was as a seal,
because it “sank’’ into the wax or clay that received
the impression. In Ex, tabba‘ath, “ring,” is a
detail of furniture or equipment, as the rings of the
ark through which the staves were thrust (Ex 26
12, etc), rings for curtains, in the high priest’s ephod
(Ex 28 28; 39 21), etc. Its other use was per-
haps the original, to describe the article of personal
adornment worn on the finger, apparently in the
OT always a signet-ring, and as such an indispen-
sable article of masculine attire. Such a ring Pha-
raoh gave Joseph as a symbol of authority (Gen 41
42); and Ahasuerus gave Haman (Est 3 10); with
it the royal missive was sealed (Est 3 12; 8 8 bis,
10). It was also a feminine ornament in Isaiah's
list of the fashionable feminme paraphernalia, “the
rings and the nose-jewels” (quite likely rings also)
(Isa 3 21). Hither as ornaments or for their in-


trinsic value, or both, rings were used as gifts for
sacred purposes from both men and women:
“brooches, and ear-rings, and signet-rings’’ (m “‘nose-
rings’) (Ex 35 22); “bracelets, rings [ARV “signet-
rings’’], ear-rings” (Nu 31 50 AV). OM, hatkam,
“signet,” mentioned in Gen 38 18.25; Ex 28 11.
21,86; Ex 89 6.14.30; Jer 22 24; Hag 2 238, ete,
was probably usually a seal ring, but in Gen 38 and
elsewhere the seal may have been swung on wire,
and suspended by a cord from the neck. It
was not only an identification, but served as a
stamp for signature. yb, galil, “circle” (cf
“Galilee,” “Circle” of the Gentiles), rendered
“ting” in Est 16; Cant 5 14, may rather mean
“cylinder” or ‘“‘rod” of metal. Earring (q.v.) in AV
is from totally different words: 072, nezem, whose
etymology is unknown, Dy, ‘dghil, “round,” or
on, lahash, “amulet”; soRV. The “rings’’ of the
wheels in Ezk 1 18 (AV) are 24, gabh, “curved,”
and mean “rims’’ (ARV), “felloes.” Egyptians esp.
wore a great profusion of rings, principally of silver
or gold, engraved with scarabaei, or other devices.
In the NT the ring, daxrddcos, daktilios, “finger-
ring,” is a token of means, position, standing: “put
a ring on his hand” (Lk 15 22). Perhaps also it
included the right to give orders in his father’s name.
To be xpvoodaxridcos, chrusodakiilios, “golden-
ringed,” perhaps with more than one, indicated
wealth and social rank: ‘a man with a gold ring”
(Jas 2 2). See also Earrine; Signet; SEAL.
Puitie WENDELL CRANNELL

RINGLEADER, ring’léd-ér: In Acts 24 5 the tr
of mpwrogrdrns, pratostdtés, ‘one who stands first.”
Not an opprobrious word in the Gr.


RINGSTREAKED, ring’strékt (AV and ERV
ringstraked): Gen 30 35.39.40; 31 8 (bis).10.12 for
“Ip? , ‘akddh. In the context of 30 35, ete, ‘akadh
certainly denotes defective coloring of some sort, but
the exact meaning of the word is uncertain. The
tr “ringstreaked” (“marked with circular bands’)
comes from connecting the word with the v ‘kd, “to
bind” (Gen 22 9), but this connection is dubious.


RINNAH, rin’a (734, rinnah, “praise to God’;
LXX B, ’Avé, And, A, ‘Pavvév, Rhannén): A
Judahite, according to MT. a son of Shimon (1 Ch
4 20). But LXX makes him a son of Hanan (B,
Phand, A, Andn) by reading “ben” in the next name
(Ben-hanan) as “son of.”


RIOT, ri’ut: Properly, “unrestrained behavior”
of any sort, but in modern Eng. usually connoting
mob action, although such phrases as a “riotous
banquet” are still in common use. AV uses the
word in the first sense, and it is retained by RV in
Lk 15 13; Tit 16; 1 Pet 4 4 for dodrws, asdtas,
dgwria, asdtia, “having no hope of safety,” “prof-
ligate.” In Prov 23 20; 28 7 RV has preferred
“gluttonous,’’ “glutton,” in Rom 13 13, “revelling,”
and in 2 Pet 2 18, “revel.”

Burton Scotr Easton

RIPHATH, ri‘fath (MB, riphath): A son of
Gomer, the eldest son of Japhet (Gen 10 3; 1 Ch
1 6, where MT and RV read Dinara {q.v.]). Jos
(Ant, I, vi, 1) identifies the Ripheans with the
Paphlagonians, through whose country on the
Black Sea ran the river “Rhebas” (Pliny, NH, vi.4),


RISING, riz’ing imNy, s’éth, “a tumor,” “swell-
ing” [Lev 13 2.10, etc]). Scc Leprosy.


RISSAH, ris’a (MO, rissah, “dew’): A camp of
the Israelites in the wilderness wanderings between


2595


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Rimmon


Robbers of Temples


Libnah and Kehelathah (Nu 33 21 f).
DERINGS oF ISRAEL.


See Wan-


RITHMAG, rith’ma (WAN, rithmah, “broom’’):
A desert camp of the Israelites (Nu 33 18.19).
The name refers to the white desert broom. See
WANDERINGS OF IsRaBL.


RIVER, riv’ér:

(1) The usnal word is "73, nahar (Aram. W33,
nchar [Ear 4 10, etc]), used of the rivers of Eden
(Gen 2 10-14), often of the Euphrates (Gen 15 18,
etc), of Abana and Pharpar (2 K 5 12), the river
of Gozan (2 K 17 6), the river Chebar (Ezk 1 1),
the rivers (canals ?) of Babylon (Ps 187 1), therivers


of Ethiopia (Isa 18 1; Zeph 3 10). Cf -@3, nahr,
the common Arab. word for “river.”’


(2) "IS", yar, according to BDB from Egyp
‘lotr, 'to’r, “watercourse,” often of the Nile (Ex 1
22, etc). In Isa 19 6, for NZ MW, y’dré
macoar, AV “brooks of defence,’’ RV has ‘‘streams of
Egypt.” In Isa 19 73.8, for y’dr, AV “brooks,”
and Zec 10 11, AV “river,’”’ RV has “Nile.” In
Job 28 10, AV “He cutteth out rivers among the
rocks,” RV has ‘channels,’ RVm “passages.”

(8) There are nearly 100 references to om,
nahal. In about half of these AV has “brook” and
in about half “river.’? RV has more often “brook”
or “valley.” But RV has river in “whatsoever
hath fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and
in the rivers’ (Lev 11 9); “the river Jabbok”’
(Dt 2 37; Josh 12 2); the stream issuing from
the temple (Ezk 47 5-12). RV has “brook of
Egypt,” 1.e. el-‘Arish (Nu 34 5; Josh 15 47; 1 K
8 65; 2 K 24 7; 2Ch78; Am 6 14, “of the
Arabah”); “brook [AV “Tiver’] of Kanah” (Josh
16 8); “valley [AV “river’’] of the Arnon” (Dt 2
24). EV has “valley”: of Gerar (Gen 26 17), of
Zered (Nu 21 12), but “brook Zered’’ (Dt 2 13),
of Eschol (Nu 32 9), of Sorek (Jgs 16 4), of Shit-
tim (Joel 3 18). EV has “brook”: Besor (1 8 30
10), Kidron (2 5 16 23), Gaash (2 8 23 30),
Cherith (1 K 17 3); also the fem. 127), nahdlah,
“brook [AV “river’’] of Egypt” (Ezk 47 19; 48
28). The torrent-valley (wddy) is often meant.


(4) 09, pelegh, with fem. my2R , pelaggah, AV


“river,” is in RV tra ‘stream,’’ except EV ‘river of
' (Ps 65 9);_ ‘streams of water” (Ps 1 3; Prov
Isa 382 2; Lam 8 48); ‘streams of honey” (Job
2 ; “streams of oil’? (Job 29 6). es

(5) DDN, ‘aphik, AV “river,” except EV “water


brooks” (Ps 42 1), isin RV “watercourses”? (Ezk 6 3;
31 12; ; 84.13: 85 8; 36 4.6), ‘ water-brooks”’
(Cant § 12; Joel 1 20).

(6) SQ5, yadhal, EV “river” Ger 17 8). 538,
‘ubhal, and Say, 'abhal, EV ‘‘river’’ (Dnl 8 2.3.6).

(7) wovauss, potamés: of the Jordan (Mk J 5);
Euphrates (Rev 9 14); “rivers of living water’ (Jn
7 38); “river of water of life’ (Rev 22 1). So
always in Gr for ‘'river’’' in RV Apoc (1 Esd 4 23, etc).
See Brook; STREAM; VALLEY.

AuFrep Evy Day
RIVER OF EGYPT. See Broox or Eeyrprt.


RIVER, THE (GREAT). See EupHrares.


RIVERS OF EDEN. See Even (1).


RIZIA, riz’i-a (NUR, ricya’): An Asherite (1 Ch
7 39).


RIZPAH, riz’pA (ABE, rigpah, “hot stone’’; Jos,
‘Pacdd, Rhaisphd): In 2 8 3 7 the subject of a
coarse slander. 2 8 21 contains the pathetic story
of Rizpah’s faithful watch over the bodies of her
dead sons Mephibosheth and Armoni (vs 10.11).


Did this story suggest. Tennyson’s “Rizpah”? A
three years’ famine had made David anxious, and
in seeking a reason for the affliction he concluded
that it lay in Sanl’s unavenged conduct to the
Gibeonites (ver 2). To appease Jeh he gave up to
the Gibeonites the two sons of Saul, Mephibosheth
and Armoni, as well as Saul’s 5 grandsons (whether
by Michal or Mcrab; see Mreras). These seven
were hanged at Gibeah. Rizpah watched 5 months
over their exposed bodies, but meanwhile the
famine did not abate. Word was brought to David
of Rizpah’s act (vs 10.11), and it is possible that her
action suggested to David his next step in expiation.
At any rate, he remembered the uncared-for bones
of Jonathan and Saul lying in ignominy at Jabesh-
gilead, whither they had been carried by stealth
after the Philis had kept them hung in the streets
of Beth-shan for some time. The bones were re-
covered and apparently mingled with the bones
Rizpah had guarded, and they were together buried
in the family grave at Zelah. We are told that
then “God was entreated for the land” (ver 14).
Henry Wa.LLAcE

ROAD, réd (INROAD) AV (1 § 27 10; cf 23

27). See Raw.


ROAD (WAY). See Roman Empire anp Curis-
tTranity, II, 6; Way.


ROAST, rast.


ROBBER, rob’ér, ROBBERY, rob’ér-i: “Robber”
represents no particular Heb word in the OT, but
in the Apoc and the NT is always a tr of Ayers,
léstés (see TutnF). In AV Job 5 5; 18 9, “rob-
ber” stands for the doubtful word DYAY , cammim,
RV “hungry” in 6 5 and “snare” in 18 9. The
meaning is uncertain, and perhaps ¢°mé’im, “thirsty,”
should be read in both places. Ps 62 10, “Become
not vain in robbery,” means “put not your trust
in riches dishonestly gained.’ RV’s changes of
AV in Prov 21 7; Dnl 11 14; Nah 8 1 are ob-
vious. In Phil 2 6 AV reads “thought it not rob-
bery to be equal with God.” ERV has “a prize,”’
while ERVm and ARV read “a thing to be grasped,”
ARY rewording “counted not the being on an equal-
ity with God a thing to be grasped.’’ The Gr here
is éprayubs, harpagmés, a word derived from har-
pazo, “to ravish away,” “carry off,” “plunder” (cf
“harpy”). Properly speaking, the termination
~mos should give the derived noun an active sense,
“the act of plundering,” whence AV’s “robbery.”
The verse would then mean “who thought that
being on an equality with God did not consist in
grasping,” and this tr gives good sense in the con-
text and has some excellent scholarly support. But
a passive significance is frequently found despite
a -mos termination, nee harpagmos the sense
of “thing grasped,” as in RV. Usually Eng. com-
mentators take “grasped” as meaning “clung to”—
“did not think equality with God should be clung
to tenaciously’’—but “to cling to’ seems unknown
as a tr of harpazé. Hence render “a thing to be
grasped at’—“did not seek equality with God by
selfish methods but by humbling himself.’ It is
to be noticed, naturally, that St. Paul is thinking
of “equality with God” simply in the sense of ‘“‘re-
ceiving explicit adoration from men’ (vs 10.11),
and that the metaphysical relation of the Son to the
Father is not at allin point. See also Grasp.

Burton Scotr Easton

ROBBERS OF TEMPLES (iepsovAo1, hierdsuloi,
“suilty of sacrilege’): A term used by the town
clerk of Ephesus (Acts 19 37, AV “robbers of
churches”). As the temple of Diana had a great
treasure-chamber, the offence might not be unknown
among them; cf Rom 2 22.


See Foon.


Robe
Romamti-Ezer


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2596


In2 Mace 4 42 AV the epithet “church-robber’’
(RV “author of the sacrilege’) is applied to Lysima-
CHUS (q.V.).


ROBE, rob. See Dress, 1, (3).


ROBOAM, roé-bd’am (‘PoBodp, Rhobodm). AV;
Gr form of “Rehoboam” (thus RV) (Mt 1 7);
successor of Solomon. .


ROCK, rok ({1] yb0, sela‘; [2] “WE, car; [3]
wren, hallémish, “flmt”; ef Arab. Unyide,
khalanbas, “flint”; [4] DODD, képhim
{Job 30 6; Jer 4 29]; cf Kndas,
Képhds, “Cephas’”’ =Tlérpos, Pétros,
“Peter” [Jn 1 42 AV and RVm]; [5] wérpa, pétra):
Cur and sela‘ are the words most often found, and
there is no well-defined distinction between them.
They are freqnently coupled together in the paral-
lelism which is characteristic of the Heb writers:
e.g.

‘*Be thou to me a strong rock [¢ér],


A house of defence to save me.
For thou art my rock [sela'] and my fortress"’ (Ps
9


1. Names


**He clave rocks [car] in the wilderness,
And gave them drink abundantly as out of the depths.
He brought streams also out of the rock [sela‘],
And ca waters to run down like rivers’’ (Ps 78
15.16).


It is plain here that the two words are used for
the sake of variety, without any clear difference of
meaning. Even hallémish (tr4 “flint’’) is used in
the same way with ear in Ps 114 8:

“Who turned the rock [¢dzr] into a pool of water,

The flint [hallamish] into a fountain of waters.”

(1) Some of the most striking and beautiful
imagery of the Bible is based upon the rocks. They
are a symbol of Ged: “Jeh is my rock,
and my fortress” (2 8 22 2; Ps 18 2;
71 3); “God, the rock of my salvation”
(2 8 22 47; cf Ps 62 2.7;89 26); “my
God the rock of my refuge” (Ps 94 22); “the rock of
thy strength” (lsa 17 10); ‘Lead me to the rock
that is higher than I” (Ps 61 2); repeatedly in the
song of Moses (Dt 82 3.4.18.30.31; ef 2 8 22 32).
Paul applies the rock smitten in the wilderness
(Ex 17.6; Nu 20 11) to Christ as the souree of
living water for spiritual refreshment (1 Cor 10 4).

(2) The rocks are a refuge, both figuratively and
literally (Jer 48 28; Cant 2 14); ‘The rocks are
a refuge for the conies’ (Ps 104 18). Many a
traveler in Pal has felt the refreshment of ‘the
shade of a great rock in a weary lund” (Isa 82 2).
A very different idea is expressed in Isa 8 14, “And
he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of
stumbling and for a rock of offence’ (cf Rom 9 33;
1 Pet 2 8).

(3) The rock is a symbol of hardness (Jer 5 3;
ef Isa 60 7). Therefore the breaking of the rock
exemplifies the power of God (Jer 23 29; cf 1 K
19 11). The rock is also a symbol of that which
endures, ‘‘Oh that they ... . were graven in the
rock for ever!” (Job 19 23.24). A rock was an ap-
propriate place for offering a sacrifice (Jgs 6 20; 13
19). The central] feature of the Mosque of ‘Umar
in Jerus is Kubbat-us-Sakhrat, the “dome of the
rock.” The rock or sakhrat under the dome is
thought to be the site of Solomon’s altar of burnt
offering, and further is thought to be the site of
the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite which
David purchased to build an altar to Jeh.

(1) The principal rock of Pal and Syria is lime-
stone of which there are many varieties, differing
in color, texture, hardness and degrecs of impurity,
some of the limestone having considerable admix-


2. Figura-
tive


tures of clay or sand. Some of the harder kinds
are very dense and break with a conchoidal fracture
similar to the fracture of flint. In
rocks which have for ages been ex-
posed to atmospheric agencies, erosion
has produced striking and highly pic-
turesque forms. Nodules and layers of flint are of
frequent occurrence in the limestone.

(2) Limestone is the only rock of Western Pal,
with the exception of some local outpourings of
basaltic rock and with the further exception of a
light-brown, porous, partly calcareous sandstone,
which is found at intervals along the coast. This
last is a superficial deposit of Quaternary or recent,
age, and is of aeolian origin. That is, it consists
of dune sands which have solidified under the in-
fluence of atmospheric agencies. This is very ex-
ceptional, nearly all stratified rocks having origi-
nated as beds of sand or mud in the bottom of the sea,

(3) In Sinai, Edom, Moab, Lebanon and Anti-
Lebanon is found the Nubian sandstone, a silicious
sandstone which, at least in the N., is of middle or
lower Cretaceous age. In the §., the lower strata
of this formation seem to be paleozoic. Most of
it is not sufficiently coherent to make good building
stone, though some of its strata are very firm and
are even used for millstones. In some places it is
so incoherent or friable that it is easily dug with the
pick, the grains falling apart and forming sand that
can be used in mortar. In color the Nubian sand-
stone is on the whole dark reddish brown, but
locally it shows great variation, from white through
yellow and red to black. In places it also has tints
of blue. The celebrated rock tombs and temples
of Petra are carved in this stone.

(4) Extensive areas of the northern part of East-
ern Pal are covered with igneous rock. In the
Jaulén S.E. of Mt. Hermon, this has been for ages
exposed to the atmosphere and has formed super-
ficially a rich dark soil. Further 8.E. is the Leja’
(Arab. “refuge’’), a wild tract covered with a deposit
of lava which is geologically recent, and which,
while probably earlicr than man, is still but little
affected by the atmosphere. It is with difficulty
traversed and frequently furmshes an asylum to
outlaws. See Crag; Fur; Groiocy; Lime.

ALrrRep Ey Day
teas OF AGES. See Aczs, Rock or; Isaran,


3. Kinds
of Rock


ROCK-BADGER, r.-baj’ér: This term is found
in RVm for “coney,” JEW, shéphan (Lev 11 5; cf
Dt 14 7; Ps 104 18; Prov 30 26). It is a tr of
klip das, the name given by the Boers to the Cape
hyrax or coney. See Coney.


ROD (P92, makkal, MOA, matteh, DAW, shebhet;
paBSes, rhibdos): Little distinction can be drawn
between the Heb words used for “rod” and “staff.”
Makkél is the word used in Gen 80 37 ff for the
twigs of poplar put by Jacob before his sheep, and
in Jer 1 11 of the “rod of an almond-tree.” Mat-
teh is used of a rod in the hand, as the “rods” of
Moses and of Aaron (Ex 4 2ff; 7 9ff, ete).
Shebhet is used, but sometimes also maiteh, of the
rod used for correction (Ex 21 20; 28 7 14;
Prov 10 18; 13 24; Isa 10 5, etc). In Ps 23 4
(“Thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me”), how-
ever, shébhet is the shepherd’s rod, figurative of
Divine guidance and care. In Ezk 21 10.13, the
word stands for the royal scepter. In the NT
“rod” is used of a rod of correction (1 Cor 4 21),
Aaron’s rod (He 9 4), a ruler’s rod “of iron”
(severity, as in Rev 2 27; 12 5; 19 15), a meas-
uring rod (Rev 11 1). See also Armor, ARMs.

JAMES ORR


2597


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Robe
Romamti-Ezer


a


RODANIM, rod’a-nim: The reading of MT in
1 Ch 17 for the Dopanim (q.v.) of Gen 10 4,
corresponding to the ‘Pédo:, Rhddiot of LXX in
both passages. The Rodanim are generally identi-
fied as inhabitants of the island of Ruoprs (q.v.),
ee to the ancient Phoenicians (Homer's
tad).


i ROE, 16, ROEBUCK, ré’buk: AV has “roe” and

roebuck” for "AX, ¢bhi, TRAX, cbhiyah. RV
usually substitutes “gazelle” in the text (Dt 12 15,
etc) or m (Prov 6 5, etc), but retains “roe” in 2 8
218; 1 Ch 12 8; Cant 3 5; 7 3. SoRV has “ga-
zelle’” for AV “roe’’ in Sir 27 20 (dorkds). RV has


“roe-buck” for WVOM), yahmir (Dt 14 5; 1K 4
23), where AV has “fallow deer.’”’ In the opinion of
the writer, DN, ’ayyal, EV “hart,” should be tr@
“roe-buck,” yahméir “fallow deer,” and ¢°bhi ‘“ga-
zelle.’ See DEER; Gazette. ALFRED ELy Day


ROGELIM, rd'gé-lim, ré-g2/lim (B"99, ragheltm;
"PwyeAdelu, Rhdgelleim): The place whence came
Barzillai the Gileadite to succor David in his flight
from Absalom (2 8 17 27; 19 31). It probably


lay near the path followed hy David, but it is not
identified.


ROHGAH, ro’ga (Kethibh MMM, rahdghah,
Keré M7, rohgah): A name in the genealogy of
Asher (1 Ch 7 84).


ROIMUS, rd’/i-mus (Péepos, Rhdeimos, A, ‘Po-
patos, Rhomélios): One of the leaders with
Zerubbabel in the return (1 Esd 5 8)=‘‘Rehum” in
Ezr 2 2, of which it is the Gr form=‘Nehum”
in Neh 7 7.


ROLL, rél (SCROLL): The usual form of book in
Bib. times. It had been in use in Egypt for per-
haps 2,000 years at the time when, according to the
Pent, the earliest Bib. books were written in this
form. The Bab tablet seems to have been the pre-
vailing form in Pal up to about 1350 BC, but by
1100 BC, at least, the roll had been in established
use for some time as far N. as Byblos. Two Heb
words, gillayén, m*ghillah, one Aram., s*phar, and
one Gr word, biblion, are so tr? in AV. S*phar
(Ezr 6 1, RV “archives,” m “books”), with the
corresponding Heb form sephér, is the generic word
for any whole work large or small, but as a book form
(Isa 34 4) it may mean “roll,” and, according to Blau
(pp. 37, 45, etc), it never does mean anything else.
Both the other words seem to be connected with
gdlal, “voll,” which is the technical term for open-


ing or closing a book The m’ghillath sephér (Jer
36 2) means the unwritten roll, or the roll considered
in its material form as contrasted with the work.
Meghillah, which is found in Ezr 6 2 (EV “Toll’’), Jer
(often), Eizk (often) and Zec, is a somewhat late
word, and came to mean a small roll (hut with a com-
plete work) as dis-
tinguished from a
book, corresponding
thus to the modern
distinction of pam-
phlet and book or
document and book.
The word gilldyén is
trdin RV as “tablet,”
and is universally re-
garded as meaning
(Isa 8 1)somesmooth
surface, correspond-
ing to the same word
in Isa 3 23 which is
rendered “hand-
mirror.’’ But
“eylinder-seal’’ would
possibly fit the sense
in both cases; this
being hung round the
neck as an ornament
in one case and in-
scribed with a per-
sonal name in the other.

Biblion is regarded by the Bible translators as
equivalent to m*ghillah in the sense of small roll.
It is in fact 4 t in the LXX of Jer 36 used as the
tr for m@ghillah, but very much oftener it is the tr
for sephér, for which in fact it is the correct techni-
cal equivalent (Birt, Buchrolle, 21). Indeed the
“small book” (Thayer, Lez., 101) is hardly con-
sistent with the ideas of the heavens as a scroll, of
the Lamb’s Book of Life, or of the vast. quantity of
books of Jn 21 25, although in Lk 4 17 it may
perhaps correspond closely with m*ghilla@h in the
sense of a complete roll and work, which is at the
same time a whole part of a larger work. Its use
in Rev 6 14 is reminiscent of Isa 34 4 (“scroll’’),
and is conclusive for the roll form. It is mdeed
always technically a roll and never codex or tablet.

It is not likely that Isaiah and St. John (here and in
his Gospel, 21 25) refer directly to the Bab idea that the
heavens are a series of written tablets or to the rabbinic
saying that ‘‘if all the oceans were ink, all reeds pens,
the heavens and earth sheets to write upon, and all men
writers, still it would not suffice for writing out the teach-
ings of my Masters"’ (Blau, op. cit., 34). Nevertheless,
the ‘‘whole Cosmos’’ does suggest ‘‘the heavens and
earth’’ as sheets to write on, and under all there does
perhaps lurk a conception of the broad expanse of heaven
as a roll for writing upon.

LitERATURE.—Birt, Die Buchrolle in der Kunst, Leip-
zig, 1907; Jew Enc, XI, 126-34, "Scroll of tho Law"’;
Blau, Studien z. althebr. Buchwesen, Strassburg, 1902, 37-
66, etc, and the literature under the art. ‘‘Writing,’’ esp.
Gardthansen, 134-54.


Egyptian Roll and Case.


E. C. Ricnarpson
ROLLER, ral’ér: AV and ERV in Ezk 30 21
for DAMM, Aittal, “bandage” (so ARV). “Roller”
was formerly a technical term in surgery for a wide
bandage.


ROLLING, rol’ing, THING: Isa 17 13, AV
“like a rolling thing before the whirlwind,” a non-
committal tr of 533, galgal, “revolving thing,”
“Wheel” (Eccl 12 6). RV “like the whirling dust
before the storm” is probably right. But see
Cuarr; Dust; STUBBLE.


ROMAMTI-EZER, yé-mam-ti-@’zér, rdé-mam-ti-
adr (ATP WAM, rdmamii ‘ezer, “highest help”):
Son of Heman, appointed chief of the 24th division


Roman, Romans
Roman Empire


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2598


of singers in David’s time (I Ch 25 4.31). See
JOSHBEKASHAH.
ROMAN, rd’man, ROMANS, rod’manz. See


Romp, III, 2; Citizensuip.
ROMAN ARMY. See Army, Roman.


ROMAN EMPIRE, em’pir, AND CHRISTIAN-
ITY:


I. Ovuruine oF THE Roman Empire
1. Roman Empire a Result of Social Conflict
2. Coming of Monarchy
(1) Exhaustion of Parties
(2) Inability of Either <Aristocracy or De-
mocracy to Hold Equilibrium
(3) Precedents
(4) Withdrawal from Public Life: Individu-
alism
(5) Industrial
(6) Military
(7) Imperial Interests
(8) Influence of Orient
II. Preparation OF THE Roman Empire For Cuais-
TIANITY


1. Pax Romana
2. Cosmopolitanism
3. Eclecticism
4. Protection for Greek Culture
5. Linguistically
6. Materially
7. Tolerance
8. Pattern for a Universal Church
9. Roman Jurisprudence
10. Negative Preparation
III. Arvirupe or tHe Roman Empire To RELIGIONS
1. Roman Religion
2. Non-Roman Religions—religiones licitae and
religiones illicitae
(1) Judaism a religio licita
a Why Christianity Was Alone Proscribed
3) Two Empires: Causes of Conflict
(a) Confusion of Spiritual and Temporal
(o) Unique Claims of Christianity
(c) Christianity the Newest Religion in
the Empire
(d) Intolerance and Exclusiveness of the
Christian Religion and Christian So-
ciety
(e) Obstinatio
He Aggressiveness against Pagan Faith
g) Christianos ad leones: Puhlic Calami-
ties
(h) Odium generis humani
(4) The Roman Empire Not the Only Disturb-
ing Factor
IV. RELATIONS BETWEEN THE RomMaAN EMPIRE AND
CHRISTIANITY


1. Beginning of Christianity till Death of Nero,
6s AD


Flavian Period, 68-96 AD
The Antonine Period, 96-192 AD
Changing Dynasties, 192-284 AD
Diocletian till First General Edict of Tolera-
tion, 284-311 AD
First Edict of Toleration till Extinction of
Western Empire, 311-476 AD
V. Vicrory or CHrisTiaANiITy
1. Negative Causes
2. Positive Causes
LITERATURE


See OuR CoN:


I. Outline of Roman Empire.—The founding of
the Rom empire was the grandest political achieve-
ment ever accomplished. The con-


1. Roman quests of Alexander the Great, Charle-
Empire a magne and Napoleon seem small com-
Result pared with the durable structure

reared by Julius and his snecessor,
Augustus. In one sense Julius Caesar—the most


wonderful man that Rome or any other country
produced—was the founder of the empire, and
Augustus the founder of the principate. But the
Rom empire was the culmination of a long process
of political, constitutional, and social growth which
gives a lasting interest to Rom history. The Rom
empire was the only possible solution of a 700
years’ struggle, and Rom history is the story of the
conflict of class with class, patrician against ple-
beian, populus against plebs, the antagonism of oli-
garchy and democracy, plutocracy against neglected
masses. It is the account of the triumphant march


of democracy and popular government against an
exclusive governing caste. Against heavy odds the
plebeians asserted their rights till they secured at
least a measure of social, political and legal equality
with their superiors (see Roms, I, 2-4). But in
the long conflict both parties degenerated until
neither militant democracy nor despotic oligarchy
could hold the balance with justice. Democracy
had won in the uphill fight, but lost itself and was
obliged _to accept a common master with aristoc-
racy. It was of no small importance for Christian-
ity that the Rom empire—practically synonymous
with the orbis terrarum—had been converging both
from internal and external causes toward a one-
man government, the political counterpart of a
universal religion with one God and Saviour.

(1) Julius Caesar.—For a couple of generations politi-
cal leaders had foreseen the coming of supreme power and
had tried tograspit. Butit was Julius Caesar who hest
succeeded in exploiting democracy for his own aggran-
dizement. He proved the potent factor of the first
triumvirate (60 BC); his consulship (59) was truly
kingly. In 49 BC he crossed the Rubicon and declared
war upon his country, but in the same year was ap-
pointed Dictator and thus made Ais enemies the enemies


of his country. He vanquisbed the Pompeians—sena-~
torial and republican—at Pharsalia in 48 BC, Thapsus


“in 46 BC, and Munda in 45 BC. Between 46 and the


Ides of March 44 no emperor before Diocletian was more
imperial. He was recognized officially as ‘‘demigod";
temples were dedicated to his ‘‘‘clemency.’’ He en-
couraged the people to abdicate to him their privileges
of self-government and right of election, became chief
(princeps) of the senate and high priest (pontifex mari-
mus), SO that he could manipulate even the will of the
gods to his own purposes. His plans were equally great
and heneficent. He saw the necessity of blending the
heterogeneous populations into one people and extend-
ing Rom citizenship. His outlook was larger and more
favorable to the coming of Christianity than that of his
successor, Augustus. The latter learned from the fate
of Caesar that he had advanced too rapidly along the
imperial path. It taught Augustus caution.

(2) Augustus.—Octavian. (Augustus) proved the po-
tent factor of the second triumvirate. The ficld of
Actium on September 2, 31 BC, decided the fate of the
old Rom republic. The commonwealth sank in ex-
haustion after the protracted civil and internecine
strife. It was a case of the survival of the fittest. It
was a great crisis in human history, and a great man was
at hand for the occasion. Octavian realized that su-
preme power was the only possible solution. On his
return to Rome he began to do over again what Caesar
had done—gather into his own hands the rcins of gov-
ernment. He succeeded with more caution and shrewd-
ness, and became the founder of the Rom empire, which
formally began on January 16, 27 BO, and was signalized
hy the bestowal of the title Aucusrus (q.v.).. Under
republican forms he ruled as emperor, controlling legis-
lation, administration and the armies. His policy was
on the whole adhered to by the Julio-Clandian line, the
last of which was Nero (d. 68 AD).

(3) Flavian Dynasty.—In 68 AD a new ‘secret of
empire’’ was discovered, viz. that the principate was
not hereditary in one line and that emperors could be
nominated by the armies. After the bloody civil wars
of 68, ‘‘the pear of the four emperors,’’ Vespasian
founded the IId Dynasty, and dynastic succession was
for the present again adopted. ‘With the Flavians begins
a new epoch in Rom history of pronounced importance
for Christianity. The exclusive Rom ideas are on the
wane. Vespasian was of plebeian and Sabine rank and
thus non-Rom, the first of many non-Rom emperors.
His ideas were provincial rather than Rom, and favor-
able to the amalgamation of Classes, and the leveling
process now steadily setting in. Though he accepted the
Augustan ‘‘diarchy,'’ he began to curtail the powers of
the senate. His son Titus died young (79-81). Domi-
tian's reign marks a new epoch in Imperialism: his
autocratic spirit stands half-way between the Augustan
principate and the absolute monarchy of Diocletian.
Domitian, the last of the ‘twelve Caesars’ (Suetonius),
was assassinated September 18, 96 AD. The soldiers
amid civil war had elected the last dynasty. This time
the senate asserted itself and nominated ‘a brief series
of emperors—on the whole the best that wore the
purple.

_ (4) Adoptive or Antonine emperors.—The Antonine
is another distinct era marked by humane government,
recognition of the rights of the provinces and an enlarge-
ment of the ideas of universalism. Under Trajan the
empire was extended; a series of frontier blockades was
established—a confession that Rome could advance no
farther. Under Hadrian a policy of retreat began;
henceforth Rome is never again on the aggressive but
always on the defensive against restless barbarlans.
Unmistakable signs of weakness and decay set in under


2599


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Roman, Romans
Raman Empire


Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius. This, the best and
happiest period of Rom imperial government, was the be-
ginning of the end. In this era we detect a growing cen-
tralization of authority; the senate practically hecomes
a tool of the emperor. A distinct civil service was estab-
Ushed which c inated in bureaucracy under Hadrian.

(5) Changing dynasties, 193-284 AD.—On the death
of Commodus, whese reign 180-93 AD stands by itself, the
empire was put up for sale by the Soldiery and knocked
down to the highest bidder. The military basls of the
empire was emphasized—which was indeed essential in
this period of barbaric aggressiveness to postpone the
fall of the empire until its providential mission was ac-
complished. A rapid succession of rulers follows, almost
each new ruler bringing a new dynasty. Those dis-
integrating forces set in which developed so rapidly trom
the reign of Diocletian. The pax Romana had passed;
civil commotion accentuated the dangers from invading
barbarians. Plague and famine depopulated rich prov-
inces. Rome itself drops into the backgreund and
the provincial spirit asserts itself proportionally. The
year 212 AD is memorable for the edict of Caracalla
converting all the free population into Rom citizens.

(6) From Diocletian till partition.—In tho next period
absolute monarchy of pure oriental type was established
by Diocletian, one of the ahlest of Rom rulers. He
Inaugurated the principle of division and subdivision of
imperial power. The inevitable separation of East and
West, with the Bre een eal eee of the East, becomes
apparent. Rome and Italy are reduced to the rank of
provinces, and new courts are opened by the two Augusti
and two Caesars. Diocletian's division of power led to
civil strife, until Constantine once more united the whole
empire under his sway. The center of gravity now
shifted from West to East by the foundation of Con-
stantinople. The empire was again parceled out to the
sons of Constantine, one of whom, Censtantius, suc-
ceeded in again reuniting it (350 AD). In 364 it was
again divided, Valentinian receiving the West and Valens
the East. :

(7) Final partition—On the death of Theodosius I
(395), West and East fell to his sons Honorius and Arca-
dius,never again to be united. The western half rapidly
degenerated before harbaric hordes and weakling rulers.
The western previnces and Africa were overrun by con-
quering barbarians who set up independent kingdoms
on Rom seil. Burgundians and Visigeths settled_in
Gaul; the latter established a kingdom in Spain. The
Vandals under Genseric settled first in Seuthern Spain,
then crossed to Africa and reduced it. Goths burst over
Rom frontiers, settled in Illyria and invaded Italy.
Alaric and his Goths spared Rome in 408 fer a ransom;
in 409 he appeared again and set up Attalus as king of the
Romaazs, and finally in 410 he captured and sacked the
city. It was again sacked hy the Vandals under Gen-
seric in 462, and, lastly, fell before Odeacer and his
Germans in 476; he announced to the world that_the
empire of the West had ceased. The empire of the East
continued at Constantinople the greatest political power
through a chequered history down to the capture of the
city in 1214 and its final capture by the Turks in 1453,
when its spiritual and intellectual treasures were opened
to western lands and proved of untold blessing in prepar-
ing the way for the Reformation of the 16th cent. The
East conquered the West intellectually and spiritually.
In the East was born the religion of humanity.

(1) Exhaustion of parties —The Rom world had tor
two generations heen steadily drifting toward monarchy,

and at least one generation hefere the em-


2. Coming pire was set up clear minds saw the inevi-

fM table necessity of one-man government or
9 on- supreme power, and each political leader
archy made it his amhition to grasp it. The


civil wars ceased for a century with the
death of Antony. But the struggles of Tiberius Gracchus
and Scipio Aemilianus, Caius Gracchns and Opimius,
Drusus and Philippus, Marius and Sulla, Pompey and
Caesar, and lastly Octavian and Antony had exhausted
the state, and this exhaustion of political parties opened
the way for monarchy. In fact it was a necessity for the
welfare of the commonwealth that one should be elevated
who could fairly hold the balance between oligarchy and
the commons and duly recognize the claims of all parties.
Even Cato Uticensis—the incarnation of republican
jideas—admitted it would_he better to choose a master
than wait for a tyrant. The bloody wars could find no
solution except the survival of the fittest. Moreover,
the free political institutions of Rome had become use-
less and could no longer work under the armed oppression
of factions. If any form of government, only supreme
power would prove effectual amid an enfcebled, un-
opular senate, corrupt and idle commons, and armhi-
ious individuals.

(2) Inability of either aristocracy or democracy to hold
equilibrium.—Events had proved that a narrow exclu-
sive aristocracy was incapable of good government
hecause of its utterly selfish policy and disregard for tho
rights of all lower orders. It had learned to burke
liberty by political murders. Neither was the hetero-
geneous population of later Rome disciplined to obey or
to initiate just government when it had seized power.
This anarchy within the body politic opened an easy way
to usurpation by individuals. No republic and no form


of free popular government could live under such con-
ditions. Caesar said of the republic that It was’* a name
without any substance,’’ and Curio declared it to be a
“vain chimera.’’ The law courts shared in the general
corruption. The judicia hecame the bone of contention
between the senate and the knights as the hest instru-
ment for party interests, and enabled the holders (a). to
receive large bribes, (b) to protect their own order when
guilty of the most flagrant injustice, and (c) to oppress
other orders. Justice for_all, and esp. for conquered
peoples, was impossible. Elective assemblies refused to
perferm their preper functions because of extravagant
bribery or the presence of candidates in arms. In fact,
the pcople were willing to forego the prerogative of
election and accept candidates at the nomination of a
despotic antherity. The whole people had hecome In-
capable of self-government and were willing—almost
glad—to he relieved of the necessity.

(3) Precedents. Besides, preccdeuts for one-man
government, or the concentration of supreme power in
one hand, were net wanting, and had hbcen rapidly mul~
tiplying in Rom history as it drew nearer to the end of
the republic. Numerous protracted commands and
special commissions had accustomed the state to the
novelty of obedience without participation in admin-
istration. The 7 consulships of Marius, the 4 of Cinna,
the 3 extraordinary commissions of Pompey and his sole
censulship, the dictatership of Sulla without time Umit,
the two 5-year-period military commands of Caesar,
his repeated dictaterships the last of which was te ex-
tend for 10 years—all these were peinting directly
toward Caesarism.

(4) Withdrawal from public fe: individualism.—On
another side the way was opened to supreme power by
the increasing tendency fer some of the noblest and hest
minds to withdraw from public life to the seclusion of
the heart life and thus leave the field open for dema-
gogic ambition. After the conquests of Alexander the
Great, philosophy abandoned the civic, political or city-
state point of view and became moral and individual.
Stoicism adopted the lofty spiritual teachings of Plate
and combined them with the idea of the brotherhood of
humanity. It also preached that man must work out
his salvation, not in public political life, but in the secret
agonies of his own soul. This religion teok hold of the
noblest Rom souls who were conscious of the weariness
of life and felt the desire for spiritual fellowship and com-
fort. The pendulum in human systems of theught gen-
erally swings te the opposite extreme, and these serious
seuls abandoned public life for private speculatien and
meditation. Those who did remain at the helm of
affairs—like the younger Cate—were often too much
idealists, living in the past or in an ideal Platonic repub-
lic, and Bie very unequal to the practical dema-
gogues who lived much in the present with a keen eye
to the future. Also a considerable numher of the mod-
erate party, who in better days would have furnished
leaders to the state, disgusted with the universal cor-
ruption, saddened by the hopeless state of secial strife
aud disquieted by uncertainty as to the issue of victory
fer either contending party, held aloof and must have
wished for and welcomed a parameunt authority to give
stability to social life. Monarchy was in the air, as

roved by the sentiments of the two pseudo-Sallustian
etters, the author of which calls upon Caesar to restore
government and reorganize the state, for if Rome perish
the whole world must perish with her.

(5) Industrial—To another censiderable class mon-
archy must have been welcome—the industrial and
middle class who were striving fer cempetence and were
engaged in trade and commerce. Civil wars and the
strife of parties must have greatly hindered their activity.
They cast their lot neither with the optimates nor with
the idle commonalty. They desired only a stable con-
dition of government under which they could uninter-
ruptedly carry on their trades.

(6) Afilitary.— Military conditions favored supreme

ower. Not only had the lengthened commands famil-
jarized the general with his legions and given him time
to seduce the soldiery to his own cause, but the soldiery
too had been petted and spoiled like the speen-fed
populace. The old republican safeguards against am-
bition had heen removed. The ranks of the armies had
also heen swollen with large numbers of provincials and
non-Romans who had no special sentiment about repub-
lican forms. We have seen the military power growing
mere and more prominent. The only way of averting
a military despetism supported and prompted by the
soldiers was to sct up a monarchy, holding all the military,
legislative and administrative functions of the state in
due proportion. This was superior to a merely nominal
republic always cringing under fear of military leaders.

(7) Imperial interests —Lastly, the aggression and
conquests of the republic had brought about a state of
affairs demanding an empire. The East and the West
had been subdued; many provinces and heterogeneous
populations were living under the Rom eagle. These
provinces could not permanently he plundered and
oppressed as under the republican senate. The jus cinile
ap Rome must learn also the jus naturale and jus gen-
tium. An exclusive selfish senatorial clique was inca-
pable of daing justice to the conquered eoples. One
supreme ruler over all classes raised above personal


Roman Empire


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2600


ambition could best meet their grievances. The senate
had ruled with a red of iron; the provinces could not
possibly be worse under any form of government. Be-
sides, monarchy was more congenial to the provincials
than a republic which they could not comprehend.

(8) Influence of Orient.—The Orientals had long been
used to living under imperial and absolute forms of
government and would welcome such a form among their
new conquerors. Besides, residence in the Orient had
affected Rom military leaders with the thirst after
absolute power. And no other form was possible when
the old city-state system broke down, and as yet federal
government had uot heen dreamed of. Another con-
sideration: the vast and dissimilar masses of population
living within the Rom dominions could more easily be
held together under a king or emperor than hy a series
of ever-changing administrations, just as the Austro-
Hungarian and the British empires are prohably held
together hetter under the present monarchies than would
he possible under a republican system. This survey
may make clear the permanent interest in Rom history
for all students of human history. The Rom empire
was established indeed in the fulness of the times for its
citizens and for Christianity.


II. Preparation of the Roman Empire for Chris-
tianity— About the middle of the reign of Augustus
a Jewish child was born who was destined to rule
an empire more extensive and lasting than that of
the Caesars. It is a striking fact that almost
synchronous with the planting of the Rom empire
Christianity appeared in the world. Although on
a superficial glance the Rom empire may seem the
greatest enemy of early Christianity, and at times
a bitter persecutor, yet it was in many ways the
grandest preparation and in some ways the best
ally of Christianity. It ushered in politically the
fulness of the times. The Caesars—whatever they
may have been or done—prepared the way of the
Lord. A brief account must here be given of some
of the services which the Rom empire rendered to
humanity and esp. to the kingdom of God.

The first universal blessing conferred by the
empire was the famous pax Romana (“Rom peace’).

The world had not been at peace since


1. Pax the days of Alexander the Great. The
Romana quarrels of the Diadochi, and the ag-
and Unifi- gression of the Rom republic had kept
cation of the nations in a state of constant tur-
the World moil. A universal peace was_ first


established with the beginning of the
reign of Augustus and the closing of the temple of
Janus. Ju all the countries round the Mediter-
ranean and from distant Britain to the Euphrates
the world was at rest. Rome had made an end of
her own civil wars and had put a stop to wars
among the nations. Though her wars were often
iniquitous and unjustifiable, and she conquered like
a barbarian, she ruled her conquests like a humane
statesman. The quarrels of the Diadochi which
caused so much turmoil in the East were ended, the
territory of the Lagids, Attalids, Seleucids and
Antigonids having passed under the sway of Rome.
The empire united Greeks, Romans and Jews all
under one government. Rome thus blended the
nations and prepared them for Christianity. Now
for the first time we may speak of the world as uni-
versal humanity, the orbis terrarum, 7 oixoupévy, hé
oikouméné (Lk 2 1), the genus humanum. These
terms represented humanity as living under a uni-
form system of government. All were members of
one earthly state; the Rom empire was their com-
munis omnium patria.

This state of affairs contributed largely to the
spread of cosmopolitanism which had set in with
the Macedonian conqueror. Under the
Rom empire all national barriers were
removed; the great cities—Rome, Alex-
andria, Antioch, etc—became mecting-
places of all races and languages. The Romans
were everywhere carrying their laws and civilization;
Greeks settled in thousands at all important centers
as professors, merchants, physicians, or acrobats;


2. Cosmo-
politanism


Orientals were to be found in large numbers with
their gods and mysteries in Rome, “the epttome of
the world.” In the Rom armies soldiers from all
quarters of the empire became companions. And
many thousands of slaves of fine education and
high culture contributed much to cosmopolitanism.
Being in many cases far superior in culture to their
masters, they became their teachers. And in every
city of importance, East or West, large bodies of
the Jewish Diaspora were settled.

This cosmopolitanism gave great impetus to a
corresponding eclecticism of thought. Nothing

could have been more favorable to
8. Eclec- Christianity than this intermixture of
ticism all races and mutual exchange of
thought. Each people discovered

how much it had in common with its neighbors.
From the days of the Diadochi, Stoicism had been
preaching the gospel of a civic and ethical brother-
hood of humanity. In the fusion of different philo-
sophic systems the emphasis had shifted from the
city-state or political or national to the moral and
human point of view. All men were thus reduced
to equality before the One; only virtue and vice
were the differentiating factors. Men were akin
with the Divine—at least_the wise and good—so
that one poet could say, ‘We are His offspring.”

Stoicism did a noble service in preparation for Chris-
tianity by preaching universalism along the path of indi-
vidualism. It also furnished comfort and strength to
countless thousands of weary human lives and min-
istered spiritual support and calm resignation at many
a heathen deathbed. It may be declared to be the first
system of religious thought—for it was a religion more
than a philosophy—which made a serious study of the
diseases of the human soul. We know of course its
weakness and imperfections, that it was an aristocratic
creed appealing ouly to the elect of mortals, that it had
little message for the fallen and lower classes, that it was
cold and stern, that it lacked—as Seneca felt—the in-
spiration of an ideal life. But with all its failures it
proved a worthy pedagogue to a religion which brought
a larger message than that of Greece. It afforded the
spiritual and moral counterpart to the larger human so-
ciety of which the Rom empire was the political and
visible symhol. Hitherto a good citizen had been a
good man. Now a good man is a good citizen, and that
not of a narrow city-state, but of the world. Stoicism
also proved the interpreter and mouthpiece to the Rom
empire of the higher moral and spiritual qualities of Gr
civilization; it diffused the best convictions of Greece
about God and man, selecting those elements that were
universal and of lasting human value (see Sroics).


The mind of the Rom empire was further pre-
pared for Christianity by the Jewish Diaspora.
Greeks learned from Jews and Jews from Greeks
and the Romans from both. The unification
effected by Rom Law and administration greatly
aidedthe Diaspora. Jewish settlements became still
more numerous and powerful both in the East and
West. Those Jews bringing from the homeland
the spiritual monotheism of their race combined it
with Gr philosophy which had been setting steadily
for monotheism. With the Jews the exclusively
national element was subordinated to the more
human and universal, the ceremonial to the reli-
gious. They even adopted the world-language of
that day—Greek—and had their sacred Scriptures
tr? into this language in which they carried on an
active proselytism. The Rom spirit was at first
essentially narrow and exclusive. But even the
Romans soon fell beneath the spell of this cos-
mopolitanism and eclecticism. As their conquests
increased, their mind was correspondingly widened.
They adopted the policy of Alexander—sparing the
gods of the conquered and admitting them into the
responsibility of guarding Rome; they assimilated
them with their own Pantheon or identified them
with Rom gods. In this way naturally the religious
ideas of conquered races more highly civilized than
the conquerors laid hold on Rom minds (see Dis-
PERSION).


2601


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Roman Empire


_ Another inestimable service rendered to human-
ity and Christianity was the protection which the
Rom power afforded the Gr civilization.


4. Protec- We must remember that the Romans
tion for were at first only conquering barba-
Greek rians who had little respect for culture,
Culture but idealized power. Already they


f _.., had wiped out two ancient and supe-
rior civilizations—that of Carthage without leaving
a trace, and that of Etruria, traces of which have
been discovered in modern times. It is hard to
conceive what a scourge Rome would have proved
to the world had she not fallen under the influence
of the superior culture and philosophy of Greece.
Had the Rom Mars not been educated by Pallas
Athene the Romans would have proved Vandals
and Tartars in blotting out civilization and arrest-
ing human progress. The Greeks, on the other
hand, could conquer more by their preéminence in
everything that pertains to the intellectual life of
man than they could hold by the sword. A prac-
tical and political power was needed to protect Gr
speculation. But the Romans after causing much
devastation were gradually educated and civilized
and have contributed to the uplifting and enlight-
enment of subsequent civilizations by both preserv-
ing and opening to the world the spiritual qualities
of Greece. The kinship of man with the Divine,
learned from Socrates and Plato, went forth on its
wide evangel. This Gr civilization, philosophy and
theology trained many of the great theologians and
leaders of the Christian church, so that Clement of
Alexandria said that Gr philosophy and Jewish
law had proved schoolmasters to bring the world to
Christ. Paul, who prevented Christianity from
remaming a Jewish sect and proclaimed its uni-
versalism, learned much from Gr—esp. from Stoic—
thought. It is also significant that the early Chris-
tian missionaries apparently went only where the
Gr language was known, which was the case in all
centers of Rom administration.

The state of the Rom empire linguistically was
in the highest degree favorable to the spread of
Christianity. The Gr republics by

5. Linguis- their enterprise, superior genius and

tically commercial abilities extended their
dialects over the Aegean Islands, the
coasts of Asia Minor, Sicily and Magna Graecia.

The preéminence of Attic culture and literature
favored by the short-lived Athenian empire raised
this dialect to a standard among the Gr peoples.
But the other dialects long persisted. Out of this
babel of Gr dialects there finally arose a normal
koiné or “common language.”’ By the conquests of
Alexander and the Hellenistic sympathies of the
Diadochi this common Gr language became the
lingua franca of antiquity. Gr was known in North-
ern India, at the Parthian court, and on the distant
shores of the Euxine (Black Sea). The native land
of the gospel was surrounded on all sides by Gr
civilization. Gr culture and language penetrated
into the midst of the obstinate home-keeping Pales-
tinian Jews. Though Gr was not the mother-
tongue of Our Lord, He understood Gr and appar-
ently could speak it when occasion required—Aram.
being the language of His heart and of His public
teachings. The history of the Maccabean struggle
affords ample evidence of the extent to which Gr
culture, and with it the Gr language, were familiar
to the Jews. There were in later days Hellenistic
bodies of devout Jews in Jerus itself. Gr was recog-
nized by the Jews as the universal language: the
inscription on the wall of the outer temple court
forbidding Gentiles under pain of death to enter
was in Gr. The koiné became the language even
of religion—where a foreign tongue is least likely
to be used—of the large Jewish Diaspora. They


perceived the advantages of Gr as the language of
commerce—the Jews’ occupation—of culture and
of proselytizing. They threw open their sacred
Scriptures in the LXX and other VSS to the Gr-
Rom world, adapting the tr in many respects to the
requirements of Gr readers. ‘The Bible whose God
was Yahweh was the Bible of one people: the Bible
whose God was xdépios [kiirios, “Lord’] was the
Bible of humanity.” When the Romans came upon
the scene, they found this language so widely known
and so deeply rooted they could not hope to sup-
plant it. Indeed they did not try—except in
Sicily and Magna Graecia—to suppress Gr, but
rather gladly accepted it as the one common means
of intercourse among the peoples of their eastern
dominions (sce LANGUAGE oF THE NT).

Though Latin was of course the official language
of the conquerors, the decrees of governors gener-
ally appeared with a Gr tr, so that they might be
‘“inderstanded of the people,” and Gr overcame
Lat, as English drove out the French of the Norman
invaders. Lat poets and historians more than once
complained that Graecia capta ferum victorem cepit
(“conquered Greece vanquished its stern con-
queror”). With the spread of Lat there were two
world-languages side by side for the whole Rom
empire, but Gr was prevailingly the language of the
eastern half of the Rom empire which was the first
soil for Christian churches and the first half of the
empire to be Christianized. Later when Chris-
tianity was able to extend her activity to the West,
she found Lat ready as the common means of inter-
course. That Rome respected Gr is greatly to her
credit and much to the advantage of Christianity.
For Christianity, when it began to aim at univer-
salism, dropped its native Aramaic. The gospel in
order to become a world-evangel was tr¢ into Gr.
The early Christian missionaries did not learn the
languages or patois of the Rom empire, but con-
fined themselves to centers of Gr culture. Paul
wrote in Gr to the church in Rome itself, of which
Gr was the language. And while Christianity was
spreading through the Gr East under the unifica-
tion of Rom administration, the Romans were
Romanizing and leveling the West for Lat Chris-
tianity (see Latin). In the West it may be noted
that the first foothold of the Christian religion was
in Gr—witness the church in Gaul.

In material ways too Rome opened the way for
Christianity by building the great highways for the


gospel. The great system of roads
6. Mate- that knit the then civilized world
rially together served not only the legions


and the imperial escorts, but were of
equal service to the early missionaries, and when
churches began to spring up over the empire, these
roads greatly facilitated that church organization
and brotherhood which strengthened the church
to overcome the empire. With the dawn of the
pax Romana all these roads became alive once more
with a galaxy of caravans and traders. Commerce
revived and was carricd on under circumstances
more favorable than any that obtained till the past
century. Men exchanged not only material things,
but also spiritual things. Many of these early
traders and artisans were Christians, and while they
bought and sold the things that perish, they did
not lose an opportunity of spreading the gospel.
For an empire which emhraced the Mediterranean
shores, the sca was an important means of inter-
communication; and the Mediterranean routes
were safer for commerce and travel at that period
than during any previous one. Pompey the Great
had driven the pirates off the sca, and with the fall
of Sextus Pompey no hostile maritime forces re-
mained. The ships which plied in countless num-
bers from point to point of this great inland sea


Roman Empire


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2602


offered splendid advantages and opportunity Pe eter: must accept with faith what these


early Christian missionary enthusiasm.

The large measure of freedom permitted by Rom
authorities to the religions of all nations greatly
favored the growth of infant Chris-
tianity. The Rom empire was never
in principle a persecntor with a per-
manent court of inquisition. Strange
cults from the East and Egypt flourished in the
capital, and except when they became a danger to
public morality or to the peace of society they were
allowed to spread unchecked under the eyes of the
police. See below on non-Rom religions.

Further, the Rom empire afforded Christianity a
material and outward symbol for its spiritual am-


7. Toler-
ance


bition. It enlarged the vision of the
8. Pattern church. Only a citizen (Panl) of such
for a Uni- a world-empire conld dream of a reli-
versal gion for all humanity. If the Rom
Church sword could so conqner and unify the


orbis terrarum, the militant church
should be provoked to attempt nothing less in the
religious sphere. It also furnished many a sug-
gestion to the early organizers of the new com-
munity, until the Christian church became the
spiritual counterpart of the Rom empire. The
Christians appropriated many a weapon from the
arsenal of the enemy and learned from them ag-
gressiveness, the value of thorough organization and
of military methods.
Rom law in its origins was characterized by the nar-


rowest exclusiveness, and the first formal Rom code was
on Gr patterns, yet the Romans here as in


i an so many other respects improved upon
9 Rom what they had borrowed and became mas-
Jurispru- ters of jurisprudence in the antique world.
dence As their empire and conceptions expanded,


they remodeled their laws to embrace all
their subjects. One of the greatest boons conferred by
Rome upon the antique world was a uniform system of
good laws—the source of much of our European juris-
prudence. The Rom law played an equally important
Téle with the Jewish in molding and disciplining for
Christianity. It taught men to obey and to respect
authority, and proved an effective leveling and_civilizing
power in the empire. The universal law of Rome was
the pedagogue for the universal law of the gospel. See
Roman Law.


The Romans could offer their subjects good laws,
uniform government and military protection, but
not a satisfactory religion. A univer-


10. Nega- sal empire called for a universal re-
tive Prep- _ligion, which Christianity alone could
aration offer. Finally, not only by what Rome


had accomplished but by what she
proved incapable of accomplishing, the way of the
Lord was made ready and a people prepared for His
coming. It was a terrible crisis in the civilization
and religion of antiquity. The old national reli-
gions and systems of belief had proved unable to
soothe the increasing imperious moral and spiritual
demands of man’s nature. A moral bankruptcy
was immanent. The old Rom religion of abstract
virtues had gone down iu formalism; it was too
cold for human hearts. Mau could no longer find
the field of his moral activity in the religion of the
state; he was no longer merely an atom in society
performing religious rites, not for his own soul, but
for the good of the commonwealth. Personality
had been slowly emerging, and the new schools of
philosophy called man away from the state to seek
peace with God in the solitude of his own soul first
of all. But even the best of these schools found the
crying need of a positive, not a negative religion,
the need for a perfect ideal life as a dynamic over
ordinary human lives. Thus was felt an imperious
demand for a new revelation, for a fresh vision or
knowledge of God. In earlier days men had be-
lieved that God had revealed Himself to primitive
wise men or heroes of their race, and that subsequent


earlier seers, who stood nearer God, as Cicero said,
had been pleased to teach of the Divine. Butsoon
this stock of knowledge became exhausted. Plato,
after soaring to the highest point of poetic and phil-
osophic thought about the Divine, admitted the
need of a demon or superman to tell us the secrets
of eternity. With the early Rom empire began a
period of tremendous religious unrest. Men tried
philosophy, magic, astrology, foreign rites, to find a
sure place of rest. This accounts for the rapid and
extensive diffusion of oriental mysteries which
promised to the initiated communion with God here,
a “better hope” in death, and satisfied the craving
for immortality beyond time. These were the more
serious souls who would gladly accept the conso-
lations of Jesus. Others, losing all faith in any form
of religion, gave themselves up to blank despair
and accepted Epicureanism with its gospel of anni-
hilation and its carpe diem morals. This system
had a terrible fascination for those who had lost
themselves; it is presented in its most attractive
form in the verses of Lucretius—the Omar Khay-
yim of Lat literature. Others again, unable to
find God, surrendered themselves to cheerless
skepticism. ‘The sore need of the new gospel of life
and immortality will be borne in upon the mind of
those who read the Gr and Rom sepulchral inscrip-
tions. And even Seneca, who was almost a Chris-
tian in some respects, speaks of immortality as a
“beautiful dream” (bellum somnium), though tribu-
lation later gave a clearer vision of the “city of God.”
Servius Sulpicius, writing to Cicero a letter of con-
solation on the death of his much-missed Tullia,
had only a sad “‘if”’ to offer about the future (Cic.
Fam, iv.5). Nowhere does the unbelief and pes-
simism of pre-Christian days among the higher
classes strike one more forcibly than in the famous
discussion recorded by Sallust (Bel. Cat. lif) as
to the punishment of the Catilinarian conspirators.
Caesar, who held the Rom high-priesthood and the
highest authority on the religion of the state, pro-
poses life imprisonment, as death would only bring
annihilation and rest to these villains—no hereafter,
no reward or punishment (eam cuncta mortalium
mala dissolvere; ultra neque curae neque gaudio
locum esse). Cato next speaks—the most religious
man of his generation—in terms which cast no
rebuke upon Caesar’s Epicureanism and material-
ism (ib, 52). Cicero (In Cat. iv.4) is content to
leave immortality an open question. The phi-
losophers of Athens mocked Paul on Mars’ Hill
when he spoke of a resurrection. Snch was the
attitude of the educated classes of the Gr-Rom
world at the dawn of Christianity, though it cannot
be denied that there was also a strong desire for
continued existence. The other classes were either
perfunctorily performing the rites of a dead national
religion or were seeking, some, excitement or aesthetic
worship or even scope for their baser passions, some,
peace and promise for the future, in the eastern
mysteries. The distinction between moral and
physical evil was coming to the surface, and hence
a consciousuess of sin. Religion and ethics had not
yet been united. ‘The throne of the human mind”
was declared vacant, and Christianity was at hand
as the best claimant. In fact, the Gr-Rom mind
pe been expanding to receive the pure teachings of
esus.

Ill, Attitude of the Roman Empire to Religions,—
The history of Rom religion reveals a continuous
penetration of Italian, Etruscan, Gr,


1. Roman Egyp and oriental worship and rites,
or State until the old Rom religion became
Religion almost unrecognizable, and even the


_ antiquarian learning of a Varro could
scarcely discover the original meaning or use of


OLD JISR EL-MUJAMIA, ROMAN BRIDGE ACROSS UPPER JORDAN


2603


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Roman Empire


many Rom deities. The Rom elements or modes of
worship progressively retreated until they and the
foreign rites with which they were overlaid gave
way before the might of Christianity. As Rome
expanded, her religious demands increased. During
the regal period Rom religion was that of a simple
agricultural community. In the period between the
Regifugium and theSecond Punic War Rom religion
became more complicated and the Rom Pantheon
was largely increased by importations from Etruria,
Latium and Magna Graecia. The mysterious
religion of Etruria first impressed the Rom mind,
and from this quarter probably came the Trinity
of the Capitol (Jupiter, Juno, Minerva) previously
introduced into Etruria from Gr sources, thus show-
ing that the Romans were not the first in Italy to
be influenced by the religion of Greece. New modes
of worship, non-Rom in spirit, also came in from the
Etruscans and foreign elements of Gr mythology.
Latium also made its contribution, the worship of
Diana coming from Aricia and also a Lat Jupiter.
Two Lat cults penetrated even within the Rom
pomoertum—that_ of Hercules and Castor, with
deities of Gr origin. The Gr settlements in South-
ern Italy (Magna Graecia) were generous in their
contributions and opened the way for the later
invasion of Gr deities. The Sibylline Books were
early imported from Cumae as sacred scriptures for
the Romans. In 493 BC during a famine a temple
was built to the Gr trinity Demeter, Dionysus, and
Persephone, under the Lat names of Ceres, Liber,
and Libera—the beginning of distrust in the primi-
tive Rom numina and of that practice, so oft re-
peated in Rom history, of introducing new and
foreign gods at periods of great distress. In 433
Apollo came from the same region. Mercury and
Asclepius followed in 293 BC, and in 249 BC Dis
and Proserpma were brought from Tarentum.
Other non-Rom modes of approach to deity were
introduced. Rome had been in this period very
broad-minded in her policy of meeting the growing
religious needs of her community, but she had not
so far gone beyond Italy. A taste had also devel-
oped for dramatic and more aesthetic forms of
worship. The period of the Second Punic War was
a crisis in Rom religious life, and the faith of the
Romans waned before growing unbelief. Both the
educated classes and the populace abandoned the
old Rom religion, the former sank into skepticism,
the latter into superstition; the former put phi-
losophy in the place of religion, the latter the more
sensuous cults of the Orient. The Romans went
abroad again to borrow deities—this time to Greece,
Asia and Egypt. Gr deities were introduced whole-
sale, and readily assimilated to or identified with
Rom deities (see Rome, III, 1). In 191 BC Hebe
entered as Juventas, in 179 Artemis as Diana, in
138 Ares as Mars. But the home of religion—
the Orient—proved more helpful. In 204 BC
Cybele was introduced from Pessinus to Rome,
known also as the Great Mother (magna mater)—
a fatal and final blow to old Rom religion and an
impetus to the wilder and more orgiastic cults and
mysterious glamor which captivated the common
mind, Bacchus with his gross immorality soon
followed. Sulla introduced M4 from Phrygia as the
counterpart of the Rom Bellona, and Egypt gave
Isis. In the wars of Pompey against the pirates
Mithra was brought to Rome—the greatest rival
of Christianity. Religion now began to pass into
the hands of politicians and at the close of the repub-
lic was almost entirely in their hands. Worship
degenerated into formalism, and formalism eul-
minated in disuse. Under the empire philosophic
systems continued still more to replace religion,
and oriental rites spread apace. The religious re-
vival of Augustus was an effort to breathe life into


the dry bones. His plan was only partly religious
and partly political—to cstablish an imperial and
popular religion of which he was the head and
centering round his person. He discovered the
necessity of an imperial religion. 1n the East kings
had long before been regarded as divine by their
subjects. Alexander the Great, like a wise politi-
cian, intended to use this as one bond of union for
his wide dominions. The same habit extended
among the Diadochian kings, esp. m Egypt and
Syria. When Angustus had brought peace to the
world, the Orient was ready to hail him as a god.
Out of this was evolved the cult of the reigning
empcror and of Roma personified. This worship
gave religious unity to the empire, while at the same
time magnifying the emperor. But the effort was in
vain: theold Rom religion was dead, and the spiritual.
needs of the empire continued to be met more and
more by philosophy and the mysteries which prom-
ised immortality. The cult of the Genius of the
empcror soon lost all reality. Vespasian himself
on his deathbed jested at the idea of his becoming
a god. The emperor-worship declined steadily, and
in the 3d and 4th cents. oriental worships were
supreme. The religion of the Rom empire soon
became of that cosmopolitan and eclectic type so

characteristic of the new era.
The non-Rom religions were divided into reli-
giones licitae (‘‘licensed worships’’) and religiones
illicitae (“unlicensed”). The Romans


2. Reli- at different times, on account of earth-
giones li- quakes, pestilences, famine or military
citae and disasters, introduced non-Rom cults
religiones as means of appeasing the numina.
illicitae This generally meant that the cults in


question could be performed with
impunity by their foreign adherents. It legalized
the collegia necessary for these worships from which
Rom citizens were by law excluded. But, generally
speaking, any people settling at Rome was permitted
the liberty of its own native worship in so far as
the exercise of it did not interfere with the peace of
the state or corrupt the morals of society. On one
occasion (186 BC), by a decree of the senate, a
severe inquisition was instituted against the Baccha-
nalian rites which had caused flagrant immorality
among the adherents. But Rome was never a sys-
tematic persecutor. These foreign rites and super-
stitions, though often forbidden and their professed
adherents driven from the city, always returned
stronger than ever. Rom citizens soon discovered
the fascination of oriental and Gr mysteries, and
devoted themselves to foreign gods while maintain-
ing the necessary formalism toward the religion of
the state. Very often too Rom citizens would be
presidents of these religious brotherhoods. It should
not be forgotten that the original moral elements
had fallen out of Rom religion, and that it had be-
come simply a political and military religion for
the welfare of the state, not for the salvation of the
individual. The individual must conform to cer-
tain prescribed rites in order to avert. calamity from
the state. This done, the state demanded no more,
and left him a large measure of freedom in seeking
excitement or aesthetic pleasure in the warm and
more social foreign mysteries. Thus, while the
Romans retained the distinction of religiones licttae
and illicitae, they seldom used severity against the
latter. Many unlicensed cults were never dis-
turbed. In fact, the very idea of empire rendered
toleration of non-Rom religions a necessity. Prac-
tically, though not theoretically, the empire aban-
doned the idea of religiones illicitae, while it retained
it upon the statute-book to use in case of such an
emergency as the Christian religion involved. Not
only the government was tolerant, but the differ-
ent varieties of religions were tolerant and on good


Roman Empire THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2604


terms with each other. The same man might be
initiated into the mysteries of half a dozen divinities.
The same man might even be priest of two or more
gods. Some had not the slightest objection to wor-
shipping Christ along with Mithra, Isis and Adonis.
Men were growing conscious of the oneness of the
Divine, and credited their neighbors with worship-
ping the One Unknown under different names and
forms. Hadrian is said to have meditated the
erection of temples throughout the empire to the
Unknown God.

(1) Judaism a “religia licita”’—An interesting
and, for the history of Christianity, important ex-
ample of a religio licita is Judaism. No more ex-
clusive and obstinate people could have been found
upon whom to bestow the favor. Yet from the
days of Julius Caesar the imperial policy toward the
Jew and his religion was uniformly favorable, with
the brief exception of the mad attempt of Gaius.
The government often protected them against the
hatred of the populace. Up to 70 AD they were
allowed freely to send their yearly contribution to
the temple; they were even allowed self-governing
privileges and legislative powers among themselves,
and thus formed an exclusive community in the
midst of Rom society. Even the disastrous war
of 68-70 AD and the fall of Jerus did not bring
persecntion upon the Jew, though most of these
self-governing and self-legislating powers were with-
drawn and the Jews were compelled to pay a poll-
tax to the temple of the Capitoline Jupiter. Still
their religion remained licensed, tolerated, protected.
They were excused from duties impossible for their
religion, such as military service. This tolerance
of the Jewish religion was of incalculable importance
to infant Christianity which at first professed to be
no more than a reformed and expanded Judaism.

(2) Why Christianity alone was prascribed.—The
question next arises: If such was the universally
mild and tolerant policy of the empire to find room
for all gods and cults, and to respect the beliefs of
all the subject peoples, how comes the anomaly that
Christianity alone was proscribed and persecuted?
Christianity was indeed a religio illicita, not having
been accepted by the government as a religia licita,
like Judaism. But this is no answer. There were
other unlicensed religions which grew apace in the
empire. Neither was it simply because Christian-
ity was aggressive and given to proselytism and
dared to appear even in the imperial household:
Mithraism and Isism were militant and aggressive,
and yet were tolerated. Nor was it simply because
of popular hatred, for the Christian was not hated
above the Jew. Other reasons must explain the
anomaly.

(3) Two empires: cause af conflict—The fact
was that two empires were born about the same
time so like and yet so unlike as to render a conflict
and struggle to the death inevitable. The Chris-
tians were uncquivocal in asserting that the society
for which they were waiting and laboring was a
“kingdom.”

(a) Confusion of spiritual and temporal: They
thought not merely in national or racial but in
ecumenical terms. The Romans could not under-
stand a kingdom of God upon earth, but confused
Christian ambition with political. It was soon
discovered that Christianity came not to save but
to destroy and disintegrate the empire. Early
Christian enthusiasm made the term “kingdom”
very provoking to pagan patriotism, for many,
looking for the Parousia of their Lord, were them-
selves misled into thinking of the new socicty as a
kingdom soon to be set up upon the earth with
Christ as king. Gradually, of course, Christians
became enlightened upon this point, but the harm
had been done. Both the Rom empire and Chris-


tianity were aiming at a social organization to em-
brace the genus humanum. But though these two
empires were so alike in several points and the one
had done so much to prepare the way for the other,
yet the contrast was too great to allow conciliation.
Christianity would not lose the atom in the mass;
it aimed at universalism along the path of indi-
vidualism—giving new value to human personality.

(6) Unique claims of Christianity: It seemed also
to provoke Rom pride by its absurd claims. It
preached that the world was to be destroyed by fire
to make way for new heavens and a new earth, that
the Eternal City (Rome) was doomed to fall, that
a king would come from heaven whom Christians
were to obey, that amid the coming desolations the
Christians should remain tranquil.

(ce) Novelty of Christianity: Again after Chris-
tianity came from underneath the aegis of Judaism,
it must have taken the government somewhat by
surprise as a new and uolicensed religion which had
grown strong under a misnomer. It was the newest
and latest religion of the empire; it came suddenly,
as it were, upon the stage with no past. It was not
apparent to the Rom mind that Ehrstanity had
been spreading for a generation under the tolerance
granted to Judaism (sub wmbracula licitae Judaeo-
rum religionis: Tert.), the latter of which was
“protected by its antiquity,’ as Tacitus said. The
Romans were of a conservative nature and disliked
innovations. The greatest statesman of the Augus-
tan era, Maecenas, advised the emperor to extend
no tolerance to new religions as subversive of mon-
archy (Dio Cassius lii.36). A new faith appearing
suddenly with a large clientéle might be dangerous
to the public peace (multituda ingens: Tac. Ann.
xv.44; modd rdfG0s: Clem. Rom.; Cor 1 6).


(d) Intolerance and exclusiveness of Christian religion
and society: In one marked way Christians contravened
the tolerant eclective spirit of the empire—the intoler-
ance and ahsoluteness of their religion and the exclusive-
ness of their society. All other religions of the empire
admitted compromise and eclecticism, were willing to
dwell rather on the points of contact with their neighbors
than on the contrast. But Christianity admitted no
compromise, was intolerant to all other systems. It
must be admitted that in this way it was rather unfair
to other cults which offered comfort and spiritual support
te thousands of the human race before the dawn of
Christianity. But we shall not blame, when we recog-
nize that for its own life and mission it was necessary
to show itself at first intolerant. Many heathen would
glsdly accept Christ along with Mithra and Isis and

erapis. But Christianity demanded complete sepa-
ration. The Jesus cult could tolerate no rival: it claimed
to be absolute, and worshippers of Jesus must be separate
from the world. The Christian church was absolute in
its demands; would not rank with, but above, all wor-
ships. This spirit was of course at enmity with that of
the day which enabled rival cults to co-exist with the
greatest indifference. Add to this the exclusive state of
Christian society. No picus heathen whe had purified
his soul by asceticism and the sacraments of antiquity
could be admitted into membership unless he renounced
things dear to him and of some spiritual value. In
every detail of public life this exclusive spirit made itself
felt. Christians met at night and held secret assemblies
in which they were reputed to perpoirate the most
scandalous crimes. Thyestean banquets, Oedipean
incest, child murder, were among the charges provoked
by their exclusiveness.

(e) Obstinatio: Add to this also the sullen obstinacy
with which Christians mct the demands of imperial
power—a feature very offensive to Rom _ governors.
Their religion would he left, them undisturhed if they
would only render formal obedience to the religion of the
state. Rom clemency and respect for law were bafficd
before Christian obstinacy. The martyr’s courage ap-
peated as sheer fanaticism. The pious Aurelius refers

ut once to Christianity, and in the words yan maparafts,
psilé pardtaxis, ‘‘sheer chstinacy,” and Aristidcs appar-
ently refers to Christianity as avtéadeca, authddetia,
‘‘stuhbornness.’’ See Persecurions, I8.


(f) Aggressiveness against pagan faith: But the
Christians were not content with an uncompromising
withdrawal from the practices of heathen worship:
they also actively assailed the pagan cultus. To
the Christians they became doctrines of demons.


2605


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Roman Empire


The imperial cult and worship of the Genius of the
emperor were very unholy in their sight. Hence
they fell under the charges of disloyalty to the em-
peror and might be proved guilty of majestas. They
held in contempt the doctrine that the greatness of
Rome was due to her reverence for the gods; the
Christians were atheists from the pagan point of
view. And as religion was a political concern for
the welfare of the state, athcism was likely to call
poe the wrath of divinity to the subversion of the
state.

(g) Christianos ad leones: Very soon when dis-
asters began to fall thickly upon the Rom empire,
the blame was laid upon the Christians. In early
days Rome had often sought to appease the gods by


Coliseum.


introducing external cults; at other times oriental
cults were expelled in the interests of public morality.
Now in times of disaster Christians became the scape-
goats. If famine, drought, pestilence, earthquake
or any other public calamity threatened, the cry
was raised ‘‘the Christians to the lions’ (see NERO;
Persecutions, 12). This view of Christianity
as subversive of the empire survived the fall of
Rome before Alaric. The heathen forgot—as the
apologists showed—that Rome had been visited
by the greatest calamities before the Christian era
and that the Christians were the most self-sacrificing
in periods of public distress, lending succor to pagan
and Christian alike.

(h) Odium generis humani: All prejudices against
Christianity were summed up in odium generis
humani, “‘hatred for the human race” or society,
which was reciprocated by “hatred of the human
race toward them.’”’ The Christians were bitterly
hated, not only by the populace, but by the upper
educated classes. Most of the early adherents
belonged to the slave, freedman and artisan classes,
“not many wise, not many noble.’ Few were
Rom citizens. We have mentioned the crimes
which popular prejudice attributed to this hated
sect. They were in mockery styled Christiant by
the Antiochians (a name which they at first re-
sented), and Nazarenes by the Jews. No nicknames
were too vile to attach to them— Asinarit (the sect
that worshipped the ass’s head), Sarmentict: or
Semazii. Rom writers cannot find epithets strong
enough. Tacitus reckons the Christian faith
among the “atrocious and abominable things”
(atrocia aut pudenda) which flooded Rome, and
further designates it superstitio exitiabilis (“‘bane-
ful superstition,” Ann. xv.44), Suetonius (Ner. 16)
as novel and malefic (novae ac maleficae), and the
gentle Pliny (Zp. 97) as vile and indecent (prava
immodica). Well might Justus say the Christians
were “hated and reviled by the whole human race.”
This opprobrium was accentuated by the attacks
of philosophy upon Christianity. When the atten-


tion of philosophers was drawn to the new religion,
it was only to scorn it. This attitude of heathen
philosophy is best understood in reading Celsus
and the Christian apologists.

(4) The Roman empire not the only disturbing
jfactor—Philosophy long maintained its aloofness
from the religion of a crucified Galilean: the ‘‘wise”’
were the last to enter the kingdom of God. When
later Christianity had established itself as a perma-
nent force in human thought, philosophy deigned
to consider its claims. But it was too late; the
new faith was already on the offensive. Philosophy
discovered its own weakness and began to reform
itself by aiming at being both a philosophy and a
religion. This is particularly the case in neo-
Platonism (in Plotinus) in which reason breaks
down before revelation and mysticism. Another
force disturbing the peace of the Christian church
was the enemy within the fold. Large numbers of
heathen had entered the ecclesia bringing with them
their oriental or Gr ideas, just as Jewish Christians
brought their Judaism with them. This led to
grave heresies, each system of thought distorting
in its own way the orthodox faith. Later another
ally joined the forces against Christianity—reformed
paganism Jed by an injured priesthood. At first
the cause of Christianity was greatly aided by the
fact that there was no exclusive and jealous priest-
hood at the head of the Gr-Rom religion, as in the
Jewish and oriental religions. There was thus no
dogma and no class interested in maintaining a
dogma. Religious persecution is invariably insti-
tuted by the priesthood, but in the Rom world it
was not till late in the day when the temples and
sacrifices were falling into desuetude that we find
a priesthood as a body in opposition. Thus the
Rom imperial power stood not alone in antagonism
to Christianity, but was abetted and often pro-
voked to action by (a) popular hate, (6) philosophy,
(c) pagan priesthood, (d) heresies within the church.

IV, Relations between the Roman Empire and
Christianity.—We have here to explain how the
attitude of the Rom empire, at first friendly or in-
different, developed into one of fierce conflict, the
different stages in the policy—if we can speak of
any uniform policy—of the Rom government
toward Christianity, the charges or mode of pro-
cedure on which Christians were condemned, and
when and how the profession of Christianity
(nomen tpsum) became a crime. We shall see the
Rom empire progressively weakening and Chris-
tianity gaining ground. For the sake of clearness
we shall divide the Rom empire into six periods,
the first from the commencement of the Christian
era till the last of the Julio-Claudian dynasty.

At first the presence of the Christian faith was
unknown to Rom authorities. It appeared first

merely as a reformed dad more spirit-
ual Judaism; its earliest preachers
and adherents alike never dreamed of
Chris-


1. Begin-
ning of
Christianity severing from the synagogue.


till Death tians were only another of the Jewish
of Nero, sects to which a Jew might belong
68 AD while adhering to Mosaism and Juda-


ism. But soon this friendly relation
became strained on account of the expanding views
of some of the Christian preachers, and from the
introduction of gentile proselytes. The first per-
secutions for the infant church came entirely from
exclusive Judaism, and it was the Jews who first
accused Christians before the Rom courts. Even
so, the Rom government not only refused to turn
persecutor, but even protected the new faith both
against Jewish accusations and against the violence
of the populace (Acts 21 31f). And the Christian
missionaries—esp. Paul—soon recognized in _ the
Rom empire an ally and a power for good. Writing


RomanEmpire THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2606


to the Romans Paul counsels them to submit in
obedience to the powers that be, as “ordained of
God.” His favorable impression must have been
greatly enhanced by his mild captivity at Rome and
his acquittal by Nero on the first trial. The Rom
soldiers had come to his rescue in Jerus to save his
life from the fanaticism of his own coreligionists.
Toward the accusations of the Jews against their
rivals the Romans were either indifferent, as Gallio
the proconsul of Achaia, who “‘cared for none of
those things” (Acts 18 12 ff), or recognized the
innocence of the accused, as did both Felix (Acts
24 1ff) and Porcius Festus (265 14ff). Thus the
Romans persisted in looking upon Christians as a
sect of the Jews. But the Jews took another step
in formulating a charge of disloyalty (begun before
Pilate) against the new sect as acting ‘contrary
to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is an-
other king, one Jesus” (Acts 17 7; cf 25 8). Chris-
tianity was disowned thus early by Judaism and
cast upon its own resources. The increasing num-
bers of Christians would confirm to the Rom govern-
ment the independence of Christianity. And the
trial of a Rom citizen, Paul, at Rome would further
enlighten the authorities.

The first heathen persecution of Christianity
resulted from no definite policy, no apprehension
of danger to the body politic, and no definite charges,
but from an accidental spark which kindled the con-
flagration of Rome (July, 64 AD). Up to this time
no emperor had taken much notice of Christianity.
It was only in the middle of the reign of Augustus
that Jesus was born. In the reign of Tiberius
belong Jesus’ public ministry, crucifixion and resur-
tection; but his reign closed too early (37 AD) to
allow any prominence to the new faith, though this
emperor was credited with proposing to the senate
a, decree to receive Christ into the Rom pantheon—
legend of course. Under the brief principate of the
mad Gaius (37-41 AD) the “new way” was not yet
divorced from the parent faith. Gaius caused a
diversion in favor of the Christians by his perse-
cution of the Jews and the command to set up his
own statue in the temple. In the next reign
(Claudius, 41-54 AD) the Jews were again harshly
treated, and thousands were banished from Rome
(Judaeos impulsore Chresto assidue tumultuantes
Roma expulit: Suet. Claud. 25). Some would see
in this an action against the Christians by inter-
preting the words as meaning riots between Jews
and Christians, in consequence of which some Chris-
tians were banished as Jews, but Dio Cassius (Ix.6)
implies that it was a police regulation to restrain
the spread of Jewish worship. It was in the reign
of Nero, after the fire of 64 AD, that the first hostile
step was taken by the government against the
Christians, earliest account of which is given by
Tacitus (Ann. xv.44). Nero’s reckless career had
given rise to the rumor that he was the incen-
diary, that he wished to see the old city burned
in order to rebuild it on more magnificent plans.
See Nero. Though he did everything Pe Able to
arrest. the flames, even exposing his own life, took
every means of alleviating the destitution of the
sufferers, and ordered such religious rites as might
appease the wrath of the gods, the suspicion still
clung to him.


‘Accordingly in order to dissipate the rumor, he put
forward as guilty [subdidit reos] and inflicted the most
cruel punishments on those who were hated for their
abominations [jlagitia] and called Christians by the
populace. The originator of that name, Christus, had
been executed by the procurator Pontius Pilatus in the
reign of Tiberius, and the haneful superstition [exitiabilis
su perstitio] put down for the time being broke out again,
not only throughout Judaea, the home of this evil, but
also in the City [Rome] where all atrocious and shameful
[atrocia aut pudenda] things converge and are welcomed.
Those therefore whb confessed [i.e. to heing Christians]
were first arrested, and then by the information gained


from them a large numher [multitudo ingens] were impli-
cated [contunctt is the MS reading, not conuicti], not so
much on the charge of incendiarism as for hatred of
mankind [odio humani generis}. The victims perished
amid mockery [text here uncertain]; some clothed in
the skins pf wild beasts were torn to pieces by dogs;
others impaled on crosses in order to be set on fire to
afford light hy night after daylight had died.....
Whence [after these cruelties] commiseration began to
be felt for them, though guilty and deserving the sever-
est penalties [gquamquam adversus sontes et novisstma
exempla meritos|, for men felt their destruction was not
from considerations of puhlic welfare hut to gratify the
cruelty of one person [Neroj.”’

This passage—the earliest classical account of the
crucifixion and the only mention of Pilate in a heathen
author—offers some difficulties which require to he
glanced at. It is held by some that Tacitus contradicts
himself by writing subdidit reos at the beginning and
sontes at the end, but sontes does not mean guilty of in-
cendiarism, but guilty from the point of view of the
populace and deserving severe punishment for other sup-

osed flagitia, not for arson. t is thus quite clear that
tracitus regards the Christians as innocent, though he
had not the slightest kindly feeling toward them. Quz
fatebantur_means most naturally, ‘‘those who confessed
to being Christians,’ though Arnold argues that confitert
or profitert_would he the correct word for professing a
religion. But this would contradict hoth the sense and
the other evidences of the context; for if fatebantur could
Mean ‘‘confessed to arson,’’ then the whole hody of
Christians shpuld have been arrested, and, further, this
would have diverted suspicion from Nero, which was
not the case according to Tacitus. Some Christians
boldly asserted their religion, nthers no douht, as in
Bithynia, recanted before trihulation. By indicio
eorum Ramsay (Christianity in the Rom Empire, 233)
understands ‘‘on the information elicited at their trial,”
i.e. from information gathered by the inquisitors in the
course of the proceedings. This-incidental information
implicated a large number of others, hence Ramsay
prefers the MS reading coniuncti to the correction, con-
uictt, This is in order to explain the difficulty seemingly
raised, viz. that the noblest Christians who boldly con-
fessed their Christianity would seek to implicate brethren.
But it is not impossible that some of these bold spirits
did condescend to give the names of their coreligionists
to the Rom courts. Hence Hardy (Christianity and the
Rom Government, 67) prefers the mpre usual rendering
of indicio eorum as ‘‘on information received from them."
This may have occurred either (1) through torture, or
(2) fpr promised immunity, or (3) on account of local
jealousies. The early Christian communities were not
perfect; party strife often ran high as at Corinth. And
In a church like that of Rome composed of Jewish and
pagan_elements and undoubtedly more cosmopolitan
than Corinth, a bitter sectarian spirit is easy to under-
stand. This as a probable explanation is much strength-
ened and rendered almost certain by the words of Clement
of Rome, who, writing to the church at Corinth (ch vi)
trom Rome only a generation after the persecution, and thus
familiar with the internal history of the Rom ecclesia,
twice asserts that a modAv mAnGos (poli pléthos =Tac.
multitudo ingens) of the Rom Christians suffered 64
gnaos (did zélos), ‘‘through jealousy or strife.’ The
most natural and obvious meaning is ‘‘mutual or sec-
tarian jealousy."' But those who do not like this fact
explain it as ‘‘by the jealousy of the Jews.’”’ Nothing
is more easily refuted. for had it been the jealousy of
the Jews Clement would not have hesitated oue moment
to say so. Those who are familiar with the Christian
literature of that age know that the Christians were
none too sensitive toward Jewish feelings. But the very
fact that it was not the Jews made Clement rather
modestly omit details the memory of which was prob-
ably still bearing fruit, even in his day. nee_more
correpti, usually rendered ‘‘arrested,"’ is taken by Hardy
as ‘‘put upon their trial.’ He argues that this is more
in accord with Tacitean usage. A “huge multitude”
need not cause us to distrust Tacitus. It is a relative
term; it was a considerahle number to be so inhumanly
butchered. There is some hesitation as to whether
odio humani generis is objective or subjective genitive:
‘hatred of the Christians toward the human race’ or
“hatred of the human race toward the Christians.”
Grammatically of course it may be either, but that it is
the former there can be no douht: it was of the uature
of a charge against Christians (Ramsay). See Prerse-
CUTION.

Some have impugned the veracity of Tacitus in this
very important passage, asserting that he had read back
the feelings and state of affairs of his own day (half a
century later) into this early Neronian period. This
early appearance of Christianity as a distinct religion
and its “huge multitude” seem impossihle to some.
Schiller has accordingly suggested that it was the Jews
who as a body at Rome were persecuted, that the Chris-
tians being not yet distinct from Jews shared iu the per-
secutions and suffered, not as Christians, but as Jews.
But Tacitus is too trustworthy a historian to be guilty of
such a confusion; hesides, as proconsul in Asia he must
have been more or less familiar with the origin of the
Christian party. Alsop Poppaea was at this time mis-


2607


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Roman Empire


am


tress of Nero's affections and sufficiently influential with
him to stay such a cruel persecution against those to
whom she had a leaning and who claimed her as a
proselyte. Again, the Jewlsh faith was certe licita and
a recognized worship of the empire.

The next question is, Why were the Christians
alone selected for persecution? That they were so
singled out we know, but exactly for what reason is
hard to say with certainty. A number of reasons
no doubt contributed. (1) Farrar (Harly Days,
ch iv) sees “in the proselytism of Poppaea, guided
by Jewish malice, the only adequate explanation
of the first Christian persecution,” and Lightfoot
is of the same opinion, but this by itself is inade-
quate, thongh the Jews would be glad of an oppor-
tunity of taking revenge on their aggressive oppu-
nents. (2) Christians had already become in the
eyes of the Rom authorities a distinct sect, either
from the reports of the eastern provincial governors,
where Christianity was making most headway, or
from the attention attracted by Paul’s first trial.
They were thus the newest religions sect, and as
such would serve as victims to appease deity and
the populace. (3) Even if ingens multitudo be
rhetorical, the Christians were no donbt consid-
erably numerous in Rome. Their aggressiveness
and active proselytism made their numbers even
more formidable. (4) They were uncompromising
in their expression of their beliefs; they looked for
a consummation of the earth by fire and were also
eagerly expecting the Parousia of their king to
reconstitute society. These tenets together with
their calm faith amid the despair of others would
easily cast suspicion npon them. (5) For whatever
reason, they had earned the opprobrium of the
populace. ‘‘The hatred for the Jews passed over
to hatred for the Christians’ (Mommsen). A
people whom the populace so detested must have
fallen under the surveillance of the city police ad-
ministration. (6) A large proportion of the Chris-
tian community at Rome would be non-Rom and
so deserve no recognition of Rom privileges.
These reasons together may or may not explain the
singling-ont of the Christians. At any rate they
were chosen as scapegoats to serve Nero and his
minion Tigellinus. The origin of the first perse-
cution was thus purely accidental—in order to
remove suspicion from Nero. It was not owing to
any already formulated policy, neither through
apprehension of any danger to the state, nor because
the Christians were gnilty of any crimes, though it
gave an opportunity of investigation and accumu-
lation of evidence. But accidental as this perse-
cution was in origin, its consequences were of far-
reaching importance. There are three principal
views as to the date of the policy of proscription of
the new faith by the Rom government: (1) the old
view that persecution for the name, i.e. for the
mere profession of Christianity, began under Trajan
in 112 AD—a view now almost universally aban-
doned; (2) that of Ramsay (Christiantty in the Rom
Empire, 242 ff, and three arts. 1n Expos, 1893), who
holds that this development from punishment for
definite crimes (flagitia) to proscription ‘for the
name” took place between 68 and 96 AD, and (3)
that of Hardy (Christianity and the Rom Govern-
ment, 77), Mommsen (Hxpos, 1893, 1-7) and
Sanday (ib, 1894, 406 ff)—and adopted by the writer
of this article—that the trial of the Christians under
Nero resulted in the declaration of the mere pro-
fession of Christianity as a crime punishable by
death. Tacitus apparently represents the perse-
cution of the Christians as accidental and isolated
and of brief duration (1.c.), while Suetonius (Ner. 16)
mentions the punishment of Christians in a list. of
permanent police regulations for the maintenance
of good order, into which it would be inconsistent
to introduce an isolated case of procedure against


the “baneful superstition” (Ramsay, op. cit., p. 230).
But these two accounts are not contradictory,
Tacitus giving the initial stage and Suetonius ‘a
brief statement of the permanent administrative
principle into which Nero’s action ultimately re-
solved itself” (ib, 232). Nero’s police adminis-
tration, then, pursued as a permanent policy what
was begun merely to avert suspicion from Nero.
But as yet, according to Ramsay, Christians were
not condemned as Christians, but on account of
certain flagitia attaching to the profession and
because the Rom police authorities had learned
enough about the Christians to regard them as
hostile to society. <A trial sti]] must be held and
condemnation pronounced ‘in respect not of the
name but of serions offences naturally connected
with the name,” viz. first incendiarism, which broke
down, and secondly hostility to civilized society
and charges of magic. The others agree so far with
Ramsay as describing the first stages, but assert
that odium humani generis was not of the nature
of a definite charge, but disaffection to the social
and political arrangements of the empire. At the
outset a trial was needed, but soon as a consequence
the trial could be dispensed with, the Christians
being “recognized as a society whose principle
might be summarized as odium generis humani.”
A trial became unnecessary; the religion itself in-
volved the crimes, and as a religion it was hence-
forth proscribed. The surveillance over them and
their punishment was left to the police administra-
tion which could step in at any time with severe
measures or remain remiss, according as exigencies
demanded. Christianity was henceforth a religio
illictta. The Rom government was never a sys-
tematic persecutor. The persecution or non-per-
secution of Christianity depended henceforth on the
mood of the reigning emperor, the character of his
administration, the activity of provincial governors,
the state of popular feeling against the new faith,
and other local circumstances. There is no early
evidence that the Neronian persecution extended
beyond Rome, thongh of course the ‘‘example set
by the emperor necessarily guided the action of all
Rom officials.” The stormy close of Nero’s reign
and the tumultuous days till the accession of Ves-
pasian created a diversion in favor of Christianity.
Orosius (Hist. vii.7) is too late an authority for a
general persecution (per omnes provinctas part per-
seculione excruciart tmperavit; tpsum nomen ez-
stirpare conatus ....). Besides, Paul after his
acquittal seems to have prosecuted his missionary
activity without any extraordinary hindrances, till
he came to Rome the second time. This Neronian
persecution is important for the history of Chris-
tianity: Nero commenced the principle of punish-
ing Christians, and thus made a precedent for future
rulers. Trouble first began in the world-capital;
the next stage will be found in the Hast; and another
in Africa and the West. But as yet persecution
was only local. Nero was the first of the Rom
persecutors who, like Herod Agrippa, came to a
miserable end—a fact much dwelt upon by Lac-
tantius and other Christian writers.
In the Flavian period no uniform imperial policy
against Christianity can be discovered. According
to Ramsay the Flavians developed the
2. The practice set by Nero from punishment
Flavian of Christians for definite crimes to pro-
Period, 68- scription of the name. But, as we have
96 AD seen, the Neronian persecution settled
the future attitude of the Rom state
toward the new faith. The Flavians could not
avoid following the precedent set by Nero. Chris-
tianity was spreading-—esp. in the East and at
Rome. We have no account of any persecution
under Vespasian (though Hilary erroneously speaks


Roman Empire


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2608


of him as a persecutor along with Nero and Decius)
and Titus, but it does not follow that none such took
place. As the whole matter was left to the police
administration, severity would be spasmodic and
called forth by local circumstances. The fall of
Jerus must have had profound influence both on
Judaism and on Christianity. For the former it
did what the fall of Rome under Goths, Vandals,
and Germans did for the old Rom religion—it weak-
ened the idea of a national God bound up with a
political religion. The cleft between Judaism and
its rival would now become greater. Christianity
was relieved from the overpowering influence of a
national center, and those Jews who now recog-
nized the futility of political dreams would more
readily join the Christian faith. Not only the dis-
tinction but the opposition and hostility would now
be more apparent to outsiders, though Vespasian
imposed the poll-tax on Jewish Christians and Jews
alike. No memory of harshness against. Chris-
tianity under Vespasian has survived. Ramsay (op.
cit., 257) would interpret a mutilated passage of
Suetonius (Vesp. 15) as implying Vespasian’s reluc-
tance to carry out justia supplicia against Christians.

Titus, ‘‘the darling of the human race,” is not
recorded as a persecutor, but his opinion of Judaism
and Christianity as stated in the council of war
before Jerus in 70 AD and recorded by Sulpicius
Severus (Chron. ii.30, 6) is interesting as an ap-
proval of the policy adopted by Nero. Severus’
authority is undoubtedly Tacitus (Bernays and
Mommsen). The authenticity of the speech as
contradicting the account of Jos has been im-
pugned; at any rate it represents the point of view
of Tacitus. Titus then advocates the destruction
of the temple in order that the religion of the Jews
and the Christians may be more thoroughly extir-
pated (quo plenius Judaeorum et Christianorum
religta talleretur), since these religions though op-
posed to each other were of the same origin, the
Christians having sprung from the Jews. If the
root was removed the stem would readily perish
(radice sublata, stirpem facile perituram). We
know, however, of no active measures of Titus
against either party, his short reign perhaps allow-
ing no time for such.

It is Domitian who stands out prominently as
the persecutor of this period, as Nero of the first
period. His procedure against Christians was not
an isolated act, but part of a general policy under
which others suffered. His reign was a return to
ancient principles. He attempted to reform morals,
suppress luxury and vice, banish immoral oriental
rites, actors, astrologers and philosophers. It was
in his attempt to revive the national religion that
he came in conflict with the universal religion. His
own cousin, Flavius Clemens, was condemned
apparently for Christianity (atheism), and his wife,
Domitilla, was banished. The profession of Chris-
tianity was not sufficient for the condemnation of
Rom citizens of high standing; hence the charges
of atheism or majesias were put forward. Refusal
to comply with the religion of the national gods
could be brought under the latter. But for ordi-
nary Rom citizens and for provincials the profession
of Christianity merited death. No definite edict
or general proscription was enacted; only the prin-
ciple instituted by Nero was allowed to be earried
out. There was, as Mommsen remarks, a standing
proscription of Christians as of brigands, hut harsh
procedure against hoth was spasmodie and depended
on the caprice or character of provincial governors.
Domitian took one definite step against Christianity
in establishing an easy test by which to detect those
who were Christians and so facilitate inquiries.
This test. was the demand to worship the Genius of
the emperor. This too was only part of Domitian’s


general policy of asserting his own daminus et deus
title and emphasizing the imperial cult as a bond of
political union. The Apocalypse reflects the suffer-

ings of the church in this reign.
(1) Nerva and Trajan.—On the death of Domi-
tian peace was restored to the Christian church
which lasted throughout the brief reign


3. The of Nerva (96-98) and the first 13 years
Antonine of Trajan. Itisa curious fact that some
Period, of the best of the Rom emperors
96-192 AD (Trajan, Marcus Aurelius, Decius and


Diocletian) were barsh to the Chris-
tians, while some of the worst (as Commodus,
Caracalla, Heliogabalus) left them in peace (see
Persecution, 17). Christianity had been rapidly
spreading in the interval of tranquillity. Pliny
became governor of Bithynia in 111 AD and found,
esp. in the eastern part of his province, the temples
almost deserted. Some Christians were brought
before him and on established precedents were ordered
to be executed for their religion. But Pliny soon
discovered that many of both sexes and all ages,
provincials and Rom citizens, were involved. The
Rom citizens he sent to Rome for trial; but being
of a humane disposition he shrank from carrying
out the wholesale execution required by a consistent.


policy.


He wrote to Trajan telling him what he had already
done, rather covertly suggesting tolerant measures.
Should no distinction be made hetween old and young?
Should pardon not be extended to those who recanted
and worshipped the emperor's image and cursed Christ?
Should mere profession (nomen ipsum) be a capital
offence if no crimes could be proven, or should the crimes
rather be punished that were associated with the faith
(an flagitia cohaerentia nomini)? He then explains his
procedure: he gave those who were accused an abundant
opportunity of recanting; those who persisted in this
faith were executed. He considered their ‘‘stubborn-
ness and inflexible obstinacy" (pertinaciam certe et
inflexibilem obstinationem) as in itself deserving punish-
ment. But the administration having once interfered
found plenty to do. An anonymous list of many
names was handed in, most of whom, however, denied
being Christians. Informers then put forward others
who likewise denied belonging to the faith. Pliny was
convinced their meetings were harmless, and on exami-
nation of two deaconesses under torture discovered
nothing but a perverse extravagant superstition (sup.
pravam immodicam). Trajan replied that no universal
and definite rule could be laid down, apparently confirm-
ing the correctness of Pliny's action and perhaps dis-
appointing Pliny in not yielding to his humane sugges-
tions. Nevertheless, the emperor made turee important
concessions: (1) the Christians were not to be sought
out by the police authorities, but if they were accused
and convicted they must be punished; (2) anonymous
information against them was not to be accepted; ®
even those suspected of flagitia in the past were to be
pardoned on_ proving they were not Christians or on
renouncing Christianity. Some regard this rescript
of Trajan as the first official and legal authorization to
eee Oe Ean but we have already seen that

hristianity as such was proscrihed as a result of the
Neronian investigations. esides, there is not the slight-
est trace of any new principle of séverity, either in the
letters of Pliny or in the rescript of Trajan. The perse-
cution of Christianity had been “permanent” like that
of highwaymen, but not systematic or general. Neither
was Trajan's rescript an edict of toleration, though on
the whole it was favorahle to the Christians in minimizing
the dangers to which they were exposed. Tho question
was as yet purely one of administration.


Trajan initiated no procedure agamst Christians
—in fact rather discouraged any, asking his lieu-
tenant to close his eyes to offenders—and Pliny con-
sulted him in the hope of obtaining milder treatment
for the Christians by putting in question form what.
he really wished to be approved. Trajan’s rescript
“marks the end of the old system of uncompro-
mising hostility’ (sce Persrcurion, 15).

(2) Hadrian —The reign of Hadrian (117-38)
was a period of toleration for the Christians. He
was no bigot, but tolerant and eclective, inquirmg
mto all religions and initiated into several mysteries
and willing to leave religion an open question. In
Asia, where Christianity was making most progress,


2609


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Roman Empire


a state of terrorism was imminent if delatores were
encouraged against Christians making a profession
of delatio (giving information), As we saw in the
letter of Pliny, even non-Christians were accused,
and any professing Christian could be threatened
by these informers in order to secure a bribe for
proceeding no farther. Licinius Silvanus Gra-
nianus, like Pliny, found himself involved in diffi-
culties and wrote to Hadrian for advice. Ha-
drian’s rescript in reply is addressed to Granianus’
successor, Minucius Fundanus, the proconsul_ of
Asia, about 124 AD. The genuineness of this im-
porta document, though impugned by Overbeck,

cim and Lipsius, is vouched for by Mommsen,
Hardy, Lightfoot and Ramsay. Indecd, it is much
easier accounted for as authentic than as a forgery,
for who but the broad-minded Hadrian could have
written such a rescript? Apparently the questions
put by the proconsul must have been of a similar
nature to those extant of Pliny. The answer of
Hadrian is a decided step in favor of Christianity
and goes beyond that of Trajan: (1) information
is not to be passed over (a) lest the innocent suffer
(as was the case under Pliny), and (6) lest informers
should make a trade of lodging accusations; (2)
provincials accnsing Christians must give proof
that the accnsed have committed something illegal;
(3) mere petitions and acclamations against the
Christians are not to be admitted; (4) a prosecutor
on failing to make good his case is to be punished.
These terms would greatly increase the risk for
informers and lessen the dangers for Christians.
That the name is a crime is not admitted, neither
is this established principle rescinded. It is quite
possible that Hadrian’s rescript ‘gave a certain
stimulus toward the employment cf the more definite
and regular legal procedure.”’

(8) Antoninus Pius (188-61).—The liberal policy
of Trajan and Hadrian was continued by An-
toninus, though persecution occurred in his reign
in which Ptolemaeus and Lucius were executed at
Rome and Polycarp at Smyrna. But he decidedly
confirmed Hadrian’s policy of protecting the Chris-
tians uncondemned against mob violence in his
letters to Larissae, Athens, Thessalonica and to “all
the Hellenes.” As at Smyrna, his “rescript was in
advance of public feeling,” and so was disregarded.
Anonymous delation was also repressed. :

(4) Marcus Aurelius (161-80)—Under Aurelius
a strong reaction set in affecting the Christians,
caused partly by the frontier disasters and devastat-
ing pestilence and partly by Aurelius’ policy of
returning to ancient principles and reviving the
Rom national religion. In this reign we find per-
secution extending to the West (Gaul) and to
Africa—a step toward the general persecutions of
the next century. Though no actual change was
made by Aurelius, the leniency of the last three
reigns is absent. No general edict or definite
rescript of persecntion was issued; the numerous
martyrdoms recorded in this reign are partly due to
the fuller accounts and the rise of a Christian litera-
ture. Christianity in itself still constituted a crime,
and the obstinacy (rapdraéts, pardtazis) of Chris-
tians in itself deserved punishment. Aurelius
seems to have actually rebuked the severity of the
Rom governor at Lugdunum, and to have further
discouraged the trade of informers against Chris-
tians. Tertullian actually styles him as debellator
Christianorum (“protector of Christians’). We
find as yet therefore no systematic or serious attempt
to extirpate the new faith. The central govern-
ment “was all this time without a permanent or
steady policy toward the Christians. It had not
yet made up its mind” (Hardy).


Under the rule of Commedus (180-92) Christians
again enjoycd a respite. The net result of the collisions


hetween the new faith and the government in this period
is somewhat differently estimated by Ramsay and by
Hardy. The latter thinks (Christianity and Rom Gov-
ernment, 156 f) that Ramsay ‘‘has to some cxtent ante-
dated the existence of anything like a policy of proscrip-
tion,” due to antedating the time when Christianity
was regarded as a serious pclitical danger. Hardy thinks
that the Christian organization was never suspected as
more than an abstraet danger during the first two cen-
turies. Had Rome taken the view that Christianity In
its organization was a real danger and an imperium in
imperio, she must have started a systematic exterml-
eae) peliey during a period when Christianity could
have least withstood it. When the empire did—as in
the 3d cent.—apprehend the practical danger and took
the severest general measures, Christianity was already
too strong to be harmed, and we shall find the empire
heneeforth each time worsted and finally offcring terms.

In the next period the insecurity of the throne,
when in less than 100 years about a score of candi-

dates wore the purple and almost
4. Chang- each newemperor began a new dynasty,
ing Dy- enabled Christianity to spread prac-
nasties, 192 tically untroubled. Further diver-
—-284 AD sions in its favor were created by those

fierce barbarian wars and by the
necessity of rencwed vigilance at the frontier posts.
The Christians’ aloofness from political strife and
their acquiescence in each new dynasty brought
them generally into no collision with new rulers.
Further, the fact that many of these emperors were
non-Rom provincials, or foreigners who had no
special attachment to the old Rom faith, and were
eclectic in their religious views, was of much im-
portance to the new eastern faith. Moreover,
some of the emperors proved not only not hostile
to Christianity, but positively friendly. In this
period we find no severe (except perhaps that of
Decius) and certainly no protracted persecution.
The Christian church herself was organized on the
principle of the imperial government, and made
herself thus strong and united, so that when the
storm did come she remained unshaken. In 202
Severus started a cruel persecution in Africa and
Egypt, but peace was restored by the savage Cara-
calla (lacte Christiano educatus: Tert.). Helio-
gabalus assisted Christianity indirectly (1) by the
degradation of Rom religion, and (2) by tolerance.
According to one writer he proposed to fuse Chris-
tianity, Judaism and Samaritanism into one reli-
gion. Alexander Severus was equally tolerant and
syncretic, setting up in his private chapel images
of Orpheus, Apollonius, Abraham, and Christ, and
engraving the golden rule on his palace walls and
public buildings. He was even credited with the
intention cf erecting a temple to Christ. Local
persecution broke out under Maximin the Thra-
cian. The first general persecution was that of
Decius, in which two features deserve notice: (1)
that death was not the immediate result of Christian
profession, but every means was employcd to induce
Christians to recant; (2) Rom authorities already
cognizant of the dangers of Christian organization
directed their efforts esp. against the officers of the
church. Gallus continued this policy, and Valerian,
after first stopping persecution, tried to check the
spread of the worship by banishing bishops and
closing churches, and later enacted the death pen-
alty. Gallienus promulgated what was virtually
the first edict. of toleration, forbade persecution
and restored the Christian endowments.  Chris-
tianity now entered upon a period of 40 years’
tranquillity: as outward dangers decreased, less
desirable converts came within her gatcs and her
adherents were overtaken in a flood of worldliness,
stayed only by the persecution of Diocletian.

Like some other persecutors, Diocletian was one
of the ablest Rom rulers. He was not disposed
to proceed against the Christians, but was finally
driven to harsh measures by his son-in-law Galerius.
The first. edict, February 24, 308, was not intended


Roman Empire
Roman Law


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2610


to exterminate Christianity, but to check its growth
and weaken its political influence, and was_directed
principally against Bibles, Christian


5. Diocle- assemblies and churches. The second
tian till was against church organization. A
First Gen- third granted freedom to those who
eral Edict recanted, but sought to compel the
of Tolera- submission of recalcitrants by tortures
tion, 284— —a partial confession of failure on
311 AD the part of the imperial government.


Bloodshed was avoided and the death
penalty omitted. But a fourth edict issued by
Maximin prescribed the death penalty and required
the act of sacrifice to the gods. In the same year
(804) Diocletian, convinced of the uselessness of
these measures, stayed the death penalty. The
change of policy on the part of the emperor and
his abdication next year were virtually a confession
that the Galilean had conquered. After the persecu-
tion had raged 8 years (or 10, if we include local
persecutions after 311), Galerius, overtaken by a
loathsome disease, issued from Nicomedia with Con-
stantine and Licinius the first general edict of tolera-
tion, April 30, 311. Christianity had thus im this
period proved a state within a state; it was finally
acknowledged as a religio licita, though not yet on
equality with paganism.

In the next period the first religious wars began,
and Christianity was first placed on an equal footing
with its rival, then above it, and


6. First finally it became the state religion of
General both West and East. As soon as
Edict of Christianity had gained tolerance it
Toleration immediately became an _ intolerant,
till Fall of bitter persecutor, both of its old rival
Western and of heresy. Constantine, having
Empire, defeated Maxentius at the Milvian


311-476 AD Bridge (October 27, 312), became sole

ruler of the West, and, in conjunction
with his eastern colleague Licinius, issued the famous
edict of toleration from Milan, March 30, 313, by
which all religions were granted equal tolerance,
and Christianity was thus placed on an equal foot-
ing with heathenism. Constantine’s favors toward
the Christian faith were largely political; he wished
simply to be on the wmning side. With each fresh
success he inclined more toward Christianity,
though his whole life was a compromise. His
dream was to weld pagan and Christian into one
society under the same laws; he in no way pro-
hibited paganism. With the founding of Con-
stantinople Christianity became practically the
state religion—an alliance with baneful conse-
quences for Christianity. It now began to stifle
the liberty of conscience for which it had suffered
so much, and orthodoxy began its long reign of
intolerance. The sons of Constantine inherited
their father’s cruel nature with his nominal Chris-
tianity. Constantine had left the old and the new
religions on equal footing: his sons began the work
of exterminating paganism by violence. Constan-
tius when sole emperor, inheriting none of his father’s
compromise cr caution, and prompted by women
and bishops, published edicts demanding the closing
of the temples and prohibiting sacrifices. Wise
provincial administrators hesitated to carry out
these premature measures. Christianity was now
in the ascendancy and on the aggressive. It not
only persecuted paganism, but the dominant Chris-
tian party proscribed its rival—this time heterodoxy
banishing orthodoxy. The violence and intoler-
ance of the sons of Constantine justified the mild
reaction under Julian the Apostate—the most
humane member of the Constantine family. He
made a “romantic” effort to reéstablish the old re-
ligion, and while proclaiming tolerance for Chris-
tianity, he endeavored to weaken it by heaping


ridicule upon its doctrines, rescinding the privileges
of the clergy, prohibiting the church from receiving
many bequests, removing Christians from public
positions and forbidding the teaching of classics
in Christian schools lest Christian tongues should
become better fitted to meet heathen arguments,
and lastly by adding renewed splendor to pagan
service as a counter-attraction. But the moral
power of Christianity triumphed. Dying on a
battle-field, where he fought the Persians, he is said
(but not on good authority) to have exclaimed,
“Thou hast conquered, O Galilean” (vevlenxas Tad
rate, nenikekas Galilate). For a brief period after
his death there was religious neutrality. Gratian—
at the instigation of Ambrose—departed from this
neutrality, removed the statue of Victory from the
senate-house, refused the title and robes of pontifex
maximus, prohibited bloody sacrifices, and dealt
a severe blow to the old faith by withdrawing some
of the treasury grants, thereby making it dependent
on the voluntary system. Theodosius I, or the
Great, adopted a strenuous religious policy against
both heresy and paganism. His intolerance must
be attributed to Ambrose—a bigot in whose
eyes Jews, heretics and pagans alike had no rights.
Systematic proscription of paganism began. In 381
Theodosins denied the right of making a will to
apostates from Christianity, in 383 the right of in-
heritance, in 391 heathen public worship was inter-
dicted, in 392 several acts of both private and pub-
lic heathen worship were forbidden, and greater
penalties were attached to the performance of sac-
rifice, Christian vandalism became rampant; all
kinds of violence and confiscation were resorted to,
monks or priests often leading the populace. For
the present the West did not suffer so severely from
fanatic iconoclasm. Under the sons of Theodosius
the suppression of paganism was steadily pursued.
Honorius in the West excluded (408 AD) pagans
from civil and military offices; in a later edict (423)
the very existence of paganism is doubted (paganos
. + +. guamquam tam nullos esse credamus). That
heathenism was still an attraction is proved by
the repeated laws against apostasy. Under Valen-
tinian III (423-55) and Theodosius I, laws were
enacted for the destruction of temples or their con-
version into Christian churches. In the western
empire heathenism was persecuted till the end, and
its final overthrow was hastened by the extinction
of the western empire (476). In the East Justinian
closed the heathen schools of philosophy at Athens
(529 AD), and in a despotic spirit prohibited even
heathen worship in private under pain of death.

V. Victory of Christianity and Conversion of the
Roman Empire.—Christianity was now acknowl-
edged as the religion of both East and West. It
had also grown strong enough to convert the bar-
barians who overran the West. It restrained and
educated them under the lead of the papacy, so that
its conquests now extended beyond the Rom em-
pire.

Merivale (preface to Conversion of Rom Empire)
attributes the conversion of the Rom empire to four
causes: (1) the external evidence of apparent fulfilment
of prophecy and the evidence of miracles, (2) internal
evidence as satisfying the spiritual wants of the empire
and offering a Redeemer, (3) the example of the pure
lives and heroic deaths of the early Christians, and (4)
the success which attended the Christian cause under
Constantine, Gibbon (ch xv of Decline and Fall) seeks
te account for the phencmenal success of Christianity
in the empire by (1) the zeal and enthusiasm of the early
Christians, (2) the belief of Christianity in immortality
with both future rewards and future retributions, (3)
miracles, (4) the high ethical code and pure morals of
professing Christians, and (5) strong ecclesiastical organi-
zation on imperial patterns. But neither of these lists


of causes seems to account satisfactorily for the progress
and success cf the religion of Jesus.


This was due in the first place to negative causes


2611


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Roman Empire
Roman Law


—the moral and spiritual bankruptcy of the antique
world, the internal rottenness and decay of heathen
_ systems. Allancient national religions
1. Negative had failed and were abandoned alike
Causes by philosophers and the masses, and
no universal religion for humanity
was offered except by Christianity. Worship had
degenerated into pure formalism which brought no
comfort to the heart. An imperious demand for
revelation was felt which no philosophy or natural
religion could satisfy.
But it was to positive causes chiefly that the suc-
cess of the new religion was due, among which were
r the zeal, enthusiasm, and moral ear-
2. Positive nestness of the Christian faith. Its
Causes sterling qualities were best shown in
f persecution and the heroic deaths of
its adherents. Paganism, even with the alliance
of the civil power and the prestige of its romantic
past, could not withstand persecution. And when
heathenism was thrown back on_the voluntary
system, it could not prosper as Christianity did
with its ideals of self-sacrifice. The earnestness
of early Christianity was raised to its highest power
by its belief in a near second coming of the Lord
and theend of the aeon. The means of propagation
greatly helped the spread of Christianity, the prin-
cipal means being the exemplary lives of its pro-
fessors. It opposed_moral and spiritual power to
political. Besides, Christianity when once studied
by the thinkers of the ancient world was found to
bein accord with the highest principles of reason and
Nature. But “‘the chief cause of its success was
the congruity of its teaching with the spiritual
nature of mankind” (Lecky). There was a deep-
seated earnestness in a large section of the ancient
world to whom Christianity offered the peace, com-
fort and strength desired. It was possessed also
of an immense advantage over all competing reli-
gions of the Rom empire in being adapted to all
classes and conditions and to all changes. There
was nothing local or national about it; it gave the
grandest expression to the contemporary ideal of
brotherhood. Its respect for woman and its at-
traction for this sex gained it many converts who
brought honor to it; in this respect it was far
superior to its greatest rival, Mithraism. In an
age of vast social change and much social distress
it appealed to the suffering by its active: self-denial
for the happiness of others. As an ethical code
it was equal and superior to the noblest contem-
porary systems. One incalculable advantage it
could show above all religions and philosophies—
the charm and power of an ideal perfect life, in which
the highest manhood was held forth as an incentive
to nobler living. The person of Jesus was an ideal
and moral dynamic for both philosopher and the
common man, far above any abstract virtue. “It
was because it was true to the moral sentiments of
the age, because it represented faithfully the supreme
type of excellence to which men were then tending,
because it corresponded with their religious wants,
aims and emotions, because the whole spiritual
being could then expand and expatiate under its
influence that it planted its roots so deeply in the
hearts of men” (Lecky, Hist of European Morals,
ch iii), Add to all this the favorable circumstances
mentioned under “Preparation for Christianity,”
above (II), and we can understand how the Rom
empire became the kingdom of Christ.
Lirerature.—Ancient sources include Tacitus, Sue-
tonius, Josephus, Pliny’s Letters, x.97-98 (in Hardy’s
ed), Dio Cassius (in ‘Xiphilin), the apologists, Church
Fathers, Inscriptions, etc. aes
Modern sources are too numerous to mention in full,
put those most helpful to the student are: Gihbon,
Decline and Fall of the Rom Empire; Merivale, Hist of


the Romans under the Empire; The Fall of the Rom
Republic, 1856; Conversion of the Rom Empire, 1865;


Milman, [ist of Christianity; Hist of Lat Christianity;
Ramsay, The Church in the Rom Empire; Expos, IV,
viii, pp. 8 ff, 110 ff, 282 {f; E. G. Hardy, Christianity and
the Rom Government, 1894; D. Duff, The Early Church:
a Hist of Christianity in the First Siz Centuries, Edin-
burgh, 1891; J. J. Blunt, A Hist of the Christian Church
during the First Three Centuries, 1861; Harnack, Misston
and Expansion of Christianity, 1907; Mommsen, ‘' Der
Religionsfreve] nach rém. Recht,” in Hist. Zeit, 1890,
LXIV (important); Provinces of the Rom Empire; Expos,
1893, pp. 6 ff; G. Beissier, La religion romaine d' Auguste
aux Antonins; La fin du paganisme; Wissowa, Religion u.
Kultus der Romer; Gerb. Uhlhorn, Conflict of Christiantly
with Heathenism, ET by Smyth and Ropes, 1879; B. Aubé,
Histoire des persécutions de l’église jusqu'd la fin dea An-
tonins, 1875; Schaff, Zist of the Christian Church (with
useful hibliographies of hoth ancient and modern authori-
ties); Orr, Neglected Factors in Early Church Hist; Keim,
Rom u. Christentum; Deissmann, Light from the Ancient
East, ET, Londen, 1910; Wendland, Die hellenistisch-
rémische Kultur?, 1912; F. Overbeck, ‘ Gesetze der rom.
Kaiser gegen die Christen,'' in his Studien, 1875; C. F.
Arnold, Die Neronische Christenverfolgung; Stud. zur
Gesch. der Plinianischen Christenverfolgung; Westcott,
“The Two Empires,”” in comm. to Epp. of St. John,
250-82; Friedlander, Sittengeschichte Roms; Lightfoot,
Apostolic Fathers; Lecky, Hist of European Morals, ch
iil, ‘‘ The Conversion of Rome.”
8. Ancus


ROMAN LAW:


I. Roman Private Law
The Twelve Tables
. Civil Procedure
Jus honorarium
The praetor peregrinus
Imperial Ordinances
Golden Age of Juristic Literature
Codification in the Later Empire
omMaAN CriminaLt Law
Jurisdiction in the Royal Period
The Right of Appeal
(1) Penalties
(2) The Porcian Law
. Popular Jurisdiction Curtailed
Jurors
. Disappearance of Criminal Courts
. Right of Tria] at Rome
LITERATURE


I.


ee ee


OouP


In the present art. we shall treat (I) Rom Private
Law and (IJ) Criminal Law only, reserving a con-
sideration of the development of the principles of
constitutional law for the art. on Rome, since it is
so closely interwoven with the political history of
the state.

It will be necessary to confine the discussion of private
law to its external history, without attempting to deal
with the substance of the law itself. In the treatment
ef criminal law attention will he directed chiefly to the
constitutional guaranties which were intended to pre-
tect Rom citizens against arbitrary and unjust punish-
ments, these heing one of the most important privileges
of Rom citizenship (see CITizENSHIP),

Rom law found its original source in the family as
a corporation. The proprietary rights of the pater
familias as representative of this primitive unit of
organization are a fundamental element in private
law, and the scope of the criminal jurisdiction of the
state was limited by the power of life and death
which was exercised by the head of the family over
those who were under his authority, by virtue of
which their transgressions were tried before the
domestic tribunal.

It is likewise of fundamental importance to re-
call the fact that before the earliest period in the
history of Rom law of which we have positive in-
formation, there must have been a time when a
large number of different classes of crime were pun-
ished by the priests as sacrilege, in accordance with
divine law (fas), by putting the offender to death
as a sacrifice to the offended deity, while restitution
for private violence or injustice was left to private
initiative to seck. For a law of the Twelve Tables
that the person guilty of cutting another’s grain by
night should be hanged, as an offering to Ceres, Is
a survival of the older religious character of con-
demnation to death, and the right to kill the noc-
turnal thief and the adulterer caught in the act
may be cited as survivals of primitive private ven-


Roman Law


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2612


geanece. The secular conception of crime as an
offence against the welfare of the state gradually
superseded the older conception, while private law
arose when the community did away with the dis-
order incident to the exercise of self-help in attempt-
ing to secure justice, by insisting that the parties
to a disagreement should submit their claims to an

arbitrator.
I, Roman Private Law.—Rom private law was
at first a body of unwritten usages handed down by
tradition in the patrician families.


1. The The demand of the plebeians for the
Twelve publication of the law resulted in the
Tables adoption of the famous Twelve Tables


(449 BC), which was looked upon by
later authorities as the source of all public and
private law (quae nunc quoque in hoc immenso aliarum
super alias acervatarum legum cumulo fons omnis
publici privatique estiuris: Livy iii.34, 6), although it
was not a scientific or comprehensive code of all the
legal institutions of the time. This primitive sys-
tem of law was made to expand to meet the growing
requirements of the republican community chiefly
by means of interpretation and the jus honorarium,
which corresponds to equity.

The function of interpretation may be defined by
mentioning the principal elements in civil procedure.
The praetor, or magistrate, listened to
the claims of the litigants and prepared
an outline of the disputed issues, called
a formula, which was submitted to the
judezx, or arbitrator, a jury, as it were, consisting of
one man, who decided the questions of fact in-
volved in the case. Neither praetor nor juder had
special legal training. The court had recourse,
therefore, for legal enlightenment to those who had
gained distinction as authorities on the law, and the
opinions, or responsa, of these scholars (jurispru-
dentes) formed a valuable commentary on the legal
institutions of the time. In this way a body of
rules was amassed by interpretative adaptation
which the authors of the Twelve Tables would never
have recognized.

Jus honorarium derived its name from the cir-
cumstance that it rested upon the authority of

magistrates (honor=magistracy). In
3. Jus hon- this respect and because it was com-
orarium posed of orders issued for the purpose

of affording relief in cases for which
the existing law did not make adequate provision,
this second agency for legal expansion may be com-
pared with English equity. These orders issued
by the praetors had legal force during the tenure
of their office only; but those the expediency of
which had been established by this period of trial
were generally reissued by succeeding magistrates
from year to year, so that in time a large, but uni-
form body of rules, subject to annual renewal, formed
the greater part of the edict which was issued by the
praetors before entering upon their term of office.
By these means Rom law maintained a proper bal-
ance between elasticity and rigidity.

After the institution of the praetor peregrinus
(241 BC), who heard cases in which one or both of

the parties were foreigners, a series of


2. Civil
Procedure


4. The similar edicts proceeded from those
praetor who were chosen to this tribunal. The
peregrinus annual edicts of the praetor pere-


grinus became an important means
for broadening Rom law, for the strangers who
appeared in the court of this magistrate were mostly
Greeks from Southern Italy, so that the principles
of law which were gradually formulated as a basis
for proceedings were largely an embodiment of the
spirit of Gr law.
Direct legislation superseded the other sources
of law under the empire, taking the form, occasion-


ally, of bills ratified by the people (leges), but
usually of enactments of the senate (senatus con-
sulta), or imperial ordinances. The
6. Imperial latter, which eventually prevailed to
Ordinances the exclusion of all other types, may
be classified as edicta, which were issued
by the emperor on the analogy of the similar orders
of the republican magistrates, decreta, or decisions of
the imperial tribunal, which had force as precedents,
and rescripta, which were replies by the emperor
to requests for the interpretation of the law. All
these acts of imperial legislation were known as
constitutiones.
In the 2d cent. Salvius Julianus was commis-
sioned to invest the praetorian edict with definite
form. The Institutes of Gaius ap-


6. Golden pearing about the same time became a
Age of model for subsequent textbooks on
Juristic jurisprudence (Gatt instituitonum com-
Literature mentarii quattuor, discovered by Nie-


buhrin 1816 at Veronaina palimpsest).
This was the Golden Age of juristic literature. A
succession of able thinkers, among whom Papinian,
Paulus, Ulpian, Modestinus, and Gaius hold fore-
most rank (cf Codex Theodosianus 1, 4, 3), applied
to the incoherent mass of legal material the methods
of scientific investigation, developing a system of
Rom law and establishing a science of jurispru-
dence.
The period of the later empire was characterized
by various attempts at codification which culmi-
nated in the final treatment of the body


7. Codifi- of Rom law under Justinian. The
cation in work of the board of eminent jurists
the Later to whom this vast undertaking was
Empire intrusted was published in three parts:


(1) the Code, which contains a selec-
tion of the imperial enactments since Hadrian in
twelve books, (2) the Digest or Pandects, which is
composed of extracts from the juristic literature in
fifty books, and (3) the Institutes, which is a text-
book in four books. In this form mainly Rom
private law has come down to modern times, and
has become, in the words of an eminent authority
(Bryce, Studies in History and Jurisprudence, Ox-
ford, 1901), next to the Christian religion, the most
plentiful source of the rules governing actual con-
duct throughout Western Europe.

Il. Roman Criminal Law.—In the royal period
criminal jurisdiction, in so far as it was a function
of secular administration, belonged by


1. Juris- right to the king. The titles quaes-
diction in ores parricidit and duumvirt perduel-
the Royal lionis, belonging to officials to whom
Period the royal authority in these matters


was occasionally delegated, indicate
the nature of the earliest crimes brought under
secular jurisdiction. The royal prerogative passed
to the republican magistrates, and embraced, be-
sides the right to punish crimes, the power to com-
pel obedience to their own decrees (coercitio) by
means of various penalties.
But the right of the people to final jurisdiction in cases


involving the life or civil status of citizens was estah-
lished hy an enactment (lez Valeria) which


2. Right of is said to have been proposed hy one of the
A 1 first consuls (509 BC), and which granted
ppea the right of appeal to the assembly (pro-


vocatio) against the execution of a capital
or other serious penalty pronounced hy a magistrate
(Cicero De Re Publica 11.31, 54; Livy ii.8, 2; Dionysius
v.19). This right of appeal was reinforced or extended
by subsequent enactments (leges Valeriae) in 449 and
299 BC. It was valid against penalties imposed hy
virtue of the coercive power of the magistrates as well
as those hased upon a regular criminal charge. Gen-
erally the magistrates made no provisional sentence of
che On, but hrought their charges directly before the
people.
(1) Penalttes—The death penalty was practically
abrogated in republican times by allowing the accused


2613


the alternative of voluntary exile.
employed imprisonment as’a punishment. The imposi-
tion of fines above a certain amount was made subject to
the right of appeal. At first the dictator possessed ah-
solute power of life and death over the citizens, hut this
authority was limited, probably about 300 BC (Liv
xxvii.6, 5), hy being made subject te the right of appeal.

2) The Porcian law.—The right of appeal to the
people was valid within the city and as far as the first
milestone; and although it was never extended beyond
this limit, yet its protection was virtually secured for
all Rom citizens, wherever they might be, by the pro-
vision of the Porcian law (of unknown date), which
established their right to trial at Rome. In consequence
of this a distinction, of great importance was created in
criminal procedure in the provinces, since Rom citizens
were sent to Rome for trial in all serious cases, while
other persons were subject to the criminal jurisdiction
of the municipalities, except when the governor sum-
moned them hefore his own tribunal.


i

m3
i,
{1
}

a:
{


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Roman Law


The Romans rarely | of 70 BC provided for the equal representation of all


three classes of the people in the courts. There were
then about 1,080 names on the list of available jurors,
of whom 75 secm to have been chosen for each trial
(Cicero In Pisonem 40). Caesar abolished the pleheian
jurors (Suetonius Caesar 41). Augustus restored the
representatives of the third class (Suetonius Aug. 32),
hut confined their action to civil cases of miner impor-
tance, He likewise excused the memhers of the senate
from service as jurors.


The system of criminal courts (quaestiones per-
petuae) diminished in importance under the em-
pire and finally disappeared toward the close of the
2d cent. Their place was taken by the senate
under the presidency of a consul, the emperor,
and eventually by imperial officials by delegated
authority from the empcror. In the first case the


Roman Forum.


The exercise of popular jurisdiction in criminal |


matters was gradually curtailed by the establish-
ment of permanent courts (quaestiones
3. Popular perpetuac) by virtue of laws by which
Jurisdiction the people delegated their authority
Curtailed to judge certain classes of cases, The
first of these courts was authorized in
149 BC for the trial of charges of extortion brought
against provincial governors. Compensation was
the main purpose of accusers in bringing charges
before this aud later permanent courts, and for this
reason, perhaps, the procedure was similar to that
which was employed in civil cases. A praetor pre-
sided over the tribunal; a number of judices took
the place of the single juror. The laws by which
Sulla reorganized the systems of criminal Jurisdic-
tion provided for seven courts dealing individually
with extortion, treason, peculation, corrupt elec-
tioneering practices, murder, fraud, and assault.
The judices, or jurors, were originally chosen from the


senate. A law proposed by C. Gracchus transferred
Tae iorsnip in all the juries to the eques-
trian class. Sulla replenished the senate
4. Jurors by admitting ahout 300 members of the


equestrian class, and then restored to it
the exclusive control of the juries. But a judicial law


senate stood in somewhat the same relation to the
presiding cousul as the jurors in the permanent
courts to the praetor. But the em-
6. Disap- peror and imperial officials decided
pearance of without the help of a jury, so that
Criminal after the 3d cent., when the judicial
Courts competence of the senate was gradu-
ally lost, trial by jury ceased to exist.
An important innovation in the judicial system of
the empire was the principle of appeal from the
decision of lower courts to higher tribunals. For
the emperors and eventually their delegates, chiefly
the praefectus urbi and praefectus praetorio, heard
appeals from Rom and Italian magistrates and pro-
vincial governors.
Under the early empire, provincial governors
were generally under obligation to grant the de-
mand of Rom citizens for the privilege
6. Right of of trial at Rome (Digest xlviii.6, 7),
Trial at although there appear to have beeu
Rome some exceptions to this rule (Pliny,
Epist. ii.11; Digest xlviii.8, 16). Lysias,
tribune of the cohort at Jerus, sent St. Paul as
prisoner to Caesarea, the capital of the province,


Roman Religion
Romans, Epistle to


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2614


so that Felix the procurator might determine what
was to be done in his case, inasmuch as he was a
Rom citizen (Acts 23 27), and two years later St.
Paul asserted his privilege of being tried at Rome
by the emperor for the same reason (25 11.21).

Rom citizens who were sent to Rome might be
brought either before the senate or emperor, but
cognizance of these cases by the imperial tribunal
was more usual, and finally supplanted entirely that
of the senate, the formula of appeal becoming pro-
verbial: cives Romanus sum, proveco ad Caesarem
(Katsara epikalotimai: Acts 26 11).

As Rom citizenship became more and more widely
extended throughout the empire its relative value
diminished, and it is obvious that many of the
special privileges, such as the right of trial at Rome,
which were attached to it in the earlier period must
have been gradually lost. It became customary for
the emperors to delegate their power of final juris-
diction over the lives of citizens (ius gladii) to the
provincial governors, and finally, after Rom citizen-
ship had been conferred upon the inhabitants of the
empire generally by Caracalla, the right of appeal
to Rome remained the privilege of certain classes
only, such as senators, municipal decurions (Digest
xlviii.19, 27), officers of equestrian rank in the army,
and centurions (Dio Cassius 1ii.22, 33).


LiteRATURE.—Greenidge, The Legal Procedure of
Cicero's ime, Oxford, 1901; Kriiger, Geschichte der
Quellen u. Litteratur des rémischen Rechts, Leipzig, 1888;
Mommsen, Rémisches Strafrecht, Leipzig, 1899; Roby,
Rom Private Law in the Times of Cicero and of the An-
tonines, Cambridge, 1902; Sohm, The Institutes of Ram
Law, triby J. C. Ledlie, Oxford, 1892.

Grorcs H. ALLEN

ROMAN RELIGION. See Roman EMPIRE AND


Curistianity, I11; Rome, IV.


ROMANS, EPISTLE TO THE:


Genuineness
Integrity
Proximate Date
Place of Writing
Destination
Language
Occasion
Some Characteristics
Main Teachings of the Epistle
(1) Doctrine of Man
(2) Doctrine of God
(3) Doctrine of Son of God—Redemption;
fleation
(4) Doctrine of the Spirit of God
(5) Dectrine of Duty
(6) Doctrine of Israel
LITERATURE
Thisis the greatest, in every sense, of the apostolic
letters of St. Paul; in scale, in scope, and in its
wonderful combination of doctrinal, ethical and
administrative wisdom and power. In some re-
spects the later Epp., Eph and Col, lead us to even
higher and deeper arcana of revelation, and they,
like Rom, combine with the exposition of truth a
luminous doctrine of duty. But the range of Rom
is larger in both directions, and presents us also with
noble and far-reaching discussions of Christian
polity, instructions in spiritual utterance and the
like, to which those Epp. present, no parallel, and
which only the Corinthian Epp. rival.
No suspicion on the head of the genuineness of
the Ep. exists which needs serious consideration.
Signs of the influence of the Ep. can
1. Genuine- be traced, at least very probably, in
ness the NT itself; in 1 Pet, and, as some
think, in Jas. But in our opinion Jas
was the earlier writing, and Lightfoot has given
strong grounds for the belief that the paragraph on
faith and justification (Jas 2) has no reference to
perversions of Pauline teaching, but deals with rab-
binism. Clement of Rome repeatedly quotes Rom,
and so do Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin. Marcion
includes it in his list of Pauline Epp., and it is safe


CRNATP WD


Justi-


to say in general Rom “has been recognized in the
Christian church as long as any collection of St.
Paul’s Epp. has been extant” (A. Robertson, in
HDB, s.v.). But above all other evidences it
testifies to itself. The fabrication of such a writing,
with its close and complex thought, its power and
marked originality of treatment, its noble morale,
and its spiritual elevation and ardor, is nothing
short of a moral impossibility. A mighty mind
and equally great heart live in every page, and a soul
exquisitely sensitive and always intent upon truth
and holiness. Literary personation is an art which
has come to anything like maturity only in modern
times, certainly not before the Renaissance. Ina
fully developed form it is hardly earlier than the
19th cent. And even now who can point to a con-
sciously personated authorship going along with
high moral principle and purpose?

The question remains, however, whether, accept-
ing the Ep. in block as Pauline, we have it, as to

details, just as it left the author’s
2. Integrity hands. Particularly, some phenom-

ena of the text of the last two chapters
invite the inquiry. We may—in our opinion we
must—grant those chapters to be Pauline. They
breathe St. Paul in every sentence. But do they
read precisely like part of a letter to Rome? For
example, we have a series of names (16 1-15),
representing a large circle of personally known and
loved friends of the writer, a much longer list than
any other in the Epp., and all presumably—on the
theory that the passage is integral to the Ep.—
residents at Rome. May notsuch a paragraph have
somehow crept in, after date, from another writing?
Might not a message to Philippian, Thessalonian
or Ephesian friends, dwellers in places where St.
Paul had already established many intimacies, have
fallen out of its place and found lodgment by mis-
take at the close of this letter to Rome? It seems
enough to reply by one brief statement of fact.
We possess some 800 MSS of Rom, and not one of
these, so far as it is uninjured, fails to give the Ep.
complete, all the chapters as we have them, and
in the present order (with one exception, that of the
final doxology). It is observable meanwhile that
the difficulty of supposing St. Paul to have had a
large group of friends living at Rome, before his
own arrival there, is not serious. To and from
Rome, through the whole empire, there was a per-
petual circulation of population. Suppose Aquila
and Priscilla (e.g.) to have recently returned (Acts
18 2) to Rome from Ephesus, and suppose similar
migrations from Greece or from Asia Minor to have
taken place within recent years; we can then readily
account for the greetings of Rom 16.

Lightfoot has brought it out in an interesting way
(see his Philippians, on 4 22) that many of the
names (e.g. Amplias, Urbanus, Tryphena) in Rom
16 are found at Rome, in inscriptions of the early
imperial age, in cemeteries where members of the
widely scattered “household of Caesar’? were in-
terred. This at least suggests the abundant possi-
bility that the converts and friends belonging to the
“household” who, a very few years later, perhaps
not more than three, were around him at Rome
when he wrote to Philippi (Phil 4 22), and sent
their special grecting (“chiefly they’’) to the Philip-
pians, were formerly residents at Philippi, or else-
where in Macedonia, and had moved thence to the
capital not long before the apostle wrote to the
Romans. A. Robertson (ut supra) comes to the
conclusion, after a careful review of recent theories,
“that the case for transferring this section... .
from its actual connection to a lost Ep. to Ephesus
is not made out.”

Two points of detail in the criticism of the text
of Rom may be noted. One is that the words “at


2615


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Roman Religion
Romans, Epistle to


Rome” (1 7.15) are omitted in a very few MSS, in a
way to remind us of the interesting phenomenon of
the omission of “at Ephesus’ (Eph 1 1m). But
the evidence for this omission being original is
entircly inadequate. The fact may perhaps be
accounted for by a possible circulation of Rom
among other mission churches as an Ep. of universal
interest. This would be much more likely if the
MSS and other authorities in which the last two
chapters are missing were identical with those which
omit ‘‘at Rome,” but this is not the case.

The other and larger detail is that the great final
doxology (16 25-27) is placed by many cursives at
the end of ch 14, and is omitted entirely by three
MSS and by Marcion. The leading uncials and a
large preponderance of ancient evidence place it
where we have it. It is quite possible that St. Paul
may have reissued Rom after a time, and may
only then have added the doxology, which has a
certain resemblance in manner to his later (cap-
tivity) style. But it is at least likely that dog-
matic objections led Marcion to delete it, and that
his action accounts for the other phenomena which
seem to witness against its place at the finale.

It is worth noting that Hort, a singularly fearless,
while sober student, defends without reserve the
entirety of the Ep. as we have it, or practically so.
See his essay printed in Lightfoot’s Bib. Studies.

We can fix the proximate date with fair certainty
within reasonable limits. We gather from 16 19

that St. Paul, when he wrote, was in
3. Proxi- the act of closing his work in the East
mate Date and was looking definitely westward.


But he was first about (15 25.26) to |


revisit Jerus with his collection, mainly made in
Macedonia and Achaia, for the “poor saints.”
Placing these allusions side by side with the refer-
ences in { and 2 Cor to the collection and its con-
veyance, and again with the narrative of Acts, we
may date Rom very nearly at the same time as
2 Cor, just before the visit to Jerus narrated in
Acts 20, etc. The year may be fixed with great
probability as 58 AD. This estimate follows the
lines of Lightfoot’s chronology, which Robertson
(ut supra) supports. More recent schemes would
move the date back to 56 AD.


“Thereader’s attention is invited to thisdate. Broadly
speaking, it was about 30 years at the most after the
Crucifixion. Let anyone in middle life reflect on the
freshness in memory of events, whether public or pri-
vate, which 30 years ago made any marked impression
on his mind. Let him consider how concrete and vivid
still are the prominent personages of 30 years ago, many
of whom of course are still with us. And let him trans-
fer this thought to the 1st cent., and to the time of our
Ep. Let him remember that we have at least this one
great Christian writing composed, for certain, within
such easy reach of the very lifetime of Jesus Christ
when His contemporary friends were still, in numbers,
alive and active. Then Ict him open the Ep. afresh,
and read, as if for the first time, its estimate of Jesus
Christ—a Figure then of no legendary past, with its halo,
but of the all but present day. Let him note that this
transcendent estimate comes to us conveyed in the
vehicle not of poetry and rhetoric, but of a treatise preg-
nant with masterly argument and admirable practical
wisdom, tolerant and comprehensive. And we think
that the reader will feel that the result of his meditations
on date and circumstances is reassuring as to the solidity
of the historic basis of the Christian faith” (from the
present writer’s introduction to the Ep. in the Temple
Bible; see also his Light from the First Days: Short
Studies in 1 Thess).


With confidence we may name Corinth as the
place of writing. St. Paul was at the time in some
“city” (16 23). He was staying with

4. Place of one Gaius, or Caius (ib), and we find
Writing in 1 Cor 1 14 a Gaius, closely con-
nected with St. Paul, and a Corinthian.

He commends to the Romans the deaconess Phoche,
attached to “the church at Cenchreae”’ (16 1),
presumably a place near that from which he was


writing; and Cenchreae was the southern part of

Corinth.
The first advent of Christianity to Rome is un-
recorded, and we know very little of its early prog-
ress. Visiting Romans (ém:équodvres, epi-


5. Desti- — démotintes), both Jews and proselytes
nation appear at Pentecost (Acts 2 10), and

no doubt some of these returned home
believers. In Acts 18 2 we have Aquila and Pris-


cilla, Jews, evidently Christians, ‘lately come from
Italy,” and probably from Rome. But we know
practically nothing clse of the story previous to this
Ep., which is addressed to a mission church obviously
important and already spiritually advanced. On
the other hand (a curious paradox in view of the
historical development of Rom Christianity), there
is no allusion in the Ep. to church organization. The
Christian ministry (apart from St. Paul’s own
apostleship) is not even mentioned. It may fairly
be said to be incredible that if the legend of St.
Peter’s long episcopate were historical, no allusion
whatever to his work, influence and authority
should be made. It is at least extremely difficult
to prove that he was even present in Rome till
shortly before his martyrdom, and the very ancicnt
belief that Peter and Paul founded the Rom church
is more likely to have had its origin in their martyr-
doms there than in St. Peter’s having in any sense
shared in the early evangelization of the city.

As to Rome itself, we may picture it at the date
of the Ep. as containing, with its suburbs, a closely
massed population of perhaps 800,000 people; a
motley host of many races, with a strong oriental
element, among which the Jews were present as a
marked influence, despised and sometimes dreaded,
but always attracting curiosity.

The Ep. was written in Gr, the “common dia-
lect,”’ the Gr_of universal intercourse of that age.

One naturally asks, why not in Lat,
6. Lan- when the message was addressed to the
guage supreme Lat city? The large major-
ity of Christian converts beyond doubt
came from the lower middle and lowest classes, not
least from the slave class. (These strata of society
were supplied greatly from immigrants, much as in
parts of East London now aliens make the main
population. Not Lat but Gr, the then lingua
franca of the Mediterranean, would be the daily
speech of these people. It is remarkable that all
the early Rom bishops bear Gr names. And same
40 years after the date of this Ep. we find Clement of
Rome writing in Gr to the Corinthians, and later
again, early in the 2d cent., Ignatius writing in Gr
to the Romans.

We cannot specify the occasion of writmg for
certain. No hint appears of any acute crisis in the

mission (as when 1 Cor, 2 Cor, Gal, or
7. Oceasion Col were written). Nor would per-

sonal reminiscences influence the writer,
for he had not yet seen Rome. We can only sug-
gest some possibilitics as follows:

(1) A good cpportunity for safe communication was
offered by the deaconess Phoehbe’s proposed visit to the
metropolis. She doubtless asked St. Paul for a com-
mendatory letter, and this may have suggested an ex-
tended message to the church.

(2) St. Paul's thoughts had long gone toward Rome.
See Acts 19 21: “I must see Rome,” words which seem
perhaps to imply some Divine intimation (cf 23 11).
And his own life-course would fall in with such a super-
natural call. Ho had always aimed at large centers;
and now his great work in the central places_of the
Levant was closing; he had worked at Ephesus, Thessa-
lonica, Corinth; he was at last to think of the supreme
center of all. Rome must always have had a dominant
interest for the ‘‘ Apostle of the Nations,’ and any sng-
gestion that his Lord’s will tended that way would
intensify it to the highest degree. Fe

(3) The form of the Ep. may throw further light on
the occasion. Tho document falls, on the whole, into
three parts. First we have chs 1-8 inclusive, a prolonged


Romans, Epistle to


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2616


exposition of the contrasted and related pbenomena of
sin and salvation, with special initial references to the
cases of Jew and non-Jew respectively. Then come
chs 9-11, which deal with the Jewish rejection of the
Jewish Messiah, developing into a prophetic revelation
of the future of Israel in the grace of God. Lastly we
have chs 12-16. Some account of the writer's plans,
and his salutations to friends, requests for prayer, etc,
form the close of this section. But it is mainly a state-
ment of Christian duty in common life, personal, civil,
religious. Under the latter head we have a noble treat-
ment of problems raised by varying opinions, particularly
on religious observances, among the converts, Jew and
Gentile.

Such phenomena cast a possible light on the
occasion of writing. The Rom mission was on
one side, by its locality and surroundings, eminently
gentile. On the other, there was, as we have seen,
a strong Judaic element in Rom life, particularl
in its lower strata, and no doubt around the Jewels
community proper there had grown up a large com-
munity of ‘‘worshippers”’ (ceBduevor, sebémenot)
or, as we commonly call them, “‘proselytes” (‘‘ad-
herents,” in the language of modern missionary
enterprise), people who, without receiving circum-
cision, attended Jewish worship and shared largely
in Jewish beliefs and ideals. Among these prose-
lytes, we may believe, the earliest evangelists at
Rome found a favorable field, and the mission church
as St. Paul knew of it contained accordingly not
only two definite classes, converts from paganism,
converts from native Judaism, but very many in
whose minds both traditions were working at once.
To such converts the problems raised by Judaism,
both without and within the church, would come
home with a constant intimacy and force, and their
case may well have been present in a special degree
in the apostle’s mind alike in the early passages
(chs 1-3) of the Ep. and in such later parts as chs
2-11, 14,15. On the one hand they would greatly
need guidance on the significance of the past of
Israel and on the destiny of the chosen race in the
future. Moreover, discussions in such circles over
the way of salvation would suggest to the great
missionary his exposition of man’s reconciliation
with a holy God and of His secrets for purity and
obedience in an unholy world. And meanwhile
the ever-recurring problems raised by ceremonial
rules in common daily life—problems of days and
seasons, and of forbidden food—would, for such
disciples, need wise and equitable treatment.

(4) Was it not with this position before him,
known to him through the many means of commu-
nication between Rome and Corinth, that St. Paul
cast his letter into this form? And did not the reali-
zation of the central greatness of Rome suggest its
ample scale? The result was a writing which shows
everywhere his sense of the presence of the Judaic
problem. Here he meets it by a statement, massive
and tender, of ‘‘heaven’s easy, artless, unencum-
bered plan’’ of redemption, grace, and glory, a plan
which on its other side is the very mystery of the
love of God, which statement is now and forever
a primary treasure of the Christian faith. And then
again he lays down for the too eager champions of
the new “‘liberty’’ a law of loving tolerance toward
slower and narrower views which is equally our
permanent, spiritual possession, bearing a signifi-
cance far-reaching and benign.

(5) It_has been held by some great students,
notably Lightfoot and Hort, that the main purpose
of Rom was to reconcile the opposing “schools” in
the church, and that its exposition of the salvation
of the individual is secondary only. The present
writer cannot take this view. Read the Ep. from
its spiritual center, so to speak, and is not the per-
spective very different? The apostle is always con-
scious of the collective aspect of the Christian life,
an aspect vital to its full health. But is he not
giving his deepest thought, animated by his own


experience of conviction and conversion, to the
sinful man’s relation to eternal law, to redeeming
grace, and to a coming glory? It is the question of
personal salvation which with St. Paul seems to us
to live and move always in the depth of his argu-
ment, even when Christian polity and policy is the

immediate theme.
Excepting only Eph (the problem of the author-
ship of which is insoluble, and we put that great
document here aside), Rom is, of all


8. Some St. Paul has written, least a letter and
Character- mosta treatise. He is seen, as we read,
. istics to approach religious problems of the


highest order in a free but reasoned suc-
cession; problems of the darkness and of the light,
of sin and grace, fall and restoration, doom and
remission, faith and obedience, suffering and glory,
transcendent hope and humblest duty, now in their
relation to the soul, now so as to develop the holy
collectivity of the common life. The Rom converts
are always first in view, but such is the writer, such
his handling, that the results are for the universal
church and for every believer of all time. Yet all
the while (and it is in this a splendid example of
that epistolary method of revelation which is one of
the glories of the NT) it is never for a moment the
mere treatise, however great. The writer is always
vividly personal, and conscious of persons. The
Ep. is indeed a masterpiece of doctrine, but also
always ‘‘the unforced, unartificial utterance of a
friend to friends.”’
Approaching the Ep. as a treatise rather than a
letter (with the considerable reserves just stated),
we indicate briefly some of its main


9. Main doctrinal deliverances. Obviously, in
Teachings imine, it is not set before us as a com-
of the plete system either of theology or of
Epistle morals; to obtain a full view of a Paul-


ine dogma and ethics we must certainly
place Eph and Col, not to speak of passages from
Thess, beside Rom. But it makes by far the near-
est approach to doctrinal completeness among the


pp.

(1) The doctrine of man.—In great measure this
resolves itself into the doctrine of man as a sinner,
as being guilty in face of an absolutely holy and
absolutely imperative law, whether announced by
abnormal revelation, as to the Jew, or through
nature and conscience only, as to the Gentile. At
the back of this presentation lies the full recognition
that man is cognizant, as a spiritual being, of the
eternal difference of right and wrong, and of the
witness of creation to personal “eternal power and
Godhead” as its cause, and that he is responsible
in an awe-inspiring way for his unfaithfulness to
such cognitions. He is a being great enough to be
in personal moral relation with God, and able to
realize his ideal only in true relation with Him;
therefore a being whose sin and guilt have an un-
fathomable evil in them. So is he bound by his
own failure that he cannot restore himself; God
alone, in sovereign mercy, provides for his pardon
by the propitiation of Christ, and for his restoration
by union with Christ in the life given by the Holy
Spirit. Such is man, once restored, once become
“a saint” (a being hallowed), a ‘“‘son of God’ by
adoption and grace, that his final glorification will
be the signal (in some sense the cause?) of a trans-
figuration of the whole finite universe. Meanwhile,
man is a being actually in the midst of a life of
duty and trial, a member of civil society, with ob-
ligations to its order. He lives not in a God-
forsaken world, belonging only to another and evil
power. His new life, the ‘mind of the Spirit” in
him, is to show itself in a conduct and characte
good for the state and for society at large, as well
as for the “brotherhood.”


2617


(2) The doctrine of God—True to the revelation
of the OT, St. Paul presents God as absolute in
will and power, so that He is not only the sole author
of nature but the eternal and ultimately sole cause
of goodness in man. To Him in the last resort all
is due, not only the provision of atonement but the
power and will to embrace it. The great passages
which set before us a “fore-defining” (mpodprots,
proorisis, “predestination”) and election of the
saints are all evidently inspired by this motive, the
jealous resolve to trace to the one true Cause all
motions and actions of good. The apostle seems
e.g. almost to risk affirming a sovereign causation
of the opposite, of unbelief and its sequel. But
patient study will find that it is not so. God is not
said to “fit for ruin” the ‘vessels of wrath.’ Their
woeful end is overruled to His glory, but nowhere is
it taken to be caused by Him. All along the writer’s
intense purpose is to constrain the actual believer
to see the whole causation of his salvation in the will
and power of Him whose inmost character is re-
vealed in the supreme fact that, “for us all,” “he
spared not his Son.”

(3) The doctrine of the Son of God.—The Ep.
affords materials for a magnificently large Chris-
tology. The relation of the Son to creation is
indeed not expounded in terms (as in Col), but it


is implied in the language of ch 8, where the inter- |


relation of our redemption and the transfiguration
of Nature is dealt with. We have the Lord’s man-
hood fully recognized, while His Godhead (as we
read in 9 5; so too Robertson, ut supra) is stated in
terms, and it is most certainly implied in the lan-
guage and tone of e.g. the close of ch 8. Who but
a bearer of the Supreme Nature could satisfy the
conception indicated in such words as those of 8
32.35-39, coming as they do from a Heb monotheist
of intense convictions? Meantime this transcend-
ent Person has so put Himself in relation with us,
as the willing worker of the Father’s purpose of
love, that He is the sacrifice of peace for us (ch 3),
our “propitiatory’ One (idacrhpior, hilastérion,
is now known to be an adj.), such that (whatever the
mystery, which leaves the fact no less certain) the
man who believes on Him, i.e. (as ch 4 fully demon-
strates) relies on Him, gives himself over to His
mercy, is not only forgiven but ‘‘justified,” “justi-
fied by faith.”’ And “justification’’ is more than for-
giveness; it is not merely the remission of a penalty
but a welcome to the offender, pronounced to be
lawfully at peace with the eternal holiness and love.
See JusTiFICATION; PROPITIATION. ues
In closest connection with this message of justi-
fication is the teaching regarding union with the
Christ who has procured the justification. This is
rather assumed than expounded In Rom (we have
the exposition more explicitly in Eph, Col, and
Gal), but the assumption is present wherever the
pregnant phrase “in Christ’ is used. Union is, for
St. Paul, the central doctrine of all, giving life and
relation to the whole range. As Lightfoot has well
said (Sermons in St. Paul’s, no. 16), he is the apostle
not primarily of justification, or of liberty, great
as these truths are with him, but of union with
Christ. It is through union that justification 1s
ours; the merits of the Head are for the member.
It is through union that spiritual liberty and power
are ours; the Spirit of life is from the Head to the
member. Held by grace in this profound and multi-
plex connection, where life, love and law are inter-
laced, the Christian is entitled to an assurance full
of joy that nothing shall separate him, soul and
(ultimately) body, from his once sacrificed and now
risen and triumphant Lord. _ ae
(4) The doctrine of the Spirit of God.—No writing
of the NT but St. John’s Gospel is so full upon this
great theme as Rom. Ch 8 may be said to be the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Romans, Epistle to


locus classicus in the Epp. for the work of the Holy
Ghost in the believer. By implication it reveals
personality as well as power (see esp. ver 26), Note
particularly the place of this great passage, in which
revelation and profoundest conditions run con-
tinually into each other. It follows ch 7, in which
the apostle depicts, in terms of his own profound
and typical experience, the struggles of conscience
and will over the awful problem of the “bondage’’
of indwelling sin. If we interpret the passage aright,
the case supposed is that of a regenerate man, who
however, attempts the struggle against inward
evil armed, as to consciousness, with his own facul-
ties merely, and finds the struggle insupportable.
Then comes in the Divine solution, the promised
Spirit of life and liberty, welcomed and put into
use by the man who has found his own resources
vain, “In Christ Jesus,’’ in union with Him, he
“by the Spirit does to death the practices of the
body,’”’ and rises through conscious liberty into an
exulting hope of ‘‘the liberty of the glory of the sons
of God’’—not so, however, as to know nothing of
“eroaning within himself,’’ while yet in the body;
but it is a groan which leaves intact the sense of
sonship and Divine love, and the expectation of a
final completeness of redemption.

(5) The doctrine of duty While the Ep. is emi-
nently a message of salvation, it is also, in vital
connection with this, a treasury of principle and pre-
cept for the life of duty. It does indeed lay down
the sovereign freedom of our acceptance for Christ’s
sake alone, and so absolutely that (6 1.2.15) the
writer anticipates the inference (by foes, or by mis-
taken friends), “Let us continue im sin.” But the
answer comes instantly, and mainly through the
doctrine of union. Our pardon is not an isolated
fact. Secured only by Christ’s sacrifice, received
only by the faith which receives Him as our all, it
is ipso facto never received alone but with all His
other gifts, for it becomes ours as we receive, not
merely one truth about Him, but Him. Therefore,
we receive His Life as our truc life; and it is morally
unthinkable that we can receive this and express
it in sin. This assumed, the Ep. (ch 12 and on-
ward) lays down with much detail and in admirable
application large ranges of the law of duty, civil,
social, personal, embracing duties to the state,
loyalty to its laws, payment of its taxes, recognition
of the sacredness of political order, even ministered
by pagans; and also duties to society and the
church, including a large and loving tolerance even
in religious matters, and a response to every call
of the law of unselfish love. However we can or
cannot adjust mentally the two sides, that of a
supremely free salvation and that of an inexorable
responsibility, there the two sides are, in the Pauline
message. And reason and faith combine to assure
us that both sides are eternally true, ‘‘antinomies”
whose harmony will be explained hereafter in a
higher life, but which are to be lived out here con-
currently by the true disciple, assured of their ulti-
mate oneness of source in the eternal love.

(6) The doctrine of Israel —Very briefly we touch
on this department of the message of Rom, mainly
to point out that the problem of Israel’s unbelief
nowhere else in St. Paul appears as so heavy a
load on his heart, and that on the other hand we
nowhere else have anything like the light he claims
to throw (ch 11) on Israel’s future. Here, if any-
where, he appears as the predictive prophet, charged
with the statement of a “mystery,” and with the
announcement of its issues. ‘The promises to Israel
have never failed, nor are they canceled. At the
worst, they have always been inherited by a chosen
remnant, Israel within Israel. And a time is com-
ing when, in a profound connection with Messianic
blessing on the Gentiles, ‘all Israel shall be saved,”


Rome


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2618


with a salvation which shall in turn be new life to
the world outside Israel. Throughout the passage
St. Paul speaks, not as one who “will not give up a
hope,” but as having had revealed to him a vast
and definite prospect, in the Divine purpose.

It is not possible in our present space to work out
other lines of the message of Rom. Perhaps enough
has been done to stimulate the reader’s own in-
quiries.


Lirerature.—Of the Fathers, Chrysostom and
Augustine are preéminent as interpreters of Rom:
Chrysostom in his expository Homilies, models of elo-
quent and illuminating discourse, full of ‘‘sanctified
common sense,’’ while not perfectly appreciative of the
inmost doctrinal characteristics; Augustine, not in any
continuous comm., but in his anti-Pelagian writings,
which show the sympathetic intensity of his study of the
doctrine of the Ep., not so much on justification as on
grace and the will. Of the Reformers, Calvin is emi-
nently the great commentator, almost modern in his
constant aim to ascertain the sacred writer's meaning
hy open-eyed inference direct from the words. On
Rom he is at his best; and it is remarkable that on cer-
tain leading passages where grace is the theme he is
much less rigidly ‘‘Calvinistic’” than some of his fol-
lowers. In modern times, the not learned but masterly
exposition of Robert Haldane (c¢ 1830) claims mention,
and the eloquent and highly suggestive expository lec-
tures (about the same date) of Thomas Chalmers. H. A.
W. Meyer (5th ed, 1872, ET 1873-74) among the Ger-
mans is excellent for carefulness and insight; Godet (1879,
ET 1881) equally so among French-writing divines; of
late English interpreters I. A. Beet (1877, many revisions),
Sanday and Headlam (1895, in the ‘‘International’’ series)
and E. H. Gifford (admirable for scholarship and exposi-
tion; his work was printed first in the Speaker's [Bible]
Comm., 1881, now separately) claim particular mention.
Cone writes on Rom in The Exzpositer’s Gr Test.
‘ Luther’s lectures on Rom, delivered in 1516-17 and
long supposed lost, have been recovered and were pub-
lished by J. Ficker in 1908. Among modern German
commentators, the most important is B. Weiss in the
later revisions of the Meyer series (9th ed, 1899), while
a very elahorate comm. has heen produced by Zahn in
his own series (1910). Briefer are the works of Lipsius
(Hand-Kommentar, 2d ed, 1892, very scholarly and sug-
gestive); Lietzmann (Handbuch zum NT, interest chiefly
linguistic), and Jiilicher (in J. Weiss, Schriften des NTs,
2d ed, 1908, an intensely able piece of popular ex-
position).

A. E. Garvie has written a brilliant little comm. in the
“{New] Century" series (no date); that of R. St. John
Parry in the Cambridge Gr Test., 1913, is more popular,
despite its use of the Gr text. F.B. Westcott’s St. Paul
and Justification, 1913, contains a close grammatical
study with an excellent paraphrase.

The writer may be allowed to name his short comm.
(1879) in the Cambridge Bible fer Schools and a fuller
Seer a more homiletic style, in the Erpositor's Bible,


ROME, rom:


I. Ds8vELOPMENT OF THE REPUBLICAN CONSTITUTION
1. Original Roman State
2. Struggle between Patricians and Plebeians
3. The Senate and Magistrates
4, Underlying Principles
If. Extension or Roman SOveEREIGNTY
Ill. Tas ImpsriaL GovERNMENT
1. Imperial Authority
2. Three Classes of Citizens
IV. Roman Re ricion
1. Deities
2. Religious Decay
V. Rome anp THE JEWws
1. Judaea under Roman Procurators and Governors
2. Jewish Proselytism
VI. Roms anp THE CHRISTIANS
1. Introduction
2. Tolerance and Proscription
3. Persecution
LITERATURE


Rome (Lat and Ital. Roma; ‘Pdpn, Rhdmé):
The capital of the Rom republic and empire, later
the center of Lat Christendom, and since 1871
capital of the kingdom of Italy, is situated mainly
ou the left bank of the Tiber about 15 miles from
the Mediterranean Sea in 41° 53’ 54” N. lat. and
12° 0’ 12” long. E. of Greenwich.

It would be impossible in the limited space as-
signed to this article to give even a comprehensive
outline of the ancient history of the Eternal City.
It will suit the general purpose of the work to


HanpbieY Dunetu


consider the relations of the Rom government and
society with the Jews and Christians, and, in addi-
tion, to present a rapid survey of the earlier devel-
opment of Rom institutions and power, so as to
provide the necessary historical setting for the

appreciation of the more essential subjects.
L. Development of the Republican Constitution.
—The traditional chronology for the earliest period
of Rom history is altogether unreli-


i. Original able, partly because the Gauls, in
Roman ravaging the city in 390 BC, de-
State stroyed the monuments which might


have offered faithful testimony of the
earlier period (Livy vi.l). It is known that there
was a settlement on the site of Rome before the
traditional date of the founding (753 BC). The
original Rom state was the product of the coalition
of a number of adjacent clan-communities, whose
names were perpetuated in the Rom gentes, or
groups of imaginary kindred, a historical survival
which had lost all significance in the period of
authentic history. The chieftains of the associated
clans composed the primitive senate or council of
elders, which exercised sovereign authority. But
as is customary in the development of human society
a military or monarchical régime succeeded the
looser patriarchal or sacerdotal organs of authority.
This second stage may be identified with the
legendary rule of the Tarquins, which was probably
a period of Etruscan domination. The confederacy
of clans was welded into a homogeneous political
entity, and society was organized for civic ends,
upon a timocratic basis. The forum was drained
and became a social, industrial and political center,
and the Capitoline temple of Jupiter, Juno, and
Minerva (Etruscan pseudo-Hellenic deities) was
erected as a common shrine for all the people. But
above all the Romans are indebted to these foreign
kings for a training in discipline and obedience
which was exemplified in the later conception of
magisterial authority signified by the term im-
perium,

The prerogatives of the kings passed over to the
consuls. The reduction of the tenure of power to
a single year and the institution of the principle
of colleagueship were the earliest checks to the
abuse of unlimited authority. But the true corner-
stone of Rom liberty was thought to be the lez
Valeria, which provided that no citizen should be
put to death by a magistrate without being allowed
the right of appeal to the decision of the assembly
of the people.

A period of more than 150 years after the estab-
lishment of the republic was consumed chiefly by the

struggle between the two classes or


2. Struggle orders, the patricians and plebeians.
between The former were the descendants of
Patricians the original clans and constituted the
and populus, or body-politic, in a more
Plebeians particular sense. The plebeians were


descendants of former slaves and de-

pendents, or of strangers who had been attracted
to Rome by the obvious advantages for industry
and trade. They enjoyed the franchise as mem-
bers of the military assembly (comitia centuriata),
but had no share in the magistracies or other civic
honors and emoluments, and were excluded from
the knowledge of the civil law which was handed
down in the patrician families as an oral tradition.
The first step in the progress of the plebeians
toward political equality was taken when they
wrested from the patricians the privilege of choosing
representatives from among themselves, the trib-
unes, whose function of bearing aid to oppressed
plebeians was rendered effective by the right of
veto (tntereessio), by virtue of which any act of a
magistrate could be arrested. The codification of


2619


the law in the Twelve Tables was a distinct ad-
vantage to the lower classes, because the evils which
they had suffered were largely due to a harsh and
abusive interpretation of legal institutions, the
nature of which had been obscure (see Roman
Law). The abrogation, directly thereafter, of the
prohibition of intermarriage between the classes

resulted in their gradual intermingling.
The kings had reduced the senate to the position
of a mere advising body. But under the republi-
can régime it recovered in fact the


3. Senate authority of which it was deprived in
and Magis- theory. The controlling power of the
trates senate is the most significant feature


. of the republican government, although
it was recognized by no statute or other constitu-
tional document. It was due in part. to the diminu-
tion of the power of the magistrates, and in part
to the manner in which the senators were chosen.
The lessening of the authority of the magistrates
was the result of the increase in their number,
which led not only to the curtailment of the actual
prerogative of each, but also to the contraction of
their aggregate independent influence. The aug-
mentation of the number of magistrates was made
necessary by the territorial expansion of the state
and the elaboration of administration. But it was
partly the result of plebeian agitation. The events
of 367 BC may serve as a suitable example to illus-
trate the action of these influences. For when the
plebeians carried by storm the citadel of patrician
exclusiveness in gaining admission to the consul-
ship, the highest regular magistracy, the necessity
for another magistrate with general competency
afforded an opportunity for making a compensating
concession to the patricians, and the praetorship
was created, to which at first members of the old
aristocracy were alone eligible. Under the fully
developed constitution the regular magistracies
were five in number, consulship, praetorship,
aedileship, tribunate, and quaestorship, all of which
were filled by annual elections.

Mention has been made of the manner of choosing
the members of the senate as a factor in the devel-
opment of the authority of the supreme council.
At first the highest executive officers of the state
exercised the right of selecting new members to
maintain the senators at the normal number of
three hundred. Later this function was transferred
to the censors who were elected at intervals of five
years. But custom and later statute ordained that
the most distinguished citizens should be chosen,
and in the Rom community the highest standard of
distinction was service to the state, in other words,
the holding of public magistracies. It followed,
therefore, that the senate was in reality an assem-
bly of all living ex-magistrates. The senate in-
cluded, moreover, all the political wisdom and
experience of the community, and so great was its
prestige for these reasons, that, although the ex-
pression of its opinion (senatus consultwm) was
endowed by law with no compelling force, it mevi-
tably guided the conduct of the consulting magis-
trate, who was practically its minister, rather than
its president. ; ae

When the plebeians gained admission to the mag-
istracies, the patriciate lost its political significance.
But only the wealthier plebeian families were able
to profit by this extension of privilege, inasmuch
as a political career required freedom from gainful
pursuits and also personal influence. These ple-
beian families readily coalesced with the patricians
and formed a new aristocracy, which is called the
nobilitas for the sake of distinction. It rested ulti-
mately upon the foundation of wealth. The dig-
nity conferred by the holding of public magistra-
cies was its title to distinction. The senate was its


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Rome


organ. Rome was never a true democracy except
in theory. During the whole period embraced be-
tween the final levelling of the old distinctions based
upon blood (287 BC) and the beginning of the
period of revolution (133 BC), the magistracies were
occupied almost exclusively by the representatives
of the comparatively limited number of families
which constituted the aristocracy. These alone
entered the senate through the doorway of the
magistracies, and the data would almost justify
us in asserting that the republican and senatorial
government were substantially and chronologically
identical.

The seeds of the political and social revolution
were sown during the Second Punic War and the
period which followed it. The prorogation of mili-
tary authority established a dangerous precedent,
in violation of the spirit of the republic, so that
Pub. Cornelius Scipio was really the forerunner of
Marius, Julius Caesar, and Augustus. The stream
of gold which found its way from the provinces to
Rome was a bait to attract the cupidity of the less
scrupulous senators, and led to the growth of the
worst kind of professionalism in politics. The
middle class of small farmers decayed for various
reasons; the allurement of service in the rich but
effete countries of the Orient attracted many. The
cheapness of slaves made imdependent farming
unprofitable and led to the increase in large estates;
the cultivation of grain was partly displaced by
that of the vine and olive, which were less suited
to the habits and ability of the older class of farmers.

The more immediate cause of the revolution was
the inability of the senate as a whole to control the
conduct of its more radical or violent members.
For as political ambition became more ardent with
the increase in the material prizes to be gained,
aspiring leaders turned their attention to the people,
and sought to attain the fulfilment of their pur-
poses by popular legislation setting at nought the
concurrence of the senate, which custom had con-
secrated as a requisite preliminary for popular ac-
tion. The loss of initiative by the senate meant the
subversion of senatorial government. The senate
possessed in the veto power of the tribunes a
weapon for coercing unruly magistrates, for one of
the ten tribunes could always be induced to inter-
pose his veto to prohibit the passage of popular
legislation. But this weapon was broken when Tib.
Gracchus declared in 133 BC that a tribune who
opposed the wishes of the people was no longer their
representative, and sustained this assertion.

It would be foreign to the purpose of the present
article to trace the vicissitudes of the civil strife

of the last century of the republic. A


4. Under- few words will suffice to suggest the
lying general principles which lay beneath
Principles the surface of political and social


phenomena. Attention hasbeen called
to the ominous development of the influence of
military commanders and the increasing empha-
sis of popular favor. These were the most im-
portant tendencies throughout this period, and the
coalition of the two was fatal to the supremacy of
the senatorial government. Marinus after winning
unparalleled military glory formed a political alli-
ance with Glaucia and Saturninus, the leaders of
the popular faction in the city in 100 BC. This
was a turning-point in the course of the revolution.
But the importance of the sword soon outweighed
that of the populace in the combination which was
thus constituted. In the civil wars of Marius and
Sulla constitutional questions were decided for the
first time by superiority of military strength exclu-
sively. Repeated appeals to brute force dulled the
perception for constitutional restraints and the
rights of minorities. The senate had already dis-


Rome


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2620


played signs of partial paralysis at the time of the
Gracchi. How rapidly its debility must have in-
creased as the sword cut off its most stalwart mem-
bers! Its power expired in the proscriptions, or
organized murder of political opponents. The
popular party was nominally triumphant, but in
theory the Rom state was still an urban common-
wealth with a single political center. The fran-
chise conld be exercised only at Rome. It followed
from this that the actual political assemblies were
made up largely of the worthless element which
was sO numerous in the city, whose irrational in-
stincts were guided and controlled by shrewd
political leaders, particularly those who united in
themselves military ability and the wiles of the
demagogue. Sulla, Crassus, Julius Caesar, Antony,
and lastly Octavian were in effect the ancient
counterpart of the modern political “‘boss.’? When
such men realized their ultimate power and inevi-
table rivalry, the ensuimg struggle for supremacy
and for the survival of the fittest formed the neces-
sary process of elimination leading naturally to the
establishment of the monarchy, which was in this
case the rule of the last survivor. When Octavian
received the title Augustus and the proconsnlar
power (27 BC), the transformation was accom-
plished.


Literature.—The standard work on Rom political
institutions is Mommsen and Marquardt, Handbuch der
klassischen Altertimer. Abbott, Rom Political Institu-
tions, Boston and London, 1901, offers a useful summary
treatment of the subject.

I, Extension of Roman Sovereignty.—Sce Ro-
MAN EMPIRE AND CuRISTIANITY, I.


Lireraturs.—Only tbe most important general works
on Rom history can be mentioned: Ihne, Rémische
Geschichte (20 ed), Leipzig, 1893-96, ET, Longmans,
London, 1871-82; Mommsen, History of Rome, ET by
Dickson, New York. 1874; Niebuhr, History of Rome,
ET by Hare and_Tbhirlwall, Cambridge, 1831-32; Pais,
Storia di Roma, Turin, 1898-99; Ferrero, Greatness and
Decline of Rome, ET by Zimmern, New York, 1909.

If. The Imperial Government.—Angustus dis-
played considerable tact in blending his own mastery

in the state with the old institutions
1. Imperial of the republican constitution. His
Authority authority, legally, rested mainly upon

the tribunician power, which he had
probably received as early as 36 BC, but which
was established on a better basis in 23 BC, and the
proconsular prerogative (imperium proconsulare),
conferred in 27 BC. By virtue of the first he was
empowered to summon the senate or assemblies
and could veto the action of almost any magistrate.
The second title of authority conferred upon him
the command of the military forces of the state
and consequently the administration of the prov-
inces where troops were stationed, besides a general
supervision over the government of the other
provinces. It follows that a distinction was made
(27 BC) between the imperial provinces which were
administered by the emperor's representatives
(legatt Augustt pro praetore) and the senatorial
provinces where the republican machinery of ad-
ministration was retained. The governors of the
latter were called generally proconsuls (see PRov-
INCE). Mention is made of two proconsuls in the
NT, Gallio in Achaia (Acts 18 12) and Sergius
Paulus in Cyprus (13 7). It is instructive to com-
pare the lenient and common-sense attitude of these
trained Rom aristocrats with that of the turbulent
local mobs who dealt with St. Paul in Asia Minor,
Judaea, or Greece (Tucker, Life in the Rom World
of Nero and St. Poul, New York, 1910, 95).

Rom citizens were still divided into three classes
socially, senatorial, equestrian, and plebeian, and
the whole system of government harmonized with
this triple division. The senatorial class was com-
posed of descendants of senators and those upon |


whom the emperors conferred the latus clavus, or
privilege of wearing the tunic with broad purple
border, the sign of membership in this


2. Three order. The quaestorship was still the
Classes of door of admission to the senate. The
Citizens qualifications for membership in the


senate were the possession of senatorial
rank and property of the value of not less than
1,000,000 sesterces ($45,000; £9,000). Tiberius
transferred the election of magistrates from the
people to the senate, which was already practically
aclosed body. Under the empire senatus consulia
received the force of law. Likewise the senate
acquired judicial functions, sitting as a court of
justice for trymg important criminal cases and
hearing appeals in civil cases from the senatorial
provinces. The equestrian class was made up of
those who possessed property of the value of 400,000
sesterces or more, and the privilege of wearing the
narrow purple band on thetunic. With the knights
the emperors filled many important financial and
administrative positions in Italy and the provinces
which were under their control.

IV. Roman Religion——(1) The Rom religion
was originally more consistent than the Gr, because
the deities as conceived by the un-
imaginative Lat genius were entirely
without human character. They were
the influences or forces which directed the visible
phenomena of the physieal world, whose favor was
necessary to the material prosperity of mankind.
It would be incongruous to assume the existence of
a system of theological doctrines in the primitive
period. Ethical considerations entered to only a
limited extent into the attitude of the Romans
toward their gods. Religion partook of the nature
of a contract by which men pledged themselves to
the scrupulous observance of certain sacrifices and
other ceremonies, and in return deemed themselves
entitled to expect the active support of the gods in
bringing their projects to a fortunate conclusion.
The Romans were naturally polytheists as a result
of their conception of divinity. Since before the
dawn of science there was no semblance of unity
in the natura] world, there could be no unity in
heaven. There must be a controlling spirit over
every important object or class of objects, every
person, and every process of nature. The gods,
therefore, were more numerous than mankind itself.

(2) At an early period the government became
distinctly secular. The priests were the servants
of the community for preserving the venerable
aggregation of formulae and ceremonies, many of
which lost at an early period such spirit as they
once possessed. The magistrates were the trne
representatives of the community in its relation-
ship with the deities both in seeking the divine will
in the auspices and in performing the more impor-
taut sacrifices.

(3) The Romans at first did not make statues of
their gods. This was partly due to lack of skill,
but mainly to the vagueness of their conceptions
of the higher beings. Symbols sufficed to signify
their existence, a spear, for instanee, standing for
Mars. The process of reducing the gods to human
form was inaugurated when they came into contact
with the Etruscans and Greeks. The Tarquins
summoned Etruscan artisans and artists to Rome,
who made from terra cotta cultus statues and a
pediment gronp for the Capitoline temple.

The types of the Gr deities had already been definitely
established when the Hellenic influence in molding
Rom culture became predominant. When the form of
the Gr gods became familiar to the Romans in works of
sculpture, they gradually supplanted those Rom deities
with which they were nominally identified as a result of a
real or fancied resemblance. See GREECE, RELIGION IN.

(4) The importation of new gods was a comparatively


1. Deities


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Rome


casy matter, Polytheism is by its nature tolerant be-
cause of Its indefiniteness. The Romans could no more
presume to have exhaustive knowledge of the gods than
they could pretend to possess a comprehensive acquaint-
ance with the universe. The number of their gods in-
creased of necessity as human consciousness of natural
phenomena expanded. Besides, it was customary to
invite the gods of conquered cities to transfer their abode


Pantheon.


to Rome and favor the Ronians in their undertakings,
But the most productive source for religious expansion
was the Sibylline Books. See Arocaryptic LITERATURE,
Vv. This oracular work was brought to Rome from
Cumae, a center of the cult of Apollo. It was consulted
at times of crisis with a view to discover what special
ceremonies would secure adequate divine aid. The forms
of worship recommended by the Sibylline Books were
exclusively Gr. As early as the 5th cent. BC the cult
of Apollo was introduced at Rome. Heracles and the
Dioscuri found their way thither about the same time.
Later Italian Diana was merged with Artemis, and the
group of Ceres, Liber, and Libera were identified with
foreign Demeter, Dionysus, and Persephone. Thus
Rom religion became progressively Hellenized. By the
close of the Second Punic War the greater gods of Greece
had all found a home by the Tiher, and the myriad of
petty local deities who found no counterpart in_the
celestial beings of Mt. Olympus fell into oblivion. Their
memory was retained by the antiquarian lore of the
prices alone (see Roman Empire AND CHRISTIANITY,
TI, 2).
Rom religion received with the engrafted
branches of Gr religion the germs of rapid decay,
for its Hellenization made Rom reli-
2. Religious gion peculiarly susceptible to the attack
Decay of philosophy. The cultivated class
in Gr society was already permeated
with skepticism. The philosophers made the gods
appear ridiculous. Gr philosophy gained a firm
foothold in Rome in the 2d cent. BC, and it became
customary a little later to look upon Athens as a
sort of university town where the sons of the aris-
tocracy should be sent for the completion of their
education in the schools of the philosophers. Thus
at the termination of the republican era religious
faith had departed from the upper classes largely,
and during the turmoil of the civil wars even the
external ceremonies were often abandoned and
many temples fell into ruins. There had never
been any intimate connection between formal
religion and conduct, except when the faith of the
gods was invoked to insure the fulfilment of sworn
promises. bier
Augustus tried in every way to restore the old
religion, rebuilding no fewer than 82 temples which
lay in ruins at Rome. A revival of religious faith
did occur under the empire, although its spirit was
largely alien to that which had been displayed in
the performance of the official cult. The people
remained superstitious, even when the cultivated
classes adopted a skeptical philosophy. The
formal religion of the state no longer appealed to
them, since it offered nothing to the emotions or


hopes. On the other hand the sacramental, mys-
terious character of oriental religions inevitably
attracted them. This is the reason why the reli-
gions of Egypt and Syria spread over the empire and
exercised an immeasurable influence in the moral
life of the people. The partial success of Judaism
and the ultimate triumph of Christianity may be as-
cribed in part to the same causes.

In concluding we should bear in mind that the
state dictated no system of theology, that the em-
pire in the beginning presented the spectacle of a
sort of religious chaos where all national cults were
guaranteed protection, that Rom polytheism was
naturally tolerant, and that the only form of religion
which the state could not endure was one which was
equivalent to an attack upon the system of poly-
theism as a whole, since this would imperil the wel-
fare of the community by depriving the deities of
the offerings and other services in return for which
their favor could be expected.


Lirerature.—Marquardt, Rémische Staatsverwaltung,
III, 3, ‘Das Sacralwesen’’; Wissowa, Religion u. Kul-
tus der Rémer, Munich, 1902; Boissier, La religion ro-
maine, Paris, 1884.


V. Rome and the Jews.—Judaea_ became a part
of the province of Syria in 63 BC (Jos, BJ, vii, 7),
and Hyrcanus, brother of the last


1. Judaea_ king, remained as high priest (archier-
under etis kai ethndrchés; Jos, Ani, XIV,
Roman iv, 4) invested with judicial as well as


Procurators sacerdotal functions. But Antony
and and Octavius gave Pal (40 BC) as
Governors a kingdom to Herod, surnamed the

Great, although his rule did not be-
come effective until 3 years later. His sovereignty
was upheld by a Rom legion stationed at Jerus
(Jos, Ant, XV, iii, 7), and he was obliged to pay
tribute to the Rom government and provide auxil-
iaries for the Rom army (Appian, Bell. Cwv., v.75).
Herod built Caesarea in honor of Augustus (Jos, Ant,
XV, ix, 6), and the Rom procurators later made it
the seat of government. At his death in 4 BC the
kingdom was divided between his three surviving
sons, the largest portion falling to Archelaus, who
ruled Judaea, Samaria and Idumaea with the title
ethnarchés (Jos, Ant, XVII, xi, 4) until 6 AD, when
he was deposed and his realm reduced to the position
of a province. The administration by Rom proc-
urators (see ProcuratTor), which was now estab-
lished, was interrupted during the period 41-44 AD,
when royalauthority was exercised by Herod Agrippa,
grandson of Herod the Great, over the lands which
had been embraced in the kingdom of his grandfather
(Jos, Ant, XIX, viii, 2), and, after 53 AD, Agrippa IT
ruled a considerable part of Pal (Jos, Ant, XX,
vii, 1; viii, 4).

After the fall of Jerus and the termination of the
great revolt im 70 AD, Pal remained a separate
province. Henceforth a legion (legio X Fretensis)
was added to the military forces stationed in the
land, which was encamped at the ruins of Jerns.
Consequently, imperial governors of praetorian
rank (legatt Augusti pro praetore) took the place
of the former procurators (Jos, BJ, VII, i, 2, 3; Dio
Cassius lv.23).

Several treaties are recorded between the Ro-
mans and Jews as early as the time of the Macca-
bees Vos, Ant, XII, x, 6; XIII, ix, 2; viii, 5), and
Jews are known to have been at Rome as early as 138
BC. They became very numerous in the capital
after the return of Pompey who brought back many
captives (see Lisrrtings). Cicero speaks of mul-
titudes of Jews at Rome in 58 BC (Pro Flacco 28),
and Caesar was very friendly toward them (Sueto-
nius Caesar 84). Held in favor by Augustus, they
recovered the p'ivilege of collecting sums to send to
the temple (Philo Legatio ad Caitum 40). Agrippa


Rome
Rosh


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2622


offered 100 oxen in the temple when visiting Herod
(Jos, Ant, XVI, 11,1), and Augustus established a
daily offering of a bull and two lambs. Upon the
whole the Rom government displayed noticeable
consideration for the religious scruples of the Jews.
They were exempted from military service and
the duty of appearing in court on the Sabbath.
Yet Tiberius repressed Jewish rites in Rome in 19
AD (Suetonius Tiberius 36) and Claudius expelled
the Jews from the city in 49 AD (Suetonius Clau-
dius 25); but in both mstances repression was not
of long duration.

The Jews made themselves notorious in Rome
in propagating their religion by means of prosely-

tizing (Horace Satires i4, 142; i.9,
2. Jewish 69; Juvenal xiv.96; Tacitus Hist.
Proselytism v. 5), and the literature of the Augustan

age contains several references to the
observation of the Sabbath (Tibullus 1.3; Ovid
Ars amatoria 1.67, 415; Remedium amoris 219).
Proselytes from among the Gentiles were not always
required to observe all the prescriptions of the Law.
The proselytes of the Gate (sebémeno?), as they were
called, renounced idolatry and serious moral] abuses
and abstained from the blood and meat of suffocated
animals. Among such proselytes may be included
the centurion of Capernaum (Lk 7 5), the centu-
rion Cornelius (Acts 10 1), and the empress
Poppaea (Jos, Ant, XX, vill, 11; Tacitus Ann.
xv1.6).

On ‘‘proselytes of the Gate,’’ GJV‘, ITI, 177, very
properly corrects the errorin HJ P. These ''Gate"' people
were not proselytes at all; they refused to take the final
step that carried them into Judaism—viz. circumcision
(Ramsay, Expos, 1896, p. 200; Harnack, Expansion of
Christianity, I, 11; see Devout; PRosELYTEs),

Notwithstanding the diffusion of Judaism by
means of proselytism, the Jews themselves lived for
the most part in isolation in the poorest parts of the
city or suburbs, across the Tiber, near the Circus
Maximus, or outside the Porta Capena. Inscrip-
tions show that there were seven communities, each
with its synagogue and council of elders presided
over by a gerusiarch. Five cemeteries have been
discovered with many Gr, a few Lat, but no Heb
inscriptions.

Literature.—Ewald, The Hist of Israel, ET by Smith,
London, 1885; Renan, Hist of the People of Israel, ET,
Boston, 1896; Schtirer, The Jewish People in the Time of
Jesus Christ, ET by MacPherson, New York.

VI. Rome and the Christians.—The date of the
introduction of Christianity into Rome cannot be

determined. A Christian community
1. Intro- existed at the time of the arrival of St.
duction of Paul (Acts 28 15), to which he had
Christianity addressed his Ep. a few years before

(58 AD). It is commonly thought
that the statement regarding the expulsion of the
Jews from Rome under Claudius on account of the
commotion excited among them by the agitation of
Chrestus (Suctonius Claudius 25: Iudaeos impul-
sore Chresto assidue tumultuantis Roma expulit),
probably in 49 AD, is proof of the diffusion of Chris-
tian teaching in Rome, on the ground that Chrestus
is a colloquial, or mistaken, form of Christus. It
has been suggested that the Christian faith was
brought to the capital of the empire by some of
the Romans who were converted at the time of
Pentecost (Acts 2 10.41). It would be out of place
to discuss here the grounds for the traditional be-
lief that St. Peter was twice in Rome, once before
50 AD and again subsequent to the arrival of St.
Paul, and that together the two apostles estahlished
the church there. Our present concern is with the
attitude of the government and society toward
Christianity, when once established. It muy suf-
fice, therefore, to remind the reader that St. Paul


| cousin Flavius Clemens (Dio Cassius, xiii) and


was permitted to preach freely while nominally in
custody (Phil 1 13), and that as early as 64 AD the
Christians were very numerous (Tacitus Ann. xv.44:
multitudo ingens).

At first the Christians were not distinguished from
the Jews, but shared in the toleration, or even pro-
tection, which was usually conceded
to Judaism as the national religiou of
ance and one of the peoples embraced within
Proscription the empire. Christianity was not

legally proscribed until after its dis-
tinction from Judaism was clearly perceived. Two
questions demand our attention: (1) When was
Christianity recognized as distinct from Judaism?
(2) When was the profession of Christianity declared
acrime? These problems are of fundamental im-
portance in the history of the ecburch under the
Rom empire.


(1) If we may accept the passage in Suetonius cited
ahove (Claudius 25) as testimony on the vicissitudes of
Christianity, we infer that at that time the Christians
were confused with the Jews. The account of Pomponia
Graecina, who was committed to the jurisdiction of her
husband (Tacitus Ann. xiii.32) for adherence to a foreign
helief (superstitionis externae rea), is frequently cited as
proof that as early as 57 AD Christianity had secured a
convert in the aristocracy. The characterization of the
evidence in this case by the contemporary authority
from whom Tacitus has gleaned this incident would
apply appropriately to the adherence to Judaism_or
several oriental religions from the point of view of Ro-
mmans of that time; for Pomponia had lived in a very
austere manner since 44 AD. Since there is some other
evidence that Pomponia was a Christian, the indefinite
account of the accusation against her as mentioned by
Tacitus is partial proof that Christianity had not as
yet heen commonly recognized as a distinct religion
(Marucchi, Eléments d’archéologie chrétienne I, 13). At
the time of the great conflagration in 64 AD the popu-
lace knew of the Christians, and Nero charged them
collectively with a plot to destroy the city (Tacitus Anna.
xv.44). The recognition of the distinctive character of
Christianity had already taken place at this time. This
was probahly due in large measure to the circumstances
of St. Paul's sojourn and trial in Rome and to the unprec-
edented numher of converts made at that time. The
empress Poppaea, who was probably an adherent of
Judaism (Jos, dant, XX, viii), may have enlightened the
imperial court regarding the heresy of the Christians and
their separation from the parent stock.

(2) In attempting to determine approximately the
time at which Christianity was placed under the official
ban of the imperial government, it will he convenient to
adopt as starting-points certain incontestable dates
hetween which the act of prosecution must have been
issued. It is clear that at the time of the great confla-
gration (64 AD), the profession of Christianity was not
a ground for criminal action. St. Paul had just heen set
at liberty hy decree of the imperial court (cf 2 Tim 4 17).
Moreover, the charge against the Christians was a plot
to burn the city, not adherence to a proscribed religion,
and they were condemned, as it appears, for an attitude
of hostility toward the human race (Tacitus Ann. xv.
44). While governor of Bithynia (c 112 AD), Pliny the
younger addressed Trajan in a celebrated letter (x.96)
asking advice to guide his conduct in the trial of many
persons who were accused as Christians, and inquiring
particularly whether Christianity iu itself was culpable,
or only the faults which usually accompanied adherence
to the new faith. The reply of the emperor makes quite
plain the fundamental guilt at that time of adherence
to Christianity, and _it supposes a law already existing
against it (x.97). It follows, therefore, that the law
agaiust Christianity which was the legal basis for
persecution must have heen issued hetween the con-
flagration in 64 AD and Plny’s administration of Bi-
thynia.

We cannot define the time of this important act of
legislation more closely with ahsolute certainty, al-
though evidence is not wanting for the support of the-
ories of more or less apparent probability. Tradition
ascrihes a general persecution to the reign of Domitian,
which would imply that Christianity was already a
forbidden religion at that time. Allusions in Rev (as
6 9), the references to receut_calamities in Rome by St.
Clement in his letter to the Corinthians (1 Ad Cor.), the
condemnation of Acilius Glabrio (Dio Cassius Ixvii.13),
a man of consular rank, together with the emperor's
lavia
Domitilla and many others on the charge of atheism and
Jewish customs (95 AD), are cited as evidence for this
persecution. The fact that a number of persons in
Bithynia abandoned Christianity 20 years before the
judicial investigation of Pliny (Pliny x. 96) is of some im-
portance as corroborative evidence.


2. Toler-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


But there are grounds worthy of consideration for
carrying the point of departure back oi Domitian. The
letter of St. Peter from Babylon (Rome ?) to the Chris-
tians in Asia Minor implies an impending persecution
(1 Pet 4 12-16). This was probably in the closing
years of the reign of Nero. Allard cleverly observes
(ifistoire des persécutions, 61) that the mention of the
Neronian persecution of the Christians apart from the
description of the great fire in the work of Suetonius
(Ner. 16), amid a number of acts of legislation, is evi-
dence of a general enactment, which must have been
adopted at the time of, or soon after, the proceedings
which were instituted on the basis of the charge of arson.
Upon the whole the theory that the policy of the imperial
government was definitely established under Nero carries
with it considerable probability (cf Sulpitius Severus,
Chron., ii.41).

Although the original enactment has been lost the
correspondence of Pliny and Trajan enables us to formu-

late the imperial policy in dealing with the

3. Persecu- Christians during the 2d cent. Adherence
Ren to Christianity was initself culpable. But
proceedings were not to he undertaken by

Magistrates on their own initiative; they
were to proceed only from charges brought by volun-
tary accusers legally responsihle for establishing the
roof of their assertions. Informal and anonymous in-
formation must be rejected. Penitence shown in abjur-
ing Christianity absolved the accused from the legal
penalty of former guilt. The act of adoring the gods and
the living emperor before_their statues was sufficient
proof of non-adherence to Christianity or of repentance.

The attitude of the imperial authorities in the 3d cent.
was less coherent. The problem became more compli-
cated as Christianity grew. Persecution was directed
more esp. against the church as an organization, since it
was believed to exert a dangerous power. About 202
AD, Septimins Severus issued a decree forbidding spe-
cifically conversion to Judaism or Christianity (Spar-
tianus, Severus, 17),in which he departed from the method
of procedure prescribed by Trajan (conquirendi non
sunt), and commissioned the magistrates to proceed
directly against suspected converts. At this time the
Christians organized funerary associations for the pos-
session of their cemeteries, substituting corporative for
individnal ownership, and it would appear that under
Alexander Severus they openly held places of worship in
Rome (Lampridius, Alerander Severus, 22, 49). ‘The em-
peror Philip (24449) is thought to have been a Christian
at heart (Husebius, HE, V1, 34). A period of com-
parative calm was interrupted by the persecution un-
der Decius (250-51 AD), when the act of sacrifice was
required as proof of non-adherence to Christianity.
Several certificates testifying to the due performance of
this rite have been preserved.

Under Valerian (257 AD) the Christian organizations
were declared illegal and the cemeteries were sequestrated.
But an edict in 260 AD restored this property (Eusebius,
VII, 13). A short persecution under Aurelian (274 AD)
broke the long period of calm which extended to the first
edict of persecution of Diocletian (February 24, 303).
The Christians seem to have gained a sort of prescriptive
claim to exist, for Diocletian did not at first consider
them guilty of a capital crime. He sought to crush their
organization by ordering the cessation of assemblies,
the destruction of churches and sacred books, and ab-
juration under pain of political and social degradation.
(Lactantius, De Morte Persecutorum, x.11, 12, 13; Euse-
bius, VIII, 2; 1X, 10). Later he ordered the arrest of all
the clergy, who were to be put to death unless they re-
nounced the faith (Eusebius, VIII, 6). Finally the
requirement of an act of conformity in sacrificing to the
gods was made general. This final persecution, con-
tinuing in an irregular way with varying degrees of se-
verity, terminated with the defeat of Maxentins by Con-
stantine (October 29, 312). The Edict of Milan issued
by Constantine and Licinius the following year estab-
lished toleration, the restoration of ecclesiastical property
and the peace of the church. See Roman EMPIRE AND
Curistianity, III, IV, V. ‘ i x

Lirerature.—Allard, Histoire des persécutions, Paris,
1903: Le christianisme et lempire romain, Paris, 1903;
Duchesne, Histoire ancienne de l’église, Paris, 1907 (ET);


Marucchi, Eléments d’archéologie chrétienne, Paris, 1899-
1902; Hardy, Christianity and the Rom Government,
London, 1894; Renan, L’église chrétienne, Paris, 1879;
Ramsay, The Church in the Rom Empire, London, 1893.
Grorcs H. ALLEN


ROOF, roof. See House.
ROOF-CHAMBER. See House.
ROOM, room. See House.


ROOT, root (WWW, shdresh; pita, rhiza): Fre-
quently mentioned in the OT and NT, but almost
always in a, figurative sense, e.g. “root of the right-
cous” (Prov 12 3.12); “root that beareth gall”


(Dt 29 18); “Their root shall be as rottenness”
(Isa 5 24); “root of bitterness’? (He 12 15).
Also of peoples: “they whose root is in Amalek”
(Jgs 6 14); of Assyria (Ezk 317); “Ephraim is
smitten, their root is dried up” (Hos 9 16); ‘Judah
shall again take root downward” (2 K 19 30; ef
Isa 27 6; 37 31); the root of Jesse (Isa 11 10;
Rom 15 12); root of David (Rev 5 5; 22 16).


ROOT OF DAVID. See Davin, Roor or.


ROOT OF JESSE (UW? WW, shdresh yishay [Isa
11 10]; pita rod “Iecoal, rhiza to% Tessat [Rom
15 12]): The Heb and Gr words are practically the
same in meaning. “Root” means descendant,
branch of the family or stock. The Messianic king
was to be of the family of Jesse the father of David.
In Rom 16 12 Paul quotes the LXX of Isa 11 10.
Jesus is a branch or descendant of the family of
Jesse, as well as of David. See also Davip, Root
OF.


ROPE, rop: Used in the OT for 23m, hebhel,
“that which binds” (2 § 17 13, etc), and for MAJ,
‘dbhéth, “that which is woven” (Jgs 15 13, etc).
In neither word is any specified thickness or strength
connoted, aud hebhel is tr4 equally well by “line”
(2 8 8 2, etc) or “cord” (Josh 2 15, etc), and
‘ébhoth by “cord” (Ps 118 27, etc), as best suits
the context. Similarly in the NT the word cxoevtor,
schoinion, lit. ‘made of rushes,’”’ can mean the
rope by which a boat is fastened (Acts 27 32) or
small cords suitable for a whip (Jn 2 15). The
usual material for ropes was certainly flax (hemp),
but the Egyptians, and so possibly the Hebrews,
at times made ropes of leathern thongs. See Corp;
Line; Surps anp Boats, III, 2.

Burton Scotr Easton

ROSE, rz: (1) (M2B20, Adbhacceleth; av6os,
dnthos, “a flower’? [Cant 2 1], xpivov, krinon, “a
lily” [Isa 35 1]): By general consent EV is wrong:
in Cant 2 1 m reads “Heb Adbazzeleth, the autumn
erocus,”’ and in Isa 36 1, m reads “‘or autumn cro-
cus.” This is the Colchicum autumnale(N.O. Lilia-
ceae). A Tg on Cant 2 1 explains the Heb word
as “narcissus,” a very common plant in the plains
and mountains of Pal and a great favorite with the
natives. Two species, N. tazetta and N. serolinus
(N.O. Amaryllideae), occur, the latter being the finer;
they are autumn plants. All authorities agree that
the so-called “‘rose’”’ was some kind of bulbed plant.
(2) (p630r, rhédon, “the rose,’’? mentioned in Ecclus
2414; 3913; 508; Wisd 28; 2 Esd 2 19):
There is no reason why the rose, of which several
varieties are common in Pal, should not be meant.
Tristram favors the rhododendron. The expression,
“rose plants in Jericho,” in Ecclus 24 14 has nothing
whatever to do with what is now sold there as a
“rose of Jericho,” a dwarf annual plant, Anastatica
hierochuntina (N.O. Cruciferae), which dries up and
can be made to reéxpand by placing the root in
water. E. W. G. Masterman


ROSH, rosh, rosh QDS, ra’sh): A son or grand-
son of Benjamin (Gen 46 21).


ROSH (UR, rd'sh; ‘Pods, Rhds, var. [Qm#] ke-
gadis, kephalés; Vulg capitis): This name occurs
in the prophecies against Gog in Ezk

1. Rosh 38 2.3 and 39 1, where AV has “Gog,
and Its the land of Magog, the chief prince of
Renderings Meshech and Tubal.” This tr is due
to ré’sh being the common Heb word

for “head” or “chief”? (cf the Gr variant and the
Vulg), and is regarded as incorrect, that of the RV,


aby Rotcuures THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2624


“Gog, of the land of Magog, the prince of Rosh,
Meshech and Tubal,’ bemg preferred.
The identification of Rosh is not without its diffi-
culties. Gesenius regarded it as indicating the
Russians, who are mentioned in Byzan-
2. Identi- tine writers of the 10th cent. under
fication with the name of ‘Pés, Rhés. He adds that
Russia they are also noticed by Ibn Fosslan
(same period), under the name of Riis,
as a people dwelling on the river Rha (Volga).
Apart from the improbability that the dominion
of Gog extended to this district, it would be needful
te know at what date the Ris of the Volga arrived
there.
Notwithstanding objections on account of its
eastern position, in all probability Fried. Delitzsch’s
identification of Rosh with the méat
3. Probably Rési, “land of Rash” of the Assyr
the Assyr- inscriptions, is the best. Sargon of
ian Rasu Assyria (c 710 BC) conquered the
countries “from the land of Résu
on the border of Elam as far as the river of
Egypt,” and this country is further described in his
Khorsabad Inscription, 18, as ‘“‘the land of Ragu,
of the boundary of Elam, which is beside the Tigris.”
Assyria having disappeared from among the nations
when Ezekiel wrote his prophecies, Babylonia was
probably the only power with which “Gog of the
land of Magog” would have had to reckon, but it
may well be doubted whether the Bab king would
have allowed him to exercise power in the district of
Ra&n, except as a very faithful vassal. It may here
be noted that the Heb spelling of Rosh presupposes
an earlier pronunciation as Aésh, a form agreeing
closely with that used by the Assyrians. See Fried.
Delitzsch, Wo lag das Paradies? 325.
T. G. Pincus
ROT, rot, ROTTENNESS, rot”n-nes (vb. 2P7,
rakébh, noun rakabh [rikkabhén, Job 41 27], with
pe, mak, “decay” [Isa 5 24], and Way, ‘abhash,
“shrivel” [so Joel 1 17 RVmjJ): ‘‘Rottenness of the
bones” (Prov 12 4; 14 30; Hab 3 16) is ulcera-
tion (caries) of the bones, used as an example of an
intensely painful disease. AV, in addition, has
“rot” in Nu 6 21.22.27, where RV has “fall away’
(252, naphal), but a euphemistic paraphrase is in
point (see the comms.). In Jer 38 11.12 AV has
“old rotten rags’ for m9 ,meloh, “rag”? (RV “worn-
out garments,”’ a tr that specializes too far).


ROTE, rit: RVm gives “learned by rote’ in Isa
29 13 for AV “taught,’’ which indicates that the
service of Jeh was mercly formal.


ROWER, rd’ér, ROWING, ro’ing. See Sirs
anp Boats, II], 1.


ROYAL, roi‘al: Either belonging to a king (king-
dom) or having kingly power, dignity, authority,
etc. In Heb, the word is expressed by using different
nouns in the gen. case (the ‘‘construct state’’).
They are: (1) melekh, ‘king’: “Asher .. . . shall
yield royal dainties,” lit. choice morsels of the king,
meaning fit for a king (Gen 49 20); ‘‘besides that
which Solomon gave her of his royal bounty,’’ lit.
which he gave her according to the hand (the wealth)
of King Solomon (1 K 10 13; cf RVm); ‘a royal
statute,” lit. statute of a malka’, which is the em-
phatie Aram. term for melekh, “king’’ (Dnl 6 7);
(2) mamlakhah, “the power and dignity of a king,”
“Gibeon .... one of the royal cities,” ie. a
capital city with a king of her own (Josh 10 2; cf
18 27 5); “all the seed royal,” lit. the seed of the
kingdom (2 K 11 1; ef2 Ch 22 10); (3) malkhath,
“kinghood,” “kingdom’’: “royal majesty,” lit.


majesty of kinghood (1 Ch 29 25); quite  fre-
quently in the Book of Est; royal wine (1 7);
crown (1 11; cf2 17; 6 8); commandment (1 19);
“her royal estate,” lit. her kmghood (1 19); house
royal (2 16; cf 5 1); royal apparel (5 1; cf 6 8.
15); throne (51); (4) m*lukhah, “kingdom,”
“kingly power and dignity”: “royal city,” lit. the
city of the kingdom, meaning here that part of the
city (Rabbah) in which the royal palace was situated
(2§ 12 26); “royal diadem,” lit. turban of king-
hood (lsa 62 3); (5) in Jer 43 10 we find the word
shaphrir; its meaning is uncertain: “royal pavilon”
(RV and AV), “glittering’ (RVm), “scepter,”
“a carpet covering a throne.”

The NT uses the word for basilikés, “belonging toa
king”: “royal apparel’? (Acts 12 21); ‘‘the royal
law,” something hke ‘the golden rule,’’ being fore-
most because including all others (Jas 2 8), and
for basileios (being vested with kingly power and
honor), “royal priesthood,” the Heb rendering would
be mamlekheth kohanim, ‘‘a kingdom of priests,” i.e.
a kingdom whose citizens are priests, emphasizing
the two facts that the true Christians have free
access to the grace of God and that they enjoy
the liberties and privileges of His kingdom (1 Pet
2 9). Wi.i1sM Baur


ROYAL CITY. See Royat, (2), (4).
RUBY, ré0’bi. See Sronszs, Precious.


RUDDER, rmd’ér, RUDDER-BANDS.
Sures anv Boats, ITI, 2, (3).


See


RUDDY, rud’i CiVO5SN, ’adhméni [1 8 16 12;
17 42; Gen 25 25 RVm], DUS, ’adhom [Cant 5 10);
vbs. DIN, 'ddham [Lam 4 7], and épuOpidw, erw-
thridé, ‘‘to blush” [Ad Est 15 5]): ‘Ruddy’ is the
form taken by the adj. “red” when used as a term
of praise of the human skin, and this is its use in the
Bible (the Heb and Gr words are all usual words for
“red” or ‘‘to be red’). The dark-skinned Hebrews
found great beauty in a clear complexion.


RUDE, rood: Not “impolite” in EV (except per-
haps 2 Macc 12 14), but “untrained,” “ignorant”;
cf the modern phrase, ‘‘a rude drawing.” So Sir
8 4 (draldevros, apoideutos) and 2 Cor 11 6 ({dcwrys,
ididtés, ‘though I lack technical training in rhetoric’);
ef AV and RVm Sir 21 24.


RUDIMENTS, roo’di-ments (crotxeia, sioicheia,
pL. of ororxetov, stoicheion [Gal 4 3.9; Col2 8.20;
He 5 12; 2 Pet 3 10.12]): This word occurs 7 t
in the NT, and AV translates it in three different


ways. In the two passages in Gal, and in the two
in 2 Pet, it is rendered “elements.” In the two
passages in Col, it is tr? “rudiments.” In He it


is rendered “‘first principles.”
The etymological meaning of the word is, that


) which belongs to a row or rank, hence any first


thing, an element, first principle. It


1. Etymo- denotes, specially (1) the letters of the
logical alphabet, the spoken sounds, as the
Meaning elements of speech; (2) the material


elements of the universe, the physical
atoms of which the world is composed; (3) the
heavenly bodies; (4) the elements, rudiments,
fundamental principles of any art, science or dis-
ciphne; cf the phrase, “the a, b, c.””

(1) The NT use of the word, where it always
occurs in the pl., is as follows: In 2 Pet 3 10.12, “The
elements shall be dissolved with fervent heat,’ that
is, the physical elements of the world and of the
heavens are to be consumed, or subjected to change,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Rot, Rottenness
Ruler


hy means of fire. In He 65 12, AV “Ye have need
that one teach you again which be the first prin-
ciples of the oracles of God.” This


2. Use of means that the Heb Christians had
Term in not made the advance expected, in
the NT grace and in the knowledge of God,


but were in need of instruction in the
elementary truths of the Christian faith.

(2) The Pauline use of the term is in Gal and Col;
see referencesasabove. InGal4 3.9AV Paul writes,
“When we were children, [we] were in bondage un-
der the elements of the world”; “How turn ye again to
the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire
again to he in bondage?’ The apostle here means
the ceremonial precepts of the worship of the Jews.
These requirements involved much and protracted
difficulty in their observance; they were ‘a yoke
.... . which neither our fathers nor we were able
to bear’ (Acts 15 10). Yet the Galatian converts
were turning back again to these legal ordinances,
and desired to be in hondage to them. These ele-
ments were “of the world,” they had reference to
material and not to spiritual things, they were
formal and sensuous. They were “weak,” for they
had no power to rescue man from condemnation,
and they could not save him from sin. They were
“heggarly,”’ for they brought no endowment of the
heavenly riches. By these epithets Paul signifies
that rites, ordinances, sacrifices, observance of
days and seasons belonged to the elementary stages
of the Jewish religion, which had now attained its
end and purpose in the coming of Christ and His
work. These things were necessary at the time they
were Divinely instituted, but the time had come
when they were no longer required. They con-
tained and conveyed an elementary knowledge, and
were intended, from the first, to lead to an advance
in the moral and spiritual life, which is now revealed
in Christ.

It has been thought by some that what is meant by
“elements or ‘’rudiments”’ in Gal and Col is the physi-
cal elements, presided over by angels, and that this is in
some way connected with the worship of angels, to which
Paul refers in Col 2 18. The Jews believed that there
were angels of fire and of the wind, and of the other
physical elements. The apostle therefore wished to
show the foolishness of the worship of angels and
of the heavenly bodies which they were supposed to
Coe ater meaning of the term is a possible, but not a
probahle one. The interpretation, already first given,
which understands ‘‘elements’’ to mean the ordinances
of Jewish legalism, is most_in harmony with the gospel
and with the teaching of Paul. ‘This is prohahly the
correct interpretation, both as simpler in itself and as
Ga oiee ee cottont a nacactorar the jew wea od
a eon ies Jee the world’s history” (Lightfoot,
Comm. on Gal, 167).

In Col2 8 AV Paul writes, “Beware lest any man
spoil you... . after the rudiments of the world,
and not after Christ”; and in ver 20, AV “Wherefore
if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
world, why ... . are ye subject to ordinances?”
The meaning of the term here is the elements of reli-
gious training, the ceremonial precepts of the Jewish
Law. In Col and Gal the meaning is that the sys-
tems of the false teachers, both in Colossae and in
Galatia, laid stress on Jewish ritual, ceremonial law
and ascetic observances—things of this world, be-
longing to the visible sphere, things elementary,
and intended, so far as the Jewish Law is concerned,
simply as a preparation for the commg of Christ.
Such were the rudiments of the world, so far as their
source was Jewish. On their heathen side they
were still more decidedly anti-Christian. Both of
these tendencies, Jewish and heathen, were “not
according to Christ.” For Christ Himself who
atoned for sin, and who now lives and reigns, de-
livers believers from all such methods, as well as
from the need of them. Joan RUTHERFURD


RUE, rd0 (whyavov, péganon): One of the plants
mentioned in Lk 11 42 as subject to tithe: in the ||
passage, Mt 23 23, anise
and cummin are men-
tioned. Ruta graveolens
(N.O. Rutaceae) is the
officinal rue, and a very
similar species, R. chale-
pensis, is indigenous. Rue
is a small shrub grow-
ing 2 to 4 ft. high with
a heavy odor, disagree-
able to Westerners, but
a favorite with Orientals.
A sprig of rue is often
fixed on a child’s cap or
elothes as a kind of
charm.


Rue (Ruta graveolens).


RUFUS, rao’fus (Potdos, Rhotiphos): The name
is mentioned twice: (1) Simon of Cyrene, who was
compelled to bear the cross of Jesus, is “the father
of Alexander and Rufus’ (Mk 15 21); (2) Paul
sends greetings to Rom Christians, ‘Rufus the
chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine”
(Rom 16 13). Rufus was well known among those
for whom Mark primarily wrote his Gospel, and
according to tradition this was the Christian com-
munity at Rome. There seems no reason to doubt,
therefore, that the Rufus of Mark and the Rufus of
Paul are the same person. The name, meaning
“red,” “reddish,” was, however, one of the com-
monest of slave names; the identification of these
two is therefore merely a conjecture. The Rufus
whom Paul greets is “the chosen in the Lord,” i.e.
“that choice Christian’’ (Denney). Since all Chris-
tians are “chosen,” this title must express some
distinction. The mother of Rufus had played the
mother’s part to Paul on some occasion of which we
are ignorant, hence the phrase “his mother and
mine” (cf Mk 10 30). S. F. Hunter


RUG, rug: Alternative rendering of a word
(MD "AW, smikhah) in Jgs 418 RV, “mantle”
AV. Thetr is doubtful; OHL gives “rug or thick
coverlet [?].”


RUHAMAH, 1rd0-hi’ma, ro0-ha’ma: See Lo-
Rugamasy, the symbolical name of Hosea’s daughter
(Hos 1 6.8).


RUIN, ré0’in (AOI, Adrisdh, etc; piiypo,
rhégma): “Ruin,” the tr of hdrigah (Am 9 11; cf
Acts 16 16, where RV Gr text, td katestramména),
and of a number of other Heb words: in Lk 6 49
rhégma, “breakage,” is used both in a literal sense
(isa 23 13; 26 2, of fallen buildings; Ezk 27 27;
31 13, of a state or people; Lk 6 49, of a house,
etc) and with a moral significance (Prov 26 28).
RVm correctly renders mikhshdl in Ezk 18 30
“stumblingblock” (AV “ruin’”’), and RV in 21 15
“stumblings” (AV “ruins’). RV has “ruins’’ for
AV “desolations” in Ezr 9 9, m “waste places’;
Ps 74 3; “in their ruins” for “with their mat-
tocks’ (2 Ch 34 6, m “‘with their axes.’ The
Heb is obscure’); “midst of the ruin” for ‘“deso-
lation” (Job 30 14); “their rnin” for “their wicked-
ness’ (Prov 21 12). ‘“Ruinous” is the tr of map-
palah (Isa 17 1) and of nagah (2 IX 19 25; Isa
37 26). W. L. WALKER


RULER, rool’ér:
() Suna, moshél, “ruler,” “prince,” “master”


(tyrant), applied to Joseph in Egypt (Gen 45 8;
cf Ps 105 21); to the Philis (Jgs 15 11); to David’s
descendants, the future kings of Israel (2 Ch 7


Ruler
Ruth


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2626


18; ef Jer 33 26); to Pharaoh (Ps 105 20); to a
wicked prince, a tyrant (Prov 28 15; cf Isa
14 5; 49 7); to the theocratic king,
the Messiah (Mie 5 2); it is often
used_in general (Prov 6 7; 23 1; 29
12; Eecl 10 4; Isa 16 1, etc).

(2) WA), naghidh, “leader,” “noble” (nobles),
“prince.’’ In a number of instances RV renders
it “prince,” where AV has ruler (1 8 26 30; 2S
6 21; 1 K 1 35, etc). It is used of Azrikam hav-
ing charge of the palace of King Ahaz (2 Ch 28 7,
“governor” of the house, AV); of Azariah (Seraiah,
Neh 11 11), who is called the “ruler of the house
of God” (1 Ch 9 11; cf 2 Ch 31 13); he was the
leader of a division or group of priests. In 2 Ch
35 8 the names of three others are given (Hilkiah,
Zechariah and Jehiel).

(8) NW}, nasi’, “prince” (so Nu 13 2, AV
“ruler”); generally speaking, the nds?’ is one of
the public authorities (Ex 22 28); the rulers of the
congregation (Ex 16 22; cf 34 31); ‘The rulers
brought the onyx stones” (Ex 35 27), as it was to
be expected from men of their social standing and
financial ability: ‘‘when a ruler [the head of a tribe
or tribal division] smneth” (Lev 4 22).

(4) j30, sa@ghan, the representative of a king or
a prince; a vice-regent; a governor; then, in the
times of Ezra and Nehemiah, a leader or principal
of the people of Jerus under the general supervision
of these two men. The EV renders it “ruler”? (Ezk
23 12.23), “deputy” (Jer 51 23.28.57), and, in
most cases, “ruler’” with “deputy” in m (Ezr 9 2;
Neh 2 16; 4 14.19; 6 7.17; 75; 12 40; 18 11;
Isa 41 25; Ezk 23 6) always used in pl.

(5) P&P, kein, “a judge” or “magistrate” (Isa
110; 36.7, 223; Mic 31.9); “a military
chief’’ (Josh 10 24).

(6) 71, rédheh, one having dominion: “There
is little Benjamin their ruler” (Ps 68 27); the
meaning is obscure; still we may point to the facts
that Saul, the first one to conquer the heathen (1 8
14 47 f), came of this the smallest of all the tribes,
and that within its boundaries the temple of Jeh
was erected.

(7) JIM, rézén, a “dignitary,”’ a “prince.” “The
kings of the earth set. themselves, and the rulers
take counsel together, against Jeh” (Ps 2 2); in
the NT the word is rendered drchontes (Acts 4 26).

(8) W, ser, “chief,” “head”; prince, king; a
nobleman having judicial or other power; a royal
officer. RV renders it frequently “prince”:
“rulers over my cattle’ (‘‘head-shepherds,”’? Gen
47 6); “rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds,”
ete (Ex 18 21); they had to be men of good char-
acter because they were endowed with judicial
power (ver 22); in Dt 1 15 the rendering of EV
is “captains,” etc; they were military leaders.
“Zebul the ruler of the city” (of Shechem, Jgs 9
30), meaning “governor” (cf 1 KX 22 26; 2 K 23 8);
“rulers [or captains; cf I K 16 9] of his [Solomon’s]
chariots” (I K 9 22); the rulers of Jezreel (2 K
10 1) were, presumably, the ruler of the palace of the
king and the ruler of the city of Samaria (cf ver 5).
It is difficult to explain why they should be called
the rulers of Jezreel; both LX-X and Vulg omit the
word; “the rulers of the substance which was king
David’s” (1 Ch 27 31) overseers of the royal do-
main; ‘The rulers were behind all the house of
Judah” (Neh 4 16), the officers were ready to
assume active command in case of an attack.

(9), (10) pod, shilton, “a commander,” “an
officer’: “‘the rulers of the provinces” (Dnl 3 2 f);
DPW , shallit, ‘a person in power,” “a potentate”
(Dnl 2 10); there seems to be little doubt that the


Aram. term is used as an adj. (cf RVm); in Dnl
5 7 occurs the vb. sh‘lat, “‘to have dominion,” ‘‘he
shall rule as the third in rank” (cf vs 16.29).

(11) j29, mdaghén, ‘shield’: ‘Her rulers [shields]
dearly love shame”’ (Hos 4 18). Perhaps we ought
to read (with LAX) migg’éndm, “their glory,” and
to translate it ‘they love shame more than their
glory”; they would rather have a good (!) time
than a good name.

(1) dpxwy, drchén, used of the “rulers’’ of the Spar-
tans (1 Mace 14 20) aud, in a general sense, of the


priest Mattathias (1 Macc 2 17). AV
has the word also in a general sense in


2. In the Sir 41.18 (RV “mighty man”’).
Apoc (2) wyovmevos, hégotimenos, “one leading


the way.’ <A quite general term, Sir 10
2 (ruler of a city); 17 17 (of gentile nations); 46 18 (of
the Tyrians). Also 2 17 AV (RV ‘“‘he that ruleth’’),
and 32 1 RV (‘ruler of a feast," AV ‘‘master’’).

(3) of peytordves, hoi megistdnes, & rare word found
ouly in the pl., for ‘‘rulers of the cougregation”’ (Sir
33 18). The same word in Mk 6 21 is tr4 “lords.”

(4) 2 Mace 4 27 AV for éwapyos, epdrchos (RV ‘‘gov-
orm) av inserts the word without Gr equivalent in
1 Macc 6 14; 11 57; 2 Macc 13 2.

(1) &pxw», drchon, ‘‘a person in authority,” “a
magistrate,” “a judge,” ‘a prince’; a councillor,
a member of the supreme council of
the Jews; a man of influence. ‘There
came a ruler’ (Mt 9 18), meaning a
ruler of the synagogue (cf Mk 6 22;
Lk 8 41); see (2) below; ‘“‘one of the rulers of the
Pharisees’ (Lk 14 1), perhaps a member of the
Jewish council belonging, at the same time, to the
Pharisees, or, more probably, one of the leading
Pharisees; “the chief priests and the rulers’ (Lk
23 13.35; 24 20; cf Jn 31; 7 2648; 12 42;
Acts 3.17; 4 5.8; 13 27; 14 5); the rulers were,
with the chief priests and the scribes, members of
the Sanhedrin, either of two councils of the Jews
(the Great and the Lesser); they were lay-members
(elders); “before the rulers’ (Acts 16 19), the
police magistrates (praetores, ‘‘praetors’’) of the
city of Philippi; ‘Thou shalt not speak evil of a
ruler of thy people” (Acts 23 5; cf Ex 22 28, nas7’;
see 1, [3] above), a magistrate, a person in authority
(cf Acts 7 27.35; Rom 13 3, the public authori-
ties); ‘‘the rulers of this world’ (1 Cor 2 6.8),
persons being mentally superior to their fellow-men,
and so having great influence in shaping their opin-
ions and directing their actions.

(2) dpxrourdywyos, archisundgégos, “ruler of the
synagogue.” He was the presiding officer of a
board of elders, who had charge of the synagogue.
Sometimes they, also, were given the same name
(ef “one of the rulers of the synagogue,” Mk 6
22.35; Lk 8 41.49; in Mt 9 18 Jairus is simply
called archén); the ruler mentioned in Lk 13 14
was, of course, the president of the board (ef Acts
18 17, Sosthenes), while in Acts 13 15 the phrase
“rulers of the synagogue” simply signifies the
board. It was a deliberative body, but at the same
time responsible for the maintenance of good order
in the synagogue and the orthodoxy of its members;
having, therefore, disciplinary power, they were
authorized to reprimand, and even to excommuni-
cate, the guilty ones (cf Jn 9 22; 12 42; 16 2).

(3) dpxirplkdALvos, orchitriklinos, the ruler (“stew-
ard,’ RVm) of the feast (Jn 2 8.9). See sepa-
rate article.

(4) xocpoxpdrwp, kosmokrdtér, a ‘world-ruler”
(Eph 6 12). The angels of the devil (Mt 26 41;
12 45) or Satan, the prince of this world (Jn 12 31),
participate in his power; they are his tools, their
sphere of action being “this darkness,” Le. the
morally corrupt state of our present existence.

(5) wodirdpyns, politdérchés; the prefect of a
city (Acts 17 6.8). Luke being the only one of the
Bib. authors to hand down to us this word, it is a


3. In the
NT


2627


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ruler
Ruth


noteworthy fact that, in relatively modern times,
a Gr inscription was discovered containing this very
word and, moreover, having reference to the city
of Thessalonica (AJT, 1898, II, 598-643). Here
it was where Paul and Silas preached the gospel so
successfully that the Jews, “being moved with
jealousy,’’ caused Jason and certain brethren to be
dragged before the rulers of the city (ept tows politdr-
chas). These magistrates suffered themselves to be
made the tools of the unscrupulous Jews by demand-
ing and getting security from Jason and the rest.
Wiuuiam Baur
RULER OF THE FEAST (dpxitplkdwwos, archi-
triklinos; AV governor): The word occurs in the NT
in the account of the wedding feast in Cana of
Galilee (Jn 2 8.9). According to Ecclus (32 1) it
was customary to appoint a ‘master of the cere-
monies’ from among the invited guests. It was his
duty to determine the places of the guests, to see
that the ordinary rules of etiquette were observed,
etc, and generally to supervise the arrangements.
RVm “steward” is possible if the ‘governor of the
feast’”’ meant the ‘‘head waiter’? (Merx renders “head
servant of the feast”), and not one of the guests
appointed for the purpose. But the context is in
favor of the view that the person in question was onc
of the prominent guests—an intimate friend or rela-
tive of the host. See Rurer, 2, (2). T. Lewis


RULER OF THE SYNAGOGUE. Sce Ruer,
3, (1), (2).


RULERS OF THE CITY.
(2), 3, (5).


RUMAH, réo’ma (“VA%, rimah; B, ‘Povpd,
Rhoumd, A, ‘Popa, Rhumd): To this place belonged
Pedaiah whose daughter Zebudah (RV ‘“‘Zebidah’’)
entered the harem of Josiah, king of Judah, and
became the mother of Jehoiakim (2 K 23 36).
Jos (Ant, X, v, 2) calls the place Abouma, but this
is an obvious clerical error for Arouma. This sng-
gests a possible identification with Arumah (Jgs
9 41), which lay not far from Shechem. Another
possible identification is with the Rumah men-
tioned by Jos (BJ, ILI, vii, 21) in Galilee (cf Neu-
bauer, Géog. du Talm, 203), which may be identical
with the modern Khirbet Rimeh, about 3 miles
N. of Seffiriyeh. Some, however, would identify
Rumah with Dumah of Josh 15 52, where the sub-
stitution of r for d is supported by the LXX (Rheu-
ma), possibly represented by the modern Domeh,
about 13 miles S.E. of Beit Jibrin. This of course
was in the territory of Judah, and no question of
jus connubium is involved, such as might arise in the
case of a Galilean site. W. Ewine


RUMP, rump: AV uses this word as tr of m5N A
talyah (Ex 29 22; Lev 39; 73; 8 25; 9 19),
where RV correctly renders ‘fat tail.” Reference
is here had to the broad tail of the Syrian sheep
which occasionally weighs as much as 20 lbs., and
is considered one of the daintiest portions of mutton.
It was one of those portions of the peace and tres-
pass offering which were not eaten by the priest or
the sacrificer, but which with other choice portions
were waved before the Lord and wholly burnt on the
altar as a sweet savor unto Jeh.


RUNAGATE, run’a-gat: A runaway: “The runa-
gates continue in scarceness”’ (Ps 68 6, Prayer Book
Version, RV “The rebellious dwell in a parched
land’’).


RUNNER, run’ér.


RUSH: (1) (red, game’; mémupos, papuros, “bul-
rushes,’ m “papyrus’’ [Ex 2 3]; “rush,” m “papy-


Sce Ruxer, 1, (8), 2,


See Games.


rus” [Job 8 11]; “papyrus,’ AV “rush” [Isa 18
2}; “rushes” (85 7]): This is almost certainly the
famous papyrus, Cyperus papyrus (N.O. Cypera-
ceae), known in Arab. as babir (whence comes our
word “paper’’). This plant, the finest of the
sedges, flourishes plentifully m Upper Egypt; in
Pal there is a great mass of it growing m the marsh
to the N. of Lake Huleh, and it also occurs on the
Lake of Galilee and the Jordan. Light boats of
plaited papyrus have been used on the Nile from
ancient times and are mentioned by many writers
(ef Ex 2 3; Isa 18 2).

(2) (TWAIN , ’aghmdn, “rope,” m “Heb ‘a rope of
rushes,’ ’’? AV “hook” [Job 41 2]; “[burning] rushes,”
AV “caldron” [Job 41 20]; “rush,’’ AV “bulrush”
[lsa 58 5]; “rush” in Isa 9 14; 19 15, used of the
humble and lowly folk as contrasted with the “palm
branch,” the highest class): The word ’aghmén
comes from Dax, ’dgham, meaning a marsh (see
Poots), being transferred from the place of the
things growing there. The word doubtless includes
not only the rushes—of which there are several
kinds in Pal—but also members of the sedge family,
the Cyperaceae. See also Reep.

. W. G. MasTerMan

RUST, rust (NST, hel’Gh; Bpdcis, brdsis):
Strictly speaking rust is the red oxide of iron formed
by the corrosion of that metal, but by extension it
has come to mean corrosion produced on any metal.
Hel’ah is tr? “rust” in Ezk 24 11.12. This
rendering is probably based on ver 11. Copper
caldrons are still used in Bible lands. Such vessels
must be constantly watched when on the fire to
guard against the possibility of their becoming dry.
If this shonld happen the contents, whatever they
may be, and the vessel itsclf will be injured. The
copper of the ecaldron oxidizes and scales off in
black or brownish scales, or rust. és, 16s, was
used in Gr to denote the corroding of metals. In
Jas 6 3 occurs, “Your gold and your silver are
rusted; and their rust... . shall eat your flesh
as fire.” The writers must have had in mind the
actions of chemicals upon these metals which formed
some such compound as the caustic silver nitrate.

Brésis, lit. “eating,’”’ which occurs in Mt 6 19.
20, may refer to the diseases which attack such
vegetation as wheat, grapes, cucumbers, etc. In
no country is the saying ‘‘where moth and rust con-
sume” (Mt 6 19) more trne than in Syria. Any
metal snbject to corrosion seems to rust faster in
that country than anywhere else. There are also
many rusting fungi which the people have not
learned to destroy and which do much damage to
the crops. See also Scum. James A. PatcH


RUTH, rasth (N17, ruth; “Pos0, Rhowvith): The
name Ruth is found in the OT only in the book
which ig so entitled. It is a contraction for re‘ath
(MAY), perhaps signifying “‘comrade,”’ “compan-
ion” (fem.; cf Ex 11 2, ‘‘every woman of her ncigh-
bor”). OL, 946, explains the word as an abstract
noun= “‘friendship.” The Book of Ruth details the
history of the one decisive episode owing to which
Ruth became an ancestress of David and of the
royal house of Judah. From this point of view
its peculiar intcrest lics m the close fricndship or
alliance between Israel and Moab, which rendered
such a connection possible. Not improbably also
there is an allusion to this in the name itself.

The history lies in the period of the Judges (1 1),
at the close of a great famine in the land of Israel.

Elimelech, a native of Bethlehem, had,
1. History with his wife Naomi and two sons,
taken refuge in Moab from the famine,
There, after an interval of time which is not more
precisely defined, he died (1 3), and his two sons,


Ruth
Sabbath


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2628


having married women of Moab, in the course of a
further ten years also died, and left Orpah and
Ruth widows (1 5). Naomi then decided to return
to Pal, and her two daughters-in-law accompanied
her on her way (1 7). Orpah, however, turned
back and only Ruth remained with Naomi, journey-
ing with her to Bethlehem, where they arrived
‘in the beginning of barley harvest’”’ (1 22). The
piety and fidelity of Ruth are thus early exhibited
in the course of the narrative, in that she refused
to abandon her mother-in-law, although thrice
exhorted to do so by Naomi herself, on account of
her own great age and the better prospects for Ruth
in her own country. Orpah yielded to persuasion,
and returned to Moab, but Ruth remained with
Naomi.

At Bethlehem Ruth employed herself in gleaning
in the field during the harvest and was noticed by
Boaz, the owner of the field, a near kinsman of her
father-in-law Elimelech. Boaz gave her permission
to glean as long as the harvest continued; and told
her that he had heard of her filial conduct toward
her mother-in-law. Moreover, he directed the
reapers to make intentional provision for her by
dropping in her way grain from their bundles (2 15f).
She was thus able to return to Naomi in the even-
ing with a whole ephah of barley (ver 17). In
answer to questioning she explained that her success
in gleaning was due to the good-will of Boaz, and
the orders that he had given. She remained accord-
ingly and gleaned with his maidens throughout the
barley and wheat harvest, making her home with
her mother-in-law (2 23). Naomi was anxious for
the remarriage of Ruth, both for her sake and to
secure compliance with the usage and_-law of Israel;
and sent her to Boaz to recall to him his duty as
near kinsman of her late husband Elimelech (3 I f).
Boaz acknowledged the claim and promised to
take Ruth in marriage, failing fulfilment of the legal
duty of another whose relationship was nearer
than that of Boaz himself (3 8-13). Naomi was
confident that Boaz would fulfil his promise, and
advised Ruth to wait in patience.

Boaz then adopted the customary and legal meas-
ures to obtain a decision. He summoned the near
kinsman before ten elders at the gate of the city,
related to him the circumstances of Naomi’s return,
with her desire that Ruth should be married and
settled with her father-in-law’s land as her marriage-
portion, and called upon him to declare his inten-
tions. Thenear kinsman, whose name and degree of
relationship are not stated, declared his inability to
undertake the charge, which he renounced in legal
form in favor of Boaz according to ancient custom
in Israel (4 6 ff). Boaz accepted the charge thus
transferred to him, the elders and bystanders bear-
ing witness and pronouncing a formal blessing upon
the union of Boaz and Ruth (4 9-12). Upon the
birth of a son in due conrse the women of the
city congratulated Naomi, in that the continuance
of her family and house was now assured, and the
latter became the child’s nurse. Thename of Obed
was given to the boy; and Obed through his son
Jesse became the grandfather of David (cf Mt 1
5.6; Lk 3 31.32).

Thus the life and history of Ruth are important
in the eyes of the narrator because she forms a
lnk in the ancestry of the greatest
king of Israel. From 1 more modern
point of view the narrative is a simple
idyllic history, showing how the faith-
ful loving service of Ruth to her
mother-in-law met with its due reward
in the restored happiness of a peaceful
and prosperous home-life for herself. Incidentally
are illustrated also ancient marriage customs of
Israel, which in the time of the writer had long since


2. Interest
and Im-
portance of
the Narra-
tive


become obsolete. The narrative is brief and told
without affectation of style, and on that account
will never lose its interest. It has preserved more-
over the memory of an incident, the national signifi-
cance of which may have passed away, but to which
value will always be attached for its simplicity and
natural grace.
For the literature, see Ruts, Boox or.


A. S. GepEN

RUTH, BOOK OF: The place which the Book
of Ruth occupies in the order of the books of the
Eng. Bible is not that of the Heb
1. Order in Canon. There it is one of the five
the Canon méghilloth or Rolls, which were ordered
to be read in the synagogue on 5

special occasions or festivals during the year.


In printed edd of the OT the mghillsth are usually
arranged in the order: Cant, Ruth, Lam, Eccl, Est. Ruth
occupied. the second position hecause the book was ap-
pointed to be read at the Feast of Weeks which was the
second of the 5 special days. In Heb MSS, however,
the order varies considerably. In Spanish MSS gen-
erally, and in one at least of the Ger. school cited by Dr.
Ginsburg (Intro to the Heb Bible, London, 1897, 4), Ruth

recedes Cant; and in the former Eccl is placed hefore
Pam The mghilléth constitute the second portion of the
kethabhim or Hagiographa, the third great division
of the books of the Heb Scriptures. The Talm, how-
ever, dissociates Ruth altogether from the remaining
méghillath, and places it first among the Hagiographa,
before the Book of Pss. By the Gr translators the book
was removed from the position which it held in the Heb
Canon, and because it described events contemporaneous
with the Judges, was attached as a kind of appendix to
the latter work. This sequence was adopted in the Vulg,
and so has passed into all modern Bibles.


The book is written without name of author, and
there is no direct indication of its date. Its aim is
to record an event of interest and im-


2. Author- portance in the family history of David,
ship and and incidentally to illustrate ancient
Purpose custom and marriage law. There is


no ground for supposing, as has been
suggested, that the writer had a polemical purpose
in view, and desired to show that the strict and
stern action taken by Ezra and Nehemiah after the
return in forbidding mixed marriages was not justi-
fied by precedent. The narrative is simple and
direct, and the preservation of the tradition which
it records of the descent of Israel’s royal house
from a Moabite ancestress was probably due in
the first instance to oral communication for some
considerable time before it was committed to
writing. The Book of 1 S also indicates a close rela-
tion between David and Moab, when during the
period of his outlawry the future king confided his
father and mother to the care of the king of Moab
(1 8 22 3f), and so far supports the truth of the
tradition which is embodied in the Book of Ruth.
With regard to the date at which the narrative
was committed to writing, it is evident from the
position of the Book of Ruth in the
3. Date of Heb Canon that the date of its com-
Composition position is subsequent to the close of
the great period of the “earlier proph-
ets.” Otherwise it would have found a natural
place, as was assigned to it in the Gr Bible, together
with the Book of Jgs and other historical writings,
in the second division of the Heb Scriptures. In the
opening words of the book also, “It came to pass in
the days when the judges judged” (Ruth 1 1), the
writer appears to look back to the period of the
Judges as to a comparatively distant epoch. The
character of the diction is pure and chaste; but
has been supposed in certain details, as in the pres-
ence of so-called Aramaisms, to betray a late origin.
The reference to the observance of marriage cus-
toms and their sanctions ‘‘in former time in Israel”
(4 7) does not necessarily imply that the composi-
tion of Ruth was later than that of Dt, in which the
laws and rights of the succession are enjoined, or


2629


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ruth
Sabbath


that the writer of the former work was acquainted
with the latter in its existing form. Slight differ-
ences of detail in the procedure would seem to sug-
gest the contrary. On the other hand, the motive
of the book in the exhibition of the ancestry of
David’s house would have lost its significance and
raison d’étre with the death or disappearance of the
last ruler of David’s line in the early period of the
return from Babylon (cf Zec 49). The most
probable date therefore for the composition of the
book would be in the later days of the exile, or
Immediately after the return. There is no clue to
the authorship. The last four verses, giving the
genealogy from Perez to David (ef 1 Ch 2 4-15;
Mt 1 3-6; Lk 3 31-83), are generally recognized
as a later addition.
_ The ethical value of the Book of Ruth is eon-
siderable, as setting forth an example of stedfast
filial piety. The action of Ruth in
4. Ethical refusing to desert her mother-in-law
Teaching and persevering in aceompanying her
to her own land meets with its due
reward in the prosperity and happiness which be-
come hers, and in the honor which she receives as


SABACHTHANI, sii-bik’thi-né.
LAMA SABACHTHAN).


See Eur, Eur,


SABACO, sab’a-ko, SABAKON, sab‘a-kon. See
So.
SABAEANS, sa-bé’anz (D°NAW, shebha’im [Joel


38 AV], DON3O, sbha'tm; ZaPaclp, Sabacim,
ZePacty, Sebacim [Isa 45 14]; EXD,
1. Forms of read sdébha’im, but rendered as though
the Word from sabha’, “to imbibe,” hence
“drunkards”;  olvwpévor, oindménot,
‘syme-drunken” [Ezk 23 42 AV]): ‘Sabaeans” is,
also the tr of the name of the country itself (RIV,
sh°bha@’) in Job 1 15; 619. This last, which is
the root of sh*bhd’tm, is regarded by Arabists as
coming from that root with the meaning of ‘to
take captive,” though seba’a, “he raided” (cf Job
1 15), has also been suggested.
As Sheba is said in Gen 10 7; 10 28; and 26 3
respectively to have been {1) a.son of Raamah, the
4th son of Cush; (2) the 10th son of


2. Two Joktan, son of Eber; (3) the Ist son
Different of Jokshan, 2d son of Abraham and
Races Keturah, at least two nationalities of


this name are implied. The former
were identified by Jos (Ant, II, x, 2) with the tall
people of Saba in Upper Egypt, described by him
as a city of Ethiopia, which Moses, when in the
service of the Egyptians, besieged and captured.
It is the Sem Sabaeans, however, who are the best
known, and the two genealogies attributed to them
(Joktan-Eber and Jokshan-Abraham)


3. Semitic seem to imply two settlements in the
Sabaeans land regarded as that of their origin.
and Their As Ezekiel (27 23) mentions Haran
Commerce (Hirran), Canneh (Kannah), and Eden


(Aden) as being connected with Sheba,
and these three places are known to have been in
Southern Arabia, their Sem parentage is undoubted.
The Sabaeans are described as being exporters of
gold (Isa 60 6; Ps 72 15), precious stones (Ezk 27
23), perfumes (Jer 6 20; Isa and Ezk), and if the
rendering “Sabaeans” for Joel 3 (4) 8 be correct,
the Sebaim, “a nation far off,” dealt in slaves.


See Sepa; Suepa; TABLE or Narions.
T. G. PINCHES


aneestress of the royal house of David. The
writer desires to show in the person and example of
Ruth that a sincere and generous regard for the
claims of duty and affection leads to prosperity and
honor; and at the same time that the principles
and recompense of righicous dealing are not de-
pendent upon race, but are as valid for a Moabit-
ess as for a Jew. There is no distinctive doctrine
taught in the book. It is primarily historical,
recording a decisive incident in the origin of David’s
house; and in the second place ethical, ndieating
and enforcing in a well-known example the ad-
vantage and importance of right dealing and the
observance of the dictates of filial duty. For de-
tailed contents see preceding article.
Literaturs.—Eng. comms. upon the Book of Ruth
are naturally not numerous. { G. W. Thatcher,
‘Judges and Ruth,” in [New] Century Bible; R. A.
Watson, in Exrpositor’s Bible; the most recent critical
comm. is by L. B. Wolfenson in 4/SL, XXVII (July,
1911), 285 ff, who defends the early date of the book.


See also the relevant arts. in Jew Enc, HDB, EB, and
Driver, LOT, 6, 454 ff.
A. S. GepEn


RYE, ri. See Sper.


SABANNEUS, sab-a-né’us (B, ZaPavvarots, Sa-
bannaiots, A, Bavvavots, Bannaiots; AV Bannaia,
following the Aldine): One of the sons of Asom
who had married “strange wives” (1 Esd 9 33) =
“Zabad” in Ezr 10 33.


SABANNUS, sa-ban’nus (ZéBavvos, Sdbannos;
AV Sabban): The father of Moeth, one of the
Levites to whom the silver and gold were delivered
(1 Esd 8 63). ‘‘Moeth the son of Sabannus” stands
in the position of ‘‘Noadiah the son of Binnui,’”
in Ezr 8 33.


SABAOTH, sab’a-oth, sa-ba’oth. See
Nags or, III, 8; Lorp or Hosts.


SABAT, sa’bat: AV=RV Sapuart, (2) (q.v.).


SABATEUS, sab-a-té’us (A, ZaBBaralas, Sab-
balaias, B, ’ABraios, Abiaios; AV Sabateas): One of
the Levites who “taught the law of the Lord’ to
the multitude (1 Esd 9 48) =“Shabbethai”’ in Neh
8 7.


SABATHUS, sab’a-thus ,(24Ba8os, Sdbathos; AV
Sabatus): An Israelite who put away his “strange
wife” (1 Esd 9 28) =“‘Zabad” in Ezr 10 27.


Gon,


SABATUS, sab’a-tus: AV=RV Sasparuts (q.v.).
SABBAN, sab’an: AV=RV Sapawnnus (q.v.).


SABBATEUS, sab-a-t@’us (ZaPBarates, Sab-
bataios; AV Sabbatheus): One of the three (or
rather two, for ‘‘Levis’’=Levite) ‘‘assessors’’ in
the investigation held concerning ‘foreign wives’
(1 Esd 9 14)=“Shabbethai the Levite”’ in Ezr 10
15. He is probably the ‘“Sabateus,”’ one of the
Levites who expounded the Law (1 Esd 9 48),
and so=the ‘‘Shabbethai” in Neh 8 7.


SABBATH, sab’ath (MW, shabbath, FNAY,
shabbathin; o&PBarov, sdbbaton, Ta cdPBara, td
sdbbata; the 7 shdbhath in Heb means “‘to desist,”
“cease,” “rest’’):

I. OnicIn or THs SABBATH


1. The Biblical Account
2. Critical Theories


Sabbath


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2630


II. History or THE SaBBaTH AFTER Moses
1. In the OT
2. In the Inter-Testamental Period
3. Jesus and the Sabbath
4. Paul and the Sabbath
LITERATURE
The Sabbath was the day on which man was to
leave off his secular labors and keep a day holy to
Jeh.
f, Origin of the Sabbath.—The sketch of crea-
tion in Gen 1 I—2 3 closes with an impress-
ive account of the hallowing of the


1. The 7th day, because on it God rested from
Biblical all the work which He had made
Account creatively. The word “Sabbath” does


not occur in the story; but it is recog-
nized by critics of every school that the author (P)
means to describe the Sabbath as primeval. In
Ex 20 8-11 (ascribed to JE) the reason assigned
for keeping the 7th day as a holy Sabbath is the
fact that Jeh rested after the six days of creative
activity. Ex 3117 employs a bold figure, and
describes Jeh as refreshing Himself (‘catching His
breath’) after six days of work. The statement
that God set apart the 7th day for holy purposes in
honor of His own rest after six days of creative activ-
ity is boldly challenged by many modern scholars as
merely the pious figment of a priestly imagination
of the exile. There are so few hints of a weekly
Sabbath before Moses, who is comparatively a
modern character, that argumentation is almost
excluded, and each student will approach the ques-
tion with the bias of his whole intellectual and
spiritual history. There is no distinct mention of
the Sabbath in Gen, though a 7-day period is
referred to several times (Gen 7 4.10; 8 10.12;
29 27f). The first express mention of the Sabbath
is found in Ex 16 21-30, in connection with the
giving of the manna. Jeh taught the people in the
wilderness to observe the 7th day as a Sabbath of
rest by sending no manna on that day, a double
supply being given on the 6th day of the weck.
Here we have to do with a weekly Sabbath as a
day of rest from ordinary secular labor. A little
later the Ten Words were spoken by Jeh from Sinai
in the hearing of all the people, and were afterward
written on the two tables of stone (Ex 20 I-I7;
34 1-5.27f). The Fourth Commandment enjoins
upon Israel the observance of the 7th day of the
week as a holy day on which no work shall be done
by man or beast. Children and servants are to
desist from all work, and even the stranger within
the gates is required to keep the day holy. The
reason assigned 1s that Jeh rested on the 7th day and
blessed it and hallowed it. There is no hint that
the restrictions were meant to guard against the
wrath of a jealous and angry deity. The Sabbath
was meaut to be a blessing to man and not a burden.
After the sin m connection with the golden calf
Jeh rehearses the chief duties required of Israel, and
again announces the law of the Sabbath (Ex 34 21,
ascribed to J). In the Levitical legislation there is
frequent mention of the Sabbath (Ex 31 13-16;
85 2f; Lev 19 3.30; 28 3.38). A wilful Sab-
bath-breaker was put to death (Nu 15 32-36).
In the Deuteronomic legislation there is equal
recognition of the importance and value of the
Sabbath (Dt 5 12-15). Here the reason assigned
for the observance of the Sabbath is philanthropic
and humanitarian: “that thy man-servant and thy
maid-servant may rest as well as thou.”
thus manifest that all the Pentateuchal codes,
whether proceeding from Moses alone or from many
hands in widely different centuries, equally recog-
nize the Sabbath as one of the characteristic insti-
tutions of Israel’s religious and social life. If we
cannot point to any observance of the weekly Sab-
bath prior to Moses, we can at least be sure that this


It is.


was one of the institutions which he gave to Israel.
From the days of Moses until now the holy Sabbath
has been kept by devout Israelites.
“The older theories of the origin of the Jewish
Sabbath (connecting it with Egypt, with the
day of Saturn, or in general with the
2. Critical seven planets) have now been almost
Theories entirely abandoned [see ASTRONOMY,
I, 5}. The disposition at present is to
regard the day as originally a lunar festival, similar
to a Bab custom (Schrader, Stud. u. Krit., 1874),
the rather as the cuneiform documents appear to
contain a term Sabaitu or Sabattum, identical in
form and meaning with the Heb word Sabbathon.”
Thus wrote Professor C. H. Toy in 1899 (JBL,
XVIII, 190). In a syllabary (II R, 32, I6a, 6)
Sabattum is said to be equivalent to @m nah libbi,
the natural tr of which seemed to be ‘‘day of rest
of the heart.” Schrader, Sayce and others so
understood the phrase, and naturally looked upon
Sabattum as equivalent to the Heb Sabbath. But
Jensen and others have shown that the phrase should
be rendered ‘‘day of the appeasement of the mind”’
(of an offended deity). The reference is to a day of
atonement or pacification rather than a day of rest,
a day in which one must be careful not to arouse the
anger of the god who was supposed to preside over
that particular day. Now the term Sabattum has
been found only 5 or 6 tin the Bab inscriptions and
in none of them is it connected with the 7th day of a
week. There was, however, a sort of institution
among the superstitious Babylonians that has
been compared with the Heb Sabbath. In certain
months of the year (Elul, Marcheshvan) the 7th,
14th, 19th, 21st and 28th days were set, down as
favorable days, or unfavorable days, that is, as days
in which the king, the priest and the physician must
be careful not to stir up the anger of the deity. On
these days the king was not to eat food prepared by
fire, not to put on royal] dress, not to ride in his
chariot, etc. As to the 19th day, it is thought that
it was included among the unlucky days because it
was the 49th (7 times 7) from the Ist of the preced-
ing month. As there were 30 days in the month,
it is evident that we are not dealing with a recurring
7th day in the week, as is the case with the Heb Sab-
bath. Moreover, no proof has been adduced that
the term sabattum was ever applied to these dies
nefastt or unlucky days. Hence the assertions of
some Assyriologists with regard to the Bab origin
of the Sabbath must be taken with several grains
of salt. Notice must be taken of an ingenious and
able paper by Professor M. Jastrow, which was read
before the Eleventh International Congress of
Orientalists in Paris in 1897, in which the learned
author attempts to show that the Heb Sabbath was
originally a day of propitiation like the Bab Sabat-
tum (AJT, II, 312-52). He argues that the restrict-
ive measures in the Heb laws for the observance of
the Sabbath arose from the original conception of
the Sabbath as an unfavorable day, a day in which
the anger of Jeh might flash forth against men.
Although Jastrow has supported his thesis with
many arguments that are cogent, yet the reverent
student of the Scriptures will find it difficult to
resist the impression that the OT writers without
exception thought of the Sabbath not as an unfavor-
able or unlucky day but rather as a day set apart
for the benefit of man. Whatever may have been the
attitude of the early Hebrews toward the day which
was to become a characteristic institution of Judaism
in all ages and in all lands, the organs of revelation
throughout the OT enforce the observance of the
Sabbath by arguments which lay emphasis upon its
beneficent and humanitarian aspects.


We must call attention to Mcinhold’s ingenious -
hypothesis as to the origin of the Sabbath. In 1894


2631


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sabbath


Theophilus G. Pinches discovered a tablet in which the
term shapatiu is applied to the 15th day of the month.
Meinhold argues that shabattu in Bab denotes the day of
the full moon. Dr. Skinner thus describes Meinhold's
theory: ‘‘ He points to the close association of new-moon
and Sabbath in nearly all the preéxilic references (Am
8 5; Hos 2 11; Isa 1 13; 2 K 4 23f); and concludes
that in carly Israel, as in Babylonia, the Sabbath was
the full-moon festival and nothing else. The Institution
of the weekly Sabhath he traces to a desire to compensate
for the loss of the old Junar festivals, when these were
abrogated by the Deuteronomic reformation. This
innovation he attributes to Ezekiel; hut steps toward
It are found in the introduction of a weekly day of rest
ee harvest_only (on the ground of Dt 16 8f; cf
Ex 34 21), and in the establishment of the sabbatical
year (Lev 25), which he considers to be older than the
weekly Sabbath" (7CC on Gen, p. 39). Dr. Skinner well
says that Meinhold’s theory involves great improbabili-
ties. It is not certain that tho Babylonians applied the
term Sabatiu to the 15th day of the month hecause it
was the day of the full moon; and it is by no means
certain that the early prophets in Israel identified Sabbath
with tho festival of the full moon.


The wealth of learning and ingenuity expended
in the search for the origin of the Sabbath has up
to the present yielded small returns.

Il, History of the Sobbath after Moses.—The
early prophets and historians occasionally make

mention of the Sabbath. It is some-


1. Inthe times named in connection with the
OT festival of the new moon (2 K 4 23;

Am 8 5; Hos 211; Isa 213; Ezk
46 3). The prophets found fault with the worship


on the Sabbath, because it was not spiritual nor
prompted by love and gratitude. The Sabbath is
exalted by the great prophets who faced the crisis
of the Bab exile as one of the most valuable institu-
tions in Israel’s life. Great promises are attached
to faithful observance of the holy day, and confession
is made of Israel’s unfaithfulness in profaning the
Sabbath (Jer 17 21-27; Isa 66 2.4; 68 13; Ezk
20 12-24). In the Pers period Nehemiah struggled
earnestly to make the people of Jerus observe the law
of the Sabbath (Neh 10 31; 13 15-22).
With the development of the synagogue the
Sabbath became a day of worship and of study of
the Law, as well as a day of cessation
2. Inthe from all secular employment. That
Inter-Testa- the pious in Israel carefully observed
mental the Sabbath is clear from the conduct
Period of the Maccabees and their followers,
who at first declined to resist the
onslaught made by their enemies on the Sabbath
(1 Mace 2 29-38); but necessity drove the faith-
ful to defend themselves against hostile attack on
the Sabbath (1 Macc 2 39-41). It was during
the period between Ezra and the Christian era that
the spirit of Jewish legalism flourished. Innumer-
able restrictions and rules were formulated for the
conduct of life under the Law. Great principles
were lost to sight in the mass of petty details. Two
entire treatises of the Mish, Shabbath and ‘H#ribhin,
are devoted to the details of Sabbath observance.
The subject is touched upon in other parts of the
Mish; and in the Gemara there are extended dis-
cussions, with citations of the often divergent
opinions of the rabbis. In the Mish (Shabbath,
vil.2) there are 39 classes of prohibited actions
with regard to the Sabbath, and there is much hair-
splitting in working out the details. The beginnings
of this elaborate definition of actions permitted and
actions forbidden are to be found in the centuries
immediately preceding the Christian era. The
movement was at flood tide during Our Lord’s
earthly ministry and continued for, centuries after-
ward, in spite of His frequent and vigorous protests.
Apart from His claim to be the Messiah, there is
no subject on which Our Lord came into such sharp
conflict with the religious leaders of the Jews as
in the matter of Sabbath observance. He set Him-
self squarely against the current rabbinic restric-


tions as contrary to the spirit of the original law
of the Sabbath. ‘The rabbis seemed te think that
the Sabbath was an end in itself, an


3. Jesus —_ institution to which the pious Israelite
and the must subject all his personal interests;
Sabbath in other words, that man was made for


the Sabbath: man might suffer hard-
ship, but the institution must be preserved inviolate.
Jesus, on the contrary, taught that the Sabbath was
made for man’s benefit. If there should arise a
conflict between man’s needs and the letter of the
Law, man’s higher interests and needs must take
precedence over the law of the Sabbath (Mt 12
1-14; Mk & 23—3 6; Lk 6 1-11; also Jn 5 1-18;
Lk 13 10-17; 14 1-6). There is no reason to
think that Jesus meant to discredit the Sabbath
as an institution. It was His custom to attend
worship in the synagogue on the Sabbath (Lk
4 16). The humane element in the rest day at the
end of every week must have appealed to His
sympathetic nature. It was the one precept of the
Decalogue that was predominantly ceremonial,
though it had distinct sociological and moral value.
As an institution for the benefit of toiling men and
animals, Jesus held the Sabbath in high regard. As
the Messiah, He was not subject to its restrictions;
He could at any moment assert His lordship over
the Sabbath (Mk 2 28). The institution was not
on a par with the great moral precepts, which are
unchangeable. It is worthy of note that, while
Jesus pushed the moral precepts of the Decalogue
into the mner realm of thought and desire, thus
making the requirement more difficult and the law
more exacting, He fought for a more liberal and
lenient interpretation of the law of the Sabbath.
Rigorous sabbatarians must look elsewhere for a
champion of their views.
The early Christians kept the 7th day as a Sab-
bath, much after the fashion of other Jews. Gradu-
ally the 1st day of the week came to be


4. Paul recognized as the day on which the
and the followers of Jesus would meet for
Sabbath worship. The resurrection of Our


Lord on that day made it for Christians
the most joyous day of all the week. When
Gentiles were admitted into the church, the question
at. once arose whether they should be required to
keep the Law of Moses. It is the glory of Paul
that he fought for and won freedom for his gentile
fellow-Christians. It is significant of the attitude
of the apostles that the decrees of the Council at
Jerus made no mention of Sabbath observance
in the requirements laid upon gentile Christians
(Acts 16 28f). Paul boldly contended that be-
lievers in Jesus, whether Jew or Gentile, were set
free from the burdens of the Mosaic Law. Even
cireumcision counted for nothing, now that men
were saved by believing in Jesus (Gal 6 6). Chris-’
tian liberty as proclaimed by Paul included all
days and seasons. A man could observe special
days or not, just as his own judgment and conscience
might dictate (Rom 14 51); but in allsuch matters
one ought to be careful not to put a stumbling-
block in a brother’s way (Rom 14 13 ff). That
Paul eontended for personal freedom in respect of
the Sabbath is made quite clear in Col 2 16f,
where he groups together dietary laws, feast days,
new moons and sabbaths. The early Christians
brought over into their mode of observing the Lord’s
Day the best elements of the Jewish Sabbath,
without its onerous restrictions. See further
Lorv’s Day; Eruics or Jesus, I, 3, (1).

Lireratore.—J. A. Hessey, Sunday, Its Origin, Hts-
tory, and Present Obligation (Bampton Lects for 1860);
Zahn, Geschichte des Sonntags, 1878; Davis, Genesis and
Semitic Tradition, 1894, 23-35; Jastrow, ‘‘ The Original


Character of the Heb Sabbath,” 4/7, II, 1898, 312-52;
Toy, The Earliest Form of the Sabbath,” JBL, XVIII,


Sabbath


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2632


1899, 190-94; W. Lotz, Questionum de historia Sabbati
libri duo, 1883; Nowack, Hebr. Arch., Il, 1894, 140 ff;
Driver, HDB, IV, 1902, 317-23; ICC, on ''Gen,” 1911,
35-39; Dillmann, Ex uw. Lev3, 1897, 212-16; Edersheim,
Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah, II, 1883, 51-62,
777-87, Broadus, Comm, on Mt, 256-61; EB,IV, 1903,
4173-80; Gunkel, Gen3, 1910, 114-16; Meinhold, Sabbat
u. Wochetm AT, 1905; Beer, Schabbath, 1908.
Joun RicHarp SAMPEY


SEVENTH-Day ADVENTIST PosITION


The views entertained by Seventh-Day Advent-
ists concerning the nature and obligation of the
Sabhath may conveniently he presented under three
general divisions: (1) what the Bible says concern-
ing the Sabbath; (2) what history says concerning
the Sabhath; (3) the significance of the Sabhath.

(1) OT teaching.—In their views concerning the
institution and primal obligation of the Sabbath,

Seventh-Day Adventists are in har-
1. What the mony with the views held by the
Bible Says early representatives of nearly all the
concerning evangelical denominations. The Sah-
the Sabbath bath is coeval with the finishing of

creation, and the main facts connected
with establishing it are recorded in Gen 2 2.3.
The blessing here placed upon the seventh day dis-
tinguishes it from the other days of the week, and
the day thus blessed was “sanctified” (AV, RV
“hallowed’’) and set apart for man.

That the Sabhath thus instituted was well known
throughout the Patriarchal age is clearly established
both hy direct evidence and hy necessary inference.


“Tf we had no other passage than this of Gen 2 3, there
would he no difficulty in deducing from it a precept for
the universal observance of a Sahhath, or seventh day,
to he devoted to God as holy time hy all of that race for
whom the earth and all things therein were specially
prepared. The first men must have known it. The
words, ‘He hallowed it,’ can have no meaning other-
wise. They would he a blank unless in reference to some
who were required to keep it holy’' (Lange’s Comm. on
Gen 2 3,1, 197).

“And the day arrived when Moses went to Goshen to
see his brethren, that he saw the children of Israel in
their burdens and hard lahor, and Moses was grieved
on their account. And Moses returned to Egypt and
caine to the house of Pharaoh, and came hefore the king,
and Moses bowed down hefore the king. And Moses
said unto Pharaoh, I pray thee, my lord, I have come to
seek a small request from thee, turn not away my face
empty, and Pharaoh said unto him, Speak. And Moses
said unto Pharaoh, Let there he given unto thy servants
the children of Israel who are in Goshen, one day to
rest therein from their lahor. And the king answered
Moses and said, Behold I have lifted up thy face in this
thing to grant thy request. And Pharaoh ordered a
proclamation to he issued throughout Egypt and Goshen,
saying, To you, all the children of Israel, thus says the
king, for six days you shall do your work and labor, hut
on the seventh day you shall rest, and shall not perform
any work; thus shall you do in all the days, as the king
and Moses the son of Bathia have commanded. And
Moses rejoiced at this thing which the king had granted
to him, and all_ the children of Israel did as Moses
ordered them. For this thing was from the Lord to the
children of Israel, for the Lord had begun to remember
the children of Israel to save them for the sake of their
fathers. And the Lord was with Moses, and his fame
went throughout Egypt. And Moses became great in
the eyes of all the Egyptians, and in the eyes of all the
children of Isracl, seeking good for his people Israel, and
speaking words of peace regarding them to the king”
(Book of Jashar 70:41-51, published by Noah & Gould,
New York, 1840).

‘Hence you can see that the Sahhath was hefore the
Law of Moses came, and has existed from the beginning
of the world. Esp. have the devout, who have preserved
the true faith, met together and called upon God on this
day’' (Luther's Works, XX XV, p. 330).

“Why should God hegin two thousand years after (the
creation of the world) to give men a Sabbath upon the
reason of His rest from the creation of it, if He had never
called man to that commemoration before? And it is
certain that the Sabhath was observed at the falling of
the manna hefore the giving of the Law; and let any
considering Christian judge... . (1) whether the uot
falling of manna, or the rest of God after the creation,
was like to be the original reason of the Sabhath; (2)
and whether, if it had heen the first, it would not have
been said, Remember to keep holy the Sahbath day;
for on six days the manna fell, and not on the seventh;
rather than ‘for in six days God created heaven and
earth, etc, and rested the seventh day.’ And it is


casually added, ‘Wherefore the Lord hlessed the Sah-
bath day, and hallowed it.’ Nay, consider whether
this annexed reason intimates not that the day on this
ground heing hallowed hefore, therefore it was that God
sent not down the manna on that day, and that He pro-
hibited the people from seeking it’’ (Richard Baxter,
Practical Works, III, 774, ed 1707).


That the Sabbath was known to those who came
out of Egypt, even before the giving of the Law at
Sinai, is shown from the experience with the manna,
as recorded in Ex 16 22-30. The double portion
on the sixth day, and its preservation, was the con-
stantly recurring miracle which reminded the people
of their obligation to observe the Sabhath, and that
the Sabbath was a definite day, the seventh day.
To the people, first wondering at this remarkahle
occurrence, Moses said, ‘‘This is that which the
Lord hath said, To morrow is the rest of the holy
sabbath unto the Lord” (ver 23 AV). And to some
who went out to gather manna on the seventh day,
the Lord administered this rebuke: ‘How long
refuse ye to keep my commandments and my
laws?” (ver 28). All this shows that the Sahbath
law was well understood, and that the failure to
observe it rendered the people justly subject to
Divine reproof. yA

At Sinai, the Sabbath which was instituted at
creation, and had been ohserved during the inter-
vening centuries, was embodied in that formal
statement of man’s duties usually designated as the
“Ten Commandments.” It is treated as an insti-
tution already well known and the command is,
“Remember the sabhath day, to keep it holy”
(Ex 20 8). In the 4th commandment the hasis of
the Sabbath is revealed. It is a memorial of the
Creator’s rest at the close of those six days in which
He made “heaven and earth, the sea, and all that
in them is.” For this reason ‘‘Jeh blessed the sah-
bath day, and hallowed it.’? This blessing was not
placed upon the day at Sinai, but in the beginning,
when ‘‘God hlessed the seventh day, and hallowed
it?’ (Gen 2 3).

From the very nature of the basis of the Sahbath,
as set forth in this commandment, hoth the insti-
tution itself and the definite day of the Sabhath
are of a permanent nature. So long as it is true
that God created heaven and earth, and all things
therein, so long will the Sabbath remain as a me-
morial of that work; and so long as it is true that
this creative work was completed in six days, and
that God Himself rested on the seventh day, and
was refreshed in the enjoyment of His completed
work, so long will it be true that the memorial of
that work can properly be celebrated only upon the
seventh day of the week.

During all the period from the deliverance out of
Egypt to the captivity in Babylon, the people of
God were distinguished from the nations ahout
them by the worship of the only true God, and the
observance of His holy day. The proper observance
of the true Sabbath would preserve them from idol-
atry, being a constant reminder of the one God, the
Creator of all things. Even when Jerus was suffer-
ing from the attacks of the Babylonians, God as-
sured His people, through the prophet Jeremiah,
that if they would hallow the Sabhath day, great
should he their prosperity, and the city should
remain forever (Jer 17 18). This shows that the
spiritual observance of the Sabbath was the su-
preme test of their right relation to God. In those
prophecies of Isaiah, which deal primarily with the
restoration from Babylon, remarkable promises were
made to those who would observe the Sabbath, as
recorded in Jsa 66 1-7.

(2) NT teaching—From the record found in the
four Gospels, it is plain that the Jews during all the
previous centuries had preserved a knowledge both
of the Sabbath institution and of the definite day.


2633


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sabbath


= ae


It is equally plain that they had made the Sabbath
burdensome by their own rigorous exactions con-
cerning it. And Christ, the Lord of the Sabbath,
both by example and by precept, brushed aside
these traditions of men that He might reveal the
Sabbath of the commandment as God gave it—a
blessing and not a burden. A careful reading of the
testimony of the evangelists will show that Christ
taught the observance of the commandments of
God, rather than the traditions of men, and that
the charge of Sabbath-breaking was brought against
Him for no other reason than that He refused
to allow the requirements of man to change the
Sabbath, blessed of God, into a merely human insti-
tution, grievous in its nature, and enforced upon the
people with many and troublesome restrictions.

All are agreed that Christ and His disciples ohserved
the seventh-day Sabhath previous to the crucifixion.
That His followers had received no intimation of any
proposed change at His death, is evident from the
recorded fact that on the day when He was in the tomh
they rested, ‘‘ou the sahhath.... according to the com-
mandment’ (Lk 23 56); and that they treated the fol-
lowing day, the first day of the week, the same as of old,
is further evident, as upon that day they came unto the
sepulcher for the purpose of anointing the hody of Jesus.
In the Book of Acts, which gives a brief history of the
work of the disciples in proclaiming the gospel of a risen
Saviour, no other Sabhath is recognized than the seventh
day, and this is mentioned in the most natural way as
the proper designation of a well-known institution (Acts
13 14.27.42; 16 13; 18 4).

In Our Lord’s great prophecy, in which He foretold
the experience of the church between the first and the
second advent, He recognized the seventh-day Sabhath
as an existing institution at the time of the destruction of
Jerus (70 AD), when He instructed His disciples, '' Pray
ye that your flight he not in the winter, neither on a
sabbath’? (Mt 24 20). Such instruction given in these
words, and at that time, would have heen confusing
in the extreme, had there heen any such thing contem-
plated as the overthrow of the Sabbath law at the cruci-
fixion, and the substitution of another day upon an
entirely different hasis.


That the original Sabbath is to be observed,
not only during the present order of things, but also
after the restoration when, according to the vision
of the revelator, a new heaven and a new earth will
take the place of the heaven and the earth that now
are, is clearly intimated in the words of the Lord
through the prophet Isaiah: “For as the new
heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall
remain before me, saith Jeh, so shall your seed and
your name remain. And it shall come to pass, that
from one new moon to another, and from one sab-
bath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before
me, saith Jeh” (Isa 66 22.23).

Seventh-Day Adventists regard the effort to
establish the observance of another day than the
seventh by using such texts as Jn 20 19.26; Acts
20 7; 1 Cor 16 1.2; Rev 1 10 as being merely an
afterthought, an effort to find warrant for an observ-
ance established upon other than Bib. authority.
During the last two or three centuries there has
been a movement for the restoration of the original
seventh-day Sabbath, not as a Jewish, but as a
Christian, institution. This work, commenced and
carried forward by the Seventh-Day Baptists, has
been taken up and pushed with renewed vigor by
the Seventh-Day Adventists during the present
generation, and the Bible teaching concerning the
true Sabbath is now being presented in nearly every
country, both civilized and uncivilized, on the face
of the earth.

(1) Josephus.—This summary of history must neces-
sarily be brief, and it will be impossible, for lack of space,


to quote authorities. From the testi-
mony of Jos it is clear that the Jews, as a


2. What nation, continued to ohserve the seventh-
History day Sabbath until their overthrow, when
Says about Jerus was captured hy Titus, 70 AD. As

colonies, and individuals, scattered over


the Sabbath jhe face of the earth, the Jews have pre-
served a knowledge of the original Sahbath,
and the definite day, until the present time. They con-


stitute a living testimony for the benefit of all who desire
to know the truth of this matter.

(2) Church history.—According to church history the
seventh-day Sahbath was ohserved hy the early church,
and no other day was ohserved as a Sahhath during the
first two or three centuries (see HDB, 1V, 322 b).

In the oft-repeated letter of Pliny, the Rom governor
of Bithynia, to the emperor Trajan. written about
112 AD, there occurs the expression, ‘a certain stated
day,” which is usually assumed to mean Sunday. With
reference to this matter W. B. Taylor, in Historical
Comms., ch i, sec. 47, makes the following statement:
“As the Sahhath day appears to have heen quite as
commonly observed at this date as the sun's day (if not
even more so), it is just as prohable that this ‘stated
day’ referred to hy Pliny was the 7th day as that it was
the 1st day; though the latter is generally taken for
granted.’’ ‘Sunday was distinguished as a day of joy
by the circurnstances that men did not fast upon it, and
that they prayed standing up and not kneeling, as Christ
had now been raised from the dead. The festival of
Sunday, like all other festivals, was always only a humau
ordinance, and it was far from the intentions of the
apostles to estahlish a Divine command in this respect,


far from them, and from the early apostolic church, to


transfer the laws of the Sabhath to Sunday. Perhaps
at the end of the 2d cent., a false application of this kind
had begun to take place; for men appear hy that time
to have considered lahoring on Sunday as a sin”’ (Tertul-
lian De Orat., c. 23). This quotation is taken from Rosc’s
Neander, London, 1831, 1, 33 f, and is the correct tr from
Neander’s first Ger. ed, Hamburg, 1826, I, pt. 2, p. 339.
Neander has in his 2d ed, 1842, omitted the second sen-
tence, in which he expressly stated that Sunday was only
a human ordinance, but he has added nothing to the con-
trary. ‘The Christians in the ancient church very soon
distinguished the first day of the week, Sunday; however,
not as a Sabhath, but as an assembly day of the church,
to study the Word of God together and to celehrate the
ordinances one with another: without a shadow of douht
this took place as early as the first part of the 2d cent.”
(Geschichte des Sonntags, 60).

Gradually, however, the first day of. the week came into
prominence as an added day, but finally by civil and
ecclesiastical authority as a required ohservance. The
first legislation on this subject was the famous law of Con-
stantine, enacted 321 AD. The acts of various councils
during the 4th and 5th cents. estahlished the observance
of the first day of the week hy ecclesiastical authority, and
In the great apostasy which followed, the rival day oh-
tained the ascendancy. During the centuries which fol-
lowed, however, there were always witnesses for the true
Sahbath, although under great persecution. And thus in
various lands, the knowledge of the true Sahbath has
heen preserved.


In the creation of the heavens and the earth the
foundation of the gospel was laid. At the close of
His created work, ‘‘God saw everything
3. The Sig- that he had made, and, behold, it was
nificance of very good” (Gen 1 31). The Sab-
the Sabbath bath was both the sign and the
7 memorial of that creative power which
is able to make all things good. But man, made in
the image of God, lost that image through sin. In
the gospel, provision is made for the restoration of
the image of God in the soul of man. The Creator
is the Redeemer and redemption is the new creation.
As the Sabbath was the sign of that creative power
which wrought in Christ, the Word, in the making
of the heaven and the earth and all things therein,
so it is the sign of that same creative power working
through the same eternal Word for the restoration
of all things. ‘'Wherefore if any man is in Christ,
there is a new creation: the old things are passed
away; behold, they are become new” (2 Cor
6 17 m). “For neither is circumcision anything,
ner uncircumcision, but a new creation” (Gal 6
15m). _‘‘For we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus fer good works, which God afore pre-
pared that we should walk in them” (Eph 2 10).

A concrete illustration of this gospel meaning of the
Sahhath is found in the deliverance of Israel from Egypt.
The same creative power which wrought in the beginning
was exercised in the signs and miracles which preceded
their deliverance, and in those miracles, such as the open-
ing of the Red Sea, the giving of the manna, and the water
from the rock, which attended the journeyings of the
Israclites. In consequence of these manifestations of
creative power in their behalf, the children of Israel were
instructed to remember in their ohservance of the Sabbath
that they were bondmen in the land of Egypt. Israel's


deliverance from Egypt is the type of every man’s deliv-
erance from sin; and the instruction to Israel concerning


Sabbath-Breaking
Sabbatical Year


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2634


the Sabbath shows its true significance in the gospel of
salvation from sin, and the new creation in the image
of God.

Furthermore, the seventh-day Sabbath is the
sign of both the divinity and the deity of Christ.
God only can create. He through whom this work
is wrought must be one with God. To this the
Scriptures testify: “In the beginning was the Word,

. and the Word was God... .. _All things
were made through him; and without him was not
anything made that hath been made.” But this
same Word which was with God, and was God,
“beeame flesh, and dwelt among us” (Jn 1 1.3.14).
This is the eternal Son, “in whom we have our
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our
trespasses, according to the riches of his grace” (Eph
1 7). To the Christian the Sabbath, which was the
sign and memorial of that Divine power which
wrought through the eternal Word in the creation
of the heaven and the earth, becomes the sign of the
same power working through the same eternal Son
to aecomplish the new creation, and is thus the sign
of both the divinity and the deity of Christ. ;

Inasmuch as the redemptive work finds its chiefest
expression in the cross of Christ, the Sabbath, which
is the sign of that redemptive work, becomes the
sign of the cross.

Seventh-Day Adventists teach and practise the obsery-
ance of the Sabhath, not because they helieve in salvation
through man’s effort to keep the law of God, but because
they believe in that salvation which alone can be accom-
plished by the creative power of God working through
the eternal Son to create believers anew in Christ Jesus.

Seventh-Day Adventists helieve, and teach, that the
observance of any other day than the seventh as the
Sabbath is the sign of that predicted apostasy in which
the man of sin would be revealed who would exalt
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped.

Seventh-Day Adventists believe, and teach, that the
observance of the true Sabbath in this generation is a
part of that gospel work which is to make ready a people
prepared for the Lord.

W. W. Prescott

SABBATH-BREAKING, s.-brik’ing. Sce
CrivEs; PUNISHMENTS.


SABBATH, COURT OF THE.
Way.


SABBATH, DAY BEFORE THE. Sce Day
BEFORE THE SABBATH.


SABBATH DAY’S JOURNEY, jtir’ni (caBBdrov
686s, sabbdtou hodds): Used only in Acts 1 12,
where it designates the distance from Jerus to the
Mount of Olives, to which Jesus led His disciples on
the day of His ascension. The expression comes
from rabbinical usage to indicate the distance a
Jew might travel on the Sabbath without trans-
gressing the Law, the command against working on
that day being interpreted as including travel
(see Ex 16 27-30). The limit sct by the rabbis to
the Sabbath day’s journey was 2,000 cubits from
one’s house or domicile, which was derived from the
statement found in Josh 3 4 that this was the
distance between the ark and the people on their
march, this being assumed to be the distance between
the tents of the people and the tabernacle during the
sojourn in the wilderness. Hence it must have been
allowable to travel thus far to attend the worship
of the tabernacle. We do not know when this
assumption in regard to the Sabbath day’s journey
was made, but it seems to have been in force in the
time of Christ. The distance of the Mount of
Olives from Jerus is stated in Jos (Ant, XX, viii,
6) to have been five stadia or furlongs and in BJ,
Y, il, 3, six stadia, the discrepancy being explained
by supposing a different point of departure. This
would make the distance of the Sabbath day’s jour-
ney from 1,000 to 1,200 yds., the first agrecing very
closely with the 2,000 cubits. The rabbis, however,


See CoverREeD


-


invented a way of increasing this distance without
technically infringing the Law, by depositing some
food at the 2,000-cubit limit, before the Sabbath,
and declaring that spot. a temporary domicile.
They might then proceed 2,000 cubits from this
point without transgressing the Law.

And in some eases even this intricacy of preparation
was unnecessary. If, for instance, the approach of the
Sabbath found one on his journey, the traveler might
select some tree or some stone wall at a distance of 2,000
paces and mentally declare this to be his residence for
the Sabhath, in which case he was permitted to go the
2,000 paces to the selected tree or wall and also 2,000
paces beyond, but in such a case he must do the work
thoroughly and must say: ‘‘Let my Sabbath residence
be at the trunk of that tree,’’ for if he merely said:
“Let my Sabbath residence be under that tree,'' this
wonld not be sufficient, because the expression would be
too general and indefinite (Tract. ‘Erabhin 4 7).

Other schemes for extending the distance have
been devised, such as regarding the quarter of the
town in which one dwells, or the whole town itself,
as the domicile, thus allowing one to proceed from
any part of the town to a point 2,000 cubits beyond
its utmost limits. This was most probably the case
with walled towns, at least, and boundary stones
have been found in the vicinity of Gaza with in-
seriptions supposed to mark theselimits. The 2,000-
cubit limits around the Levitical cities (Nu 35 5)
may have suggested the limit of the Sabbath day's
journey also. The term came to be used as a desig-
nation of distance which must have been more or
less definite. H. Porter


SABBATH, MORROW AFTER THE. Sce
Morrow AFTER THE SABBATH.


SABBATH, SECOND AFTER THE FIRST
(cGBBarov Sevrepsrpwrov, sdbbaton deuterd proton
[Lk 6 1], lit. “the second-first sabbath,” of RVm):
We will mention only a few of the explanations
elicited by this expression. (1) It was the first Sab-
bath in the second year of a 7-year cycle compris-
ing the period from one Sabbatic year to the other;
(2) the first Sabbath after the second day of Pass-
over, i.e. the first of the seven Sabbaths the Hebrews
were to “count unto” themselves from ‘the morrow
after the sabbath” (the day after Easter) until
Pentecost (Lev 23 15); (3) the first Sabbath in
the Jewish ecclesiastical year (about the middle of
March), the first Sabbath in the civil year (about
the middle of September) being counted as the
“first-first’”’ Sabbath; (4) the term deuteréprétos,
ig 4 monstrous combination of the words deuiteros,
“second,” and prétos, “first,” attributable to un-
skilful attempts at textual emendation on the part
of copyists. This supposition would, of course,
render unnecessary all other efforts to unravel the
knotty problem, and, as a matter of fact, deulero-
protos is omitted by many MSS (including & and
B). To those not feeling inclined to accept this
solution we would suggest the first of the above-


; named explanations as the most natural and prob-


Wiitiam Baur


SABBATHEUS, sab-a-thé’us: AV=RV San-
BATEUS (q.v.).


SABBATHS, sab’aths, OF YEARS (O°7U nnaw,
shabbthoth shdnim; avamatoes érav, anapariseis
etén[Lev 25 8]): The seven sabbatic years preceding
the Year of Jubilee. Sce SaspartcaL Year;
JUBILEE YEAR; Astronomy, I, 5.


SABBATICAL, sa-bat’ik-al, YEAR (JNU N70,
shtnath shabbathin; evvavrds dvaratcews, eniaulds
anapaiuscos, ‘a year of solemn rest’; or nsw nav,
shabbath shobbathén; vdBBara avamaveis, sdbbala
andpausts, “a sabbath of solemn rest” [Lev 25 4];


able one.


2635


or MAW MW, shenuth ha-shemittah; eros ris
adicews, tos tés aphéseds, ‘the year of release’ [Dt

; 16 9; 81 10]): We find the first rudi-
1. Primary ments of this institution in the so-
Intention called Covenant Book (Ex 21-23). Its

5 connection with the day of rest (Sab-
bath) is obvious, although it strikes us as somewhat
remarkable that in Ex 23 10-12 the regulation
regarding the 7th year should precede the statute
respecting the 7th day. Still it seems natural that
after the allusion in ver 9, ‘Ye were sojourners in
the land of Egypt,” the Covenant Book should put
in a good word for the poor in Israel (ver 11: “Let
it rest and lie fallow, that the poor of thy people
may eat”). Even the beasts of the field are re-
membered (cf Jon 4 11).

We must, therefore, conclude that in this early
period of the history of Israel the regulation regard-
ing the 7th year was primarily intended for the relief
of the poor and for the awakening of a sense of re-
sponsibility in the hearts of those better provided
with the means of subsistence. It would be wrong,
however, to deny its Sabbatic character, for the
text says expressly, “But in the 7th year thou shalt
let it rest’’ (lit. “thou shalt release it’), implying
that the land was entitled to a rest because it needed
it; it must be released for a time in order to gain
fresh strength and insure its future fertility. Two
motives, then, present themselves most clearly,
one of a social, the other of an economic character,
and both are rooted in God’s dealings with Israel
(ef Ex 21 1).


Another evidence of the humane spirit pervading the
Mosaic Law may he found in Ex 21 2-6 where, in the
case of a Heh slave, the length of his


2. Mosaic servitude is limited to six years. The con-
Legislation nection with the idea of the Sabbath is

g evident, but we fail to detect here any
Humane reference to the Sabbatical year. It is


clear that the 7th year in which a slave
might he set free need not necessarily coincide with the
Sabbatical year, though it might, of course, The same is
true of Dt 15 12-18; it has nothing to do with the
Sabbatical year. On the other hand it is reasonable to
assume that the ‘‘release’’ mentioned in Dt 15 1-3 took
Jace in the Sabbatical year; in other words, its scope
had been enlarged in later years so as to include the
release from pecuniary obligation, i.e. the remission of
debts or, at least, their temporary suspension. This
means that the children of Israel were now developing
from a purely agricultural people to a commercial na-
tion. Still the same spirit of compassion for the poor
and those struggling for a living asserts itself as in the
earlier period, and it goes without saying that the old
regulation concerning the release of the land in the 7th
year was still in force (cf ver 2: ‘because Jeh’s release
hath been proclaimed’’).

According to ver 1, this proclamation occurred at the
end of every 7 years, or, rather, during the 7th year;
for we must be careful not to strain the expression ‘‘at
the end”’ (cf ver 9, where the 7th year is called ‘‘the year
of release”: it is quite natural to identify this 7th year
with the Sabbatical year).

Moreover, we are now almost compelled to assert that
the Sabhatical year hy this time bad become an institution
observed simultaneously all over the country. From
the wording of the regulation regarding the 7th year in
the Covenant Book we are not certain about this in
those early times. But now it is different. Jeh’s
release hath been proclaimed.’


Tt was a solemn and general proclamation, the date
of which was very likely the day of atonement in
the 7th month (the Sabbatical month).

8. General The celebration of the Feast of Taber-
Observance nacles (booths) began five days later and
it lasted from the 15th day to the 21st

of the 7th month (Tisri). In the Sabbatical year, at
that time, the Law was read “before all Israel in
their hearing,” a fact which tends to prove that the
Sabbatical year had become a matter of general and
simultaneous observance (cf Dt 31 10-13). An-
other lesson may be deduced from this passage:
it gives us a hint respecting the use to which the
people may have put their leisure time during the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sabbath-Breaking
Sabbatical Year


12 months of Sabbatical rest; it may have been a
period of religious and probably other instruction.

In Lev 26 1-7 the central idea of the Sabbatical
year is unfolded. Although it has been said we
should be careful not to look for too much of the
ideal and dogmatic in the institutions of the chil-
dren of Israel, yet we must never lose sight of the
religious and educational character even of their
ancient legislation.

_One central thought is brought home to them,
viz. God is the owner of the soil, and through His
grace only the chosen people have come
into its possession. ‘Their time, i.e.
they themselves, belong to Him: this
is the deepest meaning of the day of
rest; their land, i.e. their means of subsistence,
belong to Him: this reveals to us the innermost
significance of the year of rest. It was Jeh’s pleas-
ure to call the children of Israel into life, and if they
live and work and prosper, they are indebted
to His unmerited loving-kindness. They should,
therefore, put their absolute trust in Him, never
doubt His word or His power, always obey Him and
so always receive His unbounded blessings.

If we thus put all the emphasis on the religious
character of the Sabbatical year, we are in keeping
with the idea permeating the OT, namely that the
children of Israel are the chosen people of Jeh.
All their agricultural, social, commercial and _politi-
cal relations were to be built upon their Divine
calling and shaped according to God’s sovereign will.

But did they live up to it? Or, to limit the ques-
tion to our subject: Did they really observe the
Sabbatical year? There are those who hold that the
law regarding the Sabbatical year was not observed
before the captivity. In order to prove this asser-
tion they point to Lev 26 341.43; also to 2 Ch
36 21. But all we can gather from these passages
is the palpable conclusion that the law regarding
the Sabbatical year had not been strictly obeyed, a
deficiency which may mar the effect of any law.

The possibility of observing the precept respect-
ing the Sabbatical year is demonstrated by the post-
exilic history of the Jewish people. Nehemiah
registers the solemn fact that the reéstablished
nation entered into a covenant to keep the law and
to maintain the temple worship (Neh 9 38; 10
32 ff). In ver 31 of the last-named chapter he
alludes to the 7th year, ‘that we would forego the
7th year, and the exaction of every debt.” We
are not sure of the exact meaning of this short, allu-
sion; it may refer to the Sabbatical rest of the land
and the suspension of debts.

For a certainty we know that the Sabbatical year
was observed by the Jews at the time of Alexander
the Great. When he was petitioned by the Samari-
tans “that he would remit the tribute of the 7th
year to them, because they did not sow therein,
he asked who they were that made such a petition”;
he ne told they were Hebrews, etc (Jos, Ant, XI,
viii, 6).

During Maceabean and Asmonean times the
law regarding the Sabbatical year was strictly ob-
served, although it frequently weakened the cause
of the Jews (1 Mace 6 49.53; Jos, Ant, XIII, viii,
1; of BJ, I, ii, 4; Ant, XIV, x,6; XV,i,2). Again
we may find references to the Sabbatical year in Jos,
Ant, XIV, xvi, 2, etc; Tac. Hist. v.4, ete, all of
which testifies to the observance of the Sabbatical
year in the Herodian era. The words of Tacitus
show the proud Roman’s estimate of the Jewish
character and customs: ‘For the 7th day they are
said to have prescribed rest because this day ended
their labors; then, in addition, being allured by
their lack of energy, they also spend the 7th year
in laziness.”” See also Astronomy, I, 5, (3), (4);
JUBILEE YEAR. WiLuIAM BauR


4. Central
Idea


Sabbeus
Sacraments


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2636


SABBEUS, sa-bé@’us (ZaBBalas, Sabbaias): In
1 Esd 9 32, the same as ‘‘Shemaiah” in Ezr 10 31.


SABI, sa’bi:

(1) A, ZaBel, Sabet, B, TwBels, Tabeis, Fritzsche;
AV Sami): Eponym of a family of porters who
returned with Zerubhabel (1 Esd 5 28)=‘Shobai”
in Ezr 2 42; Neh 7 45.

(2) AV=RV SaBie (q.v.).


SABIAS, sa-bi‘as (ZaBlas, Sabias, Fritzsche,
‘AcaBias, Asabias; AV Assabias): One of the six
“captains over thousands” who supplied the Levites
with much cattle for‘Josiah’s Passover (1 Esd 1 9)
=‘Hashabiah’”’ in 2 Ch 36 9.


SABIE, sa’bi-@ (ZaPern, Sadeié, or ZaPry, Sabie;
AV Sabi): In 1 Esd 5 34 both AV and RV, follow-
ing A, read ‘“‘the sons of Phacareth, the sons of
Sahie”’ (AV “Sabi’’) for the ‘‘Pochereth-hazzebaim”’
of Ezr 2 57; Neh 7 59. B reads correctly as one
proper name: ‘‘Phacareth Sabie.’


SABTA, or SABTAH, sab’ta (NTM2D, sabhia’,
MMA, sabhtah): Third son of Cush (Gen 10 7=1
Ch 1 9). A place Sabta is probably to be looked for
in South Arabia. Arab geographers give no exact
equivalent of the name. Al Bekri (i.65) quotes


a line of early poetry in which Dhu ’] Sabta is men- |


tioned, and the context might indicate a situation
in Yemamah; but the word is possibly not a proper
name. It is usually identified with Saubatha
(Ptol., vi.7, 38) or with the Sabota of Pliny (vi.32;
x1i1.32), an old mercantile city in South Arabia
celebrated for its trade in frankincense and, accord-
ing to Ptolemy, possessing 60 temples. It is said
also to have been the territory of a king Elisarus,
whose name presents a striking resemblance to Dhu
‘|-Adhar, one of the ‘“Tubbas” or Himyarite kings
of Yemen. Another conjecture is the Saphtha of
Ptolemy (vi.7, 30) near the Arabian shore of the
Pers Gulf. : A. 8. Funron


SABTECA, sab’té-ka (NDINIO, sabhitkha’; DaBa-
Kaed, Sabakathd, LeBeBaxa, Sebethachd; AV Sab-
techah): The 5th named of the sons of Cush in
the genealogy of Gen 10 5-7. In I Chi 8s9
AV reads “‘Sabtecha,”’ RV “Sabteca.” Many con-
jectures have been made as to the place here mdi-
cated. Recently Glazer (Skizze, IJ, 252) has re-
vived the suggestion of Bochart that it is to be
identified with Samydake in Carmania on the E. of
the Pers Gulf.
than superficial resemblance of the names; but
the phonetic changes involved are difficult. Others
have thought of various places in Arabia, toward
the Pers Gulf; but the data necessary for any sat-
isfactory decision are not now available.


? W. Ewine

SACAR, sa’kar (13, sakhar):

(1) Father of Ahiam, a follower of David (1 Ch
11 35, B,’Axdp, Achdr, A, Saxdp, Sachdr=‘Sharar”’
of 2 5 23 33; Sharar is favored as the original
reading).
ona Eponym of a family of gatekeepers (1 Ch

4).


SACKBUT, sak’but. See Music, III, 1, (f).


SACKCLOTH, sak’kloth. See Buriar.


SACRAMENTS, sak’ra-ments: The word “sac-
rament”’ comes from the Lat sacramentum, which
in the classical period of the language was used in
two chicf senses: (1) as a legal term to denote the
sum of money deposited by two parties to a suit


which was forfeited by the loser and appropriated
to sacred uses; (2) as a military term to designate
the oath of obedience taken by newly
enlisted soldiers. Whether referring to
an oath of obedience or to something
set apart for a sacred purpose, it 1s
evident that. sacramentum would readily lend itself
to describe such ordinances as Baptism and the
Lord’s Supper. In the Gr NT, however, there is
no word nor even any general idea corresponding
to “sacrament,’’ nor does the earliest history of
Christianity afford any trace of the application of
the term to certain rites of the church. Pliny
(c 112 AD) describes the Christians of Bithynia
as “binding themselves by a sacramentum to com-
mit no kind of crime” (Epp. x.97), but scholars
are now pretty generally agreed that Plmy here
uses the word in its old Rom sense of an oath or
solemn obligation, so that its occurrence in this
passage is nothing more than an interesting co-
incidence.

It is in the writings of Tertullian (end of 2d and
beginning of 3d cent.) that we find the first evidence
of the adoption of the word as a technical term to
designate Baptism, the Eucharist, and other rites
of the Christian church. This Christian adoption
of sacramentum may have been partly occasioned
by the evident analogies which the word suggests
with Baptism and the Eucharist; but what appears
to have chiefly determined its history in this direc-
tion was the fact that in the Old Lat VSS (as after-
ward in the Vulg) it had been employed to translate
the Gr pvorypior, muslérion, “a mystery’ (e.g.
Eph 5 32; 1 Tim 3 16; Rev 1 20; 17 7)—an
association of ideas which was greatly fostered in
the early church by the rapidly growing tendency
to an assimilation of Christian worship with the
mystery-practices of the Gr-Rom world.

Though esp. employed to denote Baptism and
the Eucharist, the name ‘‘sacraments”’ was for long

used so loosely and vaguely that it


1. The
Term


2. Nature was applied to facts and doctrines of
and Christianity as well as to its symbolic
Number rites. Augustine’s definition of a


sacrament as ‘‘the visible form of _an
invisible grace” so far limited its application. But


we see how widely even a definition like this might


be stretched when we find Hugo of St. Victor (12th
cent.) enumerating as many as 30 sacraments that
had been recognized in the church. The Council
of Trent was more exact when it declared that visible
forms are sacraments only when they represent an


: : | invisible grace and become its channels, and when
This seems to rest on nothing more | g 3


it sought further to delimit the sacramental area by
reénacting (1547) a decision of the Council of
Florence (1439), in which for the first time the
authority of the church was given to a suggestion
of Peter Lombard (12th cent.) and other schoolmen
that the number of the sacraments should be fixed
at seven, viz. Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist,
Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders, and Matri-
mony—a suggestion which was supported by cer-
tain fanciful analogies designed to show that seven
was a sacred number.

The divergence of the Protestant churches from
this definition and scheme was based on the fact
that these proceeded on no settled principles. The
notion that there are seven sacraments has no NT
authority, and must be described as purely arbi-
trary; while the definition of a sacrament is still
so vague that anything but an arbitrary selection
of particulars is mmpossible. It is perfectly arbi-


| trary, for example, to place Baptism and the Lord’s


Supper, which were instituted by Christ as ordi-
nances of the church, in the same category with
marriage, which rests not on His appointment but
on a natural relationship between the sexes that is


2637


as old as the human race. While, therefore, the
Reformers retained the term “sacrament” as’ a
convenicnt one to express the general idea that has
to be drawn from the characteristics of the rites
classed together under this name, they found the
distinguishing marks of sacraments (1) in their
institution by Christ, (2) in their being enjoined by
Him upon His followers, (3) in their being bound
up with His word and revelation in such a way that
they become “‘the expressions of Divine thoughts,
the visible symbols of Divine acts.” And as Bap-
tism and the Lord’s Supper are the only two rites
for which such marks can be claimed, it follows
that there are only two NT sacraments. Their
unique place in the original revelation justifies us
m separating them from all other rites and cere-
monies that may have arisen in the history of the
church, since it raises them to the dignity of form-
ing an iutegral part of the historical gospel. A
justification for their being classed together under
a common name may be found, again, in the way
in which they are associated in the NT (Acts 2
41.42; 1 Cor 10 1-4) and also in the analogy
which Paul traces between Baptism and the Lord’s
Supper on the one hand, and Circumcision and the
Passover—the two most distinctive rites of the
Old Covenant—on the other (Col 2 11; 1 Cor 5

7; 11 26).
The assumption made above, that both Baptism
and the Lord’s Supper owe their origin as sacra-
ments of the church to their definite


3. Institu- appointment by Christ Himself, has
tion by been strongly challenged by some
Christ modern critics.


(1) In regard to Baptism it has been
argued that as Mk 16 15f occurs in a passage
(vs 9-20) which textual criticism has shown to have
formed no part of the original Gospel, Mt 28 19,
standing by itself, is too slender a foundation to
support the belief that the ordinance rests upon an
injunction of Jesus, more esp. as its statements are
inconsistent with the results of historical criticism.
These results, it is affirmed, prove that all the narra-
tives of the Forty Days are legendary, that Mt 28
19 in particular only canonizes a later ecclesiastical
situation, that its universalism is contrary to the
facts of early Christian history, and its Trinitarian
formula “foreign to the mouth of Jesus’’ (see Har-
nack, History of Dogma, 1, 79, and the references
there given). It is evident, however, that some of
these objections rest upon anti-supernatural pre
suppositions that really beg the question at issue,
and others on conclusions for which real premises
are wanting. Over against them all we have to set
the positive and weighty fact that from the earliest
days of Christianity Baptism appears as the rite
of initiation into the fellowship of the church (Acts
2 38.41, ef passim), and that even Paul, with all
his freedom of thought and spiritual interpreta-
tion of the gospel, never questioned its necessity
(cf Rom 6 3 ff; 1 Cor 12 13; Eph 4 5). Onany
other supposition than that of its appointment
by Our Lord Himself it is difficult to conceive how
within the brief space of years between the death
of Jesus and the apostle’s earliest references to the
subject, the ordinance should not only have origi-
nated but have established itself in so absolute a
manner for Jewish and gentile Christians alike.

(2) In the case of the Lord’s Supper the challenge
of its institution by Christ rests mainly upou the
fact that the saying, ‘“This do in remembrance of
me,” is absent from the Mk-Mt text, and is found
only in the Supper-narratives of Paul (1 Cor 11
24.25) and his disciple Luke (Lk 22 19). Upon
this circumstance large structures of critical hy-
pothesis have been reared. It has been affirmed
that in the upper room Jesus was only holding a


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sabbeus
Sacraments


farewell supper with His disciples, and that it never
occurred to Him to institute a feast of commemo-
ration. It has further been maintained that the
views of Jesus regarding the speedy consummation
of His kingdom make it impossible that He should
have dreamed of instituting a sacrament to com-
memorate His death. The significance of the feast
was eschatological merely; it was a pledge of a
glorious future hour in the perfected kingdom of
God (see Mt 26 29 and parallels). And the theory
has even been advanced that the institution of this
sacrament as an ordinance of the church designed to
commemorate Christ’s death was due to the initia-
tive of Paul, who is supposed to have been influ-
enced in this direction by what he had seen in
Corinth and elsewhere of the mystery-practices of
the Gr world.

All these hypothetical fabrics fall, of course, to
the ground if the underlying assumption that Jesus
never said, ‘“This do in remembrance of me,’ is
shown to be unwarrantable. And it is unwarrant-
able to assume that a saying of Jesus which is
vouched for by Paul and Luke cannot be authentic
because it does not occur in the corresponding nar-
ratives of Matthew and Mark. In these narratives,
which are highly compressed in any case, the first
two evangelists would scem to have confined them-
selves to setting down those sayings which formed
the essential moments of the Supper and gave its
symbolic contents. The command of its repetition
they may have regarded as sufficiently embodicd
and expressed in the universal practice of the
church from the earliest days. For as to that
practice there is no question (Acts 2 42.46; 20 7;
1 Cor 10 16; 11 26), and just as little that it
rested upon the belief that Christ had enjoined it.
“Every assumption of its having originated in the
church from the recollection of intercourse with
Jesus at table, and the necessity felt for recalling
His death, is precluded’ (Weizsacker, Apostolic
Age, II, 279). That the simple historical supper
of Jesus with His disciples in the upper room was
converted by Paul into an institution for the gentile
and Jewish churches alike is altogether inconceiv-
able. The primitive church had its bitter contro-
versies, but there is no trace of any controversy as
to the origin and institutional character of the Lord’s
Supper.

In the NT the sacraments are presented as means
of grace. Forgiveness (Acts 2 38), cleansing (Eph

6 25f), spiritual quickening (Col 2
4, Efficacy 12) are associated with Baptism; the

Lord’s Supper is declared to be a par-
ticipation in the body and blood of Christ (1 Cor
10 16). So far all Christians are agreed; but wide
divergence shows itself thereafter. According to
the doctrine of the Rom church, sacraments are
efficacious ex opere operato, i.e. in virtue of a power
inherent in themselves as outward acts whereby
they communicate saving benefits to those who
receive them without opposing any obstacle. The
Reformed doctrine, on the other hand, teaches that
their efficacy lies not in themselves as outward acts,
but in the blessing of Christ and the operation of
His Spirit, and that it is conditioned Be faith in
the recipient. The traditional Lutheran doctrine
agrees with the Reformed in affirming that faith is
necessary as the condition of saving benefits in the
use of the sacraments, but resembles the Rom teach-
ing in ascribing the cfhcacy of Baptism and the
Lord’s Supper, not to the attendant working of the
Holy Spirit, but to a real inherent and objective
virtue resident in them—a virtue, however, which
does not lic (as the Rom church says) in the mere
elements and actions of the sacraments, but in the
power of the Divine word which they embody.
See Baptism; Lorp’s SupPER.


Sacrifice (OT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2638


Lirzeratune.—Candlish, The Christian Sacraments;
Lamhert, The Sacraments in the NT; Bartlet, Apostolic
Age, 495 ff; Hodge, Systematic Theology, I11, ch xx.


J. C. Lampert
SACRIFICE, sak’ri-fis, sak’ri-fiz:


In THE OL_p TESTAMENT


I. Terms anp Derinivrions
li. Oricin anp Narure or Sacririces
1. Theory of a Divine Revelation
2. Theories of a Human Origin
(1) The Gift-Theory
(2) The Magic Theory
(3) The Table-Bond Theory
(4) The Sacramental Communion Theory
(5) The Homage Theory
(6) The Piacuwlar Theory
(7) Originating in Religions Instincts
Til. CxrasstricaTion oF SACRIFICES
1. Maimonides
2. W. R. Smith and Others
3. Oehler
4. Paterson and Others
5. H. M. Wiener
TV. Sacrifices 1n THE Pre-Mosaic AcE
In Egypt |
In Babylonia
Among Arahiats and Syrians, ete
The Offerings of Cain and Ahel
Of Noah
Of Abraham
Of Joh
Of Isaac
Of Jacob
Of Israel in Egypt
Of Jethro
. Summary and Conclusions
HE Mosaic SacniFIcIAL System
The Covenant Sacrifice
The Common Altars
The Consecration of Aaron and His Sons
Before the Golden Calf
The Law of the Burnt Offering
(1) Ritual for the Offerer
(2) Ritual for the Priest
(3) General Laws for the Priest
(4) Laws in Deuteronomy
6. The Law of the Meal Offering
(i) Ritual for the Offerer
(2) Ritual for the Priest
(3) General Laws for the Priest
7. The Law of the Peace Offering
{1) Ritual for the Offerer
(2) Ritual for the Priest
(3) General Laws for the Priest
8. The Law of the Sin Offering
(1) At the Consecration of Aaron
(2) Laws i
(a) The Occasion and Meaning
(b) Ritual for the Offerer
(c) Ritual for the Priest
(d) General Laws for the Priest
(e) Special Uses of the Siu Offering
(i) Consecration of Aaron and His
Sons
(ii) Purifications from Uncleanness
(iii) On the Day of Atonement
div) Other Special Instances
9. The Guilt Offering
(1) The Ritual
(2) Special Laws: Leper, Nazirite, ete
10. The Wave Offering
1i. The Heave Offering
12. Drink Offerings
13. Primitive Nature of the Cultus
VI. SacRiFices 1N THE History oF IsRaBL
The Situation at Moses’ Death
In the Time of Joshua
The Period of the Judges
Times of Samuel and Saul
Days of David and Solomon
In the Northern Kingdom
In the Southern Kingdom to the Exile
In the Exilic and Post-exilie Periods
At Elephantine
Human Sacrifices
11. Certain Heathen Sacrifices
Tue PROPHETS AND SACRIFICES
SACRIFICE 1N THE ‘‘WRITINGS"
1. Proverbs
2. The Psalms
IX. Tue Ipea anp Erricacy or Saenririces
A Gift of Food to the Deity
Expression of Adoration and Devotion, etc
Means of Purification from Uncleanness
Means of Consecration to Divine Service
Means of Establishing a Community of Life
View of Ritschl
The Sacramental View
Symbol or Expression of Prayer
View of Kautzsch


REO SHN OO Rute


a


Vv.


4


SUE CO NO


S
OO OO Oy Or Oa kOe


Vil.
Vill.


$0.00 ST Se OTS COINS


10. Vicarious Expiation Theory; Objections
1i. Typology of Sacrifice
LifvERATURE


I. Terms and Definitions. —TT zebhah, sacrifice”;
mbiy. ‘lah. “burnt offering"; MNUM, hdfa’ah, MNOM,
hatta'th, “sin offering’; DYN, 'dsham, ‘guilt’ or ‘' tres-
pass offering"; DOW, shelem, onde , shlamim, ‘peace
offerings '’; mnzo. minkah, “offering,” ‘*present"";
pate Fat. ‘cebhah sh‘ladmim, “‘sacrifice of peace offer-


ings"’; sans TINT, zebhak ha-todhah, ‘' thank offerings” ;
m3 mar. “zebhah nédhabhah, ‘‘free-will offerings’;

SJ Tat. zedhak nedher, “votive offerings”; TDA.
teniiphah, ‘wave offering"; MQW, Cramah, ‘heave
offering"; JDYP. korban, “oblation,” “gift”; TDN.
‘ishsheh, ‘fire offering'’; JDJ, nesekh, ‘drink offering";
bebo, kalil, ‘‘ whole burnt offering "'; At, hagh, ‘'feast’’;
mind. lebhonah, ‘frankincense’; muep. ketérah,
mvup. ketareth, “odor,” ‘‘incense”:; no. melah,
‘salt’: yaw. shemen, ‘oil’: E


Zebhah: a ‘slaughtered animal,’’ a ‘‘sacrifice,’’ general
term for animals used in sacrifice, including burnt offer-
ings, peace offerings, thank offerings, and all sacrifices
offered to the Deity and eaten at the festivals. More
particularly it refers to the flesh eaten hy the worship-
pers after the fat parts had been burned on the altar and
the priest had received his portion.

‘Olah: a “burnt offering,’ sometimes whole burnt
offering. Derived from the vh. ‘ddh,‘'togoup." Itmay
mean ‘that which goes up to the altar'' (Knobel, Well-
hausen, Nowack, etc), or ‘‘that which goes up in smoke
to the sky"’ (Bahr, Delitzsch, Dillmann, etc); some-
times used synouymously with falil (q.v.). The term
applies to heast or fow] when entirely consumed upon
the altar, the hide of the beast: heing taken by the priest.
This was perhaps the most solemn of the sacrifices, and
symbolized worship in the full sense, i.e. adoration, de-
votion, dedication, supplication, and at times expiation.

Héta'ah, hatt@th: a ‘sin offering,"’ a special kind, first
mentioned in the Mosaie legislation. It is essentially
expiatory, intended to restore covenant relations with
the Deity. The special features were: (1) the hlood
must he sprinkled before the sanctuary, put upon the
horus of the altar of incense and poured out at the hase
of the altar of hurnt offering; (2) the flesh was holy, not
to he touched hy worshipper, but eaten by the priest
only. Thespecial ritual of the Day of Atonement centers
around the sin offering.

‘dsham: ‘' guilt offering,” ‘' trespass offering'’’ (AV; in
Isa 53 10, AV and RV ‘‘an offering for sin,’’ AR Vm “' tres-
pass offering’'). A special kind of sin offering intro-
duced in_the Mosaic Law and concerned with offences
against God and man that could he estimated hy a
money value and thus covered by compensation or resti-
tution accompanying the offering. A ram of different
degrees of value, and worth at least two shekels, was the
usual victim, and it must be accompanied hy full resti-
tution with an additional fifth of the value of the damage.
The leper and Nazirite could offer he-lamhs. The guilt
toward God was expiated hy the blood poured out, and
the guilt toward men by the restitution and fine. The
calling of the Servant an 'dshadm (Isa 53 10) shows the
value attached to this offering.

Shelem, sh*laémim: *' peace offering,’’ generally used in
the pl., sh%dmim, only once shélem (Am 5 22). These
were sacrifices of friendship expressing or promoting
peaceful relations with the Deity, and almost invariably
accompanied hy a meal or feast, an occasion of great joy.
They are sometimes called z*bhaéhim, sometimes zcbhah
shtlamim, and were of different kinds, such as zebhah
ha-todhak, ‘‘ thank offerings,'' which expressed the grati-
tude of the giver hecause of some blessings, zebhah n°-
dhabhah, ‘*free-will offerings,” bestowed on the Deity
out of a full heart, and zebhah nedher, ‘' votive offerings,”’
which were offered in fulfilment of a vow.

Afinhah: ‘‘meal offering’’ (RV), ‘‘meat offering”
(AV), a gift or presentation, at first applied to hoth
bloody and unhloody offerings (Gen 4 5), but in Moses’
time confined to cereals, whether raw or roasted, ground
to flour or haked and mixed with oi) and frankincense.
These cereals were the produce of man's labor with the
soil, not fruits, etc, and thus represented the necessities
and results of life, if not life itself. They were the in-
variable accompaniment of animal sacrifices, and in one
instance could he substituted for them (see Sin OrreER-
inc). The term minhdéh descrihes a gift_or token of
friendship (Isa 39 1), an act of homage (1 8 10 27; 1 K
10 25), trihute GJgs 3 15.171), propitiation to a friend
wronged (Gen 32 13.18 [Heh 14 19]), to procure favor or
assistance (Gen 43 11 ff; Hos 10 6).

Teniphah: “wave offering,’’ usnally the breast, the
priest's share of the peace offerings, which was waved
before the altar by hoth offerer and priest together (the
exact motion is not certain), symbolic of its presentation


2639


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sacrifice (OT)


to Deity and given back by Him to the offerer to be used
in the priests’ service.

Terimah: ‘‘heave offering,’’ something lifted up, or,
properly, separated from the rest and given to the service
of the Deity. Usually the right shoulder or thigh was
thus separated for the priest. The term is applied to
ee of the soil, or portion of land separated unto the

ivine service, etc.

Korbén: ‘‘an oblation,”’ or ‘‘offering'’; another ge-
neric term for all kinds of offcrings, animal, vegetable, or
even gold and silver. Derived from the vb. kérabh, ‘to
draw near,"’ it signifies what is drawn or brought near
and given to God.

‘Ishsheh: ‘fire offering,’ applied to offerings made by
fire and usually bloody offerings, but at times to the
minkdéh, the sacred bread and frankincense placed on the
tables as a memorial, part of which was burned with the
frankincensc, the bulk, however, going to the priest.
The gift was thus presented through fire to the Deity as
a sort of etherealized food.

Nesekh: ‘‘drink offering," or ‘‘libation,”’ a liquid offer-
ing of wine, rarely water, sometimes of oil, and usually
accompanying the ‘dlah, but often with the peace offer-
ings.

Kalil: “whole burnt offcring,"’ the entire animal
being burned upon the altar. Sometimes used synony-
monsly with ‘dlah. A technical term among the Cartha-
ginians.

Hagh: a ‘‘feast,"’ used metaphorically for a sacrificial
feast because the meat of the sacrifices constituted the
material of the feast.

_L*bhénah: “' frankincense,” ‘‘incense,’’ used in com-
bination witb the meal offerings and burnt offerings and


burned also upon the altar in the holy place. See In-
CENSE.
Ketoréh, ktoreth: “smoke,” ‘‘odor of sacrifice,’ or


incense ascending as a sweet savor and supposed to be
pleasing and acceptable to God.

Melah: ‘‘salt,"" used in all sacrifices because of its
purifying and preserving qualities.

Shemen: ‘oil,’ generally olive oil, used with the meal
offerings of cakes and wafers, etc.


Sacrifice is thus a complex and comprehensive
term. In its simplest form it may be defined as
“a, gift to God.” It is a presentation to Deity of
some material object, the possession of the offerer,
as an act of worship. It may be to attain, restore,
maintain or to celebrate friendly relations with the
Deity. It is religion in action—in early times,
almost the whole of religion—an inseparable ac-
companiment to all religious exercises. Few or
many motives may actuate it. It may be wholly
piacular and expiatory, or an offering of food as
a gift to God; it may be practically a bribe, or a
prayer, an expression of dependence, obligation
and thanksgiving. It may express repentance,
faith, adoration, or all of these combined. It was
the one and only way of approach to God. Theo-
phrastus defines it as expressing homage, gratitude
and need. Hubert and Mauss define it as “‘a reli-
gious act which by the consecration of the victim
modifies the moral state of the sacrificer, or of certain
material objects which he has in view, i.e., either
confers sanctity or removes it and its analogue,
impiety.”

Ul. Origin and Nature of Sacrifices.—The begin-
nings of sacrifice are hidden in the mysteries of pre-
historic life. The earliest narrative in Gen records
the fact, but gives no account of the origin and
primary idea. The custom is sanctioned by the
sacred writings, and later on the long-established
custom was adopted and systematized in the
Mosaic Law. The practice was almost universal.
The Vedas have their elaborate rituals. Some
Sem peoples, Greeks, Romans, Africans, and Indians
of Mexico offered human sacrifices. It is unknown
in Australia, but even there something akin to it
exists, for some natives offer a portion of a kind of
honey, others offer a pebble or a spear to their god.
For this practically universal habit of the race,
several solutions are offered.

One view maintains that God Himself initiated
the rite by Divine order at the beginnings of human
history. Such a theory implies a monotheistic
faith on the part of primitive man. This theory
was strongly held by many of the Reformed theo-


logians, and was based mainly on the narrative in


Gen 4 4f. Abel offered an acceptable sacrifice,

and, according to He 11 4, this was
1. Theory because of his faith. Faber makes a
of a Divine strong plea as follows: Since faith was
Revelation what made the sacrifice acceptable to


God, this faith must have been based
upon a positive enactment of God in the past.
Without this Divine positive enactment to guaran-
tee its truthfulness, faith, in Abel, would have been
superstition. In other words, faith, in order to be
truly based and_properly directed, must have a
revelation from God, a positive expression of the
Divine will. Fairbairn, in his Typology, goes
further and holds that the skins wherewith Adam
and Eve were clothed were from animals which had
been slain in sacrifices. This is entirely without
support in the narrative. The theory of a Divine
order cannot be maintained on the basis of the Bih.
narrative. Moreover, it involves certain assump-
tions regarding the nature of faith and revelation
which are not generally held in this age. A revela-
tion is not necessarily a positive Divine command,
an external thing, and faith may be just as real and
true without such a revelation as with it. That
there may have been such a revelation cannot be
denied, but it is not a necessary or probable ex-
planation.

(1) The gift-theory—By this it is held that sacri-
fices were originally presents to the deity which the
offerer took for granted would be re-
2. Theories ceived with pleasure and even grati-
of a Human tude. Good relations would thus be
Origin established with the god and favors
would be secured. Such motives,
while certainly true among many heathen people,
were obviously based upon low conceptions of the
deity. They were either Nature-spirits, ancestral
ghosts or fetiches which needed what was given,
and of course the god was placed under obligations
and his favor obtained. Or, the god may have been
conceived of as a ruler, a king or chief, as was the
custom in the East.


Cicero vouches for such a view when he says: ‘Let
not the impious dare to appease the gods with gifts.
Let them hearken to Plato, who warns them that there
can be no doubt what God's disposition to them will be,
since even a good man will refuse to accept presents from
the wicked” (HDB, IV, 331a).. This view of sacrifice
prevails in classical literature. Spencer therefore thinks
it is self-evident that this was the idea of primitive man.
Tylor and Herbert Spencer also find the origin of sacri-
fices in the idea of a gift, whether to the deity or to dead
ancestors, food being placed for them, and this afterward
comes to be regarded as a sacrifice. Such a view gives
no account of the peculiar value attacbed to the blood,
or to the burnt offerings. It may account for some
heathen systems of sacrifice, but can help in no degree
in understanding the Bib. sacrifices.

(2) The magic theory.—There are two slightly variant
forms of this: (a) that of R. C. Thompson (Sem Magite,
Its Origins and Developments, 175-218), who holds that
a sacrificial animal serves as 2 substitute victim offered
to a demon whose activity has brought the offerer into
trouble; the aim of the pase is to entice or drive the
malignant spirit out of the sick or sinful man into the
sacrificial victim where it can be isolated or destroyed:
(b) that of L. Marillier, who holds that sacrifice in its
origin is essentially a magical rite. The liberation of a
magical force by the effusion of the victim's blood will
bend the god to the will of the man. From this arose
under the ‘‘cult of the dead" the gift-theory of sacrifice.
Men sought to ally themselves with the god in particular
by purifying a victim and effecting communion with the
god by the application of the blood to the altar, or by
the sacrifice of the animal and the contact of the
sacrificer with its blood. Such theories give no account
of the burnt offerings, meal offerings and_ sin offerings,
disconnect them entirely from any sense of sin or estrange-
ment from God, and divest them of all piacular value.
They may account for certain depraved and heathen
systems, but not for the Biblical.

(3) The table-bond theory.—Ably advocated by Well-
hausen and W. R. Smith, this view holds that sacrifices
were meals which the worshippers and tho god shared,
partaking of the same food and thus establishing a firmer
bond of fellowship between them. Sykes (Nature of


Sacrifice (OT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2640


Sacrifices, 75) first advocated this, holding that the effi-
eacy of sacrifices ‘‘is the fact that eating and drinkin,
were the known and ordinary symbols of friendship an
were the usual rites in engaging in covenants and
leagues.'' Thus sacrifices are more than gifts: they are
deeds of hospitality which knit god and worshipper
together. W.R. Smith has expounded the idea into the
notion that the common meal unites physically those who
partake of it. Though this view may contain an ele-
ment of truth in regard to certain Arabian customs, it
does not help much to account for Bible sacrifices. As
A. B. Davidson says, ‘It fails utterly to account for the
burnt offering, which was one of the earliest, most solemn
and at times the most important of all the sacrifices."’


(4) The sacramental communion theory.—This is
a modification of the table-bond theory. The
basis of it is the totemistic idea of reverencing an
animal which is believed to share with man the
Divine nature. On certain solemn occasions this
animal would be sacrificed to furnish a feast. At
this meal, according to men’s savage notions, they
literally ‘‘ate the god,” and thus incorporated into
themselves the physical, the intellectual and the
moral qualities which characterized the animal. If
the Divine life dwelt in certain animals, then a part
of that precious life would be distributed among all
the people (RS?, 318). In some cases the blood
is drunk by the worshippers, thus imbibing the life.
Sometimes, as in the case of the sacred camel, they
devoured the quivering flesh before the animal was
really dead, and the entire carcase was eaten up
before morning.

The brilliant work of W. R. Smith has not been
universally accepted. L. Marillier has criticized
it along several lines. It is by no means certain
that totemism prevailed so largely among Semites
and there is no evidence of its existence in Israel.
Also, if an original bond of friendship existed be-
tween the god and the kin, there is no need to
maintain it by such sacrificial rites. There is no
clear instance of this having been done. If on the
other hand there was no common bond between the
god and the people but that of a common meal, it
does not appear that the god is atotem god. There
is no reason why the animal should have been a
totem. In any case, this idea of sacrifice could
hardly have been anything but a slow growth,
and consequently not the origin of sacrifice. Hubert
and Mauss also point out that W. R. Smith is far
from having established the historical or the logical
connection between the common meal and the other
kinds of sacrifices. Under piacula he confuses puri-
fication, propitiation and expiations. His attempts
to show that purifications of magical character are
late and not sacrificial do not succeed. Smith’s
theory is mainly the sacramental, though he does
recognize the honorific and piacular element. The
theory may be applicable to some of the heathen or
savage feasts of the Arabs, but not to the practices
of the Hebrews (see Fine Brit, XXIII, 981).

(5) The homage theory.—This has been advocated
by Warburton and F. D. Maurice. The idea is


| life in place of his.


that sacrifices were originally an expression of hom- !


age and dependence. Man naturally felt impelled
to seek closer communion with God, not so much
from a sense of guilt as from a sense of dependence
and a desire to show homage and obedience. In
giving expression to this, primitive man had re-
course to acts rather than words and thoughts.
Thus sacrifice was an acted prayer, rather than a
prayer in words. It was an expression of his long-
ings and aspirations, his reverence and submission.
There is much truth in this view; the elements of
prayer—dependence and submission—enter into
some sacrifices, the burnt offerings in particular;
but it does not account for all kinds of offerings.

(6) The piacular theory.—This holds that sacri-
fices are fundamentally cxpiatory or atoning, and
the death of the beast is a vicarious expiation of the
sins of the offerer. Hubert and Mauss admit that


in all sacrifices there are some ideas of purchase or
substitution, though these may not have issued from
some primitive form. The unifying principle in
all sacrifices is that the Divine is put in communi-
cation with the profane by the intermediary—the
victim—which may be piacular or honorific. It is
thus a messenger, a means of divination, a means
of alimenting the eternal life of the species, a source
of magical energy which the rite diffuses over objects
in its neighborhood. Westermarck (Origin of Moral
Ideas) makes the original idea in sacrifice a piacu-
lum, a substitute for the offerer.

This view is the most simple, the most natural,
and the only one that can explam certain sacrifices.
Man felt himself under liability to punishment or
death. The animal was his, it had life, it was of
value, and perchance the god would accept that
He felt that it would be accepted,
and thus the animal was sacrificed. The offerer
in a sense gives up part of himself. The beast must
be his own; no sacrifice can be made of another
person’s property (2 8 24 24a). The true spirit
of sacrifice appears in a willingness to acknowledge
God’s right to what is best and dearest (Gen 12).

Objection is raised to this by A. B. Davidson
(OT Theology), Paterson (HDB, IV, 331) and
others, on the ground that such an origin represents
too advanced a stage of ethical thought and reflec-
tion for primitive man. We question seriously
whether this be an advanced stage of moral reflec-
tion. On the contrary, it represents a very simple
and primitive stage. ‘The feeling that sin of some
kind is never absent from human life, and that its
true penalty is death, has been inseparable from the
human heart’s sense of sin. What could be more
simple and natural than to take an innocent animal
and offer it in place of himself, hoping that the
Deity would accept it instead? Nor is there much
force in Professor Paterson’s objection that sacrifices
were preponderantly joyous in character and there~
fore could not be offered as an expiation. This
joyous character belongs to such sacrifices as peace
offerings and thank offerings, but does not belong to
the ‘alah and others. In most cases the joyous feast,
followed the killing of the animal by which the ex-
piation was accomplished, and the feast was joyous
because atonement had been made. In fact, many
sacrifices were of the most solemn character and
represented the deepest and most serious emotions
of the heart.

(7) Originating in religious instincts.—Neither
the theory of an objective Divine revelation, nor
of a human origin will account for the universality
and variety of sacrifices. The truth lies in 4 proper
combination of the two. The notion of offering
a gift to the Deity arose out of the religious instincts
of the human heart, which in an early period had
a consciousness of something wrong between itself
and God, and that this something would mean
death sooner or later. Added to these true in-
stincts was the Omnipresent Spirit to guide men
in giving expression. What could be more simple
and primitive than to offer something possessing
life? Of course the notion originated in simple and
childlike ideas of God, and its real motive was not
to gratify God by sharing a meal with Him, or to
gain His favor by a bribe, but to present Him with
something that represented a part of the offerer
which might be accepted in his stead. Thus sac-
rifices became the leading features of the religious
life of primitive man. Naturally other ideas would
be added, such as a gift of food by fire to the Deity,
the peace offerings, etc, to celebrate the friendly
relations with God, the thank offerings, the sin
offerings, ete, all of which naturally and logically
developed from the primitive idea. It might be
expected that there would be many corruptions and


2641


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


abuses, that the sense of sin would be obscured or
lost among some peoples, and the idea of sacrifice
correspondingly degraded. Such has been’ the case,
and as well might we try to understand man at his
best by studying the aboriginal tribes of Africa and
Australia, or the inmates of asylums and peniten-
tiaries, as to attempt to understand the Bible ideas
in sacrifices by studying the cults of those heathen
and savage tribes of Semites, etc.


Hl, Classification of Sacrifices.—Maimonldes was
among the first to classify them, and he divided them
aa a ee ee (1) Teese ee Pele oF the

dj i ~ whole congregation, fixe y statute, time,
es amon number and ritual heing specified. This

would include burnt, meal and peace offer-
ings with their accompaniments. (2)
Those on behalf of the individual, whether by virtue of
his connection with the community or as a private per-
son. These would be burnt, sin and guilt offerings with
their accompaniments.

Others, such as W. R. Smith, classify them as: (1)
honorific, or designed to render homage, devetion, or

adoration, such as burnt, meal and peace


2. WR. oreNeS: @) piacular, eA to ex-

* piate or make atonement for the errors
Smith and 6 the people, i.e. burnt, sin and guilt
Others offerings; (3) communistic, intended to


establish the bond hetween the god and
the worshipper, such as peace offerings.

Ochler divides them into two classes, viz.: (1) those
which assume that the covenant relation is undisturhed,

such as peace offerings; (2) these intended
3. Ochler te do away with any disturbance in the

‘ relation and to set it right, such as burnt,
sin and guilt offerings.

Professor Paterson and others divide them into three:
(1) animal sacrifices, burnt, peace, sin and guilt offer-
ings; (2) vegetable sacrifices, meal offer-
ings, shewhread, etc; (3) liquid and
incense offerings; wine, oil, water, etc.

H. M. Wiener offers a more suggestive
and scientific division (Essays on Pentateuchal Criti-
cism, 200 f): (1) customary lay offerings, such as had
from time immemorial] heen offered on rude
altars of earth or stone, without. priest,
used and regulated by Moses and in more
or less general use until the exile, viz. burnt,
meal and peace offerings; (2) statutory individual offer-


4. Paterson


6. Wiener
ings, introduced by Moses, offered hy laymen with
priestly assistance and at the religious capital, i.e. burnt,
peace, meal, sin and guilt offerings; (3) statutory na-
tional offerings introduced by Moses and offered by the
priest at the religious capital, viz. burnt, meal, peace
and sin offerings.

IV. Sacrifices in the Pre-Mosaic Age.—Out of
the obscure period of origins emerged the dimly light-
ed period of ancient history. Everywhere sacrifices
existed and sometimes abounded as an essential
part of religion. The spade of the archaeologist,
and the researches of scholars help us understand
the pre-Mosaic period.

In Egypt—probably trom the beginning of the 4th
millennium BC—there were sacrifices and sacrificial

systems. Temples at. Abydos, Thebes,
1. In Egypt On, etc, were great priestly centers with
. YP high priests, lower priests, rituals and sac-
rifices in ent anee Burnt me3! and
eace offerings predominated. xen, wild goats, pigs,
eas were the mthiet animals offered. Besides these,
wine, oil, beer, milk, cakes, grain, ointment, flowers,
fruit, vegetables were offered, but not human beings.
In these offerings there were many resemblances to
the Heb gifts, and many significant exceptions. Moses
would be somewhat familiar with these practices though
not with the details of the ritual. He would appreciate
the unifying power of a national religious center, It is
inconceivable that in such an age a national leader and
organizer like Moses would not take special care to in-
stitute such a system.

In Babylonia, from the year 3000 BC or thereabouts,
according to E. Meyer (Geschichte des Alterthums), there

were many peace ot eo aver as

_ Eridu, Nippur, Agade, Erech, Ur, Nisin,

2. In Baby. Larsa, Sippar’ etc. These and others
lonia continued for centuries with elaborate
systems of worship, sacrifices, temples,

priesthoods, etc. Considerably over 100 temples and
sanctuaries are mentioned on inscriptions, and several
hundreds in the lit. and tablets, so that Babylonia was
studded with temples and edifices for the gods. At all
these, sacrifices were constantly offered—animal and
vegetable. A long list of the offerings of King Gudea
includes oxen, sheep, geats, lambs, fish, birds (i.e.
eagles and doves), dates, milk, greens QWJastrow, in HDB,
V, 580 f, s.v.). The sacrifices provided an income for


-and Abel


Sacrifice (OT)


the priests, as did the Mosaic system at a later time.
It had leng passed the stage when it was suppesed te
furnish a meal for the god. A sacrifice always accom-
panied a consultation with a priest, and was really an
assessment for the services rendered. It was not a vol-
untary offering or ritualistic observance. The priests on
their own behalf offered a daily sacrifice, as in the Mosaic
Law, and likewise on special occasions, to insure the good
will of the gods they served. It seems certain that in
some of the larger centers of worship animals were offered
up twice a day, morning and evening. At these sacrifices
certain portions were consumed on the altar, the rest be-
longing to the priest. The similarity of much of this to
the Mosaic institutions is obvious. ‘That the culture and
elvilization of Babylon was known to Egypt and Israel
with other nations is shown clearly by the Am Tab.
Special sacrifices on special occasions were_offered_in
Babylonia as in Israel. As Jastrow says, '‘In the Heb
codes, both as regards the purely legal portions and those
sections dealing with religious ritual, Bah methods of
legal progr and of ritual developed in Bab temples
must be taken into consideration as determining factors."
We do not doubt that Moses made use of many elements
found in the Egyp and Bab systems, and added te or
subtracted from or purified as occasion required. As
sacrificial systems and ritual had been in use more than
a millennium before Moses, there is absolutely no need
to suppose that Israel's ritual was a thousand years in
developing, and was completed after the exile. To do so
is to turn history upside down.
Among the nomads and tribes of Arabia and Syria,
sacrifices had been common for millenniums before Moses.
The researches of Wellhausen and W. R.
3. Nomads Smith are valuable here, whatever one
: : may think of their theories. The offer-
and Tribes ings were usually from the fiocks and herds.
of Arabia sometimes from the spoils taken in war
and Syria which had been appropriated as their own.
yTh The occasions were many and various,
and the ritual was very simple. A rude
altar of earth or stone, or one stone, a sacred spot, the
offerer killing the victim and burning all, or perhaps
certain parts and eating the remainder with the clan or
family, constituted the customary details. Sometimes
wild animals were offered. Babylonians, Phoenicians
and Arabs offered gazelles, but the Hehrews did not.
Arabs would sometimes sacrifice a captive youth, while
the Carthaginians chose some of the fairest of the captives
for offerings by night. Assyr kings sometimes sacrificed
captive kings. The Canaanites and others constantly
sacrificed children, esp. the firstborn.


The account of the offerings of Cain and Abel
(Gen 4 4f) shows that the ceremony dates from
almost the beginnings of the human
4, Cain race. The custom of offering the first-
lings and first-fruits had already begun.
Arabian tribes later had a similar cus-
tom. Cain’s offering was cereal and is called minhaéh,
“a gift” or “presentation.” The same term is applied
to Abel’s. There is no hint that the bloody sacrifice
was in itself better than the unbloody one, but it is
shown that sacrifice without a right attitude of heart
is not acceptable to God. This same truth is em-
phasized by the prophets and others, and is needed
in this day as much as then. In this case the altars
would be of the common kind and no priest was
needed. The sacrifices were an act of worship,
adoration, dependence, prayer and possibly pro-
pitiation.
The sacrifices of Noah followed and celebrated the
epochal and awe-inspiring event of leaving the ark
and beginning life anew. He offered
5. Noah burnt offerings of all the clean ani-
mals (Gen 8 20ff). On such a solemn
oceasion only an ‘6léh would suffice. The custom
of using domestic animals had arisen at this time.
The sacrifices expressed adoration, recognition of
God’s power and sovereignty, and a gift to please
Him, for it is said He smelled a sweet savor and was
pleased. It was an odor of satisfaction or restful-
ness. Whether or not the idea of expiation was
included is difficult to prove.
Abraham lived at a time when sacrifices and reli-
gion were virtually identical. No mention is made
of his offering at Ur or Haran, but
6. Abraham on his arrival at Shechem he erected
an altar (Gen 12 7). At Beth-el also
(ver 8), and on his return from Egypt he worshipped
there (Gen 13 4). Such sacrifices expressed adora-


Sacrifice (OT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2642


tion and prayer and probably propitiation. They
constituted worship, which is a complex exercise.
At Hebron he built an altar (Gen 13 18), officiating
always as his own priest. In 15 4 ff he offers a
“covenant” sacrifice, when the animals were slain,
divided, the parts set opposite each other, and pre-
pared for the appearance of the other party to the
covenant. The exact idea in the killing of these
animals may be difficult to find, but the effect is to
give the occasion great solemnity and the highest
religious sanction. What was done with the car-
cases afterward is not told. That animals were
slain for food with no thought of sacrifice is shown
by the narrative in ch 18, where Abraham had a calf
slain for the meal. This is opposed to one of the
chief tenets of the Wellhausen school, which main-
tains that all slaughtering of animals was sacrificial
until the 7th cent. BC. In ch 22 Abraham at-
tempts to offer up Isaac as a burnt offering, as was
probably the custom of his neighbors. That he
attempted it shows that the practice was not
shocking to his ethical nature. It tested the
strength of his devotion to God, shows the right
spirit in sacrifices, and teaches for all time that God
does not desire human sacrifice—a beast will do.
What God does want is the obedient heart. Abra-
aoe continued his worship at Beer-sheba (Gen 21
33)


Whatever may be the date of the writing of the
Book of Job, the saint himself is represented as
living in the Patriarchal age. He
7. Book constantly offered sacrifices on behalf
of Job of his children (1 5), ‘“sanctifying’”’
them. His purpose no doubt was to
atone for possible sin. The sacrifices were mainly
expiatory. This is true also of the sacrifices of his
friends (42 7-9).

Isaac seems to have had a permanent altar at
Beer-sheba and to have regularly offered sacrifices.
Adoration, expiation and supplica-
tion would constitute his chief motives
» (Gen 26 25).

Jacob’s first recorded sacrifice was the pouring
of the oil upon the stone at Beth-el (Gen 28 18).

This was consecration or dedication
9. Jacob in recognition of the awe-inspiring

presence of the Deity. After his cove-
nant with Laban he offered sacrifices (2*bhahim) and
they ate bread (Gen 31 54). At Shechem, Jacob
erected an altar (Gen 33 20). At Beth-el (35 7)
and at Beer-sheba he offered sacrifices to Isaac’s
God (46 1).

While the Israelites were in Egypt they would
be accustomed to spring sacrifices and spring feasts,
for these had been common among the
Arabs and Syrians, etc, for centuries.
Nabataean inscriptions testify to this.
Egyp sacrifices have been mentioned
(see above). At these spring festivals it was prob-
ably customary to offer the firstlings of the flocks (cf
Ex 13 15). At the harvest festivals sacrificial feasts
were celebrated. It was to some such feast Moses
said Israel as a people wished to go in the wilderness
(Ex 3 18; 5 3ff; 7 16). Pharaoh understood and
asked who was to go (Ex 10 8). Moses demanded
flocks and herds for the feast (10 9). Pharaoh
would keep the flocks, ete (10 24), but Moses said they
must offer sacrifices and burnt offerings (10 25 f).

The sacrifice of the Passover soon occurs (Ex
12 3-11). That the Hebrews had been accustomed
to sacrifice their own firstborn at this season has
no support and is altogether improbable (Frazer,
Golden Bough’, pt. II, 175f). The whole ceremony
is very primitive and has retained its primitiveness
to the end. The choosing of the lamb or kid, the
killing at a certain time, the family gathered in the
home, the carcase roasted whole, eaten that night,


8. Isaac


10. Israel
in Egypt


and the remainder, if any, burned, while the feasters
had staff in hand, ete, all this was contmued. The
blood in this case protected from the Deity, and
the whole ceremony was “holy” and only for the
circumeised. Frazer in his Golden Bough gives a
very different interpretation. :
As a priest of Midian Jethro was an expert in
sacrificing. On meeting Moses and the people he
offered both ‘alah and zbhahim and
11. Jethro made a feast (ix 18 12).

From the above it is evident that
sacrifices were almost the substance of religion in
that ancient world. From hilltops and temples in-
numerable, the smoke of sacrifices was
constantly rising heavenward. Burnt
mary and offerings and peace offerings were well
Conclusions known. Moses, in establishing a reli-

gion, must have a sacrificial system.
He had abundance of materials to choose from,
and under Divine guidance would adopt such rules
and regulations as the pedagogic plans and pur-
poses of God would require in preparing for better
things.
V. The Mosaic Sacrificial System.—The funda-
mental function of Moses’ work was to establish the
covenant between Israel and God.


12. Sum-


1. The This important transaction took place
Covenant at Sinai and was accompanied by
Sacrifice solemn sacrifices. The foundation

principle was obedience, not sacrifices
(Ex 19 4-8). No mention is made of these at the


time, as they were incidental—mere by-laws to the
constitution. The center of gravity in Israel's
religion is now shifted from sacrifices to obedience
and loyalty to Jeh. Sacrifices were helps to that
end and without obedience were worthless. This
is in exact accordance with Jer 7 21 ff. God did
not speak unto the fathers at this time about sac-
rifices; He did speak about obedience.

The covenant having been made, the terms and
conditions are laid down by Moses and accepted
by the people (Ex 24 3). The Decalogue and
Covenant Code are given, an altar is built, burnt
and peace offerings of oxen are slain by young men
servants of Moses, not by priests, and blood is
sprinkled on the altar (24 4 ff). The blood would
symbolize the community of life between Jeh and
Israel, and consecrated the altar. The Law was
read, the pledge again given, and Moses sprinkled
the representatives of the people, consecrating them
also (24 7f). Ascending the mount; they had a
vision of God, held a feast before Him, showing the
joys and privileges of the new relationship. The
striking feature of these ceremonies is the use of the
blood. It is expiatory and consecrating, it is life
offered to God, it consecrates the altar and the
people: they are now acceptable to God and dare
approach Him and feast with Him. There is no
idea of God’s drinking the blood. The entire ritual
is far removed from the crass features of common
Sem worship.

In the Covenant Code, which the people accepted,
the customary altars are not abolished, but regu-

lated (Ex 20 24ff). This law ex-


2. The pressly applies to the time when they
Common _ shall be settled in Canaan. ‘In the
Altars whole place where I cause my name to


be remembered,’ ete (ver 24m). No
need to change the reading to “in every place where
I cause,” etc, as the Wellhausen school does for ob-
vious reasons. All the land was eligible. On such
rude altars sacrifices were allowed. This same law
is implied in Dt 16 21, a passage either ignored or
explamed_ away by the Wellhausen school (see
Wiener, Essays in Pentateuchal Criticism, 200).
Moses commanded Joshua in accordance with it
(Dt 27 5 ff). Joshua, Gideon, Jephthah, Samuel,


2643


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sacrifice (OT)


Saul, David, Elijah and many others used such altars.
There were altars at Shechem (Josh 24 1.26), Miz-
pah in Gilead (Jgs 11 11), Gilgal (1 S 13 9).
Wligh places were chiefly used until the times of
Hezckiah and Josiah, when they were abolished
because of their corruptions, etc. All such altars
were perfectly legitimate and in fact necessary,
until there was a central capital and sanctuary
in Jerus. The customary burnt and peace offer-
ings with the worshipper officiating were the chief
factors. Heathen sacrifices and the use of heathen
are oe strictly forbidden (Ex 22 20 [Heb 19];


The altar used at the consecration of Aaron and his
sons was a ‘‘horned”’ or official altar, the central one.
une Crease were e SSS two rams,
_ uuleavene read, ete (ix 1-4), and
3. The Con were brought to the door of the sanctuary.
secration of The ritual consisted of Aaron laying his
Aaron and hand on the bullock’s head, designating
His Sons it as his substitute (29 10), killing it hefore
the tent of meeting (ver 11), smearing
; some blood on the horns of the altar,
and pouring the rest at its hase (ver 12). The blood
consecrated the altar, the life was given as atonement
for sins, the fat parts were hurned upon the altar as
food for God, and the flesh and remainder were burned
without the camp (vs 13.14). This is a sin offering—
hatta’th—the first time the term is used. Prohahly in-
troduced by Moses, it was intended to be piacular and
te “‘cover”’ possible sin. One ram was next slain, blocd
was sprinkled round about the altar, flesh was cut in
pieces, washed and piled on the altar, then burned as an
offering hy fire (ishskeh) unto God as a hurnt offering,
an odor of a sweet savor (vs 15-18). The naive and
primitive nature of this idea is apparent. The other
tam, the ram of consecration, is slain, hlood is smeared
on Aaron's right ear, thumb and great toe; in the case
of his sons likewise. The hlocd is sprinkled on the altar
round ahout; some upon the garments of Aaron and his
sons (vs 19-21). Certain parts are waved before Jeh
along with the bread, and are then burned upon the
altar (vs 22-25). The breast is offered as a wave offer-
ing (tna phah), and the right thigh or shoulder as a heave
offering (t¢rimdah). These portions here first mentioned
were the priests’ portion for ali time to come, although
this particular one went to Moses, since he officiated
(vs 26-30). The flesh must he boiled in a holy place, and
must he eaten by Aaron and his sons only, and at the
sanctuary. at was left till morning must be burned
(vs31-34). Consecrated to a holy service it was dangerous
for anyone else to touch it, or the Divine wrath would
flame forth. The same ceremcny on each of the seven
days atoned for, cleansed and consecrated the altar to
the service of Jeh, and it was most holy (vs 35-37).
The altar of incense is ordered (Ex 30 1), and Aaron
is to put the blccd of the sin offering once a year upon
its horns to consecrate it.


When the golden calf was made an altar was
erected, burnt and peace offerings were presented.
From the latter a feast was made, the
4. Sacrifices people followed the usual habits at such
before the festivals, went to excess and joined in
Golden Calf revelry. Moses’ ear quickly detected
the nature of the sounds. The cove-
nant was now broken and no sacrifice was available
for this sin. Vengeance was executed on 3,000 Is-
raelites. Moses mightily interceded with God. A
moral reaction was begun; new tables of the Law
were made with more stringent laws against idols
and idol worship (Ex 32 1-35).
At the setting-up of the tabernacle burnt and
meal offerings were sacrificed (Ex 40 29). The law
of the burnt offering is found in Lev 1.


5. Law of Common altars and customary burnt
the Burnt offerings needed no minute regulations,
Offering but this ritual was intended primarily
(‘olah) for the priest, and was taught to the


people as needed. They were for the

statutory individual and national offering upon
the “horned” altar before the sanctuary. Already
the daily burnt offerings of the priests had been pro-
vided for (Ex 29 38-42). The burnt offering is here
called korban, “oblation.” ;
(1) The ritual for the offerer (Lev 1 3-17).—This
may have been from the herd or flock or fowls,
brought to the tent of meeting; hands were laid


(heavily) upon its head designating it as the offerer’s
substitute, it was killed, flayed and cut in pieces.
If of the flock, it was to be killed on the north side of
the altar; if a fowl], the priest must kill it.

(2) The ritual for the priest (Lev 1 3-17).—If a
bullock or of the flock, the priest was to sprinkle the
blood round about the altar, put on the fire, lay the
wood and pieces of the carcase, wash the inwards,
legs, etc, and burn it all as a sweet savor to God.
If a fowl, he must wring the neck, drain out the
blood on the side of the altar, cast the crop, filth,
etc, among the ashes, rend the wings without
igi the bird and burn the carcase on the
altar.

(8) General laws for the priest —The burnt offering
must be continued every morning and every evening
(Ex 29 88f; Nu 28 3-8). At the fulfilment of his
vow the Nazirite must present it before God and
offer it upon the altar through the priest (Nu 6 14.
16): on the Sabbath, two lambs (Nu 28 9); on the
first of the month, two bullocks, one ram and seven
lambs (Nu 28 11); on the day of first-fruits, the
same (Nu 28 27); on the Ist day of the 7th month,
one bullock, one ram, seven lambs (Nu 29 8); on the
15th day, 18 bullocks, two rams, 14 lambs, the number
of bullocks diminishing daily until the 7th day, when
seven bullocks, two rams, 14 lambs were offered (Nu
29 12-34); on the 22nd day of this month one bul-
lock, one ram and seven lambs were offered (Nu
29 35.36). Non-Israelites were permitted to offer
the ae but no other sacrifices (Lev 17 8; 22
18.25).

(4) Laws in Dt (12 6.13.14.27; 27 6).—Antici-
pating a central sanctuary in the future, the law-
giver counsels the people to bring their offerings
there (12 6.11); they must be careful not to offer
them in any place (ver 13), but must patronize the
central sanctuary (ver 14). In the meantime com-
mon altars and customary sacrifices were allowable
and generally necessary (16 21; 27 6).

The term ‘‘meal offermg” is here confined to offer-
ings of flour or meal, etc (AV “meat-offering’’), and


was first used at the consecration of
6. Law of Aaron and hissons (Ex 29 41). These
the Meal must not be offered on the altar of
Offering incense (Ex 30 9); were used at the
(minhah) completion of the tabernacle (40 29);


and always with the morning and
evening burnt offermgs.


(1) The ritual for the offerer (Lev 2 1-16).—It must
be of fine flour, with oi] and frankincense added, and
brought to the priest; if baked in the oven, unleavened
cakes mingled with oil, or wafers and oil; if of the baking
pan, fine flour mingled with oil parted into pieces and cil
thereon; if of the frying pan, the same ingredients.
Leaven and houey must never he used as they quickl
hecome corrupt. Every offering must be seasoned wit
salt. If of the first-fruits (bikkirim), it should consist
ef corn in the ear, parched with oil and frankincense
upon it.

Pe) The ritual forthe priest (Lev 2 1-16).—This required
him to take out a handful with the oil and frankincense
therecn and burn it as a memorial upon the altar. The
remainder was holy and helonged to the priest. Of the
cakes, after bringing them to the altar, he was to take a
portion, hurn it and appropriate the remainder; thesame
with the first-fruits.


(3) General laws for the priest (Lev 6 14-18 [Heb
7-11), etc) —He might eat his portion without leaven
in the holy place. At his anointing Aaron offered
his own oblation of fine flour—yy of an ephah, one-
half in the morning and one-half in the evening. If
baked, it must be with oil. This meal offering must
all be burnt; none could be eaten. With the sin
and guilt offerings every meal offering baked in any
way belongs to the priest (Lev 7 9.10; 10 12; Nu
18 9). The meal offerings accompanied the other
offerings on all important occasions, such as the
consecration of Aaron (Lev 9 4.17); cleansing of
a leper (Lev 14 10.20.21.31); feast of first-fruits


Sacrifice (OT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2644


(Lev 23 13); Pentecost (Lev 23 16); set feasts
(Lev 23 37). Special charge was given to Eleazar
to care for the continual meal offerings (Nu 4 16).
The Nazirite must offer it (Nu 6 15.17). When the
tribes presented their offerings, meal offerings were
always included (Nu 7 13.19, etc); when the
Levites were set apart (Nu 8 8); with vows of
freewill offermgs (Nu 16 4.6); with the sin offer-
ings (15 24); at allthe several seasons (Nu 28 5—
29 39). A special form was the ‘‘showbread”’
(bread of memorial). Twelve loaves were to be
placed in two rows or heaps of six each on a pure
table in the holy place, with frankincense on each
pile or row. These were to remain for one week and
then to be eaten by the priests. They were an
offering of food by fire, though probably only the
frankincense was actually burned (Lev 24 5 f).
The peace offerings indicated right relations with


God, expressing good-fellowship, gratitude and

obligation. The common altars were
7. Lawof fitted for their use (Ex 20 24), as
the Peace feasts had been thus celebrated from
Offering time immemorial. At the feast before


God on the Mount, peace offerings
provided the food (Ex 24 5); also before the golden
bull (Ex 32 6). The wave and heave offerings
were portions of these.

(1) The ritual for the offerer (Lev 3 1-17).—The
offering might be a bullock, a lamb, or a goat, either male


or female, latitude being allowed in this case. The
ritual was the same as in the case of the hurnt offering


(see above).
(2) The ritual for the priest (Lev 3 1-17).—Blood


must be sprinkled on the altar round ahout, the caul,
the liver and the kidneys must be taken away and the
fat parts burned on the altar; the fat tail of the lamb
must also be hurned. These portions were offerings of
food by fire to the Deity. The ritual for a goat was the
same as for a bullock.

(3) General laws for the priest (Lev 6 12 [Heb 6];
7 1 ff) —The fat was to be burned on the altar of
burnt offering. If it was a thank offering (zebhoh
ha-tédhGh), it must have unleavened cakes with oil,
eakes mingled with oil and fine flour soaked. Cakes
of leavened bread might be offered, and one cake was
to be a heave offering to the priest. The flesh was
to be eaten that day, none was to be left till morn-
ing (Lev 22 30). Ii it was a votive offering (zebhah
nedher) or a freewill offering (zebhah n*dhabhah), it
might be eaten on the first and second days, but not
on the third day; it should then be an abomination
(Lev 7 18f). If eaten then by anyone, that person
was to be cut off from the community. Of all peace
offerings the wave-breast and heave-thigh belong to
the priest (Lev 7 29-34), the remainder was to be
eaten by the worshippers. At Aaron’s consecration
an ox and a ram were the peace offerings (Lev 9 4.
18.22}. The priest’s portion was to be eaten in a
clean place by the priest’s family (Lev 10 14).
When Israel should have a central sanctuary, all
were to be brought there (Lev 17 4.5). When they
had no eentral place, the common altars would
suffice. All peace offerings must be made in an
acceptable manner (Lev 19 5). Votive offerings
must be perfect (Lev 22 18-22), but certain imper-
fections are allowable in freewill offerings (ver 23).
At Pentecost two he-lambs of the first year could be
offered as peace offerings (Lev 23 19). The Nazi-
rite at the end of his separation must offer one ram
for a peace offering with unleavened bread (Nu 6
14.17), and the hair shaved from his head must
be burned under the peace offerings (6 18). This
hair was regarded as a thing having life and offered
as a sacrifice by other nations. The various tribes
brought peace offerings (ch 7, passim), and at the
feast of trumpets the people were to rejoice and
blow trumpets over the peace offerings (10 10).
Some further regulations are given (15 9 f),


The sin offering was a sacrifice of a special kind,

doubtless pecuhar to Israel and first mentioned

at the consecration of Aaron and his

8. The Sin sons. It is not then spoken of as an

Offering innovation. It was of special value
as an expiatory sacrifice. ;

(1) Use at the consecration of Aaron and his sons
(Ex 29 10 f)—A bullock was killed before the
altar, some blood was put upon the horns of the
altar by Moses, the rest was poured out at the base.
The fat of the inwards was burned upon the altar,
the flesh and skin were burned without the camp.
Every day during the consecration this was done
(Ex 29 36). ;

(2) The law of the sin offering (Lev 4 1-35; 6
24-80, etc)—(a) The occasion and meaning: Specifi-
cally to atone for unwitting sins, sins of error
(sh¢gh@ghah), mistakes or rash acts, unknown at the
time, but afterward made known. There were
gradations of these for several elasses of offenders:
the anointed priest (vs 3-12), the whole congregation
(vs 13-21), aruler (vs 22-26), one of the common peo-
ple (vs 27-35), forswearing (6 1), touching an unclean
thing (ver 2) or the uncleanness of man (ver 3), or
rashly swearing in ignorance (ver 4). For conscious
and wilful violations of the Law, no atonement was
possible, with some exceptions, for which provision
was made in the guilt offerings (see below).

(b) The ritual for the offerer (Lev 4 1-5.13, ete):
The anointed priest must offer a bullock at the tent
of meeting, lay his hands upon it and slay it before Jeh.
The congregation was also required to bring a young
bullock before the tent of meeting, the elders were to lay
hands upon it and slay it before Jeb. The ruler must
bring a he-goat and do the same. One of the common
people might bring a sbe-goat or lamh and present it in
the same manner. If too poor for these, two turtledoves
or young pigeons, one for a sin offering and one for a
burnt offering, would suffice. If too poor for these, the
tenth part of an epbah of fine flour without oil or frank-
incense would suffice.

(c) The ritual for the priest (Lev 4 1-5.13, etc): He
must bring the bullock’s blood to the tent of meeting,
dip his finger into it and sprinkle blood 7 t before the
veil of the sanctuary, and put some on tbe horns of the
altar of incense, but most of the blood must he poured
out at the base of the altar. The fat must be hurned
upon the altar, all the rest of the carcase must be carried
to a clean place without the camp and burned. In the
case of the whole congregation, the ritual is the same.
In the case of a ruler, the blood is to be put upon the
horns of_the altar of burnt offering, not the altar of in-
cense. In the case of one of the common people, the
ritual is simjlar to that of the ruler. In both the latter
cases the carcase belonged to the priest. If a bird, the
priest must wring off its head, sprinkle some blood on the
side of the altar and pour the rest at the base. Nothing
is said of the disposal of tbe carcase. If of fine fiour, the
priest must take out a handful and burn it upon the altar,
keeping the remainder for himself. The use of fine
flour for an expiatory sacrifice is evidently exceptional
and intended to beso. Though life was not given, yet a
necessity of life—that which represented life—was offered.

(d) General laws for the priest (Lev 6 24-30):
The sin offering was to be slain in the same place as
the burnt offering. It was most holy, and the priest
alone might eat what was left of the ram, pigeon or
flour, in the holy place. Whatever touched it was
to be holy, any garment sprinkled with the blood
must be washed in a holy place, earthen vessels
used must be broken, and brazen vessels thoroughly
scoured and rinsed. :

(e) Special uses of the sin offering: (i) The con-
secration of Aaron and his sons (Lev 8 2.14.15) was
similar to that of Lev 4 11.12, only Moses was to
kill the offering and put the blood on the horns of
the altar. On the 8th day a bull-calf was offered
(9 2), and the congregation offered a he-goat (ver 3).
In this case Aaron performed the ceremony, as in
Lev 4 11.12. Moses complained that they had
not eaten the flesh of the calf and goat in the sanc-
tuary, since that was requisite when the blood was
not brought into the sanctuary (Lev 10 16-20).

(ii) Purifications from uncleannesses required after
childbirth a young pigeon or turtledove (Lev 12


2645


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sacrifice (OT)


6-8). The leper must bring a guilt offering’ (a
special kind of sin offering), a he-lamb (Lev 14
12--14.19); if too poor for a lamb, a turtledove
or young pigcon (vs 22.31). Special use of the
blood is required (ver 25). In uncleanness from
issues a sin offering of a turtledove or young pigeon
must be offered by the priest (Lev 16 15.30).
(iii) On the Day of Atonement (Lev 16 1-28)
Aaron must take a bullock for himself and house,
two he-goats for the people, present the goats at
the sanctuary, cast losts, one for Jeh, as a sin offer-
ing, the other for Azazel, to be sent into the wilder-
ness. The bullock was killed, sweet incense was
burned within the rail, blood was sprinkled on the
mercy-seat and before it 7 times. The one he-goat
was killed and a similar ceremony was performed.
Blood must be put on the horns of the altar and
sprinkled 7 t about it. The other goat was pre-
sented, hands were laid on it, the sins of all con-
fessed and put upon the goat, and it was sent into
the wilderness. The carease of the bullock and he-
goat were burned without the camp. At the feast
of first-fruits a he-goat was offered (Lev 23 19).
(iv) Other special instances were: in the case of
defilement, the Nazirite must offer a turtledove or
young pigeon on the 8th day after contraction
(Nu 6 10 ff); when the days of the separation were
fulfilled a ewe-lamb with the other offerings (ver 14)
was to be offered; the twelve tribes mcluded in
each case a he-goat for sin offering (7 16 ff); at
the consecration of the Levites a young bullock (8
8.12). For unwitting sins of the congregation a he-
goat was to be offered (15 24.25). If one person
erred, a she-goat was permitted (ver 27). A sin
offering was required at the feast of the new
moon (28 15), at the Passover (ver 22), at Pen-
tecost (ver 30), on the Ist day of the 7th month
(29 5), and on the 10th, 15th-22d days (vs 10-38).
The ceremony of the red heifer (19 1-10.17) was
a special sin offering for purification purposes only.
It was of ancient and primitive origin. The young
cow was brought without the camp and was slain
before the priest’s face, blood was sprinkled 7 t be-
fore the sanctuary, the entire carcase with cedar
wood, hyssop and scarlet was burned, the ashes
gathered and laid without the camp in a clean place
to be kept for the water of impurity. It was to
purify after contact with the dead. In the case
of the unknown homicide (Dt 21 1-9) a young
unbroken heifer was brought to a running stream,
its neck was broken, the elders washed their hands
over the heifer in the presence of the priests, de-
claring their innocence. Thus the bloodshed was
expiated. The action was a judicial one, but essen-
tially vicarious and expiatory and had doubtless a
primitive origin. :
The guilt offering (AV “‘trespass offering”’) (Lev
6 14—6 7) was a special kind of sin offering, always
of a private character and accompanied


9. The by a fine. It expressed expiation and
Guilt restitution. The classes of sin requir-
Offering ing a guilt offering with reparation in


money are: (1) a trespass in the holy
things done unwittingly; (2) anything which the
Law forbade depriving God or the priest of their due;
(3) dealing falsely with a neighbor in a deposit, or
pledge, or robbery, or oppression; (4) swearing
falsely regarding anything lost; (5) seduction of a
betrothed bondmsid (Lev 19 20-22). The first two
of these are unwitting sins, the others cannot be.
The clear statement is made in another place that
sins done witha “high hand,” i.e. in rebellion agaist
the covenant and its provisions, can have no sacri-
fice (Nu 16 30). Is this a contradiction, or a later
development when it was found that the more
stringent law would not work? (See J. M. P.
Smith, et al. Atonement, 471.) Neither conclu-


sion is probable. These conscious sins are of a
kind that will admit of full reparation because
against rights of property or in money matters.
The sin offering makes atonement, toward God, the
restitution with the additional one-fifth makes full
reparation to man. No such reparation can be
made with such sins described as committed with a
“high hand.” In the case of seduction, rights of
property are violated (ef Nu 6 5-8; Dt 22 29).


(1) The ritual (Lev § 14—6 7).—A ram proportion-
ate In value to the offence and worth at least two shekels
is required. The ritual is probably the same as that of
the sin offering, though no mention is made of the laying
on of hands, and the blood is not brought into the sanc-
tuary, but sprinkled about the base of the altar, the fat
and inside parts being burned, and the flesh eaten by the
priests in a holy place.


(2) Special statutes—The leper, when cleansed,
on the 8th day must bring 4 guilt offering of two he-
lambs and one ewe-lamb; the priest must wave one
he-lamb before Jeh, kill it, and smear blood on the
right ear, thumb and toe of the leper. The guilt
offering belongs to the priest (Lev 14 12-20). If
the leper were too poor for two lambs, one sufficed,
with a corresponding meal offering, or one turtle-
dove and a young pigcon (vs 21.22). The Nazirite,
if defiled during his period of separation, must bring
a he-lamb for a guilt offering (Nu 6 12). All guilt
offerings were the priests’ and most holy (18 9).


The wave offerings were parts of the peace offerings,
and the custom was seemingly initiated at the consecra-
tion of Aaron and his sons (Ex 29 24—27),
10. Wave when the breast and bread were waved
sate before Jeh. Lev 7 30.34 fixes the law.
Offerings It must be brought from the peace offer-
Ings of the offerer himself. At Aaron's
consecration Moses put the breast, etc, on Aaron's
hands and waved them before Jeh (Lev 8 27). On the
8th day Aaron did the waving (Lev 9 21). The priests
were to eat it in a clean place (Lev 10 14f). Theleper's
he-lamb was to be waved by the priest, before being -
offered (Lev 14 12); the lamb of, the guilt offering also
(14 24). At the feast of first-fruits the sheaf must be
waved before Jeh (Lev 23 10.11.15); two loaves also
(vs 17.20). Of the Nazirite the priest took the boiled
shoulder, a cake and a wafer, put them on the Nazirite's
hand and waved them before Jeh (Nu 6 19f).
Heave offerings also are parts of the peace offerings,
and refer particularly to what is lifted up, or separated
unto the service of Jeh. They are first
11. Heave mentioned at the consecration of Aaron
ders (Ex 29 27.28). The offering consisted of
Offerings —_ the right shoulder or thigh and was the fixed
due of the priest (Lev 7 32.34). One
cake of the peace offering must be heaved (Lev 7
The offering must he eaten in a clean place (Lev _7
ae the priest's family only (Lev 10 14.15). Of the
azirite’s offering the heave thigh also went to the priest
(Nu 6 20). When the Israelites should come into the
promised land to eat bread, they must offer a heave
offering of the dough, a cake (Nu 15 19.20.21). The
law is repeated in Nu 18 8.11.19, and the Levites are


_ to receive a tithe of the heave offerings of the people


(ver 24). They were in turn to offer up a tithe of this
to the priests (vs 26-32). <A portion of_the spoil of
Midian was a heave offering (81 29.41). Dt commands
that all heave offerings be brought to the central sanc-
tuary and eaten there (12 6.11).


Jacob poured oil on the stone he had set up (Gen
28 18) in honor of the Deity and consecrated the
spot. Jacob later (Gen 35 14) set up
12. Drink a pillar where God had revealed Himself
Offerings or and poured drink offerings and oil upon
Libations it. Probably wine was used. Drink
offerings accompanied many of the sac-
rifices (Ex 29 40.41). None could be poured upon
the altar of incense (Ex 309). At all set feasts
the drink offerings must be presented (Lev 23
13.18.37). The Nazirite was not exempt (Nu 6
15.17). Wine and oil must accompany all votive
and freewill offermgs (15 4.5.7.10.24); the con-
tinual burnt offering (28 7.8); sabbaths (vs 9.10)
and all the other set feasts’ (vs 14-31; 29 6-89,
passim). That drink offerings were common among
the heathen is shown by Dt 32 38.
The cultus is thoroughly in keeping with and
adapted to the age, and yet an ideal system in


Sacrifice (OT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2646


many respects. The ethical side is in the back-
ground, the external hasthe emphasis. No sacrifices
will avail for a breach of the covenant
13. Primi- between God and the people. The
tive Nature people thoroughly believed in the efh-
of the cacy of the blood. It secured atone-
Cultus ment and forgiveness. Their religious
life found expression in the sacrifices.
God was fed and pleased by the offerings by fire.
Many of the customs are ancient and crude, so
that it is difficult to imagine how such a primitive
system could have been arranged and accepted
afterward by the people who had the lofty ethical
teachings of the prophets in their hands.
VI. Sacrifices in the History of Israel.—The
tribes were outwardly consolidated, and a religious
system was provided. Some of it was


1. The for the rulers, much for the people and
Situation much for the priests alone. The vari-
at Moses’ ous laws were given in portions and
Death afterward compiled. No one expected


them to be observed until the nation
had a capital and central sanctuary. Even then
not every detail was always possible. They were
not observed to any extent in the wilderness (Am
5 25), as it was impracticable. Even circum-
cision was neglected until the wanderers crossed
the Jordan (Josh 5 2). The body of the system
was not in full practice for 300 or 400 years. The
ritual, as far as it could be observed, served as an
educational agency, producing in the minds of the
worshippers proper conceptions of the holiness of
God, the sinfulness of man, and the proper spirit
in approaching God.
Lay or common altars were in accordance with
Ex 20 24; Dt 16 21; 27.7. Inthedaysof Joshua,
the Passover was celebrated (Josh 5


2. In the 10f). At Ebal an altar was erected,
Time of burnt and peace offerings were pre-
Joshua sented (Josh 8 30-32). Thetabernacle


was set up at Shiloh with a horned

altar doubtless (Josh 18 1), and the cultus was

observed to some extent. Concerning the altar on
the east side of the Jordan, see ALTAR.

Canaanitish altars were abundant with their

corrupt and licentious cults of the Nature-gods.

Israelites with their common altars


3. Inthe would naturally use the high places,
Period of | when possible. The stationary altars
the Judges of the Canaanites were of course unlaw-


ful. Theinevitable tendency would be
to imitate the worship of the Canaanites. They
were rebuked and threatened for this, and, weeping,
offered sacrifices at Bochim (Jgs 2 1-5). Gideon
rebuilt an altar of Jeh and offered a bullock as a
burnt offering (6 25.26). The kid prepared for the
angel was not first a sacrifice, but its acceptance as
a gift was indicated by its being burned (6 19 f).
Jephthah offered up his daughter as a burnt offering,
believing such a sacrifice well-pleasing to Jeh (11
31.39). _Manoah and his wife prepared a kid for a
burnt offering, a meal offering accompanying it (13
16f). Atthetime of the civil war with Benjamin the
ark and statutory altar seemed to be at Beth-el, where
they offered burnt and peace offerings (20 26).
The feasts at Shiloh imply at least peace offerings
(21 19).
Common lay altars and customary sacrifices
were still much in use. The official altar with
the statutory individual and national


4. In the offerings appears to be at Shiloh. El-
Times of _ kanah sacrifices and feasts there yearly
Samuel (18 13f). Such feasts were joy-
and Saul ous and tended to excesses, as drunken-


ness -seemed common (1 13f). All
Israel came thither (2 14); the priests claimed their
portion, seizing it in an unlawful manner before the


fat had been burned, or the flesh had been boiled


(2 13-17). This shows that such ritual as was pre-
scribed in Lev was practised and considered by the
people the only lawful custom. Was it in writ-
ing? Why not? Guilt offerings were made by the
Philis when smitten by tumors (6 3.4.8.17). There
were five golden mice and five golden tumors. Crude
as were their ideas of a guilt offering, their actions
show familiarity with the concept. Burnt offerings
were used on special occasions and in great crises,
such as receiving the ark (6 14f), going to war (7
9f; 18 9-12), victory (11 15), ete. SaulmetSamuel
at a sacrificial feast im a small city (9 12.13) on a high
place. At Gilgal there were burnt and peace offer-
ings (10 8; 15 15.21). Saul offered burnt offerings
himself (18 9-12), but his fault was not in offering
them himself, but in his haste and disobedience
toward Samuel. ‘To obey is better than sacrifice,”
etc, says Samuel (15 22), recognizing the funda-
mental] principle of the covenant and realizing that
ceremonies are in themselves worthless without the
right spirit. The same truth is reiterated by the
prophets later. To prevent the eating of flesh with
the blood Saul built a special altar (14 32-35).
Family and clan sacrifices and feasts were evidently

common (16 2-5).
The common altars and those on the high places
were still in use. The central sanctuary at Shiloh
had been removed, first apparently to


5. Inthe  Gilgal, then to Nob, and later to
Days of Gibeon. David’s and Saul’s families
David and kept the feast of the new moon, when
Solomon peace offerings would be sacrificed (1 8


20 5.24-29). The sanctuary at Nob
had the shewbread upon the table (21 4 ff) according
to Ex 25 30. When the ark was brought up to Jerus,
burnt and peace offerings were offered according to
the Law (28 6 17.18; 1 Ch 16 2.40). Ahithophel
offered private sacrifices at Shiloh (2 S 16 12).
David offered up burnt, meal and peace offerings
when purchasing the threshing-floor of Araunah
(1 Ch 21 23-26). The statutory horned altar at
this time was at Gibeon (2 Ch 1 6; 1 Ch 21 29),
but was soon removed to Jerus (1 Ch 22 1). Inthe
organized sanctuary and ritual, Levites were ap-
pointed for attendance on the shewbread, meal
offerings, burnt offerings, morning and evening
sacrifices, sabbaths, new moons and set feasts (23
28-31), attempting to carry out the Levitical laws
as far as possible. At the dedication of the temple
Solomon offered burnt, meal and peace offerings
in enormous quantities (1 K 8 63; 2 Ch 7 4-7);
also burnt and peace offerings with incense trien-
nially (1 K 9 25). The ritual at the regular seasons,
daily, sabbaths, new moons, set feasts, etc, was
observed according to the Levitical Law (2 Ch 2
4; 8 13). Was it written?

The golden calf worship was carried on at Dan
and Beth-el, with priests, altars and ritual (1 IK 12
27f). The high places were in use,


6. Inthe but very corrupt (13 2ff), A com-
Northern mon altar was in use on Mt. Carmel
Kingdom (18 30.32). Many others were known


; as Jeh’s altars (19 10). The system
was in full swing in Amos’ time (Am 4 4.5) at
Beth-el and Gilgal and probably at Beer-sheba (5 5).
Amos bitterly satirizes the hollow, insincere wor-
ship, but does not condemn the common altars and
sacrifices, as these were legitimate. With Hosea the
situation is worse, the cultus has been “canonized,”
priests have been fed on the sin or sin offerings of
the people, and the kingdom soon perished because
of its corruption.

The high places were still in use and not de-
nounced yet by the prophets (1 K 3 2; 2 K 14 4;
16 4.35). Worship was not fully centralized, though
tending in that direction. In the days of Abijah


2647


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sacrifice (OT)


the temple cult was in full operation according to
Moses’ Law (2 Ch 13 10f). Asa removed many
strange altars and high places because
7. Inthe of their corruption (14 3), but not all
Southern (15 17; 20 33). In the days of Je-
Kingdom to hoiada priests and Levites were on duty
the Exile according to Moses (23 18; 24 148;
: _ 2K 12 4-16). Sin and guilt offer-
Ings were in sufficient numbers to be mentioned, but
the money went to the priests. MKantzsch (HDB,
V) and Paterson (HDB, IV), with others, think
these offerings were only fines and altogether differ-
ent from those of Lev 4, 5. Such a statement is
wholly gratuitous. The guilt offerings must be
accompanied by fines, but not necessarily the sin
offerings. The passage speaks of both as perfectly
familiar and of long standing, but details are lack-
ing and there can be no certainty in the matter,
except that it proves nothing regarding a ritnal
of sin and guilt offerings existent or non-existent
at that time. Kautzsch’s and Paterson’s motives
are obvious. Having reversed the history and put
the ritual law late, they must needs make adjust-
ments in the records to have them agree. In the
days of Ahaz, the regular offerings were observed
for priests, kings and people (2 K 16 13-15).
Hezekiah destroyed many high places (18 4).
When repairing the temple, many sin offerings were
presented to expiate the terrible sins of the previous
reigns and the desecration of the temple (2 Ch 29
21-24); and so, also, burnt offerings (vs 27 {), peace
and thank offerings, etc, in large number (vs 31-35;
ef Isa 1 10-17). The Passover was celebrated
with peace offerings (2 Ch 30 1.2.15.22), oblations
and tithes (31 12); courses of Levites were estab-
lished (31 2), and the king’s portion (ver 3). All
the common altars were abolished as far as possible,
and worship centralized in Jerus (82 12). Reversed
by Manasseh (33 31), the high places were again
used (ver 17). Josiah purged Jerus (84 3), and
on the discovery of the Book of the Law, with its
rule regarding a central sanctuary, that law was
rigidly enforced (85 6-14). The reformation under
Josiah did not change the hearts of the people, and
the rule followed in spite of all the efforts of Jeremiah
and other prophets.
That the cultus was entirely suspended in Jerus
from 586 to 5386 BC seems certain. There is no
support for G. F. Moore’s statement


8. In the (EB, IV) that an altar was soon re-
Exilic and built and sacrificing was carried on
Post-exilic with scarcely a break. On the return
Periods of the exiles an altar was soon built and


the continual burnt offerings began
(Ezr 3 2 f), and likewise at the Feast of Tabernacles,
new moons and set feasts (vs 4-7). Darius decreed
that the Israelites should be given what was needed
for the sacrifices (6 9f). The band under Ezra
offered many sin offerings on their return (8 35).
At the dedication of the temple many burnt and
sin offerings were made for all the tribes (6 17).
Those who had married foreign wives offered guilt
offerings (10 19). The firman of Artaxerxes pro-
vided money for bullocks, rams, lambs, with meal
and drink offerings (7 17). Under Nehemiah and
after the formal acceptance of the Law, a more com-
plete effort was made to observe it. The shew-
bread, continual burnt and meal offerings, sabbaths,
new moons, set feasts, sin offerings, first-fruits,
firstlings, first-fruits of dough, heave offerings of all
trees, wine and oil, etc, were carefully attended
to (Neh 10 33-37) and were in full force later
(13 5.9). There is no hint of innovation, only a
thoroughgoing attempt to observe laws that had
been somewhat neglected.


At the time of Nehemiah and probably two or three
centuries previous, there existed a temple on the island


of Elephantino in the Nile. It was built by a Jewish
military colony, and a system of sacrifices was observed.

Just how far they copied the laws of Moses,
9. A Temple and what were their ideas of a central


sanctuary are uncertain.
and Sacri- Several Sem tribes or nations practised
fices at Ele- humau sacrifices. It was common among
phantine the Canaanites, as is shown by the exca-
vations at Gezer, Taanach, etc. They
seemed to offer children iu sacrifice at the
laying of corncrstones of houses and other such occa-


sions. Among the Carthaginians, Phoenicians, Greeks
and Romans human sacrifices were all too

10. Human common. , The custom was not unknown to
Som: the Israelites. Abraham felt called upon
Sacrifices to offer up Isaac, hut was stopped in the
in Israel’s act, and a lesson was given for all time.
Histor The abominable practice is forbidden by
Y Moses (Lev 18 21), where it is spoken of


as_a@ passing through the fire to Moloch,
referring to Moabitish and Ammonitish practices.
Anyone practising it was to he stoned (Lev 20 2-5;
Dt 12 31; 18 10 The rash vow of Jephthah resulted
in the immolation of his daughter, hut the incident is


recorded as something extraordinary (Jgs 11 31 f).
The execution of Zehah and Zalmunna is a case of
blood revenge, not sacrifice (8 18 ff). Nor is the


slaughter of Agag in any sense a sacrifice (1 S 15 321).
The death of Saul’s sons hecause of his breach of cove-
nant with the Gibeonites was an expiatory sacrifice, to
atone for the father’s perfidy (2 8 21 9). The Moabite
king in desperation offered up his firsthorn and heir to
appease the anger of Chemosh, and the effect was start-
ling to the Israelites (2 K 3 27). Ahaz practised the
ahomination in times of trouble (16 3). Such sacrifices
were intended to secure favor with the Deity or appease
His wrath. MHiel’s firsthorn and youngest sons were
prohahly sacrificed at the rehuilding or fortifying of
Jericho (1 IX 16_34; cf Josh 6 26). Manasseh practised
the custom (2 K 21 6), hut it was stopped by Josiah
(23 10). Micah's words were prohahly applicahle to
those times of Ahaz or Manasseh, when they thought
to obtain God’s favor hy costly: gifts apart from ethical
conditions (Mic 6 6-8). Isaiah refers to a heathen cus-
tom practised hy Israel of slaying the children in secret
places (Isa 57 5), and Jeremiah represents it as practised
in his time (Jer 7 31; 19 5). Ezekiel denounces the
same practice (Ezk 16 20.21; 23 37).
Heathen sacrifices are hinted at in the later books, such
as swine, @ mouse, @ horse, a dog (Isa 65 4; 66 3.17;
Ezk 8 10; 2 K 23 11). All such ani-
11. Certain mals were unclean to the Hehrews, and the
Heathen practice had its roots in some form of
= rimitive totemism which survived in those
Sacrifices eathen cults. They were little practised
among the Israelites. See Torremism.


VII. The Prophets and Sacrifices.—The prophets
were reformers, not innovators. Their emphasis
was on the ethical, rather than the ritual. They
based their teachings on the fundamentals of the
covenant, not the incidentals. They accepted
sacrifices as part of the religious life, but would give
them their right place. They accepted the law
regarding common altars, and Samuel, David and
Elijah used these altars. They also endorsed the
movement toward a central sanctuary, but it is the
abuse of the cult that they condemned, rather than
its use. They combated the heathenish idea that
all God needed was gifts, lavish gifts, and would
condone any sin if only they bestowed abundance
of gifts. They demanded an inward religion, moral-
ity, justice, righteousness, ‘in short, an ethical reli-
gion. They preached an ethical God, rather than
the profane, debasing and almost blasphemons idea
of God which prevailed in their times. They re-
minded the people of the covenant at Sinai, the foun-
dation principle of which was obedience and loyalty
to Jeh. If Joel be early, the cult is in full practice,
as he deplores the cutting-off of the meal offering,
or minhdh, and the nesekh or drink offering, through
the devastation of the locusts. He doesnot mention
the burnt offerings, etc, as these would not be cnt
off by the locusts (Joel 1 7.13; 2 14). Joel empha-
sized the need for a genuine repentance, telling them
to rend their hearts and not their garments (2 138).

Amos condemns the cultus at Beth-el and Gilgal,
and sarcastically bids them go on_ transgressing
(4 4.5), mentions burnt, peace, thank and freewill
offerings (4 4f; 6 22), reminds them of the fact that
they did not offer sacrifices in the wilderness (5 25),


Sacrifice (OT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2648


but demands rather righteousness and justice. There
is nothing here against the Mosaic origin of the laws.

In Hosea’s time the hollow externalism of the cult
had become worse, while vice, falsehood, murder,
oppression, etc, were rampant. He utters an epoch-
making sentence when he says, ‘I desire mercy,
and not sacrifice,” ete (6 6). This is no sweeping
renunciation of sacrifices, as such; it is only putting
the emphasis in the right place. Such sacrifices as
Hosea speaks of were worse than worthless. It is
somewhat extravagant for Kautzsch to say, ‘It
is perfeetly futile to read out of 6 6 anything else
than a categorical rejection of sacrifices.’”’ Hosea
recognizes their place in religion, and deplores the
loss during exile (3 4). The corrupt cults he con-
demns (4 131), for they are as bad as the Canaan-
itish cults (4 9). Jeh will spurn them (8 13; 9 4).
The defection of the nation began early (11 2), and
they have multiplied altars (12 11; 18 2). He
predicts the time when they shall render as bullocks
the “calves” of their lips (144 2 AV).

Micah is as emphatic. The sacrifices were
more costly in his day, in order the more surely to
purchase the favor of the Deity. Human sacrifices
were in vogue, but Micah says God requires them
“to do justly, and to love kindness, and to walk
humbly with thy God” (6 8). This does not in
the least affect sacrifices of the right kind and with
the right spirit.

Isaiah faces the same situation. There are mul-
titudes of sacrifices, burnt offerings, blood of bullocks
and goats, oblations, sweet incense, beasts, etc,
but no justice, morality, love, truth or goodness.
Thus their sacrifices, etc, are an abomination,
though right in themselves (1 11-17; 61 8).
The same is true of all pious performances today.
It is probable that Isainh worshipped in the temple
(6 1.6). In his eschatological vision there is free-
dom to offer sacrifices in Egypt (19 19.21). The
people are to worship in the holy mountain (27 13).
Ariel must let the feasts come around (29 1).

Jeremiah maintains the same attitude. Your
“frankincense from Sheba, and the sweet cane,”
burnt offerings and sacrifices are not pleasing to
God (6 20; 14 12). They made the temple a den
of robbers, in the streets they baked cakes to the
Queen of heaven, etc. He speaks sarcastically,
saying, ‘“‘Add your burnt-offerings unto your sac-
rifices, and eat ye flesh. For I spake not unto
your fathers concerning .... sacrifices:
but .... commanded... . saying, Hearken un-
to my voice,” ete (7 21-23). This was literally
true, as we have seen above; the covenant was not
based on sacrifices but on obedience. Such a state-
ment does not deny the institution of sacrifices for
those within the covenant who are obedient. It is
no “subterfuge,” as Kautzsch calls it, “to say that
the prophets never polemize against sacrifice per se,
but only against offerings presented hypocritically,
without repentance and a right disposition, with
blood-stained hands; against the opera operata of the
carnally-minded, half-heathen mass of the people.”
This is exactly what they do, and they are in perfect
harmony with the covenant constitution and with
their own ethical and spiritualfunctions. Kautzsch
can make such an extravagant assertion only by
ignoring the fact that Jeremiah himself in predict-
ing the future age of righteousness and blesscdness
makes sacrifice an important factor (33 11.18).


Picturing possible prosperity and glory, Jeremiah |


speaks of burnt and meal offerings, frankincense,
thank offerings, ete, being brought into the house
of Jeh (17 26). (We are aware of the harsh and
arbitrary transference of this passage to a later
time.

Be otiel is called by Kautzsch “the founder of the
Levitical system.” He is said to have preserved


the fragment of the ritual that was broken up in
the exile. But his references to the burnt, sin and
trespass offerings presuppose familiarity with them
(40 38-42).


He assigns the north and south chambers for the meal,
sin and trespass offerings (42 13). The cleansing of the
altar requires a bullock and he-goat for a sin offering,
with burnt and peace offerings with a ritual similar to
Lev 8 1f (Ezk 43 18-27). The Levites are to be minis-
ters and slay burnt offerings and sacrifice for the people
(44 11). The priest must offer his sin offering before
he ministers in the sanctuary (44 27). They are to eat
the meal, sin, and trespass offerings as in 44 29. in
ch 45, the people are to give the wheat, barley, oil and
lamhs for meal, burnt and peace offerings, while the
prince shall give the meal, burnt and drink offerings for
the feasts, the new moons, sabbaths and appointed
feasts. He is to prepare them to make atonement (45
13-17). Incleansing the sanctuary the Levitical ritual is
followed with added details (45 18-20). The Passover
requires the burnt, sin and meal offerings with an extra
amount of cereal. The priests prepare the prince's
burnt and peace offerings (46 2-4.6.9-12) for the sab-
baths, new moons, etc, The daily burnt offerings (vs
13-15) must have a sixth instead of a tenth part of an
ephah, asin Lev 1. The sin and guilt offerings are to be
hoiled in a certain place, and the meal offering baked (vs
20.26). Ezk varies from the Levitical Law in the quan-
tity of the meal offering, picturing the ritual in a more
ideal situation than Moses. The people are all righteous,
with new hearts, the Spirit in them enabling them to
keep the Law (86 26 f), and yet he institutes an elaborate
ritual of purification for them. Does this seem to indi-
cate that the prophets would abolish sacrifices entirely ?
It is strange reasoning which makes the prophets de-
nounce the whole sacrificial system, when one of the
greatest among them seeks to conserve an elahorate cult
for the blessed age in the future.

In the second part of Isa, God declares that He has not
been honored hy the people with burnt and meal offerings,
etc., and that He has not burdened them witb such offer-
ings, but that He is wearied with their sins (43 23 f).
Those foreigners who respect the covenant shall offer_ac-
ceptable sacrifices (56 7) in the hlessed age tocome. The
Servant of Jeh is to he a guilt offering (53 10) to expiate
the sins of Israel. Sacrifice is here for the first time lifted
out of the animal to the human sphere, thus forging the
link between the OT andthe NT. In the glorious age to
come there are to be priests and Levites, new moons,
sabbaths and worship in Jerus (66 21.23).

Daniel speaks of the meal offering heing caused to
cease iu the midst of the week (9 27).

Zechariah pictures the golden age to come when all
nations shall go up to Jerusto keep the Feast of Taber-
nacles, which implies sacrifices. Pots are used, and all the
worshippers shall use them in the ritual (14 16-21).


In Malachi’s age the ritual was in practice, but
grossly abused. They offered polluted bread (1 7),
blind, lame and sick animals (1 13 f). Jeh has the
same attitude toward these as toward those in the
times of Amos, Hosea, and Isaiah (Mal 1 10f).
The Gentiles offer better ones (1 11). The Israel-
ites covered the altar of Jeh with tears by their
hypocritical, non-ethical actions (2 13). They
robbed God in withholding tithes and heave offer-
ings (3 8). It is the abuse of the cult that is de
nounced here, as in all the other Prophets.

A special use of the term ‘sacrifice’ is made by
Zephaniah (1 71), applying it to the destruction of
Israel hy Jeh. Bozrah and Edom are to be victims
(Isa 34 6); also Gog and Magog (Ezk 39 17.19).

In summing up the general attitude of the
prophets toward sacrifices, even G. F. Moore in
EB admits: “It is not probable that the prophets
distinctly entertained the idea of a religion without
a cultus, a purely spiritual worship. Sacrifice may
well have seemed to them the natural expression of
homage and gratitude.’”’ He might have added, “and
of atonement for sin, and full fellowship with God.”

VII, Sacrifice in the ‘‘Writings.’’—Dates are
very uncertain here. The Pss and Prov extend
from David and Solomon into the Pers period.

The sages take the same attitude as the prophets.
They enjoin the sacrifice of first-fruits (Prov 3 9).
A feast usually follows a sacrifice of
peace offerings (7 14). The trespass
offering (?) has no meaning to fools
(14 9), and the sacrifices of the wicked
are an abomination to God (15 8; 21 27). Right-


1. In the
Proverbs


2649


eousness and justice are more acceptable to Jeh
than sacrifices (21 3), yet to them sacrifices are a
regular part of worship. Kdheleth speaks of sacri-
fices as quite the custom, and deprecates the offer-
ings of fools (Eccl 5 1; 9 2).

The Psalmist admonishes the faithful to offer

the sacrifices of righteousness, i.e. sacrifices offered

in the right spirit (4 5). The drink
2. In the offerings of idolaters are well known
Psalms (16 4). Prayer is made for the ac-
.ceptance of sacrifices (20 3). It is
a coveted privilege to offer them (27 6; 84 1-4).
The true relation between sacrifice and obedience
is expressed in 40 6-8. As in Jer 7 21f, the em-
phasis is laid on obedience, without which sacrifices
are worthless and repugnant to God. They are not
the important thing in Israel’s religion, for that
religion could exist without them as in the wilder-
ness and exile. The teaching corresponds exactly
with that of the prophets and is probably late.
Ps 50 is even more emphatic. The Psalmist knows
that sacrifices are in the covenant regulations (ver 5),
but repudiates the idea of giving anything to God
or of feeding Him (vs 12.13). Everything belongs
to Him, He is not hungry, He would scorn the idea
of drinking the blood of goats, etc. The idea of the
cultus being of any real value to God is scouted.
Yet in the next verse the reader is admonished to
offer sacrifices of thanksgiving and pay vows (ver
14). The sacrifices that express worship, penitence,
prayer, thanksgiving and faith are acceptable.
The penitent Psalmist speaks in similar terms.
Sacrifices as such are no delight to God, the real
sacrifice is a broken heart (61 16f). When the heart
is right, then, as an expression of true-hearted-
ness, devotion, repentance and faith, burnt offerings
are highly acceptable (ver 19). Another Psalmist
promises a freewill offering to God (54 6; 66 13.
15). Sacrifices of thanksgiving are advised.(96 8;
107 22; 118 27) and promised (116 17). Prayer
is likened to the evening sacrifice (141 2).

IX. The Idea and Efficacy of Sacrifices.—That
the Hebrews thoroughly believed in the efficacy of
sacrifices is without doubt. What ideas they en-
tertained regarding them is not so clear. No
single theory can account for all the facts. The
unbloody sacrifices were regarded as food for the
Deity, or a pleasant odor, in one instance, taking
the place of a bloody offering (see above). The
bloody offerings present some difficulties, and hence
many different views. .

Included under the head of gifts of food to the
Deity would be the meal and peace offerings, in so

far as they were consumed by fire,


1. AGift the burnt offerings and the shewbread,
of Food to ete. They were fire-food, the fire-
the Deity distilled essence or etherealized food


for God which gave Him pleasure and
disposed Him favorably toward the offerer. They
were intended either to appease wrath, to win favor,
or to express thanks and gratitude for favors ex-
perienced. The earlier and more naive idea was
probably to win the favor of the Deity by a gift.
Later, other ideas were expressed in the offerings.
The burnt offering best gave expression to the
sentiments of adoration and devotion, though they
may not be excluded from the meal


2. Expres- and peace offerings. In other words,
sion of sacrifice meant worship, which is a
Adoration complex exercise of the soul. Such
and was Abraham’s attempted sacrifice of
Devotion Isaac. The daily burnt offerings were


intended to represent an unbroken
course of adoration and devotion, to keep the right
relations with the Deity. On particular occasions,
special offerings were made to insure this relation
which was specially needed at that time.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sacrifice (OT)


The burnt and sin offerings were the principal
kinds used for the purpose of purification; water
being used in case of uncleanness from
3. A Means contact with the dead. There were
of Purifi- three classes of uncleanness: (1) those
cation from inseparable from the sex functions of
Unclean- men and women; (2) those resulting
ness from contact with a corpse; (3) the
case of recovery from leprosy.  Puri-
fication ceremonies were the condition of such per-
sons enjoying the social and religious life of the
community. Why they should require a sin offer-
ing when most of them occurred in the regular
course of nature and could not be guarded against,
can be understood only as we consider that these
offences were the effects of sin, or the weaknesses
of the fleshly nature, due to sin. Such unclean-
nesses made the subject unfit for society, and that
unfitness was an offence to God and required a
piacular offering.
Consecration was of men and things. The cere-
monies at the sealing of the covenant and the con-
secration of the Levites and of Aaron
4. A Means and his sons have been mentioned.


of Conse- The altar and furniture of the taber-
cration to nacle were consecrated by the blood
the Divine of the sin offering. This blood being
Service the means of expiation, it cleansed from

all defilement caused by human hands,
etc. The sprinkling and smearing of the blood con-


secrated them to the serviceof God. The blood be-
ing holy, it sanctified allit touched (cf Ezk 45 19 f).
In other words, it is a kind of sacral communion.
The blood is the sacred cement between man and
God. This is possible only because


5. To Es- it contains the life and is appropriated
tablish a by God as a symbol of the communion
Community into which He enters with the offerer.
of Life This blood ‘covers’ all sin and de-
between filement in man, permits him to enter
Worshipper God’s presence and. attests the com-
and God munion with Him. This is the view of


Schultz, and partly that of Kautzsch, in
regard to earlier ideas of sacrifice. Such a view may
have been held by certain peoples in primitive times,
but it does not do justice to the Levitical system.

The view of Ritschl is that sacrifices served as a form
of self-protection from God whose presence meant de-
struction toa weak creature. Thus sacri-
6. View of fices have no moral value and no relation
Ss ] to sin and defilement. They have relation
Ritsch. only to man’s creaturely weakncss which
is in danger of destruction as it approaches
the presence of God. God's presence necessarily meant
death to the creature without reference to his holiness,
etc. Such a view hanishes all real sense of sin, all ethical
values, and furnishes no proper motives. It givesa false
idea of the character of God, and is entirely out of accord
with the sacred record.


That sacrifices were really a sacrament has been
advocated by many. According to some theolo-
gians, the sacrifices were signs of spirit-

7. Sacrifice ual realities, not only representing but
a Sacra- sealing and applying spiritual blessings,
ment and their efficacy was proportionate to
the faith of the offerer. By some

Roman Catholic theologians it is held that the Pass-
over was esp. of a sacramental character, correspond-
ing to the Eucharist. The purificatory rites corre-
sponded to penance and the consecrating sacrifices
to the sacrament of ordination. Bahr says that
the acceptance of the sacrifice by Jeh and His
gift of sanctification to the worshippers give to the
sacrifice the character of a sacramental act. Cave
also speaks of them as having a sacramental sig-
nificance, while refuting the position of Bahr.
Though there may be a slight element of truth in
some of these ideas, it is not the idea expressed in
the cultus, and seems to read into the ritual the


Sacrifice (OT)
Sacrifice (NT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2650


theology of the theologians themselves. This view
is closely alhed to a phase of the following view

(see Paterson, HDB, IV).
That it is a symbol or expression of prayer is held
by Maurice and to some extent by Schultz. Thus
the sacrifices are supposed to be sym-


8. ASym- bols of the religious sentiment, which
bol or Ex- are the conditions of acceptance with
pression of God. The victim serves as an index
Prayer of what is in the worshipper’s heart,


and its virtue is exhausted when it is
presented to God. Thus it may express spiritual
aspiration or supplication, hatred of sim and sur-
render to God with confession and supplication.
Bahr holds that a valuable and unblemished victim
is selected as symbolical of the excellence and
purity to which the offerer aspires, the death is
necessary to procure life which may be offered to
God, and the sprinkling of the blood is the pres-
entation to God of the life stili resident in the blood.
Schultz thinks that the sin offering was distinct-
ively purifying. ‘Hence the real ground of puri-
fication is that God accepts the sacrifice and thereby
enters into communion with the sinner, granting
him actual pardon, and that man in this offering
enjoined by God as the embodied prayer of a peni-
tent expresses his confession, his regrets and his
petition for forgiveness.” While there is an element
of truth in this, and it is particularly applicable to
the burnt offering, it does not embrace all the facts.
It represents the views of the prophets and psalm-
ists more than that of the Levitical code.


Kautzsch holds that the efficacy of sacrifices consists
in this: ‘‘God has connected the accomplishment of
atonement with the obedient discharge of
9. View of the sacrificial prescriptions; whoever ful-
fils these and gets the priest to perform the
Kautzsch atoning usages, is forgiven. The ritual,
esp. the presenting of the hlood, is theindis-
pensable condition of atonement, but it is not synony-
mous. Forgiveness of sin flows from the grace of God
as taught hy the prophets, only with them it is unneces-
sary, hut with the PC it is necessary.” Thus Kautzsch
teaches a fundaniental coutradiction between the
prophets and the Law, which is utterly wroug and is
made uecessary hy first turning the history upside down
and making the PC a hideous anachronism. He says,
“That the process of atonement is connected with the
presenting of blood, explains itself naturally asa powerful
after-influence of primitive sacrificial usages, in which the
presenting of blood had a different meaning. It is a
symbolic (not real) satisfaction, as through the animal's
lite symbolic expression is given to the fact that the sin-
ner's life is forfeited to God. But the main idea is that
God has commandedit" (IDB, V,721a). The half-truths
in these statements will he obvious to most readers.


The theory that sacrifices were a vicarious ex-
piation of sin and defilement, by a victim whose hfe
is forfeited instead of the sinner’s, is


10. Vicari- the only one that will complete the


ous Ex- Levitical idea of sacrifices. This of
piation course applies esp. to the sin offering.
Theory While there is an element of truth in


the gift-theory, the prayer and sacra-
mental theories and others, including that of
Kautzsch, the idea of a vicarious suffering is neces-
sary to complete the conception. Ochler recognizes
the force of the prayer-theory, but advances to the
idea that in sacrifices man places the life of a pure,
innocent, sacrificial animal between himself and
God, because he is unable to approach God on
account of his sinfulness and impurity. Thus it
becomes a képher for him, to cover his sin. This
is not a punishment inflicted on the animal, although
in the case of uncertain homicide it is (Dt 21 1-9).
The law does not lay the emphasis upon the
slaughter, but on the shedding of the blood and the
sprinkling of it on certain articles. The slaughter
is of course presupposed. The altar is not regarded
as a place of execution, it 1s the means for “covering”
the sins of the covenant people, a gracious ordi-
nance of God and well-pleasing to Him. But the


gift can please God only as the gift of one who has
given himself up to Him; therefore the ritual must
represent this self-surrender, the life of the clean
and guiltless animal in place of the impure and
sinful soul of the offerer, and this pure soul, coming
in between the offerer and the Holy God, lets Him
see at the altar a pure life by which the impure life
is covered. In the same way the pure element
serves to cover the pollutions of the sanctuary and
the altar, etc. Its meaning is specific, it is the self-
sacrifice of the offerer vicariously accomplished.
This self-sacrifice necessarily involves suffering and
punishment, which.is inflicted on the beast to which
the guilt and sin are imputed, not imparted (see
Oehler, OT Theol., 278 f).


Objections have been raised by Dillmann, Kautzsch
and others on the ground that it could not have been
vicarious hecause sacrifices were not allowed for sins
which merited death, but only for venial transgressions
(Nu 15 30). Certainly, but the entire sacrificial system
was for those who were in the covenant, who did not
commit sins that merited death, and was never Intended
as a penal substitute, because the sins of those in the
covenant were not of a penal nature. The sacrifices
were ‘‘to cover”’ the sin and defilement of the offerer, not
the deserved death-penalty of one who broke the cov-
enant. Again, they object, a cereal offering may atone,
and this excludes a penal substitute. But sacrifices were
not strictly penal, aud the cereal was distinctly an excep-
tion in case of the very poor, and the exception proves
the rule. In any case it represented the self-sacrifice of
the offerer, and that was the important thing. Further,
the victim was slain by the offerer and not by the priest,
whereas it should have been put to death by God's
representative. This carries no weight whatever, as
the essential thing was a sacrifice, and priests were not
necessary for that. A more serious objection is that in
the case of penal] substitution, by which the sin and
guilt are transferred to the animal, the fiesh of that ani-
mal is regarded as most holy and to be eaten by the
priests only, whereas it would necessarily be regarded
as laden with guilt and curse, and heuce polluted and
unfit for use. This is a pure assumption. In the first
place, the substitution was uot strictly penal, and, sec-
ondly, there is no hiut that actual pollution is conveyed to
the flesh of the animal or to the blood. Even if it were
so, the shedding of the blood would expiate the sin and
guilt, wipe out the pollution, and the flesh would be in
no way affected. On the contrary, the flesh, having been
the vehicle for the blood which has accomplished such a
sacred and meritorious service, would necessarily be
regarded as most holy. All the animal would he holy,
rather than polluted, since it had performed such a holy
service. Kautzsch’s ohjection thus appears puerile.
Tho ritual of the Day of Atonement presents all these
features. It is distinctly stated that the high priest
confesses the iniquities of the children of Israel over the
scapegoat, and that the goat carries this guilt away to
the desert. Its blood is not shed, it is wholly unclean,
and the man leading it away is unclean. This is unde-
niably a vicarious act. In the case of the other goat, a
sin offering, the sin and guilt are imputed to it, but the
life is taken aud thus the expiation is made and the flesh
of the victim used in such a holy service is most holy.


That this view of a vicarious expiation was gen-
erally accepted is evident on every hand. There
was no need of a theoretical explanation in the
cultus; it was self-evident; as Holtzmann says,
“the most external indeed, but also the simplest.
and most generally intelligible and the readiest
answer to the nature of expiation” (NT Theol., I, 68).
This view is amply corroborated by the researches
of 8. I. Curtiss in his Primitive Sem Religion of
Today. By searching questions he found that the
fundamental idea of bloody sacrifices was that the
victim took the place of the man, redeemed him, or
atoned for him asa substitute. The “bursting forth
of the blood” was the essential thing (see pp. 218 f).

The typology of sacrifice has been much dis-
cussed. There can be no question that, from the

standpoint of the NT, many of the


11. Typol- sacrifices were typical. They pre-
ogy of figured, and designedly so, the great
Sacrifice sacrifice of Christ. Thus they could


not really take away sin; they were
in that sense nnreal. But the question is, were they
typical to the people of Israel? Did Moses and the
priests and prophets and people nnderstand that


2651


they were merely figures, adumbrations of the trne
Sacrifice to come, which alone could take away sin?
Did they understand that their Messiah was to be
sacrificed, His blood shed, to make an atonement
for them, and render their Divinely given means of
atonement all unreal? The answer must be an em-
phatic “No.” Thereisno hint that their minds were
directed to think of the Coming One as their sacrifice,
foreshadowed by their offerings. That was the one
thing the nation could not and would not under-
stand, and to this day the cross is their chief
stumbling-block. The statement that the Servant
is to be a guilt offering (Isa 53 10) is the nearest ap-
proach to it, but this is far from saying that the whole
sacrificial system was understood as foreshadowing
that event. The great prophets all speak of a sacri-
ficial system in full vogue in the Messianic age.

We prefer to regard the sacrificial system as a
great religious educational system, adapted to the
capacity of the people at that age, intended to
develop right conceptions of sin, proper apprecia-
tion of the holiness of God, correct ideas of how to
approach God, a familiarity with the idea of sacri-
fice as the fundamental thing in redemption, life,
and service to God and man.


_ Lirerature.—Only a selection is attempted: arts.
in Ene Brit, 11th ed; EB (G. F. Moore); HDB (Pater-
son); RE and Sch-Herz (Orelli); Jew Enc; MeClintoek
and Strong, etc; Murray's Bible Dict.; Standard BD, etc.
Kautzsch, Jastrow and Wiedermann in HDB; art. on
“Comparative Religion’ in Sch-Herz; OT Theologies of
Ochier, Dillmann, Smend, Schultz, Davidson, Koenig, etc.

On saerifices in general: Wellhausen, Reste des ara-
bischen Heidenthums; W.R.Smith, Religion of the Semites;
J. G. Frazer, Golden Bough, II, 111; E. B. Tylor, Primi-
tive Culture; E. Westermarck, Origin of Moral Ideas;
H. Hubert ct Mauss, Année sociologique, II; L. Maril-
lier, Revue de l'histoire des religions, XXXVI, 208; 8.1.
Curtiss, Primitive Sem Religion of Today.

Biblical sacrifices: F. Bahr, Symbolik des Mosdischen
Kultus; J. H. Kurtz, Der alttestamentliche Opfercultus;
A. Stewart, The Mosate Sacrifices; J. G. Murphy, Sac-
rifice as Set Forth in Scripture; A. Cave, Scriptural Doc-
lrine of Sacrifice; F. Maurice, The Doctrine of Sacrifice;
J. M. P. Smith, Bib. Doctrine of Atonement. See also:
Schultz, AJ 7, 1900, 257 {f; Smoller, Studien und Kritiken,
1891; Wiener, Essays in Pentateuchal Criticism; Penta-
leuchal Studies; Driver, ERE, VI.

J. J. Reeve


In toe New Testament


J. Terms or Sacririce Eprromizen
Wi. Arrirupe or Jesus anp NT WRiTERs T0 THE
OT SacririciaL System
1. Jesus’ Attitude
2. Paul's Attitude
3. Attitude of the Author of Hebrews
WII. Tue SacririciaL Ipgea IN THE
Teaching of John the Baptist
. Teaching of Jesus
. Teaching of Peter
. Paul's Teachin
Teaching of Hebrews
. Johannine Teaching
IV. Revation oF Carist’s SacriFice To
SALVATION ¥
1. Redemption or Deliveranec from Curse of Sin
Reconciliation _
Remission of Sins
The Cancellation of Guilt 4
Justification or Right Standing with God
Cleansing or Sanctification
Sonship
ow Curist’s Sacriries Procures SALvaTION
. Jesus’ Teaching
. Paul's Teaching
. Teaching of Hebrews
. Petrine and Johannine Teaching F
VI. Rationace or THE Erricacy oF Cunist’s SACRI-
FICE
1. Jesus’ Teaching
2. Paul's Teaching
3. The Teaching in Hebrews


OoubONr


Man's


INP Guba


PON


VII. Tue Human Conpitions_ oF APPLICATION
1. Universal in Objective Potentiality _
2. Efficacious When Subjectively Applied
VII. Tas Curistian's Lire tHe Life oF SACRIFICE


. Consequence of Christ's Sacrifice cE

" @hrist’s Death the Appeal for Christian's
Sacrifice

. Necessary to Fill Out Christ's Sacrifice

. Content of the Christian's Sacrifice

. The Supper as 2 Sacrifice

LITERATURE


oRwW Ne


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA
$$


Sacrifice (OT)
Sacrifice (NT)


_ 4. Terms of Socrifice Epitomized.—The word "'offer-
ing'’ (tpoodopa, prosphord) describes the death of Christ,
once in Paul (Eph § 2); 5 t in He (10 5.8.10.14.18).
The vb. mpochépw, prosphérd, ‘‘to offer,’ is also used,
15 tin He (§ 1.3; 8 32.3.4; 9 7.14.25.28; 10 1.8.11.12;
11 4). The noun prosphora occurs 15 t in LXX, usually
as the tr of ann, minkah, ‘‘sacrifice.” This noun in


the NT refers to OT sacrifices in Acts 7 42; 21 26; to
the offering of money in Acts 24 17: Rom 15 16. The
vb. dvadepu, anaphérd, also occurs 3 t in He (Y% 27; 9 28;
13.15); alsoin 1 Pet 2 5.

Tho word ‘‘sacrifice’’ (@vele, thusta, translates in LXX
8 Heb words for various kinds of sacrifice, occurring ahout
350 t) refers to Christ's death, once in Panl (Eph 5 2)
and 5 t in He (6 1; 9 23.26; 10 12.26). It refers °
several times to OT sacrificc.and 5 t to Christian living
or giving (Phil 2.17; 4 18; He 13 15.16; 1 Pet 2 5).
The vb. ‘' to sacrifiee"' (6vw, thd) is used once by Panl to
describe Christ's death (1 Cor 6 7).

The blood (aiua, haima) of Christ is said to secure re-

demption or salvation, 6 t in Paul (Rom 3 25; 5.9;
1 Cor 10 16; Eph 1 7; 2 13; Col 1 20); 3 t in He
(9 12.14; 10 19; ef also10 29); 2t in 1 Pet (1 2.19)
and 5 t in the Johannine writings (1 Jn 1 7; 5 62.8;
Rev_1 5). Unmistakahly this figure of the blood refers
to Christ's sacrificial death. ‘'In any case the Pee
év Tg avtod aixary (en t6 auto hatmatt, ‘in his blood,’
Rom 83 25) carries with it the idea of sacrificial blood-
shedding'' (Sanday, Comm. on Ep. to Rom, 91).
_ Aurpoy (liutron, ‘‘ransom,"’ the price paid for redeem-
ing, occurring in LXX 19 t, meaning the price paid for
redeeming the servant (Lev 25 51.52]; ransom for first-
horn [Nu 3 46]; ransom for the life of the owner of the
goring ox [Ex 21 30, etc]) oceurs in the NT only twice
(Mt 20 28; Mk 10 45). This word is used hy Jesus to
signify the culmination of His sacrificial life in His
sacrificial death.

"AvttAutpov (anttlutron, “‘ransom,’’ @ word not found
in LXX, stronger in meaning than the preceding word)
occurs only once inthe NT (1 Tim 2 6).

*AroAvtpwots (apolitrésis, ‘*redemption,'’ in Ex 21 8,
meaning the ransom paid by @ father to redeem his
daughter from a cruel master) signifles (1) deliverance
from sin hy Christ's death, 5t in Paul (Rom 3 24; 1 Cor
1 30; Eph 1 7.14; Col 1 14); once in He (9 15); (2) gen-
eral deliverance, twice (Lk 21 28; He 11 35): (38) the
Christian's final deliveranee, physical and spiritual (Rom
8 23; Eph 4 30). The simple word Aurpucts (litrésis,
‘‘redemption,”’ 10 t in LXX as the tr of 5 Heb words)
oceurs once for spiritual deliveranee (He 9 12).

*Efayopdgw (exagordzd, ‘‘redeem,"’ only once in LXX,
Dnl 2 8) in the NT means (1) to deliver from the eurse
of the law, twice by Paul (Gal 3_13; 4 5); (2) to_use
time wisely, twice by Paul (Eph § 16; Col 45). The
simple vh. éyopagw (agordzd, meaning in Lev 27 19 to
redeem land) occurs twice in Panl (1 Cor 6 20; 7% 23)
and means '‘to redeem" (in a spiritual sense).

Karadaayy (katallagé, ‘‘reconciliation,’’ only twice in
LXX) means the relation to God into which men are
brought by Christ's death, 4 t by Paul (Rom 6 11; 11
15; 2 Cor 5 18.19). :

Karadddooew (katalldssein, ‘to reconcile,’ 4 t in
LXX [3 in 2 Macc]) means to hring men into the state
of reconciliation with God, 5 t in Pawl (Rom § 10 bis;
2 Cor 5 18.19.20), : $

The words with the propitiatory idea occur as follows:
iAdcxouar (hildskomai, ‘‘to propitiate,”’ 12 t in LXX, trd
“to forgive’) occurs twice (Lk 18 13; He 2 17);
iAaouds (hilasmés,9t in LXX, Nu 5 8; Ps 129 [130] 4,
etc: ‘‘atonement,"’ ‘'forgiveness'') oecurs twice in 1 Jn
(2 2; 4 10); tAagryproy (hilastérion, 24 tin LXX, trans-
lates ‘‘mercy-seat,'' where God was gracious and spake to
man) translates in the NT “propitiation’’ (Rom 3 25),
‘*mercy-seat'’ (He 9 5). ;

Christ is called ‘'‘the Lamb," azvés, amnés, twice by
the Baptist (Jn 1 29.36); once by Philip applicd to
Christ from Isa 53 7 (Acts 8 32); and once by Peter
(1 Pet 1 19); dpviov, arnton, 28 t in Rev (5 6.8.12.13;
6 1.16; 7 9.10.14; 19 7.9; 21 9.14.22.23.27; 22 1.3).

The cross (cravpés, staurés) is used by Paul 10 t to
describe the sacrificial death of Christ (1 Cor 1 17.18;
Gal 5 11; 6 12.14; Eph 2 16; Phil 2.8; 3 18; 1 Cor
1 20: 2 14) and once hy the author of He (12 2). Jesus
also 5 t used the figure of the eross to define the life of
sacrifico demanded of His diseiples and to mako His own
cross the symbol of sacrifice (Mt 10 38; 16 24; Mk
8 34: Lk 9 23; 14 27, with contexts; cf Jn 3 14;
12 32, etc).


Though it is not our province in this article to
discuss the origin and history of sacrifice in the
ethnic religions, it must be noted that sacrifice has
been a chief element in almost every religion (Jain-
ism and Buddhism being the principal exceptions).
The bloody sacrifice, where the idea of propitiation
is prominent, is well-nigh universal in the ethnic
religions, being found among even the most enlight-
ened peoples like the Greeks and Romans (see art.
‘“Hxpiation and Atonement” in ERE). Whether


Sacrifice (NT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2652


or not the system of animal sacrifices would have
ceased, not only in Judaism but also in all the ethnic
religions, had not Jesus lived and taught and died,
is a question of pure speculation. It must be con-
ceded that the sect of the Jews (Essenes) attaining
to the highest ethical standard and living the most
unselfish lives of brotherhood and benevolence did
not believe in animal sacrifices. But they exerted
small influence over the Jewish nation as compared
with the Pharisees. It is also to be noted that the
prophets Amos, Hosea, Micah and Isaiah exalted
the ethical far above the ceremonial; even de-
nounced the sacrifice of animals if not accompanied
by personal devotion to righteousness (Am 5 21 ff;
Hos 6 6; Mic 6 6 ff; Isa 1 11 ff). The Stoic and
Platonic philosophers also attacked the system of
animal sacrifices. But these exceptions only accen-
tuate the historical fact that man’s sense of the
necessity of sacrifice to Deity is well-nigh universal.
Only the sacrifice of Christ and the destruction
of Jerus caused a cessation of the daily, weekly,
monthly and annual sacrifices among the Jews, and
only the knowledge of Christ’s sacrifice of Himself
will finally destroy the last vestige of animal sacrifice.
Il, Attitude of Jesus and NT Writers to the
OT Sacrificial System.—Jesus never attacks the
sacrificial system. He even takes for
granted that the Jews chould offer
sacrifices (Mt 5 24). More than that,
He accepted the whole sacrificial
system, a part of the OT scheme, as of Divine
origin, and so He commanded the cleansed leper to
offer the sacrifice prescribed in the Mosaic code
(Mt 8 4). There is no record that Jesus Himself
ever worshipped by offering the regular sacrifices.
But He worshipped in the temple, never attacking
the sacrificial system as He did the oral law (Mk
7 6 ff). On the other hand, Jesus undermined the
sacrificial system by teaching that the ethical tran-
scends the ceremonial, not only as a general prin-
ciple, but also in the act of worship (Mt 5 23.24).
He endorses Hosea’s fine ethical epigram, ‘God will
have mercy and not sacrifice’ (Mt 9 13; 12 7).
He also commends as near the kingdom the scribe
who put love to God and man above sacrifice (Mk
12 33). But Jesus teaches not merely the inferiority
of sacrifice to the moral law, but also the discon-
tinuance of sacrifice as a system, when He said, “This
is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out
for many” (Mk 14 24; Mt 26 28; Lk 22 20). Not
only is the ethical superior to the ceremonial, but
His sacrifice of Himself is as superior to the sacri-
fices of the old system as the new covenant is superior
to the old.
Paul’s estimate of the Jewish sacrifices is easily
seen, although he does not often refer to them.
Once only (Acts 21 26) after his
2. Paul’s conversion does he offer the Jewish
Attitude sacrifice, and then as a matter of ex-
pediency for winning the Judaistic
wing of Christianity to his universal gospel of grace.
He regarded the sacrifices of the OT as types of
the true sacrifice which Christ made (1 Cor 6 7).
The author of the Ep. to the He discusses the OT
sacrifices more fully than other NT writers. He
regards the bloody sacrifices as superior
3. Attitude to the unbloody and the yearly sacri-


1. Jesus’
Attitude


of the fice on the Day of Atonement by the
Author of — high priest as the climax of the OT
Hebrews system. The high priest under the


old covenant was the type of Christ
under the new. The sacrifices of the old covenant
could uot take away sin, or produce moral trans-
formation, because of the frailties of men (10 1-11),
shown by the necessity of repeating the offerings
(5 2), and because God had appointed another high
priest, His Son, to supplant those of the old cove-


nant (6 5; 7 1-28). The heart of this author’s
teaching is that animal sacrifices cannot_possibly
atone for sin or produce moral transformation, since
they are Divinely appointed only as a type or shadow
of the one great sacrifice by Christ (8 7; 10 1).

To sum up, the NT writers, as well_as Jesus, re-
garded the OT sacrificial system as of Divine origin
and so obligatory in its day, but imperfect and only
a type of Christ’s sacrifice, and so to be supplanted
by His perfect sacrifice.

Il, The Sacrificial Idea in the NT.—The one
central idea of NT writers is that the sacrifice
made by Christ on the cross is the final perfect
sacrifice for the atonement of sin and the salvation
of men, a sacrifice typified in the various sacrifices
of the OT, which are in turn abrogated by the
operation of the final sacrifice. Only James and
Jude among NT writers are silent as to the sacrifice
of Christ, and they write for practical purposes only.

The Baptist, it is true, presents Jesus as the com-
ing Judge in the Synoptic Gospels, but in Jn 1

29.36 he refers to Him as “the Lamb of
1. Teaching God,” in the former passage adding
of John the “that taketh away the sin of the


Baptist world.” Westcott (Comm. on St.
John, 20) says: ‘The title as applied
to Christ .... conveys the ideas of vicarious


suffering, of patient submission, of sacrifice, of
redemption, etc.” There is searcely any doubt
that the Baptist looked upon the Christ as the one
who came to make the great sacrifice for man’s
sins. Professor Burton (Bib. Ideas of Atonement,
Burton, Smith and Smith, 107) says that John sees
Christ “suffering under the load of human sin.”
There are recorded in the Synoptic Gospels two
unmistakable references by Jesus to His death as a
sacrifice (Mk 10 45 || Mt 20 28; Mk


2. Teach- 14 24 || Mt 26 28 || Lk 22 20; cf 1
ing of Cor 11 25). In the former He declares
Jesus He came to give His “life a ransom.”


Thayer (Gr-Eng. Lex. of the NT)
says this word means ‘‘the price paid for redeem-
ing.” Hence the idea in ransom must be of sac-
rificial significance. But if there could be any
doubt as to the sacrificial import of this passage,
there is a clear case of the sacrificial idea in Mk
14 24. Practically all writers of the NT theology,
Wendt, Weiss, Stevens, Sheldon and others, hold
that Jesus considered the death as the ratification
sacrifice of the new covenant, just as the sacrifice
offered at Sinai ratified the old covenant (Ex 24
3-8). Ritschl and Beyschlag deny that this pas-
sage is sacrificial. But according to most exegetes,
Jesus in this reference regarded His death as a
sacrifice. The nature of the sacrifice, as Jesus
estimated it, is in doubt and is to be discussed later.
What we are pressing here is the fact that Jesus
regarded His death as a sacrifice. We have to
concede the meagerness of material on the sacrificial
idea of His death as taught by Jesus. Yet these
two references are unquestioned by literary and his-
torical critics. They both occur n Mk, the primi-
tive Gospel (the oldest Gospel record of Jesus’
teachings). The first occurs in two of the Synop-
tists, the second in all three of them. Luke omits
the first for reasons peculiar to his purpose. Accord-
ing to Lk 24 25, Jesus regarded His sufferings and
death as the fulfilment of the OT Scriptures.

Though the head apostle does not in the early
chapters of Acts refer to Christ as the sacrifice for

sin, he does imply as much iu 2 36


3. Teach- (He is Lord and Christ in spite of His
ing of crucifixion); 3 18.19 (He fulfilled the
Peter prophecies by suffering, and by means


of repentance sins are to be blotted
out); 4 10-12 (only in His name is salvation)
and in 6 30.31 (through whose death Israel received


2653


remission of sins). In his First Ep. (1 18.19) he
expressly declares that we are redeemed by the
blood of the spotless Christ, thus giving the sacri-
ficial significance to His death. The same is implied
in 1 2; 3 18.
_ Paul ascribes saving efficacy to the blood of Christ
in Rom 3 25; 5 9; 1 Cor 10 16; Eph 1 7; 2 13;
Col 1 20. He identifies Christ with
4. Paul’s a sin offering in Rom 8 3, and perhaps
Teaching also in 2 Cor 6 21, and with the
paschal lamb in 1 Cor 5 7. In other
passages he implies that the death of Christ secured
redemption, forgiveness of sins, justification and
adoption (Rom 3 24-26; 5 10.11; 8 15.17, etc).

The argument of the author of He to prove the
finality of Christianity is that Christ is superior to

_ _ the Aaronic high priest, being a royal,
§. Teaching eternal high priest, after the order of
of Hebrews Melchizedek, and offering Himself as
the final sacrifice for sin, and for the

moral transformation of men (4 14; 10 18).

In the First Ep. of Jn (1 7; 2 2; 5 6.8) propi-

tiation for sin and cleansing from sin are ascribed

to the blood of Christ. In Rev 1 5
6. Johan- John ascribes deliverance (not washing
nine Teach- or cleansing, according to best_ MSS)
ing from sin, to the blood of Christ. Several

times he calls Christ the Lamb, making
the sacrificial idea prominent. Once he speaks of
Him as the Lamb slam from the foundation of the
world (13 8).

To sum up, all the NT writers, except James and
Jude, refer to Christ’s death as the great sacrifice
for sin. Jesus Himself regarded His death as such.
In the various types of NT teaching Christ’s death
is presented (1) as the covenant sacrifice (Mk 14
24 || Mt 26 28 | Lk 22 20; He 9 15-22): (2) as
the sin offermg (Rom 8 3; 2 Cor 5 21; He 13 11;
1 Pet 3 18); (3) as the offering of the paschal
lamb (1 Cor 5 7); (4) as the sacrifice of the Day
of Atonement (He 2 17; 9 12 ff).

IV. Relation of Christ’s Sacrifice to Man’s Sal-
vation.—The saving benefits specified in the NT as
resulting from the sacrificial death of Christ are
as follows:

Redemption or deliverance from the curse of
sin: This must be the implication in Jesus’ words,

“The Son of man also came...
1. Redemp- to give his life a ransom for many
tion or (Mk 10 45 || Mt 20 28). Man is a
Deliverance captive in sin, the Father sends His
from Curse Son to pay the ransom price for the
of Sin deliverance of the captive, and the

Son’s death is the price paid. Paul
also uses the words “redeemed” and “redemption”
in the same sense. In the great letters he asserts
that we are “justified freely by his grace through
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God
set forth to be a propitiation . . . . in his blood”
(Rom 3 24.25). Here the apostle traces justifica-
tion back to redemption as the means for securing
it, and redemption back to the “blood’’ (Christ’s
death) as the cause of its procurement. That is,
Christ’s death secures redemption and redemption
procures justification. In Gal (3 18), he speaks of
being redeemed “from the curse of the law.” The
law involved man in a curse because he could not
keep it. This curse is the penalty of the broken law
which the transgressor must bear, unless deliverance
from said penalty is somehow secured. Paul
represents Christ by His death as securing for
sinners deliverance from this curse of the broken
law (cf Gal 4 5 for the same thought, though the
word “curse” is not used). Paul also emphasizes
the same teaching in the Captivity Epp.: “In
whom we have our redemption through his blood,
the forgiveness of our trespasses’” (Eph 17; cf


”


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sacrifice (NT)


Col 1 14). In the pastoral letters (1 Tim 2 6)
he teaches that Christ gave “himself a ransom for
all.” This is the only NT passage in which occurs
the strong word antilutron for “ransom.” In his
old age the apostle feels more positively than ever
before that Christ’s death is the ransom price of
man’s deliverance from sin.

The author of He asserts that Christ by the sacri-
fice of Himsclf “obtained eternal redemption” for
man (9 12). John says that Christ ‘loosed [Avw,
46] us from our sins by his blood’ (Rev 1 5). This
idea in John is akin to that of redemption or deliver-
ance by ransom. Peter teaches the same truth in
1 Pet 119. So, we see, Jesus and all the NT
writers regard Christ’s sacrifice as the procuring
cause of human redemption.

The idea of reconciliation involves a personal
difference between two parties. There is estrange-
ment between God and man. Recon-
ciliation is the restoration of favor be-
tween the two parties. Jesus does not
utter any direct message on recon-
ciliation, but implies God’s repugnance at man’s
sia and strained relations between God and the
unrepentant sinner (see Lk 18 13). He puts into
the mouth of the praying tax-gatherer the words,
‘God be propitious to me’ (see Thayer, Gr-Eng.
Lex., hilaskomai), but Jesus nowhere asserts that
His death secures the reconciliation of God to the
sinner. Paul, however, does. ‘For if, while we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God through
the death of his Son,” etc (Rom 6 10). There can
be no doubt from this passage that Paul thought of
the death of Christ as the procuring cause of recon-
ciliation. In Eph 2 13.14.18 Paul makes the cross
of Christ the means of reconciliation between the
hostile races of men. Paul reaches the climax in
his conception of the reconciliation wrought by the
cross of Christ when he asserts the unifying results
of Christ’s death to be cosmic in extent (Eph 1 10).


The author of He also implies that Christ’s death
secures reconciliation when he regards this death as the
ratification of the ‘better covenant” (8 6 ff), and when
he plays on the double meaning of the word éa0yxq
(diathéké, 9 15 i). now “covenant’’ and now “ will,’’
“testament.'’ The death of Christ is necessary to secure
the ratification of the new covenant which brings God and
maninto new relations (8 12). In 2 17 the author uses
a word implying propitiation as wrought by the death of
Christ. So the doctrine of reconciliation is also in the
Ep. to the He. John teaches reconciliation with God
through Christ our Advocate, but does not expressly
connect it with His death as the procuring cause (1 Jn
2 1.2). Peter is likewise silent on this point.


Reconciliation implies that God can forgive;
yea, has forgiven. Jesus and the NT writers de-
clare the death of Christ to be the basis

3. Remis- of God’s forgiveness. Jesus in insti-
sion of Sins tuting the memorial supper said, ‘‘This
is my blood of the covenant, which is

poured out for many unto remission of sins’ (Mt
26 28). It is true Mk and Lk do not record this
last. phrase, ‘‘unto remission of sins.” But there is
no intimation that this phrase is the result of Mat-
thew’s theologizing on the purpose of Christ’s death
(see Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, II, 239 ff, who claims
this phrase is not from Jesus; also Allen in ‘Mt,’
ICC, in loc.). But Paul leaves no doubt as to the
connection between man’s forgiveness by God and
Christ’s sacrifice for him. This idea is rooted in the
great passage on justification (Rom 3 21—65 21;
sce esp. 4 7); is positively declared in Eph 1 7;
Col 114. The author of He teaches that the
shedding of Christ’s blood under the new covenant
is as necessary to secure forgiveness as the shedding
of animal’s blood under the old. John also implies
that forgiveness is based on the blood (1 Jn 1 7-9).
True reconciliation and forgiveness include the
canceling of the offender’s guilt. Jesus has no direct


2. Recon-
ciliation


Sacrifice (NT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2654


word on the cancellation of guilt. Paul closes his
argument for the universality of human sin by assert-
ing that ‘all the world may be brought


4, The under the judgment of God” (AV
Cancellation “guilty before God,’ Rom 8 19).
of Guilt Thayer (Gr-Eng. Lex., in loc.) says


this word ‘guilty’? means “owing satis-
faction to God” (liable to punishment by God).
But in Rom 8 1.3 Paul exclaims, ‘‘There is therefore
now no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus .. . . God, sending bis own Son in the like-
ness of sinful flesh and for sin” (ERV and ARVm ‘‘as
an offering for sin”). The guilt, or exposure of the
sinner to God’s wrath and so to punishment, is re-
moved by the sin offermg which Christ made.
This idea is implied by the author of He (2 15),
but is not expressed in Peter and John.
Right standing with God is also implied in the
preceding idea’ Forgiving sin and canceling guilt
are the negative, bringing into right
5. Justifica- standing with God the positive, aspects


tion or of the same transaction. “Him who
Right knew no sin he made to be sin [i.e.
Standing the sin offering; so Augustine and
with God other Fathers, Ewald, Ritsehl; see


Meyer, Comm., in loc., who denies this
meaning] on our behalf; that we might become
the righteousness of God in him” (2 Cor 6 21).
In this passage Paul makes justification the Divine
purpose of the sacrificial death of Christ. This
thought is elaborated by the apostle in Gal and Rom,
pus is not expressed by Jesus, or in He, in Pet or
in Jn.

Jesus does not connect our cleansing or sanctifica-
tion with His death, but with His word (Jn 17 17).

The subst. “cleansing” (xa@apiopuds, ka-
6. Cleansing tharismés) is not used by Paul, and the
or Sancti- vb. ‘“‘to cleanse” (xafapltw, katharizd)
fication occurs only twice in his later letters

(Eph 6 26; Tit 2 14). He does use
the idea of sanctification, and in Rom 6-8 teaches
that sanctification is a logical consequence of justi-
fication which is secured by Christ’s sacrificial death.
In Phil 3 10.11, he views Christ’s death and resur-
rection as the dynamic of transformation in the new
life. The author of He (1 3; 9 14.22.23; 10 2),
following his OT figures, uses the idea of cleansing
for the whole process of putting away sin, from
atonement to sanctification (see Westcott, Comm.,
in loc.). He makes Christ’s death the procuring
cause of the cleansing. John does the same (1 Jn
17; Rev 7 14).

Divine sonship of the believer is also traced by
Paul to the sacrificial death of Christ (Rom 8 17),
though this thought is not found in

7. Sonship other NT writers.

So, we sum up, the whole process of
salvation, from reconciliation with God to the adop-
tion of the saved sinner into heaven’s household,
is ascribed, to some extent by Jesus, largely by Paul
the theologian of the NT, and, in varying degrees, by
other NT writers, to the sacrificial death of Christ.
Even Holtzmann (Neutest. Theol., I, 111) admits
“Ttis upon the moment of death that the grounding
of salvation is exclusively concentrated.”

V. How Christ’s Sacrifice Procures Salvation.—
It must be conceded that the NT writers, much less
Jesus, did not discuss this subject from the philo-
sophical point of view. Jesus never philosophizes
except incidentally. Paul, the author of He, and
John had a philosophy underlying their theology,
the first and second dealing most with the sacrificial
work of Christ, the last with His person. But Paul
and the author of He did not write their letters
to produce a philosophical system explaining how
Christ’s sacrificial death can and does procure
man’s salvation.


By some it is claimed that the word ‘‘ransom"’ (Mk
10 45) gives us the key to the philosophy of the atone-
ment as presented by Jesus Himselt.
But the rules of exegesis are against this


’
1. Jesus supposition. Jesus in the context is teach-
Teaching ing His disciples that sacrificial service is


greatness. To illustrate the truth He
refers to His own example of coming to ‘‘minister, and
to give his life a ransom for many.'’ That is, Jesus is
enforcing a practical principle and not elaborating a
theoretical truth. Moreover, the word ‘‘ransom'" is
used metaphorically, and the laws of exegesis forhid us
to press the literal meaning of a figure.. The figure sug-
gests captivity in sin and deliverance by payment of a
price (the death of Christ). But Jesus does not tell us
how His sacrificial death can and does pay the price for
man’s redemption from sin. The word ‘‘ransom"’ does
give the clue to the development of the vicarious sacrifice
elaborated later by Paul. Ritschl (Rechtfertigung und
Verséhnung, U1, 85) does not. do the word ‘‘ransom
justice when he claims, that it merely reproduces the
meaning of the Heb“\DD, Aopher, ‘covering aS a pro-


tection,'’ and that Christ's death, like a covering, delivers
us by stimulating us to lead the life of sacrificial service as
Christ did. Wendt (Lehre Jesu, Il, 237; Teaching of
Jesus, 11, 226f) admits the ‘ransom "’-idea in the word,
hut says Christ delivers us from hondage to suffering and
death, not by His death, but by His teaching which is
illustrated hy His sacrificial death. Beyschlag (Newutest.
Theol., 1, 153) thinks Christ's death delivers us from
worldly ambitions and such sins by showing us the ex-
ample of Jesus in sacrifice. Weiss (Bib. Theol. ofthe NT,
I, 101-3) thinks Christ's ‘‘surrender of His life. ...
avails as a ransom which He gives instead of the many"
who were not able to pay the price themselves. He also
adds, ‘‘The saying regarding the ransom Jays emphasis
upon the God-pleasing performance of Jesus which
secures the salvation," etc. mans

Nor does Jesus’ saying at the Last Supper, “‘ This is
my hlood of the covenant”’ (Mk 14 24) give us unmis-
takable evidence of how His death saves men. 1t does
teach that sinners on entering the kingdom come into a
new covenant relation with God which implies forgive-
ness of sin and fellowship with God, and that, as the
covenant sacrifices at Mt. Sinai (Ex 24 3-8) ratified the
legal covenant hetween God and His people, so the death
of Christ as a covenant sacrifice ratifies the covenant
of grace between God and lost sinners, hy virtue of
which covenant God on His part forgives the penitent
sinner, and the surrendering sinner on his part presents
himself to God for the life of sacrifice. But this state-
ment fails to tell us how God can forgive sin on the basis
of a covenant thus ratified hy Christ's death. Does it
mean suhstitution, that as_the animal whose blood
ratified the covenant was slain instead of the people, so
Christ was slain in the place of sinners? Yr does it
suggest the immutability of the covenant on the basis of
the animal's (and so Christ’s) representing hoth God and
man, and killing signifying Joss of life or will to change
the covenant (so Westcott, Comm. on He, 301)? It
could scarcely mean that Christ's sacrifice was the offer-
ing of a perfect, acceptable life to God (Wendt, op. cit.,
I1, 237), or that Christ's death is viewed merely as the
common meal sacrifice, that God and His people thus
enter into a kind of union and communion (so some
evolutionists in the study of comparative religion; see
Menzies, Hist of Religion, 416 ff).


Ritschl and many modern scholars are disposed
to reject all philosophy in religion. They say, “Back
to Christ.” Paul was only a human


2. Paul’s interpreter of Jesus. But he was a
Teaching Divinely-guided interpreter, and we

need his first-hand interpretations of
Jesus. What has he to say as to how Christ’s


death saves men?

(1) The words expressing the idea of redemption.—
See above on the terms of saerifice. The classical
passage containing the idea of redemption is Rom
3 24-26: “Being justified freely by his grace through
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God
set forth to be a propitiation, through faith, in his
blood, to show his righteousness because of the pass-
ing over of the sins done aforetime, in the forbear-
ance of God; for the showing, J soy, of his right-
cousness at this present season: that he might him-
self be just, and the justifier of him that hath faith
in Jesus.’ A fair interpretation of this passage gives
us the following propositions: (a) The believer ob-
tains right standing with God by means of, through
the channel of (see Thayer, Gr-Eng. Lex., Aid, A,
TI, 2), redemption which is in Christ. (6) This
redemption in Christ involves, or is based upon, the
Divinely-purposed propitiation which Christ made


2655


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA _ Sacrifice (NT)


in His death. (c) The design of God in making
such a propitiation was the exhibition of His right-
eousness; 1.e., the vindication of that side of His
character which demands the punishment of sin,
which had not been shown in former gencrations
when His forbearance passed over men’s sins.
Sce Sanday, Comm. on Rom, in loc. The classical
passage containing the other word to redeem
(éayopdsw, exagordzd) is Gal 313: “Christ re-
deemed us from the curse of the law, having become
a curse for us,” etc. Professor E. D. Burton (AJT,
October, 1907) thinks: (a) Law here means “law
legalistically understood.” (b) The “curse” was the
verdict of the law of pure legalism, “a disclosure to
man of his actual status before God on a basis of
merit.” (c) The redemption meant is that Christ
“brought to an end the régime of law . . . . rather
than deliverance of individuals through release from
penalty.” He bases this argument largely on the
use of quads, hémds, “us,’”’ meaning Jews in antithesis
with 7a vy, td éthné, the Gentiles (ver 14).
Everett (The Gospel of Paul) thinks that Christ
was cursed in that He was “crucified” (the manner
not the fact of His death being the curse); that is,
as Everett sees it, Christ became ceremonially
unclean, and so free from the law. So does His
follower by being crucified with Christ become
ceremonially unclean and so free from thelaw. The
passage seems to give us the following propositions:
(a) Man under law (whether the revealed law of
the OT or the moral law) is under a “curse,” that
is, liable to the penalty which the broken law
demands. (6) Christ by His death on the cross
became a “curse for us.’”’ (c) By means of Christ
thus becoming a ‘curse for us” He delivered us, ‘‘not
the Jews as a nation, but all of us, Jews and Gentiles,
who believed,” from the curse incurred by the break-
ing of the law. Professor Burton admits that the
participle ‘yerduevos, gendmenos, “becoming,” may
be a “participle of means” (art. cited above, 643),
and so we have ‘‘Christ redeemed us from the curse
of the law by becoming a curse for us.” The pas-
sage at least suggests, if it does not declare, that
Christ saves us by vicariously enduring the penalty
to which we were exposed. d

(2) The idea of reconciliation—Paul uses the
phrase “wrath of God” (Rom 1 18, etc) to express
the attitude of God toward sin, an attitude of dis-
pleasure and of grief, of revulsion of holy character
which demands the punishment of sin. On the
other hand, God loves the sinner; love is_ the
prompting cause of redemption through Christ
(Rom 6 &; 8 32). That is, wrath is love gricving
and righteousness revolting because of sin, and
both phases may act simultaneously (Simon,
Redemption of Man, 216, to the contrary). So
Paul says, ‘“‘God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto himself, not reckoning unto them their tres-
passes” (2 Cor 5 19). Now this word “recon-
cile’”’ (katallasscin) means in the active, ‘‘to receive
into favor,” in the passive, ‘“‘to be restored to favor”’
(Thayer). See also Rev. and Expos, October, 1909,
600 ff, where Professor Estcs shows, from Sophocles,
Xenophon, Josephus, LXX and passages in the NT
like Mt 5 24, that the word must mean a change
in the attitude of God toward men and not merely a
change of men toward God. Practically the same
is taught by Meyer (Comm. on 2 Cor); Lipsius
(Handcomm. zum NT); Sanday (Comm. on Rom);
Denney (Ezeget. Gr Test. on Rom); Lietazmann (Hand-
buch zum NT); Holtzmann (Neutest. Theol.); Weiss
(Rel. of the NT); Pfleiderer (Paulinism); Stevens
(Christian Doctrine of Salvation), and in nearly all
the great comms. on Rom and 2 Cor, and by all the
writers on NT theology except Beyschlag. See also
RECONCILIATION; RETRIBUTION.

(3) The idea of propitiation—Only once (Rom


3 25) does Paul use the word “propitiation.” As
we saw in (1) above, the redemption in Christ is
based upon the propitiation which Christ made in
His death. Thayer (Gr-Eng. Lez., in loc.) says
the noun signifies ‘‘a means of appeasing, explating,
@ propitiation, an expiatory sacrifice.’ He thinks
it has this meaning in Rom 3 25, but refers it to the
‘mercy-seat” in He 9 6. Sanday (Comm. on Rom,
88) regards hilastérion as an adj. meaning “propitia-
tory.” De Wette, Fritzsche, Meyer, Lipsius and
many others take it in this sense; Gifford, Vaughan,
Liddon, Ritsch! think it means ‘mercy-seat’’ here
as in He. But with cither meaning the blood
of Christ is viewed as securing the mercy of God.
Propitiation of God is made by the blood of Christ,
and becausc of that men have access tothe mercy-seat
where shines the glory of God in His forgiveness
of man’ssins. Sce Romans, Eprste To THE, 9, (3).

(4) The prepositions trép, hupér, and évrt, anti.


—Paul never uses anti (“for,” “instead of,” “in place


of,” so Thayer) to express what, Christ’s sacrifice
does for the sinner, but huper (‘for one’s safety or
advantage,” primarily, but also ‘‘in the place of,”
‘Snstead of,” so Thayer). See Rom 5 8; 8 32; 14
15; 1 Cor 11 24; 2 Cor 5 15; Gal 3 13; Eph 6
2.25; 1 Thess 6 10; 1 Tim 2 6; Tit 2 14. It is
to be noted that in 1 Tim 2 6 Paul uses antilutron,
“ransom,” compounded with the preposition anti, but
follows it with huper, which may suggest that huper
is here used in the sense of anti, ‘in the place of.”


Summing up Paul's teaching as to how Christ's sacri-
ficesaves: (a) The propitiatory sacrifice does not ‘‘softeu
God, or assuage the anger of God"’ (as Bushnell claims
the advocates of the satisfaction theories assert, Vicarious
Sacrifice, 486). God is already willing to save men, His
love makes the propitiatory sacrifice (Rom 5 8). God's
love makes the sacrifice, not the sacrifice His willingness
tosave. (b) But man by breaking God's law had come
under the curse, the penalty of the broken law (Gal 3 13),
and so was under God’s wrath (Rom 1 18), i.e. man's sin
exposed him to punishment, while at the same time God's
love for the sinner was grieved. (c) Christ by His sacri-
ficial death made it possible for God to show Hisrighteous-
ness and love at the same time; i.e. that He did punish
sin, but did love the sinner and wish to save him (Rom 3
25.26; 5 8). (d) Christ, who was sinless, suffered _vicari-
ously for sinful men. His death was not due to His sins
but_those of men (2 Cor 5 21). (e) His death, followed
by His resurrection which marked Him off as the sinless
Son of God, and so appointed the Saviour of men (Rom
1 4), was designed by God to bring men into right relation
with God (Rom 8 266; 2 Cor 5 216). So, wemay say,
Paul explained the relation of Christ's death to the
sinner's spiritual life by thinking of a transfer of the
sinner’s ‘‘curse’’ to Christ, which He bore on the cross,
and of God's righteousness through Christ (Phil 3 9)
to the sinner by faith in Christ. But we must not ae
this vicarious idea too far into a system of philosophy of
the atonement and claim that the system is the teaching
of Paul. The quantitative, commercial idea of transfer
is notin Paul’s mind. The language of redemption,
propitiation, ransom, is largely figurative. We must feel
the spiritual truth of a qualitative transfer of sin from
man to Christ and of righteousness from Christ to man,
and rest the matter there, so far as Paul's teaching goes.
Beyond this our conclusions as to substitution as the
method of atonement are results of philosophizing on
Paul's teaching.


The author of He adds nothing to Paul’s teaching
respecting the method whereby Christ’s sacrifice
operates in saving men. His purpose


8. Teach- to produce an apology showing forth
ing of the superior efficacy of Christ’s high-
Hebrews priestly sacrifice over that of the


Aaronic pricsthood fixes his first thought
on the efficacy of the sacrifice rather than on its mode
of operation. He does use the words “redemption”
(9 12; cf ver 15), “propitiate’ (2 17), and empha-
sizes the opening up of the heavenly holy of holies
by the high-priestly sacrifice of Christ (the way of
access to the very presence of God by Christ’s
death, 10 19.20), which gives us data for forming
a system based on a real propitiation for sin and
reconciliation of God similar to the Pauline teach-
ing formulated above.


Sacrifice (NT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2656


Peter asserts that Christ suffered vicariously
(1 Pet 2 22-24), who, although He “did no sin,”
“his owu self bare our sins in his body
4. Petrine upon the tree’; who “suffered for
and Johan- sins once, the righteous for [huper,
nine Teach- not anti] the unrighteous’ (1 Pet
ing 3 18). But Peter goes no farther
than Paul (perhaps not so far) in
elaborating how Jesus’ vicarious suffering saves the
sinner. The Johannine writings contain the pro-
pitiatory idea (1 Jn 2 2; 4 10), although John
writes to emphasize the incarnation and not the
work of the Incarnate One (Jn 1 1-18; 1 Jn 4 2.3).
To sum up the NT teachings on the mode or
operation: Jesus asserts His vicarious suffering
(Mk 10 45; cf Jn 10 11) and hints at the mode
of its operation by using the “ransom’’ figure.
Paul, Peter and John teach that Christ’s sacrifice
was vicarious, and all but Peter suggest the
idea of propitiation as to the mode of its operation.
There is no direct discussion of what propitiation
means.
VI. Rationale of the Efficacy of Christ’s Sacrifice. —
Jesus emphasizes His voluntary spirit in making the sacri-


fice. ‘'The Son of man also came ....
The sacrifice


1. Jesus’ to give his life a ransom."
ts was voluntary: not compulsory. God
Teaching did not foree Him to lay down His life;


He chose to do so (cf Jn 10 11). But

Jesus gives us no philosophy on this or any other element
in His sacrifice as being the ground of its efficacy.

Paul also emphasizes the voluntary gift of Christ

(Gal 2 20), but he urges rather the dignity of Him who

makes the sacrifice as a ground of its effi-


2. Paul’s cacy. It is the sacrifice of God's Son,
¥ shown to be such in His resurrection (Rom
Teaching 1 4; 4 256). It was no ordinary man hut
the sinless Son who gave ‘‘himself" (Gal

2.20). It was not merely a dying Christ but the Son


who rose again ‘‘in power'’ (Rom_] 4), who secures our
“justification’’ (Rom 4 256; 1 Cor 15 3.4.176). Paul
also emphasizes the sinless life and character of Jesus as
a ground of efficacy in Christ’s sacrifice, ‘‘' who knew no

sin'’ in His life experience (2 Cor 5 21a).
The author of He, mostof all NT writers, elaborates the
grounds of efficacy in Christ's sacrifice. (1) It was a
ersonal Not an animal sacrifice (9 12-14;


3. The 26, ‘sacrifice of himself; 10 4).
T. hing in (2) It was the sacrifice of the Sen of God
eac g @ 5). (3) It was a royal persou who made


Hebrews the sacrifice (6 206; 7 1, ‘‘after the order
of Melchizedek . ... king of Salem’’).
(4) It was a sinless person (7 26.27; 9 14; 10 10.12).
Westcott, Comm. on He, 298, well says, ‘‘It becomes
necessary, therefore, in order to gain a complete view of
the Sacrifice of Christ, to comhine with the crowning act
upon the Cross His fulfilment of the will of God from
first to last, the Sacrifice of Life with the Sacrifice of
Death.” (5) It was an eternal person (6 20, ‘'for ever’:
7 16, ‘after the power of_an endless [m ‘*indissoluhle’’]
life’’). The author of He reaches the climax of his
argument for the superior efficacy of Christ’s sacrifice
when he represents Him as entering the holy of holies
in the very presence of God to complete the offering for
man's sin (8 1.2; 9 11.12.24).

Peter and John do not discuss the ground of efficacy,
and so add nothing to our conclusions above. The
efficacy of the sacrifice is suggested by describing the
ABs of the person (1 Pet 119; 2 22.23; 1 Jn 1 75;


To sum up our conclusion as to the efficacy of
Christ’s sacrifice: Jesus and the leading NT writers
intimate that the efficacy of His sacrifice centers in
His personality. Jesus, Peter and John do not
discuss the subject directly. Paul, though discuss-
ing it more extensively, does uot do so fully, but the
author of He centers and culminates his argument
for the finality of Christianity, in the superior effi-
cacy of Christ’s sacrifice, which is grounded in His
personality, Divine, royal, sinless, eternal (sce Méné-
goz, Théol. del Ep. aux Hébreuzx). It is easy to see,
from the position taken by the author of He, how
Anselm in Cur Deus Homo developed his theory
of satisfaction, according to which the Divinity in
Christ gave His atoning sacrifice its priceless worth
in God’s eyes.

VII. The Human Conditions of Application.—
The sacrificial death of Christ is universal in its


objective potentiality, according to Jesus (Lk
24 47, “unto all the nations’); according to
Paul(Rom 1 5; 5 18; 11 32; 2 Cor
1. Universal 5 14.15; Gal 3 14); according to the
in Objective author of He (2 9, “‘taste of death for
Potentiality every man’’); according to John (1
Jn 22, “propitiation .... for the
whole world’’).
But the objective redemptiou to be efficacious
must be subjectively applied. The blood of Christ
is the universally efficacious remedy
2. Effica- for the sin-sick souls of men, but
cious When each man must make the subjective
Subjectively application. How is the application
Applied made? And the threefold answer
is, by repentance, by faith, and by
obedience.


(lL) By repentance.—The Baptist and Jesus empha-
sized repentance (change of mind first of all, then
change of relation and of life) as the condition of en-
trance into the kingdom and of enjoyment of the Mes-
sianic salvation (Mt 3 2; Mk 115). Peter preached
repentance at Pentecost and immediately after as a means
of obtaining forgiveness (Acts 2 38; 3.19, etc). Paul,
although emphasizing faith, also stressed repentance as
an element in the human condition of salvation (Acts 20
21; Rom 2 4, etc). John (Rev 2, 3, passim) emphasizes
repentance, though not stressing it as a means of receiv-
ing the benefits of redemption. . :

(2) By faith—Jesus connected faith with repentance
(Mk 1 15) as the condition of receiving the Messianic
salvation. Paul makes faith the all-inclusive means of
applying the work of Christ. The gospel is‘ the power of
God unto salvation to every one that helieveth"’ (Rom
1 16); ‘'twhom God set forth to bea propitiation, through
faith" (3 Be ‘faith [not works] is reckoned for right-
eousness"’ (4 5); ‘justified by faith’ (5 1). In Gal,
the letters to the Cor, in the Captivity and the Pastoral
Epp. he emphasizes faith as the sole condition of receiv-
ing salvation. But what kind of faith is it that appropri-
ates the saving benefit of Christ’s death? Not historical
or intellectual but ‘‘heart"’ faith (Rom 10 10). To
Paul ‘‘heart’’ meant the seat or essence of the whole
personality, and so faith which applies the redemption
in Christ is the personal commitment of one’s self to
Christ as Saviour and Lord (2 Cor § 15). See Thayer,
Gr-Eng. Lez., motetw, pisietd, I, b, y, for a particular
discussion of the meaning of faith in this sense. The
author of He discusses esp. faith as a conquering
power, but also implies that it is the condition of entrance
upon the life of spiritual rest and fellowship (chs 3 and 4,

assim). Peter (1 Pet 1 9) and John (1 Jn 3 23; 4 16:
B 1,5, etc) also regard faith as a means of applying the
saving benefits of Christ's death.

(3) By obedience in sacrificial service—Jesus said,
‘If any man would come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his cross, and follow me’’ (Mk 8 34).
Here He lays down two elements in the conditions of
discipleship, denying one’s self and taking up his cross.
The former means the renunciation of self as the center
of thought, faith, hope and life. The latter means the
life of sacrifice. Jesus was stressing this truth when He
uttered that incomparable saying, ‘The Son of man came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
his life a ransom for many’ (Mk 10 45 || Mt 20 28).
Paul also emphasizes this phase of the human condition
of salvation when he shows how sanctification grows
spontaneously out of justification (Rom 6 8) and when
he says that what ‘‘avails"’ is ‘‘faith working through
love" (Gal § 6). The author of He says, '' He became
unto all them that obey him the author [Gr airtos, aftios,
‘‘cause'’] of eternal salvation"' (6 9). Peter and John,
the latter esp., emphasize the keeping of His command-
ments, the life of service, as the means of appropriating
to the fullest the saving benefits of Christ’s death. The
theologians in classrooms and preachers in the pulpits
have failed to emphasize this aspect of ‘'saving faith" as
did Jesus, Paul, the author of He,and John. Inthe NT
salvation is a process as well as an instantaneous act on
the part of God, and the process is carried on by means
of obedience, the life of service, which appropriates by
faith the dynamic of Christ's sacrifice.


VIII, The Christian’s Life the Life of Sacrifice.
—This discussion of the faith that “obeys”? leads
to the consideration of that climactic thought of
NT writers, namely, that the Christian’s life is
sacrificial living based on Christ’s sacrifice for him.
We note in outline the following:

The Christian’s life of sacrifice is the logical
consequence of Christ’s sacrificial death. The
Christ who sacrificed Himself for the believer is
now continuing the sacrifice in the believer’s life


2657


(Gal 2 20; Phil 1 21). Paul was crucified when
Christ was crucified (in a bold mystic figure), and
the life of Christ which sacrificed itself


1. Conse- on the cross and perpetuates itself
quence of in resurrection power now operates as a
Christ’s mighty dynamic for the apostle’s moral
Sacrifice and spiritual transformation (Phil 3


. 10.11). It is to be noted, Jesus also
emphasized this kind of living, though not so ex-
pressly connecting the believer’s sacrificial life with
His sacrificial death (see Mk 8 34 f).

Christ’s sacrificial death becomes the persuasive
appeal for the Christian’s sacrificial life, “Because

; we thus judge, that one died for all,
2. Christ’s therefore all died ; and he died for all,
Death the that they that live should no longer
Appeal for live unto themselves, but unto him
Christian’s who for their sakes died and rose again”
Sacrifice (2 Cor 56 14.15). Because He died
: for us we should live for Him. But
what is the appeal which Christ’s sacrificial death
makes to the saved sinner? ‘The love of Christ
constraineth us” (2 Cor 5 14). Christ’s death
on the cross exhibits His love, unspeakable, unthink-
able love, for it was love for His “enemies” (Rom 5
10), and that matchless love kindles love in the
forgiven sinner’s heart. He is willing to do any-
thing, even to die, for his Saviour who died for him
(Acts 21 13; Phil 1 29.30). It is a greater privi-
lege for the saved sinner to suffer for Christ than
it is to believe on Him. Peter (1 Pet 3 17.18),
the author of He (12; 13 13) and John (1 Jn 3 16;
4 16-19) emphasize this truth.

The Christian’s sacrifice is necessary to fill out
Christ’s sacrifice. ‘Now I rejoice in my sufferings
for your sake, and fill up on my part
8. Neces- that, which is lacking of the afflictions
sary to Fill of Christ; in my flesh for his body’s
Out Christ’s sake, which is the church” (Col 1 24).
Sacrifice Roman Catholic exegetes have made
the apostle teach that the sufferings
of the saints, along with Christ’s sufferings, have
atoning efficacy. But Paul nowhere intimates that
his sufferings avail for putting away sins. We may
hold with Weiss (Comm. on the NT) that Paullonged
to experience in his life the perfect sacrificial spirit
as Christ did; or with Alford (in loc.) that. he wished
to suffer his part of Christ’s sufferings to be endured
by him through His church; or, as it seems to us,
he longed to make effective by his ministry of sac-
rificial service to as many others as possible the
sacrificial death of Christ. Christ’s sacrifice avails
in saving men only when Christians sacrifice their
lives in making known this sacrifice of Christ. __
(1) The Christian is to present his personality
(Rom 15 16). Paul commends the Macedonians
for ‘first’? giving “their own selves
4, Content to the Lord” (2 Cor 8 5). (2) Chris-
of the tians must present their “bodies a
Christian’s living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to
Sacrifice God” (Rom 12 1). In the old system
of sacrifices the animals were offered
as dead; Christians are to offer their bodies, all their
members with their powers, to God a “living sacri-
fice,” ie. a sacrifice which operates in lives of
holiness and service (see also Rom 6 18.19). (3)
Christians must offer their money or earthly posses-
sionsto God. Paulspeaksof the gift from the church
at Philippi as “‘a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to
God” (Phil 4 18). This gift was to the apostle a
beautiful expression of the sacrificial spirit imparted
to them because they had the “mind” of Christ who
“emptied himself, . . . . becoming obedient even
unto death, yea, the death of the cross” (2 5-8).
The author of He (18 16) exhorts his readers, ‘““But
to do good and to communicate forget not: for with
such sacrifices God is well pleased.’ (4) The general


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sacrifice (NT)


exercise of all our gifts and graces is viewed by Peter
as sacrificinl living (1 Pet 2 5): “Ye also, as living
stones, are built up a spiritual house, to be a holy
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,’ ete. All
Christians are priests and daily offer up their burnt
offerings acceptable to God, if they ‘suffer as
Christians’ (1 Pet 2 20; 3 18) in tH® exercise of
their graces and powers. ,

But how do these sacrifices of the Christian affect
him and God? The NT writers never hint that our
sacrifices propitiate God, or so win His favor that
He will or can on account of our sacrifices forgive
our sins. They are “well-pleasing’ to Him, a
“sweet odor’; that is, they win His approval of
our lives thus lived according to the standard which
Christ. gives us. Their influence ou us is the in-
crease of our spiritual efficiency and power and
finally a greater capacity for enjoying spiritual
blessings in heaven (1 Cor 3 14).

Some scholars (Roman Catholic, Episcopalian, etc)
regard the memorial supper as a kind of sacrifice

which the Christian offers in worship.
5. The Neither Jesus, Paul, the author of He,
Supper as a Peter, or John, ever hints that in


Sacrifice eating the bread and drinking the wine
, ; the Christian offers a sacrifice to God
in Christ. Paul teaches that in partaking of the


Supper we “proclaim the Lord’s death till he come”
(1 Cor 11 26). That is, instead of offering a
sacrifice ourselves to God, in partaking of the Supper
we proclaim the offering of Christ’s sacrifice for us.
Milligan argues that as Christ in heaven perpetually
offers Himself for us, so we on earth, in the Supper,
offer ourselves to Him (Heavenly Priesthood, 266).
Even Cave (Spiritual Doctrine of Sacrifice, 489)
maintains, “In a certain loose sense the Lord’s Sup-
per may be called a sacrifice.’ See the above
books for the argument supporting this position.

To sum up our conclusions on sacrifice in the NT:

(1) Jesus and NT writers regard the OT sacrificial
system as from God, but imperfect, the various
sacrifices serving only as types of the one great
sacrifice which Christ made.

(2) All the writers, except James and Jude, with
Jesus, emphasize the sacrificial idea, Jesus_less,
giving only two hints of His sacrificial death (in
the Synoptic Gospels), the author of He putting the
climactic emphasis on Christ’s sacrifice as the sac-
rifice of atonement.

(8) As to the relation of Christ’s sacrifice to man’s
salvation, the latter is the achievement of the
former, so expressed only twice by Jesus, but
emphatically so declared by Paul, the author of He,
Peter, and John (Paul and He laying most emphasis
on this point).

(4) As to how Christ’s sacrifice saves men, Jesus,
the author of He, Peter and John suggest the idea
of propitiation, while Paul emphatically teaches that
man is under a curse, exposed to the displeasure of
God, and that Christ’s sacrifice secured the recon-
ciliation of God by vindicating His righteousness in
punishing sin and His love in saving sinners. Jesus
and the leading NT writers agree that Christ saves
men through His vicarious suffering.

(5) As to the rational basis of efficacy in Christ’s
sacrifice, there is no direct discussion in the NT except
by the author of He who grounds its final, eternal
efficacy in Christ’s personality, Divine, royal, sin-
less and eternal.

(6) As to the conditions of applying Christ’s sacri-
fice, repentance and faith, which lives and fruits in
obedience and sacrificial living, are recognized by
Jesus and all the leading NT writers as the means of
appropriating the benefits of Christ’s sacrifice.

(7) By Jesus, Paul, the author of He, Peter and
John the Christian life is viewed as the life of sacri-
fice. Christ’s death is at once the cause, motive,


Sacrifice, Human
Sadducees


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2658


measure, and the dynamic of the Christian’s sacrificial
life.


LivERaTURE.—In addition to the great comms.—
TCC, Allen on '* Mt,’’ Gould on ** Mk,” Sanday-Headlam
on ’’Rom"; Westcott on the Gospel and Epp. of John,
and on the Hebrews; Davidson, Delitzsch and Meyer on
He; Meyer on 2 Cor; Lightfoot and Abbott on Col;
and the standard authors of the Bib. Theol. of the NT,
Weiss, Beyschlag, Bovon, Stevens, Sheldon—see tha
folowing special works: Cave, Scriptural Doctrine of
Sacrifice, Edinburgh, 1890; Simon, Redemption of Man,
1886; G. Milligan, The Theology of the Ep. to the Ie,
Edinburgh, 1899; Milligan, The Ascension and Heavenly
Priesthood of Our Lord, London, 1908; W. P. Du Bose,
High-Priesthood and Sacrifice; Everett, The Gos pel of Paul,
Boston, 1893; Burton, Smith, and Smith, Bib. Ideas of
Atonement, Chicago, 1909; Denney, The Death of Christ:
Tis Place and Inierpretation in the NT, London, 1902;
Denney, The Atonement and the Modern Mind, London,
1903; Ritschl, Rechtfertigung und Versdhnung (Justifica-
lion and Reconciliation), Bonn, 1895-1902, ET, 1900;
Ménégoz, Théol. del’ Ep.aux Hébreux; art." Blood,” ERE,
hy H. Wheeler Robinson; art. ‘'Communion with Deity,”’
ib, by Nathan Sdderhlom; art. ‘Communion with Deity”
(Christian), ib, by Darwell Stone and _D. C. Simpson; art.
*Expiation and Atonement,"’ ih, by W. A. Brown (Chris-
tian viewpoint), 8. R. Driver (Heb), H. Loewe (Jewish);
art. ‘‘Redemption from the Curse of the Law,"’ in 4/T,
October, 1907, by Professor E. D. Burton; art. ‘*Some
Thoughts as to the Effects of the Death of Christ,’’ in


Rev. and Expos, Octoher, 1909.
C. B. Wittrams


SACRIFICE, HUMAN, hi/man: As an expression
of religious devotion, human sacrifice has been wide-
spread at certain stages of the race’s development.
The tribes of Western Asia were deeply affected
by the practice, probably prior to the settlement of
the Hebrews in Pal, and it continued at least down
to the 5th cent. BC. At times of great calamity,
anxiety and danger, parents sacrificed their children
as the greatest and most costly offering which they
could make to prapitiate the anger of the gods and
thus secure their favor and help. There is no inti-
mation in the Bible that enemies or captives were
sacrificed; only the offering of children by_ their
parents is mentioned. ‘The belief that this offering
possessed supreme value is seen in Mic 6 6f,
where the sacrifice of the firstborn is the climax of
a series of offerings which, in a rising scale of values,
are suggested as a means of propitiating the angry
Jeh. A striking example of the rite as actually
practised is seen in 2 K 3 27, where Mesha the
king of Moab (made famous by the Moabite Stoue),
under the stress of a terrible siege, offered his eldest
son, the heir-apparent to the throne, as a burnt
offering upon the wall of Kir-hareseth. As a mat-
ter of fact this horrid act seems to have had the
effect of driving off the allies.

Human sacrifice was ordinarily resorted to, no
doubt, only in times of great distress, but it seems
to have been practised among the old Canaanitish
tribes with some frequency (Dt 12 31). The Israel-
ites are said to have borrowed it from their Can.
neighbors (2 IX 16 3; 2 Ch 28 3), and as a matter
of fact human sacrifices were never offered to Jeh,
but only to various gods of the land. The god who
was most frequently worshipped in this way was
Moloch or Molech, the god of the Ammonites (2
K 23 10; Lev 18 21; 20 2), bunt from Jeremiah
we learn that the Phoen god Baal was, at least in
the later period of the history, also associated with
Molech in receiving this worship (Jer 19 5; 32 35).

As in the case of the Canaanitcs, the only specific
cases of human sacrifice mentioned among the
Israelites are those of the royal princes, sons of Ahaz
and Manassch, the two kings of Judah who were
most deeply affected by the surrounding heathen
practices and who, at the same time, fell into great
national distress (2 Kk 16 3; 2 Ch 28 3; 2 Wk 21
6; 2 Ch 33 6). But it is clear from many general
statements that the custom was widespread among
the masses of the people as well. It is forbidden
in the Mosaic legislation (Lev 18 21; 20 2-5; Dt
18 10); it is said in 2 K 17 17 that the sacrifice


of sons and daughlers was one of the causes of the
captivity of the ten tribes. Jeremiah charges the
people of the Southern Kingdom with doing the
same thing (Jer 7 31; 19 5; 32 35); with these
general statements agree Isa 57 5; Ezk 16 2f;
20 31; 23 37; Ps 106 37f. A study of these
passages makes it certain that in the period im-
mediately before the captivity of Judah, human
sacrifice was by no means confined to the royal
family, but was rather common among the people.
Daughters as well as sons were sacrificed. It is
mentioned only once iu connection with the North-
ern Kingdom, and theu only in the summary of the
causes of their captivity (2 KX 17 17), but the
Southern Kingdom in its later years was evidently
deeply affected. There were various places where
the bloody rite was celebrated (Jer 19 5), but the
special high place, apparently built for the purpose,
was in the Valley of Tophet or Hiunom (gé-hin-
nom, Gehenna) near Jerus (2 Ch 28 3; 33 6).
This great high place, built for the special purpose
of human sacrifice (Jer 7 31; 32 35), was defiled
by the good king Josiah in the hope of eradicating
the cruel practice (2 K 23 10).

The Bib. writers without exception look upon the
practice with horror as the supreme point of na-
tional and religious apostasy, and a chief cause of
national disaster. They usually term the rite
“passing through fire,” probably being unwilling
to use the sacred term “‘sacrifice”’ in reference to
such a revolting custom. There is no evidence of a
continuance of the practice in captivity nor after
the return. It is said, however, that the heathen
Sepharvites, settled by the Assyr kings in the de-
populated territory of the Northeru Kingdom,
“burnt their children in the fire to Adrammelech
and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim”’ (2 K
17 31). The practice 1s not heard of again, and
probably rapidly died out. The restored Israelites
were not affected by it. Cf Sacririce (OT), VI, 10.

Wituram JosepH McGuotTuuin

SACRILEGE, sak’ri-lej:_ For ‘commit sacrilege”
in Rom 2 22 (AV and ERVm), RV has “rob
temples,” which more exactly expresses the meaniug
of the vb. (hierosulé6; cf Acts 19 37, “robbers of
temples” [q.v.]). The noun occurs in 2 Mace 4 39
(AV and RV) for the corresponding form hierostiléma.


SADAMIAS, sad-a-mi’as: AV=RV Satemas
(q.v.).


SADAS, si’das: AV=RV Asrap (q.v.).
SADDEVUS, sa-dé’us: AV=RV Loppgvs (q.v.).


SADDLE, sad’’l: As noun (232, merkabh, ‘a
riding seat’’) the word occurs in Lev 15 9 (m “‘car-
riage’); ordinarily it is used as a vb. (WAT, habhash,
lit. to “bind up” or ‘‘gird about’’), to saddle an ass
(Gen 22 3; Nu 22 21; Jgs 19 10, etc).


SADDUCEES, sad’t-séz (DOP1E, caddikim;

Dabsovxato., Saddoukatot):
I. IlnrRopucToRY

1. Name: Rival Etymologies.
Zadok the High Priest

2. Authorities: NT, Josephus, Talmud (primary),
Church Fatbers (secondary)

Or1G1IN AND History

1. Early Notices in Josephus: Alleged Relation to
Differences between Prophets and_Pricsts

2. Tendencies of Sadducees toward Hellenism as
Causing Rise of hdgidhim


Prohably from


II.


3. Favored by Alex. Jannacus: Put in the Back-
ground by Alexandra Salome

4. From a Political, Become Also a Religious Party

5. NT Time—Dread of Roman Interference if
Messianic Claim Recognized

6. Sadducees Antagonistic to the Apostles: Phari-
sees More Favorable

ve Holl of Sadducean Party at Outbreak of Jewish

yor


2659


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sacrifice, Human
Sadducees


Wil. Docrrines or tue Sappucers
1. Laid Stress on Ceremonial Exactness
2. Disbelief in the Spiritual World, in a Resur-
rection, and in Providence: Their Materialism
3. Sadducces and the Pentateuch
4. Relation to Epicureans
IV. Cuaracter or SADDUCEES
1. Josephus Describes Them as Boorish
2. Talmudic Account of the Sadducees
3. Puen to Temple and Worship a Heathenish


ne
4. Works of Sadducees
V. RELATION or SappucEEs To JEsuS
1. Reasons for His Denouncing the Sadducees
Less Frequently Than the Pharisees
2. Attitude of Sadducees to Jesus


This prominent Jewish sect, though not so nu-
merous as their opponents, the Pharisces, by their
wealth and the priestly descent of many of them
had an influence which fully balanced that of their
more popular rivals. They were a political party,
of priestly and aristocratic tendency, as against the
more religious and democratic Pharisees.

f. Introductory,—The Talm form suggests deri-
vation from the name of their founder, but the form

in NT and Jos would imply connection


1. Name: with the vb. “‘to be righteous.” The
Rival Ety- probability is, that the name is derived
mologies from some person named ‘‘Zadok.”


The most prominent Zadok in history
was the Davidie high priest (28 817; 15 24;
I K 1 35), from whom all succeeding high priests
claimed to descend. It is in harmony with this,
that in the NT the Sadducees are the party to whom
the high priests belonged. On the authority of
*Abhoth d°’-Rabbt NGthan (c 1000 AD), another
Zadok is asserted to be he from whom the Sadducees
received theirname. He wasa disciple of Antigonus
of Socho (¢ 250 BC) who taught that love to God
should be absolutely disinterested (Pirké ’Abhéath,
1.3). ’Abhoth de-Rabbt Nathan's account of the
derivation of the Sadduceanism from this teaching
is purely an imaginary deduction (Charles Taylor,
Sayings of the Jewish Fathers?, 112). The majority
of authoritative writers prefer to derive the name
from Zadok, the colleague of Abiathar, the con-
temporary of David.
Our main authorities for the teaching of the Sad-
ducees are the NT and Jos. According to the


former, the Sadducees denied the
2. Author- resurrection of the body, and did not
ities believe in angels or spirits (Mt 22 23;


Acts 23 8). More can be learned
from Jos, but his evidence is to be received with
caution, as he was a Pharisee and, moreover, had
the idea that the Sadducees were to be paralleled
with the Epicureans. The Talm is late. Before
even the Mishna was committed to writing (c 200
AD) the Sadducees had ceased to exist; before the
Gemara was completed (ec 700 AD) every valid
tradition of their opinions must have vanished.
Further, the Talm is Pharisaic. The Fathers,
Origen, Hippolytus, Epiphanius and Jerome, have
derived their information from late Pharisaic
sources.

Ul. Origin and History.—Jos describes the Sad-
ducees along with the contemporary sects, the

Pharisees and the Essenes (Jos, Ant,


1. Early XIII, v, 9; X, vi, 2; XVIII,i,4,5; BU,
Notices in MU, viii, 14). His earliest, notice of
Josephus _ them is after his account of the treaties

of Jonathan with the Romans and the
Lacedemonians. He indicates his belief that the


parties were ancient; but if so, they must have
formerly had other names. It has been suggested
that the earlier form of the conflict between the Sad-
ducees and Pharisees was opposition between the
priests and the prophets. ‘This, however, is not
tenable; in the Southern Kingdom there was no
such opposition; whatever the state of matters in


the Northern Kingdom, it could have had no influence
on opinion in Judaea and Galilee in the time of Our
Lord. By others the rivalry is supposed to be in-
herited from that between the scribes and_ the
priests, but Tzra, the earliest scribe, in the later
sense of the term, was a priest with strong sacerdotal

sympathies.
Probably the priestly party only gradually crys-
tallized into the sect of the Sadducees. After the
return from the exile, the high priest


2. Tenden- drew to himself all powers, civil and
cies toward religious. To the Pers authorities he
Hellenism was as the king of the Jews. The high


priest and those about him were the
persons who had to do with the heathen supreme
government and the heathen nationalities around;
this association would tend to lessen their religious
fervor, and, by reaction, this roused the zeal of a
section of the people for the law. With the Gr
domination the power of the high priests at home
was increased, but they became still more subser-
vient to their heathen masters, and were the leaders
in the Hellenizing movement. They took no part
in the Maccabean struggle, which was mainly sup-
ported by their opponents the hdsgidhtm, as they
were called (the Hasidaeans of 1 Macc 2 42, etc).
When the hdstdhim, having lost sympathy with the
Maccabeans, sought to reconcile themselves to the
priestly party, Alcimus, the legitimate high priest,
by his treachery and cruelty soon renewed the
breach. The Hasmoneans then were confirmed
in the high-priesthood, but were only lukewarmly
supported by the hdstdhim.
The division between the Hasmoneans and the
hdsidhim, or, as they were now called, Pharisees,
culminated in the insult offered _by


8. Favored Eleazar to John Hyrcanus, the Has-
by Jan- monean high priest (Jos, Ant, XIII,
naeus; Put x, 5). Alexander Jannaeus, the son of
in Back- Hyrcanus, became a violent partisan
ground by of the Sadducees, and crucified large
Alexandra numbers of the Pharisees. Toward
Salome the end of his life he fell out of sym-


pathy with the Sadducees, and on his
deathbed recommended his wife Alexandra Salome,
who as guardian to his sons succeeded him, to favor
the Pharisees, which she did. In the conflict be-
tween her two sons, John Hyrcanus I] and Aristo-
bulus IT, the Sadducees took the side of Aristobulus,
the younger and abler brother. So long as the con-
test. was between Jews, the Sadducean candidate pre-
vailed. When the Romans were called in, they
gave the advantage to Hyrcanus.
Thrown into the background by the overthrow of
their candidate for the high-priesthood, they soon
regained their influence. They allied
4. Become themselves with the Herodians who
a Religious had supported Hyrcanus, but were
Party subservient to Rome. Though they
were not theological at first, they be-
came so, to defend their policy against the attacks
of the Pharisees. A historic parallel may be found
in the Cavaliers of the reign of Charles I, as over
against the Puritans.
The Sadducees at first regarded the struggle
between Our Lord and the Pharisees as a matter
with which they had no concern. It


6. Fear was not until Our Lord claimed to be
Roman In- the Messiah, and the excitement of the
terference people consequent on this proved likely
if Jesus’ to draw the attention of the Rom au-
Messianic thorities, that they intervened. Should
Claims Are Tiberius learn that there was wide-
Recognized spread among the Jews the belief in


the coming of a Jewish king who was
to rule the world, and that one had appeared who
claimed to be this Messiah, very soon would the


Sadducees
Saints


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2660


quasi-independence enjoyed by the Jews be taken
from them, and with this the influence of the Sad-
ducees would depart. An oligarchy is proverbially
sensitive to anything that threatens its stability; a
priesthood is unmeasured in its vindictiveness; and
the Sadducees were a priestly oligarchy. Hence it
is not wonderful that only the death of Jesus would
satisfy them.
After the resurrection, the Pharisees became
less hostile to the followers of Christ; but the
Sadducees maintained their attitude
6. Continue of suspicion and hatred (Acts 4 1).
Antagonistic Although a Pharisee, it was as agent
to Apostles of the Sadducean high priest that Paul


after persecuted the believers. The Sad-
Christ’s ducees gained complete ascendency
Departure in the Sanhedrin, and later, under the


leadership of Annas, or as he is some-
times called by Jos, Ananus, the high priest, they
put James the brother of Our Lord to death (Jos,
Ant, XX, ix, 1) with many others, presumably
Christians. The Pharisees were against these pro-
ceedings; and even sent messengers to meet Al-
binus who was coming to succeed Festus as governor
to entreat him to remove Annas from the high-
priesthood.
With the outbreak of the Jewish war, the Sad-
ducees with their allies the Herodians were driven
into the background by the Zealots,
7. Fallof John of Gischala and Simon ben Gioras.
Sadducean Annas and Joshua, also called high
Party priest by Jos, were both put to death
by the Zealots and their _Idumaean
allies (Jos, BJ, IV, v, 2). With the destruction of
the temple and the fall of the Jewish state the Sad-
ducean party disappeared.
If, Doctrines of the Sadducees.—As the sacer-
dotal party, the Sadducees laid great stress on the
ceremonial of sacrifice, and rejected


1. Cere- the changes introduced by their oppo-
monial nents unless these found support in
Exactness the words of the Law.


The most prominent doctrine of the
Sadducees was the denial of the immortality of
the soul and of the resurrection of the body. The
Pharisees believed that Moses had de-
2. Disbelief livered these doctrines to the elders,
in Spiritual and that they had in turn handed them
World and on to their successors. The Sadducees
Resurrec- rejected all these traditions. From
tion Acts (23 8) we learn that they be-
lieved in neither “angel or  spirit.’’
As appearances of angels are mentioned in the Law,
it is difficult to harmonize their reverence for the
Law with this denial. They may have regarded
these angelophanies as theophanies. Jos distinctly
asserts (Ant, XVIII, i, 4) that the Sadducees believe
that the soul dies with the body. They deny, he
says, Divine providence (BJ, II, viii, 14). Their
theology might be called “religion within the limits
of mere sensation.”
The Fathers, Hippolytus, Origen and Jerome,
credit the Sadducees with regarding the Pent as
alone canonical (Hipp., Haer., ix.24;
3. Alleged Orig., Contra Celsum, 1.49; on Mt


Belief in 22 24-31; Jeron Mt 22 31.32). This
Canonicity idea may be due to a false identification
of Penta- of the views of the Sadducees with those


teuch Alone of the Samaritans. Had they rejected

all the rest of Scripture, it is hardly
possible that Jos would have failed to notice this.
The Talm does not mention this among their
errors. It is certain that they gave more impor-
tance to the Pent than to any other of the books of
Scripture. Hence Our Lord, in the passage com-
mented on by Origen and Jerome, appeals to the
Law rather than to the Prophets or the Pss. It


follows from the little value they put upon the
Prophets that they had no sympathy with the Mes-
sianic hopes of the Pharisees.
It need hardly be said that there was no real con-
nection between Sadduceanism and the doctrines
of Epicurus. There was a super-
4. Relation ficial resemblance which was purely
to Epicu- accidental. Their favor for Hellen-
reanism ism would give a color to this identi-
fication.
IV. Character of the Sadducees.—Jos says that
while the Pharisees have amiable manners and cul-
tivate concord among all, the Saddu-


1. Charac- cees are ‘‘very boorish” (BJ, II, viii,
terizedas 14). This want of manners is not a
Rough and characteristic usually associated with
Boorish an aristocracy, or with supple diplo-


mats, yet it suits what we find in the
NT. The cruel horseplay indulged in when Our
Lord was tried before the irregular meeting of the
Sanhedrin (Mt 26 67.68), the shout of Ananias at
the trial of Paul before the same tribunal to “smite
him on the mouth,’’ show them to be rough and
overbearing. What Jos relates of the conduct of
Annas (or Ananus) in regard to James, above re-
ferred to, agrees with this. Jos, however, does not
always speak in such condemnatory terms of Ana~-
nus—in BJ (IV, v, 2) he calls him ‘‘a man venerable
and most just.”” Only the violence which, as Jos
relates in the chapter immediately preceding that
from which we have quoted, Ananus resorted to
against the Zealots better suits the earlier ver-
dict of Jos than the later. As to their general
character Jos mentions that when the Sadducees
became magistrates they conformed their judgments
to Pharisaic opinion, otherwise they would not have
been tolerated (Ant, XVIII, i, 4).


As noted above, the Talm account is untrustworthy,
late and Pharisaic. The Gemara from which most of
une ba Sse oe taken was nae copes
ic to writing ti centuries after ‘ist—
2. Talmudic when the traditions concerning the Sad-
Accounts ducees, such as had survived, had filtered
through 20 generations of Pharisaism.
Despite this lengthened time and suspicious medium,
there may be some truth in the representations of tbe
Talmudic rabbin. In Pesahim 67a it is said, ‘‘ Woe's
me on account of the house of Beotbus, woe’s me on
account of their spears; woe'’s me on account of the
house of Hanun [Annas], woe's me on account of their
serpent brood; woe’s me on account of the house of
Kathros, woe's me on account of their pen; woe’s me
on account of the house of Ishmael ben Phabi; woe's
me on account of their fists. They are high priests and
their sons are treasurers of tbe temple, and their sons-
in-law, assistant treasurers; and their servants heat
the people with sticks.’’ As these are Sadducean names,
this passage exhibits Pharisaic tradition as to the habits
of the Sadducees.


The Sadducean high priests made Hophni and
Phinehas too much their models. Annas and
his sons had booths in the courts of


3. Relation the temple for the sale of sacrificial


to Temple requisites, tables for money-changers,
and Its as ordinary coins had to be changed
Worship into the shekels of the sanctuary.


From all these the priests of the high-
priestly caste derived profit at the expense of dese-
crating the temple (Kdersheim, Life and Times
of Jesus, I, 371 ff). They did not, as did the Phari-
sees, pay Spiritual religion the homage of hypocrisy;
they were frankly irreligious. While officials of
religion, they were devoid of its spirit. This, how-
ever, represents their last stage.

The favor for tho memory of John Hyrcanus shown


by the writer of 1 Mace (16 23.24) renders probable
Geiger's opinion that tbe author was a Sad-


4. Saddu- ducee. Heshows the party in its best form:
cean his outlook on life is eminently sane, and

7 his history is trustworthy. He bas sympa-
Literature thy with the patriotism of the Hasidaeans,


but none with the religious scruples which
led them to desert Judas Maccabaeus. That the writer


2661


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sadducees
Saints


of Ecclus from his silence as to the national expectation
of a Messiah and the hope of a future life was also a Sad-
ducee, is almost certain.


V. The Relation of the Sadducees to Jesus,—As
the doctrines and practices of the Sadducees were
quite alien from the teaching of Our

1. Less De- Lord and the conduct He enjoined,


nounced it is a problem why He did not de-
by Jesus nounce them more frequently than He
Than the did. Indeed He never denounces the
Pharisees Sadducees save along with their oppo-


nents the Pharisees; whereas He fre-
quently denounces the Pharisees alone. As His
position, both doctrinal and practical, was much
nearer that of the Pharisees, it was necessary that
He should clearly mark Himself off from them.
There was not the same danger of His position being
confused with that of the Sadducees. Jos informs
us that the Sadducees had influence with the rich;
Jesus drew His adherents chiefly from the poor,
from whom also the Pharisees drew. The latter
opposed Him all the more that He was sapping their
source of strength; hence He had to defend Him-
self against them. Further, the Gospels mainly
recount Our Lord’s ministry in Gahilee, whereas
the Sadducees were chiefly to be found in Jerus and
its neighborhood; hence there may have been
severe denunciations of the Sadducees that have
not come down to us.
The Sadducees probably regarded Jesus as a
harmless fanatic who by His denunciations was
weakening the influence of the Phari-


2. Attitude sees. Only when His claim to be the
toward Messiah brought Him within the sphere
Jesus of practical politics did they desire


to intervene. When they did de-

termine to come into conflict with Jesus, they
promptly decreed His arrest and death; only the
arrest was to be secret, “lest a tumult arise among
the people’ (Mt 26 5). In their direct encounter
with Our Lord in regard to the resurrection (Mt 22
25 ff; Mk 12 20ff; Lk 20 29 ff), there is an ele-
ment of contempt implied in the illustration which
they bring, as if till almost the end they failed to
take Him seriously. For Literature see PHARISEES.

J. E. H. Toomson

SADDOUK, sad’uk (A [Fritzsche], ZabSouxos,
Sdddoukos, B, LadSotAovKes, Saddoviloukos; AV Sad-
duc): The high priest, an ancestor of Hzra (1 Esd
8 2)=“Zadok” in Ezr 7 2=“‘Sadoc” in 2 Esd 1 1.


SADOC, sa’dok:

(1) (Lat Sadoch): An ancestor of Ezra (2 Esd
11) =“Zadok” in Ezr 7 2=“‘Sadduk’ in 1 Esd 8 2.

(2) (Zaddx, Sadék): A descendant of Zerubbabel
and ancestor of Jesus (Mt 1 14).


SAFFRON, saf’run (0272, karkim; K«péxos,
krékos): Identical with the Arab. kurkum, the
same as za‘fardn, “saffron.” The source of the
true saffron is Crocus sativus (N.O. Indaceae), a
plant cultivated in Pal; there are 8 wild varieties
in all of which, as in the cultivated species, the
orange-colored styles and stigmas yield the yellow
dye, saffron. Cant 4 14 probably refers to the
C. sativus. There is a kind of bastard saffron plant,
the Carthamus tinctorius (N.O. Composilae), ot
which the orange-colored flowers yield a dye like
saffron. E. W. G. MastTerMan


SAIL, sal, SAILOR,
Boars, I, 2, (3); LE, 2.


SAINTS, sants: In AV 3 words are thus ren-
dered: (1) WITp, kadhdsh (in Dnl the same root
occurs several times in its Aram. form, UIP, kad-


sal’ér. See SHIPS AND


dish); (2) TOM, hasidh, and (3) dy, hdgiot. Of
these words (2) has in general the meaning of right-
eousness or goodness, while (1) and (3) have the
meaning of consecration and Divine claim and
ownership. They are not primarily words of char-
acter, like hdsidh, but express a relation to God as
being set apart for His own. Wherever kddhdsh
refers to angels, the rendering ‘‘holy one’ or “‘holy
ones” has been substituted in RV for AV ‘‘saint”’
or “‘saints,” which is the case also in Ps 106 16m
(cf 34 9), and in 1 § 2 9, as the tr of hasidh.

While hagiot occurs more frequently in the NT
than does kadhdsh in the OT, yet both are applied
with practical uniformity to the company of God’s


Saffron (Crocus sativus).


people rather than to any individual. Perhaps
the rendering ‘‘saints” cannot be improved, but it
is necessary for the ordinary reader constantly to
guard against the idea that NT saintship was in
any way a result of personal character, and conse-
quently that it implied approval of moral attain-
ment already made. Such a rendering as ‘‘con-
secrate ones,” for example, would bring out more
clearly the relation to God which is involved, but,
besides the fact that it is not a happy tr, it might
lead to other errors, for it is not easy to remember
that consecration—the setting apart of the indi-
vidual as one of the company whom God has in a
peculiar way as His own—springs not from man,
but from God Himself, and that consequently it
is in no way something optional, and admits of no
degrees of progress, but, on the contrary, is from the
beginning absolute duty. Yt should also be noted
that while, as has been said, to be a saint is not
directly and primarily to be good but to be set
apart by God as His own, yet the godly and holy
character ought inevitably and immediately to
result. When God consecrates and claims moral
beings for Himself and His service, He demands
that they should go on to be fit for and worthy of
the relation in which He has placed them, and so
we read of certain actions as performed ‘“‘worthily


Sala, Salah
Salmone


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2662


of thesaints” (Rom 16 2) and as such ‘‘as becometh
saints’ (Eph 5 3). The thought of the holy char-
acter of the “saints,” which is now so common as
almost completely to obscure the real thought of
the NT writers, already lay in their thinking very
close to their conception of saintship as consecration
by God to be His own. Davin Foster Estes


SALA, SALAH, sa’la (M>W, shelah, ‘a missile,”
“netition”’; Zara, Said): A son of Arpachshad
(AV Gen 10 24; 11 13ff; 1 Ch 1 18.24). Lk 3
35.36 follows LXX of Gen 10 24; 11 12=SHELAn


(q.v.).


SALAMIEL, sa-la/mi-el (B A, Zadapinr, Salamiél,
N, Dapapundr, Samamiél): An ancestor of Judith
(Jth 8 1)=AV “Samael” = “‘Shelumiel.”


SALAMIS, sal’a-mis (Zadapis, Salamis): <A
town on the east coast of Cyprus, situated some 3
miles to the N. of the mediaeval and
modern Famagusta. It lay near the
river Pediaeus, at the eastern extrem-
ity of the great plain of the Mesoréa, which runs
far into the interior of the island toward Nicosia
(Lefkosia), the present capital. It possessed a
good harbor and was the most populous and flourish-
ing town of Cyprus in the Hellenic and Rom periods,
carrying on a vigorous trade with the ports of Cili-
cia and Syria. Its population was mixed, consisting
of Gr and Phoen elements. The former, however,
gave its tone and color to the city, and the chief
cnlt and temple were those of Salaminian Zeus.

Tradition represented Salamis as founded soon after


the fall of Troy hy Teucer, the prince of Gr archers ac-
cording to the narrative of the Iliad, who


1. Site


2 Early named it after his home, the island of
et Salamis off the Attic coast. In the 6th
History cent. BO it figures as an important Hel-


lenic city, ruled by a line of kings reputed
to be descended from_Teucer and strengthened by an
alliance with Cyrene (Herod. iv.162). Gorgus, who was
on the throne in 498 BC, refused to join the Ionic revolt
against Persia, but the townsmen, led by his brother One-
silus, took up arms in the struggle for freedom. <A crush-
ing defeat, however, inflicted under the walls of Salamis,
restored the island to its Pers overlords, who reinstated
Gorgus as a vassal prince (Herod. v.103 ff). In 449 a
Gr fleet under Athenian leadership defeated the Phoen
navy, which was in the service of Persia, off Salamis;
but the Athenian withdrawal which followed the battle
led to a decided anti-Hellenic reaction, until the able and
vigorous rule of the Salaminian prince Euagoras, who
was a warm friend of the Athenians (Isocrates, Fuag.)
and a successful champion of Hellenism. In 306 a
second great naval battle was fought off Salamis, in
which Demetrius Poliorcetes defeated the forces of
Ptolemy I (Soter), King of Egypt. But 11 years later
the town came into Ptolemy's hands and, with the rest
of the island, remained an appanage of the Egyp king-
dom until the incorporation of Cyprus in the Rom
Empire (58 BC).


When Barnabas and Paul, accompanied by John
Mark, set out on their 1st missionary journey, they
sailed from Seleucia, the seaport of

3. Visit of | Antioch, and landed at Salamis, abont
the Apostles 130 miles distant, as the harbor nearest
to the Syrian coast. There they

preached the gospel in the “synagogues of the Jews”
(Acts 13 5); the phrase is worth noting as pointing
to the existence of several synagogues and thus of
a large Jewish community in Salamis. Of work
among the Gentiles we hear nothing, nor is
any indication given either of the duration of the
apostles’ visit or of the success of their mission;
but it would seem that after a short stay they pro-
ceeded ‘‘throngh the whole island’ (Acts 13 6
RV) to Paphos. ‘The words seem to imply that
they visited all, or at least most, of the towns in
which there were Jewish communitics. Paul did
not return to Salamis, but Barnabas doubtless went
there on his 2d missionary journey (Acts 15 39),
and tradition states that he was martyred there in


Nero’s reign, on the site marked by the monastery
named after him.

In 116 AD the Jews in Cyprus rose in revolt and
massacred 240,000 Greeks and Romans. The
rising was crushed with the utmost
severity by Hadrian. Salamis was
almost depopulated, and its destruction
was afterward consummated by earth-
quakes in 332 and 342 AD. It was rebuilt, though
on a much smaller scale, by the emperor Constan-
tins II (837-61 AD) under the name Constantia,
and became the metropolitan see of the island. The
most famous of its bishops was Epiphanius, the
staunch opponent of heresy, who held the see from
367 to 403. In 647 the city was finally destroyed
by the Saracens. Considerable remains of ancient
buildings still remain on the site; an acconnt of the
excavations carried on there in 1890 by Messrs.
J. A.R. Munro and H. A. Tubbs under the auspices
of the Cyprus Exploration Fund will be found in the
Journal of Hellenic Studies, XII, 59-198.

M. N. Top

SALASADAI, sal-a-sad’&-1 (A, Zakacasal, Sala-
sadat, B, Laparasal, Sarasadai, XN, LaprraSal, Sari-
sadai): An ancestor of Judith (Jth 8 1).


SALATHIEL, sa-la’thi-el:

(1) (ZaranHa, Salathiél): AV; Gr form of “Sheal-
tiel” (thus RV). The father of Zerubbabel (1 Esd
5 5.48.56; 6 2; Mt 1 12; Lk 3 27).

(2) RV: Another name of Esdras (2 Esd 3 1,
‘Salathiel’’).


SALE, sal ("39'4, mimka&r): The word is used:
(1) in the sense of the transaction (Lev 25 50);
(2) in the sense of the limit of time involved in the
transaction (Lev 25 27); (3) in the sense of the
price paid in the transaction (Dt 18 8), thongh it
may be the same as (1) above.


SALECAH, sal’é-ka, SALCAH, SALCHAH, sal’-
ka (MD90 , saltkhah; B, Bexxal, Sekchat,’Ax&, Achd,
Dedd, Seld, A, "BAxd, Elehd, *AceaAyxé, Aselchd,
Derx4, Selchd): This place first appears in Dt 3 10
as marking the eastern boundary of Bashan. It is
named as one of the cities in which Og, king of
Bashan, ruled (Josh 12 5). It must certainly
have been included in the portion given to the half-
tribe of Manasseh, “all the kmgdom of Og king of
Bashan,” although it is not named among the cities
that fell to him (Josh 18 29 ff). At a later time
we are told that Gad dwelt over against the Reuben-
ites in the land of Bashan unto Salecah (1 Ch 5 11).
The boundaries of the tribes probably changed from
time to time.

The ancient city is represented by the modern
Salkhad, a city in a high and strong position at the
southern end of Jebel ed-Driize (the Mountain of
Bashan). On a volcanic hill rising some 300 ft.
above the town, in what must have been the crater,
stands the castle. The view from the battlements,
as the present writer can testify, is one of the finest
E. of the Jordan, including the rich hollow of the
Haurén, Mt. Hermon, and all the intervening
country to the mountains of Samaria, with vast
reaches of the desert to the S. and to the E. The
old Rom roads are still clearly seen running without
curve or deviation across the country to Bozrah
and Der‘ah, away to the S.E. over the desert to
Kal‘at el-‘Azrak, and eastward to the Pers Gulf.
The castle was probably built by the Romans.
Restored by the Arabs, it was a place of strength
in Crusading times. It has now fallen on evil days.
The modern town, containing many ancient houses,
lies mainly on the slopes S.E. of the castle. The
inhabitants are Druzes, somewhat noted for turbu-


4. Later
History


2663


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sala, Salah
Salmone


lence. In the recent rismg of the Druzes (1911)

the place suffered heavily from bombardment by

the Turks. For water-supply it is entirely depend-
ent on cisterns filled during the rainy season.

tee W. Ewine

SALEM, salem (02W, shdlém; Dadhy, Salém):

The name of the eity of whieh Melehizedek was

king (Gen 14 18; He 7 1.2; cf Ps


1. Identifi- 76 2). To all appearance it lay near
cation and ‘“‘the Vale of Shaveh,” described as
Meaning “the King’s Vale.’ The general opin-


ion among the Jews was that Salem
was the same as Jerus, as stated by Jos (Ant, I, x,
2), who adds (VI], ili, 2) that it was known as
Solyma (Zé\vya, Séluma, variants, aecording to
Whiston, Salem and Hierosolyma) in the time of
Abraham. It was also reported that the city and
its temple were ealled Solyma by Homer, and he
adds that the name in Heb means “security.”
This identification with Jerus was aceepted by On-
kelos and all the Tgs, as well as by the early Chris-
tians. The Samaritans have always identified
Salem with Salim, E. of Nabdlis, but Jewish and
Christian tradition is more likely to be correct,
supported, as it is, by Ps 76 2.
The testimony of the Am Tab is apparently nega-
tive. Knudtzon’s no. 287 mentions “the land”
and “the lands of Urusalim,” twice


2. Testi- with the prefix for “eity’; no. 289
mony of likewise has this prefix twice; and no.
Tell el- 290 refers to “the city” or “a city of
Amarna the land Urusalim called Bit- Ninip”
Tablets (Beth-AnuSat[?]). As there is no prefix


of any kind before the element. salim,
it is not probable that this is the name of either a
man (the eity’s founder) or a god (like the Assyr
Sulmanu). The form in Sennacherib’s inscriptions
(ef Taylor Cylinder, III, 50), Ursalimmu, gives the
whole as a single word in the nominative, the double
m implying that the t was long. As the Assyrians
pronounced s as sh, it is likely that the Urusalimites
did the same, hence the Heb y*riishalaim, with sh.
See JERUSALEM. T. G. Pincus


SALEM (SéAnpos, Sdlémos; AV Salum): An
aneestor of Ezra (1 Esd 8 1)=“Shallum” in Ezr
7 2=‘Salemas” in 2 Esd 1 1.


SALEMAS, sal’é-mas, sa-lé’mas (Lat Salame; AV
Sadamias): An_ancestor of Ezra (2 Esd 1 1)=
“Shallum” in Ezr 7 2; ealled also “Salem” in
1 Esd 8 1.


SALIM, sa‘lim (Zorcty, Saleim): A plaee evi-
dently well known, since the position of Aenon, the
springs where John was baptizing, was defined by
reference to it: they were “near to Salim” (Jn 3
23). It must be sought on the W. of the Jordan,
as will be seen from comparison of Jn 1 28; 3 26;
10 40. Many identifications have been proposed:
eg. that of Alford with Shilhim and Ain in the S.
of Judah; that of Bisehing with ‘Ain Karim, and
that of Barclay, who would place Salim in Wédy
Suleim near ‘Anata, making Aecnon the springs m
Wady Far‘ah. These are all ruled out by their dis-
tance from the district where John is known to
have been at work. If there were no other objec-
tion to that suggested by Conder (Tent Work, 49 f)
following Robinson (BR, III, 383) with Salim in the
plain E. of Nablus, Aenon being ‘Ainiéin in Wady
Farah, it would be sufficient to say that this is in
the very heart of Samaria, and therefore impossible.
In any case the position of Aenon, 6 miles distant,
with a high ridge intervening, would hardly be
defined by the village of Salim, with the important
city of Shechem quite as near, and more easily
accessible.


Onom places Aenon 8 Rom miles S. of Seythopolis
(Beisdén), near Salumias (Sdlim) and the Jordan.
This points to Tell Ridhghah, on the northern side
of which is a shrine known locally as Sheikh Selim.
Not far off, by the ruins of Umm el-‘Amdan, there
are seven copious fountains which might well be
called Aenon, “place of springs.”

There is reason to believe that this district did
not belong to Samaria, but was included in the lands
of Seythopolis, which was an important member of
the league of ten eities. Ewina


SALIMOTH, sal’i-moth (B, Zereapod, Saleiméth,
A, "Accadtysd, ’Assalimath; the latter is due
to a wrong division of syllables; AV Assalimoth):
The same as “‘Shelomith’ (Ezr 8 10). S., the son
of Josaphias, of the family of Banias, and with
acne | men went up to Jerus with Ezra (1 Esd


SALLAI, sal’a-i, sal'i (90, sallay; Daddy, Salém,
A, Zad6, Sald, with variants):

(1) Eponym of a Benjamite family which settled
at Jerus after the return, deseendants of ‘‘Sallu”
(1 Ch 9 7; Neh 11 7.8); the pedigrees of Sallu
differ decidedly in the two passages. Curtis (ICC)
shggests that “‘son of Hodaviah, the son of Hasse-
nnah” (Ch) is a corruption or derivation of ‘Judah
the son of Hassenuah” (Neh).

(2) Name of a priestly family (Neh 12 20),
called ‘‘Sallu” in ver 7.


SALLU, sal’i. See Sauuar.


SALLUMUS, sa-li’mus, sal’ft-mus (2ZadAovpos,
Sdlloumos): One of the porters who had taken
“strange wives’ (1 Esd 9 25)=‘‘Shallum” in Ear
10 24; called also “Salum”’ in 1 Hsd 6 28.

SALMA, sal’ma. See Saumon.

SALMAI, sal’mi, sal’ m4-i maby, salmay; AV
Shalmai [AV in Neh 7 48 is “Shalmai’=Ezr 2 46];
RV “Salmai’): The eponym of a family of Nethi-
nim, called “Shamlai’ in Ezr 2 46 (K°ré, “Saw,
shamlay, Kethibh, aby, shalmay, followed by AV
text, “Shalmai’; B, Zapuadv, Samain, A, Zeraul,
Selamt; Neh 7 48, B, Zadeuel, Salemei, A, Zeduel,
Selmet, &, Tayael, Samaect). The name suggests
a foreign reign. In 1 Esd 6 30 the eorresponding
name is “Subai.”


SALMANASAR, sal-ma-na’sar (2 Esd 13 40)=
SHALMANESER (q.V.).


SALMON, sal'mon, SALMA (71>, salman,
‘Gnvestiture” [Ruth 4 21], M22W, salmah, “‘cloth-
ing” [Ruth 4 20], 82>, salma’ [1 Ch 2 11.51.54);
Darpdv, Salmon):

(1) The father of Boaz the husband of Ruth, and
thns the grandfather of Jesse, David’s father (Ruth
4 20.21). He is mentioned in both the genealogies
of Jesus (Mt 14.5; Lk 3 32). From Mt15
we learn that he married Rahab, by whom he begat
Boaz.

(2) In I Ch 2 51 ff, we read of a Salma, “the
father of Beth-lehem,” a son of Caleb the son of
Hur. He is also said to be the father of “the Ne-
tophathites, Atroth-beth-joab, and half of the Ma-
nahathites, the Zorites,” and several “families of
scribes.”’ See also ZaLMon. Hunter


SALMONE, | sal-m6’né
Acts 27 7. See PHopnix.


(Zadrposvyn, Salmdné):


Saloas
Salvation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2664


SALOAS, sal’G-as (Lodéas, Salédas; AV Talsus
after Lat Thalsas): In 1 Esd 9 22, for ‘“Flasah”
of Ezr 10 22.


SALOM, sf’lom (Sardp, Salém):

(1) The father of Helkias (Bar 1 7).
of ‘Shallum.”

(2) AV=RV “Salu” (1 Mace 2 26).


Gr form


SALOME, sa-ld’mé (Zarwdyun, Saldmé):

(1) One of the holy women who companied with
Jesus in Galilee, and ministered to Him (Mk 15
40.41). She was present at the crucifixion (15 40),
and was among those who came to the tomb of
Jesus on the resurrection morning (16 1.2). Com-
parison with Mt 27 56 clearly identifies her with
the wife of Zebedee. It is she, therefore, whose
ambitious request for her sons James and John is
recorded in Mt 20 20-24; Mk 10 35-40. From
Jn 19 25 many infer that she was a sister of Mary,
the mother of Jesus (thus Meyer, Luthardt, Alford);
others (as Godet) dispute the inference.

(2) Salome was the name of the daughter of
Herodias who danced before Herod, and obtained
as reward the head of John the Baptist (Mt 14 3-
11; Mk 6 17-28; cf Jos, Ant, XVIII, v, 4). She
is not named in the Gospels. JAMES ORR


SALT, sdélt (bis, melah,; &das, hdlas, &Xs, hdis):
Common salt is considered by most authorities as
an essential ingredient of our food. Most people
intentionally scason their cooking with more or less
salt for the sake of palatability. Others depend
upon the small quantities which naturally exist in
water and many foods to furnish the necessary
amount of salt for the body. Hither too much salt
or the lack of it creates undesirable disturbance
in the animal system. Men and animals alike
instinctively seek for this substance to supplement
or improve their regular diet. The ancients appre-
ciated the value of salt for seasoning food (Job 6 6).
So necessary was it that they dignified it by making
it a requisite part of sacrifices (Lev 2 13; Ezr 6 9;
722; Hzk 43 24; Mk 949). In Nu 18 19;
2 Ch 13 5, a “covenant of salt” is mentioned (cf
Mk 9 49). This custom of pledging friendship
or confirming a compact by eating food containing
salt is still retained among Arab.-speaking people.
The Arah. word for “‘salt”’ and for a “compact’’ or
“treaty” is the same. Doughty in his travels in
Arabia appealed more than once to the superstitious
belief of the Arabs in the “salt covenant,” to save
his life. Once an Arab has received in his tent
even his worst enemy and has eaten salt (food)
with him, he is hound to protect his guest as long
as he remains. Sec Covenant or SAtt.

The chief source of salt in Pal is from the exten-
sive deposits near the ‘‘sea of salt’’ (see Deap Spa),
where there are literally mountains and valleys of
salt (2.8 8 13; 2 K 14 7; 1 Ch 18 12; 2 Ch 25
11). On the seacoast the inhabitants frequently
gather the sea salt. They fill the rock crevices with
sea water and Icave it for the hot summer sun to
evaporate. After evaporation the salt crystals
can be collected. As salt-gathering is a govern-
ment monopoly in Turkey, the government sends
men to pollute the salt which is being surreptitious-
ly crystallized, so as to make it unfit for eating.
Another extensive supply comes from the salt lakes
in the Syrian desert E. of Damascus and toward
Palinyra. All native salt is more or less bitter, due
to the presence of other salts such as magnesium
sulphate.

Salt was used not only as a food, but as an anti-
septic m medicine. Newborn babes were bathed
and salted (Ezk 16 4), a custom still prevailing.
The Arabs of the desert consider it so necessary,


that in the absence of salt they bathe their infants
in camels’ urine. Elisha is said to have healed the
waters of Jericho by casting a cruse of salt into the
spring (2 KX 2 20f). Abimelech sowed the ruins
of Shechem with salt to prevent_a new city from
arising in its place (Jgs 9 45). Lot’s wife turned
to a pillar of salt (Gen 19 26).

Figurative: Salt is emblematic of loyalty and
friendship (see above). A person who has onee
joined in a “salt covenant” with God and then
breaks it is fit only to be cast out (cf Mt 5 18; Mk
9 50). Saltness typified barrenness (Dt 29 23;
Jer 17 6). James compares the absurdity of the
same mouth giving forth blessings and cursings to
the impossibility of a fountain yielding both sweet
and salt water (Jas 3 11 f). JAMES A. PatcH


SALT, CITY OF inven “2, ‘tr ha-melah;
A, ai wéd[elis GAGv, hai péllelis halén): One of the six
cities in the wilderness of Judah mentioned hetween
Nibshan and Engedi (Josh 15 62). The site is
very uncertain. The large and important Teil el-
Mith (i.e. “the salt hill’), on the route from Hebron
to Akaha, is possible.


SALT, COVENANT OF. See CovENANT oF
Sat.


SALT, PILLAR OF.
SuiME.


See Lor; Saxt; Srppim;


SALT SEA. See Deap Spa.


SALT, VALLEY OF wnvan NR, g@ ha-melah):
The scene of battles, firstly, between David or his
heutenant Abishai and the Edomites (2 8 8 13;
1 Ch 18 12; Ps 60, title), and later between
Amaziah and these same foes (2 K 14 7; 2 Ch
25 11). It is tempting to connect this ‘Valley of
Salt” with es Sebkhah, the marshy, salt-impreg-
nated plain which extends from the southern end
of the Dead Sea to the foot of the cliffs, but in its
present condition it is an almost impossible place
for a battle of any sort. The ground is so soft and
spongy that a wide détour around the edges has to
be made by those wishing to get from oneside to the
other. It is, too, highly probable that in earlier
times the whole of this low-lying area was covered
by the waters of the Dead Sea. It is far more natu-
ral to identify gé@ ha-melah with the Wédy el-
Mith (“Valley of Salt’’), one of the three valleys
which unite at Beersheba to form the Wéddy es-
Seba‘. These valleys, el-Afilh and es-Seba', together
make a natural frontier to Canaan.

E. W. G. Masterman

SALT-WORT, sdlt’wirt ca. , mallu*h, a word
connected with melah, “salt,” tr4 in LXX GAtpos,
hdlimos; AV mallows): The halimos of the Greeks
is the sea orache, Atriplex halimus, a silvery whitish
shrub which flourishes upon the shores of the Dead
Sea alongside the rutm (see JUNIPER). Its leaves
are oval and somewhat like those of an olive.
They have a sour flavor and would never be eaten
when better food was obtainable (Job 30 4). The
tr “mallows’’ is due to the apparent similarity of the
Heb mallé*h to the Gr paddéxn, maldché, which is the
Lat malva and Eng. “mallow.” Certain species of


malva known in Arab., as & ven , Ehubbazeh, are


very commonly eaten by the poor of Pal.
. W. G. Masterman
SALU, sa’la (N19D, sala’; LXX B, Dadpov,
Salmon, A, Sado, Salé; AV has “Salom” in 1 Mace
2 26): A prince and the head of a house of the
tribe of Simeon and the father of Zimri who was
slain by Phinehas along with the Midianitish woman


2665


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Saloas
Salvation


whom he had brought to the camp of Israel (Nu
25 14; 1 Macc 2 26).


SALUM, si’lum (Zadotp, Saloim):

(1) The head of one of the families of porters
(1 Esd 5 28; om. in B)=“Shallum” in Ezr 2 42;
10 24; Neh 7 45=“Sallumus” in 1 Esd 9 25.

(2) 1 Esd 8 1 AV=RV “Salem.”


SALUTATION, sal-i-ta’shun (acrracpés, aspas-
més): A greeting which might be given in person,
orally (Lk 1 29.41.44), or in writing, usually at the
close of a letter (1 Cor 16 21; Col 4 18; 2 Thess
3 17; cf use of xalpev, chatrein, “greeting,” “joy”
in Jas 11). The Pharisaic Jews loved salutations
in public places (Mt 23 7; Mk 12 38, AV “greet-
ing,” RV “salutation”; Lk 11 43; 20 46). Often
these salutations were very elaborate, involving
much time in prostrations, embracings, ete. When
Jesus therefore sent out the Seventy, He forbade
salutation by the way (Lk 10 4), though He ordi-
narily encouraged proper civilities of this sort (Mt
5 47; 10 12). Epwarp Bacspy PoLuarD


SALVATION, sal-va’shun:
I. In roe OT


2. Individualism
3. Faith
4, Moral Law
5. Sacrifices
6. Ritual Law
If. INTERMEDIATE LITERATURE
1. General
2. The Law
III, Tae Teacuine or CuHrist
1. The Baptist
Kingdom of God
Present and Future
. Individualism
. Moral Progress
Forgiveness
Person of Christ
. Notes
T. Pav , -
General


POND UU GN


IV.


Moral Progress
The Spirit
Mystical Union
Forgiveness
Atonement


PS SAC Se De Bet


est or NT: Summary
St. John
. Hebrews
. St. Peter

4, Summary
LITERATURE


In EV the words “salvation,” ‘“save,’’ are not
technical theological terms, but denote simply
“deliverance,” in almost any sense the latter word
can have. In systematic theology, however, “sal-
vation” denotes the whole process by which man
is delivered from all that would prevent his attain-
ing to the highest good that God has prepared for
him. Or, by a transferred sense, ‘salvation’ de-
notes the actual enjoyment of that good. So, while
these technical senses are often associated with the
Gr or Heb words tr? “‘save,”’ etc, yet they are still
more often used in connection with other words or
represented only by the general sense of a passage.
And so a collection of the original terms for “save,”
etc, is of value only for the student doing minute
detailed work, while it is the purpose of the present
article to present a general view of the Bib. doctrine
of salvation. ‘

I. In the OT.—(1) As long as revelation had
not raised the veil that separates this life from the

next, the Israelite thought of his high-
1. General est good as long life in a prosperous
Pal, as described most typically in Dt
28 1-14. But a definite religious idea was pres-
ent also, for the “land of milk and honey,” even
under angelic protection, was worthless without


wher


?


| community (Dt 21 1-9).


access to God (Ex 38 1-4), to know whom gives
happiness (Isa 11 9; Hab 2 14; Jer 31 34).
Such a concept is normal for most cf the OT, but
there are several significant enlargements of it.
That Israel should receive God’s characteristic of
righteousness is a part of the ideal (Isa 1 26; 4
3.4; 32 1-8; 33 24; Jer 31 33.34; Ezk 36 25.
26; Zee 8; Dnl 9 24: Ps B1 10-12). Good was
found in the extension of Israel’s good to the sur-
rounding nations (Mic 4 1-4; Isa 2 2-4; 45 5.6;
Jec 211; 8 22.23; Isa 60; 66 19-21; Zee 14
16.17, etc), even to the extension of the legitimate
sacrificial worship to the soil of Egypt (lsa 19 19-
22). Pal was insufficient for the enjoyment of
God’s gifts, and a new heaven aud a new earth were
to be received (lsa 65 17; 66 22), and a share in
the glories was not to be denied even to the dead
(Isa 26 19; Dn] 12 2). And, among the people
so glorified, God would dwell in person (Isa 60 19.
20; Zec 2 10-12). (2) Salvation, then, means de-
liverance from all that interferes with the enjoy-
ment of these blessings. So it takes countless
forms—deliverance from natural plagues, from in-
ternal dissensions, from externa] enemies, or from
the subjugation of conquerors (the exile, particu-
larly). As far as enemies constitute the threaten-
ing danger, the prayer for deliverance is often based
on their evil character (Ps 101, etc). But for the
individual all these evils are summed up in the word
“death,” which was thought to terminate all rela-
tion to God and all possibility of enjoying His bless-
ings (Ps 115 17; Isa 38 18, etc). Andso “death”
became established as the antinomy to “salvation,”
and in this sense the word has persisted, although
the equation “‘loss of salvation = physical death” has
long been transcended. But death and its attend-
ant evils are worked by God’s wrath, and so it is
from this wrath that salvation is sought (Josh 7 26,
etc). And thus, naturally, salvation is from every-
thing that raises that wrath, above all from sin
(Ezk 36 25.26, etc).

(1) At first the ‘“‘unit of salvation” was the nation
(less prominently the family), ic. a man though
righteous could lose salvation through
the faults of others. A father could
bring a curse on his children (2 S 21
1-14), a king on his subjects (2 S 24),
or an unknown sinner could bring guilt on an entire
(On the other hand, ten
righteous would have saved Sodom [Gen 18 32].)
And the principle of personal responsibility was
grasped but slowly. It is enunciated partly in Dt
24 16 (cf Jer 31 29.30), definitely in Ezk 14 12-20;
18; 33 1-20, and fairly consistently in the Pss.
But even Ezekiel still held that five-and-twenty
could defile the whole nation (8 16), and he had not
the premises for resolving the problem—that tem-
poral disasters need not mean the loss of salvation.
(2) But even when it was realized that a man lost
salvation through his own fault, the converse did
not follow. Salvation came, not by the man’s mere
merit, but because the man belonged to a nation
peculiarly chosen by God. God had made a cove-
nant with Israel and His fidelity insured salvation:
the salvation comes from God because of His
promise or (in other words) because of His name.
Indeed, the great failing of the people was to trust
too blindly to this promise, an attitude denounced’
continually by the prophets throughout (from, say,
Am 3 2 to Mt 39). And yet even the prophets
admit a real truth in the attitude, for, despite
Israel’s sins, eventual salvation is certain. Ezk 20
states this baldly: there has been nothing good in
Israel and there is nothing good in her at the
prophet’s own day, but, notwithstanding, God will
give her restoration (cf Isa 8 17.18; Jer 32 6-15,
etc).


2. Individ-
ualism


Salvation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2666


Hence, of the human conditions, whole-hearted |


trust in God is the most important. (Belief in God
is, of course, never argued in the Bible.)
Inconsistent with such trust are, for
instance, seeking aid from other na-
tions (Isa 80 1-5), putting reliance in human skill
(2 Ch 16 12), or forsaking Pal through fear (Jer
42). In Isa 26 20 entire passivity is demanded,
and in 2 K 18 19 lukewarmness in executing an
apparently meaningless command is rebuked.

(1) Next in importance is the attainment of a
moral standard, expressed normally in the various
codes of the Law. But fulfilment of
the letter of the commandment was by
no means all that was required. For
instance, the Law permitted the selling
of a debtor into slavery (Dt 16 12), but the reckless
use of the creditor’s right is sharply condemned
(Neh 6 1-13). The prophets are never weary of
giving short formulae that will exclude such supra-
legalism and reduce conduct toa pure motive: “Hate
the evil, and love the good, and establish justice in
the gate’ (Am 6 15); “To do justly, and to love
kindness, and to walk humbly with thy God” (Mic
6 8). And the chicf emphasis on the Law as writlen
is found in the later books, esp. Ps 119 (cf Ps 147
20). (2) Certain breaches of the Law had no pardon,
but were visited with death at once, even despite re-
pentance and confession (Josh 7). But for the most
part it is promised that repentance will remove the
guilt of the sin if the sin be forsaken (Ezk 18) or,
in the case of a sin that would not be repeated, if
contrition be felt (2 5 12). Suffering played a
part in salvation by bringing knowledge of sin to
the conscience, the exile being the most important
example (Ezk 36 31). But almost. always it is
assumed that the possibility of keeping the Law is
in man’s own power, Dt 30 11-14 stating this ex-
plicitly, while the Wisdom Books equate virtue with
learning. Consequently, an immense advance was
made when man felt the need of God’s help to keep
the Law, the need of the inscription of the Laws
on the heart (Jer 31 31-34). So an outlook was


3. Faith


4. Moral
Law


opened to a future in which God would make the |


nation righteous (see references in 1, above).
(1) The acceptance of repentance as expiating
past sins was an act of God’s mercy. And so His
mercy instituted other and additional
6. Sacrifices means of expiation, most notably that
of the sacrifices. But a theology of
sacrifice is conspicuously absent from the whole OT,
for Lev 17 11 is too incidental and too obscure to
be any exception. The Christian (or very late Jew-
ish) interpretations of the ritual laws lack all solid-
ity of exegetical foundation, despite their one-time
prevalence. Nor is the study of origins of much
help for the meaning attached to the rites by the
Jews in historic times. General ideas of offering,
of self-denial, of propitiation of wrath, and of enter-
ing into communion with God assuredly existed.
But in the advanced stages of the religion there is
no evidence that sacrifices were thought to produce
their effect because of any of these things, but solely
because God had commanded the sacrifices. (2)
Most sins required a sacrifice as part of the act of
repentance, although in case of injury done the
neighbor, only after reparation had been made. It
is not quite true that for conscious sing no sacrifices
were appointed, for in Lev 6 1; 6 1-8, sins are
included that could not be committed through mere
negligence. And so such rules as Nu 16 30.31
must not he construed too rigorously. (3) Sacri-
fices as means of salvation are taught chiefly by
Ezk, while at the rebuilding of the temple (Hag,
Zec) and the depression that followed (Mal), they
were much in the foreground, but the preéxilic
prophets have little to say about their positive value


(Jer 7 22 is the nadir). Indeed, in preéxilic times
the danger was the exaltation of sacrifice at the ex-
pense of morality, esp. with the peace offering,
which could be turned into a drunken revel (Am 5
21-24; Isa 22 13; cf Prov 7 14). Attempts were
made to “strengthen” the sacrifices to Jeh by the
use of ethnic rites (Hos 4 14; Isa 65 1-5), even
with the extreme of human sacrifice (Jer 7 31;
Ezk 20 26). But insistence on the strict centrali-
zation of worship and increasing emphasis laid on
the sin and trespass offerings did away with the
worst of the abuses. And many of the Pss, esp.
66, 118, give beautiful evidence of the devotion
that could be nourished by the sacrificial rites.

Of the other means of salvation the ritual law
(not always sharply distinguishable from the moral
law) bulks rather large in the legisla-
tion, but is not prominent in the
prophets. Requisite to salvation was
the abstention from certain acts, arti-
cles of food, etc, such abstinence seeming to lie at
the background of the term “holiness.” But a
ritual breach was often a matter of moral duty
(burying the dead, etc), and, for such breaches,
ritual means of purification are provided and the
matter dropped. Evidently such things lay rather
on the circumference of the religion, even to Eze-
kiel, with his anxious zeal against the least defile-
ment. The highest ritual point is touched by Zec
14 20.21, where all of Jerus isso holy that not a pot
would be unfit to use in the temple (cf Jer 31 38-40).
Yet, even with this perfect holiness, sacrifices would
still have a place as a means by which the holiness
could be increased. Indeed, this more ‘‘positive”
view of sacrifices was doubtless present from the first.

Il. Intermediate Literature.—(1) The great
change, compared with the earlier period, is that

the idea of God had become more
1. General transcendent. But this did not neces-

sarily mean an increase in religious
value, for there was a corresponding tendency to
take God out of relation to the world by an intel-
lectualizing process. This, when combined with
the persistence of the older concept of salvation in
this life only, resulted in an emptying of the reli-
gious instinct and in indifferentism. This tendency
1s well represented in Ecel, more acutely in Sir, and
in NT times it dominated the thought of the Sad-
ducees. On the other hand the expansion of the
idea of salvation to correspond with the higher con-
ception of God broke through the limitations of this
life and created the new literary form of apocalyp-
tics, represented in the OT esp. by Zec 9-14; Isa
24-27, and above all by Dnl. And in the inter-
mediate literature all shades of thought between
the two extremes are represented. But too much
emphasis can hardly be laid on the fact that this
intermediate teaching is in many regards simply
faithful to the OT. Almost anything that can be
found in the OT—with the important exception of
the note of joyousness of Dt, etc—can be found again
here. (2) Of the conceptions of the highest good
the lowest is the Epicureanism of Sir. The highest
is probably that of 2 Esd 7 91-98 RV: “To be-
hold the face of him whom in their lifetime they
served,” the last touch of materialism being elimi-
nated. Indeed, real materialism is notably absent
in the period, even En 10 17-19 being less exuber-
ant than the fancies of such early Christian writers
as Papias. Individualism is generally taken for
granted, but that the opposite opinion was by no
means dormant, even at a late period, is shown by
Mt 39. The idea of a oeeidesrivlere of Israel,
however, of course pervades all the literature, Sib
Or 6 and Jub being the most exclusive books and
the XII Tests. the most broad-hearted. In place
of national privilege, though, is somctimes found the


6. Ritual
Law


2667


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Salvation


still less edifying feature of party privilege (Ps Sol;
En 94-105), the most offensive cee Bane ie asser-
tion of En 90 6-9 that the (inactive) Israel will be
saved by the exertions of the “little lamb” Pharisees,
before whom every Ixnee shall bow in the Messianic
kingdom.
(1) The conceptions of the moral demands for
salvation at times reach a very high level, esp. in
the XII Tests. (making every allowance
2. The Law for Christian interpolations). “The
spirit of love worketh together with the
law of God in long-suffering unto the salvation of
men” (Tost. Gad 4 7) is hardly unworthy of St. Paul,
and even Jub can say, “Let each love his brother in
mercy and justice, and let none wish the other evil’’
(36 8). But the great tendency is to view God’s
law merely as a series of written statutes, making no
demands except those gained from a rigid constru-
ing of the letter. In Lk 10 29, ‘Who is my neigh-
bor?” is a real question—if he is not my neighbor
I need not love THe So duties not literally com-
manded were settled by utilitarian motives, as out-
side the domain of religion, and the unhealthy
phenomenon of works of supererogation made its
appearance (Lk 17 10). The writer of Wisd can
feel smugly assured of salvation, because idolatry
had been abstained from (15 4; contrast St. Paul’s
polemic in Rom 2). And discussions about “great-
est commandments” caused character in its relation
to religion to be forgotten. (2) As God’s com-
mands were viewed as statutes the distinction be-
tween the moral and the ritual was lost, and the
ritual law attained enormous and familiar propor-
tions. The beautiful story of Judith is designed
chiefly to teach abstinence from ritually unclean
food. And the most extreme case is in Jub 6 34-
38—all of Israel’s woes come from keeping the
feasts by the actual moon instead of by a correct
(theoretical) moon (!). (3) Where self-compla-
cency ceased and a strong moral sense was present,
despair makes its appearance with extraordinary
frequency. The period is the period of penitential
prayers, with an undercurrent of doubt as to how
far mercy can be expected (Three vs 3-22; Pr
Man; Bar 3 1-8, etc). ‘What profit isit unto us, if
there be promised us an immortal time, whereas we
have done the works that bring death?” (2 Esd 7
119 RV). The vast majority of men are lost (9 16)
and must be forgotten (8 55), and Ezra can trust
for his own salvation only by a special revelation (7
77 RV). So, evidently, St. Paul’s pre-Christian ex-
perience was no unique occurrence. (4) Important
for the NT background is the extreme lack of prom-
inence of the sacrifices. They are never given a the-
ological interpretation (except in Philo, where they
cease to be sacrifices). Indeed, in Sir 35 they are
explicitly said to be devotions for the righteous only,
apparently prized only as an inheritance from the
past and “because of the commandment” (Sir 35 5;
yet cf 38 11). When the temple was destroyed and
the sacrifices ceased, Judaism went on its way almost
unaffected, showing that the sacrifices meant nothing
essential to the people. And, even in earlier times,
the Essenes rejected sacrifices altogether, without
losing thereby their recognition as Jews.
UL The Teaching of. Christ.—The Baptist pro-
claimed authoritatively the near advent of the


kingdom of God, preceded by a Mes- |


sianic judgment that would bring fire for
the wicked and the Holy Spirit for the
righteous. Simple but incisive moral
teaching and warning against trusting in national
privileges, with baptism as an outward token of
repentance, were to prepare men to face this judg-
ment sccurely. But we have no data to determine
how much farther (if any) the Baptist conceived
his teaching to lead.


1. The
Baptist


It was in the full heat of this eschatological re-
vival that the Baptist had fanned, that Christ
began to teach, and He also began
2. Kingdom with the eschatological phrase, ‘“The
of God kingdom of God is at hand.” Conse-
quently His teaching must have been
taken at once in an eschatological sense, and it is
rather futile to attempt to limit such implications
to passages where modern eschatological phrases
are used unambiguously. ‘The kingdom of God
is at hand’ had the inseparable connotation ‘‘Judg-
ment is at hand,” and in this context, “Repent ye”
(Mk 1 15) must mean “lest ye be judged.” Hence,
Our Lord’s teaching about salvation had primarily
a future content: positively, admission into the
kingdom of God, and negatively, deliverance from
the preceding judgment. So the kingdom of God
is the “highest good” of Christ’s teaching but, with
His usual reserve, He has little to say about its
externals. Man’s nature is to be perfectly adapted
to his spiritual environment (see RESURRECTION),
and man is to be with Christ (Lk 22 30) and the
patriarchs (Mt 8 11). But otherwise—and again
as usual—the current descriptions are used without
comment, even when they rest on rather material-
istic imagery (Lk 22 16.30). Whatever the king-
dom is, however, its meaning is most certainly not
exhausted by a mere reformation of the present
order of material things.
But the fate of man at judgment depends on what
man is before judgment, so that the practical prob-
lem is salvation from the conditions
3. Present that will bring judgment; i.e. present
and Future and future salvation are inseparably
connected, and any attempt to make
rigid distinctions between the two results in logoma-
chies. Occasionally even Christ speaks of the king-
dom of God as present, in the sense that citizens
of the future kingdom are living already on this
earth (Mt 11 11; Lk 17 21[?]; the meaning of the
latter verse is very dubious). Such menare “saved”
already (Lk 19 9; 7 50[?]), ie. such men were
delivered from the bad moral condition that was
so extended that Satan could be said to hold sway
over the world (Lk 10 18; 11 21).
That the individual was the unit in this deliver-
ance needs no emphasis. Still, the Divine privilege
of the Jews was a reality and Christ's
4. Individ- normal work was limited to them (Mt
ualism 10 5; 15 26, etc). He admitted even
that the position of the Jewish religious
leaders rested on a real basis (Mt 23 3). But the
“good tidings” were so framed that their extension
to all men would have been inevitable, even had
there not been an explicit command of Christ in
this regard. On the other hand, while the message
involved in every case strict individual choice, yet
the individual who accepted it entered into social
relations with the others who had so chosen. So
salvation involved admission to a community of
service (Mk 9 35, etc). And in the latter part of
Christ’s ministry, He withdrew from the bulk of
His disciples to devote Himself to the training of an
inner circle of Twelve, an act explicable only on the
assumption that these were to be the leaders of the
others after He was taken away. Such passages as
Mt 16 18; 18 17 merely corroborate this.
Of the conditions for the individual, the primary
(belief in God being taken for granted) was a correct
moral ideal. Exclusion from salvation
5. Moral came from the Pharisaic casuistry
Progress which had invented limits to right-
eousness. Ex 20 13 had never con-
templated permitting angry thoughts if actual
murder was avoided, and so on. In contrast is set
the idea of character, of the single eye (Mt 6 22),
of the pure heart (5 8). Only so can the spiritual


Salvation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2668


house be built on a rock foundation. But the mere
ideal is not enough; persistent effort toward it and
a certain amount of progress are demanded impera-
tively. Only those who have learned to forgive
can ask for forgiveness (Mt 6 12; 18 35). They
who omit natural works of mercy have no share
in the kingdom (25 31-46), for even idle words will
be taken mto account (12 36), and the most pre-
cious possession that interferes with moral progress
is to be sacrificed ruthlessly (18 8.9, etc). Men are
known by their fruits (7 20); it is he that doeth the
will of the Father that shall enter into the kingdom
(7 21), and the final ideal—which is likewise the
goal—is becoming a son of the Father in moral
likeness (5 45). That this progress is due to God’s
aid is so intimately a part of Christ’s teaching on
the entire dependence of the soul on God that it
receives little explicit mention, but Christ refers even
His own miracles to the Father’s power (Lk 11 20).
Moral effort, through God’s aid, is an indispen-
sable condition for salvation. But complete suc-
cess in the moral struggle is not at all
6. Forgive- 2 condition, in the sense that. moral
ness perfection is required. For Christ’s
disciples, to whom the kingdom is
promised (Lk 12 32), the palsied man who receives
remission of sins (Mk 2 5), Zacchaeus who is said
to have received salvation (Lk 19 9), were far from
being models of sinlessness. The element in the
character that Christ teaches as making up for the
lack of moral perfection is becoming “‘as a little
child” (ef Mk 10 15). Now the point here is not
eredulousness (for belief is not under discussion),
nor is it meekness (for children are notoriously not
meek). And it most certainly is not the pure pas-
sivity of the newly born infant, for it is gratuitous to
assume that only snch infants were meant even in Lk
18 15, whilein Mt 18 2 (where the child comes in
answer to a call) this interpretation is excluded.
Now, in the wider teaching of Christ the meaning
is made clear enough. Salvation is for the poor in
spirit, for those who hunger and thirst after right-
eousness, for the prodigal knowing his wretched-
ness. It is for the penitent publican, while the self-
satisfied Pharisee is rejected. A sense of need and
a desire that God will give are the characteristics.
A child does not argue that it has earned its father’s
benefits but looks to him in a feeling of dependence,
with a readiness to do his bidding. So it is the soul
that desires all of righteousness, strives toward it,
knows that it falls short, and trusts in its Father
for the rest, that is the savable soul.
Christ speaks of the pardon of the publican (Lk
18 9 ff) and of the prodigal welcomed by the


Father (Lk 16 20), both without
7. Person intermediary. And it is perhaps not
of Christ necessary to assume that all of those


finding the strait gate (Mt 7 14)
were explicitly among Christ’s disciples. But
would Christ have admitted that anyone who had
come to know Him and refused to obey Him would
have been saved? To ask this question is to an-
swer it in the negative (Mk 9 40 is irrelevant).
Real knowledge of the Father is possible only
through the unique knowledge of the Son (Lk 10
21.22), and lack of faith in the Son forfeits all
blessings (Mk 6 5.6; 9 23). Faith in Him brings
instant forgiveness of sing (Mk 2 5), and love
directed to Him is an indisputable sign that for-
giveness has taken place (Lk 7 47). But Christ
thought of Himself as Messiah and, if the term
“Messiah” is not to be emptied of its meaning, this
made Him judge of the world (such verses as Mk
8 38 are hardly needed for direct evidence). And,
since for Christ’s consciousness an earthly judgeship
is unthinkable, a transcendental judgeship is the sole
alternative, corroborated by the use of the title Son


of Man. But passage from simple humanity to
the transcendental glory of the Son-of-Man Messiah
involved a change hardly expressible except by
death and resurrection. And the expectation of
death was in Christ’s mind from the first, as is seen
by Mk 2 18.19 (even without ver 20). That He
could have viewed His death as void of significance
for human salvation is simply inconceivable, and
the ascription of Mk 10 45 to Pauline influence is
in defiance of the facts. Nor is it credible that
Christ conceived that in the interval between His
death and His Parousia He would be out of relation
to His own. To Him the unseen world was in the
closest relation to the visible world, and His passage
into glory would strengthen, not weaken, His power.
So there is a complete justification of Mk 14 22-25:
to Christ His death had a significance that could be
paralleled only by the death of the Covenant victim
in Ex 24 6-8, for by it an entirely new relation was
established between God and man.

(1) Salvation from physical evil was a very real
part, however subordinate, of Christ’s teaching


Mk 1 34, etc). (2) Ascetic prac-
8. Notes tices as a necessary element in salva-
tion can hardly claim Christ’s author-
ity. It is too often forgotten that the Twelve were


not Christ's only disciples. Certainly not all of the
hundred and twenty of Acts 1 15 (ef ver 21), nor
of the five hundred of 1 Cor 15 6, were converted
after the Passion. And they all certainly could
not have left their homes to travel with Christ.
So the demands made in the special case of the
Twelve (still less in such an extremely special case
as Mk 10 21) in no way represent Christ’s normal
practice, whatever readiness for self-sacrifice may
have been asked of all. So the representations of
Christ as ruthlessly exacting all from everyone
are quite unwarranted by the facts. And it is
well to remember that it is Mt 11 19 that con-
tains the term of reproach that His adversaries
gave Him.

IV. St. Paal,—Instead of laying primal stress on
St. Paul's peculiar contributions to soteriology, it
will be preferable to start from such Pauline pas-
sages as simply continue the explicit teaching of
Christ. For it is largely due to the common rever-
sal of this method that the present acute ‘“‘Jesus-
Paulus” controversy exists.

That St. Paul expected the near advent of the
kingdom of God with a judgment preceding, and

that salvation meant to him primarily

1. General deliverance from this judgment, need
not be argued. And, accordingly, em-

phasis is thrown sometimes on the future deliver-
ance and sometimes on the present conditions for
the deliverance (contrast Rom 5 9 and 8 24), but
the practical problem is the latter. More explicitly
than in Christ’s recorded teaching the nature and
the blessings of the kingdom are described (see
Kincpom or Gop), but the additional matter is
without particular religious import. A certain
poviles of the Jews appears (Rom 3 1-8; 9-11),
ut the practical content of the privilege seems to
be eschatological only (11 26). Individual con-
version is of course taken for granted, but the life
after that becomes highly corporate (see CHURCH).

(1) The moral ideal is distinctly that of char-
acter. St. Paul, indeed, is frequently obliged to

give directions as to details, but the
2. Moral detailed directions are referred con-
Progress _stantly to the underlying principle,
Rom 14 or 1 Cor 8 being excellent
examples of this, while “love is the fulfilment of the
law” (Rom 13 10) is the summary. (2) Persistent
moral effort is indispensable, and the new life ab-
solutely must bring forth fruit to God (Rom 6 4;
13 12; Gal 5 24; Col 3.5; Eph 2 3; 4 17.22-82;


2669


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Salvation


Tit 2 11-14). Only by good conduct can one
please God (1 Thess 4 1), and the works of even
Christians are to be subjected to a searching test
(1 Cor 3 18; 4 5; 2 Cor 6 10) ina judgment not
to be faced without the most earnest striving (1
Cor 10 12; Phil 2 12), not even by St. Paul him-
self (1 Cor 9 27; Phil 3 12-14). And the possi-
bility of condemnation because of a lack of moral
attainment must not be permitted to leave the mind
(1 Cor 3 17; Gal 6 21; cf Rom 8 12.13; 11 20;
1 Cor 10 12; Gal 6 7-9). Consequently, growth
in. actual righteousness is as vital in at. Paul’s soteri-
ology as it is iu that teaching of Christ: Chris-
tians have “put off the old man with his doings”
(Col 3 9).

That this growth is God’s work is, however, a
point where St. Paul has expanded Christ's quiet


assumption rather elaborately. In
3. The particular, what Christ had made the
Spirit source of His own supernatural power


—the Holy Spirit—is specified as the
source of the power of the Christian’s ordinary life,
as well as of the more special endowments (see
SpigirvaL Girrs). In the Spirit the Christian has
received the blessmg promised to Abraham (Gal
3 14); by it the decds of the body can be put to
death and all virtues flow into the soul (Gal 6 16-
26), if a man walks according to it (1 Cor 6 19.20;
1 Thess 4 8). The palmary passage is Rom 7-8.
In ch 7 St. Paul looks back with a shudder on his
pre-Christian helplessness (it is naturally the ex-
treme of exegetical perversity to argue that he
dreaded not the sin itself but only God’s penalty
on sin). But the Spirit gives strength to put to
death the deeds of the body (8 13), to disregard the
things of the flesh (8 5), and to fulfil the ordinance
of the Law (8 4). Such moral power is the test
of Christianity: as many as are led by the Spirit
of God, these are the sons of God (8 14).

This doctrine of the Spirit is simply that what
Christ did on earth would be carried on with in-
creased intensity after the Passion.

4. Mystical That this work could be thought of out
Union of relation to Christ, or that Christ

Himself could have so thought of it
(see above, III, 7) is incredible. So the exalted
Christ appears as the source of moral and spiritual
power (St. Paul speaks even more of Christ’s resur-
rection than of the Passion), the two sources
(Christ and the Spirit) being very closely combined
in 2 Cor 317; Rom 8&9; Gal 46. Our old
man has been crucified, so putting an end to the
bondage of sin, and we can prevent sin from reign-
ing iu our mortal bodies, for our burial into Christ’s
death was to enable us to walk in newness of life
(Rom 6 2-14). The resurrection 1s a source of
power, and through Christ’s strength all things can
be done (Phil 4 13.20). Christ is the real center
of the believer’s personality (Gal 2 20); the man
has become a new creature (2 Cor 5 17; ef Col 2
20; 3 3); we were joined to another that we might
bring forth fruit to God (Rom 7 4). And by
contact with the glory of the Lord we are trans-
formed into the same image (2 Cor 3 18), the end
being conformation to the im@ge of the Son (Rom
8 30). F

a This growth in actual holiness, then, is funda-
mental with St. Paul: “If any man hath not the

Spirit of Christ, he is none of his
5. Forgive- (Rom 8 9). And the acquisition of
ness strength through union with Christ

is vitally connected with the remission
of sins. In Rom 7 1-6 (cf Col 2 11.12), the
mystical union with Christ makes His death ours
(cf Col 3 3) and so removes us from the Law (cf
Rom 10 4; 1 Cor 15 56), which has no relation to
the dead. And by the life-giving power of this


union the strength of sin is broken (Rom 6 6). (2)
The condition im man that makes forgiveness pos-
sibleSt. Paul calls “faith’’—a very complicated term.
Its chief use, however, is in opposition to “works”
(most clearly in Rom 9 30—10 13). The Jews’
“pursuit after rightcousness’’—the attempt to wring
salvation from God as wages earned—was vain
(Rom 10 13), and in contrast is the appeal to
God, the conscious relinquishment of ait claim
(4 5). The soul looks trustingly for salvation to
its Father, precisely the attitude of the “children”
in the feachine of Christ. But no more than in
the teaching of Christ is faith a purely passive
virtue, for man must be ‘“‘obedient”’ to it (Rom 1 5;
10 16; 1 Thess 2 13). And for the necessary pres-
ee love in faith cf 1 Cor 13 2; Gal 6 6; Eph
Because of faith—spccifically, faith in Christ
(except Rom 4; Gal 3 6)—God does not visit the
penalties of sins on believers, but
treats them as if they were righteous
(Rom 6 1, etc). But this 1s not
because of a quality in the believer or
in the faith, but because of an act that preceded any
act of Christian faith, the death of Christ (not the
cross, specifically, for St. Paul does not argue from
the cross in allof Rom). Through this death God’s
mercy could be extended safely, while before this
the exercise of that mercy had proved disastrous
(Rom $ 25.26). And this death was a sacrifice
(Rom 8 25, etc). And it is certain that St. Paul
conceived of this sacrifice as existing quite inde-
pendently of its effect on any human being. But
he has given us no data for a really complete sacri-
ficial doctrine, a statement sufficiently proved by
the hopeless variance of the interpretations that
have been propounded. And that St. Paul ever
constructed a theory of the operation of sacrifices
must be doubted. There is none in the contem-
porary Jewish literature, there is none in the OT,
aud there is none in the rest of the NT, not even in
He. Apparently the rites were so familiar that sac-
rificial terminology was ready to hand and was used
without particular reflection and without attempt-
ing to give it precise theological content. This is
borne out by the ease with which in Rom 3 24.25
St. Paul passes from a ransom (redemption) illus-
tration to_a (quite discordant) propitiation illus-
tration. For further discussion see ATONEMENT;
JustrFicaTIon. Here it is enough to say that to
make a juridical theory constructed from Pauline
implications and illustrations central in Christianity
is to do exactly what St. Paul did not do.
Summing up, there is a double line of thought in
St. Paul: the remission of penalties through the
atoning death of Christ and the de-
7. Summary struction of the power of sin through
strength flowing from Christ, the
human element in both cases being faith. The
question of the order of the steps is futile, for “‘to
have faith,” “to be im Christ,’”’ aud “to have the
Spirit” are convertible terms, i.e. in doctrinal
phraseology, the beginnings of sanctification are
simultaneous with justification. Attempts to unify
the two lines of thought into a single theory cannot
claim purely Bib. support. The “ethical” theory,
which in its best form makes God’s pardon depend
cu the fact that the sinner will be made holy (at
least in the next world), introduces the fewest ex-
traneous clements, but it says something that St.
Paul does not say. On the other hand one may feel
that considering St. Paul as a whole—to say nothing
of the rest of the NT—the pure justification doctrine
has bulked a little too large in our dogmatics. God’s
pardon for sin is au immenscly important matter,
but still more important is the new power of holi-
ness.


6. Atone-
ment


Salvation
Samaria


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2670


(1) Baptism presents another obstacle to a strict
unifying of Pauhne theology. Avery much stronger
sacramentarianism is admitted in St.
8. Notes Paul today than would have heen
accepted a generation ago, and such
passages as Rom 6 1-7; Gal 3 27; Col 2 12 make
it certain that he regarded baptism as conferring
very real spiritual powers. But that he made a
mechanical distinction between the blessings given
then and those given at some other time must be
doubted. (2) Salvation from the flesh (Rom 7 24)
involves no metaphysical dualism, as “flesh” is the
whole of the lower nature from which the power to
holiness saves a man (8 13). Indeed, the body it-
self is an object of salvation (Rom 8 11; and see
RESURRECTION). (3) Quite in the background lies
the idea of salvation from physical evil (2 Cor 1 10,
etc). Such evils are real evils (1 Cor 11 30), but
in God’s hands they may become pure blessings
(Rom 6 3; 2 Cor 12 7). (4) Salvation from sm
afler conversion is due to God’s judging the man
in terms of the acquired supernatural nature (Rom
8 14, etc). Yet certain sins may destroy the union
with Christ altogether (1 Cor 3 17, etc), while
others hring God’s chastening judgment (1 Cor 11
30-32). Or proper chastisement may be inflicted by
St. Paul himself (1 Cor 6 1-5; 1 Tim 1 20) or by
the congregation (Gal 6 1; 2 Thess 3 10-15; 2
Cor 2 6).
V. Rest of NT: Sammary.—(1) St. John had the
task of presenting Christ to Gentiles, who were as
unfamiliar with the technical meaning
1. St. John of such phrases as “kingdom of God”
or “Son of Man’’ as is the world today,
and to Gentiles who had instead a series of concepts
unknown in Pal. So a ‘translation of spiritual
values” became necessary if the gospel were to
make an immediate appeal, a translation accom-
plished so successfully that the Fourth Gospel has
always been the most popular. The Synoptists,
esp. the extremely literal St. Mark, imperatively
demand a historical commentary, while St. John
has successfully avoided this necessity. (2) The
“kingdom of God,” as a phrase (3 3.5; cf 18 36),
is replaced by “eternal life.” This life is given in
this world to the accepter of Christ’s teaching (5 24;
6 47), but its full reahzation will be in the “many
mansions’”’ of the Father’s house (14 2), where the
believer will be with Christ (17 24). A judgment of
all men will precede the establishment of this glori-
fied state (6 28.29), but the believer may face the
judgment with equanimity (6 24). So the believer
is delivered from a state of things so bad as expres-
stble as a world under Satan’s rule (12 31; 14 30;
16 11), a world in darkness (8 19), mm ignorance of
God (17 25), and in sin (8 21), all expressible in the
one word “death” (6 24). (3) The Jews had real
privilege in the reception of Christ’s message (1 11;
4 22, etc), but the extension of the good tidings to all
men was inevitable (12 23.32, etc). Belief in
Christ is wholly a personal mattcr, but the believers
enter a community of service (13 14), with the unity
of the Father and Son as their ideal (17 21). (4)
The nature of the moral ideal, reduced to the single
word “love” (13 34; 16 12), is assumed as known
and identified with “Christ’s words” (5 24; 6 63,
etc), and the necessity of progress toward it as
sharply pointed as in the Synoptists. The sinner
is the servant of sin (8 34), a total change of char-
acter isneeded (3 6), and the blessing is only on him
who does Christ’s commandments (18 17). This
“doing” is the proof of love toward Christ (14 15.
21); only by bearing fruit and more fruit ean dis-
cipleship be maintained (16 1-6; cf 14 24), and,
indeed, by bearing fruit men actually become Christ’s
disciples (15 8, Gr). The knowledge of Christ and
of God that is eternal life (17 3) comes only through


; us and by us now.


moral effort (7 17). In St. John the contrasts are
colored so vividly that it would almost appear as
if perfection were demanded. But he does not
present even the apostles as models of sanctity
(13 38; 16 32), and self-righteousness is condemned
without compromise; the crowning sin is to say,
“We see” (9 41). It is the Son who frees from sin
(8 36), delivers from darkness (8 12; 12 46), and
gives eternal life (11 25.26; cf 3 16; 5 24; 6 47).
This emphasis on the Divine side of the process is
probably the reason for the omission of the terms
“Tepent,’”’ “repentance,” from the Gospel in favor
of “faith” (6 29, esp.), but this “faith”? volves
in turn human effort, for, without abiding,” faith
is useless (8 30.31). (5) An advance on the Synop-
tists is found in the number of times Christ speaks
of His death (8 14.15; 10 11.15; 12 24.32; 17
19) and in the greater emphasis laid on it, but no
more than in the Synoptists is there any explana-
tion of how the Atonement hecame effectual. A
real advance consists in the prospect of Christ’s
work after His death, when, through the Paraclete
(7 38.39; 14 16 ff), a hitherto unknown spiritual
power would become available for the world. And
spiritual power is due not only to a union of will
with Christ but to mystical union with Him (16
1-9). See above, III, 7, for the relation of these
thoughts to the synoptic teaching.

(1) The emphasis of He is of course on the sacri-
ficial work of Christ, but the Ep. makes practically

no contribution to the theology of
2. Hebrews sacrifice. The argument is this: The

OT sacrifices certamly had an efficacy;
Christ’s sacrifice fulfilled their types perfectly,
therefore it had a perfect efficacy (9 13.14). This
must have been a tremendously potent argument
for He’s own purpose, but it is of very little help to
the modern theologian. (2) More than in St. Paul
is emphasized the human training of Christ for
His high-priestly work. Since He laid hold of the
seed of Abraham (2 16), He learned by experience
all that man had to suffer (2 17; 4 15; & 8, etc).
In He the essence of the sacrifice lies not in the
death but in what we call the ascension—the pres-
entation of the blood in the heavenly tabernacle
(9 11-14; see the comms.). That the death was
specifically on the cross (12 2 only) belonged to the
stage of training and had no especial significance
in the sacrificial scheme. Christ’s intercession for
us in heaven receives more emphasis than in the
rest of the NT (7 25).

The one other distinct contribution to NT sote-

riology is made in 1 Pet’s evaluation of the vicarious

suffering of the ‘Servant?’ of Isa 53.
3. St. Peter What Christ did throngh His sufferings

we may do in some degree through our
sufferings; as His pains helped not only living man-
kind, hut even departed sinners, so we may face
persecution more happily with the thought that our
pains are henefiting other men (3 16-20). It is
hardly possible that St. Peter thought of this com-
parison as conveying an exhaustive description of
the Atonement (cf 1 19), but that the comparison
should be made at all is significant.

(1) Salvation is@both a present and a future
matter for us. The full realization of all that God
has in store will not be ours until the
end of human history (if, indeed, there
will not be opened infinite possibilities
of eternal growth), but the enjoyment
of these blessings depends on conditions fulfilled in
‘ _ But a forctaste of the blessings
of forgiveness of sins and growth in holiness is given
ou this earth. The pardon depends on the fact of
God’s mercy through the death of Christ—a fact
for religious experience but probably incapable
of expression as a complete philosophical dogma.


4. Sum-
mary


2671


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Salvation
Samaria


But strength comes from God through the glorified
Christ (or through the Spirit), this vital union with
God being a Christian fundamental. These two
lines are in large degree independent, and the selec-
tion of the proportions profitable to a given soul is
the task of the pastor. (2) That human effort is
an essential in salvation is not to be denied in the
face of all the NT evidence, esp. St. Paul taken as
a whole. And yet no one with the faintest con-
ception of what religion means would think of
coming before God to claim merit. Here the purely
intellectual discussions of the subject and its psy-
chological course in the soul run in different chan-
nels, and ‘‘anti-synergistic’’ arguments are really
based on attempts to petrify psychological expe-
rience into terms of pure dogma. (3) Still more
true is this of attempts to describe mathematically
the steps m salvation—the ordo salutis of the older
dogmatics—for_ this differs with different souls.
In particular, NT data are lacking for the develop-
ment of the individual born of Christian parents m
a Christian country. (4) Further, the social side
of salvation is an essentially Christian doctrine and
cannot be detached from the corporate life of the
Christian church. Salvation from temporal evils is
equally, if secondarily, Christian. Nationalism in
salvation is at present much in the background.
But it is as true today as it was in ancient Israel
that the sins of a nation tend to harm the souls of
even those who have not participated actively in
those sins.


LiteraTuRE.—The literature of salvation is virtually
the literature of theology (see under separate arts.,
ATONEMENT; JUSTIFICATION; SANCTIFICATION; PERSON
or CuristT; JOHANNINE THEOLOGY; PAULINE THEOLOGY,
etc), but a few recent works may be mentioned. In-
dispensable are the works of Stevens, The Christian
Doctrine of Salvation and The Pauline Theology. Gar-
vie's Romans in the ‘New Century"’ series_should be
used as a supplement to any other comm. on Rom. The
juridical theory has as its best defencein Eng. Denney's
The Death of Christ. _The ethical theory is best presented
in the works of Du Bose, The Gospel in the Gospels, The
Gospel according to St. Paul, and High-Priesthood and
Sacrifice (Sanday's Expos reviews of the two former, re-
printed in The Life of Christ in Recent Research, should be
read in any case).

Burton Scotr Easton


SAMAEL, sam/’a-el: AV=RV Sauamiet (q.v.).


SAMAIAS, sa-ma’yas (Zapatas, Samaias):

(1) One of the ‘captains over thousands”’ promi-
nent at the Passover of Josiah (1 Esd 1 9)=‘She-
maiah” in 2 Ch 36 9.

(2) One of the heads of families of the sons of
Adonikam who returned with Ezra (1 Esd 8 39)=
“Shemaiah” in Ezr 8 18.

(3) One of the “men of understanding” whom
Ezra commissioned to obtain from Loddeus, the
captain, men to execute the priest’s office (1 Esd
8 44)="Shemaiah” in Ezr 8 16 (AV Mamaias).

(4) AV=RV “Shemaiah the great,” a kinsman
of Tobit and father of Ananias and Jonathan (Tob
5 13). 8S. ANGUS


SAMARIA, sa-mi‘ri-a, CITY OF (J1N9W, shom’-
rén; Zapdpea, Samdreia, Zepepdv, Semeron, and
other forms): ’

(1) eee was the first cMMial of the Northern
Kingdom (1 K 12 25). Jeroboam seems later to
have removed the royal residence to Tirzah (14 17).
‘After the brief reigns of Elah and Zimri came that
of Omri, who reigned 6 years in Tirzah, then he
purchased the hill of Samaria and built a city there,
which was thenceforward the metropolis of the king-
dom of Israel (16 24). Here the hill and the city
are said to have been named after Shemer, the origi-
nal owner of the land. There is nothmg intrns)-
cally improbable in this. It might naturally be
derived from shdmar, and the name m the sense of


“outlook” would fitly apply to a city in such a
commanding position. The residence, it was also
the burying-place, of the kings of Israel (1 K 16 28;
22 37; 2 K 10 35; 13 9.13; 14 16).

Toward the western edge of the Ephraimite up-
lands there is a broad fertile hollow called Wdady
esh-Sha‘ir, ‘valley of barley.’”’ From the midst of
it rises an oblong hill to a height of over 300 ft., with
a level top. The sides are steep, esp. to the S.
The greatest length is from IE. to W. The sur-
rounding mountains on three sides are much higher,
and are well clad with olives and vineyards. To
the W. the hills are lower, and from the crest a wide
view is obtained over the Plain of Sharon, with the
yellow ribbon of sand that marks the coast line, and
the while foam on the tumbling billows; while
away beyond stretch the blue waters of the Medi-
terranean. On the eastern end of the hill, sur-
rounded by olive and cactus, is the modern village
of Sebastiych, under which a low neck of land con-
nects the hill with the eastern slopes. The position


Ruins in Samaria.


is one of great charm and beauty; and in days of
ancient warfare it was one of remarkable strength.
While it was overlooked from three sides, the battle-
ments crowning the stcep slopes were too far off to
be reached by missiles from the only artillery known
in those times—the sling and the catapult. For
besiegers to attempt an assault at arms was only to
court disaster. The methods adopted by her ene-
mies show that they relied on famine to do their
work for them (2 K 6 24f, etc). Omri displayed
excellent taste and good judgment in the choice he
made.

The city wall can be traced in almost its entire
length. Recent excavations conducted by Ameri-
can archaeologists have uncovered the foundations
of Omri’s palace, with remains of the work of Ahab
and of Herod (probably here was Ahab’s ivory
palace), on the western end of the hill, while on the
western slope the gigantic gateway, flanked by
massive towers, has been exposed to view.

Under the influence of Jezebel, Samaria naturally
became a center of idolatrous worship. Ahab
“reared up an altar for Baalin the house of Baal,
which he had built in Samaria. And Ahab made the
Asherah” (1 K 16 32f). Jehoram his son put
away the pillar of Baal (2 K 3 2), and within the
temple Jehu made an end at once of the instruments
of idolatry and of the priests (10 19f). There are
many prophetic references to the enormities prac-
tised here, and to their inevitable consequences
(isa 8 4; 99; 109; 28 1ff; 3619; Jer 23 13;
Ezk 23 4; Hos 71; 18 16; Am 3 12; Mic 1 6,
etc).

Under pressure of Damascus Omri conceded to the


Samaria
Samaritans


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2672


Syrians the right to ‘make streets in Samaria” (1 K
20 34).

Ben-hadad II besieged the city, but suffered
ignominious defeat (20 1-21; Jos, Ant, VIII, xiv,
1f). Persistent attempts by the Syrians to reach
the city m the time of Jehoram were frustrated by
Elisha (2 KX 6 8 ff; Jos, Ant, IX, iv, 3). At
length, however, Ben-hadad again invested the city,
and the besieged were reduced to dire straits, in
which, urged by famine, scenes of awful horror were
enacted (2 K 6 24 ff). A mysterious panic seized
the Syrians. Their deserted camp was discovered
by despairmg lepers who carried the good news to
the famished citizens of the plenty to be found there.
Probably in the throat of the great western gateway
occurred the crush m which the incredulous captain
was trampled to death (ch 7; Jos, Ani, IX, iv, 5).

Here the 70 sons of Ahab were slain by Jehu in
the general destruction of the house of Ahab (2 K
10 1 ff). In Samaria, the Chronicler tells us, Aha-
ziah in vain hid from Jehu (2 Ch 22 9; cf 2 K 9
27). Pekah brought hither much spoil from Jerus
and many captives, whom, at the instance of the
prophet Oded, he released (2 Ch 28 8 ff). The
siege of Samaria was begun by Shalmaneser in the
7th year of Hoshea, and the city was finally taken
by Sargon II at the end of 3 years, 722 BC (2 K 17
5f; 18 9f; Ani, IX, xiv, 1). This marked the
downfall of the Northern Kingdom, the people
being transported by the conqueror. That this
was not done in a thoroughgoing way is evident
from the fact recorded in the inscriptions that two
years later the country had to be subdued again.
Colonists were brought from other parts to take the
places of the exiles (2 K 17 24; Ezr 410). Alex-
ander the Great took the city in 331 BC, killed many
of the inhabitants, and settled others i Shechem,
replacing them with a colony of Syro-Macedonians.
He gave the adjoining country to the Jews (CAp,
II, 4). The city suffered at the hands of Ptolemy
Lagi and Demetrius Poliorcetes, but it was still a
place of strength (Jos, Ant, XIII, x, 2) when John
Hyrcanus came against itm 120 BC. It was taken
after a year’s siege, and the victor tried to destroy
the city utterly. His turning of the water into
trenches to undermine the foundations could only
refer to the suburbs under the hill. From the only
two sources, ‘Ain Harin and ‘Ain Kefr Rima, to
the E. of the town, the water could not rise to the
hill. The ‘many fountains of water’? which Ben-
jamin of Tudela says he saw on the top, from which
water enough could be got to fill the trenches, are
certainly not to be seen today; and they have left
no trace behind them. The city was rebuilt by
Pompey and, having again fallen under misfortune,
was restored by Gabinius (Jos, Ant, XIV, iv, 4;
v,3; BJ, 1, vu, 7; viii, 4). To Herod it owed the
chief splendor of its later days. He extended,
strengthened and adorned it on a scale of great
magnificence, calling it Sebaste (=Augusta) in
honor of the emperor, a name which survives in the
modern Sebastiyeh. A temple also was dedicated
to Caesar. Its site is probably marked by the im-
pressive flight of steps, with the pedestal on which
stood the gigantic statue of Augustus, which recent
excavations have revealed. The statue, somewhat
mutilated, is also to be seen. Another of Herod’s
temples W. of the present village was cleared out
by the same explorers. The remains of the great


double-columned street, which ran round the upper -


terrace of the hill, bear further testimony to the
splendor of this great builder’s work (Jos, Ant, XV,
vii, 3; viii, 5; BJ, 1, xxi, 2). It was here that
Herod killed perhaps the only human being whom he
ever really loved, his wife Mariamne. Here also
his sons perished by his hand (Jos, Ant, XV, vii,
5-7; XVI, ui, 1-3; xi, 7).


It is commonly thought that this city was the
scene of Philip’s preaching and the events that
followed recorded in Acts 8, but the absence of the
def. art. in ver 5 makes this doubtful. A Rom
colony was settled here by Septimius Severus.
From that time little is known of the history of the
city; nor do we know to what the final castastrophe
was due. It became the seat of a bishopric and
was represented in the councils of Nicaea, Con-
stantinople and Chalcedon. Its bishop attended
the Synod of Jerus in 536 AD.

The Church of St. John, a Crusading structure
beside the modern village, is now a Moslem mosque.
It is the traditional burymg-place of John the Bap-
tist’s body. ;

(2) } Zaudpea, he Samdreia: A town mentioned
in 1 Macc 6 66 as on the route followed by Judas
from the district of Hebron to the land of the Philis.
The name is probably a clerical error. The margin
reads Marisa, and probably the place intended is
Mareshah, the site of which is at 7'ell Sandahannah,
about a mile 8. of Bett Jibrin. W. Ewine


SAMARIA, COUNTRY OF (fii, shdm*ran;
| Dapapetris xmpa, hé Samareitis chora): The name
oi the city was transferred to the country of which
it was the capital, so that Samaria became synony-
mous with the Northern Kingdom (1 K 13 32;
Jer 31 5, etc). The extent of territory covered by
this appellation varied greatly at different periods.
At first it included the land held by Israel E. of the
Jordan, Galilee and Mt. Ephraim, with the north-
ern part of Benjamin. It was shorn of the eastern
portion by the conquest of Tiglath-pileser (1 Ch
5 26). Judah probably soon absorbed the terri-
tory of Dan in the 8S. In NT times Samaria had
shrunk to still smaller dimensions. Then the
country W. of the Jordan was divided into three
portions: Judaea in the 8., Galilee in the N., and
Samaria in the middle. The boundaries are given
in general terms by Jos (BJ, III, iii, 1, 4, 5). The
southern edge of the Plain of Esdraelon and the
lands of Scythopolis, the city of the Decapolis W. of
the Jordan, formed the northern boundary. It
reached S. as far as _ the toparchy of Acrabatta
(modern ‘Akrabeh), while on the border between
Samaria and Judaea lay the villages of Annath and
Borceos, the modern Khirbet ‘Aina and Berkit,
about 15 miles 8. of Nablus. The Jordan of course
formed the eastern boundary. On the W. the coast
plain as far as Acre belonged to Judaea. The
country thus indicated was much more open to
approach than the high plateau of Judah with its
steep rocky edges and difficult passes. The road
from the N. indeed was comparatively easy of
defence, following pretty closely the line of the
watershed. But the gradual descent of the land
to the W. with long, wide valleys, offered inviting
avenues from the plain. The great trade routes,
that to the fords of Jordan and the E., passin
through the cleft in the mountains at Shechem, an
those connecting Egypt with the N. and the N.E.,
traversed Samarian territory, and brought her into
constant intercourse with surrounding peoples.
The influence of the,heathen religions to which she
was thus exposed nifde a swift impression upon her,
leading to the corruptions of faith and life that
heralded her doom (Jer 23 13; Hos 7 1ff, ete).
The Assyrians came as the scourge of God (2 K 17
5-23). Their attack centered on the capital. Shal-
maneser began the siege, and after three years the
city fell to Sargon II, his successor. With the fall
of Samaria the kingdom came to an end. Follow-
ing the usual Assyr policy, great numbers of the in-
habitants were deported from the conquered coun-
try, and their places taken by men brought from
“Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Avva, and


2673


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Samaria
Samaritans


ot


from Hamath and Sepharvaim,” cities which had
already bowed to the Assyr power (ver 24).

It appears from the Assyr inscriptions that the
number carried away was 27,290. The number
afterward deported from Judah was 200,000, and
then the poorest of the land were left to be vine-
dressers and husbandmen (2 K 26 12). It is evi-
dent that, a similar poliey must have been followed
in Samaria, as 27,290 eould certainly not include
the whole population of the eities and the country.
But it would include the higher classes, and esp.
the priests from whom the victors would have most
to fear. The population therefore after the con-
quest contained a large proportion of Israelites.
It was no doubt among these that Josiah exercised
his reforming energy (2 K 23 19f; 2 Ch 34 6f).
Here also must have been that ‘remnant of Israel,”
Manasseh and Ephraim, who contributed for the
repair of the house of God (ver 9). These people,
left without their religious guides, mingling with
the heathen who had brought their gods and, pre-
sumably, their priests with them, were apt to be
turned from the purity of their faith. A further
importation of pagan settlers took place under
Esar-haddon and Osnappar (Ezr 4 9.10). The
latter is to be identified with Assur-bani-pal. What
the proportions of the different elements in the pop-
ulation were, there is now no means of knowing.
That there was some intermarriage is probable;
but having regard to racial exelusiveness, we may
suppose that it was not common. When the Jews
deny to them any relation to Israel, and call them
Cuthaeans, as if they were the descendants purely
of the heathen settlers, the facts just mentioned
should be borne in mind.

After the Assyr conquest we are told that the
people suffered from lions (2 K 17 25). Jos (Ant,
IX, xiv, 3) says “a plague seized upon them.” In
aecordance with the ideas of the time, the strangers
thought this due to the anger of the tutelary deity
of the land, because they worshipped other gods in
his territory, while neglecting him. Ignorant of
his special ritual (‘‘manner’’), they petitioned the
Assyr king, who sent one (Jos says “some’’) of the
priests who had been carried away to teach them
“how they should fear the Lord.” How much is
implied in this “fearing of the Lord” is not clear.
They continued at the same time to serve their own
gods. There is nothing to show that the Israelites
among them fell into their idolatries. The interest
of these in the temple at Jerus, the use of whieh
they may now have shared with the Jews, is proved
by 2 Ch 34 9. In another place we are told that
four score men “from Shechem, from Shiloh, and
from Samaria,’’ evidently Israelites, were going up
with their offerings to the house of the Lord (Jer
41 5). Once the people of the country are called
Samaritans (2 K 17 29). Elsewhere this name
has a purely religious significance. See Samanri-
TANS.

Of the history of Samaria under Assyr and Bab
rulers we know nothing. It reappears at the return
of the Jews under Pers auspices. The Jews refused
the proffered assistance of the Samaritans in rebuild-
ing the temple and the walls of Jerus (Ear 4 1.3).
Highly offended, the latter sought to frustrate the
purpose of the Jews (vs 4ff; Neh 4 7ff; 1 Esd 2
16 ff). That the Samaritans were accustomed to
worship in Jerus is perhaps implied by one phrase
in the letter sent to the Pers king: “The Jews that
came up from thee are come éo us unto Jerus (Ear
4 12). Perhaps also they may be referred to in
6 21. Idolatry is not alleged against the “adver-
saries.”” We can hardly err if we ascribe the refusal
in some degree to the old antagonism between the
N. and the S., between Ephraim and Judah. What-
ever the cause, it led to a wider estrangement and a


deeper bitterness. For the history of the people
and their temple on Gerizim, see SAMARITANS.

Samaria, with Pal, fell to Alexander after the
battle of Issus. Antiochus the Great gave it to
Ptolemy Epiphanes, as the dowry of his daughter
Cleopatra (Jos, Ant, XII, iv, 1). John Hyrcanus
reduced and desolated the country (Jos, BJ, I, ii,
6f). After varying fortunes Samaria became part
of the kingdom of Herod, at whose death it was
given to Archelaus (Jos, Ant, XVII, xi, 4; BJ, II,
vi, 3). When Archelaus was banished it was joined
to the Rom province of Syria (Jos, Ant, XVII,
xil, 5; BJ, II, viii, 1).

Samaria is a eountry beautifully diversified with
mountain and hill, valley and plain. The olive
grows plentifully, and other fruit trees abound.
There is much excellent soil, and fine crops of barley
and wheat are reaped annually. The vine also is
largely cultivated on the hill slopes. Remains of
ancient forests are found in parts. As Jos said,
it is not naturally watered by many rivers, but
derives its chief moisture from rain water, of which
there is no lack (BJ, III, iii, 4). He speaks also
of the excellent grass, by reason of which the cows
yield more milk than those in any other place.

There is a good road conneeting Nablus with
Jaffa; and by a road not quite so good, it is now
possible to drive a carriage from Jerus to Nazareth,
passing through Samaria. W. Ewine


SAMARITAN, sa-mar’i-tan, PENTATEUCH,
THE. See Pentateucu, THe SAMARITAN.


SAMARITANS, sa-mar’i-tanz (D7) 9W, shdm-
rénim; Zapapeitrar, Samareital, NT Zapaplrys
[sing.], Samarttés): The name “Samaritans” in 2 K
17 29 clearly applies to the Israelitish inhabitants
of the Northern Kingdom. In subsequent history
it denotes a people of mixed origin, composed of the
peoples brought by the conqueror from Babylon
and elsewhere to take the places of the expatriated
Israelites and those who were left in the land (722
BC). Sargon claims to have earried away only
27,290 of the inhabitants (AJB, II, 55). Doubtless
these were, as in the case of Judah, the chief men,
men of wealth and influence, including all the
priests, the humbler classes being left to till the
land, tend the vineyards, etc. Hezekiah, who came
to the throne of Judah probably in 715 BC, could
still appeal to the tribes of Ephraim, Manasseh,
Issachar, Asher and Zebulun (2 Ch 30 5.10.11.
18 ff); and the presence of these tribesmen is im-
plied in the narrative of Josiah’s reformation (84
6f). Although the number of the eolonists was
increased by Esar-haddon and Osnappar (Assur-
bani-pal, Ezr 4 2.9f), the population, it is reason-
able to suppose, continued prevailingly Israelite;
otherwise their religion would not so easily have
won the leading place. The colonists thought it
necessary for their own safety to acknowledge Jeh,
in whose land they dwelt, as one among the gods to
be feared (2 K 17 24ff). In the imtermixture
that followed ‘their own gods’’ seem to have fallen
on evil days; and when the Samaritans asked per-
mission to share in building the temple under
Zerubbabel, they elaimed, apparently with a good
conscience, to serve God and to sacrifice to Him as
the Jews did (Ezr 4 If). Whatever justification
there was for this claim, their proffered friendship
was turned to deadly hostility by the blunt refusal
of their request. The old enmity between north
and south no doubt intensified the quarrel, and the
antagonism of Jew and Samaritan, in its bitterness,
was destined to pass into a proverb. The Samari-
tans set themselves, with great temporary success,
to frustrate the work in which they were not per-
mitted to share (Ear 4 4ff: Neh 4 7 ff. ete).


Samatus
Samson


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2674


From the strict administration of the Law in
Jerus malcontents found their way to the freer at-
mosphere of Samaria. Among these renegades was
Manasseh, brother of the high priest, who had mar-
ried a daughter of Sanballat, the Pers governor of
Samaria. According to Jos, Sanballat, with the
sanction of Alexander the Great, built a temple for
the Samaritans on Mt. Gerizim, ef which Manasseh
became high priest (Ant, XI, vii, 2; viii, 2 ff).
Jos, however, places Manasseh a century too late.
He was a contemporary of Ezra and Nehemiah
(Neh 13 28).

When it suited their purpose the Samaritans
elaimed relationship with the Jews, asserting that
their roll of the Pent was the only authentic copy (see
PENTATEUCH, THE SAMARITAN); they were equally
ready to deny all connection in times of stress, and
even to dedicate their temple to a heathen deity
(Jos, Ant, XII, v, 5). In 128 BC, John Hyrcanus
destroyed the temple CXIII, ix, 1). In the time of
Christ the Samaritans were ruled by procurators
under the Rom governor of Syria. Lapse of years
brought no lessening of the hatred between Jews
and Samaritans (Ant, XX, vi, 1). To avoid insult
and injury at the hands of the latter, Jews from
Galilee were accustomed to reach the feasts at Jerus
by way of Peraea. ‘‘Thou art a Samaritan, and
hast a demon’’ was an expression of opprobrium
(Jn 8 48). Although Jesus forbade the Twelve to
go into any city of the Samaritans (Mt 10 5), the
parable of the Good Samaritan shows that His love
overleaped the boundaries of national hatred (Lk
10 30 ff; cf 17 16; Jn 4 9).

During the Jewish war Cerealis treated the Sa-
maritans with great severity. On one occasion (67
AD) he slaughtered 11,600 on Mt. Gerizim. For
some centuries they were found in considerable
numbers throughout the empire, east and west,
with their synagogues. They were noted as “‘bank-
ers” and money-changers. For their anti-Christian
attitude and conduct Justinian inflicted terrible
vengeanceonthem. From this the race seems never
to have recovered. Gradually dwindling, they
now form a small community in Ndblus of not
more than 200 souls. Their great treasure is their
ancient copy of the Law. See Samaria.

Litzrature.—The best account of the Samaritans
is Milis, Nablus and the Modern Samaritans (Murray,
London); ef Montgomery, The Samaritans (1907). A
good recent description by Rev. J. E. H. Thomson, D.D.,


of the Passover celebrated annually on Mt. Gerizim will
be found in PEFS, 1902, 82 ff.
W. Ewina


SAMATUS, sam’a-tus (Zdparos, Sdmatos): One
of the sons of Ezora who put away their “strange
wives” (1 Esd 9 34). It is difficult to say which,
if any, name it represents in || Ezr 10 34 ff, where
no “sons of Ezora”’ are inserted between ‘‘sons of
Bani” and “sons of Nebo”: probably Shallum
(ver 42), but possibly Shemariah (ver 41).


SAMECH, sam’ek (0, samekh): The 15th letter
of the Heb alphabet; transliterated in this Ency-
clopaedia as s. It came to be used for the number
60. For name, etc, see ALPHABET.


SAMEIUS, sa-mé’yus: AV=RV Sameus (q.v.).


SAMELLIUS, sa-mel’i-us (B, Zapé\dcos, Samél-
lios, A, ZePée\dvos, Sebéllios, al DepéddAvos, Semeéllios;
AV Semellius): ‘‘S. the scribe,” one of those who
wrote a letter of protest to Artaxerxes against the
building of Jerus by the returned exiles (1 Esd 2
16.17.25.30) =‘‘Shimshai” in Ezr 4 8.


SAMEUS, sa-mé’us (A and Fritzsche, Zapaios,
Samoios, B, Oapatos, Thamaios; AV Sameius):
One of the sons of Emmer who put awny their


“strange wives’ (1 Esd 9 21) =‘‘Shemaiah” (RVm
“NMlaaseiah”) of the sons of Harim in Ezr 10 21.


SAMGAR-NEBO, sam-gir-né’b6 (12) "3°20,
samgar n*bhé, a, Bab name): An officer of Nebuchad-
nezzar, king of Babylon, who, according to the MT
of Jer 39 3, took his seat with other nobles in the
middle gate of Jerus after the Chaldaean army had
taken the city. Schrader (COT, ii, 109) holds that
the name is a Hebraized form of the Assyr Sum-
girnabu (“be gracious, Nebo’’), but Giesebrecht
(Comm., 211) conjectures for Samgar a corruption of
Sar-mag (sar-magh), equivalent to Rab-mag (rab-
magh), which implies virtual dittography. The num-
ber of variant readings exhibited by the LX-X seems
to confirm the belief that the text is corrupt. Nebo
(nabu) is there joined with the following Sarsechim
to agree with Nebushazban of ver 13. If the name
Samgar-nebo is correct, the first Nergal-sharezer
should perhaps be dropped; we would then read:
“Samgar-nebo the Sarsechim, Nebushazban_ the
Rab-saris [ef ver 13] and Nergal-sharezer the Rab-
mag” (Sayce). See Ras-mMac; Ras-saRis.

Horace J. Woir

SAMI, si’mi: AV=RV Sasi (q.v.).


SAMIS, sa’mis: AV=RV Somes (q.v.).


SAMLAGH, sam’la (M2, samlah; Yadape,
Salamd): One of the kings of Edom, of the city of
Masrekah. He reigned before the Israelites had
kings (Gen 36 36.37; 1 Ch 1 47.48). The fact
that the city is mentioned in connection with the
name of the king suggests that Edom was a con-
federacy at this time and the chief city was the
metropolis of the whole country.


SAMMUS, sam/us (A, Zappots, Sammoirs,
B, Zappot, Sammow): One of those who stood on
Ezra’s right hand as he expounded the Law (1 Esd
9 43) =“Shema” in Neh 8 4.


SAMOS, sa/mos (Zdpos, Sdmos, “height,’’ “moun-
tain”’ [see Strabo 346, 457]): One of the most famous
of the Ionian islands, third in size among the group
which includes Lesbos, Cutos (q.v.) and Cos (q.v.).
It is situated at the mouth of the bay, of Ephesus,
between the cities of EpHrsus and MILETUs (q.v.),
and separated from the mainland of Ionia by the
narrow strait where the Greeks met and conqnered
the Pers fleet in the battle of Mycale, 479 BC
(Herod. ix.100 ff). The surface of the island is very
rugged and mountainous, Mt. Kerki (modern name)
rising to a height of 4,700 ft., and it was due to this
that the island received its name (see above; see
also SAMOTHRACE).

Samos was renowned in antiquity as one of the
noted centers of Ionian Inxury, and reached its
zenith of prosperity under the rnle of the famous
tyrant Polycrates (533-522 BC), who made himself
master of the Aegean Sea. He carried on trade
with Egypt, and his intercourse with that country,
his friendship with Amasis, the famous ‘‘ring”’ story
and the revolting manner of the death of Polyc-
rates are all told in one of the most interesting
stories of Herodotus (Herod. iii.39 ff).

In 84 BC, the island was joined to the province
of Asia, and in 17 BC it became a civitas Libera,
through the favor of Augustus (Dio Cass. liv.9;
Pliny, NH, v.37). Both Marcus Agrippa and Herod
visited the island; and according to Jos (Ani,
XVI, ii, 2; BJ, I, xxi, 11) “bestowed a great many
benefits” on it. In the Apoc, Samos is mentioned
among the places to which Lucius, consul of the
Romans, wrote, asking their good will toward the
Jews (1 Macc 15 23).


2675


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Samatus
Samson


In the NT, Pau! touched here, after passing Cutos
(q.v.), on his return from his third missionary
journey (Acts 20 15). In 7'R, we find in this pas-
sage kal pelvavres év Tpuyuddlw, kai meinantes en
Trogullié (“and having remained in Trogyllium’’).
This reading is wanting in the oldest MSS, and
may be a sort of gloss, or explanation, due to the
technical use of parabddilein, “to touch land” (cf Jos,
Ant XVIII, vi, 4), and not necessarily “to make a
landing.’ ’ ‘Trogyllium lay on the mainland opposite
Samos, at the end of the ridge of Mycale. Still
there is no particular reason why this reading should
be supported, esp. as it is not found in the earliest
of authorities. Soden’s 1913 text, however, retains
the reading in brackets.

Literature.—Tozer, Islands of the Aegean (1890).
Herodotus and Pausanias have rather full accounts of


Samos, and Enc Brit (11th ed) gives a good bibliograph:
of works both ancient and modern. : cigs


ARTHUR J. KINSELLA

SAMOTHRACE, sam’é-thras (Zapopdxy, Samo-
thradké, “the Thracian Samos’; AV Samothracia,
sam-6-thra’sha; the island was formerly Dardania;
for change of name see Pausanias vii.4,3; Strabo
x.457, and for a full discussion Couze, Hauser and
Benndorf, Neue Untersuchungen auf S., 1880): An
island in the Aegean Sea, S. of Thrace opposite
the mouth of the Hebrus River, and N.W. of Troas.
The island is mountainous, as the name indicates
(see Samos), and towers above Imbros when viewed
from the Trojan coast. Thesummit is about a mile
high. It is mentioned in the Jliad (xiii.12) as the seat
of Poseidon and referred to by Virgil Aeneid vii.208.

The island was always famous for sanctity, and the
seat of a cult of the Cabeiri, which Herodotus (i1.51)
says waa derived from the Pelasgian inhabitants
(see also Aristophanes, Pax 277). The mysteries
connected with the worship of these gods later
rivaled the famous mysteries of Eleusis, and both
Philip of Macedon and Olympias his wife were
initiated here (Plut. Alez. 3).

Probably because of its sacred character the
island did not figure to any extent in history, but
in the expedition of Xerxes in 480 BC, one ship at
least of the Samothracian contingent Js mentioned
as conspicuous in the battle of Salamis.

The famous “Victory of Samothrace” (now iu
the Louvre) was set up here by Demetrius Polior-
cetes c 300 BC, and was discovered in 1863. Since
that time (1873-75), the Austrian government
carried on extensive excavations (see Conze, Hauser
and Benndorf, op. cit.).

In the NT the island is mentioned in Acts 16 11.
From Troas, Paul made a straight run to Samo-
thrace, and the next day sailed to NEAPoLIs (q.v.)
on the Thracian coast, the port of Pmurppi (q.v.).
At the northern end of S. was a town where theship
could anchor for the night, and on the return jour-
ney (Acts 20 6) a landing may have been made,
but no details are given. Pliny characterizes the
island as being most, difficult for anchorage, but
because of the hazards of sailing by night, the an-
cient navigators always anchored somewhere if
possible.

LiTEraTuRre.—See under Samos.

ArtTuur J. KINSELLA

SAMPSAMES, samp’sa-méz | (Zappapuns, Sam-
psimés): A place mentioned in 1 Mace 165 23,
usually identified with Samsun, on the coast of the
Black Sea. Vulg, with RVm, has ‘“Lampsacus.

SAMSON, sam’/sun (j1WAW, shimshon, derived
probably from WW, shemesh, “sun,” with the
diminutive ending }1-, -6n, meaning
“little sun” or “sunny,” or perhaps
“sun-man”; Zapyov, Sampsén; Lat
and Eng. Samson): His home was near Beth-


1. Name


shemesh, which means “house of the sun.’’ Com-


pare the similar formation "WW, shimshay (Har 4
8.9.17.23).

Samson was a judge, perhaps the last before
Samuel. He was a Nazirite of the tribe of Dan

(Jgs 18 5); a man of prodigious
2. Charac- strength, a giant and a gymnast—the
ter Heb Hercules, a strange champion for

Jeh! He intensely hated the Philis
who had oppressed Israel some 40 years (13 1),
and was willing to fight them alone. He seems to
have been actuated by little less than personal
vengeance, yet in the NT he is named among the
heroes of faith (He 11 32), and was in no ordinary
sense an OT worthy. He was good-natured, sar-
castic, full of humor, and fought with his wits as
well as with his fists. Milton has graphically por-
trayed his character in his dramatic poem Samson
Agonistes (1671), on which Handel built his ora-
torio Samson (1748).

The story of S.’s life is unique among the biog-

raphies of the OT. It is related in Jgs 13-16.

Like Isaac, Samuel and John the Bap-
3. Story of tist, he was a child of prayer (13 8.12).
His Life To Manoah’s wife the angel of Jeh

appeared twice (13 3.9), directing
that the child which should be boru to them should
be a Nazirite from the womb, and that he would
“begin to save Israel out of the hand of the Philis”
(13 5.7.14). The spirit of Jeh first began to move
him in Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol
(18 25). On his arriving at manhood, five remark-
able circumstances are recorded of him.

(1) His marriage with a Phili woman of Timnah
(ch 14). His parents objected to the alliance (14 3),
but §.’s motive in marrying her was that he “sought
an occasion against the Philis.”’ At the wedding
feast. 8. propounded to his guests a riddle, wagering
that if they guessed its answer he would give them
30 changes of raiment. Dr. Moore felicitously
renders the text of the riddle thus:


‘Out of the eater came something to eat,
And out of the strong came something sweet’ (14 14).


The Philis threatened the life of his bride, and she
in turn wrung from 8S. the answer; whereupon he
retorted (in Dr. Moore’s version):


‘Tf with my heifer ye did not plough,
Ye had not found out my riddle, I trow’ (14 18).


Accordingly, in revenge, 8. went down to Ash-
kelon, slew some 30 men, and paid his debt; he
even went home without his wife, and her father to
save her from shame gave her to 8.’s “best man”
(14 20). It has been suggested by W. R. Smith
(Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia, 70-76)
that 8. did not from the first intend to take his
bride to his home, his marriage being what is known
among the Arabs as a ¢adikat, or gift marriage, by
which is meant that the husband becomes a part
of the wife’s tribe. This assumes that the social
relations of the Hebrews at that time were matri-
archate, the wife remaining with her family, of
which custom there are other traces in the OT, the
husband merely visiting the wife from time to time.
But this is not so obvious in 8.’s case in view of
his pique (14 19), and esp. in view of his parents’
objection to his marrying outside of Israel (14 3).
Not knowing that his bride had been given by her
father to his friend, 8. went down to Timnah to
visit her, with a kid; when he discovered, how-
ever, that he had been taken advantage of, he went
out and caught 300 jackals, and putting firebrands
between every two tails, he burned up the grain
fields and olive yards of the Philis. The Phillis,
however, showed they could play with fire, too, and
burned his wife and her father. Thereupon, 8S.


Sager THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2676
smote the Philis in revenge, ‘‘hip and thigh’? (15 | He prayed, and Jeh heard his prayer. Guided by


1-8).

(2) When he escaped to Etam, an almost vertical
rock cliff nm Judah (by some identified with ‘Araq
Ismain) not far from Zorah, 8.’3 home, the Philis
invaded Judah, encamped at Lehi above Etam, and
demanded the surrender of their arch-enemy. The
men of Judah were willing to hand S. over to the
Philis, and accordingly went down to the cliff Etam,
bound 8. and brought him up where the Philis were
encamped (15 9-13). When S. came to Lehi the
Philis shouted as they met bim, whereupon the
spirit of Jeh came mightily upon him, so that he
broke loose from the two new ropes with which the
3,000 men of Judah had bound him, and seizing a
fresh jawbone of an ass he smote with it 1,000 men of
the Philis, boasting as he did so in pun-like poetry,
‘With the jawbone of an ass, m-ass upon m-ass’;
or, as Dr. Moore translates the passage, ‘With the
bone of au ass, I ass-ailed my ass-ailants’ (15 16).
At the same time, 8. reverently gave Jeh the glory
of his victory (15 18). 8S. being thirsty, Jeh provided
water for him at a place called En-hakkore, or
“Partridge Spring,” or “the Spring of the Caller’ —
another name for partridge (15 17-19).

(3) S. next went down to Gaza, to the very
stronghold of the Philis, their chief city. There
he saw a harlot, and, his passions not being under
control, he went in unto her. It was soon noised
about that 8., the Heb giant, was in the city. Ac-
cordingly, the Philis laid wait for him. But 8.
arose at midnight and laid hold of the doors of the
gate and their two posts, and carried them a full
quarter of a mile up to the top of the mountain that
looketh toward Hebron (16 1-3).

(4) From Gaza 8. betook himself to the valley
of Sorek where he fell in love with another Phili
woman, named Delilah, through whose machina-
tions he lost his spiritual power. The Phili lords
bribed her with a very large sum to deliver him
into their hands. Three times 8. deceived her as
to the secret of his strength, but at last he explains
that he is a Nazirite, and that his hair, which has
never been shorn, is the secret of his wonderful
power. J.G. Frazer (Golden Bough, IIL, 390 ff) has
shown that the belief that some mysterious power
resides in the hair is still widespread among savage
peoples, e.g. the Fiji Islanders. Thus 8. fell. By
disclosing to Delilah this secret, he broke his cove-
nant vow, and the Spirit of God departed from him
(16 4-20). The Philis laid hold on him, put out
his eyes, brought him down to Gaza, bound him
with fetters, and forced him to grind in the prison
house. Grinding was women’s work! It is at this
point that Milton catches the picture and writes,


“Eyeless in Gaza, at the mill with slaves.”


Howheit, the hair of his head began to grow again;
but his eyes did not! (16 21.22).

(5) The final mcident recorded of S. is in con-
nection with a great sacrificial feast which the
Phili lords gave in honor of Dagon, their god. In
their joyous celebration they sang iu rustic rhythm:

‘Our god has given us into our hand

The foe of our land,

Whom even our most powerful band

Was never able to withstand’ (16 24).
This song was accompanied probably, as Mr.
Macalister suggests, by hand-clapping (Gezer, 129).
When they became still more merry, they called
for 8. to play the buffoon, and by his pranks to
entertain the assembled multitude. The house of
Dagon was full of people; about 3,000 were upon
the roof beholding as 8. made sport. With the new
growth of his hair his strength had returned to him.
The dismantled giant longed to be avenged on his
adversaries for at least one of his two eyes (16 28).


his attendant, he took hold of the wooden posts of
the two middle pillars upon which the portico of the
house rested, and slipping them off their pedestals,
the house fell upon the lords and upon all the people
that were therein. ‘So the dead that he slew at his
death were more than they that he slew in his life’
(16 29.30). His kinsmen came and carried him
up and buried him near his boyhood home, between
Zorab and Eshtaol, in the family burying-ground
of hisfather. ‘And he judged Israel twenty years”
(16 31).

The story of Samson is 2 faithful mirror of his times:


‘Every man did that which was right in his own eyes"
(17 6; 21 25). There was no king In


4. Histori- those days, ie. no central government.
i Each tribe was separately occupied driving
cal Value out their_individual enemies. For 40
years the Philis had oppressed S.'s tribal

compatriots. Their suzerainty was also recognized by


Judah (14 4; 15 11). S. was the hero of his trihe. The
general historicity of his story cannot be impeached on
the mere ground of improbability. His deeds were those
which would most naturally be expected from a giant,
filled with a sense of justice. He received the local
popularity which a mau of extraordinary prowess would
naturally be given. AH peoples glory In their heroes.
The theory that the record In Jgs 13-16 ls based
upon some ‘solar myth" is now generally abandoned.
That there are incidents in his career which are diffi-
cult to explain, is freely granted. For example, that
he killed a lion (14 6) is not without a parallel; David
and Benaiah did the same (1 8 17 34-36; 2 83 23 20).
God always inspires a man in the line of his natural en-
dowments. That God miraculously supplied his thirst
(15 19) is no more marvelous than what God did for
Hagar in the wilderness (Gen 2] 19). That S. carried
off the doors of the gate of Gaza and their two posts,
bar and all, must not confound us till we know more
definitely their size and the distance from Gaza of the
hill to which he carried them. The fact that he pulled
down the roof on which there were 3,000 men and women


} is not at all impossible, as Mr. Macalister has shown.


If we suppose that there was an immense portico to
the temple of Dagon, as is quite possible, which was
supported by two main pillars of wood resting on bases
of stone, like the cedar pillars of Solomon's house (1 K
7 2), all that S., therefore, necessarily did, was to push
the wooden beams so that their feet would slide over
the stone hase on which they rested, and the whole por-
tico would collapse. Moreover, it is not said that the
whole of the 3,000 on the roof were destroyed (16 30).
Many of those in the temple proper prohably perished
In the number (R. A. 8. Macalister, Bible Side-Lights
fromthe Mound of Gezer, 1906, 127-38).


Not a few important and suggestive lessons are
deducible from the hero’s life: (1) 8. was the object
of parental solicitude from even before

5. Religious his birth. One of the most suggestive
Value and beautiful prayers in the OT is that
of Manoah for guidance in the train-

ing of his yet unborn child (13 8). Whatever our
estimate of his personality is, S. was closely linked
to the covenant. (2) He was endowed with the
Spirit of Jeh—the spirit of personal patriotism, the
spirit of vengeance upon a foe of 40 years’ standing
(13 1.25; 14619; 15 14). (3) Healso prayed, and
Jeh answered him, though in judgment (16 30).
But he was prodigal of his strength. S. had spirit-
ual power and performed feats which an ordinary
man would hardly perform. But he was uncon-
scious of his high vocation. In a moment of weak-
ness he yielded to Delilah and divulged the secret
of his strength. He was careless of his personal
endowment. He did not realize that physical en-
dowments no less than spiritual are gifts from God,
and that to retain them we must be obedient. (4)
He was passionate and therefore weak. The ani-
mal of his nature was never curbed, but rather ran
unchained and free. He was given to sudden fury.
8. was a wild, self-willed man. Passion ruled. He
could not resist the blandishments of women. In
short, he was an overgrown schoolboy, without self-
mastery. (5) He accordingly wrought no per-
manent deliverance for Israel; he lacked the spirit
of codperation. He undertook a task far too great
for even a giant single-handed. Yet, it must be


2677


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


allowed that 8. paved the way for Saul and David.
He began the deliverance of Israel from the Philis.
He must, therefore, be judged according to his
times. In his days there was unrestrained indi-
vidual independence on every side, each one doing
as he pleased. S. differed from his contemporaries
in that he was a hero of faith (He 11 32). He was
a Nazirite, and therefore dedicated to God. He
was given to revenge, yet he was ready to sacrifice
himself in order that his own and his people’s
enemies might be overthrown. He was willing to
lay down his own life for the sake of his fellow-
tribesmen—not to save his enemies, however, but
to kill them. (Cf Mt 6 48f; Rom 6 10.)
LITERATURE.—(1) Comms, on Jgs, notably those b

G. F. Moore, ICC, 1895; Budde, KUSEREDILTR AR OTR
mentar, 1897; Nowack, Handkommentar, 1900; E. L.
Curtis, The Bible for Home and School, 1913; Bachmann,
1868; Keil, 1862; Farrar in Ellicott’s Comm.; Watson,
Exposttor’s Bible. (2) Arts. on ‘‘Samson”’ Jn the various
aes Dicts. and Encs; in particular those by Budde,


B; OC. W. Emmet, in l-vol HDB; 8. A. Cook, New
Enc Brit; Davis, Dict. of the Bible.


Grorce L. Rosinson
SAMUEL, sam’tl-el (ONOW , shemi al; Tapovs,,
Samouél): The word “Samuel? signifies “name of
God,” or “his name is El’ (God). Other inter-
pretations of the name that have been offered are
almost certainly mistaken. The play upon the
name in 1 § 1 20 is not intended of course to be
an explanation of its meaning, but is similar to the
play upon the name Moses in Ex 2 10 and fre-
quently elsewhere in similar instances. Thus by
the addition of a few letters sh¢mw’él becomes sha’ ul
méel RNID, OND SINT), “asked of God,” and
recalls to the mother of Samuel the circumstances of
the Divine gift to her of ason. Outside of the Ist
Book of S the name of the great judge and prophet
is found in Jer 15 1; Ps 99 6 and in 1 and 2 Ch.
The reference in Jer seems intended to convey the
same impression that is given by the narrative of
18, that in some sense Samuel had come to be
regarded as a second Moses, upon whom the mantle
of the latter had fallen, and who had been once
again the deliverer and guide of the people at a great
national crisis.
The narrative of the events of the life of Samuel
appears to be derived from more than one source
(see SAMUEL, Booxs oF). The narra-
1. Sources tor had before him and made use of
and Char- biographies and traditions, which he
acter of the combined into a single consecutive
History history. The completed picture of the
-  prophet’s position and character which
is thus presented is on the whole harmonions and
consistent, and gives a very high impression of his
piety and loyalty to Jeh, and of the wide influence
for good which he exerted. There are divergences
appareut in detail and standpoint between the
sources or traditions, some of which may probably
be dne merely to misunderstanding of the trne
nature of the events recorded, or to the failure of
the modern reader rightly to appreciate the exact
circumstances and time. The greater part of the
narrative of the life of Samuel, however, appears
to have a single origin. '
In the portion of the general history of Israel
contained in 1 § are narrated the circumstances of
the future prophet’s birth (ch 1); of
2. Life his childhood and of the custom of his
parents to make anuual visits to the
sanctuary at Shiloh (2 11.18-21.26); of his vision,
and the universal recognition of him as a prophet
eujoying the special favor of Jeh (8-4 1). The
narrative is then interrupted to describe the conflicts
with the Philis, the fate of Eli and his sons, and the
capture of the ark of God. It is only after the


Samson
Samuel


return of the ark, and apparently at the close of the
20 years during which it was retained at Kiriatb-
jearim, that Samuel again comes forward publicly,
exhorting the people to repentance and promising
them deliverance from the Philis. A summary
narrative is then given of the sammoning of a na-
tional council at Mizpah, at which Samuel “judged
the children of Israel,” and offered sacrifice to the
Lord, and of Jeh’s response iu a great thunderstorm,
which led to the defeat and panic-stricken flight of
the Philis. Then follows the narrative of the erec-
tion of a commemorative stone or pillar, Eben-ezer,
“the stone of help,” and the recovery of the
Israelite cities which the Philis had captured (7
5-14). The narrator adds that the Philis came no
more within the border of Israel all the days of
Samuel (7 13); perhaps with an intentional refer-
ence to the troubles and disasters of which this
people was the cause in the time of Saul. A brief
general statement is appended of _Samuel’s practice
as a judge of going on annual circuit through the
land, and of his home at Ramah (7 15-17).

_No indication is given of the length of time occu-
pied by these events. At their close, however,
Samuel was an old man, and his sons who had been
appointed judges in his place or to help him in his
office proved themselves unworthy (8 1-3). The
elders of the people therefore came to Samuel de-
manding the appointment of a king who should be
his successor, and should judge in his stead. The
request was regarded by the prophet as an act of
disloyalty to Jeh, but his protest was. overruled
by Divine direction, and at Samuel’s bidding the
people dispersed (8 4-22). Pie ;
_ At this point the course of the narrative is again
interrupted to describe the family and origin of Saul,
his personal appearance, and the search for the lost
asses of his father (9 1-5); his meeting with Samuel
in a city in the land of Zuph, in or on the border of
the territory of Benjamin (Zuph is the name of au
ancestor of Elkanah, the father of Samuel, in 1 s
1 1), a meeting of which Samuel had received Di-
vine pre-intimation (9 15f); the honorable place
given to Saul at the feast; his anointing by Samuel
as ruler of Israel, together with the announcement
of three “‘signs,”’ which should be to Saul assurances
of the reality of his appointment and destiny; the
spirit of prophecy which took possession of the
future king, whereby is explained a proverbial say-
ing which classed Saul among the prophets; and
his silence with regard to what had passed between
himself and Samuel on the subject of the kingdom
(9 6—10 16).

It is usually, and probably rightly, believed that the
narrative of these last incidents is derived from a differ-
eut source from that of the preceding chapters. Slight
differences of inconsistency or disagreement lie on the
surface. Samuel's home is not at Ramah, but a nameless
city in the land of Zuph, where he is priest of the high
place, with a local but, as far as the narrative goes, not
a@ national influence or reputation; and it is anticipated
that he will require the customary present at the hands
of his visitors (9 6-8). He is described, moreover, not
as a judge, nor does he discharge judicial functions, but
expressly as a ‘'seer,’’ a name sald to he an earlier title
equivalent to the later '‘prophet'’ (9 9.11.19). Apart,
however, from the apparently different position which
Samuel occupies, the tone and style of the narrative is
altogether distinct from that of the preceding chapters.
It suggests, hoth in its form and In the religious coucep-
tions which are assumed or implied, an older and less
elaborated tradition than that which has found expressiou
in the greater part of the hook; and it seems to regard
events as it were from a more primitive standpoint than
the highly religious and monotheistic view of the later
accounts. Its value as a witness to history is not im-
paired, hut perhaps rather enhanced hy its separate
and independent position. The writer or compiler of
1 § has inserted it as a whole in his completed narrative
at the polnt which he judged most suitahle. To the
same source should possihly be assigned the announce-
ment of Saul's rejection in 13 8-15c.


The course of the narrative is resumed at 10 17 ff,


Samuel
Samuel, Books of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2678


where, in 2 second national assembly at Mizpah,
Saul is selected by lot and accepted by the people
as king (10 17-24); after which the people dis-
persed, and Saul returned to his home at Gibeah
(vs 25-27). At a solemn assembly at Gilgal, at
which the kingship is again formally conferred upon
Saul, Samuel delivered a farewell address to his
fellow-countrymen. A thunderstorm terrified the
people; they were reassured, however, by Samuel
with promises of the protection and favor of Jeh,
if they continued to fear and serve Him (11 14—
12 25). Later the rejection of Saul for disobedi-
ence and presumption is announced by Samuel (13
8-15a). The commission to destroy Amalek is de-
livered to Saul by Samuel; and the rejection of the
king is again pronounced because of his failure to
carry out the command. Agag is then slain by
Samuel with his own hand; and, the latter having
returned to his home at Ramah, the narrator adds
that he remained there in seclusion until the day of
his death, “mourning” for Saul, but refusing to meet
him again (ch 15). Finally the death and burial of
Samuel at Ramah, together with the lamentation
of the people for him, are briefly recorded in 25
1, and referred to again in 28 3. y

Two incidents of Samuel’s life remain, in which
he is brought into relation with the future king
David. No indication of date or circumstance is
given except that the first incident apparently
follows immediately upon the second and final re-
jection of Saul as recorded in ch 15. In 16 1-13 is
narrated the commission of Samuel to anoint a
successor to Saul, and his fulfilment of the com-
mission by the choice of David the son of Jesse, the
Bethlehemite. And, in a later chapter (19 18-24),
a second occasion is named on which the compelling
spirit of prophecy came upon Saul, and again the
proverbial saying, “Is Saul also among the proph-
ets?” is quoted (19 24; cf 10 11.12), and is appar-
ently regarded as taking its origin from this event.

The anointing of David by Samuel is a natural sequel
to his anointing of Saul, when the latter has been rejected
and his authority and rights as king have ceased. There
is nothing to determine absolutely whether the narra-
tive is derived from the same source as the greater part
of the preceding history. Slight differences of style and
the apparent presuppositions of the writer have led
most scholars to the conclusion that it has a distinct and
separate origin. If so, the compiler of the Books of S
drew upon a third source for his narrative of the life of
the seer, a source which there is no reason to regard as
other than equally authentic and reliable. With the
second incident related in 19 18-24, the case is different.
Itis hardly prohable that so striking a proverb was sug-
gested and passed into currency independently on two
distinct occasions. It seems evident that here two inde-
pendent sources or authorities were used, which gave

ardly reconcilable accounts of the origin of a well-
known saying. in one of which it has heen mistakenly
attributed to a similar but not identical occurrence in
the life of Sanl. In the final composition of the hook
both accounts were then inserted, without notice being
ren of the inconsistency which was apparent between
them.

Yet later in the history Samuel is represented as
appearing to Saul in a vision at Endor on the eve
of his death (28 11-20). _ The witch also sees the
prophet and is stricken with fear. He is described
as in appearance an old man “covered with a robe”
(ver 14). In characteristically grave and meas-
ured tones he repeats the sentence of death against
the king for his disobedience to Jeh, and announces
its execution on the morrow; Saul’s sons also will
die with him (ver 19), and the whole nation will be
involved in the penalty and suffering, as they all
had a part in the sin. |

The high place which Samuel occupies in the
thought of the writers and in the tradition and
esteem of the people is manifest throughout the
history. The different sources from which the
narrative is derived are at one in this, although
perhaps not to an equal degree. He is the last


and greatest of the judges, the first of the prophets,
and inaugurates under Divine direction the Israelite
kingdom and the Davidic line. It is
3. Charac- not without reason, therefore, that he
ter and In- has been regarded as in dignity and
fluence of importance occupying the position of
Samuel a second Moses in relation to the
people. In his exhortations and warn-
ings the Deuteronomic discourses of Moses are
reflected and repeated. He delivers the nation
from the hand of the Philis, as Moses from Pharaoh
and the Egyptians, and opens up for them a new
national era of progress and order under the rule
of the kings whom they have desired. Thus, like
Moses, he closes the old order, and establishes the
people with brighter prospects upon more assured
foundations of national prosperity and greatness.
Tn nobility of character and utterance also, and in
fidelity to Jeh, Samuel is not unworthy to be placed
by the side of the older lawgiver. The record of his
life is not marred by any act or word which would
appear unworthy of his office or prerogative. And
the few references to him in the later literature (Ps
99 6; Jer 16 1; 1 Ch 6 28; 9 22; 11 3; 26 28;
29 29; 2 Ch 36 18) show how high was the estima-
tion in which his name and memory were held by
his fellow-countrymen in subsequent ages.
Literature.—The literature is given in the art.
SamuEL, Booxs oF (q.v.).
A. 8. GEpEn


SAMUEL, BOOKS OF:


I. Puacet or tHe Books or § in roe HEBREW CANON
Il. Conrents of THE Books aNp PERIOD oF Tims
CoveEREpD BY THE History
III. Summary anp ANALYSIS
1. Life of Samuel
2. Reign and Death of Saul
3. Reign of David
(1) In Hehron
(2) In Jerusalem
4, Appendix
IV. Sources or tHe History
Two Main and Independent Sources


V. CHARACTER AND Dats orf THE SOURCES
VI. GREEK VERSIONS OF THE Books or S
VII. Evstcat anp Reticrous TEACHING


LITERATURE


I. Place in the Canon.—In the Heb Canon and
enumeration of the sacred books of the OT, the two
Books of § were reckoned as one, and formed the
third division of the Earlier Prophets (O°8"2}
DUN, nbhi’im ri’shdnim). The one book bore
the title “Samuel” eNaiati , sh°'mi’ él), not because
Samuel was believed to be the author, but because his
life and acts formed the main theme of the book,
or at least of its earlier part. Nor was the Book of
S separated by any real division in subject-matter
or continuity of style from the Book of K, which
in the original formed a single book, not two as in
the Eng. and other modern VSS. The history was
carried forward without interruption; and the
record of the life of David, begun in S, was com-
pleted in K. This continuity in the narrative of
Israelite history was made more prominent in the
LXX, where the four books were comprised under
one title and were known as the four ‘Books of the
Kingdoms” (iPro Baciedv, bibloi basileién).
This name was probably duc to the translators or
scholars of Alexandria. The division into four
books, but not the Gr title, was then adopted in
the Lat tr, where, however, the influence of Jerome
secured the restoration of the Heb names, 1 and 2
8, and 1 and 2 K (Regum). Jerome’s example was
universally followed, and the fourfold division with
the Heb titles found a place in all subsequent VSS
of the OT Scriptures. Ultimately the distinction of
5 and K each into two books was received also into
printed editions of the Heb Bible. This was done
tor the first time in the editio princeps of the Rab-
binic Bible, printed at Venice in 1516-17 AD.


2679


I. Contents and Period of the History.—The
narrative of the two Books of § covers a period of
about a hundred years, from the close of the un-
settled era of the Judges to the establishment and
consolidation of the kingdom under David. It is
therefore a record of the changes, national and con-
stitutional, which accompanied this growth and
development of the national life, at the close of
which the Israelites found themselvesa united people
under the rule of a king to whom all owed allegiance,
controlled and guided by more or less definitely
established institutions and laws. This may be
described as the general purpose and main theme
of the books, to trace the advance of the people
under Divine guidance to a state of settled pros-
perity and union in the promised land, and to give
prominence to the theocratic rule which was the
essential condition of Israel’s life as the people of
God under all the changing forms of early govern-
ment. The narrative therefore centers itself around
the lives of the three men, Samuel, Saul and David,
who were chiefly instrumental in the establishment
of the monarchy, and to whom it was due more
than to any others that Israel emerged from the
depressed and disunited state in which the tribes
had remained during the period of the rule of the
Judges, and came into possession of a combined
and effective national life. If the formal separation
therefore into two books be disregarded, the his-
tory of Israel as it is narrated in ‘Samuel’ is most
naturally divided into three parts, which are fol-
lowed by an appendix recording words and inci-
dents which for some reason had not found a place
in the geueral narrative:


AY: ge ute and rule of Samuel (1 S 1-15) (death 1 8
a
B. The life, reign and death of Saul (1 S 16—2 81).
C. The reign and acts of David to the suppression of
the two rehellions of Absalom and Sheha (2 8 2-20).
D. Appendix; other incidents in the reign of David, the


names of his chief warriors and his Song or Psalm
of Praise (2 8 21-24).

IL Summary and Analysis.—To present a brief
and clear analysis of these Books of S is not
altogether easy. Tor as in the Pent and the earlier
historical Books of Josh and Jgs, repetitions and
apparently duplicate accounts of the same event
are found, which interfere with the chronological
development of the narrative. Even the main
divisions, as stated above, to a certain extent over-


lap.
(1) Visit of Hannah to Shiloh, and promise of the birth
ofason (18 1 1-19); birth and weaning of Samnel, and
presentation to Eli at Sbiloh (1_ 19-28).
1. Life of (2) Hannah's song Oras (2 1-10);
. ministry of Samuel to Eli the priest (2
Samuel 11.18-21.26); the evil practices of the
(1$ 1-15) sons of Eli and warning to Eli of the con-
2 sequences to his house (2 12-17.22-25.
27-36).


(3) Samuel’s vision ae the ee and his induction
rophetic office (3 1— A a
2 a Beteat of the Israclites hy the Philis, capture of
the ark of God, death of the two sons of Eli and of Eli
i ch 4).
Sag yeaa eres of Dagon before the ark of God at
Ashdod: return of the ark to Beth-shemesh, with expi-
atory offerings of golden tumors and golden mice; its
twenty years’ sojourn at Kiriath-jearim (5 1—7 4).

(6) Assembly of Israel under Samuel at Mizpah, and
victory over the Philis (7 5-14); Samuel estahlished as
judge over all Israel (vs 15-17). .

(7) Samuel’s sons appointed to be dudies and the con-
sequent demand of the people for a king; Samuel’s
warning concerning the character of the king for whom

ch 8). t
Bae aeeuie merch for the lost asses of his father and
meeting with Samuel (ch 9).

(9) Saul is anointed by Samuel to be ruler over the
people of Israel, and receives the gift of rophecy ao
1-16); second assembly of the necpe under Samuel at
Mizpah, aud election of Saul to be ing (vs 17-27).

(10) Victory of Saul over the Ammonites and deliver-
ance of Jahesb-gilead (1] 1-13); Saul made king in

ilgal (vs 14.15). :

Bea eee onan to the people in Gilgal, defend-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


| wife, after the death of


Samuel
Samuel, Books of


ing his own life and action, and exhorting them to fear
and serve the Lord (ch 12).

(12) Saul at Gilgal offers the burnt offering in Samuel's
absence; gathering of the Philis to battle at Michmash;
the Israclites’ lack of weapons of iron (eh 18). %

013) Jonathan's surprise of the Phili army, and their
sndden panic (14 1-23); Saul’s vow, unwittingly broken
hy Jonathan, whom the people deliver from the fatal con-
sequences (vs 24-45); victories of Saul over his enemies
on every side (vs 46-52). 2

(14) War against Amalek, and Saul's disobedience
tone eee command to exterminato the Amalekites

Cc by

(1) Anointing of David as Saul's successor (16 1-13);
his summons to the court of Saul to act as minstrel

before the king (vs 14-23).
2. Reign @ David and Goliath (ch 17).

3 d 3) The love of David aud Jonathan
and Death (1§ 1-4); the former's advancement and
of Saul fame, the jealousy of Saul, and his attempt
(1 S 16— to kill David (18 5—16.29.30); David's mar-
291 riage to the daughter of Sanl (vs 17-28).

) 4) Saul’s renewed jealousy of David

and second attempt to kill him (19 1-17);

David's escape to Ramah, whither the king followed
(vs 18-24).

(5) Jonathan's warning to David of his father's resolve
and their parting (ch 20). ; :

; ees at Nob (21 1-9); and with Achish of Gath

vs 10-15).

(7) David's band of ontlaws at Adnllam (22 1.2);
his provision for the safety of his father and mother in
Moah (vs 3-5); vengeance of Saul on those who had
helped _ David (vs 6-23).

(8) Repeated attempts of Saul to take David (chs


, 24).
(9) Seath of Samuel (25 1); Abigail becomes David's
er husband Nabal (vs 2-44).

(0) Sanl's further pursnit of David (ch 26).

(11) David’s sojourn with Achish of Gath (27 1—28
2.29); Saul and the witch of Endor (28 3-25).

(12) David's pursuit of the Amalekites who had raided
Ziklag, and victory (ch 30).

(13) Battle hetween the Philis and Israel in Mt. Gil-
boa and death of Saul (ch 81).

(14) News of Saul’s death brought to David at Ziklag
(2.8 1 1-16); David’s lamentation over Saul and
Jonathan (vs 17-27).

® David's seven and a half years’ reign over Judah
in Hebron (2 8 2 1—5 8).

a) Consecration of David as king in
3. Reign of Hebron (2 1-42); message to the men of
David Jahesh-gilead_ (2 40-7); {sh-hosheth made

avi king over Northern Israel (vs 8-11);

(2 S 2-20) Geel or Abner and death of Asahel
VS — .


(b) Iucrease of the fame and prosperity of David, and
the names of his sons (3 1—5); Abhner’s submission to
eae treacherous murder of the former hy Joah

vs 6-39).

(c) Murder of Ish-bosheth and David's vengeance
nupou his murderers (4 1-3.5-12); notice of the escape
of Mephihbosheth, when Saul and Jonathan were slain at
Jezreel (ver 4).

(d) David accepted as king over all Israel (5 1-3).

(2) Reign of David in Jerus over united Israel (5 4—


0 26).
5 gine of Jerus and victories over the Philis
5).

{2 Return of the ark to the city of David (ch 6).

ce) David's purpose to build a temple for the Lord
(7 1-8); the Divine answer by the prophet Nathan,
and the king’s prayer (vs 4-29).
1 Victories over the Philis, Syrians, and other peoples


).

(e) David’s reception of Mephibosheth (ch 9).

Y Defeat of the Ammonites and Syrians by the men
srael under the command of Joab (10 1—11 1).

(g) David and Uriah, the latter's death in battle, and
David's marriage with Bath-sheha (11 2-27).

(kh) Nathan's Papable and David's conviction of sin
(12 1-15a); the king’s grief and intercession for his sick
son (vs 15t-25); siege and capture of Rahbah, the Am-
monite capital (vs 26-31).

(@) Amuon and Tamar (13 1-22); Absalom's revenge
rere of Amnon (vs 23-36); flight of Absalom

vs 37-39).

g Return of Absalom to Jerus (14 1-24); his beauty,
and reconciliation with the king (vs 25-33).

(kt) Absalom's method of ingratiating himself with
the people (15 1-6); his revolt and the flight of the king
from Jerus (vs 7-31); meeting with Hushai (vs 32—-37a);
Absalom in Jerus (ver 376).

(l} David's meeting with Ziba (16 1-4), and Shimei
(vs 5-14); couusel of Ahitophel and Hushai (16 15—
17 14); the news carried to David (vs 15-22); death of
Ahitophel (ver 23).

ae David at Mahanaim (17 24-29).

n) The revolt subdued, death of Absalom, and recep-
tion by David of the tidings (18 1—19 8a).

(0) Return of the king to Jerus, and meetings with
ee Mephibosheth, and Barzillai the Gileadite (19


6
of


Samuel, Books of
Sanctification


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2680


(p) Revolt of Sheba the Benjamite, and its suppres-
sion by Joab with the death of Amasa (20 1.2.4—22);
the king's treatment of the concubines left at Jerus (ver 3);
the names of his officers (vs 23-26).

(1) Seven male descendants of Saul put to death at
the instance of the Gibeonites (21 1-14); incidents of

ewer ie Philis ae Lae a
. 2 avid's song of thanksgiving an
4, Appendix Araiae (ch 28):
(2 S 21-24) “"(3) The “last words” of David (23
1-7); names and exploits of David's
“mighty men‘’ (vs 8-39).

(4) The king's numbering of the people, the resulting
plague, and the dedication of the threshing-floor of
Arannah the Jebusite (ch 24).


IV. Sources of the History.—The natural infer-
ence from the character and contents of the Books
of S, as thus reviewed, is that the writer has made
use of anthorities, ‘“‘sources’’ or ‘documents,’ from
which he has compiled a narrative of the events
which it was his desire to place on record. The
same characteristics are noticeable here which are
found in parts of the Pent and of the Books of
Josh and Jgs, that in some instances duplicate or
parallel accounts are given ef one and the same
event, which seems to be regarded from different
points of view and is narrated in a style which is
more or less divergent from that of the companion
record. Examples of this so-called duplication
are more frequent in the earlier parts of the books
than in the later. There are presented, for instance,
two accounts of Saul’s election as king, and an act
of disobedience is twice followed, apparently quite
independently, by the sentence of rejection. Inde-
pendent also and hardly consistent narratives are
given of David’s introduction to Saul (1 § 16 14-
23; 17 3117.55 ff); and the two accounts of the
manner of the king’s death can be imperfectly recon-
ciled only on the hypothesis that the young Amalek-
ite told a false tale to David in order to magnify
his own part in the matter. In these and other
instances little or no attempt seems to be made to
harmonize conflicting accounts, or to reconcile
apparent discrepancies. In good faith the writer
set down the records as he found them, making
extracts or quotations from his authorities on the
several events as they occurred, and thus building
up his own history on the basis of the freest possible
use of the materials and language of those who had
preceded him.

However alien such a method of composition may
appear to modern thought and usage in the West,
it 1s characteristic of all early oriental writing. It
would be almost impossible to find in any eastern
literature a work of any length or importance which
was not thus silently indebted to its predecessors,
had incorporated their utterances, and had itself
in turn suffered interpolation at the hands of later
editors and transcribers. Accordingly, early Heb
historical literature also, while unique in its spirit,
conformed in its methods to the practice of the age
and country in which it was composed. It would
have been strange if it had been otherwise.

Apart from the appendix and minor additions, of which


Hannah's song or psalm in 1 § 2 is one, the main por-
tion of the book is derived from two inde-


* pendent sources, which themselves in all
Two Main probability formed part of a larger whole, a
and Inde- morc or less consecutive history or histories
pendent of Israel. ‘These sources may, however,
Sources have been, as others think, rather of a bio-


graphical nature, presenting and enforcing
the teaching of the acts and experience
of the great leaders and rulers of the nation. The
parallelism and duplication of the narrative is perhaps
most evident in the history of Saul. The broad lines
of distinction between the two may be defined without
much difficulty or uncertainty. The greater part of the
first eight chapters of 1S is in all probability derived
from the later of these two sources, to which is to be
assigned more or less completely chs 10-12, 15, 17-19,
21-25, 28 and 28 1-7. The earlier source has contrib-
uted 1 S 9 with parts of chs 10, 11, 13, 14, 16, 20 and
considerable portions of chs 22, 23, 26-37, 39-31, 2.8 1
(in part), 2-6,9-20. Some details have probably been


derived from other sources, and additions made by the
editor or editors. This general determination of sources
rests upon a difference of standpoint and religious con-
ception, and upon slighter varieties of style which are
neither so pronounced nor so readily distinguished as in
the books of the Pent. It is reasonable also to hear in
mind that a close and exact division or line of demar-
cation in every detail is not to be expected. A

V. Character and Date of Saurces.— Attempts which
have been made to determine the date of these two sources,
or to identify them with one or other of the principal
authorities from which the historical narratives of the
Pent are derived, have not heen convincing. In the
judgment of some, however, the later of the two sources
should be regarded as a continuation of the narrative
or document known as E, and the earlier be assigned
to J. The style of the latter has much in common with
the style of J, and is clear, vigorous and poetical; the
religious conceptions also that are embodied and taught
are of a simple and early type. The later writing has
been supposed to give indications of the influence of the

rophetic teaching of the 8th cent. The indications,

owever, are not sufficiently decisive to enable a final
judgment .to be formed. If it is borne in mind that J
and E represent rather schools of teaching and thought
than individual writers, the characteristics of the two
sources of the Books of 8 would not be out of harmony
with the view that from these two schools respectively
were derived the materials out of which the history was
compiled. The ‘‘sources’’ would then, according to the
usual view, helong to the 9th and 8th cents. before the
Christian era; and to a period not more than a century
or a century and a half later should be assigned the
final compilation and completion of the book as it is con-
tained in the Heb Canon of Scripture.

VI. Greek Versions.—For an exact estimate and_un-
derstanding of the history and text of the Books of 8 ac-
count must further be taken of the Gr version or versions.
In the LXX there is great divergence from the Heb Mas-
soretic text, and it is probable that in the course of trans-
mission the Gr has been exposed to corruption to a very
considerable extent. At least two recensions of the Gr
text are in existence, represented by the Vatican and
Alexandrian MSS respectively, of which the latter is
nearer to the Heb original, and has apparently been
conformed to it at a later period with a view to removing
discrepancies; and this process has naturally impaired
its value as a witness to the primary shape of the Gr
text itself. There are therefore three existing types of
the text of 8; the Massoretic Heb and B and A in the
Greek. The original form of the LXX, if it could be
recovered, would represent a text anterior to the Mas-
soretic recension, differing from, but not necessarily
superior to, the latter. For the restoration of the Gr
text, the Old Lat, where it is available, affords valuahle
help. It is evident then that in any given instance the
agreement of these three types or recensions of the text
is the strongest possible witness to the originality and
authenticity of a reading; but that the weight attaching
to the testimony of A will not in general, on account of
the history of its text, be equivalent to that of either
of the other two.


VI. Ethical and Religious Teaching.—The re-
ligious teaching and thought of the two Books of
8 it is not difficult to summarize. The books are
in form a historical record of events; but they are
at the same time and more particularly a history
conceived with a definite purpose, and made to suh-
serve a definite moral and religious aim. Itis nota
narrative of events solely, or the preservation of his-
torical detail, that the writer has in view, but rather
to elucidate and enforce from Israel’s experience
the significance of the Divine and moral govern-
ment of the nation. The duty of king and people
alike is to ohey Jeh, to render strict and willing
deference te His commands, and on this path of
obedience alone will national independence and
prosperity be secured. With the strongest em-
phasis, and with uncompromising severity, sin even
in the highest places is condemned; and an ideal of
righteousness is set forth in language and with an
earnestness which recalls the exhortations of Dt.
Thus the same is true of the Books of S as is mani-
fest in the preceding books of the canonical OT:
they are composed with a didactic aim. The expe-
rience of the past is made to afford lessons of warn-
ing and encouragement for the present. To the
writer or writers—the history of the development
and upbuilding of the Israelite kingdom is pregnant
with a deeper meaning than lies on the surface, and
this meaning he endeavors to make plain to his
readers through the record. The issues of the events


2681


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Samuel, Books of
Sanctification


and the events themselves are under the guidance
and control of Jeh, who always condemns and
putishes wrong, but approves and rewards right-
eousness. Thus the narrative is history utilized
to convey moral truth. And its value is to be esti-
mated, not primarily as recording the great deeds
of the past, but as conveying cthical teaching; that
by means of the history with all its glamor and
interest the people may be recalled to a sense of
their high duty toward God, and be warned of the
inevitable consequences of disobedience to Him.
_Literature.—Upon all points of introduction, criti-
cism and interpretation, the comms. afford abundant
and satisfactory guidance. Tho priucipal Eng. comms.
are by H. P. Smith in ICC, Edinburgh’ 1899, and S. R.
Driver, Notes on the Heb Text of the Books of S, 2d ed,
Oxford, 1913; A. R.S. Kennedy, ‘‘Samuel,'' New Century
Bible, New York, Frowde, 1905; in German by R. Budde,
1902, W. Nowack, 1902, A. Klostermann, 1887. See
also the arts. ‘‘Samuel’’ In DB, EB and Jew Enc.
A. 8. Gepan

SANAAS, san’A-as (A and Fritzsche, Zavdas,
Sandas, B, Zapa, Samd; AV Annaas): The sons of
Sanaas returned in large numbers with Zerubbabel
(1 Esd 6 23)=‘‘Senaah” in Ezr 2 35; Neh 7 38.
The numbers vary in each case (Esd, 3,330 or
3,301; Ezr, 3,630; Neh, 3,930).


SANABASSAR, san-a-bas’ar (in 1 Esd 2 12.15),
SANABASSARUS, san-a-bas’a-rus (in 6 18.10; a
name appearing in many variations, A always read-
ing ZavaBdocapos, Sanabdssaros, B, Havaparcdpe,
Sanamassdré, in 2 12(11] [RVm Samanassar], Zap-
avacrcdpov, Samanassdrou, in 2 15[14], but 2aBav-
accdpe, Sabanassdré, in 6 18[17|[RVm] and Zava-
Badooapos, Sanabdssaros, in 6 20 [{19]): He was
“governor of Judaea” under Cyrus, conveyed the
holy vessels of the temple from Babylon to Jerus
and “laid the foundations of the house of the Lord”
for the first time since its destruction (1 Esd 2 12.
15; 6 18-20)=“SuusHpazzar [q.v.] the prince of
Judah” (Ezr 1 8).


Some identify him with Zerubhahel as AVm iu 1 Esd
18: “Z., which is also S. the ruler." This view ap-
ears to he favored hy the order of the words here, where,
in case of two persons, one might expect ‘'S. the ruler
to come first. Zerubhahel appears as ‘“‘governor of Ju-
daea”’ also in 1 Esd 6 27-29. Ezr 3 10 speaks of the
foundation of the temple under Zerubbahel and 6 16 as
under Sheshbazzar. Thereis further the analogy of 1 Esd
5 40, where Nehemias and Attharias refer to the same
person. Against this identification: Zerubbahel is not
styled ruler or governor either in Neh or Ezr, but in
Hag 1 14; 2 2.21 he is pehah or governor of Judah; no
explanation is given of the douhle name, as in the case
of e.g. Daniel, Belteshazzar; the language of Ezr § 14f
seems to refer to work commenced under a different
person than Zerubhahel. Nor is there any reason
against supposing a first return under Sheshhazzar
(Sanabassar) aud a foundation of the temple previous to
the time of Zorubhahel—an undertaking into which the
Jews did not enter heartily, perhaps because Sanahassar
may have heen a foreigner (though tt is uncertain whether
he was a Babylonian, a Persian, or a Jew). A later pro-
posal is to identify Sanahassar with Sheuazzar, the uucle
of Zerubbahel in i Ch 3 18. _ But either of these identi-
fications must remain doubtful. LE-
BUBBABEL.


See SHENAZZAR;


Seon ‘
ANASIB, san’a-sib (Fritzsche, Zavacl yt anastb,
te B and Swete, YavaPels, Sanabeis, A, AvacelB,
Anasetb): Found only in 1 Esd 5 24, where the
sons of Jeddu, the son of Jesus, are a priestly
family returning “among the sons of Sanasib.

The name isnot found in the || Ezr 2 36; Neh. 7 39,
and is perhaps preserved in the Vulg ‘‘Eliasib.


SANBALLAT, san-bal’at (022}0, san‘bhallat;
Gr and Vulg Sanaballdt, Pesh Samballat): San-
ballat the Horonite was, if the appellation which
follows his name indicates his origin, a Moabite of
Horonaim, a city of Moab mentioned in Isa 16 5;
Jer 48 2.5.34; Jos, Ant, XIII, xxi; XIV, uu. He
ig named along with Tobiah, the Ammonite slave


(Neh 4 1), and Geshem the Arabian (Neh 6 1)


as the leading opponent of the Jews at the time when
Nehemiah undertook to rebuild the walls of Jerus
(Neh 2 10; 41; 6 1). He was related by mar-
riage to the son of Eliashib, the high priest at the
time of the annulment of the mixed marriages for-
bidden by the Law (Neh 13 28).

Renewed interest has been awakened in Sanballat
from the fact that he is mentioned in the papyri I
and If of Sachau (Die aramdischen Papyrusur-
kunden aus Elephantine, Berlin, 1908, and in his
later work, Aramdische Papyrus und Ostraka, Leip-
zig, 1911; cf Staerk’s convenient ed in Lietzmanns
Kleine Texte, No. 32, 1908) as having been the
governor (pahath) of Samaria some time before the
17th year of Darius (Nothus), i.e. 408-407 BC,
when Bagohi was governor of Judah. His two
sons, Delaiah and Shelemiah, received a letter from
Jedoniah and his companions the priests who were
in Yeb (Elephantine) in Upper Egypt. This letter
contained information concerning the state of affairs
in the Jewish colony of Yeb, esp. concerning the de-
struction of the temple or synagogue (agora) which
had been erected at that place.


The address of this letter reads as follows: ‘“‘To our
lord Bagohi, the governor of Judaea, his servants Jedo-
niah and his companions, the priests in the fortress of Yeh
[Elephantine]. Jay the God of Heaven inquire much
at every time after the peace of our lord and put thee iu
favor hefore Darius the king,"’ etc. The conclusion of
the letter reads thus: ‘'Now, thy servants, Jedoniah
and his companions and the Jews, all citizens of Yeh,
say thus: If it seems good to our lord, mayest thou
think on the rehuildiug of that temple (the agora which
had heen destroyed by the Egyptians]. Since it has not
heen permitted us to rebuild it, do thou look on the
receivers of thy benefactions and favors here in Egypt.
Let a letter with regard to the rehuilding of the temple
of the God Jaho in the fortress of Yeb, as it was formerly
built, he sent from thee. In thy name will they offer
the meal offerings, the incense, and the burnt offerings
upon the altar of the God Jaho; and we shall always
pray for thee, we aud our wives and our children and all
the Jews found here, until the temple has heen rehuilt.
And it will he to thee a meritorious work [gedhakah] in
the sight of Jaho, the God of Heaven, greater than the
meritorious work of a man who offers to him a burnt
offering and a sacrifice of a value equal to the value of
1,000 talents of silver. And_as to the gold [prohahly
that which was sent hy the Jews to Bagohi as a bak-
sheesh] we have sent word and given knowledge. Also,
we have in our name communicated iu a letter all [these]
matters unto Delaiah and Shelemiah, the sons of San-
ballat, governor of Samaria. Also, from all that has
been done to us, Arsham [the satrap of Egypt] has
learned nothing.

The 20th of Marcheshvan in the 17th year of Darius
the king."’


Sanballat is the Bab Sin-uballit, ‘may Sin give
him life,’ a name occurring a number of times in the
contract tablets from the time of Nebuchadnezzar,
Nabonidus, and Darius Hystaspis. (See Tallquist,
Neubabylonisches Namenbuch, 183.)

R. Dick Witson

SANCTIFICATION, sank-ti-fi-ka’shun:


Etymology.
Il. Tue Format SENSE
1. In the OT
2. Inthe NT
fl. Tur Eruican Sense
Transformation of Formal to Ethical Idea
. Our Relation to God as Personal: NT Idea
Sanctification as God's Gift
Questions of Time and Method
An Elementin All Christian Life
. Follows from Fellowship with God
. Is It Instantaneous and Eutire ?
. Sanctification as Man's Task
LITERATURE


_The root is found in the OT in the Heb vb.


GON gue pon me


WIP, kadhash, in the NT in the Gr vb. aéydfo,


hagidzd. The noun “sanetifieation”’
Etymology (ayacués, hagiasmés) does not occur in

the OT and is found but 10t in the
NT, but the roots noted above appear in a group of
important words which are of very frequent occur-
rence. These words are “holy,” “hallow,” ‘“‘hal-
lowed,” “‘holiness,”’ “consecrate,” “saint,” “sanctify,”


Sanctification


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2682


“sanctification.” Jt must be borne in mind that
these words are all tr? of the same root, and that
therefore no one of them can be treated adequately
without reference to the others. All have under-
gone a certain development. Broadly stated, this
has been from the formal, or ritual, to the ethical,
and these different meanings must be carefully dis-
tinguished.

I. The Formal Sense.—By sanctification is ordi-
narily meant that hallowing of the Christian believer
by which he is freed from sin and enabled to realize
the will of God in his life. This is not, however, the
first or common meaning in the Scriptures. To
sanctify means commonly to make holy, that is,
to separate from the world and consecrate to God.

To understand this primary meaning we must go
back to the word “holy” in the OT. That is holy
which belongs to Jeh. There is
nothing implied here as to moral
character. It may refer to days and
seasons, to places, to objects used for
worship, or to persons. Exactly the same usage
is shown with the word “sanctify.” To sanctify
anything is to declare it as belonging to God.
“Sanctity unto me all the first-born... . it is
mine” (Ex 13 2; cf Nu 3 13; 8 17). It applies
thus to all that is connected with worship, to the
Levites (Nu 3 12), the priests and the tent of
meeting (Ex 29 44), the altar and all that touches
it (Ex 29 36f), and the offering (Ex 29 27; cf
2 Mace 2 18; Ecclus 7 31). The feast and holy
days are to be sanctified, that is, set apart from ordi-
nary business as belonging to Jeh (the Sabbath,
Neb 13 19-22; a fast, Joel 1 14). So the nation
as a whole is sanctified when Jeh acknowledges it
and receives it as His own, “a kingdom of priests,
and a holy nation” (Ex 19 5.6). A man may thus
sanctify his house or his field (Lev 27 14.16), but
not the firstling of the flock, for this is already Jeh’s
(Lev 27 26).

It is this formal usage without moral implication that
explains such a passage as Gen $8 21. he word trd
“prostitute” here is from the same y kddhash,
meaning lit., as elsewhere, the sanctified or consec-
erated ono (Kedhéshah; see margin and cf Dt 23 18;
1K 14 24; os 4 14). It is the hierodule, the fa-
miliar figure of the old pagan temple, the sacred slave
consecrated _to the temple and the deity for immoral
purposes. The practice is protested against in Israel
(Dt 23 17f), but the use of the term illustrates clearly
the absence of anything essentially ethieal in its pri-
mary meaning (cf also 2 Ik 10 20, ‘And Jchu said,
Sanetify a solemn assembly for Baal. And they pro-
claimed it’; cf Joel ] 14).


Very suggestive is the transitive use of the word
in the phrase, “‘to sanctify Jeh.”’ To understand
this we must note the use of the word “holy” as
applied to Jeh in the OT. Its meaning is not pri-
marily ethical. Jeh’s holiness is His supremacy,
His sovereignty, His glory, His essential being as
God. To say the Holy One is simply to say Cod.
Jeh’s holiness is seen in His might, His manifested
glory; it is that before which peoples tremble,
which makes the nations dread (Ex 16 11-18; ef
15 6 20; Ps 68 35; 89 7; 99 2.3). Significant
is the way in which “jealous” and “holy” are almost
identified (Josh 24 19; Ezk 38 23). It is God
asserting His supremacy, His unique claim. To
sanctify Jeh, therefore, to make Him holy, is to
assert or acknowledge or bring forth His being as
God, His supreme power and glory, His sovereign
claim. Ezekicl brings this out most clearly. Jeh has
been profaned in the eyes of the nations through 1s
rael’s defeat and captivity. True, it was because of
Israel’s sins, but the nations thought it was because
of Jeh’s weakness. The ethical is not wanting in
these passages. The people are to be separated
from their sins and given a new heart (Ezk 36 25.
26.33). But the word “sanctify” is not used for


1. In the
OT


this. Jt is applied to Jeh, and it means the assertion
of Jeh’s power in Israel’s triumph and the conquest
of her foes (20 41; 28 25; 36 23; 38 16; 39 27).
The sanctification of Jeh is thus the assertion of
His being and power as God, just as the sanctifi-
cation of a person or object is the assertion of Jeh’s
right and claim in the same.

The story of the waters of Meribah illustrates the
same meaning. Moses’ failure to sanctify Jeh is his
failure to declare Jeh’s glory and power in the miracle
of the waters (Nu 20 12.13; 27 14; Dt 32 51). The
story of Nadab and Abihu points the same way. Here
“‘T will be sanctified”’ is the same as ‘'I will be glorified”
Lev 10 1-3). Not essentially different is the usage in
sa § 16: ‘‘Jeh of hosts is exalted in justice, and God
the Holy One is sanctified in righteousness.'’ Holiness
again is the exaltedness of God, His supremacy, which is
seen here in the judgment (justice, righteousness) metcd
oeut_to the disobedient people (ef the reeurrent refrain
of § 25; 9 12.17.21; 104; see Justice; Justice oF
Gop). Isa 8 13; 29 23 suggest the same idea by the
way in which they relate ‘‘sanetify’’ to fear andawe. One
NT passage brings us the same meaning (1 Pet 3 15):
“Sanctify in your hearts Christ as Lord,” that is, exalt
Him as supreme.


In a few NT passages the OT ritual sense reap-
pears, as when Jesus speaks of the temple sanctify-
ing the gold, and the altar the gilt
(Mt 23 17.19; cf also He 9 13; 1
Tim 4 5). The prevailing meaning
is that which we found inthe OT. To
sanctify is to consecrate or set apart. We may
first take the few passages in the Fourth Gospel.
As applied to Jesus in 10 36; 17 19, sanctify cannot
mean to make holy in the ethical sense. As the
whole context shows, it means to consecrate for
His mission in the world. The reference to the dis-
ciples, ‘‘that they themselves also may be sanctified
in truth,” has both meanings: that they may be set
apart (for Jesus sends them, as the Father sends
Him), and that they may be made holy in truth.

This same meaning of consecration, or separation,
appears when we study the word saint, which is the
same as “‘sanctified one.” Aside from its use in the
Pss, the word is found mainly in the NT. Outside
the Gospels, where the term “‘disciples’’ is used, it is


2. In the
NT


, the common word to designate the followers of


Jesus, occurring some 56 1. By “saint”? is not
meant the morally perfect, but the one who belongs
to Christ, just as the sanctified priest or offering
belonged to Jeh. Thus Paul can salute the disci-
ples at Corinth as saints and a little later rebuke
them as carnal and babes, as those among whom
are jealousy and strife, who walk after the manner of
men (1 Cor 1 2; 3 1-3). In the same way the
phrase “the sanctified”’ or ‘‘those that are sanctified”
is used to designate the believers. By ‘‘the inherit-
ance among all them that are sanctified” is meant
the heritage of the Christian believer (Acts 20 32;
26 18; ef 1 Cor 1 2; 6 11; Eph 1 18; Col 1 12).
This is the meaning in He, which speaks of the be-
liever as being sanctified by the blood of Christ.
In 10 29 the writer speaks of one who has fallen
away, who “hath counted the blood of the covenant
wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing.”
Evidently it is not the inner and personal holiness
of this apostate that is referred to, esp. in view of
the tense, but that he had been separated unto God
by this sacrificial blood and had then counted the
holy offering a common thing. The contrast is
between sacred and common, not between moral
perfection and sin (cf 10 10; 18 12). The formal
meaning appears again in 1 Cor 7 12-14, where the
unbelieving husband is said to be sanctified by the
wife, and vice versa. It is not moral character that
is meant here, but a certnin separation from the
profane and unclean and a certain relation to God.
This is made plain by the reference to the children:
“Else were your children unclean; but now are
they holy.” The formal sense is less certain in other


2683


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sanctification


instances where we have the thought of sanctifi-
cation in or by the Holy Spirit or in Christ; as in
Rom 16 16, “being sanctified by the Holy Spirit” ;
1 Cor i 2, to “them that are sanctified in Christ
Jesus’; 1 Pet 1 2, ‘in sanctification of the Spirit.”
Paul’s doctrine of the Spirit as the new life in us
seems to enter in here, and yet the reference to
1 Cor suggests that the primary meaning is still
that of setting apart, the relating to God.
_ I, The Ethical Sense.—We have been consider-
ing so far what has been called the formal meaning
of the word; but the chief interest of Christian
thought lies in the ethical idea, sanctification con-
sidered as the active deed or process by which the
life is made holy.
_ Our first question is, How does the idea of belong-
ing to God become the idea of transformation of life
and character? The change is, in-


1. Trans- deed, nothing less than a part of the
formation whole movement for which the entire
of Formal Scripturesstand asa monument. The
to Ethical ethical is not wanting at the beginning,
Idea but the supremacy of the moral and


spiritual over against the formal, the
ritual, the ceremonial, the national, is the clear
direction in which the movement as a whole tends.
Now the pivot of this movement is the conception
of God. As the thought of God grows more ethical,
more spiritual, it molds and changes all other con-
ceptions. Thus what it means to belong to God
(holiness, sanctification) depends upon the nature
of the God to whom man belongs. The hierodules
of Corinth are women of shame because of the na-
ture of the goddess to whose temple they belong.
The prophets caught a vision of Jeh, not jealous
for His prerogative, not craving the honor of punc-
tilious and proper ceremonial, but with a gracious
love for His people and a passion for righteousness.
Their great message is: This now is Jeh; hear what
it means to belong to such a God and to serve
Him. ‘What unto me is the multitude of your
sacrifices? .... Wash you, make you clean; ....
seek justice, relieve the oppressed”’ (Isa 1 11.16.17).
“When Israel was a child, then I loved him... ..
I desire goodness, and not sacrifice; and the knowl-
edge of God more than burnt-offerings’” (Hos 11 1;
6 6).

2 this way the formal idea that we have been
considering becomes charged with moral meaning.
To belong to God, to be His servant, His son, is no
mere external matter. Jesus’ teaching as to sonship
is in point here. The word “sanctification” does
not occur in the Synoptic Gospels at all, but ‘“‘son-
ship” with the Jews expressed this same relation of
belonging. For them it meant a certain obedience
on the one hand, a privilege on the other. Jesus
declares that belonging to God means likeness to
Him, sonship is sharing His spirit of loving good
will (Mt 5 43-48). Brother and sister for Jesus
are those who do God’s will (Mk 3 35). Paul
takes up the same thought, but joins it definitely to
the words “saint”? and “sanctify.” The. religious
means the ethical, those “that are sanctified” are
“called to be saints” (1 Cor 1 2). The significant
latter phrase is the same as in Rom 1 1, Paul
_... called to be an apostle.’”? In this light we read
Eph 4 1, “Walk worthily of the calling wherewith
ye were called.” Cf i Thess 2 12; Phil 1 27. And
the end of this calling is that we are “foreordained
to be conformed to the image of his Son’’ (Rom 8
29). We must not limit ourselves to the words
“saint” or “sanctify” to get this teaching with Panl.
It is his constant and compelling moral appeal:
You belong to Christ; live with Him, live unto
Him (Col 3 1-4; 1 Thess 5 10). It is no formal
belonging, no external surrender. It is the yielding


affections and highest powers, to be ruled by a new

spirit (Eph 4 13.20.23.24.32; ef Rom 12 1).
But we do not get the full meaning of this thought
of sanctification as consecration, or belonging, until
we grasp the NT thought of our rela-


2. Relation tion to God as personal. The danger
to God has always been that this consecration
Personal: should be thought of in a negative or
NT Idea passive way. Now the Christian’s


surrender is not to an outer authority
bnt to an inner, living fellowship. The sanctified
life is thus a life of personal fellowship lived out
with the Father in the spirit of Christ in loving
trust and obedient service. This positive and vital
meaning of sanctification dominates Paul’s thought.
He speaks of living unto God, of living to the Lord,
and, most expressively of all, of being alive unto
God (Rom 14 8; cf 613; Gal 219). So com-
pletely is his life filled by this fellowship that he
can say, “It is no longer I that live, but Christ
liveth in me” (Gal 2 20). But there is no quietism
here. It is a very rich and active life, this life of
fellowship to which we are surrendered. It is a
life of sonship in trust and love, with the spirit that
enables us to say, ‘‘Abba, Father’ (Rom 8 15;
Ga] 4 6). Itisa life of unconquerable kindness and
good will (Mt 5 43-48). Itisa life of “faith work-
ing through love” (Gal 5 6), it is having the mind
of Christ (Phil 2 5). The sanctified life, then, is
the life so fully surrendered to fellowship with Christ
day by day that inner spirit and outward expression
are ruled by His spirit.
We come now to that aspect which is central for
Christian interest, sanctification as the making holy
of life, not by our act, but by God’s


3. Sancti- deed and by God’s gift. Tf holiness
fication as represents the state of heart and life
God’s Gift in conformity with God’s will, then


sanctification is the deed or process by
which that state is wrought. And this deed we are
to consider now as the work of God. Jesus prays
that the Father may sanctify His disciples in
truth (Jn 17 17). So Paul prays for the Thessa-
lonians (1 Thess 6 23), and declares that Christ is
to sanctify His church (ef Rom 6 22; 2 Thess 2
13; 2 Tim 2 21; 1 Pet 1 2). Here sanctification
means to make clean or holy in the ethical sense,
though the idea of consecration is not necessarily
lacking. But aside from special passages, we must
take into account the whole NT teaching, according
to whieh every part of the Christian life is the gift
of God and wrought by His Spirit. “It is God that
worketh in you both to will and to work’ (Phil 2
13; cf Rom 8 2-4.9.14.16-26; Gal 6 22f). Sig-
nificant is the use of the words “creature” (“‘crea-
tion,” see margin) and ‘‘workmanship” with Paul
(2 Cor 5 17; Gal 6 15; Eph 2 10; 4 24). The
new life is God’s second work of creation.
When we ask, however, when and how this work
is wrought, there is no such clear answer. What
we have is on the one hand uncompro-


4. Ques- mising ideal and demand, and on the
tions of other absolute confidence in God. By
Time and adding to these two the evident fact
Method that the Christian believers seen in the


NT are far from the attainment of
such Christian perfection, some writers have as-
sumed to have the foundation here for the doctrine
that the state of complete holiness of life is a special
experience in the Christian life wrought in a definite
moment of time. Ht is well to realize that no NT
passages give a specific answer to these questions of
time and method, and that our conclusions must be
drawn from the general teaching of the NT as to the
Christian life.

First, it must be noted that in the NT view sancti-


of the life in its passions and purposes, in its deepest | fication in the ethical sense is an essential element


Sanctification


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2684


and inevitable result of all Christian life and experi-
Looked at from the religious point of view,


ence.
it follows from the doctrine of regenera- |
5. An Ele- tion. Regeneration is the implanting
mentin All of a new life in man. So far as that
Christian is a new life from God it is ipso facto
Life holy. The doctrine of the Holy Spirit


teaches the same (see Hoy Spirit).
There is no Christian life from the very beginning
that is not the work of the Spirit. ‘No man can
[even] say, Jesus is Lord, but m the... . Spirit”
(1 Cor 12 3). But this Spirit is the Holy Spirit,
whether with Paul we say Spirit of Christ or Spirit
of God (Rom 8 9). His presence, therefore, in so
far forth means holiness of life. From the ethical
standpoint the same thing is constantly declared.
Jesus builds here upon the prophets: no religion
without righteousness; clean hands, pure hearts,
deeds of mercy are not mere conditions of worship,
but joined to humble hearts are themselves the
worship that God desires (Am § 21-25; Mic 6 6-8).
Jesus deepened the conception, but did not change
it, and Paul was true to this succession. “If any
man hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
And if Christ isin you, .... the spirit is life because
of righteousness” (Rom 8 9.10). There is nothing
in Paul’s teaching to suggest that sanctification is
the special event of a unique experience, or that
there are two kinds or qualities of sanctification.
All Christian living meant for him clean, pure, right
living, and that was sanctification. The simple,
practical way in which he attacks the bane of sexual
impurity in his pagan congregations shows this.
“This is the will of God, even your sanctification,
that ye abstain from fornication; that each one of
you know how to possess himself of his own vessel
in sanctification and honor. For God called us not
for uncleanness, but in sanctification” (1 Thess 4
3.4.7). The strength of Paul’s teaching, indeed, lies
here in this combination of moral earnestness with
absolute dependence upon God.

The second general conclusion that we draw from
the NT teaching as to the Christian life is this: the
sanctification which is a part of all
Christian living follows from the very
nature of that life as fellowship with
God. Fundamental here is the fact
that the Christian life is personal, that
nothing helongs in it which cannot be
stated in personal terms. It is a life with God
in which He graciously gives Himself to us, and
which we live out with Him and with our brothers
in the spirit of Christ, which is His Spirit. The
two great facts as to this fellowship are, that it is
God’s gift, and that its fruit is holiness. First,
it is God’s gift. What God gives us is nothing
less than Himself. The gift is not primarily for-
giveuess, nor victory over sin, nor peace of soul,
nor hope of heaven. It is fellowship with Him,
which includes all of these and without which
none of these can be. Secondly, the fruit of this
fellowship is holiness. The real hallowing of our
life can come in no other way. For Christian holi-
ness is personal, not something formal or ritual, and
its source and power can be nothing lower than the
personal. Such is the fellowship into which God
graciously lifts the believer. Whatever its mystical
aspects, that fellowship is not magical or sacra-
mental. It is ethical through and through. Its
condition on our side is ethical. For Christian
faith is the moral surrender of our life to Him in
whom truth and right come to us with authority
to command. The meaning of that surrender is
ethical; it is opening the life to definite moral real-
ities and powers, to love, meckness, gentleness,
humility, reverence, purity, the passion for right-
eousness, to that which words cannot analyze but


6. Follows
from Fel-
lowship
with God


which we know as the Spirit of Christ. Such a
fellowship is the supreme moral force for the mold-
ing of life. An intimate human fellowship is an
analogue of this, and we know with what power it
works on life and character. It cannot, however,
set forth either the intimacy or the power of this
supreme and final relation where our Friend is not
another but is our real self. So much we know: this
fellowship means a new spirit in us, a renewed and
daily renewing life.


It is noteworthy that Paul has no hard-and-fast forms
for this life. The reality was too rich and great, and
his example should teach us caution in the insistence
upon theological forms which may serve to compress the
truth iustead of expressing it. Here are some of his
expressions for this life in us: to ‘have the mind of
Christ’ (1 Cor 2 16; Phil 2 5), ‘‘the Spirit of Christ’’
(Rom 8 9), ‘Christ is in you’’ (Rom 8 10), *‘the spirit
which is from God" (1 Cor_2 12), ‘'the Spirit of God”
(1 Cor 8 16), ‘the Holy Spirit’’ (1 Cor 6 19), ‘‘the
Spirit of the Lord" (2 Cor 3 17), ‘the Lord the Spirit”
(2 Cor 3 18). But in all this oue fact stands out, this
life is personal, a new spirit in us, and that spirit is
one that we have in personal fellowship with God; it
is His Spirit. Especially significant is the way in which
Paul relates this new life to Christ. We have already
noted that Paul uses indifferently ‘‘Spirit of God’ and
‘Spirit of Christ,’’ and that in the same passage (Rom
8 9). Paul's great contrihution to the doctriue of the
Holy Spirit_lies here. As he states it in 2 Cor 3 17:
“‘Now the Lord is the Spirit.'"’ With that the whole
conception of the Spirit gains moral content and _per-
sonal character. The Spirit is personals not some thing,
nor some strange aud magical power, The Spirit is
ethical; there is a definite moral quality which is ex-
pressed when we say Christ. He has the Spirit who has
the qualities of Christ. Thus the presence of the Spirit
is not evidenced in the unusual, the miraculous, the
ecstatic utterance of the enthusiast, or some strange
deed of power, but in the workaday qualities of kindness,
goodness, love, loyalty, patience, self-restraint (Gal 5
221). With this identification of the Spirit and the
Christ in mind, we can better understand the passages
in which Paul hrings out the relation of Christ _to the
sanctification of the believer. He is the goal (Rom 8
29). Weare to grow up in Him (Eph 415). He is to
be formed in us (Gal 4 19). We are to hehold Him and
be changed into His image (2 Cor 17f). This deep-
ens into Paul’s thought of the mystical relation with
Christ. The Christian dies to sin with Him that he
may live with Him a new life. Christ is now his real
life. He dwells in Christ, Christ dwells in him. He
has Christ's thoughts, His mind. See Rom 6 3-11;
8 9.10; 1 Cor 2 16; 15 22; Gal 2 20.

This vital and positive conception of the sanctifica-
tion of the believer must be asserted against some popu-
lar interpretations. The symbols of fire and water, as
suggesting cleansing, have sometimes heen made the
hasis for a whole superstructure of doctrine.
former, note Isa 6 6f; Lk 8 16; Acts 2 3:
latter, Acts 2.38; 22 16; 1 Cor 611; Eph 5 26;
Tit 3.5; He 10 22; Rev 15; 7 14.) There is a two-
fold danger here, from which these writers have not
escaped. The symbols suggest cleansing, and their
over-emphasis has meant first a negatlve and narrow
idea of sanctification as primarily separation from sin
or defilement. This is a falling back to certain OT
levels. Secondly, these material symhols have been
literalized, and the result has been a sort of mechanical
or magical conception of the work of the Spirit. But
the soul is not a substance for mechanical action, however
sublimated. It is personal life that is to be hallowed,
thought, affections, motives, desires, will, and only a
persone! agent through personal fellowship can work

is end.


The clear recognition of the personal and vital
character of sanctification will help us with another
problem. Ifthe holy life be God’s re-

7. IsItIn- quirement and at the same time His
stantaneous deed, why should not this sanctifica-
and Entire? tion be instantaneous and entire? And
does not Paul imply this, not merely in

his demands but in his prayer for the Thessalonians,
that God may establish their hearts in holiness, that
He may sanctify them wholly and preserve spirit
and soul and body entire, without blame at the
boming of Our Lord Jesus Christ (1 Thess 3 13;

3)?

In answer to this we must first discriminate be-
tween the ideal and the empirical with Paul. Like
John (1 Jn 1 6; 3 9), Paul insists that the life of
Christ and the life of sin cannot go on together, and


2685


-THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sanctification


he knows no qualified obedience, no graduated
standard. He brings the highest Christian demand
to the poorest of his pagan converts. Nor have we
any finer proof of his faith than this uncompro-
mising idealism. On the other hand, how could he
ask less than this? God cannot require less than
the highest, but it is another question how the ideal
is to be achieved. In the realm of the ideal it is
always either .... or. In the realm of life there
is another category. The question is not simply,
Is this man sinner or saint? It is rather, What
is he becoming? This matter of becoming is the
really vital issue. Is this man turned the right
way with all his power? Is his life wholly open to
the Divine fellowship? Not the degree of achieve-
ment, but the right attitude toward the ideal, is
decisive. Paul does not stop to resolve paradoxes,
but practically he reckons with this idea. Side by
side with his prayer for the Thessalonians are his
admonitions to growth and progress (1 Thess 3 12;
6 14). Neither the absolute demand or the promise
of grace gives us the right to conclude how the con-
summation shall take place.
That conclusion we can reach only as we go back
again to the fundamental principle of the personal
character of the Christian life and the
8. Sanctifi- relation thus given between the ethical
cation as and the religious. All Christian life
Man’s Task is gift and task alike. ‘Work out your
own salvation .... for it is God who
worketh in you” (Phil 2 12f). All is from God;
we can only live what God gives. But there is a
converse to this: only as we live it ont can God
give to us the life. This appears in Paul’s teaching
as to sanctification. It is not only God’s gift, but
our task. “This is the will of God, even your
sanctification” (1 Thess 4 3). ‘Having therefore
these promises .... let us cleanse ourselves from
all defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness
{hagidstiné] in the fear of God” (2 Cor 71). Sig-
nificant is Paul’s use of the word “walk.” We are
to “walk in newness of life,” “by [or in] the Spirit,”
‘Sn love,” and “in Christ Jesus the Lord” (Rom 6
4; Gal 6 16; Eph 6 2; Col 26). The gift in
each case becomes the task, and indeed becomes
real and effective only in this activity. It is only
as we walk by the Spirit that this becomes powerful
in overcoming the lusts of the flesh (Gal 5 16; cf
5 25). But the ethical is the task that ends only
with life. If God gives only as we live, then He
cannot give all at once. Sanctification is then the
matter of a lifeand not of amoment. The life may
be consecrated in a moment, the right relation to
God assumed and the man stand in saving fellow-
ship with Him. The life is thus made holy in
principle. But the real making holy is coextensive
with the whole life of man. It, is nothing less than
the constant in-forming of the life of the inner spirit
and outer deed with the Spirit of Christ until we,
“speaking truth in love, may grow up in all things
into him, who is the head” (Eph 4 15). (Read also
Rom 6; that the Christian is dead to sin is notsome
fixed static fact, but is true only as he refuses the
lower and yields his members to a higher obedience.
Note that in 1 Cor 6 7 Paul in the same verse
declares “ye are unleavened,” and then exhorts
“Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new
lump”; ef also 1 Thess 5 5-10.) . the
We may sum up as follows: The word “‘sanctify’
is used with two broad meanings: (1) The first is
to devote, to consecrate to God, to recognize as
holy, that is, as belonging to God. This is the
regular OT usage and is most common 1n the NT.
The prophets showed that this belonging to Jeh
demanded righteousness. The NT deepens this
into a whole-hearted surrender to the fellowship of
God and to the rule of His Spirit. (2) Though the


word itself appears in but few passages with this
sense, the NT is full of the thought of the making
holy of the Christian’s life by the Spirit of God in
that fellowship into which God lifts us by His grace
and in which He gives Himself to us. This sancti-
fying, or hallowing, is not mechanical or magical.
It is wrought out by God’s Spirit in a daily fellow-
ship to which man gives himself in aspiration and
trust and obedience, receiving with open heart,
living out in obedient life. It is not negative, the
mere separation from sin, but the progressive hal-
lowing of a life that grows constantly in capacity,
as in character, into the stature of full manhood as
it is in Christ. And from this its very nature it is
not momentary, but the deed and the privilege of
a whole life. See also Hoty Sprrit and the follow-
ing article.

Literatrure.—The popular and special works are
usnally too undiscriminating and unhistorical to be of
value for the Bih. study. An exception is Beet, Holiness
Symbolic and Real. Full Bib. material in Cremer, Bib.
Theol. Lezx., but treated from special points of view.
See Systematic Theologles, OT Theologies (cf esp.
Smend), and NT Theologies (cf esp. Holtzmann).

Harris Frankiin RALL


WEsLEYAN DocTRINE


. Doctrine Stated

. Objections Answered
Importance for the Preacher
. Hymnology

. Its Glorious Results

. Wesley's Personal Testimony


Christian perfection, through entire sanctifica-
tion, by faith, here and now, was one of the doc-
trines by which John Wesley gave
1. Doctrine great offence to his clerical brethren
Stated in the Anglican church. From the
beginning of his work in 1739, till 1760,
he was formulating this doctrine. At the last date
there suddenly arose a large number of witnesses
among his followers. Many of these he questioned
with Baconian skill, the result being a confirmation
of his theories on various points.

In public address he used the terms “Christian
Perfection,” ‘Perfect Love,’ and “Holiness,” as
synonymous, though there are differences between
them when examined critically. With St. Paul he
taught that all regenerate persons are saints, i.e.
holy ones, as the word “saint,”’ from Lat. sanctus,
through the Norman-Fr., signifies (1 Cor 1 2;
2 Cor 11). His theory is that in the normal
Christian the principle of holiness, beginning with
the new birth, gradually expands and strengthens
as the believer grows in grace and in the knowledge
of the truth, till, by a final, all-surrendering act of
faith in Christ, it reaches an instantaneons com-
pletion through the act of the Holy Spirit, the
sanctifier: 2 Cor 7 1, “perfecting holiness,” etc;
Eph 4 13,AV “Till we all come....unto a
perfect man,” etc. Thus sanctification is gradual,
but entire sanctificatien is instantaneous (Rom
6 6, “our old man was crucified,” etc, a sudden
death; Gal 2 20, “I have been crucified with
Christ; and it is no longer I that live’). In1 Thess
5 23, the word “sanctify” is a Gr aorist tense, sig-
nifying an act and not a process, as also in Jn 17
19, “that they .... may be sanctified in truth,”
or truly. (See Meyer’s note.) Many Christians
experience this change on their deathbeds. If
death suddenly ends the life of a growing Christian
before he is wholly sanctified, the Holy Spirit per-
fects the work. Wesley's advice to the preachers
of this evangelical perfection was to draw and not
to drive, and never to quote any threatenings of
God’s word against God’s children. The declara-
tion, ‘Without sanctification no man shall see the
Lord” (He 12 14), does not apply to the saints,
“the holy ones.”


op Codon


Sanctification
Sanctuary


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2686


Wesley’s perfection of love is not perfection of
degree, but of kind. Pure love is perfect love.
The gradual growth toward perfect purity of love is
beautifully expressed in Monod’s hymn,

“'O the bitter shame and sorrow!"
The first response to the Saviour's call is,
“All of self, and none of Thee."
But after a view of Christ on the cross, the answer Is
faintly,
‘‘Some of self, and some of Thee.”
Then, after a period of growing love, the cry is,
‘‘Less of self, aud more of Thee."
After another period, the final cry is,
“None of self, and all of Thee!”
an aspiration for pure love, without any selfishness.

The attainment of this grace is certified by the
total cessation of all servile fear (1 Jn 4 18).
Wesley added to this the witness of the Spirit, for
which his only proof-text is 1 Cor 2 12.

(1) Paul, in Phil 3 12, declares that he is not
“made perfect’: (a) in ver 15, he declares that he zs

perfect; (b) “made perfect” is a term,


2. Objec- borrowed from the ancient games,
tions signifying a finished course. This is
Answered one of the meanings of feleiéd, as seen


also in Lk 13 32 m, ‘The third day I
end my course.”? Paul no more disclaims spiritual
perfection in these words than does Christ before
“the third day.’ Paul claims in ver 15, by the use
of an adj., that he is perfect. In ver 12 Paul claims
that he is not perfect as a victor, because the race is
not ended. In ver 15 he claims that he is perfect
as a racer.

(2) Paul says (I Cor 15 31), “TI die daily.”
This does not refer to death to sin, as some say that
it does, but to his daily danger of being killed for
preaching Christ, as in Rom 8 36, “we are killed
all the day long.”’

(3) 1 Jn 18: “If we say that we have no sin,”
ete. (a) If this includes Christians, it contradicts
John himself in the very next verse, and in 3 9,
“Whosoever is begotten of God doeth no sin,” and
Jn 8 36, “If... . the Son shall make you free,”
etc, and in all those texts in the NT declaring sins
forgiven.

(6) Bishop Westcott says that the expression, ‘to
have sin,"’ is distinguished from ‘‘to sin."‘ as the sinful
principle is distinguished from the sinful act in itself.
It includes the idea of personal guilt. Westcott asserts
that John refers to the Gnostics, who taught that moral
evil exists only in matter, and never touches spirit, which
jis always holy; and, therefore, though guilty of all
manner of vice, their spirits had no need of atonement,
hecause they were untouched by sin, which existed only
in their bodies, as it does in all matter. When told that
this made the hody of Christ sinful, they denied the
reality of His body, saying that it was only a phantom.
Hence, in the very first verse of this Ep., John writes
evidently against the gnostic error, quoting three of the
five senses to prove the reality of Christ's humanity.
(By all means, see ''The Epp. of St. John,"’ Cambridge
Bible for Schools, etc, 17-21.)


The relation of this doctrine to the Methodist
Episcopal church in the United States is seen in the
following questions, which have been

3. Required affirmatively answered in public by


for the all its preachers on their admission to
Highest the Conferences: “Are you going on
Success to perfection?”’; ‘Do you expect to
of the be made perfect in love in this life?”;
Preacher “Are you earnestly striving after it?”


The hymns of the Wesleys, still uni-
versally sung, are filled with this doctrine, in which
occur such expressions as:

“Take away our bent to sinning," .. . .
“Let us find that secoud rest," 9... .
“Make and keep me pure within,” ....
“'Tis done! Thou dost this moment save,

With full salvation bless." .. . .

To the preaching of Christian perfection Wesley
ascribed the success of his work in the conversion,
religious training and intellectual education of the


4. Hym-
nology


masses of Great Britain. It furnished him a multi-
tude of consecrated workers, many of them lay
preachers, who labored im nearly every


5. Its hamlet, and who carried the gospel
Glorious into all the British colonies, mclud-
Results ing America. It is declared by secular


historians that this great evangelical
movement, in which the doctrine of entire sancti-
fication was so prominent, saved England from a
disastrous revolution, like that which drenched
France with the blood of its royal family and its
nobility, in the last decade of the 18th cent. It
is certain that the great Christian and humani-
tarian work of William Booth, originally a Metho-
dist, was inspired by this doctrine which he con-
stantly preached. This enabled his followers in the
early years of the Salvation Army to endure the
persecutions which befell them at that time.

Wesley’s own experience of this grace is found in his

journal, March, 1760: “I felt my soul was all love.

J was so stayed on God as I never felt
6. Wesley’s before, and knew that J] loved Him with
Personal all my heart. When I came home I
Testimony could ask for nothing; I could only give

thanks. And the witness that God had
saved me from all my sins grew clearer every hour.
On Wednesday this was stronger thanever. I have
never since found my heart wander from God.”

This is as explicit a testimony to his entire sancti-

fication as his only recorded testimony to his justi-
fication in these words (May 24, 1738): “TI felt
my heart strangely warmed .... and an assur-
ance was given me, that He had taken away my
sins,” etc. DaniIeL STEELE


SANCTITY, sank’ti-ti, LEGISLATION, lej-is-
la’shun, OF. See Astronomy, I, 5, (6).


SANCTUARY, sank’tti-&-ri, sank’{i-a-ri (DIP,
mikdash, DIp'2, mikkedhash, WIP, kédhesh, “holy
place’; Gyvov, hdgion):


1. Nature of Article
2. The Graf-Wellhausen Hypothesis
The Three Stages
3. Difficulties of the Theory
(1) Slaughter Not Necessarily Sacrificial
(2) Sacrifice and Theophany
(3) Alleged Plurality of Sanctuaries
(4) The Altar of God's House
(5) Local Altars in Deuteronomy
4. The Alternative View
(1) Lay Sacrifice
(2) Three Pilgrimage Festivals
5. The Elephantine Papyri
The Elephantine Temple
LITERATURE


The present art. is designed to supplement the


arts. on Autars; HicH Puace; PENTATEUCH;
TABERNACLE; TEMPLE, by giving an


1. Nature outline of certain rival views of the
of the course of law and history as regards
Article the place of worship. The subject


has a special importance because it
was made the turning-point of Wellhausen’s dis-
cussion of the development of Isracl’s literature,
history and religion. He himself writes: “I differ
from Graf chiefly in this, that I always go back to
the centralization of the cultus, and deduce from
it the particular divergences. My whole position
is contained in my first chapter’ (Prolegomena,
368). For the purposes of this discussion it is
necessary to use the symbols JE, D, H, and P,
which are explained in the art. PENTATEUCH.

It is said that there are three distinct stages of
law and history.

(1) In the first stage all slaughter of domestic ani-
mals for food purposes was sacrificial, and every
layman could sacrifice locally at an altar of earth or
unhewn stones. The law of JE is contained in Ex


2687


20 24-26, providing for the making of an altar of
earth or stones, and emphasis is laid on the words
“in every place [“in all the place” is
2. The grammatically an equally possible ren-
Graf-Well- dering] where I record my name I will
hausen Hy- come unto thee and I will bless thee.”
pothesis This, it is claimed, permits a plurality
; of sanctuaries. Illustrations are pro-
vided by the history. The patriarchs move about
the country freely and build altars at various places.
Later sacrifices or altars are mentioned in_con-
nection with Jcthro (Ex 18 12), Moses (17 15,
etc), Joshua (Josh 8 30), Gideon (Jgs 6 26 etc),
Manoah (13 19), Samuel (1 8 7 17, etc), Elijah
(1 K 18 32), to take but a few instances. Per-
haps the most instructive case is that of Saul after
the battle of Michmash. Observing that the people
were eating meat with blood, he caused a large
stone to be rolled to him, and we are expressly told
that this was the first altar that he built to the Lord
(1 § 14 35). While some of these examples might
be accounted for by theophanies or other special
circumstances, they are too numerous when taken
together for such an explanation to suffice. In
many instances they represent the conduct of the
most authoritative and religious leaders of the age,
e.g. Samuel, and it must be presumed that such men
knew and acted upon the Law of their own day.
Hence the history and the Law of Ex 20 are in
unison in permitting a multiplicity of sanctuaries.
Wellhausen adds: ‘‘Altars as a rule are not built
by the patriarchs according to their own private
judgment wheresoever they please; on the contrary,
a theophany calls attention to, or, at least after-
ward, confirms, the holiness of the place’’ (op. cit.,
31).

(3) The second stage is presented by Dt in the
Law and Josiah’s reformation in the history.
Undoubtedly Dt 12 permits local non-sacrificial
slaughter for the purposes of food, and enjoins the
destruction of heathen places of worship, insisting
with great vehemence on the central sanctuary.
The narrative of Josiah’s reformation in 2 K 23
tallies with these principles.

(3) The third great body of law (P) does not deal
with the question (save in one passage, Lev 17).
In Dt “the unity of the cultus 1s commanded; in
the PC it is presupposed... . . What follows from
this forms the question before us. To my thinking,
this: that the PC rests upon the result which is only
the aim of Dt” (Prolegomena, 35). Accordingly, it
is later than the latter book and dates from about
As to Lev 17 1-9, this belongs


Wellhausen Hypothesis). ; ae,

(1) Slaughter not necessarily sacrificial.—The
general substratum afforded by the documentary
theory falls within the scope of the
art. Penrateucu. The present dis-
cussion is limited to the legal and his-
torical outline traccd above. The
view that all slaughter of domestic
animals was sacrificial till the time of Josiah_is
rebutted by the evidence of the early books. The
following examples should be noted: in Gen 187
a calf is slain without any trace of a sacrifice, and in
27 9-14 (Jacob’s substitute for venison) no altar
or religious rite can fairly be postulated. In 15
28 24 the slaughter is performed by a woman, 80


8. Difficul-
ties of the
Theory


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sanctification
Sanctuary


that here again sacrifice is out of the question. If
Gidcon performed a sacrifice when he “made ready
a kid” (Jgs 6 19) or when he killed an animal for
the broth of which the narrative speaks, the animals
in question must have been sacrificed twice over,
once when they were killed and again when the food
was consumed by flames. Special importance
attaches to Ex 22 1 (Heb 21 37), for there the JE
legislation itself speaks of slaughter by cattle thieves
as a natural and probable occurrence, and it can
surely not have regarded this as a sacrificial act.
Other instances are to be found in Gen 43 16;
18 25 11; 1K 19 21. In 18 8 13 the word
tr? “cooks” means lit. “women slaughterers.’’ All
these instances are prior to the date assigned to
Dt. With respect to Lev 17 1-7 also, the theory
is unworkable. At any time in King Josiah’s reign
or after, it would have been utterly impossible to
limit all slaughter of animals for the whole race
wherever resident to one single spot. This part of
the theory therefore breaks down.

(2) Sacrifice and theophany.—The view that the
altars were erected at places that were peculiarly
holy, or at any rate were subsequently sanctified
by a theophany, is also untenable. In the Patri-
archal age we may refer to Gen 4 26, where the
calling on God implies sacrifice but not theophanies,
Abram at Beth-el (12 8) and Mamre (13 18), and
Jacob’s sacrifices (31 54; 33 20). Compare later
Samuel’s altar at Ramah, Adonijah’s sacrifice at
En-rogel (1 K 1), Naaman’s earth (2 K 6), David’s
clan’s sacrifice (1 S 20 6.29). It is impossible to
postulate theophanies for the sacrifices of every clan
in the country, and it becomes necessary to trans-
late Ex 20 24 ‘Sn all the place” (see supra 2, [1})
and to understand ‘“‘the place” as the territory of
Israel.

(3) Alleged plurality of sanctuaries —The hy-
pothesis of a multiplicity of sanctuaries in JE and
the history also leaves out of view many most im-
portant facts. The truth is that the word ‘‘sanc-
tuary” is ambiguous and misleading. A plurality
of altars of earth or stone is not a plurality of
sanctuaries. The early legislation knows a ‘house
of Jeh” in addition to the primitive altars (Ex 23
19; 34 26; cf the parts of Josh 9 23.27 assigned to
J). No eyewitness could mistake a house for an
altar, or vice versa.

(4) The altar of God’s house —Moreover a curious
little bit of evidence shows that the “house” had
quite a different kind of altar. In 1 K 1 50f;
2 28 ff, we hear of the horns of the altar (ef Am 3
14). Neither earth nor unhewn stones (as required
by the Law of Ex 20) could provide such horns,
and the historical instances of the altars of the
patriarchs, religious leaders, etc, to which reference
has been made, show that they had no horns. <Ac-
cordingly we are thrown back on the description of
the great altar of burnt offering in Ex 27 and must
assume that an altar of this type was to be found
before the ark before Solomon built his Temple.
Thus the altar of the House of God was quite dif-
ferent from the customary lay altar, and when we
read of ‘mine altar’ as a refuge in Ex 21 14, we
must refer it to the former, as is shown by the pas-
sages just cited. In addition to the early legislation
and the historical passages cited as recognizing a
House of God with a horned altar, we see such a
house in Shiloh where Eli and his sons of the house
of Aaron (1 5 2 27) ministered. Thus the data
of both JE and the history show us a House of God
with a horned altar side by side with the multi-
plicity of stone or earthen altars, but give us no
hint of a plurality of legitimate houses or shrines
or sanctuaries.

(5) Local altars in Deuteronomy.—Dt also recog-
nizes a number of local altars in 16 21 (see JCC, ad


Sanctuary
Sanhedrin


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2688


loc.) and so does Dz in Josh 8 30 ff. There is no
place for any of these passages in the Wellhansen
theory; but again we find one house side by side

with many lay altars.
(1) Lay sacrifice—The alternative view secks to
account for the whole of the facts noted above. In
bald outline it is as follows: In pre-


4. The Al- Mosaic times customary - sacrifices
ternative had been freely offered by laymen at
View altars of earth or stone which were not


“sanctuaries,” but places that could
be used for the nonce and then abandoned. Slangh-
ter, as shown by the instances cited, was not neces-
sarily sacrificial, Moses did not forbid or dis-
courage the custom he found. On the contrary,
he regulated it in Ex 20 24-26; Dt 16 21f to pre-
vent possible abuses. But he also superimposed
two other kinds of sacrifice—certain new offerings
to be brought by individuals to the religious capital
and the national offerings of Nu 28, 29 and other
passages. If P assumes the religious capital as
axiomatic, the reason is that this portion of the
Law consists of teaching intrusted to the priests,
embracing the procedure to be followed in these
two classes of offerings, and does not refer at all to
the procedure at customary lay sacrifices, which was
regulated by immemorial custom. Dt thunders not
against the lay altars—which are never even men-
tioned in this connection—but against the Canaan-
itish high places. Dt 12 contemplates only the
new individual offerings. The permission of lay
slaughter for food was due to the fact that the in-
fidelity of the Israelites in the wilderness (Lev 17
5-7) had led to the universal prohibition of lay
slaughter for the period of the wanderings only,
though it appears to be continued by Dt for those
who lived near the House of God (see 12 21, limited
to the case ‘if the place... . be too far from
thee’’).

(2) Three pilgrimage festivals in JE.—The JE leg-
islation itself recognizes the three pilgrimage festi-
vals of the House of God (Ex 34 22f). One of these
festivals is called ‘‘the feast of weeks, even of the
bikkarim [a kind of first-fruits] of wheat harvest,”
and as 23 19 and 34 26 require these bikkdrim to
be brought to the House of God and not to a lay
altar, it follows that the pilgrimages are as firmly
established here as in Dt. Thus we find a House
(with a horned altar) served by priests and lay altars
of earth or stone side by side in law and history till
the exile swept them all away, and by breaking
the continuity of tradition and practice paved the
way for a new and artificial interpretation of the
Law that was far removed from the intent of the
lawgiver.

The Elephantine temple—Papyri have recently
been found at Elephantine which show ns a Jewish

community in Egypt which in 405
5. The Ele- BC possessed a local temple. On the
phantine Wellhausen hypothesis it is usual to
Papyri assume that P and Dt were still un-

known and not recognized as authori-
tative in this community at that date, although the
Deuteronomic law of the central sanctuary goes
back at least to 621. It is difficult to understand
how a law that had been recognized as Divine by
Jeremiah and others could still have been unknown
or destitute of authority. On the alternative view
this phenomenon will have been the result of an
interpretation of the Law to snit the nceds of an
age some 800 years subsequent to the death of Moses
in circumstances he never contemplated. The
Pent apparently permits sacrifice only in the land
of Israel: in the altered circumstances the choice
lay between interpreting the Law in this way or
abandoning public worship altogether; for the
synagogue with its non-sacrificial form of public


worship had not yet been invented. All old legis-
lations have to be constrned in this way to meet
changing circumstances, and this example contains
nothing exceptional or surprising.

LiTERATURE.—J. Wellhausen, Prolegomena to the His-
tory of Israel, ch 1, for_the critical hypothesis; H. M.
Wiener, EPC, ch vi, PS passim tor the alternative view;
POT, 173 ff.

5 Harotp M. WIENER

SAND (557, hal; Gppos, dmmos; a variant
of the more usual Pappos, psdmmos; cf apalos,
dmathos, Wapa8os, psdmathos):

Sand is principally produced by the grinding action
of waves. This is accompanied by chemical solution,
with the result that the more soluble constituents of
the rock diminish in amount or disappear and the sands
tend to become more or less purely silicious, silica or
quartz being a common constituent of rocks and very
insoluble. The rocks of Pal are so largely composed of
limestone that the shore and dune sands are unusually
calcareous, containing from 10 to 20 per cent of calcium
carbonate. This is subject to solution and redeposition
as a cement between the sand grains, binding them
together to form the porous sandstone of the seashore,
which is easily worked and is mucb used in building. See
Rock, ITI, (2).

Figurative: (1) Used most often as a symbol of
countless multitude; esp. of the children of Israel
(Gen 22 17; 32 12; 28 17 11; 1 K 4 20; Isa 10
22; 48 19; Jer 33 32; Hos 1 10; Rom 9 27; He
11 12); also of the enemies of Israel (Josh 11 4;
Jgs 7 12; 15 13 5; cf Rev 20 8). Joseph laid
up grain as the sand of the sea (Gen 41 49); God
gave Solomon wisdom and understanding and large-
ness of heart as the sand that is on the seashore
(1 K 4 29); Job says “I shall multiply my days
as the sand” (Job 29 18); the multitude of quails
provided for the Israelites in the desert is compared
to the sand (Ps 78 27); the Psalmist says of the
thoughts of God, ‘‘They are more in number than the
sand” (Ps 139 18); Jeremiah, speaking of the deso-
lation of Jerus, says that the number of widows is
as the sand (Jer 15 8). (2) Sand is also a symbol
of weight (Job 6 3; Prov 27 3), and (3) of insta-
bility (Mt 7 26).

It is a question what is meant by “the hidden
treasures of the sand” in Dt 33 19.

ALFRED Exty Day

SAND FLIES, sand’fliz (033, kinnim [Ex 8 16m;
Wisd 19 10 mJ): EV “lice.” See Frea; Gwar;
Insects; Lice.


SAND, GLOWING, ¢glo’ing. See Mirace.


SAND-LIZARD, sand’liz-ard (O'AN, hamet; LXX
caipa, saira, “‘lizard’’; AV snail): Homet is 7th in
the list of unclean “creeping things” in Lev 11 29.30,
and occurs nowhere else. It is probably a skink or
some species of Lacerta. See Lizarn; Snail,


SANDAL, san’dal.
LatcHeEr.


See Dress, 6; Suoz; SHon-


SANHEDRIN, san‘hé-drin (7977739, sanhedhrin,
the Talmudic transcription of the Gr cuvéSprov,
sunédrion): The Sanhedrin was, at
and before the time of Christ, the name
for the highest Jewish tribunal, of 71
members, in Jerus, and also for the lower tribunals,
of 23 members, of which Jerus had two (Tosephta’
Hdghighah 11 9; Sanh. 16; 11 2). It is derived
from _ stn, “together,” and hédra, “seat.”” In Gr
and Rom literature the senates of Sparta, Carthage,
and even Rome, are so called (cf Pausan. ui.11, 2;
Polyb. iii.22; Dion Cassius x1.49). In Jos we meet
with the word for the first time in connection with
the governor Gabinius (57-55 BC), who divided
the whole of Pal into 5 sunédria (Ant, XIV, v, 4),
or stinodot (BJ, I, viii, 5); and with the term sune-
drion for the high council in Jerus first in Ant, XIV,


1. Name


2689


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sanctuary
Sanhedrin


ix, 3-5, in counection with Herod, who, when a
youth, had to appear before the sunedrion at Jerns
to answer for his domgs in Galilee. But before that
date the word appears in the LXX version of Prov-
erbs (c 130 BC), esp. in 22 10; 31 23, as an
equivalent for the Mishnaic béth-din =“judgment-
chamber.”

_ In the NT the word sometimes, esp. when used
in the pl. (Mt 10 17; Mk 13 9; cf Sanh. 1 5),
means simply ‘court of justice,” i.e. any judicatory
(Mt 6 22). But in most cases it is used to desig-
nate the supreme Jewish Court of Justice in Jerus
in which the process against Our Lord was carried
on, and before which the apostles (esp. Peter and
John, Stephen, and Paul) had to justify themselves
(Mt 26 59; Mk 14 55; 15.1; Lk 22 66; Jn 11
47; Acts 4 15; 6 21 ff; 6 12ff; 22 30; 23 1 ff;
24 20). Sometimes presbutérion (Lk 22 66; Acts
22 5) and gerousia (Acts 5 21) are substituted for
sunedrion. See SENATE.

In the Jewish tradition-literature the term ‘‘San-
hedrin” alternates with k*nzshia’, ‘“meeting-place”
(Af*ghillath Ta‘dnith 10, compiled in the Ist cent.
AD), and béth-din, ‘‘court of justice’ (Sanh. 11 2.4).
As, according to Jewish tradition, there were two
kinds of sunedria, viz. the supreme sunedrion in
Jerus of 71 members, and lesser sunedria of 23
members, which were appointed by the supreme
one, we find often the term sanhedhrin g*dhdlah,
“the great Sanhedrin,” or béth-din ha-gddhdl, ‘‘the
great court of justice’ (Afiddoth 5 4; Sanh. 1 6),
or sanhedhrin g¢dhélah ha-yoshebheth b*-lishtkhath ha-
gdzith, “‘the great Sanhedrin which sits in the hall
of hewn stone.”

There is lack of positive historical information as
to the origin of the Sanhedrin. According to Jew-

ish tradition (cf Sanh. 16) it was
2. Origin constituted by Moses (Nu 11 16-24)
and History and was reorganized by Ezra imme-

diately after the return from exile (cf
the Tg to Cant 6 1). But there is no historical
evidence to show that previous to the Gr period
there existed an organized aristocratic governing
tribunal among the Jews. Its beginning is to be
placed at the period in which Asia was convulsed
by Alexander the Great and his successors.

The Hellenistic kings conceded a great amount of
internal freedom to municipal communities, and
Pal was then practically under home rule, and was
governed by an aristocratic council of Elders (1
Macc 12 6; 2 Macc 1 10; 4 44; 11 27; 3 Mace
1 8; cf Jos, Ant, XII, ili, 4; XIII, v, 8; M°ghillath
Ta‘dnith 10), the head of which was the hereditary
high priest. The court was called Gerousia, which
in Gr always signifies an aristocratic body (see
Westermann in Pauly’s RE, III, 49). Subsequently
this developed into the Sanhedrin.

During the Rom period (except for about 10
years at the time of Gabinius, who applied to Ju-
daea the Rom system of government; cf Mar-
quardt, Rémische Staatsverwaltung, I, 501), the
Sanhedrin’s influence was most powerful, the inter-
nal government of the country being practically in
its hands (Ant, XX, x), and it was religiously rec-
ognized even among the Diaspora (cf Acts 9 2;
22 5: 26 12). According to Schiirer (AJP, div II,
vol 1, 171; GJV4, 236) the civil authority of the
Sauhedrin, from the time of Archelaus, Herod the
Great’s son, was probably restricted to Judaea
proper, and for that reason, he thinks, it had no
judicial authority over Our Lord so long as He re-
mained in Galilee (but see G. A. Smith, Jerus, 1,
416). :

The Sanhedrin was abolished after the destruction
of Jerus (70 AD). The béth-din (court of judg-
ment) in Jabneh (68-80), in Usah (80-116), in
Shafran (140-63), in Sepphoris (163-93), in Tibe-


rias (193-220), though regarded in the Talm (ef
Ra'sh ha-shanah 31a) as having been the direct con-
tinuation of the Sanhedrin, had an essentially
different character; it was merely an assembly of
scribes, whose decisions had only a theoretical im-
portance (cf Satah 9 11).

The Great Sanhedrin in Jerus was formed (Mt

26 3.57.59; Mk 14 53: 161; Lk 22 66; Acts
4 5f; 5 21; 22 30) of high priests
3. Consti- (i.e. the acting high priest, those who
tution had been high priests, and members of
: the privileged families from which the
high priests were taken), elders (tribal and family
heads of the people and priesthood), and scribes
(i.e. legal assessors), Pharisees and Sadducees alike
(cf Acts 4 1 ff; 6 17.34; 23 6). In Mk 16 43;
Lk 23 50, Joseph of Arimathaea is called bouleutés,
“councillor,’”’ i.e. member of the Sanhedrin.

According to Jos and the NT, the acting high
priest was as such always head and president (Mt 26
3.57; Actes 6 171%; 7.1; 9 1f; 22 5; 23 2; 24 1;
Ant, IV, viii, 17; XX,x). Caiaphas is president
at the trial of Our Lord, and at Paul’s trial Ananias
is president. On the other hand, according to the
Talm (esp. Hdghighdh 2 2), the Sanhedrin is repre-
sented as a juridical tribunal of scribes, in which one
scribe acted as nds’, “‘prince,” i.e. president, and
another as ’abh-béth-din, father of the judgment-
chamber, i.e. vice-president. So far, it has not been
found possible to reconcile these conflicting descrip-
tious (see ‘‘Literature,” below).

Sanh. 43 mentions the sdph*ré-ha-daydnim,
‘notaries,’’ one of whom registered the reasons for
acquittal, and the other the reasons for condem-
nation. In the NT we read of hupérétat, ‘con-
stables’ (Mt 5 25) and of the “servants of the
high priest” (Mt 26 51; Mk 14 47; Jn 18 10),
whom Jos describes as “‘enlisted from the rudest
and most restless characters” (Ant, XX, viii, 8;
ix, 2). Jos speaks of the “public whip,” Matthew
mentious “tormentors” (18 34), Luke speaks of
“spies”? (20 20).

The whole history of post-exilic Judaism circles
round the high priests, and the priestly aristocracy
always played the leading part in the Sanhedrin
(cf Sanh. 4 2). But the more the Pharisees grew
in importance, the more were they represented in
the Sanhedrin. In the time of Salome they were
so powerful that ‘‘the queen ruled only in name, but
the Pharisees in reality” (Ant, XIII, xvi, 2). So
in the time of Christ, the Sanhedrin was formally
led by the Sadducean high priests, but practically
ruled by the Pharisees (Ant, XVIII, i, 4).

In the time of Christ the Great Sanhedrin at
Jerus enjoyed a very high measure of independence.

It exercised not only civil jurisdiction,
4. Juris- according to Jewish law, but also, in
diction some degree, criminal. It had ad-
ministrative authority and could order
arrests by its own officers of justice (Mt 26 47;
Mk 14 43; Acts 4 3; 6 17f; 9 2: cf Sanh. 1 5).
lt was empowered to judge cases which did not in-
volve capital punishment, which latter required
the confirmation of the Rom procurator (Jn 18 31;
of Jerus Sanh. 1 1; 7 2[p. 24]; Jos, Ant, XX, ix, 1).
But, as a rule, the procurator arranged his judg-
ment in accordance with the demands of the San-
hedrin.

For oue offence the Sanhedrin could put to death,
on their own authority, even a Rom citizen, namely,
in the case of a Gentile passing the fence which
divided the inner court of the Temple from that of
the Gentiles (BJ, VI, ii, 4; Middath 11 3; cf Acts
21 28). The only case of capital punishment in
connection with the Sanhedrin in the NT is that of
Our Lord. The stoning of Stephen (Acts 7 54 ff)
was probably the illegal act of an enraged multitude.


Sansannah
Saraias


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2690


The Talmudie tradition names “‘the hall of hewn


stone,” which, according to Aliddath 6 4, was on ;


the south side of the great court, as
5. Place the seat of the Great Sanhedrin (Pé’ah
and Time 2 6; ‘Edhuydth 7 4, et al.). But the
of Meeting last sittings of the Sanhedrin were

held in the city outside the Temple
area (Sanh. 41a; Shabbath 16a; Roa'’sh ha-shanah
31a; ‘Abhadhah zarah 8c). Jos also mentions the
place where the beuleuta, “the councillors,” met
as the boulé, outside the Temple (BJ, NV, iv, 2), and
most probably he refers to these last sittings.

According to the Tasephia’ Sanh. 7 1, the San-
hedrin held its sittings from the time of the offering
of the daily morning saerifiee till that of the evening
sacrifice. There were no sittings on Sabbaths or
feast days.

The members of the Sanhedrin were arranged in
a semicircle, so that they eould see each other
(Sanh. 4 3; Tasephta’ 81). The two
notaries stood before them, whose duty
it was to record the votes (see 3, above).
The prisoner had to appear in humble
attitude and dressed in mourning (Ant, XIV, ix, 4).
A sentenee of eapital punishment eould not be
passed on the day of the trial. The decision of
the judges had to be examined on the following
day (Sanh, 4 1), except in the case of a person
who misled the people, who could be tried and
condemned the same day or in the night (T3-
sephia@ Sanh. 10). Beeause of this, eases which
involved eapital punishment were not tried on a
Friday or on any day before a feast. A herald
preceded the condemned one as he was led to the
place of exeeution, and eried out: “N. the son of N.
has been found guilty of death, etc. If anyone
knows anything to clear him, let him come forward
and declare it” (Sanh. 6 1). Near the place of
exeention the condemned man was asked to eonfess
his guilt in order that he might partake in the world
to come (ib; cf Lk 23 41-48).

Lirerature.—Our knowledge about the Sanhedrin
is based on three sources: the NT, Jos, and the Jewish
tradition-literature (esp. Mish Sankedhrin and Makkoth,
best ed, Strack, with Ger. tr, Schriften des Institutum
Judaicum in Berlin, N. 38, Leipzig, 1910). See art.
TALMUB.

Consult the following histories of the Jewish people:
Ewald, Herzfeld, Gritz, hut esp. Schtirer’s exeellent
HJP, much more fully in G/V4;_also G. A. Smith, Jerus.
Special treatises on Sanhedrin: D. Hoffmann, Der oberste
Gerichtshof in der Stadt des Heiligtums, Berlin, 1878, where
the author tries to defend the Jewish traditional view as
to the antiquity of the Sanhedrin; J. Reifmann, Sanhe-
dhrin (in Heb), Berditschew, 1888; A. Kuenen, On the
Composition of the Sanhedrin, in Dutch, tr¢ into Ger. by
Budde, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, etc, 49-81, Freiburg,
1894; Jelski, Die innere Einrichtung des grossen Synedrions
zu Jerusalem, Breslau, 1894, who tries to reconcile the Tal-
mudical statements about the composition of the San-
hedrin with those of Jos and the NT (esp. in connection
with the question of president) by showing that in the
Mish (except Haghighah 11 2) nasi’ always stands for the
political president, the high priest, and ’abh-béth-din for
the scribal head of the Sanhedrin, and not for the vice-
president; A. Biichler, Das Synedrium in Jerusalem und
das grosse Beth-din in der Quaderkammer des jerusalem-
tschen Tempels, Vienna, 1902, a very interesting hut not
convincing work, where the author, in order to reconcile
the two different sets of sources, trics to prove that the
great Sanhedrin of the Talm is not identical with the
Sanhedrin of Jos and the NT, but that there were two
Sanhedrins in Jerus, the one of the NT and Jos heing
a political one, the other a religious one. He also thinks
that Christ was seized, not by the Sanhedrin, but by the
temple authorities.

See also W. Bacher’s art. in HDB (excellent for sifting
the Talmudic sources); Dr. Lauterbach's art. in Jew
Enc (accepts fully Biichler’s view); H. Strack’s art. in
Sch-Herz (concise and exact).


6. Pro-
cedure


Paci Leverrorr
SANSANNAH, san-san’a (M3030, sansannah;
Lavodvva, Sansdnna, or Zebevvax, Sethenndk): One


of the uttermost eities in the Negeb of Judah (Josh |


16 31), identical with Hazar-susah (Josh 19 5),
one of the eities of Siineon, and almost eertainly the


same as Hazar-susim (1 Ch 4 31). It cannot be
said to have been identified with any certainty,
though Simsim, “a good-sized village with well and
pool, surrounded by gardens and having a grove of
olives to the north,” has been suggested (PHF, III,
260, Sh XX).


SAPH, saf (20, saph; B, Bad, Sdéph, A, LTepé,
Sephé): A Philistine, one of the four champions of
the race of Rapha (‘‘giant’’?) who was slain by
Sibbecai, one of David’s heroes (2 § 21 18; 1 Ch
20 4). Itis supposed by some that he was the son
of the giant Goliath, but this is not proved. In
1 Ch 20 4, the same person is called ‘‘Sippai.”’


SAPHAT, si’fat:

(1) A and Fritzsche, Za¢dr, Saphdt; omitted in
B (and Swete); Bs ™’Acdd, Asdph: The eponym
of a family whieh returned with Zernbbabel (1 Esd
5 9)=“Shephatiah” in Ezr 2 4: Neh 7 9.

(2) A, Zadar, Saphdt; B, Swete, and Fritzsehe,
Zagdy, Saphig; AV Sabat: One of the families of
“the sons of the servants of Solomon” who returned
with Zernbbabel (1 Esd 5 34); wanting in the ||
Ezr 2 57; Neh 7 59.


SAPHATIAS, saf-a-ti’as (Gadarlas, Saphatias,
B, Zodorlas, Saphatias; omitted in A): Name of a
family of returning exiles (1 Esd 8 34) =‘Shepha-
tiah” in Ezr 8 8. If Saphatias (1 Esd 8 34)=
Saphat (6 9), as would appear, then part of the
family went up with Zerubbabel and part with
Ezra.


SAPHETH, sa‘feth: AV=RV Sapuurnt (q.v.).
SAPHIR, si’fér (MEU, shdphir). See SHAPHIR.


SAPHUTHI, saf’-thi, sa-ft’thi (A and Fritzsehe,
Zavel, Saphuihi, B [and Swete], Zadvel, Saphuei;
AV Sapheth): Name of one of the families of ‘‘the
sons of the servants of Solomon” (1 Esd 6 33)=
“Shephatiah” in Ezr 2 57; Neh 7 59.


SAPPHIRA, sa-fi'ra (NI"BW, shappir@; Aram.
for either “beautiful” or ‘sapphire’; Zamdelpa,
Sappheira): Wife of Ananias (Acts 6 1-10). See
Awnantas, (1).


SAPPHIRE, saf’ir. See Srones, PREctovs.


SARABIAS, sar-a-bi'as (ZapaBlas, Sarabias):
One of the Levites who taught and expounded the
Law for Ezra (1 Esd 9 48)=‘“Sherebiah” in Neh
8 7, probably identieal with the ‘‘Asebebias’’ in
1 Esd 8 47 (Ezr 8 18).


SARAH, s&’ra, SARAIT, sA’ri:

(1) In Gen 17 15 the woman who up to that
time has been known as Sarai (WWW, sdray; =dpa,
Sdra) reeeives by Divine command the name Sarah
(TW, sarah; Zdppe, Sdrra). (This last form in
Gr preserves the ancient doubling of the r, lost in the
Heb and the Eng. forms.)


The former name appears to be derived from the same
root as [srael, if, indeed, Gen 32 28 is intended as an
etymology of Israel. ‘She that strives,’ a contentious
person, is a name that might he given to a child at birth
(cf Hos 12 3.4, of Jacob), or later when the child's char-
acter developed; in Gen 16 6 and 21 10 a contentious
character appears. Yet comparison with the history of
| her hushand’s name (see ABRAHAM) warns us not to
operate solely upon the basis of the Heb language.
| Sarai was the name this woman bronght with her from
Mesopotamia. On the other hand there can he little
doubt that the name Sarah, which she reeeived when her
son was promised, means ‘‘princess,’’ for it is the fem.
| form of the extremely common title sar, used by the
| Semites to designate a ruler of greater or lesser rank.


2691


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sansannah
Saraias


te oye vere solo ne ane aie where this name fs con-
erred, it is declared of Sarah that ''kin { hall
be of her’’ (Gen 17 16). se of peovlcss

_ We are introduced to Sarai in Gen 11 29. She
is here mentioned as the wife that Abraham ‘‘took,’’
while still in Ur of the Chaldees, that is, while
among his kindred. It is immediately added that
“Saral was barren; she had no child.” By this
simple remark in the overture of his narrative, the
writer sounds the motif that is to be developed in
all the sequel. When the migration to Haran occurs,
Sarai is named along with Abram and Lot as accom-
panying Terah. It has been held that the author
(or authors) of ch 11 knew nothing of the relation-
ship announced in 20 12. But there can be no
proof of such ignorance, even on the assumption of
diversity of authorship in the two passages.

Sarai’s career as described in ch 11 was not dependent
on her being the daughter of Terah. Terah had other
descendants who did not accompany him. Her move-
ments were determined hy her being Abram’s wife. It
appears, however, that she was a daughter of Terah hy
a different mother from the mother of Abram. The
language of 20 12 would indeed admit of her heing
Ahram’s niece, but the fact that there was hut 10 years’
difference between his age and hers (Gen 17 17) renders
this hypothesis less prohahle. Marriage with half-
sisters seems to have been not uncommon in antiquity
(even in the OT cf 2 S 13 13).


This double relationship suggested to Abraham
the expedient that he twice used when he lacked
faith in God to protect his life and in cowardice
sought his own safety at the price of his wife’s
honor. The first of these occasions was in the
earlier period of their wanderings (ch 12). From
Canaan they went down into Egypt. Sarai, though
above 60 years of age according to the chronology
of the sacred historian, made the impression on the
Egyptians by her beauty that Abraham had antici-
pated, and the result was her transfer to the royal
palace. But this was in direct contravention of
the purpose of God for His own kingdom. The
earthly majesty of Pharaoh had to bow before the
Divine majesty, which plagued him and secured
the stranger’s exodus, thus foreshadowing those
later plagues and that later exodus when Abraham’s
and Sarah’s seed ‘‘spoiled the Egyptians.”

We meet Sarah next in the narrative of the birth
of Ishmael and of Isaac. Though 14 years separated
the two births, they are closely associated in the
story because of their logical continuity. Sarah’s
barrenness persisted. She was now far past middle
life, even on a patriarchal scale of longevity, and
there appeared no hope of her ever bearing that
child who should inherit the promise of God. She
therefore adopts the expedient of being “builded
by” her personal slave, Hagar the Egyp (see Gen
16 2m). That is, according to contemporary law
and custom as witnessed by the CH (see ABRAHAM,
IV, 2), a son born of this woman would be the free-
born son and heir of Abraham and Sarah.

Such was in fact the position of Ishmael later. But the
insolence of the maid aroused the vindictive jealousy
of the mistress and led to a painful scene of unjustified
expulsion. Hagar, however, returned at_God's hehest,
humbled herself before Sarah, and bore Ishmael in his
own father’s house. Here he remained the sole and right-
ful heir, until the miracle of Isaac's birth disappointed
all human expectations and resulted in the ultimate ex-
pulsion of Hagar and her son.


The change of name from Sarai to Sarah when
Isaac was promised has already been noted. Sarah’s
laughter of incredulity when she hears the promise
is of course associated with the origin of the name
of Isaac, but it serves also to emphasize the miracu-
lous character of his birth, coming as it does after
his parents are both so “well stricken in age” as to
make parenthood seem an absurdity. _

Before the birth of this child of promise, however,
Sarah is again exposed, through the cowardice of


her husband, to dishonor and ruin. Abimelech,
king of Gerar, desiring to be allied by marriage with
a man of Abraham’s power, sends for Sarah, whom
he knows only as Abraham’s sister, and for the
second time she takes her place in the harem of
a prince. But the Divine promise is not to be
thwarted, even by persistent human weakness and
sin. In adream God reveals to Abimelech the true
state of the case, and Sarah is restored to her hus-
band with an indemnity. Thereupon the long-
delayed son is born, the jealous mother secures the
expulsion of Hagar and Ishmael, and her career
comes to a close at the age of 127, at Hebron, long
time her home. The grief and devotion of Abraham
are broadly displayed in ch 23, in which he seeks
and obtains a burying-place for his wife. She is
thus the first to be interred in that cave of the
field of Machpelah, which was to be the common
neecite place of the fathers and mothers of the future
srael.

The character of Sarah is of mingled light and
shade. On the one hand we have seen that lapse
from faith which resulted in the birth of Ishmael,
and that lack of self-control and charity which re-
sulted in a quarrel with Abraham, an act of injus-
tice to Hagar, and the disinheriting of Ishmael.
Yet on the other hand we see in Sarah, as the NT
writers point out (He 11 11; 1 Pet 3 6), one who
through a long life of companionship with Abraham
shared his hope in God, his faith in the promises,
and his power to become God’s agent for achieving
what was humanly impossible. In fact, to Sarah
is ascribed a sort of spiritual maternity, correlative
with Abraham’s position as ‘father of the faithful’;
for all women are declared to be the (spiritual)
daughters of Sarah, who like her are adorned in
“the hidden man of the heart,” and who are “‘doers
of good” and “fearers of no terror’ (1 Pet l.c.,
literally rendered). That in spite of her outbreak
about Hagar and Ishmael she was in general “‘in
subjection to her husband” and of ‘‘a meek and quiet
spirit,” appears from her husband’s genuine grief
at her decease, and still more clearly from her son’s
prolonged mourning for her (Gen 24 67; cf 17 17
and 28 1 with 26 20). And He who maketh even
the wrath of man to praise Him used even Sarah's
jealous anger to accomplish His purpose that “the
son of the freewoman,”’ Isaac, ‘born through
promise,’ should alone inherit that promise (Gal
4 22-31).

Apart from the three NT passages already cited,
Sarah is alluded to only in Isa 51 2 (‘Sarah that
bare you,” as the mother of the nation), in Rom 4
19 (‘the deadness of Sarah’s womb”), and in Rom
9 9, where God’s promise in Gen 18 10 is quoted.
Yet her existence and her history are of course pre-
supposed wherever allusion is made to the stories
of Abraham and of Isaac.

To many modern critics Sarah supplies, by her name,
a welcome argument in support of the mythical view of
Abraham, She has been held to be the local numen to
whom the cave near Hebron was sacred; or the deity
whose consort was worshipped in Arabia under the title
Dusares, i.e. Hushand-of-Sarah; or, the female associate
of Sin the moon-god, worshipped at Haran. On these
views the student will do well to consult Baethgen,
Beitrdge, 94, 157, and, for the most recent point of view,
Gressmann's art., ‘Sage und Geschichte in den Patri-


archenerz#hlungen,’’ ZATW, 1910, and Eerdmans, Ali-
testamentliche Studien, II, 13.


(2) The daughter of Raguel, and wife of Tobias

(Tob 3 7.17, etc). See Tonrr, Boox or.
J. Oscar Boyp

SARAIAS, sa-ra’yas, sa-ri’as (Zapatas, Saratas,
Lat Sareus):

(1) =Seraiah, the high priest in the reign of Zede-
kiah (1 Esd 6 5, cf 1 Ch 6 14).

(2) Sareus the father of Ezra (2 Esd 1 1)=
‘“Seraiah” in Ezr 7 1, sometimes identified with


Saramel
Satan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2692


Saraias under (1). He is probably identical with the
“Azaraias” of 1 Esd 8 1.
(3) AV=RV “‘Azaraias” (1 Esd 8 1).


SARAMEL, sar’a-mel: AV =RV ASARAMEL (q.V.).


SARAPH, sa’raf, si’raf cay, sadraph, “noble
one’; cf NW, sa@raph, “burn,” “shine’’): A de-
scendant of Judah through Shelah (1 Ch 4 22).


SARCHEDONUS, sir-ked’é-nus (B &, Zaxep-
Sovés, Sacherdonds, A, ZaxepSav, Sacherdién, but
LayepSoverss, Sacherdonosés in Tob 1 22): An
incorrect spelling, both in AV and RV, for Sacher-
donus in Tob 1 21 f, another form of Esar-haddon.


SARDEUS, sar-dé’us: AV=RV Zarpeus (q.v.).


SARDIN(E), sar’din, sir’din, SARDIUS. See
Srones, PRECIOUS.


SARDIS, sir’dis (ZdpSas, Sdrdeis): Sardis is
ef special interest to the student of Herodotus
and Xenophon, for there Artaphernes, the brother
of Darius, lived, and from there Xerxes invaded
Greece and Cyrus marched against his brother
Artaxerxes; it 1s also of interest to the student of
early Christian history as the home of one of the
Seven Churches of Rev (1 11; 3 1 ff). It was
moreover one of the oldest and most important
cities of Asia Minor, and until 549 BC, the capital
of the kingdom of Lydia. It stood on the northern
slope of Mt. Tmolus; its acropolis occupied one
of the spurs of the mountain. At the base flowed
the river Pactolus which served as a moat, render-
ing the city practically impregnable. Through
the failure to watch, however, the acropolis had
been successfully scaled in 549 BC by a Median
soldier, ‘and in 218 by a Cretan (cf Rev 3 2.3).
Because of its strength during the Pers period, the
satraps here made their homes. However, the city
was burned by the Ionians in 501 BC, but it was
quickly rebuilt and regained its importance. In
334 BC it surrendered to Alexander the Great who
gave it independence, but its period of independence
was brief, for 12 years later in 322 BC it was taken
by Antigonus. In 301 EC, it fell into the possession
of the Seleucidan kings who made it the residence of
their governor. It became free again in 190 BC,
when it formed a part of the empire of Pergamos,
and later of the Rom province of Asia. In 17 AD,
when it was destroyed by an earthquake, the Rom
emperor Tiberius remitted the taxes of the people
and rebuilt the city, and in his honor the citizens
of that and of neighboring towns erected a large
monument, but Sardis never recovered its former
importance (cf Rev 3 12). Again in 295 AD, after
the Rom province of Asia was broken up, Sardis
became the capital of Lydia, and during the early
Christian age 1t was the home of a bishop. The
city continued to flourish until 1402, when it was
so completely destroyed by Tamerlane that it was
never rebuilt. Among the ruins there now stands
a small village called Sert, a corruption of its an-
cient name. The ruins may be reached by rail
from Smyrna, on the way to Philadelphia.

The ancient city was noted for its fruits and wool, and
for its temple of the goddess Cybele, whose worship
resembled that of Diana of Ephesus. Its wealth was
also partly due to the gold which was found in the sand
of the river Pactolus, and it was here that gold and silver
coins were first struck. During the Rom pcriod its coins
formed a beautiful series, and are found in abundance by
the pcasants who till the surronnding flelds. The ruins
of the huildings which stood at the base of the hill have
now been nearly buried by the dirt washed down from
above. The hill upon which the acropolis stood meas-
ures 950 ft. high: the triple walls still surround it. The
more imposing of the ruins are on tho lower slope of the


hill, and among them the temple of Cybele is the most
interesting, yet only two of its many stone columns are
still standing. Equally imposing is the necropolis of
the city, which is at a distance of two hours’ ride from
Sert, S. of the Gygaean lake. The modern name of the
necropolis is Bin Tepe or Thousand Monnds, because
of the large group of great monnds in which the kings
and nobles were buried. Many of the mounds were long
ago excavated and plundered.


Coin of Sardis.


We quote the following from the Missionary
Herald (Boston, Mass., August, 1911, pp. 361-62):


Dr. C. C. Tracy, of Marsovan, has made a visit to
ancient Sardis and observed the work of his countryman,
Professor Butler, of Princeton University, who is un-
covering the ruins of that famous city of the past. Al-
ready rich ‘‘finds'’ have been made; among them por-
tions of a temple of Artemis, indicating a building of the
same stupendous character as those at Ephesus and
Baalbec, and a necropolis from whose tombs were un-
earthed three thousand relics, including utensils, orna-
ments of gold and precions stones, mirrors, etc. What
chiefly impressed Dr. Tracy was the significance of those
**Seven Churches of Asia,'' of which Sardis held one.
“When I think of the myriads of various nationality
and advanced civilization for whose evangelization these
churches were responsihle, the messages to the Christian
communities occupying the splendid strategic centers
fill me wlth awe. While estabiished amid the splendors
of civilization, they were set as candlesticks in the midst
of Erors spiritual darkness. Did they fulfil their mis-
sion?"

One of Dr. Butler's recoveries is the marble throne of
the Bishop of Sardis; looking upon it the message to
Sardis recurs to mind. A fact of current history quick-
ened the visitor's appreciation of the word to ‘‘the angel”
of that church. ‘‘ Yonder among the mountains over-
hanging Sardis there is a robber gang led by the noto-
rious Chakirjali. He rulesin the mountains; no govern-
ment force can take him, Again and again he swoops
down like an eagle out of the sky, in one quarter of the
region or another. From time immemorial these moun-
tains have been thehaunts of robbers; very likely it was
so when Rev was written, ‘I will come upon thee as a
thief.’ In each case the message was addressed to ‘the
angel of the church.’ Over every church in the world
there is a spirit hovering, as it were—a spirit representing
that church and by whose name it can be addressed.
The messages are a8 vital as they were at the first. ‘He
that hath an,ear, let him hcar what the Spirit saith unto


the churches.’ "’
E. J. Banks
SARDITE, sir’dit. See Surep.


SARDIUS, sir’di-us. See Stones, Precious.


SARDONYX, sir’dé-niks.
clous.


SAREPTA, sa-rep’ta (édperra, Sdrepta): The
name in Lk 4 26 AV, following the Gr, of the
Phoen town to which Elijah was sent in the time
of the great famine, in order to save the lives of a
widow and her son (1 K 17 9.10). RV adopts the
form of the name based upon the Heb, and as found
in the OT: Zarupuats (q.v.).


See Sronzs, PrE-


SARID, si’/rid (TW, saridh; B, "HoedexywAd,
Esedekgéld, ZebSotn, Seddotik, A, Zap0l8, Sarthid,
Zaplé, Sarid): A place on the southern border of
Zebulun to the W. of Chisloth-tabor (Josh 19 10.12).
It is mentioned but not identified in Onom. Prob-
ably we should read ‘Sadid,” and in that case may
with Conder locate it at Tell Shaddé, an artificial
mound with some modern ruins and good springs,


2693


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Saramel
Satan


yak stands on the plain, about 5 miles W. of
sal.


SARGON, sir’gon (722-705 BC): The name of
this ruler is written PIANO, sargdn, in the OT,
Shar-ukin in the euneiform inscriptions, ‘Apr,
Arnd, in the LXX, and ’Apeeaves, Arkeanos, in
the Ptolemaic Canon, Sargon is mentioned but
once by name in the OT (Isa 20 1), when he sent
his Tartan (iurtannu) against Ashdod, but he is
referred to in 2 IX 17 6 as “‘the king of Assyria”
who earried Israel into captivity.

Shalmaneser V had laid siege to Samaria and
besieged it three years. But shortly before or very
soon after its capitulation, Sargon, perhaps being
responsible for the king’s death, overthrew the
dynasty, and in his annals credited himself with the
capture of the eity and the deportation of its in-
habitants. Whether he assumed the name of the
famous ancient founder of the Acead dynasty is not
known.

Sargon at the beginning of his reign was con-
fronted with a serious situation in Babylon. Mero-
dach-baladan of Kaldd, who paid tribute to pre-
vious rulers, on the change of dynasty had himself


Sargon in His War Chariot.


proclaimed king, New Year’s Day, 721 BC. At
Dur-ilu, Sargon fought with the forces of Meradach-
baladan and his ally Khumbanigash of Elam, but
although he claimed a victory the result was appar-
ently indecisive. Rebellions followed in other parts
of the kingdom. er. ;

In 720 Uu-bi’di (or Yau-bi’di), king of Hamath,
formed a coalition against Sargon with Hanno of
Gaza, Sib’u of Egypt, and with the cities Arpad,
Simirra, Damascus and Samaria. He claims that
Sib’n fled, and that he captured and flayed [lu-
bi'di, burned Karkar, and carried Hanno captive
to Assyria. After destroying Rapihu, he carried
away 9,033 inhabitants to Assyria. _

In the following year Ararat was invaded and the
Hittite Carchemish fell before his armies. The
territory of Rusas, king of Ararat, as well as a part
of Melitene became Assyr provinces.

In 710 Sargon direeted his attention to Merodach-
baladan, who no longer enjoyed the support of
Elam, and whose role over Babylon had not been
popular with his subjects. He was driven out from
Babylon and also from his former capital Btt-
Yakin, and Sargon had himself crowned as the
shakkanak of Babylon.

In 706 the Bee ey called Ddr-Sharrukin was
dedicated as his residence. A year later he was
murdered. It was gunna ie reign ee the height

ncy had been reached.
of Assyr ascendancy Re See

SARON, sa’‘ron (Zdépev, Sdran): AV; Gr form

of Sharon (Aets 9 35).


SAROTHIE, sa-ro’thi-é (A, Zapwhté, Sardthié,
B and Swete, Dapwbel, Sardthei): Name of a family
of ‘“‘the sons of the servants of Solomon” who re-
turned with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 6 34); it is want-
ing in the || lists in Ezr 2 57; Neh 7 59.


SARSECHIM, sir’sé-kim, sir-se’kim (D°207W,
sargtkhim): A prince of Nebuchadnezzar, present at
the taking of Jerus by Nebuchadnezzar in the 11th
year of Zedckiah (Jer 89 3). The VSS with their
various readings—‘‘Nabousaehar,” ‘“Nabousarach,”
“Sarsacheim’’—point to a eorrupt text. The best
emendation is the reading ‘“Nebhishazibhon” (=
Nabisézib-anni, “Nebo delivers me’); this is based
on the reading in Jer 39 13.


SARUCH, si’ruk (Zapotx, Sarotich, Depody,
Serovich); AV; Grform of Serug (thus Lk 3 35 RY).


SATAN, sa’tan (J2W, satan, “adversary,” from
the vb. JOW, sdtan, “‘to lie in wait” [as adversary];
Zarév, Saldn, Zaravas, Satands, ‘adversary,”
§aBodos, didbolos, “devil,” “adversary” or “accuser,”
kathywp, katégor [altogether unclassical and un-
Greek] [used once in Rev 12 10], “‘accuser’’):

I. Derinition

II. Scriprurat Facts coNcERNING Satan

1. Names of Satan
2. Character of Satan
3. Works of Satan
4. History of Satan
TII. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
1. Scripture Doctrine of Satan Not Systematized
2. Satan and God
3. Satan Essentially Limited
4, Conclusions:
LITERATURE

I. Definition.—A created but superhuman, per-
sonal, evil, world-power, represented in Scripture
as the adversary both of God and men.

II. Scriptural Facts concerning Satan.—The
most important of these are the Heb and Gr equiva-
lents noticed above. These words are
used in the general sense justified by
their etymological significance. It is

applied even to Jeh Himself (Nu 22
22.32; cf 1 3 29 4; 28 19 22; Ps 109 6, ete).
The word ‘Satan’ is used 24 tin the OT. In Job
(1 6f) and Zee (3 1f) it has the prefixed definite
article. In all cases but one when the art. is omitted
it is used in a general sense. This one exception is
1 Ch 21 1 (cf 2S 24 1), where the word is gen-
erally coneeded to be used as a proper name. This
meaning is fixed in NT times. We are thus en-
abled to note in the term ‘‘Satan” (and Devil) the
growth of a word from a general term to an appella-
tion and later to a proper name. All the other
names of Satan save only these two are descriptive
titles. In addition to these two principal names
a number of others deserve specifie enumeration.
Tempter (Mt 4 5; 1 Thess 3 5); Beelzebub (Mt
12 24); Enemy (Mt 13 39); Evil One (Mt 13
19.38; 1 Jn 2 13.14; 3 12, and particularly 6 18);
Belial (2 Cor 6 15); Adversary (dvrld:Kos, antidikos),
(1 Pet 5 8); Deeeiver (lit. ‘‘the one who deceives’’)
(Rev 12 9); Dragon (Great) (Rev 12 3); Father of
Lies (Jn 8 44); Murderer (Jn 8 44); Sinner (1 Jn
8 8)—these are isolated references occurring from 1
to 3teach. In the vast majority of passages (70
out of 83) either Satan or Devil is used.

Satan is eonsistently represented in the NT as
the enemy both of God and man. The popular

notion is that Satan is the enemy of
2. Charac- man and active in misleading and
ter of Satan cursmg humanity because of his in-

tense hatred and opposition to God.
Mt 13 39 would seem to point in this direction, but
if one were to venture an opinion in a region where
there are not enough facts to warrant a conviction,


1. Names
of Satan


Satan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2694


it would be that the general tenor of Scripture indi-
cates quite the contrary, namely, that Satan’s
jealousy and hatred of men has led him into an-
tagonism to God and, consequently, to goodness.
The fundamental moral] description of Satan is given
by Our Lord when He describes Satan as the “‘evil
one’ (Mt 13 19.38; ef Isa’s description of Jeh as
the “Holy One,” 1 4 and often); that is, the one
whose nature and will are given to evil. Moral
evil is his controlling attribute. It is evident that
this description could not be applied to Satan as
originally created. Ethical evil cannot be con-
created. It is the creation of each free will for
itself. We are not told in definite terms how Satan
became the evil one, but certainly it could be by
no other process than a fall, whereby, in the mystery
of free personality, an evil will takes the place of a
good one.
The world-wide and age-long works of Satan are
to be traced to one predominant motive. He hates
both God and man and does all that
3. Works im him lies to defeat God’s plan of
of Satan grace and to establish and maintain
a kingdom of evil, in the seduction and
ruin of mankind. The balance and sanity of the
Bible is nowhere more strikingly exhibited than in
its treatment of the work of Satan. Not only is
the Bible entirely free from the extravagances of
popular Satanology, which is full of absurd stories
concerning the appearances, tricks, and transfor-
mations of Satan among men, but it exhibits a de-
pendable accuracy and consistency of statement
which is most reassuring. Almost nothing is said
concerning Satanic agency other than wicked men
who mislead other men. In the controversy with
His opponents concerning exorcism (Mk 3 22 f
and ||’s) Our Lord rebuts their slanderous assertion
that He is in league with Satan by the simple propo-
sition that Satan does not work against himself.
But in so saying He does far more than refute this
slander. He definitely aligns the Bible against the
popular idea that a man may make a definite and
conscious personal alliance with Satan for any pur-
pose whatever. The agent of Satan is always a
victim. Also the hint contained in this discussion
that Satan has a kingdom, together with a few other
not very definite allusions, are all that we have to
go upon in this direction. Nor are we taught any-
where that Satan is able to any extent to introduce
disorder into the physical universe or directly oper-
ate in the lives of men. It is true that in Lk 13 16
Our Lord speaks of the woman who was bowed
over as one “whom Satan has bound, lo, these
eighteen years,” and that in 2 Cor 12 7 Paul
speaks of his infirmity as a “messenger of Satan
sent to buffet him.’ Paul also speaks (1 Thess
2 18) of Satan’s hindering him from visiting the
church at Thessalonica. A careful study of these
related passages (together with the prologue of Job)
will reveal the fact that Satan’s direct agency in the
physical world is very limited. Satan may be said
to be implicated in all the disasters and woes of
human life, in so far as they are more or less directly
contingent upon sin (see particularly He 2 14).
On the contrary, it is perfectly evident that Satan’s
power consists principally in his ability to deceive.
It is interesting and characteristic that according
to the Bible Satan is fundamentally a liar and his
kingdom is a kingdom founded upon lies and deceit.
The doctrine of Satan therefore corresponds in
every important particular to the general Bib.
emphasis upon truth. ‘The truth shall make you
free’ (Jn 8 32)—this is the way of deliverance
from the power of Satan.
Now it would seem that to make Satan preémi-
nently the deceiver would make man an innocent
victim and thus relax the moral issue. But accord-


ing to the Bible man is particeps criminis in the
process of his own deception. He is deceived only
because he ceases to love the truth and comes first
to love and then to believe a lie (2 Cor 1 10).
This really goes to the very bottom of the problem
of temptation. Men are not tempted by evil, per
se, but by a good which can be obtained only at
the cost of doing wrong. The whole power of sin,
at least in its beginnings, consists in the sway of the
fundamental falsehood that any good is really at-
tainable by wrongdoing. Since temptation con-
sists in this attack upon the moral sense, man is
constitutionally guarded against deceit, and is
morally culpable in allowing himself to be deceived.
The temptation of Our Lord Himself throws the
clearest. possible light upon the methods ascribed
toSatan. The temptation was addressed to Christ’s
consciousness of Divine sonship; it was a deceitful
attack emphasizing the good, minimizing or cover-
ing up the evil; indeed, twisting evil into good. It
was a deliberate, malignant attempt to obscure the
truth and induce to evil through the acceptance of
falsehood. The attack broke against a loyalty to
truth which made self-deceit, and consequently
deceit from without, impossible. The he was
punctured by the truth and the temptation lost its
power (see ‘TempraTion oF Curist). This inci-
dent reveals one of the methods of Satan —by
immediate suggestion as in the case of Judas (Lk
22 3; Jn 13 2.27). Sometimes, however, and,
perhaps, most frequently, Satan’s devices (2 Cor
2 11) include human agents. Those who are given
over to evil and who persuade others to evil are
children and servants of Satan (see Mt 16 23; Mk
8 33; Lk 48; Jn 6 70; 8 44; Acts 13 10; 1
Jn 3 8). Satan also works through persons and
institutions supposed to be on the side of right but
really evil. Here the same ever-present and active
falseness and deceit are exhibited. When he is
called ‘‘the god of this world” (2 Cor 4 4) it would
seem to be intimated that he has the power to clothe
himself in apparently Divine attributes. He also
makes himself an angel of ight by presenting ad-
vocates of falsehood in the guise of apostles of truth
(2 Cor 11 13.15; 1 Jn 4 1; 2 Thess 2 9; Rev 12
9; 19 20). In the combination of passages here
brought together, it is clearly indicated that Satan
ig the instigator and fomenter of that spirit of law-
lessness which exhibits itself as hatred both of truth
and right, and which has operated so widely and so
disastrously in human life.
The history of Satan, including that phase of it
which remains to be realized, can be set forth only
along the most general lines. He be-
4. History longs to the angelic order of beings. He
of Satan is by nature one of the sons of Elohim
(Job 16). He has fallen, and by
virtue of his personal forcefulness has become the
leader of the anarchic forces of wickedness. As a
free being he has merged his life in evil and has
become altogether and hopelessly evil. As a being
of high intelligence he has gained great power and
has exercised a wide sway over other beings. As a
created being the utmost range of his power lies
within the compass of that which is permitted. It
is, therefore, hedged in by the providential govern-
ment of God and essentially limited. The Bib.
emphasis upon the element of falsehood in the
career of Satan might be taken to imply that his
kingdom may be less in extent than appears. At
any rate, it is confined to the cosmic sphere and to
a limited portion of time. It is also doomed. In
the closely related passages 2 Pet 2 4 and Jude
ver 6 it is affirmed that God cast the angels, when
they sinned, down to Tartarus and committed them
to pits of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.
This both refers to the constant Divine control of


2695


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Satan


these insurgent forces and also points to their final
and utter destruction. The putting of Satan in
bonds is evidently both constant and progressive.
The essential limitation of the empire of evil and
its ultimate overthrow are foreshadowed in the
Book of Job (chs 38-41), where Jeh’s power ex-
tends even to the symbolized spirit of evil.


According to synoptic tradition, Our Lord In the
crisis of temptation immediately following the baptism
(Mt 4 and ||) met and for the time conquered Satan as
His own personal adversary. This preliminary contest
did not close the matter, hut was the earnest of a com-
plete victory. According to Lk (10 18), when tho
Seventy returned from their mission flushed with victory
over the powers of evil, Jesus said: ‘I saw Satan fall
{not ‘fallen’'; see Plummer, ‘'Lk,'' CC, in loc.] as light-
ning from heaven.’ In every triumph over the powers
of evil Christ beheld in vision the downfall of Satan.
In connection with the coming of the Hellenists who
wished to see Him, Jesus asserted (Jn 12 31), ‘‘ Now is
the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this
world be cast out.'' In view of His approaching passion
He says again (Jn 14 30), ‘‘The prince of the world
cometh: and he hath nothing in me.'' Once again in
connection with the promised advent of the Spirit, Jesus
asserted (Jn 16 11) that the Spirit would convict the
world of judgment, ‘‘hecause the prince of this world hath
been judged."' In He (@® 14.15) itis said that Christ took
upon Himself human nature in order ‘‘that through
death he might bring to nought him that had the power
of death, that is, the devil." In 1 Jn 3 8 it is said,
“To this end was the Son of God manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the devil." In Rev 12 9
it is asserted, in connection with Christ's ascension, that
Satan was cast down to the earth and his angels with
him. According to the passage immediately following
(12 10-12), this casting down was not complete or final
in the sense of extingnishing his activities altogether,
but it involves the potential and certain triumph of God
and His saints and the equally certain defeat of Satan.
In 1 Jn 2 18 the young men are addressed as those who
“have overcome the evil one.’ In Rev 20 the field
of the future is covered in the assertion that Satan is
“bound a thousand years''; then loosed ‘for a little
time,” and then finally ‘‘cast into the lake of fire.”


A comparison of these passages will convince the
careful student that while we cannot construct a
definite chronological program for the career of
Satan, we are clear in the chief points. He is lim-
ited, judged, condemned, imprisoned, reserved for
judgment from the beginning. The outcome is
certain though the process may be tedious and slow.
The victory of Christ is the defeat of Satan; first,
for Himself as Leader and Saviour of men (Jn 14
30); then, for believers (Lk 22 31; Acts 26 18;
Rom 16 20; Jas 4 7; 1 Jn 2 13; 6 4.18); and,
finally, for the whole world (Rev 20 10). The
work of Christ has already destroyed the empire
of Satan.

Ill. General Considerations.—There are, no
doubt, serious difficulties in the way of accepting
the doctrine of a personal, superhuman, evil power
as Satan is described to be. It is doubtful, however,
whether these difficulties may not he due, at least
in part, to a misunderstanding of the doctrine and
certain of its implications. In addition, it must
be acknowledged, that whatever difficulties there
may be in the teaching, they are exaggerated and,
at the same time, not fairly met by the vague and
irrational skepticism which denies without nvesti-
gation. There are difficulties involved in any view
of the world. To say the least, some problems are
met by the view of a superhuman, evil world-power.
In this section certain general considerations are
urged with a view to lessening difficulties keenly
felt by some minds. Necessarily, certain items
gathered in the foregoing section are here empha-
sized again. ;

The Scriptural doctrine of Satan is nowhere
systematically developed. For materials in this
field we are shut up to scattered and incidental
references. These passages, which even m the
aggregate are not numerous, tell us what we need
to know concerning the nature, history, kingdom
and works of Satan, but offer scant satisfaction to


the merely speculative temper. The comparative
lack of development in this field is due partly to

the fact that the Bib. writers are pri-
1. Scripture marily interested in God, and only
Doctrine of secondarily in the powers of darkness;


Satan Not and partly to the fact that in the
Systema- Bible doctrine waits upon fact. Hence
tized the malign and smister figure of the


Adversary is gradually outlined against
the light of God’s holiness as progressively revealed
in the providential world-process which centers in
Christ. It is a significant fact that the statements
concerning Satan become numerous and_ definite
only in the NT. The daylight of the Christian
revelation was necessary in order to uncover the
lurking foe, dimly disclosed but by no means fully
known in the earlier revelation. The disclosure
of Satan is, in form at least, historical, not dogmatic.

In the second place, the relationship of Satan to
God, already emphasized, must be kept constantly


in mind. The doctrine of Satan
2. Satan merges in the general doctrine con-
and God cerning angels (see ANGELS). It has


often been pointed out that the per-
sonal characteristics of angels are very little insisted
upon. They are known chiefly by their functions:
merged, on the one hand, in their own offices, and,
on the other, in the activities of God Himself.
In the OT Satan is not represented as a fallen
and malignant spirit, but as a servant of Jeh, per-
forming a Divine function and having his place
in the heavenly train. In the || accounts of David’s
numbering of Israel (1 8 241; 1 Ch 21 1) the
tempting of David is attributed both to Jeh and
Satan. The reason for this is either that ‘the
temptation of men is also a part of his providence,’
or that in the interval between the documents the
personality of the tempter has more clearly emerged.
In this case the account in Ch would nearly ap-
proximate the NT teaching. In the Book of Job
(1 6), however, Satan is among the Sons of God and
his assaults upon Job are Divinely permitted. In
Zec (3 1.2) Satan is also a servant of Jeh. In both
these passages there is the hint of opposition be-
tween Jeh and Satan. In the former instance
Satan assails unsuccessfully the character of one
whom Jeh honors; while in the latter Jeh explicitly
rebukes Satan for his attitude toward Israel (see
G. A. Smith, BTP, Ul, 316f). The unveiling of
Satan as a rebellious world-power is reserved for
the NT, and with this fuller teaching the symbolic
treatment of temptation in Gen is to be connected.
There is a sound pedagogical reason, from the view-
point of revelation, for this earlier withholding of the
whole truth concerning Satan. In the early stages
of religious thinking 1t would seem to be difficult,
if not impossible, to hold the sovereignty of God
without attributing to His agency those evils in the
world which are more or less directly connected
with judgment and punishment (cf Isa 45 7;
Am 36). The OT sufficiently emphasizes man’s
responsibility for his own evil deeds, but super-
human evil is brought upon him from above.
‘When wilful souls have to be misled, the spirit
who does so, as in Ahab’s case, comes from above”
(G. A. Smith, op. cit., 317). The progressive reve-
lation of God’s character and purpose, which more
and more imperatively demands that the origin of
moral evil, and consequently natural evil, must be
traced to the created will in opposition to the Divine,
leads to the ultimate declaration that Satan is a
morally fallen being to whose conquest the Divine
Power in history is pledged. There is, also, the
distinct possibility that in the significant transition
from the Satan of the OT to that of the NT we
have the outlines of a biography and an indication
of the way by which the angels fell.


Satan
Saul


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2696


A third genera] consideration, based upon data
given in the earlier section, should be urged in the
same connection. In the NT delin-


3. Satan eation of Satan, his limitations are
Essentially clearly set forth. He is superhuman,
Limited but not in any sense Divine. His


activities are cosmic, but not universal
or transcendent. He is a created being. His
power is definitely circumscribed. He is doomed
to final destruction as a world-power. His entire
eareer is that of a secondary and dependent being
who is permitted a certain limited scope of power—
a time-lease of activity (Lk 4 6).

These three general considerations have been
grouped in this way because they dispose of three
objections which are current against
the doctrine of Satan.

(1) The first is, that it is mytho-
logical in origin. That it is not dog-
matic is a priori evidence against this hypothesis.
Mythology is primitive dogma. There is no evi-
dence of a theodicy or philosophy of evil in the
Bib. treatment of Satan. Moreover, while the
Scriptural doctrine is unsystematic in form, it is
rigidly limited in scope and everywhere essentially
consistent. Even in the Apocalypse, where natu-
rally more scope is allowed to the imagination, the
same essential ideas appear. The doctrine of Satan
corresponds, item for item, to the intellectual sane-
ness and ethical earnestness of the Bib. world-view
as a whole. It is, therefore, not mythological.
The restraint of chastened imagimation, not the
extravagance of mythological fancy, is in evidence
throughout the entire Bib. treatment of the sub-
ject. Even the use of terms current in mythology
(as perhaps Gen 3 1.13.14; Rev 12 7-9; cfi1 Pet
5 8) does not imply more than a literary clothing
of Satan in attributes commonly ascribed to ma-
lignant and disorderly forces.

(2) The second objection is that the doctrine is
due to the influence of Pers dualism (see PERSIAN
RELIGION; ZOROASTRIANISM). The answer to this
is plain, on the basis of facts already adduced.
The Bib. doctrine of Satan is not dualistic. Satan’s
empire had a beginning, it will have a definite and
permanent end. Satan is God’s great enemy in the
cosmic sphere, but he is God’s creation, exists by
Divine will, and his power is relatively no more
commensurate with God’s than that of men. Satan
awaits his doom. Weiss says (concerning the NT
representation of conflict between God and the
powers of evil): “There lies in this no Manichaean
dualism, . . . . but only the deepest experience of
the work of redemption as the definite destruction
of the power from which all sin in the world of men
proceeds” (Bib. Theol. NT, ET, II, 272; ef G. A.
Smith, op. cit., I, 318).

(3) The third objection is practically the same as
the second, but addressed directly to the doctrine
itself, apart from the question of its origin, namely,
that it destroys the unity of God. The answer to
this also is a simple negative. To some minds the
reality of created wills is dualistic and therefore
untenable. But a true doctrine of unity makes
room for other wills than God’s—namely of those
beings upon whom God has bestowed freedom.
Herein stands the doctrine of sin and Satan. The
doctrine of Satan no more militates against the
unity of God than the idea, so necessary to morality
and religion alike, of other created wills set in oppo-
sition to God’s. Just as the conception of Satan
merges, in one direction, in the general doctrine of
angels, so, in the other, it blends with the broad
and difficult subject of evil (cf Satan,” HDB, IV,
412a).

LireratuRe.—All standard works on Bib. Theology,
as well as Dicts., etc, treat with more or less thorough.


4. Conclu-
sions


ness the doctrine of Satan. The German theologians
of the more evangelical typc, such as Weiss, Lange,
Martensen (Danish), Dorner, while exhibiting a tend-
ency toward excessive speculation, discern the deeper
aspects of the doctrine. Of monographs known to the
writer none are to be recommended without qualification.
It is a snbject on which the Bible is its own best inter-
reter.

‘ Louris Mattuews SwEEtT

SATAN, DEPTHS OF (ta Badéa rot Zarava,
td bathéa tot Satand): Found in Rev 2 24, and has
reference to false teaching at Thyatira. It is a
question (that perhaps may not be decided) whether
tou Satana, ‘‘of Satan,’’ represents the claim of the
false teachers, or is thrown in by the Lord. Did
those false teachers claim to know ‘‘the depths” of
Satan? Or was it that they claimed to know “‘the
depths” of Deity, and the Lord said it was rather
“the depths of Satan’? In either case the an-
tithesis to “depths of Satan”’ is “depths of God,” as
referred to in Rom 11 33; 1 Cor 2 10.

E. J. Forrester

SATAN, SYNAGOGUE OF: The expression
occurs neither in the Heb nor in the Gr of the OT,
nor in Apoc. Three passages in the OT and one in
Apoe suggest the idea conveyed in the expression.
In Nu 14 27.35, Jeh expresses His wrath against
“the evil congregation” (LAX guvaywyy movrnpd,
sunagogé ponérd) which He threatens to consume
in the wilderness. In Ps 21 (22) 16, we find,
“A company of evil doers [LX X_ cuvaywynh rovy-
pevopérwr, sunagogé ponéreuoménon] have inclosed
me.” In Sir 16 6, we read, ‘In the congregation
of sinners [LXX cvvaywyh duaprwrSr, sunagagé
hamartélén] shall a fire be kindled.”

Only in the NT occurs the phrase “synagogue of
Satan,” and here only twice (Rev 29; 8 9).
Three observations are evident as to who consti-
tuted ‘‘the synagogue of Satan’ in Smyrna and
Philadelphia. (1) They claimed to be Jews, ie.
they were descendants of Abraham, and so laid
claim to the blessings promised by Jeh to him and
his seed. (2) But they are not regarded by John
as real Jews, i.e. they arc not the genuine Isracl
of God (the same conclusion as Paul reached in Rom
2 28). (8) They are persecutors of the Christians
in Smyrna. The Lord “‘knows their blasphemy,”
their sharp denunciations of Christ and Christians.
They claim to be the true people of God, but really
they are “the synagogue of Satan.” The gen.
Zaravé, Satand, is probably the possessive gen.
These Jewish persecutors, instead of being God’s
people, are the “assembly of Satan,” i.e. Satan’s
people.

In Polye., Mar. xvii.2 (¢ 155 AD) the Jews of
Smyrna were still persecutors of Christians and
were conspicuous in demanding and planning the
martyrdom of Polycarp the bishop of Smyrna, the
same city in which the revelator calls persecuting
Jews “‘the assembly of Satan.”

In the 2d cent., in an inscription (CIJ, 3148)
describing the classes of population in Smyrna, we
find the expression of moré ‘Iovdaior, hot poté
Toudaioi, which Mommsen thinks means ‘Jews
who had abandoned their religion,” but which
Ramsay says “probably means those who formerly
were the nation of the Jews, but have lost the legal
standing of a separate people.” ;

LITERATURE.—Ramsay, The Seven Churches of Asia,
ch xii; Swete, The Apocalypse of St. John, 31, 32; Poly-


carp, Mar. xiii ff.17.2: Tommsen, Historische Zeit-
schrift, XX XVII, 417.


SATCHEL, sach’el.


Cuarxes B. WILLIAMS
See Baa.


SATHRABUZANES, sath-ra-bi’za-néz, sath-ra-
bti-za‘néz (ZadpaBoufdvys, Sathrabouzdnés): In 1
ae 6 3.7.27=‘Shethar-bozenai” in Ezr 5 3.6; 6


2697


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Satan
Saul


_ SATISFACTION, sat-is-fak’shun: Occurs twice
in AV (Nu 36 31.32) as a rendering of the Heb
képher (RV “ransom’’). It means a price paid as
compensation for a life, and the passage cited is
a prohibition against accepting such, in case of
murder, or for the return of the manslayer. Such
compensation was permitted in ancient justice
among many peoples. Cf mow}, poiné, which
Liddell and Scott define as “properly quit-money
for blood spilt, the fine paid by the slayer to the
kinsman of the slain, as a ransom from all conse-
quences.” The same custom prevailed among
Teutonic peoples, as seen in the Ger. Wergeld and
Old Eng. wergild. The Heb laws of the OT per-
mit it only in the case of a man or woman gored to
death by an ox (Ex 21 30-32).
Benjamin Reno Downer

SATRAPS, si’traps, sat/raps (DIETIVEN,
*dhashdarp'nim, Ezr 8 36; Est 3 12; 89; 9 3, AV
“Neutenants”’; Dnl 3 2.3.27; 6 1ff, AV “princes’”’):
The viceroys or vassal rulers to whom was in-
trusted the government of the provinces in the Pers
empire.
thrapavan, ‘‘proteetors of the realm.”


SATYR, sat/ér, sa/tér (WW, sa‘ir, lit. “he-
goat’; cf WW, sa‘ir, “hairy” [Gen 27 11, of Esau],
and Arab. ah, sha'r, “hair’; pl. ovyy,


strim): For s*trim in Lev 17 7 and 2 Ch 11 15,
AV has “devils,” RV “he-goats,” ERVm ‘“satyrs,”’
LXX rots paratos, tots matatotis, ‘vain things.” For
sirim in Isa 18 21, AV and ERV have ‘“satyrs,”
ERVm ‘‘he-goats,” ARV “wild goats,” LXX da
poma, daiménia, “demons.” For sé‘ir in Isa
34 14, AV and ERV have “satyr,” ERVm ‘“he-
goat,’ ARV “wild goat.’ LXX has érepos mpos
tov t#repov, héleros prés tén héteron, “one to an-
other,” referring to daimonia, which here stands for
ciyim, “wild beasts of the desert.”

The text of ARV in these passages is as follows: Lev
17 7, ‘And they shall no more sacrifice their sacrifices
Deo ue he-goats, after which they play the harlot’’;


1 15, ‘And he [Jeroboam] appointed him priests


for the high places, and for the he-goats, and for the


Isa 13 211 (of Babylon),


('drébh] shall dwelltherein: ... . and it shall be a habi-
tation of jackals (tannim], a court for ostriches [bendth


The question is whether sd‘tr and s*trim in these
passages stand for real or for fabulous animals. In
Lev 17 7 and2 Ch 11 13, it is clear that they are
objects of worship, but that still leaves open the
question of their nature, though it may to many
minds make ‘devils’ or “demons” or ‘‘satyrs”’
seem preferable to “he-goats.” In Isa 13 20 we
read, “neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there;
neither shall shepherds make their flocks to lie
down there.” This may very likely have influ-
eneed the American Committee of Revisers to use
“wild goat”? im Isa 18 21 and 34 14 instead of the
“he-goat’”’ of the other passages. In ARV, no
fabulous creatures (except perhaps “night-monster’’)
are mentioned here, but LXX employs daimonia,
“demons,” in Isa 18 21 for s*trim and in 34 14
for giyim;  évoxévraupot, onokéntauroi, {from bvos,
énos, “ass,” and xévravpos, kéntauros, “centaur,
in Isa 13 22 and 34 14 for ’tywm, and again in 34


The word answers to the Old Pers khsha- |


14 for lilith; cepives, seirénes, “sirens,” in Isa_13
21 for bendth ya‘dnah, and in 34 13 for tannim. We
must bear in mind the uncertainty regarding the
identity of giytm, 'iyim, ’dhim and tannim, as well
as of some of the other names, and we must recall
the tales that are hung about the name Jiltth (AV
“screech owl,’ AVm and RV “night-monster,”
RVm “Lilith’). While s@‘ir is almost alone among
these words in having ordinarily a well-understood
meaning, ie. “he-goat,” there is good reason for
considering that here it is used in an exceptional
sense. The tr “satyr’ has certamly much to be
said forit. See Goat; JACKAL.
Atrrep Exry Day
SAUL, s6l (SIND, sha@'ul; Zaotd, Saoil):


(1) The first king of Israel.


I. Earry History
1, Name and Meaning
2. Genealogy
3. Home and Station
4, Sources for Life
5. Election as King
6. Reasons for It
II. Reign anp Fat
1. His First Action
Army Reorganized
Battle of Michmash
Defeats the Amalekites
Deposition Pronounced
David Introduced to Saul
Two Accounts
. Saul’s Envy of David
. Attempts to Get Rid of Him
10. David Spares Saul
11. Sanl’s Divided Energics
12. Consults a Necromancer
13. Battle of Gilboa
14, Double Accounts
15. Saul’s Posterity
III. CHaracter
1. Book of Chronicles
2. Saul's Failings
3. His Virtue
4. David's Elegy


I. Early History.—The name Saul is usually
regarded as simply the passive participle of the
vb. “to ask,”’ and so meaning “asked”


DONA GON


1. Name (ef 1 S 8 4 ff), but the gentilic adj.
and Mean- shd@’alt (Nu 26 13) would point to its
ing having also an intensive connotation,


“the one asked importunately,” or

perhaps, “‘the one asking insistently,” “the beggar.”
Saul was the son of Kish, a Benjamite. His
genealogical tree is given in 1591 (cf LXX


10 21). In1S 9 1 his grandfather is
2. Gene- Abiel, but in 1 Ch 8 33; 9 39, Ner,
alogy who appears as his paternal uncle in


18 14 50.51.


The last verse contains a very curious scribal error,
a yodh having slipped ont of one word in it into another.
It states that both Abner and Ner were sons of Abiel.
These apparent inconsistencies are to be explained by
the fact that in Heb, as in Arab., ‘‘son"’ is often used in
the sense of grandson. Also, with the facility of divorce
then prevalent, by ‘brother’ and “‘sister’’ we must in
most cases understand half-brother and _ half-sister.
Moreover, Saul’s mother might have been the wife at
different times of Kish and of his brother Ner (cf 1 8
90 30). This was quite common, and in some cases
compulsory (Dt 25 5-9).


Saul’s home was at GiBzan (q.v.), which is also
called Gibeah of Saul, ie. Saul’s Hill (1 8 11 4;
ef also 10 5, God’s Hill, or simply The
3. Home Hill, 10 10; Hos 6 8, etc), or the Hill
and Station of Benjamin or of the Benjamites (18
13 15; 2S 23 29). Itis usually iden-
tified with Tell el- Fal, but perhaps its site is marked
rather by some ruins near but beneath that eminence.
The tribe of Benjamin was the fighting tribe of
Israel, and Kish seems to have been one of its most
importantmembers. Saul’s remarks in depreciation
(1 S 9 21) are not to be taken literally.
The circumstances of Saul’s career are too well
known to require recapitulation. It will be suffi-
cient to refer to some of the recognized difficulties


Saul


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2698


of the narrative. These difficulties arise from the
fact that we appear to have two distinct biographies
of Saul in the present Books of S.
4. Sources This may well be the case as it is the
for Life practice of the Sem historian to set
down more than one tradition of each
event, without attempting to work these up into one
consistent account. We shall call the duplicated
narratives A and B, without postulating that either
is a continuous whole. See SamvurEz, Booxs or.
According to A, Saul was anointed king of Israel
at Ramah by the prophet Samuel acting upon an
inspiration from Jeh, not only without
5. Election consulting anyone, but in the strictest
as King secrecy (1 5 9 1—10 16). According
to B, the sheiks of the tribes demanded
a king. Samuel in vain tried to dissuade them.
They would not listen, and a king was chosen by lot
at Mizpah. The lot fell upon Saul, and Samuel
immediately demitted office (ch 8; 10 17-27, omit-
ting last clause; and ch 12).
There are three distinct reasons given in the text
for the abolition of the theocracy and institution of
an elective or hereditary monarchy:
6. Reasons first, the incapacity of Samuel’s sons


for It (8 1 ff); second, an invasion of the

Ammonites (12 12); and third, the
Philis (9 16). These three motives are not mutually
exclusive. The Philis formed the standing menace


to the national existence, which would have necessi-
tated the creation of a monarchy sooner or later.
The other two were temporary circumstances, one
of which aggravated the situation, while the other
showed the hopelessness of expecting any improve-
ment in it in the near future.
I, Reign and Fall.—The election of Saul at
Mizpah was conducted in the presence of the chief-
tains of the clans; it is not to be
1. His First supposed that the whole nation was
Action present. As soon as it was over, the
electors went home, and Saul also
returned to his father’s farm and, like Cincinnatus,
once more followed the plough. ‘Within about a
month,” however (10 27 LXX, for MT “But he
held his peace’), the summons came. A message
from the citizens of JABESH-GILEAD (q.v.) was sent
round the tribes appealing for help against the
Ammonites under Nahash. They, of course, knew
nothing about what had taken place at Mizpah,
and it was only by chance that their messengers
arrived at Gibeah when they did. Saul rose to the
occasion, and immediately after he was acclaimed
king by the whole body of the people (ch 11). This
double election, first by the chiefs and then by the
people, is quite a regular proceeding.
This first success encouraged Saul to enter upon
what was to be the mission of his life, namely, the
throwing off of the Phili suzerainty.


2. Army From the first he had had the boldest
Reorgan- spirits upon his side (10 26 LXX,
ized RVm); he was now able to form a


standing army of 3,000 men, under the
command of himself and his son JoNATHAN (q.V.).
The Philis, the last remnant of the Minoan race,
had the advantage of the possession of iron weapons.
It was, in fact, they who introduced iron into Pal
from Crete—the Israelites knowing only bronze,
and having even been deprived of weapons of the
softer metals. They seem to have armed them-
selves—with the exception of the king and his son—
with mattocks and ploughshares (13 19 ff).

The first encounter was the attack upon the
Phili post at Michmash (1 8 13, 14). The text
of the narrative is uncertain, but the following out-
line is clear. On hearing that the Hebrews had re-
volted (13 3 LXX), the Philis gathered in great
force, including 3,000 chariots (18 5 LAX; MT has


30,000) at Michmash. In dismay, Saul’s troops de-
serted (vs 6f), until he was left with only 600 (14 2).
In spite of this, Jonathan precipitated
3. Battle of hostilities by a reckless attack upon one
Michmash of the outposts. This was so success-
ful that the whole Phili army was
seized with panic, and the onset of Saul and the
desertion of their Heb slaves completed their dis-
comfiture. Saul followed up his victory by making
predatory excursions on every side (14 47).
Saul’s next expedition was against the Amalckites
under Agag, who were likewise completely defeated.
The fight was carried out with all the
4. Defeats remorsclessness common to tribal war-
the Amalek- fare. Warning was sent to the friendly
ites Kenites to withdraw out of danger;
then the hostile tribe was slaughtered
to a man, their chief alone being spared for the time
being. Even the women and children were not
taken as slaves, but were all killed (1 S 15).
It is not clear what was the precise attitude of
Samuel toward Saul. As the undoubted head of
the theocracy he naturally objected to
5. Deposi- his powers being curtailed by the loss


tion Pro- of the civil power (8 6). Even after
nounced the elections of Saul, Samuel claimed

to be the ecclesiastical head of the
state. He seems to have objected to Saul’s offering


the sacrifice before battle (13 10 ff), and to have
considered him merely as his lieutenant (16 3)
who could be dismissed for disobedience (15 14 ff).
Here again there seem to be two distinct accounts
in the traditional text, which we may again call
A and B. In A Saul is rejected because he does
not wait long enough for Samuel at Gilgal (13 8;
cf 10 8). “Seven days,” of course, means eight, or
even more, in short, until Samuel should come,
whenever that might be. The expression might
almost be omitted in translating. In B Saul is
rejected because he did not carry out Samuel’s
orders (15 3) to the letter. The two narratives are
not mutually exclusive. The second offence was
an aggravation of the first, and after it Samuel did

not see Saul again (15 35).
He had good reason for not doing so. He had
anointed a rival head of the state in opposition to
Saul, an act of treason which, if dis-


6. David covered, would have cost him his
Introduced head (ci2 K 9 6.10). Saul did not at
to Saul ouce accept his deposition, but he lost


heart. One cannot but admire him,
deserted by Samuel, and convinced that he was
playing a losing game, and yet continuing in office.
To drive away his melancholy, his servants intro-
duced to him a musician who played until his
spirits revived (16 14 ff; cf 2 K 3 15).

By a strange coincidence (cf I, 5, above) the min-
strel was the very person whom Samuel had secretly
anointed to supplant Saul. According
to what looks like another account,
however, it was his encounter with
Goliath which led to the introduction
of David to Saul (17 1ff; see Davin). In spite
of all that has been said to the contrary, the two
narratives are not incompatible, since we are not
told the order of the events nor over how many
years these events were spread. The theory of
duplicate narratives rests upon the assumption that
all statements made by the dramatis personae in
the Bible are to be taken at their face value. If
chs 16 and 17 had formed part of a play of Shakc-
speare, they would have been considered a fine
example of his genius. Treatises would have
been written to explain why Saul did not recog-
nize David, and why Abner denied all knowledge
ofhim. LXX, however, omits 17 12-31.41.50.55—
18 5.


7. Two
Accounts


2699


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Saul


Whether Saul actually discovered that David had
been anointed by Samuel or not, he soon saw in
him his rival and inevitable successor,


8. Saul’s and he would hardly have been human
Envy of if he had not felt envious of him. His
David dislike of David had two motives.


The first was jealousy, because the
women preferred the military genius of David to
his own (18 7f). His consequent attempt upon
the life of David (vs 8-11) is omitted in LXX.
Not -least was the love of his own daughter for
David (18 20; in ver 28 read with LXX “all
Israel”). The second cause was his natural
objection to see his son Jonathan supplanted in
his rights to the throne, an objection which was
aggravated by the devotion of that son to his own
tival (20 30; see also Davin; JonaTHan).

Saul could not believe that David could remain
loyal to him (24 9); at the first favorable oppor-
tunity he would turn upon him, hurl him

9. Attempts from the throne, and exterminate his
to Get Rid wholehouse. In these circumstances, it
of Him was his first interest to get rid of him.

His first attempt to do so (omitting
with LXX 18 8d-11) was to encourage him to
make raids on the Philis in the hope that these
might kill him (18 21 ff); his next, assassination by
one of his servants (19 1), and then by his own
hand (19 9f). When David was compelled to
fly, the quarrel turned to civil war. The supersti-
tious fear of hurting the chosen of Jeh had given
place to blind rage. Those who sheltered the
fugitive, even priests, were slaughtered (22 17 ff).
From one spot to another David was hunted, as he
says, like a partridge (26 20).

It is generally maintained that here also we have
duplicate accounts; for example, that there are two
accounts of David taking refuge
10. David with Achish, king of Gath, and two of
Spares Saul his sparing Saul’s life. The latter
are contained in chs 24 and 26, but
the points of resemblance are slight. Three thou-
sand (24 2; 26 2) was the number of Saul’s picked
men (cf 13 2). David uses the simile of ‘a flea”
in 24 14, but in 26 20 for ‘‘a flea” LXX has “my
soul,” which is no doubt original. The few other
expressions would occur naturally in any narrative
with the same contents. ‘
Obviously Sanl’s divided energies could not hold
out long; he conld not put down the imaginary
rebellion within, and at the same time


11. Saul’s keep at bay theforeign foe. Nosooner
Divided had he got the fugitive within his
Energies grasp than he was called away by an


inroad of the Philis (23 27f); but
after his life had been twice spared, he seemed to
realize at last that the latter were the real enemy,
and he threw his whole strength into one desperate
effort for existence.
Saul himself saw that his case was desperate,
and that in fact the game was up. As a forlorn
hope he determined to seek occult
42. Con- advice. He could no longer use the
sulisa Nec- official means of divination (28 6),
romancer and was obliged to have recourse to a
necromancer, one of a class whom he
himself had taken means to suppress (28 3). The
result of the séance confirmed his worst fears and
filled his soul with despair (28 7 ff).
Jt says much for Saul that, hopeless as he was, he
engaged in one last forlorn struggle with the enemy.
The Philis had gathered in great


13. Battle force at Shunem. Saul drew up his
of Gilboa army on the opposing hill of Gilboa.

Between the two forces lay a valley
(cf 14 4). The result was what had been foreseen.


The Israelites, no doubt greatly reduced in numbers


(contrast 11 8), were completely defeated, and Saul
and his sons slain. Their armor was placed in the
temple of Ashtaroth, and their bodies hung on
the wall of Bethshan, but Saul’s head was set in
the temple of Dagon (1 Ch 10 10). The citizens
of Jabesh-gilead, out of ancient gratitude, rescued
the bodies and, in un-Semitic wise, burned them
and buried the bones.
Once more we have, according to most present-
day critics, duplicate accounts of the death of Saul.
According to one, which we may name
14. Double A, he fell, like Ajax whom he much
Accounts resembles, upon his own sword, after
being desperately wounded by the
archers (1 § 31 4). According to the second (2 §
1 2 ff), an Amalekite, who had been by accident a
witness of the battle, dispatched Saul at his own
request to save him from the enemy. But B
is simply the continuation of A, and tells us how
David received the news of the battle. The
Amalekite’s story is, of course, a fabrication with
a view to a reward. Similar claims for the reward
of assassination are common (2 8 4 9 ff).
With Saul the first Israclite dynasty began and
ended. The names of his sons are given in 18
14 49 as Jonathan, Ishvi and Malchi-
15. Saul’s shua. Ishvi_ or Ishyo (LXX) is
Posterity Eshbaal, called in 28 2 8 Isu-Bo-
SHETH (q.v.). 1 Ch 8 33 adds Abina-
dab. Jonathan left a long line of descendants
famous, like himself, as archers (1 Ch 8 34 ff).
The rest of Saul’s posterity apparently died out.
Malchishua and Abinadab were slain at Gilboa
(1 8 316; 1 Ch 102), and Ish-bosheth was
assassinated shortly after (2 8 4 2 ff). Sanl had
also two natural sons by Rizpah who were put to
death by David in accordance with a superstitious
custom, as also were the five sons of Saul’s daughter
Merab (2 § 21 8,not Michal; cf 1 S 18 19). Saul’s
other daughter Michal apparently had no children.
Saul had, it seems, other wives, who were taken into
the harem of David in accordance with the practice
of the times (2 § 12 8), but of them and their
descendants we know nothing.
HI. Character,—Saul’s life and character are
disposed of in a somewhat summary fashion by the
Chronicler (1 Ch 10, esp. vs. 13.14).
1. Book of Saul was rejected because he was dis-
Chronicles loyal to Jeh, esp. in consulting a
necromancer. The major premise of
this conclusion, however, 1s the ancient dictum,
“Misfortune presupposes sin.” From a wider
point of view Sau] cannot be dismissed so cavalierly.
Like everyone else, Saul had his virtues and his


failings. His chief weakness seems to have been

want of decision of character. He was
2. Saul’s _ easily swayed by events and by people.
Failings The praises of David (1 8 18 7f) at


once set his jealousy on fire. His per-
secution of David was largely due to the instigation
of mischievous courtiers (24 9). Upon remonstrance
his repentance was as deep as it was short-lived (24
16; 26 21). His impulsiveness was such that he did
not know where to stop. His interdict (14 24 ff)
was quite as uncalled for as his religious zeal (15 9)
was out of place. He was always at one extreme.
His hatred of David was only equal to his affection
for him at first (18 2). His pusillanimity led him
to commit crimes which his own judgment would
have forbidden (22 17). Like most beaten persons,
he became suspicious of everyone (22 7 f), and, like
those who are easily led, he soon found his evil
genius (22 9.18.22). Saul’s inability to act alone
appears from the fact that he never engaged in
single combat, so far as we know. Before he could
act at all his fury or his pity had to be roused to
boiling-point (11 6). His mind was peculiarly sub-


Savaran
Sceptre, Scepter


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2700


ject to external influences, so that he was now a
respectable man of the world, now a prophet (10 11;
19 24).
On the other hand, Saul possessed many high
qualities. His dread of office (10 22) was only
equaled by the coolness with which he
3. His accepted it (11 5). To the first call
Virtues to aetion he responded with prompti-
tude (11 6 ff). His timely aid excited
the lasting gratitude of the citizens of Jabesh-gilead
(31 11 ff). If we remember that Saul was openly
disowned by Samuel (15 30), and believed himself
cast off by Jeh, we cannot but admire the way in
which he fought on to the last. Moreover, the
faet that he retained not only his own sons, but a
sufficient body of fighting men to engage a large
army of Philis, shows that there must have been
something in him to excite confidence and loyalty.
There is, however, no question as to the honorable
and noble qualities of Saul. The chief were his
prowess in war and his generosity
4. David’s mm peace. They have been set down
Elegy by the man who knew him best in
what are among the most authentic
verses in the Bible (2 8 1 19 ff).
(2) Saulof Tarsus. See Paut. ;
.  TxHomas HUNTER WEIR
SAVARAN, sav’a-ran: AV=RV Avaran (q.v.).


'


SAVE, sav: In the sense ‘‘except,”’ the word came
into Eng. through the Fr. (sauf) and is fairly com-
mon (88 t, in addition to “saving,” AV Eccl 5 11;
Am 98; Mt 5 32; Lk 427; Rev 2 17). It
represents no particular Heb or Gr terms but is
employed wherever it seems useful. It is still in
good (slightly archaic) use, and RV has few modi-
fications (Dt 15 4 AV; Ps 18 315, ete), but ERV
has dropped “saving” in Lk 4 27 and Rev 2.17
and ARV also in Heel 5 11; Am 9 8, retaining it
only ia Mt 5 32.


SAVIAS, sa-vi’as (Zaovta, Saouia): In 1 Esd 8 2,
for Uzzi, an aneestor of Ezra, in Ezr 7 4. ;


SAVIOUR, sav’yér: (1) While that “God is
the deliverer of his people’”’ is the concept on which,
virtually, the whole OT is based (see SaLvaTion),
yet the Hebrews seem never to have felt the
need of a title for God that would sum up this
aspect of His relation to man. Nearest to our
word ‘“Savioyr” is a participial form (77,
méshi?') from’the vb. 9U>, yasha‘ (Qal not used;
“save” in Hiphil), but even this participle is not
frequently applied to God (some 13 t of which 7
are in Isa 43-63). (2) In the NT, however, the
case is different, and Zwr%p, Sdtér, is used in as
technical a way as is our “Saviour.” But the dis-
tribution of the 24 occurrences of the word is signifi-
cant, for two-thirds of them are found in the later
books of the NT—10 in the Pastorals, 5 in 2 Pet,
and one each in Jn, 1 Jn, and Jude—while the
other instances are Lk 1 47; 211; Acts 5 31;
13 23; Eph 6 23; Phil 3 20. And there are no
occurrences in Mt, Mk, or the earlier Pauline Epp.
- The data are clear enough. As might be expected,
the fact that the OT used no technieal word for
Saviour meant that neither did the earliest Chris-
tianity use any such word. Doubtless for Our
Lord ‘‘Messiah” was felt to convey the meaning.
But in Gr-speaking Christianity, “Christ,” the
tr of Messiah, soon became treated as a proper
name, and a new word was needed. (3) Sdter
expressed the exact meaning and had already been
set apart in the language of the day as a religious
term, having become one of the most popular
Divine titles in use. Indeed, it was felt to be a |


most inappropriate word to apply to a human being.
Cicero, for instance, arraigns Verres for using it:
“Soter .... How much does this imply? So
much that it cannot be expressed in one word in
Latin” (Verr. 11.2, 63, § 154). So the adoption
of Sétér by Christianity was most natural, the
word seemed ready-made. (4) That the NT
writers derived the word from its contemporary
use is shown, besides, by its occurrence in combina-
tion with such terms as “manifestation” (epi-
phdneia, 2 Tim 1 10; Tit 2 13), “love toward man”
(philanthrépia, Tit 3 4), “captain” (archégds, Acts
5 31; ef He 2 10), etc. These terms are found
in the Gr sourees many times in exactly the same
combinations with Sdtér. (5) In the NT Sdéér is
uniformly reserved for Christ, except in Lk 1 47;
Jude ver 25, and the Pastorals. In 1 Tim (1 1;
2 3; 4 10) itis applied only to the Father, in 2 Tim
(1 10, only) it is applied to Christ, while in Tit there
seems to be a deliberate alternation: of the Father
in 1 3; 2 10; 3 4; of Christ inl 4; 2 18; 3 6.

Lireraturse.—P. Wendland, ‘‘Zwrip,” ZNTW, V,
335-53, 1904; J. Weiss, ‘'Heiland," in RGG, II, 1910;
H. Lietzmann, Der Weltheiland, 1909. Much detailed
information is available in various parts of Deissmann,
Light from the Ancient East, 1910.

Burton Scorr Easton

SAVOR, sa’vér (1777, réh; Oopf, osmé): (1) The
primary meaning of the word is ‘‘taste,” “flavor”
(from Lat sapor, taste’). Soin Mt 6 13; Lk 14
34, “if the salt have lost its savor? (nwpar6%,
moranthé, “become tasteless,” “insipid,” so as to lose
its characteristic preserving virtue). (2) But gener-
ally it has the meaning of “‘smell,” ‘“odor’’: (a)
once of evil odor: “Its stench shall come up, and its
ill savor shall come up” (Joel 2 20); (6) elsewhere
in the sense of pleasant smell. In the OT, with the
exception of Ex 5 21 and AV Cant 1 3 (RV
“fragranee”’), it is always accompanied by the adj.
“sweet.” It stands for the smell of sacrifices and
oblations, in agreement with the ancient anthro-
pomorphic idea that God smells and is pleased
with the fragrance of sacrifices (e.g. ‘“Jeh smelled
the sweet savor,’ Gen 8 21; “to make a sweet
savor unto Jeh,’ Nu 15 3; and frequently). In
the NT, ‘‘savor” in the sense of smell] is used meta-
phorically: (a) once the metaphor is borrowed from
the incense which attends the victor’s triumphal
procession; God is said to make manifest through
His apostles ‘‘the savor of his knowledge in every
place” as He “Jeadeth”’ them “in triumph in Christ”
(2 Cor 214; see TriumpH). (b) Elsewhere the
metaphor is borrowed from the fragrant smell of
the sacrifices. The apostles ‘are a sweet savor of
Christ unto God” (2 Cor 2 15), i.e. they are, as it
were, a sweet odor for God to smell, an odor which
is pleasing to God, even though its effect upon men
varies (to some it is a ‘savor from death unto death,”
ie. such as is emitted by death and itself causes
death; to others it is “a savor from life unto life,”
ver 16). By the same sacrificial metaphor, Christ’s
offering of Himself to God is said to be “for a sweet
smelling savor” (Eph 6 2 AV, RV “for an odor
of a sweet smell’; the same phrase is used in
Phil 4 18 of acts of kindness to Paul, which were
“a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God”).
(3) Once it is used in the figurative sense of reputa-
tion: ‘Ye have made our savor to be abhorred [lit.
“our smell to stink”’] in the eyes of Pharaoh” (Ex 5
21). Cf the Eng. phrase, “to be in bad odor.”

The vb. ‘to savor’? means: (1) intransitively, to
taste or smell of, to partake of the quality of something,


as in the Pretacc of AV, ‘'to savour more of curiosity than
wisdome,”’ or (2) transitively, to perceive by the taste


| or smell, to discern: ‘'thou savourest not the things that


be of God" (AV Mt 16 23; Mk 8 33, RV ‘mindest”;
gpovets, phronefs; Vulg sapis). The adj. ‘savory’ occurs
only in Gen 27 4.7.9.14.17.31 (‘savory food") and RV


Isa’ 30 24 (m “salted"). D. Mraun Epw
. ARDS


Le


2701


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Savaran
Sceptre, Scepter


SAW, s6. See Toots.


SAWING ASUNDER, sé6‘ing a-sun’dér.
PUNISHMENTS.


SAYEST, si/est: “Thou sayest” (Mt 27 11;
Mk 15 2; Lk 22 70, “Ye say”; Jn 18 37), ic.
rightly; ‘‘Thou hast said’ (Mt 26 25.64),=“Yes”:
a rabbinical idiom never found in the OT. Mark
(14 62) renders by “L am.’ All these passages
a ica interrogatively (cf K¢thiibhath,


See


SAYINGS, sa’ingz, DARK. See Darx Sayinas.
SAYINGS, FAITHFUL. See Fairarun Sayincs.
SAYINGS OF JESUS. Sce Louia.


SAYINGS, UNWRITTEN, un-rit’’n.
PHA,


See Acra-


SCAB, skab, SCABBED, skab’ed, skabd (M533,
yallepheth, DDBOA, mispahath, NOBD, sappahath,
vb. MEW , sippoh; onpacta, sémasia, Aex hy, icichén):
These are generic terms for any skin disease in which
there are patches of hard crusts on thesurface. The
commonest of these are the forms now named ecze-
ma, herpes and, perhaps, psoriasis, all of which are
common in Bible lands. Milder cases in which the
disease was localized and in small patches (the
sémasia of LX-X) did not render the bearer unclean,
and they were to be distinguished by the priest (Lev
13 2.6) from the more virulent and spreading erup-
tions which (ver 7) were regarded as causes of cere-
monia] uncleanness. These severer forms are the
leichén of LXX mentioned in Lev 21 20, which dis-
qualified any son of Aaron from serving as a priest,
and when affecting an animal rendered it unfit to be
offered as a burnt offering (Lev 22 22). Hippocrates
speaks of these cases as obstinate and persistent, and
Galen believed that they might degenerate into
leprosy; hence the terms in which Aeschylus speaks
of it (Choephori 281). Celsus, however, recognized
that leichén was a papular eruption, not a true scab.
The name yallepheth seems to have been given to it
on account of the firmness of attachment of the
scabs, while the term mispahath refers to its tend-
ency to spread and cover the surface. A cognate
word in Ezk 13 18 is the name of a large fallith or
prayer veil used by the false prophetesses in Israel
(trd ‘‘kerchief’’). Scabs were esp. disfiguring on the
head, and this infliction was threatened as a punish-
ment on the daughters of Zion for their wanton
haughtiness (Isa 3.17). In Middle Eng., “scab”
is used for itch or mange, and as a term of oppro-
brinm, as in Greene, Bacon and Bungay, 35, 1591.

AuLEx. MAcaListTer

SCABBARD, skab’ard, SHEATH, shéth. See

Armor, III, 5; War, 9.


SCAFFOLD, skaf’old (113, kiyydr): The Eng.
word is used once of Solomon’s ‘‘brazen scaffold’’
on which he knelt at the dedication of the temple
(2 Ch 6 18).


SCALE, skal.
MEASURES.


See Since, 4, (ec); WEIGHTS AND


SCALES, skalz ([1] MWPWP, kaskeseth, “fish-
scales’; [2] M33, meghinndh, ja'2, maghén,
“scales of the crocodile’; [8] Aemls, lepis, with
vb. Aerltw, lepizd, ‘scale away” [Tob 3 17; 11 13)):
(1) The first Heb word kaskeseth means the imbri-
cated scales of fish, which together with the dorsal
fin were a distinguishing mark of all fish allowed as


food to the Israelite (Lev 11 9ff; Dt 14 9f).
In the figurative sense the word is used of a coat of
mail (1 8 17 5.88). (2) Meghinnah from maghén,
lit. ‘a buckler” or “small shield” (2 Ch 23 9; Jer
46 3), is used im the description of the crocodile (see
LeviaTHAn) for the horny scales or scutes imbedded
in the skin, not imbricated upon it (Job 41 15 [Heb
ver 7]). (3) The Gr lepis, which m classical lan-
guage has a much wider range of meaning than the
above Heb words (“rind,” “husk,” “shell,’”’ “fish-
seale,”’ “scale of snake,’ “flake of metal and of
snow,” etc), is found in the NT description of St.
Panl’s recovery from temporary blindness, “And
straightway there fell from his eyes as it were scales,
and he received his sight”? (Acts 9 18). There
is nothing in the words of the sacred text which
compels us to think of literal scales. (In Tob,
however, a literal flaking-off of foreign substance is
meant.) We have here rather a description of the
sensation which terminated the three days’ period
of blindness which the apostle suffered after his
meeting with the risen Lord on the road to Damas-
cus. The apostle himself does not use this expres-
sion in his own graphic description of the same
experience: ‘‘In that very hour ] looked upon him”
(22 18). The phrase has, however, come into Eng.,
for we speak of “‘scales falling from one’s eyes” when
we mean a sudden illumination or remembrance or
a dissipation of harassing doubt.

In Isa 40 12; RV Prov 16 11 for O58, peles, in
the sense of ‘instrument for weighing.” See Ba1-
ANCE. H. L. E. Luerine


SCALL, skél (PE), nethek; Opatopa, thrarisma):
This only occurs in Lev 13 and 14 where it is used
14 t to describe bald or scaly patches of eruption on
the skin. Such patches are generally the result of
the action of parasitic organisms. The common
form known now as scalled head is produced by a
microscopic plant, Achdrion schoenleinii. In Old
and Middle Eng., scall was used for scabbiness of
the head_(Chancer and Spenser). See also Skeat,
Concise Etymol. Dict. of Eng. Language.


SCAPE-GOAT, skap’git.
SCARLET, sk&r‘let. See Cotors; Dyeina.


SCARLET (WORM) (730 nr>in, tdla‘oth shanti
[Ex 25 4, etc]): Cermes vermilio, a scale insect
from which a red dye is obtained. See Cotor;
Dyrinc; Worm.


See AzAzEL.


SCATTERED ABROAD, skat’érd a-bréd’. See
DISPERSION.
SCENT, sent: (1) In Hos 14 7, ‘The scent


[m “his memorial’’] thereof shall be as the wine
of Lebanon.” “Scent” is used for “37, zekher
(so MT, but the pointing is uncertain), properly
“memorial,’ whence RVm. The Eng. tr comes
through the LXX which took zkr as “offering of
sweet savor,” and so ‘sweet savor.” For the ‘“wine
of Lebanon” see Wine. If this tr is not right, the
alternative is “‘memorial” in the sense of ‘“‘renown.”
(2) Job 14 9; Jer 48 11 for ON, réh, “odor.”
“Scent” of the water in Job 14 9 is poetic for
“contact with.” (8) Wisd 11 18 AV has “filthy
scents of scattered smoke,’’ where “scent’’ is used in
the obsolete sense of “disagreeable odor.’ The tr
is, however, very loose, and “scents” is a gloss; RV
“noisome smoke.” Burron Scorr Easton


SCEPTRE, SCEPTER, sep’tér (U2W, shebhet,


DAW , sharbhit, expanded form in Est 4 11; 5 2;
8 4; paBSes, rhdbdos [Ad Est 15 11; He 1 8],


Sceva
Scorpion


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2702


oKimtpos, sképiros): A rod or mace used by | (1 Cor 12 18 ff). The ecclesiastical meaning is


sovereign as a symbol of royal authority. The Heb
shébhet is the ordinary word for rod or club, and is
used of an ordinary rod (ef 2 S 7 14), of the shep-
herd’s crook (Ps 23 4), scribe’s baton or marshal’s
staff (Jgs 6 14), as well as of the symbol of royalty.
Itssymbolism may be connected with the use of the
shébhet for protection (2 8 23 21; Ps 23 4) or for
punishment (Isa 10 24; 30 31). It is used with
reference to the royal line descended from Judah
(Gen 49 10), and figuratively of sovereignty in
general and possibly of conquest (Nu 24 17, in
Israel; Isa 14 5, in Babylonia; Am 1 5.8, in
Syria, among Philis; Zec 10 11, in Egypt), the
disappearance or cutting off of him that holdeth
the scepter being tantamount to loss of national
independence. The kingship of Jeh is spoken of
as ascepter (Ps 45 6[Heb ver 7] quoted in He 1 8).
The manner of using the scepter by an oriental
monarch is suggested in the act of Ahasuerus, who
holds it out to Esther as a mark of favor. The
subject touches the top of it, perhaps simply as an
act of homage or possibly te indicate a desire to be
heard. The scepter of Ahasuerus is spoken of as
“golden” (Est 5 2), but it is probable that scepters
were ordinarily made of straight branches (mateh)
of certain kinds of vines (Ezk 19 11.14).

It is sometimes difficult to determine whether
the word shébhet is used in figurative passages in the
sense of scepter or merely in the ordinary sense of
staff (e.g. Ps 125 3, AV “rod,” RV and ARV
“sceptre” [of the wicked]; Ps 2 9, ‘rod of iron’;
Prov 22 8, “rod of his wrath’). Another word,
mehokek, lit. “prescribing” (person or thing), for-
merly tr? uniformly ‘“lawgiver,’’ is now generally
taken, on the basis of parallelism, to mean “‘sceptre”
in four poetic passages (Gen 49 10, “‘rnler’s staff”
to avoid repetition; Nu 21 18; Ps 60 7; 108 8).

Natuan Isaacs

SCEVA, sé’va (Zrevd, Skeud): A Jew, a chief
priest, resident in Ephesus, whose seven sons were
exorcists (Acts 19 14 ff). Ewald regards the name
as being Heb shekhabhyah. He was not an officiat-
ing priest, as there were only synagogues in Asia
Minor. He may have belonged to a high-priestly
family, or perhaps at one time he had been at the
head of one of the 24 courses in the temple.

In the narrative the construction is loose. There
were seven sons (ver 14), and it would appear (ver
16) that in this particular case all were present.
But (ver 16) the demon-possessed man _ over-
powered “both of them.” TR gets over the diffi-
culty by omitting “both,” but SABD, so Tisch.,
WH, Soden, and best critics, retain the difficult
reading. The explanation is that ver 14 states the
custom: ‘‘who did this” being hoi towito pototntes,
‘“vho used to do this.”” Vs 15 and 16 state a par-
ticular case in which two took part, but the in-
cident is introduced in a careless manner. ;

Ewald would translate amphotérén as “in both
sides,” but this is impossible. Baur understood
“disciples” for “sons.” D and Syrhavean interest-
jing expansion which Blass considers original (ver
14): “Among whom also the sons [Syr ‘seven’] of a
certain Sceva, a priest, wished todo the same, [who]
were in the custom of exorcising such. And enter-
ing into the demon-possessed man they began to call
upon the Name, saying, ‘We charge you by Jesus
whom Paul preaches to come out.’ ”


: -§. F. Hunter
SCHISM, siz'm (cxlepa, schisma): Only in
1 Cor 12 25. The same Gr word, lit. “a split,”


is tr? “rent” in Mt 9 16; Mk 2 21; and “division”
in Jn 7 43; 9 16; 10 19. It designates ‘‘a separa-
tion,” not from, but within, the church, interfering
with the harmonious coérdination and coéperation
of the members described in the preceding verses


that of a break from a church organization, that may
or may not be connected with a doctrinal dissent.


SCHOOL, skool («XxoAv, scholé). See TYRANNUS.


SCHOOLMASTER, sk6dl’mas-tér: Gal 3 24f
AV reads: “The law was our schoolmaster to bring
us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith.
But after that faith is come, we are no longer under
a schoolmaster.” ‘“Schoolmaster” is a tr of wada-
ywrybs, paidagagés, lit. ‘“child-leader.” This paida-
gogos was not a teacher but a slave, to whom in
wealthy families the general oversight of a boy
wags committed. It was his duty to accompany
his charge to and from school, never to lose sight of
him in public, to prevent association with objec-
tionable companions, to inculcate moral lessons
at every opportunity, etc. He was a familiar
figure in the streets, and the (sour) “face of a
paidagégos” and “to follow one like a paidagégos”
were proverbial expressions. Naturally, to the
average boy the paidagdgos must have represented
the incorporation of everything objectionable.
Hence St. Paul’s figure may be paraphrased: ‘“The
law was a paidagogos, necessary but irksome, to
direct us until the time of Christ. Then was the
time of our spiritual coming-of-age, so that the
control of the paidagégos ceased.” The word
paidagogos was taken over into Aram. at an early
date, and St. Paul’s language, which is hardly that


| of a mere adult observer, suggests that he had had


personal experience with the institution. Wealthy
and intensely orthodox Jewish parents living in a
gentile city may well have adopted such a precau-
tion for the protection of their children.

No Eng. word renders paidagdgos adequately.
“Schoolmaster’ is quite wrong, but RV’s “tutor”
(ef 1 Cor 4 15) is little better m modern Eng.

Burton Scott Easton

SCHOOLS OF THE PROPHETS. See Enu-

CATION; PROPHETS.


SCIENCE, si’ens: This word as found in AV
means simply “‘knowledge.” “Science” occurs in
AV only in two places, Dnl 1 4, “children... .
understanding science’ (NIT YT, ysdh*'édha'‘ath,
“those who understand science”). The meaning of
the term here is ‘“‘knowledge,”’ “wisdom.” The only
other occurrence of “science” is in the NT (1 Tim
6 20, “avoiding . . . . oppositions of science falsely
so called,” tis Peviwnduov yrdcews, tés pseudinimou
gnéseés, “the falsely called gndsis”’). “Science” is
the tr of the Gr gnésis, which in the NT is usually
rendered ‘‘knowledge.’”’ The science here referred
to was a higher knowledge of Christian and Divine
things, which false teachers alleged that. they pos-
sessed, and of which they boasted. It was an
incipient form of Gnosticism, and it prevailed to a
considerable extent in the churches of proconsular
Asia, e.g. in Colossae and Ephesus. Timothy is
put on his guard against the teaching of this gndsis
falsely so called, for it set itself in opposition to the
gospel. See Gnosticism.

“Science” in the modern sense of the word, as
the discovery and orderly classification and exposi-
tion of the phenomena and of the laws of Nature,
is not found either in the OT or the NT unless
the passage in Dnl be interpreted as meaning the
scientific knowledge which the learned men of Baby-
lon possessed of mathematics and astronomy, ete.
See also Acts 7 22. To the Heb mind all natural
phenomena meant the working of the hand of God
in the world, directly and immediately, without the
intervention of any secondary laws.

Joun RoTHERFURD


2703


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sceva
Scorpion


SCIMITAR, sim’i-tar, -tér (dxudun, akindké):
Formerly given as “fauchion” in AV Jth 13 6;
16 9, the weapon which Judith took down from the
rail of the bed at Holofernes’ head, and with which
she severed his head from his body.


_ SCOFF, skof, SCOFFER, skof’ér: The vb.
indicates the manifestation of contempt by insulting
words or actions; it combines bitterness with ridi-
cule. It is much more frequent in RV than in AV,
replacing “‘scorn’”’ of the latter in Ps 11; Prov 1
22, ete. ‘Scorn” refers rather to an inner emotion
based on a sense of superiority; ‘scoff,’ to the
outward expression of this emotion.


Further, this state or reaction is not simple but complex.
It includes a sense of superiority, resentment, and aver-
slon. This rcaction occurs when one is confronted witha
person or a proposition that by challenging certaiu things
for itself evokes a vivid sense of one’s own superiority and
awakens mingled resentment, repulsion and contempt hy
the hollowness of its claims and its intrinsic inferiority
or worse. Scorn is a hotter, fiercer emotion than disdain
or coutempt. It is ohvious that scorn may—indeed, it
not uncommonly does—arise in connection with an un-
grounded, arrogant sense of self-esteem.


The word, outside of the phrase “laugh to scorn,”
is found only in the OT, and then only 4 t (Est
3 6; AV Ps 44 13; 79 4; Hab 1 10), and it repre-
sents three different Heb words for none of which
itis a suitable rendering. The two words ‘‘thought
scorn” in Est 3 6 represent but one in Heb, viz.
bazah, for which ‘‘disdain” would be a nearer equiv-
alent. In Hab 1 10 AV the word tr? “‘scorn’’ is
mishdk, “an object of laughter,” “Jaughing-stock.”
In Ps 44 13; 79 4 the Heb word is la‘agh from a
root, probably meaning “‘to stutter,” “stammer,”
for which “mocking” is a better Eng. equivalent.
In AV Job 34 7; Ps 123 4, la‘agh is rendered
“scorning’” (the rendering given in Prov 1 22 to
lacén, a word from a totally different root and one
much more nearly approximating the fundamental
idea of the Eng. word “‘scorn.’’ In Prov 29 8 and
Isa 28 14 lécén is rendered ‘‘scornful’’).

As a vb. the word is the tr given to la’agh, ‘‘to mock”’
(2K19 21 || Isa 87 22; Job 22 19; Neh 2 19; Ps 22
7, ‘all laugh to scorn’'); Kdlas ="'to scoff"’ (zk 16 31,
m''Gr scoffeth,”’ but text still “scorneth’’); for the noun
cfhok, “laughter” (Ezk 23 32); sahak =‘'to laugh,”
“Jangh at” (Job 89 7.18; 2 Ch 30 10), with the noun
sthok, ‘laugh to scoru’’ (RV "‘laughing-stock,”’ Job 12
4); lig =" to scoff’’ (as used in ethical and religious con-
nections) (Joh 16 20; Prov 3 34; 9 12, all ‘‘scoff”’
in RV); in Prov 19 28 RV, not happily, mock at.”
RV is warranted in substituting ‘“‘scotf’’ for ‘‘scorn
hecause the context Indicates some form of outward
expression of the scorn.


RV always (except Job 12 4; Sir 6 4; 1 Macc
10 70) retains ‘laugh to scorn” (2 K 19 21; 2 Ch
30 10; Neh 2 19; Job 22 19; Ps 22 7; Isa 37 22;
Fzk 16 31; 28 32; 2 Esd 2 21; Jth12 12; Wisd
4 18; Sir 7 11; 18 7; 2017; Mt 9 24; Mk 5 40;
Lk 8 53). The vb. in Apoc and the NT is usually
karayerdw, katageldd, but in Wisd 4 1 éxyeddw, ekge-
Idd; in Sir 13 7 KaTapwxdopar, katamokdomat, and in
9% Esd 221 inrideo. In addition ‘“‘scorn’”’ is retained
in Est 3 6; Job 39 7.18; 2 Esd 8 56 (contemno).
In Prov 19 28 ‘‘scorn” is changed to “mock at,”
but elsewhere invariably to “scoff.”

Scorner is the tr of the participle of lie, and
once of the participle of lagag. For ‘“‘scorner”’
RV_ everywhere substitutes—properly—‘‘scoffer.
Outside of Prov (and Hos 7 5) the word is to be
found only in Ps 1 2. The force of the word has


been well indicated by Cheyne, who says that the
“seorner [scoffer] is one who despises that which
is holy and avoids the company of the noble ‘wise
men,’ but yet in his own vain way seeks for truth;
his character is marked by arrogance as that of the
wise is characterized by devout caution.”
W. M. McPHEEtTERS
SCORPION, skér’pi-un (A9PY, ‘akrabh; of Arab.


EELS “scorpion”; DD IPT M279,


macdleh ‘akrabbim, “the ascent of Akrabbim”;
cxoprlos, skorptos. Note that the Gr and Heb
may be akin; cf, omitting the vowels, ‘krb and
skrp): In Dt 8 15, we have, “who led thee through
the great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery
serpents [nadhadsh sdéraph] and scorpions [‘akrabh].”
Rehoboam (1 K 12 11.14; 2 Ch 10 11.14) says,
“My father chastised you with whips, but I will
chastise you_with scorpions.” Ezekiel is told to
prophesy to the children of Israel (2 6), and “Be not
afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words,
though briers and thorns are with thee, and thou dost
dwell among scorpions.” ‘The ascent of Akrabbim,”
the north end of Wddi-ul-‘Arabah, S. of the Dead
Sea, is mentioned as a boundary 3 t (Nu 34 4; Josh
15 3; Jgs 1 36). Jesus says to the Seventy (Lk
10 19), “‘Behold, I have given you authority to
tread upon serpents and scorpions,” and again in
Lk 11 12 He says, ‘‘Or if he shall ask an egg, will
he give him a scorpion?”

Note that we have here three douhlets, the loaf and
the stone, the fish and the serpent, and the egg and the
scorpion, whereas in the passage in Mt (7 9f) we have
only the loaf and stone and the fish and serpent. EB
(s.v. ‘Scorpion”’) ingeniously seeks to bring Lk into
nearer agreement with Mt by omitting from Lk the
second doublet, i.e. the fish and the serpent, iustancing
several texts as authority for the omission, and reading
byov, épson, ‘‘fish,”’ for gov, Gdn, “egg.”

In Rev 9 2-10 there come out of the smoke of the
abyss winged creatures (‘‘locusts,"’ dxpides, akrides)
like war-horses with crowns of gold, with the faces of
men, hair of women, teeth of lions, breastplates of iron,
and with stinging tails like scorpions. In Ecclus 26 7
1t is said of an evil wife, ‘He that taketh hold of heris
as one that graspeth a scorpion.” In 1 Macc 6 51 we
find mention of ‘pieces [cxopmidia, skorpidia, diminutive
of skorpios} to cast darts.”” In Plutarch skorpios is used
in the same sense (Liddell and Scott, s.v. cxopmios),


_ In the passage cited from Dt, and probably also
in the name “ascent of Akrabbim,” we find refer-
ences to the abundance
of scorpions, esp. in the
warmer parts of the
country. Though there
is a Gr proverb, “Look
for ascorpion under every
stone,’ few would agree
with the categorical state-
ment of Tristram (NHB)
that “every third stone is
sure to conceal one.”
Nevertheless, campers and
people sleepmg on the | : ;
ground need to exercise care in order to avoid their
stings, which, though often exceedingly painful for
several hours, are scldom fatal.

Scorpions are not properly insects, but helong with
spiders, mites and ticks to the Arachnidae. ‘The scor-
pions of Palare usually 2or3in.long. The short cepha-
othorax bears a powerful pair of jaws, two long limbs
terminating with pincers, which make the creature look
likea small crayfish or lobster, and four pairs of legs. The
rest of the hody consists of the abdomen, a broad part
continuous with the cephalothorax, and a slender part
forming the long tail which terminates with the sting.
The tail is usually carried curved over the back and is
used for stinging the prey into insensihility. Scorpions
teed mostly on insects for which they lie in wait. The
scorpion family is remarkable for having existed with


very fittle change from the Silurian age to the present
time.


‘akrab,


Scorpion.


It does not seem necessary to consider that the


Scorpions
Scrip


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2704


words of Rehoboam (1 K 12 11, etc) refer to a whip
that was called a scorpion, but rather that as the
sting of a scorpion is worse than the lash of a whip,
so his treatment would be harsher than his father’s.
ALFRED Ezy Day
SCORPIONS, skér’pi-unz, CHASTISING WITH.
See PunisumMents, 3, (17); Scorpion.


SCOURGE, skiarj, SCOURGING, skir’jing
(paorié, mdslix, partvydw, mastigé6d; in Acts 22 25
paotifw, mastizo, in Mk 16 15 || Mt 27 26 dpayed-
\éa, phragelléo): A Rom implement for severe bodily
punishment. Horace calls it horribile flagellum. It
consisted of a handle, to which several cords or leather
thongs were affixed, which
were weighted with jagged
pieces of bone or metal, to
make the blow more pain-
ful and effective. It is
comparable, in its horrid
effects, only with the Rus-
sian knout. The victim
was tied to a post (Acts
22 25) and the blows were
applied to the back and
loins, sometimes even, in
the wanton cruelty of the
executioner, to the face
and the bowels. In the
tense position of the body,
the effect can easily be
‘ imagined. So hideous was the punishment that the
victim usually fainted and not rarely died under it.
Eusebius draws a horribly realistic picture of the tor-
ture of scourging (H#, IV, 15). By its application
secrets and confessions were wrung from the victim
(Acts 22 24). It usually preceded capital punish-
ment (Livy xxxiii.36). It was illegal to apply the
flagellum to a Rom citizen (Acts 22 25), since the
Porcian and Sempronian laws, 248 and 123 BC,
although these laws were not rarely broken in the
provinces (Tac. Hist. iv.27; Cie. Verr. v.6, 62; Jos,
BJ, Il, xiv, 9). As among the Russians today,
the number of blows was not usually fixed, the
severity of the punishment depending entirely on
the commanding officer. In the punishment of
Jesus, we are reminded of the words of Ps 129 3.
Among the Jews the punishment of flagellation was
well known since the Egyp days, as the monuments
abundantly testify. The word “scourge” is used
in Lev 19 20, but ARV translates “punished,”
the original word bikkdreth expressing the idea of
investigation. Dt 26 3 fixed the mode of a Jewish
flogging and limits the number of blows to 40.
Apparently the flogging was administered by a rod.
The Syrians reintroduced true scourging into Jewish
life, when Antiochus Epiphanes forced them by
means of it to eat swine’s flesh (2 Macc 6 30;
71). Later it was legalized by Jewish Jaw and
became customary (Mt 10 17; 23 34; Acts 22
19; 26 11), but the traditional limitation of the
number of blows was still preserved. Says Paul
in his “foolish boasting’’: “In stripes above meas-
ure,” “‘of the Jews five times received I forty stripes
save one,” distinguishing it from the “beatings
with rods,” thrice repeated (2 Cor 11 28-25).

The other OT references (Job 5 21; 9 23; Isa
10 26, 2815.18 (DTW, shal]; Josh 23 13 [UOW,
shété]) are figurative for “‘affliction.”” Notice the
curious mixture of metaphors in the phrase “‘over-
flowing scourge” (Isa 28 15.18).

Henry E. Dosker

SCRABBLE, skrab’’l: Occurs only in1 S 21 13, as
the tr of MN, tawah: “David .. . . feigned him-
self mad and scrabbled on the doors of the gate.”
“To scrabble” (modern Eng. “scrawl’’) is here to


Roman Scourges.


make unmeaning marks; t@waéh means “to make a
mark”’ from taw, “a mark,’’ esp. as a cross (Ezk 9 4),
a signature (Job 31 35, see RV), the name of the
letter M, originally made in the form of a cross;
RVm has “made marks”; but LXX has tumpanizé,
“to beat as a drum,” which the Vulg, Ewald, Driver
and others follow (“beat upon” or “‘drummed on the
doors of the city,”” which seems more probable).


SCREECH, skréch, OWL. See Nicut-MonstTer.


SCRIBES, skribz: The existence of law leads
necessarily to a profession whose business is the
study and knowledge of the law; at any rate, if the
law 1s extensive and complicated. At the time of
Ezra and probably for some time after, this was
chiefly the business of the priests. Ezra was both
priest and scholar (DO, sdéphér). It was chiefly
in the interest of the priestly cult that the most
important part of the Pent (P) was written. The
priests were therefore also in the first instance the
scholars and the guardians of the Law; but in the
course of time this was changed. The more highly
esteemed the Law became in the eyes of the people,
the more its study and interpretation became a, life-
work by itself, and thus there developed a class of
scholars who, though not priests, devoted them-
selves assiduously to the Law. These became
known as the scribes, that is, the professional stu-
dents of the Law. During the Hellenistic period,
the priests, esp. those of the upper class, became
tainted with the Hellenism of the age and frequently
turned their attention to paganistic culture, thus
neglecting the Law of their fathers more or less and
arousing thescribes to opposition. Thus the scribes
and not the priests were now the zealous defenders
of the Law, and hence were the true teachers of the
people. At the time of Christ, this distinction was
complete. The scribes formed a solid profession
which held undisputed sway over the thought of the
people. Inthe NT they are usually called ypanuareis,
grammateis, i.e. “students of the Scriptures,” “‘schol-
ars,” corresponding to the Heb DDO, sdph’rim=
homines literati, those who make a profession of
literary studies, which, in this case, of course, meant
chiefly the Law. Besides this general designation,
we also find the specific word voucxol, nomikoil, i.e.
“students of the Law,” “lawyers” (Mt 22 35; Lk 7
30; 10 25; 11 45.52; 14 3); and in so far as
they not only know the Law but also teach it they
are called voyodiddoxador, nomodiddskalot, ‘‘doctors
of the Law” (Lk 6 17; Acts 5 34).


The extraordinary honors bestowed on these scholars
on the part of the people are expressed in their honorary
titles. ost common was the appellative “ rabbi’’ =
“my lord’ (Mt 23 7 and otherwise). This word of

olite address gradually became a title. The word
‘rabboni’’ (Mk 10 51; Jn 20 16) is an extensive form,
and was employed by the disciples to give expression
to their veneration of Christ. In the Gr NT “rabbi”
is tr as xvpie, kiurie (Mt 8 2.6.8.21.25 and otherwise),
or dédcnadc, diddskale (Mt 8 19 and otherwise), in
Lk by émordra, epistdia (LK 5 5: 8 24.45; 9 33.49:
17 13). Besides these, we find rarip, patér, ‘‘father,'’
and xa@nyjrns, kathégétés, ‘teacher’? (Mt 23 9).


From their students the rabbis demanded honors
even surpassing those bestowed on parents. ‘‘Let
the honor of thy friend border on the honor of thy
teacher, and the honor of thy teacher on the fear of
God” (Abhath 4 12). “The honor of thy teacher
must surpass the honor bestowed on thy father; for
son and lather are both in duty bound to honor the
teacher” (Kerithéth 6 9). Everywhere the rabbis
demanded the position of first rank (Mt 23 6f; Mk
12 38f; Lk 11 43; 20 46). Their dress equaled
that of the nobility. They wore orodai, stolat,
pane and these were the mark of the upper
class.


2705


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Scorpions
Scrip


Since the scribes were lawyers (see LawyrEr),
much of their time was occupied in teaching and
in judicial functions, and both these activities must
be pursued gratuitously. Rabbi Zadok said:
“Make the knowledge of the Law neither a crown in
which to glory nor a spade with which to dig.”
Hillel used to say: “He who employs the crown (of
the Law] for external purposes ‘shall dwindle.”
That the judge should not receive presents or hribes
was written in the Law (Ex 23 8; Dt 16 19);
hence the Mish said: “If anyone accept pay for
rendering judgment, his judgment is null and void.”
The rabbis were therefore obliged to make their
living by other means. Some undoubtedly had
inherited wealth; others pursued a handicraft
besides their study of the Law. Rabbi Gamaliel Il
emphatically advised the pursuit of a business in
addition to the pursuit of the Law. It is well
known that the apostle Paul kept up his handicraft
even after he had become a preacher of the gospel
(Acts 18 3; 20 34; 1 Cor 4 12; 96; 2 Cor 11
7; 1 Thess 2 9; 2 Thess 3 8), and the same is
reported of many rabbis. But in every instance
the pursuit of the Law is represented as the worthier,
and warning is given not to overestimate the value
of the ordinary avocation. It was a saying of
Hillel: ‘He that devotes himself to trade will not
become wise.’’ The principle of gratuity was
probably carried out in practice only in connection
with the judicial activity of the scribes; hardly in
connection with their work as teachers. Even
the Gospels, in spite of the admonition that the
disciples should give without pay because they had
received without pay (Mt 10 8), nevertheless also
state that the workman is worthy of his hire (Mt 10
10; Lk 10 7); and Paul (1 Cor 9 14) states it as
his just due that he receive his livelihood from those
to whom he preaches the gospel, even though he
makes use of this right only in exceptional cases
(1 Cor 9 3-18; 2 Cor 118.9; Gal66; Phil
4 10.18). Since this appears to have been the
thought of the times, we are undoubtedly justified
in assuming that the Jewish teachers of the Law also
demanded pay for their services. Indeed, the ad-
monitions above referred to, not to make instruc-
tion in the Law the object of self-interest, lead to
the conclusion that gratuity was not the rule; and
in Christ’s philippies against the scribes and Phari-
sees He makes special mention of their greed
(Mk 12 40; Lk 16 14; 20 47). Hence, even
thongh they ostensibly gave instruction in_ the
Law gratuitously, they must have practised methods
by which they indirectly secured their fees.

Naturally the place of chief influence for the
scribes up to the year 70 AD was Judaea. But not
only there were they to be found. Wherever the
zeal for the law of the fathers was a perceptible
force, they were indispensable; hence we find them
also in Galilee (Lk 6 17) and in the Diaspora. In
the Jewish epitaphs in Rome, dating from the latter
days of the empire, grammateis are frequently
mentioned; and the Bab scribes of the 5th and
6th cents. were the authors of the most monumental
work of rabbinical Judaism—the Talmud.

Since the separation of the Pharisaic and the
Sadducean tendencies in Judaism, the scribes
generally belonged to the Pharisaic class; for this
latter is none other than the party which recog-
nized the interpretations or “traditions’ which the
scribes in the course of time had developed out of
the body of the written Law and enforced upon the
people as the binding rule of life. Since, however,
“scribes”? are merely “students of the Law,” there
must also have been scribes of the Sadducee type;
for it ig not to be imagined that this party, which
recognized only the written Law as binding, should
not have had some opposing students in the other


class. Indeed, various passages of the NT which
speak of the ‘‘seribes of the Pharisees’ (Mk 2 16;
Lk 6 30; Acts 23 9) indicate that there were also
“scribes of the Sadducees.”

Under the reign and leadership of the scribes, it
became the ambition of every Israelite to know more
or less of the Law. The aim of education in family,
school and synagogue was to maké the entire people
a people of the Law. Even the common laborer
should know what was written in the Law; and not
only know it, but also do it. His entire life should
be governed according to the norm of the Law, and,
on the whole, this purpose was realized in a high
degree. Jos avers: ‘Even though we be robbed
of our riches and our cities and our other goods, the
Law remains our possession forever. And no Jew
can be so far removed from the land of his fathers
nor will he fear a hostile commander to such a
degree that he would not fear his Law more than
his commander.” So loyal were the majority of the
Jews toward their Law that they would gladly
endure the tortures of the rack and even death for it.
This frame of mind was due almost wholly to the
systematic and persistent instruction of the scribes.

The motive underlying this enthusiasm for the
Law was the belief in Divine retribution in the
strictest judicial sense. The prophetic idea of a
covenant which God had made with His select
people was interpreted purely in the judicial sense.
The covenant was a contract through which both
parties were mutually bound. The people are
bound to observe the Divine Law literally and con-
scientiously; and, in return for this, God is in duty
bound to render the promised reward in proportion
to the services rendered. This applies to the people
as a whole as well as to the individual. Services
and reward must always stand in mutual relation
to each other. He who renders great services may
expect from the justice of God that he will receive
great returns as his portion, while, on the other
hand, every transgression also must be followed
by its corresponding punishment.

The results corresponded to the motives. Just as
the motives in the main were superficial, so the
results were an exceedingly shallow view of religious
and moral life. Religion was reduced to legal
formalism. All religious and moral life was dragged
down to the level of law, and this must necessarily
lead to the following results: (1) The individual is
governed by a norm, the application of which could
have only evil results when applied in this realm.
Law has the purpose of regulating the relations of
men to each other according to certain standards.
Its object is not the individual, but only the body
of society. In the law, the individual must find
the proper rule for his conduct toward society as
an organism. This is a matter of obligation and
of government on the part of society. But religion
is not a matter of government; where it is found,
it is a matter of freedom, of choice, and of conduct.
(2) By reducing the practice of religion to the form
of law, all acts are placed on a par with each other.
The motives are no longer taken into consideration,
but only the deed itself. (3) From this it follows
that the highest ethical attainment was the formal
satisfaction of the Law, which naturally led to
finical literalism. (4) Finally, moral life must,
under such circumstances, lose its unity and be
split up into manifold precepts and duties. Law
always affords opportunity for casuistry, and it was
the development of this in the guidance of the
Jewish religious life through the ‘‘precepts of the
elders” which called forth Christ’s repeated denunci-
ation of the work of the scribes.

Frank E. Hrrscu

SCRIP, skrip: A word connected with “scrap,”
and meaning a “bag,” either as made from a “scrap”


Scripture
Sea, The Great


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2706


(of skin) or as holding “‘scraps”’ (of food, etc). AV
has “serip” in 1 8 17 40 and 6tin NT; ERV has
‘wallet’ in the NT, but retains “scrip” in 1 8 17
40; ARV has ‘“‘wallet’’ throughout. See Bac.


SCRIPTURE, skrip’tir () ypadh, hé graphé,
pl. at yeapaG hat graphat): The word means
‘writing.’ In the OT it occurs in AV only once,
“the scripture of truth,’ in Dnl 10 21, where it
is more correctly rendered in RV, “‘the "writing of
truth.’ The reference is not to Holy Scripture, but
to the book in which are inscribed God’s purposes.
Iu the NT, “scripture” and “scriptures”? stand
regularly for the OT sacred books regarded as “‘in-
spired” (2 Tim 3 16), ‘the oracles of God” (Rom
3 2). Cf on this usage Mt 21 42; 22 29; Mk
12 10; Lk 4 21; 24 27.32.45; Jn 5 39; 10 35;
Acts 8 32; 17 2.11; Rom 15 4; 16 26, etc; in
Rom 1 2, “holy scriptures.’ See Brste. The ex-
pression ‘holy scriptures” in 2 Tim 3 15 AV repre-
sents different words (hierd grédmmata) and is properly
rendered in RV “sacred writings.” In2 Pet 3 16,
the term “scriptures” is exteuded to the Epp. of
Paul. In Jas 4 5, the words occur: ‘“Think ye that
the scripture speaketh in vain? Doth the spirit
which he made to dwell in us long unto envying?”
The passage is probably rather a summary of Scrip-
ture teaching than intended as a direct quotation.
Others (e.g. Westcott) think the word is used in a
wide sense of a Christian hymn. JAMES ORR


SCRIPTURES, skrip’ttirz, SEARCH THE. See
SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES.


SCROLL, skrél.


SCUM, skum (ANSI, hel’Gh; LXX és, ids,

“poison” or “verdigris’’; if Plato Rep. 609a): The
word is only found im Ezk 24 6.11.12, where
RV translates it “rust.’”’ The fact, however, that
the caldron isof brass and therefore not liable to rust,
and the astonishment expressed that the fire did not
remove it (ver 12), would seem to point to the
preferability of the tr “scum,” the residue of dirt
adhering to the caldron from previous use.


See Rou.


SCURVY, skér’vi (373, garabh; Wépa dypla,
pséra agria [Lev 21 20; 22 22]): This word is
used to denote an itchy, ‘scaly disease of the scalp,
probably auy of the parasitic diseases which are
known as tinea, porrigo or impetigo. These cases
have no relation whatever to the disease now
known as scorbutus or scurvy. The name was
probably derived from its scaliness, and the old Gr
physicians believed these diseases to be peculiarly
intractable.


The name ‘‘Gareb''is used in Jer 31 39 as the place-


name of a hill at or near the southeastern corner of
Jerus, probably from the bare roughness of the surface of
its slope at the southern end of the Wéddy er- Rababi.
Another hill of this name is mentioned near Shiloh in
the Talm, and the name is given to one of David's war-
riors (2 3 23 38).

Seurvy etymologically means any coudition of
sealiness of skin which can be scraped off, such as
dandruff. Avex. MAcauisTER


SCYTHIANS, sith’i-anz (of BetOar, hot Shuithai):
The word does not occur in the Heb of the OT, but
LAX of Jgs 1 27 mserts Zavddy rcs, Skuthin
pélis (Scythopolis), in explanation, as being the
same as Beth-shean. The same occurs in Apoc
(Jth 3 10; 1 Mace 12 29), and the S. as a people
in 2 Mace 4 47, and the adj. in 3 Mace 7 5.
The people are also mentioned in the NT (Col 3 11),
where, as in Mace, the fact that they were barba-
riuns is implied. This is clearly set forth in classical


writers, and the description of them given by Herod-
otus in book iv of his history represents a race of
savages, inhabiting a region of rather indefinite
boundaries, north of the Black and Caspian seas
and the Caucasus Mountains. They were nomads
who neither plowed nor sowed (iv.19), moving about
in wagons and carrying their dwellings with them
(ib, 46); they had the most filthy habits and never
washed in water (ib, 75); they drank the blood of
the first enemy killed in battle, and made napkins
of the scalps and drinking bowls of the skulls of
the slain (ib, 64-65). Their deities were many of
them identified with those of the Greeks, but the
most characteristic rite was the worship of the naked
sword (ib, 62), and they sacrificed every hundredth
man taken in war to this deity. War was their
chief business, and they were a terrible scourge to
the nations of Western Asia. They broke through
the barrier of the Caucasus in 632 BC and swept
down like a swarm of locusts upon Media and
Assyria, turning the fruitful fields into a desert;
pushing across Mesopotamia, they ravaged Syria
and were about to invade Egypt when Psammitichus
1, who was besieging Ashdod, bought them off by
rich gifts, but they remained in Western Asia for
28 years, according to Herodotus. It is supposed
that a company of them settled in Beth-shean, and
from this circumstance it received the name Scy-
thopolis. Various branches of the race appeared
at different times, among the most noted of which
were the PARTHIANS (q.Vv.). PorTER

SCYTHOPOLIS, si-thop’é-lis, si-thop’é-lis. See
BETH-SHEAN.


SEA, sé (BD), yam; Oddkacca, thdlassa; in Acts 27
5 wé&tayos, pélagos): The Mediterranean is called
ha-yam ha-gadhol, “the great sea’ (Nu 34 6; Josh
1 4; Ezk 47 10, etc); ha-yam ha-’ahdron, “the hin-
der,” or “western sea” (Dt 11 24; 34 2; Joel 2 20;
Zec 14 8); yam p'lishtim, ‘the sea of the Philis”’
(Ex 23 31); AV translates yam yaphd’ in Ezr 3 7
by “sea of Joppa,” perhaps rightly.

The Dead Sea is called yam ha-melah, ‘‘the Salt
Sea” (Nu 34 3; Dt 3 17; Josh 3 16, "ete); ha-
yam ha-kadhmani, “the east sea” (Ezk 47 18; Joel
2 20; Zec 14 8): yam ha-‘drabhah, “the sea of the
Arabah” (Dt 3 17; Josh 3 16; 12 3; 2 KK 14 25).

The Red Sea is called yam stph, lit. ‘‘sea of weeds”
(Ex 10 19; Nu 14 25; Dt 11; Josh 2 10; Jgs
11 16; 1 K 9 26; Neh 9 9; Ps ‘106 7; Jer 49 21,
etc); ” epubpa Oddacca,, eruthrd thdlassa, lit. “red
sea’ (Wisd 19 7; Acts 7 36; He 11 29): yam mic-
rayim, ‘the Eeyp sea” (Isa 11 15).

Yam is used of the Nile in Nah 3 8 and probably
also in Isa 19 5, as in modern Arab. bahr, ‘“‘sea,”’ is
used of the Nile and its affluents. Yam is often
used for ‘‘west”’ cr “westward,” as “look from the
place where thou art, . westward” (Gen 13
14); ‘“‘western border” (Nu 34 6). Yam is used
for “sea”? in general (Ex 20 11); also for “molten
sea’’ of the temple (1 KK 7 23).

The Sea of Galilee is called _kinnereth, “Chinne-
reth” (Nu 34 11); kindréth, “Chinueroth” (Josh
11 2); kinn*roth, ‘Chinueroth” (1 K 15 20); yam
kinnereth, ‘‘the sea of Chinnereth” (Nu 34 11; Josh
13 27); yam kinn*rath, “the sea of Chinneroth”
(Josh 12 3); 7 Alurn Tevvqoapér, hé limné Gennésa-
rét, “the lake of Gennesaret” (Lk 5 1); and 7d
Sep Tevynodp, t6 hidér Gennésdr, “the water of
Gennesar’”’ (1 Mace 11 67), from ‘late Heb O23,
ginésar, or N04, g*nésar; 7 OdAacca ris Tanihnlar,
hé thdlassa tés Galilatas, “the sea of Galilee” (Mt
4 18; 16 29; Mk 1 16; 7 31; Jn 6 1); % OddAacoa
ris TiBepddos, hé thlassa tés Tiberiddos, “the sea of
Tiberias” (Jn 21.1; cf Jn 6 1).


2707


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Scripture
Sea, The Great


In Jer 48 32 we have yam ya'zér, “the sea of
Jazer.” Jazeris a site E. of the Jordan, not satis-
factorily identified (Nu 21 32; 82 1.3.35; Josh 18
25; 21 39; 25 24 5; 1 Ch 6 81; 26 31; Isa 16
8.9). See Sua or Jazur.

In midhbar yam, “the wilderness of the sea”
(Isa 21 1), there may perhaps be a reference to the
Pers Gulf. A.trrep Evy Day


SEA, ADRIATIC, 4-dri-at’ic, ad-ri-at‘ik. See
» ApRIA.


SEA, BRAZEN, bra’z’n. See Sea, Tue Mouren.


SEA, DEAD; EASTERN, @s’tém. See Drap
SEA.

SEA, FORMER, fér’mér. See Derap Sera;
ForMER.


SEA, HINDER, hin’dér; UTMOST, ut’mist;
UTTERMOST, ut’ér-most; WESTERN, wes’térn.
See MEDITERRANEAN SEa.


SEA, MEDITERRANEAN.
NEAN SEA.


See MeEpITERRA-


SEA-MEVW, sé’mii (SU, shahaph; Adpos, Iéros;
Lat Larus canus): The sea-gull. Used by modern
translators in the list of abominations in the place of
the cuckoo (Lev 11 16; Dt 14 15). It is very
probable that the sea-gull comes closer to the bird
intended than the Cuckoo (q.v.).. The sea-gull
is a “slender” bird, but not “lean”? as the root
shahaph implies. However, with its stretch of
wing and restless flight it gives this impression.
Gulls are common all along the Mediterranean
coast and around the Sea of Galilee. They are
thought to have more intelligence than the average
bird, and to share with some eagles, hawks, vultures
and the raven the knowledge that if they find a
mollusk they cannot break they can carry it aloft
and drop it on the rocks. Only a wise bird learns
this. Most feathered creatures pick at an unyield-
ing surface a few times and then seek food elsewhere.
There are two reasons why these birds went on the
abomination lists. To a steady diet of fish they
add carrion. Then they are birds of such ner-
vous energy, 50 exhaustless in flight, so daring in
flying directly into the face of fierce winds, that the
Moslems believed them to be tenanted with the souls
of the damned. Moses was reared and educated
among the Egyptians, and the laws he formulated
often are tinged by traces of his carly life. History
fails to record any instance of a man reared in
Egypt who permitted the killing of a gull, ibis, or
hoopoe. Gene StTraTTON-PoRTER


SEA-MONSTER, sé’mon-stér: Gen 1 21 (DD°90,,
tanninim), ‘sea monsters,” AV “whales,” LXX
ra Kirn, té kété, “sea-monsters,”’ “huge fish,” or
“whales.” Job 712 (F130, tannin), ‘sea-monster,”
AV “whale”? LXX dpdkwr, drdkon, “dragon.”
Ps 7413 (CPB, tanninim), ARV and ERVm
“seg-monsters,” AV and ERV “dragons,” AVm
“whales,” LXX dpdxovres, drdkontes, “dragons.”
Ps 148 7 (D0 BE, canninim), “sea-monsters,” AV
and ERV “dragons,” ERVm ‘“‘sea-monsters’’ or
“water-spouts,’” LXX drakontes, “dragons.” Lam
43 (PIR, tannin), “jackals,’’ AV “sea monsters,
AVm “sea calves,’ LXX drakontes. Mt 12 40
(referring to Jonah) («#ros, kétos), EV “whale,
RVm “sea-monster.”’ In the Apoc RV changes AV
“Whale” (kétos) into “sea-monster’’ in Sir 43 25
but not in Three ver 57. See Dragon, Jackan,
WHALE. Aurrep Evy Day


SEA OF CHINNERETH, kin’é-reth. See Gaui-


LEE, SHA OF.

SEA OF GALILEE. Sce GaAuiLeE, Sea or.

SEA OF GLASS. See Guass, SEA or.

SEA OF JAZER (VY? 07, yam ya'zér): This
is a scribal error (Jer 48 32), yam (“sea’’) being
accidentally imported from the preceding clause.
See JazeR; Sma.

SEA OF JOPPA. See MEpITERRANEAN SBa.

SEA OF LOT. Sce Dean Sea; Laxs.


SEA OF SODOM (SODOMITISH, sod-om-it’-
ish). See Dap Sha.


SEA OF THE ARABAH. See Dap Sea.


SEA OF THE PHILISTINES. See Mepvirerra-
NEAN SBA.


SEA OF THE PLAIN (ARABAH, ar’a-ba).
Deap Ska.


See
SEA OF TIBERIAS, ti-bé’ri-as.
SHA OF.
SEA, RED. See Rep Sia.
SEA,SALT. See Dean Sra.


See GaLiLzE,


SEA, THE.
GREAT.


SEA, THE GREAT (255393 DD, ha-ydm ha-


See MEDITERRANEAN SEA; SEA, THE


gadhbl): This is the name given to the Medi-

terranean, which formed the western
1. Names boundary of Pal (Nu 34 6f; Josh
of the Sea 16 12. 47; Ezk 47 19f; 48 28). It


is also called “the hinder sea’ (Heb
ha-yam ha@-’ ahdron), i.e. the western sea (Dt 11 24;
34 2: Joel 2 20; Zec 14 8), and ‘“‘the sea of the
Philis” (Ex 23 31), which, of course, applies esp.
to the part washing the shore of Philistia, from
Jaffa southward. Generally, when the word ‘“‘sea”’
is used, and no other is definitely indicated, the
Mediterranean is intended (Gen 49 13; Nu 13 29,
etc). It was the largest sheet of water with which
the Hebrews had any acquaintance. Its gleaming
mirror, stretching away to the sunset, could be
seen from many an inland height.
It bulked large in the minds of the landsmen—
for Israel produced few mariners—impressing itself
upon their speech, so that “seaward”
2. Israel wasthe common term for “westward”
and the Sea (Ex 26 22; Josh 5 1, etc). Its mys-
tery and wonder, the raging of the
storm, and the sound of ‘sorrow on the sea,”
borne to their upland ears, infected them with a
strange dread of its wide waters, to which the seer
of Patmos gave the last Scriptural expression in his
vision of the new earth, where ‘‘the sea is no more”
(Rev 21 1).
Along the coast lay the tribal territories assigned
to Asher, Zebulun, Manasseh, Dan and Judah.
Many of the cities along the shore
3. The they failed to possess, however, and
Coast Line much of the land. The coast line
offered little facility for the making of
harbors. The one seaport of which in ancient
times the Hebrews seem to have made much use
was Joppa—the modern Jaffa (2 Ch 2 16, etc).
From this place, probably, argosies of Solomon
turned their prows westward. Here, at least,


Sea, The Molten
Sealskin


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2708


“ships of Tarshish” were wont to set out upon their
adventurous voyages (Jon 1 3). The ships on this
sea figure in the beautiful vision of Isaiah (60 8 f).
See Acco; Joppa.

The boy Jesus, from the heights above Nazareth,
must often have looked on the waters of the great


sea, as they broke in foam on the
4. The curving shore, from the roots of
Sea inthe Carmel to the point at Acre. Once
NT only m His journeyings, so far as we


know,
namely on His ever-memorable visit to the “borders
of Tyre and Sidon” (Mt 15 21; Mk 7 24). The
sea, in all its moods, was well known to the great
apostle of the Gentiles. The three shipwrecks,
which he suffered (2 Cor 11 25), were doubtless
due to the power of its angry billows over the frail
craft of those old days. See Pau.
The land owes much to the great sea. During
the hot months of summer, a soft breeze from
the water springs up at dawn, fanning
5. Debt of all the seaward face of the Central
Palestine to Range. At sunset the chilled air
the Sea slips down the slopes and the higher
strata drift toward the uplands, charged
with priceless moisture, giving rise to the refreshing
dews which make the Palestinian morning so sweet.
See, further, MEDITERRANEAN SEA. W. Ewinea


SEA, THE MOLTEN, mol’t’n, or BRAZEN
(py DI, ydm micak, NOTIT D2, yam ha-
nthésheth): This was a large brazen (bronze)
reservoir for water which stood in the court of
Solomon’s Temple between the altar and the
temple porch, toward the 8. (1 K 7 23-26; 2 Ch
4 2-5.10). The bronze from which it was made is
stated in 1 Ch 18 8 to have been taken by David
from the cities Tibhath and Cun. It replaced the
laver of the tabernacle, and, like that, was used for
storing the water in which the priests washed their
hands and their feet (ef Ex 30 18; 38 8). Itrested
on 12 brazen (bronze) oxen, facing in four groups the
four quarters of heaven. For particulars of shape,
size and ornamentation, see Tempe. The “sea’’
served its purpose till the time of Ahaz, who took
away the brazen oxen, and placed the sea upon a
pavement (2 K 16 17). It is recorded that the
oxen were afterward taken to Babylon (Jer 52 20).
The sea itself shared the same fate, being first broken
to pieces (2 KK 26 13.16).


W. SHaw CaLpEecott
SEA, WESTERN, wes’tém. Sec MbrnpiTEr-
RANEAN SEA.
SEAH, sé’a (MND, sah): A dry measure equal to
about one and one-half pecks. See WEIGHTS aND
MEASURES.


SEAL, sél (subst. O10, hatham, “seal,” “sig-
net,” MY2V, tabba‘ath, ‘signet-ring”; Aram. NPT? ,
‘izka@’; opeyls, sphragis; vb. BOT, hatham
{Aram. ODT, hdtham]; cpaylto, sphragizd, xara-
obpayitopar, katasphragizomai, “to seal”):

f, Literal Sense.—A seal is an instrument of stone,
metal or other hard substance (sometimes set in a
ring), on which is engraved some device or figure,
and is used for making an impression on some soft
substance, as clay or wax, affixed to a document or
other object, in token of authenticity.

The use of seals goes back to a very remote
antiquity, esp. in Egypt, Babylonia and Assyria.
Herodotus (i.195) records the Bab custom of wear-
ing signets. In Babylonia the seal generally took
the form of a cylinder cut in crystal or some hard
stone, which was bored through from end to end
and a cord passed through it. The design, often


did He approach the sea, |


accompanied by the owner’s name, was engraved on
the curved part. The signet was then suspended
by the cord round the neck or waist (cf


1. Preva- RV “cord” in Gen 38 18; “upon thy
lence in heart . . . . upon thine arm,’ i.e. one
Antiquity seal hanging down from the neck and


another round the waist; Cant 8 6).
In Egypt, too, as in Babylonia, the cylinder was
the earliest form used for the purpose of a seal;


Ancient Seals from Originals in the British Museum.


1, Signet cylinder. 2. Signet cylinder of Sennacherib. 3. Seal of chalce-
dony with Phoenician inscription. 4. Seal of sapphire chaleedony, with
Assyrian inscription, 5. Seal of chalcedony, with Persian inseription.
6. Seal in forin of a duck with head resting on the back. 7. Clay impres-
sion from seal of Esnr-haddon, from Kouyunjik. 8. Clay impression from
seal, devico, ear of wheat, from Kouynojik. 9. Clay impression fro
seal, device, a scorpion, from Kouyunjik.


but this form was in Egypt gradually superseded by
the scarab (=beetle-shaped) as the prevailing type.
Other forms, such as the cone-shaped, were also in
use. From the earliest period of civilization the
finger-ring on which some distinguishing badge
was engraved was in use as a convenient way of
carrying the signet, the earliest. extant rings being
those found in Egyp tombs. Other ancient peoples,
such as the Phoenicians, also used seals. From the
East the custom passed into Greece and other
western countries. Devices of a variety of sorts
were in use at Rome, both by the emperors and by
private individuals. In ancient times, almost
every variety of precious stones was uscd for seals,
as well as cheaper material, such as limestone or
terra-cotta. In the West wax came early into use
as the material for receiving the impression of the
seal, but in the ancient East clay was the medium
used (ef Job 38 14). Pigment and ink also came
into use.
That the Israelites were acquainted with the use
in Egypt of signets set in rings is seen in the state-
ment that Pharaoh delivered to Joseph
2. Seals his royal signet as a token of deputed
among the authority (Gen 41 41f). They were
Hebrews also acquainted with the use of seals
among the Persians and Medes (Est
3 12; 8 8.10; Dnl 617). The Hebrews them-
selves used them at an early period, the first recorded
instance being Gen 38 18.25, where the patriarch
Judah is said to have pledged his word to Tamar
by leaving her his signet, cord and staff. We have
evidence of engraved signcts being in important
use among them in early times in the description of
the two stones on the high priest’s ephod (Ex 28 11;
39 6), of his golden plate (Ex 28 36; 39 30), and
breastplate (39 14). Ben-Sirach mentions as a
distinct occupation the work of engraving on signets


2709


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sea, The Molten
Sealskin


(Sir 38 27). From the case of Judah and the
common usage in other countries, we may infer that
every Hebrew of any standing wore a seal. In the
case of the signet ring, it was usual to wear it on one
of the fingers of the right hand (Jer 22 24). The
Hebrews do not seem to have developed an original
type of signets. The seals so far discovered in Pal
go to prove that the predominating type was the
Egyptian, and to a less degree the Babylonian.

(1) One of the most important uses of sealing in
antiquity was to give a proof of authenticity and

authority to letters, royal commands, etc.
3. Uses of It served the purposes of a modern
Sealing signature at a time when the art of

writing was known to only a few.
Thus Jezebel “wrote letters in Ahah’s name, and
sealed them with his seal’ (1 K 21 8); the written
commands of Ahasucrus were ‘‘sealed with the
king’s ring,” “for the writing which is written in the
king’s name, and sealed with the king’s ring, may
no man reverse” (Est 8 8.10; 3 12). (2) Allied
to this is the formal ratification of a transaction or
covenant. Jeremiah sealed the deeds of the field
which he bought from Hanamel (Jer 32 10-14;
ef ver 44); Nehemiah and many others affixed
their seal to the written covenant between God
and His people (Neh 938; 101ff). (3) An
additional usc was the preservation of books in
security. A roll or other document intended for
preservation was sealed up before it was deposited
in a place of safety (Jer 32 14; cf the “book ....
close sealed with seven seals,’” Rev 5 1). In seal-
ing the roll, it was wrapped round with flaxen
thread or string, then a lump of clay was attached
to it impressed with a seal. The seal would have
to be broken by an authorized person before
the book could be read (Rev 6 2.5.9; 6 1.3, etc).
(4) Sealing was a badge of deputed_ authority and
power, as when a king handed over his signet ring
to one of his officers (Gen 41 42; Est 3 10; 8 2;
1 Mace 6 15). (5) Closed doors were often sealed
to prevent the entrance of
any unauthorized person.
So the door of the lion’s
den (Dnl 6 17; cf Bel ver
14). Herodotus mentions
the custom of sealing
tombs (ii.121). So we
read of the chief priests
and Pharisees sealing the
stone at the mouth of Our
Lord’s tomb in order to
“make the sepulchre sure”
against the intrusion of
the disciples (Mt 27 66).
Cf the sealing of the abyss
to prevent Satan’s escape :
(Rev 20 3). A door was sealed by stretching a cord
over the stone which blocked the entrance, spread-
ing clay or wax on the cord, and then impressing
it with a seal. (6) To any other object might a
seal be affixed, as an official mark of ownership;
e.g. a large number of clay stoppers of wine jars
are still preserved, on which seal impressions of the
cylinder type were stamped, by rolling the cylinder
along the surface of the clay when it was still soft
(cf Job 38 14).

IL. Metaphorical Use of the Term.—The word
“seal,” both subst. and vb., is often used figuratively
for the act or token of anthentication, confirmation,
proof, security or possession. Sin is said not to be
forgotten by God, but. treasured: and stored up
with Him against the sinner, under a seal (Dt 32
34; Job 14.17). A lover’s signet, Is the emblem
of love as an inalienable possession (Cant 8 6);
an unresponsive maiden is “a spring shut up, 4
fountain sealed” (Cant 4 12). The seal is some-


Sealed Stone at Entrance
to a Tomb.


times a metaphor for secrecy. That which is
beyond the comprehension of the uninitiated is
said to be as “a book that is sealed” (Isa 29 11 f;
ef the book with seven scals, Rev 6 1ff). Daniel
is bidden to “shut up the words” of his prophecy
“and seal the book, even to the time of the end,”
ic. to keep his prophecy a secret till it shall be
revealed (Dnl 12 4.9; ef Rev 10 4). Elsewhere
it stands for the ratification of prophecy (Dnl 9 24).
The exact meaning of the figure is sometimes
ambiguous (as in Job 33 16; Ezk 28 12). In the
NT the main ideas in the figure are those of authenti-
eation, ratification, and security. The believer in
Christ is said to ‘‘set his seal to this, that God is
true’ (Jn 3 33), i.e. to attest the veracity of Gad, to
stamp it with the believer’s own endorsement and
confirmation. The Father has scaled the Son, i.e.
authenticated Him as the bestower of hfe-giving
bread (Jn 6 27). The circumcision of Abraham
was a “sign” and “‘seal,’”’ an outward ratification,
of the righteousness of faith whieh he had already
received while uncircumcised (Rom 4 11; cf the
prayer offered at the circumcision of a child,
“Blessed be He who sanctified His beloved from the
womb, and put His ordinance upon his flesh, and
sealed His offering with the sign of a holy covenant’;
also Tg Cant 38: “The seal of circumcision is in
your flesh as it was sealed in the flesh of Abraham”’).
Paul describes his act in making over to the saints
at Jerus the contribution of the Gentiles as having
“sealed to them this fruit’? (Rom 15 28); the mean-
ing of the phrase is doubtful, but the figure seems to
be based on sealing as ratifying a commercial trans-
action, expressing Paul’s intention formally to hand
over to them the fruit (of his own labors, or of
spiritual blessings which through him the Gentiles
had enjoyed), and to mark it as their own property.
Paul’s converts are the “seal,” the authentic con-
firmation, of his apostleship (1 Cor 9 2). God
by His Spirit indicates who are His, as the owner
sets his seal on his property; and just as documents
are scaled up until the proper time for opening them,
so Christians are sealed up by the Holy Spirit “unto
the day of redemption” (Eph 1 13; 4 30; 2 Cor
1 22). Ownership, security and authentication
are implied in the words, ‘The firm foundation of
God standeth, having this seal, The Lord knoweth
them that are his’ (2 Tim 2 19). The seal of
God on the foreheads of His servanis (Rev 7 2-4)
marks them off as His own, and guarantees their
eternal security, whereas those that ‘‘have not the
seal of God on their foreheads’ (Rev 9 4) have no
such guaranty.

On the analogy of the rite of circumcision (see above),
the term ‘‘seal’’ (sphragis) was ata very early period ap-
plied to Christian baptism. But there is no snfficient
ground for referring such passages as Eph 1 13; 4 30; 2
Cor 1 22 to the rite of baptism (assome do). The use of
the metaphor in connection with baptism came after NT
times (early instances are given in Gebhardt and Light-
foot on 2 Clem 7 6). Harnack and Hatch maintain
that the name ‘“‘seal"’ for baptism was taken from. the
Gr mysteries, bunt Anrich and Sanday-Headlam hold
that it was horrowed from the Jewish view of circum-
cision as a seal. See Mystery.

D. Miatu Epwarps

SEALED, sald, FOUNTAIN: These words, ap-
plied to the bride (Cant 4 12), find their explana-
tion under Seay (q.v.). Anything that was to
be authoritatively protected was sealed. Where
water was one of the most precious things, as in the
East, fountains and wells were often sealed (Gen
29 3; Prov 6 15-18).


SEALSKIN, sél'skin: The rendering of RV
(Ex 26 5; Ezk 16 10) for UOM NW, ‘dr tahash,
RVm “porpoise-skin,’ AV “badgers’ skin.” A
seal, Monachus albiventer, is found in the Mediterra-
nean, though not in the Red Sea, but it is likely


Seam, Seamless
Secure, Security


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2710


that tahash means the dugong, which is found in
the Red Sea. See BapcEerR; PorRpoisz.


SEAM, sém, SEAMLESS, sém’les: The coat or
inner garment (x:T&», chitén) of Jesus is described
in Jn 19 23 as “without seam” (&fados, drrha-
phos), i.e. woven in one piece.


SEAR, sér: In 1 Tim 4 2 for xavornpidto,
kaustéridz6, “burn with a hot iron” (cf “‘cauterize’’),
AV “having their conscience seared with a hot iron,”
and RVm. “‘Seared’’ in this connection means
“made insensible,” like the surface of a deep burn
after healing. The vb., however, probably means
“brand” (so RV). ‘‘Criminals are branded on their
forehead, so that all men may know their infamy.
The consciences of certain men are branded just
as truly, so that there is an inward consciousness
of hypocrisy.” See the comms.


SEARCH, stirch: Some peculiar senses are:
(1) In the books of Moses, esp. in Nu, “searching out
the land” means to spy out (23% , raggél), to investi-
gate carefully, to examine with a view to giving a
full and accurate report on. (2) When applied to
the Scriptures, as in Ezr 4 15.19 ("P3, bakkér);
Jn 5 39; 1 Pet 1 11 (épavvdw, eraundé), it means
to examine, to study out the meaning. In Acts 17
11, RV snbstitutes ‘examining’ for the ‘‘searched”’
of AV. See Szarcuinas. (3) ‘Search out” often
means to study critically, to investigate carefully,
eg. Job 8 8; 29 16; Eccl 1 18; Lam 3 40; Mt
28; 1 Cor 210; 1 Pet 110. (4) When the word
is applied to God’s searching the heart or spirit, it
means His opening up, laying bare, disclosing what
was hidden, e.g. 1 Ch 28 9; Ps 44 21; 189 1; Prov
20 27; Jer 17 10; Rom 8 27.

G. H. Gersprvine

SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES: The sentence
beginning with épavvare, eraundie, in Jn 5 389 AV
has been almost universally regarded as meaning
“Search the scriptures, for in them ye think ye have
eternal life.’ But one cannot read as far as doxeire,
dokeite, “‘ye think,’’ without feeling that there is
something wrong with the ordinary version. This
vb. is at least a disturbing element in the current of
thought (if not superfluous), and only when the first
vb. is taken as an indicative does the meaning of the
writer become clear. The utterance is not a com-
mand, but a declaration: ‘Ye search the scriptures,
because ye think that in them,” etc. Robert
Barclay as early as 1675, in his Apology for the
True Christian Divinity (91 ff), refers to two scholars
before him who had handed down the correct
tradition: ‘Moreover, that place may be taken in
the indicative mood, Ye search the Scriptures;
which interpretation the Gr word will bear, and so
Pasor tr? it: which by the reproof following seemeth
also to be the more genuine interpretation, as Cyril-
lus long ago hath observed.” So Dr. Edwin A.
Abbott, in his Johonnine Grammar (London, 1906,
§2439 [i]). See also Transactions American Philo-
logical Association, 1901, 64f. J. E. Harry


(25yp7,


d7 66


SEARCHINGS, | siir’chingz hikré
(lébh], from hakar, to ‘‘search,’’ “explore,” “examine
thoroughly’): In the song of Deborah the Reuben-
ites are taunted because their great resolves of
heart, hikeké lébh, led to nothing but great “search-
ings” of heart, hikrélébh, and no activity other than
to remain among their flocks (Jgs 5 15f). The
first of the two Heb expressions so emphatically
contrasted (though questioned by commentators
on the authority of 5 MSS as a corruption of the
second) can with reasonable certainty be inter-
preted “acts prescribed by one’s understanding”


(cf the expressions hdkham lébh, ntbhin lébh, in
which the heart is looked upon as the seat of the
understanding). The second expression may mean
either irresolution or hesitation based on selfish
motives, as the heart was also considered the seat
of the feelings, or answerability to God (cf Jer 17 10;
Prov 25 3); this rendering would explain the form
liphtlaghdth in Jgs & 16, lit. ‘for the water courses
of Reuben, great the searchings of heart!’
Naraan Isaacs

SEASONS, s@’2’nz (summer: P7p, kayic, Chald
O°P, kaytt [Dnl 2 35); S€pos, théros; winter: WD,
sthaw [Cant 2 11], 20, héreph; xewpov, cheimon):
The four seasons in Pal are not so marked as in more
northern countries, summer gradually fadmg into
winter and winter into summer. The range of
temperature is not great. In the Bible we have no
reference to spring or autumn; the only seasons
mentioned are ‘‘summer and winter’ (Gen 8 22;
Ps 74 17; Zec 14 8).

Winter is the season of rain lasting from Novem-
berto May. ‘The winter is past; the rain is over”
(Cant 211). See Rain. The temperature at sea-
level in Pal reaches freezing-point occasionally, but
seldom is less than 40°F. On the hills and moun-
tains it is colder, depending on the height. The
people have no means of heating their houses, and
suffer much with the cold. They wrap up their
necks and heads and keep inside the houses out of
the wind as much as possible. ‘The sluggard will
not plow by reason of the winter’ (Prov 20 4).
Jesus in speaking of the destruction of Jerus says,
“Pray ye that your flight be not in the winter”
(Mt 24 20). Paul asks Timothy to ‘come before
winter’ (2 Tim 4 21) as navigation closed then
and travel was virtually impossible.

Summer is very hot and rainless. ‘‘{When] the
fig tree . . . . putteth forth its leaves, ye know that
the summer is nigh” (Mk 13 28); ‘The harvest is
past, the summer is ended” (Jer 8 20). It is the
season of harvesting and threshing (Dnl 2 35).
‘He that gathereth in summer is a wise son” (Prov
10 5). See Corp; Hnar; Astronomy, I, 5.

Atrrep H. Joy

SEAT, sét: This word is used to translate the Heb
words AWA, mdshdbh, NIW, shebheth, NOD, kiss’,
and MDIDM, ekhinah, once (Job 23 3). It trans-
lates the Gr word xa6éépa, kathédra (Mt 21 12;
23 2; Mk 11 15), and ‘chief seat” translates the
compound word mpwroxafedpla, protokathedria (Mt
23 6; Mk 12 39; Lk 20 46). In AV it translates
Opévos, thrénos (Lk 1 52; Rev 2 13; 4 4; 11 16;
18 2; 16 10), which RV renders “throne.” It
denotes a place or thing upon which one sits, as a
chair, or stool (1 8 20 18; Jgs 3 20). Itis used
also of the exalted position occupied by men of
marked rank or influence, either in good or evil
(Mt 23 2; Ps 1 1). Jesse L. Corron


SEATS, séts, CHIEF. See Carer Snats.


SEBA, sé’ba (N20, s*bha’; Daa, Sabd[Gen 10 7;
1 Ch 19]; Gr ib, but B has ZaBdv, Sabdén):
The first son of Cush, his brothers
1. Forms of being Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and
Name, and Sabtecha. In Ps 72 10 and Isa 43 3
Parentage (where the Gr has Zojvy, Soéné),
of Seba Seba is mentioned with Egypt and
Ethiopia, and must therefore have been
a southern people. In Isa 45 14 we meet with the
gentilic form, DINZO, sbha’tm (ZaBaelu, Sabacim),
rendered ‘‘Sabaeans,”’ who are described as “men of
stature’ (i.e. tall), and were to come over to Cyrus
in chains, and acknowledge that God was in him—
their merchandise, and that of the Ethiopians, and
the labor of Egypt, were to be his.


2711


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Seam, Seamless
Secure, Security


Their country is regarded as being, most elk
the district of Saba, N. of Adulis, on the west coast
i of the Red Sea. There is just a possi-
2. Position bility that the Sabi River, stretching
of the from the coast to the Zambesi and
Nation the Limpopo, which was utilized as a
waterway by the states in that region,
though, through silting, not. suitable now, may con-
tain a trace of the name, and perhaps testifies to
still more southern extensions of the power and
influence of the Sebaim. (Scc Th. Bent, The Ruined
Cities of Mashonaland, 1892.) The ruins of this
tract are regarded as being the work of others than
the black natives of the country. Dillmann, how-
ever, suggests (on Gen 10 7) that the people of
Seba were another branch of the Cushites E. of
Napatha by the Arabian Sea, of which Strabo (xvi.
4,8, 10) and Ptolemy (iv.7, 7f) give information.
See SHepa and HDB, s.v. T. G. PIncues


SEBAM, sé’bam (DAW, sbhadm; ZeBapd, Sebamd;
AV Shebam): A town in the upland pasture land
given to the tribes of Reuben and Gad. It is
named along with Heshbon, Elealch and Nebo (Nu
32.3). It is probably the same place as Sibmah
(AV “Shibmah”) in ver 38 (so also Josh 13 19).
In the time of Isaiah and Jeremiah it was a Moabite
town, but there is no record of how or when it was
taken from Israel. It appears to have been famous
for the luxuriance of its vines and for its summer
fruits (Isa 16 8f{; Jer 48 32). Onom calls ita city
of Moab in the land of Gilead which fell to the tribe
of Reuben. Jerome (Comm. in Isa 5) says it was
about 500 paces from Heshbon, and he describes
it as one of the strong places of that region. It may
be represented by the modern Simnia, which stands
on the south side of Wddy Hesban, about 2 miles
from Hesban. The ancient ruins are considerable,
with large sarcophagi; and in the_ neighboring
rock wine presses are cut (PEFM, ‘‘Eastern Pal,”’
221 f). W. Ewinc

SEBAT, se-bit’, sé’bat (Zec 1 7). Sec Suepat.

SECACAH, s@-ka’ka, sek’a-ké (W330, s*khakhah;
B, Alyvofd, Aichiozd, A, Zoxoxa, Sochochd): One of
the six cities “in the wilderness of Judah’ (Josh 15
61), that is in the uncultivated lands to the W. of
the Dead Sea, where a scanty pasturage is still ob-
tained by wandering Bedouin tribes. There are
many signs in this district of more settled habitation
in ancient times, but the name Secacah is lost.
Conder proposed Kh. ed Dikkeh (also called Kh. es
Sikkeh), “the ruin of the path,” some 2 miles 8. of
Bethany. Though an ancient site, it is too near the
inhabited area; the name, too, is uncertain (PEF,
III, 111, Sh XVI1). E. W. G. Masterman


SECHENIAS, sek-é-ni’as:

(1) (A, Zexertas, Sechenias; omitted in B and
Swete): 1 Esd 8 29=“Shecaniah” in Ezr 8 3; the
arrangement in Ezr is different.

(2) (A, Sechenias, but B and Swete, Elexovias,
Eiechonias): Name of a person who went up at
the head of a family in the return with Ezra (1 Esd
8 32)=“Shecaniah” in Ezr 8 5.


SECHU, sé’ki (12, sckhi). See Secu.


SECOND COMING, sek’und kum’ing. See
Parovusia; Escuaroiocy or THE NT, V


_ SECOND DEATH. See Dzata; EscHATOLOGY
or rue NT, X, (6).


SECOND SABBATH. Sec SasBatn, SECOND.


SECONDARILY, sck’un-da-ri-li: AV for ded-
repov, detiteron (1 Cor 12 28). Probably without
distinction from “secondly’’ (so RV, and so AV also
for deuteron in Sir 23 23). Still AV may have
wished to emphasize that the prophets have a lower
rank than the apostles.


SECRET, sé’kret: In Ezk 7 22, EV has “secret
place” for JP, caphan, “hide,” “treasure.” A
correct tr is, “They shall profane my cherished
place”’ (Jerus), and there is no reference to the Holy
of Holies. The other uses of “secret” in RV are
obvious, but RYV’s corrections of AV in Jgs 13 18;
18 6 9; Job 15 11 should be noted.


SECT, sekt (alpeots, hairesis): “Sect”? (Lat
secta, from sequt, ‘‘to follow’’) is in the NT the tr of
hairesis, from hairéd, ‘‘to take,” “to choose’; also
tr? “heresy,’’ not heresy in the later ecclesiastical
sense, but a school or party, a sect, without any bad
meaning attached to it. The word is applied to
schools of philosophy; to the Pharisees and Sad-
ducees among the Jews who adhered to a common
religious faith and worship; and to the Christians.
It is tr’ ‘sect’? (Acts 5 17, of the Sadducees; 16 5,
of the Pharisees; 24 5, of the Nazarenes; 26 5, of
the Pharisees; 28 22, of the Christians); also RV
24 14 (AV and ERVm “heresy’’), “After the Way
which they call a sect, so serve I the God of our
fathers” (just as the Pharisees were ‘‘a sect’’); it
is tr’ “heresics’” (1 Cor 11 19, m “sects,” ARV
‘factions,’ m ‘Gr ‘heresies’”; ERV reverses the
ARV text and margin; Gal 5 20, ARV “parties,”
m “heresies”; ERV reverses text and margin; 2
Pet 21, “damnable heresies,’ RV “destructive
heresies,’ m “sects of perdition’); the “sect” in
itself might be harmless; it was the teaching or
principles which should be followed by those sects
that would make them ‘‘destructive.”’ Hairesis
oceurs in 1 Mace 8 30 (“They shall do it at their
pleasure,’ i.e. “choice’); cf LXX Lev 22 18.21.
See Heresy. W. L. WALKER


SECU, ski (DW, sékhi; B, ev rd Dedel, en td
Sephei, A, év Bony, en Sokchd; AV Sechu): This
name occurs only in the account of David’s visit
to Samuel (1 S 19 22). Saul, we are told, went
to ‘Ramah, and came to the great well that is in
Secu,’’ where he inquired after Samuel and David.
It evidently lay between the residence of Saul at
Gibeah and Ramah. It is impossible to come to
any sure conelusion regarding it. Conder suggested
its identification with Khirbet Suweikeh, which lies
to the S. of Bireh. Thisis possible, but perhaps we
should read with LXX B, “He came to the cistern of
the threshing-floor that is on the bare hill” (en té
Sephet). The threshing-floors in the East are natu-
rally on high exposed ground where this is possible,
and often form part of the area whence water in the
rainy season is conducted to cisterns. This might
have been a place actually within the city of Ramah.

W. Ewine

SECUNDUS, sé-kun’dus (WH, Zékovv80s, Sé-
koundos, TR, ZexotvEes, Sekovindos): A Thessa-
lonian who was among those who accompanied
Paul from Greece to Asia (Acts 20 4). They had
preceded Paul and waited for him at Troas. If he
were one of the representatives of the churches in
Macedonia and Greece, intrusted with their con-
tributions to Jerus (Acts 24 17; 2 Cor 8 23), he
probably accompanied Paul as far as Jerus. The
name is found in a list of politarchs on a Thessa-
lonian inscription.


SECURE, sé-kir’, SECURITY, sé-ki’ri-ti: The
word béiah and its derivatives in Heb point to se-


Sedecias
Sela


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2712


curity, either real or imaginary. Thus we read of
a host that ‘was secure’ (Jgs 8 11) and of those
‘that provoke God [and] are secure’ (Job 12 6);
but also of a security that rests in hope and is safe
(Job 11 18). The NT words roéw dpuepluvous, poiéd
amerimnous, used in Mt 28 14 [AV “secure you’’}
guarantee the safety of the soldiers, who witnessed
against themselves, in the telling of the story of
the disappearance of the body of Christ.

Securely is used in the sense of “trustful,” “not
foes danger” (Prov 3 29; Mic 2 8; Ecclus
4 15).

The word lxavéy, hikanén, tri security (Acts 17
9), may stand either for a guaranty of good behavior
exacted from, or for some form of punishment in-
flicted on, Jason and his followers by the rulers of


Thessalonica. Henry E. Dosxrer
SEDECIAS, | sed-é-si’as: AV=RV SrEnekras
(q.v.).


SEDEKIAS, sed-é-ki’as:

(1) (BA, Zedexlas, Sedekias; AV Zedechias): 1 Esd
1 46 (44) =Zedekiah king of Judah; also in Bar 1 8
where AV reads “‘Sedecias.”’

(2) In Bar-d 1 (AV ‘‘Sedecias’’), an ancestor of
Baruch, “the son of Asadias,’’ sometimes (but in-
correctly) identified with the false prophet ‘‘Zede-
kiah the son of Maaseiah’’ (Jer 29 21).


SEDITION, sédish’un: The tr in Ezr 4 15.19
for WINS, 'eshtaddar, “struggling,” “revolt”;
in 2 Esd 16 16 for inconstabilitio, “instability,”
with “be seditious” for cracidtw, stasidzé, “rise in
rebellion” in 2 Mace 14 6. In addition, AV has
“sedition” for ordows, stdsis, ‘standing up,” “re-
volt” (RV_ ‘‘insurrection’”’) in Lk 23 19.25; Acts
24 5, with dixecracla, dichostasia, “a standing
asunder’ (RV ‘‘division”’) in Gal 5 20. As “‘sedi-
tion” does not include open violence against a gov-
erument, the word should not have been used in
any of the above cases.


SEDUCE, sé-dis’, SEDUCER, sé-dis’ér (Hiphil
of MWD, taah, or NIN, ta'ah, “to err’; of MN,
pathah, “to be simple’; wAavaw, plandd, droTAavdw,
apoplandé, ‘‘to lead astray”): (1) The word “seduce”
is only used in the Bible in its general meaning of ‘‘to
lead astray,’ “to cause to err,’”’ as from the paths of
truth, duty or religion. It occurs in AV and RV
Ezk 13 10; 2 K 219; 1 Tim 41; Rev 2 20;
in AV only, Prov 12 26 (RV “causeth to err’);
Isa 19 13 (RV ‘‘caused to go astray”); Mk 13 22;
1 Jn 2 26 (RV “lead astray’). The noun “seducer’
(2 Tim 3 13 AV, ‘éns, géés) is correctly changed
in RV into “impostor.” (2) It is not found in its
specific sense of ‘‘to entice a female to surrender her
chastity.” Yet the crime itself is referred to and
condemned.


Three cases are to be distinguished: (a) The seduction
of an unbetrothed virgin: In this case the seducer ac-
cording to JE (Ex 22 16 f) is to be compelled to take the
virgin as his wife, if the father consents, and to pay the
latter the usnal purchase price, the amount of which is
not defined. In the Denteronomic Code (Dt 22 28) the
amount is fixed at 50 shekels, and the seducer forfeits the
right of divorce. (b) The seduction of a betrothed virgin:
This case (Dt 22 23-27; not referred to in the other
codes) is treated as virtually one of adultery, the virgin

: being regarded as pledged to her future hushand as fully
as if she were formally married to him; the penalty there-
fore is the same as foradultery, viz. death for both parties
(except in the case where the girl can Feneona ply be
acquitted of blame, in which case the man only is put to
death). (ce) Theseduction of a hetrothed bondmaid (men-
tioned only in Lev 19 20-22): Here there is no infliction
of death, because the girl was not free; but the seducer
shall make a trespass olfering, besides paying the fine.
See Crimes; PuNIsHMENTS.


D. Misty Epwarps


[


SEE, sé: In addition to the ordinary sense of
perceiving by the eye, we have (1) OI, hazah, “‘to
see’ (in vision): ‘‘Words of Amos .. . . which he
saw concerning Israel’? (Am 11). The revelation
was made to his inward eye. ‘‘The word of Jeh
. ... which be [Micah] saw concerning Samaria”
(Mic 1 1), describing what he saw in prophetic
vision (cf Hab 1 1); see Revexarion, III, 4; (2)
dpdw, hordd, “‘to take heed’’: “See thou say noth-
ing” (Mk 1 44); (8) «léov, eidon, “to know,” ‘‘to
note with the mind”’: “‘Jesus saw that he answered
discreetly” (Mk 12 34); (4) Oewpéw, thedréd, ‘‘to
view,” “‘to have knowledge or experience of’’: “‘He
shall never see death” (Jn 8 51). M.O.Evans


SEED, séd (OT always for J7, zera‘, Aram.
[Dnl 2 43] SY, era‘, except in Joel 1 17 for
MIT, perudhdth [pl. RV “seeds,” AV ‘“‘seed”],
and Lev 19 19 [AV “mingled seed’) and Dt 22 9
[AV ‘‘divers seeds’’] for DIN , kilayim, lit. “two
kinds,’ RV ‘two kinds of seed.” Invariably in
Gr Apoc and usually in the NT for oréppa, spérma,
but Mk 4 26.27; Lk 85.11; 2 Cor 910 for
onopos, spéros, and 1 Pet 1 23 for emopd, spord):
(1) For “seed” in its literal sense see AGRICULTURE.
Of interest is the method of measuring land by
means of the amount of seed that could be sown on
it (Lev 27 16). The prohibition against using
two kinds of seed in the same field (Lev 19 19;
Dt 22 9) undoubtedly rests on the fact that the
practice had some connection with Canaanitish
worship, making the whole crop ‘‘consecrated’”’
(taboo). Jer 31 27 uses “seed of man’’ and ‘‘seed
of beast”’ as a figure for the means by which God
will increase the prosperity of Israel (i.e. ‘“‘seed
yielding men”). (2) For the transferred physio-
logical application of the word to human beings
(Lev 15 16, etc) see CLrzan; UNCLEAN. The con-
ception of Christians as “born” or “begotten”
of God (see REGENERATION) gave rise to the
figure in 1 Pet 1 23; 1 Jn 39. If the imagery
is to be stressed, the Holy Spirit is meant. In
1 Jn 3 9 a doctrine of certain Gnostics is opposed.
They taught that by learning certain formulas
and by submitting to certain rites, union with
God and salvation could be attained without holi-
ness of life. St. John’s reply is that union with
a righteous God is meaningless without righteous-
ness as au ideal, even though shortcomings exist
in practice (1 Jn 1 8). (8) From the physio-
logical use of ‘‘seed”’ the transition to the sense of
‘offspring’ was easy, and the word may mean
“children” (Lev: 18 21, etc) or even a single child
(Gen 4 25; 185111 RVm). Usually, however,
it means the whole posterity (Gen 3 15, etc); ef
“seed royal” (2 1K 111, ete), and ‘‘Abraham’s
seed” (2 Ch 20 7, etc) or ‘the holy seed” (Ezr 9
2; Isa 6 13; 1 Esd 8 70; cf Jer 2 21) as desig-
nations of Israel. So “to show one’s seed’? (Ear
259; Neh 7 61) is to display one’s genealogy,
and ‘‘one’s seed’’ may be simply one’s nation, ecn-
ceived of as a single family (Est 10 3). From
this general sense there developed a still looser use
of “seed” as meaning simply “men’’ (Mal 2 15;
Isa 14; 57 4; Wisd 10 15; 12 11, etc).

In Gal 3 16 St. Paul draws a distinction between
‘seeds’’ and ‘‘seed”’ that has for its purpose a proof
that the promises to Abraham were realized in
Christ and not in Israel. The distinction, how-
ever, overstresses the language of the OT, which
never pluralizes zera‘ when meaning ‘‘descend-
ants” (pl. only in 1S 8 15; cf Rom 4 18; 9 7).
But in an argument against rabbinical adversaries
St. Paul was obliged to use rabbinical methods
(cf Gal 4 25). For modern purposes it is probably
best to treat such an exegetical method as belong-


2713


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sedecias
Sela


ing simply to the (now superseded) science of the
times. Burton Scotr Easton

SEER, sé’ér, ser: The word in EV represents two
Heb words, MN, rd’eh (18 9 9.11.18.19; 2S 16
27; 1 Ch 9 22, etc), and MIM, hazeh 2 § 24 11;
2K 17 138; 1 Ch 21 9; 26 5; 29 29, etc). The
former designation is from the ordinary vb. ‘“‘to see’’;
the latter is connected with the vb. used of pro-
phetic vision. It appears from 15 99 that
“seer” (ra’eh) was the older name for those who,
after the rise of the more regular orders, were called
“prophets.” It is not just, however, to speak of the
“seers” or “prophets” of Samuel’s time as on the
level of mere. fortune-tellers. What insight or
vision they possessed is traced to God’s Spirit.
Samuel was the ré’eh by prcéminence, and the name
is little used after his time. Individuals who bear
the title ‘seer’ (Adzeh) are mentioned in connection
with the kings and as historiographers (2 8 24 11;
1 Ch 219; 26 5; 29 29; 2 Ch 9 29; 12 15;
19 2, etc), and distinction is sometimes made be-
tween ‘prophets’ and “seers” (2 K 17 13; 1 Ch
29 29, etc). Havernick thinks that “‘seer’’ denotes
one who does not belong to the regular prophetic
order (Intro to OT, 50 ff, ET), but it is not easy to
fix a precise distinction. See PRopHET, PROPHECY.

JAMES ORR

SEETHE, séth: Old Eng. for “boil’’; past tense,
“sod” (Gen 25 29), past participle, “sodden” (Lam
410). See Ex 23 19 AV.


SEGUB, sé/gub (AUS, sghabh [Keré], 23V,
s¢ghibh [Kethibh]; B, ZeyooB, Zegovb, A, ZeyooB,
Segoub):

(1) The youngest son of Hiel, the rebuilder of
Jericho (1 K 16 34). The death of Segub is
probably connected with the primitive custom of
laying foundations with blood, as, indeed, skulls
were found built in with the brickwork when the
tower of Bel at Nippur was excavated. See Guzmur.
If the death of the two sons was based on the custom
just mentioned, the circumstance was deliberately
obscured in the present account. The death of
Segub may have been due to an accident in the
setting up of the gates. In any event, tradition
finally yoked the death of Hiel’s oldest and youngest
sons with a curse said to have been pronounced
by Joshua on the man that should venture to rebuild
Jericho (Josh 6 26). ‘

(2) Son of Hezron and father of Jair (1 Ch 2 21).

Horace J. Wour

SEIR, sé’ir:

(1) CP AM, har seir, “Mt. Seir” [Gen 14 6,
etc], IW TI, ’erec sé'ir [Gen 32 3, etc]; 74 dpos
Tyelp, t6 dros Séeetr, yH Znelp, gé Séeir): In Gen 32
3 “the land of Secir” is equated with “the field of
Edom.” The Mount and the Land of Seir are
alternative appellations of the mountainous tract
which runs along the eastern side_of the Arabah,
occupied by the descendants of Esau, who suc-
ceeded the ancient Horites (Gen 14 6; 36 20),
“cave-dwellers,” in possession. For a description
of the land see Epo.

(2) (WHY AD, har set; B, *Aoadp, Assdr, A,
Snelp, Séeir): A landmark on the boundary of
Judah (Josh 15 10), not far from Kiriath-jearim
and Chesalon. The name means ‘“‘shaggy,’ and
probably here denoted a wooded height. It may be
that part of the range which runs N.E. from Saris by
Karyat el-'Anab and Biddu to the plateau of el-Jib.
Traces of an ancient forest are still to be seen here.

: W. Ewina

SEIRAH, sé-i'ra, s8/i-ra (TPIDN, ha-s*“trah; B,

Sererpudd, Selecirdthd, A, Veerpd0a, Secirdtha; AV


Seirath): The place to which Ehud escaped after
his assassination of Eglon, king of Moab (Jgs 3 26).
The name is from the same root as the foregoing,
and probably applied to some shaggy forest. The
quarries by which he passed are said to have been
by Gilgal (ver 19), but there is nothing to guide us
to an identification. Onom gives the name, but no
indication of the site.


SEIRATH, sé-i'rath, sé"i-rath. Sce Serran.


SELA, sé‘la (920, sela', 929N, ha-sela* [with the
art.]; wérpa, pétra, 4% wétpa, hé pétra; AV Selah
[2 K 14 7]): EV renders this as the name of a city
in 2K 147; Isa 161. In Jgs 1 36; 2 Ch 26
12; and Ob ver 3, it translates lit. “rock”; but
RVm in each case “Sela.” It is impossible, to
assume with Hull (HDB, s.v.) that this name, when
it appears in Scripture, always refers to the capital
of Edom, the great city in Wady Masa. In Jgs 1 36
its association with the Ascent of Akrabbim shuts us
up to a position toward the southwestern end of the
Dead Sea. Probably in that case it does not denote
a city, but some prominent crag. Moore (‘Judges,”
ICC, 56), following Buhl, would identify it with
es-Safieh, “a bare and dazzlingly white sandstone
promontory 1,000 ft. high, E. of the mud flats of
es-Sebkah, and 2 miles 8. of the Dead Sea.” A more
probable identification is a high cliff which com-
mands the road leading from Wddy el-Mith, “‘valley
of Salt,” to Edom, over the pass of Akrabbim. This
was a position of strategic importance, and if forti-
fied would be of great strength. (In this passage
“Edomites” must be read for “Amorites.”) The
victory of Amaziah was won in the Valley of Salt.
He would naturally turn his arms at once against
this stronghold (2K 14 7); and it may well be the
rock from the top of which he hurled his prisoners
(2 Ch 25 12). He called it Jokteel, a name the
meaning of which is obscure. Possibly it is the
same as Jekuthiel (1 Ch 4 18), and may mean
“preservation of God” (OHL, s.v.). No trace of
this name has been found. The narratives in which
the place is mentioned put identification with Petra
out of the question.

“The rock'’ (RVm ' Sela’) in Ob ver 3, in the phrase
"thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock,"’ is only a
vivid and picturesque description of Mt. Edom. ‘'The
purple mountains into which the wild sons of Esau
clambered run out from Syria upon the desert, some
hundred miles by twenty, of porphyry and red sandstone.
They are said to he the finest rock scenery in the world.
‘Salvator Rosa never conceived so savage and so suit-
able a haunt for handitti.’ . . . . The interior is reached
hy defiles so narrow that two horsemen may scarcely
ride abreast, and the sun is shut out by the overhanging
rocks... .. Little else than wild fowls’ nests are the
villages: human eyries perched on high shelves or hidden


away in caves at the ends of the deep gorges’”’ (G. A.
Smith, The Book of the Twelve Prophets, II, 178 f).


In Isa 161; 4211 RV, perhaps we have a
reference to the great city of Petra. Jos (Ant, IV,
vii, 1) tells us that among the kings of the Midianites
who fell before Moses was one Rekem, king of
Rekem (akre, or rekeme), the city deriving its name
from itsfounder. This he says was the Arab. name;
the Greeks called it Petra. Onom says Petra is a
city of Arabia in the land of Edom. It is called
Jechthoel; but the Syrians call it Rekem. Jokteel,
as we have seen, must be sought elsewhere. There
can be no doubt that Jos intended the city in Wady
Masa. Its OT name was Bozrah (Am 1 12, etc).
Wetzstein (Excursus in Delitzsch’s Isai, 696 ff)
hazards the conjecture that the complete ancient
name was Bozrat has-Sela, ““Bozrah of the Rock.”


This '‘rose-red city half as old as Time”
was for long difficult of access, and the attempt to


visit it was fraught with danger. In recent years,
however, it has been seen by many tourists and


Sel:
Self-Surr moder ee INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2714
exploring parties. Of the descriptions written the | and impressiveness opens to the beholder. The


best is undoubtedly that of Professor Dalman of
Jerus (Petra und seine Felsheiligttimer, Leipzig,
1908). An excellent account of this wonderful city,
brightly and interestingly written, will be found in
Libbey and Hoskins’ book (The Jordan Valley and
Petra, New York and London, 1905; see also Na-
tional Geographic Magazine, May, 1907, Washington,
D.C.). The ruins lie along the sides of a spacious
hollow surrounded by the many-hued cliffs of Edom,
just before they sink into the Arabah on the W. It
is near the base of Jebel Harun, about 50 miles


]


Entrance to the Stk.


from the Dead Sea, and just. N. of the watershed
between that sea and the Gulf of Akaba. The
valley owes its modern name, W’ddy Misa, ‘Valley
of Moses,” to its connection with Moses in Moham-
medan legends. While not wholly inaccessible
from other directions, the two usual approaches
are that from the 8.\W. by a rough path, partly
artificial, and that from the E. The latter is by
far the more important. The valley closes to the
E., the only opening being through a deep and
narrow defile, called the Sik, “shaft,” about a mile
inlength. Inthe bottom of the Sik flows westward
the stream that rises at ‘Ain Misa. E. of the
cleft is the village of Eiji, an_ancient site, corre-
sponding to Gaia of Onom. Passing this village,
the road threads its way along the shadowy wind-
ing gorge, overhung by lofty cliffs. When the
valley is reached, a sight of extraordinary beauty


temples, the tombs, the theater, etc, hewn with
great skill and infinite pains from the living rock,
have defied to an astonishing degree the tooth of
time, many of the carvings being as fresh as if they
had been cut yesterday. An idea of the scale on
which the work was done may be gathered from the
size of the theater, which furnished accommodation
for no fewer than 3,000 spectators.

Such a position could not have been overlooked
in ancient times; and we are safe to assume that a
city of importance must always have existed here.
It is under the Nabataeans, however, that Petra
begins to play a prominent part in history. This
people took possession about the end of the 4th
cent. BC, and continued their sway until overcome
by Hadrian, who gave his own name to the city—
Hadriana. This name, however, soon disappeared.
Under the Romans Petra saw the days of her
greatest splendor.

According to old tradition St. Paul visited Petra
when he went into Arabia (Gal 1 17). Of this there
is no certainty; but Christianity was early intro-
duced, and the city became the seat of a bishopric.
Under the Nabataeans she was the center of the
great caravan trade of that time. The merchandise
of the East was brought hither; and hence set out
the caravans for the South, the West, and the
North. The great highway across the desert to
the Pers Gulf was practically in her hands. The
fall of the Nabataean power gave Palmyra her
chance; and her supremacy in the commerce of
Northern Arabia dates from that time. Petra
shared in the declining fortunes of Rome; and her
death blow was dealt by the conquering Moslems,
who desolated Arabia Petraea in 629-32 AD. The
place now furnishes a retreat for a few poor Bedawy
families. W. Ewinea


SELA-HAMMAHLEKOTH, sé-la-ha-miilé-koth,
-koth (Mop>maT PL, sela' ha-mahl’kath; wérpa. 4
pepiodeioa, péira hé meristheisa): “The rock of
divisions (or, escape)” (1 5 23 28m). “Saul....
pursued after David in the wilderness of Maon.
And Saul went on this side of the mountain, and
David and his men on that side of the mountain:
and David made haste to get away for fear of Saul”
(1 8 23 25.26). The name seems to survive in
Wéady Malaki, ‘the great gorge which breaks down
between Carmel and Maon eastward, with vertical


cliffs’ (PEF, It], 314, Sh XXI).
SELAH, s@’la. See Musre, II, 1.


SELED, sé’led erick geledh): A Jerahmeelite
(I Ch 2 30 bis).


SELEMIA, sel-€-mi’a: One of the swift scribes
whose services Ezra was commanded to secure
(2 Esd 14 24). The name is probably identical
with Sevemras of I Esd 9 34 (q.v.).


SELEMIAS, sel-é-mi’as (ZeAewlas, Selemias): One
of those who put away their ‘‘strange wives” (1 Esd
9 34)=“Shelemiah” in Ezr 10 39, and probably
identical with “‘Selemia”’ in 2 Esd 14 24. °


SELEUCIA, sé-li’shi-a (Zedcvela,  Seleukia):
The seaport of Antioch from which it is 16 miles
distant. It is situated 5 miles N. of the mouth of
the Orontes, in the northwestern corner of a fruit-
ful plain at the base of Mt. Rhosus or Pieria, the
modern Jebel Masa, » spur of the Amanus Range.
Built by Seleucus Nicator (d. 280 BC) it was one
of the Syrian Tetrapolis, the others being Apameia,
Laodicea and Antioch. The city was protected


GENERAL VIEW OF PETRA


2715


by nature on the mountain side, and, being strongly
fortified on the 5. and W., was considered invulner-
able and the key to Syria (Strabo 751; Polyb. v.58).
It was taken, however, by Ptolemy Euergetes
(1 Maee 11 8) and remained in his family till
219 BC, when it was recovered for the Seleucids by
Antiochus the Great, who then richly adorned it.
Captured again by Ptolemy Philometor in 146 BC,
it remained for a short time in the hands of the
Egyptians. Pompey made it a free city in 64 BC
in return for its energy in resisting Tigranes (Pliny,
NH, v.18), and it was then greatly improved by
the Romans, so that in the Ist cent. AD it was in a
most flourishing condition.

On their first missionary journey Paul and Barna-
bas passed through it (Acts 138 4; 14 26), and
though it is not named in Acts 15 30.39, this
route is again implied; while it is excluded in
Acts 15 3.

The ruins are very extensive and cover the whole
space within the line of the old walls, which shows
a circuit of four miles. The position of the Old
Town, the Upper City and the suburbs may still
be identified, as also that of the Antioch Gate,
the Market Gate and the King’s Gate, which
last leads to the Upper City. There are rock-cut
tombs, broken statuary and sarcophagi at the base
of the Upper City, a position which probably repre-
sents the burial place of the Seleucids. The outline
of a circus or amphitheater can also be traced, while
the inner harbor is in perfect condition and full of
water. It is 2,000 ft. long by 1,200 ft. broad, and
covers 47 acres, being oval or pear-shaped. The
passage seaward, now silted up, was protected
by two strong piers or moles, which are locally
named after Barnabas and Paul. The most re-
markable of the remains, however, is the great water
canal behind the city, which the emperor Con-
stantius cut through the solid rock in 3388 AD.
It is 3,074 ft. long, has an average breadth of 20 ft.,
and is in some places 120 ft. deep. Two portions
of 102 and 293 ft. inlengtharetunneled. The object
of the work was clearly to carry the mountain tor-
rent direct to the sea, and so protect the city from
the risk of flood during the wet season. Nae

Church synods occasionally met in Seleucia in
the early centuries, but it gradually sank into decay,
and long before the advent of Islam it had lost all
its significance. W. M. Curistiz

SELEUCIDAE, sé-li’si-dé. See Suieucus.

SELEUCUS, sé-li’kus (ZéAevkos, Séleukos):

(1) Seleucus I (Nicator, “The Conqueror’’), the
founder of the Seleucidae or House of Seleucus, was
an officer in the grand and thoroughly equipped
army, which was perhaps the most important part of
the inheritance that came to Alexander the Great
from his father, Philip of Macedon. He took part in
Alexander’s Asiatic conquests, and on the division
of these on Alexander’s death he obtained the
satrapy of Babylonia. By later conquests and un-
der the name of king, which he assumed in the
year 306, he became ruler of Syria and the greater
part of Asia Minor. His rule extended from 312
to 280 BC, the year of his death; at least the
Seleucid era which seems to be referred to in 1 M ace
1 16 is reckoned from Seleucus I, 312 BC to 65 BC,
when Pompey reduced the kingdom of Syria to a
Rom province. He followed generally the policy
of Alexander in spreading Gr civilization. He
founded Antioch and its port Seleucia, and is said
by Jos (Ané, XII, iii, 1) to have conferred civic
privileges upon the Jews. The reference in Dni 11
5 is usually understood to be tothis ruler.

(2) Seleucus II (Callinicus, ‘“The Gloriously
Triumphant”), who reigned from 246 to 226 BC,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sela
Self-Surrender


was the son of Antiochus Soter and is “the king of
the north” in Dnl 11 7-9, who was expelled from
his kingdom by Ptolemy Kuergetes.

(8) Seleucus III (Ceraunus, ‘‘Thunderbolt’’),
son of Seleucus II, was assassinated in a campaign
which he undertook into Asia Minor. He had a
short reign of rather more than 2 years (226-223
BC) and is referred to in Dnl 11 10.

(4) Seleucus IV (Philopator, “Fond of his
Father’) was the son and successor of Antiochus
the Great and reigned from 187 to 175 BC. He is
called “King of Asia’’ (2 Macc 3 3), a title claimed
by the Seleucidae even after their serious losses
in Asia Minor (see 1 Mace 8 6; 11 13; 12 39;
13 32). He was present at the decisive battle
of Magnesia (190 BC). He was murdered by °
Hetioporus (q.v.), one of his own courtiers whom
he had sent to plunder the Temple (2 Macc 3 1-40;
Dn! 11 20).

For the connection of the above-named Seleucidae
with the ‘‘ten horns” of Dnl 7 24, the commentators
must be consulted.

Seleucus V (125-124 BC) and Seleucus VI
(95-93 BC) have no connection with the sacred
narrative. J. Hurcaison


SELF-CONTROL, self-kon-tral’ (éyxpdreva, eghrd-
teta): Rendered in AV “temperance” (cf Lat
temperatio and continentia), but more accurately
“self-control,” as in RV (Acts 24 25; Gal 5 23;
2 Pet 16); adj. of same, éyxparys, egkratés,
“‘self-controlled’”? (Tit 1 8 RV); cf vb. forms in
1 Cor 7 9, “have... . continency’; 9 25, the
athlete ‘‘exerciseth self-control.’ Self-control is
therefore repeatedly set forth in the NT as among
the important Christian virtues.


SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS, self-ri’chus-nes: A
term that has come to designate moral living as a
way of salvation; or as a ground for neglecting the
redemptive work of Jesus Christ. The thonght is
present in the teaching of Jesus, who spoke one
parable particularly to such as reckoned themselves
to be righteous (Lk 18 9 ff). The Pharisees quite
generally resented the idea of Jesus that all men
needed repentance and they most of all. They
regarded themselves as righteous and locked with
contempt on “sinners.” Paul in all his writings,
esp. Rom 3; Gal 3; Eph 2; Phil 3, contrasts the
righteousness that is God’s gift to men of faith
in Jesus Christ, with righteousness that is ‘‘of the
law” and ‘‘in the flesh.” By this latter he means
formal conformity to legal requirements in the
strength of unregenerate human nature. He is
careful to maintain (cf Rom 7) that the Law is
never really kept by one’s own power. On the other
hand, in full agreement with Jesus, Paul looks to
genuine righteousness in living as the demand and
achievement of salvation based on faith. God’s gift
here consists in the capacity progressively to realize
righteousness in life (ef Rom 8 1 ff). See also
SANCTIFICATION. WILLIAM OWEN CarRvER


SELF-SURRENDER, self-su-ren‘dér: The strug-
gle between the natural human impulses of self-
secking, self-defence and the like, on the one hand,
and the more altruistic impulse toward self-
denial, self-surrender, on the other, is as old as
the raee. All religions imply some conception of
surrender of self to deity, ranging in ethical quality
from a heathen fanaticism which impels to complete
physical exhaustion or rapture, superinduced by
more or less mechanical means, to the high spiritual
quality of self-sacrifice to the divinest aims and
achievements. The Scriptures represent self-sur-
render as among the noblest of human virtues.


Self-Surrender
Semites


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2716


I. Inthe OT.—In the OT self-surrender is taught
in the early account of the first pair. Each was to
be given to the other (Gen 2 24; 3 16)


1. Ius- and both were to be surrendered to
trious Ex- God in perfect obedience (3 1-15).
amples The faithful ones, throughout the


Bible narratives, were characterized
by self-surrender. Abraham abandons friends and
native country to go to a land unknown to him,
because God called him to do so (12 1). He
would give up all his cherished hopes in his only
son Isaac, at the voice of God (22 1-18). Moses,
at the call of Jeh, surrenders self, and undertakes
the deliverance of his fellow-Hebrews (Ex 3 1—
4 13; cf He 11 25). He would be blotted out of
“God’s book, if only the people might be spared
destruction (Ex 32 32).

The whole Levitical system of sacrifice may be
said to imply the doctrine of self-surrender. The
nation itself was a people set apart to


2. The Jeh, a holy people, a surrendered
Levitical nation (Ex 19 5.6; 22 31; Lev 20 7;
System Dt 76; 142). The whole burnt


offering implied the complete surrender
of the worshipper to God (Lev 1). The ceremony
for the consecration of priests emphasized the same
fundamental doctrine (Lev 8); so also the law as
to the surrender of the firstborn child (Ex 13 13 ff;
22 29).

In the Divine call to the prophets and in their
life-work self-surrender is prominent. The seer, as
such, must be receptive to the Divine
impress, and as mouthpiece of God,
he must speak not his own words, but
God’s: ‘Thus saith the Lord.” He
was to bea “man of God,” a “man of the spirit.”
‘The hand of the Lord was upon me’ (Ezk 1 3; 3
14) implies complete Divine mastery. Isaiah must
submit to the Divine purification of his lips, and
hearken to the inquiry, ‘Who will go for us?” with
the surrendered response, ‘‘Here am I; send me”
(Ilsa 6 8). Jeremiah must yield his protestations
of weakness and inability to the Divine wisdom and
the promise of endowment from above (Jer 1 1-10).
Ezekiel surrenders to the dangerous and difficult
task of becoming messenger to a rebellions house
(Ezk 2 1—3 3). Jonah, after flight from duty, at
last surrenders to the Divine will and goes to the
Ninevites (Jon 3 3).

On the return of the faithful remnant from cap-
tivity, self-giving for the sake of Israel’s faith was

dominant, the people enduring great


8. The
Prophets


4. Post- hardships for the future of the nation
exilic Ex- and the accomplishment of Jeh’s
amples purposes. This 1s the spirit of the


great Messianic passage, Isa 63 7:
“He was oppressed, yet when he was afflicted he
opened not his mouth; as a lamb that is led to the
slaughter, and as a sheep that before its shearers
is dumb, so he opened not his mouth.” Nehemiah
surrendered position in Shushan to help reéstablish
the returned exiles in Jerus (Neh 2 5). Esther
was ready to surrender her life in pleading for the
safety of her people (Est 4 16).
Il. In the NT—ln the NT scelf-surrender is still
more clearly set forth. Christ’s teachings and ex-
ample as presented in the Gospels, give


1. Christ’s to it special emphasis. It is a prime
Teaching requisite for becoming His disciple
and Ex- (Mt 10 38f; 16 24; Lk 9 23.24.
ample 59f; 14 27.33; cf Mt 19 27; Mk 8


34). When certain of the disciples
were calicd they left all and followed (Mt 4 20;
99; Mk 2 14; Lk 6 27f). His followers must so
completely surrender self, as that father, mother,
kindred, and one’s own life must be, as it were,
hated for His sake (Lk 14 26). The rich young


ruler must renounce self as an end and give his own
life to the service of men (Mt 19 21; Mk 10 21; ef
Lk 12 33). But this surrender of self was never a
loss of personality; it was the finding of the true self-
hood (Mk 8 35; Mt 10 39). Our Lord not only
taught self-surrender, but practised it. Asa child,
He subjected Himself to His parents (Lk 2 51).
Self-surrender marked His baptism and temptation
(Mt 315; 41). It is shown in His life of
physical privation (8 20). He had come not to do
His own will, but the Father’s (Jn 4 34; 6 30;
6 38). He refuses to use force for His own deliver-
ance (Mt 26 53; Jn 18 11). In His person God's
will, not His own, must be done (Mt 26 29; Lk 22
42); and to the Father He at last surrendered His
spirit (Lk 23 46). So that while He was no ascetic,
and did not demand asceticism of His followers, He
“emptied himself... . becoming obedient even
unto death, yea, the death of the cross” (Phil 2 7 f;
see Kmnosis).

The early disciples practised the virtue of self-


surrender. Counting none of their possessions their

own, they gave to the good of all (Acts
2. Actsof 2 44.45; 4 34.35.37). Stephen and
Apostles others threw themselves into their


witnessing with the perfect abandon of
the martyr; and Stephen’s successor, Paul, counted
not his life dear unto himself that he might finish the
Divinely appointed course (20 22-24).
The Epp. are permeated with the doctrine of
self-surrender. The Pauline Epp. are particularly
full of it. The Christian life is con-
3. Epistles ceived of as a dying to self and to the
of Paul world—a dying with Christ, a cruci-
fixion of the old man, that a new man
may live (Gal 2 20; 6 14; Col 2 20; 3 3; Rom
6 6), so that no longer the man lives but Christ lives
in him (Gal 2 20; Phil 1 21). The Christian is
no longer his own but Christ’s (1 Cor 6 19.20).
He is to be a living sacrifice (Rom 12 1); to die
daily (1 Cor 15 31). As a corollary to surrender
to God, the Christian must surrender himself to the
welfare of his neighbor, just as Christ pleased not
Himself (Rom 16 3); also to leaders (1 Cor 16
16), and to earthly rulers (Rom 13 1).
In the Epp. of Peter self-surrender is taught
more than once. Those who were once like sheep
astray now submit to the guidance of
4. Epistles the Shepherd of souls (1 Pet 2 25).
of Peter The Christian is to humble himself
under the mighty hand of God (5 6);
the younger to be subject to the elder (5 5); and
all to civil ordinances for the Lord’s sake (2 18).
So also in other Epp. The Christian is to subject
himself to God (Jas 4 7; He 12 9).
Epwarp Bacsy Pontarp
SELF-WILL, self-wil’ (FIZ1, racdn; av0ddys,
authddés): Found once in the OT (Gen 49 6, “In
their self-will they hocked an ox’’) in the death
song of Jacob (see Hock). The idea is found twice
in the NT in the sense of “pleasing oneself”: ‘not
self-willed, not soon angry” (Tit 1 7); and ‘daring,
self-willed, they tremble not to rail at dignities’’
(2 Pet 2 10). In all these texts it stands for a
false pride, for obstinacy, for “‘a pertinacious ad-
herence to one’s will or wish, esp. in opposition to
the dictates of wisdom or propriety or the wishes
of others.” Henry FE. Dosker


SELL, SELLER, sel’é.


SELVEDGE, sel’ve] (M¥P, kagah): The word
occurs only in the description of the tabernacle
(Ex 26 4; 3611). It has reference to the ten
curtains which overhung the boards of the sanctuary.
Five of these formed one set and five another.


See Trape; Lypia.


2717


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Self-Surrender
Semites


These were “coupled” at the center by 50 loops of
blue connected by “clasps” (q.v.) with 50 others on
the opposite side. The “selvedge”’ (sclf-edge) is
the extremity of the curtain in which the loops were.


SEM, scm (Zp, Sém): AV from the Gr form of
Shem; thus RV (Lk 3 36).


SEMACHIAH, sem-a-ki’a (DAD , s*makhyaha,
“Jch has sustained”): A Korahite family of gate-
keepers (1 Ch 26 7). Perhaps the same name
should be substituted for ‘Ismachiah”’ in 2 Ch
31 13 (sce HPN, 291, 295).


SEMEI, sem’é-i:

(1) (A, Zepel, Semei, B, Teueel, Semeet): One of
those who put away their “strange wives” (1 Esd 9
33) =‘“Shimei” “of the sons of Hashum’”’ in Ezr 10 33.

(2) AV=RV “Semeias” (Ad Est 11 2).

(3) AV form of RV “Semein” (Lk 3 26).


SEMEIAS, s@-miéi/as (NA, Zepelas, Semetas;
B, Depeclas, Semeeias; AV Semei): An ancestor of
Mordecai (Ad Est 11 2)=‘“‘Shimei” (Kst 2 5).


SEMEIN, sé-mé’/in (NB, Zepeclv, Semeein, A,
Zepeel, Semeei, TR, Zepet, Semeit; AV Semei): An
ancestor of Jesus in Lk’s genealogy (Lk 3 26).


SEMEIS, sem’é-is (A and Fritzsche, Zepels,
Semeis; B, Zevoels, Senseis; AV Semis): One of the
Levitcs who put away their ‘strange wives” (1 Esd
9 23) =‘“Shimei’”’ in Ezr 10 23.


SEMELLIUS, sémel’i-us: AV=RV Same.uius
(q.v.).


SEMIS, s@’mis: AV=RV Semeis (q.v.).


SEMITES,
RELIGION:
. Biblical References
The Five Sons of Shem
Original Home of the Semites
Confusion with Other Races
Reliability of Gen 10
Semitic Languages
. Semitic Religion.

(1) Its Peculiar Theism

(2) Personality of God

(3) Its View of Nature

(4) The Moral Being of God
LITERATURE


The words “‘Semites,” “Semitic,” do not occur in
the Bible, but are derived from the name of Noah’s
oldest son, Shem (Gen 5 32; 6 10;

1. Biblical 9 18.23 ff; 10 1.21f; 11 10f; 1 Ch
References 1). Formerly the designation was
limited to those who are mentioned in

Gen 10, 11 as Shem’s descendants, most of whom
can be traced historically and geographically; but
more recently the title has been expanded to apply
to others who are not specified in the Bible as
Semites, and indeed are plainly called Hamitie,
e.g. the Babylonians (Gen 10 10) and the Phoeni-
cians and Canaanites (vs 15-19). ‘he grounds for
the inclusion of these Bib. Hamitcs among the
Sentites are chiefly linguistic, although political,
cdiitmercial and religious affinities are also con-
sittered. History and the study of comparative
hilology, however, suggest the inadequacy of a

‘linguistic argument. ‘

“The sons of Shem are given as Elam, Asshur,
Arpachshad, Lud and Aram (Gen 10 22), All
except the third have been readily identified, Elam
as the historic nation in the highlands E. of the
Tigris, between Media and Persia; Asshur as the
Assyrians; Lud as the Lydians of Asia Minor; and
Aram as the Syrians both E. and W. of the


sem’its, SEMITIC,  sem-it’ik,


Deeg te


Euphrates. The greatest uncertainty is in the
identification of Arpachshad, the most prolific
ancestor of the Semites, esp. of those


2. The of Bib. and more recent importance.
Five Sons From him descended the Hebrews and
of Shem the Arab tribes, probably also some


East African colonics (Gen 10 24-
30; 11 12-26). The form of his name (TWPEW,
’arpakhshadh) has given endless trouble to ethnog-
raphers. McCurdy divides into two words, Arpach
or Arpath, unidentified, and kesedh, the sing. of
kasdim, i.e. the Chaldaeans; Schrader also holds to
the Chaldacan interpretation, and the Chaldaeans
themselves traced their descent from Arpachshad
(Jos, Ant, I, vi, 4); it has been suggested also to
interpret as the “‘border of the Chaldacans” (BDB;
Dillmann, in loc.). But the historic, ordinary and
most satisfactory identification is with Arrapachilis,
N.E. of Assyria at the headwaters of the Upper Zab
in the Armenian highlands (so Ptolemy, classical
geographers, Gesenius, Delitzsch). Delitzsch calls
attention to the Armenian termination shadh
(Comm. on Gen, in loc.).
If we accept, then, this identification of Arpach-
shad as the most northeasterly of the five Scm
families (Gen 10 22), we are still
3. Original faced by the problem of the primitive
Home of home and racial origin of the Semites.
the Semites Various theories of course have been
proposed; fancy and surmise have
ranged from Africa to Central Asia. (1) The most
common, almost generally accepted, theory places
their beginnings in Arabia because of the conserva-
tive and primitive Semitic of the Arabic language,
the desert characteristics of the various branches
of the race, and the historic movements of Sem
tribes northward and westward from Arabia. But
this theory does not account for some of the most
significant facts: e.g. that the Sem developments of
Arabia are the last, not the first, in time, as must
have been the case if Arabia was the cradle of
the race. This theory does not explain the Sem
origin of the Elamites, except by denial; much
less does it account for the location of Arpach-
shad still farther north. It is not difficult to
understand a racial movement from the moun-
tains of the N.E. into the lowlands of the South and
West. But how primitive Arabs could have mi-
grated uphill, as it were, to settle in the Median and
Armenian hills isa much more difficult proposition.
(2) We must return to the historic and the more nat-
ural location of the ancient Sem home on thehillsides
and in the fertile valleys of Armenia. Thence the
eldest branch migrated in prehistoric times south-
ward to become historic Elam; Lud moved west-
ward into Asia Minor; Asshur found his way down
the Tigris to become the sturdy pastoral people of
the middle Mesopotamian plateau until the invasion
of the Bab colonists and civilization; Aram found a
home in Upper Mesopotamia; while Arpachshad,
remaining longer in the original home, gave his
name to at Icasta part of it. There in the fertile
valleys among the high hills the ancient Semites
developed their distinctively tribal life, emphasizing
the beauty and close relationship of Nature, the
sacredness of the family, the moral obligation, and
faith in a personal God of whom they thought as a
member of the tribe or friend of the family. The
confinement of the mountain valleys is just as
adequate an explanation of the Sem traits as the
isolation of the oasis. So from the purer life of their
highland home, where had been developed the dis-
tinctive and virile elements which were to impress
the Sem faith on the history of mankind, increasing
multitudes of Semites poured over the mountain
barricrs into the broader levels of the plains. As


Semites
Senate, Senator


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2718


their own mountain springs and torreuts sought a
way to the sea down the Tigris and Euphrates beds,
so the Sem tribes followed the same natural ways
into their future homes: Elam, Babylonia, Assyria,
Mesopotamia, Arabia, Pal. Those who settled
Arabia sent further migrations into Africa, as well
as rebounding into the desert west of the Euphrates,
Syria and Pal. Thus Western Asia became the
arena of Sem life, whose influeuces also reached
Egypt and, through Phoenicia, the far-away West-

Mediterranean.
While we may properly call Western and South-
western Asia the home of the Sem peoples, there
still remains the difficulty of separating


4. Confu- them definitely from the other races
sion with among whom they lived. The historic
Other Babylonians, e.g., were Sem; yet
Races they dispossessed an earlier non-Sem


people, and were themselves frequently
invaded by other races, such as the Hittites, and
even the Egyptians. It is not certain therefore
which gods, customs, laws, ete, of the Babylonians
were Sem, and not adopted from those whom they
superseded. |


Assyria was racially purely Sem, but her laws, customs,
literature, and many of her gods were acquired from
Babylonia; to such an extent was this true that we are
indebted to the library of the Assyr Asshurhanipal for
much that we know of Bab religion, literature and his-
tory. In Syria also the same mixed conditions prevailed,
for through Syria by the fords of the Euphrates lay the
highway of the nations, and Hittite and Mitannian at
times shared the land with her, and left their influence.
Possibly in Arahia Sem blood ran purest, but even in
Arabia there were tribes from other races; and the table
of the nations in Gen divides that land among the
descendants of both Ham and Shem (see TaBLe oF
Nations). Lastof all, in Pal, from the very beginning of
its historic period, we find an intermingling and con-
fusion of races and religions such as no other Sem center
presents. A Hamitic people gave one of its common
names to the country—Canaan, while the pagan and
late-coming Philistine gave the most used name-—Pales-
tinc. The archaic remains of Horite, Avite and Hivite
are being uncovered hy exploration; these races sur-
vived in places, no doubt, long after the Sem invasion,
contributing their ee to_the customs and religious
practices of the land. The Hittite also was in the land,
holding outposts from his northern empire, even in the
extreme south of Pal. If the blue eyes and fair complex-
ions of the Amorites pictured on Egyp monuments are
true representations, we may helieve that the gigantic
Aryans of the North had their portion also in Pal.


It is customary now in Bib. ethnology to dis-
regard the classification of Gen 10, and to group
all the nations of Pal as Sem, esp.

6. Reliabil- the Canaanite and the Phoenician
ity of along with the Hebrew. McCurdy
Gen 10 in the Standard BD treats the vari-
ous gods and religious customs of Pal

as though they were all Sem, although uniformly
these are represented in the OT as perversions
and enormities of alien races which the Hebrews
were commanded to extirpate. The adoption of
them would be, and was, inimical to their own
ancestral faith. Because the Hebrews took over
eventually the language of the Phoenician, appro-
priated his art and conveniences, did traffic in his
ships, and in Ahab’s reign adopted his Baal and
Astarte, we are not warranted at all in rushing
to the conclusion that the Phoenicians represented
a primitive Sem type. Racial identification by
linguistic argument is always precarious, as history
clearly shows. One might as well say that Latin
and the gospel were Saxon. There are indications
that the customs and even the early language of the
Hebrews were different from those of the people
whom they subdned and dispossessed. Such is the
consistent tradition of their race, the Bible always
emphasizing the irreconcilable difference between
their ancestral faith and the practices of the people
of Canaan. We may conclude that the reasons for
disregarding the classification of Gen with reference


to the Semites and neighboring races are not final.
Out from that fruitful womb of nations, the Can-
casus, the Semites, one branch of the Caucasian
peoples, went southwestward—as their cousins
the Hamites went earlier toward the South and
as their younger relatives, the Aryans, were to
go northward and westward—with marked racial
traits and a pronounced religious development, to
play a leading part in the life of man.

The phrase Sem Languages is used of a group of
languages which have marked features in common, which

also set them off from other languages.
6. Semitic But we must avoid the unnecessary
i: inference that nations using the same or
Languages kindred languages are of the same ancestry.
There are other explanations of linguistic
affinity than racial, as the Indians of Mexico may speak
Spanish, and the Germans of Milwaukee, English. Soalso
neighhoring or intermingled nations may just as naturally
have used hranches of the Sem language stock. However,
it is true that the nations which were truly Sem used lan-
guages which are strikingly akin. These have heen
grouped as (1) Eastern Sem, including Bab and Assyr;
(2) Northern, including Syriac and Aramaic; (3) Western,
including Canaanite, or Phoenician, and Hebrew, and
(4) Southern, including Arahic, Sahaean and Ethiopic
(ef Geden, Intro to the Heb Bible, 14-28). The dis-
tinctive features of this family of languages are (1) the
tri-literal root, (2) the consonantal writing, vowel indica-
tions being unnecessary so long as the languago was
spoken, (3) the meager use of moods and tenses in verbal
inflection, every action being graphically viewed as
helonging to one of two stages in time: completed or
incomplete, (4) the paucity of parts of speech, verb and
noun covering nearly all the relations of words, (5) the
frequent use of internal change in the inflection of words,
e.g. the doubling of a consonant or the change of a vowel,
and_ (6) the use of certain letters, called ‘‘serviles,'' as
prefixes or suffixes in inflection; these are parts of pro-
nouns or the worn-down residua of nouns and particles,
The manner of writing was not uniform in these lan-
guages, Bah and Assyr being ideographic and syllabic,
and written from left to right, while Aram., Heb and Arah.
were alphahetic and written from right to left. The
primitive forms and inflections of the group are hest pre-
served in the Arah. by reason of the conservatism of the
desert peoples, and in the Assyr hy the sudden destruc-
tion of that empire and the burial of the records of that
language in a comparatively pure state, to he brought
back to light by 19th-cent. exploration. All the char-
acteristics given above are clearly manifest in the Heb
of the OT.

In the study of Sem Religion there are two
tendencies toward error: (1) the Western prag-
matical and unsympathetic overtaxing
of oriental Nature-symbols and vividly
imaginativespeech. Because theSem-
ite nsed the figure of the rock (Dt 32
4.18.30) in describing God, or poetically conceived
of the storm-cloud as Jeh’s chariot (Ps 104 3), we
must not be led into believing that his religion was a
savage animism, or that Jeh of Israel was only the
Zeus of the Greeks. How should an imaginative
child of Nature speak of the unseen Spiritual Power,
except iu the richest analogies of Nature? (2) The
second error is the tendency to treat the accretions
acquired by contact with other nations as of the
essence of Sem religion, e.g. the golden calf following
the Egyp bondage, and the sexual abominations of
the Can. Baal and Astarte. _ ‘

The primitive and distinctive beliefs of the Sem
peoples lie still in great uncertainty because of the
long association with other peoples, whose practices
they readily took over, and because of the lack of
records of the primitive periods of Sem development,
their origin and dispersion among the nations being

rehistoric. Our sources of information are the
Bab and Assyr tablets and monuments, the Egyp
inscriptions, Phoen history, Arabian traditions and
inscriptions, and principally the OT Seriptures.
We can never know perhaps how much the pure
Semitism of Babylonians and Assyrians was diverted
and corrupted by the developed civilization which
they invaded and appropriated; Egypt was only
indirectly affected by Sem life; Sem development
in Arabia was the latest in all the group, besides
which the monuments and res/e of Arabian antiquity


7. Semitic
Religion


2719


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Semites
Senate, Senator


which have come down to us are comparatively few;
and the Phoen development was corrupted by the
sensuality of the ancient Canaanitish cults, while
the Bible of the Hebrews emphatically differentiated
from the unwholesome religions of Pal their own
faith, which was ancestral, revealed and pure. Was
that Bible faith the primitive Sem cult? At least
we must take the Heb tradition at its face value,
finding in it the prominent features of an ancestral
faith, preserved through one branch of the Sem
group. Weare met frequently in these Heb records
by the claim that the religion they present is not a
new development, nor a thing apart from the origin
of their race, but rather the preservation of an
ancient worship, Abraham, Moses and the prophets
appearing not as originators, but reformers, or
revivers, who sought to keep their people true to an
inherited religion. Its elemental features are the
following:

(1) It was pronouncedly theistic; not that other
religions do not affirm a god; but the theism of
the Semites was such as to give their religion a
unique place among all others. To say the least, it
had the germ of or the tendency toward monotheism,
if we have not sufficient evidence to afhirm its mono-
theism, and to rate the later polytheistic representa-
tions of Babylonia and Assyria as local perversions.
If the old view that Sem religion was essentially
monotheistic be incapable of proof, it is true that
the necessary development of their concept of God
must ultimately arrive at monotheism. ‘This came
to verification in Abram the Hebrew, Jesus the
Messiah (Jn 4 21-24) and Mohammed the false
prophet. A city-state exclusively, a nation pre-
dominantly, worshipped one god, often through
some Nature-symbol, as sun or star or element.
With the coming of world-conquest, intercourse and
vision, the one god of the city or the chief god of
the nation became universalized. The ignorant
and materialistic Hebrew might localize the God of
Israel in a city or on a hilltop; but to the spiritual
mind of Amos or in the universal vision of Isaiah
He was Jeh, Lord of all the earth.

(2) Closely related to this high conception of
Deity was the apparently contradictory but really
potent idea of the Deity as a personality. The
Semite did not grossly materialize his God as did
the savage, nor vainly abstract and etherealize
Him and so eliminate Him from the experience of
man as did the Greek; but to him God universal was
also God personal and intimate. The Hebrew ran
the risk of conditioning the spirituality of God in
order to maintain His real personality. Possibly
this has been the most potent element in Sem
religion; God was not far from every one of them.
He came into the closest relations as father or friend.
He was the companion of king and priest. The
affairs of the nation were under His immediate care;
He went to war with armies, was a partner in har-
vest rejoicings; the home was His abode. This
conception of Deity carried with it the necessary
implication of revelation (Am 3 8). The office,
message and power of the Heb prophet were also the
logical consequence of knowing God as a Person.

(3) Its peculiar view of Nature was another
feature of Sem religion. God was everywhere and
always present in Nature; consequently its sym-
bolism was the natural and ready expression of His
nature and presence. Simile, parable and Nature-
marvels cover the pages and tablets of their records.
Unfortunately this poetic conception of Nature
quickly enough afforded a ready path in which
wayward fect and carnal minds might travel
toward Nature-worship with all of its formalism
and its degrading excesses. This feature of Sem
religion offers an interesting commentary on their
philosophy. With them the doctrine of Second


Causes received no emphasis; God worked directly
in Nature, which became to them therefore the
continuous arena of signs and marvels. The
thunder was His voice, the sunshine reflected the
light of His countenance, the winds were His mes-
sengers. And so through this imaginative view of
the world the Semite dwelt in an enchanted realm
of the miraculous.

(4) The Semite believed in a God who is a moral
being. Such a faith in the nature of it was certain to
influence profoundly their own moral development,
making for them a racial character which has been
distinctive and persistent through the changes of
millenniums. By it also they have impressed
other nations and religions, with which they have
had contact. The CH is an expression of the
moral issues of theism. ‘The Law and the Prophets
of Israel arose out of the conviction of God’s right-
eousness and of the moral order of His universe (Ex
19 5.6; Isa 1 16-20). The Decalogue is a con-
fession of faith in the unseen God; the Law of Holi-
ness (Lev 17-26) is equally a moral code.

While these elements are not absent altogether
from other ancient religions, they are pronouncedly
characteristic of the Sem to the extent that they
have given to it its permanent form, its large devel-
opment, and its primacy among the religions of
the human race. To know God, to hear His eternal
tread in Nature, to clothe Him with light as with
a garment, to establish His throne in righteousness,
to perceive that holiness is the all-pervading atmos-
phere of His presence—such convictions were bound
to affect the life and progress of a race, and to con-
secrate them as a nation of priests for all mankind.


Literarure.—For discussion of the details of Sem
peoples and religions reference must be made to the par-
ticular articles, such as ARnPACHSHAD; Exser;, ABRAHAM;
Hammurazi; Assyzia; BaBYLtonia; Bast; ASHTORETH;
AsHERIM; Motocn; CaemosH; Cartun; Israen, Reni-
eon of, etc. The lit. on the subject is vast, interesting
and far from conclusive. Few of the Bible Dicts. have
arts. on this particular subject; reference should be
made to those in the Standard and in the HDB, vol V,
both by McCurdy; ‘‘Semites" in Catholic Enc skims the
surface; arts. in International Ene are good. In OT
Theologies, Davidson, pp. 249-52; Schultz, ch iii of vol
I: Riehm, Alttestamentliche Theologie; Delitzsch, Psy-
chology of the OT. For language see Wright's Compara-
live Grammar of Sem Languages._ For history and reli-
gion: Maspero’s three vols; McCurdy, HPM; Hommel,
Ancient Heb Tradition, and Sem Vélker u._ Sprache;
Jastrow, Comparative Sem Religion; Friedr. Delitzsch,
Babel u. Bibel; W. R. Smith, Religion of the Semites.

Epwarp Mack

SENAAH, sé-na’a, sen’d-a (NiO, s*nd’ah; B,
Zaavd, Saand, Davavar, Sanandt, A, Zavava,
Sanand, Zevvad, Sennad, ‘Acdv, Hosdn): The
children of Senaah are mentioned as having formed
part of the company returning from the captivity
with Zerubbabel (Har 2 35; Neh 7 38). The
numbers vary as given by Ezr (3,630) and Neh
(3,930), while I Esd 5 23 puts them at 3,330. In
the last place the name is Sanaas, AV ‘‘Annaas”’
(B, Zand, Samd, A, Zavdas, Sandas). In Neh 3 3
the name occurs with the def. art., ha-senaah. The
people may be identical with the Benjamite clan
Hassenuah (1 Ch 9 7). Onom speaks of Magdal-
senna, a village about 7 miles N. of Jericho, which
may be the place intended; but the site is not
known. Ewina


SENATE, sen’it, SENATOR, sen’a-tér: In
Pg 105 22, “teach his senators [RV “‘elders”}
wisdom.” The Heb is ]pT, zakén, “elder” (LXX
mpecBirepat, presbuterot). In Acts 6 21, “called the
council together and all the senate of the children of
Israel.’ The Gr yepoucla, gerousia, is here evidently
used as a more precise equivalent of the foregoing
“eouncil’’ (suvédptovr, sunédrion), to which it is added
by xal, kai, explicative. Reference is had to the
Sanhedrin. See SanHEDRIN. This term gerousia


Seneh
Sepharvaim


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2720


occurs in LXX Ex 3 16, etc, and in 1 Mace 12 6;
2 Macc 110; 4 44 of the supreme council of the
Jews (see GOVERNMENT). In 1 Macc 8 15; 12 3,
Bovrevryprov, bouleutérion, 1s used of the Rom senate,
which is said to consist of 320 members meeting
daily, consulting always for the people, to the end
that they may be well governed. These statements
are not quite accurate, since the senate consisted nor-
mally of 8300 members, and met not daily, but on call
of the magistrates. Originally, like the gerousia of
the Jews, the representatives of families and clans
(gentes), the senators were subsequently the ex-
magistrates, supplemented, to complete the tale of
members, by representatives of patrician (in time also
of plebeian) families selected by the censor. The
tenure was ordinarily for life, though it might be ter-
minated for cause by the censor. Although constitu-
tionally the senate was only an advisory body, its ad-
vice (senatus consultum, auctoritas) in fact became in
time a mandate which few dared to disregard.
During the republican period the senate practically
ruled Rome; under the empire it tended more and
more to become the creature and subservient tool of
the emperors. Witiram ArtHuR HEIDEL


SENEH, sé’ne (739, seneh; eva, Sennd):
This was the name attaching to the southern of
the two great cliffs between which ran the gorge
of Michmash (18 14 4). The name means
“acacia,” and may have been given to it from the
thorn bushes growing upon it. Jos (BJ, V, u, 1)
mentions the “plain of thorns” near Gabathsaul.
We may hear an echo of the old name in that of
Wdady Suweinit, ‘valley of the lttle thorn tree,”
the name by which the gorge is known today.
The cliff must have stood on the right side of the
wddy; see Bozez. Conder gives an excellent
description of the place in Tent Work in Pal, II,
112-14. Ewina


SENIR, sé‘nir (TID, snir; Zavelp, Saneir):
This was the Amorite name of Mt. Hermon, accord-
ing to Dt 3 9 (AV “Shenir”). But in 1 Ch 6 23;
Cant 4 8, we have Senir and Hermon named as
distinct mountains. It seems probable, however,
that Senir applied to a definite part of the Anti-
Lebanon or Hermon range. An inscription of
Shalmanescr tells us that Hazael, king of Damascus,
fortified Mt. Senir over against Mt. Lebanon. So
in Ezk 27 5, Senir, whence the Tyrians got planks
of fir trees, is set over against Lebanon, where cedars
were obtained. The Arab geographers give the
name Jcbel Sanir to the part of the Anti-Lebanon
range which lies between Damascus and Homs
(Yakut, c 1225 AD, quoted by Guy le Strange in
Pal under the Moslems, 79. He also quotes Mas‘udi,
943 AD, to the effect that Baalbek is in the district
of Senir, 295). W. Ewine


SENNACHERIB, se-nak’ér-ib (230, san-
héribh; Devvaxnpelp, Sennachéreim, Assyr Sin-akhi-
erba, ‘‘the moon-god Sin hasinercased the brothers”):
Sennachcrib (704-682 BC) ascended the throne of
Assyria after the death of his father Sargon.
Appreciating the fact that Babylon would be
difficult to control, instead of endeavoring to
conciliate the people he ignored them. The Baby-
lonians, being indignant, crowned a man of humble
origin, Marduk-zakir-shom by name. He ruled
only a month, having been driven out by the irre-
pressible Merodach-baladan, who again appeared
on the scene.

In order to fortify himself against Assyria the
latter sent an embassy to Hezekiah, apparently for
the purpose of inspiring the W. to rebel against
Assyria (2 IX 20 12-19).


Sennacherib in his first campaign marched into
Babylonia. He found Merodach-baladan in-
trenched at Kish, about 9 miles from Babylon, and
defeated him; after which he entered the gates of
Babylon, which had been thrown open to him. He
placed a Babylonian, named Bélibni, on the
throne.

This campaign was followed by an invasion of the
country of the Cassites and Iasubigalleans. In his
third campaign he directed his attention to the W.,
where the people had become restless under the
Assyr yoke. Hezekiah had been victorious over
the Philis (2 K 18 8). In preparation to with-
stand a siege, Hezekiah had built a conduit to bring
water within the city walls (2 IX 20 20). Although
strongly opposed by the prophet Isaiah, gifts were
sent to Egypt, whence assistance was promised
(Isa 80 I-4). Apparently also the Phoenicians
and Philis, who had been sore pressed by Assyria,
had made provision to resist Assyria. The first
move was at Ekron, where the Assyr governor Padi
was put into chains and sent to Hezekiah at
Jerus.

Sennacherib, in 701, moved against the cities in
the W. He ravaged the environs of Tyre, but made
no attempt to take the city, as he was without a
naval force. After Elulaeus the king of Sidon fled,
the city surrendered without a battle, and Ethbaal
was appointed king. Numerous cities at once sent
presents to the king of Assyria. Ashkelon and
other cities were taken. The forces of Egypt were
routed at Eltekeh, and Ekron was destroyed. He
claims to have conquered 46 strongholds of Heze-
kiah’s territory, but he did not capture Jerus, for


concerning the king he said, in his annals, ‘“‘him-
self like a bird in a cage in Jerus, his royal city, I
penned him.” He states, also, how he reduced his
territory, and how Hezekiah sent to him 30 talents
of gold and 800 talents of silver, besides hostages.

The Bib, account of this mvasion is found in
2 K 18 13—19 37; Isa 36, 87. The Assyr account
differs considerably from it; but at the same time
it corroborates it in many details. One of the
striking parallels is the exact amount of gold which
Hezekiah sent to the Assyr king (see Expos T,
NII, 225,405; XIII, 326).

In the following year Sennacherib returned to
Babylonia to put down a rebellion by Bél-ibni and
Merodach-baladan. The former was sent to
Assyria, and the latter soon afterward died. Ashur-
n4din-shum, the son of Sennacherib, was then
crowned king of Babylon. A campaign into Cili-
cia and Cappadocia followed.

In 694 Sennacherib attacked the Elamites, who
were in league with the Babylonians. In revenge,
the Elamites invaded Babylonia and carried off


Ashur-nédin-shum to Elam, and made Nergal-
ushézib king of Babylon. He was later captured
and in turn carried off to Assyria. In 691 Sen-
nacherib again directed his attention to the S., and
at Khaluté fought with the combined forces. Two
years later he took Babylon, and razed it to the
ground.

In 681 Sennacherib was murdered by his two
sons (2 IX 19 37; sce SuHartzer). Esar-haddon
their younger brother, who was at the time con-
ducting a campaign against Ararat, was declared
king in his stead. A. T. Cray


SENSES, sen’siz: The tr of atcOqrijpior, aisthé-
térion (He 6 14, “those who by reason of use have


their senses exercised to discern good and evil’).
The word means, primarily, the seat of the senses,
the region of feeling; in the LXX of Jer 4 19, it
represents the Heb 47r, “the walls of the heart’’ (see
RV), and is used to denote the internal sense or
| faculty of perceiving and judging, which in He 6


2721


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Seneh
Sepharvaim


ars:


14 is regarded as becoming perfected by use or
exercise (cf Eph 4 12f; 1 Tim 4 7; 2 Pet 3 18).
In 2 Esd 10 36 we have “Or is my sense deceived,
or my soul in a dream?” Lat sensus, here “mind”
rather than “sense.” W. L. WaLker


SENSUAL, sen’sh06-al (Wuxtxds, psuchikds, ‘ani-
mal,” “natural’’?): Bib. psychology has no Eng.
equivalent for this Gr original. Man subject to the
lower appetites is capxixés, sarkikés, “fleshly”; in
the communion of his spirit with God he is mvev-
parixds, pneumatikés, ‘‘spiritual.’” Between the two
is the Yuxh, psuché, “soul,” the center of his per-
sonal being. This ego or “I’’ in each man is bound
to the spirit, the higher nature; and to the body or
lower nature.

The soul (psuch@) as the seat of the senses, desires,
affections, appetites, passions, i.e. the lower animal
nature common to man with the beasts, was distinguished
in the Pythagorean and Platonic philosophy from the
higher rational nature (notis, pnetima).

The subjection of the soul to the animal nature is
man’s debasement, to the spirit indwelt of God is his
exaltation. The Eng. equivalent for psuchikos, “psy-
chic,” does not express this debasement. In the
NT “sensual” indicates man’s subjection to self and
self-interest, whether animal or intellectual—the
selfish man in whom the spirit is degraded into sub-
ordination to the debased psuché, “soul.” This
debasement may be (1) intellectual, “not wisdom
ae from above, but... . earthly, sensual”
(Jas 3 15); (2) carnal (and of course moral), ‘‘sen-
sual, having not the Spirit” (Jude ver 19). It
ranges all the way from sensuous self-indulgence
to gross immorality. In the utter subjection of the
spirit to sense it is the utter exclusion of God from
the life. Hence ‘the natural [psuchikos] man re-
ceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God” (1 Cor
214). The term is equivalent to “the mind of the
flesh” (Rom 8 7) which “is not subject to the law
of God.” See PsycHoLocy. Dwicur M. Pratr


SENT (MU, shalah; amocré&\ho, aposiélld):
“Sent” in the OT is the tr of shalah, “‘to send” (of
presents, messengers, etc, Gen 32 18; 44 3; Jgs
6 14; 1 K 14 6; Est 3 13; Prov 17 11; Jer 49
14; Ezk 3 5; 23 40; Dnl 10 11; Ob ver 1); of
sh'lah, Aram. (Ezr 7 14; Dnl 5 24); of shilluhim,
“sending” (Ex 18 2); in the NT of apostello, ‘“‘to
send off” or “away,” ‘‘to send forth” (Jn 9 7, ‘the
pool of Siloam [which is by interpretation, Sent]’’);
ef Lk 18 4; Neh 3 15, “the pool of Siloah,” RV
“Shelah”; Isa 8 6, ‘‘the waters of Shiloah that go
softly,” where LXX has Siléam for Heb shiléah, “a
sending,” which, rather than ‘‘Sent,” is the original
meaning—a sending forth of waters. See SrtoaM.
“Sent? is also the tr of apéstoles, ‘‘one sent forth”
(the original of the familiar word ‘‘apostle”); in Jn
13 16, “one that is sent’’ (m “Gr ‘an apostle’”’); ef
He 1 14. W. L. WaLKER


SENTENCE, sen’tens: Eight Heb and three Gr
words are thus tr? in AV. Sometimes it points to a
mystery (Dnl 6 12; 8 238); then again to the con-
tents of the Law (Dt 17 11); then again to the
idea of judgment (Ps 17 2) or of a judicial sen-
tence (2 Cor 1 9; Lk 28 24), or of judicial advice
(Acts 15 19, ARV “judgment”’).


SENUAH, sé-nii’a, sen’t-a (MND, s*nd’ah): In
AV “A Benjamite’ (Neh 119); RV has ‘“Has-
senvuah,” transliterating the def. art. AV is to be
preferred (cf 1 Ch 9 7).


SEORIM, sé-d'rim, sé-dr’im (QW, s*arim):
The name borne by one of the (post-exilic) priestly
courses (1 Ch 24 8).


SEPARATE, sep’a-rét: The tr of a number of
Heb and Gr words, Sa3, hadhal (Lev 20 24, etc),
and agopl{w, aphorizs (Mt 26 32, etc), being the
most common. “To separate’ and ‘‘to conse-
erate” were originally not distinguished (e.g. Nu 6
2m), and probably the majority of the uses of
“separate” in EV connote ‘‘to set apart for God.”
But preeisely the same term that is used in this
sense may also denote the exact opposite (e.g. the
use of ndézar in Ezk 14 7 and Zee 7 3). See
Houy; Nazirire; Sarnr.


SEPARATION, sep-a-ri’shun: In the Pent the
word niddah specially points to a state of cere-
monial uncleanness (Lev 12 2.5; 15 20ff; Nu 6 4ff;
12 13; 19 21). For a description of the ‘water of
purification,” used for cleansing what was cere-
monially unclean (Nu 19), sce Hetrer, Red; Un-
CLEANNEsS. For “‘separation”’ in the sense of nézer,
see Nazirive.


SEPHAR, s@fiir: Only in Gen 10 30 (M720,
s°pharah, “toward Sephar’’), as the eastern limit
of the territory of the sons of Yoktan (Joktan).
From the similarity between the names of most of
Yoktan’s sons and the names of South Arabian
towns or districts, it can hardly be doubted that
Sephar is represented by the Arab. Zafar. The
appropriateness of the site seems to outweigh the
discrepancy between Arab. z and Heb 5. But two
important towns in South Arabia bear this name.
The one lies a little to the S.of San‘a’. According
to tradition it was founded by Shammir, one of the
Sabaean kings, and for a long time served as the
royal seat of the Tubbas. The other Zafar stands
on the coast in the district of Shihr, E. of Hadra-
maut. The latter is probably to be accepted as the
Bib. site. A. 8S. Fuiron


SEPHARAD, sé-fa‘rad, sef’a-rad (TID, s¢pha-
radh): Mentioned in Ob ver 20 as the place of cap-
tivity of certain “captives of Jerus,” but no clear
indication is given of locality. Many conjectures
have been made. The Tg of Jonathan identifies
with Spain; hence the Spanish Jews are called
Sephardim. Others (Pusey, etc) have connected
it with the “Cparda” of the Behistun Inscription,
and some have even identified it with ‘‘Sardis.”
The now generally accepted view is that which con-
nects it with the ‘‘Saparda” of the Assyr inserip-
tions, though whether this is to be located to the HE.
of Assyria or in Northern Asia Minor is not clear.
See Schrader, Cuneiform Inscriptions, II, 145-46;
Sayce, HCM, 482-84; arts. in DB, HDB, EB, etc.

Jamns ORR

SEPHARVAIM, sef-dr-va/im, sé-far-va'im

(BIND , s*pharwayim; Zeppapovdsp, Sephpharou-

dim, Sewhapovdip, Seppharoudim, Ber-
1. Formerly $apoiv, Seppharotin, Zerhapovpdry,
Identified Seppharowmdin, "Ewdapovéip, Eppha-
with the roudim, Zewpapely, Sepphareim, the
Two Baby- first two being theforms in MSS A and
lonian Brespectively, of the passages in K, and
Sippars the last two in Isa): This city, men-

tioned in 2 K 17 24; 18 34; 19 13;
Isa 86 19; 37 13, is generally identified with the
Sip(p)ar of the Assyr-Bab inscriptions (Zimbhir in
Sumerian), on the Euphrates, about 16 miles S.W.
of Bagdad. It was one of the two great seats of the
worship of the Bab sun-god Sama&, and also of the
goddesses [Star and Anunit, and seems to have had
two principal districts, Sippar of Sama%, and Sippar
of Anunit, which, if the identification were correct,
would account for the dual termination -ayim, in
Heb. This site is the modern ‘Abu-Habbah, which
was first excavated by the late Hormuzd Rassam in


separates = THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2722
: ; S
1881, and has furnished an enormous number of in- | among translations. Its importance is many-


scriptions, some of them of the highest importance.
Besides the fact that the deities of the two cities,
Sippar and Sepharvaim, are not the same, it is to
be noted that in 2 K 19 13 the king
2. Difficul- of Sepharvaim is referred to, and, as
ties of That far as is known, the Bab Sippar never
Identifi- had a king of its own, nor had Akkad,
cation with which it is in part identified, for
at least 1,200 years before Sennacherib.
The fact that Babylon and Cuthah head the list of
cities mentioned is no indication that Sepharvaim
was a Bab town—the composition of the list, indeed,
points the other way, for the name comes after Ava
and Hamath, implying that it lay in Syria.
Joseph Halévy therefore suggests (ZA, IJ, 401 ff)
that it should be identified with the Sibraim of
Ezk 47 16, between Damascus and
3. Another Hamath (the dual implying a frontier
Suggestion town), and the same as the Sabara’in
of the Bab Chronicle, there referred
to as having been captured by Shalmaneser. As,
however, Sabara’in may be read Samara’in, it is
more likely to have been the Heb Shdm:ran (Sa-
maria), as pointed out by Fried. Delitzsch.
Literaturs.—See Schrader, COT, I, 71f; Kittel on
K; Diltmann-Kittel on Isa, ad loc.; HDB, s.v.
T. G. PincHEs
SEPHARVITES, sé'fiir-vits, sé-far’vits (O71920 ,
s¢pharwim): In 2 K 17 31, the inhabitants of
SEPHARVAIM (q.v.), planted by the king of Assyria
in Samaria. They continued there to burn their
children to their native gods.


SEPPHORIS, sef’é-ris: A city of Galilee, taken
by Josephus (Vita, LX, Ixvii, 71) and later de-
stroyed by the son of Varus (Ant, XVII, x, 9).


SEPTUAGINT, sep’ti-a-jint:

I. IMPORTANCE

I. Name
Ill. TrapitrronaL ORIGIN
1. Letter of Aristeas
2. Evidence of Aristobulus and Philo
3. Later Accretions

4. Criticism of the Aristeas Story

5. Date

6. Credibility
EviIpDENCE OF PROLOGUE TO SIRACH
V. TRANSMISSION OF THE LXX Text
Early Corruption of the Text
Official Revision of Hebrew Text c 100 AD
. Adoption of LX.X by Christians
Alternative 2d-Century Greck Versions
Aquila
Theodotion
Symmachus and Others
Origen and the Hexapla
Hexaplariec Manuseripis
. Recensions Known to Jerome
. Hesychian Recension

12. Lucianic Recension
Reconstruction or LXX Text;
MaANuscRiIpTa AND Prinrep Epirrons
1. Ancient Versions Made from LXX
2. Manuscripts

3. Printed Texts

4. Reconstruction of Original Text
NumMser, TITLES AND OrDER OF Booxs
1. Contents


LOOT RLS OO IN Te


VERSIONS,


VI.


VII.


2. Titles
3. Bipartition of Books
4. Grouping and Order of Books
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE VERSION AND Its Com-
PONENT Parts
1. Grouping of Books on Internal Evidence
(1) The Hexateuch
(2) The “ Latter” Prophets
(3) Partial Version of the ‘‘Former’’ Prophets
(4) The ‘‘ Writings*’
(5) The Latest LXX Translations
2. General Characteristics
SALIENT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN GREEK AND
Hesprew Texts
1. Sequence
2. Subject-Matter
LITERATURE


L. Importance—The Gr VS of the OT commonly
known as the Septuagint holds a unique place


VIII.


IX.


sided. Its chief value lies in the fact that it is a
VS of a Heb text earlier by about a millennium than
the earliest dated Heb MS extant (916 AD), a VS,
in particular, prior to the formal rabbinical revi-
sion of the Heb which took place early in the 2d
cent. AD. It supplies the materials for the recon-
struction of an older form of the Heb than the MT
reproduced in our modern Bibles. It js, moreover,
a pioneering work; there was probably no precedent
in the world’s history for a series of translations
from one language into another on so extensive a
seale. It was the first attempt to reproduce the
Heb Scriptures in another tongue. It is one of the
outstanding results of the breaking-down of inter-
national barriers by the conquests of Alexander the
Great and the dissemination of the Gr language,
which were fraught with such vital consequences
for the history of religion. The cosmopolitan city
which he founded in the Delta witnessed the first
attempt to bridge the gulf between Jewish and Gr
thought. The Jewish commercial settlers at Alex-
andria, forced by circumstances to abandon their
langnage, clung tenaciously to their faith; and the
tr of the Scriptures into their adopted language,
produced to meet their own needs, had the further
result of introducing the outside world to a know!l-
edge of their history and religion. Then came the
most momentous event in its history, the starting-
point of a new life; the tr was taken over from the
Jews by the Christian church. It was the Bible of
most writers of the NT. Not only are the majority
of their express citations from Scripture borrowed
from it, but their writings contain numerous
reminiscences of its language. Its words are honse-
hold words to them. It laid for them the founda-
tions of a new religious terminology. It was a
potent weapon for missionary work, and, when
VSS of the Scriptures into other languages became
necessary, it was in most cases the LAX and not
the Heb from which they were made. Preéminent
among these daughter VSS was the Old Lat which
preceded the Vulg. Jerome’s VS, for the most part
a direct tr from the Heb, was in portions a mere
revision of the Old Lat; our Prayer-book VS of the
Psalter preserves peculiarities of the LAX, trans-
mitted through the medium of the Old Lat. The
LXX was also the Bible of the early Gr Fathers,
and helped to mold dogma; it furnished proof-
texts to both parties in the Arian controversy. Its
language gives it another strong claim to recog-
nition. Uncouth and unclassical as much of it
appears, we now know that this is not wholly due
to the hampering effects of translation. ‘Biblical
Greek,” once considered a distinct species, is now
a rather diseredited term. The hundreds of con-
temporary papyrus records (letters, business and
legal documents, etc) recently discovered in Egypt
illustrate much of the vocabulary and grammar and
go to show that many so-called ‘“Hebraisms’’ were
in truth integral parts of the koiné, or “common
language,” i.e. the international form of Gr which,
since the time of Alexander, replaced the old dia-
lects, and of which the spoken Gr of today is the
lineal descendant. The VS was made for the
populace and written in large measure in the lan-
guage of their everyday life.

If. Name.—The name “Septuagint” is an abbre-
viation of Interpretatio secundum (or juata) Sep-
tuaginta sentores (or viros), i.e. the Gr tr of the OT
of which the first instalment was, according to the
Alexandrian legend (see III, below), contributed
by 70 (or 72) elders sent from Jerus to Alexandria
for the purpose at the request of Ptolemy II. The
legend in its oldest form restricts their labors to the
Pent, but they were afterward credited with the
tr of the whole Bible, and before the 4th cent. it


2723


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sepharvites
Septuagint


had become customary to apply the title to the
whole collection: Aug., De Civ. Dei, xviii.42,
quorum interpretatio ut Septuaginta vocetur iam
obtinuit consuetudo” (“whose tr is now by custom
called the Septuagint’). The MSS refer to them
under the abbreviation of 0’, hoi o’ (“the seventy”),
or of of’, hoi ob’ (“the seventy-two”). The “Sep-
tuagint” and the abbreviated form “LXX” have
been the usual designations hitherto, but, as these
are based on a now discredited legend, they are
coming to be replaced by “the OT in Greek,” or “the
Alexandrian version” with the abbreviation 6.

I. Traditional Origin —The traditional account
of the tr of the Pent is contained in the so-called
letter of Aristeas (edd Gr text, P. Wendland, Teubner
series, 1900, and Thackeray in the App. to Swete’s
Intro to the OT in Gr, 1900, etc; Wendland’s sections
cited below appear in Swete’s Intro, ed 2; ET by
Thackeray, Macmillan, 1904, reprinted from JQR,
XV, 337, and by H. T. Andrews in Charles’s A poc-
rypha and Pseudepigrapha of the OT, II, 83-122,
Oxford, 1913).

The writer professes to be a high official at the
court of Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-247 BC), a

Greek interested in Jewish antiquities.
1. Letter of Addressing his brother Philocrates
Aristeas he describes an embassy to Jerus on

which he has recently been sent with
another courtier Andreas. According to his narra-
tive, Demetrius of Phalerum, a prominent figure
in later Athenian history, who here appears as the
royal librarian at. Alexandria, convinced the king
of the importance of securing for his library a tr
of the Jewish Law. The king at the same time,
to propitiate the nation from whom he was asking
a favor, consented, on the suggestion of Aristeas, to
liberate all Jewish slaves in Egypt. Copies follow
of the letters which passed between Ptolemy and
Eleazar, the high priest at Jerus. Ptolemy requests
Eleazar to select and dispatch to Alexandria 72
elders, proficient in the Law, 6 from each tribe, to
undertake the tr, the importance of the task re-
quiring the services of a large number to secure an
accurate VS. Eleazar complies with the request
and the names of the selected translators are ap-
pended to his letter.

There follow: (1) a detailed description of votive
offerings sent hy Ptolemy for the temple; (2) a sketch of
Jerus, the temple and its services, and the geography
of Pal, donbtless reflecting in part the impressions of an
eyewitness and giving a unique picture of the Jewish
capital in the Ptolemaic era; (3) an exposition by Eleazar
of portions of the Law.

The translators arrive at Alexandria, bringing
a copy of the Law written in letters of gold on rolls
of skins, and are honorably received by Ptolemy.
A seven days’ banquet follows, at which the king
tests the proficiency of each in turn with hard ques-
tions. Three days later Demetrius conducts them
across the mole known as the Heptastadion to the
island of Pharos, where, with all necessaries pro-
vided for their convenience, they complete their
task, as by a miracle, in 72 days; we are expressly
told that their work was the result of collaboration
and comparison. The completed VS was read by
Demetrius to the Jewish community, who received
it with enthusiasm and begged that a copy might
be intrusted to their leaders; a solemn curse was
pronounced on any who should venture to add to or
subtract from or make any alteration in_ the tr.
The whole VS was then read aloud to the king who
expressed his admiration and his surprise that Gr
writers had remained in ignorance of its contents;
he directed that the books should be preserved with
scrupulous eare. __

To set beside this account we have two pre-
Christian allusions in Jewish writings. Aristobulus,
addressing a Ptolemy who has been identified as


Philometor (182-146 BC), repeats the statement
that the Pent was tr? under Philadelphus at the in-

stance of Demetrius Phalereus (Euseb.,
2. Evidence Praep. Ev., XLII, 12.6646); but the


of Aristo- genuineness of the passage 1s doubtful.
bulus and If it is accepted, it appears that some
Philo of the main features of the story were


believed at Alexandria within a century
of the date assigned by “‘Aristeas”’ to the tr. Philo
(Vit. Moys, ii.5 ff) repeats the story of the send-
ing of the translators by Eleazar at the request
of Philadelphus, adding that in his day the com-
pletion of the undertaking was celebrated by an
annual festival on the isle of Pharos. It is improb-
able that an artificial production like the Aristeas
letter should have occasioned such an anniversary;
Philo’s evidence scems therefore to rest in part
on an independent tradition. His account in one
particular paves the way for later accretions; he
hints at the inspiration of the translators and the
miraculous agreement of their separate VSS: “They
prophesied like men possessed, not one in one way
and one in another, but all producing the same
words and phrases as though some unseen prompter
were at the ears of each.” At the end of the 1st
cent. AD Jos includes in his Anéiquities (XII, ii,
1 ff) large portions of the letter, which he para-
phrases, but does not embellish.

Christian writers accepted the story without sus-
picion and amplified it. A caiena of their evidence
is given in an Appendix to Wend-
land’s ed. The following are their
principal additions to the narrative,
all clearly baseless fabrications.


(1) The translators worked independently, in separate
cells, and produced identical versions, Ptolemy proposing
this test of their trustworthiness. So Irenaeus, Clement
of Alexandria, Augustine, the Chronicon Paschale and the
Cohortatio ad Graecos (wrongly attribnted to Justin);
the author of the last work asserts that he had seen
the cells and heard the tradition on the spot. (2) A
modification of this legend says that the translators
worked in pairs in 36 cells. So Epiphanius (d. 403 AD),
and later G. Syncellns, Julius Pollux and Zonaras.
Epiphanius’ account is the most detailed. The trans-
lators were locked up_in sky-lighted cells in pairs with
attendants and shorthand writers; each pair was in-
trusted with one hook, the hooks were then circulated,
and 36 identical VSS of the whole Bible, canonical and
apocryphal books, were produced; Ptolemy wrote
two letters, one asking for the original Scriptures, the
second for translators. (3) This story of the two
embassies appears already in the 2d cent. AD, in Justin's
Apology, and (4) the extension of the translators’ work to
the Prophets or the whole Bible recurs in the two Cyrils
andin Chrysostom. (5) The miraculous agreement of the
translators proved them to be no less inspired than the
authors (Irenaeus, etc; cf Philo). (6) As regards
date, Clement of Alexandria quotes an alternative tra-
dition referring the VS back to the time of the first
Ptolemy (322-285 BC); while Chrysostom brings it
down to ‘‘a hnndred or more years [elsewhere ‘not
many years’’] before the coming of Christ.” Justin
absurdly states that Ptolemy's embassy was sent to
King Herod; the Chronicon Paschale calls the high priest
of the time Onias Simon, brother of Eleazar.


3. Later
Accretions


Jerome was the first to hold these later inventions
up to ridicule, contrasting them with the older and
more sober narrative. They indicate a growing oral
tradition in Jewish circles at Alexandria. The
origin of the legend of the miraculous consensus of
the 70 translators has been reasonably sought in a
passage in Ex 24 LXX to which Epiphanius expressly
refers. We there read of 70 elders of Israel, not
heard of again, who with Aaron, Nadab and Abihu
form a link between Moses and the people. After
reciting the Book of the Covenant Moses ascends
to the top of the mount; the 70, however, ascend
but a little way and are bidden to worship from afar:
according to the LXX text “They saw the place
where the God of Israel stood . . . . and of the
elect of Israel not one perished” (ver 11), ie. they
were privileged to escape the usual effect of a vision
of the Deity (Ex 33 20). But the vb. used for


Septuagint


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2724


“Herish” (diaphdnein) was uncommon in this sense;
‘not one disagreed”’ would be the obvious meaning;
hence apparently the legend of the agreement of
the translators, the later intermediaries between
Moses and Israel of the Dispersion. When the
translations were recited, ‘“‘no difference was dis-
coverable,” says Epiphanius, using the same vb.
Cave-dwellings in the island of Pharos probably
account for the legend of the cells. A curious
phenomenon has recently suggested that there is
an element of truth in one item of Epiphanius’ ob-
viously incredible narrative, viz. the working of
the translators in pairs. The Gr books of Jer and
Ezk fall into two nearly equal parts, apparently the
work of separate translators (see VIII, 1, [2], below);
while in Ex, Lev and Pss orthographical details indi-
cate a similar division of the books for clerical pur-
poses. There was, it seems, a primitive custom of
transcribing each book on 2 separate rolls, and in
the case of Jer and Ezk the practice goes back to
the time of tr (J TS, IV, 245 ff, 398 ff; UX, 88 ff).
Beside the later extravagances, the story of
Aristeas appears comparatively rational. Yet it
has long been recognized that much of
4. Criticism it is unhistorical, in particular the pro-


of the fessed date and nationality of the
Aristeas writer. Its claims to authenticity
Story were demolished by Dr. Hody two


' centuries ago (De bibliorum textibus
originalibus, Oxon., 1705). Clearly the writer is not
a Greek, but a Jew, whose aim is to glorify his race
and to disseminate information about their sacred
books. Yet the story is not wholly to be rejected,
though it is difficult to disentangle truth from fiction.
On one side his veracity has since Hody’s time been
established; his court titles, technical terms, epis-
tolary formulae, etc, reappear in Egyp papyri and
inscriptions, and all his references to Alexandrian
life and customs are probably equally trustworthy
(§§ 28, 109 ff, measures to counteract the ill effects
upon agriculture of migration from country to town;
§ 167, treatment of informers [cf § 25]; §175 recep-
tion of foreign embassies [cf § 182]). The import of
this discovery has, however, since its announcement
by Lombroso (Recherches sur économie politique
de V Egypte, Turin, 1870), been somewhat modified
by the new-found papyri which show that Aristeas’
titles and formulae are those of the later, not the
earlier, Ptolemaic age.

The letter was used by Jos and probably known


to Philo. How much earlier is it? Schiirer (HJP,
II, iii, 309 f (47 V4, ITI, 608-16}), rely-
5. Date ing on (1) the questionable Aristobulus


passage, (2) the picture drawn of Pal
as if still under Ptolemaic rule, from which it passed
to the Scleucids c 200 BC, argued that the work
could not be later than that date. But it is hard
to believe that a fictitious story (as he regards it to
be) could have gained credence within little more
than half a century of the period to which it relates,
and Wendland rightly rejects so ancient an origin.
The following indications suggest a date about
100-80 BC.


(1} Many of Aristeas’ formulae, ctc (see above),
only came into use in the 2d cent. BO (Strack, Rhein.
Mus., LV, 168 ff; Thaekeray, Aristeas, ET, pp. 3, 12).
(2) The later Maccahean age or the cnd of the 2d cent.
BC is suggested by some of the translators’ names (Wend-
land, xxvi), and (3) by the_independent position of the
high priest. (4) Some of Ptolemy's questlons indicate
a tottering dynasty (§187,etc). (5) The writer oceasiou-
ally forgets his réle and distinguishes hetween his own
time and that of Philadelphus (§§ 28, 182). (6) He
appears to horrow his name from a Jewish historian of
the 2d cent. BC and to wish to pass off the latter's
history as his own (§ 6). (7) He is guilty of historical
inaccuracies concerning Demetrius, etc. (8) The pro-
logue to the Gr Ecclus (after 132 BC) ignores and
contradicts the Aristeas story, whereas Aristeas_possihly
used this prologue (Wendland, xxvii; ef Hart, Heclus in
Greek, 1909). (9) The imprecation upon any who should


alter the tr (§ 311) points to divergences of text which
the writer desired to check; cf § 57, where he seems to
insist on the correctness of the LXX text of Ex 25 22,
‘‘gold of pure gold,” as against the Heh. (10) Allusions
to current criticisms of the Pent (§§ 128, 144) presuppose
a familiarity with it on the part of non-Jewish readers
only explicahle if the LXX had long been current. (11)
Yet details in the Gr orthography preclude a date much
later than 100 BC.


The probable amount of truth in the story is
ably discussed by Swete (Intro, 16-22). The follow-
ing statements in the letter may be
accepted: (1) The tr was produced at
Alexandria, as is conclusively proved
by Egyp influence on its language.
(2) The Pent was tr? first and, in view of the homo-
geneity of style, asa whole. (3) The Gr Pent goes
back to thefirst half of the 3d cent. BC; the style is
akin to that of the 3d-cent. papyri, and the Gr Gen
was used by the Hellenist Demetrius toward the
end of the cent. (4) The Heb rolls were brought
from Jerus. (5) Possibly Philadelphus, the patron
of literature, with his religious impartiality, may
have countenanced the work. But the assertion
that it owed its inception wholly to him and his
librarian is incredible; it is known from other sources
that Demetrius Phalereus did not fill the office of
librarian under that monarch. The language is that
of the people, not a literary style suitable to a work
produced under royal patronage. The importation
of Palestinian translators is likewise fictitious. Dr.
Swete acutely observes that Aristeas, in stating
that the tr was read to and welcomed by the Jewish
community before being presented to the king, un-
consciously reveals its true origin. It wasno doubt
produced to meet their own needs by the large
Jewish colony at Alexandria. A demand that the
Law should be read in the synagogues in a tongue
‘understanded of the people’ was the originating
impulse.

IV. Evidence of Prologue to Sirach.—The inter-
esting, though in places tantalizingly obscure, pro-
logue to Eeclus throws light on the progress made
with the tr of the remaining Scriptures before the
end of the 2d cent. BC.


The translator dates his settlement in Egypt, during
which he produced his VS of his grandfather's work,
as ‘‘the 38th year under Euergetes the king.'" The
words have been the suhject of controversy, hut, with
the majority of critics, we mays interpret this to mean
the 38th year of Euergetes [1, reckoning from tho
beginning (170 BC) of his joint reign with Philometor,
ie. 182 BC. TEuergetes I reigned for 25 years only.
Others, in view of the superfluous preposition, suppose
that the age of the translator is intended, but the cum-
hrous form of expression is not unparalleled. A reeent
explanation of the date (Hart, Ecelus in Gr) as the 38th
year of Philadelphus which was also tho lst year of
Euergetes I (ie. 247 BC) is more ingenious than con-
vincing.


6. Credi-
bility


The prologue implies the existence of a Gr VS of
the Law, the Prophets and “‘the rest of the books.”
The translator, craving his readers’ indulgence for
the imperfections of his own work, due to the diffi-
culty of reproducing Heb in Gr, adds that others
have experienced the same difficulties: “The Law
itself and the prophecies and the rest of the books
have no small difference when spoken in their origi-
nal language.”” From these words we may under-
stand that at the time of writing (132-100 BC)
Alexandrian Jews possessed Gr VSS of a large part
(probably not the whole) of “the Prophets,” and
of some of “the Writings” or Hagiographa. For
some internal evidence as to the order in which the
several books were tr4 see VIII, below.

V. Transmission of the LXX Text.—The main
value of the LXX is its witness to an older Heb
text than our own. But before we can reconstruct
this Heb text we need to have a pure Gr text before
us, and this we are at present far from possessing.


| The Gr text has had a long and complex history of


2725


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Septuagint


its own. Used for centuries by both Jews and
Christians it underwent corruption and interpo-
lation, and, notwithstanding the multitude of
materials for its restoration, the original text has
yet to be recovered. We are much more certain
of the ipsissima verba of the NT writers than of the
original Alexandrian VS of the OT. This does not
apply to all portions alike. The Gr Pent, e.g., has
survived in a relatively pureform. But everywhere
we have to be on our guard against interpolations,
sometimes extending to whole paragraphs. Not
a verse is without its array of variant readings.
An indication of the amount of ‘mixture’ which
has taken place is afforded by the numerous ‘‘doub-
lets’”’ or altcrnative renderings of a single Heb word
or phrase which appear side by side in the trans-
mitted text.

Textual corruption began early, before the Chris-


tian era. We have seen indications of this in the

letter of Aristeas (III, 5, [9] above).
1. Early Traces of corruption appear in Philo
Corruption (e.g. his eomment, in Quis Rer. Div.
of Text Her. 56, on Gen 15 15, shows that al-


ready in his day taphets, ‘buried,’ had
become trapheis, “nurtured,’’ asin all our MSS);
doublets already exist. Similarly in the NT the
author of He quotes (12 15) a corrupt form of
the Gr of Dt 29 18.
But it was not until the beginning of the 2d cent.
AD that the divergence between the Gr and the
Palestinian Heb text reached an acute


2. Official stage. One cause of this was the revi-
Revision of sion of the Heb text which took place
Hebrew about this time. No actual record
Text 100 of this revision exists, but it is beyond
AD doubt that it originated in the rah-


binical school, of which Rabbi Akiba
was the chief representative, and which had its
center at Jamnia in the years following the destruc-
tion of Jerus. The Jewish doctors, their temple in
ruins, concentrated their attention on the settlement
of the text of the Scriptures which remained to
them. This school of eminent critics, precursors of
the Massoretes, besides settling outstanding ques-
tions coneeruing the Canon, laid down strict rules
for Bib. interpretation, and in all probability estab-
lished an official text. ,
But another cause widened still farther the dis-
tanee between the texts of Jerus and Alexandria.
This was the adoption of the LXX
3. Adoption by the Christian church. When Chris-
of LXX by _ tians began to cite the Alexandrian VS
Christians in proof of their doctrines, the Jews
began to question its accuracy. Hence
mutual recriminations which are reflected in_the
pages of Justin’s Dialogue with Trypho. “They
dare to assert,” says Justin (Dial., 68), “that the
interpretation produced by your seventy elders
under Ptolemy of Egypt is in some points inaccu-
rate.’ A crucial instance cited by the Jews was
the rendering “virgin” in Isa 7 14, where they
elaimed with justice that “young woman would
be more accurate. Justin retaliates by eharging
the Jews with deliberate excision of passages favor-
o Christianity. 5
Soret such Bee eations should be made in those
critical years was inevitable, yet there is no evi-
dence of any material interpolations


4. Alterna- having been introduced by either
tive 2d- party. But the Alexandrian VS, in
Century view of the revised text and the new
Greek and stricter canons of interpretation,
Versions was felt by the Jews to be inadequate,


and a group of new translations of
Scripture in the 2d eent. AD supplied the demand.
We possess considerable fragments, of the work of
three of these translators, viz. Aquila, Symmachus


and Theodotion, besides scanty remnants of further
anonymous VSS.


The earllest of ‘‘the three’’ was Aquila, a proselyte
to Judaism, and, like his NT namesake, a native of
Pontus. He flourished, according to
5. Aquila Epiphanius (whose account of these later
+ Ad translators in his De mens. et pond. is not
wholiy trustworthy), under Hadrian (117-
38 AD) and was_related to that emperor; there is no
prey in Epiphanius’ further statement that
adrian intrusted to Aquila the superintendence of
the building of Aclia Capitolina on the site of Jerus,
that there he was converted to Christianity by Christian
exiles returning from Pella, but that refusing to abandon
astrology he was excommunicated, and in revenge turned
Jew and was actuated by a bias against Christianity in his
VS of the OT, What is certain is that he was a pupil of
the new rahbinical school, in particular of Rahbi Akiba
95-135 AD), and that his VS was an attempt to repro-
uce exactly the revised oficial text. The result was an
extraordinary production, unparalleled in Gr _lit., if it
cap be classed under that category at all. No jot or
tittleof the Heb might be neglected; uniformity in the tr
of each Heb word must he preserved and the etymological
kinship of different Heb words represented, Such were
some of his leading principles. he opening words of
his tr (Gen 1 1) may he rendered: ‘‘In heading founded
God with the heavens and with the earth." ‘' Heading”
or ‘summary’ was selected hecause the Heb word for
‘beginning’ was a derivative of ‘head.’ ‘* With”
represents an untranslatable word (’éh) prefixed to the
accusative case, hut indistinguishable from the preposi-
tion with.” The Divine Name (the tetragrammaton)
was not tr4, but written in archaic Heb characters. ‘‘A
slave to the letter,’’ as Origen calls him, his work has
aptly heen described by a modern writer as ‘'a colossal
crib” (Burkitt, JQR, Octoher, 1896, 207 ff). Yet it was
a success. In Origen’s time it was used by all Jews
ignorant of Heb, and continued in use for several cen-
turies; Justinian expressly sanctioned its use in the
synagogues (Nov., 146). Its lack of style and violation
of the laws of grammar were not due to isnorance of
Gr, of which the writer shows, in vocabulary at least, a
considerable command. Its importance lay and_lies
(so far as it is preserved) in its exact reproduction of the
rabbinical text of the 2d cent. AD; it may he regarded
as the heginning of the scientific study of the Heb Scrip-
tures. Though ‘a hold attempt to displace the LXX,’’
it cannot be charged with being intentionally antagonistic
to Christianity. Of the original work, previously known
ouly from extracts in MSS, some palimpsest fragments
were recovered from the Cairo Genizah in 1897 and
edited by F. C. Burkitt (Fragments of the Books of
Kings, 1897) and by C. Taylor (Sayings of the Jewish
Fathers?, 1897; Heb-Gr Cairo Genizah Palimpsests, 1900).
The student of Swete’s OT will trace Aquila’s unmistak-
ahle style in the footnotes to the Books of S and K; the
older and shorter B text in those books has constantly
heen supplemented in the A text from Aquila. A longer
specimen of his work occurs in the Gr Eccl, which has
no claim to be regarded as ‘‘Septuagint'’; Jerome re-
fers to a second ed of Aquila’s VS, and the Gr Ecclis
perhaps his first ed of that hook, made on the basis of an
unrevised Heb text (MeNeile, Intro to Eccl, Cambridge,
1904, App. I). The suggested identification of Aquila
with Onkelos, author of the Tg of that name, has not
been generally accepted.
Epiphanius’ account of the dates and history of
Theodotion and Symmachus is untrustworthy. He
seems to have reversed their order, proh-
6. Theodo- ably misled by the order of the tr in the
( columns of the Hexapla (see helow). He
tion also apparently confused Aquila and Theo-
dotion in calling the latter a native of Pon-
tus. As regards date, Theodotion, critics are agreed,
preceded Symmachus and probably flourished under M.
Aurelius (161-80), whereas Symmachus lived under Com-
modus (180-92); Irenaeus mentious only the VSS of
Aquila and Theodotion, and that of Symmachus had in
his day either not heen produced or at least not widely
circulated. According to the more credible account of
Irenaeus, Theodotion was an Ephesian and a convert to
Judaism. His VS constantly agrees with the LXX and
was rather a revision of it, to bring it into accord with
the current Heh text, than an independent work. The
supplementing of lacunae in the LX X (due partly to the
fact that the older VS of some hooks did not aim at
completeness) gave scope for greater originality. These
lacunae were greatest in Job and his VS of that hook was
much longer than the LXX. The text of Job printed
in Swete’s ed is a patchwork of old and new; the careful
reader may detcct the Theodotion portions by translitera-
tions and other peculiarities. Long extracts from Theo-
dotion are preserved in cod. Qin Jer. As regards the
additional matter contained in LXX, Theodotion was
inconsistent; he admitted, e.g., the additions to Dnl
(Sus, Bel and the Three), but did not apparently admit
the non-canonical boo as_a whole. The church
adopted his Dnl in place of the inadequate LXX VS,
which has survived in only one Gr MS; hut the date
when the change took place is unknown and the early


Septuagint


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2726


history of the two Gr texts is obscure. Theodotion's
renderings have_been found in writings before his time
(including the NT), and it is reasonably conjectured
that even before the 2d cent. AD the LX-X text had been
discarded and that Theodotion’s VS is but a working
over of an older alternative VS. Theodotion is free
from the harbarisms of Aquila, hut is addicted to
transliteration, i.e. the reproduction of Heb words in
Gr letters. His reasons for this habit are not always
clear; ignorance of Heb will not account for all (cf VITI,

1, {5], below).
Beside the two VSS produced hy, and primarily
intended for, Jews was a third, presumahly to meet
the needs of a Jewish Christian_sect_who


. Symma- were dissatisfied with the LXX. Sym-
ee and machus, its author, was, according to the
chu more trustworthy account, an Ehionite,
Others who also wrote a comm. on Mt, a copy of


which was given to Origen by Juliana, a
lady who received it from its author (Euseh., HE, VI, 17).
Epiphanius’ description of him as a Samaritan convert
to Judaism may be rejected. The date of his work, as
above stated, was probably the reign of Commodus
(1s0-92 AD). In one respect the VS resembled Aquila’s,
in its faithful adherence to the sense of the current Heb
text; its style, however, which was flowing and literary,
was a revolt against Aquila’s monstrosities. It seems to
have been a recasting of Aquila’s VS, with free use of
both LXX and Theodotion. It carried farther a tend-
ency apparent in the LXX to refine away the anthro-
pomorphisms of the OT. |
Of three other MSS discovered by Origen (one at
Nicopolis in Greece, one at Jericho) and known from
their position in the Hexapla as Quinta, Serta, and
Septima, little is known. There is no reason to suppose
that they embraced the whole OT. Quinta is character-
ized by Field asthe most elegant of the Gr VSS. _ F.C,
Burkitt has discussed ‘‘the so-called Quinta of 4 Kings"'
in PSBA, June, 1902. The Christian origin of Serta be-
trays itself in Hab 3 13 (‘Thou wentest forth to save
thy people for the sake of [or ‘“‘by"'] Jesus thy anointed
One"’).


These later VSS play a large part in the history
of the text of the LAX. This is due to the labors
of the greatest LXX scholar of an-


8. Origen _ tiquity, the celebrated Origen of Alex-
and the andria, whose active life covers the
Hexapla first half of the 3d_ cent. Origen


frankly recognized, and wished Chris-
tians to recognize, the merits of the later VSS, and
the divergences between the LXX and the current
Heb. He determined to provide the church with the
materials for ascertaining the true text and mean-
ing of the OT. With this object he set himself to
learn Heb—a feat probably unprecedented among
non-Jewish Christians of that time—and to collect
the later VSS. The idea of using these VSS to
amend the LXX seemed to him an inspiration:
“By the gift of God we found a remedy for the di-
vergence in the copies of the OT, namely to use the
other editions as a criterion” (Comm. on Mt 16 14).
The magnum opus in which he embodicd the results
of his labors was known as the Hezapla or “six-
column” edition. This stupendous work has not
survived; a fragment was discovered toward the
end of the 19th cent. in the Ambrosian Library at
Milan (Swete, Znéro, 61 ff) and another among the
Cairo Genizah palimpsests (ed C. Taylor, Cam-
bridge, 1900). The material was arranged in six
parallel columns containing (1) the current Heb
text, (2) the same in Gr letters, (8) the VS of Aquila,
(4) that of Symmachus, (5) that of the LXX, (6)
that of Theodotion. The text was broken up into
short clauses; not more than two words, usually one
only, stood in the first column. The order of the
columns doubtless represents the degree of conform-
ity to the Heb; Aquila’s, as the most faithful, heads
the VSS, and Symmachus’ is on the whole a revi-
sion of Aquila as Theodotion’s is of the LXX. But
Origen was not content with merely collating the
VSS; his aim was to revise the LXX and the 5th
column exhibited his revised text. The basis of it
was the current Alexandrian text of the 3d cent. AD;
this was supplemented or corrected where necessary
by the other VSS. Origen, however, deprecated
alteration of a text which had received ecclesiastical
sanction, without some indication of its extent, and


T
(


the construction of the 5th column presented diffi-
culties. There were (1) numerous cases of words
or paragraphs contained in the LXN-X but not in the
Heb, which could not be wholly rejected, (2) cases
of omission from the LXX of words in the Heb,
(3) cases of paraphrase and minor divergences,
(4) variations in the order of words or chapters.
Origen here had recourse to a system of critical
signs, invented and employed by the grammarian
Aristarchus (3d cent. BC) in his ed of Homer.
Passages of the first class were left in the text, but
had prefixed to them an obelus, a sign of which the
original form was a ‘‘spit”’ or “spear,” but figuring
in LXX MSS as a horizontal line usually with a
dot above and a dot below (+); other varieties
are —, =, 4%; the sign in Aristarchus indicated
censure, in the Hexapla the doubtful authority of
the words which followed. The close of the obe-
lized passage was marked by the metobelus, a colon
(:), or, in the Syr VSS, a mallet (¢). Passages
missing in the LX-X were supplied from one of the
other VSS (Aquila or Theodotion), the beginning
of the extract being marked by an asterisk ( % )—
a sign used by Aristarchus to express special ap-
proval—the close, by the metobelus. Where LXX
and Heb widely diverged, Origen occasionally gave
two VSS, that of a later translator under an asterisk,
that of LXX obelized. Divergence in order was
met by transposition, the Heb order being followed;
in Prov, however, the two texts kept their respective
order, the discrepancy being indicated by a com-
bination of signs. Minor supposed or real cor-
ruptions in the Gr were tacitly corrected. Origen
produced a minor edition, the Tetrapla, without
the first two columns of the larger work. The
Heptapla and_ Oetapla, occasionally mentioned,
appear to be alternative names given to the Hexa-
pla at points where the number of columns was
increased to receive other fragmentary VSS. This
gigantic work, which according to a reasonable esti-
mate must have filled 5,000 leaves, was probably
never copied in exienso. The original was pre-
served for some centuries in the library of Pamphilus
at Caesarea; there it was studied by Jerome, and
thither came owners of Bib. MSS to collate their
copies with it, as we learn from some interesting
notes in our uncial MSS (e.g. a 7th-cent. note ap-
pended to Est in cod. 8). The Library probably
perished ec 638 AD, when Caesarea fell into the
hands of the Saracens.
But, though the whole work was too vast to be
copied, it was a simple task to copy the 5th column.
This task was performed, partly in
9. Hexa- prison, by Pamphilus, a martyr in the
plaric MSS Diocletian persecution, and his friend
Eusebius, the great bishop of Caesarea.
Copies of the ‘““Hexaplaric’’? LXX, i.e. Origen’s doc-
tored text with the critical signs and perhaps occa-
sional notes, were, through the initiative of these
two, widely circulated in Palin the 4th cent. Natu-
rally, however, the signs became unintelligible in
a text detached from the parallel columns which
explained them; scribes neglected them, and copies
of the doctored text, lacking the precautionary
symbols, were multiplicd. This carelessness has
wrought great confusion; Origen is, through others’
fault, indirectly responsible for the production of
MSS in which the current LX.X text and the later
VSS are hopelessly mixed. No MSS give the
Hexaplaric text as a whole, and it is preserved in a
relatively pure form in very few: the uncials G and
M (Pent and some historical books), the cursives
86 and 88 (Prophets). Other so-called Hexaplaric
MSS, notably cod. Q (Marchalianus: Proph.) pre-
serve fragments of the 5th and of the other columns
of the Hexapla. (For the Syro-Hexaplar see below,
VI, 1.) Yet, even did we possess the 5th column


2727


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Septuagint


entire, with the complete apparatus of signs, we
should not have “the original LXX,” but merely,
after removing the asterisked passages, a text
current in the 3d cent. The fact has to be empha-
sized that Origen’s gigantic work was framed on
erroneous principles. He assumed (1) the purity
of the current Heb text, (2) the corruption of the
current LXX text where it deviated from the Heb.
The modern critic recognizes that the LXX on the
whole presents the older text, the divergences of
which from the Heb are largely attributable to an
official revision of the latter early in the Christian
era. He recognizes also that in some books (e.g.
Job) the old Gr VS was only a partial one. To
reconstruct the original text he must therefore have

recourse to other auxiliaries beside Origen.
Such assistance is partly furnished by two otherre-
censions made in the century after Origen. Jerome
(Praef.in Paralipp.; cf Adv. Ruf., 1i.27)


10. Recen- states that in the 4th cent. three re-
sions censions circulated in different parts of
Known to the Christian world: “Alexandria and
Jerome Egypt in their Septuagint acclaim


Hesychius as their authority, the region
from Constantinople to Antioch approves the copies
of Lucian the martyr, the intermediate Palestinian
provinces read the MSS which were promulgated
by Eusebius and Pamphilus on the basis of Origen’s
labors, and the whole world is divided between these
three varieties of text.”

Hesychius is probably to be identified with the
martyr bishop mentioned by Eusebius (H#, V11]1,

13) along with another scholar martyr,
11. Hesych- Phileas bishop of Thmuis, and it is
ian Re- thought that these two were engaged
cension in prison in revising the Egyp text at

the time when Pamphilus and Eusebius
were employed on a similar task under similar con-
ditions. How far existing MSS preserve the He-
sychian recension is uncertain; agreement of their
text with that of Egyp VSS and Fathers (Cyril
in particular) is tbe criterion. For the Prophets
Ceriani has identified cod. Q and its kin as He-
sychian. For the Octateuch N. McLean (JTS, II,
306) finds the Hesychian text in a group of cursives,
44, 74, 76, 84, 106, 134, ete. But the first instal-
ments of the larger Cambridge LXX raise the
question whether cod. B (Vaticanus) may not itself
be Hesychian; its text is more closely allied to that
of Cyril Alex. than to any other patristic text, and
the consensus of these two witnesses against the
rest is sometimes (Ex 32 14) curiously striking.
In the Psalter also Rahlfs (Septuaginta-Studien,
2. Heft, 1907, 235) traces the Hesychian text in B
and partially in S (Sinait.). Cf von Soden’s theory
for the NT and see Text anp MSS or THE NT.

The Lucianiec recension was the work of another
martyr, Lucian of Antioch (d. 311-12), probably
with the collaboration of the Hebraist

42. Lucianic Dorotheus. There are, as Hort has
Recension shown, reasons for associating Lucian
with a “Syrian” revision of the NT in

the 4th cent., which became the dominant type of
text. That he produced a Syrian recension of the
Gr OT is expressly stated by Jerome, and we are
moreover able with considerable certainty to iden-
tify the extant MSS which exhibit it. The identifi-
cation, due to Field and Lagarde, rests on these
grounds: (1) certain verses in 2 K are in the Arab.
Syro-Hexaplar marked with the letter L, and a note
explains that the letter indicates Lucianic readings;
(2) the readings so marked occur in the eursives 19,
82, 93, 108, 118; (3) these MSS in the historical
books agree with the LXX citations of the Antioch-
ene Fathers Chrysostom and Theodoret. |
enabled Lagarde to construct a Lucianic text of
the historical books (Librorum Vet. Test. canontc.


This clue |


pars prior, Gottingen, 1883); his death prevented
the completion of the work. Lagarde’s edition is
vitiated by the fact that he does not quote the read-
ings of the individual MSS composing the group,
and it can be regarded only as an approximate
reconstruction of ‘Lucian.’ It is evident, however,
that the Lucianic LXX possessed much the same
qualities as the Syrian revision of the NT; lucidity
and completeness were the main objects. It is a
“full’ text, the outcome of a desire to include, so far
as possible, all recorded matter; ‘doublets’ are
consequently numerous. While this ‘‘conflation’’
of texts detracts from its value, the Lucianic re-
vision gains importance from the fact that the
sources from which it gleaned include an element of
great. antiquity which needs to be disengaged;
where it unites with the Old Lat VS against all
other authorities its evidence is invaluable.

VI. Reconstruction of LXX Text; Versions,
Manuscripts and Printed Editions.—The task of
restoring the original text is beset with difficulties.
The materials (MSS, VSS, patristic citations) are
abundant, but none has escaped “mixture,” and
the principles for reconstruction are not yet securely
established (Swete, Intro, I, iv-vi; III, vi).

Among the chief aids to restoration are the daughter
VSS made from the LXX, and above all the Old Lat

(pre-Hieronymian) VS, for the earliest
1. Ancient


(African) Old Lat VS dates from the
2d cent. AD, i.e. before Origen, and _con-


Versions tains a text from which the asterisked
Made from passages in Hexaplaric MSS are absent;
the LXX it thus ‘‘hrings us the hest independent


proof we have that the Hexaplar signs in-
troduced by Origen can be relied on for
the reconstruction of the LX X" (Burkitt). The Old
Lat also enahles us to recognize the ancient element in
the Lucianic recension. But the Lat evidence itself is
by no means unanimous. Augustine (De Doctr. Christ.,
ii.16) speaks of the infinite variety of Lat VSS, though
they may ultimately prove all to fall into two main
families, African and European. Peter Sahbatier's collec-
tion of patristic quotations from the Old Lat is still
useful, though needing verification hy recent editions of
the Fathers. Of Old Lat MSS one of the mest important
is the cod. Lugdunensis, edited hy U. Rohert (Pentateucht
e cod. Lugd. versio Lat. antiquissima, Paris, 1881; Hep-
tateuchi partis post. versio Lat. antig. e cod. Lugd., Lyons,
1900). The student should consult also Burkitt’s ed of
The Rules of Tyconius ('Texts and Studies,” III, 1,
Cambridge, 1894) and The Old Latin and the Itala (ib,
IV, 3, 1896).

Jerome’s Vulgate is mainly a direct tr from the Heh,
but the Vulg Psalter, the se-called Gallican, is one of
Jerome’s two revisions of the Old Lat, not his later
VS from the Heh, and some details in our Prayer-hook
Psalter are ultimately derived through the Vulg Psalter
from the LXX. Parts of the Apoc (Wisd, Ecclus, Bar,
i and 2 Macc) are also pure Old Lat, untouched hy
Jerome.

The early date (2d cent. AD) once claimed for the
Egyp or Coptic VSS (Bohairic, i.c. in the dialect of
Lower Egypt, Sahidic or Upper Egyp, and Middle
Egyp) has not been confirmed by later researches, at least
as regards the first-named, which is prebably not earlier
than the 3d or 4th cent. AD. Rahlfs (Sept.-Studien,
II, 1907) identifies the Bohairic Psalter as the Hesych-
jan recension. The Sahidic VS of Job has fortunately

reserved the shorter text lacking the later insertions
rom Theodotion (Lagarde, Mittheilungen, 1884, 204);
this does not cenclusively prove that it is pre-Origenic;
it may he merely a Hexaplaric text with the asterisked
passages omitted (Burkitt, ZB, 1V, 5027). The infiu-
ence of the Hexapla is traceable elsewhere in this VS.

The Ethiopic VS was made in the main from the Gr
and in part at least from an early text; Rahlfs (Sept
Stud., 1, 1904) considers its text of S-K, with that of cod.
B, to be pre-Origenic.

The Vulg or Peshitta Syriac VS was made frem the
Heb, though partly infiuenced by the LXX. But
another Syr VS is of ny importance for the LXX
text, viz. that of Paul, bishop of Tclla (Constantine in
Mesopotamia), executed at Alexandria in 616-17 and
known as the Syro-Hexaplar. This is a hald Syr VS
of the LXX column of the Hexapla, containing the
Hexaplar signs. A MS of the poetical and prophetical
hooks is in the Ambrosian Library at Milan and has heen
edited by Ceriaui (Monumenta sacra et profana, 1874);
fragments of the historical books are also extant (Lagarde
aud Rahlfs, Bibliothecae Syriacae, Géttingen, 1892).
This VS supplements the Gr Hexaplaric MSS and is the
et authority for Origen's text. For the original

8 of Dnl, which has survived in only one late MS, the


Septuagint


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2728


Syro-Hexaplar supplies a second and older authority of
great value.

The Armenian VS (ascribed to the 5th cent.) also owes
its value to its extreme literalness; its text of the
Octateuch is largely Hexaplaric.

A bare mention must suffice of the Arabic VS (of which
the prophetical and poetical books, Job excluded, were
rendered from the LXX); the fragments of the Gothic
VS (made from the Lucianic recension), and the Slavonic
(partly from LXX, also Lucianic) and the Georgian VSS.

For a full description of the Gr MSS see Swete, Intro,
I,ch v. They are divided according te their script (capi-

tals or minuscules) inte uncials and cur-


2. Manu- _ Sives. the former ranging from the 4th cent.
es (four papyrus scraps go back to the 3d
scripts cent.; Nestle in PRE, XXI1I, 208) to the


10th cent. AD, the latter from the 9th to
the 16th cent. AD. Complete Bibles are few; the ma-
jerity contain groups of books only, such as the Pent,
Octateuch (Gen-Ruth), the later historical books, the
Psalter, the 3 or 5 ‘“Sclomenic’’ books, the Prophets
(majer, minor or both). Uncials are commonly denoted
hy capital letters (in the ed of Helmes and Parsons by
Roman figures); cursives, of which over 300 are known, by
Arabic figures; in the larger Cambridge LX X the selected
cursives are denoted by small Roman letters.

The following are the chief uncials containing, or
which ence contained, the whole Bible: B (Vaticanus,
at Rome, 4th cent. AD), adopted as the standard text
in all recent edd; S or x (Sinaiticus, at St. Petersburg
and Leipzig, 4th cent. AD), discovered by Tischendorf
in 1844 and subsequent years in St. Catherine's Convent,
Mt. Sinai; A (Alexandrinus, British Museum, prohably
5th cent. AD); C (Ephraemi rescriptus, Paris, prohably
5th cent.), a palimpsest, the older Bib. matter underlying
a mediaeval Gr text of works of Ephrem the Syrian. For
the Octateuch and historical books: D (Cottonianus,
Brit. Mus., probahly 5th or 6th cent.), fragments of an
iNuminated Gen, the hulk of which perlshed in a fire at
Ashburnham House in 1731, but earlier collations of
Grabe and others are extant, which for the lest por-
tions are cited in the Cambridge texts as D (Dsil, i.e.
silet Grabius, denotes an inference from Grahe's silence
that the MS did not contain a variant); F (Ambro-
sianus, Milan, 4th to 5th cent.), fragments of the Octa-
teuch; G (Sarravianus, fragments at Leyden, Paris and
St. Petershurg, 4th to 5th cent.), important as containing
an Origenic text with the Hexaplar signs; L (Purpureus
Vindobeonensis, Vienna, 5th te 6th cent.), fragments of
an illuminated MS Genesis on purple vellum: M (Coisli-
niauus, Paris, 7th cent.), important on account of its
marginal Hexaplaric matter. For the Prophets, Q (Mar-
chalianus, Rome, 6th cent.) is valuable, both for its text,
which is ‘‘ Hesychian"’ (see abeve), and for its abundant
marginal Hexaplaric matter. A curious mixture of uncial
and cursive writing occurs in E (Bodleianus, prebabl
10th cent.), fragments of the histerical books (to 3
16 28) preserved at Oxford, Cambridge (1 leaf), St. Peters-
burg and London; Tischenderf, whe brought the MS
from the East, retained the tell-tale Cambridge leaf, on
which the transition from uncial to cursive script occurs,
until his death. The long-concealed fact that the
scattered fragments were part of a single MS came to
light through Swete’s identification of the Cambridge
leaf as a continuatiou of the Bodleian fragment. Many
of the cursives still await investigation, as do also the
lectionaries. The latter, though the MSS are mainly
late, should repay study. The use of the LXX for
lectionary purpeses was inherited by the church from
the synagogue, and the course of lessons may partly
represent an old system; light may also be expected from
them on the local distribution of various types of text.

Of the printed text the first four editions were (1) the
Complutensian Pelyglet of Cardinal Ximenes, 1514-17,

comprising the Gr, Heb and Vulg texts,


) the last in the middle place ef honor being
3. Printed compared to Jesus in the midst between
Texts the two thieves (1). The Gr was based on


MSS from the Vatican and onefrem Veuice;
it exhibits on the whole the Lucianic recension, as the
Hesychian is by a curious coincidence represented in
(2) the Aldine ed of 1518, based on Venetian MSS. (3)
The monumental Sixtine ed, published at Rome in 1586
under the auspices of Pope Sixtus V_ and frequently
reprinted, was mainly based on the cod. Vaticanus, the
superiority of which text is justly recognized In the inter-
esting preface (printed in Swete's Intro). (4) The
Eng. ed (Oxford, 1707-20) begun by Grahe (d. 1712) was
based on the cod. Alexandrinus, with aid from other MSS,
and had the peculiarity that he employed Origen’s
critical signs and different sizes of type toe show the
divergence between the Gr and the Heb. Of more
recent edd three are preéminent. (5) The great Oxford
ed of Holmes and Parsous (Oxford, 1798-1827, 5 vols,
folio) was the first attempt to bring together in a gigantic
apparatus criticus all the evidence of uncial and cursive
MSS (upward of 300), VSS and early citations from
Philo and Jos onward. As a monumental storehouse of
materials ‘‘H. and P."' will not be wholly superseded by
the latest ed now (1913) in preparation. (6) The service-
able Cambridge ‘'manual,”’ ed of Swete (1st ed 1887-94,
ed 3, 1901-7, 3 vols, 8vo), Isin the hands of all serious LX X


students. The text is that of B, or (where B fails) of A,
and the apparatus contains the readings of the principal
uncial MSS. New materials discovered since the ed of
H. and P., esp. ced. S, are employed, and greater accuracy
in the presentation of the other evidence has been made
possible by photography. The fact that the text here
puted is but a provisional one is sometimes overlooked.

wete's ed was designed as a precursor to (7) the larger
Cambridge LXX, of which three instalments embracing
the Pent have (1913) appeared (The OT in Gr,ed A.E.
Brooke and N. McLean, Cambridge, 1911 pt. IU,
Nu and Dt). The text is a reprint of Swete's except
that from Ex onward a few alterations of errors in the
primary MS have heen corrected, a delicate task in which
the editors have rejected a few old readings without suffi-
cient regard to the peculiarities of Hellenistic Gr. The
importance of the werk lies in its apparatus, which
presents the readings of all the unciails, VSS and early
citations, and those of a careful representative selection of
the cursives. The materials of H and P are brought
up to date and presented in a more reliable and con-
venient form. esides these there is (8) Lagarde’s
reconstruction of the Lucianic recension of the historical
poe: which, as stated, must be used with caution (see
above).

The task of reconstructing the oldest text is still un-
accomplished. Materials have accumulated, and much
peg nay ‘‘spade-work"’ has been done,
4, R y Lagarde in particular (see his '‘axioms"

° €con- in Swete, Intro, 484 ff) and more recently
struction of by Nestle and Rahifs; but the principles


Original which the editor must follow are not yet
Text finally determined. The extent to which
ex ‘tmixture’’ has affected the decuments is


thestumbling-bleck. Clearly ne single MS
presents the eldest text. That of cod. B, asin the NT, is
on the whole the purest. In the 4 books of Reigns"
(1 S-2 K), e¢.g., it has escaped the grosser interpolations
found in most MSS, and Rahlfs (Sept.-Siudien, I, 1904)
regardsits textaspre-Origenic. Itis, however, of unequal
value and by no means an infallible guide; in Jgs, e.g., its
text is undoubtedly late, no earlierthan the 4th cent. AD,
according to one authority (Moore,''Jgs,"' JCC). Inrela-
tion to two of the 4th-cent. recensions its text is neutral,
neither predominantly Lucianic nor Hexaplaric; but
it has been regarded by some authorities as Hesychian.
Possibly the recension made in the country which pro-
duced the LXX adhered more closely than others to the
primitive text; some ‘‘ Hesychian"’ features in the B text
may preve to be original. Still even its purest portions
contain marks of editorial revision and patent corrup-
tions. Cod. A presents a quite different type of text,
appreximating to that of the MT. In the books of
‘Reigns’ it is practically a Hexaplaric text without the
critical signs, the additional matter being mainly derived
from Aquila. Yet that it contains an ancient element is
shown by the large support given to its readings by the
NT and early Christian writers. Individual MSS must
give place te groups. In order to reconstruct the texts
current hefore Origen's time, it is necessary to isolate the
groups containing the three 4th-cent. recensions, and to
eliminate from the recensions thus recovered all Hexa-
plarlc matter and such changes as appear to have been
introduced by the authors of those recensions. Other
pees brought to light by the larger Cambridge text
ave also to be taken into account. The attempt to
enetrate inte the earlier stages of the history is the
hardest task. The Old Lat VS is here the surest guide;
it has preserved readings which have disappeared from
all Gr MSS, and affords a criterion as to the relative
antiquity of the Gr variants. The evidence of early
Christian and Jewish citations is also valuable. Ulti-
mately, after elimination of all readings proved te be
‘recensional’’ or late, the decision between outstand-
ing variants must depend on internal evidence. These
variants will fall into two classes: (1) those merely
affecting the Gr text, by far the larger number and pre-
senting less difficulty; (2) those which imply a different
Heb text. In adjudicating on the latter Lagarde’s main
axioms have te be berne in mind, that a free tr is to be
preferred to a slavishly literal one, and a tr presupposiug
another Heb original te one based on the MT.


Vil, Number, Titles and Order of Books.—In
addition to the Heb canonical books, the LXX in-
eludes all the books in the Eng. Apoc

1. Contents except 2 Esd (Pr Man only finds a
place among the canticles appended

in some MSS to the Ps) besides a 3d and 4th book
of Mace. Swete further includes in his text as an
appendix of Gr books on the borderland of canon-
icity the Ps of Sol (fonnd in some eursives and men-
tioned in the list in cod. A), the Gr fragments of the
Book of En and the ecclesiastical eanticles above
mentioned. Early Christian writers in quoting
freely from these additional books as Scripture doubt-
less perpetuate a tradition inherited from the Jews
of Alexandria. Most of the books being original


2729


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Septuagint


Gr compositions were ipso facto excluded from a
place in the Heb Canon. Greater latitude as re-
gards canonicity prevailed at Alexandria; the
Pent occupied a place apart, but as regards later
books no very sharp line of demarcation between
“canonical” and “uncanonical’”’ appears to have
been drawn.

Palestinian Jews employed the first word or words
of each book of the Pent to serve as its title; Gen


. e.g. was denoted “in the beginning,”
2. Titles Ex “[And these are the] names’; a
: _ few of the later books have similar
titles. It is to the LXX, through the medium of


the Lat VSS, that we owe the familiar descriptive
titles, mostly suggested by phrases in the Gr VS.
In some books there are traces of rival titles in the
Ptolemaic age. Exodus (‘outgoing’’) is also called
Exagogé (‘leading out”) by Philo and by the Hel-
lenist Ezekiel who gave that name to his drama on
the deliverance from Egypt. Philo has also al-
ternative names for Dt—Epinomis (‘‘after-law’’)
borrowed from the title of a pseudo-Platonic treat-
ise, and for Jgs ‘the Book of Judgments.” The
last title resembles the Alexandrian name for the
books of S and K, viz. the four Books of Kingdoms
or rather Reigns; the name may have been given
in the first place to a partial VS including only the
reigns of the first few monarchs. Jerome’s influ-
ence in this case restored the old Heb names as also
in Ch (=Heb “Words of Days,” ‘“Diaries’’), which
in LXX is entitled Paraleipomena, “omissions,” as

being a supplement to the Books of Reigns.
Another innovation, due apparently to the Gr
translators or later editors, was the breaking up of
some of the long historical narratives


3. Biparti- into volumes of more manageable
tion of compass. In the Heb MSS, S, K, Ch,
Books Ezr-Neh form respectively one book


apiece. In the LXX the first three of
these collections are subdivided into two volumes
as in modern Bibles; an acquaintance with the
other arrangement is, however, indicated in cod. B
by the insertion at the end of 1 R, 3 R, 1 Ch of
the first sentence of the succeeding book, a reminder
.to the reader that a continuation is to follow. Ezr-
Neh, the Gr VS (2 Esd) being made under the
influence of Palestinian tradition, remains undivided.
Originally Ch-Ezr-Neh formed a unit, as was ap-
parently still the case when the oldest Gr VS (1 Esd)
was made. ; :
In the arrangement of books there is_a radical
departure from Palestinian practice. ‘There were
three main unalterable divisions in the
4. Grouping Heb Bible, representing three stages in
and Order the formation of the Canon: Law,
of Books Prophets (“Former,” i.e. Josh, Jgs, 8,
K, and “Latter”)and “Writings.” This
arrangement was known at Alexandria at the end of
the 2d cent. BC (Sir, prol.) but was not followed.
The ‘Writings’? were a miscellaneous collection of
history and poetry with one prophetical book (Dnl).
Alexandrian scholars introduced a more literary and
symmetrical system, bringing together the books
of each class and arranging them with some re-
gard to the supposed chronological order of their
authors. The Law, long before the Gr tr, had
secured a position of supreme sanctity; this group
was left undisturbed, it kept its precedence and
the individual books their order, (Lev and Nu,
however, exchange places in a few lists). The other
two groups are broken up. Ruth is removed from
the “Writings” and attached to Jgs. Ch and Ezr-
Neh are similarly transferred to the end of the his-
torical group. This group, from chronological con-
siderations, is followed by the poetical and _ other
“Writings,” the Prophets coming last (so in B, ete;
in SA prophets precede poets). The internal order


of the Gr Hagiographa, which includes quasi-his-
torical (Est, Tob, Jth) and Wisdom books, is va-
triable. Dn! now first finds a place among the
Prophets. The 12 minor prophets usually precede
the major (S and Western authorities give the Four
precedence), and the order of the first half of their
company is shuffled, apparently on chronological
grounds, Hos being followed by Am, Mic, Joel, Ob,
Jon. Jer has his train of satellites, Bar, Lam (trans-
ferred from the ‘‘Writings”’) and Ep. Jer; Sus and Bel
consort with and form integral parts of Dnl. Va-
riation in the order of books is partly attributable
to the practice of writing each book on a separate
papyrus roll, kept in a cylindrical case; rolls con-
taming kindred matter would tend to be placed in
the same case, but there would be no fixed order for
these separate items until the copying of large
groups in book-form came into vogue (Swete,
Intro, 2251, 2291).

VUE. Characteristics of the Version and Its
Component Parts.—Notwithstanding the uncertain
state of the text, some general characteristics of the
VS are patent. It is clear that, like the Heb itself,
it is not a single book, but a library. It is a series
of VSS and Gr compositions covering well-nigh 400
years, since it includes a few productions of the 2d
cent. AD; the bulk of the tr*, however, fall within
the first half of the period (Sir, prol.).

The tre may be grouped and their chronological

order approximately determined from certain character-

istics of their style. (1) We may inquire

1. Grouping how a Heb word or phrase is rendered in
of LXX


different parts of the work. Diversity of
renderings is not an infallible proof that


Books on different hands have been employed, since
Internal invariahle uniformity in tr is difficult of
Evid attainment and indeed was not the aim

vidence of the Pent translators, who seem rather


to have studied variety of expression. If,
however, a Heb word is consistently rendered by one
Gr word in one portion and by another elsewhere, and
if each of the two portions has other features peculiar
to itself, it becomes highly prohable that the two portions
are the work of different schools. Among “‘test-words”
which yield results of this kind are ‘‘seryant’’ in ‘‘Moses
the servant of the Lord,” ‘‘ Hosts’ in ‘‘Lord of Hosts,"
‘*Philistines"’ (Swete, Intro, 3171; Thackeray, Grammar
of the OT, 7 ff). (2) We may compare the Gr with that
of dated documents of the Ptolemaic age. The trs
were written in the koiné or common” Gr, most of them
in the vernacular variety of it, during a period when this
new cosmopolitan language was in the making; the
ahundant dated papyri enable us to trace some stages in
its evolution. The Petrie and Hiheh papyri of the 3d
cent. BC afford the closest parallels to the Gr Pent.
The following century witnessed a considerable develop-
ment or ‘degeneracy’ in the language, of which traces
may he found in the Gr of the prophetical books. Beside
the vernacular Gr was the literary language of the
** Atticistic’’? school which persistently struggled, with
indifferent success, to recover the literary flavor of the old
Gr masterpieces. This style is represented in the LXX
hy most of the original Gr writings and_by the para-
phrases of some of the “ Writings.”" (3) We may com-
are the Gr books as translations, noting in which hooks
[recuse is allowed and which adhere strictly to the Heb.
The general movement is in the direction of greater
literalism; the later books show an increasing reverence
for the letter of Scripture, resulting in the production
of pedantically literal VSS; the tendency culminated
in the 2d cent. AD in the barbarisms of Aquila. Some
of the “ Writings" were freely handled, because they had
not yet ohtained canonical rank at the time of tr. In-
vestigation on these lines goes to show that the order of
the tr was approzimately that of the Heb Canon. The Gr
Hexateuch may he placed in the 3d cent. BC, the Prophets
mainly In the 2d cent. BC, the “Writings’’ mainly in the
2d and 1st cents. BO.


(1) The Hexateuch—The Gr Pent should un-
doubtedly be regarded as a unit: the Aristeas story
may so far be credited. It is distinguished by a
uniformly high level of the ‘‘common” vernacular
style, combined with faithfulness to the Heb,
rarely lapsing into literalism. It set the standard
which later translators tried to imitate. The text
was more securely established in this portion and
substantial variant readings are comparatively few.
The latter part of Ex is an exception; the Heb had


Septuagint


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2730


here not reached its final form in the 3d cent. BC,
and there is some reason for thinking that the VS
is not the work of the translator of the first half.
In Dt a few new features in vocahulary appear
(e.g. ekklesia; see Hort, Christian Ecclesia, 4 ff).
The Gr VS of Jos forms a link between the Pent and
the later historical hooks. The text was not yet
fixed, and variants are more abundant than in the
Pent. The earliest VS, probably of selections only,
appears from certain common features to have heen
nearly coeval with that of the Law.

(2) The “‘Latter’’ Prophets —There is little doubt
that the next hooks to be tr? were the Prophets in
the narrower sense, and that Isa came first. The
style of the Gr Isa has a close similarity, not wholly
attributable to imitation, to that of the Pent: a
certain freedom of treatment connects it with the
earlier tr period: it was known to the author of
Wisd (Isa 3 10 with Ottley’s n.). The tr shows
“obvious signs of incompetence” (Swete), but the
task was an exacting one. The local Egyp coloring
in the tr is interesting (R. R. Ottley, Book of Isa
according to the LXX, 2 vols, Gr text of A, tr and
notes, Cambridge, 1904-6, with review in JTS, X,
299). Jer, Ezk and the Minor Prophets were
probably tr? en bloc or nearly so. The Palestinian
Canon had now been enlarged by a second group of
Scriptures and this stimulated a desire among
Alexandrian Jews to possess the entire collection of
the Prophets in Gr. The undertaking seems to
have heen a formal and quasi-official one, not a
haphazard growth. For it has heen ascertained
that Jer and Ezk were divided for tr purposes into
two nearly equal parts; a change in the Gr style
occurs at the junctures. In Jer the break occurs
in ch 29 (LXX order); the clearest criterion of the
two styles is the twofold rendermg of ‘Thus saith
the Lord.” The last ch (62) is probably a later
addition in the Gr. The translator of the second
half of Jer also tr the first half of Bar (1 1—3 8);
he was incompetent and his work, if our text may
be relied on, affords flagrant examples of Gr words
being selected to render Heh words which he did not
understand merely because of their similar sound.
Ezk is similarly divided, but here the translator of
the first half (chs 1-27) undertook the difficult
last quarter ag well (chs 40-48), the remainder
being left to a second worker. An outstanding
test is afforded by the renderings of the refrain,
“They shall know that I am the Lord.” The Gr
VS of “the twelve” shows no trace of a similar di-
vision; in its style it is closely akin to the first half
of Ezk and is perhaps by the same hand (J7'S, IV,
245, 398, 578). But this official VS of the Prophets
had probably been preceded by VSS of short pas-
sages selected to be read on the festivals in the
synagogues. Lectionary requirements occasioned the
earliest VSS of the Prophets, possibly of the Pent
as well. Two indications of this have been traced.
There exists in four MSS a Gr VS of the Psalm
of Habakkuk (Hab 3), a chapter which has been
a Jewish lesson for Pentecost from the earliest
times, independent of and apparently older than the
LXX and made for synagogue use. Similarly in
Ezk LXX there is a section of sixteen verses (36
24-38) with a style quite distinct from that of its
context. This passage was also an early Christian
lesson for Pentecost, and its lectionary use was
inherited from Judaism. Here the LXX trans-
lators seem to have incorporated the older VS,
whereas in Hab 3 they rejected it (J TS, XII, 191;
IV, 407).

(3) Partial version of the “Former” Prophets (1-3
R).—The Gr style indicates that the history of
the monarchy was not all tr? at once. Ulfilas is
said to have omitted these books from the Gothic
VS as likely to inflame the military temper of his


race; for another reason the Gr translators were at
first content with a partial VS. They omitted as
unedifying the more disastrous portions, David’s
sin with the subsequent calamities of his reign and
the later history of the divided monarchy culmi-
nating in the captivity. Probably the earliest VSS
embraced only (1) 1 R, (2) 2R 1 1—11 1 (David’s
early reign), (3) 3 R 2 12—21 13 (Solomon and
the beginning of the divided monarchy); the third
hook of ‘Reigns’ opened with the accession of
Solomon (as in Lucian’s text), not at the point
where I K opens. These earlier portions are
written in a freer style than the rest of the Gr
“Reigns,” and the Heb original differed widely in
places from that tr? in the Eng. Bible (J 7S, VIII,
262).

(4) The “Writings.’—The Hagiographa at the
end of the 2d cent. BC were regarded as national lit.
(Sir, prol. “the other books of our fathers’), but
not as canonical. The translators did not scruple
to treat these with great freedom, undeterred by
the prohibition against alteration of Scripture (Dt
4 2; 12 32). Free paraphrases of extracts were
produced, sometimes with legendary additions. A
partial VS of Job (one-sixth being omitted) was
among the first; Aristeas, the historian of the 2d
cent. BC, seems to have been acquainted with it
(Freudenthal, Hellenistische Studien, 1875, 136 ff).
The translator was a student of the Gr poets; his VS
was probably produced for the general reader, not
for the synagogues. Hatch’s theory (Essays in Bib.
Gr, 1889, 214) that his Heb text, was shorter than
ours and was expanded later is untenable; avoid-
ance of anthropomorphisms explains some omis-
sions, the reason for others is obscure. The first
Gr narrative of the return from exile (1 Esd) was
probably a similar VS of extracts only from Ch-Ezr-
Neh, grouped round a fable of non-Jewish origin, the
story of the 3 youths at the court of Darius. The
work is a fragment, the end heing lost, and it has
been contended by some critics that the VS once
embraced the whole of Ch-Ezr-Neh (C. C. Torrey,
Ezra Studies, Chicago, 1910). The Gr is obviously
earlier than Esd B and is of great value for the re-
construction of the Heh. The same translator
appears from peculiarities of diction to have pro-
duced the earliest VS of Dnl, treating it with similar
freedom and incorporating extraneous matter (the
Three Children, Sus, Bel). The maximum of inter-
polation is reached in Est, where the Gr additions
make up two-thirds of the story. The Gr Prov
(prohably Ist cent. BC) includes many maxims not
in the Heb; some of these appear to he derived from
a lost Heb collection, others are of purely Gr origin.
This translator also knew and imitated the Gr
classics; the numerous fragments of iambic and
hexameter verse in the tr cannot be accidental
(JTS, XIII, 46). The Psalter is the one tr in this
category in which liberties have not heen taken;
in Ps 13 [14] 3 the extracts from other parts of Pss
and from Isa included in the B text must be an
interpolation possibly made before St. Paul’s time
(Rom 3 13 ff), or else taken from Rom. The little
Ps 151 in LXX, described in the title as an “‘auto-
graph” work of David and as ‘outside the numher,”
is clearly a late Gr production, perhaps an appendix
added after the VS was complete.

(5) The latest LXX translations.—The latest VSS
included in the LXX are the productions of the
Jewish translators of the 2d cent. AD; some books
may be rather earlier, the work of pioneers in the
new school which advocated strict adherence to the
Heb. The books of “Reigns” were now completed,
hy Theodotion, perhaps, or by one of his school;
the later portions (2 R 11 2—3 R 2 11, David’s
downfall, and 3 R 22—4 R end, the downfall of
the monarchy) are by one hand, as shown by pecu-


2731


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Septuagint


larities in style, e.g. “I am have with child” (2 R
11 5)="T am with child,” a use which is due to a
desire to distinguish the longer form of the pro-
noun ’dnokhi (‘T,” also used for “I am’’) from the
shorter ’dn7. A complete VS of Jgs was now prob-
ably first made. In two cases the old paraphrastic
VSS were replaced. Theodotion’s Dnl, as above
stated, superseded in the Christian church the older
VS. A new and complete VS of Ch-Ezr-Neh was
made (Esd B), though the older VS retained its
lace in the Gr Bible on account of the interesting
legend imbedded in it; the new VS is here again
possibly the work of Theodotion; the numerous
transliterations are characteristic of him (Torrey,
Ezra Studies; the theory had previously been ad-
vanced by Sir H. Howorth). In the Gr Eccl we
have a specimen of Aquila’s style (see McNeile’s ed,
Cambridge, 1904). Canticles is another late VS.
A marked feature of the whole tr is the scrupu-
lous avoidance of anthropomorphisms and phrases
derogatory to the Divime transcend-
2. General ence. Thus Ex 4 16, “Thou shalt
Character- be to him in things pertaining to God”’
istics (Heb “for” or “fas God”); 16 3, “The
Lord is a breaker of battles’? (Heb ‘a
Man of war’); 24 10, ‘They saw the place where
the God of Israel stood” (Heb “‘they saw the God
of Israel”); ver 11, “Of the elect of Israel not one
perished and they were seen in the place of God”
(Heb “Upon the nobles... . He laid not His
hand, and they beheld God’’). The comparison of
God to a rock was consistently paraphrased as
idolatrous, as was sometimes the comparison to the
sun from fear of sun-worship (Ps 83 [84] 12, ‘““The
Lord loves mercy and truth” for Heb ‘The Lord is
a sun and shield”). ‘The sons of God” (Gen 6 2)
becomes “the angels of God.’ For minor liberties,
e.g. slight amplifications, interpretation of difficult
words, substitution of Gr for Heb coinage, tr of
place-names, see Swete, Intro, 323ff. Blunders in
tr are not uncommon, but the difficulties which
these pioneers had to face must be remembered, esp.
the paleographical character of the Heb originals.
These were written on flimsy papyrus rolls, in a
script. probably in a transitional stage between the
archaic and the later square characters; the words
were not separated, and there were no vowel-points;
two of the radicals (waw and yodh) were also fre-
quently omitted. Add to this the absence at Alex-
andria, for parts at least of the Scriptures, of any
sound tradition as to the meaning. On the other
hand the vocalization adopted by the translators,
e.g. in the proper names, is of great value in the his-
tory of early Sem pronunciation. It must further
be remembered that the Sem language most famil-
iar to them was not Heb but Aram.,and some mis-
takes are due to Aram. or even Arab. colloquialisms
Swete, Intro, 319).
IX, ‘Salient Differences between Greek and He-
brew Texts.—Differences indicating a Heb original
other than the MT affect either the sequence or
the subject-matter (cf Swete, Intro, 231 ff).
The most extensive discrepancies in arrangement
of materials occur in (1) Ex 36—39, the construc-
tion of the Tabernacle and the orna-
1. Sequence ments of its ministers, (2) 3 R 4-11,
Solomon’s reign, (3) Jer (ast half),
(4) Prov (end). (1) InExthe LXX gives precedence
to the priests’ ornaments, which in the Heb follow
the account of the Tabernacle, and omits altogether
the altar of incense. The whole section describing
the execution of the instructions given in the pre-
vious chapters in almost identical words is one of
the latest portions of the Pent and the text had
clearly not been finally fixed in the 3d cent. BC; the
section was perhaps absent from the oldest Gr VS.
In Ex 20 13-15 cod. B arranges three of the com-


mandments in the Alexandrian order (7, 8, 6), at-
tested in Philo and in the NT. (2) Deliberate re-
arrangement has taken place in the history of Solo-
mon, and the LXX unquestionably preserves the
older text. The narrative of the building of the
Temple, like that of the Tabernacle, contains some
of the clearest examples of editorial revision in the
MT (Wellhausen, Hist of Israel, 67, 280, etc). At
the end of 3 R LXX places chs 20 and 21 in their
proper order; MT reverses this, interposing the
Naboth story in the connected account of the
Syr wars and justifying the change by a short pref-
ace. (3) In Jer the chapter numhers differ from the
middle of ch 25 to the end of ch 61, the historical
appendix (ch 62) concluding both texts. This is
due to the different position assigned to a group of
prophecies against the nations: LXX places them
in the center, MT at the end. The items in this
group are also rearranged. The diversity in order
is earlier than the Gr tr; see JTS, IV, 245. (4)
The order of some groups of maxims at the end of
Prov was not finally fixed at the time of the Gr
tr; like Jeremiah’s prophecies against the nations,
these little groups seem to have circulated as late
as the 2d or 1st cent. BC as separate pamphlets.
The Ps numbers from 10 to 147 differ by one in
LXX and MT, owing to discrepancies in the lines
of demarcation between individual pss.
Excluding the end of Ex, striking examples of
divergence in the Pent are few. LXX alone pre-
serves Cain’s words to his brother,
2. Subject- ‘Let us go into the field” (Gen 4 8).


Matter The close of Moses’ song appears in
an expanded form in LXX (Dt 32
43). Similarly Hannah’s song in 1 R 2 (? originally


@ warrior’s triumph-song) has been rendered more
appropriate to the occasion by the substitution in
ver 8c of words about the answer to prayer, and
enlarged by the insertion of a passage from Jer;
the changes in both songs may be connected with
their early use as canticles. In Josh the larger
amount of divergence suggests that this book did
not share the peculiar sanctity of the Law. But
the books of ‘‘Reigns” present the widest differences
and the fullest scope for the textual eritic. The
LXX here proves the existence of two independent
accounts of certain events. Sometimes it incor-
porates both, while the MT rejects one of them;
thus LXX gives (3 R 2 35a ff.46a ff) a connected
summary of events in Solomon’s personal history;
most of which appear elsewhere in a detached form,
12 24a-z is a second account of the dismemberment
of the kingdom; 16 28a-h a second summary of
Jehoshaphat’s reign (cf 22 41 ff); 4 R1 18a
another summary of Joram’s reign (cf 3 1 ff).
Conversely in 1 R 17-18, MT has apparently pre-
served two contradictory accounts of events in
David's early history, while LAX presents a shorter
and consistent narrative (Swete, Intro, 245f). An
“addition” in LXX of the highest interest appears
in 3 R 8 530, where a stanza is put into the mouth
of Solomon at the Temple dedication, taken from
“the Song-book” (probably the Book of Jashar);
the MT gives the stanza in an edited form earlier in
the chapter (8 12f); for the reconstruction of the
original Heb see JTS, X, 439; XI, 518. The last
line proves to be a title, “For the Sabbath—On
Alamoth” (i.e. for sopranos), showing that the song
was set to music for liturgical purposes. In Jer,
besides transpositions, the two texts differ widely
in the way of excess and defect; the verdict of
critics is mainly in favor of the priority of the LXX
(Streane, Double Text of Jer, 1896). For diver-
gences in the “Writings” see VITI, above; for addi-
tional titles to the Pss see Swete, Intro, 250 f.


LITERATURE.—The most important works have been
mentioned in the body of the article. See, further, the


Sepulchre
Sermon on Mount


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2732


very full lists in Swete’s Intro and_the bibliographies
by Nestle in PRE}, III, 1-24, and XXIII, 207-10 (1913);
ADB, IV, 453-54.
H. St. J. THackpray
SEPULCHRE, sep’ul-kér (2 Ch 21 20; 32 33;
Jn 19 41f; Acts 2 29, etc). See Burrat; Jeru-
sALEM, VIII.


SERAH, sé’ra (TW, serah, “abundance”):
Daughter of Asher (Gen 46 17; Nu 26 46, AV
“Sarah”; 1 Ch 7 30).


SERAIAH, sé-ra’ya, sé-ri’a CMW, srayahi,
“Jeh hath prevailed’; LXX Zapatlas, Saraias, or,
Zapata, Saraia):

(1) Secretary of David (2 8 8 17); in 2S 20
25 he is called Sheva; in1 K 4 3 the name appears
as Shisha. This last or Shasha would be restored
elsewhere by some critics; others prefer the form
Shavsha, which is found in 1 Ch 18 16.

(2) A high priest in the reign of Zedekiah; exe-
cuted with other prominent captives at Riblah by
order of Nebuchadnezzar (2 Ix 25 18.21; Jer 52
24.27). Mentioned in the list of high priests (1 Ch
6 14). Ezra claims descent from him (Ezr 7 1[3]).
See Azaratas; SaRAIJAS.

(3) The son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and
one of the heroic band of men who saved themselves
from the fury of Nebuchadnezzar when he stormed
Jerus. They repaired to Gedaliah, the son of Ahi-
kam, but killed him on account of his allegiance to
the Chaldaeans (2 IK 26 23.25).

(4) Son of Kenaz, and younger brother of Oth-
niel, and father of Joab, the chief of Ge-harashim
(1 Ch 4 13.14).

(5) Grandfather of Jehu, of the tribe of Simeon
(1 Ch 4 35).

(6) A priest, the third in the list of those who
returned from Babylon to Jerus with Zerubbabel
(Ezr 2 2; Neh 7 7, here called Azariah; 12 1),
and third also (if the same person is meant) in the
record of those who sealed the covenant binding all
Jews not to take foreign wives (Neh 10 2). As the
son of Hilkiah, and consequently a direct descend-
ant of the priestly family, he became governor of
the temple when it was rebuilt (Neh 11 11). He
is mentioned (under the name Azariah) also in 1
Ch 9 11. Neh 12 2 adds that “‘in the days of Joi-
akim” the head of Seraiah’s house was Meraiah.

(7) Son of Azriel, one of those whom Jehoiakim
commanded to imprison Jeremiah and Baruch, the
son of Neriah (Jer 36 26).

(8) The son of Neriah, who went into exile with
Zedekiah. He was also called Sar Menthah
(‘prince of repose”). The Tg renders Sar Menuhah
by Rabh Tikrabhia’, “prince of battle,” and LXX by
dpxwv dwpwyv, drchdn dérén, “prince of gifts,’”’ reading
Minhah for Menthah. At the request of Jeremiah
he carried with him in his exile the passages contain-
ing the prophet’s warning of the fall of Babylon,
written in a book which he was bidden to bind to a
stone and cast into the Euphrates, to symbolize
the fall of Babylon (Jer 51 59-64).

Horace J. Wor

SERAPHIM, ser’a-fim (O°DW, s‘rdphim): A
pl. word oceurring only in Isa 6 2 ff—Isaiah’s
vision of Jeh. The origin of the term in Heb is
uncertain. Sdréphin Nu 21 6; Isa .14 29, ete, sig-
nifies a fiery serpent. A Bab name for the fire-god,
Nergal, was Sharrapu. In Egypt there have been
found eagle-lion-shaped figures guarding a grave,
to which is applied the name seref. The equivalent
Eng. term is “griffin.”

It is probable enough that popular mythology
connected fire with the attendants of the deity in
various ways among different peoples, and that
burning lies at the base of the idea in all these sug-


gested etymologies. It remains, however, that in
Isaiah’s-use there is nothing of the popular legend
or superstition. These seraphim are august beings
whose forms are not at all fully described. They
had faces, feet, hands and wings. ‘The six wings, in
three pairs, covered their faces and feet in humility
and reverence, and were used for sustaming them
in their positions about the throne of Jeh. One of
them is the agent for burning (with a coal off the
altar, not with his own power or person) the sin
from the lips of the prophet.

Seraphim are in Jewish theology connected with
cherubim and ophanim as the three highest orders
of attendants on Jeh, and are superior to the angels
who are messengers sent on various errands. As
the cherubim in popular fancy were represented by
the storm-clouds, so the seraphim were by the
serpentine flashes of the hghtnmg; but none of this
appears in Isaiah’s vision.

In the NT the only possible equivalent is in “the
living ones’ (‘‘beasts” of AV) in Rev 4, 5, ete.
Here, as in Isa, they appear nearest Jeh’s throne,
supreme in praise of His holiness.

WILLIAM OWEN CaRVER

SERAR, sé‘rar (Zepdp, Serdr; AV Aserer): Name
of one of the families which returned with Zerub-
babel (1 Esd 5 32)=‘‘Sisera” of Ezr 2 53; Neh
7 55.


SERED, sé‘red (3°10, seredh): Son of Zebulun
(Gen 46 14; Nu 26 26).


SERGIUS PAULUS, sdr’ji-us pé’lus.
Pautus, SERGIUS.


SERJEANTS, sir’jents, -jants (saPSo0txo, rhab-
dotichot): In Acts 16 35.38 the word (lit. “holders
of rods,” corresponding to Rom “‘lictors,” thus
RVm) is used of the officers in attendance on the
Philippian magistrates, whose duty it was to exe-
cute orders in scourging, etc, in this case in setting
prisoners free. Paul and Silas, however, as Romans,
refused thus to be “privily” dismissed.


SERMON, sdr’mun, ON THE MOUNT, THE:


See


. PARALLEL Accounts
II. Histroriciry or THE Discourse
Ill. Time anp Occasion
IV. Scene
. Tae Hearers
VI. Tur Messaoe:
1. Analysis
2. Argument: The Kingdom of God (Heaven)
5 Characteristics of the Subjects
2) Vocation of the Subjects
(3) Relation of New Righteousness to Mosale


aw.
in The Relation Defined

b) The Relation Illustrated
Motives and Principles of Conduct
(a) In Worship

eh In Life’s Purpose

c) In Social Relations

Hortatory Conclusion

(a) The Narrow Way

(6) The Tests of Character

VII. Principies


LiteRaTURB


The Sermon on the Mount is the title commonly
given to the collection of sayings recorded in Mt 5-7
and in Lk 6 20-49. The latter is sometimes called
the Sermon on the Plain from the fact that it is
said to have been delivered on a level space some-
where on the descent of the mountain. The Sermon
appears to be an epitome of the teachings of Jesus
concerning the kingdom of heaven, its subjects and
their life. For this reason it has always held the
first place of attention and esteem among the sayings
of Jesus. See SERMON ON THE PLAIN.

1. Parallel Accounts.—As indicated above, the
Sermon is reported by both Matthew and Luke.


SumMMaRY


—


(4


(Cs)


~~


2733


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sepulchre
Sermon on Mount


A comparison of the two accounts reveals certain
striking differences. A total of 47 verses of the
account in Mt have no parallel in Lk, while but 43
verses of the latter arc wanting in the former. On
the other hand, many of the sayings in Mt that are
lacking in the Sermon of Lk, amounting in all to 34
verscs, appcar elsewhere distributed throughout
the Lukan narrative and im some instances con-
nected with different incidents and circumstances.


_ These facts give rise to some interesting literary and
historical questions: Do the twe accounts represent two
distinct discourses dealing with tho same general theme
but spoken on different occasions, or are they simply
different reports ef the same discourse? If it be held
that the Sermcn was delivered but once, which of the
accounts represents more closely the original address?
Is the discourse in Mt homogeneous or does it Include
sayings originally spoken on ether occasions and early
incorporated in the Sermon in the gospel tradition ?

Hl, Historicity of the Discourse.—There have been
and are today schclars who regard the sermons recorded
in Mt and Lk as collections of sayings spoken on different
eccasions, and maintain that they de not represent any
cennected discourse ever delivered by Jesus. In their
view the Sermen is either a free compilation by the
evangelists or a product of apostclic teaching and cral
tradition.

The prevailing opinion among NT scholars is, however,
that the gospel accounts represent a genuine histcrical
discourse. The Sermon as recorded in Mt bears such
marks of inner unity ef theme and exposition as to give
the appearance of genuineness. That Jesus should
deliver a discourse of this kind accords with all the cir-
cumstances and with the purpose _of His ministry.
Besides, we know that in His teaching He was accustomed
to speak to the multitudes at length, and we should
expect Him to give early in His ministry some formal
exposition of the kingdom, the burden of His first preach-
ing. That such a summary of one of His most impertant
discourses should have been preserved is altegether
prebable.

On the other hand, it may be conceded that the
accounts need not necessarily be regarded as full or
exact reports of the discourse but possibly and prebably
rather summaries of its theme and substance. Our
Lerd was accustomed to teach at length, bnt this dis-
course could easily be delivered in afew minutes. Again,
while His pepular teaching was marked by a unique
wealth of illustration the Sermon is largely gnomic in
form. This gnomic style and the paucity of the usual
concrete and illustrative elements suggest the probability
ef condensation in transmission. Moreover, it is hardly
prebable that such an address of Jesus would be recorded
at ehe time of its delivery or would be remembered in
detail.


There is evidence that the account in Mt 5-7
contains some sayings not included in the original
discourse. This view is confirmed by the fact
that a number of the sayings are given in Luke's
Gospel in settings that appear more original. It
is easy to believe that related sayings spoken on
other occasions may have become associated with
the Sermon in apostolic teaching and thus handed
down with it, but if the discourse were well known in
a specific form, such as that recorded in Mt, it is
hardly conceivable that Luke or anyone else would
break it up and distribute the fragments or associate
them with other incidents,as some of the sayings
recorded in both Gospels are found associated in
Lk.

WW. Time and Occasion.—Both Matthew and
Luke agree in assigning the delivery of the Sermon to
the first half of the Galilean ministry. The former
apparently places it a little earlier than the latter, in
whose account it follows immediately after the
appointment of the twelve apostles. While the
time cannot be accurately determined, the position
assigned by the Gospels is approximately correct
and is supported by the internal evidence. | Por-
tions of the Sermon imply that the opposition of
the religious teachers was already in evidence, but
it clearly belongs to the first year of Our Lord's
ministry before that opposition had become serious.
On the other hand, the occasion was sufficiently late
for the popularity of the new Teacher to have reached
its climax. In the early Galilean ministry Jesus
confined His teaching to the synagogues, but later,


1


when the great crowds pressed about Him, He re-
sorted to open-air preaching after the manner of
theSermon. Along with the growth in His popular-
ity there is observed a change in the character of
His teaching. His earlier message may be summed
up in the formula, ‘‘Repent yc; for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand” (Mt 4 17). Later, both in His
public discourses and in His more intimate con-
ferences with His disciples, He was occupied with
the principles of the kingdom. The Scrmon on
the Mount bclongs to this later type of teaching
and fits naturally ito the circumstances to which it
has been assigned. Luke probably gives the true
historical occasion, i.e. the appointment of the
Twelve.

IV. Scene.—According to the evangelists, the
scene of the delivery of the Sermon was one of the
mountains or foothills surrounding the Galilean
plain. Probably one of the hills lying N.W. of
Capernaum is meant, for shortly after the Sermon
we find Jesus and His disciples entering that city.
There are no data justifying a closer identification
of the place. There is a tradition dating from the
time of the Crusades that identifies the mount. of
the Sermon with Karn Hattin, a two-peaked hill
on the road from Tiberias to Nazareth, but there are
no means of confirming this late tradition and the
identification is rather improbable.

V. The Hearers.—The Sermon was evidently
addressed, primarily, to the disciples of Jesus.
This is the apparent meaning of the account of both
evangelists. According to Matthew, Jesus, “‘seeing
the multitudes, . . . . went up into the mountain:
and when he had sat down, his disciples came unto
him: and he opened his mouth and taught them.”
Theseparation from the multitudes and the direction
of His words to the disciples seem clear, and the
distinction appears intentional on the part of the
writer. However, it must be observed that in
the closing comments on the Sermon the presence
of the multitudes is implied. In Luke’s account
the distinction is less marked. Here the order of
events is: the night of prayer in the mountain, the
choice of the twelve apostles, the descent with
them into the presence of the multitude of His
disciples and a great number of people from Judaea,
Jerus and the coast country, the healing of great
numbers, and, finally, the address. While the
continued presence of the multitudes is implied,
the plain meaning of the words, “And he lifted up
his eyes on his disciples, and said,” is that his
address was intended esp. for the latter. This
view is borne out by the address itself as recorded in
both accounts. Observe the use of the second
person in the reference to suffering, poverty and
persecution for the sake of the Son of Man. Further
the sayings concerning the ‘‘salt of the earth” and
“the light of the world’ could hardly have been
addressed to any but His disciples. The term
disciple, however, was doubtless employed in the
broader sense by both evangelists. ‘This is clearly
the case in Matthew’s account, according to which
the Twelve had not yet been appointed.

VI. The Message: A Summary.—It is hardly
proper to speak of the Sermon on the Mount as a
digest of the teaching of Jesus, for it does not include
any reference to some very important subjects dis-
cussed by Our Lord on other occasions in the
course of His ministry. It is, however, the most
comprehensive and important collection or summary
of His sayings that is preserved to us in the gospel
record. For this reason the Sermon properly holds
in Christian thought the first place of esteem among
all the NT messages. As an exposition of the ideal
life and the program of the new society which Jesus
proposed to create, its interpretation is of the
deepest interest, and the profoundest concern.


Sermon on Mount


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2734


It may assist the student of the Sermon in arriving at
a clear appreciation of the argument and the salient
ius ine eC OUee pene whole is
: rst viewed in outline. ere is some
1. Analysis Gifterence of opinion among scholars as
to certain features of the analysis, and
consequently various outHnes have been presented hy
different writers. Those of C. W. Votaw in 4DB, Canon
Gore in The Sermon on the Mount, and H. C. King in The
Ethics of Jesus are worthy of special mention. The fol-
lowing analysis of the Sermon as recorded by Matthew
is given as the basis of the present discussion.

It is not implied that there was any such formal plan
before the mind of Jesus as He spoke, but it is believed
that the outline presents a faithful syllabus of the argu-
ment of the Sermon as preserved to us.

THEME: THE KINGDOM OF GOD (HEAVEN), ITS SUBJECTS
AND ITS RIGHTEOUSNESS (§ 3—% 27).


I. The subjects of the kingdom (5 3-16).

1. The qualities of character essential to happi-
ness and influence (vs 3~12).

2. The vocation of the subjects (vs 13-16).

Il. The relation of the new righteousness to the Mosaic
Law (5 17-48).

1. The relation defined as that of continuance in a
higher fulfilment (vs 17-20).

2. The higher fulfilment of the new righteousness
illustrated by a comparison of its principles with
the Mosaic Law as currently taught and prac-
tised (vs 21-48).

(1) The higher law of brotherhood judges ill-
will as murder (vs 21~26).

(2) The higher law of purity condemns lust as
adultery (vs 27-32).

(3) The higher law of truth forbids oaths as
unnecessary and evil (vs 33-37).

(4) The higher law of rights substitutes
self-restraint and generosity for retaliation
and resistance (vs 38-42).

(5) The higher law of love demands universal
‘good will of a snpernatural quality like that
of the Father (vs 43-48).

III. The new righteousness. Its motives as applied
to_ religious, practical and social duties, or the
principles of conduct (6 1—7 12).

1. Reverence toward the Father essential in all

acts of worship (6 1-18).
(1) In all duties (ver 1).
(2) In almsgiving (vs 2-4).
(3) In prayer (vs 5-15).
(4) In fasting (vs_16—-18).
. Loyalty toward the Father fundamental in all
activities (6 19-34).
(1) In treasure-seeking (vs 19-24).
(2) 1n trustful devotion to the kingdom and the

Father’s righteousness (vs 25-34).

3. Love toward the Father dynamic in all social
relations (7 1-12).

(1) Critical estimate of self instead of censorious
judgment of others (vs 1-5).

(2) Discrimination in the communication of
spiritual values ace 6).

(3) Kindness toward others in all things like
the Father’s kindness toward all His chil-
dren (vs 7-12).

IV. Hortatory conclusion (7 13-27).

1. The two gates and the two ways (vs 13-14).

2. The tests of character (vs 15-27).


(1) Charecteristics of the subjects (& 8-12).—
The Sermon opens with the familiar Beatitudes.
Unlike many reformers, Jesus begins
2. Argu- the exposition of His program with a
ment: The promise of happiness, with a blessing
Kingdom of rather than a curse. He thus con-
God nects His program directly with the
(Heaven) hopes of His hearers, for the central
features in the current Messianic con-
ception were deliverance and happiness. But the
conditions of happiness proposed were in strong con-
trast with those in the popular thought. Happiness
does not consist, says Jesus, in what one possesses,
in lands and houses, in social position, in intellectual
attainments, but in the wealth of the inner life, in
moral strength, in self-control, in spiritual insight,
in the character one is able to form within himself
and in the service he is able to render to his fellow-
men. Happiness, then, like character, is a by-
product of right living. It is presented as the fruit,
not as the object of endeavor.
It is interesting to note that character is the secret
of happiness both for the individual and for socicty.
There are two groups of Beatitudes. The first four


ty


deal with personal qualities: humility, penitence,
self-control, desire for righteousness. These are the
sources of inner peace. The second group deals
with social qualities; mercifulness toward others,
purity of heart or reverence for personality, peace-
making or solicitude for others, self-sacrificing loy-
alty to righteousness. These are the sources of
social rest. The blessings of the kingdom are social
as well as individual.

(2) Vocation of the subjects (8 13-16)—Men of the
qualities described in the Beatitudes are called ‘the
salt of the earth,” “the light of the world.” Their
happiness is not, then, in themselves or for them-
selves alone. Their mission is the hope of the
kingdom. Salt is a preservative element; light
is a life-giving one; but the world is not eager to
be preserved or willing to receive life. Therefore
such men must expect opposition and persecution,
but they are not on that account to withdraw from
the world. On the contrary, by the leaven of
character and the hght of example they are to help
others in the appreciation and the attainment of
the ideal life. By their character and deeds they
are to make their influence a force for good in the
lives of men. In this sense the men of the kingdom
are the salt of the earth, the light of the world.
See BeatTITUDEs.

(3) The relation of the new righteousness to the
Mosaic Law (5 17-48).—(a) Relation defined
(6 17-20): The qualities of character thus set before
the citizens of the kingdom were so surprising and
revolutionary as to suggest the inquiry: What is
the relation of the new teaching to the Mosaic Law?
This Jesus defines as continuance and fulfilment.
His hearers are not to think that He has come to
destroy the law. On the contrary, He has come
to conserve and fulfil, The old law is imperfect,
but God does not despair of what is imperfect.
Men and institutions are judged, not by the level of
present attainment, but by character and direction.
The law moves in the right direction and is so
valuable that those who violate even its least pre-
cepts have a very low place in the kingdom.

The new righteousness then does not set aside
the law or offer an easier religion, but. one that is
more exacting. The kingdom is concerned, not so
much with ceremonies and external rules, as with
motives and with social virtues, with self-control,
purity, honesty and generosity. So much higher
are the new standards of righteousness that Jesus
is constrained to warn His hearers that to secure
even a place in the kingdom, their righteousness
must exceed that of the scribes and Pharisees.

(b) The relation illustrated (5 21-48): In illustra-
tion of the deeper meaning of the new righteousness
and its relation to the Mosaic Law, Jesus proceeds to
deal in detail with the precepts of the old moral
law, deepening it as He proceeds into the higher
law of the kingdom. In each instance the standard
of judgment is raised and the individual precepts
are deepened into spiritual principles that call for
perfect fulfilment. In considering specific precepts
no account is taken of overt acts, for in the new
righteousness they are impossible. All acts are
treated as expressions of the inner life. The law
is carried back to the impulse and the will to sin,
and these are judged as in the old law the completed
acts were judged. Therefore all anger and lust in
the heart are strictly enjoined. Likewise every
word is raised to a sacredness equal with that of the
most solemn religious vow or oath. Finally, the
instinct to avenge is entirely forbidden, and uni-
versal love like that of the Father is made the funda-
mental law of the new social life. Thus Jesus does
not abrogate any law but interprets its precepts
in terms that call for a deeper and more perfect
fulfilment.


2735


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA  Sermonon Mount


(4) Motives and principles of conduct (6 1—7 12).
—The relation of His teaching to the law defined,
Jesus proceeds to explain the motives and principles
of conduct as applied to religious and social duties.

(a) In worship (6 1-18): In the section 6 1—7 12
there is one central thought. All righteousness
looks toward God. He is at once the source and
the aim of life. Therefore worship aims alone at
Divine praise. If acts of worship are performed
before men to be seen of them there is no reward
for them before the Father. In this Jesus is passing
no slight on public worship. He Himself instituted
the Lord’s Supper and authorized the continuance
of the rite of baptism. Such acts have their proper
value. His censure is aimed at the love of ostenta-
tion so often associated with them. The root of
ostentation is selfishness, and selfishness has no part
in the new righteousness. Any selfish desire for
the approval of men thwarts the purpose of all
worship. The object of almsgiving, of prayer or
of fasting is the expression of brotherly love, com-
munion with God or spiritual enrichment. The
possibility of any of these is excluded by the pres-
ence of the desire for the approval of men. It is
not merely a Divine fiat but one of the deeper laws
of life which decrees that the only possible reward
for acts of worship performed from such false
motives is the cheap approval of men as well as the
impoverishment of the inner life.

(b) In life’s purpose (6 19-34): The same
principle holds, says Jesus, in the matter of life’s
purpose. There is only one treasure worthy of
man’s search, only one object worthy of his highest
endeavor, and that is the kingdom of God and His
righteousness. Besides, there can be no division
of aim. God will be first and only. Material
blessings must not be set before duty to Him or to
men. With any lower aim the new righteousness
would be no better than that of the Gentiles. And
such a demand is reasonable, for God’s gracious
providence is ample guaranty that He will supply
all things needful for the accomplishment of the
purposes He has planned for our lives. So in our
vocations as in our worship, God is the supreme and
effectual motive. : :

(c) In social relations (7 1-12): Then again
because God is our Father and the supreme object
of desire for all men, great reverence is due toward
others. Considerate helpfulness must replace the
censorious spirit. For the same reason men will
have too great reverence for spiritual values to cast
them carelessly before the unworthy. Moreover,
because God is so gracious and ready to bestow the
best gifts freely upon His children, the men of the
kingdom are under profound obligation to observe
the higher law of brotherhood expressed in the
Golden Rule: “All things .... whatsoever ye would
that men should do unto you, even so do ye also
untothem.” Thus in the perfect law of the Father-
hood of God and the brotherhood of men the new
righteousness makes perfect the Law and the
Prophets.

(3) Hortatory conclusion (7 13-27).—(a) The
narrow way (7 13-14): In the hortatory con-
clusion (7 13-27), Jesus first of all warns His
hearers that the way into the kingdom is a narrow
one. It might seem that it ought to be different;
that the way to destruction should be narrow and
difficult, and the way to life broad and easy, but it is
not so. The way to all worthy achievement 1s the
narrow way of self-control, self-sacrifice and infinite
pains. Such is the way to the righteousness of the
kingdom, the supreme object of human endeavor.
“Narrow is the gate, and straitened the way, that
leadeth unto life.’

(b) The tests of character (7 15-27): The test
of the higher fulfilment is fruit. By their fruits


alone the subjects of the kingdom will be known.
In the presence of the Father there is no room for
those who bring nothing but the leaves of empty
professions. The kingdom is for those alone who do
His will. The test of righteousness is illustrated
in conclusion by the beautiful parable of the Two
Builders. The difference between the two is essen-
tially one of character. 1t is largely a question of
fundamental honesty. The one is superficial and
thinks only of that which is visible to the eye and
builds only for himself and for the present. The
other is honest enough to build well where only
God can see, to build for others and for all time.
Thus he builds also for himself. The character of
the builder is revealed by the building.

VI. Principles.—The Sermon on the Mount is
neither an impractical ideal nor a set of fixed legal
regulations. It is, instead, a statement of the
principles of life essential in anormal society. Such
a society is possible in so far as men attain the
character and live the life expressed in these
principles. Their correct interpretation is there-
fore important.

Many of the sayings of the Sermon are meta-
phorical or proverbial statements, and are not to
be understood in a literal or legal sense. In them
Jesus was illustrating principles in concrete terms.
Their interpretation literally as legal enactments is
contrary to the intention and spirit of Jesus. So
interpreted, the Sermon becomes in part a visionary
and impractical ideal. But rather the principles
behind the concrete instances are to be sought and
applied anew to the life of the present as Jesus
applied them to the life of His own time.


The following are some of the leading ideas and prin-
ciples underlying and expressed in the Sermon:

(1) Character is the secret of happiness and strength.
Men of the qualities described in the Beatitudes are
called ‘‘blessed.'' Happiness consists, not in external
blessings, but_in the inner poise of a normal life. The
virtues of the Beatitudes are also the elements of strength.
Humility, self-control, purity and loyalty are the genuine
qualities of real strength. Men of such qualities are
to inherit the earth because they are the only ones
strong enough to possess and use it.

(2) Righteousness is grounded in the inner life. Char-
acter is not something imposed from without buta life that
unfolds from within. The hope of a perfect morality
and a genuine fulfilment of the law lies in the creation
of a sound inner life. Therefore the worth of all religious
acts and all persona] and social conduct is judged by the
quality of the inner motives.

(3) The inner life is a unity. The spiritual nature is
all of a piece, so that a moral slump at one point imperils
the whole life. Consequently a rigid and exacting
spiritual asceticism, even to the extent of extreme major
surgery, is sometimes expedient and necessary. ‘“‘If
thy right eye causeth thee to stumble, pluck it out,and
cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of
thy members should perish, and not thy whole body
be cast into Gehenna”’ (Mt § 29m).

(4) Universal love is the fundamental social law. It
is the dynamic principle of true character and right
conduct. In this respect, at least, the perfection of the
Father is set as the standard for men. MKindliness in
disposition, in word and in act is an obligation binding on
all. We may not feel alike toward all, but our wills
must be set to do good even toour enemies. In this the
supernatural quality of the Christian life may be known.

(5) The Sermon sets the fact of God the Father at the
center of life. Character and life exist in and for fellow-
ship with the Father. All worship and conduct look
toward God. His service is the supreme duty, His
perfection the standard of character, His goodness the
ground of universal love. Given this fact, all the essen-
tials of_religion and life follow as a matter of course.
God is Father, all men are brothers. God is Father, all
duties are sacred. God is Father, infinite love is at the
heart of the world and life is of infinite worth.

(6) Fulfilment is the final test of life. The blossoms
of promises must ripen into the frnit of abiding character.
The leaves of empty professions have no value in the
eyes of the Father. Deeds and character are the only
things that abide, and endurance is the final test. The
life of perfect fulfilment is the life anchored on the rock
of ages. See further Eruics; Ernics or Jesus; Kine-
pom or Gop,

LiteRature.—The standard comms. and Lives of
Christ. Among the most important encyclopaedic
arts. are those of C. W. Votaw in 1/DB, James Moffatt


Sermon on Plain
Serpent


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2736


in EB and W. F. Adeney in DCG, The following
are a few of the most helpful separate volumes on the
subject: A. Tholuck, Expasition of Christ's Sermon on
the Mount; Canon Gore, The Sermon on the Mount;
B. W. Bacon, The Sermon on the Maunt; W. B. Car-
penter, The Great Charter af Christ; Hubert Foston, The
Beatitudes and the Contrasts; cf H. C. King, The Ethics of
Jesus, and Stalker, The Ethic af Jesus. The following
periodical arts. are worthy of notice: Franklin Johnson,
“The Plan of the Sermon on the Mount,'' Homitetic
Review, XXIV, 360; A. Hall, ‘The Gospel in the
Sermon on _the Mount,” Bib, Sac., XLVIII, 322; The
Bishop of Peterborough (W.C. Magee), ‘''The State and
the Sermon on the Mount," Fortnightly Review, LIII,
32; J. G. Pyle, ‘‘ The Sermon on the Mount,"' Putnam’s
Magazine, VII, 285.
Russert Bensamin MILLer

SERMON ON THE PLAIN, THE: This title is
sometimes given to the discourse recorded in Lk
6 20-49, because according to the Gospel (ver 17) it
was delivered on a plain at the foot of the mountain.
In many respects this address resembles the one re-
corded in Mt 5-7, but in general the two are so dif-
ferent as to make it uncertain whether they are
different reports of the same discourse or reports
of different addresses given on different occasions.
See SeRMoN on THE Moont.

In contrast with the Sermon on the Mount which
is assigned a place early in the Galilean ministry,
and prior to the appointment of the
Twelve, that event is represented as
the occasion of this discourse. If the
two accounts are reports of the same
address the setting of Lk is probably the historical
one.

The Sermon of Lk includes a little less than one-
third of the matter recorded in the Sermon on the

Mount. The Lukan discourse includes
2. Contents only a portion of the Beatitudes, with

a set of four “woes,” a rather brief
section on the social duties, and the concluding
parable of the Two Houses.

The Gospel of Lk has been called the social Gospel
because of its sympathy with the poor and its

emphasis on the duty of kindliness of
3. Message spirit. This social interest is esp.
: prominent in the Sermon. Here the
Beatitudes deal with social differences. In Mt they
refer to spiritual conditions. Here Jesus speaks
of those who hunger now, probably meaning bodily
hunger. In Mt the reference is to hunger and
thirst after righteousness. In Mt the invectives
are addressed against the self-satisfied religious
teachers and their religious formalism. Here the
rich and their unsocial spirit are the subject of the
woes. This social interest is further emphasized
by the fact that in addition to this social bearing of
the Beatitudes, Lk’s discourse omits the remainder
of the Sermon on the Mount, except those portions
that deal with social relations, such as those on the
Golden Rule, the duty of universal love, the equality
of servant and master, and the obligation of a
charitable spirit. RusseLL Benyamin MILLER


SERON, sé’ron (2Zhpev, Séran): “The commander
of the host of Syria” of Antiochus Epiphanes, who
was defeated at Beth-horon by Judas in 166 BC
(1 Macc 3 13 ff). Not a Gr name; “perhaps it
represents the Phoen Hiram’”’ (Rawlinson, ad loc.).


1. The
Occasion


SERPENT, siir’pent: Serpents are not particu-
larly abundant in Pal, but they are often mentioned
in the Bible. In the Heb there are 11

1. General names. The NT hasfour Gr names and
XX employs two of these and three

others as well as several compound expressions, such
as bps werduevos, Sphis petimenos, “flying serpent,”
bgis Oavardv, 6phis thanatén, “deadly serpent,”
and ois ddxvwv, dphis ddknén, “biting” or “sting-
ing serpent.” Notwithstanding this large vocab-
ulary, 1t is impossible to identify satisfactorily a


single species. Nearly every reference states or
implies poisonous qualities, and in no case is there
so much as a hint that a snake may be harmless,
except in several expressions referring to the millen-
nium, where their harmlessness is not natural but
miraculous. In Arab. there is a score or more of
names of serpents, but very few of them are em-
ployed at all definitely. It may be too much to
say that the inhabitants of Syria and Pal consider
all snakes to be poisonous, but they do not clearly
distinguish the noh-poisonous ones, and there are
several common and well-known species which are
universally believed to be poisonous, though actually
harmless. Of nearly 25 species which are certainly
known to be found in Syria and Pal, four are deadly
poisonous, five are somewhat poisonous, and the rest
are absolutely harmless. With the exception of
kippoz, ‘“dart-snake”’ (Isa 34 15), which is prob-
ably the name of a bird and not of a snake, every
one of the Heb and Gr names occurs in passages
where poisonous character is expressed or implied.
The deadly poisonous snakes have large perforated
poison fangs situated in the front of the upper jaw,
an efficient apparatus like a hypodermic syringe
for conveying the poison into the depths of the
wound. In the somewhat poisonous snakes, the
poison fangs are less favorably situated, being
farther back, nearly under the eye. Moreover,
they are smaller and are merely grooved on the
anterior aspect instead of being perforated. All
snakes, except a few which are nearly or quite tooth-
less, have numerous small recurved teeth for hold-
ing and helping to swallow the prey, which is usually
faken into the stomach while living, the peculiar
structure of the jaws and the absence of a breast-
bone enabling snakes to swallow animals which
exceed the ordinary size of their own bodies.
The following list includes all the serpents which are
certainly known to exist in Pal and Syria, omitting the
names of several which have heen reported
2. Serpents but whose occurrence does not seem to be


sufficient] confirmed. The range of
of Paland Gach species is given.


Syria (1) Harmless serpents.—Typhlops vermi-
cularis Merr., Greece and Southwestern
Asia; T. simoni Bttgr., Pal; Eryx jaculus L., Greece,


North Africa, Central and Southwestern Asia; Tropida-
notus tessellatus Laur., Central and Southeastern Europe,
Central and Southwestern Asia; Zamenis gemanensis
Laur., Central and Southeastern Europe, Gr islands,
Southwestern Asia; Z. dahlii Fitz., Southeastern Europe,
Southwestern Asia, Lower Egypt; Z. rhodorhachis Jan.,
Egypt, Southwestern Asia, India; Z. ravergiert Menatr.,
Southwestern Asia: Z. nummifer Renss., Egypt, Syria,
Pal, Cyprus, Asia Minor; Oligeden melanocephalus Jan.,
Syria, Pal, Sinai, Lower Egypt; Contia decemlineata D.
and B., Syria, Pal; C. cellaris Meuetr., Gr islands, Cyprus,
Asia Minor, Syria, Pal; C. rathi Jan., Syria, Pal; C. cero-
nella Schleg., Syria, Pal.

(2) Somewhat poisonous serpents.—Tarbophis savignyt
Blgr., Syria, Pal, Egypt; T. fallax Fleischm., Balkan
Peninsula, Gr islands, Cyprus, Asia Minor, Syria, Pal;
Caelopeltis monspessulana Herm., Mediterranean coun-
tries, Caucasus, Persia; Psammophis schokari Forsk.,
North Africa, Southwestern Asia; Micrelaps muelleri
Bttgr., Syria, Pal.

(3) Deadly poisonous serpents—Vipera ammadytes
L., Southeastern Europe, Asia Minor, Syria; Vipera
lebetina L., North Africa, Gr islands, Southwestern Asia:
Cerastes cornutus Forsk., Egypt, Sinai, Arabia; Echis
coloratus Gthr., Southern Pal, Arabia, Socotra.

To this list should be added the scheltopusik, a large
snake-like, limbless lizard, Ophiesaurus apus, inhabiting
Southeastern Europe, Asia Minor, Persia, Syria aud Pal,
ach while perfectly harmless is commonly classed with
vipers.

Of all these the commonest is Zamenis nummifer,


or yes sur
Arab. 3x3! hk , ‘akd-ul-jauz, ‘string of walnuts,"


a fierce but non-poisonous snake which attains the length
of a meter. Its ground color is pale yellow and it has a
dorsal series of distinct diamond-shaped dark spots. Al-
ternating with spots of the dorsal row are on each side two
lateral rows of less distinct dark spots. It is everywhere
considered to be fatal. Another common snake is Zamenis


ee
gemonensis, Arab. rd, hanash, which attalns the


2737


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sermon on Plain
Serpent


length of two meters. It is usually black and much
resembles the American black snake, Zamenis constrictor.
Like all species of Zamenis, these are harmless. Other
common harmless snakes are Zamenis dahlii, Tropidono-
tus tessellatus which is often found in pools and streams,
Contia collaris, Oligodon melanocephalus, a small, nearly
toothless snake with the crown of the head coal black.
Among the somewhat poisonous snakes, a very common


al-haiyat ul-barshat, which is about two meters long, as
large as the black snake. It is uniformly reddish brown
above, paler below. Another is Psammophia schokart.


Arab. wha \, an-nashshdab, ‘‘thearrow.”’ Itisabouta
meter long, slender, and white with dark stripes. Many
marvelous and utterly improbable tales are told of its
Jumping powers, as for instance that it can shoot through
the air for more than a hundred feet and penetrate a
tree like a rifle bullet.

The commonest of the deadly poisonous snakes is
Vipera lebetina, which attains the length of a meter, has
a thick body, a short tail, a broad head and a narrow
neck. It is spotted somewhat as Zamenis nummifer,
but the spots are less regular and distinct and the ground
color is grey rather than yellow. It does not seem to
have a distinct name. Cerastes cornutus, having two
small horns, which are modifled scales, over the eyes, is
a small but dangerous viper, and is found in the south.
Not only are the species of poisonous serpents fewer than
the non-poisonous species, but the individuals also appear
to be less numerous. The vast majority of the snakes
which are encountered are harmless.


As stated above, all of the Heb and Gr names
except kippdz, which occurs only in Isa 34 15, are
used of snakes actually or supposedly
poisonous. This absence of discrimi-
nation between poisonous and non-
poisonous kinds makes determination of the species
difficult. Further, but few of the Heb names are
from roots whose meanings are clear, and there is
little evident relation to Arab. names.

(1) The commonest Heb word is ©}, nahash,
which occurs 31 t and seems to be a generic word
for serpent. While not always clearly indicating
a venomous serpent, it frequently does: e.g. Ps 58
4; 140 3; Prov 23 32; Eccl 10 8.11; Isa 14 29;
Jer 817; Am 6 19. According to BDB it is


perhaps from an onomatopoetic 7/, UN}, nahash,


3. Names


“to hiss.” It may be akin to the Arab. a>,
hanash, which means “snake” in general, or esp.
the black snake. Cf Ir-nahash (1 Ch 4 12);
Nahash (a) (1 S 11.1; 2 8 10 2), ) 2 8 17 27),
(c) (28 17 25); also MYM, n*hdsheth, “copper”
or “brass”; and JINWM), n°kushian, “Nehushtan,”
the brazen serpent (2 K 18 4). But BDB derives
the last two words from a different root. |

(2) NY, sardph, apparently from NW, saraph,
“to burn,” is used of the fiery serpents of the wilder-
ness. In Nu 21 8, it occurs in the sing.: “Make
thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a standard.”
In ver 6 we have DPI DWNT, ha-n-hashim
ha-s*raphim, “fiery serpents” ; in Dt 8 15 the same
in the sing.: VW WM2, nahash saraph, also tr?
“fiery serpents’; in Isa 14 29; 306 we have
piv OW, sdraph mophéph, “fiery flying ser-
pent.” The same word in the pl. DoE W , seraphim,
is tr¢ “seraphim” in Isa 6 2.6.

(3) PRE, tannin, elsewhere “dragon”? or “sea-
monster” (q.v.), is used of the serpents into which
the rods of Aaron and the magicians were trans-
formed (Ex 7 9.10.12), these serpents being desig-
nated by nahash in Ex 43; 7 15. Tannin 18
rendered “serpent” (AV “dragon”’) in Dt 32 33,
“Their wine is the poison of serpents,’ and Ps 91
13, “The young lion and the serpent shalt thou
trample under foot.” On the other hand, nahash
seems in three passages to refer to a mythical crea-
ture or dragon: “His hand hath pierced the swift


-while most snakes will


serpent” (Job 26 13); “In that day Jeh....
will punish leviathan the swift serpent and leviathan
the crooked serpent” (Isa 27 1); ‘“. .. . though
they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea,
thence will 1 command the serpent, and it shall bite
them’? (Am 9 3).

(4) “ont , zonalé, is tr¢ “crawling things” in Dt 32
24 (AV “serpents”) and in Mic 7 17 (AV ‘‘worms’’).

(5) AND2D, ‘akhshibh, occurs only in Ps 140 3,
where it is tr? “adder? (LXX denis, aspis, Vulg
aspis), ‘‘adders’ poison is under their lips.” It has
been suggested (BDB) that the reading should be
WADY, ‘akkabhish, ‘spider’ (q.v.). The || word
in the previous line is nahdash.

(6) 7B, pethen, like most of the other names a
word of uncertain etymology, occurs 6 t and it is
tr? “asp,” except in Ps 91 13, “Thou shalt tread
upon the lion and adder.” According to Liddell
and Scott, aspis is the name of the cobra,
Nata haje L., which is not included in m5) above,
because it does not certainly appear to have been
found in Pal. The name “adder” is applied to
various snakes all of which may perhaps be supposed
to be poisonous but some of which are actually
harmless. Aspis occurs in Rom 3 13 in a para-
phrase of Ps 140 3 (see [5] above); it occurs fre-
quently, though not uniformly, in LXX for (2), (5),
(6), (7), (8) and (10). 3

7) DEX, cepha', occurs only in Isa 14 29 where
it is tr? “adder” (AV “‘cockatrice,” ERV “basilisk,”
LXX exyova daorldwy, ékgona aspiddn, Vulg regu-
lus). The y JPX, capha‘, of (7) and (8) may be an
onomatopoetic word meaning ‘to hiss” (BDB).

(8) "FWPE, or IPL, ciph‘oni, occurs in Prov
23 32, ‘At the last it biteth like a serpent {nahash],
and stingeth like an adder” (¢iph‘énit). In Isa 11
8; 59 5, and Jer 8 17, ARV has ‘‘adder,” while
AV has ‘‘cockatrice’”’ and ERV has “basilisk.”

(9) {P{W , sh*phiphon, occurs only in Gen 49
17:
“Dan shall be a serpent [nadhash] in the way,
An adder {shephiphdn] in the path,
That biteth the borse's heels,
So that his rider falleth backward."

This has been thought to be Cerastes cornutus,
on the authority of Tristram (NHB), who says
that lying in the path it
will attack the passer-by,


glide away at the ap-
proach of a person or
large animal. He adds
that his horse was much
frightened at seeing one
of these serpents coiled up
in a camel’s footprint.
The word is perhaps


akin to the Arab. okay


wd “
siff, or Vaiw, suff, which
deadly snake.
(10) MAIDR, veph'eh, is found in Job 20 16; Isa
30 6; 59 5, and in EV is uniformly tr? ‘‘viper.”


It is the same as the Arab. 3{, ’af‘a, which is


usually tr4 ‘‘viper,” though the writer has never
found anyone who could tell to what snake the name
belongs. In Arab. as in Heb a poisonous snake is
always understood.

(11) TEP, kippoz, ARV ‘‘dart-snake,” ERV
“arrowsnake,” AV ‘great owl,” only in lsa 34 15,
“There shall the dart-snake make her nest, and lay,
and hatch, and gather under her shade; yea, there
shall the kites be gathered, every one with her


denotes a spotted and


Serpent
Servant of Jeh


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2738


mate.” This is the concluding verse in a vivid
picture of the desolation of Edom. The renderings
“dart-snake” and “arrowsnake’ rest on the author-
ity of Bochert, but LAX has éyives, echinos,
“hedgehog,” and Vulg ericeus, ‘hedgehog.’ The
rendering of AV ‘great owl” seems preferable to
the others, because the words “make her nest, and
lay, and hatch, and gather under her shade” are asa
whole quite inapplicable to a mammal or to a rep-
tile. The derivation from TDP, kaphaz (cf Arab.


yi, kdfaz), “to spring,” “to dart,’”’ suits, it is
true, a snake, and not a hedgehog, but may also
suit an owl. Finally, the next word in Isa 34 15


4 Be
is “kites,” MIP, dayyath: cf Arab. 3lAs, hida’at.


See Birrern; Ow1; Porcupine.

(12) 8¢ts, éphis, a general term for ‘‘serpent,”’
occurs in numerous passages of the NT and LXX,
and is fairly equivalent to nahash.

(13) dels, aspis, occurs in the NT only in Rom
3 13 ||to Ps 140 3. See under (5) ‘akhshibh and
(6) pethen. It is found in LXX for these words,
and also for ’eph‘eh (Isa 30 6).

(14) exudva, échidna, occurs in Acts 28 3, “A
viper came out... . and fastened on his [Paul's]
hand,” and 4 t in the expression ‘‘offspring [AV
“generation”| of vipers,” yevyyyara éxidvdv, genné-
mata echidnén (Mt 3 7; 12 34; 23 33; Lk 3 7).
The allied (mase.?) form éyis, échis, occurs in Sir
39 30, RV “adder.” _

(15) épweréy, herpetén, “creeping thing,’ AV “ser-
pent,” is found in Jas 3 7.

That the different Heb and Gr names are used without
clear distinction is seen from several examples of the
employment of two different namés in | expressions:

‘Their poison is like the poison of a serpent [nahdash];

They are like the deaf adder [pethen] that stoppeth


her ear” (Ps §8 4). |
*They have sharpened their tongue like a serpent


nahash];

aden ee poison is under their lips”
(Ps

‘For, behold, I will send serpents [n-hashim], adders
[ciph'onim], among you, which will not be
charmed; and they shall hite you, saith Jeh”
(Jer 8 17). :

“They shall lick the dust like a serpent [ndhash];
like crawling things of the earth [zdhdl2”’erec]
they shall come trembling out of their close
places” (Mic 7 17).

‘He shall suck the poison of asps [pethen]: The viper’s
[‘eph'eh] tongue shall slay him’’ (Job 20 16).

“Their wine is the poison of serpents [tanninim], and
the cruel venom of asps [pethanim]"' (Dt 32 33).

** And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the
asp [pethen], and the weaned child shall put his
hand on the adder’s [¢ipA‘'éni] den” (Isa 11 8).

See also (8) and (9) above.


Most of the Bib. references to serpents are of a
figurative nature, and they usually imply poison-
ous qualities. The wicked (Ps 58 4),
the persecutor (Ps 140 3), and the
enemy (Jer 8 17) are likened to venom-
ous serpents. The effects of wine are
compared to the bites of serpents (Prov 23 32).
Satan is a serpent (Gen 3; Rev 12 9; 20 2). The
term “offspring of vipers” is applied by John the
Baptist to the Pharisces and Sadducees (Mt 3 7)
or to the multitudes (Lk 3 7) who came to hear
him; and by Jesus to the scribes and Pharisees
(Mt 12 34; 23 33). Dan is a “serpent in the
way .... that biteth the horse’s heels’? (Gen 49
17). Serpents are among the terrors of the wilder-
ness (Dt 8 15; Isa 30 6). Among the signs ac-
companying believers is that “they shall take up
serpents” (Mk 16 18; ef Acts 28 5). It is said
of him that trusts in Jeh:

Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder:


The young lion and the serpent shalt thou tramplo
under foot”’ (Ps 91 13).


4. Figura-
tive


In the millennium, ‘the sucking child shall play
on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall
put his hand on the adder’s den’”’ (Isa 11 8). The
serpent is subtle (Gen 3 1; 2 Cor 11 3); wise (Mt
10 16); accursed (Gen 3 14); eats dust (Gen 3 14;
Isa 65 25; Mic 7 17). The adder is deaf (Ps 68 4).
The serpent lurks in unexpected places (Gen 49 17;
Eccl 10 8; Am 5 19). Serpents may be charmed
(Ps 68 5; Eccl 10 11; Jer 8 17). Among four won-
derful things is ‘‘the way of a serpent upon a rock”
(Prov 30 19). ALFRED Evy Day

SERPENT, BRAZEN, bra’z’n. See NEHUSHTAN.

SERPENT-CHARMING, -chirm’ing: Allusion
to this art, widely practised by the ancients (see
references in DB, s.v.; esp. Bochart, Hieron., ITI,
161, 164, etc), as by modern Orientals, is found in
Ps 68 5; Eccl 10 11; Jer 8 17; Sir 12 13, perhaps
in Jas 3 7. The skill displayed in taming snakes,
often without removing the poison fangs, is very sur-
prising. Bruce, Davy and other travelers give strik-
ing illustrations. See esp. the interesting account of
serpent-charming in Hengstenberg’s Egypt and the
Books of Moses, ET, 100-104.


SERPENT, CROOKED, krook’ed: With refer-
ence to the constellation round the North Pole, in
Job 26 13, RV “the swift serpent,” m “fleeing’’;
and Isa 27 1, RVm ‘‘winding.” In the first part
of the latter passage, AV “piercing serpent’’ is
changed in RV to “swift serpent,’ m ‘gliding’ or
‘fleeing.”’ See Astronomy, II, 1.


SERPENT, FIERY. See Serpent, 3, (2).


SERPENT WORSHIP, wir’ship: Traces of this
superstition are thought by certain critics to be
discoverable in the religion of Israel. Stade men-
tions that W. R. Smith supposed the serpent to be
the totem of the house of David (Geschichte, I, 465).
H. P. Smith says: “We know of a Serpent’s Stone
near Jerus, which was the site of a sanctuary (1 K
1 9), and this sanctuary was dedicated to Jch”
(Hist of OT, 239, 240). Special reliance is placed
on the narrative of the brazen serpent, which Heze-
kiah is recorded to have destroyed as leading to
idolatry (2 K 18 4). “In that case,” says H. P.
Smith, “we must treat the Nehushtan as a veritable
idol of the house of Israel, which had been wor-
shipped in the temple from the time of its erection.
Serpent worship is so widespread that we should be
surprised not to find traces of it in Israel” (ut
supra). In the same line, see G. B. Gray, Nu,
275-76. The fancifulness of these deductions is
obvious. See Nesusutan. James Orr


SERUG, sé’rug aanip, srtigh; Zepoty, Serotich):
Son of Reu and great-grandfather of Abraham (Gen
11 20 ff; I Ch 1 26; Lk 35).


SERVANT, str’vant (TA), ‘ebhedh; 80%dXos,
dovilos): A very common word with a variety of
meanings, all implying a greater or less degree of
inferiority and want of freedom: (1) The most fre-
quent usage is as the equivalent of “slave” (q.v.),
with its various shades in position (Gen 9 25; 24 9;
Ex 21 5; Mt 10 24; Lk 17 7, and often); but also
a hired workman where “hired servant” translates
Heb and Gr expressions which differ from the above.
(2) An attendant in the service of somcone, as Joshua
was the ‘servant,’ RV “minister,” of Moses (Nu
11 28). (8) Asa term of respectful sclf-depreciation
referring to one’s self, “thy servant” or “your serv-
ant’’ is used in place of the personal pronoun of the
first person: (a) in the presence of superiors (Gen


2739


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Serpent
Servant of Jeh


19 2; 32 18, and often); (b) in addressing the Su-
preme Being (1S 3 9; Ps 19 11; 27 9; Lk 2 29,
and often). (4) Officials of every grade are called
the “servants” of kings, princes, etc (1 $ 29 3; 28
16 1; 1 K 11 26; Prov 14 35, and often). (5) The
position of a king in relation to his people (I K
12 7). (6) One who is distinguished as obedient
and faithful to God or Christ (Josh 1 2; 2 K 8 19;
Dnl 6 20; Col 4 12; 2 Tim 2 24). (7) One who
is enslaved by sin (Jn 8 34).
Wituiam JosepH McC ioruiin

SERVANT OF JEHOVAH (THE LORD):
; Historical es ee
“Orne Prophet of tno male
. The Unity of Chs 40-66
. Principal Ideas of Chs 40-66
The Servant-Passages

(1) Date of the Servant-Passages

(2) Discussion of the Passages

(3) Whom Did the Prophet Mean hy the Servant?
(4) The Psychology of the Prophecy

7. Plaee of the Servant-Passages in OT Prophecy
8. Large Messianie Significance of the Servant-Passages


A century and a half had passed since the great


days of Isaiah in Jerus. The world had vastly
changed during those long decades


Domo


1. Histori- when politicians had planned, armies
cal Sit- surged back and forth, and tribes and
uation nations had lost or won in the struggle


for existence, place and power. The
center of the world had changed—for Assyria had
gone to its long home, and the city claiming pre-
eminenee was not Nineveh but Babylon.

Nowhere perhaps had time laid a heavier hand
than on the city of Jerus and the country of Judah.
For eity and land had come to desolation, and the
inhabitants of the eountry had become familiar
with the strange sights and sounds of Babylonia,
whither they had been carried by their conquerors.
Many had found graves in the land of the exile, and
new generations had arisen who had no memory
of the hill country of their fathers. It is the sit-
uation of these captive Jews in Babylonia whieh is
refleeted and they who are addressed at the waning
of the long night of captivity by the stirring message
recorded in Isa chs 40-66 (leaving out of account
here disputed passages in chs 40-66).

The more one studies the problem of the author-
ship of these chapters, the more unlikely does it

seem that their author penned them
2. Author- 150 years before the time with which
ship of Isa they are vitally connected. Jt is ob-
Chs 40-66 viously impossible to treat that prob-

lem in a detailed way here, but onemay
sum up the arguments by saying that in theological
ideas, in style, and use of words they show such
differenees from the assured productions of Isaiah's
pen as to point to a different authorship. And the
great argument, the argument which earries the
most weight to the author of this article, is that these
late chapters are written from the sfandpoint of the
exile. The exile is assumed in what is said. These
chapters do not prophesy the exile, do not say it is
to come; they all the time speak as though it had
come. The message is not that an exile is to be,
but beginning with the fact that the exile already
is, it foretells deliverance. Now of course it is
conceivable that God might inspire a man to put
himself forward 150 years, and with a message to
people who were to live then, assuming their cir-
cumstances as a background of what he said, but
it is improbable to the last degree. To put it in
plain, almost gruff, English, it 1s not the way God
did things. The prophet’s message was always
primarily a message to his own age. Then there
is no claim in the chapters themselves that Isaiah
wag their author. And having once been placed
go that it was supposed they were by Isaiah—placed


so through causes we do not know—the fact that
in speaking of passages from these chapters NT
authors referred to them by a name the people would
recognize, is not. a valid argument that they meant
to teach anything as to their authorship. The
problem had not arisen in NT times. Isa, chs 40-
66, as Professor Davidson has suggested, has a
parallel in the Book of Job, each the production of
a great mind, each from an author we do not know
(cf Isatan),

Ont of the deep gloom of the exile—when the Jew

was a man without a country, when it seemed as if
the nation’s sins had murdered hope—
3. The out of this time comes the voice most
Prophet of full of gladness and abounding hope
the Exile of all the voices from the OT hfe. In
; the midst of the proud, confident civili-
zation of Babylonia, with its teeming wealth and
exhaustless splendor, came a man who dared_ to
speak for Jeh—a man of such power to see reality
that to him Babylonia was already doomed, and he
could summon the people to prepare for God’s
deliverance.

In recent criticism, esp. in Germany, there has been a

strong tendency to assign the last chapters of this section
i a arent ULE OPO nS oe eine
H ackgroun 1 is claime Is no ab;
i ciaerer! the sins rebuked are the sins of the people
9 820-00 when at home in Judaea, and in at least
one passage the temple at Jerus seems to
he standing. That these chapters present difficulties
need not be disputed, but it seems to me that again and
again in them one can find the hand of Second Isa.
Then undonbtedly the author quotes from previous
prophecies which we can recognize, and the suggestion
that some of the difficult passages may he quotations
from other older prophecies which are not preserved to
us, I think an exceedingly good one. The qnotation of
such passages in view of the prospect of return, and the
prophet’s feeling of the need of the people, would seem
to me not at all nnnatural. Ifa later hand is responsible
for some utterances in the latter part of the section, it
seems to me fairly clear that most of it is from the hand
of the great nnknown prophet of the exile.

The questions regarding the Servant-passages as
affecting the nnity of the hook will he treated later.

The first part of this section vividly contrasts Jeh
and the idols worshipped with such splendor and

ceremony. All the resources of irony
5. Principal and satire are used to give point and
Ideas of effect to the eontrast. Cyrus the
Chs 40-66 Median conqueror is already on the

horizon, and he is declared to be God’s
instrument in the deliverance. The idols are de-
scribed in process of manufacture; they are ad-
dressed in scornful apostrophe, they are seen carried
away helpless. On the other side Jeh, with illimit-
able foresight and indomitable strength, knows and
reveals the future. They know and reveal nothing.
He brings to pass what He has planned. They do
nothing. Not only the idols but Babylonia itself
is made the victim of satire—and the prophet hurls
a taunt song at the proud but impotent city. ;

Israel—the people of Jeh—the elect of God—is
given the prophet’s message. The past is ealled
up as a witness to Jeh’s dealings. His righteous-
ness—His faithfulness to His people—shall not fail.
They are unworthy, but out of His own bounty
salvation is provided. And with joy of this salva-
tion from exile and from sin the book rings and rings.
The Zion of the restored Israel is pictured with all
the play of color and richness of imagery at the
prophet’s command. And _ this restored Israel is
to have a world-mission. Its light is to fall upon
all lands. It is to minister salvation to all races of
men.

But back of and undcr these pictures of great hope
is the prophct’s sense of his people's sin and their strnggle
with it. In the latter part of the book, esp. chs 59 and
64 this comes ont clearly. And the mood of these chap-
ters expresses the fecling out of which some of the deep
things of the Servant-passages came. There is no need
to insist that the chapters as they stand are in the order


Servantof Jeh THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2740


In which they were written. We know from other
prophecies that this was not always true. But even if a
man were convinced that the chapters now occurring
after the Servant-passages were all written after them,
he could still hold, and I think would he justified in
holding, that in places in those chapters the reader finds
the record of a state of the prophet’s mind before the
writing of those passages. The former view would be,
I think, the preferable one. At any rate the point of view
Js logically that out of which some of the deep things in
the Servant-passages came.


In profoundness of meaning the climax of the
book is reached in these passages where the deliver-
ance from exile and the deliverance from sin are
connected with one great figure—the Servant of
Jeh.

The word “servant,’’ as applied to servants of
God, is not an unfamiliar one to readers of the OT.

It is applied to different individuals


6. The and by Jeremiah to the nation (ef Jer
Servant- 30 10; 46 27); but its message is on
Passages the whole so distinct and complete


in Second Isa that we can study it
without any further reference to previous usage.

The “‘servant” first appears in Isa 41 8, Here
the reference is undoubtedly to Israel, chosen and
called of God and to be upheld by Him, Here
Israel is promised victory over its enemies. In
vivid picture their destruction and Israel’s future
trust and glory in God are portrayed.

There are several incidental references to Israel as
Jeh's servant: created by Jeh and not to be forgotten
(41 8); Cyrus is said to be called for the sake of His
servant Jacob (45 4); Jeh is said to have redeemed His
servant Jacob (48 20).

In 44 26 “‘servant'' seems to be used with the meaning
of prophet. It is said of Jeh that He ‘‘confirmeth the
word of his servant, and performeth the counsel of his
Inessengers.

In 42 19 we find the failure and inadequacy of Israel
presented in the words, ‘‘ Who is blind, but my servant ?
or deaf, as my messenger that Isend?'' This passage is
an explanation of the exile. Israel proved unworthy and
sinned, hence its punishment, but even in the exile the
lesson had not been taken to heart.

In 43 8ff Jeh summons Israel] the servant, who in
spite of blindness and deafness yet is His witness. It
has at least seen enough to be able to witness for Him in
the presence of the heathen.

In 44 1-5, leaving the unworthiness of the actual
Israel, there comes what seems to me a summons in the
name of the possible, the ideal. The underlying thought
is a cali to the high future which God has ready to give.

This covers the reference to the servant outside
the great Servant-passages to which we now come.
There are four of these: 42 1-9; 49 1-9a; 50 4-11;
52 13—53 12. 61 1-4 perhaps represents words of
the Servant, but may refer to words of the prophet,
and, as at any rate it adds no new features to the
picture of the Servant already given in the passages
undoubtedly referring to him, we will not discuss it.

(1) Date of the Servant-passages—Ewald long
ago suggested that the last of the Servant-passages
must have been borrowed from an earlier compo-
sition, which he assigned to the age of Manassech.
“If we find in the study of the passage reason for
its vividness, we shall not need to seek its origin
in the description of some past martyrdom.”

Duhm quoted by Cheyne thinks the Servant-
passages post-exilic. The gentleness and quiet
activity of the Servant for one thing, according to
Duhm, suggest the age of the scribes, rather than
that of the exile. But might not an age of suffering
be a time to learn the lesson of gentleness? Ac-
cording to Skinner, Duhm thinks the passages were
inserted almost haphazard, but Skinner also refers
to Kosters, showing that the passages cannot be
lifted without carrying some of the succeeding
verses with them. This is particularly significant
in view of the recent popularity of other theories
which deny the Servant-passages to the hand and
time of Second Isa. The theory that these passages
form by themselves a poem or a set of poems which


have been inserted here can boast of distinguished
names.

There does not seem much to commend it, however.
As to the argument from difference as to rhythm, there
is disagreement, and the data are probably not of a sort to
warrant much significance being applied to it either way.
The fact that the passages are not always a part of a
connected movement of thought would play great
havoc if made a universal principle of discrimination as
to authorship in the prophecies of the OT. If we
succeed in giving the fundamental Ideas of the passages
a place in relation to the thought of Deutero-Isa, an argu-
ment for which cogency might be claimed will be dissi-
pated. But even at its best this argument would not be
conclusive. To deny certain ideas to an author simply
because he has not expressed them in a certain bit of
writing acknowledged to him is perilous business. A
message of hope surely does not preclude an appreciation
of the dark things.

The truth of the matter is that even by great scholars
the temptation to a criticism of knight-errantry is not
always resisted. And I think we shall not make any
mistake in believing that this is the case with the attempt
to throw doubt upon the Deutero-Isaianic anthorship
of the Servant-passages.


(2) Discussion of the passages.—42 1-9: In these
verses Jeh Himself is the speaker, describing the
Servant as His chosen, in whom His soul delights,
upon whom He has put His spirit. He is to bring
justice to the Gentiles. His methods are to be
quiet and gentle, and the very forlorn hope of
goodness He will not quench. He is to set justice
in the earth, and remote countries are described as
waiting for His law. Then comes a declaration by
the prophet that Jeh, the Creator of all, is the speak-
er of words declaring the Servant’s call in righteous-
ness to be a covenant for the people, a light to the
Gentiles, a helper to those in need—the blind and
imprisoned. Jeh’s glory is not to be given to an-
other, nor His praise to graven images. Former
prophecies have come to pass. New things He
now declares. One’s attention needs to be called
to the distinction of the Servant from Israel in this
passage. He is to be a covenant of the people:
according to Delitzsch, “he in whom and through
whom Jeh makes a new covenant with His people
in place of the old one that has been broken.”

49 1-9a; Here the Servant himself speaks, telling
of his calling from the beginning of his life, of the
might of his word, of his shelter in God, of a time
of discouragement in which he thought his labor
in vain, followed by insistence on his trust in God.
Then Jeh promises him a larger mission than the
restoration of Israel, viz. to be a light to the Gentiles.
Jeh speaks of the Servant as one despised, yet to
be triumphant so that he will be honored by kings
and princes. He is to lead his people forth at their
restoration, “‘to make them inherit the desolate
heritages; saying to them that are bound, Go
forth; to them that are in darkness, Show your-
selves.”

Clearly the Servant is distinét from the people
Israel in this passage. Yet in ver 3 he is addressed
as Israel. The word Israel here may be a gloss,
which would solve the difficulty, or the Servant may
be addressed as Israel because he gathers up in
himself the meaning of the ideal Israel. If itis true
that the prophet gradually passed from the concep-
tion of Israel as a nation to a person through whom
its trne destiny would be realized, this last sug-
gestion would gain in probability.

One notices here the emphasis on the might of
the Servant, and in this passage we come to under-
stand that he is to pass through a time of ignominy.
The phrase ‘a servant of rulers’ is a difficult one,
which would be clear if the prophet conceived of
him as one of the exiles, and typically representing
them. The Servant’s mission in this passage seems
quite bound up with the restoration.


, 50 4-II: In the first part of this passage the Servant
is not mentioned directly, but it seems clear that he is


2741


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Servant of Jeh


speaking. He is taught of God continually, that he may
bring a message to the weary. Hc has opened his ear so
that he may fully understand Jeh's message. The
Servant now describes his sufferings as coming to him
becanse of his obedience. He was not rebellious and
did not turn back from his mission. Flint-like he set
his face and with confidence in God met the shame
which came upon him. After language vivid with a
sense of ignominy his assured consciousness of victory
and faith in God aro expressed.

In vs 10-11, according to Delitzsch, Jeh speaks, first
encouraging those who listen to the Servant, then
addressing those who despise his word. Cheyne thinks
the Servant mentioned in ver 10 may be the prophet,
but I prefer Delitzsch’s view.


52 13—63 12: The present division of 52 13—
63 12 is unfortunate, for obviously it is all of a
piece and ought to stand together in one chapter.

In 62 13-15 Jeh speaks of the humiliation and
later of the exaltation of the Servant. He shall
deal wisely—the idea here including the success re-
sulting from wisdom—and shall be exalted. Words
are piled upon each other here to express his exal-
tation. But the appearance of the Servant is such
as to suggest the very opposite of his dignity, which
will astonish nations and kings when they come to
understand it.

Entering upon ch 53 we find the people of Israel
speaking confessing their former unbelief, and giving
as a reason the repulsive aspect of the Servant—
despised, sad, sick with a visage to make men turn
from him. He is described as though he had been
aleper. They thought all this had come upon him
as a stroke from Ged, but they now see how he
went even to death, not for his own transgression
but for theirs. Their peace and healing came
through his suffering and death. They have been
sinful and erring; the result of it all God has caused
to light upon him.

They look back in wonder at the way he bore his
sufferings—like a lamb led to the slaughter; with
a false judicial procedure he was led away, no one
considering his death, or its relation to them. His
grave even was an evidence of ignominy.

Beginning at ver 10 the people cease speaking,
according to Delitzsch, and the prephecy becomes
the organ of God who acknowledges His Servant.
The reference to a trespass offering in ver 10 is
remarkable. Nowhere else is prophecy so con-
nected with the sacrificial system (A.B. Davidson).
It pleased God to bruise the Servant—his soul hay-
ing been made a trespass offering; the time of humil-
jation over, the time of exaltation will come.

By his knowledge we are told—here a momentary
reversion to the time of humiliation taking place—
by his knowledge he shall justify many and bear
their iniquities. Then comes the exaltation—
dividing of spoils and greatness—the phrases sug-
gesting kingly glory: all this is to be his because of
his suffering. The great fact of ch 53 is vicarious
suffering.

(3) Whom did the prophet mean by the Servant ?—
(a) Obviously not all of Israel always, for the Serv-
ant is distinguished from Israel. (0) Not the
godly remnant, for he is distinguished from them.
Then the godly remnant docs not attain to any
such proportions as to fit the description of ch 53.
(c) And one cannot accept the theory that the pro-
phetic order is intended. The whole order is not
great. enough to exhaust the meaning of one of a
half-dozen of the greatest lines in ch 53.

Professor A. B. Davidson’s OT Prophecy con-
tains a brilliant and exceedingly able discussion of
the question which he approaches from the stand-
point of Bib. rather than simply exegetical theology.
His fundamental position is that in the prophet’s
outlook the restoration is the consummation. In
his mind the Servant and his work cannot come after
the restoration. The Servant, if a real person,
must be one whose work lies in the past or the


present, as there is not room in the future for him,
for the restoration which is at the door brings felicity,
and after that no suffcrings of the Servant are con-
ceivahle. But there is no actual person in the past
and none in the present who could be the Servant.
Hence the Servant cannot be to the prophet’s mind
areal person (sec ContaH).

Of course Davidson relates the result to his larger
Conception of prophecy in such a way as to secure the
Messianic significance of the passages in relation to
their fulfllment in Our Lord. The ideas they contain
are realized in Him.

But coming back to the prophet's mind—if the Servant
was not a person to him, what significance did he have?
The answer according to Davidson is, He is a great per-
scnification of the ideal Israel. ‘' He is Israel according
to its idea.” To quote more fully, ‘'The prophet has
created out of the Divine determinations imposed on
Israel, election, creation and forming, endowment with
the word or spirit of Jeh, and the Divine purpose in these
operations, an ideal Being, an inner Israel in the heart
of the phenomenal or actual Israel, an indestructihle
Being having these Divine attributes or endowments,
present in the outward Israel in all ages, powerful and
effectual because really composed, if I can say so, of
Divine forces, who cannot fail in God’s purpose, and who
as an inner power within Israel by his operation causes
all Israel to become a true servant” (cf Davidscen,
OT Prophecy, 435-36).

Now it seems to me that Davidson is more effective in
his destructive than in his constructive work. One must
confess that he presents real difficulties in the way of
holding to a personal Servant as the prophet’s conception.
But on the other hand when he tries to replace that hy a
more adequate conception, I de not think he conspicu-
cusly succeeds.

The greatest of the Servant-passages (it seems to
me) presents more than can be successfully dealt
with under the conception of the Servant as the
ideal Israel. ‘The very great emphasis on vicarious
suffering in ch 63 simply is not answered by the
theory. Words would not leap with such a flame
of reality in describing the suffering of a personifi-
cation. The sense of sin back of the passage is not
a thing whose problem could be solved by a glitter-
ing figure of speech. There it surges—the move-
ment of an aroused conscience—and the answer to
it could never be anything less than a real deed by
a real person. My own feeling is that if language
can express anything it expresses the fact that the
prophet had a real personal Servant in view.

But, what of the difficulties Davidson suggests?
Even if the answer were not easy to find, one could
rest on the total impression the passages make.
One cannot vaporize a passage for the sake of pla-
cing it in an environment in which one believes it
belongs. As Cheyne in other days said, ‘In the
sublimest descriptions of the Servant I am unable
to resist the impression that we have the present-
ment of an individual, and venture te think that our
general view of the Servant ought to be ruled by
those passages in which the enthusiasm of the
author is at its height.”

The first. thing we need to remember in dealing
with the difficulties Davidson has brought forth is
the fimelessness of prophecy, and the resulting fact
that every prophet saw the future as if lying just
on the horizon of his own time. As prophets saw
the day of Jeh as if at hand, so it scems to me
Deutero-Isaiah saw the Servant: each really afar
off, yet each really seen in the colors of the present.
Then we must remember that the prophets did not
relate all their conceptions. They stated truths
whose meaning and articulation they did not under-
stand. They were not philosophers with a Hege-
lian hunger for a total view of life, and when we try
to read them from this standpoint we misjudge
them. Then we must remember that the prophet
may here have been lifted to a height of prophctic
receptiveness where he received and uttered what
went beyond the limits of his own understanding.
To be sure there was a point of contact, but I see
no objection to the thought that in a place of unique


Servant of Jeh
Seven Stars


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2742


significance and importance like this, God might
use a man to utter words which reached far beyond
the limits of his own understanding. In this con-
nection some words of Professor Hermann Schultz
are worth quoting: ‘If it is true anywhere in the
history of poetry and prophecy, it is true here that
the writer being full of the spirit has said more than
he himself meant to say and more than he himself
understood.”

(4) The psychology of the prophecy—This does
not mean that something may not be said about
the connection of the Servant-passages with the
prophet’s own thought. Using Delitzsch’s illus-
tration, we can see how from regarding all Israel as the
servant the prophet could narrow down to the godly
part of Israel as experience taught him the faith-
lessness of many, and it ought not to be impossible
for us to see how all that Israel really meant at its
best could have focused itself in his thought upon
one person. Despite Davidson’s objection, I can
see nothing artificial about this movement in the
prophet’s mind. There was probably more pro-
gression in his thought than Professor Davidson is
willing to allow. If it is asked, Where was the
person to whom the prophet could ascribe such
greatness, conceiving as he did that he was to come
at once? surely a similar question would be fair in
relation to IJsaiah’s Messiah. The truth is that
even on the threshold of the restoration there was
time for a great one suddenly to arise. As John the
Baptist on the Jordan watched for the coming One
whom he knew not, yet who was alive, so the great
prophet of the exile may have watched even day
by day for the coming Servant whose work had
been revealed to him.

But deep in the psychology of the prophecy is
the sense of sin out of which these passages came
and indications of which I think are found in the
latter part of the book. The great guilt-laden past
lay terribly behind the prophet, and as he mused
over the sufferings of the righteous, perhaps esp.
drawn to the heart-rent Jeremiah, the thought of
redemptive suffermg may have dawned upon him.
And if in its light, and with a personal sense of sin
drawn from what experiences we know not, he
grapples with the problem, can we not understand,
can we not see that God might flash upon him the
great conception of a sin-bearer?

At last the idea of vicarious suffering had been
connected with the deep things of the nation’s life,

and henceforward was a part of its
7. Place of heritage. To the profoundest souls
the Servant- it would be a part of the nation’s for-


Passages ward look. The priestly idea had
in OT been deepened and filled with new
Prophecy moral meaning. The Servant was a

prophet too—so priest and prophet
metinone. And I think Cheyne was right when he


suggested that in the Servant’s exaltation in ch 53,
the idea of the Servant is brought nearer to that of
king than we sometimes think. So in suggestion,
at least, prophet, priest and king mect in the great
figure of the suffermg Servant.

A new rich stream had entered into prophecy,
full of power to fertilize whatever shores of thought
it touched. In the thoughts of these passages
prophecy seemed pressing with impatient eagerness
to its goal, and though centuries were to pass before
that goal was reached, its promise is seen here, full
of assurance and of knowledge of the kind of goal
it is to be.

But whatever our view of the meaning of the
prophet, we must agree (cf Mt 8 17; 12 18-21;
26 67; Jn 12 41, et al.) that the conception he so
boldly and powerfully put upon his canvas had its
realization, its fulfilment in the One who spoke to
the world from the cross on Calvary. And in its


T


darkly glorious shadow the Christian, with all the
sadness and joy and wonder of it, with a sense of

its solving all his problems and meet-
8. Larger ing the deepest needs and outreaches
Messianic of his life, can feel a strange companion-
Significance ship with the exilic prophet whose


of the yearning for a sin-bearer and belief in
Servant- His coming call across the long and
Passages slowly moving years. In the light and


penetration of that hour he may be

trusted to know what the prophet meant. Pro-

fessor Delitzsch well said of that passage, ‘Every

word is as it were written under the cross at Gol-
gotha.” Lynn Harotp HovcH

SERVANTS, SOLOMON’S. See Sotomon’s


SERVANTS.


SERVICE, sir’vis: Six Heb, two Aram. and four
Gr words are so rendered.
In the OT the word most used for “service” is (1)
‘abhadhah, from ‘ébhadh, which is the general word,
meaning ‘‘to work’’ and so “‘to serve,”
1. Inthe ‘“‘to till,” also “to enslave.’ The noun
OT means “bondage,” “‘labor,’’ ‘‘minister-
ing,’ “service,” “tillage,” ‘work,”
‘use.’ The word is used in describing work in the
fields (Ex 1 14, et al.), work in the tabernacle (Ex
27 19, et al.), sanctuary service (Nu 7 9), service
of Jeh (Nu 8 11), Levitical or priestly service (Nu
8 22), kingly service (1 Ch 26 30), etc. Reference
is made to instruments, wood vessels, cattle, herbs,
shekels for the service in the house of Jeb. (2)
‘Abhadh itself is tr? “service” in Nu 8 15; 18 23;
Jer 22 13. (3) Serddh means “stitching,” 1.e. pier-
cing with a needle; it occurs only 4 t, and in each
case in RV instead of “service” is tr? “finely
wrought garments’ (Ex 31 10; 35 19; 89 1.41).
(4) Shdrath means primarily “to attend” as a
servant or worshipper, and to contribute to or
render service, wait on, and thence service; occurs
only 3 t (Ex 35 19; 39 1.41 AV) and in ARV is
rendered “for ministering.” (5) Cabha@ is found 7
t, used in the same connection each time, and refers
to those numbered for service in the tent of meet-
ing. Its primary root meaning refers to service for
war, campaign, hardship (Nu 4 30.35.39.43; 8 24).
(6) Yadh means lit. an “open hand,” indicating
direction, power, and so ministry as in 1 Ch 6 3],
where David appoints certain ones to have direc-
tion of the music, tr? in 1 Ch 29 5, RV not service,
but “himself.” (7) ‘Abhidhah means “business,”
“labor,” “affairs’; Ezr 6 18 is the only place
where it is found. (8) Polhdn, from root meaning
“to worship,’ ‘‘minister to,’’ and so in Ezr 7 19
vessels given for service.
The following are the uses in the NT: (1) Dia-
konio, from root meaning ‘to run on errands,” and
so attendance, aid as a servant, min-


2. Inthe istry, relief, and hence service; cf
NT Eng. word “deacon”; Paul: “that

I might minister unto you” (2 Cor 11
8); also found in Rom 16 31 (‘ministration’)


and Rev 2 19 (“ministry’’). (2) Douledo, lit. “to
be a slave,” in bondage, service (Gal 4 8, “bond-
age’; Eph 6 7, “‘service’; 1 Tim 6 2, “serve’).
(3) Latreta, from root meaning ‘to render religious
homage,”’ menial service to God, and so worship
(Jn 16 2, “service’; Rom 9 4, “service’; Rom
12 1, “spiritual service’; He 9 1, “service”; 9 6,
“services’”’). (4) Leitourgia, from root ‘‘to perform
religious or charitable functions,” worship, relieve,
obey, minister, and hence a public function, priestly
or charitable (liturgy) (2 Cor 9 12, “service”; also
in Phil 2 17.30). See SeRVANT.
WituiaM Epwarp RaFrety


2743


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Servant of Jeh
Seven Stars


SERVITUDE, siir’vi-tid. See Servant; SLAVE.


SESIS, sé'sis (B, Zeoeis, Sescis, A, Leooels,
Sesseis): One who put away his forcign wife (1 Esd
9 34)=‘Shashai”’ in Ezr 10 40.


SESTHEL, ses’thel (ZeoOAr, Sesthél): Onc of the
sons of Addi who put away their foreign wives
(1 Esd 9 31)=“Bezalel” in Ezr 10 30.


SET: Few words in the Eng. language have such
a rich variety of meaning and are used in so
rich a variety of idiomatic expression as the word
“set.’’ A glance at any of the great dicts. will con-
vince anyone of the truth of this statement. The
Standard Dictionary devotes three and a half columns
to the word. In its primary meaning it there de-
notes 22 distinct things, in its secondary meaning
17 more, while 18 distinct phrases are given in
which it is used, in some cases again in a variety of
meanings. It is indeed a word calculated to drive
a foreigner to despair. Some 70 Heb and about
30 Gr words in the original tongues of the Holy
Scriptures have been rendered by the word “set,”
in AV andalsoin RV. A careful comparative study
of the original and of tr’ in other tongues will at
once indicate that a lack of discrimination is evi-
dent on the part of the Eng. translators in the fre-
quent use of the word ‘‘set.”


Thus in Cant § 14, ‘hands are as rings of gold set with
beryl,"' the Heb word is xe , malé',"' to he filled," "' full."
Vulg translates plenae, the Dutch gevuld, the Ger. voll;
Prov 8 27, ‘‘when he set a circle,” Heb P a, hakek,

ly
“to describe,"' ‘‘ decree,"" Vulg vallabat, Dutch beschreef;
Ezr 4 10, “set in the city of Samarla,’’ Aram. 3°,


yethibh, *‘to cause to sit down," “to cause to dwell!"
Vulg Aabitare eas fecit, Dutch doen wonen; Ps 2 6, ‘' Yet
have I set my king upon my holy hill,"" Heb 702 . nasakh,


“to pour out,” "to anoint," Dutch gezalfd; Isa "19 2, AV
“T will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians,’ Heb
JD. sakhaks, ''to disturb,” “to confuse,” Vulg concur-


rere faciam, Dutch verwarren, Ger. an etnander setzen;
Rev 3 8, ‘‘I have set before thee a door,” Gr dda,
didémi, “to give," Vulg dedi coram te, Dutch gegeven,
Ger. gegeben; Acts 19 27, AV ‘Our craft is in danger
to be set at nought.” Gr épxonat, érchomai, ‘to come,"
Vulg periclitabitur, Dutch in verachting komen; Lk 4 18,
“to set at liberty them,"’ Gr dzogrcAdw, apostéllo, ‘to
send away,'’ Dutch heen te zenden in vrijheid; Acts 13 9,
AV “Saul... . set his eyes on him,'' Gr drevigw,
atentz6, ‘'to stare fixedly,"' Vulg intwens in eum, Dutch
de oogen op hem houdende. ‘These are but a few examples
chosen at random where our Eng. translators have
rendered Heb and Gr words by ‘'set,'' where a more
literal tr, in equally good idiomatic language, was
ossible. The word "set" is the causative of ‘'sit,"" and
frdicates primarily a power of self-support, in opposition
to the Idea of the word ‘'lay.


(1) In its primary meaning the word ‘“‘sct”’ is
used in our Eng. Bible in many senses: (a) Foun-
dation: Cant 6 15, “His legs are as pillars of marble
set upon.” (6) Direction: Ezk 21 16, “whither-
soever thy face is set.” (c) Appointed time: Acts
12 21, “upon a set day.” (d) Fixed place: 2 Ch
20 17, “Set yourselves, stand ye still, and see’’;
298617; Mt 45. (e) Cause to sit: 15 2 8, AV
“+o set them among princes’; 2 Ch 28 20; Ps 68 6.
(f) Appointment: Ezr 7 25, AV “set_magistrates
and judges’; Gen 41 41; 1 8 12 18; Ps 2 6; Dnl
111. (g) To lift up: Gen 31 17, “set his sons
and his wives upon.’”? (h) Appointed place: Gen
117, “God set them in the firmament.” (¢) Cause
to stand: Gen 47 7, “Joseph broughtin Jacob... .
and set him before Pharaoh’; Nu 8 13; 2 Ch 29
25. (j) Sitting: Mt 6 1, AV “when he was set’’;
He8 1 AV. (k) Location: Mt 6 14, “a city set on
a hill.” These by no means exhaust the meaning
which the word, in its primary sense, has in our
Eng. Bible. es :

(2) In asecondary or tropical sense it Is used with
equal frequency, usually with various prepositions.


Thus (a) To attack: Jgs 9 33, AV “and sct upon the
city.” (6) To imprint: Gen 4 15, AV “The Lord
set a mark upon Cain.” (ec) Todirectto: 1 Ik 2 15,
“And that all Israel sct their faces on me.” (d)
To place: 1 KK 20 12, Ben-hadad shouted one word
to his allies: ‘‘Set,’’ ie. set the armics in array, the
battering-rams and engines of attack in their place.
(e) To incline toward: Ezk 40 4, “Set thy heart
upon all that I shall show.” (f) To trust in: Ps 62
10, “If riches increase, set not your heart thereon.”
(g) To place before: Ps 90 8, “Thou hast set our
iniquities before’; Ps 141 3, “Seta watch, O Jch,
before my mouth.” (Ah) To go down: of the sctting
of the sun (Mk 1 32; Lk 4 40). (2) To be proud:
Mal 3 15, AV “They that work wickedness arc
set up.” (j) To fill in: Ex 36 9, “stones to be
set, for the ephod.” (k) To plant: Mk 12 1, “sct
a hedge about it.’ () To mock: Lk 23 11,
“Herod .... set him at nought.” (m) To honor:
1 § 18 30, ‘so that his name was much set by.”
(n) To start: Acts 21 2, “We went aboard, and set
sail.” As may beseen the word is used in an endless
variety of meanings. Henry E. Dosxer


SETH, seth, SHETH, sheth (MW, shéh; =46,
Séth):

(1) The son born to Adam and Eve after the
death of Abel (Gen 4 25f; 6 3ff; 1 Ch 11; Sir
49 16; Lk 3 38). In Gen 4 25 the derivation of
the name is given. Eve “called his name Seth: For,
said she, God hath appointed [shaih] me another seed
instead of Abel.” In 1 Ch 11 AV, the form is
“Sheth”; elsewhere in AV and in RV throughout
the form is “Seth.”

(2) AV “the children of Sheth,’? RV “the sons
of tumult.”” Aecording to AV rendering, the name
of an unknown race mentioned in Balaam’s parable
(Nu 24 17). 8S. F. Honter


SETHOR, sé’thur (TINO, sthar; Zabovp, Sa-
thouir): An Asherite spy (Nu 13 13 [14]).


SETTING, set‘ing (N22, millw ah, lit. “a fill-
ing’): The word is used in the description of the
manufacture of the breastplate of judgment (Ex 28
17). The instruction runs: ‘‘Thou shalt set in it
settings of stones,’ viz. four rows of precious
stones. The same word is rendered ‘‘inclosings’’
in ver 20, and in 39 13 AV.


SETTLE, set”! (TITY, ‘dzarah): For this word in
Ezk 43 14.17.20; 465 19, ARV and ERVm sub-
stitute more correctly “ledge.” See Tempe.


SETTLE: The Heb language has 8 words which
are thus tr¢: yashabh, ndhath, ‘amadh, shakat, tabha',
nacabh, makom, kdpha’. Now the meaning is to settle
down, to cause to occur (Ezk 36 11 AV; 1 Ch 17
14); then it denotes fixedness (2 IX 8 11; Ps 119
89; Prov 8 25); again it points to a condition of
absolute quiescence, as the settlings on the lees (Jer
48 11); and in still another place it means packing
solidly together (Ps 66 10). In the NT the words
édpaios, hedratos, Oeuedide, themelidd, and 7lOyut, tithémi,
have becn tr4 “settle.” RV in 1 Pct 5 10 has tr4
“establish,” and the context unquestionably points
to the idea of a fixed establishment in the faith.
Ju Lk 21 14 the word tr4 “settle” cvidently points
to a fixed determination. Henry E. Doskrer


SEVEN, sev’’n (920, shebha'; éwré, heptd). See
NuMBER.


SEVEN CHURCHES.
SEVEN STARS. See AsTRONOMY.


See CHURCHES, SEVEN.


Seveneh
Shade, Shadow


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2744


SEVENEH, sé-ven’e, se-vé’ne (1210, s*wénéh):
For AV ‘‘the tower of Syene,”’ in Ezk 29 10; 30 6,
RV reads, “the tower of Seveneh,” with note m,
“or, from Migdol to Syene.” Seveneh is the town at
the First Cataract in Egypt, now known as Assuan.
Fresh interest has recently been given to it by the
Elephantine discoveries bearing on the ancient Jew-
ish colony and temple of Jeh in that place in the 5th
cent. BC. See Aramaic; Eerrr; Papyri; Sanc-
TUARY, 4, etc.


SEVENTH, sev’’nth, DAY. See Sasparu.


SEVENTY, sev’n-ti (DIVA, shibh'tm; EPSoph-
xovta, hebdomékonta). See NUMBER.


SEVENTY DISCIPLES: The account of the
designation and mission of these is found only in
Lk 10. Some have therefore sought to maintain
that we have here only a confused variant of the
appointment of the Twelvé; but this is impossible
in the light of Luke’s account of the Twelve in ch 9.

The documents vary as between the numbers
seventy and seventy-two, so that it is impossible
to determine which is the correct reading; and
internal evidence does not help at all in this case.
There is nothing in the function or circumstances
to indicate any reason for the specific number.

Commentators have sought parallels in the seventy
elders chosen to assist Moses (Nu 11) and suppose that
Jesus was incidentally indicating Himself as the ‘‘ prophet
like unto Moses'’ whom God would raise up.

Again, the Jews popularly reckoned the _‘'number of
the nations of the earth’’ at seventy (cf Gen 10), and
some have supposed Jesus to he thus indicating that
His gospel is universal. Attention is called_to the fact
that the Seventy are not forbidden to go to Gentiles and
that their commission probably included Peraea, where
many Gentiles were to be found. Some, again, have
supposed that Jesus had in mind the Jewish Sanhedrin,
composed of seventy (or seventy-two), and that the
appointment of a like number to extend the work of His
kingdom was a paraholic recognition that as the Jews
were officially rejecting Him, so He was rejecting them
as agents for the work of the kingdom. It is impossible
to speak with any certainty as to any of these suggestions.
It is to he noted that there is the same confusion he-
tween the numbers seventy and seventy-two in all four
Instances, as also in the tradition as to the number of
translators of the LXX.

Inasmuch as no further mention is made of these
workers, it is to be understood that they were ap-
pointed for a temporary ministry. Tradition
names several of them and identifies them with
disciples active after Pentecost. While it is prob-
able that some of these were witnesses later, the
tradition is worthless in details. The mission of
these and the reason assigned for their appoint-
ment are essentially the same as in the case of the
Twelve. Jesus is now completing His last popular
campaign in preaching and introducing the king-
dom of heaven. The employing of these in this
service is in line with the permanent ideal of Chris-
tianity, which makes no distinction between the
“laymen’’ and the “clergy” in responsibility and
service. Jesus was perhaps employing all whose
experience and sympathy made them fit for work in
the harvest that was so plenteous while the laborers
were few. He found seventy such now as He
would find a hundred and twenty such after His
ascension (Acts 1 15). WILLIAM OWEN CARVER


SEVENTY WEEKS: The “seventy weeks” of
the prophecy in Dn] 9 24-27 have long heen a sub-
ject of controversy in the critical schools. The
conflicting views may be seen very fully in Dr.
Driver’s Dnl, 94 ff, 143 ff, and Dr. Pusey’s Daniel
the Prophet, lects II, III, IV. On both sides it is
agreed that the “weeks” in this prophecy are to
be interpreted as ‘‘weeks of years,’’ i.e. the 70 weeks
represent 490 years. This period, commencing


with “the going forth of the commandments to
restore and build Jerus”’ (ver 25), is divided into three
parts, 7 weeks (49 years), 62 weeks (434 years),
and one week (7 years). The 69 weeks extend to
the appearance of “an anointed one [Heb ‘‘Mes-
siah’’], the prince” (ver 25), who, after the 62 weeks,
shall be “‘cut off” (ver 26), apparently in the “midst”
of the 70th week (ver 27). On the traditional view
(see Pusey), the 69 weeks (483 years) mark the
interval from the decree to rebuild Jerus till the
appearance of Christ; and if, with Pusey, the
decree in question be taken to be that of the 7th
year of Artaxerxes (457-56 BC; the mission of
Ezra; cf Ezr 7 8 ff), confirmed and extended in the
20th year of the same king (mission of Nehemiah;
ef Neh 2 1 ff), the 483 years run out ahout 27-28
AD, when Our Lord’s public ministry began. On
the other hand, the view which supposes that the
Book of Dnl belongs wholly to the Maccabean age,
and does not here contain genuine prediction, is
under the necessity of making the 490 years termi-
nate with the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes (171-164
BC), and this, it is admitted, cannot be done. To
give time the violent expedient is adopted of dating
the commencement of the 70 weeks from the
prophecy of Jeremiah of the 70 years’ captivity, or
of the rebuilding of Jerus (606 or 587 BC), ie.
before the captivity had begun. Even this, as Dr.
Driver admits (p. 146), leaves us in 171 BC, some
67 years short of the duration of the 62 weeks, and
a hnge blunder of the writer of Dnl has to be as-
sumed. The divergent reckonings are legion, and
are mutually contradictory (see table m Pusey, p.
217). To mvalidate the older view Dr. Driver
avails himself of the altered renderings of vs 25
and 27 in ERV. It is to be noted, however, that
ARV does not follow ERV in these changes. Thus,
whereas ERV reads in ver 25, “‘Unto the anointed
one, the prince, shall be seven weeks: and three-
score and two weeks, it shall be built again,” and
accordingly takes “the anointed one” of ver 26 to
be a distinct person, ARV (as also ERVm) reads,
asin AV, “shall be seven weeks, and threescore and
two weeks.” Again, where ERV reads in ver 27
“Por the half of the week he shall cause the sacrifice
and the oblation to cease,’”? ARV (and ERVm) has
as formerly, ‘In the midst of the week he shall
cause” ete (conversely, in ver 25 ARVm gives the
ERV rendering). The question cannot be dis-
cussed here, but it is believed that the traditional
interpretation may yet claim acceptance from those
who do not accept the postulates of the newer
critical writers. See Danie; JUBILEES, Book oF.
JaMEs ORR
SEVENTY YEARS: The period assigned by
Jeremiah for the duration of the Jewish exile m
Babylon (Jer 25 11.12; 29 10; cf 2 Ch 36 21f;
Ezr 11; Dnl 92). If the period be reckoned
from the date of the first deportation in the 4th
year of Jehoiakim (2 K 24 1; 2 Ch 36 6 ff; Dnl
1 1 by another reckoning calls it the 3d year), i.e.
606 BC, till the decree of Cyrus, 536 BC, the pre-
diction was fulfilled to a year. See Captivity.


SEVER, sev’ér: The three Heb words badhal,
palah and paradh are thus tr’. The idea conveyed
is that of setting apart (Lev 20 26 AV) or of setting
someone or something apart in a miraculous way
(Ex 8 22; 9 4 AV, ERV), or, again, of simple sepa-
ration on one’s own volition (Jgs 4 11 AV, ERY).
The Gr word ddoplf{w, aphorizd (Mt 13 49) stands
for final judicial segregation.


SEVERAL, sev’ér-al, SEVERALLY, sev’ér-al-i:
The Heb words hophshath and hophshith, tr
“several” in AV, ERV, 2 K 15 5; 2 Ch 26 21, are
in both cases tr‘ “separate” in ARV, and indicate


2745


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Seveneh
Shade, Shadow


ceremonial uncleanness and consequent severance
on account of leprosy. In the parable of the
Talents (Mt 25 15) and also in 1 Cor 12 11 the
word tos, idios, is tr’ “several,” “severally.”
In both cases it points to the individuality of the
Tecipients of the gift bestowed.


SHAALABBIN, sh3-a-lab’in (P229W, sha'dlab-
bin; B, ZadaPelv, Salabein, A, Zadapelv, Salamein):
A town in the territory of Dan named between Ir-
shemesh and Aijalon (Josh 19 42). It seems to
be identical with Suaatsim.


SHAALBIM, shi-al’bim (D°A99W, sha‘albim;
B, Byfadapel, Béthalamet, A, Zadaelp, Salabeim,
in Josh BA, @odoPeip, Thalabeim): When the
Amorites had forced the children of Dan into the
mountain they came and dwelt in Mt. Heres, Aija-
lon and Shaalbim, where, it appears, they were made
tributary to_the house of Joseph (Jgs 1 35). In
the time of Solomon it was included in the admin-
istrative district presided over by Ben-deker, along
with Makaz, Beth-shemesh and Elon-beth-hanan
(1 K 4 9). Beth-shemesh is the same as Ir-shemesh
(Josh 19 42). Shaalbim is probably only another
name of Shaalabbin. One of David’s mighty men
is called Eliahba the Shaalbonite. This presumes
the existence of a town called Shaalbon (2 8 23 32;
1 Ch 11 33), which again is probably identical with
Shaalbim. Onom identifies it with Salaba, a large
village in the district, of Sebaste (Samaria), which
apparently Eusebius and Jerome thought to be in
the territory of Dan. It seems, however, too far
to the N. Jerome in his comm. on Ezk 48 speaks
of the towers of Aijalon and Selebi and Emmaus.
Conder would identify Selebi with Selbit, 3 miles
N.W. of Aijalon (Y4lo), and 8 miles N. of Beth-
shemesh. This wonld snit for Shaalbim, as far as
position is concerned; but it is difficult to account
for the heavy ¢ in the name, if derived from Shaalbim.

W. Ewine

SHAALBONITE, shi-al-bd’/nit, sh4-al’bé-nit
QZA2IWO , ha-sha‘alboni; 6 ZaraBwvelrys, ho Sala-
boneités [2 S 28 32], B, 6 ‘Opel, ho Hamel, A,
6 DadaPovl, ho Salabént): Eliahba, one of David’s
heroes, a native of Shaalbon. See Swaaisim.


SHAALIM, sha’a-lim, LAND OF (0°22 PrN,
’erec sha‘dlim; B, ths yis’Eacakép, tés gés Hasakém,
A, Tis yijs Zaadelp, és gés Saaleim; AV Shalim):
Saul in search of his father’s asses passed through
Mt. Ephraim and the land of Shalishah, then
through the land of Shaalim and the land of yemini.
This last name EV renders “Benjamin” (1 5 9 4).
The whole passage is so obscure that no certain
conclusions can be reached. The search party may
have proceeded northward from Gibeah, through
the uplands of Ephraim, turnmg then westward,
then southward, and finally eastward. We should
thus look for the land of Shalishah and the land of
Shaalim on the west side of the mountain range:
and the latter may have been on the slopes to the
E. of Lydda. Possibly we ought here to read
“Shaalbim,” instead of “Shaalim.” W. Ewine


SHAAPH, sha’af (09, sha‘aph):

(1) A son of Jahdai (1 Ch 2 47). —

(2) The son of Maachah, a concubine of Caleb,
the brother of Jerahmeel. Shaaph is called the
“father, or founder, of the city Madmannah (1 Ch
2 48 f).


SHAARAIM, shi-a-ri’im (OTI2W, sha‘drayim,
“two gates”; Zanapelp, Sakareim; AV Sharaim):
(1) A city in the Shephelah or “lowland” of
Judah mentioned (Josh 15 36) in close association


with Socoh and Azekah; the vanquished army of
the Philis passed a Shaaraim in their flight from
Socoh toward Gath and Ekron (1 8 17 52). It
is possible that in this latter reference the “two
gates’’ may refer—as LXX implies—to the two
Phili strongholds themselves. Shaaraim has been
identified with Tell Zakartya (see however AZEKAB)
and with Kh. Sa‘treh (PEF, 111, 124, Sh XVII),
an old site W. of Beit ‘Atab. Both proposals are
hazardous.

(2) One of the towns of Simeon (1 Ch 4 31),
called (Josh 19 6) “Sharuhen” and, as one of the
uttermost cities of Judah, called (Josh 16 32)
‘Shilhim.” This town was in Southwestern Pal
and is very probably identical with the fortress
Sharhana, a place of some importance on the road
from Gaza to Egypt. Aahmes (XVIIIth Dynasty)
besicged and captured this city in the 5th year of
his reign in his pursuit of the flying Hyksos (Petrie,
Hist, 11, 22, 35), and a century later Tahutmes III,
in the 23d year of his reign, took the city of Sharu-
hen on his way to the siege and capture of Megiddo
(Petrie, Hist, II, 104). On_ philological grounds
Tell esh-Sheri‘ah, 12 miles N.W. of Beersheba, a
large ruin, has been proposed, but it does not suit
at all the Egyp data (PEF, ITI, 399, Sh XXIV).

E. W. G. MAsTERMAN

SHAASHGAZ, sha-ash’gaz (TaWIW, sha‘ash-
gaz; LXX reads Tat, Gai, the same name it gives
to the official referred to in Est 2 8.15; the name
may go back to the Old Bactrian word Sdsakshant,
“one anxious tolearn” [Scheft]; most commentators
suggest no explanation): A chamberlain of Ahas-
uerus, king of Persia; as keeper of ‘‘the second
house of women,” he had Esther under his charge
(ver 14).


SHABBETHAI, shab’é-thi (MAW, shabbethay,
“one born on the Sabbath”; B, ZaPalal, Sabathai,
A, KafBabal,. Kabbathat=“Sabbateus” of 1 Esd
9 14): A Levite who opposed (?) Ezra’s suggestion
that the men who had married foreign wives put
them aside (Ezr 10 15). Kuenen, however, ren-
ders the phrase MRT op VVay , ‘amedhii ‘al 20’ th, of
which Asahiel and Jahaziah are the subjects, to
mean “stand over,” “have charge of,” rather than
“stand against,” “oppose” (Gesammelte Abhand-
lungen, 247f); this would make Shabbethai, who
was in accord with the two men mentioned above,
an ally rather than an opponent of Ezra. We in-
cline toward Kuenen’s interpretation in view of the
position attained by Shabbethai under Nehemiah—
one he would have been unlikely to attain had he
been hostile to Ezra. He is mentioned amon
those appointed to explain the Law (Neh 8 7), and
as one of the chiefs of the Levites who had the over-
sight of “the outward business of the house of
God” (Neh 11 16). Horace J. Wour


SHACHIA, sha-ki’a, shak’i-a (73D , sakh yah [so
Baer, Ginsberg]; some edd read N°2W, sakheya’,
or NIDW, sakheyd’; also TDW, shakheyah, and
AW, shabheyah. This last reading is favored by
the Syrian and the LXX [B, ZaBla, Sabia, A, EePrd,
Sebid, but Luc., Lexa, Sechid]; the forms in kh (3)
instead of bh (2) have the support of the Vulg,
Sechia, ‘Yahweh has forgotten’’[?]): A name in a
genealogy of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 10).


SHADDAI, shad’a-i, shad’i. See Gop, Names
or, [1, 8.


SHADE, shid,, SHADOW, shad’s, SHADOW-
ING, shad’d-ing (02, cél; oid, skid): A shadow is
any obscuration of the light and heat with the form


Shadow of Death
Shalmaneser


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2746


of the intervening object, obscurely projected, con-
stantly changing and passing away. “Shadow”’ is
used lit. of a roof (Gen 19 8), of mountains (Jgs
9 36), of trees (Jgs 9 15, etc), of wings (Ps 17 8,
etc), of a cloud (Isa 25 5), of a great rock (Isa
32 2), of a man (Peter, Acts 6 15), of the shadow
on the dial (2 K 20 9, etc), of Jonah’s gourd (Jon
4 5f). It is used also figuratively (1) of shelter
and protection (of man, Gen 19 8; Cant 2 3; Isa
16 3, etc; of God, Ps 36 7; 91 1; Isa 4 6, etc);
(2) of anything fleeting or transient, as of the days
of man’s life on earth (1 Ch 29 15; Job 8 9; Ps
109 23); (3) with the idea of obscnrity or imper-
fection (in He 8 5; 10 1, of the Law; cf Col 2
17); (4) of darkness, gloom; see SHapow or
Dears. In Jas 1 17, we have in AV, “the Father
of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning” (aposkiasma), RV “shadow that
is cast by turning’; the reference is to the un-
changeableness of God as contrasted with the
changes of the heavenly bodies. RV has “of the
rusthng of wings” for “shadowing with wings” in
Isa 18 1; ARV has “shade” for “shadow’’ in
various places (Jgs 9 15; Job 40 22; Isa 4 6,
etc). In Job 40 21.22, for “‘shady trees’ RV has
“Jotus-trees.”’ W. L. Waker


SHADOW OF DEATH (nay, calmdweth):
The Heb word tr4 “shadow of death”’ is used poeti-
eally for thick darkness (Job 3 5), as descriptive
of Sheol (Job 10 21f; 12 22; 38 17); figuratively
of deep distress (Job 12 22; 16 16; 24 I7 bis; 28 3;
34 22 [in the last three passages ARV has “thick
darkness” and ‘‘thick gloom’’]; Ps 23 4, RVm “deep
darkness [and so elsewhere]; 44 19; 107 10.14; Isa
9 2; Jer 2 6; 13 16; Am 5 8; Mt 4 16; Lk 1 79,
skid thandtau). The Heb word is perhaps composed
of ¢él, “shadow,” and médweth, “death,” and the
idea of ‘the valley of the shadow of death” was
most probably derived from the deep ravines, dark-
ened by over-hanging briars, etc, through which the
shepherd had sometimes to lead or drive his sheep
to new and better pastures. W. L. Waker


SHADRACH, sha’drak: The Bab name of one
of the so-called Heb children. Shadrach is probably
the Sumerian form of the Bab Kudurru-Aki, “serv-
ant of Sin.’ It has been suggested by Meinhold
that we should read Merodach instead of Shadrach.
Since there were no vowels in the original Heb or
Aram., and since sh and m as well as r and d are
much alike in the old alphabet in which Dnl was
written, this change is quite possible.

Shadrach and his two companions were trained
along with Daniel at the court of Nebuchadnezzar,
who had carried all four captive in the expedition
against Jerus in the 3d year of Jehoiakim (Dnl 1 1).
They all refused to eat of the food provided by
Ashpenaz, the master who had been sct over them
by the king, but preferred to eat pulse (Dn) 1 12).
The effect was much to their advantage, as they
appeared fairer and fatter in flesh than those who
ate of the king’s meat. At the end of the appointed
time they passed satisfactory examinations, both
as to their physical appearance and their intellectual
acquirements, so that none were found like them
among all with whom the king communed, and they
stood before the king (see Dnl 1).

When Daniel heard that the wise men of Babylon
were to be slain because they could not tell the
dream of Nebuchadnezzar, after he had gained a
respite from the king, he made the thing known to
his three companions that they might unite with
him in prayer to the God of heaven that they all
might not perish with the rest of the wise men of
Babylon. After God had heard their prayer and
the dream was made known to the king by Daniel,


Nebuchadnezzar, at Daniel’s request, set Shadrach,
Meshach and Abed-nego over the affairs of the
province of Babylon (Dnl 2). With Meshach and
Abed-nego, Shadrach was cast into a fiery furnace,
but escaped unhurt (Dn1 3). See ABED-NEGO; Han-
ANIAH; Sone oF THREE CHILDREN.


R. Dick WILson
SHADY, shad’i, TREES (Job 40 21f). See
Lotus TREEs.


SHAFT, shaft: Isa 49 2 for PTI, hée, ‘“anarrow”;
also Ex 25 31; 37 17; Nu 8 4 AV fora part of the
candlestick of the tabernacle somewhat vaguely
designated by the word 777, yarekh, “thigh.” The
context in the first 2 verses shows that the upright
stem or ‘‘shaft’’ is intended, but in Nu 8 4 a differ-
ent context has caused RV to substitute ‘‘base.”’
See also ARcHERY; ARMoR, ARMs.


SHAGEE, sha’ge (XN, shaghe’; B, Dodd, Sold,
A, Zayf, Sagé; AV Shage): The father of Jona-
than, one of David’s heroes (I Ch 11 34).


SHAHARAIM, sha-ha-ra‘im (DYINW, shahd-
rayim; B, Saaphd, Saarél, A, Saaphp, Saarém): A
Benjamite name (1 Ch 8 8). The passage is cor-
rupt beyond only the most tentative emendation.
“Sharaim” has no connection with the foregoing
text. One of the suggested restorations of vs 8.9
reads: ‘‘And Shaharaim begat in the field of Moab,
after he had driven them [i.e. the Moabhites] out,
from Hodesh his wife, Jobab,”’ etc (Curtis, ICC).


SHAHAZUMAH, sha-ha-2z60’ma, sha-haz’66-ma
(VOISTW , shahdgamah; B, Dadelp kara Gddarcay,
Saleim katd thdlassan, A, Zaorepad, Saseimdth; AV
Shahazimah, sha-haz’i-mah): A town in the terri-
tory of Issachar on the boundary which ran from
Tabor to the Jordan (Josh 19 22}. The site, which
has not yet been recovered, must be sought, prob-


ably, to the 8.E. of the mountain. :


SHALEM, shi’lem (ody , shalém; els Dadhp, eis
Salém): The word as a place-name occurs only in
Gen 33 18. With Luther, following LXX, Pesh
and Vulg, AV reads ‘“‘And Jacob came to Shalem,
a city of Shechem.” RV with the Tgs Onkelos and
pseudo-Jonathan, the Sam codex and the Arab.,
reads, ‘‘came in peace to the city of Shechem.”
There is a heavy balance of opinion among scholars
in favor of the latter reading. It is certainly a
remarkable fact, supporting AV, that about 4 miles
E. of Shechem (Nablus), there is a village bearing
the name Salem. If AV is right, this must repre-
sent the city referred to; and E. of Salem would
transpire the events recorded in Gen 44. Against
this is the old tradition locating Jacob’s well and
Joseph’s tomb near to Shechem. Onom gets over
the difficulty by identifying Shalem with Shechem.


Ewing
SHALIM, shi’lim. See Suaauim.


SHALISHAH, sha-li’sha, shal’i-shi, LAND OF
(AWOW-P A , ’eree shdlishth; B, h yi Dedya, hé
gé Selchd, A, yi Baruoroa, hé gé Salissdé): If the
general indication -of the route followed by Saul,
given under SHAALIM, is correct, the land of Shali-
shah (1 § 9 4) will he to the N.E. of Lydda on the
western slope of the range. Baal-shahshah would
most likely be in the district, and may indeed have
given its name to it. If Conder is right in identify-
ing this city with Khirbet Kefr Thilth, about 19
miles N.E. of Jaffa, it meets well enough the general
indication given above. Onam knows the name,
but gives no guidance as to where the district is.


2747


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Shadow of Death


Shalmaneser


Baal-shalishah it places in the Thamnite region,
15 miles N. of Diospolis (Lydda). No boundaries
can be laid down, but probability points to this
neighborhood. Ewina


SHALLECHETH, shal’é-keth, sha-lé’keth, THE
GATE (M230 PW, sha'ar shallekheth, i.e. as in m,
“Casting forth”): A gate of the temple “at the
causeway that goeth up” (1 Ch 26 16)—probably
an ascent from the Tyropmon Valley to the W. of
the temple. It has been supposed on account of
the meaning of the name that the ashes and offal
of the temple were cast forth there, but this is very
unlikely—they were thrown into the Kidron valley
to the E. or 8.E. The LXX has racrogopior,
pastophorion, which seems to point to a building
with chambers; in consonance with this Cheyne


reads in the Heb MDW}, lishkath, “[of] the cham-
bers.” E. W. G. Mastrerman


SHALLUM, shal’um (0730, shallam, DPV,
shallum; variousformsin LXX): This is the name of
not less than 12 Heb persons:

(1) The youngest son of Naphtali (1 Ch 7 13).
He is also called ‘‘Shillem” in Gen 46 24; Nu 26

(2) A descendant of Simeon, the son of Shaul
and the father of Mibsam (1 Ch 4 25). He lived
in 1618 BC.

(3) The son of Sismai “son” of Shesham of the
ube of Judah (1 Ch 2 40.41). He lived in 1300


(4) Ason of Kore, a porter of the sanctuary dur-
ing the reign of David (1 Ch 9 17.19.31; Ezr 2
42: Neh 7 45). The name is also written ‘Me-
shullam” in Neh 12 25, “Salum” in 1 Esd 6 28,
“Meshelemiah” in 1 Ch 26 1.2.9, and “Shelemiah”
inl Ch 26 14. He lived about 1050 BC.

(5) A son of Zadok and father of Hilkiah, a high
priest and ancestor of Ezra the scribe (1 Ch 6 12.
13; Ezr 7 2). In the works of Jos he is called
“Sallumus’; in 1 Esd 8 1, ‘Salem,’ and in 2 Esd
11, “Salemas.”

(6) The 15th king of Israel.
article. ;

(7) A son of Bani, a priest who had taken a
heathen wife and was compelled by Ezra the scribe
to put her away (Ezr 10 42; omitted in 1 Hsd 9 34).

(8) The father of Jehizkiah, an Ephraimite in the
time of Ahaz king of Israel (2 Ch 28 12).

(9) The husband of the prophetess Huldah (2 K
22 14; 2 Ch 34 22). He was the keeper of the
sacred wardrobe and was probably the uncle of
Jeremiah the prophet (Jer 32 7; cf Jer 36 4).

(10) King of Judah and son of Josiah (Jer 22 11;
1 Ch 3 15), better known by the name Jehoahaz
JI. This name he received when he ascended the
throne of the kingdom of Judah (2 Ch 36 1).

(11) A Levite who was a porter at the time of
Ezra (Ezr 10 24; ‘“Sallumus” in 1 Esd 9 25).

(12) A ruler over a part of Jerus and a son, of
Hallohesh. He with his daughters aided in build-
ing the walls of Jerus in the time of Nehemiah
(Neh 3 12). S. L. Umpacu


SHALLUM (0790, shallim, 02, shallwm, “the
requited one” {2 K 15 10-15]): The 15th king of
Israel, and successor of Zechariah, whom he pub-
licly assassinated in the 7th month of his reign.
Nothing more is known of Shallum than that he
was a son of Jabesh, which may indicate that he
was a Gileadite from beyond Jordan. He is said
to have made ‘‘a conspiracy” against Zechariah, so
was not alone in hiscrime. The conspirators, how-
ever, had but a short-lived success, as, when Shallum
had “reigned for the space of a month in Samaria,


See following


Menahem, then at Tirzah, one of the minor capitals
of the kingdom, went up to Samaria, slew him and
took his place.

It was probably at this time that Syria threw off
the yoke of tribute to Israel (sce JeRoBoAm II), as
when next we meet with that kingdom, it is under
js ae king and in alliance with Samaria (2 K

The 10 years of rule given to Menahem (2 K
16 17) may be taken to include the few months of
military violence under Zechariah and Shallum,
and cover the full years 758-750, with portions of
years before and after counted as whole ones. The
unsuccessful usurpation of Shallum may therefore
be put in 758 BC (some date lower).

W. Spaaw Capecotr

SHALLUN, shal’un (Poe , shallan, notin LXX):
Another form of Shallum, the son of Col-hozeh. He
was the ruler of the district of Mizpah. He assisted
Nehemiah in building the wall of Jerus and in repair-
ing the gate by the Pool of Siloah at the King’s
Gardens (Neh 3 15).


SHALMAI, shal’mi, shal’ma-i: AV form in Ezr
2 46 for “Shamlai”’; Neh 7 48 “Salmai” (q.v.).


SHALMAN, §shal’/man (Way, shalman): A
name of uncertain meaning, found only once in the
OT (Hos 10 14), in connection with a place-name,
equally obscure, ‘‘as Shalman destroyed Beth-
arbel.” Shalman is most commonly interpreted
as a contracted form of Shalmaneser, the name of
several Assyr kings. If this explanation is correct,
the king referred to cannot be identified. Some
have thought of Shalmaneser IV, who is said to
have undertaken expeditions against the West in
775 and in 773-772. Others have proposed Shal-
maneser V, who attacked Samaria in 725. This,
however, is improbable, because the activity of
Hosea ceased before Shalmaneser V became king.
Shalman has also been identified with Salamanu, a
king of Moab in the days of Hosea, who paid tribute
to Tiglath-pileser V of Assyria; and with Shalmah,
a North Arabian tribe that invaded the Negeb.
The identification of BrrH-aRBEL (q.v.) is equally
uncertain. From the reference it would seem that
the event in question was well known and, there-
fore, probably one of recent date and considerable
importance, but our present historical knowledge
does not enable us to connect any of the persons
named with the destruction of any of the localities
suggested for Beth-arbel. The ancient tr® offer no
solution; they too seem to have been in the dark.

F.C, Eiseien

SHALMANESER, shal-ma-né’zér (TON}"990,
shalman’eser; LXX Zapevwdoap, Samenndsar,
Zadpavacap, Salmandsar): The name of several
Assyr kings. See Assyria; ASSYRIAN CaPTIviTy.
It is Shalmaneser IV who is mentioned in the Bib.
history (2 K 17 3; 18 9). He succeeded Tiglath-
pileser on the throne in 727 BC, but whether he was
a son of his predecessor, or a usurper, is not appar-
ent. His reign was short, and, as no annals of it
have come to light, we have only the accounts con-
tained in 2 K for his history. In the passages
referred to above, we learn that Hoshea, king of
Israel, who had become his vassal, refused to con-
tinue the payment of tribute, relying upon help
from So, king of Egypt. No help, however, came
from Egypt, and Hoshea had to face the chastising
forces of his suzerain with his own unaided resources,
the result being that he was taken prisoner outside
Samaria and most likely carried away to Nineveh.
The Bib. narrative goes on to say that the king of
Assyria came up throughout all the land, and went
up to Samaria and besieged it 3 years. There is


Shama
Shaphan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2748


reason to believe that, as the siege of Samaria was
proceeding, Shalmaneser retired to Nineveh and
died, for, when the city was taken in 722 BC, it is
Sargon who claims, in his copious annals, to have
captured it and carried its inhabitants into cap-
tivity. It is Just possible that Shalman (Hos 10
14) is a contraction for Shalmaneser, but the iden-
tity of Shalman and of Beth-arbel named in the
same passage is not sufficiently made out.


Lirerature.—Schrader, COT, I, 258 ff; McCurdy,
HPM,I, 387 f.
T. Nrcou


SHAMA, sha’ma easy , shéma‘): One of David’s
heroes (1 Ch 11 44).


SHAMATI, sham’a-3. See Saumat.
SHAMARIAH, sham-a-ri’a, sha-mir’ya. Sec
SHEMARIAH.


SHAMBLES, sham’b’lz (pakeAdov, mdkellon):
A slaughter-house; then a butcher’s stall, meat-
market. The word is once used in the NT in 1 Cor
10 25.


SHAME, sham (W'3, bdsh, “to be ashamed,”
MWA, bosheth, “shame,” OP, kalon; alexiva,
aischtiné, “ignominy,” a&tiple, aftmia, “dishonor,”
and other words): An oft-recurring word in Scripture
almost uniformly bound up with a sense of sin and
guilt. It is figuratively set forth as a wild beast (Jer
3 24), a Nessus-garment (3 25), a blight (20 18),
a sin against one’s own soul (Hab 2 10), and twice
as the condensed symbol of Heb abomination—
Baal (Jer 11 183m; Hos 9 10m; see IsH-BOSHETH).
It is bracketed with defeat (1sa 30 3), reproach
(Ps 69 7; Isa 54 4; Mic 2 6), confusion (Isa
6 7), nakedness (Isa 47 3; Mic 1 11), everlast-
ing contempt (Dnl 12 2), folly (Prov 18 13),
cruelty (1sa 60 6; He 12 2), poverty (Prov 13
18), nothingness (Prov 9 7 AV), unseemliness
(1 Cor 11 6; 14 35 AV; Eph 6 12), and “them
that go down to the pit” (Ezk 32 25). In the
first Bib. reference to this emotion, “shame” ap-
pears as “‘the correlative of sin and guilt’? (De-
litzsch, New Comm. on Gen and Bib. Psychology).
Shamelessness is characteristic of abandoned wick-
edness (Phil 3 19; Jude ver 13, m ‘‘Gr ‘shames’’’).
Manifestly, then, shame is a concomitant of the
Divine judgment upon sin; the very worst that a
Hebrew could wish for an enemy was that he might
be clothed with shame (Ps 109 29), that the judg-
ment of God might rest upon him visibly.

Naturally, to the Hebrew, shame was the portion
of those who were idolaters, who were faithless to
Jeh or who were unfriendly to themselves—the
elect people of Jeh. Shame is to come upon Moab
because Moab held Israel in derision (Jer 48 39.27),
and upon Edom ‘for violence against his brother
Jacob” (Ob ver 10). But also, and impartially,
shame is the portion of faithless Israelites who deny
Jeh and follow after strange gods (Ezk 7 18; Mic
710; Hos 10 6, and often). But shame, too,
comes upon those who exalt themselves against God,
who trust in earthly power and the show of mate-
rial strength (2 Ch 32 21; Isa 30 3); and upon
those who make a mock of righteousness (Job 8 22;
Ps 35 26; 132 18). With a fine sense of ethical
distinctions the Bib. writers recognize that in con-
fessing to a sense of shame there is hope for better
things. Only in the most desperate cases is there
no sense of shame (Hos 418; Zeph 3 5; Phil
3 19; Jude ver 13); in pardon God is said to
remove shame (Isa 54 4 bis; 61 7).

On conditions beyond the grave the Bib. revela-
tion is exceedingly reticent, but here and there are
hints that shame waits upon the wicked here and


hereafter. Such an expression as that in Dnl
(12 2) cannot be ignored, and though the writing
itself may belong to a late period and a somewhat
sophisticated theological development, the idea is
but a reflection of the earlier and more elementary
period, when the voice of crime and cruelty went
up from earth to be heard in the audience chamber
of God (Gen 4 11; 6 13). In the NT there is
similar reticence but also similar implications. It
cannot be much amiss to say that in the mind of the
Bib. writers sin was a shameful thing; that part of
the punishment for sin was a consciousness of guilt
in the sense of shame; and that from this conscious-
ness of guilt there was no deliverance while the sin
was unconfessed and unforgiven. “Many of them
that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some
to everlasting life and some to shame and everlast-
ing contempt.” From one’s own past there is no
deliverance, save through contrition of spirit and the
grace and forgiveness of God. While the sense of
shame persists, or, in other words, while the moral
constitution of man’s nature remains as it is, there
will never be wanting an avenger of sin.
Cuarues M. Stvarr
SHAMED, shi’med. See SHEMED.


SHAMEFACEDNESS, shim’fast-nes, shim-
fas'ed-nes. See SHAMEFASTNESS.
SHAMEFASTNESS, shiam’fast-nes: The origi-


nal AV tr of al&ds, aidds, in Sir 41 16 and 1 Tim
29. Perhaps half a century later the spelling
“shamefacedness”’ supplanted the better form, and
continues in the ordinary editions of the King James
Version. RV, however, rightly restores ‘‘shame-
fastness.”


SHAMER, sha’mér. See SuEMeERr.

SHAMGAR, sham’gir ("49W, shamgar): One
of the judges, son of Anath (‘dénath), in whose days,
which preceded the time of Deborah
(Jgs 6 6.7) and followed those of
Ehud, Israel’s subjugation was so
complete that ‘‘the highways were
unoccupied, and the travelers walked through by-
ways.” The government had become thoroughly
disorganized, and apparently, as in the days of
Deborah, the people were entirely unprepared for
war. Shamgar’s improvised weapon with which
he helped to “save Israel” is spoken of as an ox-
goad. With this he smote of the Philis 600 men.
This is the first mention of the Philis as trouble-
some neighbors of the Israelites (Jgs 3 31). Ac-
cording to a tradition represented in Jos (Ant, V,
iv, 3), Shamgar dicd in the year he became judge.

Several writers have challenged the Bib. account
on the following grounds: that in Jgs 5 no mention

is made of any deliverance; that the
2. Critical name ‘Shamgar” resembles the name
Hypotheses of a Hittite king and thename ‘‘Anath”

that of a Syrian goddess; that the
deed recorded in Jgs 3 31 is analogous to that of
Samson (Jgs 15 15), and that of Shammah, son of
Agee (2 8 23 111); and lastly, that in a group of
Gr MSS and other VSS this verse is inserted after
the account of Samson’s exploits. None of these
is necessarily inconsistent with the traditional
account. Nevertheless, they have been used as a
basis not only for overthrowing the tradition, but
also for constructive theorics such as that which
makes Shamgar a forcign oppressor and not a
judge, and even the father of Sisera. There is,
of course, no limit to which this kind of interesting
speculation cannot leed.

(For a complete account of these views see
Moore, “Jgs,”’ in JCC, 1895, 104 f, and same author


1. Biblical
Account


2749 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA ae
. T_ =
in Journal of the American Oriental Society, XYX,2, | Hanop). One of “the thirty” and captain of Solo-


159-60.) Exiua Davis Isaacs


SHAMUHUTH, sham’huth. See SHaumuan, LV.


SHAMIR, shi/mér (1"9W, shdmir; Zapelp,
Sameir):

(1) Mentioned along with Jattir and Socoh
(Josh 15 48) as one of the cities of Judah in the hill
country. Possibly it is Kh. (or Umm) Sémerah,
2,000 ft. above sea-level, a site with ancient walls,
caves, cisterns and tombs not far W. of Debifr (edh
Dhatheriych) and 2 miles N. of Anab (‘Anab) (PEF,
III, 262, 286, Sh XX).

(2) A place in the hill country of Ephraim (Jgs
10 1) from which came “Tola, the son of Pual, a
man of Issachar,” who judged Israel 23 years; he
died and was buried there. It is an attractive
theory (Schwartz) which would identify the place
with the semi-fortified and strongly-placed town of
Sandr on the road from Ndblus to Jenin. A local
chieftain in the early part of the last century fortified
Sandir and from there dominated the whole district.
That Sanér could hardly have been within the
bounds of Issachar is an objection, but not neces-
sarily a fatal one. It is noticeable that LXX A
has Zapudpea, Samdreia, for Shamir (PEF, II, Sh
XI). E. W. G. Masterman


SHAMIR (7"AV, shdmir; Zapip, Samér):
Kohathite, son of Micah (1 Ch 24 24).


SHAMLAI, sham’l4-i, sham’li. See Saumat.


SHAMMA, sham’a (NQ, shamma’; B, Sepa,
Semd, A, Zappa, Sammd): An Asherite (1 Ch 7 37).


A


SHAMMAH, sham’a (UW, shammah):

(1) The son of Reuel, the son of Esau, a tribal chief
of Edom (Gen 36 13.17; 1 Ch 1 37, Zoué, Somé).

(2) The third son of Jesse and brother of David.
Together with his two other brothers he fought
under Saul in the campaign against the Philis and
was with the army in the valley of Elah when David
slew Goliath (1 8 17 13 ff). One redactor states
that he was a witness of the anointing of David by
Samuel (1 S 16 1-13). He was the father of
Jonadab, the friend of Amnon (2 § 13 3 ff), and
that Jonathan whose victory over a Phili giant
is narrated in 2 S 21 20 ff was also his son. His
name is rendered as “Shammah” (1S 16 9; 17
13), “Shimeah” (2 8 13 3.32), “Shimei” (28 21
21), and “Shimea” (1 Ch 2 13; 20 7).

(3) The son of Agce, a Hararite, one of the
“three mighty men” of David (2 8 23 11, LXX
Zapad, Samatd), who held the field against the
Philis. The || passage (1 Ch 11 10 ff) ascribes this
deed to Eleazar, the son of Dodo. The succeeding
incident (2 8 23 13 ff), viz. the famous act of
three of David’s heroes who risked their lives to
bring their leader water from the well of Bethlehem,
has frequently been credited to Shammah and two
other members of ‘the three”; but the three warriors
are plainly said (ver 13) to belong to “the thirty”;
ver 33 should read ‘Jonathan, son of Shammah, the
Hararite.” Jonathan, one of David’s “thirty,” was
a son of Shammah; the word “son” has been acci-
dentally omitted (Driver, Budde, Kittel, etc).
The || passage (1 Ch 11 34) has ‘“‘son of Shagee,”
which is probably a misreading for “son of Agee.
Lucian’s version, “son of Shammah,” is most plau-
sible. ‘“Shimei the son of Ela” (1 K 4 18) should
also appear in this passage if Lucian’s reading of
“Ela” for “Agee” (2S 23 11) be correct,

(4) A Harodite (2 8 28 25.33), 1e. probably a
native of ‘Ain-harod (‘Ain Jalid, Jgs 7 1; see


mon’s 5th monthly course. In the || lists (1 Ch 11
27) he is called “the Harorite” (this last being a
scribal error for Harodite) and “Shamhuth the Izra-
hite” (1 Ch 27 8). Horace J. Wor


SHAMMAI, sham’4, sham‘ Craw, shammay) :
(1) A Jerahmeelite (1 Ch 2 28.32).
‘5 wae son of Rekem and father of Maon (1 Ch


(3) A Judahite (1 Ch 4 17).


SHAMMOTH, sham’oth, sham’éth. See Suam-
MAH, (4).


SHAMMOUA, SHAMMUAH, sha-mii’a, sham’t-a
(FIAW , shamma*):

(1) The Reubenite spy
Samouél, and other forms).

(2) One of David’s sons (2 8S 5 14; 1 Ch 14 4,
Zappyots, Sammots). In 1 Ch 3 5 he is called
“Shimea.”’

(3) A Levite (Neh 11 17);
maiah”’ in 1 Ch 9 16.

(4) The head of a priestly family (Neh 12 18);
a contemporary of Joiakim.


(Nu 13 4, Zapouyr,


he is called ‘‘She-


SHAMSHERAT, sham’shé-+zi, sham-shé-ra’I
("JWAW, shamsheray): A Benjamite (1 Ch 8 26).


SHAPE, shap: In AV the tr of «fdos, eidos,
‘form,’ ‘‘appearance” (Lk 3 22; Jn 5 37), and of
6polwpna, homotdma, “likeness,” ‘‘resemblance’”’ (Rev
9 7). The meaning of these words is not so
much “tangible shape,” in which sense we use the
word in modern Eng., but rather “aspect,” ‘“ap-
pearance,” the looks of a thing or a person. This
is even the case where the word is joined with the
adj. rwuarikés, simatikds, “bodily,” as in the pas- -
sage Lk 3 22, “The Holy Spirit descended in a
bodily form [i.e. “in a corporeal appearance,’ AV
“in a bodily shape’’], as a dove, upon him.” The
second passage also refers to the ‘“appearance”’ of
God, and cannot therefore be regarded as material
shape: ‘“Ye have neither heard his voice at any
time, nor seen his form” (AV “shape’’) (Jn 5 37).
As has been seen from the above quotations, RV,
which retains the tr “‘shape” for homoidma, has tr4
eidos with “form,’? which also serves to render
several other Gr synonyms, such as “op¢%}, morphé
(Mk 16 12; Phil 2 6f), udpgwors, mirphdsis (Rom
2 20; 2 Tim 3 5), réros, tipos (RVm “pattern,”
Rom 6 17), and brortrwos, hupotipdsis (RV “pat-
tern,’ 2 Tim 1 13). In AV Wisd 18 1 “shape’’
translates morphé, RV “form.”

H. L. E. Lugerina

SHAPHAM, sha’fam (DEW, shapham; Bada,
Saphdm, ZaBar, Sabdt): Name of a Gadite chief,
who had the second place in command of his tribe
(1 Ch 6 12). So far as the fragmentary geneal-
ogics are intelligible, they scem to indicate that
Shapham and his chief, Joel, lived in the time of Saul
and shared in the war against the Hagrites (1 Ch
5 7-10.18-22), but it is to be noted that these
lists were first. recorded between the years 750 and
740 BC, just before the eastern tribes were carried
into captivity.


SHAPHAN, sha’fan (JU, shdphan, “rock-
badger,” EV ‘“coney”; Zadddv, Saphphén): An
old totem clan name (so W. R. Smith; cf, however,
art. Totemism; Gray, HPN, 103 ff, and Jacob's
Studies in Bib. Archaeology, 84 ff).

(1) Son of Azaliah and scribe of King Josiah.
He received from Hilkiah the Book of the Law


Shaphat
Shavsha


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2750


which had been found in the Temple (2 K 22 3 ff;
2 Ch 34 8-28). It was from Shaphan’s lips that
Josiah heard the Law read. Shaphan was also one
of those sent by the king to the prophetess Huldah
(2 Ik 22; 2 Ch 34). He was undoubtedly one of
the staunchest supporters of Josiah in his work of
reform. He was the father of Ahikam (2 K 22 12;
2 Ch 34 20; Jer 26 24), who befriended and pro-
tected the prophet Jeremiah. Another son, Elasah,
was one of the two men intrusted by Jeremiah with
his letter to the captives in Babylon (Jer 29 3).
A third son, Gemariah, vainly tried to prevent King
Jehoiakim from burning ‘‘the roll’’ (Jer 36 10.11.12.
25). The Micaiah of Jer 36 11.12, and Gedaliah,
the governor of Judaea after the captivity of 586
BC, were his grandsons (Jer 39 14).

(2) Perhaps the father of Jaazaniah, one of
the 70 men whom Ezekiel saw, in his vision of the
Temple, sacrificmg to idols (Ezk 8 11).

. Horace J. Wor

SHAPHAT, sha’fat (QDW, shaphat):

(1) The Simeonite spy (Nu 13 5, Zag¢dr, Saphdt).

(2) ‘The father of the prophet Elisha (1 K 19 16;
2K 3 11, LXX Saphdth).

(3) A name in the royal genealogy of Judah
(1 Ch 3 22).

(4) A Gadite (1 Ch 6 12).

(5) One of David’s herdsmen (1 Ch 27 29).

SHAPHER, sha’fér. See SHEPHER.

SHAPHIR, sha'fér (W7DW, shdphir, “glittering”;
Kadés, kalds; AV Saphir): One of a group of
towns mentioned in Mic 1 10-15. From the asso-
ciation with Gath, Achzib (of Judah) and Mare-
shah, it would seem that the places mentioned were
in Southwestern Pal. According to Onom, there
was a Zadelp, Sapheir, “im the hill country” (from
a confusion with Shamir [Josh 15 48], where LXX
A has Sapheir) between Eleutheropolis and Ascalon.
The name probably survives in that of three vil-
lages called es-Saafir, in the plain, some 3} miles
8.E. of Ashdod (PEF, II,-413, Sh XV). Cheyne
(#B, col. 4282) suggests the white “glittering’’ hill
Tell es-Safi, at the entrance to the Wddy es-Sunt,
which was known to the Crusaders as Blanche-
garde, but this site seems a more probable one for
GaTH (q.v.). E. W. C. MasTERMAN


SHARAI, sha-r4’s, sha’ri co, shdéray): One of
the sons of Bani who had married foreign wives
(Ezr 10 40).


SHARAIM, sha-ri’im. See SHAARAIM.


SHARAR, sha’rar. See Sacar.


SHARE, shir.


SHAREZER, sha-ré’zér (AEN, sar’ecer, WD,
shar'ecer): Corresponds to the Assyr Shar-usur,
“protect the king’’; found otherwise, not as a com-
plete name, but as elements in personal names, e.g.
Bel-shar-usur, “may Bel protect the king,” which
is the equivalent of Belshazzar (Dnl 5 1). The
name is borne by two persons in the OT:

(1) The son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, who
with ADRAMMBELECH (q.v.) murdered his father
(2 IX 19 37; Isa 37 38). The Bab Chronicle
says concerning Sennacherib’s death: “On the 20th
day of Tebet Sennacherib, king of Assyria, was
slain by his son in a revolt.’’ This differs from the
OT account in that it speaks of only one murderer,
and does not give hisname. How the two accounts
can be harmonized is still uncertain. Hitzig,
(Kritik, 194 ff), following Abydenus, as quoted by


See Plow.


|


Eusebius, completed the name of Sennacherib’s son,
so as to read Nergal-sharezer= Nergal-shar-usur
(Jer 39 3.13), and this is accepted by many modern
scholars. Johns thinks that Sharezer (shar’ecer or
sar’ecer) may be a corruption from Shar-etir-Ashur,
the name of a son of Sennacherib (1-vol HDB,
s.v.). The question cannot be definitely settled.

(2) A contemporary of the prophet Zechariah,
mentioned in connection with the sending of a
delegation to the spiritual heads of the community
to inquire concerning the propriety of continuing
the fasts: “They of Beth-el had sent Sharezer and
Regem-melech” (Zec 7 2). This tr creates a diffi-
culty in connection with the succeeding words, lit.
“and his men.’ The Revisers place in the margin
as an alternative rendering, ‘““They of Beth-el, even
Sharezer .... had sent.” Sharezer sounds pecu-
liar in apposition to ‘‘they of Beth-el’; hence some
have thought, esp. since Sharezer seems incomplete,
thatin the two words Beth-el and Sharezer we have
a corruption of what was originally a single proper
name, perhaps Bel-sharezer= Bel-shar-usur =Bel-
shazzar. The present text, no matter how tr,
presents difficulties. See REGEM-MELECH.

Pane F. C. ErseLeN

SHARON, shar’un (JW, ha-shardn, with the
def. art. possibly meaning ‘‘the plain”; 16 medlov,
t6 pedion, 6 Spupds, ho druméds, 6 Dapav, ho Sarén):

(1) This name is attached to the strip of fairly
level land which runs between the mountains and
the shore of the Mediterranean, stretching from
Nahr Rubin in the 8S. to Mt. Carmel in the N.
There are considerable rolling hills; but, compared
with the mountains to the E., it is quite properly
described as a plain. The soil is a deep rich loam,
which is favorable to the growth of cereals. The
orange, the vine and the olive grow to great per-
fection. When the many-colored flowers are in
bloom it is a scene of rare beauty.

Of the streams in the plain four carry the bulk cf
the water from the western slopes of the mountains
to the sea. They are also perennial, being fed by
fountains. Nahr el-‘Aujeh enters the sea to the
N. of Jaffa; Nahr Iskandertineh 7 miles, and Nahr
el-Mefjir fully 2 miles 8. of Caesarea; and Nahr
ez-Zerka, the “Crocodile River,” 23 miles N. of
Caesarea. Nahr el-Falik runs its short course about
12 miles N. of Nahr el-‘Aujeh. Water is plentiful,
and at almost any point it may be obtained by dig-
ging. Deep, finely built wells near some of the
villages are among the most precious legacies left
by the Crusaders. The breadth of the plain varies
from 8 to 12 miles, being broadest in the 8S. There
are traces of a great forest in the northern part,
which accounts for the use of the term drumos.
Jos (Ant, XIV, xiii, 3) speaks of “the woods” (hoi
drumot) and Strabo (xvi) of “‘a great wood.”? There
is still a considerable ocak wood in this district.
The “excellency” of Carmel and Sharon (Isa 35 2)
is probably an allusion to the luxuriant oak forests.
As in ancient times, great breadths are given up to
the pasturing of cattle. Over David’s herds that
fed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite (1 Ch 27
29). In the day of Israel’s restoration ‘Sharon
shall be a fold of flocks’ (Isa 665 10). Jerome
speaks of the fine cattle fed in the pastures of
Sharon, and also sings the praises of its wine (Comm.
on Isa 33 and 65). Toward the S. no donbt there
was more cultivation then than there isat the present
day. The Ger. colony to the N. of Jaffa, pre-
serving in its name, Saréna, the old Gr name of the
plain, and several Jewish colonies are proving the
wonderful productiveness of the soil. The orange
groves of Jaffa are far-famed.

“The rose of Sharon” (Cant 2 1) is a mistrans-
lation: hdbhacceleth is not a “rose,” but the white
narcissus, which in season abounds in the plain.


2751


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shaphat
Shavsha


ae is mentioned in the NT only in Acts 9 35.
@ district E. of the Jordan, occupied by the
tribe of Gad (1 Ch 6 16; here the ris is oa at
the art.). Kittel “Ch,” SBOT) suggests that this is
a corruption from “‘Sirion,” which again is synony-
mous with Hermon. He would therefore identify
Sharon with the pasture lands of Hermon. Others
think that the mishér or tableland of Gilead is
intended.

_(8) In Josh 12 18 we should perhaps read “the
king of Aphek in Sharon.” See Lasuaron. The
order seems to point to some place N.E. of Tabor.
Perhaps this is to be identified with the Sarona of
Onom in the district between Tabor and Tiberias.
If so, the name may be preserved in that of Sarna
on the plateau to the S.W. of Tiberias.

W. Ewine


Canaanitish descent.
is found in Nu 26 13.
_ (8) An ancestor of Samuel (1 Ch 6 24 [Heb 9]);
in ver 36 he is called “‘Joel.”


SHAVEH, sha’ve, VALE OF (“IU pay, ‘emek
shdwéh). See Kina’s Vag.


SHAVEH-KIRIATHAIM, sh§&’ve-kir-ya-tha’im
(DIN Mp MW, shaweh kiryéthayim; w Lavh rH
mode, en Saué 1é pdlet): Here Chedorlaomer is said
to have datented the Emim (Gen 14 5). RVm
reads “the plain of Kiriathaim.” If this rendering
is right, we must look for the place in the neighbor-
hood of Isiriathaim.of Moab (Jer 48 1, etc), which
is probably represented today by el-Karetyat, about
7 miles to the N. of Dibon.


The patronymic Shaulites


Puain or SHARON.


SHARONITE, shar’un-it C2NWM, ha-sharoni;
& Tapovelryns, ho Sardneités): Applied in Scripture
only to Shitrai (1 Ch 27 29). See SHaron.


SHARUHEN, sha-rod’hen (JJINW, shdrahen;
ot dypol avrdv, hoi agrot aulén): One of the cities
in the territory of Judah assigned to Simeon (Josh
19 6). In 15 32 itis called “Shilhim,” and in 1 Ch
4 31, ‘Shaaraim” (q.v.).


SHASHAI, sha'shi (WW, shashay; Beoel, Seset):
One of the sons of Bani who had married foreign
wives (Ezr 10 40)=“‘Sesis” in 1 Esd 9 34,


SHASHAK, sha’shak (PUW, shashak): Eponym
of a Benjamite family (1 Ch 8 14.25).


SHAUL, sha’ul, SHAULITES, sha’ul-its (oNW,
sh@ al; Yaovtr, Saori):

(1) A king of Edom (Gen 36 37 ff=1 Ch 1
48 ff).

(2) A son of Simeon (Gen 46 10; Ex 6 15;
Nu 26 13; 1 Ch 4 24). The clan was of notori-


ously impure stock, and, therefore, Shaul is called |


“the son of a Canaanitish woman” (Gen 46 10;
Ex 6 15); the clan was of mixed Israelitish and


SHAVING, shiv’ing (in Job 1 20, TT3, gézaz,
usually m3, galah; in Acts 21 24, tupdo, rurdo):
Customs as to shaving differ in different countries,
and in ancient and modern times. Among the Egyp-
tians it was customary to shave the whole body (ef
Gen 41 14), With the Israelites, shaving the head
was a sign of mourning (Dt 21 12; Job 1 20);
ordinarily the hair was allowed to grow long, and
was only cut at intervals (ef Absalom, 2 8 14 26).
Nazirites were forbidden to use a razor, but when
their vow was expired, or if they were defiled, they
were to shave the whole head (Nu 6 5.9.18 ff;
ef Acts 21 24). The shaving of the beard was not
permitted to the Israelites; they were prohibited
from shaving off even “the corner of their beard”
(Lev 21 5). It was an unpardonable insult when
Hanun, king of the Ammonites, cut off the half of
the beards of the Israelites whom David had sent
to him (2 8 10 4; 1 Ch 19 4).

Shaving “with a razor that is hired’’ is Isaiah’s
graphic figure to denote the complete devastation
of Judah by the Assyr army (Isa 7 20).

JAMES ORR


SHAVSHA, shav’sha (RBI, shawsha@’; in
2S 20 25, Kethibh, 8°U, sheya’, Keré, NTW, shewa',
EV “Sheva,” are refuted by LXX; in 28 8 15-18,


2752


epee THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA
in other respects identical with Ch, ‘“Seraiah’’ is SHEARIAH,  shé-a-ri’a, shé-ar’ya Coase,


found; LXX varies greatly in all passages; it is
the general consensus that Shavsha is correct) : State
secretary or scribe during the reign of David (1 Ch
18 16; 2.8 20 25). He was the first occupant of
this office, which was created by David. It is sig-
nificant that his father’s name is omitted in the very
exact list of David’s officers of state (1 Ch 18 14—
17 || 2S 8 15-18); this fact, coupled with the
foreign sound of his name, points to his being an
“alien”; the assumption that the state secretary
handled correspondence with other countries may
explain David’s choice of a foreigner for this post.
Shavsha’s two sons, Elihoreph and Ahijah, were
secretaries of state under Solomon; they are ealled
“sons of Shisha” (1 K 4 3), ‘Shisha’ probably
being a variant of ‘Shaysha.”
Horace J. Woit¥F

RV substitutes ‘“‘shawls” for


SHAWL, shél:
See Dress.


AV “wimples” in Isa 3 22.


SHEAF, shai, SHEAVES, shévz cvabe, ’dlum-
mah, WY, ‘dmer, V2 , Samir): When the grain is
reaped, it islaid in handfuls back of the reaper to be
gathered by children or those who cannot stand the
harder work of reaping (Ps 129 7). The handfuls
are bound into large sheaves, two of which are laden
at a time on a donkey (cf Neh 13 15). In some
districts carts are used (cf Am 2 13). The sheaves
are piled about the threshing-floors until threshing
time, which may be several weeks after harvest.
It is an impressive sight to see the huge stacks of
sheaves piled about the threshing-floors, the piles
often covering an area greater than the nearby vil-
lages (see AGRICULTURE). The ancient Egyptians
bound their grain into small sheaves, forming the
bundles with care so that the heads were equally
distributed between the two ends (see Wilkinson,
Ancient Egyptians, 1878, I], 424; ef Joseph’s dream,
Gen 87 5-8). The sheaves mentioned in Lev 32
10-12.15 must have been handfuls. It is a custom
in parts of Syria for the gatherers of the sheaves to
run toward a passing horseman and wave a handful
of grain, shouting kemshi, kemshi (lit. ‘“handful’’).
They want the horseman to feed the grain to his
horse. In OT times forgotten sheaves had to be
left for the sojourner (Dt 24 19); cf the kindness
shown to Ruth by the reapers of Boaz (Ruth 2
7.15).

Figurative: “Being hungry they carry the
sheaves” is a picture of torment similar to that of
the hungry horse urged to go by the bundle of hay
tied before him (Job 24 10). The joyful sight of
the sheaves of an abundant harvest was used by the
Psalmist to typify the joy of the returning eaptives
(Ps 126 6). James A. Patcu


SHEAL, shé’al OND, sh’ al, “request’’): One of
the Israelites of the sons of Bani who had taken
foreign wives (Ezr 10 29, LXX Salowid, LAX Luc.,
Assaél; 1 Esd 9 30, ‘‘Jasaelus’’).


SHEALTIEL, shé-ol’ti-el GNMOND, sh alsi’al,
but in Hag 1 12.14; 2 2, SNNSw , shaliv’él; LXX
and the NT always Zadabiqd, Salathiél, hence “‘Sala-
thiel” of 1 Esd 5 5.48.56; 6 2; AV of Mt 1 12;
Lk 3 27): Father of Zerubbabel (Ear 3 2.8; 6 2:
Neh 12 1; Hag 1 1.12.14; 2 2.23). But, accord-
ing to 1 Ch'3 17, Shealtiel was the oldest son of
King Jeconiah; in ver 19 the MT makes Pedaiah,
a brother of Shealtiel, the father of Zerubbabel (cf
Curtis, /CC).


SHEAR, shér. See SHesp; SHEEP TENDING.


sh*aryah; Zapard, Saraid): A descendant of Saul
(1 Ch 8 38; 9 44).


SHEARING, shér’ing, HOUSE (D°75 Tpy M3,
bath ‘ékedh ha-ro‘im, “house of binding of the shep-
herds”; B, BavOaxa0 [A, Baddxad}) tdv rowdvov,
Batthékath [Baithtkad] tén poiménén): Here, in the
course of his extinction of the house of Ahab, Jehu
met and destroyed 42 men, ‘the brethren of Aha-
ziab king of Judah” (2 K 10 12-14). Onom takes
the phrase as a proper name, Bethacath, and locates
the village 15 miles from Legio in the plain. This
seems to point to identification with Beit Add, about
3 miles E. of Jenin.


SHEAR-JASHUB, shédr-ja’shub or jash’ub
(AW ANW, sh’Gr ydshibh, “a remnant shall re-
turn”; LXX ho kataleiphtheis Iasovib): The son of
Isaiah, who accompanied him when he set out to
meet Ahaz (Isa 7 3). The name like that of other
children of prophets (cf ‘Immanuel,’ ‘Maher-
shalal-hash-baz,’”’ “Lo-ruhamah,” ete) is symbolic
of a message whieh the prophet wishes to empha-
size. Thus Isaiah uses the very words sh’dr yd-
shubh to express his oft-repeated statement that
a remnant of Israel will return to Jeh (Isa 10 21).


SHEATH, shéth. See Sworn.


SHEBA, shé’ba (RAW, sh*bha’; BaBs, Sabdé): (1)
Sheba and Dedan are the two sons of Raamah son
of Cush (Gen 10 7). (2) Sheba and Dedan are
the two sons of Jokshan the son of Abraham and
Keturah (25 3). (3) Sheba is a son of Joktan son
of Eber who was a descendant of Shem (10 28).

From the above statements it would appear that
Sheba was the name of an Arab tribe, and conse-
quently of Sem descent. The fact that Sheba and
Dedan are represented as Cushite (Gen 10 7)
would point to a migration of part of these tribes
to Ethiopia, and similarly their derivation from
Abraham (25 3) would indicate that some families
were located in Syria. In point of faet Sheba was
a South-Arabian or Joktanite tribe (Gen 10 28),
and his own name and that of some of his brothers
(e.g. Hazarmaveth=Hadhramaut) are place-iiames
in Southern Arabia.

The Sabaeans or people of Saba or Sheba, are
referred to as traders in gold and spices, and as in-
habiting a country remote from Pal (1 K 10 1f;
Isa 60 6; Jer 6 20; Ezk 27 22; Ps 72 15; Mt
12 42), also as slave-traders (Joel 3 8), or even
desert-rangers (Job 1 15; 6 19; ef CIS 84 3).

By the Arab genealogists Saba is represented as
great-grandson of Kahtén (=Joktan) and ancestor
of all the South-Arabian tribes. He is the father
of Himyar and Kahlin. He is said to have been
named Saba because he was the first to take
prisoners (shdbhah) in war. He founded the capital
of Saba and built its citadel Marib (Mariaha),
famous for its mighty barrage.

The authentie history of the Sabaeans, so far as
known, and the topography of their country are

derived from South-Arabian inscrip-
1. History tions, which began to be discovered

about the middle of the last century,
and from coins dating from about 150 BC to 150
AD, the first eolleetion of which was published in
1880, and from the South-Arabian geographer
Hamdani, who was later made known to European
scholars. Oneof the Sabaean kings is mentioned on
Assyr inseriptions of the year 715 BC; and he is
apparently not the earliest. The native monu-
ments are scattered over the period extending from
before that time until the 6th cent. AD, when the


2753


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shawl
Shebna


Sabaean state came to an end, being most numerous
about the commencemeut of our era. Saba was
the name of the nation of which Marib was the
usual capital. The Sabaeans at first shared the
sovereignty of South Arabia with Himyar and one
or two other nations, but gradually absorbed the
territories of these some time after the Christian era.
The form of government seems to have been that of
a republic or oligarchy, the chief magistracy going
by a kind of rotation, and more than one “king”
holding office simultaneously (similarly Dt 4 47
and often in the OT). The people seem to have
been divided into patricians and plebeians, the
former of whom had the right to build castles and
to share in the government.
_A number of deities are mentioned on the inscrip-
tions, two chief being [-Makkih and Ta‘lab.
Others are Athtar (masc. form of the
2. Religion Bib. ‘asht@raéth), Rammon (the Bib.
Rimmon), the Sun, and others. The
Sun aud Athtar were further defined by the addition
of the name of a place or tribe, just as Baal in the
OT. Worship took the form of gifts to the temples,
of sacrifices, esp. incense, of pilgrimages and prayers.
Ceremonial ablution, and abstinence from certain
things, as well as formal dedication of the wor-
shipper and his household and goods to the deity,
were also religious acts. In return the deity took
charge of his worshipper’s castle, wells, and belong-
ings, and supplied him with cereals, vegetables and
fruits, as well as granted him male issue.

(1) The chief occupations of the Sabaeans were
raiding and trade. The chief products of their

country are enumerated in Isa 60 6,
3. Civil- which agrees with the Assyr inscrip-
ization tions. The most important of all
commodities was incense, and it is sig-
nificant that the same word which in the other Sem
languages means “gold,’’ in Sabaean means “per-
fume” (and also ‘gold’’). To judge, however, from
the number of times they are mentioned upon the
inscriptions, agriculture bulked much more largely
in the thoughts of the Sabaean than commerce, and
was of equal importance with religion.

(2) The high position occupied by women among
the Sabaeans is reflected in the story of the Queen of
Sheba and Solomon. In almost all respects women
appear to have been considered the equal of men,
and to have discharged the same civil, religious and
even military functions. Polygamy does not seem
to have been practised. The Sabaean inscriptions
do not go back far enough to throw any light upon
the queen who was contemporary with Solomon, and
the Arab. identification of her with Bilkis is merely
dueto the latter being the only Sabaean queen known
to them. Bilkis must have lived several centuries
later than the Heb monarch. cae

(3) The alphabet used in the Sabaean inscriptions
is considered by Professor Margoliouth to be the
original Sem alphabet, from which the others are
derived. Inother respects Sabaean art seems to be
dependent ov that of Assyria, Persia and Greece.
The coins are Gr and Rom in style, while the system
of weights employed is Persian. See further Sa-
BABANS.


Lirerature.—Rédiger and Osiander in ZDMG, vols
XX and XXI; Halévy in Journal Asiatique, Série 6, vol
IX; CIS, pt. IV, ed by J. and H. Derenbourg; Ham-
dani, ed by D. H. Miiller, 1891; Mordtmann, Himya-
rische Inachriften, 1893; Hommel, Sidarabische Chrestho-
mathie, 1893; Glaser, Abyssinien in Arabien, 1895;
D. H. Miiller, Sidarabische Alterthimer, 1899; Deren-
bourg, Les monuments sabéens, 1899. On the coins,
Schlumberger, Le trésor de San‘a, 1880; Mordtmann in
Wiener numismatische Zeitschrift, 1880.

Tuomas Hunter WEIR


SHEBA, shé’ba (V2Y, shebha'; EdPee, Sdbee, or
Zdpaa, Sdmaa): The name of oue of the towns
allotted to Simeon (Josh 19 2). AV mentions 1t


as an independent town, but as it is not men-
tioned at all in the parallel list (1 Ch 4 28), and is
omitted in Josh 19 2 in some MSS, it is probable
that RV is correct in its tr ‘‘Beer-sheba or Sheba.”’
Only in this way can the total of towns in this group
be made 13 (Josh 19 6). If it is a separate name,
it is probably the same as SHEMA (q.v.).
E. W. G. MasterMan
SHEBA, QUEEN OF. See QUEEN oF SHEBA.


SHEBAH, shé’ba. See Suipan.


SHEBAM, shé’/bam. See Sepa.


SHEBANIAH, sheb-a-ni’a, shé-ban’ya (M222,
sh°bhanyah, in 1 Ch 16 24, sh*bhanyahit):

(1) Name of a Levite or a Levitical family that
participated in the religious rites that followed the
reading of the Law (Neh 9 4). The name is given
in Neh 10 10 among those that sealed the covenant.

(2) A priest or Levite who took part in the
sealing of the covenant (Neh 10 4; 12 14). See
SHECANIAH.

(3) Another Levite who sealed the covenant
(Neh 10 12).

(4) A priest in the time of David (1 Ch 15 24).


SHEBARIM, sheb’a-rim, shé-ba’rim (Q™3W7,
ha-sh*bharim; cvvérpubav, sunétripsan): After the
repulse of the first attack on their city the men
of Ai chased the Israelites “even unto Shebarim’”’
(Josh 7 5). RVm reads “the quarries’; so Keil,
Steuernagel, etc. LXX reads “until they were
broken,” ie. until the rout was complete. The
direction of the flight was of course from Ai toward
Gilgal in the Jordan valley. No trace of such a
name has yet been found.


SHEBAT, she-bit’ (02%), shbhat): The 11th
month of the Jewish year (Zec 1 7), corresponding
to February. See CALENDAR.


SHEBER, shé’bér (naw , shebher; B, ZéBep, Sdber,
A, ZéBep, Séber): A son of Caleb by his concubine
Maacah (1 Ch 2 48).


SHEBNA, sheb’na (N22W, shebhnd’; Zopvas,
Sémnas; but MAL, shebhnah, in 2 IX 18 18.26;
meaning uncertain [2 K 18 18.26.37 and 19 2=Isa
36° 3.11.22 and 37 2; Isa 22 15)):

In Isa 22 15 Shebna is referred to as he “‘who
is over the house,” or household, apparently that of

theking. The phrase is tr4 “steward of
1. Position the house’ in RVof Gen 43 16.19; 44 1,
in Isa 22 and occurs also in 39 4, “overseer”;

44 4. It is used of an officer of the
Northern Kingdom in 1 K 16 9; 183; 2 K 10
5. This officer is distinguished from him “‘that was
over the city” in 2 K 10 5, and it is said in 2 K
16 5 that after his father Azariah was stricken with
leprosy, “Jotham, the king’s son, was over the
household, judging all the people of the land.”
Again Isa 22 15 speaks of “this sdkhén,’’ a phrase
that must apply to Shebna if the prophecy refers
tohim. This word is the participle of a vb. meaning
‘‘to be of use or service,’’ so “‘to benefit” in Job 16 3;
22 2; 349. The fem. participle is employed of
Abishag in 1 K 12.4, where AVm_ translates
“eherisher”’; BDB renders it ‘servitor’ or “steward”
in Jsa 22 15. It occurs also as a Can. gloss in the
Am Tab (Winckler no. 237.9). The sakhén was
evidently a high officer: Shebna had splendid
chariots (ver 18), but what the office exactly was
is not certain. The other reference to Shebna in
the title of the prophecy would lead one to conclude
that it denoted him ‘‘who was over the household,”


Shebna
Shechem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2754


i.e. governor of the palace, probably, or major-
domo. The word sdkhén is thus a general title;
others deny this, maintaining that it would then
occur more frequently.

In 2 K 18f=Isa 36f we find too a Shebna men-
tioned among the officers of Hezekiah. There he

is called the sdéphér, “scribe” or “sec-
2. Shebna retary,’ i.e. a minister of state of some
in2K18f kind, whereas Eliakim is he ‘who is

over the household.” 1s then the
Shebna of Isa 22 the same as this officer? It is of
course possible that two men of the same name
should hold high office about the same time. We
find a Joah (ben Asaph) “recorder” under Heze-
kiah (2 Ik 18 18) and a Joah (ben Joahaz) having
the very same position under Josiah a century later
(2 Ch 34 8). But such a coincidence is rare.
Had there been two high officers of state bearing
this name, it is most probable that they would
somehow have been distinguished one from the
other. Shebna’s name is thought to be Aram.,
thus pointing to a foreign descent, but G. B. Gray,
“Isa,”’ ICC, 373 ff, denies this. We can perhaps
safely infer that he was a parvenu from the fact
that he was hewing himself a sepulcher in Jerus,
apparently among those of the Heb nobility,
whereas a native would have an ancestral burial-
place in the land.

However, in 2 K, Shebna is the scribe and not
the governor of the palace. How is this to be ex-
plained? The answer is in Isaiah’s prophecy.

The prophecy of Isa 22 divides itself into 3 sec-


tions. The words “against [not as RV “unto’’]

Shebna who is over the house,’ or
3. Isa 22: palace, are properly the title of the
15 ff prophecy, and should come therefore


at the very beginning of ver 15.

(1) Vs 15-18 form one whole. In ver 16 the
words ‘‘hewing him out a sepulchre,” etc, should be
placed immediately before the rest of the verse as
ver 16a with the rest of the section is in the second
person. We thus read (vs 15-17): ‘Against Shebna
who was over the house. Thus saith the Lord,
Jeh of hosts, Go unto this steward [RVm] that is
hewing him out a sepulchre on high, graving a
habitation for himself in the rock, [and say] What
doest thou here and whom hast thou here that
thou hast hewed thee out here a sepulchre? Be-
hold, Jeh of hosts, ....’ ete. G. H. Box (Isa)
would further transpose some parts of vs 17f.
Shebna is to be tossed like a ball into ‘a land wide
of sides,’’ i.e. a broad extensiveland. Heisaddressed
as a disgrace to the house of his royal master. The
prophet’s language is that of personal invective,
and one asks what had made him so indignant.
Some (e.g. Dillmann, Delitzsch) suggest that Shebna
was the leader of a pro-Egyp party, while others
(e.g. Cheyne) believe that the party was pro-Assyr
(cf Isa 8 5-Sa). The actual date of the prophecy
can only be inferred.

(2) Isa 22 19-23 contains a prophecy which
states that Eliakim is to be given someone’s post,
apparently that of Shebna, if this section be by
Isaiah; ver 23, however, is held by many to be a
gloss. These verses are not so vehement in tone
as the previous ones. Some maintain that the
section 1s not by Isaiah (Duhm, Marti). It can,
however, be Isaianic, only later in date than vs 15 ff,
being possibly meant to modify the former utter-
ance. The palace governor is to lose his office and
to be succeeded by Eliakim, who is seen to hold
that post in 2 K 18f (see ExtaKim).

(3) Vs 24f are additions to the two utterances
by a later hand; they predict the ruin of some such
official as Eliakim owing to his own family.

There is nothing a priori against believing that
these three sections are entirely independent one


of another, but there seems to be some connection
between (1) and (2), and again between (2) and (8).
Now the question that has to be solved


4. Date is that of the relation of Isa 22 15 ff
of the with 2 K 18f=Isa 36f, where are
Prophecy given the events of 701 BC. We have


q the following facts: (a) Shebna is scribe
in 701, and Eliakim is governor of the palace; (b)
Shebna is governor of the palace in Isa 22 15, and
is to be deposed; (c) if Isa 22 18-22 be by Isaiah,
Eliakim was to succeed Shebna in that post.
Omitting for the moment everything but (a) and
(b), the only solution that is to any extent satis-
factory is that Isa 22 15-18 is to be dated previ-
ous to 701 BC. This is the view preferred by
G. B. Gray, op. cit. And this is the most satis-
factory theory if we take (2) above into considera-
tion. The prophecy then contained in (1) had not
been as yet fulfilled in 701, but (2) had come to
pass; Shebna was no longer governor of the pal-
ace, but held the position of scribe. Exile might
still be in store for him.

_ Another_explanation is put forward hy K. Fullerton
in AJT, TX, 62142 (1905) and criticized by E. K6nig
in X, 675-86 (1906). Fullerton rejects vs 24f as not
due to Isaiah, and maintains that Isa 22 15-18 was
spoken by the prophet early in the reign of Manassech,
i.e. later than 2 K 18 f, ‘not so much as a prophecy, a
simple prediction, as an attempt to drive Shebna from
It must be admitted that Isaiah probably
did not succeed. The reactionary party seems to have
remaiued in control during the reign of Manasseh. ... .
Fortunately, the moral significance of Isaiah does not
depend on the fulfilment of this or that specific predic-
tion. We are dealing not with a walking oracle, but
with a great character and a noble life" (p. 639). He
then infers from the massacres of Manasseh (2 K 21 16)
‘that a conspiracy had been formed against him hy the
prophetic party which proposed to place Eliakim on the
throne”’ (p. 640). Isaiah he thinks would not ‘resort to
such violent measures,’’ and so the character of Isaiah
makes it_questionahle whether he was the author of vs
20-23. This part would then be due to the prophetic
party ‘‘who went a step farther than their great leader
would approve.’”’ This view assumes too much, (a)
that the terms in vs 20-23 refer to kingly power; (b)
that Eliakim was of Davidic descent, unless we have
a man of non-Davidic origin aiming at the throne, which
is again a thing unheard of in Judah; and (c) that there
was such a plot in the reign of Manasseh, of which we
have no proof.

Davip Francis RopErts

SHEBUEL, shé-bi'’el, sheb’i-el Osnay , shebha’ al;
DouBahdrA, Soubaél):

(1) A son of Gershom and grandson of Moses (1
Ch 23 16). He was ‘Tuler over the treasures”
(26 24). In 24 20 he is called “Shnbael,” which is
probably the original form of the name (see Gray,
HPN, 310).

(2) A son of Heman (1 Ch 26 4), called in ver
20 ‘“Shubael” (LXCX as in ver 4).


SHECANIAH, SHECHANIAH, shek-a-ni’a, shé-
kan’ya (32Y , sh*khanyah [in 1 Ch 24 11; 2 Ch
31 15, shtkhanyahi); B, Ioxavd, Ischanid, Dexevd,
Sekenta) :

(1) A descendant of Zerubbabel (1 Ch 3 21.22).
This is the same Shecaniah mentioned in Ezr 8 3.

(2) “The sons of Shecaniah,” so the MT of Ezr
8 dreads, were among those who returned with Ezra,
bnt a name appears to have been lost from the text,
and we should probably read “‘of the sons of Zattu,
Shecaniah the son of Jahaziel” (cf 1 Esd 8 32, “of
the sons of Zathoes, Sechenias the son of Jezelus’’).
vie oe of the tenth course of priests (1 Ch

(4) A priest in the reign of Hezekiah (2 Ch
31 15).

_ (5) A contemporary of Ezra who supported him
in his opposition to foreign marriages (Ezr 10 2).

(6) The father of Shemaiah, “the keeper of the

east gate’? (Neh 3 29).


2755


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shebna
Shechem


(7) The father-in-law of Tobiah the Ammonite
(Neh 6 18).

(8) The eponym of a family which returned with
Zerubbabel (Neh 12 3). It is the same name
which, by an interchange of (A) bh and (2) kh,
appears as Shebaniah (see Suepanian, [2]) im
Neh 10 4.12.14. Horace J. Wour


SHECHEM, shé’kem (D9, shekhem, ‘shoulder’;
Luxe, Suchém, h Vlerpo, hé Sikima, ra Tlkpa, td
Sikima, etc; AV gives “Sichem” in

1. Histori- Gen 12 6; and “Sychem’’ in Acts 7 16):
cal This place is first mentioned in con-
- nection with Abraham’s journey from

Haran. At the oak of Moreh in the vicinity he


of Ephraim; it was made a city of refuge, and as-
signed to the Kohathite Levites (20 7; 21 21).
Near the city the Law was promulgated (Dt 27 11;
Josh 8 33). When his end was approaching
Joshua gathered the tribes of Israel here and ad-
dressed to them his final words of counsel and ex-
hortation (ch 24). Under the oak in the neighbor-
ing sanctuary he set up the stone of witness (ver 26).
The war of conquest being done, Joseph’s bones
were buried in the parcel of ground which Jacob
had bought, and which fell to the lot of Joseph’s
descendants (ver 33). Abimelech, whose mother
was a native of the city, persuaded the men of
Shechem to make him king (Jgs 9 1-6), evidently
seeking a certain consecration from association with


NABLUS AND Mr. EBA.


reared his first altar to the Lord in Pal (Gen 12 6 f).
It was doubtless by this oak that Jacob, on his
return from Paddan-aram, buried “the strange
[ARV “foreign”’] gods” (36 4), Hither he had come
after his meeting with Esau (33 18). Onom here
identifies Shechem with Shalem; but see SHatuo.
To the E. of the city Jacob pitched his tent in a
“parcel of ground” which he had bought from Hamor,
Shechem’s father (ver 19). Here also he raised
an altar and called it El-Elohe-Israel, “‘God, the
God of Israel” (ver 20). Then follows the story of
Dinah’s defilement by Shechem, son of the city’s
chief; and of the treacherous and terrible vengeance
exacted by Simeon and Levi (ch 34). To the rich
pasture land near Shechem Joseph came to seek his
brethren (37 12 ff). It is mentioned as lying to the
W. of Michmethath (el-Makhneh) on the boundary
of Manasseh (Josh 17 7). It was in the territory


“the oak of the pillar that was in Shechem.” Jo-
tham’s parable was spoken from the cliff of Gerizim
overhanging the town (vs 7ff). After a reign of
three years Abimelech was rejected by the people.
He captured the city, razed it to the foundations,
and sowed it with salt. It was then theseat of Can.
idolatry, the temple of Baal-berith being here (Jgs
9 4.46). In the time of the kings we find that the
city was once more a gathering-place of the nation.
It was evidently the center, esp. for the northern
tribes; and hither Rehoboam came in the hope of
getting his succession to the throne confirmed (1 K
121; 2 Ch 101). At the disruption Jeroboam
fortified the city and made it his residence (ver 25;
Ant, VIII, viii, 4). The capital of the Northern
Kingdom was moved, however, first to Tirzah and
then to Samaria, and Shechem declined in political
importance. Indeed it is not named again in the


Shechem
Sheepcote


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2756


history of the monarchy. Apparently there were
Israelites in it after the captivity, some of whom
on their way to the house of the Lord at Jerus met
a tragic fate at the hands of Ishmael ben Netha-
niah (Jer 41 5 ff). It became the central city of
the Samaritans, whose shrine was built on Mt.
Gerizim (Sir 50 26; Ant, XI, viii, 6; XII, i, 1;
XIII, iii, 4). Shechem was captured by John
Hyrcanus in 132 BC (Ant, XIII, ix, 1; BY, I, ii, 6).
It appears in the NT only in the speech of Stephen
(Acts 7 16, AV ‘Sychem’’). Some (e.g. Smith,
DB, s.v.) would identify it with Sychar of Jn 4 5;
but see SycHar. Under the Romans it became
Flavia Neapolis. In later times it was the seat of
a bishopric; the names of five occupants of the
see are known.
There is no doubt as to the situation of ancient
Shechem. It lay in the pass which cuts through
Mts. Ephraim, Ebal and Gerizim,
2. Location guarding it on the N. and S. respect-
and Physi- ively. Along this line runs the great
cal Features road which from time immemorial has
formed the easiest and the quickest
means of communication between the E. of the
Jordan and the sea. It must have been a place of
strength fromantiquitv. Thenameseems to occur in
Travels of a Mohar (Max Miller, Asien u. Europa,
394), “Mountain of Sahama”’ probably referring to
Ebal or Gerizim. The ancient city may have lain
somewhat farther E. than the modern Ndblus, in
which the Rom name Neapolis survives. The situ-
ation is one of great beauty. The city lies close
to the foot of Gerizim. The terraced slopes of the
mountain rise steeply on the S. Across the valley,
musical with the sound of running water, the great
bulk of Ebal rises on the N., its sides, shaggy with
prickly pear, sliding down into corn fields and
orchards. The copious springs which supply abun-
dance of water rise at the base of Gerizim. The
fruitful and well-wooded valley winds westward
among the hills. It is traversed by the carriage
road leading to Jaffa and the sea. Eastward the
valley opens upon the plain of Makhneh. To the
E. of the city, in a recess at the base of Gerizim, is
the sanctuary known as Rijal el-‘Amiid, lit. “men
of the column” or “pillar,” where some would locate
the ancient “oak of Moreh” or “of the pillar.”
Others would find it in a little village farther E. with
a fine spring, called Balata, a name which may be
connected with balla, “oak.’’ Still farther to the
E. and near the base of Ebal is the traditional tomb
of Joseph, a little white-domed building beside a
luxuriant orchard. On the slope of the mountain
beyond is the village of ‘Askar; see Sycuar. To
the 8. of the vale is the traditional Well of Jacob;
sce Jacos’s Wetu. To the 8.W. of the city is a
small mosque on the spot where Jacob is said to
have mourned over the blood-stained coat of
Joseph. In the neighboring minarct is a stone
whereon the Ten Commandments are engraved in
Samaritan characters. The main center of interest
in the town is the synagogue of the Samaritans,
with their ancient MS of the Pent.
The modern town contains about 20,000 inhab-
itants, the great body of them being Moslems.
There are some 700 or 800 Christians,
3. Modern chiefly belonging to the Gr Orthodox
Shechem church. The Samaritans do not total
more than 200. The place is still the
market for a wide district, both E. and W. of Jor-
dan. A considerable trade is done in cotton and
wool. Soap is manufactured in large quantities,
oil for this purpose being plentifully supplied by the
olive groves. Tanning and the manufacture of
leather goods are also carried on. In old times the
slopes of Ebal were covered with vineyards; but
these formed a source of temptation to the “faith-


ful.” They were therefore removed by authority,
and their place taken by the prickly pears men-
tioned above. W. Ewine


SHECHEMITES, shé‘kem-its (WAPWO, ha-
shikhmi; Svxepel, Suchemet): The descendants
of Shechem the son of Gilead, a clan of Eastern
Manasseh (Nu 26 31; Josh 17 2).


SHED, SHEDDING: The three Heb words,
ndghar, sim or stim and shaphakh, tr¢ “shed” in
many OT passages, always mean a “pouring out,”
and in nearly every case point to the cffusion of
blood (Gen 9 6; Nu 85 33; Dt 21 7;.2 8 20 10;
1 Ch 22 8; Prov 1 16, etc). The Gr words éxxéw,
ekchéd, and éxxtvw, ekchiind, have precisely the
same specific meaning (Mt 28 35; 26 28; Mk 14
24; Lk 11 50; He 9 22; Rev 16 6). Sometimes
they are tropically used in reference to the out-
pouring of the Holy Spirit (Acts 2 33 AV; Tit
3 6), and to the outpouring of the love of God in
the believer’s heart (Rom 5 5).

Henry E. Dosxer |

SHEDEDUR, shed’éur, shé-d@ur (TINT,
shedhé tr, “daybreak”; B, Zebiodp, Sediorir, "Hbvo0tp,
Ediowr): The father of Elizur, the chief of Reu-
ben (Nu 15; 2 10; 7 30). Fr. Delitzsch cor-
rectly conceives the name as an Assyr compound,
Sad uri, “daybreak.” Cf, however, Gray, HPN,
169, 197, who emends the text to read Shaddaz’Ur,
“Shaddai is flame.”


SHEEP, shtp: The usual Heb word is {S%, ¢@’n,
which is often tr? “flock,” e.g. “Abel . . . . brought
of the firstlings of his flock’’ (Gen 4 4);
“butter of the herd, and milk of the
flock” (Dt 32 14). AV and ERV have


“milk of sheep.” Cf Arab. lds, da’n. The Gr
Y


word is mpé8aror, prébaton. For other names, see
notes under Cartte; Ewe; Lams; Ram.


1. Names


The origin of domestic sheep is unknown. There are
11 wild species, the majority of which are found in
Asia, and it is conceivahle that they may
have spread from the highlands of Central
Asia_ to the other portions of their habitat.
In North America is found the “bighorn,”’
which is very closely related toa Kamschatkan species.
One species, the ural or sha, is found in India. The
Barbary sheep, Ovis tragelaphus, also known as the
aoudad or arut, inhabits the Atlas Mountains of North-
west Africa. It is thonght hy Tristram to be zemer,
EV “chamois” of Dt 14 5, but there is no good evidenca
that this animal ranges eastward into Bible lands. Geo-
graphically nearest is the Armenian wild_shcep, Ovis
gmelini, of Asia Minor and Persia. The Cyprian wild
sheep may be only a variety of the last, and the mouflon
of Corsica and Sardinia is an allied specics. It is not
easy to draw the line between wild sheep and wild
goats. Among the more obvious distinctions are the
chin beard and strong odor of male goats. The pcelage
of all wild sheep consists of hair, not wool, and this indeed
is true of some domestic sheep as the fat-rumped short-
tailed sheep of Abyssinia and Central Asia. The young
lambs of this breed have short curly wool which is the
astrachan of commerce. Sheep are geologically recent,
their bones and teeth not being feund in earlier deposits
than the pleiocene or pleistocene. They were, however,
among the first of domesticated animals.


The sheep of Syria and Pal are characterized by


the possession of an enormous fat tail which weighs


3. Sheep of many. pounds and is known in Arab.


ct o
Palestine as KAT, ’alyat, or commonly kad,


liyat. This is the moby , alyah, “fat tail” (AV
rump”) (Ex 29 22; Lev 3 9; 7 3; 8 25; 9 19),
which was burned in sacrifice. This is at the present
day esteemed a great delicacy. Sheep are kept in
large numbers by the Bedawin, but a large portion of
the supply of mutton for the cities is from the shcep
of Armenia and Kurdistan, of which great droves are


2. Zadlogy


2757


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shechem
Sheepcote


brought down to the coast in easy stages. Among the
Moslems every well-to-do family sacrifices a sheep
at the feast of al-’adha’, the 10th day of the month
dhd-l-hijjat, 40 days after the end of ramaddén, the
month of fasting. In Lebanon every peasant family
during the summer fattens a young ram, which is


Broad-tailed Sheep.


literally crammed by one of the women of the house-
hold, who keeps the creature’s jaw moving with one
hand while with the other she stuffs its mouth with
vine or mulberry leaves. Every afternoon she
washes it at the village fountain. When slaughtered


Boe.
in the fall it is called Soleo , malas, “fed,” and is


very fat and the flesh very tender. Some of the
meat and fat are eaten at once, but the greater
part, fat and lean, is cut up fine, cooked together
in a large vessel with pepper and salt, and stored in


vrur


an earthen jar. This, the so-called Buoy ys kaura-


mat, is used as needed through the winter.

In the mountains the sheep are gathered at night
into folds, which may be caves or inclosures of
rough stones. Fierce dogs assist the shepherd
in warding off the attacks of wolves, and remain
at the fold through the day to guard the slight
bedding and simple utensils. In going to pasture
the sheep are not driven but are led, following the
shepherd as he walks before them and calls to them.
“When he hath put forth all his own, he goeth before
them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his
voice” (Jn 10 4). ;

The sheepfolds of Reuben on the plain of Gilead
are referred to in Nu 82 16 and Jgs 5 16. A cave

is mentioned in 15 243 in con-
4. OT Ref- nection with the pursuit of David by
erences Saul. The shepherd origin of David
is referred to in Ps 78 70:


"He chose David also his servant,
. And took him from the sheepfolds.”


Cf also 2 8 7 8 and 1 Ch 17 7. ’
The shearing of the sheep was a large operation
and evidently became a sort of festival. Absalom
invited the king’s sons to his sheep-shearing in
Baal-hazor in order that he might find an oppor-
tunity to put Amnon to death while his heart was
‘nerry with wine” (2 8 13 23-29). The character
of the occasion is evident also from the indignation
of David at Nabal when the latter refused to pro-
vide entertainment at his sheep-shearing for David’s
young men who had previously protected the flocks
of Nabal (1 § 25 2-13). There is also mention of
the sheep-shearing of Judah (Gen 38 12) and of
Laban (Gen 31 19), on which occasion. Jacob stole
away with his wives and children and his flocks.
Sheep were the most important sacrificial ani-
mals, a ram or a young male being often specified.


Ewes are mentioned in Lev 3 6; 4 32; 6 6; 14 10;
22 28; Nué 14.


In the Books of Ch we find statements of enormous
numbers of animals consumed in sacrifice: ‘‘And king
Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand
oxen, and a hundred and twenty thonsand sheep"’ (2 Ch
7 5); ‘And they sacrificed unto Jeh in that day [in the
reign of Asa]... . seven hundred oxen and seven
thousand sheep"’ (2 Ch 15 11); at the cleansing of the
temple by Hezekiah ‘the consecrated things were six
hundred oxen and three thousand sheep. But the priests
were too few, so that they could not flay all the burnt-
offerings: whercfore their hrethren the Levites did help
them” (2 Ch 29 331); and ‘Hezekiah king of Judah
did give to the assemhly for offerings a thousand hullocks
and seven thousand sheep; and the princes gave to the
assembly a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep”
(2 Ch 80 24). In the account of the war of the sons
of Reuhen and their allies with the Hagrites, we read:
“And they took away their cattle; of their camels
fifty thousand, and of shcep two. hundred and fifty
thousand, and of asses two thousand, and of men a hun-
dred thousand” (1 Ch § 21). Mesha king of Moah is
called a ‘‘sheep-master,’’ and we read that “he rendered
unto the king of Israel the wool of a hundred_thousand
lambs, and of a hundred thousand rams” (2 K 3 4).


Christ is represented as the Lamb of God (Isa


563 7; Jn 1 29; Rev 6 6).: Some of the most

beautiful passages in the Bible repre-
5. Figura- sent God asa shepherd: “From thence
tive is the shepherd, the stone of Israel’


(Gen 49 24); “Jeh is my shepherd; I
shall not want’ (Ps 23 1; cf Isa 40 11; Ezk 34
12-16). Jesus said “I am the good shepherd; and
I know mine own, and mine own know me....
and I lay down my life for the sheep” (Jn 10 14 f).
The people without leaders are likened to sheep
without a shepherd (Nu 2717; 1 K 22 17;
2 Ch 18 16; Ezk 34 5). Jesus at the Last Supper
applies to Himself the words of Zec 13 7; “I will
smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall
be scattered abroad” (Mt 26 31; Mk 14 27).
The enemies of Jeh are compared to the fat of the
sacrifice that is consumed away in smoke (Ps 37 20).
God’s people are ‘‘the sheep of his pasture” (Ps
79 13; 96 7; 100 3). In sinning they become like
lost sheep (Isa 63 6; Jer 560 6; Ezk 346; Lk
15 3 ff). In the mouth of Nathan the poor man’s
one little ewe lamb is a vivid image of the treasure
of which the king David has robbed Uriah the
Hittite (2 8 12 3). In Cant 6 6, the teeth of the
bride are likened to a flock of ewes. It is prophesied
that ‘‘the wolf shall dwell with the lamb” (Isa 11 6)
and that ‘the wolf and the lamb shall feed together”
(Isa 65 25). Jesus says to His disciples, “I send
you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves” (Mt 10
16; cf Lk 10 3). In the parable of the Good
Shepherd we read: ‘He that is a hireling, and not
a shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, beholdeth
the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth”’
(Jn 10 12). ALFRED ELY Day


SHEEPCOTE, shép’kot, shép’kot, SHEEPFOLD,
shép’fold (W773, g°’dhérah, m3", mikhléh, DINSWA,
mishpthayim, 2, ndweh; addq, aulé): At night
the sheep are driven into a sheepfold if they are
in a district where there is danger from robbers or
wildbeasts. These folds are simple walled inclosures
(Nu 32 16; Jgs 5 16; 2 Ch 32 28; Ps 78 70;
Zeph 2 6; Jn 10 1). On the top of the wall is
heaped thorny brushwood as a further safeguard.
Sometimes there is a covered hut in the corner for
the shepherd. Where there is no danger the sheep
huddle together in the open until daylight, while
the shepherd watches over them (Gen 31 39; Lk
28). In the winter time caves are sought after
(1 8 24 3; Zeph 2 6). The antiquity of the use
of some of the caves for this purpose is indicated
by the thick deposit of potassium nitrate formed
from the decomposition of the sheep dung.

James A. PatcH


Sheep Gate
Shemaiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2758


SHEEP GATE (j838 "JW, sha‘ar ha-co’n [Neh
3 1.32; 12 39]): One of the gates of Jerus, probably
near the northeast corner. See JERUSALEM. For
the “sheep gate” of Jn 5 2, see Betaespa; SHEEP
MARKET.


SHEEP MARKET (Jn 5 2, RV “sheep gate’):
The Gr (4 wpoBarix}, h€ probatiké) means simply
something that pertains to sheep. See BETHESDA;
SHEEP GATE.


SHEEP-MASTER ("p), nakédh, “herdsman,”
2 Ik 3 4). See SHEEP-SHEARING.


SHEEP-SHEARING, shép’shér-ing: The sheep-
shearing is done in the springtime, either by the
owners (Gen 3119; 38 135 Dt 1519; 15 25
2.4) or by regular “shearers” (113, gazaz) (1 8 25
7.11; Isa 53 7). There were special houses for
this work in OT times (2 K 10 12.14). The
shearing was carefully done so as to keep the fleece
whole (Jgs 6 37). The sheep of a flock are not
branded but spotted. Lime or some dyestuff is
painted in one or more spots on the wool of the back
as a distinguishing mark. In 2 K 3 4, Mesha, the
chief or sheikh of Moab, was a sheep-master, lit.
“a sheep spotter.” James A. Patcu


SHEEPSKIN, shép’skin.
Rams’ SKINS, etc.


See Borrte; Dress;


SHEEP TENDING, ten’ding: The Scriptural
allusions to pastoral life and the similes drawn from
that life are the most familiar and revered in the
Bible. Among the first verses that a child learns is
“The Lord is my shepherd, [ shall not want’ (Ps
23 1 AV,ERV). What follower of the Master does
not love to dwell on the words of the ‘Good Shep-
herd” chapter in the Gospel of John (Jn 10)?
Jesus must have drawn a sympathetic response
when He referred to the relationship of sheep to
shepherd, a relationship familiar to all His hear-
ers and doubtless shared by some of them with their
flocks. As arule the modern traveler in the Holy
Land meets with disappointment if he comes ex-
pecting to see things as they were depicted in the
Bible. An exception to this is the pastoral life,
which has not changed one whit since Abraham and
his descendants fed their flocks on the rich plateaus
E. of the Jordan or on the mountains of Pal and
Syria. One may count among his most prized
experiences the days and nights spent under the
spell of Syrian shepherd life. James A. PatcH


SHEERAH, sh@’é-ra (WIND, she’érah; A, Zaapa,
Saard, B omits): A daughter of Ephraim, who,
according to the MT of 1 Ch 7 24 (AV ‘“‘Sherah”),
built the two Beth-horons and Uzzen-sheerah. The
verse has been suspected becanse elsewhere in the
OT the founders of cities are men. Uzzen-sheerah
as a place is unidentified; Conder suggests as the
site Bé Sird, a village 2 miles 8.W. of the Lower
Beth-horon (Mem 3 16).


SHEET, shét. See Dress; cf Acts 10 11, ‘“‘as it
were a great sheet” (6@6y, othéné).


SHEHARIAH, shé-ha-ri’a (AMIN, sheharyah):
A Benjamite (1 Ch 8 26).


SHEKEL, shek”’l, shek’el, shé’kel, shé’kul OpB,
shekel): A weight and a coin. The Heb shekel was
the 50th part of a mina, and as a weight about 224
grains, and as money (silver) was worth about 2s.
9d., or 66 cents. No gold shekel has been found,
and hence it is inferred that such a coin was not


used; but as a certain amount of gold, by weight,
it is mentioned in 2 Ch 3 9 and is probably intended
to be supplied in 2 K 5 5. The gold shekel was
1/60 of the heavy Bab mina and weighed about
252 grains. In value it was about equal to £2 1s.
Od., or $10. See Money; WrIcnts anp MrasurgEs.
In RV of Mt 17 27 “shekel” replaces “piece of
money’ of AV, the tr of crarip, statér. SeeSTaTEr.
H. Porter

SHEKEL OF THE KING’S WEIGHT, or
ROYAL SHEKEL (J2AT jBN, ’ebhen ha-melekh,
“stone fie. weight] of the king’): The shekel by
which Absalom’s hair was weighed (2 § 14 26),
probably the light shekel of 130 grains. See
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.


SHEKEL OF THE SANCTUARY, or SACRED
SHEKEL (WIPO 2pwW, shekel ha-kidhesh [Nu 7
passim]): The same as the silver shekel mentioned
under SHEKEL (q.v.), except in Ex 38 24, where it
is used in measuring gold. The term is used for
offerings made for sacred purposes.


SHEKINAH, shé-ki'na (Mp"W, sh*khingh, “that
which dwells,” from the vb. 12W, shdkhén, or J2U,
shakhan, “to dwell,” “reside’”): This word is not
found in the Bible, but there are allusions to it in
Isa 60 2; Mt 17 5; Lk 29; Rom 9 4. It is first
found in the Tgs. See Gory.


SHELAH, shé’la (MW, shélah; Bade, Sdla):

(1) The youngest son of Judah and the daughter
of Shua the Canaanite (Gen 38 5.11.14.26; 46 12;
Nu 26 20 [16]; 1 Ch 2 3; 4 21). He gave his
name to the family of the Shelanites (Nu 26 20
[16}). Probably “the Shelanite’ should be sub-
stituted for “the Shilonite” of Neh 11 5; 1 Ch 9 5.

(2) (now , sheldh): The son or (LXX) grandson
of Arpachshad and father of Eber (Gen 10 24; 11
13 [12].14.15; 1 Ch 1 18.24; Lik 3 35).

(3) Neh 8 15=“‘Shiloah” of Isa 86. See Srtoam.


SHELANITES,
SHELAH.


shé‘lan-its, shé-la’nits. See


SHELEMIAH, shel-é-mi'a, shé-lem’ya (W™9>U,
shelemydh; B, Bedeutd, Selemid, A, Dedreplas, Sele-
mias):

(1) One of the sons of Baniwho married foreign
wives In the time of Ezra (Ezr 10 39), called
“Selemias” m1 Esd 9 34.

(2) Father of Hananiah who restored part of the
wall of Jeruns (Neh 3 80) (B, Tedeued, Telemid, &,
Tedreulas, Telemias).

(3) A priest who was appointed one of the treas-
urers to distribute the Levitical tithes by Nehemiah
(Neh 13 13).

(4) The father of Jehucal (or Jucal) in the reign
of Zedekiah (Jer 37 3; 38 1; in the second passage
the name is Shelemyahi).

(5) The father of lrijah, the captain of the ward,
who arrested Jeremiah as a deserter to the Chal-
daeans (Jer 37 13).

(6) 1 Ch 26 14. See MEsHELEMIAH.

(7) Another of the sons of Bani who married for-
eign wives in the time of Ezra (Ezr 10 41). 1t is
of interest to note that the order of names in this
passage—Sharai, Azarel, and Shelemiah—is almost
identical with the names in Jer 36 26, viz. Seraiah,
Azriel, Shelemiah.

(8) Ancestor of Jehudi (Jer 36 14).

(9) (LXX_ omits.) Son of Abdcel, one of the
men sent by Jehoiakim to seize Baruch and Jeremiah
after Baruch had read the “roll” in the king’s
presence (Jer 36 26). Horace J. Woir


2759


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sheep Gate
Shemaiah


SHELEPH, shé'lef (32M, shdleph, in pause;
LXX Zadeh, Sdleph): Son of Joktan (Gen 10 26;
1 Ch 1 20). Sheleph is the name of a Yemenite
tribe or district, named on Sabaean inscriptions


and also by Arabian geographers, located in Southern
Arabia.


SHELESH, shé'lesh (W2W, shélesh; B, Dent,
Semé, A, Zeddfs, Sellés, Luc., Zédep, Sélem): An
Asherite, son of Helem (1 Ch 7 35).


SHELOMI, shé-l6’mi, shel’6-mi ony , shelomi):
An Asherite (Nu 34 27).


SHELOMITH, shé-lo’mith, shel’S-mith (new ;
shlomtuh; in Ezr 8 10, MDW, shelemith):

(1) The mother of the man who was stoned for
blasphemy (Lev 24 11) (BAF, Zadrwpeld, Saldmeith,
Luc., Zadrul6, Salmith).

(2) Daughter of Zerubbabel (1 Ch 3 19) (B,
Zarwyedel, Saldmethel, A, Zarwuedl, Salémethi, Luc.,
Larwull, Sal6mith).

(3) One of the “sons of Izhar’’ (1 Ch 23 18)
(B, Zorwuwd, Salémbth, A, Zarovudé, Saloumébth,
Luc., Zarwull, Salimith), called ‘‘Shelomoth” in
24 22.

(4) The name of a family whose representatives
returned with Ezra (Ezr 8 10) (B, Zareuova,
Saletmotith, Luc., Zadiué0, Saliméth). The MT
here should read, “‘and the sons of Bani; Shelomith,
son of Josiphiah’?; and in 1 Esd 8 36, ‘‘of the sons
of Banias, Salimoth, son of Josaphias.’’

Horace J. Wor

SHELOMOTH, shé-l0’moth, shel’d-moth, -mith
(Ms>t , shelomath):

(1) An Izharite (1 Ch 24 22, BA, Zadwudd,
Salométh, Luc., Zarwuld, Salomith = “Shelomith”
of 23 18).

(2) A Levite descended from Eliezer ben Moses
(1 Ch 26 25, Kera m°7S5t, shelomith; 26 28).

(3) A Gershonite (1 Ch 239, Kere mvdow ;
B, *AdwOelu, Aldtheim, A, Dadrwpell, Salomeith).


SHELUMIEL, shé-lu’mi-el (8"A2Y, shelumi’al;
both the punctuation and interpretation are in
doubt. MT punctuates the first element as a
passive participle; the use of the participle m com-
pounds is common in Assyr but rare i Heb [cf
Gray, HPN, 200}. The meaning of the present
form, if it be correct, is “at peace with God”
[Hommel, AHT, 200, “my friend is God”). LXX
reads Badraplna, Salamtél): Prince of the tribe of
Simeon (Nu 1 6; 2 12; 7 36.41; 10 19). The
genealogy of Judith (8 1) is carried back to this
Shelumiel or Shelamicel, ealled there ‘‘Salamiel.”’

5 Horace J. Wour

SHEM, shem (DW, shém; Zp, Sém): The eldest
gon of Noah, from whom the Jews, as well a3 the

Semitic (“Shemitic”) nations in general


1. Position have descended. When giving the


in Noah’s names of Noah’s three sons, Shem is
Family: always mentioned first (Gen 9 18;
His Name 10 1, etc); and though ‘‘the elder”


in “Shem the brother of Japheth the
elder” (10 21 m) is explained as referring to Shem,
this is not the rendering of Onkelos. His five sons
peopled the greater part of West Asia’s finest tracts,
from Elam on the K. to the Mediterranean on the
W. Though generally regarded as meaning “dusky”
(ef the Assyr-Bab sdmu—also Ham —possibly =
“black,” Japheth, “fair’’), it is considered possible
that Shem may be the usual Heb word for “name

(shém), given him because he was the firstborn—a
parallel to the Assyr-Bab usage, in which “son,


‘name” (Sumu) are synonyms (WW. A. Inscriptions,
V, pl. 23, Il. 29-32abc).

Shem, who is called ‘the father of all the children
of Eber,’ was born when Noah had attained the
age of 500 years (Gen 6 32). Though
married at the time of the Flood, Shem
was thenehildless. Aided by Japheth,
he covered the nakedness of their father,
which Ham, the youngest brother, had
revealed to them; but unlike the last,
Shem and Japheth, in their filial piety,
approached their father walking backward, in order
not to look upon him. Two years after the Flood,
Shem being then 100 years old, his son Arpachshad
was born (Gen 11 10), and was followed by further
sons and daughters during the remaining 500 years
which preceded Shem’s death. Noah’s prophetic
blessing, on awakening from his wine, may he re-
garded as having been fulfilled in his descendants,
who occupied Syria (Aram), Pal (Canaan), Chaldaca
(Arpachshad), Assyria (Asshur), part of Persia
(Elam), and Arabia (Joktan). In the first three of
these, as well as in Elam, Canaanites had settled (if
not in the other districts mentioned), but Shemites
ruled, at some time or other, over the Canaanites,
and Canaan thus became ‘‘his servant” (Gen 9 25.
26). The tablets found in Cappadocia seem to show
that Shemites (Assyrians) had settled in that district
also, but this was apparently an unimportant colony.
Though designated sons of Shem, some of his de-
scendants (e.g. the Elamites) did not speak a Semitic
language, while other nationalities, not his descend-
ants (e.g. the Canaanites), did. See Ham; JAPHETH;
TaBLE OF NATIONS. T. G. Pincus


SHEMA, shé'ma (YU, sh*ma‘; Zapad, Samad):
A city of Judah in the Negeh (Josh 15 26). If, as
some think, identical with Sarepa (q.v.) of Josh 19
2, then the latter must have been inserted here from
Josh 15 26. It is noticeable that the root letters
(9740) were those from which Simeon is derived.
Shema is probably identical with Jeshua (Neh 11
26). The place was clearly far S., and it may be
Kh. Sa‘wah, a ruin upon a prominent hilltop between
Kh.‘ Attir and Kh. el-Milh. There is a wall around
the ruins, of large blocks of conglomerate flint
(PEF, III, 409, Sh XXYV).

: E. W. G. Masrerman

SHEMA (32, shema‘):

(1) A Reubenite (1 Ch 5 8, BA, Zdpa, Sdma,
Luce., Zeueel, Semeet). See Sure.

(2) One of the heads of ‘fathers’ houses’’ in
Aijalon, who put to flight the inhabitants of Gath
(1 Ch 8 18, BA, 2Zdue, Sdma, Luc., Zapad, Samad);
in ver 21 he is called “Shimei.”” The statement is
very obscure and the whole incident is probably due
to some marginal note.

(3) One of those who stood at Ezra’s right during
the reading of the Law (Neh 8 4, Zaualas, Samaias).
He is called ‘“Sammus” in 1 Esd 9 43.

Horace J. Wour

SHEMAAH, shé-ma’a, shem’i-a (7200,
ha-sh'm@'Gh; B, Apa, Amd, A, Zapad, Samad, Luc.,
*Aopd, Asmd): A Benjamite, who was the father,
according to the MT, of Ahiezer and Joash; but
according to the LXX vids, huids= 13 (ben) instead
of "93 (b'né) of Joash alone (1 Ch 12 3), The
original text may have read VQUIN j2, ben ycho-
shdma@ (ef WW, hishdma‘, of 3 18); then a
dittography of the following 7 (h) caused the error
(Curtis, ICC).


SHEMAIAH, shé-mi’ya, shé-mi'a (MND,
shema‘yah [in 2 Ch 11 2; 17 8; 31 15; 35 9; Jer
26 20; 29 24; 36 12, shema'yahu], “Jahveh hears’):


2. History,
and the
Nations
Descended
from Him


Shemaiah
Sheol


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2760


The name is most frequently borne by priests,
Levites and prophets.

(1) B, Sapupyatas, Sammatas, A, Zapalas, Samatas
(2 Ch 12 5.7). A prophet who, together with
Ahijah, protested against Rehoboam’s contemplated
war against the ten revolted tribes (1 K 12 22-24=
2 Ch 11 2-4). He declared that the rebellion had
Divine sanction. The second Gr account knows
nothing of Ahijah in this connection and introduces
Shemaiah at the gathering at Shechem where
both Jeroboam and Rehoboam were present;
it narrates that on this occasion Shemaiah (not
Ahijah) rent his garment and gave ten parts to
Jeroboam to signify the ten tribes over which he
was to become king. (This version, however, is
not taken very seriously, because of its numerous
inconsistencies.) Shemaiah also prophesied at ihe
invasion of Judah by Shishak (2 Ch 12 5-7).
His message was to the effect that as the princes of
Israel had humbled themselves, God’s wrath against
their idolatrous practices would not be poured out
upon Jerus by the hand of Shishak (2 Ch 13 7).
He is mentioned as the author of a history of Reho-
boam (2 Ch 12 15).

(2) Son of Shecaniah (1 Ch 3 22, Zayuacd,
Samaidé), a descendant of Zerubbabel. This is
also the name of one of the men who helped to
repair the wall (Neh 3 29, Zeuela, Semeia [N} [cf
Curtis, (CC, in vs 17-24 of 1 Ch 3]).

(3) A Simeonite (1 Ch 4 37, B, Zupedy, Sumeén,
A, Zapalas, Samatas), identical, perhaps, with the
Shimei of 1 Ch 4 26.27.

(4) A Reubenite (1 Ch 6 4, B, Zeneet, Semeet,
A, Zeuelv, Semein), called Shema in ver 8.

(5) A Merarite Levite (1 Ch 9 14; Neh 11 15,
Zapaid, Samaid), one of those who dwelt in Jerus.

(6) A Levite of the family of Jeduthun, father
of Obadiah or Abda (1 Ch 9 16, B, Zayed,
Sameid, A, Zaplas, Samias, called “Shammua”’
in Neh 11 17).

(7) Head of the Levitical Kohathite clan of
Elizaphan in the time of David (1 Ch 15 8, B,
Zapalas, Samatas, A, Zena, Semaid, &, Tauéas,
Saméas; ver 11, B, Zaylas, Samias, A, Zeuelas,
Semeias, &, Saual, Samai). He may be the same
person as (8).

(8) The scribe (1 Ch 24 6), the son of Nethanel,
who registered the names of the priestly courses.

(9) A Korahite Levite, eldest son of Obed-edom
(1 Ch 26 4.6, B, Zayalas, Samaias, A, Zapelas,
Sameias; ver 7, B, Sapal, Samat, A, Zeuela, Semeia).

(10) A Levite (2 Ch 17 8, B, Zapovas, Samoias,
A, Zayoulas, Samoutas). One of the commission
appointed by Jehoshaphat to teach the book of the
Law in Judah. The names of the commissioners as
a whole belong to a period later than the 9th cent.
(Gray, HPN, 231).

(11) One of the men “over the free-will offerings
of God” (2 Ch 81 15, Sepeet, Semeet).

(12) A Levite of the family of Jeduthun in the
reign of Hezekiah (2 Ch 29 14), one of those who
assisted in the purification of the Temple.

(13) A chief of the Levites (2 Ch 36 9), called
“Samaias” in LXX and 1 Esd 1 9.

(14) A “chief man” under Ezra (Ezr 8 16),


called ‘“Maasmas” and “Samaias” in 1 Esd 8 43, |


44.

(15)°A member of the family of Adonikam
(Ezr 8 13, B, Zapata, Samaia, A, Zapacd, Samaeid;
“Samaias” in 1 Esd 8 39).

(16) A priest of the family of Harim who married
a foreign wife (Ezr 10 21), called “Sameus” in
1 Esd 9 21.

(17) A layman of the family of Harim who mar-
ried a foreign wife (Ezr 10 31), called “Sabbeus’”’
in 1 Esd 9 32.


a


(18) A prophet (Neh 6 10-14, B, Zeneel, Semeet,
A, Seuel, Semet), employed by Sanballat and Tobiah
to frighten Nehemiah and hinder the rebuilding of
the wall.

(19) One of the 24 courses of priests, 16th under
Zerubbabel (Neh 12 6,NA, Zepelas, Semeias), 15th
under Joiakim (Neh 12 18, NA, Zeuela, Semeia), and
21st under Nehemiah (Neh 10 8, Zapacd, Samaid),
mecunicned in connection with the dedication of the
wall.

(20) A priest, descendant of Asaph (Neh 12 35).

(21) A singer (or clan) participating in the-dedica-
tion of the wall (Neh 12 36).

(22) Father of the prophet Urijah (Jer 26 20,
BA, Sapalas, Samaias, 8, Macéas, Maséas).

(23) A false prophet who was upbraided by
Jeremiah (29 24-32) for attempting to hinder his
work. He is styled “the Nehelamite”’ and was
among those carried into captivity with Jehoiachin.
In opposition to Jeremiah, he predicted a speedy
ending to the captivity. Jeremiah foretold the
complete destruction of Shemaiah’s family.

(24) Father of Delaiah, who was a prince in the
reign of Zedekiah (Jer 36 12).

(25) “The great,” kinsman of Tobias (Tob 5 13).

Horace J. WoLF.

SHEMARIAH, shem-a-ri’a, shé-mar’ya (TIVO,
shemaryah and SWIV2W, shemaryahi, “whom Jah-
veh guards’):

(1) A Benjamite warrior who joined David at
Ziklag (1 Ch 125, B, Sappopadd, Sammaraid,
NA, Zauapid, Samarid, Luc., Zapnapias, Samarias).

(2) A son of Rehoboam (2 Ch 11 19).

(3) One of the sons of Harim who had married
foreign wives (Ezr 10 32, B, Zapaped, Samareid,
Luc., Zapuaptas, Samarias, RA, Zeyapid, Semarid).

(4) One of the sons of Bani who had married
foreign wives (Ezr 10 41, A, Sapapetas, Samaretas,
B, Zapaped, Samareid, Luc., Zapaplas, Samarias).

Horace J. Wor.

SHEMEBER, shem-é’bér, shem’é-bér (ANU,
shem ébher): Theking of Zeboiim (Gen 14 2). See
SHINAB.


SHEMED, shé’med. See SHEm=r, (4).


SHEMER, shé’mér (VOW, shemer; Zésnp, Sémér,
Luc., Zéapnp, Sémmér):

(1) The owner of the hill which Omri bought
and which became the site of Samaria (1 K 16
24, JINAW, shdm'rdn). Shemer may be an an-
cient clan name. The fact, however, that the
mountain was called Shomeron when Omri bought
it makes one doubt that the city of Samaria was
named after Shemer; the passage is questionable.
The real etymology of Samaria roots it in “watch
mountain” (see Stade, Zeitschrift, 165 f).

(2) A Merarite (1 Ch 6 46 [31], Zéuunp, Sémmer).

(3) An Asherite (1 Ch 7 34, A and Luc.,
Zwunp, Sdmér), called Shomer” in ver 32.

(4) A Benjamite (1 Ch 8 12, B, S4unp, Séméer;
A, Séuunp, Sémmér, Luc., Zapaijr, Samaiél); RV
“Shemed,’’ AV “Shamed.”

The Heb MSS differ;
others “‘Shemedh.”


SHEMIDA, SHEMIDAH, shé-mi'da, SHEMI-
DAITES, shé-mi’da-its (7 T2W, shemidha'): A
Gileadite clan belonging to Manasseh (Nu 26 32;
Josh 17 2, B, Zupapelu, Sumareim, A, Zempaé,
Semiraé, Luc., Zaudde, Samidde; 1 Ch 7 19, AV
“Shemidah,” after whom the Shemidaites (Nu
26 32] were called).


SHEMINITH, shem’i-nith. See Music; Psaus.


some read “Shemer,”
Horace J. Woir


2761


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shemaiah
Sheol


SHEMIRAMOTH, shé-mir’a-moth, shé-mi'ra-
moth, shem-i-ra’/mdth (MVAVIAW , shemiramath;
in 2 Ch 17 8, Kethibh NVI; TDeperpapds,
Semeiraméth): The name of a Levitical family.
In 1 Ch 15 18.20; 165 Shemiramoth is listed
among the names of David's choirs; in 2 Ch 17 8
the same name is given among the Levites delegated
by Jehoshaphat. to teach the Law in the cities of
Judah. According to Schrader (KAT [2], 366) the
name is to be identified with the Assyr Sammura-
mat; the latter occurs as a woman’s name on the
monuments, more esp. on the statues of Nebo from
Nimrod. Another suggestion is that Shemiramoth
was originally a placename meaning “image of
Shemiram” (=name of Ram or “the Exalted One”).

Horace J. Woir

SHEMITES, shem‘its. See Srmres.

SHEMUEL, shé-mi’el, shem’i-el OxvOD,
sh‘mii’ él, “name of God” [?] [1 Ch 6 33 (18)]; RV
re prophet [see Samurt]}; ef Gray, HPN,

,n. 3):

_(1) The Simeonite appointed to assist in the
division of the land (Nu 34 20). The MT should
be emended to SXA2W, sh‘lumi’él, to correspond
with the form found in 1 6; 2 12; 7 36.41; 10 19.
LXX has uniformly Zaha, Salamiél.

(2) Grandson of Issachar (1 Ch 7 2) (B, Ioauov-
#r, Isamouél, A and Luc., Zapouyh, Samouél).


SHEN, shen (jWO, ha-shén, “the tooth’ or
“peak”; tis wada.ds, tés palaids): A place named
only in 1 8 7 12 to indicate the position of the
stone set up by Samuel in connection with the vic-
tory over the Philis, ‘between Mizpah and Shen.”
LXX evidently read yashan, “old.” Probably we
should here read y‘shdna@h, as in 2 Ch 13 19 OHL,
s.v.). Then it may be represented by ‘Ain Stnia,
to the N. of Betitn.


. SHENAZAR, shé-na’zar:
(q.v.).


SHENAZZAR, shé-naz’ir (AZR2W, shen’agcar):
Ason of Jeconiah (Jehoiachin) and uncle of Zerub-
babel (1 Ch 3 18, BA, Zdvecap, Sdnesar, Luc.,
LZdvacap, Sdnasar, Vulg Sennaser, Senneser). It is
highly probable that Sheshbazzar (Ezr 1 8.11),
“the prince of Judah,’’ and Shenazzar are identical
(so Meyer, Rothstein, etc). The name is difficult;
some suggest a corruption of “WNOAWW | shush-
balagcar, and as equivalent to Sin-usur, “Sin [the
moon-god] protect.”


AV=RV SHENazzarR


SHENIR, shé’nér (WW, s*nir, “HD, shenir):
Only found in Cant 4 8 (MT). See Senir.


SHEOL, she'd] (AND, shal):


1. The Name

2. The Abode of the Dead
1) Not a State of Unconsciousness _
2) Not Removed from God's Jurisdiction
(3) Relation to Immortality

8. Post-camonical Period


This word is often tr? in AV “grave” (e.g. Gen 37
35; 1826; Job79; 1413; Ps 65; 49 14;
Isa 14 11, etc) or “hell” (e.g. Dt 32

1. The 22; Ps 917; 185; Isa 149; Am
Name 9 2, etc); in 3 places by “pit” (Nu 16
30.33; Job 17 16). It means really
the unseen world, the state or abode of the dead, and
is the equivalent of the Gr Hdidés, by which word
it is tr! in LXX. The Eng. Revisers have acted
somewhat inconsistently in leaving “grave”’ or ‘‘pit”’
in the historical books and putting ‘“‘Sheol’’ in the
margin, while substituting “Sheol” in the poetical


writings, and putting ‘‘grave’’ in the margin (“‘hell’’
is retained in Isa 14). Cf their ‘Preface.’ The
American Revisers more properly use “Sheol”
throughout. The etymology of the word is uncer-
tain. A favorite derivation is from shd’al, “to ask”’
(cf Prov 1 12; 27 20; 30 15.16; Isa 5 14; Hab
25); others prefer the y sh@al, ‘to be hollow.”
The Babylonians are said to have a similar word
Sualu, though this is questioned by some.

Into Sheol, when life is ended, the dead are

gathered in their tribes and families. Hence the

expression frequently occurring in the
2. Abode of Pent, ‘‘to be gathered to one’s people,”
the Dead ‘‘to go to one’s fathers,” etc (Gen 15

15; 26 8.17; 49 33; Nu 20 24.28:
31 2; Dt 32 50; 34 5). It is figured as an under-
world (Isa 44 23; Ezk 26 20, etc), and is de
scribed by other terms, as ‘“‘the pit’? (Job 33 24;
Ps 281; 303; Prov112; Isa 38 18, etc),
ABADDON (q.v.) or Destruction (Job 26 6; 28
22; Prov 16 11), the place of ‘‘silence’”’ (Ps 94 17;
115 17), “the land of darkness and the shadow of
death” (Job 10 21f). It is, as the antithesis of the
living condition, the synonym for everything that
is gloomy, inert, insubstantial (the abode of Rephaim,
“shades,” Job 26 5; Prov 218; 21 16; Isa 14
9; 26 14). Itis a “land of forgetfulness,’ where
God’s ‘wonders’ are unknown (Ps 88 10-12).
There is no remembrance or praise of God (Ps 6 5;
88 12; 115 17, etc). In its darkness, stillness,
powerlessness, lack of knowledge and inactivity, it
is a true abode of death (see Dears); hence is
regarded by the living with shrinking, horror and
dismay (Ps 39 13; Isa 38 17-19), though to the
weary and troubled it may present the aspect of a
welcome rest or sleep (Job 3 17-22; 14 12f). The
Gr idea of Hades was not dissimilar.

(1) Not a state of unconsciousness.—Y et it would
be a mistake to infer, because of these strong and
sometimes poetically heightened contrasts to the
world of the living, that Sheol was conceived of as
absolutely a place without consciousness, or some
dim remembrance of the world above. This is not
thecase. Necromancy rested on the idea that there
was some communication between the world above
and the world below (Dt 18 11); a Samuel could
be summoned from the dead (18 28 11-15); Sheol
from beneath was stirred at the descent of the king
of Babylon (Isa 14 9 ff). The state is rather that
of slumbrous semi-consciousness and enfeebled exist-
ence from which in a partial way the spirit might
temporarily be aroused. Such conceptions, it need
hardly be said, did not rest on revelation, but were
rather the natural ideas formed of the future state,
in contrast with life in the body, in the absence of
revelation.

(2) Not removed from God’s jurisdiction —It
would be yet more erroneous to speak with Dr.
Charles (Hschatology, 35 ff) of Sheol as a region
“quite independent of Yahwe, and outside the
sphere of Hisrule.” “Sheol is naked before God,”
says Job, “and Abaddon hath no covering” (26 6).
“Tf I make my bed in Sheol,” says the Psalmist,
“behold thou art there” (Ps 139 8). The wrath
of Jeh burns unto the lowest Sheol (Dt 32 22).
As a rule there is little sense of moral distinctions
in the OT representations of Sheol, yet possibly
these are not altogether wanting (on the above and
others points in the theology of Sheol, see EscHa-
TOLOGY OF THE OT).

(3) Relation to immortality —To apprehend fully
the OT conception of Sheol one must view it in its
relation to the idea of death as something unnat-
ural and abnormal for man; a result of sin. The
believer’s hope for the future, so far as this had
place, was not prolonged existence in Sheol, but
deliverance from it and restoration to new life in


Shepham
Shepherd


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2762


God’s presence (Job 14 13-15; 19 25-27; Ps 16
10.11; 17 15; 49 15; 73 24-26; see ImmMorTaL-
1ry; EscHATOLOGY OF THE OT; ReEsuRRECTION).
Dr. Charles probably goes too far in thinking of
Sheol in Pss 49 and 73 as “the future abodeof the
wicked only; heaven as that of the righteous” (op.
cit., 74); but different destinies are clearly indicated.
There is no doubt, at all events, that in the post-
canonical Jewish lit. (Apoc and apocalyptic) a very
considerable development is manifest


3. Post- in the idea of Sheol. Distinction
canonical between good and bad in Israel is em-
Period phasized; Sheol becomes for certain


classes an intermediate state between
death and resurrection; for the wicked and for
Gentiles it is nearly a synonym for Gehenna (hell).
For the various views, with relevant lit. on the
whole subject, see EscHaToLoGy oF THE NT; also
DeratH; Hangs; HELL, etc. JAMES ORR


SHEPHAM, shé’fam (ODW, sh*phdm; Zerpédpap,
Sepphdmar): A place, probably a hill town, on the
ideal eastern boundary of Israel, named in Nu 84
10, but omitted in Ezk 47 15-18. It lay between
Hazar-enan and Harbel (MT ‘Hariblah’’), which
must have been in the neighborhood of Hermon.
The word means a “naked” place, and doubtless
indicates one of the barer midway ridges of Anti-
Lebanon. It was probably the native place of Zabdi
the Shiphmite, who was David’s chief vine-gardener
(1 Ch 27 27).


SHEPHATIAH, shef-a-ti’a, shéfat’ya (KTQDU,
shphatyah, ‘Jeh has judged’):

P os A son of David, by Abital (2 8 3 4; 1 Ch

(2) A Benjamite, father of Meshullam, of Jerus
(1 Ch 9 8).

(8) A Benjamite, who joined David at Ziklag
(1 Ch 12 5).

(4) A prince of the Simeonites in the time of
David (1 Ch 27 16).

(5) A son of IXing Jehoshaphat (2 Ch 21 2).

(6) A family, 372 of whom returned with Zerub-
babel (Ezr 2 4; Neh 7 9); 80 more males of this
family, with their head, returned with Ezra (Ezr
8 8).

(7) A servant of Solomon, 392 of whose descend-
ants returned with Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 57f; Neh
7 59f); “Saphat” in 1 Esd 5 9 and ‘“Saphatias”
inl Esd 8 34.

(8) A Perezzite (Judahite), some of whose de-
scendants dwelt at Jerus in the time of Nehemiah
(Neh 11 4).

(9) A son of Mattan, a contemporary of Jere-
miah (Jer 38 1). James ORR


SHEPHELAH, shetf-é@’/la (eEwT, ha-sh*phélah;
cehnrd, sephéld, capndrd, saphéld): The word de-


notes “lowland,” and is variously
1. Name rendered in AV. It is ‘vale’ in Dt
and Refer- 17; Josh 10 40; 1 K 10 27; 2 Ch
ences 115; Jer 33 13; ‘valley’? in Josh
91; 112.16; 128; 15 33; Jys 1


9; Jer 32 44; “low plain” in 1 Ch 27 28; 2 Ch
9 27; “plain” in Jer 17 26; Ob ver 19; Zec
77; and “low country” in 2 Ch 28 18. RV
renders uniformly “lowland.” As the word always
occurs with the definite art., indicating a distinct
district, it might have been well to retain it without
tr. The boundaries of the district are clearly
marked and include much broken country; the
hills being low compared with the mountains to the
E., but much higher than the plain that runs to the
shore. Ifa tr was to be made, perhaps “lowlands”
would have been the best, as applied to the “Low-


lands” of Scotland, “which likewise are not entirely
plain, but have their groups and ranges of hills”
(HGHL, 203). In the wide sense the Shephelah
included the territory originally given to the tribe
of Dan, and also a considerable part of Western
and Southwestern Judaea. At an early day the
tribes of Dan and Simeon were practically absorbed
by Judah, and hence we find in Josh 15 many cities
in the Shephelah which belonged to that tribe
(DB, I, 211).

(1) The sites of many ancient cities named in

the Shephelah have been identified. They all lie

within the strip of hill country that
2. Districts runs along the western base of the
and mountains of Judah, terminating in
Features the N. at the Valley of Aijalon. Once

indeed the name appears to apply to
the low hills N. of this (Josh 11 16, ‘the mount of
Israel and its Shephelah’). Every other reference
applies only to the S.

Principal G. A. Smith has pointed out the difference
between the district to the N. and that to the 8. of Aija-
lon (HGHL, 203 ff). ‘‘ North of Ajalon the low hills
which run out on Sharon are connected with the high
mountains hehind them. ‘You ascend to the latter from
Sharon either hy long sloping ridges, such as that which
today carries the telegraph wire and the high road from
Jaffa to Nablus; or else you climb up terraces, such as
the succession of ranges closely built upon one another
by which the country rises from Lydda to Bethel. That
is, the low hills west of Samaria are (to use the Heh
phrase) 'dshédhoth, or slopes of the central range, and not
aseparate group. But 8. of Ajalon the low hills do not
so hang upon the Central Range, hut are separated from
the mountains of Judah hy a series of valleys, hoth wide
and narrow, which run all the way from Ajalon to near
Beersheha; and it is only when the low hills are thus
flung off the Central Range into an independent group,
separating Judaea from Philistia, that the name Shephe-
lah seems to he applied to them.”

(2) On the E. of the Shephelah, then, taking the
name in this more limited sense, rises the steep wall
of the mountain, into which access is gained only
by narrow and difficult defiles. The hills of the
Shephelah are from 500 to 800 ft. high, with nothing
over 1,500. The formation is soft limestone. In
the valleys and upland plains there is much excel-
lent land which supports a fairly good population
still. Wheat, barley and olives are the chief prod-
ucts. But ancient wine presses cut in the rocks
testify to the culture of the vine in old times. The
district is almost entirely dependent on the rain for
its water-supply. This is collected in great cis-
terns, partly natural. The rocks are in many places
honeycombed with caves.

The western boundary is not so definite as that
on the E. Some have held that it included the
Phili plain. This contention draws support from
the mention of the Phili cities immediately after
those of Judah, which are said to be in the Shephe-
lah (Josh 16 45 ff; these verses can hardly be ruled
out as of a later date). On the other hand the
Phils are said to have invaded the cities of the
Shephelah (2 Ch 28 18), which implies that it was
outside their country. In later times the Talm
(Jerus Sh*bhi'tth 9 2) distinguishes the Mountain,
the Shephelah, and the Plain. See, however, dis-
cussion in Buhl (GAP, 104, n.; and G. A. Smith,
Expos, 1896, 404 ff).

The Shephelah is crossed by five wide valleys which
furnish easy access from the plain. These are of

importance chiefly because from each

3. The Five of them a way, crossing the ‘‘foss,”’
Valleys enters one of the defiles by which alone
armies could approach the uplands of

Judaea. The hills of Judaea are much steeper on
the east than on the west, where they fall toward
Philistia in long-rolling hills, forming the Shephelah.
(1) The most noteworthy of these is the Vale of Aija-


lon. It winds its way first in a northeasterly direction,
past the Beth-horons, then, turning to the 8.E., it reaches


2763


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shepham
Shepherd


the plateau at el-Jib, the ancient Gibeon, fully 5 miles
N WW. of Jerus. This is the easiest of all the avenues
leading from the plain to the heights, and it is the one
along which the tides of battle most frequently rolled
from the days of Joshua (Josh 10 12) to those of the
Maccahees (1 Macc 3 167f, etc). It occupies also a
yee ae place in the records of the Crusades.

2) Wéady es-Surdr, the Valley of Sorek, crosses the
Shephelah 8. of Gezer, and pursues a tortuous course

ast Beth-shemesh and Kiriath-jearim to the plateau
-W. of Jerus. This is the line followed by the Jaffa-
Jerus Railway.

@) Wéady es-Sunt runs eastward from the N. of Teil
eg-Safieh (Gath) up the Vale of Elah to its confluence with
Wady es-Sur which comes in from the S. near Khirbet
Shuweikeh (Socoh); and from that point, as Wddy el-
Jindy, pursues its way S. of Timnah to the uplands W.
of Bethlehem.

(4) Wéddy el-‘Afranj crosses the plain from Ashdod
(Esdud), passes Beit Jibrin (Eleutheropolis), and winds
up through the mountains toward Hebron.

(5) Wéady el-Hesy, trom the sea about 7 miles N. of
Gaza, runs castward with many windings, passes to the
N, of Lachish, and finds its way to the plateau some 6
miles 8.W. of Hebron.


—


Ezk 34 12), but more often he delegates the work to
his children (Gen 29 9; 1 S 16 19; 17 15) or rela-
tives (Gen 31 6). In such cases the sheep have
good care because the keepers have a personal in-
terest in the well-being of the animals, but when
they are attended by a hireling (1 8 17 20) the
flocks may be neglected or abused (Isa 66 10.11;
Ezk 34 8.10; Zee 1115.17; Jn 10 12). The
chief care of the shepherd is to see that the sheep
find plenty to eat and drink. The flocks are not
fed in pens or folds, but, summer and winter, must
depend upon foraging for their sustenance (Ps
23 2). In the winter of 1910-11 an unprecedented
storm ravaged Northern Syria. Jt was accom-
panied by a snowfall of more than 3 ft., which
covered the ground for weeks. During that time,
hundreds of thousands of sheep and goats perished,
not so much from the cold as from the fact that they
could get nofood. Goats hunt out the best feeding-


SHEPHERD AND SHEEP.


From the Shephelah thus opened the gateways
by which Judaea and Jerus might be assailed: and
the course of these avenues determined the course
of much of the history. It is evident that the
Shephelah lay open to attack from both sides, and
for centuries it was the debatable land between
Israel and the Philis. The ark for a time sojourned
in this region (1 8 6 6f). In this district is laid
the scene of Samson’s exploits (Jgs 14-16). The
scene of David’s memorable victory over the giant
was in the Wddy es-Sunt, between Socoh and
Azekah (1 8 17 1). David found refuge here in
the cave of Adullam (1 S 22 1). For picturesque
and vivid accounts of the Shephelah and of the
part it played in history see Smith, WGHL, 201 ff;
A. Henderson, Palestine, Its Historical Geography,
1894. W. Ewine


SHEPHER, shé’fér (BW, shepher, “beauty”):
A mount near which the Israelites encamped (Nu
33 23f). See WANDERINGS OF ISRAEL.


SHEPHERD, shep’érd (TWA, rd'eh, "7, rd";
monty, poimén, ‘a feeder’): The sheep owner fre-
quently tends the flocks himself (Gen 4 4; 30 40; cf


grounds, but sheep are more helpless and have to be
led to their food (cf Nu 27 16.17); nor do they
possess the instinct of many other animals for find-
ing their way home (cf Ezk 34 6-8). Flocks
should be watered at least once a day. Where
there are springs or streams this is an easy matter.
Frequently the nearest water is hours away. One
needs to travel in the dry places in Syria or Pal, and
then enter the watered valleys like those in Edom
where the flocks are constantly being led for water,
to appreciate the Psalmist’s words, ‘‘He leadeth me
beside still waters.” Sometimes water can be ob-
tained by digging shallow wells (Gen 26 18-22.
25.32). The shepherd frequently carries with
him a pail from which the sheep can drink when the
water 1s not accessible to them. On the mountain
tops the melting snows supply the needed water.
in other districts it is drawn from deep wells (Gen
29 2; Jn 4 6). The usual time for watering 1s at
noon, at which time the flocks are led to the water-
ing-places (Gen 29 2.3). After drinking, the ani-
mals lie down or huddle together in the shade of a
rock while the shepherd sleeps. At the first sound
of his call, which is usually a peculiar guttural
sound, hard to imitate, the flock follow off to new


Shephi, Shepho
Sheshach


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2764


feeding-grounds. Even should two shepherds call
their flocks at the same time and the sheep he inter-
mingled, they never mistake their own master’s
voice (Jn 10 3-5).

The shepherd’s equipment is a simple one. His
chief garment is a cloak woven from wool or made
from sheepskins. This is sleeveless, and so made
that it hangs like a cloak on his shoulders. When
he sleeps he curls up under it, head and all. During
the summer a lighter, short-sleeved ‘aba or coat is
worn. He carries a staff or club (see Starr), and
a characteristic attitude is to make a rest for his
arms by placing his staff on his shoulders against
the back of his neck. When an esp. productive
spot is found, the shepherd may pass the time, while
the animals are grazing, by playing on his pipe (Jgs
6 16). He sometimes carries a sling (eR, kela‘)
of goat’s hair (1 § 17 40). His chief belongings
are kept in a skin pouch or hag 5D, kelt) (1 8
17 40). This bag is usually a whole tawed skin
turned wrong side out, with the legs tied up and the
neck forming the opening. He is usually aided in
the keeping and the defending of the sheep by a
dog (Job 30 1). In Syria the Kurdish dogs make
the best protectors of the sheep, as, unlike the
cowardly city dogs, they are fearless and will drive
away the wild beasts. ‘The shepherd is often called
upon to aid the dogs in defending the sheep (Gen
ao 1$ 17 34.35; Isa 314; Jer 66; Am

2).

Figurative: The frequent use of the word ‘‘shep-
herd” to indicate a spiritual overseer is familiar to
Bible readers (Ps 28 1; 801; Eccl 12 11; Isa
40 4; 63 14; Jer 31 10; Ezk 34 23; 37 24; Jn
2115-17; Eph 411; '1 Pet 6 1-4). We ‘still
use the term ‘“‘pastor,’’ lit. ‘a shepherd.’’ Leaders
in temporal affairs were also called shepherds (Gen
47 17m; Isa 44 28; 6311). “Sheep without a
shepherd”’ typified individuals or nations who had
forgotten Jeh (Nu 27 17; 1 K 22 17; 2 Ch 18
16; Ezk 34 5.8; Zec 10 2; Mt 9 36; Mk 6 34).

Jesus is spoken of as the good shepherd (Jn 10
14); chief shepherd (1 Pet 5 4); great shepherd
(He 18 20); the one shepherd (Jn 10 16). “He
will feed his flock like a shepherd, he will gather
the lambs in his arm, and carry them in his
bosom, and will gently lead those that have their
young” (Isa 40 11) is a picture drawn from pas-
toral life of Jeh’s care over His children. A strong
sympathy for helpless animals, though sometimes
misdirected, is a marked characteristic of the people
of Bible lands. The birth of offspring in a flock
often occurs far off on the mountain side. The
shepherd solicitously guards the mother during
her helpless moments and picks up the lamb and
carries it to the fold. For the few days, until it is
able to walk, he may carry it in his arms or in the
loose folds of his coat ahove his girdle. See also
SHEEP. James A. PatcH


SHEPHI, shé’fi, SHEPHO, sho’fs (DW, shephi;
B, 248, Sb, A, Bwodap, Sdphdr, Lue., Zardel,
Sapphei [1 Ch 1 40]; or Shepho, 12W, shepho;
A, Zab, Sdph, Luc., Zoav, Séphin [Gen 36 23)):
A Horite chief.


SHEPHUPHAM, SHEPHUPHAN, shé-fi’fam
or -fan (DBIDW, sh*phiiphdm; BA, Zoddv, Saphdn,
Lue., Zopav, Sophdn [Nu 26 39 (48)]; or Shephu-
phan, JDIEW, sh*phiphan; B, Zwhapdax, Sdphar-
phak, A, odar, Sophan, Lue., Lerpap, Seppham
{1 Ch 8 5], “a kind of serpent,” Gray, HPN, 95):
Eponym of a Benjamite family. The name occurs
in Gen 46 21 as “Muppim” and in 1 Ch 7 12.15;
26 16 as “Shuppim.” It is almost impossible to


arrive at the original form; the gentilic ‘Shupha-
mites’? appears in Nu 26 39 (43).


SHERAH, shé’ra. See SHEERAH.


SHERD, shird. See PotsHErp.


SHEREBIAH, sher-é-bi’a, shé-reb’ya (MIA7V,
shérébhyah, “‘God has sent burning heat’’[?]; the
form is doubtful): A post-exilic priest and family.
Sherebiah, who jomed Ezra at the river Ahava
(Ezr 8 18; LXX omits), and had charge, along with
eleven others, of the silver and gold and vessels for
the: Temple (ver 24, BA, Zapacd, Saraid, Luc.,
ZapaBlas, Sarabias). He aided in the exposition
of the Law (Neh 8 7), was among those who made
public confession (9 4) and sealed the covenant
(10 12 [13]). His name also appears in 12 8.24.
In every passage listed above except 10 12 (13),
BA read ZapaBla, Sarabia, Luc., SapaBlas, Sarabias.
In1 Esd 8 47 the name appears as ‘“‘Asebehia,” RV
“Asebebias’’; in ver 54, ‘“‘Esebrias,’’ RV ‘“‘Eserebias,”’
and 1 Esd 9 48, “‘Sarabias.” Many of the com-
panion-names on the lists are plainly ethnic
(Cheyne). Horace J. WoiF


SHERESH, shé’resh (UT, shadresh; B, Zodpos,
Sotiros, A, Zépos, Séros, Luc., Padpes, Phares,
Pépos, Phéros): A Machirite name in a genealogy
of Manasseh (1 Ch 7 16).


SHEREZER,
SHAREZER.


she-ré’zér (Zec 7 2 AV). See


SHERGHAT, shir’gat, sher’gat, or ASSHUR, or
ASSUR: The name of the first capital city of
Assyria is known by the Arabs as Kala’at Sherghat,
or the Fortress of Sherghat. Its ancient name was
Asshur or Assur (Gen 10 11m). From it was de-
rived the name of the country, Assyria, and of the
people, Assyrians. The date of the founding of the
city is not known. Apparently about 2000 BC a
colony of Babylonians migrated northward along
the Tigris River and settled upon the right shore
about halfway between the Upper and Lower Zab
or halfway between the modern cities of Mosul and
Bagdad. Assur, the local deity of the place, hecame
the national god of Assyria. Itis uncertain whether
the deity gave the name to the city, or the city to the
deity, but probably an early shrine of Assur stood
there, and the people, building their city ahout it,
became known as the Assyrians. At first the city
was a Bab dependency, governed by priests from
Babylonia. In time, as the city acquired a political
significance, the power of the priesthood declined;
allegiance to Babylonia ceased, and the Assyr
empire came into existence. Ahout 1200 BC the
political power had so increased that a new capital,
Nimrud (Calah) was built to the N. near the junc-
tion of the Upper Zab with the Tigris. In 722 BC
the capital was transferred by Sargon to his new
city, Dur-Sharrukin, and in 705 BC Sennacherih
enlarged Nineveh, and it remained the capital city
till the fall of the empire in 606 BC. Assur, how-
ever, as the seat of the national deity, never ceased
to be the chief religious center.

The mounds of Assur are among the largest in
Mesopotamia. They rise abruptly from the Tigris,
which they follow for about half a mile, and extend
a quarter of a mile inland. In the surrounding
plam are other mounds, marking the sites of temples,
and indicating that a part of the city was without
the walls. At the northern end the mounds are
surmounted by a high conical peak, which represents
the tower or ziggurat of the temple of Assur.

Of the early excavators Layard and Rassam ex-


2765


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shephi, Shepho
Sheshach


amined the ruins, but the fanaticism of the sur-
rounding Arabs prevented extensive excavations.
In 1904 Dr. W. Andrae, for the Deutsche Orient-
gesellschaft, began the systematic excavations
which have been continued by Dr. P. Maresch for
ten years. Discoveries of the greatest importance
have been made. The city was found to have been
surrounded on the land side by a double wall.
The space between the walls, several rods in width,
was occupied by houses, possibly the homes of the
soldiers. The base of the outer wall was of stone;
above it were mud bricks strengthened at intervals
with courses of burned bricks. Along the outer
upper edge was a parapet, protected by battlements.
From the floor of the parapet small holes were bored
vertically downward, so that the soldiers, without
exposing themselves, might discharge their arrows
at the enemy close to the base of the wall. Many
of the holes are still visible. The wall was pierced
with several gateways; the names “Gate of Assur,”
“Gate of the Tigris,’ “Gate of the Sun God” have
survived. At the sides of the gateways were small
chambers for the guards, and from them passage-
ways led to the parapet above. The gates were
reached by bridges which spanned the moat. Along
the river side the city was protected by a high steep
embankment, which was built partly of limestone,
but chiefly of square bricks laid in bitumen.


Loopholes through Which Arrows Were Shot.

The temple of Assur at the northern end of the
city has been thoroughly excavated. With its
outer and inner court and tower it conformed in its
general plan to the older Bab temples. Several of
the palaces of the early kings were discovered, but
the best-preserved of the palaces was one which the
excavators have called the residence of the mayor.
It stood near the western edge of the city on the
main street which ran from the western gate to the
Tigris. It consisted of two courts surrounded by
chambers. Grooves in the paved floor conducted
fresh water to the kitchen, the baths and the cham-
bers, and round tiles beneath the floor carried away
the waste water to the arched city sewer and to the
Tigris. To the rear of the mayor’s house was a
crowded residential quarter. The streets were very
narrow and winding. The houses were exceedingly
small; in some of them one could not lie at full
length upon the floor. Among their ruins appeared
little but stone mortars and broken pottery and other
essential household implements. |

Near the southern end of the city a most remark-
able discovery was made. About a hundred mono-
liths, from 4 to 8 ft. high, were found still standing
erect. On the side of each one, near the top, was
an inscription of several lines, dedicating the stone
to some individual who had been of great service
to the state. They were not tombstones, appar-


ently they had been erected during the lifetime of
the people whom they honored. Of the greatest
interest was one which bore the name of Sammura-
mat or Semiramis, the once supposed mythical
queen of Nineveh. Its tr reads: “The column of
Sa-am-mu-ra-mat, the palace wife of Samsi-Adad,


Monuments in Assur Discovered by the Germans.


king of the world, king of Assyria, the mother of
Adad-Nirari, king of the world, king of Assyria, the

. of Shalmaneser, king of the four regions.”
The inscription not only makes Semiramis a his-
torical character, but places her among the foremost
rulers of Assyria.

The tombs of the kings and nobles were found
deep in the ruins in the very center of the city.
They were rectangular structures of cut stone,
covered above with a rounded arch of burned
bricks. In some cases the massive stone doors
still turned in their sockets. The roofs of many of
them had fallen in; others, which were intact, were
filled with dust. From the tombs a vast amount of
silver, gold and copper jewelry and stone beads and
ornaments were recovered.

One of the chief temples of the city stood at a
short distance without the eastern wall. Nothing
but its foundations remain. However, the temple
was surrounded by a park, traces of which still exist.
The soil of the surrounding plain is a hard clay,
incapable of supporting vegetable life. Into the
clay large holes, several feet in diameter, were dug
and filled with loam. Long lines of the holes may
still be traced, each marking the spot where a tree,
probably the date palm, stood in the temple park.

A modern cemetery on the summit of the main
mound is still used by the neighboring Arabs, and


* therefore it will likely prevent the complete exca-


vation of this oldest of the capital cities of Assyria.
See further Assyria. Banks


SHERIFF, sher'if (Aram. R°MDM, tiphiay2’,
‘Sudicial,” “a lawyer,’ “a sheriff?’ [Dnl 3 2f]):
Probably a “lawyer” or “jurist’’ whose business it
was to decide points of law. At best, however, the
tr “sheriff” is but a conjecture.


SHESHACH, shé’shak (FWW, shéshakh, as if
“humiliation”; cf J2W, shakhakh, “to crouch’’):
The general explanation is that this is ‘a cypher-
form of ‘Babel’ (Babylon)” which is the word given
as equivalent to “Sheshach” by the Tg (Jer 25 26;
51 41; LXX omits in both passages). By the
device known as AtbaS (WANN), ie. disguising a
name by substituting the last letter of the alphabet
for the first, the letter next to the last for the second,
etc, TWW is substituted for 292, babhel. This
theory has not failed of opposition. Delitzsch


Sheshbazzar
Shiggaion


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2766


holds that ‘“‘Sheshach’” represents Si3-ki-KI of
an old Bab regal register, which may have stood
for a part of the city of Babylon. (For a refutation
of this interpretation see Schrader, KAT?, 415;
COT, 11, 108f.) Lauth, too, takes ‘‘Sheshach” to
bea Hebraization of Szska, a Bab district. Winckler
and Sayce read Uru-azagga. Finally, Cheyne and
a number of critics hold that the word has crept into
the text, being “a conceit of later editors.’’ See
further JEREMIAH, 6. Horace J. WoLrF


SHESHBAZZAR, shesh-baz’ar (WSAWW, shesh-
baccar, or ‘W, sh@shbaccar): Sheshbazzar is the Heb
or Aram. form of the Bab Shamash-aba-ugur, or
Shamash-bana-usur: ‘Oh Shamash, protect the
father.” 1t is possible that the full name was
Shamash-ban-zeri-Babili-usur, “(Oh Shamash, protect
the father [builder] of the seed of Babylon.” (See
Zerubbabel, and compare the Bab names A shur-bana-
usur, Ban-ziri, Nabu-ban-ziri, Shamash-ban-aplt,
Shamash-apil-usur, Shamash-ban-ahi, and others in
Tallquist’s Neubabylonisches Namenbuch, and the
Aram. names on nos. 35, 44, 36, and 45 of Clay’s
Aramaie Dockets.) lf this latter was the full name,
there would be httle doubt that Sheshbazzar may
have been the same person as Zerubbabel, since the
former is called in Ezr 5 14 the governor of Judah,
and the latter is called by the same title in Hag 1
1.14; 2 2.21. It is more probable, however, that
Sheshbazzar and Zerubbabel were different persons,
and that Sheshbazzar was governor of Judah in the
time of Cyrus and Zerubbabel in that of Darius.
It is possible that Sheshbazzar came to Jerus in the
time of Cyrus and laid the foundations, and that
Zerubbabel came later in the time of Darius Hystas-
pis and completed the building of the temple (cf Ezr
2 68; 4 2; Hag 1 14).

According to Ezr 1 § Sheshbazzar was the prince
(Hannasi) of Judah into whose hands Cyrus put the
vessels of the honse of the Lord which Nebuchad-
nezzar had brought forth out of Jerus and had put
in the house of his gods. _ It is further said in ver 11
that Sheshbazzar brought these vessels with them
of the captivity which he brought up from Babylon
to Jerns. In Ezr 5 14f it is said that these vessels
had been delivered by Cyrus unto one whose
name was Sheshbazzar, whom he had made gover-
nor (pehdh), and that Sheshbazzar came and laid
the foundations of the house of God which was in
Jerus. Sce SANABASSAR. R. Dick Witson


SHESHAIL, shé’shi ("8W, shéshay): Oue of the
sons of Anak, perhaps an old Hebronite clan name.
(Sayce combines the name with Sasu, ¥ MOW, the


Egyp name for the Syrian Bedouins.) The clan’


lived in Hebron at the time of the conquest and
was expelled by Caleb (Nu 13 22, B, Zecoel, Sesset,
A, Zeuel, Semei; Josh 15 14, B, Sovoe, Sousei, A,
Zoveal, Sousai; Jgs 1 10, B, Zeocel, Sessei, A, Tel,
Geththi).


SHESHAN, shé’shan (JWW, shéshan; Zwody,
Sésin): A Jerahmeelite whose daughter married
his servant Jarha (1 Ch 2 31.34.35). The genea-
logical list which follows embraces some very early
names (ef Curtis, /CC, ad loc.).


SHETH.


SHETHAR, shé’ thir (NW, shéthar; B and Luc.,
Zapoabaios, Sarsathaios, A, Lapéreos, Saréstheos):
One of the “seven princes” at the court of
Abasuerus (Est 1 14); these princes “sat first in
the kingdom” and had the right of entrance to the
king’s presence at any time, except when he was
in the company of one of his wives. (According


See Sera.


to Marquart, Fund., 69, Shethar comes from
INWAW, with which the Pers Siydtis, “joy,” is to
be compared.) The word has never really been
satisfactorily explained; it is presumably Pers.


SHETHAR-BOZENAT, shé’thir-boz’é-ni,
SHETHAR-BOZNAI, shé’thar-boz’ni, = -boz’né-1,
(7272 TNW, sh*thar boznay, meaning uncertain): The
name of « Pers (?) official mentioned with Tattenai
in connection with the correspondence with Darius
relative to the rebuilding of the Temple (Ezr 5
3.6; 6 6.12; B, ZaapBovtéy, Satharbouzdn, A,
LabapBovfaval, Satharbouzanat, in 6 3; 6 13; ZaGap-
Bovgavys, Satharbouzanés, in 5 6; ZabapBoviaré,
Satharbouzané, in 6 6; Luc., throughout, GapBovga-
vatos, Tharbouzanaios), called in 1 Esd 6 3.7.27; 7 1
“Shathrabuzanes.”

Among the conjectures as to the meaning and deriva-
tion of the name, the following may be mentioned: (1)
Shethar-boznai may be a corruption of wan.
metharbéznay =MOpoBovgdvys, Mithrobouzdnés, Old Pers
Mithrobauzana—i.e. ‘‘Mithra is deliverer."’ (2) nv
isidentical with the Old Pers (ithra (‘‘ seed,” ‘‘brilliance"’);
names have been found that are confounded with this
word. (3) "3710 Mw may bea title, but "YW, sethar,
must then be read for anu, shethar. (4) STD Ww is
equivalent to the Old Pers Séthrabizana, ‘“empire-
delivering’; cf #B, art. ‘‘Shethar-boznai,"' and BDB.

: Horace J. Wour

SHEVA, shé’va (NW, shewa’; B, Zaod, Saoii,
A, ZaotaA, Saoitl, Luc., Bove, Soué):

(1) A son of Caleb by his concubine Maacah
(1 Ch 2 49).

(2) See SHAVSHAH.


SHEW, SHOW, shi: “Show” (so always ARV)
is simply a modernized spelling of “shew” (so
always in AV and generally in ERV), and it should
be carefully noted that ‘‘shew’’ is never pronounced
“shoo,” not even in the combination “shewbread”’;
ef “sew.”

In AV “shew” as a vb. is the tr of a very large
number of terms in the original. This number is
reduced considerably by RV (esp. in the NT),
but most of these changes are to secure uniformity
of rendition, rather than to correct obscurities. The
proper sense of the vb., of course, is “to cause a per-
son to see’ (Gen 12 1, etc) or “to cause a thing [or
“person”] to be seen” (Dt 4 35; Jgs 4 22, etc).
‘Seeing,”’ naturally, can be taken as intellectual or
moral (Jer 38 21; Ps 16 11, etc), and can even be
used for “hearing” (Isa 43 9, etc; contrast RV
18 9 27). Hence “shew” can be used as a general
tr for the most various phrases, as ‘“‘be shewed” for
ylvouat, ginomat, “come to pass” (Acts 4 22, RV “be
wrought’); “shew forth themselves” for évepyéw,
energéd, “be active’ (Mt 14 2, RV ‘“work’’); “shew”
for mow, poiéd, “do” (Acts 7 36, RV “having
wrought”); for dcyyéouar, diégéomai, “relate” (Lk 8
39, RV ‘‘declare’’); for én\éw, déléd, ‘make clear”
(2 Pet 1 14, RV “signify”’), etc. In Cant 2 9
AV (ERV) “shewing himself”? and ARV (ERVm)
“slanceth” both miss the poetry of the original:
“His eyes shine in through the lattice’ (gue, “blos-
som,” ‘‘sparkle’’).

AV’s uses of the noun “shew” usually connote
appearance in contrast to reality. So Lk 20 47,
“for a shew”’ (rpddacts, préphasis, “apparent cause,”
RV “pretence’); Col 2 23, “shew of wisdom”


(so RV, dAébyos, légos, “word,” “repute’); Gal
6 12, “make a fair shew’ (so RV, evrpoowréu,
ewprosépés, “have a fair face”); Ps 39 6, ‘vain


shew” (so ARV poy , gelem, “image,” RVm “‘shad-
ow’). However, in Sir 43 1 (8paya, hérama,
“spectacle” [so RV]) and in Col 2 15 (Seryparitu,
deigmatizo, “to display’) “shew’=“‘spectacle.”


2767


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sheshhazzar
Shiggaion


In Isa 3 9 “the shew of their countenance” is a
bad tr for “their respect of persons” (so RVm for
hakkarath penéhem). The “‘shewing’ of the Bap-
tist ‘unto Israel” (Lk 1 80 AV, ERV) is of course
his appearing to begin his ministry.

Burton Scorr Easton

SHEWBREAD, sho/bred, THE (DBT ond,
lehem ha-panim, “bread of the presence’; 4

apd0erig tdv aprav, hé préthesis tin
1. The drtén [He 9 2]; ARV “showbread.”’
Term See SHEw): The marginal reading of
Ex 25 30; 35 13, RV ‘“‘Presence-bread,”’
exactly gives the meaning of the Heb. In 2 Ch 2
4 it is spoken of as the “continual showbread,”
because it was to be before Jeh “alway” (Ex 25 30).

Later Judaism has much to say as to the number

and size of the loaves, more properly thin cakes,

which bore this name, together with
2. Mosaic many minute regulations as to the
Regulations placing of the loaves, the covering of

them with frankincense, and other
ritualistic vapidities. All that the Mosaic legislation
required was that, once in every week, there should
be twelve cakes of unleavened bread, each con-
taining about four-fifths of a peck of fine flour,
placed in two piles upon a pure table with frankin-
cense beside each pile and changed every Sabbath
day (Lev 24 5-9). From the description of the
table upon which the flat cakes were to lie (Ex
25 23-30; 37 10-16), it held a series of golden
vessels comprising dishes, spoons, flagons and bowls.
As it is unlikely that empty cups were set before
Jeh—they being described as “the vessels which
were upon the table’’—we may conclnde that the
table held presentation offerings of ‘‘grain and wine
and oil,”’ the three chief products of the land (Dt
7 13). The ‘dishes’ were probably the salvers
on which the thin cakes were piled, six on each.
The ‘‘flagons” would contain wine, and the bowls
(made with spouts, “to pour withal’’), the oil;
while the “spoons” held the frankincense, which
was burned as a memorial, ‘even an offering made
by fire unto Jeh.” The cakes themselves were
eaten by the priests on every Sabbath day, as being
among the “most holy” sacrifices. Each of the
synoptists refers to the incident of David and his
companions having eaten of the shewhread (hoi
drtow tés prothéseds), as told in 1 S 21 4-6 (Mt
12 4; Mk 2 26; Lk 6 4).

At such times as the removal of the tabernacle

took place, the separate appointments of the table

of incense were not parted from it,
3. On but were carried with it—dishes,
Journeyings spoons, bowls, and cups | (Nu 4 7).

These, like the other furniture, were
borne by the Kohathite Levites, but a few articles
of lighter weight were in the personal care of the
high priest. ‘These comprised the oil for the candle-
stick, the sweet incense, the holy oil of consecration,
and the meal for the continual bread offering (Nu
4 7.8.16). Small quantities of these alone would
be borne from place to place, such. as would be
needed with the least delay to refurnish the vessels
of the sanctuary on every reérection of the tent of
meeting. .

With this view of the nature, we have a natural
and adequate sense of the meanings and importance
of the shewbread, in the economy of
the temple ritual and service. It was
a continual reminder to the worshippers
of the truth that man does not live
by bread alone, emphasized by the fact that these
most holy offerings were afterward eaten. It was
the O'T version of the prayer, “Give us this day our
daily bread”; and in the fact that the holy table
was never for a moment left without some loaves


4, Signifi-
cance


lying on it, we have the symbol of man’s con-
tinued and unbroken dependence upon God. Even
during the travels of the table of shewbread with
the tabernacle, the ‘‘continual bread” was required
to he in its place thereon (Nu 4 7).

It has been usual to say that “frankincense in
golden urns stood beside the twelve loaves’ (HB,
IV, col. 4212). But this is a mere repetition of
a Jewish legend, as spoons were the recognized
holders of the frankincense to be burned (cf Nu 7
14 ff). Such spoons formed a part of the equipment
of the shewbread table, and on the removal of the
week-old cakes the spoons were carried forth and
the frankincense in them burned on the great, altar
on the Sabbath day. If this were done while the
grain and wine and oil were being consumed, it
would derive additional significance, as betokening
the gratitude and adoration of the representative
recipients of the bounties of Nature, just as the
daily burning of incense in the holy place betokened
the worship and adoration of the praying multi-
tudes without the temple (Lk 1 10). See SHew-
BREAD, TABLE OF, W. Suaw Cabpecorr


SHEWBREAD, TABLE OF (70>, shulhan
[Ex 25 25-30, etc]; 4 rpdmrefa kal 4 mpdbecis Tav
aptav, hé irdpeza kat hé prothesis tén drtén (He 9 2)):
For construction, see TABERNACLE; TEMPLE. A
rude representation of the table is given on the Arch
of Titusin Rome. The bas-relief was measured by
Professor Boni in 1905, and the height and width of
the represented tables were found to be 48 cms., or
nearly 19 in. ‘The table represented is, of course,
that of Herod’s temple, taken at the fall of Jerus
in 70 AD. See the anthor’s art. on “The Temple
Spoils” in PEFS, 1906, 306 ff.

The table of shewbread is to be distinguished from
the altar of incense. It has become the fashion of
the newer criticism to deny the existence of the
altar of incense in preéxilic times, and to explain the
allusion to it in 1 K 6 20 as the table of shewbread
(so in Ezk 41 22). The other references (1 K 6
22; 7 48; 9 25) are dismissed as interpolations.
The procedure is radically vicious. The table of
shewbread is not an ‘‘altar,’’ though the altar is once
spoken of as a “table” (Ezk 41 22). There was
only one altar of incense (1 K 6 20), but (in 2 Ch
4 8) ten tables of shewbread. See SurEwBREaD.

W. Suaw CapEcotr

SHIBAH, shi‘ba (MYAW, shibh‘ah, “seven”;
bpkos, hérkos; Swete reads Ppéap Spxov, Phréar
hérkou, lit. ‘well of oath’; AV Shebah): The name
of the original well of Beer-sheba according to Gen
26 33. See BEER-SHEBA.


SHIBBOLETH, shib’é-leth (M23W, shibbdleth):
A test of speech applied by the men of Gilead
to the Ephraimites, who wished to cross the Jor-
dan, after defeat. If they pronounced the word
sibbéléth, their dialectic variety of speech betrayed
them (Jgs 12 6). The word probably has the sense
of ‘‘stream”’ or ‘‘flood’”’ (cf Ps 69 2). .


SHIBMAH, shib’ma (M030, sibkmah). See Siz-
MAH.


SHICRON, shik’ron (FADw, shikkeron). See
SHIKKERON.


SHIELD, shéld. See Armor, IV, 1.


SHIGGAION, shi-ga’yon, shi-gi’on (J14W, shig-
gayén): Occurs in the title of Ps 7, and, in the pl.,
in the verse introducing Habakkuk’s prayer (Hab
31). Derived from a vb. meaning “to wander,” it
is generally taken to mean a dithyramb, or rhapsody.


Shihon
Shimeathites


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2768


This is not supported by the Gr VSS, but they are
evidently quite at aloss. See Psatus, Boox or.


SHIHON, shi’hon CAND, shi’Gn). See Suton.


SHIHOR, shi’hér (“1N"W, shihar, also written
without 7 and lin Heb and incorrectly ‘‘Sihor’” in
Eng.): A stream of water mentioned in connection
with Egypt. Joshua (13 3) speaks of the ‘Shihor,
which is before Egypt,” a stream which commen-
tators have thought to be “the brook of Egypt,”
the stream which separated Egypt from Pal, now
called Wédy el-‘Arish. Jeremiah (2 18 AV) says,
“What hast thou to do in the way to Egypt, to
drink the waters of Sihor?’’ Commentators have
thought Shihor in this case to be a name for the
Nile. Both interpretations cannot be correct.
Whatever the name S. means, at least it did not
denotea movableriver. It mustbe the same stream
in both these passages, and no identification of the
stream can be correct that does not, satisfy both
ofthem. Professor Naville has recently shown con-
clusively (Prec. Soc. Bib. Arch., January, 1913)
that neither of these interpretations is strictly cor-~
rect, and has made clear the Bib. references to S.
In the northeasternmost province of ancient Egypt,
Khentabt (“Fronting on the East’), was a canal, a
fresh-water stream drawn off from the Nile, called
in the Egyp language Shi-t-Hor, i.e. “the Horus
Canal” (the -t- is an Egyp fem. ending). There
have been many changes in the branches and canals
from the Nile in the Delta, and this one with many
others has been lost altogether; but there is a
tradition among the Bedouin of Wéddy el-‘Arish to
this day that once a branch of the Nile came over
to that point. This Shi-i-Hor, “Stream of Horus,”
makes perfectly clear and harmonious the different
references of Scripture to §. It was “before
Egypt,” as Josh describes it, and it was the first
sweet water of Egypt which the traveler from Pal
in those days was able to obtain, as the words of
Jeremiah indicate. ‘To drink the waters of 8.”
meant to reach the supply of the fresh water of the
Nile at the border of the desert. The two other
references to 8. (1 Ch 13 5; Isa 23 3) are per-
fectly satisfied by this identification. The “seed
of §.” (Isa 23 3 AV) would be grain from Egypt
by way of the Shihor. M. G. Kyte


SHIHOR-LIBNATH, shi’hér-hb’nath (Vw
M3A2, shthar libhnath; B, tO Yadv nal AaBavds,
t6 Seién kai Labandth, A, Zedp xtd., Seidr, etc):
A place named on the boundary of Asher (Josh 19
26). It seems to mark with Carmel the western
limit, and may have been on the S. of that moun-
tain. Pesh, Syr, and Onom take this as two distinct
names attaching to cities in this region. So far,
however, no trace of either name has been found in
the course of very careful exploration. More prob-
ably Shihor was the name of _a river, “Libnath” dis-
tinguishing it from the Nile, which was called
Shihor of Egypt. It may have been called Shihor
because, like the Nile, it contained crocodiles.
The boundary of Asher included Dor (Tantarah),
so the river may be sought S. of that town. Croco-
diles are said still to be found in the Kishon; but
this river runs N. of Carmel. The Crocodeilon of
Ptolemy (V. xv.5; xvi.2) and Pliny (v.19), which
the latter makes the southern boundary of Phoeni-
cia, may possibly be Nahr ez-Zerka, which enters the
sea about 5 milesS. of Tantirah. Here also it is said
the crocadile is sometimes seen, Perhaps therefore
we may identify this stream with Shihor-libnath.

: _W. Ewinea

SHIKKERON, shik’ér-on (7INDW,  shikkrran;
AV Shicron): A place mentioned in Josh 15 11


as being on the northern border of Judah, between
Ekron and Baalah, Jabneel being beyond, toward
the sea. The site is unknown, but Rev. C. Hauser
(PEFS, 1907, 289) suggests Tell es-Sellakeh, N.W.
of ‘Akir, remarking that if this were the site the
boundary would follow a natural course over the
mountain to Jabneel.


SHILHI, shil’hi ((M9W, shilhz): Father of
Jehoshaphat’s mother (1 IX 22 42=2 Ch 20 31;
BA in 2 Ch, Zande, Salei, B in 1 KK, Zeueel, Semeet,
A in 1 K, 2adadd, Solald, Luc. in both, Zereet,
Seleei), Cheyne (2B, art. “Shilhi’) ventures the
supposition that “Shilhi’ is a misreading for ‘‘Shil-
him” (Josh 15 32), and is therefore the name of a
place rather than that of a person; he holds it to
be the name of the birthplace of Azubah, the king’s
mother.


SHILHIM, shil’him (O°M>W, shilhim [Josh 15
32]): See SHaaraim, (2). Possibly Azubah the
mother of Jehoshaphat, who is called “the daughter
of Shilhi” (1 IK 22 42; 2 Ch 20 31), was a native
of Shilhim.


SHILLEM, shil’em, SHILLEMITES, shil’em-its
(RDU, shillgm, “APWM, ha-shillémi): Shillem is
found in Gen 46 24, a son of Naphtali; Shillem-
ites, his descendants, are mentioned in Nu 26 49;
SHALLUM (q.v.) isfound in 1 Ch 7 18.


SHILOAH, shi-ld’a, shi-l6’a (Isa 8 6).
SILOAM,


SHILOH, shi’lo (I3°W, shilah): The prophecy
in Gen 49 10, ‘‘The sceptre shall not depart from
Judah, .... until Shiloh come,” etc, has been
the subject of very diverse interpretations. RVm
gives as alternative renderings, “‘‘“Till he come to
Shiloh having the obedience of the peoples’ Or, ace.
to Syr, ‘Till he come whose it is,’ ete.’ (1) From
the earliest times the passage has been regarded as
Messianic, but the rendering in the text, which
takes “Shiloh” as a proper name, bearing a meaning
such as “peaceful” (ef Isa 9 6, ““Prince of Peace’’),
labors under the difficulty that Shiloh is not found
elsewhere as a personal name in the OT, nor is it
easy to extract from it the meaning desired. Further,
the word was not personally applied to the Messiah
in any of the ancient VSS, which rather assume a
different reading (see below). Apart from a purely
fanciful passage in the Talm (cf Driver, Gen, 413),
this application does not appear earlier than the
version of Seb. Miinster in the 16th cent. (1534).
(2) The rendering, ‘‘till he come to Shilch,’”’ where
Shiloh is taken as the name of a place, not a person,


See


| is plausible, but is felt to yield no suitable sense in


the context. It is, therefore, now also set aside
by most recent scholars. (3) The 8d rendering,
which regards Shiloh as representing the Heb
TI2W (shellah) =Tbv for WN , ’dsher 16, “whose
[it is], has in its favor the fact that this is evi-
dently the reading presupposed in the LXX, the
Pesh, and the Jewish Tgs, and seems to be alluded
to in Ezk 21 27, “until he come whose right it is.”
In this view the passage has still a Messianic ref-
erence, though critics argue that it must then be
regarded as late in origin. Other interpretations
need not detain us. See for details the full dis-
cussions in Hengstenberg's Christology, I, 54 ff, ET,
the comms. of Delitzsch, Driver, and Skinner, on
Gen (esp. Execursus II in Driver), and the arts. in
the various Bible dicts.; see also PRopHEcY.
JAMES ORR


SHILOH (the most usual form is mow, shiloh,
but it appears 8 t as Sy, shilé, and 3 t as


2769


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shihon
Shimeathites


SOD; Bqddb, S2ld, Unddp, Sélém): A town in the
lot of Ephraim where Israel assembled under Joshua
at the close of the war of conquest (Josh 18 1).
Here territory was allotted to the seven tribes who
had not yet received their portions. A commission
was sent out to “describe the land into seven por-
tions’”’; this having been done, the inheritances were
assigned by lot. Here also were assigned to the
Levites their cities in the territories of the various
tribes (chs 18-21). From Shiloh Reuben and Gad
departed for their homes E. of the Jordan; and here
the tribes gathered for war against these two, having
misunderstood their building of the great altar in
the Jordan valley (ch 22). From Jgs 18 31 we
learn that in the period of the Judges the house of
God was iu Shiloh; but when the sanctuary was
moved thither from Gilgal there is no indication.
The maids of Shiloh were captured by the Beu-
jamites on the occasion of a feast, while dancing in
the vineyards; this having been planned by the
other tribes to provide the Benjamites with wives
without involving themselves in responsibility
(21 21 ff). While the house of the Lord remained
here it was a place of pilgrimage (1 S 1 3). To
Shiloh Samuel was brought and consecrated to
God’s service (ver 24). The sanctuary was pre-
sided over by Eli and his wicked sons; and through
Samuel the doom of their house was announced.
The capture of the ark by the Philis, the fall of
Hophni and Phinehas, and the death of the aged
priest and his daughter-in-law followed with start-
ling rapidity (chs 3,4). The sanctuary in Shiloh is
called a “temple” (1 9; 3 3) with doorpost and
doors (1 9; 3 15). It was therefore a more durable
structure than the old tent. See TaBERNACLE;
Tempe. It would appear to have been destroyed,
probably by the Philis; and we find the priests of
Eli’s house at Nob, where they were massacred at
Saul’s order (22 11ff). The disaster that befell
Shiloh, while we have no record of its actual occur-
rence, made a deep impression on the popular mind,
so that the prophets could use it as au effective
illustration (Ps 78 60; Jer 7 12.14; 26 6). Here
the blind old prophet Ahijah was appealed to in
vain by Jeroboam’s wife on behalf of her son (1 K
14 2.4), and it was still occupied in Jeremiah’s
time (41 5). ave

The position of Shiloh is indicated in Jgs 21 19,
as “on the north of Beth-el, on the east side of the
highway that gocth up from Beth-el to Shechem,
and on the south of Lehonah.” This is very ex-
plicit, and points definitely to Seilun, a ruined site
on a2 hill at the N.E. of a little plain, about 9 miles
N. of Beitin (Bethel), and 3 miles 8.E. of Khan
el-Lubban (Lebonah), to the E. of the highway to
Shechem (Nablus). The path to Seilin leaves the
main road at Sinjil, going eastward to Turmus ‘Aya,
then northward across the plain. A deep valley
runs to the N. of the site, cutting it off from the ad-
joining hills, in the sides of which are rock-hewn
tombs. A good spring rises higher up the valley.
There are now no vineyards in the district; but in-
dications of their ancient culture are found in the
terraced slopes around. ;

The ruins on the hill are of comparatively modern
buildings. At the foot of the hill is a mosque which
is going quickly to ruin. A little distance to the
SE. is a building which seems to have been a
synagogue. It is called by the natives Jami el-
‘Arba‘in, “mosque of the Forty.” There are many
cisterns. ;

Just over the crest of the hill to the N., on a
terrace, there is cut in the rock a rough quadrangle
400 ft. by 80 ft. in dimensions. This may have
been the site of ‘‘the house of the Lord” which was
in Shiloh. W. Ewine


SHILONITE, shi'lé-nit ("I> , shiloni [2 Ch 9
29], “Mb, shiloni [10 15; Neh 11 5], "OW;
Zyrovel, Sélonei, Unrwvelrys, Séldneités): This
denotes an inhabitant of Shiloh, and applies (1) to
Ahijah the prophet (1 K 11 29, etc); and (2) to
a family of the children of Judah, who, after the
exile, made their home in Jerus (1 Ch 9 5; Neh
11 5, AV “Shiloni’’).


SHILSHAH, shil’sha (WWW, shilshah; BA, Za-
Aeod, Saleisdé, Luc., Ledepodv, Selemsdn): An
Asherite (1 Ch 7 87).


SHIMEA, shim’é-a (SPW, shim‘a’): See SHam-
MuA and SHAMMAH.

(1) Brother of David (see SHamMMan).

(2) Son of David (1 Ch 8 5, B, Zépav, Séman;
but in 28 6 14; 1 Ch 14 4, “Shammua”).

(8) A Merarite Levite (1 Ch 6 30, B, open,
Soméa, A, Zand, Samd, Luc., Zapad, Samad).

(4) A Gershonite Levite (1 Ch 6 39 [24], Deuad,
Semad).


SHIMEAH, shim’é-a (MN'AW, shim’ah; B, Depad,
Semad, A, Zaped, Samed, Luc., Zapad, Samad): A
descendant of Jehiel, the ‘‘father” of Giheon (1 Ch
8 32); in 1 Ch 9 88 he is called “Shimeam”’ (B
S, Luc., Zauad, Samad, A, Zand, Samd; see JOR,
XI, 110-13, §§10-12).


SHIMEAM, shim’é-am. See SHIMeag.


SHIMEATH, shim’é-ath (PV, shim‘ath, or
Mmynw , shim‘ath; LXX in 2K, "Tepovaé, Iemoudth,
B in 2 Ch, Zapé, Samd, A, Zapdé, Samdth, Luc.,
Tapad8, Samadth): Father of Jozacar (2 K 12 21
[22]), one of the murderers of Joash, king of Judah.
According to 2 Ch 24 26 Shimeath is an Ammon-
itess and the mother, not the father, of Jozacar.
Many textual emendations have been suggested
(ef HDB, art. “Shimeath”’), but they are unneces-
sary, as the Chronicler’s revised version of the inci-
dent in K was a deliberate one. The Chronicler
was a sturdy opponent of intermarriage, and in the
story of the assassination of King Joash he saw an
opportunity to strike a blow against the hated prac-
tice. In the older account in K the names of the
conspirators are given as ‘Jozakar the son of NYU
[shim‘ath}, and Jehozabad the son of 19W [shemer].”
The two names are both masc.; but the final ™ of
the former looked to the Chronicler like the fem.
ending and offered him his opportunity. In his
account, the one of the two murderers (dastardly
villains, even though the king had merited death)
was “the son of MY [shim'ath], the Ammonitess,”
and the other was “‘the son of 17010 [shimrith], the
Moabitess” (cf Torrey, Ezra Studies, 212 ff).

Horace J. Wotr.

SHIMEATHITES, shim’é-ath-its (DTU,
shim‘athim; BA, Zepabcely, Samathieim, Luc., Zapa-
Gelv, Samathein): A subdivision of the tribe of
Caleb (1 Ch 2 55). In the three families men-
tioned in this passage Jerome saw three distinct
classes of religious functionaries: Vulg canentes
alque resonantes et in tabernaculis commorantes.
The Tg has a similar explanation, except that the
“Sucathites’”’ are those ‘‘covered” with a spirit of
prophecy. Bertheau (Handbuch zum AT) accepts
Jerome’s explanation, except that he regards the
first class as gate-keepers (Aram. JI), t*ra‘= Heb
“JW, sha‘ar). Wellhausen (DGJ, 30 f) finds under-
lying the three names NPM, tir'adh, a technical
term for sacred music-making, MY%2W , shim‘ah, the
Halacha or sacred tradition. Buhl (HWB") de-


Shimei
Shinar


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2770


tives Shimeathites and Sucathites from ae) Shimei left his home in Jerus to recapture some escaped


places. Keil interprets as descendants from the
unknown Shemei (cf Curtis, 7CC). The passage
is hopelessly obscure. Horace J. Wour


SHIMET, shim’é-i (YW , shim't, possibly “hear
me [El]” or ‘{Jah]}’; epecl, Semeei, Yepel,
Semei): A name of frequent occurrence throughout
the OT records, sometimes varying slightly in form
in EV. AV has “Shimi’’ in Ex 6 17; “Shimhi”
in 1 Ch 8 21; ‘Shimeah” in 258 21 21. RV
has ‘“Shimeites’” in Zec 12 13, where AV has
‘Shimei,”’ and Nu 3 21 for AV “Shimites.’”’ EV
has ‘“Shema” in 1 Ch 8 13.21m for the ‘‘Shimei’”’
of ver 21. In all others of the many occurrences
in AV and RV the form is ‘‘Shimei.”

(1) A family name among the Levites before and
after the exile, at least five of whom bore it: (a)
Son of Gershon and grandson of Levi (Ex 6 17;
Nu 318; 1Ch617; 237.10). The text of
1 Ch 6 and 23 is corrupt, making difficult the
tracing of the various genealogies and the identi-
fication of the several Shimeis. Evidently that of
23 9 is a scribe’s error for one of the four sons of
Ladan or Libni, whose names are given in the pre-
ceding verse. (6) An ancestor of Asaph the musi-
cian (1 Ch 6 42), possibly the same as (a) above,
Jahath the son of 8. (cf 23 10) being by a copyist’s
error transposed so as to read as if he were the
father of S. (c) A descendant of the Merarite
branch of the Levites (1 Ch 6 29). (d) One of the
288 trained singers in the service of the sanctuary
under Asaph (1 Ch 25 17). (e) One of the Levites
who helped to cleanse the Temple in Hezekiah’s
reformation (2 Ch 29 14). He was a descendant
of Heman the musician. Hezekiah afterward
appointed him with Conaniah to have chief over-
sight of ‘‘the oblations and the tithes and the dedi-
cated things” which were brought into the chambers
of Jeh’s house prepared for them (2 Ch 31 11.12).
(f) A Levite who under Ezra put away his foreign
wife (Ezr 10 23), “Semeis” in 1 Esd 9 23.

(2) The best-known Bible character of this name
is the Benjamite, of the family of Saul (2 S 16 5—
12; 19 16-20; 1 K 2 8.9.36-46), who met David
at Bahurim as he was fleeing from Absalom, and in
bitter and cowardly fashion cursed and attacked
the hard-pressed king. Apparently David’s flight
to the Jordan led through a narrow ravine, on one
side of which, or on the ridge above, stood Shimei
in safety as he cast stones at David and his men,
cursing as he threw (2 8 16 5.6). His hatred of
David who had displaced his royal kinsman Saul
had smouldered Jong in his mean heart; and now
the flame bursts out, as the aged and apparently
helpless king flees before his own son. S. seizes
the long-coveted opportunity to pour out the acid
hate of his heart. But when David’s faithful com-
panions would cross the ravine to make quick work
of 8., the noble king forbade them with these
remarkable words: “Behold, my son, who came
forth from my bowels, seeketh my life: how much
more may this Benjamite now do it? let him alone,
and let him curse; for Jeh hath bidden him. It
may bethat Jeh . . . . will requite me good for his
cursing” (2 8 16 11.12). After Absalom’s over-
throw, as the king was returning victorious and
vindicated, 8. met him at the Jordan with most
abject confession and with vows of allegiance (2 8
19 16-23).

The king spared his life; hut shortly hefore his death
charged his son Solomon to sce that due punishment
should come to Shimei for his sins: ‘'Thou shalt bring
his hoar head down to Sheol with blood" (1 K Q 9).
When he came to the throne Solomon summoned Shimei
and bade him build a house in Jerus, to which he showld


come and from which he must not go out on pain of
death (1 K 2 36-38). Feellng secure after some years,


slaves (vs 39-41), and in consequence he was promptly
dispatched by that gruesome avenger of blood, the
royal executioner, ‘‘Benaiah the son of Jehoiada,'’ who
“fell upon him,” as he had upon Adonijah and Joab,
‘*so that he died"’ (ver 46).

(3) Another Benjamite, mentioned with Rei as
an officer in the king’s bodyguard, who was faithful
to David in the rebellion of Adonijah (1 K 1 8).
Jos reads Rei as a common noun, describing S. as
“the friend of David.”’ He is to be identified with
the son of Elah (1 K_ 4 18), whom Solomon, prob-
ably because of his fidelity, named as one of the
12 chief commissary officers appointed over all
Israel, ‘‘who provided victuals for the king and his
household.”

(4) A man of some prominence in the tribe of Ben-
jamin (1 Ch 8 21), whose home was in Aijalon, where
he was a ‘‘head of fathers’ houses’’ (ver 13); but his
descendants lived in Jerus (ver 28). In AV he is called
“Shimhi‘’; in ver 13 he is called ‘‘Shema.” .

(5) Another Benjamite, an ancestor of Mordecai
(Est 2 5), ‘‘Semeias’’ in Ad Est 11 2.

(6) A brother of David (2. S 2] 21, AV ‘‘Shimeah");
in 1S 16 9 he is called '‘Shammah"; cf ‘'Shimeah,"
‘* Shimea.”"

(7) A man of Judah, called ‘‘the Ramathite,’’ who
was “ over the vineyards" in David'sreign (1 Ch 27 27).

(8) A Simeonite living in the time of David
(1 Ch 4 26.27), whose chief claim to distinction
was that he was father of 16 sons and 6 danghters.
The descendants of such a numerous progeny, not
being able to maintain themselves in their ancestral
home in Beer-sheha, in the days of Hezekiah fell
upon Gerar, and dispossessed “the sons of Ham”
(ver 39 LXX), and upon Mt. Seir, driving out the
Amalekites (ver 43).

(9) A man of Reuben, son of Gog (1 Ch § 4).

(10), (11) Two men of ‘‘Israel,”” i.e. not priests or
Levites, one ‘‘of the sons of Hashum”™ (Ezr 10 33), the
other ‘‘of the sons of Bani” (10 38), who put away their
foreign wives at Ezra’s command, in 1 Esd called re-
spectively ‘‘Semei"' (9 33) and ‘‘Someis"’ (9 34).

(12) A brother of Zerubbabel (1 Ch 3 19).

The Shimeites were descendants of Shimei,
grandson of Levi; cf (1) (a) above (Nu 8 21; Zec
12 13). Epwarp Mack


SHIMEON, shim’é-on (JAW, shim‘dn; else-
where “Simeon”): One of the sons of Harim who
had married foreign wives (Ezr 10 31; BA, Zened»,
Semedn, Luc., Supedy, Sumedu=1 Esd 9 32, “Simon
Chosameus”’).


SHIMHI, shim’hi. See Suimei.


SHIMI, shim’i, shi’mi, SHIMITES, shim‘its.


See SHiMEI.
SHIMMA, shim’a.


SHIMON, shi’mon (72%, shimon; B, Depry,
Semibn, A, Deperdv, Semeidn, Luc., Zapl, Sami): A
name in the Judahite genealogy (1 Ch 4 20).


SHIMRATH, shim’rath (MW , shimrath; Zapa-
p40, Samardth): The last of nine sons of Shimei of
the tribe of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 21).


SHIMRI, shim’ri (AW, shimrt; various forms
in LXX): There are four Hebrews mentioned in the
Bible who bear this name:

(1) A Simeonite, a son of Shemaiah and father of
Jedaiah, a chief of his tribe (1 Ch 4 37). -

(2) The father of Jediael, a bodyguard of King
David (1 Ch 11 45).

(3) A sou of Hosah, a Levite. He was appointed
by David to be doorkeeper in the house of the Lord.
He was made chief of the tribe, although not the
firstborn of his family (1 Ch 26 10).


See SHAMMAH.


2771


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shimei
Shinar


(4) One of the sons of Elizaphan, a Levite. He
assisted in purifying the temple in the time of
Hezekiah (2 Ch 29 13). S. L. Umsacn


SHIMRITH, shim’rith (M°"YAW, shimrith,
“guard,” fem.): A Moahitess, the mother of Je-
hozabad, one of those that conspired against King
Joash (2 Ch 24 26). Elsewhere (2 K 12 21) Je-
hozabad is described as the son of SHOMER (q.v.),
the same name without the fem. ending.


SHIMRON, shim’ron (fIVQW, — shimron,
“wateh”’): The 4th son of Issachar (Gen 46 13;
Nu 26 24; 1 Ch 7 1), and ancestor of the Shim-
ronites (Nu 26 24).


SHIMRON (7j1V2U, shimron; B, Zvpodv,
Sumo6n, A, Dopepdv, Somerdn and other forms):
A town whose king was tributary to Jabin king
of Hazor, and who joined in the attempt to
resist the invasion under Joshua (Josh 11 1). It
was in the territory allotted to Zebulun (19 15).
No sure identification is yet possible. LXX and
Talm both omit ther from the name; and Neubauer
would identify it with Simonias (Vita, 24), the
Simonia of the Talm, which is now represented by
Seminiyeh, a village about 5 miles W. of Nazareth,
on the edge of the plain (Géog. du Talm). Beit
Lahm, named by Jos along with it, is a short dis-
tance to the N.W. Es-Semeiriyeh, about 3 miles
N. of Acre, has also been suggested; but it is per-
haps too far to the W. W. Ewina


_ SHIMRON-MERON, shim’ron-mé’ron (JOU
PR, shimrén mr’6n; Zvpodv ... . Mappad,
Sumoén .... Mamréth, A, Zappav .. . . Paoyd
.... Mapdv, Samrén.... Phasgd.... Ma-
rén): A royal city of the Canaanites, the king of
which was slain by Joshua (12 20). Here the name
is followed by that of Achshaph, which also follows
the name of Shimron in 11 1. This suggests that
the two are in reality one, and that Shimron-meron
may only be the fullname. A royalCan. city,Sam-
simuruna, is mentioned in the inscriptions of Sen-
nacherib, Esar-haddon and Assur-hani-pal, which
Schrader (KAT?, 163) would identify with this,
and thinks it may now be represented by es-Semeir7-
yeh. See SHimRon. W. Ewine


SHIMSHAI, shim’shi, shim’sh’-i (WOW, shim-
shay; B, Zapacd, Samasd, Zapad, Samaé, Zapeals,
Sameais, Zaperd, Samesd, A, Zaporal, Samsat, Luc.,
Lapalas, Samaias, throughout; in 1 Esd 2 17 he
is called “Semellius,” RV ‘“Samellius’; a number
of explanations of this name have been offered, but
no one has been generally favored. One conjecture
traces it to an Old Iranian caritative VAWW con-
formed to WNW; another prefers the Old Bactrian
simézhi=simaezhi; cf BDB,s.v. The name looks
as though it were derived from Wg , shemesh, ‘the
sun”): A state secretary who, with Renum (q.v.)
and others, wrote to Artaxerxes to persuade him
to prohibit the rebuilding of the temple (Ear 4 8.
9.17.23). Horace J. Wor


SHIN, shén, SIN, sén (W, W): The 21st letter of
the Heb alphabet; transliterated in this Encyclo-
paedia as sh, s. It came also to be used for the
number 300. For name, ete, see ALPHABET.


SHINAB, shi‘nab (ANIW, shin’abh, Sam. "N70,
shin’ar; Sevvadp, Sennadr): King of ApMaH (q.v.).
He is mentioned with Shemeber, king of Zeboiim;
he was attacked hy Chedorlaomer and his allies
(Gen 14 2). The reading is very uncertain. Tf the


incident narrated is founded on fact, Shinab may
be identical with Sanibu, an Ammonite king in the
time of Tiglath-pileser III (so Fr. Delitasch, Wo lag
das Paradies? 294); or the name may be equated by
the Assyr Sin-Sar-usur (cf ‘“Shenazzar’’), and Shem-
eber with the Assyr Sumu-abi (Sayce, Expos T, VIII,
463). Jewish exegesis gives a sinister explanation
of all four names (ver 2). The Midr (Ber. Rab. 42)
explains Shinab as PO ANTW, sha’ ébh mammon,
“one who draws money [wherever he can].” It is
of interest to note that the names fall into two
alliterative pairs and that each king’s name con-
tains exactly as many letters as that of his city.
On the whole, however, the list leaves an impression
of artificiality; as the names are not repeated in
ver 8, it is highly probable that they are later addi-
tions to the text. Horace J. WoLF


SHINAR, shi’nir (WWW, shin‘ar; Zevadp, Zev-
[vladp, Sen[nladr):
1. Identification
2. Possible Babylonian Form of the Name
3. Sumerian and Other Equivalents
4. The Syriac Sen'ar
5. The Primitive Tongue of Shinar
6. Comparison with the Semitic Idiom
7. The Testimony of the Sculptures, etc, to the Race
8. The Sumerians Probably in Shinar before the
Semites
9. The States of Shinar:
Sippar; Ké3; Babylon; Nippur; Adab;, Surippak;
Umma: Erech; Lagas; Larsa: Ur; Eridu; the
Land of the Sea; Nisin, Isin, or Karrak; Upé or
Upia (Opis); Other Well-known Cities
10. Shinar and Its Climate
1I. Sculpture in Shinar
12. The First Nation to Use Writing in Western Asia
138. The System Employed, with an Example
The name given, in the earliest Heb records, to
Babylonia, later called Babel, or the land of Bahel
(babhel, ’ereg babhel). In Gen 10 10
1. Identi- it is the district wherein lay Babel,
fication Erech, Accad, and Calneh, cities which
were the “beginning” of Nimrod’s
kingdom. In 11 2 Shinar is described as the land
of the plain where migrants from the E. settled, and
founded Babel, the city, and its great tower. _
Thongh sometimes identified with the Bab Sumer,
the connection of Shinar with that name is doubt-
ful. The principal difficulty lies in
2. Possible the fact that what might be regarded
Babylonian as the non-dialectical form Singar
Form (which would alone furnish a. satis-
factory basis of comparison) Is not
found, and would, if existent, only apply to the
southern portion of Babylonia. The northern
tract was called Akkad, after the name of its capital
city (see Accan). The Gr form Sen(n)aar shows
that, at the time the LXX tr was made, there was
no tradition that the ‘ayin was guttural, as the
supposed Bab forms would lead us to expect. As
the Bib. form Shinar indicates the whole of Baby-
lonia, it corresponds with the native (Sumerian)
Kingi-Ura, rendered ‘Sumer and Akkad,” from
which, by changing K into Sh (found in Sumerian),
Shinar may have been derived, but this explanation
is not free from difficulties. :
This twofold designation, Kingi-Ura, is that
which is commonly used in the inscriptions of the
earlier kings, thongh it cannot then


8. Sume- have indicated always the whole
rian and country, but only such parts of it as
Other acknowledged their overlordship. Lat-


Equivalents er on the corresponding term seems

to have been Kar-Duniak (‘the terri-
tory of the god Dunia&,” to all appearance a term
introduced by the Kassite rulers). Nabonassar
and his successors seem to have contented them-
selves with the title “king of Babylon,” rule in the
city implying also the dominion over the whole


Sea THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2772
country. Often, however, the equivalent term for | of its great cities, was a son of Cush (Gen 10 8),


Babylonia is E**, probably an abbreviation of Bridu,
and here standing for the land belonging to that
sacred city—‘‘the good city,’’ a type of Paradise,
Babylonia being, in fact, situated upon the édinu,

or “‘plain’’ (see EpEn).
All these comparisons tend to show that the
Bab equivalent of Shinar is not any of the above,
and as yet has not, in fact, been


4. The found. This is also implied by the
Syriac fact, that Sen’ar was used in Syr
Sen’ar for the country around Bagdad, and


anciently included (it may be sup-
posed) the plain upon which the ruins of Babylon
stand. Sen’ar was therefore in all probability an
ancient Bab designation of the tract, now lost,
but regarded by the Hebrews as synonymous with
Babylonia.
From the inscriptions it would seem that the
primitive language of Shinar was not Semitic, but
the agglutinative idiom now named
6. Primitive Sumerian—a tongue long regarded as
Tongue of Turanian, and having, it is thought,
Shinar Turko-Chinese affinities—gal, ‘‘to be,”’
Turkish ol-mak; ama (ana), ‘“‘mother,”’
Turkish ana; abba, “old man,’’ Turkish baba,
“father’; (h)é, “house,” Turkish ev, etc. The
Chinese affinities seem less close, but the following
may be quoted: a(y)a, “father,’’ Chinese ye (Amoy


ia); ge, “night,” Chinese | ye; gu, “to speak,”
Chinese yt; shu, “hand,” Chinese shet; kin,
“bnsiness,’’ Chinese kiing, “work”; etc. Chinese


and Turkish, however, have bad time to pass
through many changes since Sumerian was current
in Shinar. Many words of the Sumerian language
were borrowed by the Sem Babylonians, and a few
(like hékal, “‘temple,’’ Sem [h]égal, “great house’)

entered the other Sem languages.
Halévy’s contention, that Sumerian is simply ‘‘an
allography"’ for the expression of Sem Bab, seems to be
uutenable, as they differ not ouly in words,


- hut also in grammar; moreover, Sumerian
6. Compari- jada dialect, called by thenatives “woman's


son with tougue.”’ For the rest, the principal differ-
Semitic ences between Sumerian and Sem Bab are:
Idiom (1) post-positional suffixes instead of prep-


ositions; (2) verbs with long strings of
prefixes aud infixes to express the persons
and regimeus, instead of a prefix and a suffix; (3) eom-
pound words, both nouus aud verbs, are common instead
of being exceedingly rare. Sumerian seems to have bor-
rowed several words from Sem Bab.


Not only the language, but also the sculp-
tures which they have left, point to the probability
that the earlier inhabitants of Shimar
7. Testi- belonged to a different race from the
mony of the later. The Semites of Babylonia
Sculptures, were to all appearance thick-set and
etc muscular, but the Sumerians, not-
withstanding the stumpy figures which
their statues and bas-reliefs show, seem to have been
slim—in any case, their warriors, in the better bas-
reliefs, as well as the figures of the god Nin-Girsu
(formerly known as ‘the god with the firestick’’),
and the engraved cylinders, have this type.
over, the sculptures and cylinder-seals show that
certain classes—priests or the like—were clean
shaven, in marked contrast to Sem usage elsewhere.
Their deities, however, always had hair and beard,
implying that they came from a different, thongh
possibly related, stock. ‘These deities were very
numerous, and it is noteworthy that, though those
with Sumerian names may be counted by hundreds,
those with Sem names are only to be reckoned by
tens.
Though there is no certain indication which race
entered Shinar first, it is to be noted that Nimrod,
presumably Shinar’s first king and the founder


More- |


and the name of Shinar seems to have existed

before the foundation of Babel (Baby-
8. Sume- lon) and its tower (Gen 11 2). In
rians Prob- the native sculptures, moreover, the
ably Pre- non-Sem type precedes the Sem; and
ceded Sem- in the inscriptions the non-Sem idiom
ites in precedes that of the Sem tr. Every-
Shinar thing points, therefore, to the Sumeri-

ans having been in Babylonia before
the Sem inhabitants.

At the earliest period to which our records refer
the Sumerians of Shinar were divided into a number
of small states, of whicb the following
may be regarded as the principal:

(1) Sippar or Sippar-Aruru (-Ya’
ruru), possibly including Accad (Gen
10 10), some distance S.W. of Bagdad. It is the
modern ‘Abu-habbah, “father of grain.” Though
it seems to have fallen early under the dominion of
the Semites, it was at first Sumerian, as its native
name, Zimbir, and the ideographic writing thereof
show. According to Berosus, who calls it Panta-
biblion, one of its earliest kings was Amelon or
Amillarus, who reigned 13 sari, or 46,800 years.
Later on came Evedoreschus, the native Enwe-dur-
an-ki, renowned as a priest favored by the gods.
His descendants, if of pure race, inherited the
divine grace which he enjoyed It, is said to have
been in Sippara (Sippar) that Ut-napistim, the
Bab Noah, buried the records before entering the


ark.

(2) About 18 miles N. of Babylon lay Ké3, now
Oheimer—a foundation which seems to have pre-
ceded Babylon as the capital of Shinar. Its early
queen, Azag-Bau, is said to have been the wife of
a wine-merchant and to have reigned 100 years.

(3) Babylon, for which see BABEL; Basyton.
As one of its early kings, Berosus mentions Alerus,
“the shepherd of the people,” as having reigned
for 10 sari, or 36,000 years. The state of Babylon
probably included Cuthah (Tel Ibrahim), which
once had kings of its own, and possessed a special
legend of the Creation. Belonging to Babylon,
also, was the renowned city Borsippa, now Sirs,
or the Birs Nimroud, the traditional site of the
Tower of Babel (see BABEL, TOWER OF).

(4) Some distance §.E. of Babylon lay Nippur
or Niffur, now Niffer (Noufar), identified by the
rabbis with the ‘‘Calneh” of Gen 10 10. It was
a place of considerable importance, and the seat of
the worship of Enlil and Ninh, later, also, of their
son Ninip and his spouse (see CAaLNEH). The
American excavations on this site have thrown a
flood of light upon almost every branch of Assyr-
iological research.

(5) Adab, now called Bismaya, the city of Afah,
the goddess of reproduction. One of the earliest
rulers of Adab was seemingly ealled Lugal-dalu, of
whom a fine statue, discovered by the American
explorers, exists. Jt was apparently renowned as
a necropolis. ie

(6) S. and a little W. of Adab was Surippak, now
Fara. This was the birthplace of the Bab Noah,
Ut-napistim, son of Opartes (Umbara-Tutu), 2
Chaldaean of Larancha. The coming of the Flood
was revealed to Ut-napistim here.

(7) Practically E. of Fara lay Umma or Giiuh
(or Giuk), now Jokha. This city was apparently
of considerable importance, and the traditional
rival of LagaS.

(8) S. of Fara lay Unuga, Sem Uruk, the Bib.
ErecuH (q.v.), now Warka. Its most celebrated
king, after Gilgame’, was Lugal-zaggi-si, one of the
opponents of the rulers of Lagas.

(9) Some distance E. of Warka was the territory
of Lagas, now Tel-loh—a little state, rather in-


9. States
of Shinar


2773


accessible, but of considerable importance to the
antiquarian, which is a testimonial to the advance
in civilization which it had made. Its kings and
viceroys were among the most renowned, though
apparently unknown outside their own domains.
The most celebrated were the reformer Uru-ka-
gina and viceroy Gudéa, to whom many erections
in the city were due. (See Gudéa’s remarkable
statue in the Louvre.)

(10) Somewhat to the 8.E. of Warka lay Larsa,
the “Ellasar” of Gen 14 1 (q.v.). This center of
learning maintained its independence even after
the other states had been absorbed by Hammurabi
and his dynasty into the Bab empire.

_(11) To the 5.E. of Warka and Sengara lies the
site of the ancient Ur or THE CHALDEES (q.V.)
now Mugheir. It was renowned for its temple to
the moon, and for the kings known as the dynasty
of Ur: Sur-Engur, Dungi, Bar-Sin, Gimil-Sin, and
Tbi-Sin,

(12) 8. of the Ur lay Bridu, or, in full, Guru-
duga, “the good city,” wherein, apparently, lay the
earthly Paradise. This is identified with the present
‘Abu-shahrein, and was the seat of Ea or Enki, god
of the sea and of fertilizing streams. According
to the tradition, it was there that the ‘dark vine”’
grew—a type, seemingly, of the tree of life. The
later kings of Babylon sometimes bear the title
“king of Eridu,” as though rulers of the domain of
Paradise.

(13) The Land of the Sea (that bordering on the
Pers Gulf), in which, seemingly, the Chaldaeans
afterward settled, seems to have played an impor-
tant part in the early history of Shinar. Berosus
speaks of its king Ammenon, who reigned 12 sari,
or 43,200 years, and in whose time the Musarus
Oannes, or Annedotus, arose out of the Pers Gulf.
Like others referred to in the legends which Berosus
refers to, he was half-man and _half-fish. It is
thought that these incidents, though evidently
mythical, point to the introduction of civilization
into Babylonia, from this point. See also Jonau;
Jona, THE Book or.

(14) Nisin, Isin, or Karrak, seat of the worship
of Nin-Karraga, was also an important state gov-
erned by its own kings.

(15) Upé or Upia, the Gr Opis, apparently ob-
tained renown at a very early date, its kings being
given in the great chronological list before those of


Ais.

(16) Other well-known cities, possibly _ state-
capitals, were Larak, Gr Laranche; Amarda, one
of the centers of the worship of Nergal; Asnunna,
a province E. of the present Bagdad; Dilmu, now
Dailem; Nuru, Ennigi, and Kakra, seemingly
centers of the worship of Hadad; Tilmun, at the
head of the Pers Gulf, and including the island of
Bahrein; the province of Sabu; Seseb or Bagdadu,
possibly the modern Bagdad; and several others.

Whether the country was in the same seemingly
uncared-for state anciently as at present 1s un-

known; but one cannot help admiring
10. Shinar the courage of the original immigrants
and Its into such a district, for example, as
Climate that of Lagas. This, which belongs to
the southern region, is very inaccessible
on account of the watercourses and marshes. Like
the whole of Shinar in general, it is more or less
dried up in summer, and unhealthy for Europeans.
The alterations in the waterways, owing to changes
in the irrigation-channels, must then, as now, have
hindered communication. Sharp cold, with frost,
succeeds the heat of summer, and from time to time
sand-storms sweep across’ the. plain. Notwith-
standing the destruction sometimes wrought, the
floods were always welcomed in consequence of the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shinar
Shine


fruitfulness which followed, and which was such
as to make Babylonia one of the most fertile tracts

known.
The reference to the Sumerian sculptures in (7)
above will have shown that the inhabitants of the
Plain of Shinar possessed an art of no


11. Sculp- mean order and of some antiquity,
ture in even at the time when it first. presents
Shinar itself to our notice. It is true that


many specimens are crude and un-
couth, but this is probably due to the sculptors
having been, often enough, the slaves of their ma-
terial. Their stones were frequently more‘or less
pebble-shaped, and they had neither the skill nor
the tools to reduce them to better proportions—
moreover, reduction of bulk would have meant a
diminution of their importance. The broad, squat
figures which they produced, however, gave them
bad models for their bas-reliefs, and it was long ere
this defect was removed, notwithstanding the
superior work produced by their seal-engravers
during and after the 4th millennium BC.
But in all probability special renown will always
be attached to the non-Semitic inhabitants of
Shinar as the inventors, or at least the
12. First to earliest users known to us, of the
Use Writing cuneiform script. It may be objected
in Western that the system which they intro-
Asia duced was cumbersome and imperfect,
but they knew of nothing simpler, and
modern Chinese, with which their script has been
compared, is far less practical. Briefly, the system
may be described as syllabic for the prefixes and suf-
fixes, and ideographic for the roots. To show this the
following transcribed example will probably suffice:
: E nu-DU URU nu-DIM, A house was not built, a
city was not constructed;
Se Ue ents
Sy syater fn eh cei
Employed ABZU nu-DU GURUDUGA nu-DIM,


The abyss was not built, Eridu was not
constructed;


E AZAGA DINGIRene KI-DURA-bi nu-DIM, The
holy house of the gods, its seat was not constructed;


Su-NIGIN KURK URAgi AABBAama, The whole of
the lands was sea.

The nominal and verbal roots of the above extract
from the bilingual account of the Creation are in
capitals, and the pronominal prefixes and suffixes,
with a couple of lengthenings which determine the
pronunciations of the nouns, in small letters. This
will not only give an idea of the poetical form of the
Sumerian legend of the Creation by Merodach and
Aruru, but also show how short and concise, as a
language, was the speech of Shinar, before Sem
supremacy. T. G. Pincues


SHINE, shin: The Heb words ’éhal, ’ér, halal,
zdhar, zarah, yapha‘, ndghah, ‘ashath and karan
are all tr’ “shine.” All indicate either the direct
or indirect diffusion of beams of light. In a direct
and literal sense the word “shine” is used of the
heavenly bodies, or of candles, and fire (Job 18 5;
25 5AV; 29 3; 31 26; 2 K 3 22). Ina figurative
sense it, is used of reflected light or brightness, in any
sense (Ex 84 29f.35; Isa 60 1; Ezk 43 2; Dnl
12 3). God as the sun of righteousness is thus
depicted in Ps 60 2, The NT words astréptd,
augdzd, liémpd and phaind are tr’ “shine.” Thus
literally it is said of the lightning that it shines
(Mt 24 27 AV; Lk 17 24); the word is tropically
applied to the life of faith or to men prominent in
the kingdom of God (Mt 5 16; Jn 5 35; 2 Cor
4 6; Phil 2 15; 2 Pet 1 19); to the glory of God
(Lk 2 9); to angelic appearances (Lk 24 4; Acts
12 7), or to Christ as He appeared to John on Pat-
mos (Rev 1 16). Henry E. Dosker


Shion
Ships and Boats


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2774


SHION, shi’on (JAN W, sht’dn; B, Tova, Siond,
A, Zedv, Seiin): A town in the territory of Issa-
char, named with Shunem, Hapharaim and Ana-
harath (Josh 19 19). It is possibly identical with
Khirbet Sha’in, near ‘Ain esh-Sha’in, e 4 miles
N.W. of Mt. Tabor.


SHIPHI, shi’ft CPW , shiph'z; B, Zar, Saphdl,
A, Zehelv, Sephein, Luc., Bwoel, Sdphet): A Simeon-
ite prince (1 Ch 4 37 [86)).


SHIPHMITE, shif’mit.
MOTH.


SHIPHRAH, shif'ra (IHW , shiphrah, “fairness,”
“beauty”; LXNX Zerhwpd, Sepphord, the rendering
also of (VIBE, gipparah, in Ex 2 21): The name of
one of the Heb midwives (Ex 1 15). See also Zrp-
PORAH.


SHIPHTAN, shif'tan (]ODW, shiphian; B,
ZaPadd, Sabathd, A, DaBabdv, Sabathdn, F, Zada-
trav, Saphaldn, Luc., [Z]epabd, [Slephathd): An
Ephraimite prince (Nu 34 24).


See SHEPHAM; SIPH-


SHIPMASTER, ship’mas-tér. See SHIPS AND


Boats; PHOENIX.


SHIPMEN, ship’men.
I, 2, (3); II, 2.


SHIPS AND BOATS:


I. Tue Hesrews AND THE SEA
II. Snips in THE OT anv Apoc
1. Among the Hebrews
(1) In Early Times

(2) During the Monarchy
(3) In Later. Times
2. Among Neighhoring Nations
(1) Egypt i
(2) Assyria and Babylonia
(3) Phoenicia
3. General References
III. Sirs IN THE
1, In the Gospels
2. In the Acts of the Apostles
3. In Other Books
LITERATURE


In the OT the following words are found:

(1) The word most commonly used in Heb for ‘‘a
ship” is TWIN, ’dniyah (Prov 30 19; Jon 1 3.4),
of which the pl. ’énZyéth is found most frequently
(Jgs 6 17; 1 IX 22 48f, and many other places).

The collective term for ''a navy of ships’ is JN, ‘dni


(1K 9 26f; 10 22, dni Tharshish, ‘a navy [of ships] of
Tarshish"’; but Isa 33 21,'éni shayit, a‘‘galley with oars"’).
(2) "Y, ct (Nu 24 24; Ezk 30 9; Isa 33 21), ¢t 'addir,


“gallant ship’; Dnl11 30, ciyim Kittim, ‘ships of Kit-
tim.’’


See Sips aNnp Boats,


(3) MIDO, sephindh, ‘innermost parts of the ship”


RV, "sides of the ship’ AV (Jon 1 5, the only place where
the word is found).

In Apoc mAociov, plofon, is the nsual word (Wisd 14 1;
Ecclus 33 2, etc), tré‘‘vessel’’ in Wisd 14 1, hut ''ship"
elsewhere. For ‘'ship’’ Wisd 5 10 has vats, nats. *'Boat”’
in 2 Macc 12 3.6 is for oxados, skd phos, and ‘‘navy" in
1 Mace 1 17; 2 Macc 12 9; 14 1 for orédAos, stélos. In
Wisd 14 6 Noah's ark is called a oxeéta, schedia, a ‘'clumsy
ship’’ (the literal tr ‘‘raft'' in RV is impossible),

In the NT there are four words in use: (1) vads,
nats (Acts 27 41, the only place where it occurs, desig-
nating the large sca-going vessel in which St. Paul
suffered shipwreck). (2) mAotdptov, plotdrion, ‘a little
boat’’ (Mk 3.9 and two other places, Jn 6 22 ff;
21 8). (3) mAotov, ploton, “hoat’’ (Mt 4 21.22 and
many other places in the Gospels—the ordinary fishing-
boat of the Sea of Galilee rendered “boat’’ uniformly
in RV instead of ''ship’’ AV), ‘'ship”’ (Acts 20 13, and
all other places where the ship carrying St. Paul is men-
tioned, except 27 41, as above). In Jas 3 4; Rev 8 9;
18 17 ff, it is rendered “ship.” (4) cxapn, skdphe,
“boat”? (Acts 27 16.30.32, where it means the small
boat of the ship in which St. Paul was being conveyed as


a prisoner to Rome). ‘ i P
Cognate expressions are: ‘'shipmen,” PIN Wry,
natiai (Acts 24


Tanshé ‘Oniyoth (1 K 9 27);


vaurTat,


27.30 AV, ‘sailors’? RV); ‘‘ mariners,” pm. mallahim
(Jon 1 15; Ezk 27 9.27.29), pow, shdfim (Ezk 27 8
AV, “rowers” RV; 2% 26, AV and RV); “pilot,” Soh.
hobhel (Jon 1 6; Ezk 27 8.27.28.29); ‘‘sailing,” ‘'voy-
age," wAous, plods (Acts 21 7; 27 9.10, RV ‘ voyage” in
all verses).

I. The Hebrews and the Sea.—The Hebrews
were a pastoral and agricultural people, and had no
inducements to follow a seafaring life. They were
possessed of a considerable seaboard along the
Mediterranean, but the character of their coast gave
little encouragement to navigation. The coast line
of the land of Israel from Carmel southward had
no bays and no estuaries or river-mouths to offer
shelter from storm or to be havens of ships. Solo-
moon landed his timber and other materials for the
Temple at Joppa, and tradition has handed down
what is called ‘“Solomon’s Harbor’ there. The
builders of the second temple also got timber from
Lebanon and conveyed it to Joppa. It was Simon
Maccabaeus, however, who built its harbor, and
the harbor at Joppa was ‘‘the first and only harbor
of the Jews” (G. A. Smith, HGHL, 136). Caesarea
in NT times was a place of shipping and possessed
a harbor which Jos declared to be greater than the
Piracus, but it was Herodian and more Gr and Rom
than Jewish. It was mostly inhabited by Greeks
(Jos, BJ, 111, ix, 1). Now Caesarea has dis-
appeared; and Joppa has only an open roadstead
where vessels lie without shelter, and receive and
discharge cargo and passengers by means of boats
plying between them and the shore. It was in other
directions that Israel made acquaintance with the
activities of thesea. Of internal navigation, beyond
the fishing-boats on the Sea of Galilee which belong
exclusively to the NT, the ferry boat on the Jordan
(2 § 19 18, W132, ‘dbsdrah) alone receives notice,
and even that is not perfectly clear (RVm ‘‘con-
voy,” but a “ford” is doubtless meant). It is from
Tyre and Egypt and even Assyria and Babylonia,
rather than from their own waters, that the Heb
prophets and psalmists drew their pictures of sea-
faring life.

II. Ships inthe OT and Apoc.—(1) In early times.
—In the early books of the OT there are references

connecting certain of the tribes, and


1. Among these northern tribes, with the activi-
the ties of the sea. In the “Blessing of
Hebrews Jacob’ and in the “Blessing of Moses”


Zebulun and Issachar are so connected
(Gen 49 13; Dt 33 19); and m Deborah’s Song,
which is acknowledged to be a very early fragment
of Heb Iit., Dan and Asher are also spoken of as
connected with the life and work of the sca (Jgs
6 17). The Oracle of Balaam (Nu 24 24) looks
forward to a day when a fleet from Kittim should
take the sea for the destruction of Assyria. “‘Ships
of Kittim’”’ are mentioned in Dnl (11 30). Kittim
is referred to in the three greater Prophets (Isa
23 1.12; Jer 2 10; Ezk 27 6). The land of Kittim
is Cyprus, and in the references in Isaiah it is
associated with Tyre and the ships of Tarshish.
(2) During the monarchy. —lt is not till the time
of the monarchy that the Hebrews begin to figure
as a commercial people. Already in the time of
David commercial relations had been established
between Israel and Tyre (28 5 11f). The
friendly codperation was continued by Solomon,
who availed himsclf not only of the cedar and the fir
at Hiram’s command on Lebanon, but also of the
skilled service of Hiram’s men to bring the timber
from the mountains to the sea. Hiram also under-
took to make the cedar and the fir into rafts (1 IK


59, M135, dabheroth, AV “floats”; 2 Ch 2 16,
NVIOH), raphsadhath, “flotes’ AV, “floats” RV) to
go by sea and to deliver them to Solomon’s men


2775


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shion
Ships and Boats


at the place appointed, which the Chronicler tells
us was Joppa. From this codperation in the
building of the Temple there grew up a larger
connection in the pursuit of sea-borne commerce.
It was at Ezion-geber near to Eloth on the Red Sea,
in the land of Edom which David had conquered,
that Solomon built his fleet, “a navy of ships”
(1 K 9 26-28). Hiram joined Solomon in these
enterprises which had their center ou the Red Sea,
and thus the Phoenicians had water communication
with the eoasts of Arabia and Africa, and even of
India, The same partnership existed for the com-
meree of the West. “For the king [Solomon] had
at sea a navy of Tarshish with the navy of Hiram:
once every three years came the navy of Tarshish,
bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and pea-
coeks” (I K 10 22)


Tarshish is the name of the Phoen colony on the river
Tartessus, called also Baetis, tho modern. Guadalquivir.
It was the farthest limit of the western world as known ta
the Hebrews. Attempts have been made to identify
it with Tarsus of Cilicia, but they are not convincing.
Itis conceived of in Heb lit. as remote (Isa 66 19; Jon 1

: 4 2), as rich (Ps 72 10; Jer 10 9), as powerful in
Commerce (Ezk 38 13). Ships of Tarshish were no
doubt ships actually built for the Tarshish trade (2 Ch
20 361; Jon 1 3), but the expression became a general
designation fer large sea-going vessels to any quarter.
Ships of Tarshish_ made a deep impression upon the
imagination of the Heb people. The Psalmist takes it as
a proof of the power of Jch that He breaks the ships of
Tarshish with an east wind (Ps 48 7). Isaiah includes
them among the great and lofty objects of power and
glory which the terror of the Lord would certainly over-
take (Isa 2.16). Ezekiel regards them as the caravans
that bore the merchandise of the mistress of the sea
(27 25). It is in ships of Tarshish that the prophet of
the Return sees the exiles borne in crowds to Jerus as
their natural home (Isa 60 9).


From Solomon’s time onward the kings of Judah
retained their hold upon Eloth (I K 22 48f; 2 Ch
20 35-37) till it was seized by the Syrians in the
days of Ahaz (2 Ix 16 6).

(3) In later times.—As Solomon had the codpera-
tion of Hiram in securing material and craftsmen
for the building of the first Temple, so Joshua and
Zerubbabel by the favor of Cyrus obtained timber
from Lebanon, and masons and carpenters from
Sidon and Tyre for the building of the second.
Again, cedar trees were brought from Lebanon by
sea to Joppa, and thence conveyed to Jerus (Ezr 3


From Joppa Jonah fled to avoid compliance with God’s
command to go to Nineveh and preach repentance there
(Jon 1 1 ff). He found a ship bound for Tarshish as
far toward the W. as Nineveh to the E. The fare
(sakhadr) paid by him as a passenger, the hold of the ship
in which he stowed himself away (sephindh), the crew
(malléhim), the captain or shipmaster (rabh ha-hobhél),
the storm, the angry sea, the terrified mariners and their
ery to their gods, and the casting of Jonah overhoard to
appease the raging waters—all make a lifelike picture.


It was in the time of Simon, the last survivor of
the Maceabean brothers, that Joppa became a sea~
port with a harbor for shipping— “Amid all his glory


Making a Papyrus Boat.
{Froin Tomb at the Pyramids.)


he took Joppa for a haven, and made it an entrance
for the les of the sea” (1 Mace 14 5). When
Simon reared his monument ever the sepulcher of
his father and brothers at Modin, he set up seven
pyramids with pillars, upon which were carved
figures of ships to be ‘‘seen of all that sail on the


—


sea” (1 Mace 13 29). About this period we hear
of ships in naval warfare. When Antiochus IV
Epiphanes planned his expedition against Egypt,
he had with other armaments ‘‘n great navy,” pre-
sumably ships of war (1 Mace 1 17); and ata later
time Antiochus V11 speaks expressly of “ships of
war” (1 Macc 16 3).


rc


Assyrian Armed Galley in Motion.
(Sculpture froin Koyunjik. Brit. Mus.)


(1) Egypt—The Egyptians, like other nations

of antiquity, had a great horror of the open sea,

although they were expert enough in

2. Among managing their craft upon the Nile.

Neighboring Pharaoh-necoh built up a powerful

Nations navy to serve him both in commerce
and in war. See PHARAOH-NECOH.


Of explicit references to Egyp ships in the OT there are
but few. Isaiah speaks of ‘vessels of papyrus upon
the waters”’ of the Upper Nile, on board of which are
the messengers of Cush or Ethiopia returning to tell the
tidings of the overthrow of Assyria to the inhahitants of
those remote lands (18 2 AV has “‘bulrushes”’ instead
of ‘‘papyrus"’). Ezekiel alsc, foretelling the overthrow
of Egypt, speaks of messengers travcling with the news
on swift Nile hoats to strike terror into the hearts of the
‘eareless Ethiopians’’ (80 9). When Joh compares
his days to ‘'the swift ships’’ (‘‘ the ships of reed’? RVm),
the allusion is most likely to Egypt's, these heing skiffs
with a wooden keel and the rest of bulrushes, sufficient
to carry one person, or at most two, and light, to travel
swiftly @ 26).

(2) Assyria and Babylonia-—The Assyrians and
Bahylonians were mainly an inland people, but their
rivers gave them considerable scope for navigation.
The Assyr monuments contain representations of naval
engagements and of cperations on the seaccast. When
Isaiah pictures Jeh as a hetter defence of Judah than the
rivers and streams of Assyria and Egypt are to their
people he says, ‘‘There Jeh will be with us in majesty,
a piace of broad rivers and streams, wherein shail go no

alley with oars [’6ni shayit], neither shall gallant ship
¢i ‘addir) pass thereby. .... Thy tacklings (ropes,
cables] are loosed; they could not strengthen the foot
of their mast, they could not spread the sail”’ (33 21.23).
Speaking of Jeh's wonders to be performed toward His
people after Babylon had heen overthrown, the prophet
declares: ‘‘Thus saith Jeh, your Redeemer, the Holy
One of Israel: For your sake I have sent to Babylon,
and I will bring down all of them as fugitives, even the
Chaldeans, in the ships of their rejoicing’ (43 14).
In this case, however, the ships are not war ships, but
more nae merchant ships, or ships for pleasure,
sailing in the Euphrates.


(3) Phoenicia —It was from the Phoenicians
that the Mediterranean peoples learned seamanship
and skill in navigation. It 1s fitting, therefore, that
in his dirge over the downfall of the mistress of the
sea, Ezekiel should represent Tyre as a gallant ship,
well built, well furnished, and well manned, broken
by the seas in the depths of the waters, fallen into
the heart of the seas in the day of herruin. Ezekiel’s
description (ch 27, with Davidson’s notes) brings
together more of the features of the ship of antiquity
than any other that has come down to us. Her
builders have made her perfect in beauty with
planks of fir or cypress, mast of cedar, oars of the
oak of Bashan, benches or deck of ivory inlaid with
boxwood, sail of fine linen with broidered work
from Egypt, and an awning of blue and purple


Ships and Boats
Shishak


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2776


from the coastlands of Elishah (possibly Sicily).
She is manned with oarsmen of Sidon and Arvad,
pilots of the wise men of Tyre, calkers from Gebal
to stop up the cracks and seams in her timbers,
mariners and men of war from other lands who
enhanced her beauty by hanging up the shield and
helmet within her. She is freighted with the most
varied cargo, the produce of the lands around, her
customers, or as they are called, her traffickers, being
Tarshish in the far W., Sheba and Arabia in the
8., Haran and Asshur in the B., Javan, which is
Greece, and Togarmah, which is Armenia, in the N.

One or two of the particulars of this description may
be commented upon. (a) As regards rigging, the Phoen
ships of the time of Ezekiel, as seen in Assyr representa-
tions, had one mast with one yard and carried a square
sail. Egyp ships on the Red Sea about the time of the
Exodus, from reliefs of the XIXth Dynasty, had one mast
and two yards, and carried also one large square sail.
The masts and yards were made of fir, or of pine, and the
sails of linen, hut the fiber of papyrus was employed as
well as flax in the manufacture of sail-cloth. The
sail had also to serve “‘for an ensign"’ (lenés, Ezk 27 7).
‘The flag proper,’ says Davidson (ad loc.), ‘‘seems not
to have been used in ancient navigation; its purpose
was served hy the sail, as for example at the battle of
Actium the ship of Antony was distinguished by its
purple sail.”

(b) As regards the crew, in the two-hanked Phoen
ship the rowers of the first hank work their oars over
the.gunwale, and those of the second through portholes
lower down, so that each may have free play for his oar.
The calkers were those who filled up seams or cracks in
the timbers with tow and covered them over with tar or
wax, after the manner of the instruction given to Noah
regarding the Ark: “Thou... . shalt pitch it within
and without with pitch” (Gen 6 14).

(c) As regards cargo, it is to he noted that ‘‘the
persons of men,’’ that is, slaves, formed an article of
merchandise in which Javan, Tubal, and Meshech,
countries to the N., traded with Tyre.


Of general references to shipping and seafaring
life there are comparatively few in the OT. In
his great series of Nature-pictures in
3. General Ps 104, the Psalmist finds a place for
References the sea and ships (vs 25ff), and in
Ps 107 there is a picture of the storm
overtaking them that go down to the sea in ships,
and of the deliverance that comes to them when
God ‘bringeth them into their desired haven’
(vs 23 ff). In the Book of Prov the ideal woman
who brings her food from far is hke “the merchant
ships” (31 14). In the same book the drunkard,
because of his unnatural insensibility to danger, is
likened to a man ‘‘that lieth down in the midst of
the sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast”
(23 34); and among the inscrutable things of the
world the writer includes “the way of a ship in the
midst of the sea” (30 19). In Wisd, human life is
described “‘as a ship passing through the billowy
water, whereof, when it is gone by, there is no
trace to be found, neither pathway of its keel in the
billows” (6 10). The same book notes it as a
striking example of the case of a divine and benefi-
cent Providence that ‘men intrust their lives to a
little piece of wood, and passing throngh the surge
on a raft are brought safe to land” (14 1-5). The
Jews like the Egyptians and the Assyrians had a
natural shrinking from the sea, and Ecclesiasticus
interprets their feeling when he says: “They that
sail on the sea tell of the danger thereof; and when
we hear it with our cars, we marvel’”’ (43 2+).

Il. Ships in the NT.—It is the fishing-boats
of the Sea of Galilee which exclusively occupy
attention in the Gospels. In the time
of Our Lord’s ministry in Galilee the
shores of the Sea were densely peopled,
and there must have been many boats
engaged in the fishing industry. Bethsaida at
the northern end of the Lake and Tarichaca at
the southern end were great centers of the trade.
The boats were probably of a size and build similar
to the few employed on the Lake today, which


1. In the
Gospels


are between 20 and 30 ft. in length and 7 ft. in
breadth. The word “launch,” of putting a boat
or a ship into the sea, has disappeared from RV,
except in Lk 8 22, where it is more appropriate
to an inland lake. They were propelled by oars,
but no doubt also made use of the sail when the wind
was favorable (Lk 8 23), though the pictures which
we have in the Gospels are mostly of the boatmen
toiling in rowing in the teeth of a gale (Mk 6 48),
and struggling with the threatening waves (Mt 14
24). In the boat on which Jesus and the disciples
were crossing the Lake after the feeding of the 5,000,
Jesus was in the stern “asleep on the cushion’’
(Mk 4 38, AV “a pillow’; Gr proskephdlaion,
headrest”). More than once Jesus made special
use of a boat. As He was by the seashore a great
concourse of people from all parts made it desirable
that ‘a, small boat” (ploiarion) should be in attend-
ance off the shore to receive Him in case of need,
though He does not seem to have required it (Mk 3
9). On another occasion, when the crowds were
still greater, He went into a boat and sat ‘“‘in the sea”
with the multitude on the sloping beach before Him
(Mk 4 1; Lk 6 3). This boat 1s said in St. Luke’s
narrative to have been Simon’s, and it seems from
references to it as “the boat” on other occasions
to have been generally at the disposal of Jesus.

It is St. Panl’s voyages which yield us the knowl-
edge that we possess from Bib. sources of ships in

NT times. They are recorded for us
2.Inthe in the Acts by St. Luke, who, as Sir
Acts of the William Ramsay puts it, had the true
Apostles Gr feeling for the sea (St. Paul the

Traveller, 21). In St. Luke’s writings
there are many nautical terms, peculiar to him,
used with great exactitude and precision.

When St. Paul had appealed to Caesar and was
proceeding to Rome in charge of Julius, the centu-
rion, along with other prisoners, a ship of Adramyt-
tium, a coasting vessel, carried the party from


Roman Ship from Tomb at Pompeii.


Caesarea along the Syrian coast, northward of
Cyprus, past Cilicia and Pamphylia, to Myra of
Lycia. There the centurion found a ship of Alex-
andria sailing for Italy, one of the great corn fleet
carrying grain from Egypt for the multitudes of
Rome. (After the capture of Jerus the emperor
Titus returned to Italy in such a vessel, touching
at Rhegium and landing at Puteoli.) The size of
the vessel is indicated by the fact that there were
276 persons on board, crew and passengers all told
(Acts 27 37). St. Luke has made no note of the
name of this or of the previous vessels in which St.
Paul had voyaged. Of the presumably larger
vessel, also an Alexandrian corn ship bound for
Rome, which had wintered in Melita, and which
afterward took on board the shipwrecked party


2777


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ships and Boats
Shishak


(Acts 28 11), “the sign’ (rapdonuov, pardsémon)
is given, and she is called “The Twin Brothers.”
The expression shows that it was in painting or
relief; a figurehead, with the Twin Brothers repre-
sented, would be given by értonuov, episémon. ‘The
cargo (dopriov, phortion, Acts 27 10, AV and RV
“Jading’’) in this case was wheat (27 38), but another
word is used, yéuos, gémos, by St. Luke of a ship’s
load of varied wares (Acts 21 3; cf Rev 18 11 ff).

Of those engaged in handling the ship we find (ver
11) the master (xuBeprirns, kubernétés), the owner
(vaveAnpos, natikléros, although this expression
seems not quite consistent with the ownership of a
corn ship of the imperial service, and Ramsay’s
distinction between the words, making the former
“sailing-master” and the latter “captam,” may be
better), the sailors (ver 30, who treacherously sought
to lower the ship’s boat on the pretence of laying
out anchors from the “foreship” or prow, and to get
away from the doomed vessel).

Of operations belonging to the navigation of the
vessel in the storm there were (1) the taking on
board of the ship’s boat and securing it with ropes
(ver 16, mm which opera-
tion St. Luke seems to
have taken part; cf ver
32), (2) the undergirding
of the ship (ver 17, using
helps, that is taking
measures of relief and
adopting the expedient,
only resorted to in ex-
tremities, of passing cables
under the keel of the ship
to keep the hull together
and to preserve the tim-
bers from starting), (8)
the lowering of the gear
(ver 17, reducing sail, taking down the mainsail
and the main yard), (4) throwing freight over-
board and later casting out the tackling of the ship
(ver 19), (5) taking soundings (ver 28), (6) letting
go four anchors from the stern (ver 29, stern-
anchoring being very unusual, but a necessity in
the circumstances), (7) further lightening the ship
by throwing the wheat into the sea (ver 38), (8)
cutting the anchor cables, unlashing the rudders,
hoisting up the foresail to the wind, and holding
straight for the beach (ver 40).

Of the parts of the ship’s equipment there are
mentioned “the sounding lead” (SoAls, bolis, though
it is the vb. which is here used), “the anchors”
(Ayxupar, dgkurai, of which every ship carried
several, and which at successive periods have been
made of stone, iron, lead and perhaps other metals,
each having two flukes and being held by a cable
or a chain), “the rudders” (radd\a, péddlia, of
which every ship had two for steering, which in this
ease had been lifted out of the water and secured by
“bands” to the side of the ship and unlashed when
the critical moment came), ‘“‘the foresail’ (dpréuw»,
artémon, not the mainsail, but the small sail at the
bow of the vessel which at the right moment was
hoisted to the wind to run her ashore), and “the
boat” (c«édn, skdph2, which had been in tow in the
wake of the vessel, according to custom still preva-
lent in those seas—coasting-vessels being some-
times becalmed, when the crew get into the small
boat and take the ship in tow, using the oars to
get her round a promontory or into a position
more favorable for the wind). The season for navi-
gation in those seas in ancient times was from
April to October. During the winter the vessels
were laid up, or remained in the shelter of some
suitable haven. The reason for this was not simply
the tempestuous character of the _weather, but
the obscuration of the heavens which prevented


Coin of Antoninus Pius,
Showing Anchor.


observations being taken for the steering of the
ship (Acts 27 20). ;
_ In 2 Cor 11 25 St. Paul mentions amon suffer-
ings he had endured for Christ’s sake that thrice he
had suffered shipwreck, and that he
3. In Other had been “a night and a day in the
Books deep,’ implying that he had been in
danger of his life clmging to a spar,
or borne upon a hurriedly constructed raft. It may
be a reminiscence of the sea when St. Paul in the
very earliest of his Epp. (1 Thess 4 16), speaking
of the coming of the Lord, says “The Lord himself
shall descend from heaven, with a shout’ (é xedeto-
pati, en keleismati), where the picture is that of the
xehevoT ys, keleustés, giving the time to the rowers on
boardaship. Although brapérys, hupérétés, was “an
underrower” and trnpesta, hupéresia, “the crew of
a ship,” as contrasted with «vBepyyrys, kubernétés,
“the sailing-master,” the derived meaning of “serv-
ant” or “officer” has lost in the NT all trace of its
origin (Mt 5 25; Lk 1 2 and many passages; cf
oréMev, stéllein, and aver éddev, sustéllein, where the
idea of “furling” or ‘‘shifting a sail” is entirely lost:
1 Cor T 29; 2 Cor 8 20).

Figurative: In He the hope of the gospel is figured as ‘‘an
anchor .... sure and stedfast, and entering into that
which is within the veil’’ (6 19, esp. with Ebrard’s note in
Alford, ad loc.). St. James, showing the power of little
things, adduces the ships, large though they be, and driven
by fierce winds, turned about by a very small “rudder’’
(rydddvov, péddiion), as ‘‘the impulse of the steersman will-
eth’’ (Jas 3 mae In Rev thereis arepresentation of the fall
of Babylonin languagereminiscent of the fall of Tyre (Ezk
27), in which lamentations arise from the merchants of
the earth who can no more buy her varied merchandise
(r6v yopnov, tén gémon, “cargo'’ RVm), and shipmasters
and passengers and _ seafaring poonte look in terror and
grief upon the smoke of her burning (Rev 18 12-18).

LitERATURE.—The usual books on Gr and_Rom
antiquities furnish descriptions and illustrations. Works
on the monuments like Layard, Nineveh, II, 379 ff;
Maspero, Anctent Egypt and Assyria; Ball, Light from
the East, and Reissner, Cairo Museum Catalogue, ‘‘Models
of Ships and Boats,’’ 1913, contain descriptions and fig-
ured representations which are instructive. On shipping
and navigation in classical antiquity Smith of Jordanhill,
Voyage and Shipwreck of St. Paul, is still the standard
authority.

Aves T. Nicon

SHISHA, shi’sha (NW°W, shisha’): One of Solo-


mon’s officers of state (1 K 4 3).


SHISHAK, shi’shak (PW W, shishak [1 K 14
25]; Zoveaxelp., Sousakeim): Sheshonk or Shesheng I,
as he is called on the monuments, the
1. Shishak, founder of the XXIId Dynasty, was
952-930 BC in all probability of Libyan origin. It
is possible that his claim to the throne
was that of the sword, but it is more likely that he
acquired it by marriage with a princess of the
dynasty preceding. On the death of Pasebkhanu
II, the last of the kings of the XXIst Dynasty,
952 BC, Shishak ascended the throne, with an
efficient army and a well-filled treasury at his
command. He was a warlike prince and cherished
dreams of Asiatic dominion.
He had not long been seated on the throne when
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, of the tribe of Ephraim,
whom Solomon had promoted but
2. Patron of afterward had cause to suspect, fled
Jeroboam from the displeasure of his sovereign
to the court of Shishak (1 IK 11 26 ff).
There Jeroboam remained till the death of Solomon,
when he returned to Canaan, and, on Rehoboam’s
returning an unsatisfactory answer to the people’s
demands for relief from their burdens, headed the
revolt of the Ten Tribes, over whom he was chosen
king with his capital at Shechem (1 K 12 25 ff).
Whether there was not in the XXIst Dynasty some
kind of suzerainty of Egypt over Pal, when Solomon
married Pharach’s daughter and received with her
Gezer as a dowry, seems not to be clearly established.


Shishak
Shore


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2778


It is, however, natural that Jeroboam’s patron in
the day of adversity should take sides with him
against Rehoboam, now that the kingdom was
divided. Active support of Jeroboam would be in
the line of his dreams of au eastern empire.

So it came to pass that in the 5th year of Reho-
boam, Shishak came up against Jerus with 1,200
chariots, and 60,000 horsemen, and
people without number out of Egypt,
the Libyans, Sukkiim, and Ethiopians,
and took the fenced cities of Judah,
and came to Jerus. At the preaching of the prophet


3. Syrian
Campaign


ee ee Ns. Enbes = a ty

Figure of the God Amon Holding Captive the Cities of
Judah for Shishak.

One of the Heads of the Cities, Jud-ha-malek (Jehud of
the King, Josh 19 45), Whichis the Third behind the
KKnee of the God Amon.


Shemaiah, Rehoboam and his people repented,
and Jerus was saved from destruction, though not
from plunder nor from servitude, for he became
Shishak’s servant (2 Ch 12 8). Shishak took
away the treasures of the house of the Lord and the
treasures of the king’s house, carrying off among
the most precious of the spoils all the shields of gold
which Solomon had made (1 K 14 25ff; 2 Ch
12 1-9). From the Scripture narrative it does not
appear that there was any occupation of Pal by
the Egyp forces on this occasion.


There is, however, a remarkable contemporary record
of the Campaign engraved on the south wall of the
Temple of Amon at Karnak by Shishak
4, Shishak’s himself. Not only is the cxpedition
Record at recorded, but there is a list of districts
and towns of Pal granted _to his victories
Karnak by Amon-Ra and the goddess of Thebes
engraved there. A number of towns
mentioned in the Book of Josh have been identified;
and among the names of the list are Rabhath, Taanach,
Gibeon, Mahanaim, Beth-horon and other towns both
of Israc] and Judab. That names of places in the North-
ern Kingdom are mentioned in the list does not imply that
Shishak had directed his armies against Jeroboam and
plundered his territories. It was the custom in antiquity
for a victorious monarch to include among conquered
cities any place that paid tribute or was under subjection,
whether captured in war or not; and it was sufficient
reason for Shishak to include these Israelite places that
Jerohoam, as secms probable, had invited him to come
to his aid. none the names in the list was ‘ Jud-ha-
malek’’—Yudhmalk on the monuments—which was at
first beHeved to represent the king of Judah, with a figure
which passed for Rehoboam. Being, however, a place-
name, it is now recognized to he the town Yehudah,
belonging to the king. On the death of Shishak his
suecessor assumed a nominal suzerainty over the land
of Canaan.


Lirerature.—Flinders Petrie, History of Egypt, III,
227 ff; Maspero, Struggle of the Nations, 772 ff; Nicol,
Recent Archaeology and the Bible, 222-25,

T. Nicox ,


SHITRAI, shit’ri, shit-ri%, shit’ra-1 COU,
shitray): A Sharonite, David’s chief shepherd
(1 Ch 27 29).


SHITTAH, shit’a, TREE (NOW, shittah; LXX
fiAov aanrrov, xilon dsépton; RV ACACIA TREE
[Isa 41 19]); SHITTIM WOOD (D°OW AY, ‘ace
shittim; RV ACACIA WOOD [Ex 26 5.10.13;
26 15.26; 27 1.6; Dt 10 3]): The word was
originally shintah, derived from the Arab. sant,
now a name confined to one species of acacia,
Acacia nilotica (N.O. Leguminosae), but possibly was
once a more inclusive term. The A. nilotica is at
present confined to the Sinaitic peninsula and to
Egypt. Closely allied species, the A. tortilis and A.
seyal, both classed together under the Arab. name
sayyal, are plentiful in the valleys about the Dead
Sea from Engedisouthward. Thosewho haveridden
from ‘Ain Jidy to Jebel Usdum will never forget
these most striking features of thelandscape. They
are most picturesque trees with their gnarled trunks,
sometimes 2 ft, thick, their twisted, thorny branches,
which often give the whole tree an umbrella-like
form, and their fine bipimnate leaves with minute
leaflets. The curiously twisted pods and the masses
of gum arabic which exude in many parts are also
peculiar features. The trees yield a valuable, hard,
close-grained timber, not readily attacked by insects.

E. W. G. Masrerman

SHITTIM, shit’im (D°OWMO, ha-shitlim, “the
acacias”; Bartely, Satiein):

(1) This marked the last camping-ground of Israel
before they crossed the Jordan to begin the con-
quest of Western Pal. Here it was that the people
fell into the snare set for them by the satanic
counsel of Balaam, who thus brought upon them
greater evil than all his prohibited curses could
have done (Nu 25 1 ff; 31 16). In Nu 33 49 it
is called Abel-shittim. It was from Shittim that
Joshua sent the spies to view out the land and
Jericho (Josh 2 1); and from this point the host
moved forward to the river (3 1). The place is
mentioned by Micah in a passage of some diffi-
culty (6 5): after ‘what Balaam the son of Beor
answered,” perhaps some such phrase as “remember
what I did” has fallen out. This would then be a
reference to the display of Divine power in arresting
the flow of Jordan until the host had safely crossed.
Jos places the camp “near Jordan where the city
Abila now stands, a place full of palm trees” (Ant,
IV, viii, 1). Onom says Shittim was near to Mt.
Peor (Fogor). It may possibly be identical with
Khirbet el- Kefrain, about 6 miles 8. of the Jordan,
on the lip of Wady Seiseban, where there are many
acacias.

(2) In Joel 8 18 we read of the valley of Shittim
which is to be watered by a fountain coming forth
of the house of the Lord. It must therefore be
sought ou the W. of the Jordan. The waters from
the Jerus district are carried to the Dead Sea down
the Wédy which continues the Brook Kidron:
Wddy cn-Nadr. The acacia is found plentifully
in the lower reaches of this valley, which may
possibly be intended by the prophet.

. W. Ewine

SHIZA, shi’za (RTW, shiza’; Darla, Saizd): A
Tene one of David’s leading warriors (1 Ch

42).


SHOA, shi’a (10, sha"; Yové, Soué): A people
named in Izk 23 23 in association with Baby-
lonians, Chaldaeans and Assyrians. Schrader iden-


2779


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shishak
Shore _


tifies with the Sutd of the inscriptions (E. of the
Tigris).


SHOBAB, sho’bab (225W, shabhabh; DoBag,
Sébdb):

(1) One of the sons of David (2 S 5 14; 1 Ch
3 5; 14 4).

(2) A son of Caleb (1 Ch 2 18).


SHOBACH, sho’bak (J2°W, shabhakh: ToPd,
Sobdék): Captain of the Syrian host (2 § 10 16.18);
pay enon seh (JDVW, shdphakh) in 1 Ch 19


SHOBAI, sho'bi, sh6-ba's, sho’ba-i CAW , shabhay;
B, “Afaot, Abaou, A, Luc., ZoBal, Sabai): The
head of one of the families which returned from the
Bab captivity (Ear 2 42; Neh 7 45).


SHOBAL, shd’bal (O2°W, shabhal, “overflow-
ing’; ZoBad, Sobdl, with variants):

1)_An Edomite name mentioned in connection
with Lotan, Zibeon and Anah, es that of a “son”
of Seir (Gen 36 20), the father of a clan (ver 23),
ae a Horite “duke” (alluph) (ver 29; 1 Ch 1 38.
(2) A Calebite, the father (possibly of the inhabit-
ants) of Kiriath-jearim (1 Ch 2 50.52).

(3) A Judahite, perhaps to be identified with (2)
above (1 Ch 4 1f).


SHOBEK, shi’bek (paW, shdbhek; ToBA,
Sobék): One of those who sealed the covenant under
Nehemiah after the Bab captivity (Neh 10 24).


SHOBI, sho'bi (AW, shobhi; OveoBel, Ouesbet):
One of those who remained faithful to David
during the rebellion of Absalom (2 8 17 27).


SHOCHOH, sho’ks (MDW, sakhoh, B, Tonxsd,
Sokchéth, A, °O«x6, Okchd): This in i S17 1 AV
is a variant of Socou (q.v.).


SHOE, shoo, SHOE-LATCHET, shoo’lach-et
(233, na‘al, lit. “that which is fastened,’ with
denominative vb. S35, na@‘al, “to provide with


Egyptian Sandals.


hoes” [2 Ch 28 15; Ezk 16 10]; trd8npa, hupd-
aBiie ioe 46 19; Mt 3 11, ete], from the vb.
brodéw, hupodéo [Mk 6 9; Eph 6 15], to bind
under,” cav8adtov, sanddlion, “sandal [Jth 10 4;
16 9; Mk 69; Acts 12 8]; AV, RVm also have
“shoe” for oon, min‘al, “bar”? [so RV text] in
Dt 33 25; the “latchet” is either ae See
“twisted thing’ [Gen 14 23; Isa 5 27], or tpas,
himds, “leather thong” [Mk 17; Lk 3 16; Jn 1


27]): The no‘al was a simple piece of leather tied on
the foot with the s*rakh, so easy of construction that
its low cost was proverbial (Am 2 6; 8 6; Sir 46
19; cf Gen 14 23), and to be without it was a
sign of extreme poverty (2 Ch 28 15; Isa 20 2).
Women, however, might have ornamental sandals
(Cant 7 1; Jth 16 9), and Ezekiel names “sealskin”
(16 10) asa partieularly luxurious material, but the
omission of sandals from the list of Isa 3 18-23 shows
that they were not commonly made articles of great
expense. The hupodéma was likewise properly a
sandal, but the word was also used to denote a
shoe that covered the foot. The contrast between
hupodéma in Mt 10 10 and sandalion in Mk 6 9
seems to show that this meaning is not unknown
in the NT, the “‘shoe’’ being regarded as an article
of Juxury (cf Lk 15 22). But in Mt 3 11 and
||’s, only the sandal can be meant. ‘

Sandals were not worn indoors, so that putting
them on was a sign of readiness for activity (Ex
12 11; Acts 12 8; Eph 6 15), the more wealthy
having them brought (Mt 3 11) and fastened (Mk
1 7 and |\’s) by slaves. When one entered a house
they were removed; all the more, naturally, on
entering a sanctuary (Ex 3 5; Josh 5 15; Acts
7 33). Mourners, however, did not wear them
even out of doors, as a sign of grief (Ezk 24 17.23),
perhaps for the same reason that other duties of the
toilet were neglected (2 S 12 20, etc). A single
long journey wore out a pair of sandals (Josh 9
5.13), and the preservation of ‘‘the latchet of their
shoes” from being broken (Isa 5 27) would require
almost miraculous help.

Ruth 4 7f states as a ‘‘custom in former times in
Israel,'’ that when any bargain was closed ‘‘a man drew
off his shoe,and gave it to his neighbor.’’ This was of
course simply a special form of earnest-money, used in
all transactions. In Dt 25 9f the custom appears in a
different light. If a man refused to perform his duty to
his deceased brother's wife, the elders of the city were
to remove his shoe and disgrace him publicly, ‘‘ And his
name shall he called in Israel, The house of him that
hath his shoe loosed.’’ The removal of the shoe is
apparently connected with the rite in_Ruth 4 7 as a
renunciation of the man’s privilege. But the general
custom seems to have hecome obsolete, for the removal of
the shoe is now a reproach.

The meaning of Ps 60 8 || 108 9, ‘‘Upon [m ‘‘unto”’]
Edom will I cast my shoe,"' is uncertain. by, ‘al,
may mean either upon" or ‘“unto."" If the former,
some (otherwise unsubstantiated) custom of asserting
ownership of land may he meant. If the latter, the


meaning is “Edom I will treat as a slave,‘' to whom the
shoes are cast on entering a house.


Burton Scorr Easton
SHOHAM, shi’ham (DW, shodhom, “onyx”;
B, "Ioodp, Isodm, A, "Iooodp, Issodm): One of
the sons of Merari (1 Ch 24 27).


SHOMER, shi'mér (WATW, shdmér):

(1) The father of one of the conspirators who
killed Joash (2 K 12 21). Sce Suimeatn.

(2) One of the sons of Heber of the tribe of Asher
(1 Ch 7 32). See SHemur.


SHOPHACH, shi’fak. See SHopacu.


SHOPHAN, shd’fan (JPW, shophdn). See
ATROTH-SHOPHAN.


SHORE, shor: (1) mn, héph, always of the


Mediterranean, variously tr! “haven,” “beach,”
“shore,” ‘sea-shore,”’ “‘coast,’’ “sea coast’? (Gen 49
13; Dt17; Josh 91; Jgs617; Jer 47 7;


Ezk 25 16). (2) my, saphah, lit. “lip; ef


Arab. Kaa, shafat, “lip”; of the sand upon the
seashore, a figure of multitude (Gen 22 17; Ex
14 30; Josh 11 4; Jgs 7 12; 18135; 1K 4
29); the shore of the Red Sea or Gulf of ‘Akabah


Shorten
Shunem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2780


by Ezion-geber (1 K 9 26; 2 Ch 8 17); thebrink
of the River Nile (Gen 41 3.17); the edge (AV
“brink’”’) of the valley of Arnon (Dt 2 36). (3)
MEP, kaceh, lit. “end,” “extremity,” the uttermost
art (AV “shore’’) of the Salt Sea (Josh 15 2);
ING OP, keh ha-'Gree, “the end of the earth”


Ur oo -E
(Ps 46 9); cf Arab. Ley out, ‘akdst-lard,


“the uttermost parts of the earth.” (4) xetdos,
cheilos, lit. “lip,” “as the sand which is by the sea-
shore” (He 11 12). (5) atyeodds, aigialds, the
beach (AV “‘shore’’) of the Sea of Galilee (Mt 13 2.
48; Jn 21 4); of the Mediterranean (Acts 21 5;
27 39.40). (6) dooov rapedéyorro Thy Kpirny, dsson
parelégonto tén Krétén, doubtful reading, “sailed
along Crete, close in shore’ (AV “sailed along by
Crete’’) (Acts 27 13). See Coast; Haven; SaAnp.
ALFRED Ery Day

SHORTEN, shér’t’n: The Heb word ka&gar and
the Gr kolobéd lit. dicate abbreviation of time or
space (Ps 89 45; Prov 10 27; Ezk 42 5); figura-
tively they point to limitation of power or of suffer-
ing (Nu 11 23; Isa 60 2; 59 1; Mt 24 22; Mk
13 20).


SHOSHANNIM EDUTH, shé-shan’im é’duth.
See Sona; Psaums.


SHOULDER, shil’dér (B2W, sh*khem, Bi)2, ka-
théph, ZV or VY, 275, HIM or NPI, zro'ah,
PW, shok; Gpos, dmos, Bpaxlov, brachion [Sir 7 31
only]): The meanings of the Heb words are rather
varied. The first (sh*khem) has perhaps the widest
application. It is used for the part of the body on
which heavy loads are carried (Gen 21 14; 24
15.45; Ex 12 34; Josh 45; Jgs 9 48). King
Saul’s impressive personality is thus described:
“There was not among the children of Israel a good-
lier person than he: from his shoulders and upward
he was higher than any of the people’ (1 8 9 2;
10 23). To carry loads on the shoulder or to have
“a staff on the shoulder” is expressive of subjection
and servitude, yea, of oppression and cruel punish-
ment, and the removal of such burdens or of the
rod of the oppressor connotes delivery and freedom
(isa 9 4; 14 25).

Figuratively: The shoulders also bear responsi-
bility and power. Thus it is said of King Messiah,
that ‘the government shall be upon his shoulder”
(Isa 9 6) and “‘the key of the house of David will
1 lay upon his shoulder; and he shall open, and
none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall
open’ (22 22). Job declares that he will refute all
accusations of unlawful conduct made against him,
in the words: “Oh .... that I had the indictment
which mine adversary hath written! Surely I would
carry it upon my shoulder’ (Job 31 35 f).

The Heb word kathéph comes very close in mean-
ing to the above, though it is occasionally used in
the sense of arm- and shoulder-piece of a garment.
Like Heb sh’khem, it is used to describe the part
of the body accustomed to carry loads. On it the
Levites carried the implements of the sanctuary
(Nu 79; 1 Ch 1515; 2 Ch 35 3). Oriental
mothers and fathers carried their children on the
shoulder astride (Isa 49 22; cf 60 4); thus also
the little bundle of the poor is borne (Ezk 12 6.7.
12). The loaded shoulder is likely to be “worn”
or chafed under the burden (29 18). In the two
passages of the NT in which we find the Gr
equivalent of shoulder (dmos, fairly common in
Apoc), it corresponds most closely with this use
(Mt 23 4; Lk 15 5). Of the shoulders of animals
the word kathéph is used in Ezk 34 21 (of sheep,


where, however, men are intended) and in Isa
30 6 (of asses). ;

Stubborn opposition and unwillingness is ex-
pressed by “withdrew the shoulder” (Neh 9 29),
or “pulled away the shoulder’ (Zec 7 11), where
the marginal rendering is ‘“‘they gave [or “turned” ] a
stubborn shoulder.” Contrast “bow the shoulder,”
ie. “submit” (Bar 2 21). Cf “‘stiffnecked”; see
Nzcx. Somewhat difficult for the understanding
of Occidentals is the poetical passage in the blessmg
of Moses: “Of Benjamin he said, The beloved of
Jeh shall dwell in safety by him; he covereth him
all the day long, and he dwelleth between his
shoulders” (Dt 33 12). The “shoulders’’ refer
here to the mountain saddles and proclivities of
the territory of Benjamin between which Jerus,
the beloved of Jeh, which belonged to Judah, lay
nestling close upon the confines of the neighboring
tribe, or even built in part on ground belonging to
Benjamin.

Much less frequently than the above-mentioned words,
we find zeraa', zeré'ah, which is used of the ‘boiled
shoulder of the ram"’ which was @ wave offering at the
consecration of a Nazirite (Nu 6 19) and of one of the
priestly portions of the sacrifice (Dt 18 3). In Sir 7 31
this portion is called brachidn, properly ‘‘arm,"’ but both
AV and RV translate ‘‘shoulder.’’ Regarding the wave
and heave offerings see Sacriricz. AV frequently trans-


lates Heh shok, lit. “leg,"' “thigh” (q.v.) hy ‘‘shonlder,"
which RV occasionally retains in the margin (e.g. Nu


6 20).
H. L. E. Lusrine |
SHOULDER-BLADE, shil’dér-blid (M5,
shikhmah): ‘Then let my shoulder [kathépA] fall from
the shoulder-blade [shikhmah], and mine arm [z°r6*']
be broken from the bone [kaneh]’ (Job 31 22).
The Heb word is the fem. form of sh*khem (see
SHOULDER). It is found only in this passage.


SHOULDER-PIECE, shol’dér-pés (SND, kath-
éph): The word designates the two straps or pieces
of cloth which passed from the back of the ephod
(see EpHop) of the high priest over the shoulder and
were fastened at the front. These shoulder-pieces
seem to have been made of a precious texture of
linen (or byssos) with threads of gold, blue, purple
and scarlet, to which two onyx (or bery!) stones were
attached bearing the names of six tribes of Israel
each. These are called the “stones of memorial’
(Ex 39 18). On these straps there were also
fastened the plaited or woven bands (‘‘wreathed
chains”) from which, by means of two golden rings,
the breastplate was suspended. It is by no means
clear from the descriptions (Ex 28 7.12.25; 39
4.7.18.20) how we have to imagine the form and
attachment of these shoulder-pieces. It has been
thought that the ephod might be of Egyp origin,
which is not very probable, though V. Ancessi,
Annales de philosophie chrétienne, 1872, 46 fi,
reproduces some representations from the great
work of Lepsius, Denkmdler, where costly royal
garments have two shoulder straps, like the ephod.
Usually Egyp garments have no shoulder strap, or
at most one. H. L. E. Luserine


SHOVEL, shuv’1: (1) MT, rakath, is a wooden
shovel used on the threshing-floor for winnowing the
grain (lsa 30 24). (2) 93, ya‘, is used in various
passages to indicate some instrument employed to
carry away ashes from the altar (Ex 27 3; 38 3;
Nu 4 14;1K 7 40.45; 2 K 26 14; 2 Ch 4 11.16;
Jer 62 18). It was very likely a small shovel like
those used in connection with modern fireplaces for
cleaning away the ashes (cf Heb ya'‘ah, “to sweep
away”) or for carrying live coals to start a new
fire. (3) IH), yathedh (Dt 23 138 RVm).

James A. Patou


SHOW, sho. See Suew,


2781


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shorten
Shunem


SHOWBREAD, shé’bred. See SurwBREAD.


SHOWBREAD, TABLE OF. See SHEWBREAD,
TABLE oF.


SHOWER, shou’ér: (1) DDI, rebhibhim, a pl.
form apparently denoting gentle rain, usually used
figuratively, as in Dt 32 2; Ps 72 6; Mic 6 7.
(2) DWa, geshem, used of gentle rain in Job 87 6:
“shower of rain,” AV “small rain’; used of the
flood in Gen 712. Figuratively, of blessing,
“showers of blessing” (Ezk 34 26); of destruction:

There shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger,
and great hailstones in wrath to consume it”
(Ezk 13 13). (3) DMT, zerem, usually storm or
tempest (cf Isa 4 6; 28 2): “They are wet with
the showers of the mountain’? (Job 24 8). (4)
buBpos, 6mbros (Lk 12 54). Rain is-unknown in
Pal in the long summer of 5 or 6 months. A few
showers usually fall in September, succeeded by
fine weather for some weeks before the beginning of
the heavy and long-continued winter rains.

ALFRED Evy Day

SHRINE, shrin (vaés, naéds): In Acts 19 24
small models of temples for Diana.


SHROUD, shroud (W9M, héresh, “bough’’):
Winding-sheet for the dead. See Buriat. Used in
AV, ERV Ezk 31 3 in therare oldsense of “shelter,”
“covering.” ARV has “a forest-like shade” (WIM,
héresh, “wood,” ‘wooded height’’) (Isa 17 9, ete).
Cf Milton, Comus, 147.


SHRUB, shrub (MW, sith [Gen 21 15]). See
Bus, (2).


SHUA, SHUAU, shoo’a:

(1) (290, shu‘, “prosperity’): A Canaanite
whose daughter Judah took to wife (Gen 38 2.12;
1 Ch 2 3; see BaTu-suva).

(2) (RZW, sha‘a’, “prosperity’’):
Heber, an Asherite (1 Ch 7 32).

(3) (MW , shah, ‘“depression’’): A son of Keturah
by Abraham (Gen 25 2; 1 Ch 1 32), and his


posterity. See Bripap.
(4) A brother of Caleb (1 Ch 4 11).


Suva.


Daughter of


See


SHUAL, shoo’al (970, sha'al): An Ashcrite
(1 Ch 7 36).


SHUAL, LAND OF (3290 YS, 'eree sha‘al;
4 Zaydd, he Sogdl): From their encampment at
Michmash the Philis sent out marauding bands, one
going westward toward Beth-horon, another east-
ward, “the way of the border that looketh down
upon the valley of Zeboim.” The pass to the §.
was held against them by Israel. The third party
therefore went northward, turning “unto the way
that leadeth to Ophrah, unto the land of Shual’
(1 § 13 17f). Ophrah is probably identical with
et-Taiyibeh, a village which lies some 5 miles E.
of Beilin (Bethel). It is in this district therefore
that the land of Shual must be sought, but no
definite identification is possible. W. Ewine


SHUBAEL, shéo'ba-el, shod-ba’el (O82,
shibha@ él):

QQ) A Levite, son of Amram (1 Ch 24 20);
one of the leaders of song in the temple (1 Ch 25
20). See SHepueL; Gray, HPN, 310.

(2) Ason of Heman (1 Ch 25 4). See SHEBUEL.


SHUHAH, shéoo’ha (TNNW, shihah, “depres-
sion”): A brother of Caleb (1 Ch 4 11).


SHUHAM, shoo’ham (omy , shiham): Son of
Dan, ancestor of the Shuhamites (Nu 26 42f).
In Gen 46 23 called ‘“Hushim.”’


SHUHITE, shoo’hit CMW, shuhi): Cognomen
of Bildad, one of Job’s friends (Job 2 11; 8 1;
18 1; 256 1; 42 9). The place referred to cannot
be definitely located. See Birpap; Sauan.


SHULAMMITE, shoo’la-mit (Cant 6 13, AV
‘Shulamite’). See SHUNAMMITE.


SHUMATHITES, shéo’math-its (MW, shumd-
bey of the families of Kiriath-jearim (1 Ch
538).


SHUNAMMITE, shoo’na-mit (M"A2U, shunam-
mith, MYAINW, shinammith; B, DZopaveiris, S6ma-
nettis, A, Zovxpavuriis, Soumanilés): Applied to natives
of Shunem.

(1) Abishag, who was brought to minister to the
aged king David, love for whom led Adonijah to his
doom (1 K 1 3.15; 2 17, etc).

(2) The woman, name unknown, whose son Elisha
raised from the dead (2 K 4 12, etc). Later whan
apparently she had become a widow, after seven
years’ absence on account of famine, in the land
of the Philis, she returned to find her property in
the hands of others. Elisha’s intervention secured
its restoration (8 1-6).

(3) The Shulammite (Cant 6 13). In this name
there is the exchange of / for n which is common.

5 W. Ewine

SHUNEM, shoo’nem (B33W, shanim; B, Zovvav,
Soundn, A, Zovvap, Soundm): A town in the terri-
tory of Issachar named with Jezreel and Chesulloth
(Josh 19 18). Before the battle of Gilboa the
Philis pitched their camp here. They and the
army of Saul, stationed on Gilboa, were in full view
of each other (1 S 28 4). It was the scene of the
touching story recorded in 2 K 4 8~87,in which the
prophet Elisha raises to life the son of his Shunam-
mite benefactress. Onom describes it as a village
called Sulem, 5 Rom miles 8S. of Mt. Tabor. This
points to the modern Sdlam, a village surrounded
by cactus hedges and orchards on the lower south-
western slope of Jebel ed-Duhy (‘Hill of Moreh’’).
It commands an uninterrupted view across the plain
of Esdraelon to Mt. Carmel, which is about 15
miles distant. It also looks far across the valley
of Jezreel to the slopes of Gilboa on the 8S. It
therefore meets satisfactorily the conditions of
Josh and 18. A question has, however, been raised
as to its identity with the Shunem of 2 K 4.
Elisha’s home was in Samaria. Apparently Carmel
was one of hisfavorite haunts. If he passed Shamem
“continually” (ver 9), going to and coming from the
mountain, it involved a very long détour if this
were the village visited. It would seem more
natural to identify the Shunem of Elisha with the
Sanim of Onom, which is said to be in the territory
of Sebaste (Samaria), in the region of Akrabatta:
or perhaps with Salim, fully a mile N. of Taanach,
as nearer the line of travel between Samaria and
Carmel.

There is, however, nothing to show that Elisha’s
visits to Shunem were paid on his journeys between
Samaria and Carmel. It may have been his custom
to visit certain cities on circuit, on business calling
for his personal attention, e.g. in connection with
the “schools of the prophets.” Materials do not
exist on which any certain conclusion can rest.
Both Sélamand Salim are on the edge of the splendid
grain fields of Esdraeclon (2 K 4 18).

W. Ewine


Shuni, Shunites
Sick, Sickness


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2782


SHUNI, shoo’ni, SHUNITES, shoo’nits C210,
shtint): One of the sons of Gad and his descendants
(Gen 46 16; Nu 26 15).


SHUPHAM, shoo’fam, SHUPHAMITES, shao’-
fam-its. See SHEPHUPHAM.


SHUPPIM, shup’im (O"5W, shuppim):

(1) One of the descendants of Benjamin (1 Ch
7 12.15).

(2) One of the porters in the temple (1 Ch 26
16). See Mupri; SHEPHUPHAM.


SHUR, shtr, shdor ("70 , shar; Zotp, Soir): The
name of a desert E. of the Gulf of Suez. The word
means a “‘wall,”’ and may probably refer to the
mountain wall ofthe 7th plateau as visible from the
shore plains. In Gen 16 7 Hagar at Kadesh (‘Ain
Kadis) (see ver 14) is said to have been ‘‘in the way
to Shur.” Abraham also lived “between WKadesh
and Shur” (Gen 20 1). The position of Shur is
defined (Gen 25 18) as being “opposite Egypt on
the way to Assyria.” After crossing the Red Sea
(Ex 15 4) the Hebrews entered the desert of Shur
(ver 22), which extended southward a distance of
three days’ journey. It is again noticed (1 8 16 7)
as being opposite Egypt, and (27 8) as near Egypt.
There 1s thus no doubt of its situation, on the E.
of the Red Sea, and of the Bitter Lakes.

Brugsch, however, proposed to regard Shur (‘‘the
wall’) as equivalent to the Egyp andu (‘‘wall’'), the
name of a fortification of some kind apparently near
Kantarah (see Micpot [2]), probably barring the en-
trance to Egypt on the road from Pelusium to Zoan.
The extent of this ‘wall’ is unknown, but Brugsch
connects it with the wall mentioned by Diodorus Siculus
(i.4) who wrote about 8 BC, and who attributed it to
Sesastris (probably Rameses II) who defended ‘‘the
east side of Egypt against the irruptions of the Syrians
and Arabians, hy a wall drawu from Pelusium through
the deserts as far as to Heliopolis, for a space of 1,500
furlongs.’ Heliopolis lies 90 miles (ot 188) S.W. of
Pelusium: this wall, if it existed at all, would have run
on the edge of the desert which extends N. of Wédy
Tumeildt from Kantarah to Tell el-Kebir; but this line,
on the horders of Goshen, is evidently much too far W.
to have any connection with the desert of Shur E. of the
Gulf of Snez. See Budge, Aist. Egypt, 90; Brugsch,
Egypt under the Pharaohs, abridged edition, 320.

. , C. R. Conver

SHUSHAN, shoo’shan (JWI, shiishan; Loved,
Sousdn, Zotora, Sovisa): This city, the Susu or Susan

of the Babylonians, and the native
1. Position, (Elamite) Suisun, is the modern Shush
Etymology (Sus) in Southwestern Persia, a series
and Forms of ruin-mounds on the banks of the
of Its Name river Kerkha. The ancient etymolo-

gies (“city of lilies’ or ‘'of horses’’)
are probably worthless, as an etymology in the
language of the place would rather be expected.
Sayce therefore connects the name with sasésa,
meaning ‘‘former,’’ and pointing to some such
meaning as ‘‘the old” city. It is frequently men-
tioned in the Bab inscriptions of the 3d millennium
BC, and is expressed by the characters for the
goddess IS8tar and for ‘‘cedar,”’ implying that it was
regarded as the place of the ‘divine grove” (see 5,
below). In later days, the Assyrians substituted for
the second character, that having the value of &cé,
possibly indicating its pronunciation. Radau
(Early Bab History, 236) identifies Shushan (Susa)
with the Sd’a of the Bab king Kuri-galzu (14th
cent. BC, if the first of the name), who dedicates to
the Bab goddess Ninlil an inscription of a certain
Siatu, who had, at an earlier date, dedicated it to
létar for the life of the Bab king Dungi (¢ 2500 BC).

The surface still covered with ruins is about
2,000 hectares (4,040 acres), though this is but a
fraction compared with the ancient extent of the
city, which is estimated to have been between


12,000 and 15,000 hectares (29,640-37,000 acres).
Though considerable, the extent of Susa was small
compared with Nineveh and Babylon.
The ruins are divided by the French
explorers into four tracts: (1) The
Citadel-mound (W.), of the Achae-
menian period (5th cent. BC), ¢ 1,476 by 820 ft.,
dominating the plain (height c 124 ft.). (2) The
Royal City on the E. of the Citadel, composed of
two parts: the Apadana (N.E.), and a nearly triangu-
lar tract extending to the B. and theS. This con-
tains the remains of the palace of Darius and his
successors, and occupies rather more than 123 acres.
The palace proper and the throne-room were sepa-
rated from the rest of the official buildings. (3) The
City, occupied by artisans, merchants, etc. (4) The
district on the right bank, similarly inhabited. This
anciently extended into all the lower plain, between
the Shaour and the Kerkha. Besides these, there
were many isolated ruins, and the suburbs con-
tained a number of villages and separate construc-
tions.

Most of the constructions at Susa are of the Pers period.
In the northern part of the Royal City lie the remains


of the Apadana, the only great monument
of which remains were found on the level.


2. The
Ruins


3. The The principal portion consisted of a great
Royal hall of columns, known as the throne-room
City,” “The of Artaxerxes Mnemon. It replaced an
Citadel,” earlier structure by Darius, which was
> destroyed by fire in the time of Artaxerxes

and the J. The columns apparently had capitals
Ruins of the style common in Persia—the fore-
Therei ants of two bulls kneeling back to back.
erein n the Citadel a palace built by Xerxes


seems to have existed, the hase of one of
his columns having been found there. Bricks bearing
the inscriptions of early Elamite kings, and the founda-
tions of older wails, testify to the antiquity of the occu-
pation of this part. According to the explorers, this was
the portion of the city reserved for the temples.
The number of important antiquities found on the
site is considerable. Among the finds may be men-
tioned the triumphal stele of Nardm-
4. The Sin, king of Agadé (83d—4th millennium
Monuments BC); the statuettes of the Bab king
Discovered Dungi (c 2360 BC); the reliefs and in-
2 scriptions of the Elamite king Ba(?)-3a-
SuSinak (c 2340 BC); the obelisk inseribed with the
laws of Hammurabi of Babylon; the bronze bas-
relief of the Elamite king Sutruk-Nabhunte (¢ 1120
BC), who carried off from Babylonia the stelae
of Narim-Sin and Hammurabi above mentioned,
together with numerous other Bab monuments; the
stele of Adda-hamiti-In-Susnak, of a much later
date, together with numerous other objects of art
and inscriptions—a most precious archaeological
find.
Shushan passed through many serious crises, one
of the severest being its capture and destruction by
the armies of the Assyr king A&Sur-
5. ASSur- _bani-Apli about 610 BC. According
bani-4pli’s to his account, the ztgqurat or temple-
Description tower of Susa was built of enameled
of the City brick imitating lapis-lazuli, and was
adorned with pinnacles of bright
bronze. The god of the city was SuSinak, who
dwelt in a secret place, and none ever saw the
form of his divinity. Lagamaru (Laomer) and five
other of the city’s deities were adored only by kings,
and their images, with those of 12 more (worshipped
by the people), were carried off as spoil to Assyria.
Winged bulls and genii adorned Susa’s temples, and
figures of wild bulls protected the entrances to their
shrines. Other noteworthy things were the sacred
groves into which no stranger was allowed to enter,
and the burial-places of the Elamite kings. After
recovering from the blow inflicted by the Assyrians,
Shushan ultimately regained its old importance, and,
as the summer residence of the Pers kings, became


2783


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Shuni, Shunites
Sick, Sickness


the home of Ahasuerns and Queen Esther (Neh 1 1;
ae 2.5; 23; 3 15; 9 11ff; Dnl 8 2; Ad Est

LiteratuRe.—See Perrot et Chipiez, Histoire de Uart
dans l’antiquité, vol V, Perse, 1890; de Morgan, Déléya-
tion en Perse (Mémoires), 1900, etc; Histoire et travauz de
la délégation en Perse, 1905; art. ‘‘ Klamites” in Hastings
ERE; art. Exam in this work.

T. G. PincHes


SHUSHAN EDUTH, shoo’shan é’duth. Sec
Song; Psarms.


SHUSHANCHITES, shoo-shan‘kits (S7D7U1,
shishantkhdy@ [Aram.]; B, Zovevvaxater, Sousuna-
chaiot; AV Susanchites): Colonists in Samaria
whose original home was in Shushan (Ezr 4 9).


SHUTHALHITES, shoo-thal’hits, shdo’thal-hits.
See SHUTHELAB.


SHUTHELAH, shoo-thé’la, shoo’thé-la, SHU-
THELAHITES, sho6o-thé'la-hits, sh60'thé-la-hits
(I2NY, shuthalht): A son of Ephraim (Nu 26
35.36; cf 1 Ch 7 20.21), and his descendants.
See GENEALOGY.


SHUTTLE, shut”1.


SIA, si’a, SIAHA, si’a-ha (R9"O, st'a’): One
of the remnant which returned from captivity (Neh
7 47; Ezr 2 44).


SIBBECAI, SIBBECHAI, sib’é-ki, sib-é-ka’i
("220 sibbe’khay): One of the valiant men in
David’s army (2 8 21 18; 1 Ch 11 29; 20 4; 27
11).


See WEavING.


SIBBOLETH, sib’é-Icth (MBO, sibbaleth). See
SHIBBOLETH.


SIBMAH, sib’ma.


SIBRAIM, sib-ra‘im, sib'ra-im (O° 20, sibhrayim;
B, ZeBpap, Sebrdm, A, Vebpap, Sephrdm): A place
named as on the boundary of Pal in Ezekicl’s
ideal delineation, “‘between the border of Damascus
and the border of Hamath” (Ezk 47 16). It may
possibly be represented by the modern Ahirbet
Sanbariyeh on the west bank of Nahr el-Hasbany,
about 3 miles 8.E. of ‘Abdi.


See SEBAM.


SIBYLLINE ORACLES, sib’i-lin, -lin or’a-k’lz.
See Apocatyptic LiteraTuRE, B, V.

SICARII, si-ka’ri-i. See Assassins.

SICHEM, si’kem (DDy, sh’khem). AV in Gen
12 6. See SHecuEem.


SICK, sik, SICKNESS, sik’nes (m2, halah [Gen
48 1, etc], %20, hdlt [Dt 28 61, etc], RAIN, tohdlu’
[Dt 29 21, ete], MN, mahdlah (Ex 23 25, etc],
TF, daweh [Lev 15 33, etc], WIN, ’dnash [2 8 12
15, etc]; dcOevéw, asthenéd (Mt 10 8, etc; cf2 Mace
9 22], xakds txov, kokds éehon [Lk a 2), Kkakds Exov-
ras, kakds échontas (Mt 4 24, etc], appworos, drrhis-
tos [Sir 7 35; Mt 14 14, ie ea hecemie artes a
Sir 10 10, etc], with various cognates, kapve,
hee [Jas 5 15]; Lat morbus [2 Esd 8 31]):
Compared with the number of deaths recorded
in the historical books of the Bible the instances
in which diseases are mentioned are few. Sick
and “sickness”. (including ‘‘disease,” ete) are the
tr? of 6 Heb and 9 Gr words and occur 56 t in
the OT and 57 t in the NT. The number of
references in the latter is significant as showing


how much the healing of the sick was characteristic
of the Lord’s ministry. The diseases specified are
varied. Of infantile sickness there is an instance
in Bath-sheba’s child (2 S 12 15), whose disease
is termed ’dnash, not improbably trismus nascentium,
a common discase in Pal. Among adolescents
there are recorded the unspecified sickness of Abijah
(1 K 14 1), of the widow’s son at Zarephath
(1 K 17 17), the sunstroke of the Shunammite’s
son (2 K 4 19), the epileptic boy (Mt 17 15),
Jairus’ daughter (Mt 9 18), and the nobleman’s
son (Jn 4 46). At the other extreme of life Jacoh’s
death was preceded by sickness (Gen 48 1). Sick-
ness resulted from accident (Ahaziah, 2 K 1 2),
wounds (Joram, 2 K 8 29), from the violence of
passion (Amnon, 2 § 18 9}, or mental emotion
(Dnl 8 27); sce also in this connection Cant 2 5;
5 8. Sickness the result of drunkenness is men-
tioned (Hos 7 5), and as a consequence of famine
(Jer 14 18) or violence (Mic 6 13). Daweh or
periodic sickness is referred to (Lev 15 33; 20 18),
and an extreme case is that of Lk 8 43.

in some examples the nature of the disease is
specified, as Asa’s disease in his feet (1 K 16 23),
for which he sought the aid of physicians in vain
(2 Ch 16 12). Hezekiah and Job suffered from
sore boils, Jehoram from some severe dysenteric
attack (2 Ch 21 19), as did Antiochus Epiphanes
(2 Mace 9 5). Probably the sudden and fatal
disease of Herod was similar, as in both cases there
is reference to the presence of worms (cf Acts 12 23
and 2 Mace 9 9). The disease of Publius’ father
was also dysentery (Acts 28 8). Other diseases
specified are paralysis (Mt 8 6; 9 2), and fever
(Mt 8 14). Not improbably the sudden illness of
the young Egyptian at Ziklag (1 S 80 11), and
the illness of Ben-hadad which weakened him so
that he could not resist the violence of Hazael, were
also the common Pal fever (2 JK 8 15) of whose
symptoms and effects there is a graphic description
in Ps 88. Unspecified fatal illnesses were those of
Elisha (2 K 13 14), Lazarus (Jn 11 1), Tabitha
(Acts 9 37). In the language of the Bible, leprosy
is spoken of as adefilement to be cleansed, rather
than as a disease to be cured.

The proverb concerning the sick quoted by the
Lord at Capernaum (Mk 2 17) has come down to
us in several forms in apocryphal and rabbinical
writings (Babh@ Kammd’ 26 13; Sanhedhrin 176),
hut is nowhere so terse as in the form in which
He expresses it. The Lord performed His healing
of the sick by His word or touch, and one of the
most emphatic charges which He gave to His
disciples when sending them out was to heal the sick.
One of the methods used by them, the anointing
with oil, is mentioned in Mk 6 13 and enjoined
hy James (5 15). In later times the anointing
which was at first used as a remedial agent became
a ceremonial in preparation for death, one of the
seven sacraments of the Rom church (Aquinas,
Summa Theologia suppl. ad P iii. 29).

The duty of visiting the sick is referred to in
Ezk 34 4.16, and by the Lord in the description of
the Judgment scene (Mt 25 36.43). It is incul-
eated in several of the rabbinical tracts. ‘He
that visits the sick lengthens his life, he who refrains
shortens it,’ says Rabbi Ishanan in Nedhdrim 29.
In Shulhan ‘Arikh, Yorch Dé‘ah there is a chapter
devoted to this duty, which is regarded as incumbent
on the Jew, even though the sick person be a Gentile
(Gittin 61a). The church’s duty to the sick, so long
neglected, has, within the last century, been recog-
nized in the mission field, and has proved, in heathen
lands, to be the most important of all pioneer agres-
sive methods.

While we find that the apostles freely exercised
their gifts of healing, it is noteworthy that we read


Sickle
Sidon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2784


of the sickness of two of St. Paul’s companions,
Epaphroditus (Phil 2 26) and Trophimus (2 Tim
4 20), for whose recovery he seems to have used no
other means than prayer. See algo DisEaseE.

; ALEX. MacaisTER

SICKLE, sik’] (WOW, hermésh [Dt 16 9; 28
25], baa, maggal; cf Arab. minjal [Jer 60 16; Joel
3 13]; Spéravov, drépanon [Mk 4 29; Rev 14 14-
19]): Although the ancients pulled much of their
grain by hand, we know that they also used sickles.
The form of this instrument varied, as is evidenced
by the Egyp sculptures. The earliest sickle was
probably of wood, shaped like the modern scythe,
although much smaller, with the cutting edge made
of sharp flints set into the wood. Sickle flints were
found at Tel el-Hesy. Crescent-shaped iron sickles
were found in the same mound. In Pal and Syria
the sickle varies in size. It is usually made wholly
of iron or steel and shaped much like. the instru-
ment used in western lands. The smaller-sized
sickles are used both for pruning and for reaping.

James A. PatcH

SICYON, sish‘i-on (Zuvav, Sikudn, Duevdv, Suku-
én, Bvnrdv, Sukién): Mentioned in 1 Mace 15 23
in the list of countries and cities to which Lucius
the Rom consul (probably Lucius Calpurnius Piso,
139 BC) wrote, asking them to be friendly to the
Jews. The Jewish dispersion had already taken
place, and Jews were living in most of the seaports
and cities of Asia Minor, Greece and Egypt (cf Sib
Or 3 271, ¢ 140 BC, and Philo).

Sicyon was situated 18 miles W. of Corinth on the
south side of the Gulf of Corinth. Its antiquity and
ancient importance are seen by its coins still extant,
dating from the 5th cent. Though not as important
as Corinth in its sea trade, the burning of that city in
143 BC, and the favor shown to Sicyon by the Rom
authorities in adding to its territory and assigning
to it the direction of the Isthmian games, increased
its wealth and influence for a time.

8. F. Hunrer

SIDDIM, sid‘im, VALE OF (O™1H4 pay, ‘emek
ha-siddim; LXX 4 ddpayé [or Koidds] 4 GAvKH, he
phdrage [kotlds] hé haluké): The place mentioned
in Gen 14 3-8 as being the scene of encounter
between Chedorlaomer and his allies with the kings
of Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboiim and Zoar.
In ver 3 it is identified with the Salt Sea, and in
ver 10 it is said to have been full of slime pits
(“bitumen’’).

According to the traditional view, the Vale of
Siddim was at the southern end of the Dead Sea.
But in recent years a number of eminent authorities
have maintained that it was at the northern end of
the Dead Sea, in the vicinity of Jericho. Their
argument has mainly been drawn from incidental
references in the scene (Gen 13 1-13) describing
the parting of Lot and Abram, and again in the
account of Moses’ vision from Pisgah (Dt 34 3).

In the account of Abram and Lot, it is said that from
Bethel they saw ‘‘all the Plain of the Jordan, that it was
well watered everywhere, hefore Jeh destroyed Sodom
and Gomorrah.’ The word here trd ‘‘plain’” means
“circle,” and well describes the view which one has of
the plain about Jericho from Bethel as he looks down the
valley past Ai. But it seems to go beyond the text to
assume that the Vale of Siddim was within that circle
of vision, for it is said in Gen 13 12 simply that Lot
dwelt ‘‘in the cities of the Plain, and meved his tent as
faras Sodom."’ In the vision of Moses, likewise, we have
a very general and condensed description, in which it is
said that. he was shown ‘‘the Plain of the valley of
Jericho, the city of. palim-trees, unto Zoar,’’ which, as
we learn from Gen 19 22, was not far from the Vale of
Siddim. It is true that from the traditional site of Pis-
gah the south cnd of the Dead Sea could not be seen.
But we are by no means sure that the traditional site of
Pisgah is the true one, or that the impert of this lan-
guage should be restricted to the points which are
actually within range of vision.


The tendency at the present time is to return to
the traditional view that the Vale of Siddim was at
the south end of the Dead Sea. This is supported
by the fact that Jebel Usdum, the salt mountain at
the southwest corner of the Dead Sea, still bears the
name of Sodom, Usdum being simply another form
of the word. A still stronger argument, however, is
drawn from the general topographical and geological
conditions. In the first place, Zoar, to which Lot
is said to have fled, was not far away. The most
natural site for it ig near the mouth of the Wady
Kerak, which comes down from Moab into the
southern end of the Dead Sea (see Zoar); and this
city was ever afterward spoken of as a Moabite city,
which would not have been the case if it had been at
the north end of the sea. It is notable in Josh 13
15-21, where the cities given to Reuben are enumer-
ated, that, though the slopes of Pisgah are men-
tioned, Zoar is not mentioned.

In Gen 14, where the battle between Amraphel
and his allies with Sodom and the other cities of the
plain is described, the south end of the Dead Sea
comes in logical order in the progress of their cam-
paign, and special mention is made of the slime or
bitumen pits which occurred in the valley, and evi-
dently played an important part in the outcome
of the battle.

At the south end of the Dead Sea there is an
extensive circle or plain which is better supplied
with water for irrigation than is the region about
Jericho, and which, on the supposition of slight
geological changes, may have been extremely fertile
in ancient times; while there are many indications
of such fertility in the ruins that have been described
by travelers about the mouth of the Kerak and
other localities nearby. The description, therefore,
of the fertility of the region in the Vale of Siddim
may well have applied to this region at the time of
Lot’s entrance into it.

There are very persistent traditions that great
topographical changes took place around the south
end of the Dead Sea in connection with the destruc-
tion of Sodom and Gomorrah, while the opinion has
been universally prevalent among the earlier his-
torical writers that the site of Sodom and Gomorrah
is beneath the waters of the Dead Sea.

Geological investigations, so far from disproving
these traditions, render them altogether possible
and credible. There is a remarkable contrast
between the depths of the north end of the Dead
Sea and of the south end. Near the north end the
depth descends to 1,300 ft., whereas for many miles
out from the south end it is very shallow, so that
at low water a ford exists, and is occasionally used,
from the north end of the salt mountain across to
el- Lisdn.

The precipitous salt cliffs of Jebel Usdum which
border the southwest corner of the Dead Sea would
indicate that, in comparatively recent times, there
had been abrupt subsidence of a good many feet in
the bottom of the Dead Sea at that end.

Such subsidences of Imited areas and in connection
with earthquakes are by no means uncommon. In 1819
an area of 2,000 sq. miles about the delta of the Indus
sank beneath the level of the sea, so that the tops of the
houses were harely scen_above the water. A smaller
area in the delta of the Seclenga River sank during the
last century beneath the waters of Lake Baikal. “Pro-
fessor R. 8S. Tarr of Cornell University has recently de-


scribed the effect of an earthquake on the shores of
Alaska, in which there was a change of level of 47 ft.


More probably (see Arkasan; Dean Sea) there
has been a rise in the waters of the Dead Sea since
Abraham’s time, caused by the encroachment upon
the original area of evaporation by the deltas which
have been pushed into the main part of the depres-
sion by the Jordan, and various smaller streams
descending from the highlands on either side. In


2785


consequence of these encroachments, the equilibrium
between precipitation and evaporation could be
maintained only by a rise in the water causing it to
spread over the shallow shelf at the south end, thus
covering a large part of the Vale of Siddim with the
shoal water now found between el-Lisdn and Jebel
Usdum. Grorcs Frepprick WricHt


SIDE, si’dé (Zi8y, Sidz): An ancient town of
Pamphylia, occupying a triangular promontory
on the coast. It was one of the towns to which a
letter favorable to the Jews was sent by the Rom
consul Lucius (1 Mace 15 23). The town seems
to have been of considerable antiquity, for it had
existed long before it fell into the possession of
Alexander the Great, and for a time it was the
metropolis of Pamphylia. Off the coast the fleet of
Antiochus was defeated by the Rhodians. During
the 1st cent. Side was noted as one of the chief ports
of pirates who disposed of much of their booty there.
The ruins of the city, which are now very extensive,
bear the name Eski Adalia, but among them there
are no occupied houses. The two harbors pro-
tected by a sea wall may still be traced, but they
are now filled with sand. The wall on the land side
of the city was provided with a gate which was pro-
tected with round towers; the walls themselves
are of Gr-Rom type. Within the walls the more
important of the remains are three theaters near
the harbors, and streets with covered porticoes
leading from the city gate to the harbors. Without
the walls, the street leading to the city gate is lined
with sarcophagi, and among the shrubbery of the
neighboring fields are traces of many buildings and
of an aqueduct. E. J. Bangs


SIDES, sidz (4372, yarkhah, “thigh,” “flank’”’):
RV substitutes ‘innermost parts’ for AV “sides”
in Jon 1 5; cf 1S 24 3.


SIDON, si’don (j7%, cidhan): The eldest son
of Canaan (Gen 10 15).


SIDON, si‘don (jIPR, cidhin; W8dv, Sidon;
AV Sidon and Zidon; RV SIDON only): One of
the oldest Phoen cities, situated on a

1. Location narrow plain between the range of
and Dis- Lebanon and the sea, in lat. 33° 34’
tinction nearly. The plain is well watered and
fertile, about 10 miles long, extending

from a little N. of Sarepta to the Bostrenus (Nahr
el-‘Auly). The ancient city was situated near the
northern end of the plain, surrounded with a strong
wall. It possessed two harbors, the northern one
about 500 yds. long by 200 wide, well protected
by little islets and a breakwater, and a southern
about 600 by 400 yds., surrounded on three sides by
land, but open to the W., and thus exposed in bad
weather. The date of the founding of the city 1s
unknown, but we find it mentioned in the Am ‘Tab
in the 14th cent. BC, and in Gen 10 19 it is the
chief city of the Canaanites, and Joshua (Josh 11 8)
calls it Great S. It led all the Phoen cities in its
early development of maritime affairs, its sailors
being the first to launch out into the open sea out of
sight of land and to sail by night, guiding themselves
by thestars. They were the first to come into con-
tact with the Greeks and we find the mention of
them several times in Homer, while other Phoen
towns are not noticed. 8. became early dis-
tinguished for its manufactures and the skill of its
artisans, such as beautiful metal-work in silver and
bronze and textile fabrics embroidered and dyed
with the famous purple dye which became known
as Tyrian, but which was earlier produced _at 8.
Notices of these choice articles are found in Homer,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sickle
Sidon


both in the Iiéad and the Odyssey. S. had a monar-
chical form of government, as did all the Phoen
towns, but it also held a sort of hegemony over those
to the 8. as far as the limit of Phoenicia. It like-
wise made one attempt to establish an inland colony
at Laish or Dan, near the headwaters of the Jordan,
but this ended in disaster (Jgs 18 7.27.28). The
attempt was not renewed, but many colonies were
established over-sea. Citium, in Cyprus, was one
of the earliest.

(1) The independence of 8. was lost when the
kings of the XVIIIth and XIXth Dynasties of
Egypt added Pal and Syria to their
dominions (1580-1205 BC). The kings
of 8. were allowed to remain on the
throne as long as they paid tribute,
and perhaps still exercised authority over the towns
that had before been subject to them. When the
power of Egypt declined under Amenhotep IV
(1375-1358), the king of S. seems to have thrown
off the yoke, as appears from the Am Tab. Rib-
addi of Gebal writes to the king of Egypt that Zim-
rida, king of S., had joined the enemy, but Zimrida
himself claims, in the letters he wrote, to be loyal,
declaring that the town belonging to him had been
taken by the Khabiri (Tab. 147). 8S., with the other
towns, eventually became independent of Egypt, and
she retained the hegemony of the southern towns
and perhaps added Dor, claimed by the Philis, to
her dominion. This may have been the reason for
the war that took place about the middle of the 12th
cent. BC, in which the Philis took and plundered
S., whose inhabitants fled to Tyre and gave the
latter a great impetus. §., however, recovered
from the disaster and became powerful again. The
Book of Jgs claims that Israel was oppressed by 8S.
(10 12), but it is probable 8. stands here for Phoeni-
cia in general, as being the chief town.

(2) S. submitted to the Assyr kings as did the
Phoen cities generally, but revolted against Sen-
nacherib and again under Esar-haddon. The latter
destroyed a large part of the city and carried off most
of the inhabitants, replacing them by captives from
Babylon and Elam, and renamed it Ir-Esar-had-
don (‘City of Esar-haddon’’). The settlers readily
mingled with the Phoenicians, and S. rose to power
again when Assyria fell, was besieged by Nebuchad-
nezzar at the time of his siege of Jerus and Tyre, and
was taken, having lost about half of its inhabitants
by plague. The fall of Babylon gave another short
period of independence, but the Persians gained con-
trol without difficulty, and S. was prominent in the
Pers period as the leading naval power among the
Phoenicians who aided their suzerain in his attacks
upon Greece. In 351 BC, S. rebelled under Tabnit.
II (Tennes), and called in the aid of Gr mercenaries
to the number of 10,000; but Ochus, the Pers king,
marched against him with a force of 300,000 infantry
and 30,000 horse, which so frightened Tabnit that
he betrayed the city to save his own life. But the
citizens, learning of the treachery, first burned their
fleet and then their houses, perishing with their
wives and children rather than fall into the hands
of Ochus, who butchered all whom he seized, Tabnit
among them. It is said that 40,000 perished in the
flames. A list of the kings of 8. in the Pers period has
been recovered from the inscriptions and the coins,
but the dates of their reigns are not accurately known.
The dynasty of the known kings begins with Esmun-
azar I, followed by Tabnit I, Amastoreth; Esmun-
azar II, Strato I (Bodastart), Tabnit II (Tennes)
and Strato II. Inscriptions from the temple of Es-
mun recently discovered give the name of a Bodas-
tart and a son Yatonmelik, but whether the first is
one of the Stratos above mentioned or a third is
uncertain; also whether the son ever reigned or not.
As Bodastart calls himself the grandson of Esmun-


2. His-
torical


Sidonians
Siege


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2786


azar, he is probably Strato I who reigned about 374-
363 BC, and hence his grandfather, Esmunazar I,
must have reigned in 400 BC or earlier. Strato II
was on the throne when Alexander took possession of
Phoenicia and made ho resistance to hini, and even
aided him in the siege of Tyre, which shows that 8.


Coin of Sidon.


had recovered after the terrible disaster it suffered in
the time of Ochus. It perhaps looked upon the
advance of Alexander with content as its avenger.
The destruction of Tyre increased the importance
of 8., and after the death of Alexander it became
attached to the kingdom of the Ptolemies and re-
mained so until the victory of Antiochus ITI over
Scopas (198 BC), when it passed to the Seleucids and
from them to the Romans, who granted it a degree
of autonomy with native magistratcs and a council,
and it was allowed to coin money in bronze.

8. comes into view several times in the NT; first
when Christ passed into the borders of Tyre and 8.
and healed the daughter of the Syro-
phoenician woman (Mk 7 24-30); also
when Herod Agrippa I received a
delegation from Tyre and S. at
Caesarea (Acts 12 20), where it appears to have
been outside his jurisdiction. St. Paul, on his way
to Rome, was permitted to visit some friends at
S. (Acts 27 3). See also Mt 11 21 f and Mk 3 8.

It was noted for its school of philosophy under
Augustus and Tiberius, its inhabitants being largely
Greek; and when Berytus was destroyed by an
earthquake in 551, its great law school was removed
to S. It was not of great importance during the
Crusades, being far surpassed by Acre, and in
modern times it is a small town of some 15,000.

LITERATURE.—Sce PHOENICIA.


3. NT
Mention


H. Porter
SIDONIANS, si-dd’ni-anz: Natives or inhabit-
ants of Sidon (Dt 3 9; Josh 18 4.6; Jgs 3 3;
1 Is 6 6).


SIEGE, sc] (NA, macsr [Dt 28 52.53; 1 K
16 27; 2K 26 2; Isa 29 3; Ezk 4 2]; “to be
besicged,” “to suffer siege,” ba-mécor bo’ [Dt 20 19;
2k 24 10; 26 2):


. In Early Hebrew History

In the Monarchy
Preliminaries to Siege

Siego Operations: Attack

(1) Investment of City

(2) Line of Circumvallation
(3) Mound, or Earthworks
(4) Battering-Rams

(5) Storming of Walls and Rushing of Breach
Siege Operations: Defence
Raising of Siege

Horrors of Siege and Capture
. Siege in the N

ITERATURE


b


te CODD


menon


In early Heb history, siege opcrations are not
described and can have been little known. Although
the Israelites had acquired a certain

1. In Early degree of military discipline in the
Hebrew wilderness, when they entered Canaan
History they had no experience of the opera-
tions of a siege and were without the

engines of war necessary for the purpose. Jericho,


with its strongly fortified wall, was indeed formally
invested—it ‘“‘was straitly shut up because of the
children of Israel: none went out, and none came in”
(Josh 6 1)-—but it fell into thetr hands without a
siege. Other cities seem to have yielded after
pitched battles, or to have been taken by assault.
Many of the Canaanite fortresses, like Gezer
(28 6 25; Josh 16 10), Taanach and Megiddo
(Jgs 1 27), remained unreduced. Jerus was cap~-
tured by the men of Judah (Jgs 1 8), but the fort
of Jebus remained unconquered till the time of
David (2 8 5 6).

In the days of the monarchy more is heard of
siege operations. At the siege of Rabbath-Ammon
Joab seems to have deprived the city
of its water-supply and rendered it
untenable (2 8 11.1; 12 27). At Abel
of Beth-maacah siege operations are
described in which Joab distinguished himself
(2.8 20 15). David and Solomon, and, after the
disruption of the kingdom, Rehoboam and Jeroboam
built fortresses which ere long became the scene of
siege operations. The war between Judah and
Israel in the days of Nadab, Baasha, and Elah was,
for the most part, a war of sieges. It was while
besieging Gibbethon that Nadab, the son of Jero-
boam, was slain by Baasha (1 K 16 27), and,
27 years after, while the army of Israel was still
investing the same place, the soldicry chose their
commander Omri to be king over Israel (1 K 16
16). From the Egyptians, the Syrians, the Assyri-
ans, and the Chaldaeans, with whom they came
into relations in later times as allics or as enemies,
the people of the Southern and of the Northern
Kingdoms learned much regarding the art, both
of attack and of defence of fortified places.

Jt was an instruction of the Deuteronomic Law
that before a city was invested for a long siege, it

should be summoned to capitulate


2. In the
Monarchy


3. Pre- (Dt 20 10; cf 28 2018; 2K 18
liminaries 17/ff). If the offer of peace be
to Siege declined, then the siege is to be pro-


ceeded with, and if the city be cap-
tured, all the male population is to be put to death,
and the women and children reserved as a prey
for the captors. To this humane reservation the
cities of the Canaanites were to be an exception:
their inhabitants were to be wholly exterminated
(Dt 20 16-18).


The same law prescribed that there should bo no
unnecessary destruction of fruit trees in the prosecution
of a long siege. Trees not yielding fruit for human sus-
tenance might be cut down: ‘And thou shalt build
bulwarks [mdcér, “‘siegeworks"] against the city that
maketh war with thee, until it fall’? (Dt 20 19.20).
This instruction to have regard to the fruit trees around
a hostile city seems to have been more honored in the
breach than in the observance, even in Israel. When the
allied kings of Israel, Judah, and Edom were invading
Moab and had instruction to ‘‘smite every fortified
city,” the prophet Elisha bade them also ‘fell every good
tree, and stop all fountains of water, and mar every good
piece of land with stones” (2 K 3 19.25). When the
assault of Jerus by the Chaldacans was imminent, Jeh
commanded the cutting down of the trees (Jer 6 6). In
Arabian warfare, we are told, the destruction of theenemy’s
palm groves was a favorite exploit (Robertson Smith,
OTJC?, 369), and the Assyrians when they captured a
city had no compunction in destroying its plantations
(Inscription of Shalmaneser II on Black Obelisk).


From passages in the Prophets, upon which much
light has been thrown by the ancicnt monuments of
Assyria, and Chaldaca, we gain a very

4. Siege clear idea of the siege works directed
Operations: against a city by Assyr or Chaldaean
Attack invaders. The siege of Lachish (2 K
18 13.14; Isa 36 1.2) by Sennacherib

is the subject of a serics of magnificent reliefs from
the mound of Koyunjik (Layard, Monwments of
Nineveh, II, plates 20, 21, 22). The downfall of
Nineveh as predicted in Nahum’s prophecy lets


2787


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


us see the siege operations proceeding with striking
realism (see Der Untergang Ninivehs by A.
Jeremias and Colonel Billerbeck). Nowhere, how-
ever, are the incidents of a siege—the gathering
of hostile, forces, the slaughter of peaceful inhabit-
ants in the country around, the raising of siege
works, the setting of engines of war against the walls,
the demolition of the towers, the breach in the
principal wall, the rush of men and the clatter of
horses’ hoofs through the streets, the slaughter, the
pillage, the destruction of walls and houses—more
fully and faithfully recorded than by Ezekiel when
predicting the eapture of Tyre by Nebuchadrezzar
(Ezk 26 7-12). The siege of Tyre lasted 13 years,
and Ezekiel tells how every head was made bald
and every shoulder worn by the hard service of the
besiegers (Ezk 29 18). There were various ways
in which an invading army might deal with a fortified
city so as to secure its possession. Terms might
be offered to secure a capitulation (1 K 20 1 ff;
2K 18 14ff), An attempt might be made to
reduce the city by starvation (2 K 6 24ff; 2K
17 5 ff). The city might be invested and captured
by assault and storm, as Lachish was by Sennacherib
(2 K 18 13; 19 8; see Layard, op cit., II, plates
20-24). The chief operations of the besiegers were
as follows: (1) There was the investment of the city
by the besieging army. It was sometimes necessary
to establish a fortified camp, like that of Sennacherib
at Lachish to guard against sorties by the defenders.
Of the siege of Jerus we read that Nebuchadrezzar
came, “he and all his army, against Jerus, and en-
camped against it’ (Jer 524; cf 2 K 265 1).
From the commencement of the siege, slingers and
archers were posted where they could keep the
defenders engaged; and it is to this that reference is
made when Jeremiah says: ‘Call together the
archers against Babylon, all them that bend the
bow; encamp against her round about; let none
thereof escape” (Jer 50 29).

(2) There was next the drawing of a line of
circumvallation (déyék) with detached forts round
about the walls. These forts were towers manned
by archers, or they were used as stations from which
to discharge missiles (Jer 52 4; Ezk 17 17).
In this connection the word “munition” in AV and
ERV (macér) in Nah 1 1 disappears in ARV and is
replaced by “fortress.”

(3) Following upon this was the mound (sdl*lah),
or earthworks, built up to the height of the walls,
so as to command the streets of the city, and strike
terror into the besieged. From the mound thus
erected the besiegers were able to batter the upper
and weaker part of the city wall (2 5 20 15; Isa
37 33; Jer 6 6; Ezk 42; Dnl 1115; Lam 4 18).
If, however, the town, or fortress, was built upon an
eminence, an inclined plane reaching to the height
of the eminence might be formed of earth or stones,
or trees, and the besiegers would be able to bring
their engines to the foot of the walls. This road
was even covered with bricks, forming a kind of
paved way, up which the ponderous machines
could be drawn without difficulty. To such roads
there are references in Scripture (Job 19 12; Isa
29 3, “siege works”; ef Layard, Nineveh and Its
Remains, II, 366f). In the case of Tyre this
mound, er way of approach, was a dam thrown
across the narrow strait to obtain access to the walls
(Ezk 26 8). Very often, too, there was a trench,
sometimes filled with water, at the foot of the wall,
which had to be dealt with previous to an assault.

(4) The earthworks having been thrown up, and
approaches to the walls secured, it was possible to
set and to work the battering-rams (ka@rim) which
were to be employed in breaching the walls (Ezk 4
2), or in bursting open the gates (Ezk 21 22).
The battering-rams were of different kinds. On


Sidonians
Siege


Assyr monuments they are found joined to movable
towers holding warriors and armed men, or, in other
cases, joined to a stationary tower constructed on
the spot. When the men who are detailed to work
the ram get it into play, with its heavy beams of
planks fastened together and the great mass of


Battering-Ram.


metal forming its head, they can hardly fail to make
an impression, and gradually, by the constantly
repeated shocks, a breach is opened and the be-
siegers are able to rush in and bear down the
defenders. It is to the shelter furnished by these
towers that the prophet Nahum refers (2 5) when
he says, ‘“The mantelet is prepared,” and that Isaiah
points when he declares that the king of Assyria
“shall not come unto this city, nor shoot an arrow
there, neither shall he come before it with shield
[mdghén], nor cast up a mound against it” (Isa 37
33). Ezekiel has the same figure when, describing
the siege of Tyre by Nebuchadrezzar, he declares
that he shall “cast up a mound” against her, and
“raise up the buckler,” the buckler (¢innah) being
like the Rom testudo, or roof of shields, under cover
of which the besiegers carried on operations (Ezk
26 8; Colonel Billerbeck [op. cit., 178] is doubtful
whether this device was known to the Assyrians).
Under the shelter of their movable towers the
besiegers could push forward mines, an operation
known as part of siegecraft from a high antiquity
(see 2 8 20 15, where ARVm and ERVm give
“undermined” as an alternative to ‘‘battered”’;
tunneling was well known in antiquity, as the
Siloam tunnel shows).

(5) The culminating operation would be the
storming of the walls, the rushing of the breach.
Scaling-ladders were employed to cross the encircling
trench or ditch (Prov 21 22); and Joel in his power-
ful description of the army of locusts which had
devastated the land says that they ‘‘climb the
wall like men of war’ (Joel 2 7). Attempts were
made to set fire to the gates and to break them
open with axes (Jgs 9 52; cf Neh 13; 28;
Ezk 26 9). Jeremiah tells of the breach that was
made in the city when Jerus was captured (Jer
89 2). The breaches in the wall of Samaria are
referred to by Amos (4 3), who pictures the women
rushing forth headlong hke a herd of kine with
hooks and fishhooks in their nostrils.

While the besiegers employed this variety of
means of attack, the besieged were equally ingenious

and active in maintaining the defence.
5. Siege All sorts of obstructions were placed
Operations: in the way of the besieging army.
Defence Springs and cisterns likely to afford

supplies of water to the invaders were
carefully covered up, or drained off into the city.
Where possible, trenches were filled with water to


Siege
Signs of Heavens


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2788


make them impassable. As the siege-works of the
enemy approached the main wall, it was usual to
build inner fortifications, and for this purpose
houses were pulled down to provide the needful
space and also to supply building materials (Isa
22 10). Slingers placed upon the walls hurled stones
upon the advancing enemy, and archers from loop-
holes and protected battlements discharged arrows
against the warriors in their movable towers.
Sorties were made to damage the siege-works of
the enemy and to prevent the battering-rams from
being placed in position. Tocounteract the assaults
of the battering-rams, sacks of chaff were let down
like a ship’s fender in front of the place where the
engine operated—a contrivance countered again
by poles with scythes upon them which cut off the
sacks (Jos, BJ, III, vii, 20). So, too, the defenders,
by dropping a doubled chain or rope from the battle-
ments, caught the ram and broke the force of its
blows. Attempts were made to destroy the ram
also by fire. In the great bas-relief of the siege of
Lachish an inhabitant is seen hurling a lighted
torch from the wall; and it was a common device
to pour boiling water or oil from the wall upon the
assailants. Missiles, too, were thrown with deadly
effect from the battlements by the defenders, and
it was by a piece of a millstone thrown by a woman
that Abimelech met his death at Thebez (Jgs 9 53).
While Uzziah of Judah furnished his soldiers with
shields and spears and helmets and coats of mail
and bows and slingstones, he also ‘made in Jerus
engines, invented by skilful men, to be on the towers
and upon the battlements, wherewith to shoot
arrows and great stones” (2 Ch 26 15). The Jews
had, for the defence of Jerus against the army of
Titus, engines which they had taken from the
Twelfth Legion at Beth-horon which seem to have


Catapult for Hurling Missiles.


had a range of 1,200 ft. Many ingenions devices
are described by Jos as employed by himself when
conducting the defence of Jotapata in Galilee against
Vespasian and the forces of Rome (BJ, III, vii).
When Nahash king of the Ammonites laid siege
to Jabesh-gilead in the opening days of the reign of
Saul, the terms of peace offered to
6. Raising the inhabitants were so humiliating
of the Siege and cruel that they sought a respite
of seven days and appealed to Saul in
their distress. When the newly chosen king heard
of their desperate condition he assembled a great
army, scattered the Ammonites, and raised the
siege of Jabesh-gilead, thus earning the lasting
gratitude of the inhabitants (1 8 11; cf1 S 31 12.
13). When Zedekiah of Judah found himself
besieged in Jerus by the Chaldaean army under
Nebuzaradan, he sent intelligence to Pharaoh
Hophra who crossed the frontier with his army to
attack the Chaldaeans and obliged them to desist
from the siege. The Chaldaeans withdrew for the
moment from the walls of Jerus and offered battle
to Pharaoh Hophra and his host, but the courage


of the Egyp king failed him and he retired in haste
without encountering the Chaldaeans in a pitched
battle. The siege was prosecuted to the bitter
end, and Jerus was captured and completely over-
thrown (2 K 265 1; Jer 37 3-10; Ezk 17 17).
In the ancient law of Israel ‘‘siege”’ is classed with
drought and pestilence and exile as punishments
with which Jeh would visit His people
7. Horrors for their disobedience (Dt 28 49-57).
of Siege Of the horrors there described they
and Capture had again and again bitter experience.
At the siege of Samaria by Ben-hadad
II, so terrible were the straits to which the besieged


Rock of Masada.


were reduced that they cooked and ate their own
children (2 K 6 28). In the siege of Jerus by
the Chaldaeans, which ended in the overthrow of
the city and the destruction of the Temple, the
sufferings of the inhabitants from hunger and dis-
ease were incredible (2 K 26 3; Jer 32 24; Lam
2 20; 48-10). The horrors of siege have, per-
haps, reached their climax in the account given
by Jos of the tragedy of Masada. To escape cap-
ture by the Romans, ten men were chosen by lot
from among the occupants of the fortress, 960 in
number, including combatants and non-combatants,
men, women and children, to slay the rest. From
these ten one was similarly chosen to slay the sur-
vivors, and he, having accomplished his awful task,
ran his sword into his own body (Jos, BJ, VII, ix, 1).
While all the inhabitants of a city under siege suf-
fered the famine of bread and the thirst for water,
the combatants ran the risk of impalement and
other forms of torture to which prisoners in Assyr
and Chaldaean and Rom warfare were subjected.

The horrors attending the siege of a city were only
surpassed by the barbarities perpetrated at its
capture. The emptying of a city by its capture
is likened to the hurling of a stove from a sling
(Jer 10 17.18). Deportation of the whole of the
inhabitants often followed (2 K 17 6; 24 14).
Not only were the inhabitants of the captured city
deported, but their gods were carried off with them
and the idols broken in pieces. This is predicted
or recorded of Babylon (Isa 21 9; 46 1; Jer 50 2),
of Egypt (Jer 43 12), of Samaria (Hos 10 6).
Indiscriminate slaughter followed the entrauce of
the assailants, and the city was usually given over
to the flames (Jer 39 8.9; Lam 4 18). ‘Cities
without number,” says Shalmaneser II in oue of his
inscriptions, ‘I wrecked, razed, burned with fire.”
Houses were destroyed and women dishonored
(Zec 14 2). When Darius took Babylon, he
impaled three thousand prisoners (Herod. iii.159).
The Scythians scalped and flayed their enemies and
used their skins for horse trappings (ib, iv.64).
The Assyr sculptures show prisoncrs subjected to
horrible tortures, or carried away into slavery. The
captured Zedekiah had his eyes put out after he


2789


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Siege
Signs of Heavens


had seen his own sons cruelly put to death (2 K
25 7). It is only employing the imagery familiar
to Assyr warfare when Isaiah represents Jeh as
saying to Sennacherib: “Therefore will I put my
hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I
will turn thee back by the way by which thou
camest”’ (Isa 37 29).
barbarities that would follow the capture of Samaria
by the Assyrians, Hosea foresees the infants being
dashed to pieces and the women with child being
tipped up (Hos 10 14; 1316; cf Am 1 13).
The prophet Nahum predicting the overthrow of
Nineveh recalls how at the capture of No-amon
(Egyp Thebes) by the Assyr conqueror, Ashur-
banipal, “her young children also were dashed in
pieces at the head of all the streets; and they cast
lots for her honorable men, and all her great men
were bound in chains” (Nah 3 10).
_ The only explicit reference to siege operations
in the NT is Our Lord’s prediction of the complete
, _ destruction of Jerus when He wept over
8. Siege in its coming doom: “For the days shall
the NT come upon thee, when thine enemies
, shall cast up a bank [xdpat, chdraz,
AV, quite incorrectly, ‘‘trench”] about thee, and
compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side,
and shall dash thee to the ground, and thy children
within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one
stone upon another’ (Lk 19 43.44). The order
and particulars of the siege are in accordance with
the accounts of siege operations inthe OT. How
completely the prediction was fulfilled we see from
Jos (BJ, V, vi, 10).

Figurative: In St. Paul’s Epp. there are figures
taken from siege operations. In 2 Cor 10 4
we have “the casting down of strongholds,” where
the Gr word xaéalpesis, kathairesis, from xaGaspetv,
kathairetn, is the regular word used in LXX
for the reduction of a fortress (Prov 21 22; Lam
2 2;1 Macc 6 65). In Eph 6 16 there is allusion
to siege-works, for the subtle temptations of Satan
are set forth as the flaming darts hurled by the
besiegers of a fortress which the Christian soldier is
to quench with the shield of faith.


Literature.—Nowack, Hebrdische Archaeologie, 71;
Benzinger, ‘‘ Kriegswesen"’ in Herzog?; Billerbeck and A.
Jeremias, Der Untergang Ninivehs; Billerbeck, Der
Festungsbau im alten Orient.

T. Nrcou


SIEVE, siv, SIFT. See AcricutturE; THREsH-
ING.


SIGLOS, sig’los (olyAos, siglos): A Pers silver
coin, twenty of which went to the gold Daric


(q.v.).


SIGN, sin (FAN, *Gth, “a sign,” “mark,” NP,
méphéth, ‘wonder’; onpetov, sémeion, “a sign,”
“signal,” “mark”): A mark by which persons or
things are distinguished and made known. In
Scripture used generally of an address to the senses
to attest the existence of supersensible and there-
fore Divine power. Thus the plagues of Egypt
were “signs” of Divine displeasure against the
Egyptians (Ex 4 8ff; Josh 24 17, and often);
and the miracles of Jesus were “signs” to attest
His unique relationship with God (Mt 12 38; Jn
218; Acts 222). Naturally, therefore, both in
the OT and the NT, “signs” are assimilated to the
miraculous, and prevailingly associated with imme-
diate Divine interference. The popular belief in
this manner of communication between the visible
and the invisible worlds has always been, and is
now, widespread. So-called ‘natural’ explana-
tions, however ingenious or cogent, fail with the
great majority of people to explain anything. | Wes-
ley and Spurgeon were as firm believers in the


Anticipating the savage.


) 1 Cor 11 23-28).


validity of such methods of intercourse between
ee and God as were Moses and Gideon, Peter and
ohn.

The faith that walks by signs is not by any means
to be lightly esteemed. It has been allied with the
highest nobility of character and with the most
signal achievement. Moses accepted the leader-
ship of his people in response to a succession of signs:
e.g. the burning bush, the rod which became a ser-
pent, the leprous hand, ete (Ex 3 and 4); so, too,
did Gideon, who was not above making proof of
God in the sign of the fleece of wool (Jgs 6 36-40).
In the training of the Twelve, Jesus did not disdain
the use of signs (Lk 6 1-11, and often); and the
visions by which Peter and Paul were led to the
evangelization of the Gentiles were interpreted by
ae as signs of the Divine purpose (Acts 10 and

The sacramental use of the sign dates from the
earliest period, and the character of the sign is as
diverse as the occasion. The rainbow furnishes
radiant suggestion of God’s overarching love and
assurance that the waters shall no more become a
flood to destroy the earth (Gen 9 13; cf 4 15);
the Feast of Unleavened Bread is a reminder of
God’s care in bringing His people out of bondage
(Ex 13 3); the Sabbath is an oft-recurring proc-
lamation of God’s gracious thought for the well-
being of man (Ex 31 13; Ezk 20 12); the brazen
serpent, an early foreshadowing of the cross, per-
petuates the imperishable promise of forgiveness
and redemption (Nu 21 9); circumcision is made
the seal of the special covenant under which Israel
became a people set apart (Gen 17 11); baptism,
the Christian equivalent of circumcision, becomes
the sign and seal of the dedicated life and the mark
of those avowedly seeking to share in the blessedness
of the Kingdom of ‘God (Lk 3 12-14; Acts 2 41,
and often); bread and wine, a symbol of the spiritual
manna by which soul and body are preserved unto
everlasting life, is the hallowed memorial of the
Lord’s death until His coming again (Lk 22 14-20;
Most common of all were the
local altars and mounds consecrated in simple and
sincere fashion to a belief in God’s ruling and over-
ruling providence (Josh 4 1-10).

Signs were offered in proof of the Divine com-
mission of prophet (Isa 20 3) and apostle (2 Cor
12 12), and of the Messiah Himself (Jn 20 30;
Acts 2 22); and they were submitted in demon-
stration of the Divine character of their message
(2 K 20 9; Isa 38 1; Acts 3 1-16). By antici-
pation the child to be born of a young woman (Isa
7 10-16; cf Lk 2 12) is to certify the prophet’s
pledge of a deliverer for a captive people. See
IMMANUEL.

With increase of faith the necessity for signs will
gradually decrease. Jesus hints at this (Jn 4 48),
as does also Paul (1 Cor 1 22). Nevertheless
“signs,” in the sense of displays of miraculous

owers, are to accompany the faith of believers
(Mk 16 171), usher in and forthwith characterize
the dispensation of the Holy Spirit, and mark the
consummation of the ages (Rev 15 1). See also
MiRACLE.

For “sign” of a ship (wapdonyos, pardsémos,
“ensign,” Acts 28 11) see Dioscuri; Suirs AND
Boats, III, 2. Cuartes M. Stuart

SIGNET, sig’/net. See Sra.

SIGNS, NUMERICAL, ni-mer’i-kal.
BER.


See Num-


; nek S OF THE HEAVENS. See Astronomy,


Sihon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2790


Siloam


SIHON, si’hon (j1"0, sihon): King of the
Amorites, who vainly opposed Israel on their journey
from Egypt to Pal, and who is frequently men-
tioned in the historical books and in the Pss
because of his prominence and as a warning for
those who rise against Jeh and His people (Nu 21
21, and often; Dt 1 4; 31 4; Josh 2 10; Jgs 11 19.


20.21; 131X419; Neh 9 22; Ps 136 11; 136
19; Jer 48 45).
SIHOR, si’hér. See Suipor.


SIHOR-LIBNATH, si’h6r-lib’nath. See SuHrnor-
LIBNATH.


SILAS, si’las (ZAas, Silas, probably contraction
for Zrovaves, Stlouands; the Heb equivalents sug-
gested are WW, shalish, “Tertius,” or M2W,
shelah [Gen 10 24] [Knowling], or 2INW, sha’ al=
“asked” [Zahn]): The Silas of Acts is generally
identified with the Silvanus of the Epp. His
identification with Titus has also been suggested,
based on 2 Cor 1 19; 8 23, but this is very im-


probable (cf Knowling, Expositor’s Gr Test., II, 326). |


Silas, who was probably a Rom citizen (cf Acts
16 37), accompanied Paul during the greater part
of his 2d missionary journey (Acts 15-18). At
the meeting of the Christian community under
James at Jerus, which decided that circumcision
should not be obligatory in the case of gentile
believers, Silas and Judas Barsabas were appointed
along with Paul and Barnabas to convey to the
churches in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia the ep.
informing them of this decision. As “leading men
among the brethren’’ at Jerus, and therefore more
officially representative of the Jerus church than
Paul and Barnabas, Silas and Judas were further
commissioned to confirm the contents of the letter
by ‘word of mouth.” On arrival at Antioch, the
ep. was delivered, and Judas and Silas, “being
themselves also prophets, exhorted the brethren
with many words, and confirmed them.” Their
mission being thus completed, the four were ‘‘dis-
missed in peace from the brethren unto those
that had sent them forth’? (RV), or “unto the
apostles” (AV) (Acts 15 22-33).

Different readings now render the immediate move-


ments of Silas somewhat obscure; ver 33 would imply
that he returned to Jerus. But some texts proceed in


ver 34, ‘Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide there |


still,” and others add “and Judas alone proceeded.”
Of this, the first half is accepted by AV. The principal
texts however reject the whole verse and are followed in
this by RV. It is held hy some that he remained in
Antioch till chosen by Paul (ver 40). Others maintain
that he returned to Jerus where John Mark then was
(cf Acts 13 13); and that either during the interval of
“some days” (Acts 15 36), when the events described
In Gal 2 11 ff took place (Wendt), he returned to Antioch
along with Peter, or that he and John Mark were sum-
moned thither by Paul and Barnabas, subsequent to their
dispnte regarding Mark. (For fuller discussion, see
Knowling, Exposiior's Gr Test., II, 330, 332-35.)


Upon Barnabas’ separation from Paul, Silas was
chosen by Paul in his place, and the two missionaries,
“after being commended by the brethren [at
Antioch) to the grace of the Lord,’”’ proceeded on
their journey (Acts 15 33m-40). Passing through


Syria, Cilicia, Galatia, Phrygia and Mysia, where |


they delivered the decree of the Jerus council and
strengthened the churches, and were joined by
Timothy, they eventually reached Troas (Acts
15 41—16 8). Indications are given that at this
city Luke also became one of their party (cf also the
apocryphal “Acts of St. Paul,” where thisis definitely
stated; Budge, Conlendings of the Apostles, 11, 544).

Upon the call of the Macedonian, the missionary
band set sail for Greece, and after touching at Samo-
thrace, they landed at Neapolis (Acts 16 9-11).


_-


At Philippi, Lydia, a seller of purple, was con-
verted, and with her they made their abode; but
the exorcism of an evil spirit from a sorceress brought
upon Silas and Paul the enmity of her masters,
whose source of gain was thus destroyed. On
being charged before the magistrates with causing a
breach of the peace and preaching false doctrine,
their garments were rent off them and they were
scourged and imprisoned. In no way dismayed,
they prayed and sang hymns to God, and an earth-
quake in the middle of the night secured them a
miraculous release. The magistrates, on learning
that the two prisoners whom they had so maltreated
were Rom citizens, came in person and besought
them to depart out of the city (Acts 16 12-39).
After a short visit to the house of Lydia, where they
held an interview with the brethren, they departed
for Thessalonica, leaving Luke behind (cf Knowling,
op. cit., 354-55). There they made many converts,
esp. among the Greeks, but upon the house of Jason,
their host, being attacked by hostile Jews, they
were compelled to escape by night to Bercea (16 40—
17 10). There they received a better hearing from
the Jews, but the enmity of the Thessalonian Jews
still pursued them, and Paul was conducted for
safety to Athens, Silas and Timothy being left
behind. On his arrival, he dispatched an urgent
message back to Beroea for Silas and Timothy to
rejoin him at that city (17 11-15). The narra-
tive of Acts implies, however, that Paul had left
Athens and had reaehed Corinth before he was
overtaken by his two followers (18 5). Knowling
(op. cit., 363-64) suggests that they may have
actually met at Athens, and that Timothy was
then sent to Thessalonica (cf 1 Thess 3 1.2), and
Silas to Philippi (cf Phil 4 15), and that the three
came together again at Corinth. The arrival of
Silas and Timothy at that city is probably referred to
in 2 Cor 11 9. It is implied m Acts 18 18 that
Silas did not leave Corinth at the same time as Paul,
but no further definite reference is made to him in the
narrative of the 2d missionary journey.

Assuming his identity with Silvanus, he is men-
tioned along with Paul! and Timothy in 2 Cor 1 19
as having preached Christ among the Corinthians
(ef Acts 18 5). In 1 Thess 1 1, and2 Thess 1 1,
the same three send greetings to the church at
Thessalonica (cf Acts 17 1-9). Ini Pet 6 i2heis
mentioned as a “faithful brother” and the bearer of
that letter to the churches of the Dispersion (cf
on this last Knowling, op. cit., 331-32). The theory
which assigns He to the authorship of Silas is unten-
able. C. M. Kerr


SILENCE, si’lens: Five Heb roots, with various
derivatives, and two Gr words are thus tr’. The
word is used lit. for dumbness, interrupted speech,
as in Lam 2 10; Ps 32 3; Eccl 3 7; Am 6 13;
Acts 15 12; 1 Cor 14 28; 1 Tim 2 11.12 AV
(ARV ‘‘quietness”); Rev 8 1, or figuratively of the
unanswered prayers of the believer (Ps 83 1; 35 22;
Jer 8 14); of awe in the presence of the Divine
majesty (isa 41 1; Zec 2 13), or of death (18
29; Ps 94 17; 116 17).


SILK, SILKWORM, silk’wtirm ([1] "0%, meshi
[Ezk 16 10.13), perhapsfrom ¥ MW), mashah, “to
draw,” “to extract’; cf Arab. ne; masa’, of same


meaning; LXX tplxamrov, trichapton, “woven of
hair”; [2] cfptxov, sérikon [Rev 18 12]; [3] WW,


shésh; cf Arab. pls , shdsh, a thin cotton material;
“of


[4] PD, bic; cf Arab. pawl, abyad, “white,”
from ¥ vel, bad; [5] Biooos, bissos, “fine linen,”


2791


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sihon
Siloam


later used of cotton and silk): The only undoubted
reference to silk in the Bible is the passage cited from
Rey, where it is mentioned among the merchandise
of Babylon. Sérikon, “silk,” is from Sér, the Gr
name of China, whence silk was first obtained. The
equivalent Lat sericum occurs frequently in classical


Silkworm.
2. Chrysalis.


1. Moth. 3. Cocoon.

authors, and is found in the Vulg (Est 8 15) for
bie, “fine linen.” For bic, bussos, and shésh EV
has nearly always “fine linen,” but for shésh in
Prov 31 22, AV has “silk,’ and in Gen 41 42
and Ex 25 4, AVm has “‘silk’”’ and RVm has ‘‘cot-
ton.” See Lrvgn; Fine.

There can be little doubt of the correctness of EV
“silk” for mesh? in Ezk 16 10, “I girded thee about
with fine linen [shésh], and covered thee with silk
[mesh7],”’ and in the similar passage, Ezk 16 13.

Silk is produced by all Lepidoptera, butterflies and
moths, but it is of great_economic importance only in
the Chinese silkworm, Bombyx mori, whose larva, a
yellowish-white caterpillar from 2 to 3 in. long, feeds on
the leaves of tue mulberry (Morus). A pair of large
glands on the two sides of the stomach secrete a viscous
fluid, which is conveyed by ducts to an orifice under the
mouth. On issuing into the air, the fine stream is
hardened into the silk fiber, which the caterpillar spins
into a cocoon. Within the cocoon the caterpillar is
presently transformed into the chrysalis or pupa. The
cocoons from which silk is to he spun are subjected to
heat which kills the pupae and prevents them from being
transformed into the perfect insects or moths, which
would otherwise damage the cocoons as they made their
exit.

The raising of silkworms, and the spinning and weav-
ing of silk are now important industries in Syria, though
the insect was unknown in Bible times. It was intro-
duced to the Mediterranean region from China a few
centuries after Christ. Coarse silk is produced from the
Chinese oak silk-moth, Saturnia pernyi, and_from the
Japanese oak silk-moth, Saturnia yama-mai. The largest
moth of Syria and Pal is Saturnia pyri, from which silk
has also been spun, but not commercially. See, further,
WEAVING.

Aurrep Enry Day


SILLA, sil’a (NBO, silla’; B, Todad, Galld, A,
Taadd\48, Gaalléd): Joash was assassinated by his
servants “at the house of Millo, on the way that
goeth down to Silla’ (2 K 12 20). Wherever
Beth-millo stood, Silla was evidently in the valley
below it; but nothing is known of what it was or
where it stood.


SILOAM, si-ld’am, si-lé’am, SILOAH si-lé’a,
SHELAH, shé’la, SHILOAH, shi-lé’a: (1) B-WI,
mé ha-shiloth (shiloh or shillo"h is a passive form
and means “sent” or ‘‘conducted”), “the waters of
[the] Shiloah” (Isa 8 6). (2) M2WM NB7B, bere
khath ha-shelah, “the pool of [the] Shelah” (AV
“Siloah”’) (Neh 315). (8) TH cohvpByOpay Tob
(or 7d) ZAwdy, tén kolumbéthran tow (tn) Siadm,
“the pool of Siloam” (Jn 9 7). (4) 6 mbpyos év 7@
Eadwdu, ho piirgos en ts Silodm, “the tower in Siloam
(Lk 13 4). A ieee ?

Although the name is chiefly used in the OT and
Jos as the name of certain “waters,” the surviving
name today, Silwan, is that of a fairly prosperous
village which extends along the steep east side of
the Kidron valley from a little N. of the “Virgin’s
Fountain” as far as Bir Eyyib. The greater part
of the village, the older and better built section,


belongs to Moslem fellahin who cultivate the well-
watered gardens in the valley and on the hill slopes
opposite, but a southern part has re-


1. The cently been built in an extremely primi-
Modern tivemanner by Yemen Jews, immigrants
Silwan from South Arabia, and still farther


S., in the commencement of the Wady
en Nér, is the wretched settlement of the lepers.
How long the site of Silwdén has been occupied it is
impossible to say. The village is mentioned in the
10th cent. by the Arab writer Mukaddasi. The
numerous rock cuttings, steps, houses, caves, ete,
some of which have at times served as chapels,
show that the site has been much inhabited in the
past, and at one period at least by hermits. The
mention of ‘those eighteen, upon whom the tower
in Siloam fell, and killed them” (Lk 13 4) certainly
suggests that there was a settlement there in NT
times, although some writers consider that this may
have reference to some tower on the city walls near
the Pool of Siloam.

Opposite to the main part of Silwén is the
“Virgin’s Fount,” ancient GriHoN (q.v.), whose
waters are practically monopolized by


2. The the villagers. It is the waters of
Siloam this spring which are referred to in
Aqueduct Isa 8 5.6: ‘‘Forasmuch as this people

have refused the waters of Shiloah that
go softly, .... now therefore, behold, the Lord


bringeth up upon them the waters of the River.”


(
¢


Serpentine Course of Siloam Aqucduct.


The contrast between the little stream flowing from
the Gihon and the great Euphrates is used as a
figure of the vast difference between the apparent
strength of the little kingdom of Judah and the
House of David on the one hand, and the might of
“Rezin and Remaliah’s son” and “all his glory.”
Although it is quite probable that in those days there
was an open streamlet in the valley, yet the meaning
of Shiloah, “sent” or ‘‘conducted,” rather implies


Siloam
Simeon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2792


some kind of artificial channel, and there is also
archacological evidence that some at least of the
waters of Gihon were even at that time conducted
by a rock-cut aqueduct along the side of the KKidron
valley (see JERUSALEM, V1], 5). It was not, how-
ever, till the days of Hezekiah that the great tunnel
aqueduct, Siloam’s most famous work, was made
(2 K 20 20): “Hezekiah also stopped the upper
spring of the waters of Gihon, and brought them
straight down on the west side of the City of David”’
(2 Ch 32 30); ‘They stopped all the fountains,
and the brook [nakal] that flowed through the
midst of the land, saying, Why should the kings of
Assyria come, and find much water?” (2 Ch 32 4;
Ecclus 48 17). Probably the exit of the water at
Gihon was entirely covered up and the water flowed
through the 1,700 ft. of tunnel and merged in the
pool made for it (now known as the Birket Silwdn)
near the mouth of the Tyropewon valley. This
extraordinary winding aqueduct along which the
waters of the “Virgin’s Fount’’ still flow is described
in Jerusatem, VII, 4 (q.v.). The lower end of
this tunnel which now emerges under a modern
arch has long been known as ‘Ain Silwdn, the
“Fountain of Siloam,’’ and indeed, until the redis-
covery of the tunnel connecting this with the
Virgin’s Fount (a fact known to some in the 13th
cent., but by no means generally known until the
last century), it was thought this was simply a spring.
So many springs all over Pal issne from artificial
tunnels—it is indeed the rule in Judaea—that the
mistake is natural. Jos gives no hint that he knew
of so great a work as this of Hezckiah’s, and in the
5th cent. a church was erected, probably by the
empress Eudoxia, at this spot, with the high altar
over the sacred “‘spring.’”’ The only pilgrim who
mentions this church is Antonius Martyr (c 570),
and after its destruction, probably by the Persians in
614, it was entirely lost sight of until excavated by
Messrs. Bliss and Dickie. It is a church of extraor~
dinary architectural features; the floor of the center

aisle 1s still visible.
The water from the Siloam aqueduct, emerging
at ‘Ain Silwén, flows today into a narrow shallow
pool, approached by a steep flight of


3. The modern steps; from the southern
“Pool of extremity of this pool the water crosses
Siloam” under the modern road by means of


an aqueduct, and after traversing a
deeply cut rock channel below the scarped cliffs
on the north side of el-JVdd, it crosses under the
main road up the Kidron and enters a ntimber
of channels of irrigation distributed among tbe
gardens of the people of Szlwdén. The water here,
as at its origin, is brackish and impregnated with
sewage.

The modern Birket es-Silwén is but a poor sur-
vivor of the fine pool which once was here. Bliss
showed by his excavations at the site that once
there was a great rock-cut pool, 71 ft. N. and S., by
75 ft. E. and W., which may, in part at least, have
been the work of Hezekiah (2 Ik 20 20), approached
by asplendid flight of steps along its west side. The
pool was surrounded by an arcade 12 ft. wide and
222 ft. high, and was divided by a central arcade,
to make in all probability a pool for men and
another for women. These buildings were probably
Herodian, if not earlier, and therefore this, we may
reasonably picture, was the condition of the pool
at the time of the incident in Jn 9 7, when
Jesus sent the blind man to ‘“‘wash in the pool of
Siloam.”

This pool is also probably the Pool of Shelah
described in Neh 3 15 as lying between the Foun-
tain Gate and the King’s Garden. Jt may also
be the “king’s pool” of Neh 2 14. lf we were in
any doubt regarding the position of the pool of


Siloam, the explicit statement of Jos (BJ, V, iv, 1)
that the fountain of Siloam, which he says was a
plentiful spring of sweet water, was at the mouth of
the Tyropeon would make us sure.


A little helow this pool, at the very mouth of el- Wad, is
a dry pool, now a vegetable garden, known as Birket el


Hamra_ (‘the red pool’). For many

4. The years the sewage of Jerus found its way to
Birket this spot, but when in 1904 an ancient city
HAASE sewer was rediscovered (see PEFS, 1904,
el Hamra 392-94), the sewage was diverted and the


site was sold to the Gr convent which
surrounded it with a wall. Although this is no longer a
pool, there is no douht but that hereabouts there existed
a pool because the great and massive dam which Bliss
excavated here (see Jerusatem, VI, 5) had clearly been
made originally to support a large hody of water. It is
commonly supposed that the original pool here was
older than the Birket Silwén, having heen fed by an
aqueduct which was constructed from Gihon along the
side of the Kidron valley hefore Hezekiah's great tunnel.
If this is correct (and excavations are needed here to
confirm this theory), then this may be the ‘'lower pool’’
referred to in Isa 22 9, the waters of which Hezekiah
‘‘stopped,"’ and perhaps, too, that described in the same
passage as the ‘‘old pool.”


The earliest known Heb inscription of any length
was accidentally discovered near the lower end of the
Siloam aqueduct in 1880, and reported


5. The by Dr. Schick. It was inscribed upon
Siloam a rock-smoothed surface about 27 in.
Aqueduct square, some 15 ft. from the mouth


of the aqueduct; it was about 8 ft.

above the bottom of the channel on the east side.
The inscription consisted of six lines in archaic Heb,
and has been tr by Professor Sayce as follows:

(1) Behold the excavation. Now this [is] the history
of the tunnel: while the excavators were still lifting up

(2) The pick toward each other, and while there were
yet three cuhits [to he broken through] . . . . the voice
of the one called

(3) To his neighhor, for there was an [?] ercess in the
rock on the right. They rose up... . they struck on
the west of the

(4) Excavation; the excavators struck, each to mect
the other, pick to pick. And there flowed

(5) The waters from their outlet to the pool for a
thousand, two hundred cubits; and [?]

(6) Of a cubit, was the height of the rock over the
head of the excavators ....


It is only a roughly scratched inscription of the
nature of a graftito; the flowing nature of the
writing is fully explained by Dr. Reissner’s recent
discovery of ostraca at Samaria written with pen
arid ink. It is not an official inscription, and con-
sequently there is no kingly name and no date, but
the prevalent view that it was made by the work
people who carried out Hezekiah’s great work (2 K
20 20) is now further confirmed by the character of
the Heb in the ostraca which Reissner dates as of the
time of Ahab.

Unfortunately this priceless monument of antjq-
uity was violently removed from its place by some
miscreants. The fragments have been collected and
are now pieced together in the Constantinople
museum. Fortunately several excellent “‘squeezes”
as well as transcriptions were made before the
inscription was broken up, so that the damage
done is to be regretted rather on sentimental than
on literary grounds. E. W. G. Masrerman


SILOAM, TOWERIN. See JmarusaLem; SiLOAM.


sil-v4/nus Silouands


See Sinas.


SILVANUS,
[2 Cor 1 19}).


(ZtAovavds,


SILVER, sil'vér (OD , keseph; apyiprov, argiirion,
&pyupos, drguros): Silver was known in the earliest
historic times. Specimens of early Egyp and Bab
silver work testify to the skill of the ancient
silversmiths. in Pal, silver objects have bcen
found antedating the occupation of the land by


2793


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Siloam
Simeon


the Hebrews. This mctal was used for making
all kinds of ornamental objects. In the mound
of Gezer were found bowls, vases, ladles, hair-
pins, rings and bracelets of silver. The rings and
settings for scarabs or seals were commonly of
this metal. The first mention of silver in the
Bible is in Gen 13 2, where it says that Abraham
was rich in cattle, in silver and gold. At that time
it was commonly used in exchange in the form of
bars or other shapes. Coins of that metal were of a
touch later date (Gen 20 16; 28 15; 24 53; 37 28,
etc). Booty was collected in silver (Josh 6 19);
tribute was paid in the same (1 K 15 19). It was
also used for jewelry (Gen 44 2). The Children
of Israel systematically despoiled the Egyptians of
their silver before the exodus (Ex 3 22; 11 2;
12 35, etc). Ex 20 23 implies that idols were
made of it. Jt was largely used in the fittings of the
Bee (Ex 26 ff) and later of the temple (2 Ch

It is likely that the ancient supply of silver came
from the mountains of Asia Minor where it is still
found in abundance associated with lead as argentif-
erous galena, and with copper sulphide. The Turk-
ish. government mines this silver on shares with the
natives. The Sinaitic peninsula prohably also
furnished some silver. Later Phoen ships brought
quantities of it from Greece and Spain. The Arabi-
an sources are doubtful (2 Ch 9 14). Although
silver does not tarnish readily in the air, it does
corrode badly in the limestene soil of Pal and Syria.
This probably partly accounts for the small number
of objects of this metal found. On the site of the
ancient jewelers’ shops of Tyre the writer found
objects of gold, bronze, lead, iron, but none of
silver.

Figurative: Silver to be as stones in Jerus (1 K
10 27) typified great abundance (cf Job 3 15,
22 25; 27 16; also Isa 60 17; Zec 9 3). The try-
ing of men’s hearts was compared to the refining of
silver (Ps 66 10; Isa 48 10). Jeh’s words were as
pure as silver refined seven times (Ps 12 6). The
gaining of understanding is better than the gaining
of silver (Prov 3 14; cf 8 19; 10 20; 16 16; 22 1;
25 11). Silver become dross denoted deterioration
(Isa 1 22; Jer 6 30). Breast and arms of silver
was interpreted by Daniel to mean the inferior
kingdom to follow Nebuchadnezzar’s (Dnl 2 32.
39).

Th the NT, reference should be made esp. to Acts
19 24; Jas 63; Rev 1812. James A. Patcu


SILVERLING, sil’vér-ling (19D O28, ’eleph
keseph (Isa 7 23]): ‘A thousand of silver’ means a
thousand shekels. See Pisce or Stiver.


SILVERSMITH, sil’vér-smith (apyvpoxéos,
arguroképos): Mentioned only once (Acts 19 24),
where reference is made to Demctrius, a leading
member of the silversmiths’ guild of Ephesus.

AV =RV_ Imatcuge


SIMALCUE, si-mal-ki’é:


(q.v.).


SIMEON, sim’é-on (JW, shim'on; Supedv,
Sumeén; the Heb root is from JW, shama', “to
hear” [Gen 29 33]; some modern scholars (Hitzig,
W. R. Smith, Stade, etc] derive it from Arab. sima’,
“the offspring of the hyena and female wolf”):
In Gen 29 33; 30 18-21; 35 23, Simeon is given
as full brother to Reuben, Levi, Judah, Issachar and
Zebulun, the son of Leah, and_in Gen 34 25;
49 5 as the brother of Levi and Dinah. He was
left as a hostage in Egypt by orders of Joseph (Gen
42 24; 43 23).


In the “blessing” of the dying Jacob, Simeon and
Levi are linked together:


“Simeon and Levi are brethren;


1. The Weapons of violence are their swords.
Patriarch: Omysoul, come not thon into their council;
Biblical Unto their assembly, my glory, be not thou
Data united;


For in their anger they slew a man,
And in their self-will they hocked an ox.
Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce;

And their wrath, for it was cruel:

I will divide them in Jacoh,

And scatter them in Israeli’ (Gen 49 5-7).


Whatever view may be taken of the events of
Gen 34 25 (and some would sec in it ‘‘a tradition
of the settlement of Jacob which belongs to a
cycle quite independent of the descent into Egypt
and the Exodus” [see 8. A. Cook, Enc Brit, art.
“Simeon”’]), it is clear that we have here a reference
to it and the suggestion that the subsequent history
of the tribe, and its eventual absorption in Judah,
was the result of violence. In the same way the
priestly Levites became distributed throughout the
other tribes without any tribal inheritance of their
own (Dt 18 1; Josh 13 14). From the mention
(Gen 46 10; Ex 6 15) of Shaul as heing the son of
a Canaanite woman, it may be supposed that the
tribe was a mixed one.

In the “blessing of Moses’’ (Dt 33) Simeon is not
mentioned at all m the Heb text, although in some
MSS of LXX the latter half of ver 6 is made to
apply to him: ‘Let Simeon he a small company.”
The history of the tribe is scanty and raises many
problems. Of the many theories advanced to
meet them it cannot be said that any one answers
all difficulties.

In the wilderness of Sinai the Simeonites camped
beside the Reubenites (Nu 2 12; 10 19); it was

Zimri, a member of one of the leading


2. The families of this tribe, who was slain by
Tribe in Phinehasin the affair of Baal-peor (Nu
Scripture 26 14). The statistics in Nu 1 22f,


where the Simeonites are given as
59,300, compared with the 2d census (Nu 26 14),
where the numhers are 22,200, indicate a diminish-
ing tribe. Some have connected this with the sin of
Zimri.

At the recital of the law at Mt. Gerizim, Simeon
is mentioned first among those that were to respond
to the blessings (Dt 27 12). In the conquest
of Canaan ‘Judah said unto Simecn his brother,
Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight
against the Canaanites; and I likewise will go with
thee into thy lot. So Simeon went with him”
(Jgs 13; cf ver 17). (Many scholars find in
Gen 34 a tribal attempt on the part of the Simeon-
ites to gain possession of Shechem; if this is so,
Judah did not assist, and the utter failure may
have been a cause of Simeon’s subsequent depend-
ence upon, and final absorption in, Judah.) In
Jgs 4 and 6 Simeon is never mentioned. In the
settlement of the land there is no account of how
Simeon established himself in his territory (except
the scanty reference in Jgs 1 3), but “their inherit-
ance was in the midst of the inheritance of the
children of Judah” (Josh 19 1); this is accounted
for (ver 9), ‘for the portion of the children of Judah
was too much for them.” Nevertheless we find
there the very cities which are apportioned to
Simeon, allotted to Judah (Josh 16 21-32; cf
Neh 11 26-29). It is suggested (iu 1 Ch 4 31)
that the independent possession of these cities
ceased in the time of David. David sent spoil to
several Simeonite towns (18 30 26f), and in
1 Ch 12 25 it is recorded that 7,100 Simeonite
warriors came to David in Hebron. In 1 Ch 27 16
we have mention of a ruler of the Simeonites,
Shephatiah, son of Maacah.


Simeon
Simon Magus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2794


In 1 Ch 4 39f mention is made of certain iso-
lated exploits of Simeonites at GEpoR (q.v.),
against the Meunrm (q.v.), and at Mr. Serr (q.v.).
Later references associate certain Simeonites with
the Northern Kingdom (2 Ch 15 9; 34 6), and
tradition has come to view them as oue of the ten
tribes (cf Ezk 48 24.25.33; Rev 7 7), although all
the history of them we have is bound up with
Judah and the Southern Kingdom. There is no
mention of the return of any Simeonites after the
captivity; their cities fall to Judah (Neh 11 26 f).

It has been supposed by many authorities that
the name Shim‘an occurs in the list of places


plundered by Thothmes III (see
3. Refer- Petrie, Hist, I, 104;. also Hommel,
ences in AHT, 268; Sayce, Early Heb Tra-
Egyp and ditions, 392). In the 7th cent. we
AssyrIn- have a doubtful reference iu an inscrip-
scriptions tion of Esar-haddon relating his Egyp


campaign when a city Ap-kw is men-
tioned as in the country of Sa-me-n(a), which may
possibly be a reference to Simeon. The survival of
the name so late, if true, is strange, in the light of
what we gather from the Bible about the tribe.
(For discussion of both of these inscriptions, with
references to the lit., see #B, coll. 4528-30.)
The cities of Simeon as given in Josh 19 2-6
and I Ch 4 28.31 are (the names in parentheses
are variations in the latter reference):


4. The Beer-sheba, Moladah, Hazar-shual,
Territory Balah (Bilhah), Azem (AV) (Ezem),
of Simeon Eltolad (Tolad), Bethuel, Hormah,


Ziklag, Beth-marcaboth, Hazar-susah
(IIazar Susim), Beth-lebaoth (Beth-biri), Sharuhen
(Shaaraim) (Etam), Ain Rimmon, Ether (Tochen),
Ashan—in all, 16 cities in Josh and 17 in 1 Ch.
Ashan (1 Ch 6 59) is the only one assigned to the
priests. It is written wrongly as “Ain” in Josh 21
16. All the above cities, with certain variations in
form, and with the exception of Etam in 1 Ch 4 32,
which is probably a mistake, occur in the list of
the cities of Judah (Josh 15 26-32.42). Ziklag is
mentioned (I 8 27 6) as being the private property
of the kings of Judah from the days of David, who
received it from Achish, king of Gath.

For the situation of these cities, so far as is known,
see separate arts. under their names. It is clear
that they were all situated in the southwestern part
of Pal, and that Simeon had no definite territorial
boundaries, but isolated cities, with their villages,
among those of the people of Judah.

: : : E. W. G. Masterman

SIMEON (]1'RU, shim‘n; Bupedv, Sumedn):

(1) The 2d son of Jacob by Leah (see separate
art.).

(2) Great-grandfather of Judas
(1 Mace 2 1)

(3) A man in Jerus described as “righteous and
devout, looking for the consolation of Israel.”
When the infant Jesus was brought into the Temple,
he took Him into his arms and blessed God in words
which are famous as the Nunc dimittis. Simeon
bestowed his blessing on the wondering father and
mother (Lk 2 25.34). Legend has made him the
son of Hillel and father of Gamaliel I, but this has
no historical basis.

(4) An ancestor (Lk 3 30); RV
“Symeon.”

(5) RV “Symeon’: one of the prophets and
teachers in the Christian community at Antioch.
He is also called Niger, which was the gentile name
he had assumed, Symeon being Heb. He was
among those who set apart Paul and Barnabas for
their missionary work (Acts 13 1.2). Nothing
more is known of him.

(6) RV “Symeon”:
Peter (Acts 15 14).


Maccabaeus


of Jesus


the Heb name of Simon
S. F. Hunter


SIMEON (NIGER, ni’jér):
RV “Symeon”’ (q.v.).


AV iu Acts 13 1,


SIMEONITTES, sim’é-on-its. See Simeon.
SIMILITUDE, si-mil’i-tid: In AV means either
“an exact facsimile’ (Ps 106 20 AV, RV “‘like-
ness’; Rom 6 14, etc), or else “the form itself’’
(Nu 12 8; Dt 4 12.15.16 for tminah, ‘form’
[so RV]); cf Likeness. ERV has retained the word
in 2 Ch 4 3; Dnl 10 16 (ARV “likeness’’), while
ERV and ARV have used “‘similitudes” in Hos 12
10 (WAIT, damah, “be like”). The meaning is “T
have inspired the prophets to speak parables.”


SIMON (Zipev, Simon, Gr form of SimEon [q.v.]):
The persons of the name of Simon mentioned in the
Apocrypha are:

(1) Simon the Maccabean (Hasmonean), sur-
named Tuassr (q.v.), the 2d son of Mattathias
and elder brother of Judas Maccabaeus. On his
deathbed, Mattathias commended Simon as a “man
of counsel” to be a “father” to his brethren (1 Macc
2 65), and a ‘‘man of counsel” he proved himself.
But it was not till after the death of Judas and the
capture of Jonathan that he played the chief réle.
Dispatched by Judas with a force to the relief of
the Jews in Galilee he fought with great success
(6 17 ff; Jos, Ant, XII, vii, 1 f). We find him
next taking revenge along with Jonathan on the
“children of Jambri” (1 Mace 9 33 ff), and coéper-
ating in the successful Campaign arouud Bethbasi
against Bacchides (ec 156 BC) (9 62 ff), and in the
campaign agaiust Apollonius (10 74 ff). In the
conflict between Tryphon and Demetrius II, Simon
was appointed by Antiochus VI “captain from the
Ladder of Tyre uuto the borders of Egypt” (11 59).
After the capture of Jonathan at Ptolemais by
Tryphon, Simon became acknowledged leader of his
party. Hethwarted Tryphon in his attempts upon
Jerus, in revenge for which the latter murdered
Jonathan (13 23). Simon then took the side of
Demetrius on condition of immunity for Judaea, and
so ‘in the 170th year’ (143-142 BC) ‘the yoke of
the heatheu was taken away from Israel’ (13 41).
Simon applied himself to rebuild the strongholds
of Judaea, reduced Gazara, captured the Acra
(citadel) and made Joppa a seaport. He showed
his wisdom most of all in his internal administration:
“He sought the good of his country”; commerce
and agriculture revived; lawlessness was suppressed,
and “‘the land had rest all the days of Simon”
(14 4 ff). His power was acknowledged by
Sparta and Rome (14 16ff). In 14f BC he
was appointed by the nation leader, high priest
and captain ‘for ever, until there should arise a
faithful prophet” (14 41 ff), and thus the Hasmo-
neau dynasty was founded. A new chronological
era began with the first year of his administration,
and he minted his own coins. A few years later
Simon again meddled in Syrian politics (139 BC),
this time at the entreaty of Antiochus VII (Sidetes)
in his contest against Tryphon; when, however,
Antiochus was assured of success, he refused the
help of Simon and sent Cendebaeus against Judaea.
Judas and John, sons of Simon, defeated the in-
vaders near Modin (137-136 BC). In 135 BC
Simon met his death by treachery. Ptolemy the
son of Abubus, Simon’s own son-in-law, determined
to secure supreme power for himself and, in order to
accomplish this, to assassinate the whole family of
Simon. He accordingly invited Simon and his sons
to a banquet in the stronghold of Dok near Jericho,
where he treacherously murdered Simon with his
two sons Mattathias and Judas. The other son,
John Hyrcanus, governor of Gazara, received inti-
mation of the plot and saved himself to become


2795


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Simeon
Simon Magus


the head of the Hasmonean dynasty. ‘The sig-
nificance of Simon’s administration consists in this,
that_he completed the work of Jonathan and left
the Jewish people absolutely independent of Syria”
(Schiirer). See Maccapagvs, II, 4.

(2) Simon I, the high priest, son of Onias I,
whom he succeeded ¢ 300 BC. He was one of the
last of the Great Synagogue, and to him is attributed
the saying, ‘On three things the world depends—
the Law, worship and the showing of kindness.”’
According to Jos (Ant, XII, ii, 5) this Simon was
called “the Just”’ (6 dixatos, ho dikatos), ‘‘on account
of his piety and his benevolent disposition toward
his countrymen.”


Many authorities (Herzfeld, Derenbourg, Stanley,
Cheyne) assert that Jos is wrong in attaching this epi-
thet to Simon [ instead of Simon II, and Schirer is not
certain on this question. But the Talm passage which
Derenbourg cites means the opposite of what he takes it,
viz. it is intended to show how splendid and holy were
the days of Simeon (ha-caddik) compared with the later
days. Besides, Jos is more likely to have known the
truth on this matter than these later authorities. The
same uncertainty ohtains as to whether the eulogium
in Sir 50 1 ff of ‘‘the great priest’’ refers to Simon [ or
Simon II. Schtirer and others refer it to Simon II.
It is more likely to refer to the Simon who was famous
as ‘‘the Just,’ and consequently to Simon I. Besides
we know of no achievements of Simon II to entitle him
to such praise. The huilding operations mentioned
would suit the time of Simon [ hetter, as Ptolemy cap-
tured Jerus and probahly caused considerable destruc-
tion. The Talm states that this Simon (and not Jaddua)
met Alexander the Great.


(3) Simon II, high priest, son of Onias IT and
grandson of Simon I and father of Onias III,
flourished about the end of the 3d cent. BC, and was
succeeded by his son Onias JII ¢ 198 BC. Jos
says that this Simon in the conflict of the sons of
Joseph sided with the elder sons against Hyrcanus
the younger. Schiirer (probably incorrectly) thinks
he is the Simon praised in Sir 50 1ff. See (2)
above (3 Mace 2 1; Jos, Ant, XII, iv, 10).

(4) Simon, a Benjamite, guardian of the temple,
who, having quarreled with the high priest Onias ITT,
informed Apollonius of the untold sums of money
in the temple treasury. Apollonius laid the matter
before the king Seleucus IV, who sent Heliodorus
to remove the money. An apparition prevented
Heliodorus from accomplishing his task (2 Mace
3 4ff). It is further recorded, that Simon con-
tinued his opposition to Onias. He is spoken of as
brother of the renegade Menelaus (4 23). Of his
end we know nothing.

(5) Simon Chosameus (B [and Swete], Xocduaos,
Chosdmaos, A, Xocopuaios, Chosomatos), one of the sons
of Annas who had married ‘‘strange wives” (1 Esd
9 32). Simon apparently=“Shimeon” (shem‘dn)
of the sons of Harim (Ezr 10 31); Chosameus is
probably a corruption standing in the place of, but
not resembling, any of the three names: Benjamin,
Malluch, Shemaraiah, which Esd omits from the Ezr


list. ANGUS
SIMON, si’mon (Zipov, Simon):
(1) Simon Peter. See PETER (Stmon).
(2) Another of the Twelve, Simon ‘the Cana-


naean” (Mt 10 4; we 3 18), “the Zealot” (Lk 6
15; Acts 1 13). See Cananazan.

(3) One of Whe brethren of Jesus (Mt 13 55;
Mk 6 3). See BRETHREN OF THE Lorp.

(4) ‘The leper” in Bethany, in whose house
a woman poured a cruse of precious ointment over
the head of Jesus (Mt 26 6; Mk 14 3). He had
perhaps been healed by Jesus; in that case his
ungracious behavior was not consistent with due
gratitude. However he was healed, the title
referred to his condition in the past, as lepers were
ostracized by law. | .

5) A Pharisee in whose house a woman, 4
sinner,” wet the feet of Jesus with her tears, and


anointed them with ointment (Lk 7 36 ff). By
some he is identified with (4), this being regarded
as Luke’s version of the incident recorded in Mt 26
and Mk 14. Others as strongly deny this view.
For discussion see Mary, 1V.

(6) A man of Cyrene, who was compelled to carry
the cross of Jesus (Mt 27 32; Mk 15 21; Lk 23
26). Mark calls him ‘‘the father of Alexander and
Rufus,” well-known members of the church at
(probably) Rome (cf Acts 19 33; Rom 16 18).
See CYRENIAN.

(7) The father of Judas Iscariot (Jn 6 71; 12
4 AV, RV omits; 13 2.26).

(8) Simon Magus (Acts 8 9 ff).
article.

(9) Simon, the tanner, with whom Peter lodged
at Joppa. His house was by the seaside outside
the city wall, because of its ceremonial uncleanncss
to a Jew, and also for reasons of sanitation (Acts
9 48). S. F. Hunter


SIMON MAGUS, ma’gus (Zipev, Simdn, Gr
form of Heb JWAW, shim‘dn; Gesenius gives the
meaning of the Heb word as “hearing with accept-


ance’; it is formed from ¥ YW, shama', “to
hear’):
1. Simon, a Magician
2. Simon and the Apostles
(1) Simon and Philip
(2) Simon and Peter and John
The Magicians and the Gospel
. Testimony of Early Christian Writers
Sources of Legendary History
. Traditions of His Death
The Simoniani
. Was Simon the Originator of Gnosticism ?
The name or term ‘‘Magus” is not given to him
in the NT, but is justly used to designate or par-
ticularize him on account of the inci-
1. Simon, dent recorded in Acts 8 9-24, for
a Magician though the word “Magus” does not
occur, yet in ver 9 the present participle
mageton is used, and is tr, both in AV and in RV,
“used sorcery.” Simon accordingly was a sorcerer,
he “bewitched the people of Samaria” (AV). In
ver 11 it is also said that ‘‘of long time he had
amazed” them ‘with his sorceries’’ (magiais). The
claim, given out by himself, was that he ‘was some
great one”; and this claim was acknowledged by
the Samaritans, for previous to the introduction of
the gospel into Samaria, “they all gave heed [to
him], from the least to the greatest, saying, This
man is that power of God which is called Great”
(ver 10).
(1) It so happened, however, that Philip the
deacon and evangelist went down from Jerus to
Samaria, and “proclaimed unto them


See separatc


DWNAIBO


2. Simon’ the Christ” (ver 5); and as the result
and the of the proclamation of the gospel,
Apostles many were gathered into the Chris-


tian church. Many miracles also were
performed by Philip, sick persons cured, and de-
mons cast out; and Simon fell under the influence
of all these things, both of the preaching and of
‘“thesigns.” So great was theimpression now made
upon Simon that he “believed” (ver 13). This
means, at least, that he saw that Philip was able
in the name of Jesus Christ to display powers
greater than anything he himself was acquainted
with: Philip’s power was greater by far than
Simon’s. He therefore came forward as one of the
new converts, and was baptized. After his baptism
he continued with Philip. The signs which accom-
panied the introduction of the gospel into this city
did not cease, and Simon seeing them ‘‘was amazed.”
The word denoting Simon’s amazement at the
“signs” wrought by Philip is the same as that used
to express how the people of Samaria bad been


Simon Magus
Simon the Zealot


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2796


amazed at Simon’s sorceries. It is an indication
of the nature of the faith which he possessed in the
gospel—wondering amazement at a new phenome-
non wot yet understood, not repentance or trust in
Christ.

(2) News having reached Jerus of the events
which had occurred in Samaria, the apostles sent
Peter and John to establish the work there. These
two apostles prayed for the converts that they might
receive the Holy Ghost, which they had not yet
received. And when they had laid their hands upon
the converts, the Spirit was given to them. At this
early period in the history of the church the Holy
Ghost. was bestowed in a visible manner which
showed itself in such miraculous gifts as are de-
scribed in Acts 2. Simon saw what had taken
place, and then, instead of joining the company of
those who had truly repented and trusted Christ,
he came forward with the same amazement as he
had previously shown, and offered money to Peter
and John, if they would impart to him the power of
giving the Holy Ghost to others. Peter instantly
rebuked this bold and ungodly request, and did so
with such sternness as to cause Simon to ask that
the judgment threatened by the apostle might not
fall upon him.

Such is the unenviable history of Simon Magus,
as it is recorded in the NT. Later centuries have
shown their estimation of the heinousness of
Simon’s sin by employing his name to indicate the
crime of buying or selling a spiritual office for a
price in money—‘‘simony.”

It is not strange to find the gospel brought into
direct conflict with magicians, for in the lst and

2d _ cents. there were a multitude of


3. The such persons who pretended to possess
Magicians supernatural powers by which they
and the endeavored to deceive men. They
Gospel flattered the sinful inclinations of the


human heart, and fell in with men’s
current ways of thinking, and required no self-
renunciation atall. For these reasons the magicians
found a ready belief on the part of many. The
emperor Tiberius, in his later years, had a host of
magicians in constant attendance upon him. Ely-
mas, with whom Paul came in contact in Cyprus
“was with the deputy of the country, Sergius Paulus,
a prudent man” (Acts 13 7 AV). Elymas was one
of those magicians, and he endeavored to turn away
the deputy from thefaith. Lukeexpressly calls this
man “magus,” Elymas the magus (Acts 13 6.8 m).
The influence of such persons presented an ob-
stacle to the progress of the Christian faith, which
had to force its way through the delusions with
which these sorcerers had surrounded the hearts of
those whom they deceived. When the gospel came
in contact with these magicians and with their
works, it was necessary that there should be strik-
ing facts, works of supernatural power strongly
appealing to men’s outward senses, in order to
bring them out of the bewilderment and deception
in which they were involved, and to make them
able to receive the impression of spiritual truth.
Such miracles were wrought both in Cyprus and in
Samaria, the spheres of influence of the magicians
Elymas and Simon. These Divine works first
arrested men’s attention, and then dispelled the
delusive influence of the sorcerers.
(1) The history of Simon Magus does not close
with what is narrated in the Acts, for the early
Christian writers have much to say in


4. Said regard to him.

Early o Justin Martyr, himself a Samaritan,
ty states that Simon Magus was a ‘‘ Samari-

Writers tan from the village called Gittén.”” Justin


also relates that, in the time of Claudius
Caesar, Simon was worshipped as a god at Rome on
account of his magical powers, and that a statue had


been erected to him, on the island in the river Tiber,
with the inscription Simoni Deo Sancto, that is, ‘‘To
Simon the sacred god.” Curiously enough, in the year
1574, a stone which appears to have served as a pedestal
of a statue, was dug up in the Tiber at the spot
described by Justin; and on it were inscribed the words
Semoni Sanco Deo Fidio Sacrum, that is, the stone
then discovered was dedicated to the god Semo Sancus,
the Sabine Hercules. This antiquarian find makes
it probable that Justin was mistaken in what he said
about a statue having been erected in honor of Simon
Magus. ‘It is incredible that the folly should ever
be carried to such an extent as that a statue should
be erected, and the senate should pass a decree enroll-
ing Simon Magus among the deos Romanos'’ (Neander,
Church History, 11,123). The inscription found in 1574
shows the source of the error into which Justin had fallen.

There are many stories told hy some of the early Chris-
tian writers regarding Simon Magus, hut they are full
of legend and fable: some of them are improbable in the
extreme and border on the impossible.

(2) Jerome, who professes to quote from writings of
Simon, represents him as employiug these words in refer-
ence to himself, ‘‘I am the Word of God, I am the Com-
forter, I am Almighty, I am all there is of God" (Mansel,
The Gnostic Heresies, 82). Irenaeus (Mansel, ib, 82)
writes regarding him: ‘Simon, having purchased a cer-
tain woman named Helena, who had been a prostitute in
the city of Tyre, carried her about with him, and said
that she was the first couception of his mind, the mother
of all things, by whom, in the beginning, he conceived the
thought of making the angels aud archangels; for that
this conception proceeded forth from him, and knowing
her father's wishes, she descended to the lower world, and
produced the angels and powers; by whom also he said
that this world was made. But after she had produced
them, she was detained by them through envy, since
they were unwilling to he considered the offspring of
any Other being; for he himself was entirely unknown hy
them; but his conception was detained by those powers
and angels which were put forth from her, and suffered
every insult from them that she might not return upward
to her father; and this went so far that she was even
confined within a human body, and for ages passed into
other female bodies, as if from_one vessel into another.
He said also that she was that Helen, on whose account
the Trojan war wasfought . .. . and that after passing
from one body to another, and constantly meeting with
insult, at last she became a public prostitute, and that
this was the lostsheep. On this account he himself came,
that he might first of all reclaim her and free her from
her chains, and then give salvation to men through the
knowledge of himself. For since the angels ruled the
world badly, because one of them desired the chief place,
he had come down for the restoration of all things, and
had descended, being changed in figure, and made like
to principalities and powers aud angels, so that he
appeared among men as a man, and was thought to have
suffered in Judaea, though he did not suffer. ....
Furthermore he said that the prophets uttered their
prophecies under the inspiration of those angels who
ramed the world; for which reason they who rest their
hope on him and his Helena no longer cared for them,
but as free men could act as they pleased, for that men
are saved hy his [i.e. Simon's] grace, and not according
to their owu just works, for that no acts were just by
nature, but by accident, according to the rules estab-
lished by the angels, who made the world, and who
attempt by these precepts to bring men iuto bondage.
For this reasou he promised that the world should be
released, and those who are his set at liherty from the
government of those who made the world."’


The chief sources of the legendary history of
Simon Magus are the collection of writings known
as The Clementines (see LITERATURE,

5. Sources Sus-aposTouic; Peter, First Epistip


of Legend- ofr; Prrrer, Seconp EpistiE oF).
ary His- What is there said of him is, that he
tory studied at Alexandria, and that he


had been, along with the heresiarch
Dositheus, a disciple of John the Baptist. He be-
came also a disciple of Dositheus, and afterward
his successor. The Clementines comprise (1) The
Homilies, (2) The Recognitions, and (3) The Epit-
ome. These three are cognate works, and in part
are identical. The date of The Homilies may
be placed about 160 AD. The contents comprise
a supposed letter from the apostle Peter to the
apostle James, along with other matter. Then
follow the homilies, of which there are twenty.
These record the supposed travels of Clement, a
Rom citizen. Clement meets with Barnabas and
with Peter. Then there is narrated a discussion
between Peter and Simon Magus. This disputation


2797


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Simon Magus
Simon the Zealot


lasts for three days, Simon maintaining that there
are two gods, and that the God of the OT is an
imperfect being. Simon Magus withdraws to Tyre
and then to Sidon. Peter follows Simon from place
to place, counteracting his sorceries, and instrueting
the people. At Laodicea a second disputation takes
place between the apostle and Simon on the same
subjects.

The Homilies are not a Christian protest against
Gnosticism, but merely that of one gnostie school
or sect against another, the Ebionite against the
Marcionite. The Deity of Christ is denied, and
He is regarded as one of the Jewish prophets.

In the legends Simon is represented as constantly
opposing Peter, who ultimately discredits and
vanquishes him. These legends occur in more
forms than one, the earlier form selecting Antioch
as the place where Simon was discomfited by the
apostle and where he also died, while the later
tradition chooses Rome for these events.

One tradition tells how the magician ordered his
followers to bury him in a grave, promising that

if this were done, he would rise again


6. Tradi- on the third day. They did as he
tions of His wished and buried him; but this
Death was the end of him, for he did not


rise again.


Simon is said to have met his death at Rome, after an
encounter with the apostle Peter. putin this his
final controversy with the apostle, Simon had raised
himself in the air by the help of evil spirits, and in answer
to the prayer of Peter and Paul he was dashed to the
ground and killed.

According to another form of this tradition, Simon

roposed to give the Rom emperor a proof of his power
ie fiying off to God. He succeeded, it is said, in flying
for a certain distance over Rome, but in answer to the
prayer of Peter he fell and broke one of his legs. This
tradition accounts for his end by saying that the people
stoned him to death.

The Simoniani, the Simonians or followers of
Simon, were an eclectic sect, who seem, at one time,
to have adopted tenets and opinions
derived from paganism, at another,
from Judaism and the beliefs of. the
Samaritans, and at another still, from
Christianity. Sometimes they seem to have been
ascetics; at others they are wild scoffers at_ moral
law. They regarded Simon Magus as their Christ,
or at least as a form of manifestation of the redeem-
ing Christ, who had manifested Himself also in
Jesus. The Simonians were one of the minor
gnostic sects and were carried far away both from
the doctrine and from the ethical spirit of the
Christian faith. ’

Origen denies that the followers of Simon were
Christians in any sense. ‘The words of Origen are,
“It escapes the notice of Celsus that the Simonians
do not in any way acknowledge Jesus as the Son
of God, but they call Simon the Power of God.
In the time of Origen the followers of Simon had
dwindled in number to such a degree that he writes,
“J do not think it possible to find that all the fol-
lowers of Simon in the whole world are more than
thirty: and perhaps I have said more than there
really are” (Contr. Cels., 1.57, quoted by Alford,
Gr NT, Acts 8 9). : ;

Trenaeus also has much to say regarding Simon
and his followers. He makes the legendary Simon

identical with the magician of Acts 8,


7. The
Simoniani


8. Was makes him also the first im the lst
Simon the which he gives of heretics, and also
Originator says that it was from him that Gnosti-
of Gnosti- cism sprang. The account which he
cism? gives of the Simonians shows that by


the time when Irenaeus lived, their
system had developed into Gnosticism; but this
fact does not justify Irenaeus in the assertion that
Simon of Acts 8 is the originator of the gnostic


system. The early Christian writers took this
view, and regarded Simon Magus as the founder of
Gnosticism. Perhaps they were right, ‘‘but from
the very little authentic information we possess, it is
impossible to ascertain how far he was identified with
their tenets” (Alford, N7’, II, 86). In the midst of
the various legends regarding Simon, it may be that
there is a substratum of fact, of such a nature that
future investigation and discovery will justify
these early Christian writers in their judgment,
and will show that Simon Magus is not to be over-
looked as one of the sources from which Gnosticism
sprang. The exact origin of Gnosticism is certainly
difficult to trace, but there is little or no indication
that it arose from the incidents narrated in Acts 8.
It cannot be denied that a connection is possible,
and may have existed between the two, that is
between Simon Magus and some of the gnostic here-
sies; but the facts of history show widespread
tendencies at work, during and even hefore the
Apostolic age, which amply account for the rise of
Gnosticism. These are found e.g. in the Alex-
andrian philosophy, and in the tenets of the false
teachers at Colossae and in other places. These
philosophical and theosophical ideas commingled
with the influences of Zoroastrianism from Persia,
and of Buddhism from India, and these tendencies
and influences, taken in conjunction, were the
sources of the various heresies known by the name
of Gnosticism. See GNosticism.
JoHN RUTHERFURD
SIMON PETER. See Perer, Simon.


SIMON THE CANAANITE, OR CANANAEAN,
OR ZEALOT (Ztyov Kavavaios, Simin Kananaios;
"NDP, kanna’t, “the Jealous [or Zealous] One’’):
One of the Twelve Apostles. This Simon was also
named ‘‘the Canaanite’ (Mt 10 4; Mk 3 18 AV)
or “the Cananaean” (Mt 10 4; Mk 3 18 RV) or
“Zelotes”’ (Lk 6 15; Acts 1 13 AV) or ‘‘the Zealot”
(Lk 6 15; Acts 1 13 RV).

According to the ‘‘ Gospel of the Ebionites"’ or ‘‘ Gospel
of the Twelve Apostles”’ (of the 2d cent. and mentioned
by Origen) Simon received his call to the apostleship along
with Andrew and Peter, the sons of Zebedee, Thaddaeus
and Judas Iscariot at the Sea of Tiberias (ef Mt 4 18-
22; see also Hennecke, Neutestamentliche Apokryphen,
24-27).

Although Simon, like the majority of the apostles,
was probably a Galilean, the designation ‘“Cana-
naean’ is regarded as of political rather than of
geographical significance (cf St. Luke’s rendering).
The Zealots were a faction, headed by Judas of
Galilee, who “in the days of the enrolment” (cf
Acts 5 37; Lk 2 1.2) bitterly opposed the threat-


_ened increase of taxation at the census of Quirinius,


and would have hastened by the sword the fulfil-
ment of Messianic prophecy.

Simon has been identified with Simon the brother
of Jesus (Mk 6 3; Mt 13 55), but there also are
reasons in favor of identifying him with Nathanael.


Thus (1) all the arguments adduced in favor of the
Bartholomew-Nathanael identification (see NaTHaNaAEL)
can equally be es to that of Simon-Nathanael, ex-
cept the second. ut the second is of no account, since
the Philip-Bartholomew connection in the Synoptists
occurs merely in the apostolic lists, while in St. John it
is narrative. Further, in the Synoptists, Philip is con-
nected in the narrative, not with Bartholomew but with
Andrew.

(2) The identity is definitely stated in the Genealogies
of the Twelve Apostles (see NatHANAEL). Further, the
‘‘Preaching of Simon, son of Cleopas” (cf Budge, II,
70 ff) has the heading ‘‘ The preaching of the blessed St.
Simon, the son of Cleopas, who was surnamed Judas,
which is interpreted Nathanael, who became bishop of
Jerus after James the brother of Our Lord.'"' Eusebius
(HE, III, xi, 32; IV, xxii) also refers to a Simon who suc-
ceeded James as bishop of Jerus and suffered martyrdom
under Trajan; and Hegesippus, whom Eusebius pro-
fesses to quote, calls this Simon a son of Cleopas.


Simple
Sin


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2798


(3) The invitation of Philip to Nathanael (cf Jn 1 45) SIN (NM, haita’th, ‘a missing,” yy, ‘dwon,


was one which would naturally he addressed to a follower
of the Zealots, whe based their cause on the fulfilment of
Messianic prophecy.

(4) As Alphaeus, the father of James, is generally
regarded as the same as Clopas or Cleopas (see JaMEs,
Son or AtpHaeus), this identification of the ahove
Simon Nathanael, son of Clecpas, with Simon Zelotes
would shed light on the reason of the juxtaposition of
James son of Alphaeus and Simon Zelotes in the apostolic
lists of St. Luke and Acts, i.e. they were brothers.

C. M. Kerr

SIMPLE, sim’p’]: In the OT the uniform tr of the
Heb word pethi (root pathah, “be open’’). Like the
Eng. word ‘“‘simple” (etymologically “‘of one fold’’),
the Heb peth? is used sometimes in a good sense,
ie. “open-minded” (Ps 197; 1166; 119 130,
possibly in all three cases the sense is neutral
rather than positively good), and sometimes in a
bad sense (Prov 7 7, || to ‘destitute of understand-
ing”; 8 5, || to “fools” [blockheads]; 14 15, opposed
to prudent). The fundamental idea of peth? seems
to be open to influence, i.e. easily influenced. That
one open to influence should as a rule be classed with
the irreligious is one of many instances in which
language is an unwilling witness to the miasmatic
moral atmosphere in which we live. The line be
tween moral weakness and moral turpitude, between
negative goodness (if indeed such a thing be con-
ceivable) and positive badness, is soon passed.

In the NT the word “simple” is found only in
Rom 16 18.19 AV. In the first of these passages
it is used to translate dkakos (RV “innocent”’).
In He 7 26 AV the same word is rendered ‘“‘harm-
less,’ the rendering of RV in this instance being
“guileless.” This would suit Rom 16 18 better than
“Imnocent.’? Guilelessness is not a synonym for
gullibility; but the guileless are frequently the prey
of designing men. In Rom 16 19 the word tr?
“simple” is akéraios, lit. “unmixed,” “sincere”
(Trench and Godet; Young, erroneously “‘hornless’’
and so ‘“‘harmless’’). ‘‘Uncontaminated” seems to be
the idea of the apostle. He would have those to
whom he wrote ‘wise as regards good” and not
ignorant as regards evil—for that would be impos-
sible, even if desirable—but without that kind of
knowledge of evil that comes from engaging in it,
as we say, mixing themselves up with it, unalloyed
with evil. W. M. McPHEETERS


SIMPLICITY, sim-plis‘i-ti (AYP, pethayyuth;
awdétns, hapldtés): The words in the OT com-
monly tr “simplicity” are pethi, “simple” (Prov 1
22), ptthayyuth, “simplicity” (9 13m), tom, “com-
pleteness,” “integrity’’ (2.5 16 11), “They went
in their simplicity.” In the NT, haplotés, ‘‘single-
ness of mind,” “‘simplicity,’’ occurs in Rom 12 8,
“He that giveth let him do it with simplicity,” RV
‘hberality,”? m “Gr ‘singleness’”’; 2 Cor 1 12, “‘in
simplicity and godly sincerity,” RV (with corrected
text) “in holiness and sincerity of God”; 11 3,
“the simplicity that is in Christ,” RV (with cor-
rected text) “the simplicity and the purity that. is
toward Christ”; cf Eph 6 5; Col 3 22, where the
tr is “‘singleness.” In Wisd 1 1 we have, “Think ye
of the Lord with a good mind [AV “‘heart’’], and in
singleness [AV ‘“‘simplicity”] of heart seek ye him”
(haplotés). Our Lord also speaks (Mt 6 22; Lk
11 34) of the ‘single eye’ (haplotis), and James
(1 5) applies haplés, “simply,” “directly,” without
after-thought [AV and RV “liberally’} to God,
who had been described by Plato (iep. 11.382 FE)
as being perfectly simple (haplous) and true, both
in word and deed. In such ‘“simplicity’’—openness,
sincerity, freedom from double-mindedness—man
most resembles God and is most open to His visita-
tion and blessing. W. L. Waikpr


SIMRI, sim’ri. See Sumer.


“perversity,” SWH, pesha‘, “transgression,” 1,
ra‘, “evil,” etc; adpaprdve, hamartdnd, ‘miss the
mark,” wapaBacis, pardbasis, “transgression’’ with
a suggestion of violence, a5uxle, adikia, “injustice,”
‘nrighteousness”):

Sin as Disobedience

. Affects the Inner Life

Involves All Men

The Story of the Fall

The Freedom of Mau

A Transgression against Light

Inwardness of the Moral Law


NOTE wr


(3) Jesus
8. Sin a Positive Force
9. Heredity
10. Environment
11. Redemption
12. Life in Christ
13. Repentance
14. Forgiveness
LITERATURE


A fairly exact definition of sin based on Bib. data
would be that sin is the transgression of the law
of God (I Jn 3 4). Ordinarily, sin


1. Sinas is defined simply as “‘the transgression
Disobedi- of the law,” but the idea of God is so
ence completely the essential conception


of the entire Bib. revelation that we can
best define sin as disobedience to the law of God.
It will be seen that primarily sin is an act, but from
the very beginning it has been known that acts
have effects, not only in the outward world of
things and persons, but also upon


2. Affects him who commits the act. Hence we
the Inner find throughout the Scriptures a
Life growing emphasis on the idea of the


sinful act as not only a fact in itself,
but also as a revelation of an evil disposition on
the part of him who commits the act (Gen 6 5).
Then also there is the further idea that
3. Involves deeds which so profoundly affect the
All Men inner life of an individual m some way
have an effect in transmitting evil
tendencies to the descendants of a sinful individual
(Ps 61 5.6; Eph 2 3). See Hprenity; Trapition.
Hence, we reach shortly the conception, not only
that sin is profoundly inner in its consequences, but
that its effects reach outward also to an extent
which practically involves the race. Around these
various items of doctrine differing systems of the-
ology have sprung up.
Students of all schools are agreed that we have
in the OT story of the fall of Adam an eternally true
account of the way sin comes into the
4. Story of world (Gen 3 1-6). The question is
the Fall not so much as to the literal historic
matter-of-factness of the narrative,
as to its essentially psychological truthfulness. The
essential thought of the narrative is that both Adam
and Eve disobeyed an express command of God.
The seductiveness of temptation is nowhere more
forcefully stated than in this narrative. The fruit
of the tree is pleasant to look upon; it is good to
eat; it is to be desired to make one wise; morc-
over, the tempter moves upon the woman by the
method of the half truth (see ADAM IN THE OT).
God had said that disobedience to the command
would bring death; the tempter urged that disobedi-
ence would not bring death, implying that the com-
mand of God had meant that death would imme-
diately follow the eating of the forbidden fruit.
In the story the various avenues of approach of sin
to the human heart are graphically suggested, but
after the seductiveness of evil has thus been set,
forth, the fact remains that both transgressors knew
they were transgressing (Gen 3 2f). Of course, the
story is told in simple, naive fashion, but its per-


2799


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Simple
Sin


ennial spiritual truth is at once apparent. There
has been much progress in religious thinking con-
cerning sin during the Christian ages, but the prog-
ress has not been away from this central concep-
tion of wilful disobedience to the law of God.
In this early Bib. account there is implicit the
thought of the freedom of man. The idea of trans-
gression has sometimes been inter-
5. Freedom preted in such wise as to do away with
of Man this freedom. An unbiased reading of
f the Scriptures would, with the possible
exception of some passages which designedly lay
stress on the power of God (Rom 8 29.30), pro-
duce on the mind the impression that freedom is
essential to sin. Certainly there is nothing in the
account of the OT or NT narratives to warrant
the conception that men are born into sin by forces
over which they have no control. The argument of
the tempter with the woman is an argument aimed
at her will. By casy steps, indeed, she moves
toward the transgression, but the transgression is a
transgression and nothing else. Of course, the evil
deed is at once followed by attempts on the part of
the transgressors to explain themselves, but the
futility of the explanations is part of the point of
the narrative. In all discussion of the problem of
freedom as relating to sin, we must remember that
the Bib. revelation is from first to last busy with
the thought of the righteousness and justice and
love of God (Gen 6 9 tells us that because of
justice or righteousness, Noah walked with God).
Unless we accept the doctrine that God is Himself
not free, a doctrme which is nowhere implied in the
Scripture, we must insist that the condemnation of
men as sinful, when they have not had freedom to
be otherwise than sinful, is out of harmony with the
Bib. revelation of the character of God. Of course
this does not mean that a man is free im all things.
Freedom is limited in various ways, but we must
retam enough of freedom in our thought of the
constitution of men to make possible our holding
fast to the Bib. idea of sin as transgression. Some
who take the Bib. narrative as literal historical fact
maintain that all men sinned in Adam (see Impu-
TATION, III, 1). Adam may have been free to sin
or not to sin, but, “in his fall we sinned all.” We
shall mention the hereditary influences of sin in a
later paragraph; here it is sufficient to say that even
if the first man had not sinned, there is nothing in
our thought of the nature of man to make it im-
possible to believe that the sinful course of human
history could have been initiated by some descend-
ant of the first man far down the line. , :
The progress of the Bib. teaching concerning sin
also would seem to imply that the transgression of
the law must be a transgression com-


6. Trans- mitted against the light (Acts 17 30;
gression 1 Tim 1 13). To be sinful in any
against full sense of the word, a man must
Light know that the course which he is adopt-


ing is an evil course. This does not
necessarily mean a full realization of the evil of the
course. It is a fact, both of Bib. revelation and of
revelation of all times, that men who commit sin
do not realize the full evil of their deeds until after
the sin has been committed (2 8 12 1-13). This
is partly because the consequences: of sin do not
declare themselves until after the deed has been
committed; partly also because of the remorse of the
conscience; and partly from the humiliation at
being discovered; but in some sense there must be
a realization of the evil of a course to make the
adoption of the course sinful. E.g. in estimating
the moral worth of Bib. characters, esp. those of
earlier times, we must keep in mind the standards
of the times in which they lived. These standards
were partly set by the customs of the social group,


but the customs were, in many cases, made sacred by
the claim of Divine sanction. Hence we find Bib.
characters giving themselves readily to polygamy
and warfare. The Scriptures themselves, however,
throw light upon this problem. They refer to early
times as times of ignorance, an ignorance which God
Himself was willing to overlook (Acts 17 30).
Even so ripe a moral consciousness as that of
Paul felt that there was ground for forgiveness
toward a course which he himself later considered
evil, because in that earlier course he had acted
ignorantly (Acts 26 9; 1 Tim 1 13).

The Bib. narratives, too, show us the passage

over from sin conceived of as the violation of

external commands to sin conceived
7. Inward- of as an unwillingness to keep the
ness of the commandments in the depths of the
Moral Law inner life. The course of Bib. history
is one long protest against conceiving
of sin in an external fashion.

(1) Prophets—In the sources of light which are
to help men discern good from evil, increasing stress
is laid upon inner moral insight (cf Isa 58 5f£; Hos
6 1-7). The power of the prophets was in their
direct moral insight and the fervor with which they
made these insights real to the mass of the peaple.
Of course it was necessary that the spirit of the
prophets be given body and form in carefully artic-
ulated law. The progress of the Hebrews from the
insight of the seer to the statute of the lawmaker was
not different from such progress in any other nations.
It is easy to see, however, how the hardening of
moral precepts into formal codes, absolutely neces-
sary as that task was, led to an externalizing of the
thought of sin. The man who did not keep the
formal law was a sinner. On such basis there
grew up the artificial systems which came to their
culmination in the NT times in Pharisaism. On the
other hand, a fresh insight by a new prophet might
be in violation of the Law, considered in its literal
aspects. It might be necessary for a prophet to
attack outright some additions to the Law. We
regard as a high-water mark of OT moral utterances
the word of Micah that the Lord requires men to
do justly and to love mercy and to walk humbly
with Him (6 8), At the time this word was
uttered, the people were giving themselves up to
multitudes of sacrifices. Many of these sacrifices
called for the heaviest sufferings on the part of the
worshippers. It would seem that an obligation
to sacrifice the firstborn was beginning to be taught
in order that the Hebrews might not be behind the
neighboring heathen nations in observances of
religious codes. The simple direct word of Micah
must have seemed heresy to many of its first
hearers. The outcome, however, of this conflict
between the inner and the outer in the thought
of transgression was finally to deepen the springs
of the inner hfe. The extremes of externalism led
to a break with moral realities which tended to
become apparent to the most ordinary observer.
The invective of Jesus against NT Pharisaism
took its force largely from the fact that Jesus gave
clear utterance to what everyone knew. Those who
thought of religion as external gave themselves
to formal keeping of the commandments and allowed
the ee life to run riot as it would (Mt 23 23,
et al.).

(2) Paul.—With the more serious-minded the
keeping of the Law became more and more a matter
of the inner spirit. There were some who, like
Paul, found it impossible to keep the Law and
find peace of conscience (Rom 7). It was this
very impossibility which forced some, like Paul, to
understand that, after all, sin or righteousness
must be judged by the inner disposition. It was
this which led to the search for a conception of a


Sin THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2800


God who looks chiefly at the heart and judges men
by the inner motive.

(3) Jesus.—In the teaching of Jesus the emphasis
‘upon the inner spirit as the essential factor in the
moral life came to its climax. Jesus honored the
Law, but He pushed the keeping of the Law back
from the mere performance of externals to the inner
stirrings of motives. It is not merely the actual
commission of adultery, for example, that is sin:
it is the lustful desire which leads to the evil glance;
i¢ is not merely the actual killing of the man that is
murder; it is the spirit of hatred which makes the
thought of murder welcome (Mt 6 21.27). Paul
caught the spirit of Jesus and carried the thought
of Jesus out into more elaborate and formal state-
ments. There is a law of the inver life with which
man should bind himself, and this law is the law of
Christ’s life itself (Rom 8 1-4). While both
Jesus and Paul recognized the place of the formal
codes in the moral hfe of individuals and societies,
they wrought a great service for righteousness
in settmg on high the obligations upon the inner
spirit. The follower of Christ is to guard the inmost
thoughts of his heart. The commandments are
not always precepts which can be given articulated
statement; they are rather instincts and intuitions
and glimpses which must be followed, even when we

cannot give them full statement.
From this standpoint we are able to discern some-
thing of the force of the Bib. teaching as to whether
sin is to be looked upon as negative


8. Sina or positive. Very often sin is defined
Positive as the mere absence of goodness.
Force The man who sins is one who does not


keep the Law. This, however, is
hardly the full Bib. conception. Of course, the
man who does not keep the Law is regarded as
a sinner, but the idea of transgression is very often
that of a positive refusal to keep the commandment,
and a breaking of the commandment. Two
courses are set before men, one good, the other
evil. The evil course is, in a sense, something posi-
tive in itself. The evil man does not stand still; he
moves as truly as the good man moves; he becomes
a positive force for evil. In all our discussions we
must keep clearly in mind the truth that evil is
not something existing in and by itself. The
Scriptures deal with evil men, and the evil men are
as positive as their natures permit them to be. In
this sense of the word sin does run a course of posi-
tive destrnction. In the thought, ¢.g., of the writer
who describes the conditions which, in his belief,
made necessary the Flood, we have a positive state
of evil contaminating almost the whole world (Gen
6 11). It would be absurd to characterize the
world in the midst of which Noah lived as merely a
negative world. The world was positively set
toward evil. And so, in later writings, Paul’s
thought of Rom society is of a world of sinful men
moving with increasing velocity toward the de-
struction of themselves and of all around them
through doing evil. It is impossible to believe that
Rom 1 conceives of sin merely in negative terms.
We repeat, we do not do full justice to the Bib.
conception when we speak of sin merely in negative
terms. If we may be permitted to use a present-
day illustration, we may say that in the Bib. thought
sinful men are like the destructive forces in the
world of Nature which must be removed before
there can be peace and health for human life. For
example, science toduy has much to say concern-
ing germs of diseases which prove destructive to
human life. A large part of modern scientific
effort has been to rid the world of these germs, or at
least to cleanse human surroundings from their
contaminating touch. The man who stcrilizes
the human environment so that these forces cannot


touch men does in one sense a merely negative
work; in another sense, however, his work makes
possible the positive development of the forces
which make for health.
It is from this thought of the positiveness of
sin that we are to approach the problem of the
hereditary transmission of evil. The
9. Heredity Bib. teaching has often been mis-
interpreted at this point. Apart from
certain passages, esp. those of St. Paul, which set
forth the practically universal contamination of
sin (e.g. Rom 6 J8, etc), there is nothing in the
Scriptures to suggest the idea that men are born into
the world under a weight of guilt. We hold fast to
the idea of God as a God of justice and love. There
is no way of reconciling these attributes with the
condemnation of human souls before these souls have
themselves transgressed. Of course much theologi-
cal teaching moves on the assumption that the
tendencies to evil are so great that the souls will
necessarily trangress, but we must keep clearly in
mind the difference between a tendency to evil and
the actual commission of evil. Modern scientific
research reinforces the conception that the children
of sinful parents, whose sins have been such as to
impress their lives throughout, will very soon mani-
fest symptoms of eviltendency. Even in this case,
however, we must distinguish between the psycho-
logical and moral. The child may be given a
wrong tendency from birth, not only by hereditary
transmission, but by the imitation of sinful parents;
yet the question of the child’s own personal re-
sponsibility is altogether another matter. Modern
society has come to recognize something of the
force of this distinction. In dealing with extreme
cases of this kind, the question of the personal guilt
of the child is not raised. The attempt is to throw
round about the child an environment that will
correct the abnormal tendency. But there can be
little gainsaying the fact that the presence of sin in
the life of the parent may go as far as to mark the
life of the child with the sinful tendency.
The positive force of sinful life also appears in
the effect of sin upon the environment of men. Itis
not necessary for us to believe that all
10. En- the physical universe was cursed
vironment by the Almighty because of man’s
sin, in order to hold that there is a
curse upon the world because of the presence of
sinful men. Men have sinfully despoiled the world
for their own selfish purposes. They have wasted
its resources. They have turned forces which
onght to have made for good into the channels of
evil. In their contacts with one another also, evil
men furnish an evil environment. If the employer
of 100 men be himself evil, he is to a great extent
the evil environment of those 100 men. The curse
of his evil is upon them. So with the relations of
men in larger social groups: the forces of state-life
which are intended to work for good can be made to
workfor evil. So far has this gone that some earnest
minds have thought of the material and social realms
as necessarily and inherently evil. In other days
this led to retreats from the world in monasteries
and in solitary cells. In our present time the same
thought is back of much of the pessimist idea
that the world itself is like a sinking ship, absolutely
doomed. The most we can hope for is to save
individuals here and there from imminent destruc-
tion. Yet a more Bib. conception keeps clear of
all this. The material forces of the world—apart
from certain massive physical necessities (e.g.
earthquakes, storms, floods, whirlwinds, fires, etc),
whose presence ¢loes more to furnish the conditions
of moral growth than to discourage that. growth—
are what men cause them to be. Social forces are
nothing apart from the men who are themselves the


2801


forces. No one can deny that evil men can use
physical forces for evil purposes, and that evil men


can make bad soeial forees, hut both these forces,


ean he used for good as well as for evil. “The whole
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain’ waiting
for the redemption at the hands of the sons of
God (Rom 8 19-23).

In the thought of Jesus, righteousness is life.

Jesus came that men might have life (Jn 10 10).

’ It must follow therefore that in His
11, Re- thought sin is death, or rather it is
demption the positive course of transgression
_ which makes toward death (Jn 6 24).
But man is to cease to do evil and to learn to do well.
Heis to face about and walk in a different direction;
he is to be born from above (Jn 3 3), and surrender
himself to the forees which beat upon him from
above rather than to those which surge upon him
from below (Rom 12 2). From the realization of
the positiveness both of sin and of righteousness,
we see the need of a positive force which is to bring
men from sin to righteousness (Jn 3 3-8).

Of course, in what we have said of the positive
nature of sin we would not deny that there are
multitudes of men whose evil consists in their pas-
sive aequiescenee in a low moral state. Multitudes
of men may not be lost, in the sense that they are
breaking the more obvious of the commandments.
They are lost, in the sense that they are drifting
about, or that they are existing in a condition of
inertness with no great imterest in high spiritual
ideals. But the problem even here is to find a foree
strong enough and positive enough to bring such
persons to themselves and to God. In any case
the Scriptures lay stress upon the seriousness of the
problem constituted by sin. The Bible is centered
on redemption. Redemption from sin is thought
of as carrying with it redemption from all other
calamities. If the kingdom of God and of His
righteousness can be seized, all other things will
follow with the seizure (Mt 6 33). The work of
Christ is set before us as chiefly a work of redemp-
tion from sin. A keen student once observed that
almost all failures to take an adequate view of the
person of Christ can be traced to a failure to realize
adequately the seriousness of sin. The problem
of changing the course of something so positive as a
life set toward sin is a problem which may well tax
the resourees of the Almighty. Lives cannot be
transformed merely by precept. The only effective
force is the force of a Divine life which will reach
and save human lives (see REDEMPTION). —

Weare thus in a position to see something of the
positiveness of the life that must be in Christ if
: He is to he a Saviour from sin. That

12. Life in positiveness must be powerful enough
Christ to make men feel that in some real
sense God Himself has come to their

rescue (Rom 8 32-39). For the problem of sal-
vation from sin is manifold. Sin long persisted in
begets evil habits, and the habits must be broken.
Sin lays the conscience under a load of distress, for
which the only relief is a sense of forgiveness. Sin
blights and paralyzes the faculties to such a degree
that only the mightiest of tonic forces can bring
back health and strength. And the problem is
often more serious than this. The presence of evil
in the world is so serious in the sight of a Holy God
that He Himself, because of His very holiness, must
be under stupendous obligation to aid us to the
utmost for the redemption of men. Out of the
thought of the disturbance which sin makes even
in the heart of God, we see something of the
reason for the doctrine that in the*eross of Christ
God was discharging a debt to Himself and to
the whole world; for the insistence also that, in
ithe cross there is opened up a fountain of life,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Sin


which, if aceepted hy sinful meu, will heal aud re-
store them.

It is with this seriousness of sin before us that we

must think ef forgiveness from sin. We can under-

stand very readily that sin can be for-

13. Repent- given only on condition that men seek


ance forgiveness in the name of the highest
manifestation of holiness which they
have known. For those who have heard the preach-


ing of the eross and have seen something of the
real meaning of that preaching, the way to for-
givencss is in the name of the cross. In the name of
a holiness which men would make their own, if
they could; in the name of an ideal of holy love
which men of themselves cannot reach, but which
they forever strive after, they seek forgiveness.
But the forgiveness is to betaken seriously. In hoth
the OT and NT repentance is not merely a changed
attitude of mind. It is an attitude which shows its
sincerity by willingness to do everything possible
to undo the evil whieh the sinner has wrought (Lk
19 8). If there is any consequence of the sinner’s
own sin which the sinner can himself make right,
the sinner must in himself genuinely repent and
make that consequence right. In one sense
repentanee is not altogether something done onee
for all. The seductiveness of sin is so great that
there is need of humble and continuous watching.
While anything like a morbid introspection is
unscriptural, constant alertness to keep to the
straight and narrow path is everywhere enjoined
as an obligation (Gal 6 1).

There is nothing in the Seriptures which will
warrant the idea that forgiveness is to be conceived
of in such fashion as would teach that
the consequences of sin can be easily
and quickly eliminated. Change in
the attitude of a sinner neeessarily
means change in the attitude of God. The sinner
and God, however, are persons, and the Scriptures
always speak of the problem of sin after a com-
pletely personal fashion. The changed attitude
affects the personal standing of the sinner in the
sight of God. But God is the person who creates
and carries on a moral universe. In carrying on
that universe He must keep moral considerations
in their proper place as the constitutional principles
of the universe. While the father welcomes back
the prodigal to the restored personal relations with
himself, he cannot, in the full sense, blot out the
fact that the prodigal has been a prodigal. The
personal forgiveness may be complete, but the
elimination of the consequences of the evil life is
possible only through the long lines of healing set at
work. The man who has sinned against his hody
can find restoration from the consequences of the
sin only in the forces which make for bodily healing.
So also with the mind and will, The mind which
has thought evil must be cured of its tendency to
think evil. To be sure the curative processes may
come almost instantly through the upheaval of a
great experience, but on the other hand, the cura-
tive processes may have to work through long years
(see SanctiricaTion). The will whieh has been
given to sin may feel the stirrings of sin after the
life of forgiveness has begun. All this is a manifes-
dation, not only of the power of sin, but of the
constitutional morality of the universe. Forgive-
ness must not be interpreted in such terms as to
make the transgression of the Law of God in any
sense a light or trivial offence. But, on the other
hand, we must not set limits to the curative powers
of the cross of God. With the removal of the power
which makes for evil the possibility of development
in real human experience is before the life (see
ForGivEnEss). The word of the Master is that He
“came that they may have life, and may have it


14. For-
giveness


Sin THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sinai


abundantly” (Jn 10 10). Sin is serious, because
it thwarts life. Sin is given so large a place in the
thought of the Bib. writers simply because it blocks
the channel of that movement toward the fullest
life which the Scriptures teach is the aim of God in
placing men in the world. God is conceived of as
the Father in Heaven. Sin has a deeply disturbing
effect. in restraining the relations between the
Father and the sons and of preventing the proper
development of the life of the sons. See further,
Eruics, I, 3, (2); Evsics or Jesus, I, 2; Gurnt;
JOHANNINE TuEoLoGy, V, 1; PauL THE APOSTLE;
Pautins THeotocy; Repempmion, etc.


Liverature.—Tennant, Origin and Propagation of Sin;
Hyde, Sin and Its Forgiveness; chapter on “Incarnation
and Atonement’? in Bowne’s Studies in Christianity;
Stevens, Christian Doctrine of Salvation; Clarke, Chris-
tian Doctrine of God; various treatises on


2802


SINA, si’na: In Acts 7 38 AV, RV “Sinai”


(q.v.).


SINAI, si’ni, si/né-1 (2D, sinay; A, Deva, Sind,
B, Zeva, Seind): The name comes probably from a
root meaning ‘‘to shine,” which occurs
in Syr, and which in Bab is found in
the name sinu for ‘the moon.’ The
old explanation, “clayey,’’ is inappro-
priate to any place in the Sinaitic desert, though
it might apply to Sin (Ezk 30 15.16) or Pelu-
sium; even there, however, the applicability is
doubtful. The desert of Sin (Ex 16 1; 17 1; Nu
33 11f) lay between Sinai and the Gulf of Suez,
and may have been named from the “‘glare’’ of its
white chalk. But at Sinai “the glory of Jeh was


1. The
Name


Systematic Theology.
Francis J. McConneLu


SIN, sin (PO, sin, “clay or mud”;
Suivy, Suén®, A, Tavis, Ténis): A city
of Egypt mentioned only in Ezk 30 15.16.
This seems to be a pure Sem name. The
ancient Egyp name, if the place ever had
one such, is unknown. Pelusium (Gr
TleXotcwor, Pelotision) also meant ‘the
elayey or muddy town.’ The Pelusiac
mouth of the Nile was “the muddy
mouth,” and the modern Arab. name of
this mouth has the same significance.
These facts make it practically certain
that the Vulg is correct in identifying 5.
with Pelusium. But although Pelustam
appears very frequently in ancient history,
its exact location is still not entirely
certain. The lst of cities mentioned in
Ezk in connection with 8. furnishes no
clue to its location. From other histori-
cal notices it seems to have been a frontier
city. Rameses II built a wall from 8. to
Heliopolis, probably by the aid of Heb
slaves (Diodorus Siculus; cf Budge, Hist
of Egypt, V, 90), to protect the eastern
frontier. 8. wasameeting-place of Egypt
with her enemies who came to attack her,
many great battles being fonght at or
near this place. Sennacherib and Cam-
byses both fought Egypt near Pelusium
(Herod. ii.141; 1i.10-13). Antiochus IV
defeated the Egyptians here (Budge, VIII,
25),and the Romans under Gabinius de-
feated the Egyptians in the same neighbor-


ate
a"


Mt SINAI


We AN

} : xRN ie THE ADJACENT VALLEYS

Aas
mS,


Brith Ales


hood. Pelusinm was also accessible from
the sea, or was very near a seaport, for
Pompey after the disaster at Pharsalia fled into
Egypt, sailing for Pelusium. These historical
notices of Pelusium make its usual identificatiou
with the rnins near el-Kaniara, a station on the
Suez Canal 29 miles S. of Port Said, most prob-
able. “‘S., the stronghold of Egypt,’’ in the words of
Ezk (30 15), would thus refer to its inaccessibility
because of swamps which served as impassable
moats. The wall on the 8. and the sea on the N.
also protected it on either flank. M. G. Kyrie


SIN AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST (SPIRIT).
See BLASPHEMY.


SIN, MAN OF. See Man or Srv.
SIN MONEY. See Sacririce 1n THE OT.
SIN OFFERING. See SacriFice.


SIN, WILDERNESS OF. See WanpDERINGS OF
ISRAEL.


like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the
eyes of the children of Israel’ (Ex 24 17); and,
indeed, the glory of the Lord still dyes the crags of
Jebel. Masa (the “mountain of Moses’) with fiery
red, reflected from its red granite and pink gneiss
rocks, long after the shadows have fallen on the
plain beneath. Sinai is mentioned, as a desert and
a mountain, in 35 passages of the OT. In 17
passages the same desert and mountain are called
““Horeb,” or “the waste.” This term is chiefly used
in Dt, though Sinai also occurs (Dt 33 2). In the
other books of the Pent, Sinai is the usual name,
though Horeb also occurs (Ex 3 1; 17 6; 33 6),
applying both to the ‘“Mount of God’”’ and to the
desert of Rephidim, some 20 miles to the N.W.
The indications of position, in various passages
of the Pent, favor the identification with the tradi-
, tional site, which has become generally
2. Tradi- accepted by all those explorers who
tional Site have carefully considered the subject,
: though two other theories may need
notice. Moses fled to the land of Midian (or “empty
land”), which lay E. of the Sinaitic peninsula


IVNIS ENOAOW #0 dOL FHL WO MATA


2803


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA ae


Sinai


(Nu 22 4.7; 26, 31), and when he wandered with
his flocks to Horeb (Ex 3 1) he is said to have
reached the west side of the desert. In another
note (Dt 1 2) we read that the distance was
eleven days’ journey from Horeb by the way of
Mount Seir unto Kadesh-barnea” or Petra (sce
WanpvEriNGs oF IsramL), the distance being about
145 miles, or 14 miles of daily march, though Israel—
with its floeks, women and children—made 16
marehes between these points. Sinai again is
described as being distant from Egypt ‘three days’
journey into the wilderness” (Ex 6 3), the actual
route being 117 miles, which Israel accomplished
in 10 journeys. But, for Arabs not encumbered
with families and herds, this distance could still


Jebel Kdtartn (so named from a legend of St.
Catherine of Egypt), rising 8,550 ft. above the sea.
N.E, of this is Jebel Misa (7,370 ft.), which, though
less high, is more conspicuous because of the open
plain called er Réhah (‘the wide”) toits N.W. This
plain is about 4 miles long and has a width of over
a mile, so that it forms, as Dr. E. Robinson (Bib.
Res., 1838, I, 89) seems to have been the first to note,
a natural camp at the foot of the mountain, large
enough for the probable numbers (see Exopus, 3)
of Israel.

Jebel Masa has two main tops, that to the S.E.
being crowned by a chapel. The other, divided
by gorges into three precipitous crags, has the Con-
vent to its N., and is called Rés-es-Safsdfeh, or “the


be covered by an average march of 39 miles daily,
on riding camels, or even, if necessary, on foot.
These distances will not, however, allow of our
placing Sinai farther E. than Jebel Masa. Lofty
mountains, in all parts of the world,
8. Identifi- have always been sacred and re-
cation with garded as the mysterious abode of
Jebel Misa God; and Jos says that Sinai is “the
highest of all the mountains there-
about,” and again is “the highest of all the moun-
tains that are in that country, and is not only very
difficult to be ascended by men, on account of its
vast altitude, but because of the sharpness of its
precipices: nay, indeed, it cannot be looked at
without pain of the eyes, and besides this it was
terrible and inaccessible, on account of the rumor
that passed about, that God dwelt there” (Ant, II,
xii, 1; III, v, 1). Evidently in his time Sinai was
supposed to be one of the peaks of the great granitic
bloek called et Tar—a term applying to any lofty
mountain. This block has its highest peak in


Rd s-es-Safsdfeh.


willow top.” N. of the Convent is the lower top
of Jebel ed Deir (“mountain of the monastery’’).

These heights were accurately deter-
4. Descrip- mined by Royal Engineer surveyors in
tion of 1868 (Sir C. Wilson, Ordnance Survey
Jebel Musa of Sinai); and, though it is impossible

to say which of the peaks Moses
ascended, yet they are all much higher than any
mountains in the Sinaitic desert, or in Midian. The
highest tops in the Tih desert to the N. are not much
over 4,000 ft. Those in Midian, E. of Elath, rise
only to 4,200 ft. Even Jebel Serbal, 20 miles W.
of Sinai—a ridge with many crags, running 3 miles
in length—is at its highest only 6,730 ft. above the
sea. Horeb is not recorded to have been visited by
any of the Hebrews after Moses, excepting by Elijah
(1 K 19 8) in a time of storm. In favor of the
traditional site it may also be observed that clouds
suddenly formed, or lasting for days (Ex 24 15 f),
are apt to cap very lofty mountains. The Hebrews
reached Sinai about the end of May (Ex 19 1)


Sinai
Sinlessness


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2804


and, on the 3d day, ‘‘there were thunders and
lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount” (ver
16). Such storms occur as a rule in the Sinaitic
desert only in December and January, but thunder-
storms are not unknown in Pal even in May.
A constant tradition fixing the site is traceable
back to the 4th cent. AD. Eusebius and Jerome
(Onem, s.v. “Choreb’) place Horeb
5. Patristic near Paran, which in their time was
Evidence placed (Onom, s.v. ‘‘Raphidim’’) in
Wédy Feirdn. Anchorites lived at
Paran, and at Sinai at least as early as 365 AD, and


Convent Garden, Sinai.


are noticed in 373 AD, and often later (Robinson,
Bib. Res., 1838, I, 122-28); the monastery was
first built for them by Justinian in 527 AD and his
chapel still exists. Cosmas (Topogr. Christ.), in the
same reign, says that Rephidim was then called
Pharan, and (distinguishing Horeb from Sinai, as
Eusebius also does) he places it ‘about 6 miles from
Pharan,” and “near Sinai.” These various con-
siderations may suffice to show that the tradition
as to Horeb is at least as old as the time of Jos, and
that it agrees with all the indications given in the


Lepsius, it is true (Letters from Egypt, 1842-44),
denying the existence of any unbroken tradition,
and relying on his understanding of
Cosmas, supposed Sinai to be the Jebel
Serbal_ above mentioned, which lies
: immediately 8. of Wddy Feiran. His
main argument was that, visiting Smai in March,
he considered that the vicinity did not present
sufficient water for Israel (Appendix B, 303-18).
But, on this point, it is sufficient to give the opinion
of the late Rev. F. W. Holland, based on the experi-
ence of four visits, in 1861, 1865, 1867-68.

He says (Recovery of Jerus, 524):

“With regard to water-supply there is no other spot In
the whole Peninsula which is nearly so well supplied
as the neighborhood of Jebel Masa. Four streams of
running water are found there: one in Wddy Leja; a
second in Wddy et Tl'ah which waters a succession of
gardens extending more than 3 miles in length, and forms
pools in which I have often had a swim; a third stream
rises to the N. of the watershed of the plain of er Radkah
and runs W. into Wédy et T’ah; and a fourth is formed
hy the drainage from the mountains of Umm ‘Alawy, to


6. Lepsius’
Theory


the E. of Wady Sebaiyeh and finds its way into that valley -


by a narrow ravine opposite Jebel ed Deir. Inaddition to
these streams there are numerous wells and springs, afford-
ing excellent water throughout the whole of the granitic
district. I have seldom found it necessary to carry water
when making a mountain excursion, and the intermediate


neighborhood of Jebel Masa would, I think, bear com-
parison with many mountain districts in Scotland with
regard to its supply of water. There_is also no other
district in the Peninsula which affords such excellent
pasturage.”’

This is important, as Israel encamped near Sinai
from the end of May till April of the next year.
There is also a well on the lower slope of Jebel Masa
itself, where the ascent begins.

Another theory, put forward by Mr. Baker Greene
(The Heb Migration from Egypt), though accepted by

Dr. ayer Ctaohen (ae eae Auk

Yq aPpears ewlse to be entirely untenable.

7. Greene’s Mr. Greene supposed Elim (Ex 15 27) to
Theory be Elath (Dt 2 8), now ‘Ailch at the head
of the Gulf of ‘Akdbah; and that Sinai there-
fore was some unknown mountain in Midian. But in this
case Israel would in 4 days (see Ex 15 22.23.27) have
traveled a distance of 200 miles to reach Elim, which can-
not hut be regarded as quite impossible for the Hebrews
when accompanied by women, children, flocks and herds.
C. R. Conner |

SINCERE, sin-sér’, SINCERITY, sin-ser’iti
(DMA, tamim; apOapela, aphtharsia, eiAckplvea,
eilikrineta): “Sincerity”? occurs once in the OT as
the tr of tamim, “complete,” “entire,” “sincere,” ete
(Josh 24 14); the same word is tr‘ “sincerity” (Jgs
9 16.19, RV “uprightly”). Four different. words
are rendered ‘‘sincere,”’ “‘sincerely,” “sincerity,” in
the NT: ddolos, “without guile,” “unadulterated,”
“desire the sincere milk of the word” (1 Pet 2 2 AV,
RV “‘the spiritual,’”’ ARVm “Gr, ‘belonging to the
reason’; cf Rom 12 1,” ERVm “reasonable’’), “milk
which is without guile,” with no other purpose but
to nourish and benefit the soul (Alford); hagnés,
“without blame,” “pure,” “preach Christ . . . . not
sincerely” (Phil 1 17); aphtharsia, ‘‘without corrup-
tion” (Eph 6 24, AV “that love our Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity,’ ARV “with a love incorrupt-
ible,” m “‘in incorruption.’ See Rom 2 7,’’ ERV
“uncorruptness”’; Tit 2 7, AV “shewing uncorrupt-
ness... . sincerity,” RV “uncorruptness”’); gnésios,
‘not spurious” (2 Cor 8 8); eilikrinés, lit., judged of
in the sunlight, hence, “clear,” “manifest”? (Phil 1
10); etlikrineta, with same meaning, is tré “sincerity”
(1_Cor 6 8; 2 Cor 1 12; 2 17).

RV has “sincere” for ‘pure’ (2 Pet $ 1), “sin-
cerely” for ‘clearly’? (Job 33 3).

In Wisd 7 25 we have etlikrinés in the de-
scription of Wisdom as a ‘“‘pure influence,” RV
“clear effluence.”’ W. L. WALKER


SINEW, sin’ (TA, gidh [Job 10 11, etc]):
The tendons and sinews of the body are uniformly
(7 t) thus called. ‘Therefore the children of Israel
eat not the sinew of the hip which is upon the hollow
of the thigh, unto this day: because he touched
the hollow of Jacob’s thigh in the sinew of the
hip” (Gen 32 32). In the poetical description of
Behemoth (hippopotamus) it is said: i““He moveth
his tail like a cedar: the sinews of his thighs are
knit together” (Job 40 17). The prophet Ezekiel
saw in his vision (37 6.8) that the dry bones were
gathered together, that they were covered with
sinews, flesh and skin, and that they were revived by
the spirit of the Lord. In figurative language the
neck of the obstinate is compared to an ‘‘iron sinew”
(Isa 48 4). AV “my sinews take no rest” (w*‘drekay
Io’ _yishkabhtin, Job 30 17) has been corrected by
RV into “the pains that gnaw me take no rest,”
but the earlier version has been retained in the
margin. H. L. E. Luserine


_ SINGERS, sing’érz, SINGING, sing’ing: Sing-
ing seems to have become a regular profession at a
quite early date among the Hebrews. David had
his troupe of “singing men and singing women” at
Jerus (2 8 19 35), and no doubt Solomon added to
their numbers. Isa 23 16 suggests that it was not
uncommon for foreign female minstrels of question-


2805


Sinai
Sinlessness


able character to be heard making “swect melody,”
singing songs along the strcets and highways of
Judaea. Nor was the worship of the temple left
to the usually incompetent and inconstant leader-
ship of amateur choristers. The claborate regula-
tions drawn up for the constitution of the temple
orchestra and chorus are referred to under Music
(q.v.). It has been inferred from Ezr 2 65 that
women were included among the temple singers,
but this is erroneous, as the musicians there men-
tioned were of the class employed at banquets,
festivals, etc. The temple choir consisted exclu-
sively of Levites, one essential qualification of
an_ active member of that order being a good
voice.

Of the vocal method of the Hebrews we know
nothing. Wellhausen imagines that he can detect
one of the singers, in the portrayal of an Assyr
band, compressing his throat in order to produce a
vibrato; and it is quite possible that in other
respects as well as this, ancient and modern orien-
tal vocalization resembled each other. But that is
about all that can be said.

On the other hand, we cannot repeat too often
that we are quite unable to identify any intervals,
scales, or tunes as having been used in ancient Israel.
Even those who hold that the early church took the
Gregorian ‘‘tones”’ from the synagogue, confess
that it was “certainly not without considerable
modifications.’ And, of course, there was not the
slightest affinity between the Heb and the Anglican
chant. See Musrc; Praise; Sonc; TEMPLE.

James MILuar

SINGLE, sin’g’l, EYE: Mt 6 22f| Lk 11 34:
“Tf therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body
shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil,
thy whole body shall be full of darkness.”’ ‘Single’
and “evil”? here represent ddovs, haplotis, and
movnpés, ponérés. Ponéros elsewhere in the NT
means “wicked’’; haplows occurs only here in the
NT, but is very common in ordinary Gr and always
has the meanmg “simple.” But in view of the
context, most commentators take haplous here
as meaning “normal,” “healthy,” and ponéros as
“diseased,’”’ so rendering “Just as physical enlighten-
ment depends on the condition of the eye, so does
spiritual enlightenment depend on the condition
of the heart.”’ This is natural enough, but it is not
satisfactory, a8 it gives to haplous a unique sense
and to ponéros a sense unique in the 73 NT examples
of the word. Moreover, the same expression, “evil
eye,” is found also in Mt 20 15; Mk 7 22, where
if means “jealousy” or “covetousness.” With
ponéros =“‘covetous,” haplous would =“‘generous”’;
and this rendition gives cxcellent sense in Mt, where
the further context deals with love of money. Yet
in Lk it is meaningless, where the context is of a
different sort, a fact perhaps indicating that Lk has
placed the saying in a bad context. Or the Gr
tr of Christ’s words used by Matthew and Luke
may have taken the moral terms haplous and
ponéros to translate physical terms healthy” and
“diseased”?) employed in the original Aramaic.
The Sinaitic Syr version of Lk 11 36 may perhaps
contain a trace of an older rendering. Sce Jtilicher,
Die Gleichnisreden Jesu, II, 98-108.

Burton Scotr Easton

SINGULAR, sin’gt-lar: “Pertaining to the single
person,” “individual,” and so sometimes “anusual,
“remarkable.” So Wisd 14 18, AV “‘the singular
diligence of the artificer” (p:Aoriula, philotimta, “love
of honor,” RV “ambition”). In Lev 27 2 by ‘when


a man shall make a singular vow’ AV seems to have |


understood a “personal” or “private” vow. RV
has “accomplish a vow,” with m ‘‘make a special
vow.” Cfthesamephrase (yaphlv’ [y*phallé’ | nedher)
used of the Nazirite vow in Nu 6 2.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


SINIM, si/nim, sin’im, LAND OF (O°°O 7S,
*eree sintm; yh Ilepoav, gé Persén): The name
occurs in Isaiah’s prophecy of the return of the
people from distant lands: ‘Lo, these shall come from
far; and, lo, these from the north and from the west;
and these from the land of Sinim’’ (49 12). The
land is clearly far off, and it must be sought either
in the 8. or in the E. LXX points to an eastern
country. Many scholars have favored identifica-
tion with China, the classical Sinae. It scems
improbable that Jews had already found their
way to China; but from very early times trade
relations were established with the Far East by
way of Arabia and the Pers Gulf; and the name
may have been used by the prophet simply as
suggesting extreme remotencss. Against this view
are Dillmann (Comm. on Isa), Duhm, Cheyne and
others. Some have suggested places in the &.:
e.g. Sin (Pelusium, Ezk 30 15) and Syenc (Cheyne,
Intro to Isa, 275). But these secm to be too near.
In harmony with his reconstruction of Bib. history,
Cheyne finally concludes that the reference here is
to the return from a captivity in North Arabia (ZB,
s.v.). While no certain decision is possible, prob-
ability points to the E., and China cannot be quite


ruled out. See art. “China,” Hnc Britt, 1880.
W. Ewine
SINITES, si’nits (90, sinz): A Canaanite


people mentioned in Gen 10 17; 1 Ch 115. The
identification is uncertain. Jerome mentions a ruined
city Sin, near Arka, at the foot of Lebanon.


SINLESSNESS, sin‘les-nes: The 15th Anglican
article (“Of Christ Alone without Sin’) may be
quoted as a true summary of Scripture teaching
on sinlessness: ‘‘Christ in the truth of our nature
was made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted,
from which He was clearly [prorsus} void, both in
His flesh and in His spirit... .. Sin, as Saint
John saith, was not in Him. But all we the rest,
though baptized, and born again in Christ, yet
offend in many things; and, if we say we have no
sin, we deceive ourselves.”

Here the sinlessness of the Incarnate Son is


affirmed. It needs no elaborate argument to

show that this is the affirmation of
1. Christ Scripture. It is not only, as we are
Sinless reminded above, definitely taught


there. Yet more is it implied in the
mysterious (and morally miraculous) phenomenon
of the Lord’s evidently fotal immunity from the
sense of sin, His freedom from inward discord or ,
imperfection, from the slightest discontent with
self. It isnot too much to say that this representa-
tion is self-evidential of its truth to fact. Had it
been the invention of worshipping disciples, we may
say with confidence that they (supposed thus cap-
able of “free handling’) would have been certain
to betray some moral aberrations in their por-
traiture of their Master. They must have failed
to put before us the profound ethical paradox of a
person who, on the one hand, enjoins penitence
and (with a tenderness infinitely deep) faves the
penitent, and, on the other hand, is never for a
moment penitent Himself, and who all the while
has proved, from the first, a supreme moral and
spiritual magnet, ‘drawing allmen tohim.” Mean-
while the Scripture represents the sinlessness of the
Incarnate Lord as no mere automatic or effortless
condition. He is sensitive to temptation, to a
degree which makes it agony. His sinlessness, as
to actual expcrience (we are not here considering
the matter sub specie aeternitatis), lies in the perfect
fidelity to the Father of a will, exercised under
human conditions, filled absolutely with the Holy
Spirit, willingly received.


Sinner
Sirach, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2806


On the other hand, ‘‘we the rest,’’ contemplated
as true believers, are warned by the general teaching
of Scripture never to affirm sinlessness
2. Saints as our condition. There are passages
Not Sinless (e.g. 1 Jn 3 9; 5 1f) which affirm of
the regenerate man that he ‘‘sinneth
not.” But it seems obvious to remark that such
words, taken without context and balance, would
prove too much; they would make the smallest
sense of sin a tremendous evidence against the
person’s regeneration at all. It would seem that
such words practically mean that sin and the regen-
erate character are diametrical opposites, so that
sinning is owt of character, not in the man as such,
but in the Christian as such. And the practical
result is an unconquerable aversion and opposition
in the regenerate will toward all known sin, and a
readiness as sensitive as possible for confession of
failure. Meanwhile such passages as 1 Jn are, to
the unbiased reader, an urgent warning of the peril
of affirming our perfect purity of will and character.
But then, on the other hand, Scripture abounds in
both precepts and promises bearing on the fact that
in Christ and by the power of His Spirit, received
by faith into a watchful soul, our weakness can be
so lifted and transformed that a moral purification
and emancipation is possible for the weakest Chris-
tian which, compared with the best efforts of un-
regenerate nature, is a ‘‘more than conquest” over
evil (see e.g. 2 Cor 12 9.10; Gal 2 20; Eph 6 16;
Jude ver 24). See further FLesu; Spirir.
Hanviey DunELM
SINNER, sin’ér (ROO, hata’; apaprodds, hamar-
iolés, ‘devoted to sin,’”’ “erring one’): In the NT,
in addition to its ordinary significance of one that
sins (Lk 5 8; 18 2; Rom 6 8.19; 1 Tim 1 15; He
7 26), the term is applied to those who lived in dis-
regard of ceremonial prescription (Mt 9 10.11; Mk
2 15 ff; Lk & 30; Gal 2 15); to those stained with
certain definite vices or crimes, as the publicans (Lk
15 2; 18 13; 19 7); to the heathen (Mt 26 45;
Gal 2 15; ef Tob 13 6; 1 Macc 1 34; 2 Macc 2 48.
62); to the preéminently sinful (Mk 8 38; Jn 9 24.
31; Gal 2 17; 1 Tim 1 9; Jude ver 15). It was
the Jewish term for a woman of ill-fame (Lk 7 37;
cf Mt 21 32, where it is stated that such had come
even to John’s baptism also). For the general Bib.
conception of the term, see Sin. MM. O. Evans


SION, si’‘un (JIN, s?’dn; Undv, Sen):

(1) A name given to Mt. Hermon in Dt 4 48.
The name may mean “protuberance” or ‘‘peak,”
‘and may have denoted the lofty snow-covered
horn of the mountain as seen from the 8. It may,
however, be a scribal error for Sirion, the name by
which the mountain was known to the Zidonians.
Syr takes it in this sense, which, however, may be
a correction of the Heb. It is possible that this
name, like Senir, may have applied to some distinct
part of the Hermon Range.

(2) Mt. Sion; see Zron.


SIPHMOTH, sif’moth, sif’moth (MYDDW, siph-
moth [Ginsburg], MVADW, shiphdmodth [Baer]; Zadet,
Saphet): One of the cities to which David sent pres-
ents from Ziklag (1 5 30 28). 1t occurs between
Aroer and Eshtemoa, so it must have been some-
where in Southern Judah. The site has not been
recovered. Zabdi the Shiphmite (1 Ch 27 27) may
quite probably have been a native of this place.

SIPPAI, sip’i, si-pa’l. See Sapu.

SIR, sir: In the OT this word in Gen 43 20 AV
(ddhén) is changed in RV into “my lord.” In the
NT the word sometimes represents 4v%p, anér, as


in Acts 7 26; 14 15; 19 25, cte; more frequently
xdpcos, kuiirios, “‘lord,’’ asin Mt 18 27; 21 30; 27 36;
Jn 4 11.15.19.49 (RVm “lord”’); 20 15. In Rev
7 14, RV renders “my lord.”


SIRACH, si’rak (BOOK OF), or The Wisdom

of Jesus the Son of Sirach:
I. Name

II. Canonicity

Ill. Contents

IV. Teacnine

1. Religion

2. Morals

3. Manners

4. Counsels of Prudence

V. Literary Form

VI. AvTHOR
1. Jesus, Son of Sirach
2. Otber Views
Unity anp INTEGRITY
Date
1. Most Probable Views
2. Other Views

IX. Oricinat Lancuaces

1. Composed in Hebrew
2. Margolioutb’s View
X. Versions
1. Greek
2. Syriac
3. Latin
4. English
LitERATURE

Sirach is the largest and most comprehensive
example of Wisdom Literature (see Wispom LiTERa-
TURE), and it has also the distinction of being the
oldest book in the Apoc, being indeed older than at
least two books (Dnl, Est) which have found a place
in the Canon alike of the Eastern and Western
churches.

I, Name.—The Heb copy of the book which
Jerome knew bore, according to his explicit testi-
mony (see his preface to his version of Libri Sol.),
the same title as the canonical Prov, i.e. D220,
m‘shdlim, ‘“Proverbs’’ ( Parabolae is Jerome’s word).
It is quoted in rabbinical lit. by the sing. of this
name, ?W, mdshél= Aram. soma, mathia’, but
in the Talm it is cited by the author’s name, ‘‘Ben
Sira” (NTO 12, ben stra’). The Heb fragments
found in recent years have no title attached to
them. In the Gr MSS the heading is Zogla ’Inaod
uiod Zipdy (or Zepdx), Sophia Léso% huiot Sirdch
(Seirdch), “The Wisdom of Jesus, son of Sirach”
(so 8 A); or simply Zola Tepdx, Sophia Seirdch
(B), “The Wisdom of Sirach.’ The Fathers called
it either (as Euseb., etc)  mavdperos copla, hé
pandretos sophia, “the all virtuous wisdom,” or
simply # mavdperos, hé pandretos, “the all virtuous
(one),” or (Clement of Alex.) tacdaywyés, paida-
gogés, “teacher.” The first Heb and the several
Gr titles describe the subject-matter, one Heb title
(ben sira@’) the author. But the Lat name Ecclesias-
ticus was given the book because it was one of the
books allowed to be read in the Ecclesia, or church,
for edification (libri ecclesiastict), though not one
of the books of the Canon (libri canonict) which
could be quoted in proof or disproof of doctrine.
The present book is called Ecclesiasticus by way of
preéminence since the time of Cyprian (Testimon.
2, etc). The Syr (Pesh) title as given in the
London Polyglot is “The Book of Jesus the son
of Simon ’Asir@’ [NJ"ON], called also the Book of
the Wisdom of Bar [=Heb ben, ‘“‘son of’’] ’?Asira’.”
There can be no doubt that Asira (sometimes tr?
“bound’’) is but a eorrupted form of Sira. For
other explanations see Ryssel in Kautzsch, AT
Apoc, 234.

Lagarde in his corrected text prefixes the title, ‘‘ The
Wisdom of Bar [ =Heb ben, ‘‘son of''] Sira."’ How is it
that the Heb R30, sird', has in the Gr become Sirach


(or Seirach}? How are we to explain the final ch in
the Gr? The present writer thinks it is due to an


2807


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sinner
Sirach, Book of


attempt to represent in writing the guttural sound of the
final letter ‘aleph in the Heb name asin the Gr ‘AccAdapax,


Akeldamdch, for the Aram. NYO DPM, hdkal dema’
(Acts 119). Dalman, however (Aram. Gramm., 161, n. 6),


followed by Ryssel, holds that the final ch is simply a
sign that the word is indeclinahle; cf ‘lwojx, Idséch


(Lk 3 26), for Heb %O47, yose.


I, Canonicity.—Though older than both Dal
and Est, this book was never admitted into the
Jewish Canon. There are numerous quotations
from it, however, in Talmudic and rabbinic lit. (see
alist in Zunz, Die Gottesdienstlichen Vortrdge?, 101 1;
Delitzsch, Zur Geschichte der jiid. Poéste, 2041;
Schechter, JQR, III, 682-706; Cowley and Neu-
bauer, The Original Heb of a Portion of Ecclus,
x1x-xxx). It is not referred to explicitly in Scrip-
ture, yet it is always cited by Jewish and Chris-
tian writers with respect and perhaps sometimes
as Scripture. It forms a part of the Vulg of the
Tridentine Council and therefore of the Romanist
Canon, but the Protestant churches have never
recognized it as canonical, though the bulk of
modern Protestant scholars set. a much higher value
upon it than they do upon many books in the Protes-
tant Canon (Ch, Est, etc). It was accepted as of
canonical rank by Augustine and by the Councils
of Hippo (393) and Carthage (897, 419), yet it is
omitted from the lists of accepted books given by
Melito (¢c 180 AD), Origen, in the Apost. Canons
and in the list of the Councils of Laodicea (341
and 381). Jerome writes in Libri Sol.: “Let the
church read these two books [Wisd and Sir] for the
instruction of the people, not for establishing the
authority of the dogmas of the church.” It suffered
in the respect of many because it was not usually
connected with a great name; ef the so-called
“Proverbs of Solomon.’ Sir is cited or referred to
frequently in the Ep. of Jas (Jas 1 2-4—cf Sir 2
1-5; Jas 1 5—cef Sir 1 26; 41 22; 51 13f; Jas18
[“double minded” ]—cf Sir 1 28, etc). The book
is often cited in the works of the Fathers (Clem.
Alex., Origen, Augustine, etc) and also in the Apos
Const with the formula that introduces Scripture
passages: ‘‘The Scripture says,’’etc. The Reformers
valued Sir highly, and parts of it have been incor-
porated into the Anglican Prayer-book.

HI. Contents.—It is quite impossible in the book
as lt stands to trace any one scheme of thought,
for the author’s mind moves lightly from topie to
topic, recurring frequently to the same theme and
repeating not seldom the same idea. It is, however,
too much to say with Sonntag (De Jesu Siracidae,
etc) that the book is a farrago of sayings with no
connection, or with Berthold that the “work is but
arhapsody,”’ for the whole is informed and controlled
by one master thought, the supreme value to every-
one of Wisdom. By this last the writer means the
Jewish religion as conceived by enlightened Jews
toward the beginning of the 2d cent. BC, and as
reflected in the Law of Moses (see 24 23-34), and in
a less degree in the books of the Prophets and in the
other writings (see Prologue). The book follows the
lines of the canonical Book of Prov, and is made up
of short pithy sayings with occasional longer discus-
sions, largely collected but in part composed, and all
informed and governed by the dominant note of the
book: true Wisdom, the chief end of man. Most of
the book is poetical in form, and even in the prose
parts the parallelism of Heb poetry Is found.
Many unsuccessful attempts have been, made to
trace a definite continuous line of reasoning in the
book, but the vital differences in the schemes pro-
pounded suggest what an examination of the
book itself confirms, that the compiler and author
put his materials together with little or no regard
to logical connection, though he never loses sight
of his main theme—Wisdom the chief thing.


Eichhorn (#inleitung, 50 ff) divides the book into threo
parts (chs 1-23; 24—42 14; 42 15—50 24), and main-
tains that at first each of these was a separate work,
united subsequently by the author. Julian divides
the work into three, Scholz into twelve, Fritzsche (£in-
leitung, xxxii) and Ryssel (op. cit., 240) inte seven, Eders-
heim (op. cit., 19f) and R. G. Moulton (Modern Reader's
Bible: Heclus, xvi ff) into five portions, and many other
arrangements have been proposed and defended as hy
Ewald, Holzmann, Bissell, Zéckler, etc. That there are
small independent sections, essayeties, poems, etc, was
seen hy the early scribes to whom the LX X in its present
form was largely due, for they have prefixed headings to
the sections heginning with the following verses: 18 30


(‘Temperance of Soul’); 20 27 (‘'Proverbs"'); 23 7
24 1 (‘The Praise of


(“Discipline of the Mouth");
Wisdom"); 301 (‘’Concerning Children"); 380 14


(Concerning Health"); 30.16 (‘Concerning Foods”;
this Is absent from many MSS, though retained by
Swete who, however, omits the preceding heading);
30_24 (EV 33 24, ‘‘Concerning Servants"); 35 (EV 82 1,
““Concerning Rulers"); 44 1 (‘Praise of the Fathers’’);
51 1 (The Prayer of Jesus, Son of Sirach’'). Prob-
ably the whole book possessed such headings at one time,
and it is quite possible that they originated in the need to
guide readers after the hook had hecome one of the
chief church reading-hooks (so W. J. Deane in_Hrpos,
il, vi, 327). These headings are given in Eng. in
AV proper (in the margin), though in medern reprints,
as also in RV, they are unfortunately omitted. The
whole book has been arranged in headed sections by
H. J. Holzmann (Bunsen's Bibelwerk, IX, 392 ff) and
by R. G. Moulton (op. cit.).

IV. Teaching.—In general] it may be said that
the principles enunciated in this book agree with
those of the Wisdom school of Palestinian Judaism
about 200 BC, though there is not a word in the
book about a Messianic hope or the setting up of
a Messianic kingdom. None of the views char-
acteristic of Alexandrian Judaism and absent, from
the teaching of Palestinian Judaism are to be found
in this book, though some of them at least are repre-
sented in Wisd (see Wispom or Soxtomon, VI;
Teacuina). Gfrérer (Milo und die jid.-alez.
Philo., II, 18 ff) and Dahne (Gesch. der jiid.-alez.
rel. Phil., II, 141 ff) hold that the book contains
many Alexandrian expressions and numerous
statements peculiar to the Alexandrian philosophy.
But apart from some late interpolations, mostly
Christian, what these Ger. scholars say is untrue, as
Drummond (Philo Judaeus, I, 144 ff), Deane
(Expos, 11, v, 334 ff) and others have shown. The
outstanding features of Alexandrianism are the
allegorical interpretation of the Scriptures, its eon-
ception of the ecstatic vision of God, its doctrine
of mediating powers between man and God and
its adoption of purely Gr ideas. None of these
can be traced inSir. The Hebrews never developed
a theoretical or speculative theology or philosophy:
all their thinking gathered about life and conduct;
the duties that men owed to Gad and to one another;
the hopes that they cherished and the fears by which
they were animated. This is the only philosophy
which the Bible and the so-called Apoc teach,
and it is seen at its highest point in the so-called
Wisnom LiteraTuRE (q.v.). The main lines of
the teaching of Sir may be set out as follows, under
the three heads of religion, morals, and manners.

(1) God.—The view of God given in this book
agrees generally with that put forth by the later

writers of the OT from the exile
1. Religion (Second Isa, Job, etc) onward, though

the God of this book lacks the love
and tenderness of the Jeh of the OT prophets.
God is present everywhere (16 17-23); He created
the world as an ordered whole (16 26-30) and
made man intelligent and supreme over all flesh.
The expressions used are no doubt modeled on
Gen 1, and it may fairly be inferred that creation
out of nothing is meant. Wisd, on the other hand,
teaches the Alexandrian doctrine that matter (An,
hilé) is eternal and that the Creator’s work con-
sisted of fashioning, adapting and beautifying.
The world is a creature of God, not (as in Philo, etc)


Sirach, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2808


an emanation from Him. Yet is He compassionate
and forgiving (17 24ff). His works are past
finding out (18 2 ff); but His compassion is upon
all flesh (18 13), 1.e. upon all that accept His
chastening and seek to do His will (18 14). In
43 27 God is said to be “‘the all” (7d rv, 16 pdn),
which simply means that He pervades and is the
ground of everything. It is not Alexandrian
pantheism that is taught. Gfrérer and others take
@ contrary view.

(2) Revelation —In harmony with other products
of the ‘Wise Men,” Sir sets chief value upon natural
religion, that revealed in the instincts, reason
and conscience of man as well as by the sun, moon,
stars, etc. Yet Sir gives far more prominence than
Prov to the idea that the Divine Will is specially
made known in the Law of Moses (24 23; 45 1-4).
We do not meet once with the word “‘law” in Eccl, nor
law in the technical] sense (Law of Moses) in either
Job, Wisd or Prov. In the last-named it is simply
one of many synonyms denoting ‘‘Wisdom.” In
Sir the word occurs over 20 t, not, however, always,
even when the expression ‘‘Law of Moses’’ is used, in
the sense of the ‘‘five books” (Pent). It generally
includes in its connotation also ‘the prophecies and
the rest of the books” (Prologue); see 32 (LX-X 35)
24; 33 (LXX 36) 1-3.

(3) Sin.—Sin is due to the wrong exercise of man’s
free will. Men ean, if they like, keep the com-
mandments, and when they break from them they
are themselves alone to be blamed (15 14-17). Yet
it was through a woman (Eve) that sin entered the
world and death by sin (25 24; cf 1 Tim 2 14).
See Rom 6 12 where ‘‘one man,” strictly “human
being”? (ver 14, ““Adam’’), is made the first cause of
sin. But nowhere in Sir is the doctrine of original
sin taught.

(4) Predestination.—N otwithstanding the promi-
nence given to “free will’ (see [3], above), Sir
teaches the doctrine of predestination, for God has
determined that some men should be high and some
low, some blessed and others cursed (33 10 ff).

(5) Satan.—The word ‘‘Satan” (Zaravas, Satands)
in 21 27 (it occurs nowhere else in the Apoc)
denotes one’s own wicked heart, as the parallelism
shows.

(6) Salvation —There is no salvation except by
way of good works on man’s part (14 16f) and
forgiveness on God’s (17 24-32). The only atone-
ment is through one’s own good works (6 5f),
honoring parents (82 14f), almsgiving, ete (3 30;
17 19 ff). Thereis no objective atonement (‘‘ex-
piation,” lit. “propitiation”; the Gr vb. éf:Adcxopar,
exildskomai, is the great LAX word for the Heb
BD, kipper, ‘to atone’).

(7) Sacrifice —The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to God (34 18 ff), thongh He Himself
appointed sacrifices and first-fruits (45 20f), and
when the righteous offer sacrifices to God they are
accepted and remembered in the time to come (35
1-12).

(8) Feasts.—Fcstivals as well as seasons are
ordained by God to be observed by man (33 [LXX
36] 8f; cf Gen 1 14).

(9) Prayer.—The duty of prayer is often pointed
out (37 15, etc), the necessary preparation defined
(17 25; 18 20.23), and its successful issne promised
(35 17). There must be no vain repetitions
(7 14; cf Mt 6 7), nor should there be any faint-
heartedness in the matter (6 10; cf Jas 1 6).
Men are to pray in sickness (38 9), but all the
same the physician should be consulted and his
advice followed (38 11.12 ff).

(10) Angelology.—Sir nowhere clearly expresses
his belief in angels or uses language which implies
such a belief. For “an angel [6 dyyedos, ho
dggelos) destroyed them” the Heb of the original


passage (2 1K 19 35) has MDA, maggéphah,
“plague,”’ and so the Syr, though the LXX (fol-
lowed by the Vulg) has “angel.”

(11) Eschatology—Nowhere in this book is the
doctrine of a future life taught, and the whole
teaching of the book leaves no place for such a
doctrine. Men will be indeed rewarded or pun-
ished according to their conduct, but in this world
(see 2 10f; 9 12; 11 26f). The retribution is,
however, not confined to the individuals in their life-
time; it extends to their children and involves their
own glorious or inglorious name after death (see 11
28; 40 15; 41 6; 44 11-13). The passage concern-
ing Gehenna (7 17) is undoubtedly spurious and is
lacking in the Syr, Ethiopic, ete. Since the book
is silent as to a future life, it is of necessity silent on
the question of a resurrection. Nothing is hinted
as to a life beyond the grave, even in 41 1-4,
where the author deprecates the fear of death. In
these matters Sir agrees with the Pent and the
prophetic and poetical books of the OT (Pss, Job,
etc), none of which give any intimation of a life
beyond the grave. Little or nothing is said of the
Messianic hope which must have been entertained
largely by Palestinian Jews living in the anthor’s
time, though in 36 (LXX 33) 1-17 the writer
prays for the restoration of Israel and Jerus, i.e.
R. H. Charles thinks (Eschatology, etc, 65), for the
bringing in of the Messianic kmgdom.

(12) Sirach’s doctrine of Wisdom.—For a general
disenssion of the rise and development of the con-
ception of Wisdom in the OT and in the Apoc see
Wispom Lirerature. A brief statement as to
what the word implies in Sir is all that can here be
attempted. It is in chs 1 and 24 that Ben Sira’s
doctrine is chiefly contained.

Wisdom is from God: He created it and it must
therefore have a separate existence. Yet it is
dependent on Him. It is omnipresent, thongh it
dwells in a peculiar sense with all flesh. The root
and beginning of Wisdom, its fulness and crown,
are the fear of God (1 14.16.18.21); so that only
the obedient and pious possess it (1 10.26); indeed
Wisdom is identified with the fear of the Lord and
the observance of the Law (19 20); it is even made
one with the Law of Moses (24 23), i.e. it consists
of practical principles, of precepts regulating the life.
In this doctrine we have a combination of uni-
versalism, principles of reason and Jewish particular-
ism as the teaching of the revealed Law. We have
the first in 24 3-21; the second in 24 23-34. Have
we in this chapter, as in Prov, nothing outside the
teaching of Palestinian Judaism? Gfrérer (op. cit.,
II, 18 ff) denies this, maintaining that the whole of ch
24 was written by an Alexandrian Jew and adopted
unchanged by Ben Sira. But what is there in this
chapter which an orthodox, well-informed Palestinian
Jew of Ben Sira’s time might not well have written?
It is quite another question whether this whole
conception of Wisdom in the so-called Wisdom
books is not due, in some measure, to Gr, thongh not
Alexandrian, influence, unless indeed the Gr influ-
ence came by way of Alexandria. In the philosophy
of Socrates, and in a less exclusive sense in that of
Plato and Aristotle, the good man is the wise one.
Cheyne (Job and Sol, 190) goes probably too far
when he says, ‘By Gr philosophy Sirach, as far
as we can sce, was wholly uninfluenced.”

The ethical principle of Sir is Hedonism or
individual utilitarianism, as is that of Prov and the

OT generally, though in the Pss and
2. Morals in the prophetical writings gratitude
to God for the love He has shown and
the kind acts He has performed is the basis of end-
less appeals and vows. Moreover, the individual
point of view is reached only in the late parts of the
OT. In the older OT books, as in Plato, ete,


2809


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA | Sirach, Book of


it is the state that constitutes the unit, not the
individual human being. The rewards and penalties
of conduct, good and bad, belong to this present
world. See what is said in (11) ‘Eschatology,”’
ane see also 2 7f; 1117; 16 6f; 40 13f,
etc.

The hedonistic principle is carried so far that we
are urged to help the good because they are most
likely to prove serviceable to us (12 2); to aid our
fellow-man in distress, so that in his days of pros-
perity he may be our friend (22 23); contrast the
teaching of Jesus Christ (Lk 6 30-36). Friendsare
to be bemoaned for appearance’ sake (88 17). Yet
many of the precepts are lofty. We are exhorted
to show kindness and forbearance to the poor and to
give help to our fellow-man (29 8.20); to give alms
(12 3); speak kindly (18 15-18); masters should
treat servants as brethren, nay as they would
themselves be treated (7 20-22; 33 30f); parents
should give heed to the proper training of their ehil-
dren (3 2; 7 23; 30 1-13); and childreu ought
to respect and obey their parents (3 1-16). It is
men’s duty to defend the truth and to fight for it.
So shall the Lord fight for them (4 25.28). Pride
is denounced (10 2 ff), and humility (3 18), as
well as forgiveness (28 2), commended.

Sir is as much a code of etiquette as one of ethics,
the motive being almost invariably the individual's

own good. Far more attention is
3. Manners given to ‘‘manners” in Sir than in

Prov, owing to the fact that a more
complex and artificial state of society had arisen
in Pal. When one is invited to a banquet he is
not to show greed or to be too forward in helping
himself to the good things provided. He is to be
the first to leave and not to be insatiable (31 12-18).
Moderation in eating is necessary for health as
well as for appearance’ sake (31 19-22). Mourning
for the dead is a social propriety, and it should on
that account be carefully carried out, since failure
to do this brings bad repute (38 16f). It is quite
wrong to stand in front of people’s doors, peeping
and listening: only fools do this (21 23 f). Music and
wine are praised: nay even a “concert of music” and
a “banquet of wine’ are good in their season
and in moderation (32 [LXX $5] 5f). The author
has not a high opinion of woman (26 13). A man
is to be on his strict guard against singing and
dancing girls and harlots, and adultery is an evil
to be feared and avoided (36 18-26). From a
woman sin began, and it is through her that we all
die (25 4). Yet no one has used more eulogistic
terms in praising the good wife than Ben Sira (26
1 ff), or in extolling the happiness of the home
when the husband and wife “walk together in
agreement” (26 1).

Never lend money to a man more powerful than

thyself or thou wilt probably lose it (8 12). It is

unwise to become surety for another
4. Counsels (29 18; 8 13), yet for a good man one
of Prudence would become surety (29 14) and he

would even lend to him (29 1 ff). It
should be remembered that in those times lending
and becoming financially liable were acts of kind-
ness, pure and simple: the Jewish Law forbade the
taking of interest in any form (see Century Bible,
“Pzra,” etc, 198). ‘A slip on a pavement is better
than a slip with the tongue,” so guard thy mouth
(20 18); ‘He that is wise in words shall advance
himself; and one that is prudent will please great
men?’ (20 27). The writer has the pride of his class,
for he thinks the common untrained mind, that of
the ploughman, carpenter and the like, has little
capacity for dealing with problems of the intellect
(88 24-34). :

V. Literary Form.—The bulk of the book is
poetical in form, abounding in that parallelism


which characterizes Heb poetry, though it is less
antithetic and regular than in Prov. No definite
meter has been discovered, though Bickell, Margoli-
outh and others maintain the contrary (see PorTry,
Hesrew). Even in the prose parts parallelism
is found. The only strophic arrangement is that
suggested by similarity of subject-matter.


Bickell (Zeitschr. fir katholische Theol., 1882) trd 51_1-
20 back into Heb and tried to prove that it is an alpba-
hetic acrostic ps, and Taylor supports this view by an
examination of the lately discovered fragments of the Heb
text (see The Wisdom of Ben Sira, etc, by 8. Schechter
and C. Taylor, lxxix ff). After 1 12 of the Gr and other
VSS the Heh has a ps of 15 verses closely resembling
Ps 136; hut the Heb VS of 61 1-20 does not favor
Bickell’s view, nor does the ps, found only in the Heh, lend
much support to what either Bickell or Taylor says.
Space precludes detailed proofs.


VI. Author.—The proper name of the author was
Jesus (Jeshua, Gr Tésous[?]), the family name being


“Ben Sira.’ The full name would
1. Jesus, be therefore ‘Jesus Ben Sira.”’ In
Son of the Talm and other Jewish writings
Sirach he is known as “Ben Sira,” lit. ‘son


{or descendant?] of Sira.”’ Who Sira
was is unknown. No other book in the Apoc gives
the name of its author as the Prologue to Sir does.
In the best Gr MSS (BNA) of 50 27, the author’s
name appears as ’Incots vids Zepdx 'Edeafdp 6
‘Ieporodvupelrns, Tésovis huids Seirdch Eleazdr ho
Hierosolumettes, “Jesus the son of Sirach [son of]
Eleazar the Jerusalemite.”’ For the last two
words & has by a copyist’s error, 6 lepebs 6 Zodv-
peltys, ho hieretis ho Solumettés, ‘‘the Solomon-like
priest.” The Heb text of 50 27 and 61 30 gives
the following genealogy: Simeon son of Jesus, son
of Eleazar, son of Sira, making the author the grand-
son and not the son of Sira, and so he is called by
Saadia; see HDB (Nestle) and EB, II, 1165 (Toy).
We know nothing of Ben Sira beyond what can be
gathered from the book itself. He was a resident
in Pal (24 10f), an orthodox Jew, well read in at


‘least Jewish lit., a shrewd observer of life, with a


philosophical bent, though true to the national

faith. Hehad traveled far and seen much (34 11 f).

Hig interests were too general and his outlook too

wide to allow of his being either a priest or a scribe.
Many suppositions have heen put forward as to the

author's identity.

a0) That the author was a priest: so in. cod. & (50 27).


29-31 he speaks much of the priesthood, and there
are numerous references to sacrifices in


2. Other the book. In 45 6-26 he has a long
Vi poem in praise of Aaron and his high-
lews riesthood. Yet on the whole Ben


ira does not write as a priest.

(2) That he was a high priest: so Syncellus (Chron, ed
Dindf., 1 525) through a misunderstanding of a passage
In Eusehius. But the teaching and temper of the book
make this supposition more improbahle than the last.

(3) That he was a physician: an inference drawn from
$8 11.12 ff and other references to the professional
healer of the body (10 10). But this is a very small
foundation on which to build so great an edifice.

(4) That he was one of the 72 translators (LXX):
so Lapide (Comm.), Calmet, Goldhager, a wholly un-
supported hypothesis.

(5) No one of course helieves that Solomon wrote the
hook, though many of the early Fathers held that he was
the author of the five Wisdom Books, Prov, Eccl, Cant,
Sir and Wisd.


VII. Unity and Integrity.—There is, on the
whole, such a uniformity in the style and teaching
of the book that most scholars agree in ascribing
the whole book (except the Prologue, which is the
work of the translator) to Ben Sira. This does
not mean that he composed every line; he must
have adopted current sayings, written and oral, and
this will account for the apparent contradictions, as
about becoming surety (29 14), and refusing to be-
come surety (8 13; 29 18); words in praise (25 1;
26 1 ff) and condemnation of women (26 4.13; 36
18-26); the varying estimates of life (86 16-35;


Sirach, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2810


40 1-11), ete. But in these seeming opposites we
have probably no more than complementary prin-
ciples, the whole making up the complete truth.
Nothing is more manifest in the book than the all-
pervading thought of one dominant mind. Some
have denied the genuineness of ch 61, but the evi-
dence is at least indecisive. There is nothing in this
chapter inconsistent with the rest of the book.

In the recently discovered fragments of Heb text there
is a ps between vs 12 and 13 of the Gr and EV which
seems a copy of Ps 186. Itis absent from the VSS and
its genuineness is doubtful. But in both the Heb and
Gr texts there are undoubted additions and omissions.
There are, in the Gr, frequent glosses by Christian editors
or copyists and other changes (by the translators 2)
in the direction of Alexandrian Judaism; see Speaker's
Apoc and other comms. for details.

VIII, Date.—In the book itself there is one mark
of definite date. (60 1), and in the Prologue there
is another. Unfortunately both are ambiguous.
In the Prologue the translator, whose grandfather
or ancestor (Gr rémmos, pdppos) wrote the book (the
younger Siracides, as he is called), says that he
reached Egypt, where he found and tr? this book
in the reign of Euergetes, king of Egypt. But there
were two Egyp kings called Euergetes, viz. Ptolemy
Euergetes, or Euergetes I (247-222 BC), and Ptol-
emy VII Physcon, or Euergetes II (218- 198 BC).
Sir 50 1 mentions, among the great men whom he
praises, Simon the high priest, son of Onias, who is
named last in the list and lived probably near the
time of the elder Siracides. But there were two high
priests called Simon and each of them was a son
of Onias, viz. Simon J, son of Onias I (c 310-290
BC), and Simon JI, son of Onias II (ec 218-198 BC).
Scholars differ as to which Euergetes is meant in the
Prologue and which Simon in 60 1.

The conclusions to which the evidence has brought
the present writer are these: (1) that Simon J (d. 290

BC) is the high priest meant; (2) that


1. Most Ptolemy VII Physcon (218-198 BC) is
Probable the Euergetes meant.
Views (1) In favor of the first proposition


are the following:

(a) The book must have been written some time
after the death of Simon, for in the meantime an
artificial fame had gathered around the name, and
the very allusion to him as a hero of the past makes
it clear that he had been long dead. Assuming
that Simon had died in 290 BC, as seems likely,
it is a reasonable conclusion that the original Heb
work was composed somewhat later than 250 BC.
If Simon II is the man intended, the book could
hardly have been composed before 150 BC, an
impossible date; see below.

(b) In the list. of great men in chs 44-60 the
praises of Simon (50 1 ff) are sung after those of
Nehemiah (49 13), suggesting that the space of
time between them was not very great.

(ec) The “Simon the Just”? of Jos was certainly
Simon I, he being so called, this Jewish historian
says (Ant, XII, ii, 5), on account of his piety and
kindness.

(2) It is probable that the “Simon the Just” of the
Mish (Abs i.2) is also Simon I, though this is not
certain. Jt is said of him that he was one of the
last members of the great synagogue and in the
Talm he is the hero of many glorifying legends.
The so-called great’ synagogue never really existed,
but the date assigned to it in Jewish tradition shows
that it is Simon I that is thought of.

(e) In the Syr VS (Pesh) 60 23 reads thus:
“Let it [peace] be established with Simon the Just,”
etc. Some MSS have “Simon the Ixind.” This
text muy of course be wrong, but Gractz and Eders-
heim support it. This is the exact tille given to
Simon I by Jos (op. cit.), the Mish and by Jewish
tradition generally.


(f) The only references to Simon II in Jewish
history and tradition depict him in an unfavorable
light. In 2 Macc 3 heis the betrayer of the temple
to the Syrians. Even if the incident of the above
chapter were unhistorical, there must have been
some basis for the legend. Jos ( Ant, XII, iv, 10 f)
makes him side with the sons of Tobias against
Hyrcanus, son of Joseph, the wrong side from the
orthodox Jewish point of view.

(g) The high priest Simon is said (50 1-13) to
have repaired the temple and fortified the city.
Edersheim says that the temple and city stood in
need of what is here described in the time of Simon
I, but not in the time of Simon II, for Ptolemy I
(247-222 BC) in his wars with Demetrius destroyed
many fortifications in Pal to prevent their falling
into the hands of the enemy, among which Acco,
Joppa, Gaza are named, and it is natural to think
that the capital and its sanctuary were included.
This is, however, but_a priori reasoning, and Deren-
bourg argues that Simon II must be meant, since
according to Jos (Ant, XII, iii, 3) Antiochus the
Great (223-187 BC) wrote a letter in which he
undertakes that the city and temple of Jerus shall
be fully restored. This is not, however, to say that
Simon II or anyone else did, at that time, restore
either.

(hk) Of the numerous errors in the Gr text some
at least seem due to the fact that the VS in that
language was made so long after the composition of
the original Heb that the sense of several Heb words
had become lost among the Alexandrian Jews. If
we assume that the Simon of ch 50 was Simon I
(d. 290 BC), so that the Heb work was composed
about 250 BC; if we further assume that the Euer-
getes of the Prologue was Ptolemy VII (d. 198 BC),
there is a reasonable space of time to allow the
sense of the Heb to be lost in many instances (sce
Halévy, Rev. Sem., July, 1899). 1t must be ad-
mitted that there is no decisive evidence on one
side or the other, but the balance weighs in favor
of Simon I in the opinion of the present writer.

(2) That the Euergetes of the Prologue in whose
reign the translation was made must have been Ptol-
emy VII Physcon, Euergetes II, seems proved by
the translator’s statement that he came to Egypt in
the 38th year, él rod Evepyérov Baciddws, epi tot
Euergétow basiléds, i.e. almost certainly of the reign
of Euergetes, for what reason could the younger
Siracides have for giving his own age? Now
Euergetes I reigned but 25 years, but Euergetes II
(Physcon) reigned in all 54 years, from 170 to 145
BC as regent with his father, and from 145 to 116
BC as sole monarch. Jf we accept this interpre-
tation of the above words, the question is settled.
Westcott, however (DB, 1863, T, 479, n. c), says
“the words can only mean that ‘the translator in
his 38th year came to Egypt during the reign of
Euergetes.”’ Theother rendering adopted by Eich-
horn is, he adds, ‘‘absolutely set at variance with the
grammatical structure of the sentence.” In the
second ed of DB (1893) this note has become
expunged, and the article as edited by D. 8. Mar-
goliouth (I, 841) teaches the contrary view, which is
now accepted by nearly all scholars (Schiirer, etc).
We may therefore assume that the original Heb
book was composed about 240-200 BC, or some
50 or more years after the death of Simon I, and
that the translation was made about 130 BC, for the
younger Siracides came to Egypt in 132 BC, and he
gives us to understand in the Prologue that he tr?
the Heb work of his grandfather almost immediately
after reaching that country. If Simon IT (d. 198
BC) is meant in ch 60, we are compelled to assume
a date for the original work of about 150 BC in
order to allow time for the growth of the halo of
legend which had gathered about Simon. The trans-


2811


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA | Sirach, Book of


lation must, in that case, have been completed some
20 years after the composition of the Heb, a con-
clusion which the evidence opposes. The teaching
of the book belongs to 200 BC, or slightly earlier.
The doctrine of the resurrection taught in Dn] (165
BC) is ignored in Sir, as it has not yet become a
Jewish doctrine.

(I) That the Euergetes of the Prologue and the Simon


of ch 50 are in both cases the first so called. So Hug,
Scholz, Welt, Keil, Edersheim (Speaker's


2. Brief Apoc) and many others. The hook was
G accordingly written after 290 BC, perhaps
Statement in 250 BC, or later, and the translation was
of Other made some time aftcr 220 BC, say 200 BC.
Views ae That Euergctes II (d. 116 BC)
and Simon II (d. 198 BC) are the two


persons referred to. So Eichhorn, De
Wette, Ewald, Franz Delitzsch, Hitzig, Schiirer.

(3) Hitzig (Psalms, 1836, II, 118) made the original
work a product of tho Maccabean period—+an impossible
supposition, for the hook says nothing at all ahont the
Maccahees.
praised in this book (chs 50, ete); It was held in little
respect during the time of the Maccahean wars, owing to
the sympathy it showed toward the Hellenizing party,


IX, Original Languages.—-Even before the dis-
covery of the substantial fragments of what is
probably the original Heb text of this


1. Com- book, nearly all scholars had reached
posed in the conclusion that Sir was composed
Hebrew in Heb. (1) The fact of a Heb orginal


is definitely stated in the Prologue.
(2) Jerome (Praef., in vers. libri Sol.) says that he
had seen the Heb original—the same text probably
that underlies the fragments recently published,
though we cannot be sure of this. (3) Citations
apparently from the same Heb text are made not
seldom in Talmudic-and rabbinical literature. (4)
There are some word-plays in the book which in the
Gr are lost, but which reappear in thediscovered Heb
text, e.g. (43 8) 6 why xara 7d bvoua airas éori avéa-
vouévyn (read dvaveouévy), ho mén katd 16 dnoma aulés
estin auxanoméné (read ananeoméné), ‘the month is
called after her name,’ WINN Ni VawD wah,
hddhesh kishems ha’ mithhadhésh, ‘the moon accord-
ing to its name renews itself’; the Heb words for
“moon” and “renews itself” come from one root, as if
we said in English—what of course is not Enghsh—
“the moon moons itself.” There are other cases
where mistakes and omissions in the Gr are explained
by a reference to the newly found Heb text.

The strongly supported conjecture of former years
that the book was composed in Heb was turned
into a practical certamty through the discovery, by
Dr. S. Schechter and others in 1896 and after, of
the fragments of a (probably the) Heb text called
now ABCandD. ‘These contain much over half
the whole book, and that the text in them, nearly
always identical when the same passages are given


in more than one, is the original one, is exceedingly


likely, to say the least.

D. §. Margoliouth (Origin of the Original Heb

of Ecclus, 1899) bas tried to prove that the Heb
text of the fragments is a tr of a Pers

2. Margoli- VS which is itself derived from Gr

outh’s View and Syr. The proofs he offers have
not convinced scholars.

(1) He refers to words in Heb which in that
language are senseless, and he endeavors to show
that they are disgnised Pers words. As a matter
of fact, in such cases the copyist has gone wholly
wrong or the word is undecipherable.

(2) There do appear to be Pers glosses, but they
are no part of the original text, and there can be no
reasonable doubt that they are duc to a Pers reader
or copyist. :

(3) There are many cases in which the Heb can
be proved to be a better and older text than the Gr
or Syr (see Konig, Expos T, XI, 170 ff). ;

(4) As regards the character of the language, 1


Moreover, the priestly house of Zadok is’


may be said that in syntax it agrees in the main with
the classical Heb of the OT, but its vocabulary
links it with the latest OT books. Thus we have
the use of the ‘“waw-consecutive”’ with the imperfect
(43 23; 44 9.23; 45 21, etc) and with the perfect
(42 1.8.11), though the use of the simple waw with
both tenses occurs also. This mixed usage is
exactly what meets us in the latest part of the OT
(Eccl, Est, etc). As regards vocabulary, the word
VD, héphec, has the sense of “thing,” “matter,’’ in
20 9, asin Eccl 3 1; 5 7; 8 6. In generalit may
be said that the Heb is that of early post-Bib. times.
Margoliouth holds that the extant Heb VS is_no
older than the 11th cent., which is impossible. His
mistake is dne to confounding the age of the MSS
with that of the VS they contain.

(5) It is nevertheless admitted that in some cases
the Syr or the Gr or both together preserve an older
and correcter text than the Heb, but this because
the latter has sometimes been miscopied and inten-
tionally changed.

(6) The numerous Hebraisms in the Gr VS which
in the Heb have their original expression point to
the same conclusion—that this Heb text is the
original form of the book.

Margoliouth has been answered by Smend (TLZ,
1889, col. 506), Kénig (Expos T, X, XI, 1899-1900),
Noldeke (ZATW, XX, 81-94), and by many others.
Bickell (Zeitschrift fiir katholische Theol., 111, 387 fi)
holds also that the Heb Sir extant is a tr from the
Gr or Syr or both.

X. Versions.—The LXX tr was made from
the Heb direct; it is fairly correct, though in all the

extant. MSS the text is very corrupt in
1. Greek several places. (1) The book occurs in
the uncials B 8 C and part of A fairly
free from glosses, though abounding in obvious
errors. (2) The text is found in a much purer
form in cod. V and also in N@ and part of A.
All extant Gr MSS except the late cursive 248 seem
to go back to one original MS, since in all of them
the two sections 30 25—33 15 and 33 16—36 11
have changed places, so that 33 16—36 11 follows
30 24 and 30 25—33 15 comes after 36 11. Most
scholars accept the explanation of Fritzsche (Exeg.
Handbuch zu den Apok, V, 21 {) that the two leaves on
which these two parts (of similar size) were written
got mixed, the wrong one being put first. On the
other hand, the cursive 248 (14th cent.) has these sec-
tions in their proper order, and the same is true of the
Syr (Pesh), Lat and Armenian VSS and of the Gr
VS of the Complutensian Polyglot (which follows
throughout 248 and not the uncials) and EV which
is made from this Polyglot. The superiority of
248 to the older MS (B& ACV) is seen in other
parts of the Gr text. Inthe other Gr MSS, 3 25
is omitted, as it is by Edersheim and most com-
mentators before the discovery of the Heb text.
But this last supports 248 in retaining the verse, and
it is now generally kept. In 48 23 “islands” is
properly read by 248, Vulg, Syr, 23 and the Heh, but
older Gr MSS read “Jesus,” making nonsense (“And
Jesus planted her’ [atrq», autén| for “he planted
islands therein’), The other MSS have a text
which yields no sense in 43 26: EV “By reason of
him his end hath success.”’ The Gr of 248 and the
Heb give this sense: ‘The angel is equipped for his
task,” ete.

The Syr (Pesh) VS is now almost universally
acknowledged to have been made from the Heb, of
which, on the whole, it is a faithful
rendering. In some places, however,
it agrees with the LXX against the
Heb, probably under the influence of the inaccurate
idea that the Gr text is the original one. In this
VS the two sections 30 25—33 5 and 33 16—36 11


2. Syriac


Se Alphabet qe INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2812


are in proper order, as in the Heb, a fresh proof
that the Syr is not tr4 from the Gr.

The Vulg agrees with the Old Lat which follows
the LXX closely. Lapide, Sabatier and Bengel tried
to prove that the Vulg was based on
the lost original Heb, but the evidence
they supply falls far short of proof, and
recently discovered Heb fragments show that they
were wrong. The two sections transposed in the
LXX (except 248) are also transposed in the Lat,
showing that the latter is based on the Gr text.
The Lat text of both Sir and Wisd according to the
cod. Amiant is given by Lagarde in his Mittheilung-
en, 1, 243-84. This closely follows the Gr text.

AV follows the cursives and often repeats their
errors. RV isbased, for the most part, on the uncials

and thus often departs from the Heb.

4. English 3 19 is retained by AV but omitted by

For the latter clause of the verse

(“mysteries are revealed unto the meek’”’), AV is

supported by cod. 248, the Syr and the Heb. Both

EV should be corrected by the Heb in 7 26 and 38 1.
15.

For fuller details concerning VSS see Speaker's
Apoc, II, 23-32 (Edersheim); Kautzsch, Die Apok.
des AT, I, 242 ff (Ryssel), and the art. by Nestle
in HDB, IV, 544 ff.


Lirerature.—In addition to books mentioned under
Apoc and in the course of the present art., note the fol-
lowing:

(1) The text of the Heb fragments: For accounts of
the discovery and decipherments of these see HDB, IV,
546f (Nestle); Bible Polygloite (F. Vigoureux), V, 4 ff;
Schiirer, GJ V4, III, 221 ff, The text of the Heb as yet
known is conveniently printed in the following: H. L.
Strack, Die Spriiche Jesus, etc (with notes and glossary),
Leipzig, 1903; Isaac Levi, The Heb Text of Ecclesiasticus
(with notes and glossary), Leiden, 1906; Rudolf Smeud,
Die Weisheit des Jesus Sirach, Heb und Deutsch (with
notes and glossary), Berlin, 1906. The Heb appears
also in the Bible Polyglotte, ed F. Vigoureux, with the
LXX, Vulg and a French translation in | columus.
other Polyglot has appeared since the discovery of the
Heh.) There are || texts in Heh, Syr, Gr and Eng., and
also useful notes and tables in The Original Heb of Sir
39 15—49 11, by Cowles and Neubauer, Oxford, 1897.
Still later and fuller is The Wisdom of Ben Sira in Heb
and Eng., with notes on the Heb by Schechter and
Taylor, Cambridge, 1899.

(2) Commentaries: The works of Fritzsche (1859),
who neglects the evidence of the Syr and ignores the
Heb idioms in the book, and of Bissell (1880) and Eders-
heim (1888) appeared hefore the discovery of the Heb
fragments. The last-named shows both learning and
ingenuity in tracking the Heb idioms aud in explaining
difficulties by means of Heh. The following comms.
take full note of the Heb text as far as discovered:
Israel Levi, L'Eccléstastique ou la sagesse de Jésus fils de
Sira: traduit et commenté, Paris, 1898, 1901; Ryssel in
Kautzsch's Apok. des AT, I, 280-475, exceedingly valu-
able, esp. for the text and introduction, hut he takes
account of the Heb fragments published by Cowley and
Neubauer only in this hook. © complete his treatment
of the Heb parts published aftcr he wrote, see further
articles by him in Stud. wu. Krit., 1900-1-2; Knahenbaur,
Commentarius in Ecclesiasticum, Paris, 1902; Peters,
Der jiingst wieder aufgefundene hebrdische Text des Buches
Ecclesiasticus, 1902 (cf the notice hy Smend, TLZ,
1903, 72-77); Smend, Die Weishett des Jesus Strach
erkldrt, 1906 (full discussion of the hook in the newest
light; cf notice by Jiilicher in TLZ, 1908, 323-29).
The New Oxford Apoc (Intro_and Notes), ed by R. H.
Charles (1913), contains a fullIntro and Comm. J.H. A.
Hart has published separately a critical edition of cod.
248, in which he collates the principal authorities, MS
and printed.

Ot the Dict. articles those in HDB (Nestle, strong in
the critical, but, weak and defective on the historical
and exegetical side); EB (C. H. Toy, sound and well
halanced); see also Jew Ene (Israel Levi) and Enc Brit
(W. Baxendale). For detailed register of the literature
see HDB (Nestle); Jew Enc, “ Sirach"’ (Israel Levi); and
esp. Schiirer, GJ V‘, III, 219 ff.


3. Latin


T. Wirron Daviges
SIRACH, THE ALPHABET OF: Usually called
The Alphabet of Ben Sira. The compilation so
designated consists of two lists of proverbs, 22 in
Aram. and 22 in Heb, arranged in each case as
alphabet acrostics. Each of these proverbs is fol-
lowed by a haggadic comm., with legends and tales,


(No -


many of them indecent. Some of the proverbs in
the Alphabets are probably genuine compositions
by Ben Sira and are quoted as such in the Talm,
but in their present form the Alphabets are at least
as late as the 11th cent. AD.


Lirerature.—The only complete copy of the text
known isin the British Museum, the copy in the Bodleian
heing defective. Steiuschneider has published a reprint
of this last with critical notes (Alphabeticum Syracidis,
Berlin, 1854). Cowley and Neubauer (The Original
Heb of a Portion of Ecclus), besides giving a general
account of this work, add a tr into Eng. of the Aram.
proverhs. In his hrief but excellent articles in Jew_Enc
(Ben Stra, The Alphabet of), Dr. Louis Ginzherg (New
York) also gives a tr of the 22 Aram. proverbs with useful
remarks after each. The work has heen tr4 into Lat,
Yiddish (often), Judaeo-Spanish, Fr. and Ger., but never,
so far, completely into English.

T. Witton Davies

SIRAH, si’ra, WELL OF ("7100 ia, bor ha-
sirah, “the pit,” “well” or “cistern of Sarah’’):
The spot from which Abner was enticed back to
Hebron to his death (2 8 3 26). Jos (Ant, VII,
1, 5) callsit By(p)orpd, Bé(r)sird, implying that 1t was
a “well.” It is possible that this spot is now ‘Ain
SGrah, a spring which flows into a little tank near the
west side of the road about a mile out of ancient
Hebron, on the way to Jerus. There is, however
a curious cistern with steps known as Hamam Sarah
(“Sarah’s bath’’) near Romet el-Khalil, which is also
possibly the site (PEF, 314, Sh X XI).


SIRION, siri-on (JTW, siryon; Dando,
Saniér): The name of Mt. Hermon among the
Phoenicians (Dt 3 9). It is given as “Shirion” in
Ps 29 6 (Heb “breastplate” or “body armor’’).
Here it is named with Lebanon. Sirion therefore
probably did not denote a particular part of the
Hermon Range, as did Senir, but may have been sug-
gested by the conformation of the range itself, as
seen from the heights above the Phoen coast.

SISAMAI, sis’a-mi. See Srsmaz.

SISERA, sis’ér-a (N7O"0, sis‘ra’, of doubtful
meaning; Zlehodpa, Slelisdra):

(J) Given in Jgs 4 as the captain of the army of
Jabin, king of Hazor. The accounts given of the
battle of Sisera with Barak, as found in Jgs 4
and 6, have important points of difference. The
first is a prose, the second a poetic narrative. In the
first only Naphtali and Zebulun are mentioned
as being under the command of Barak; in thesecond
6 tribes are given as being under his command.
In Jgs 4 Sisera is known as the captain of Jabin’s
forces, while in Jgs 5 he seems to have been an
independent leader. There is also a difference as
to the scene of the battle and as to the manner in
which Sisera met his death at the hand of Jael.
Because of these points of difference, added to the
fact that this is the only account, in these early
times, where a king did not lead his own forces, it is
thought by many that there is here the combina-
tion of two traditions dealing with different and
distinct events.

Sisera resided in Harosheth of the Gentiles, a
place identified with el-Harithiyeh, on the right bank
of the Kishon and commanding the way from the
Central Plain to thesea. Taking the versions in the
two chapters of Jgs as being the account of a single
campaign, we find Deborah urging Barak to com-
bine the forces of Israel to wage war with Sisera as
the representative of Jabin, the king of Hazor.
The scene of the battle was on the plain at the foot
of the slopes of Mt. Tabor (4 12-14), or at the foot
of the Carmel heights (6 19). The attack of
Barak and Deborah was so furious, animated as it
was by the hatred of Sisera and the Canaanites, that
the hosts of Sisera were put to rout, and Sisera,


2813


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sirach Alphabet
Skin


deserting his troops, fled on foot tothe N.E. He took
refuge in the tent of Heber, near Kedesh, and here
met death at the hands of Jael, the wife of Heber
(see Jaz). Sisera’s name had long produced fear
in Israel because of his oppression of the people,
his vast: army and his 900 chariots of iron. His
overthrow was the cause of much rejoicing and was
celebrated by the song in which Deborah led the
people. See DEBorau.

It is interesting to note that the great rabbi Akiba,
who fought so valiantly in the Jewish war for inde-
pendence as standard bearer to Bar-cocheba, was
descended from the ancient warlike Sisera of
Harosheth.

(2) In Ezr 2 53 and Neh 7 55 the name Sisera,
after a long interval, reappears in a family of the
Nethinim. There is no evidence that the latter
Sisera is connected by family descent with the former.

C. E. Scurenx

SISINNES, si-sin’éz (2uolvvys, Sisinnés): “The
eparch [governor] of Syria and Phoenicia” under
Darius Hystaspis (1 Esd 6 3.7.27; 7 1) ¢ 520 BC=
“Tattenai the governor beyond the river” in Ezr 5
3.6; 66.13. He took a prominent part in the
efforts to prevent the rebuilding of the temple.


SISMAI, sis’mi (7200, sismay; AV Sisamai):
A Judahite, of the descendants of the daughter of
Sheshan and Jarha, his Egyp servant (1 Ch 2 40).
Commentators have compared the name to DOO,
ssm, a Phoen god (cf Rudolph Kittel, Comm. ad loc.;
BDB, s.v.).


SISTER, sis’tér (MINN , ’Ghdth): Used repeatedly
in the OT of a female (1) having the same parents
as another; or (2) having one parent in common,
with another, half-sister (Gen 20 12; Lev 18 9),
and also (3) of a female belonging to the same family
or clan as another, so a kinswoman (Gen 24 60;
Job 42 11); (4) also of a woman of the same country
(Nu 25 18). (5) Figuratively, the two kingdoms,
Israel and Judah, are sisters (Hzk 23 7 ff). (6)
Confederate cities are conceived of as sisters (Ezk
16 45 ff). (7) ’Ahath is used of objects which go
in pairs, as curtains, each ‘coupled to its sister’ (Ex
26 3.6), and of wings in pairs (Ezk 1 9; 3 18);
(8) of virtues or conditions, with which one is
closely related: “Say unto wisdom, thou art my
sister” (Prov 7 4; cf Job 17 14); (9) of a lover
concerning his spouse, as a term of endearment
(Cant 4 9f;5 11; 8 8).

In the NT, 45e\¢7, adelphé, used (1) in sense of


physical or blood kinship (Mt 12 50; 13 56;
1929; Lk 1039f; 1426; Jn 11 1f; 19 25;
Acts 23 16); (2) of fellow-members in Christ:


“Phoebe, our sister” (Rom 16 1; see also 1 Cor 7
15; 1Tim51; Jas 215); (3) possibly, of a
church, “thy elect sister’ (2 Jn ver 13). See
RELATIONSHIPS, FAMILY.
Epwarp Bacpy POLLARD

SISTER’S SON: AV translates rightly (1)
SMAMIN TB, ben-’dhdthd (Gen 29 13); and (2) vids
THs ddaAbhs, huids tés adelphés (Acts 23 16), and
wrongly, (3) éveyuds, anepsids (Col 4 10), where,
without doubt, the real meaning is ‘‘cousin,” as in
RV. See RELATIONSHIPS, FAMILY.


SITH, sith: An Anglo-Saxon word meaning
“afterward,” “since” (izk 36 6 AV and ERV,
ARV “since’’). :


SITHRI, sith’ri (WMO, sithrt): A grandson of
Kohath (Ex 6 22).


SITNAH, sit’na (mp , stindh, “hatred,” “hostil-
ity”; éx@pla, echthria): The name of the second of


the two wells dug by the herdsmen of Isaac, the
cause of further “enmity” with the herdsmen of
Gerer (Gen 26 21,m “Thatis, Enmity”). Thesite
is unknown, but Palmer (P EFS, 1871) finds an echo
of the name in Shutnet er Ruheibeh, the name of a
small valley near Ruheibeh. See ReHoBoru.


SITTING, sit/ing (27, yashabh, “to sit down or
still,” "3°, daghar, “to brood,” “hatch”; xaQéfo-
por, kaihézomai, “to sit down,” dvdkepar, and-
keimai, “to lie back,” “‘Tecline’’): The favorite
position of the Orientals (Mal 3 3; Mt 99; 26


55 [ef 51; Lk 4 20; 5 3]; Mk 14 18; Lk 18
35; Jn 2 14, ete).


‘In Pal people sit at all kinds of work; the carpenter
saws, planes, and hews with his hand-adze, sitting upon
the ground or upon the plank he is planing. The washer-
woman sits by the tub, and, in a word, no one stands
where lt is possihle to sit..... On the low shop-
counters the turbaned salesmen squat in the midst of
the gay wares'"' (LB, II, 144, 275; III, 72, 75).


Figurative: (1) To sit with denotes intimate
fellowship (Ps 11; 26 5; Lk 13 29; Rev 3 21);
(2) to sit tn the dust indicates poverty and contempt
(Isa 47 1), in darkness, ignorance (Mt 4 16) and
trouble (Mic 7 8); (3) to sit on thrones denotes
authority, judgment, and glory (Mt 19 28).

M. O. Evans

SIVAN, sé-vin’, si’van (JO, stwdn): The third
month of the Jewish year, corresponding to June
(Est 8 9). See CaLenpan.


SIXTY, siks’ti (DOW, shishshim; é€fxovra,
hextkonta). See NUMBER.


SKILL, skil, SKILFUL, skil’fo6l (forms of YT",
yadha‘ [2 Ch 2 14, ete], 772, bin [1 Ch 16 29),
Sov, sakhal [Dul 1 4, ete], T92, lamadh [1 Ch
6 18], DDN, hakham [1 Ch 28 21], WIN, harash
(Ezk 21 31], 30°, yatabh [Ps 33 3]; in Apoc
tprapla, empeiria (Wisd 13 13], érverthyn, epistéme
{Sir 1 19; 38 3.6]; advb. edpa0ds, eumathds [Wisd 13
11]): As a vb. “to skill,” meaning to have under-
standing or to be dexterous, common in Elizabethan
Eng. and in AV and ERV (1 K 5 6; 2 Ch 2 7f;
$4 12), is obsolete. ARV substitutes such expres-
sions as “knoweth how’ (1 K 6 6) and “wereskilful
with” (2 Ch 34 12). As a noun the word is used
in the sense of “knowledge” (Eccl 9 11), “‘insight”
(Dnl 1 17), and “wisdom” (1 Ch 28 21). The
adj. skilful is used in corresponding senses, esp.
in ARV, where it takes the place of ‘‘cunning”
(Ex 26 31; 314; 35 33.35; 38 23; 2 Ch 2
7.13.14; Cant 7 1; Isa 40 20; Jer 10 9) and of
“eurious” (Ex 35 32), where the Heb hashabh
suggests planning or devising, and thus what we
should call “original” work. Both ERV and ARV
use the word in place of “eloquent” (Isa 3 3),
“right” (Eccl 4 4) and “cunning” (1 Ch 26 7).
In the first of these instances the Heb word means
‘understanding’; in the second, it refers to the
manner of doing a thing, and in the third, to the
training that makes one “‘skilled.” RV uses the
word “skilled” of those that “took the war upon
them” (Nu 31 27 AV). Skilfulness (Ps 78 72)
is used with reference to the hands, not only in their
work, but also in guiding (as, e.g., a pilot). To
play well (Heb htbhii_naggén) is rendered “play
skilfully” (Ps 333). ‘“Unskilful’” is used with refer-
ence to the uninitiated in the sense of “inexperi-
enced” (He 5 13, depos, dpeiras).

; Nataan Isaacs

SKIN (M49, ‘or, T33, geledh, “human skin”
(Job 16 15], "WB, basdr, “flesh,” in the sense of
“nakedness” [Ps 102 5 AV]; Séppa, dérma):


Skin
Slave, Slavery


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2814


Literal: The word ‘ar designates the skin of both
men and animals, the latter both raw and in tanned
condition: “Jeh God made for Adam and for his
wife coats of skins [‘ar], and clothed them” (Gen
3 21); “She put the skins [‘dr] of the kids of the
goats upon his hands, and upon the smooth of his
neck” (27 16); “Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, or the leopard his spots?” (Jer 13 23). The
Heb geledh is found in the sense of human skin:
“T have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and have
laid my horn in the dust” (Job 16 15).

Figurative: ‘To escape by the skin of the teeth’
is equivalent to a narrow escape (Job 19 20).
Satan saysin hiscalumny of Job: ‘‘Skin for skin, yea,
all that a man hath will he give for his life” (2 4).
The idea here is, that a man will endure or do the
worst, even as it were the flaying of his body, to save
his life. The RV has replaced “skin” as the tr of
Heb basa@r by “‘flesh’’: “My bones cleave to my
flesh” (Ps 102 5). “‘The bars of his skin” is a
poetical expression for ‘the members of his body” in
Job 18 13 m, where the text interprets rather than
translates the original.

Skins served for purposes of clothing from an early
date (Gen 3 21). In later days they were the
raiment of prophets and hermits (Zec 13 4; He
11 37). LXX translates NIN, 'addereth, “the
mantle” of Elijah (1 K 19 13.19; 2 K 2 8.131),
with undwr#, meélaté, i.e. “sheepskin,” the word in He
being derived from these passages. It isnot unlikely
that the raiment of John the Baptist made “of
camel’s hair’ and the “‘leathern girdle about his
loins” are identical with the rough garb of OT
prophets. Theskins of cattle were largely employed
for technical uses; “‘rams’ skins and badgers’ skins”
are esp. mentioned in the construction of the taber-
nacle as material for the waterproof covering of
the roof (Ex 25 5; Nu 4 8.10 ff).


RV, rejecting the tr ‘‘badgers’ skins,’ substitutes
“tsealskins’' and adds ‘‘ porpoise skins’’ in the margin.
There is little doubt that the rendering of the AV is
indeed incorrect. The Heb name of the animal (¢ahash)
is the same as the Arab. Us ° , tihas, which means the
dolphin and the ‘‘sca-cow”’ or halicore of the Red Sea,
of which genus there are two species even now extant
(H. tabernaculi Russ, and H. Helprichit Ehr.). It is
probable that the Jews included various marine animals,
seals, porpoises, dolphins and halicores, under the same
expression. See SEALSKIN.


In Ezk 16 10 we find these skins mentioned as
material for elegant. shoes, and the Arabs of the
Red Sea littoral use the same material in the
manufacture of sandals. A quaint use was made
of skins in the making of skin bottles, the kurbeh or
kirbeh of modern Arabia. We find a great variety
of Heb expressions, which possibly designated special
varieties, all of which were rendered doxés, askds, in
LXX and the NT (AM, hémeth, TRI, TS, nd'dh,
TIN? nd’dhah, 532, nebhel, 523, nébhel, PPB,
bakbuk, 21%, ’dbh). RV has rendered the Gr askas
in the NT by “wineskin” (Mt 9 17; Mk 2 22;
Lk 6 37) with the marginal addition ‘‘that is,
skins used as battles.’ These skin bottles were
made of the skins of goats, sheep, oxen or buffaloes;
the former had more or less the shape of the ani-
mals, the holes of the extremities being closed by
tying or sewing, and the neck of the skin being
closed by a tap or a plug, while the larger ones were
sewn together in various shapes. As a rule only
the inside of the skin was tanned, the skin turned
inside out, and the fluid or semi-fluid filled in, e.g.
water, milk, butter, cheese. The hairy inside was
not considered as in any way injurious to the
contents. Only in the case of wine- and oil-skins
was it thought advantageous to tan the skins inside
and out. H. L. E. Lugring


SKIRT, skirt: (1) 023, kanaph, ‘‘wing,” ‘‘ex-
tremity” (Ruth 3 9, etc), is the usual word. But
in 18 24 4ff perhaps “corner” is the best tr.
(2) Saw, shal, “loose hanging’ (Hx 28 33, ete;
in AV often rendered “hem’’). (3) MB, peh,
“mouth,” ‘opening’ (Ps 133 2, “the precious oil
. ... that came down upon the skirt’). But the
“opening” is that for the head, so that RVm
“collar” is the correct tr. “Skirt”? is frequently
used in a euphemistic sense, for which the comms.
must be consulted. See Dress; TRAIN.


SKULL, skul (M3553, gulgaleth; kpaviov, kra-
nian): The Heb word, which is well known to
Bible readers in its Aram.-Gr form ‘Golgotha,”
expresses the more or less globular shape of the
human skull, being derived from a root meaning
“to roll.” It is often tr? in EV by “head,” “poll,”
etc. In the meaning “skull’’ it is found twice (Jgs
9 53; 2 K 9 35). In the NT the word is found
only in connection with GoLcotua (q.v.), ‘the place
of a skull” (Mt 27 33; Mk 15 22; Jn 19 17),
or “the skull” (Lk 23 33).


SKY, ski (pow , shahak, “fine dust” or “cloud,”
apparently from ¥ POW, shahak, “to rub,” “to
pulverize”; Sam MPPNW, sh*hakayyah


1.1 :
oT. a instead of Heb DIU, shdmayim;
RS’, sahk =“cloud,” “small dust’):
RV has “skies” for AV “clouds” in Job 35 5; 36
98; 37 21; Ps 36 5; 57 10; 68 34; 78 23; 108 4;
Prov 3 20; 8 28, in which passages BD B supports
therendering of AV. In Ps 89 6.37 RV has ‘“‘sky”
for AV “heaven.” EV has “sky” in Dt 33 26;
28 22 12: Job 37 18; Ps 1811: 7717; Isa 46 8:
Jer 51 9. The word occurs mainly in poetical pas-
sages.
In the NT otpards, ourands, is tr’ “heaven”
(AV “sky”) in connection with the weather in
Mt 16 2.3; Lk 12 56. In He 11 12
2. Inthe we find ‘the stars of heaven” (‘‘the
NT sky’’) as a figure of multitude. The
conception, however, that the visible
“sky” is but the dome-like floor of a higher world
often makes it hard to tell whether “‘heaven’’ in
certain passages may or may not be identified with
the sky. See Heaven; Cosmocony.
Aurrep Ery Day
SLANDER, slan’d@& (subst., “3%, dibbah,
“slander”; 8aBodos, didbolas, ‘‘slanderer’; vb.


Dan , raghal, ‘‘to slink about’’ as a talebearer, yw ?
lashan, ‘‘to use the tongue,” “toslander’; 8:aBddXo,
diaballa, ‘to calumniate,” “to slander’; and other
words): Slander (etymologically a doublet of
“scandal,” from OFr. eselandre, Lat seandalum,
“stumbling-block”) is an accusation maliciously
uttered, with the purpose or effect of damaging the
reputation of another. Asa ruleit isa false charge
(cf Mt 6 11); but it may be a truth circulated
insidiously and with a hostile purpose (e.g. Dnl 3 8,
“brought accusation against,’’ where LXX has
diaballa, “‘slander”; Lk 16 1, the same Gr word).
Warnings, condemnations and complaints in refer-
ence to this sin are very frequent, both in the OT and
NT. Mischievous “tale-bearing” or ‘‘whispering”
is condemned (Lev 19 16; Ezk 22 9). There are
repeated warnings against evil-speaking (as in
Ps 34 13; Prov 15 28; Eph 4 31; Col 38; Jas
411; 1 Pet 3 10), which is the cause of so much
strife between man and man (Prov 16 27-30),
and which recoils on the speaker himsclf to his
destruction (Ps 101 5; 14011). Esp. is false
witness, which is “slander carried into a court of
Justice,” to be condemned and punished (Ex 20 16;


2815


Dt 19 16-21; cf Prov 1217; 14 5.25; 19 5;
21 28; 24 28). Special cases of slander more than
usually mean are when a wife’s chastity is falsely
impeached by her husband (Dt 22 13-19), and
when one slanders a servant to his master (Prov 30
10). Even a land may be slandered as well as
persons (Nu 14 36). Slanderersand backbiters are
mentioned in some of Paul’s darkest catalogues of
evildoers (Rom 1 29.30; 2 Cor 12 20; 2 Tim 3
3). To refrain from slander is an important quali-
fication for citizenship in the theocracy (Ps 15 1.3;
24 3.4) and for_a place in the Christian church
(1 Tim 3 11; Tit 2 3). Jesus Himself was the
victim of slanders (Mt 11 19) and of false testi-
mony (Mt 27 63). The apostles, too, came in
for a full share of it (e.g. Acts 24 5f; 28 22; 2 Cor
6 8). In the case of Paul, even his central doctrine
of justification was “slanderously reported” as if it
encouraged immorality (Rom 3 8). The devil
(=the calumniator”’) is represented as the great
accuser of God’s people (Rev 12 10), the slanderer
par excellence (cf Job 1 9-11; Zee 31). See
also CrimEs; PUNISHMENTS.
D. Miatt Epwarps

SLAUGHTER, slé’tér, OF THE INNOCENTS.

See Innocents, Massacre oF,


SLAUGHTER, VALLEY OF: In Jer 7 32; 19 6,
a name given to the valley of Hinnom. See Hrn-
nom, VALLEY OF; JERUSALEM, III, 2.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


SLAVE, sliv, SLAVERY, slav’ér-i:
1. Acquiring of Slaves
2. Hebrews as War Captives
3. Freedom of Slaves
4, Rights of Slaves
5. Rights of Slave Masters
6. The NT Conception
LITERATURE

The origin of the term “slave” is traced to the Ger.
sklave, meaning a captive of the Slavonic race who
had been forced into servitude (cf Slav); Fr. esclave,
Dutch slaaf, Swedish slaf, Spanish esclavo. The word
“slave” occurs only in Jer 2 14 and in Rey 18 13,
where it is suggested by the context and not ex-
pressed in the original languages (Heb y?idh bayith,
“one born in the house’; Gr séma, ‘“‘body’’). How-
ever, the Heb word 739, ‘cbhedh, in the OT and the
Gr word 4doé\os, dowilos, in the NT more properly
might have been tr? “slave” instead of “servant”
or “‘bondservant,” understanding though that the
slavery of Judaism was not the cruel system of
Greece, Rome and later nations. The prime
thought is service; the servant may render free
service, the slave, obligatory, restricted service. .

Scripture statement rather than_ philological
study must form the basis of this article. We shall
notice how slaves could be secured, sold and


redeemed; also their rights and their masters’ rights,
confining the study to OT Scripture, noting in
conclusion the NT conception. The word ‘‘slave”
in this art. refers to the Heb slave unless otherwise
designated. ;
Slaves might be acquired in the following ways,
viz.:
(1) Bought,—There are many instances of buying
slaves (Lev 25 39ff). Heb slavery broke into the
ranks of every human relationship:


1. Acquir- a father could sell his daughter (Ex 21
ing of 7; Neh 5 5); «a widow’s children
Slaves might be sold to pay their father’s


debt (2 K 4 1);
himself (Lev 25 39.47); a woman could sell her-
self (Dt 16 12.13.17), etc. Prices paid were some-


a man could sell ;


what indefinite. According to Ex 21 32 thirty
shekels was a standard price, but Lev 27 3-7 gives
a scale of from 3 to 50 shekels according to age and


Skin
Slave, Slavery


sex, with a provision for an appcal to the pricst in
case of uncertainty (ver 8). ‘Twenty shekels is the
price set for a young man (ver 5), and this corre-
sponds with the sum paid for Joseph (Gen 37 28).

But in 2 Mace 8 11 the price on the average is
90 for a talent, ie. 40 shekels each. The ransom
of an entire talent for a single man (1 K 20 39)
means that unusual value (far more than that of a
slave) was set on this particular captive.

There were certain limitations on the right of
sale (Ex 21 7ff).

(2) Eachange.—Slaves, i.e. non-Heb slaves, might
be traded for other slaves, cattle, or provisions.

(3) Satisfaction of debt.—It is probable that a
debtor, reduced to extremity, could offer himself in
payment of his debt (Lev 26 39), though this was
forbidden in the Térath Kéhdntim; cf’Ocar Yisrd él,
vii.292b. That a creditor could sell into slavery a
debtor or any of his family, or make them his own
slaves, has some foundation in the statement of the
poor widow whose pathetic cry reached the ears
of the prophet Elisha: “Thy servant my husband
is dead; .... and the creditor is come to take
unto him my two children to be bondmen” (2 K


4 1).

(4) Gift-—The non-Heb slave, and possibly the
Heb slave, could be acquired as a gift (Gen 29 24).

(5) Inheritance —Children could inherit non-Heb
slaves as their own possessions (Lev 26 46).

(6) Voluntary surrender.—In the case of a slave’s
release in the seventh year there was allowed a
willing choice of indefinite slavery. The ceremony
at such a time is interesting: ‘Then his master
shall bring him unto the judges [m], and shall bring
him to the door, or unto the door-post; and his
master shall bore his ear through with an awl;
and he shall serve him for ever’ (Ex 216). A
pierced ear probably meant obedience to the
master’s voice. History, however, does not record
a single instance in which such a case oceurred.

(7) Arrest—If the thief be found breaking in,
.... heshall make restitution: if he have nothing,
then he shall be sold for his theft” (Ex 22 2.3).

(8) Birth—The children of slaves, born within
the master’s house of a wife given to the slave there,
became slaves, and could be held, even if the father
went free (Ex 21 4; cf Lev 25 54).

(9) Capture in war.—Thousands of men, women
and children were taken in war as captives and
reduced, sometimes, to most menial slavery.
Such slavery, however, was more humane than
wholesale butchery according to the customs of
earlier times (Nu 81 7-35). Males were usually
slain and females kept for slavery and concubinage
(Dt 21 10.11.14). Captive slaves and bought
slaves, ‘from nations round about,” forced moral
ruin into Israel’s early civilization. See Srecr, 3.

The two principal sources of slave supply were
poverty in peace and plunder in war.

The Hebrews themselves were held as captive
slaves at various times by (1) Phoenicians (the

greatest slave traders of ancient
2. Hebrews times), (2) Philis, (3) Syrians (2 Ix
as War 5 2 ff), (4) Egyptians, and (5) Romans.
Captives There must have been thousands

subjected to severest slavery. See also
Ecypt; IsraBL; PHARAOH; SERVANT, etc.

The freedom of slaves was possible in the follow-
ing ways: a)

(1) By redemption —Manumission by

3. Freedom redemption was common among the
of Slaves Hebrews. The slave’s freedom might
be bought, the price depending on

(a) the nearness to the seventh year or the Jubilee
year, (b) the first purchase price, and (c) personal
considerations as to age and ability of the one in
bondage. A slave could be redeemed as follows:


Slave, Slavery
Slip


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE’ ENCYCLOPAEDIA


' 2816


(a) by himself, (6) by his uncle, (c) by his nephew
or cousin, (d) or by any near relative (Lev 25 48-
55). The price depended on certain conditions as
indicated above.

(2) By the lapse of time—The seventh year of
service brought release from bondage. “If thou
buy a Heb servant [m “bondman”’], six years he
shall serve: and in the seventh he shall go out free
for nothing” (Ex 21 2-4),

(3) By the law of the Jubilee year.—The year of
Jubilee was the great year when slaves were no
longer slaves but free. ‘He shall serve with thee
unto the year of jubilee: then shall he go out from
thee, he and his children . . . . return unto his own
family, and unto the possession of his fathers’’ (Lev
25 40f).

(4) By injury—aA servant whose master maimed
him (or her), in particular by causing the loss of an
eye or even a tooth, was thereby freed (Ex 21 26f).

(5) By escape—(Dt 28 15f; 1 K 2 39). See
“Code of Hammurabi” in HDB (extra vol, p. 600)
and cf Philem vs 12 ff.

(6) By indifference.—In case of a certain kind of
female slave, the neglect or displeasure of her
master in itself gave her the right to freedom (Ex
21 7-11; Dt 21 14).

(7) By restitution. A caught thief, having become
a bondsman, after making full restitution by his
service as a slave, was set at liberty (Ex 22 1-4).

(8) By the master’s death—‘And Abram said,
. . « » I go childless, and he that shall be possessor
of my house is Eliezer of Damascus... . and,
lo, one born in my house is mine heir’ (Gen 15 2 f).
This passage has been mistakenly supposed to indi-
cate that a master without children might give
freedom to a slave by constituting the slave an heir
to his possessions. But on the contrary, Abram
seems to contemplate with horror the possibility
that Eliezer will take possession of his goods in the
absence of an heir. In view of the fact that adop-
tion, the adragatia of the Rom law, was unknown
both to Bib. and Talmudic law (see Jew Ene, s.v.),
the statement in Gen 15 2 does not seem to indicate
any such custom as the adoption of slaves. If any
method of emancipation is here suggested, it is by
the death of the master without heir, a method
thoroughly discussed in the Talm (mithath ha-
’adhan).

(9) By direct command of Jeh—‘The word that
came unto Jeremiah from Jeh, .... that every
man should let his man-servant, and... . his
maid-servant, that is a Hebrew or a Hebrewess,
go free; that none should make bondmen of them
.... they obeyed, and let them go’ (Jer 34
8-10).
‘ The nine methods here enumerated may be classified
A. By operation of law:


1. By lapse of time.
(a) After serving six years or other contractual


period. See (2) above.
(b) Upon the approach of the Jubilee year. See
(3) above.
2. By death of the master without heirs. See (8)


above.
B. By act of the parties:

1. By an act of the master.
(a) Voluntary manumission, including (9) above.
(b) Indifference in certain cases. Sec (6) above.
(c) Maiming servant. See (4) above.

2. By act of the servant.
(a) Redemption. Sce (1) above.
(b) Restitution. See (7) ahove.
(c) Escape. See (5) above.

3. By act of a third party.
Redemption— (1) above.


As noted in the beginning of this article, the
Heb slaves fared far better than the Grecian, Rom
and other slaves of later years. In general, the
treatment they received and the rights they could
claim made their lot reasonably good. Of course


a slave was a slave, and there were masters who
disobeyed God and even abused their “‘brothers in


bonds.” As usual the unfortunate
4. Rights female slave got the full measure of
of Slaves inhuman cruelty. Certain rights were


discretionary, it is true, but many Heb
slaves enjoyed valuable individual and social
privileges. As far as Scripture statements throw
light on this subject, the slaves of OT times might
claim the following rights, viz.:

(1) Freedom.—¥reedom might be gained in any
one of the above-mentioned ways or at the master’s
will, The non-Hebrew could be held as a slave in
perpetuity (Lev 25 44-46).

(2) Good treatment.—‘Thou shalt not rule over
him [Heb slave] with rigor, but shalt fear thy
God... .. Ye shall not rule, one over another,
with rigor’ (Lev 25 43.46). The non-Hebrew
seemed to be left unprotected.

(3) Justice.—An ancient writer raises the query of
fairness to slaves. ‘‘If I have despised the cause of
my man-servant or of my maid-servant, when they
contended with me; what then shall I do when
God riseth up?” (Job 31 13f). No doubt the true
Heb master was considerate of the rights of his
slaves. The very fact, however, that the Heb
master could punish a Heb slave, ‘‘to within an inch
of his life,” gave ready opportunity for sham
justice. “And if a man smite his servant, or his
maid [“bondman or bondwoman”], with a rod,
and he die under his hand; he shall surely be
punished. Notwithstanding, if he continue a day
or two, he shall not be punished; for he is his
money” (Ex 21 20f).

(4) Family.—The slave before his release might
have his wife and children (Ex 21 5).

(5) Voluntary slavery—Even when the seventh
year came, the slave had a right to pledge himsclf,
with awl-pierced ear, to perpetual service for his
master (Ex 21 5f; Dt 15 16). The traditional
interpretation of ‘for ever’ in these passages is
“until the next Jubilee year” (cf Kiddishin 21).

(6) Money or property—Some cases at least
indicate that slaves could have money of their own.
Thus, if a poor slave ‘‘waxed rich’’ he could redeem
himself (Lev 25 49). Cf1 9 5-10, where, how-
ever, the Heb throughout calls the ‘‘servant” na‘aer,
“a, youth,” never ‘ebhedh.

(7) Children.—If married when free, the slave
could take wife and children with him when free-
dom came, but if he was married after becoming a
slave, his wife and children must remain in possession
of his master. This law led him often into per-
petual slavery (Ex 21 3 f).

(8) Elevation.—A chance to rise was allowable
in some instances, e.g. Eliezer, a foreign slave in a
Heb household, and Joseph, a Heb slave in a foreign
household. Each rose to a place of honor and
usefulness (Gen 15 2; 389 4).

(9) Religious wership.—After being circumcised,
slaves were allowed to participate in the paschal
sacrifice (Ex 12 44) and other religious occasions
(Dt 12 12).

(10) Gifts—Upon obtaining freedom, slaves, at
the discretion of masters, were given supplies of
cattle, grain and wine (Dt 15 13 f).

The rights of a slave master may briefly be stated


as follows: (1) to hold as chattel possession his

non-Heb slaves (Lev 25 45); (2) to
5. Rights leave such slaves as an inheritance for
of Slave his children (Lev 25 46); (8) to
Masters hold as his own property the wife and


children of all slaves who were un-
married at the time they became slaves (Ex 21 4);
(4) to pursue and recover runaway slaves (1 K 2
39-41); (5) to grant freedom at any time to any
slave. This is implied rather than stated. Emanci-


2817


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Slave, Slavery
Slip


pation other than at the Sabbatical and Jubilee years
was evidently the right of masters; (6) to cir-
cumcise slaves, both Jew and Gentile, within his
own household (Gen 17 13.23.27); (7) to sell, give
away, or trade slaves (Gen 29 24. According to
Torath Kohdnim a Heb servant could be sold only
under certain restrictions. See 1, [1]); (8) to chas-
tise male and female slaves, though not unto death
(Ex 21 20); (9) to marry a slave himself, or give
his female slaves in marriage to others (1 Ch 2 35);
(10) to marry a daughter to a slave (1 Ch 2 34 f);
(11) to purchase slaves in foreign markets (Lev 25
44); (12) to keep, though not as a slave, the runa-
way slave from a foreign master (Dt 23 15.16.
See 3, [5]); (18) to enslave or sell a caught thief
(Gen 44 8-33; Ex 22 3); (14) to hold, in per-
petuity, non-Heb slaves (Lev 26 46); (15) to seek
advice of slaves (1 S 26 14 ff; but the reference
here is open to doubt. See 4, [6]); (16) to demand
service (Gen 14 14; 24).

Throughout OT times the rights of both slaves
and masters varied, but in general the above may
be called the accepted code. In later times Zedekiah
covenanted with the Hebrews never again to enslave
their own brothers, but they broke the covenant
(Jer 34 8).

_ There were slaves during NT times. The church
issued no edict sweeping away this custom of the
old Judaism, but the gospel of Christ

6. NT with its warm, penetrating love-
Conception message mitigated the harshness of
ancient times and melted cruelty

into kindness. The equality, justice and love of
Christ’s teachings changed the whole attitude of
man to man and master to servant. This spirit
of brotherhood quickened the conscience of the
age, leaped the walls of Judaism, and penetrated
the remotest regions. The great apostle pro-
claimed this truth: ‘‘There can be neither Jew nor
Greek, there can be neither bond nor free, ....
ye all are one man in Christ Jesus’ (Gal 3 28).
The Christian slaves and masters are both exhorted
in Paul’s letters to live godly lives and make Christ-
like their relations one to the other—obedience to
masters and forbearance with slaves. ‘‘Bondserv-
ants [m], be obedient unto... . your masters,
as bondservants [m] of Christ... . And,

. .. forbearthreatening: ... . their


His own benign presence.

Literature.—Nowack, Heb Arch.; Ewald, Alterthamer,
III, 280-88: Griinfeld, Die Stellung des Sklaven bet den
Yuden, nach bibl. und talmud. Quellen, 1886; Mielziner,
Die Verhaltnisse der Sklaven bei den alien Hebrdern, 1859;
Mandl, Das Sklavenrecht des AT, 1886; Kahn, L'es-
clavage dans la Bible etle Talmud, 1867; Sayce, Social Life
among the Assyrians and Babylonians; Lane, Manners
and Customs of Modern Egyptians, 205; Arabian Nights,
I, 64 ff; Thomson, LB; cCurdy, HPM,1894; Trum-
pull, Studies in Oriental Social Life, 1894. There is a
wealth of material in the Talmudic tractate Kiddiéshin
(pp. 17-22).
Wiiiram Epvwarp Rarrery
SLAYING, sla’ing (by spear, dart, or sword).


See PunISHMENTS.


SLEEP, slép: Represents many words in Heb and
Gr. For the noun the most common are TU,
shénah, and trvos, hiipnos; for the vb., JW", yashén,
3DW , shakhabh, and xadeddw, katheddd. The figura-


tive uses for death (Dt 31 16, etc) and sluggishness
(Eph 6 14, etc) are very obvious. See Dreams.


SLEEP, DEEP (MAT, tardémah, vb. DT,
rddham, from a root meaning “‘to be deaf’): Thevb.
rddham has no further meaning than “to be fast
asleep” (Jgs 4 21; Jon 1 5), but AV used ‘deep
sleep” as a tr only in Dnl 8 18; 10 9, where a
sleep supernaturally caused (a ‘“‘trance’”’) is meant
(cf “dead sleep” in Ps 76 6). RV’s insertion of
“deep sleep” in place of AV’s “fast asleep” in Jgs 4
21 is consequently unfortunate. The noun tardémah
has the same meaning of “trance” in Gen 2 21;
16 12; 1S 26 12; Job 4 13; 383 15, but in Prov
19 15; Isa 29 10, it is used figuratively of torpor.
In Acts 20 9 (huipnos baths), heavy natural sleep
is Meant. Burton Scotr Easton

SLEEVES, slévz (Gen 37 3 m). See Dress.

SLEIGHT, slit: No connection with “slight,” but
from the same root as ‘“‘sly’ and so=‘‘cunning.”
So in Eph 4 14, “sleight of men,” for xveta, ku-
beia, “‘dice-playing” (cf “cube’’), ‘gamblers’ tricks,”
“trickery.”

SLIME, slim, SLIME PITS, slim’pits ("AT,
hémar; LXX acdhadros, dsphalios; Vulg bitumen;

~ 2
RVm “bitumen”; cf Arab. , hummar, “‘bitu-


men”; and cf QM, hdmer, “clay,” “mortar’’): In


the account of the ark in Gen 6 14, “DD, kopher
(LXX dogadros, dsphaltos; Vulg bitumen; cf Arab.
o>?


aS , kufr, “pitch”’) does not necessarily denote


vegetable pitch, but may well mean bitumen. The
same may besaid of MDI, zepheth, ‘pitch’ (cf Arab.


wy, zift, “pitch”), inEx 2 3andIsa 34 9. The


- word “‘slime” occursin the following passages: ‘“‘And


they had brick for stone, and slime had they for
mortar” (Gen 11 3); ‘‘Now the vale of Siddim was
full of slime pits’ (Gen 14 10, m ‘bitumen pits’’);
“She took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed
it with slime and with pitch” (Ex 2 3).

Bitumen is a hydrocarbon allied to petroleum and
natural gas. It is a lustrous black solid, breaking
with a conchoidal fracture, burning with a yellow
flame, and melting when ignited. It is probably
derived from natural gas and petroleum by a process
of oxidation and evaporation, and its occurrence may
be taken as a sign that other hydrocarbons are or
have been present in thestrata. Itisfound in small
lumps and larger masses in the cretaceous limestone
on the west side of the Dead Sea, and there is reason
to believe that considerable quantities of it rise to
the surface of the Dead Sea during earthquakes.
In ancient times it was exported to Egypt to be
used in embalming mummies. Important mines
of it exist at Hdsbeiya near Mt. Hermon and in
North Syria. Springs of liquid bituminous matter
exist in Mesopotamia, where according to Herodotus
and other classical writers it was used as mortar with
sun-dried bricks. Various conjectures have been
made as to the part played by bitumen in the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. Diodorus
Siculus calls the Dead Sea Aiuvn dogpadrizis, limné
asphailitis, “lake of asphalt.” See Sippim; Citrus
OF THE Pain. AuFrrep Ey Day


SLING. See Armor, ITT, 2.


SLIP: As meaning ‘‘a cutting from a plant,’ it
is still good Eng. In this sense in Isa 17 10 for


THE INTERNATIONAL Nee BIBLE eae


2818


min, zmorah, “branch,” “twig.”
“slip of the tongue” cf Sir 14 1;
21 7; 255


For the phrase
19 16; 20 18;


SLOPES, sléps. See ASHDOTH-P1SGAH.

SLOW, sld: Chiefly for JUN, ’erekh, lit. “long,”
in the phrase “slow to anger’ (Neh 9 17, etc). In
Ex 4 10; Lk 24 25; Jas 1 19, for TAD, kabhedh;
Bpadds, brads, both meaning “heavy,” “sluggish,”
while Sir 7 35 uses “be slow” for éxvéw, oknéd,
‘hesitate.’ In addition, AV uses “slow” for &pyos,
argos, “inactive,” in Wisd 15 15, “slow to go” (RV
‘helpless for walking’), and in Tit 1 12, “slow
bellies’ (RV “idle gluttons’). In Sir 61 24, AV
has “be slow” for torepéw, husteréd, ‘be lacking”’
(so RV).


SLUGGARD, slug’ard: Found only in the OT,
and there only in Prov. It is the rendering given
the word ‘agél everywhere in RV, but in AV only in
Prov 6 6.9; 10 26; 13 4; 20 4; 26 16 (elsewhere
AV translates by “lothful”). The root meaning of
‘acél is ‘‘to be sluggish,” ‘‘stupid.” The Eng. word
“slug”? is said to be ‘allied to slack” (Webster).


SLUICE, sloos orion sekher, lit. “‘hire’’): In Isa
19 10, AV reads, ‘“‘all that make sluices and ponds
for fish.’ RV entirely alters the tr of the whole


verse. It reads, ‘And the pillars of Egypt shall be
broken in pieces; allthey that work for hire [m “that
make dams’”’] shall be grieved in soul.”

SMELL, smel (Heb and Aram. D™1, réh, as
noun, “savor,” “scent”; T, rath, as vb., lit. “to
breathe,” “to inhale,” thence “to smell”; oop,
osmé, the ‘smell,”’ “savor,” evodla, euddia, “sweet
smell, My “fragrance,” dr dpnots, ésphrésis, ‘the sense
of smell”; vb. oodpalvonat, osphrainomai): “And


he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled [way-
yarah] the smell (ré*h] of his raiment, and blessed
him, and said, See, the smell [réh] of my son is as
the smell [reah| of a field which Jeh hath blessed’”’
(Gen a7 27). Idols are described as “‘gods, the work
of men’s hands, wood and stone, which neither see,
nor hear, nor eat, nor smell” (Dt 4 28). Acceptable
sacrifices and plous conduct are called a “sweet
smell” or ‘savor’ (Ex 29 18; Eph 6 2; Phil 4
18), well-pleasing to Gad. The gadless life, which
dishonors God, is hateful to Him: “T will not smell
the savor of your sweet odors” (Lev 26 31). The
phrase, “‘being in bad odor with a person,” can be
traced to Bib. language: ‘‘Ye have made our savor
to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the
eyes of his servants’ (Ex 65 21). Thus ‘“‘smell’” is
occasionally equivalent with ‘“‘quality,” ‘character’:
“is [Moab’s] taste remaineth in him, and his scent
is not changed” (Jer 48 11). Character or quality
is the most infallible test, the most manifest adver-
tisement of a thing or a person; thus we find the
following very instructive passage: ‘[God] maketh
manifest through us the savor [osmé] of his knowl-
edge in every place. For we are a sweet savor
[euddia] of Christ unto God, in [better: “among’’]
them that are saved, and in [better: ‘“among’’] them
that perish; to the one a savor [osmé] from death
unto death; to the other a savor [osmé] from life
unto life” (2 Cor 2 14-16). See Trrumpyu. Inthe


passage Isa 3 24, AV “sweet smell” (DWD, besem,


“balsam plant’’) hasbeen changed to “sweet spices”’
in RV. L. E. Luprina


SMITH, smith. See Crarts, 10; Tupat-cain.


SMITING BY THE SUN. See Sun Smrtina.


SMOKE, smodk: Used figuratively of the Divine
jealousy (Dt 29 20) and anger (Ps 74 1); symbolic
of the glory of the Divine holiness (Isa 4 5; 6 4;
Rev 15 8).


SMYRNA, smitir’na (Zpipva, Smurna): Smyrna,

a large ancient city on the western coast of Asia
Minor, at the head of a gulf which

1. Ancient reaches 30 miles inland, was originally
peopled by the Asiatics known as the

Lelages. The city seems to have been taken from the
Lelages by the Aeolian Greeks about 1100 BC; there


Ancient eT at Smyrna.


still remain traces of the cyclopean masonry
of that early time. In 688 BC it passed into the
possession of the Ionian Greeks and was made one
of the cities of the Ionian confederacy, but in 627
BC it was taken by the Lydians. During the years
301 to 281 BC, Lysimachus entirely rebuilt it on a
new site to the §.W. of the earlier cities, and sur-
rounded it by a wall. Standing, as it did, upon a
good harbor, at the head of one of the chief high-
ways to the interior, it early became a great trading-
center and the chief port for the export trade. In
Rom times, Smyrna was considered the most
brilliant city of Asia Minor, successfully rivaling
Pergamos and Ephesus. Its streets were wide and
paved. Its system of coinage was old, and now
about the city coins of every period are found. It
was celebrated for its schools of science and medi-
cine, and for its handsome buildings. Among them
was the Homerium, for Smyrna was one of several
places which claimed to be the birthplace of the
poet. On the slope of Mt. Pagus was a theater
which seated 20,000 spectators. In the year 23 AD
a temple was built in honor of Tiberius and his
mother Julia, and the Golden Street, connecting the
temples of Zeus and Cybele, is said to have been the
best in any ancient city. Smyrna early became a
Christian city, for there was one of the Seven
Churches of the Book of Rev (2 8-11). There
Polycarp, the bishop of Smyrna, was martyred,
though without the sanction of the Rom govern-
ment. Itseems that the Jews of Smyrna were more
antagonistic than were the Romans to the spread of
Christianity, for it is said that even on Saturday,
their sacred day, they brought wood for the fire in
which Polycarp was burned. His grave is still
shown in a cemetery there. Like many other
cities of Asia Minor, Smyrna suffered frequently,
esp. during the years 178-80 AD, from earthquakes,
but it always escaped entire destruction. During
the Middle Ages the city was the scene of many
struggles, the most fierce of which was directed
by Timur against the Christians. Tradition relates
that there he built a tower, using as stones the heads
of a thousand captives which he put to death, yet
Smyrna was the last of the Christian cities to hold
out against the Mohammedans; in 1424 it fell into


2819


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Slopes
Snow


the hands of the Turks. It was the discovery of |
America and the resulting discovery of a sea route
to India which ruined the Smyrna trade.
Modern Smyrna is still the largest city in Asia
Minor, with a population of about 250,000, of whom
half are Greek and less than one-
2. Modern fourth are Mohammedans. Its mod-
: ern name, Ismir, is but a Turkish cor-
ruption of the ancient name. Even under the
Turkish government the city is progressive, and is
the capital of the Aidin vilayet, and therefore the
home of a governor. Several railroads follow the
courses of the ancient routes into the distant
interior. In its harbor ships from all parts of the
world may be seen. The ancient harbor of Paul’s
time has been filled in, and there the modern bazaars
stand. Theold stadium has been destroyed to make
room for modern buildings, and a large part of the
ancient city lies buried beneath the modern houses
and the 40 mosques of which the city boasts. The
better of the modern buildings, belonging to the
government and occupied by the foreign consuls,
stand along the modern quay. Traces of the
ancient walls are still to befound. W. of Mt. Pagus
is the Ephesian gate, and the Black-gate, as the
Turks call it, 1s near the railroad station. The
castle upon Mt. Pagus, 460 ft. above the sea, dates
from Byzantine times. The prosperity of Smyrna
is due, not only to the harbor and the port of entry
to the interior, but partly to the perfect climate
of spring and autumn—the winters are cold and
the summers are hot; and also to the fertility of
the surrounding country. Figs, grapes, valonia,
opium, sponges, cotton and liquorice root are among
the chief articles of trade. See also CHURCHES,
SEVEN. E. J. Banxs


SNAIL, snal ({1] DAN, homet, RV “sand-lizard,”’
LXX_ caipa, satira, “lizard” [Lev 11 30]; [2]
Saw, shabb'lal, LXX kypés, kérés, “wax’’ [Ps 68
8]): (1) Hémet is 7th in the list of unclean “creeping
things” in Lev 11 30, and occurs nowhere else.
“Snail” is not warranted by LXX or Vulg. RV has
“sand-lizard.”” It may be the skink or a species of
Lacerta. See Lizarp. (2) Shabbelil is tr? ‘snail’
in Ps 68 8: “Let them be as a snail which melteth
and passeth away.” Mandelkern gives limaz,
“slug.” Gesenius derives shabb‘lal from _balal, ‘to
pour’; ef Arab. balla, ‘‘to wet,’ instancing Aeiuag,
leimax, “snail,” or “slug,” from elBw, leiba, “to
pour.” While LX-X has kéros, ‘‘wax,” Talm (Md‘édh
Katén 6b) supports “‘snail.” The ordinary expla-
nation of the passage, which is not very satisfying,
is that the snail leaves a trail of mucus (i.e. it
melts) as it moves along. This does not in any way
cause the snail to waste away, because its glands
are continually manufacturing fresh mucus. Two
large species of snail, Helix aspersa and Helix
pomatia, are collected and eaten, boiled, by the
Christians of Syria and Pal, esp. in Lent. The
Jews and Moslems declare them to be unclean and
do not eat them. Aurrep ELy Day


SNARE, snér (MB, poh; wayls, pagis, but
Bpdxos, bréchos, in 1 Cor 7 35): Over half a
dozen Heb words are used to indicate different
methods of taking birds and animals, of which the
snare (MB, pah) ismentioned oftener than any other.
It was a noose of hair for small birds, of wire for
larger birds or smaller animals. The snares were set
in a favorable location and grain scattered to attract
theattention of feathered creatures. They accepted
the bribe of good feeding and walked into the snare,
not suspecting danger. For this reason the snare
became particularly applicable in describing a
tempting bribe offered by men to lead their fellows


into trouble, and the list of references is a long one,
all of the same nature. See Ex 10 7; 18 18 21;
289; Ps 116; 18 5, “snares .of death”; used
symbolically of anything that may kill: 91 3;
124 7; 140 5; 141 9; Prov 7 23; 13 14; 18 7;
20 25: 22 25: 29 25: Weel 9 12.’ “But this is a
people robbed and plundered; they are all of them
snared in holes, and they are hid in prison-louses:
they are for a prey, and none delivereth; for a
spoil, and none saith, Restore” (Isa 42 22). Here
it is specified that the snare was in a hole so covered
as to conceal it. Jer 18 22 clearly indicates
that the digging of a pit to take prey was customary,
and also the hiding of the snare for the feet. North
American Indians in setting a snare usually figure
on catching the bird around the neck. Jer 60 24,
“I have laid a snare for thee’; Hos 9 8, ‘‘A fowler’s
snare is in all his ways’; Am 3 5 seems to indicate
that the snare was set for the feet; Lk 21 34, ‘“‘But
take heed to yourselves, lest haply ... . that
day come on you suddenly asa snare’; Rom 11 9,
“Let their table be made a snare, and a trap”;
1 Cor 7 35, “not that I may cast a snare upon
you”; 1 Tim 3 7, “‘the snare of the devil”; also
6 9, “But they that are minded to be rich fall into
a temptation and a snare and many foolish and
hurtful lusts, such as drown men in destruction and
perdition.” See Gin; Nev; Trap.
GENE Stratron-PoRTER

SNEEZE, snéz (V1, zdrér, Po'él-form VT,
zarar): “The child sneezed seven times, and the
child opened his eyes” (2 I< 4 35). “Sneezing,”
better ‘snorting,’ is found in the description of
Leviathan (the crocodile): “His sneezings [TW°UD,
‘aitishah] flash forth light, and his eyes are like the
eyelids of the morning” (Job 41 18 [Heb 10]).
See NEESING.


SNOW, snd (J5¥, shelegh, 32%, t’lagh [Dn] 7 9);
xvdv, chidén): (1) Snow is not uncommon in the
winter in Jerus, but it never reaches any depth and
in many winters it is not seen at all. It usually
disappears, for the most part, as soon as the sun
appears, though it may “hide itself’ for a time in
the gorge cut by a stream (Job 6 16). On lower
levels than Jerus there is never sufficient to cover
the ground, though often there are some flakes seen
in the air. Even at sea-level there is occasionally
a sufficient fall of hail to cover the ground. A very
exceptional snowfall is related in 1 Mace 13 22 at
Adora (near Hebron). lt was heavy enough to
prevent the movement of troops. (2) The tops of
the mountains of Lebanon are white with snow
for most of the year, and snow may be found in
large banks in the valleys and the northern slopes
at any time in the summer. Mt. Hermon, 9,200
ft. high, has long streaks of snow in the valleys all
the summer. (3) The snow of the mountains 1s the
source of the water of the springs which last through-
out the drought of summer. In case the snow fails
there is sure to be a lack of water in the fountains:
“Shall the snow of Lebanon fail . . . . or shall the
cold waters that flow down from afar be dried up?”
(Jer 18 14). (4) Large quantities of snow are
stored in caves in the mountains in winter and
are brought down to the cities in summer to be
used in place of ice for cooling drinks and refriger-
ating purposes. ;

(5) God’s power over the clements of Nature is
often brought out in the OT: ‘‘For he saith to the
snow, Fall thou on the earth” (Job 37 6); but
man cannot fathom the works of God: ‘Hast thou
entered the treasuries of the snow?” (Job 38 22).
“The snowy day” (1 Ch 11 22; 25 23 20) and
the “fear of snow” (Prov 31 21) are figurative
uses describing winter and cold. “Snow in sum-


Snuffers
Solemn


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2820


mer’’ (Prov 26 1) would be most out of place, yet
it might be most refreshing to the tired workmen in
the time of harvest.

(6) Snow is the symbol of purity and cleanness,
giving us some of our most beautiful passages of
Seripture: ‘Wash me and I shall be whiter than
snow” (Ps 61 7); ‘Though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow” (Isa 1 18). Carry-
ing the figure farther, snow-water might be expected
to have a special value for cleansing: “If I wash
myself with snow-water’ (Job 9 30). The most
common use in Scripture is to denote whiteness in
color and implying purity as well: “His raiment was
white as snow’ (Dnl 79; Mt 28 3; Mk 9 3;
Rev 1 14).

(7) The whiteness of leprosy is compared to snow
(Ex 4 6; Nu 12 10; 2 K 6 27).

ALFRED H. Joy

SNUFFERS, snuf’érz, SNUFFDISHES, snuf’-
dish-ez (DINP3A, melkahayim, MINT, mahtath):
These two utensils are thrice mentioned in connec-
tion with the wilderness tabernacle (Ex 25 38;
37 23; Nu 4 9). ARV prefers to read ‘‘snuffers
and snuffdishes” in place of ‘‘tongs and snuffdishes”
(ef 2 Ch 4 22), the connection hetween the two
utensils being indicated by the fact that both are
said to belong to the seven lamps, and were to be
made out of the talent of gold which was specified
as the weight of the whole (Ex 25 37-39).

The seven-branched candlestick which stood in
the holy place of both tabernacle and temple was
surmounted, in each of its arms, by a removable
lamp in which olive oil was burnt. From the
requirement of keeping these lights brilliantly
burning throughout each night of the year, arose the
need for snuffers and snuffdishes. By the former,
the burnt portions of the wick were removed; in
the latter they were deposited previous to removal.
The lamps may have required to be trimmed as
often as every half-hour. For this purpose a
priest would enter the outer chamber ‘‘accomplish-
ing the services” (He 9 6).

In the time of Solomon’s Temple another word
than melkdhayim was used to describe this utensil.
It is NIVAIN, m*zamméroth, from a vb. meaning
“to prune’ or “trim,” and is found in 1 K 7 50;
2K 12 13; 25 14; 2 Ch 4 22; Jer 52 18 In
4 of these passages, the Eng. text reads, ‘‘the
snuffers and the basins’; the 5th is merely a sum-
mary of things taken to Babylon (2 K 25 14). In
this constant later association of “basins” and
“snuffers’’ it is seen that the basins referred to were
used for the reception of the cast-off portions of the
wicks of the seven lamps, and took the place of the
snuffdishes of an earlier age. See Towncs.

: W. Saaw CaLnEecorr

SO, sd (NO, 30’, although the Heb might be
pointed NID, sewe’; Assyr Sil’u; LXX Znyydp,
Ségér, Zod, Sod; Manetho, Zevexos, Sevechos;
Lat Sevechus; Herod. [ii. 137 ff], ZaPaxév, Sabakén):
In all probability the ‘‘SSabaeo”’ of Herodotus, the
Shabaka, who founded the Ethiopian dynasty,
the XXVth of Egyp kings. His date is given as
715-707 BC (Flinders Petrie, History of Egypt, III,
281 ff), but we may suppose that before his accession
to the throne he was entitled to be designated king,
as being actually regent. To this So, Hoshea,
king of Israel, made an appeal for assistance to
enable him to throw off the yoke of the Assyr
Shalmaneser IV (2 K 17 3 ff). But MHoshea’s
submission to So brought him no advantage, for
Shalmaneser came up throughout all the land and
laid siege to Samaria. Not long after the fall of
Samaria, So ventured upon an eastern campaign,
and was defeated hy Sargon, the successor of Shal-
maneser, in the battle of Raphia in 720 BC.


Lirsrature.—Flinders Petrie, History of Egypt, III,

281%; McCurdy, 4PM,I, 422; Schrader, COT, I, 261.
? T. Nico.

SOAP, sdp (M72, borith; AV sope): Barth is
a derivative of 2, bdr, “purity,”’ hence something
which cleanses or makes pure. Soap in the modern
sense, as referring to a salt of a fatty acid, for
example, that produced by treating olive oil with
caustic soda, was probably unknown in OT times.
Even today there are districts in the interior of
Syria where soap is never used. Cooking utensils,
clothes, even the body are cleansed with ashes.
The ashes of the household fires are carefully saved
for this purpose. The cleansing material referred
to in Jer 2 22 (cf LXX ad loc., where bérith is
rendered by vola, poia=“‘grass’’) and Mal 3 2 was
probably the vegetable lye called in Arab. el kali
(the origin of Eng. alkali). This material, which
is a mixture of crude sodium and potassium car-
bonates, is sold in the market in the form of greyish
Iumps. It is produced by burning the desert
plants and adding enough water to the ashes to
agglomerate them. Before the discovery of Le-
blane’s process large quantities of kali were exported
from Syria to Europe.

For washing clothes the women sprinkle the pow-
dered kali over the wet garments and then placethem
on a flat stone and pound them with a wooden
paddle. For washing the body, oil is first smeared
over the skin and then kali rubbed on and the whole
slimy mixture rinsed off with water. Kali was also
used anciently as a flux in refining precious metals
(cf Mal 3 2). At the present time many Syrian
soap-makers prefer the kali to the imported caustic
soda for soap-making.

In Sus (ver 17) is a curious reference to “washing
balls” (smégmata). James A. Patcu


SOBER, sd’bér, SOBRIETY, sé-bri’é-ti, SOBER-
NESS, so’bér-nes (Gr adj. séphrén, and its related
nouns, sdphrostiné, séphronismés; vbs. sdphronéd
and sdphroniz6; advb. sdphrénds, ‘of sound mind,”
“self-possessed,” ‘“‘without excesses of any kind,”
“moderate and discreet”): In Mk 5 15; Lk 8 35,
“‘sane,’’ said of one out of whom demons had just
been cast. In the Pastoral Epp., this virtue is esp.
commended to certain classes, because of extrava-
gances characterizing particular periods of life, that
had to be guarded against, viz. to aged men,
with reference to the querulousness of old age (Tit
2 2); to young men, with reference to their san-
guine views of life, and their tendency to dis-
regard consequences (Tit 2 6); enjoined upon
young women, with reference to extravagance in
dress and speech (Tit 2 5; 1 Tim 2 9); and, in
a similar manner, commended to ministers, because
of the importance of their judgment and conduct,
as teachers and exemplars (1 Tim 8 2). ‘Words
of soberness”’ (Acts 26 25) are contrasted with
the “mania,” “madness,” that Festus had just
declared to be the explanation of Paul’s eloquence
(ver 24).

In a few passages, the Gr vb. néphd and its deriva-
tive adj. néphdlios are used in the same sense. The
word originally had a physical meaning, as opposed
to drunkenness, and is thus used in 1 Thess 6 6.8,
as the foundation of the deeper meaning. Used
metaphorically also in the Pastoral Epp. and 1 Pet,
as sometimes in the classics, for “cool,” “unimpas-
sioned.” Ellicott, on 1 Tim 3 2.11, distinguishes
between the two words by regarding sdphran “‘ag
pointing to the outward exhibition of the inward vir-
tue” implied in néphalios. H. E. Jacops

SOCHO, s6’ks: RV


Occurs in 1 Ch 4 18,
“Saco.” See Socon.


.


x


1 pehey
