Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do nol send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


i %

^ v'


* ^ *

s is an authorized facsimile of the original book, and
produced in 1371 by microfilm-xerography by University
rofilms, A Xerox Company, Ann Arbor, Michigan, U.S.A.

j|c j|c j|e


MOGENS

AND OTHER STORIES*

By
JENS PETER JACOBSEN

Translated from the Danith

By

ANNA CRABOW


NICHOLAS L BROWN

NEW YORK MCMXXI


833.88

to?


THE SEA GULL LIBRARY

Edited by 0. F. THEIS
Cover Design by Orland Campbell

VOL L-ROMANCE OF THE
RABDIT. By Francis Jammes. J

Authorized translation from the
French by Gladys Edgerton.

é

VOL n.-MOCENS AND OTHER
STORIES. By Jens Peter
•Jacobsen.

Translated from the Danish by^
Anna Grabow,

VOL III.-THE SHEPHERD'S
PIPE. By Arthur Schnitzler.

Authorized translation from the
German by O. F. Theis.

other volumes in preparation


I


(i

c*


10

CONTENTS

PAOI
iNTRODUCnON • • • 7

Mogens 15

The Plague at Bergamo • • • . .87
There Should Have Been Roses • • • 105
Mrs. FdNss • • « • • • • • . 119


o^ili'lii'-(^(^


' f


INTRODUCTION

In the decade from 1870 to 1880 a new spirit
was stirring in the intellectual and literary world
of Denmark. George Brandes was delivering his
lectures on the Main Currents of Nineteenth Cen*
tury Literature; from Norway came the deeply
probing questionings of the granitic Ibsen; from
across the North Sea from England echoes of
the evolutionary theory and Darwinism. It was
a time of controversy and bitterness, of a conflict
joined between the old and the new, botli going
to extremes, in which nearly every one had a
share. How many of the works of that period
are already out*worn, and how old-fashioned the
theories that were then so violently defended and
attacked! Too much logic, too much contention
for its own sake, one might say, and too little
art.

This was the period when Jens Peter Jacobsen
began to write, but he stood aside from the con*
flict, content to be merely artist, a creator of
beauty and a seeker after truth, eager to bring

7


8 INTRODUCTION

into the realm of literature '*the eternal laws
of nature, its glories, its riddles* its niiracles»**
as he once put it That is why hb work has
retained its living colors until to-day, without
the least trace of fading.

There is in his work something of the passion
for form and style that one finds in Flaubert and
Pater, but where they are often hard, percussive,
like a piano, he is soft and strong and intimate
like a violin on which he plays his reading of
life. Such analogies, however, have little sig*
nificance, except that they indicate a unique and
powerful artistic personality.

Jacobsen is more than a mere stylist. The art
of writers who are too consciously that is a
sort of decorative representation of life, a formal
composition, not a plastic composition. One
element particularly characteristic of Jacobsen
is his accuracy of observation and minuteness of
detail welded with a deep and intimate under*
standing of the human heart. 'Ilis characters
are not studied tissue by tissue as under a scien-
tist's microscope, rather they are built up living
cell by living cell out of the author's, experience
and imagination. ^ He shows how they are con-
ditioned and modified by their physical being,
their inheritance and environment« Through


INTRODUCTION 9

each of his senses he lets impressions from with-
out pour into him. He harmonizes them with a
passionate desire for beauty into marvelously
plastic figures and moods. A style which grows
thus organically from within is style out o{
richness; the other is style out of poverty.

-In a letter he once stated his> belief that every
(book to be of real value must embody the
struggle of one or more persons against all those
things which try to keep one from existing in
one's own way. That is the fundamental ethos
which runs through all of Jacobsen's work. It
is in Marie Grubbe, Niels Lyhne, Mogens, and
the infinitely tender Mrs. Fonss.

They are types of the kind ho has described in
the following passage: **Know yo not that there
is hero in this world a secret confraternity,
which one might call the Company of Molan«
choliacs? That people there aro who by nat*
ural constitution have been given a difTerent
nature and disposition than the others; that have
a larger heart and a swifter blood, that wish
and demand more, have stronger desires and a
yearning which is wilder and more ardent than
that of the common herd. They are fleet as chil*
dren over whose birth good fairies have pre-
sided; their eyes are opened wider; their senses


10 INTRODUCTION

are more subtile in all their perception«. The
gladness and joy of lire, they drink with the
roots of their heart, the while the others merely
grasp tliem with coarse hands.**

He himself was one of these, and in this
passage his own art and personality is described
bettor than could be done in thousands of words
of commentary,

Jens Peter Jacobsen was born in the little
town of Thisted in Jutland, on April 7, 1847.
In 1868 he matriculated at tlie University of
Copenhagen, where he displayed a remarkable
talent for science, winning the gold medal of
the university with a dissertation on Seaweeds,
He definitely chose science as a career, and was
among the first in Scandinavia to recognize the
importance of Darwin. He translated the
Origin of Species and Descent of Man into
Danish. In 1872 while collecting plants he con-
tracted tuberculosis, and as a consequence, was
compelled to give up his scientific career. This
was not as great a sacrifice, as it may seem, for
he had long been undecided whether to choose
science or literature as his life work.

The remainder of his short life — he died
April 30, 1883 — was one of passionate devotion
to literature and a constant struggle with ill


INTRODUCTION II

health. The greater part of this period was
spent in his native town of Thisted* but an ad«
vance royalty from his publisher enabled him to
visit the South of Europe. His journey was
interrupted at Florence by a severe hemorrhage.

He lived simply, unobtrusively, bravely. His
method of work was slow and laborious. He
shunned the literary circles of the capital witli
their countless intrusions and interruptions, be*
cause he knew that the time allotted him to dp
his work was short. '* When life has sentenced
you to suffer," he has written in Niels Lyhne,
*^the sentence is neither a fancy nor a threat,
but you are dragged to the rack, and you are
tortured, and there is no marvelous rescue at the
last moment,*' and in this book there is also a
corollary, ^* It is on the healthy in you you must
live, it is the healthy that becomes great.*' The
realization of the former has given, perhaps, a
subdued tone to his canvasses; the recognition
of the other has kept out of them weaknesjs or
self-pity.

Under the encouragement of George Brandes
his novel Marie Grubbe was begun in 1873, and
published in 1876. His other novel Niels Lyhne
appeared in. 1880. Excluding his early scien«
tific works, these two books together with a


12 INTRODUCTION

collection of short stories, Mogens and Other
Tales, published in 18829 And a posthumous
volume of poems, constitute Jacobsen's literary
testament The present volume contains
Mogens, the story with which he made his liter«
ary debut, and other characteristic stories.

The physical measure of Jacobsen's accom«
plishment was not great, but it was an import«
ant milestone in northern literature. It is
hardly an exaggeration to say that in so far as
Scandinavia is concerned he created a new
method of literary approach and a new artistic
prose. There is scarcely a writer in these coun«
tries, since 1880, with any pretension toward
literary expression who has not directly or in«
directly come under Jacobscn's influence.

0. F. TiiElS.


MOGENS


•■ «


J


MOGENS

UMMER it was; in the middle of the day;

in a corner of the enclosure^ Immedi«

ately in front of it stood an old oaktree«

of whose trunk one might say, that it agonized

in despair because of the lack of harmony

> between its fresh yellowish foliage and its black

, and gnarled branches; they resembled most of

/ all grossly misdrawn old gothic arabesques.

Behind the oak was a luxuriant thicket of hazel

I with dark sheenless leaves, which were so dense,

' that neither trunk nor branches could be seen.

Above the hazel rose two straight, joyous maple-

j trees with gayly indented leaves, red stems and

long dangling clusters of green fruit. Behind

the maples came the forest — a green evenly

rounded slope, where birds went out and in as

elves in a grasshill.

All this you could see if you came wander«

ing along the path through the fields beyond the

fence. If, however, you were lying in. the

shadow of the oak with your back against the

15


I


16 MOGENS

trunk and looking the other way — and there
was a some one, who did tliat — - then you would
see first your own legs, then a little spot of
short, vigorous grass, next a large cluster of
dark nettles, then the hedge of thorn with the
big, white convolvulus, the stile, a little of the
ryefield outside, finally the councilor*s flagpole
on the hill, and tlien the sky.

It was stifling hot, the air was quivering with
heat, and tlicn it was very quiet; the leaves were
hanging from the trees as if asleep. Nothing
moved except the lady-birds and the nettles and
a few witliered loaves that lay on the grass and
rolled themselves up with sudden little jerks
as if they were shrinking from the sunbeams. _

And then the man underneath the oak; he
lay there gasping for air and with a melan*
choly look stared helplessly towards the sky.
He tried to hum a tune, but gave it up; whistled,
then gave that up too; turned round, turned
round again and let his eyes rest upon an old
mole-hill, that had become quite gray in the
drought. Suddenly a small dark spot appeared
upon the light-gray mold, another, three, four,
many, still more, the entire mole-hill suddenly
was quite dark-gray. The air was filled with
nothing but long, dark streaks, the leaves nodded


i


MOGENS ^ 17

and swayed and there rose a murmur which
turned into a hissing — rain was pouring down.
Everything gleamed, sparkled, spluttered.
Leaves, branches, trunks, everything shone with
moisture; every little drop that fell on eardi,
on grass, on the fence, on whatever it was, broke
and scattered in a thousand delicate pearls.
Little drops hung for a while and became big
drops, trickled down elsewhere, joined with
otiier drops, formed small rivulets, disappeared
into tiny furrows, ran into big holes and out
of small ones, sailed away laden with dust,
chips of wood and ragged bits of foliage, caused
tliem to run aground, set them afloat, whirled
them round and again caused them to ground.
Leaves, which had been separated since they
were in the bud, were re-united by the flood;
moss, that had almost vanished in the dryness,
expanded and became soft, crinkly, green and
juicy; and gray lichens which nearly had turned
to snufl*, spread their delicate ends, pufl'ed up
like brocade and with a sheen like that of silk.
The convolvuluses let their white crowns be filled
to the brim, drank healths to each other, and
emptied the water over the heads of the nettles.
The fat black wood-snails crawled forward on
their stomachs with a will, and looked approv-


18 MOGENS

ingly towards the sky. And the man? The
man was standing bareheoded in the midst of
the downpour, letting the drops revel in his hair
and brows, eyes, nose, mouth; ho snapped his
fingers at tlio rain, lifted a foot now and ogain
as if ho were about to dance, shook his head
sometimes, when there was too much water in
the huir, and sang at the top of his voico with«
out knowing what he was singing, so pre-occu*
pied was ho with the rain:

Had I, oh had I a grandson, trala.
And a chest with heaps and heaps of gold.
Then very likely had I had a daughter, trait.
And house and home and meadows untold.

Had T, oh had I a daughter dear, trala.
And houne and home and meadows untold.
Then very like had I had a sweetheart, trait.
And a chest with heaps and heaps of gold.

There he stood and sang in the rain, but yon*
der between the dark hazelbushes the head of a
little girl was peeping out. A long end of her
shawl of red silk had become entangled in a
branch which projected a little beyond the others,
and from time to time a small hand went for-
ward and tugged at the end, but this had no
other result, further than to produce a little
shower of rain from the branch and its neigh«


MOGENS 19

bora. The rest of the shawl lay close round the
little girFs head and hid half of the brow; it
shaded the eyesi then turned abruptly and be-
came lost among the leaves, but reappeared in
a big rosette of folds underneath the girKs chin.
The face of the little girl looked very aston-
islicd, she was just about to laugh; tlie smile
already hovered in tlie eyes. Suddenly he, who
stood there singing in the midst of the down-
pour, took a few steps to the side, saw the red
shawl, the face, the big brown eyes, the aston-
ished little open mouth; instantly his position
became awkward, in surprise he looked down
himself; but in the same moment a small cry
was heard, the projecting branch swayed vio-
lently, the red end of the sliawl disappeared in a
flash, the girl's face disappeared, and there was
a rustling and rustling further and further away
behind the hazelbushes. Then he ran. He did
not know why, he did not think at all. The
gay mood, which the rainstorm had called forth,
welled up in him again, and he ran after the
face of the little girl. It did not enter his head
that it was a person he pursued. To him it was
only the face of a little girl. He ran, it rustled
to the right, it rustled to the left, it rustled in
front, it rustled behind, he rustled, she rustled,


20 MOGENS

and all these sounds and the running itself ex-
cited him, and he cried: ** Where are you? Say
cuckoo! *' Nobody answered. "When he heard
his own voice, he felt just a little uneasy, but
he continued running; then a thought came to
him, only a single one, and he murmured as he
kept on running: ^What am I going to say to
her? What am I going to say to her? ** He
was approaching a big bush, there she had hid
herself, he could just see a corner of her skirt.
*^What am I going to say to her? Wliat am I
going to say to her? " he kept on murmuring
while he ran. He was quite near the bush, then
turned abruptly, ran on stil! murmuring the
same, came out upon the open road, ran a dis-
tance, stopped abruptly and burst out laughing,
walked smiling quietly a few paces, then burst
out laughing loudly again, and did not cease
laughing all the way along the hedge.


It was on a beautiful autumn day; the fall of
the foliage was going on apace and the path
which led to the lake was quite covered with tlio
citron-yellow leaves from the elms and maples;
here and there were spots of a darker foliage.
It was very pleasant, very clean to walk on this


MOGENS 21

tigerskin-carpety and to watch the leaves fall
down like snow; the birch looked even lighter
and more graceful with its branches almost bare
and the roan-tree was wonderful with its heavy
scarlet cluster of berries. And the sky was so
blue, so blue, and the wood seemed so much
bigger, one could look so far between the trunks.
And then of course one could not help thinking
that soon all this would be of the past. Wood,
field, sky, open air, and everything soon would
have to give way to the time of the lamps, the
carpets, and the hyacinths. For this reason the
councilor from Cape Trafalgar and his daughter
were walking down to the lake, while their car-
riage stopped at the baililT^s.
"^The councilor was a friend of nature, nature
was something quite special, nature was one of
the finest ornaments of existence. The coun«
cilor patronized nature, he defended it against
the artificial; gardens were nothing but nature
spoiled ; but gardens laid out in elaborate style
were nature turned crazy. There was no style
in nature, providence had wisely made nature
natural, nothing but natural. Nature was that
which was unrestrained, that which was un-
spoiled. Dut with the fall of man civilization
had come upon mankind; now civilization had


i


22 MOGENS

become a necessity; but it would have been bet-
ter, if it had not been thus. The state of nature
was something quite diflferent«. quite different.
The councilor himself would have had no ob*
jection to maintaining himself by going about in
a coat of Iamb-skin and shooting hares and
snipes and golden plovers and grouse and
haunches of venison and wild boars. No, the
state of nature really was like a gem, a perfect
gem.

The councilor and his daughter walked down
to the lake. For some time already it had glim-
mered between the trees, but now when they
turned the corner where the big poplar stood, it
lay quite open before them. There it lay with
large spaces of water clear as a mirror, with
jagged tongues of gray-blue rippled water, with
streaks that were smooth and streaks that were
rippled, and the sunlight rested on the smooth
places and quivcreil in the ripples. It captured
onc^s eye and drew it across its surface, carried
it along the shores, past slowly rounded curved,
past abruptly broken lines, and made it swing
around the green tongues of land; then it let go
of one*s glance and disappeared in largo bays,
but it carried along the thought — Oh, to sail!
Would it be possible to hire beats here?


MOGENS 23

No, there were none, said a little fellow, who
lived in the white country-house near by, and
stood at the shore skipping stones over the sur-
face of the water. Were there really no boats
at all?

Yes, of course, there were some; there was the
miller's, but it could not be had; the miller
would not permit it. Niels, the miller^s son,
had nearly gotten a spanking when he had let
it out the other day. It was useless to think
about it; but then there was the gentleman, who
lived with Nicolai, the forest-warden. He had a
fine boat, one which was black at the top and
red at the bottom, and he lent it to each and
every one.

The councilor and his daughter went up to
Nicolai*s, the forest-warden. At a short dis-
tance from the house they met a little girl. She
was Nicolai*s, and they told her to run in and
ask if they might see the gentleman. She ran
as if her life depended on it, ran with both
arms and legs, until she reached the door; there
she placed one leg on the high doorstep, fastened
her garter, and then rushed into the house. She
reappeared immediately afterwards with two
doors ajar behind her and called long before
she reached the threshold, that the gentleman


24 MOGENS

would be there in a moment; then she 8at down
on the doorstep, leaned against the wall, and
peered at the strangers from underneath one of
her arms.

The gentleman came, and proved to be a
tall strongly-built man of some twenty years.
The councilor's daughter was a little startled,
when she recognized in him the man, who had
sung during the rainstorm. But he looked so
»trange and absentmindcd; quite obviously he
had ju»t been reading a book, one could tell
that from the expression in his eyes, from his
hair, from the abstracted way in which he man-
aged his hands.

The councilor's daughter dropped him an
exuberant courtesy and said "Cuckoo,** and
laughed.

"Cuckoo?** asked the councilor. Why, it
was the little girl's face! The man went quite
crimson, and tried to say something when the
councilor came with a question about the boat.
Yes, it was at his service. But who was going to
do the rowing? Why, he of course, said the
girl, and paid no attention to what hec father
said about it; it was immaterial whether it was
a botlier to the gentleman, for sometimes he
himself did not mind at all troubling other peo«


MOGENS 2S

pie. Then they went^own to the boatt and on
the way explained things to the councilor.
They stepped into the boat, and were already a
good ways out, before the girl had settled her«
self comfortably and found time to talk.

** I suppose it was something very learned you
were reading,'* she said, **whcn I came and
called cuckoo and fetched you out sailing? **

** Rowing, you mean. Something learned!
It was the ' History of Sir Peter witli tlie Silver
Key and the Beautiful Magelone.* "

"Whoisthotby?"

** By no one in particular. Books of that sort
never are. *Vigoleis with the Golden Wheel*
isn't by anybody either, neither is * Bryde, the
Hunter.* "

'M have never heard of those titles be-
fore.**

** Please move a little to the side, otherwise
we will list. — Oh no, that is quite likely, they
aren't fine books at all; they are the sort you
buy from old women at fairs.**

** That seems strange. Do you always read
books of that kind? **

** Always? I don't read many books in the
course of a year, and the kind I really like the
best are those that have Indians in them.** .


26 MOGENS

** But poetry? Oehlenschlager, Schiller, and
the others? "

** Oh, of course I know them; we had a whole
bookcase full of them at home^ and Miss Holm
— my mother's companion — read them aloud
after lunch and in the evenings; but I can*t
say tliat I cared for them; I donH like verse.**

•* Uon*t like verse? You said had, isn't your
mother living any more? **

" No, neither is my father.**

Ho said tliis with a rather sullen, hostile tone,
and the conversation hnhed for a time and made
it possible to hear clearly the many little sounds
created by the movement of the boat through the
water. The girl broke the silence:

" Do you like paintings? **

"Altar-pieces? Oh, I don*t know.**

*^Yes, or other pictures, landscapes for in-
stance? **

** Do people paint those too? Of course they
do, I know that very well.**

** You are laughing at me? **

"I? Oh yes, one of us is doing that.**

"But aren't you a student? "

"Student? Why should I be? No, I am
nothing.**


MOGENS 27

** But you must be something. You must do
something? **

" But why? ••

"Why, because — everyb»^dy does some«
thing! '*

" Are you doing something? "

•* Oh well, but you are not a lady.**

*• No, heaven be praised/'

" Thank you.**

lie stopped rowing, drew the oars out of the
water, looked her into the face and asked:

"What do you mean by that? — No, don*t
be angry with me; I will tell you something, I
am a queer sort of person. You cannot under«
stand it. You think because I wear good clothes,
I must be a fine man. My father was a fine
man; I have been told that ho knew no end of
things, and I darci^ay he did, since he was a dis«
trirt-judgc. I know nothing because mother and
I were all to carh other, and I did not care to
learn the things they teach in the schools, and
donU care about them now eitlier. Oh, you
oufsht to have seen my mother; she was such
a tiny wee lady. When I was no older than
thirteen I could carry her down into the garden.
She was so light; in recent years I would often


28 MOGENS

carry her on my arm through the whole garden
and park. I can still see her in her black
gowns with the many wide laces. . . .**

He seized the oars and rowed violently. The
councilor became a little uneasy, when the
water reached so high at tlie stern, and f u^gested,
tliat they had better see about gelling home
again; so back Uicy went.

** Tell me/' said the girl, when the violence of
his rowing had decreased a little. **Do you
often go to town? "

" I have never been there.*'

** Never been there? And you only live
twelve miles away? "

** I don't always live here, I live at all sorts
of places since my mother's death, but the com«
ing winter I shall go to town to study arithme«
tic."

" Mathematics? "

*' No, timber," he said laughingly, '^ but that
is something you don't understand. I'll tell you,
when I am of age I shall buy a sloop and sail
to Norway, and then I shall have to know
how to figure on account of the customs and
clearance."

"Would you really like that? "

" Oh, it is magnificent on the sea, there is such


MOGENS 29

a feeling of being alive in sailing— > here we are
at the landing-stage! '*

He came alongside; the councilor and his
daughter stepped ashore after having made him
promise to come and see them at Cape Trafalgar.
Tlien they returned to the bailifTs, while he again
rowed out on the lake. At the poplar they could
still hear the sounds of the oars.


*' Listen, Camilla,'* said the councilor, who
had been out to lock the outer door, ** tell me,**
he said, extinguishing his hand-lamp with the
bit of his key, ** was tlie rose tlicy had at the
Carlsons a Pompadour or Maintenon? **

** Cendrillon," the daughter answered.

"That's right, so it was, — well, I suppose
we had better see that we get to bed now; good
night, little girl, good night, and sleep well.**

Wlien Camilla had entered her room, she
pulled up the blind, leaned her brow against
the cool pane, and hummed Elizabeth's song
from ** The Fairy-hill." At sunset a light breeze
had begun to blow and a few tiny, white clouds,
illumined by the moon, were driven towards
Camilla. For a long while she stood regarding
them; her eye followed tliem from a far dii«


30 MOGENS

tance, and she sang louder and louder as they
drew nearer, kept silent a few seconds while they
disappeared above her« then sought others« and
followed them too. With a little sigh she pulled
down the blind. She went to the dressing table,
rested her elbows against her clasped hands and
regarded her own picture in the mirror without
really seeing it.

She was thinking of a tall young man, who
carried a very delicate, tiny, blackdresscd lady
in his arms; she was thinking of a tall man, who
steered his small ship in between cliffs and
rocks in a devastating gale. She heard a whole
conversation over again. She bluslied: Eugene
Carlson might have thought that you were pay*
ing court to him! With a little jealous asso«
ciation of ideas she continued: No one would
ever run after Clara in a wood in the rainstorm,
she would never have invited a stranger — liter-
ally asked him — to sail with her. "Lady to
her fingertips," Carlson had said of Clara; that
really was a reprimand for you, you peasant*
girl Camilla! Then she undressed with affected
slowness, went to bed, took a small elegantly
bound book from the bookshelf near by and
opened the first page. She read through a short
hand-written poem with a tired, bitter expression


MOGENS 31

on her face, then let the book drop to the floor
and burst into tears; afterwards she tenderly
picked it up again, put it back in its place and
blew out the candle; lay there for a little while
gazing disconsolately at the moonlit blind, and
finally went to sleep.

A few days later the ^^rainman** started on
his way to Cape Trafalgar. He met a peasant
driving a load of rye straw, and received permis«
sion to ride with him. Then he lay down on
his back in the straw and gazed at the cloudless
sky. The first couple of miles he let his thoughts
come and go as they listed, besides there wasn't
much variety in them. Most of them would
come and ask him how a human being possibly
could be so wonderfully beautiful, and they mar«
veled that it really could be an entertaining occu-
pation for several days to recall the features of
a face, its changes of expression and coloring,
the small movements of a head and a pair of
hands, and tlie varying inflections in a voice.
But then the peasant pointed with his whip to*
wards the slate-roof about a mile away and said
that the councilor lived over there, and the good
Mogens rose from the straw and stared anxiously
towards tlie roof. He had a strange feeling of
oppression and tried to make himself believe


32 MOGENS *

that nobody was at home, but tenaciously came
back to tho conception that there was a large
party, and ho could not free himself from that
idea, even though he counted how many cows
** Country-joy " had on ihe meadow and how
many heaps of gravel he could see along the
road. At last the peasant stopped near a small
palli leading down to the country-house, and
Mogens slid down from the cart and began to
bru^h away the bits of straw while the cart slowly
creaked away over the gravel on the road.

He approached the garden<gale step by step,
saw a red shawl disappear behind the balcony
windows, a small deserted white sewing-basket
on the edge of tlie balcony, and the back of a still
moving empty rocking-chair. He entered the
garden, with his eyes fixed intently on the bal-
cony, heard the councilor say good-day, turned
his head toward the sound, and saw him stand-
ing there nodding, his arms full of empty flower-
pots. They spoke of this and that, and the coun-
cilor began to explain, as one might put it, that
the old specific distinction between the various
kinds of trees had been abolished by grafting,
and that for his part he did not like this at all.
Then Camilla slowly approached wearing a


MOGENS 33

brilliant glaring blue shawl Her arms were en«
tirely wrapped up in the shawl, and she greeted
him with a slight inclination of the head and
a faint welcome. Tlie councilor left with his
flowor«pots, Camilla stood looking over her
shoulders towards the balcony; Mogens looked
at her. How had he been since tlie other day?
Thank you, nothing especial had been the mat-
ter with him. Done much rowing? Why, yes,
as usual, perhaps not quite as much. She turned
her head towards him, looked coldly at him,
inclined her head to one side and asked with
half-closed eyes and a faint smile whetlier it
was the beautiful Magelone who had engrossed
Us time. He did not know what she meant, but
he imagined it was. Then they stood for a while
and said nothing. Camilla took a few steps
towards a corner, where a bench and a garden-
chair stood. She sat down on the bench and
asked him, after she was seated, looking at the
chair, to be seated; he must be very tired after
his long walk. He sat down in the chair.

Did he believe anything would come of the
projected royal alliance? Perhaps, he was com-
pletely indifferent? Of course, he had no in-
terest in the royal house. Naturally he hated


34 MOGENS

aristocracy? There were very few young men
who did not believe tliat democracy was, heaven
only knew what Probably he was one of those
who attributed not the slightest political impor*
tance to the family alliances of the royal house?
Perhaps he was mistaken. It had been seen. . • •
She stopped suddenly, surprised that Mogens
who had at first been somewhat taken aback
at all this information, now looked quite pleased.
He wasn*t to sit there, and laugh at her! She
turned quite red.

** Arc you very much interested in politics? '*
she asked timidly.

" Not in the least.'*

**But why do you let me sit here talking
politics eternally? '*

^* Oh, you say everything so charmingly, that
it does not matter what you are talking about.'*

"That really is no compliment.'*

•* It certainly is," he assured her eagerly, for
it seemed to him she looked quite hurt.

Camilla burst out laughing, jumped up, and
ran to meet her father, took his arm, and walked
back with him to the puzzled Mogens.

\(licn dinner was through and they had drunk
their cofTcc up on the balcony, the councilor
suggested a walk. So the three of tliem went


MOGENS 85

along the small way across the main road, and
along a narrow path with stubble of rye on
both sides, across the stile, and into the woods.
There was the oak and everything else; there
even were still convolvuluses on the hedge.
Camilla asked Mogens to fetch some for her.
He tore them all off, and came back with both
hands full.

**^ Thank you, I don*t want so many,** she said,
selected a few and let the rest fall to the ground.

**Then I wish I had let them be,** Mogens
said earnestly.

Camilla bent down and began to gather them
up. She had expected him to help her and
looked up at him in surprise, but he stood there
quite calm and looked down at her. Now as she
had begun, she had to go on, and gathered up
they were; but she certainly did not talk to
^Iogcns for a long while. She did not even look
to the side where ho was. But somehow or other
they must have become reconciled, for when on
their way back they reached the oak again,
Camilla went underneath it and looked up into
its crown. She tripped from one side to the
other, gesticulated with her hands and sang, and
Mogens had to stand near the hazelbushes to see
what sort of a figure he had cut. Suddenly


36 MOGENS

Camilla ran towards him, but Mogens lost his
cue, and forgot both to shriek and to run away,
and then Camilla laughingly declared that she
was very dissatisfied with herself and that she
would not have had the boldness to remain
standing there, when such a horrible creature —
and she pointed towards herself — came rushing
towards her. But Mogens declared that ho was
very well satisfied with himself.

V^licn towards sunset he was going home the
councilor and Camilla accompanied him a little
way. And as they were going home she said to
her father that perhaps they ought to invite that
lonesome young man rather frequently during
the month, while it was still possible to stay in
the country. He knew no one here about, and
the councilor said ^'yes,** and smiled at being
thought so guileless, but Camilla walked along
and looked so gentle and serious, that one would
not doubt but that she was the very personifica«
tion of benevolence itself.

Tho autumn weather remained so mild that
tho councilor stayed on at Cape Trafalgar for
another whole month, and the effect of the
benevolence was that Mogens came twice the first
week and about every day the third.

It was one of the last days of fair weather*


MOGENS 37

It had rained early in the morning and had re-
mained overclouded far down into the forenoon;
but now the sun had come forth. Its rays were
so strong and warm, that the garden-paths« the
lawns and the branches of the trees were en«
veloped in a fine filmy mist. The councilor
walked about cutting asters. Mogens and Ca«
niilla were in a corner of the garden to take
down some late winter apples. Ho stood on a
table with a basket on his arm, she stood on a
chair holding out a big white apron by the cor«
ners.

"Well, and what happened thcn?\*' she called
impatiently to Mogens, who had interrupted the
fairy-tale he was telling in order to reach an
apple which hung high up.

"Then," he continued, **the peasant began
to run three times round himself and to sing:
*To Babylon, to Babylon, with an iron ring
through my head.* Then he and his calf, his
great-grandmother, and his black rooster flew
away. They flew across oceans as broad as
Arup Vejle, over mountains as high as the
church at Jannerup, over Himmerland and
through the Holstein lands even to the end of
the world. There the kobold sat and ate break-
fast; he had just finished when they came.


38 MOGENS .

** * You ought to be a little more god-fearing,
little father/ said the peasant, * otherwise it
might happen that you might miss the kingdom
of heaven/ **

Well, he would gladly be god-fearing/*

** * Then you must say grace after meals/ said
the peasant. • • /*

**No, I won*t go on with the story,'* said
Mogens impatiently.

•*Very well, then dohV* wid Camilla, and
looked at him in surprise.

** I might as well say it at once/* continued
Mogens, ** I want to ask you something, but you
mustn't laugh at me/*

Camilla jumped down from the chair.

'*Tell me — no, I want to tell you something
myself — here is the table and there is the hedge,
if you won't be my bride, I'll leap with the
basket over the hedge and stay away. One! **

Camilla glanced furtively at him, and noticed
that the smile had vanished from hb face.

"Two!"

He was quite pale with emotion.

"Yes,'* she whispered, and let go the ends
of her apron so that the apples rolled toward all
corners of the world and then she ran.

But she did not run away from Mogens.


MOGENS 39

** Three,** said she, when he reached her, but
he kissed her nevertheless.

The councilor was interrupted among his
asters, but the district-judge*s son was too ir«
reproachable a blending of nature and civiliza-
tion for the councilor to raise objections.


It was late winter; the large heavy cover of
snow, the result of a whole week's uninterrupted
blowing, was in the process of rapidly melting
away. The air was full of sunlight and reflec«
tion from the. white snow, which in large, shining
drops dripped down past the windows. Within
the room all forms and colors had awakened, all
lines and contours had come to life. Wliatever
was flat extended, whatever was bent curved,
whatever was inclined slid, and whatever was
broken refracted the more. All kinds of green
tones mingled on the flower-table, from the soft-
est dark*green to the sharpest yellow*green.
Reddish brown tones flooded in flames across
the surface of the mahogany table, and gold
gleamed and sparkled from the knick-knacks,
from the frames and moldings, but oil the car«
pet all the colors broke and mingled in a joyous,
shimmering confusion.


40 MOGENS

Camilla sat at the window and sewed, and she
and the Graces on the mantle were quite en«
vcloped in a reddish light from the red curtains
Mogens walked slowly up and down the room,
and passed every moment in and out of slanting
beams of light of palo rainbow-colored dust.

He was in talkative mood.

•* Yes,** he said, ** llicy are a curious kind of
people, these with whom you associate. There
isn*t a thing between heaven and earth which
tliey cannot dispose of in the turn of a hand.
This is common, and tliat is noble; this is the
most stupid thing that has been done since the
creation of the world, and that is the wisest;
this is so ugly, so ugly, and that is so beautiful
it cannot be described. They agree so abso-
lutely about all this, that it seems as if they
had some sort of a table or something like that
by which they figured things out, for they
always get the same result, no matter what it
may be. How alike they are to each other, these
people! Every one of them knows the same
things and talks about the same things, and all
of tliem have tlie some words and the same


tt


opmions.
** You don*t mean to say,** Camilla protested,


MOGENS 41

'^that Carlsen and Ronholt have the same opin*


ions."


** Yes, they are the finest of all, they belong
to different parties! Their fundamental prin«
ciples are as different as night and day. No,
they are not They are in such agreement that
it is a perfect joy. Perhaps there may be some
little point about which they don*t agree; per«
haps, it is merely a misunderstanding. But
heaven help me, if it isn^t pure comedy to Ibten
to them. It is as if tliey had prearranged to do
everything possible not to agree. They tegin
by talking in a loud voice, and immediately talk
themselves into a passion. Then one of them in
his passion says something which he doesnU
mean, and then the other one says the direct
opposite which he doesnH mean either, and then
the one attacks that which the other doesn't mean,
and the other that which the first one didn't
mean, and the game is on.*'

"But what have tlicy done to you? *•

" They annoy me, these fellows. If you look
into their faces it is just as if you had it under
seal that nothing especial is ever going to hap-
pen in the world in the future."

Camilla laid down her sewing, went over and


42 MOGENS .

took hold of the corners of his coat collar and
looked roguishly and questioningly at him,

^I cannot bear Carlsen,^ he said angrily,
and tossed his head.
Well, and then.*'.

And then you are very, very sweet,** he mur-
mured with a comic tenderness.

"And then?*'

*^ And then/* he burst out, *' he looks at you
and listens to you and talks to you in a way I
don*t like. He is to quit that, for you are mine
and not his. Aren*t you? You are not his, not
his in any way. You are mine, you have bonded
yourself to me as the doctor did to the devil;
you are mine, body and soul, skin and bones, till
all eternity.**

She nodded a little frightened, looked trust-
fully at him; her eyes filled with tears, then she
pressed close to him and he put his arms around
her, bent over her, and kissed her on the fore«
head.

The same evening Mogens went to the station
with the councilor who had received a sudden
order in reference to an official tour which he
was to make. On this account Camilla was to
go to her aunt*s the next morning and stay there
until he returned.


MOGENS 43

When Mogens had seen his future father-in-
law off, he went home, thinking of the fact
that he now would not see Camilla for several
days. He turned into the street where she lived«
It was long and narrow and little frequented.
A cart rumbled away at the furthest end; in this
direction, too, there was the sound of footsteps,
which grew fainter and fainter. At the moment
he heard nothing but the barking of a dog
within the building behind him. lie looked up
at the house in which Camilla lived; as usual
the ground-floor was dark. The white-washed
panes received only a little restless life from the
flickering gleam of the lantern of the house next
door. On the second story the windows were
open and from one of them a whole heap of
planks protruded beyond the window-frame.
Camilla*s window was dark, dark also was every-
thing above, except that in one of the attic win-
dows there shimmered a white*golden gleam
from the moon. Above the house the clouds
were driving in a wild flight In the houses on
both sides the windows were lighted.

The dark house made Mogens sad. It stood
there so forlorn and disconsolate; the open win-
dows rattled on tlicir hinges; water ran monoton-
ously droning down tlio rainpipe; now and then


U MOGENS •

a little water fell with a hollow dull thud at
Boine spot which he could not aee; the wind
swept heavily through the street. The dark,
dark house! Tears came into Mogen*s eyes, an
oppressive weight lay on his chest, and he was
seized by a strange dark sensation that he had
to reproach himself for something concerning
Camilla, llicn he had to think of his mother,
and he felt a great desire of laying his head
on her lap and weeping his fill.

For a long while he stood thus with his hand
pressed against his breast until a wagon went
through the street at a sharp pace; he followed
it and went home. He had to stand for a long
time and rattle the front door before it would
open, tlien he ran humming up the stairs, and
when he had entered the room he threw himself
down on the sofa with one of SmolleU's novels
in his hand, and read and laughed till after
midnight. At last it grew too cold in the room,
he leaped up and went stamping up and down
to drive away the chill. He stopped at the win-
dow. The sky in one corner was so bright, that
the snow-covered roofs faded into it. In an-
other comer several long-drawn clouds drifted
by, and the atmosphere beneath them had a curi-
ous reddish tinge, a sheen that wavered un-


MOGENS 45

Bteadily, a red smoking fog, Ho tore open the
window, fire had broken out in the direction of
the councilor's. Down the stairs, down the
street as fast as he could; down a cross-street,
through a side-street, and then straight ahead.
As yet he could not see anything, but as ho
turned round the comer he saw the red glow of
fire. About a score of people clattered singly
down the street. As they ran past each other,
they asked where the fire was. The answer was
"The ^ugar-refinery.*' Mogens kept on run«
ning as quickly as before, but much easier at
heart. Still a few streets, there were more and
more people, and they were talking now of the
soap-factory. It lay directly opposite the coun«
cilor's. Mogens ran on as if possessed. There
was only a single slanting cross-street left. It
was quite filled with people: well-dressed men,
ragged old women who stood talking in a slow,
whining tone, yelling apprentices, over-dressed
girls who whispered to each other, corner-loafers
who stood as if rooted to tlie spot and cracked
jokes, surprised drunkards and drunkards who
quarreled, helpless policemen, and carriages
that would go neither forwards nor backwards.
Mogens forced his way through the multitude.
Now he was at the corner; the sparks were slowly


46 MOGENS

falling down upon him. Up the street; thete
were showers of sparks, the window-panes on
both sides were aglow, the factory was burning,
the councilor's house ^as burning and the house
next door also. There was nothing but smoke,
fire and confusion, cries, curses, tiles that rattled
down, blows of axes, wood that splintered, win-
dow-panes that jingled, jets of water that hissed,
spluttered, and splaslied, and amid all this the
regular dull »ob*likc throb of the engines. Fur-
niture, beilding, black helmets, ladders, shining
buttons, illuminated faces, wheels, ropes, tar-
paulin, strange ini^truments; Mogens rushed into
their midst, over, under it all, forward to the
house.

The facade was brightly illuminated by the
flames from the burning factory, smoke issued
from between the tiles of the roof and rolled
out of the open windows of the first story.
Within the fire rumbled and crackled. There
was a slow groaning sound that turned into a
rolling and crashing, and ended in a dull boom.
Smoke, sparks, and flames issued in torment out
of all the openings of the house. And then the
flames began to play and crackle with redoubled
strength and redoubled clearness. It was the
middle part of tlie ceiling of the first floor that


MOGENS 47

fell. Mogens with both hands seized a large
scaling-ladder which leaned against the part of
the factory which was not yet in flames. For
a moment he held it vertically, but then it slipped
away from him and fell over toward the coun-
cilor's house where it broke in a window*frame
on the second story. Mogens ran up tlie ladder,
and in through the opening. At first he had
to close his eyes on account of the pungent
wood*smoke, and the heavy suiTocaling fumes
which rose from the charred wood that the
water had reached took his breath away. He
was in the dining-room. The living-room was a
huge glowing abyss; the flames from the lower
part of the house, now and then, almost reached
up to the ceiling; the few boards that had re-
mained hanging when the floor fell burned in
brilliant yellowish-white flames; shadows and
the gleam of flames flooded over the walls; the
wall-paper here and there curled up, caught fire,
and flew in flaming tatters down into the abyss;
eager yellow flames licked their way up on
the loosened moldings and picture-frames.
Mogens crept over the ruins and fragments of
the fallen wall towards the edge of the abyss,
from which cold and hot blasts of air alter-
nately struck his face; on the other side so much


48 MOGENS

of the wall had fallen, that he could look into
Camilla^s room, while the part that hid the coun-
cilor's office still stood. It grew hotter and hot«
ter; the skin of his face became taut, and he
noticed, that his hair Was crinkling« Something
heavy glided past his shoulder and remained
lying on his back and pressed him down to the
floor; it was the girder which slowly had slipped
out of place. He could not move, breathing
became more and more difficult, his temples
throbbed violently; to his left a jet of water
splashed against the wall of the dining-room,
and tlie wish rose in him, that the cold, cold
drops, which scattered in all directions might
fall on hira. Then he heard a moan on the
other side of the abyss, and he saw something
white stir on the floor in Camilla's room. It
was she. She lay on her knees, and while her
hips were swaying, held her hands pressed
against each side of her head. She rose slowly,
and came towards the edge of the abyss. She
stood straight upright, her arms hung limply
down, and the head went to and fro limply on
the neck. Very, very slowly the upper part of
her body fell forward, her long, beautiful hair
swept the floor; a short violent flash of flame.


MOGENS 49

and it was gone» the next moment she plunged
down into the flames.

Mogens uttered a moaning sound« short« deep
and powerful« like the roar of a wild beast«
and at the same time made a violent movement«
as if to get away froiti the abyss. It was impos-
sible on account of the girder. His hands
groped over the fragments of wall« then they
stiffened as it were in a mighty clasp over the
debris« and he began to strike his forehead
against the wreckage with a regular beat, and
moaned: **Lord Cod« Lord God« Lord God.*'

Thus he lay. In the course of a littlo while«
ho noticed that there was something standing
beside him and touching him. It was a fireman
who had thrown tiic girder aside« and was about
to carry him out of the house. With a strong
feeling of annoyance« Mogens noticed tliat he
was lifted up and led away. The man carried
him to the opening« and then Mogens had a
clear perception that a wrong was being com-
mitted against him, and that the man who was
carrying him had designs on his life. He tore
himself out of his arms« seized a lathe that lay
on the floor« struck the man over the head with
it so that he staggered backward; he himself


so MOGENS

issued from the opening and ran ereel down the
ladder, holding the lathe above his head.
Through the tumult, the smoke, the crowd of
people, through empty streets, across desolate
squares, out into the fields. Deep snow every-
where, at a little distance a black spot, it was
a gravel -heap, that jutted out above the snow.
He struck at it with the lathe, struck again and
again, continued to strike at it; he wished to
strike it dead, so that it might disappear; he
wanted to run far away, and ran round about
the heap and struck at it as if possessed. It
would not, would not disappear; he hurled the
lathe far away and flung himself upon the black
heap to give it the finishing stroke. He got his
hands full of small stones, it was gravel, it was
a black heap of gravel. Wliy was he out here
in th3 field burrowing in a black gravel-heap? —
He smelled the smoke, the flames flashed round
him, he saw Camilla sink down into them, he
cried out aloud and rushed wildly across the
field. Ho could not rid himself of the sight
of the flames, he held his eyes shut: Flames,
flames! He threw himself on the ground and
pressed his face down into the snow: Flames!
He leaped up, ran backward, ran forward,
turned aside: Flames everywhere! He rushed


MOGENS 51

further across the snow, past houses, past trees«
past a terror-struck face, that stared out through
a vrindow-pane, round stacks of grain and
through farm-yards, vrhere dogs howled and tore
at their chains* He ran round the front wing
of a building and stood suddenly before a
brightly, restlessly lighted window. The light
did him good, the flames yielded to it; he went
to the window and looked in. It was a brew-
room, a girl stood at the hearth and stirred the
kettle. The light which she held in her hand
had a slightly reddish sheen on account of the
dense fumes. Another girl was sitting down,
plucking poultry, and a third was singeing it
over a blazing straw*fire. When the flames grew
weaker, new straw was put on, and they flared up
again; then they again became weaker and still
weaker; they went out. Mogens angrily broke
a pane with his elbow, and slowly walked away.
The girls inside screamed. Then he ran again
for a long time with a low moaning. Scattered
flashes of memory of happy days come to him,
and when they had passed the darkness was twice
as black. He could not bear to think -of what
had happened. It was impossible for it to have
happened. He threw himself down on his knees
and raised his hands toward heaven, the while


52 MOGENS .

he pleaded that that which had happened might
be as thougli it had not occurred. For a long
time he dragged himself along on his knees with
his eyes steadfastly fixed on the sky^ as if afraid
it might slip away from him to escape his pleas,
provided he did not keep it incessantly in his
eye. Then pictures of his happy time came
floating toward him, more and more in mist-like
ranks. There were also pictures that rose in a
sudden glamor round about him, and others
flitted by so indefinite, so distant, that they were
gone before he really knew what they were.
Ho sat silently in the snow, overcome by light
and color, by light and happiness, and the dark
fear which he had had at first that something
would come and extinguish all this had gone.
It was very still round about him, a great peace
was within him, the pictures had disappeared,
but happiness was here. A deep silence!
There was not a sound, but sounds were in the
air. And there came laughter and song and
low words came and light and footsteps and
dull sobbing of the beats of the pumps. Moan-
ing he ran away, ran long and far, came to the
lake, followed the shore, until he stumbled over
the root of a tree, and then he was so tired that
he remained lying.


I

I


MOGENS 53


With a soft oludcing sound the water ran over
the smail stones; spasmodically there was a soft
soughing among the barren limbs; now and
then a crow cawed above the lake; and morn-
ing threw its sharp bluish gleam over forest and
sea, over the snow, and over the pallid face«

At sunrise he was found by die ranger from
the neighborin.a;' forest, and carried up to the
forester Nicolai; there he^ lay for weeks and
days between life and death«


About the time when Mogens was being car«
ried up to Nicolai^ a crowd collected around a
carriage at the end of the street where the coun-
cilor lived. The driver could not understand
why the policeman wanted to prevent him from
carrying out his legitimate order, and on that
account they had an argument. It was the car«*
riage which was to take Camilla to her aunt*s.


** No, since poor Camilla lost her life in that
dreadful manner, we have not seen anything of
him! "

^* Yes, it is curious, how much may lie hidden
in a person. No one would have suspected any*


54 MOGENS

thingt 80 quiet and shy, almost awkward« Isn't
it so? You did not suspect anything? '*

*' About the sickness! IIow can you ask such
a question! Oh, you mean — I did not quite
understand you — you mean it was in the blood,
something hereditary? — Oh, yes, I remember
there was something like that, they took hh
father to Aarhus. Wasn't it so, Mr, Carlsen? **

**No! Yes, but it was to bury him, his first
wife is buried there. No, what I was thinking
of was the dreadful — yes, the dreadful life he
has been leading the last two or two and a half
years."

*'Why no, really! I know nothing about
that."

** Well, you see, of course, it is of the things
one doesn't like to talk about. • • • You under-
stand, of course, consideration for tliose nearest«
The councilor's family. . . ."

** Yes, there is a certain amount of justice in
what you say — but on the other hand — tell
me quite frankly, isn't there at present a false,
a sanctimonious striving to veil, to cover up the
weaknesses of our fellow-men? As for myself
I don't understand much about that sort of thing,
but don't you think that truth or public morals,
I dm i mean this morality, but — morals, con-^


MOGENS 55

ditionsy whatever you will^ suffer under it? ^
** Of course, and I am very glad to be able
to agree so with you, and in this case • • • the
fact simply is, that he has given himself to all
sorts of excesses. Ho has lived in the most dis-
reputable manner with the lowest dregs, peopio
without honor, without conscience, without posi-
tion, religion, or anything else, with loafers,
mountebanks, drunkards, and — and to tell the
truth with women of easy virtue."

*'And this after having been engaged to Ca-
milla, good heavens, and after having been down
with brain-fever for three months! "

'*Yes — and what tendencies doesn't this let
us suspect, and who knows what his past may
have been, what do you think? **

*'Yes, and heaven knows how things really
were with him during the time of their engage-
ment? There always tva3 something suspicious
about him. That is my opinion.

" Pardon me, and you, too, Mr. Carlsen, par-
don me, but you look at the whole affair in
rather an abstract way, very abstractedly. By
chance I have in my possession a very concrete
report from a friend in Jutland, and can present
the whole affair in all its details.*'
"Mr. Ronholt, you don't mean to . • .? "


56 MOGENS

** To give details? Yes, that is what I intend.
Mr. Carlsen, with the lady's permission. Thank
you! He certainly did not live as one should
live after a brain-fever. He knocked about from
fair to fair with a couple of boon-companions,
and, it is said, was somewhat mixed up with
troupes of mountebanks, and especially with the
women of the company. Perhaps it would be
wisest if I ran upstairs, and got my friend's
letter. Permit me. Til be back in a moment.**

*^ Don't you think, Mr. Carlsen, that Ronholt
is in a particularly good humor to-day? "

**Yes, but you must not forget tliat he ex-
hausted all his spleen on an article in the
morning paper. Imagine, to dare to maintain —
why, that is pure rebellion, contempt of law, for
him. . • •"

"You found the letter?"

"Yes, I did. May I begin? Let me see, oh
yes: * Our mutual friend whom we met last year
at Monstcd, and whom, as you say, you knew in
Copenhagen, has during the last months haunted
the legion hereabouts. He looks just as he used
to, he is the some pale knight of the melancholy
mien. He is the most ridiculous mixture of
forced gayety and silent hopelessness, *he is af-
fected — rutliless and brutal toward himself and


MOGENS 57

\ others. He is taciturn and a man of few words«

! and doesn't seem to be enjoying Iiimself at all,

though he does nothing but drinic and lead a
I riotous life. It is as I have already said, as if he

I had a fixed idea that he received a personal in«

; suit from destiny. His associates here were

especially a horse-dealer, called ** Mug-sexton,"
because he does nothing but sing and drink all
the time, and a disreputable, lanky, over-grown
\ cross between a sailor and peddler, known and

I feared under the name of Peter "Rudderless,"

j to say nothing of the fair Abelone. She, how-

i ever, recently has had to give way to a brunette,

I belonging to a troupe of mountebanks, which for

J some time has favored us with performances of

I feats of strength and rope-dancing. You have

seen this kind of women with sharp, yellow,
prematurely-aged faces, creatures that are shat-
tered by brutality, poverty, and miserable vices,
I and who always over-dress in shabby velvet and

dirty red. There you have his crew. I don't
understand our friend's passion. It is true that
his fiancee met with a horrible death, but that
does not explain the matter. I must still tell you
how he left us. We had a fair a few miles from
. here. He, '* Rudderless," the horse-dealer, and
the woman sat in a drinking-tent, dissipating


58 MOGENS

until far into the night. At three o'clock or
thereabouts they were at last ready to leave.
They got on the wagon, and so far everything
went all right; but then our mutual friend turns
off from the main road a^id drives with them
over fields and heath, as fast as the horses can
go. The wagon is flung from one side to the
other. Finally things get too wild for the horse-
dealer and he yells that he wants to get down.
After he has gotten off our mutual friend whips
up the horses again, and drives straight at a
large heather-covered hill. The woman becomes
frightened and jumps off, and now up the hill
they go and down on the other side at such a ter-
rific pace that it is a miracle the wagon did not
arrive at the bottom ahead of the horses. On
the way up Peter had slipped from the wagon,
and as thanks for the ride he threw his big clasp-
knife at the head of the driver.' "

^*The poor fellow, but this business of the
woman is nasty.'*

** Disgusting, madam, decidedly disgusting.
Do you really think, Mr. Ronholt, that this de-
scription puis the man in a better light? "

**No, but in a surer one; you know in the
darkness things often seem larger than they are."

" Can you think of anything worse? *'


MOGENS 59

** If not, then this is the worst, but you know
one should never think the worst of people/*

" Then you really mean, that the whole affair
is not so bad, that there is something bold in it,
something in a sense eminently plebeian, which
pleases your liking for democracy/*

** Don't you sec, that in respect to his en-
vironment his conduct is quite aristocratic? "

"Aristocratic? No, that is rather paradox-
ical. If he is not a democrat, then I really don*t
know what he is."

** Well, there are still other designations."


White alders, bluish lilac, red hawthorn, and
radiant laburnum were in flower and gave forth
their fragrance in front of the house. The win-
dows were open and the blinds were drawn.
Mogens leaned in over the sill and the blinds
lay on his back. It was grateful to the eye
after all the summer*sun on forest and water
and in the air to look into the subdued, soft,
quiet light of a room. A tall woman of opulent
figure stood within, the back toward the window,
and was putting flowers in a large vase. The
waist of her pink morning-gown was gathered
high up below the bosom by a shining black


60 MOGENS

leather*l>elt; on the floor behind her lay a snow«
white dressing* jacket; her abundant, very blond
hair was hanging in a bright-red net«

^You look rather pale after the celebration
last night/' was the first thing Mogens said.

** Good-morning," she replied and held out
without turning around her hand with the flowers
in it towards hinu Mogens took one of the
flowers. Laura turned the head half towards
him, opened her hand slightly and let the flowers
fall to the floor in little lots. Then she again
busied herself with tlie vase.

"III?'' asked Mogens.

** Tired."

** I won't eat breakfast with you to-day.**

"No?"

•* We can't have dinner together eithen**

** You are going fishing? "
No — Good-by!"
When are you coming back? "
I am not coming back."
What do you mean by that? " she asked ar«
ranging her gown; she went to the window, and
there sat down on the chair.

•* I am tired of you. That's all."

"Now you are spiteful, what's the matter
with you? What have I done to you? "


u
u


MOGENS 61

** Nothings but since we are neither married
nor madly in love with each other« I don*t see
' anything very strange in the fact« that I am
going my own way."

" Are you jealous? " she asked very softly.

*'0f one like you! I haven't lost my
senses! "

But what is the meaning of all this?**'
It means that I am tired of your beauty, that
I know your voice and your gestures by heart,
and that neither your whims nor your stupidity
nor your craftiness can any longer entertain me.
Can you tell me then why I should stay? **

Laura wept. '^ Mogens, Mogens, how can
you have the heart to do this? Oh, what shall
I, shall I, shall I, shall I do! Stay only to-
day, only to-day, Mogens. You dare not go
away from me! *'

"Those are lies, Laura, you don*t even be-
lieve it yourself. It is not because you think
such a terrible lot of me, that you are distressed
now. You are only a little bit alarmed be-
cause of the change, you are frightened because
of the slight disarrangement of your daily
habits. I am thoroughly familiar with that,
you are not the first one I have gotten tired
of.'*


62 MOGENS •

** Oh, stay with me only to-day« I won*t tonnent
you to stay a single hour longer«

**You really are dogs, you women! You
haven't a trace of fine feelings in your body.
If one gives you a kick, you pome crawling back
again/*

"Yes, yes, that's what we do, but stay only
for to-day — won't you — stay!"

"Slay, stay! No! •*

"You have never loved me, Mogens! **

"No!"

"Yes, you did; you loved me the day when
there was such a violent wind, oh, that beautiful
day down at the sea-shore, when we sat in the
shelter of the boat."

"Stupid girl!"

" If I only were a respectable girl with fine
parents, and not such a one as I am, then you
would stay with me; then you would not have the
heart to be so hard — and I, who love you so! "

"Oh, don't bother about that."

"No, I am like the dust beneath your feet,
you care no more for me. Not one kind word,
only hard words; contempt, that is good enough
for me."

" The others are neither better no* worse than
you. Good-by, Laura! "


MOGENS 63

He held out his hand to her, but she kept hers
on her back and wailed: ** No, no, not good-by!
not good-by! "

Mogens raised the blind, stepped back a
couple of paces and let it fall down in front of
the window. Laura quickly leaned down over
the window-sill beneath it and begged: ** Come
to me! come and give me your hand/*

" No."

When he had gone a short dbtance she cried
plaintively:

'* Good-by, Mogens! **

He turned towards the house with a slight
greeting. Then he walked on: "And a girl
like that still believes in love! — no, she does
not! "


The evening wind blew from the ocean over
the land, the strand-grass swung its pale spikes
to and fro and raised its pointed leaves a little,
the rushes bowed down, the water of the lake
was darkened by thousands of tiny furrows, and
the leaves of the water-lilies tugged restlessly
at their stalks. Then the dark tops of the
heather began to nod, and on the fields of sand


64 MOGENS

the sorrel swayed unsteadily to and fro. To«
wards the land! The stalks of oats bowed
downward, and the young clover trembled on
the stubble-fields, and the wheat rose and fell
in heavy billows; the roofs groaned, the mill
creaked, its wings swung about, the smoke was
driven back into the chimneys, and the window«
panes became covered with moisture.

There was a swishing of wind in the gable«
windows, in the poplars of the manor-house; the
wind whistled through tattered bushes on the
green hill of Bredbjerg. Mogens lay up there,
and gazed out over tlie dark earth. The moon
was beginning to acquire radiance, and mists
were drifting down on the meadow. Everything
was very sad, all of life, all of life, empty be-
hind him, dark before him. But such was life.
Those who were happy were also blind.
Tlirough misfortune he had learned to see;
everything was full of injustice and lies, the en«
tire earth was a huge, rotting lie; faith, friend-
ship, mercy, a lie it was, a lie was each and every« •
thing; but that which was called love, it was ;
the hollowcst of all hollow things, it was lust, ^
flaming lust, glimmering lust, smoldering lust,
but lust and nothing else. Why had he to
know this? Why had he not been permitted to


MOGENS 6S


hold fast to his faith in all these gilded lies?
Why was he compelled to see while the others
remained blind? He had a right to blindness,
he had believed in everything in which it was
possible to believe.

Down in the village the lights were being lit.

Down there home stood beside home. My
home! my homel And my childhood's belief in
everything beautiful in the world. — And what
if they were right, the others! If the world
were full of beating hearts and the heavens full
of a loving God! But why do I not know thai^
why do I know something different? And I do
Icnow something different, cutting, bitter,
true • • •

He rose; fields and meadows lay before him
bathed in moonlight. He went down into the
village, along the way past the garden of the
manor-house; he went and looked over the stone«
wall. Within on a grass-plot in the garden
stood a silver poplar, the moonlight fell sharply
on the quivering leaves; sometimes they showed
their dark side, sometimes their white. He
placed his elbows on the wall and stared at the
tree; it looked as if the leaves were running in
a fine rain down the limbs. He believed, that
he was hearing the sound which the foliage pro«


k


66 MOGENS

duced. Suddenly the lovely voice of a woman
became audible quite near by:

••Flower in dew I
Flower in dew!

Whisper to me thy dreamt, thine own.
Does in them lie the tame strange air
The tame wonderful elfin air.
Aft in mine own?
Are they filled with whispen and tobbing and

sighing
Amid radiance ftlumbering and fragrances dying,
Amid trembling ringing, amid rising singing:
In longing,
In longing, I live.**

Then silence fell again. Mogens drew a long
breath and listened intently: no more singing;
up in the house a door was heard. Now he
clearly heard the sound from the leaves of the
silver poplar. He bowed his head in his arms
and wept.

The next day was one of those in which late
summer is rich. A day with a brisk« cool wind,
with many large swiftly flying clouds« with ever-
lasting alternations of darkness and light« ac-
cording as the clouds drift past the sun.
Mogens had gone up to the cemetery, the garden
of the manor abutted on it. Up there it looked
rather barren, the grass had recently been cut;
behind an old quadrangular iron-fence stood


MOGENS 67

a wide*8preadingt low elder with waving foliage.
Some of the graves had wooden frames around
them, most wiere only low, quadrangular hills;
a few of them had metal-pieces with inscriptions
on them, others wooden crosses from which the
colors had peeled, others had wax wreaths, the
greater number had nothing at all. Mogens
wandered about hunting for a sheltered place,
but the wind seemed to blow on all sides of the
church. He threw himself down near the em*
bankment, drew a book out of his pocket; but
he did not get on with his reading; every time
when a cloud went past the sun, it seemed to
him as though it were growing chilly, and he
thought of getting up, but then the light came
again and he remained lying. A young girl
came slowly along the way, a greyhound and
a pointer ran playfully ahead of her. She
stopped and it seemed as if she wanted to sit
down, but when she saw Mogens she continued
her walk diagonally across the cemetery out
through the gate. Mogens rose and looked
after her; she walked down on the main road,
the dogs still played. Then he began reading
the inscription on one of the graves; it quickly
made him smile. Suddenly a shadow fell across
the grave and remained lying there. Mogens


C8


Ml


V


\v all aiå^ **^ ^

»*^^^''^{, »eemea w
y,e »>»«» '• end he

lly •^'^^t wanted to »J

>€*" the »"»"' T .
Then H« -^ jj qu«*'/


looked sideways. A
there, one hand in hU
held his gun.

" It isn't really hal
the inscription.

"No/' said Mogens
his bent position.

"Tell me/* contini

to tlie side, as if seek

been here for a coupl

going about wondori

the present didn*t con

drift about so alone,

in on us? And ^ha

to kill the time? F

ness in the neighborhi

** No, I am staying

** There isn't much

exclaimed and laug

Wouldn't you like to c

I have to go down to

shot, and while you b

over, and call dowi

Will you join?"

"Yes, with plcasui

** Oh, by the way,-

a girl? " ho jumped


MOGENS 69

** Yes, there she is, she is my cousin, I can*t in-
troduce you to her, but come along, let us fol-
low her; we made a wager, now you can be the
judge. She was to be in the cemetery with the
dogs and I was to pass with gun and game-bag,
but was not to call or to whistle, and if the dogs
nevertheless went with me she would lose; now
we will see,**

After a little while they overtook the lady;
the hunter looked straight alicad, but could not
help smiling; Mogrns bowed when thoy passed.
The dogs looked in surprise after the hunter
and growled a bit; then they looked up at the
lady and barked, she wanted to pat them, but in-
dilTercntly they walked away from her and
barked after the hunter. Step by step they drew
further and further away from her, squinted at
her, and then suddenly darted off after the
hunter. And when they reached him, they were
quite out of control; they jumped up on him
and rushed off in every direction and back again.

"You lose," he called out to her; she nodded
smilingly, turned round and went on.

They hunted till late in the afternoon. Mo«
gens and William got along famously and
Mogens had to promise that he would come to
the manor-house in the evening. This ho did,


70 MOGENS

and later he came almost every day» but in apite
of all the cordial invitations he continued living
at the inn.

Now came a restless period for Mogens. At
first Thora^s proximity brought back to life all
his sad and gloomy memories. Often he had
suddenly to begin a conversation with one of
the others or leave, so that his emotion might
not completely master him. She was not at all
like Camilla, and yet he heard and saw only
Camilla. Thora was small, delicate, and
slender, roused easily to laughter, easily to tears,
and easily to enthusiasm. If for a longer time
she spoke seriously with some one, it was not
like a drawing near, but rather as if she disap«
peared within her own self. If some one ex*
plained something to her or developed an idea,
her face, her whole figure expressed the most
intimate trust and now and again, perhaps, also
expectancy. William and his little sister did
not treat her quite like a comrade, but yet not
like a stranger either. The uncle and the aunt,
the farm-hands, the maid-servants, and the
peasants of the neighborhood all paid court to
her, but very carefully, and almost timidly. In
respect to her they were almost like a wanderer
in the forest, who sees close beside him one of


MOGENS 71

those tiny, graceful song-birds with very clear
eyes and light, captivating movements. He is
enraptured by this tiny, living creature, he would
so much like to have it come closer and closer,
but he does not care to move, scarcely to take
breath, lest it may be frightened and fly away.

As Mogens saw Thora more and more fre-
quently, memories came more and more rarely,
and he began to see her as she was. It was a
time of peace and happiness when he was with
her, full of silent longing and quiet sadness
when he did not see her. Later he told her of
Camilla and of his past life, and it was almost
with surprise tliat he looked back upon himself.
Sometimes it seemed inconceivable to him that it
was he who had thought, felt, and done all the
strange things of which he told.

On an evening he and Thora stood on a
height in the garden, and watched the sunset.
William and his little sister were playing hide*
and-seek around the hill. There were thousands
of light, delicate colors, hundreds of strong
radiant ones. Mogens turned away from them
and looked at the dark figure by his side. How
insignificant it looked in comparison with all
this glowing splendor; he sighed, and looked
up again at the gorgeously colored clouds. It


72 MOGENS

was not like a real thought« but it came 'vague
and fleeting, existed for a second and disap-
peared; it was as if it had Ijeen the eye that
thought it

** The elves in the green hill are happy now
tliat the sun has gone down/* said Thora.

•*0h — are they?"

** Don't you know tliat elves love darkness? **

Mogens smiled.

** You don't believe in elves, but you should.
It is beautiful to believe in all that, in gnomes
and elves. I believe in mermaids too, and elder*
women, but goblins! What can one do with
goblins and three-legged horses? Old Mary
gets angry when I tell her this; for to believe
what I believe, she says is not God-fearing.
Such things have nothing to do with people, but
warnings and spirits are in the gospel, too.
What do you say? "

"I, oh, I don't know — what do you really
mean? "

" You surely don't love nature? "

"But, quite the contrary."

"I don't mean nature, as you see it from
benches placed where there is a fine view on
hills up which they have built steps; where it
is like a set scene, but nature every day, always."


MOGENS 73


I


** Just 80 1 I can take joy In every leaf, every
twig, every beam of light, every shadow.
There isn't a hill so barren, nor a turf-pit so
square, nor a road so monotonous, that I can«

I not for a moment fall in love with it.**

'*But what joy can you take in a treo or a
bush, if you don't imagine that a living being
dwells within it, that opens and closes the flow-
ers and smooths the leaves? When you see a

! lake, a deep, clear lake, don't you love it for this

I reason, that you imagine creatures living deep,

deep down below, that have their own joys and
sorrows, that have their own strange life with

! strange yearnings? And what, for instance, is

there beautiful about the green hill of Berdbjerg,

< if you don't imagine, that inside very tiny

creatures swarm and buzz, and sigh when the
sun rises, but begin to dance and play with their
beautiful treasure-troves, as soon as evening


t


comes."


li


How wonderfully beautiful that is! And
you see that? "

"But you?"

"Yes, I can't explain it, but there is some-
thing in the color, in the movements, and in the
shapes, and then in the life which lives in them;
in the sap whidi rises in trees and flowersi in


1


74 MOGENS

the sun and rain that make them grow« in the
sand which blows together in hills, and in the
showers of rain that furrow and fissure the hill*
sides. Ohy I cannot understand this at all, when
I am to explain it."

"And that is enough for you? **

"Oh, more than enough sometimes — much
too much! And when shape and color and
movement are so lovely and so fleeting and a
strange world lies behind all this and lives and
rejoices and desires and can express all this in
voice and song, then you feel so lonely, that you
cannot come closer to this world, and life grows
lusterlcss ond burdensome.**

" No, no, you must not think of your fiancee
in that way."

" Oh, I om not tliinking of her.**

William and his sister came up to them, and
together they went into the house.


On a morning several days later Mogens and
Thora were walking in the garden. Ho was to
look at the grape-vine nursery, where he had not
yet been. It was a rather long, but not very
high hothouse. The sun sparkled and played


MOGENS 75

over the glass*roof. They entered« the air was
warm and moist, and had a peculiar heavy
aromatic odor as of earth that has just been
turned. The beautiful incised leaves and the
heavy dewy grapes were resplendent and lu-
minous under the sunlight. They spread out
beneath the glass-cover in a great green field *
of blessedness. Thora stood there and happily
looked upward; Mogens was restless and stared
now and then unhappily at her, and then up into
the foliage.

"Listen," Thora said gayly, **I think, I am
now beginning to understand what you said the
other day on the hill about form and color."

" And you understood nothing besides? "
Mogens asked softly and seriously.

'* No,** she whispered, looked quickly at him,
dropped the glance, and grew red, " not then.**

"Not then," Mogens repeated softly and
kneeled down before her, "but now, Thora?**

She bent down toward him, gave him one of
her hands, and covered her eyes with the other
and wept. Mogens pressed the hand against his
breast, as he rose; she lifted her head, and he
kissed her on the forehead. She looked up at
him with radiant, moist eyes, smiled and
whispered: "Heaven bo praised! "


L


76 MOGENS

Mogens stayed another week. Tbe arrange-
ment was that the wedding was to take place in
midsummer. Then he left, and winter came with
dark days« long nights, and a snowstorm of let-
ters«


All the windows of the manor-house were
lighted, leaves and flowers were above every
door, friends and acquaintances in a dense
crowd stood on the large stone stairway, all
looking out into the dusk« — Mogens had driven
off with his bride.

The carriage rumbled and rumbled. The
closed windows rattled. Thora sat and looked
out of one of them, at the ditch of the high-
way, at the smithes hill where primroses blos-
somed in spring, at Bertel Nielsen's huge elder-
berry bushes, at the mill and the miller's geese,
and the hill of Dalum where not many years
ago she and William slid down on sleighs, at
the Dalum meadows, at the long, unnatural
shadows of the horses that rushed over the
gravel-heaps, over the turf-pits and rye-field.
She sat there and wept very softly; from time
to time when wiping the dew from the pane, she
looked stealthily over towards Mogens. He sat


MOGENS 77


bowed forward* hb traveling-cloak was open»
his hat lay and rocked on the front seat; hb
hands he held in front of hb face. All the
things he had to think of I It had almost robbed
him of his courage. She had had to say good-by
to all her relatives and friends and to an in-
finity of places, where memories lay ranged in
strata, one above the other, right up to the sky»
and all this so that she might go away with him.
And was he the right sort of a man to place all
one^s trust in, he with his past of brutalities and
debaucheries! It was not even certain that all
tliis was merely his past. He had changed, it
is true, and he found it difficult to understand
what he himself had been. But one never can
wholly escape from one^s self, and what had
been surely still was there. And now this in-
nocent child had been given him to guard apd
protect. He had managed to get himself into
the mire till over his head, and doubtless he
would easily succeed in drawing her down into
it too. No, no, it shall not be thus — no, she
is to go on living her clear, bright girl's life in
spite of him. And the carriage rattled and
rattled. Darkness had set in, and here and
there he saw through the thickly covered panes,
lights in the houses and yards past which they


78 MOGENS

drove. Thora slumbered. Toward morning
they came to their new home, an estate that
Mogens had bought. The horses steamed in
the chill morning air; the sparrows twittered
on the huge linden in the court« and the smoke
rose slowly from the chimneys. Thora looked
smiling and contented at all this after Mogens
had helped her out of the carriage; but there
was no other way about, she was sleepy and too
tired to conceal it. Mogens took her to her
room and then went into the garden, sat down on
a bench, and imagined tliat he was watching the
sunrise, but he nodded too violently to keep up
the deception. About noon he and Thora met
again, happy and refreshed. They had to look
at things and express their surprise; they con*
suited and made decisions; they made the ab*
surdest suggestions; and how Thora struggled
to look wise and interested when the cows were
introduced to her; and how difficult it was not
to be all too impractically enthusiastic over a
small shaggy young dog; and how Mogens
talked of drainage and the price of grain, while
he stood there and in his heart wondered how
Thora would look with red poppies in her hair!
And in the evening, when they sat in their
conservatory and the moon so clearly drew the


MOGENS 79

outline of the windows on the floori what a
comedy they played, he on his part seriously
representing to her that she should go to sleep,
really go to sleep, since she must be tired, the
while he continued to hold her hand in his; and
she on her part, when she declared he was dis-
agreeable and wanted to be rid of her, that he
regretted having taken a wife. Then a recon*
ciliation, of course, followed, and they laughed,
and the hour grew late. Finally Thora went to
her room, but Mogens remained sitting in tlie
conservatory, miserable that she had gone. He
drew black imaginings for himself, that she was
dead and gone, and that he was sitting here all
alone in the world and weeping over her, and
tlien he really wept. At length he became angry
at himself and stalked up and down the floor,
and wanted to be sensible. There was a love,
pure and noble, without any coarse, earthly pas-
sion; yes, there was, and if there was not, there
was going to be one. Passion spoiled every«
thing, and it was very ugly and unhuman. How
he hated everything in human nature that was
not tender and pure, fine and gentle! He had
been subjugated, weighed down, tormented, by
this ugly and powerful force; it had lain in his
eyes and ears, it had poisoned all his thoughtsi^


80 MOGENS '

Ho went to his room. He intended to read and
took a book; he read, but bad not the »lightest
notion what — could anything have happened
to hert No, how could il? Bui ncyerlhclcas he
wan afraid, possibly there mipbt have — no, ho
couhl no longer ilaiid it. lie Mole »ohly to her
door; no, everything was Mill and peaceful.
When he listcnccl intently it seemed as If he could
hear her breathing — how his heart throbbed,
it seemed, he could hear it too. He went back
to his room and hjs book. He closed his eyes;
how vividly he saw her; he heard her voice, she
bent down toward him and whispered — how he
loved her, loved her, loved her! It was like
a song within hjm; it s«»cmcd as if his thoughts
took on rhythmic form, und how clearly ho could
see everything of which ho thought I Still and
silent she lay and slept, her arm beneath the
neck, her hair loosened, her eyes were closed,
she breathed very softly — tho air trembled
within, it was red like tho reflection of
roiics. Like a clumsy faun, imitating the
dance of the nymphs, so the bed-cover with its
awkward folds outlined her delicate form. No,
no, he did not want to think of her, not in tliat
way, for nolliing in all tho world, no; and now
it all came back again, it could not be kept away,


MOGENS 81

but he would keep it away, away! And it came
and went, came and went, until åleep seized hiniy
and the night passed.


Wlicn the sun had set on the evening of the
next day, they walked about together in the
garden. Arm in arm they walked very slowly
and very silently up one path and down the
other, out of the fragrance of mignonettes
through that of roses into that of jasmine. A
few moths fluttered past them; out in the grain-
field a wihl duck colled, otherwise most of tlie
sounds came from Thorn's silk dress.

*Mlow silent wo con be,** exclaimed Thora.

"And how wo can walk! ** Mogens continued,
" we must have walked about four miles by now.**

Then they walked again for a while and were
silent.

*' Of what are you thinking now? ** she asked.

** I am thinking of myself.**

"That's just what I am doing.**

" Are you also thinking of yourself? **

*• No, of yourself — of you, Mogens.**

He drew her icloser. They were going up to
the conservatory. The door was open; it was


82 MOGENS

very light in there, and the table with the snowy*
white cloth, the silver dish with the dark red
strawberries, the shining silver pot and the chan*
dclicr gave quite a festive impression.

** It is as in the fairy-tale, where Hiinsel and
Crete! come to the cake-house out in the wood,**
Thora said.

** Do you want to go in? *•

**0h, you quite forget, that in there dwells
a witch, who wants to put us unhappy little
children into an oven and cat us. No, it b much
better that wo resist the sugar*panes and the
pancake-roof, take each other by the hand, and
go back into the dark, dark wood.**

They walked away from the conservatory.
She leaned closely toward Mogens and contin-
ued: '* It may also be the palace of the Grand
Turk and you are the Arab from the desert who
wants to carry mo off, and the guard is pur-
suing us; tlie curved sabers flash, and we run
and run, but they have taken your horse, and
then they take us along and put us into a big
bag, and we are in it together and are drowned
in the sea. — Let me see, or might it be . • .? **

" my might it not be, what it b? **

'* Well, it might bo that, but it is not enough.
• . • If you knew how I love you, but I am so


MOGENS 83

unhappy — I don*t know what it is — there is
such a great distance between us — - no — **

She flung her arms round his neck and kissed
him passionately and pressed her burning cheek
against his:

** I donH know how it is, but sometimes I al-
most wish that you beat me — I know it is child*
ish, and that I am very happy, very happy, and
yet I feci so unhappy I **

Slie laid her head on his breast and wept, and
then she began while her tears were still stream-
ing, to sing, at first very gchtly, but then louder
and louder!

** In longing
In longing I live I**

**My own little wife! *' and ho lifted her up
in his arms and carried her in.

In the morning he stood beside her bed. The
light came faintly and subdued through the drawn
blinds. It softened all the lines in the room and
made all the colors seem sated and peaceful.
It seemed to Mogens as if the air rose and fell
with her bosom in gentle rarifications. Her
head rested a little sidewise on the pillow, her
hair fell over her white brow, one of her checks
was a brighter red than the other, now and then


4 -


84 MOGENS

there was a faint quivering in the calmly-arched
eyelids, and the linci of her mouth undulated int-
perceptibly between unconscious seriousness
and slumbering smiles. Mogens stood for a
long time and looked at her, happy and quiet.
The last shadow of his past had disappeared.
Then he stole away softly and sat down in the
living-room and wailed for her in silence. Ho
had sat there for a while, when he felt her head
on his shoulder and her cheek against his.


They went out together into the freshness of
the morning. The sunlight was jubilant above
the earth, the dew sparkled, flowers that had
awakened early gleamed, a lark sang high up
beneath the sky, swallows flew swiftly through
the air. He and she walked across the green
field toward the hill with the ripening rye; they
followed the footpath which led over there.
She went ahead, very slowly and looked back
over her shoulder toward him, and they talked
ond laughed. The further they descended the
hill, tlic more the grain intervened, soon they
could no longer be seen.


TUE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO


THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO

OLD BERGAMO lay on the summit of a
low mountain« hedged in by walls and
gates, and New Bergamo lay at the foot
of the mountain, exposed to all winds.

One day the plague broke out in the new town
and spread at a terrific speed; a multitude of
people died and the others fled across the plains
to all four corners of the world. And the citi-
zens in Old Bergamo set (ire to the deserted town
in order to purify the air, but il did no good.
People began dying up there too, at first one a
day, then five, then ten, then twenty, and, when
the plague had reached its height, a great many
more.

And they could not flee as those had done,
who lived in the new town.

There were some, who tried it, but they led
the life of a hunted animal, hid in ditches and
aewers, under hedges, and in the green fields;
for the peasants, into whose homes in many
places the first fugitives had brought the plague,
atoned every stranger they came across, drove

87


88 THE PUGUE IN BERGAMO

him from their lands« or struck him down like
a mad dog without mercy or pity« in justifiable
self •defense« as they believed. ,

The people of Old Bergamo had to stay where
they were« and day by day it grew hotter; and
day by day the gruesome di!>ease became more
voracious and more grasping. Terror grew to
madness. Wliat there had been of order and
good government was as if the earth had swab
lowed it, and what was worst in human nature
came in its stead.

At the very beginning when the plague broke
out people worked together in harmony and con-
cord. They took care that the corpses were duly
and properly buried, and every day saw to it
that big bonfires were lighted in squares and
open places so that the healthful smoko might
drift through the streets. Juniper and vinegar
were distributed among the poor, and above all
else, the people sought the churches early and
late, alone and in processions. Every day they
went with their prayers before God and every
day when the sun was setting behind the moun-
tains, all the churchl>ells called wailingly to-
wards heaven from hundreds of swinging throats.
Fasts were ordered and every day holy relics
were set out on tlie altars.


THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO 89

At last one day when they did not know what

else to do, from the balcony of tlie town hall,

* amid the sound of trumpets and horns, they pro«

claimed the Holy Virgin, podesta or lordmayor

of the town now and forever.

But all this did not help; there was nothing
that helped.

And wlien the people felt this and the belief
grew stronger that heaven either would not or
could not help, they not only let their hands lie
idly in tlio lap, saying, **Lct there come what
may." Nay, it seemed, as if sin had grown
from a secret, stealthy disease into a wicked,
open, raging plague, which hand in hand with
the physical contagion sought to slay the soul
as tho otlier strove to destroy tlie body, so in-
credible were their deeds, so enormous their do*
pravity! The air was filled with blasphemy
and impiety, with the groans of the gluttons and
tho howling of drunkards. The wildest night
hid not greater debauchery than was here com*
mitted in broad daylight.

"To-day we shall eat, for to-morrow we
die! ** — It was as if they had set these words to
music, and played on manifold instruments a
never-ending hellish concert« Yea, if all sins
had not already been invented, they would have


90 THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO

been invented here» for there was no road thejr
would not have followed in their wickedness«
The most unnatural vices flourished among them,
and even such rare sins as necromancy, magic»
and exorcism were familiar to tliem, for there
were many who hoped to obtain from the pow«
ers of evil the protection which heaven had not
vouchsafed tlicm.

Whatever had to do with mutual assistance or
pity had vanished from their minds; each one
had thoughts only for himself. He who was sick
was looked upon as a common foe, and if it hap*
pened that any one was unfortunate enough to
fall down on the street, exhausted by the first
fever*paroxysm of the plague, there was no door
that opened to him, but with lance*pricks and
the casting of stones they forced him to drag
himself out of the way of those who were still
heahhy.

And day by day the plague increased, the sum«
mcr*s sun bla/cd down upon tlie town, not a
drop of rain fell, not the faintest breeze stirred.
From corpses that lay rotting in the houses and
from corpi^s that were only half -buried in the
earth« there was engendered a sulTocating stench
which mingled with the stagnant air of the
streets and attracted swarms and clouds of


THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO 91

ravens and crows until the walls and roofs were
black with them. And round about the wall
encircling the town sat strange, large, outland«
ish birds from far away with beaks eager for
spoil and expectantly crooked claws; and they
sat there and looked down with their tranquil
greedy eyes as if only waiting for the unfor«
tunate town to turn into one huge carrion-pit.

It was just eleven weeks since the plague had
broken out, when the watchman in the tower and
other people who were standing in high places
saw a strange procession wind from the plain
into the streets of the new town between the
smoke-blackened stone walls and the black ash-
heaps of the wooden houses. A multitude of
people! At least, six hundred ox more, men and
women, old and young, and they carried big
black crosses between them and above their heads
floated wide banners, red tis fire and blood.
They sing as they are moving onward and heart-
rending notes of despair rise up into the silent
sultry air.

Brown, gray, and black are their clothes, but
all wear a red badge 'on their breast. A cross
it proves to be, as they draw nearer. For all the
time they are drawing nearer. They press up«
ward along the steep road, flanked by walls.


92 THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO

which leads up to the old town. It is a throng of
white faces; they carry scourges in their hands.
On their red banners a rain of fire is pictured.
And the black crosses sway from one side to the
other in the crowd.

From the dense mass there rises a smell of
sweat, of ashes, of the dust of the roadway, and
of stale incense.

They no longer sing, neither do they speak,
nothing is audible but the tramping, herd-liko
sound of their naked feet.

Face after face plunges into the darkness of
the towcr-gatc, and emerges into the light on
tlie other side with a dazed, tired expression and
half »closed lids.

Then the singing begins again: a miserere;
they grasp their scourges more firmly and walk
with a bri>kcr step as if to a war-song.

They look as if they came from a famished
city, their checks are hollow, their bones stand
out, their lips are bloodless, and tliey have dark
rin^^s beneath their eyes.

The people of Bergamo have flocked together
and watch them with amazement — and uneasi«
ness. Red dissipated faces stand contrasted with
these pale white ones; dull glances exhausted
by debauchery are lowered before these piercing,


THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO 93

flaming eyes; mocking blasphemers stand open«
mouthed before these hymns.

And there is blood on their scourges.

A feeling of strange uneasiness filled the peo«
pie at the sight of these strangers.

But it did not take long, however« before they
shook off this impression. Some of them recog«
nized a half*crazy shoemaker from Brescia among
those who bore crosses, and immediately the
whole mob through him became a laughing-
stock. Anyhow, it was something new, a dis-
traction amid the everyday, and when the stran-
gers marched toward the cathedral, everybody
followed behind as they would have followed
a band of jugglers or a tame bear.

But as they pushed their way forward they
became embittered; they felt so matter*of*fact
in comparison with the solemnity of these peo-
ple. They understood very well, that those shoe-
makers and tailors had come here to convert
them, to pray for them, and to utter the words
which they did not wish to hear. Tliere were
two lean, gray-haired philosoph.ers who had
elaborated impiety into a system; they incited
the people, and out of the malice of their hearts
stirred their passions, so that with each step as
they neared the church the attitude of the crowd


94 THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO

became more threatening and their cries of anger
wilder. It would not have taken much to have
made them lay violent hands on those unknown
flagellants. Not a hundred steps from the church
entrance, the door of a tavern was thrown opcn»
and a whole Hock of carouiers tumhicd out, one
on top of the other. They placed themselves
at the head of the procession and led tlio way,
singing and bellt)Wing with grotesquely solemn
gestures— -all except one who turned hand*
springs right up the grass-grown stones of the
church-steps. This, of course, caused laughter,
and so all entered peacefully into the sane«
tuary.

It seemed strange to be here again, to pass
through this great cool space, in this atmosphere
pungent with the smell of old drippings from
wax candles — across the sunken flag-stones
which their feet knew so well and over these
stones whose worn*down designs and bright in-
scriptions had so often caused their thoughts to
grow weary. And while their eyes half-curi-
ou.sly, half-unwillingly sought rest in the gently
subdued light underneath the vaults or glided
over the dim manifoldncss of the gold-dust and
smoke-stained colors, or lost themselves in the
strange shadows of the altar, there rose in their


THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO 95

hearts a longing which could not bo suppressed.

In the meantime those from the tavern con«
tinued their scandalous behavior upon the high
altar, A huge, massive butcher among them» a
young man, had taken olT his white opron and
tied it around his neck, so that it hung down his
back like a surplice, and ho celebrated mass with
the wildest and maddest words, full of obscenity
and blasphemy. An oldish little fellow with a
fat belly, active and nimble in spite of his weight,
with a face like a skinned pumpkin was the sac-
ristan and responded with the most frivolous
refrains. He kneeled down and genuflected and
turned his back to the altar and rang the bell as
though it were a jester's and swung the censer
round like a wheel. The others lay drunk on
the steps ot full length, bellowing with laughter
and hiccoughing with drunkenness.

The whole church laughed and howled and
mocked at the strangers. They called out to
them to pay close attention so that they might
know what the people thought of their God, here
in Old Bergamo. For it was not so much their
wish to insult God that made them rejoice in tlie
tumult; but they felt satisfaction in knowing
that each of their blasphemies was a sting in
the hearts of these holy people.


96 THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO

They stopped in tho center of the nave and
groaned with pain, their hearts boiling with
hatred and vengeance. They lifted their eyes
and hands to God, and prayed tliat His vengeance
might fall because of the mock done to Him here
in His own house. They would gladly go to
destruction together with these fool-hardy, if
only He would show His might. Joyously they
would let themselves be crushed beneath His
heel, if only llo would triumph, that cries of ter«
ror, despair, and repentance, that were too late,
might rise up toward Him from these impious
lips.

And they struck up a miserere. Every note
of it sounded like a cry for the rain of fire that
overwhelmed Sodom, for the strength which
Samson possessed when he pulled down the
columns in tho house of the Philistines. They
prayed with song and with words; they denuded
their shoulders and prayed with their scourges.
They lay kneeling row after row, stripped to
their waist, and swung the sharp^pointed and
. knotted cords down on their bleeding backs«
Wildly and madly they beat themselves so that
the blood clung in drops on their hissing whips.
Every blow was a sacrifice to God. Would that
they might beat themselves in still another way»


THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO 97

would that they might tear themselves into a
thousand bloody shreds here before His eyes!
This body with which they had sinned against
His commandments had to be punished^ tortured,
annihilated, that He might see how hateful it
was to them, that He might see how they became
like unto dogs in order to please Him, lower
than dogs before His will, the lowliest of vermin
tliat ate the dust beneath tlie soles of His feet I
Blow upon blow — until their arms dropped or
until cramps turned them to knots. There they
lay row on row with eyes gleaming with mad-
ness, with foam round their mouths, tlie blood
trickling down their flesh.

And those who watched this suddenly felt
their hearts throb, noticed how hotness rose into
their cheeks and how their breathing grew diffi«
cult. It seemed as if something cold was grow«
ing out beneath their scalps, and their knees
grew weak. It seized hold of them; in their
brains was a little spot of madness which under-
stood this frenzy.

To feel themselves the slaves of a harsh and
powerful deity, to thrust themselves down be«
foro His feet; to be His, not in gentle piety, not
in tho inactivity of silent prayer, but madly, in
a frenzy of self-humiliation, in blood and wail«


I


98 THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO

ing, beneath wet gleaming scourges— -this they
were capable of understanding. Even the
butcher became silent, and the toothless philoso«
phcrs lowered their gray heads before the eyes
that roved about.

And it became quite still within the church;
only a slight wave«Hke motion swept through
the mob. ,

Then one from among the strangers^ a young
monk, rose up and spoke. He was pale as a
sheet of linen, his black eyes glowed like coals,
which are just going to die out, and the gloomy,
pain-hardened lines around his mouth were as if
carven in wood with a knife, and not like the
folds in the face of a human being.

He raised his thin, sickly hands toward
heaven in prayer, and the sleeves of his robe
slipped down over his lean, white arms.

Then he spoke.

Of hell he spoke, that it is infinite as heaven
is infinite, of the lonely world of torments which
each one of the condemned must endure and (ill
with his wails. Seas of sulphur were there,
fields of scorpions, flames that wrap themselves
round a person like a cloak, and silent flames
that have hardened and plunged into the body
like a spear twisted round in a wound.


THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO 99

It was quite still; breathlessly they listened
to his words, for he spoke as if he had seen it
with his own eyes, and they asked themselves: is
he one of the condemned, sent up to us from the
caverns of hell to bear witness before us?

Then ho preached for a long time concerning
the law and the power of the law, that its every
title must be fulfilled, and that every transgres-
sion of which they were guilty would be counted
against them by grain and ounce. ** But Christ
died for our sins, say yc, and we are no longer
subject to the law. But I say unto you, hell will
not be cheated of a single one of you, and not
a single iron tooth of the torture wheel of hell
shall pass beside your flesh. You build upon
the cross of Golgotha, come, come! Come and
look at it! I shall lead you straight to its foot.
It was on a Friday, as you know, that they
thrust Him out of one of their gates and laid the
heavier end of a cross upon His shoulders.
They made Him bear it to a barren and unfruit-
ful hill without the city, and in crowds they
followed Him, whirling up the dust with their
many feet so that it seemed a red cloud was over
the place. And they tore tlie garments front
Him and bared His body, as tlie lords of the
law have a malefactor e:tcposcd before the eyes


100 THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO

of all, sa that all may see the flesh that is to be
committed to torture. And they flung Him on
the cross and stretched Him out and they drove
a nail of iron through each of His resistant hands
and a nail through His crossed feet. With clubs
they struck the nails till they were in to the
heads. And they raised upright the cross in a
hole in the ground, but it would not stand firm
and straight, and they moved it from one side to
the other, and drove wedges and posts all around,
and those who did this pulled down the brims
of their hats so that the blood from His hands
might not drop into their eyes. And Ho on the
cross looked down on the soldiers, who were
casting lots for His unstitched garment and down
on the whole turbulent mob, for whose sake He
sufl'ered, that they might be saved; and in all
the multitude there was not one pitiful eye.

** And those below looked up toward Him, who
hung there sufl'ering and weak; they looked at
the tablet above His head, whereon was written
•King of tlic Jews,' and lliey reviled Him ond
called out to Him: *Thou that destroyest the
temple, and buildest it in three days, save thy-
self. If thou be the Son of God, come down
from the cross.* Then He, the only begotten
Son of God was taken with anger, and saw that


THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO 101

they were not worthy of salvation« these mobs
that fill the earth. He tore free His feet over
the heads of the nails, and He clenched His
hands round the nails and tore them out, so that
the arms of the cross bent like a bow. Tlien
Ho leaped down upon the earth and snatched up
His garment so that the dice rolled down the
slope of Golgotha, and flung it round himself
with the wrath of a king and ascended into
heaven. And the cross stood empty, and the
great work of redemption was never fulfilled.
There is no mediator between God and us; there
is no Jesus who died for us on the cross; there
is no Jesus who died for us on the cross, tlicre
is no Jesus who died for us on the cross! ''

He was silent.

As he uttered the låst words he leaned for-
ward over the multitude and with his lips and
hands hurled the last words over their heads.
A groan of agony went through the church, and
in the corners they had begun to sob.

Then the butcher pushed forward with raised,
threatening hands, pale as a corpse, and shouted:
'* Monk, monk, you must nail Him on the cross
again, you must! *' and behind him there was a
hoarse, hissing sound: "Yea, yea, crucify, cru-
cify Him! " And from all mouths, threatening.


102 THE PLAGUE IN BERGAMO

beseeching, peremptory« rose a storm of cries up
to the vaulted roof: ** Crucify, crucify Him! '*

And clear and serene a single quivering voice:
"Crucify Him!"

But the monk looked down over this wave of
outstretched hands, upon these distorted faces
with the dark openings of screaming lips, where
rows of teeth gleamed white like the teeth of
enraged beasts of prey, and in a moment of
ecstasy he spread out his arms toward heaven
and laughed. Then he stepped down, and his
people raised their banners with the rain of (ire
and their empty black crosses, and crowded their
way out of the church and again passed singing
across the square and again tlirough the opening
of the tower-gate.

And those of Old Bergamo stared after them,
as they went down the mountain. The steep
road, lined by walls, was misty in the light of
llie sun setting beyond the plain, but on the red
wall encircling the city the shadows of the great
crosses which swayed from side to side in the
crowd stood out black and sharply outlined.

Further away sounded the singing; one or
another of the banners still gleamed red out of
the new town^s smoke-blackened void; then they
disappeared in the sun-lit plain.


I


THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN ROSES


THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN ROSES

THERE should have been roses.
Of the large, pale yellow ones.
And they should hang in abundant
clusters over tlie garden-wall, scattering their
tender leaves carelessly down into the wagon*
tracks on the road: a distinguished glimmer of
all the exuberant wealth of flowers within.

And they should have the delicate, fleeting
fragrance of roses, which cannot be seized and is
like that of unknown fruits of which the senses
tell legends in their dreams.

Or should they have been red, the roses?

Perhaps.

They might be of the small, round, hardy
roses, and they would have to hang down in
slender twining branches with smooth leaves,
red and fresh, and like a salutation or a kiss
tlirown to the wanderer, who is walking, tired and
dusty, in tlie middle of the road, glad that he
now is only half a mile from Rome.

Of what may he be tliinking? What may be

his life?

105


106 THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN ROSES

And now Uio houses hide him, thoy hide every«
tiling on that side, Tlicy hide one another und
the road and tlie city, but on tlio otlier side there
is still a diMant view. There the road swings
in an indolent, slow curve down toward the river,
down toward the mournful bridge. And behind
this lies the immense Campagna.

The gray and the green of such large plains.
• •• It is as if the weariness of many tedioui
miles rose out of them and settled with a heavy
weight upon one, and made one feel lonely 'and
forsaken, and filled one with desires and yearn-
ing. So it is much better that one should take
one's ease here in a corner between high garden-
walls, where the air lies tepid and soft and still
— to sit on the sunny side, where a bench
curves into a niche of the wall, to sit there <ind
gaze upon the shimmering green acanthus in the
roadside ditches, upon the silver-spotted thistles,
and the pale-yellow autumn flowers. •

The roses should have been on the long gray
wall opposite, a wall full of lizard holes and
chinks with withered grass; and they should
have peeped out at the very spot where the long,
monotonous flatness is broken by a large, swell-
ing basket of beautiful old wrought iron, a lat-
ticed extension, which forms a spacious bal-


THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN ROSES 107

cony, reaching higher tlian the breast. It must
have been refreshing to go up tliero when one
was weary of the enclosed garden.

And this tlicy often were.

They hated the magnificent old villa, which
is said to be within, with its marble stair-cases
and its tapestries of coarse weave; and the an*
cient trees with their proud large crowns, pines
and laurels, ashes, cypresses, and oaks. Dur*
ing all the period of their growth they were
hated with tlie hatred which restless hearts feel
for that which is commonplace, trivial, unevent-
ful, for that which stands still and therefore
seems hostile.

But from the balcony one could at least range
outside with one's eyes, and that is why they
stood there, one generation after the other, and
all stared into the distance, each one with pro
and each one with his cofi. Arms adorned with
golden bracelets have lain on the edge of the
iron railing and many a silk-covered knee has
pressed against the black arabesques, the while
colored ribbons waved from all its points as
signals of love and rendezvous. Heavy, preg-
nant housewives have also stood here and sent
impossible messages out into the distance.
Large, opulent, deserted women, pale as hatred


108 THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN ROSES

• • • could one but kill with a thought or open
hell with a wish! • • • Women and men! It
is always women and men, even these emaciated
white vir;;in souls which press against the black
latticework like a flock of lost doves and cr) out,
** Take us! ^' to imagined, noble birds of prey.

One might imagine a provcrbc here*

Tlio scenery would be very suitable for a
proverbe.

Tlio wall there, just as it is; only the road
would have to bo wider and expand into a cir*
cular space. In its center there would have to
be an old, modest fountain of yellowish tufT and
with a bowl of broken porphyry. As figure for
the fountain a dolphin with a broken-oiT tail,
and one of the nostrils stopped up. From the
other the fine jet of water rises. On one side
of the fountain a semicircular bench of tuff and
terracotta«

The loose, grayish white dust; the reddish,
molded stone, the hewn, yellowish, porous tuff;
tlie dark, polished porpliyry, gleaming with
moisture, and the living, tiny, silvery jet of
water: material and colors harmonize ratlier
well.

The characters: two pages.


THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN ROSES 109

Not of a definite« historical period^ for the
pages of reality in no way correspond with t!ie
pages of the ideal. The pages here, howeveri
are pages such as dream in pictures and books.

Accordingly it is merely the costume which has
a historical eiTect.

The actress who is to represent the youngest
of the pages wears thin silk which clings closely
and is pale-blue, and has heraldic lilies of the
palest gold woven into it. This and as much
lace as can possibly bo employed are the most
distinctive feature of the costume. It does not
aim at any definite century, but seeks to empha-
size tlio youthful voluptuousness of the figure,
tho magnificent blond hair, and the clear com*
plexion.

She is married, but it lasted only a year and a
half, when she was divorced from her husband,
and she is said to have acted in anything but a
proper fashion towards him. And that may
well be, but it is impossible to imagine any-
thing more innocent in appearance than she.
That is to say, it is not the gracious elemental
innocence which has such attractive qualities;
but it is rather the cultivated, mature ihnocence,
in which no one can be mistaken, and which


no THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN ROSES

goes straight to the heart It captivates one
with all the power which something that has
reached completion only can have.

The second actress in the proverbe is slender
and melancholy. She is unmarried and has no
past« absolutely none. There is no one who
knows the least thing about her. Yet these
finely delineated, almost lean limbs, and these
amber-pale, regular features arc vocal. The
face is shaded by raven-black curls, and borne
on a strong masculine neck. Its mocking smile,
in which there is also hungry desire, ollures.
The eyes ore unfathomable and their depths are
OS soft and luminous as the dark petals in the
flower of the pansy.

The costume is of pale-yellow, in the man*
ner of a corselet with wide, up-and-down stripes,
a stiff ruff and buttons of topaz. There is a
narrow frilled stripe on the edge of the collar,
and also on the close-fitting sleeves. The trunks
ore short, wide-slashed, ond of o dead-green
color with pale purple In the slashes. The hose
is gray. — Those of the blue page, of course, ore
pure while. — Both wear barrets.

Such is their appearance.

And now the yellow one is standing up on tlie
balcony, leaning over the edge, the while the blue


THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN ROSES HI

is sitting on the bench down by the fountaint
comfortably leaning back, with his ring*covered
hands clasped around one Icnee. He stares
dreamily out upon the Campagna.

Now he speaks:

** No, nothing exists in the world but women!
*-I don*t understand it • . • there must be a
magic in the lines out of which they are created,
merely when I see them pass: Isaura, Rosa-
mond, and Donna Lisa, and the others. When
I see how their garment clings around their
figure and how it drapes as they walk, it is as
if my heart drank the blood out of all my ar-
teries, and left my head empty and without
thoughts and my limbs trembling and without
strength. It is as though my whole being were
gathered into a single, tremulous, uneasy breath
of desire. What is it? Why is it? It is as if
happiness went invisibly past my door, and I
had to snatch it and hold it close, and make it
my own. It is so wonderful — and yet I cannot
seize it, for I cannot see it."

Then the other page speaks from his balcony:

''And if now you sat at her feet, Lorenzo, and
lost in her thoughts she had forgotten why she
had called you, and you sat silent and waiting,
and her lovely face were bent over you further


112 THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN ROSES

from you in the clouds of its dreams than the
star in the heavens, and yet so near you that
every expression was surrendered to your admir-
ation, every beauty-engendered line, every tint
of the skin in its white stillness as well as in its
soft rosy glow — would it not then be as if she
who is sitting there belonged to another world
than the one in which you kneel in adoration!
Would it not be as if hers were another world,
as if another world surrounded her, in which her
festively garbed thoughts are going out to meet
some goal which is unknown to you? Her
love is far away from all that is yours, from your
world, from everything. She dreams of far dis-
tances and her desires are of far distances. And
it seems as if not the slightest space could be
found for you in her thoughts, however ardently
you might desire to sacrifice yourself for her,
your life, your all, to the end that that might
be between her and you which is hardly a faint
glimmer of companionship, much less a belong-
ing together."
*' Yes, you know that it is thus. But. • • /'
Now a greenish-yellow lizard runs along the
edge of the balcony. It stops and looks about.
The tail moves. • • •

If one could only find a stone. • •


THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN ROSES 113

Look oott my foor-leggod friend«

No« you cannot hit them, they hear the ttone
long before it reaches thenu Anyhow he got
frightened.

But the pages disappeared at the same mo«
ment«

The blue one had been sitting there so prettily.
And in her eyes lay a yearning which Wiås
genuine and unconscious and in her movements
a nervousness that was full of presentiment.
Around her mouth was a faint expression of
pain, when she spoke, and even more when she
listened to the soft, somewhat low voice of the
yellow page, which spoke to her from the bal-
cony in words that were provocative and at the
same time caressing, that had a note of mockery
and a note of sympathy.

And doesn't it seem now as if both were still
here I

They are there, and have carried on the action
of the proverbe, while they were gone. They
have spoken of that vogue young love which
never finds peace but unceasingly flits through all
the lands of foreboding and through all the
heavens of hope; this love that is dying to satisfy
itself in the powerful, fervent glow of a single
great emotion! Of this they spoke; the younger


114 THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN ROSES

one in bitter complaint, the elder one with re-
grctful tenderness. Now the latter said — the
yellow one to the blue — that he should not so
impatiently demand tlie love of a woman to cap-
ture him and hold him bound.

** For believe me," he said, ** the love that you
will find in the clasp of two white arms, with
two eyes as your immediate heaven and the cer-
tain bliss of two lips — this love lies nigh unto
the earth and unto the dast. It has exchanged
the eternal freedom of dreams for a happiness
which is measured by hours and which hourly
grows older. For even if it always grows young
again, yet each time it loses one of tlie rays
which in a halo surround the eternal yotith of
dreams. No, you are happy."

" No, you arc happy," answered the blue one,
" I would give a world, were I as you are."

And the blue one rises, and begins to walk
down the road to the Campagna, and the yellow
one looks after him with a sad smile and says
to himself: ** No, he is happy! "

But far down the road the blue one turns roqnd
once more toward the balcony, and raising his^
barret calls: "No, you are happy!"


There should have been roses«


THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN ROSES 115

And now a breath of wind might come and
shake a rain of rose-leaves from the laden
branches, and whirl them after the departing
poge.


■'.1

■Il


mr&fSnss


\ s


^1


MRS. f5nSS

IN the graceful pleasure-gardens behind the
Pope's ancient palace in Avignon stands a
bench from which one can overlook the
Rhone, the flowery banks of the Durance, hills
and fields, and a part of the town.

One October afternoon two Danish ladies were
seated on this bench, Mrs. Fonss, a widow, and
her daughter Elinor.

Although they had been here several days and
were already familiar with the view before them,
they nevertheless sat there and marveled that
this was the way the Provence looked.

And this really was the Provence! A clayey
river with flakes of muddy sand, and endless
shores of stone-gray gravel; pale«brown fields
without a blade of grass, pale-brown slopes, pale-
brown hills and dust-colored roads, and here
and there near the white houses, groups of black
trees, absolutely black bushes and trees. Over
all this hung a whitish sky, quivering with light,
which made everything still paler, still dryer,

no


I


120 MUS. FONSS

and more wearily light; never a glimmer of
luxuriant« satiated hues, nothing but hungry« sun*
parched colors; not a sound in the air« not a
scytlio passitig through the grass« not a wagoa
rattling over the roads; and the town stretching
out on both sides was also as if built of silence,
with all the streets still as at noon time, with all
the houses deaf and dumb, every shutter closed,
every blind drawn, each and every one; houses
that could neither see nor hear.

Mrs. Fonss viewed this lifeless monotony with
a resigned smile, but it made Elinor visibly nerv-
ous; not actively nervous as in the case of annoy-
ance, but mournful and weary, as one often
becomes after many days of rain, when all one's
gloomy thoughts seem to pour down upon one
with the rain; or as at the idiotically consoling
tick-tack of a clock, when one sits and grows in-
curably tired of one's self; or at watching the
flowers of the wall-paper, when the same chain
of worn-out dreams clanks about against one's
will in the brain and the links are joined and
come apart and in a stifling endlessness are united
again. It actually had a physical cfl'ect upon
her, this landscape, almost causing her to faint.
To-day everything seemed to have conspired with
the memories of a hope which was dead and of


MRS. f6nSS 121

sweet and lively dreams which had become dis-
agreeable and nauseous; dreams which caused
licr to redden when she thought of them and
which yet she could not forget. And what had
all that to do with the region here? The blow
hod fallen upon her far from here amid the
surroundings of her home, by the edge of a
sound with changing waters, under pale green
beech-trees. Yet it hovered on the lips of every
pale brown hill, and every green-shuttered house
stood there and held silence concerning it.

It was the old sorrow for young hearts which
had touched her« She had loved a man and be*
lieved in his love for her, and suddenly he had
chosen some one else. Why? For what rea-
son? What had she done to him? Had she
changed? Was she no longer the same? And
all the eternal questions over again. She had
not said a word about it to her mother, but her
mother had understood every bit of it, and had
been very concerned about her. She could have
screamed at this thoughtfulness which knew and
yet should not have known; her mother under-
stood this also, and for that reason they had gone
traveling.

The whole purpose of the journey was only
that she might forget.


122 MRS, FONSS

Mrs. Fonss did not need to make her daughter
feel uneasy by scrutinizing her face in order
to know where her thoughts were. All she had
to do was to watch the nervous little hand which
lay beside her and with such futile despair
stroked the bars of the bench; they changed their
position every moment like a fcver-palicnt toss«
ing from side to side in his hot bed. When she
did this and looked at the hand, she also knew
how life- weary the young eyes were that stared
out into the distance, how pain quivered through
every feature of the delicate face, how pale it
was beneath its sufTcring, and how the blue veins
showed at the temples beneath the soft skin.

She was very sorry for her little girl, and
would have loved to have had her lean against
her breast, and to whisper down to her all the
words of comfort she could think of, but she had
the conviction that there were sorrows which
could only die away in secret and which must not
bo expressed in loud words, not even between a
mother and daughter. Otherwise some day un-
der new circumstances, when everything is build-
ing for joy and happiness, these words may be-
come an obstacle, something that weighs heavily
and takes away freedom. The person who has
spoken hears their whisper in the soul of the


MRS. f5nSS 123

other* imagines them turned over and Judged in
the thoughts of the other«

Then, too» she was afraid of doing injury to
her daughter if she made confidences too easy.
She did not wish to have Elinor blush before her;
she did want, however much of a relief it might
be, to help her over the humiliation, which lies
in opening the inmost recesses of one*s soul to
the gaze of another. On the contrary the more
dilEcult it became for both, the more slie was
pleased, that ttie aristocracy of soul which slie
herself possessed was repeated in her young
daughter in a certain healthy inflexibility.

Once upon a time — it was a time many, many
years ago, when she herself had been an eighteen*
year old girl, sho had loved with all her soul,
with every sense in her body, every living hope,
every thought. It was not to be, could not be.
He had had itothing to olTer except his loyalty
which would have involved the test of an end-
lessly long engagement, and there were circum-
stances in her home which could not wait. So
she had taken the one whom they had given her,
the one who was master over these circumstances.
They were married, then came children: Tage,
the son, who was with her in Avignon, and the
daughter, who sat beside her. Everything had


124 MRS. FONSS

turned out so much better than she could have
hoped for, both easier and more friendly« Eight
years it lasted, then the husband died, and she
mourned him with a sincere heart* She had
learned to love his fine, thin*blooded nature
which with a tense, egotistic, almost morbid love
loved whatever belonged to it by ties of relation*
ship or family, and cared nought for anything
in all the great world outside, except for what
they thought, what their opinion was — nothing
else. After her husband's death she had lived
chiefly for her children, but she had not de-
voted herself exclusively to them; she had taken
part in social life, as was natural for so young
and well-to-do a widow; and now her son was
twenty-one years old and she lacked not many
days of forty. But she was still beautiful.
There was not a gray thread in her heavy dark-
blonde hair, not a wrinkle round her large, cour«
agcous eyes, and her figure was slender with
well-balanccd fullness. The strong, fine lines of
her features were accentuated by the darker
more deeply colored complexion which the years
hod given her; tlio smile of her widely sweeping
lips was very sweet; an almost enigmatical youth
in the dewy luminosity of her brown eyes soft-
ened and mellowed everything again. And yet


MRS. FONSS 125

iLe also had the round fullnoM of cheek, the
strong-willed chin of a mature woman.

^That surely is Tage coming,** said Mrs.
Fonss to her daughter when she heard laughter
and some Danish exclamations on the other side
of the thick hedge of hornbeam.

Elinor pulled herself together.

And it was Tage, Tage and Kastager, a whole-
sale merchant from Copenhagen, with his sister
and daughter; Mrs. Kastager lay ill at home in
the hotel.

Mrs. Fonss and Elinor made room for the two
ladies; the men tried for a moment to converse
standing, but were lured by the low wall of stone
which surrounded the spot. They sat there and
said only what was absolutely necessary, for the
newcomers were tired from a little railway excur-
sion they had taken into the Provence with its
blooming roses.

*^ Hello! ** cried Tage, striking his light trous-
ers with the flat of his hand, ^* look! **

They looked.

Out in the brown landscape appeared a cloud
of dust, over it a mantle of dust, and between
the two they caught sight of a horse. **That*s
tlie Englishman, I told you about, who came the
other day,'* said Tage, turning toward his mother.


126 MRS. FONSS

** Did ycu ever see any one ride like that? ^ he
aakedy turning toward Kastager, **he reminds
me of a gaucho/'

** Mazeppa? '* said Kastager, questioningly«

The horseman disappeared.

Then they all rose, and set out for the hotel.

They had met the Kastagcrs in Belfort, and
since they were pursuing the same itinerary
through southern France and along the Riviera,
they for the time being traveled together. Here
in Avignon both families had made a halt;
Kastagcr because his wife had developed a vari«
cose vein, the Fonss* because Elinor obviously
needed a rest.

Tage was delighted at this living togetlier.
Day by day he fell more and more incurably
in love with the pretty Ida Kastager. Mrs.
Fonss did not especially like this. Though Tage
was very self-reliant and mature for his age,
there was no reason for a hasty engagement—-
and there was Mr. Kaslagcr! Ida was a splen*
did little girl, Mrs. Kastager was a very well-
bred woman of excellent family, and Kastager
himself was capable, rich, and honest, but there
was a hint of the absurd about him. A smile
came upon people's lips and a twinkle into their
eyes when any one mentioned Mr. Kastagen


MRS. FONSS 127

The reason for this was that he was full of fire
and given to extraordinary enthusiasms; he was
frankly ingenuous, boisterous, and communica-
tive, and nowadays it requires a great deal of
tact to be lavish with enthusiasm. But Mrs.
Fonss could not bear the thought that Tagens
father-in-law should be mentioned with a twinkle
in the eye and a smile round the mouth, and for
that reason she exhibited a certain coldness to-
ward the family to the great sorrow of the
enamored Tage.


On the morning of the following day Tage
and his mother had gone to look at the little
museum of the town. Tliey found the gate open,
but the doors to the collection locked; ringing
the bell proved fruitless. The gateway, how-
ever, gave admission to the not specially largo
court which was surrounded by a freshly white-
washed arcade whose short squat columns had
black iron bars between them.

They walked about and looked at the objects
placed along the wall: Roman sepulchral monu-
ments, pieces of sarcophagi, a headless draped
figure, the dorsal vertebræ of a whale, and a
series of architectural details.


•• .


128 MRS. FONSS

On all the objects of interest there were fresh
traces of the masons* brushes.

By now they had come back to their starting
point.

Tage ran up the stairs to see if there might
not bo people somewhere in tlie house, and Mrs.
Fiinss in the meantime wallced up and down tlie
arcado.

As she was on the turn toward the gate å tall
man with a bearded, tanned face, appeared at
the end of the passage directly in front of her.
Ho had A ruidc-book in his hand; he listened
for something, and then looked forward, straight
at her.

Tlio Englishman of yesterday immediately
came to her mind.

" Pardon me? " he began interrogatively* and
bowed.

^ I am a stranger," Mrs. Fonss replied, ** no-
body seems to be at home, but my son has just
run upstairs to see whether. • • •

These words were exchanged in French.

At this moment Tago arrived. ** I have been
everywhere,'* he said, ** even in the living quar«
ters, but didn't find as much as a cat."

*'I hear," said the Englishman, thb time in


MRS. f5nSS 129

Danish, ^ that I have the pleasure of being with
fellow-countrymen.**

He bowed again and retreated a couple of
steps, as if to indicate that he had merely said
this to let them know that he understood what
they were saying. Suddenly ho stepped closer
than before with an intent, eager expression on
his face, and said to Mrs. Fonss, ** is it possible
that you and I are old acquaintances? **

**Are you Emil Thorbrogger? ** exclaimed
Mrs. Fonss, and held out her hand.

He seized it. *' Yes, I am he,** ho said gayly,
"and you* are she? *'

His eyes almost filled with tears as he looked
at her. ,

Mrs Fonss introduced Tage as her son.

Tage had never in his life heard mention of
Thorbrogger, but that was not his thoughts; he
thought only of the fact that this gaucho turned
out to be a Dane; when a pause set in, and
some one had to say something he could not help
exclaiming, ** and I who said yesterday that you
reminded me of a gaucho! **

"Well,** replied Thorbrogger, "that wasn*t
far from the truth; for twenty*one years I have
lived in the plains of La Plata, and in those


130 MRS. FONSS

years certainly spent more time on horse*back
llian on fool/*

And now he had come back to Europe!

Yes, he had sold his land and his sheep and
had come back to have a look around in the old
world where he belonged, but to his shame he
had to confess thai he often found it very much
of a bore to travel about merely for pleasure.

Perhaps, he was homesick for the prairies?

No, he had never had any special feeling for
places and countries; he thought it was only his
N dailv woik which ho misseil.

In that way they went on talking for a while.
At la^t the custoilian appeared, hot and out of
brcatli, with heads of lettuce under his arms and
a bunch of scarlet tomatoes in his hand, and
they were admitted into the small, stuffy collec-
tion of paintings, where they gained only the
vaguest impression of the yellow thunder*clouds
and black waters of old Vemet, but on the con*
trary told each other with considerable detail of
tlieir lives and the happenings during all tlie
years since they had parted.

For it was he whom she had loved, at tlie time
when she married another. In the days which
now followed they were much together, and the
others thinking tliat such old friends must have


MRS. FONSS 131

much to say to each other left them often alone.
In those days both soon noticed that however
much they might have changed during the course
of the years, their hearts had forgotten nothing.

Perhapi it was he who first became aware of
this, for all the uncertainty of youth, its senti«
mentality and its elegiac mood came upon him
simultaneously, and he suffered under it. It
seemed out of place to the mature man, that he
should so suddenly be robbed of his peace of
life and the self-possession which he had
acquired during the course of time, and he
wanted his love to bear a diflTerent stamp, wished
it to be graver, more subdued.

She did not feel herself younger, but it seemed
to her as if a fountain of tears tliat had been
obstructed and dammed had burst open again
and begun to flow. There was great happiness
and relief in crying, and these tears gave her a
feeling of richness; it was as if she had become
more precious, and everything had become more
precious to her — in short it was a feeling of
youth after all.


On an evening of one of tliese days Mrs. Fonss
sat alone at home, Elinor had gone to bed earlyt
and Tage had gone to the theater with tlie


132 MRS. FONSS

Kastagers, She had been sitting in the dull
botel*room and had dreamed in tlie half light of
a couple of candles. At length her dreams had
come to a stop after their incessant coming and
going; she had grown tired, but witli that mild
and smiling weariness which wraps itself round
us, when happy thoughts are falling asleep in
our mind.

She could not go on sitting here, staring in
front of her, the whole evening long without so
much as a book. It was still over an hour be«
fore the theater let out. So she began to walk
up and down the room, stood in front of the mir-
ror, and arranged her hair.

She would go down into the reading-room, and
look over the illustrated papers. At this time
af the evening it was always empty there.

She threw a large black lace shawl over her
head and went down.

TIic room was empty.

Tlio small room, overfull with furniture, was
brilliantly illuminated by half a dozen large gas*
flames; it was hot and the air was almost pain*
fully dry.

She drew tlie shawl down around the shoul-
ders.

The white papers there on the table, the port*


MUS. FONSS 133

folios with thrir large gilt lettors* the empty
plush chairs, the regular squares of the carpet
and the even folds of the rep curtains <— all this
looked dull under the. strong light.

She was still dreaming, and dreaming she
stood, and listened to the long-drawn singing
of the gas-flames.

The heat was such as almost to make one dizzy.

To support herself she slowly reached out for
a large, heavy bronze vase which stood on a
bracket fixed in the wall, and grasped the flower-
decorated edge.

It was comfortable to stand thus, and the
bronze was gratefully cool to the touch of her
hand. But as she stood thus, there came an*
other feeling also. She began to feel a content-
ment in her limbs, in her body, because of the
plastically beautiful position which she had as«
sumed. She was conscious of how becoming it
was to her, of the beauty which was hers at the
moment, and even of the physical sensation of
harmony. All this gathered in a feeling of
triumph, and streamed tlirough her like a strange
festive exultation.

She felt herself so strong at this hour, and
life lay before her like a great, radiant day; no
longer like a day declinmg toward the calni^


134 MRS. f6nSS

melancholy hours of dusk. It seemecl to her like
an open, wide-awake space of time» with hot
pulses throbbing every second, with joyous light«
with energy and swiftness and an infinity with*
out and within. And she was thrilled with the
fullness of life« and longed for it with the fever*
ifh eagerness with which a traveler sets out on
a journey.

For a long time she stood thus, wrapped in
her tlioughts, forgetting everything around her.
Tlien suddenly as if she heard the silence in the
room and the long-drawn singing of the gas-
flames, she let her hand drop from the vase and
sat down by the table and began to turn over the
leaves of a portfolio.

She heard steps, passing by the door, heard
them turn back, and saw Thorbrogger enter.

They exchanged a few words but as she seemed
occupied with the pictures, he also began to look
at the magazines that lay in front of him. They,
however, did not interest him very much for
when a little later she looked up, she met his
eyes which rested search ingly upon her.

lie looked as if he were just about to speak,
and there was a nervous, decided expression
round his mouth, which told her so definitely
what his words would be that she reddened.


MRS.FONSS 135

Instinclifelf« as if the widied to lioM håA these
words, she hold out a pictoro across the tablo and
pointed at some horsemen from the pampas, who
were throwing lassoes over wild steers.

He was just about to make some jesting re-
mark about the draftsman*s naive conception of
the art of throwing a lasso. It was so enticingly
ea^y to speak of this rather than of that which
he had on his mind. Resolutely, however, he
pushed the picture aside, leaned a little ways
across tlie table and said,

** I have thought a great deal about you since
we met again; I have olways thought a great deal
about you, both long ago in Denmark and over
where I was. And I have always loved you, and
if it sometimes seems to me that it b only noti;
that I really love you since we have met again,
it is not true, however great my love may be,
for I have always loved you, I have always loved
you. And if it should happen now that you
would become mine — you cannot imagine what
that would mean to me, if you, who were taken
from me for so many years, were to come back.**

He was silent for a moment, tlien he rose, and
came closer to her.

^Oh, do say a word! I am standing here
talking blindly. I speak to you as to an inter*


136 MRS. FONSS

prcter, a stranger« who has to repeat what I am
saying to the heart I am speaking to. I don*t
know ... to stand here and weigh my words
... I don't know, how far or how near. I dare
not put into words the adoration which fills me
— or dare I? •*

He let himself sink down on a chair by her
side.

'' Oh, if I might, if I didn't have to be afraid —
is it true! Oh, Cod bless you, Paula.**

** There is nothing now that need keep us
apart any longer,** said she, with her hand in
his, ** whatever may happen I have the right to
l>c happy once, to live fully in accordance witli
my being, my desire, and my dreams. I have
never renounced. Even though happiness was
not my share, I have never believed that life was
nothing but grayncss and duty. I knew that
there are people who are happy.**

Silently he kissed her hand.

** I know,** she said sadly, " that those who
will judge me least harshly will not envy me the
happiness which I shall have in having your
love, but they will also say that I should be
satisfied.**

** But that would not be enough for me, and
you have not the right to send me away.**


MRS. FdNSS 137

•*No,-iho8aid,-no,-

A little later she went upstairs to Elinor,

Elinor slept.

Mrs. Fonss sat down by her bed and looked
at her pale child whose features she could only
dimly distinguish under the faint yellow glow
of the night lamp.

For Elinor's sake they would have to wait.
In a few days they would separate from Thor*
brogger, go to Nice, and stay there by them*
selves. During the winter she would live only'
that Elinor might regain her health. But to«
morrow she would tell the children what had
happened and what was to be expected. How*
ever they might receive the nqws it was impos-
sible for her to live with them day in, day out,
and yet be almost separated from them by a
secret like this. And they would need time to
get used to the idea, because it would mean a
separation between them, whether greater or
smaller would depend on the children themselves.
The arrangement of their lives in so far as it con*
cerned her and him was to be left entirely to
them. She would demand nothing. It was for
them to give.

She heard Tage* step in the sitting-room and
went to him,


138 MRS. FONSS

He was so radiant and at the same time so
nervous that Mrs. Fonss knew something had
happened, and she had an intuition of what it
was.

He sought for an opening to unburden his
heart and sat and tallced absent-mindedly of
the theater. Not until his mother went over to
him and put her hand on his forehead, forcing
him to look at her, was he able to tell her that
he had wooed Ida Kastager and gained her
•* yes."

They talked about it for a long time, but
throughout Mrs. Fonss felt a coldness in what«
ever she said, which she could not overcome.
She was afraid of being too sympathetic with
Tage on account of her own emotion. Besides,
in the uncertain state of her mind she was dis-
trustful of the idea that there might be even
thp faintes>t shadow of an association between
her kindness of to-night and what she was to
tell to-morrow.

Tage, however, did not notice any coolness.

Mr*. Fon5s did not sleep much ihol night;
there were too many tlioughts to keep her awake.
She thought how strange it was that he and she
should have met and that when they met they
should love each other as in tlie old days.


' MRS. f6'NSS 139

It was long agOt especially for her; she was
no longer, could no longer, be young. And this
would show; and he would be thoughtful with
her, and grow used to the fact that it was a long
time since she was eighteen years old. But she
felt young, she was so in many respects, and yet
all the while she was conscious of her years.
She saw it very clearly, in a thousand move«
mcnts, in expressions and gestures, in the way
in which she would respond to a hint, in the
fashion in which she would smile at an answer.
Ten times a day she would betray her age, be-
cause she lacked the courage to be outwardly as
young as she was within.

And thoughts came and thoughts went, but
through it all the same question always rose,
as to what her children would say.

On the forenoon of the following day she put
the answer to the test.

They were in the sitting-room.

She said that she had something important
to tell them, something that would mean a great
change in tlicir lives, something that would be
unexpected news to them. She asked them to
listen as calmly as they could, and not to let
themselves be carried away by the first impres-
sion into thoughtlessness. They must know that


140 MRS. FONSS

what she was about to tell them was definitely
dccidedt And that nothing they might say could
make her alter her decision.

^ I am going to marry again,** she said* and
told them of how she had loved Thorbrogger,
before she had known their father; how she had
become separated from him, and how they had
now met again.

Elinor cried, but Tage had risen from his scat,
utterly bewildered. He then went close to her»
kneeled down before her, and seized her hand.
Sobbing, half-stifled with emotion, ho pressed it
against his cheek with infinite tenderness, with
an expression of helplessness in every line of his
face.

*^ Oh, but mother, dearest mother, what have
we done to you, have we not always loved you,
have we not alw(»ys, both when we were with
you and when we were away from from you,
wanted you as the best thing we possessed in tlie
world? We have never known father except
through yon: h was you who taught us to love
him, and if Elinor and I are so close to each
other, is it not because day after day you always
pointed out to each of us what was best in the
other? And has it not been thus witli every
other person to whom we became attached, do


MRS. FONSS 141

wo not owo overylhing to you? Wo owo ovory-
thing to youy and we worship you, mother, if you
only knew. • • • Oh, you cannot imagine, how
much we want your love, want you beyond all
bounds and limits, but there again you have
taught us to restrain our love, and we never dare
to come as close to your heart as we should like.
And now you say that you are going to leave us
entirely, and put us to one side. But that is
impossible. Only one who wanted to do iis the
greatest harm in the world could do anything
as frightful as that, and you don*t want to do us
the greatest harm, you want only what is best
for us — how can it tlicn be possible? Say
quickly that it is not true; say it is not true, Tage,
it is not true, Elinor.**

'* Tage, Tage, don*t be so distressed, and don*t
make it so hard, both for yourself and us others.**

Tage rose.

^'Hard,*' he said, ''hard, hard, oh were it
nothing but that, but it is horrible — unnatural;
it is enough to drive one insane, merely to think
of it. Have you any idea of the things you make
me think of? My mother loved by a strange
man, my motlier desired, held in the arms of
another and holding him in hers. Nice thoughts
for a son, worse than the worst insult — but


142 MRS. FONSS

it is inipo9sible» must be impossiblop must be!
Are the prayers of a son to be as powerless as
tlintl Elinor, don't sit there and cry, come and
help me beg mother to have pity on us.**

Mrs. Fonss made a restraining gesture with
her hand and said: **Ix:t Elinor alone, she is
probably tired enough, and besides I have told
you that nothing can be changed.**

'*I wish I were dead,** said Elinor, "but,
mother, everything that Tage has said is true,
and it never can be right that at our age you
sliould give us a step-father.**

** Stcp.father,** cried Tage, "I hope that he
docs not for one moment dare. • • • You are
mad. Where he enters, we go out. There isn*t
any power on earth that con force me into the
slightest intimacy with that person. Mother
must choose — he or we! If they go to Den-
mark after tlicir marriage, then we are exiles;
if they stay here, we leave.*'

** And those are your intentions, Tage? **
asked Mrs. Fonss.

" I don't think you need doubt that; imagine
tlie life. Ida and I are sitting out there on the
terrace on a moonlit evcnmg, and behind the
Iaurel-bu?hes some one is whispering. Ida asks
who is whispering, and I reply that it is my


MRS, FONSS 143

mother and her new husband.— N0| no, I
shouldn't have said tliat; but you see the elTect
of it already, the pain it causes mc, and you
may bo sure that it won*t help Elinor's health
either."

Mrs. Fonss let the children go while she re«
mained sitting here.

No, Tage was right, it had not been good for
them. How far from her they had already gone
in that short hour! How they looked at her,
not like her children, but like their father's!
How quick they wore to desert her os soon as
they saw that not every motion of her heart was
theirs! But she was not only Togo's ond Elinor's
mother alone; she was also o humon being on
her own account, with a life of her own and
hopes of her own, quite opart from them. But
she was, perhaps, not quite as young as she hod
believed herself to be. This hod come to her
in the conversation with her children. Had she
not sot there, timid, in spite of her words; hod
she not almost felt like one who was trespassing
upon the rights of youth? Were not all the
exorbitant demands of youth and all its noYvo
tyranny in everything they had said? — It is
for 115 to love, life belongs to us^ and your life it
is but to exist for us.


144 MRS. FONSS

She began to understand that there might be
a satisfaction in being quite old; not that she
wished it, but yet old-age smiled faintly at her
like a far-distant peace, coming after all the
agitation of recent times, and now when the pros«
pect of 80 much discord was so near. For she
did not believe that her children would ever
change their mind, and yet she had to discuss it
with them over and over again before she gave
up hope. The best thing would be for Thor*
broggcr to leave immediately. With his pres«
cnco no longer here the children might bo less
irritable, and she could try to show them how
eager she was to be as considerate as possible to
them. In time tlie first bitterness would disap-
pear, and everything • • • no, she did not be-
lieve, that everything would turn out well.

They agreed that Thorbrogger should leave
for Denmark to arrange their aflfairs. For the
time being they would remain here. It seemed,
however, that nothing was gained by this. The
children avoided her. Tage spent all his time
with Ida or her father, and Elinor stayed all the
time with the invalid, Mrs. Kastager. And when
they happened to be actually together, the old
intimacy, the old feeling of comfort, was gone.
Where were tlie thousand subjects for conversa-


MRS. f5nSS 145

tioiiy Bnåf when finally they found one» where
was the interest in it? They sat there keeping
up a conversation like people who for a while
have enjoyed each other's company^ and now
teust part All the thoughts of those who are
about to leave are fixed on the journey's end, and
those who remain think only of settling back
into the daily life and daily routine* as soon as
the strangers have left.

There was no longer any common interest in
their life; all the feeling of belonging together
had disappeared. Tliey were able to talk about
what they were going to do next week, next
month, or even the month following, but it did
not interest them as though it had to do with
days out of their own lives. It was merely a
time of waiting, which somehow or other had to
be endured, for all three mentally asked them-
selves: And what then? They felt no solid
foundation in their lives; there was no ground
to build upon before thisp which had separated
them, was settled.

Every day that passed the children forgot
more and more what their mother had meant to
them, in the fasliion in which children who be*
lieve themselves wronged will forget a thousand
benefactions for the soke of one injustice.


146 MRS. FONSS

Tage was the most sensitive of them, but also
the one who was hurt most deeply, because he
had loved most. He had wept through long
nights because of his mother whom he could not
retain in the way in which he wanted. There
were times when the memory of her love almost
deafened ail other feelings in his heart. One
day he even went to her and beseeched and im-
plored her that she might belong to them, to
them alone, and not to any other one, and the
answer had been a "no." And this "no" had
made him hard and cold. At first he had been
afraid of this coldness, because it was accom-
panied by a frightful emptiness.

The case with Elinor was different. In a
strange way she had felt that it was an injustice
toward her fother, and »he began to worship him
like fetish. Even though she but dimly re-
membered him, she recreated him for herself in
most vivid fashion by becoming absorbed in
everything she had ever heard about him. She
asked Kaslagcr about him and Tage, and every
morning and night she kissed a medallion-por-
trait of his which belonged to her. She longed
with a somewhat hysterical desire for some
letters from him which she had left at home, and
for things which had once belonged to him.


MRS. FONSS 147

In proportion as the father hi this way rose
in her estimation, the mother sank. The fact
that she had fallen in love with a man harmed
her less in her daughter's eyes; but she was no
longer the mother, the unfailing, tlie wisest, the
supreme, most beautiful. She was a woman like
other women; not quite, but just because not
quite, it was possible to criticize and judge her
and to find weaknesses and faults in her. Elinor
was glad that she had not confided her unhappy
love to her mother; but she did not know how
much it was due to her mother that she had not
done so.

One day passed like another, and their life
became more and more unendurable. All three
felt that it was useless; instead of bringing them
together, it only drove them further apart.

Mrs. Kastager had now recovered. Though
she had not played an active part in anything
that had happened, she knew more about the
situation than any one else, because everything
had been told her. One day she had a long talk
with Mrs. Fonss who was glad that there was
some one who would quietly listen to her plans
for the future. In this conversation Mrs. Kast*
ager suggested that the children go with her to
Nice, while they sent for Thorbrogger to come


L


148 MHS. FONSS

to Avignon, 8o ihat ihey might be married.
Kastagcr could slay on as witness.

Mrs. Fonss wavered a little while longer, for
she had been unable to discover what her chil-
dren's reaction would be. Wljen they were told,
they acceptr/l it with proud silence, and when
they were pressctnor answer, they merely said
that they would, of course, adjust themselves to
whatever she decided to do.

So things turned out as Mrs. Kastager had pro.
posed. She said good-by to the children, and
they left; Thorbrogger came, and they were
married.

Spain became their home; Thorbrogger chose
It for the sake of sheep-farming.

Neillier of them wished to return to Denmark.

And they lived happily in Spain.

She wrote several times to her children, but
in their first violent anger that she had left them,
they returned the letters. Later they regretted
it; they were unable, however, to admit this to
their mother and to write to her; for that reason
all communication between them ceased. But
now and then in round about ways they heard
about each other's lives.


MRS. FONSS 149

For five years Thorbrogger and his wife lived
happily, but then she suddenly fell ill. It was
a disease whose course ran swiftly and whose end
was necessarily fatal. Her strength dwindled
hourly, and one day when the grave was no
longer far away she wrote to her children.

*' Dear children," she wrote, ** I know that you
will read tins letter, for it will not reach you
until after my death. Do not be afraid, there
are no reproaches in these lines; would that I
might make them bear enough love.

"Wlicn people love, Tage and Elinor, little
Elinor, the one who loves most must always
humble himself, and therefore I come to you
once more, as in my thoughts I shall come to you
every 'hour as long as I am able. One who is
about to die, dear children, is very poor; I am
very poor, for all tliis beautiful world, which
for so many years has been my abundant and
kindly home, is to be taken from me. My chair
will stand here empty, the door will close behind
me, and never again will I set my foot here.
Therefore I look at everything with the prayer
in my eye that it shall hold me in kind memory.
Therefore I come to you and beg tliat you will
love mo with all the love which once you had for
me; for remember that not to be forgotten is the


150 MRS. FONSS

only part in the living world which from now on
is to be mine; just to be remembered, nothbg
more.

** I have never doubted your love; I knew very
well that it was your great love, that caused your
great anger; had you loved me less, you would
have let me go more easily. And therefore I
want to say to you, that should some day it
happen that a man bowed down with sorrow
come to your door to speak with you concerning
mc, to talk about me to relieve his sorrow, tlien
remember that no one has loved me as he has,
and that all the happiness which can radiate
from a human heart has come from him to me.
And soon in the last great hour he will hold my
hand in his when the darkness comes, and his
words will be the last I shall hear. . • .

** Farewell, 1 say it here, but it is not the fare-
well which will be the last to you; it I will say
as late as I dare, and all my love will be in it,
and all the longings for so many, many years,
and the memories of the time when you were
small, and a thousand wishes and a thousand
thanks. Farewell Tage, farewell Elinor, fare-
well until the last farewell.

*• Your Mother.**

THE END
