38h. wile 

tg tere erat are ga 

- © 

[iat QP | 

ATDE FTACE 

JACHIN AND BOAT: . a 

wo es OR, AN 

“authentic Kep 

TO THE 

DOOR OF FREE-MASONRY, | 

BOTK , 

_ ANCIENT AND MODERN. ° 

GALCULATED NOT ONLY FOR THE INSTRUCTION OF EVERY NEW: 

MADE MASON; BUT ALSQ FOR THE INFORMATION OF ALL 
' WHO INTEND TO BECOME @RETHREN. . 

CONTAINING : 

J. A eircumstantial Account of all the Hiram by the three Fellow-Craftes 

« Proceedings in making a Mason, their Discovery and Punishment ; 
with the several Qbligations of an the Burial of Hiram by King Solo~ 
Entered Apprentice, Fellow-Craft, mor’s Order; with the Five’ Points 
and Master; the Prayers, and also || ~ of Fellowship, &e. 
the Sign, Grip, and Pass-Word of || V. The ceremony of the Instalment of 
each Degree. the Masters of different Lodges omSt 

H. The manner of opening a Lodge, John’s Day; Description of the Re- 
and setting the Craft to work. -li — galia, &c. 

- UJ. The Entered Apprestice, FeHow- |] VJ. Ceremonies used at the Funeral of 

Craft, and Master’s lecture, verba-'jj 9 Masout. 
be as delivered in all Lodges; with || VII. A safe and easy Method proposed, 

he Song st the Conclusion of each by which a Man may obtain Admit- | 

art. tance into any Lodge withéut passin 
IV. The Origin of Masonry ; Descrip- through the’ Form required, an 
tion of Solomon’s Temple; History thereby save 2 Guinea or two in his 
of the Murder of the Grand Master Pocket. 
WITH AN | 

Accurate Plan of the Drawing on the Floor vf a Lodge, 

INTERSPERSED WITH. - 

A VARIETY OF NOTES AND REMARKS, 
Necessary to explain and render the while clear to the meanest Capacity. 

To WHIce ant ADDED, . 

4 SELECT COLLECTION OF SONGS, AND A LIST OF TOASTS AND SENTI: 

ores PROPER roe THE SOCIETY OF FREE-MASONS. 
WITH 

y | Correct List of all the Reguler Lodges in Scotland. 

—_ 
LONDON : = 
_PRINTED FOR THE BOOKSELLERS, 

eae 

912, od 

t 

ae we 
ee 
’ . 
. 
= ‘ 
. = 
‘ 
e 
- - 
’ 
‘ ” ‘a 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
° 
’ 
, 
. . 
vA 
. 
* e+ <p 
ae 
, e 
, 
. 
e 
s 
v 

rr 2: ae 
 FREE-MASONS. 

Ji Author of the following pages has the honout of © 
being respected inj most of the. lodges of reputation in this 
metropolis, He acquired his:knowledge at first from some 
loose papers belonging to a-merchant to whom he was 
nearly related, who had been a member of the Queeh’s 
Ariis,St Paul’s Church-yard. This relation dying about ten 
years ago, the Editor became possessed of his effects; and 
on looking over papers, among others hd found some me- 
morandums or retnarks on Masonry, which excited his 
¢uriosity so far, that he resolved on ag¢complishing his 
scheme, without going through the ceremony required by 
the society. Te Pg oe eee 
‘Phe remarks of his friend above-memtioned furnished 
hints sufficient to make a trial on an intimtate acquaintance, — 
a Free-Mason, which succeeded, and he‘received an inwi-~ 
tation to spend an evening at a tavern in the Strand, with 
several acquaintances, where he gave full satisfaction, and 
took his seat. Fhat night he saw twq makings,* and 
came off full of spirits. . | 
His regard to the society and respect to the public, are _ 
tlie only inducements to this publication, which isintended | 
not only to assist those who have been lately made, and 
still remain ignorant of the true foundation of the art, but 
also to give all that have an inclination to become Masons 
an opportunity of considermg the advantages and disad. 
vantagos of the engagements: and oaths, by which they are 
bound, Such is the intention of this undertaking; and 
the Editor flatters himself the brotherhood will not con.‘ 
demn his officiousness in this respect, as it will rather 
strengthen than hurt the interest of the society ; the fear 
of going through the ceremony, which has hitherto been 
represented in such frightful shapes, being the greatest ob- | 
stacle to its future welfare and support. __ | 

* Makings, the term used in the circular letters to the members of the lodge ° 
acquajating them that new members are to be-admigted the next lodge-night, 

we oy 
Fi 

PPLLIL OL EL OD DOOD DLL DOLL IDI DIOL DDD IE DOODLE DOOD SS 

Plan of the Drawing on the Floor at the Making of « Mason. 

+ EAST 
0 
Ag? 2 6B 
oD MASTER. Oe: 
e LG 
= 
R 
o 
q 

e $ 

" Seemeseaeale talalateain ial clad: as 
on | 

ne © 
© 7 : | 

© 

Third Degree, or Master's Ste 
0 Kneel with both Knees. sa 

0 Second ee, or Fellow-Craft’s Step, 0 
0 Kneel with the Right Kneg. 0 

, O 
= First’ Degree, = Entered Apprentice’s St 
40 id Kaeel with both Kn Koes a oO. 
EFOE TOTO LEE DEEL OOT COTE OC 
re) 
WEST. 
EXPLANATION. 

' A Senior Deacon, with a black red. 
5 Past Master, with the Sun and Compasses, and a string of cords, 
C Senior Warden, with the Level, and a Column in his hand. - 
D Junior Deacon, with a black rod. 
E Junior Warden, with a Cofumpn in his head, — 
F The Secretary, with Cross Pens. 
'. G HI Candles, ine 
) Masons standing round at the Ceremony, 9! 

SILI P LL IL PLL LLL LL LDL DLL DP DL OLLI OD DL PILL IDPS DDL IG 

e 

AN AUTHENTIC KEY 
DOOR OF FREE-MASONRY. | 

4h HE origin : of the Society called Free-Masons, is. said. by. 

- gome to have been a certain number of persons who formed a re- 

solution to rebuild the Temple of Solomon}. This appears from: 
the lecture, or rather history, of the order, at the making or 
raising of a member to the degree of master, which is fully: 
described in the folowing work. But Iam iaelined: to think: 
that the chief design of. the establishment is to rectify the heart,. 
inform the mind, and promote the moral and social. virtues. of 
humanity, decency, and good order as much as possible in the’ 
world, and some of the emblems of the Free-Masons. confirny 
this opinion, such as the compass, square, rule, &c: - 
In all countries where masonry is practised or established at 
this time, there is a Grand Master; but formerly. there wasi 
only one Grand Master, and he was an Englishman. -His Rovat 
Hicaness Geores Puince or Waxes, is the person on whom 
this dignity is now bestowed, who governs all the lodges .in. 
Great Britain, and has the power of delivering the constitutions 
and laws of the society to the masters who preside over the 
subordinate assemblies: which constitutions. must always be: 
signed by the grand secretary of the order. - a. 
The lodges meet twice a month in the winter half-year, and: 

_ @pce 2 month in the summer; and the members of each lodge 

pay quarterly, from 3s. 6d. to 5s. into the hands.of thie trea~ 
surer ;. and this generally defrays the expence of their meetings. 
- ‘There are also quarterly communications or méetings held, 

‘ ° aa \ ; 

* The rise of this science (says an original record) was hefore the flood. In the 
4th chapter of Genesis it is said, there was aman named Lamech ‘who had tw¢ 
wives named Adah and Zillah; by Adah he begat two sons, Jabal and Jubal; by 

_ Zillah he begat one son, called Tubal Cain, and adaughter named Naamah. These 

children found owt the beginning of all the Crafts in the world. Jubal found out 
Geometry; he divided flocks of sheep, and built the first house of timber and - 
stone. Jabal found out the art of Music,and was the father of all those that hand- 
led the Harp. ‘Tubal Cain was the instructor of all artificers in Iron and Brass, © 
and his daughter discovered the craft of Weaving. _ one 

+ By an old record it appears, thac King Solomon confirmed all the charges 
which King David had given to Masons, in Jerusalem: and that che ‘femple 

- . was finished, A. M. 3000. In the year 43, after Christ, Masons first came inte 

f 

England, and bullt the Monastery ef Glastonbury in Spmersetshire. 

eo. 
{ ‘ 4 a 

6 

dt which are present the master and warderjs of every reguldt 

constitution in and near Loudon; where the several lodges send 

by the said wardens, different sums of money, to be paid into 
the hands of the treasurer-general, and appropriated to such 
. charitable uses as the grand mester, and thé masters of thé dif- 
ferent lodges under him, think proper; but these charities are 

chiefly confined to masons only. Such as have good recom- 
mendations as to their good behaviour and character; will be 
assisted with five, ten, or twenty pounds ; and less:sums are dis-' 
tributed to the indigent brethren, in proportion te their wants, 
and the number of years they have been members; At these’ 
quarterly eommunieatious, large sums are likewise sent from. 
lodges in the most remote parts of the world, viz. in the East. 
and West Indies, and aecounts transmitted of the growth of 
masonry there. The state of the funds of the society are like- 
Wise communicated to the company, and the deliberations of. 
the meeting taken down by the secretary, who lays them before 
the prand master at the yearly meeting. 7 

The number of members which compose a lodge is indeter- 
minate ; but it is no lodge except there are present one masters 
three fellow-crafts, and two apprentices. _ | , 

_ When a lodge is met, there are two -principal officers under 
the master, called senior and junior wardens, whose business 
it is to see the laws of the society strictly adhered to, and the, 
word of command given by the grand master regularly followed. 

It must be remarked, that the authority of a master, though 
chief of the lodge, reaches no farther than he is himself an ob- 
server of the laws; should he intringe them, the brethren- never 
fail to censure him; and if this has -had no effect, they have a 
power of deposing him, on.appealing to the grand master, and 
giving their reason for it; but they seldom proceed to this ex- 
tremity. — , bet 

As no doubt the reader chuses to be made acquainted with ° 
every circumstance of the ceremony of making a mason, I shall 
begin with the following directions, and proceed regularly in 
the description of what further concerns masonry. ; 

A man desirous of becoming a free-mason, should endea- 
vour to get acquainted with a member of some good lodge, 
who will propose him as a candidate for admission the next 
lodge-night. The brother who proposes a new member, is’ 
likewise obliged to inform the brethren of the qualifications of 
’ the candidate.* Upon this it is debated whether or not he shall 

* For the goad of this and all other societies, it were to be wished a more strict 
regard was paid, on the part of the proposers, to the character and merals of every 

candidate, 

’ 
% rd 

7 

_be.aduiitted, end't being carried in the affirmative, the next 

step is to go with the proposer the ensuing lodge-night. 

' he evening being come when,.a lodge is to be held, which, 
generally begins: about seven in the winter, and nine in the 
summer, a6‘previous notices are:sent to the members for this 
purpose, the masons are punctual to time, and it frequently 
happens, that, in half an hour, the whole lodge are assembled. 

The master, the ‘assistants, secretary, and treasurer, begin 
with putting over their necks a blue ribbon of a triangular 
shape 5 ; to the master’s ribbon thang.a rule and compass, which 
is in. some lodges made of gold, though in others only gilt.: 
the assistants, senior wardens, and ithe ‘other officers, carry the 
compass alone. 

' ‘The candles are placed upon the table in the form of a trian. 
gle; and in the'best lodges, the candlesticks are finely caryed 
with embleriatical figures. ‘Every brother has an apron made 
of white skin, and the strings are also of skin ; though some of 
them chuse to ornament. them with ribbons of variqus. colours. 
‘On the grand days, such as quarterly communications, or ge- 
neral meetings, the grand officers’, aprons are finely: decorated, 
and: they carry the rule and compass, the emblems.of the order. 

When they sit down to the table, the master’s place is on the 
east side, the ‘bible ‘being opened ‘before him, with the com- 
pass laid thereon, and the points of them covered with a lig- 
num vite: or-box square; and the senior and junior wardens 
opposite to him-on ithe west and south. On the table is like- 
wise placed wine, punch, &e. to regale the brethren, who take 
their places according to their seniority. Being thus seated, af- 
ter a few minutes the master proceeds to open the lodge, ,* in the 
following manner : : | 

Manner of opening a lodge, and setting the men to work. 

| Master ‘to the junior deacon, What is the chief care “of a 
mason ? ) 

Ans. To see that ‘the lodge i is tyled,- 

Mas. Pray, do your duty. 

(Phe junior deacon gives three knocks at the doer; .and the 
syle, + on the. EIBeE side of the door, answereth, ‘hy: giving 

_ “To opena Lodge, in n Masonty, signifies iat it. is dliseeit to speak freely a- 
mong one another of the mysteries of the order. 
+ A tyler is properly no more than a guard, or ¢entinel, placed at the: Jodge 
door, that when any one craves admittance, the Wardens may. ceme eut and ex- 
amine him ; but‘he is always.one of the eee 

— 

g 

three Knocks. _ Then‘the junior deacon tells the master, saying, } 

Ans. Worshipful, the lodge is tyled.- 

_ Master to the junior deacon. Prey, where is the junior dea- 
con’s place in the lodge ? | 

Deacon's Ans. At the back of the senior warden; or on his. 
right hand, if he permit him. oe en 

Mas. Your business there ? | 

Ans. To carry messages from the senior to the junior warden, 
‘so that they may be dispersed round ‘the lodge. : 
faster to the senior deacon. Pray, where is the senior dea- 
_ con's placé in the lodge? | | | 

Senior deacon’s ans. At the back of the master; or af his | 
right hand, if he permit. , 
- Afas. Your business there ? OO 

Ans. ‘To carry messages from the master to the senior warden. 

Mas. The junior warden’s place in the ledge? — | 

Deacon's ans. In the south. 

Master to the juntor warden. Why in the south ? 

Junior warden’s ans. ‘Fhe better to observe the sun at high 
meridian, to eall the men off from work to refreshment, and to 
see that they come on in due time, that the master may~have 
‘pleasure and profit thereby. a 
' Mas. Where is the senior warden’s place in the lodge? — 

Juntor warden’s ans. In the west. 

“Master to the senior warden. Your business there, brother ? 

Seator warden’s ans. .As the sun sets in the west to close. 
the day, so the senior warden stands in the west to close the. 
lodge, to pay the men their wages, and dismiss them from 
their labour.: Be | 

Mas. The master’s place in the lodge 2 

Senior warden’s ans. In the east. 

Mas. His business there? ~- —«- 
Senior warden’s ans. As the sun rises in the east to ope 
the day, so the master stands in the east to open the lodge, and 

set the men to work. | | 
(Then the master takes.‘off his’ hat, and declares the lodge 
age oe open as follows:) 

' Master. « This lodge is open in the name of Holy St. John, 
forbidding all cursing, swearing, or whispering, and all profane 
discourse whatever, under no less penalty than what the majo- 
rity shell think proper.’ 

The master gives three knocks on the table with a wooden 
hammer, and puts on his hat, the brethren being uncoyered. 
He then asks, if the gentleman proposed last lodge-night is 
Yeady to be made; ad on being answered in the affirmative, 

¢ 

a 
—§ 

hd orders thé Wardens to go owt and prepare the person, whé 
is generally Waiting in a room at sonré distance from the lodges 
roéni’ by hiniself, being left there by his friend who proposed — 
hin. He is conducted iito another room, which is totally 
dark ; and then asked, whether he is cotistious of having the 
vocation necessary to be received? on. afswering yes, he is ~ 
asked his namté, sername, and profession. When he has an« 
“ swered these questions, whatever be-has about hin made of mics 
tal is taken away, as buckles, buttons, rings, &¢. and even the 
thoney in his pocket.* Theft they uncover his right kriee, and 
put his left. foot with his shoe on into a slipper; hoodwink hin 
with a handkerchief, and leave hini to his reflcetions for about 
half an hour. ‘The chamber is also guarded within and without 
by some of the brethren, who have drawn swords in theit lends, 
he person who proposed the candidate stays in the room with 
him; but they are not permitted te converse together. 

During this silence, and while the candidate is preparing, the 
brethrett in the lodge ate putting every thing in. order for his reu 
ception there; such as drawing the annexed figure 6n the floor 
at the upper part of the room; which is generally done with 
chalk and charcoal intermixed; though some lodges usé tape and 
Kittle nails to form it, which prevents any ntark or stain on the 
floor. It is drawn east and west: . The master stands in the east, 
With the square hanging at his breast, the holy bible opened ab 
the gospel of St John, and three ligtited tapers are placed in the 
form of a triangle in the midst of the drawing on the floor. 

The proposer then goes and knocks three times at the door 
of the grand apartment, in which the eeremony is to be per- 

formed. . The master answers within by three strokes with the 
hammer, and the junior warden asks, Who comes there? The 
candidate answers (after another who prompts him,) ‘one who 
Pa to receive part of the benefit of this right worshipful lodge, 
dedicated to St John, as many brothers and fellows have done © 
before me.” The doors are then opened, and the senior and ju- 
nior wardens, or their assistants, recéive him, oné on the right, 
and the other on the left, and conduct him, blindfolded, three 
tintest round the drawing on the floor, and bring him up ta the 

. ® In sbnie lodges they are, co particular, that the candidate’s clothes‘are taken off 
if there be lace on them, iii | 
F + This is not practised in every lodge ; some only slipping the heel of the shoe 
own, | . 

$ In. some lodges the candidates are led nine times round ; bat as this is very tires 
some to the person who ‘is to undefgo the operation, his patietice being pretty wet 
tried by beiiig blinded so long beforeliand, it is véry justly omitted, 
| i 

* 

10 

foot of it, with his face tothe master, * the brethren ranging 
themselves on each side, and making a confused noise, by striking 
on the attributes of the order, which they carry in their hands.+ 
y When this pagt of the ceremony is ended, the master, who 
stands at the upper end, faeing the foot or steps of the drawing 
on the floor, behind a low arm chair, asks the following ques- 
tions, Whether you have a desire to become a mason? and if 
it is of your own free will and choice? Upon which the candi- - 
date answers, Yes. ‘ Let him see the light,’ says the master. 
They then take the handkerchief from his eyes, and whilst they 
are so doing, the brethren form a circle round him, with their 
swords drawn in their hands, the points of which are presented 
to his breast: ‘The ornaments borne by the officers, the glitter- 
ing ef the swords, and fantastic appearance of the brethren in 
white aprons, create great surprise, especially.to a person who 
for above an hour has been fatigued with the bandage over his 
eyes; and his uncertainty saa aoa is farther to be done 
for his reception, must, no doubt, throw his mind into great 
perplexity.t | , 

The candidate is then directed to advance three times to a 
stool at the foot of the arm chair; he-is taught to stepin a pro- 
per.manner by one of the assistants.—-Upon the stool are placed 
the rule and eompass; and one of the brethren says to the candi- 
date to this effect: ‘ You are now entering into a respectable so- 
eiety, which is more serious and important than you imagine. 
It admits of nothing contrary to law, religion, or morality ; nor 
does it allow any thing inconsistent with the allegiance due to 
his Majesty; the worshipful grand master will inform you ef 
the rest.’ 7 | - 
| As oa as:the speaker has ended his speech, he is desired to | 
put his right knee upon the stool, which is bare, as mentioned 
above, ** and his left foot is put into a slipper with the shoe on, 
er the shoe slipped at the heel, to represent a slipper. : 

. The candidate being in this posture, the worshipful grand 
master address him to the following effect: ‘Do you promise 

*. # Many lodges throw a fine powder, or rosin, on the floor, which, with the illue: 
‘@mination of the room, has a pretty effect. 7 
. + This custom is not observed in all lodges. 
““€ The ancient masons made use of a prayer inserted in the apprentice’s lecture ; 
_ but the moderns leave jt out when they make a brother. . | : 
' §.It is here to be! understéod, that in different lodges this speech varies; as alse 
do the forms of making in some respects, which may be seen in the entered ap— 
prentice’s leeture, where the only proper andancient method is clearly pointed out... 
-** The ancient custom was this; the candidgte, though kneeling on his right 
knee, skould have his lef foot in the air, but this pesition being fatiguing, ir ix 
emitted ia most lodges." + eo i 

ag 

never to tell, write or disclose, in any manner whatever, the so- 
crets of free-masonry and free masons, except to a brother ‘at 
the ledge,.and in the presence of the worshipful .grand-master ?” 
‘On which the persen. says, ‘I do.’ His waistc6at is then unbut- 
toned*, and the point of a pair of compasses} placed upon. his 
naked left breast, and he himself holds it with his left hand, 
his right hand being laid upon the gospel opened at St John, 
when the following oath is administered to him, he repeating it 
after the master. , oa oe _— 

- THE OATH. . 

“I, A. B. of my own free will and accord, and in the pre- 
sence of Almighty God,} and this right worshipful lodge, de- 
dicated to St John, do hereby and herein most solemnly and 

ncerely swear, that I will always hale, conceal, and never re-. 
“veal any of the secrets or-mysteries of free-masonry, that shall be 
delivered to me now, or at any time hereafter, except it be'toa 
rue and lawful brother, er‘in a just and lawful lodge of brothers 
and fellows, him or them whem I shall find to Be such, after 
‘as and dut examination. [I furthermore do swear, that 

will not write it, print it, cut it, paint it, stint it, mark it, 
stain or engrave it, or cause it so to be done, upan any thing 
moveable or immoveable, under the eanopy of heaven, where-— 
by it may become legible or intelligible, or the least appear- 
‘ance of the character of a letter, whereby the secret art may 
‘be unlawfully. obtained. All this I swear, with a strong and 
steady resolution to perform the same, without any hesita-.— 
tion, mental reservation, or self-evasion of mind in me whatsa-’ 
ever; under 0 less penalty than to have.my throat cut across, 
my tongne torn out -by the root, and that it be buried in the sands _ 
of the sea at low water mark, a cables length from the shore, © 
where the tide ebbs and flows twice in twenty-four hours. So | 
help me God, and keep me stedfast in this my entered gppren- 
tice’s obligation.” .(He kisses the book.) = | °. ae 

The new-made member is then taught the sign, grip, and pasa- — 

So 22 a 2 

. This.is done lest a woman should offer ‘herself. If we believe the Irish, thefe 
is a lady at this time in Ireland, who has gone through the whole ceremony, and 
‘is as good a mason as any of them. 

+ The ancients used a sword or 2 spear instead of a compass. ; 

} The form of the oath differs in many lodges, though this is the strictest in use; 
.andin some societies, instead of saying, ‘in the presence of Almighty Ged,’ it rune 
Shus, ‘I promise before the great architect ef the universe,’ Kc. - 

f 

me 

‘word of the entered apprentice, which will be seen more clearly 
in the following leeture belonging to that part of masonry. 

He is also learnt the step, or to advance to the master 
‘upen the drawing on the floor, which in some ledges resembleg _ 
the grand building termed a Mosaic palace, and is deseribed 
with the utmost exactness. They also draw ether figures, one 

~ of which is called the laced tuft, and the other the throne beset 
"with stars. There is also represented a perpendicular line in 
_ the form of a mason’s instrument, commonly called the plumb- 
line; and another figure which represents the tomb of Hiram, 
the first grand master, who has been dead almost three thou- 
sand years. ‘These are all explained to him in the most accurate 
‘manner, and the ornaments or emblems of the order are described 
-with great facility. ‘The ceremony being now ended, the new- 
‘ade member is obliged to take a mop out of a pail of water, 
brought for that purpose, and rub out the drawing on the floor, 
$f it is done-with chalk and charcoal. Then he is eonducted 
‘back, and every thing that he was divested of is restored, and he 
takes his seat on the right hand of the master. He also rew. 
‘ceives an apron, which he puts on, and the list of the lodges is 
. Jikewise given him. | _ + a 
_. The brethren now congratulate the new-made member, and 
all return to the table to regale themselves: when the master 
‘proposes 2 health to the young brother, which is drank with 
the greatest applause by the whole body, the new mason sit- 
ting all the while. Mfter which he, instructed by a brother, 
takes a bumper, and drinks ‘To the worshipful grand master, 
_. the senior and junior wardens, the rest of the officers, and mem- 
_ bers of the lodge; wishing them success in all their public and 
private undertakings, to masonry in general, and this ledge in. 
particular, oe their assistance.” To which they answer, 
* they will assist him.’. And after he has drank he throws his 
. glass from him, and brings it back three times, and then sets it 
. dewn on the table, the rest doing the same inexact order. This 
' they call firing : Then they clap their hands nine times divided 
inta three, and stop between each, keeping true time. 

The reader having been led thus far, it is high time to intro- 
duee the apprentice’s lecture, which is intended not only to 
@muse, but likewise to instruct him in the pdrt he has entered 
into, The readiness of many of the brethren in answering the 
questions, adds a lustre to the order, the members vying with 
each other who shall most contribute to the edification of their 

* new brother, | 7 

48 
The Entered Apprentice’: 8 Pietiie » 

_, Mas.. Brotuer, is there any thing | between you and me? 
‘ Ans. ‘There is Right Worshipful. 
' Mas. What is it, Brother, pray ? ’ Ans. A Secret. 
_. Mas. What is that secret, rother ? ' Ans, Masonry. 
_ Mas.’ Then.T presume you are a Mason ? | 
Ans. Tam so taken and accepted among Brothers and Fellows. 

Mfas. Pray what sort of a than ought a Mason to be? 
dns. A man that is born of a free woman. | 
' Mas. Where was you first prepared to be made a Mason : > 
' Ans. In my heart. 

Mas. Where was you next prepared i ? 

' Ans. In a room adjoining to the Lodge. 
. Mas. How was you prepared, Brother ? - 

Ans. I was neither naked nor clothed, barefoot nor shod; . 
‘deprived of all metal ; hoodwinked, with a cable-tow about my 
neck, where I was led to the door of the Lodge, in a halting, 
moving posture, by the hand of a friend, whom I afterwards 
found to be a Brother. 

"Mas. How do you know it to be a door, you being blinded r 
_ Aus. By finding a stoppage, and eve rare an entrance oF 
‘admittance. | 

Mas. How got you admittance? 

Ans. By three knocks. ~ 

Mas. What was said to you within 7 
‘ Ans. Who eomes there. 

Mas. Your Answer, Brother ? a 

Ans. One who begs to have and receive part of the benefit 
of this-Right Worshipful Lodge, dedicated to St J ohn, as 
many Brothers and Fellows have done before me. | 

Mas. How do you expect to obtain it ? 

_ Ans. By being free-born and well reported : ? ee 

‘Mas What was said to you then ? | Ans. Enter. 

Mas. How did you enter, and upon what ? 

Ans. Upon the point of a sword, or spear, or some warlike. 
instrument, ‘presented to my naked left breast. 

_ Mas. What was said to you then ? | 

Ans. I was asked if I felt any thing. 

Mas. What was your answer? _— ev 

Ans. I did, but I could see nothing. 

Mas. You ‘have told.me how you was received : rey, whe 
received you? 

© The reader i is desired to observe, that here 1 give the whole of the Lectyr 
defivered in the primitive times but the modern Masons leave out atleast = 

4 

Ans. The Junior Warden. _ 
#as. How did he dispose of you ? = lt. 
Ans. He delivered me to the Master, who ordered me te - 
kneel dewn and receive the benefit of a prayer. | 
| Brethren, let us Pray. | : 
O LORD GOD, thou great and universal Mason of the 
' World, and first Builder of Man, as it were a Temple; be 
with us, O Lord, as thou hast promised, where two or three 
are gathered together in thy name, thou wilt be in the midst 
of them. . Be with us, O Lord, and bless all our undertakings, 
and grant that this our friend’ may become a faithful Brother. 
Let Grace and Peace be multiplied unto him, through the 
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: And grant, O Lord, as 
he putteth forth his hand to thy holy word, that he may also 
put fofth his hand to serve a brother, but not to hurt himself 
or his family; that thereby may be given to us great and 
precious promises, that by this we may be partakers of thy di- 
vine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world | 
through lust. wo ; 
O Lord God, add to our Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Know- 
ledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to Teraperance 
Prudence, and to Prudence Patience, and to Patience Godliness, 
and to Godliness Brotherly Love, end to Brotherly Love 
Charity ; and grant, O Lord, that Masonry may be blest 
throughout the world, and thy peace be upon us, O Lord; and 
grant that we may be all united as one, through Jesus Chrisf, 
who liveth and reigneth for ever and ever. Amen. - 
Mas. After this prayer, what was said to you? 
_ Ans. I was asked who I put my trust in. © 
Mas. Your answer, Brother ? Ans. In God. 
Mas. What was the next thing said to you ? 
Ans. I was taken by the right hand, and a Brother said, 
Rise up, and follow your leader, and fear no danger. 
‘Mas. After all this how was you disposed of ? 
Ans. I was led three times round the Lodge. 
Mas. Where did you meet with the first opposition ? 
Ans. At the back of the Junior Warden in the south, where 
I gave the same three knocks as at the door. 8 
Mas. What answer did he give you ? 
Ans. He said, Who comes there? 
Mas. Your answer? | | 
Ans. The same as at the door, one who begs to have and re-. 
e¢ive, &e. | “— 
~ Mas. Where did you meet with the second opposition ? 
“Ans. At the back of the Senior Warden in the west, where 

, 

15 

I made the same repetition as at the door. He said, Who 

comes there? One who begs to have, &c. 

Mas. Where did you meet with the third opposition. oe, 

Ans. At the back of fhe Master in the east, where I made ad 
repetition‘as before: - 

Mas. What did the Master do. with you ? 

Ans. He ordered me back to the Senior Warden i in the west 
to receive instructions. | 

Mas. What were the instructions he gave you ? 

Ans. He taught me to take one step upon the first step of a 
right ange oblong square, with my left knee bare bent, my ho- 
dy upright, my right foot forming a square, my naked right 
hand upon the Holy Bible, with the square and compass there- 
on; my left hand supporting the same; where I took that se- 
lemn obligation oroath of a Mason. , 

Mas. Brother, can you repeat that obligation ? ce 

Ans. I will do my endeavour with your assistance, . ee 
shipful. , 

Mas. Stand up, and begin. 

(Here the Oath is repeated, as mentioned before. After repeat- 
ing this obligation, they drink a toast to the heart that con- 
ceals, and to the tongue that never reveals. The Master in 
the chair gives it, and they all say ditto, and draw the glas- 
ses across their throats as aforesaid. ) 

Mas. Now, Brother, after you received - obligation, what 
was said to you? 

Ans. I was asked what I most desired. - 

Mas. What was your answer ? - 

Ans. To be brought to light. 

Mas. Who brought you to light ? 

_ Ans. The Master and the rest of the Brethren. 

Mas. When you was thus brought to light, § what were the 
frst things you saw ? 

Ans. The Bible, Square, and Compass. 

Mas. What was it they told you they signified ? ? 

Ans. Three great lights in Masonry. 

_ Mas. Explain them, Brother? | 

Ans. The Bible to rule and govern our faith; the Square to 
square our actions; the Compass to keep within bounds with 
all men, particularly with a Brother. 

- Mas. What were the next things that were e shewn to you? 

Ans, Three Candles, which I was told were three lesser Holts 

.in Masonry. | 

Mas. What do they eeneent: ? 

_ Ans. The Sun, aca) and Master Mason. 

| 46 
‘ Mas. Why so, Brother ? ae | 

Ans. There is the Sun to rule the day, the Moon to rule the 
night, and the Master Mason his Lodge, or at least ought se te do. 
' Mas. What was ther done to you ? 

Ans, The Master took me by the right hand, and gave med 
the grip and word of an entered Apprentice, and said, Rise, . 
my Brother JACHIN. - an: 
(Sometimes they shew you the sign before the grip arid word is 
given, which is JACHIN: It is the entered Apprentice’s word, 
and the grip thereto belonging is to pinch with your Le 
thumb nail upon the first joint of your Brotliet’s right hand.) © 

‘Mas. Have you got this grip and word, Brother ? 

Ans. I have, Right Worshipful. | 
’ Mas. Give it to your Brother. 

(Themhe takes his next Brother by the riglit hand, and givet 
| him the grip and the word as before described.) 

The tst Brother gives him the grip. a 

The 2d Brother says, What's this? | 

Ast Bro. The grip of an entered Apprentice. 

2d. Bro. Has it got a name? Ist Bro. It has. 

2d Bro. Will you give it me? | 

Ist Bro. I'll letter it with you, or halve it. 7 

2d Bro. Plt halve it with you. _ Ist Bro. Begin, 
_ 2d Bro. No, you begin first. 

‘ Ist Bro. JA- 

2d Bro. CHIN. ) 

ist Bro JACHIN. ° | | 

2d Bro. It is right, Worshipful Master. . 

Mas. What was the next thing that was shewn to you? 

Ans. The guard or sign of an entered Apprentice.* 

Mas. Have you got the guard or sign of an entered Appren- 
tice ? 

[He draws his right hand across his throat (as aforesaid,) te 
shew the Master that he has. | 

Mas. After this, what was said to you ? a 

Ans. I was ordered to be taken back, and invested with what 
I had been divested of; and to be brought back again to return 
thanks, and to receive the benefit of a lecture, if tinte would 

ermit. i | 
: Mas. After what you had been divested of was restored, what 
was next done to you ? | 

* The guard of sign, as they call it, is by drawing your right hand across your” 
throat edgeways; which is to remind you of the penalty of your obligation, that 
you would sooner have yodrthroat eut across than discovet the secrete of miasopry. 

ee ee 
- Ans. T'was brought to the north-west, corner of the lodge, in, 
order to return thenks. | rane = 
Mas. How did you return thanks? me 
Ans. I stood in the north-west corrier of the lodge, and, with 
‘the’ instruction of a brother, I said, Master, senior abd junior - 
wardens, senior and junior deacons, and the rest of the brethren, 
of this lodge, I return you thanks for the honour you have done 
rhe in rhaking me a mason, and admitting me a memberof thia. 
worthy-soeiéty, ° 2h ee eg . , # 
Mas. What was then said to you? | 
- Ang. ‘Fhe master calted:‘me up to the north-west corner of 
the lodge at his right hand. . -.%, & “65> 4 
* Mas. Did-he present.you with any thing? = hdl: 
Ans. He presented me with an apron, which he put on me +; 
He told me it was a badge of inriocence, more ancient than the - 
golden fleece or the Roman eagle; more thonourable than the - 
star and garter, or any other order under the sun, that could: 
be conferred upon ime at that: time, or any titne hereafter. — 
-' Mas. What were the next things that were shewn you? 

- Ans. I was set down by the master’s right Kand, who shewed: 
me the working tools of an entered spprenticen = 
(Mas. What were they? = , | 

Ans. The 24 inch gauge, the square, and comfion gavel, or- 
setting maul. : _— | Basse 
Mas. What are their uses? ae ee 
| Ans, "Phe square to square ‘my work, the 24 inch vauge to 
measure my work, the common gavel to knock off all superfiu- 
ous matter, whereby the square may sit easy and just. 
Mas, Brother, as we are not all working masons, wé apply 
them to our morals, which we call spiritualizing: Explain them, ; 
Ans. The 24 inch gauge represents the 24 ian of the day. 
Mas. How do you spend them, brother ? 
. Ans, Six hours to work.in, six-hours to serve God, and six 
to serve a friend or a brother, as far as lies in my. power, with- 
out being detrimental to myself or family. 

a , 

_ I come now to the entered apprentice’s reasons: but as the. 
ceremony of drinking healths ameng the masons takes up much 

_ of their time, we must stop a litfle, in order to introduce some — 

of them. ‘The first is, ‘ ‘To the heart that conceals, and the: 

"tongue thet never reveals ;” then, © The King and Royal Fa- 

mtily;° and ‘ To all Brethren wheresoever dispersed.’ * The. 

pleasures they enjoy, the purity of their sentiments, and the uni. 

_* These toasts, or healths, are alt drank with three times three, which is performed 
in a most regular niapner, apdan buzza at the end of each, as befere described, 
S - 

~~ 

“ 

‘%S 

' fprmity that always reigns in their assemblies, are far from be- | 

ng tiresome or insipid. I next proceed to the _ 
- Entered Apprentice's Reasons. * 

Mas. Way was you neither naked nor clothed, barefoot nor- - 
shod, with a cable-tow (or halter) about your neck ? 

Ans. If I had reeanted and ran out inte the street, the people 
would have said I was mad; but if a brother had seen me, he 
would have brought me back, and seen me done justice by. 

Mas. Why was you hoodwinked? 

- Ans. That my heart may conceal before my eyes did discover. 

Mas. The second reason, brother ? - 

Ans. As I was in darkness at that time, I should keep all the 

world i in darkness. 
‘ Mas. Why was you deprived of all. metals ? 

‘ Ans. That I should‘bring nothing ‘offensive or defensive into 

the lodge. 
Mas. Give me the second reason, brother ? 

Ans. As I was poor and pennyless when I was made a mason, 

it informed me that I shovld assist all poor and pennyless bre-— 

thren as far as lies in my power. 

Mas. Brother, you told me you gave three distinct knocks 
at the door: Pray, what do they signify ? 

Ans. A certain text in Scripture. 

Mas. What is the text ? 

‘Ans. * Ask, and you shalt have; seek, ‘aad you shall find ; 
knock, and it shall be opened unto you.’ 

Mas. How do you apply this text in masonry ? - 

- Ans. I sought it in my mind; I asked of my triend; I knock- 
ed, and the door-of masonry became open unto me. 

. Mas. Why had you a sword, spear, or some other warlike 

instrument, presented to your naked left breast particularly ? 
Ans. Because the left breast is the nearest the heart, that it 

might be the more.a prick to my conscience, as it pricked my : 

flesh at that time. 
‘Mas. Why was you led three times round the lodge 2 

‘ Ang, That all the brethren might see I was duly prepared. 

4 

: ‘Mas. When you was made. an bapprentice, why was your left 

| knee bare bent 2 

_ Ans. Because the left ice: Js . the: weakest part of my: body, . 

and an entered apprentice is the:-weakest part of mony) inte | 

which degree I was then entering. | 
. (Here the brethren resume their glasses, and drink a health, 

fe 

: This ia fact is only a sculimeatien of the lecture. 
: es 

ys 

sometimes to the grand master, at other times to: the ——— 
or other officers, and. then proceed: a 
: The form “of a Idee 

Mas. Brerner, pra what makes a lodge! ? 

Ans. Right worshipful, ‘a certain number of masons met te 
gether to work. 

Mas. Pray, what: number makes a ledge ? 

Ans, ‘Three, five, seven, or eleven. 

Mas. Why do three make a lodge, brother? | 
Ans. Because there were three grand masons in the building 
of the world, and also that noble piece of architecture, man ; 
which ‘are so complete in proportion, that the ancients began 
their architecture by the same rules. | . 

Mas. The second reason, brother? — x 

Ans. There were three grand masons ®&t the building of So 
lomon’s Temple. | 

Mas. Why do five make a lodge? > oe 

Ans. Because every man is endowed with five senses. 

Mas. What are the five senses ? 7 

Ans. Hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, and fecling. 

Mas. What uses are those five senses to you in masonry? 

. Ans. ‘Thaee ape of great use to me, viz. nearing; ree and 

seein 

cng. Of what use are the brother? 

‘Ans. Hearing is to hear P ‘word ; seeing is te see the sign ; = 
feeling is to feel the gr that I may know a pee as well 
in the dark as in the ight, 

Mas. Why should seven make a lodge? 

Ans. Because there are seven. liberal sciences, 

_ Mas. ‘Will you:name them, brother? — 

Ans. Grammar, rhetoric, logic, arithmetic, geometry, mute, 
end astronomy. , 

Mas. Brother, what do those sciences teach your es 

Ans. Grammar teaches me the art of writing and speaking | 
the language taught me, according to. the first, ‘second, and. 
third concord. . 

Mas. What doth rhetoric tech. you ? ar: 

Ans. The art of speaking any topic whatsoever, bed 

Mas. What doth logic t teeth ou? iz 

Ans. The art ef reasoning well, herby you may find o out 
truth from falsehood. | 

Mas. What doth arithmetic teach you e 

Ans. The use of numbers... 

Mas, What doth pomeny teach yon? 

20. 

Ans. The art of measuriig, wherebj the Bpyptians found 
out their own lend, or the same quantity whieh they had before 
the overflowing of the river Nile, that frequently used to water 
their country ; at which time they fled to the mountains till it 
went offagain, and this made them have eontinual quarrels about. 
their lands. 

Mas. What doth music teach you, brother i p- 

Ans. The virtue of sounds. : 7 

Mas. What doth astronomy teach you ? 

_ Ans. The knowledge of the heavenly bodies. 

- Mas. Why should eleven make a lodge, brother? 

Ans. There were eleven patriarchs when sa al ‘was ee sia 
Esypt, and supposed to be last. 

“Mas. The second reason, brother ? 

Nene There were out sc apostles wher J ae betrayed = 
Christ. 

Mas. What form is ca lodge? aie 

Ans. An oblong g biohs | s oe 
_ Mas. How long, brother # 

Ans. From east to west. 

Mas. How wide, brother ? | : 

Ans. Between north and south, - 

Mas. How high, brother ? | : 

Ans. From the earth to the heavens. > = et 

Mas. How deep, brother? ‘- | : 

' Ans, From the surfate of the earth to the « centre. 

Mas. Why is your lodge said te be from the surface t to the 
centre of the earth ? 

Ans. Because that masonry is ‘universal. : 

Mas, Why is your lodge situated east and west ? 

Ans. Because all churches or chapels are, or ought to be 60. 

Mas. Why so, brother? — | 

- Ans, Because the gospel was first preached in the ron and 
extn itself to the west. ' 

Mas. What supports your p 

_ Ang, Three atest ol gla 

‘Mas. What are. their names ? 

Ans. Wisdom, strength, and beauty. 

Mas. Who doth the pillar of wisdom represent ? 

‘Ans. The master in the east. 

-.-Mas. Who doth the piller of strength represent P . 

Ans. The senior warden in the west. 

Mas. Who doth the pillar of beauty represent ? 

Ans. The junior warden in the south. 

Mas. Why should the mpster — the og of wisdom ? 

gt 

Ans. Because he gives instructions to the crafts to carry on 
their work, ina proper manner, with good harmony. . 3 

Mas. Why should the senior .warden represent the pillar of 
strength ? | 

Ans. As the sun sets to finish the day, .so the senior warden 
stands in the west to pay the hirelings their wages, which is 
the strength and support of all business. 

Mas. Why should the junior warden represent the pillar of 
beauty ? 

Ans, Because he stands in the south at high twelve at noon, : 
which is-the beauty of the day, to call the men off from work 
to refreshment, and to see that they come.on again in due time, 
that the master may have pleasure and profit therein. | 

Mas. Why is it said, that 'your lodge is supported by those 
three great pillars, wisdom, strength, and beauty ? | 

Ans. Because wisdom, strength, and beauty, are the finishers 
of all work, and nothing can be carried on without them. 

Mas. Why so, brother? 

Ans. Because there is wisdom to Cantey atengts - sup. 
port, and beauty to adorn. 

Mas. Had you any covering to your lodge? 

_ Ans. Yes, a clouded canopy of divers colours, 

Mas. How blows a mason’s wind, brother ? 

Ans. Due east and west. 

Mas. What o’clock is it, brother ? 

Ans, High twelve. 

Mas. Call-the men off from work to refreshment, and ee 
that they come on again in due time. , 

(‘The entered apprentice’s lecture being finished, it is customary 
for the master to call upon one of the brethren, who can best 
acquit himself, for the following song, which is i rea- 
dily complied with. | 

SONG, at the Conclusion of the entered Apprentice’s Lecture, 

Come let us prepare, 
We brothers that are, 
Assembled on every occasion ; 
' Let us drink, laugh, and sin & 
Our wine has a spring, 
Here’ s a health to an accepted mason 
Chorus.—Let’s diay ec, 
The world i is in pain, 
Our secrets to gain, 
But still let. them wonder and gaze on! 
_ ne'er can divine, 

The word or the sign, 
Of.a free and an accepted mason. 
Tis this, and’ *tis that, 
_ They cannot tell what, 
‘Why so many great men of the nation, 
Should aprons put on, 
To make themselves one, 
‘With a free and an accepted mason. 
Great kings, dukes, and lords, 
Have laid by their swords, 
Our myst’ry to put a poo grace on, 
And ne’er been asham’d, 
To hear themselves nam'd 
. With a free and an accepted mason. 
Antiquity’s pride - 
We have on our side, 
-And it maketh men just in their station ; . 
There’s nought but what's good, 
To be understood, 
By a free and an accepted mason. 
| Werre true and sincere. 
And just to the fair, 
Who will trust us on every eceasion ; 
No mortal can more 
' The ladies adore, 
Than a free and an accepted mason. 
‘Then join hand in hand : 
To each other firm stand 
Let’s be merry and put a bright face on, 
What mortal can boast, 
So noble a toast, | 
As a free and an accepted mason. . 

While this song is ok soa aaeh all stand round the table, and 
when they come to the last verse they join hands crossways in 
_-the following manner: the right hand. man takes hold of the 
Jeft hand of his neighbour with his right hand; and the left 
hand man takes hold of the right hand of his next brother with 
his left hand, so as to form a chain by so many links, and all 
join in the chorus, jumping violently with their feet on the 
floor, and shaking their hands up and down, linked together as 
ghove, keeping exact time with both. : 

Every one now talks of what he pleases; ‘and as it is gene- 
rally half an hour before they proceed to business, those who 

erhaps have ordered a supper retire into. another room ; but 
before they are permitted, the master proceeds to call the men 

. 
fd 

23 

off from work, as it is termed, which is done in this manner:¢ 

e master whispers to the senior deacon, who sits on his right - 
hand, and says, ‘ It is high time to call the men from work to’ 
refresh themselves :’ the senior deacon whispers to the senior 
warden ; and it is communicated from him to the junior deacon, - 
who carries it to the junior warden; he proclaims it openly to 
the lodge, and sets his column upright, * and the senior warden | 
lays his down, which signifies that the junior warden is entrusted 
with the care of the fade while the brethren refresh themselves. 

In this place it will be necessary to acquaint the reader, how 

he may discover an entered apprentice by drinking with him 

in company. Take the glass with your right hand, and draw’ 
it across your throat, either before or after you drink; and if. 
an apprentice is present he will immediately take notice of it, 
by asking you some question in masonry, which you will readily 

- answer from this book. If he ask the meaning of your doin 

that, you may whisper to him, that it is the penalty of the ob- 
ligation of an entered apprentice. From this answer ‘he will - 
proceed farther in his inquiry. ' 

The brethren having now regaled themselves, they take their 
seats, and the master proceeds to set them on again, which is. 
performed in the same manner as the calling off; with this dif- 
ference, the warden proclaims, ‘It is our worshipful master’s 

leasure, that this lodge is called from refreshment to work.” 
he junior warden lays down his column, and the senior sets — 

his up. But as it often happens, that the time will hot permit 

for the fellow-craft’s lecture, they close the lodge ; whichis done | 
after the same manner as that of opening. The senior warden 
declares it in the following words: ‘ It is our master’s will and 
pleasure, that this lodge stand closed till the first or third Wed 
nesday in next month, ’ according to the night the lodge is held. 
Then the master, wardens, deacons, secrelary, &c. take off the: 
ensigns and ornaments from their necks, and every one is at li- 
berty to depart or stay longer ; every thing of masonry is éx- 
cluded ; they talk of what they please, and sing various sangs 
for their amusement. | | a a 
I shall now prooaed to the second degree of masonry, called 
the Fellow-Crafts ; that is, one who has served his time justly 
and lawfully as an entered apprentice, and desires to become . 
more perfect in masonry, by being’ a fellow-craft.. But in most 
lodges at this time, they are made entered apprentices and fel- 

© The senior and janior wardens columns are about twenty-five inches long, and 

" represent the columns that support the porch of Solomon’s temple ; the senior’sis _ 

bfish inthe’ Lord, See the first beok ef Kiogs, chap. vii. 

4, 

called JACHIN, and signifies strength, the junior’s BOAZ, and signifies to estan 

/ 

24. 

low-crafts the samie evening. The ceremony is the gaine, 
though they have different lectures, pass-word, and grip, be- 
Jonging to each. es 

The F. ellow-Craft’ 8 tenes 

_ Mes. Brorner, are you a fellow-craft ? 

Ans. Iam. Try me, prove me. 

Mas. Where was you made a fellow-craft ? 
Ans. In a just and lawful lodge. 

Mas. How was you prepared to be made a fellow.oraft ? 

Ans. I was neither naked, nor clothed, bare-foot nor shod-3— 
in a halting moving posture; deprived of all metal, I was led 
to the door of the lode e by the hand of a brother. 

Mas. How got you Taduithanes : 

Ans. By three distinct knocks. 

_ Mas. What was said to you within ? 

Ans. Who comes there. 

Mas. Your answer, brother ? 

Ans. One who has served. his time justly and lawfully as ar 
entered apprentice, and now begs to ‘become more pertect in 
_masonry, by being admitted a fellow-craft. 

‘ Mas. How do you expect to attain to uae degree! P 

Ans. By the benefit of a pass-word. 

Mes Have you got that pass-word ? 

Ans. I have. 

Mas. Give it me, Beoiher! . 

Ans. SHIBBOLETH. * - 

Mas. What did he then say to you-? 

Ans. Pass, Shibboleth. : | 

Mas. What became of you then ? 

Ans. I was led twice round the lodge. 

Mas. Where did you meet with the first opposition ? 2 

Ans. At the back of the senior warden. 

Mas. Where did you meet with the second opposition ? 

Ans. At the back of the Master, where I ge lac the sayie 
as before. | 

Mas. What did he do with you? # 

Ans. He ordered me back to the senior warden to receive in- | 
structions. _ 

‘Mas. What inetrudtions did he give you ? 

Ans. He taught me to shew the master my due guard, and 
ta take two sae i the second step ofa ighester oblong 

‘@ SHIBBOLE H, the pass-word of a fellow- bal — plenty. See the 
Gith chapter ef ¢ beok of Be fae 1 

ob | : 
square, with my right knéd bent Bare, by left foot formidg o 
syinitd, my body tpright, tty rizlit hahd upon the Holy Bible, 
my left arm supported. bY the pens of the compasses, forttith 
a square, where I. tovk the obligation of 4 fellow-craft, 
as. Havd you got thht oblivation, brother? — 
Anis: Chave; right worshipfil 
Mas. Can yourepeat it? =. ee 
Ans. Pil‘do nty endeavour, right worshtipful, with yout assist- 
ance. _, Mas. Pray stand up, let the brethren hear it. 
The obligation of a Fellow-Craft. —- “ 
_©J, A. B. of my own free will and accord; afid in the pre. 
aetivé ‘of Almighty God, ard this right wordhipful lodge, dedi- 
cated to St John, do hereby swear, that I will alivays halé, cofi- 
ceal, and never reveal, that patt of a fellow-éraft to an éntered 
apprentice, or either of thém, excépt if be in 4 true and lawful 
lodge of crafts, him or them whom I shall find to bé sich, 
after just trial and examination._—«I_ do furthermore. swear, 
. that f wil answer all signs and summotisés sent’ f0 me fron a — 
lodge of crafts, within the léngth of acdblé.tow*. I also swear, 
that I will not wrong a brother, nor see him wrotiged, buf give 
. him timely notice of all approaching dangers whatsoever, sb far as 
inmeis. I will alsoserye a brother ay mitch as liés in my power, 
without being detrimental to myself or family : atid T will Keep 
all my brothers’ secrets as my own, that shall be deéliveréd to 
me as such, murder and treason exceptéd.—All this I sweat with 
a firm resolution to perform the sarne, without ahy vee 
or hesitation in me whatsoever, under no less penalty than to have 
my héart torn from my naked left breast, and giveir to the vul- 
tures of the air as a prey. So help me God, and keep me sted 
fest in this my fellow-craft’s obligation.’ (Kisses the book.) 
_ Mas. Thank you, brother.—After you received this obliga: 
tion, pray what was shewn to you? = | ee. 
Ans. The.sign of a féllow-craft. 
Mas. Pray give it me? 
Ans. I will, right worshipful. Oe ee 
[He stands up, and puts his right hand to his left breast, keep- 
- ing his thumb square ; -and his left hand raised up, so as to form. 
& squarer . ue 
as. What was next dorie to you ? 
Ans. He took me by the right hand, and gave me the grip 
and word of a fellow-craft, and the pass-gtip. . 

© A cable-tow is three miles in length 5 so that if a fellow-craft ivat that distanced | - 

fram his lodge, be is not culpable on account of his non-attendance. ' 
¢ The pass grip is thus geet : You must: put ‘your thumb nail between the 
rst and second joint of she right hand, and whisper the. word SHIBBOLETH. 
c ,: my i 

f 

Ae 

> Ans. Thirty-five cubits, with a chapiter five sabitay + whick 

s 
ts uN ae? 
c 2B 

Mas. What did he then doto you?- - - 

Ans. He took me by the right hand, and said, ‘Rise, prothes: 
Boas, 
‘ Mas. What followed after that, brother ? 

Ans. He ordered me back, when every thing I had been di- | 

vested of was restored, and I was brought in egain in order te 
return thanks * 
Mas. Being thus admitted, brother, did you ever work as @ 
craft p 
Ans. Yes, right worshipful, in building the temple. 
Mas. Where did you receive your wages? — 
Ans. In the middle chamber. _ | 
. Mas. When you came to the door of the middle en ee 
.pray who did you see? Ans. A warden, 
- Mas. What did he demand of you? | 
_ Ans. The pass word of a fellow-craft, | 
_ Mas. Did you give it him? 
_ Ans. I did, right worshipful. 
Mas. Pray what is it? | Ans. SHTBBOLETH. 
_Mas. How got you to the middle chamber ? 
_ Ans. Through the porch. | 
. Mas. Did you see any thing worth your notice ? 
Ans. I did, right worshipful. i 
Mas. What was it? . 

: Ans. Two fine brass pillars. 

Mas. What are their names? — 
Ans. JACHIN and BOAZ.. | 
Mas. How high were these pillars ; ? 

"Jade forty in the whole. , 

[This is described more clearly i in the third chapter of, the | 

second book of Chronicles, verse 15, 
Mas. What were they ornamented with,. brother ? 
Ans. Two chapiters, each five cubits in hei ht. 
. Mas. What were they adorned with besides? ~ 
Ans. Lily-work, net-work, and pomegranates. 

_. Mas. Were they hollow, brother Pp 

s 

The | grip of a fellow-craft i is by putting the thumbnail on the second joint of the 
right hand, and the word is BOA Z, 

* The cerentrony of returning thanks is the same as the entered apprentice’s ex- 
_Cepting for admitting me a fellow. craft. 

+ The reader is here to understand that there are.three sorts of cubits; the King’s e: 

cubit, three English feet ; the holy cubit, one foot six inches; and the common 

’ -cubit, twenty one inches, The cubit mentioned, in the Old Testament is the hoty 

cubit, which is one foot six inches, | 
s 7 Be te i aa 2 A 

me - 

$7 
Ans. _ right ht worshi ful. | 
Mas. How thick was the olen coat f. 
_Ans. Four inches. | _ on. | 

Mas. where were they cast? — 
Ans. On-the plain of Jordan, between Succoth and Zartha, in 

aclay ground, where all Solomon’s holy ves were cast. 
Mas. Who cast them brother ? 

Ans. Hiram Aeid the widow’s son. 
This generally fin ishes the fellow-craft’s lecture, and very few | 

lodges go so far in their Questions and Answers : Therefore, i In. © 

order to enliven the company, the master asks some good singer 

to favour them with the fellowing song, which is commonly sung 

. with great energy and rapture throughout the mare ; aye : 
brother hearing a part i in the chorus. | . Oy 

“THE FELLOW-CRAFT’s SONG: 

‘Han, Masonry ! thou craft divine! a. 
Glory of earth, from heaven reveal’d, © | 
‘Which does with jewels precious shine, 
: From all but mason’s eyes conceal’d, 
Chorus. ‘Thy praises due who can rehearse, 
, In nervous prose, or flowing verse! 

- As men from brutes distinguish’d are, — 
A mason other men excels, | 
For what’s in knowledge choice or rare, 
But jn his breast securely dwells. 58 
' Chorus. His silent breast and faithful heart .. 
3 ” Preserves the secrets of the art. “| - Do 

From scorching heat and piercing cold, —., 
From beasts whose roar the forest rends ; * 
From the assaults of warriors bold, se 
- Yhe mason’s art mankind defends. ae re 
cc horus. Be to this art dne honour paid, 
From which mankind receives ‘such aid. a 
Ensigns of state, that feed our pride, . oe 
Distinctions troyblesome and vain, = a : 
By masons true are laid aside: | 
Art’s‘free born sons such toys disdain, “3 
Chorus. Ennobled by the name they bear, °° 
“Ge “ane . Distinguish’d by thé badge* they wear... 
SUE ERReREREREERRREERreeen ee EENEnEEEene in : 
' * Here the whole lodge strike their right hands all at once on their aprons,” 
keeping as regular time as she soldiers i in St Jame’ $ ark when they strike their | 
gartouch- boxes ek” oe 

rp? 

. 

t 

o 

J 
Sweet fellowship, from envy free, —- a 
Friendly eopyerse of bratherhqod ! _ 
The lodge’s lasting cement be, _ 
; Which has for ages firmly staed. 
' Cherus. & lodge thus built, for ages past 
Has lasted, and will ever last. _ 
Then in our songs be justice done, — 
To those who have enriched the art, 
From Jabal down to Aberdour ;* 
And let each brother bear a part. 

Chorus. Let noble masons’ healths go round, 

| Their praise in lofty lodge resound. 

- In company the fellow-craft takes the pot or glass, and diaws 
it across his left breast, and touches it; the penalty being thus,- 
that he would sopper have his heart torn trom his left breast, 

_and given to the fowls of the air, than discover the secrets.of 
mesonry, Sometimes this is dane with the right hand only, as 
it is less taken notice of by'strangers. : 

Having given the entered apprentice and fellow-cyaft’s part, 
. I now proceed te the third and last degree af masonry, which ~ 
is termed the Afaster’s Part, it being performed in the same 
manner as the other two, viz. by way of Question and Answer, 
and is as follows : _ — 
Mas. Broruer, where have you been? 
Ans. In the west. | oe 

\ ‘ 
 .crnnenneeneneneeneeamenenntne Geena eens Berne Ser Cae or ee ened 

* Lord Aberdour -was formerly grand master ; at present the Prince of Wales, 
fills that station; and they make use of his name aris gh For the entertaine 
ment of our readers, the editor obtained a complete list of all the grand masters, 
since thé year 1723, viz. 1 : ‘ : 

Tf 

Francis Scott, Earl of Dalkeith. — H. Brydges, marquis of Caernarvon 
Charles Lenox, duke of Richmond, Le- | Robert Raymond, lord Raymond 
nox, and Aubigny,. = — Jolis Keith, earl of. Kiatore- 

J. Hamilton, Jord Paisfe J. Douglas, earl of Morton 
‘Wm. O'Brien, earl, of Inchiquin John Ward, Lord Ward " ; 
Henry Hare, lord Colrain "Thomas Lyon, earl of Strathmore 
James King, lord Kingston | James Crapstayn, lord Cranstoun 
Thomas Howard, duke of Norfolk” {+ Wm. Byron, lord Byron ~ 

'T. Coke, lord Lovell 

Brown, Id. visc. Montacute. 
James Lyon, ear] of Syfathmore 
- John Lindsey, ear! of Cravford. 
. Thomas Thynne, ‘dor viscount Wey- 

‘John Proby, lord Carysfort 
‘James Bsydges, earl of Caernarvon 
, Shalte Ch. Douglas, lord Aberdour . 

W. Shisley, lord Feprars- 

‘ 

Lord Petre °, 

mouth Duke of Cumberland, and at present 
. John € eaxl.of Loudon | The Prince of Walts 

Egware Bligh, earlef Darnley = [ : | 
ott r ve noble ligt af grand masters, such as no age, society, or kingdom 
ea oast to have ruled them, masonry has been fixed on the éolid basis i 
pow statds, en | ae ee 

. 

20 

Mas, And where are you going? - . Ans. To the east. 
_ Mas Why de you leave the west, and goto the east? 

Ans. Wei ‘the light of the gospel was first pein in the | 

east. 
Mas. What are you going to da in the east ?- 

_ Ans. To seek for a lodge of masters. 
Mas. Then you are a master mason, I presume ! ? 
Ans. I am so taken and accepted among masters. 

_ Mas. Where was you made a master? 

Ans. In a lodge of masters. _ 
; Mas. Haw was you prepared to be made 9 master? 

Ans. My shoes were taken off my feet, my arm's and breast, 

were naked, and I was deprived of all metals. this manner 
I was led to the dbor of the lodge. *. 
. Mas. aun got you admittance ? 
_ Ans, By three distinct knocks. 
Mas. What was then satd to you from within J 
Ans. Whe comes there. | 
_, Mas, Your answer, brother? ~_ 
-_, Ans. One who hath lawfully and erily » served his time as an 
entered apprentice and fellow-craft, and now begs ta attain the 
last and most honourable degree of magonry, hy} eing admitted 
+. & master. é _ 
Mas. How do you expect to attain it? 
_ Ang. By the benefit of a pass-word, | 
Mas. Can you give me that word, brother? 
Ans. I can and will, right worshipful. 
_ Mas. Pray give it me then? . Ans. TUBAL CAIN. 
_ Mas. What. was then said to you? : e 
Ans. Enter TUBAL CAIN. 
_ Mas. How was you disposed of ? 
Ang. J was led raynd the lodge: 
Mas, Where did you meet, with, the first cppition a 
Ans, At the back of the master. 
. Mas. What did he demand of you? 
| Ans..The same as at the door. 
Mas, Haw. did he dispose of yau ? 

- 

Ans. He ordered me back to the senior warden i mm the west, | 

to receive proper’ instructions. 
Mas. What were these instructions, beothoe? = 

‘Ans. He instructed me ag I stood in the west, first, to shew - 

——— 
* ‘The difference between the manner of preparing the person for the degres of 

. Master and the entered Apprentice and Fellow-Craft, is this: Thet the entered © 
Appregtice’s left arm and left, hreast are naked, with the left shoe off; and. the 

Felow-Craftts right breast i is naked, with the right shoe off, 

a 

~ 

~ 

Cd 

30 
the master in the’ east the due guard or sign of an entered ‘a 
prentice, and take one step upon the first step of the right an fe 
of an oblong square, with my left foot forming a square. & 
eondly, to make two steps upon tHe same oblong square, and to 
shew the sign of a fellow-craft. Thirdly, I was taught to take 
two steps upon the same oblong square, with both my knees 

bent and bare; my body upright, my right hand upon the 

Holy Bible, both points of a pair of compasses being pointed to 
my right and left breast, where’ I took the solemn oath or ob- 
ligation of a master mason... © 2 
. Mas. Brother, can you remember the obligation you speak of ? 
— Ans, Tll'do my endeavour, right worshipful, with your as~ 
sistance. oO | | — 
‘cs. Pray stand up and begin. — ; : : 
- Ans. ©, A. B. of my own free will and accord, and in the 
pressnce of Almighty God and this right worshipful lodge, de- 
dicated te holy St John, do hereby and herein most solemnly 
and sincerely swear, that I will always hale, conceal, and never 
reveal, this part.of a master mason to a fellow-craft, oy more 
than that of a fellow-craft to an apprentice, or any of them, to 
the rest of the world, except in a true and lawful lodge of mas- 
ters, him or them whom I shall find to be such, after a just trial 
and examination.—I furthermore do swear, that I will attend- 
all summonses sent to me from a lodge of masters, if within the 

e 

+ length of a cable-tow.—I will also keep ali my brothers’ secrets 

as my own, treason and murder excepted, and that at my own. 
, free will. . Iwill not wrong a brother, or seé him wronged, but” 
qveoun notice of al! danger, as far as in my power lies, And 
- JT also swear, that I will conform myself to all the laws and. in- 
___ &titutions of this lodge.—All this I swear, with a firm and fixed 
resolution to perform the same, under no less penalty than to 
have my body severed in two ; the one part carried to the south, - 
and the otker to the north; my bowels burnt to ashes, and the 
ashes to be scattered to the four winds of the heavens, that no 
farther remembrance of such 2 vile wretch may exist among 
amen, (and in particular masons): So help me God, and keep me | 
stedfast in this my master’s obligation.” (Kisses the book.) - 
Afas. ‘Thank you, brother.—Pray what was shewn you after 

you received this obligation ?. ie 

_ Ans. One of the master’ssigns: «i. a 

[The sign is given by drawing your right hand across your 
- “belly, which is the penalty of the obligation. Then he gives 
__ the master the grip of an apprentice, who says, What’s this? 

’ “The person answers, the grip of an entered apprentice. ] 

_ Mas. Has it got a name? Ans Tt has, - 

Bt 

Mas. Will you give it me? ~ . Ans. JACHIN, 
* Mas. Will-you be of or from ? -, ., Ams, oe 
. Mas. From what, brother? — ' | 
Ans. From an entered ‘apprentice toa fellow-craft. 
'” Mas. Pass, brother. ~ 

[He puts his thumb between the first and second joint, which | 
is the pass-grip, and you pronounce the word Surspouers.] ie 

' ‘Mas. What was done to you after that ? 

Ans. He took me by the grip of a fellow-craft, and said, 
‘What's s this? © | : 

Mas. Your answer, brother 2 

_ Ans. the grip of a fellow-craft : > 

, Mas Has it got a name! ? | Ans. It has, 

Mas. Will you'give itme? | ns. BOAZ. 
Mas. What was then said to i . | ' aa 
' Ans. Rise up, brother BOAZ. 
Mas. Brother, what followed : > 

_ Ans. He told me I represented & one of the greatest men in the 
world, viz. our grand master Hiram, who was killed just at the. 

finishing of the temple and the manner of his death is thus 
related: 

‘ There were originally fifteen fellow-crafts, who perceiving 

the temple almost finished, and not having received the mastez’s. 

word, they grew impatient, and agreed ‘to extort it from their. 

master Hiram, the ‘first feb gileclire they could find of meeting’ 
him alone, that they mig 

. could accomplish their scheme, twelve of them recanted ; the 
other three were obstinate, and determined to have it by force, 
if no other way could be found ; their names were, dubela, 
Jubelo, and Jubelum. 

‘It being always the: custom of Hiram, at eel at noon, as ' 

soon as the men were called off to refresh themselves, to go.into 

the Sanctum {anctorum, or holy of holies, to pay his, devotion 
to the true and living God, the three assassins abovementioned: 
placed themselves at the east, west, and south doors of the’ 

temple. At the north there was no entrance, Pecans’ the rays 
of the sun never dart from that point. © _ 
‘ Hiram, having.finished his prayer to the Lord, came to the 

east door, which he found guarded by Jubela, who demanded . 

-the. masters grip in a resolute manner: he received for answer 
froin Hiram, that it was not customary to ask it in such a strain : 

that he himself did not receive it so ; adding, that he must wait, 

and time and patience would bring it about. He told him far- 

{her, that if. was not in his poner. alone te reveal it, ad a in 

od f 
} *, i 

t pass for masters in other countries, ~ 
and receive the wages or profits of masters: but before they. | 

—_ 

the presence of Solomon King of Israel, and Hirani King of Tyre, 
Jubéla being dissatisfied with this anstver, struck hii across the 
throat with a twenty-four inch gauge. Hiram upon this usage 
flew to thé south door of the temple, where he was meét by Ju- 
belo, who asked him the master’s grip and word ih like mianner 
fis Jubela had done before ; and on receiving thé samé ahswet 
‘ from his mastér, he gave him a violent. blow with a square upon 
his left breast, which made him reel. Upori recovering his 
strerigth hé ran to the west door, the only way left him of es- 
caping ; and on being interrogated by Jubelum to the saine | Ao 
rt, who guarded that passage, (to whom hereplied as at first) 
e received a terrible fracture upon his head with a gavel * or 
setting maul, which occasioned fis death. After this they car- 
. ried his body out at the west door, + and hid it under some rub- 
bish till paclee o’clock the next night, when they met by agree- 
- ment, and buried him on the side of a hill, in a grave six feet per- 
_ pendicular, dug east and west.” 
Mas. After you was thus knocked down, what was said to. 
you then ? | : | | 

_ © When you come to this part ofthe ceremony of making a Master, it occasions 
eomte surprisé; the Junior Warden strikes you with a twenty-four inch gauge 
attoés the throats the Senior ‘Warden follows the blow by striking you with a 
square on the left breast ; and almost at the sathe instant the Master knocks you 
down with the gavel. ‘This is the custom in most Lodges ; and it requires.no small 
share of courage, for the blows are frequently so severe that the poor candidate 
falls backwards on the floor ; and the greater his terror at this usage, thé moré 
the brethren are pleased. This custom savours too much of barbarity ; arid many 
instances can be produced of persons in this situation who have requested on their 
knees to be set at liberty, and others who have made their escape as fast as poe- 
sible out of the Lodge. he French and natives of Switzerland have a more 
striking and solemn way of representing the death of Hiram. When a brother 
comes into the lodge, in order to be raised to the degree of 4 master, one of © 
the members lies flat on his back, with his face disfigured, and besnieared with 
blood, on the spet where the drawing on the floor is made. His natural surprise 
. atid confusion immediately appear, and one of the brethten generally addressed 

him to the purport following ; * Brother, be not frightened ; this is the unfortus 
nate remains of a worthy Master, that would not deliver the grip and word ta . 
three Fellow-Crafts, who had no right to it; and from his example we leatn 
our duty, viz. to die before we deliver the Master’s part of Masonry to those _ 
who have no claim thereto.? On kneeling to receive the obligation, the sup- 
-posed dead brother lies behind you, and daring the time of administering the oath 
and reading the history of his death, he gets up, and you are laid down in -his 
place. This is the most material difference between the French and English 
method of making a Master Mason ; and that it is more agreeable to humasity than’ 
giving a man a violent blow of the forehead with a gavel, must bé obvious: td 
every reader. ae . 

tin this point the Masons themselves differ; some of them say, he was. not 

carrjed out at the west door, but buried on the spot where He was killed, in this 
manner: The three assassins took up part of the pavement, made a hole, an? 
covered him over with stones as goon 23 ghey had crammed him in; after whieh, 
they conveyed the rubbish out in their aprons, to prevent suspicign, | 

~ 

83 

" Ans. I was told I represented one of the greatest men in the 

world lying dead, viz. our grand master Hiram. ) 
Mas. Thank you, brother. —Pray go on. 

' Ans. As I lav on my back, the master informed me how 

Hiram was found, and by what means the three ruffians were 

discovered, as follows : 

‘ Our master //iram not coming to view the workmen as usual, 
{ing Solomon caused strict search to be made ; ; but this prov- 
ing ineffectual, he was supposed to be dead. ‘The twelve fellow- 
cr afts who recanted, hearing the report, their consciences prick- 
ing them, went to Solomon with white aprons and gloves, em- 
blems of their i innocence, and informed him of every thing ree 
lative to the affair, as far as they knew, and offered their assist- 
ance in order to discover the three other fellow-crafts, who had 
Absconded. ‘They separated, and divided themselves into four 
parties ; three east, west, north, and south, in quest of the mur- 
derers. As one of the twelve was travelling on the sea-side, 
near Joppa, being fatigued, he sat down to refresh himself; but 
was soon alarmed by the fullowing hideous exclamations ‘from 
the cliff of a rock: ‘ Oh! -that my throat had been cut across, 
my tongue torn out by the root, and buried in the sands of 
the sea at low-water mark, a cable’s length from the shore, | 
where the tide ebbs and flows twice in twenty-four hours, ére 

I had consented to the death of our grand master Hiram !’°— 
* Oh, (says another) that my heart had been torn from under my 
naked left breast, and given a prey to the vultures of the air, 

rather than I had been concerned in the death of so ‘good a — 

master!—< Rut (says a third) I struck him harder than you both; 
it was. I that killed him. . Oh! that my body had been severed 
in two, and scattered to the south and north; my bowels burnt. 
to ashes in the south ; and scattered between the four winds of 
the earth, ere I had been the. cause of the death of our good 
master Hiram!’ The fellow-craft hearing this, went. in quest 
of his two associates, and they entered the cliff of the rock, took 
and bound them fast, and brought them to King Solomon, bes. 
fore whom they voluntarily confessed theif guilt, and begged to 
die. The sentence passed on:them was the same as they ex: 
- pressed in their lamentation in the cliff: Jubela’s throat was cut 
across; Jubelo’s heart was torn from under his left breast; and 
Jubelum’s body was severed i in two, and scattered -$othe south 
and. north. 
_ ¢ When the-execution was over, King Solomon sent for the 
twelve crafts, and desired them ‘to take the body of Hiram up, 
in order that it might be interred in a solemn manner in the - 
Sanctum Sanctorum ; he also told them, that if they cowld net .. 
Ki 

a 

© Fy 

Van 

34 

Gnd wkey-word about him, it was lost ; for there were only three 
in the world to whom it was known ; and unless they were pre- 
sent, it could not be delivered. Hiram being dead, it conse- 
quently was jost. However, as Solomon ordered, they went and 
cleared the rubbish, and found their master in a mangled condi- 

tion, having lain fifteen days; upon which, they lifted up their 

hands above their heads in astonishment, and said, O Lord my 
God! 'This being the first word and sign, King Solomon adopted 
it as the grand sign of a master mason, and it is used at this day 
in all the lodges of masters.’ ; 

Mas. Brother, when Hiram was tlrus found dead, how was 
he raised? 

Ans. By the five points of fellowship. 

Mas, What are these points of fellowship ? 

Ans. He was taken by the entered apprentice’s grip, and the 
skin slipped off. Then he was taken by the fellow-craft’s grip, 
which also slipped off ; and lastly by the master’s grip *. 

Mas, Brother, it appears you could not have been raised but 
by the five points of fellowship. Pray explain them ? : 

Ans. Hand in hand signifies, that I will always put forth my 
hand to serve a brother as far as ia my power lies.—Foot to foot, 
that I never will be afraid to go a foot out of my way to serve 
e brother.—Knee to knee, that when I pray, I should never for- 
get my brother's welfare.—Breast to breast, to shew I will keep 
my brother's secrets as my own.—The left hand supporting the 
back, that I will always support a brother, as far as I can, 
without being detrimental to my own family. | 

Mas. Thank. you, brother.—Bvt pray, why was you deprived 

of all metal ? | 

Ans. Because there was neither axe, hammer, nor sound of 
any metal tool heard in the building of’ the temple ef Solomon. 
Mas. Why so, brother ? ; es 
Ans. Because it should not be polluted. 7 
. Mas. Hew is it possible, brother, that sucha large buildmg 

should be carried on without the use or sound of some metal tool? 

-. Ans: It was prepared in the forest of Lebanon, and brought 
down upon. proper carriages, and set up with wooden mauls, 

made on-purpose for the occasion, 

Mas. Why were both your shoes takea off from your feet ? 

'...-4 Phe Master’s grip is thus performed. You take a brother with the four 
= naile of your right hand, and press close into the lower part of the wris 
ef his righ 

t hand, with all your strength ; your right fect to his right foos, and 

his right knee to your right knee; the right breast to that of your brother, and 
owr left hand supporting his back. In this position you whisper in his ear 
ARABONE; oF, a§ in the modern Lodges, Macaazwaca, which is the Mas- 

cor’s e v 

we 

Ans. Because the place I stoad on, when I was made 9 mae. 
son, was holy ground. | : 
Mas. What supports our lodge ? 
Ans. Three pillars. 
Mas. Pray, what are their names, brother ? 
Ans. Wisdom, strength, and heauty. 
. Mas. What do they represent ? iS 
Ans. Three grand masters; Solomon King of Israel; Hiram, 
King of Tyre; and Hiram Alf, who was killed by the three — 
fellow-crafts. - 
Mas. Were these three grand masters concerned in the build- 
ing of Selomox’s temple. ne | 
Ans. They were. | | 
Mas. What was their husiness? ee 
Ans. Solomon found provisions and money to pay the work- 
men; Hiram King of Tyre provided materails for the building ; 
and Hirem Abiff performed or syperintended the work. 
. (End of the Master's Lecture.) 

The form observed at the instalment ofe Master, and the the ather 
Officers, on St John’s Day. | 

_ The year being expired, @ proper person is fixed on by the 
members of every lodge to preside over, and govern the societies 
in the capacity of master. The qualifications for this office are, 
Ast, That he must he regularly and Jawfully raised: 2dly, He 
ought to be a man of good character, and irreproachable in his 
private eonduet: Sdly, He myst he well versed in the laws and 
coustitutions of the arder, and ought to be temperate, cool, ang 
quite perfect in going ne the before mentioned lectures, ag 
all the questions are put by him, and he js often obliged to as- 
sist the brethren in making the proper answers; for every mar 
_ son sitting round the table angwers in his turn, ip the same manr 
ner as the hoys af ghureh saying the eatechism. This they term 
working. For instance; supose a brother meets another, an 
asks him, if he wae at his lodge last night P hesays, yes. ‘Well 
replies the ather, did you wark ? that is, did you go through the 
several questions and answers {a any of the Lectures.-~lf any 
member, cannot, or does not chuse to werk, when the question 
is put, and it comes to his turn, he gets up, and clapping his 
hand an his breast, addreses himself to the master, and begs ta 
be excused; then the left hand man answers in his room, — 
_ ‘The brethren haying chosen a proper man for this office, and — 
he being approved of by the grand master, they proceed to the 
installing him as follows: He TS down ip the south pert ef 
= 

Bi Oe 

36: ; 

the Iodge, and-the late master gives him the following: obliga- 
tion before he resigns the chair, which he repeats : a 

‘I, 4. B. of my own free will and consent, in the presence 
of Almighty God, and this right worshipful lodge, dedicated to 
St John, do most solemnly and sincerly swear, that I will not 
deliver the word and grip belonging to the chair whilst I am 
master, or at any time hereafter, except it be to a' master in 
the chair, or a past. master, him or them whom I shall find to 

be such, after due trie] and examination.—I alsa swear, that T 

a 

will act as master of this lodge till next St John’s day, and fill: 
the chair every lodge night, If I am within the length of my 
cable-tow.—I likewise further promise, that I will not wropg. 
this lodge ; but act in every respect for the good of masonry, 
by behaving myself agreeably to the rest of the brethren; and 
maintaining good order and regularity in-this lodge, as far as 
les in my power. All this I swear with a firm and stedfast re- 
solution to perform the same, under no less than the four follow. 
ing penalties: My throat cit across, my tongue torn out, my 
heart torn from my left breast, and my body severed in two. 
So help me God, and assist me in'this' my obligation belonging 
to the chair.” (Késses the book.) . 

The past master raises him, and takes off the jewels and rib- 
bons frem his own neck, and puts it on the new master, taking 
him at the same time by the master’s grip, and whispering in 
his ear the word CHIBBELUM;;* after which he slips his hand 
from the master’s grip to the elbow, and presses his nails in, as 
is done in the grip of the master under the wrist. Os 

The senior and junior wardens, secretary, &c. receive the ob« 
ligation as the master, except the grip and word: their being 
none peculiar to them. | 

Having now gone through the |several degrees and lectures 
belonging to the entered apprentice, fellow-craft, master, and the 
manner of instalment, I shall close the work with a few general 
directions, dividing them under the following heads. 

I. A Description of the Ornaments worn by the different Officers 

when assembled tn the lodge, and thetr proper places of sitting. 

_ The master, who sits in the east of the lodge, has the rule — 
and compass, and square, hanging to a ribbon round his neck, 
and a black rod in his hand, when he opens the lodge, near seven 
feet high. © : : 

* CHIBBELUM signifies s worthy mason. The origin of the words and signs 

am ng the free- masons was on this account ; Hiram, the chief architect of the temple, 
had su great a number of workmen to pay, that he could not possibly know them 
all; he therefore give each degree or class a ‘particular-sign and word, by which 

be could distinguish them more readily, m order to pay them their differeut calaries, 

1 

of 
The senior warden’s place is in the west, with a level hang- 
ing by a ribbon round his neck, ,and a column placed on the 
table, about twenty nine inches long. 
. The junior warden’s place is in the south, with the plumb- 
rule hanging by.a ribbon from his neck, and a column in his hand. 
‘rhe secretary wears the cross-pens, hanging in the same 
manner. 
‘The senior and junior deacons have each a black rod, with 
e compass hanging round their necks; the senior sits’ at the - 
back of the master, . or at his right hand ; the junior at the se- - 
nior warden’s right hand. ad 3 
The past master has the ome and sun,’ with a line of 

‘ cords about his neck. 

- wrist 0 

The treasurer has. a key hanging from his neck. E 

II. The manner of giving the signs of every degree, and the word 
belonging to it, with the fellow-craft and master’s. clap. 

The master’s sign, grip, and word, &c._ 
The sign. Draw your right hand edgeways across your bely, 
which is the penalty of the obligation. | 
The grip. Take hold of the rivht hand of ; your. brother with 
your ee hand, and press the four finger nails hard under the 
his right hand ;' put your right foot to his right foot ; 
your. right knee to his right knee; and his right Breast to 
your's, with your left hand supporting his back. 
. The word is MAHABONE; or in some lodges, MACBE- 
ACH. 
— The pass word is TUBAL CAIN. | 
’ The master’s clap is, by holding both your heads — your 
head, and striking them down at once upon your apron, both 
feet keeping time. They assign two reasons for this sign, viz. 
when the twelve:fellow-crafts saw their master lie dead, they 
lifted up their hands in surprise, and said, O Lord our God ! and 
that when Solomon dedicated the temple to the Lord, he stood " 
up, and lifting up both his hands, exclaimed, O Lord my God! : 
Great art thou above all Gods. 

The fellow-craft 8 sign, grip, word, and clap. 
Sign. Put your right hand to your left breast, keeping your 
thumb square, and your left hand upright, forming a square. - 
_ The pass grip.is, by putting the thumb nail of your right 
hand between the first and second joint of a-brother’s right hand. 
The pass word is SHIBBOLETH. 
The grip is the same as the pass grip, except pressing your 
: ae on the second joint, instead of between the first and 
secon 

38 

‘The word is BOAZ. 

The fellow-craft's clap is, by forming the sign of a eraft as 
above, holding your left hand square and upright; then clap 
your right and left hands together: and afterwards strike your 
Jeft breast with your right hand, and from thence give a slap 
on your apron, your right foot going at the same time. : 

: The entered apprentice’s sign, grip, and word. 
_ Sign. Draw your hand across your throat edgeways. The 
penalty of the obligation being this, that an apprentice would 
sooner have his throat cut than discover the secrets of masonry. 
‘The grip. Take a brother with your right hand, and press 
hard with your thumb-nail upon the first joint of the fore-finger 
of his right hand. ee 
. The word. Whisper in his ear JACHIN. : 
i master kneels upon both knees ia the ceremony of 
making. | | 
The craft kneels with the right knee. 
_ The apprentice with the left knee. 
III. The form observed in drinking. © 
The table being plentifully stored with wine and punch, &c, 
every man has q glass set before him, and fills it with what he 
chuses, and as often as he pleases. But he must drink his glass 
in turn, or at least keep the motion with the rest. When, 
therefore, a public health is given, the master fills first, and de. - 
sires the brethren to charge glasses; and when this is ares 
to be done, the master says, Brethren are ye all charged? The 
senior and junior. wardens answer, te are all charged in the south 
and west. Then they all stand up, and observing the master’s 
_ motion, (like the soldier his right hand man) drink their glasses 
off: and if the master proposes the health or toast with three. 
times three claps, they row the glasses with the right hand, at 
. full length, bringing them across their throats three times, and 
making three motions to put them down on the table; at the 
third they are set down, (though perhaps fifty in number) as if 
at was but one: then raising their hands breast high, they cla 
nine times against the right, divided into three divisions, whic 
is termed drinking with three times three, and at the end they 
give a huzza. a : a 
Having at length gone through my plan, I have nothing fur- 
ther to add than this, that the following is the best method for 
2 stranger to get admittance, being what I have often tried in 
many places in order to be fully satisfied. _ 
As soon as you come to the door of the lodge, you will find 
; the tyler on the outside with a drawn sword in his hand, and a 

eo 

white apron‘on. Ask him if there isa full ledge? and tell him 
you shall be glad of admittance as a visiting member; taking 
care to provide yourself with a white leather apron, which you — 
may shew him as if by accident. He will, perhaps, ask you 

what degree you are of, and desire a sign, which you may shew 
He with readiness, and likewise inform him what lodge you 

long to. ; 7 Z_ 

It being contrary to the rules of the society that the tyler 
should admit a stranger, he will go in, and acquaint the master, 
that such a person (mentioning your name, and the lodge you 
told him you belonged to) craves admittance. Upon which one 
of the wardens will come out and examine you, draw your right 
hand across your throat edgeways,, and he will say, ‘ What's 
that? Your answer must be, ‘ The due guard of an appren-_ 
tice.’ Then he will take you by the first joint of the thumb 
of hice right-hand, and press it hard withthe thumb nail of his 
right hand and ask, ‘ What's this?” ‘You must immediately 
. answer, ‘ The grip of an entered apprentice.’ Ifhe is not fully 

satisfied with this, he will go farther on in this manner. : 
Ques. Has it got’ a name?—You must answer, ‘It has.” 
Then he will ask you to give it him. | 
- Ans. T'll halve it with you. Begin, says he. 

Ans. J A- a e 
Mason. CHIN. Ans. JACHIN. 
Ques. Will you be of or from ? Ans. From. 

Ques. From what ? 
Ans. From an entered apprentice to a fellow-craft. He will 
.. then shift his thumb from the apprentice’s grip towards the fel- 
Jow-craft’s ; and ask, ‘ What's this ? Ans. The pass word of a | 
fellow-craft. Give it me, says he. Whisper in his ear SHIB- 
BOLETH. On this he will put his thumb to the second joint 
and say, What’s this? Ans. The grip of a fellow-craft. Has it 
aname? sayshe. Ans. It has—Pray give itme. Ans. I will 
. letter it, or halve it with you. Mason. I'l letter it with you. 
Ans. Begin. Mason. No, you begin. Ans. B. Mason. O. 
Ans. A. Mason. Z. Ans. BOAZ. | | 
What I have here offered being more than sufficient, you will 
be admitted, and you must put your apron on, and take your 
seat. If there should be a making that night, you. will be per- 
fect in the first principles, and know more than one in ten whe 
have been masons many years, and have never read this book. 

_ If you should after this chuse to go to a lodge of masters, 
the ceremony is the same as above ; but-you are interrogated te- 
. the grip, pass-grip, and werd of a master, which you cannot 
- fadl of anwweriag by reading the master’s part hefore-mentioned. 

In all this hia must take care not to betray ant feat, but pug 
on an air of assurance. = 

The ceremony observed at the Free Masons’ Funerals actording % ~ 
) ancient custom. 

No mason can be interred with the formelities of the order, 
unless by his own special request, communicated to the master 
of the lodge of which he died a member; nor unless he had been 
advanced to the third degree of masonry. _ | 
_ The master of the lodge, on receiving intelligence of his death, 
and being made acquainted with the day and hour appointed for 
his funeral, is to issue his command for summoning the lodge ; 
and immediately to make application, by the grand secretary, 
to the deputy grand master, for a legal power and authority to 
attend the procession with his officers, and such brethren as he 
may approve of, properly clothed. 

. "The dispensation bei 

' 

ing obtained, the master may invite as 
many lodges as he thinks proper, and the members of the said 
lodges, may accompany their officers in form; but the whole 
ceremony must be under the direction of the master of the lodge 
to which the deceased belonged ; and he, and his officers, must 
be duly honoured, and clieerfully obeyed on the occasion. 

All the brethren, who walk in procession, should observe, as 
much as possible, an uniformity in-their dress. Decent mourn- 
ing, with white stockings, gloves, and aprons, is most suitable 
and becoming. Ne person ought to be distinguished with a 
jewel, unless he is an officer of one of the lodges invited to at- 
tend in form, and the officers of such lodges should be orna- 
mented with white sashes and hat-hands ; as also the officers of 
the lodge to whom the dispensation is granted, who should like- - 
wise be distinguished with’ white rods. 

In the procession to the place of interment, the different 
lodges rank according to their seniority ; the junior ones pre- 
ceding. Each lodge forms oxe division, and the following order 
is Observed: 7 23 : 
7 Thé tyler with his sword ; 

The stewards, with white rods ; 
The brethren out of office, two and two; 
| The secretary with a roll; 
The treasurer, with his badge of office; 
Senior and junior wardens, hand in hand; 
- The past master; 
The master; ; 

The lodge to which the deceased brother belonged, in the fol- 

at 
ihe orders ail the menibers beving “flowers, ez ach, in 
ands 

their 
‘The tyler; 
The stewards; . 
The music, cccums muffled, and trumpets covered Hy 
The senior and junior wardens s 
The past tiester; = 
The bible and book of, constitutidns, on a: cinlide: “eovered. 
‘with black cloth, bases by. a meéiaber. ae the mee 
he mastet fe 4 
‘The diane singing an Anthem: Sig Ba 
‘The clergyman. . - 

with ape di oe 
t P ated ft. 
thereon, and two swotds | 

crossed. 7a « 

on 

| Pall bearers. 

” Chief mowrher'j Pe head 
: twee creas b 
wo stew 
A tyler, 

One or two. lodges match, befére the ales ales, 6 to the 
shurch-yard, to prevené confusion an make the Aecdsiarp pre- 
parations. The brethren are on no.aceeunt to desett them ranks, 
or change their places, but keep: ini their diferent va besa 

Whew dy ession arrives at the gate of the ehurch-yatd, the 
e to which the deveased brother belonged, ¢ud all the rest 
are the brethren, must halt till the members of the different lodges 

_. have formed a perfect circle round the grave, when an opening 

‘is made to receive:them. ‘They then march up to the grave: 
and the clergyman, and the officers of the, acting lodge, take 
their station at the head of the grave; with the chorusters on 
each side, and the mourners at the foot ; the service is rehvdrsed, 
an Anthem sung, and that perticular part o€ the cerethony is 
concluded with the usual forms. Tit retutuing from ms fiheral 
the same order of procession is observed. 

* 
_ SONGS SUNG INTHE BEST LODGES. 
SONG I.’ | 

, [ Tune, Attic Fire ] 
Adar and blow th Y trumpet, Fame, 
Free-masonry aloud proclaim, 
To scala and worlds unknown: 
Tell them of mighty David's son, _ 
The wise and matchless Solomon, 
Priz’d far above his throne. 

The solemn temple's cloud-capt towers; 
Th’ aspiring domes are works of ours, . 
By us those piles were rais‘d : 
Then bid mankind with song advance, 
And through th’ etherial vast expanse, 
Let masonry be prais’d. | 
We help the. poor in time of need, 
The naked clothe, the hungry feed ; 
*Tis our foundation stone: 
_ ‘We build upon the noble plan:;: 
For friendship rivets man.to fan frome three times. 
.» . And-‘make us all.as one. - 

aes, Still louder, Fame, thy. trumpet blow ; 

- ‘Let all the distant regions know a | . 
. Free-masonry isthis: § = 8 

ae Aisi gby | wisdom gave it bith, 

. ¢ And eav'n has fix'd.it here on earth, 

= A pe of future bliss. 

SONG IT. 
. [Tune, Rule Britannia. ] 

| . Wuer earth's foundation first was laid, 

_"* By the Almighty avtist’s hand, 
~™Pwas then our perfect, our perfect laws were made, 
Establish’d by his strict command. —_ 
Cho. Hail mysterious! hail, glorious masonry ! 
‘That makes us ever great and free. 
As man throughout for shelter-sought, 
In vain from place.to place to roam, 
Until from Heaven, from Heaven he was taught, 
Te plan, to build, to fix his home. 
Mail, mysterious, &e. 

i 

- Henee illustrious rose our art, = oe gr | 
And now in besuteous piles appears;‘ 
Which shall to endless, to endless time impart, 
_ How worthy and how great we are, 3 
. Hail, mysterious, &c, 
Nor we less fam’d for every tie, — 
_ By which the human thought is bound; _ — 
Love, truth, and friendship, and friendship socially, 
Join all our hearts and hands around. 2! 
Hail, mysterious, &e. 
Our actions still by virtue blest, | 
And to our precepts ever true, — ” 
The world admiring, admiring shall request — 
Zo learn, and our bright paths pursue. ~~ 
| >: .. Hail, mysterious, &e. 
SONG Ill, | 
[ Tune, Goddess of Ease.] 
Genius of masonry, descend, ieee 
And with thee bring thy spetless trains) 
Constant our sacred rites attend, 7° i ° 
While we adore thy peaceful reign: °- °°. 
Bring with thee virtue, brightest maid, . ~~ 
Bring love, bring truth, and friendship here; 
While social mirth shall lend her aid, eee 
To smooth the wrinkled: brow:of care.) -— 
Come charity, with goodness crown’d, °° ' | 
Encireled in thy heaw’nly robe, 9 
Diffuse thy blessings all areund, 
__ ‘To every corner of the globe: 7 
See where she comes with power to bless, | 
..__ With open hand, and tender heart, | 
Which wounded is at man’s distress, 
And bleeds at ev'ry. human smart, * 
Envy may ev'ry ill devise, _ 
And falsehood be thy deadliest foe, 
- Though friendship still shall tow’ring rise,- - 
And sink thine adversaries low ; te ow 

=. 

Thy well built pile shall long endure, _ ae 
_ Through rolling years preserve its prime, 

’ Upon a rock it stands secure, Oe 
And braves the'rude assaults of time, 
Ye happy few, wha here extend : 

In perfect lines from Aa to west, — 
| F 

eo 

44. 

With forvent zeal the jedga. defend, 
- And lock ite seerets in eank breast : 
Sincg Fe ete met upan the square, , 

Bid love and friensebip josntly reign j ae 

Re pence and harmony your care, 
- Nor break the adawantine chain, 
‘Behold the pleaets hew they weve, - 
__ ¥es keap due order 9a they rup 
Then imitate the stars abeve, 
And shine resplendent as the sun ; 
That future masons whep. thy meet, 
- May all our glorious deeds rehearse, 
i as y, their fathers wera s0 great, 
hat they adorn’d the universe, 

SONG IV. 

[Tune To Lnfoncy, |: 

Let Masonry from pole to pale, 
Her Agwa expand, 

Far as the mighty waters roll, 
To wash remotest land : 

That virtue has not left mankind, 
Mer social maxime prove, | 

For stamped upon the mason’s mind, 
-Are ypity apd love. 

Ascending to her nalive ake 
Let masonry, AACFEOSA 5 
Ag lorious pillar rais'd on high, 

ntegrity its base, 

Peace sale to olive boughs, entwin'd, 

An emblematic dove, 

- AAs stamped ypen the masen ‘3 said 

Are unity and love, 

SONG vy 

‘Lut ‘icuaveats boast the power of wine; 
And reel from side to Tie: | 
Let lovers kneel at beauty’s shrine, 
. The ‘sport le pride ; 
Be our’s the more exalted part, 
To observe the mason’s art, 
. And prea its praises wide . 

45: 

‘To dens and thickets dark aad rude, 
For shelter beasts repair; °° 
With sticks and straws the fegther'd brood 
Suspend their nests in air : 
And man untaught, as wild as these, 
Binds up sad hyts with boughs of trees 
e 

And feeds on wretched fare, ne 

But science dawning in bis mind, 
The quarry he explores ; 
Industry and arts combin’d, 

Improv’d all nature's stores ; | 
Thus walls were built, and houses rear'd, 
No storms nor tenipest now are fear'd 
Within his well fram’d deors. — 

When stately palaces arise, 

_ When columns grace the hall, | 
When tew’rs and spires salute the skies, 

We owe to masons all; 

Nor buildings only do they give, 

‘But teach men how within to live, 

And yield to reason’s eall. 

All party quarrels they detest, a 
_ For virtue and the arta, : ‘s 

Lodg’d in each true free-mason’s breast, 

Unite and rule qur hearts: 

By these while masons square their minds, 
The state no hetter subjects finds, - - “2 

None act more upright parts. 

When Bueke aad Albiens, are forgot, 

Free-masons will remain ; . 

_Mushrooms each day spring up and rot, 

While oaks stretch o'er-the plain : 

Let others quarrel, rant, and rear, 
Their nojsy revelg when no mare, 

Still masqnry shal) neiga. 

Our leather aprons may compare 

With garters red or blue, - - 
Prinogs and kings our brothers are, 

_ May they our rulea purwe: — 
‘Shen drink syceass and health to all 
The craft around this earthly ball, — 
_, May brethren. still prove trus.. 

= AG. 
SONG VI. 
[ Tune, The Huntsman.} . 

” Assemut’p and tyl'd, let’ us social a | 
With the monarch that sits on the t throne, 

For he charges a glass, and round lets it pass, 
To celebrate ancient St John. 

Though babblers ntay prattle in showing their spleey, 
Their spite we compare to the drone, 

, For in love and sweet harmony still we'll agree, 

To celebrate ancient St John. . 

"The world’s in pain our secrets to gain, 3 
In ignorance let them think on, | 

For in love and sweet harmony still we Ve agree, 
To celebrate ancient St John... 

With toast after toast let us drink to the King, 

_ Remembrring the great Solomon, 

For his actions were.rare, by the compass and square, 
Thus celebrate ancient St John. 

Then join hand in hand, in a body firm stand, | 
Our cares, and our troubles begone, | 

Let us love, laugh, and sing; loye the ladies and King, 
Thus celebrate ancient St John. 

SONGYI.L © - 

Benotp in a lodge we dear brethren are met, 
' And in proper order together are set; 7 
Our secrets to none hut ourselves shall be knowa, < 
Our actions to none but free-masons he shown. 7 

_ Derry down, down, down, derry inion. 
Let brotherly love be among us reviv'd ; 
Let us stand by our laws that are wisely contriv'd ; 
And then all the glorious creation shall see, 
That none are so poving 80 nine as we. a 
Derry dawn, §¢. 
The temple, and many a magnificent pile, 
Ev'n buildings now standing within our own ilse, _ - 
With wisdom contriv’d, with beauty refin'd, = -__ 
With strength to mapper and the buildin gtobind. — | 

| Derry down, Se. 

These noble grand structures will strays proclaim, 

What honour i is due to a free-mason’s name, 
= 7 , 

47. : 7 : v: 

Ev'n ages to come, when our work they do see, 
Will strive with each other like us to be free. 
Derry down, he 

What though some » of late, by their spleen, plainly show, 
They fain would deride what they gladly would know, 
Let ev'ry true brother these vermin despise, ae 
And the ancient grand secret keep back from their eyes. 

Derry downs Se. 

Then, brethren, let’s all put our hand t to our hear 4 Brey, 8 
And resolve from true masonry ne'er. to depart: . Gs 
And when the last trumpet on earth shall descend 5, 
Gur lodge will be clos’d and our secrets shallend. == 

| ae iad ae 

SONG VII. 
[ Tune, The Miller of Mansfield. 1 

How happy a mason ! whose. bosom still flows 
With friendship, and ever most cheerfully goes ; 
Th’ effects of the mysteries lodg’d in his breast, 
Mysteries rever’d and by princes possess’d. 
Our friend, and our.bottle, we best can enjoy, 
No rancour, no envy our quiet can annoy, 
Our plumb-line and compass, our square and our : tools, 
‘Direct all our actions in virtue’s fair rules. 
‘To Mars, and to Venus, we're equally true, | 
Our hearts can enliven, our arms can subdue. 
Let the enemy tell, and the ladies declare, 
No’class, or profession, with masons compare. 
To give a fond lustre, we ne'er need a crest, 
Since honour and virtue remain in our breast. 
Weill charm the rude world when we clap, Jaugh, and sing, 
if so happy 2 mason, say, who'd be a King? 

. SONG IX. 

Ox, on, my dear brethren, pursue the great lecture, - 
‘And refine on the rules of old architecture: 

High honour to masons the craft daily brings, 

To those brothers of princes, and fellows tS kings. 
We drove the rude Vandals and Goths off the stage, 
And reviv'd the old arts of Augustus’ fam'’d age; 
Vespasian destroy’d the vast temple in vain, 

Since so many now rise under this noble reign. 

The noble five orders, compos d with such art, 

Shall amaze the swift, eye, aud ens $984 the mane heart ; 

% 

* F a) 
Bs é 

B® 
Proportion, sweet harmony, #racing the whole, 
Gives our work, like thé glotiodé creation, a soul. 
Then, master ahd brethren, hie your great name, 
This lodge, so majestic, shall purchase your fame: 
Rever'd it shall statrd till all nature expire, : 
And its glories ne’er fade till the world is otf fire.. 
See, see, behiold here what rewards all our toil, — 
Oar genius inspires, and bids labour smile ; 
To our noble grand master fet « bumper be ctown’d, ‘ ~ - 
"To all masons 4 battiper,—so let it g6 rownd. | a 
Again, my lot’d brethren, dyain let it pass, a. : 
Our ancient firm ution cement with a glass: 
And all the contention ‘mong masons shalt be, - 
Who better can work, or who better agree. ~ 

gONG X. 

Once I was blind and could not see, . 
' All was dark me around, = 7 
But providence providedme, . 3, - 
And soon a friend I found; ~ 
Through hidden paths my friehd me led, | 
Such paths as babblersne’er shall tread, _ | | 
oo, Wath a fa, la, la, la, la, la, 
He took all stumbling blocks away, | 
That I might walk secure, __ 
And brought me long ere break of day, © 
To Sol’s bright temple deor, | 
Where we both admittance found | | 
By help of magic spell and sound.—With a fa, $c. 
The carbet of my.rash attentpt, — 
Did then my breast alarm, 2 4 ; | 
_ And hinted’ I was not exempt, | 
- Nor free from double harm ; s 4 | 
Which ‘put & stop to rising pride, a | 
_ And made me trust more to tity guide-=IWith @ fa, &e. 
With sober pace I then was led, 2 
, . Aid brought to Sol’s bright throne ; | a 
_ Wheté I was obliged to stop, a. n 
"Till I tuyself made known. SO | 
With hideous tioise F round was brought, — 
For to obtain that which I sought. == With d fit, He 
_ In humble gee atid due form, _ 

I listened with good will; 

Instead of mighty noise and storm, 
All then was calm and still. 

Such charinihg sountis' F then did hear, _ - 
As quite expell’d all doubt and fear. With a fa, Gc. 

The mighty monarch from his throne 
Bade darkness then withdraw, 
No sooner said than it was done, 
And great things then I saw. | 
But what they were I'll not now tell, 
But such they were as here shall dwell. With a fa, ge. 

Then round and round me he did tie, 
A noble ancient-charm : | ar 
_ AI future: darkness to defy, 7 dios 
- And: ward off cowan’s harm, 
So I returned from whence I came, 
Not what. I: was, but whet-I am.—- IV “ith-a Ja: Ge. 

THE MASON’S ANTHEM. 

Grrantr’'us; kind Heav'n, what-we: request, 
In masonry let-us be blest ;- Z 
Direct us‘to that happy pliee,, | : 2 f. 
Where friendship smiles in'ev’ry face: ae 
Where freedom and sweet innocente 
Enlargé' the mind, arid cheer the sense. | 

Where scepter'd reason’ from’ her throne 

Surveys’ the lodge, and makes us one: 

- And’ harmony’s delightful sway 

For ever sheds’ ambrosial: day ; : 
Where we blest’ Eden’s pleasure taste, 
Wliilst balmy j joys are our repast. 

No prying eye can view us here, 
No ‘tool or Knave disturb our cheer: 
Our well form’d laws set mankind free, 
And give relief to misery : 
‘Lhe poor oppress’d with woe and grief, 
Gain: from. our bounteous hands relief. 

Our lodge, the social virtues ‘vrace, 
And wisdem’s rules we fondly trace. ; 
All nature open to our view, =| 
Points out the path. we should pursue: . 
.Let.us’subsist in lasting g peace, 
_And-niay. our happiness i increase. 

a : 
é 

 €- 

- , 
' 50 | . 
. 
- ¢ 

TOASTS AND SENTIMENTS — 
SOCIETY OF FREE MASONS. 

- anamenemaeratarsemaaesegy 

To the King and the Craft.—To all the Kings, Princes, and 
Potentates, who ever propagated the Royal Art—To all the 
Fraternity round the globe.—To all the noble Lords, and Right 

Worsiy ul Brothers, that have been Grand Masters —The - 

Grand 
- The Grand Lodge of Ireland.—To all well disposed masons.— 
‘l'o the perpetual honour of free-masons.—To the Masters and 
Wardens of all regular Lodges.—To all true and faithfal bro- 
thers.—To all free bérn sons of the ancient and honourable 
Craft.+-To the memory of him who first planted the Vine.— 
To masonsand to mason’s bairns, and Women with both wit 
and charms, that love to lie in-masons’ arms.—'To all the female 

friends of free-masons.—'T'o him that.first the world began.— . 

‘To the memory of the Tyrian Artist—To the ancient sons of 
peace.—To all upright and pure masons.—Prosperity to the 
ancient and honourable Craft.—TTo the secret and silent.—'T'o 
all masons who walk in the line-—To him that did the temple 
_ rear.—To every true and faithful heart, that still preserves the 
secret art.—To all that live within compass and square.—To 
all social free-masons.—To all true masons and upright, Whe 
' saw the east where rose the light.—To the increase of” perpetual 
friendship and peace among the ancient Craft.—To each charm- 
iny fair and faithful she, Who loves the Craft of masonry.—— 
‘Lo all ancient free-masons, wherever oppressed or dispersed.— 
"Lo each faithful brother both ancient and young, Who governs 
his passions and bridles his tongue.-—To all those who steer their 
course by the three great L——s of masonry.—May every ma- 
son be enabled to act so as to have an approving monitor.——May 
the Lodges in this place be distinguished fori 
harmony.—May al! free-masons, be enabled to act in{a strict 

odge of Scotland.—The Grand- Lodge of England.— . 

love, peace, and 

F teal 

% 

conformity to the rules ‘of their order.—May our actions 4s . 

masons be properly squared.—A proper application of the 24 
inch gauge,.so as -that we miay measure out, and husband one 

x 

~ 

51 

time to. the best purposes.—To him who uses the mallet in — 
knocking off those superfluous passions that in any manner de- 
grade the man or the mason.—May the lives of all -free-ma- 
sons be spent in acts of true piety, highly seasoned with tran- 
quillity.—May the mason’s conduct be so uniform as he may not 
be ashamed to take a retrospective view of it—The absent 
Brethren of this Lodge.—Every worthy Brother who was at 
first duly prepared, and whose heart still retains an awful regard 
to the three great ja of masonry.—Every brother who main- 
tains a constancy inleve, and sincerity in friendship.—May the 
brethren ef our glorious craft be-ever distinguished in the world 
by their regular fives, more than by their gloves and aprons.— 
May the square, plumb-line, and level, regulate the conduct of 
every brother.—May virtue ever direct our actions with respect 
to ourselves, justice to those with whom we deal, mercy, love, 
and charity, to all mankind.—May every worthy Brother who 
is willing to work and labour-through the day, as his condition 
requires, be happy at night with his friend, his Jove, and a cheer- 
ful glass.—Every Brother who keeps the key of knowledge from 
all intruders, but will cheerfully open it to a worthy brother.— 
May masonry flourish until nature expire,eAnd its glories ne'er 
fade till the world is on fire.—-May every society instituted for the 
promotion of virtue flourish—May concord, peace, and har- 
mony, subsist in all regular Lodges, and always distinguish the 
fraternity of free-masons.—~-Prosperity to masons and ma- 
fonry.~—May every Brother learn to live within the compasses, 
and watch upon the square.—~-May the prospect of riches never 
have that effect upon a mason, as to induce him to that which 
is repugnant to virtue.—May our conversation be such, as that 
youth may therein find instruction, womer modesty, the aged 
respect, and all men civility.——-May peace, harmony, and concord 
stbsist among free-masons, and may every idle dispute and 
frivolous distinction, be buried in oblivion.—The mason. that 
knows the true value and use of his tools.—All the friends of the 
craft.—May every brother who is lawfully and regularly entered 
into our soeiety, which is both ancient and honourable, be as duly 
instructed in the true morals thereof—May masonry prove as 

"universal; as # is honourable and useful—The memory of the 

. 

fess ervonae three —May unity, friendship, and brotherly love, 
ever distinguish ‘the brethren of the ancient craft.—All regular 
Lodges.—May the morning have no oecasion to censure the 
night spent by free-masons.—May every Brother have a heart 
to feel, and a hand to give.—May no free-masons wish for more 
liberty than constitutes happiness, nor more freedom than tends 

_ to the- public good.—May we never condemn that in a Brother, 
- a@. | 

a 

which we would pardon .in-oursclyes—-May ‘the cares - which 
haunt the heart of the covetous, be unknown to a free-mason. 
——May no free-mason desire plenty, but with the benevolent 
view torelive the indigent—May the deformity of vice in other 
men, teach a mason to abhor his own—May we bemore,ready 
_ to correct our own faults, than to pyblish the errors of the bre- 
thren.—May every free-mason participate in the happiness of 
2 brother.—May we never rashly believe the report we hear, 
‘which is predjudicial to a brother——May discord, party-rage, 
and insolence, be for ever reoted out from among niasons.— 
May all free-masons go hand in hand jin the road of virtue. 
“May all free-masons ever taste and relish the sweets of freer 
-dom.—May the.bearts of free-mason’s agree, although their 
heads should difler.—May the mason’s condyct be so uniform 
as to convince the natural world that they dwell in light.+r 
"May honour and honesty distinguish the brethren.—'I'he hum- 
ble beggar.—Relief to all indigent brethren.—May all free- 
masons liye in love, and die in peace.-To masonry, friendship, 
and love.—The heart which conceals, and the tongue that never 
reveals.—May no free-mason taste the bitter apples of afflic- 
tion.—To the natioy’s wealth and glory.—To the innocent and - 
faithful craft.—To a happy meeting.— May the frowns of resent. 
ment never be known among us.—May the gentle spirit of love 
animate the heart of every mason.——May hypocrisy, faction, and 
strife, be for ever rooted from every Lodge.—May every free- 
mason be distinguished by the internal ornament of the upright 
heart.—May the Brethren in this place be united to one another 
by the bond of love.—May every free-mason have as much 
genuine philosophy as that he may neither be too much exalted 
witu the smiles of prosperity, nor too mueh dejected with the _ 
frowns of adversity = May free-masons ever taste and relish 
the sweets of domestic contentment.—May the foundation of _ 
every regular Lodge be solid, its building sure, and its members 
yumerous and happy.— May every free-mason have health, peace, 
and plenty.— May every free-mason find constancy in loye, and. 
sincerity in friendship.—May the free-mason’s conscience be 
sound, though his fortune be rotten.—May temptation never 
" gonquer a free-mason’s virtue.—Honour and influence to every 

+ 

pubhe spirited brother. 

Order. 

Right Hon. James Earl of Rosslyn, Acting Grand Master. 

Right Hon: Lord ase Duncan, Grand Master Elect. : 
yubstitute Grand Master. _ 7 

Sir James Gardiner Baird, Bart. Senior Grand Warden. 

Richard Wharton Duff, Esq. Junior Grand Warden. 

Bart. Gr. T'reas,—Rev. Dr. John Lee, Gr. Chap. 

William Inglis, Esq. .§ 

Sir John Hay, 

OFFICERS © 

, cf THE 
GRAND LODGE OF SCOTLAND, 
FOR THE YEAR 1812. 

. His Royal Highness Georcr Prince of Waxes, Prince Regent - 
of Great Britain, Grand Master of Scotland, and Patron of the 

4 
3 
{ 

W. Guthrie & A. Lawrie, Gr. Sees.---3J. Bertram, Gr. Clerk. 
A. Camanghen, Jeweller.---A. Lawrie, Bookseller and Stationer. 

List of fodges holding of the Grand Lodge of Scoiland. 

EDINBURGH, Mother Kilwinning 
Mary’s Chapel - 

Canongate Kilwinning 

Glasgow Kilwinning 

Canongate and Leith 

Old Kilwinning, Inverness 

couteeyaien Masons,. Edinburgh 
Dumblayne 

Dalkeith 

Maybole 

Greenock Kilwinning 
Torphichen do. Bathgate 
Dunkeld 

Montrose Kilwinning 
Falkirk 
Linlithgow 

Dumbarton Kilwinning 
Cupar of Fife St John 
Lesmahagoe 

Old Lodge of Lanark. 
Kilmarnock 

Dunse 

Old Lodge of Peebles 

St Andrews 
Dunfermline 

Glasgow St Mungo 
Kirkintilloch = 
Kilsyth, 

St Andrew's Inverness 
Stirling 

Bervie 

Coltness . : 

4 

Falkland St John 

Selkirk ! 

St David's Edinburgh 

St John’s Operative Forres 
Aberdeen 

Keith Lodg e Peterhead 

St. Cuthbers’s Kircudbright 
Kirkwall 

St Thomas's Arbroath 
Thurso St J: ohn’ 

Crieff — 

Fort William 

St Luke 

Kilmolymoack — 

{ Auchterarder 

Dysart ° 

Operative Lodge of Dandee 
Edinburgh St Andrews 

Ancient Lodge of Scotland 
Cumberland —— Peebles 
Inverary 
Cumberland Kilwi 
Duke of Norfolk’s Loc 
Banff 

Dumfries 

Maddicton — 

Welch Fuzillers 

Inverness: 

Thistle Edinburgh 

. Campbelt own 

St Machar’s 

Dyke 

Kelso 

Glasgow Montrose 

‘a 

Inverkeithing “st Mark's Glasgew 

Huntly . Union and Crown Glasgow 7 : 
White's Lodge, sod Regiment Jedburgh Lodge 
Thistle Lodge Dumfries _ Cupar of Angus 

Moriah Lodge, 22d Regiment 
Lindores Newburgh 
Eskdale Kilwinning Langholm 

St Michael’s Dumfries 
Argyle’s Lodge Glasgow 
Royal Arch Glasgow | 

Stonehaven Fortrose Lodge Stornaway 
St Ninian’s Brechin St Marnock’s Lodge Kilmarnock ~ 
Forbes’ Lodge at Roscharty Royal Welsh Fuzileers 
St Andrews Boston Carron Lodge 
Blandford Lodge Virginia Nithsdale St Paul’s 
Alloa St Andrew’s Aberdeen 
St Abb’s Hawick 
Moncur St John’s Fisherrow 
Kirkcaldy Grant’s East Florida 
Thistle ind Rose Glasgow St David's Glasgow ; 
St Andrew's Perth } St Mungo Royal Arch Glasgow 
Lastle of Dunbar | Cambuslang Royal Arch 
_Pythagoric Lodge Borrowstounness United Lodge 4th Regiment 
‘St Regulus Cupar of Fife : New Edinburgh Kilwinning 
Prince of Wales Lodge from Edinr, Rutherglen Royal Arch 
Stirling Royal Arch | Patrick St Mary 
Lanark Kilwinning | St Andrew’s St Christopher's 
* St Columba’s Lodge Johnshaven St Joha 
St David's Dundee Lesmahagaoe ~ 

St Peter’s Montrose 
St Kilda at Portree. 

Hooker St John, 17th foot, ° 
Union Kilwinning South Caroling 

Annan St Andrew's St Patrick’s Royal Arch, asd Regt. 
Fort George a Auchtermuchty St Cyrus : 
. Kitg George IIL. 56th Regiment Perth Royal Arch 

St Andrew’s Royal Arch, Seots Greys 
Hartfel] Ladge Moffat 

De la Parfaite Union de Namur 
Oswald of Dunnikier’s Lodge 
St James’s Brechin 

Ayr Kilwinnin 

Hamilton Kiwinning . 

St James's New Town of Ayr 
St Andrew's Kilmarnock 
Thistle Lodge Stewarton 
Unity Lodge, 17th foot 
Shewelston St John Glasgow 
Paisley St Merrion’s . © 
Girvan St Andrew's 

Scots Lodge of St Andrew Jamaica 
Musselburgh Kilwinning | 
St Duthus’ at Tain. 
St Andrew's at Crail, 
Duke of York’s Lodge Ceres. 
St George Sist Regiment — 
Kirknewton and Ratho 
Irvine Navigation Lodge 
Thistle Lodge Glasgow 
New Monkland Montrose 

" Morton’s Lodge Lerwick 
Forfar Kilwinning 
Elgin’s Lodge Leven 
Fort George Arderseer Point 

oa 

St Nichdlas Aberdeen Galston St Paul’s Kilmarnock 
St John’s Norfolk Virginia St Luke’s Lauder 
St Leonard’s Kinghorn Tarbolton St David's 

St Ayle’s Anstruther 

Operative Lodge Banff 

Union, General Majoribanks’ Regt. 
St Bernard’s Kilwinnin 

Royal Arch Edinburgh 

St James’s Edinburgh 

Wigton Kilwinning 

Sc James’s Paisley 
‘Robertson’s Lodge Cromarty 
St John’s Philadelphia 
St James’s Tarbolton =. 
Dumfries St Andrew's 
St Laurence Laurencekirk 
St John’s Blairgowrie Cupar of Angus 

Glammis Operative Lodge Ayr 
St Magdalene Lochmaben St Andrew’s Cree Bridge 
St Vigean’s Arbroath _ Operative Lodge Dumfries 

~St-Andréw’s Pittenweém 
St John’s Lodge Campbeltown 
Strathaven Kilwinning 
Queen’s, or 7th Dragoons 
_ St Luke’s Gilcomston Aberdeen 
St Laurence Forres; —-, 
Paisley Royal Arch 
St Stephen’s Edinburgh 
Renfrew Prince of Wales 
Argyle by Glasgow 
h 

* i 
a g 
Trimty Lodge Elgin 

ar Kilwinning 
Irvine St Andrew’s 

% 

St Magnus Lodge Gottenburgh ~ 

' Operative Ledge Aberdeen 

Edinburgh Defensive Band Operative 

Lodge 
Royal Arch Pollockshaws 
Union Lodge Dumfries 
St Anthony’s Inverury 
Lodge of Macduff — 

Imperial Scots Lodge Petersbo rgh- 

St Barchan’s at Kilbarchan 
St John’s Beith | 
Thistle Operative Lodge Biviilee's 

Royal Arch Union, 3d Dragoons* 

Roman Eagle Edinburgh 
Musselburgh Kilsyth 

St Stephen’s Gatehouse of Fleet: 
St John’s New Abbey Duntfries 
Union Lodge Carlisle 

Union St Christopher’s 

Caledonian Lodge Edinburgh _ 3 

Old Aberdeen Ledge 
Royal Arch Ayr 

Airdrie St John ° F 
higgar Free Operatives 

St James’s Aberdeen 
Thistle and Rose Stevenson 

e peens Lodge St Joha Antigua 

Jia Douce Harmonie 
4.’Ardente Amitie 
Leven St John Dumbarton 
St James’s Downe 
' St Bride’s Kirkcaldy 
Trafalgar Leith ~ 

55 

=e 

S2 

- St John’s cored eet 
St G } 
ig = ss 

Largs St Joha 
Dunning 

Greenock St Johit t 

Denny and Loanhead 
Pheenician Lodge Leith 
St Paul’s Kirkwall 

Old Monkland St James’s. 

Glasgow St Patrick’s 

St Mungo’s Mauchline 

Mount Oliver’s St Christopher's 
Commercial Lodge Oban 

St Andrew’s Jedburgh 

St Brook’s Rothsay 

Hopetoun’s Lodge Bathgate 

‘Royal Arch Aberdeen 

Union Lodge Newton- Douglas 

Montrose Kilwinning Incorporated 

Lennox Kilwinning at Campsie 
St Thomas’s Whithorn 
Operative Lodge Falkirk: 

St James's Tative Keith 
- St John’s ‘Carh uke ~ 

St Fergus’ Lodge Wiel 2 

St Ruth’s 3 : 
St John’s vi a 5 Oe : ae ¢ 
Rothes Lodge Sig 
Argyleshire Military Part 

Operative Clacnacydden 

Campsie 
St Stephen's Portsoy 
Solomon's Lodge Frasereburgh } 
Royal Arch Maybole 
St Andrew’s Cumbernauld 
St George Bermuda 
Scotia Lodge. Barbadces 
St Thomas’s Muirkirk 
St Clement’s Riccarton 
Operative Lodge Airdrie 

Ayr and Renfrew Milica: y Sz Pan} ni | 

Garthland St Winnoch. 
Strauraer Kitwinring © 

bP» 

08 , 
Ynion Royal Arch, 4th. agen ce 
— Caledonian St John Royal Arch 

Description of the Regalia and Emblematicat Figures 

used in Masonry, represented i in the Frontispiece. 

1. The two pillars called Jaeuin and Boaz, the first signifying Strength, the se~ 
cond to establish in the Lerd. 

2, Holy Bible opened, as.an emblem that it should be the rule of our faith. 

3. Compass and square, to square our actions; and keep'them. within boui ds, 
the master’s emblem or jewel, which is suspended with a ribbon round the neck, 
ann always: worn when the ledge is opened, and on public days of meeting, 

&e. : 

4. Level, the senior wardén’s-emblem or jewel. 

5. "Twenty-four inch gauge to’ measure Masons’ work. 

6. Key, the Treasurer’s emblem.. 

7. Sword, presented to the naked left bteast of the apprentice, oo 

8. Cable, or rope;. put:round theneck of évery. new made. naaon at. the time of . 
making. 

9. Trowel, an instrument of great use among masons. . 

10. Gavel, or setting: niaul, used in building Solomon’s aasle the- fret: sea 
work of masonry. 

11. Plumb-level, compass and plumb-rule, the junior warden ‘siemblem. 

12. Small hammer, to knoek off superfluous pieces; © 

13. Cross- pens, the secretary’s emblem. 

14, A,coflin, wih a figure of the maimed body of Hiram , (the first grand macs 

ter) painted on : t . le wis Ineedarel by three fellowcralts, tor felusing to reveal 

the secret. 
15. Hand plums.et, for axing perpend 
16. The sun sising in the east, emb] 
east, setting fhe mento work, - r 

lars. 
al of the master mason, standing in the 

17. ‘The seven stars, an astronomical emblem, frequently sa on the medals . 

worn by masons. 

@ 18. The moon that rules the night. . 

19, Candlesticks, placed in a tringular form. 
20. Columns, id by the senior and junior siiawi in the lodge. 
21, Two black-rods, carried: by the senior and junior deacons, 
22. The three steps "and, pavement. 
23. Entrance or porch to Selemon’s temple. : 
24, ‘Terrestrial and celestial globes, representing the works of creation. 
25. A machine-uged by. masons to form a triangle. 
26. Large rule for meaguring:the work. 
27. ‘The three step ladder used in masonry. - | 
, 28. Hiram’s teats a 
29.."Uhe white apron and. gloves,emblems of innocence. — . ih 
30, The eye of: Providence, the great saperintendant of the universe; and ma- 
sonry represented as umder its immediate influence. 
The frontispeice is a Medallion, in imitation of those medals, or plates, that are 
commen among the brotherhood, These medals are of silver, and some have them 

highly finished and ornamented, so as to be worth ten or twenty guineas, They are’ 

suspended round the neck with ‘ribbons of various colours, and worn on their pubs 
lic days of meeting, at funeral processions, &c. in honour of the craft. On the 
reverse of these medals it is usual to put the owner’s. coat of arms, or cypher, or 
any other device the owner fancies, and some even add to the emblems other fancy 
things that bear some*analogy to masonry. 

The candlesticks, &c. in many lodges are curiously wrought ; the chair in which 
the grand master sits, as well as those of the masters of inferior lodges, are richly 
carved with emblematica!l figures: their aprons are bound with ribbons of various 
colouts ; and, in short every thing belonging to them is finished in the most elegant 
fants, Re 

. 

- at © FF 

=
