Zoroaster, the Prophet of Ancient Iran (A.V. Williams Jackson, 1899)
==========================================================
Jackson's 1899 Columbia lectures on Zoroaster — the American founding of Iranian studies and the classic English life of the prophet. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

!00

=o


HO


Dini-Saal
amshedi  Navroze)
Mubarak


CO  Roz    Hormazd»

Mah   Fravardin,
A.  Y.    1332


The  Sun  returned  to  the  first  degree
of  Aries  in  the  month  of  Fravardin.
Shah  Jamshed  performed  Jashan  cere-
mony on  that  day  and  called  it  Navroze.
Whosoever  performs  Jashan  on  this
day  and  joyfully  takes  part  in  the
celebration  thereof,  will  pass  his  life  in
happiness  till  the  next  day  of  Navroze,
Wise  men  have  confirmed  this  experience.

— Omar  Khayyam  (1025-1123  A.D.)
in  his  Navroze  Nameh.


Sun  in  Aries
March  21st,
A.  D.   1963


i>       A  at —  ^i\       ^^


J[^— ^rv-wAr-Ttv^


Presented  to  the

LIBRARIES  of  the

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO


Willard  G.  Oxtoby


As  the  faithful  followers  of  the  only  Prophet  in  all
history  who  magnanimously  granted  us  complete  freedom
of  thought  in  religious  matters  ("Narem  narem  khvakhyai
tanuye"),  it  behoves  us,  one  and  all,  to  carefully  consider
all  the  pros  and  cons  of  the  burning  questions  of  the  day.
One  such  question  relates  to  our  correct  year.

The  Iranians  of  yore  believed  that  the  religious  cere-
monies must  be  performed  according  to  the  fixed  Dini  Saal
and,  therefore,  they  took  great  pains  to  see  that  the  Holy
Gathas  and  the  Muktad  ceremonies  for  the  departed  fell
near  the  Vernal  Equinox,  at  the  beginning  of  Spring.  And
to  keep  the  year  thus  fixed  with  reference  to  seasons,  they
corrected  the  year  by  the  scheme  of  Kabiseh  (intercala-
tion). If  it  were  not  so,  what  was  the  sense  or  merit  in
their  simultaneously  following  two  different  calendars?
Dastur  Zatsparm  of  Iran  acaually  records  that  in  his  time,
the  date  of  the  passing  away  of  Lrord  Zarathushtra  fell  on
Roz  Khurshid,  Mah  Dae  (Civil)  and  Mah  Ardibehesht
(Vahizaki,  or  IDini).

This  booklet  is  an  humble  attempt  to  place  before  you
succinctly  the  thinking  of  the  Pehlavi  writers  on  this  vital
question.

1  take  this  opportunity  of  offering  my  heartfelt  thanks
to  Major  S.  R.  Bamji  for  his  unstinted  help  and  encourage-
ment to  me.


Behram  D.  Fithavala


17,  Sukhia  Lane,

Bombay -1.

March  9,  1963.  C  V


'*Ez  Ahunavar  Minuy  Sal  fraz  but",

i.e.,  the  spiritual  year  arose  from  the  Ahunavar
(at  the  time  of  creation) — Zancl-Akasih(i)

TRUE  ZOROASTRIAN  YEAR
An  invitation  to  think

by  Behram  D.  Pithavala

Since  some  decades  past  a  controversy  has
been  raging  in  our  community  on  the  question
of  our  proper  New  Year  day.  It  is  not  a
matter  of  mere  annual  celebrations  and  festi-
vities. The  present  wrong  calendars  have
upset  all  our  important  religious  feasts  and  it
is  our  boundeu  duty  to  set  things  right  once
for  all  in  the  light  of  the  extant  books  on  our
religious  customs  and  usages.

We  humbly  give  below  some  cogent  reasons
to  prove  that,  as  in  ancient  times,  our  year
should  be  made  to  start  from  the  day  of  the
solar  ingress  into  Aries,  which  happens  on  the
2ist  of  March  every  year.  We  do  not  want
to  impose  upon  you.  We  only  want  you  to
consider  this  matter  in  a  spirit  of  dispassionate
inquiry,  leaving  aside  all  prejudices  and  pre-
conceptions, and  come  to  your  own  conclusion.

The  quotation  given -at  the  top  of  this  dis-
cussion is  pregnant  with  meaning.  It  shows
that  in  Iran  a  religious  year  (Minoi  Saal),  as
distinct  form  a  civil  year,  was  in  vogue;  and
further,  that  it  had  its  inception  at  the  very
dawn   of   creation   itself.     Its   importance   can


be  gauged  from  the  fact  that  a  whole  chapter
(Xo  XX\')  is  devoted  to  this  subject  under  the
heading:  "ReUgious  Year"  (Saal-i-dini).  The
expression  "Dini  Saal"  is  not  coined  by  us.

In  fixing  any  calendar  three  factors  have  to
be  considered,  viz.,  (i)  the  length  of  the  year,
and   (ii)   its  starting  and   (iii)   ending       points.

Fortunately,  Zand-Akasih  (also  known  as
Irani  or  Greater  Bundahishn)  records  in  un-
mistakable terms  the  fact  that  the  religious
year  discussed  in  Chapter  XXV  thereof,  was
a  solar  tropical  year  of  three  hundred  and
sixty-five  days,  and  five  hours,  and  a  fraction
(Se  sad  u  sast  u  panj  ruz,  u  panj  daman
u  khurda)  which  is  the  period  taken  by  the
Sun  to  return  to  the  first  degree  of  Aries  from
which  it  had  started  in  the  beginning  (2),  i.e.,
'  at  the  time  of  creation,  as  stated  hereafter.

We  shall  now  consider  when  the  Dini  Saal
should  end.  Fravardin  Yasht  declares  that
"the  good,  strong,  beneficent  Fravashis  of  the
faithful  come  and  go  through  the  borough  at
the  time  of  the  Hamaspathamaedha,  they  go
along  there  for  ten  nights  etc."  (3).  Dinkard
is  more  precise  on  this  point.  It  says:  "The
coming  of  the  pious  fravahars  into  this  world
is  in  those  ten  days  which  occur  at  the  end  of
winter,  at  the  end  of  the  year,  as  in  them  are
those  five  Gathic  days.  "(4)  As  to  the  duration
J  of  Winter,  we  are  further  informed  by  the
learned  author  of  Dinkard  that  "the  fourth
and  last   (season)   "Jamestan"    (\Vinter)   starts


when  the  Sun  transits  the  first  degree  of
Capricorn"  (24th  December)  and  ends  when  the
Sun  leaves  the  sign  of  Pisces  (20th  March).  (5)
Further,  the  very  name  of  this  last  Gahambar
(Hamaspathamaedem  i.  e.  Samas-Patha-Madh-
yam)  indicates  that  it  must  fall  at  a  time  when
the  Sun  arrives  at  "the  meeting  of  the  two
paths,"  viz.,  the  Eclij^tic  and  the  Celestial
Equator,  in  short,  at  the  end  of  Winter  just
before  the  Spring  Equinox,  which  occurs  on  the
2ist  of  March.  This  conclusively  proves  that  the
last  Gahambar  must  be  observed  in  March.
But  the  matter  is  clinched  by  the  statement
in  Zand-Akasih  that  during  the  season  of
Hamaspathmaedya,  that  is,  in  the  pentad  at  the
end  of  the  last  month  of  Spendarmad,  day  and
night  again  become  equal.. (6)  This  happens
throughout  the  world  on  or  about  March  18
every  year,  as  can  be  seen  by  a  reference  to
Raphael's  Ephemerides  for  any  year.  For
facility  of  reference  please  see  the  following
table  culled  from  the  above  publication  : —

Length  of  day  on  March  18th  the  World  over


N.  Lat.
60

55
50

Sunrise
6. II
6. II
6.10

Sunset
6.07
6.08
6.08

Length  of  day
hrs.     11.56

>.       11-57
„       11.58

40
30

6.09
6.08

6.09
6.10

12.00
12.02

20
10

6.07
6.06

6.10
6. II

12.03
12.05

0

6.05

6.12

12.07

It  will  be  interesting  to  note  that  at  Lat.  40
North,  which  passes  through  modem  Iran,
the  day  and  night  are  each  12  hours  long,  and
hence  equal,  at  the  time  of  the  five  days  of
Gathas  only  as  per  the  scheme  of  the  Religious
Year.

Now  that  we  know  definitely  the  fixed,
unchanging  length  of  the  Dini  Saal,  (viz.,  365
days  and  about  six  hours)  and  the  point  of
time  when  the  last  Gahambar  in  such  a  year
should  come  off,  (viz.,  near  the  Spring  Equinox,
when  the  day  and  night  are  of  equal  length,
ie..  about  the  i8th  of  March),  there  is  no
scope  at  all  for  any  doubt  as  to  when  it  should
have  its  beginning.  On  the  contrary,  there  are
some  other  factors  which  clearly  confirm  this
finding  and  we  shall  now  consider  the  same
briefly.

According  to  Pehlavi  writers  the  most  im-
portant characteristic  of  the  ReUgious  year
is  that  the  months  thereof  are  fixed  with
reference  to  the  solar  passage  through  the  twelve
signs  of  the  Zodiac.  Thus,  the  year  com-
mences on  the  day  of  solar  entry  into  the  first
sign  Aries  and  the  fourth  month  Teer  coincides
with  the  solar  transit  through  Cancer,  the  fourth
sign  (7).  A  glance  at  the  following  figure  will
show  the  months  of  the  religious  year  in  re-
lation to  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  and  the  four


seasons  of  the  year,  as  visualised  by  the  authors
of   Bundahishn    and   Dinkard  : —


'      Ml


c
4^.


Thus,  according  to  Bundahishn,  Winter
commenced  in  Iran  on  Roz  Adar,  Mah  Dae
(December  24th)  (8)  and  on  that  day  people
"kindled  the  fire  ever>^vhere  and  made  a  sign
that  Winter  had  come.  "(9)


Again,  the  longest  day  of  the  year  was  Roz
Khurshid,  ]\Iah  Teer  (June  2gth)  and  the  shortest
one  was  Roz  Behram,  j\Iah  Dae  (Januar^^  4th) .
Not  only  that,  but  it  is  stated  that  the  longest
day,  which  should  coincide  with  the  beginning
of  Maidyoshem  Gahambar,  measured  16  hours
in  length,  while  the  shortest  day  which  fell
during  Maidyarem  Gahambar  measured  8  hours
(10).  All  this  can  happen  only  if  we  start
the  year  on  the  day  of  the  Spring  Equinox
(March  21st);  but  not  otherwise.  By  the
way,  the  last  mentioned  phenomenon  could
occur  only  in  countries  lying  in  about  58  North
Ivatitude,  i.e.,  in  North  Asia  or  Europe  where
our  forefathers  must  have  lived  in  bygone  days.

Again,  in  Datestan-i-Dinik,  a  question  is
asked  as  to  what  the  "Spiritual  food"  of  the
departed  souls  is  like  in  terms  of  earth-life,  and
the  answer  given  is  that  it  is  like  butter,  parti-
cular! v  the  hiitter  extracted  in  the  second  month
of  Ardibehesht  when  the  Sun  passes  through  the
second  sign,  Taurus.  As  this  period  coincided
with  mid-spring,  this  butter  was  called
"Metyok-zarem  Mashga",  i.e.  mid-spring
butter(ii).  This  undoubtedly  proves  that  the
year  started  in  Iran  with  the  Sun's  entry  into
the  first  sign  Aries.  Incidentally,  this  answer
suggests  that  the  food  of  the  departed  is  the
extraction  of  lessons  from  experiences  during
earth-life,  in  short,  our  conscience  (con,  plus
science) .

Finally,  we  are  informed  by  Zand-Akasih
that  the  world  came  into  being,  i.e.,  the  birth


of  the  first  human  being  took  place,  on  the  day
of  the  Spring  Equinox.  It  is  stated  in  the
scripture  ;  "The  Adversary  entered  the  earth,
in  the  month  of  Fravardin,  day  of  Ormazd,
at  noon,  when  day  and  night  were  equal  .  .  .
Aries  was  the  Mid-heaven,  the  Sun  was  disposed
in  it,  etc"  (12).  Thus  Jamshedi  Navroze  is,
in  fact,  the  birthday  of  the  human  race  itself,
and  hence,  apart  from  any  other  considerations,
it  is  the  most  auspicious  day  of  the  year.
According  to  Al-Biruni,  the  Persians  believed
that  "the  beginning  of  their  year  was  fixed
by  the  creation  of  the  first  man  on  Roz  Hor-
mazd,  Mah  Fravardin,  while  the  Sun  stood  in
the  point  of  Vernal  Equinox(i3).

It  is  also  worth  remembering  that  in  the
region  of  the  North  Pole  where  the  Indo-
Arj'-ans  first  lived  (see  Vendidad)  the  6-month
long   day   starts   on   March   21st.

Again,  the  whole  scheme  of  Rapithvin  Geh  can
be  observed  faithfully  only  if  the  year  is  made
to  start  on  March  21st.  If  the  Religious  year
is  only  365  days  long,  it  can  never  run
concurrently  with  the  four  seasons  of  the  year
as  it  should,  as  already  described  above.  This
important  principle  was  scrupulously  observed
by  our  forefathers.  It  was  for  this  very  reason
that  the  lunar  year  was  forbidden  to  be  used
for  purposes  of  religion  since  thereby  "summer
became  mingled  with  winter,  and  vice
versa". (14).

In  passing,  it  will  be  interesting  to  note  that
Firdausi,    the    immortal    poet    of    Iran,    also


followed  our  Dini  vSaal  iu  giving  dates  of  events
in  his  Shalmameh.  Thus,  he  says,  "Proceed
with  your  cavalry  towards  the  left  like  the
Sun  in  Aries  on  the  Navroze  day"(i'^).  Again,
he  identifies  an  event  as  happening  on  "the
famous  day  of  IVIeher  of  the  month  of  Meher
(Meherangan)  when  the  Sun  is  passing  through
Libra." {16)  Here  the  seventh  month  of  the
year  is  clearly  identified  with  the  seventh  sign
of  the  Zodiac.  And  Firdausi  admits  that  he
based  his  work  on  ancient  Pehlavi  books  in
his  possession.

It  is  thus  clear  that  the  true  Zoroastrian
Religious  year  was  a  fixed  one,  the  months
thereof  keeping  pace  with  the  passage  of  the
Sim  through  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac.
Since,  however,  the  Sun  takes  about  126  hours
more  than  360  days  to  pass  through  360  degrees
of  the  zodiacal  circle,  120  hours,  or  five  da3^s,
were  added  as  Gathas  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth
month  and  since  part  of  a  day  could  not  be
tacked  on  to  the  year,  every  fourth  3^ear  one
additional  da}^  w^as  comited  after  the  five  da^^s
of  Gathas.  Dinkard  refers  to  this  day  as
"Ruz-i-vahizak"(i7)

Two  types  of  solar  years

As  a  matter  of  fact,  Dinkard  talks  of  two
distinct  types  of  solar  years,  an  ordinary  civil
year  of  365  days  called  "Hushmordi",  and
a  year  in  which  the  additional  about  six
hours  per  year  are  taken  into  account  to  keep
it  fixed  with  reference  to  the  seasons  of  the  year.


It  is,  however,  stated  that  the  day  should  not
be  added  before  the  close  of  a  month,  nor
should  this  correction  be  delayed  beyond  the
five  months  (of  Winter)  (17).  In  short,  there
v/ere  three  ordinary  years  of  365  days  each
and  the  fourth  year  was  of  366  days.  It  is
directed  in  the  clearest  language  possible  that
the  Hushmordi  years  (of  365  days  each)  should
not  he  alloived  to  shift  from  their  place  (18),
and  this  can  only  be  done  by  adding  a  day
at  the  end  of  the  fourth  year.  It  is  nowhere
stated  that  it  is  wrong  to  follow  this  practice
of  adding  one  day  every  fourth  year.

An  alternative  method

From  the  writings  of  some  old  Muslim  his-
torians it  appears  that  during  the  Sassanian
age  two  kinds  of  years  were  simultaneously
used:  a  civil  year  and  a  rehgious  year,  but
care  was  taken  to  see  that  the  five  days  of
Gathas  always  fell  near  the  Spring  Equinox
in  both  types  of  years.  In  both  these  calendars
the  days  (Roz)  were  indentical :  only  the  months
varied  from  time  to  time.  Thus,  Navroze,
the  first  day  of  the  Dini  saal,  always  coincided
with  the  entry  of  the  Sun  into  Aries,  whereas
the  civil  year  shifted  from  its  place  by  one
whole  month  at  a  time,  every  120  years.  Thus
Al  Biruni  has  stated  in  his  book  "Athar-al-
Bakia"  that  the  first  Gahambar  Maidyozarem
(mid-spring)  was  once  being  observed  in  Iran
on  Roz  Khurshid,  Mah  Dae,  obviously,  of  the
civil  year(i9).  This  would  be  clear  if  we
remember  that  the  first  month  of  the  Dini  saal,


10

Fravardin,  then  coincided  with  the  month  of
Adar  of  the  civil  year.  In  the  same  way,
when  our  last  king  Yazdezard  III  came  to  the
throne  of  Iran  it  was  Roz  Hormazd,  Mah
Fravardin  of  the  civil  year,  the  corresponding
Dini  Saal  month  was  the  fourth  month  of
Teer,  counting  from  the  Spring  Equinox,  the
Roz  was  Hormazd  and  the  date  was  June  icth
(New  style).  However,  looking  to  the  con-
ditions prevailing  at  present,  we  believe  the
method  of  correcting  the  year  by  adding  a  day
every  fourth  year,  is  only  feasible  and  must
be  adopted.

Rosicrucians  and  Navroze

The  fact  that  our  New  year  day  fell  on  the
da}^  of  the  Spring  Equinox  is  also  corroborated
by  the  usages  of  the  Rosicrucian  community
as  appears  from  the  following  extract  from
their  official  organ,  the  Rosicrucian  Digest,
of  March  1962: —

"In  the  Near  East  and  the  Levant  generally,
the  birthplace  of  the  great  civilization,  the
Vernal  Equinox — when  the  sim  enters  the  sign
Aries  on  its  celestial  journey,  at  the  coming
of  spring — was  heralded  as  a  cosmic  event.
Men  saw  a  symbolical  relationship  to  their  own
lives  in  the  awakening  of  nature  in  the  spring.
As  plant  life  apparently  dies  and  passes  into
the  darkness  of  winter  to  be  reborn  in  the
spring,  so  man's  spirit  and  soul  may  be  reborn
again  after  mortal  death.


II

"Among  the  earl}^  Christian  sects  it  was
beHeved  that  the  creation  of  the  Universe  began
in  March  on  the  occasion  of  the  Vernal  Equinox.
(Compare  this  with  what  is  stated  in  Zand-
Akasih(i2),  already  referred  to  above).  It
was  likewise  thought  by  some  sects  that  Jesus,
the  Christ,  must  have  been  conceived  in  March,
a  time  of  creation,  and  that  his  nativity  must
have  occurred  nine  months  later  in  December.

"The  period  of  the  Vernal  Equionox  was  a
time  of  great  festivity  and  celebration  by  many
of  the  ancient  peoples  It  was  a  time  of  fertility
and  growth  ...  A  deeper  significance  was
attached  to  the  period  by  certain  Mystery
Schools.  Ritual  dramas  were  enacted  depict-
ing the  death  of  man  and  his  resurrection  or
rebirth  into  a  divine  life  of  greater  spiritual
illumination  .  .  .  The  elements  partaken  at  the
feast  represented  the  elements  of  man's  nature.
Every  year  on  the  occasion  of  the  Vernal
Equinox,  Rosicrucian  Lodges,  Chapters  and
pranoi  throughout  the  world — and  thousands
of  men  in  their  home  sanctums — symboliclly
celebrate  the  true  beginning  of  the  New  Year.
The  calendar  New  Year  has  no  relation  to
natural  phenomena  .  .  .

"Further,  in  their  symbolical  feasts  on  the
same  occasion  the  Rosicrucians  perpetuate  the
mystical  meaning  of  life,  death  and  resurrection
and  the  triune  elements  of  man's  nature."

Further,  the  Rosicrucians  believe  that  this
practice   of  celebrating  the   New  Year  on  the


12


Vernal  Equinox  day  was  adopted  by  the
Egyptians  when  they  came  in  contact  with
the  Persians  on  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by
Cambysis.  The  Rosicrucian  tradition  has  it
that  this  celebration  is  being  observed  for
the  last  over  three  thousand  years  As  a
matter  of  fact,  March  21,  1962  was  declared
by  their  Imperator  as  the  begmnmg  of  the
traditional  Rosicrucian  year  3,315.

Comments  are  superfluous.  The  principle
here  is  that  'seasons  must  be  based  on  the
cardinal  da^^s  of  the  year",  viz.,  the  two
Equinoxes  and  two  Solstices.  In  fact,  our
Saal-i-Dini  was  based  on  this  principle  alone,
as  were  those  of  many  ancient  nations  of  the
world.

After  severe  Winter  months  the  arrival  of
Spring  (Bahar)  was  a  portent  of  great  joy  and
relief  to  the  Iranians  and  many  poets  of  Iran
have  left  songs  in  praise  of  this  invigorating
season.  In  the  Marriage  Ashirwad  ceremony
the  bridal  couple  is  blessed  in  the  following
words  :  "KJmrram  bed  cJiiin  Bahar" ,  i.e.,  Be
happy  like  the  season  of  Spring.  If  there  was  no
season  of  Spring  as  such  in  Iran,  as  some  Taqiz-
ada  has  now  'discovered" ,  how  the  above  bless
ing  came  to  be  given  to  the  couple  ?  And  were
all  those  poets  idle  dreamers  ?  Are  we  justified
in  brushing  aside  the  imanimous  testimony
of  our  Pehlavi  writers  and  look  to  Taqizada
for  guidance  ?


13

Dastur  Ardeshir  Kermani  who  undertook
to  write  a  Persian  Dictionary  at  the  request
of  King_  Akbar,  has  quoted  Mahomed  Bakar
Sabzwari  as  having  advised  Muslims  to  observe
"the  Parsi  Calendar,  which  started  on  the  ist
of  Farvardin  with  the  Sun  in  Aries."  He  is
reported  to  have  stated  that  if  a  Muslim  on
this  day  kept  fast  and  prayed,  his  sins  of  60
years   could   be   washed   away.

Tishtriya  or  Sirius  was  the  star  whose  heliacal
rising  heralded  the  coming  of  the  rains.  The
great  Greek  historian  Plutarch  has  noted  that
Teshtar  was  held  in  high  veneration  by  the
Persians  in  his  time  (first  century  of  the
Christian  Era)  (20).  According  to  Dasturji
Nairyosang  Dhaval,  this  was  the  star  of  rains
{"Tishtran  itee  vrishtee-nakshatrani")[2i).  Un-
less the  year  is  a  fixed  one,  the  rising  of  Sirius
with  the  Sun  cannot  coincide  with  the  fourth
month  of  Teer  for  all  time.  Sirius  was,  and
still  is,  in  Cancer  and  can  rise  with  the  Sun
only  once  a  year,  in  Jtme-July.

Dear  reader,  we  would  leave  the  above  in-
dubitable facts  and  scriptural  evidence  in  favour
of  Dini  Saal  to  speak  for  themselves  and  you
may  come  to  your  own  decision.  During  the
dark  days  of  Arab  terror  and  the  confusion
that  followed  in  the  wake  of  their  conquest,
Iranians  had  perforce  to  abandon  many  of
their  cherished  customs  and  usages  (22),  and
one  such  must  have  been  the  practice  of
observing  the  religious  year,  since  the  Muslims


14

believed   that   intercalation   was   the   work   of
Satan.

A  true  calendar  may  not  be  a  pre-requisite
for  our  salvation.  But  till  we  reach  "that  far  off
divine  event  towards  which  the  whole  creation
moves,"  certain  ceremonies  have  got  to  be
performed  and  these  religious  duties  (Kar-i-
Dini)  can  be  performed  only  according  to  the
Dini  Saal  calendar,  as  directed  by  Dinkard'23).

•

According  to  the  testimony  of  Al  Birun^
(who  surely  was  not  a  Fasali  fanatic)  our
revered  Prophet,  I^ord  Zarathushtra,  was  also
very  much  interested  in  this  calendar  con-
troversy. "He  intercalated  the  years  with  the
months,  which  upto  that  time  had  summed  up
from  the  day — quarters  .  .  .  Then  he  ordered
people  in  all  future  times  to  do  with  the  day-
quarters  the  same  as  he  had  done,  and  they
obeyed  his  command.  "(24)  May  we  also  have
wisdom  to  obey  his  command,  is  our  prayer
to  Ahura  Mazda  on  this  auspicious  day!

Key  to  References

(i)  Zand-Akasih,  (Greater  Bundahishn),  Chap-
ter I,  para  50.

(2)  Z— A,  XXV,  26.

(3)  Fravardin  Yasht,  karda  13.

(4)  Dinkard,  Vol.  VIII,  Bab  6,  para  11.

(5)  Dinkard,  III,  419,15.


15
(6)  Z— A,  XXV,  6.

(7)Z— A,   VI-B,    2:    also   Dinkard,   III,   419,
12  to  15.

(8)  Z— A,  XXV,  13.

(9)  Z— A,  XXV,  14.

(10)  Z— A,  XXV,  3-5.

(11)  Datestan-i-Dinik,  Question  30  and  its
answer.

(12)  Z— A,  V-A,  1-2.

(13)  Sachau's  Translation,   Ch.   V,   page  55.

(14)  Z— A,  XXV,  24.

(15)  Shahnameh,  Kutar  brothers.  Vol  5,  page  4,

67.

(16)  Ditto,  Vol  6,  page  2,  37.

(17)  Dinkard,  Vol  X,  Dasturji  San j ana's  trans-
lation, page  449,  line  7.  Also  please  note
that  the  correction  is  referred  to  in  Dinkard,
III,  419,  17,  as  "Roz.  .vahiz  kardan",  i.e.,
"addition  of  a  day":  not  "Mah.  .vahiz
kardan"  as  it  would  have  been  the  case
if  a  month  was  to  be  added  by  way  of
correction.

(18)  Dinkard,  III,  419,  8-10

(19)  Sachau's  translation,   Ch.    IX,    page    212.

(20)  De  Iside  47.

(21)  Khurshid  Niyaish,  stanza  8:  see  also  Z-A,
Ch.VI-B,2.


i6

{22)  Z — A,  Pehlavi  Preface,  paras  3-4.

(23)  Dinkard,  III,  419,  16.

(24)  Sachau's  translation,  Ch.  V,  page  55.
Please  also  see  Teer  Yasht,  36:  "Kadha
Airyao  Danghavo  hooyairyao  hawaonti"
i.e.,  Wrhen  will  the  Aryan  countries
become  (observers  of)  a  true  year?  (Dastur
Meherjirana's  Gujarati  translation).  This
is  enough  to  indicate  why  "Barvakht"  Is
so  very  important  for  religious  observances.

Behram  D.  Pithavala


Printed  at  Kaiser-cHind  Press,  Bombay-1,  and  Published
by  Major  S.  R.  Bamji,  at  Prospect  Annexe,  Bombay-1
