Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri: The Memoirs of Jahangir, Vols. I-II (Jahangir (Alexander Rogers, trans.; Henry Beveridge, ed.), 1624)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of Alexander Rogers' 1909-1914 Royal Asiatic Society translation, two vols in one reprint (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.39216). The Mughal emperor Jahangir's own memoirs, regnal years 1-19 — court politics, natural history observations, painting and drinking, in the emperor's frank voice.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE TUZUK-I-JAHANGiRf 
OR MEMOIRS OF JAHANGIR 
VOLUME I 

FROM THE FIRST TO THE 
TWELFTH YEAR OF HIS REIGN 

VOLUME II 

FROM THE THIRTEENTH TO THE BEGINNING OF 
THE NINETEENTH YEAR OF HIS REIGN 




THE 

TtJZUK-I- 

JAHANGlRl 

OR 

MEMOIRS OF JAH^GIR 


MV )■:' U • ..>t ' hXWrans^dted 

ALEXANDER ROGERS 

I,C.S. (Retired) 


Edited by 

HENRY BEVERIDGE 

I.C.S. (Retired) 

(Two Vols in One ) 


LOW PRICE PUBLICATIONS 

[A Division of D.K. Publishsrs Distributors (P) Ltd.] 
]>ellii>l 10052 




9 ^ 3 . 309540 ^^^ 

3 


Sales Office : 

D.K. PUBLISHERS DISTRIBUTERS (P) LTD. 

Ansari Road, Darya Ganj, New Delhi-1 10002 
Phones : 3261465, 3278368 
Fax:091-011-3264368 


First Published 1909-1914 
First Reprint 1989 
Second Reprint 1994 

rHE ASIATIC SOdETY 

CALCUTTA-7000 1 6 

ISBN 81-86142-11-8 Acso. No ZZd 

Published by : 

LOW PRICE PUBLICATIONS [A Division of D.K. Publishers 
Distributors (P) Ltd.] at Regd. Off. A-6, NIMRI 
Community Centre, Ashok Vihar, Phase-IV, Delhi-110052. 


Printed at : 

D.K. Fine Art Press (P) Ltd., Delhi. 




PRINTED IN INDIA 



PREPACK 


Mb. BooBbs transUted the Memoirs of Jahta^ several 
years ago from the edition which Sayyid Ahmad printed 
at Qhazipur in 1863 and at Allyghur in 1864. Orientalists 
are greatly indebted to the l^yyid for his disinterested 
labours, but his text seems to have been nuwle from 
a single and defective. MS. aoid is often intorrect, 
espedidly in the case of proper names. I have collated 
it mth the excellent MSS. in the India Office and 
the British Museum, and have thus been aUe to make 
numerous corrections. I have also consulted the MS. 
in the Library of the B.A.S., but it is not a good one. 
1 have, with Mr. Bogeia's permission, revised the trans* 
lation, and I have added many notes. 

There is an account of the Memoits in the sixth volume 
of Elliot Si Dowson’s "History of India,” and there the 
snlyect of the various recensions is discussed. There is 
also a valuable note by Dr. Bieu in his “Catalogue of 
Persian MSS.,” i, 263. It is there pointed out that there 
is a manuscript translstion of the first nine years of the 
Memoirs by William Erskine in the Britiah Museum. 

I have consulted this translation and found it helpful. 
The MS. is numbered Add. 26,611. The translation is, 
of course, excellent, and it was made from a good MS. 

A translation of what Dr. Bieu calls the garbled 
Memoirs of Jahingfr was made by Major David Price 
and pqUished by the Oriental Translation Committee of 
the Boyal Asiatie Society in 182D. Tlie author of this 
work is unknown, and its histoiy is an unsolved problem. 
It is ocearionally fuller than the genuine Memoirs, and 
it contains some pietnresqne touches, such as the account 



▼i 


PRKFAOB. 


of AktMtf's defttiibed. But it is certain that it is, m part 
at least, s fabrication, and that it ocmtains statements 
which Jahftngfr could never have made. Compare, for 
instance, the account of the death of SohrAb^ the son 
of IDrsA Rustam, near the end of Price’s trandatioD, 
1S8-9, with that given in the gmiuine Memoirs in the 
narrative of the fifteenth year of the reign, p. 298, and 
also in the Iqbftl-n&ma, p. 189. Besides being inaccurate, 
the garbled or spurious Memmrs are much shorter than 
the genuine work, and do not go beyond the fifteenth 
year. Price’s translation, too, was made from a single and 
badly written MS.* which is now in the RA.S. Libraty. 
Dr. Bieu remarks that it is to be regretted that so poor 
a fabrication as the garbled Memoirs should have been 
given to the world as a genuine production of Jah&ngir. 
This being so, it is appropriate that the present translation 
of the genuine Memoirs should be pulfiished bp the Royal 
Asiatic Society. 

When Jah&n^r had written his Memoirs for the first 
twelve years of his reign he made them into a volume, 
and had a number of copies made and distributed (Elliot, 
vi, 360). 'The first of these he gave to SiAh Jahftn, who 
was then in high favour. The present publication is 
a translation of the first volume of the Memoirs, but 
the translation of the whole Memoirs, t<^ther with the 
additions of Mu‘tamad Sb&n and Muhammad HAdl, has 
been completed, and it is to be hoped that its publication 
will follow in due course. 

Jah&ng^r reigned for twenty-two years, but ill-health 
and sorrow made him give up the writing of his Memoirs 
in the seventeenth year of his reign (see Elliot, vi, 280). 
He then entrusted the task to Mutamad Khto. the author 

’ It ii owing to Oie ertbbod writing of Meo’a MS. that at p, SI 
Jahangir ia made to aay that the Prince of Kaahmir belonged to the 
aociety of Jogia. The real etatement ia that the prince belonged to 
the Chak family. 



PREFACE. 


•• 
VII 

of the Iqbftl>nftma, who eontintted the Memoira to the 
banning of the nineteenth year. He then dnqyped 
writing the Memoirs in the name of the emperor, bat 
he continued the narrative of the reign, to JahSnj^r’s 
death, in his own work, the Iqbftl-n&ma. Hubanunad 
H&dl afterwards continued the Memoirs down to 
Jahftoj^s death, but his work is little more than an 
abridgment of the Iqb&l-n&ma. Sayyid Ahmad’s edition 
contains the continuations of the Memoirs by Mu'tamad 
and Muhammad HSdi, and also Mohammad Hidi’s 
preface and introduction. But this preface and intro- 
duction have not been translated by Mr. Bogers, and 
I do not think lhat a translation is necessary. Muhammad 
Hid is a late writer (see Elliot, vi, 392), his date being 
the first quarter of the eighteenth century, and his 
introduction seems to be almost wholly derived from the 
Ma’isir-i*Jahkn|^ii of Kftmgar Musaini (Elliot, vi, 257). 
It consists mainly of an account of Jah&ngir’s life from 
his birth up to his accession. 

It is perhaps unnecessary to say anything about the 
importance of Jah&ngir’s Memoirs. They give a lively 
picture oi India in the early decades of the seventeenth 
century, and are a valuable supplement to the Akbar-nama. 

I may be allowed, however, to end this preface anUi the 
following remarks whidi I contributed to the Iindian 
Magazine for May, 1907 : — 

"The Royal authors of the East had more Uood in 
them tiian those kings whose works have been catalogued 
ly Hmwce Walpole. To find a parallel to them we moat 
go back to Julius C!aeaar, and even then the advantage is 
not npcm the side of Europe. After all, the coininentarias 
of the famous Roman are a little disappointing, and 
certainly the Memoirs of B&bar and Jah&ngir are far 
more human and fuller of matter than the' gjtory of the 
Qallie Wars. All Muhammadans have a fancy fur writing 
(dmmicles and antolnographies, and several Muhammadan 



vffi 


PBSFAOB. 


kings have yielded to the common impulse. Central Asia 
has given us the Memoirs of Tamarlaue, B&bar^ and ^aida^, 
and the chi'onicle of Abu-l-ghasi ; Persia has given us the 
Memoirs of Shah Tahmasp, and India the Memoirs of the 
Princess Oulbadan and Jah&nj^r. In modem times we see 
the same impulse at work, for we have the biography of 
the late Ameer of Afghanistan and the diary of the Shah 
of Persia. 

‘^The contributions to literature by Royal authors which 
come to us from the East form a department by them- 
selves, and one which is of great value. Nearly all Elastem 
histories are disfigured by adulation. Even when the 
author has had no special reason for flattery and for 
suppression of trath, he has been dazzled by the greatness 
of his subject, and gives us a picture which no more 
reveals the real king than does a telescope the real 
constitution of the Morning Star. But when Eastern 
monarchs give us chronicles, the case is different. They 
have no occasion for fear or favour, and mercilessly expose 
the failings of their contemporaries. Not that they are 
to be trusted any more than other Orientals when 
speaking of themselves. B&bar has suppressed the story 
of his vassalage to Shah Isma'il, of his defeat at 
GhajdawAn, and his treatment of *Alam Lodi ; and 
Jahangir has glossed over his rebellion against his father, 
and the circumstances of Shir-Afgan’s death. But when 
they have to speak of others — whether kings or nobles — 
they give us the whole trath, and perhaps a little more. 
An amiable Princess like Oulbadan Begam may veil ttie 
faults and weaknesses of her brothers Hum&yOn and 
Hind&l; but BAbar strips the gilt off nearly every one 
whom he mentions, and spares no one — not even his 
own father. 

*'The Memoirs of BAbar, Haidar, and Gulbadan have 
been translated into English, and those of T^hmasp have 
been translated into Germany but unfortunately JahAngir's 



PREFACE. 


ix 


have never been fully translated,^ though there are extracts 
in Elliot & Dowson’s History, and Major Price many 
years ago gave us from an imperfect manuscript a garbled 
account of a few years of his Memoirs. Yet in reality 
Jah&ngir’s Memoirs are not inferior in interest to those 
of B&bar. Indeed, we may go further and say there is 
twice as much matter in them as in B&bar's Memoirs, 
and that they are by far the most entertaining of the 
two works. Not that JahAngir was by any means as 
remarkable a man as his great-grandfather. He was 
a most faulty human being, and his own account of 
himself often excites our disgust and contempt. But he 
had the sense not to confine his narrative to an account 
of himself, and he has given us a picture of his father, 
the great Akbar, which is a bigger ' plum ’ than anything 
in B&bar’s Memoirs. But his account of himself has also 
its charm, for it reveals the real man, and so he lives 
for us in his Memoirs just as James VI — ^to whom, and 
to the Emperor Claudius, he bears a strange and even 
ludicrous resemblance — lives in the * Fortunes of Nigel' or 
Claudius in Suetonius and Tacitus. Jah&ngir was indeed 
a strange mixture. The man who could stand by and 
see men flayed alive, and who, as he himself tells us, put 
one man to death and hod two others hamstrung because 
they showed themselves inopportunely and frightened 
away his game, could yet be a lover of justice and could 
spend his Thursday evenings in holding high converse. 
He could quote FirdOsi’s verse against cruelty to animals — 

* Ah I spare yon emmet, rich in hoarded grain — 

He lives with plessnrs, and he dies with pain ’ ; 

and be soft-hearted enough to wish that his father were 
alive to share with him the delicious mangoes of India 
Ho could procure the murder of Abu-l-fa?l and avow 

^ A translation was began by the Rev. Mr. Lowe for the Asiatio 
Society of Bengal, bat only one fasciculos was pablished. This was 
in 1889. 



X 


PfiBFAGE. 


the fact without remoi'ae, and alao pity the royal elephants 
because they shivered in winter when they sprinkled 
themselves with cold water. ‘I observed this/ he says, 
^and so I ordered that the water should be heated to 
the temperature of luke-warm milk.’ And he adds : ‘ This 
was entirely my own idea ; nobody had ever thought of it 
before.’ One good trait in JahAngir was his hearty enjoy- 
ment of Nature and his love for flowers. B&bar had 
this also, but he was old, or at least worn out, w^hen 
he came to India, and he was disgusted by an Indian 
attempt to poison him, and so his description of India 
is meagre and splenetic. JahAngir, on the other hand, 
is a true Indian, and dwells delightedly on the charms 
of Indian flowers, particularises the palas, the bokul, and 
the champa, and avows that no fruit of Afghanistan or 
Central Asia is equal to the mango. He loved, too, to 
converse with pandits and Hindu ascetics, though he is 
contemptuous of their avatars, and causes the image of 
Vishnu as the boar avatar to be broken and flung into 
the Pushkar lake. 

** It is a remark of Hallam’s that the best attribute of 
Muhammadan princes is a rigoious justice in chastising 
the offences of others. Of this quality Jah&ngir, in spite 
of all His weaknesses, hod a large share, and even to this 
day he is spoken of with respect by Muhammadans on 
account of his love of justice. It is a pathetic circumstance 
that it was this princely quality which was to some extent 
the cause of the great affront put upon him by Mah&bat 
Khan. Many complaints had been made to JahAngIr of 
the oppressions of Mah&bat in Bengal, and crowds of 
suppliants had come to Jah&ngir’s camp. It was his 
desire to give them redress and to punish Mah&bat for 
his exactions, together with his physical and mental 
weakness, which led to his capture on the banks of the 
Jhilam. 

**One of the many interesting observations in his Memoirs 



PBIVACB. 


zi 


is his aoeoont of sn inscription he saw at Hindann. He 
says tiiat in the thirteenth year of his reign, as he was 
marching back to Agra, he found a verse by someone 
inscribed on the pillar of a pleasnre-house on an islet 
in the lake at Hindann. He then proceeds to quote it, 
and it tnms ont to be one of Omar Khayyam’s! This 
is FitsQerald’s paraphrase : — 

‘For Mane we loved, the lovelieet and the beat 
That from hie vintage Time hath preet. 

Have drank their Cup a Round or two before. 

And one by one crept rilently to reat.’ 

“ The same quatrain has also been quoted by BodayQn! 
in his history, and the interesting thing about Jahftngir’s 
quotation of it is that he could see the beauty of the verse 
and at the same time did not know who was the author. 
There is also an interest in the fact that the third line 
contains a different reading from that given in Whiniield’s 
edition of the text. Hindann is in the Jaipur territory, 
and one would like to know if the inscription still exists. 

"Among other things in Jah&n£^’s Memoirs there is the 
de8eripti<m of the outbreak of the Plague, given to him by 
a lady of his court [which has been quoted by Dr. Simpson 
in his book upon Plague], and there is a very full account 
df Kashmir, which is considerably superior to that in the 
Ayin Akbarl, which Sir Walter Lawrence has praised.” 

Witii reference to the portrait of Jahftngir prefixed to 
this vdume, it may be interesting to note that it appears 
from Mr. E. B. Havell’s “ Indian Sculpture,” p. 203, that 
the British Museum possesses a drawing by Rembrandt 
which was copied from a Moghul miniature, and which 
has been pronounced by Mr. Bonftaer to be a portrait of 
JaVionglr. Coryat (Pnrehas, reprint, iv, 473) thus describes 
Jahangir’s persemd appearance : — “ He is fifty and three 
years of age, his nativity-day having been celebrated with 
wonderful pomp since my arrival here. On that day he 
weighed himself in a pair of golden scales, which by great 



xii 


PKEFACE. 


chance I saw the same day ; a custom he observes most 
inviolably every year. He is of complexion neither white 
nor block, but of a middle betwixt them. I know not 
how to express it with a more expressive and significant 
epitheton than olive. An olive colour his face presenteth. 
He ib of a seemly composition of body, of a stature little 
unequal (os I guess not vrittiout grounds of probability) to 
mine, but much more corpulent than myself.*' 

As regards the bibliography of the Tuzuk-i-Jahangiii. 
I have to note tliat there is an Ui*du translation by Munshi 
Ahmad *Ali Simab of Bampura, that is, Aligarh in Tonk. 
It was made from Muhammad Hadi’s edition under the 
patronage of Muhammad Ibrahim *Ali Khan NawAb of 
Tonk, and was published by Newal Kishor in 1291 (1874). 
There is also a Hindi translation by Munshi Debi Prasad 
which was published in 1905 at Calcutta by the Bh&rat 
Mitra Press. The Urdu translation referred to by 
Mr. Bluinhardt in his Catalogue of Hindustani MSS., 
p. 61, and noticed by Elliot, vi, 401, and Garcin de 
Tassy, iii, 301, is, as the two latter writers have remarked, 
a translation of the Iqbal-n&ma. The MS. referred to by 
Elliot vi, 277^ as having been in the possession of General 
Thomas Paterson Smith, and which is described in Eth4’s 
Catalogue of the India Ofiice MSS., No. 2833, p. 1533, was 
made by Sayyid Mubammad, the elder brother of Sayyid 
Ahmad. As the end of the MS. the copyist gives some 
account of himself and of his family He made the copy 
from copies in the Royal Library and in the poesession of 
Rajah Koghu N&th Singh alioB lAl Singh J&lpCur. He 
finished it in October, 1843. Sayyid Mubammad was 
Munsif of Hutg&m in the Fatbpur district. He died 
young in 1845. My friend Mr. T. W. Arnold, of the 
India Office, informs me that Sayyid Abmad told him 
that he found a valuable illustrated MS of the Tiiruk 
in the debris of the Delhi Royal Library, and took it 
home, but that it was lost when his house was plundered 



PBEFACB. 


Xiii 

by the mutineers. There is in the Bodleian a copy in 
Sayyid Ahmad’s own handwriting. He states that he 
made use of ten good MSS. The Englishman at whose- 
request he made the copy was Jphn Panton Oubbins, who 
was once Sessions Judge of Delhi. This copy is described 
in the Bodleian Catalogue, p. 117, No. 221. The MS. 
No. 220 described on the same page was brought home* 
by Fraser, and is a good one, hut only goes down to the 
end of the 14th year. 

H. Beveridge. 

Mareht 1900. 


Postscript. — Since writing this Preface 1 have been 
enabled by the kindness of Mr. Irvine to examine the 
Hindi Jahftngir-nama of Debi Pras&d. It is not a transla- 
tion, but an abstract, and 1 do not think it is of much 
value. Being a JodhpOr mah he has been able, perhaps, 
to correct some spellings of places, but he does not seem to 
have consulted any MSS., and when he comes to a difficulty 
he shirks it. The most valuable adjunct to the Tuzuk, 
after the Iqb&l-n&ma, is the Ma’Rsir-i-Jah&ngiri of Eamg&r 
^U8aini. It is important as giving the early history of 
Jah&ngir, that is, of the time when he was Prince Selim. 
There are three copies of his work in the British Museum, 
but the so-called Ma&thir-i-Jah&ngiii of the India Office 
Library, No. 3098, or 324 of the new Catalogue, is only 
a copy of the Iqb&l-n&ma. 

I regret that the number oi Errata and Addenda is so 
large, but when I began the revision I did not know that 
Sayyid Ahmad’s text was so incorrect It will be seen 
that at pp. 158 and 162 I have made two erroneous notes. 

H. B. 




TABLE OF TRANSUTERATION. 


(Hamza) not represented 
at the beginning or end 
of a word ; ’ in the 
middle of a word. 


V 


C 

t 

J 

u 

J 

J 

J 

« 

J 

J 

4 

« 


b 

P 

t 

t 

8 

J 

ch 

h 

kh 

d 

d 

2 

r 

r 

z 

zh 

8 


a • • • 8h 

.... 8 
. ... 2 

k . . . . t 

^ • • • • 2 

. . gh 

wi . , . . f 

J • • • q 

i.J' . . . . k 

g 

J . . . . 1 

r • • • • m 

(m before and i^) 

J . . . w 

(v in Hindu names) 

^ . h 

(not represented at the 
end of a word except 
when radical) 

uS . . . y 


VOWBI.8 -i. 


a. a. (alit muksuru) it. 

i. 0-7- I ; e in some Hindu names. 
I at the end of a word. 


*yy; 


JL u. J JL u ; o in some Hindu names. ]JL uww ; 
u at the end of a word. 


Diphthongs — au. Jjl aww. ai. ayy. 

The ‘ Izafat * is rendered by ‘ -i- 

The Persian copulative particle j is transliterated by ' u 

The J of the Arabic article is assimilated according to 
rule, the final vowel of the prcoc<iing word lieing preserved. 




JAHANGIRS MEMOIRS. 


In the Name of Gtod, the Merciful, the Clem£nt 


CHAPTER I 

T> Y the boundless favour of Allah, when one sidereal 
hour oi Tliursday, Juinadi.-8-f^ni 20th, a.h. 1014 
(October 24th, 160^), had passed, 1 ascended the royal 
throne in the capital of Agra, in the 38th year of my age.^ 
Till he was 28 years old, no child of my father hod 
lived, and he was continually praying for the survival 
of a son to dervishes and recluses, by whom spiritual 
approach to the throne of Allah is obtained. As the great 
master, Khwaja Mu*inu-d-dta Chisbti, was the fountain^ 
liead of most of the saints of India, he coMidered that in 
order to obtain this object he should have recourse to his 
blessed threshold, and resolved within himself that if 
Almighty Ood should bestow a son on him he would, by 
way of complete humility, go on foot from Agra to his 


^ That is, ha was 37 years 3 months by the lahar calendar, and 36 years 
1 month hy *olar reckoning (Fidstwhnima, i, 69). XUiot and all the 
MSS. have 8th Jumflda-s s&nk as the date of the accession, hut this 'is 
clearly wrong, as Akbar did not die till 13th JumidSHIgaid. Evidently 
the copyists have, as is so often the rose, misread bifCanias Aaa^m. 8m 
Blochmann’s remark, p. 454, note 3. That Jahangir was not at this 
time 38 is shown hy his stating at p. 37 that he oeiekitted his SSth 
birthday at Lahore after the eapiore ii Ehuwan. 





2 BIRTH OF JAHANGIe. FOUHBING OF FATHPUE. 


blessed mausoleum, a distance of 140 koa. In A.H. 977, 
on Wednesday, l7th Babl'u-l^irwal (August Slst, 1669), 
when seven gharl of the aforesaid day had passed, when 
Libra (Mlz&n) had risen to the 24th degree, Qod Almighty 
brought me into existence from the hiding-place of 
nothingness. At the time when my venerated father was 
on the outlook for a son, a dervish of the name of Shaikh 
Salim, a man of ecstatic condition, who had traversed 
many of the stages of life, had his abode on a hill near 
Sikri, one of the villages of Agra, and the people of that 
neighbourhood had complete trust in him. As my father 
was very submissive to dervishes, he also visited him. 
One day, when waiting on him and in a state of distraction, 
he asked him how many ao?i 9 he should have. The Shaikh 
replied, ** The Qiver who gives without being asked will 
bestow three sons on yoa.” My father said, have 
made a vow that, casting my first son on the skirt of your 
favour, I will make your friendship and kindness his 
protector and preserver.” The Shaikh accepted this idea, 
and said, 1 congratulate you, and I will give him my own 
name.*' When my mother came near the time of her 
delivery, he (Akbar) sent her to the Shaikh’s house that 
I might be bom there. After my birth they gave me the 
name of Sultan Salim, but I never heard my father, 
whether in his cups or in his sober moments, call me 
Muhammad jSalim or Sultan Salim, but always 
Bdbd. My revered father, considering the village of Sikri, 
which was the place of my birth, lucky for him, made it 
his capital. In the course of fourteen or fifteen years that 
hill, full of wild beasts, became a city containing all kinds 
of gardens and buildings, and lofty, elegant edifices and 
pleasant places, attractive to the heart After the conquest 
of Ovyartt this village was named Fathpur. l^en 
I became king it occurred to me to change my name, 
because this luaembled that of the Emperor of Rum. An 
in^mtion from the hidden world brought it into my mind 



AOOOUHT 09 AOSA.. 


3 


tiiatk inaamoeh as the bosinesB of kinip is the onittolling 
of the worid, I should give myself the name of Jahingir 
(Wotld-aeiser) and make my title of hononr (laqab) Nani<4> 
din, inasmuch as my sitting on the throne coincided with 
the rising and shin^ on the earth of the great li^t (the 
Sun). I had also heard, in the days when I was a prince, 
front Indian sages, that after the expiration of the reign 
and life of King JalAln-d-dln Akhar one named NOm-d-dln 
would be administrator of the affidrs of the State. There- 
fore I gave myself the name and appellaiion of NOm-d-din 
JahAngir PAdqbAh. As this great event took place in Agra, 
it is necessary that some account of that city should be given. 

Agra is one ot the grand old cities of ffindustan. It had 
formerly an old fort on the bank of the Jumna, but this 
my father threw down before my birth, and he founded 
a fort of cut red stone, the like of which those who have 
travelled over the world cannot point out. It was completed 
in the space of fifteen or sixteen years. It had four gates 
and two satly-ports, and its cost was 35 lakhs of rupees, 
equal to 115,000 Um/in of current Persian coinage and to 
10,500,000 khOni according to the TOrin reckoning. The 
habitable part of the city extends on both sides ci the 
river. On its west side, which has the greater population, its 
circumference is seven kos and its breadth is one kos. The 
circumference of the inhalnted part on the other side of 
the water, the side towards the east, is 2^ kos, its length 
being one kos and its breadth half a kos. But in the 
number of its buildings it is equal to several cities of 
‘Iriq, KbnitoAo, and MAwaift’a-n-nahr (Transoxiana) put 
together. Many persons have erected buildings <d three or 
four storeys in it. The maus of people ia so great, that 
moving about in the lanes and bazars is difficult. It ia on 
the boundary of the second climate. On its east is the 
province of Qanauj ; on the west, N&gor ; on the north, 
Sambhal ; and on the south, Chanderi. 

It is written in the books of the Hindus that the source 



AOOOVKT or AGRA. 


of the Jnmiie is in a hill the name of Ealind,* which 
men cannot reach because of the excessive cold. The 
apfiarent source is a hill near the pai;gana of Khi^had. 

The air of A^ia is warm and dry ; physicians say that 
it depresses the qurits (rfl^rd ba taJjM mfba/rad) and 
induces weakness. It is unsuited to most temperaments, 
exc^ to the ^egmatic and melancholy, which are safe 
from its bod effecta For this reascm animals of this 
oonstitutimi and temperament, such as the elephant, the 
buffido, and others, thrive in its climate. 

Before the rule of the Lodi Afghans, Agra was a great 
and p<^uloos place, and had a castle described by Mas'hd 
b. Sa‘d b. SalmAn in the ode (goffdd) which he wrote in 
praise of Mabmhd, son of Sultan Ibr&him. son of Mas'ud, 
S(m of Sultan Mabmhd of QhaznL on the capture of the 
castle — 

“TIm fort of Agia appeared in the nddet of the dust 
like a mountain, and ita battlementa like peaka.” * 

When Sikandar Lodi designed to tdce Gwalior he came 
to Agra from Delhi, which was the capital of the Sultans 
of India, and settled down there. From that date the 
population and prosperity of Agra increased, and it 
became the capital of the Sultans of Delhi. When God 
Almighty bestowed the rule of India on this illustrious 
family, the late king, B&bar, after the defeat of Ibr&him, 
the son of Sikandar Lodi, and his being killed, and after 
his victory over B&n& Sftnga, who was the chief of the 
Rajas of Hindustan, established on the east side of the 
Jumna, on improved land, a garden (chirb dgh) which few 
places equal in beauty. He gave it the name of Gnl-a^dllftn 

’ The Sanskrit ICalinda. 

* The oonplet appears in Mas*ad’s divan, B.M. MS. Egerton, 701, 
p. 1420, line 4. The preceding liim show that the dust (pard) referred 
to in the first line means the dust caused the invading army. I take 
the words barU bdrhot to mean the battlements or pinnacles of the 
fortisM, the I at the end of bdrhd being intensive. 



DBSCREPnOK OF FRUITS. 


S 


(Flower-scatterer), and erected in it a small building of cut 
red stone, and having completed a mosque on one side of 
it he intended to make a lofty building, but time failed 
him and his design was never carried into execution. 

In these Memoirs, whenever qirdni is written it 

^refers to Amir TimOr Glirgftn; and whenever FirdUa- 
maJcd/ni is mentioned, to B&bar Padsh&h ; when Jannat- 
d^ydni is used, to Humftytln Pfidsh&h; and when ^ArA- 
d^ydnl is employed, to my revered father, Jalalu-d-dln 
Muhammad Akbar P&dsh&h Qb&zi. 

Melons, mangoes,, and other fruits grow well in Agra and 
its neighbourhood. Of all fruits I am very fond of 
mangoes. In the reign of my father {'Areh-dAydni) many 
fruits of other countries, which till then were not to be had 
in India, were obtained there. Several sorts of grapes, 
such as the ^dtiihi and the fyab^i ' and the 
became common in several towns; for instance, in the 
bazars of Lahore every kind and variety that may be 
desired can be had in the grape season. Among fruits, one 
which they call ananSs (pineapple), which is grown in 
the Frank ports,’ is of excessive fragrance and fine flavour. 
Many thousands are produced every year now in the 
Gul-af.^&n garden at Agra. 

From the excellencies of its sweet-scented flowers one may 
prefer the fragrances of India to those of the flowers of the 
whole world. It has many such that nothing in the whole 
world can be compared to them. The first is the champa 
(Miclkjelia champouxi), which is a flower of exceedingly 
sweet fragrance ; it has the shape of the saflron-flower, but 
is yellow inclining to white. The tree is very symmetrical 

' Erskine*!! manuscript translation of the Tazuk-i-Jabingirl, B.M. 
MS. Add. 26,611, and the B.M. MS. have rAnif, not ^Ml. But 
I.O. MS. Na 161 and the R.A.S. MS. have ^Ktaini, and this seems 
right. See Memoirs, Leyden k Erskine, p. 326, and the Haidarabsd 
TurkI text, p. 284. The is a small grape like that of which 

currants are made. 

* Cf. in/m the aocouoi of the 11th year, p. 173. 



6 


SESCBmiON 07 710WXBB. 


•ad large, fall of fataoeheB aod leaves, aod is shady. Whea 
in flower one tree will peifame a garden. Snrpsssing 
this is the keord^ flower (Pandaniu odoratisnmuB). 
Its shape and appearance are sipgalar, and its scent is so 
strong and penetrating that it does not yield to the odour 
of mnsk. Another is the rOe M,* which in scent resemUes 
white jessamine. Its flowers are double and treUe (?). 
Another is the millsari* (Mimuaops EUngi). This tree, 
too, is very graceful and qomnetricsl, and is shady. The 
scent of its flowers is very pleasant. Another is tiie ketaki* 
{PamdwMia ?), which is of the nature of the keotH, but the 
latter is thorny, whereas the ketH has no thorns. More* 
over, the ketki is yellowish, whereas the heord is white. 
From these two flowers and also from the chamhAi* 
(Janninum grandiftorum), which is the white jessamine 
of vnl&yat (Persia or .Afghanistan), they extract sweet- 
scented oila There are other flowers too nnmerons to 
mention. Of trees there are the cypress (sorw), the pine 

* 8m Hemoin, L. 'It S., p. 330. 

* The neme ftfc bel is not given in Clarke’s Roxburgh^ but perhaps it ia 

one of the jessamines, and may be the bela of Clark j (p. 30). The rOe 
hd is described by Abud-fa^l (Blochmann, pp. 76 and 82). The state- 
ment about its flowers being double and treble is obscure. Erskine 
renders the passage ** The leaves are generally two and three fold.” The 
Peniaa word is which apparently is equivalent to the na or 

fold of the Ayln-i-Akbail, Persian text, i, 96. The reference may be to 
the flowers growing in umbela 

« This is the hoInU of Indian gardens (Clarke, p. 813), and well deserves 
Jahinglr’s praise. It is probably the hhoUibri mentioned in the Ayin 
(Blochmann, Na 10, pu 88). Blochmann gives hhoUirl (p. 70) as the 
name of a fruit-tree, and the bhoUM of {k 88 may be a miaiak» tot 

* The text has mwCI, but the tewH seems to be the Jtam gkmihU\fera oi 
Boxbnrgh (Clarke, p. 407) and has no resemblance to the Pandemis. See 
also the description of the sewff, Blochmann, p. 82. (Perhape there are 
two etwdi, one famous for fragrance, the other for beauty. See Lc., 
pp, 76 and 82 l) What is meant in the text is evidently a Pandamu and 
the hetkf of Blochmann, p. 83. I have followed, therefore^ 10. MS. 181, 
and have substituted hetla tar mwil. The keikt may be Pnrnrfiiniii iwfli iisiy 
which has no thorns (Clarke, p. 706). Erskine also has hdkL 

» li.c., p. 38etseq. 



CKilN O? JU8TIGI. 


7 


(mnilftor), the chamar (Platcunua <mentalia), the white 
poplar (aafidd/r, Populua alba), and the Hd m^UUl ^willow), 
which they had formerly never thought of in Hindustan, 
but are now plentiful. The sandal-tree, which once was 
peculiar to the islands (ie., Java, Sumatra, etc.), also 
flourishes in the gardens. 

The inhabitants of Agra exert themselves greatly in the 
acquirement of crafts and the search after learning. 
Various professors of every religion and creed have taken 
up their abode in the city. 

After my accession, the first order that I gave was for 
the fastening up of the Chain of Justice, so that if those 
engaged in the administration of justice should delay or 
practise hypocrisy in the matter of those seeking justice, 
the oppressed might come to this chain and shake it so 
that its noise might attract attention. Its fashion was 
this : I ordered them to make a chain of pure gold,' 
30 gaa in length and containing 60 bells. Its weight 
was 4 Indian maunds, equal to 42 'Iraqi maunds. One 
end of it they made fast to the battlements of the Shfth 
Buij of the fort at Agra and the other to a stone post fixed 
on the bank of the river. I also gave twelve orders to be 
observed as rules of conduct (cZas^tlru-I-*ama{) in all my 
dominions — 

(1) Forbidding the levy of cesses under the names of 
tamgha and mir baJ)ri (river tolls), and other burdens 
which the jaglrddrs of every province and district had 
imposed for their own profit. 

(2) On roads where thefts and robberies took place, which 
roads might be at a little distance from habitations, the 


^ Du Jarric, who got his information from missionary reports, seems 
to imply that the chain was of silver, and says that JahAngir was 
following the idea of an old Persian king. It is mentioned in the Siyar 
al-muta’akhkhirin (reprint, i, 230) that Muhammad 8b&h in 1721 reviverl 
this, and hung a long chain with a bell attached to it from the octagon 
tower which looked towards the river. 



8 


BEGULATIOl^S. 


jdgiSrddrs ot the neighbourhood should build aard'ia (public 
rest-houses), mosques, and dig wells, which might stimulate 
population, and people might settle down in those aard^ie. 
If these should be near a estate (under direct State 

management), the administrator (muta^addl) of that place 
should execute the work. 

^(3) The bales of merchants should not be opened on 
the roads without informing them and obtaining their leave. 

i(4) In my dominions if anyone, whether unbeliever or 
Musalman, should die, his property and effects should be 
left for his heirs, and no one should interfere with them. If 
he should have no heir, they should appoint inspectors and 
separate guardians to guard the property, so that its value 
might be expended in lawful expenditure, such as the 
building of mosques and aard^la, the repair of broken 
bridges, and the cUgging of tanks and wells. 

(5) They should not make wine or rice-q[>irit (darbaJira) ^ 
or any kind of intoxicating drug, or sell them ; although 
I myself drink wine, and from the age of 18 years up till 
now, when I am 38, have persisted in it. When I first took 
a liking to drinking I sometimes took as much as twenty 
cups of double-distilled spirit; when by degrees it acquiiod 
a great influence over me I endeavoured to lessen the 
quantity, and in the period of seven years I have brought 
myself from fifteen cups to five or six. My times for 
drinking were varied ; sometimes when three or four 
sidereal hours of the day remained I would begin to drink, 
and sometimes at night and partly by day. This went on 
till I was 30 years old. After that I took to drinking 
always at night. Now I drink only to digest my food. 

*(6) They should not take possession of any person’s 
house. 

' In test this is wrongly made pert of regulation 2. 

* Gladwin and the MSS. have dilbahra (exhilarating drink), and this is 
probably correct. JahSngIr would know little about rice-spirit. 

* This regulation is more fully expounded in Price, p. 7. 



REGULATIONS. 


9 


(7) I forbade the cutting off the nose or ears of any 
person, and I myself made a vow by the throne of God that 
I would not blemish anyone by this punishment. 

(8) I gave an order that the officials of the Crown lands 
and ih» jagf/rddT8 should not forcibly take the ryots* lands 
and cultivate them on their own account. 

(9) A government collector or a jaglrdar should not 
without permission intermarry with the people of the 
pargaTui in which he might be. 

(10) They should found hospitals in the great cities, and 
appoint physicians for the healing of the sick ; whatever 
the expenditure might be, should be given from the khalifa 
establishment. 

(11) In accordance with the regulations of my revered 
father, I ordered that each year from the 18th* of Rabfu-1- 
awwal, which is my birthday, for a number of days corre- 
sponding to the years of my life, they should not slaughter 
animals (for food). Two days in each week were also 
forbidden, one of them Thursday, the day of my accession, 
and the other Sunday, the day of my father*s birth. He 
held this day in great esteem on this account, and because 
it was dedicated to the Sun, and also because it was tlie 
day on which the Creation began. Therefore it was one of 
the days on which there was no killing in hi.s dominions.* 

(12) I gave a general order that the offices and jiujlvn of 
my father's servants should remain as they were. Later, 
the man^aba (ranks or offices) were increa.sed according to 

‘ It is curious that JahAiigir should give the 18th Rabi'u-l-awwal oa 
his birthday, while the authorities give it as the 17th. Probably the 
mistake has arisen froiiir Jahangir’s writing Rabi'u-l-uwwal instead of 
Sbahriwar. His birthday was Rashn the 18th day of ^hahriwar (see 
Akbarnftma, ii, 344), but it was the 17th Rabi'u-l-awwal. 8ee Muliatnmad 
H&dl*s preface, p. 2, and Beale, and Jahangir’s own statement a few 
lines above. Possibly Jahkngir wished to make out that he was born on 
the 18th Rabi*u4>awwal and a Thursday, because he regarded Thursday 
as a biassed day {mubdrak ^tamba), whilst he regarded Wednesday as 
peculiarly unlucky, and caU4d it kam, or gam, §hamba, 

’ Cf. Elliot’s translation, vi, 613, and note 2. 



10 


PBN8ION8. ACCOUMT OP COINS. 


eaeh one's cucumstanoes by not less than 20 per cent, to 
300 or 400 per cent. The subsistence money of the a^adia 
was increased 50 per cent., and I raised the pay of all 
domestics by 20 per cent. I increased the allowances of 
all the veiled ladies of my father’s harem from 20 per cent, 
to 100 per cent., according to their condition and relati<m> 
ship. By (me stroke of the pen 1 confirmed the subsistenoe 
lands * of the holders of avmaa (charity lands) within the 
dominions, who form the army of prayer, according to the 
deeds in their possession. 1 gave an order to MirSn i^adr 
Jah&n, who is (me of the genuine Sayyi(b of India, and who 
for a l(mg time held the high ofBce of vuifr (ecdesiastioal 
officer) under my fother, that he ahouia every day produce 
before me deserving people (worthy of chanty). *Ireleased 
all (tfiminals who had been confined and imprisoned for a l(mg 
time in the forts and priaona* 

At a pn^tious hour I ordered that they should o(»n 
gold and silver of different weighta To each coin I gave 
a separate name, via, to the m/uhr of 100 tola, that of 
mn/r-iiflhl', to that of 50 tola, that of nWr-anltflmi’, to 
that of 20 tola, nttr-demlat; to that of 10 tola, rytUr- 
bcmim ; to diat of 5 tola, nUr-mihr ; and to that (ff 1 tola, 

* The MSS. have “ the sobeisteiiae lands of peo|de in general ((dtSO) 
and the atmo#.’* 

* In the text and in Elliot, tI, 516, this ie made a separate order, bnt 
it is liot so in the MSS. If it were, we should have thirteen instead of 
twelve regulations. This is avoided in text and in Elliot by putting the 
8th and 7th regulations into one ordinance. With reg^ to the 
regulation about releasing the prisoners, Sir Henry Elliot is somewhat 
unjust to Jahingfr in his commentary at p. 515. It was only those who 
had been iang imprisoned whom Jah&ngir released, and his prooeedinga 
at Ranthambhor in the 13th year (Tfizuk, p. 256) show that he exercised 
diseriminatiou in releasing prisoners. Tho account in Price, p. 10, may 
(ilso bo consulted. There Jahangir says he released 7,000 men from 
Gwalior alone. It may be remembered that most of these were political 
ofibodera Private criminals were for the most part put to death, or 
mutilated, or fined. There were no r^lar jails. 

* The above translation of the Institutes should ho oompared with 
Sii Henry Elliot’s translation and his oommentaiy : Hiatofy of India, 
£. h D., voL vi, Appendix, p. 488. 



AOOOUHT or ooDra. 11 

nllr^oAOnC The half of this I ealled ntMM, and the 
ravoO^ With regard to the ailver coins {tUdeas), 
I gave to the ooin ci 100 tola the name of Ixmhab-i-iflU' 
(star of horoscope): to that of 50 tolOt the name of 
lccmhab-^4qh6l (stu of fortone); to that of 20 tola, the 
name of kaukcdhi-mtbrSd (star desire); to that of 
10 tola, the name of hauhah-i~b afAt (star of good lock) ; 
to that of 5 tola, the name of baiuhab-i-aa‘d (star of 
anspidoiisneas) ; to that of 1 tola, the name of jahdngiri. 
The half johS/agM I called att^Sdni; the quarter, niaS/ri, ' 
(showering monqjr): the dime, kkawr-i-qainl (the acceptable). 
Copper, also, 1 corned in the same proportions, and gave 
each division a pactioolar name. I ordered that on the 
gcdd muhr of 100, 60, 20, and 10 tola the following verse 
Afaf Shhn* should be impressed — namdy, on the 
obverse was this couplet : — 

“ F*te!8 pen wrote on the ooin in lottscs ol light. 

The {Qilh NSni'd'dln Jehinglr ” t 

and between the lines of the verse the Creed (Kalima) 
was impressed. On the reverse was this couplet, in which 
the date of coinage was signified : — 

•< Through this ooin is ths world brlghtsosd as hgr the sun, 

And the date thereof is ' Sun'^ Doaoinion ' (Aftab-i-Msinlnkst). ’* * 

Between the lines of the verse, the mint, the Hyra year, and 
the regnal year were impressed. On the nWr-jahO/M, which 
is in the place of the ordinary gold muhr and exceeds it 
in weight by 20 per cent, (os 12 to 10), is impressed this 
couplet of the Amlra-l-umar& : — 

" Sbah Nam-d-dln Jahangir ibn Akbnr ftddtlh 
BCade gold’s faos bright with ths ahoon of son and asoon.” 

' EisUasi’s MS. has ftM for and n^iar’i-fabat instead of 

U a ir -i-fabal. 

* nUs is Bfeehmaan’s Asaf IQMhi Na iii, vis. MbsS Ja’far Beg. 
Bee ppk aw and 411. 

* Ths words Aftib-i-llsmlsbat yield, aneording to the numeration by 
milfml, ths date 1014 a.a. (160S). 



12 


ACCOUNTS OF COINS AND CHBONOORAH8, 


Accordingly, a hemistich was imp&«s8ed on each face, and 
also the mint, and the Hijra and regnal year. The 
jaha'iiglrl sikka, also, which is greater in weight by 20 per 
cent., was reckoned as equal to a rupee, its weight being 
fixed in the same manner as that of the nUr^jdhdni (each 
was a tola in weight, but one was in gold and the other 
was in silver). The weight of a tola is 2} misqala of 
Persia and TClr&n.^ 

It would not be good to give all the versified chronograms 
which were made for my accession. I therefore content 
myself with the one which MaktQb Kb&n, the superintendent 
of the library and picture gallery, and one of my old 
servants, composed — 

The second lord of conjunction, SlM^Hin^h Jahftnglr, 

With justice and equity sat on the throne of happiness. 

Prosperity, Good Fortune, Wealth, Dignity, and Victory, 

With loins girt in his service, stood rejoicing before him. 

It became the date of the accession when Prosperity 
Placed his head at the feet of the ^liih-QirAn-i-^ani.” - 

To my son Khusrau a lakh of rupees was presented that 
he might build up for himself the house of Mun'ini Khftn * 
the (former) KhAnkh&nan. outside the fort. The admini- 
stration and government of the Panjab was bestowed on 


Page 4 of the text is followed by engravings of the coins of Jahangir 
and' the inscriptions thereon, fur wliich the editor, Saiyid Aliinad, says he 
is indebted to Mr. Thornhill, the Judge of Meerut. They do not show 
the lines of poetry. There is an interesting article on the couplets on 
Jahangir's coins by Mr. C. J. Rtalgers, J.A.S.B. for 1888, p. 18. 

' The clironogram is ingenious. The words Suliib-Qinin-i-Saiil yield 
only 1013 acrx)i*ding to ahjad, and this is a year too little. But the verse 
states that Prosperity (or Fortune), I<|bril, laid his head at the second lonl 
of conjunctioirs feet, and the head of l<|lNil, according to the parlance of 
clii*onograin-coni|K>Hcrs, is the first letter of the word, that is, alif, which 
stanfls for one (\) in ahjad, and so the date 1014 is mode up. SAhih- 
Pirund-Sanl moans * the second lord uf conjunction,* and is a title 
generally applicni to Shiih Jah&ii ; the first lord of conjunction (i.e the 
conjunction of Jupiter and Velius) was TiniOr. 

* A great ofiiccr under HunifiyOn and Akbar. See Ayin, Blochmann, 
p. 317. 



GIFTS TO OFFICERS. 


13 


SaTd Kb&n»^ who was one of the confidential nobles and 
connected with my father by marriage. His origin was 
from the Moghul tribe, and his ancestors were in the service 
of my forefathers. At the time of his taking leave, as it 
was said that his eunuchs oppressed and tyrannized over 
the weak and the poor, I sent a message to him that my 
justice would not put up with oppression from anyone, and 
that in tne scales of equity neither smallness nor greatness 
was regarded. If after this any cruelty or harshness 
should be observed on the part of his people, he would 
receive punishment without favour.’ 

Again, having previously bestowed on Shaikh Farid 
Bu kh ari, who had been Mir Bakh^i in my father’s service, 
a dress of honour, a jewelled sword, a jewelled inkstand 
and pen, 1 confirmed him in the same post, and in order to 
exalt him I said to him, regard thee as Sakibu-n-salf- 
wor-l-qoUim’* ('^Captain Sword and Captain Pen”). Muqfm,’ 
to whom my father had given at the end of his reign the 
title of Wazir Khan and the viziersliip of his dominions, 
1 selected for tlie same title, rank, and service. I also gave 
Khwiijagi Fathu-lloJx a dress of honour, and made him 
a bakhslii, as formerly 'Abdu-r Bazzaq Ma'muri, although 
when 1 was prince he had left uiy service without cause or 
reason and had gone over to my father, I made bakhshi as 
fonnerly, and I gave him a dress of honour. To Aminu-d- 
daula, wlio when I was prince had the post of bakhshi, and 
without my leave had run away and taken service with my 
revered father, not looking to his offences I gave the office 

I Blochuiann, p. 331. He had 1,200 eunuchs. He it generally ftt 3 'led 
Selkl Gho^otai. The exact nature of his relationship does not upfiear. 
It is not mentioned in his biography In tlie Ma’osir, ii, 403. Perlmps the 
word (nutof) does not here mean affinity by marriage. 

* According to the account in PHoe, p. 16, and in the Ma'isir, ii, 405, 
8a*id lyuhi gave a bond that if his people were oppressive he would 
forfeit his heed. 

* He does not seem to have hod any reel power, and he was soon 
superseded. See Ma’iiiir, iii, 032. 



14 Aooomrr or nuMiw smIx. 

of Ati^-i-begl^ (Head of the Artilleiy), which he had held 
under my father. I left all those wto were in possessian 
of posts, both inside and outside, in the positions whidk 
they had with my father. Sharif Sbhn* had lived with 
me from his early yeara When I was prince I had 
j^ven him the title of ^On, and when I left Allahabad 
to wait upon my honoured father 1 presented him with 
a drum and the tOmdn4o^ (standard of yOk tails). 
I had also promoted him to the rank oi 2,500 and given 
him the government of the province of Bihar. I gave *»»*" 
complete dontrol over the province, and sent him off there. 
On the 4th of iUyab, being fifteen days after my accession, 
he waited upon me. I was exceedingly pleased at his 
coming, for his connection with me is such that I look 
upon him as a brother, a son, a friend, and a companion. 
As I had perfect confidence in his friendship, intelligence, 
learning, and acquaintance with aflBiits, having made him 
Grand Vizier, I promoted him to the rank of 5,000 
with 5,000 horse and the lofty title of Amfru-l-umord, 
to which no title of my servants is superior. Though his 
position might have warranted a higher rank, he himself 
represented to me that until some notaUe service on his 
part had become perceptible to me he would not accept a 
higher grade than that mentioned (5,000). 

As the reality of the loyalty of my father’s servants had 
not yet become apparent, and certain faults and errors and 
unbecoming intentions which wqre not ajqtroved at the 
throne of the Creator or pleasing to His creatures had 

‘ It appears from Emkine and from I.O. MS. ttiat this is a mistaka for 
YAtifii-b^, * Captain of the Watch,’ and that the name is AmInaHl.dlB, 
and not Amlnu-d-daula. See Akharnkma, iii, 474, etc. 

* Sharif 'Khun had been sent by Akbar to reoall JahSn^ to his dnty, 
but instead of coming back he stayed on. Be did not accompany 
JahSngir When the latter went off the seeoo d than te vnit npoa his father, 
ftobably he wan airaid to do sa Jahlnglr appointed him to Bihar 
before he left AUahabnd to visit his lather for the second time. Jahkngir 
says Sharif Matted upon him Sfteen days after his a ceeae i on, and on 



ACCOUNT OF SHARIF KHAN» 


15 


shown themselves, they of themselves became ashamed. 
Though on the day of my accession *I had forgiven all 
offences and determined with myself that I would exact no 
retribution for past deeds, yet on account of the suspicion 
that had been aroused in my mind about them I considered 
the Amiru-l-umarft my guardian and protector ; although 
God Almighty is the guardian of all His servants, and is 
especially so of kings, because their existence is the cause 
of the contentment of the world. His father, 'Abdu-s- 
i^mad, who in the art of painting had no equal in the age, 
had obtained from the lateking(«7an7iaf-as&ydn{) Hum&yan 
the title of Shirln^alam (Sweet pen), and in his council 
had attained a great dignity and was on intimate terms with 
him (the king). He was one of the chief men of Sbir&z. 
My honoured father, on account of his former services, paid 
him great honour and reverence. 1 made Raja M&n Singh — 
who was one of the greatest and most trusted noblemen of 
my father, and had obtained alliances with this illustrious 
family, inasmuch as his aunt had been in my father's house 
(i.e. was his wife),^ and I had married his sister, and 
Khusrau and his sister Sult&nu-n-nis& Begam, the latter of 
whom is my eldest child, were bom of her — ^as before, ruler 
of the province of Bengal. Thoiigh as in consequence of 
certain of his acts he had no expectation of this favour 
towards himself, I dignified him with a chSnrqab (vest 
without sleeves) as a robe of honour, a jewelled sword, and 

4111 Rajab. This Is anothsr proof, if proof were needed, that the copyists 
haTS misread the opening sentence of the TOzuk and have writtei* 
Aoitlom instead of hutom, for 4th Rajab isSfteen days after 20th JumidA-l- 
41lihir* The Fid^hniiiia and m All Shin have 20th, and Price and 
Prioe'k original say that Qbarlf arrived sixteen days after the accession. 

' 1.0. MS. 181 and Mahammad Hidl have Snll&n Nifftr Begam. 
KbSfl SbSn, i, 24S, has 8ai|in Begam, and says she was born in 024. 
Price’s Jah&ngir, p. 20, says she was bora a year before Rhuoran. She 
built a tomb for herself in the Rbwou Bl^, Allahabad, but she is 
not buried there (see J.R.AS. for July, 1007, p. 007). She died on 
4th 8ba*bftn, 1056 (5th September, 1646), and was at W own request 
buried in her grsixlCather’B tomb at Sikandra (PiklMjUUiniina, ii, 603-4).' 



16 


Accoulirre of man singh and others. 


one of my own horses, and sent him off to his province, 
which is a place of (or can keep up) 50,000 horse. His 
father was Raja BhagwAn DAs. His grandfather. Raja 
BihAri Mai, was the first of the EachwAha Rajputs to have 
the honour of entering my father's service, and he excelled 
his tribe in truth and sincerity of friendship, and in the 
quality of valour. After my accession, when all the nobles 
with their retinues presented themselves at my palace, it 
came into my mind that I should send this body of retainers 
under my son, Sultan Parwiz, to make a holy war against 
tlie RAnA, who was one of evil deeds, and a foul infidel of 
the country of Hindustan, and in m> father^s time had 
had troops sent constantly against him, but had not been 
driven off. In a fortunate hour I invested my said son 
with gorgeous robes of honour, a jewelled waist - sword, 
a jewelled waist-dagger, and a rosary of pearls intermixed 
with rubies of great price of the value of 72,000 rupees, 
VlrAq and Turkman hoi*ses and famous elephants, and 
dismissed him. About 20,000 hoi'semen with nobles and 
chief leaders were appointed to this service. The first was 
Asaf Khan, who in my father's time was one of his con- 
fidential servants, and for a long time had been confirmed in 
the post of bakhshi and afterwards became diivan ba istiqldl 
(Chancellor with full powers) ; him 1 advanced from the 
rank of an Amir to that of Vizier, and pi'omoting him from 
the command of 2,500 horse to that of 5,000 made him 
guardian to Parwiz. Having honoured him with a robe of 
honour, jewelled waist-sword, a horse and an elephant, 
I ordered that all the manAabdars (commanders), small and 
great, should not depart from such orders as he thought 
proper to give them. I made ‘Abdu-r-Razzaq Ma'mUri his 
bakhshi and Mukhtar Beg, Asaf EhAn's paternal uncle, 
diwan to Parwiz. I also presented to Raja JagannAth, son 
of Raja Bihari Mai, who had the rank of 5,000, a robe of 
honour and a jewelled waist-sword. 

Again, I gave RAna Shankar, cousin of the RAnA — ^to 



PBOMOTIONS. NOTICE OF ICANOHAB. 


17 


whom my father had given the title of RanA, proposing to 
send him with Khusrau against the Rana, but at that time 
he (Akbar) became a hangar (a falcon, i.e. he died) — 
a robe of honour and a jewelled sword, and sent him 
with him. 

I presented Madho Singh, brothers son of Raja Man 
Singh, and Rawal Sal Darbari with flags, from this con- 
sideration, that tliey were always present at Court and 
belonged to the Sekhawat ^ Rajputs, and were oon- 
tidential servants of my father. Each received also the 
rank of 3,000. 

I promoted Slmikh Ruknu-d-din the Afghan, to whom 
when I was prince I had given the title of Shir Khan, 
from tlie grade of 500 to that of 3,500 Shir Khan is 
tlie head of his clan and a very valiant man. He lost his 
arm by the sword in service against the Uzbegs.* ‘Abdu-r- 
Ralnnan, son of Shaikh Abu-1-fazl, Maha Singh, grandson 
of Raja Man Singh, Zahid Khan, son of Sadiq KbAn, Wazir 
Jamil, and Qarh Khan Turkm&n were exalted to the rank 
of 2,000 ; all these obtained robes of honour and horses, 
and were dismissed. Munohar also obtained leave to join 
the expedition. He is of the tribe of the Sekhawat 
Kaclihwfihas, and on him in his young days my father 
bestowed many favoui-s. He had learned the Persian 
langxiage, and, altliough from him tip to Adam the power 
of iinderstaiKliiig cannot be attributed to any one of his 
tribe, lu^ is not without intelligence. He makes Persian 
versos, and the following is one of his couplets : — 

' * The object of shade in Creation is this': 

That DO one place his foot on the liglit of my Lord, the 8un.*'’ 


' Should be ShaikhiwaC 

^ The R.A.S. and LO. MSS. have here Umru instead of Ur.bcgs. 
Umra here stand.s, I think, for Umr Singh, the R&n& of Udaipflr, and the 
meaning is that Shir Khan lost his arm in service against the RAna. 

* The point of the verse seems to be that light is regarded ns some- 
thing spread like a carpet on the groond, ond that to place the foot upon 



18 


EXPEDITION AOAINfiT THE BIkI. 


If the details were to be described of all the commanders 
and servants appointed by me, with the conditions and 
connections and rank of each, it would be a long business. 
Many of my immediate attendants and personal followers 
and nobles’ sons, house-bom ones (khcmazadci/n) and 
zealous Bajputs, petitioned to accompany this expedition. 
A thousand ahadis, the meaning of which is single ones 
(Blochmann, p. 20), were also appointed. In short, a force 
was collected together such that if reliance on the Friend 
(God) were vouchsafed, it could have embarked on enmity 
and conflict with any one of the monarchs of power. 

' Soldiers came up from all sidM, 

Setting life from heroes of the world in battle ; 

Th^ had no fear of death from the sharp swo^, 

No terror of water^ and no flight from fire ; 

In Talonr singular, in Tigour a crowd. 

Anvils in endurance, rocks in attack.**' 


When I was prince I had entrusted, in consequence of 
my extreme confidence * in him, my own Uzuk seal ’ to the 
Amiru-l-umar& (Sharif), but when he was sent off to the 
province of Bihar I made it over to Parwlz. Now that 
Parwiz went off against the B&na, I made it over, according 
to the former arrangement, to the Amiru-l-umarft 

Parwiz was bom of Sahib-Jam&l (Mistress of Beauty), 


it is to insult the sun. Compare PHoe, p. 33 ; but Manohar's verse is 
wrongly translated there owing to a badly written MS. For UmanliMi 
see Akbarnfaia, iii, 221, and Badayilnl, iii, 201, also Blochmann, p. 404, 
and his article in OaleiUia .Htview for April, 1871, also the Dabistfln, 
translation, ii, 53. 

‘ Prolttbly here db means both water and the water of the sword. 
These lines are not in the R. A.S. or LO. MSS. 

* Text, (caution) ; the MSS. have iUiqdd (confidenoe), sad I 
adopt this reading. 

* Blochmann, p. 52. It was a small round seaL CtOk or flenk is 
a Tartar word meaning a ring, i.e. a signet-ring. 



BIBTH8 OF CHILDREN. 


19 


the cousin ^ of Zain Sb&n Koka, who, in point of affinity, 
was on the same footing* as Mirz& ‘Aziz Koka, in the 
34th year of my father's reign, in the city of Kabul, two 
years s>nd two months after the birth of Khusrau. After 
several other children had been bom to me and had been 
received into God’s mercy, a daughter was bom of 
Karamsi,* who belonged to the R&thor clan, and the child 
received the name of Bihar Banu Begam. To Jagat 
Oosa'in,^ daughter of the Mota Baja (the fat raja), 
was born Sultan Khurram, in the 36th year of my 
father's reign, corresponding to A.H. 999,® in the city of 
Lahore. His advent made the world joyous (^urram),* 

* Text, fobiyya (daughter), and thia led Blochmann (p. 477, note 2) to 
say that if Sayyid Ahmad's text was oorroct Jab&ngir must have 
forgotten, in the number of his wives, which of them was the mother of 
Parwiz. As a fact, Sayyid Ahmad’s text is not correct, though the 
R.A.S. MS. agrees with it. The two excellent 1.0. MSS. have 
(relative), which is here equivalent to cousin. So also has the B.M. MS. 
used by Erskine. Acv )rding to Muhammad Midi’s preface Parwis’s 
mother was the daughter of Khwija Hasan, the paternal uncle of Zain 
lUian Koka. His birth was in Muharram, 998. or 19th Aban (November, 
1589). See also Akbarnama, iii, 5^. 

’ I.e., both were Akbar's foster-brothers. 

* Price, p. 20, has Karmitty, and says the daughter only lived two 
months. Karamsi appears twice in the Akbarnima as the name of 
a man ; see Akbarnama, ii, 261, and iii, 201. The name may mean 
* composed of kindness.* The statement in Price is wrong. Bihir 
Bana was married to T^l^muras s. Prince Diniyil in his 2()th year (see 
Tazuk, M. Midi’s continuation, p. 4(X)). According to M. Hidl’s prelaoe, 
Karamsi was the daughter of Rija Kesho Dis Ritbcir, and her daughter 
Bihir BinU was born on 23rd Shahriwar, 998 (September, 1590). Nesho 
Das Rathor is probably the Kesho Dis MirO of the TAsnk. 

* Best known as Jodh Bii (Blochmann, p^ 619). 

* It is extraordinary that Jahingir should have put 8b8h-Jahin’s 

birth into A.H. 999. The 1.0. MSS. support the text, but the R.'A.S. 
MS. has A.H. 1000. which is without doubt righh Cf. Akbarnima, Bib. 
Ind., iii, 603. Later on, a great point was made of his having been bqrn 
in a millennium. The date is 5th January, 1592. . ^ w 

* Muhammad Midi says in his preface, p. 6, that ShMi-Jahin’s grand- 
father ^bar gave him the name of SuUain IKburram, ’ Prince Joy, 
becanae his birth made the world glad. It a'as noted that the child was 
born in the Erst .millennium, lind also that, like his father,, he w ae bom 
in the tame month the Pro|ihet. 



20 BIRTHS OF CHILDREN. NOTICE OF MIRZA GHAZI. 


and gradually, as his years increased, so did his excellencies, 
and he was more attentive to my father than all (my) 
other children, who was exceedingly pleased with and 
grateful for his services, and always recommended him to 
me and frequently told me there was no comparison 
between him and my other children. He recognised him 
as his real child. 

After that (Khurram’s birth) some other children were 
bom who died in infancy, and then within one month two 
sons were borne by concubines. One of these I called 
Jahandar and the other Shahryar.^ 

About this time there came a petition from Sa'id Khan 
with regard to granting leave to Mirza Ghazi, who was 
a son of the ruler of the province of Thathah (Tattah in 
Sind)." I said that as my father had betrothed his sister 
to my son Khusrau, please God, wlien this alliance came 
into force, I would give him leave to return to Sind. 

A year beforf* I became king I had determined that 
I would drink no wine on Friday eve, and I hope at the 
throne of God that He will keep me irm in this resolve as 
long as I live. 

Twenty thousand rupees were given to Mirza Muhammad 
Ri^ Sabzwari to divide amongst the faqirs and the 
needy of Delhi. The viziership of my dominions I gave in 
the proportions of half and half to Khan Beg,^ to whom 
when I was prince I had given the title of Waziru-l-mulk, 
and to Wazir Kb&u * (Muqim), and I gave to Shaikh Farid 
Bul^ri, who held the rank of 4,000, that of 5,000. 


' Gladwin siys they were twins, but this ‘.seems a mistake. They were 
both born about the time of Akbor’s death. 

• In MS. No. 310 of Eth^’s Cit. of I.O. MSS. Sa*id KhAn is described 
as giving os his reason for asking for M. Ohazi that he had adopted him 
as hts son. Price’s .Jahangir, p. 21, saya the same thing. 

’ This should be Jkn, and is ao in I.O. MS. 181 

* See Ma’uairu-I-umara, iii, 932. The meaning of the and half is 
iliat the two mcu were mode coadjutors. 



PROMOTIONS OF OFFICERS. 


21 


T promoted Kam Das Kachhwaha, whom my father hod 
favoured, and who held the rank of 2,000, to that of 3,000. 
I sent dresses of honour to Mirza Rustam, son of Mirza 
Sultan Husain and grandson of Shah Isma'il, the ruler of 
Qandahar, and to 'Abdu-r-Bahlm Kbanl^anan, son of 
Bairam Khan, and to Iraj and Darab, his sons, and to other 
nobles attached to the Deccan (command). Barkhurdar, son 
of * •* Abdu-r<Rahman, son of Mu ayyid Beg, as he had come 
to court without a summons, I ordered back to his jagir. 
^ It is not according to good manners to go to the king’s 
banquet without a summons, otherwise there would be no 
forbidding of the doors and walls to the foot of clesire. 

A month had elapsed after my auspicious accession 
when Lala Beg, who while I was prince had obtained the 
title of Baz Bahadur, obtained the blessing of waiting on 
me. His rank, which had been 1,500, was raised to 4,000. 
I promoted him to the Subah of Bihar and gave him 
2,000 rupees. Baz Bahadur is of the lineage of tlie special 
attendants of our family; his father's name was Nizam, 
and he was librarian to Humayun. Kesho Das Marti, who 
is a Rajput of the province of Mairtha and is greater in 
loyalty than liis contemporaries, 1 promoted to Hm* rank of 
1 ,500. I directed the *tUamd and the learned men of Islam 
to collect those of the distinctive appellations of (hxl which 
were easy to remember, in order that I might make them 
into rny rosary ^ (tmird). On Friday eves ^ 1 associate with 
learned and pious men, and with dervishes and recluses. 
When Qilij Khan, who was one of the old retainers of the 
Stale in my revered father's reign, was appointed to the 
government of the province of Gujarat, I presented him 
with a lakh of rupees for his expenses. I raised Miran 

* In R. A.S. and I.O. MSS. the following jiaHHage is a verse. See also 
Mr. Lowe's translation, p. IS. 

- llVrrf means ‘ daily practice,' and may be the word inteiulerl hero. 

•* Cf. this with the fuller det.-iils in Price, p. ‘2*2. Following Blochniann, 
i take Shab-i-juin'u to mean Thursday an<l not Fri<lay 



22 gLDJt lABlXi. OBITlS BEG. 

• •• 

9«dr Ja)i&n from the rank of 2,000 to that of 4,000. 
I knew him in my childhood when I read the Forty 
Sayings” with SStiai]^ 'Abdu-n-Nabi,^ whose history is 
given in detail in the Akbam&ma. From these early days 
till now Mirftn Q^dr Jah&n has acted towards me with 
single-minded loyalty, and I regard him as my preceptor 
in religions matters Qduillfa). Whilst I was prince and 
before my revered father’s illness, and daring that time, 
when the ministers (pillars of the State) and the high 
nobles had become agitated, and each had conceived some 
idea of gain for himself and wished to become the originator 
of some act which could only bring min on the State, he 
had not failed in the activity of his service and devotedness. 
Having made ^Inlyat Beg,* who for a long period in the 
reign of my father had been Master of Works (Dfiodn-i- 
buyiUM) and held the rank of 700, half-vizier of my 
dominions in the place of Wazir I gave him the 

high title of Itim&du-d-daula with the rank of 1,500, and 
I appointed Wazir ^^h&n to the Diwami of the province of 
Bengal, and assigned to him the settlement of the revenues 
thereof. To Patr Die, who in the time of my father had 
the title of B&y B&y&n, I gave the title of Raja Bikramajit. 
The latter was one of the great Rajas of India, and it was 
in his reign that astronomical observatories were established 
in India. I made Patr Das Master of Ordnance, and 
ordered that he should always have light artillery * in the 


‘ The text has 'Abdu-l-@^o!, but this, as the MSS. show and 
Blochinann has pointed out, is a mistake for *Abdu-n-Nabi. 'AMu n- 
Nabl was strangled, and the common report is that this was done liy 
Abu-l-fafL If this be true it is rather surprising that Jahangir does not 
mention it as an excuse for killing Abu-l-fa;xl. Cf. the account of 
Mirftn Sadr Jah&n in Price, p. 24. The ** Forty Sayings " is a book by 
J&mi. See Rieu, Cat. i, 17, and also Dr. Herbelot s*.v. Arbain. 

* This should be Qhiyfts Beg. He was father of NQrjahan. According 
to the Ma*&8iru-l-umar& (i, 129), he was commander of 1,000 under Akbar. 

* Topkhdna-i-rikdh, lit. stirrup-arsenal. It means light artillery tliat 
could accompany royal progresses. See Bernier, and Irvine, A. of M., 134. 



OBANTS OF JAOIS8. 


arsenal, 60,000 light guns^ and 3,000 gim-carriages, ready 
and in efficient order. He was a khairi by caste, and rose in 
my father’s service from being accountant of the elephants’ 
stables to be diwan and an amir. He is not wanting in 
military qualities and in administrative skill. I made 
Khurram, the son of Sb&n A‘^m (*Aziz Eoka), who had 
had the rank of 2.000, an officer of 2,500. 

As it was my desire that many oi the Akbari and 
Jahangiri officers should obtain the fruition of their wishes, 
I informed the bakhshis that whoever wished to have his 
birthplace made into his jagir should make a representation 
to that effect, so that in accordance with the Chingiz canon 
{tiJi/ra) the estate might be conveyed to him by al tamgh^ 
and become his property, and he might be secured from 
apprehension of change. Oui ancestors and forefathers 
were in the habit of granting jagirs to everyone under 
proprietary title, and adorned the farmans for these with 
the al tamgka seal, which is an impressed seal made in 
vermilion (i.e. red ink). I ordered that they should cover 
the place for the seal, with gold-leaf (Hldpo^) and impress 
the seal thereon, and I called this the alt an * tamgha. 

* Text, topeht, which Beeme properly to mean a gunner, but the 
number is preposterous. Cf. Blochmann, p. 470, and Price, p. 28. Price’s 
original has 6,000 topehl mounted on camels, and has pdyta^, i.e. the 
capital. Erskine has ** To have always in readiness in the arsenal arms, 
and accoutrements for 50,000 matchlock men.” This seems reasonable, 
for even if Jahangir ordered 50,000 musketeers, he would not have 
required them to be kept in the arsenal. It seems to me that though 
ehl in Turki is the sign of the agent (nomen ogtrUiB) it is occasionally 
used by Indian writers as a diminutive. Thus topehl here probably 
means a small gun ur a musket, and in Hindustani we are familiar with 
the word Mlamchi, which meana a small basin. At p. .301 of the Tuzuk, 
four lines from foot, we have the word i/cAf, which commonly inciin.s an 
ambassador — ^an agent of a people — used certainly not in this seii.^e, and 
apparently to mean a number of horses. It is, however, doubtful if 
iUhl here be the true reading. 

^ Text, aknun (now), which is a mistake for altUn (gold). See Elliot 
and Dowson, vi, 288. Al vermilion in Turki and rUtun golfl. 
Jahangir m6ans that he changed the name from til lamfjhn to aUtoi 
famffkd. 



24 


HIRZl SULTAN. BU SINGH BEu. 


I had selected from the other sons of Shthrukh. Mirza 
SulfSii/ son of MirzA Sb&hml^ the grandson of MirzA 
SnlainiAn, who was a descendant (great-grandson) of 
MiizA Snl^n AbG Sa'id an«f for a long time ruler of 
Badakhshan, and with consent of my* revered father 
brought him into my service. I count him as a son, and 
have promoted him to the rank of 1.000. I also promoted 
BhAo Singh, son of Raja MAn Singh and the most capable 
of his sons, from his original rank to that of 1,500. 
I raised ZamAna Beg,* son of Ghayur Beg of Kabul, who 
has served me personally from his childhood, and who, 
when I was prince, rose from the grade of an ahadi to 
that of 500, giving him the title of Mahabat SbAn and the 
rank of 1,500. He was confirmed as bakhshi of my private 
establishment (sj^ird-pi^a). 

I promoted Raja Bir Singh Deo, a Bandeia Rajput, who 
had obtained my favour, and who excels his equals 
and relatives in valour, personal goodness, and simple- 
heartedness, to the rank of 3,000. The reason for his 
advancement and for the regard shown to him was that 
near the end of my revered father s time, ^aikh Abu-l-fazl, 
who excelled the ShaikhzaJas of Hindustan in wisdom and 
learning, had adorned himself outwardly with the jewel of 
sincerity, and sold it to my father at a heavy price. He 
had been summoned from the Deccan, and, since his feelings 
towards me were not honest, he both publicly and privately 
svx>ke against me. At this period when, through strife-) 
exciting intriguers, the august feelings of my royal father 
were entirely embittered against me, it was certain that if 
he obtained the honour of waiting on him ( Akbar) it would 
bo the cause of more confusion, and would preclude me 

' Mirza Sultan was great-grandson of Sulaim&n. 

Perhaps the rcfereuco is to the boy’s own father. Ho was alive at 
chis time, and Akbar was not. 

’ This is the man who afterwards rebelled and made Jahangir his 
prisoner. 



HUBDER OF ABU-L-FAZL. 


25 


from the favour of union with him (my father). It became 
necessary to prevent him from coming to Court. As Bir 
Singh Deo’s country was exactly on his route and he was 
then a rebel, I sent him a message that if he would stop 
that sedition-monger and kill him he would receive every 
kindness from me. By God’s grace, when Shaikh Abu-1-fazl 
was passing through Bir Singh Deo’s country, the Raja 
blocked his road, and after a little contest scattered his 
men and killed him. He sent his head to me in Allahabad. 
Although this event was a cause of anger in the mind of 
the late king (Akbar), in the end it enabled me to proceed 
without disturbance of mind to kiss the threshold of my 
father’s palace, and by degrees the resentment of the king 
was cleared away. 

I made Mir Ziya’u-d-din of Qazwin, who had done me 
service in the days of my princehood and had shown 
loyalty, commander of 1,000 and accountilnt of the stables. 
An order was given that every day thirty horses should 
be produced before me for the purpose of making presents. 
1 honoured Mirza 'Ali Akbarshahi, who is one of the dis- 
tinguished braves of this family/ with the rank of 4,000, 
and gave him the sarkar of Sambhal os his jagir. 

One day the Amiru-l-umara (Sharif Khan) greatly pleased 
me by an incidental remark. It was this : ** Honesty and 
dishonesty are not confined to matters of cash and goods ; 
to represent qualities as existing in acquaintances which 

’ Text, nluB-i-DiKli, Blochmann (p. 482 n. ) {x>into out that this is a very 
doubtful term, as Mirz& 'All came from Badakhshan. On examining 
three MSS. of the Tazuk-i-Jah&ngiri 1 find no word Dihlit but the 
words la u/fis, ' this tribe or family/ and I think this must be the correct 
reading, and refers to the Timurides. The same phrase occurs at text, 
p. 173. Blochmann suggests to read DUdddy for Dihli^ but 1 think it 
more probable that the word Dihii should be 'd/l. Mlrz& *Ali was 
styled Akharfhahl^ and no doubt this is why Jah&ngir writes in vJhh 
or Mirza *Ali is often mentioned in the Akbarnania in 

connection with the wars in the Deccan, and is generally culled 
Akbar^iAhi, e.g. at p. 702. For an account of his pathetic death see 
Blochmann, l.c., the Ma*usiru-l-umar&, iii, 357. and the text, p. 163. 



26 


DESIGNS UPON TRANSOXIANA. 


do not exist, and to conceal the meritorious qualities of 
strangers, is dishonerty. In truth, honesty of speech 
consists in making no distinction between intimates and 
strangers and in describing each man as he really is.” 

When I sent off Parwiz I had said to him, " If the Bana 
himself, and his eldest son who is called Earan, should come 
to wait upon you and proffer service and obedience, you 
should not do any injury to his territory.” My intention 
in this recommendation was of two kinds; one, that 
inasmuch as the conquest of Transoxiana was always in 
the pure mind of my revered father, though every time he 
determined on it things occurred to prevent it, if this 
business could be settled, and this danger dismissed from 
my mind, I would leave Parwiz in Hindustan, and in reliance 
on Allah, myself start for my hereditary territories, 
especially as at this time there was no permanent ruler in 
that region. Baqi Eh&n, who, after 'Abdu-llah Kh&n and 
*Abdu-l-Mu’min Kh&n, his son, had acquired complete inde- 
pendence, had died, and the affairs of Wali Muhammad 
Kb&n, his- brother, who is now the ruler of that region, had 
not as yet been brought into proper order. Secondly, to 
bring about the termination of the war in the Deccan, of 
which a part in the time of my revered father had been 
acquired, so that it might come into possession, and be 
incorporated with the Imperial dominions. My hope is 
that through the favour of Allah both these undertakings 
will be accomplished. 

** Though a king should seize the seven climes,' 

He still would labour to take others.” 

I promoted Mirza Sb&hrukh,- grandson of Mirza Sulaiman, 
(once) the ruler of Badakhshan, who was nearly related to 

' The MSS. have a different reading, '* If a king seize country and 
climes,” etc. 

* Shahrukh was married to JohiLnglr’s half-sister, Shakaru-n-nisa. He 
was a Timurid. 



ACCOUNT OF HIRZI ^HRUM. 27 

my family, and held the rank of 5,000 in my father’s 
service, to the rank of 7,000. The Mirz& is a true Turk 
in disposition and simple-minded. My father conferred 
great honour on him, and whenever he bade his own sons 
sit he gratified him also with this distinction. Notwith- 
standing the mischievous propensities of the people of 
Badakhshan, the Mirz& in this familiarity never left the 
right road, or undertook anything that might lead to 
unpleasantness. 1 confirmed him in the Subah of Malwa 
just as my father had kindly conferred it on him. 

I conferred on Ehwaja *Abdu-llah, who is of the Naqsb- 
bandi family, and in the commencement of his service was 
an ahadi, and who had risen by degrees to the command of 
1,000, but without reason had gone into my father’s service, 
the rank and jagir my father had conferred on him. 
Although I considered it best for my own prosperity that 
my attendants and people should go into his (Akbar’s) 
service, yet this had occurred without my leave, and I was 
rather annoyed at it. But the fact is that he is a manly 
and zealous man ; if he had not committed this fault he 
would have been a faultless hero (jatoan), 

Abu-n-nabi,^ the Uzbeg, who is one of the distinguished 
inhabitants of Mawara’a-n-naht and in the time of 'Abdu-1- 
Mu’min Kh&n was governor of Mashhad, obtained the 
rank of 1,500. 

»Shaikh Hasan is the son of Shaikh BahA* From the 
days of his childhood to this day he has always been in my 
service and in attendance on me, and when I was prince 
was distinguished by the title of Muqarrab EhAn. He 
was very active and alert in his service, and in hunting 
would often traverse long distances by my side. He is 


* The MSS. have Aba-l>wall, and thin seems more likely. 

* The MSS. liave Bhliia, and Price’s original seems also to have Bhiiia. 
Muqarrab did not return for about seven months, as this entry could not 
liave been made till then. See p. S5 of Persian text of TQzuk. 



28 


MUQARRAB KHXK. KAQIB KHAN. 


skilful with the arrow and the gun, and in surgery is the 
most skilful of his time. His ancestors also had been well 
practised in this profession. After my accession, in con- 
sequence of the perfect confidence I had in him, I sent him 
to Burhanpur to bring the cliildren and dependants of my 
brother Daniyal to wait on me, and sent a message to the 
Khankhanan in low and high words ^ and profitable ad- 
monitions. Muqarrab Khan performed this service correctly 
and in a short time, and, clearing off the suspicions which 
had entered the minds of the Kh&nkhan&n and the nobles 
of that place, brought those who had been left behind 
by my brother in safety and security, together with his 
establishment and property and effects, to Lahore, and 
there presented them before me. 

I promoted Naqib Kban,^ who is one of the genuine 
Sayyids of Qazwin and is called Qhiyasu-d-din *Ali, to the 
rank of 1,500. My father had distinguished him with the 
title of Naqib I^an, and in his service he had complete 
intimacy and consideration. Shortly after his accession he 
(Akbar) had discussed several matters with him, and from 
this familiarity he called him akkund. He has no equal or 
rival in the science of history and in biographies. There 
is in this day no clironologist like him in the inhabited 
world. From the beginning of Creation till the present 
time, he has by heart the tale of the four quarters of the 
world. Has Allah granted to any other person such 
faculty of memory ? 

* Text, Sukhundn-i-paM u hvland. Cf. Steingass, 8.v. past. Words 
gentle and severe seem meant. 

* See Bloohinanii, p. 447. He is moiitioncd by Du Jarric as disputing 
with the Catholic priests before Jahangir (see J.A.S.B. for 1896, p. 77). 
According to Badayuni, iii, 98, it was Naqil)’s father, *Al)du-l Latif, 
with whom Akbur read (see AkljariianiH, ii, 19). ‘AWu-l Liitif and his 
family arrived in 963 (1556). Erskine understantis Jahangir’s remark to 
mean that Naqib Ma.s his (Jahangir’s) teacher, but jn-obably Jahangir 
means that it was Naqib’s father who Uiught Akbur, or he h.is confouiidfx) 
the father and son. As Naqib lived till 102.3 (1614), he would proliably 
be too 3 'ouiig in 1 .k> 6 to have been Akbar's te-aober. 



OUTBREAK OF RAJPUTS. 


29 


Shaikh Kabir, who was of the family of tho venerable 
Shaikh Salim, I had honoured with the title of §haja‘at 
Kh&n when I was prince, on account of his manliness and 
bravery. I now selected him for the rank of 1 ,000. 

On Sha'ban 27th (28th December, 1606) a strange thing 
was done by the sons of Akhayraj,son of Bhagw&n Das, the 
paternal uncle* of Raja Man Singh. These unlucky ones, 
who bore the names of Abhay RAm, Bijay Ram, and Shyam 
Ram, were exceedingly immoderate. Notwithstanding that 
the aforesaid Abhay Ram haddoneimproper(disproportioned) 
acts, I had winked at his faults. When at this date it 
was represented to me that this wretch was desirous of 
d espat'ehin g his wives and children without leave to his own 
country and afterwards of himself running away to the 
Rana, who is not loyal to this family, I referred to Ram 
Das and other Rajput nobles, and said to them that if any 
one of them would become security for them, I would confirm 
the rank and jagir of those wretches, and passing over 
their offences would forgive them. In consequence of their 
excessive turbulence and bod disposition no one became 
security. I told the Amiru-l-uinara that as no one would 
be bound for them, they must be handed over to the charge 
of one of the servants of the Com-t until security was 
forthcoming. The Amiru-l-umara gave them over to IbrAhim 
El&kar, who was afterwaixls dignified with tho title 
of Dil&war Kb&n, and ll&tim,’’ second son of Mangli, who 
held the title of Slifthnaw&z Khan.* When these wished 
to disarm these foolish people, they refused, and, not 
observing the duos of good manners, began, together with 
their servants, to quarrel and fight. The Amiru-l-umara 
reported the dreumstonce to me, and I oixlercd them to be 

^ Ifin Singh wo the adofited von of Bhugw&n DAi, and it wouUI 
appear from this paasage that he waa liia nephew aivo. 

* The MSS. hare HAtim a. SahQl Mangli, and thia is righcw See 
Blochmann, p. 370, n. i, and p. 473. 

> The MSS. have Shahw&r. 



30 BIOT. SHAira HUSAIN JImFs DREAM. 

punished according to their deeds. He betook himself to 
driving them off, and I sent Shaikh Farid also after him. 
One Rajput armed with a sword, and another with a dagger 
stood up to the Amiru-l-umara. One of his attendants 
named Qutb engaged the man with the dagger and was 
killed. The Rajput also was cut to pieces. One of the 
Afghan attendants of the Amiru-I-umara attacked the one 
who had the sword and killed him. Dilawar lOian drew 
his dagger and turned towards Abhay Ram, who with two 
others was holding his ground, and after wounding one of 
these fell down after receiving wounds from the three. 
Some of the ahadis and the men of the Amiru-l>umara 
opposed and slew these doomed men. A Rajput drew his 
sword and turned to SbO'ikb Farid ; he was met by a 
Habshi slave, who brought him down. This disturbance 
took place in the courtyard of the public palace. That 
punishment served os a warning to many who had not 
looked to consequences. Abu-n-nabi^ represented that if 
such a deed had been done in the Uzbeg country the whole 
family and connections of that band of men would have 
been destroyed. I replied that as these people had been 
treated kindly and educated by iny revered father I carried 
on the same benevolence to them, and justice demands that 
many shall not be chastised for the fault of one. 

Shaikh Husain Jami, who now sits on the cushion of 
danvi^l and is one of the disciples Oi the dervish of SIriraz,' 
had written to me from Lahore six months before my 
accession that he had seen in a dream that saints and pious 
men had delivered over the afiaii*s of the kingdom to that 


* I.O. MSS. have Aba-l-wali. He won an Uzl>eg, and received the 
title of Bahadur I^ian. See Mn aHirii-l-umaru, i, 4U0, and Akbamama, 
iii, 820 and 830, where he is called Ahu-l-Baqu. The real name seems to 

/ be Abal Be or Bey, and this is how Krskinc writes the name. 

* The text seems corrupt. The 1.0. MSS. say nothing about Shiraz, 
but merely that Ilus;iiii .Tfnnl was a diiiciplo wlio luid a dervish character 
(ifimt ) ; nor does the H.A.S. MS. mention Shims. 



ABt-L-al8IM NAMAKIN. 


31 


chosen one of the Court of Allah (Jahangir), and that, 
rejoicing in this good news, he should await the event, and 
that he hoped that when it had occurred, the faults of 
]^waja Zakariyya, who was one of the Al.irariyya,^ would 
be pardoned ‘ 

I conferred on Ta^ Beg Furji,^ who was one of the 
old servants of the State, and whom my father had 
honoured with the title of Taj Khan, and who had the 
rank of 2,000, that of 3,000, and I raised Tukhta^ Beg 
Kabuli from the rank of 2,500 to that of 3,000. He is 
a brave and active man, and was greatly trusted in the 
service of my uncle, Mirza Muhammad Hakim. I promoted 
Abu-l-Qasim Tamkin,® who was one of my father's old 
servants, to the rank of 1,500. There are few men such as 
he for abundance of children ; he has thirty sons, and if 
his daughters do not number so many they must be half 
that number. I dignified Shaildi *Ala'u>d-din, grandson of 
Shaikh Salim, who had strong connections with me, with 
the title of Islam Kban, and promoted him to the rank of 


^ That is, descended from the famous Central Asian saint Khwaja 
Ahrftr. 

* Something seems to have fallen out of the text and MSS., for this 
passage is obscure and not connected with the context. It is clearer in 
Price’s version, where it is brought in as part of Jahangir’s statements 
about promotions, and where (p. 40) we read as follows I shall now 
return to the more grateful subject of recording rewards and advance- 
ments .... On ^waja 2Uariyy&, the son of lOiwaja Muliaiiimad 
Yahya, although in disgrace, I copferred the rank of 500. This I was 
induced to do on the recommendation of the venerated Shaikh Husaiu 
JOml. Six months previous to my accession,” etc. Evidentiy the 
statement about Zakariyy&’s promotion has been omitted accidentally 
from theTOzuk. There is a reference to the Shaikh’s dream in Muhammad 
Hidl’s preface to the TOzuk (p. 15). He says there that it was the saint 
Bahh’tt-l-haqq who appeared in E dream to Husain Jami and told him 
that Sultto Salim would soon be king. 

’ Le. M Furj or Fnrg in Persia. But Furji is a mistake for QQrchl 
(belongiDg to the body-guard). He was a Mogul. See Blochmann, p. 457. 

* Text has wrongly Fakhta. See Blochmann, p. 469. He received the 
title of SardOr KhAn. 

* Should be Kamaklo. See Blochmann, p. 199. 



32 PROMOTIONS, DISCUSSION WITH PANDITS, 

2,000. He had giown up with me from his childhood, and 
m ly be a year younger than L He is a brave and well- 
dispositioned youth, and is distinguished in every way above 
his family. Till now he has never drunk intoxicating 
drinks, and his sincerity towards me is sueh that I have 
honoured him witli the title of son. 

I have bestowed on 'All Asghar Barlia, who has not a 
rival in bravery and zeal, and is the son of Sayyid Mahmud 
Khan Barha, one of my father’s old nobles, the title of Saif 
Khan, and thus distinguished him amongst his equals and 
connections. He is evidently a brave youth. He was 
always one of the confidential men who went with me to 
hunt and to other places. He has never in his life drunk 
anything intoxicating, and as he has abstained in his youth 
he probably will attain high dignities. I granted him tlie 
rank of 3,000. 

I propmoted Faridfiii, son of Muhammad Qiili Khan Biirlas, 
who held the rank of 1 ,000, to that of 2,000. Faridfin is 
one of the tribe of Chaghatay, and is not devoid of manliness 
and courage. 

I promoted Shaikh Bayazid, grandson of Shaikh Salim, 
who lield the rank of 2,000, to that of 3.000. The first 
person who gave me milk, but for not more than a day, 
was the mother of Shaikh Bayazid. 

'One day I observed to the Pandits, that is, tlie wise men 
of the Hindus, “It the doctrines of your religion arc based 
on the incarnation of the Holy Person of Qod Almighty in 
ten different forms by the process’ of metempsychosis, they 
arc virtually rcyoctcd by the intelligent. This pernicious 
idea requiix^s that the Sublime Cause, who is void of all 
limitations, should be possessed of length, breadth, and 
thickne.ss. If the purpose is the manifestation of the Light 
of God in these bodies, that of itself is existent equally in 

> This piiHMugo has been translated by Elliot (vi, 280). See also Price 
(p 44), wlier« the discussion is fuller. 



DISCUSSION WITH PANDITS. AKBAR’S PERSON. 33 


all created things, and is not peculiar to these ten forms. 
If the idea is to establish some one of God’s attributes, even 
then there is no right notion, for in every faith and code 
there are masters of wonders and miracles distinguished 
beyond the other men of their age for wisdom and 
eloquence.”^ After much argument and endless oontro- 
versy» they acknowledged a God of Gods, devoid of a body 
or accidents,^ and said, As our imagination fails to con- 
ceive a formless personality (^t-i-mu^'orrod), we do not 
find any way to know Him without the aid of a form. 
We have therefore made these ten forms the means of 
conceiving of and knowing Him/’ Then said I, How can 
these forms be a means of your approaching the Deity 

My father always associated with the learned of every 
creed and religion, especially with Pandits and the learned 
of India, and although he was illiterate, so much became 
clear to him through constant intercourse with the learned 
and wise, in his conversations with them, that no one knew 
him to be illiterulc, and he was so acquainted with the 
niceties of verse and prose compositions that his deficiency 
was not thought of. 

In his august personal appearance he was of middle 
height, but inclining to be tall ; he was of the hue of wheat ; 
his eyes and eyebrows v*ere black, and his complexion rather 
dark than fan , he was lion-bodied,’ with a broad chest, and 
his hands and arms long. On the left side of his nose he 
had a fleshy mole, very agreeable in appearance, of the sice 

> Jahangir's idea is somewhat vaguely expressed, but his meaning 
seems to be that the ten incarnations do not inustrate any attribute of 
God, for there have been men who perfonned similar wondera The 
corresponding passage in the text used by Major Price is differently 
rendered by him, but his version isavowedly a paraphrase, and it appears 
incorrect in this passage. 

* Literally, **of the How and the Why.” 

’ Text, ihlr andam, * tiger-shaped,* which I tliink means thin in the 
dank (see Steingass, av.). I have taken the translation of the words 
maUiJIjal and fahahtA from Elliot. See his note vi, 376, where the two 
words seem wrongly spelt. 



34 


AKBAR'fi OHIIiDBBK. 


oi half a pea. Thoee skilled in the scienoe of physiognomy 
considered this mole a sign of great prosperity and exceeding 
good fortune. His august voice was very loud, and in 
speaking and explaining had. a peculiar richness. In his 
actions and movements he was not like the people of the 
world, and the glory of God manifested itself in him. 

'*OrettUieeB in his mAnnsr« kingdiip in his linesge. 

As if Solomon wonld hsre put the ring on his finger.*’ ^ 

Three months after my birth my sister, ghahz&da KbAnam* 
was bom to one of the royal concubines ; they gave her 
over to his (Akbar's) mother, Maryam Makfini. After her 
a son was bom to one of the concubines, and received the 
name of Shah Murftd. Ac his birth occurred in tne hill 
country of Fatbphr, he was ziicknamed Pahari When 
my revered father sent him to conquer the Deccan, he 
Had taken to excessive drinking through associating with 
unworthy persons, so that he died in his 30th year, in 
the neighbourhood of J&ln&ptir, in the province of Berar. 
His personal appearance was fresh-coloured ; he was thin 
in body and tall of stature. Dignity and authority were 
evident in bis movements, and manliness and bravery 
manifested themselves in his ways. On the night of 
Jumada-l-awwal 10th, a.h. 979 (September, 1572), another 
son was bom to one of the concubines. As his birth took 
place at Ajmir in the house of one of the attendants of the 
blessed shrine of the reverend Sbw&ja Mu’inu-d-din Chiehti, 
whose name was Shaikh D&niy&l, this child was called 
DftniyaL 

After the death of my brother Sb&h Murid he (Akbar), 
towards the end of his reign, sent D&niy&l to conquer the 
Deccan and followed him himself. When my revered father 
was besieging Asir (Asirgarh) he, with a large body of 
nobles such as the Sb&nkhto&n and his sons and Mirz& 
T9saf IKJiun, invested the fort of Ahmadnagar, and it came 

' Erskine hue Let SulmimAn plsoe his ring on his finger.*’ 



AOCOUNT OF SULTAN DANITIL. 


36 


into the possession of the victorious officers about the time 
that Asir was taken. After my father ‘Arsh-ashy&ni had 
returned in prosperity and victory from Burhanpur towards 
his capital, he gave the province to D&niy&l and left him in 
possession of that territory. D&niyal took to improper ways, 
like his brother Sh&h Mur&d, and soon died from excessive 
drinking, in the 33rd year of his age. His death occurred 
in a peculiar way He was very fond of guns and of 
hunting with the gun. He named one of his guns yaka 
ujandza , ' the same as the bier/ and himself composed this 
couplet and had it engraved on the gun : — 

“ From the joy of the chase with thee, life is fresh and new ; 

To everyone whom thy dart strikes, ’tis the same as his bier.’* ' 

When his drinking of wine was carried to excess, and the 
circumstance was reported to my father, farmans of reproach 
were sent to the Kbankh&nto. Of course he forbade it. 
and placed cautious people to look after him properly. 
When the road to 'Wng wine was completely closed, he 
began to weep and to importune some of his servants, and 
said : “ Let them bring me wine in any possible way.” He 
said to Mur^id Quli Khan, a musketeer who was in his 
immediate service : Pour some wine into this yaJca u 
jandza, and bring it to me.” That wretch, in hope of favour, 
undertook to do this, and poured double-distilled spirit into 
the gun, which had long been nourished on gunpowder and 
the scent thereof, and brought it. The rust of the iron wat 
dissolved by the strength of the spirit and mingled with it, 
and the prince no sooner drank of it than he fell down. 

No one shoald draw a bod omen : * 

If he doee, he draws it for himself.** 

^ PHoe translatee— 

" In pleasure of the chase with thee, my soul breathes fresh and clear ; 

But who receives thy fatal dart, sinks lifeless on his bier.** 

* Pierliaps referring to the name which Mniyal gave to his gun, and 
which recoiled on himself, but the MSS. and text have nogfnuf, and not 
bagtrad. 



36 


DlNlTlL AUD |HAJCABt7-N-NI6Z. 


Daniyal was of pleasing figure, of exceedingly agreeable 
mannerd and appearance ; he was very fond of elephants 
and horses. It was impossible for him to hear of anyone 
as having a good horse or elephant and not take it from 
him. He was fond of Hindi songs, and would occasionally 
compose verses with correct idiom in the language of the 
people of India, which were not bad. 

After the birth of Daniya! a daughter was bom to Bite 
Duulet-rhad whom they named ghakara-n-nisa Begam.^ 
As she wat brought up in the skirt of my. revered father’s 
care, she turned out very well. She is of good disposition 
and naturally compassionate towards all people. From 
infancy and childhood she has been extremely fond of me, 
and there can be few such relationships between brother 
and sister. The first time when, according to the custom of 
pressing the breast of a child and a drop of milk is 
perceptible, they pressed my sister’s breast and milk 
appeared, my revered father said to me: ‘*BabaI drink 
this milk, that in truth this sister may be to thee as a 
mother.” God, the knower of secrets, knows that from 
that day forward, after I drank that drop of milk, I have 
felt love for my sister such as children have for their 
mothers. 

After some time another girl was bom to this same 
Bite Daulat-Shad, and he (Akbar) called her ArSm Banti 
Begam.^ Her disposition was on the whole inclined to 
excitement and heat. My father was very fond of her, so 
much so that he described her impolitenesses as politenesses, 
and in his august sight they, from his great love, did not 
appear bad. Repeatedly he honoured me by addressing 
me, and said : Baba ! for my sake be as kind as I am, 
after me, to t' is sister, who in Hindi phrase is my darlmg 

' The MSS. have gbskar-iudir, * Bogar-spriakliiig.’ She lived into 
gh&h-Jahan*s reign. 

* She died unmarried in jAh&n3;lr*B reign. 



EULOOIUM OF AKBAB. 


37 


(that is, dearly cherished). Be affectionate to her and pass 
over her little impolitenesses and impudences.” 

The good qualities of my revered father are beyond the 
limit of approval and the bounds of praise. If books were 
composed with regard to his commendable dispositions, 
without suspicion of extravagance, and he be not looked at 
as a father would be by his son, even then but a little out 
of much could be said. 

Notwithstanding his kingship and his treasures and his 
buried wealth, which were beyond the scope of counting 
and imagination, his fighting elephants and Arab horses, he 
never by a hair’s breadth placed his foot beyond the base 
of humility before the throne of God, but considered 
himself the lowest of created beings, and never for one 
moment forgot God. 

“ Always, everywhere, with everyone, and in every circumstance, 
Keep the eye of thy heart secretly fixed on the Beloved.’* 

The professors of various faiths had room in tiie broad 
expanse of his incomparable sway. This was different 
from the practice in other realms, for in Persia ^ there is 
room for Shias only, and in Turkey, India, and Turaii 
there is room for Sunnis only. 

As in the wivle expanse of the Divine compassion there 
is room for all classes and the followers of all creeds, so, on 
the principle that the Shadow * must have the same 
properties as the Light, in nis dominions, which on all sides 
were limited only by the salt sea, there was room for the 
professors of opposite religions, and for beliefs good and 
bad, and the road to altercation was closed. Sunnis and 
Shias met in one mosque, and Franks and Jews in one 
church, and observed their own forms of worship. 

* This must, I think, be che meaning, though according to the wording 
the statement would seem to be that there is no room for Shias except in 
Persia. Erskine has “ None but Shias are tolerated iii Persia, Sunnis in 
Ham and Taran, and Hindus in Hindustan.” 

> Kings are regarded as shadows of God. 



38 


EULOOIUM OF AKBAR. 


He ajgsociated with the good of every race and creed and 
perRuasion, and was gracious to all in accordance with 
their condition and understanding. He passed his nights 
in wakefulness, and slept little in the day ; the length of 
his sleep during a whole night and day {nycthemeron) was 
not more than a watch and a half. He counted his 
wakefulness at night as so much added to his life. His 
courage and boldness were such that he could mount 
raging, rutting elephants, and subdue to obedience 
murderous elephants which would not allow their own 
females near them — although even when an elephant is bad- 
tempered he doee no harm to the female or his driver — 
and which were in a state in which they might have killed 
their drivers or the females, or not have allowed theii 
approach. He would place himself on a wall or tree near 
which an elephant was passing that had killed its mahout 
and broken loose from restraint, and, putting his trust in 
God's favour, would throw himself on its back and thus 
by merely mounting, would bring it under control and 
tame it. This was repeatedly seen. 

He ascended the throne in his 14th year. Hemu, the 
infidel whom the Afghan ruler had raised to high station, 
coUected a wonderful force after King Hum&yun’s death 
with a stud of elephants such as no ruler of Hindustan 
had at that time, he went towards Delhi. HumAyun 
had appointed Akvmt to drive off some of the Afghans 
from the foot-hills of the Panjab, but just then he 
exemplified the hemistich which is a description of the 
accident and the chronogram of his death — 

Hm august monarch (Humftyan) fell from the roof. The news (of 
the death) was conveyed to my father by Naxar-jivL” ’ 

BairAm KhAu> who was then his tutor, having collected 
the nobles w'ho were in the province, chose an auspicious 

' The chronogram is one vear short, yielding 962 instead of 963. 



HBMU. 


30 


hour and seated him on the throne of role in pargana 
Eal&nOr, near Lahore. 

When HemQ reached the neighbourhood of Delhi, Tardi 
Beg Sh&n and a large lotoe that was in the city drew up 
to oppose him- When the preparations for the combat had 
been made the armces attacked one another, and, after 
considerable endeavours and strife, defeat fell on Tardi 
Beg SbAn and the Moguls, and the army of darkness 
overcame the army of light. 

« All tliiaga and battlM and fights an of .Gcd, 

He knows whose will be tiie victoiy. 

SVom the blood of the brave and the dost of the troops^ 

The earth grew red and the heavens Ua^” 

Tardi Beg Kb*-" and the other defeated ones took the 
Toad to my revered father's camp. As Bair&m Kbftn 
disliked Tardi Beg, he made this defeat an excuse to put 
im to death. 

A second time, through the pride engendered in the 
mind of this accursed infidel by his victory, he came out of 
Delhi urith lus force and elephants and advanced, while the 
glorious standards of His Migesty (Akhar) proceeded from 
Eal&nfir for the purpose of driving him away. The armies 
of darkness and light met in the neighbourhood of Panipat, 
and on Thursday, Muharram 2nd, A.H. 964 (November 6th, 
1556), a fight took pJaca In the army of Hemfi were 
30,000 brave fi ghting horsemen, while the of the 

victorious army were not more than 4,000 or 5,000. On 
that day Hemu was riding an elephant named Haw&’i. 
Suddenly an arrow struck the eye of that infidel and came 
out at the back of his head. His army, on seeing this, 
took to flight By chahce Sbih Qull Shin Mahram with 
a few brave men came up to the elephant on which was the 
wounded Hemh, and would have shot an arrow at the 
driver, but he cried " Do not kill me ; Hemh is on this 
elephant” A number of men immediately conveyed HemQ 
as he was to the king (Akbew). Baixftm Kllhn represented 



40 


AKBAS’8 ACHIEVEMENTS. 


that it would be proper if the king with his own hand 
should strike the infidel with a sword, so that obtaining 
the reward of a gh&zi (warrior of the Faith) he might use 
this title on the imperial farmans. The king answered, 
** I have cut him in pieces before this/* and explained : 

One day, in Kabul, I was copying a picture in presence of 
Khwaja*Abdu-8-3amad ghirin Qalam, when a form appeared 
from my brush, the parts of which were separate and 
divided from each other. One of those near asked, * Whose 
picture is this ? ' It came to my tongue to say that it was 
the likeness of Hemu.*’ Not defiling his hand with his 
(Hemu’s) blood, he told one of his servants to cut off his 
head. Those killed in the defeated army numbered 5,000 
in addition to those who fell in various places round about. 

Another of the well-known deeds of Akbar was the 
victorious expedition against Gujarat, and his rapid march 
there, at the time when Mirza Ibrahim Husain, Muhammad 
Husain Mirz&, and Shah MirzA revolted from this State 
and went towards Gujarat, and all the nobles of that 
province, combining with the turbulent of those parts, 
besieged the fort of Ahmadabad in which was Mirza 'Aziz 
Eoka with the royal army. His Majesty, in consequence 
of the distracted state of Jiji Angft, the mother of the 
last-named Mirza, staited for Gujarat with a body of royal 
troops without delay from the capital of Fathpur. Having 
covered in the space of nine days the long road which it 
should take two months to accomplish, sometimes on horse 
hack, sometimes on a camel or in a bullock-cart, he arrived 
at Sam&l. 

When, on 5th Jumada-l-awwal, 980 (September 15th, 
1572), he reached the neighbourhood of the enemy’s camp, 
he consulted with those who were loyal to him Some 
said he should make a night attack on the camp. His 
Majesty, however, said that a night attack was the resort of 
the faint-hearted and the way of the deceitful, and im- 
mediately gave orders to beat the drums and set the horsemen 



akbab’8 achievements. 


41 


at them. When the river Sabar Mahi (S&barmati) was 
reached, he ordered his men to cross it in order. Muhammad 
Husain Mirza was agitated by the noise of the army of 
victory, and himself came forward to reconnoitre. SubhAn 
Quli Turk, also with a troop of brave men, went to the 
river’s bank to enquire into the enemy’s position. The 
Mirza asked what troops these were. Subhan Quli 
replied that they were of the army of King Jalalu-d-din 
Akbar. That ill-fated one would not believe this, and 
said his spies had seen the king fourteen days before in 
Fathpur, and that it was clear Subh&n Quli was lying. To 
this Subhan Quli rejoined, '' Nine days ago the king with 
this expedition started from Fathpur.” “How could 
elephants have come ?” ^ asked the Mirza. “ What need was 
there of elephants ? ” answered Subhan Quli. “ Young men 
and heroes who cleave rocks, and are better than famous 
and raging elephants, have come; the difference between 
loyalty and sedition will now become known.” The Mirza, 
after this conversation, turned aside and began to marshal 
his troops. The king waited until his advanced guard sent 
word that the enCmy had put on their armour. He then 
moved forward, and although he sent several times to order 
the Khan A'zam to advance, the latter stood still. It was 
said to Akbar that, as the enemy was in force, it would he 
well to remain on his side of the river until the army of 
Gujarat arrived from within the fort. His Majesty answered : 
“ Always, and especially in this affair, I have put my trust 
in God. If I had considered routine, I should not have 
come in this rapid manner. Now that our foe is ready for 
the fight, we ought not to delay.” With these woixls, and 
with his innate reliance on God as his shield, he put his 
horse into the river with a few cho.seii men whom lie laid 
appointed to ride with him. Though it was not sup{K>sed 


' According to tho Taboqut, Elliot, v, 306, ulial the Mir/A SHid was 
“ Where are the elephants ? ** 



42 


akbab’s achieyements. 


that there was a ford, he crossed in safety. He had called 
for his helmet, but in the agitation of bringing it his 
armour-bearer dropped the face-guard (buffe). His comrades 
did not regard this as a good omen, but he said at once, It is 
an excellent omen, for it has revealed my face.” ^ Meantime 
the wretched Mirza arrayed his ranks to fight his benefactor. 

If bhou come out (to fight) with thy benefactor, 

If thou wert the sphere, thou wouldeet be reversed.” 

The fLbAn A'zam had had no idea that the king would 
cast the shadow of his compassion on these regions vnth 
such speed and eagerness, and he believed no one who gave 
him news of that arrival, until convinced by visible proof. 
Then, airaying the army of Gujarat, he prepared to march. 
Meanwhile Asaf Khan also sent news to him. Before his 
army issued from the fort the enemy had appeared from 
amongst the trees. The king, taking the Divine aid as the 
security of liis courage, started off Muhammad Quli Kh&u 
Turk and Tardi ShAU Diwana came forward with a band 
of brave followers, and after a little fighting turned rein. 
On this His Majesty said to Bhagw&n D&s, ” The enemy are 
unnumbered and we are few; we must attack with one face 
and one heart * for a clenched fist is more useful than an 
open hand.” With these words he drew his sword, and 
with shout of Allahu-akbar and Yd Mu*%n^ charged with 
those devoted to him. 

** The sense of the age evaporated with the clamour, 

The ear of the heavens was ^pUt with the shouts.” 

The royal right and left wings and a band of brave men 
in the centre fought with valour. Stars (haukabd^i), which 
are a kind of firework, were lighted by the enemy ; they 

* The word for * face-guard is pfsA-rAy (front-face), and Jahinglr 
makes his father pun u|x>n the word, saying, " It has loosed (opened) my 
front-face.” Of. Price, p. 54. 

* * The hel|icr.* Thin is an allusion to Akbar's patron saint, Mulnu-d- 
din Chishti, whose name he adopted os his liattle-cry. 



akbab’s achibyementb. 


43 


twisted about among the thorn-bnshes, and created such 
confusion that a noted elephant of the enemy began to 
move and threw their troops into disarray. With this the 
royal centre came up and dispersed Muhammad Husain and 
his force. M&n Singh Dar )&ri overcame his foe under the 
king’s eyes, and BSgho Das Elachhw&ha sacrificed his life. 
Muhammad Wafa, who was of the house-bom of the State, 
behaving very bravely, fell wotmded from his horse. By 
the favour of the Creator who cherishes His servants, and 
simply through the courage and good fortune of the exalted 
king, the enemy were scattered and defeated. In gratitude 
for this great victory the king turned his face in sup- 
plication to the throne of his merciful Maker, and poured 
forth his thanka 

One of the kal&wants (musicians) represented to His 
Majesty that Saif Sb&n Eokaltftab had offered the coin of 
his life in loyalty to the State, and on enquiry it appeared 
that when Mubammad Husain Mirza with some of his 
riffraff was attacking the centre Saif EbAn met him and 
fighting valiantly became a martyr. The Mirza himself 
was wounded by the hands of the brave men of the main 
body. The Kokalt&^ mentioned is the elder brother of 
Zain Khan Koka. 

A strange circumstance was this : on the day before the 
battle, when the king was eating, he asked Haz&ra, who 
was learned in the science of looking at the shoulder-blades 
(a kind of divination), to see on whose side the victory 
would be. Haz&ra said: “The victory will be on your 
side, but one of the chiefs of your army will become a 
martyr.” Whereupon Saif Sb&n Koka said “ Would that 
this blessing might fall to my lot I " 

Many an omen that we have treated aa jest’ 

Became true when the star passed by." 


’ The reeding in the lithograph seems wrong; the MSS. have at 
bdiicka, «in Jeet.’ 



44 


AKBAB’S YICTOBT at AHIIADABAB. 


In short, Mirza Muhammad Husain turned his reins, but 
his horse's feet became entangled in the thom-brake and he 
fell. An ahadi of the king, Qad& *Ali by name, found him, 
and having mounted him before him on his horse took him 
to the king. As two or three claimed a share in his capture. 
His Majesty asked who had made him prisoner. “The 
king’s salt," he answered. The king ordered his hands, that 
had been fastened behind him, to be tied in front. Mean- 
while he asked for water. Farhat who was one of 

the confidential slaves, struck him on the head, but the king, 
disapproving of this, sent for his private drinking water 
and satisfied his thirst. Up to this time MirzA ‘Aziz Koka 
and the garrison of the fort had not come out. After the 
capture of the MirzA, His Majesty was proceeding slowly 
towards Ahmadabad. He had delivered the MirzA to RAy 
RAy Singh RAthor, one of the Rajput chiefs, to be put on an 
elephant and brought with him. Meanwhile IkhtiyAru-1- 
mulk, who was one of the infiuential Gujarati leaders, made 
his appearance with an army of nearly 6,000 men. Complete 
confusion fell upon the royal troopa The king, .as his 
natural valour and lofty disposition required, ordered the 
drums to be beaten, and ShajA’at SbAn, RAja Bhagy^n DAs, 
and some others charged on in front to fight this force. 
Fearing that the enemy might get possession of MirzA 
Muljiammad Husain, RAy RAy Singh’s men, by the advice 
and plan of the aforesaid Raja (BhagwAn DAs), cut off his 
head. My father did not want to kill him. The forces of 
IkhtiyAru-l-iiiulk also were dispersed, and he was thrown 
from his horse into the thorn thicket. SuhrAb Beg 
TurkmAn cut off his head and brought it in. It was only 
by the grace and power of (Jod that such a victory was 
won by a small number of men. 

In the same way are beyond all reckoning the conquest 
of the pro\dnce of Bengal, the capture of well-known and 
celebrated foiis in Hindustan suck as Chitor and Rantam- 
bhor, the subjection of the province of Khandesh, and the 



CHTTOB. AKBAB'S ABSTIMBNCE. 


45 


taking of the fort oi Am and of other provinces whidi by 
the exertions of i^e royal armies came into the possession 
of the servants of the State. If these were related in detiul 
it would be a long story. 

In the fight at Chitor, the king with his own hand 
killed Jitmal, the leader of the men in the fort. He had 
no rival in shooting with a gun, and with the one with 
which he killed Jitnud, and which was called Sangr&m, he 
killed some 3,000 or 4,000 birds and beasts.' I may be 
reckoned a true pupil of his. Of all sports I am most 
diqKMed to that with the gun, and in one clay have shot 
eighteen deer. 

Of the austerities practised by my revered father, one 
was the not eating the flesh of animals. During three 
months of the year he ate meat, and for the remaining 
nine contented himself with Sufi food, and was no way 
pleased with the slaughter of animals. On many days and 
in many months this was forbidden to the people. The 
days and months on which he did not eat flesh are detailed 
in the AkbamAma. 

On the day I made rtimAdu-l-mulk diwan, I put 
Mu‘izzu-l-mulk in charge of the diwdni-i-bttyiUdt (care of 
buildings). The latter is a S%yyid of Bakharz.* and under 
my revered father was accountant of the hwrha/rSq 
department.* 

On one of my accession days, a hundred of the Akbaii 
and JahAngiri servants were promoted to higher rank and 
jagirs. At the commencement of the RamafAn 'Id, as it 
was the first after my accession, I cune down to the ‘IdgAh 
from my auspicious throne. There was a great crowd, and 
having performed the dues of thankigiving and praise 

* AbS'l-fafl ia BMxe aioditate s aewylBlechmsen, p.lia)tlietAklier 

killed 1,019 epimele with Seagita. 

■ MoidiinenB mya, ol Meehhid, pk tSl. 

* Ihe ferriafy. Saa BInciMiiaBBi 97 a. aad 910. Kmrii maana 
•fer'isTarki. 



46 LARGESSES BT JAHIngTB. 

I returned to the palace, where according to the verse From 
the table of kings favours come to beggars/’ I commanded 
a sum of money to be spent in alms and charity. Some 
lakhs of dams of this were entrusted to Dust Muhammad 
(afterwards Khwaja Jah&n), who divided them amongst 
taqirs and those who were in want, and a lakh of dams 
each was given to Jamalu-d-din Husain Anju (the lexico- 
grapher), Mirza Sadr Jahan, and Mir Muhammad Riza 
Sabzawari to dispose of in charity in different quarters of 
the city. I sent 5,000 rupees to the dervishes of Shaikh 
Muhammad Husain JAmi, and gave directions that each day 
one of the officers of the watch ^ should give 50,000 d&ms 
to faqirs. I sent a jewelled sword to the ]^ankh&nan, and 
promoted Jamalu-d-din Anju to the rank of 3,000. The 
office of Sadr was entrusted to Miran Sadr Jah&n, and 
I ordered H&ji Koka, who was one of my father’s foster- 
sisters,^ to bring before me in the palace such women as 
were worthy to be presented with land and money. 
1 promoted Zahid Khan, son of Muliammad Sadiq Khan, 
from the rank of 1,500 to that of 2,000. 

It had been the custom^ that when the gift of an 
elephant or horse was made to anyone, the naqibs and the 
Masters of the Horse {Mir Al^urdn) took from him a sum 
of money as jUawdna (bridle-money). I gave orders that 
this money should be paid by the government, so that 
people might be freed from the importunities and demands 
of that set of men. 

At this time Salbahan arrived from Burhanpur and 
produced before me the horses and elephants of my deceased 
brother Daniyal. Of the elephants, one male named Mast 


^ The word yiVish in omitted in text, but occurs in the MSS. 

* Haji Koka wus sister of Sa*Adat Yiir Koka (Akbar-n&ma, iit, 056). 
According to Price this passage refers to a widows' fund. 

* This was one of Akbor's regulations (Blochmann p. 142). The 
amount was ton dams on each muhr of the horse’s Talue, calculated on 
an increase of 50 per cent. See also Price, p. 61. 



ACCOUNT OF AN ELEPHANT. SBABIF XMULI. 47 


Alast appeared to me the best, and I gave him the name of 
Nut Qaj. A wonderful thing showed itself in this 
elephant ; on the sides of his ears small lumps had grown 
about the size of melons, and from them came fluid sucli as 
drops from an elephant in the rutting season ; moreover, 
the top of his forehead was more prominent than in otlier 
elephants. It was a splendid and imposing animal.^ 

I gave to my son Khurram (ghah-Jahan) a rosary of 
jewels, with the hope that he might obtain fulfilment of all 
his desires, both in visible and in spiiitual things. 

As I had remitted in my dominions customs duties 
amounting to krors, I abolished also all the transit dues 
(ad/ir-jihdt) in Kabul, which is one of the noted towns on 
the road to Hindustan. These brought in 1 ki*or and 
23 lakhs of dams. From the provinces of Kabul and 
Qandahar large sums used to be derived every year from 
customs {zakd't), which were in fact the chief revenue of 
those places. I remitted these ancient due.s, a proceeding 
that greatly benefited the people of Iran and Turan. 

Asaf Khan 8 jagir in the subah of Bihar had been given 
to Baz Bahadur ; I therefore ordered that a jagir in the 
Panjab should be given to him. As it was represented to 
me that a large sum was in arrears in his jagir, and now 
that the order for exchange had been given its collection 
would be difficult, I directed that a lakh of rupees should be 
given to him from the Treasury and the arreara recovered 
from B&z Bahadur for the royal revenues. 

1 promoted Sharif Amuli to the rank of 2,500, original 
and increase. He is a pure^hearted, lively-spirited man. 
Though he has no tincture of current sciences, lofty words 
and exalted knowledge often manifest themselves in him. 
Ii* the dress of a faqir he made many journeys, and he 


^ This pMBAge is not clear, but the peculiarity to which attention a 
drawn aeaina rather the prominent forehead than the ooaing fluid. Price 
(p. 62) haa a fuller account of thie elephant. 



48 GIFT TO RUQAYYA BEGAH. NEW YEAR’S FEAST. 


has friendship with many saints and recites the maxims 
of those who profess mysticism. This is his conversation, 
not his practice {qaZi-H a3t ma hall). In the time of my 
revered father he relinquished the garments of poverty 
and asceticism, and attained to amirship and chiefship. 
Hia utterance is exceedingly powerful, and his conversation 
is remarkably eloquent and pure, although he is without 
Arabic. His compositions also are not devoid of verve.' 

A garden in Agra had been left by Shah Quli Khan 
Mabram, and oA he had no heirs I handed it over to 
Ruqayya Sultan Begam, the daughter of Hindal Mirza, 
who had been the honoured wife of my father.* My 
father had given iny son Khurram into her charge, and 
she loved him a thousand times more than if he had been 
her own. 


THE GREAT FEAST OF NAURUZ. 

On the night of Tuesday, Zi-l-qa'da 11th, A.H. 1014 
(March 11th or 12th, 1606), in the morning, which is the 
time of the blessing of light, his Eminence the Great 
Luminary passed from the constellation of the Fish to the 
House of Honour in the constellation of the Ram. As this 
was the first New Year’s Day after my auspicious accession 
I ordered them to decorate the porticoes of the private and 
public halls of the palace, as in the time of my revered 
father^ with delicate stuffs, and to adorn them handsomely. 
From the first day of the Nauruz to the 19th degree of the 
Ram (Aries), which is the day of culmination, the people 
gave themselves over to enjoyment and happiness. Players 
and singers of all bands and castes were gathered together. 
Dancing lulis and charmers of India whose caresses would 

’ See Blochroann. pp. 176, 452, and the very full account of him in the 
Ma’offir, iii, 285. Araul is an old city south of the Caspian and west of 
Astrabod. 

She wa? Akbar's first and principal wife, but bore him no children. 
She long survivetl him. 



NEW year’s entertainments. 49 

captivatf* the heaits of angels kept up the excitement of 
the assemblies. I gave orclei-s that whoever might wish 
for intoxicating drinks and exhilarating drugs should not 
be debarred from using them. 

Ciipl)earer ! brighten my cup with the light of wine ; 

Sing, minstrel, for the world has ordere<l itself as I desire."* 

In my fathers time it had become established that one 
of the great nobles should prepare an entertainment on 
each of the 17 or 18 days of the festival, and should 
present His Majesty the king with choice gifts of all kinds 
of jewels Jind jewelled things, precious .stuffs, and eh^phants 
and liorscs, and should invite him to take the troubli* to come 
to his assembly. By way of exalting his servants, lie would 
deign to present, and having looked at the presents 
would take what he approved of and bestow the remainder 
on the giver of the entertainment. As my mind was 
inclined to the comfc ' and ease of the army and subjects, 
I this year lot them ott their gifts with the exception of a 
few from my iiiiniediate retainei’s, which I accepted in 
order to gratify them. In those same days many servants 
of tha State obtained higher rank. Among.st tht*m I rai.sed 
Dilawar Khan Afghan to 1,500, and I raised Ib'ija Bfiso, 
who was a landholder of the hill country of the Panjab, 
and who from the time I wa.s prince till now has kept 
the way of service and sincerity towards me and held 
the rank of 1,500, to 3,500. Shah Beg Klian, the 
governor of Qandahar, I promoted to 5,000, and Ray 
Ray Singh, a Rajput noble, obtained the .same rank. 
I gave 12.000 rupees for expenses to Rana Shankar. 

At the beginning of my reign, a son of that Muwffar 
Gujarati who claimed to be descended from the rulers of 
that country lifted up the head of disturbance and attacked 
and plundered the environs of the city of Ahinadal^ad. 


* These are the opening lines of an ode of Hafiz. 



60 


DI8TUBBAKCE IN GUJARAT. 


Some sardars such aa Pirn ^ Bahadur Uzbeg and Ray *Ali 
Bhatij who were amongst the distinguished and brave men 
thert;, became martyrs in that outbreak. At length Baja 
Bikramajit and many mansabdars were provided by me 
with 6,000 or 7,000 horse, and appointed to assist the army 
of Gujarat. It was decided that when things had quieted 
down, by the driving off of those seditious people, Raja 
Bikramajit should be Subahdar of Gujarat. Qilij Eban, 
who had been previously nominated to this office, should 
come to Court. After the arrival of the royal troops 
the thread of the rebels’ union was severed ; they took 
refuge in different jungles, and the country was reduced 
to order. The news of this victory reached the ear of my 
state and dignity in the most acceptable of hours ('New 
Year time). 

About this time there came a representation from my 
son Parw'iz that the Rana had left thana Mandal, which is 
about 30 2 or 40 kos from Ajmir, and had run away, and 
that a force had been appointed to pursue him ; and that it 
was to be hoped the good fortune of Jahangir would cause 
him to become non-existent 

On the last day of the feast of the New Year., many 
servants of the State were honoured with favours and 
increase of rank. Pi^rau Kh&n was an old retainer and 
had come from Persia (wUdyat) with Humayun ; indeed, he 
was one of the men whom Sbah Tahmasp had sent with 
Hutii&yun. His name was Mihtar Sa'adat. As under my 
father he w'as superintendent (ddTOfjha) and head (mihtar) 
of the farrdfJt-khdna (store department), and had no equal 
in this service, he had given him the title of Pl^rau IKb&n 
(the active Khan). Though he ivas a subordinate (() servant 
and had an aitificer's disposition (qalaqchi mu^rab), 


' Mil u^iru-l uinnr&. To/fm iimtaad of Pini or Bim. Soe Blochmann, 
|>. 470. Knikine luvt Sain Bahildttr. 

MS. IHI luu) 34. 



FLIGHT OF KHUSRAU. 


61 


I looked to his claims of service and gave him the rank 
of 2.000.1 


THE FLIGHT OP ^USRAU IN THE MIDDLE OF THE 
FIRST YEAR OF MY R£I(;N. 

Futile ^ ideas had entered the mind of Kbusrau in con- 
sequence of his youth and the pride youths have, and the 
lack of experience and the lack of foresight of worthless 
companions, especially at the time of my revered father s 
illness. Some of these short-sighted ones, through the 
multitude of their cnines and offences, had become hopeless 
of pardon and indulgence, and imagined that by making 
Kbusraii a tool they might conduct the affairs of State 
through him. They overlooked the truth that acts of 
sovereignty and world rule are not things to be arranged by 
the worthless endeavoura of defective intellects. The just 
Creator bestows them on him whom he considers fit for this 
glorious and exalUJ duty, and on such a person doth He 
fit the robe of honour. 

** He who iff mized of Fortune cannot be deprived of it ; 

Throne and diadem are not thing!<) of purchase ; 

It is not right to wrest crown niul doinir.ioii 

From the head which God, the Crown -cherisher, has indicatod.'' 

As the futile imaginations of the seditious and short- 
sighted had no I'csult but di8gract3 and regret, the affaii‘s of 
the kingdom were confirmed in the hands of this suppliant 


^ I think Jahingir means that thou^^h the Khiiii was an rxceUcnt 
servant in his own line, he was hardly tit for the command of 2.000 or 
for the title of lU^n. Cf. his praise of him at p. 71 (Blochinaiiii. p. 498). 
He was oaUed Plsl^u probably from his going on ahead with the 
advance camp, as being in chai^ of the carpets, etc. . as well as because 
of his personal activity. 

* In Price's JahAnglr, p. 15, Jah&ngir states that he had impri.soned 
IQluBraa in the upper part of the royal tower in the castle of Agra. It 
was from this oonflaement that Kb^sraa escaped* 



52 


FLIGHT OF KHUSRAU. 


at the throne of Allah I invariably found Khusrau pre- 
occupied and distracted. However much, in favour and 
affection for him, T wished to drive from his mind some of 
his fears and alarms, nothing was gained until, at last, by 
the advice of those whose fortune was reversed, on the night 
of Sunday, Zi-l-hijja 8th, of the 3^ear mentioned (April 6th, 
1605), when two gharis had passed, he made a pretence' of 
going to visit the tomb of His Majesty (Akbar), and went 
off with 350 horsemen, who were his adherents, from within 
the fort of Agra. Shortly after, one of the lamp attendants 
who was acquainted . with the Waziru-l-mu) k gave him the 
news of Khusrau’s flight. The Vizier took him to the 
Amiru i<umara, who, as the news seemed true, came in 
a dietracied state of mind to the door of the private 
apartments and said to one of the eunuchs, Take in my 
request and say that I have a necessary representation 
to make, and let the king honour me by coming out.** 
As such an affair had not entered my thoughts I supposed 
that news had come from the Deccan or Qujarat. When 
I came out and heaixl what the news was. I asked, 
“ What must be done ? Shall I mount myself, or shall 
I send Khurram ? ** The Amiru-l-umara submitted that 
he would go if I oidered it. “ Let it be so,” I said. 
Afterwards lie said, ** If he will not turn back on my 
advice, and takes up arms, what must be done ? ” Then 
I said, If he will go in no way on the right road, do not 
consider a crime anything that results from your action. 
Kingship regards neither son nor son-in-law. No one is 
a relation to a king.'* 

When I had said these words and other things, and hod 
dismissed him, it occurred to me that Khasrau was very 
much annoyed with him, and that in consequence of the 

* Du Jarric sayH it was in this way that he was allowed to pass the 
•antinols. Du Jarric gives the date of Khiisrau's flight as 15th Aprih 

lOUH (this would be New Style). By Sunday night is meant Saturday 
evening. Sunday was Akhar*s birthday. 



PURSUIT OF KHUSRAU. 


53 


dignity and nearness (to me) which he (the Amir) enjoyed, 
he was an object of envy to his equals and contemporaries.^ 
Perhaps they might devise treachery «nd destroy him. I 
therefore ordered Mu'izzu-l-mulk to recall him, and selecting 
in his place Shaikh Farid Bakhshi-begi commanded him to 
start off at once, and to take with him the mansabdars and 
ahadis who were on guard. Ihtimam Khan the kotwdl was 
made scout and intelligence officer. I determined, God 
willing, to start off myself when it was day. Mu‘izzU'l- 
mulk brought back the Amiru-l-umara. 

About this time, Ahmad Beg Kban and Dust Muhammad 
Khan Had been sent off to Kabul,^ and had got as far as 
Sikandra, which was on Khusrau’s route. On his arrival 
they came out of their tents with some of their people, and 
returned and waited on me with the news that K.husraii 
had taken the Panjab road and was hastening on. It 
occurred to me that he might change his route and go 
somewhere else. As his maternal uncle, Ma:.. :ri.tigh, was 
in Bengal, it occurred to many of the servants of the State 
that he might go in that direction. I sent out on every 
side, and ascertained that he was making for the Panjab. 
Meantime day dawned, and in reliance on the grace and 
favour of God Almighty, and with clear rasolve, I iuounte<l, 
withheld by nothing and no one. 

** In truth, he who i.s pursucxi hy Horrow. 

Knows not how the road is or how he may travel it. 

This he knows, that horror drive.s him on ; 

He knows not with whom he f^oes nor whom he loaves behind." 


* Elliot (vii, 292) makes the Amirud-umani envious of his and 

Jahangir apprehensive lest he should destroy Khusruu, hut he had just 
told him that nothing he did against Khunrau would be wrong, (pearly 
Jahangir's fear was that his favourite shouUl he rlestroyed iiy KhiMrau, 
or perha|)s by the Amir's treacherous a.ssociates. 

* The text has a curious mistake here : instead of bo Kdbnt it has 
/laJtriim/ superintendent of the kitchen*) ns jwirt of DiUt Miih.iiiim.'urs 
name. DQst was not ttakthvat, but held higher ofTirT'. mid later put 
in charge of the fort of Agra and given the title of Khwiija .lahan. 



54 


PUBSUIT OF KHUSRAXT. 


When 1 reached the venerable mausoleum of my revered 
father, which is three kos from the city, I begged for aid 
to my courage from the spirit of that honoured one. 
About this time they captured and brought in^ Mirza 
Hasan, son of Mirza Shahrukh. who had proposed to 
accompany Sbusrau. He could not deny it when I 
questioned him, and I ordered them to tie his hands and 
mount him on an elephant.^ This was the first good omen 
manifested through the kindness and blessing of that 
venerable one. At midday, as it had become exceedingly 
hot, having rested awhile under the shade of a tree, I said 
to the A'^m that we, with all our composure, were 

in such a state that we had not taken till now our regular 
allowance of opium, which it was the practice to take the 
first thing in the morning, and no one had reminded us of 
the omission. We might imagine from this what was now 
the condition of that graceless one (KhusrauV* 

My trouble was this, that my son without any cause 
or reason should become an opponent and an enemy. 
If 1 should make no endeavour to capture him, the 
fractious or rebellious would have an instrument, or else 
he would take his own >vay and go for an asylum to the 
Uzbegs or the Persians, and contempt would fall upon my 
government. On this account, having made a special 
point of capturing him, I went on after a short rest tw'o 
or three kos beyond pargana Mathura, which is 20 kos 
from Agra, and I alighted at one of the villages of that 
pargana where there is a tank. 

When Kbusrau arrived at Mathura, he met Husain 
Beg Badakhshi. who was of those who had received 
favours from my revered father and was coming from 

‘ Price, p. 6, note. 

* According to Kl^fi lUi&n (i, 250) he wm put to death, unless ttie 
exfiression ** claws of death ” is merely rhetorical. The Ma*asir (iii, 
3S4) i»Ays ho w‘as imprisoned. 

^ The above ol« 3 cure {jassage is explained in Price, p. 60. 



KHUSRAX7*8 EYIL DEEDS. 


55 


Kabul to wait on me. As it is the temperament of the 
Badakhahis to be seditious and turbulent, Khusrau 
regarded^ this meeting as a godsend, and made Husain 
Beg the captain and guide of 200 or 300 Badakhshan 
Aimaqs, who were with him. 

Anyone whom they met, they plundered of horses and 
goods. Merchants and conveyers of goods were plundered 
by these rascals, and wheresoever they went men's wives and 
children were not safe from the calamity of these wretches. 
With his own eyes Khusrau was witnessing the oppression 
practised in the hereditary dominions of his ancestors, and 
after being a witness of the improper deeds of these rascals 
he a thousand times every moment wished death for himself. 
Finally, he had no remedy but to temporize with and 
support those dogs. If good luck and fortune had assisted 
him in his affairs, he would have made repentance and 
regret his voucher, and come without any deceit to wait on 
me. God, who knows the world of secrets, knows that 
I should have passed over his offences entirely and shown 
him such favour and affection that to the extent of a hair’s 
point no estrangement or fear would have remained upon 
his mind. Inasmuch as during the lifetime of the late 
king (Akbar) an intention of joining in the sedition of 
some of the rebels had manifested itself in his mind, and 
he knew that this had come to my knowledge, he placed 
no reliance on my kindness and affection. His mother, 
while I was prince, in grief at his ways and behaviour and 
the misconduct of her brother M&dho Singh,* killed herself 
by swallowing opium (tirydq)* What shall I write of 
her excellences and goodness ? She had perfect intelligence, 
and her devotion to me was such that she would have 


1 Elliot (vi, 2S3) obforvM that this is a very involved and obscure 

passage. 

* Blochmaan, p. 418. 

> The word lirydg me 


both opium and antidote. 



56 raUSRAU’s HOTHER. 

sacrificed a thousand sons and brothers for one hair of 
mine. She constantly wrote to Si^usrau and urged him to 
be sincere and affectionate to me. When she saw that 
it was of no use, and that it was unknown how far he 
would be led away, she from* the indignation and high 
spirit which are inherent in the Rajput character 
determined upon death. Her mind was several times 
disturbed, for such feelings were hereditary, and her 
ancestors and her brothers had occasionally showed signs 
of madness, but after a time had recovered. At a time 
when I had gone hunting, on Zi-l>hijja 26th, 1013^ (May 
6th, 1605), she in her agitation swallowed a quantity of 
opium, and quickly passed 4iway. It was as if she had 
foreseen this behaviour of her unworthy son. 

My first marriage and that at the commencement of my 
adolescence was with her. After Khusrau^s birth I gave 
her the title of Shah Begam. When she could not endure 
the bad conduct of her son and brother towards me she 
became disgusted with life and died, thereby escaping the 
present grief and sorrow. In consequence of her death, 
from the attachment I had for her, I passed some days 
without any kind of pleasure in life or existence, and for 
four days, which amount to 32 watches, I took nothing in 
the shape of food or drink. When this tale was told to 
my revered father, a letter of condolence of excessive 
kindness and affection reached this devoted disciple, and 
he sent me a robe of honour and the auspicious turban tied 
just as he had taken it off his head. This favour threw 
water on the flame of my grief and afforded complete quiet 
and repose to my unquietude and disturbance. My intention 
in relating the.se circumstances is to point out that no evil 
fortune is greater than when a son, through the impropriety 


* Blochmann, relying on Kh&n Kli&n, puU her death in 1011, and 
the Akhar-n&ma (iii, 826) puts it in 1012. The chronogram in the 
Khuarau Bagh yields 1012. See J.R.A.S. for July, 1007, p. 604. 



JAHANGIR’S MARCH. 


57 


of his conduct and his unapproved methods of behaviour, 
causes the death of his mother and l^ecomes contumacious 
and rebellious to his father, without cause or reason, but 
simply through his own imaginations and futile ideas, and 
chooses to avoid the blessing of waiting upon him. 
Inasmuch as the Almighty Avenger lays a proper punish- 
ment on each action, of necessity his condition finally came 
to this, that he was caught under the worst circumstances, 
and falling from a position of trust became captive to 
perpetual incarceration. 

When the man of sense behiives as if drunk, 

Me puts his foot in a snare, his head in a noose.*' 

To sum up, on Tuesday, Zi-l-hij^ja 10th, I alighted at 
the station of Hodal.^ Shaikh Farid Bakh^i and a band 
of valiant men were chosen to pursue Khusrau and became 
the vanguard of the victorious army. I sent back Dust 
Mul.iammad, who was in attendance on me, on account 
of his previous service and his white beard, to take charge 
of the fort of Agra and of the zanana and the treasuries. 
When leaving Agra, I had placed the city in the charge 
of rtiuiadu-d-daula and Waziru-l-mulk. I now said to 
Dust Muhammad, As we are going to the Panjab, and 
that province is in the diwani of l*timadu-d-daula, you will 
despatch him to us, and will imprison and keep watcli 
over the sons^ of Mirza Mul.iaininad Hakim who are in 
Agra ; as when such proceedings manifest thenistdves in 
the son of one’s loins what may one expect from nephews 
and cousins?” After the dispatch of Dust Muhammad, 
Mu'izzu-l-mulk became bakhshi. 

On Wednesday I alighted at Palwal, and on Thursday 
at Faridabad ; on Friday, the 13th, I reached Delhi. 

* Where Lord Bellomont died in 1050 See Manuoci (Irvine), i, 71. 

* Profmbly this inean.s the grandsons. At p. 3211 it is meiitioiieH that 
the grandsons had been confined in Gwalior up to the Kith year. 



58 


VISITS humayCn^s tomb. 


From the dust of the road (i.e. immediately) I hastened 
to the venerated tomb of Humayun, and there besought 
help in my purpose, and with my own hand distributed 
money to poor persons and dervishes. Thence turning 
to the shrine of the venerable saint Shaikh Nia^mu-d-din 
Auliya, I performed the dues of pilgrimage. After this 
I gave a portion ^ of money to Jamalu-d-din Husain Anju 
and another portion to Hakim Mu^ffar that they might 
divide it amongst the poor and dervishes. On Saturday 
the 14th I stayed in Saray Narela.* This rest-house 
{saray) Khusrau had burned as he went. 

The rank of Aqa Mulla, brother of Asaf ^an, who 
had been exalted by becoming my servant, was fixed in 
original and increase at 1,000 with 300 horse. He was 
in close attendance during this journey. Considering that 
some of the Aimaqs attached to the royal army were in 
league with Khusrau, and fearing that consequently some 
fraud or sedition might enter their minds, 2,000 rupees 
were given to their leaders to distribute amongst their 
men and make them hopeful of the Jahangiri favour. 
I gave money to Shaiyi Faz.lu-llah and Raja Dhirdhar to 
distribute to faqirs and brahmans on the road. I gave 
orders that to Rana Shankar in Ajmir should be given 
30,000 rupees by way of assistance for his expenditure. 

On Monday, the 16th, I reached the pargana of Panipat.* 
This station and place used to be very propitious to my 
gracious father and honoured ancestors, a^d two great 
victories had been gained in it. One was the defeat of 
Ibrahim Lodi, which was won by the might of the 
victorious hosts of His Majesty Firdus - inakani. The 
story of this has been written in the histories of the time. 

* Aim, qu. * a heap ’ ? 

' Narela is said to Iks 15} miles uorth-west of Delhi. William Finch, 
in his itinerary, mentions the stage as Xalera, a name that corresponds 
with Jahi\nglr*s 

^ 53 miles north of Delhi. 



EHUSRAU’S PBOCEEDINOS. 


59 


The second victory was over the wicked Hemu, and was 
manifested from the world of fortune in the beginning 
of the reign of my revered father, as has been described 
by me in detail. 

At the time that Khusran had left Delhi and was 
proceeding to Panipat, it happened that Dilawar Kb&n 
had arrived there. When shortly before Khusrau’s arrival 
he heal'd of this affair, he sent his children across the 
Jumna and bravely determined to hasten on and throw 
himself into the fort of Lahore before Khusrau should 
arrive. About this time 'Abdu-r-Rabim also reached 
Panipat from Lahore, and Dilawar Khan suggested to him 
that he too should send his children across the river, and 
should stand aside and await the victorious standards of 
Jahangir. As he was lethargic and timid, he could not 
make up his mind to do this, and delayed so much that 
Khusrau arrived. He went out and waited on him, and 
either * voluntarily or in a state of agitation agreed to 
accompany him. He obtained the title of l^Ialik Anwar 
and the position of vizier. Dilawar Khan, like a brave 
man, turned towards Lahore, and on his road informed 
everyone and everybody of the servants of the court and 
the karoriydn, and the merchants whom he came across, 
of the exodus of Khusrau. Some he took with him, and 
others he told to stand aside out of the way. After that, 
the servants of God were relieved of the plundering by 
robbers and oppressors. Most probably, if Sayyid Kamal 
in Delhi, and Dilawar Kb^n at Panipat, had shown courage 
and determination, and had blocked Kbusrau’s path, his 
disorderly foice would not have been able to resist and 
would have scattered, and he himself would have been 
captured. The fact is that their talents {himTMit) were 
not equal to this, but afterwards each made amends for 
his fault, viz., Dilawar Kb&n, by his rapid march, entered 
the fort of Lahore before Khiisrau reached it, and by this 
notable service made amends for his earlier shortcoming, 



60 


APPOINTMENTS. 


and Sayyid Eamal manfully exerted himself in the 
engagement with Kbusrau, as will be described in its 
own place. 

On Zi-1-l.iijja 17th the royal standards were set up in the 
pargana of Karnal. Here I raised 'Abidin Khwaja. son of 
Khwaja Kal&n Juybari and pirzadou (spiritual adviser), son 
of 'Abdu-llah Khan Uzbeg, who had come in the time of 
my revered father, to the rank of 1,000. Shaikh Nia^m 
Thaneswari, who was one of the notorious impostors 
{sh^yyaddn) of the age, waited on Khusrau, and having 
gratified him with pleasant news, again ^ led him out of 
the (right) path, and then came to wait on me. As I had 
heard of these transactions, I gave him his road expenses 
and told him to depart for the auspicious place of 
pilgrimage (Mecca). On the 19th the halt was in pargana 
ShAhabad. Here there was very little water, but it 
happened that heavy rain fell, so that all were rejoiced. 

I promoted Shaikh Ahmad Lahori, who from my prince- 
hood had tilled the relationship of service and discipleship 
and the position of a house-born one (khdnazdda) to the 
office of Mir-i-‘Adl (Chief Justice). Disciples® and sincere 
followers were presented on his introduction, and to each 
it was necessary to give the token ® and the likeness (diwst 

^ Instead of tSza the MSS. have pdra, and the meaning seems to be 
that he acdompanied Khusrau for some distance. In Price’s Jah&ngir 
(p. 81) it is said that Nixam received 6,000 rupees. 

* This is an interesting passage, because it is Jah&ngir’s account of his 
father's 'Divine Faith.’ But it is obscure, and copyists seem to have 
made mistakes. It is explained somewhat by the MS. used by Price 
(trans., pp. 82, 83), where more details are given than in the text. It is 
there stated that Ahmad was Mir-i-*Adl of Jahangir before the latter’s 
accession. 

* The text has dcut n unia (hand and bosom), but the correct words, 
as is shown in the' I.O. MS., No. IRl, are »haitf ## ^ahiha or (fheUmht and 
these refer to the ring or token and the {lortriiit given bj* Akbar to the 
followers of the ‘ Divine Faith. ’ See Blochinann, pp. 160 n. and 203 ; and 
BudayOni, ii, 338. Ahmad api^ears to be the Ahinnd Sft/i of Blochmann, 
pp. 208, 209, and of Boday Anl, ii, 404, and Lowe, p. 418. Me was 
a ineinlier of the * Divine Faith ’ 



ACCOUNT OP THE DIVINE FAITH. 


61 


Ur shaJbah). They were given on his recommendation (?). 
At the time of initiation some words of advice were given 
to the disciple : he must not confuse or darken his years 
with sectarian quarrels, but must follow the rule of 
universal peace with regard to religions ; he must not 
kill any living creature with his own hand, and must not 
flay anything. The only exceptions are in battle and 
the chase. 

“Be not the practiser of making lifeless any living thing. 

Save in the battlefield or in the time of hunting.*’ 

Honour the luminaries (the Sun, Moon, etc.), which are 
manifesters of God’s light, according to the degree of each, 
and recognize the power and existence of Almighty God at 
all times and seasons. Be careful indeed that whether in 
private or in public you never for a moment forget Him. 

“ Lame or low ’ or crooked or unrefined, 

Be amorous of Him and seek after Him.” 

My revered father became possessed of these principles, and 
was rarely void of such thoughts. 

At the stage of Alawa(?)* I appointed Abu-n-nabl(?)* 
Uzbeg with fifty-seven other ihansabdars to assist Shaikh 
Farid, and gave the force 40,000 rupees for its expenses. 
To Jamil Beg were given 7,000 rupees to divide among 
the Aim&qs (cavalry). I also presented Mir Sharif Amuli ^ 
with 2,000 rupees. 

On Tuesday the 24th of the same month they captured 
flve of the attendants and comrades of Ousrau. Two of 

* Text, pikj or pfick, but the manuscript reading iQk is preferable. 
Erskinc's MS. has /sy, naked. 

* Price ip. 83) has Auaod or Anwand. Apparently Alfiwa is right ; 
it Is a place 18 miles north-west of UmMla. Cf. “ India under 
Aurangrih,** by J. N. Sarkar. 

* Aba-l-Boy, the AbA-l-Baqa of Akbar-nama, iii, 820. 

* A of the * Divine Faith’ (Bloohmann, p. 4J2, etc.). 



62 


XHUSRAir. 


these, who confessed to his service, I ordered to be thrown 
under the feet of elephants, and three who denied were 
placed in custody that enquiry might be made. On 
Farwardin 12th of the first year of my reign, Mirz& 
Husain and Nuru-d-din Qull the kotwdl entered Lahore, 
and on the 24th of the same month a ine.sscnger of Dilawar 
Kban arrived (there) with news that Khusrau was moving 
on Lahore and that they should be on their guard. On 
the same day the city gates were guarded and strengthened, 
and two days later Dil&war Kh&n entered the fort with 
a few men and began to strengthen the towers and walls. 
Wherever these were broken and thi*own down he repaii'ed 
them, and, placing cannon and swivel guns on the citadel, 
he prepared for battle. Assembling the small number 
of the royal servants who were in the foil, they were 
assigned their several duties, and the people of the city 
also with loyalty gave their assistance. Two days later, 
and when all was ready, Kbusmu arrived, and, having 
fixed a place for his camp, gave orders to invest ^ the city 
and to prepare for battle, and to burn one of the gates 
on any side where one could be got at. “After taking 
the fort,” he said to his wicked crew, “ I will give oidei-s 
to plunder the city for seven days and to make captive 
tlie women and children.” 

This doomed lot set tire to a gate, and Dilawar Beg 
Khan, Husain Beg the diwnn, and Nhru-d-din Quli the 
kotwal built a wall inside opposite the gateway. 

Meantime Sa‘id Khan, who was one of thase apiK)inted 
to Kashmir and was now encamped on the Chentib, having 
heal'd the news, .started rapidly for Lahore. When he 
ri;ached the Ravi he sent word to the garri.son of the fort 
that he came with a loyal intention and that they should 
admit him. They sent someone at night and conducted 
him and .some of hi.s men inside. When the siege had 


* The text lia.H qaft b> mistake for qnbl. 



jahangIr’s march. 


63 


lasted nine days, news of the approach of the royal army 
came repeatedly to Kbusrau and his adherents. They 
became helpless (bC pa), and made up their minds that they 
must face the victorious army. 

As Lahore is one of the greatest places in Hindustan, 
a great number of people gathered in six or seven days. 
It was reported on good authority that 10,000 or 12,000 
horse were collected, and had left the city with the view 
of making a night attack on the royal vanguard. This 
news was brought to me at the aardy of Qazi *Ali on the 
night of Thursday the 16th. Although it rained heavily 
in the night I beat the drum of march and mounted. 
Arriving in Sultanpur at dawn I remained there till noon. 
By chance, at this place and hour the victorious army 
encountered that ill-fated band. Mu*izzu-l-mulk had 
brought a dish of roast meat,^ and I was turning towards 
it with zest when the news of the battle was brought to 
me. Though I had a longing to eat the roast meat, 
I immediately took a mouthful by way of augury and 
mounted, and without waiting for the coming up of men 
and without regard to the smallne.ss of my force I went 
oif in all haste. However much I demanded my chiltah 
(wadded coat), they did not produce it. My only arms 
were a spear and sword, but I committed myself to the 
favour of God and started ott' without hesitation. At first 
my escort did not number more than fifty horsemen ; no 
one had expected a fight that day. In tine, when I reached 
the head of the bridge of Gobindwal,^ 400 or 500 horse, 
good and bad, had come together. When I had crossed 
the bridge the news of a victory was brouglit to me. The 
bearer of the good news was Shamsi, tu^ukchi (wardroixi 
man), and for his good news he obtained the title of 


' Birydni. See Blochmann, p. 00. 

The Gundv&l of Tiefentimler, i, 113. in his history of 

the Sikhs, sfiulls it Goindwul. It is on the licas. 



64 


BATTLE OF GOBINDWAL. 


Khush-liba'ba'r Khan. Mir Jamalu-d-din Husain, whom 
] had sent previously to advise Khusrau, came up at the 
same time and said such things about the number and 
bravery of Khusrau*s men as frightened his hearers. 
Though news of the victory came continuously, this 
simple-minded Saj^yid would not believe it, and expressed 
incredulity that such an army as he had seen could be 
defeated by Shaikh Farid’s force, which was small and not 
properly equipped. When they brought Khusrau’s litter ^ 
with two of his eunuchs, the Mir admitted what had 
happened. Then, alighting from his horse, he placed his 
head at iny feet and professed every kind of humility and 
submission, and said that there could be no higher or more 
lofty fortune than this. 

In this coinmand Shailch Farid behaved with sincerity 
and devotion. The Sayyids of Barha, who aiv of the 
brave ones* of the age, and who liave lield this place in 
every fight in which they have Ix^en, formed the van. 
Saif Khan, son of Sayyid Mal.inifid Khan Barha, the head 
of the tribe, had shown great bravery and had received 
seventeen Avouiids. Sayyid JalAl, also of the brethren of 
this band, received an anwv in his temple and died a few 
days later. At the time when the Sayyids of Barha, who 
were not more than fifty or sixty in number, having 
received wounds from 1,500 Badakhshi horsemen, had 
been cut to pieces, Sayyid Kanml, who, with his brothers, 
had been appointed to support the van, came up on tlie 
flank and fought with wondrous bravery and manliness. 
After that the men of the riglit wing raised the cry of 
Pad^inh mlCimat (“ Long live tlie King”) and charged, and 
the rebels hearing the words, gave up and scattered abroad 
to various hiding-places. About 400 Aim&qs became 
crushed on the plain of anger and overcome by the 

^ The text has insteAcl of Kemgar Ifusaini has 

sjHh/tOl. 



raOSRAU’S MISCONDUCT. 65 

victorious army. Kbusrau’s box of jewels and precious 
things which he had always with him, fell into our hands. 

** Who thought that this boy of few years 
Would behave so badly to his sire ? 

At the first taste of the cup he brings up the lees. 

He melts away my glory and his own modesty. 

He sets on fire ' the throne of KhOrshid, 

He longs for the place of Jam^ld.” 

Short-sighted men in Allahabad had urged me also to 
rebel against my father. Their words were extremely 
unacceptable and disapproved by me. I know what sort 
of endurance a kingdom would have, the foundations of 
which were laid on hostility to a father, and was not 
moved by the evil counsels of such worthless men, but 
acting according to the dictates of reason and knowledge 
1 waited on my father, my guide, my qibla? and my 
visible Ood, and as a result of this good purpose it went 
well with me. 

In the evening of the day of Khusrau's flight I gave 
Raja Bftso, who is a trusty zamindar of the hill-country of 
Lahore leave to go to that frontier, and, wherever he heard 
news or trace of Khusrau, to make every eflbrt to capture 
him. I also appointed Mahabat Khan and MirzA *Ali 
Akbarshahi to a large force, which was to pursue Khusrau 
in whatever direction he might go. I resolved with myself 
that if Khusrau went to Kabul, I would follow him and 
not turn back till he was captured. If not delaying in 
Kabul he should go on to Badakhshan and those regions, 

I would leave Mah&bat Khan in Kabul and return myself 
(to India). My reason for not going to Badakhshan was 
that that wretch^would (in that case) certainly ally 
himself with the Uzbegs, and the disgrace would attach to 
this State. 

' Instead of the boMfadtidd oi the text, the MSS. have f>aj>h6rdnmd, be 
defiles. In the lant line they ineteed of 

* 1.6. the piece to which u> torn in prmyer. 



PURSUIT OP KHUSRiLU. 


66 


On the day on which the royal troops were ordered to 
pursue Khusrau, 15,000 rupees were given to Mahabat 
T^kn and 20,000 to the ahadis, and 10,000 more were 
sent with the army to be given to whom it might be 
necessary to give it on the way. 

On Saturday, the 28th, the victorious camp was pitched 
at Jaipal,^ which lies seven kos from Lahore. On the 
same day Khusrau arrived with a few men on the bank of 
the Chenab. The brief account of what had happened is 
that after his defeat those who had escaped with him from 
the battle became divided in opinion. The Afghans and 
Indians, who were mostly his old retainers, wished to 
double back like foxes into Hindustan, and to become 
a source of rebellion and trouble there. Husain Beg, 
whose people and family and treasure were in the direction 
of Kabul, suggested going to Kabul. In the end, as action 
was taken according to the wish of Husain Beg, the 
Hindustanis and the Afghans decided to separate theni- 
aelves from him. On arriving at the Chenab, he proposed 
to cross at the ferry of Shahpur, which is one of the 
recognized crossings, but as he could find no boats there 
he made for the ferry of Sodharah, where his people got 
one boat without boatmen and another full of firewood 
and grass. 

The ferries over the rivers had been stopped because 
before Khusrau's defeat orders had been given to all the 
jagirdars and the superintendents of roads and crossings in 
the subah of the Fanjab that as this kind of dispute had 
arisen they must all be on the alert. Husain Beg wished 
to transfer the men from the boat with drewood and grass 
to the other, so that they might convey Kh usrau across. 
At this juncture arrived Kilan,* son-in-law of KamU 


‘ Elliot (vi, 299) lisa Jahin, and Uie word in tlio MSS. does not look 
like Jaip&l. 

* This word appears to be a misUke ; It is not in the MSS. 



PURSUIT OF XHUSRAU. 


67 


Chaudhari of Sodharah, and saw a body of men about to 
cross in the night. He cried out to the boatmen that there 
was an order from the king Jah&ngir forbidding unknown 
men from crossing in the night, and that they must be 
careful. Owing to the noise and upmar, the people of the 
neighbourhood gathered together, and Kamal’s son-in-law 
took from the boatmen the pole with which they propel 
the boat, and which in Hindustani is called balll, and thus 
made the boat unmanageable. Although money was 
offered to the boatmen, not one would ferry them over. 
News went to Abu-i-Qasim Namakin, who was at Gujarat, 
near the Chen&b, that a body of men were wanting to 
cross the river by night, and he at once came to the ferry 
in the night with his sons and some horsemen. Things 
went to such a length that Husain Beg shot arrows at the 
boatmen,^ and Kamal's son-in-law also took to shooting 
arrows from the river-bank. For four kos the boat took 
its own way down the river, until at the end of the night 
it grounded, and try as they would they could not get it 
off. Meantime it became day. Abu-l-Qftsim and Khwaja 
lUiizr Khan, who by the efforts of Hil&l Kb&n had 
assembled on this (?the west) side of the river, fortified 
its west bank, and the zamindara fortified it on the east. 

Before this affair of Kbusrau’s, I had sent HilAl Kbta 
as aazawal to the army appointed for Kashmir under Sa'id 
Kbftn, and by chance he arrived in the neighbourhood (of 
the ferry) that same night ; he came in the nick of time, 
and his efforts had great effect in bringing together Aba-1- 
Q&sim Namakin, and KbwRja Kbi?r Khan in the 

capture of Sbuerau. 

On the morning of Sunday, the 24th of the aforesaid 
month, people on elephants and in boats captured KbusreUi 
and on Monday, the last day of the month, news of this 

^ When the beet slabk, the boetmeii ewem eahore, end it wee probnbly 
then that Hoeein shot et theta See BlodiOMon, p. 414, n. 2. 



68 


KHrSRAU BROUGHT BBFOKE HIS FATHER. 


reached me in the garden of MirzA K&mr&n. 1 immediately 
ordered the Amiru-I-uinai*a to go to Gujarat and to bring 
Khusrau to wait on me. 

In counsels on State affairs and government it often 
happens that I act according to my own judgment and 
prefer my own counsel to that of others. In the first 
instance I had elected to wait on my revered father from 
Allahabad in opposition to the advice of my faithful 
servants, and I obtained the blessing of serving him, and 
this was for my spiritual and temporal good. By the 
same course of conduct I had become king. The second 
instance was the pursuit of Khusrau, from which I was 
not held back by taking time to ascertain the (auspicious) 
hour, etc., and from which I took no rest until I captured 
him. It is a strange thing that after I had started I asked 
Hakim *Ali, who is learned in mathematics, how the hour 
of my departure had been (i.e. whether propitious or not), 
and he replied that in order to obtain my objec^t if I had 
wished to select an hour, there could not have been for 
years one selected better than that in which I mounted. 

On Thursday, Muharram 3rd, 1015, in Mirza Kamrans 
garden, they brought Khusrau before me with his hands 
tied and chains on his legs from the left side ^ after the 
manner and custom of Chingiz Khan. They made Husain 
Beg stand on his right hand and *Abdu<r-Rahim on his 
left. Khusrau stood weeping and trembling between them. 
Husain Beg, with the idea that it might profit him, began 
to speak wildly. When his purport became apparent to 
me I did not allow him to continue talking, but handed 
over ShusrRU in chains, and ordered these two villains to 
be put in the skins of an ox and an ass, and that they 


’ ** With a chain fafttened fix>m hia left hand to fua left foot, according 
to the law of Chingiz Khan " (Gladwin’s Jahangir, quoted by Elliot, 
vi, .507 >. But apiNtrently what is meant is that Khusrau was led up 
trvin tlie left side of the emiieror. 



PUNISHMENT OF KHUSRAU’S COMPANIONS. 


69 


should be mounted on asses with their faces to the tail ^ 
and thus taken round the city. As the ox-hide dried more 
quickly than that of the ass, Husain Beg remained alive 
for four watches and died from suffocation. ' Alxiu-r-Rabitn. 
who was in the ass's skin and to whom they gave some 
refreshment from outside, remained alive. 

From Monday, the last day of Zi<l-biijA> until the 9th 
of Mubarram of the aforesaid year, I remained in Mirza 
Kamran's garden because the time was unpropitious.'*^ 
1 bestowed Bhairawal,^ where the battle had taken place, 
on Shaikh Farid, and rewarded him with the high title of 
Murtaza Khan. For the sake of good government I ordertxi 
posts to be set up on both sides of the road from the 
garden to the city, and ordered them to hang up and impale 
the seditious Aimaqs and others who had taken part in the 
rebellion Thus each one of them received an extraordinary 
punishment. I gave headship to those landholders who 
had shown loyalty, and to every one of the Chaudharis 
between the Jhelam and the Chenab I gave lands for their 
support. 

Of Husain Beg’s property there were obtained from the 
house of Mir Muhammad Baqi nearly seven lakhs of rupees. 
This was exclusive of what he had made over to other 
places and of what he had with him. After this, whenever 
his name is mentioned, the words ^ tjdirdn a l^huran 


’ Du Jmtic, in hi« history of t* e Jenuit Mi.sHion.'f, g-ivoM noinu detAiKs 
about tha puoiahment. The bullock and ans were Nlau^htcred on the 
spot and their nkine were eewed on the boilitis of the unhappy men. 
Horne and ears were left on the skins. 

* Perhaps the meaning is that the weather wrh had. 

* The proper form seems to Bhaironwal, the Bbyrowal of the ma|>.<«. 
It is on the right bank of the Bikh (Bea^) on the road from Jalandhar to 
Amritsar. See Blochmann, p. 414, note. 

* The words are omitted in the text. Erskine read in his MS. *jdi* 

which I do not understand. The T.O. MSS. and B. M. MS. Or 
327S ha\e gatodn u khardn. Husain Beg, whose pro|)er name was Hasan, 
was a brave soldier, and did good service under Akbar. See his 
biography in Blochmann, p. 454. 



70 


JAHiNOIR ENTERS LAHORE. 


(bullocks and asses) will be used. When he came to this 
Court in company with Mlrz& Sh&hrukh he had one horse. 
By degrees his affairs flourished so that he became possessed 
of treasure both visible and buried, and projects of this 
kind entered his mind. 

While !IO^usrau*s affair was still in the will of God, as 
there was no actual governor between Afghanistan and 
Agra, which is a source of sedition and mischief, and, 
fearing that Kbusrau’s affair might be prolonged, I ordered 
my son Parwiz to leave some of the sardars to look after 
the Ranai and to come to Agra with A^f Kh&u and a body 
of those nearly connected with him in the service. He 
was to consider the protection and management of that 
region his special charge. But by the blessed favour of 
Allah, Khuarau*s affair was settled before Parwiz arrived in 
Agra ; I accordingly ordered my aforesaid son to come and 
wait on me. 

On Wednesday, Mubarrain 8th, I auspiciously entered 
the fort of Lahore. A number of loyalists represented to 
me that my return to Agra would be for the good of the 
State at this time when much was going amiss in Gujarat, 
in the Deccan, and in Bengal. This counsel did not meet 
with my approval, for the reports of ghah Beg Khan, the 
governor of Qandahar, showed that the officers of the 
Persian border were meditating an attack on that fortress. 
They had been moved thereto by the machinations of tlie 
re.siduum of the Mirza.s of Qandahar s army, which was 
always shaking the chain of contention. The Persian 
officers had written letters to these malcontents, and there 
was likelihood of a disturbance. It occurred to me that 
the death of His Majesty Akbar and the unreasonable 
outbreak of Khusrau might put an edge on their design, 
and that they might attack Qandahar. What had occurred 
to my mind became a realized fact. The governor of 
Far&h. the Malik of Sistan, and the jagirdars of that 
neighbourhood, with the assistance of Husain Khan, the 



SIEGE OF OANDAHAR. 


71 


governor of Herat, invaded Qandahar. Praise is due to 
the* manliness and courage of Shah Beg Khan, who planted 
his foot firmly like a man, and strengthened the fort, and 
seated himself on the top of the thii*d(?) citadel of the 
aforesaid fort in such a manner that outsiders could see his 
entertainments. During the siege he girded not his loins, 
but with bare head and feet arranged parties of pleasure ; 
yet no day passed that he did not send a force from the 
fort to meet the foe and did not make manly efforts. This 
went or as long as he was in the fort. The Qizilba^ 
army had invested on three sides. When news of this 
reached Lahore it was clearly advisable to remain in that 
neighbourhood. A large foi'ce was immediately appointed 
under the leadership of Mirza Qbazi, who was accompanit^d 
by a number of men ot rank and servants of the Court, 
such as Qar& Beg and Tukhta Beg, who had been promoted 
with the titles of Qara Khan and Sard&r Khan. 1 appointed 
MirzA QbAzi to a mansab of 5,000 personal, and horsemen, 
and bestowed drums on him. MirzA Ghazi was the son of 
MirzA jAni TarkhAn, king of Thathah (Sind), and by tne 
efforts of *Abdu-r-Rabim KhAnkhanAn that country had 
been conquered in the reign of the late king. The country 
of Thatnah was included in his jagir, and he held the rank 
vrith personality and horsemen of 5,000. After his death 
his son MirzA QJbAzi was raised to his rank and service. 
Their ancestors were among the amirs of SulUn Husain 
Mirza BAy-qarA, the ruler of Khuro-san, and they were 

originally descended from the amirs of Timur (SdfnO- 

qirdni). KbwAja *Aqil was appointed bakhshi of this 
army ; 43,000 rupees were given to Qara KhAn for road 

expenses, and 15,000 to Na(|di Beg and Qilij Beg, who 

were to accompany MirzA fll?Azi. I determined to stay at 
Lahore in order to settle tliis matter and with the intention 
of a tour to Kabul. About this time the rank of Hakim 
Fatbu-llah was fixed, original and increased, at 1,000 
personality and 300 horse. As Shaikh Husain Jaini had 



72 


ARJUNt THE SIKH LEADER. 


had dreams about me ^ hich had come true, 1 gave him 
twenty lakhs of dams, equivalent to 30,000 or 40,000 
rupees, for the expenses of himself and his monastery and 
the dervishes who were with him. On the 22nd I pro- 
moted *AbdU'llah ^&n to the rank of 2,500 personal and 
500 horse, original and increased. I ordered to be given 
to the ahadis two lakhs of rupees to be paid in advance 
and deducted by degrees from their monthly pay. 1 
bestowed 6,000 rupees on Qasim Beg Khan, the son-in-law 
of Shah Beg Kh&n, and 3,000 rupees on Sayyid Bahddur 
Khan. 

In Gobindwal, which is on the river Biyah (Beos), 
there was a Hindu named Arjun,^ in the garments of 
sainthood and sanctity, so much so that he had captured 
many of the simple-hearted of the Hindus, and even of the 
ignorant and foolish followers of Islam, by his ways and 
manners, and they had loudly sounded the drum of his 
holiness. They called him OHrH, and from all sides stupid 
people crowded to worship and manifest complete faith in 
him. For three or four generations (of spiritual successors) 
they had kept this shop warm. Many times it occurred to 
me to put a stop to this vain affair or to bring him into 
the assembly of the people of Islam. 

At last when Kbusrau passed along this road this 
insignificant fellow proposed to wait upon him. Khusrau 
happened to halt at the place where he was, and he came 
out and did homage to him. He behaved to Khusrau in 
certain special ways, and made on his forehead a finger- 
mark in saffron, which the Indians (Hindu wan) call 
qa^hqa* and is considered propitious. When this came to 
my ears and I clearly understood his folly, I ordered them 


* The fifth GOrQ of the Sikhs and the compiler of the Oranth. He was 
the fatlier of Har Oovinrl. See Sayyid Muhammad Latlf's history of the 
PaaiSb, p. 253. Arjun\s tomb is in T^hore. 

* But qatkqa is a Turkish word. Th«; Hindi phrase eeeme to be fikd. 



ARRIVAL OF PARWiZ. 


73 


to produce him and handed over his houses, dwelling- 
places, and children to Murta^ Khan, and having coii' 
fiscated his property commanded that he should be put 
to death. 

There were two men named Raju and Amba, who, under 
the shadow of the protection of the eunuch Daulat Khan, 
made their livelihood by oppression and tyranny, and had 
done many acts of oppression in the few days that 
Khuarau was before Lahore. I ordered Raju to the 
gallows and a fine to be taken from Amba, who was 
reputed to be wealthy. In short, 1.5,000 rupees were 
collected from him, which sum I ordered them to expend 
on bulghur-khdnas (refectories) and in charity. 

Sa'du-llah Khan, son of Sa'd Khan, was promoted to the 
rank of 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse. 

In his great de.sire to wait upon me, Parwiz traversed 
long distances in a short time, in the rainy season and 
incessant rain, and on Thursday, the 29th, when two 
watches and three ghari of day had passed, obtained the 
blessing of seeing me. With exceeding kindness and 
affection, I took him into the embrace of favour and 
kissed his forehead. 

When this disgraceful conduct showed itself in Khusrau, 
I had resol v^ed not to delay in any place till I had 
captured him. There was a probability that he might 
turn back towards Hindustan, so it appeared impolitic 
to leave Agra empty, as it was the centre of the 
State, the abode of the ladies of the holy harem, and 
the depository of the world s treasures. On these accountsr 
I had written when leaving Agra to Parwiz, saying that 
his loyalty had had this result, that Khusrau had fled and 
that Fortune had turned her face toward himself ; that 
I had started in pui-suit of Khusrau, and that he should 
consequently dispose of the affairs of the Rana in some 
way according to the nec«!s.sity of the time, and for the 
l>etiefit of the kingdom should himself come quickly to 



74 


ACCOUNT OF THE RInX. 


Agra. I had delivered into his charge the capital and 
treasury, which was equal to the wealth of Qarun,* and 
I had commended him to the God of power. Before this 
letter reached Parwiz. the Bana had been so humbled that 
he had sent to Asaf Khan to say that as by his own acts he 
had come to shame and disgrace, he hoped that he would 
intercede for him in such a way that the prince would be 
content with his sending Bagha,^ who was one of his sons. 
Parwiz had nOt agreed to this, and said that either the 
Rana himself should come or that he should send Karan. 
Meantime the news of Khusrau’s disturbance arrived, and 
on its account Asaf Khan and other loyalists agreed to the 
coming of Bagha, who obtained the blessing of waiting on 
the prince near Mandalgarh. 

Parwiz, leaving Baja Jagannath and most of the chiefs 
of his army, started for Agra with Asaf Khan and some of 
those near to him and his own attendants, and with him 
brought Bagha to the Court. When he came near Agra 
he heard the news of the victory over Khtusrau and his 
capture, and aftei resting two days an order reached him 
that os matters appeared settled in all quarters he should 
betake himself to me, in order that on the prescribed date 
he miglit obtain the good fortune of waiting on me. 
I bestowed on him the parasol {dftdb-glr)? which is one 
of the signs of royalty, and I gave him the rank of 10,000 
and sent an oi*der to the officials to grant him a tankhwdh 
jagir. At this time I sent Mirza ‘Ali Beg to Kashmir ; 
10,000 rupees wei*e delivered to QAzi *Izzatu>llah to divide 
amongst faqirs and the poor of Kabul. Al.imad Beg Khan 
was promoted to the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,250 
horse, original and extra. At the same time Muqarrab 
Khan, who hivd been sent to Burhanpur to bring the 
children of DaniyAl, returned after an absence of 6 months 

* The cousiiii of Moses, famous for his wealth ; the Korah of the Bible. 

* (ilariwin lias Niigh. 

’ Blonhinaiin, p. 50. 



PR01C0TI0N8. LRKIYAL OF DANITXl’s CHILDREN. 75 


22 days and had the honour of an audience, and related 
in detail what had occurred in those regions. 

Saif Khan was promoted to the rank of 2,000 personal 
and 1,000 horse. Shaikh 'Abdu-l-Wahhab^ of the Bukhara 
sayyids, who was governor of Delhi under the late king, 
was dismissed from the post (by me) for certain ill-deeds 
done by his men, and was entered amongst the holders of 
subsistence lands and the arhdh-i-8a*ddat 

In the whole of the hereditary dominions, both the 
crown lands and the jagirs, I ordered the preparation of 
bulghur’k/uzncta (free eating-houses), where cooked food 
might be provided for the poor according to their condition, 
and so that residents and travellers both might reap the 
benefit. 

Amba^ Khan Kashmiri, who was of the stock of the 
rulers of Kashmir, was selected for the rank of 1,000 
personal and 300 horse. On Monday, Rabi*u-l-al^ir 9th, 
I gave Parwiz a special sword ; and jewelled swords were 
presented also to Qutbu-d-din Khan Koka and the 
Amiru-l-umara. I saw Daniyal's children, whom Muqarrab 
Khan had brought ; there were three sons and four 
daughters. The boys bore the nameis Ta-hmuras,* B&y- 
sunghar, and Hushang. Such kindness and affection were 
shown by me to these children as no one thought possible. 
I resolved that TAhmuras, who was the eldest, should 
always be in waiting on me, and the others were handed 
over to the charge of my own sisters. 

A special dress of honour was sent to R&ja M&n Singh 
in Bengal. I ordered a reward of 30 lakhs of dams to 
Mirza Qhazi. I bestowed on Shaikh IbrShim, son of 

> Akhar-iiiina, iii, 748, and BlociiiPiiiru p> 544. He wan a man of 
inety and learning, and means that he restored him to his 

former quiet life. The arbdb-*-sa*ddatt or auspicious persons, were those 
who offered up prayers for the kingS proA|ierity and other blessings. 

- Amha was killed later by Nar-JahAn's husband, Shir Afgan (TOzuk, 
pp. 54, 5.5). 

HliK’hmaiin, p. 3tU. 



76 


JAHANGIR WAITS UPON HIS MOTHER. 


Qutbu-d-din Khan Koka, the rank of 1,000 personal 
and 300 horse, and dignified him with the title of 
Kishwar Kban. 

As when I started in pursuit of Khusrau I had left my 
son Khurram in charge of the palaces and treasury, I now, 
when that affair had been settled, ordered the said son to 
attend upon Hazrat Maryam-zamani and the other ladies, 
and to escort them to me. When they reached the 
neighbourhood of Lahore, on Friday the 12th of the 
month mentioned, I embarked in a boat and went to 
a village named Dahr to meet my mother, and I had the 
good fortune to be received by her. After the performance 
of obeisance and prostration and greeting which is due 
from the young to the old according to the custom of 
Chingiz, the rules of Timur and common usage, and after 
worship of the King of the World (Gotl), and after 
finishing this business, I obtained leave to return, and 
re-entered the foi-t of Lahore. 

On the I7th, having appointed Mu‘izzu-l-mulk bakhshi 
of the army against the Bana, 1 dismissed him to it. As 
news had come of the rebellion of Ray Ray Singh and his 
son, Dulip, in the neighbourhocxi of Nagor, I ordered Baja 
Jagannath to proceed against them with others of the 
servants of the State and Mu'izzu-l-mulk, and to put 
a stop to this disturbance. I gave 50,000 rupees to Sardar 
KJian, who had been appointed to the place of ^ah Beg 
Khan as Governor of Qandahar, and I promoted him to 
the rank of 3,000 personal and 2,500 horse. To 
Khan, the late ruler of Khandesh. were given 3,000 rupees, 
and to his brother, Ahmad Khan,* who is one of the 
kh^iazadas of the State. Hwihim Khan, son of Q&sim 
Khan, who is one of the house-bom of the State, and 


* These words are not in the MSS., and they seem to have crept into 
the text by mistake and to be a premature entry of words relating to 
Hushinit etc. The brother of the former ruler (or king) of Khandeeh 
could hardly be a khdnatUd, 



PROMOTIONS. 


77 


worthy of advancement, I promoted to tiie rank of 2,500 
personal and 1,500 horse. I gave him also one of my own 
horses. I sent robes of honour to eight individuals 
amongst the nobles of the army of the Deccan.^ Five 
thousand rupees were given to Nimm of Shiraz, the story- 
teller. Three thousand rupees were given for the expenses 
of the hvlijhUr-khana of Kashmir to the wakil of Mirza 
'All Beg, the governor of that place, to send to Srinagar. 
I presented^ a jewelled dagger of the value of 6,000 rupees 
to Qutbu-d-din Khan. 

News reached me that ghail^ Ibrahim Baba, the Afghan, 
had opened a religious establishment (lit. one of being 
a shaikh and having disciples) in one of the parganas of 
Lahore, and as his doings were disreputable and foolish 
a considerable number of Afghans had collected round him. 
I ordered him to be brought and handed over to Parwiz to 
be kept in the fort of Chunar ; so this vain disturbance 
was put an end to. 

On Sunday, 7th Jumada-l-awwal, many of the mansabdars 
and ahadis were promoted : Mahabat Khan obtained the 
rank of 2,000 personal and 1,300 horse, Dilawar Khan 
2,000 personal and 1,400 horse, Waziru-l-mulk 1,300 
personal and 550 horse, Qayyam Khan 1,000 personal and 
horse, ghyam Singh 1,500 personal and 1,200 hoiw* ; in 
the same way forty-two mansabdars were promoted. (In 
most days the same observances occur. I presented Parwiz 
with a ruby of the value of 25,000 rupees. On Wednesday 
the 9th of the aforesaid month, the 2l8t of Shahriwar,^ 
after three watches and four gharis, the feast for my solar 
weighing, which is the commencement of the 38th year of 
iny age, took place. According to custom they got ready 

' Thifl should be, sooording to the M88., ‘‘army sgainst the RAnA," 
not army of the Deccan. 

* The MSS. have ** in the neighbourhood of Lahore.” Parwiz had then 
charge of Bihar. 

Text, wrongly. Bahniun. Jeliungir waa born on tlie 21at of ^ahrlwar. 



78 


SOLAR WEIGHING OF JAHINGIr. 


the weighing apparatus and the scales in the house of 
Maryam-zamani (his mother). At the moment appointed 
blessings were invoked and I sate in the scales. Each 
suspending rope was held by an elderly person who offered 
up prayers. The first time the weight in gold came to 
three Hindustani maunds and ten seers. After this I was 
weighed against several metals, perfumes, and essences, up 
to twelve weighings, the details of which will be given 
hereafter. Twice a year I weigh myself against gold and 
silver and other metals, and against all sorts of silks and 
cloths, and various grains, etc., once at the beginning of 
the solar year and once at that of the lunar. The weight 
of the money of the two weighings I hand over to the 
different treasurers for faqirs and those in want. On the 
same auspicious day I promoted Qutbu-d-din Khan Koka, 
who for many years had expected such a day,^ with various 
favours. First, I gave him the rank of 5,000 peraonal and 
horse, and with this a special robe of honour, a jewelled 
sword, and one of my own horses, with a jewelled saddle, 
and I gave him leave to go to the subahdarship of the 
province of Bengal and Orissa, which is a place for 50,000 
horse. As a mark of honour he set off accompanied by 
a large force, and two lakhs of rupees were given him as 
a sumptuary allowance. My connection with his mother 
ib such that as in my childhood I was under her guardian- 
ship and care, I have not so much affection for my own 
mother as for her. She is to me my gracious mother, and 
I do not hold him leas dear than my own brothers and 
children. Qutbu-d-din is tlie fo.ster-brother who is most 
fit for fosterage. I gave 300,000 rupees to his auxiliaries. 
On this day 1 sent 139,000 as a nuimage present {sachiq) 
for the daughter of Pahari (his brother Mur&d), who had 
been betrothed to Parwiz. 

* Appereotlj, had long looked forn-ard to the happy day when 
Jah&ngfr snould be weighed aa a king. 



REMARKABLE LETTER OF ‘AZIZ KOKA. 


79 


On the 22nd, B&z Bahadur Qalm&q, who had long been 
guilty of evil practices in Bengal, by the guidance of 
fortune obtained the honour of kissing uiy threshold. 
I gave him a jewelled dagger, 8,000 rupees, and promoted 
him to the rank of 1,000 personal and horse. One lakh of 
rupees and cash and jewels were bestowed on Parwiz. 
Kesho D&s Maru was promoted to the grade of 1,500 
personal and horse. Abu-l-basan, who had been the diwan 
and factotum of my brother Oaniyal, together with his 
children,^ had the honour of an audience, and was raised 
to the rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horSe. On the Ist 
of the second Jumad& Shaikh Bayazid,^ who was one of 
the shaikhzadas of Sikri, well known for brilliance of 
understanding and knowledge, and the connection of old 
service,^ was honoured with the title of Mu'az^m O&n, 
and to him I gave the government of Delhi. On the 2 Ist 
of the same month I presented Parwiz with a necklace 
composed of four rubies and one hundred pearls. The 
rank of Hakim Muufiar was fixed at 3,000 personal and 
1,000 horse, original and extra. I gave 5,000 rupees to 
Nathu Mal(?), R&ja of Manjholi.^ 

A remarkable occurrence was the discovery of a letter 
from Mirza *Aziz Koka to *Ali Khan, the ruler of 
Khandesh. I had had an impression that he had u 
particular enmity to me on Khusrau's account, who was 
his son-in-law. From the discovery of this writing it 
became, clear that he had never given up his innate 
treachery, and had adopted this unbecoming attitude 
towards my revered father also. In short, this letter 
which he had written at some time to Raja 'Ali Kb&n 

* Perhaps the meaning is thnt he Has introrluorci along with D&niyAl's 
children. 

^ Blochmann, p. 492. 

* This refers to his parentage. 

* In the M88. this name seems to be Bhim Mai. Mnnjholi is written 
Manjholah in Blochmann, p. 175. 



80 


SUBJECT OF LETTER CONTINUED. 


was from beginning to end full of abuse and disapprobation, 
and said things which no enemy even could have written 
and such as could not be attributed to anyone, and far 
less to one like His Majesty, *Ar^-d^ydn%, a king 
and an appreciative sovereign, who from childhood had 
educated him and brought him up because of what was 
due for services rendered by his mother, and raised the 
standard of reliance on him to such a high degree as no 
other person possessed. This letter fell into the hands of 
Khwaja Abu-l-hosan in Burhanpur amongst the property 
of Raja ‘All Khan. He brought and laid it before me. 
In reading and seeing it the hair on my limbs stood on 
end. But for the consideration and due recognition of the 
fact that his mother hod given her milk to my father 
I could have killed him with my own hand. Having 
procured hi.s attendance I gave the letter into his hand 
and told him to read it with a loud voice to those present. 
When he saw the letter I thought his body would have 
parted from his soul, but with shamelessness and impudence 
he read it os though he had not written it and was reading 
it by order. Those present in that paradise-like assembly 
of the servants of Akbar and Jahangir and heard the letter 
read, loosened tlie tongue of reproach and of curses and 
abuse. I put the (|uestion to liiin, Leaving aside the 
treacheries which in reliance on your worthless self you 
contrived against my fortune, what >va8 done to you by 
my father, who raised you and your family from the dust 
of the road to such wealth and dignity as to make you the 
envy of your contemporaries, that you should write these 
things to the enemies of his Empire ? Why did you enrol 
yourself amongst the wicked and disloyal ? Truly, what 
can one make of an original nature and innate disposition? 
Since your temperament has been nourished by the water 
of treachery, what else can spring up but such actions ? 
Passing over w’hat you did to myself, I gave you the 
rank you had held betore, thinking that your treachery 



MARRIAGE OF PRINCE PARWIZ. 


81 


was directed against me only. Since it has become known 
that you behaved in a similar way to your benefactor and 
visible Deity, I leave you to the thoughts and actions 
which you formerly had and still have.” After these 
remarks his lips closed, and he was unable to make any 
reply. What could he have said in the presence of such 
disgrace ? 1 gave an order to deprive him of his jagir. 

Although what this ingrate had done was unpardonable, 
yet in the end, from certain considerations, 1 passed 
it over. 

On Sunday the 26th of the above-mentioned month 
was held the marriage feast of Parwiz and the daughter 
of Prince Murad. The ceremony was performed in the 
house of Her Highness Maryam -zamanl. The entertain- 
ment was arranged in the house of Parwiz, and all who 
were present were exalted with all kinds of honour and 
civilities. Nine thousand rupees were handed over to 
Sharif Amuli and other nobles, to be given in alms to 
faqira and other poor people. 

On Sunday the 10th Rajab I left the city to hunt in 
Girjhak and Nandana,' and took up my quarters in the 
garden of Ram Das, where I remained four days. 

On Wednesday the 13th the solar weighing of Parwiz 
took place. They weighed him twelve times against 
various metals and other things, and each weighing came 
to two maunds and eighteen seers. I ordered the whole to 
h<! distnbuted amongst faqirs At this time the rank of 
Shaja*at Khan was fixed at 1,500 personal and 700 horse, 
original and extra. 

After the march of Mirza Oh^i tt»d liis force it oijcuiTcd 
to me to send a second contingent after him. Having 
be.stowed on Bahadur* KhAn Qfirl>cgi the rank of 1,500 
personal and 800 horse, original and extra, I .st4irt(*d off 

* ? K;iiifian|iitr. These places er** hi .^imUnpr^r. near Multan. 

- MS. ISl has r<?^her, .lud it h^s iiisn-ail of Sim horse. 



82 OFFICERS APPOINTED TO ACT AS COLLEAGUES. 


■a body of cavalry,^ which came to about 3,000, with him 
under the leadership of Sh&h Beg and Muhammad Amin. 
For the expenses of this force 200,000 rupees were given 
and 1,000 musketeers were also appointed. 

I left Asaf Khan to guard Khusrau and defend Lahore. 
The Amiru-l-umara was deprived of the honour of waiting 
on me, as he had a severe illness and remained in the city. 
*AbdU'r-Razzaq Ma'murl, who had been summoned from 
the Rana’s country, was promoted to be bakhshi at 
headquarters, and it was ordered that in company with 
‘Abu-l-ha<8an he should perform this service permanently. 
Following my father's rule, I appoint two m6n in 
association in the discharge of the chief offices, not from 
want of confidence in them, but because, as they are mortal 
and no man is safe from accidents or illness, if any con- 
fusion or obstacle should present itself to one the other is 
there so that the affairs of the servants of God may not 
come to ruin. 

At this time also news came that at the Dasahra, which 
is one of the fixed feast days of the Hindus, *Abdu-llah 
Khan had made an incursion from Kalpi, which is his jagir, 
into the province of Bandilah, and displaying great valour 
made prisoner Ram Chand, son of Madhukar, who for 
a long time had made a centre of disturbance in that 
difficult country and taken him to K&lpi. For this service 
he was presented with a standard and raised to 3,000 
personal and 2,000 horse. 

Petitions from the subah of Bihar represented that 
Jah&ngir Quli Khan had had a battle with Sangr&m, one 
of the chief zemindars of Bihar, who had about 4,000 horse 
and innumerable foot, on account of certain opposition and 


* Text, Uyniaq purt (?). MS. 181 Iim mad 305 aaema to have the 
Maine. Can it mean * red cavalry ’ ? Aa Blocdmiann has pointed out, 
371, n. 2, the word Uym&q doe^ not alwa^fi mean the tribe, but was used 
to denote a superior kind of cavalry. 



HUNTING INCIDENTS. 


83 


disloyalty on rough land, and that on the field the aforesaid 
Khan had exerted himself manfully. In the end Sangr&m 
di^d of a gunshot wound ; many of his men fell in the 
battle, and those saved from the sword took to flight. 
Since this distinguished affair had been brought about by 
Jahangir Quli Khan, I promoted him to the rank of 4,500 
personal and 3,500 horse. 

Three months and six days passed by in hunting ; 581 
animals were captured with the gun, hunting leopards and 
nets, and a qamargdh ; of these 158 were killed by my own 
gun. The qamargah was held twice ; on one occasion in 
Girjhak, when the ladies were present, 155 animals were 
killed; and the second time, in Nandina. 110.^ The detaib 
of the animals killed are as follows: mountain sheep, 180 ; 
mountain goats, 29 ; wild asses, 10 ; Nilgai, 9 ; antelope, 
etc.. 348. 

On Wednesday the 16th Shawwal I returned safe from 
my hunting, and wi.en one watch and six gharis of day 
had passed I entered Lahore on the day named. During 
this hunting a strange affair was witnessed At ChandwA.lah, 
where a minaret had been erected, I had wounded in the 
belly a black antelope. When wounded, a sound proceeded 
from him such as I have never heard from any antelope 
except in the rutting season. Old hunters and those with 
me were astonished, and said they never remembered nor 
had they heaid from their fathers that such a voice issued 
from an antelope except at rutting time. This has been 
written down because it is not void of strangeness. I found 
the flesh of the mountain goat more delicious than that of 
all wild animals, although its skin is exceedingly ill-odoured, 
so much so that even when tanned the scent is not destroyed. 
I ordered one of the largest of the he-goats to be weighed : 
it was 2 maunds and 24 seers, equal to 21 foreign inaunds 


‘ The qamargdh or ring-hunt prodaoed 26J head of game ; tlif* rest 
were shot ei other tiinee ; the totel of the list vhould be epfiar* nrly S7S. 



84 MOUNTAIN RAMS. PUNISHMENT OP DULIP. 


(Persian). I ordered a large ram to be weighed, and it 
came to 2 maunds and 3 seers Akbarl, equal to 17 Persian 
{wildyati) maunds. The largest and strongest of the wild 
asses weighed 9 maunds and 16 seers, equal to 76 Persian 
(wilayati) maunds. I have frequently heard from hunters 
and those fond of the chase that at a certain regular time 
a worm develops in the horns of the mountain ram, and 
that this worm causes an irritation which induces tlie ram 
to fight with his hind, and that if he finds no rival he 
strikes his head against a tree or a rock to allay the 
irritation. After enquiry it seems that the same worm 
appears in the horn of the female sheep, and since the 
female does not fight the statement is clearly untrue. 
Though the flesh of the wild ass is lawful food and most 
men like to eat it, it was in no way suited to my taste. 

Inasmuch as before this time the punishment of Dulip and 
of his father, Ray Ray Singh, had been ordered, there now 
came news that ZAhid Khan, the son of Sadiq KhAn. and 
*Abdii-r- Rahim, son of Shaikh Abu-1-fazl, and RanA Sankar 
and Mu4zzu-l-inulk, with another force of mansabdars and 
followers of the Court, had heard news of Dulip in the 
neighbourhood of NAgor, which is in tlie subah of Ajmir, 
and having moved against him had found him. As he 
could find no way of escape, of necessity he planted a firm 
foot and came to blows with the royal army. After 
a short encounter he was badly beaten and gave over 
many to slaughter, and himself, taking with him his own 
ertects, fled into the vale of ruin. 

With broken MrmR and looeened belt. 

No power to fight and no care for head. ’* 

In spite of his old age, I continued Qilij in his 

mnnsab because of his service under my father, and I 
oi-dered that he should get a jagir in the sarkar of KAlpi. 

In the month Zi-I-qa*da the mother of Qutbu-d-din 
Khan Koka, who had given me her milk and was as 



DEATH OP JAHANOIR^S NURSE. SECOND YEAR. 85 


a mother to me or even kinder than my own kind mother, 
and ill whose lap I had been brought up from infancy, was 
committed to the mercy of God. I placed the feet of her 
corpse on my shoulders and carried her a part of the way 
(to her grave). Througli extreme gi ief and sorrow I had 
no inclination for some days to eat, and I did not change 
iiiy clothes. 


Feast of the Second New Year. 

On Wednesday the 22nd Zi-l-cja'da, 1015 (10th March, 
1607), when gharis of the day had pas.sed, the sun 
rose to his House of Honour. They decorated the palaces 
after the usual fashion : a great entertainment was pr(»pared, 
and liaving seated myself at an auspicious hour on the 
throne of accession I exalted the nobles and courli<us with 
kindness and favour. On this same auspicious day it was 
learned from the reports sent from Qandahar that the. 
army sent under Mirza Ghazi. son of Mirza Jani, to succour 
(which had been appointed to assist) Shah Beg l\_han, had 
entered the city of Qandahar on the 12th of Shawwiil. 
When the Persians heard of the arrival of the victorious 
army at the last stage before the aforesaiil city,' they 
became surprised and wretched and repentant, and did not 
draw rein until they had reached the Helmand, fifty or 
sixty kos distant. 

In the second place it became known that the governor 
of Farah and a number of the officers of that neiglibour- 
huod had taken it into their heads, after the d ath of th«; 
late king, that in this confusion Qandahar might easily 
fall into their hands, and without waiting for an order 
from Shah 'Abbas had collected together and won over 
the Chief of Sewistan (Sistan/ Sending someone to 


* Tha MSS. have the 6th Mtage iniitenrl of ** la^t. 



86 


SIEGK OF QANOAHAR. 


Husain Kb&i* the governor of Herat they asked for 
support from him. He also sent a force. After that they 
turned to attack Qandahar. Shah Beg Khan, the governor 
of that place, seeing that battle has two heads, and that if 
(which God forbid !) he should be defeated he would lose 
possession of Qandahar, thought that to confine himself 
in a fort would be better than to fight. He therefore 
determined to hold the fort, and sent quick messengers to 
the C!ourt. It happened that at this time the royal 
standards had started from Agra in pursuit of Khusrau. 
and had arrived at Lahore. Immediately on hearing this 
news (from Shah Beg Khan), a large force was sent off 
of amirs and mansabdars under Mirza Ghazi. Before the 
Mirza reached Qandahar the news had been carried to the 
ghah (of Persia) that the governor of Farah, with some 
of the jagirdars of that neighbourhood, had proceeded 
towards the province of Qandahar. Considering this an 
improper proceeding, he sent Husain Beg, a well-known 
man and one of his own intimates to make enquiries. 
He also sent a farman in their names that they should 
move away from the vicinity of Qandahar and go to their 
own places and abodes, because the friendship and amity 
of his ancestors with the dignified family of Jahangir 
Padshah were of old standing. That body, before the 
arrival of Husain Beg and the King s order, not being able 
to oppose the royal army, considered the opportunity of 
returning a favourable one. The said Husain Beg censured 
the men and started off to wait on me, which he had the 
honour to do at I^ahore. He explained that the ill-fated 
army wliich had attacked Qandahar had acted without the 
order of Shah ‘Abbas. God forbid (he said) that in 
consequence of this any unpleasantness should remain 
in my mind. In short, after the victorious tiwps reached 
Qandahar, they, according to orders, delivered the fort 
over to SardAr Khan, and Shah Beg Khan returned to 
Court witli the relieving force. 



RAM CHAND BANDILAH. KHAN JAHlN LODi. 8/ 


On the 27th Zi-l-qa*da, *Abdu*llah Khan, having brought 
Ram Chand Bandilah into captivity and chains, brought 
him before me. I ordered them to take the fetters from 
his legs, and bestowed on him a robe of honour, and 
handed him over to Raja fiaso that he might take security 
and release him and a number of his relations who had 
been captured with him. This through my clemency and 
kindness came to pass. He had never imagined such 
clemency and kindness as I showed t6 him. 

On the 2nd Zi-l-bijja I gave my son Kburram a tUman 
u tUgh, a flag and drums, and bestowed on him the rank 
of 8,000 personal and 5,000 horse, and gave an order for 
a jagir. On the same day, having exalted Pir Kh&n,* 
son of Daulat Khan Lodi, who had come from Khandesh 
with the children of Daniyal, with the title of Salabat 
Kh&n and honoured him with the rank of 3,000 personal 
and 1,500 horse, and presented him with a standard 
and drums, I promoted him to the distinction of sonship 
(farzandi) beyond his fellows and equals. The ancestors 
and uncles of Salabat Khan s grandfather had been great 
and honourable among the tribe of L(x]i. An earlier Daulat 
Khan, uncle of Salabat Khan's grandfather, when Ibrahim 
after his father Sikandar’s death, began to behave ill to 
his father’s amii*s and destroyed many, became appre- 
hensive, and .sent his younger son, Dilawar Kliaii, to wait 
upon H.M. Babar in Kalml, and HUgge.stcd U) him the 
acquisition of Hindustan. As Babar also had this enter- 
prise in mind, he at once pr<x*eeded in that direction, and 
did not turn his rein till he reached the neighbourhood 
of Lahore. Daulat Khan with his followers obtained the 
good fortune to wait upon him, and performed loyal service. 
As lie was an old man, adorned with inward and outward 
excellencie.s, he did much good service. He (Babar) 
generally called him ** father," and entniHiiiig t4j him as 


> ThiH is the fRinou.s Khan JoJinii Lodi of .Slmh Jaluin .s reign. 



88 


KHAN JAHAN LODl’S ANCESTORS. 


before^ the government of the Panjab placed its amirs 
and jagirdars under his jurisdiction. Taking Dilawar 
Kh&n with him he (Babar) returned to Kabul. When he 
(Babar) came a second time into the Panjab with intent to 
invade Hindustan, Daulat Khan waited on him, and about 
the same time died. Dilawar Khan was honoured with 
the title of Khankhanan and was with Babar in the 
battle he had writh Ibrahim. In the same way he was 
permanently in waiting on the late king Humayun. 
In the tJiand of Mungir at the time of his (Humayun 's) 
return from Bengal, he fought bravely against Shir Khan 
Afghan, and was made prisoner on the field of battle. 
Although Shir Khan urged him to take service with him, 
he refused and said, “ Thy ancestors were always thf* 
servants of mine : how, then, could I do this ? ” Shir 
Khan was enraged, and ordered him to be shut up in 
a wall.* 

‘Umar Kh an, the grandfather of Salabat Khan Farzand, 
who was cousin of Dilawar Khan, had been treated with 
ivs[x;ct in the thiie of Salim Khan. After Salim Khan s 
death and the slaughter of Firuz, his son, at the hand of 
Muhammad Khan, ‘Umar Khan and his brethren became 
suspicious of Muhammad Khan and went to Gujarat, where 
‘ Umar Khan died. Daulat Khan, his son, who was a brave 
young man of pleasant appearance, and good at all things, 
chose the companionship of ‘Abdu>r- Rahim, son of Bairam 
Khan, who had been dignified with the title of Khan- 
khaiian in the reign of Akbar, and performed excellent 
service. The Khankhanan regarded him as his own brother, 
or even a thousand times better than his brotlier, and 
dearer. Most of the Khankhanan^s victories were gained 
through Daulat Khan s valour and manliness.^ When my 

* Text, W 0 ant nr. 

* I.e. built him up in it. 

® Jahuni^ir dij not like the Khankh&n&n, and ao here belittles his 
services. 



KHAN JAHXN LODI. 


89 


revered father, having taken the province of Khandesh 
and the fort of Asir, returned to Agra, he left Daniyal in 
charge of that province and of all the provinces acquired 
from the rulers of the Deccan. At this time Daniyal had 
separated Daulat Khan from the Khanidianan. and was 
keeping him in attendance on himself and handing over to 
him for disposal all the busineas of the State. He showed 
him much favour and perfect affection until he died in his 
service. He left two sons, one Muliammad Khan, and the 
other Pir Khan ; Muhammad Khan, who was the (dder, died 
a short time after his father. Daniyal, too, wore himself 
out with drinking. After my accession I summoned Pir 
Khan to Court. As I discovered in him a good disp< 3 sition 
and natural abilities, I raised the pedestal of regard for 
him to the point that has been described. To-day there 
is not in my government any person of greater infiuencx* 
than he, so much so that on his representation 1 pass over 
faults which are not pardoned at the intercession of any of 
the other servants of the Court. In short, he is a young 
man of good disposition, brave, and worthy of favour, and 
what I have done for him has been done rightly, and he 
will be exalted by further favours.^ 

As I had made up my exalted mind to the concjuest of 
Mawara’a-n-nahr (Transoxiana), which was the here»litary 
kingdom of my ancestors, I desired tt> fr«*e the face of 
Hindustan from the rubbish of the factious and rebellious, 
and leaving one of my sons in that country, to go myself 
with a valiant army in due array, with elephants of 
mountainous dignity and of lightning speed, and taking 
ample trea.sure with me, to undertake tlui ennqiirst of 
my ancestral dominions. In accordance with this idea, 

I despatched Parwiz to drive back the Hana. and inteTi(h*»| 
to go myself to the I>eccan. when just at that luoiiH ut the 

' During $|h&h .Tahan’s reign, Khan .Jalian HrM tioiii Court, was 

luimied, and killerl. 



90 


PROPOSED EXPEDITIOK TO TRAKBOXIANA. 


improper action of l^nsrau took place, and it became 
necessary to pursue him and put an end to that disturbance. 
For the same reason, the undertaking of Parwiz did not 
assume a promising appearance, and regarding the exigency 
of the time he gave a respite to the Ran&. Bringing with 
him one of the R&na*8 sons, he came to wait on me, and 
had the bliss of attending me in Lahore. When I was at 
ease about Sbusrau's disturbance, and the repulse of the 
Qizilbashes, who had invested Qandahar, had been brought 
about in a facile way, it came into my mind to make 
a hunting tour to Kabul, which is like my native land. 
After that I would return to Hindustan, when the purposes 
of my mind would pass from design to action. In 
pursuance of these steps, on the 7th 2i-l-liijja, at an 
auspicious hour, I left the fort of Lahore and took up my 
quarters in the Dil-amiz Garden which is on the other 
side of the Ravi, and stayed there four days. Sunday, 
the 19th Farwaixiin, which is the culmination of His 
Majesty the Sun, I passed in the garden, and some of the 
servants of the Court were favourably and kindly 
honoured with increased rank. Ten thousand rupees were 
bestowed on Hasan Beg, the envoy of the ruler of Persia 
(Shah *Abbas). Leaving Qilij Khan, Miran Sadr Jahaii, 
and Mir Sharif Amuli in Ijahore, I ordered them to settle 
in consultation any matters that might present themselves. 
On Monday I marched from the garden mentioned, and 
encamped at the village of Harhar, 3J kos distant from 
the city. On Tuesday tne royal standards alighted at 
Jahangirpur, which is one of my fixed hunting-places. 
In this neighbourhood had been erected by my order 
H huinar at the head of the grave of an antelope called 
Mansaraj,^ which was without equal in fights with tame 


* Perha^fH the antelope a name wa#» Raj, and the syllable man the 
pronoun ‘my,* when the translation would be * my antelope Raj.* See 
Elliot, vi, 30U, and R.A«S. MS., N«*. 1-4. 



ACCOUNT OF AN ANTELOPE. 


91 


antelopes and in hunting wild ones. On a stone of that 
manar was carved this prose composition, written by 
Mulla Muhammad Husain of Kashmir, who was the chief 
of the elegant writers of the day : In this enchanting 
place an antelope came into the world-holding {jahan-giri) 
net of the Ood-knowing ruler Nuru-d-din Jahangir 
Padshah. In the apace of one month, having overcome 
his desert fierceness, he became the head of the special 
antelopes.” On account of the rare quality of this 
antelope, I commanded that no person should hunt the 
deer of this plain, and that their flesh should be to Hindus 
and Muhammadans as is the flesh of cows and pigs. They 
made the gravestone in the shape of an antelope. I ordered 
Sikandar Mu'in, the jagirdar of the aforesaid pargana, to 
build a strong fort in the village of Jahangirpur. 

On Thursday, the 1 4th, I encamped in the pargana of 
Chandala.^ Thence on Saturday, the 16th, making one 
stage in the middle, I came to Hafismbad.^ I stayed in the 
station which had been erected by the exertions of the 
karori of that place, Mir Qiyamu-d-din. Having reached 
the Chenab in two marches on Thursday, the 21st Zi-l-liijja, 
I crossed the river by a bridge which had been built there 
and my camp was pitched in the neighbourhood of the 
pargana of Gujrat. At the time when His Majesty Akbar 
went to Kashmir, a fort had been built on that bank of 
the river. Having brought to this fort a body of Qujars 
who had passed their time in the ncighbournood in 
thieving and highway robbery, he established them here. 
As it had become the abode of Ciujars, he made It 
a .separate pargana, and gave it the name of Qujrat 
Tliey call Gujars a caste which does little manual work 
and subsists on milk and curds. On Friday I pitched at 
Khawasspur, five kos from Gujrat, founded by KhawasB 

’ Perhafjfi the Jeodiila of the Indian Oaxettecr, vii, 137. 

* Indian <«uzetteer, v, 239. 



92 


ACCOUNT OF THE JHELAH. 


Khan, a slave of Shir Khan Afghan. Thence, with two 
halts in the middle, I pitched on the bank of the Bihat 
(Jhelam). On that night a great wind blew and a black 
cloud hid the face of the sky. The rain was of such 
violence that old men remembered none such. It turned 
to hail, and every hailstone was tlie size of a hen’s egg. 
From the flooding of the river and the force of the wind 
and rain, the bridge broke. I, with the inmates of the 
harem, crossed in a boat. As there were few boats, 
I ordered the men not ^ to cross in these, but to rebuild 
the bridge. It was finished in a week, and the whole army 
crossed with ease. The source of the Bihat is a spring in 
Kashmir called the V^ir-nag ; in the language of India 
a snake is vir-ndg. Clearly there had been a large snake 
at that place. I went twice to the spring in my father’s 
lifetime ; it is 20 kos from the city of Kashmir. It is an 
octagonal reservoir about 20 yards by 20. Near it are 
the remains of a place of worship for recluses ; cells cut 
out of the rock and numerous caves. The water is 
exceedingly pure. AlthougJi I could not guess its depth, 
a grain of poppy-seed is visible until it touches the bottom. 
There were many fish to be seen in it. As I had heai-d that 
it was unfathomable, I ordered them to throw in a cord 
with a stone attached, and when this curd was measured 
in f/az it beCituie evident that the depth wjis not more tlian 
once and a half the height of a man. After my accession 
I ordered them to build the sides of the spring round with 
stone, and they made a garden round it with a canal ; and 
built hails and houses .about it, and made a place such that 
travellers ov»ir the world can point out few like it. When 
the river reaches the village of Pampur, at a distance of 
ten kos from the city, it increases, and all the saflron of 
Kashmir is obtained in this village. I do not know if 
there is so much .saffron in any other place in the world. 


^ Ttsxi uniitM the n«!gative. 



SAFFRON CULTIVATION. 




The annual crop is 500 niaunds by Hindustan weight, 
equal to 5,000 wildyat (Persian) inaunds. In attendance 
on my revered father, I went to this place at the season 
when the saffron was in flower. On other plants of the 
world, first the branches (steins) shoot out and then the 
leaves and flowers. On the contrary, when the saffron 
stem is four fingers breadth from the dry ground, its 
flowers shoot out, of the colour of the iris,^ with four 
petals, and in the middle are four threads (rf^fta) of an 
orange colour like that of tlie flower, and of the length of 
a finger-joint. This is the saffron. The land is not 
ploughed * or irrigated, the plant springs up amongst the 
clods. In some places its cultivation e.xteiids for a kos. 
and in others for half a kos. It looks better fnjin a 
distance. At the time of plucking, all my attendants got 
headache from its sharp scent. Though I drank wine and 
took a cup, I too got headache. I asked the animal-like. 
Kashmiris, who were employed in picking the flowers how 
they felt. I ascertained that they had nevf*r experienced 
headache in their lives. 

The waters from the spring Vir-nag and of otli^T 
streams and nullahs that join from right and left form 
the river Bihat, which pius.ses through tlie In^art of the 
city. Its breadth in most places is not more than 
a l>owsliot.^ No one drinks its water, because of its 
heavin*‘ss and indigestibility. All the people of Kashmir 
drink tlie water of a lake that is near the city, and is 
willed Dali. The river Bihat enters this lake and flows 
througli to the Panjab by the BAraniula Pass, Pakli, and 
Dantur. 


* Tfxv. ; apparently a blue iri^. 

® Tlic texf has ^humtlr wronj^ly f«»r nhiyt'ir^ and it ncemn tliat tlie 
negative of thf^ text is wrong, since it does not orrrrur in Uic MSS. 
\.lm-l-fa{l gives the numlier <if and HtarnenK inore collect ly than 

Jahangir. 

^ At tikka aiuldtl ; perhafis * the ca**t of a javelin.' 



94 


zainu-l-^abidIn, king of xashmir. 


In Kashmir there is plenty of water from streams and 
springs. By far the best is that of the Lar valley, which 
joins the Blhat in the village of Shihabu-d-din-pur. This 
village is one of the celebrated places of Kashmir, and is 
on the Bihat. About a hundred plane-trees {chandr) of 
graceful form clustered^ together on one plot of ground, 
pleasant and green, join each other so as to shade the 
whole plot, and the whole surface of the ground is grass 
and trefoil ^ ; so much so that to lay a carpet on it would 
be superfluous and in bad taste. The village was founded 
by Sultan Zainu-l-‘abidin, who for 52 years ruled Kashmir 
with absolute sway. They speak of him as the great 
Padshah. They tell many strange customs of his. There 
are many remains and traces of buildings of his in 
Kashmir. One of these is in the midst of a lake called 
Wulur, and of which the length and breadth are more 
than three or four kos. It is called Zain-lanka, and in 
making it they have exerted themselves greatly. The 
springs of this lake are very deep. The first time they 
brought a large quantity of* stone in boats and poured it 
on the place where now the building stands it had no 
result. At last they sank some thousands of boats with 
stones, and with great labour recovered a piece of ground 
loo gaz by 100 gaz out of the water, and made a terrace, 
and on one side thereof the Sultan erected a temple for the 
worship of his supreme Ood. Than this there is no finer 
place.* He often came to the spot by boat and engaged in 
worship of the King of Wisdom. They say he spent many 
** forty days ” in that place. One day a wicked Son of his 
came to that place to kill him, and finding him alone, drew 
a sword and went in. When his eye fell on the Sultan, 


‘ Lit. *have joiiictl hands.* 

^ Sih-barga ; but this reading seemn doubtful ; perhaps it is afr-t<terpa, 
full of leaves. Jahiingir says that to lay a carpet on tl^ grass wonld bo 
bl-danli, unfeeling, unayrapatheiic, and kam Boligagf. 

* The text has iuiq$h barjdy, bat the true reading seems to he nuflztar. 



95 


zainu-l-^IbibIn, king of kashmir. 

however, on account o£ his venerable dignity and the 
might of his virtues, he became confused and bewildered 
and turned away. The Sultan shortly after came out and 
seated himself in the boat with this same son, and started 
for the city. On the way he said to his bod. have 
forgotten my rosary ; get into a canoe and fetch it for 
me.” The son having gone into the temple sees his 
father in the same place, and the graceless man with 
complete shame of fa^e falls at his father’s feet and asks 
pardon for his fault. They have told many tales of 
such miracles as this of him, and they say also that he 
had well practised the science of l^la'} When, from 
the ways and methods of his sons, he perceived in 
them signs of haste in seeking for rule and government, 
he would say to them, ** To me it is very easy to abandon 
rule, and even to pass away from life, but when I am gone 
you will do nothing and the time of your prosperity will 
not endure long, but in a short time you will obtain tlie 
recompense of your evil deeds and your own dispositions.” 
Having spoken thus, he gave up eating and drinking, and 
passed forty days in this manner He made not his eye 
acquainted with sleep, and employed hiinself after the 
manner of men of piety and austerity in the worship of 
God Almighty. On the fortieth day he gave up the 
deposit of his existence, and entered into the mercy of God. 
He left three sons — Adam Khan. Haji Khan, and Bahr&m 
Khan. They quarrelled with each other, and all three 
were ruined. The government of Kashmir was transferred 
to the tribe of the Chaks, who belonged to the class of the 
common soldiers of the country. During their dynasty 
three of the rulers constructed buildings on three sides of 
the terrace formed by Zainu-I-'abidin in the Wulur Lake, 
but none of these is as strong as his. 

* *Ilm-i-kKafa*-i-badan, ‘withilrawal of the soul from the body 

(Erskine). 



96 


ACCOUNT OF THE PANJAB ROHTAS. 


Autumn and Spring in Kashmir are things woi*thy to be 
seen. I witnessed the Autumn season, and it appeared 
to me to be better than what T had heai*d of it. I have 
never seen Spring in that province, but hope to do so some 
day. On Saturday the Ist of Mut.iarram (18th April, 1607) 
1 left the bank of the Bihat, and with one day between 
reached the fort of Rohtas, which was built by Shir Khan 
Afghan. This fort was founded in a cleft of the ground, 
and the strength of it cannot be imagined. As the place 
is near the Ghakhar temtory, and they are a proud and 
rebellious people, he had looked to this fort specially as 
a means of punishing and defeating them. When a little 
of the building had been done Shir Khan died and his son, 
Salim KhAn, obtained the grace to complete it. On each 
of the gates ^ they hav’e carved on a stone the cost of 
erecting the fort; 16 krora, 10 lakhs of dams, and more 
were expended, equal in Hindustan reckoning to 4,025,000 
rupees, and according to the currency of Iran to 120,000 
tilman, and in the currency of Turan to 1 «r6, 21 lakhs 
and 75,000 khdnl, that are now current.* 

On Tuesday the 4th of the month, having travelled 
four kos and threc-quartera, I encamped at Tila.* Thence 
I came down to the village of Bhakra. In the Ghakhar 


' So ill text, but the MSS. and Elliot* vi, 307, have '*oii one of the 
gates.” 

^ The figures seem wrong, and the MSS. differ. See Elliot, vi, .307. 
Apjvireiitly the correct sum in rufiees is 34 lakha 2«>,000. At p. fil 
the kimiii of Ttinin is reckoned at one-third of a rupee. If the dam 
lie taken at its ordinary value of one>fortieth of a rupee, the number 
of ru|iees should be 40 lal^hs 23,000, and if the khani of Turan be one 
third of a rupee we should read one kror instead of one arb. Probably 
Jahangir has used arb os meaning kror, and not 100 krors. There is 
a valuable note on his expedition through the Ghakkar country in 
Blochmann, p. 4Sfi. Blochmaan takes the figures for the rupees to he 
four krors, but probably this is due to wrong |x>inting. 

* The MSS. and text have Pile or Pila. 1 adopt Tlla from Blochmann, 
p. 487, note. Elliot h.ns Tillah, vi, 307. and note. 



THE OHAKKAR COUNTRY. 


97 


tongue bhakra ^ is a jungle. The jungle was composed of 
clusters of flowers, white and scentless. I came the whole 
way from Tila to Bhakra in the middle of the river-bed • 
which had running water in it, with oleander flowers of 
the colour of peach-blossom. In Hindustan this plant 
is always in full bloom {pxirbdv). There was much of 
it on the banks of this river. The horsemen and men 
on foot who were with me were told to put bunches of the 
flower on their heads, and whoever did not do so had his 
turban taken off ; a wonderful flower-bed was produced. 

On Thursday the 6th of the month the halting-place 
was at Hatya. On this road many palas- trees (Butea 
fro'iidosd) were in blossom. This flower, too, is peculiar to 
the jungles of Hindustan ; it has no scent, but its colour is 
flaming orange. The base of the flower is black ; the 
flower itself is as big as a red rose. It is so beautiful that 
one cannot take one's eyes ott* it. As the air was very 
sweet and clouds had hidden the sun, and rain was gently 
sprinkled about, I feL an inclination to drink wine. In 
.short this road was traversed with great enjoyment and 
pleasure. They call the place Hatya because it was 
founded by a Ghakkar named Hilthi (elephantV From 
Mftrgala to Hatya the country is called Pothflw&r^ In 
these regions there are few crows. From Roht&s to 
Hatya is the place and abode of the Bhugyals/ who are 
related to and of the same ancestry as the Ghakkara. 

Marching on Friday the 7th, I travelled 4^ kos and 
alighted at the station of Pakka.^ This place is called 


^ In Tolbort's account of Ladhiyana, J. A.S.B. for 1869, p. 86, hhakkra 
is given as the name of a creeping plant {Pedalium mttray 

BSd-IMna ; this, uccordiiig Blochniann, should be tlie river 
Kahan, (sidna being a mistake for Kahan. See p. 487 note. But all 
the have kKaua. 

^ See KUiot, vi. S09 note. 

* BOgyAls ; Elliot, vi, 909. They are deacendants of Sul tin BOgl. 

* Palm ia mentioned in Tiefeiit haler, i, 114. 



98 THE GHAKKAR COUNTRY. 

Pakka because the aardy is of burnt brick, and in the 
Hindi language what is ripe (that is, not raw material) 
is called pakka. The station was strangely full of dust 
and earth. The carts reached it with great difficulty 
owing to the badness of the .road. They had brought 
from Kabul to this place riwdj (rhubarb), which was 
mastly spoiled. 

On Saturday the 8th we marched 4^ kos and encamped 
at the village of Khar.^ Khar in the Ghakkar language 
is a rent and bi^akage. There are few trees in this 
country. On Sunday the 9th 1 halted beyoni R&walpindi. 
This place was founded by a Hindu named R&wal, and 
pindi in the Ghakkar tongue means a village. In the 
valley near this station there was a stream flowing, the 
waters of which were collected in a pool. As this halting- 
place was not devoid of freshness I alighted there for 
a time, and I asked the Ghakkars the depth of the 
pool. They gave me no precise answer, but said tl*^” 
had heard from their fathers that there were alligators 
in the pool which wounded animals that came there, 
and on that account no one had the boldness to go in. 
1 ordered them to throw in a sheep. It swam, across 
the pool and came out. I then ordered a farrdfh to go 
in, and he also came out safe. It thus became clear that 
there was no foundation for what the Ghakkars had said 
The pool was an arrow’s flight in width. 

On Monday the lOth the village of Kbarbuza^ was 
our stage. The Ghakkars in earlier times had built a 
dome here and taken tolls from travellers. As the dome 
was shaped like a melon it became known by that name. 
On Tuesday the 11th I halted at Kala-p&ni, which in 
Hindi means black water. There is a mountain pass 
(kotal) at this place called Margalla ; in Hindi mar means 


^ Khor ; Elliot, vi, 309 note. Near the M&niky&la tope. 
^ Kharhuza Sara\' is marked on Elphiastone's map. 



ACCOUNT OF HASAN ABDiL. 


99 


to beat and gaUa is a caravan, the name therefore means 
the place of the plundering of the caravan. The boundary 
of the Ghakkar cotmtry is here. This tribe are wonder- 
fully like animals; they are always squabbling and 
fighting with one another. Although I wished to put an 
end to this fighting, I was unable to do so. 

** The seal of the fool is doomed to trouble.” ^ 

On Wednesday the 12th the camp was at Baba Hasan 
Abdal. One kos to the east of this station there is 
a waterfall over which the stream rushes with great force. 
There is no fall like it on the way to Kabul. On the road 
to Kashmir there are two or three like it.® 

In the middle of the basin, in which is the source of the 
stream. Raja Man Singh has erected a small building. 
There are many fish in the basin of the length of half 
a gaz and a quarter gaz. 1 halted three days at this 
enchanting place, drinking wine with those who were 
intimate with me and employing myself in catching fish. 
Until now I had never thrown a sufrti net, which is 
a famous kind of net, and which in Hindi they call 
hhanwar^ jaZ. It is not easy to throw, I threw it with 
my- own hand and caught, twelve fish, and putting pearls 
into their noses, ^ let them loose in the water. I enquired 

^ Mr. Rogers has ** The soul of the fool thou canst purchase for little.” 
Perhaps the sense is **Ood grants life to the fool on hard terms.” 
Erskine has **To serve a fool is hard indeed.” Possibly the literal 
meaning is You buy the soul of the fool at a high price,” that is, kr 
costs a great deal to win him. over. Elliot had what is probably the bMt 
rendering, Barbarous characters should be treated with severity”; 
though in Elliot, vi, 310, the translation is, **The life of fools is held 
very cheap in troublous times.” 

* Apparently this remark must have been written after Jah&ngir's visit 
to Kashmir by the Buramdla route in the fourteenth year. 

* Bhanwar, as Mr. Lowe has .pointed out, means in Hindi an eddy or 
whirlpool. 

* William Finch says that at Hasan Abdftl there were many fish with 
gold rings in their noses hung by Akbar, and that the water is so clear 
that you may see a penny in the bottom. JahAnglr’s informants were 



100 


▲GGOUNT OF HASAN ABDAL. 


into the story of Bab& Hasan from the story-tellers and 
from the inhabitants of the place, but no one could tell me 
any particulars. The celebrated place at that station is 
a spring which flows from the foot of a little hill, 
exceedingly clear, sweety and nice, as witness this couplet 
of Amir Khusrau : — 

** lu the bottom of the water, from ita clearness, a blind man 
Can count the sand -grains in the heart of the night.” 

F^hwaja Shamsu-d-din Muhammad Khwafi, who was for 
long employed as Vizier by my revered father, had made 
a i>latform and a reservoit there, into which is led the 
water from the spring, and thence is used in cultivation 
and in gardens. On the edge of this terrace he had built 
a dome for his own burial. By chance his destiny was not 
tliere, and (the bodies of) Hakim Abu-l-fath Gilani and 
his brother Hakim Huinam, who were close to the person 
and had the complete confidence of my revered father, 
were placed in that dome in accordance with his order. 

On the 1 5th the halt was at Amrohi.^ It is a wonder- 
fully gi'eeii place, in which no ups and downs were visible. 
In this village and its neighbourhood there are 7,000 or 
S.OOO households of Khaturs and Dalazaks. All kinds of 
mischief and oppression and highway robbery take place 
through this tribe. I ordered the government of this 
I'Lgion and Attock to be given to Zafar Khan, son of Zain 
Khan Koka, and that by the time of the return of the 
r(^^>yal standards from Kabul they should march all the 
Dalazaks to Lahore and capture the head men of the 
Khaturs and keep them in prison. 

npiMirently not versed in hagiography. Bab& Hasan Abclal is apparently 
the saint who was an ancestor of Ma'^Qm Bhakari, and is buried at 
Qundahar. See Beale, and Jarrett’s translation of the Ayin, ii, 324 note. 
The Sikhs identify the place with their Baba N&nak. It is not a wife 
of Akbar who is buried at Hasan Abdal, but Hakim AbQ-l-fath and hie 
brother. 

^ Elliot has Amardl, but the MSS. have Amrohi. The Ma’ifiir, ii, 755, 
has Ahru'i. Sec Blocbmanti. p. 522. 



ARRIVAL AT ATTOCK. 


101 


On Monday, the 17th, a march was made, and, with 
on& stage in between, the royal standards alighted near 
the fort of Attock on the bank of the river Nilab 
(Indus). At this stage Mah&bat Sban was promoted to 
the rank of 2,500. This fort was built by the late king 
Akbar, and was completed by the labours of ^waja 
Shamsu-d-din Khwafi. It is a strong fort. At this time 
the water of the Nilab was low,^ and accordingly a bridge 
had been made with eighteen boats, and the people crossed 
over easily. I left the Amiru-l-umara at Attock on 
account of weakness of body and illness. An order was 
given to the bakhshis that, as the province of Kabul 
could not support a large army, they should only allow 
the immediate attendants of the Court to cross the river, 
and until the return of the royal standards the royal 
camp should remain at Attock. On Wednesday, the 19th. 
with the princes and some of the private servants, having 
mounted on to a raft (with inflated skins underneath) 
and having crossed the river Nilab safely, I alighted on 
the bank of the river Kama. The Kama is a river 
that flows by the qa^ba (fortified town) of Jalalabad. 
The jdla is a structure they make of bamboos and grass 
and place underneath it skins full of air. In this provinct* 
they call them ^dl (or sal). In rivers and streams in 
which there are rocks they are siifer than boats. 12,000 
rupees were given to llir Sjiarif Aniuli and to a number 
of men, who had been appointed to perform s«*i*vie<\s at 
Lahore, to divide aniongsL the fa(|irs. An order was given 
to ‘Abdu-r-Razzaq Ma‘iiiuri'^ and to BihAri Das, baklishi 
the Ahadis, to complete the force th«b liad been appointi.-d 

* Az f/iffhl/tfti fnrud umnda. Perlia|>M the meiinin|.; is i-xtif flx the 
opposite, viz. ‘had rome doH'ii in violf*nce. ’ Hut if .mj, a Iniflifr 

have l)een made, and with eighteen boats? Tlie time uas fh<? 4th nr ."nh 
May. Elliot has “ the NiLib was very full.” 

Aoconling to the Ma'a'<iiti l-iunara, iii, .S7o, M^'inur i«> a village i!i 
Arabia. 



102 


ARRIVAL AT PESHAWAR. 


to accompany Zafar Khan and send them away. With 
one stage in between, the camp halted at the saray of BAra. 
On the other side of the river Kama there is a fort 
which Zain Khan Koka built at the time w'hen he was 
appointed to subjugate the Yusuf za’e Afghans, and called 
Naushahr (Newcastle). About 50,000 rupees were spent 
upon it. They say that Humayun used to hunt rhinoceros 
in this region. I also heard from my father that he had 
twice or thrice witnessed such a hunt in the company 
of his father. On Thursday, the 25th, I alighted at the 
saray of Daulatabad. Ahmad Beg of Kabul, jagirdar of 
Peshawar, with the Maliks of the Yusuf za*es and the 
Ghoriya-khel, came and waited on me. As the service of 
Ahmad Beg was not approved, I transferred him from that 
territory (wilayat) and conferred it on Shir Khan, the 
Afghan. On Wednesday, the 26th, I encamped in the 
garden of Sardar Khan, which he had made in the neigh- 
bourhood of Peshawar. I walked round Ghorkhatri, which 
is the worshipping-place of the jogis in this neighbourhood, 
with the idea that I might ' see some faqirs from 
association with whom I might obtain grace. But that 
was like looking for the phoenix or the philosopher’s 
stone. A herd without any religious knowledge came 
to my view, from seeing whom I derived nothing but 
obscurity of mind. On Thursday, the 27th, I arrived at 
the halting-place of Jamrud, and on Friday, 28th, at the 
Kb^ibar Kotal (Khyber Pass) and encamped at 'Ali Masjid, 
and on Saturday I traversed the tortuous {mdrplch, i.e. 
snake-twisting) Pass, and alighted at Gharib-khana. At 
this stage Abu-1-qasiin Namakin, Jagirdar of Jalal&b&d, 
brought an apricot, which was not inferior in beauty to 
go<xl Kashmir apricots. At the stage of Daka they brought 
from Kabul gUas (chenies), which my revered father had 
entitled Shdh-dld, As I was much inclined to eat them, 
inasmuch as I had not (liitherto ?) obtained them, I ate 
them with great zest as a relish to wine. On Tuesday, 



APPOINTMENT OP ASAP KHAN. 


103 


2nd Safar, I encamped at Basawal, whicli is on the bank of 
the river. On the other side of the river there is a mountain 
which has no trees or gi'ass on it, and on that account 
they call this mountain the hill of Bidaulat (unt^ortunatc;)- 
I heard from my father that in mountains like this there 
are mines of gold. On the mountain of Ala Bfiglmn, 
at the time when my revered father went to Kabul, I had 
had a qamargdh hunt, and killed several ^ red deer. As 
I had handed over the administration of all civil affairs 
to the Amirud-umara, and his illness increased greatly, 
and forgetfulness came over his faculties to such an 
extent that what was settled in one hour he forgot in 
the next, and his forgetfulness was increasing day by 
day, on Wednesday, the 3rd 8afar, I entrusted the duties 
of the viziership to Asaf Khan, presenting him with 
a special robe of honour, and inkstand and a jewelled 
pen. It was a remarkable coincidence that twenty-eight 
years previously to this, at the same haltirg-place, my 
revered lather had promoted him ^ to the rank of Mir 
Bakhshi (chief paymaster). A ruby which his brother* 
Abu-l-qasim had >X)ught for 40,000 rupees and sent him, 
he presented as an offering on obtaining the viziership. 
He petitioned that Khwaja Abu-l-hasan, who held the 
offices of bakhshi and the etc., might go with him. 
Jalalabad was transferred from Abfi-l-qasiin Namakin to 
Arab Khan. A white rock w'as present in the river-bed ; 
I ordered them to carve it in the form of an elephant 


* The MSS. hiive md instead of r/innd, i.e. 100. 

’ This Asaf Khan is Qawumii’d-diii Ja'fai Beg and the No. iii of 
Hlochinjiiin,* p. 411. A|i|Kircntly hi?< ap{X)iiitment aa Mir Bakh.shi was 
maulc in OSO (InSl), in whirh year Akimr went to Kabul. Bloehmann 
miys A.s»f Khiin was made Mir Bakhshi in the room of Qazi ‘Ali, and Nve 
find At p. .*172 of A.N., iii, that Qii/i ‘Ali Bakhshi was upfiointisl in ij'rr 
year to the Panjah. Twenty-eight years before HUS (to tin* Ugjnuinj 
o. which .Tahfingir is referring) 3 'ieldj« 9HH. Ragftwal is on right b.mU 
of Kabul Itiver Inflow JalaUilUid. 

^ hni/}, blit the MSJ<. have //#//, i.t*. damsiig girl. 



104 


PUNISHMENT OF KALYAN. 


Slid cut upon its breast this hemistich, which agrees with 
the date of the Hijra year: “The white stone elephant 
of Jahangir Padshah,” that is, 1016. 

On the same day Kalyan, son of Raja Bikramajit, came 
from Gujarat. Certain extraaidinary proceedings on the 
part of this rebellious rascal had been reported to me. 
Amongst these was this. He had kept a Musulman lidl 
woman in his house, and for fear this affair should become 
known had killed her father and mother and buried them 
in his house. I ordered that he should be imprisoned 
until I could enquire into his proceedings, and after 
ascertaining the truth I ordered first that they should 
cut out his tongue and place him in perpetual confinement, 
and that he should eat his food with dog-keepers and 
outcasts. On Wednesday I encamped at Surkhab. Thence 
1 alighted at Jagdalak. At this stage I saw many ballut 
trees (oak or chestnut), which are the best wc3od for 
burning. Although this stage liad neither passes nor 
declivities there were plenty of rocks. On Friday, the 
12th, I encamped at Ab-i-barik, and Saturday, the 13th, 
at Yurt-i-pad.'diah. On Sunday, the 14th, I alighted at 
l^iurd Kabul (little Kabul). At this stage I entrusted 
the Chief Justiceship and Qaziship of the city of Kabul 
to Qaya 'Arif, son of Mullii Sadiq Ilalwai. They brouglit 
some ripe (cherries) from the village of Gullmhar 

to this place ; of the.se I ate with much enjoyment nearly 
a hundred. Daulat, the head of the village of Jigri*^(?), 
brought some uncommon flowers, such as I had never 
seen in my life. Thence I alighted at Bikrami. At this 
place they brought to .show me a piebald * animal, like 
the flying (i.e. jumping) mouse, which in the Hindi tongue 
they call (sf|uirrel), and .said that mice would not 

* Oeneraily 'iif-lr Imtfut, oitlier tlie oak or the chc'itn'it. Cf. Er.>kine's 
Baher, |>. 1 1.’>. Sir .\U.*\!jn«lcr B’lrnc^ c-alN the hnihv the hfilly. 

- S«e p. Tvl, wlit ri- th»* y.*'/’?" or licadinan of Chikri iiieutioned 

" Cf. Kr5l.i:!- H.il»vr, p. in. 



NOTICE OF THE SON OF ABU-L-FAZL. 


105 


frequent any house in which this animal was. On this 
account they call this animal the master of mice. As 
I had never seen one before, I ordered my painters to 
drav' a likeness of it. It is larger than a mongoose. 
On the whole it is very like a civet cat. Having 
appointed Abmad Beg Khan to punish the Afghans of 
Banga^, I ordered 'Abdu-r-Bazzaq Ma'muri, who was in 
Attock, to take 2,000,000 rupees under the charge of 
Mohan Dfis, son of Raja Bikramajit, with him, and 
divide it among the auxiliaries of ^he aforesaid army. 
One thousand musketeers were also ordered to accompany 
this army. 

Shaikh 'Abdu-r- Rahman, son of Shaikh Abu-1-fazl, was 
promoted to tiie rank of 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse, 
and obtained the title of Afzal Khan. 15,000 rupees 
were presented to ‘Arab Khan, and 20,000 rupees more 
for the repair of the fort of Pesh Bulagh.^ I bestowed 
Sarkar Khanpur^ in fief on Dilawar Khan Afghan. On 
Thursday, the 17th, from the Mastan bridge as far as the 
Shahr>ara garden, which was the encamping place for 
the royal standards, scattering rupees, lialf-rupees, and 
quarter-rupees to faqirs and indigent persons on lx>th 
sides of the road, I entered the aforesaid garden. It 
appeared to be very green and fresh. As it was a 
Thursday I gave a wine entertainment to my intimates, 
and on account of hilarity and excitement ordered those 
who were of e(pial age to myself and had been my 
playfellows to jump over the stream that flowed through 
the middle of the garden and was about four gaz in 
width. Most of them could not jump it, and fell on thi* 
bank or into the stream. Although I jumped it, yet now 
that I was 40 years of age I could not jump it with thr 


* The fort of Pesh Bulilq ia mentioned in the third volume of tin- 
Akbar-n&ina, p. 512. It is marked on the map of Afghaniatan hctwiM-n 
Daka and Jalulnljud. 

* Sic ill text, hut should lie JaunpQr as in the MSS. 



106 


ACCOUNT OF GARDENS IN KABUL. 


activity that I had shown in the presence of my revered 
father wlien I was 30. On this day I perambulated 
seven of the famous gardens of Kabul. I do not think 
that I ever walked so far before. 

First of all I walked round the Shahr-ara (city- 
adorning), then the Mahtab (moonlight) garden, then the 
garden that Bika Begam, grandmother of my father, had 
made, then passed through the Urta-bagh (middle garden), 
then a garden that Maryam-makani, my own grandmother, 
had prepared, then the Svirat-khana garden, W'hich has 
a large t7i(t?i(7r-tree, the like of which there is not in tiic 
other gardens of Kabul. Then, having seen the Charbagh, 
wliich is the largest of the city gardens, I returned to my 
own ab(xle. There were abundance of cherries on the 
trees, each of which looked as it were a round ruby, 
hanging like globes on the branches. The Shahr-ara 
garden was made by Shahr-banu ^ Begam, daughter of 
Mirza Abu Said, who was own aunt to the late king 
Babar. From time to time it has been added to, and 
there is not a garden like it for sweetness in Kabul. It 
has all sorts of fruits and grapes, and its softness is such 
that to put one s sandalled * feet on it would be far from 
propriety or good manners. In the neighbourhood of 
this garden an excellent plot of land came to view, 
wiiich I ordered to be bought from the owners. 
I ordered a stream that flows from the fjuzargdh (ferry, 
also bleaching green) to be diverted into the middle of 
the ground so that a garden might be made such that 
in beauty and sweetness there should not be in the 
inhabited world another like it. I gave it the name of 
Jahaii-ara (world - adorning). Whilst I 'was at Kabul 
I had several entertainments in the Shahr-ara gaixlen, 

’ There wns also a Shahr-banQ who was Bahar s sister. Bika Bi^ain 
wa« Biiljar's widow and the lady who carried his l>ones to Knhnl. 

* wliich Erskine renders ‘with slipjiers on* and Elliot 

‘with hU shcH>.s on.' 



AT KABUL. 


107 


sometimes with my intimates and courtiers and sometimes 
with the ladies of the harem. At nights I ordered the 
learned and the students of Kabul to hold the cooking 
entertainment/ bugh'i^, and the throwing of bughra, 
together with arghuMak dances. 

To each of the band of BitQhra'iydn I gave a dress of 
honour, and also gave 1,000 rapees to divide amongst 
themselves. To twelve of the trustworthy courtiers 
I ordered 12,000 rupees to be given, to be bestowed 
every Thurs y, as long as I was in Kabul, on the poor 
and needy. I gave an order that between tw-^o plane- 
trees that were on the canal bank in the middle of the 
garden — to one of which I had given the name of Farnh- 
bakhsh (joy-giver) and the other Saya-bakhsh (shade- 
giver) — they should set up a piece of white stone 
(marble ?) one gaz in length and three-quarters of a gaz 
in breadth, and engrave my name thereon (and those of 
ray ancestors) up to Timur. It was set forth on the 
other side that I had done away with the whole of the 
customs dues and charges of Kabul, and w^hichever of my 


^ BAyazId BiyAt describes HumAyQii as holding a cooking festival in 
BadakhshAn. See A.N., i, translation, p. 496, n. 2. They cooked 
6«gAra, which appears to be macaroni. The text wrongly has raqz 
az (love -dances). The real worrl, as the MSS. bhow. is 

ar^hu^aq, which is a kind of dance (not a child's game ns in Jc»linson). 
It is described in Vullers, s.v., in accordance with the af*r*ount in the 
BurhAn-i-qAti*. It is a dance by girls or young men, and is accoiniMinied 
with singing and with clapping of hands, etc. Prolxibly it is the daiire 
described by Elphinstone in his account of Kabul, i, 311, where he says : 
** The great delight of all the western Afghans is to dance the Attun or 
Choomboor. From ten to twenty men or women stand up in a cirr '.e 
(in summer before their houses and tents, and in winter round .a 6rc) ; 
a person stands within the circle to sing and play on some instrument. 
The dancers go through a number of attitudes and figures ; shouting, 
clapping their hands, and snapping their fingers. Every now aiui then 
they join hands, and move slow or fast according to the musicr, all joining 
in chorus. When I was showed this, a love -song was sung to an 
extremely pretty tune, very siiniile, and not unlike a Scottish air.’' 
Erskine’s translation is : ** Ciistanls and confections were presenter!, and 
the amusements of dancing girls and arghustak were introdiircd.” 



108 


BABAR'8 TOMB. 


descendants and successors should do anything contrary 
to this would be involved in the wrath and displeasure 
of God. Up to the time of my accession these were fixed 
and settled, and every year they took large sums on 
this account from the servants of God (the Muhammadan 
people in general). The abolition of this oppression was 
brought about during my reign. On this journey to 
Kabul complete relief and contentment were brought 
about in the circumstances of my subjects and the people 
of that place. The good and leading men of Ghaznin 
and that neighbourhood were presented with robes of 
honour and dealt kindly with, and had their desires 
excellently gratified. 

It is a strange coincidence that (the words) rUz-i- 
panjsihanha hl^daham-i-Safar} Thursday, 18th Safar, 
which is the date of my entry into Kabul, give the Hijra 
date thereof. 

I ordered them to inscribe this date on the stone. Near 
a seat (takkt) on the slope of a hill to the south of the 
city of Kabul, and which is known as Takht-i-shah, they 
have made a stone terrace where Firdus-makani (Babar) 
used to sit and drink wine. In one corner of this rock 
they have excavated a round basin which could contain 
about two Hindustani maunds of wine. He caused his 
own blessed name with the date to be carved on the wall 
of the terrace which is next to the hill. The wording is, 
“ The seat of the king, the asylum of the world, Zahiru-d- 
din Muhammad Babar, son of ‘Umar Shaikji Gfirgan, may 
God perpetuate his kingdom, 914 (1508 -9).” I also 
ordered them to cut out of stone another throne parallel 


' The words Aoem to me to yield 1066, hut if wi; row! 
iii*'t<*;id of we get 1016, which is the Hijrn date of Jiihniigir > 

Ciitiy into Kabul ami corresponds to 4th .June, 1607- A marginal imt#- 
oil 1.0. M. IlO.'i makes the chronogram clear hy writing ruz i-jMi nr ha nha 
h*zhrlah-i-Sa/at\ thereby getting rid of the mnn mid the r/d of h>zhtlafinni 
and ht'iiiging out the tigures 1016. 



bIbar’8 commentaries. 


109 


to this, and dig another basin of the same fashion on its 
side, and engrave my name there, together with that of 
^bib-qirani (Timur). Every day that I sat on that 
throne I ordered them to fill both of the basins with wine 
and give it to the servants who were present there. 
One of the poets of Qhaznin found the date of iny coming 
to Kabul in this chronogram — “The king of the cities 
of the seven climes” (1016). I gave him a dress of 
lionour and a present, and ordered them to engrave this 
date on the wall near the aforesaid seat. Fifty thousand 
rupees were given to Parwiz; Wazir-al-rnulk was made 
Mir Bakhshi. \ firman was sent to Qilij Khan to despatch 
170,000 rupees fi^m the Lahore treasury for expenses 
of the army at Qandahar. After visiting the Khiyaban 
(avenue) of Kabul and the Bibi Mah-ru, I ordered the 
governor of that city to plant other trees in the place of 
those cut down by Husain Beg Ru-siyah (the black-faced). 
I also visited the Ulang-yurt of Chalak and found it 
a very pleasant place. The Ra’is of Chikri (Jigri ?) shot 
with an arrow a 'mwf ^ and brought it to me. Up to this 
time 1 liad never seen a rang. It is like a mountain 
goat, and tliere is a difference only in its horns. The 
horns of th<^ rang are bent, and those of the goat are 
straight and convoluted. 

In connection with the account of Kabul the com- 
mentaries of Balmr^ passed in view before me. These 
were in his own handwriting, except four sections (juz' ^) 
that I wrote myself. At the end of the said sections 
a sentence was written by me also in the Turki character, 
so that it might be known that these four sections were 
written by me in my own hand. Notwithstanding that 
1 grew up in Hindustan, I am not ignorant of Turki 

> Evklanily * kind of sheep. 

* This is A reference to B&bar*s klemoirs. 

* A jwt' is said to consist of eight leuvss or sixteen pages. Docs 
Jah&nglr mean that he wrote si sty -four puyes? 



110 


BAC£S* 


t>peeeb and writing.^ On the 25th Safer I with the people 
of the harem visited tlie jvXgdh (plain) of Safid-sang, 
a very briglit and enjoyable place. On Friday, the 26th, 
I enjoyed the blessing of a pilgrimage to (the tomb of) 
H.M. Fir(^us-inakani (Babar). I ordered much money and 
food, bread, and sweetmeats for the souls of the departed 
to be distributed to faqirs. Buqayya Sult&n Begam, 
daughter of JNIirza Hindal, had not perfonned a pilgrimage 
to her father’s tomb, and on that day had the honour to 
do so. On Thursday, 3i*d Rabl'u-l-awwal, I ordered them 
to bring my racehorses {aapan-i-dawanda) to the Khiy&h&n 
(avenue). The princes and the Amirs raced them. A bay 
Arab horse, which 'Adil Kh^> the ruler of the Deccan, 
had sent to me, ran better than all the other horses. At 
this time the son of Mirza Sanjar Hazara and the son of 
Mirza Ma^i, who were the chief leaders of the Haz&ras, 
came to wait on me. The Haz&ras of the village of 


^ Probably' the sections which Jahfingir wrote were those printed in 
the llminsky edition and which bring the narrative down to B&bar’s 
death. They seem to have been in great measure copied from the 
Akbar-n&ma. Jah&ngir does not say if he wrote them wh^n he was 
in Kabul or previously. According to Blochmann, J.A.S.B. for 1869, 
p. 134, one jxiz' = two sheets of paper. The passage is translated 
in Elliot, vi, 315. Though Jah&ngir does not say when he wrote the 
four scions, I think that his language implies that these additions 
were in the manuscript when he was looking at it in KabuL Psrbape 
he made them when he was a student in India, and for the sake 
of practice in Turkl. He may have translated the sections from the 
Akbar-n&ma. All, I think, he did in Kabul was to put the Turkl note, 
stating that the sections were his. But possibly even this was done 
before. Elliot, vi, 315, has the words **to complete the work,’* but 
these words do not occur in the MSS. that I have seen. The 
translation in Elliot, seems to represent Jah&ngir’s words as meaning 
that the work was complete, but that the four sections were not, like the 
1 ‘est, in B&bar’s handwriting, and so JahOnglr re-copied them. But it 
docs not appear that there could be any object in his doing this. There 
is a valuable article in the Zeitschrift d. Deutschen MoigenL Gesellacsh. 
for 1883, p. 141, by Dr. Teufel, entitled "B&bur und Abdl-fa^** in 
which the fragments in Ifaninsky are discussed. But the passage in 
the TOzuk-i-Jahangiri is not referred to. 



raUSRAU SULTAN. LUNAR WEIGHING. Ill 

Mirdad produced before me two rangs^ that they had 
killed with aii-ows. I had never seen a rang of this size ; 
it was larger by 20 per cent, than a large vidrkhxLr (?). 

News came that ghah Beg IChan, the governor of 
Qandahar, hod reached the parganah of Shor,* which is 
his jagir. I determined to give Kabul to him and return 
to Hindustan. A petition came from Rfija Birsirig-deo 
that he had made a prisoner of his nephew, who liad been 
creating a disturbance and hod killed many of his men. 
I oi*dered him to send him to the fort of Gwalior to be 
imprisoned there. The parganah of Gujrat^ in the Punjab 
Sarkar I bestowed on Shir Khan, the Afghan. I promoted 
Chin Qilij, son of Qilij Kban, to the rank of 800 personal 
and 500 horse. On the I2th I sent for Khusrau and 
ordered them to take the chains off his legs that he might 
walk in the Shahr-ara garden. My fatherly affection 
would not permit me to exclude him from walking in the 
aforesaid garden. I transferred the fort of Attock and 
that neigJiliourhood from Alimad Beg to ^far Khan. 
To Taj Khan, who was nominated to beat back the 
Afghans of Bangash, I gave 50,000 rupees. On the 
14th I gave *Ali Kh&n Karori,* who was one of my 
revered father’s old servants and was the daroqtuL of the 
Naq&rakhana (drum-house), the title of Naubat Kb^n, 
and promoted him to the rank of 500 personal and 200 
horse. I made Ram D&s dtdliq to Mahd. Singh, grandson 
of R&ja Man Singh, who had also been nominated to 
diive back the rebels of Banga^. On Friday, the 18th, 
the waan-i-qaiYUirl (the weighing according to the lunar 
year) for my 40th year took place. On that day the 


' The text mentionfi a horse, hut the MSS. nave not thi8, and it 
seems to be a mistake. 

* Apparently the Shorkot of I.O., xii, 4*24. In tl)e HiTlinnii DQub 
{Jamtt, ii, 321). It ia north ol Mnltan and in the Jhanc' district. 

* LQ. T, 188. 

^ Perhaps the ‘All Dost Qiin of Blochmann, p.‘533. 



112 AFFAIR OF QANDAHAR. APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS. 


assembly was held when two watches of the day had 
passed. I gave 10,000 rupees of the money of the 
weighing to ten of my confidential servants to divide 
amongst those who deserved it and the needy. On this 
day a petition came from Sardar Khan, governor of 
Qandahar, by way of Hazara, and Ghaznfn, in twelve 
days ; its purport was that the ambassador of Shah 
'Abbas, who had started for the Coui-t, had entered the 
Hazara ' (countiy). The Shah had written to his own 
people : " What seeker of occasion and raiser of strife has 
come agaihst Qandahar without my order ? Perhaps he 
does not know what is our connection with H.M. Sultan 
Timur, and especially with Humayun and his glorious 
descendants. If they by chance should liave taken the 
country into their possession they should hand it to the 
friends and servants of my brother Jahangir Pad.^ah and 
return to their own abodes.” I determined to tell Shah 
Beg Khan to secure the Ghaznin road in such a way that 
travellers from Qandahar might reach Kabul with ease. 
At the same time I appointed Qazi Nuru-d-din to the 
Sadarat of the province of Malwah and Ujjain. The son 
of Mirza Shadman Hazara and grandson of Qaracha 
Khan, who was one of the influential Amirs of Humajrfln, 
waited on me. Qaracha Khan had married a woman 
from the Hazara tribe, and this son ^ had been bom by 
her. On Saturday, the 19th, Rana ghankar, son of Rana 
tlday Singh, was promoted to tlic ituik of 2,500 personal 
and 1,000 horse. An oixler was given for the rank 
of 1,000 personal and 600 horse for Ray Manohar. The 
ghinw&ri Afghans bi-ought a mountain ram the two 
horns of which had become one and had become like 
a rangs horns. The same Afghans killed and brought 

* The MSS. have Hviat, mid Uiin is probably correct. 

That is, apiKirently, Muza Sluidiniin, but )ierhapRthe meaning is that 
Qarachii 1|i<ul sought u wife for hta son mnong the Haxftrae, and not that 
lie hud liiiiisclt' iimiTicd an woman. 



ACCOUNT OF SHXR-AFOAK. 


113 


a ma/rlAllr (Erskine translates this *a serpent - eating 
goat’), the fike of which I had. never seen or imagined. 
I ordered my artists to paint him. He weighed four 
Hindustani maunds ; the length of his horns was 1} 
gaz^ On Sunday, the 27th, I gave the rank of 1,500 
personal and 1,000 horse to Sbftj&’at Sb&u> and the havMi 
(district surrounding) of Gwalior was placed in the jagir 
of I'tibAr ^ftn. I appointed Qau *IkEatu-llah with his 
brothers to the Bangash duty. At the end of the same 
day a petition came to me from Islam Sh&n fmm Agra, 
together with a letter which Jahan^r Quli Kb&n had 
written to him from Bihar. Its purport was that on 
the 3rd Safar (30th May, 1607), after the first watch, *Ali 
Quli Istajlu had wounded Qutbu-d-din Khan at Bardwan, 
in the province of Bengal, and that he had died when 
two watches of the same night had passed. The details 
of this matter are that the aforesaid 'All Quli was aufmchi 
(table servant) to %&h IsmA'il (the 2nd), ruler of Iran; 
after his death he took to flight through his natural 
wickedness and habit of making mischief, and came to 
Qandahar, and having met at Multan the Kb^ld^anan, 
who had been appointed to the charge of the province 
of Tulamba^ started with ’ im for that province. The 
KhankhanAn in the field ^ piaced him among the servants 
of the late king (Akbar), and he having performed 
servicas in that campaign was promoted to a rank in 
accordance with his conditio ;i, and was a long time in the 
service of my revered fatiier. At the time when ho 
(Akbar) went in prosperity to the provinces of the 
Deccan, and I was ordered against the R&d&, he came and 
became servant to me. I gave him the title of Sblr* 


* The MSS. have ** lees than I) j by J (idm-pdo).” 

^ Shonld, I think, be Tattah, i.e Sind. 

^ O/jatbdna, ‘secretly.* But the phrase merely meam chat the 
appointment was not made in the Emperor's presence. 



114 


DEiLTH OF SHU-AFGAK. 


afgan (tiger-throwing). When I came from Allahabad 
to wait on my revered father* on aecoont of the un- 
frieridlinesa that was shown me* most of my attendants 
and people were scattered abroad* and be also at that 
time chose to leave my servica After my accession, out 
of generosity I overlooked his oiSences* and gave an order 
for a jagir for him in the Snbab of Bengal. Thence 
ciiiiKi news that it was not right to leave such mischievous 
persons thcire. and an order went to Qutbu-d-din Khan 
to send him to Court* and if he showed any futile* 
seditious ideas* to punish him. The aforesaid Khan had 
reaso 1 to know him (his character)* and with the men he 
had present* immediately the order arrived* went hastily 
to Bardwan, which was his jagir. When he (^ir- 
afgaii) became aware of the arrival of Qutbu-d-din 
fQi&n* he went out to receive him alone with two grooms. 
After he arrived and enter«)d into the midst of his army 
(his camp) the aforesaid Khan surroimded him. When 
from this proceeding on the pait of Qutbu-d-din Khan 
a doubt arose in his mind, he by way of deceiving him 
said : “ What proceeding is this of thine ? ” ^ The 
aforesaid Khan, keeping back his own men* joined him 
alone in order to explain the purport of the order to him. 
Seeing his opportunity he immediately drew his sword 
and inflicted two or three severe wounds upon him. 
Amba Khan Ka^miri* who was descended from the 
rulers of Kashmir and was connected (by marriage ?) with 
thti aforesaid Khan* and had a great regard for him by 
way of loyalty and manliness* rushed forward and struck 
H lii^avy blow on *Ali Quli’s head* and tliat vicious fellow 
inflicted a severe wound on Amba Khan vrith the point 
of his sword.^ When they saw Qutbu-d-din Kh&n in this 


* T«xt JyartfOfhi, * he turned round.' Bat the MSS. have chi rawi^-i- 
* * What kind of arrangemeot is this ? '' 

^ ^huiruhlr’i fUkhnkX, ^X’^inted sword, {louiard *? 



VISIT TO SHAH-JAHiN. 


115 


state, his men attacked him (Shir-afgan ). and cut him in 
pieces and sent him to hell. It is to be hoped that the 
place of this black-faced scoundrel will always he there. 
Amba Sh&n obtained martyrdom on the spot, and Qutbu-d- 
din Kh&n Koka after four watches attained the mercy of 
God in his quarters. What can I write of this unpleasant- 
ness ? How grieved and troubled I became ! Qutbu-d-din 
Kh&n Koka was to me in the place of a dear son, a kind 
brother, and a congenial friend. What can one do with 
the decrees of God ? Bovdng to destiny 1 adopted an 
attitude of resignation. After the departure of the late 
King and the death of that honoured one, no two mis 
fortunes had happened to me like the death of the mother 
of Qutbu-d-din Kb&n Koka and his own martyrdom. 

On Friday, the 6th Rabi*u-l-akhir. I came to the quarters 
of Khurram (Shah-Jahan). which had been made in the 
Urta Garden. In truth, the building is a delightful and 
well-proportioned one. Whereas it was the nile of my 
father to have himself weighed twice every year, (once) 
according to the solar and (once accoiding to the) lunar 
year, and to have the princes weighed according to the 
solar year, and moreover in this year, which was the 
commencement of my son Khurram^s 16th lunar year, 
the astrologers and astronomers ^ represented that a most 
important epoch according to his horoscope would occur, 
as the prince’s health ^ had not been good, I gave an order 
that they should weigh him according to the prescribed 
rule, against gold, silver, and other metals, which should 
be divided among faqirs and the needy. The whole of 
that day was passed in enjoyment aud pleasure in the 
house of B&b& Kburram, and many of his presents were 
approved. 

' The meaning of two words beiBg used probehly is tliat both Hindu 
end Versien sstrologoni ere referred to. Blochinsnn, p. 311, uyB that 
Hliuh-Jahau’s birthday was 30th Rabeu-l-aa’wsl. 

“ Lit., His dis|iosition had changed from equability." 



116 


KABUL FBX7ITS. 


As I had experienced the excellencies of Kabul, and had 
eaten most of its fruits, in consequence of important 
considerations and the distance from the capital, on 
Sunday, the 4th Jumada-l-awwal, I gave an order that 
they should send out the advance camp in the direction 
of Hindustan. After some days I left the city, and the 
royal standards proceeded to the meadow of Safid-sang. 
Although the grapes were not yet fully ripe, I had often 
before this eaten Kabul grapes. There are many good 
sorts of grapes, especially the S&hibi and Kishmishi. The 
cherry also is a fruit of pleasant flavour, and one can eat 
more of it than of other fruits ; I have in a day eaten up 
to 150 of them. The term ^ah^lu means gilds'^ (cherry), 
which are obtainable in most places of the country, but 
since glide is like glide, which is one of the names of the 
chalpdea (lizaid), my revered father called it ehah-dlil. 
The zard-dlH paywandi ^ is good, and is abundant. There 
is especially a tree in the Shahr-ara garden, that Mirza 
Muhammad Hakim, my uncle, planted, and is known as 
the Mirza’i. The apricots of this tree are quite unlike 
the apricots of other trees. The peaches also are very 
delicious and plentiful. They had brought some peaches 
from Istalif. I had them weighed in my presence, and 
they came exactly in weight to 25 rupees, which is 
68 current m'ieqdL Notwithstanding the sweetness of 
the Kabul fruits, not one of them has, to my taste, the 
flavour of the mango. The parganah of Mah&ban was given 
as jagir to Mahabat Khan. ‘Abdu-r-Rabim, paymaster 
of the Ahadis, was promoted to the rank of 700 personal 


> OUtU is a cherry in Kashmiri. See Blochmann's Ayin, p. 616. 
Abe-l-fa^.l mentioius in the Ayin (Biochmann, p. 66) that Aklmr called 
ffllda §hdh-dlu. 

* Paytvandi means * to graft,* and poBaibly this is the meaning here, 
but Steingass gives paywandi as part of tlie name of a plum. The 
text seems to be corrupt, and |jcrhap6 what- Jahangir wrote was **the 
iard-diA resembles the 



A LARGE SPIDER. ACCOUNT OP A UUMMT. 117 


and SOO horse. Mubarak Khan Sarwani was appointed 
to the faujdarship of the sarkar of Hi^r. I ordered 
that Mirza Faridun Barlas should have a jagir in the 
Subah of Allahabad. On the 14th of the aforesaid 
month I gave Iradat Khan, brother of Asaf Khan, the 
rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horse, and presenting 
him with a special robe of honour and a horse, bestowed 
on him the paymastership of the Subah of Patna and 
Hajipur. As he was my qUrbegi, I sent by his hand 
a jewelled sword for my son (farzand) Islam Khan, the 
governor of the aforesaid Subah. As we were going 
along I saw near 'All Masjid and (iharib-khana a large 
spider of the size of a crab that had seized by the throat 
a snake of one and a half gaz in length and half strangled 
it. I delayed a minute to look on at this, and after 
a moment it died (the snake). 

I heard at Kabul that in the time of Mahmud of 
Qhazni a person of the name of Kbwaja Tabut^ had 
died in the neighbourhood of Zuhak and Bamiyan, and 
was buried in a cave, whose limbs had not yet rotted 
asunder. This appeared very strange, and I sent one 
of my confidential record writers with a surgeon to go 
to the cave and, having seen the state of affairs as they 
were, to make a special report. He represented that 
half of the body which was next the ground liad most 


‘ Text has Y&qdt, but it is clear from the Iqb&l-nama. I>. 25. an<i from 
I.O. MS. 181 that the name is Khw&ja T&bat, *the coffin Khwaja.’ The 
author of the Iqbal-nama was the person sent to make the inquiry, ami 
he gives a long account of what he saw. A surgeon was sent with him, 
as the lUiwaja was said to have been martyred, and it was necesaary to 
report on the wounds. The coffin story is mentioned in the Ayin, i, 194. 
See Jarrett, ii, 409-10, but the traa.dation is not quite accurate, I think. 
The punctuation of the text seems to me to he correct. It is characteristic 
of .Jahftngir and the author of the Iqbal-nama that they take no notice of 
the colossal figures at B&miyun, though Abu-l-fa?.l does. See .Ttiri ett's 
note. It is stated in the IqliAl-nama that Khw’uja Tabat was suirl to 
have been killed in the time of Chingiz Khan. If so, the Sultan MahinoJ 
mentioned by Jahangir must lie Sultan MalimQd Ghori. 



118 AN ALLEGXB SON OF OBAHROra. 

of it come asunder^ and the other half which had not 
touched the ground remained in ita own condition. The 
nails of the hands and feet and the hair of the head had 
not been shed, but the hair of the beard and moustache 
as far as one side of the nose had been shed. From 
the date that had been en^aved on the door of the 
cave it appeared that his death had occurred before the 
time of Sultan Mahmud. No one knows the exact state 
of the case. 

On Thursday, the 16th Arslan Bi, governor of the 
fort of Kahmard, who was one of the servants of middle 
rank(?) of Wall Muhammad Khan, ruler of Turan, came 
and waited on me.^ 1 had always heard that Mirza 
Husam, son of Shahrukh Mirza, had been killed by the 
Uzbegs. At this time a certain person came and presented 
a petition in his name, and brought a ruby of the colour 
of an onion, which was woi*th 100 rupees, as an offering. 
He prayed that an army might be appointed to assist 
him, so that he might take Badakhshan out of the 
Uzbegs* hands. A jewelled dagger-belt was sent him, 
and an order given that, as the royal standards had 
alighted in those regions, if he really was Mirza Husain, 
son of Mirza Shahrukh, he should first hasten into my 
presence, so that having examined his petitions and 
claims 1 might send him to Badakhshan. Two hundred 
thousand rupees were sent for the army that had been 
sent with Maha Singh and Ram Das against the rebels of 
Bangash. 

On Thursday, the 22nd, having gone to the Bala 
Hi^r, I inspected the buildings in that place. As the 
place was not fit for me I ordered them to destroy these 
buildings and to prepare a palace and a royal hall of 
audience. On the same day they brought a peach from 
IstAlif, ha/rahar tar-i-bvh bakaldni, “ as big as an owl's 


> He was appointed governor of BehwSn (Tqb&l-ntinia. p. 27). 



119 


ACCOUNT OF HlBZl mlHBUXH. 

head”(?y I had not seen a peach of snch a size, and 
ordered it to be weighed, and it came to 63 Akbari 
rupees, or 60 tolas. When I cut it in half its stone 
also came into two pieces, and its substance was sweet. 
I had in Kabul never eaten blotter fruit from an^^ tree. 
On the 25th news came from Malwa that Mirza Sh;ihrukh 
had bid farewell to this transitory world, and God Almighty 
had submerged him in Hia mercy. From the day on 
which he entered the service of my revered father till 
the time of his departure, from no act of his could 
dust be brought into the royal mind. He always did 
his duty with sincerity. The aforesaid Mirza apparentl 3 ^ 
had four sons : Hasan and Husain were bom of tlur 
same womb (i.e. they were twins). Husain fled from 
Hurhanpur and went by sea to Iraq, and thence to 
Badakhshan, where they say he n<^)w is, as has been 
written about his message and his .sending some one to 
me. No one knows for certain whether it is the same 
Mirza Husain, or the people of Badakhshan havc^ raised 
up this one like other false MirzAs and given him the 
mime of Mirza Husain. From the time when Mirza 
Sljahrukh came from Badakhshan and had the g(xxl 
fortune to wait on ray father until now, nearly 25 years 
hav€^ passed. For some time the people of Badakhshwii, 
on account of the oppression and injury they ha\e to 
undergo from the '0zlx3gs, have given notoriety to a 
Bndakhslmn Ixy, wdio had on his face the marks of 
nohility, as really the .son of Mirza Shahrukh and of 
the race of Mirza Sulaiman. A large number of the 
scattered UyniAjs, and the hill-people of Badakhshan, 


* The MSS merely have “of h ‘•ixe that. I h.'wl never neen lieforo. ’* 
IVohahly the text is corrupt, aiul the meaning may 1x5 “a« big as 
a head.” B*h ix a quiine, and perhaj*'* this what is meant here. Or 
the meaning may be “equal to the biggest for site.” Or wr may ho 
a mistake for sih and the meaning Ijo “diiial in Co three (ordinary 
I>eache«i). *’ 



120 SHlHRUra’S SONS. A RINO HUNT. 

whom they call Qharchal (Georgians ?), collected round 
him, and showing enmity and disputing with the tTsbegs, 
took some of the districts of Badakhshan out of their 
possession. The tJzbegs attacked that false MirzS and 
captured him, and placing his* head on a spear sent it 
round to the whole country of Badakhshan. Again 
the seditious people of Badakhshan quickly produced 
another Mirza. Up to now several MirzSs have been 
killed. It appears to me that as long as there is any 
trace of the people of Badakhshan they will keep up 
this disturbance. The third son of the Mirza is Mirza 
Sult&n, who excels in appearance and disposition all 
the other sons of the Mirza. 1' begged him from his 
revered father, and have kept him in my own service, 
and having taken great pains with him reckon him as 
my own child. In disposition and manners he has no 
likeness to his brothers. After my accession I gave him 
the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse, and sent 
him to the Subah of Malwa, which was his father’s 
place. The fourth son is Badi*u-z-zaman, whom he 
always had in attendance on himself ; he obtained the 
rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horse. 

While I was at Kabul, nc qama/rgah hunt had taken 
place. As the time for returning to Hindustan had come 
near, and 1 was very desirous of hunting red deer, 
I ordered them to go forward as soon as possible and 
surround the hill Faraq,^ which is seven kos from Kabul. 
On Tuesday, the 4th Jumada-l>awwal, I went to hunt. 
Nearly 100 deer had come into the enclosure (qamargah). 
About a half of these were taken, and a very hot hunt 
took place. 1 gave 5,000 rupees in rewards to the ryots 
who were present at the hunt. On the same day an 
increase of 500 horse was ordered to the rank of Shaikh 


^10. MS. 181 has Qarqara mountaii.s. There i** also the reading 
Hbiu*aq. 



visit's BIBAR’S tomb. leaves KABUL. 


121 


'Abdu-r-Babman, son of Abu-1-fazl, so as to bring 

it to 2,000 personal and (2,000) horse. On Thursday, the 
6th, I went to the throne-place of the late king Babar. 
As I was to leave E^bul on the next day I looked on that 
day as a feast day, and ordered them to arrange a wine- 
party on the spot, and fill with wine the little reservoii 
they had cut in the rock. Cups were given to all the 
courtiers and servants who were present, and few 
days have passed in such enjoyment and pleasure. On 
Friday, the 7th, when a watch of day had passed, leaving 
the city auspiciously and with pleasure, a halt was made 
at the jvlgdh (meadow) of the Safid-sang. From the 
Shahr-ara as far as the julgah I scattered to faqirs and 
poor people darb and cliaran, that is, half and quarter 
rupees.^ On that day, when 1 mounted my elephant 
for the purpose of leaving Kabul, the news arrived of 
the recovery of the Amiru-l-umara and ghah Beg Khan. 
The news of the good health of these two chief servants 
of mine I took an auspicious omen for myself. From 
the julgah of the Safid-sang, marching one kos on Tuesday, 
the 11th, 1 halted at Bikram. I left Til.^ Beg Khan at 
Kabul to take proper care of Kabul and neighbourhood 
until the coming of ghah Beg Khan. On Tuesday, the 
18th, I marched two and a half kos from the halting- 
place of Butkhak by the road Du aba,^ and encamped at 
a spring on the bank of which there are four plane- 
trees. No one till now had looked to the preparation 
of this halting-place, and they were ignorant of its 
condition and suitability. It is in truth a most excellent 
spot, and one fit to have a building erected in it. At this 
halting-place another qamargah hunt took place, wlien 
about 112 deer, etc., were taken. Twenty -four rang 
antelope and 50 red antelope and 16 mountain goats were 


> Blochmann, p. 31. 

Da'aVia is mentioned as a stnjiife Uy \V. Fiiicli. 



122 


AN ANTELOPE. raUSRAU’s PLOT. 

taken. I had never till now seen a rang antelope alive.^ 
It is in truth a wonderful animal of a beautiful shape. 
Although the black buck of Hindustan looks very finely 
made, the shape and fashion and appearance of this 
antelope is quite a different thing. They weighed a ram 
and a rang ; the ram came to a maund and 33 seers and 
tlie rang to two maunds and 10 seers. The rang, although 
of this size, ran so that ten or twelve swift dogs were 
worn out and seized it with a hundred thousand difRculties. 
The flesh of the sheep of the Barbary goat in flavour does 
not surpass that of the rang. In the same village* kulangs 
(demoiselle crane) were also caught. 

Although Khusrau had repeatedly done evil actions and 
deserved a thousand kinds of punishment, my fatherly 
affection did not permit me to take his life. Although 
in the iaws of government and the ways of empire one 
should take notice of such disapproved deeds, I averted 
niy eyes from his faults, and kept him in excessive comfort 
and ease. It became known that he was in the habit of 
sending men to scoundrels who did not consider con- 
sequences, and of inciting them to give trouble and 
attempt my life, and making them hopeful with promises. 
A band of these ill-fated ones of little foresight having 
joined together, desired to attack me in the hunts that 
took place in Kabul and those parts. As the grace and 
protection of Qod Almighty are the guardians and keepers 
of this sublime dynasty, they did not attain to their end. 
On the day when the halt was at the Surkhab, one of that 
band went at the risk of his life to Kbwaja Waisi, the 
DiwAn of my son Khtirram, and revealed that nearly 500 
men at Khusrau^s instigation had conspired with Fathu-llah, 
son of Hakim Abfl-l-fatb, NCiru-d-din, son of Qbiyasu-d- 
din *Ali Asaf-khAn, and Sharif, son of 1‘timAdu-d-daulah 
(Nur-JahAu’s father), and were awaiting an opportunity 


^ Tlie text mmit» the word * alive.* 



KHUSRAD'S PLOT. 123 

to carry out the designs of the enemies and evil-wishers 
of the king. ]Kbw&ja Waisi told this to KhuiTam, 
and he in great perturbation immediately told me. 
I gave Khurram the blessing of felicity, and prepared 
to get hold of the whole set of those short-sighted ones 
and punish them with various kinds of punishment. 
Again, it came to my mind, as I was on the march, and 
the seizure of these people would create a disturbance 
and confusion in the camp,^ to Older the leaders of the 
disturbance and mischief to be apprehended. I handed 
over Fatbu-llah in confinement to certain trusty men, and 
ordered capital punishment for the other two wretches, 
with three or four of the chief among the black -faced 
(conspirators). I had dignified Qasim *Ali, who was one 
of the servants of the late king Akbar, after my accession 
with the title of Day&nat Kh&n. He always accused 
Fatbu-llah of a want of loyalty, and said things about 
him. One day he said to Fatbu-llah : ** At the time when 
Khusrau fled and the king pursued him, you said to me : 
' The Panjab should be given to Khusrau and this quarrel 
cut short’ ” Fatbu-llah denied this, and both resorted to 
oaths and curses (on themselves). Ten or fifteen days had 
not passed after this altercation when that hypocritical 
wretch was arrested, and his false oath did its business. 

On Saturday, the 22nd JumftdA-l-awwal, the news 
came of the death of the l^aklm JalAlu-d-d!n Mu^fTar 
Ardist&nl, who was of a family of skill and medicine 
and claimed to be a descendant of Galen. At all events 
he was an unequalled healer. His experience added to 
his knowledge.* As he was very handsome and well-made 

^ The nrda or osmp wis probeblj not with Jehiaglr thee, end he 
thought that if he SMit to it for t^ eeptore of SOO there would be 
oonfusioii. He therefore eontented biaaself et the time with erreeting 
the ringleadem. There is a full edoount of the oonspiraoj in the 
Iqbil-niine, p. 27 , etc. 

* Fomibly the meeaing is *‘hia esperienoe wee greeter then hie skill.” 



124 


ACCOUNT or A PBT8ICZAN. 


in the days of his youth (8dda^r0,’ih&)^ he frequented 
the assemblies of Sh&h Tahmtep, Mid the king recited 
this hemistich about him: — 

“We have a pleasant- physician : come, let ns all be ilL" 

^akim 'Ali, who was hu contemporary, exceeded hin* 
in skill. In short, in medical skill and auspiciousness 
and rectitude and purity of method and disposition he 
was perfect. Ofiher physicians of the age could not 
compare with hiin. In addition to his medical skill he 
had many excellencies. He had perfect loyalty towards 
me. He built at Lahore a house of great pleasantness 
and purity, and repeatedly asked me to honour it (with 
my presence). As I was very fond of pleasing him 
I consented. In short, the aforesaid ^akIm, from his 
connection with me and being my physician, had great 
skill in the management of affairs and boriness of the 
world, so that for some time at Allahabad I made him 
Diwan of my establishment. On account of his great 
honesty he was very exacting in important business, and 
people were vexed at this method of proceeding. For 
about twenty years he had ulcerated lungs, and by his 
wisdom preserved in some measure his health.. When 
he was talking he mostly coughed so much that his 
cheek and eyes became red, and by degrees his colour 
became blue. I often said to him : " Thou art a learned 
physician ; why dost thou not cure thy own wounds ? ” 
He represented that wounds in the lungs were not of 
such a nature that they could be cured. During his 
illness one of his confidential servants put poison into 
some medicine he was in the habit of taking every day 
and gave it to him. When he perceived this he took 
remedies for it. He objected very much to be bled, 
although this was necessary. It happened that he was 
going to the privy when his cough overcame him and 


’ Lit., when he was smooth-faced, i.e. beardless. 



DEATH OF PHTSiaAir. A HUNT. 


125 


opened the wounds in his lungs. So much blood poured 
out of his mouth and brain that he became insensible 
and fell, and made a fearful cry. An aftahachl (ewer- 
bearer) becoming aware of this, came into the assembly- 
room, and seeing him smeared with blood cried out: 
‘*They have killed the bftkim.** After examining him 
it was seen that there was no sign of wounds on his 
body, and that it waa the same wound in the lungs 
that had begun to flow They informed QilSj Shan, who 
was the Governor of Lahore, and he, having ascertained 
the true state of the affair, buried him. He left no 
capable son. 

On the 24th, between the garden of Wafa and Nimlah, 
a hunt took place, and nearly forty red antelope were 
killed. A female panther (yUz) fell into our hands in 
this hunt. The zamindars of that place, Laghniftnis, 
gh&li, and Afghans, came and said that they did not 
remember nor had they heard from their fathers that 
a panther had been seen in that region for 120 years. 
A halt was made on the 2nd Jumftd&-l-&khir, at the 
Waf& Garden, and the assembly for the solar weighing 
was held. On the same day Arslan Bi, an Ozbeg who 
was one of the Sardars and nobles of *Abdu-l-Muinin Kh&n, 
and was at that time governor of the fort of Kahmard, 
having left his fort, had the blessing of waiting on me. 
As he had come from friendship and sincerity, I exalted 
him with a special robe of honour. He is a simple 
tTzbeg, and is fit to be educated and honoured. On the 
4th of the month an order was given that 'Izzat Kb&ri, 
the governor^ of JalAl&bAd, should make the hunting- 
ground of the Arzina plain into a qamargah (ring- 
hunting ground). Nearly 300 animals were captured, 

* The I.O. MSS. do not call him governor, and the numea of the 
animals captured differ in tho MSS. from thoee given in the text. 
The Utter are obviously wrong, and 1 have discarded them. The 
Iqbftl-nama, p. 30, has Anana aa the name of the hunting-gronnd. 
Erskinc has Arzina. 



126 


SHAH B£a KHAN. 


namely, 35 qUch (rams /), 25 qHtlyjl (?), 90 a/rghpll 
(wild sheep), 55 tULgjld% (yaks?), 95 antelope {^safida). 

As it was the middle of the day when I arrived at 
the hunting-place and the air was very hot, the {tdzi) 
Arabian dogs had been exhausted.^ The time for running 
dogs is in the morning or at the end of the day. On 
Saturday, the 12th, the halt was at Akura Saray(?). 
At this stage Shah Beg Sban,^ with a good force, came 
and waited on me. He was one who had been brought 
up by my father, the late king Akbar. In himself he is 
a very brave man and energetic, so much so that constantly 
in the time of my father he fought several single combats, 
and in my own reign defended the fort of Qandahar 
from the hosts of the ruler of Iran. It was besieged for 
a year before the royal army arrived to his assistance. 
His manners towards his soldiers are those of an Amir 
(nobleman, umxirayana), and not according to discipline 
{qudrat), especially towards those who have helped him 
in battles or are with him in campaigns. He jokes 
much with his servants, and this gives him an undignified 
appearance.^ I have repeatedly warned him about this, 
but as it is in his nature my remonstrances liave had 
no effect. 

On Monday, the 14th, I promoted H&ghim Khan^ who 
is one of the household, born ones of our dynasty, to 

' Erakine has **niany of the hounds were destroyed.” Soffdn-i-tdzi 
probably means greyhounds, whether bred in Arabia or eloewhere. 

‘ Blochmann, p. 377, and Ma’isiru - 1 > umara, ii, 642. He was an 
Arghun. 

The passage is obscure and the text is corrupt. Erskine's translation 
is : ** His manners towards the soldiers is frank and gallant^ but not 
according to the rules of discipline, especially towards those who have 
been or are* in the wars with him. He is much flattered by his servants, 
which give.s him a light appearance.” Evidently Erakine reed ndil or 
ndz instead of hdt as in the text, and the MSS. supixirt his reoding. 
I think, however, that mix IrtfhkiaH means *to jest.* Instead of the 
/d f»amlnffawl of text the MSS. have yd ftamdyaiid, the meaning Ijeing 
those huUiVrs who have served liim well, or are doing so We learn 
froiu Blo(;hiu:iiid. p. 37H, that Sh'ih Beg was **a fi-ank Turk.'* 



A SON OF 8HAHRUKH REBELS. 


127 


the rank of 3,000 with 2,000 horse, and I made him 
governor of the province of Orissa. On the same day 
news came that Bad^u-z-zaman, son of Mirza Shahrukh. 
who was in the province of Malwa, through folly and 
youth had started with a body of rebels to go to the 
province of the Ran& and join him. *Abdu41ah Kh&n. 
the governor of that place, being informed of this event 
went after him, and having made him prisoner on the 
way, slew several of the wretches who had joined with 
him. An order was given that Ihtimam Khan should 
start from Agra and bring the Mirza to the court. On 
the 25th of the aforesaid month news came that Imam 
Quli Khan, nephew of Wali Khan, ruler of Mawara'a-n- 
nahr, had killed him who was called Mirza Husain, who 
had been reported to be the son of Mirza Shahrukh. 
In truth, the killing of the sons of Mirza Shahrukh is 
like the killing of the demons, as they say that from 
every drop of their blood demons are produced. In the 
station of Dhaka, Shir Kban, the Afghan, whom when 
I left I had placed at Peshawar to guard the Khaibar 
Pass, came and waited on me. He had made no default 
in preserving and guarding the road. Zafar Khan, son 
of Zain Khan Koka, had been appointed to move on 
the Dalaz&k Afghans and the tribe of Khatur, who had 
perpetrated all kinds of misdeeds in the neighbourhood 
of Attock and the Beas and that vicinity. After 
performing that service and the conquest of those rebels, 
who numbered about 100,000 houses, and sending them 
off towards Lahore, he came and waited upon me at the 
same halting -place, and it was evident that he had 
performed that service as it ought to have been done. 
As the month of Bajab, corresponding with the Il&hi 
month of Ab&n, had arrived,^ and it was known that this 

* The peooliarity of this year was that the lunar month ami the seiar 
month of Akbar’s birth, ra, Rajab and A)»an, coincided, 9o that theca 
was a double celebration. 



128 


BISTBIBUTIOK OF CHARITY. 


was one of the months fixed for the lunar weighing 
{wazn~i-qamar%) of my father, 1 determined that the 
value of all the articles which he used to order for his 
own weighing in the solar and lunar years should be 
estimated, and that what this came to should be sent 
to the large cities for the repose of the soul of that 
enlightened one, and be divided amongst the necessitous 
and the faqirs. The total came to 100,000 rupees, 
equal to 300 IrAq tumans, and 300,000 of the currency 
of the people of M&war&’a-n-nahr. 

Trustworthy men divided that sum among the twelve 
chief citie8,8uch asAgra,Delhi,Lahore,Gujarat(Ahmadabad), 
etc. On Thursday, the 3rd Rajab, I favoured with the 
title of Kh&n-jahan my son (farzand) ^alabat Kh&n. who 
is not less to me than my own sons, and ordered that they 
should in all firmans and orders write of him as Kh&n- 
jahan. A special robe of honour and a jewelled sword 
were also given him. Also, having entitled Shah Beg 
I£han IChan-daurAn, I presented him with a jewelled 
waist-dagger, a male elephant, and a special horse. The 
whole of the sarkars of Tirah, Kabul, Bangash, and the 
province of Sawad (Swat) Bajaur, with the (task of) 
beating bock the Afghans of those regions, and a jagir 
and the faujdarship were confirmed to him. He took 
leave from Baba Hasan Abd&l. I also ordered Rain DAs 
Kachhwaha to receive a jagir in this province and to be 
enrolled among the auxiliaries of this Subah. I conferred 
on Ki^an Chand, son of the Mota (fat) RAja, the rank 
of 1,000 personal and 500 horse. A firman was written 
to Murtaza KhAn (Sayyid Farid), governor of Gujarat, that 
as the good conduct and excellence and abstemiousness 
of the son of Miy&n Wajihu-d-din ^ had been reported 
to me, he should hand over to him from me a sum of 
money, and that he should write and send me soiue of 


> Wajiho-d-d!ii was a famems Gujarat taint. He died in 998. 



HUVriKO. 


129 


the names of God which had been tested. If the grace 
of God should be with me I would continually repeat^ 
them. Before this 1 had given leave to Zafar Kbte to 
go to Baba. Hasan Abdil to collect together game for 
sport. He had made a djdJMand (literally a tying 
together of horns or branches). Twenty-seven red deer 
and 68 white ones came into the ^^ba'iid. I myself 
struck with arrows 29 antelope, and Parwiz and ^urram 
also killed some others with arrows. Afterwards orders 
were given to the servants and courtiers to shoot. O&n 
Jahan was the best shot, and in every case of his strikmg 
an antelope the arrow penetrated through and through.* 
Again, on the I4th of the month of Rajab, Zafar had 
arranged a qamargab at Rawalpindi. I struck with an 
arrow a red deer at a long distance, and was highly 
delighted at the arrow striking him and his falling down. 
Thirty-four red deer and 35 qa/ra-qilyrilgh (black-tailed) 
antelope, which in the Hindi language they call chikO/ra, 
and two pigs were also killed. On the 2l8t another 
qamargah had been arranged within three kos of the fort 
of Rohtas by the efforts and exertions of Hilil O&n. 
I had taken with me to this hunt those who were 
screened by the curtains of honour (the members of the 
zanftnah). Tlie hunt was a good one and came pflf with 
great Mat Two hundred red and white antelope were 
killed. Passing on from Rohtas, the hills of which 
contain these antelope, there are in no place in the 
whole of Hindustan, with the exception of Girjh&k and 
Nandanah, red deer of this description. I ordered them 

' The word uied by Jehioslr, and which has been translated * reptat 
continually,* is muddwamai, and Erskine understood it to mean that 
Jahangir hoped to prolong his life by this exercise. 

* Har ahik-i kih tad bar mr-i-tlr raft. The literal rendering 
apparently is : ** whenever an antelope was struck by him the arrow 
entered up to its (the arrow’s) head.” Perhaps the meiiiiing simply 
is every arrow (or bullet) that he shot went home. 



130 


HUNTING. 


to catch and keep some of them alive, in order that 
possibly some of them mi(;ht reach Hindustan for 
breeding purposes. On the 25th another hunt took 
place in the neighbourhood of Bohtas. In this hunt also 
my sisters and the other ladies were with me, and 
nearly 100 red deer were killed It was told me that 
Shams unde of Jal&l Khto ^ Gakkhar who was in 

that neighbourhood, notwithstanding his great age took 
much delight in hunting, such that young men had not 
so much eiyoyment in it. When 1 heard that he was 
well-disposed towards faqirs and dervishes I went to 
his house, and his disposition and manners pleased me. 
[ bestowed on him 2,000 rupees, and the same sum on 
his wives and children, with five other villages with large 
receipts by way of livelihood for them, that they might 
pass their days in comfort and contentment. On the 6th 
Sha'ban, at the halting-plaoe of ChandAlab, the Amiru-1- 
umar& came and waited on ma I was greatly pleased 
at obtaining his society again, ior all the physicians, 
Hindu and Musulman, had made up their minds that 
he would die. Almighty God in His grace and mercy 
granted him the honour of recovery, in order that it 
might be known to such as do not recognize His will 
that for every difficult ill, which those who look on the 
outside of causes only may have given up as hopeless, 
there is One who is powerful to provide a cure and 
remedy out of His own kindness and compassion. On 
the same day R&y Ray Singh, ^ one of the most con- 
siderable of the Rajput Amirs, ashamed on account of 
the fault he had committed in the matter of Kbusrau, 
and who was living at his home, came, and under the 
patronage of the Amiru-l-umara obtained the good 


^ JaISI Sh&a VM s grandson of SnltSn Adam (Blodunann, pp. 465 
andOSS;. 

* heo fi|^ for anothw notice of Urn in the chapter On 



RiT RAT SINGH OF BIKANXR. 


131 


fortune of waiting on me; his offences were pardoned. 
At the time that I left Agra in pursuit of Khuarau 
I had in full confidence left him in charge of Agra, 
so that when the ladies (maJialhd)^ should be sent 
for he might come with them. After the ladies were 
sent for he went for two or three stages with them, and 
in the village of Mathura, on merely hearing foolish 
tales, separated from them, and went to his native place 
(Bikanir). He thought that as a commotion had arisen 
he would see where the right road was. The merciful 
God, who cherishes His servants, in a short time having 
arranged that affair broke the rope of the alliance of 
those rebels, and this betrayal of his salt remained a 
burden on his neck. In order to please the Amiru-1- 
umara I ordered the rank which he formerly held to be 
confirmed to him, and his jagir to remain as it was. 
I promoted Sulaiman Beg, who was one of my attendants 
from the time when I was prince, to the title of Fid&'i 
^&n. On Monday, the 12th, a halt was made- at the 
garden of Dil-amiz, which is on the bank of the river 
Ravi. 1 waited on my mother in this garden. Mirza 
Qh&zi. who had done approved service in command of 
the army at Qandahar, waited on me, and I bestowed 
great favour on him. 

On Tuesday, the 13th, 1 auspiciously entered Lahore. 
The next day Mir Khalilu-llah, son of Qbiyasu-d-din 
Muhammad, Mirmiran, who was of the descendants of 
Sb&h Ni'matu-llah Wall, paid his respects.* In the 
reign of Shah TRhmasp there was no family of such 
gmtness in the whole country, for the sister of the 
Shah, by name Janish Begam, was in the house of 
(married to) Mir Ni'matu-llah, the father of the MirmLr&n. 


’ One of jAhSngfr's wives wsb * deugbter of Ray R&y Singh (of 
Bikenir). See. Blochmann, p. 310. 

* See Rieu, Cat. ii, p. 634. 



132 


Nl^MATU-LLAH’S FAMILY. 


A daughter who was born to them, the Shah gave in 
marriage to his own son Isma'il Mirza, and making the 
sons of that Mirmiran sons-in-law, gave his younger 
daughter to his eldest son, who had the same name as his 
grandfather, and connected (in marriage) the daughter of 
Ismail Mirza, who was .born of the niece of the Shah, 
to another son, Mir Shalilu-llah. After the death of 
the Shah, by degrees the family went to decay, until 
in the reign of Sh&h 'Abbas they became all at once 
extirpated, and they lost the property and effects that 
they had and could no longer remain in their own place. 
Mir ^alilu-llah came to wait upon me. As he had 
undergone trouble on the road, and the signs of sincerity 
were apparent from his circumstances, having made him 
a sharer of my unstinted favours I gave him 12,000 rupees 
in cash, and promoted him to the rank of 1,000 personal 
and 200 horse, and gave an order for a jagir. 

An order was given to the civil department {dlicdniydn) 
to confer the rank of 8,000 personal and 5,000 horse on 
my son Khurram, and to pi-ovide a jagir for him in the 
neighbourhood of Ujjain, and to assign the Sarkar of 
Hi^r Firuza to him. On Thursday, the 22nd, on the 
invitation of Asaf Khan, I went with my ladies to his 
house and passed the night there. The next day he 
presented before me his own offerings, of the value of 
ten lacs of rupees, in jewels and jewelled things, robes, 
elephants, and horses. Some single rubies and jacintlis 
and some pearls, also silk cloths with some pieces of 
porcelain from China and Tartary, were accepted, and 
I made a present of the rest to him. Murta/A Khan 
from Gujarat sent by way of offering a ring made of 
a single ruby of good colour, substance, and water, the 
stone, the socket, and the ring being all of one piece. 
They weighed 1^ tanks and one surkh, which is equal 
to one misqal and 15 surkh. This was sent to me and 
much approved. Till that day no one had ever heard of 



ENVOY FROM MECCA. mIrZA GJHAZI. 133 

such a ring having come to the hands of any sovereign. 
A. single ruby weighing six surkhs or two tanks and 
15 surkhs,^ and of which the value was stated to he 
£25,000, was also sent. The ring was valued at the 
same figure. 

On the same day the envoy of the Sharif of Mecca came 
to wait on me with a letter and the curtain of the door 
of the Ka'bah. He showed great friendship towards me. 
The said envoy had bestowed on him 500,000 rfdm, equal 
tc 7,000 or 8,000 rupees, and I resolved to send the Sharif 
the equivalent of 100,000 rupees of the precious things 
of Hindustan. On Thursday, the 10th of the month, 
a piece of the Subah of Multan was added to the jagir 
of Mirz& Qhazi. though the whole of the province of 
Thattah had been given to him in jagir. He was also 
promoted to the rank of 5,000 personalty and 5,000 
horse. The government of Qandahar and the protection 
of that region, which is the frontier of Hindustan, were 
assigned to his excellent administration. Conferring on 
him a robe of honour and a jewelled sword I gave him 
his leave. In fine, Mirz& Qhazi possessed perfection,^ 
and he made also good verses. He used Waqari as his 
takkallvs, or poetic name (Ruz-i-rushan, Bhopal 1297, 
p. 455; also Ma'asiru-l-umara, vol. iii, p. 347). This is 
one of his couplets : — 

** If my weeping should cause her U> smile, what wonder? 

Though the cloud weep, the cheek of the rose-bush smile.s.’* 


^ There is evidently something wrong in the text, for a ruli 3 ' weighing 
6 surkhs could not weigh 2 tanks and lo .surkhs. I.O. MS. IHl has 
barfa instead of but I do not know what this means. Perhaps 

^ha^-ffu4ha, ‘hexagonal,’ was intended. This view is conSrmed by the 
Iq(bal n&ma, p. 31, which has sAoM paA/ii, 'six-Kided.' Erskine’s M8. 
also had ‘six-sided,’ and he translates “a nix-sided ruby which weighed 
two fanffn fifteen mrkhs/' I.O. MS. 305 has '*hash prlrrha, and it is 
evident that rhis word, as also the harja of No. 181, is the jHirrhe of 
Steingass, which means a segment or facet. 

^ This remark al>out Mirzu (jhdzi, and also the quotation, do not occur 
in the two I.O. MSl^. 



134 BlY DUROA. SHiR KHAR. 

On the 15th the offering of the Ehankhanan was pre- 
sented to me : 40 elephants, some jewelled and decorated 
vessels, some Persian robes, and cloth that they make 
in the Deccan and those parts, had been sent by him, 
altogether of the value of 150,000 rupees. Mirza Rustam 
and most of the office-holders of that Subah had also sent 
good offerings. Some of the elephants were approved. 
News of the death of Rfty Durga,^ who was one of those 
who had been brought up by my revered father, arrived 
on the 18th of the month. He had been in attendance 
for forty years and more in the position of an Amir on 
my revered father, until, by degrees, he had risen in rank 
to 4;000. Before he obtained the good fortune of waiting 
on my father he was one of the trusted servants of Rana 
Uday Singh. He died on the 29th. He was a good military 
man. Suljto ShAh, the Afghan, whose disposition was 
turbulent and mischievous, passed his time in the service 
of Khusrau, and had his complete intimacy, so much so 
that this rebel was the cause of the running away of 
that unfortunate one. After the defeat and capture of 
Khusrau he went off alone (?)* into the skirts of the hills 
of Khizrabad and that region. At last he was made 
prisoner by Mir Mughal, the karorl of that place. As he 
had been the cause of the destruction and ruin of such 
a son, I ordered tliein to shoot him with arrows on the 
plain of Lahore. The aforesaid karori was promoted to 
higher rank, and was dignified with a grand dress of 
honour. On the 29th ghir Khan, the Afghan, who was 
one of my old servants, died. One might say that he 
took his own life, because he was continually drinking 
wine, to the extent that in every watch he used to 
drink four brimming cups of an-ack of double strength. 
He had broken the fa.st of the Ramaran of the past year. 


* Blochmann, pw 417. 

* JUayakti^ but the 1.0. MSS iMve batagpd^, * rapidly.’ 



INTERVIEW WITH A fiAINT. 


135 


and took it into his head this year that he would fast 
in the month of Sha'b&n on account of his having broken 
the fast of Ramson, and would fast for two months 
together. In abandoning his usual custom, which is a 
second nature, he became weak and his appetite left him, 
and becoming very weak he passed away in his 57th 
year. Patronising his children and brothers according 
to their circumstances, 1 bestowed on them a portion of 
his rank and jagir. 

On the 1st of the month of ghawwAl 1 went to 
visit MaulanA Muhammad Amin, who was one of the 
disciples of Shaikh Mahmhd Eam&ngar (the bow-maker). 
The Shaikh Mabmhd^ mentioned was one of the great 
men of his age, and H.M. Humayhn had entire reliance 
on him. so much so that he once poured water on 
his hands. The aforesaid Maul&nA is a man of .^ood 
disposition, and is free, notwithstanding the attachments 
and accidents (of the world), a faqir in manner and 
ways^ and acquainted with brokenness of spirit. His 
company pleased me exceedingly. I explained to him 
some of the griefs that had entangled themselves in 
my mind and heard from him good advice and agree- 
able words, and found myself greatly consoled at heart. 
Having presented him with 1,000 h^ha and 1.000 
rupees in cash by way of maintenance, I took leave. 
One watch of day had passed on Sunday when 1 left 
Lahore on my way to the capital of Agra. Having made 
Qilij Ehan governor, Mir Qaw&mu-d-din diwan, Shaikh 
Yusuf bakhshi, and Jamalu-d-din kotwal, and presented 
each according to his circumstances vrith dresses of honour, 

I turned towards my desired way. On the 25th, having 
passed over the river at Sultanpur, I proceeded two kos 
and halted at Nakodar. My revered father had given 

' Properly ZainU'd din MahmOd. See the etory in BodayOuI. Ranking, 
p. 589; also Akbar ntoia translation, i, 611, and Blochmann, p. *>30 
and note. 



136 


DEATH OF WAZIRU-L-HULX. 


Sbftiyi Abtk-l-fazl ^ gold of the wttght of 20,000 rupees 
to build an embankment between these two parganahs 
and prepare a waterfall, and in truth I found a halting- 
place exceedingly pleasant and fresh. I ordered Mu'izzu-1- 
mulk, the jagirdar of Nakodar, to erect a building and 
prepare a garden on one side of this embankment, so 
that wayfarers seeing it might be pleased. On Saturday, 
10th Zi-l-qa'da, Waziru-l-mulk, who before my ascension 
had the good fortune to serve me, and was Diwan of my 
establishment, died of diarrhcna. At the end of his life 
a son of evil fortune (lit footsteps) had been bom in his 
house, who in the space of forty days ruined* (Erskine 
has ^ate’) both his father and mother, and who himself 
died when he was two or three years old. It occurred 
to me that the house of Waziru-l-mulk must not all at 
once be ruined, and patronising Man^hr, his brother's son, 
I gave aim rank. Indeed,* he showed uo love to me 
(the scent of love did not come from him). On Monday, 
the 14th, I heard on the road that between Panipat and 
Karnal there were two tigers that were giving much 
trouble to wayfarers. I collected the elephants and sent 
them off. When I arrived at their (the tigers’) place 
I mounted a female elephant, and ordered them to place 
the elephants round them after the manner of a qamargah 
(enclosure), and by the favour of Allah killed both with 
a gun, and thus got rid of the raging tigers that had 
closed the road to the servants of Ood. On Thursday, 


^ I do not know if this is the author. There appears to be no mention 
of the construction in the Akhar-nima. Nakodar is in the Jalandhai 
district (I.G., x, 180, and Jarrett, ii 317). Perhaps the two tombs at 
Nakodar mentioned in I.G. as of Jah&ngir’s time are those ot Muqim 
the Waziru-l-mulk and hbi wife. See TSzuk, pp. 6'and 64. 

^ ^wurd, lit. devoured.’ Apparently he refers to the fact of 
birth as a misfortune. I.O. MS. 181 haa sar-t-mddar u pidar rd khwurd, 
and the A.S 124 has shlr-t-mddar u pidar’i-khdd, *the milk of his own 
mother and father^ ! 

* This is given as a quotation in No. 181. 



MiRZl SHAHRUra’S CHILDREN. 


137 


the 18th/ 1 halted at Delhi and alighted at the residence 
which Salim !l£han, the Afghan, had made in the days 
of his rule in the middle of the river Jumna and called 
Salimgadh. My revered father had given the place to 
Murta^ Khan, who was originally an inhabitant of Delhi. 
The aforesaid Khan had built on the margin of the 
river a terrace of stone excessively pleasant and bright. 
Below that building* near the water there was made 
a square chavJcaTidl with glazed tiles by the order of 
H.M. Humayun, and there are few places with such air. 
In the days when the late king Humayun honoured Delhi 
with his presence, he often sat there with his intimates, 
and associated with the members of his assemblies. 
I passed four days in that place, and with my courtiers 
and intimates enjoyed myself with wine parties. Mu'az^m 
Khan, who was governor of Delhi, presented offerings. 
The jagirdars and citizens also made offerings and presents, 
each according to his circumstances. I was desirous to 
employ some days in a qamargah hunt in the parganah of 
Palam, which is one of the places near the aforesaid 
city and one of the fixed hunting-grounds. As it was 
represented to me that the (fortunate) hour for approaching 
Agra had come very near, and another proper hour was 
not to be obtained at all near that time, I gave up the 
intention, and embarking on board a boat went on by 
water. On the 20th of the month of Zi-l-qa‘da four boys 
and three girls, children of Mirza Shahrukh. whom he 
had not mentioned to my father, were brought. I placed 
the boys among my confidential servants, and made over 
the girls to the attendants of the ladies of the harem in 
order that they might look after them. On the 2l8t of 
the same month R&ja Man Singh came and waited on me 


‘ This should be the 17th if Monday was the 14th. 

* The MSS. seem to have mtitaH^^i-mnh-i-chaakandlf 'in shafio like 
a chaukandi (?).* It was from the roof of this building that Humayan fell. 



138 


MIN SINGH. THIRD TEAR. 


from the fort of Rohtas, which is in the province of 
Patna and Behar, after orders had been sent to him six 
or seven times. He also, like Khan is one of the 

hypocrites and old wolves of this State. What they have 
done to me, and what has happened to them from me, 
Qod the knower of secrets knows; possibly no one could 
mention such another case (?). The aforesaid Raja produced 
as offerings 100 elephants, male and female, not one of 
which was fit to be included among my private elephants. 
As he Was one of those who had been favoured by my 
father, I did not parade his offences before his face, but 
vnth royal condescension promoted him. 

On this day they brought a talking jal (lark) which 
distinctly said Miyan XOti.’* It was very strange and 
wonderful. In Turki they call this bird turghai} 

The Third New Year's Feast from my Accession. 

On Thursday, the 2nd Zi-l-bijja, corresponding with the 
Ist Farwardin (19th March, 1608), the Sun, which en- 
lightens and heats the world with its splendour, changed 
from the constellation of Pisces to the joyful mansion of 
Aries, the abode of pleasure and rejoicing. It gave the 
world fresh brightness, and being aided by the Spring 
clothed those w'ho had been plundered by the cold season, 
and tyrannised over by the Autumn, with the robes of 
honour of tlie New Year and the garments of emerald 
green, and gave them compensation and recuperation. 

“ Again to Not- Being came the world** lord’s order, 

* Re.store what thou bast devoured.**’ 

‘ Tur^lwi or tnrtfkti is a thrush according to Vambery, and was the 
n:ime (»f Timur's father. Perhaps the bird was the large maiad, Uie 
Hliimruj or Bhringraj (?) of the Ayiii, Jarrett, ii, p. 125 and note. In 
Scully's (flos.«uiry, turghai is said to be the lark. The text arrangea the 
wonls differently from the MSS. They have miui^khkhaf Miydn Tuti 
gufta^ niui Erskine translates ‘which said clearly Miyan Tuti.* But 
possibly Jahangir meant that it spoke clearly like a parrot. 



NEW TEA.R FEAST. 


139 


The fea49t of the New Year was held in the village of 
Bankattar which is five kos off (from Agra), and at the 
time of transit (of the sun) I seated myself on the throne 
with glory and gladness. The nobles and courtiers and 
all the servants came forward with their congratulations. 
In the same assembly I bestowed on Oanjahan the rank 
of 5,000 personal and horse. I selected Kbw&]a Jahan 
for the post of bakhshi. Dismissing Wazir O&n irom 
the Viziership of the province of Bengal, I sent in his 
place Abti-l-hasan Shih&bkhani : and Nuru-d>din Quii 
became kotwal of Agra. As the glorious mausoleum of 
the late king Akbar was on the road, it entered my mind 
tliat if in passing by I should have the good fortune of 
a pilgrimage to it, it might occur to those who were short- 
sighted that I visited it because it was the place where 
my road crossed. I accordingly had determined that this 
time I would enter Agra, and after that would go on foot 
on this pilgrimage to the shrine, which is two and a half 
kos off, in the same way that the Hazrat (my father), on 
account of my birth, had gone from Agra to Ajmir. 
Would that I might also traverse the same on my head ! 
When tw’o watches of day had passed of Saturday, the 
5th* of the month, at an auspicious hour, I returned 
towards Agra, and scattering with two hands 5000 rupees 
in small coins on the way, entered the august palace w'hich 
was inside the fort. On this day haja Bir Singh Deo 
brought a white cheeta to show me. Although other sorts 

^ Blochmann, p. 33*2. Sikiindi’a, AkW’s tomb, lies half-way Ijetw^^en 
Rankattah and Agra. Tiefenthaler, i, *206, gives the name as Runcca, 
and says it is a famous place, as R&m there took the figure of Paras 
R&m. Jarrett, ii, ISO, has Rangtah, and it is there described as 
a village on the Jumna, near the city, and a much frequented place 
of worship. The Agra volume of the N.W.P. (iasetteer, p. 764, sfiells 
it Runkutti^ and says it is 9 miles north-west of Agra. See also Ma’&sir, 
ii, 407, art. ^*id ^&n, where mention is made of Rankatta and HiUl&bild, 
and Blochmann, p. 332. 

* It Thursday was the 2nd, Saturday would be the 4th. He went first 
to Agra from Rangta, apparently. 



140 


A WHITE CHEETA. ELEPHANTS. 


of creatures, both birds and beasts, have white varieties, 
which they call f Ctyg}i.am,^ I had never seen a white cheeta. 
Its spots, which are (usually) black, were of a blue colour, 
and the whiteness of the body was also inclined to bluish- 
ness. Of the albino animals that I have seen there are 
falcons, sparrow-hawks, hawks {i^ilcara) that they call 
hlgH ’ in the Persian language, sparrows, crows, partridges, 
florican» podma^ (Sylvia clivacea)^ and peacocks. Many 
hawks in aviaries are albinos. I have also seen white 
flying mice (flying squirrels) and some albinos among the 
black antelope, which is a species found only in* Hindustan. 
Among the chikdra (gazelle), which they call aaftda in 
Persia, I have frequently seen albinos. At this time 
Batan, son of Bhoj-h&ra, who is one of the chief Rajput 
nobles, came to the camp and waited on me, bringing three 
elephants as an oflering. One of these was much approved, 
and they valued it in the office at 15,000 rupees. It was 
entered among my private elephants, and I gave it the 
name of Ratangaj. The value of elephants of the former 
great Rajas of India was not more than 25,000 rupees, but 
they have now become very dear. I dignified Ratan with 
the title of Sarbuland Ray. I promoted Miran ^adr Jahan 
to the rank of 5,000 personal and 1,500 horse and Mu*az^m 
ILhan to 4,000 personal and 2,000 horse. 'Abdu-llah Oan 
was promoted to 3,000 and 500 horse. Mu^ffar Khan and 
Bhao Singh each obtained the rank of 2,000 personal and 
1,000 horse. Abu-l-basan diwan had 1,000 and 500 horse. 
I'timadu-d-daulah that of 1,000 personal and 250 horse. 
On the 25th Raja Suraj Singh, the maternal uncle of my 
son Khurram, came and paid his respects to me. He 
brought with him Shyam, the cousin of the turbulent 

^ THyqhun or fuy^un isf given in Zenker 09 TurkI for the white falcon. 
See Elliot, vi, 317. 

^ Blfjhfit which is given in Zenker,-i9 TurkI. The text has /{/>!. The 
I.O. MSS. have higft. 

’ Should be htldaM, * quail. * 



COMPLIMENTARY VERSES. 


141 


Umra In truth he possesses some skill and understands 
well how to ride elephants. Raja Suraj Singh had brought 
with him a poet who wrote verse in the Hindi tongue. 
He laid before me a poem in my praise to the purport that 
if the Sun had a son it would be always day and never 
would be night, because after his setting that son would 
sit in his place and keep the world in light. Praise and 
thanksgiving to God that God gave your father such a son 
that after his death men should not wear mourning which 
is like the night. The Sun had envy on this account, 
saying, “ Would I might also have a son who, taking my 
place, should not allow night to approach the world, for 
from the light of your rising and the illumination of your 
justice, notwithstanding such a misfortune, the spheres are 
so bright that one might say * night had neither name nor 
sign.*'* Few Hindi verses of such freshness of purport 
have ever reached my ear. As a reward for this eulogy 
I gave him an elephant. The Rajputs call a poet Ch&ran 
(name of a caste who are many of them poets) One of 
the poets of the age has turned ^ these sentiments into 
(Persian) verse — 

** If the world- illuminator hod a son, 

There would be no night ; it would be always day ; 

For when his gold-crowned head was hidden 
His son would display his tiara peak. 

Thanks that after such a father 
Such a son sits in his place. 

For from the demise of that king 
No one made black robes for mourning.’* 

On Thursday, the 8th Muharraiii, 1017^ (24th April, 
1608), Jalalu-d-din Mas’ud, who held the rank of 400 
personal and was not wanting in bravery, and who in 
several battles had done great deeds, died at about the age 
of 50 or 60 years of diarrhoea. He was an opium-eater, 
and used to eai; opium after breaking it in pieces, like 

^ Apparently this is a translation from the Hindi. 

^ Teit wrongly has 1014. 



142 


A NOTABLE HORSE. 


cheese, and it is notorious that he frequently ate opium 
from the hand of his own mother. When his disease 
became violent and there was a prospect of his death, 
his mother from excessive love for him ate more opium 
than was right out of that which she used to give her 
son, and two or three hours after his death she also 
died. I have never heard of such affection on the part 
of a mother for her son. It is the custom among the 
Hindus that after the death of their husbands women 
bum themselves, whether from love, or to save the honour 
of their fathers, or from being ashamed before their 
sons-in-law, but nothing like this was ever manifested 
on the part of mothers, Musulman or Hindu. On the 
15th of the same month I presented my best horse by 
way of favour to Baja Man Singh. Sb&h 'Abbas had 
sent this horse with some other horses and fitting gifts 
by Minu^ihr, one of his confidential slaves, to the late 
king Akbar. From being presented with this horse the 
Baja was so delighted that if I had given him a kingdom 
1 do not think he would have shown such joy.. At the 
time they brought the horse it was three or four years 
old. It grew up in Hindustan. The whole of the 
servants of the Court, Moghul and Bajput together, 
represented that no horse like this had ever come from 
Iraq to Hindustan. When my revered father gave the 
province of Khandesh and the Subah of the Deccan to my 
brother Daniyal, and was returning to Agra, he by way of 
kindness told Daniy&l to ask of him whatever he desired. 
Seizing the opportunity, he asked for this horse, and he 
accordingly gave it to him. On Tuesday, the 20th, 
a report came from Isl&m Sbftn with the news of the 
death of Jah&ngir Quli Sbftn, the governor of the Subah 
of Bengal, who was my special slave. On account of his 
natural excellence and innate merit he had been enrolled 
in the list of the great Amirs. 1 was much grieved at his 
death. I bestowed the rule of Bengal and the tutmrship 



A.CCOUNT OF A MONKEY. 


143 


to Prince Jah&ndar on my farzani ^ Isl&m Khan, and in 
his place gave the government of the Subah of Behar to 
Afzal Khan (son of Abu-I-fazl). The son of Hakim ‘All, 
whom I had sent on some duties to Burhanpur, came and 
brought with him some Karnatic jugglers who had no 
rivals or equals ; for instance, one of them played with 
ten baLlls, each of which was equal to an orange and one 
to a citron, and one to a sur kfi? in such a way that 
notwithstanding some were small and some large he never 
missed one, and did so many kinds of tricks that one’s 
vdts became bewildered. At the same time a dervish 
from Ceylon came and brought a strange animal called 
a deoTuik ^ (or devarig). Its face was exactly like a large 
bat, and the whole shape was like that of a monkey, but 
it had no tail. Its movements were like those of the 
black tailless monkey which they call ban mdnuslk 
(jungle man) in the Hindi language. Its body was like 
that of a young monkey two or three months old. It 
had been with the dervish for five years.* It appeared 
that the animal would never grow larger. Its food is 
milk and it also eats plantains. As the creature appeared 
very strange, I ordered the artists to take a likeness of 
it in various kinds of movement. It looked very ugly. 

On the same day MirzA Faridun Barl&s was promoted 
to the rank of 1,500 personal and 1,300 horse. An 
order was given that Payanda^ Khan Moghul, as he 
had reached old age after exerting himself as a soldier, 
should receive a jagir equal to 2,000 personal. Df 
Kb&n was promoted to the rank of 700 personal and 
600 horse. The rank of IslAm Kbftn. my son (/cLrzarul), 

* Jshingfr calls LiUm fartand because he was the eon of hie foster* 
brotlier. Jahangir Quli means * slave of Jahangir.' 

* Hie seed of Abnu precaUiriwt. 

* Or devtaq. Qu. devandyak ? The M88. have yfink and wabfihk. The 
lest is carmpt and has oonverted the word for * bat ’ into a * lamb.' 

* The text is corr u pt. 

* Btochmann, p. 387. 



144 


jahInoIr’s marriage. 


the governor of the Sabah of Bengal, was fixed at 4,000 
personal and 3,000 horse. The guardianship of the fort 
of Bohtas was bestowed on Kishwar Kb&n, son of 
Qutbu-d-din Khan Koka. Ihtimam KbAn was raised 
to the rank of 1,000 personal and 300 horse, and made 
mtr* bahr (admiral) and was appointed to the charge 
of the nawdra (fleet) of Bengal. On the 1st ^far 
ghamsu-d-din Khan, son of Khan A'^m, made an offering 
of ten elephants, and, receiving the rank of 2,000 personal 
and 1,500 horse, was selected for the title of Jahangir 
Quli Khan, and Zafar Khan received the rank of 2,000 
personal and 1,000 horse. As I had demanded in marriage 
the daughter of Jagat Singh, eldest son of Raja Man Singh, 
I on the 16th sent 80,000 rupees for the mchaq (a 
marriage present) to the house of the aforesaid Raja in 
order to dignify him. Muqarrab Kban sent from the 
port of Cambay a European curtain (tapestry), the like 
of which in beauty no other work of the Frank painters 
hod ever been seen. On the same day my aunt, Najibu-n- 
nisa Begam,^ died in the 6Ist year of her age of the 
disease of consumption and hectic fever. I promoted 
hei son, Mirza W&Ii, to the rank of 1,000 personal and 
200 horse. A man of Mawara*a-n-nahr, of the name of 
Aqam Haji, who for a long time had been in Turkey 
and was not without reasonableness and religious know- 
ledge, and who called himself the ambassador of the 
Turkish Emperor, waited upon me at Agra. He had 
an unknown writing (? illegible letter). Looking to his 
circumstances and his proceedings none of the servants 
of the Court believed in his being an ambassador. When 
Timur conquered Turkey, and Yildirim Bayazid, the ruler 


‘ Sister of Mir«& Hakim, also known as Fa]{hni-n-nisft (Blochmaiia, 
p. 322). The MSS. have BaUitu-n-nisk, fuid it would seem that the 
Najibu-n-ni9& of the text is a wrong reading. See Gnlhadan Begam's 
Memoirs p. 214. 



EXPEDITION 40A1N6T THE ItANA. 


145 


of that place, fell alive into his hands, he, aftei levying 
tribute and taking one year’s revenue, detemined to 
hand bock into his possession the whole of the country 
of Turkey. Just at that time Yildirim B&yaaHl died, 
and (Timur), having handed over the kingdom to his 
son Musa Chelebi, returned. From that time until now, 
notwithstanding such favours, no one had come on the 
part of the emperors, nor has any ambassador been sent ; 
how, then, can it now be believed that this person from 
M&war&’a-n-nahr should have been sent by the emperor ? 
I could in no way understand the afiair, and no one could 
bear witness to the accuracy of his claim : I therefore 
told him to go wherever he might wish. On the 4th 
Rabi'u-l-awwal the daughter of Jagat Singh entered the 
harem, and the marriage ceremony was performed in 
the house of Her Highness Maryam -zam&ni. Amongst 
the things sent with her by R&ja Sliin Singh were 60 
elephants. 

As I had determined to conquer the RAn&, it occurred 
to me that 1 should send MahAbai KhAn. I appointed 
12,000 fully armed cavalry under able officers to go with 
him, and in addition 500 ahadis, 2,000 musketeers on 
foot, with artillery made up of 70 to 80 guns mounted 
on elephants and camels; 60 elephants were appointed 
to this duty. Two million rupees of treasure were ordered 
to be sent with this army. On the 16th of the said 
month Kbnliludlah, grandson of Mfr Xi*matu-Ilah 
Yasdi, the whole of whose circomstancea and family 
history has already been written, died of diarrhoea. In 
his appearance the traces of sincerity and dervishhood 
were manifest If he had lived and passed a long time 
in my service he would have risen to high rank. The 
liakhshi of Burhanpur had sent some mangoes, one of 
which I ordered to be weighed ; it came to 52| tolas. 
On Wednesday, the 18th, in the house of Maryam-zamanrS 
10 the feast of the lunar ureighiiig of my 4f0tli year 



146 


Aif AKCIENT JAB. 


was held. 1 ordered tiie money used in weif^ing 
to be divided amongst women and needy periKnis. On 
Thursday, the 4ih Balfl‘n-l-4khir. Xhhir Beg, the bakhahi 
of the Ahadis, was given the title of Mn^lif Sb^n, 
and Mall4-i-TailiyyA SbOstail** who was adorned with 
excellencies and perfections, and was well acquainted with 
the scienoe of history and genealogy, that of Mn’arril^ 
Kh*-"- On the 10th of the same montii, having given 
BarkhOrdfa. the brother of *Abda-llah m)An, the titie of 
Bah&dttr SJjAni I dignified him mnong his fellows. UOnis 
]U)&n, son of Mihtar SbAat presented me with a jug of 
jasper (jade), wluch had been made in the reign of 
Mlrzl Ulugh B^ QOzgftn, in tire honoured rtame of that 
prince. It was a very ddieate rarity and of a beautiful 
shape. Its stone was exceedingly white and pure. Around 
the neck of the jar they had carved the auspicious name 
of the MMi and tire Hijra year in riqd'* characters. 
I ordered them to inaeribe my irame and the auspidotis 
naore of Akhar on the edge of the lip of the jar. Mihtar * 
Kbin waa one of the anoient alayes of thia State. He 
had the honour of serving tire late king Hnnr&yfin, aitd 
during the rwgn of my revered firtirer had attained the 
rank' of iroUlity. He regarded him as one of his con- 
fidential servants. On the 16tir a firman waa issued 
that the eountry of Sangr&m,* whidr had been given for 
a year by way of rewaid to my son (JwncmS) Isl&m 
should be handed over for the same purpose for 
a year to Af?al Sb&Di the governor of the Subah of 
Behar. On this day I promoted Mah&bat Kb&n to the 
rank of 3»000 personal and 2,500 horse, and YCtsuf 
son of Husain Kbiin Tukriyah, obtained that of 2,000 

1 Text wroogly bee Bbsmgblrt. The MSS. hsTe Sbtleteri, and this is 
right. See Blochmann, ppw 906, 909, and 5ia 

* JKgd* is a kind of writing (Bloriiamn, pp. 99, 190). 

* Bloehnann, p. 417. Hie name was Anhni-d-dln. 

« This moat be R&Ja Sangcifn of Bbarak|iar, who had been a rebel. 
Bee Bloohmahh, p. 446 and nota 



Apponmoiin. thk nZirraZirZir. 


147 


fwcaonal and 800 hone. Od the 24Ui I gsya leen to 
Mehftbet Sbhd end the Amin end men ' who had been 
•ppmnted to anbdue the Rfaii. The aforeeeid Khan 
was honoured with a robe of h<mour, a hone, a apeeial 
elephant, and a jewelled sword. Za&r Kbin. having 
been honoured witii i| standard, was presented witii a 
private robe of honour and a jewelled dagger. Shi^'at 
Kbhn also was presented with a standard, and I gave 
him a robe of honour and a special elephant Bi^a 
Bir Singh. Deo received a robe of honour and s special 
horse, and Mangll Kbto a horse and jewelled dagger. 
Narftyan DSs Ksehhw&hah, ‘All Qull Darmsn, and Hixsbr 
Kb&n Tiduuntsn obtained leave. On Bahidur Kbhn and 
Mu*iz8U<l-molk the bakhshi jewelled daggen were 
conferred, and in the same manner all the Amirs and 
leaders, each one according to his degree, were honoured 
with royal gifta A watch of the day had passed when 
the Khankhanan, who had been selected for the high 
honour of my Atillq (guardian), came from Bnrhanpur 
and waited on me. Delight and happiness had so over- 
powered him that he did not know whether he came 
on his head or his feet. He threw himself bewildered 
at my feet. By way of favour and kindneas 1 lifted 
lip his head and held it in an embrace of kindliness 
and afTection, and kissed his face. He brought me as 
offerings two strings of pearls and some roHea and 
emeralds. The value of tiie jewela was 300,000 rupeesi 
Besides these he laid before me many valuable things. 
On the 17th JumAdA-l-awwal Wasir Kbta, the Diwan of 
Bengal, came and waited <m me, and offered 60 elq[>hants, 
male and female, and one Egyptian* ruby. As he was 
one of the old servants adH he performed every duty, 

I ordered him to remain in attendance pn me. As QmI"* 
Kbhn and his elder brothur, JUim KbAn, could in no way 


' VntOstbl. hut I rlitok tlw nerd is (jiblil, ‘Egj'ptisii. 



148 


PRESENTS. AN ANTELOPE. 


keep the peace together, I had sent for the former to 
my own presence, and he yesterday came and waited 
on me. On the 22nd, A^tf Kb&n. msde me an offering 
of a rul^ of the weight of seven tdnk, which AbO-l- 
qAsim, his brother, had bought in the port of Cambay 
for 75,000 rupees. It is of a beautiful colour and well- 
shaped, but to my belief is not worth more than 60.000 
rupees. Great faults had been committed by Dulip ItAy, 
son of RAy RAy Singh, but as he took refuge with my 
farzand libin jAhAn his offences were pardoned, and I 
knowingly and purposely passed over his delinquencies. 
On tne 24th the sons of KhAnkhAnAn> who had followed 
after him, arrived and waited on me and produced as 
an offering the sum of 25,000 rupees. On the same day 
the said Khan offered 90 elephants. On Thursday, the 
Ist JumAdA-s-wni, the feast of my solar year was 
celebrated in the house of Maryam-zamAiii. Some of 
the money I divided among the women, and an order 
was given that the balance should be distributed to the 
poor of the hereditary kingdoma On the 4th of the 
month I ordered the Diwans to give a jagir, accoiding 
to his rank, of 7,000 rupees to KbAn A*»m. 

On this day a female antelope in milk was brought 
that allowed itself to be milked with ease, and gave eveiy 
dsy four .seers of milk. I had never seen or heard of 
anything of the kind before. The milk of the antelope, 
of the cow, and the buffalo in no way diffei-s. They say 
it is of great use in aathma. On the 11th of the month 
Raja Man Singh asked for leave to complete the army of 
the Deccan to which he had been appointed, as well as to 
visit Amber, Win native plac*.*. I gave him a male elephant 
of my own called Husliyar-mast, and gave him leave. 
On Monday, the 12th, as it was the annivenary of the 
death of the late king Akbar, in addition to the expenses 
of that entertainment, which are fixed separately, 1 sent 
4,060 rupees more to be divided among the faqitv and 



KHUSRAU’S DAUGHTER. 


149 


dervishes who are present in the enlightened mausoleum 
of the venerated one. On that day I exalted *Abdu-llah, 
the son of Khan A*zam, with the title of Sarfaraz Kh&n. 
and 'Abdu-r-Raliim, son of Qasim Khan, with that of 
Tarbiyat Khan. On Tuesday, the 18th, I sent for 
Khusrau’s daughter, and saw a child so like her father 
as no one can remember to have seen. The a.strologers 
used to say that her advent would not be auspicious to her 
father, but would be auspicious to me. At last it became 
known that they had augured rightly. They said that 
I should see her after three years. I saw her when she 
had paased this age. On the 21st of the month Khankhanan 
determined to clear out the province of tlie NizAniu-l- 
mulk, into which, after the death of the late king Akbar, 
some disturbances had found their way, and stated in 
writing that “ If I do not complete this service in the 
course of two years, I shall be guilty (of a fault), on tlie 
condition that in addition to the force that had been 
allotted to that Subah 12,000 more horse witli 1,000,000 
rupees should be sent with me." I ordered that materials 
for the army and the treasure should be 4uickly prepared, 
and he should be despatched. On the 26th Mukhli^ Khan 
bakhshi of the ahadis, was appointed bakhshi of tlie 
Subah of the Deccan, and I bestowed his place on Ibrahim 
Husain Khan, the Mir BaUr. On the 1st Kajah, Pi.shrau 
KliAn and KaniAl Khan, who belonged to the servants who 
were in constant attendance on me {ru-^inaa), died. S.hah 
Tahm&sp had given Pi^rau Khan as a slave to my 
grandfatiker, and he was called Sa’adat. When he was 
promoted in the service of the late king Akhar to the 
daroghahship ond superintendenct* of the farrd>^khdnn 
(carpet department), he obtained the title of Pishrau. 
He was so well acquainted with this service that one 
might say it was a garineiit they had «cwii on the stature 
of his capacity. When he was !)0 years old ho was 
quicker than lads of 14. He had the good fortune 



150 ACCOUNT OF PimKAU KHAN. 

to serre my grandfather, my father, and me. Until he 
breathed his last he was never for a moment without the 
intoxication of wine. 

** BesnMared with wine FighinI ^ went to the duet. 

Alee ! if the engda ^ imelt hie freeh ehroiid !’ 

He left 1,500,000 rupees. He has one very stupid son, 
called Ri'Ayat. On account of his father's claims for 
services performed, I gave the superintendence of half 
the farrashkhana to him and the other half to TukhmAq 
KbAn. KamAl SJ^kn was one of the slaves sincerely 
devoted to my service ; he is of the caste of the EalAls 
of T)elhi. On account of the great honesty and trust- 
worthiness that he had shown I made him bfiskdwal-begi 
(chief of the kitchen). Few such servants are ever met 
with. He had two sons, to both of whom I showed great 
kindness, but where are there others like him ? On the 
2nd of the said month LaM’ KalAwant, who from his 
childhood had grown up in my father’s service, who had 
taught him every breathing and sound that appertains to 
the Hindi language, died in the 65th or 70ih year of his 
age One of his girls (concubines) ate opium on this event 
and killed herself. Few women among the Musulmans 
have ever shown such fidelity. 

In Hindustan, especially in the province of Sylhet/ 
which is a dependency of Bengal, it was the custom for 
the people of those parts to make eunuchs of some of their 
sons and give them to the governor in place of revenue 
(urud*wd]ihl). This custom by degrees has been adopted 
in other provinces, and every year some children are thus 

' Fi^toni was a famous poet and also a drunkard. See Rieu, ii, p. a51, 
and Sprenger, Oude Cat. , p. 403. also means liimentation, and 

there is a play in the couplet on the double meaning. 

' In the Clliot* MSS., B M., the second line is translated ** Alas ! if 
the angels made his shroud of another kind ol odour ! ** The angeln 
meant are Nakir and liftunkar. 

« Blmliunn, p ilSL 

« Cr. Janwtt, jl, p 122. 



EUNUCHS FROM BENGAL. 


151 


ruined and cut oft* from procreation. This practice has 
become common. At this time 1 issued an order that 
hereafter no one should follow this abominable custom, and 
that the trafiic in young eunuchs should be completely 
done away with. Islam Khan and the other governors of 
the Subah of Bengal received firmans that whoever should 
commit such acts should be capitally punished, and that 
they should seize eunuchs of tender years who might be 
in anyone’s possession. No one of the former kings had 
obtained this success. Please ^mighty Ood, in a short 
time this objectionable practice will be completely done 
away vnth, and the traffic in eunuchs being forbidden, no 
one shall venture on this unpleasant and unprofitable 
proceeding. I presented the Khi^nkhanAn with a bay 
horse out of those sent me by Sh&h *Abb&s ; it was the 
head of the stable of my private horses. He was so 
rejoiced over it that it would be difficult to describe. 
In truth a horse of this great size and beauty has hardly 
come to Hindustan. I also gave him the elephant Futub, 
that is unrivalled in fighting, with twenty other elephants. 
As Ki^an Singh, who was accompanying Mah&bat Kh&n> 
performed laudable service, and was wounded in the leg 
by a spear in the fight with the R&na’s men, s that about 
twenty noblemen of his were killed and about 3 « 000 made 
captive, he was promoted to the rank of 2,000 personal 
and 1,000 horse. On the I4th of the same month I gave 
an order for Mirz& QhAzi to betake himself to Qandahar. 
A strange occurrence was that as soon as the aforesaid 
Mirz& started from Bakhar for that province the news of 
the death of SarclAr Khan, the governor of that place, 
came. SardAr was one of the permanent and 

intimate attendants of my uncle Muhammad Hakim, and* 
wafl known as Tukhta ' Beg. I gave half his rank (the 
pay of it) to his sons. On Monday, the 17th, I went on 


> Blochmann, p. 409. 



152 


akbak’s tomb at SIKANDRA. 


foot on my pilgrimage to the enlightened mauMoleum of 
the late king. If it had been possible, I would have 
traversed this road with my eyelashes and head. My 
revered father, on account of my birth, had gone on foot 
on a pilgrimage to the shrine of Khwaja Mu'inu-d-din 
Saiijan Chishti, from Fatbpur to Ajmir, a distance of 120 
koK : if I should traverse this road with my head and 
ej'cs, what should I have done ? When I was dignified 
with the good fortune of making this pilgrimage, 1 saw 
the building that had been erected in the cemetery. It 
did not come up to my idea of what it ought to be, for 
that would be approved which the wayfarers of the world 
should point to as one the like of which was not in the 
inhabited world. Inasmuch as at the time of erecting the 
aforesaid building the affair of the ill-starred Khusrau 
took place, I started for Lahore, and the architects had 
built it after a design of their own. At last a certain 
expenditure was made until a large sum was expended, 
and work went on for three or four years. I ordered 
that experienced architects should again la}^ the founda- 
tions, in agreement with men of experience, in several 
places, on a settled plan. By degrees a lofty building was 
erected, and a very bright garden was arranged round the 
building of the shrine, and a large and lofty gateway with 
minarets of white stone was built. On the whole they 
told me the cost of this lofty edifice was 1,500.000 rupees, 
equivalent to 50,000 current tumans of Pei*Ria and 4,500,000 
khanis, accoi*ding Uj the currency of TurAn. 

On Sunday, the 23rd, I went with a band of courtiers 
who had not seer it to look at the reservoir in the 
house of Hakim like one that had been made at 
Lahore in the time of my father. The reservoir is 
6 gaz by 6 gaz. At its side has been erected a well- 
lighted room, the entrance to which is through the 
water, but the water does not get into it. Ten or twelve 
I>e6ple could meet in it. He made an offering of .some 



HAKIIC ^ALl’S RESERVOIR. 


153 


of the cash and jewels that had accumulated ^ in his 
time. After looking at the room, and the entering of 
a number of courtiers therein, I raised him to the rank 
of 2,000, and returned to the palace. On Sunday, the 
14th Sha*ban, the Kh&nkhanan was honoured with a 
jewelled sword for the waist, a robe of honour, and 
a special elephant, and was given leave to go to his 
duty in the Deccan. Raja Siiraj Singli, who was attached 
to him in that service, was raised to the rank of 3,000 
personal and 2,000 horse. As it was again represented 
to me that oppression was being committed by the 
brethren and attendants of Murtaza Khan on the ryots 
and people of Ahmadabad in Gujarat, and that he was 
unable properly to restrain hia relations and people about 
him, I transferred the Subah from him and gave it to 
A'zatn Khan, and it was settled that the latter should 
attend at court, and that his eldest son Jahangir Quli 
Kb&n should go to Gujarat as his deputy. The rank 
of Jahangir Quli Kb&n was fixed at 3,000 personal and 
2,500 horse. An order wa.s given that in company with 
Mohan D&s diwAn and Mas*ud Beg Hamazani bakhshi 
he should carry on the business of the province. Mohan 
D&s was pi*omoted to the rank of 800 with 500 horse, 
and Mas^ud Beg to 300 with 150 horse. Tarbiyat Khan, 
one of the pei-sonal servants, was given the rank of 700 
with 400 hoi’se, and Nasru-llah the same. Mihtar Khan, 
whose circumstances have been related, died at this 
time, and I promoted his son Munis Khan to the rank 
of 500 personal and 130 honne. On Wednesday, the 
4th Zi-l-1.iijja, Khusrau hod a son lK>nk to him by the 
daughter of the Khftn A*zam, and I gave him the name 
of Buland-akhtar. On the Gth of the same month 
Muqarrab Kb&n sont a picture (with a report) that tin; 


' **What money Mild articles he could {>roduco at the tunc" < 
vi. 320). 



154 


■riM^R’S nCTDBB. ROURTH TBAR. 


belief of the IVanks was this, that the pietnre was tiiot 
of Timor. At the time when Tildirim B&yodd was 
token prisoner by his victorious army, a Nozorene, who 
at that time was ruler^ of Constantinople, hod sent an 
ambassador with gifts and preseilts in token of snb- 
mission and service, and on artist who hod been sent 
with the ambassador took hu likeness and brought it 
away. If this story wmre tme, no better gift could be 
presented to me. But as the picture hod no resemblance 
to any of his descendants I was not satisfied of the truth 
of the statement. 

The Fourth New Year’s Feast after the Ausncious 

Accession. 

X'he passing of the great star that illumines the world 
into the constellation of Aries took place on the night of 
Saturday, the 14th 2i>l>hUia, in Hyra 1017 (21st March, 
1609), and New Year’s Day that made brilliant tire world 
began with good auspices and rejoicing. On Friday, the 
5th Muharram, in the year 1018, ^aklm 'Air died. He 
was on unrivalled physician ; he had derived much profit 
from Arabic sciences. He hod written a commentary on 
the Canon (of Avicenna) in the time of my revwed father. 
He had greater diligence than understanding, just os his 
appearance was better than his disposition, and his 
acquirements better than his talents ; on the whole he was 
bad-hearted, and of an evil spirit. On the 20th afar I 
dignified Minsft Boi'khttrdftr with the title of Khan 'Alam. 
They brought from the neighbourhood of Fathphr a water- 
melon, greater than any 1 had ever seen. I ordered them 
to weigh it, and it come to 33 seers. On Monday, the 
19th Rate'u-l-awwal, the feast of my urnnal lunar weighing 

* Amisraatly the |WfSoii epoken of m s NeaeNiie (Chrintioii) was the 
Emperor of CoBiitantlno|ile. Con this inctnre he the original of that 
prefixed to White A Dnvey's traiulation of Tlmflf'o Inetitutee ! 



PABWXZ 8B1IT TO TUB DBCCAM. 


156 


was amnged in the palace my fevered mother ; • part 
of the money waa divided am<mg the women who had 
aaaembled there on that day. 

As it had been evident that in order to carry on the 
affidra of the State in the Labah of the Deccan it was 
neoeasaty to send one of the princes there, it came into 
my mind to send my son Farwis there. I ordered them 
to send his equipments and flx the hour for his departure. 
I summoned to Court llahfthat Kb5a, who had bemi 
nominated to the command of the army against the rebel 
RftnA to arrange certain matters at headquarters, and 
appointed in his place 'Abdn-Uah Kbtn, whom I exalted 
with the title of FtrOs-jang. I sent ‘Ahdu-r>Bazsaq 
bakhshl to cany an order to all the mansahdars of that 
army not to depart from the orders of the aforesaid 
Kbftn, and to pay every heed to his thanks and blame. 
On the 4th JuuilUlA-l*awwal one of the goatherds, who 
arc a particular tribe, brought before me a gelded goat 
that h^ teats like a female, and gave every day sufficient 
milk to take with a cup of coffee.* As milk is one of 
the favours of Allah, and the source which nourishes 
nmny animals, I looked on this strange affair an an omen 
for good. On the 6th of the same month, having given 
hini the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse, I sent 
Kburram, son of lSJ)An A'sam, to the government of the 
province of Sorath, which is known as Jfinagadh (in 
Kathiyawid). I honoured* Hakim SadtA with the title of 
Masihu-s-zamftn, and gave him the rank of 500 personal 
and 30 hone. On the 16th a jewelled waist-sword sran 
sent tO'RAja Ifta Singh. On the 22nd, having handed 
over 2,000,000 rupees for the expenses of the army of 
the Deccan, which had been ordered for Parwis, to a 
separate treasurer, 500,000 rupees more were given for 

' FtrlM|» tb* BMMriag is sooiigh milk to 611 s coSm-eop. 

* Aceording to Iho eentomiioraiy, hot MMMijfpieas, ovthor quotod in 
Elliot, vi, 44S. this wns in rswaid for rsstoring tks sight of Kbnsniv. 



156 


JAHINOIr’S son JAHiNDAR. 


the private expenseh of Parwiz. On the 25th, Wednesday, 
Jah&ndar (his son), who previoaely to this had been 
appointed, together with Qutbu-d<^n J|£b&n Koka, to 
Bengal, came and waited on me. In reality it became 
known to me that lie was a born devotee.^ As my 
mind was taken up with the preparations for the Deccan, 
on the 1st J umadA-l-Akhir I nominated the Amiru-1- 
umarft as well to that duty. He was honoured with 
he favour of a robe of honour and a horse. Having 
promoted Karam Chand, son of Jagannath, to the rank of 

2.000 personal and 1,500 horse, 1 sent him in company 
with Parwiz. On the 4th of the month 370 ahadi liorse 
were appointed with 'Abdu-llah Khan to the aasistniice 
of the ai-my employed against the Ran&. One hundred 
horses were also despatched from the government stables 
to be given as he thought proper to the mansabdars and 
ahadis. On the 17th I gave a ruby of the value of 

60.000 rupees to Parwiz, and another raby with two 
single pearls, worth about 40,000 rupees, to Kburram. 
On Monday, the 28th: Jagann&tb was promoted to the 
rank of 5,000 personal and 3,000 horse, and on the 8th 
of Rajab, R&y J&y Singh was promoted to that of 4,000 
penmnal and 3,000 horse, and was dismissed £or service 
in the Deccan. On Thursday, the 9th, Prince Sbahriyiir 
from Oujarat came and waited on me. On Tuesday, the 
4th, I despatched my son Paruaz on the service of con- 
quering the country of the Deccan. He was pre.sente<l 
with a robe of honour, a special horse, a s^iecial elephant, 
a 8\Vord, and a jewelled dagger. The Sardai's and Aiaii's 
who uerc appointed with him each according to his 
condition received and were made happy with the favour 
of a horse, ii robe of honour, an elephant, a sword, and 
a jewelled dagger. I apixiiiited 1,000 ahadis to be in 

* i ProlMbly th» meaning lu that ha was a horn 

idiot. 



PROHIBITION OF SPIRITS. 


157 


attendance on Parwiz for the service of the Deccan. On 
the same day a representation came from 'Abdu-llah Khan 
that having pursued the rebel Rana into the hill country 
into rough places, he had captured several of his elephants 
and horses. When night came on he had escaped with 
difiSculty with his life. As he had made things go hard 
with him, he would soon be taken prisoner or killed. 
I promoted the said Kb&n to the rank of 5,000 personal, and 
a rosary of pearls, worth 10,000 rupees, was given to Parwiz. 
As 1 had given the province of Khandesh and Bcrar to 
the said son, I also conferred on him the fort of Asir, 
and 300 horse were sent with him to be given to ahadis. 
mansabdars, and whomever else he might consider worthy 
of favour. On the 26th, Saif Kh&n Bftrha was given 
the rank of 2,500 personal and 1,350 hoi*se, and appointed 
to tike faujdarship of the Sarkar of Hisar. On Monday, 
the 4^h Sha*bRn, an elephant was given to Wazir Kb&n. 
On Briday, the 22nd; I gave an order that as baivg and 
baza (rice spirit) were injurious, they should not be sold 
in the bazars and that gambling should be abolished, 
and on this subject 1 issued stringent oidcrs. On the 
25th they brought a tiger from my private menagerie to 
fight with a bull. Many people gathered together to see 
the show, and a band of Jogis (religious mendicants) 
auth them. One of the Jogis was naked, and the tiger, 
by way of sport, and not with the idea of rage, turned 
towards him. It threw him on the ground and began to 
behave to him as it would to its own female. The next 
day and on several occasions the same thing took place. 
As no such tiling had ever been seen before and was 
exceedingly strange, this has been recoitled.* On the 
2nd of the month of Ramaspftn, at the request of Jsl&m 

* The mory i* also told in tlie IqliOl-niiiui, n. 87, wh&rt it is sukl that 
tlM tiger WM one brooght by a ealenclor ee a preeent. It hod the nsm 
of Lni KbAn ami woe very uma It is added that the tiger did .no 
inhiry to the jogi with his ciaws or teeth. 



158 APPOINTMENTS. POETRY BY JAHANGIR. 


Kh&n. ^ Kb&n was promoted to the rank of 1,600 

personal and 800 horse. Farldlin Kh&n Barl&s was pro- 
moted to the rank of 2,500 with 2,000 horse. One 
thousand tdclux ot gold and silver and 1,000 rupees 
were given in aims on the day of the procession of the 
sun into the constellation of the Scorpion, which, according 
to the general acceptation of the Hindoos, is called the 
Sankrant. On the 10th of that month an elephant was 
presented to »^&h Beg Yuzi * (? the panther-keeper), and 
Salamu-llah, the Arab, who is a distinguished young 
man and a relative ^son-in-law ?) of Mubarak, the ruler 
of Darful.^ On account of some suspicion that Sb&h 
'Abbas had entertained against him, he came to wait 
upon me. 1 pationised him, and gave him the rank of 
400 personal and 200 horse. Again, another force, con- 
taining 193 mansabdars and 46 ahadis, I sent after 
Parwiz for service in the Deccan. Fifty horses were also 
entrusted to one of the servants of the Court to convoy 
to Parwiz. 

On Friday, the 13th, a certain idea came into my mind, 
and this rhymed ghazal was produced : — 

** What shall I do, for the arrow of loss of thee has pierced my Kvei * 

So that the (evil) eye not reaching me again may reach another ? 

Thou movest as if frenzied, and Uie world is frenzied for thee. 

I bum rue lest thy ey^ .should reach me. 


^ The MSS. have ‘In&yat. 

• I.O. MS.'No. 181, 8b&h Beg lyi&n. 

’ SaUmu-llah is mentioned later on (p. 78), and is descrilwd as 
brother's son of Mub&rak, who held the country of Jptra(?) and Darfnl. 
He is also mentionedin the IqhfthnAma, p. 38. where Muhirak is described 
ae ruler {k&kim) of JUyza and SafUl (?). But a MS. of the Iqb&l>nania in 
.my possession only mentions JCyza or. JOyna. I think jQyza must be 
Juina or Juanny, which, accordii^ to Sir William Jones, is one of the 
names of the island of Johanna or Hinzuan (one of the Gomorro Islands), 
and that Solal must be Sofala, a town on the east coast of Africa. 
.Sir W. Jones was landed on Johanna, and has a long account of the 
island (see )ii.s works). The Iqbkl-ntaia says that SaUmu-llah killed 
himself with drink, ^ere is a short notice of him in the Ma'usir, ii, 641, 
where ho is called by his title of ShsiA'at Khiln. 



1CA.RRUGE OF 8HAH JAHAN. 


169 


I mm frensied at union ith rny friend, and in despair at her absence. 

Alas for the grief that has o’erwhelmed me ! 

I Ve grown mad that I may rush on the pathway of meeting : 

Woe for the time that brought me the news ! 

Jah&ngir, the time for humility and prayer is every morning,* 

I hope that some B}iark of light may take effect.*’ 

On Sunday, the 15th, 1 sent ‘50,000 rupees as scLcluiq 
to the house of the daughter of Mu^ifar Husain Mirza, 
son of Sult&n Husain MirzR, son of Bahram Mirza, son of 
Sh&h Isma'il ^fawi, who had been demanded in marriage 
for my son Khurram. On the 17th of -.the month Mubarak 
Kh&ii Sarwani was honoured with the rank of 1,000 
personal and 300 horse. Five thousand rupees were also 
given to him, and 4,000 rupees to Haji Bi tJzbeg. On 
the 22nd a ruby and a pearl were given to Shahriy&k 
One hundred thousand rupees were given for the sub- 
sistence of the Oym&qs (special cavalry) who had been 
appointed for service in the Deccan. Two thousand 
rupees were ^ven to Farrukh Beg, the painter, who is 
unrivalled in the age. Four thousand rupees were sent 
for expenditure on Baba Hasan Abdal. One thousand 
rupees were handed to MullR 'All Ahmad Muhrkan 
(engraver) and Mulla Rfizbih&n Shirazi to expend on 
the anniversary festival of Hazrat Shaiidi Salim at his 
mausoleum. An elephant was given to Muhammad 
Husain, the writer, and 1.000 rupees to liJ^waja *Abdu-l- 
Haqq An^H. I gave orders to the Diwans that having 
raised the rank of Murtaza IChau to 5..000 personal and' 
horse they should give him a jagir. I ordered Bih&ri 
Chand Qftnfmgu, of the Sarkar of Agra, to take 1,000 
footmen and equipment from the Zamindars of Agra, 
and, fixing their monthly pay, to send them to Parwiz 
in the Deccan, and 500,000 rupees more weire fixed for 
the expenses of Parwiz. On Thursday, the 4th »^awwal, 

* The LO. MSS. have a different reading here. InRteiid of 'every 
morning’ they have 'renew (humility).’ The word nSr, 'light,* in the 
last line probably refer* to .TahAngIr’s name of NQra-d-dfn. 



160 


ECLIPSE OF THE MOON. 


Isl&m KbAn was promoted to the rank of 5,000 personal 
and 5,000 home, Abu-l-wali Beg Uzbeg to that of 1,500 
and Zafar KhAn to tliat of 2,500. Two thousand rupees 
were given to Badi*u-z-zamlin, son of Mirza ShAhrukh. 
and 1,000 rupees to Path&n Misr. I ordered that drums 
should be given to all of them as their rank had been 
raised to 3,000 and higher. Five thousand rupees more 
of the money from my weighing wei-e entrusted for the 
construction of a bridge at B&bA Hasan Abda and the 
building that is there to AbA-l-wafA, son of Hakim Abu-1- 
fatb, in order that he might exert himself and put the 
bridge and the aforesaid building in pei-fect order. On 
Saturday, the 13th, when four gharis of day were left, 
the moon began to be eclipsed. By degrees the whole 
of its body was obscured, and it continued till five gharis 
of night had passed. In order to avert the bad omen 
of this I had myself weighed against gold, silver, cloth, 
and grain, and gave away in alms all kinds of animals, 
such as elephants, horses, etc., the cost of all of which 
was 15,000 rupees. I ordered them to be distributed 
among the deserving and the poor. On the 25th, at the 
request of lier father, I took the daughter of R&in Chand 
Banclilab into iny service (i.e. married her). 1 gave an 
elephant to Mir FAzil, nephew of Mir gharif, who had 
been appointed to the faujdarship of Qabulah and those 
regions * Inayat-ullah was dignified with the title of 
*lnayat Khan. On Wednesday, the Ist Zi-l-qa‘da, Bihari 
Chand was granted the rank of 500 personal and 300 
hoi*se. A khapwu (dagger), adorned with jewels was 
given to my son BalA Khurram. Mulla Hayati, by 
whom I had sent a me.saage to the KbAnkhAnAn, with 
a verbal message containing (expressions of) all kinds 'of 
condescension and affection, came and brought before me 
a ruby and two pearls of the value of about 20,000 
nipces, which the Khtok[mii&n had sent by him. Mir 
Jainalu-d-din ilasain, wlio was in Burhonpur and whom 



XHlN JAHAN LODI SENT TO THE DECCAN. 161 


I had sent for, came and waited on me. I presented 
Sbaj&'at Kh&n Dakhani with 2,000 rupees. On the 6tb of 
the aforesaid month, before Parwiz arrived at Burhanpur, 
a petition came from the Khankhanan and the Amirs 
that the Dakhanis had assembled together and were 
making disturbances. When I discovered that, notwith- 
standing the nomination of Parwiz and the army that 
had pi*oceeded with him and been appointed to his 
service, they were still in need of support and assistance, 
it occuri'ed to me that I should go myself, and by Allah’s 
favour satisfy myself with regard to that affair. In the 
meanwhile a petition came also from Asaf Kb&n that 
my coming thera would be for the advantage of the 
daily-increasing State. A petition from ‘Adil Kh&n, from 
Bijapur, also came, that if one of the trusted ones of the 
Couii could be appointed there to w^hom he could tell 
his desires and claims, so that the envoy might convey 
them to me, he hoped that it might become the means 
of atfoidiiig profit to these slaves (i.e. himself). On this 
account I consulted with the Amirs and loyal men, and 
told them to represent whatever entered into anyone'.^ 
mind. My sou Kb&n Jah&n represented that inasmuch 
as so many Amii*s had been despatched for the conquest 
of the Deccan, it was not necessary for me to go m 
person. If he were ordered, he himself would go and 
attend on the prince and would, please God, perform this 
duty while serving him. Those woids were approved of 
by all those who were loyal. I had never conteinplateii 
separation from him, but as the affair was an important 
one 1 Jieoessarily gave him permission, and ordei*ed that 
as soon as matters had been arranged he should return 
without delay, and should not remain more than a year 
in those regiona On Tuesday, the 17th Zi-l-qa*da. he 
was free to ga I presented him with a apodal gold- 
embroidered robe of honour, a spcnrial horse with a 
1 1 jewelled saddle, a jew-elled sword, and a special elephant 



162 


ARRAKOEHENT FOR EXPEDITION. 


I also gave him a yak-tail standard (tHindn fUgihy 1 
appointed Fida Kb&n, who was one of my faithful 
servants, and to whom I gave a robe of honour and 
a horse and his expenses, promoting him to the rank of 
1,000 personal and 400 horse, original and extra, to go 
with Khan Jahan, in order that if it were necessary to 
send anyone to ‘Adil Kh&n according to his request, 
he might despatch him. Lanku Pandit, who in the time 
of the late king Akbar had come with offerings from 
*Adil Khan, I also gave leave to go with lUian Jahan, 
bestowing on him a horse, a robe of honour, and money. 
Of the Amirs and soldiers who had been appointed with 
'Abdu-llah lOian to the duty of beating back the Rana, 
men such as Raja Bir Singh Deo, Shiya'at lLh&n> Raja 
Bikramajit, and others, with 4,000 or 5,000 horse, were 
nominated to support Khan Jah&n. I sent Mu‘tamad 
Kban with the announcement that I had made him a 
^zdwal (i.e. one who urges on others), and that he 
was to act along with Kh&n Jah&n in UJjain. Out of 
the men of the palace, I sent 6,000 or 7,000 horse with 
him, such as Saif Kb&n Barha, Haji Bi fTzbeg, Salamu- 
Hah 'Arab, brother’s son of Mub&rak 'Arab, who had 
in his possession the proWnce of Jutra(?)^ and Darful(?) 
and that neighbourhood, and other mansabdars and 
courtiers. At the time of giving them leave I gave 
each one an increase of rank and robe of honour and 
money for their expenses. Making Muhammad Beg pay- 
master of the army, I provided him with 1,000,000 rupees 
to take with him. I sent to Parwiz a special horse, 
and to the Khankhanan and other Amirs and officers who 
were appointed to that Subah dresses of honour. 

After carrying out these matters I left the city for the 
purpose of hunting. One thousand rupees were given to 

* See note above. JQtra or Jotra is probably a mistake for the 
inland of Johanna, i.e. Hinzuan. DarfOl is UazfOl in 1.0. MS. No. 181. 



HUNTINU, 


163 


Mir 'All Akbar. As the Rabi' FasI (Spring season) had 
arrived, for fear any damage should happen to the 
cultivation of the ryots from the passage of the army, 
and notwithstanding that I had appointed tL qUrladwul ^ 
(Erskine has Kor, the Yasawal) (probably a kind of provost 
marshal) with the band of ahadis for the purpose of 
guarding the fields, I ordered certain men to see what 
damage had been done to the crops from stage to stage 
and pay compensation to the ryots. I gave 10,000 rupees 
to the daughter of the Khankhanan, the (vife of D&niyal, 
1,000 rupees to 'Abdu-r-Rabim Khar (i.e. ass) for expenses, 
and 1,000 to Qaclia the Dakhani. On the 1 2th, Kb&njar 
Khan, brother of 'Abdu-llah Kbau, received the rank of 
1,000 personal and 500 horse original and extra, and 
Bahadur Kb&n, another brother, that of 600 personal and 
^00 horse. On this day two antelopes with horns and one 
doe were taken. On the 13th I bestowed on and sent to 
Kban Jah&n a special horse. Having promoted Badi'u-z- 
zaman, son of Mirza Sh&hrukh. to the rank of 1,000 and 
500 horse, I gave him 5,000 rupees for expenses, and he 
was sent off with Khan Jahta for service in the Deccan. 
On this day two male and three female antelope were 
killed. On Wednesday, the 10th, I killed a female nUgdw 
and a black antelope with a gun, and on the 15th a female 
nilgaw and a chikdra (gazelle). Oh the 17 th of the month 
two rubies and a pearl were brought to me by Jah&ngir 
Quli Khan from Gujarat, as well as a jewelled opium box, 
which Muqarrab Kban had sent from the port of Cambay 
On the 20th I killed with a gun a tigress and a nilgaw. 
There were two cubs with the tigress, but they disappeared 
from view in consequence of the thickness of the jungle 
and the number of trees. An order was given that they 
should search for and bring them. When I reached the 

* PoMibly Q&r Yn^diKni is right, but most probably it wom a JioMAunU 
attached to the Qur, for which see Blochmann, p. 50. 



164 JAHANGIR’S CRUELTY TO HIS SERVANTS. 

halting-place my son Kburram brought me one of the cubs^ 
and the next day Mah&bat O&n . caught the other and 
brought it. On the 22nd, when I had got within shot of 
a nilgaw, suddenly a groom (jUauddr) and two haJidr 
(bearers) appeared, and the nilgaw escaped. In a great 
rage I ordered them to kill the groom on the spot, and 
to hamstring ^ the kahars and mount them on asses and 
parade them through the camp, so that no one should 
again have the boldness to do such a thing. After this 
I mounted a horse and continued hunting with hawks and 
falcons, and came to the halting-plaoe. 

Next day, under the guidance of Iskandar Mu*in, I shot 
a large nilgaw, and promoted him to the rank of 600 
personal and 500 horse. On Friday, the 24th, ^fdar 
Khan, who had come from the Subati of Behar, had the 
good fortune to perform his obeisance to me. He presented 
as offerings a hundred muhrs, a sword, and five female and 
one male elephant. The male elephant was accepted. On 
the same day Yadgar Khwaja of Samairkand came from 
Dalkh and paid his respects. He made offerings of an 
album, some horses, and other presents, and was dignified 
with a robe of honour. On Wednesday, 6th ^i-l-bijja, 
Mu‘izzu-l-mulk, who l\ad been removed from the pay- 
iiiasterslnp of the army against the rebel R&n&, ill and 
miserable, waited on me. On the 14th of the said month, 
having pardoned all the faults of 'Abdu-r-Rahim Khar* 
I promoted him to the rank of yilzhafhl (centurion) and 
20 horse, and oixlered him to go to Kashmir and in 


* .Jahuiigir's conduct was Hutficiently bratal, but the text has made it 
worse t!)an it was by omitting the word pay before jsrfy. The back tendons 
of the betirei'K* feet were cut. Their feet were not cut off. Erakine 
translates the iMssage rightly, and the I.O. MSS. agree with him. 

* Thin was the same *AlNlu i'-K(diim who was a companion of Hhueran, 
and after his capture was sweated in a skin. Ai^ nc had life left in him 
he escaped from that destruction, and, on iieing released, became one of 
the personal servants, and served His Majesty till by degrees tlie latter 
became gracious to him. |Note of Sayyid Alt mud.) 



NEW YEAR CELEBRATIONS. 


165 


company with the bakhshi of that place hold a muster 
of the troops of Qilij Kb&n and all the jagirdars and 
Uymaks in the service or not, and to bring the list. Kishwar 
son of Qutbu-d-din Khan, came from the fort of 
Bohtas and had the good fortune to pay his respects to me. 


The Fifth New Year’s Feast from the Auspicious 
Accession. 

On Sunday, the 24th Zl-l-bUja (20th Mai*ch, KilO). after 
two watches and three gharis the sun entered into the 
constellation of Aries, which is the house of lionour and 
good fortune, and at this auspicious hour the New Year's 
feast was arranged at Bak Bhal, one of tlie viJiagt.^s of 
the parganah of B&ri, and according to the rules of triy 
revered father I mounted the throne. On that morning, 
which was the New Year’s Daj’' that lighted up the 
world, and coincided with the 1st of Farwardin of the 
5th year from my accession, I held a public reception, 
and all the nobles and servants of the Court had the 
good fortune to pay their respects. Some of the nobles’ 
offerings were laid before me. Khan A'zain gave a pearl 
worth 4,000 rupees; MirAn l^dr Jahan, twenty-eight 
hawks and falcons, and other gifts ; MaliAb<it KbAn. 
two European boxes, the sides of which were made with 
slabs of glass, so that whatever was placed inside could 
be seen from outside in a w'ay that you miglit say 
there was nothing betw^een them ; Ki^iwar Khan, 
twenty-two male and female elephant-s. In (he .same 
way each of the servants of the Court laid before me 
the presents and offerings that they had. Nasru-llah, 
son of Fathu-llah sb^Fbatchl (in charge of the whorbat), 
w''as plactnl in charge of the offerings. By Sarsng* Peo. 
w'ho had Nm'U apixiinted to carr}' orders to the victorious 
aimy of the Deccan. 1 sent souvenirs {h^urruk) to 



166 


HUNTIKO VISIT TO BUPBA6. 


Parwiz and to each of the oiRcers. I presented 
^u 8 & 1 nu-d•din, son of Qb&zi BadaU^ii, who had 

taken to the ways of a dervish and seclusion, with 1,000 
rupees and a farjl shawl. The day after the New Year’s 
I>ay I mounted and started for a tiger-hunt. Two males 
and a female were killed. I gave rewards to the 
ahadis who had shown bravery and gone in to the 
tigers, and increased their monthly pay. On the 26th 
of the same month I went and busied myself mostly with 
hunting nilgaw. As the air was hot and the (propitious) 
hour for re-entering Agra had nearly arrived, I went 
to Rupbas, and hunted antelope in that neighbourhood 
for some days. On Saturday, the Ist Mubarram, 1019, 
ROp Khaw&gg. who was the founder of ROpb&s, presented 
the offering that he had prepared. That which pleased 
was accepted and what remained was given him back 
as a reward. At the same time Bayazid Mankali and 
his brothers, who had come from the Subah of Bengal, 
were honoured with paying their respects. Sayyid Adam, 
son of Sayyid Q&sim Bftrha, who had come from 
Ahmodabad, also had the same good fortune. He pre- 
sented an elephant as an offering. The faujdarship of 
the Subah of Multan was given to Wall Bi iTzbeg in 
place of Taj Khan. 

On Monday, the 3rd Mubarram of the 5th year, I halted 
at the Mandakar Garden, which is in the neighbourhood of 
the city. On the morning on which was the auspicious 
hour of entry into the city, after a watch and two gharis 
had passed I mounted and rode on a horse to the 
beginning of the inhabited part, and when I came to 
the immediate neighbourhood mounted on an elephant, 
'SO that the people from far and near might see, and 
scattering money on both sides of the road, at the hour 

' Qhftsi Ki^n WM one of the famone officers of Akher. MiisSm his 
sun wss married to AbO-l-fa^rs sister. See Blochaann, p. 440. 



OAXE-BOOX. PRESBHTS FROM SURAT. 


167 


that the astrologers had chosen, after midday had passed, 
entered with congratulation and happiness the royal 
palace. In accordance with the usual c^8tom of the 
New Tear I had ordered them to decorate the palace, 
which is like the courts of heaven. After seeing the 
decorations, KhwAja Jahia laid before me the offering 
that he had prepared. Having accepted out of the 
ornaments and jewels, dresses and goods, whatever 
I approved of, I gave the rest as a reward to him. I had 
ordered the clerks of the hunting department to write 
out (a list of) all the animals that hAd been killed from 
the time of my leaving until I re-entered the city. At 
this time they represented that in 56 days 1,362 animals, 
quadrupeds, and birds had been killed ; the tigers were 
7 in number; nilgaw, male and female, 70; black buck, 
51 ; does and mountain goats and antelope (rojk), etc., 82 ; 
kulang (cranes); peacocks, and other l»ni^ 129 ; 

6sh. 1,02S. On Friday, the 7th, Muqanab SbAn came 
from the ports of Cambay and Surat, and had the honour 
of waiting on me. He had brought jewels and jewelled 
things, and vessels of gold and silver made in Europe, 
and other beautiful and uncommon presents, male and 
female Abyssinian slaves, Arab horses, and things of all 
kinds that came into Jus 'mind. Tlius his presents were 
laid before me for two and a . half months, and most of 
them were pleasing to me. On this day ^fdar KbAn, 
who held the rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horse, hi^ 
an increase of 500 personal and 200 horse, and was 
presented with a standard, and given leave to return 
to his former jagir. Standards were also given to 
Kisbwar KbAn uid FarldOn* KbAn BarlAs. A 6gbting 
elephant for Af^ SbAn (Abh-l-fa^l’s son) was handed 
over to his son Bi^htan, to take to his father. I bestowed 

' Bmimini docks. 

* A too of Akbwr’s odkor, Mohsmaiad Qott Barlls (BlodUMaii. 
pp. 348 sod 478). 



168 


▲N ILLUlCtNAtED MS. AN ASSEMBLY. 


1»000 rupees on Sbw&ja Husain^ a descendant of Khw&ja 
Mu‘inu-d-dln Chightli as was usual for thS half-year. 
The Ehankhanan had sent as an offering a Yusuf and 
ZulaikM” in the handwriting of Mull& Mir 'Ali,^ with 
illustrations and in a beautiful gilt binding, worth 1,000 
muhrs. This Ma^fum, his Wakil, brought and submitted. 
Up to the day of culmination, which is the conclusion 
of the New Tear’s feast, every day many offerings were 
laid before me by the Amirs and servants of the Court. 
Whichever of the rarities was approved of by me I accepted, 
and gave back what was left. On Thuraday, the 13th, 
corresponding to the 19th Farwardin, which is the day 
of culmination of the sun and of gladness and pleasure, 
I ordered them to prepare an entertainment of different 
kinds of intoxicating drinks, and an order was given 
to the Amirs and servants of the Court that everyone 
might choose the kind of drink he affected. Many took 
wine and some mufarrik (exhilarating drinks), whilst 
some ate what they wished of the preparations of opium. 
The assembly was successfully held. Jah&ngir Quli Khan 
from Gujarat had sent as an offering a throne of silver, 
inlaid and painted, of a new fashion and shape, which 
was presented to me. A standard was also conferred on 
Mah& Singh. In the commencement of my reign I had 
repeatedly given orders that no one should make eunuchs 
or buy or sell them, and urhoever did so would be 
answerable as a criminal. At this time Af^l Kb&n sent 
some of these evildoers to Court from the Subah of Behar, 
who were continually perpetrating this vile offence. 
I ordered these unthinking ones {bU*dqibatdn) to bo 
imprisoned for life. 


‘ Mir *AU wvi a famoun calligraphor. See Hieu, Cat., ii, 531. Can 
the copy mentioned by Jahangir be that in the Bodleian Library, which 
Sir \V. Jonev pratved so highly? A writer in the Journal of the Moslem 
Institute for January-March, 1007, p. 1S6. auggetU that the copy i« in 
the Bankipur Library. 



STB^OE DEATH. 


169 


On the night of the 12th an uncommon and strange 
event took place. Some Delhi angers (Qawwalan, see 
Jarrett, ii, 236) were singing songs in my presence, and 
Sayyidi * Sb&h was, by way of buffoonery, mimicking a 
religious dance. This verse of Amir Kbusntu was the 
refnun (miy&n-Utana) of the song — 

** Each nation has its right road of faith and its shrine 

I’ve set up my shrine (qMa) on the path of him with the cocked cap.” 

I asked what was the real meaning of the (last) 
hemistich. Mull& *Ali Ahmad,* the seal engraver, who 
in his own craft was one of the first of the age, and 
had the title of Khalifa, and was an old servant, and 
with whose father I had learned when 1 was little, came 
forward and said, have heard from my father that 
one day Shaikh Nidmu-d-din Auliy& had put his cap 
on the side of his head, and was sitting on a terraced 
roof by the bank of the Jumna and watching the 
devotions* of the Hindus. Just then Amir Kbosrau 
appeared, and the Shaikh turned to him and said, ‘Do 
you see this crowd,* and then he recited this line : — 

* Each race hM its right rosd of faith and its shi ino * (qibla-gfthi). 
The Amir, without hesitating, respectfully did homage to 
the Shaikh, and addressing him said — 

* I *ve set up my shrine in the direction of him with the cocked cap.”' * 

The aforesaid Hull&, when these words were uttered, 

and the last words of the second hemistich passed over 
his tongue, became senseless and fell down. Conceiving 

* The Iqb&l-nima, p. 41, has SbsyySdl, *a dervish, a hypocrite,’ aiid 
the R.A.S. MS. has Sayyidi Sbayyid. SbsyySd is used at p. 60 to 
mean an im|ioator. Here, perhaps, it would mean a huSbon. 

* *A1I Ahmad’s father was 9bs>kb Husain. See Bkiohmann, p. 93. 

* It was the bathing of the Hindus that the saint was watching. 

* The point of Amir IQiusrau’s hemistich is that Atp-kn/dA literally 
means *the awiy cap,’ and so refers to the saint, who had his cap 
on his ear or on the side of his head. But It also means one who is 
presumptuous, and has left the true path of religion. It also means, 
according to Steingass, a Ijeloved person. 



170 


GIFTS OF ELEPHANTS. 


a great fear from his falling down, I went to his head. 
Most of those who were present doubted whether he 
had not had an epileptic fit. The physicians who were 
present distractedly made inquiry and felt his pulse and 
brought medicine. However much they beat their hands 
and feet and exerted themselves, he did not come to. 
Immediately he fell he had delivered his soul to the 
Creator. As his body was quite warm, they thought 
that possibly some life might be left in him. After 
a short time it became evident that the thing was all 
over and he was dead. They carried Iiim away dead 
to his own house. I had never seen this kind of death, 
and sent money to his sons for his shroud and burial, 
and the next morning they sent him to Delhi and buried 
him in the burial-place of his ancestors. 

On Friday, the 21st, Kii^war KhAn, who held the rank 
of 1,500, was promoted to 2,000 personal and horse, and, 
having been presented with an Iraq horse out of my 
private stable, a robe of honour and a private elephant, 
named Bakht-jit,^ and the Faujdarship oi the country 
of Uch, was dismissed with a view to the punishment of 
the rebels of that region. Bayazid Mankali, haying been 
honoured with a robe and a horse, was sent oft* together 
with his brothers in the company of Ki^war Kb&u. An 
elephant iroro iny private stud, by name *Alam-gum&n, 
was entrusted to Habibu-llah for R&ja M&n Singh and 
sent. A special horse was sent to Bengal for Kegho Dds 
MAru,^ and a female elephant was now given to ‘Arab 
Khan, the jagirdar of Jalalabad. At this time Iftikhar 
Khan had sent an offering of a rare elephant from Bengal. 
As 1 approved of it, it was entered among my private 
elephants. I raised the rank of Ahmad * Beg Kb&D> who 

> I.O. MS. ISl hs8 Tmibi-i-baikt CThrane of fortane). 

Kedio Das was perhaps the lather of Karainsl, one of Akbar*s wives. 
See Blochmann, p. 310. 

> Blochmann, |i. 465. 



XAUKAB’S HISBEHiiVIOVR. 


171 


Had been nominated to the command of the army of 
Bangash on account of his good service and that of his 
sons, from his original rank of 2,000 personal and 1,500 
horse by 500 more personal. I sent a gold throne^ of 
jewelled work for Parwis, and a earplch, which was of 
rubies and pearls, and made at a cost of 2,000 rupees, 
was sent for Kh&n Jahan by the hand of ^abib, son of 
Sarbar&h Kb&n, to Burhanpur. At this time it became 
known that Kaukab, son of Qamar Kbftn, had become 
intimate with a Sanyasi, and by degrees his words, which 
were all blasphemous and impious, made an impression 
on that foolish fellow. He had made ‘Abdu-l-Latif, son 
of Naqib Sb^n, and Sharif, his cousins, partners in 
that error. When this affair was discovered, with only 
a slight frightening they revealed certain circumstances 
with regard to themselves, the relation of which would 
be extremely disgusting. Considering their punishment 
advisable, I imprisoned Kaukab * and Sb^Hf after giving 
them a whipping, and ordered *Abdu*l-Latff a hundred 
lashes in my presence. This special chastisement (was 
given) for the purpose of carrying out the Divine law in 
order that other ignorant persons might not be disposed 
towards the same actions. On Mmday, the 24th, Mu*a^m 
Kb&n was despatched to Delhi to punish the rebels and 
disaffected of that neighbourhood. Two thousand rupees 
were given to Sb^j&'at Kb&n Dakhani. I had ordered 
Shaikh i^usain Dar^iani to proceed with certain firmans 
to Bengal and presents to each of the Amirs of that 
Subah. I now gave him his orders and despatched him. 
With an eye on his actions and his approved services, 
I promoted Isl&m Kb5n to the rank of 5,000 personal and 
horse, and bestowed on him a special dress of honour. 


> qii. s signet? 

* Kaukab ia mentioned again at the end of the twelfth year. Tor 
notice of hie father see Bkichinann. fi. 4S.S. 



172 


A WIDOM^*S COMPLAINT. 


I gave a special dress of honour also to Ki^war KhAn, 
and presented Raja Kalyan with an Iraq horse, and 
similarly to the other Amirs there were given robes of 
honour or horses. Faridfin Barlas, who held the **ank 
of 1,500 personal and 1,300 horse, 1 promoted to 2,000 
personal and 1,500 horse. 

On the night of Monday, the 1st Safar, through the 
carelessness of the servants, a great fire occurred in the 
house of Khwaja Abu-l-basan, and before they became 
aware of it and the fii'e could be put out many of his 
properties were burnt. In order to afford consolation 
to the mind of the Khwaja and to make up for the loss 
he had sustained, I gave him 40,000 rupees. On Saif 
Khan Barha, who had been cherished and biought up 
by me, I bestowed a standard. I increased the rank of 
Mu4zzu-l-mulk, who had been appointed to the Diwanship 
of Kabul, from his original of 1,000 personal and 225 
horse by 200 peraonal and 275 horse, and dismissed him. 
The next day I sent a phiU-katara (dagger) studded 
with valuable jewels to Burhanpur to Kbftn JahAn. 

A widow woman complained that Muqarrab Kb&n had 
taken her daughter by force in the port of Cambay, and 
after some while, during which he had kept her in his 
own house, when she enquired for the girl had said tliat 
she had died by an unavoidable death. I ordered an 
enquiry to be made into the affair. After much search 
I discovered that one of his attendants had been guilty 
of this outrage, and had him put to death, and reduced 
Muqarrab KhAn’s mansab by one half, and made an 
allowance to the woman who had been thus injured. 

As on Sunday, the 7th of the month, a qirdn-i-nahsin 
(an unlucky conjunction) had occurred, I gave alms of 
gold and silver and other metals, and different kinds of 
cereals, to facprs and indigent people to be divided in 
most parts of the dominion. On tli«% night of Monday, 
the 8th, having sent for Shaikh Husain Sirhindi and 



RELIGIOUS DANCE. PATNA OUTBREAK. 


173 


Shaikh MustafA, who were celebrated for the adoption of 
the ways of dervishdom and the state of poverty, a party 
was held, and by degrees the assembly engaged warmly 
in sama* and wajd (dervish dancing and ecstasy). 
Hilarity and fren:^ were not wanting. After the meeting 
was over 1 gave money to each and gave him leave. As 
MirzA QhAzi Beg TarkhAn repeatedly made representations 
with regard to provisions for Qandahar and the monthly 
pay of the musketeers of the said fort, I ordered 200,000 
rupees to be sent there from the treasury of Lahore.^ 

On the 19th Urdibihisht, in the fifth year of my reign, 
corresponding with the 4th Safar, there occurred a strange 
affair at Patna, which is the seat of government of the 
province of Behar. Af^l KbAn, the governor of the 
Subah, went off to the jagir to which he had just been 
appointed, and which was at a distance of 60 kos from 
Patna, and handed over the fort and the city to the 
charge of Shaikh BanArasi and dbiyAs Zain-khAni, the 
Diwan of the Subah, and to a number of other nian- 
sabdars. With the idea that there were no enemies 
in that region he did not satisfy himself as he should 
have with regaitl to the protection of the fort and 
city. By chance, at that time .an unknown man of 
the name of Qutb belonging to the people of Uch, who 
was a mischievous and seditious fellow, came to the 
province of Ujjainiyya,- which is in the neighbourhood of 
Patna, with the look of a dervish and the clothes of 
a beggar, and having made acquaintance with men of that 
part, who were always seditious, represented to them 
that he was Khusrau, who had escaped from prison 
and conveyed himself there; saying that if they would 
accompany and assist him, after the affair had been 
completed they would be the ministers of his State. In 


' Elliot, vi, .'J21. 
njjAiiiiyya here means BhojpQr. 



174 


PATNA OUTBREAK. 


short, deceiving those simpletons with foolish words he 
brought them over to him and persuaded them that 
he was Sbusrau. He showed those deceived ones the 
parts about his eyes, where at some time he had produced 
scars, of which the marks were still apparent, and told 
them that in the prison they had fastened cups (iaforf) 
on them and those were the marks.^ Through these 
falsehoods and deceit a number of foot- and horsemen 
had collected round him, and had obtained information 
that A{xa1 Kb&n was not at Patna. Considering this 
a great opportunity, they made a raid, and when two 
or three hours of the day had passed on Sunday came to 
the city, and being hindered by nothing went for the fort. 
Shaikh Ban&rasl, who was in the fort, obtaining news of 
this, went in a disturbed state to the gate of the fort. 
The enemy, who came on with speed, did not give him 
time to close the gate of the fort. Together with Qhiy&8f 
he betook himself to the side of the river by a wicket 
gate, and procuring a boat proposed to go to Af^al KbAn. 
Those rebels came with ease into the fort and took 
possession of Af^l KhAn’s property and the royal 
treasury ; and some of those wretched creatu^ who wait 
on events, who were in the city and its neighbourhood. 


' Apparently we may infer from this that Joh&ngir did blind or 
attempt to blind his eon Kboerau, though he says nothing about it. 
Else why should this impostor pretend that he hod marks of the 
blinding? Tavernier says Sbwau was blinded. Du Jarric also tells 
us that Jahftnglr blinded Sbusraa on his way back from Kabul, when 
he came to the place vhere hJiasrau hod fought the battle. He was 
blinded by some juice of a plant being fioared into his eyes. The 
juice resembled milk (qu. Unpkorbia). One of his captains, who was 
also a judge, was likewise blinded there along with his son. W. Finch, 
too, s|[jeaks of this outbreak. He also says that Kbusrau was reported 
iio have been blinded on the battleheld with a glass. Another story 
was thht Jahftnglr merely caused a handkerchief to be tied over hie eyes 
and hod it sealed -with his own seal. It is mentioned in Whiteway*s 
**Rise of the Portuguese Power in India,*' p. 105, note, that fifteen 
relatives of the King of Ormus hod been blinded by r^-hot bowls having 
been passed close to their eyes. 



PATNA OUTBREAK. 


175 


joined them. This news reached Af^l Kb&R Rt Gorakhpur 
(KbarRkptlr),^ and Sbail^ Ban&rasi and Qbiy&» also came 
to him there by way of the river. Letters came from 
the city that this wretch, who called himself Kbusrau, 
was in reality not Kbusrau. Af^l Kh&n. placing his 
trust on the grace and mercy of Allah, and through my 
good fortune, started without delay against those rebels. 
In live days he reached the neighbourhood of Patna. 
When the news of Afzal lUi&n’s coming reached those 
scoundrels, they entrusted the fort to one of those whom 
they had confidence in, and the horse and foot arraying 
themselves went out for four kos to meet Af^l Kh&n. 
A tight took place on the bank of the river PUn Pun, 
and after a slight skirmish the array of those ill-fated 
ones was broken and they became scattered. In great 
bewilderment a second time that wretch wa.s coming into 
the fort with a few men. Af^al Kk&n followed him, 
and did not allow them to close the gate of tlie fort. 
Going to Af^l Sb&n’s house in a state of confusion, they 
fortified the house and remained there for three watches, 
and fought. They wounded about thirty people with 
arrows. Aftei his companions had gone to jahannam 
(hell) he himself became helpless, and. asked for quarter, 
and waited upon Af^l Kh&n. In order to put a stop 
to this aflTair, Afzal Khftn executed him on the same day. 
and imprisoned some of his companions who hod fallen 
alive into his hand. These items of news one after 
another reached the royal ear. I summoned to Agra 
Shaikh Banarasi and QbiyfiR Zain-khAni and the other 
mansabdars who had made default in holding the fort 
and protecting the city, and ordered their hair and beards 

' IQianikpar. The woiU Is written Gocmkbpur in eome MSS., hat 
1 think it is clear that Kharskpar is the piece meant, for ^Abda-rRehmAn 
had lately got SangrAm's estate of Khaimkpar io Jagir. The fact, too, 
that he fought with the impoetor at the Mn POn to the east of Patna 
.shows that he wa.s coning bock from down the Oangea 



176 


DEPUTATIOIT OF HUSAIN INJO. 


to be cut off, and that they should be clothed in women's 
clothes, seated on eases, and paraded round the city of 
Agra and in the bazars, as a warning and example to 
others. 

At this time representations succeeded each other from 
Parwiz and the Amirs appointed to the Deccan and those 
who were well-wishera of the State, that ‘Adil Khftn 
Bijapfirl prayed that they would send to him Mir Jam&lu-d* 
din Husain lujO, on whose words and acts all the ralera 
of the Deccan had great reliance, that he might associate 
himself with them and dispel the fear in their minds, and 
tlie affairs of that place might be arranged as it might 
seem proper to ‘Adil Sb&n, who had chosen the way of 
loyalty and service. In any case, he might drive out of 
their minds the fear that was in them, and soothing them 
might give him hopes of the royal favour. In older 
to obtain this end, on the 16th of the same month 
I despatched the above-mentioned Mir, giving him a prasent 
of 10,000 rupees. I increased the former rank of Qasini 
iy.i&n, which was 1,000 personal and 600 horse, by 600 
personal and horse, in order that he might go to the 
support of his brother Isl&m Sbiln in Bengal; At the 
same time, in order to punish Bikramftjit, Zimindar of 
the province B&ndha,^ who had withdrawn his foot from 
the drcle of obedience and service, I appointed Mah& 
Sinj^, grandson of R&ja M&n Singh, to proceed to put 
doum the disaffection in that region and at the same time 
administer the estate of the jagir of the Baiia, which was 
in that neighbourhood. 

On the 20th of the month I gave an elephant to 
Sbaj&'at Dakhani. As the governor of Jalalabad 

had written and represented the minous state of the fort 
of that place, I ordered what might be required for the 
repair of the said fort to be taken from the tieasuiy of 


Test wTougly be* Misdhu. 



PBOMOnOllS. AOCOVMT OF BLACK THJtONB. 177 


Lahore. Iftikhar SbSn had done approved service in 
Bengal. On the request of the governor of that Subah 
I increased his original rank, which was 1,500, by 600. 
On the 28th a representation came from *Abdu-llah 
FirOz-iang, containing recommendations in favour of 
some of the zealous servants who had been sent with 
him to subdue the rebel Bana. as Qhaznin Kbhn J&lwail 
had shown the greatest zeal of all in this service, 
1 increased by 500 personal and 400 horse his former 
rank, which was 1.500 personal and 300 horse. In the 
same maimer each one of those persons was promoted 
accmtding to his servicea 

Danlat Kb&n> who had been sent to Allahabad to bring 
the throne of black stone, came on Wednesday, the 4th 
of the month of Mihr {15th September, 1610), and had an 
audience and brought the stone safe and sound. In truth 
it was a wonderful slab, very black and shining. Many 
say it is of a species of touchstone ; in length it was one* 
eightii less than four cubits, and in breadth 2^ cubits 
and one whilst its thickness may be three taall, 

I ordered stone-cutters to carve suitable couplets on the 
sides of it. They had attached feet to it of the same kind 
of stone. I often sat on that throne. 

As the brothers of Kbkn 'Alain became security for him, 
I brought out of prison ‘Abdu-s-Subh&n Kbkn, who was 
in confinement for certain ofiences, and promoted him to 
the rank of 1,000 personal and 400 horse, and appointed 
him to the faqjdarship of the Subah of Allahabad, and 
gave him the jagir of QHsim Kb&n, the brother of Isl&ni 


* A ttuiil, or f/iMu, in aaid in Wilnoirs tilosMiry to lie the 24th pert 
of a or about a third of an inch. I.O. MS. nuiken the breadth 
^ cubits 1 tasu. The slab is described in Keene's Citiule niul in the 
N.W.P. Gazetteer, Agra volume. One inscription ha*< the date 1011, 
or 1002. Archaeological Re|iort, Iv, p|>. J32-fh saye it is 10ft. T^iiif. 
long. Oft 10 ins. broad, and 6 inches thick. It is supported on octagonal 
pedestals. See also Beale’s Mitialiu-t*tawir1hh, pp. 300, 301, u'here 
12 a representation of the stone and copies of the inscriptions are given. 



178 APPOINTMENTS. ACCOUNT OF KHXNKHZnXN. 

£han I sent Tarbiyat ]^ban to the faujdarship of the 
Sarkar of Alwar. On the 12th of the same month 
a- representation arrived from Khan Jahan that the Khan- 
khanan, according to my order, had started for the Court 
in company with Mahabat Klian, and that Mir JamAlu-d- 
din Husain, who had been nominated by the Court to 
go to Bijapur, had also gone from Burhanpur, together 
with the wakils of *Adi] Oan, to Bijapur. On the 2l8t 
of the same month I promoted Murta^ Sbto to the 
subadarship of the Panjab, which is one of the largest 
charges in my dominions, and gave him a special shawl. 
Having appointed Taj Kb&u, who was in the Subah of 
Multan to the govemorshin of Kabul, 1 added 500 horse 
to the rank of 3,000 personal and 1,500 horse already 
held by him. At the request of 'Abdu-llab Sh&n Firuz- 
jang, the son of Rd.n& Shankar was also promoted in rank. 
When Mahabat Kbw, who had been sent to Burhanpur 
to ascertain the numbers of the forces of the Amirs 
appointed to the Deccan, and to bring the Khankhanan, 
arrived in the neighbourhood of Agra, he left the Khan- 
khanan some stages off the city and came on in fiont 
himself, and was honoured with the good fortune of 
paying his respects and kissing the threshold. After 
a few days, on the 12th Ab&n, the Khankhanan came and 
waited on me. As many of those who were loyal had 
represented the state of his affairs whether true or false, 
according to their ideas, and I was displeased with him, 
because the degree of favour and regard that I previousl> 
had observed in his case and that I had seen in my 
revered father had not produced its effect, I did justice in 
the matter, for previously to this a letter of appointment 
to the service of the Deccan for a certain time had been 
given to him, and he had proceeded there in attendance 
on Sult&n Parwiz with other nobles for that important 
matter. After he arrived at Burhanpur he liad not 
looked to the opportuneness of the time, and at an 



khInkhanIn’s misbehaviour. 179 

improper season for moving, and when forage and other 
necessaries had not been laid in, he had taken Sult&n 
Parwiz" and his forces above the Ghats, and by degrees, 
in consequence of want of concert among the Sardars and 
his treachery, and of conflicting opinions, things had come 
to such a pass that grain was obtained with difficulty, 
and not a vidn was to be got for large sums of money. 
The affairs of the army became so confused that nothing 
went on properly, and horses, camels, and other four- 
footed beasts died. In consequence of the exigency of 
the time he had patched up a kind of peace with the 
enemy and withdrawn Sultan Parwiz and the army to 
Burhanpur. As this business did not turn out well, all 
the well-wishers of the State knew that this diWsion (of 
counsels) and confusion had arisen from treachery and 
want of arrangement of the Khankhanan, and repre- 
sented this to the Court. Although this appeared 
altogether incredible, at last this impression was left 
upon my mind, and a representation came from Kb&n 
Jahan to the effect that all this mischief and confusion had 
arisen through the treachery of the Khankhanan ; either 
this service should be left entirely in his conti*ol, or, 
summoning him to Court, 1 should appoint to this duty 
this man whom I had myself cherished and brought up, 
and appoint 30,000 horse to support this slave (Kb&n 
Jahan himself), in order that in the space of two years, 
having freed the whole of the royal pravince, now in 
the possession of the enemy, and having brought the fort 
of Qandahar' and other forts on the border into the 
occupation of the servants of the Court, he should include 
in the royal dominions the province of Bijapur. If he 
did not complete this service in that time, he might' be 
debarred from the good fortune of paying his respects 
(to me) and wolild not show his face to the servants of 


’ A fort iQ the Deooen "eizty miles north of Bider*' (Elliot, vi, 70). 



180 APPOINTMENTS. SULTAN XHURRAM’S MARRIAGE. 


the Court. When the relations between the Sardars and 
the Khankbanan reached this point, I did not consider it 
advisable for him to be there any longer, and handed 
over the command to l^an Jahan and sent for him to 
Court. In reality the cause of my disinclination and 
want of favour to him was this. The degree of inclination 
and disinclination towards him in future will be in 
accordance vrith whatever may become clear. 

I favoured and promoted Sayyid 'Ali Barha, who is 
one of our distinguished young men, with an increase of 
500 personal and 200 horse beyond his previous rank, 
which was 1 ,000 personal and 500 horse, and gave Darab 
Khan, son of the Khankhanan, the rank of 1,000 personal 
and 500 horse, with the Sarkar of Ghazipur as his jagir. 
Previously to this I had had the daughter of Alirza Muzaffar 
Husain, son of Sultan Husain Mirza Safawi, ruler of 
Qandahar, betrothed to my sou SultAn Khurram, and on 
this date, the 17th Aban, as the marriage meeting had 
been arranged, I went to the house of Baba Khurram and 
passed the night there. I presented most of the Amirs 
with robes of honour. Some of those confined in the 
fort of Gwalior 1 released, and especially Haji Mirak. 
Islam Khan had collected 100,000 rapees from the Uuilim 
^diiectly managed) parganahs. As he was at the head 
of the army and the service, I handed this over to him 
as a present. Giving a little gold and silver and sotnc 
of every kind of jewellery and grain to trustworthy men, 
I fletermined that they should distribute them to the 
poor of Agra. On the same day a report came from 
Khan Jahan that Iraj, the son of the Khankhanan, had 
obtained leave from the prince, and according to ordei*s 
Ik* had despatched him to Court. With regard to what 
had been ordered in the case of Abu-l-fath> of Bijapur, 
is the above-mentioned was an cxiierienced man, and 
hi* being s;ent would cause despair to the other Sarxlars 
of the Deeeaii whom promises had been made, he 



KESHO BAS. AHMABNAGAR. 


181 


had (therefore) kept him under surveillance.^ An order 
had been sent that as Ke^o Das, the son of Ray Ealah (?), 
was in the service of Parwiz, if any impediment should 
occur in sending him, he (Khan Jahan) should despatch 
him whether he wished it or not. Immediately on this 
becoming known to Parwiz, he gave him leave and said to 
Khan Jahan : ** These few words from my mouth thou wilt 
represent, that as I would give my existence and liie for 
the service of my visible God (Jahangir), what is there 
in the being or annihilation of Kesho Das * that I should 
show any resistance in sending him ? When they (i.e. the 
king) send for my confidential servants for any reason it 
produces a feeling of hopelessness and disquietude of mind 
in the rest, and becoming known in these regions gives 
an idea of disfavour on the part of our lord and Qibla 
(place looked towards in worship). As for the rest, it 
is His Majestj's order.” From the date on which the, 
fort of Ahmadnagar, by the efforts of my <leceased 
brother Daniyal, came into the pos.sessiou of the heads 
of the victorious State, up till now, the guardianship and 
preservation of that place had been entrusted to Khwaja 
Beg Mirza Safawi, wno was a relative of the asylum of 
pardon Shah Tahmasp. After the disturbance of the 
rebel Deccanis went to a great length, an<l they Ix^sieged 
the said fort, he had committed no fault in the duties 
of devotedness and holding of the fort. When the Khan- 
khanan and the Amirs and other leaders who had 
assembled at Burhanpur in waiting on Parwiz devoted 
themselves to the driving back and defeat of the rel>els, 
and from the differences of opinion and quarrels of the 
Amirs, and the absence of provision of forage and grain, 


' So in MSS. A[>|tfirently Khan Jahari’a roeariirif' was that if thiri 
Deccani man were aent to Agra (a«« if to be puninhed) the other Deccani 
leadens would be diecouraged. 

- The text »eemii corrupt. Apparently I.O. MS. ha^ Sargala, and this 
may have liecn Ke^ho Dis'i title. 



182 BTJRBENDER OF AHMABNAGAR. HUNTING. 


those who looked after matters of importance brought 
this large army into improper roads and among hills and 
difficult passes, they in a short space of time rendered 
it wretched and impotent, and matters had come to such 
a pass and the difficulty with regard to grain was such 
that they were giving a life for a loaf. They then tmned 
back helplessly with their objects unfulfilled. The garrison 
of the fort, who were expecting aid from this army, on 
hearing this news, lost heart and stability, and tumultuously 
wished to vacate the fort at once. When Khwaja Beg 
Mirza became aware of this he endeavoured to soothe 
and quiet the men, but though he did his best it had 
no good result. At last, under an agreement, he vacated 
the fort, and proceeded to Burhanpur, and on the day 
mentioned waited on the prince. Representations with 
regard to his coming reached me, and, as it was ciear 
that he had hot been wanting in bravery and loyalty, 
I ordered his rank of 5,000 personal and horse to be 
confirmed and a jagir to be given him. On the 9th 
a petition came from some of the Amirs in the Deccan 
that on the 22nd Sha*b&n Mir Jamalu-d>din Husain had 
gone to Bijapur. *Adil Khan sent his wakil forward for 
20 koB, and himself received him at a distance of 3 kos, 
and took the Mir by the same road to his own I'esidence. 

As the desire to hunt overcame me, at a propitious 
hour determined by the astrologers, when a watch and 
six gharis had passed on the night of Friday, the 
15th Kama^An, corresponding with the 10th A^r in 
the 5th year (of my reign), I started to hunt, and made 
my first halt in the Dahrah Garden, which is near the 
city. At this stage I gave Mir *Ali Akbar leave to go 
into the city after bestowing on him 2,000 rupees and 
a special warm wrapper Qargul), In order that the grain 
and cultivation should not be trodden down by my men 
I ordered that all should remain in the city but the 
men who were actually wanted and my personal servants. 



ECUP8E. MISMAKAOEIIENT IN DECCAN. 168 


Having entrusted the charge of the city to Khwaja Jahan 
I gave him Jbis leave. On the 14th Sa*du-llah Oan, eon 
of Sa'id Khan, was given an elephant. On the 28th, corre- 
sponding with the 21st Bama/An, forty-four elephants, 
which H&shim Kb&n, son of Qasim Khan, had sent as an 
offering from Orissa, were produced before me. Of these 
one was very good and tame ; this one I put in my private 
stud. On the 28th an eclipse (of the sun, kumlf) took 
place, in order to do away with the unluckiness of which 
I weighed myself against gold and silver; it came to 
1,800 tolas of gold and 4,900 rupees. This, along with 
several kinds of vegetables and sorts of animals such as 
elephants and horses and cattle, I ordered to be divided 
among deserving people who were unprovided for and 
helpless poor of the city of Agra and other cities in the 
neighbourhood. 

As the affairs of the army which had been nominated 
for the subjugation of the Deccan under the command 
of Parwiz, and leadership of the Khankhanan and other 
high Amirs such as R&ja Man Singh, Khan JahAn, Asaf 
Khan, the Amiru-I-nmam, and other mansahdars, and 
other leaders of every tribe and condition, had ended in 
this, that they had turned back from half-way and returned 
to Burhanpur, and all the confidential servants and news- 
writers who spoke the truth had sent in reports to the 
Conrt, that although there were many causes for the rum 
of this army, yet the chief reason was the disagreenfent 
of the Amirs, especially the treachery of the Khanknanaii, 
it came into my mind that I must send Khan A*zam 
with another fresh and powerful army to make amends 
for and set to rights some of the improper proceedings 
that had arisen fiom the disagreement of the Amirs that 
has been described. On the 11th of Day he (Khan A'zam) 
was honoured with the charge of this duty, and an order 
was given to the Diwans to make preparations and send 
him eff quickly. I appointed Khan *AIam, Faridun KhAn 



184 APPOlNTUKNt OF KHiN HUNTING. 


Barlas, Ytlsuf Khan, son of Husain Khan Tukriyah, *Ali 
IQi&n Niyazi. Baz Bahadur Qalm&q, and other mansabdars, 
near to the number of lO.OOO horse, to accompany him. 
It was settled that in addition to the ahadis who were 
appointed to this dutv 2,000 others should accompany 
him, making altogether 12,000 horse. Having sent with 
him thirty lakhs of rupees and several elephants, I gave 
him his leave and presented him with a magnificent dreas 
of honour, a jewelled sword-belt, a horse with a jewelled 
saddle a private elephant, and 500,000 rupees foi expenses. 
An order was given that the chiefs of the civil department 
should recover this from his jagir. The Amirs who were 
under his orders were honoured with robes of honour, 
horses, and presents 1 increased by 500 more horse the 
rank held by Mah&bat Kban, of 4,000 personal and 
3,000 horse, and ordered him to conduct Khan A'zarii 
and this army to Burhanpur, and having enquired into 
(the circumstances of) the destruction of the army, should 
give the order of the appointment of the Khan A*^m 
to the Amirs of those regions and make them of one 
purpose and counsel with. him. He was to see the state 
of preparation of the army of those parts, and after 
arranging all matters should bring the Khankhanan 
with him to Court. On Sunday, the 4th Shawwal. when 
near the end of the day, I engaged in a cheetah hunt. 
I had determined that on this day and Thursdays no 
animals should be killed and I would eat no meat, on 
Sunday especially because of the respect my revered father 
had for that day in not being inclined to eat flesh on it, 
and in forbidding the killing of any animals for the 
reason that on the night of Sunday his own honoured 
birth had taken place. He used to say it was better 
on that day that all animals should be free from the 
calamity of those of a butcherly disposition. Thursday 
is the day of my accession. On that day also I ordered 
that animals should not be killed, so that whilst sporting 



ENCOUNTER WITH A TIGER. 


185 


I should not shoot an arrow or a gun at wild animais. 
In hunting with cheetahs Anup Ray, who is one of my 
close attendants, was heading the men wlio were with 
him in the hunt at a little di tance ^ from me and cainc 
to a tree on which some kites were sitting. When his 
sight fell on those kites he took a bow and some pointless 
arrows (tukicd) and went towards them. By chance in the 
neighbourhood of that tree he saw' a half-eaten bullock. 
Near it a huge, powerful tiger got up out of a clump 
that was near and went off. Though not more than two 
gharis of day remained, as he knew my liking for tiger- 
hunting, he and some of those who were with him 
surrounded the tiger and sent some one to me to give 
me the news. When it reached me I rode there at onc<^ 
in a state of excitement and at full speed, and Baba 
Khurram, Ram Das, I'timad Ray, Hayat Khan, and one 
or two others went with me. On arriving I saw the 
tiger standing in the shade of a tree, and wished to 
fire at him from horseback but found that iiiy horse 
was unsteady, and dismounted and aimed and fired iii}' 
gun. As 1 was standing on a height and the tiger below, 
I did not know whether it had struck him or not. In 
a moment of excitement I fired the gun again, and I think 
that this time I hit him. The tiger rose and charged, 
and wounding the chief huntsman, who had a falcon 
on his wrist and happened to be in front of him, sat 
down again in his own place. In this state of affairs, 
placing another gun on a tripod,* I took aim (majrd^ 

‘ Pdra ddrtar, but it woula mem from the Ma'&Hir, ii, 231, five lines 
from foot, that pdm, or bdra, is a word meaning a body of men. 
Perhaps it is hdmA, * twelve.* 

* At p. 236 we have the phnuie majrd ylrand applied to the directing 
ol cannon against the buildings of Fort Ranthambhor. I confess that 
I do not know whether JahSngir fired the gun that was on the stand or 
the one that Kamfil loaded. 

'' Majrd tjiriftaw seeans rather to mean here 'adjusted the tri|>od,’ 
for from what follows it appears that the gun was not then loaded. Tlie 
Iqh&l-nama, p. 47, has md^ha rd tfr hard, 'applied the match *(?). 



186 


SUBJECT COBTlNUEb. 


giriftam). An6p R&y stood holding the rest, and had 
a sword in his belt and a baton (Imtaka) in his hand. 
B&bft Sburram was a short distance off to my left, and 
B&m D&s and other servants behind him. Eam&l the 
huntsman (qardvml) loaded the gun and placed it in 
my hand. When I was about to fire, the tiger came 
roaring towards us and charged. I immediately fired. 
The ball passed through the tiger’s mouth and teeth. 
The noise of t^e gun made him very savage, and the 
servants who had ci*owded together could not stand his 
charge and fell over one another, so that I, through 
their pushing and shock, was moved a couple of paces 
from my place and fell down. In fact, I am sure that 
two or three of them placed their feet on my chest and 
passed over me. I'tim&d RAy and the huntsman Kam&l 
assisting me, I stood up. At this moment the tiger made 
for those who were on the left-hand side. Antip R&y 
let the rest slip out of his hand and turned towards 
the tiger. The tiger, with the same activity wdth which 
he had charged, turned on him, and he manfully faced 
him, and struck him twice with both hands on the head 
with the stick he had in his hand. The tiger, opening 
his mouth, seized both of Anup Ray’s arms with it, and 
bit them so that his teeth passed ilirough both, but the 
stick and the bracelets on his arms were helpful, and 
did iiQt allow liis arms to be destroyed. From tlie attack 
and pushing of the tiger Aiifip R&y fell down bc^tween 
the tiger’s fore-feet, so that his head and face were 
opposite the tiger’s chest. At this moment Baba Kburrain 
and Rain Das came up to the assistance of Anup R&y. 
The prince struck the tiger on the loins with his sword, 
and R&in D&s also struck him twice with his sword, once 
on the shoulder-blade. On the whole it was very warm 
work, and Ilayat Khan struck the tiger several blows 
over the head with a stick he Imd in his liand. Anfip R&y 
with force dttigged his arms out of the tiger’s mouth 



SUBJECT CONTINUED. 


187 


and struck him two or three times on the cheek with 
his fist» and rolling over on his side stood up by the 
force of his kneea At the time of withdrawing his 
arms from the tiger’s mouth, as his teeth had passed 
through them, they were partly tom, and both his paws 
passed over his shoulder When he stood up, the tiger 
also stood up and wounded him on the chest with his claws, 
so that those wounds troubled him for some days. As the 
ground was uneven, they rolled over each other, holding 
on like two wrestlers. In the place where I was standing 
the ground was quite level. Anup B&y says that God 
Almighty gave him 90 much intelligence that he bore 
the tiger over deliberately to^ one side (in the original, 
that side), and that he knew no more. At this time the 
tiger left him and was making off. He in that state of 
bewilderment raised up his sword and followed him and 
struck him on the head. When the tiger turned his face 
round, he struck him another blow on the face, so that 
both his eyes were cut, and the skin of the eyebrows, 
which had been severed by the sword, fell over his eyes. 
In this state of affairs, a lamp-man of the name of Salih, 
as it was time to light the lamps, came in a hurry and 
by a blind chance ^ came across the tiger. The tiger struck 
him one blow with his paw and knocked him down. 
To fall and give up his life were the same thing. Other 
people came in and finished the tiger’s business. As Anup 
Ray had done this service to me and I had witnessed the 
way in which he offered his life, after he had recovered 
from the pain of his wounds and had the honour of 
waiting on me, I bestowed on him the title of Anira’i 


' ApiMireiitly the meaning ie that he rolled the tiger over to the sido 
fortheat from Jahangir. 

* Kfkragl, The Iqb&l-n&ma, p. 4S, snya the night wan dark, and so 
tlie lam|dighter hlindly (oz kiirayl) fell upon (he tiger aiwl was kilM. 
Thie tiger hunt and JahAiigIr's danger, etc., are deerrihed by Willieit 
Finch (Purchas, i, 430). 



188 


FISHING. 


Singh-dalan. Anira'i^ they call in the Hindi language 
the leader of an army, and the meaning of Singh-dalan 
is a tiger-slayer. Giving him a special sword of my 
own, I Increased his mansab. I gave Khurram, son of 
Khan A'zam, who had been appointed to the governorship 
of the province of Junagadh, the title of Kamil Khan. 
On Sunday, the 3rd Zi-I-qa'da, I employed myself in 
fishing, and 766 fish were caught; these were divided 
in rny presence among the Amirs, Ibachkidn (?),* and most 
ot the servants.' I eat no fish but those that have scales, 
but not because the professors of the Shiah faith look 
on those without scales as unlawful, but the cause of 
my aversion is this, that I have heard from old men, 
and it has become known to me by experience as well, 
that fish without scales eat the fiesli of dead animals and 
fish with scales do not eat it. From this cause, to eat 
them is contrary to my disposition. The Shiahs know-* 
why th«‘y do not eat them and for what reason they 
consider them unlawful. One of my home-bred camels 
that was with me in the hunt carried five nilgaws that 
weighed 42 Hindustani maunds. I had Ixjfore tins sent 
for Naziri of Nishapur, who excelled other men in the 
art of poetry, and passed his time in Gujarat as a merchant. 
At this time he came and waited on me, and imitating 
a poem of Anwari, 

“ A»j;iin, what youth and heauty this is for the world !** 

laid before me a poem that he had composed on me. 
I presented him with 1,000 rupees, a horse, and a robe 
of honour as a gift for this poem. I had also sent for 
Hakuii Hamid Gujarati, wlioin Murtaza Khan greatly 


' Anikini means an army in Sanskrit and Rai is .*% title meaning 
leadership. 

- Text, Zantjrhiyan I.O. IHl has Itttichkiyiliu i.e. people of the 
lltnrhki-khutui or closet. Sec Ayin, Persian text, i, 42, and Blochmann, i, 46. 
'* This; is said ironically. 



HAKiM HAMIB. MORE HUNTIMQ. 


189 


praised, and he came and waited on me. His good 
qualities and purity were better than his doctoring. He 
waited on me for some time. When it became known 
that there was no physician but himself in Gujarat, and 
I found he himself desired leave to go, I gave him and 
his sons 1,000 rupees and some shawls, and set aside 
a whole village for his maintenance ; be went off to his 
native place quite happy. Yusuf son of Husain 

l^an Tukriyah, came from his jagir and waited on me. 
On Thursday, the 10th Zi-l-hijjR> was the festival of the 
Qurban (the sacrifice of Ishmael) As it is forbidden to 
take life on that day (Thursday), I ordered that on the 
Friday they should kill the sacrificial animals. Having 
sacrificed three sheep with my own hand, I mounted to 
go hunting, and returned when six gharis of night had 
passed. On this day was killed a nilgaw (commonly called 
blue bull) of the weight of 9 maunds and t35 seers. The 
story of this nilgaw is written because it is not devoid of 
strangeness. In the two past years, during which I had 
come to this same place to wander about and hunt 1 had 
shot St him each time with a gun. As the wounds were 
not in a fatiU place, he had not fallen, but gone off. This 
time again I saw that nilgaw. in the hunting-ground 
(^ikdrydh), and the watchman recognized that ir the 
two previous years he iiad gone away wounded. In short, 
I fired at him again three times on that day. It was in 
vain. I pursued him rapidly on foot for three kos, but 
however much I exerted myself T could not catch him. At 
last I made a vow that if this nilgaw fell 1 would have his 
flesh cooked, and for the soul of Khwaja Mu'iiiu-d-din 
would give it to eat to poor people. I also vowed a muhr 
and one rupee to iny revered father. Soon after this the 
nilgaw became worn out with moving, and I ran to his head 
and ordered them to make it lawful (cut its throat in the. 
name of Allah) on the spot, and having brouglit it to the 
camp I fultillcd my voW iis I had proposed. They cooked- 



190 


SHOOTING OF NILGAI. 


the nilgaw» and expending the muhr and rupee on sweets. 
I assembled poor and hungry people and divided them 
among them in my own presence. Two or three days 
afterwards I saw another nilgaw. However much I exerted 
myself and wished he would stand still in one place, so that 
I might fire at him, 1 could get no chance. With my gun 
on my shoulder I followed him till near evening until it 
was sunset, and despaired of killing him. Suddenly it 
came across my tongue, Khwaja. this nilgaw also is 
vowed to you.’' My speaking and his sitting down were 
at one and the same moment. I fired at and hit him, and 
ordered him, like the first nilgaw, to be cooked and given 
to the poor to eat. On Saturday, the 19th Zi-l-bijja, I fished 
again. This time about 830 fish were caught. On the 
night of Wednesday, the 28th^ of the same month,! encamped 
at RupbAs. As this was one of my fixed hunting-places 
and there was an order that no one should hunt in the 
neighbourhood, a great number of antelope had come 
together in the desert there, so much so that they came 
into the inhabited parts and were not subject to any kind 
of molestation. I hunted for two or three days in those 
desert plains, and shot, and hunted with cheetahs many 
antelopes. As the hour for entering the city was near, 
making two halts on the way, I alighted on the night of 
Thursday, the 2nd Muharram, in the year 1020 (17th March, 
1611), at the garden of *Abdu-r-Razzaq Ma'muri, which is 
near, in fact close to, the city. On this night many of the 
servants of the Court, such as Sbwaja Jahan, Daulat 
]^an, and a number who had remained in the city, came 
and waited on me. Iraj also, whom I had sent for from 
the Subah of the Deccan, had the honour of kissing the 
threshold. I stayed in that garden also on the Friday. 
On that day ‘Abdu-r-Razz&q presented his own offerings. 
As this was the last day for hunting, an order was given 


^ The text htm 14th night, bat I follow the LO. MS. ISl. 



OAM£*BAG. ENTRY INTO AGRA 


191 


that the duration of the hunt and the number of animals 
killed should be counted up to me. The time of the hunt 
was from the 9th of the month of A^r to the 29th 
Isfandarmuz of the 5th year, or three months and twenty 
days. In this time tigei-s 12, deer {gdwzan) 1, citikdrah 
(gazelle) 44, kiUdh-pdcha (hog-deer) 1 head, fawns 2 head, 
black buck 68 head, does 31 head, foxes 4, kurdtu deer 8, 
pdtcU (?) 1, bears 5, hyienas 3, hares 6, nilgaw 108, fish 
1,096. eagle 1, bustard 1 peafowl 5, herons 5, partridges 5, 
brahmini dnckf {sturk/idb) 1, mras 6, dhtk (?) 1 ; 
total, 1,414. 

On Saturday, the 29th Isfandarmuz, corresponding to 
the 4tl\ MuUarram, I mounted an elephant and went to the 
city. From the garoen of ‘Abdu-r-Razzaq to the palace 
the distance is a kos and 20 tandb. I scattered 1,500 rupees 
to the crowd. At the fixed hour I entered the palace. The 
bazars had been decorated with cloths after the manner of 
the New Year’s feast. As at the hunting-time an order had 
been given to Kh w&ja Jahan to prepare in the MahaU 
(Zenanah) a building fit for me to sit in, the said 
had in the ^pace of three months prepared and brought to 
perfection this kind of lofty building, and with folded 
hands (in humility) had done exceedingly active work. 
Coming off the dust of the road I entered that Paradise- 
like building and went to look round that abode, and it 
was very much to my taste. Ow&ja Jah&n was dignified 
with much praise and commendation. The offerings he had 
prepared were displayed to me in the same building. Some 
of these were approved and accepted and the remainder 
presented to him. 

The Sixth New Year’s Feast after mv auspicious 

Accession. 

Two gharis and forty seconds of day had passed on the 
Monday when the sun (lit bis honour the greatest star) 
entered his tower of honour, which is in the constellation of 



192 


SIXTH TEAR. APPOINTMENTS. 


Aries. Thai day was the Ist Farwardin, corresponding 
with the 6th Mubarram^ (2l8t March, 1611). The feast of 
the New Year having been prepared. I seated myself on the 
throne of good fortune. The Amirs and all the servants of 
the Court enjoyed the good fortune of waiting on me and 
gave their congratulations. The offerings of the servants 
of the Court Mir&n Sadr Jahan, 'Abdu>llah Sban Firuz< 
jang, and JahAngir Quii KbAn, were laid before me. On 
Wednesdays the 8th Mubarram, the offering of Raja Kaly&n, 
who had sent it from Bengal, was laid before me. On 
Thursday the 9th of the same month, ghaja'at KhAn and 
some of the mansabdara, who had come on summons fh>m 
the Dcccan, waited on me. I gave a jewelled waist- 
dagger to RazzAq-wirdi Uzbcg. On the same day the New 
Year’s offering of MurtazA KhAn was laid before me. He 
had prepared all kinds of things. Having inspected all 
these, 1 took what I approved in the shape of valuable 
jewels, fine cloths, elephants, and horses and gave back the 
rest. I presented a jewelled dagger to Abu-l-fath Dakhani, 
3.000 rupees to Mir ' Abdu-llah, and an Iraq horse to Muqim 
KhAn. I increased the rank of Shaja'at Khan, which was 
1 ,500 personal and 100 horse, by 500 personal and horse. 
I had summoned him irom the Deccan for the purpose of 
sending him to Bengal to IslAm Khan, in reality to take his 
place pennaneiitly, and I entrusted him with the charge 
of that Subah. Kbwaja Abu-l-hasan laid before me 
(as offerings) two rubies, one royal pearl, and ten rings. 
I gave traj, the son of KhankhAnAn, a jev^elled dagger. 
The rank of Khurram was 8.000 personal and 5,000 
horse ; 1 increased his personal allowance by 2,000, and 

* .TahAngfr does nor mention that it was in this year that he married 
Nar Jahan. He saw her on New Year's Day (IqlAl-numa, p. 56). and it 
np()ears from a note of Jah&ngir on p. 1S2 of B.M. MS. Or. 3276 that he 
married her on I4th Khui*dad (end of May, 1611). It was in the 11th year 
that she got the title of Nilr- Julian. Before that she was known aa 
Ndr-Mahall. It would seem that .Jahungir married Xilr -Jaluin four 
years and a few days after her first husband s death. 



SHAH Abbas' embassy. 


193 


increased that of Kb^aja Jah&n, which was 1,600 personal, 
1,000 horse by 500 personal^ 200lior8e. On 24th Muharram, 
1 8th Farwardin,the day of the ascendant, T&dg&r *A]i Sult&n, 
ambassador of Sh&h 'Abbfis, ruler of Persia, who had come 
on a visit of condolence on the death of the late king and 
with congratulations on my accession, had the honour of 
waiting on me, and laid before me the gifts ghah 'Abbas, 
my brother, had sent. He had brought good horses, cloth 
stuffs, and every kind of fitting present After he had 
presented the gifts, on the same day I gave him a superb 
robe of honour and 30,000 rupees, which were equivalent 
to 1,000 Persian tumans. He handed me a letter in which 
were mingled congratulations and condolences for the death 
of my revered father. As in the letter of congratulation 
he expressed the greatest friendship, and omitted no point 
of regard and concord, it has pleased me to enter here an 
exact copy of it. 

Copy of the letter of §}idh * Abbas, 

May the sprinklings of the cloud of the grace of God 
and the dropping of the favour of the Almighty impart 
freshness to the gardens of wonderful men and inventors 
(of new things) ! May the dower-bed of sovereignty and 
rule and the mead of magnificence and exalted happiness 
of his Honour of heavenly dignity, of sun-like grandeur, 
the king whose fortune is young, of Satum-like majesty, 
the renovmed prince, possessing the authority of the spheres, 
the Khedive, the world-gripper (Jah&ngir) and country- 
conquering sovereign, the prince of the exaltedness of 
Sikandar, with the banner of Darius, he who sits on the 
throne of the pavilion of greatness and glory, the possessor 
of the (seven) climes, the increaser of the joys of good 
fortune and prosperity, adomer of the gardens of happiness, 
decorator of the rose-partene, lord of the happy ^n- 
13 junction (of the planets), the opener of the countenance. 



194 


LEITER FROM SHAH ^ABBSS. 


the perfection of kinghood, expounder of the mysteries of 
the sky, the adornment of the face of learning and in- 
sight, index of the book of creation, compendium of human 
perfections, mirror of the glory of God, elevator of the 
lofty soul, increaser of good fortune and of the beneficent 
ascension, sun of the grandeur of the skies, the shadow of 
the benignity of the Creator, he who has the dignity of 
Jamsiiid among the stars of the host of heaven, lord 
of conjunction, refuge of the world, river of the favours of 
Allah, and fountain of unending mercy, verdure of the 
plain of purity, may his land (lit. surface) be guarded from 
the calamity of the evil eye ; may his fountain of perfection 
be preserved in truth, his desire and love ; the tale of his 
good qualities and benevolence cannot be written. 

** * The pen has not the tongue to ezpreee the secret of love.’ 

Although outwardly the distance (between us) prevents my 
attaining to the ka'bah of desire, yet he is the qiblah of 
my keen longing for spiritual intercourse. Thank God that 
by virtue of essential oneness this humble supplicant and 
that pure nursling of gloiy have in reality been united to 
one another. The distance of space and outward separation 
of the body not having prevented nearness of soul and 
.spiritual union, my face is still towards friendship, and 
accordingly the dust of sorrow has not settled on the sun- 
like mirror of my mind, but it has received the reflection 
of the beauty of that exhibitor of perfection, and the 
olfactory of my soul has been ever scented with the sweet 
savour of friendship and love and the ambergris-perfumed 
breezes of affection and concord, and spiritual fellowship 
and perpetual union have rubbed off the rust from 
friendship. 

** * I sit beside thee in thought, and my heart is at ease, 

For this is an union not followed by separation’s pain.* 

Praise be given to the most mighty and pure God that 
the plant of the desire of true friends hath borne the fruit 



CONTINUATION OF LETTEH. 


19S 


of fruition. Success (maq^d), that beauty who for years 
was hidden behind the veil/ has by dint of humility and 
supplication at the throne of the Almighty, come forth and 
manifested herself f i*om the hidden bridal chamber, and 
a ray of perfection has been thrown on the plain of the 
hopes of the expectants; she has ascended the auspicious 
throne and seated herself beside the king who adorns the 
assembly and enhances the glory of the tribune of the king 
of kings. The world-opening standard of the Caliphate 
and rule, and the sky-scraping umbrella of justice and 
world-sway of that creator of the diadem and throne, and 
that opener of the knots of knowledge and wisdom have 
cast the shade of equity and sovereignty and mercy over the 
heads of the inhabitants of the world. My hope is that the 
chief of desire-granters may make the auspicious ascension 
of that blessed rising of fortune brighten the crown and 
illuminate the throne, making it of good omen and 
prosperous to all, and may the things that appertain to 
kingship and rule uf the world and the causes of dignity 
and prosperity be ever on the increase ! For long past the 
customs of amity and the ways of intimacy, which have 
been in existence between our ancestors, and now freshly 
have been re-established between this one who is bent on 
friendship and him who is intent on equity, demanded tliat 
when the good news of the accession of him who sits on 
the GQrgAni throne and is the heir of the crown of Timur 
reached this country, one of the confidants of the royal 
palace should be quickly nominated to convey congratu- 
lations, but inasmuch as the business of AurbijAn and the 
conquest of the province of just then occurred, and 

until my loving mind waa satisfied as to the affairs of that 
province, Z could not return to my capital, some delay 
took place in the accomplishment of this important duly. 
AJthough outward ceremonial observances and politenesses 
have not much weight with people of knowledge and 
discernment, yet the observance of them is the observance 



196 


CONTINUATION OF LETTER. 


of the dues of friendship. Of necessity, therefore, at this 
auspicious time when the attention of the servants of 
holy angels (?) has been withdrawn from the affairs of 
that province, which have been arranged in accordance 
with the desires of my well-wishers, and I am at ease in 
that quarter, I have returned and settled down in my 
capital of Isfahan, which is the permanent seat of i*ule. 
Therefore I have despatched KamAlu-d-din Yadgar 'Ali, 
who poasesses the attributes of nobility, is perfect in 
sincerity and fully reliable, who is moreover of the number 
of devoted servants and Sufis of pure design of our family, 
to the most exalted C!ourt, that after he has obtained the 
good fortune to salute you, to condole with you» and kissed 
tlu carpet of honour, and performed the dues of inquiry 
(after health, etc.) and congratulations, he may obtain leave 
to return, and may convey to the sincere mind of your 
well-wisher the good tidings of the safety of your angelic 
person and the health of your temperament that is of the 
brightness of the sun and increases joy. It is hoped that 
the tree of hereditary friendship and assiduousness, and 
the garden of intimacy and regard, both apparent and 
spiritual, which by the irrigation of the rivers of affection 
and the brooks of sincere regard acquire great splendour 
and greenness, not casting their leaves, may set in motion 
the cord of intimacy and drive away the misfortune of 
estrangement by the*arrival of correspondence, which is 
the communication of the soul, and may connect by spiritual 
chains our visible friendship, and may favour the course 
and accomplishment of business. 

“ May God Almighty give the assistance of the secret 
powers to that living family of dignity and glory and that 
liousebold of grandeur and good, fortune.” 

Up to tliis is the copy of the letter of my brother Shah 
‘AWms. 

My bmthers Sultan Murad and Daniyal, who had died 
ill the lifetime of my revered father, people had called 



WEIGHTS, MEASURES, AND COINAGE. 197 

by several names. I ordered that one of them should be 
called Shahzada maghfur (the pardoned prince), and the 
other Shahzada niarhum (the prince admitted to mercy) 
I promoted I'timadu-d-daulah and ' Abdu-r-Razza({ Ma'muri, 
who each held the rank of 1.500, to that of 1,800, and 
increased the horse-rank of Qasim Khan, brother of Islam 
Kkankhanan, by 250. I dignified Iraj, eldest son of the 
Khaiikhanan, with the title of Shah-nawaz Khan, and 
Sa*du-llah. son of SaTd Khan, with the appellation of 
Nawazi^ Khan. 

At the time of my accession I had increased wei;;:htH and 
measure.^ (lit. f/az), viz. to the extent of thret^ rat is (.small 
weight e(]ual to eight barleycoms), in the weight of muhrs 
and rupee.s. At this time it wa.s represented to me that in 
mercantile transactions it would be for the convenience of 
the people that muhrs and rupe».»s should be of the same 
weight as previously. As in all affairs the contentment 
and ease of the people are to be looked to. I. gave an order 
that from the present day. that is, the I lih I'nlihiJii.^ht in 
the Gth year of my reign, tliey slnuild strike muhrs and 
rupees of the foriiu^r weight in all tin* mints of my 
dominions. As Ixdore this, on Saturday, the 2nd of the 
month of Safar, in the year 1020. the evil-dispo.sitionisi 
Alidad had heard that Kabul was deprive<l of an eminent 
leader, that Khan Dauran^ was in the interior, and only 
Mu‘izzu-l-mulk with a few servants of the aforesaid was in 
Kabul, thinking it a good opportunity he (Ahdad) betook 
himself unexpectedly to Kabul with a large nunil)er of 
horsemen and foot-soldiers. Mu*izzu-l-inulk, according tf) 
the measure of his ability, displayed activity, and the 
Kabulis and other inhabitants. e.specia]ly the Farmuli* tribe, 
barricaded up the streets and fortified their houses. The 
Afghans with some guns came in to the streets and bazars 


* Kb*n Oauran was away in the district of Ningnaliar (Iqhdl-n&ma, 
p. 5;<). 

* Text wrongly ba8 Qi/.in)a.Hhaa. 



198 DISTUBBANCE IN KABUL. 

from difTorent directions. The people from the shelter of 
their terraces and houses killed many of these wretches 
with arrows and guns, and Bargi,^ one of the confidential 
leaders of A.hdfid. was killed. From the occurrence of this 
affair, for fear that the people from all sides and quarters 
should assemble and block the road for them to get out, 
giving up their hearts and feet (in a state of distraction), 
in fear and confusion they turned back. About 800 of 
those dogs went to jahannam (hell), and 200, having caught 
horses, hastily escaped with their lives from that deadly 
place. Nfid 'All Maid&ni, who was in Lahugar, at last on 
the same day anived there, and pursued them for a short 
distance. As the distance (between them) was too great 
and his band small, he turned back. For the energy he 
had shown in coining quickly, and for the activity displayed 
by Mu'izzu-l-mulk, they were botlr promoted in rank ; Nad 
*Ali, who held that of 1,000 personal to that of 1,500, and 
Mu'izzu-l-mulk, who held the rank of 1,500, to 1,800. As 
it transpired that Khan DauraJi and the Kabulis were in 
the habit of passing their days in carelessness, and the 
repelling of the evil disposition of Ahdad had taken a long 
time it occurred to me that as the Khankhanan was 
without employment I might appoint him and his sons to 
this duty. Soon after this idea occurred Qilij Khan, to 
summon whom a firman had already been issued, came from 
the Panjab and obtained the honour of an audience. It 
became evident from the forehead of his cii-cuinstances (his 
manner) that he was annoyed at the duty of driving liank 
the ill-dispositioned Ahdad being as.signcd to Khankhanan. 
As he faithfully promised to take up this duty, it was settled 
that the governorship of the Subah of the Panjab should 
belong to Murtaza Kb^n, and that the Khankhanan should 
remain at home, and that Qilij Khan should be promoted to 
the rank of 6,000 pei*sonaI and 5,000 horse, and be appointed 


' Or Barkf. 



APPOINTMENTS. 


199 


to Kabul to drive back Abdad and the up-country robbers. 
1 ordered the Khankhanan to have a jagir in the Subah 
of Agra in the Sarkars of Qanauj and Kalpi, that he unght 
inflict condign punishment on the rebels of that region 
and exterminate them (pull them out by the roots). When 
I dismissed them I gave each of them special robes of 
honour and horses and elephants, and having received the 
it>be8 of exaltation they started of. At the same time, on 
account of the sincerity of his friendship and his old services, 
1 bestowed on I'timAdu-d-daulah the rank of 2,000 personal 
and 500 horse, and presented him with a sum of 5,000 rupees 
by way of gift. Mah&bat Kb&n» whom I had sent to make 
the necessary preparations for war for the victorious army 
of the Deccan and point out to the Amirs the desirability 
of concord and unanimity, paid his respects to me at the 
capital of Agra on the 12tli of the month of Tir, the 2lBt 
of RabPu-s-s&ni. It was brought to notice in a letter from 
IslAm Kb&n that 'In&yat Kb&u had performed approved 
service in the Subah of Bengal ; on this account I increased 
by 500 personal the rank he already held of 2,000. I also 
increased by 500 personal and 300 hoi-se, so as to make it 
up altogether to 1,500 peisonal and 800 horse, the rank of 
Raja Kalyan, who was one of the oflicials of that Subah. 

I appointed Hftshim who was in Orissa, to the 

govemuieiit of Kashmir, and sent liis uncle, Kbwaja 
Muhammad Husain, there to look after the aflairs of that 
country until his airival. In the time of iny revered father 
his father, Muhammad Qasim, Jiad conquered Kashmir. 
Chin Qilij, who was the eldest son of Qilij Khan, came 
from the Subah of Kabul and waited on me. As in addition 
to his natural excellence he was a HCniazad (house Ijorn 
one), he was honoured with the title of Khan, and iierording 


* The text hoe here the HCitl whirli itws nut •^•eni ti» h.iw 

much meaning. Erskine Um 'without his so lit* pioi<aMv 

had in his M8. 



200 


APPOINTMENTS. A WOBK OF ART. 


to the prayer of his father, and on condition of his under- 
taking service in Tirah, I increased his rank by 500 personal 
and 300 horse. On the 14th Amardad, on account of the 
previous service and great sincerity and ability of 
rtim&du-d-daulah, I bestowed on him the high rank of 
the viziership of the kingdom, and on the same day 
presented a belt with a jewelled dagger to Y&dgar *Ali, 
ambassador of the ruler of Iran. As 'Abdu-llah KbUn, 
who had been appointed to command the army against the 
rebel RAna, promised to enter the province of the Deccan 
from the direction of Gujarat, I promoted him to be 
Subahdar of that province, and at his request appointed 
R&ja B&so to the command of the army against the Rana, 
increasing his rank by 500 horse. In place of Gujarat 
I conferred the Subah of Malwa on Kban A‘^in and sent 
400,000 rupees to provide for the army and warlike materials 
for the force that had been appointed to accompany 
‘Abdu-llah Kb&n by way of Nasik, which is near the 
province of the Deccan, ^ofdar ^An, with his brothers, 
came from the Subah of Behar, and had the honour of 
kissing the threshold. 

One of the royal slaves who was serving in the seal- 
cutting departments prepared and laid before me a design 
such as I had never seen or heard of before. As it is 
exceedingly strange, a detailed^ description of it is given. 
In the shell of a filbert four compartments had been carved 
out of ivory. The first compartment was one of wrestlers, 
in which two men were engaged in wrestling, a third was 
standing with a spear in his hand, a fourth with a hard 
stone.* Another was sitting with his hands placed on the 
ground, while in front of him were laid a piece of wood, 
a bow and a pot. In the second a throne had been made 

‘ Compare EUiot, vi, 324. 

* 5Eiiw-t-<liini44n. Ellioi had the tame reading and tranelatea *aheavy 
•tone.* But both MSS. have mug n mmar, *a stone and a cord,* query 
a allng, and this is certainly the right reading. See Iqbai-nSma, p. 57. 



WORK OF ART DESCRIBED. 


201 


above which a fJiamiydna (a tent-fly or canopy) was 
depicted, and a man of wealth (a prince) was seated on 
throne with one leg placed over the other and a pillow at 
his back. Five servants were standing urouml and bidon* 
him, and tree-boughs threw a shade over the throne. In 
the third compartment is a company of rope-dancers, who 
have raised upright a pole with three ropes fastened to it. 
A rope-dancer upon it (qu. on the ropes ? ') has taken hold 
of his own right foot with his left iiand behind his head, 
and standing on one foot has placed a goat on the top of 
the pole. Another person has thrown a drum on his 
neck and is beating it, whilst another man is standing with 
his hands lifted up and looking at the rope-dancer. Fivi^ 
other men are also standing, of whom one lias a stick in his 
hand. In the fourth compartment there is a tref\ Indow 
which the figure of the revered (hazntt) Jesus is shown. 
One person has placed his head at Jesus* feet, and an old 
inRn is conversing with Jesus and four others are standing 
by.^ As he had made such a masterpiece, I honoure<l him 
with a present and with increased salary. 

On the 30th Shah ri war. Mirza Sultan, who had Imsui 
sent for from the Deccan, came and waited on me. Safdai* 
Khan had an increase of rank conferred on him, and was 
appointed to go to the assistance of the army against the 
rebel Rana. As 'Abdu-llah Khan Bahadur Firuz-jang liar] 
proposed to enter the neighbouring province of the Deccan 
by W'ay of Nasik, it occurred to me to appoint Ram Das 
Kochhw&ha, who was one of the sincere servants of my 

‘ Twt bar pdif, but thu 1.0. MS. and Iqb&l-numa, p. 58, have htr Ofiz* 
(* on the rope * ? or perhapn * is doing gymna-stics ') 

’ Note of Sayyid Ahm^ {to the fourth comiiartineiit). — ** Evidently 
this masterpiece «’aa not the work of a slave in the seal department, for 
no reason appears ' why the portrait of Jesus should be introduced into 
the fourth compartment. Pkx>bably this masterpiece was the work of 
Frank artists and had fallen into Uie hands of the slave, and he hod 
ascribed it to his oum workmanship. (Pbrhafis the scene depiotwi whi 
the Transfiguration. ) *' 



202 RAM DAS KACHHWAHA. TRANSOXIANA NOBLES. 


revered father, to accompany him in order that he might in 
every place look after him, and not allow him to be too 
rash and hasty. For this purpose 1 bestowed on him gi*eat 
favours, as well as the title of Raja, which he had not 
thought of for himself. I also gave him drums and the 
foit of Ranthanbur, which is one of the noted castles in 
Hindustan, and honouring him with a superb it>be of 
honour and an elephant and horse I dismissed him. I 
appointed Kbw&ja Abti-l-basan, who had been transferred 
from the chief Diwanship, to the duty of the Subahdarship 
of the Deccan, as he had been for a long time in those 
regions in the service of my deceased brother (D&niyRl). 
I honoured AbO-l-basan, son of I*timRdu-d-daulah, with 
the title of I*tiqdd jS^&n» and having promoted the sons of 
Mu*azxam Khftn to fitting ranks sent them to Bengal to 
IslAm Khan* At the request of Isl&in Kh&n, RAja Kaly&n 
was appointed to the govenmient of the Sarkar of Orissa 
and had an iiici'ease in rank of 200 personal and hoi*se. 
1 presented ghaja'at Khan Dakhani with 4,000 rupees. On 
the 7th Aban Badru-z-xaman, son of Mii'z& Sh&hnikh. came 
fi*om the Deccan and waited on me. 

About this time, in consequence of the disturbances tnat 
had (x^curred in the country of MAwaiA’a-n*nahr, many of 
the Amirs and Uzbeg soldiers, such as Husain Bi, 
Pahluwaii B&ba,aiid Nauras Bl Darmaii, and Baram Bi and 
oihei*s came to Court and waited on me. They were all 
honoured with robes of honour, hoi'ses, cash, man.sabe, and 
jagirs. On the 2nd Azar Ha^iiii Khan came fix)!!! Bengal 
and luul the honour of kissing my threshold. I sent 
500,000 rupees for the expensi»s of the victorious anny of 
the Deccan, of which the leader was ‘Abdu-llah Kban, to 
Ahmadabiid in Gujarat by the luiiitls of Rup KhawAss and 
^ibaikh Anbiya. On the Ist day 1 went to the village of 
Samonagar, which is one of my 'fixed hunting-places, to 
hunt. Twenty-two antelope.* wen* killixl, of which I myself 
killed sixteen and Kliurnun the other six. Remaining 



APPOINTMENTS. EXEMPTION FROM PROSTRATIONS. 203 


there two daye and two nights, on the night of Sunday 
I returned to the city in health and safety, and one night 
this couplet threw its brilliance on iny mind ; — 

** All long as there’s in heaven light for the sun, 

Be not the reflection far from the Shah’s umbrella.” 

I ordered the lamplighters and the relators of stories that 
at the time of their salutations and telling stories they 
should commence with this couplet, and it is still in use. 
On Saturday, the Srd day, a letter came from Kban A'»m 
that ^Adil Sb&n BijApdri had given up his evil ways and 
become penitent, and in the rank of servants was now more 
loyal than ever. On the 14th day, corresponding with the 
last day of Shaww&l, leave was given to H&shim KhAn to 
go to Kashmir. I gave a special wrapper^ (fargril) to 
Tfldg&r *Ali, ambassador of Persia. I presented I’tiq&d 
KhAn with one of my special swords called Sar-andAz 
(thrower of heads). Having honoured SbAdmAn, son of 
fUiAn A'zam, with the title of SbAdmAn KhAn, I increased 
his rank to 1,700 personal and 500 horse. He was also 
honoured with a standard. SardAr KbAn, brother of 
*Abdu-llah KbAn FirQs-jang, and ArslAn Bi Usbeg, who 
had been appointed to the charge of Sivistan,^ were also 
presented with standards. I ordered that j^Vi-imindz 
(prayer carpets) should be made of the skins of the 
antelopes I had myself killed, and be kept in the public 
audience hall for people to use in saying their prayers. 
By way of special respect to the Law I oidered that the 
Hir-i**AdI and QA^i, who are the pivot of affairs of the 
divine law, should not kiss the ground (before me), which is 
a kind of si^da. On Thursday, the 22iid day, I went again 
to Sainonagar to hunt. As many antelope had collected 
together in that neighbourhood I had this time sent off 
KbwAja JahAii to prepaid; a «|aniargah and drive in the 
antelope into a brood place from all sides, to place canvas- 

' See Blochiniitiii, p. 80, note. It cerne from £uro|je. 

* In ScifMle ; it in the fuiiiie Sahwan, and if on the InHut. 



204 


GRAND HUNT. 


walln {mra-'pardxi) and a gxdal-hdr^ round it They 
enclosed a kos and half of ground with sarapardas. When 
news came that the hunting-place had been prepared and 
a great deal of game had been confined, I went there and 
began to hunt on the Friday Until the next Thursday 
1 went every day to the qainargali with the ladies and hunted 
as much as I liked. Some of the deer W'ere taken alive and 
some killed with arrows and guns. On the Sunday and 
Thursday, on wj)ich I do not fire guns at animals, they 
took them alive in nets. In these seven days 917 head, 
male and female, were caught, and of these 041 deer were 
cauglit alive. Four hundred and four head were sent to 
Fathpur to be let loose on the plain there, and with regard 
to 84 I ordered them to put silver rings in their noses and 
set them free in the .same place. The 27(> other antelope 
that liad been killed with guns and arrows and by cheetaJis 
were divided from day to day among the Begams and the 
slaves of the palace, and Amirs and servants of the palacp. 
As T became very tired (flUgfr) of hunting, I gave orders 
to the Amirs to go to the (hunting-phxce) and 

hunt all that were left over, and myself returned in safety 
to the city. On the 1st Bahman, corresponding with the 
17th Zi-l-qa\la, 1 oixiered that in the large cities of my 
dominions, like Ahiiiadabad, Allahalxid, Lahore, Delhi, Agra, 
etc., they should arrange bulghur-khana.s (places for the 
distribution of cooked food) for the poor ; thirty inahalls 
(districts) had been ordered. Six had already been estab- 
lished, and twenty-four other districts were now onlered. 
On the 4th Bahman I increased the rank of RAja Bir Singh 
Deo by 1,000 peitional ; it was previously 4,000 personal 
and 2,000 horse : I gave him a jewelled swoid. Another 
sword out of my special one.s, that was called i^ah-bacha 
(king's child), was presented to ShAh-nawAz KbAn. On the 
Ifith Isfandarmuz. Badi'u-z-zaniAn, son of MirzA Shahrukh, 


’ Blochnuinn, fK 4Z. 



ORDERS TO GOVERNORS OF PROVINCES. 


205 


was appointed to the army against the rebel R&nS. and 
a sword sent by his hand for R&ja Baso. Having again 
heard that the Amirs on the borders interfere with 
authority in matters that do not concern them, and do not 
observe laws and regulations, I ordered ^ that the Bakhshis 
should circulate orders, to be obeyed amongst the Amirs of 
the borders, that hereafter they should not interfere in such 
things, which are the private affair of kings. The first 
thing is this, that they should not sit in the jharokhu 
(private window), and should not trouble their officers and 
captains of the auxiliaries with keeping guard or saluting 
them, and should not have elephant fights, and should not 
inflict the punishment of blinding, and should not cut off 
ears and noses, and should not force Islam on anyone, and 
should not confer titles on their servants, and should not 
order the royal servants to do kUrnif^ or prostration, and 
should not force singers to remain on duty in the manner 
customary in (royal) darbars, and should not beat drums 
when they go out, and when they give a horse or elephant 
to anyone, whether to the king’s attendants or to their own 
servants, they should not place reins or elephant’s goads on 
their backs and make them perform obeisance. In going 
in procession they .should not take with them on foot in 
their retinue the royal attendants. ' If they write anything 
to them they should not put a seal on it.* The regulations 
which have been styled the rules of JahAngir (Ayin-i- 
JahAngiri) are now in force.* 

A Elliot, Vi, S2J. 

Both MS& have bar ru instead of bar fl, * in front ’ or Mn the face * 
of the letter, and this is no doubt the correct reading. See IqbAl-iiiiina, 
fi. See Blochmann, p. 263, for the different places where seals ore 
to be |mt. Jaliaiigir’s order ap|iarently was that the firovincial governors 
were not to impress their seals on the face of their letters ur other 
documents. 

’ The lefereiico seems to be, not to these subsidiary regulations, but to 
tlie code of twelve rules promulgated by lihn at the oommenoemeiit of 
hie reign. 



206 


NEW YEAB CELEBKATION8. 


The Seventh New Year’s Festival after the 
AUSPICIOUS Accession. 

On Tuesday, the Ist Fanvarcbn of the seventh year frtMn 
my accession on the 16th Muhanum u-l-bsr&m (19th March, 
1612) in the year 1021, the New Year's assembly that 
illuminates the world, and the festival that brings joy, 
were held in the capital of Agra. After four gharis 
of the night had passed on Thursday, the 3rd of the 
aforesaid month, the hour that the astrologers bad chosen, 
I sat on the throne. I had ordered that, according to 
annual custom, the bazars should be decorated and the 
assembly should be kept up until the day of culmination 
{rUz-i-^araf). miuarau Bl Ozbeg, who was known among 
the Uzbegs as Kbusrau Qvmchl} came on these days and 
had the honour of waiting on me. As he was one of the 
influential men of M&wara’a-n-nahr, 1 bestowed many 
favours on him, and gave him a fine robe of honour. 
I gave 15,000 rupees to Yadgftr ‘All, ambassador of the ruler 
of Iran, for his expenses. On the same day the offering 
of Afzal Kbftn, which he had sent from the Subah of 
Behar, was laid before me. There were 30 elephants 
and 18 ponies (gilrUh), and pieces of Bengal cloth, 
sandalwood, some pods of musk, aloes-wood (AgaUoehvm), 
and all kinds of things. The offering of Khan Daurta 
was also produced before me. He had sent 45 head 
of horse and two strings of camels, porcelain from OLina 
dressing-gowns (pHiUinJia * ) of sable (aammllr), and 
other veduable presents procurable in Kabul and its 
neighbourhood. The officers of the palace had taken 
trouble about their offerings, and according to the yearly 
custom from day to day of the festival the offerings of 
the servants were laid before me. Having looked at them 

' Q^n^h$ in LO. MS. and in Iqliil-nSm*, p. OOi StMngnas givM it 
nsnMMiing on* wKo look* after the king’s game^ and as a eentlnel. 

* Text has pMAa, skins, but LQ. MS. hasjriMInM. 



DEFEAT OF ‘USMAN THE AFGHAN. 207 

in detail, I twk what 1 approved and gave them the 
i*emainder. On the 13th Farwardin, correnponding with 
the 29th Mubarram, a representation from Islam Kban 
anived to the effect that through the blessing of Allah's 
favour and through the benign influence of the royal 
grace, Bengal had been freed from the disturbance of 
‘Usmftn, the Afghan. Before the circumstances of this 
war are written down, some particulars with regard to 
Bengal will be recorded.^ Bengal is a country of great 
extent, and in the second clime its length, from the poi*t 
of Chittagong to Qari, is 450 kos ; and its breadth, f i*om 
the Northern hills to the boundary of Sarkar MadAran, 
220 kos. Its revenue is about 60 krores of datns.^ The 
former rulers of this place always had 20,000 horse, 
a lakh of foot-soldiers, 1,000 elephants, and 4,000 or 
5,000 war-boats. From the time of Shir Kb4n and his 
son Salim Kbftn. this country was in the posseasion of 
the Afghans. When the throne of sovereignty of 
Hindustan in the hands of my revered father acquired 
beauty and splendour, he ordered the victorious forces 
(of the empire) into it, and for a long time made the 
conquest of it his object, until the aforesaid pi'ovince, 
through the great efroi*t8 of the chiefs of the victorious 
State, passed from the posseasion of DA'ud Karani, who 
was the last of its rulers. That wretch was killed in the 
light with Jah&n, and his anny becauie scattered 

and in desperate condition. From that date until now 
the province is in the possession of the servants' of the 
State. In the end a few of the remaining Afghans hod 
remained in the comers and sides of the country, and 
kept a few distant places in their possession, until, by 
degrees, most of that body became despised and helpless, 

* Copied from Ayln. See Jamtt, li, 115. See also Elliot, vi, 826. 

* This is equal to one krore, Sfty lifchi of rupees. The Sarkar of 
Oriaea was included in Bengsl, and its reveqps is included in this. 
(Note of Sayyid Ahmad.) 



208 


PARTICULARS REQARDING BENGAL. 


and were captured by the chiefs of the State in the places 
of which they had still possession. When the arrange- 
ment of the affairs of rule and empire, simply through 
the grace of God, became entrusted to this humble servant 
of the throne of Allah, in the lirst year after my accession 
I sent for Raja MAn Singh, who had been appointed to 
the rule and government of that place, to Court, and 
sent Qutbu-d-din KhAn, who, out of all the officials, was 
distinguished as my foster-brother, in his place. As he 
entered the province he attained to martyrdom at the 
hand of one of those mischievous ones who had been 
appointed to that country, and that man, who had not 
thought of the consequences, also obtained the reward of 
his deeds, and was slain. I promoted JahAngir Qull Kb&n, 
who was governor and a Jagirdar in the province of 
Behar, on account of his nearness to that neighbourhood, 
to the rank of 5,000 personal end horse, and ordered him 
to go to Bengal and take possession of the province. I sent 
an order to IslAm KhAn, who was at the capital of Agra, to 
go to Behar and consider that province his Jagir. When 
a short time had passed under the rule of JahAngir Quli 
Khan, he contracted a severe illness, in consequence of the 
bad water and air of that place, and by degrees the power 
of the disease and his weakness became so gi-eat as to end 
in his destruction. When the news of his death came to 
my hearing at Lahore, an order was issued in the name of 
IslAm KhAn to proceed as soon as possible to Bengal. When 
I appointed him to this important duty, most of Mie servants 
of the State made remarks on his youth and want of 
experience. As the excellence of his disposition and his 
natural capacity had been noticed by my judicious eye, 
I myself chose him fof this duty. As it happened, the 
affairs of this province were carried on by him in such 
a manner os from the time when it first entered into the 
possession of the Chiefs of the everlasting State until this 
day has never been attained to by any of the servants of 



DEFEAT OF ‘DMCZK. 


m 

the Comt. One of hie noteworthy deeds was the drmng 
sway of the rebel ‘Usman, the Afghan. He frequently da 
the time of 'tiie late king encountered the royal forces, but 
his ezpnlsion was not aocmnplished. When JUba Sbia 
made Dhaka (Dacca) his place - of abode and made the 
subjection of the 2!amindars of t)>at n^hbonrhood his chief 
object, it oocnrred to him that he should ^nd an army 
against the rebel ‘Usmftn and his province. If he agreed 
to serve loyally, well and good, but if not, th^ should 
punish and annihilate him like other seditions people. At 
that time iShajA‘at Khto ^ joined Isl&m Shan, and the lot 
of leading in this service * fell on his name. Several others 
of the State servants were also appointed to go with him, 
such as Kisbwar Sbtn, Iftikhir Kb&n, Sayyid Adam 
Bftrha, Sbaikb Aehhay,* nephew of Muqarrab Sbftn, 
Mn’tamad Kb&n, the sons of Mu'assam Sbin Ihtimftm 
and others. He took with him also some of his 
own men. At the hour when Mu^tari (Jupiter) was 
propitious, he staruvi oif this band, and appointed Mir 
QaNiiii, son of MirzA Mur&d, its chief pa3miS8ter and 
news- writer. He took also some of the Zamindars with 
him to show the road. The victorious armies started. 
When they reached the neighbourhood of ‘Ugmftn’s fort 
and land, they sent some eloquent men to admonish 
him and point out to him the way of loyalty, and 
bring him bock from the rood of rebellion to the right 
path. As much pride had seated itself in his brain-cup, 
and he had in his head a desire to seize the countey, beside 
other fancies, he turned a deaf ear to their words and 

‘ AIw eslM Sbaikh K«Mr Chii^tl (Bloduaaim, p. 819 1 Ma’lfira-l- 
uiiMua, ii, tf90). 

Perhaps this it only rhetoric, but Aba.l-lad dstcribas bow lots 
were east between him and Rija Birhal os to who (dMmM go on the 
YOmifsoi expedition. 

’ ithi means a hawk, but the swaning may bo a SboMdl at tleb. 
Arkn is given in Zenker as meaning a ikther in TnrU. Tho IqbAl-alina 

liSM Ajho. 



210 


SUBJECT COimirUEO. 


prepared himself for conflict and fight. The battlefield 
happened to be on the bank of a nullah in a place which 
was a complete bog. On Sunday (12th March, 1612), the 
9th Mubanam, ShajS'at Kh&n, choosing the hour for the 
fight, arrayed the victorious forces, so that everyone 
should go to his place and be prepared for the battle 
‘Usmftn had not settled the battle for that day with 
himself. When he heard that the royal army had cpme 
prepared for battle, having no remedy he himself mounted 
and came to the bank of the nullah, and arrayed his own 
horse and foot opposite the victorious army. When the 
affair grew hot, and the two forces pppoaed each other, 
that foolish, obstinate man at the first ohset threw his own 
fi ghting raging elephant against the advanced guard. After 
much fighting many of the leaders of the advanced guard, 
as Sayyid Adam * B4riia and Shaikh Achhay, attained the 
dignity of martyrdom. Iftikhftr Kb&n, the leader of the 
right wing; was in no way remiss in attacking, and sacrificed 
his own life. The band that was with him fought to such 
a degree that they were all cut to pieces. In the same way 
Kiab^si^* Sbfin and his band of the left wing bravely 
sacrificed themselves in the affair of their master, but 
many of the enemy (lit. those of dark fortune) were also 
wounded and killed. That evil one (‘Usm&n) took account 
of the combatants and ascertained that the leaders of the 
advanced guard and right and left wings were killed. The 
centre alone remuned. He took no account of the killed 
and wounded on his own side, but attacked the centre (of 
the rojral army) with the same energy. On tiiis side the 
son and brotirers and sons-in-law of Sbsj&'at Kh&n. as well 
as other oflkers, stopped the advance of those lost ones, 
and attacked them like tigers and leopards armed with 
claws and teeth Some of them attained the dignity of 

' Text wioagly liM A'laiii. 8m BlochinMiii, p. 8S1, note. 

* Kidiwar «m the mb ot Jahioglr'e laMer-brother QH|ba-d.dia, wba 
WM kilM bjr Shlr-allgM. 



6UBJSCT CONTTNTTED. 


ail 

martyrdom, and those that remained alive bore away fatal 
wounds. At this time ('Usm&n) drove a raging elephant 
of the name of Oajpat/ which was his premier elephant, 
at who laid hold of his spear and struck 

the elephant. What does a raging elephant* care for 
a javelin He then seiased his sword and struck him two 
blows one after another. How did he regard these 
either ! He then drew his dagger and struck him twice 
with it, but for this, too, he did not turn back, but over- 
threw Shajyat with his horse. Immediately he was 
separated from his hor^; calling out ** Jahftngir SbAh," 
he leapt up, and his equerry struck the elephant on both 
frcmt legs a blow with a two-handed sword. As the 
elephant fell on his knees, the equerry pulled the elephant 
driver down off the elephant, and Sbujft'ut with the dagger 
he had in his hand, and while on foot, struck such blows on 
the trunk and forehead of the elephant that the elephant 
roared out at the pain and turned round. As he was 
severely wounded, he went to his own army and fell down. 
Shajyat Sb&n’s horse got up safely. As he was mounting 
his horse those vile ones drove another elephant at his 
standard-bearer, and overthrew his horse and standard. 
Shaj&'at Sbto gave a manly shout and roused the standard- 
bearer, saying; ** Be bold : I’m alive and the standard is at 
my feet (?).” * At this critical moment all the servants of 
the State who were present seized their arrows and daggers 
and swords, and smote the elephant. »Sbai&"at himself 
came up and shouted to the standard-bearer to rise, and 
got another horse for the standaid-bearer and mounted 
him on it. The standard-bearer unfurled the standard and 
maintained his ground. At the time of this struggle 

> The Iqbil-niiiia end the B.M. MSS. cell it Bekhla. 

* Theee lest words seem to be fjert of Sbej&*atV speech, but m 
I qbil-naiiie, pu SS. See ak«o Elliot, vi, 329, end the transletion of the 
Iqbil-niiiia eocoont in Appendix L, SCewert's Get. of Tipfio 8ulUn*e 
MSS., p. 275. The IqbSl-n&me aeys thet ^Usm&n's corpulence cotn|)eUed 
him to ride on an olephent. 



212 


SUBJECT COETINUEE. 


a (ball from a) gun struck that rebel on his forehead. 
However much they enquired for the man who fired it 
he could not be found. When this struck him, he 
recognized that he was a dead man. Yet for two watches, 
notwithstanding this fatal wound, he urged on his men to 
the fight, and the battlefield was still deadly and the 
struggle warm. Afterwards the enemy turned their 
and the victorious army pursued them, and continually 
striking them drove back those vile ones into the place 
where they had encamped. With arrows and guns those 
wretches would not allow the royal troops to enter the 
place where they were. When Wall, the brother of 
‘U.^man, and Mamrez, his ('Usman’s) son and other 
relations and followers became aware of 'Usm&ns wound, 
they made up their minds that he would not recover 
from it, and that if they, defeated and put to flight, 
should go towards their fort none would reach it alive. 
They thought it best to remain for the night in the 
place where they had encamped, d.nd towards the end of 
the night seek an opportunity and get to their fort. Two 
watches of night had passed when ‘Usman went to hell. 
In the third watch they raised his lifeless body, and 
leaving his tent and the things they had with them in 
the camp, proceeded to their fortress. The scouts of the 
victorious army, having obtained news of this, informed 
Shaja‘at Khan. On the morning of Monday the loyalists 
dissembled and decided to follow them, and not allow 
breatliing-time to those of dark fortune. In the end, in 
c(jnse(iuence of the tired state of the soldiers, and in order 
to bury the inartyra and out of sympathy for the wounded, 
they were pei-plexed in their minds as to going or settling 
down (where they were). Ju.st at this time ‘Abdu-s-Salam, 
son of ilu‘azzam Khan, arrived with a body of servants 
<;f the Sti^te, altogether 300 horse and 400 musketeei’s 
(tiipvhi). When this fresh b<Kly of men arrived it was 
dotcriiiined to pursue, and they accoi-dingly went on. 



SUBJECT CONTINUED. 


213 


When Wali, who after 'Usm&n was the stock of the 
disturbance, learned that Shaj&'at Khto. with the victorious 
army had come together with another fresh force, he saw 
no resource for himself but to go to »^aja'at Khan on 
the straight line of faith and loyalty. In the end he 
sent a message that he who had been the cause of the 
disturbance had gone, and that the body of those who 
were left were servants and Ifusulmans. If he would 
give his word they would wait upon him and would 
agree to serve the State;, giving their elephants as an 
offering. Shaj&‘at Khan and Mu'taqid Kb&n, who had 
arrived on the day of the battle and had done approved 
service, and all those who were loyal, in accordance with 
the necessity of the time and with what w’^as best for the 
State, gave their word and encouraged then). On the 
next day. Wall and the sons, brothers, and sons-in-law of 
* Usman all came and waited upon »^ajn*at Khan and the 
other servants of the State. They brought forty-nine 
elephants as an offering. After the coinpletion of this 
work ghaja'at Khan, leaving some of the royal servants 
in Adhar^ and the neighbourhood which was in the 

' The text has dar adhdr u tflrf kih dar tammif-i-dn tlra-ruzyar hud. 

I do not know if adhdr is the name of a place or what its meaning ih. 
The I.O. MSS., Nos. 181 and 305, have arAdd. Blochmann, p. 5‘JO, on the 
authority of the MaUizan-i- Afghani, says the fight took place 100 koM 
from Dacca and in a place called Nek Ujyftl, and he jioints out in a noU; 
that there are several Ujyals in Eastern Bengal. Tonsihly AdhAr i.s 
UdhAr or Uz&r, and a corruption of Ujyal. The ' hills of Dacca,' referred 
to by Blochmann, might be Ran Bhawal or the MadhOpur jungle. The 
RiyA^u-s-salAtln does not mention the aite cf the Imttle, and the 
translator, Maulawi ‘Abdu-s-Salam, haa in hia note at p. IT.l confounded 
two *ImI KhAns, and so drawn groundlesa inferences. Blochmann |>oint 9 
out, p. 520, that the Ma'aairu-I-umarA Mays the pri.soners were after 
wards put to death. Tlie |)assage is at vol. ii, p. fi.'12. It say.s they 
were put to death by JahAnglr's orders by 'AfKiudlah (who certainl) 
wa^ brute enough for anything). Jahangir, Tdr.iik. p. 1 12, mentions the 
arrival of * Usman's son.s and brothers at (Join t. >o that Klochmann's 
statemeot at p. 520 about their lieing exeented fm the road is nut 
correct. It ap|)ears, too, they came to Court, after .Shaju'at’s death, 
.lah.nngir says (TOxuk, p. 112) he nuide over the prisoners fn raspon.««i)d«; 

5 i rvants of goi'crnment 'Alslii-lluh m.iy have b-?i»s one of these, and 



214 


SUBJECT CONTIMUEI). 


pOBfiesRion of that one of evil fortune, took with him Wall 
and the other Afghans, and on Monday, the 6th of the 
month of ^afar, came to Jahangimagar (Dacca) and joined 
Isl&m Oto When the joyful news reached in Agra 
this supplicant at the throne of Allah, he performed 
the prostrations of gratitude, and recognized that the 
driving away of this description of enemy was brought 
about simply through the unstinted mercy of the A Imighty 
Qiver. As a reward for this good service I promot^ 
Isl&m Kh&n to the rank of 6,000 personal, and honoured 
Shaja*at Khan with the title of Rustam of the age ” 
(Bustam-zam&n), as well as increased his rank by 1,000 
personal and horse. I also increased the rank of other 
servants according to the measure of their services, and 
they were selected for other honours 

When this news first came of the killing of 'Usman it 
appeared to be a joke, but by way of ascertaining the 
truth or falsehood of the words I took an omen from 
the divan of the tongue, of the unseen world, Khwftja 
H&tiz of Shiraz, and this ghazaP turned up: — 

** 1 make my eyes red and throw patience to the wilds, 

And in such a case throw my heart into the sea. 

I'm wounded by the shaft of heaven : 

Give wine, so that intoxicated I may cast a knot in tho girdle of 
the Twins.” 

have got rid of his prisoners by killing them. It would appear that 
the battle with * Usm&n took place to the east or south-east of Dacca, 
and not near Orissa, as Stewart supposed. 

' The lines occur in divSn, under the letter M, Brockhaus* od., 

No. 396, but Jah&ngir has missed c.* .t two lines in his quotation. An 
Indian lithograph has ral^ in the first line instead of {fohr, bet the 
latter reading occurs in Brockhaus. In the fourth line nargis is a mistake 
for tirkanh, Tir-i-falak, * the arrow of the spheres,* is also a name for the 
planet Mercury. Tlrkai^h i-JawA means both a particular constellation 
rn the sign Gemini, which is supposed to resemble a quiver in appearance, 
and also the strings of a musical instrument. The meaning of the lines 
seems to Ije, ** 1 have been wounded by the shaft of heaven : give me wine 
that 1 may become intoxicated and be able to tie a knot in the quiver- 
girdle of the Gemini.” The appositeness of the /d/ is not very apparent, 
but the mention of an arrow was taken to be an allusion to the death of 
* Ufm&n by a shot from an unknown hand. 



GUBlOSmES FROX QOA. 


215 


Ab this couplet was very appropriate to the occasion, 
1 drew an omen from it. After some days news came 
again that the arrow of Fate, or rather of Qod, had struck 
^Usman, for however much they enquired for him, he 
who fired the shot was not made manifest. This has 
been recorded on account of its strange nature. 

On the 16th Farwardin, Muqarrab who is one of 

my chief retainers and the old confidants of the Jahangiri 
service, who had attained the rank of 3,000 personal and 
2,000 horse, came from the fort of Cambay and had the 
honour of waiting on me. 1 had ordered him, on account 
of certain business, to go to the port of Goa' and buy 
for the private use of the government certain rareties 
procurable there. According to orders he went with 
diligence to Goa, and remaining there for some time, 
took at the price the Franks asked for them the rareties 
he met with at that port, without looking at the face of 
the money at all (i.e. regardless of cost). When he 
returned from the aforesaid port to the Court, he 
produced before me one by one the things and 
rareties he had brought. Among these were some 

animals that were very strange and wonderful, such 
as I had never seen, and up to this time no one had 
known their names. Although King Babar has described 
in his Memoirs the appearance and shapes of several 
animals, he had m^ver ordered the painters to make 
pictures of them. As these animals appeared to me to 
Ixi very strange, I both described them and ordered that 
painters should draw them in the Jahangir-naina, so 
that the jimazeinent that arose from hearing of them 
might be increased. One of the.se animals in body is 
larger than a peahen and .smaller than a peacock.- When 


' Elliot, Vi. 

^ 't hey call this in the English language a turkey, and the people 
of India call it pirn ; Persian-knowing Indians call it in Persian 
fUmuroh. They are now plentiful in India. (Note uf Sayyid Ahmad.) 



S}6 AOCOUKT or 4 TURKEY. 

it IB ilk beat and displaya itaelf, it qweads out ite 
feathem like the peacock and dances about. Ita beak 
and legs ate like tboae of a cock. Its bead and neck 
and the paii under the throat are every minute of a 
different colour. When it is in heat it is quite red — 
one might say it' had adwned itsdf with , red coral — and 
after a while it becomes white in the same places, and 
looks like cotton. It sometimes looks of a turquoise 
colour. like a chameleon it constantly changes colour. 
Two pieces of flesh it has on its head look like the comb 
of a cock. A strange thing is this, that when it is in 
heat the aforesud piece of flesh hangs down to the length 
of a qtain trcmi the top of its head like an elephant’s 
trunk, and again when he raises it up it appears on its 
head like the hwn of a rhinoceros, to the extent of two 
finger>hieadths. Bound its eyes it is always of a turquoise 
colour, and does not change. Its feathers appear to be of 
various colours, differing from the oolonrs of the peacock’s 
feathers.' He also brought a monkey of a strange and 
wonderful form. Its hands, feet, ears, and head are like 
tboae of a monkey, and its face like that of a fox. The 
colour of its eyes is like that of a hawk’s eye, but the 
eyes are larger than those of a hawk. FVom its head 
to the mid of its tail it is an ordinaiy cubit in length.. It 
is lower tiian a monkey and taller than a fox. Its hair 
. is. like the wool of a sheep and its colour like that of 
ashes. From the lobe of its eai to its chin it is red and 
of the odour of wine. Its tail is two or three finger- 
breadths longer than half a cubit, quite different from tha( 
of other monkeys. The tail of ^is animal hangs dowi 
like the tail of a cat. Sometimes it makes a sound like 
a young antelope. On the whole it is a very strange 
beast. Of the wild birds which they call tadrH (pheasant) 
till now it has never been heard that they breed in 
eSptivity. In the -time of my revered father they made 
great efforts to obtain eggs and young ones but it was 



▲PPOlNXMEtfTB. 


217 


not managed. I ordered them to keep some of them, 
nude and female, in one place, and by degrees they bred. 
I wdered them to place the eggs under hens, and in a 
apace of two years sixty or seventy young were produced 
aid fifty or sixty grew up. Whoever heard of this matter 
was astimished. It was said that in the Wil&yat (Persia ?) 
the people there had made great efforts, but no eggs were 
produced and no young were obtained. 

In these days I increased the manaab of Mah&bat KJbAn 
by 1,000 personal and 500 horse, which thus became 4,000 
pers(mal and 3,500 horse. The manaabof Ptimadu-d-daulah, 
original and increased, was fixed at 4,000 personal and 
1,000 horse. To the mansab of Mah& Singh also an 
increase of 500 personal and horse was given: it was 
originally and with increase 3,000 personal and 2,000 
horse. The mansab of I'tiqftd Kbftn was increased by 
500 personal and 200 horse, and made up to 1,000 
personal and 800 horse. Kbwftja AbO-l-basan in these 
days came from the Deccan and waited on me. Daulat 
Sbhn, who had been appointed to the faujdarship of 
Allahabad and of the Sarkar of Jauiipur, came and paid 
his respects: an increase of 500 was made to his mansab 
which was 1,000. On the day of culmination (rUz-i- 
fiaaraf), which was the 19th Farwardin, I raised the 
mansab of Soltin Kburram, which was 10,000, to .12,000, 
and made that of I*tib&r Kb4n, which was 3,000 personal 
and 1,000 horse, up to 4,000. I raised the mansab of 
Muqarrab Sbin from 2,000 personal and 1,000 hontu by 
500 personal and horse; and increased that of Kbw&ju 
Jahio,. which was 8,000 personal and 1,200 horse, by .500. 
As these were the days oi the New Year, many of 
the servants (of the State) obtained an increase of their 
ma^sabo. On tiie same day DiiUp came from the Diwcan 
and waited on me. As his father Biy RAy Singh had iiie«l. 
I honoured him with the title of RAy and clothed him in 
a dress of honour. RAy RAy Singh had another snn, by 



218 


BULlP 81N0H. 


name SQraj Singh. Although Dullp was his tik& (marked 
with the tika) son, he wished SOraj Singh to suooeed him, 
in consequence of the love that he bore to his mother. 
When the circumstances of his death were reported to me, 
Stiraj Singh, in consequence of his want of intelligence 
and tender years, represented to me: father has 

made me his successor and given me the This 

remark was not to my liking, and I said : If thy father 
has given thej tUcdL to thee, we shall give it to Dullp.” 
Then marking the tUcd, with my own hand, I presented 
the latter with his father’s jagir and hereditary possessions. 
I bestowed on rtimfidu-d-daulah an inkstand and jewelled 
pen. Radar, the father of Lakhmi Chand, Raja of 
Kumaon, who is one of the considerable Rajas of the 
hill country, had come in the time of the late King 
Akba^,^ and when he came had petitioned* that the 
son of Raja To4s*r Mai might take him by the hand and 
bring him to wait on him. In consequence, the Raja’s 
(Todar Mai’s) son had been appointed to bring him. 
Lakhmi Chand now similarly asked that the son of 
I'timadu-d-daulah might bring him to pay his i-espects. 
I sent iShapar* to bring him to wait on me. He laid 
K^fore me rare things from his own hill country, such as 
ganth ponies, and birds of prey, such as hawks, jurra 
(falcons), royal falcons, qatds (yaks), navels of musk, and 
skius of the musk antelope with the musk-bags on them, 
Kwords which in their language they call Uuindd, and 
daggers which they call katdr, and all kinds of things. 
Amongst the Rajas of this hill country this Raja is well 
known for tlie large (|nantitie.s of gold he has. They say 
t))eri^ is a gold-mine in his ten*itory.^ 

* Aklmr-n&ma, iii, 539. It was in the 33rd year. 

He asked Toejar Mai’s protection, hiit the son was sent (Akbar*nftma, 
iii, S33). 

* This name is not in all the MSS. It is another name for I*tiqiUl, 
aon of rtiinkdu-d-daulalj. 

^ Blochmann, p. 508. 



AFFAIRS OF THB DECCAN. 


219 


In order to lay the foundation of a palace at Lahore, 
1 sent there SbwSOa Jahftn KhwAja Dost Muhammad, who 
is well skilled in this kind of business. 

As the affmrs of the Deccan, in consequence of the 
disagreements among the Sardars and the carelessness of 
Khftn A*sam, did not look well, and the defeat of * Abdu-llah 
Sbftn had taken place, I had sent for Sbw&ja Abud- 
hasan to midce enquiries into the real state of these 
quarrels. After much enquiry and investigation it became 
clear that the defeat of 'Abdu-Uah Kh&n had been caused 
by his pride and his sharp temper, and not listening to 
words (of advice) and partly by the quarrels and want 
of agreement between the Amirs. Briefly, it had been 
determined that 'Abdu-llah Khkn should start from the 
direction of NAsik and Trimbak with the Gujarat army 
and the Amirs who had been appointed to accompany 
him. This army had been brought into proper order by 
trustworthy leaders and zealous Amirs, such os Raja B&ni 
D&s, Kban A'lam, Saif Kh an. ‘Ali MardAn Bahadur, ^far 
Khan, and other servants of the State. The number of 
the army had passed 10,000 and come up to near 14,000. 
On the side of Berar it was settled that Baja Man Singh, 
Kban Jahan. the Amiru-l-umara,^ and many other leadei's 
should proceed. These two armies should be aware of 
each other’s marches and halts, so that on an appointed 
day they might catch the enemy between the two. Tf 
this rule had been observed and their hearts had been 
in unison, and self-interest hod not come between,' 'it is 
most probable that Almighty God would have given them 
the victory of the day. When ’Abdu-Uah KhAn passed 
the Ghats and entered the enemy’s country, he did not 
take care to send runners (qdifiddn) to bring intelligence 
from the other army, nor did he, in accordance with the 
arrangements, make his movements harmonise with theirs, 
so that on an appmnted day they might take the enemy 
between two armies. Batiier he relied on his own strength, 



220 


DEFEAT OF ^ABDU-LLAH. 


and considered that if he could gain the victory alone 
it would be better. This idea fixed itself in his niind> 
and however much Ram Das desired him to promise to 
go forward with due deliberation, it was of no use. The 
enemy, who were observing him closely, had sent a large 
number of leaders and Bargis (Mahrattas) against him, 
and encounters took place with them every day. They 
did not fail to throw rockets and different fireworks at 
night. At last the enemy drew near, and yet he obtained 
no intelligence about the other army, though he had 
approached Daulatabad, which was the place of assembly 
of the Dakhanis. 'Ambar, the black-faced, had raised to 
sovereignty a child who, in his opinion, bore relationship 
to the family of Nizilmu-l-mulk. In order that men 
might fully accept his (the child’s) sovereignty, he raised 
him up and took him by the hand, and made himself 
the Peshwa and leader. He sent men again and again 
(against 'Abdu-llah), and the numl)er of the enem^'^ was 
continually increasing till at last they made an attack, 
and by throwing rockets and other fireworks made 
matters hot for him.^ At length the loyalists thought it 
best, as no a-ssistance had come to them from the other 
army and all the Dakhanis had turned against them, to 
retreat, at once and try some other arrangement All 
agreed, and with one consent started off befoi’e dawn. 
The Dakhanis followed them to the boundaries of their 
own countrj’, and th»‘ two armies, meeting every day. 
did not fail in fighting. In these days several of the 
ambitious and zealous young men were killed. ‘Ali 
Mardan Khan Bahadur, behaving like a brave man. 
carried away terrible wounds and fell into the hands <»f‘ 
the enemy, and showed his eompani<»ns an example nf 
fidelity to his salt and of life -sac lifice. Zu-l-faqar B»‘g 
also displayed manly actions, and a riK-kct struck him of» 


’ Kiiiot. Vi. :m 



SUBJECT CONTINUED. 


221 


the leg, and two days afterwards he died. When they 
entered the country of Raja Bharju/ who was one of those 
loyal to the throne, that body (the enemy) turned back, 
and *Abdu-llah SJb&n proceeded towards Gujarat. The 
real truth is this, that if in going he had drawn his rein 
(gone slowly) and allowed the other army to have come up 
to him, the matter would have turned out according to the 
wish of the chief men of the victorious State.^ As soon 
as the news of the retreat of *Abdu-llah Khan reached 
the leaders of the army that was advancing from Bcrar, 
not seeing any advantage from further stay, they also 
retired, and joined the camp of Parwiz at 'Adilabad in the 
neighbourhood of Burhanpur. When this intelligence 
reached me at Agra I was greatly agitated, and proposed 
to go there myself and destroy root and branch those 
servants who had become mastcra. The Amirs and other 
devoted ones would in no way consent to this. Khwaja 
Abu-l-basan represented that as no one understood the 
business of that region as the Khankhanan did I ought to 
send him, and that he should again arrange matters that 
hod fallen into disorder, and according to the exigencies 
of the time should compose differences so that affairs 
might return to their original condition. Other well- 
wishers being consulted, all their opinions were at one in 
this, that the Khankhanan must be sent and that Khwaja 
Abu-l-hasan should accompany him. Agreeing with this 
determination, those who had charge of the affairs of the 
Khankhanan and his companions obtained leave to go 
on Sunday, the 17th Uidibihight, in the 7th year, ^ah- 
nawaz ICb&D> Khwaja Abu-l-hasan, Razzaej-birdi Uzbeg, 
and several others if his associates paid their parting 
salutations on the same day. The Klmrikhaiiati was 
promoted to the rank of 6,000 pei-sonal, ghuh-nawaz Khaii 


‘ Raja of Buglaiitt. 

‘ A periphrasis for liiiiisclf. 



222 


DEATH OF A8AF KHZN. 


to that of 3,000 and horse, that of Darab Kb&n increased by 
500 personal and 300 horse (altogether 2,000 personal and 
1,500 horse), and to Rabman-dad, his (the Khankhanan’s) 
younger son, I also gave a fitting mansab. I presented 
the Khankhanan with a grand dress of honour, a jewelled 
dagger, a special elephant with taldyir (accoutrements), 
and an Iraq horse. In the same way I bestowed on his 
sons and companions dresses of honour 'and horses. In 
the same month Mu‘izzu-l-mulk came from Kabul with 
Ids sons, and had the good fortune to kiss the thi'eshold. 
Shyam Singh and Ray Mangat Bhadauriya, who belonged 
to the army of Bangash, according to the request of Qilij 
Khan, were promoted to higher mansabs. Shy&m Singh 
had 1,500 personal and was increased by 500, and Bsy 
Mangat was also raised to a higher rank. 

For a long time past news had come of the illness of 
Asaf Khan ; . sometimes the disease was got under and 
sometimes recurred, until he died at Burhanpur in the 
63rd year of his age. His understanding and capacity 
were very good. He was very quick-witted. He also 
wrote poetry. He composed “ Khusrau and Shirin,” 
dedicating it to me, and called it the “Nur-nama” (the 
writing of light).' He had been ennobled in the time of 
my revered father and made Vizier. In the days when 
I was a prince he had seveml times done foolish things, 
and mast men. and indeed Khusrau himself, were of 
opinion that after my accession I would do unpleasant 
things (with regard to him). In a manner contrary to 
what had entered the minds of himself and others, 
I favoured him and promoted him to the rank of 5,000 
personal and horse, and after he had for some tiine been 
Vizier with full authority, neglected no point in increasing 
favour tow'ards him. After his death I gave mansabs 
to his sons and bestowed kindnesses on them. At last 


^ The history of NOr, i.e. histor}' of NUru-d-dln Jahangir. 



DEATH OF MIRZI GHZzT. 


223 


it was clear that his disposition and sincerity were not 
as they should be, and, considering his own evil deeds, 
he had always been suspicious with regard to me. They 
say he was aware of the conspiracy and disturbance that 
took place on the Kabul expedition, and had given 
support to the wretches. Indeed, I had no confidence 
that notwithstanding my favour and kindness to him he 
was not disloyal and of perverse fortune. 

After a short space of time, on the 25th of the same 
month of Urdibihi^t, the news of Mirza Qhazi s death 
arrived. The said Mirz& was of the ruling family of 
Thatta (Tatta), of the tribe of Tarkhani. His father, 
MirzA J&ni, in the time of my revered father became 
loyal, and with the Khankhanan, who had been appointed 
to his province, he had the good fortune to have the 
honour of waiting on Akbar near Lahore. By the royal 
favour he was given his own province, and, choosing 
himself to serve at Court, he sent his men to the charge 
and administration of Thatta, and remained in the service 
while he lived. At last he died at Burhanpur. Mirza 
Ghazi Khan, his son, who was at Thatta, in accoixlance 
w'ith the firman of the late king obtained the government 
of that countiy. Sa'id Khan, who was at Bhakar (Bukkur), 
received an order to console him and bring him to Coart. 
The aforesaid Khan sent men to him to recommend loyalty 
to him. At last, having brought him to Agra, he procui*ed 
him the honour of kissing the feet of my revered father. 
He was at Agra when my father died and I aseeiiderl the 
throne. After I arrived at Lahore for the {)ur.suit of 
Khusrau news came that the Aiiiii*s on the Ixjrders of 
Khurasan had assembled together and proceeded against 
Qandahar, and that Sb&h Beg, the governot of that place, 
was shut up in the fort and looking out for aissi.stance. 
Of necessity an army was appointed for the relief of 
Qandahar under the leadership of Mirz& Qb&zi and other 
Amirs and generals. When this army reached tlie 



224 


ACCOUNT OF HfRZX GHldl 


neighbourhood of Qandahar, the army of Khurasan, not 
seeing in themselves the power to await it, returned. Mirz& 
Qhazi, having entered Qandahar, handed over the country 
and the fort to Sardar Khan, who had been appointed to 
the government of the piace, and Shah Beg went to his 
own jagir. Mirza Qhdzi started for Lahore by way of 
Bbakar. Sard&r Khan was only a short time at 

Qandahar before he died, and that province was again 
in need of a leader and master. This time I added 
Qandahar to Thatta and handed it over to Mirzft Qha^. 
From that time till his death he remained there con- 
tinuously in performance of the duties of its protection 
and government. His conduct towanls the disaffected 
was excellent. As it was necessary to send a leader to 
Qandahar in the place of Mirza (liuizi. I appointed 
Abu-l-bi Uzbeg,^ who was at Multan and in that 
neighbourhood, to that post. I promoted him in rank 
from 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse to H,000 personal 
and horse, and honoured him with the title of Bahad 
Khan and a standaid. The governoi-sliip of Delhi and 
the protection and administration of that province was 
conferred on Muqarrab Khan. I dignified Rup Kbawasg, 
who was one of the personal servants of my revered 
father, with the title of Khawass Khan, and, giving him 
the rank of 1,000 pei'sonal and 500 Iioi-se, bestowed on 
him the faujdarship of the Sarkar of Qanuj. As I had 
sought the daughter* of I'tiqHd Kban, son of I‘tiinadu-d- 
daulah, in marriage for Khurram, and the marriage 


‘ Should be Aba-n-nabi. See iit/rai 

* This was Arjumand Bunft or Muoitas-maliall, Uie favourite wife of 
JaliTiii the mother of fourteen of his ciiildren. She was the 
niece uf Ndr-Jahan, her father being Nilr Jahan’s brother, the A^af 
Khan IV and Aha-Miasaii of Beale, whaalso hud the names of I*tiq&d 
Klian aiMl Yaminu-d-daulah. Tliere is an account of the betrothal and 
wedding in the PudshAh-iiuma, i, 3S8. It seems tiuit the betrothal took 
place five years and three months Itefore the marriage, and when gb^h 
Jahun was 15 years old. At the time of the marriage gb^b Jahin was 



SHAH JAHIn’S XABBIAGE. AFFAIRS OF SIND. 225 


festival had been arranged foir> I went on Thursday, 
18th SburdAd, to his house, and stayed there one day 
and one night. He (IQiuiTam) presented offerings (to me) 
and he |;ave jewels ^ to the Begams, and to his mothers 
(including stepmothers) and to the female servants of the 
harem, and dresses of honour to the Amirs. 

I sent 'Abdu-r-Razz&q, the bakhshi of the palace 
(darJ^na), to settle the country of Thatta (Sind) 
until a Sardar should be appointed who could conciliate 
the soldieiy and the cultivators, and so bring the 
province into order. I increased his rank and presented 
him , with . an elephant and a shawl (parmnann), and 
sent him off. I made Mu*izzu-l-mulk bakhshi in his 
room. Sbw&ja JahSn, who had been sent to inspect 
the buildings in Lahore and to arrange about them, 
came in the end of this month and waited on me. 
MirzA *Iai. TarkhAii, one of the relations of MirzA (JbAzi, 
had been appointed to the army of the Deccan. I sent 
for him to arrange about the business of Thatta, and 
on the same day he had the good fortune to pay his 
respects. As he was deserving of favour, he was given 
the rank of 1,000 personal and 600 horse. The disease 


20 ytm and 3 months old and Arjumand B&nO was 19 years and 
1 month. 18th ]{Jiardad, 1021, would correspond to about the end d 
May, 1612, but the FSdshah-n&ma gives the eve of Friday, 9th Rabi'u-1- 
awwal of 1021, oorresponding to 22nd Urdlbihi^t, as the day of the 
marriage. This would correspond to 30th April, 1612, so that apparently 
Jahangir’s visit to the house (apparently I*timidu-d-daulah’s, but 
possibly Sbih Jah&n’s) took place about a month after the marriaga 
Arjumand BSnO died in childbed at Burhanpur in 1040, or July, 1631, 
the chronogram being one word, viz. * grief.’ She must have been 

bom in 1591, and was in her 40th year when she died. Shb was not 
Sbah Johan’s drst wife, for he was married to the daughter of Moitaffar 
Husain Safawl, a descendant of Shah Isma’li of Persia, in September, 1610 
(Rajab, 1019), but the betrothal to Arjumand waa earlier than this. It 
was in Arjumand’s honour that the Taj was built. 

1 TArhh The corrsspooding passage in the Iqbal-nama, p. 67, last 
line, shows that jewels aie meant. The teat omits the preposition ha 
1^ before Bt^farndn. 



226 ILiiXUSS OF JAHiKOiR. APPOIHTMEITrS. 


of khiln-jta/ra^ had affected my health. By the advice 
of the physicians on Wednesday, the (date not given) 
of the said month, I drew about a sir (dear)* of blood 
&om my left arm. As great lightness resulted, it occurred 
to me that if they were to call blood-letting ‘ lightening * 
it would be well. Nowadays this expression is made 
use of. To Muqarrab who had bled me, I gave 

a jewelled khaptua (dagger). Ki^an Dfts, accountant of 
the elephant department and stable, who from the time 
of the late king until now has been the clerk in charge 
of two departments, and for ages had been hopeful of 
the title of Raja and the rank of 1,000 personal, and 
before this had been gratified with a title, now had the 
rank of 1,000 conferred on him. M!rz& Rustam, son of 
Sultftn flusain Mirz& ^afawi, who had been appointed to 
the army of the Deccan, I sent for at his request. On 
Saturday, the 9th of the month of Tir, he came with 
his sons and waited on me. He made an offering of 
a ruby and forty^six royal pearls. I increased the rank 
of T&j Kb&n, the governor of Bhakar, who was one 
of the old Amirs of this State, by 500 personal and 
horse. 

The tale of the death of Shaj&*at Khan is a very 
strange affair. After he had performed such services 
and Isl&m Kban had given him leave to go to the Sarkar 
of Orissa, one night on the road he was riding on 
a female elephant chavJeandi-dar^ (?in a square howdah 
or four-pillared canopy), and had given a young eunuch 
a place behind him, When he left his camp they had 


‘ fCkOM-pAra, * congestion of blood ’ ; pdra or Sdra is used to mesn 
a oollection or gathering. See Ma’Sjsra-I-nimua, ii, 221, where we have 
hdnt ya'nl jam'l. Erekine, in spite of his MS., reads ekSn pira and 
translates * as quicksilver.’ 

• A*ar, which, aoconding to Forbes, is a sir weight 

* Perhaps it was only what is called a ehOr-jitma and not an enclosed 
howriah. 



DEATH OF SHAJI'AT KHiK. 


237 


fastened up an elephant that was in heat on the road. 
From the noise of the horses’ hoofs and the movement 
of the horsemen he attempted to break his chain. On 
this account a great noise and confusion took place. 
When this noise reached the ear of the eunuch, he in 
a state of bewilderment awoke Shaj&'at who was 

asleep or in the insensibility of wine, and said : An 
elephant in heat has got loose and is coming in this 
direction.” As soon as he heard this he became confused 
and threw himself down from the front of the chaukandi. 
When he threw himself off his toe struck against a stone 
and was toin open, and he died in two or three days 
of that same wound. In short, from hearing this affair 
I was completely bewildered. That a orave man on the 
mere hearing of a cry or a word coming from a child 
should become so confused and throw himself down 
without control from the top of an elephant is in truth 
a matter of amazement. The news of this event reached 
me on the 19th of the month of Tir. I consoled his 
sons with kindnesses and the conferring of offices. If 
this accident had not happened to him, as he had done 
notable service, he would have obtained exaltation with 
greater favours and kindnesses. 

**On€ cannot strive against destiny.’* 

Islam Khan had sent 160 male and female elephants 
from Bengal ; they were brought before me and placed 
in my private elephant stables. R&ja Tekchand, the Raja 
of Kumaon, asked for leave to depart, As in the time 
of my father there had been given to his father 100 
horses, 1 gave him the same number as well as an elephant, 
and while he was at Court bestowed on him dresses •of 
honour and a jewelled dagger. Also to his brothers 
I gave dresses of honour and horses. I presented him 
with his territory according to previous arrangements, and 
he went back to his home happy and successful. 



228 


VERSIFICATIONS. 


It happened incidentally that this verse of the Amiru-1- 
umard. was quoted : — 

*'Pa8s, O Messiah, o'er the heads of us slaiu by love; 

Thy restoring one life is worth a hnndred murders.” ^ 

As I have a poetical disposition I sometimes inten- 
tionally and sometimes involuntarily eompose couplets 
and quatrains. So the following couplet came into my 
head : — 

**Tum not thy cheek, without thee I cannot live a momeuii; 

For thee to break one heart is equal a hundred mniders.” 

When I had recited this, everyone who had a poetical 
vein composed a couplet in the same mode. MuIIft ‘All 
Ahmad,* the seal-engraver, of whom an account has. been 
given previously, had not said badly — 

**0 Censor, feai* the weeping of the old vintner; 

Thy breaking one jar is equal to a hundred murders.” 

Abu-l-fath Dakhani,* who was one of the most con- 
siderable of *Adil Khan’s Amirs, and had two years 
previously taken to being loyal and had entered himself 
among the leaders of the victorious army, on the 10th 

^ The reference is to the Messiah as the restorer to life by His 
brcutl). For bagm^r, * pas.«i by,’ Erskine bad in his MS. magu^r, 

* pass not. ’ Apparently the verse means that it is more meritcirious 
for the Messiah to restore one man to life than it in for another to slay 
a hundred infidels. 

^ *Ali Ahmad died suddenly two years before this, unless indeed tho 
passage at p. 169 refers to the mimic and not to *Ali Ahmad. Probably 
the meaning is that *An Ahmad hod made this couplet on some ])revious 
occasion, and that one of the courtiers now quoted it. His verse about 
the hundred murders may contain a play on the word * blood,* and 

refer to the spilling of the blood>like wine. It is difficult to understand 
how Jahangir came to introduce the verse into his Memoirs here. It 
does not seem to have any connection with the account of the Raja 
of Kumaon. Jahangir sa^ s it was quoted * incidentally,' Id taqarrubi. 
Perhaps the word here means ‘by way of parody,' or ‘by way of 
paraphrasf?.’ In the MS. used by Erskine the words of the first line 
seem to be Mayumr Masih bar aar^i-md, and so Erskine translate.*; “ Pass 
not,^ O Mes'iiiih, over the heivds of us victims of love.” Pcrhap.s maywf'’- 
means ‘ do not pasM >>y.’ 

> This is the Dak haul chief mentioned previously at p. 192. 



APPOINTMENTS. 


229 


of Amurdad waited on me, and being accepted by my 
grace and favour had bestowed on him a special sword 
and a robe of honour, and after some days I also gave 
him a special horse. Kbw&jagi Muhammad Husain/ 
who had gone to Kashmir as the deputy for bis brother’s 
son, when he was satisfied in his mind with the state 
of affairs of that place, came on the same day and waited 
on me. As a Sardar was needed to be sent for the 
governorship of Patna and the rule of that place, it 
occurred to me to send Mfrza Rustam. Having raised 
his rank from 5,000 personal and 1,500 horse to 5,000 
personal and horse, on the 26th Jumada-s-.^ni, corre- 
sponding to the 2nd Shahriwar. I gave him the 
government of Patna, and bestowing on him a special 
elephant, a horse with a jewelled saddle, a jewelled 
sword, and a superb dress of honour, I dismissed him. 
His sons and the sons of his brother Muzaffar Husain 
Khan Mirza’i were exalted with increased rank, elephants, 
horses, and dresses of honour, and sent off with him. 
I appointed Ray Dulip to support MirzA Rustam. As 
his residence was near that place, he collected a good 
body of men for that service. I increased his rank by 
.500 pf‘rsonal and horse, so that it l^came 2,000 with 
1,000 horse, and also gave him an elephant. Abfi-1-fath 
Dakhani had obtained a jagir in the Sarkar of Nagpur 
and that neighbourhood. He was disiniased in order that 
he might administer his jagir and look to the guarding 
and government of that country as well. Khusrau Bi 
tJzbeg w'as appointed to the faujdsrship of the Sarkar 
of Mewar. His rank of 800 personal and 300 horse 
was now increased to 1,000 personal and 500 horse, and 
I also presented him with a horse. As I had my eye 
on the old service of Muqarrab Khan, it occurred to me 
that I must not paas by the desire of his heart. I had 

’ Blochmann, p. 485. He acted in Kaebmir for his brother Hitahim. 



230 


BOIAB WBIOHMBMT. 


increased his rank and he had obtained good jagirs, but 
he longed for a standard and drums, and he was now 
honoured with these as well, ^ibt the adopted son of 
Kbwaja Beg-Mirzft 9^awi, was a youth of groat bravery 
and zeal. I gave him the title of Shanjar Sh&Q> and 
made him eager in the service 

On Thursday, the 22nd Shahriwar, corresponding with 
1 7th Rajab, 1021, the feast of my solar weighing took place 
in the house of Maryam-zamani. It is an approved custom 
with me to weigh myself in this manner. The late king 
Akbar, who was the place of manifestation of kindness and 
grace, also approved of the custom, and twice in every 
year weighed himself against several sorts of metals, gold, 
silver, and many precious articles, once according to the 
solar and once according to the lunar year, and divided 
their total value, whidi was worth about a lakh of rupees, 
among faqirs and needy people. I also observe this 
annual custom and weigh myself in the same manner, 
and give those valuables to faqirs. Mu'taqid Kbto, 
Diwan of Bengal, who had been relieved from that 
service, produced before me the sons and brothers and 
some of the servants of ‘Usman, whom Islam ^&n had 
sent with him to the Court. The charge of each one 
of the Afghans was entrusted to a responsible servant. 
'Ihen he (MuHaqid) produced his own offering, which 
consisted of twenty-five elephants, two rubies, a jewelled 
phul kcUdra^ (a kind of dagger), trustworthy eunuchs, 
Bengal stuffs, etc. Mir Miran, son of SulU^n Kbwaja, 
who was in the Deccan army, obtained the honour of 
kissing the threshold and gave a ruby as an offering. 
As between Qilij Khto. leader of the army of Bangasji 

‘ Thtt hafdra was a long, narrow dagger. Bee Blochmann’s Ayio, 
pi. xli, iig. 9. But the word phiU (Sower) is obscure. Ptebaps it means 
the knot or crochet of jewels called by Chardin, iv, 164, ed. Rouen, ** une 
enseigne ronde de pierrertes,” and which, he says, the Persians called 
* rose de Poignard.* 



APPOINTVEKn. DEATH OF AHIBU-L-DHABI. 231 


on the borders of Kabul, and the Amirs of that Subah. 
who had been sent as companions to him under his 
leadership, there were quarrels, especially with Kh&n 
Daur&n, 1 sent KhwAja Jah&n to make enquiry as to 
which side was in fault On the 11th of the month of 
Mihr, Mu'taqid Khan was appointed to the high dignity 
of bakhshi, and his mansab was raised to 1,000 personal 
and 300 horse. Raising for the second time the mansabs 
of Muqarrab Khan a little, I made it 2,500 personal and 
1,500 horse by an increase of 500. On the representation 
of the Khankhanan, Faridun Khan Barlas was raised to 
the mansab, original and increase, of 2,500 personal and 
2,000 horse. R&y Manohar received that of 1,000 peisonal 
and 800 horse, and Raja Bii Singh Deo that of 4,000 
personal and 2,200 horse. Bharat, grandson of Ramchand 
Bandilah, I, after the latter's death, honoured with the 
title of Raja. On the 28tli Aban, Zafar Khan, having 
come according to sunnnons from the Subah of Gujarat, 
waited on me. He brought os offerings a ruby and 
three pearls. On the 6th A^r, corresponding with the 
3rd Shawwal, news came from Burhanpur that the 
Amiru-l-uitiara had died on Sunday, the 27th Aban, in 
the parganali of Nihalpur. After the illness he had at 
Lahore hi.s intelligence appeared to be less, and a great 
lass of memory happened to him. He was very sincere. 
It is sad that he left no son capable of patronage and 
favour. Chin Qilij Khan came from his father, who 
was at Peshawar, on the 20th Azar, and offered (on his 
father's behalf) 100 muhrs and 100 rupees, and also 
presented the offerings he had of his own in the shape 
of a horse and cloth stuffs and other things. To the 
government of Behar I promoted Zafar KhAn, who is one 
of the trustworthy house-bom ones and foster-children, 
and increasing his mansab by 500 personal and horse, 

I made it up to 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse, and also 
honouring his brothers with robes of honour and horses. 



232 DEATH OF SALflCA SULTAN. 

allowed them to go off to that province. He had always 
hoped that he might obtain some separate service in 
order that he might show his natural ability. 1 also 
desired to prove him and make this service the touch- 
stone by which to try him. As it was the season for 
travelling and hunting, on Tuesday, the 2nd Zi-l-qa‘da 
(25th December, 1612), corresponding with the 4th Day, 
I left Agra with the intention of hunting and encamped 
in the Dahrah garden, remaining there four days.^ On 
the 10th of the same month the news came of the death 
of Salima Sultan Begam, who had been ill in the city. 
Her mother was Qul-rul^ Begam, daughter of King Babar, 
and her father Mirza Nuru-d-din Muhammad, of the 
Naqshbandi Khwajas. She was adorned with all good 
qualities. In women this degree of skill and capacity 
is seldom found. H.M. Humayun, by way of kindness 
(to Bairam), had betrothed her who was his sister's 
daughter to Bairam Kban. After his death, in the 
beginning of the reign of the late king Akbar, the 
marriage took place. After the said Khan had been 
killed, my revered father married her himself. She 
received mercy (died) in the 60th year of her age * On 
the same day 1 marched from the Dahrah garden and 
sent I'timadu-d-daulah to bury her (lit. lift her up), and 
ordered him to place her in the building in the Mandakar 

' He must have remained more than four days, for he got the news of 
Salima's death while in the garden. See infra. Perhaps the date 10th 
refers to Day and not to Zi-l-qa*da. The Dahrah garden was in the 
environs of Agra. 

* This statement is wrong. Salima was 78 when she died, she having 
been born on 4th Sbaww&l, 04S, or 23rd February, 1539. She died on 
or about 10th Zi-l-qa*da, 1021 (2nd January, 1613), so that she was 73 solar 
years old. See note in B.M. MS. Or. 171, Rieu, 257a, and an article in 
J. A.S. B. for 1906. The note is by the author of the T&rlkh-i-Muhammadi 
and is at 72a of the B.M. MS. Or. 171, and the corresponding passage 
appears in MS. Or. 182, on p. 140. The chronogram of Salima’s birth 
was which yields 945. She was about 3} years older than 

Akbar. 



APPOINTMENTO. 


233 


garden which she herself had diade. On the 17th of 
the month of Day, Mirza ‘All Beg Akbar^&hi came from 
the army of the Deccan and waited on me. Khwaja 
Jahan, whom I had despatched to the Subah of Kabul, 
returned on the 21st of the same month and waited on 
me. The time for his going and coming had extended 
to three months and eleven days. He brought twelve 
muhrs and twelve rupees as an offering. On the same 
day Raja Ram Das also came from the victorious army 
of the Deccan and paid his respects, and made an offering 
of 101 muhrs. As robes of honour for the winter season 
had not been sent to the Amirs of the Deccan, they were 
forwarded by the hand of Hayat Khan. As the port of 
Surat had been assigned in jagir to Qilij Khan, he prayed 
that Chin Qilij (his sou) might be despatclied for its 
guardianship and administration. On the 27th Day he 
had a dress of honour, and being honoured with a dress 
of honour and the title of Khan, and a standard, obtained 
leave to go. For the purpose of advising the Amix-s of 
Kabul, and on account of the disagreements that had 
sprung up between them and Qilij Khan, I sent Raja 
Ram Das, and bestowed on him a horse and rol)e of 
honour and 30.000 rupees for expenses. On the 6th 
Bahman, when iny camp was in the parganah of Bari, there 
came the news of the death of Khwajagi Mul.iaminad 
Husain, who was of the ancient servants of this State. 
His elder brother, Muhammad Qasim Kban, in the time 
of my revered father, found great favour, and Khwaja 
Muhammad Husain as well was one of his confidential 
servants, and held employments such as that of super- 
intendent of the kitchen (bakdwtU) and such like. He 
left no son and was beardless, and not a single hair of 
moustache or whiskers appeared on him. At the time 
of speaking he spoke very shrilly, and was looked upon 
as an eunuch. Sh&ti-nawAz Kb&n, whom the Kliankhanan 
had sent from Burhanpur to make certain representations. 



234 


APFOllfTlfENTS. HUKUNG. 


came on the 15th of the same month and waited on me. 
He presented 100 muhrs and 100 rupees. As the affairs 
of the Deccan, in consequence of the hasty proceedings 
of 'Abdu-llab Kb&n and the treachery of the Amirs, did 
not present a good prospect, the Dakhanis obtained an 
opportunity for speaking and began to talk of peace to 
the Amirs and well-wishers there. ‘Adil Kh5n embraced 
the robe of loyalty, and prayed that if the affairs of the 
Deccan were entrusted to him he would so aiTange that 
some of the districts which had been taken out of the 
possession of the officers of the State should be restored. 
The loyal ones, looking to the necessities of the time, 
represented this, and a settlement of some kind was 
arrived at, and the Khankhanan undertook to settle 
matters. The Kh&n A*^in was also desirous of putting 
down the rebel R&na, and begged for this service by way 
of obtaining merit (as a He was oidered to go to 

Malwa, which was his jagir, and after arranging matters 
there to take up this duty. The maiisab of Abu-l-bi 
Uzbeg^ was increased by 1,000 personal and 500 horse to 
4,000 personal and 3,500 horse. My hunting went on 
for 2 months and 20 days, and during that time I went 
out every day to hunt. As not more than 50 or 60 days 
remained befoi*e the world-illumining New Year, I returned, 
and on the 24th IsfandiyAr encamped in the Dahrah 
garden. The courtiers and some of the mansabdars, who 
by order had remained in the city, came on that day and 
waited on me. Muqarrab KbAn presented a decorated jar, 
Frank hats, and a jewelled sparrow (?). I remained three 
days in the gaiden, and on the 27th Isfandiyar entered 
the city. During this time^ 223 head of deer, etc., 
95 nilgaw, 2 boars, 36 cranes (or herons), etc., and 1,457 
fish were killed. 

’ The real name appean to be Aba-n-nabl. He had the title of 
Bah&dur Kh&n. See Ma'Aeiru-l-mnarft, i, 400. In the Akbar-nima, iii, 
S20 and 839, he in called Abil-l-baqd. 

* This must refer to the 2 months and 20 days of hunting. 



CBLEBKATIONS. 


235 


The Eighth New Year after the auspicious 
Accessiok. 

The eighth year after my accession, corresponding with 
Muhuram, 1022. On the night of Thursday, the 27tii 
Muharram, corresponding with the 1st Fsrwardiu in the 
eighth year after my accession, after 3^ gharis of day had 
elapsed, his honour the sun passed from the constellation 
of Pisces to that of Aries, which is his abode of rejoicing 
and victory. Early in the morning "of the New Year’s 
Day the feast was prepared and adorned after the custom 
of every year. At the end of that day I sat on the throne 
of State, and the Amirs and ministers of the State and the 
courtiers of the palace came to salute and congratulate me. 
On these days of happy augury I sat the whole day in 
the public audience hall. Those who had anything to ask 
or claim presented their petitions, and the offerings of the 
servants of the palace were laid before me. AbQ-l-bl, 
governor of Qandahar, had sent for an offering Iraq horses 
and hunting dogs, and they were brought before me. On 
the 9th of the same month Afsal Kb&u came from the 
Subah of Behar, and in waiting on me presented 100 niuhrs 
and 100 rupees, as well as an elephant. On the 12th the 
offering of Ptimidu-d-daulah was laid before me, consisting 
of jewels, cloths, and other tilings. That which pleased 
me attained to the dignity of acceptance. Of the elephants 
of Afsal Khto’s offering ten others were' inspected on this 
day. On the 13th the offerings of Tarbiyat Kli&n were 
laid before me. Mu'taqid Kh*n bou^t a house at Agra, 
and passed some days in that place. Misfortunes happened 
to him one after another. We have heard that prosperity 
and bad luck depend on four things: first, upon your wife ; 
second, np<m your slave ; third upon your house ; fourth, 
ap<ai your horse. In order to know the prosperity or ill- 
luck of a house a rule has been established, indeed they 



236 


ACCOUNT OP MAOH8- 


say it is infallible. One must clear a small piece of the 
site from earth, and again strew the earth upon the same 
ground. If it cover it, one may call it middling good 
fortune for that house, neither prosperity nor misfortune ; 
if it become less (i.e. does not cover it exactly) it points to 
ill-luck, and if it does more (than cover it) it is fortunate 
and auspicious. On the 14th the mansab of I'tibar Kh&n 
was raised from 1,000 and 300 horse to 2,000 personal and 
500 horse. I increased the mansab of Tarbiyat Khan by 
500 personal and 50 horse, so that it became 2,000 personal 
and 850 horse. Hu^ang, son of Islam Khan, who was in 
Bengal with his father, came at this time and paid his 
respects. He brought with him some Maghs, whose 
country is near Pegu and Arracan, and the country is still 
in their possession. I made some enquiries as to their 
customs and religion. Briefly they are animals in the 
form of men. They eat everything there is either on land 
or in the sea, and nothing is forbidden by their religion. 
They eat with anyone. They take into their possession 
(marry) their sisters by another mother. In face they are 
like the Qar& Qalmaqs, but their language is that of Tibet 
and quite unlike TurkL There is a range of mountains, 
one end of which touches the province of Kashghar and 
the other the country of Pegu. They have no proper 
religion'or any customs that can be interpreted as religion. 
They are far from the Musulman faith and separated 
from that of the Hindus. 

Two or three days before the Sharaf (the sun’s highest 
point) my son Kburrain desired me to go to his house that 
he might present his New Year’s offerings from that place. 
I agreed to his request, and remained for one day and one 
night at his house. He presented his offerings. I took 
what I approved of and gave him back the rest. The next 
day MurtazA KbAn presented his offerings. Every day 
until the day of culmination (ra^-i-sAam/) the offerings 
of one or of two or three of the Amirs were laid before me. 



APPOINTMENTS. 


237 


On Monday, the 19th Farwardin, the assembly of the 
Sharaf was held. On that auspicious day I sat on the 
throne of State, and an order was given that they should 
produce all sorts of intoxicating things, such as wine, etc., 
so that every one according to his desire might take what 
he liked. Many took wine. The offerings of Mahabat 
Khan were on this day brought to me. I gave one gold 
muhr of 1,000 tolas, which is called the star of destiny 
{kaukah-i~tali*\ to Yadgar 'All Khan, the ambassador of 
the ruler of Iran. The feast went off well. After the 
assembly broke up I ordered that they might carry off the 
furniture and decorations. The offering of the Muqarrab 
Khan had not been arranged on New Year's Day. All 
sorts of rareties and excellent presents were now produced 
which he had collected together. Amongst others, twelve 
Iraq and Arab horses that had been brought in a ship, 
and jewelled saddles of Frank workmanship * were pro- 
duced before me. To the mansab of Nawazish Khan 500 
horse were added so as to make it one of 2,000 personal 
and horse. An elephant called Bansibadan, which Islam 
Khan had sent from Bengal, was brought to me and put 
among my special elephants. On the 3rd Urdibihi^t, 
Khwaja Yadgar, brother of 'Abdu-llah Khan, came from 
Gujarat and waited on me ; he offered 100 Jahangiri 
muhrs. After he had been in attendance a few days he 
was honoured with the title of Sardar Kban. As a com- 
petent bakhshi had to be sent to the army of Bangash and 
those regions, I chose Mu*taqid Khan for this duty, and 
increased his mansab by 300 personal and 50 horse so 
that it became 1,500 with 350 horse, and dismissed him. 
It was settled that he must go quickly. I sent off 
Muhammad Husain Chelebi, who understood the purchase 
of jewels and collecting curiosities, with money to go by 


* Ztn-i-muraMfa* kdrl-i-Faranyl. The MSS. in the B.M. eeem to have 
zarum instead of ztn. 



238 


EXPERIMENTS WITH MCmIYA. 


way of Iraq to Constantinople and buy and bring for the 
Sarkar curiosities and rareties. For this purpose it was 
necessary that he should pay his respects to the ruler of 
Iran. I had given him a letter and a memorandum (of 
what he was to procure). Briefly, he saw my brother, 
Shah 'Abbas, in Mashhad, and the king enquired from him 
what kind of things should be brought for his master’s 
Sarkar. As he was urgent, Chelebi showed the list he 
had brought with him. In that list there were entered 
good turquoise and mUmlya (bitumen) from the mine of 
Ispahan. He told him that these two articles were not to 
be bought, but he would send them for me. He authorized 
Uwaisi Tupchi (gunner), who was one of his private servants, 
to hand over to him six bags (ambd'ncJia) of turquoise 
earth holding about 30 seers, with 14 tolas of mumiya 
and four Iratj horses, one of which was a piebald, and 
he wrote a letter containing many, many expressions of 
friendship. With regard t<j the inferior quality of the 
turquoise dust (hjiflka) and the small quantity of mumiya 
he made many apologies. The khaka appeared very 
inferior. Although the jewellers and makers of rings 
made every endeavour, no stone that was lit to be made 
into a finger ring could be produced. Probably in these 
days tunjiioise dust is not procurable from the mines such 
as it was in the time of the late king- Xahmasp. He 
mentioned all this in the letter. With regard to the effect 
of mumiya 1 had heard much from scientists, but when 
I tried it no result was apparent. I do not know whether 
physicians have exaggerated its effect, or whether its 
efficacy had been lessened by its being stale. At any rate, 
I gave it to a fowl with a broken leg to drink in larger 
quantity than they said and in the manner laid down by 
the physicians, and rubbed some on the place whore it was 
broken, and kept it there for three days, though it was 
said to be sufficient to keep it from morning till evening. 
But after I had examined it, no effect was produced, and 



APPOINTMENTS. 


239 


the broken place remained os it was.^ In a separate letter 
the Shah had written a recommendation of Salamu-llah, 
the Arab. I immediately increased his mansab and his 
jagir. 

I sent one of my private elephants with trappings 
to *Abdu-llah Khan and gave another to Qilij Khan. 
I ordered that assignments (tankhwali) should be made to 
12,000 horse on the establishment of 'Abdu-llah Khan 
at the rate of three horses and two horses for each trooper 
As previously with a view to service in Junagarh I had 
increased the mansab of his brother Sardar Khan by 500 
personal and 300 horse, and had afterwards assigned the 
duty to Kamil Khan. 1 ordered that he should retain his 
increase and that it should be counted (permanently) in 
his mansab. I increased the rank of Sarfaraz Khaii, 
which was that of 1,500 personal and 500 hoi*se, by 200 
horse more. On the 27th Urdibihisht, corresponding with 
the 26th KabPu-l-awwal, in the eighth year of my reign, 
in the year 1022 of the Hijra era, on Thursday, the 
meeting for my lunar weighing took place in the house of 
Maryam-zamani (his mother). Some of the money that 
was weighed I ordered to be given to the women and the 
deserving ones who had assembled in my mother’s house. 
On the same day I increased by 1,000 the mansab of 
MurtazA Khan, so that it came to 6,000 pei*sonal and 5,000 

' Jahangir’s words seem to imply that he caused the fowl's leg to he 
broken in order tc try the exfieriment. Manucci, has a good 

deal to say about mUmlyd, though he admits that he had not himself 
witnessed its effects. I do not find that Haji Babu descants on its 
virtues, though at the end of the first chapter he says that his mother 
gave him an unguent which she said would cure all fractures. The 
Persian translator, no doubt rightly, has rendered the word * unguent ’ by 
m&mtyd. With regard to the derivation of the word, may it not be 
connected with mom, ' wax ’ ? Vitilers has a long article on the word. 

* The text has Mrdddrf, ' brotherhood,’ ^ut the true reading, as 
shown by the D.M. MSS., is tar dwardl, Ji t means either 

the estaUishmeiit of *Abdn-Uah or a list submitted hy him. Perhaps 
’list* is a better translation, the word dwardl being connected with the 
dwarda-ntMd» of Wilson’s Glossary. 



240 


PAIHING OF CHEETAHS AND TIGERS. 


horse. Khusrau Beg, a slave of Mirza Khan, came from 
Patna in the company of 'Abdu-r-Razzaq Ma'muri and 
waited on me, and Saixlar Khan, brother of 'Abdu-llah 
Khali, obtained leave to go to Ahmadabad. An Afghan 
had brought from the Carnatic two goats that had pdzahar 
(bezoar stones, an antidote against poison). I had always 
heard that an animal that has pazahar is very thin and 
miserable, but these goats were very fat and fresh. 
I ordered them to kill one of them, which was a 
female. Four pazahar stones became apparent, and this 
caused great astonishment.. 

It is an established fact that cheetahs in unaccustomed 
places do not pair off with a female, for my revered father 
once collected togetlier 1,000 cheetahs. He was very 
desirous that they should pair, but this in no way came off 
He had many times coupled male and female cheetalis 
together in gardens, but there, too, it did not come off. At 
this time a male cheetah, having slipped its collar, went to 
a female and paired with it, and after two and a half 
months three young ones were born and grew up. This 
has been recorded because it appeared strange. As cheetahs 
did not pair with cheetahs, (still less) had it ever been heaid 
in former times (?) that tigers mated in captivity. As 
in the time of my reign wild beasts have abandoned their 
savagery, tigers have become so tame that troops of them 
without chains or restraint go about amongst the people, 
and they neither harm men nor have any wildness or 
alarm. It happened that a tigress became pregnant and 
after three months bore three cubs ; it had never happened 
that a wild tiger after its capture had paired. It had 
been heard from philosophers that the milk of a tigress 
was of great use for brightening eyes. Although we made 
every ef&)rt that the moisture of milk should appear in her 
breasts, we could not accomplish it. It occurs to me that 
as it is a raging creature, and milk appears in the breasts 
of mothers by reason of the affection they have for their 



EXCURSION. BUILDING OF A H08QUE. 


241 


young, as milk ^ comes into their breasts in connection 
with their young ones drinking and sucking at the time 
of their taking (the milk), their (the mothers*) rage 
increases and the milk in their breasts is dried up. 

At the end of Urdibihi^t, Kbwaja Qasiro, brother of 
Khwaja 'Abdu-l-'Aziz, who is of the Naqshbandi Khwajas, 
came from Mawara*a-n-nahr and waited on me. After 
a few days 12,000 rupees were given to him as a present. 
As Khwaja Jahan had made a melon-bed in the neighbour- 
hood of the city, when two watches of day had passed 
on Thursday, the 10th Kburd&d, I got into a boat and 
went to inspect the melon-bed, and took the ladies with 
me. We reached there when two or three gharis of day 
were left, and passed the evening in walking among the 
beds. A wonderfully sharp wind and whirlwind sprang 
up, so that the tents and screens fell down. 1 got into 
the boat and passed the night in it. 1 also passed part of 
the Friday in walking about the melon-bed, and returned 
to the city. Afza: Kb&n, who for a long time had been 
afflicted with boils and other sores, died on the 10th 
Klifirdad. I transferred the jagir and hereditary land 
of Raja Jagmaii, who had failed in his service in the 
iJrocan, to Mahabat Khan. Shaikh Pir, who is one of the 
omaneipated ones who hold aloof from the attachments 
of tlie Age, and who on account of the pure friendship 
that he bears towards me has chosen to be my companion 
and servant, hod before this founded a mosque in the 
parganah of Mairtha, which is his native place. At 
this time he took occasion to mention the circumstance. 
As I found his mind bent on the completion of this 
building I gave him 4,000 rupees, so ihat he himself 
might go and expend it, and also gave him a valuable 

‘ Tlie ficnten^ in very otmeure. MS. No. ISl I.O. has £ASii, * lilood,* 
instead of ch»irt, *iis,’ and perh.afi^ the meaning is bloofl in the breasts 
t III us to milk on account of love for their cubs, and then the fucking by 
tl:c latter increases the mother s iiatuial terocitv and the milk dries up. 



842 


ALTERATIONS IN AVDIBNOB HALL. 


rikswl Aod dwmieaed him. In the pnblic audience hail 
there were two railinge {maigar) oi wood. Inside the 
first, Amirs, ambassadors, and people of honoar sat, and 
no one entered this arde without on order. Within 
the second railing, which is broader than the first, the 
mansahdars of inferior rsmk,^ ahadis, and those who 
had work to do are admitted. Outside this railing stand 
the servants of the Amirs and dl the people who may 
enter the Diwankhana. As there was no difference 
between the first and second railings, it occurred to me 
that I should decorate the first with silver. I ordered 
this railing and the staircase that led from this railing 
to the balcony of the Jharokha, as well as the two 
elephants placed on the two sides of the seat of the 
Jharokha, which skilful people had made of wood, to 
be decorated with silver. After this was completed it 
was reported to me that 125 maunds of silver in 
Hindustani weight, equal to 880 maunds of Persia, 
had been Used up; indeed, it now assumed a worthy 
appearaice. 

On the 3rd of the month of 'Hr, Musaffar Kb&o came 
from Thatla* and waited cm me. He made an offering 
of twelve muhrs and a Koran with a jewelled cover, 
and two jewelled rose8(7) (da gvl). On the 14th of 
the same month ^ofdor Shin came from the Subah of 
Behar and waited on me, offering 101 muhrs. After 
Muuafhr Kbio hod been some days in attendance, 
1 increased his former mansab by 500 personal, and 
giving him a standard and a private shawl dismissed 
him to Thatta.* 

I knew that every animal or living thing bitten by 
a mad dog died, but this had not been ascertained in 

' la Um B.I1. MSS. ttM words aro mantabdMn-i-rfad-mtuuab. These 
last two woida are wanting in tlie toxt. 

* t'axt Pkttna, bat B.M. MSS. ham Thatta. 

* Text has Patna. 



TWO ELEPHANTS DIE OF HYDBOPHOBIA. 243 


the case of an elephant. In my time it so happened 
that one night a mad dog came into the place where 
was tied one of my private elephants, Qajpati ^ by name, 
and bit the foot of a female elephant that was with 
mine. She at once cried out. The elephant-keepers at 
once ran in, and the dog fled away into a thom-brake 
that is there. After a little while it came in again 
and bit my private elephant’s fore-foot as well. The 
elephant killed it. When a month and five days had 
passed after this event, one day when it was cloudy the 
growling of thunder came to the ear of the female 
elephant, that was in the act of eating, and it of 
a sudden raised a cry and its limbs began to tremble. 
It threw itself on the ground, but rose again. For 
seven days water ran out of its mouth, then suddenly 
it uttered a cry and showed distress. The remedies the 
drivers gave it had no effect, and on the eighth day it 
fell and died. A month after the death of the female 
elephant they took the large elephant to the edge of 
the river m the plain. It was cloudy and thundery in 
the same way. The said elephant in the height of 
excitement all at once began to tremble and sat down 
on the ground. With a thousand difficulties the drivers 
took it to its own place. After the same interval and 
in the same way that had happened to the female 
elephant this elephant also died. Great amazement was 
caused by this affair, and in truth it is a matter to be 
wondered at that an animal of such size and bulk 
should be so much affected by a little M^ound inflicted 
on it by such a weak creature. 

As Kb&nkhAnan had repeatedly begged for leave to be 
given to his son ShAh-nawAz Kb^n, on the 4th AmurdAd 
I gave him a horse and a robe of honour and dismissed 
him to the Deccan. I promoted Ya qub Badal^sbh whose 


Text Kaehhl, bat U is Gajpstl hi B.M. MSS. 



244 


HINDU CASTES. 


mansab was ISO, to 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse, on 
account of the bravery he had displayed, and gave him the 
title of Khan as well as a standard. 

The Hindus are in four divisions, and each of these 
acts according to its own rules and ways. In every 
year they keep a fixed day. The first is the caste of 
the Brahmans,^ that is those who know the Incomparable 
God. Their duties are of six kinds — (1) to acquire 
religious knowledge, (2) to give instructions to others, 
(.3) to worship fire, (4) to lead men to the worship of 
fire, (5) giving something to the needy, (6) taking 
gifts. There is for this caste an appointed day, and 
that is the last day of the month of Sawan, the second 
month of the rainy season.* They consider this an 
auspicious day, and the worshippers go on that day to 
the banks of rivers and tanks, and recite enchantments, 
breathe upon cords and coloured threads; on another 
day, which is the first of the New Year, they fasten 
them on the hands of the Rajas aiid great men of the 
time, and look on them as (good) omens. They call 
this thread rakhl? that is, preservation {nigah-da^t). 
This day occurs in the month of Tfr, when the wodd- 
heating sun is in the constellation of Cancer. The second 
caste is that of the Chhatri, which is known as Khatri. 
Their duty is to protect the oppressed from the evil of 
the oppressors. The customs of this caste are three 

^ This seems taken from AbO-l-fa^, See Jarrett, hi, 115. The third 
dnty, which Jahangir calls ** worshipping Are,'* is by AbQ-1-fafl termed 
Yftg, i.e. sacrifice. 

* It is the day of the fuU moon in Skwan that is holy. 

3 Blochmann, p. 184, and Wilson's Glossary. Badayfinl (Lowe, p. 269) 
speaks of Akbar's wearing the rdkhl on the 8th day of Virgo. 1 do not 
know why Jah&ngir calls the day after the last day of Skwan the first 
day of the New Year. Perhaps rdz-f-cfvpam here means ‘another day,' 
and not * the next day ' ; but then, if so, why is it the rakhi day, for that 
is in Sftwan? The Hindu New Year b^ns in Baisftkh (April). It will 
be observed from Jarrett, ii, 17, that S&wan is also the name of a month 
of A |»articu]ar length. Perhaps Jahlingir has confused the two things. 



HINDU CASTES. 


245 


things — (1) that they study religious science themselves 
bat do not teach others ; (2) that they worship fire, but 
do not teach others to do so; (3) that they give to 
the needy, but although they are needy take nothing 
themselves. The day of this caste is the Bijay dasamin, 
*the victorious tenth.’ ^ On this day with them it is 
lucky to mount and go against one’s enemy with an 
army. B&m Chand, whom they worship as their god, 
leading his army on that day against his enemy won 
a victory, and they consider this a great day, And, 
decorating their elephants and horses, perform worship. 
This day falls in the month of Shahrlwar* when the 
Sun is in the mansion of Virgo, and on it they give 
presents to those who look after their horses and 
elephants. The third caste is that of Baish (Vaighya) 
Its custom is this, that they serve the other two castes 
of which mention has been made. They practise agri- 
culture and buying and selling, and are employed in 
the business of profit and interest. This caste has also 
a fixed day which they call the DewAlI ; this day occurs 
in the month of Mihr when the sun is in the constellation 
of Libra, the 28th day of the lunar month. On the 
night of tJiat day they light lamps, and friends and 
those who are dear as.semble in each other’s houses and 
pass their time busily in gambling. As the eyes of 
this caste are on profit and interest, they consider 
carrying over and opening new accounts on that day 
auspicious. The fourth caste is the Sudras, who are 
the lowest caste of the Hindus. They are the servants 
of all, and derive no profit from those things which are 
the specialities of every Mother) caste. Thursday is the 
Holi, which in their belief is the last day of the year. 
This day oocura in the month of IsfandArmuz, when the 
sun is in the constellation of Pisf^es. On the night of 

* It M the 10th of A»win iSeptember). 

' The text wrongly han dar har tmdh inMtead of only dar mah. 



246 


RAKHI CEREMONY. 


this day they light fires at the head of the streets and 
ways, iftnd when it becomes day they for one watch 
scatter the ashes on each other’s heads and faces, and 
make a wonderful noise and disturbance, and after this 
wash themselves, put on their apparel, and walk about 
in the gardens and on the plains. As it is an established 
custom of the Hindus to bum the dead, to light fires 
on this night, which is the last night of the year that 
has passed, signifies that they bum the last year, which 
has gone to the abode of the dead. In the time of my 
revered father the Hindu Amirs and others in imitation 
of them performed the ceremony of rakhi in adorning 
him, making strings of rabies and royal pearls and 
flowers jewelled with gems of great value and binding 
them on his auspicious arms. This custom was carried 
on for some years. As they carried this extravagance to 
excess, and he disliked it, he forbade it. The brahmam 
by way of auguries used to tie these strings and (piece^> 
of) silk according to their custom. I also in this year 
carried out this laudable religious practice, and ordered 
that the Hindu Amirs and the heads of the caste ^ should 
fasten rakhis on my arms. On the day of the rakhi, 
which was the 9th Amurd&d, they performed the same 
rites, and other castes by way of imitation did not give 
up this bigotry; this year I agreed to it, and ordered 
that the brahmans should bind strings (of cotton) and 
silk after the ancient manner. On this day by chance 
fell the anniversary of the death of the late king.* The 
commemoration of such an anniversary is one of the 
standing rules and customs in Hindustan. Every year 
on the day of the death of their fathers and those who 


* The oegstive in text ie wrong apparently. It does not occur in 
MS. No. 181 1.O. nor in the B.M. MSS., wV.ich have^ instead of no, 

* That ia, 9tli Amordid corresponded with the Hijra date of Akbar'a 
death, Tia. 13ih JnnidA-ff-iia!, which this year, 1022, occurred in July. 
According to the tolar calendar Akbar’a death waa in October. 



AKBAR'S ANN1YER8ARY. STRANGE DEATHS. 347 


are dear to them, each according to his circumstances 
and ability prepares food and all kinds of perfumes, and 
the learned men, the respectable and other men assemble, 
and these assemblies sometimes last a week. On this 
day I sent B&b& Khurram to the venerated tomb to 
arrange the assemblage, and 10,000 rupees were given 
to ten trustworthy servants to divide among fakirs and 
those who were in want. 

On the 15th of the month of AmurdAd the offering 
of Isl&m m^n was laid before me. He had sent 28 
elephants, 40 horses of that part of the country which 
are known as tdnghan, 50 eunuchs, 500 pargMa nafta 
sitdrkdnl} 

It had been made a rule that the events of the Subaha 
should be reported according to the boundaries of each, 
and news-writers from the Court had been appointed 
for tliis duty. This being the rule that my revered 
father had laid down, I also observe it, and much gain 
and great advantage are to be brought about by it and 
information is acquired about the world and its in-* 
habitanta If the advantages of this were to be written 
down it would become a long affair. At this time the 
news- writer of Lahore reported that at the end of the 
month of Tir ten men had gone from the city to 
AmAnab&d, which lies at a distance of 12 kos. As the 
air was very hot, they took shelter under a trea Soon 
afterwards wind and a dust-storm {chaJcrl) flfpiang up, 
and when it blew on that band of men they trembled, 
and nine of them died under the tree, and only one 
remained alive ; he was ill for a long time, and recovered 
with great difficulty. In that neighbourhood such bad 

> PargdlmM wmm to b« elothst of aono oort. Perhapa tha word ia 
another form of of BloehaMao, p. Sa The tekt haa mtdriOm. 

Siidr meana a veil, but probably we ahookl read Somargacmt, *of 
SonargaoB.* Both the MSS. give the aomber of elephanta aa 68 iaatead 
of 2S aa io test. 



248 


VISIT VO SAMONAGAR. 


air was created that numerous birds who had their nests 
in that tree all fell down and died, and that the wild 
beasts (beasts of the plain^ perhaps cattle) came and 
threw themselves on to the cultivated fields, and, rolling 
about on the grass, gave up their lives. In short, many 
animals perished. On Thursday, the 13th Amurdad, 
having said my prayers (lit. counted my rosary), 
I embarked on board a boat for the purpose of hunting 
in the village of Samonagar, which is one of my fixed 
hunting - places. On the 3rd Shahriwar. Khan ‘Alam, 
whom 1 had sent for from the Deccan in order to despatch 
him to Iraq in company with the ambassador of the ruler 
of Iran, came and waited on me at this place. He offered 
100 muhrs. As Samonagar was in Mahabat Khans jagir, 
he had prepared a delightful halting-place there on the 
bank of the river, and it pleased me greatly. He 
presented offerings of an elephant and an emerald ring. 
The former Mras put into my private stud. Up to the 
6th Shahriwar I was employed in hunting. In the.se 
few days 47 head of antelope, male and female, and other 
animals were killed. At this time Dilawar Kb&n sent as 
an offering a ruby, which was accepted I sent a special 
swoi*d for Islam Khan. I increased the mansab of Hasan 
^Afi Turkoman, which was 1,000 personal and 700 horse, 
by 500 personal and 100 horse. At the end of Thursday, 
the 20th of the same month, in the house of Maryam - 
zamani, my solar weighing took place. I weighed 
myself according to the usual custom against metals 
and other things. 1 had this year attained to the age 
of 44 solar years. On the same day Tadgar 'All, 
ambassador of the ruler of Iran, and Khan 'Alam, wlio 
had been nominated to accompany him from this side, 
received their leave to go. On Yadgar *Ali there were 
bestowed a horse with a jewelled saddle, a jewelled .sword, 
a vest without sleeves with gold embroidery, an aigrette 
with feathers and a jhjha (turban ornament), and 30,000 



VISIT TO AKBAR’S tomb. DEPARTURE FOR AJMIR. 249 


rupees in cash, altogether 40,000 rupees, and on Khan 'Alain 
a jewelled kluipwa or phul katdra (a sort of dagger) with 
a pendant of royal pearls. On the 22nd of the same 
month I visited the venerated mausoleum of my revered 
father at Bihi^tab&d, riding on an elephant. On the 
way 5,000 rupees in small coin were scattered round, and 
I gave other 5,000 rupees to Khwaja JahAn to divide 
among the dervishes. Having said my evening prayers, 
I went back to the cit}’ in a boat. As the house of 
rtimadu-d-daulah was on the tank of the river Jumna, 
I alighted there until the ead of the next day. Having 
accepted wliat pleased me of his oOerings, I went towards 
the palace ; I'tiqad Khan’s hou.sc was also on the halxk 
of the river Jumna ; at his request I disembarked there 
with the ladies, and walked round the houses he had 
lately built there. This delightful place pleased me 
greatly. He had ptx)dq$ed suitable ufTerings of cloth 
stuffs and jewels and otker things ; these were all laid 
before me and most of them were approved. When it was 
near evening I entered the auspicious palace. As the 
astrologers had fixed an hour in this night for starting 
for Ajinir, when seven gharis of the night of Monday, the 
2nd »%a*ban, corresponding with the 24th »^ahriwar, had 
paased, I started in happiness and prosperity with intent 
to go there from the capital of Agra In this under- 
taking two things were agreeable to iiie^ one a pilgrimage 
to the splendid mausoleum of Kbw&ja Mu'inu-d-diii 
Chi.^ti, from the blessing of whose illustrious .soul great 
advantages had been derived by this dignified family, 
and whose venerable shrine I had not visited after iny 
accession to the throne. The second was the defeat and 
beating back of the rebel Rana Aiiiar Singh, who i.s one 
of the most considerable of the Zamindat*s and Rajas of 
Hindustan, and who.se headship and leadership and those 
of hLs ancestors all the Rajas and Rays of this province 
agree to. The administration has for long been in the 



250 


ACCOUNT OF BXNAS OF UDAIPITW. 


hands of this family, and they have long borne role 
towards the East, that is the POrab. They became in 
that time well known under the title of Rajas. After 
this they fell on the Deccan ^ and took possession of many 
of the countries of that region. In the place of Raja 
they have taken the title of Rawul. After this they came 
into the hill country of MewAt, and by degrees got into 
their possession the fort of Chitor. From that date until 
this day, which is in the eighth year after my accession, 
1,471 years have passed.^ 

There are twenty-six others of this caste who have 
ruled for 1,010 yeara. They have the title of Rawal, 
and from the Rawal who was first known as Rawal 
down to Rana Amar Singh, the present Rana, there are 
twenty-six individuals who have ruled for the space of 
461 years. During this long time they have never bent 
their necks in obedience to any of the kings of the 
country of Hindustan, and have for most of the time 
been rebellious and troublesome, so much so that in 
the reign of the late king Babar, Rana Sanga collected 
together all the Rajas, Rays, and Zamindars of this 
province, and fought a battle in the neighbourhood of 
Biyana with 180,000 horse and several lakhs of foot- 
soldiers. By the aid of Almighty Qod and the assistance 
of fortune the victorious army of Islam prevailed against 
the infidel forces, and a great defeat happened to them 
The details of this battle have been given in the Memoirs 
of King Babar. My revered father (may his bright tomb 
be the abode of unending Grace) exerted himself greatly 

1 See Jarrett, ii, *268, where it ie said that an ancestor of BSppa came 
to Berar. 

* According to Tod, Bi.ppa, the ancestor of the lUnS, acquired Chitor 
ill A.D. 728. Jah&ngir makes twenty-six princes rule for 1,010 years 
and twenty-six others only reign for 401 years ! Tod says the legendary 
ancestor Kenek Sen, the sixty-third from Loh, the son of Shm, emigrated 
from the Fsnjab to Gujarat in 145 a.d. Perhaps the Mewkt of the 
TOzuk is a mistake for Mew&r. 



BUBJECT CONTXEXJEl). 


251 


to put down these rebels, and several times sent armies 
against them. In the twelfth year after his accession 
he set himself to capture the fort of Chitor, which is 
one of the strongest forts of the inhabited world, and 
to overthrow the kingdom o the Rana, and after four 
months and ten days of siege took it by force from the 
men of Amar Singh’s father, after much fighting, and 
returned after destroying the fort. Every time the 
victorious forces pressed him hard in order to capture 
him or make him a fugitive, but it so happened that 
this was not effected. In the end of his reign, on the 
same day and hour that he proceeded to the conquest 
of the Deccan, he sent me with a large army and reliable 
Sardars against the Ranft. By chance these two affairs, 
for reasons which it would take too long to recount, 
did not succeed. At last I came to the throne, and as 
this matter was only half done, the first aimy I sent to 
the borders was this one. Making my son Parwiz its 
leader, the leading nobles who were at the capital were 
appointed to this duty. I sent abundant treasure and 
artillery with him. As every matter depends on its 
own season, at this junctui-e the unhappy affair of 
bJjLUsrau occurred, and I had to pursue him to the 
Panjab. The province and the capital of Agra remained 
void. I had necessarily to write that Parwiz sliould 
return with some of the Amirs and take charge of Agra 
and the neighbourhood. In short, this time again the 
matter of the R&n& did not go off as it should. When 
by the favour of Allah my mind was at rest from 
Khusrau’s disturbance, and Agra became again the 
alighting place of the royal standards, a victorious army 
was appointed under the leadership of Mah&bat Kh&n, 
*Abdu-11ah Kh^u, and other leaders, and from that date 
up to the time when the royal standards started for 
Ajmir his country was trodden under foot by the 
victorious forces. As finally the affair did not assume 



252 


KHTfSEATT SULTAN. HUNTING. 


an approved form, it occurred to me that, as I had 
nothing to do at Agra, and 1 was convinced that until 
I myself went there the affair would not he set to rights 
I left the fort of Agra and alighted at the Dahrah garden. 
On the next day the festival of the Dasahra took 
place. Accoiding to the usual custom they decorated 
the elephants and horses, and I had them before me. 
As the mothers and sisters of Khusrau repeatedly repi*e- 
seiited to me that he was very repentant of his deeds 
the feelings (lit. sweat) of fatherly affection having 
come into movement, I sent for him and determined 
that he should come every day to pay his respects to 
me. I remained for eight days in that garden. On the 
28th news arrived that Raja Ram Das, who was doing 
service in Bangash and the neighbourhood of Kabul with 
Qilij Khan, had died. On the 1st of the month of 
Mihr I marched from the garden, and di.smisscd Khwaja 
Jalian to look after the capital of Agra and guard the 
treasure and the palace, and gave him an elephant and 
a special robe (Jargtd), On tlie 2nd Mihr news arrived 
that Raja Baso had died in the thanah of Shahabad,^ 
which is on the border of the territory of Amar. On 
the 10th of the same month I halted at Rtip Bas, which 
has now been named Amanabad. Fonnerly this district 
had been given as jagir to Rup KhawAss. Afterwards, 
bestowing it on Amanu-llah, son of Mahabat Khan 
I oidered it to be called by his name. Eleven days 
were passed at this halting - place. As it is a fixed 
hunting - place, 1 every day mounted to go hunting, and 
in these few days 158 antelopes, male and female, and 
other animals were killed. On the 25th of the month 
1 marched from Amanai^Ad. On the 81st, corresponding 
with the 8th Kama/An, Khwaja A.bii-1-l.ia.san, w'horn 
I had sent for from Burhanpur, came and waited on me, 

ProLahly ^he town of that name in the Rajputana State of Jhalawar. 
See ** Rajputana (Gazetteer,** ii, 211. 



DEATH OF QlLiJ ^AN. ENTERS AJMIR. 253 

and presented as offerings 50 muhrs, 15 jewelled vessels, 
and an elephant, which I placed in iny private stud. 
On the 2nd Ab&n, corresponding with the 10th RamazAn, 
news came of the death of Qilij Khan. He was one 
of the ancient servants of the State, and obtained the 
mercy of God in the 80th year of his age. He was 
employed at Peshawar in the duty of keeping in older 
the Afghans full of darkness.^ His rank was 6,000 
personal and 5,000 horse. MurtazA Kban Dakhani was 
unrivalled in the art of pHUta-bdzi, which in the language 
of the Dakhanis they call yayanagi, and the Moguls 
^m^%T-hdzi, ‘sword-play* (fencing). For some time 
I studied it with him. At this time J exalted him with 
the title of Warzish Khan (Exercise - Khan). I had 
established a custom that deserving people and dervishes 
should be brought before me every night, so that I might 
bestow on them, after personal enquiry into their con- 
dition, land, or gold, or clothes. Amongst these was 
a man who represented to me that the name Jahangir, 
according to the science of abjad (numerals reckoned by 
letters), corresponded to the great name “ Allah Akbar.'* ^ 
Considering this a good omen, I gave him who discovered 
(this coincidence) land, a horse, cfish, and clothing. On 
Monday, the 5th Shawwal, corresponding to the 26th Aban, 
the hour for entering Ajmir was fixed. On the morning 
of the said day I went towards it. When the fort and 
the buildings of the shrine of the revered Kbwaja 
appeared in sight, 1 traversed on foot the lemainder of 
the road, about a kos. 1 placed trustworthy men on 
both sides of the road, who went along giving money 
to fakirs and the necessitous. When four gharis of day 
had passed, I entered the city and its inhabited portion, 
and in the fifth ghari had the honour of visiting the 
venerated mausoleum. After visiting it I proceeded to 

Tlie Rau4ianT««, called hy their enemieii the T&rikla. 

- Both .Jahangir and Allah Akljar yield 2S8« 



254 


FUSHKAB LAKE. 


the auspicious palace, and the next day ordered all those 
present in this honoured resting-place, both small and 
great, belonging to the city, and travellers, to be brought 
before me, tliat they might be made happy with numerous 
gifts according to their real circumstances. On the 
7th A^r I went to see and shoot on the tank of Pushkar, 
which is one of the established praying-places of the 
Hindus, with regard to the perfection of which they 
give (excellent) accounts that are incredible to any 
intelligence, and which is situated at a distance of three 
kos from Ajmir. For two or three days I shot water- 
fowl on that tank, and returned to Ajmir. Old and 
new temples which, in the language of the infidels, they 
call Deohara^ are to be seen around this tank. Among 
them Raua Shankar, who is the uncle of the rebel Amar, 
and in my kingdom is among the high nobles, had built 
a Deohara of great magnificence, on which 100,000 rupees 
had been spent. I went to see that temple. I found 
a form cut Out of black stone, which from the neck above 
was in the shape of a pig’s head, and the rest of the 
body was like that of a man. The worthless religion 
of the Hindus is this, that once on a time for some 
pai-ticular object the Supreme Ruler thought it necessary 
to show himself in this shape ; on this account they 
hold it dear and worship it.* 1 ordered them to break 
that hideous form and throw it into the tank. After 
looking at this building thei*e appeared a white dome 
on the top of a hill, to which men were coming from 
all quarters. When I asked about this they said that 
a Jogi lived there, and when the simpletons come to 
see him he places in their hands a handful* of flour, 
which they put into their mouths and imitate the cry 

^ Saimkrit Devahsrft, * an idol temple.’ 

* Rojputana Gazetteer,” ii, 69. 

* Inetead of dnft, *a handful of Sour,’ the R.a.fik<M3. has 
Im/ os wap, ' his spittle,’ and this seems more likely. 



UUNUNO. PORTUGUESE OUTRAGE. 


255 


of an animal which these fools have at some time injured, 
in order that by this act their sins may be blotted out. 
I ordered them to break down that place and turn the 
Jogi out of it, as well as to destroy the form of an 
idol there was in the dome. Another belief they have 
is that there is no bottom to this tank. After enquiry 
it appeared that it is nowhere deeper than 12 cubits. 
I also measured it round and it was about kos. 

On the 16th Aur news came that the watchmen had 
marked down a tigress. I immediately went there and 
killed it with a gun and returned. After a few days 
a nilgaw (blue bull) was killed, of which I ordered them to 
take off the akin in my presence and cook it as food for 
the poor. Over 200 people assembled and ate it, and 
I gave money with my own hand to each of them. In 
the same month news came that the Franks of Qoa had, 
contrary to treaty, plundered four cargo vessels' that 
frequented the port of Surat in the neighbourhood of 
that port : and, making prisoners a large number of 
Musulmans, had taken possession of the goods and 
chattels that were in those ships. This being very 
disagreeable to my mind, I despatched Muqarrab Khan, 
who is in charge of the port, on the 18th A^r, giving 
him a horse and elephant and a dress of honour, to obtain 
compensation for this affair. On account of the great 
activity and good services of TOsuf Khan and Bahaduru-1- 
mulk in the Subah of the Deccan, I sent standards 
for them. 

It has been written that my chief object, after my visit 
to the Kbw&ja, was to put a stop to the affair of the rebel 
R&n&. On this account I determined to remain myself at 

1 Text ajmabl^ 'foreign* or 'eUraoge,* and Doweon had the luune 
reading, for at vi, 337, we have the tranalation 'ahipa engaged in the 
foreign trade of SnraA* Bnt I adopt the reading of I.O. MS. 181, 
which ia as it does not aeem likely that Jah&ngir wonld intereat 

himaelf about ' foreign * ohioa. 



‘256 EXPEDITION OP RHAH JAHIN. 

Ajrnir and send on Baba KhurrAni. iny fortunate son. 
This idea was a very good one» and on this account, on the 
6th of Day, at the hour fixed upon, I despatched him in 
happiness and triumph. 1 presented him with a qaha 
(outer coat) of gold brocade with jewelled flowers and 
pearls round the flowers, a brocaded turban with strings 
of pearls, a gold woven sash with chains of pearls, one 
of my private elephants called Fati.i Gaj, with trappings, 
a special horse, a jewelled sword, and a jewelled klidpioa, 
with a 2 >/tdZ kiUara, In addition to the men first appointed 
to this duty under the leadership of Khan A*zam, I sent 
12,000 more horac with my son, and honoured their leaders, 
each according to his condition, with special horses and 
elephants and robes of honour, and dismissed them. 
Fida’i Khan was nominateci to the paymastership of this 
army. At the same time. Safdar Khan was despatched 
to the government of Kashmir in place of Hashim Khan. 
Ho received a horeo an<l robe of honour. On Wednesday, 
the 11th, Khwaja Abu-l-hasiin was made general pay- 
master (bal^^i-ktd), and received a dress of honour. 
1 had ordered them to make a large caldron ^ at Agi-a 
for tlie revered mausoleum of the Khwaja. On this 
day it was brought, and I ordered them to cook food 
for the p<3or in tluit pot, and collect together the poor of 
Ajrnir to feed them whilst 1 was there. Five thousand 
people assembled, and all ate of this food to their fill. 
After the food I gave money to each of the dervishes 
with my own hand. At this time Islam Khan, governor 
ot‘ Bengal, was promoted to the mansab of 6,000 pei-sonal 
and horse, and a flag was given to Mukarram Khan, son 
ol: Mu‘az/Am Khan. 

On the 1st of Lsfandarmuz, corresponding witli the 
JOth Mubiirrani, 1023 (20th Febi-uary, 1614), I left 


' '*Raj|iaUnA Gaietteer,*’ ii, 03. Tliere are now two largo caldrons 
(dfy) iiisido th« ditryak eucloauiH*. 



EUNTINQ. ISLAM KHIn’S DEATH. 


257 


Ajmir to hunt nilgaw, and returned on the 9th. I halted 
at the fountain of Hahz Jamal, ^ two kos from the city, 
and passed the night of Friday^ there. At the end of 
the day I entered the city. In these twenty days ten 
nilgaw had been killed. As the good service of ^waja 
Jahan and the smallness of his force for the defence and 
government of Agra and that neighbourhood were brought 
to my notice, I increased his mansab by 500 personal 
and 100 horse. On the same day Abu-l-fatb Dakhani 
came from his jagir and waited on me. On the 3rd of 
the same month news came of the death of Islam ^an ; 
he had died on Thursday, the 5th Rajab, in the year 1022 
(21st August, 1613). In one day, without^any previous 
illness, this inevitable event occurred. He was one of 
those born and brought up in the house (house-bom). 
The naturally good disposition and knowledge of affairs 
that showed themselves in him were seen in no one else. 
He ruled Bengal with entire authority, and brought 
within the civil jv.risdiction of the province countries 
that had never previously come under the sway of any 
of the jagird 2 irs or into the possession of any of the Chiefs 
of the State. If death had not overtaken him he would 
have done perfect service. 

The Khan A*^m had iiimself prayed that the illustrious 
prince should be appointed to the campaign agaiiist the 
Rana, yet, notwithstanding all kinds of encouragement 
and gratification on the part of my son (gh&h Jah&n), 
he would not apply himself to the task, but proceeded 
to act in his own unworthy manner. When this was 
heard by me, I sent Ibrahim Husain, who was one of 
my most trusty attendants, to him, and sent affectionate 

^ Haiis Jamal was the name of the saint Muliiu-d-din’s daughter 
(** Rajpuuna Gazetteer,” ii, 6*2). It lies at the back of the Taragarh hill, 
and is now commonly called Nar-chs^ma. The fountains, etc., are in 
a ruined state. Sir Thomas Roe visited this place (id., p. 1*2S). 
n * Shah-i-Jum*a, which ia Friday eve according to Blochmann. 



258 


MISBEHAVIOUR OF KHAN A'ZAM. 


jnenutges to him to say that when he was at Burhanpur 
he had daily begged this duty of me» as he considered 
it equivalent to the happiness of both worlds, and had 
said in meetings and assemblies that if he should be 
killed in this enterprise he would be a martyr, and if 
he prevailed, a ghazi. I had given him whatever support 
and assistance of artillery he had asked for. After this 
he had written that without the movement of the royal 
standards to those regions the completion of the affair 
was not free of difficulty. By his counsel I had come 
to Ajmir, and this neighbourhood had been thus honoured 
and dignified. Now that he had himself prayed for the 
prince, and everything had been carried out according 
to his counsel, why did he withdraw his foot from the 
field of battle and enter the place of disagreement ? To 
B&b& m^urram, from whom up till now 1 had never 
parted, and whom 1 sent in pure reliance on his (|£han 
Alum’s) knowledge of affairs, he should show loyalty and 
approved good-will, and never be neglectful day or night 
of his duty to my son. If, contrariwise, he should draw 
back his foot from what he had agreed to, he must know 
that there would be mischief. Ibr&him Husain went, 
and impressed these words on his mind in the same 
detailed way. It was of no avail, as he would not go 
back from his folly and determination. When B&b& 
Khurram saw that his being in the affair was a cause of 
disturbance, he kept him under observation and represented 
that his being there was in no way fitting, and he was 
acting thus and spoiling matters simply on account of 
the connection he had with Shusrau.^ I then ordered 
Mah&bat Kh&n to go and bring him from Udaipur, and 
told Muhammad Taq!, the diwan of buildings, to go to 
Mardesfir and bring his children and dependants to 
Ajmir. 

On the 11th of the month news came that Dulip, son 

^ ^asrau was married to his daughter. 



EZECUTIOy OF DULiP SINOH. NINTH TEAK. 259 


of Ray Siogh, who was of a seditious and rebellious 
disposition, had been heavily defeated by his younger 
brother, R&o Shraj Singh, who had been sent against 
him, and that he was making disturbance in one of the 
districts of the Sarkar of ^i 98 ar. About this time 
Hashim of Khost. the faujdar. and the jagirdars of that 
neighbourhood seized him, and sent him as a prisoner to 
Court. As he had misbehaved repeatedly, he was 
capitally punished, and this was a warning to ooany ol 
the seditious. In reward for this service an increase 
of 500 personal and 200 horse was made to the mansab 
of BSo S&raj Singh. On the 14th of the month a repre- 
sentation came from my son B&b& Khurram that the 
elephant 'Alain-gumin, of which the Rftnft was very fond, 
together with seventeen other elephants, had fallen into 
the hands of the warriors of the victorious army, and that 
his master would also soon be captured. 


The Ninth New Year’s Feant after my auspicious 

Accession. 

The commencement of the ' ninth year after iny 
auspicious accession, corresponding with the Hijra year 
1023 (1614). 

Two watches and one ghari had passed on the night of 
Friday, the 9th Ssfar (21st March, 1614), when the world- 
warming sun shed his rays on the constellation of Arie.s. 
which is his house of dignity and honour; it was the 
first morning of the month of Farwardin. The assembly 
for the New Year’s festival took place in the pleasant 
regions of Ajmir, and at the time of entry (of the sun 
into Aries), which was the propitious hour, I seated 
myself on the throne of good fortune. They had in 
the usual manner decorated the palace with rare cloth - 
stulTs and jewels and gem-decked things. At this 



360 


PB0M0T10N6. 


auspicious moment the elephant 'Alam-gum&n,^ which 
was fit to be entered in the private stud, with the 
seventeen other male and female elephants which my 
son Baba lyiurram had sent of the R&na’s elephants, 
were presented before me, and the hearts of the loyal 
rejoiced. On the 2nd day of the New Year, knowinj; 
it to be propitious for a ride, I mounted it and scattered 
about much money. On the 3rd I conferred on I*ti(}ad 
^an a mansab of 3,000 personal and 1,000 horse, 
increasing thus that which he had already, which was 
of 2,000 pei*sonal and 500 horse, and 1 distinguished 
him with the title of Asaf Khto, with which title 
two of his family had been previously honoured I also 
increased the mansab of Dayanat TQikn by 500 personal 
and 200 horse. At the same time I promoted I‘timadu-d- 
daulah to the mansab of 5,000 personal and 2,000 horse. 
At the request of Baba Khurram I increased the mansab 
of Saif Khan Barha by 500 personal and 200 horse, that 
of Dilawar Kh&n by the same number, that of Ki^an 
Singh by 500 horse, and that of Sarfaraz Khan by . 500 
personal and 300 horse. On Sunday, the 10th, the offering 
of Asaf Khan was produced before me, and on the 14th 
rtitnadu-d-daulah produced his own offering. From these 
two offerings I took what pleased me and gave back 
the rest. Chin Qilij Khan, with his brothers, relations, 
and the army and retinue of his father, came from Kabul ^ 
and waited on me. Ibrahim Khan, w^ho had a mansab 
of 700 personal and 300 horse, having been promoted 
to that of 1,500 personal and 600 horse, was appointed 
jointly with Khwaja Abu-l-hasan to the exalted dignity 
of paymaster of the household. On the 15th of this 
month Mahabat Khan, who had been appointed to bring 
Khan A*/.am and his son ‘Abdu-llah, came and waited 

* Tim “ Arrogant of the Karth” (Tod). 

‘ I'eiliups thiM menus Peshawar, for apparently Qilij was there when 
lie (lied. 



EXCLUSION OF KHU8RAU. 


261 


on me. On the 19th the assembly of honour was held. 
On that day the offering of Mah&bat Khan was laid 
before me, and I sent a private elephant called Rup 
Sundar for my son Parwiz. When that day had passed 
I ordered them to deliver Kh&n A'^m into the charge 
of Asaf Kban, that he might keep him in the fort of 
Gwalior. As my object in sending him to the fort was 
in case some disagreement and disturbance should occur 
in the matter of the Rana in consequence of the attach- 
ment that he had to Khusrau, I ordered him not to be 
kept in the fort like a prisoner, but that they should 
provide everything necessary for his comfort and con- 
venience in the way of eating and clothing. On the 
same day I promoted Chin Qilij Khan to a mansab of 
2,500 personal and 700 horse. To the rank of Taj Khan, 
who had been appointed to the charge of the province 
of Bhakar, I added 500 personal and horse. On the 
18th Urdibihisht I forbade Khusrau to pay his respects. 
The reason was this, that through the affection and 
fatherly love (I bore him) and the prayera of his mother 
and sisters, I had ordered again that he should come every 
day to pay his respects (kUmish). As his appearance 
showed no signs of openness and happiness, and he wa.s 
always mournful and dejected in mind, I accordingly 
ordered that he should not come to pay his respects. 
In the time of my revered father, Muzaffar Husain Mir/A 
and Rustam Mirza, sons of Sult&n Husain Mirza, nephews 
of Shah TAhinasp Safawi, who had in their possession 
Qandahar and Zamind&war and that neighbourhood, 
sent petitions to the effect that in consequence of the 
nearness to Khurasan and the coming of *Abdu-llah 
Kb&n tTzbeg to that country, they could not leave the 
charge of looking after the country and come (to pay 
their respects), but that if he (Akbar) would send one 
of the servants of the palace they would hand over the 
country to him, and theni.selves come to pay their respects. 



262 


HlRZlS OF QANOAHAB. 


As they repeatedly made this request, he sent Shah Beg 
Khan, who is now honoured with the title of Khan 

Daur&n, to the governorship of Qandahar and Zainin- 
dawar and that neighbourhood, and wrote tirinans full 
of favour to the Mirzas summoning them to the Court. 
After their arrival favours appropriate to the case of 
each were bestowed on them, and he gave the:n a territory 
equal to two or three times the collections of Qandahar. 
In the end, the management expected from them was 
not achieved, and by degrees the territory deteriorated. 
Mu^ffar Husain Mirza died during the lifetime of my 
revered father, and he sent Mirza RusUini with the 

Khankhanan to the Subah of the Deccan, where he 
had a small jagir. When the throne was honoured by 
my succession, I sent for him from the Deccan with tlut 
intention of showing him favour and sending him to 
one of the border territories. About the time he came 
Mirza Ghazi Tarkhan, who held the governorship of 
Thatta and Qandahar and that neighbourhood, died. 
It occurred to me to send him to Thatta, so that 

he might show there his natural good qualities and 
ivdminister that country in an approved manner. I pro- 
moted him to a inansab of 5,000 personal and horse, 
200,000 rupees w'ere given to him for expenses, and 
I despatched him to the Subah of Thatta. My 

belief was that he would do good service^* on tho.sc 
V)orders. In opposition to my expectation he did no 
service, and committed so much oppression that many 
people complained of his wickedness. Such newrs of him 
was heard that it w'as considered necessary to recall liim. 

* According to the Miiasir, iii, 486, in the biography of *i»tL Khan, 
Rustam wasi sent to put down the Tarkh&ns, and succeeded in doing ao. 
See also ibid., p. 438, in the biografihy of Rustam, where it is said that 
.Tahangir told him to send away the Arghuns. Perhaps the passage 
in Maasir, p. 438, which according to Blochmann, p. 314, means that 
Rustam ill-treated the Arghuns, rather means that he intrigued with 
them but oppressed the iieasantry. 



D£FE4T OF AHDIB AFGHAN. 


263 


One of the servants of the Court was appointed to 
summon him, and I sent for him to Court On the 
26th Urdibihisht they brought him. As he had com- 
mitted great oppression on the people of Ood, and 
inquiry into this was due according to the requirements 
of justice, I handed him over to Anir&’i Singh-dalan 
that he might enquire into the facts, and that if guilty 
he might receive prompt punishment and be a waming 
to others. In those days the news also came of the 
iefeat of Abdad, the Afghan. The facts are that 
Mu'taqid Khan came to Pulam ^ Guzar (ferry ?), in the 
district of Peshawar, with an army, and Khan Dauran 
with another force in Afghanistan and blocked the path 
of that rascal (lit. black-faced one). Meanwhile a letter 
came to Mu'taqid Kb&n from Pish Bulagh that Al.)dad had 
gone to Kot Tirah, which is 8 kos from Jalalabad, with 
a large number of horse and foot, and had killed a few 
of those who had chosen to be loyal and obey, and inadti 
prisoners of others, and was about to send them to Tirah, 
and intended to make a raid on Jalalabad and Pisli 
Bulagh. Immediately on hearing this news Mu‘ta(|i(l 
Khan started in great haste with the troops he had witli 
him. When he arrived at Pish Bulagh he sent out spies to 
ascertain about the enemy. On the morning of Wednesday, 
the 6th, news reached him that Alidad in the same 
place. Placing, his trust on the favour of God, wliich 
is on the side of this suppliant at the throne of Allah, 
he divided the royal army into two, and went towards 
the enemy, who, with 4,000 or 5,000 experienced men, 
had seated themselves haughtily in complete carelessness, 

' Though the text has Palaui, the real word neema to he lUm or 
Ailam. Ailam Guear appears to Ije a paas in a range of hills. It may, 
however, be a ferry on the Kabul River. That river seems to be also 
known as the Sb&h *Alam, and there is a ferry on it of that name. 
The text speaks of Kot llrah as 8 kos from .Jalalabad, but Tirah 
is much further away. The B.M. MSS. have Kotal-i-Tlnlh, 'theTir&h 
defile.’ 



264 


DEFEAT OF AFGHANS. 


and did not snspect that besides Khan Dauran’s there was 
an army in the neighbourhood that could oppose itself 
to them. When news came that the royal forces were 
coming against that ill-fortuned man, and the signs of 
an army were becoming manifest, in a state of bewilder- 
vTient he distributed his men into four bodies, and seating 
himself on an eminence a gunshot away, to get to which 
was a difficult matter he sent his men* to fight. The 
musketeers of the victorious army assailed the rebel with 
bullets, and sent a large number to hell. Mu'taqid Khan 
took the centre of his army to his advanced guard, and, 
not giving the enemy more than time to shoot off their 
arrows two or three times, swept them clean away, and 
pursuing them for 3 or 4 kos, killed nearly 1,500 
of them, horse and foot. Those left of the sword took 
to flight, most of them wounded and with their arms 
thrown away. The victorious army remained for the 
night in the same place on the battlefield, and in the 
morning proceeded with 600 decapitated heads ^ towards 
Peshawar and made pillars of the heads there. Five 
hundred horses and innumerable cattle and property 
and many weapons fell into their hands. The prisoners 
of Tirah were released, and on this side no well-known 
men were killed. On the night of Thursday, the l.st of 
Khtirdad, I proceeded towards Pushkar to shoot tigers, and 
on Friday killed two of them with a gun. On the same 
day it was represented to me that Naqib Khan had died. 
The aforesaid Khan was one of the Saifi Say y ids, and 
was originally from Qazwin. The tomb of his father, Mir 
'Abdu-l-Latif, is at Ajmir. Two months before his death 
his wife,^ between whom and her husband there was 

' Compare Price's Jahangir, p. 94. Ifc apfjearM from that account 
that Mu'taqid alia$ Lashkar lOian was originally called Abu-l-liusain. 
According to the account there, the prisoners were brought to Jahangir 
with the decapitated heads of 17,000 (!/ fiu.spended from their necks ! 

* She was a daughter of Mir Mnhmad, Akbar's secreury (Blochmann, 
p. 449). 



DEATH OF KAaiB KHAN. BIRTH OF AN ELEPHANT. 265 


a great affection, and who for twelve days was ill with 
fever, drank the unpleasant draught of death. I ordered 
them to bury him by the side of his wife, whom they 
had placed in the Khwaja^s venerated mausoleum. As 
Mu*taqid Khan had done approved service in the fight 
with Ahdad, in reward he was exalted with the title of 
Lashkar Khan. Dayanat Khan, who had been sent to 
Udaipur in the service of Baba Khurram and to convey 
certain orders, came on the 7th Khurdad and gave good 
account of the rules and regulations made by Baba 
Khurram. Fida’i Khan, who in the days of my prince- 
hood was my servant, and whom after my accession 
I had made bakhshi in this army, and who had 
obtained favour, gave up the deposit of his life on 
the 12th of the same month. Mirza Rustam, as he 
showed signs of repentance and regret for his mis- 
deeds, and generosity demanded that his faults should 
be pardoned, was, in the end of the month, summoned 
to my presence, and I satisfied his iiiiiid, and having given 
him a dress of honour, ordered him to pay his respects 
to me. On the night of Sunday, the 11th of the montli 
of Tir, a female elephant in the private elephant stud 
gave birth to a young one in my presence. I had 
repeatedly ordered them to ascertain the period of their 
gestation ; at last it became evident that for a female 
young one it was 18 months and for a male 19 months 
In opposition to the birth of a human being, which is 
in most cases by a head delivery, young elephants are 
bom with their feet first. When the young one was born, 
the mother scattered dust upon it with her foot, and began 
to be kind and to pet it. The young one for an instant 
remained fallen, and then n.sing, made towards its mother’s 
breasts; On tlie 14th the assembly of Gulab-pa.^i 
(sprinkling of rose-water) took place ; from former times 
this has been known os db-pd^i (water-sprinkling), and 
has become established from amongst customs of former 



266 DEATH OF MXN 8INOH. JAHlNOfR’S ILLNESS. 


days. On the 5th Amurdl^ (middle July, 1614) came 
news of the death of R&ja MAn Singh.^ The aforesaid 
Raja was one of the chief officers of my revered father. 
As I had sent many servants of the State to serve in 
the Deccan, I also appointed him. After his death in 
that service, I sent for Mirza Bhao Singh, who was his 
legitimate heir. As from the time when I was prince 
he had done much service with me, although the chiefship 
and headship of their family, according to the Hindu 
custom, should go to Mah& Singh, son^ of Jagat Singh, 
the Raja’s eldest son, who had died in the latter’s lifetime, 
I did not accept him, but 1 dignified Bh&o Singh with 
the title of MirzA RAja, and luised him to the mansab 
of 4,000 peiDonal and 3,000 horse. I also gave him 
Amber, the native place of his ancestors, and, soothing 
and consoling the mind of MahA Singh, increased his 
former mansab by 500, and gave him as an in* dm the 
territory of Qarha.^ I also sent him a jewelled dagger 
belt, a horse, and dress of honour. On the 8th of this 
month of AmurdAd 1 found a cliange in my health, and 
by degrees was seized with fever and headache. For fear 
that some injury might occur to the country and the 
servants of Qod, 1 kept this secret fi'om most of those 
familiar- ^ith and near to me, and did not inform the 
physicians and hakims. A few days passed in this 
manner, and I only imparted this to NQr-JahAn Begam 
than whom I did not think anyone was fonder of me ; 
I abstained from eating heavy' foods, and, contenting 
myself with a little light food, went every day, according 
to my rule, to the public Diwan-khana (hall of audience), 
and entered the Jharokha and r/htiscil-k/idna (parlour) 


' Man Siiigli died in the Deccan in 1614, and ap|iarently in the month 
of June. 

* Text pidar by mistake for pii/ar, 

’ Garlia, deecribed us BandhS in Ma'aair, ii, 176. It ie Garha- Katanga, 
i.e. Jabalpur. 



ACCOUNT OF ILLNESS. 


267 


in my usual manner, until signs of weakness showed 
themselves in my skin.^ Some of the nobles^ became 
aware of this, and informed one or two of my physicians 
who were trustworthy, such as Hakim Masihu-z-zaman, 
Hakim AbO-l-qAsim, and I.Iakim 'Abdu-sb-Sbahtir. As 
the fever did not change, and for three nights 1 took 
my usual wine, it brought on greater weakness. In the 
time of disquietude, and when weakness prevailed over 
me, I went to the mausoleum of the revered Kbwaja, 
and in that blessed abode prayed to God Almighty for 
recovery, and agreed to give alms and charity. God 
Almighty, in His pure grace and mercy, bestowed on me 
the vohe of honour of health, and by degi'ees I recovered. 
The headache, which had been very severe, subsided 
under the remedies of Hakim *Abdu-^-Sb&kiir, and in 
the space of twenty- two days my state returned to what 
it was before. The servants of the palace, and indeed the 
whole of the people, made offerings for this great bounty. 
I accepted the alms of no one, and oidered that everyone 
in his own house should distribute what he wished 
among the poor. On the 10th Shahriwar news came 
that Taj Khaii. the Afghan, governor of Thatta,* had 
died ; he was one of the old nobles of the State. 

During my illness it. had occurred to me that when 
I completely recovered, ina.smuch as I was inwardly an 
ear-boi*ed slave of the Kbwaja (Mu*inu-d-din) and was 
indebted to him for iiiy existence, I should openly make 
holes in my ears and be enrolled among his ear-marked 
slaves. On Thui*sday, 12th Sba^hriwar,* corresponding 
to the month of Biyab, I made holes in my ears and 
drew into each a shining pearl. W^en the servants of 
the palace and my loyal friends saw this, both those who 

> PerhaiJS tlie meaning ie that there waa an eruption. 

* Bmiirytla, which perhapa here means elder ladies of the liarem. 

3 This in Taih Beg (Blochmanii, p. 457). The text wrongly hea Patna. 

* Jahangir was bwn in this month, which then correafiondcd to Rajab. 



268 SOLAR WEIGHMENT. DEATH OF FARIdVN KHIN. 

were in the presence and some who were in the distant 
borders diligently and eagerly made holes in their ears, 
and adorned the beauty of sincerity with pearls and rabies 
which were in the private treasury, and were bestowed 
on them, until by degrees the infection caught the Ahadis 
and others. At the end of the day of Thursday, the 22nd 
of the said month, corresponding with the 10th Sba'ban, 
the meeting for my solar weighing was arranged in my 
private audience hall, and the usual observances were 
carried out. On the same day Mirz& R&ja Bh&o Singh, 
gratified and prosperous, returned to his native country 
with the promise that he would not delay (there) more 
than two or three months. On the 27th of the month 
of Mihr news came that Fariduu Kb&n Barlas had died 
at Udaipur. In the clan of Barlas no leader remained 
but he. As his tribe had many claims on this State and 
endless connection with it, I imtronised his son Mihr ‘Ali, 
and raised him to the iiiansab of 1,000 personal and horse. 
On account of the approved services of Khan Dauran, 
I increased by 1,000 his inansab, which became 6,000 
personal and 5,000 horae, original and increase. On the 
6th Aban the qurdimU9 (fhikdrla) reported that three 
tigers had been met at a distance of 6 kos. Starting 
after midday, I killed all three of them with a j^n. On 
the 8th of the month the festival of the Dewali came on. 
I ordered the attendants of the palace to have games 
with each other for two or three nights in my presence ; 
winnings and losings took place. On the 8th of this 
month they brought to Ajmir the body of Sikandar Mu'in 
Qar&wul (ghikari), who was. one of my old attendants 
and had done much service for me when I was prince, 
from Udaipur, which was the place where my son 
Sultan Kburram was staying. I ordered the qarawuls 
and his fellow-tribesmen to take his body and bury it 
on the bank of RAn& Shankar’s tank. He was a good 
servant to me. On the 12th Agar two daughters whom 



ARRIVAL OF XOCH BEHAR PR1RCE88ES. 


269 


Isl&m Kb&n in his lifetime had taken from the Zamindar 
of KOch (Behar), whose country is on the boundary of 
the eastern provinces, together with his son and 94 
elephants, were brought before me. Some of the elephants 
were placed in iny private stud. On the same day, 
Hushang, Islam Khan*a son, came from Bengal, and had 
the good fortune to kiss the threshold, and presented 
as ofTerings two elephants, 100 muhrs, and 100 rupees. 
On one particular night in Day 1 dreamt that the late 
king (Akbar) said to me: “Baba, forgive for my sake 
the fault of *Azlz Kb&n, who is tlie Khan A'zam.” After 
this dream, I decided to summon him from the fort (of 
Gwalior). 

There is a ravine in the neighbourhood of Ajmir that 
is very beautiful. At the end of this ravine a spring 
appears which is collected in a long and bix>ad tank, 
and is the best water in Ajmir. This valley and spring 
are well known as H&fiz JaniAl. When 1 crossed over 
to this place I ordered a suitable building to be made 
there, as the place was good and fit for developing. In 
the course of a year a house and grounds were made 
there, the like of which those ^ who travel round the 
world cannot point out. They made a basin 40 gaz 
by 40, and made the water of the spring rise up in 
the basin by a fountain. The fountain leaps up 10 or 
12 gaz. Buildings are laid on the edge of this 
basin, and in the same way above, where the tank and 
fountain are, they have made agreeable places and en- 
chanting halls and resting-rooms pleasant to the senses. 
These have been constructed and finished off in a 
masterly style by skilled painters and clever artists. 
Ah I desired that it should be called by a name 

' la tibia an alluaioti to aome oomplimentary remark of Sir Tliomaa 
Roe? Sir Tliomaa did not come to Ajmir till Uecember, 1616, Init 
Jahangir ia here apiiorently writing of what happened a year after 
hie^ieit to Ilafii:. Jamal. Tlie chronogram wae 1034 (1616). 



270 


HAFIZ JAHAI.. FERSIAN FKVIT8. 


connected with my auguet name, I gave it the name of 
Chashma-i-NOr, or the fountain of light.* In short, 
the one fault it has is this, that it ought to have been 
in a large city, or at a place by which men frequently 
pass. From the day on which it was completed I have 
often passed Thursdays and Fridays there. I ordered 
tluvt they should think out a chronogram for its com* 
pletion. Sa‘id& UilAnI, the head of the goldsmiths, 
discovered it in this clever hemistich : — 

** The pelttoe ' of SbAh Karu>d-dln Jshingir ” (10S4). 

I ordered them to put a stone with this carved upon it 
on the top of the portico of the building. 

In the begiiming of the month of Day, merchants came 
from Persia and brought pomegranates of Yasd and 
melons from K&riz, which are the best of Khurasan 
melons, so many that sU the servants of the Court snd 
the Amim of the frontiers obtained a portion of them 
and were vei-y grateful to the True Qiver (God) for 
them. I had never had such melons and pomegranates. 
It seemed as if 1 had never had a pomegranate Or 
a melon before. Every year I had had melons from 
Badaklisliaii and pomegranates from Kabul, but they 
bore no comparison with the Yazd pomegranates and 
the K&ris melons. As my revered father (may God’s 
light be his witness!) had a great liking for fruit, 
I was very grieved that such fruits had nut come to 
Hindustan from Persia in his victorious time, that he 
might have enjoyed and profited by them. I have the 
same regret for the Jah&ngM (so-called otto of 
roses), that his nostrils were not gratified with such 
essences. This 'itr is a discovery which was made 
during my reign through the efforts of the mother of 
Nttr-JabAn Begam. When she was making rose-water 

* il4iai-i.8ll&h Nsra-d-dln Jsh&nglr. lOM (M1S|. 8 m Vroeetdiags 
A.8.Bs for August, 1873, pp. 189-M. 



ono or KOSE8. 


271 


a seam formed on the surface of the dishes into which 
the hot rose*water was poured from the jugs. She 
collected this scum little by little; when much rose- 
water was obtained a sensible portion of the scum was 
collected. It is of such strength in perfume that if 
one drop be rubbed on the palm of the hand it scents 
a whole assembly, and it appears as if many red rosebuds 
had bloomed at once. Thei^ is no other scent of equal 
excellence to it. It restores hearts that have gone and 
brings back withered souls. In reward for that invention 
I presented a string of pearls to the inventress. Salima * 
Sid$ftn Begam (may the lights of God be on her tomb) 
was present, and she gave this oil the name of * ‘itr-;- 
JahangirL* 

Great difference appeared in the climates of India. 
In this month of Day, in Lahore, which is between Persia 
and Hindustan, the mulbeny-tree bore fruit of as much 
sweetness and fine fiavour as in its ordinary season. For 
stnne days pec^e were delighted by eating it. The news- 
writers of that place wrote this. In the same days 
BaUitar Kal&want, who was closely connected with 

‘Adil Hhto. inasmuch as he (*Adil) married his oem 
brother’s daughter to him, and made him his preceptor 
in singing and dwrpat* guftan, appeared in the habit of 
a dervish. Summoning him and enquiring into his 
dreumstances, I endeavoured to honour him. In the first 
ossemUy I gave him 10,000 rupees in cash and 50 pieces 
of doth of all sorts and a string of pearls, and having 
made him a guest of Asaf Sbfin* ordered him to enquire 
into his drenmatancea. It did not appear whether he 
bad come without 'Adil Sbfin’s permisdon, or the latter 

i BsWins disd is Uw 7th ysar, so that the dfaworscy most hove 
oce ar isd boom tine befoee thie nentton of it. 

* HimliieUiii, d kwpu i , "petit potaM eediooinneat odnpoet do einq 
hteietiohae ow one Bitaio rime.’* " It woe invented Iqr Raje Mta of 
OwoUor ” (Oer^in do Teeejr, Hist. litt. Hindonio, i, IS). 



272 <1D1L KHlK. ACCOUNT OF 8TRAN0B BIBD. 

had sent him in this guise in order that he might find 
out the designs of this Court and bring him news about 
them. Considering his relationship to 'Adil KhAn, it is 
most probable that he has not come without 'Adil Khan’s 
knowledge. A report by Mir Jamalu-d-din Husain, 
who at this time was (our) ambassador at Bijapur, 
corroborates this idea, for he writes that *Adil Khan 
has, on account of the kindness which has been shown 
by H.M. (Jahangir) to Bakhtar Khan, been very gracious 
to him (Jamalu-d-din). Every day he has shown him 
moie and more favour, keeps him beside him at nights, 
and recites to him durpats, which he (‘Adil Khan) has 
cojnposed, and wliich he calls (Juvenilia). “ The 

remainder of the facts will be written on the day when 
I get my dismis-sal.” 

In these days they brought a bird from the country 
of Zirbad (Sumatra, etc., Blochmann, p. 616) which was 
coloured like a parrot, but had a smaller body. One of 
its peculiarities is that it lays hold with its feet of the 
branch or peix;!! on which they may have placed it and 
then makes a somei*sauIt, and remains in this position 
all night and whispers to itself. When day corner it 
seats itself on the top of the branch. Though they say 
that animals also have worship, yet it is most likely 
that this practice is instinctive. It never drinks water, 
and water acts like poison upon it, though other birds 
subsist on water. 

In the month ^ of Bahman there came pijeces of good 


* SeA Rieu, 7416, who calls the iiatercM a treatine on music composed 
Ibr&hlm *Adil Shah II. This *Adil Sb&h was Firi^ta's iMitron, and 

reigned till 1626. Jamalu-d-din is the dictionary -maker and friend of 
Sir T. Roe. The sentence alx>ut reporting the remainder of the facts 
seems to be an extract from his report. Muhammad Waris, in his 
continuation of the Padshilh-nania, B.M. MS. Add. 6556, p. 438, 
mentions, with reprobation, that *Adil Sb&h had given his niece in 
marriage to a singer. • 

* Translated Elliot, vi, 339. 



SUBMISSION OF THE KImI. 


278 


news one after the other. The first was that the IUn& 
Amar Singh had elected for obedience and serrice to tiie 
Court. The circumstances of this affair are these. My 
son of lofty fortune, Suli&n Shurram, by dint of placing 
a great many posts, especially in some places where most 
people sud it was impossible to place them on account 
of the badness of the air uid water and the wild nature 
of the localities, and by dint of moving the royal forces 
one after another in pursuit, without regard to the heat 
or excessive rain, and making prisoners of the families 
of the inhabitants of that region, brought matters with 
the B&n& to such a pass that it became clear to him 
that if this should happen to him again he must either 
fly the country or be made prisoner. Being without 
remedy, he chose obedience and loyalty, and sent to my 
fortunate son his maternal uncle, Subh Sjuran, with Haridis 
JhSlk, who was one of the men in his confidence, and 
petitioned that if that fortunate son would ask forgiveness 
for his ofimices and tranquillise his mind, and obtain for 
him the auspicious sign-manual,^ he would himself come 
and wait on my son, and would send his son and 
successor Karan to Court, or he, after the manner of 
other Rqjss, would be enrolled amongst the servants of 
the Court and do service. He also begged that he 
himself might be excused from coming to Court on 
account of his old age. Accordingly my son sent them 
in company with his own Diwan Mull& Sbukru-llah, 
whom after the conclusion of this business I dignified 
with the title of Af^ Kb&n, and Sundor DSs, his 
major-domo, who, after this matter was settled, was 
honoured a’ith the title of B&y B&yftn, to the exalted 
Court, and i-epreseuted the circumstances. My lofty 

' Lit iiroeure for him the aign of the Uomod peu^ (fire fingon). 
Tho aigii-meniMl wee that of JehOnglr. See below. See eleo Tod’a 
Rajesthiui, re|iriDt, i, 411, for e rqMreaeuUtion of tho jme/e ; eleo p. 389, 
I® note hi. 



274 D£iLTH OP BAHADUR OF QUJARAT. ENGLISH VICTORY. 

mind was always desirous, as far as poGsible, not to 
destroy the old families. The real point was that as 
Rani Amar Singh and his fathers, proud in the strength 
of their hilly country and their abodes, had never seen 
or obeyed any of the kings of Hindustan, this should 
be brought about in my reigiL At the request of my 
son I forgave the Rftn&’s ottenoes, and gave a gracious 
farman that should satisfy him, and impressed on it the 
marie of my auspicious palm.^ 1 also wrote a farman 
of kindness to my son that if he could arrange to 
settle the matter 1 should be much pleased. My son 
also sent them ^ with Mull& Shukru»llah and Sundar. 
Dfts to the K&nft to console him and make him hopeful 
of the royal favour. They gave him the gracious farman 
with the sign-manual of the auspicious hand, and it 
was settled that on Sunday, the 26th of the month of 
Bahman, he and his sons should come and pay their 
respects to my son. The second piece of good news 
was the death of Bahadur, who was descended from the 
rulers of Gujarat, and was the leaven of disturbance and. 
mischief (there). Almighty Qod had annihilated him in 
His mercy: he died of a natural illness. The third 
piece of news eras the defeat of the WansR (Portuguese 
Viceroy), who had done his best to take the castle and 
port of Surat. In the roadstead’ of the port of Surat 
a fight took place between the English, who had taken 
shelter there, ind the Viceroy. Most of his ships were 
burnt by the English fire. Being helpless he had not 

‘ Patnia m/¥bdrak (Tod’s Rsjsstluui, i, 38S and 411). 

* Perhaps the unde and Hsridis, or the fnAd, ‘them,’ may the 
fsman. See Elliot, vi, 340, which has ‘my letiers.’ Tod has translated 
this part of the Tdsuk, i, 99SL 

* ilie text has and LO. 181 has khaur-i-biuidar. iChaw 

means a bay or gulf in Arabic. The battle is that between (^hptein 
Downton and the Portuguese, which took place in Januafy, 1615, and is 
described in Orme’s Hist, Fragments, p. 351, etc. See also Danvers' 
“ Portuguese in India,” ii. 170. TOe engagement was in the Swally 
chan net 



UALIK <AXBA.R. THE RXnX. 


276 


the power to fight any more, and took tc flight. He 
sent some one to Muqarrab Kh&n. who was the governor 
of the ports of Gujarat, and knocked at the door of 
peace, and said that he had come to make peace and 
not to make war. It was the English who had stirred 
up the war. Another piece of news was that some of 
the Rajputs, who had determined to attack and kill 
‘Ambar (misprinted (2bir), had made an ambush, and 
finding a good opportunity had gained access to him, 
when a slight wound had been inflicted on him by one 
of them. The men who were round ‘Ambar (again 
misprinted Ghlr) had killed the Rajputs and taken 
‘Ambar to his quarters. A very little^ more would 
have made an end of him. In the end of this month, 
when I was employed in hunting in the environs of 
Ajmir, Mubamnuul Beg,* an attendmit on my fortunate 
son Sul{&n Ebunam, came and brought a report from 
that son, and stated that the Rftn& had come with his 
sons and paid his respects to the prince; “the details 
would be made known by the report.” I immediately 
turned the face of supplication to the Divine Ck>urt, and 
prostrated myself in thanksgiving. I presented a horse, 
an elephant, and a jewelled- dagger to the aforesaid 
Muhammad Beg, and honoured him with the title 
Zfi-l-faq&r Sh&n.* From the report it appeared that on 
Sunday, the 26th Bahman, the Rftnfi paid his respects 
to my fortunate son with the politeness and ritual that 
servants pay their respects, and produced as offbrings 
a famous large ruby that was in his house, with some 
decorated articles and seven elephants, some of tiiem 
fit for the private stud, and which had not fallen into 

‘ BUiot, Ti, 340. Aa Mr. Rogen remarka, the aen t ence ia not aaaU|r 
FkobaUjt the trsnaUtion abMld he, “No one remained 
(oil the RaJimta having been killed) who eonid finiah off Malik ‘Ambar.* 

* ProbaUr the father or grandfather of the Mnhammad Beg Zd*l<fa)ilr 
who waa a aervaut of Anrangtfb (Ua’A|iru-l-umarS, 11, SO). 



376 


▲OOOVMT OF THE BInI AKD HU SON. 


oar hands and were the only tmes left him, and nine 
horses. 

Hy son also behaved to him with perfect kindness. 
When the R&nA clasped his fert and asked forgiveness 
foe his faults, he took his head and placed it cm his breast, 
and consoled him in such a manner as to comfort him. 
He presented him with a superb dress of honour, a 
jewelled sword, a horse with a jewelled saddle, and 
a private elephant with silver housings, and, as there 
were not more than 100 men witii him who were worthy 
of complete robes of honour (aar u p&), he gave 100 
sarupa and 50 horses and 12 jewelled khaptoa (daggers). 
As it is the custom of the Zomindars that the son who 
is the heir-apparent should not go with his fatiier to 
pay his respects to a king or prince, the BftnA observed 
this custom, and did not bring witih him Elaran, the son 
who had received the tikd. As the hour (fixed 
astrology) of the departure of that, son of loffy fortune 
from that place was the end of that same day, he gave 
Kim leave, so that, having himself gone, he might send 
to pay his respecta After he had gone, Karan 
also came and did sa To him also he gave a superb 
dress honour, a jewelled sword and dagger, a none 
with a gold saddle, and a special elephant, and on the 
same day, taking Koran in attendance, he p r oce e ded 
towards the illustrioas Courc. On the 8td Tslandtimns 
my return to Ajmir from hunting took fdaca From the 
17th Bahman up to that date, during which I was 
one tigress with three cubs and thirteen nilgaw 
had been killed. The fortunate prince encamped on 
Satnrday, the 10th of the same month, at the vfilage of 
Devrini, which is near the city of i^mir, and on order was 
given that all the Amirs should go to meet him, and that 
eoidi should present an oftring aocordn^ to hie standing 
and condition, and on the next d^y, Sunday, the 11th he 
should have the good fortune to wait upon me Tim naxt 



RBCBraov or sultjlm khubbam (cnAR jaiOh). 977 

day the prince, irith greet magnificence, with all the 
vietorioos foroee that had been i^ppcwted to accompany 
him on that aervice, entered the public palace. The hoot 
for him to wait on me waa when two watriiea and two 
gharia of the day had panned, and be had good fortune 
to pay hia reapeeta, and performed his proetrarions and 
aalutationa. He preaented 1,000 aahrafia and 1,000 rupees 
by way of offering, 1,000 muhte and 1,000 rupeea 1^ 
way of charity. I called that aon forward and embraced 
him, and having Idaaed hia head and face, favoured him 
witii special kindneaaea and greetings. When he had 
finished the dues of aervice and had presented hia offbringf 
and charities, he petiti<»ed tiiat Karan might be exalted 
with the good fortune <d prostrating himself and paying 
his respects. Irndered them to Inring him, and the Bakhshia 
arith the usual ceremonies of respect produced him. After 
prostration and salutation were completed, at the request 
of my son Kburram, I ordered them to place him in front 
on ^ right hand of the circle. After this 1 ordered 
Sburram to go and wait on his mothers, and gave him 
a qtedal dress of honour, consisting a jewelled dUirfsh 
(sleeveless vestX a coat of gold brocade, and a rosary of 
pearls. After he had made hb salutation, there were 
presented to him a speeial dress .of honour, a sperisl 
horse with a jewelled saddle, and a qiecial elephant. 
I also honoured Karan with a superb robe of honour and 
a jewelled sword, and the Amirs and mansabdarc had 
the honour of prostrating themselves and paying their 
reqwcts, and presented their offerings. Each of these, 
according to his service and rank, was honoured ' with 
favoniB. As it was necessary to win the heart of Karan, 
who was of a wild nature and had never seen assemblies 
and had lived among the hills, I eveiy day showed hifa 
smne fresh favour, so that on the second day of his 
attendanop a jewelled dagger, and on the next day 
a qieeial Iraqi horse with jewelled saddle, were given 



278 


OATIKAT £HIN*8 PUNISHMBNT. 


to him. On the day when he went to the darbar in 
the female apartments, there were given to him on the 
part of Nhr-Jah&n Begam a rich dress ci honour, a 
jewelled sword, a horse and saddle, and an elephant. 
After this I presented him with a rosary of pearls of 
great value. On the next dey a special elephant with 
trappings (taldyir) were given. As it was in my mind 
to give him something of every kind, 1 presented him 
with three hawks and three falcons, a special sword, 
a coat of mail, a special cuirass, and two tings, <me with 
a ruby and one with an emerald. At the end of the 
month I ordered that all sorts of doth stbfis, with carpets 
and cushions {named takiya) and all kinds of perfumes, 
with vessels of gold, two Qtyrati carts, and cloths^ should 
he placed in a hundred trays. The carried them 

in their arms and on their shoulders to the public audience 
hall, where they were bestowed on him. 

§&bit Khto ^ at the paradise - resembling assemblies 
was always addressing unbecoming speeches and making 
palpable allusions to rtimfidu>d>daulah and his son . 
Afaf Kbftn. Once or twice, showing my dislike of this, 
I had forbidden him to do so, but this was not enough'; 
for him. As I hdd very dear rtimidu-d*daulah’s good- 
will towards me, and was very closely ccmnected with 
his family, this matter became very irksome to me. As 
one night without reason and without motive he began 
to speak unpleasant words to him, and said them to 
such an extent that mgns of vexation and annoyance 
became evident in rtimadu-d-daulah’s face, I sent him 
next morning, in the custody a servant of the Court, 
to Aaaf Sbto to eay that as on the previous evening 
he had qpoken unpleasant words to his father 1 handed 
him over to him, and he might shut him up either 
there or in the fort of Qwalior, as he pleased; until he 


* R. A.B. MS. hsit LtaySut IShen, Mid has LO Ma. ISl 



GIFTS TO OERYISHSS. jUBTH OF GXAKSCHIUO. 279 


made amendB to his fotiiar I wotdd never forgive his 
fault. Acoording to the order Afal Kb&n sent him to 
Owali^ fort In the same month Jahftngtr Quli Shin 
was promoted to an increased mansab, and was given 
that of 2,500 personal and 2,000 horse. Ahmad Beg 
Shin* who is (me of the old. retainers ot the State, 
ecmimitted some faults oa the journey to the Snhah of 
Kabul, and Qihj ShAn, who was the commander of the 
army, had repeatedly complained of hU making himself 
disagreeable. Necessarily I summoned him to Court, and 
in order to punish him handed him over to Mahtbat 
Sb*n to condne him in the fcnrt of Rantambhor. Qisim 
Shin, governor of Bengal, had sent two rubios as an 
offering, and they were laid before me. As I had made 
a rule that they 8h<nild bring before me after two 
watches of the night had passed the dervishes and 
necessitous people who had collected in tiie illustrious 
palace, this year also after the same manner I bestowed 
on the dervishes with my own hand and in my own 
presence 55,000 rupees and 190,000 bighas of land, with 
fourteen entire villages, and twenty-six ploughs,* and 
11,000 f^rwSr* (ass-loads) of rice; I presented as well 
.732 pearls, oi the value of 36,000 rupees, to the servants 
who by way of loyalty had bored their ears. 

At the end of the aforesaid month news came that 
when four and a half gharis of ni^t had passed <m 
Sunday the 11th of the month, in the city of Burhanpur, 
Cod Almighty had bestowed on Snit&n Parwls a son 
the daughter of Prince MuiAd. 1 gave him the name of 
Sultta DOr-an^bsh* (long-tiioughted). 

' Oiitte. It doM not appear tliat tUa fa a land- m aae n re. 

* &artn&r. It ia a waf^t. Saa Jarratt, ii, SM, irifera a kharwar k 
aaid to ba equal to tan Hindnstani inannda 

* ProbaUy thia waa the aon who diod.ia the 14th year (TSsnk, p. 98^ 



280 


NEW TEAR CELEBRATIONS. 


The Tenth New Year’s Festival after mt 

AUSPICIOUS ACCESSION. 

When 55 seconds had passed on Saturday, Ist Farwardfn, 
in my 10th year, corresponding with the 8th^ of the month 
of Safar (March, 1615). 1024 Hijra, the* sun from the 
constellation of Pisces entered the house of honour of Aries. 
When three gharis had passed on the night of Sunday 
I seated myself on the throne of State. The New Year’s 
feast and cei'emonials were prepared in the usual manner. 
The illustrious princes, the great Khans, the chief officers 
and Ministers of State made their salutations of con- 
gratulation. On the 1st of the month the mansab of 
I'timAdu-d-daulah was increased from 5,000 persona^ and 
2,000 horse by 1,000 personal and horse. Special horses 
were given to the Kunwar Karan, Jahangir Quli Khan, and 
RAja Bir Singh Deo. On the 2nd the offering of Asaf 
Khan was laid before me; it was an approved offering 
of jewels and jewelled omameiits and things of gold, of 
cloth stuffs of all kinds and descriptions and was looked 
over in detail. That Vhich I approved was worth 85,000 
rupees. On this day a jewelled sword with a belt and 
band (?) (band u bdr) was given to Karan, and an elephant 
to Jah&ngir Quli KbAu- As I had made up my mind 
to proceed to the Deccan, I gave an order to 'Abdu-1- 
Karim Ma^muri, to go to Mandu and prepare a new 
building for my private residence and repair the buildings 
of the old kings. On the 3rd day the offerings of Raja 
Bir Singh Deo were laid before me and one ruby, some 
pearls, and one elephant had the honour of being accepted. 
On the 4th day the mansab of MustafA KbAu was 
increased by 500 personal and 200 horse to 2,000 personal 

* Should be 18th. See Elliot, vi, 341. LO. 181 Ims: SOth, tad 
tins is probably correct, blatam and hiufUam being often mistaken for 
one another by the copyists. B.M. MS. Add. 26215 has cfOsAam^a, 
Monday, instead ot »^mba, Saturday. 



PROMOTIONS. SOLAR ECLIPSE. 


281 


»nd 250 horse. On the 5th I gave a standard and 
drums to rtim&du-d-daulah, and an order was given him 
to beat his drums. The mansab of Asaf Kb&n was 
increased by 1,000 personal and horse to 4,000 personal 
and 2,000 horse, and having increased the mansab of 
Raja Bir Singh Deo by 700 horse, I dismissed him to 
his own country, directing that he should present himself 
at Court' at stated periods. On the same day the offering 
of Ibrahim Sb&n was laid before me. Some of all the 
kinds of things pleased me. Kishan Chand, of the sons 
of the Rajas of NagarRot, was honoured with the title 
of Raja. On Thursday, the 6th, the offerings of 
I*timadu-d-daulah were laid before me at Cha^ma-i-Nur ; 
a large meeting had been arranged, and by way of 
favour the whole of his offerings were inspected. Of 
the jewels and jewelled things and choice cloth stuffs 
the value of 100,000 rupees was accepted, and the 
remainder given back. On the 7th day 1 increased by 
1,000 personal the mansab of Kishan Singh, which had 
been 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse. On this day a 
tiger was killed in tiie neighbourhood of Chaghma-i-NOr. 
On the 8th I gave Karan the mansab of 5,000 personal 
and horse, and gave him a small rosary of pearls and 
emeralds with a ruby in the centre which in the 
language of the Hindus is called muj/rcun (Sanskrit for 
' remembrance ’). I increased the mansab of Ibr&him Kb&n 
by 1.000 personal and 400 horse, so as to make it 2,000 
personal and 1,000 horse, original and increase. The 
mansab of Haji Bi Dzbeg was increased by 300 horse, 
and that of R&ja Sby&m Singh by 500 personal so as 
to make it 2,500 personal and 1,400 horse. On Sunday, 
the 9th. there was an eclipse of the sun. when twelve 
gharis of the day had passed. It began from the west, 
and four out of five parts of the sun were eclipsed in 
the knot of the dragon. From the commencement of 
the seizure until it became light eight gharis elapsed 



282 BIRTH OP DARA raUKlTH. PROMOTIONS. 

Alms of all kinds, and things in the shape of metals, 
animals, and vegetables, were given to fakirs and the 
poor and people in need. On this day the offering of 
R&ja Stiraj Singh was laid before me; what was taken 
was of the value of 43,000 rupees. The offering of 
Bahfidur the governor of Qandahar, was also laid 

before me on this day ; its total value came to 14,000 
rupees. Two watches of the night had passed on the 
night of Monday, the 29th Safer (30th March, 1615), 
in the ascension of Sagittarius, when a boy was bom 
to B&b& jSbutram by the daughter of Asaf Kb&n ; I gave 
him the name of Dftrft Shukfth. I hope that his coming 
will be propitious to this State conjoined with eternity, 
and to his fortunate father. The mansab of Sayyid ‘Al! 
BArha was increased by 500 personal and 300 horse, so 
as to bring it to 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse. On 
the 10th the offering of rtib&r Khto was laid before 
me, and what was of the value of 40,000 rupees was 
accepted. On this day the mansab of Khusi-au Bl 
Ozbeg was raised by 300 horse, and that of Mangll Khto 
by 500 personal and 200 horse. On the 11th the 
offering of Muita^ Kbto was laid before me. . Of it 
seven rubies, one rosary of pearls, and 270 other pearls 
were accepted, and their value was 145,000 rupees. On 
the 12th the offerings of Mirzft B&ja Bhfio Singh and 
Bftwat SbAnlcar were laid before nic. On the 13th, 
out ' of the offering of Kbw&ja Abh-l-liasan, one qutlA 
(Egyptian?) ruby, one diamond,* one string of pearls, 
five rings, four pearls, and some cloths, alt(^ether the 
value of 32000 rupees, were accepted. On the 14th 
the mansab of fibwAja Abh*l-hasnn, which was 3,000 
personal and 700 horse, was increased by 1,000 personal 
and 500 horse, and that of WafAd&i Kb4n, of 750 personal 
and 200 horse, by 2,000 personal and 1,200 horse. On 
'^Uie same day MustafR Beg, the ambassador of the ruler 
of Iran, had the good fortune to wait upon me. After 



SIEGE or kXmgba. presents bt officers. 283 


completing the matter of Goijistan (Georgia), my exalted 
brother sent him. with a letter consisting of expressions 
of friendship and assurances of sincerity, with several 
horses, camels, and some stuffs from Aleppo, which had 
come for that fortunate brotner from the direction of 
ROm. Nine large European hunting dogs, for which 
a request had gone, were also sent by him. 

MurtasR SJjAn, on this day, obtained leave to go for 
the capture of tilie fort of K&ngrS, the equal of which 
for strength they cannot point to in the hill country of 
the Panjab or even all the habitable world. From the 
time when the sound of Islam reached the country of 
Hindustan up to this auspicious time when the throne 
of rule has been adorned by this suppliant at the throne 
of Allah, none of the rulers or kings has obtained 
possession of it. Once in the time of my revered father, 
the army of the Panjab was sent against this fort, and 
besieged it for a long time. At length they came to the 
conclusion that the fort was not to be taken, and the army 
was sent off to some more necessary business. When he 
was dismissed, I gave Murta^ SbAu private elephant 
with trappings. B&ia SCtny Mai, son of R&ja Bfiso, as 
his country was near that fort, was also appointed, and 
his previous mansab was increased by 500 personal and 
horse. Rftja Sony Sin|^ also came from his place and 
jagir and waited on me, and presented an offering of 
100 ashrafis. On the I7th the offering of MirrA Rustam 
was laid before me. Two jewelled daggers, one rosary 
of pearls, some pieces of doth, an dephant, and four Iraq 
horses were accepted. Mid the rest returned; their value 
was 15,000 rupees. On the same dite the offering of 
PtiqM Kbin, of the value of 18,000 rupees, was laid 
before me. On the 18th tlie ofluriiig of Jahftngir Qull 
Sbftn was inspected. Of jewels and ^doth staffs the value 
of 15,000 rupees was accepted. The mansab of PtiqOd 
Kbin. which was 700 personal and 200 hcmw, I itiereo^ 



284 


VISIT TO CHAraHiL-I'HffE. 


by 800 persoiiAl and 300 hone, so that with original and 
inerease it came to 1,500 penonal and 600 hone. Shusnm 
Bi tTzbeg, who was one of the disringoished sdidien. 
died of the disease of dysentery. On the 8th day, which 
was Thursday, after two watches and four and a half 
gharis had- passed, the ^o/raf (highest point of the suns 
ascension) began. On this au^iciouc day 1 ascended the 
throne in happiness and prosperity, and the people saluted 
and congratulated me. Whmi one watch of the day 
i-emained I went, to the Cha^ma-i-NOr. According to 
agreement the offering of Mah&bat Kbftn was laid befon 
me at that place. He had arranged beautiful jewels and 
jewellery, with cloth stuff and articles of all kinds that 
Mrere pleasing to me. Among these, a jewelled khapwa 
(dagger), which at his request the royal artificers had 
made, and the like of which in value there did not exist 
in my private treasury, was worth 100,000 rupees. In 
addition to this, jewels and other things of the value of 
138,000 rupees were taken. Indeed, it was a splendid 
offering. To Mustaf& Beg, the arnt me sador of the ruler 
of Iran, I gave 20,000 da/rah, or 10,000 rupees. On the 
21st I sent robes of honour by the hand of ‘Abdn-l-Qhafftr 
to fifteen of the Amirs of the Deccan. Bl^a Bikramhjlt 
obtained leave to go to his jagir, ana a speeia] shawl 
(parm narm') was given to him. On the same day 
I gave a jewelled wust-dagger to Mus|af& Beg, the 
ambassador. I increased the mansab of HOshang, the son 
of Isl&m IQiftn, vhich was 1,000 personal and 500 horse, 
by 500 personal and 200 horse. On the 23rd, Ibrihun 
Kbkn was promoted to the Subah of Behar. Zafar KbAn 
was ordered to present himself at Court- To the mansab 
(d Ibr&him Kbuit which was 2,000 personal and 1,000 
horse, 1 added 500 persmial and 1,000 hrase. Saif KbAn 
on the same day was dismissed to his jagir, as well as 

* Akbar used the woid pmrm iwrm, 'vwy aeft,' m a mbstituta for 
‘■bawl ’ (BlochaaiaMi, p. SO). 



PB0M0T10N8. VALUABLE BVBT. 


285 


91 ^ Bl Osbeg, who wa6 honoured with tiie title of tlzbeg- 
SbftiL Bahidura-l-mulk, who belonged to the anuy of 
the Deocen. and held the manaab of 2,500 personal and 
2,100 horse received an increase 500 personal and 200 
horse. An in c r e as e of 200 was made in the mansab of 
Taql, which was 800 personal and 180 horse. 
On the 25th an increase of 200 horse was made in the 
rank of Salftmu-llah, the Arab, so that it became 1,500 
personal and 1,000 horse. I presented Mah&bat KhAn 
with the black piebald horse out of my special horses 
which the ruler of Iran had sent die. At the end of the 
day of Thursday I went to the house of BabA Sburxam 
and remained there till a watch of the night had pafinrd 
His second offering was laid before me on tiiat day. 
On the first day he paid his respects he laid before me 
a celebrated ruby oi the BAnA, which, on the day of his 
paying his respects, he had made an offering of to my son, 
and which the jewellers valued at 60,000 rupees. It was 
not worthy of the praue they had given it. The weight 
of this ruby was eight tOmk}- and it was formerly in 
the possession of BAy Haldeo, who was the chief of the 
tribe of the BAthors and one of the diief rulers (or Bays) 
of Hindustan. From him it waS' transferred to his son 
Chandar Sen. who. in the days of his wretchedness and 
hopeiessneas, sold it to BAna Uday Singh. From him it 
went to BAna PartAp, and afterwards to tiiia BAnA 
Amar Singh. As thay had no more valuaUe gift in 
their family, he presented it on the day that he 
paid his respects to my fmrtunate son BAbA Sburram, 
together with the whole of his stud of elephants, which, 
according to the Indian idiom, they call gheta ehSr.* 

* Aeaofding to Okdwin, flS tooks ■■ one air. Tew tneahee aeks 
a teak, aad a madia is aboat 18 grains toop. . 

• Vssk Aids dUtr. Bat the two B.1I. 1C8& whisk, 

I hara oowoltod have ao and have Malta or j A sIta cjkSr. I think 
that the word mast bo HSI, flMS, Whioh ia 8aaakiit SMoan a troop' 



286 


PRESENTS. PROHOXIONS. 


I ordered them to engrave on the ruby that at the time 
of pa3dng his respects Bana Amar Singh had presented it 
as an offering to Sultan Khurram. On that day certain 
other things from among the offerings of Baba Khurram 
were accepted. Among them was a little crystal box of 
Frank work, made with great taste, with some emeralds, 
three rings, four Iraq horses, and various other things, 
the value of which was 80,000 rupees. On the day 
on which I went to his house he had prepared a great 
offering, in fact there were laid before me things and 
rarities w'orth about four or five lakhs of rupees. Of 
these the equivalent of 100,000 rupees was taken away 
and the balance given to him. 

On the 28th the mansab of Klnvaja Jahan, which was 

3.000 personal and 1,800 horse, was increased by 500 
personal and 400 hoi-se. In the end of the month I 
presented Ibrahim Khan with a horse, a robe of honour, 
a jewelled dagger, a standard and drums, and dismissed 
him to the province of Behar. The office of *arz-mukarrir 
(reviser of petitions), that belonged to Khwajagi Haji 
Muhammad, as he had died, I gave to Muldilis Khan, 
who was in m^^ confidence. Three hundred horse were 
increased in the mansab of Dilawar Khan, who now had 

1.000 personal and horse. As the hour of the leave-taking 
of Kunwar Karan was at hand, I was desirous of showing 
him my skill in shooting with a gun. Just at this time 
the qarawvlan (shikaris) birnght in new's of a tigress. 
Though it is an established custom of mine only to hunt 
male tigers, yet, in consideration that no other tiger 
might be obtained before his departure, I went for the 
tigreas. I took with me Karan, and said to him that 
I would hit it wdierever he wished me to do so. After 
this arrangement I went to the place where they had 

of elephants assembled for war. I am not sure what the word char 
means, but |)ui-hups it is only an affix. According to AbQd-fa^l a herd 
of (wild) elephants is called aahn (Blochmann, p. 122). 



SUCCESSFUL SHOT. PARDONS KHAN A^ZAM. 287 


marked down the tiger. By chance there was a wind 
and disturbance in the air, and the female elephant on 
which 1 was mounted was terrified of the tigress and 
would not > stand still. Notwithstanding these two great 
obstacles to shooting, I shot straight towards her eye. 
God Almighty did not allow me to be ashamed before 
that prince, and, as I had agreed, I shot her in the eye. 
On the same day Karan petitioned me for a special gun, 
and I gave him a special Turkish one. 

As on the day for his departure I had not given 
Ibrahim Khan an elephant, I now gave him a special 
elephant, and I also sent an elephant to Bahaduru-l-mulk 
and one to Wafadar Khan. On the 8th Urdibihi^t the 
assemblage for my lunar weighing was held, and I weighed 
myself against silver and other things, distributing 
them amongst the deserving and needy. Naw&zish 
Khftn took leave to go to his jagir, which was in Malwa. 
On the same day I gave an elephant to Khw&ja Abu-1- 
hasan. On the 9th they brought Khan A'zam, who had 
come to Agra from the fort of Gwalior, and who had 
been sent for. Though he had been guilty of many 
offences, and in all that [ had done to him I was right, 
yet when they brought him into my presence and my 
eye fell on him, I perceived more shame in myself than 
in him. Having pardoned all his offences, I gave him 
the shawl I had round my waist. I gave Kunwar Karan 
100,000 darab. On the same day Raja SQraj Singh 
brought a large elephant of the name of Ran-rawat, 
which was a celebrated elephant of his, as an ofiering. 
In fact, it was such a rare elephant that I put it into 
my private stud. On the 10th the offering of Khwaja 
Jahan, which he sent me from Agra by the hand of his 
son, was laid before me. It was of all kinds of things, 
of the value of 40,000 rupees. On the 12th the offering 
of Khan Daurftn, which consisted of forty-five ^ horse 

> PanJ tngikt, i.e. 9 by 5. The fcext has taavr 



288 


GIFTS AND PROMOTIONS. 


two strings of camels^ Arabian dogs (greyhounds), and 
hunting animals (hawks ?), was brought before me. On 
the same day seven other elephants from R&ja Suraj 
Singh were also brought to me as an offering, and were 
placed in my private stud. Tabayyur Khah, after he had 
been in attendance on me for four months, to-day got 
leave to go. A message was sent to ‘Adil Khan. I 
impressed on him the profit and loss of friendship and 
enmity, and made an agreement (with Tabayyur Khan) 
that all these words should be repeated to 'Adil Khan, 
and he should bring him back to the path of loyalty 
and obedience. At the time of his taking leave I also 
bestowed on him certain things. On the whole, in this 
short time, what with the gifts bestowed on him by me 
privately, by the princes, and those given him by the 
Amirs according to order, the account mounted up to 
about 100,000 rupees that he had received. On the 
14th the rank and reward of my son Khurram were 
fixed. His mansab had been one of 12,000 personal and 
6,000 horse, and that of his brother (Parwiz) 15,000 
personal and 8,000 horse. I ordered his mansab to be 
made equal with that of Parwiz, besides other rewards. 
1 gave him a private elephant of the name of Panchi 
Qaj,^ with accoutrements of the value of 12,000 rupees. 
On the 16th an elephant was given to Mah&bat Kh&n. 
On the 17th the mansab of Raja Suraj Singh, which 
was 4,000 personal and 3,000 horse, was increased by 
1,000, and it was raised to 5,000. At the request of 
'Abdu-llah bJl^n the mansab of Khwaja ‘Abdu-l-Latif, 
which was 500 personal and 200 horse, was raised by 
200, and it was ordered to be 1,000 personal and 400 
horse. 'Abdu-llah, the son of Kh&n A*^m, who was 
imprisoned in the foi*t of Rantambhor, was sent for at 
the request of his father. He came to the Court, and 

* The B.M. MSS. Beeni to have panch ‘five elephants,* 

i.e. equal to live elephaute (?). 



ELEPHANTS. PROMOTIONS. 


289 


I took the chains oflT his legs and sent him to his father’s 
house. On the 24th, Raja Suraj Singh presented me 
with another elephant, called Fauj-sangar (* ornament of 
the army*), by way of ofTering. Although this is also 
a good elephant, and has been placed in my private stud, 
it is not to be compared with the first elephant (he 
sent), which is one of the wonders of the age, and is 
worth 20,000 rupees. On the 26th, 200 personal were 
added to the mansab of Badi'u-z-zaman, son of Mirza 
Shahrukh ; it was 700 personal and 500 horse. On the 
same day Khwaja Zainu-d>din, who is of the Naqshband! 
Khwajas, came from Mawara’a-n-nahr and waited on me, 
bringing as sn offering eighteen horses. Qizilbn^ Khan, 
who was one of the auxiliaries of the province of Gujarat, 
had come to Court without the leave of the governor. 
I ordered that an ahadi should put him into confine- 
ment, and that he be sent back to the governor of 
Gujarat, so that others might not desire to do the same. 
The mansab of Mubarak Khan Sazawal I raised 500 
personal, so that it should be 1,500 personal and 700 
horse. On the 29tti I gave Khan A'zam 100,000 rupees, 
and ordered that the parganahs of Dasna^ and Kasna,^ 
which are equivalent to 5,000 personal, should be made 
his jagir. At the end of the same month I gave leave 
to Jahangir Quli Khan, with his brothers and other 
relatives, to go to Allahabad, which had been appropriated 
to them as jagir. At this meeting twenty horse, a qabd 
{panm narm) of Cashmere cloth, twelve deer, and ten 
Arabian dogs were given to Karan. The next day, 
which vras the 1st KbOrd^* forty horse, the next day 
forty-one horse, and the third day twenty, amounting 
in the space of three days to 101 head, were given ,as 
a present to Kunwar Karaa In return for the elephant 
Fauj-sangar, an elephant worth 10,000 rupees out of 


19 


^ In Sarkar Delhi (Jairett, ii. 287). 



290 


A. bebvish’s strange death. 

my private stud was presented to Baja Suraj Singh. 
On the 5th of the month ten turbans (chira), ten coats 
(qaba), and ten waist-hands were given to Karan. On 
the 20th I gave him another elephant. 

In these days the news-writer of Kashmir had written 
that a Mulla of the name of Oada*i, a disciplined dervish, 
who for forty years had lived in one of the monasteries 
of the city, had prayed the inheritors of that monastery 
two years ^ before he was to deliver over the pledge of 
his life that he might select a comer in that monastery 
as a place for his burial. They said, Lee it be so.*’ In 
short, he selected a place. When the time for his delivery 
came he informed his friends and relations and those 
who were dear to him that an order had reached him 
that, delivering over the pledge (of life) he had, he should 
turn towards the last world. Those who were present 
wondered at his words, and said that the prophets had 
no such information, and how could they believe such 
wolds ? He said, Such an order has been given to 
ma” He then turned to one of his confidants, who was 
of the sons of the Qaris of the country, and said : You 
will expend the price* of my Koran, which is worth 
700 tankas, in carrying me (to the grave). When you 
hear the call to Friday's prayer you will enquire for 
me.’* This conversation took place on the Thursday, 
and he divided all the goods in his room among his 
acquaintance and disciples, and went, and at end of the 
day bathed at the baths. The Qftsi-zada aforesaid came 
before the call for prayer, and enquired as to the health 
of the Mulla. When he came to the door of the cell 

^ The text does not expressly say that the dervish foretold two years 
before his death the period of his death, but apparently Jsh&ngir 
means this, for he goes on to speak of the time mentioned for his 
delivery. See also Iqbkl-nfima, p. SI, where the dervish is called SUiSs, 
and where it is added that the whole population of Srinagar followed 
the bier. 

* Lit. give it, for the Koran cannot be directly sold. 



SUBJECT CONTINUED. KIJPCT FIGHT. 


291 


he found the door closed and a servant sitting there. 
He asked the slave what had happened, and the servant 
said, '*The Mull& has enjoined me that until the door 
of the cell open of its own accord I must not go in." 
Shortly after these words were said the door of the 
cell opened. The Qazi-zada entered the cell with that 
servant and saw that the Mulla was on his knees with 
his face turned toward the qibla, and had given up 
his soul to God. Happy the state of the freed who can 
fly away from this place of the snares of dependence 
with such ease ! 

By the increase of 200 personal and 50 horse in the 
iiiansab of Karam Sen Rathor, I raised it to 1,000 personal 
and 300 horse. On the 11th of this month the offering 
of Lashkar Khan, which onsisted of three strings of 
Persian camels and twenty cups and plates from Kbit^ 
(China) and twenty Arabian dogs, was brought before me. 
On the 12th a jewelled dagger was bestowed on I*tibar 
Kh&u, and to Karan I gave a plume {kalgi) worth 2,000 
rupees. On the 14th I gave a dress of honour to Sar-^ 
buland Ray, and gave him leave to go to the Deccan. 

On the night of Friday, the 15th, a strange affair 
occurred. By chance on that night I was at Fushkar. To 
be brief, Ki^pin, own brother to Rftja Suraj Singh, was in 
great perturbation through Qobind Das, the Vakil of the 
said Raja having some time ago kiUed his nephew, 
a youth of the name of Oop&l Das. The cause of the 
quarrel it would take too long to tell. Ki^an Singh 
expected that, as Gopal Dm was also the nephew of the 
Raja (Sflraj Singh), the latter would kill Gobind Dka, 
But the Raja, on account of the experience and ability 
of Gobind Dfts; relinquished the idea of seeking revenge 
for his nephew's death When Kishan saw this neglect 
on the part of the Raja, he resolved himself to take 

' Text pimr, ‘son of BnUnd RSj.' but from the B. M. MSS. it appears 
that jMMr is a mistake for Sar. 



292 


RAJPUT FIGHT. 


reveoge for his nephew, and not allow his blood to pass 
away unnoticed. For a long time he kept this matter 
in his mind, until on that night he assembled his brothers, 
friends, and servants, and told them that he would go 
that night to take Gobind Das's life, whatever might 
happen, and that he did not care what injury might 
happen to the Raja. The Raja was in ignorance of w^hat 
was happening, and when it was near dawn Kishan 
came with Karan, his brother s son, and other companions. 
When he arrived at the gate of the Raja's dwelling he 
Sent some of the experienced men on fooc to the house 
of Gobind Das, which was near the Raja's. He himself 
(Ki.^an) was on horseback, and stationed himself near 
tlie gate. The men on foot entered Gobind Da/;'s house, 
and killed some of tnose who were there on guard. 
Whilst this light was going on Gobind Das awoke, and 
seizing his swoid in a stac^e of Vjewilderment was coming 
out from one side of the hou.ve to join the outside watch- 
men. When tile men on fcK t hud tirii.shed killing some 
ot tlie people, they came out of the tent to endeavour 
to lind out Gobind D<is, and, meeting him, they 
Hnislied his affair (killed him). Before the news of the 
killing of Gobind Das rea^died Kishan, he, unable to bear 
it any more, dismounted and came inside the dwelling 
Although his men protested in a disturbed state that it 
was not right to be on foot, he would in no way listen 
to them. If he had remained a little longer and the 
news of his enemy having been killed had reached 
him, it is possible that he would have escaped safe and 
sound, mounted as he was. As the pen of destiny had 
gone forth after another fashion, as soon as he alighted 
and went in, the Raja, who was in his rnaljuU (female 
aiiaitmcnt), awoke at the uproar among the people, and 
stood at the gate of his house with his sword drawn. 
People from all sides were aroused and came in against 
the nww who were on foot. They saw what the number 



RlJpPr FIGHT. PROMOTIONS. 


293 


of men on foot was, and came out in great numbers 
and faced Kishan Singh’s men, who were about ten in 
number. In short, Ki^an Singh and his nephew Karan, 
when they reached the Raja’s house, were attacked by 
these men and both of them killed. Kishan Singh had 
seven and Karan nine wounds. Altogether in this fight 
66 men on the two sides were killed, on the Raja’s side 
30 and on Kishan Singh’s 36. When the sun rose and 
illumined the world with its light, this business was 
revealed, and the Raja saw that his brother, his nephew, 
and some of his servants, whom he considered dearer 
than himself, were killed, and the whole of the rest had 
dispersed to their own places. The news reached me 
in Pushkar, and I ordered them to bum those who wer* 
killed, according to their rites, and inform me of the 
:rue circumstances of the affair. In the end it became 
clear that the affair had happened in the manner in which 
it has been written here, and that no further enquiry wai» 
necessary. 

On the dth Miran Sadr Jahan came from his native 
place and waited on me with an olSeriug of 100 muhrs. 
Ray Suraj Singh vras dismissed to his duty in the Deccan. 
I presented him with a couple of pearls for his ears and 
a special Kashmir shawl (pa^vn narm). A pair of pearls 
were also sent to Kh an Jahan. On the 25th I increased 
the mansab of I*tibar Kb&n by 600 horse, so as to bring 
it to 5,000 personal and 2,000 horse. On the same day 
Karan obtained leave to go to hie jagir. He received 
a present of a horse, a special elephant, a dress of 
honour, a string of peails of the value of 50,000 rupees, 
and a jewelled dagger which had been completed for 
2,000 rupees. From the time of his waiting on me till 
he obtained leave, what he had had in the shape of 
cash, jewellerj^ jewel.s, and jewelled things was of tin 
value of 200,000 rupees, with 110 horses, five elephants 
in addition to what iiiy .son Khurrsfn bestowed on mm 



294 miH *ABBA8 KILLS HIS SON. 

at variouB times. I gave Mub&rak Khan Sazawal a horse 
and an elephant, and appointed him to accompany him. 
I sent several verbal messages to the Rana. Raja Suraj 
Singh also obtained leave to go to his native country, 
with a promise to return in two months. On the 27th, 
Payanda Kban Moghul,^ who was one of the old Amirs 
of the State, gave up the deposit of his Ufe. 

At the end of this month news came that the ruler 
of Tran had executed his eldest son Safi Mirza. This 
was a cause of great bewilderment. When I enquired 
into it they said that at Dara^,^ which is one of the 
noted cities of Gil&n, he ordered a slave of the name 
of Bihbud to kill $afi MirzA. The slave found an 
opportunity, early in the .morning on the 5th of 
Mubarram, in the year 1024 (25th January, 1615), when 
the Mirza was returning from the baths towards his 
house, and finished his affair for him with two wounds 
from a sword {sikhakVi? After a great part of the day 
had passed, while his body lay between the water and 
the mud, ShaiUi Baha'u-d-din Muljiammad, who was the 
beat known man in the country for learning and holiness, 
and on whom the Shah had full reliance, reported the 
affair, and, obtaining leave to lift him up, took his corpse 
and sent it to Ardabil, where was the burial-ground of 
his ancestors. Although much enquiry was made of 
travellers from Iran, no one would say a word of this 
affair that satisfied my mind with regard to it. The 
killing of a son must have some powerful motive in 
order to do away with the disgrace of it. 

1 Blochnuum, p. 887^ Possibly he was the part author of a translation 
of B&bar’s Conmentaries. 

* The name is wrong. The Iqbftl-nftnia, p. 84, has Rasht (Rashd), 
which is a weU-known town on the Caspian. 

* According to the IqhUl-nkma the true reading is Mnjakl (see p. 84). 
But Olsarins, who gives a full account of the murder <p. 382 of English 
translalion, ed. 1662), says Bihbad gave him two stabs with a rAcir/ze, 
whkdi is a kind of poniard. 



GIFTS. A FESTIVAL. 


295 


On the Ist of the month of Tir I gave an elephant 
of the name of Banjit with its trappings to Mirza Rustam 
and another to Sayyid Ali Barha. Mirak Husain, a 
relation of Khwaja Shamsu-d-din. was appointed bakhshi 
and news-writer of the Subah of Behar, and took leave 
to go. I gave Khwaja ‘Abdu-l-Latif Qush-begi (the 
falconer) an elephant and a dress of honour, and dismissed 
him to his Jagir. On the 9th of the same month I gave 
a jewelled sword to Kb&n Dauran, and a jewelled dagger 
was sent for Allahdad, the son of Jalala the Afghan, who 
had become loyal. On the 13th took place the meeting 
for the festival of the Ah-pd^an'^ (rose-water scattering), 
and the servants of the Court amused themselves v^ith 
sprinkling rose-water over each other. On the 17th, 
Amanat Khan was appointed to the port of Cambay. 
As Muqarrab Khan proposed to come to Court, the 
(charge of the) aforesaid port was changed On the 
same day I sent a jewelled waist-dagger to my son 
Parwiz. On the 18th the offering of Khai.khanan was 
laid before me. He had prepared all kinds of jewellery 
and other things, jewels with jewelled things, such as 
three rubies and 103 pearls, 100 rubies (ydgut), two 
jewelled daggers and an aigi-ette adorned with rubies 
and pearls, a jewelled water-jar, a jewelled sword, a quiver 
bound with velvet, and a diamond ring, altogether of 
the value of about 100,000 rupees, in addition to jewels 
and jewelled things, cloth from the Deccan and Carnatic, 
and all kinds of gilt and plain things, with fifteen 
elephants and a horse whose mane reached the ground. 
The offering of Shah-nawaz Khan (hip son) also, consisting 
of five elephants, 300 pieces of all kinds of cloth, was 
brought before me. On the 8th I honoured Hushang 
with the title of Ikram Khan. Ruz-afzun, who was 
one of the princes of the Subah of Behar and who had 

^ A Persian festival in memory of a rain which fell on the 13th Tir and 
put an end to a famine (Bahur-i-*iijam). 



296 HINDU RAJA TURNS MUSULMAN. PROMOTIONS. 


been from his youth one of the permanent servants ot 
the Court, having been honoured by admission into 
Islam, was made Raja of the province of his father, 
Baja Sangram.^ Though the latter had been killed in 
opposing the leaders of the State. I gave him an elephant 
and leave to go to his native place. An elephant was 
presented to Jahangir Quli Khan. On the 24th, Jagat 
Singh, son of Kunwar Karan, who was in his 12th 
year, came and waited on me, and presented petitions 
from his grandfather, the Rana Ainar Singli, and from 
his father. The signs of nobility and high birth were 
evident on his face. I pleased him with a dress of honour 
and kindness. To the mansab of MirzA ‘Isa Tarkhan 
an addition of 200 personal was made, so that it attained 
to 1,200 personal and 300 horse. In the end of the 
month, having honoured Shaikh Husain Rohila with 
the title of Mubariz Khan, I dismissed him to his jagir. 
Ten thousand darabs (5,000 rupees) were given to the 
relations of Mirza Sharafu-d-din Husain Kashghari, who 
at this tiTiie had come and had the honour oi kissing 
the threslioUl. On the 5th AmurdAd, to the mansab of 
Raja Nathiiml. which wa.s 1,500 personal and 1,100 horsey 
an addition of 500 personal and 100 horse was made. 
On the 7th. Ke.sho (Das) Maru, who had a jagir in the 
Sarkar of Orissa, and who had been sent for to Court on 
account of a complaint - against the governor of the Subah 
of that place, came and paid his respects. He produced 
as an offering four elephants. As I hod a great desire to 
see iny farzand (son) Khan Jahan (Lodi), and for the 
purpose of enquiring into important matters connected 
with the Deccan, it was necessary for him to come at 
once, I sent for him. On Tuesday, the 8th of the same 


^ Sangram was Raja of Kharkpur in Befiar, and was killed in battle 
with Jahangir Quli RhAn (Blochmann, ]i. 446. note). 

* S^hakwa'i'.fdhih i Sobti. I presume it means a complaint against the 
governor, and perhaps one made by Kesho. 



SUFI ENTERTAINMENT. PROMOTIONS. 


297 


month, he waited on me, and presented as an offering 
1,000 muhrs, 1,000 rupees, 4 rubies, 20 pearls, 1 emerald, 
and a jewelled phal katdra, the total value being 50.000 
rupees. On the night of Sunday, as it was the anniversary 
of the great Kbwaja (Mulnu-d-din), I went to his 
revered mausoleum, and remained there till midnight. 
The attendants and Sufis exhibited ecstatic states, and 
I gave the fakirs and attendants money with my own 
hand ; altogether there were expended 6,000 rupees in 
cash, 100 Mub - kurta (a robe down to the ankles), 
70 rosaries of pearls,^ coral and amber, etc. Maha Singh, 
grandson of Raja M&n Singh, was honoured with the 
title of Raja, and a standard and drums given him. On 
the 1 6th an Iraq horse out of my private stable and 
another liorae were presented to Mah&bat Khan. On 
the 19th an elephant was given to Khan A'^m. On the 
20th, 200 horse were added to the mansab of Ke§ho 
(Das) Maru, which was 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse, and 
he was dignified with a dress of honour. An increase 
of 200 personal and horse was made to the mansab of 
Khwaja ‘Aqil, which was 1,200 personal and 600 horse. 
On the 22nd, Mirza Raja £hao Singh took leave to go 
to Amber, which was his ancient native place, and had 
given him a special Kashmir pAtlp (?) robe.^ On the 25th, 
Abmad Beg Khan, who was imprisoned at Rantambhor, 
paid his respects to me, and his offences were pardoned 
on account of his former services. On the 28th, Muqarrab 
Khan came from the Subah of Gujarat and waited on 
me, and offered an aigrette and a jew*ellcd throne.^ An 
increase of 500 personal and horse was made to the 
mansab of Salamu-llah, the Arab, and it was brought 
to 2,000 personal and 1,100 horse. On the 1st of the 
month of Shahriwar the following increases were made 

* The pearU are omitted in the MSS. 

^ It is phai in MS. No. 181. 

’ TakfUl^ qu. a signet? No. 181 has a W takhti. 



298 


PBOMOTIOKS. AN EKTERTAINICEBT. 


in the rank of a number of men who were going on 
service to the Deccan: — ^To Mubariz lO^an 300 horee, 
making 1,000 personal and horse. Nahir Khan was also 
raised to 1,000 personal and horse. Dilawar Khan was 
raised by 300 horse to 2,600 personal and horse. Mangli 
Khan 8 rank was increased by 200 horse to 1,500 personal 
and 1,000 horse. Girdhar, the son of Ray Sal, had the 
rank of 800 personal and horse bestowed on him, and 
Ilf Khan Qiyam Khan the same mansab, original and 
increase. Yadgar Husain was raised to 700 personal and 
500 horse, and Kamalu-d-din, son of Shir Khan, to the 
same mansab. One hundred and fifty horse were added 
to the rank of Sayyid 'Abdu-llah Barha, which then came 
to 700 personal and 300 horse, original and increase. 
On the 8th of the said month I bestowed one Nur- 
jahani muhr, which is equal to 6,400 rupees, on Mustafa 
Beg, the ambassador of the ruler of Iran, and presented 
five cheetahs to Qasim Khan, governor of Bengal. Mirza 
Murad, eldest son of Mirza Rustam, on the 12th of the 
same month was honoured with the title of Htifat Khan. 
On the night of the 16th, coiresponding with the 8hah~i- 
bardt (consecrated to the memory of forefathers), I ordered 
them to light lamps on the hills round the Ana Sagar 
tank and bii its banks, and went myself to look at them. 
The reflection of the lamps fell on the water and had 
a wonderful appearance. I passed the most of that night 
with the ladies of the mahall on the bank of that tank. 

On the 17th, Mirza Jamalu-d-din Husain,^ who had 
gone as an ambassador to Bijapur, came and waited on 
me, and presented three rings, the stone of one of which 
was a cornelian from Yemen, of great beauty and pureness 
of w^ater, the like of which is seldom seen among the 
cornelians of Yemen. ‘Adil Khdn sent a person of the 
imim* of Sayyid Kabir Khan on his own part with the said 


> Sir Thomas Hoe's friend. 



SOLAR WEIGHMENT. PROMOTIONS. 299 

Mir, and forwarded a8 offerings elephan&s with gold and 
silver fittings, Arab horses, jewels and jewelled things, 
and all kinds of cloth made in that country. On the 
24th of this month they were brought before me with 
a letter he had brought. On the same day the assembly 
for my solar w'eighing w^as held. On the 26th, Mustofa 
Beg, the ambassador, took his leave. In addition to 
what had been bestowed on him during the time of his 
attendance, I gave him 20,000 rupees more in cash and 
a dress of honour, and in answer to the letter he had 
brought sent a friendly letter written in the perfection of 
friendship. On the 4th of the month of Mihr the mansab 
of Mir Jamalu-d-din Husain, which was 2,000 personal 
and 500 horse, was fixed at 4,000 personal and 2,000 horse. 
On the 5th, Mahabat Khan, in company with Khftn Jahan, 
who had been appointed to serve in the Deccan, at the 
hour that had been appointed for him, took his leave ; 
he was honoured with a dress of honour, a jewelled 
dagger, a phul katdra, a special sword, and an elephant. 
On the 8th, Khan Jahan took his leave, and I presented 
him with a dress of honour, and a special nadiri (a dress), 
and an ambling horse with a saddle, a special elephant, 
and a special sword. On the same date 1,700 horse of 
those under the command of Mah&bat Khan were ordered 
to have assignments (tankhwdh) for two or three horses 
given them. The whole of the men who were at this 
time appointed for service in the Deccan ivere 330 
mansfibdars, 3,000 ahadis, 700 horse from the tJymaqs, 
and 3;000 Dalazak Afghans. Altogether there were 
30,000^ cavalry, and 3,000,000 rupees of treasure, and 
an efficient artillery, and war elephants. They proceeded 
on this duty The mansab of Sarbuiand Ray was increased 
by 500 personal and 260 horse, and came to 2,000 personal 
and 1,500 horse. Balju, nephew of Qilij Kban, was 


' Text wrongly has 3 instead of 30. 



300 


PHOMOTIONS. DECCAN AFFAIBS. 


promoted to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 700 horse, 
original and increase. 1 also increased RAja Kishan Das’s 
mansab by 500. the request of IU]An Jahan, the 
mansab of Shahbaz KhAn Lodi, who belonged to the 
Deccan force, was fixed, original and increase, at 2,000 
personal and 1,000 horse ; and 200 horse were added 
to the mansab of Wazir SbAn. The mansab of SuhrAb 
Khan, son of MirzA Bustam, was fixed at 1,000 personal 
and 400 horse, original and increase. On the 14th of 
the same month 1,000 was added to the mansab of Mir 
JamAlu-d-din Husain, and by increasing it also by 500 horse 
he was raised to the exalted rank of 5,000 personal and 
2,500 horse. On the 19th, RAja Siiraj Singh, with his 
son Gaj Singh, who had gone home, came and paid their 
respects, and presented as offerings 100 muhrs and 1,000 
rupees. I gave Sayyid Kabir, who had been sent by 
*Adil Khan, one NuijahAni muhr, which weighed 500 
tolcha. On the 23rd, ninety elephants of those which Qasiui 
KhAn had acquired from the conquest of the country 
of Kuch (Behar), and the conquest of the Maghs and the 
zamindars of Orissa, were brought before me and placed 
in the special elephant houses. On the 26th, Iradat KhAn 
was raised to the rank of Mir-samani (head butler), 
Mu'tam^ KhAn to that of Bakhshi of the Ahadis, 
Muhammad Ri^ JAbiri to that of Bakhshi of the Subah 
of the Panjab and news writer of that place. Sayyid 
Kabir, who had come on the part of *Adil KhAn to beg 
pardon for the offences of the rulers (dunyd-daran) of the 
Deccan, and to promise the restoration of the fort of 
Ahmadnagar and the royal territory which had been 
taken out of the possession of the chiefs of the victorious 
State through the rebellion of certain rebels, came and 
waited on me, and obtained leave to go on this date; 
and, having received a dress of honour, an elephant, and 
a horse, started off. As Raja Raj Singh KachhwAha 
h;ul died in the Deccan. I prorii«>t«'d his son Rain Das 



PBOMOXIONS. DEATH OF CHIN QILIJ. 


301 


to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 400 horse. On 
the 4th of Aban, drums were given to Saif Khan Barha 
and his mansab increased by 300 horse, so as to bring 
it up to 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse. On the same 
date I released Raja Man, who was in confinement in the 
fort of Gwalior, on the security of Murta>A Khfiii, and, 
confirming his mansab, sent him to the said Khiln for 
duty at the fort of Kangra. At the request of Khan 
Dauran, an increase of 300 horse was ordered to the 
mansab of Sadiq Kl^an, raising it to 1,000 persona] and 
horse. Mirza ‘Isa Tarkhan came from the province of 
Sambhal, which was his jagir, and waited on me, and 
offered 100 muhrs. On the IGth, Raja Suraj Singh 
obtained leave to go to his duty in the Deccan, and 
1 increased his mansab by 300 horse, so as to make it 
5,000 personal and 3,300 horse ; he received a dress of 
honour and a horse, and started. On the 18th I confirmed 
the mansab of Mirza ‘Isa, original and increase, at 1,500 
persona] and 800 horse, and gave him an elephant and 
a dress of honour ^ and he took leave to go to the Deccan. 

On the same day the news of the death of the wretch 
Chin Qilij was received by a letter from Jahangir Quli 
Khan. After tlie deatli of Qilij Khan, who was one 
of the old servants of this State, I had made this in- 
auspicious man an Amir, and shown him great favour, 
and given him in jagir such a place as Jaunpur. I also 
sent his other brothers and relations with him and made 
them his deputies. He had one brother of the name 
of I^hori,^ of a very wicked disposition. It w'as reported 
to me that the servants of Qod (people) were greatly 
oppressed by his conduct. I sent an ahadi to bring 
him (Labor!) from Jaunpur. At the con .ig of the 
ahadi, suspicion without any cause prevailed over Chin 
Qilij, and it came into his mind to run away, taking 


* Ap(Mirently because born in Lahore <see Blochmann, p. 600). 



302 


ACCOUNT OF CHIN OILTJ. 


his misguided brother with him. Leaving his mansab, 
his government, place, and jagir, money, property, children, 
and people, he took a little money and gold and a few 
jewels and went with a small body among the zamindars. 
This news arrived a few days ago and caused great 
astonishment. In short, to whatever zamindar he went 
he took moneys from him(?) and then let him go(?), 
until news came that he had entered the country of Johat.^ 
When this news reached Jahangir Quii Kh&n. he sent 
some of his men to take and bring that thoughtless 
one. They took hiih as soon as they arrived, and were 
intending to take him to Jahangir Quli Kb&n> when he 
at that very moment went to hell. Some of those who 
hod accompanied him said that for some days previously 
he had contracted an illness and it had killed him. But 
this was heard of him as well, thafc he committed suicide, 
in order that they might not take him to Jah&ngir Quli 
Khan in this state. In any case, they brought his body 
with his children and servants who were with him to 
Allahabad. They made away with most of the money 
that he had, and the zamindars took it from him. Alas, 
that salt (i.e. loyalty) should not have brought such 
block-faced wretches to condign punishment! 

Behind the duty that lies on all people is the duty to the 
fiovereign and benefactor ”(?).’ 

^ According to LO. MS. 181 every zamindar took some money from 
Chin Qillj and sent him out of hie eetate, and thip eeeme to be the 
probable meaning, for we are told later on that the zamindars plundered 
Chin Qillj. 

* Tirhut. R.A.8. MS. has **lt chanced that the aamiiMlar of this 
place was with JahZnglr QuU, and the latter sent him with some people 
to seise Chtn QiBJ.” I.O. MS. has the same, and this seems correct. 
The text has ** It chanced that the zamindar of that pleoe was spending 
some days in that neighbourhood <!).” Perhaps a negative has been 
omitted before * spending.’ 1.0. MB seems to have Johirhat as the 
name of the lamindar's estate. 

* Apparently tlie verse is quoted with retersnee to Jah&ngir Quli’s 
failure to exact retribution from the zamindara There is an account 
of Chin Qillj in the Ma’Ssir, ill, ,851. 



PSOXOTIONS ▲MD OIITS. 


303 


On the 22nd, at the request of Kb&n Daur&n, 200 
horse were added to the ntansab of Nad ‘All Maidani, 
one of the officers appointed to Banga^, which brought 
it to 1,600 personal and 1,000 horse ; 100 horse 

were also added to the mansab of La^kar ]y>&n, 
which was 2,000 personal and 900 horse. On the 24th 
I confirmed the mansab of Mnqarrab Ohn, which was 
3,000 personal and 2,000 horse, and increased it to 5,000 
personal and 2,500 horse. On the same day I bestowed 
the title of TChan on Qiy&m, son of Shah Muhammad 
Qandah&ri, who was an Amir-z&da, and was in service 
as a huntsman. On the 5th of the month of Azar 
a jewelled dagger was given to Dirib Sb&Q, and by 
the hand of B&ja Strang Deo dresses of honour were 
bestowed on the Amirs of the Deccan. As some (evil) 
things had been heard about ^afdar Khftn. governor of 
Kashmir, I dismissed him from the government, and 
favouring Ahmad Kbtn cm account of his previous 
services, I promoted him to be Subadar of Kashmir, and 
confirmed his mansab of 2,500 perscmal and 1,600 horse, 
honoured him with a jewelled waist-dagger and a dress 
of honour, and gave him leave. By the hand of Ihtim&m 
Shtn I sent wintw dresses of honour to Qtsim Khtn# 
governor of Bengal, and the Amirs that were attached 
to that province. On the 15th of the month there was 
laid before me the offering of Maka’l, son of Iftikhte 
eODsistiag of an el^hant, got^ horses, and pieces 
of dotiL He ms hcmomred with the title <A Mnmwwat 
Kb5n. At the request of I‘timidu-d-daula, I had sent 
for Dayinat Sbin, who was in the fort of Owaliw, and 
he had the good fortune to pay his respects ; his properfy, 
which had been confiscated, was restored to him. 

At this time Shwl^u Hlf^m, of Dahbid, who at this 
day vigoroqsly maintains in Transoxiana the profession 

* OSnfk, abfMdefaasUhanMacpeaiM. 



304 VERSES BY KINO BABAR AND JAHANGIR. 


of a dervish, and in whom the people of that country 
have great belief, sent a letter by the hand of one of 
his disciples pointing out his old devotion (to the royal 
family) and connection ahd friendship of his ancestors 
with this illustrious family, together with a farjl^ and 
a bow and a couplet which the late king Babar had 
made for a saint of the name of Khwajagi, who also 
belonged to that sect of dervishes. The last hemistich 
is as follows: — 

‘*We are bound to the ^wajagi and are servants to the Khwajagi.” 

I also with iny own pen wrote some lines in the style 
of that writing, and sent impromptu quatrains with 1,000 
Jahangiri muhrs to the said Khwaja — 

** O thou whose kindness to me is ever more and more, 

The State has remembrance of thee, O Dervish, 

As from good tidings our heart is rejoice(i, 

We are glad that thy kindness passes all bounds.” 

As I ordered that whoever had the poetic temperament 
should recite (compose ?) this quatrain, Hakim Masihu-z- 
zainan said, and said very vrell — 

** Although we have the business of kingship before us. 

Every moment more and more we think on the dervishes, 
if the heart of our Dervish be gladdened by us 
Wc count that to be the profit of our kingship.” 

I gave the Hakim 1,000 muhrs for the composition of 
this (juatrain. On the 7th of the month of Day, when 
I was coming back from Pushkar and returning to 
Ajmir, on the way forty-two wild pigs were taken. 

On the 20th, Mir Miran came and waited on me. 
A summary of his circumstances and of his family is 


* Afarji is a coat (sec Blochmann, p. 89). 

^ Text In rubd*i, * this quatrain,* which does not seem to make sense. 
Perha|)8 In here should ho d^n-i-rvbd% *the rules or the custom of 
a quatrain.’ Similarly, in kitdbat five lines down may be dyin-i-kitdbat, 
* the rules of writing.’ 



ACCOUNT OF XHALiLU-LTAH. 305 

now written. On the side of his father^ he is the 
grandson of Mir Ghiy&su-d-dm Muhammad Mir Mirftn, 
son of Shah Ni'matu-llah Wall. During the reigns of 
the Safawi kings the family had attained to great respect, 
so that Shah Tcthmasp gave his own sister Janish^ Khinim 
to Sb&h Ni'matu-llah, and so on account of his being 
a great Shaikh and of his being an instructor he was 
made a relative and a son-in-law (of kings). On the 
side of his mother he was the daughter's son of ghAh 
Isma'il Khuni (Isma^il II, the Bloody). After the death 
of Shah Ni'matu-llah, his son Ghiyasu-d-din Muhammad 
Mir Mir&n received great consideration, and the late 
Sh&h (Tehmasp) gave to his eldest son in marriage 
a daughter from the royal family. He gave the daughter 
of the above-mentioned Shah Isma'il to another son of 
his, Kbftlllu-llah, to whom Mir Miran was bom. The 
aforesaid Mir Kbalilu-llah, seven or eight years before 
this, had come from Persia and waited on me at Lahore. 
As he belonged to a high and saintly family, I Was 
much interested in his -affairs, and gave him a mansab 
and a jagir, and honoured and cherished him. After the 
seat of government was at Agra, in a short time he 
was attacked by bilious ’ diarrhoea from eating too many 
mangoes, and in ten or tweb e days gave up his soul 
to the Creator. I was grieved at his going, and ordered 
what he had left in cash and jewels to be sent to his 
children in Persia. Meanwhile Mir Mirftn, who was 
22 years old, became a qalandar and dervish, and came 
to me at Ajmir in a way that nobody on the road could 
recognize him. I soothed all the troubles of his mind 
and the miseries of his inward and outward cemdition, 

‘ His father was Kbslllo-llah, previously mentioned in the Tosiik, 
and who had lately died (IqbSl-oiiiia, |v M, and Tasuk, pp. €2 and SS). 
TahmSsp gave Ni'maiu-llah's daoghiir in maniage to his own son 
IsmaiL 

* fiphoisb ffiinim in Ma’iffir, lii, M. 

20 « 



306 WEIGHINQ OF SHIH JAHAK. 

and gave him a mansab of 1,000 personal and 400 horse, 
and presented him with 30,000 darabs in cosh. He is 
now in waiting and attendance on me. 

On the 12th, ^far Khan, who had been removed 
from the Subah of Behar, came and waited on me, and 
made an offering of 100 muhrs, as well as three elephants. 
On the 15th of Day 1 increased the mansab of Qasim 
Khan, the Subahdar of Bengal, by 1,000 personal and 
horse, so as to make it 4,000 personal and horse. As 
the diwan and bakhshi of Bengal, Husain Beg and T&hir, 
had not done approved service, Mukhlis Khan, who 
was one of the confidential servants of the Court, was 
nominated to these duties. 1 conferred on him a mansab 
of 2,000 personal and 700 horse, and also gave him 
a standard. The duty of ^curz-muJcarrir (reviser of 
petitions) I ordered to be given to DayAnat Kb&n- On 
the 25th, Friday, the weighing of my son l^urram took 
place. Up to the present year, when he is 24 years old, 
and is married and has children, he has never defiled 
himself with drinking wine. On this day, when the 
assembly for his weighing was held, I said to him: 

B&ba, thou hast become the father of children, and kings 
and kings’ sons have drunk wine. To-day, which is 
the day of thy being weighed, I will give thee wine 
to drink, and give thee leave to drink it on feast days 
and at the time of the New Year, and at all great 
festivals. But thou must observe the path of moderation, 
for wise men do not consider it right to drink to such 
an extent as to destroy the understanding, and it is 
necessaxy that from drinking only profit should be 
derived,” Bfi *Ali (Avicenna), who is one of the most 
learned of hakims ^d physicians, has written this 
quatrain — 

** Wine is e raging enemy, e prudent friend ; 

A little is en antidote, but much a snake’s poison, 
la much there is no little injury,.. 

In a little there is mndl profit.” 



jahamgir’s drinking habits. 


307 


WiUi TKiK’h \vin«» \v;is ;^iven to him. I had not 

drunk it till I was 15^ years old, except when in the 
time of my infancy two or three times my mother and 
wet-nurses gave it by way of infantile remedy. They 
asked for a little spirit from my revered father, and 
gave it me tc the extent of a tola mixed with water 
and rosewater to take away a cough, designating it as 
medicine. At the time wdien the camp of my revered 
father had been pitched in order to put down the 
disturbance of Yusuf za’e Afghans at the fort of Attock, 
which is on the bank of the Nilab (Indus) River, one 
day I had mounted to go out to hunt. When I had 
moved about a good deal and the signs of weariness 
had set in, a gunner of the name of Ustad Sh&h-quU, 
a wonderful gunner out of those under my revered uncle 
Mirza Muhammad Hakim, said to me that if I would 
take a cup of wine it would drive away the feeling of 
being tired and heavy. It was in the time of my youth, 
and as I felt dispo led towards it I ordered Mahmud, the 
Ab-dar (person in charge of drinking water, etc.), to go 
to the house of Hakim *Ali and bring me an intoxicating 
draught. He sent me the amount of one and a half cups 
of yellow wine of a sw^eet taate in a little bottle. I drank 

' Two I.O. MSS. and the R.A.S. MS. have 18 instead of 15. Elliot 
has ** up to my fourteenth ” year. Jah&ngir was born in RabI*, 977, or 
31st August, 1569, and the beginning of wine-drinking to which he 
refers must have taken place at earliest in January, 1586. He tolls us 
that it was after the death of Muhammad Hakim, and at the time when 
his father was at Attock. Now Akbar arrived there on 15th Maharraiii, 
004, according to Nisamu-d-din, and on 12th Day, 994, according to 
Aha-l-fii?l, iii, 976, i.e. about the end of December, 1585, and at that 
time J;diriiig!r was 17 years and 4 months of age, or in his 18tli year. 
He continued to drink heavily for nine years, i.e. till he was 26 (17 
then be moderated for seven years, i.e. till he was 33, and he kept to 
that for fifteen years more, i.e. till he was 48. These years were lunar 
years, and he tells that at the time of urriting he was 47 years and 
9 months old, according to the lunar calendar. It seems to follow that 
the MSS. are right, and that we should read 13. 

* ElUot, Vi, 841. 



308 


SUBJECT CONTINUED. 


it, and found its quality agreeable. After that 1 took 
to drinking wine, and increased it from day to day 
until wine made from grapes ceased to intoxicate me, 
and I took to drinking arrack ('araq, spirits), and by 
degrees during nine years my potions rose to twenty cups 
of doubly distilled spiiits, fourteen during the daytime and 
the remainder at night The weight of this was six 
Hindustani sirs or one and a half maunds of Iran. The 
extent of my eating in those days was a fowP with 
bread and vegetables (lit radish).* In that state of 
matters no one had the power to forbid me, and matters 
went to such a length that in the crapulous state from 
the excessive trembling of my hand I could not drink 
from my own cup, but others had to give it me to 
drink, until 1 sent for Hakim Humam, brother of Hakim 
Abh-l-fatb« who was of the most intimate with my 
revered father, and informed him of my State. He, with 
excessive sincerity and unfeigned burning of heart, said 
to me with6ut hesitation, *'Lord of the world, by the 
way in which you drink spirits, God forbid it, but in 
six months matters will come to such a pass that there 
will be no remedy for it.’* As his words were said out of 
pure good-will, and sweet life was dear to me, they made 
an impression on me, and from that day I began to lessen 
my allowaiice and set myself to take fililniyd^ In 

* The two good I.O. MSS. have, not mm^ or myrf^, hntJughdarf or 
tggkdanf a * buetard,’ unlesa indeed the word be tof^kaddl^ * breakfast.*' 
Bat probably the word is iuyhdarl, a bustard, and the reference is to the 
particular mdmorable day when he first drank wine. His food that day, 
he says, was a bustard with bread and a radish (f nrb). 

* Blochmann. CalcttUa Review ^ 1869, has * turnips.* 

* FilMyik The word is not given in ordinary dictionaries, but it 
is explained in Doxy’s Supplement. It is stated there t^t it is 
a sed^ive electuary, and that the word is derived from the Greek, 
being piaMria, which is the name of an antidote or drug invented by 
Fhilon of Tarsus. There is an account of Philon and a reference to hie 
dipg in Smith’s Ckssical Dictionazy. Philon lived fn or before the ficat 
century after Christ, and is referred to by CJolen and others. The wcud 
as given them is ^iXavtiov. We are not told what it wee made ofi In 



SUBJECT CONTINUED. 


309 


proportion as I diminished my liquor, I increased the 
amount of filuniya. 

I also ordered that the arrack should be diluted with 
wine of the grape so that there should be two parts 
wine and one part arrack. Every day I diminished the 
quantity I took, and in the course of seven years 
I brought it down to six cups. The weight of each 
cupful was 18 ^ misqals. It is now fifteen years that 
I have drunk at this rate, neither more nor less. And 
my drinking time is the night except on the day of 
Thursdays, as it is the day of the blessed accession. 
Also on the eve^ of Friday, which is the most blessed 
eve of the week, and is the prelude to a blessed day 
(I do not drink). I drink at the end of each day with 
these two^ exceptions, for it does not appear right that 
this, eva (Thursday night) should be aprct in neglect, 
and that there should be an omission (on l<>iday) of 
returning thanks to the True Benefactor. On Uie day 
of Thursday and on the day of Sunday I do no eat 

Price’s Jah&ngir, filuniya, misread there as Kelourica, is described bv 
Jahftngir as brother’s son to tirydq^ i.e. theriaca (see Price, p. 6). Tiryat^ 
or firydq is supposed to be a Oreek word (see Lane), and means an 
antidote against poison, etc. It is so used in the verse from Avioenna 
quo^l by Jgh&ngir to his son Shah Julian. See D’Herlielot, s.v. Teriak. 
But it is also often used apjterently os a s 3 ’’nonym for opium, llie 
mixing of wine with spirits was intended to dilute the potation, for 
hitherto Jahftngir had been taking raw spirit. A is said to be 

63) grrins troy, and so 18 inisqabs would be alsiiit .3 ounces, and the six 
cups would be about l^lb. troy. In Elliot, Jahangir i.s made to say 
that he does not drink on Thursdays and Fridays. But the tthah-i jum^a, 
as Blochmann has pointed out elsewhere, Ayin translation, p. 171, n. 3, 
means Thursday night or Fridn 3 ' eve, and this is clearly the ease here, 
for Jahftngir speaks of the eves being followerl by a blessed day. 
It should be noted that there is no connection in Juhftngs’^s mind 
between abstaining from wine and abstaining from incwt. He did not 
eat meat on Thursdays or Sundays because he did not approve of taking 
life on theee days, but he drank on ^th of them. 

^ Cf. Blochmann’s translation and Calcuita Itttyieic for 1860. 

^ I understand the two exceptions (efft ehiz) to be that on Tliursdays 
he drank in the daytime, contrary to the general rule of only drinking 
at night, and that on Tliursday ci'fuiings he did not drink. 



310 


APPOINTMENTS. 


meat. Not on Thursday, because it is the day of my 
auspicious accession, and not on Sunday, because it is 
the birthday of my revered father, and he greatly 
honoured and held dear the day. After some time 
I substituted opium for filuniya. Now that my age 
has arrived at 46 solar years and 4 months, I eat 
eight surkhs (a red berry used as a weight) of opium 
when five gharis of day have passed, and six surkhs 
after one watch of night. 

I gave a jewelled dagger to ‘Abdu-llah Khan by tlic 
hand of Maejsud ‘Ali. Shaikh Musa, a relation of Qasim 
Khan, was dignified with the title of Khan, and pro- 
moted to the mansab of 800 personal and 400 horae, 
and was allowed to go to Bengal. The mansab of Zafar 
Khan was increased to 500 personal and horse, and he 
was appointed to duty in Bangash. On the same day 
Muhammad Husain, brother of Khwaja Jahan, was 
given the faujdnrship of the Sarkar of Hissar and dis- 
missed, his man.sab being increased by 200 horse to raise 
it to 500 personal and 400 horse, with the gift of an 
elephant. On the 5th Bahman an elephant was conferred 
on Mir Miran. When the merchant *Abdu-l-Karim left 
Iran for Hindustan, my exalted brother Shah 'Abbas 
sent me by his hand a rosary 9 f cornelian from Yemen 
and a cup of Venetian workmanship, which was very 
fine and rare. On the 9th of the same month they were 
laid before me. On the 18th some offerings of many 
kinds of jewelled ornaments, etc., which Sul^n Parwiz 
had sent to me, were laid before me. On the 7 th Isfan- 
darmuz, Sadiq, nephew of Ttimadu-d-daulah, who was 
permanently employed as Bakhshi, was honoured with 
the title of Khan. I had also conferred this title on 
Khwaja 'Abdu-l-*Aziz. According to what was right, 
I called him by the title of 'Abdu-l-'Aziz Khan and 
Sadiq by that of Sadiq Kban. On the 10th, Jagat 
Singh, son of Run war Karan, who had obtained leave 



GOOD NEWS. 


311 


to go to his uative country, when he took leave wae 
presented with 20,000 rupees, a horse, an elephant, a 
dress of honour, and a special shawl. Five thousand 
rupees, a horse, and a dress of honour were also given 
to Haridas Jhala, who was one of the coniidants of the 
Rana and tutor to Karan s son. By his hand I also 
sent a mace of gold (^a^pari) for the Ban&. 

On the 20th of the same month, R&ja Suraj Singh, 
son of Baja Baso, who on account of the nearness of his 
dwelling-place to it had been sent with Murtai^ Khlm 
to capture the fort of Kangra, came on my summons 
and waited on me. The aforesaid Kb&n had entertained 
certain suspicions with regard to him, and on this account, 
considering him an undesirable companion, had repeatedly 
sent petitions to the Court, and wrote things about him 
until an order was received to summon him. 

On the 26th, Ni^mu-d*dm Kh&n came from Multan 
and waited on me. In the end of this year news of 
victory and prosperity came in from all sides of my 
dominions. In the first place, this was with regard to 
the disturbance of Ahdad, the Afghan, who for a long 
time past had been in rebellion in the hill country of 
Kabul, and round whom many of the Afghans of that 
neighbourhood had assembled, and against whom from 
the time of iny revered father until now, which is the 
10th year after my accession, armies have always been 
employed. He by degrees was defeated, and, falling into 
a wretched state, a part of his band was dispersed and 
a part killed. He took refuge for some time in Charkh, 
which was a place on which he relied, but Khan Dauran 
surrounded it and closed the road for entiy and exit. 
When there remained no grass for hi.s beasts or means 
of living for men in the fortress, he at night brought 
down his animals from the hills and grazed them on 
the skirts, and accompanied them lamself, in order that 
he might set an example to hi.s men. At last this 



312 


OBFBIT OF AFOEA.NS. 


intelligence reached Sbftn Dauian. He then appointed 
a body of his leaders and experienced men to go into 
ambnsh on mi appointed night in the neighbourhood of 
CShaiMi. That band went and hid itself at night in 
places of refuge, and Kh an Daur&n rode on the same 
day in that direction. When those ill-fated ones brought 
out their cattle and let them loose to graze, and the 
ill-conditioned Ahdid himsdf passed by the places of 
ambush with his own band, suddenly a dust rose in 
frant of him. When they enquired it became known 
that it was Daur&n. In a state of bewilderment 

he endeavoured to turn back, and the scouts announced 
to the aforesaid Khan that it was Ahdid. The Kh&n 
gave hia horse the reins and went at Ahdad ; the men 
who were in ambush also blocked the road and attacked 
him. The fight lasted till midday in consequence of 
the broken nature of the ground and the thickness of 
the jun^e ; at last defeat fell on the Afghans and they 
betook themselves to the hill : about 300 fighting men 
wmit to hell and 100 were taken prisoners. Ahd&d 
could not regain the stronghold and hold on there. 
Necessarily he turned his face towards Qandahar. The 
vfctmioua troops entering Charkh, burnt all the places 
and houses of those ill-fortuned ones, and destroyed and 
rooted them up from their foundations. 

Another ' piece ot news was the defeat of the ill-starred 
‘Amfaar and the destruction of his unfortunate army. 
Briefly, a band of the influential leaders and a body of 
Bargls (Mahrattas), who are a hardy lot and who are 
the centre of resistance in that country, becoming angry 
with ‘Ambar, showed an intention to be loyal, and begging 
for quarter from ^i&h-nawaz Kb&n, who was in B&l&pOr 
with an army of royal troops, agreed to interview the 
aid end being satisfied, Adam Kb&n, Y&qht tUi&n, 


1 Elliot, vi, 343. 



DEFEAT OF MALIK ‘AMBAR. 


313 


and other leaders, and the Bargis Jado^ Ray and Bapu 
Eatiya, came and interviewed him. ghah-naAvaz Khan 
gave each of them a horse, an elephant, money, and 
dress of honour, according to their quality and condition, 
made them liot in duty and loyalty, and marching from 
Balapur started against the rebel. 'Ainbar in their 
company. On the road they fell in with an army of the 
Dakhanis, whose leaders were Maballdar,^ Daniel (Ata^ ?). 
Dil&war, Bijli, Firuz, and others, and touted it. 

'* With broken arms and loosened loins, 

No strength in their feet, no sense -in their heads.”-*' 

They reached the camp of that ill-starred one, and 
he from excessive pride determined to Hght with the 
victorious troops. Having collected those rebels who 
were with him and "Adil Khan’s army and that of 
Qutbu-l-mulk together, and preparing their artillery, he 
started to meet the royal troops until a space of not 
more than 5 or 6 kos remained between. On Sunday, 
the 25th Bahman, the armies of light and darkness 
approached each other and the scouts became visible. 
Three watches of day had passed when cannon and 
rocket firing began. In the end DArab Khan, who was 
in command of the vanguard, with other leaders and 
zealous men such as Raja Bir Singh Deo, Ray Chand, 
‘Ali Kh&n the Tatar, Jahangir Quli Beg Turkman, and 
other lions of the forest of* bravery, drew their swords 
and charged the vanguard of the enemy. Performing 
the dues of manliness and bravery, they scattered this 
army like the Ban&tu-n-na'sh ('Daughters of the Bier.’ 
i.e. the Great Bear) ; and not stopping there they attacked 

^ Tbe MSS. have JidQn Ra.v and Baba Chokanth (Jiu Kaiith ?). Tho 
Ma*i||ini-l-iiiiiara, ii, 646, has MSlajl Kant iya. The text has B&bO KAntiya. 

* Tbe text is corrupt. The Ma’i^ir, id., has Ata^i instead of DaniNh. 

’ Tho text ia corrupt. In the second line of tlie verse the text lias 
which seems meaningless, and two I.O. MSS. and B.M. MS. Add. 26,215 
have yang, * battle.' The R. A.S. MS has pdy, * feet,' which seems to me 
the best reeding. Poosibly gH/l should be reed kift, ' dioulder.’ 



314 


SUBJECT CONTINUED. 


the enemy's centre. Turning on the army opposed to 
them, such a hand-to-hand struggle took place that the 
onlookers remained bewildered. For nearly two gharis 
this combat went on. Heaps of the dead lay there, and 
the ill-starred ‘Ambar, unable to offer further opposition, 
turned his face to flight. If darkness^ and gloom had 
not come on at the cry of those black-fortuned ones, 
not one of them would have found the road to the 
valley of safety. The crocodiles of the river of conflict 
followed the fugitives for 2 or 3 kos. When horses 
and men could move no more and the defeated were 
scattered, they drew rein and returned to their places. 
The whole of the enemy's artillery, with 300 laden 
camels that carried rockets, war elephants, Arab and 
Persian horses, weapons and armour beyond reckoning, 
fell into the hands of the servants of the State, and there 
was no counting the slain and the fallen. A great 
many of the leaders fell alive into their hands. The 
next day the victorious troops, marching from the place 
of victory, proceeded to Karki, which was the nest of 
those owlish ones, and seeing no trace of them they 
encamped iliere, and obtiuned news that they during 
that night and day had fallen miserably in different 
places. For some days the victorious army, delayed at 
Karki, levelled with the dark earth the buildings and 
houses of the enemy, luid burnt that populous place. 
In consequence of the occurrence of certain events, to 
describe which in detail would take too long here, they 
i-eturned from that place and descended by the Rohan 
Khandu Pass. In reward for this service I ordered 
iiieivases to bi* made in the munsabs of a number who 
hiid shown /.eal and bravery. 

Tlio third piece oi news w;is the conquest of the 
province of Khokharft ' and the acquisition of the diamond 

' It will Im.* I eiiieniWi^ that lias fnllwi ‘Ambar's army the 

army of dai-kiw^v. nllntjmc n**rhaDS ti> 'Ambar's hvin^ an Abyssinian. 



DIAMOND MINKS. 


315 


mines, which were taken by the excellent exertions of 
Ibrahim Khan. This province is one of the dependencies 
of the Subah of Behar and Patna. There is a river 
there from which they procure diamonds. At the season 
when there is little water, there are pools and water- 
holes, and it has become known by experience to those 
who are employed in this work that above every 
water-hole in which there are diamonds, there are crowds 
of dying animals of the nature of gnats, and which in 
the language of India they call jhln(j(l('i)? Keeping 
the bed of the stream in sight as far as it is accessible, 
they make a collection of stones (sangchin) round the 
water-holes. After this they empty the water-lioles 
with spades and shovels to the extent of a yard or 
li yards and dig up the area. They find among the 
stones and sand large and small diamonds? and bring 
them out. It occasionally happens that they find a piece 
of diamond worth 100,000 rupees. Briefly, this province 
and this river were in possession of a Hinda Zamindar 
of the name of Durjan Sal, and although the governors 
of the Subah frequently sent armies against him and 
went there themselves, in consequence of the difHcult 
roads and thickness of the jungles they contented them- 
selves with taking two or three diamonds and left him 
in his former condition. When the aforesaid Subah was 
transferred from &far Khan, and Ibrahim Khan was 


‘ Elliot, vi, and Alochmiinn, p. 479, n. 3. 

* Perhaps it should be phangd or feringha, a graN8hop|)er, or it may 
be jhingur, a cockroach. Presumably the country was covered with 
thick jungle, and the cloud of insects indicated where water was. 
Erskine's MS. has rkika. B.M. Or. 3276 has eJiika or jika. Possibly 
the word is a cockroach (see Blochiiiann in J.A.S.B, for 1H7I, 

vol. xl). He quotes a Hindustani Diet., which says that the jhimja 
is what in Arabic is called the jarddu-l-ltafir or water-locust. The rivci 
referred to by Jaliangir is the Saiikh of I.C., xii, 222. V. Ball, Proc. 
A.S.B. for 1H81, p. 42, suggests that the jhhit/ii may be thiiiMlcr-strjiieS ) 
Coniparr Tiivcriiier's uecount of the searching for diamniuls it 
Samlihalpur (vol. ii, p. 311, of cd. of l676). 



^16 


CONQUEST OF KHOKHARX. 


appointed in his place, at the time of his taking leave 
I ordered him to go and take the province out of the 
possession of that unknown and insignificant individual. 
As soon as he arrived in the province of Behar he 
assembled a force and went against that Zamindar. 
According to former custom he sent some of his. men 
with a promise to give some diamonds and some elephants, 
but the Khan did not agree to this and entered im- 
petuously into the province. Before the fellow could 
collect his mem he found guides and invaded it. Just when 
the zamindar received this news, the hills and vales that 
are his abode were beleaguered. Ibrahim sent men about 
to find him and they got hold of him in a cave with 
several women, one of whom was his mother, while 
others were also his father’s wives. They aiTested him, 
and also one of his brothers. They searched and took 
from them the diamonds they had with them. Twenty- 
three male and female elephants also fell into Ibr&hims 
hands. In reward for this service the mansab of Ibrahim 
Khan original and increase, wan made up to 4,000 
pereonal and hor.se, and he was exalted with the title 
of Fath-jang. Orders were also given for an increase 
in the mansabs of those who accompanied him on this 
service and had shown bravery. That province is now 
in possession of the imperial servants of the State. 
They carry on work in the bed of the stream, and bring 
to Court whatever diamonds are found. A large diamond, 
the value of which has been estimated at 50,000 rupees, 
has lately been brought from there. If a little pains 
are taken, it is probable that good diamonds will be found 
and be placed in the jewel-room. 



NKW year's OFFEKINGS. 


317 


The Eleventh New Year’s Feast after the 
AUSPICIOUS Accession. 

Fifteen gharis of day had passed on Sunday, the last 
day of Isfandarniuz, corresponding with the Ist Rabi‘u-I- 
awwal (19th Mai*ch, 1616), when from the mansion of Pisces 
the sun cast the ray of prosperity on the palace of Aries. 
At tills auspicious hour, having performed the dues of service 
and supplication at the throne of Almighty God, I ascended 
the throne of State in the public &ildicnce hall, the area 
of which was laid out witli tents and canopies 
ydnahoL), and its sides adorned with European screens, 
painted gold brocades, and rare cloths. The princes, 
Amirs, the chief courtiers, the ministers of State, and all 
the servants of the Court performed their congratulatory 
salutations. As Hafiz Nad *Ali, giiyanda (singer), was 
one of the ancient servants, I ordered that whatever 
offerings were made on the Monday by anyone in the 
shape of cash or goods should be given to him by 
way of reward. On the 2nd day (of Farwardin) the 
offerings of some of the employes were laid before me. 
On the 4th day the offering of Khwaja * Jahan, who 
had sent them from Agra, and which consisted of several 
diamonds and pearls, of jewelled things, cloth stuffs of 
all kinds, and an elephant, worth altogether 50,000 
rupees, was brought before me. On the 5th day, 
Kunwar Karan, who had been given leave to go to his 
home, returned and waited On me. He presented as 
offering 100 muhrs, 1,000 rupees, an elephant with 
fittings, and four horses. To the mansab of Ai^tf Kbto, 
which was 4,000 personal and 2,000 horse, I on the 
7th made an addition of 1,000 personal and 2,000 horse, 
and honoured him with drums and a standard. On this 
day the offering of Hir Jamalu-d-din Husain was laid 
before me; what he offered was appiovod and iiccepted. 
Among the things was a jewelled dagger which had 



318 


PROMOTIONS AND OFFERINGS. 


been made under his superintendence.^ On its hilt was 
a yellow ruby ^ {yaqat-i-zard), exceeding clear and bright, 
in size equal to half a help’s egg. I had never before 

seen so large and Ixiautiful a yellow ruby. Along with 

it were other rubies of approved colour and old emeralds. 
Brokers (inuqlvidn) valued it (the dagger) at 50,000 
rupees. I increased the inansab of the said Mir by 
1,000 horse, which brouglit it to 5,000 personal and 
3,500 horse. On the 8th I increased the inansab of 
Sadi(j Ha^iq by 300 personal and horse, and that of 

fradat Khan by 300 personal and 200 horse, so as to 

raise each to 1,000 personal and 500 horse. On the 
9th the. offering of Khwaja Abu-l-basan was laid before 
me ; of jewelled ornaments and cloth stuffs, what Was 
of tfirt value of 40,000 rupees was accepted, and the 
remainder I made a present to him. The offering of 
Tatar Khan Bakawul-begi, consisting of one riilty 
one ydqUt, a jewelled -(signet ?), two rings, and 

some cloths, was accepted. On the 10th three elephants 
which Raja Maha Singh sent from the Deccan, and 100 
and odd pieces of gold brocade, etc., which Murta/A Khan 
sent from Lahore, were laid before me. On this date 
Dayanat Klian presented his offering of tw’o pearl rosaries, 
two rubies, six large pearls, and one gold tray, to the 
value of 28,000 rupees. At the end of Thursday, the 
11th, I went to the house of l*tiin^u-d-dau]ah in oi*der 
to add to his dignity. He then presented me with his 
offering, and I examined it in detail. Much of it was 
exceedingly rare. Of jewels there were two pearls 
worth 30,000 rupees, one qufbi ruby which had been 
purchased for 22,000 rupees, with other pearls and rubies. 


* Text, khOd-hunarkJrl, *hiH own workman.ship,* but the MS8. have 
khQd-MLrkAri, See also Iqbabnama, p. 87, which .says that Jamalu-d-din 
liacl had it made in BijapAr. 

* Really a topaz. Tavernier points out that the natives call various 
precious stones rubies, distinguishing them by their colour. 



NUR-MAHaLL styled nur-jahan. 


319 


Altogether the value was 110,000 rupees. These had 
the honour of acceptance, and of cloth, etc., the value of 
15,000 rupees was taken. When I had finished inspecting 
the offering I passed nearly one watch of the night in 
conviviality and enjoyment. I ordered that cups (of 
wine) should be given to the Amirs and servants. The 
ladies of the maJf/itL (harem) were also with me, and 
a pleasant assembly was held. After the festive assembly 
was over I begged I'timadu>d-daulah to excuse me, and 
went to the hall of audience. On the same day I ordered 
Nur-mabftU Begam to be called Nur-Jahan Begain. On 
the 12th the offering of I'tibar Khan was laid before me. 
They had made a vessel (zarf) in the form of a fish, 
jewelled with beautiful gems, exceedingly well shaped 
and calculated to hold my allowance.^ This, w'ith other 
jewels and jewelled things and cloth stuffs, the value 
of which was worth 56,000 rupees, I accepted and gave 
back the rest. Bahadur governor of Qandahar, 

had sent seven Iraq horses and nine tuqUz (81 ?) of 
cloth staffs. The offerings of Irftdat Kban and Raja 
Suraj Mai, son of R&ja Base, were laid before me on 
the 13th. ^Abdu-s-Subban, who held a mansab of 1,200 
personal and 600 horse, was promoted to 1,500 personal 
and 700 horse. On the 15th the Subahdarship of the 
province of Thatha was transferred from Sbamshir Khan 
Uzbeg to Muuffar Sb&n. On the 16th the offering of 
I'tiq&d Sbftn, son of TtimAdud-daulah, was laid before 
me. Of this the equivalent of 32,000 rupees was taken, 
and- I gave bock the rest to him. On the 17th the 
offering of Tarbiyat Kb&n was inspected. Of jewels and 
cloth what was valued at 17,000 rupees was approved. 
On the 18th I went to the house of Asaf Kb&n, and his 
offering was presented to me there. From the palace 

^ Text, ha<LndSm-i-nm*M-i-mant *of capacity corresponding to my 
enstflss.* Presamably it was a drinking-cup, and held Jahdnglr’s 
entomaiy potation. 



320 


ENTERTAINMENTS. 


to his house was a distance of about a kos. For half 
the distance he had laid down under foot velvet woven 
with gold and gold brocade and plain velvet, such 
that its value was represented to me as 10,000 rupees. 
I passed that day until midnight at his house with the 
ladies. The ofTerings he had prepared were laid before 
me in detail. Jewels, jewelled ornaments, and things 
of gold and beautiful cloth stuffs, things of the value 
of 114,000 rupees, four horses, and one camel were 
approved of. On the 19th (Farwardin), which was the 
day of honour (raz-i-dmraf) of the sun, a grand assembly 
was held in the palace. In order to observe the auspicious 
hour, when gharis of day were left of the aforesaid 
day, I sealed myself on the throne. My son Baba 
Khurrain at this blessed hour laid befoi*c me a ruby of 
the purest vrater and brilliancy, which they pronounced 
to be of. the value of 80,000 rupees. I fixed his mansab, 
which was 15,000 personal and 8,000 horse, at 20,000 
personal and 10,000 horse. On the same day my lunar 
weighing took place. I increased the mansab of I*timadu-d- 
daulah, which was 6,000 personal and 3,000 horse, to 

7.000 personal and 5,000 horse, and bc^stowed on him 

a * tHradn tugh (horse-4;ail standard), and ordered his 
drums to be beaten after those of my son Khurram. 
I increased the mansab of Tarbiyat Kh&n by 500 personal 
and horse, so as to bring it to 3,500 personal and 1,500 
horse. The mansab of T*tiqad was increased by 

1.000 personal and 400 lorse. Ni^mu-d-din I^an was 
promoted to 700 personal and 300 horse, and appointed 
to the Subah of Behar. Salaiuu-llah, the Arab^ was 
honoured with the title of Shaja'at KhAQ» being 
dignified with a necklace of pearls, became one of the 
royaP servants. I promoted Mir Jamillu-d-din Injfk to 
the title of 'Azudu-d-daul^h (Ana of the State). On the 

> Jfidqa-ha-ffOkhAn. Apparently referring to his being one of thoss 
who bored their ears in imitation of flah&ngir. 



APP01NT11EMT8. OUTBREAK OP AFGHANS. 


321 


2l8t Almighty God gave Kbusrau a son by the daughter 
of Muqim, son of Mihtar Fazil Rikab-dar (stirrup-holder). 
To Allah-dad, the Afghan, who, accepting my service, had 
separated himself from the evil-minded Abdad and come 
to Court, I gave 20,000 darabs (10,000 rupees). On the 
25th came the news of the death of Ray Manohar, who 
had been attached to the army of the Deccan. Giving 
his son a mansab of 500 personal and 300 horse, 
I bestowed upon him his father's place and property. 
On the 26th the offering of Nad 'Ali Maidani, consisting 
of nine horses; several bits (Idafiana and four 

Persian camels (wildyati), was brought before me. On the 
28th I presented Bahadur Khan, governor of Qandahar, 
Mir Mir&n, son of Khalllu-llah, and Sayyid Bayazid, 
governor of Bhakar, each with an elephant. On the 
Ist Urdibihi^t, at the request of 'Abdu-llah Kb&n. 
I presented drums to his brother Sardar Kban. On the 
3rd 1 gave Allah-dad Khan, the Afghan, a jewelled 
Uuipiva (dagger). On the same day news came that 
Qadam,^ one of the Afridi Afghans who had been loyal 
and obedient, and to whom the rah-ddri (transit dues) 
of the Khaibar Pass belonged, from some slight suspicion 
had withdrawn his feet from the circle of obedience and 
raised his head in sedition. He had sent a force against 
each of the posts {thdna), and wherever he and his 
men went, through the carelessness of those men (in the 
posts), had plundered and killed many of the people. 
Briefly, in consequence of the shameful action of this 
senseless Afghan, a new disturbance broke out in the 
hill country of Kabul. When this news arrived I ordered 
Harun, brother of Qadam, and JaUkl, his son, who were 
at Court, to be apprehended and handed over to Asaf 
Kb&n to be imprisoned in the fort of Gwalior. By the 

* The text is corrupt. Th^ true reeding seems to be fad ddtia-i-klfh, 

‘ one hundred pieces of muslin ’ (?). LO. 181 seems to beveloh«jt, * rams.* 
21 - Here follow two unintelligible words, Pag6na Bankdna. 



322 


A ROYAL PEARL. 


manifestation of the Divine mercy and kindness and 
the signs of God's favour, an affair took place at this 
time which is not devoid of strangeness. After the 
victory over the Bana my son presented me in Ajmir 
with an exceedingly beautiful and clear ruby, valued at 
60,000 rupees. It occurred to me that I ought to bind 
this ruby on my own arm. I much wanted two rare 
pearls of good water of one form to be a fit match for 
this kind of ruby. Muqarrab Khan had procured one 
grand pearl of the value of 20.000 rupees, and given 
it to me as a New Year's offering. It ocrurred to me 
that if I could procure a pair to it they would make 
a perfect bracelet. Khurram, who from his childhood 
had had the honour of waiting on uiy revered father, 
and remained in attendance on him day and night, 
represented to me that he had seen a pearl in an old 
turban (sar-band) of a weight and shape equal to this 
pearl. They produced an old mr-p%ch (worn on the 
turban), containing a royal pearl of the same quality, 
weight, and shape, not differing in weight even by a 
trifle, so much so that the jewellers were astonished at 
the matter. It agreed in value, shape, lustre, and 
brilliance; one might say they had been shed from the 
same mould. Placing the two pearls alongside of the 
ruby, I bound them on my arm, and placing my head 
on the ground of supplication and humility, I returned 
thanks to the Lord that cherished His slave, and made 
my tofigue utter His praise — 

** Who siicoeedfi with hand aod tongue ? 

He who performs the dues of thanks.** 

On the 5th (Urdibihisht) 30 Iraq and Turki Iiorses 
that MurtazA Kh& n had sent from Lahore were brought 
before me, os also 63 horses, 15 camels, male and female, 
a bundle of crane's (Icuhnig) pluine.s, 9 *dqiri(?)^ 


* Perhaps this should be /og^ri, * iiorcelaln.* 



AFRICAN ELEPHANT. OUTBREAK OBkaFQHANS. 323 


9 veined^ fish -teeth, 9 pieces of china from Tartary 
3 guns, etc., from KlAn Dauran, which he had 
sent from Kabul, were accepted. Muqarrab Kh&n pre- 
sented an offering of a small elephant from Abyssinia 
which they had brought by sea in a ship. In 
comparison with the elephants of Hindustan it presents 
some peculiarities. Its ears are larger than the ears of 
the elephants of tnis place, and its trunk and tail are 
longer. In the time of my revered father Ptimad Khan 
of Gujarat sent a young elephant^ as an offering; by 
degrees it grew up and was very fiery and bad-temperod. 
On the 7th a jewelled dagger was given to Mu^ffar 
Khan, governor of Thatha. On the same day news came 
that a band of Afghans^ had attacked 'Abdu-s-Subbau. 
brother of Khan ^Alam, who was stationed at one of the 
posts, and had laid siege to his post. *Abdu-8-Subban, 
with certain other mansabdars and servants who had 
been appointed to ffo with him had behaved valiantly, 
but at last, in accordance with the saying — 

** When gnats get wings they smite the elephant/’ 

those dogs overcame them, and elevated 'Abdu-s-Subbaii 
with several of the men of the post to the dignity of 
martyrdom.^ As a condolence for this affair a gracious 
farman and a special dress of honour were sent to Khan 
*Alam, who had been appointed ambassador to Iran (and 
was still in that country). On the 14th the offering of 
Mukarram Khan, son of Mu'azzam Khan, came from Bengal. 
It consisted of jewels and articles procurable in that 
province, and was brought before me. I increased the 
mansab of some of the jagirdars of Gujarat. Of these. 

' Jauhar-ddr^ defined by Vullera ns bone or wood benrihg vei'us, 
i.e. striated. 

^ Sec Akbar-nAma, ii, 315. It was sent before Juhungir was born. 
It, too, was an African elephant. 

Here the two words referred to at note 2 on p. 321 are repeated. 

* Ma'usiru-l umara, i, 736. lOian *Alam*s name wae MirrA U.irklntnlar. 



324 APPOINTMENTS. DEATH OF MURTAZA KHAN. 


Sard&r Khan^ whose mansab was that of 1,000 personal 
and 500 horse, was raised to 1^500 personal and 300 ^ horse, 
and had a standard given to him as well. Sayyid Qasim, 
son of Sayyid Dilawar Barha, was raised to an original 
and increased mansab of 800 personal and 450 horse, 
and Yar Beg, nephew of Ahmad Qasim Koka, to one of 
600 personal with 250 horse. On the 17th there came 
the news of the death of Razzaq of Merv, the Uzbeg 
who belonged to the armj' of the Deccan. He was 
well skilled in war, and one of the distinguished Amirs 
of Mawara’a-n-nahr. On the 21st, Allah-dad, the Afghan, 
was honoured with the title of Khan, and his mansab, 
which was 1,000 personal and GOO horse, was raised to 
2,000 personal and 1,000 horse. Three hundred thousand 
rupees out of the treasury of Lahore were ordered as 
a reward and for expenses to KhAn Dauran, who had 
greatly exerted himself in the Afghan disturbance. On 
the 28th, Kunwar Karan obtained leave to go home for 
his marriage. T conferred on him a dress of honour, 
a special Iraq horse with a saddle, an elephant, and 
a jewelled waist-dagger. On the 3rd of this month 
(Khurdad) the news of the death of Murtara ^an came. 
He was one of the ancients of this State. My revered 
father had brought him up and raised him to a position 
of consequence and trust. In my reign also he obtained 
the grace of noteworthy service, namely the overthrow 
of l^usrau. His mansab had been raised to 6,000 
personal and 5,000 horse. As he was at this time 
Subalidar of the Panjab, he had undertaken the capture 
of Kangra, to which in strength no other fort in the 
hill country of that province or even in the whole 
inhabited world can be compared. He had obtained 
leave to go on this duty. I was much grieved in mind 
at this news; in trath, grief at the death of such 

^ ThiK seoms wrong ; tlic numUor of liarse would probably not l»o 
reduced. 



APPOINTMENTS. 


325 


a loyal follower is only reasonable. As he had died 
after spending his days in loyalty, I prayed to God for 
pardon for him. On the 4th Khurdad the mansab of 
Sayyid Ni^m was fixed, original and increase, at 900 
personal and 650 horse. I gave Nuru-d-din Quli the 
post of entertainer to the ambassadors from all parts. 
On the 7th news came of the death of Saif Khan 
Barha: he was a brave and ambitious young man. He 
had exerted himself in an exemplary way in the battle 
with Khusrau. He bade farewell to this perishable 
world in the Deccan through cholera (haiza). I con- 
ferred favours on his sons. -Ali Muhammad, who was 
the eldest and most upright of his children, was given 
the mansab of 300 ^ personal and 400 horse, and his 
(‘All Muhammad's) brother, by name Bahadur, that of 
400 personal and 200 horse. Sayyid ‘Ali, who was his 
nephew, received an increase in rank of 500 personal 
and horse. On the same day Khub-Allah, son of 
Sh&h-baz KbAn Kambu, received the title of Ran-baz 
Khan. On the 8th ^ the mansab of Hashiin lEO>&n, original 
and increase, was fixed at 2,500 personal and 1,800 horse. 
On this date I bestowed 20,000 daraha (10,000 ruj)cc.s) 
on Allah-dad Kh&n, the Afghan. Bikrarfiajit, Raja of 
the province of Bandhu, whose ancestors were, considerable 
zamindars in Hindustan, through the patronage of my 
fortunate son Baba Khurram, obtained the blessing of 
paying his respects to me, and his pfiences were pardoned. 
On the 9th, ^ Kalyan of Jesalmlr, to summon whom Raja 
Kishan Das had gone, came and waited on me. He 
presented 100 niuhrs and 1,000 rupt?e.s. His elder brother 
Rawal Bhiiii was a person of distinction. When he died 
he left a son 2 months old, and he t(X) did not live 


* So in text, but No. 181 ban SOU, and this is more likely, for the 
number of horse i.s never. 1 think, larger than the zo/ rtnk. 

^ I.O. MSS. have 18th. 

I.O. MSS. have 2Uth. 



326 


DEATH OF SHAH JAHAN’S DAUGHTER. 

long, lik the time when I was prince I had taken his 
daughter in marriage, and called her by the title of 
Malika-JahAn ^ (queen of the world). As the ancestors 
of this tribe had come of ancient loyal people, this 
alliance took place. Having, summoned the aforesaid 
KAlyan, who was the brother of Bawal Bhim, I exalted ^ 
him with the tika of Raja and the title of Rawal. News 
came that after the death of Murta:^ Khan loyalty was 
shown by Raja Man« and that, after giving encourage- 
ment to the men of the fort of Kangra an arrangement 
had been made that he should bring to Couit the son 
of the Raja of that country, who was 29 years ok). In 
consequence of his great zeal in this service, I fixed his 
rnansab. which was 1,000 personal and 800 horse, at 1,500 
personal and 1,000 horse. Khwaja Jahan was promoted 
from his original and increased mansab to that of 4,000 
personal and 2,500 horse. On this date^ an event 
occurred such that, although 1 was greatly desirous of 
writing it down, my hand and heart have failed me 
Whenever I took my pen my state became bewildered. 
And I helplessly ordered I*timadu-d-daulah to write it. 

'' An ancient sincere slave, Ttimadu-d-daulah, by order 
writes iii this auspicious volume^ that on the llth^ 
Khurdad the traces of fever were seen in the pure 
daughter^ of Sh&h Kburram of lofty fortune, for whom 
His Majesty showed much affection as the early fruit of 

’ The two I.O. MSS. have the following .sentence here: **On thie 
day it happened that however much I tried to write, my heart and 
hand would not act. Whenever I seized the pen my condition altered. 
At last I hod to tell I*tim&du-d-daulah to write.” 

* This nentenco is not in the I.O. MSS. 

* Here comes the {lassago which the two I.O. MSS. enter higher up. 

* I.O. MS. 181 has writes that on the llth^*’ etc. 

* The I.O. MSS. jidd here “ of the 11th year.” 

* Probably this is the ChimnI Begam, a daughter of Jah&ii. 

whose grave is near that of the saint Khwaja Mu*lnu-d-dia Chishti 

Rajputana (Gazetteer,” ii, (12). Psobably Chimni should be Chamanl, 
which means * verdant * and comes from •hameut, a garden. Perhaps she 
dieil of smallimx. It was in the summer. 



SUBJECT CONTINUED. 


327 


the garden of auspiciousneas. After three days pustules 
{abila) appeared, and on the 26th of the same month, 
corresponding with Wednesday, the 29th JumlU]a>l-awwaI 
(16th June, 1616), in the year 1025, the bird of her soul 
flew from her elemental cage and passed into the gardens 
of Paradise. From this date an older was given that 
Char-shamba (Wednesday) should be called Kam<sharaba 
(or Gum-^amba). What shall I write as to what 
happened to the pure personality of the siiadow of Ood 
in consequence of this heartburning event and grief- 
increasing calamity ? Inasmuch as it happened after 
this manner to that soul of the world, wliat must be the 
condition of those other ' servants whose life was bound 
up with that pure pei'sonality ? For two days the 
servants were not received in audience, and an oidei- 
was given that a wall should be built in front of the 
house which had been the abode of that biid of paradise, 
so that it might not be seen. In addition to this he did 
not adorn the gate of the hall of audience (did not come 
there). On the third day he went in an agitated state to 
the house of the illustrious prince, and the servants had 
the good fortune to pay their salutations and found 
fresh life. On the roail, however much the Hazrat (the 
Emperor) desired to control himself, the tears flowed 
from the auspicious eyes, and for a long time it was so 
that at the mere hearing of a word from which came 
a whirt*of pain, the state of the Ha/.rat l)ecamc bewildered. 
He remained for some days in the house of the prince 
of the inhabitants of the world, and on Monday - of Tir. 
Divine month, he went to the house of Asaf l^an, and 
turned back thence to the Chii.'inna-i-Nur, and for two or 


' A|i|)arently the reterenre 15 to the |)iii'eiit5 of t)ic child and to the 
irrandfather, that is, the writer of this notieo. 

" I.O. MSS. have Monday, the tfth Tir, and .«iiy that Jahan^^ir went to 
Choshma-i-Nur on the Uth, which they say Mav a Thurs<la\ . And wc see 
Inter that Jaluingfr Spe.nk^ of Satiirdny nf the I Ith. 



328 BIBTH OF SHAH MAJA^AT. 

three days employed himself there. But as long as he 
was in Ajmir he could not control himself. Whenever 
the word ' friendship ’ reached his ear, the tears would 
drop from his eyes unrestrained, and the hearts of his 
faithful followers were tom in pieces. When the 
parturc of the cortege of fortune to the Subah of the 
Deccan took place, he gained a little composure.” 

On this date Prithi Chand, son of Ray Manohar, 
obtained the title of Ray and the mansab of 500 
personal and 400 horse, and a jagir in his native place. 
On Saturday, the 11th, I went from the Chashma-i-Nur 
to the palace at Ajmir. On the eve of Sunday, the 12th, 
after 37 seconds had passed, at the time of the ascension 
of Sagittarius to the 27th degree, by the calculations 
of the Hindu astronomers, and the 1 5th degree of 
Capricorn, by the calculations of the Greeks, there came 
from the w^omb of the daughter of Asat Khan (wife of 
Khurram) a precious pearl into tlie world of being. 
With joy and gladness at this great boon the drums beat 
loudly, and the door of pleasure and enjoyment was 
opened in the face of the people. Without delay or 
reflection the name of Shah Shaj&‘at came to my tongue. 
1 hope that his coming will be auspicious and blessed 
to me and to his father. On the 12th a jewelled dagger^ 
and an elephant were bestowed on Rawal Kalyan of 
Jesalmir. On the same day arrived the news of the 
death of Khawaas Klian, whose jagir was in the Sarkar 
of Qanauj. I gave an elephant to Ray Kunwar. Diwan 
of Gujarat. On the 22nd of the same month (Tir) 
1 added 500 personal and horse to the mansab of Raja 
Maha Singh, so as to make it one of 4,000 personal and 
3,000 horse. The mansab of 'Ali Tatar!, who 

before this had been exalted with the title of Nu^rat 
Kh&n, was fixed at 2,000 personal and 500 horse, and 


^ The word * dagger ' is omitted in the teset. 



SULTiN PARWIZ RECALLED. 


329 


a standard was also conferred on him. With a view 
to the accomplishment of certain purposes^ I had made 
a vow that they should place a gold railing with lattice- 
work at^ the enlightened tomb of the revered Khwaja. 
On the 27th of this month it ^as completed, and I oidered 
them to take and affix it. It had been made at a cost 
of 110,000 rupees. As the command and leading of 
the victorious army of the Deccan had not been carried 
out to my satisfaction by my son Sultan Parwiz, it 
occurred to me to recall him, and send Baba Khurrain 
as the advanced guard of the victorious army, inasmuch 
as the signs of rectitude and knowledge of affairs were 
evident in him, and that I myself would follow him, so 
that this important matter would be carried through in 
one and the same campaign. With this object a farmaii 
had already been sent in the name of Parwiz ordering him 
to start for the Subah of Allahabad, which is in the 
centre of my dominions. Whilst I was engaged in the 
campaign, lie would be entrusted with the guarding and 
administration of that region. On the 29th of the same 
month a letter came from Bihari Das, the news-writer 
of Burhanpfir, that the prince on the 20th had left the 
city safely and well and gone towards the aforesaid 
Subah. On the 1st Amurdad I bestowed a jewelled 
turban on Mirza Raja Bhao Singh. An elephant was 
conferred on the shrine of Kushtigir. On the 18th, 
Lashkar I^an had sent four ambling (ra Invar) horses, 
and they vrere brought before me. Mir Mughal was 
appointed to the faujdarship of the Sarkar of Sambal 
in the place of Sayyid 'Abdu-I-W&ris, who had r)htaiTied 
the governorship of the Subah of Qanauj in the place 
of Khawas^ Kban. His mansab, in view of that duty, 
was fixed at 500 personal and horse. On the 2l8t the 
offering of R&wal Kaly&n of Jesalmir was laid before 


^ 1.0. MSS. have bar daur. * round.’ 



330 


OUTBBEAK OF PLAGUE. 


me; it waa 3,000 muhrs, 9 horses, 25 camels, and 
1 elephant. The mansab of Qizil-ba^ Sh&n was fixed 
original and increase, at 1,200 personal and 1,000 horse. 
On the 23rd, Shaja'at Kh&n obtained leave to go to his 
jagir that he might arrange the affairs of his servants 
and his territory, and present himself at the time agreed 
upon. In this year,^ or rather in the 10th year after 
my accession, a great pestilence appeared in some places 
in Hindustan. The commencement of this calamity was 
in the parganahs of the Panjab, and by degrees the 
contagion spread to the city of Lahore. Many of the 
people, Musulmans and Hindus, died through this. After 
this it spread to Sirhind and the Du'ab, until it reached 
Delhi and the surrounding parganahs and villages, and 
desolated them. At this day it had greatly diminished. 
It became known from men of great age and from old 
histories that this disease had never shown itself in this 
country * (before). Physicians and learned men were 
questioned as to its cause. Some said tliat it came 
because tlierc had been drought for two years in succession 
4 ind little rain fell ; others said it was on ivccount of the 
corruption of the air which occurred through the drought 
and scarcity. Some attributed it to other causes. Wisdom 
is of Allah, and we must submit to Allah's decrees ! 

What does u slave who hows not hiS neck to tlie oixlei*?*' 

On 5th §hahriwar 5,000 rupees towaitls her expenses 
were sent to the mother of Mir Miran, the daughter of 
^ah Isma'il II, by inerchaiits* who were proceeding 
to the province of Iraq. On the Gth a letter came from 
‘Abid Wirin* bakhshi and news-writer of Ahmadabad, 

' Klliot, vi, 340. There is n lietter aoeount of the plague in the 
Jqhul-iiaiiin, pp. MS, SO. 

^ The wonis ure ftnr wiMifttf, mid may inemi ‘any <x>uutry * oi* ‘any 
I'nreiurn innintry. ' 

The von of the historian Ni/iiiiiu-d-din. Sir T. Roe refers to thi.s 
aSair. 



MISBEHAVIOUR OF ^ABDU-LLAH KHAN. 


331 


to the purport that ‘Abdu-llah Kban Bahadur Firuz-jang 
had quarrelled mth him because he had recorded 
among (current) events certain affairs that had been 
unpleasing to him, and had sent a body of men against 
him, and had insulted him by carrying him away to 
his house, and had done this and that to him. This 
matter appeai*ed serious to me, and I was desirous at 
once to cast him out of favour and ruin him. At last 
it occurred to me to send Dayanat Kbsn to Ahmadabad 
to enquire into this matter on the spot from disinterested 
people to see if it had actual^ occurred and if so, to 
bring *Abdu-llah Khan with him to the Court, leaving 
the charge and administration of Ahmadabad to SardAr 
Kban, his brother. Before Day&nat Kb&n started, the 
news reached Firuz-jang, and he in a state of great 
perturbation confessed himself an offender and started 
for the Court on foot. Day&nat Kbi*n met him on 
the road, and seeing him in a strange condition, as 
he had wounded his feet with walking, he put him on 
horseback, and taking him with him came to wait on 
me. Muqarrab Kb&n, who is one of the old servants of 
the Court, from the time when I was a prince had con- 
tinually wanted the Subali of Qujarat. It thus occurred 
to me that, as this kind of action on the part of *Abdu-llah 
Kb&n had come about, I might fulfil the hope of an 
ancient servant and send him to Ahmadabad in the 
place of the aforesaid Kb&n. A fortunate hour was 
chosen in these days, and I appointed him to be ruler 
of the Subah. On the 10th the mansab of Bah&dur 
Khan, governor of Qandahar, which was 4,000 personal 
and 3,000 horse, was increased by 500 personal. 

Sbnnqlt the mandolin player, is the wonder of the 
age. He also sings Hindi and Peraian songs in a manner 
that clears the rust from all hearts. I delighted him 
with the title of Anand Kb&n: Anand in the Hindi 
language means pleasure and ease. 



332 


Mi^NGOBS. STATUES OF RAJPUTS. 


Mangoes^ used not to be in season in the country of 
Hindustan after the month of Tir (June- July), (but) 
Muqarrab Khan had established gardens in the parganah 
of Kairana,^ which is the native place of his ancestors, 
and looked after the mangoes there in such a manner 
as to prolong the season for more than two months, and 
sent them every day fresh into the special fruit store- 
house. As this was altogether an unusual thing to be 
accomplished, it has been recorded here. On the 8th 
a beautiful Iraq horse of the name of La‘l Bi-baha 
(priceless ruby) was sent for Parwiz by the hand of 
Sharif, one of his attendants. 

I had ordered quick-handed stone-cutters to carve 
full-sized figures of the Rana and his son Karan out of 
marble. On this day they were completed and submitted 
to me. I ordered them to be taken to Agra and placed 
in the garden^ below the jharoka (exhibition- window). 
On the 26th the meeting for my solar weighing was held 
in the usual manner. The first weight came to 6,514 
tidcha of gold. I was weighed twelve times against 
different things ; the second weighing was against quick- 
silver, the third against silk, the fourth against various 
perfumes, such as ambergris and musk, down to sandal- 
wood, ban, and so on, until twelve weighings were 
(‘ompleted. Of animals, according to the number of 


* Text Ajtnnd, but this inakes no sense. The I.O. MSS. have ai)i6a. 
mangoes, and though the remark seems abrupt this is no doubt the 
correct reading. Jahangir m'us ]iarticulurly fond of mangoes, and 
|>ei‘haps he is here playing on the similarity between the words nmfta 
and auaud, 

'In Sarkur Saharanpur (Jarrett, ii, 292). It is now in the Miijuffar* ** 
iiagar district (I.t*., vii, SU8). 

** It is a pity that no trace of the.se is left at Agra. Had there been, 
they would have been the woraler of the age ” (mite of Suyyi<l Ahmad). 
Perhaps they are the two figures M'hich have generally lieen jnip|x>sed 
to have been put up hy Aklwr and to represent Chitor hei'oes. The 
word farkfh in the te.\t mav mean that they were iiiountevl statue^. But 
then the destn iptioii of llieiii as mui'ble btnrues would be w.oiig. 



SOLAR WEIGHMENT. DAYANAT PARDONED. 333 


years that I had passed, a sheep, a goat,^ and a fowl 
(for each year) were given to fakirs and dervishes. This 
rule has been observed from the time of my revered 
father up to the present day in this enduring State. 
They divide after the weighing all these things among 
the fakirs and those in need to the value of about 
100,000 rupees. 

This day a ruby which Mahabat Khan had purchased 
at Burhanpur for G5,000 rupees from *Abdu-llah Khan 
Firuz-jang was laid lx*fore me, and was approved of. 
It is a ruby of beautiful form. The special inansab of 
Khan A'^m was tixed at 7,000 personal, and an order 
was passed that the diwani establishment should pay 
an equivalent to tiiat in a tanJcMvdh jdglr. At the 
request of Ttimadu-d-daulah, what had been deducted 
from the mansab of Dayanat on account of former 
proceedings was allowed to remain as before. *A;pudu-d- 
daulah, who had obtained the Subah of Malwa in jagir, 
tcx)k his leave, and was dignified with the gift of a horse 
and a dress of honour. The mansab of R&wal Kalyan 
of Jesalmir was fixed at 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse, 

’ Text has y&tifand-i’nar, * a ram,’ but the MSS. have yii*/and u Itar, 
or 6tcz, and it is evident that the true reading is *a sheep, a goat.’ See 
Blochmann, p. 206, where goate are mentioned among the unimuls 
distributed by Akbar. The number of animals distributed corresjionded 
with the years of Jah&ngir’s age (48) multiplied by 3, and so would be 
48 X 3 = 144 (see Blochmann, l.c.). The weight of Jahangir was 6, .114 
iulchas, and Blochmann (p. 267, n.) takes this to be the same os tolas, 
and estimates Jah&ngir’s weight at 210| lb. troy or 15 stone. Probably 
this is excessive, and his weight might be 82 sir or about 2 maunds, 
i.e. 1641b. or 11| stone. The perfumes against which he was weighed 
were ambergris, not amber (which has no scent), ’Otl, i.e. lignum aloes, 
and hdn (not pdn as in text), which apparently is the same as IvbaUf 
* frankincense ’ (see the chapter on perfumes in Blochmann, p. 77). 1 am 
nol sure of the meaning of the phrase ba-doMt nihSuda, The MSS. have 
not the preposition ha. Perhaps the meaning is *put them into the 
hands of the fakirs.’ Jaliangir was born on the 18th Sbahrlwur, 877 = 
3l8t August, 1369. The weighings described in the text took place on 
the 26th Sbahrlwor. Perhaps this was because his birthday was on the 
24ih ghaliriwar according to the Jalali year. 



334 


MUQA.RRAB KHAN PROMOTED. 


and it was oi*dered that that province (Jesalmir) should 
be given him as tankhwah. As the (auspicious) hour 
of his departure was on that same day, he took leave 
to depart for his province well pleased and exalted with 
the gift of a horse, an elephant, a jewelled sword, 
a jewelled khapwa (dagger), a robe of honour, and 
a special Kashmir shawl On the 31st Muqarrab Khan 
took leave to go to Ahmadabad, and his mansab, which 
was 5,000 personal and 2,500 horse, was fixed at 5,000 
personal and horse, and he was honoured with a dress 
of honour a nddiri (a kind of dress), a takina ^ of 
pearls, whilst two horses from my private stable, a special 
elephant, and a jewelled sword were also bestowed on 
him. He went off to the aforesaid Subah with delight 
and in a state of happiness. On the 1 1th of Mihr, Jagat 
Singh, son of Kunwar Karan, came from his native place 
and waited on me. On the 16th, Mirza ‘Ali Beg Akbar- 
^ahl came from the province of Oudh, which had been 
given him in jagir, and waited on me. He presented as 
ofieriiigs 1,000 rupees, and he produced before me an 
elepliaiit which one of the zainindars of that province 
po.s.sessed, and which he had been ordered to take from 
him. On the 21.st the offering of .Qutbu-l-mulk, the 
ruler of Golcondah, consisting of some jewelled ornaments, 
was .inspected by me. The mansab of Sayyid Qasim 
Barha was fixed, original and increase, at 1,000 personal 
and 600 horse. On the eve of Friday, the 22nd, Mirza 
‘All Beg, who.se age had passed 75 years, gave up the 
deposit of his life. Great- services had been performed 
by him for this State. His mansab ro.se by degrees to 
4,000. He was one of the distinguished hei-oes of this 

' Ceiicnilly written faqhnta, *at badge of honour,' * a iiiurlal, etc. 

- Sue Tuzuk, p. 11, Blochmann, p. 482, and Mu*tV;iru-l-uinaru, iii, SS.'t 
The RtiitfMiiLMit at TQziik, p. 11, about Delhi seems a mistake, and is not 
in the M88. MirxTi *AU oaiiio from Bndakhshan; He is frequently 
iiicntioiicci ill vol. iii of the Akbar-iiiinm. 



DEATH OF AN OLD OFFICER. 


335 


family {jawa/nan-i in ulus)^ and of a noble disposition. 
He left neither son nor other descendants. He had the 
poetic temperament. As his inevitable destiny had been 
fulfilled^ on the day on which he went to pay his devotions 
at the venerated mausoleum of Khwaja Mu*inu-d-din, 
I ordered them to bury him in the same blessed place. 

At the time when I gave leave to the ambassadors 
of 'Adil Khan of Bijapur, I had requested that if in 
that province there were a wrestler, or a celebrated 
swordsman, they should tell *Adil Khan to send him to 
me. After some time, when the ambassadors returned, 
they brought a Mughal, by name Shir ‘Ali, who was born 
at Bijapur, and was a wrestler by profession and had great 
experience in the art. together with certain sword-plavers. 
The performances of the latter were indifferent, but 
I put i^ir 'All to wrestle with the wrestlers and athletes- 
who were in attendance on me, and they could none of 
them compete with him. One thousand rupees, a dress 
of honour, and an elephant were conferred on him ; ho 
was exceedingly well mode, well shaped, and powerful. 
I retained him in my own service, and entitled him 

the athlete of the capital.’ A jagir and inansab were 
given him and great favours bestowed on him. On the 
24th, Dayanat Khan, who hod been appointed to bring 
*Abdu-llah Khan Bahadur Firuz-jang, brought him and 
waited on me, and presented as an offering 100 muhrs. 
On the same date Ram Das, the son of Raja Raj .Singh, 
one of the Rajput Amirs who had died on duty in the 
Deccan, was promoted to a man.^b of 1,000 personal 
and 500 horse. As *Abdu-IIah Khan had been guilty of 
faults, he made Baba Khurram his intercessor, and on 
the 26th, in order to please him, t ordered the former 

’ Thin M the name phriue ias, according to the MSS., occurn at p. II. 
Apparently the ntiU referred to is the Timurido family to which Jahangir 
belonged. It is connected with Mirsd *Ali*s title of Akbar^uihi. 

’ See in Blochmann, l.c., the affecting story of his death. 



336 


^ABDU-LLAH KHAN PARDONED. 


to pay his respects to me. He waited upon me with 
a face of complete shame, and presented as offerings 
100 muhiB and 1,000 rupees. Before the coming of 
'Adil Khan’s ambassadors I hsd made up my mind that, 
liaving sent Baba Khurram with the vanguard, I should 
myself proceed to the Deccan and carry out this important 
affair, which for some reasons had been put off. For 
this reason I had given an order that except the prince 
no one should represent to me the affairs of the rulers 
of the Deccan. On this day the prince brought the 
ambassadors and laid their representation before me. 
After the deatli of MurtazA Khan, Raja Man and many 
of the auxiliary Sardars had come to Court. On this 
day, at the request of I*tiinadu-d-daulah, I appointed 
Raja Man as the leader in the attack on the fort of 
Kangra. I appointed all the men to accompany him, 
and according to the condition and rank of each made 
iiim happy with a present — ^a horse, an elephant, a i*obe 
of honour, or money — ^and gave them leave. After some 
days I conferred on 'Abdu-llah Khan, at the request of 
Baba Khurram, a jewelled dagger, as he was exceedingly 
broken-heai*tcd and grieved in mind, and an oixier was 
passed that his mansab should continue as it was before, 
and that he should remain in attendance on iny son 
among those appointed for duty in the Deccan. On the 
3rd Aban 1 ordered the mansab of Wazir Khan, who 
was in attendance on BAba Parwiz, to be, original 
and increase, 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse. On the 
4th, Khusrau, who was in the cliarge, for safe keeping, 
of Anira’i Singh-dalan, for certain consideiations was 
lijuided over to A^f Khan. 1 presented him with a 
special shawl. On the 7th (Aban), corresponding with 
the 17th Shawwal (28th October, 1(510), a person of the 
name of IVluhammad Ri/A Beg, whom the niler of Persia 
had sent as his ivpresentative, paid liis respects. After 
p4*rfoi‘nnng the dues of prostration and salutation 



SHAH JaHAN marches TO THE DECCAN. 337 


sijda, tcutlim), he laid before me the letter he had farought. 
It was decided that he should pitxluce before me the horses 
and other presents he had brought with him. The written 
and verbal messages sent were full of friendship, brother- 
hood, and sincerity. I gave the ambassador on that same 
day a jewelled tiara (tdj) and a Vess of honour. As in 
the letter much friendliness and affection were displayed, 
an exact copy is recorded in the Jah&ngir-n&ma.^ 

On Sunday, the 18th Shawwal. corresponding to the 
8th Aban,^ the camp equipage of my son Bab& Ourram 
left Ajmir for the purpose of the conquest of the provinces 
of the Deccan, and it was decided that my son aforesaid 
should start by way of advanced guard, followed by the 
glorious standards (of Jah&ngir). On Monday, the 19th, 
corresponding with the 9th Aban, when three gharis of 
day had passed, the auspicious palace moved in the same 
direction in the like manner. On the 10th the mansab 
of R&ja Suraj Mai, who had been appointed to accompany 
the prince, was made up, original and increase, to 2,000 
personal and hoi'se. On the night of the 19th Ab&n, 
after my usual custom, I was in the ghnsful-l^ria. Some 
of the Amirs and attendants, and by chance Muhammad 
Riza Beg, the ambassador of the ruler of Persia, were 
present. When six gharis had passed, an owl came and 
sat on top of a high terrace roof belonging to the 
palace, and was hardly visible, so that many men failed 

' This letter being of the nsual Persian style, and having nothing to 
do with Jah&ngir’a history, is omitted. It relates to the sending of 
Muhammad Husain Chelebi with presents to the emperor, and to the 
offering his services for the purchase of jewels, etc. 

- Text 20th Abdn, but the MSS. have 8th, and this is clearly right. 
By the latter part of the sentence Jah&nglr means that gbih Jaliftn 
was to start first, and that he himself was to leave afterwords. The 
** auspicious palace referred to in the next sentence is apparently SbAb 
«Tali&n*8 establishment. Jahangir did not leave for about a fortnight. 
Though Sbnh Jahdn and the establishment (dauAif-^fUE-t-AiwidytiM) 
made a start on the 8th or 9th Abdn, ho did not finally leave till the 
20th Aban. See hfra. 



338 SVOOESSrUL shot. WiK ‘ABBZS KIL18 HIS SOX. 

to iiiafcingnMh it I sent for s giui and took aim and 
died in the diieetion that they pointed out to me. 1!he 
gun, like the decree of heaven, fell on that ill-omened 
Inrd and Uew it to pieces. A shout arose from those 
who were present^ and involuntarily they opened their 
lips in apidauae and praise. On the same night I talked 
witii the ambassador of my brotiier *AbbSs, and at 
last tlie erniversation turned on the slaying of 9afl Mlrsi, 
his (the Shah’s) eldest son. 1 asked him because this 
was a difficulty in my mind. He represented that if 
his slaughter had not been carried out at that time he 
would certainly have attempted the Shah’s life. As this 
intention became manifest from his behaviour, the Shah 
wae beforehand with him and mdered him to be killed. 
On the same day the mansab of Miraft ffaaan, son of 
Hinft Rustam, was fixed, original and increase, at 1,000 
personal and 300 hmne. The mansab of Mu’tamad 
KbAn,* who had been appointed to the post of paymaster 
of the army with fiAbA Kburram, was settled at 1,000 
personal and 250 horse. The time for the leave-taking 
of BAbA Kbunmn had been fixed as Friday, the 20tii 
(AbAn). At the end of this day he paraded befm. me 
the pick of his men armed and ready in the public hall 
of audience. Ot the distinguished favours bestowed on 
tile aforesaid son one was the title of SbAh, which wae 
made a part of h|s name. I ordered that thereafter he 
should be styled SbAh SultAn Kburram. I presented 
him with a robe of honour, a jewelled eharqab, the 
fringe and cdlar of which were decorated with pearls, 
an Iraq horse with a jewelled saddle, a Turki horse, 
a qweial elephant called 6aaBl'badan,*a carriage, according 
to the En^ish ffishum,* toe him to sit and travel about 

> Aelhor of labal-nisis. 

* * Of body liko Kridioii, or like m into*? 

* Aooordiiii^ to Roo, it woo not tbo Ei^lub otnri^. bnt n oo|iy. 

POrhnpo JnhiDi^ had Uie or^nal oarriago and 8bib Jabin tbo oopy. 



PKE8ENT8 TO JAHiV. 8T0RT OF A THTEC. 339 

in, s jewelled eword with a apeeial pardala (sword*bdt) 
that had been taken at the ooni;iue8t of the fciit of Ahmad- 
na^^ and waa veiy celebrated, and a jewelled dagger. 
He atarted with great kmneaa. My trust in Almi^ty 
(Sod is that in this service he may gain renown (lit. 
become red-faced). On each of the Amita and manaabdara, 
according to his quality and d^pree, a luwae and an 
dei^iant were conferred. Looaening a private sword 
from my own waist, I gave it to 'Abdu-llah Kban 
Firtks-jang. As Day&nat Sbhn had been appcmted to 
accompany tlie prince, I gave the duty of 'arr-mukorrir 
(reviser of petitions) to KhwAja (jftsim <^llj SbAn. 
Previously^ to this a band of thieves had carried off 
a certain sum of numey from the royal treasuiy in the 
kotwSiU chahfUara (Pcdice Office^ After some days seven 
men of that band, with titeir leader, of the name of 
Nawal, were cau|^t, and a pwtion of that money was 
recovered. It occrnred to me that as they had been 
guilty of sodi boldness I ought to punish them severely. 
Each was punished in exemplary fashion, and I ordered 
Nawal, the leader of them idl, to be thrown under the 
feet of an elephant. He petitioned that if I woifld give 
the order he would fight the ele^umt. 1 ordered it to 
be sa They produced a very furious dtephant. I bade 
them put a dagger into his hand and bring him in 
front of the elephant. The elephant several times threw 
him down, and each time that violent and fearless man, 
although he witnessed the punishments of his comrades, 
got up again and bravely and with a stout heart struck 
the elephant’s trunk anth the dagger, so that the animal 
refrain^ from attacking him. ^en 1 hod wit ne sse d 
this pluck and manliness, I ordered them to inquire into 
his history. After a shevt time, according to his evil 
nature and low disposition, he ran away in his longing 


> Bifat, Vi, MS. 



340 


RIDES IN AN ENOUSH CARRUOE. 


for his own plaee and abode. 'Hiis annoyed me greatly, 
and I (wdered the jagiidais of that neighbonrhood to 
hunt him up and apprehend him. By chance he was 
caught a second time, and this time I ordered that 
ungrateful and unappreciative one to he hanged. The 
saying of Shaikh. Muslihu-d-din Sa'di accords with his 
case— 

'* In the end a wolfs enb becomes n wolf, 

Althongfa he be brought op with mu.” 

On Tuesday,* the 1st ^-1-qa'da (10th November, 1616^, 
corresponding with the 21st Ab&n, after two watches 
and five gharis of the day had passed, in good condition 
and with a right purpose I mounted the Fnmk carriage, 
which had four horses attached to it, and left the city 
of Ajmir. I ordered many of the Amirs to accompany 
me in carriages, and at about sunset alighted at a halting- 
place about If kos distsmt, in the village of Deo R&y 
(Dotii?).* It is the custom of the people India that if 
the movement of kings or great men for the conquest of 
a country is towards the east they should ride a tusked 
elephant, and if the movement is towards the west^ on 
a horse of one colour ; if towaods the north in a palanquin 
or a litter {aingh&mm), and if towards the south, that is, 
in the direction of the Deccan (as on this occasion), on 
a rath, which is a kind of cart (fvrdba) or hahal (two- 
wheeled car). I had stayed at Ajmir for five days 
less than three years.’ They consider the city of Ajmir, 
wbidk is the place of the blessed tomb of the revered 
KbwAja Mu‘inn-d-din, to be in the second dime. Its 
air is nearly equable. The capital of Agra is to the 
east of it; <m the north are the townships (district) of 

* Th« day was Saturday, not Tueaday, and it is Saturday in the HSS. 

* Elliot baa Deo R&ni, and it is Deo Rtnt in I.O. MS. 305. 

* .T^ngir arrived in Ajmir on the 20th Abin, 1022, and loft it on the 
218t AliSn, 1025. The Muhammadan dates are 5th Sbawwal, 1022, and 
let Zl-l-qa*da, 1025 = ISth November, 1613, and 10th Novembw, 1616. 



ACCOUNTS OF AJMIK. 


341 


Delhi, and on the south the Subah of OtgaraA On the 
west lie Multan and De&lpur. The soil of this province 
is all sandy ; water is found with difliculty in the land, 
and the reliance for cultivation is on moist ^ soil and on 
the rainfall. The cold season is very equable, and the 
hot season is milder than in Agra. From this subali 
in time of war 86,000’ horse and 304,000 Rajput foot 
are provided. There are two large lakes in this city; 
they call one of these the Bisal’ and the other the 
Aii&s&gar. The Bisal tank is in ruins and its embank- 
ment is broken. At this time I ordered it to be repaired. 
The Anasi^r at the time that the royal standards were 
there was always full of water and waves. This fdf is 
H kos and 5 fandb (lit. tent-ropes) (in circumference?). 
Whilst at Ajmir I visited nine times the mausoleum of 
the i*evered Kbwaja, and fifteen times went to look at tln^ 
Pushkar lake ; to the Chashma-i-NOr I went thirty-eight 
times. I went out to hunt tigers, etc., fifty times. I killed 
15 tigers, 1 cheetah, 1 black -ear (lynx), 53 nilgaw, 33 gazelle 
(ffatoazn), 90 antelope, 80 boars, and 340 water-fowl. I en- 
camped seven times at Deo BAy (Deo Rani) (Dor&i?), At 
this halt 5 nilgaw and 1 2 water-fowl were killed. Marching 
on the 29th from Deo R&y, my camp was pitched at the 
village of DasHwali, 2 kos and quarters distant from 
Deo Ray. On tliis day 1 gave an elephant to Mu'tainad 
Khan I stayed the next day at this village. On this 
day a nilgaw was killed, and I sent two of my falcons 
t^> my son Kbunuin. 1 marched from this village on the 

' Text far, but MSS. hn%’e ahfnr, ue. inferior and fierliaiie low land. 
The text seemn cjomipt. 

MSS. have SO, ASO horde niul 347,000 foot, and thifi aaroes with the 
Ayiii (Jarrett, ii, 372). 

Text wrongly hiw Nil. The tank in qiiention in the Bi.«a]ya tank of 
the Rajputana l«azetteor, ii, 4, which wax made by Blaal Deo Cboh&n 
about 1000 A.D. It in deecrib^ in Tod'n ** Personal Narrative,** i, S24, 
of Calcutta reprint. It is, or was, about S miles in circumforence 
4 UmI is about a mile west of the .\nMgar, which was made by Bisal 
Dco*s grandson. 



342 


HUNTING. AN ENTJilRTAlNMKNT. 


3rd Aw, and pitched at the village of Badhal (Mawal?), 
2^ kos distant. On the road six watcr>fowl, etc., were 
killed. On the 4th, having gone l A koa, R&nisar.^ which 
belongs to Nur-Jahan Begatn, became the place for the 
alighting of honour and glory. A halt was made at 
this place for eight days. In the place of Khidmat-g&r 
ICkan 1 here appointed Hidayatu-llah mlr-tuzak (master 
of ceremonies). On the 5th day 7 antelope, 1 kulang 
(crane), and 15 fish were killed. The next day Jagat 
Singh, fKin of Kunwar Karan, received a horse and a robe 
of honour and took leave for his native place. A horse 

was also given to Kesho Das Lala and an elephant to 

Allah-dAd Kb^n Afghan. On the same day I killed 

a gazelle, 3 antelope, 7 fish^ and 2 water-fowl. On 
that daj' was heard the news of the death of Raja 

Syam Singh, who belonged to the army of Bangash. 
(]b the 7th day 3 antelope, 5 water -fowl, and 
a qcifiiqalddgh^ (coot) were killed. On Thursday and 
the eve of Friday, as Ramsar belongs to the jagir of 
Nur-Jahan, a feast and entertainment were prepared. 
Jewels, jewelled ornaments, fine cloths, sewn tapestry, 
And every kind of jewellery were presented as offerings. 
At night on all sides and in the middle of the lake, 
which is very broad, lamps were displayed. An excellent 
eiiteiiaiiiment was arranged. In the end of the said 
Thursday, having also sent for the Amirs. 1 ordered cups 
foe most'^ of the servants. On my journeys by land 
some boats are always taken along with the victorious 
camp : the boatmen convey them on carts. On the day 
after this entertainment I went to fish in these boats, 
and in a short time 208 large fish came into one net. 

> About 20 miles south-esHt of Ajmir. 

* lliis is the name of a water-bird in Turki. It is also oaUed rndgA 
and water-crow and in Hindi jojfkawd (note of Sayyid 

Ahmad). 

’ Proliiibly the meaning is that he allowed those who wiidied to drink 
to do so. Many, or at least some, would be abstainers. 



ACCOUNT OF SARAa. 


343 


Half of these were of the species of rahii. At night 
I divided them among the servants in my own presence. 
On the ISth A^ar I marched from K&msar, and hunting 
for 4 koB along the road, the camp was pitched at 
the village of BalodA.^ Here I stayed for two days. 
On the 16th, moving 3| kos, 1 alighted at the village 
of Nih&l.* On the 18th the march was one of 2} kos. 
On this day 1 gave an elephant to Muhammad Rixa 
Beg, ambassador of the ruler of Persia. The village of 
JonsA became the halting-place of the tents of greatness 
and prosperity. On the 20th I marched to the halting- 
place of DeogAon ; I hunted along the roacKor a distance 
of 3 kos. I stayed at this place for two days, and at 
the end of the day went out to hunt. At this stage 
a strange affair was witnessed. Before the royal standards 
arrived at this halting-place, an eunuch went to the bank 
of a large tank there is in the village, and caught two 
young sdras, which are a kind of crane ; at night, when 
we stopped at this halting-place, two large saras appeared 
making loud cries near the ghusul-khana (parlour), which 
they had placed on the edge of the tank, as if somebod}* 
were exercising oppression on them. They fearlessly 
began their cries and came forward. It occurred to me 
that certainly some kind of wi*ong had been done to 
them, and probably their young had been taken. After 
enquiry was made the eunuch who had taken the young 
saras brought them before me. When the saras heard 
the cries of these young ones, they without control threw 
themselves upon them, and suspecting that they had had 
no food, each of the two saras placed food in the mouths 
of the young ones, and made much lamentation. Taking 
the two young ones between them, and stretching out 
their wings and -fondliiig them, they went off to their 
nest. Marching on the 23rd 3^* kos, I alighted at the 


^ 111 M.SS. 


^ StJutl irr 



344 


HUNTING AND HARCHING. 


village of Bahasu (Bhalu?). Here there was a halt of two 
days, and each day I rode to hunt. On the 26th the royal 
standards moved and the halt was outside of the village; 
of KakaL A halt was made after traversing 2 kos. 
On the 27th the mansab of Badi'u-z-zainan, son of 
Mirza Shahrukh. original and increased, was fixed at 
1,500 personal and 750 horse. Marching on the 29th 
2f kos, a halt was made at the village of Lasa, near 
parganah Boda.^ This day corresponded with the festival 
of Qurban (19th December, 1616). 1 ordered them to 

observe the ordinances of that day. From the date on 
which I left Ajmir up to the end of the aforesaid month, 
viz. the 30th Anr, 67 nilgaw, antelope, etc., and 37 water- 
fowl etc., had been killed. A inarch was made from 
LasA on the 2nd Day, and 1 marched and hunted for 
3 kos 10 jarih^ and halted in the neighbourhood of th** 
village of K&nrA. On the 4th a inarch of 3\ kos wa.s 
made to the village of SOrath. Marching 4i kos on the 
6th, a halt was made near the village of Barora^Bardaiu?). 
On the 7th, when there was a halt, 50 water-fowl and 
14 qashqaldagh (coot) were killed. The next day was 
a halt as well. On this day 27 water-fowl became a ptey. 
On ttie 9th a march of 4ji kos was made. Hunting and 
overthrowing prey, I alighted at the halting-place of KhCish 
Tal. At this stage a report came from Mu*tamad Khan that 
when the territory of the R&na became the halting-place 
of Shah Kburram, though there had been no agreement 
to this effect (i.e. to the RanA’s meeting him), the fame 
and dignity of the victorious army had introduced 
a commotion into the pillars of his patience and hrniness, 
and* he had come and paid his respects to him when he 
halted at Dodpur,^ which wa.s on the border of his jagir, 

^ In SarkAr Blaroaor (Jamtt, ii, 208). It was in Malwa. But tli» 
I.O. MSS. have Nanda. 

* Text UdaipQr, but this was not on the lioitler of the Rank's 
territor}*, and the MSS. have DadpQr. 



kIna of uoaipOk. 


345 


and observing all the dues and ceremonies of service he 
had neglected not the smallest portion of them. gb&H 
Khurram had paid him every attention, and pleased him 
with the gift of a dress of h< nour, a chdrqab, a jewelled 
sword, a jewelled khapwa, Persian and Turki horses, and 
an elephant, and dismissed him with every honour. He 
had also favoured his sons and relations with dresses of 
lionour, and out of his offering, which consisted of five 
elephants, twenty-seven horses, and a tiay full of jewels 
and jewelled ornaments, had taken three horses and given 
Imck the remainder. It was settled that his son Karan 
should attend on the stirrup of Baba Khurram in this 
expedition with 1,500 horse. On the 10th the sons of 
Raja Maha Singh came from their jagir and native place 
^Amber) and waited on me in the neighbourhood of 
Rantambhor, making an offering of three elephants and 
nine horses. Each one of them, according to his condition, 
received an increase of mansab. As the neighbourhood 
of the said fort became a halting-place for the royal 
standaixls, 1 released some of the prisonera who were 
confined in that fort. At this place I halted for two 
days and each day went to hunt. Thirty-eight water- 
fowl and qoshqaldagh (coot) were taken. On the 12th 
1 inarched, and after going 4 kos halted at the village 
of Koyala. On the road I killed fourteen water-fowl 
and an antelope. On the 14th, having traversed kos, 
1 halted in the neighbourhood of the village of Ektora/ 
killing on the road a blue bull, twelve herons (kanmnaJe), 
etc. On the same day Agh& Fazil, who had lx*cii 
appointed deputy for l*timAdu-d-daulah at Lahore, was 
dignified with the title of F&idl Khan. At this stage 
they had erected the royal lodging (dauiat-Mul'ii a) on 
the bank of a tank, which was exceedingly bright and 
pleasant. On account of the pleasantness of the place 


' PerhapB the Tod» of Sir T. Koo. 



346 HUNTINO AND HARCHING. 

I halted two days there, and at the end of each went 
to hunt water-fowl. To this place the younger son of 
Mahabat Khan, by name Bahra-war, came from the 
fort of Rantambhor, which is his father’s jagir, to pay 
his respects to me. He had brought two elephants, both 
of which were included in my private stud. I promoted 
^fi, son of Ain&nat Kh&n, to the title of Kh^n, and, 
increasing his mansab, made him bakhshi and news-writer 
of the Subah of Gujarat. Having travelled kos on 
the 17th, I halted at the village of Las&yA.^ During the 
halt I killed one water-fowl and twenty-three sand-grouse 
(durraj). As I had sent for La^kar Kb&n to Court on 
account of the disagreement that had occurred between him 
and Khan Dauran, I at this place appointed *Abid 
bakhshi and news- writer, in his stead. On the 10th, 
having made a march of 2^ kos, an encampment was 
made in the neighbourhood of the village of Kuraka 
( Koran ?),^ which is situated on the bank of the Chanibal. 
()n account of the excellence of the place and the pleasant- 
ness of its air and water, a halt took place here for 
three days. Every day I sat in a boat and went to 
hunt water-fowl and to wander over the river. On the 
22nd* there was a march, and having traversed 4^ kos, 
shooting pn the road, the victorious camp was pitched 
at the villages of 8ultanpur and Chila Mala (ChilAinilA ?). 
On this day of halt I bestowed on Mjran 2:^r Jahan 
5,000 rupees, and gave him leave to proceed to the place 
assigned to him as his jagir. Another 1,000 rupees 
were given to Shaildi Pir. On the 25th 1 marched 
and hunted for 3^ kos and encamped at the village of 
Basur.^ According to fixed rules one halt and one march 
took place, and on the 27th I inarched and hunted 4} kos 
and encamped at the village of ChArdiiha (VaradhA ?). 

‘ I/y.'isa in MSS. * Son of Ni»iniii-cl-diii the hisUu'iaii. 

- Ouranu in MSS. ami the liiHtance 2| leaf and 1 Jarih, 

* 2:<nl ill MSS. ^ Munfiar in text. 



STBANQK K8C.4PK OF A BIRD. 


347 


Two days halt took place here. In this month of Day 
416 animals were killed, namely, 97 sand-grouse (durraj), 
192 qashqaldagh, 1 saras, 7 herons, 118 water-fowl, and 
1 hare. On the 1st Bahman, corresponding with the 
12th Muharram, 1026 (20th January, 1617), seating myself 
in boats with the ladies, I went forward one stage. When 
one ghari of day lemaincd I arrived at the village of 
Rupahem, the halting-place, the distance being 4 kos 
and 15 jarib. I shot five sand-grouse. On the same day 
I sent by the hands of Kaikana winter dresses of honour 
to twenty-one Amirs on duty in the" Deccan, and oidered 
him to take 10,000 ^ rupees from those Amirs as a tliaiiks- 
giving for the dreascs of honour. This halting-place had 
much verdure and pleasantness. On the 3id a march took 
place. As on the previous day, I embarked in a boat, 
and after traversing 2} kos the village of Kakha-dils 
(Kakhavas?)^ became the encamping place of the victorious 
camp. As I came hunting on the way, a sand-grouse fell 
flying into a thicket. After much search it was marked, 
and I oidercd one of the beaters to surround the thicket and 
catch it, and w^ent tow^ards it myself. Meanwhile another 
sand-grouse rose, and this I made a falcon seize. Soon 
afterwards the beater came and laid the sand-grouse 
before me. I ordered them to satisfy the falcon with 
this sand-grouse, and to keep the one we had caught, as 
it was a young bird. (But) before the order reached 
him the head huntsman fed the falcon with the sand- 
grouse (the second one, viz. that which the falcon had 
caught). After a while the beater represented to me 
that if he did not kill the snnd-gi'ouse it would die 
(and then could not be eaten os not propc>rly killed). 
I ordered him to kill it if that was the case. As he 
laid his sword on its throat, it with n. slight movement 
freed itself from the sword and flew away. After I hti#l 


' MSS. 2,000 ni|jeeM. 


- ri'iliap** Kitiiha Oif* 



348 


NUK-JAHAX SHOOTS A BIRD. 


left the boat and mounted iny horse, suddenly a sparrow 
(kunjidjc) by the foi'ce of the wind struck the head of 
an arrow that one of the beaters who u^as in my retinue 
had in his hand, and immediately fell down and died. 
I was amazed and bewildered at the tricks of destiny ; 
on one side it preserved the sand-grouse, whose time had 
not arrived, in a short time from three such dangers, 
and on the other hand mode captive in the hand of 
destruction on the arrow of fate the sparrow whose 
hour of death hod come — 

** Tlie world -sword may move from its place, 

But it will cut no vein till Cud wills.” 

DresHe.s of honour for tlic wdiiter hod also bt^eii sent by 
the hand of Qara, the yaadvntl (usher), to the Ainu's at 
Kabul. I halted at this place on account of the pleasant- 
ness of the spot and the excellence of the air. On tliis 
day there came the news of the death of Nad 'All Kh&ii 
Maidani at Kabul. I honoured his sons with inansabs, 
and at the request of Ibrahim Khan Firiiz-jang ^ increased 
the maiisab of Rawat Shankar by 500 personal and 1,000 
horse. Oh the 6th there was a inarch, and going for kos 
by the pass known as Ghate Chanda, the royal caiiip was 
pitched at the village of Anihar (Amjar ?). This valley 
is very green and pleasant and good trees are seen in 
it. Up to this stage, which is the limit of the country 
of the Subah of Ajmir, 84 kos had Ixjen travei*sed. It 
was also a pleasant stage. Nfir- Julian Begam here shot 
with a gun a qmn^a{?), the like of whicli for size and 
beauty of colour liad never l^oii seen. 1 ordered them 
to weigh it, and it came to 19 tolas and 5 iiiashas. The 
aforesaid village in the coiiiinencement of the Subah of 
Malwa, which is in the second clime. The length^ of this 
Subah from the oxtroiiiity <if the province of Gurhn to tlie 
province of Banswala (Ban-swam ?) is 245 kos, and ks 


^ S^ioulrl lio Futk-jan^ At in MSS. 


-■ jurretf. ii. ISS. 



ACCOUNT OP MALWA. 


349 


breadth from the parganah of Chanderi to the paiganah of 
Nandarbar is 230 kos. On the east is the province of 
Bandho, and on the north the fort of Narwar, on the 
south the province of BaglanA, and on the west the 
Subahs of Gujarat and Ajinir. Malwa is a large province 
abounding in water and of a pleasant climate. There 
are five rivers in it in addition to streams, canals, 
and springs, namely, the Godavari,^ Bhima, Kalisindh, 
Nira, and Narbada. Its climate is nearly equable. The 
land of this province is low, but part of it is high. In 
the district of Dhar, which is one of the noted places 
of Malwa, the vine gives grapes twice in the year, in 
the beginning of Pisces and the beginning of I^o, but 
the grapes of Pisces are the sweeter. Its husbandmen 
and artificers are not vrithout arms. The revenue of the 
province is 24,700,000 dams. When needful there are 
obtained from it about 9,300 horse and four lakhs, 
70,300 foot-soldiers, with 100 elephants. On the 8th, 
moving on 3^ kos, an encampment was made near 
Khair&bad. On the road 14 sand-grouse and 3 hemns 
were killed, and having traversed and shot over 3 kos 
the camp was pitched at the village of Sidhara. On 
xne 1 1th, while tliere was a halt, I mounted at the end 
of the day to hunt, and killed a blue bull. On the 
12th, after traversing 4} kos, a halt was made at the 
village of Bachliayari. On that day Bana Amar Singh 
had sent some baskets of figs. In truth it is a fine 
fruit, and I had never seen such delicious figs in India. 
But one must eat only a few of them ; it does harm to 
eat many. On the 14th there was a march; having 
traversed 4| kos, I encamped at the village of BalbalL 
Baja Janba who is an influential zamindar in these 

^ The name eoerna to be wrong. Jahaiigfr in evidently copying from 
r)ie Ayfn, and the riven mentioned tliere (Jarrett, ii, 195) are the 
Narbada, Sipra, Kfillsimlh Bvtwa, and tlie Kodi (or iJoili). 

^ *29,668 (Jarrett, ii. IU8}. 



350 


FRUITS. 


regions, hod sent two elephants as an offering, and they 
were brought before me. At the same stage they brought 
many melons g rown in RAris near Herat. Kbsn 'Alam 
had also sent 60 camela In former yean they had never 
brought melons in such abundance. On one tray they 
brought many kinds of fruit — ^Kftrls melons, melons from 
Badakhshan and Kabul, grapes from Samarkand ' and 
Badakhshan, apples from Samarkand, Kashmir, Kabul, 
and from Jalalabad, which is a dependent of Kabul, and 
pineapples, a fruit that comes from the European ports, 
plants of which liave been set in Agra. Every year 
stnne thousands are gathered in the gardens there which 
appertain to the private domains * ; 

kcmla,* which are similar in form to an orange, but 
smaller and better in flavour. They grow very well 
in the Subah of Bengal. In what language can one 
give thanks for such favours? My revered father had 
a great liking for fruit, especially for melons, pome- 
granates, and gropes. Oaring his time the Kftris 
melons, which are the finest kind, oud pomegranates 
from Yvsd, which are celebrated throughout the wwld 
and Samarkand gropes had not been brought to Hindusuui. 
Whenever I see these fruits they cause me great regret. 
Would that such fruit liod come in those days, so that 
he might have enjoyed them! 

On the IStli, which was a halting day, news came of 
the death of Mir ‘AH, son of Farldtkn Khto BorlAs, who 
was one of the trusted amlr-zOUiM (descended from amin) 
of this family (the Timurides). On tiie 10th a march 
took place. Having traversed 4^ kos, the camp of 
heavenly dignity was pitbhed near the village of Oiri. 
On the rood the scouts bron|^t news tliat there was 

' Tlw MSS. elto nave, s we et' pOBWg n ina t Mi from Ywd, and aulMMsU 
ones firom Fsisiii mid peon from BMlnkfaelHui.(eee Elliot, 

vi.'stS). 

* The MSS. hove iJMftit- i' ti m r ff et. 

’ Qn. iwe/o? Instead id ySMSwr Uw MSS. havenSfdteA 



M8SBOTIOK or A UON. 


361 


ft li<m in *!>«■ neighboariiood. I went to hunt him nnd 
finished Kim with one shot. As the btftveness of the 
litm (ehfr babar) has been established, 1 wished to look 
at his intestinea After they were extracted, it apipeared 
that in a msnnmr oontrsiy to other animals, whose gall- 
bladder is outside their livers, the gall-Uadder of the 
lion is wititin his liver(?). It oeourred to me that the 
courage of the lion may be from this cause. On the 
18th, after traversing 2| kos, the village of AmriyA was 
our halting - place. On the 19th, which was a halt. 
I went out to hunt After going 2 kos, a village came 
to view exceedingly sweet and pleasant. Nearly 100 
mango-trees were seen in one garden; I. liad seldom 
seen mango-trees so large and green and pleasant In 
tile same garden I saw a bar-tree (a banyan), exceedin^y 
large. I ordered tiiem to measure its length, breadth, 
and height in yards (gaz). Its height from the surface 
to the h^hest branch (sar-a&aM) was 74 cubits (nra‘). 
The dreumferenoe of its trunk was 44^ cubits and its 
breadth* 176| measured by tiie gas. Tliis has been 
recorded as it is very unusual. On the 20th nras a march, 
and on the road a blue bull was shot with a gun. On 
the 21st, which was a holt, I went out to hunt at the 
end of the day. After returning, I came to the house 
of rtimtdu-d-daulah for the festival of Kbw&ja Kl)i?r, 
whom they coll Kbi?ri ; 1 remained there till a watch of 
the night had passed, and then feeling inclined for food 
1 went back to the royal quarters. On tiiis day I 
honoured Itimidu-d-daulah as an intimate friend by 
directing the ladies of the harem not to veil their faces 
from him By this favour I bestowed everlasting liononr 
on him On the 22nd on order was ^ven to match, and 
after3| kos were traversed the camp was pitclied at the 
village of B&l|^iaif (Nawalkhcff ?). On the rood two Uue 

iWsn Us ana or Shada FnUiis tlw 1701 an yardis sot 



352 


BEEE-SHOOTINO. 


bulls were killed. On the 28rd day of Tir, which was 
a halt, I killed a blue bull with a gun. On the 24th, 
traversing 5 kos, the village of Qftsim-khera was the 
halting-place. On the road a white animaP was killed, 
which resembled the kfUah pdya (h<^-deer) ; it had four 
horns, two of which were opposite the extremities of its 
eyes, and two finger-breadths in height, and the two other 
horns four finger-breadths towards the nape of the neck. 
These were four finger-breadths in height. The people 
of India call this animal dndliadharlt (dudltdriya ?). 
The male has four horns and the female none. It was 

said tliat this kind of antelope lias no gall-bladder, but 

when they looked at its intestines the gall-bladder was 
apparent, and it became clear that this report has no 
foundation. On the 25th, vrhich was a lialt, at the end 
of the day I rode out to hunt and killed a female 
nilgaw with my gun. B&lju, nephew of Qilij Khan^ who 
held tile mansab of 1,000 personal and 850 horse, and 
had a jagir in Oudh, I pitmioted to 2,000 personal and 
1,200 horse, dignified Iiim with the title of Qilij Kh&tip 
and appointed him to the Subah of Bengal. On the 

26th a march took place, and after traversing 4} kos 

a halt was made at the village of Dih Qftsiyta, which 
is in the neighbourhood of Ujjain. A number of mango- 
trees ill this place had blossomed. They had pitched the 

i Evidently the four-honied antelope, the Tttro/rtrH* qnadricoruia of 
Blanford, p. 520, and which hoe the Hindustani name of doda. Blanford 
describes its colour as dull pole brown ** Tlie posterior horns are 
much larger than the anterior ones, which are situated between the 
orbits and are often mere knobs. It is the only Indian representative 
ol the duikaHtok of Africa. Another Indian name is ehamiuffha. In 
jungle this species and the hog-deer may easily be mistaken the one for 
the other. It is not gregarious, and moves with a peculiar jerky action.” 
The resomblanoe between the four-homed antelope and the hog-deer — 
the kiuak pdycha or short-legged deer of B&bar and JahiLngir->may 
account for Blaiiford’s givil^; dodn as a native nanm for the hog-deer 
(GSenmit poreintu). For Babar’s de^cHiAion of the kiUdh pdya or pAychm 
see Emkine, p. S17. Gladwin in his history of Jahangir writes tlie 
native name us DinUutyau. 



EXECimON or a MATSnJlDlt. 


858 


tents <m the hank of a li^ and had prqMied an 
enchanting place. Pahir> aoQ Qbaanin^ Shin, was 
d^tally pnnidied at thia stage. Cherishing thin milimlry 
one after the death of his father, I had given him the 
fort and province of Jilaur, which was the |daoe of his 
ancestors. As he was of tender year*, his mother used 
to forbid him certain evil practioes. That etemaUy Mack- 
faced (me with some of his companions one ni j^t came 
into the house and killed his own full mother with his 
own hand. This news reached me and I ofdered them 
to bring him. After his crime was proved against him, 
I (ndered them to put him to death {kih ha biyMi msdni- 
dand). At this halting-place a tamarind *-tree came to 
view, the form and habit of which were scnnewhat strange. 
The original tree had one trunk ; when it had grown to 
6 gas, it turned into two I»ranehe8,one of whicdi was 10 and 
the other 9} gas. The distance between tire two brandies 
was 4} gas. From the ground to the place where the 
branches and leaves came to an end(?), there were (m 
the side of the large branch 16 gas, and <m tiie other 
branch 15^ gas. Friun the place whence the branches 
and green leaves bqgan(?) to the top (trunk?) of the 
tree was 2| gas, and the circnmference was 2} gan 
I ordered them to mdce a dtabfUara (platform) round it 
of the height of 3 gas. As the trunk was very rtiai|^t 
and weU-shaped, 1 hdd my artists to depict it in the 
illustrationa to the Jahfaigir-n&ma. A inarch was made 
on the 27th. After traversing 2^ kos, a hdt was made 


' Blochnuuin, |i. 49SI. 

Ttxt, khwrmd, a date, bat evidently the ^urma-i-Hind or the 
Umarind, i.e. 'the palm of Iiidia»’ ia meant (eee lobar’s Mem., Erakine, 
|i. 934). 1 do not underatand the meaauremenU. The word jjakt * one,* 
liefore the word aldiA ia not in the M88. and ta , 1 think, wrong. I think 
the 16 gaa and 15i gax are the lengtha of the two branchea, and that the 
meaaarementa 2) and gai refer to the length and circumfertoee of 
the two brandies at the place wlien th^ etortcd from the trunk and 
23 before tliey pot out luxes. 



354 


ACCOUNT OF KlLIYADAHA. 


at the village of Hinduwal ^ ; on the road a Uue bull wae 
killed. On the 28th, after traversing 2 kos, the village 
of Kaliyadaha became the halting place. K&liyadaha 
is a building which was made by Nasiru-d-din, son of 
Qhiyasu-d-din, son of Sultan Mabmud Khalji, who was 
ruler of Malwa. In the time of his rule he had made it 
in the neighbourhood of Ujjain, which is one of the most 
celebrated cities in the Subah of Malwa. They say 
that tLe heat overcame him so much that he passed his 
time in the water. He made this building in the middle 
of the river, and divided its waters into canals, and 
brought the water on all sides, as well as inside and 
outside, of the house, and made large and small reservoirs 
suited to the place. It is a very pleasant and enjoyable 
place, and one of the noted habitations of Hindustan. 
Before it was decided to halt at this place I sent 
ai*chitects and ordered them to clean up the place again. 
On account of its pleasantness I remained in this place 
for three days. At the same place Sbftj5*at Khan came 
from his jagir and waited on me. Ujjain is one of the 
old cities, and is one of the seven cfstablished places of 
worship of the Hindus. Baja Bikramajit, who introduced 
the observation of the heavens and stars into Hindustan, 
lived in this city and province. From the time of his 
observations until now, which is the 1026th Hijra year 
(1617 A.D.) and the 11th year from my accession, 1,675^ 
years have passed. The deductions of the astronomers 
of India are all based on his observations. This city 
is on the bank of the River Sipra. The belief* of the 

' Hindwas or Hindawa.s in MSS. 

^ This is in accordance with and probably derived from B&bar’s 
Ck>mmontaries, Erskine, p. 51, where he says that 1,584 years have 
elapsed from the time when Bikramajit made his observatory. Erskine 
takes this to show that B&bar was writing in 934, and if we odd 92 years, 
or the difference between 934 and 1026, we get 1,676 years (or 1,675 if we 
take the year to be 1025). 

’ See Jarrett, ii, 196. Aba-l-fa?l says there that the 6ow occurred 
a week before his arrival at Ujjain. 



RIVER TURKS INTO MILK. 


355 


Hindus is that once in some year at an uncertain time 
the water of this river turns* into milk. Li the reign 
of my revered father, at the time when he had sent 
Abh-l-fazl to set in order the affairs of my brother 
Shah Mur&d, he sent a report from that city that a large 
body of Hindus and Musulmans had borne testimony 
that some days previously at night this river had become 
milk, so that people who took water from it that night 
found in the morning their pots full of milk.^ As this 
obtained currency it has been recorded, but my intelli- 
gence will in no way agree to it. The real truth of 
this affair is known to Allah. On the 2nd Isfand&rmuz 
I embarked in a boat from SL&liyftdaha, and went to the 
next stage. I had frequently heard that an austere 
Sanyas!^ of the name of JadrUp many years ago retired 
from the city of Ujjain to a comer of the desert and 
employed himself in the worship of the true Qod. I had 
a great desire for his acquaintance, and when I was at 
the capital of Agra I was desirous of sending for and 
seeing him. In the end, thinking of the trouble it would 
give him, I did not send for him. When I arrived in 
the neighbourhood of the city I alighted from the boat 
and went | kos on foot to seie him. The place he had 
chosen to live in was a hole on the side of a hill which 
hod been dug out and a door made. At the entrance 
there is an opening in the shape of a mUirdb? 'which 

' Cf. Jarrett, ii, 196. - SanyiUl-i-mwrtdz, 

^ Text, mihrdbh^kakl *a place like a prayer-niche.’ Poesibly 

the true reading is tnajrd bl-fhaM 'a paseage without form.* 

However, the MSS. have mi^rdb. The account in the text may be 
compared with the Ma’S^irn-l-umaia, i, 674, and with the Iqbiil-nSina, 
p. 94. The measoremente of the mouth of the hole in the Ma’Afir are 
taken from the IqbAl-nAma, and diflbr from the account in the TQSUk. 
The Ma’ftffir, following the ^bAl-nAma, calla the ascetic Achhad or Ajliarl. 
It also gives his snbsequent history. He went to Mathura and was 
there cruelly beaten by lUkim Beg. Jahkngir’s visit to JadrAp is 
referred to by Sir Thomas Roe, who mentions a report that the saint %vas 
said to be 300 years old. JahAngIr does not my any such nonsense. 



356 


ACCOUNT OF AN ASCKTIC. 


is in length (? height) 1 gaz and in breadth 10 gvra 
(knots, each yg of a gaz), and the distance from this 
door to a hole which is his real abode is 2 gaz and 
5 knots in length and in breadth 11^ knots. The height 
from the ground to the roof is 1 gaz and 3 knots. The 
hole whence is the entrance to the abode is in length 
5^ knots and its breadth knots. A person of weak 
body (thin ?) can only enter it with a hundred difficulties. 
The length and breadth of the hole are such. It has 
no mat and no straw. In this narrow and dark hole 
he passes his time in solitude. In the cold days of 
winter, though he is quite naked, with the exception of 
a piece of rag that he has in front and behind, he nevei 
lights a fire. The Mulla of Rlim (Jal&lu-d-din) has put 
into rhyme the language of a dervish — 

** By day oar clothes are the son, 

By night oar mattress and blanket the moon’s rays.” 

He bathes twice a day in a piece of water near his 
abode, and once a day goes into the city of Ujjain, and 
nowhere but to the houses of three brahmins whom he 
has selected out of seven, who have wives and children 
and whom he believes to have religious feelings and 
contentment. He takes by way of alms five mouthfuls 
of food out of what they have prepared for their own 
eating, which he swallows without chewing, in order 
that he may not enjoy their flavour; always provided 
that no misfortune has happened to their three houses, 
that there has been no birth, and there be no menstruous 
woman in the house. This is his method of living, just 
as it is now written. He does not desire to associate 
with men, but as he has obtained great notoriety people 
go to see him. He is not devoid of knowledge, for he 
has thoroughly mastered the science of the Ved&nta, 
which is the science of Sufism. I ccmversed with him 
for six gharis; he spoke well, so much so as to make 
a great impression on me. My society also suited him 



HINDU CASTES. 


367 


At the time when my revered father conquered the fort 
of Asir, in the province of Khandeeh, and was returning 
to Agra, he saw him in the very same place, and always 
remembered him well. 

The learned of India have established four modes of 
life for the caste of brahmins, which is the most honoured 
of the castes of Hindus, and have divided their lives into 
four periods. These four periods they call the four 
asram} The boy who is bom in a brahmin’s house they 
do not call brahmin till he is 7 years old, and take no 
trouble on the subject. After he has arrived at the age 
of 8 years, they have a meeting and collect the brahmins 
together. They make a cord of mtlnjf grass, which they 
call mdnji, in length 2^ gaz, and having caused prayers 
and incantations to be repeated over it, and having had 
it made into three strands, which they call sih ta/a, by 
one in whom they have confidence, they fasten it on 
his waist. Having woven a zunriar (girdle or thread) 
out of the loose threads, they hang it over liis right‘d 
shoulder. Having given into his hand a stick of the 
length of a little over 1 gaz to defend himself with 
from hurtful things and a copper vessel for drinking- 
water, they hand him over to a learned brahmin that 
he may remain in his house for twelve years, and employ 
himself in reading the Vedas, which they believe in as 
God’s book. From this day forward they cull him 
a brahmin. During this time it is necessary that he 
should altogether abstain from bodily pleasures. When 
midday is passed he goes as a beggar to the houses of 
other brahmins, and bringing what is given him to his 
preceptor, eats it with his permission. For clothing, 
with the exception of a loin cloth (lungi) of cotton to 
cover his private parts, and 2 or 3 more gaz of cotton 

' See Jerrett, iii, 371, etc. The Senfdcnt word is Asrsms, or 

* Left shoulder in A}in. 



368 


AUSTEBITIES OF BKAHMANS. 


which he throws over his hack, he has nothing else. 
This state is called ImJmaeharya, that is, being busied 
with the Divine books. After this period has passed, 
with the leave of his preceptor and his father, he 
marries, and is allowed to m\}ciy all the pleasures of 
his five senses until the time when he has a son who 
shall have attained the age of 16 years. If he does not 
have a son, he passes his days till he is 48 in the sociid 
life. During this time they call him A grUuUt, that is, 
householder. After that time, separating himself from 
relatives, connections, strangers, and friends, and giving 
up all things of eigoyment and pleasure, he retires to 
a place of solitude from the place of attachment to 
sodality (ta‘aUiiq-i'‘db&d-i-hasrat), and passes his days in 
the jurgle. They call this condition bSnprcuia} that is, 
abode in the jungle. As it is a maxim of the Hindus 
that no good deed can be thoroughly performed ly men 
in the social state without the partnership of the presence 
of a wife, wh<nn they have styled the half of a man 
and as a portion of the ceremonies and worshippings is 
yet befmre him (has to be accomplished), he takes his 
wife with him into the jungle. If she should be pregnant, 
he puts off his going until she bear a child and it arrive 
at the age of 5 years. Then he entrusts the child to 
his ddest son or other relation, and carries out his 
intenti<m. In the same way, if his wife be menstruous, 
he puts off gmng until she is purified. After this he 
has no connection with her, and does not defile himself 
with ccnnmunieation with her, and at night he sleeps 
apart.* He passes twelve years in this place, and lives 
on vegetables which may have sprung up of themselves 
in the desert and jungle. He keeps his snnnar by him 
and worships fire. He does not waste his time in looking 

' Sanidirit, VinapraMha. 

” Text gai'i dar miydu a/at nihoda, but apparently thia ahould be dlat 
yal* hit Mi.yvlh nikoda : that ia, “membruni virile in invoincriateponens.” 



INTERVIEW WITH JABRtfP. 


359 


after his nails or the hair of his head, or in trimming 
his bemrd and moustaches. When he completes this 
period in the manner related, he returns to his own 
house, and having commended his wife to his children 
and brothers and sons-in-law, goes to pay his respects 
to his spiritual guide, and bums by throwing into the 
fire in his presence whatever he has in the way of 
a zunnar, the hair of his head, etc., and says to him : 
“ Whatever attachment (ta^aUuq) I may have had, even 
to abstinence and worshipping and will, I have rooted 
up out of my heart." Then he closes the road to his 
heart and to his desires and is always employed in con- 
templation of God, and knows no one except the True 
Cause of Being (God). If he speak of science it is the 
.science of Vedanta, the purport of which Baba FighAni 
has versified in this couplet — 

** There *a one lamp in this house, by whose rays 
Wherever I look there is an assembly.** 

They call this state sa'i^'ahiyds} that is, giving up all. 
They call him who possesses it sarvahiydai. 

After interviewing Jadrup I mounted an . elephant 
and passed through the town of Ujjain, and as I went 
scattered to the right and left small coins to the value 
of 3,500 rupees, and proceeding 1} kos alighted at Da'ud- 
khera. the place where the royal camp was pitched. On 
the 3rd day, which was a halting day, I w'ent, from 
desire for association wdth him, after midday, to see 
Jadrup, and for six gharis enjoyed myself in his company. 
On this day also he uttered good words, and it was near 
evening when I entered my palace. On the 4th da}* 

I journeyed 3} kos and halted at the village of Jarao” 

* Text, murb biyM, which may mean *(liMtribtitiiig cveiytliiiij^.' Tliv 
Iqbal-nkma, p. 96, has «ir6 ii/Im, ‘destroying everything.* 

* I.O. MS. No. 306 says nothing iihout a garden, but fl|iCMks •»! 
a village Khirwiir and of halting under m mango- tree. Nor* diM‘ 2 i Na .{OS 
mention n ganleii. 



360 


l^BOE BANTAK-THBE. 


in the P&raniyA garden. This is also a very pleasant 
halting . place, full of trees. On the 6th there was 
a march; after proceeding for 4} kos I halted on the 
bank of the lake of 0eb&lpQr BheriyA. On account of 
the pleasantness of the place and the delights of the 
lake, 1 halted at this stage for four days, and at the 
end of each day, embarking in a boat, employed myself 
in shooting ducks (marghsbi) and other aquatic animals. 
At this halting-place they brought fakhri grapes from 
Ahmadnagar. Although they are not as large as the 
Kabul fakhri grapes, they do not yield to them in 
sweetness. 

At the request of my son Bab& Khnrram the mansab 
of Badl'u-z-zaman, son of Mirz& Shahrukh. was fixed at 
1,500 personal and 1,000 horse. On the 11th I marched, 
and after proceeding for 3| kos halted in the parganah 
Daulatahad. On the 12th, which was a halt, I rode 
out to hunt. In the village of ShaikhapQr. which 
belcmged to the said parganah, I saw a very large 
and bulky banyan-tree, measuring round its trunk 
18^ gas, and in height from the root to the top of the 
branches 128^ cubits. The branches spread a shade for 
203| eulnts. The length of a branch, on which they 
have represented the tusks of an elephant, was 40 gas. 
At the time when my revered father passed by this, 
he had made an impression of his hand by way of 
a mark at the height of 3| gas from the ground. 
1 ordered them also to make the mark of my hand 
8 gas above another root. In order that these two 
hand-marks might not be effaced in the course of time, 
they were carved on a piece of marble and fastened 
on to the trunk of the tree. I ordered them to place 
a ehahoiara and platform round the tree. 

As at the time when I was prince I had promised 
Mir Ziyft*u-din QaswInI, who was one of the Saifl Sayyids, 
and whom during my reign I have honoured with the 



DEATH OF BIJA MAN. 


861 


title of MustafA Khan, to give the parganah of Maldah, 
which is a famous parganah in Bengal, to him and 
his descendants^ in al ifimgha (perpetual royal grant), 
this great gift was bestowed in his honour at this 
halting-place. On the 13th a march took place. Going 
separately from this camp to look round the country 
and hunt with some of the ladies and intimates and 
servants, I proceeded to the village of Hasilpur, and 
whilst the camp was pitched in the neighbourhood of 
Nalcha (Balchha ?) I halted at the village of Sangor. What 
shall be written of the beauty and sweetness of this 
village ? There were many mango-trees, and its lands 
were altogether green and delightful. On account of 
its greenness and pleasantness I halted here for three 
days. I gave this village to KamAl KbAn, the huntsman, 
in place of Kefho DAs Marfi. An order was passed that 
they should hereafter call it ICamalpur. At this same 
halting-place occurred the night of ghivrAt (ShivrAtri). 
Many Jogis collected. The ceremonies of this night were 
duly observed, and I met the learned of this body in social 
intercourse. In these days 1 shot three blue bulls. The 
news of the killing of BAja MAn reached me at this 
place. I had appointed him to head the army that had 
been sent against the fort of KAngjrA. When he arrived 
at Lahore he heard that SangrAm, one of the zamindars 
of the hill-country of the Panjab, had attacked his 
place and taken possession of part of his province. 
Considering it of the 6rat importance to drive him 
out, he went against him. As SangrAm had not the 
power to oppose him, he left the country of which he 
had taken possession and took refuge in difficult hills 
and placea RAja MAn pursued him there, and in his 
great pride, not looking to the means by which he 
himself could advance and retreat, came up to him with 


* QL JS IIi oC, VI, 348. The MSM. nay nothing about two Mina. 



362 


HASILPCH. 


a small force. When Sangram saw that he had no way 
to flee by, in accordance with this couplet — 

** In t.ime of need when no (way of) flight is left, 

The hand seizes the edge of the sharp sword.” ^ 

A fight took place, and according to what was decreed, 
a bullet struck Raja Man and he delivered his soul to 
the Creator thereof. His men were defeated and a great 
number of them killed. The remainder, wounded, aban- 
doned their horses and arms, and with a hundred alarms 
escaped half-dead. 

On the 17 th I marched from Sangor, and after 
proceeding 3 kos came again to the village of H&silpur. 
On the road a blue bull was killed. This village is one 
of the noted places in the Subah of Malwa. It has 
many vines and mango-trees without number. It has 
streams flowing on all sides of it. At the time I arrived 
there were grapes contrary to the season in which they 
are in the Wilayat (Persia or Afghanistan). They were 
so cheap and plentiful that the lowest and meanest 
could get as much as they desired. The poppy had 
flowered and showed varied colours. In brief, there are 
few villages so pleasant. For three days more I halted 
in this village. Three blue bulls were killed with my 
gun. From Hftsilpur on the 2l8t in two marches 
I rejoined the big camp. On the road a blue bull 
was killed. On Sunday, the 22nd, marching from the 
neighbourhood of Nalcha (BaJchha ?), I pitched at a lake 
that is at the foot of the fort of Mandu. On that day 
the huntsmen brought news that they had marked down 
a tiger within 3 kos. Although it was Sunday, and on 
these two days, viz. Sunday and Thursday, I do not 
shoot, it occurred to me that as it is a noxious animal 
it ought to be done away with. I proceeded towards 
him, and when I arrived at the place it was sitting 

* From the “CJulistHii." 



SHOOTS A TIGER. 


363 


under the shade of a tree. Seeing its mouth, which 
was half open, from the back of the elephant, I fired 
my gun. By chance it entered its moutli and found 
a place in its throat and brain, and its affair was finished 
with that one shot. After this the people who were 
with me, although they looked for the place where tlie 
tiger was wounded, could not find it, for on none of its 
limbs was there any sign of a gunshot wound. At 
last I ordered them to look in its mouth. From this 
it was evident that the bullet had entered its mouth 
and that it had been killed thereby. Mirza Rustam had 
killed a male wolf and brought it. I wished to see 
whether its gall-bladder was in its liver like that of 
the tiger, or like other animals outside its liver. After 
examination it was clear that the gall-bladder was also 
inside the liver. On Monday, the 23rd, when one watch 
had passed in a fortunate ascension and a benign hour, 
I mounted an elephant and approached the fort of Mandu. 
When a watch and three gharis of day had passed, I entered 
the houses which they had prepared for the royal accom- 
modation. I scattered 1,500 rupees on the way. From 
Ajmir to Mandu, 159 kos, in the space of four months 
and two days, in forty-six marches and seventy-eight 
halts, had been traversed. In these forty-six marches our 
halts were made on the banks of tanks or streams 
or large rivers in pleasant places which were full of 
trees and poppy -fields in flower, and no day passed that 
I did not hunt while halting or travelling. Riding on 
horseback or on an elephant I came along the whole way 
looking about and hunting, and none of the difficulties 
of travelling were experienced ; one might say that 
there was a change from one garden to another. In 
these huntings there were always present with me A^f 
Sh&n, Mirz& Rustam, Mir Mir&n, Anira'i, Hidayatu-llah, 
R&ja S&rang Deo, Sayyid K&sCi, and Khawaffs Kh&n. 
As before the arrival of the royal staiidards in tliesr 



364 


BUILDINGS AT MANDU. 


regions I had sent 'Abdu-l-Karim, the architect, to look 
to the repair of the buildings of the old rulers in M&ndG, 
he during the time the camp halted at Ajmir' had 
repaired some of the old buildings that were capable of 
repair, and had altogether rebuilt some places. In short, 
he had made ready a house the like of which for 
pleasantness and sweetness has probably not been made 
anywhere else. Nearly 300,000 rupees, or 2,000 Persian 
tumans, were expended on this. There should be such 
grand buildings in all great cities as might be fit for 
royal accommodation. This fort is on the top of a hill 
10 kos in circumference; in the rainy season there is 
no place with the fine air and pleasantness of this fort. 
At nights, in the season of the qaUyii4-amd (Cor leonis 
or Regulus, the star a of Leo), it is so cold that one 
cannot do without a coverlet, and by day there is no 
need for a fan (bad-zan). They say^ that before the 
time of R&ja BikramSjit there was a Raja of the name 
of Jai Singh Deo. In his time a man had gone into 
the fields to bring grass. While he was cutting it, the 
sickle he had in his hand appeared to be of the colour 
of gold. When he saw that his sickle had been trans- 
muted, he took it to a blacksmith of the name - of 
M&dan * to be repaired. The blacksmith knew the sickle 
had been turned into gold. It had before this been 
heard that there was in this country the alchemist's 
stone (sang-i-pdras), by contact with Which iron and 
copper became gold. He immediately took the grass- 
cutter with him to that place and procured the stone. 
After this he brought to the Raja of the time this 
priceless jewel. The Raja by means of this stone made 
gold, and spent part of it on the buildings of this fort 

^ Of. Jarrett, ii, 197. The story is also told with many more details 
in Price’s Jah&ngir, p, 108 etc. 

* Text, Jiddan. But the name is lidmian^ as MS. No. 181 and the 
Ayln-i-Akbari (Jarrett, ii, 197) show. The legend is intended to show 
how MAnda got its name (see also Tiefenthaler, i, S58). 



8T0RT ABOUT A PHlIiOSOPHEa’S 8TONB. 


365 


luid completed them in the space of twelve years. ' At the 
desire of that blacksmith he caused them to cut into 
the i^pe of an anvil most of the stones that were to 
be built into the well of the fort. At the end of his 
life, when his heart had given up the world, he held an 
assembly on the bank of the Narbada, which is an object 
of worship among the Hindus, and, assembling brahmins, 
made presents to each of cash and jewels. When the 
turn of a Inahmin came who had long been associated 
with him, he gave this stone into his hand. He from 
ignorance became angry and threw the priceless jewel 
into the river. After he came to know the true state 
of the affair he was a captive to perpetual sorrow. 
However much he searched, no trace of it was found. 
These things are not written in a book; they have been 
heard, but my intelligence in no way accepts this story. 
It appears to me to be all delusion. M&ndQ^ is one of 
the famous Sarkars of the Subah of Malwa. Its revenue 
is 1,390,000 dams. It was for a long time the capital 
of the kings of this country. There are many buildings 
and traces of former kings in it, and up till now it has 
not fallen into ruin. 

On the 24th I rode to go round and see the buildings 
of the old kings, and went lirst to the Jftmi* mosque, 
which is one built by Sult&n Htt^iang Qbhrl. A very 
lofty building came to view, all of cut stone, and although 
180 years have passed race the time of its building, it 
is as if the builder liad just withdrawn his hand from 
it. After this 1 went to the building ccmtaining the 
tombs of the Kbulji ruleta The grave of Na^Iru-d-dln, 
sou of Sulf&n Qbiyftsu-d-din, whose face is blackened 
for ever, was also there. It is well knowm that that 
wretch advanced himself by the murder of his own 
father, Obiyisa-d-din, who was in his 80th year. Twice 


' EUiot, vi. 34S. 



366 


NASIRU-D-DIN, THE PARBICIDE. 


lie gave him poison, and he twice expelled it by means 
of a zahr-mt^hra (poison antidote, bezoar) he nad on 
his arm. The third time he mixed poison in a cup of 
sherbet and gave it to his father with his own hand, 
saying he must drink it. As his father understood what 
efforts he was making in this matter, he loosened the 
zahr-muhra* from his arm and threw it before him, and 
then turning his face in humility and supplication towards 
the throne of the Creator, who requires no supplication, 
said: “O Lord, my age has arrived at 80 years, and 
I have passed this time in prosperity and happihess such 
as has been attained to by no king. Now as this is 
my last time, I hope that Thou wilt not seize Na 9 ir 
for my murder, and that reckoning my death as a thing 
decreed Thou wilt not avenge it.’" Alter he had spoken 
these words, he drank off that poisoned cup of sherbet 
at a gulp and delivered his soul to the Creator. The 
meaning of his preamble was that he had passed the 
time of his reign in enjoyment such as has not been 
attained to by any of the kings. When in his 48th year 
be came to the throne, he said to his intimates and those 
near him, ‘'In the service of my revered father I have 
passed thirty years in warfare and have committed no 
faul^ in my activity as a soldier; now that my turn to 
reign has arrived, I have no intention to conquer countries, 
but desii'o to pass the remainder of my life in ease and 
enjoyment." They say that he had collected 15,000 
women in his harem. He had a whole city of them, 
and had made it up of all castes, kinds, and descriptions — 
artificers, magistrates, qazis, kotwals, and whatever else 
i.s necessary for the administration of a town. Wherever 
he heard of a virgin possessed of beauty, he would not 
desist (lit. did not sit down from his feet) until he 
possessed her. He taught the girls all kinds of arts and 
crafts, and was much inclined to hunt. He had made 
a deer park and collected all kinds of animals in it. 



8ULTA.N GHITASU-D-DIK. 367 

He often used to hunt in it with his women. In brief, 
in the period of thirty-two years of his reign, as he had 
determined, he went against no enemy, and passed this 
time in ease and enjoyment. In the same way no one 
invaded his country. It is reported that when Shir 
lUuln, the Afghan, in the time of his rule, came to the 
tomb of Nasiru-d-din, he, in spite of his brutish nature, 
on account of Nasiru-d-din’s shameful conduct, ordered 
the head of the tomb to be beaten with sticks. Also 
when I went to his tomb I gave it several kicks, and 
ordered the servants in attendance on me to kick the 
tomb. Not satisfied with this, I ordered the tomb to 
be broken open and his impure remains to be thrown 
into the fire. Then it occurred to me that since fire 
is Inght, it was a pity for the light of Allah to be 
polluted with burning his filthy body; also, lest there 
should be any diminution of torture for him in another 
state from being thus burnt, I ordered them to throw 
his crumbled bones, together with his decayed limbs, 
into the Narbada. During his lifetime he always passed 
his days in the water in consequence of the heat that 
had acquired a mastery over his temperament. It is 
well known that in a state of drunkenness he once threw 
himself into one of the basins at Kaliy&daha, which 
was very deep. Some of the attendants in the harem 
exerted themselves and caught his hair in their hands 
and drew him out of the water. After he had come to 
his senses they told him that this thing had happened. 
When he had heard that they bad pulled him out by 
the hair of his head, he became exceedingly angry, and 
ordered the hands of the attendants to be cut ofi*. Another 
time, when an affair of this kind took place, no one 
had the boldness to pull him out and he was drowned. 
By chance, after 110 years had passed since his death, it 
came to pass that his decayed liii-.bs also became mingled 
with the water. 



368 


^ZiyiL KHAN OF BIJAPOR. 


On the 28th, as a reward for the buildings of M ftndu 
having been completed through his excellent exertions, 
I promoted ‘Abdu-l-Karim to the rank of 800 personal 
and 400 horse, and dignified him with the title of 
Ma'mur Kb&n (the architect-IUian). On the same day 
that the royal standards entered the fort of M&ndu, my 
son of lofty fortune, SuljAn ^urram, with the victorious 
army, entered the city of Burhanpur, which is the seat 
of the governor of the province of Khandesh. 

After some days, representations came from Af^ KhAn 
and the Ray Rayan, to whom at the time of leaving Ajmir 
my son had given leave to accompany the ambassador 
to *Adil reporting that when the news of our 

coming reached 'Adil Khan he came out for 7 kos to 
meet the order and the litter of the prince, and per^ 
formed the duties of salutation and respect which are 
customary at Court. He did not omit a hair's point of 
such ceremonies. At the same interview he professed 
the greatest loyalty, and promised that he would restore 
all those provinces that ^Ambar of dark fate had. taken 
from the victorious State, and agreed to send to the Court 
with all reverence a fitting offering with his ambassadors. 
After saying this he brought the ambassadors in all 
dignity to the place that had been prepared for them. 
On the same day he sent some one to ^Arnbar with 
a message of the matters it was necessary to acquaint 
him with. I heard this news from the reports of Af^l 
Kbftn and the Ray R&y&n. 

From Ajmir up to Monday, the 23rd of the aforesaid ^ 
month, during four months, 2 tigers, 27 blue bulls, 
6 clMol (spotted deer), 60 deer, 23 hares and foxes, 
and 1,200 water-fowl and other animals had been killed. 
On these nights I told the story of my former hunting 
expeditions and the liking I had for this occupation to 

‘ Monday, the 2Srd lefandAnnaa the day on which he rea ch e d 
MAnda. It wtis about the Cth March, 1617. 



oame-rao. 


those standing at the foot of the throne of the Caliphate. 
It occurred to me that 1 might make up the account 
of my game from the commencement of my years of 
discretion up to the present time. I accordingly gave 
orders to the news-writers, the hunt-accountants and 
huntsmmi, and others employed in this service to make 
enquiries and tell me of all the animals tluit had been 
killed in hunting. It was shown tliat from the com- 
mencement of my 1 2th year, which was in 988 
up to the end of this year, which is the 1 Ith year after 
my accession and my 50th lunar year, 28,532 head of 
game had been taken in my presence. Of these, 17,167 
animals I killed myself with my gun or otherwise, viz. : 
Quadrupeds, 3,203 ; viz., tigers, 86 ; bears, cheetahs, 
foxes, otters (Udbildo), and hyenas, 9 ; blue bulls, 889 ; 
mhaJea, a species of antelope, in size equal to a blue 
bull, 35 head; of antelope, male and female, chikdra, 
chital, mountain Croats, etc., 1,670'; rams (q^‘) and red 
deer, 215 ; wolves, 64 ; wild buffaloes, 36 ; pigs, 90 ; 
rang, 26 ; mountain sheep, 22 ; arg^i, 32 ; wild asses, 6 ; 
hares, 23. Birds, 13,964; viz., pigeons, 10,348; lagar- 
jliagar (a species of luiwk), 3 ; eagles, 2 ; qalivoS^ 
(ghalixvdj, kite), 23 ; owls (chv^M), 39 ; qautdn (gold- 
hnch ?), 12 ; .kites (mfl^-khwur, mice-eaters), 5 ; sparrows, 
41 ; doves, 25 ; owls {bum), 30 ; ducks, geese, cranes, etc., 
150 ; crows, 3,276. Aquatic animals, 10 magar machha, 
that is, crocodiles* {nahang). 

i The MSS. hsv« 1,672. 

* See Elliot, vi, 391 and 962, note. Jabingir only give* detaile of the 
17,167 nniniftla killed by himaelf. The mhdta ia possibly s clericsl 
error for »a<lr-tjinir. The test asya it ia allied to the gamuH, but the 
MSS. have g&r, a wild aaa The deuila of the quadnipeda oome’to 
3,203, the total aUted by Jnhioglr. The deUila of the birds come to 
13,054, but the 10 crocodiles bring up the figures to 13,064, and the 
total 3,203 + 13.064 oooiea to the 17,167 mentioned. It has been sug- 
gested to me that the mhdka of the text ia the mahd or swamp.deer 
of the Terai, Soetrm* DhoomHU. 



370 NEW YBA.R F£\ST. PROHIBITION OF TOBACCO. 


The Twelfth New Year's Feast after my 

AUSPICIOUS ACCESSION. 

One ghari of day remained of Monday, the 30th of 
the aforesaid (Isfandiyar) month, corresponding to the 
12th RabTu-l-awwal, 1026 (20th March, 1617), when tlie 
sun changed from the constellation of Pisces into the 
pleasure-house of Aries, which is his abode of honour 
and good fortune. At the very time oi transit, which 
was a fortunate hour, I sat upon the throne. I had 
ordered that acc3rding to the usual custom they should 
decorate the pub^'^ audience hall with fine cloths, etc. 
Notwithstanding that many of the Amirs and chief men 
of the State were in attendance on my son Khurram, 
a meeting was arranged which was not inferior to those 
of previous years. I presented the offerings of Tuesday ^ 
to Anand Khan. On the same day, which was the 
1st Farwardin of the 12th year (21st or 22nd March; 
1617) a representation arrived from ghah Khurram to 
the effect that the New Year's festival had been arranged 
for in the same manner as in previous years, but as the 
days of travelling and service had occurred the annual 
offerings of the servants Would be remitted. This pro- 
ceeding of my son was much approved. Remembering 
my dear son in my prayers, 1 besought for him from 
the throne of Allah his welfare in both worlds, and 
ordered that on this New Year’s Day no one should 
present offerings. 

In consequence of the disturbance that tobacco brings 
about in most temperaments and constitutions, 1 had 
ordered that no one should smoke it (lit. draw). My 
brother ghah *Abbfts had also become aware of the 
mischief arising from it, and had ordered that in Iran 
no one should venture to smoke. As Kh&n 'Alam 

The MSS. have Saturday inatead of Tuesday, and this seems reason- 
able, for there were no offerings on Tuesday (see tf|/Wi). 



SHOOTING OF A LION. 


371 


(ambassador to Persia) was without control in continual 
smoking of tobacco, he frequently practised it. TfidgUr 
‘Ali Sult&n, ambassador of the ruler of Iran, represented 
to Shah ‘Abbaa that Kh&n ‘Alam could never be a moment 
without tobacco, and he (Sh&b ‘Abb&s) wrote this couplet 
in answer — 

** The friend’a envoy wishes to exhibit tobacco ; 

W^ith fidelity’s lamp I light up the tobacco-market.” 

Khan 'Alam in answer wrote and sent this verse — 

** I, poor wretch, was miserable at the tobacco notice ; 

By the just Shah’s favour the tobacco-marxet became brisk.” 

On the 3rd of the same month, Husain Beg, the diwan 
of Bengal, had the good fortune to kiss the threshold, 
and made an offering of twelve elephants, male and female. 
Tabir, bakhshi of Bengal^ who had been accused of several 
offences, obtained the favour of paying his respects to 
me, and presented before me an offering of twenty-one 
elephants. Twelve Ok these were approved and the 
remainder I conferred on him. On this day a wine- 
feast was arranged, and 1 gave wine to most of the 
servants who were engaged in waiting on me, and made 
them all heated with the wine, of loyalty. On the 4th 
the huntsmen sent news that they had marked down 
a lion in the neighbourhood of the Shakkar^ tank, whicn 
is inside the fort and one of the famous constructions 
of the rulers of Malwa. I at once mounted and went 
towards that game. When the lion appeared he charged 
the ahadis and the retinue and wounded ten* or twelve 
of them.. At last I finished his business with three shots* 
(lit. arrows) from my gun, and removed his evil from 
the servants of God. On the 8th the mansab of l^ir 
Mir&n, which was 1,000 personal and 400 horsH. was 


* Text^ 8slmr. Now locoUy osUod the Sigan, * sea,’ lank. 

* The MGS. only speak of twelve. 

* The MSS. seem to have merely ha tir^vbandyq, * with helleta.* 



372 


PKOMOTIOMB AKD PBEBENTB. 


fixed ei 1,500 personal and 500 horse. On the 9th, at 
the request of my son Sbonam, I increased the msnsab of 
Shfin Jahftn by 1,000 personal and horse, making it thus 

6.000 personal and horse; that of Ta'qfib Khfa, which 
was 1,500 personal with 1,000 horse, was made 2,000 
personal and 1,500 horse ; that of fiahlfil Sliftn Ifiyina ^ 
was increased 500 personal and 800 horse to 1,500 
personal and 1,000 horse ; and that Mirsft Sharafu-d-din 
Kfahg^ari. by whom and nis son great bravery had been 
shown in the Deccan, was increased to 1,500 personal 
and 1,000 horse. On the 10th Farwardin, correqKmdii^ 
with the 22nd BabPu-l-awWal, 1026, my lunar weighing 
took place. On this day two ‘Iraq horses from my 
private stable and a dress of honour were oonferred on my 
son Sbvrram and sent to him by Bahr&m Beg. I increased 
the mansab of 1‘tibftr Kbfin to 5,000 personal and 8,000 
horse. On the 11th, ffusarn Beg, of Tal»ix, whom the 
niler of Iran had sent to the ruler of Gkdccmda by way 
of embassy, as, in eonsequence of the quarrel of the 
Franks with the Persians, the road of the Mir had been 
dosed,* waited upon me with the ambassador of the ruler 
of Golconda. Offerings came from him of two horses find 
some tuqUa* (nine-pieces 7) of doth from tiie Deccan 
■and Gqjjarat. On the same day an ‘Iraq horse firom my 
private stable was bestowed on Sbin Jahin. On the 
15th, 1,000 personal were added to tiie mansab of Mirxfi 
Bl^ Bhfio Sii^h', raising it to 5,000 personal and 8,000 
horse. On the 17th, 500 horse were added to the mansab 
of Mirsfi Rustam, and I made it up to 5,000 personal and 

1.000 horse; that of Sfidiq Ohn was fixed at 1,500 personal 
and 700 horse, original and increase ; Iridat Kbin in the 
same mannar was raised to the maniab of 1,500 and 

' Biyaea^tnct, 

* ta, eppHently, the Joerney beA by Me from the Deeeen. The 

Mfitt^Jtaye ipeaea hwteed o( ^meiii, mad my the reebe by Oneae vee 
eloasil* 'Ptritepe the h» Mhr of text' ie e mietehe for ler *byeee. 

* Ptiaii eiiieni nine ia Twtht 



ESCAPE OF PRISONER. AFFAIRS OF RENOAL. 373 


600 aone. To the maiiflab of Anir&l 600 peraonal and 
100 hone were added, and it was made oae of 1,500 
peraonal and 600 hmrae. Three gharia of Saturday, the 
19th, remained when the beginning of the "(jj/wraf (day of 
ann’a eolmination) oeeurred, and at the same time I agabi 
took my seat on the throne. Of the thirty-two prieonera 
from the army of the rebel 'Ambar who had been captured 
by the aervanta of the victorious State in the battle 
won by Sb6h-naw&s Sbkn and the defeat of that 
disaatrous man (*Ambar), I had handed one man over 
to rtiqSd Khto. The guards who had been appointed 
to keep him showed carelessness and let him escape. 
I was much annoyed at this, and I forbade I'tiq&d 
to come to wait on me for three months. As the said 
prisoner’s name and condition were unknown, he was 
not caught again, although they showed activity in the 
matter. At last I ordered the captain of the guards 
who had been careless in keeping him to be capitally 
punished. I’tiqtd SbAu on this day, at the request of 
rtimidu-d-daulah, had the good fortune to pay his 
respects to me. 

As for a long time no good had been heard of th«‘ 
affairs of Bengal and of the conduct of (^im 
it entered my mind to send to the ■Subah of Bengal 
Ibr&him KhAn Fatb-jang, who had carried on successfully 
the affiurs of the Subah of Behar and had brought 
a diamond mine into the possession of the State, and to 
despatch JahAnglr Quit Kb<n, who had a jagir in the 
Subah of Allahabad, in his place to Behar. I sent for 
QAsim Kb6n to CSourt. At the same hour on the 
auspicious day (the day of culmination) an order was 
given that they should write royal farmans to the offect 
that mtrdwaUbn (revenue coUectm) should be appointed 
to take Jahinglr Quit KbAn to Behar and to semi IbiAhIm 
KbAn Fath'jang to Bengal. Patronizing Sikondar,’ the 

‘ Hm LO. mss. wem to have Sakakdar or Rakakandar. 



374 


PBRSI4N AMBASSADOtt DEPARTS. 


jeweller, I promoted him to the mansab of 1,000 personal 
and 300 horse. 

On the 21st I gave leave to Muhammad Riz&. 
ambassador of the ruler of Iran, and bestowed on him 
30,000 darbs, equal to 30,000 rupees, with a dress of 
honour. As an equivalent to the souvenir {yod-huM) 
that my brother Sh&h 'Abbas had sent to me, I forwarded 
with the aforesaid ambassador certain presents of jewelled 
things which the rulers of the Deccan had sent, with 
cloths and rare things of every kind fit for presentation, 
of the value of 100,000 rupees. Among these was 
a crystal cup that Chelebi^ had sent from 'Iraq. The 
Shah had seen this cup and said to the ambassador 
that if his brother (Jahan^r) would drink wine out of 
it and send it to him it would be a great mark of 
affection. When the ambassador represented this, having 
drunk wine several times out of the cup in his presence, 
I ordered them to make a lid and a saucer for it and sent 
it along with the presents. The lid was of enamel 
(mfnd-IsdrC). I ordered the Munshis of mercurial writing 
{‘UtoLrid-'raqm) to write in due form an answer to the 
letter he had brought. 

On the 22nd the scouts brought in news of a fciger. 
Mounting immediately, I went against the tiger and with 
three shots I delivered the people from his wickedness, and 
himself from the wickedness of his vile nature. Mosihu-z* 
zamAn produced before me a cat, and represented that it 
was a hermaphrodite, and that in his house it had young 
ones, and that when it had connection with another cat, 
young were bom lo the latter. 

On the 25th the contingent of I'timadu-d-daulah passed 
before me in review on the plain under the jharoka. 
There were 2,000 cavalry well horsed, most of whom 

‘ It appears from 8bSH *AbbAs*8 letter to <fah&ngir (T.azuk, \x 165) that 
Mu^aaimad Husain Chelebi had been employed by Jahangir to collect 
curies in Persia. 



NUR-JAHIN SHOOTS FOUR TIGER 


375 


were Moghuls, 500 foot armed with bows and guns, and 
fourteen elephants. The bakhshis reckoned them up and 
reported that this f6rce was fully equipped and according 
to rule. On the 26th a tigress was killed. Oi^Thursday, 
the Ist Urdibihisht, a diamond that Muqan*ab Khan had 
sent by runners was laid before me ; it weighed 23 aurkh, 
and the jewellers valued it at 30,000 rupees. It was 
a diamond of the first water, and was much approved. 
I ordered them to make a ring of it. On the 3rd the 
mansab of Yusuf ^an waa, at the request of Baba 
Khurram, fixed at 1,000 with 1,500 horse and in the 
same way the mansabs of several of the Amirs and 
mansabdars were increased at his suggestion. On the 
7th, as the huntsmen had marked down four tigers, 
when two watches and three gharis had passed I went 
out to hunt them with my ladies. When the tigers came 
in sight Nur-JahAn Begam submitted that if I would 
order her she herself would kill the tigers with her gun. 
I said, ‘‘Let it be so.” She shot two tigers with one 
shot each and knocked over the two others with four 
shots. In the twinkling of an eye she deprived of life 
the bodies of these four tigers. Until now such sliooting 
was never seen, that from the top of an elephant uiid 
inside of a howdah (*amdri) six shots should bti made and 
not one miss, so that the four beasts found no opportunity 
to spring or move.^ As a reward for this good shooting 
I gave her a pair of bracelets - (pahunchi) of diamonds 
worth 100,000 rupees and scattered 1,000 ashrafis (over 
her). On the .same day Ma'mur Kliaii (tlie. architect- 

^ Note by Sayyid Ahmad. They say that a poet recited thifi 
Impromptu couplet — 

Though NOr-Jahan be in form a woman, 

In the rankn of men sl»e *» a tigei -'»layi.T.*‘ 

The point of this couplet is that before NOr-Jahaii entered Jahangir's 
harem she was the wife of Shir-afgan, the tiger- slayer. The line may 
also read ** lo battle she is a inan-smiter and a tiger- slayer.” 

- The two I.O. MSS. have •* a pair of pearls and a diamond.” 



376 APPOINTMENTS. ■& CKLEBKATBD MUSICIAN. 

Khan) obtained leave to go to Lahore to complete the 
buildings of the palace there. On the 10th the death 
of Sayyid W&ris, who was faujdar of the Subah of Oudh, 
was reported. On the 12th, as Mir Mahm&d asked for 
a faujdarship, I dignified him with the title of Tahawwur 
KJi&n, and, increasing his mansab, appointed him to the 
faujdarship of some of the parganalis of the Subah of 
Multan. On the 22nd, T&hir, the bakhshi of Bengal, 
who had been forbidden to pay his respects, waited upon 
me and presented his offerings. Eight elephants were 
also presented as the offering of Q&sim Khto. governor 
of Bengal, and two as that of Shmkh ModhfL On the 
28th, at the request of Kbkn Daurftn, an order was given 
for the increase of the mansab of ‘Abdu-l-'A^ Kb&n 
by 500. On the 5th Khnrd&d the duty of the Diwanship 
of Qujarat was given to Mirza Husain in supercession 
of Ke^o. I dignified him with the title of Kif&yat Kh&n. 
On the 8th, Ladlkar Kl)5n, who had been appointed 
bakhshi of Bangash, came and waited on me ; he offered 
100 muhrs and 500 rupees. Some days before this Ust&d 
Muhammad N&yi (flute -player), who was unequalled in 
his craft, was sent by my son Kbonam at my summons. 
I had heard some of his musical pieces ^ (majlia-ad»), and 
he played a tune which he had composed for an ode 
(^azal) in my name. On the 12th I ordered him to 
be weighed against rupees; this came to 6,300 rupees. 
1 also gave liim an elephant with a howdah,* and I ordered 
him to ride on it and, having packed* his rupees about 
him, to proceed to his lodging. MulUt Asad, the story- 

' There in a fuller acoount of this flute-player io Price's Jahflngir, 
p. Hi. The melody H*hich he composed in Jahinglr'a name is there 
called by Price flant JabAnglri. (The text does not give the name 
Jshanglrl.) It is there stated that 8bAh Jahftn brought the flute-player 
with him fffcm Burhanpur and introduced him. 

^Nmnum^ddti, * wKh a hasin-ahaped litter on it. 

Ihs word pd^kia, ^aoattered,’ docs not occur in thm LO. MSS. But 
perhaps the word has two opposite meanings. 



BECITER WEIGHED. MANGOES. 


377 


teller, one of the eervaote of Mlnsft Qb&d, came on the 
same day from Tattah and waited on me. As he was 
a reciter and story-teller full of sweetness and sniartness. 
1 liked his society, and I made him happy with the title 
of Mah^ Sb&n, and gave Itm 1,000 rupees, a dress 
of honour, a horse, an elephant, and a palanquin. After 
some, days I ordered him to be weighed against rupees, 
and his weight came up to 4,400. He was raised to 
the mansab of 200 personal and 20 horse. I ordered 
him always to be present at the meetings for talk {ga^\ 
On the same day La^kar O&n brought his men to the 
darti^n jhourcka before me. There were 600 horse, 
14 elephant^ and 100 musketeers. On the 24th news 
came that Mah& Singh, grandson of Bftja M&n Singh, 
who was entered among the great officers, had died from 
excessive wine-drinking at B&l&pQr in the province of 
Berar. His father also had died at the age of 82 ^ from 
the drinking of wine beyond measure. On the same 
day they hod brought to my private fruit-house many 
mangoes from all parts of the province of the Deccan, 
Burhanpur, Gqjarat, and the poiganahs of Malwa. 
Although this province is well known and celebrated for 
the sweebiess, freedom from struoginess, and size of its 
mangoes, and there are few mangoes that equal its 
mangoes — so much so that I often orderetl them to be 
weighed in my presence, when they were shown to come 
to a seer or 1^ seer or even more — ^yet in sweetness 
water and delidous flavour and digestibility the 
mangoes of Chapr&mau,* in the province of Agra, are 
superior to all the mangoes of this province and of all 
other places in India. 

On the 28th I sent for my son BAb& Kburram a special 
gold-embroidered nddtri of a fineness such as had never 

' Father and aon both died apiMuentty St Um aasM age. 

* It waa ia Sarkar Qanaej (Janrett, ii, 185). It ia (%ibrSiiiaii of LU., 
Hi, 87, and ia in Farrakhabad diatrict. 



878 


JAHZNafR PRAYS FOR RAIN. 


been produced before in my establishment; I ordei^ 
the bearer to tell him that as this rarity had the speciality 
that I had worn it on the day I quitted Ajmir for the 
conquest of the Deccan, I had sent it to him. On the 
same day I placed the turban from my own head, just 
as it was, on the head of I'timadu-d-daulah, and honoured 
him with this favour. Three emeralds, a piece of jewelled 
and a rul^ signet ring that Mah&bat Kb&n 
had sent by way of offering were laid before me. They 
came to 7,000 rupees in value. On this day, by the 
mercy and favour of Allah, continued rain fell. Water 
in Mandu had become very scarce and the people were 
agitated about the matter so that most of the servants 
had been ordered to go to the bank of the Narbada. 
There was no expectation of rain at that season. In 
consequence of the agitation of the people I turned by 
way of supplication to the throne of God, and He in 
His mercy and grace gave such rain that in the course 
of a day and a night tanks, ponds Qnrkaha), and rivers 
became full, and the agitation of the people was changed 
to complete ease. With what tongue can I render thanks 
for this favour ? On the 1st of Tir a standard was 
presented to Wazir KhAn. The offering of the Kana, 
consisting of two horses, a piece of Gujarati clotli, and 
some jars of pickles and preserves, was laid before me. 
On the 3rd, Mu*a2za‘(?) brought news of the capture of 
*Abdu-l-Latif, a descendant of the rulers of Gujarat, who 
had always been the originator of mischief and disturbance 
in that Subah. As his capture was a reason for the 
contentment of the people, praise was given to God, 
and I ordered Muqarrab Khan to send him to Court 

' Vrva$l is- the name of an Aptisra or celestial nyinph. Pi'obably it 
is here the name of a drees. . (In Forbes's Hindustani Dictionaiy SWsisf 
is said to denote a particular kind of ornament worn on the breoet.) 

* The MSS. have fRo^m, which may be connected with the Arabic 
mcigkr, * travelling quickly.* It may he the name of a courier, or 
uinruly mean ' quickly.* 



DIAMONDS FROM BENGAL. 


379 


by one of his mansabdars. Many of the zamindars in 
the neighbourhood of M&ndu came and waited on me, 
and laid offerings before me. On the 8th, Rd.m Dfts, 
son of B&ja Raj Singh KachUw&ha, was given the tlka 
of a Raja, and I honoured him with that title. Yfidg&r 
Beg, who was known in M&wara’a-n-nahr (Transoxiana) 
as T&dgar Qurchi, and had not been without connection 
and influence with the ruler of that country, came and 
waited on me. Of all his offerings a white china cup 
on a stand was the most approved The offering of 
Bah&dur Khto. governor of Qandahar, consisting of nine 
horses, nine tuqU-z of fine cloth (81 pieces ?), two black 
foxes’ skins, and other things, was brought before me. 
Also on this day the R&ja of Gadeha, Pcin^ Narayan, 
had the good fortune to wait on me, and made an 
offering of seven elephants, male and female. On the 10th 
a horse and dress of honour were given to Y§dg&r 
Qtirchl. On the 13th was the feast of rose-water 
scattering (guldb-pd^dn). The rites due to that day were 
performed. Shaikh Maudtid Chighti, one of the officers 
of Bengal, was honoured with the title of Chishti Kb&n> 
and I presented him with a horse. On the 14th, R&wal 
Samarsi (Samarsii|iha),son of R&wal tJday Singh, zamindar 
of Bansw&la, waited on me ; he gave as offering 30,000 
rupees, three elephants, a jewelled pan-dan (box for 
betel), and a jewelled belt. On the 15th nine diamonds 
which Ibr&him Rb&n Fath-jang, the governor of Behar, 
had sent along with Muhammad Beg fiDm the mine, 
and from the collections of the zamindars of that place, 
were laid before me. Of these, one weighed 14^ tanks, 
and was of the value of 100,000 rupees. On the same 
day Yftdgftr (jfkichi was presented with 14,000 darbs, 

^ Apparently it ahoald bo Dhim ; see Gadeha ia^|>robably 

Oadhl in Khandeah ; aee Lethbridge’s •«C4oldcn Book of India,” p. 13&. 
It is the Garvl of I.G., r, 8S, and is one of the Bhil Btates in the 
DOag Tract. 



380 


SHAH JAHlli’s SUCCESS. 


and I promoted him to the mansab of 500 personal 
and 300 horse. I fixed the mansab of Tatar Khan, 
baJcdwul-begi (chief steward), original and increase, at 
2,000 personal and 300 horse, and each of his sons was 
separate!}^ promoted to an increased mansab. At the 
request of Prince Sultan Parwiz. 1 increased the personal 
mansab of Wazir Khan by 500. 

On the 29th, which was the auspicious day of Thursday, 
Sayyid *Abdu-llah Barha, the envoy of my son of good 
fortune, Baba >Khurrani, waited on me, and presented 
a letter from that son containing news of a victory 
over the provinces of the Deccan. All the chiefs, laying 
the head of duty in the noose of obedience, had consented 
to service and humility, and laid before him the keys of 
forts and strongholds, especially the fort of Ahmadnagar. 
In gratitude for this great favour and beneficence, placing 
the head of supplication on the throne of that God who 
requires no return, I opened my lips in thankfulness, 
and, humbling myself, ordered them to beat the drums 
of rejoicing. Thanks be to Allah that a territory that 
had passed out of hand has come back into the possession 
of the servants of the victorious State, and that the 
seditious, who had been breathing the breath of rebellion 
and boasting, have turned towards supplication and 
weakness, and become deliverers of properties and 
payers of tribute. As this news reached me through Nur- 
Jahan Begam, I gave her the parganah of Boda (To4& 
the revenue of which is 200,000 rapees. Please God, 
when the victorious forces enter the province of the 
Deccan and its forts, and the mind of my excellent son 
ILburram is satisfied with regard to their possession, he 
will bring with the ambassadors such an offering from 

* There wa« a Bodah in Sarkar Muroeor in Malwa, but its revenue 
was only 2^ lakhs of dams (Jarrett, ii, 208). The two I.O. MSS. 
and Hobi Prasad's Hindi version have To^a. To*}* Ajmir, 

Rantambhor Sarkar, and its revenue in Akbars time was 1^ lakhs of 
ru|Mjes (Jarititt. ii, 275). 



OMEN FROM HIFIZ. 


381 


the Deccan as no other king of this age has received 
It was ordered that tie should bring with him the Amirs 
who were to receive jagirs in this Subah, in order that 
they might have the honour of waiting on me. They 
will thereafter get leave to depart, and the glorious royal 
standards will return with victory and rejoicing to the 
capital of Agra. Some days before the news of this 
victory reached me, 1 took one night an augury from 
tlie diwan of Khwaja Hafiz as to what would be the end 
of this affair, and this ode turned up — 

**The day of absence and night of parting from the friend are o*er. 

I took this augury ; the star passed and fulfilment came.*** 

When the secret tongue (liadnu-l~g^ib) of H&fiz showed 
such an ending it gave me a strong hope, and accordingly, 
after twenty-five days, the news of victory arrived. In 
many of my desires I have resorted to the Khw&jas 
diwan, and (generally) the result has coincided with 
what I found there. It is seldom that the opposite has 
happened. 

On the same day I added 1,000 horse to the mansab 
of Afaf Oan, and raised it to that of 5,000 personal 
and horse. At the end of the day I went with the 
ladies to look round the building of the Haft Mani^r 
(seven storeys^, and at the beginning of the evening 
returned to the palace. This building was founded by 
a former ruler of Malwa, Sultan Mabmud Kba^i. It has 
seven storeys, and in each storey there are four chambers 
(ifuffa) containing four windows. The height of this 
tower (mlTidr) is 64^ cubits, and its circumference 
50 yards (gaz). There are 171 steps from the ground 

* Ode 192 of BrockhauB* edition, p. 112, first couplet. 

* This is the building described by Wiliium Finch. See the Journal 
of John Jourdain, ed. by Foster for the Hakluyt Society, App. D. 
Finch speaks of a high turret 170 steps high. The tower was the 
Tower of Victory erected by SulfAn Mahmfid I in 1443 to commemorate 
a victory over the Raja of Chitor. ** Tl^ stump of it has beer# found ." 
Jourdain speaks of six storeys. It was built of green stone Hke marble. 



382 


APPOINTMENTS. HUNTING. 


to the seventh storey. In going and returning I scattered 
1,400 rupees.^ 

On the Slst I honoured Sayyid ‘Abdu-llah with the 
title of Saif Khan, and having exalted him with a dress 
of honour, a horse, an elephant, and a jewelled dagger, 
gave him leave and sent him to do duty with my son 
of lofty fortune. I also sent by him a ruby of the 
value of more than 30,000 rupees for my son. I did not 
regard its value, but as for a long time I used to bind 
it on my own head, I sent it him by way of good 
augury, considering it lucky for him. I appointed 
Sul^n Mahmud, a son-in-law of Khwaja Abu-l-hasan 
bakhshi, to be bakhshi and news-writer of the Subah of 
Behar, and when he took leave I gave him an elephant. 
At the end of the day of Thursday, 6tli Amurdad, 
I went with the ladies to see the Nil-kund» which iS 
one of the most ^ pleasant places in the fort of Mandu 
(Mtodogarh). Shah-budagh Khan, who was one of my 
revered fathers most considerable Amirs, at the time 
when he held this province in jagir, built in this place 
an exceedingly pleasing and enjoyable building. Delaying 
there till two or three gharis of night had passed 
I returned to the auspicious palace. 

As several indiscretions on the part of Mukhlis Khan 
diwan and bakhshi of the Subah of Bengal, had come 
to my ears, I reduced his mansab by 1,000 personal and 
200 horse. On the 7th a war (viaati) elephant from 
among those sent as offerings by 'Adil Khan, by name 
Qaj-raj, was sent to Rana Amr Singh. On the 11th, 
I went out to hunt and came one stage fi*om the fort. 
There was excessive rain, and the mud was such that 
there was hardly any moving. For the convenience of 
the people and the comfort of the animals I gave up 

1 Two hundred rupees per storey (f). 

2 Blochmann, p. 371, and Ma’i^iru-l-umaril, ii, 037. Now locally 

called iteNil-kan^h, * blue neck.’ 



STORM AT MAM DU. 


38 » 


this undertaking, and passing the day of Thursday 
outside, returned on Friday eve. On the same day" 
Hidayatu-llah, who is very well suited to carry out 
the rules and movements (in travelling) of the head- 
quarters (lit. presence), was honoured with the title of 
Fida'i Khan. In this rainy season rain fell in such 
quantities that old men said tliat they did not remember 
such rain in any age. For nearly forty days there was 
nothing but cloud and rain, so tliai the sun only appeared 
occasionally. There was so much wind that many buildings, 
both old and new, fell down. On the first night there 
was^ such rain and thunder and lightning as has seldom 
been heard of. Nearly twenty women and men were 
killed, and the foundations even of some of the stone 
buildings were broken up. No noise is more terrifying 
than this. Till the middle of the month was passed, 
wind and rain increased. After this they gradually 
became less. What can be written of the verdure and 
self -grown fragrant plants ? They covered valley and 
plain and hill and desert. It is not known if in the 
inhabited world there exists another such place as Mandu 
for sweetness of air and for the pleasantness of the 
localitv and the neighbourhood, especially in the rainy 
season. In this season, which lasts for months and 
extends up to the hot weather, one cannot sleep inside 
houses without coverlets, and in the day the temperature 
is such that there is no need for a fan or for change 
of place. All that could be written would still fall short 
of the many beauties of the place. I saw two things 
that I had not seen in any other place in Hindustan. 
One was the tree of the wild plantain that grows in 
most of the uncultivated places in the fort, and the 
other the nest of the wagtail {mxmiUa), which they 
call in Persian the dwm-Hcha (tail-wagger). Up till 
now none of the hunters had pointed out its nest. By 

^ The text tmiMmi oat a conianotion before ^add. 



384 


VISITS antiquities, invents a dress. 


chance in the building I occupied there was its nest, 
and it brought out two young ones. 

Three watches of day bad passed on Thursday, the 
19th, when 1 mounted with the ladies iii order to go 
round and see the courts and buildings on the Shakkar 
tank, founded by former rulers of Malwa. As an elephant 
had not been conferred on I*timadu-d-daulah on account 
of his government of the Panjab, I gave him on the 
road one of my private elephants of the name of 
Jagjot. I remained in this enchanting place until the 
evening, and was much delighted with the pleasantness 
and greenness of the surrounding open spaces. After 
performing my evening prayer and counting my rosary, 
we returned to our fixed residence. On Friday an 
elephant named Ban-badal (cloud of war ?), which Jahangir 
Quli iy>an had sent as an offering, was brought before 
me. Having adopted for myself certain special cloths and 
cloth-stuffs, I gave an order that no one should wear 
the same but he on whom I might bestow them. One 
was a nadirl coat that they wear over the qaha (a kind 
of outer vest). Its length is from the waist down to 
below the thighs, and it has no sleeves. It is fastened 
in front with buttons, and the people of Persia call it 
kurdi (from the country of the Kurds). I gave it the 
name of nadiri. Another garment is a sha wl, which 
my revered father had adopted as a dress. The next 
was a coat (qaba) with a folded collar (batH giribdn). 
The ends of the sleeves were embroidered. He had also 
appropriated this to himself. Another waa a qaba with 
a boitlei, from which the fringes of cloth were cut off 
and sewn round the skirt and collar and the ends of 
the sleeve. Another was a qaba of Gujarati satin, and 
another a chira and waistbelt woven with silk, in which 
were interwoven gold and silver threads. 

As the monthly pay of some of Mah&bat Kb&n’s 
horsemen, according to the regulation of three and two 



A FEAST. 


365 


horsed men, for the performance of duty in the Deccan, 
had become increased and the service^ had not been 
performed, I gave an order that the civil officers 
(diwaniyan) should levy the difference from his jagir. 
In the end of Thursday, the 26th, corresponding with 
the 14th Sha*ban, which is the Shab-i-barat, I held 
a meeting in one of the houses of the palace of Nur- 
Jahan Begam, which was situated in the midst of large 
tanks, and summoning the Amirs and courtiers to the 
feast which had been prepared by the Begam, I ordered 
them to give the people cups and all kinds of intoxicating 
drinks according to the desire of each. Many asked for 
cups, and I ordered that whoever drank a cup should 
sit according to his mansab and condition. All sorts of 
roast meats, and fruits by way of relish, were ordered 
to be placed before eveiyone. It was a wonderful 
assembly. In the beginning of the evening they lighted 
lanterns and lairps all round the tanks and buildings, 
and a lighting up was carried out the like of which has 
perhaps never been arranged in any place. The lanterns 
and lamps cast their reflection on the water, and it 
appeared as if the whole surface of the tank was 
a plain of Are. A grand entertAinment took place, and 
the drinkers of cups took more cups than they could 
carry. 

feast was arranged that lighted up the heart, 

It was of such beauty as the heart desired. 

They flung over this verdant meaa 
A carpet broad as the field of genius. 

From abundance of perfume the feast spread far. 

The heavens were a musk-bag by reason of incense. 

The delicate ones of the garden (the flowers) became glorious. 

The face of each was lighted up like a lamp.*’ ''^ 

^ Apparently the meaning is that the standard of two and three horses 
had not been kept up. 

^ Some lines of this agree with the verses in the Akbar nama, ii, 190. 
The last two lines are quoted again in the account of the 15th year 
25 (p. 299 of Penian text). 



386 GOOD AND BAD DATS. ^riLD BANANAS. 


After three of four gharis of night had passed, I dismissed 
the men and summoned the ladies, and till a watch of 
night (remained ?) passed the time in this delightful 
place, and enjoyed myself. On this day of Thursday 
several special things had happened. One was that it 
was the day of my ascension of the throne ; secondly, 
it was the Shab-i-barat ^ thirdly, it was the day of the 
rdkhi, which has already been described, and with the 
Hindus is a special day. On account of these three 
pieces of good fortune I called the day MubArak-shamba. 

On the 27th, Sayyid K&su was dignified with the 
title of Parwart^ Khan. Wednesday in the same way 
that Mubarak-^amba had been a fortunate one for me 
had fallen out exactly the opposite. On this account 
I gave this evil day the name of Kam-shamba, in order 
that this day might always fail from the world (lessen). 
On the next day a jewelled dagger was conferred on 
Yadgar Qurchi, and I ordered that after this he should 
be styled Yadgar Beg. I had sent for Jay Singh, son 
of Raja Maha Singh. On this day he waited on me 
and presented an elephant as an offering. A watch and 
three gharis of Mubarak -shamba, the 2nd of »^ahriyar, 
had passed, when I rode to look round the Nil-kund 
and its neighbourhood ; thence I passed on to the plain 
of the *Id-gah on the top of a mound that was very 
green and pleasant. Champa flowers and other sweet 
wild herbs of that plain had bloomed to such a degree 
that on all sides on which the eye fell the world looked 
like a world of greenery and flowers. I entered the 
palace when a watch of night had passed. 

As it had been several times mentioned to me that 
a kind of sweetmeat was obtained from the wdld plantain 
such that dervishes and other poor people made it their 
f()()<l, I wished to enquire into the matter. What 1 found 
was that the fruit of the wild plantain was an exceedingly 
hard and tasteleas thing. The real fact is that in the 



CARRIER PIGEONS. 


387 


lower part (of the trunk) there is a thing shaped like 
a fir - cone from which the real fruit of the plantain 
comes out. On this a kind of sweetmeat forms which 
has exactly the juiciness and taste of pdlada>. It appears 
that men eat this and enjoy it.^ 

With regard to carrier pigeons (kabfUar-i^ndnui-bar), 
it had been stated to me in the course of conversation 
that in the time of the Abbaside Caliphs they taught^ 
the Baghdad pigeons who were styled * letter-carriers ’ 
(ndvut-bar), and were one-half larger® than the wild 
pigeon. I bade tiie pigeon-fanciers to teach their pigeons, 
and they taught some of them in sucli a manner that we 
let them fly from Mandu in the early morning, and if 
there was much rain they reached Burhanpur by 2^ pahars 
(watches) of the day, or even in 1.V pahars. If the air 
was very clear most of them ari’ived by one pahar of 
the day and some by four gharis (hours) of the day. 

On the 3rd a letter came from Baba Kburram, 
announcing the coining of Afzal Khan and RAy Rayan 
and the arrival of the ambassadors of 'Adil Klmn, and 
their bringing suitable offerings of jewels, jewelled things, 
elephants, and horses, offerings such as had never come in 
any reign or time, and expressing much gratitude for 
the services and loyalty of the aforesaid Khan, and his 
faithfulness to his woivl and duty. He asked for 
a gracious royal firman bestowing on him tiie title of 
farzaiid (son) and for other favours, which bad never 

' The account is obscure. Elliot’s translation is '* In the root of the 
tree is found a lump of sweet Hul)stance which is exactly like that of 
Faluda. It is eaten by the poor.'’ The text and some MSS. have 
yak pfircha-i-^hMnl, but B.M. Or. 3276 has yoA para. Roxburgh says 
nothing about any such growth on the -vild plantain. FahtdA or pdlMt 
is the name of a sweetmeat. 

^ It is curious that the word * taught,’ in the text, and which 

appeal's to lie almost necessaiy for the sense, does not occur either in the 
two 1.0. MSb. or in the R.A.S. one. Burhanpur is about 100 miles as 
the crow Hie-s south-south-east of Mandu. 

The text has par, * feathers,’ instead of the sign of tins oomparatiTo 
tar, but the MSS. have kaldntar. 



388 


‘iDIt KHIM or BUAPUA HONODRBD. 


yet been voudunfed in his honour. Since it was very 
gratifying to me to please my son, and his request was 
reasonable, I ordered that the Munshis of the mercurial 
pen should write a farman in the name of ‘Adil 
conveying every kind of affection and favour, and 
exceeding in his praise ten or twelve times what had 
been previously written They were ordered in these 
farmans to address him as fanand. In the body of the 
farman I wrote this couplet with my own hand — 

“Thon’Ht become, et Sbth Ovmm’s reqneet. 

Renowned in the world M my aon” {/rnmmdl). 

On the 4th day this farman was sent off with its 
copy, so that my son Shah ^urram might see the 
copy and send off the original. On Mubarak*gbamba, 
the 9th. I went with the ladies to the house of Afal 
Sh&n* His house was situated in the valley, and was 
exceedingly pleasant and bright. It had several valleys 
round it ; in some places there were flowing waterfalls, 
and mango and other trees exceedingly green and pleasant 
and shady. Nearly 200 or 300 keora shrubs (gvl-i-keora, 
Ptmda/nvu odoraiiuimuei) grew in one valley. In fine, 
that day passed in great enjoyments A wine party was 
held and cups were presented to the Amirs and intimates, 
and an offering from A^af Sbftn was laid before me. 
There were many rare things. I took whatever I approved, 
and the remainder was given to him. On the same day 
m^w&ja Mir, son of Sul$tn Kbwfcja, who had come on 
a summons from Bangash, waited on me, and presented 
as an offering a ruby, two pearls* and an elephant R&ja 
Bhim Narftyan, a zamindar of the province of Qadeha, 
was promoted to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 500 
horse. An order was given that a jagir should be provided 
him out of his native country. On the 12th a letter 
came from my scm Sburrani that Bl^a Sony Mai, son 
of B^a Blao, whose territory is near the fort of Kangra, 
had proniiaed that in the course of a year he would 



BIBTM OF BCSHANIrA BBOAK. 


389 


bring that fort into the possession of the servants of 
the victorious State. He also sent his letter which 
covenanted for this. I ordered that after comprehending 
his desires and wishes, and satisfying himself with regard 
to them, he should send off the Baja to wait on me, 
so that he might set about the said duty. On the same 
day, which was Monday, the 11th, corresponding witli 
the 1st Rama^n (2nd September, 1617), after four gharis 
and seven pals had passed, a daughter was bom to my 
son by the mother of his other children, who was the 
daughter of Asaf Khto. This child was named Rushan- 
ar& Begam. As the 2^roindar of Jaitpur, which is in 
the jurisdiction^ of Mandu, in consequence of wickedness 
had not had the felicity of kissing the threshold I oi’dcrcfi 
Fida’i Khan to proceed against him with some mansrt blares 
and 400 or 500 musketeers and plunder his countn'. 
On the 13th one elephant was given to Fida’i Khan 
and one to Mir Qasiin, son of Sayyid Murad. On thi> 
16th Jay Singh, son of Raja Maha Singh, who was 
12 years old, was promoted to the inan.Mali oF 1, 000 
personal and horse. To Mir MirAn, son of Mir Khalilii' 
llah, I gave an elephant which I had myself upprovod. 
and another to Mulla ‘Abdu-J^-Sattar.* Bhqj, .son of Raj« 
Bikrarnajit Bhadauriya, after liis father’.s death, came 
from the Deccan and waited on me, and presented 100 
muhrs as an offering. On the 17th it was represented 
that Raja Kalyaii had come from the province of Orissa, 
and proposed to kiss iiiy thresliold. As some unpleasant 
stories had lieeii told with regard to him, an order was 
given that they should hand him over with his sun to 

* The word w hateflil, whiiili is* mMnctimci^ transUti**! ‘ neiglihoiirlHXMJ/ 
and has been no tran-nlated here hy Mr. K(i}|r*^rtt. But iMtlier 
has mode a mistake or the wonl hatnift is <ru|KiMe of a wide iiiter ueUtimi. 
for JuitpAr apiwntra to be Jatlpflr in Kiifhiuw'ar. See tiurrect, ii, *JoS. 
iirul !.(}., vii, m2. Possibly MamlU is a mi^^take for B&ndliA. But 
th«*re in a .Jetgarh in Malwa (Juri-ctt. ii, 2110). 

- IVoliuMy this was the author who colUlHirated w'ith .fcrome .\avicr. 
See Rieu'a Catalogue, iii. 1077. 



390 


RAJA KALYAN ACQUITTED. 


A^f Kban to enquire into the truth of what had been 
said about him. On the 19th an elephant was given 
to Jay Singh. On the 20th 200 horses were added to 
the mansab of Keidio Daa Maru, so tiiat it came, original 
and increase, to 2,000 personal and 1,200 liorse. On 
the 23rd, having distinguished Allah>d^, the Afghan, 
with the title of Ra^id Khan, I gave him a pann-nann 
(shawl). The offering of Raja Kalyan Singh, consisting 
of eighteen elephants, was bi*ought before me ; sixteen 
elephants were included in my private elephant stud, and 
I presented him with two. As the news had arrived from 
Iraq of the death of the mother of Mir Miran, daughter 
of Shah Isma'il II, of the race of the Safawi kings, 
I sent him a dress of honour and brought him out of 
the robes of mourning. On the 25th Fida’i Khan 
received a dress of honour, and, in company with his 
brother Ruhu-llah and other mansabdars, obtained leave 
to go to punish tlie Zaiiiindar of Jaitpur. On the 28th, 
having come down fiom the fort with the intention of 
seeing the Narbada and to hunt in its neighbourhood, 
I took the ladies with me and halted two stages down 
on the bank of tlie river. As there were many inasquitoes 
and fleas, I did not stay more than one night. Having 
come the next day to Tiirapur I returned on Friday, 
the Slst. On the 1st of the month of Mihr, Mubsin 
Khwaja, who at this time had come from Transoxiana, 
received a dress of honour and 5,000 rupees. On the 
2nd. after enquiry into the matters of Raja Kalyan, 
with regard to which a report had been received, and 
which Asaf Khan had been appointed to investigate, 
as he appeared inn<xrent, he enjoyed the good iortune 
to kiss the threshohl, and presented as an offering 100 
iiiuhrs and 1,000 rupees. His offering of a string of 
pt'arls, consisting of eighty pearls and two rubies with 
a bracelet with a ruby and two pearls, and the golden 
figure of a lior.se studded with jewels, was Jaid before 



JAITPUR TAKEN. DEATH OF BUHU-LLAH. 391 


me. A petition from Fida’i Khan arrived stating that 
when the victorious army entered the province of Jaitpur 
the zamindar had elected to run away. He could not 
oppose Fida’i, and his country was ravaged. He now 
repented of what he had done, and intended to come 
to the Court, which was the asylum of the world, and 
proffer service and obedience. A force with Rubu-llah 
was sent in pursuit of him to capture and bring him 
to Court, or to lay waste and ruin his domain and 
imprison his women and dependants, who had gone into 
the country of the neighbouring zamindai^s. On the 
8th h^iwaja Ni^m came and laid before me fourteen 
pomegranates from the port of Mukha (Mocna), which 
they had brought to Surat in the space of fouiteen 
days, and in eight days more to Mandu. The size of 
these was the same as that of the Thatta pomegranates. 
Though the pomegranates of Thatta are seedless and these 
have seeds,^ yet they are delicate, and in freshness excel 
those of Thatta. On tlie 9th news came that while Kubu< 
Hah was passing through the villages, he came to know 
that the women and dependants of the Jaitpuri zamindar 
were in a certain village. He remained outside, and sent 
men into the village to make enquiries and to bring 
out tlie persons w'lio were there Whilst he was making 
enquiries, one of the devoted servants of the zamindar 
came along with the villagers. Whilst liis men were 
.scattered here and there, and Kul,iu-I]ah with mmie 
servants laid brought out hi.s furniture and was sitting 
on a carpet, that devoted servant canio btdiind him and 
struck him with a spear; the blow was fatal and tin* 
spearhead caiiu* out at hi.s breast. The pulling out of ih.. 
.spear and the reverting - to his original (dying) of Ruhu- 
llah t(K)k place together. Those who were pre.seni 
sent that wretch to hell. All the men wlu> had been 

* I.O. MS. .305 rut Jki. ‘Hiift (or i»vvi\h. 

* Note 181 hfts tnlyU itushtnu. •beetmiinp united ’ (to the Ih ity). 



393 


SVBAJ MAIi PBOOBBOS KAROKA. 


scattered about put on their armour and attacked the 
village. Those doomed men (lA'an^girifiahA) had the 
disgrace of harbouring^ rebels and sedition-mongers, and 
were killed in the course of an astronomical hour. They 
brought into captivity their wives and daughters, and, 
setting fire to the village, made it so that nothing was 
seen but heaps of ashes. They then lifted up the body 
of RlU^u-llah and went and joined Ildft’i Sb&n. With 
regard to the bravery and seal of R(khu-llah, there was 
no dispute; at the most, his carelessness brought about 
this turn of fortune. No traces of habitation remiuned 
in that region ; the samindar of that place went into the 
hills and jungles and concealed and obliterated himself. 
He then sent someone to Fid&’i Kb&n and begged for 
pardon for his offences. An order was given that he 
should be allowed quarter and brought to Court. 

The mansab of Muruwwat Kbto was fixed, (viginal and 
increase, at 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse, on condition 
that he should destroy Harbhto,* Zamindar of Chandra- 
kota, from whom travellers endured great annoyance. 
On the 13th Rftja Sfiraj Mai, t<^ther with Taql, the 
bakhshi who was in attendance on BAbft Khnrram, c^e 
and waited <ni me. He represented all his requirements. 
His engagement to perform the work was approved, 
and at the request of my son he was honoured with 
a standard and drums. To Taql, who had been appointed 
with him, a jewelled khapwa (dagger) was given, and 
it was arranged that he should finish his own afTairs 
and start oflT quickly. The mansab of Kbwi()a ‘All Beg 
Mirzft, a'ho had been appointed to the defence and 

‘ M dadan, ‘ to give wsjr,’ the meening epperentljr being thu they 
had protected Rohu.Ueh’e murderere. But I.O. MS. SOS eeema to have 
jdfUUUi, * eternal,* which would mean that they wer e killed and also 
eternally diitgrao^ ae relieln. The Ma’S^iru-l-amari, iii, IS, hae 
a difcrent account of the manner ^ Rohn-llali’a death. He wae FidSTa 
elder lirothcr. 

* The 1.0. MSS. have Pir Bah4r and Chandra Kona, whidi la tt er may 
be the place in Midna|iur. 



AFFAIRS OF THE OlOOAN. 393 

administration of Ahmadnagsr, was fixed at 5,000 personal 
and horse. An elephant apiece was given to NOru-d- 
din Qoli, Sbwi^as^ Thhir, Sayyid Kbhn Unhammad, 
Mortal Sbftn, and Wall Beg. On the 17th the mansab 
of 9&kim Beg was fixed, original and increase, at 1,000 
personal and 200 horse. On the sune day, after 
presenting Bl^a Sony Mai with a dress of honour, an 
elephant, and a jewelled khapwa, and Taql with a dress 
of honour, I gave them leave to proceed on duty to 
Kangra. When those who had been sent by my son 
of lofty fortune, Sb^h Kburram, with the ambas^ors 
of 'Adil Kb&u and his offerings, arrived at Burhanpur, 
and my son’s mind was completely satisfied with regard 
to the affibits of the Deccan, he prayed for the Subahdar* 
ship of Berar, Khandesh, and Ahmadnagar for the 
Commanderdn-Chief, the Khankhanan, and sent his son 
Sb&h>naw&s Kbftn, who is rMlly Khankhanan junior, 
with 12,000 cavalry to hold possession of the conquered 
provinces. Kvety place and estate were put as jagirs 
into the hands of reliable men, and fitting arrangements 
were made for the government of the province. He 
left, out of the troops that were with him, 30,000 horse 
and 7,000 musketeer infantry,' and took with him the 
remainder, amounting to 25,000 horse and 2,000 gunners, 
and set off to wait on me. On 'niursday (MubAtak- 
(duunba), the 20th ^ of the month of Mihr (Divine month), 
in the twelfth vear from my accession, corresponding 
with the 11th Sbawwftl, 1026 Hijra (mh October, 1617), 
after three watches and one ghari liod passed, he entered 
the fort of Mandu auspiciously and joyfully, and Imd 
the honour of waiting on me. The duration of our 
separation was 11* months and 11 days. After he hod 

* Text 8th, but ehoukl lie 80th. See jt. 100, where the next Thunicit&y 
ift mentioned ee the 27th. See Elliot, vi, 851. 

* Text 15 montke end 1 1 but it should be 1 1 incettlit. Sb^h *1011011 

left hie father at Aiiair on the huit day of Sbawwul, 1025, and he rejoinu*! 
him on llth Ebawwil of tlm foUoiring year. 



394 


PBBffiNTS BT OmCBBS. 


performed the dues of salutation and kissing the ground, 
I called him up into the jharokha, and with exceeding 
kindness and uncontrolled delight rose from my place 
and held him in the embrace of affection. In proportion 
as he strove to be humble and polite, I increas^ my 
favours and kindness to him and made him sit near 
me. He presented 1,000 ashrafis and 1,000 rupees as 
•Mtzar and the same amount by way of alms. As the 
time did- not allow of his presenting all his offerings, 
he now brought before me the elephant Sam&k (?) 
(snake-head ?), that was the chief of the elephants of 
‘Adil Khan’s offering, with a casket of precious stones. 
After this the bakhshis were ordered to an-auge according 
to their mansabs the Amirs who had come with my son 
CO V their respects. The first who had the honour 
of audience was Kbin Jahkn. Sending for him above, 
I selected him for the honour of kissing luy feet. He 
presented 1,000 mnhrs and 1,000 rupees as uazr, and 
a casket tilled with jewels and jewelled things as an 
offering (pi^-katjh). What was accepted of his otlering 
was worth 45,000 rupees. After this *Abdu-llah Kbkn 
kissed the threshold, and pitMentcd 100 luuhrs a» nazr. 
Then Mahabat Kbkn had tlie honour of kissing the 
ground, and presented an offeiing of 100 mulirs and 

1.000 rupees, with a parcel {yiUhri) ^ of precious 
atones and jewelled vessels, the value of which was 

124.000 rupees. Of these one ruby weighed 11 iniskals; 
an European brought it last y^r to sell at Ajinir, and 
priced it at 200,000 rupees, but the jewellers valued it 
at 80,000 rupees. Consetpiently the bargain did not 
come off, and it was returned to him and he took it 
away. When h<> cnine to Burhnnpnr, Mahabat KImn 
Itouglit it from him for 100,000 rupees. After this Baja 
Bliao .Singh waited on me, pix*senting 1,000 rupees as 
nazr and some jewels and jewelled things os a pi^-katA. 

* So ill text, Imt I.O. MSS. have kuriti, * a vimir or utool* (I. 37). 



mXH XHURBAX STTLSD WAH JAHXN. 395 

In the same manner DAr&b Kb&n, eon of the Khan- 
khanan, SardAr Kb&n, brother of *Abdu-llah KbAn, 
SbftjA'at KbAn the Arab, DayAnat Kb&n, Sb&h-bAz KhAn. 
Mu*tamad KbAn bakhelii, OdA BAm,^ who was one of 
the chief Amirs of Nis^iu-l-mulk, and who came on 
the promise of my son gb&h Kliurrani and joined the 
ranks of the loyal, waited on me in the order of their 
mansabs. After this the Wakils of *Adil IjLbAn had the 
honour of kissing the ground, and presented a letter 
from him. Before this, as a reward' for the conquest of 
the BAna, a mansab of 20,000 personal and 10,000 horse 
was conferred on my son of lofty fortune. When he 
liad hastened to the capture of the Deccan he had 
obtained the title of Shah, and now, in reward for this 
distinguished service, 1 gave him a mansab of 30,000 
personal and 20,000 horse and bestowed on him the title 
of ShAh JahAn. An order was given that henceforth 
they should place a chair in the paradise -resembling 
assemblies near my throne for my son to sit upon. This 
was a special favour for my son, as it had never been 
the custom heretofore. A special dress of honour with 
a gold-embix>idered cMrqab, with collar, the end of the 
sleeves and the skirt decorated with pearls, worth 50,000 
rupees, a jewelled sword with a jewelled pardala (l3elt), and 
a jewelled dagger were bestowed upon him. In his honour 
1 myself came down from the jharokha and poured over 
his head a small tray of jewels and a tray of gold (coins).* 
Having called SamAk elephant to me. I saw without 
doubt that what hod been heard in its prai.se and of 
its beauty was real. It stood all the tests in si/.e, form, 
and beauty. Few elephants are to be seen of such 
beauty. As it appeared acceptable to me, I myself 
mounted (i.e. drove it) and took it into my private 
palace, and scattered a quantity of gold coins on its head. 

‘ Ttirt ftS'iiiNfl, iHit Rfttn in the only IHikliaiii olticer nieiitioned. 

* The MSS. Iiave *gold tirociule.’ 



396 PROVINCE OF BAOLlNA. DESCRIBED. 

and oidered them to tie it up inside the royal palace 
With regard to this I gave it the name of NOr-bakht * 
(light of fortune). On Friday, the 24th, B&ja Bharjiv, 
Zamindar of BaglRo^i came and waited on me. His 
name is Part&p ; every Raja there has been of that place 
they call Bharjiv. He has about 1,600 horse in his pay 
(inavxLjib-khwdr), and in time of need he can bring 
into the field 3,000 horse. The province of Bagl&na 
lies between Qujarat, Khandesh, and the Deccan. It has 
two strong forts, S&ler and Maler (Muler), and as M&ler 
is in the midst of a populous country he lives there 
himself. The country of Bagl&na has pleasant springs 
and running waters. The mangoes of that region are 
very sweet and large, and are gathered for nine months 
from the beginning of immaturity^ until the end. It 
has many grapes, but not of the best kinds. The afore- 
said Raja does not drop the thread of caution and 
prudence in dealing with the rulers of Gujarat, the 
Deccan, and Khandesh. He has never gone himself to 
see any of them, and if any of them has wished to 
stretch out his hand to possess his kingdom, he has 
remained undisturbed through the support of the others. 
After the pn)viiices of Gujarat, the Deccan, and Khandesh 
came into the possession of the late king (Akbar), Bharjiv 
came to Burhanpiir and liad the honour of kissing his 
feet, and after being enrolled among his servants was 
raised to tlie inansab of 3,000. At this time, when 
Jahan went to Burhanpur, he brought eleven elephants ns 
an offering. He came to Court in attendance on my son, 
and in accordance witli his friendship and siu'vice was 
dignified with voydl favours, and hod presented to him 
a jewelled swonl. an elephant, a horse, and dress of 
honour. After sonu' days I conferred on him three rings 
of jacinth diamond, and ruby. On Mubarak- 


* In rirfemnce to hU own imiiiu of NQru-U-flin. 
Cffirufft, * unripenoi^H.' 



mGr jaham gives a feast. 


397 


e^amba (Thursday), the 27th, Ntkr-Jah&n Begam prepared 
a feast of victory for my son Sb&h Jahftn, and conferred 
on him dresses of honour of great price, with a nadirt 
with embroidered flowers, adorned with rare pearls, 
a aarpidi (turban ornament) decorated with rare gems, 
a turban with a fringe of pearls, a waistbelt studded with 
pearls, a sword with jewelled pardala (belt), a phal 
leat&ra (dagger), a mda (?) of pearls, with two horses, 
one of which had a jewelled saddle, and a special elephant 
with two females. In the same way she gave his children 
and his ladies dresses of honour, t uquz (nine pieces) of cloth 
with all sorts of gold ornaments, and to his chief servants 
as presents a horse, a dress of honour, and a- jewelled 
dagger. The cost of this entertainment was about 300,000 
rupees. Presenting on the same day a horse and dress 
of honour to ‘Abdu-llah Khan and Sard&r 'Kbftn, his 
brother, 1 gave them leave to go to the Sarkor of Kalpi, 
which had been given them in jagir, and also dismissed 
Shaj&'at Kjb&n to his jagir, which was in the Subah 
of Qujarat, with a dress of honour and an elephant. 
I dismissed Sayyid H&jl, who was a jagirdar of Behar, 
with a gift of a horse. 

It was frequently reported to lAe that Kb&n DaurAn 
had become old and weak, so as to be unfit for active 
duty, and the Subahs of Kabul and Bangosh is a land 
of disturbance, aud to subdue the Afghans required 
riding and active movement Inasmuch as caution is the 
condition of rule, I appointed Mah&bat KbAn, Subahdar 
of Kabul and Bangash, giving him a dress of honour , 
and promoted Sb&n DaurAn to the governorship of the 
province of Thatta. IbrAhim Kbhn Fatb*jang had sent 
as an offering from Behar forty 'nine elephants; these 
were snlnuitted to me. On this day they brought some 
tOnadeda (golden plootainH, bananas) for me. I had 
never eaten such plantains before. In size they are 
one finger, and are very sweet and of good flavour ; they 



398 


DEATH OF PERSIAN AMBASSADOR. 


have no resemblance to plantains of other descriptions, 
but are somewhat indigestible, so that from the two that 
I ate I experienced heaviness, whilst others say they 
can eat as many as seven or eight. Though plantains 
are really unfit to eat, yet of all the kinds this is the 
one fit to eat. This year, up to the 23rd of the niontli 
of Mihr, Muqarrab Khan sent Gujarat mangoes by post 
(ddk-c/iatcH), 

On this date I heard that Muhammad Ri/ii, ambassador 
of my brother Shah ‘Abbas, gave up the deposit of his 
life at Agra through the disease of ishdl (diarrhoea). 
I made the merchant Muhammad Qasim, who had come 
from my brother, his executor, and ordered that according 
to the will he should convey his goods and chattels to 
the Shah, so that he might grant them in his own 
presence to the heira of the deceased. Elephants and 
dresses of honour were conferred on Sayyid Kabir and 
Bakhtar Khan, Wakils of ‘Adil JFQ\an. On Mubarak- 
^amba, the 13th Aban, Jahangir Quli Beg, Turkman, 
who is dignified with tlie title of Jan-sipar Khan, came 
from the Deccan and waited on me. His father was 
included among the Amii*s of Iran. He had come from 
Persia in tlie time of the late king Akbar, and having 
a mansab conferred on him was sent to the Deccan. 
He was brought up in that Subah. Although he had 
been appointed to a duty, yet as my son »Shah Jahan 
came at this time to pay Ids respects and represented 
his sincerity and devotion, I oi-dered that he should come 
post to Court and have the good fortune to wait upon 
me and then return. On this day I promoted Uda Ram ^ 
to the rank of 3,000 personal and 1,500 horse. He is 
a brahmin by caste, and was much relied on by 'Ambar. 
At the time w^hen Shah-nawaz Kb^n went against ‘Ambar, 
Adam Khan Hab^i, Jadu Ray, Babu R&y Kayath, 
Odd. Ram, and .some other Sard&rs of Ni^mu-l-inulk 
^ The Ud&ji Ram of Ma'asiru-l-umaril, i, 142. 



MALIK *AMBAR. 


399 


left him and came to ghah-nawaz Khan. After 'Ambar's 
defeat they, by the persuasions of *Adil Khan and the 
deceit of *Ambar, left the right road again and gave up 
their loyalty and service. *Ambar took an oath on the 
Koran to Adam Khan and put him off his guard, and, 
capturing liim deceitfully, imprisoned him in the fort of 
Daulatabad, and at last killed him. Babu Ray Kayath 
and t}d& Ram came away and went to the borders of 
*Adil Khan’s dominions, but he would not admit them 
into his territory. About that time Babu Ray Kayath lost 
his life (lit. played away the coin of existence) by the 
deceit of his intimates, and ‘Ambar sent a force against 
tJdA RAm. He fought well and defeated 'Ambar’s army. 
But afterwards, as he could not remain in that country, he 
threw himself on to the borders of the royal dominions, and, 
having got a promise, came with his family and dependants 
and entered the service of my son Shah Jahan. That 
son distinguished him with favours and kindnesses of 
all sorts, and made him hopeful by giving him a mansab 
of 3,000 personal and 1,000 horse, and brought him to 
Court. As he was a useful servant, I increased this by 
500 horse. I altw) increased the mansab of Shah-baz Khan, 
who had one of 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse, by 500 
more horse, and gave him the faujdarship of the Sarkaii* 
of Sarangpur and a part of the Subah of Malwa. 
A special horse and elephant were given to Khan Jahan. 
On Mubarak -^airba (Thursday), the lOtli of the month, 
iny son i^ah Jahan produced his own f)fiV*ring8 — jewels 
and jewelled things and fine cloths and other rare things. 
These were all laid out m the courtyard of the jharokha, 
and arranged together with the horsi.^s and elephants 
adorned with gold and silver trappings. In onler to 
please him I came down from the jharokha and l(X)kcd 
through them in detail. Among all these there was 
a fine ruby they had bought for my .son at the port of 
Goa for 200,000 rupees; its weight was 10^ tanks, or 



400 


FAMOUS DIAMOND. 


17 miskals, and 5^ surkha There was no ruby in my 
establishment over 12 tanks, and the jewellers agreed to 
this valuation.* Another was a sapphire, among the 
offerings of *Adil Khan ; it weighed 6 tanks and 7 surkhs 
and was valued at 100,000 rupees. I never before saw 
a sapphire of such a size and good colour. Another was 
the Chamkora diamond, also of 'Adil Kbd*n s ; its weight 
was 1 tank and 6 surkhs, which they valued at 40,000 
rupees. The name of Chamkoiu is derived from this, that 
there is in the Deccan a plant called adg-uchiirnJcora} At 
the time when Murtaza Ni^mu-l-mulk conquered Berar 
he had gone one day with his ladies round to look at 
the garden, when one of the women found the diamond 
in a chamkora vegetable, and took it to Nizamu-l>mulk. 
From that day it became known as the Chamkora diamond, 
and came into the possession of the present Ibrahim *Adil 
Khan during the interregnum (fatardt) of Ahmadnagar. 
Another was an emerald, also among *Adil Khan’s 
ofterings. Although it is from a new mine, it is of such 
a beautiful colour and delicacy as 1 have never before 
seen. Again, there were two pearls, one of the weight of 
()4 surkhs, or 2 iniskals and 1 1 surkhs, and it was valued 
at 25,000 rupees. The other weighed 16 surkhs, and was 
of exceeding roundness and fineness. It was valued at 
12,000 rupees. Another was a diamond from the offerings 
of Qutbu-l-mull , in weight 1 tank, and valued at 30,000 
rupees. There were 150 elephants, out of which three 
had gold trappings, chains, etcr, and nine had silver 
trappings. Though twenty * elephants were put into my 
private stud, five were very large and celebrated. The 
first, Nur-bakht, which my son presented on the day 
of meeting, was worth 125,000 rupees. The second, 
Mahipati,^ from the offerings of *Adil Khan, was valued 

' Jamkuni is given in Forlies us the Dukhani word for a covering made 
of reeds or psilin leaves and used in rainy weather. 

« The MS. has eight. 

* In the MSS. the name seema to be Hanaomat (swan-like ?1. 



WaH JAUil«'S OJrFERlNGS. 40] 

at 100,000 rupees ; I gave it the name of Durjansal. 
Another, also from his ofieringr^, was Ba^it-buland, and 
valued at 100,000 rupees ; I called it Giran-bar. Another 
was Qaddus Kh^n, and the fifth was Imam Riza. They 
were from the offerings of Qutbu-l-mulk. Each of the 
two was valued at 100,000 rupees. Again, there were 
100 Arab and Iraq horses, most of which were good 
horses. Of these, three had jewelled saddles. If the 
private offerings of my son and those of the rulers of 
the Deccan were to be written down in detail, it would 
be too long a business. What I accepted of his presents 
was woi*th 2,000,000 rupees. In addition to this he 
gave his (8tep-)inother,' Nur-Jahan Begam, offerings 
worth 200,000 rupees, and 60,000 rupees to his other 
mothers and the Begams. Altogether my son’s offerings 
came to 2,260,000 rupees, or 75.000 tumans of the currency 
of Iran or 6,780,000 current Turan-khanis. Such offerings 
had never been made during this dynasty. I showt.'d 
him much attention and favour ; in fact, he is a son 
who is worth grace and kindness. I am very pleased 
and satisfied with him. May God Almighty allow him 
to enjoy long life and prosperity ! 

As I had never in my life had any elephant-hunting, 
and had a great desire to see the province of Gujarat 
and to look on the salt sea, and my huntsmen had ofteji 
gone and seen wild elephants and fixed on hunting-places, 
it occurred to me to travel through Ahmadabad and look 
on the sea, and having hunted elephants on my return, 
when it was hot and the season for liunting them V) 
go back to Agi*a. With this intention 1 lespatched to 
Agra Hazrat Maryamu-z-zam&n (his mother) and the other 
Begams and people of the harem with the baggage ai;d 
extra establishments, and betook myself to a tour in the 
Subah of Gujarat to hunt, with such as were indi.spensable 


26 


^ Text has * his own motlier. 



402 JAHlNOlB PROCBBD8 TOWARDS GUJARAT. 

with me. On the eve of Friday in the month of Aban 
(precise date not given, but apparently the 10th), 
I marched auspiciously and happily from Mandu, and 
pitched, on the bank of the tank of Nalchha. In the 
morning I went out to hunt and killed a blue bull with 
my gun. On the eve of Saturday, Mahabat Khan was 
presented with a special horse and an elephant, and 
obtained leave to go to his Subah of Kabul and Bangash. 
At his request I conferred on Ra^id Kb&n a robe of 
honour, a horse, an elephant, and a jewelled dagger, and 
appointed him to assist him. I promoted Ibrahim Husain 
to the post of bakhshi in the Deccan, and Mirak Husain 
to that of news-writer in the same Subah. Raja Kalyan,^ 
son of R&ja Todar Mai, had come from the Subah of 
Orissa ; on account of some faults which had been 
attributed to him he had for some days been forbidden 
the honour of paying his respects. After enquiry his 
innocence appeared clear, and having given him a dress 
of honour and a horse, I appointed him to do duty 
together with Mahabat Khan in Bangash. On Monday 
I gave the Wakils of *Adil Khan jewelled turban fringes 
after the fashion of the Deccan, one of the value of 
5,000 rupees and the other worth 4,000 rupees. As 
Af^l Khan and R&y Rayan had performed the duties 
of Wakils to my son Sh&h Jahan in a becoming manner, 
I raised them both in mansab and honoured Ray Rayan 
with the title of Bikramajit, which among Hindus is 
the highest title. In truth he is a servant worthy of 
patronage. On Saturday, the 12th, I went to hunt and 
shot two female nilgaw. As the hunting-ground was 
a long way from this halting-place, I on Monday marched 
4^ kos* and pitched at the village of Kaid Hasan. On 
Tuesday, the 15th, I killed three blue bulls, the larger 
one of which weighed 12 maunds. On this day MirzA 


^ A repetitioD. 


* The MSS. have 3} kos. 



HiRZl RUSTAM’S ACCIDENT. 


403 


Rustam escaped a great danger.' It seems that he had 
taken aim at a mark and fired his gun. Then he re- 
loaded, and as his bullet was very flexible, he rested 
the gun on his chest and put the bullet between his teeth 
in order that he might contract it and put it right. By 
chance the match reached the pan, and his chest at the 
place where the gun was resting was burnt to the extent 
of the- palm of the hand, and the grains of powder got 
into his skin and flesh and a wound was made, and he 
suffered much pain.* 

On Sunday (?), the 16th,* four nilgaw were killed, 
three females and one bukra ^ nilgaw. On Mubarak - 
^amba (Thursday) I went to look round a hill valley 
in which there was a waterfall near the camp. At this 
season it hud* but little water, biit as for two or three 
days’ they had dammed the watercourse and, about the 
time of my reaching the place, let it loose, it flowed 
over very well. Its height might be 20 gaz. It 
separate at the top of the hill and flows down. In 
this way it is a great boon {g/iuniinat) on the road. 
Having enjoyed the usual cups on the edge of the stream 
and the shade of the hill, I came back to the camp 
at night. On this day the Zamindar of Jaitpur, whose 
offences I had forgiven at the request of niy son gh&h 
Jahan, had the good fortune of kissing the threshold. 
On Friday, the 18th, a large blue bull and a bukra, 
and on Saturday, the 19th, two females, were killed. 

' Text khata\ * fault,* but the MSS. show that the word is hhaiar^ 
‘danger.’ 

The passage is obscure, and the MSS. do not throw much light on 
it. Fortunately for the Mirxft, there was no bullet in his gun. The 
word which I have translated by ‘flexible* is miada. Perhaps the 
meaning is quite dilferent. Possibh' it is ** he would fire a shot and then 
reload. As many of his bullets had been shot away, he put a pellet 
{qMvld) into his mouth and was shaping it," etc. 

* He has just spoken of Tuesday as the 15th ! And as JahAngIr did 
not shoot on Sundays, Sunday must be a mistake for Wednesday. It is 
Wednesday in LO. MS. fi05. 

^ Perhaps here means a male nilgaw ; hfllra means also u he-goat. 



404 


HOMTINO. A GOOD SHOT. 


As my huntsmen represented that there was much 
game in the parganah of H&filpQr, 1 left my large camp 
at this halting- place, and on Sunday, the 20th, and 
with some of my close attendants, hastened to 9&silpttar, 
a distance of 3 koa Mir Musimu-d-din, son of Mir 
Jam&lu-d-din Husain Inju, who has the title of ‘A^udu-d- 
daulah, was promoted to the mansab, original and increase, 
of 1,000 personal and 400 horse. I presented Yadgftr 
Husain Qhdi-hegi and Yadg&r QOrchi, who had been 
appointed to do duty in Bangash, with an elephant each. 
On this day some Musaini grapes without seeds arrived 
from Kabul ; they were very fresh. The tongue of this 
suppliant at the throne of Ood fails in gratitude for 
the favours by which, notwithstanding a distance of 
three months, grapes from Kabul arrive quite fresh in 
the Deccan. On Monday, the 21st, three small blue bulls, 
on Tuesday, the 22nd. one blue bull and three cows, and 
on Kam-.shamba (Wednesday), the 23rd, <nie cow, were 
killed. On Mubftrak-^amba, the 24th, a feast of cups 
was held on the bank of the tank of EE&silphr. Gups 
were presented to my son Sh&h Jah&n and some of the 
great Amirs and private servants. On Yushf Kb4n, son 
of Husain KhAn (Tukriyah), who was of the housebom 
ones worthy of patronage, was bestowed the mansab of 
3.000 personal and 1,500 horse, original and increase, 
and he was dismissed to the faujdarship of GondwAna, 
dignifying him with a gift of a dress of honour and an 
elephant. BAy Biharl DAs, the diwan of the Subah of 
the Deccan, had the good fortune to kiss the threshold. 
On IViday JAn-sipAr KbAn was exalted with a standard, 
presented with a horse and a dress of honour, and 
dSspatched to the Deccan. This day I made a remarkable 
shot with a gun. By chance there was inside the palaee 
a kkiml tree (MivMuops Kauki). A (?) came 

* This ia the cum kind of bird that NSr-JakSn is nMUoiMd m having 
•hot Ferlwi{W u green pigeon ie nwent 



S^OOTINa. 


405 


and sat on a high branch, and I saw its breast in the 
midst of it. I fired at it and struck it in the middle 
of its breast ; from where I stood to the top of tlie 
branch was 22 gaz. On Saturday, the 26th, marching 
about 2 kos, I pitched at the village of Kamalpur. On 
this day 1 shot a blue bhll.^ Rustam IQi&n, who was 
one of the principal attendants of my son Sb&h Jaban, 
and who had been appointed from Burhanpur with a body 
of the royal servants against the zamindars of Oondwaiia, 
having taken a tribute Of 110 elephants and 120,000 
rupees, came this day to wait upon me. Zahid, son of 
Shaja'at Shan, was given the tnansab of 1,000 personal 
and 400 horse, original and increase. On Sunday, the 
27th, I hunted with hawks and falcons. On Monday 
I killed a large blue bull and a bukra ; the bull weighed 
12^ maunds. On Tuesday, the 20th, a blue bull was 
killed. BahlQl Miy&na and Allah-yar came from service 
in Qondwana, and had the good fortune to wait upon 
me. Bahlul Kh§.n is the son of lla.san Miyana, and 
Miyana is an Afghan tribe. In the commencement of 
his career Hasan was a servant of S^iq Kb&n, but 
a servant who recognized the king (worthy of a king’s 
service), and was at last included among the royal servants 
and died on service in the £)eccan. After his death his 
sons were granted niansabs. He had eight sons, and two 
of them became famous as swordsmen. The elder brother 
in his youth gave up the deposit of his life. Bahl&l by 
degrees was promoted to the mansab of 1,000. At this 
time my son Sh&h Jahftn arrived at Burhanpur, mid, 
finding him worthy of patronage, made him hopeful with 
a mansab of 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse. As he had 
not yet waited on me and was very desirous to kiss the 
threshold, I summoned him to Court. He is in truth 

^ Text etfe, witboat the additioo of gaw. The M5S. have gor or rAor, 
a phesMBtl?). 



406 


STRANGE BIRTHS IK KASHMIR. 


a good Kjiana-zada (household-born one), inasmuch as his 
heart is adorned with the perfection of bravery and his 
exterior is not wanting in good appearance. The mansab 
my son Shah Jahan had bespoken for him was granted 
at his request, and he was honoured with the title of 
Sar-buland Khan. Allah-yar Koka was also a brave youth 
and a servant worthy of patronage. Finding him fit 
and suitable for service in my presence, I sent .for him 
to Court. On Kam-^amba (Wednesday), the Ist of the 
month of Azar, I went out to hunt and shot a blue 
bull. On this day the Kashmir^ reports were laid before 
me. One was that in the house , of a certain silk-seller 
two girls were bom with teeth, and with their backs as 
far as the waist joined together, but the heads, arms, and 
legs were separate ; they lived a short time and died. On 
Mubarak-^amba, the 2nd, on the bank of a ^nk where 
my tents were, a feast of cups was held. Presenting 
La.^kar Khan with a dress of honour and an elephant, 
1 promoted him to the duty of diwan of the Subah of 
the Deccan, and gave him the mansab of 2,500 personal 
and 1,500 horse, original and increase. To each of the 
Wakils of ‘ Adil Khan two * kaulcab-i-taW (horoscope star) 
niuhrs, the weight of each of which was 500 ordinary 
fiiuhrs, were given. I gave a horse and robe of honour 
to Sar-buland Khan. As fitting service and approved 
activity were manifest in Allah-yar Koka, I honoured 
him with the title of Himmat Khan and gave him a dress 
of honour. On Friday, the 3rd. I marched 4^ kos and 
halted the royal standards in the parganah of Dikhtan.^ 
On Saturday also I marched 4} kos and halted at the 
township of Dhar. 

Dhar i.s one of the old cities, and Raja Bhoj, who was 


* Elliot, vi, 352. 

* The * two ’ ill omitted in text. 

’ In Sarkar Munda (Jarrett, ii, 2n7V Debi Prasud*e Hindi version 
has Daknd. 



ACCOUNT OF DHAB. 


407 


one of the great Rajas of Hindustan, lived in it. From 
his time 1,000^ years have passed, and in the time of 
the Sultans of Malwa it was for a long time the capital. 
At the time when Sultan Muhammad Tughluq was 
proceeding to the conquest of the Deccan, he built a fort 
of cut stone on the top of a ridge. Outside it is very 
showy and handsome, but inside the fort is "devoid 
of buildings. I ordered them to measure its length, 
breadth, and height. The length inside the fort was 
12 tandb, 7 gaz ; the breadth, 17 tanab, 13 gaz, and the 
breadth of the fort wall 19^ gaz. Its height up to the 
battlements appeared to be 17^ gaz. The length of the 
outer circuit (?) of the fort was 55 tanabs. 'Amid Shah 
Ghori, who was called Dilawar Khan, and who in the time 
of Sultan Muliaminad, son of Sultan Firuz, king of Delhi, 
had complete authority over the province of Malwa, built 
the Jami' mosque in the inhabitable part outside the fort, 
and opposite the gate of the mosque fixed a quadrangular 
iron column. When Sul^n Bahadur of Gujarat took 
the province of Malwa into his own possession, he wished 
to transfer this column to Gujarat. The artificers did 
not take proper precautions when they lowered it, and 
it fell and broke into two pieces, one of them of 7^ gaz 
and the other of 4{ gaz. The column was 1 ] gaz round. 
As it was lying there useless, I ordered them to take 
the larger piece to Agra and put ^ it up in the courtyard 
of the mausoleum of 'H.M. Akbar, and to burn a lamp 
on the top of it at night. The aforesaid mosque has two 
gates. In front of the arch of one gate some sentences 
in prose have been carved on a stone tablet ; their purport 
is that Amid Shah Ghori founded this mosque in the 

' The MSS. have ''more than 1,000.” R&ja Bhoj’s elate, aocordiog U> 
Tod, i8 567 a.d. (Jarrett, ii, *211). 

- ThiH iron pillar is not now in existence at the mausoleum of Ax bar 
(Note of Sayyid Alimad). The pieces of the pillar are still lying at 
Dhar. outside the Lftt Muejid (I.G., new ed., xi, *205). 



408 


SHOOTING OF AN ALLIGATOR. 


year 870,^ and on the arch of the other gate a qaslda 
has been written, and these few couplets are from it — 

** The lord of the age the star of the sphere of glory, 

Centre of the people of the earth, sun of the zenith of perfection, 
Asylum and support of religious law, *Am!d ghah Da’ud,* 

In whose excellent qualities Ghor glories, 

Helper and protector of the Faith of the Prophet, Dilawar ICuin, 
Who has been chosen by the most mighty Lord (God), 

Founded the Jami^ mosque in the city of Dhar, 

At a fortunate, auspicious time, on a day of happy omen. 

The date of eight hundred and seven’ had passed 
When the Court of hopes was completed by Fortune.’* 

When Dilawar Khan gave up the deposit of his life 
there was no king with full dominion over Hindustan, 
and it was a time of confusion. Hu^ang, son of Dilawar 
Khan, who was just and possessed of courage, seeing 
his opportunity, sat on the throne of sovereignty in 
Malwa. After his death through destiny the rule was 
transferred * to Mahmud Khalji» son of Khan Jahan, who 
had been V^izier to Hushang and passed from him to 
his son Ghiyasu-d-din, and after him to Nasiru>d-din, 
son of Ghiyaau-d-din, who gave his father poison and 
sat on the throne of infamy. From him it passed to 
his son Mahmud. SuIlAn Bahadur of Gujarat took from 
Mahmud the province of Malwa. The succession of kings 
of Malwa ended with the aforesaid Mahmud. 

On Monday, the 6th, I went to hunt and shot a female 
nilgaw. Presenting an elephant to Mirza Sharafu-d-din 
Husain Kashghari. I dismissed him to duty in the Subah 
of Bangash. A present of a jewelled dagger, a muhr 
of 100 tolas, and 20,000 darbs was made to Uda Ham. 
On Tuesday, the 7th, I shot an alligator in the tank at 
Dhar. Though only the top of his snout was visible 
and the rest of his body was hidden in the water, I fired 

' The MSS. have 807, and this ia correct, for Dilawsir coiKpicred Malwa 
in 803 := 1400 

** Probably this means that *Amid was the .son of lla'Od. 

Text 70, but should be 7. 807 1405. 

* Aeon of HOshang Muhammad gbAb, intervened. 



^AH JAHAN GIVEN AN ANCESTRAL RUBY. 409 

at a guess and hit him in his lungs and killed him with 
a single shot. An alligator is of the crocodile species 
and exists in mobt of the rivers of Hindustan, and grows 
very large. This one was not so very big. An alligator 
has been seen (by me) 8 gaz long and 1 gaz in 
breadth. On Sunday, marching 4^ kos, I halted at 
Sa'dalpur. In this village there is a stream over which 
N&siru-d-din Khalji built a bridge and erected buildings. 
It is a place like Kaliyada, and both are his works. 
Although his building is not worthy of praise, yet as it 
has been built in the river-bed and they have made 
rivulets and reservoirs, it is somewhat remarkable. At 
night I ordered them to place lamps all round the canals 
and streams. On Mubarak-shamba (Thursday), the 9th, 
a feast of cups was held. On this day 1 made a present 
to my son Shah Jahaii of a ruby of one colouf, weighing 
9 tanks and 5 surkh, of the value of 125,000 rupees, 
with two pearls. This is the ruby which had heen given 
to my father at the time of my birth by Hazrat Maryam - 
makani, mother of H.M. Akbar, by way of present when 
my face was shown, and was for many years in his 
saijiick (turban ornament). After him I also happily 
wore it in my sarpich. Apart from its value and delicacy, 
as it had come down as of auspicious augury to the 
everlasting State, it wa.s bestowed on my son. Having 
raised Mubariz Khan to a mansab of 1,500 personal and 
horse, I appointed him to the faujdai-ship of the province 
of Mew&t, distinguishing him with the present of a dress 
of honour, a swoid, and an elephant. A sword was given 
to Hiiiunat Khan, son of Rustam Khan. I gave Kainal 
Kh&n, the huntsman, who is one of the old servants 
and is always present with me on hunting expeditions, 
the title of Shikar KhAn (hunting-Khan). Appointing 
tJda RAm to service in the Subah of the Deccan, I conferred 
on him a dress of honour, an elephant, and Iracj horses 
(lit. wind - footed ones), and sent with him for the 



410 


BUILDING OF WAYSIDE WELLS. 


Qommander-in-Chief, Khankhanan, the Ataliq, a special 
gilt dagger {zar-niMhdn). On Friday, the 10th, I halted. 
On Saturday, the 11th, I marched 3f kos and halted 
at the village of Halwat.^ On Sunday, the 12th, marching 
5 kos, I halted in . . the parganah ^ of Badnor. This 
parganah from the time of my father had been in the 
jagir of Kesho Das Maru,^ and in fact had become a kind 
of waUin (native country) to him. He had constructed 
gardens and buildings. Out of these one was a well 
(bdoli) (step-well probably) on the road, which appeared 
exceedingly pleasant and well made. It occurred to me 
that if a well had to be made anywhere on a roadside 
it should be built like this one. At least two such 
ought to be made. 

On Monday, the 13th, I went to hunt and shot a blue 
bull. From the day on which the elephant Nur-bakht 
was put mto the special elephant stables, there was an 
order that he should be tied up in the public palace 
(court). Among animals elephants have the greatest 
liking for water ; they delight to go into the water, not- 
withstanding the winter and the coldness of the air, and 
if there should be no water into which they can go, they 
will take it from a water-hmg {maMc) with their trunks 
and pour it over their bodie.s. It occurred to me that 
however much an elephant delights in water, and it 
is suited to their temperament, yet in the winter the 
cold water must affect them. I accordingly ordered the 
water to be made lukewarm (as* warm as milk) before 
they (the elephants) poured it into their trunks. On other 
days when they poured cold water over themselves they 
evidently shivered, but with warm water, on the contrary 
tliey were delighted. This usage is entirely my own. 


' The MSS. have Jalot (aa in the Hindi version). 

■ Text, “ the parganah aforesaid.'" But the MSS. have Badnor. See 
irtfra^ p. 204 of text. (In this passage the Hindi version has Madtor.) 

^ Blovhinunii, p. oU2. 



MARCHES. 


411 


On Tuesday, the 14th, marching 6 kos, I halted at 
Silgarh (Sabalgarh ?). On Wednesday, the 15th, crossing 
the Mahi River, a halt was made near Ramgarh. A march 
of 6 kos was made on Thursday, the 16th, and a halt was 
made and a feast of cups held at a waterfall near the 
camp. Distinguishing SAr-buland Khan with a standard 
and giving him an elephant, I iiisniissed him to do duty 
in the Deccan. His mansab, original and increase, was 
fixed at 1,500 personal and l,2Q0""horse. Raja Bhim 
Narayan, Zamindar of Gadeha, who had been promoted to 
the mansab of 1,000 horse, obtained leave to go to his 
jagir. Having raised Raja Bharjiv, Zamindar of Baglana, 
to the mansab of 4,000, 1 gave him leave to go to his 
native country, and an order was given that when he 
arrived there he should send to Court his eldest son, who 
was his successor, that he might do duty m my presence. 
1 honoured Haji Baluch, who was the chief of the hunts* 
men and was an active and old servant, with the title of 
Baluch Khan. On Friday, the 17th, marching 5 kos, 
T alighted at the village of Dliavala. On Saturday, the 
18th, which was the fea.st of Qurban, after the Qurban 
rites had been performed, marching kos, I halted on 
the bank of the tank of the village of Nagor.' On 
Sunday, the 19th, marching about 5' kos, the royal 
standanls were erected on the bank of' the tank of the 
village of Sainriya. On Monday, the 20th, inaiching 
4i kos, we alighted at the chief place of the Dohad - 
parganah. This parganah is on the boundary l^etween 
Malwa and Gujarat. Until I passed Badnor the whole 
country was a jungle, with an abundance of trees and 
stony land. On Tuesday, the 21st, I halted. On Kani- 
shaiiiba (Wednesday), the 22nd, marching 5^ kos, I halted 
at the village of Ranyad (Renav ?). On Thursday, the 
28rd. I halted and held a feast of cups on the bank of 

» MSS. Bukor. 

" DakOt in MSS. But Dohad 8eem]i right, as it means two boundaries 



412 


CARNATIC JUGGLERS. LOTUS FLOWERS. 


the village tank. On Friday, the 24th, marching 2} kos, 
the royal standards were hoisted at the village of Jalot. 
At this halt some jugglers from the Carnatic came and 
showed their tricks. One of them placed one end of an 
iron chain, .5J gaz in length and weighing 1 seer and 
2 dams,^ in his throat and slowly swallowed it with the 
aid of water. It was for a while in his stomach ; after 
this he brought it up. On Saturday, the 25th, there was 
a halt. On Sunday, the 26th, marching 5 kos, I alighted 
at the village of Nimdah. On Monday, the 27th, also 
marching 5 kos, I pitched on the bank of a tank. On 
Tuesday, the 28th, marching 3J kos, the royal standards 
alighted near the township of Sahra® on the edge of 
a tank. The flower of the lotus, which in the Hindi 
language they call kumudini, is of three colours — white, 
blue, and red. I had already seen the blue and white, 
but had never seen the red. In this tank red flowers were 
seen blooming. Without doubt it is an exquisite- and 
delightful flower, as they have said — 

*‘From redness and moistness H melt away.**’- 
The flower of the kanwal^ is larger than the kumudini. 
Its flower is red. I have seen in Kashmir many kanwal 
with a- hundred leaves (petals). It is certain that it 
opens during the day and becomes a bud at night. The 
kumudini, on the contrary, is a bud during the day 
and opens at night. The black bee, which the people 
of India call bhaunrd, always sits on these flowers, and 
goes inside them to drink the juice that is in both of 
them. It often happens that the kanwal flower closes and 

* The datn was also used as a weight, and w’as equal to 5 fdnk or 1 tola, 
8 moifha, 7 Mirkh (Blochmann, p. 31). 

“ Apparently Sahra is the name of a town, and does not mean an o|)eii 
space here. 

Perhufis the line refers to the bee, and means that the bee wishes to 
suck the moisture of the flower. 

* The MSS. have gul i kOl, * the flower of the tank.’ It seems to bo 
a water-lily. 



TAN SEN KALSWANT. 


413 


the bee remains in it the whole night. In the same 
manner it remains in the kumudini flower. When the 
flower opens it comes out and flies away. As the black 
bee is a constant attendant on these flowers, the poets 
of India look on it as a lover of the flower, like the 
nightingale, and have put into verse sublime descriptions 
of it. Of these poets the chief was Tan Sen Kalawant, 
who was without a rival in my father’s service (in fact, 
there has been no singer like him in any time or age). 
In one of his compositions he has likened the face of 
a young man to the sun and the opening of his eyes 
to the expanding of the kanwal and the exit of the bee. 
In another place he has compared the side-glance of the 
beloved one to the motion of the kanwal when the bee 
alights on it. 

At this place figs airived from Ahmadabad. Although 
the tigs of Burhanpur are sweet and well-grown, these 
tigs are sweeter and with fewer seeds, and one may call 
them 5 per cent, better. On Kam-^amba, the 29th, 
and Mubarak-^amba, the SOth, we halted. At this stage 
Sar-faraz Khan came from Ahmadabad and had the good 
fortune to kiss the threshold. Out of his offerings 
aixisary of pearls, bought for 11,000 rupees, tw’o elephants, 
two horses, two bullocks and a riding cart, and some 
pieces of Gujarati cloth, were accepted, and the remainder 
presented to him. Sar-farAz Khan is a grandson of 
Mus&bib Beg, by which name he was called by Akbar 
after his grandfather, who was one of the Arnirs of 
HumAyun. In the beginning of my reign I increased 
his mansab and appointed him to the Subah of Gujarat. 
As he had an hereditary connection with the Court as 
a Khana-zada (one born in the house), he proved himself 
efficient in the Subah of Gujarat. Considering him 
worthy of patronage, I gave him the title of Sar-farAz 
Kb&n and raised him in the world, and his mansab has 
risen to 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse. On Friday, 



414 FISH. PARGANAH BOHAR. 

the Ist of Day, I marched 3| kos and halted on the bank 
of the tank of Jhasod> At this stage RAy M&n, captain 
of the Khidmatiya,^ caught a rohfi fish and brought it. 
As I am particularly partial to the flesh of fish, especially 
that of the rohu, which is the best kind of fish in 
Hindustan, and I had never, notwithstanding much enquiry, 
had one for eleven months from the time of crossing the 
pass of Ghatl Chand^ until the present time, and now 
obtained it, I was greatly delighted. I presented a horse 
to Ray Man. Although the parganah of Dohad is reckoned 
as within the boundary of Gujarat, yet, in fact, it was 
from this stage that all things appeared different. The 
open plains and soil are of a different kind ; the people 
are difierent and the language of another description. 
The jungle that appeared on the road has fruit-bearing 
trees, such as the mango and khiml and tamarind, and 
the method of guarding the cultivated fields is with hedges 
of zaqqam. The cultivators separate their fields with 
cactus, and leave a narrow road between them for coming 
and going. Since all this country has a sandy soil, when 
any movement takes place, so much dust rises that the 
faces of people are seen with difficulty, so that one should 
call Ahmadabad *Gardab&d’^ (abode of dust). On Saturday, 
the 2nd, having marched 3f kos, I encamped on the bank 
of the Mahi. On Sunday, the 3rd, again after a march 
of kos, I halted at the village of Bardala. At this 
stage a number of mansabdars who had been appointed 
to serve in Gujarat had the good fortune to kiss the 
threshold. Marching 5 kos on Monday, the 4th, the royal 

' Query ** the tank of Yasod&,” the foster-mother of Krishna ? 

‘ Blochmann, p. 23*2. 

* Jali&DgIr crossed the Oh&t! Chand or Chind, between Ajmere and 
Malwa, in the 1 1th year (see p. 172), but he does not speak of having had 
any rohu fish there. Perhaps the reference is to his halt at RSmsar 
shortly before coming to Ohftti Chand. He jgot 104 rohu at Rftmsar. 
See p. 169. 

« Elliot, Vi, 353. 



ACCOUNT OF CAMBAY. 


415 


standards halted at Chitrasima, and the next day, Tuesday, 
after a march of 5 kos, in parganah Monda.^ On this 
day three blue bulls were killed; one was larger than 
the others and weighed 13 maunds and 10 seers. On 
Wednesday, the 6th, I marched 6 kos and halted in 
parganah Naryad.^ In passing through the town 1 
scattered 1,600 rupees. On Thursday, the 7th, marching 
6^ kos, I halted in the parganah of Pitlad.^ In the 
country of Gujarat there is no larger parganah than 
this ; it has a revenue of 700,000 rupees, equal to 23,000 
current tumans of Iraq. The population of the town 
(qo^fra), too, is dense. Whilst I passed through it I scattered 
1,000 rupees. All my mind is bent upon this, that under 
any pretext the people of God may be benefited. As 
the chief way of riding among the people of this country 
is in carts, I also wished to travel in a cart. I sat for 
2 kos in a cart, but was much troubled with the dust, 
and after this till the end of the stage rode on horseback. 
On the road Muqarrab IGi&n came from Ahmadabad, and 
had the good fortune to wait on me, and presented an 
offering of a pearl he had bought for 30,000 rupees. On 
Friday, the 8th, marching 6^ kos, the place of the descent 
of prosperity was on the shore of the salt sea. 

Cambay^ is one of the old ports. According to the 
brahmins, several thousand years have passed since its 
foundation. In the beginning its name was Trimbawati> 
and Raja Tryambak Kunwar had the government of the 
country. It would take too long to write in detail the 
circumstances of the aforesaid Raja as the brahmins relate 
it. In brief, when the turn to the government came round 

^ Mondah of Jarrett, li, 253. 

' Text NUao. No such parganah is mentioned in the Ajin ; the two 
I.O. MSS. have Naryid. 

* Pitliid is mentioned in Bayley’s Gujarat, p. 9, as having a very large 
revenue. It is the Fatlid of Jarrett, ii, 253. Text wrongly has Niliib. 
Possibly Bhil is the parganah meant. 

« Elliot, vi, 353. 



416 


ACCOUNT OF CAMBAY. 


to R&ja Abhay Kuinar>^ who was one of his grandsons^ 
by the decree of heaven a great calamity happened to 
this city. So much dust and earth were poured on it 
that all the houses and buildings were hidden, and 
the means of livelihood of many people was destroyed. 
Before the arrival of this calamity, an idol {hut), which 
the Raja worshipped, came in a dream and announced this 
event. The Raja with his family embarked in a ship, 
and carried away the idol with them with a pillar it had 
behind it for a support. By chance the ship also wa^: 
wrecked by a storm of misfortune. As there was left 
still a tenn of life for the Raja, that pillar bore the boat 
of his existence in safety to the shore, and he proposed 
to rebuild the city. He put up the pillar as a mark of 
repopulation and the coming together of the people. As in 
the Hindi language they call a pillar istcimbh and khambh, 
they called the city Istambhnagari and KhambAwati, and 
sometimes also Trimbawatl, in connection with the Raja*s 
name ; KhambAwati has by degrees and much use become 
Khambayat (Cambay). This port is one of the largest 
ports '^ in Hindustan and is near a lirth, which is one of 
the hrths of the Sea of Oman. It has been estimated 
to be 7 kos in width, and nearly 40 kos in length. 
Ships cannot come inside the firth, but must cast anchor 
in the port of OogA, which is a dependency ^ of Cambay 
and situated near the sea. Thence, putting their cargoes 
into ghurdba ^ (commonly called * grabs ’) they bring them 
to the port of Cambay. In the same way, at the time 
of loading a ship they carry the cargo in ghurabs and put 
it in the ships. Before the arrival of the victorious host 
some ghurabs from European porta had come to Cambay 
to buy and sell, a;nd were about to return. On Sunday, 

^ The 1.0. MSS. have Abhay or Abhl K&r. 

> Tiofenthaler, i, p. SSO, etc., has an iiiteresUiig notioe of OamlMi,y. 
He aim gives a eketch of its bay (plate xxaii). 

’ Now m silted up that no tolerably large venel cen approach it. 

* Abu-l-fivl calls them Idioari (Jarrett, ii, 211). 



ACCOUMT or CAMBAY. 


417 


the 10th, they decorated tiiem aod showed them to me. 
Taking leave they went abonif their bosiness. On Monday, 
the 11th, I myself went on board a ghorab for about 
a kos (H) the &ce of the water. On Tuesday, the^^2th, 
I went out with cheetahs (y^), and captured two* antdope. 
On Wednesday, the 13th, I went to see the tank of 
T&rangsar (NarangBar?),*and passed through the streets and 
bazaar on the way, scattering nearly 5,000 rupees. In the 
time of H.M. Akbar (may Allah’s lights be his testimony), 
Ealyin fifty, the superintendent of the port, by His 
Majesty’s order built a wall of brick and cement round 
the city, and many merchants came from various quarters 
and settled there, and built fine houses and employed 
themselves ip gaining their livelihood under easy circum- 
stances. Although its market is small, it is dean uid 
full of people. In the time of the Sultans of Qujarat 
the customs of this port came to a large sum. ^fow in 
my reign it is ordered that they should not take more 
than one in forty. In other ports, calling it a tithe, they 
take one in ten or one in eight, and give all kinds of 
trouble to merchants and travellers. In Jeddah, which is 
the port of Mecca, they take one in four or even more. 
One may imagine from this what tiie customs of the ports 
of Gujarat must have come to in the time of the former 
rulers. God be praised that this suppliant at the thrcme 
of God obtained the grace to remit the whole of the 
customs dues of his dominions, which came to a countless 
sum, and the very naipe.of customs has passed 

away from my empire. At this time an <»rder was given 
that tankas* of gold and diver should be coined twice 
the wei^t of ordinary muhrs and rupees. The legend 

> 1.0. MSa have ‘ten.' 

* Tit Wmmg. FoMibly tbrwtt ■honM lead twrorng (wsfee)^ and the 
meaning be that JahSn^ want to sae the famoos boM in the Gnlf of 
Oamhajr. 

* Seo BUot, vi, SS5, and note. 



il8 


M£W conrjLOE. 


on the gold coin was on one side the words “ Jahfinj^r- 
^&hi, 1027 " (1618), and on the reverse “ Struck in 
Cambay in the 12th year of the reign.” The legend for 
silver coins was on one side “ Sikka, Jah&ngir-iJi&hi, 1027 
round it this hemistich, “ King Jahftnglr of the conquering 
ray struck this " ; and on the reverse, ” Coined at Cambay 
in the 12th year of the rmgn,” with this second hemistich 
round it — 

** When alter the conquest of the Deccan he come to Gujarat from 
M&nda.” 

In no reign except, mine have tankas been coined except 
of copper ^ ; the gold and silver tankas are my invention. 
I ordered it to be called the Jah&n^rl coinage. On 
Mub&rak-^amba (Thursday), the 14th the offering of 
Amanat Kb&n, the superintendent {mvia^addi) ot Cambay, 
was laid before me in the women’s apartments. His 
mansab was fixed, original and increase, at 1,500 personal 
and 400 horse. Nuru-a*din Quli was honoured with the 
mansab, original and increase, of 3,000 personal and 600 
horse. On Friday, the 15th, mounted on the elephant 
Nur-bakht, 1 made it run after a horse. It ran exceedingly 
well, and when it was stopped stood well. This is the 
third time that I myself have ridden it. On Saturday, the 
16th, Ram Das, son of Jay Singh, was promoted to the 
mansab, original and increase, of 1,500 personal and 700 
horse. On Sunday, the 17th, an elephant each was given 
to Dar&b Khan, Amanat Sh&n, and Sayyid B&yazid Barha. 
In these few days during which I was encamped on the 
shore of the salt sea, merchants, traders, indigent people, 
and other inhabitants of the port of Cambay having been 
summoned before me, I gave each according to his condition 
a dress of honour or a horse or travelling money or assistance 

' In the text occurs by mistake instead of ‘oAcft, and man 
instead of smm. 

* Wrongly so in text, but Jay Singh should be oorrected to Singh. 
The son of Jay Singh, Raja of Ajmir, was Rom Singh, who was born in 
Sambati ISOS. 



FISH AND TEaETABLES. 


419 


in living. On this day, Sayyid Muhammad, S&hib SajjAda 
(Lord of the prayer carpet) of Sh&h *Alam (a mosque 
near Ahmadabad), the sons of Shaikh Muhammad Ghaus. 
Shaikh Haidar, grandson of Miyan Wajihu-d>din, and 
other {Shaikhs living at Ahmadabad came to meet me 
and pay their respects. As my desire was to see the 
sea and tljLe flow and ebb of the water, I halted for ten 
days, and on^Tuesday, the 19th (Day, about 30th December. 
1618), the royal standards started for Ahmadabad. The 
best description of fish procurable in this place, the name 
of which is *aH>lyat} was caught and frequently brought 
for me by the fishermen. Without doubt these fish are, 
as compared with other fish of this country, more delicious 
and better, but they are not of the flavour of the rohn. 
One might say as nine to ten or even eight to ten. Of 
the food which is peculiar to the people of Gujarat there 
is the kliichH of hajrd, (a mixture of split peas and 
millet boiled together) ; this they also call laziza. It 
is a kind of split giain, which does not grow in any 
other country but Hindustan, and which in comparison 
with many other regions of India is more abundant in 
Gujarat; it is cheaper than most vegetables. As I had 
never eaten it, I ordered them to make some and bring 
it to me. It is not devoid of good flavour, and it suited 
me well. I ordered that on the days of abstinence, when 
I partake of dishes not made with flesh, they should 
frequently bring me this khichri On the said Tuesday 
having marched 6^ kos, I halted at the village of 
Eos&lA. On Wednesday, the 20th, I passed through 
the parganah of B&br&* and halted on the bank of 
the river. This was a march of 6 kos. On Mub&rak- 
shamba, the 2l8t, 1 halted and held a feast of cups. 
In this river I caught many fish, and divided them 
among the servants who were present at the feast. On 
Friday, the 22nd, having moved on 4 kos, I pitched at 
^ Or (AhOmmi ?). * MfcUr or NAtor io LO. MSS. 



420 


BESTS FOB F0BTBB8. FAMOUS TANK. 


the village of B&rich&. On this road, walls came in sight 
from to 3 gaa in length, and on enquiry it appeared 
that people had made them from the desire of spiritual 
reward. When a porter is tired on the road he places 
his burden on the wall and gains his breath a little, and 
lifting it up again with ease and without assistance from 
anyone proceeds towards his destination. This is one of 
the peculiar ideas of the people of Gujarat. The building 
of these walls pleased me greatly, and I ordered that in 
all large towns ^ they should make walls of this kind at 
the imperial expense. On Saturday, the 23rd; marching 
4^ kos, the camp was pitched at the K&nkriya tank. 
Qutbu-d-din Muhammad, grandson of Sultan Ahmad, the 
founder of the city of Ahmadabad, made this tank, and 
placed ix>und it steps of stone and cement. In the 
middle of the tank he constructed a little garden and 
some buildings. Between the bank of the tank and 
these buildings he had made a causeway, which was the 
way for entering and leaving. Since this occurred a long 
time ago, most of the buildings had become dilapidated, 
and there was no place left fit to sit in. At the time 
when the host of prosperity was about to proceed towards 
Ahmadabad, Safi £han, bakhshi of Gujarat, repaired at 
the expense of government what was broken down and 
in ruins, and clearing out the little garden erected a 
new building in it. Certainly it is a place exceedingly 
enjoyable and pleasant. * Its style pleased me. On the 
side where the causeway is, Ni^mu-d-din Ahmad,* who 
was for a while bakhshi of Gujarat in my father’s time, 
had made a garden on the bank of the tank. At this 
time a representation was made to me that ‘Abdu-llah 
I^an, in consequence of a dispute that he had with 
'Abid, son of Ni^mu-d-din Ahmad, cut down the trees 
of this garden. I also heard that during his government 

^ 1.0. MS. 181 hos ** in nil the cities of Upper Indie.” 

* The historian. 



▲OOOUNT OF ▲ RAISINO OF THE BEAD. 


421 


he, at a wine party, signed to a slave, and cut off the 
head of an unfortunate man who was not wanting in 
fun and jesting, merely because in a state of drunkenness 
he had uttered some improper expressions by way of 
a joke. On hearing these two reports, my sense of justice 
was shocked, and I ordered the Diwans to change one 
thousand of his two^horsed and three-horsed cavalry into 
one-horsed, and to deduct from his jagir the difference (of 
pay), which came to 7,000,000 dams * 

As at this stage the tomb of Sbf^h 'Alam was by the 
roadside, I recited the fdtikd in passing by it. About 
100,000 rupees had been spent in building this mausoleum. 
Shfth ‘Alam was the son of Qutb *Alam, and their family 
goes back to MaUidOm-i- Jah&niy&n ^ (a saint). The people 
of this country, high and low, have a wonderful belief 
in him, and they say that Sh&h ^Alam used to raise the 
dead. After he had raised several dead men, his father 
became aware of this and sent him a prohibition, saying 
it was presumption in him to meddle with the workshop 
of Qod, and was contrary to true obedience. It happened 
that Sh&h ‘Alam liad an attendant (female) who had. no 
cnildren, but at Sh&h 'Alam’s prayer Ood Almighty 
bestowed a son on her. When he reached his 27th^ year 
he died, and that slave came weeping and wailing into 
his presence, saying, “ My son has died, and he was my 
only son ; since Qod Almighty gave him to me by your 
favour, I am hopeful that through your prayer he may 
become alive.” Sh&h *Alam fell into thought for a time 
and went into his cell, and the attendant went to his 
son, who greatly loved her, and besought him to ask 
the Shah to make his son alive. The son, who was of 
tender years, went into his cell, and used much entreaty. 

* A saint of Maltan who died in 1384. See Beale, s. v. Shaikh Jaldi, 
and Jarrett, iii, 369. 

* So in text, but surely it should be “ 8th or 7th ** ? It appears from 
the miaslnatu-l-a^fiyS, ii, 71, that the attendant who lost the child was 
a female disciple, and that the child was young. 



422 


ACCOUNT OF HIBACLE CONTINUED. 


Sb&h 'Alam said, *'If you are content to give up your 
life for him, perhaps my petition may be accepted/’ 
He represented I am perfectly contented with what may 
be your wish and the desire of Qod.” Shah ‘Alam took 
his son's hands, and lifting him up from the ground 
turned his face towards heaven and said, ** O God, take 
this kid in place of that one.” Instantaneously the boy 
surrendered his soul to Qod, and Shah ‘Alam laid him 
down on his own bed and covered his face with a sheet, 
and coming out of the house said to that attendant, ** Go 
homA and get news of thy son ; perhaps he may have 
been in a trance and not have died.” When she arrived 
at her house she saw her son alive. In short, in the 
country of Gujarat they say many things of this sort of 
Shah *Alam. I myself asked Sayyid Muhammad, who 
is lord of his prayer carpet (in charge of the mausoleum), 
and who is not wanting in excellence and reasonableness, 
what was the real state of the case. He said, I have 
also heard the same from my father and grandfather, 
and it has come down in succession, and wisdom is from 
Allah.” Although this affair is beyond the laws of 
understanding, yet, as it has attained great notoriety 
among men, it has been recorded as a strangef occurrence. 
His departure from this perishable mansion to the eternal 
world took place in 880 (1476), in the time of the reign 
of Sultan Mahmtid Bigara, and the buildings of this 
mausoleum are the memorial of T&j Khfa Tariyftni,^ who 
was one of the Amirs of Sult&n Muzaffar, the son of 
Mahmud. 

As an hour on Monday had been chosen for my entry 
into the city, on Sunday, the 24th, I halted. At this 
place some melons came from K&riz, which is a town 
dependent on Herat, and it is certain that in Khurasan 
there are no melons better tlian those of Karia. Although 

* According to Boyley’s Gujarat, p. 238, and Index, p. 515, tho name 
.U eitlier T4j Kbin TOrpSli or NarpUi. 



MELONS, elephants’ TUSKS. 


423 


this is at a distance of 1,400 kos, and kafilahs (caravans) 
take five months to come, they arrived very ripe and 
fresh. They brought so many that they sufficed for all 
the servants. Together with these there came oranges 
(kamsia) from Bengal, and though that place is 1,000 
kos distant most of them arrived quite fresh. As this 
is a very delicate and pleasant fruit, runners bring by 
post as much as is necessary for private consumption, 
and pass it from hand to hand. My tongue fails me in 
giving thanks to Allah for this. 

** Thankfulness for Thy favours is one of Thy favours.** 

On this day Am&nat Kh&n presented two elephants’ tusks ; 
they were very large, one of them being 3 cubits 8 tq^a 
(finger-breadths) in length and 16 tassu in circumference; 
it weighed 3 maunds and 2 seers, or 24^ Iraq maunds. 
On Monday, the 25th, after six gharis, I turned towards 
the city in pleasure and prosperity at the propitious 
hour, and mounted the elephant ^urat-gaj, a favourite 
elephant of mine, which is perfect in appearance and 
disposition. Although he was fractious (mcuit), I had 
confidence in my own riding and his pleasant paces (?).^ 
Crowds of people, men and. women, had assembled, and 
were waiting in the streets and bazars and at the gates 
and the walls. The city of Ahmadabad did not seem to 
me so worthy of praise as 1 had heard. Although they 
had made the main road of the bazar wide and spacious 
they had not suited the shops to this breadth. Its 
buildings are all of wood and the pillars of the shops 
slender and mean (zabUn), The streets of the* bazar 
were full of dust, and there was dust from the Kankriya 
tank up to the citadel, which in the dialect of the 
country they call Bhadar. I hastened along scattering 

* SawtlrUi-kh&d h ** my own riding and his pleasant 

paces (?).** It does not seem likely that Jah&ngir would himself drive the 
elephant. The meaning here probably is that .lah&ngir trusted to his 
being on the elephant. Kh9c\i>^h-Jaiu is used lower down about another 
elephant, and seems to refer to the elephant's paces. See p. 214. 



424 AHMADABAB. WEIGHING OF ffllH JAHAN. 

money. The meaning of Bhadar is 'blessed’ (bhadfu). The 
houses of the Sultans of Gujarat, which were inside the 
Bhadar, have fallen into ruin within the last fifty or 
sixty years, and no trace of them is left. However, our 
servants who have been sent to the government of this 
country have erected buildings. When 1 was proceeding 
from MandQ to Ahmadabad, Muqarrab Sh&o had done 
up the old buildings and prepared other places for sitting 
that were necessary, such as a jharokha, a public audience 
hall, etc. As to-day was the auspicious day for the 
weighing of my son gh&h Jah&n, I weighed him in the 
usual manner against gold and other things, and the 27th 
year from his blessed birth began in pleasure and enjoy- 
ment. I hope that the Giver of gifts will bestow him 
on this suppliant at His throne and let him enjoy life 
and prosperity. On the same day I gave the province 
of Gujarat in jagir to that son. From the fort of M&ndli 
to the fort of Cambay, by the road we came, it is 124 
kos, which were traverse in twenty-eight marches and 
thirty halts. I remained at Cambay for ten days ; from 
that place to the city of Ahmadabad is 21 kos, which we 
traversed in five marches with two halts. Altogether, 
from M&ndu to Cambay and from Cambay to Ahmadabad 
by the road we came is 145 kos, which we accomplished in 
two months and fifteen days; this was in thirty-three 
marches and forty-two halts. 

On Tuesday, the 26th, I went to see the J&mi* mosque, 
and gave with my own hand in alms to the fakirs who 
were present there about 500 rupees. This mosque was 
one of the memorials of Sultftn Ahmad, the founder of 
the city of Ahmadabad. It has three gates,^ and on each 
side a bazar. Opposite the gate that looks towards the 
east is the mausoleum of the said Sultan Ahmad. In 
that dome Sultan Ahmad, his son Muhammad, and his 

. * Or doom. The IqbAl-ntaa, 108, has in front of anch gnto tboro io 



AHIIADABAI) MOSQtni. 


425 


grandson Qutbu-d-din are Udd to rest. The length of 
the court of the mosque, excluding maq^O/ra (the holy 
of holies), is 103^ cubits, and its breadth 89 .cubits. 
Bound this they have made an ayw&n (portico), in 
Ineadth 4f cubits. The flooring of the court is of 
trimmed bricks, and the pillars of the portico of red stone. 
The maqsura contains 354 * pillars, above which there is 
a dome. The length of the maqsura is 75 cubits, and 
its breadth 37 cubits. The flooring of the maqsura, the 
mihrSb (arch towards which the face is turned in prayer), 
and the pulpit are made of marble. On both sides of 
the main arch are two polished minarets of cut 

stone, contedning three &akya/na (stories) beautifully 
shaped and (decorated. On the right-hand side of the 
pulpit near the recess of the maqsura they have made 
a separate seat for the king. The space between the 
pillars has been covered in vrith a stone platform, and 
round this up to the roof of the maqsura they have put 
stone cages* (in which women sit so as not to be seen). 
The object of this was that when the king came to the 
Friday service or the ‘Id he went up there with his 
intimates and courtiers, and performed his devotions. 
This in the dialect of the country they call the MulOk-kh&na 
(King’s chamber). This practice and caution were on 
account of the crowding of the pe<q>le. Truly this mosque 
is a very noble building.* 

On Wednesday,* the 27th, I went to the monastery of 
gl^ilch Wajihu-d-din, which was near the palace, and 
the fSU^ia was read at the head of his shrine, which is 
an the court of the' mmiastery. 9&diq who was 

one of the chief Amirs of my father, built this monastery. 

‘ 123 io Iqb&l-ntauL 

* 3fl0 in I.O. MSS. 

* Pan^ara-i-Mng, presunmbly UttiiTe'Work in stone. 

* See for dimensions of the mosQue Bayley’s Qnjaimt, p. 92 and note, 
and the authorities there quoted. 

* Text wrongly has Sunday. 



426 


017JABAT SAINTS. 


The Shaikh was a successor of Shaikh Muhammad ^bAus,^ 
but a successor against whom the teacher disputed. 
Wajihu-d-din’s loyalty to him is a clear proofs of the 
greatness of ghaiMi Muhammad Qhaus. Shaikh Wajihu-d> 
din was adorned with visible excellencies and spiritual 
perfection. He died thirty years ago in this city 
(Ahmadabad), and after him Shaikh 'Abdu-llah, according* 
to his father’s will, took his place. He was a very 
ascetic dervish. When he died his son Sh aikh Aaadu-llah 
sat in his place, and also quickly went to the eternal 
world. After him his brother Shaikh Haidar became lord 
of the prayer carpet, and is now alive, and is employed 
at the grave of his father and grandfather in the service 
of dervishes and in looking after their welfare. The traces 
of piety are evident on the forehead of his life. As it was 
the anniversary festival of SbaiUl Wajihu-d-din, 1,500 
rupees were given to ghaiUi Haidar for tho. expenses of 
the anniversary, and I bestowed 1,500 rupees more on the 
band of fakirs who were present in the monastery, with 
my own hand in charity, and made a present of 500 
rupees to the grandson (?) of Shaikh Wajihu-d-din. In the 
same way 1 gave something for expenses, and land to 
each of his relatives and adherents according to his 
merit. I ordered Shail^ Haidar to bring before me 
the body of dervishes and deserving people who were 
associated with him, in order that they might ask 
for money for expenses and for land. On Thursday, 
the 28th, I went to look round the Rustam -Sh&n- 
b&n, and scattered 1,500 rupees on the road. They 
call a garden a bdri in the language of India. This is 

* Muhammad was accused of heresy by some of the GujaiAti 

mullas. He was much respected by Hum&yCn, and is buried at Gwalior. 

* Jahangir means that WajIhu-d-dIn was a very learned man, and that 
his devotion to Muhammad Ghaus, who was an ignorant man (ttmmi), 
shows what a great personality the latter was. Of. IqbAl-n&ma, 169, and 
Ma’S^iruJ-umaril, ii, 683, where we are told that Wajihu-d-din thanked 
God that both his Prophet and his Hr were ignorant. 



81XANDAR THE AUTHOR. RAJA OF lOAR. 427 


a garden that my biuther Shah Mur&d made in the name 
of his son Rustam. I made a Thursday entertainment 
in this garden, and gave cups to some of my private 
servants. At the end of the day I went to the little 
garden of the iawHl (mansion) of Shaikh Sikandar, 
which is situated in the neighbourhood of this garden, 
and which has exceedingly good figs. As picking the 
fruit with one’s own hand gives it quite a different relish, 
and I had never before plucked figs with my own hand, 
their excellence in this respect was approved. Shaikh 
Sikandar^ is by origin a Gujarati, and is not wanting 
in reasonableness, and has complete infonnation about the 
Sultans of Gujarat. It is now eight or nine years since 
he has been employed among the servants (of the State). 
As my son Shah Jah&n had appointed to the government 
of Ahmadabad Rustam Kh^i who is one of his chief 
ofiicera, at his request I, in accordance with the association 
of his name, presented him with (the garden) Rustam- 
b&n. On this day R&ja EalyAn, zamindar of the province 
of l<iiar, had the good fortune to kiss my threshold, and 
presented an elephant and nine horses as an offering; 
I gave him back the elephant. He is one of the most 
considerable zamindars on the frontier of Gujarat, and 
his country is close to the hill-country of the RftnA. 
The Sultans of Gujarat constantly sent armies against 
the Raja of that place. Although some of them have 
professed obedience and presented offerings, for the most 
part none of them have come to see anyone personally. 
After the late king Akbar conquered Gqjarat, the 
victorious army was sent to attack him. As he under- 
stood that his deliverance lay in obedience and submission, 
he agreed to serve and be loyal, and hastened to enjoy 
the good fortune of kissing the threshold. From that 
date he has been enrolled among the servants (of the 

> He wrote a history of Gujarat — the Mirit-i-Sikandarl. Rieu, Cat., 
i, 287. 



438 


SHAIKH AHHAS KBATTV. 


State). He comes to see whoever is appointed to the 
government of .Ahmadabad, and when work and service 
are necessary appears with a body of his men. On 
Saturday, the Ist of the month of Bahman, in the 12th 
year of my reign, Chondar Sen, who is one of the 
chief zamindars of this country, had the good fortune 
to kiss the threshold, and presented an offering of nine 
horses. On Sunday, the 2nd, I gave elephants to 
Kaly&n, zamindar of I'dar, to Sayyid MuB|af&, and Mir 
FAziL On M<mday I went out hawking, and scattered 
nearly 600 rupees on the road. On this day pears came 
from Badakhshan. On Mubftrak-^amba, the 6th, I went 
to see the “ garden of victory ” at the village of Sair-khaiz 
(Sorkhej), and scattered 1,500 rupees on the way. As 
the tomb of Shaikh Ahmad Khatta * is on the road, I first 
went there and the fSiiha was read. is the 

name of a town in the Sarkar of Nftgor, and was the 
birthplace of the Shaikh.* The Shaikh lived in the time 
of Sult&n Ahmad, who founded the city of Ahmadabod, 
and the latter had a great"respect for him. The people 
of this country have a strange belief in him, and consider 
him one of the great saints. Every Friday night a great 
crowd of people, high and low, go to- visit his shrine. 
Sult&n Muhammad, son of the aforesaid Sul$&n Ahmad, 

' Blochmann, 507, note. 

* ** SbeiMi Ahmad who had the title of Jamilu-d-dln, was 

born at Delhi of a noble family in 737 a.h. (1338-7). He was the 
disciple and successor of Bibft Ishiq (Isaac) MaghribL His name was 
Na^ru-d-dln. By the Jugglery of the heavens he was- separated from 
his home in a storm, and after a while entered the service of B3bi, IsMq 
Maghribl. He acquired from him spiritual and secular learning, and 
came to Gujarat in the time of Sull&n Ahmad. High and low acoepted 
him, and paid him homage. Afterwards he travelled to Arabia and 
Persia, and made the acquaintance of many saints. He is buried at 
Sarkhech, near Ahmadabod.’* — .dyia-i-Akharl (voL ii, p. 290, of Bib. Ind., 
ed. Jarrett, iii, 371). See Bayley’s Gujarati p. 00, note, and Ifl i a a ln a li nd- 
atfiyft, ii, 314, and Blochmann, 507, note, where the reference to the 
Kbulno, 057, seems wrong. The story told in the Khaslna is that 
Sbaildi. Ahmad belonged to the royal family of Delhi, and was, as m baby, 
blown out of his nurse’s arms into the street during a storm. 



ORieiN OV NAMB UOARA. 


429 


built lofty buildings in the shape of mausoleums, mosques, 
and monasteries at the head of his Unnb, and near his 
mausoleum on the south side made a large tank, and 
surrounded it with stoAe and lime (masonry). This 
building was completed in the time of Qu(bu-d-dln, son 
of the aforesaid Muhammad. The shrines of several of the 
Sultans of Qnjarat are on the bank of the tank by 
the feet of the Shaikh. In that dome there have been 
laid at rest Sult&n Mahmhd Bigara, Sultftn Mu^ffar, 
his son, and Mahmlid, the martyr, (mndson of Sultftn 
Muj^ffiir, and who was the la^ of the Sultans of Gujarat 
Bigara, in the language of the people of Gujarat, signifies 
* tumed-up moustache,’ and Sult&n MahmQd had a large 
tumed-np moustache ; on this account they call him 
Bigara. Near his (Shaikh l^batth’s) tomb is the dome of 
his ladiea^ Without doubt the mausoleum of the Shaikh 
is a very grand building and a beautiful place. It is 
estimated that 600,000 rupees were spent on it God 
only knows what is true. 

After performing this visitation I went to Fath-bigh 
(garden of victory). This garden is situated on the 
ground on which the Commander-in-Chief, Kh ftnkh&nftn 
Atftliq fought with and defeated Nabh (Nannh ? Nanhh?), 
who gave himself the title of Mu^fiar Sbto. On this 
account he called it Bftgh-i-fath ; the people of Gujarat call 
it Fath-bftri. The details of this are that when, by means 
of the good fortune of the late king Akbar. the country 
of Oqjarat was conquered, and Nabh fell into his hands, 
rrimftd Kbfin represented that he was the son of a carter. 
As no son was left by Sul|ftn MahmOd, and moreover 
there was no <me of the descendants of the Sultans of 
Gqiarat whom he could raiae to the throne, he (Itimftd) 
had scented the most available course, and had made 
out that this was the scm of MahmOd. He gave him 

' *MMma*bBSevid«itly tliisiss mi i t el re lorBgiaWi*, 

thsplntBltf iiSMN, 'sledy.' 



480 


XUZAFFAB GUJARAXl. 


the name of Sultftn Muttifar. and raised him to the 
sovereignty. Men from necessity consented to this. 
As His Majesty considered the word of TtimSd Sbftn 
of weight, he ignored NabQ, and for some time he did 
doty among the servants, and the king paid no attention 
to his case. In consequence of this he ran away from 
FathpOr, and coming to Gujarat lived for some years 
under the protection of the zamindars. When Sbih&bu-d- 
din Ahmad SbAn was turned out from the government 
of Gujarat and Ttim&d JUlfisk installed in his place, 
a body of the servants' of ShihAbn-d«dln Kbte# who were 
attached to Gujarat,, separated from him» and remamed. 
at Ahmadabad in the hope of service with TtimAd. After 
rtim&d entered ihe city they had recourse to him, but 
had no good luck with him. They had not the face to 
go to Shih&bu-d«dln. and had no prospects in Ahmadabad. 
As they were without hope they thought their remedy 
lay in betaking themselves to NabCl, and in making him 
an excuse for disturbance. With this intent 600 or 700 
horsemen from among them went to NabO and carried 
him off along with Lon& K&thi, under whose protection 
he was living, and proceeded to Ahmadabad. When he 
arrived near the city many wretched men on the look 
out for an occasion joined him, and nearly 1,000 horsemen, 
Mugbals and Gujaratis, collected together. When I'timSd 
became aware of this he left his son Shir Sb&A 
in the city, and hastened off in search of Qbih&b 
who was proceeding towards the Court, in order that 
with his help he might quiet the disturbance. Many 
of the men had separated themselves from him, and he 
read on the faces of those who were left the signs of 
unfaithfulness, but ^h&bu-d-din, in company with 
rtimAd Kb&Q. turned his rein. It happened that before 
their arrival NabO had entered the fort of Ahma da ba d. 
Those who wejre loyal drew up their troops near the dty, 
and the rebels came out of the fort and hastened to the 



ACCOUNT or A KBBRLUOH. 


431 


Ijattlefield. When the anny of the rebels -showed itself, 
those of the servants of ShihAb KhAn who were left took 
the wrong road and joined the enemy. ^ihAb KbAn was 
defeated and hastened towards Pa^ (PAtan ?), which was 
in the possession of the royal servants. His retinue and 
camp were plundered, and NabO, bestowing mansabsi and 
titles <m the rebels, went against Qu|bu-d*dln Muhammad 
KhAn. who was in Baroda. The servants of the latter, 
like the servants of SblhAb KbAn, took the road of 
faithlessness and chose separation, as is related in detail 
in the Akbar-nAma. In the end, after giving his word 
to .Qutbu-4-din Muhammad, h^ sent him to maity^om, 
and his goods and property, which were equal to the 
treasure of his courtesy and grandeur, were plundered. 
Nearly 45,000 horsemen collected rpund NabA. 

When this state of affairs was represented to H.M. Akbar 
he sent against him MlrzA KhAn, son of BairAm KhAn. 
with a force of brave warriors. On the day when MirzA 
KbAn arrived near the city, he drew up the ranks of 
good fortune. He had about 8,000 or 9,000 horse, and 
NabA met him with 80,000, and drew up his host tainted 
with ruin. After prolonged fighting and slaughter the 
Isreeze of victory blew on the flag oi the loyal, and 
NabA, being defeated, fled in arretdied plight. My father, 
in reward for this victory, gave MlrsA KbAn a mansab 
of 5,000 with the title of KbAnkhAnAn and the govern- 
ment of the country of Qqjarat. The garden that KhAn- 
UiAnAn made on the field of battle* is situated on the 
bank of the River SAbarmati. He founded lofty buildings 
alrmg tiiat eminmioe on tiie river, and made a strong 
wall of strme and cement round the garden. 'Die garden 
contains 120 jarib of land, and is a charming resort. 
It may have cost 200,000 rupees. It pleased me greatly. 
One may say tiiat in the whole of Qqjarat there is no 
gardm like this. Arranging a Thursday feast, I bestowed 
cops on my private servants, and remained there for the 



432 


PUNISHMENT OF A THIEF. 


night At the end of the day, on Friday, I entered 
the city, scattering about 1,000 rupees on the road. At 
this time the gardener represented that a servant of 
Muqarrab Khan had cut down some champd trees above 
the bench alongside the river. On hearing this I became 
angry, and went myself to enquire into the matter and 
to exact satisfaction. When it was established that this 
improper act had been committed by him, I ordered both 
his thumbs to be cut off as a warning to others. It was 
evident that Muqarrab Khan knew nothing of this affair, 
or otherwise he would have punished him there and then. 
On Tuesday, the 11th, the Kotwal of the city caught 
a thief and brought him. He had committed several 
thefts before, and each time they had cut off one of his 
members ; once his right hand, the second time the thumb 
of his left hand, the third time his left ear, and fourth 
time they hamstringed him, and the last time his nose ; 
with all this he did not give up his business, and 
yesterday entered the house of a grass-seller in order to 
steal. By chance the owner of the house was on the look 
out and seized him. The thief wounded the grass-seller 
several times with a knife and killed him. In the uproar 
and confusion his relatives attacked the thief and caught 
him. I ordered them to hand over the thief to the 
relatives of the deceased, that they might retaliate^on him. 

**The lines of the face show the thought of your head(?).” 

On Wednesday, the 12th, 3,000 rupees were handed 
over to 'A^mat KhAn and Mu*taqad. that they 

might go the next day to the tomb of Shaikh Abmad 
Khattu, and divide it among the fakirs and indigent 
people who had taken up their abode there. On Thursday, 
the 13th, I went to the lodging of my son Shah Jah&n, 
and held a MubArak - shAiuba entertainment there, and 
distributed cups among my private servants. 1 gave 
my son the elephant Sundar Mathan,^ which was 
^ I.O. MSS. have Sundar Sen. 



CONQUEST OF MCRDA. 


433 


superior to all my private elephants in speed ana 
beauty and pleasant paces, and competed with horses, 
and was the lirst among the elephants, and one much 
liked by King Akbar. My son ghah Jahan had a great 
liking for him, and frequently asked him of me, and 
seeing no way out of it I gave it to him with its gold 
belongings of chains, etc., together with a female elephant. 
A present of 100,000 of darbs was given to the wakils 
of ‘ Adil Khan. At this time it was represented ^ to me 
that Mukarram Khan, son of Mu'a^m who was 

the governor of Ori&sa, had conquered the country of 
Khurda, and that the Raja of that place had fled and 
gone into the Rajmahendra. As he was a !^na-zdd 
(houseborn one) and worthy of patronage, I ordered his 
mansab, original and increase, to be 3,000 personal and 
2,000 horse, and honoured him with drums, a horse, and 
a dress of honour. Between the province of Orissa and 
Golconda there were two zamindars, one the Raja of Khurda 
and the second tha Raja of Rajmahendra. The province 
of Khurda has come into the possession of the servants 
of the Court. After this it is the turn of the country of 
Rajmahendra. My hope in the grace of Allah is that the 
feet of my energy may advance farther. At this time 
a petition from Qutbu-l-mulk reached my son Sb&h Jahan 
to the effect that as the boundary of his territory had 
approached that of the King, and he owed service to this 
Court, he hoped an order would be issued to Mukarram 
Kb&n i^ot to stretch out his hand, and to acquire 
possession of his country. It was a proof of Mukarram 's 
valour and energy that such a one as Qutbu-l-mulk 
should be apprehensive about his (Mukarram) becoming 
his neighbour. 

On this day Ikram son of Islam Sib^Qf was 

appointed faujdar of Fathpur and its neighbourhood, and 
presented with a dress of honour and an elephant; Chandar 
^ See Elliot, vi, 355. 



434 MUZAFFAR TAU^lN. 

Sen, the zamindar of Haloz (Halwad ?),^ was given a dress 
of honour, a horse, and an elephant. An elephant was 
also given to La^hin Qaq^al. At the same time Mu^ffar,^ 
son of Mirza Baqi Tarkhan, had the honour of kissing the 
threshold. His mother was the daughter of Barha (Bhara), 
the zamindar of Kachh. When Mirza Baqi died and the 
government of Thatta went to Mirza Jani, Mu^ffar was 
apprehensive of Mirza Jani, and he took refuge with 
the aforesaid zamindar. He had remained from his 
childhood until now in that country. Now that the 
fortunate retinue had reached Ahmadabad, he came and 
did homage. Though he had been reared among men 
of the wilds, and was unfamiliar with civilized ways and 
ceremonies, yet as his family had had the relations of 
service with our exalted dynasty from the times of Timur * 
— ^may God make his proof clear ! — I considered it right 
to patronize him. For the present I gave him 2,000 
rupees for expenses, and a dress of honour. A suitable 
rank will be given to him, and perhaps he will show 
himself efficient as a soldier. 

On Thursday, the 20th, I went to the " Garden of 
Victory,” and contemplated the red roses. One plot had 
bloomed well. There are not many red roses (gvl-i-8wl(Ji\ 
in this country, so it was pleasant to see so many here. 
The anemone^ bed, too, was not bad, and the figs had 

^ This name is doubtful, for the MSS. have a different reading, 
apparently NamQd. There is a HalOd in Gujarat (Jarrett, ii, 242). Sm 
also Bayley’s Gujarat, 439. Perhaps it is the Halol of the Indian Gazetteer. 

* The existence of this son of B&q! Tarkh&n does not seem to liave 
been known to Aba-l-fafl or to Blochmann. Nor is he mentioned in the 
Ma’asiru-l-umara. See Jarrett, ii, 347, where only Payanda is spoken 
of as the son of Baq! Khan, and Blochmann, p. 362. See also Ma’asiru-l- 
umara, iii, 485, the biography of Mirz& ‘Isa Tarkh&n. . His name appears, 
however, in the |)edigree of his house in the Tarkh&n*n&maof Jamal Shirftzi. 

* The word »Anl in Sahib-qirdii’i-sdni in text is a mistake. 

^ Shnqd'iq^ which perhaps means tulips. In Price's Jahangir, p. 115, 
there is much more said about the ** Garden of Victor^'," and Jah&nglr's 
entertainment there by his wife Khairu-n-nisu, the daughter of the 
Khtnkhanan. 



JAHlNOiR LEAVES AHMADABAD. 


435 


ripened. I gathered some figs with my own hands, and 
weighed the largest one. It came to 7^ tolas. On this 
day there arrived 1,500 melons from Kariz. The Kb&n 
*Alam had sent them as a present. I gave a thousand 
of them to the servants in attendance, and five hundred 
to the women of the harem. I spent four days in this 
gaixien in enjoyment, and on Monday eve, the 24th, 
1 came to the city. Some of the melons were given to 
the Shaikhs of Ahmadabad, and they were astonished 
to see how inferior were the Qujarat melons. They 
marvelled at the goodness of the Deity. 

On Thursday, the 27th, 1 held a wine-feast in the 
Nagina^ garden, which is inside the palace grounds, and 
which one of the Gujarat Sultans had planted. I made 
my servants happy with fiowing bowls. A pergola {takhta) 
of grapes had ripened in this garden, and I bade those 
who had been drinking to gather the bunches with their 
own hands and partake of them. 

On Monday, the J st of Isfandarmuz, I left Ahmadabad 
and marched towards Malwa. I scattered money on the 
road till we reached the bank of the K&nkriya tank, where 
I halted for three days. On Thursday, the 4th, the 
presents of Muqarrab Khan were laid before me. There 
was nothing rare among them, nor anything that 1 took 
a fancy to, and so 1 felt ashamed^ I gave them to my 
children to take into the harem. I accepted jewellery 
and decorated vessels and clotlis to the value of a lakh, 
and gave him back thp rest. Also about one hundred 
Kachhi horses were taken, but there was none of great 
excellence. 

On Friday, the 5th, I marched 6 kos^ and encamped 
on the bank of the Ahmadabad River. As my son 
Jahan was leaving Rustam Khan, one of his chief 
servants, in charge of the government of Qujarat, I, at 
my son's request, gave him a standard, drums, a dress 

* Bagtna in text. Dcbi Prasad lias Bakind, 



436 


princes’ servants get brums. 


of honour, and a decorated dagger. Up till now it had 
not been the custom in this dynasty to give to the prince’s 
servants standards or drums. For instance, H.M. Akbar 
with all his affection and graciousness to me, did not 
decide upon giving to my olficers a title or a standard. 
But my consideration for this son is so unbounded that 
I would do anything to please him, and, in fact, he is 
an excellent son, and one adorned with every grace, and 
in his early youth has accomplished to my satisfaction, 
everything that he has set his hand to. 

On this day Muqarrab K^an took leave to go to his 
home. 

As the shrine of Qutb ‘Alam, the father of ShAh ‘Alam 
Bul^ari, was in the village of Batoh,^ and on my way, 
I went there and gave 500 rupees to the guardians. On 
Saturday, the 6th, I entered a boat on the MahmUdAbad 
River and went a-fishing. On the bank is the tomb of 
Sayyid MubArak BukhAri. He was one of the leading 
officers of Gujarat, and his son Sayyid MirAn erected 
this monument to him. It is a very lofty cupola, and 
there is a very strong wall of stone and lime round 
it. It must have cost more than two lakhs of rupees. 
None of the tombs of the Gujarat Sultans that I saw 
came up to one-tenth of it. Yet they were sovereigns, 
and Sayyid MirAn was only a servant. Genius and the 
help of God have produced this result. A thousand 
blessings on a son who has made such a tomb for his 
father : ‘ 

‘‘That there may remain a memorial of him upon earth.** 

On Sunday I halted and fished, and caught 400 fish. 
One of them had no scales, and is called the sang-maJil, 

^ Baaoh in teat. S|ee Bayley*s Gujarat, p. 237 ; alao Tiefenthaler, i, 377, 
who upeakB of it aa being 3 leagues south of Ahmailahad. See alao 
Jarrett, ii, 240, n. 7. 

* For Sayyid Mubirak and his son see Bayley*8 Gujarat. Sayyid 
Mubhrak was the patron of the author of the Mirftt-i-Sikandari. See 
loc. cit, p. 454. 



ACCOUNT OF SSWRAS. 


437 


‘the stone-fish.* Its belly was very large and swollen, 
so I ordered them to cut it open in my presence. Inside 
was a fish with scales which it had recently swallowed 
and which had as yet undergone no change. I told them 
to weigh both fish. The stone-fish came to seers and 
the other to nearly 2. 

On Monday, the 8th, I marched 4^ kos. and encamped 
in the village of Moda (Mahaondat). The inhabitants 
praised the rainy season of Gujarat. It happened that 
on the previous night and on this day before breakfast 
some rain fell, and the dust was laid. As this is a sandy 
country, it is certain that there would not be any dust in 
the rainy season, nor would there be any mud. The lields 
would be green and cheerful. At any rate, a specimen 
of the rainy season has been seen by me. On Tuesday 
I marched 5^ kos, and halted at the village of Jarsiina 
(Jarisama).^ 

At this stage news came that Man Singh Sewm had 
surrendered his soul to the lords of hell. The account 
of this in brief is that the Sewras ^ are a tribe of infidel 
Hindus who always go with their head and feet bare. 
One set of them root out their hair, their beard.^*, and 
moustaches, while another set shave them. They do not 
wear sewn garments, and their central principle is that 
no living creature should be injured. The Banyans regard 
them as their ptrs and teachers, and even worship them. 
There are two sects of Sewras, one called Pata (Tapa) 
and the other Kanthal (Kartal). Man Singh was the 
head of the latter, and Bal Chand the head of the Patas.'* 
Both of them used to attend upon H.M. Akbar. When 
he died and Khusrau fled and I pursued him, Ray Singh 
Bhurtiya, zamindar of Bikanir, who had been made an 
Amir by Akbar's kindness, asked Man Singh what 

^ It is the Chandsuma of Bayley's map. 

^ Jarrett, iii, 210 ; and Akhar-nZma, translation, i, 147. n. 2. 

^ Thi.s should be Ta|iu. Sec Addenda. 



438 


ACCOUNT OF 8EWRA8. 


would be the duration of my reign and the chances of 
my success. That black-tongued fellow, who pretended 
to be skilled in astrology and the extraction of judgments, 
said to him that my reign would, at most, last for two 
years. The doting old idiot (Ray Singh) relied upon 
this, and went off without leave to his home. Afterwards, 
when the glorious God chose out this suppliant and 
1 returned victorious to the capital, he came, ashamed 
and downcast, to Court. What happened to him in the 
end has been told in its proper place.^ In fine, Man Singh, 
in the course of three or four months, was struck with 
leprosy (jttsdm), and his limbs fell off him till he was 
in such a state that death was by many degrees preferable 
to life. He was living at Bikanir, and now I remembered 
him and sent for him. On the road he, out of excessive 
fear, took poison, and surrendered his soul to the lords 
of hell. So long as the intentions of this suppliant at 
God’s courts are just and right, it is sure that whoever 
devises evil against me will receive retribution according 
to his merits. 

The sect of the Sewras exists in most of the cities of 
India, but is especially numerous in Gujarat. As the 
Banyans are the chief traders there, consequently the 
Sewras also are plentiful. Besides making idol-temples 
for them, they have built houses for them to dwell in 
and to worship in. In fact, these houses are the head- 
quarters of sedition. The Banyans send their wives and 
daughters to the Sewras, who have no shame or modesty. 
All kinds of strife and audacity are perpetrated by them. 
I therefore ordered that the Sewras should be expelled, 
and I circulated farinans to the effect that wherever there 
were Sewras in my empire they should be turned out. 

* I.O. MS., instead of has chundnchih ttkwdi, '*aa 

has been atated in its place.*’ This is probably correct, as JahAngir 
baa already referred to hia death. See also the account of the 2nd year, 
where he spaaka of RAy Singh’s going home without leave. 



HUNTING. ENTERTAINMENT. 


4Z9 


On Wednesday, the 10th, I went out to hunt, and shot 
two nilgaw, one male and one female. On this day the 
son of Dilawar ^an came from Pattan, which was his 
father’s fief, and paid his respects. He presented a Kachhi 
horse. It was a very handsome animal, and pleasant to 
ride. Till I came to Gujarat no one had presented me 
with so fine a horse. Its value was 1,000 rupees. 

On Thursday, the 11th, I had a wine party on the bank 
of the tank, and bestowed many favours on those servants 
who had been appointed to the province, and then dis- 
missed them. Among the promotions was that of ghaja'at 
Khan, the Arab, to the rank of 2,500 personal and 2,000 
horse. I also gave him drums, a horse, and a robe of 
honour. Hiinmat Khan was raised to the rank of 1,500 
with 800 horse, and had a robe of honour and an elephant. 
Kifayat Khan, who was made Diwaii of the province, 
received the rank of 1,200 with 300 horse. Safi Khan 
bakhshi received a horse and a robe of honour. Khwaja 
*Aqil had the rank of 1,500 with 650 horse, and was made 
bakhshi of the Ahadis, and had the title of 'Aqil Kh&n. 
Thirty thoasand darbs vere given to tlie wakil of Qutbu-1- 
Mulk, who had brought the tribute. 

On this day my son ghah Jahan presented pomegranates 
and quinces that had been sent to him from Farah. I had 
never seen such large ones, and I ordered them to be 
weighed. The quince weighed 29 tolas 9 mashas and 
the pomegranate 40 J tolas. On Friday, the 12th, I went 
a-hunting and shot two nilgaw, a male and a female. 
On Saturday, the 13th, I shot three nilgaw, two males 
and one female. On Sunday, the 14th, I gave Shaikh 
Ismail, the son of ghaikh Mubainmad Obaus, a robe of 
lionour and 500 rupees. On Monday, the 1 5th, I went 
a-huiiting and shot two female nilgaw. On Tue.sday, the 
16th, I again presented the Shaikhs of Gujarat, ivho were 
in attendance, with robes of honour and maintenance- 
lands. To each of tliein I gave a book from niy special 



440 


CHARITIES. ACCOUNT OF KAUKAB. 


library, such as the Tafsir-i-ka^shaf,^ the Tafsir-i-Husaini,^ 
and the Rau^tu-l-abbab.^ I wrote on the back of the 
books the day of my arrival in Gujarat and the day of 
presentation of the books. 

At the time that Ahmadabad was adorned by the 
setting up of the royal standards my employment by 
day and by night was the seeing of necessitous persons 
and the bestowing on them of money and land. I directed 
ShaiUi Ahmad the Sadr and some other tactful servants 
to bring before me dervishes and other needy persons. 
I also directed the sons of Shaikh Muhammad Qhaus, 
the grandson of Shaikh Wajihu-d-din, and other leading 
Shaikhs to produce whatever persons they believed to 
be in want. Similarly I appointed some women to do 
the same thing in the harem. My sole endeavour was 
that as 1 A king had come to this country after many 
years, no single person should be excluded. God is my 
witness that I did not fall short in this task, and that 
I never took any rest from this duty. Although I have 
not been delighted with my visit to Ahmadabad, yet 
I have this satisfaction — that my coming has been the 
cause of benefit to a large number of poor people. 

On Tuesday, the 16th, they caught Kaukab, the son 
of Qamar Khan. He had in Burhanpur put on a faqir s 
dress and gone off into the wilds. The brief account 
of his case is this : — He was the grandson of Mir *Abdu-l- 
Latif, who was one of the Saifi Sayyids and was attached 
to this Court. Kaukab had been appointed to the Deccan 
army, and had spent some days with it in poverty and 
wretchedness. When for a long time he did not get 
promotion he suspected that I was unfavourable to 
him, and foolishly took the dress of asceticism and went 
off to the wilderness In the course of six months he 

* Perhaps an explaoatioa of ZamaUi^iari’s Commentary. 

* A Persian commentary on the Koran (Rieu, p, 96). 

* A life of Muhammad (Rieu, i, 147). 



kaukab’s travels. 


441 


traversed the whole of the Deccan, including Daulatabad, 
Bidar, Bijapur, the Carnatic, and Golconda, and came to 
the port of DAbul.^ From there he came by ship to the 
port of Goga, and after visiting the ports of Surat, 
Bro&ch, etc., he reached Ahmadabad. At this time 
Zahid, a servant of Shah Jahan, arrested him and brought 
him to Court. I ordered them to bring him before me 
heavily bound. When I saw him I said to him, “ Con- 
sidering the obligations of service of your father and 
grandfather, and your position as a housebom one, why 
have you behaved in such an inauspicious manner ? *’ 
He replied that he could not tell a lie in the presence 
of his qilla and real teacher, and that the truth was 
that he had hoped for favours, but as he was unlucky 
he had left outward ties and gone into the w'ildemess 
of exile. As his words bore the marks of truth they 
made an impression on me, and I abandoned my harsh 
tone and asked him if in his misfortunes he had waited 
upon 'Adil Kbw, or Qutbu-l-Mulk, or * Ambar. He replied 
that though he had been unsuccessful at this Court and 
had remained thirsty in this boundless ocean of beneficence, 
he had never — God forbid that he should — approached 
with his lips other fountains. Might his head be cut off 
if it had bowed at this Court and then lowered itself 
at another! From the time that he went into exile he 
had kept a diary shewing what he had done, and by 
examining it it would be seen how he had conducted 
himself. These words of his increased my compassion 
for him, and I sent for his papers and read them. It 
appeared from them that he had encountered great hard- 
ship, and that he had spent much time on foot, and that 
he had suffered from want of food. On this account 
I felt kindly disposed towards him. Next day 1 sent 
for him and ordered them to remove the bonds from his 
arms and legs, and gave him a robe of honour, a horse, 

* Dftbhol (I.G., new ed., 100). 



442 


PLAGUE. 


and 1,000 rupees for his expenses. I also increased his 
rank by one half, and showed him such kindness as he 
never had imagined. He repeated this verse — 

**What I see, is it, O God. waking or in a trance? 

Do 1 behold myself in such comfort after such torture?” 

On Wednesday, the 17th, I marched 6 kos and halted 
at the village of Barasinor (B&lasinor). It has already 
been mentioned that the plague had appeared in Kashmir. 
On this day a report of the chronicler of events arrived, 
stating that the plague had taken firm hold of the 
country and that many had died. The symptoms were 
that the first day there was headache and fever and much 
bleeding at the nose. On the second day the patient 
died. In the house where one person died all the inmates 
were carried off. Whoever went near the sick person or 
a dead btxly was affected in the same way. In one 
instance the dead body was thrown on the grass, and 
it chanced that a cow came and ate some of the grass. 
It died, and some dogs that had eaten its flesh also all 
died. Things had come to such a pass that from fear 
of death fathers would not approach their children, and 
children would not go near their fathers. A strange 
thing was that in the ward in which the disease began, 
a fire broke out and nearly 3,000 houses were burnt. 
During the height of the plague, one morning when the 
pecfple of the city and environs got up, they saw circles 
on their doors. There were three large circles, and on 
the face of these (i.e. inside them) there were two circles 
of middle size and one small one. There were also other 
circles which did not contain any whiteness^ (i.e. there 
were no inner circles). These figures were found on all 
the houses and e’ cn on the mosques. From the day 
when the fire took place and these circles appeared, they 
say there was a diminution of the plague. This has been 

^ jSiyciz. The meaning ifl not clear. Perhaps wliat is meant is that 
there vras no writing, only the circles. 



THE JAM. RAJA OF KUCH 


443 


recorded as it seems a strange affair. It certainly does 
not agree with the canons of reason, and my intellect 
cannot accept it. Wisdom is with God ! I trust that 
the Almighty will have mercy on his sinful slaves, and 
that they will be altogether fi^ed from such calamity. 

On Thursday, the 18th, 1 marched 2^ kos and halted 
on the bank of the Mahi. On this day the Jam zamindar ^ 
had the good fortune to kiss the ground. He presented 
50 horses, 100 muhrs, and 100 rupees. His name is Jassa, 
and Jam is his title. Whoever succeeds is called J&in. 
He is one of the chief zamindars of Gujarat, and, indeed, 
he is one of the noted rajas of India. His country is 
close to the sea. He always maintains 5,000 or 6,000 
horse, and in time of war can supply as many as 10,000 
or 12,000. There are many horses in his country ; 
Kachhi horses fetch as much as 2,000 rupees. I gave 
him a dress of honour. 

On the same day Lachmi Naravan, Raja of Kuch (Bihar), 
which adjoins Bengal, did homage and presented 500 
muhrs. He received a dress of honour and an ornamented 
dagger. 

Nawazish Khan, son of Sa*id Khan, who had been 
appointed to Junagarh, had the good fortune to pay his 
respects. On Friday, the 19th, I halted, and on Saturday, 
the 20th, I marched 3f kos and halted at the tank of 
Jhanud. On Sunday I marched 4^ kos and halted at 
the tank of Badarwala. On this day there came the 
news of the death of 'Awmat Khan Gujarati. On account 
of illness he had remained in Ahmadabad. He was a 
servant who knew one’s disposition,- and did good work. 
As he had thorough knowledge of the Deccan and Gujarat, 
I was grieved at his death. In the tank above mentioned 
I noticed a plant which at the approach of the finger 
or the end of a stick contracts its leaves. After a while 
it opens them out again. Its leaves resemble those of 
> EUiot, yi, 356. 



444 


THE SENSITIYE PLANT. 


the tamarind, and it is called in Arabic Shajarw-Uhaya, 
'the plant of modesty.’ In Hindi it is called LajvaTUl, 
Ldj means modesty. It is certainly not void of strange- 
ness. They also call it naghaoJe, and say that it also 
grows on dry land. 

On Monday, the 22nd, I halted. My scouts reported 
that there was a tiger in the neighbourhood which vexed 
wayfarers, and in the forest where it was they had seen 
a skull and somp bones lying. After midday I went out 
to shoot it, and killed it with one discharge. Though 
it was a large tiger, I had killed several that were larger. 
Among them was a tiger which I killed in the fort of 
Mandu, and which was 8^ maunds. This one weighed 
7i maunds, or 1 maund less. 

On Tuesday, the 23rd, I marched over 3^ kos and 
alighted on the bank of the River Bayab.^ On Wednesday 
I marched nearly 6 kos and halted at the tank of Hamda.^ 
On Thursday I ordered a halt and had a wine party, 
and gave cups to my special servants. I promoted 
Nawazish Khan to the rank of 3,000 with 2,000 horse, 
which was an increase of 500 personal, and gave him 
a robe of honour and an elephant, and allowed him to 
go to his fief. Muhammad Husain Sabzak,’ who had been 
sent to Balkh to buy horses, came to Court to-day and 
paid his respects. Of the horses he brought, one was 
piebald and was of fine shape and colour. I had never 
seen a piebald horse of this colour before. He had also 
brought other good roadsters. I therefore gave him the 
title of Tijarat! Khan. 

On Friday, the 26th, I marched 51 kos and halted at 
the village of Jalod.^ Raja Lachmi Narayan, the paternal 
uncle of the Raja of Kuch, to whom I had now given 
the territory of Kuch, was presented with a horse. On 

‘ MSS. seem to have Manib. MSS. seem to have Nimda. 

^ The MSS. have Muhammad Husain Saud&g^r (traider). 

^ xii«s Jhallod of Bayley*s map. 



ANECDOTE OF A MONKEY. 


445 


Saturday I marched 3 kos and halted at Boda.^ On 
Sunday I marched 5 kos and set up the royal standards 
at Dohad. It is on the borders of Malwa and Gujarat. 

Pahluwan Baha’u-d-din, the musketeer, brought a young 
monkey {la'ngUr) with a goat, and represented that on 
the road one of his marksmen had seen the female langur 
with a young one in its arms on a tree. The cruel man 
had shot the mother, which on being struck had left the 
young one on a branch, and had herself dropped on the 
ground and died. Pahluwan Baha*u-d-din had then come 
up and taken down the young one, and had put it beside 
the goat to be suckled. God had inspired the goat with 
affection for it, and it began to lick the monkey and to 
fondle it. In spite of difference of species she showed 
such love as if it had come out of her own womb. I told 
them to separate them, but the goat immediately began to 
lament, and the young langur also became much distressed. 
The affection of the monkey is not so remarkable, as it 
wanted to get milk, but the affection of the goat for it 
is remarkable. The langur is an animal belonging to the 
monkey tribe. But the hair of the monkey (maimUn) is 
yellowish and its face is red, while the hair of the langur 
is white and its face is black. Its tail, too, is twice as long 
as the maimun’s. I have written these things on account 
of their strangeness. On Monday, the 29th, I halted and 
went to hunt nilgaw. I shot two, one male and one 
female. On Tuesday also, the 30th, I halted. 


End of the twelfth year of the Emperor's reign, in the 
Tuzuk-i- J ahangiri. 


1 MSS. have RanSd. 




ERRATA AND ADDENDA. 

Page 15, line 7 from foot. The (igpire 1 should be placed at SultAnu- 
n-nis& Begani. 

p. 24, 1. 5. For my read his. With reference to n. 2, p. 120, 1. 13, 
shovrs that the father meant is Sh&hrul^. 

p. 34, 1. 2 of verse. Solomon’s greatness depended on the possession 
of a ring. When that was lost his power departed. See the story of 
its loss and recovery in Mir ^w8nd (Rehatsek's translation, pt. i, 100). 
Probably then the line should be rendered * Call him the ring-wearing 
Solomon.’ 

p. 38, near foot. The words -*the news,’ etc., are not a verse, and 
Kai^-jivi should be Najar ChOli, i.e. the Na^r who accompanied 
Hum&yOn through the desert {chal). See Akbar-n&ma translation, i, 
657, n. 3. 

p. 39, 1. 2. For near Lahore read a dependency of Lahore. Kal&nOr 
is the Kalanaur of the maps, and is 15 miles west of Gurd&spQr (LG., 
new ed. , xiv, 297). 

p. 43, note. For lithograph read text, 
p. 46, 1. 8. For Mirz& read Miran. 

p. 50, 1. 1, and note 1. I.O. MSS. seem to have Tanam Bahfidur. 
The reference to Ma’a^iru-l-umari is ii, 140. The name of Mu^atfar 
Gujar&ti’s son was Bahlidur. 

p. 54, n. 1. For Price, p. 6 read Price, p. 68. The Iqb&l-n&ma and 
KhuUisatu-t-taw&rikh say he was put in charge of Ihtim&m Kotw&l. 
p. 58, n. 2. It is Nttera in 1.0. MS. No. 181. 

p. 60, 1. 6. The meaning is that *Abidin was the son of 'Abdu-llah 
Kh&n’s spiritual adviser. ‘Abidin is called 'Abidi in Akbar-n&ma, iii, 832. 
He came to India in 1013 (1604-5), and' Akbar gave him the rank of 
1,000 and 500 horse (iii, 634), 
p. 65, 1. 11. For know read knew, 
p. 66, 1. 7. The MSS. seem to have Jaih&l. 

p. 66, last line. Kilin means * daaghter-in-law ’ in Turk!. Perhaps 
Kllan here is a synonym for ‘son-in-law.’ 

p. 67, 1. 8. The words ‘ which in Hindustani is called balli ’ are not in 
the LO. MSS. I do not know the word baUl as meaning a pole. Perhaps 
it is a mistake for layyl. 

p. 76, 1. 3 from foot. Omit the words ‘ who is one of the tehaniMtSii^ 
of the State.’ 

p. 79, L 6. For and cash read in cash. 

p. 81, n. 1. Delete question mark and the words ‘near Mult&n.’ 
Nandanpur, i.e. Nandana (I.G., xviii, 349), and Girjhftk are in the Jhelam 
district.* The R&m Di\s garden was some place near Lahore, where 
Jah&i^r cook up his residence on the way to the hunting-ground. He 
spent Zi months in hunting. 

p. 84, 1. 19. For ‘Abdu-r-Rahim read 'Abdu-r-Bahm&n 



448 


ERRATA AND ADDENDA. 


p. 87, 1. 21. Firishta in his account of B&bar says the Daulat Khftn 
of that time was descended from the Daulat IDian who in 816 a.h. 
(1413-14) was Sultan of Delhi. See Elliot, iv, 45. 

p. 90, 1. 4 from foot. JahangirpQr is mentioned in account of 
15th year, p. 317, last line (text). It is the Sbekhopura of the maps, 
and is 22 miles from HSfizahfid and 18 miles west of Lahore. It was 
called ShaikhupOra in allusion to Jahiingir*s pet name of Sheikha B&b&, 
and also in honour of Shaikh Salim. See ^uU^a T. in account of 
Jahangir’s reign. The I.G., xxii, 270, wrongly ascribes its origin to 
D&ra Shukuh. Mulla Husain Kashmiri, mentioned on p. 91, died in 1037 
(1627-8), Rieu, ii, 7756. The minaret is still standing. S^ Eastwick’s 
** Pan jab Handbook,^’ 200. Instead of * the gravestone in the shape of 
an antelope ’ we should render, I think, * a stone tomb with the figure 
of an antelope (engraved upon it).’ The I.O. MSS. have Marr&j as the 
name of the antelope. Perhaps we should read Manor&j * mind’s lord.’ 
p. 99, 1. 3 from foot. I.O. MSS. have bahiir as the name of the net. 
p. 100, n. 1. Delete note. The rang is the ibex, 
p. 110, n. 1. See J.A.S.B. for February, 1908, p. .39. 
p. 117. The Iqb&l-n&ma mentions in connection with the story of the 
mummifted saint that many Sabzawar saints lived in B&miyfin. See also 
Kamgar Husaini. 

p. 120, 1. 1. Delete word * Georgians.* I.O. MS. No. 181 has ^urja. 
p. 122, 1. 10. Insert * and ’ alter * sheep.’ 
p. 125, 1. 13. For garden read gardens, 
p. 133, 1. 4. For £ read rupees. 

p. 134, 1. 15. For he died on the 29th read he died in his ninth decade 
(i.e. between 80 and 90). The Ma’&giru-l-umarft, ii, 143, says he was 
82 when he died. 

p. 134, 1. 13 from foot. Instead of * he wont off alone ’ the MSS. have 

* carrying off his life’ (i.e. escaping) with difficulty. 

p. 136, n. 1. The opinion expressed in this note is proved to be wrong 
by General Cunningham’s Report, Arch. S., xiv, p. 58. The tombs are 
those of a musician and his pupil, 
p. 140, 1. 8. Delete Sylvia olivtic^, 

p. 143, 1. 7. Apparently there were twelve balls, or at least objects, 
ten being as large as an orange, another being a citron, and the twelfth 
a sicrH. So instead of *one to a citron’ we should read, perhaps, 

* a citron and a mrkh.* 

p. 143, 1. 3 from foot. For Ilf read Alf. 

p. 147, 1. 4 from foot. Delete the word ’’Egyptian ’ and also n. 1. It 
appears from the Ghiyasu-l-logh&t that a Qutbi ruby is a broad ruby 
suitable for a ring (signet ?). 
p. 153, 1. 13 from foot. For Hama^ni read Hamad&ni. 
p. 156. According to Terry, Ja^ndAr was called Sultan Takht 
bemuse born when JahAngIr first sat on his throne. 

p. 158, 1. 9. Perhaps Yazi = Yaz-bAshl, i.e. centurion. But I.O. 181 
has not the word, only saying *SbAh Beg KhAn,’ and No. 305 has 
SbAb Beg KliAn Bari (7). 

p. 158, 1. 10. The passage is wrongly translated. No elephant was 



ERRATA AND ADDENDA. 


449 


presented to Salamu-llah. The sentence should end on 1. 9 after the 
word * panther- keeper/ which word is probably a ;ni8translatioD. Then 
this new sentence should come, i.e. * l^lainu-llah *Arab, who is a young 
man of a distinguished Arabian family (kih at jawdndn-i-qarar-d&da’i- 
*Arab ast) and related to Mubarak, the governor of Dizfal, came to wait 
upon me on account of his being suspicious of the designs of §hah * Abbas 
(against himself).* patronized him,’ etc. (os on p. 1.58). 

p. 158, n. 3, and p. 162, n. 1. Both notes are wrong. The place 
meant by Jahangir is Dizfal, a town in the Khazistan province of Persia, 
and Jayza is evidently a copyist’s error for lUuz or KiiQza, another name 
for Khazistan. Dizfal is an ancient name, and according to Yaqat, 
Barbierde Meynard’s translation, p. 231, the proper spelling is Dizpul, 
i.e. * the Bridge of. the Citadel,’ the town being named after a famou^ 
bridge built over the river. For Khaz see B. de MeYnard7216. 
p. 160, 1. 12 from foot. Qabalah was a town in the Bet Jalandhar Da’ub. 
p. 163, 1. 9. It is 2,000 rupees in 1.0. MSS. 

p. 163, 1. 12. It is not Qach& Dakhani in 1.0. MSS., but I am not sure 
what the clause, as given by them, means. No. 181 seems to have 
hafaidhmgl for * assistance’ (?). Two B.M. MSS. have apparently 
fiafatdhdi kapl, but Add. 26,215 has the Arabic ha^ while Or. 3276 has 
the oixlinary A, so that the words possibly mean ’the young of the 
monkey ’ (kapi). 

p. 166, 1. 2. Husamu-d-din was married to AbiiJ-fai^ra sister, 
Blochmann, 441. 

p. 167, 1. 16. The word rojh in brackets is wrong. The MSS. have 
qara-qnyraqh and qard'quyrdqh, P. de Courteille gives quyrnqh as 
meaning a tail, so perhaps qard-qHyruqh means a black-tailed sheep 
or deer. See p. 129, 1. 17, where the qard^qiiyrugh is said to be the 
rhikdra. 

p. 168, last line. The MSS. has hah«4-n\azUl^ which does not necessarily 
mean imprisonment for life, 
p. 170, n. 2. For Akbar's wives read Jahangir’s wives, 
p. 172, 1. 21 seq. Is this the story referred to by Hawkins (Purchas), 
alfout Muqarrab having taken a Banian’s daughter ? 
p. 177, note. For one- third of an inch rtad one and a third inches, 
p. 183, 1. 8. This is the annular eclipse entered in Dr. R. Schramm’s 
Tables. Sewell’s Indian Calendar, as having occurred on 5th December, 
1610, which corresponds to 28th Ramaipin, 1019. 

p. 185, n. 3. Persian text, p. 309, 1. II, has the phrase majrd girifta 
dtaah dddandy * took aim and 6red ’ (a cannon). 

p. 188, 1. 7 from foot. For Naziri, see Rieu, ii, 807A, and Blochmann, 
579. He died in 1622(1613). 
p. 191, 1. 10. Fordhtk{1) read dhfk, i.e. adjutant bird, 
p. 191, 1. 8. Pdfal means ‘red’ or * rose-coloured ’ in Sanskrit. Query 
‘ red deer.’ 

p. 192, 1. 2. Add year 1020. 

p. 195, last line. The (M^^age is rather olise'ne. but the meaning 
seems to be that though formalities arc not regarded by the wise, yet 
29 weak persona {qdtedsir, w-hich apiiarently is a plural of qd^tr), regard 



450 


KREATik AND ADDENDA. 


externals as ^'he means of paying the dues of friendship (and so we must 
attend to them). Hence when at this auspicious time a province which 
liad gone out of my ('Abb&s's) possession has been sealed by the exertions 
of angelic servants in accordance with the hopes of w^ll- wishers, I (*Abbto) 
have returned to the capital, and have despatched Kamftlu-d-din, etc. 
p. 197, 1. 7. For Khankhftn&n read I£h&n. 

p. 197, 1. 12. The I.O. MSS. have a different reading here. They 
Bay nothing about three ratis. What they say is, At this time I had 
made some increase in the amounts of weights and measures. For 
instance, 1 added one-fourth (etii^’f) to the weight of the muhrs and 
rupees.” The M rail of text is a mistake for atird*f. 

p. 197, 1. 12 from foot. I.O. MSS. have ‘Sunday in Safar,’ but they 
wrongly have 1022. 

p. 197, 1. 9 from foot. Both LO. MSS. have ‘Neknahar’ instead of 
‘ in the interior.’ 
p. 198, 1. 11. OrLohgar. 

p. 206, 1. 14. I do not think that the translation ‘ should not force 
Islam on anyone,* or the version in Elliot, vi, 325, 'Not to forcibly 
impose Musulman burdens on anyone,* gives the full force of the words 
iakltf-i^MuteUmdia bar koH nakunand. I think the reference clearly is to 
circumcision, and that the words takllf-i-Muaalmdni d&ould be rendered 
* the Muhammadan ceremonial,’ This explains why the injunction comes 
in immediately after the prohibitions against blinding and mutilation, 
'’t has been said, and 1 believe with truth, that the members of the Delhi 
royal family never were circumcised. Probably one reason for this was 
that in many instances they had Hindu mothers. As pointed out in 
Elliot, the passage is omitted in the Iqbil-nftma. It also does not oocur 
in the version given in 'All Muhammad’s " History of Gujarat,” vol. i, 
p. 200 of lithograph, 
p. 214, verse. For red read a river. 

p. 216. See picture of a turkey in Havell’s "Indian Sculpture,” 
pp. 214-lA 

p. 218, L 10 from foot. About gbftpar see Ma’4siru-l-umari, i, 180. 
p. 224, n. 1. For infra read supra, pp. 27 and 30, note, 
p. 229, 11. 9 and 14. For Fotna road Tatta. 
p. 229, note. For brother read brother’s son. 

p. 231, 1. 14 from foot. For NihilpQr oubdihUo Thilner as 'a the 
MSS. The news of the death seems to have reached Agra very quickly, 
p. 232, L 1. Insert the word ' and * before ' allowed.’ 
p. 234, 1. 2 from foot. The word translated 'cranes* Is Adnsdnak, 
and probably means ' a little crane.’ In Blcchmann, 03, harwdaeA is 
rendered by ' stone-curlew.’ 

p. 234, 1. 0 from foot. The word seems to be ‘sparrow,’ 

in the MSS., but probably it should be Aaq^, ' a ourioaity, a rarity.’ 

p. 235, 1. 2. It is Thursday, the 2Bth, in the MBS., and inst^ of 
'night* we should read 'eve.* The English date corresponding to 
28th Muharram is 10th March, 1613. 

p. 237. L 8. It is 1,000 in the M88., and this is probably correct, 
though B.M. MS. 1646 has changed the word for 1,000 into one^ for 106. 



ERR4TiL AND ADDENDA. 


451 


The ordinary hoHhab-i^i* was 100 tolas in weight, see p. 11. At p. 400 
two kankab-i-tali^ are mentioned of 000 tolas each. It is a mistake, 
I think, to regard the word muhr as always implying gold. The 
ordinary kaukab-i-tili* was of silver, and these large mnhrs were no 
doubt also of silver. The note 1 to Elliott, vi, 866, is probably incorrect. 

p. 237, 1. 10. * The feast went off well,’ etc. The passage is obscore; 
but probably the translation should be ‘There was a splendid assemblage 
{majiaMg^fta paw^), and after it was over I ordered that they should 
arrange an illumination.’ The words in text, p. 110, 1. 3, are h^km 
kardam kih cubdb u dyin bdr kunand. The MSS. have cuhdb-i-dyin rd. 
No. 181 seems to have bdz ktowntd, and so has B.M. MS. 1645, but 
No. 305 bas bdr kunandt as in text. It may be that the meaning is that 
Jahftngir told the servants they piight appropriate the decoration^ but 
I rather think the order was to make an illumination. It may also 
simply mean that he ordered the decorations to be taken down. Bdz 
Itufumd ordinarily means ‘ to open out,* bdr kunand * to load.’ 
p. 237, 1. 12. Delete ‘ the ’ before Muqarrab. 
p. 237, note. 1.0. MSS. seem to have sarin, ' golden ’ (?). 
p. 241, L 6 from foot. LG., new ed., xvii, 309, speaks of a handsome 
mosque in Mairtha having been founded by Akbar, but probably it is 
this one of SbMkb Plr* Psrhaps 8b*ikb ^ ^ the old beggar rs f errsd 
to in Roe’s JoumaL 

p. 247, 1. 6 from foot. For ehakrt tmAJhaUbof, It was not necessarily 
a dust-storm. 

p. 260, 1. 6. The MSS. have ROp instead of Rdwal, and so has Elliot, 
vi, 336. They have * hill country of Mewftt,’ as in text. They have 
Chitor, and not JaipQr, as in Elliot, and they make (by error) JahiQgIr 
speak of the year as the 10th, instfsd of the 8th. Instead of * (^ve ’ at 
1. 12 we shcmld read * had,* and instead of ' from the Rdwal who was 
first known as Rftwal,’ they have, as also has Elliot, ‘Rahab, who was 
the first to take the title of Rftni.* Rahab is the Rahup of Tod, who 
. says he came to the throne in 1201 A^i>. 

p. 253, 11. 10 and 11. I cannot find the word pUUa-bdtt, My friend, 
Mr. Irvine, suggests that we should read pa^d hda. Paffd means 
a ‘ foil,’ or ‘ wooden sword,’ and paffd bdz is given in Forbes as meaning 
a ‘fencer.’ jPdUka mdmd oeours in Forbw as meaning a ‘peooUar 
posture.* Theyopdiiapf of L 11 should be fahlvapi,nieaalng ‘one body,’ 
or ‘one limb,’ and oorieeponds to the yakkdtk of Blodhmann, 208, both 
phrases "«^*»g apparent^ ’that the fencer fights with one band,* 
that is, ‘without ^ii"g a shield.’ 

p. 280, L 8. Tills 1‘tiqid is the lather of Mumtis-malfaAll, the wile of 
Sbih JahiiL He now became Afaf lUdUi, and apparently the title of 
Ftiqid was transfened to his younger brother (or consiaf) Sbihpnr, who 
was afterwards governor of Kaehmir. See Ma’iffir i, 180. The two 
previoao Aiaf ISbBfm of the family are Qhlyifn-d-dla of Qaswln 
(Bloohmann, 433)» and MlnA Ja’Dw Bsg» who was QhiyAfu«d •din’s 
nephew. The fs^ of NOrOahin was Qbiyii Beg of Tlhiaa 
(Bloehmann, 606). Bloehamnn, in his Table, 610 p has not meo t iei ^ 
Sbihpar, 1 . 0 . the 1‘tiqid who became governor of Kashmir. 



452 


ERRATA AND ABDENDA. 


p. 261, 1. 17 from foot. For mother rtad mothers (i.e. stepmothers), 
p. 201, 1. 10 from foot. For nephews rtad nephew, 
p. 278, 1. 13. Far named rtad namadt and it ^ould be in italics, 
p. 281, 1. 2. The permission to beat his drums is explained by the 
Iqb&l-nama, p. 79, where it is said that he was permitted to b^ his 
drums in the capital, pdy-i-ta^t, 
p. 281, b6 from foot. This eclipse is noted in Dr. Schram’s Tables as 
occurring on 19th March, 1615. 
p. 282, 1. 10 from foot. Delete word * Egyptian.* 
p. 286, 1. 6. For Frank rtad Venetian. Kdr-i- Wanadik, as in MSS. 
p. 288, 1. 5. Chatar, instead of Talia^'yur, in No. 305, and Bakhtar (?) 
in No. 181. 

p. 293. According to the Iqbil-nama, 80, Kunwar Karan, son of 
R&n& Amar Singh, became an officer of Jah&ngir, receiving the rank of 
5,000 personal and horse. He was the first of the direct royal line of his 
family to accept office. 

p. 293, 1. 2 from foot. No. 181 has 102 horses, 
p. 294, n. 2. No. 181 has Rasht. 

p. 300, 1. 18. According to Vullers* Diet., i, 482, a tiUeha is 96 grains 
or about half a tola. The f^iyaim-Mo^^t, however, says that tolcha is 
merely the Persian form of the Hindustani t&td. Aoeording to the Burhan-i- 
q&ti* a tola is only 2^ masha in Upper India. Generally it is reckoned as 
12 mdisha. According to Sir Thomas Roe 2^ tolas were equal to 1 ounce, 
p. 317, MS. No. 181 has a.h. date 1025. 

p. 321, 1. 11. For several bits rtad some marten skins. See Tfizuk 
text, p. 308, 1. 3 from foot, and Vullers* Diet, ii, 6. The MS. No. 181 
has fod ddna-i-kuhf * one hundred marten skins.* 
p. 321, 1. 13 from foot. For transit dues rtad for keeping open the 
Pass (rdk'Cfdrf). 

p. 321, n. 2. The words in I.O. MSS. seem to be ig&iui begdna, which 
is perhaps a mere jingle on the word q/>/5diia, but may mean * known, 
unknown.’ JahAnglr puns on the name Qadam, which means *a foot» 
a pace.* The words occur again at p. 323. 

p. 322, last line. Probably *dfgifi is, or is derived from, *aqdrf 
which means a bird whose feathers were used for ornamentation. 
According to P. de Courteille, Turki OicL, 384, *aqdr is a heron. 

p. 328, 1 13 from foot. For ghah ghaja'at rtad gbAh gbujA*. He 
was gb&h Jahan*s second son, and Wiis born at Ajmir on the eve of 
Sunday, and on 11th Tlr. Apparently this corresponds to 24th June, 
1616, which is tho date of birth mentioned by Sir Thomas Roe. Beale’s 
date of Pith May is wrong. 

p. 332, 1. 6 from foot. Here the word eiUcha is used again, and 
apparently as meaning the same thing as toia ; 6,514 tOlchas or tolas 
would be about 82 sirs, or over 2 maunds and abont 12 stone. Next 
year Sir Thomas Roe saw Jsh&nglr weighed, and he understood that his 
weight was 9,000 rupees. U so, his weight would appear to have 
considerably increased during the twelve months. Perhaps we should 
read 8,514, instead of 6,514 tOlcha.s. Hathi (8) and tia^ (6) are often 
confounded. 



ERRATA AND ADDENDA. 


463 


p. 341, 1. 8 from foo^. For times read days, the word rdz (days) 
having been omitted from the text. 

p. 344, n. 1. Apparently we should read Toda. The difference between 
it and Nauda is, in Persian writing, only one dot. Toda is mentioned by 
Roe as the place where he overtook Jah&ngir, and the stages given by 
him come to 21 kos, counting from RAmsar, and this agrees very nearly 
with Jah&ngir's stages from the same place. 

p. 351, 1. 15 from foot. The MS. No. 181 has the word gaz twice, and 
makes the poAiid*!, or width, 175} gaz (yards), 
p. 351, last line. For Bulghari read Palkhari. 

p. 352, 1. 1. Delete the words *of Tir.* The month was Bahman, 
cori'esponding to January-February, 1617, and 23rd Bahman would be 
about 1st February. In Sayyid Aliinod's edition the word Tir is a mistake 
for nfz, * also, * the meaning being that the 23rd was a halt as well as the 22nd. 

p. 353, 1. 2. Ghaznin IQian is mentioned by Finch under the name of 
Oidiiey Kh&n, and he is said to have been originally a Hindu. But this 
seems doubtful, as his father’s name is given in the Mir*&t-i-AhmadI as 
Malik IQianji Afgh&n. See also Bayley’s ** Gujarat,” p. 16. JAlor is 
now in Jodhpffr. It is described by Finch. 

p. 353, 1. 2. This seems to be the cose of matricide mentioned in 
Terry’s “ Voyage,” p. .362, of ed. of 1777. His statement that it occurred 
at Ahmadaluid is presumably an oversight. Terry sa 3 '’s the matricide 
was put to death by being bitten by two snakes. See also Irvine’s 
**Maniicci,” iv, 422. Apparently the punishment recorded by Jah&ngir 
took place on the 4th February, for Sir Thomas Roe mentions that they 
reached K&liyadaha, the next stage, on 6th February. The hi in hiydmz 
should be deleted. J&laur, or Jalor, is in Jodhpflr (I.G., xiv, 29). It 
used to be in Ajmir. It is not quite clear if Terry was with Roe at 
Kali^^adaha, but if not he was with him at Ujjain, The execution may 
have taken place there. 

p. 355, 1. 16. For * from the city of ijjjain,' etc., reocf ' to a rural spot 
near the city of Ujjain.’ 

p. .360, 1. 22. For ]28| cubits rtad 2S^ cubits. I.O. MS. 181 has 
28f yards. The printed text of Sayyid Ahmad has 128^ cubits, 
p. 362, 1. 8 from foot. Delete (Balchha ?). 

p. 373, 1. 11 seq. This I’tiq&d was the younger brother or perhaps 
cousin of A 9 af lOi&n, the brother of Nur Jnhnii. He was also known as 
ShahpAr. See Ma’isini-bumarA, i, 180. 
p. 375, n. 2. Read two diamonds. 

p. 406, n. 3. DiUit&n or Daikhtan seems right. It is so in buth the 
I.O. MSS. 

p. 406, 1. 11 from foot. These muhrs were probabl 3 ' of sih'er, ana 
were calleil muhrs because they were medals rather than coins. Dr. Kehr 
has given an account of a large muhr which is now appat*cntl 3 ' in Dresden. 
See also Richardson's Diet., article Sikka. . 

p. 407, 1. 4. Tliis is jQna K|iAn, non of Ghiyosu-d-din Tughluq. He 
ascended the throne in 1325 under the title of Muhammad bin Tughluq. 

p. 407, 1. 15. This is the prince known as Naafru-d-dln. He asoendiiMl 
the throne as Muhammad bin FfrQs in 1387, and again in 1390. 



454 


EBBATA AND ADDENDA. 


p. 4I«% 11. 11 and 3 from foot. 1.0. MSS. show that Sar-faraz 
■hould be SarafrAz; apparently hie present was ‘seven bullock-carts’ 
rd$ gdw bcthal) and not two bullocks, 
p. 417, n. 2. Gsncel note. Nftrangsar seems right, 
p. 417, 1. 2 from foot. The words are dah btst warn muhr u r&piya 
ma^rn^U. Elliot, p. 354, renders this * ten and twenty times heavier than 
the current gold muhr and rupee.’ 

p. 418. 1. 10. See n. 2 in Elliot, vi, 355. Apparently Jahangir 
means that he was the first person to coin double muhrs and double 
rupees. There is an account of tankas in the BahAr-i-'Ajam, 261, col 2, 
p. 421, n. 2. But it is 27 in I.O. MSS. 113, p. 423, 1. 14. A tfusu is 
more than a finger-breadth, it is the of a gaz or yard, and should 
be about I 4 inches. 

p. 437. I am indebted to my friend Dr. Hoernle for the explanation of 
the names of the two sects of Sewras. They should be Tap& and Kharatara. 
M&n Singh’s name in religion was Jin-simha. See Epigraphia Indica^ 
i, 37, and Ind, Antiquary^ zi, 250. MAn Singh died at Mairtna (in 
JodhpAr) according to the Jain books, in the beginning of 1618. The 
head of the TapA sect in JahAngfr’s time was Vijayasena. There is an 
elaborate paper on the Jains of Gujarat and Marwar by Colonel Miles in 
the Transactions R. A.S., iii, pp. 335-71. 

p. 442, 1. 8. There is no previous reference to the outbreak of plague 
in Kashmir, though there is one to its occurrence in the Pan jab. There 
is an interesting account of the plague in KhAfi KhAn. i, 286-8, in which 
the description is carried down to the time of Aurangzlb. 



INDEX. 


A 

‘Abbas Shah I, king of Persia, pro- 
hibits servants from attacking 
Qandahar, 86 ; his written 
orders, 112 ; sent Akbar horses, 
142 ; ambassador brings pre- 
sents, 193 ; letters from, 193-6« 
337 ; sends miimiyd and tur- 
quoise-earth, 238 ; sends pre- 
sents, 282-3, 310 ; kills his son. 
204 ; talk with his ambassador 
about Saf! Mirza’s murder, 33H ; 
forbids smoking, 370. 

‘Abclu-l-Karim Ma'mQrf, directed 
to make buildings at Mainlri, 
280 ; j)romoted, 368. 

‘Abdu-l-Latl^ Akbar’s teacher, 28. 
n. 2 ; tomb at Ajmir, 264. 

'Abdu-l-LaUf, son of Nuqib Khiln, 
whipped, 171. 

*Abdu-l-Latif, Khwaja, promoted, 
288 ; rewarded, 293. 

*Abdu-l-Latif, descemlant of rulers 
of Gujarat, captured, 378. 

‘Abdu-l-Wahhtib, Shaikh, removed 
08 incompetent, 7o and n. 1. 

*Abdii-llah, son of Klian A'zain, 
receives title of Snrfariiz l^nn, 
149'; brought to Court and 
promoted, 260; sent for from 
Rantambhor prison, 288 ; un- 
chained and sent to his father’s 
hou.se, 289. 

*Abdu-llah Barha, Sayyid, pro- 
moted, 298 ; brings news of 
victory, 380 ; stvled Saif ^an, 
382. 

* AlKlu-llahKhan, Fir Qz- jang, Naq^- 
band! ^w&ja, began as an 
ahadi, 27 ; promoted, 72, 140, 
157, 200; takes prisoner R&ju 
Rftm Chand, 82 ; produces him 
in Court, 87 ; captures Badru-z- 
zamAn, 127 ; ap}x>inted to act 
against RAn& and receives title 
of FirQz-jang, 155 ; said to have 
killed prisoners, 213 note ; 
defeated in Deroan, 219-21. 
234 ; elephant sent to, 239 and 
n. 2, 310 : misbehaviour, 331 ; 
fi^oned, 335-6 ; quarrel wiih 
*Abid and punishment, 420-1. 


‘Abdu-n Nabl, Shaikh, Jahangir 
read the “Forty Sayings” with, 
22 . 

‘Abdu-r-Kahim, ^ankhunan, son 
of Bniram, message sent to, 
28; enlists Shir-afgan, 113; 
presents forty elephants, etc., 
13i, 148 ; comes to Court, 147 ; 
his sons, 148 ; undertakes to 
.subdue Deccan, 149 ; given an 
elephantandasu|>erbhoi.sc, 131 ; 
daughter, the-wife of Daniyal, 
receives 10,000 rupees, 163 ; 
sends manuscript of “ Yusuf and 
Zulaikha ’ in Mir ‘AH’s hand- 
writing, 168 ; uiLsatisfactory 
conduct, 178 9; given jagir in 
Agra province, 199 ; sent to 
Deccan by advice of Khw;ijii 
Abu-Mmsari, 221 ; pi(>inotc><l, 
221 ; applies for .son’s leave, 
243 ; ottering of, 29.> ; at Ali mada 
biid, 429 ; defeats Mu/.atfar,431. 

‘AlMhi-r-Kaliim Khar \a.s.s), joins 
Khusrau' and receives title r>f 
Malik Anwar, 59 ; sewn up in 
ass’s hide, but survives, 68.9 ; 
given 1,000 rupee.s, 163; pur 
donefi and sent to Ka.shmir, Ui4. 

*Abdu-r-Rahinj, .son of QasimKhAii, 
paymaster of ahadis, 116; 
receives title of Tarbiyat ^an, 
149. See Tarbiyat. 

*Abdu-r-Rahman, son of Abil-l-fa/l, 
promoted, 17, 121 ; receives title 
of Af^al l^an, 105 ; made 
TOvernor of Behar, 143 ; given 
Kharakpur in fief for a year, 
146 ; nghting elephant sent 
to, 167 ; sends to JahAngir 
makers of eunuchs, 168 ; quells 
Patna rebellion, 173-5 ; sends 
presents, 206 ; comes to Court 
and presents elephants, etc.. 
235 ; death, 241. 

*Abdu-r-RazzAq Ma’mfirl, made 
bakhshi, 13, 16; made Cdurt 
hakhshi {hakhfhl l^nzur). 82; 
.sent to army, 155 ; his garden 
near Agra, 1*90. 

*Abdu-a-SalAm, son of Mu’azzani 
Khan, arrives op;x>rtuiiely with 
reinforcements, 212. 



456 


INDEX. 


*Abdu-s-Sattar, Mulla, 389. 

‘AbHV’S-Subhan brother of 

Kh&p *AlBin, releas^ and pro- 
moted, 177, 319 ; killed in 
Afghanistan, 323 

Abhay Rftm, son of A khayraj, makes 
^ riot and is slain, 29-30. 

'Abid, son of Ni^niu • d - din, 
historian, ill • treated, 331 ; 
appointed to Kabul, 346 ; 
quarrel aith *Abdu-llah, 420. 

*Abidin l^waja, promoted, 60. 
See cUao Addenda. 

Ahjad, 11, n. 3 ; of words Allah 
Akbar and Jah&nglr, 253. 

ilfi-pddAi,_festival of, 265, 295. 

AbO-l-bi Uzbeg, sent to Qandahar, 
224 ; iqu. perhaps should be 
Aba-n-nabi ?), 234 and n. 1 ; 
governor of Qandahar and Sends 
presents, 235. 

AbQ-]-fath. of Bijapur, also called 
Dckhani, 180; dagger presented 
to 192, waits on Jah&ngir, 228, 
257 ; obtains 5ef in Nagpur, 229. 

Abd'bfatli (tilani, buried at Hasan 
Abdui; UK). 

Abu l-fa/1, ^liaikh, son of Mubarak, 
account of, 24 : killed by Bir 
55ingh Ihso, 25 ; referred to, 93. 
n. 2; built embankment, 130 
and n. 1 ; sister of, 166 and 
It. 1 ; report by< 355. 

Abu-l-hiisaii (Asaf Khan IV), son of 
rti infid U'd-daulah and brother 
of NOr Jahan, receives title of 
Htnifid. 202 ; given swbrd, 203 ; 
hou'^t of, Z 49 ; comes from 
Burhanpr ' and waits on 
.lahaneir, 252 ; receives title 
of Khan, 260, 278 ; sends 
Davauat to Gwalior, 279 ; 
(itreiinfs of: 281, 283, 319 ; 
niagiuncent offerings, 320 ; pays 
bib res|iects, 373 ; promoted, 
381 ; Jahangir visits, 388. 

Abo • 1 liasan, Khwaja, Dfiniyal'-s 
diwah, ha(l an audience, 79 : 
produces a letter of *Aziz Koka, 
so t Joined with A 9 af Khan, 103 ; 
fire in hi.s hnuse, 172K; makes 
offering, 192 i appointed to 
Deccan as he had long servecl 
Suhiiii Duiii^'&l there, 202 ; 
sent to Deccan to inquire into 
cause of *Abdu-llah's defeat, 
219: recommends dis{>atch of 
*Abau-r* Rahim, 221 ; advice 


accepted and the Khwaja sent 
with *AbdU‘r>RahIm, 221 ; made 
bakhsht - W, 256 ; appointed 
along with Ibrafilm Kh&n to be 
paymaster of household, 260; 
promoted, 28S« 287, 318, 320. 

Aba • 1 • hasan Shihabkh&nl, made 
vizier’ of Bengal in room of 
WazTr Khan(Muqim), 139. 

AbO-l-q&gim, brother of A 9 af Khfin, 
Muhammad Ja‘far, 103. 

AbO-1- q ftaim Namakin,hi8 numerous 
ehildren, 31 ; assists in capture 
of Khusrau, 67 ; Jagirdar of 
Jalal&bad, 102; removed from 
there, 103. 

Aba-l-waffi, given money for build- 
ing bridge, etc. , at Hasan Abdal. 
160. 

.AbQ-l-wali, promot^, 160. 

Aba • n - nabl (?), Uzbeg, formerly 
governor of Mashhad, promoted, 
27 and n. 1 ; remark of. 30 and 
n. 1 ; appointed to assist Farid, 
61 and n. 3. 

Adhfir, place in East Bengal, 213 
and note. 

‘.\dil Kh&n, of Blj&par, horse sent 
by, wins race, 110 ; offers 
loyalty, 176, 182, 203, 234; 
gives niece in marriage to singer, 

271 ; musical compositions of, 

272 and n. 1 , 288 ; sends offering, 
299, 335, 368 ; styled /arzarid, 
388 ; his diamond, 400 ; presents 
elephants, 400-1. 

Af^l iQdin, son of Aba-l-fa^l. See 
*Abdu-r-^hman. 

Afptl Khftn, title of Mullfi Sbukru- 
llah, the Mlrza Sowcolla of Roe, 
SbAb J ahan’sdiwan, reportfrom , 
368, 387 ; promoted, 402. 

Agra, description of, 3-5, 7. 

Ahdfid, Afgnan, creates disturVi- 
once, 197 ; defeated, 263, 
311-12. 

Ahmad Beg, Kabuli, reports 
’ Khusrau 's march, 53 ; removed, 
102 ; appointed toBanga^, 105 ; 
Attock transferred from, 1.11 ; 
confined at Rantambhor, 279 ; 
released, 297 ; governor of 
Kashmir, 303. 

Ahmad Kh&n, brother erf Khi?r 
* Kb&n, who was formerly ruler 
of Kluuidesh, 76. 

Ahmad Khatta, Sb^kbi a saint, 428 
and note. 



INDEX. 


457 


Ahmad lAhorl, Shaikh, made Mlr-i- 
' *Ad], 60 and n. 2. 

Ahmad, Sayyid, editor of TOzuk, 
notes by, 164> 200, 216, 332, 428. 

Ahmad, Sultftn of Gujarat, 420, 424. 

Ahinadab3d>401 ; styltd Gardabud, 
* 414; description of. 423; mosque 
of, 424. 

Ahmadnagar. 161 ; grapes of, 360. 

Ainuuis, cavalry. 55 ; present to 
leaders, 58, 61 ; killed, 64, 82 
and note, 119, 159. 

Ajmir, entered, 253 ; description 
of, 340. 

Akbar, emperor, desire for a son, 1 ; 
makes Sikri his capital, 2 ; 
styled after death 
d^ydnl, 5 ; illiterate. 33 ; 
personal appearance, ,33 - 4 ; 
children of, ; good qualities, 
37-8 ; declines to kill HemO, 40 ; 
march to Gujarat, 40- 1 ; account 
of, 42-5 : abstinence of, 45 ; 
* Divine Faith,* 60 and n. 2 ; 
builds fort on Chenab, 91 ; 
changed name for cherries, 1 16 ; 
anniversary of birth, 127 ; of 
death, 148*; tomb of, visited by 
tJahangir, 152; orders about 
Sunday, 184 ; weighed twice a 
year, 230; kept 1,000 cheetahs. 
240 ; apijears to Jahangir in a 
dream, 269 ; fondness for fruit. 
270 ; in Gujarat, 429, 436. 

Akhayraj, .son of Bhagw&n Das, 
riot by his sons, 29. 

*Alam-guman, name of elephant, 
259. 260. 

‘Al&’u-d-dfn, Shaikh, grandson of 
Shaikh S^llm, receives title of 
Islam Khan, 31. See Islam 
Kh&n. 

Albino birds and beasts, 140. 

*AU Ahmad, Mullfi, son of Shaikh 
Husain, seal • engraver, l,00i» 
rupees given to, 159; sudden 
death cjF, 169 ; couplet by, 228 
and n. 2. 

*Ali Akbarit^i, Mina, promoted 
and given Sambhal in 6ef, 25 
and note ; sent in pursuit of 
Khusrau, 65 ; given 1 ,000 rupees, 
163 ; reward to, 182 ; comes 
from Deccan, 233 ; death, 334. 

*A1I Am^r Barha, son of ^yvid 
Mahmad, styled Saif *32. 
See Saif lyi&n. 

*Ali Birha, Sayyid, promoted, 282. 


All Khftn Karori, receives title of 
Naubat Khan, 111 and n. 4. 

‘Ali lUi&n Niy&zi, sent to Deccan, 
184. 

All Khan, ruler of Khandesh, 
letter of *Aziz Koka to, 79-^. 

All Mardan lOian Bah&dur, 
wounded and made prisoner, 
220 . 

‘All Masjid, fort of, 102, 117. 

‘All Quit Istajla, table servant of 
lRm&‘!l II, 113. See Shir-afgan. 

Allahdad, son of Jalal&, presents to, 
295, .321.. 324, 390. 

Allah-yar Koka, styled Himmat 
Khan, 406. 

Alligator, 408. 

A/tHH-tamffM, meaning of term, 23. 

AIAm’u Saral ( 1 1 miles south*ea.st of 
Sirhind), 61. 

Amanaliad, strange occurrence at, 
247. 

A manat Khiln, superintendent of 
Cambay, 418, 423. 

Am&nuJlah, son of Mahahat Khan, 
ROp Bas called Amaiial)&d after 
him, 252. 

Amar Sir.^1), Ranft, of UdaipQr, 
defeat of, 249-51 ; submits, 273, 
‘276 285 ; statue of, 332 ; sends 
tigs, 349. 

Ami Mi, an oppressor (Sikh ?), heavily 
tilled, 73. 

Amba Khiln Kashmiri, receive.** 
rank of 1,000, 75; wounds 
S_bir-afgaii and is himself killed, 
ii5: 

‘Ambar, Malik, 2*20. See Malik 
*Anil»ar. . 

‘Amid Shah Ghori or Diluwar Khan, 
ruler of .Malwa, 407^. 

.Amlnu'cbrlaula, marie Atish-i-begi, 
nr j>erha|>s Yatish-bcgl, 13, 14 
and n. 1. * 

Amir Khu.srau, verses by, 100, 169. 

Amiru l UmarA, see Slpirlf Khan. 

Ainrohl, halt at, lOO. 

AttandM (pineapple), 5. 

Anand Klian, title of Shaiiqi, .331 ; 
given one day's offering's, 370. 

Anir&'i Singh -dalan, title of AnQp 
Ray, saves Jah&ngir at tiger 
hunt, 185*7 ; recciveh his title, 
188 ; , in charge of Rustam 
Safawi, 263 ; charge of Khusrau 
^ansferred from, to Asaf Kh&n 
(compare Sir T. Roe's account); 
336 ; promoted, 373. 



458 


INDEX. 


AnjH or Inju, see Jamalu-d-dln 
Husain. 

Antelopes, 83 ; grave of antelope 
at Jahangirpur (^ai^dpOra), 
90, 91, 12^, 129; milk of ante- 
lope, 148 ; prayer carpet made 
of skins of, 203. 

Andp Ray, see Ani ra’I. _ 

Aqa Mulla, brother of A^af J^an, 
i.e. Muhammad Ja'far Asaf 
(No. iii), rank dxed, 58. 

Aqam Haji, pretended Turkish 
ambassador, 144. 

*Aqil, Ij^waja, made bakhshi, 71 ; 
promoted, 207 ; made a lUan, 
439. 

‘Arab Khan, made fief- holder of 
Jalalabad, 103, 105 ; given 
elephant, 1 70. 

Aram Baiui, daughter of Akbar 
and BibI Daulat - ShM, 30 ; 
character of, 30. 

Arffhu^ia/e dance), 107 and 

note. 

Arjumarid Banu (Mumtdz Maliall), 
married to Khurram, Sulf:,a!i 
(Shah Jahiin), 224 and note ; 
birth of Dura, 282. 

Arjuii, Sikh, fifth OdrQ, favours 
Khusrau, 72 : put to death, *73 
and n. 1. 

*Arsh-(iHhydm (title of Akbar), 5. 

Ai'Klaii Bi, governor of Kahmurd 
fort, 118; waited upon Jahangir, 
125 ; appointed to Sahwaiii, 
203. 

Asad Mulla, story-teller, 377. 

Asaf Khan (No. iii), otherwise 
Mirza Ja*far Beg, son of Badi*u- 
z-zaman, of Qazwin (the Asaf 
No. iii of Blochmann), couplet 
on coins, 1 1 ; nephew of Mul^tar 
Beg, 16 ; made vizier, 16, 42. 
103 and n. 2 ; given fief i 
Panjab, 47 ; with Porwiz, 74 
left to guard IQiusrau, 82 
house visited by Jahangir, 132 ; 

g resents ruby, 148 ; dies at 
urban pur, 222-3 ; suspected 
of privity to Kabul plot of 
^usrau, 223. 

Asaf-ldi&n (No. ii), see (ihiy&su-d- 
din ‘Ali. 

Ayaf l^an (No. iv), stft Aba-l-hasan. 
Asirgarh, 34. 

Attock, fort of, 101. 

Avicenna quoted about wine- 
drinking, 30G. 


Ayin-i- Jahangir!, Jahangir’s regu- 
lations, 205. 

‘A^rnat Khan, 432 ; death, 443. 

‘Aziz Koka, ^an A*»im, son of 
Shamsu-d-din and Jiji Anga, 
rescued by Akbar, 40-2 ; accom- 
panies Jahangir in pursuit of 
Khusrau, 54 ; discovery of his 
letter to ‘Ali ^an, 79-81 ; 
hypocritical character, 138 ; 
governor of Gujarat, 153 ; sent 
to Deccan, 183 ; governor of 
Malwa, 200 ; Shadmdn, his .son, 
203 ; letter from, 203 ; begs to 
be sent against the Rand, 234, 
256 ; behaves badly, 257- S ; 
made over to Amf Khdn 
(No. iv) to be confined in 
Gwalior, but to he made com- 
fortable, 26 1 ; Akbar ap|)ears to 
Jahangir in a dream and begs 
forgiveness for ‘Aziz, 2H9 ; 
brought from Gwalior and par- 
doned, 287 ; gets lakh of rupees, 
etc., 289. 

B 

Babd Khurram, see Khurram Baba 
and Shah Jahan. 

Bdbar, emperor, defeats Ibrahim, 
Sultan, 4 ; makes garden, 4 ; 
styled Firdus-makanl^ o; waited 
cn by Dilawar Khan, 87 ; his 
stone terrace at Kabul, 108 ; 
his Memoirs, 109, 110 note, 
215 ; Jahangir visits his tomb, 
110; revisits .stone terrace, 121 ; 
defeats Hand Sungd, 250 ; verse 
by, 304. 

Bad luck, four causes of, ‘235. 

Badl*u-z-zamdn, fourth son of 
Shahrukh, 120 ; goes off to join 
Iflana, arrested and sent to 
Court, 127 ; gets 2,000 rupees, 
160 ; promoted, 163, 289, 360 ; 
waits on Jahangir, ‘202 ; ap- 
pointed to expedition against 
R&nd, ‘204. 

Bagha, son of Rdnn, 74. 

Bagldna, account of, 306. 

Bahddur, son of Mu^ffar Gujarati, 
makes disturbance, 49 ; death, 
•274. 

Bahddur, Sultan of Gujarat, 408. 

Baliudiir lOidn Qurbegi, promoted, 
81 ; governor of Qandaliar, 282. 
319 ; makes offering, 379. 



INDEX. 


459 


Baliaduru-l-mulk, given standard, 
255 ; promoted, 285. 

Bahlfll lA&n, 372, 405. 

Bahra-war, son of Mahabat Khan, 

346. 

Bair&m Khan, Akbar’s tutor, 38 ; 
kills Tard! Beg, 39 ; advises 
Akbar to kill Hemu, 40 married 
to Salima Sultai Begam, 232. 
Bai^ (Vaishya), Hindu caste, 245. 
Bak Bhal, village, 165. 

Bakhtar Khan Kalawant, ^Adil 
Khan’s favourite, 271. 

Bala Hi^ar, of Kabul, inspected, 
118. 

B&miyftn, 117 and note. 

Banarasi, Shaikh, misconduct at 
Patna and punishment, 175-6. 
Rang and huza, forbidden, 157. 
Bansibadan, elephant sent by Islam 
Khan, 237. 

Bappa, 250 n. 2. 

B&qi Khan, ruler of Transoxiana, 26. 
Bargls (Muhrattos), 220. 

Barba Sayyids, 64. 

BarkhardAr, son of *Abdu • r • 
Rahman, son of Mu’ayyid Beg, 
ordered back to his, Hef, 21 ; 

S iven title of Kh&n *Alam, 154. 
tt alto lUi&n *Alani. 
BarkhQrd&r, brother of *Abdu-llah 
FirOz-jang, gets title of Bahaci iir 
EJ^n, 146 ; promoted. 163. 
Bas&wal, 103. 

B&so, Raja of M&u, promoted, 49 ; 
sent in quest of Khusrau, 65 ; 
in charge of R&m Chand 
Bandllah, 87 ; appointed to 
army against RAn&, 200 ; death, 
252. 

Batoh, villi^ in Gujarat, 436. 
Bayazid, Sb&>kh, grandson of 
Sbei^ Salim, promoted, 32 ; 
receives title of Mu*a^m Khun, 
70 ; governor of Delhi, 137 ; 
promoted and sent to Delhi. 
171 ; sons promoted, 202. 
B&yazid Barha, 418. 

B&yazid Biydt, Quoted, 107 note. 
Bftyazid Mankali, pays respects 
along with his brothers on 
coming from Bengal, 166 ; sent 
off after getting ftrass, 170. 
B&ysung^r, son of DanW&l, 75. 

BAs Bahildur, title of Lila Begt 
son of Ni^m librarian to 
HumiiyOn, 21 ; held fief in 
Bihar, 21. 


Biz Bahidur Qalmaq, waits on 
Jahingir, 79 ; appointed to 
Deccan, 184. 

Bengal, account of, 207. 

Bizoar stones, goats with them 
brought from Carnatic, 240. 
Bhadan, name of AlimadilAd 
citadel, 423. 

Bhagwan Dis, R&ja, son of BihAri 
Mai, uncle (and adoptive father) 
of Min Singh, 16, 29 ; in battle 
in Gujarat, 42. 

Bhakra, village in Ghakhar country, 
96. 

Rhanwar, net, 99. 

Bhao Singh, son of Man Singh, 

S romoM 24, 140, 372 ; made 
lirza Raja, 266 ; goes home, 
268 ; offering of, 282 ; goes to 
Amber, 297 ; given a turban, 
329. 

Bhurat, grandson of Ram Chand 
Bandilah, made Raja, 231. 
Bharju, Raja of Baglana, 221, 396, 
411. 

Bhim Navuyan, of Gadeha, 411. 
Bhoj, Raja, 406. 

Bhoj, son of Bikramajit Bhadauriya, 
389. 

Bhugyai tribe, 97. 

Bid mfdld (willow-tree), 7. 

Bigara, meaning of title, 429. 

Bih&r Binu Begam, daughter of 
Jahangir, 19. 

Bihari Chand QanangO, to send 
infantry to Parwiz, 159 ; pro- 
moted, 160. 

Bihiri Mai, Raja, first RajpQt tp 
serve Akbar*, 16. 

Bihat River, source of, 92-3. 
Bihi|htabad, that is, Sikandra, 249. 
Bijay Ram, riot by, 29. 

Bika Begam, (step) great-grand- 
mother of Jahangir, wife of 
BAbar, her gaitlen at Kabul, 
106 and n. 1. 

Bikramajit, Raja, title of Patr D&s, 
22; sent to Gujarat, 50. See 
Patr DAs. 

Bikramajit, Sundar DAs, RAja, 325, 
402. 

Bikramajit, of Ujjain, founder of 
observatories, 22, 354. 
BfknunAjit, zamindar of BAndha, 
176. 

Bir Singh Deo, of Bandela, pro- 
moted, 24, 204, *231, 281 ; kills 
Aba-l-fa?l, 25; refiorts from. 



460 


INDEX, 


111; brings white cheeta, 139 : 
present to, 147. 

Bird, strange, from Zirbad( Sumatra, 
etc.), 272. 

Birthday, Jahflngir's, 9 and ii. 1. 

Bishata'n, gt-aiidson of Aba-l-fa^l, 
167. 

Blackstone throne, account of, 177. 

Blochmann quoted, 6 notes, and 
passim. 

Bokidy a tree, 6 note. 

Brahmans, duties of, 244, 357. 

Bughray cooking entertainment, 
T07 and note. 

Buland-akhtar, son of Khusrau, 
153. 

Bidghnr-khanas^ free eating-houses, 
%y 204. 

C 

Caldron, large, for Ajmir shrine. 
2.56. 

Cambay, account of, 415-17. 

Carrier-pigeons, 387. 

(.'arving, curious, 200. 

Chain of Just ice, 7. 

(vhaUs, dynasty, in Ka.shmir, 95. 

Chaml'tt (white jessamine), 6. 

Champft (sweet-scented flower), 5. 

1 7m// /r tree (plane), 7. 

(.'ha Ildar Sen, Kainindar, 428, 4.34. 

('handwalah, minaret erected at. 
•S3, till- Chandtila or Jandiala of, 
HI, 1.30. 

( 'h.-ipnttnaii in Qanauj, mangoes of. 
.377. 

(.'haran. Hin<li )>oet, 141. 

Ch.'irdin. J., traveller, quoted, 230 
note. 

(Jiaritics, I2.S. 

Clnuidlmritf rcwarfled, 09. 

Chauhmd't . on Jumna, made by 
Humavun, 137. 

Chectas, i3H. 240. 

(Jielebi, Miiliammad Husain, sent to 
make piiicha.ses in Persia, 237-8. 

Chhatri or Khatri, Hindu caste, 
244. 

Chimni (?) Bcgam, dau::hter of 
Shrdi Jahun, die.s at .-ijmir, 326 
(perhaps the name is Chamuni). 

Chin (^ilij, promoted. 111, 261 ; 
made a Khan. 199, 231 ; .^ent 
to administer Surat, 233, 201 ; 
M'aits on Jahangir, 200 ; mi.s- 
conduct and death, 301. 

Chingiz Khdn, customs of, 2.3, 08, 76. 


Chitor, Akbar killed Jitmal at, 
45, 250 ; taken, 251. 

Chronograms, 11, 12 and note, 38, 
104, 108, 109, 270. 

Coinage, gold and silver, 10-12, 
197 ; new coinage at Cambay, 
417-18. 

Column, iron, at Dhar, 407. 

Customs, abolition of, 47, 107-8, 
417. 

Cypress, 6. 

D 

Dahr, village, 70. 

Dahrah, garden near Agra, 182, 
232, 234, 252. 

Hulazak, Afghan tribe, 1(X>, 127. 

Dali, lake in Kashmir, 93. 

Dancing, religious, 173. 

Daniyal, Sultan, son of Akbar, 
birth, 34 ; account of, 35- 0 ; 
his elephants, 46 ; children, 
75 ; employs Daulat Khun, 89 ; 
gets horse from Akbar, 142 ; 
Jahangir directs that he he 
styled Shdhzada mar hum, 197. 

Dara Shukuh, birth of, 282. 

Darab, .son of ‘Alxfu-r-Rahim the 
Khunkhanan, dress given to. 
21 ; promoted and receives 
Gha/.ipur in tief, ISO ; receives 
dagger, ilOS ; his bravery, 313 ; 
re(;eiyes an elephant, 418. 

Darful, country, 158 and n. 3, 162 
and 11 . 1 ;.|>ro{)erly Dizful, the 
Desfulof the maps, in Khuzistan, 
Persia. Sat Addenda. 

Da'ud Karum, Afghan ruler of 
Bengal, 207. 

Daulat Khan, ancestor of Khan 
Jahnri Lodi, 87. 

Daulat Khan, father of Khan Jah&n 
Lodi, serves * Abdu-r-Rahim, 88. 

Daiilat Khan brings blackstone 
throne from Allahabad, 177 ; 
fuujdar of Allahabad and 
.Jaunpur, 217. 

Daulat- Shad mother of Shakaru-n- 
nisu and Aram Banu, .36. 

Dayanat Klidn, title of Qasim 'Ali, 
123; promoted, 200, 265; in- 
sults I'timaflu-d-duulah and is 
punished (text wrongly calls 
Dayunat Sabit ), 278-9 ; released, 
303, 306 .‘*318; sent to Gujarat, 
.331 ; rank restored, 333; brings 
*AlHbi-llah. 3.3.}. 



INDEX 


461 


Deonak^ a kind of monkey, 143. 

Dhar, account of, 407 ; inscription 
at. 408. 

Dhlrokar, Raja, 58. 

Dhurpml, or durpat. Hind! verse or 
song, 271 and n. 1. 

Diamond, called Chamkora, 4(X> ; 
nine diamonds sent from Bihar, 
379. 

Diamond ipines, 315. 

Dikhtan, village in Malwa, 406. 

Dil-ilmiz Garden, near Lahore, 00 ; 
Jahangir meets his mother 
there, 131. 

Dilaw a r, title of Ibrahim Khan 
Kiikar, 29, 30 ; promoteil, 49, 
77, 286, 298 ; opposed Khugruu, 
50, 62j given Jaunpur, 105 ; 
sends ruby, 248. 

Dilawar Khan, son of Daulat Khan 
and servant of Babar, put to 
death b^ Shir Shah, 88. 

Dilaw'ar Ivhan, or *Amid Shah 
Ohori, founder of Malwa 
dymasty, 407-8. 

Divine Faith, Aklmr’s, account of, 
60 and n. 2, 61 . 

Diw&li festival, 245, 268. 

Dogs, 126, 283, 288. 

Dohad parganah, 414, 445. 

Downton, Captain, 274 note. 

Drinking, Jahangir's rules for, 8 ; 
resolves not to drink on Friday 
eves, 20. 

Dulip, son of Ray Ray Singh, 
rebels, 76 ; defeated, 84 ; par- 
doned, 148 ; given dress of 
honour, 217 ; mode Raja, 218 ; 
sent to support Mirza Rustam, 
229 ; put to death, 259. 

Durga, Ray, death and account 
of, 134 and Ad<lenda. 

Durjan Sal, zamindar of Khokhara, 
315. 

DOet Muhammad, are Khwaja 
Jah&n. 

Dust storm, 247. 


X 

Bar-boring, 267-8. 

Eclipse, of moon, 160 ; of sun, 183, 
281. S^e cUmo Addenda. 
Elephants, rock near Jalal&bad 
carved into shape of elephant, 
103; prices of elephants, 140; 
death of two elephants from 


bite of a mad dog, 243 ; birth 
of an elephant, elephant 

huntiiig, 401. 

English, victory of, 274. 

Ermine, W., quoted, 5 n. 1 ; 6 
notes 2 and 4, etc. 

Eunuchs, custom of making in 
Sylhet, abolished by Jahangir, 
150-1, 168 : but see Isl&m’s 
presents, 247, unless indeed 
they were sent under orders 
mentioned in 151, 


F 

Farah, governor of, designs attack 
on Qandahur, 85. 

Farhat Khan, strikes Muhammad 
Hiisain, 44. 

Farid Bukhari, Bhaikh, confirmed 
in post of Mir Bal^hij 13 ; 
rais^ to rank of 5,000, 20 ; 
assists in quelling Rajput riot, 
30; sent in pursuit of Khusiau, 
53, 57 ; victory over Khusrau, 
64 ; given Bhairaw'ul and title 
of Murta^ Khan, 69 ; receives 
charge of Arjun < tHra’s children 
and houses, 72 ; Orman issued to, 
128 ; sends ruby ring, 132 ; ma<le 
terrace on Jumna, 137 ; removed 
from Gujarat on account of 
servant's oppression, 153 ; ap- 
pointed to the Pan jab, 178 ; 
presents New Year’s gifts, 192 ; 
seUled that he should lie 
governor of Pan jab, 198 ; ofl’er- 
ings of, 236, 282, 318 ; promoted 
to 6,000 with 5,(H)0 horse, 239 ; 
sent to Kangra, 283 ; suspects 
Silraj Singh, 311 ; death and 
character of, 324. 

Faridftbad, 57. 

FaridOn, son of Muhammad Qul! 
Barlis, promoted, 32, 143, 158, 
231 ; getsdef in Allahabad, 117 ; 
nven standard, 167 ; sent to 
Deccan, 184 ; dies at Udaipur, 
268. 

Farmuli, Afghan tribe, barricade 
Kabul streets, 197. 

Farrukh Beg, painter, gets present, 
159. 

Fath-htah, garden, 429, 434. 

Fath GajT elephant, 256. 

Fathpar, so called after conquest 
of Gujarat, 2. 



462 


INDEX. 


Fathu-llah, son of Hakim Aba-1- 
fath, involved in Khusrau's 
plot and imprisoned, 123. 

Fathu-llah, Hakim, promoted, 71. 

Fathu-llah, Khwajagi, confirmed as 
bak^i, 13. 

Fa^il, Mir, faujdarof Qabfllah, 160. 

Fa^il ^an, i.e. Agha Fa^il, 345. 

Fida’i IQian, title of Sulaiman Beg, 
131 ; promoted and sent to 
Deccan, 162 ; made hcJcJ^l of 
l^ah Jahan*s army, 256 ; dies, 
265. 

Fida'i ^an, titlejof Hidayatu-llah, 
383, 380 ; sent against the 
Jamindar of Jait{>ur, 390, 391. 

Fighani, poet, 150 and n. 1 ; quoted, 
359. 

FUfiniyd, explained, 308 and n. 3. 

Finch, W., quoted, 99 note, 121 
n. 2, 174 note, 381 note. 

Firdun-makdnit 5. See Babar. 

Fishing, 188, 436. 

Flowers, Indian, superior to all 
others, 5. 

Frank ()orts, pineapples grown at, 5. 

Frank saddles, 237. 

Franks of Goa plunder four vessels, 
255. 

Fruits, 6 ; Jahftngir’s partiality for 
mangoes, 5, 116; description of 
fruits, 116, 270, 350, 397, 422, 
435, 439. 


O 

Gad& ‘Ali, captures Muhammad 
Husain, 44. 

Gadk’i, Mulla, account of, 290. 

Oalahri (squirrel), animal called 
* 'master of mice,’ 104-5. 

Game-bag, 83, 126, 167, 191, 204, 
234, 369. 

Ghakkar tribe, 99. 

Gharchal, Badakhshan tribe, 120. 

Gharib-khana, in the Khyber, 117 
(now known as Landi-kotal). 

Ghaug, Muhammad, 426 and note. 

Ghazii Mir^, son of J&ni Beg, 
sister betrothed by Akbar to 
lyiusrau, 20 ; account of, 71 ;* 
rewarded with 30 lakhs of dams, 
75 ; sent to Qandahar, 86 ; waits 
on Jahangir, 131 ; poetry of, 
133 ; ordered to Qandahar, 151 ; 
reports about Qandahar, 173; 
death and character, 223^. 


Ghiyfis Bee, father of Nflr Jah&n, 
styled Ftimadu-d-daula, 22 and 
n. 2 ; put in charge of Agra, 57 ; 
his son Sharif executea, 122 : 
rank of 2,000, 199 ; made Vizier, 
200 ; house of, 249 ; receives 
rank of 5,000 with 2,000 horse, 
260 ; affronted by Dayanat, 278 ; 
promoted, 280, 281 ; ottering 
of, 318 : records death of grand- 
child, 326 ; contingent reviewed 
374 ; Jahangir gives his own 
turban to, 378. 

(Ihiyas Zain-khanI, diwanof Patna, 
173; punished, 176. 

Ghiyasu-d-din, Sultan of Mandu, 
murder of, 365. 

Ghiyasu-d-din *Ali, see Ni^ib Khan. 

Ghiyasu • d - din * Ali Agaf - khan 
(No. ii), father of NOru-d-din, 
122 . 

Ghorkhatri, near Peshawar, ignor- 
ance of faqirs at, 102. 

Oilds (cherry), 116 and n. 1. 

Gladwin, F. referred to, 8 n. 2. 

Goa, 215, 255. 

Gobind Das, Vakil, killed, 292. 

Gobindwal, news of victory received 
at, 63 ; residence of ArjunGarQ, 
72. 

Gra}>e8, 5, 404, etc. 

Gujars, caste, 91. 

Gul-afshan, Bnbar’s garden at Agra, 
4-5. 

Gul-rukh Begam, mother of Salima 
Sultan Begam, 232. 

Gulab-pashi, ceremony of, 265. 

Gulbahar, cherries of, 104. 

Gwalior, 4, etc. 

H 

J/abshl, kind of grape, 5. 

iladi, Muhammad, quoted, 15 n. 4, 
19 n. 6.* 

Hafiz, omens taken from, 214, 381. 

Hafiz Jamiil, fountain near Ajmir, 

' 257, 269 n. 1. 

Haidar, Shaikh, of Ahmadabad, 426. 

kailstorm, 92. 

Haji Bi Uzbeg, given 4,000 rupees, 
159 ; promo^, 281 ; gets title 
of Uzbeg Kh&n, 285. 

Haji Koka, sister of 9a*&dat Yar 
Koka, foster-sister of Akbar, 46. 

Haji Mirak and others released 
from Gwalior, 180. 



INDEX. 


463 


Hakim *Abdu>^-^akQr, 267. 

Hakim 'Ali, physician, learned in 
mathematics, 68 ; subaqueous 
chamber, 152 ; death and 
character, 154. Se^ eUso p. 124, 
where the * Yad* is a mistake 
of text. 

Hakim Muwffar, 58; rank fixed, 
79. See Jalalu - d - din Hakim. 

Hakim $adra, receives titje of 
Masihu-z-zaman, 155, 267 ; pro- 
duces hermaphrodite cat, 374. 

Hakim Ydd *Ali, 124. The Ydd is 
a mistake of text. The name 
is Hakim *Ali, and he is the 
man who treated Akbar in his 
last illness. 

Humid Gujarati, physician, 188-9. 

Haridas Jhala, servant of the Rana, 
273. 

Hasan, Mirza, one of ghahrukh's 
twin sons, seized as he was 
going to join Kh^usrau, 54 and 
n. 2 (apparently he was put to 
death, as no more is heard of 
him). 

Hasan, gb^ikhi son of Shaikh Baha, 
27 and n. 2. See MuqarraV) 
Kh&n. 

Hasan Abdal, place, 9V. 

Hasan *Ali Turkuman promoted, 
248. 

Hasan and Husain, twin sons of 
^ahrukh, .54, 119: for Flusain 
itee cUeo 1 18, 127. 

Hasan Beg, ambassador of the 
king of Persia, receives 10,000 
rupees, 90. 

Hasan Miy&na, 405. 

Haefhim, ^waja, of Dahbid, 303. 

Ha^im Khan, governor of Orissa, 
127 ; sends forty-four elephants, 
183 ; made governor of Kashmir, 
199; has loave to go there, 203 : 
^afdar Kh&n substituted for 
him, 256. 

HaeilpOr, villas, 362, 404. 

Hatim, son of Mangli, or Mankli, 
29. 

Hatya, village, 97. 

Hazara, a soothsayer, 43. 

Haz&ras, 110. 

HemQ, rebel, .38, 39 ; killed, 40, 59. 

Hidayatu-llah, styM Fid&*i Khan, 
383. 

Hilal Kh&n, eazdweU, 67 ; makes 
ring-hunt at Rohtas in Pan jab, 
129. 


Himmat ^an, promoted, 439 ; 
he is Allah -yar Koka, 406. 

Hind&l, father of Ruqayya Sult&n 
Begam, 48 ; tomb of, at Kabul, 

no. 

Hindu castes, 244. 

Hodal, Jahangir arrives at, 57. 

Holi ceremonies, 245. 

Humam, Hakim, buried at Hasan 
Abdal,* 100. 

Humayun, emperor, .5 ; gave title 
of Shirin - qalam to *Al)du-8- 
^amad, 15 ; death of, 38 ; 
hunted rhinoceros near the 
Kama, 102 ; poured water on 
saint's hands, 135 ; betrothed 
SalimaSultan Begam to Bairam, 
232. 

Hunting, Jahangir prefers shooting 
with a gun, and on one day 
killed ei^teeii deer, 45 ; hunted 
for 3 months 6 days, 83, 120, 
121, 125, 130, 191, 202, 204,2.34, 
248, 276, 342, 344, 369. 

Husain Beg, diwan of Bengal, 
makes offering, 371. 

Husain Beg, sent by Shah * Abbas, 
86 ; makes offering, 372. 

Husain (properly Hasan) Beg 
Badakh^hi joins Khiisrau, 54 ; 
suggests going to Kabul, 66 ; 
shoots at boatmen, 67 ; pro- 
duced before Jahangir, 68 ; 
sewn up in ox-hide and dies, 
69 ; reference to, 109. 

Husain Chelebi sent to Persia, 
237-8. 

Husain .J&mi, his dream, 30 ; 
disciplc|fe» rewarded, 46 ; gets 
twentv lakhs of dams, 72. 

Husain Khan, governor of Herat,86. 

Husain Mirz&, son of §h&hrul^, 
alleged petition from, 1 18 ; 
killed, 127. 

Htmini (kind of gra()e), 5 n. 1, 404. 

Hus&mu-d-din, dervish, son of Gh&zi 
KhAn Badakh^i, married to 
Abal-l-fazl’s sister, 166 and n. 1. 

Hu.s&mu-d-din, son of Jam&lu-d- 
din Inja, 404. 

Hashang, son of Isl&m Kh&n, comes 
from Bengal, 269 ; produces 
Magh.«, 2.^ ; promotra, 284 ; 
styled Ik'-Am M&n, 295. 

Hashang GhQri, Sultan of M&ndQ, 
365, 408. 

Hydrophobia, death of two 
elephants from, 243, 



464 


INDEX. 


I 

Jbachkidn, 188. 

Ibr&him, son of Qutbu-d* 

din Koka, promoted and styled 
Kish war Khan, 76 ; governor of 
Rohtas, 144 ; faujdar of Uch, 
170 ; joins army against ‘Usman, 
209 ; killed in battle, 210. 
alfto Ki^war Khan. 

Ibrahim Haba, Shaikh, the Afghan, 
conhned in Chunar, 77. 

Ibrahim Husain, Mir Bahr, ftcMMhi 
of ahadis, 149 ; sent to ‘Aziz 
Koka, ‘257-8. 

Ibrahim Husain, Mi”“if rebel, 40. 

Ibrahim Khan, promot^ and made 
joint -paymaster of household, 
260 ; his offering, ‘281 ; sent to 
Behar, ‘284 ; conquers Kh^ikhara, 
315 ; sent to Bengal, 373 ; sends 
diamonds, 379. 

Ibrahim Khan Kakar, ‘29. See 
Dilawar Khan. 

Ibrahim Lodi, Sultan, son of 
Sikandar Lodi, kille<i, 4, 58 ; 
tyranny of, 87. 

Iftil^ar ^an, father of Mu‘taqid 
Khan, sends rare elephant, 170 ; 
promoted for good service in 
Bengal, 177 ; joins army against 

* Usman, *209 ; killed in £ittlc, 

210 . 

Ihtim&m Khan (Kotwal), sent to 
bring Badi‘u-z-zaman tc> Court, 
r27 ; promoted and afijiiointed 
to the charge of the Bengal fleet, 
144 ; in expedition against 

* Usman, ‘209. According to the 
Iqbal-'nama he had charge of 
Mir Ha.saii, son of Shahrukh. 

Ikhtiyaru l-mulk, thrown from his 
horse and killed, 44. 

Ikrarn Khun, .son of Islam Khan, 
433. 

Ilf Kjiaii, promoted, 143, *298. 

Imam Quli, ruler of t'ransoxiuna, 
puts Mirza Husain, or at ]ea.st 
the pretended Mirza Husain, to 
death. 1*27. 

‘Inayat Beg, mistake for Ghiya.s 
Beg, ‘2*2. 

' Inayat Khan (text has 0hiya.s), 
promoted, 158 and n. 1, *199 ; 
made ‘Inayat Khan, 160. 

in jo, eee Jamalu-d-din Hu-sain. 

Iqbal-nama quoted, 

Ir&dat Khan, brother of Asaf Khan 
(Ja'far), made haMfi/ir of Patna 


and H&jipQr, 117, promoted, 

^ 300, 372. 

Iraj, eldest son of Khankhanan, 
dress of honour sent to, 21 ; 
obtoins leave from Parwiz, 180 ; 
waits on Jahangir, 190 ; given 
jewelled dagger, 19*2 ; styled 
Shah-nawaz £han, 197 ; given 
sword, 204 ; sentagaiii to Deccan, 
*2*21 ; promoted, ‘222 ; comes to 
Court, 234 ; sent back to Deccan, 
‘243 : offering of, 295 ; defeats 
Malik ‘Ambar, 313, etc. 

Irvine, W., quoted, ‘22 n. 3, etc. 

‘'Isil Tarj^nn, Mirza, promoted, 
*2*25, 296 ; came from Sambhal 
and honoured, 301. 

Islam, Khan, original name ‘Alfi'u- 
d-din, 31 ; letters from, 1 13, 199 ; 
sword sent to, 117, 248 ; pro- 
moted, 144, 171 ; he and his 
brother Q^sim could not agree, 
147 ; presented with a lakh of 
rupees collected by him, 180 ; 
sent to Behar ancf to Bengal, 
in spite of objections about his 
youth, 208; madeDaccahishead- 
quarters, ‘209 ; sends 160 ele- 

g hants, 227 ; sends the elephant 
iansibadan, 237 ; sends ele- 
phants and fifty eunuchs, 247 ; 
made officer of 6,(KK>, 256 ; death 
and character, 251. 

IsrnA*!!, son of Muhammad Cj^aus, 
439. 

I*tibar IDian, given Gwalior in lief, 
113 ; offering of, *28*2, 319 ; pro- 
moted, 37*2. 

Ptimad Khan, of Gujnrat. 4*29, 4.30. 
I'timadii d-daula.‘2*2. •Si.t GhiynsBeg. 
[‘tiqad Khan, title of Asaf Khan, 
the father of Nfir -Jalian, and 
the Asaf No. i'* of Hlochmunn, 
*260. Su: Ahu-l-liasiiii. 

1‘tiqud Khun, a younger brother (?) 
of A^f No. iv, and also known 
as Shapur, ‘218 n. 3: he became 
governor of Kashmir. 319 : hi.s 
presents, 319 ; promoted, 3*20 ; 
censured for allowing pristniers 
t5 escape, 373. (For this l*tu)iul 
9€e. Moasirii-l-Uiiiara, i, 180.) 


Jadrup, Sanvasi, 35.5, .3.39. 
JogiiniiAth, ftaja, son of Bih&ri Mai, 
dress, etc., presented to, 16. 



INDEX. 


466 


Jagat Gofl&’In (Jodh Bai) daughter 
of Mota Raja, mother of Sultftn 
Khurram, that is gb&h Jah&n, 
19. 

Jagat Singh, eldest son of M&n 
Singh, marriage-pft of 8,000 
rupees sent to, on the marriage 
of his daughter to JahAngir, 144 ; 
father of Mah& Singh. 266. 

Jagat Singh, grandson of R&nft 
Amar, 2M, 311, 334. 

Jagdalak, Afghanistan, 104. 

Ja^an, RiQa (of Dhandhera, 
Akbar-n&ma, trans., ii, 354); 
his jagir given to Mah&bat 
Khin,^l 

Jah&n-&rA, garden at Kabul made 
by JahAngfr, 106. 

JahAndAr, younger son of JahAngfr, 
20; IslAm KhAnmade his tutor, 
143 ; examined by J^ianglrand 
found to.be a bom devotee (?), 
156. (He died unmarried. 
Apparently he is the Sultan 
Taut of Terry.) 

JahAngfr, his accession, 1 and note; 
birth, 2, 9 and n. 1 ; named 
Sult.An l^lim, 2 ; alw^ called 
by Akbar Sbei^liil BAbA, 2; 
assumes title of JahAngfr and 
Naru-d-din, 3 ; fondness for 
mangoes, 5 ; Chain of Justice, 
7 : establishes twelve Regula- 
tions, 7>10 ; drinking hi^its, 
8 ; forbids mutilations and 
slaughter of beasts on birth- 
day, etc., 9; coinage of, 10-12; 
releases State prisoners, 10 and 
n. 2; eldest child, SuljtAnu-n- 
nisA, 15 and n. 1 ; Khusniu, 15 
and n. 1 ; his sun Farwfz, 18 ; 
other children, 19; abstains 
from wine on Friday eyes, 20 ; 
orders names of God. to be col- 
lected, 21; reads with *Abdu-n- 
Nabf, 22 ; orders about grants 
of land and about seals, 23 ; 
favours Mini Sult.An, son of 
MfrsA Sbibruldif 24 ; causes 
Abul-1-fafl to be murdered, 
24-5 ; Shaikh BAyairid’s mother 
his nurse for one day, 32 ; bis. 
sisters, 36; abolishM fees , on 
presents, excuses nobles 
from making gilts, 49 1 abolishes 
transit dues, 47 ; cdebimtes Kew 
Year, 48; told of Sight of 
pursues him next 


morning, 53 ; account of Divine 
Faith, t^l ; advantage of acting 
on his own judgment, 68 ; estab- 
lishes free eating-houses, 75: 
meets bis mother, 76;solar weigh- 
ment, 77 ; hunting, details of, 83 ; 
resolves to take Transoxiana, 
89; marches towards Kabul, 
90 ; monument to antelope, 90 ; 
nuurch through Ghakkar coun- 
try, 96 ; encamps at Ali Masjid, 
and traverses Khyber, 102; has 
an elephant carved in stone, 
103 ; describes stages to Kabul, 
104-5 ; enters Kabul city, 105 ; 
visits gardens, 106 ; makes 
JahAn-Ara garden, 106 ; records 
abolition of customs, 1(17 : visits 
Babar’s seat, 108 ; engraves 
name there, 109; knows Tiirki 
and adds to BAbor’s Memoirs, 
109, 1 10 and note ; visits BAbar’s* 
tomb, 110; lunar weighment, 
111 ; visits Khurranr. (ShAh- 
JahAn) in 0rta-‘BAgh, 115; 
arranges to leave Kabul, 116 ; 
large spider, 117 ; visits IMbar^s 
throne-place. 121 ; lUtuBrau’s 
plot, 122 ; solar weighment, 
125; sends for names of God, 
129 ; saw mother at Dil-Amfs 
Garden, near Lahore, 131 ; asks 
Jagat Singhs daughter in 
marriage, 144 ; marries her, 
IM ; aunt's death, 144 ; lunar 
weighment, 146 ; visits father's 
toniD and account of building 
there, 152 ; character of son 
JahAndAr, 156 ; compuses ode, 
158 ; marries RAm Chand 
Bandllah’s daughter, 160 ; 
cruelty to servants, 164 ; game- 
bag, 167 ; orders almt eunuchs, 
150, 168 ; black-stone throne, 
177 ; about damage tocrops, 163, 
182 ; does not shoot or eat meat 
on Sundays and Thursdays, 184 ; 
dangerous tiger hunt, lM-7 ; 
does not eat fish which have 
no scales, 188 ; fishing, 188 ; 
hunting, 188 ; game-bag, 101 ; 
order to lamj^hters, 208 ; 
relieves Mlr-l-^Adl and QA«1 
from ceremony nf prastration, 
203 ; prohibits certain practices 
of Amirs, 205 ; illness, 226 ; 
composes a oouriet, 228 ; experi- 
ment on fowl, 238; gives money 


30 



466 


INDEX. 


to Plr for ft mo^ue, 

241 ; wftlked 2 miles to Ajmir, 
253 ; visits Pushkftr Uke, 254 ; 
cftldron for Ajmir shrine, 256; 
shootinff ftt F^hkftr, 264 ; ill- 
ness, 2fil ; bores his ears, 267 ; 
Akbar appears to him in a 
dream, 269 ; visits Jam&l, 
269 ; Akbar’s fondness for fruit, 
270 ; Jahdnffirl 270 ; de- 
scription of strange bird, 272 ; 
senoB Ran& farman bearing 
impression of bis fingers, 273 
and note, 274 ; receives Sultan 
J^urram, 277 ; gifts to der- 
vishes, ^9 ; resolves to gu 
to Deccan, 280 ; gives name 
of D&r& BJ)ukah to Sult&n 
^urram’s son, 282 ; receives 
Sbfib Jab&n’s offerings, 285-6 ; 
shows bis skill to Kunwar 
Karan, 286>7 ; visits Ajmir 
shrine, 297 ; lights up Ana 
Sigar, 298; drinking nabits, 
307 ; visits I*tinifidu-d-daulah, 
318 ; ruby and pearls, 322 ; 
account of Abyssinian elephant, 
323; married when prince a 
daughter of R&wal Bhim, 325 ; 
death of granddaughter, 32G ; 
his grief and order that 
Wednesday be called Kam- 
shamba, 327 ; birth of grand- 
son, Sb&h Sbii>&*at, 328 ; puts 
railing round Mu*lnu • d - din's 
tomb, 329 ; recalls Parwtz, 329 ; 
describes outbreak of plague, 
330; has marble statues made 
of K&n& and his son, 332 ; is 
weighed, 332; wrestler’s per- 
formances, 335 ; conversation 
about dea^ of Mlrza, 338 ; 
anecdote about a thief, 339 ; 
rides in an English (?) carriage, 
340 ; leaves Ajmir, 340 ; account 
of what he did there, 341 ; at 
R&msar, 342 ; account of sdnu 
birds, 343 ; hunting, 344 ; Nar- 
Ja'nfinshootsabird,3^; Persian 
melons, 350; honours I *timadu- 
d-daulah by allowing ladies to 
unveil before him, 351 ; large 
banyan-tree, 351 ; account of 
four • homed antelope, 352 ; 
executes a matriciae, 353 ; 
large tamarind-tree, 353 ; vinta 
UJjain, 359 ; lai:^ banyan, 
3W; renamed Sfingor Kamftl- 


pfir, 361 ; tiger-shooting, 363 ; 
arrives at M&nda, 363 ; lemnd 
about M&nda, 364; game^g, 
369; remits offerinn by ser- 
vants, 370; shoots lion, 371; 
executes captain of the guard, 
373; sends cup to Sb&h ' Abbas, 
374; shoots tiger, 374; takes 
his turban off and gives it to 
@^y&8 Beg, 378 ; prays for 
rain, 378; takes omen from 
Hafi^, 381 ; visits Haft Man^r 
in Manda, 381 ; visits buildings, 
384 ; invents nddtrl dress, 384 ; 
ives feast, 385; styles Thurs- 
ay Mubarak-shamba, 386 ; wild 
plantain, 386; carrier-pigeons, 
387 ; receivespomegranatesfrom 
Mecca,391 ; receives Sb&h Jah&ti, 
and honours him, 393-5; opinion 
about bananas (plantains), 397 ; 
receives BJbeh Jah&n’s gifts, 
399-401 ; goes to Gujarat, 401 ; 
seedless grapes, 404 ; hunting 
and good shot, 404 ; at Dhar, 
406-7; orders removal of iron 
column, 407 ; prescribes luke- 
warm water for elephants, 410 ; 
describes lotus, 412 ; liking for 
rohu fish, 414; at Cambay, 415; 
on board a 417 ; strikes 

new coins, 4T8; leaves CamlMy, 
419 ; describes Gujarat fish and 
vegetables, 419 ; fishes, 436 ; 
expels Sewras, 438 ; l^atows 
books on Gujarat Shaikhs, 439 ; 
charities, 440 ; at D^had, 445. 
Jah&ngir Quli Beg, Turkm&n, also 
called Jftn-sipar Khan, 398. 
Jahangir QulI Khan, eldest son of 
* Aziz Koka, gets title of Shaifisu- 
d-dln, 144; sent to Gujarat as 
father’s deputy, 153 ; sends 
jewels, 163 ; sends silver throne, 
168 ; promoted, 279,280 ; offering 
of, 283 ; goes to Allahabad, 289, 
302 ; sent to Behar, 373. 
Jahdnffiri *tj(f (otto of roses), 270. 
Jah&ii^rpar, hunting-box, 90-1. 
(The Shakhopura of the maps ; 
it is also called Jah&n^r&bftd ; 
it is west of Lahore.) 

M'i-naLwOz (praver carpets), 203. 
JaitpOr, zamindar of, 389; par- 
aon^, 391 ; comes to Court, 403 
Jdia (a raft), described, 101. 

JalAl Gakkhar, 130. 

Jal&l&bid mentioned, 125, 176. 



INDEX 


467 


Jal&la-d-dln Maa*ad, death of, and 
hia mother’s devotion, 141. 

Jalalu-d-din Muhammad, see Akbar. 

Jalalu-d-dln, Mu^afl^ Hakim, 79 ; 
death and account o^, 123. 

J&lnapo r, gb&h Murad’sdeath at, 34. 

Jam, the, zamindar, 443. 

Jam&lu-d -din Husain An ja (or In jQ ), 
aut-ihor of dictionary, rewarded, 
46, 58 ; sent to advise Khusrau, 
64 ; waits on Jahan^r, 160-1 ; 
*Adil Khan asks for, 176 ; 
received at Bijapur, 182; report 
by, 272 ; arrives fi^m Bijapur, 
298 ; promoted, 299, 300 ; offer- 
ing of, 317 ; styled ‘A;pudu-d* 
daulah, 320 ; his son, 404. 

Jamil Beg gets 7,Cl00 rupees to 
distribute among the cavalry, 
61 (apparently the Wazir Jamil 
of p. 17 of text). 

Jan Beg (or t^&n Beg), Waz!ru-1- 
mulk, 20 and n. 3 ; hears of 
Oight of Khusrau, 52 ; 57 ; death 
of, 136. 

JanI, Mirza, account of, 223 ; death 
at Burhaiipur, 223. 

Jarric, Du,* quoted, 28 n. 2, 52 
It. 1, 69 n. 1. 

Jay Singh, son of Maha Singh, 386 ; 
promoted, 389. 

Jay Singh Deo, Raja, 364. 

Jeddah, customs at, 417. 

Jesus, carving of, on a filbert, 201. 

Jharokha (exhibition window), 205, 
242, 266. 

JhinffA, insect (?), 315 and n. 2. 

Jiji Anga, mother of *Az!z Koka, 40. 

Jtiauddr cruelly put to death, 164. 

JUaiffdna (bridle-mpney), perquisite 
of, aboli.shcd, 46 and n. 3. 

Jitmal shot by Akbar at Chitor, 45. 

Jogi and tiger, strange story, 157. 

Jo|p near Pushkar, 254. 

Jugglers, 143. 

Jumna River, source of, 4. 

Jumping competition, 105. 

Jatra, a mistake for Khuzistan {$ee 
Addenda), 158 n. 3,’ 162 note. 


K 

Kabir, gbAihh, of 8b*ihh Salim’s 
family, 29. See 9bejk*at. 
Kabul, «mh&nglr visits, 105 ; fruits, 
116. 

Kahdre (bearers) hamstrung, 164. 


Kalind, hill, source of the Jumna, 4. 

Kaliyadaha, description of, 354. 

Kalyan, son of RAja BikramAjft, 
i.e. Patr Das, misconduct and 
punishment, 104. 

Kalyan, Raja, olQBcial of Bengal, 
offering of, 192 ; promoted, 199; 
governor of Orissa, 202; pro 
moted end made Raja, 326 ; 
inquiry about, 389 ; pronounced 
innocent. 390, 402. 

Kaly&n, Raja, of Idar, 427. 

Kalyan Ray, sut^erintendent of 
port, Cambay, 417. 

Kama, river, 101. 

Kamal Chaudhari, 67. 

Kam&l Khan, slave, died, 149, 150. 

Kamal, gat'd {nU (hu'dsrnan) st 
tig^r-hiint, 186 : sfv'led Shikar 
Khdn, 4fH) 

Kamdl, .Say . id, failed to stop 
Khusrau, 59 ; distinguished 
himself in battle, 60, 64. 

Kamdlu-d-din Yedgai *Aii, Persian 
ambassador, 196. 

K&mil Khdn, title of Khuriam, 
son of 'Aziz Koka, 188. 

Kamrdn’s garden, Ijahore, 68. 

Kankriya ta.nk, AMntuhibad, 420. 

Karam Chand, son of Jaganndth, 
promoted, 156. 

Karam Sen Rdtlior, promotea, 

Karamsi, wife of Jahangir, mother 
of Bihar Band Begum, 19 and 
n. 3. 

Karan, son of Rdn.d A mar Singh, 
26, 273 ; waits on Hhah Jahdn, 
276 (cf. Roc), 277 -8 ^ Jahdninr 
exhibits his slcil! 286-4 ; 
receives presen t of 50. (M)0 ru [;6ca, 
287 ; gifts to, 289 ; gets leave, 
293; returns, 317; statue of, 
332. 

Kdriz, near Herat, melons of, 270, 
422, 435. 

Kashmir, account of, 94, 96 ; strange 
births at, 406 ; plague in, 442. 

Kaukab, son of Qamar Kl^n, 
whipped and imprisoned, 171 1 
escapes and is recaptured, 440 ; 
account of, 440-2. 

Kaukab-i‘tdli\ silver coin, 11 ; 
large coin (though called a 
ntuAr, it probably was silver) 
given to Persian ambassador, 
2,37. 

K^ord, fiower {Pamianw), 6. 

Koaho Ddf*. .son of Rdy Kalah, 181. 



46b 


INDEX. 


Kedio Du M&ra, 19 n. 3 ; pro- 
moted,21,79, 296, 297, 390,410; 
horse sent to Bengal for, 170. 

Ktitkl, flower (Paiieiatitrs), 6 and n. 4. 

Khalilu-Uah, son of GhiyAsu-d-din, 
pays his respects, 131 ; account 
of, 131 ; death of, 145, 305. 

Khan *Alani, title of Barhhdrd&r, 
son of *Abdu-r-Raliman, 154; 
appointed ambassador to Persia, 
248 ; ghah *Abb&s allows him to 
smoke, 371 ; sends melons, 43.5. 
Sett of M Barkhflrcl&r. 

Kh&n A*zam, see *Azlz Koka. 

Kh&n Dauran, aee ghah Beg. 

Khan Jahaii Lodi, original name 
Pir Khan, received title of 
galabat Khan, 87 ; character of, 
89 ; given title of Khan .lahan, 
128 ; skill as shot, 129 ; raised 
to rank of 5,000, 139 ; offers to 
go to Deccan, 161 ; sent for, 
296 ; takes leave, 299 ; pro- 
mot^; 372. 

AAdiif, value of coin, 06 and n. 2. 

Kh&njar Khan, brother of *Abdu- 
^ llah Khan FliHz Jang, pro- 
moted, 163. 

Khan jar l^an, title of galili, 230. 

Kh&nkhanaii, ece *Alidu-r-Ralilm. 

Khar, village, 08 and n. 1. 

Kharataru, Sewra sect, 4.37. 

Khawa^ Khdii, jagirdur of Qanauj, 
death of, 328. 

Khi;i;rKhaii, late ruler of Khandesh, 
presents to, 76. 

Khi^rabad, apiiarent source of 
Jumna, 4, 1.34. 

KhOb-AHuh, son of gh&h-liftz 
Kamba, promoted, 325. 

Khan-para (congestion of blood), 
226 and ii. 1. 

KhOrda coiui^uered, 4.3.3. 

Khurrain, Mb&, name of ghah 
•JiUian, birth of, 19; brought 
up by Ruqayya Begam, 48; 
rank of 8,0U0, 87 ; lunar ireigh- 
ment in Urta earden, 115; 
reveals Khuarau^ plot, 123 ; 

f iven flef, 132; jewels given to, 
56 ; marriage present of 50,000 
rupece sent to house of Muzafiar 
Husain Mlrzd, whose daughter 
was engaged to Khurram, 159 ; 
niarriage took place, 180 ; his 
rank increased from 8,000 to 
10,000, 192 ; helps AnQp Rfty 
with tiger, 186 ; rank increased 


from 10,000 to 12,000, 217; 
his marriage with i*tiq&d’s 
daughter Ariumand B&nO 
(MumtAz-mahall), 224 and n. 2; 
makes New* Year’s ofibring, 
236 ; sent to visit Akbars 
tomb on anniversary, 247 ; sent 
against the RAna, 256, 2.58, 
259, 260, 265 ; his success, 273, 
276 ; waits on Jah&ngir, 277 ; 
birth of son (D&ra ), 282 ; presents 
rare ruby, 285 ; promoted to 
equal rank with Parwiz, 288 ; 
his weighment, 306; tastes wine, 
306 ; increase of rank, 320 ; 
leaves for Deccan, 337 : gets 
title of Shdh Sultan Murrain, 
338 ; enters Burhanpur, 368 ; 

S ‘ven a drass, 377 ; birth of 
lughter (RashanarA), 380; his 
Inception, 393-4 ; increased 
rank, .395 ; gives ruby, etc., 
to Jahiingfr, 300 ; his weigh- 
ment, 424 ; presents fruit, 
4.39. 

Khurram, son of *Az!z Koka, pro- 
moted from 2,000 to 2,500, 23 ; 
ap|)Ointed governor of l^rath or 
.Jilnagadh, 155 ; gets title of 
KAmal KhAn, 188. 
Khu^i-khabar KhAn, title given to 
ghamsT, 64. 

Khusrau, Spit An, eldest son of 
.JahAngir, given a lakh of rupees, 
12 ; his night, 51 ; cAiise of 
mother's suicide. .55 ; 58 ; 59 ; 
attendants seized, 61 ; attacks 
Lahore, 62 : defeated, 64 ; cap- 
tured, 66, 67 ; brought l^efore 
.lahAnglr, 68, 70, 72 ; chains 
removed. 111 ; his plot, 122, 
130 ; his daughter inspected by 
Jahangir, 149 ; son born to 
him by daughter of *AzIz Koka 
and called by JahAngir Buland- 
akhtar, 153 ; personated by one 
Qutb, 173 ; note about blinding, 
174 n. 1, 222 ; allowed to pay 
his respects, 252 ; forbidden to 
do so, 261 ; has, a son by the 
daughter of Muqim, 321 ; made 
over to A^af KhAn, 336. 
Khusrau Beg, slave of MirzA KhAn 
(*Abda - r • Rahim), came from 
Patna and waited on JahAngir, 
240. 

Khusrau Bi Uzbeg, waited on 
JahAngir and received dress. 



INDEX. 


469 


etc., 206 ; aprainted to Sarkar 
of Mewar and promoted, 229, 
282 ; death, 284. 

^w&ja, Muhammad Husain, the 
brother of Khwaja Muhammad 
Q&sim. j8ee3tuhammad Husain 
lUiwftja. 

Khwaja Beg Mfrzil ^afawi. governor 
of Ahmadnagar, 181 ; good 
conduct, 182 ; his adopted son 
9alih, 230. 

Khwaja Jah&n, title of Dust 
Muhammad, 46, 53, 57 ; makes 
offering, 167 ; ordered to make 
u house, 191 ; promoted, 217, 
219, 286, 326 ; waits on Jah&npr, 
225 ; sent to make inquiries, 
231 ; his melon-bed, 241 ; 5,000 
rupees eiven him for distri- 
bution, 249 ; offering, 317. 

Khw^a Mir, son of Sult&u ^wAja, 

Khwaja TAbat, or ‘coffin KhwAja,* 
mummy of, 117. 

Khwaja YAdgAr, brother of ‘Abdu- 
llah ^An, receives title of 
Sardar KhAn, 237 ; promoted, 
239. 

Kif Ayat ^An, titleof MirzA Husain, 
376 ; promoted, 439. 

Ki^n Chand, son of Mota RAja, 
made officer of 1,000, 128. 

Kishan Chand, son of the Raja 
of Nagorkot, made a Raja, 
281. 

Kis^han DAs, accountant of stables, 
received the rank of 1,000, 
226. 

Kishan Singh, did good service, 
and was wounded in fight with 
RanA, 151 ; promoted, 151,281 ; 
death of, 291-3. 

kind of grapo, 5 n. 1. 

Kishwar l^An, son of Qutbu-d-din, 
governor of Rohtas, 144 ; pre- 
sented twenty -two elephants, 
165 ; promoted and made 
faujdar of Uch, 170; killed, 
210. Stt also IbrAhlm Sb^kh- 

Kot TirAh, 8 kos from JalalAbad, 
2U.3. 

KQch BihAr, two daughters of this 
zamindar who had lieen taken 
by IslAm KhAn, together with 
a son and ninety-four elephants, 
produced before JahAngir, 269 ; 
zamindar of, 44.3, 444. 

Kuniaon, Raja of, 218. 


L 

LAchin QaqshAl, 434. 

Lachmi NarAyan of KOch BihAr, 
443, 444. 

Lahore, papes abundant at, 5; 
uews from, 247. 

Lakhm! Chand, Raja of Kumaon, 
brought to Court, 218. 

La‘l KalAwant died, and a concu- 
bine poisoned herself, 150 

LAla Beg, styled BAz Bahadur, 21, 
47. Se^ Baz Bahadur. 

Lanka • Pandit, envoy of *Adil 
Khan, 162. 

Lashkar KhAn, 265. See Mu‘taqid 
KhAn. 

Leyden, J., quoted, 5 note, etc. 

Lotus flowers, 412. 

Lunar weighing, 239, etc. 


X 

MAdan, blacksmith, of MAndQ, 364. 

MAdho Singh, brother's son of 
MAn Singh, presented with flag, 
17 ; misconduct, 55. 

Maghs, brought by 
account of, 236. 

Maha Singh, grandson of MAn 

Singh, son of Jagnt Singh, pro> 
moted to 2,000, 17 ; appointed 
to Bangash, and Rta lias 

made his tutor. 111 ; sent to 
Banga.^, 118 ; given standard. 
168 ; sent to quell BikramAjlt 

of Bandha, 176 ; does not 

succeed Man Singh, but is 
promoted, and given Garh.*!- 
katanga in flef, 2(16 and n. 3 ; 
receives title of Raja, 297 : 
sends elephants, .31 S ; promoted. 
.328 ; sons wait u]M>n .Jahangir. 
345 ; dies of drink, ,377. 

Mahabaiv |)arganah assigned . to 
MahAbat, 116. 

Mahabat, title of Zamana Beg, son 
of Ghayur Beg of Kabul, pro- 
moted, 24 and n. .3 ; ap)K>inteil 
to pursue Khusrau, 65 ; given 
1.5,000 rupees. 66; promotM. 
77 ; promoted to .3,000 with 
2,.5n0 horse, 146; received Tobe 
of honour, etc., 147; sen! for 
to Court, I.'m : bring.s tiger-cub. 
164 ; pavs his respects, 199 : 
promoted. 217 ; fief given to 



470 


INDEX. 


241 ; prepares halting>place at 
Samonagar, 248 ; oraered to 
bring * Aziz Koka from Udaipur, 
268 ; preKenta offering, 261 ; 
l occives charge of Ahmad Beg, 
279: splendid offerings, 284; 
given horse, 286, 297 ; given 
presents, 299 ; pay reduc^, 385 ; 
appointed to Kabul, 402. 

Mahmud, Sultan of Ghazni, 117 and 
note. 

Mahmfid Kam&near, saint, HumA- 
yiin’s res|>ect for, 135 and note. 

Malitah garden at Kabul, 106. 

Makt.ub Khan, librarian, verse by, 

12 . 

Malik 'Arnbar, defeats *Abdu-llah, 
220 ; attempt to assassinate, 
276 ; iJefeat of, 312, 368, 373. 

Malwa, ncoount of, 348. 

Man, Riija, releaseil, 301 ; loyalty 
of, 320, 336 ; killed, 361. 

Man Singh, son (originally nephew) 
of Bhagwan Das, 16 ; maternal 
uncle to Khusrau, conhrmed 
in government of Bengal, 15, 
63 ; sent a dress of honour, 
76 : built iiouse at Hasan 
AlKlfil, 99 : waits on Jahangir 
after being sent for six or seven 
times. 137 : character, 138 ; 
presents 100 elephants, 138 ; 
presented with a horse, 142; 
sends sixty elephants, 145 ; 
gets leave on appoint merit to 
f?ecoan, 148 ; swincl presented 
to, 166 ; Hummoncil to Court, 
2t)8 ; (lealh, 

Man Singh Darbriri at battle at 
AhriiiiOab/i(l, 43. 

.Mini Singh Si upi, 4.37 

Miintin, .•u*co\inr i-f, 364 6, 381, 384 ; 
‘itorm at, 3S.3. 

M angli or Mankali Khan, receives 
!uir‘-e and dagger, 147 ; pro- 
moted, 282, 298. 

Mungov?* received from Kalra.ia, 
.3.32. 

Manohur Sekhawat Karlihwuha, 
son xii Kaja lAtnkaran, l*cr.sian 
Si'hohu- and poet, 17 ; jiromoted, 
112 2.31 ; death of. 321. 

.Mjii.sur Klian. nepht w of Waziru-l- 
rmilk (.Ian ITki. 

Manneei. oii'*rrd. 2.3d n. 1, etc. 

Mr.rkhifr (’vild go.at), 113. 

.Marram Mak..in iHarnida Bdiiu). 
.Vkhar's moilu given eharge of 


Sb&hzfida Khanam, 34 ; presents 
ruby to Akbar, 409. 

Maryam-zamAnfyJah&ngir’smother, 
Jahan^r pays his respects to 
her at Dahr, 76 ; solar weighing 
takes place in her house. 78, 
230, and Parwiz’s marriage, 81, 
and Jahangir’s marriage, 145 ; 
sent to Agra, 401. 

Maslhu-z-zaman, title of Hakim 
9^r&, 155. 

Mas*0d, son of Sa‘d, poet, his 
couplet, 4 and n. 2. 

Mas'aa Beg Hamaz&nl, promoted, 
153. 

Ma* 9 am,Wakil of theKhankhanan, 
brings MS., 168. 

Mathura, 54. 

Matricide, punishment of, 353. 

Maudud Ciii^tl, styled Chi^tl 
Klian, 379. 

Melons, 5 ; one from near FathpOr 
weighed 33 seers, 154 ; of KArIz, 
270. 

Mihtar lUian, account of, 146 ; 
death of, 153. 

Mihtar 8a*&dat, name of Plshraii 
Khan, 50. See Pi^irau. 

Mir * AH, calligrapher, 168 and note. 

Mir *A1), son of FarldOn, death, 
350. 

Mir Miran, son of Khalllu-lliih, 304 ; 
promoted, 371 ; gifts to, 389. 

Mir Miran, son of Sultan I^waja, 
belonging to Deccan- army, 
presents ruby, 230, 388. 

Miran, eee Sadr Jahan. 

Miran, Hayyid, bin monument to 
his father, 436. 

Mirza, Sultan, son of Shahrukh, 
character, 120 ; came from 
Deccan, ‘201. 

Aiiydn TutJ, sjjcech of a bird. 138. 

Mohan Das, son of Raja Bikramajit, 
163 

Monkey, strange, 216 ; story of 
afl'ection of a goat for young 
monkey, 446. 

Mosc|ue of Ahmadabad, 424-5. 

Mu'arrikh Khun, title of Mulla-i- 
Tacjiyya Shustari, 146. 

M*a*a7.7.Hm, Mee Bayazid. 

Mulairiik *Anib, possessor of land in 
Khuzistaii, etc., 158 and note, 
and 162 and note. 

Mubarak Khun Sazawal promoted. 
280 ; gifts to, 204. 

Muburik Bukhari, his tomb, 436. 



INDEX. 


471 


MuJtAm K^n, title of gb^ikb 
Husain, 296 ; promoted, 208, 409. 

Muhammad Amin, MaulftnA, 135. 

Muhammad Beg, styled Zu-l-faq&r 
khan, 275. He is mentioned 
under this title by Sir T. Roe. 

Muhammad Beg, bakhshf, 162. 

Muhammad Hakim, uncle of 
Jahanfflr, his sons, 57 and n. 2 ; 
planted an apricot-tree, 116. 

Muhammad Husain, Khw&ja, 
uncle of H&^im K^n, superin- 
tendent of kitchen, sent to 
Kashmir to act for his nephew, 
190 ; returns, 229 ; personal 
appearance and death of, 233. 

Muhammad Husain Chelebi, sent 
to make purchases in Persia, 
237-8. I 

Muhammad Husain M!rz&, rebel, 
40 ; put to death, 44. 

Muhammad Rifft, ambassador of 
king of Persia, 374 ; death, 398. 

Muhammad Ri^ Sabzw&ri given 
^,000 rupees for distribution, 
20 . 

Muhammad §beh, emperor, rein- 
stitutes Chain of Justice, 7 
n. 1. 

Muhammad Taol, diwan, sent to 
bring *Aziz Khan’s family from 
MnndesQr, 258. 

Muhr, gold(?) coin of 1,000 tolas 
weight given Yadgkr *AlI, 
ambassador of Persia, called 
katthab’i’fdll^ 237. 

Ma*inu-d-din Chishti, of Ajmir, 
groat saint, 1, 34, 42 r. 2, 249. 

Mu^ia^u-l-mulk, Sayyid of Bakharz, 
in charge of buildings, 45 ; 
recalls Sharif, 53 ; 63 ; OcikK^f, 
76 ; 6ef -holder of Nakodar, 136 ; 
ill and miserable, 164 ; diwan of 
Kabul, and promoted, 172 ; at 
Kabul, 197 ; came from Kabul 
with his sons, 222. 

Mukarram Khan, son of Mu*A 4 (auun 
Kh&n, given a flag, 256 ; hi« 
ofiering, 323 ; conquers Khard&, 
4.33. 

Mukhlis Khan, hakh^l of Deccan, 
149 ; punished, 382. 

Mukhlis Khan, 306. 

Mukhtair Beg, diwan of Parw!z,16. 

Mulberry fruited at Lahore in 
December-January, 271. 

JfM/airl, flower, 6. 

MurnTya^ bitumen, 238. 


Mun*im Kh&n, hit house, 12. 

Mflnis Kh&n, son of Mihtar Kh&n, 
presents jug of jade, 146 ^ pro- 
moted, 153. 

M’lqarrab Khan, title of Shaikh 
Hasan, son of Shaikh Bahh or 
fihinft, account of, 27 ; brings 
Dftniy&rs children from Bu«*- 
hanpur, 28, 75 ; sends'Emperor 
tapestry, 144 ; sends picture of 
l^mur, 153-4 and note ; brings 
curiosities from Cambay and 
Surat, 167 ; a widow complains 
against, 172 ; brings turkey, 
etc., from Qoa, 215; governor 
of Delhi, 224 : bleeds Jah&nglr, 
226 ; gets standard and drums, 
230 ; promoted, 231 ; presents 
of, 234 ; New Year’s offering, 
237 ; sent to inquire into affair 
at Surat, 255 ; arrives from 
Gujarat, 297 ; promoted, 303 ; 
presents Abyssinian elephant, 
323 ; made governor of Gujarat. 
331 ; sends mangoes, .3.32 ; 
presents pearl, 415 ; 424 ; 432 ; 
has presents, 435. 

Muqlm, styled by Akbar Wazir 
^&n, confirmed in appoint- 
ment, 13 ; niaoe co-vizier, 2l) ; 
diwan of Bengal, 22 ; dismissed, 
139 ; presents sixty elephants, 
147. 

Murad, Mirza, son of Mirzii Rustam, 
styled Iltifat Kh&n, 298. 

Murad, Shah, second son of Akbar, 
nicknamed PahArl^ birth and 
account of, 34 ; styled ghahzada 
maghfOr after death, 197. 

Mtiri^id Quli Khan, musketeer, 
abetsdrinkingofSultAnDaniyal, 
.35. 

MurtarA Khan Dakhank distin- 
guished fencer, receives title of 
Warzish Khan, 253. 

Mustafa Beg, ambassador from 
Persia, 2f^, 284; gets a Nflr- 
jah&ni muhr, 298 ; takes leave. 
299. 

Mu 9 tafa Kh&n, 280 ; name of 
^yar'u * d • din Qazwlnl, < ich 

•Cf. 

Mu'tamid Kh&n, author of the 
I^tel-n&ma, 117 note ; promoted, 

Mu*taqid Kh&n, son of IftikhAr 
kh&n, distinguished in battle 
with *UsniAn, 213 ; had bee" 



472 


INDEX. 


diwan of Bengal, brought 
‘Uam&n's sons, etc., to Court, 
290 ; produced offering of 
twenty - five elephants, 290 ; 
made hakh^l. 291 ; buys house 
in Agra, his misfortunes, 295; 
went as hakh^f to Bangash, 
297 ; defeats Ahd&d Afghan, 
263-4; received title of La«^ar 
Id^n, 205 ; offering of, 291 ; 
promoted, 909; 377; made diwan 
of Deccan, 406 ; sent to dis- 
tribute alma, 432. 

Mu^affor, Sultan of Gujarat, alleged 
sun of SulUln Mahmad, originally 
Nanna, causes disturbance in 
Gujarat, 429-31. 

Mu^ffiar Hakim, see Hakim 
Mu^affar.' 

Muspkfiiitr Tarkhan, son of Mlrz& 
Baql Tarkh&n, belonged to the 
Tarah&n family of Scinde, waits 
upon Jahftngir, 434 and n. 2. 

H 

Nad *Ali Maidani, 198 ; pror oted, 
903, 917 , offerings, 321 (the 
entry here should be ddna kith, 
marten-skins) ; death, 348. 

Nagina garden, ^madabad, 495. 

Najibu-n-nisa or Fakhru-n-nisa, 
sistei of Muhammad Hakim and 
aunt of Jah&ngir, death of, 144. 

Nakodar, 135, 136 and n. 1. 

Nandanah, r^ deer of, 129. See 
I.G., xviii, 349. 

NannQ or Naba, styled Muzaffar 
Khan, 429. 

Naqib Khan, of Qazwin, son of 
*>Mk1u • 1 - Latif, orinnal name 
Ghiya.sii-d-din, death of, 264 ; 
buried beside his wife, 265. 

Naryad, )>arganah in Gujarat, 415. 

Nfisiru - d - cUn, Khalji, buildings 
made by. 354 ; evil behaviour, 
365 7, 409. 

Nanru-llah, given rank of 700 with 
400 horse, 15.1. 

Nathu Mai, Raja of Manjholi, 79 
and n. 4 ; promoted, 296. 

XaurCM, musical compositions of 
*Adil Khan, 272 and n. 1 

Nau^ahr, fort on the K&ma, 102. 

Nawazish Khan, title of Sa*du-llah, 
son of 8a*id Khan, 197 ; pro- 
moteYl. 2.37, 444 ; leave to deiiurt, 
287, 443. 


Na^ar-jivi, brought Akbar news of 
HumAvAn’s death, 38 ('jivi* 
should be *chaU’). 

Naffirl of NishupQr, poet, 188 
(Rieu, ii. 8175). 

New Year Feasts, 48, 85, 138, 154, 
165, 191, 206, 235, 259, 280, 
317, 370. 

News-writers, 247. 

Nll&b, river (Indus), 101. 

Nllgaw, Jah&ngir’s cruelty in con- 
nection with hunt of, 164 ; 
incident about shootingone, 189. 

Ni*niatu-llah, married to J&nish 
Begam, sister of 7<^hmA8p, 131. 

Ni;;am, HumAyttn’s librarian, 21. 

Nii;Am, Khw'Aja, brings pome- 
granates, 391'. 

NisAm, of Shiraz, story - teller, 
receives 3,000 rupew, 77. 

NitAm Thaneswari, dismissed to 
Mecca, 60. 

Ni^Amu-d-din, historian, 420. 

Ni;^mu-d-dm AuliyA, saint, 169. 

Ni^mu - d - din iWn, 31 1 ; pro- 
moted, 320. 

Nflr-bakht elephant, 396, 410, 418. 

KOr Gaj, name of elephant and its 
description, 47 

Ntir-JahAn, 192 note ; name first 
mentioned in Tazuk, 266 ; makes 
presents to Karan, 278; name 
changed from Nfir - maliall to 
NOr- JahAn, 319 ; RAmsar belongs 
to, 342 ; shoots a bird, 348 ; 
shoots four tigers, 375 ; given 
parganah of To^, 380; gives 
a feast, 385 ; entertains Sb&h 
JahAn, 397 ; receives presents 
from ^Ah JahAn, 401. 

NQr-nAma, poem, 222. 

Naru-d-din, son of GhiyA^u-d-din 
*Ali Aeaf-Khan (No. ii), plots 
with l^nsrau and is put to 
death, 122-3 

NQru-d-din Jahangir PadshAh, title 
assumed, 3. 

NQru-d-din Muhammad, Naq^i- 
handi, father of Salima Sultan 
Begam, 232. 

NQru-d-din Quli,- promoted, 418. 


Oranges, 423. 

Orders about fiefs, 23 ; about com- 
pensation to {jeasants for damage 
tocroiw, !63, 1H2 ; about Amirs, 

2a'>. 



INDEX. 


473 


p 

Pahar, son of GU^nin Khan, matri- 
cide, put to death, 353. 

Pdhdrl^ see Mur&d Sh&h. 

Pahluwan Baha’u-d-dln, 445. 

PaUs tree, 97. 

PampQr, village in Kashmir, famous 
for saffron, 92. 

Pandanua, see Keord and Keikl. 

Pandits, religious discussion with, 
32,33. 

Panipat, battles at, 39, 58. 

Pargdia^ fargul (kind of garment), 
247 and note, 252. Set 182, 203. 

Parwiz, Sultan, son of Jah&n^r, 
sent against Rana, 16 ; usea to 
keep Jah&ngir’s s^, 18 ; birth 
of, 18-19 and n. 1 ; directions 
to, 26 ; report from about R&n&, 
ordered to Agra, 70 ; joins 
Jah&ngir, 73, 74 ; given sword, 
75 ; 130,000 rupees sent as 

marriage present for Mur&d 
Sb4h’s daughter, betrothed to 
Parwiz, 78 ; solar weighing of, 
81 ; sent to Deccan, 156 ; ruby 
worth 60,000 rupees given to, 
156 ; Khandesh, Berar, and 
Asir, given to, 157 ^ pearl rosary 
given to, 157 ; unsatisfactory 
results, 161 ; ieikhtl sent to, 171 ; 
failure of, 1^ ; son born to, 279 ; 
offering of, 310. 

Pat&, properly Ta|i&, a Sewra sect, 
437. See Addenda. 

Pathan Misr, 1.000 rupees given to, 
160. 

Patr Das, styled Ray Kay&n, 
receives title of Raja Bikramajit 
and made Master of Ordnance, 
22 ; ajipointed to Gujarat, 50 ; 
honoured, 284. 

P&yanda Kh&n Moghul, to receive 
a jagir, 143 ; death, 294. 

Peaches, 116, 118. 

Pesh Bulagh, fort, 105, 263. 

Phul hafdra, what is it, 230 and note. 

Pim Bah&dur, killed, 50. 

Pineapples, 5. 

Pir, ^aikh, built mosque at 
Mairtha,24l (4i<e a/«o Addenda) ; 
given 1 ,000 ruiiees, 340. 

Hr Khan, tee Kbau Johan Lorli. 

Pf^rau Kli&n, styled Mihtar 
Sa^adat, 50 ; came from Persia 
with Hum&yOn, 50 ; death, 
149-50. 


PitlAd, parganah in Gujarat, 415. 

Plague, outbreak of, in Pan jab, 
330 ; in Kashmir, 442. 

Plantains (bananas), wild,at Manda, 
383, 386-7 ; golden plantains 
(s5na-ks/a), 397. 

Poplar, white, 7. 

Portuguese Viceroy, defeat of, 274. 

Price, Major, quotra, 15 n. 2 ; 23 
n. 1 and pamm, 

Prithi Ghana, son of R&y Manohar, 
promoted, 328. 

Prosperity, four causes of, 235. 

Pushkar, lake and tempto, 254 ; 
Jah&ngir visits, 264. 

Pan Pan, light on bank of, 175. 


Q 

Qabalah, town in Bet-J&landhar 
Da&b, 160. 

Qadam, Afghan, deserts, 321. 

^margdh (ring -hunt), 120, 125, 
129, 203-4. 

Qandahar, in Afjghanistan, 70, 86, 
etc. ; in Deccan, 179. 

Qarft Khftn Turkm&n promoted, 17. 

Qarficha Khan, Amir of Humayun, 

112 . 

Q&sim, Khwiija, came from Trans- 
oxiana and waited on Jah&ngir 
and given 12,000 rupees, 241. 

Qasiin *Ali, styled Day&nat Khan, 
123. See Day&nat. 

(Jasim Khan, disagrees with hi.M 
brother Islam, sent for, 148 ; 
promoted, 176; 177; gets present, 
298 ; sends elephant, 300 ; dresx 
of honour sent to, 303 ; pro- 
moted, 306 ; dismissed, 373. 

Oftsim Khan, Muhammad, servant 
of Ak^r, 233. 

Qilij (should he Qulij) Kh&n, 
appointed to Gujarat, and 
given a lakh of rupees, 21 ; 
recalled to Court, 50 ; oidered 
a fief, 84 ; buries Hakim 
Mu;^ffar, 125 ; governor of 
Lahore, 135; promoted to 6,000 
with 5,000 horse, sent to Kabul, 
198-9 ; quarrels with Amirs, 
230 I ; death of, 253 ; 279 

Qiratt-i’ttahi*hi (unlucky conjunction 
of planets), 172. 

Qizilb&^i Khun disgraced, 289. 

(Jutb personates Kpusrau at Patna, 
173. 



474 


INDEX. 


Qatb * Alam, father of gh&h * Alom, 
421 ; his shrine, 436. 

Qutbu-d-din Koka, given 

dagger worth 6,000 rupees, 77 ; 
promoted and appointed to 
Bengal, 78 ; mother dies, 84>5 ; 
killed by ghlr-afgan at Bard wan, 
113. 

Qutbu-d-din Muhammad, maker of 
Kankriya tank, 420. 

Qutbu-d-din Muhammad Kh&n 
killed at Baroda, 431. 

Qutbu-l-mulk, king of Golconda, 
433. 

X 

Racing, horse, at Kabul, 110. 

Roe. bel (6ower), 6 and n. 2. 

Ragho Das Kachhwaha killed at 
Ahmodabad battle, 43. 

Ra h man -dad, younger son of Khan> 
•khanan, given suitable mansab, 
222 . 

Railings in the public audience 
hall, construction of, 242. 

Rajinahendra, Raja of, 433. 

Raja, Sikh, put to death, 73. 

H^hl (bracelet), custom of wearing, 
244. 

Ram Chand, Bandllah, capture of, 
82 ; released, 87 ; Jahangir 
marries his daughter, 160. 

Ham Dos Kachhw^a, promote<l to 
rank of 3,000, 21 ; 29 ; to receive 
fief, 128 ; at tiger-hunt, 186 ; 
sent to accompany ‘Abdu-Hah 
Khun, 201-2 ; given Ranthan- 
bdr, 202 ; advice ui: heeded, 
220; sent to adjust disputes 
l)etween Qillj and Amirs, given 
horse, robes, and 30,000 rupees 
for expenses, 233 ; reported 
death of, 252 ; made Raja, 
379 ; promoted, 418. 

Ramsar in Ajmir, 342. 

Hfina Amur Singh, 249. See Amar 
Singh. 

R a //#/, k i nd of gout ( ibex ), descript ion 
of, 109, 122. 

Kankntt4i, village, 139 and n. 1. 

RiiMhid Klifin, 4* >2. 

RatJin, son of Bhoj-hilra, wait-s on 
•Tahangsr and presents valuable 
ele))hiir.is, given title of Sarbu- 
Innd Hiiv, 140. 

Kaiv^hanis or Tankls, 253 and n. 1. 

Kuwiil Sal Darbaii. given Hags, 17. 


Rawal Samarsi, of Banswala, 379. 

Rawalpindi, 98; hunting at, 129. 

Ray *Ali BhaU, killed in Gujarat, 50. 

R&y Man, captain of Khidmatiya, 
414. 

R&y Ray Singh, son of Ray Kalyan 
M&l, of Bikanir, has charge of 
Mirz& Muhammad Husain, 44 ; 
promoted to 5,000* 49 ; his 
rebellion, 76, 84 ; his misconduct 
in matter of I^usrau, 130-1 ; 
comes to Court and is pardoned, 
131 and n. 1 ; death, 217 ; 
wished to make SQraj Singh his 
heir, 218 ; his folly, 438. 

Regulations (dasfilru-/-*ama/), 7-10, 
205. 

Release of prisoners, 10 and n. 2. 

Riga* (kind of writing), 146 and n. 2. 

Rodgers, C. J., quot^, 12 n. 1. 

Rohtas, fort in Panj&b, 96 and n. 2. 

Rohu (fish), 414. 

Ruby, historic, 409. 

Radar, Raja of Kumaon, 218. 

Rahu-llah, 390 ; death, 391. 

Rnknu-d-din, Afghan §haikh, 
styled Shir Khan, promoted, 
17 ; given Peshawar, 102 ; given 
Gujrat in Panjab, 111; waits on 
Jahangir at Dhaka in Khaibar, 
127 ; dies of drink, 134-5. 

Rap l^aw&SR, founder of Ropbas, 
presented offering, 166 ; 202 ; 
gets title of Khawas^ Khan 
and made faujdar of Qanuj, 224. 

Rupbas, near Agra, hunting at, 
166; numerous antclo|)e8 at, 
100; afterwards called Amana- 
bad, *247, 252. 

Ruqayya Sultan Regain, daughter 
of Hindaland first wife of Akbar, 
given a garden, 48 ; brings up 
Shah Jahan, 48 ; visits father’s 
tomb at Kabul, 110. 

Ru-shanara Begam, birth of, 389. 

Rustam, MirrA, son of Mirza Sultfin 
Husain, dress of honour sent to, 
21 ; waits on Jahangir, 226 ; 
giver, government of Scinde, 
229, 261 ; sent by Akbar to 
Deccan, 262 ; sent by .Tahangir 
to Scinde, 262 and n. 1 : mis- 
conduct, 263 ; pardoned, 265 ; 
accident to, 403. 

Rustam Khan, servant of Shah 
Jahan, 405 ; given garden, 427 ; 
promotefl, 435. 

RustHui-Khanbari, 426. 



INDEX. 


475 


ROz • afztlD, of Behar, becomes 
Muhammadan, 205. 

ROzbih&n MulU, ^iven 

money to expend on anniversary 
of Shaikh Salim, 159. 


8 

Sabar Mahl (Sabarmatl), river in 
Gujarat, 41. 

^bit Khan, Me Dayanat ^an. 
3a*du-il^i ^&n, son of Sa*d Kh&n, 
promoted, 73 ; given elephant, 
183 ; styled Nawazi^Khan, 197. 
Sadio Kl^n, promoted, 301, 310, 
372 ; built monastery, 425. 

Sadr Jah&n, Miran, to produce 
deserving poor before Jahangir, 
10 ; promoted to 4,000, 22 ; 

g iven a lakh of d&ms for 
istributioii, 46 ; made ^dr, 
46 ; promoted to 5,0(X), 140 ; 
waits on Jah&ngir, 203. 

Safdar Uian, waits on Jahangir, 
164 ; promoted, 167 ; comes 
from Bihar, 200, 242 ; sent to 
Kashmir, 2o6 ; dismissed, 303. 
Saffion, cultivation of, 93. 

$afl Khftn, bakh^l of Gujarat, 420, 
4m 

^fl Mlrza, son of Shah ^Abbas, 
murder of, 2i>4 ; rea.son for 
killing him, 338. 

Safid-sang, meadoM* of, 121. 

Sdhih qirdui^ title of TiinOr, 5. 
SdhibJ, kind of graf>e, 5. 

Sa'id Khan, officer appointed to 
Kashmir, and op(K>i'tuiiely 
reaches Lahore, 62 
8a 'Id Khan Chaghatai, governor of 
Panjab, 13 ; report from, 20 ; 
directed to bring Mlrza GliazI 
to Court, 223. 

Saif Khan, title of *A11 Asghar 
Barlii. son of Sayyid MnlimQd 
Bilrha, 32 ; received seventeen 
wounds, M ; promoted and 
made faujdar of Hisar; 157 ; 
receives standanl, 172, 284 ; 
death from cholera, ^5. 

Saif KJiaii Kokaltash, brother of 
Zain Khfin Koka, killed in 
battle, 43. 

Salshat Khun, title of Khan Jahan 
Lixii, 87. 

SalilrnuJlah. Arab, 1.58 and n. 3; 
sent to Deccan. 162; promoted. 


285, 297 ; styled Shaj&'at Khan, 
320, 397. 

Salbahan comes with Daniyars 
elephants, 46. (In Muhammad 
Hi^li’s preface, p. 1 1 , he is 
called Raja Shalbahan. ) 

S&lih, adopt^ son of Khwaja Beg 
$afawl, styled Khan jar Khan, 
230. 

Salim, Shaikh, of Slkrl, piomises 
Akbar three sons, 2. 

Salim ]^&n, son of ^ir Khiiii, 88, 
137. 

Salima Sult&n Begain, daughter of 
Naru-d-din Muhammad and 
Gul-rukh Begam, account of, 
and death, 2§2 and n. 2 ; gave 
name of *itr Jahdnylri to otto 
of roses, 271. 

Sallmeadh, fort in the Jumna, 137. 

Sandid-tree, 7. 

Sanga, Ran&, defeated by Babnr, 
4, 250. 

Sangor village, beauty of, and 
name changed to. KamalpOr, 
361. 

Sangram, hill Raja, kills Raja Man, 
361. 

Sangram, name of Akbar*sgun, J.'). 

Sangram, zamindar of Bihar, killed, 
83 

Sdran (birds), account of, 343. 

Sarbulnnd Ray promoted, 299. 
406, 411. 

Saiflar Khan, see Yadgar Khwaja. 

Sar>faraz Khan, grandson of 
Musahib Beg (apparently 
should be Sar-afraz), 413. 

Sarkhej, 428. 

Satif custom of, referred to, 142. 

sayyid Muhammad, descendant of 
Shah ‘ A lam, 422. 

Sayyids of Bilrha, l^earing of, 64. 

Sensitive plant, 443. 

SliAdman, son of 'Aziz Koka, 
matl^e Khan, 203. 

gh&h 'Alam, saint, raises the dead, 
42!. 

Shah Beg Khan, governor of 
Qandahar, promoted to .5,0(H), 
49 ; re|)ort.« ini ended Persian 
attack on fort, 70 ; bravery of, 
71 ; defends fort anrl makes it 
over to Surdiir Khun, 86 ; comes 
to Shor, 1 ) 1 and n. 2 ; recovers 
from illness, 121; account of 126; 
styled Khin-dati ran, 128; offer* 
ing of, 2U6, 287 8; originally 



476 


INDEX, 


sent to Qandahor by Akbar, 
262; present to, 205; defeats 
Ahd&d, Afghan, 511 ; trans- 
ferred to Sind, ^7. 

Sb&h Begain, title given to Khus- 
rau’s mother, daughter of 
Bhagwnn Das, takes |x>ison, 56. 

Sbah-hudagh Khan, 582. 

Shah Jah&n, Mt Khurram, Sult&n. 

8b&h Mirzu, re1>el, 40. 

ShAh-naw&z Khan, 197. See Iraj. 

Sb&h Qull Khftn Maliram, seizes 
Hema, 30 ; his garden, 48. 

Sbah Sbaja*at, birth of, 328; he 
was born on the eve of Sunday, 
the 12th Tir = June 24th, 1616. 

ShahalNul in Rajputana, 252 and 
note. 

SbO'hr-ara garden at Kabul, 105-6, 

111 , 121 . 

Sb^iir-bana, aunt of Babar, maker 
of Sbahp>ara garden, 106. 

Sbahrukh, Mlrza, of Biadukhshati, 
son of Ibrahim, grandson of 
Sulaim&n, account of, 26-7 ; 

g iven province of Malwa, 27 ; 
eath, 110; account of family, 
119; his seven children brought 
to Court, 137. 

Sbtthrytlr, son of Jnh&nglr, 20 and 
II. 1 ; conies from Gujarat, 156. 
Shahz&da Khanam, daughter of 
Akbar, born three months after 
Jahan^r mode over to Maryam 
Mak&nl, 54. 

Sbtti&*at ^lan, title of Kablr 
Chilli, 29 ; in battle at Ahma- 
dabad, 44 ; promoted, 113 ; 
promoted and sent to Bengal, 
102 ; account of battle against 
‘Usman, Afghan, 209-14; re- 
ceives title of Rustam-zam&n, 
214 ; death of, 227. 

8bAj4*&t Khan, title of Salamu-llah, 
Anh {which see), 320; pcomoted, 
439. 

8boja‘at Khan DakhanI, 171, 176. 
8b<ikaru-n-nisa, daughter of Akbar, 
character of, 56. 

Shakhftattdf a kind of fence, 129. 
Shfims Khan Gakkhar, 130. 
Sbamsu-d-dln, son of ‘Aziz Koka, 
made JahAng^r Qull Khun, 
which see. 

Sb^nisu-d-dln Khwafl, officer of 
Akbar, 10(», loi. 

Sbnnkar,' Riina, son of Udai Singh, 
cousin of the Kanu, 16 ; pro- 


moted, 112; given 12,000 and 
30,000 rupees, 49, 58 ; his son 
promoted, 178; templedestroyed. 
254 ; tank, 268. 

Sb&pflr, son of Khu'&jagl Khw&Ja, 
218 ; perha|)8 a nephew of 
Ghiya^, butMa’asir, i, 180, calls 
him son of 1‘timAdu-d-daula, 
and it may be another name for 
I‘tiq&d. 

Sbarafu-d-dln K&shgharl, promoted, 
372 : sent to Bangash, 408. 

Sb^rlf, son of 1‘timAdu-d-daula, 
plots with Khusrau, 122 ; put to 
death, 123. 

Sbarif Amull, account of, 47-8 ; 
receives 2,000 rupees, 61 ; 9,000 
rupees, 81 ; and 12,000 rupees, 
101. 

Sharif Kh&n, Amiru • 1 - umanl, 
son of *Abdu- 9 -Samad, couplet 
b}*, 11 ; account of, 14 and n. 2, 
15 ; seal entrusted to, 18 ; 
remark of, 25-6 ; employed to 
quell riot, 29 ; directed to pursue 
Khusrau, 52 ; recalled, 53 ; left 
ill at Lahore, 82 ; at ^ttock, 
101 ; gets worse, 103 ; recovers, 
121 ; waits on Jah&ngir at 
Chandaltth, 130; sent to Deccan, 
156; verse by, 228; death in 
Deccan, 231. 

Sbaunl, mandolin -player, 33f. 

ghihatm-d-din Ahmad K^n; officer 
of Akbar, 430-1. 

Shir Khan, ruler of Bengal, 367. 

ghlr-afgan, title given by Jahangir 
to * All Qull IstajlQ, husband of 
Ndr • Jahan, 113; account of 
him and of his killing Quj^bu-d- 
dln, 113-15. 

gbukru-llah, MullA, SbAh JahAn’s 
diwan, 273, 274. See Af^al IQian. 

ShyAm RAm, riot b 3 ’, 29. 

Shyam Singh, cousin of UmrA, 140-1 ; 
promoted, 222, 281. 

Sikandar Mu 'In, ordered to build 
fort at Jahanelrpilr (SbaikhQ- 
pQra), 91 ; helps Jahangir to 
shoot nilgaw, 268; buried at 
Rana 8b&nkar’s tank, having 
died at Udaipur, 268. 

Sikandar MunshI, author, 427. 

£::kHndra, buildinu of, 152. 

Siyar al-muta'alml^irln, quoted, 
7 note. 

Solar weighments, 250, 248. 

Spider, large. 117. 



INDEX. 


477 


Squirrel, flyioff, 104. 

Statues, marble, of RAna and son, 
erected at Agra, 332. 

Snbb Karan, maternal uncle of 
RftnA Amar, 273. 

Subli&n Qullj ^rk, 41. 

Sudras, Hindu caste, 243. 

Ih/ra net, 09. 

Sulaim&n Beg, 131 . 8u FidA*l Khan. 

Sult&n, MlrzA, son of 8b&hrukh, 
favoured by Jah&n^, 24. 

Sult&n Khurram, i.e. JahAn, 
see Khurram B&bA. 

Sult&n Malimfld, son-in-law of 
l^waja Aba-l-liasan, 382. 

Sultan Mall mad Blgara, 429. 

Sult&n 8b&^t Afghan, shot to death 
witharroaa, 134. 

Sult&nu - n • nisa, eldest child of 
JahAngir, 15 and n. 1. 

Sundar Ms, styled R&y BAy&n, 
273, 274, 368 ; styled Bikram&jlt, 
402. 

Saraj Mai, son of RAja BAso, 283, 
31.1, 337, 388, 393. 

Saraj Singh, R&ja, maternal uncle 
of IChurram B&lji (8b5h Jah&n), 
140-1 ; promoted, 153 ; fights 
with his brother, 291 ; sent to 
Deccan, 293. 

Saraj Singh, son of R&v RAv Singh, 
younger brother of Dulip, 218, 
2.59; offering of, 282-3, 288; 
presents elej^ants, 289 ; given 
one in return, 290 ; promoted, 
288, 301. 

SurkhAb, discovery of plot at, 122. 

Sylhet, eunuchs in, 150. 


I 

Tahayyur KbAn, 288. The name 
appears as BAMitar or Chattar 
in LO. MSS. 

TAhir, of Bengal, makes 

offering, 371.. 

TAhir Beg, styled Mukhli? Kh&n, 
htMM of the Ahadis, 146; 
of Deccan, 149. 

TohmAsn, king of Persia, anecdote 
of, 1^ ; gives sister in marriage 
to Ni*niatu llah, 131. 

Tahmanis, son of Duniy&l, *75 ; 
marries Bihar Biliia,.19 n. 3. 

T&j KhAn Tariyanl, 422. 

Tal^ta Beg Kabuli, 31. 

T&n Sen Kalawant, musician, 413. 


Taqiy 3 '& SbOstarl, MullA, 146. 

Tarbiyat KhAn, title of 'Alidu-r- 
Ralilm, son of Q&sim Kh&n, 
paymaster of Ahadis, 116; 
receives title of Tarbiyat, 149 ; 
promoted, 1.53 ; made faujdar 
of Alwar, 178 ; pronioted, 2.36, 
320. 

TardI Beg Kh&n, defeated and put 
to death, 39. 

TardI Kh&n Diw&na, at battle of 
Ahmadabad, 42. 

T&^ Beg Furjl (should lie Qarclil), 
sty lea by Akljar Taj Khan, 
ijromoted to 3,000, 31 ; left at 
Kabul, 121 ; removed from 
Multan, 166; promoted, 178, 
226, 261 ; apixiinted to Bhakar, 
261 ; death, 267. 

FosA (measure), 177 and note. The 
note is wrong, instead of one- 
third of an inch read one and 
a third inch. 

T&t&r Kh&n, offering of, 318. 

Tekchand, Raja of Kiiinaon, 227. 

Teufel, Dr., quoted, 110 n. I. 

Thief, story of, 432. 

Tiger, strange story of, 157. 

Tigress’s milk, 240. 

TlmAr, jiicture of, 154. 

Tdlar Mai, his son R&ja Kaly&n 
honoured, 402. 

Tomtln^ value of, 3. 

Topckl (gunner), 23 note. 

Topi^thta-i-riktihf 22 n. 3. 

Trees, large, ^5.3, 360. 

Trimb&watl, old name of Comliay, 
416. 

Tuf^luq, Sultan Muhammad, built 
Tort at DhAr, 407.’ 

Turkey, bird, account of, 215. 

Turquoises, 238. 


U 

OdA RAm, 398-9 ; presents to, 408, 
409. 

Ulugh Beg, II jiulc jar of, 146. ^ 
*Umnr Kh&n, gniii<lfather of Kh&n 
.JahAn JxKlf, 88. 

‘UifniAn, Afghiin. 209 15. 

DymOqs, 1 19. AimAqs. 

V 

Vir-nfig, spring in Kashmir, 92,9.3. 



478 


INDEX. 


W 

Wagtairs nest, 383. 

Waisi, ^waja, diwan of Sultftn 
Khurram, reveals Khusrau's 
plot, 122. 

Wajihu-d-din, Gujarati saint, 128, 
425-6. 

Wall, brother of 'Usman, 212,213, 
230. 

Willi, Mirza, son of Najlbu-n-nisi, 
promoted, 144. 

W*ulT Bl Dzbeg, faujdar oi Multan, 
166. 

Wall Muhammad Khan, ruler of 
Tttran, 118. 

W’ltqfirl, f)en<namc of Mirza GhazI, 
133. 

Wnzir Jamil, promoted, 17 ; given 
7,000 ru|jees, 61. 

WazTr Khiln, ttee Muqlm Kh&n. 

Weight‘d and measures, 12,- 197,417. 

Wular Luke, Kashmir, 94-5. 


Y 

Yudg&r, Khwaja, brother of ‘Abdu- 
llah Khun FirQzjang and father 
of the historian Kumgar Hiisainf, 
comes from Gujarat and gets 
title of Sardar Khan, 2,'C. 

Yadgur ‘All Khnn, Persian ambas 
sador, receives inuhr (silver?) 
of 1,0(K) tolas in weight, ‘2.?7. 

Yadgar BegQurchl, of Transoxinna, 
makes ofl'enng, 379 ; given 
presents and title, 386, 404. 

Yaclgai Husain Qu^-begi, 404. 

Yfidgar. Khwaja of Samarkand, 
presents an album, 164. 

Ya'qub Biidakhshi. promoted for 
bravery and given title of Khan, 
244 ; promoted, 372. 


Yildirlm Bftyazid, Sultan of Turkey, 

YQsuf and ZuUukhil, splendid copy, 
168 and note. 

Yiisuf Kh&n, son of Husain 
Tukriyah, promoted, 146, 37«5, 
404 ; sent to Deccan, 184 ; waited 
on Jahangir, 189 ; standard sent 
to, 255. 


Z 

ZafaV KlUln, son of Zain Kh&n Koka, 
Attock give.i to, 100, 111 ; does 
good service, 127 ; arranges 
ring-hunt, 129 ; receives dress, 
147 ; promoted, 160, 310 ; comes 
from Gujarat, 231 ; appointed 
to Behar, 231 ; sent for. 284 ; 
waits on Jah&ngir, 306. 

Zahid, son of ghaja'at I^&n, pro- 
moted, 405. 

Zahid Khan, son of Sadiq, pro- 
moted, 17; raised to rank of 
2,(XX), 46 ; defeats Dullp, 84 ; 
servant; of Shah Jahan, 441. 

Zain Khan Koka, Akbar’s foster- 
brother, 19 : built Naushahr 
fort on the K&ma, 102. 

Zain-Ianka, i-slaiid in Wuldr Lake, 
94. 

Zaifiu-d-dln. Khwaja, comes from 
Trii.tisoxiana, *289. 

Zainu-l-‘AbidlM, Sultiin, king of 
Kashmir, 94. 

Zaiiiana Beg, 24. Mahabal 

Khan. 

Ziya’u-d-dlii of QazwTn, prom**^ted 
and made accountant of stables, 
‘25 ; receives title of MuHtaf& 
Khan and given |>arganali of 
Maldah in Bengal, 360. 

Zu-l-faqar Khan, title of Muhammad 

" Beg, 275. 



VOLUME SECOND 


THE 

tuzuk-wahangIrT 


MSMOIRB ox* JAHAlfOIR 

FROM THE THIRTEENTH TO THE BEOINNINa OF 
THE NINETEENTH YEAR OF HIS REISN 




PREFACE 


After an interval of about five years, the second volume of 
Mr. Alexander Rogers’ translation of Jahangir’s Memoirs 
has been published by the Royal Asiatic Society. It is a 
smaller work than the first volume, for it only extends over 
six years of the reign, as against the twelve years of its pre- 
decessor. Even then it does not include the whole of the 
reign, for that lasted twenty-two years. The two volumes, 
however, contain all that Jahangir wrote or supervised. It 
will be found, I think, that the present volume is fully as 
interesting as its predecessor. The accounts of the Zodiacal 
coinage (pp. 6 and 7). and erf the comet, or new star (p. 48), 
the notice of the Plague in Agra (pp. 6.5-67), and the elaborate 
description of Kashmir, under the chronicle of the 1.5th 
year, are valuable, and a word should be said for the pretty 
story of the King and the Gardener’s daughter (p. .50), and 
for the allusions to painters and pictures. 

If Babur, who was the founder of the Moghul Empire in 
India, was the Csesar of the East, and if the many-nded 
Akbar was an epitome of all the great Emperors, including 
Augustus, Trajan, Hadrian, Marcus Aurelius, Julian, and 
Justinian. Jahangir was certainly of the type of the Emperor 
Claudius, and so bore a close resemblance to our James I. 
All three were weak men, and under the influence of their 
favourites, and aU three were literary, and at least two of 
them were fond of dabbling in theology. AU three wore 'in 
tb^ wrung places as rulers. Had James I. (and VI. of 
Scotland) been, as he half wished, the Keeper of the Bodloan, 
and Jahangir been head of a Natural History Museum, th^ 
would have been better and happier men. Jahanpr’s best 


31 



IV 


points were his love of nature and powers of observation, and 
his desire to do justice. Unfortunately, the last of these 
merits was vitiated by a propensity for excessive cmd recon- 
dite punishments. Like his father, grandfather, and great- 
grandfather, he was addicted to drugs and alcohol, and he 
shortened his life in this way. He made no addition to the 
imperial territories, but, on the contrary, diminished them 
by losing Qandahar to the Persians. But possibly his peace- 
ful temper, or his laziness, was an advantage, for it saved 
much bloodshed. His greatest fault as a king was his sub- 
servience to his wife, Nur-Jahan, and the consequent quarrel 
with his son, Shah Jahan, who was the ablest and best of his 
male children. The last years of his reign were especially 
melancholy, for he suffered from asthma and other diseases; 
and he had to endure the ignominy of being for a while a 
captive to one of his own servants — Mahabat j^an. He 
died on the borders of Kashmir, when on his way to Lahore, 
in October, 1627, in the fifty-ninth year of his age, and was 
buried at Shahdara, near Lahore, where his widow, Nfir- 
Jahan, and her brother are also interred. At the time of his 
death his son Shah Jahan was at Junair in the Deccan, and 
there the news was conveyed in a wonderfully short time by 
a Hindu courier. Jahangir was succeeded by Shah Jahan, 
who lost no time in getting rid of his relatives, for, like the 
Turk, he bore no kinsman near the throne. Indeed, he is 
strongly suspected of having killed his elder brother, IQiusrau, 
several years before. 

I am indebted to Mr. Ellis, of the India Office, for revising 
the proob. 


NOTE. 

In the Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Library of Trinity 
College, Dublin, p. 416, mention is made of a history of 
Hindustan during the reign of Jahangir, in two volumes, with 
paintings (Ouseley MSS.}. I have, recently ascertained that 
the MS. is only a modem copy of the Iqb&l-nama. 

H. BEVERIDGE. 



CONTENTS 


rAo« 

THK THIKTJEIBNTU. MKW TKAR'S KBAST 1 

THE EOURTEENTH MEW TEAR’S FEAST FROM THE ADSPl. 
Cions ACCESSION 78 

THE FIFTEENTH MEW TEAR’S FEAST AFTER THE ADSPI. 
aOUS ACCESSION 130 

THE SIXTEENTH NEW TEAR’S FEAST AFTER THE AUSPI- 
CIOUS ACCESSION IW 

THE SEVENTEENTH NEW TEAR’S FEAST AFTER THE 
AUSPICIOUS ACCESSION 203 

THE EIGHTEENTH NEW TEAR’S FEAST AFTER THE AUSPI- 
CIOUS ACCESSION 368 

THE NINETEENTH NEW TEAR’S FEAST AFT::R THE AUSPI- 
CIOUS ACCESSION '904 

INDEX - - • -301 


▼ii 




THE THIRTEENTH NEW YEAR’S FEAST 


On the eve of Wedneeday^ the 23id ‘ Babi'u-I-awwal, 1027 
(March 10^ 1618), after the lapee of fourteen and a half gharis, 
the entrance of the Sun — ^that is, H.M. tne Oreat Light — the 
Benefactor of the Universe, into the constellation of the Ram, 
took place. Twelve years had now passed from the august 
Accession of this suppliant at the throne of God, in prosperity, 
and the New Tear began i a joy and thanksgiving. On Thurs- 
day, 2 Farwardin, Divine month, the festival of my Lunar 
weighment took place, and the fifty-first * year of the age of 
this suppliant at God's throne began with rejoicings. I trust 
that mv life will be spent in the doing of God’s Will, and that 
not a breath of it will pass without remembering Him. Aftor 
the weighment had been finished, a fresh feast of joy was 
arranged, and my domestic servants celebrated the dav with 
brimming cups. 

On this day A.saf K. (Nur*Jahan's biother), who held the 
rank of 5,000 with 3,000 horse, was favoured by the grant of 
4,000 two-horsed and three-horsed troopers, and §abit K. was 
raised to the office of Examiner of Petitions. ^ 1 bestowed the 
post of the Artillery on Mu'tamid K. A Kachh (Catch) horse 
had been brought as an oiTering by the son of Dilawar K. 
No horse so good as this had come into my establishment till 
1 encamped in Gujarat, and as M. Rustam showed a great 
liking fox it, I presented it to him. On the Jam weie con- 
ferred four rings — \'iz., diamond, ruby, emerald, and sapphire 

* Jahfingir was bom on Wednesday, 17 Rabru-l>awwal« 977 a.h.. 
or August 31, 1569, and so on March 11, 1618. or 23 HaDru-l-awwal. 
1027, ho was in the beginning of bin fifty-first lunar year. By solar 
computation he was not yet fifty, that is, he was in his fiftieth 3 *ear. 
The text wrongly has 1017 instead of 1027. 



2 


— and two hawks. I also gave four rings — viz., ruby, cat’s- 
eye, emerald, and sapphire — ^to Baja Lachmi Narayan (of 
Kfich Bihar). Muruwwat E. had sent three elephants from 
Bengal, and two of them were included in my private stud. 
On the eve of Friday I ordered lamps to be plac^ roimd the 
tank, and this had a very good appearance. On Sunday Qaji 
Bafiq came from Iraq, and had the good fortune to kiss the 
threshold, and laid before me a letter which my brother Shah 
^Abbas had sent with him. The aforesaid person is a slave of 
Mir Muhammad Amin E., the caravan leader, and the Mir 
had brought him up from his childhood. In truth, he is an 
excellent servant. He frequently visited Iraq, and became 
intimate with my brother ^h ‘Abbas. This time he had 
brought tipchaq* horses and fine cloth-stuffs, such that of 
the horses some were put into the private stables. As he is 
a skilful slave, and a servant worthy of favour, I honoured 
him with the title of Mal%ku44ujjar (Eing of Merchants). On 
Monday I gave Baja Lachmi Narayan a special sword, a 
jewelled rosary, and four pearls for ear-rings. On M^Jbdrah- 
shqmba (Thursday) 1 increased by 500 horse the mansab of 
5,000 personal and 1,000 horse held by Mirza Bustam ; 
l‘tiqad E. was promoted to a mansab of 4,000 and 1,000 
horse ; Sarfaraz E. was promoted to a mansab of 2,500 and 
1,400 horse; Mu‘tamid E. to the rank of 1,000 with 350 
horse. On Anira’i Singh-dalan and Fida’i E., horses worth 
100 mtihara were conferred. As the guarding and administra- 
tion of the Punjab had been entrusted to I‘timadu-d-daula, I, 
at his request, promoted to the government (bukfimat) of the 
said Subah, Mir Qasim, the B aldish i of the Abadis, who is 
related to him, and bestowed on him a mansab of 1,000 per- 
sonal with 400 horse and the title of Qasim E. Before this I 
had given Baja Lachmi Narayan an Traq horse. On this 
day I conferred on him an elephant and a Turki horse, and 
gave him leave to go to Bengal. The Jam was dismissed to 
his native country with a present of a jewelled waist-sword, 

* Text wrongly has panehdq. In Turki dictionaries it is spelt 
topohSq, and means a large or long-necked horse. See P. de Courteille 
Diet., etc. 



3 


a jewelled rosary, two horses, one from *Iraq and the other a 
Turki, and a dress of honour, ^alih^ brother’s son of the 
deceased A^af IQian,* was promoted to a mansab of 1,000 with 
300 horse, and allowed to go to Bengal, and a horse was con- 
ferred on him. On this date Mir Jumlaf came from Persia, 
and had the good fortune to pay his respects. The aforesaid 
is one of the respectable Sayyids of Isfahan and his family 
have always been held in honour in Persia, and now his 
brother’s son, Mir Riza, is in the service of my brother, %ah 
‘Abbas, and has the rank of $adr, and the Shah has married 
him to his own daughter. Mir Jumla had left Persia fourteen 
years before this, and gone to Golconda to Muhammad Quli 
Qutbu-l-mulk. His name is Muhammad Amin. Qutbu-1- 
mulk gave him the title of Mir Jumla. For ten years he had 
been his Muddr ^Alaihi (Centre of Affairs) and his Sdman 
(factotum). After Qutbu-l-mulk died, and the rule came to 
his brother’s son, the latter did not treat the Mir properly, 
and so he took leave and hastened to his native country. 
The Shah, on account of his connection with Mir Riza, and 
the respect which he had for men % of merit, showed much 
consideration for and kindness to him. He (the Mir) also 
presented fitting offerings, and passed three or four years in 
Persia, and amassed properties (estates ?).§ As he several 
times represented that he wished to enter the service of this 
Court, I sent a farman and invited him. Immediately the 
farman arrived he severed his connections there, and set the 
face of loyalty towards this Court. This day he attained the 

* A^af K. III. of Bloch manii ; his name was Ja'far Beg. 

t Sm “Iqbai-nfima,” p. ill. etc. He is not the famous Mir Jumla, 
who was Aurangzeb's general, though possibly the latter was his son. 
Aoooiding to the Iqbai-nSma, he was the nephew, and not the ancle, 
of Mir RizI, but Jahangir's statement agrees with the 'Alam-arl'i 
(p. 623). Mir Jumla’s patron. Muhammad Quit Qutb-Shah, died in 
1612. He himself died in 1637, while Aurangzeb’s general died In 1663. 

X Possibly what is meant is that Shah ‘Abbas was greedy after Mir 
Jumla’s (Saman) wealth. Kamgar llusainf distinctly says that 'Abbas 
wanted to get hold of Mir Jumla’s goods. 

f The Iqbai-nama says that 'Abbas only gave ^r Jumla flattering 
words, and did not give him any high appointment. See also 'Alam- 
arfl, 623, and Ma'asiru-l-umara, III. 415. 



4 


honour of kissing the carpet, and produced as offering twelve 
horses, nine of silk cloths, and two rings. As he had 

come with devotion and sincerity, 1 conferred favours and 
kindness on him, and presented him with 20,000 da/rba 
(Rs. 10,000) for his expenses and a dress of honour. On the 
same day I gave the post of B aldwh i of the Ahadis to ^Inayat 
K. in place of Qasim K. I honoured IQiwaja *AqiI, who is 
one of the old servants, with the title of ‘Aqil K., and pre- 
sented him with a horse. On Friday, Dilawar K., coming 
from the Deccan, had the good fortune to kiss the threshold, 
and presented an offering of 100 muhara and Rs. 1,000. 
Baqir K., Faujdar of Multan, was promoted to a mansab of 
800 personal and 300 horse. Tijarat K . and Bahu’i,*f Zamindar 
of Multan, were honoured with the gift of elephants. On 
Saturday, the 11th, marching from Dobad vdth the intention 
of hunting elephants, I pitched at the village of Kara Bara 
(Garbara?). On Sunday, the 12th, the village of Sajara 
(Ssjwara?) became the place of alighting. It is 8 koaa 
from this place to Dohad, and IJ hoaa to the hunting- 
ground. On the morning of Monday, the 13th, I went to 
hunt elephants with a body of my private servants. As 
the grazing-place of the elephants is in a hilly countr>% with 
elevations and depressions, a passage is obtained with diffi- 
culty by one on foot. Before this, a large body of horse 
and foot had surrounded the jungle after the manner of a 
qam*trgbaf and outside the jungle, on a tree, they had pre- 
pared a wooden platform for me. On all sides of this they 
had arranged seats on other trees for the Amirs. They had 
got ready 200 male elephants with strong nooses, and many 
female elephants. On each elephant there were seated two 
elephant-drivers of the tribe of Jarga.X whose special em- 

* Tuquz inpains ** iiiiio/* but {jcrhaps it is here only used to express 
a gift, and the pieces of cloth were fierhaps only nine, and not eighty- 
one. See Vullero s.v., who refers to Quntrexnere. 

t The 1.0. MSS. have MSmu'i, and the meaning may be *‘the 
maternal uncle of the Zamindur.'* 

J Jariya in No. 181. It scorns to bo the .Tarcja tribe of Abu-l-Fazl, 
Jan'ott II. 250. Com|)are Blochmaiin's i ninslation, p. 2M5 n., of the 
eonti;|K>iKling pa.s.s4vgo in the Irjb&Nnima. The tril^e is iliero callc^l 
.llrwi JAh. 



5 


pk^nrantis huntiiig of elephants, and it had been ananged 
that they should biing the wild elephants from the jungle 
into my piesenoe, that I might witness the hunt. It hap- 
pened that at the time when the men from all sides entered 
the jungle, in oonsequenoe of the thickness of the forest and 
the heights and hollows, the chain was broken, and the order 
of the jomufgia did not remain perfect. The wild elephahts 
in bewilderment turned in every direction, but twelve male 
and female came to this side (where J. was). As the fear was 
that they might escape, they drove in the tame elephants and 
tied them (the wild elephants) up wherever they found them. 
Although many elephants were not caught, at lease two ex- 
cellent ones were captured, very handsome in shape, of good 
breed, and perfect marks. As there is a hill in the jungle in 
which the elephants were, called Bakas (R&kshas) Pahar,* 
or demon hill, 1 called these two elephants Bavan Sar and 
Pivan Sar, these being the names of two demons. On 
Tuesday, the 14th, and Kam-diamba (Wednesday), the 15tb, 
I halted 

On the eve of Thursday, the 16th, I marched, and halted 
at the stage of Kara Bara. Hakim Beg,t who is one of the 
household of the Court, was honoured with the title of Hakim 
K., and a sum of Bs. 3,000 was given to Sangram, a Zamindar 
of the bill country of the Panjab. As the beat was very 
great, and marching by day was' to be avoided, I marched 
by night. On Saturday, the 18th, a halt was made in the 
paiganah of Dohad. On Sunday, the 19tk, the sun that 
bestows favour on the world attained the highest point in 
the constellation of Aries. On this day a great entertainment 
was held, abd I sat on the throne. I promoted Shuh-nawaz 
K., who held a mansab of 5,000, with the favour of 2,000 
horse, of two and three horses, ^waja AbQ-M.lasan, the 
Chief Ba Mithi. was given a mansab, original and increased, 
of 4,000 with 2,000 horse. As Ahmad Beg K., of Kabul, who 

* This must be Ptvigarh, * hill fort in the PSncii Mal.iSI dwlrivt. 
which is 2.600 feet above the see. See I.G. XX. 70, and XIX. 380. 

t Son-in-law of I*tmidu-d-daula, being married (o a !>islcr »( N'nr 
JahCn. See Ifo’inni-huinarS i, 573. 



6 


had obtained the govemotahip of Kaahmix, had promised 
that he would conquer in the space of two years Tibet and 
KiAtwar, and the promised time had elapsed, and he had 
not fulfilled this service, I removed him, and promoted 
Dilawar K. Kakar to the Government of Kashmir. I gave 
him a dress honour and an elephant, and sent him off. 
He also made a promise in writing that in the course of two 
years he would conquer Tibet and Ei^twar. BadTu^x- 
Zamfin, s. ^&hru^ M. came from the jagir he held in Sul* 
lianpllx, and had the good fortune to kiss the threshold. 
Having at this time honoured Qasim K. with a jewelled dagger 
and an elephant, 1 dismissed him to the' Government of the 
Punjab. 

On the night of Tuesday, the 21st, I marched from 
the stags mentioned, and turned the reins of the army of 
prosperity towards Ahmadabad. As in consequence of the 
great heat and the corruption of the air 1 would have had to 
undergo much hardship, and would have had to traverse a 
long distance before reaching Agra, it occurred to me not to 
proceed at this hot season to the capital. As I heard much 
praise of the rainy season in Gujarat, and there was no report 
about the evil reputation of Ahmadabad (tee infra for account 
of epidemic there), 1 finally conceived the idea of remaining 
there. Inasmudi as the protection and guardianship of God 
(to Him be praise) was in all places and at all times extended 
to this suppliant, just at this crisis news-arrived that signs 
of the plague (wabd) had shown themselves again at Agra, 
and many people were dyii^, my intention of not going to 
Agra, which had thrown its rays on my mind through Divine 
inspiration, was confirmed. The entertainment of Thursday, 
the 28rd, was held at the station of Jalod.* 

Previously to this, the rule of coinage was that on one face 
of the metal they stamped my name, and on the reverse the 
name of the plaM, and the month and year of the reign. At 
this time it entered my mind that in place of the month they 
should substitute the figure of the constellation which be* 
kmged to that month; for instance, in the month of Phr- 

* Jbllod in Um Dohad tatUqs of tba Plaoh MatU dMriet, Bomtay. 



7 


mwdla tii6 figiue of a nun, tod in Uxdibihyit the figmeof a 
boll. Similady, in each numA that a coin nas steuok, the 
fignxe of the ooneteQatitm nas to be on one fao^ aa if the enn 
weie emeiging fram it. This naage is my own, and has never 
been practised until now.* 

On this day 1‘tiqSd E. was promoted to the dignityof a 
standard, and a standard was also oonferred on Murawwat K., 
who was attached to Bengal. On the nig^t of Monday.f tiie 
27th, the camp was pitched in the village of Badrwala, in 
the paq;anah of Sahra.{ At this stage was heard the voice 
of the Icoel (toj/al). The koel is a bird of the crow tribe, but 
smaller. Theorow’s eyes are black, and those of the koel red. 
The female has white spots, but the male is all black. The 
male has a very pleasant voice, quite unlike that of the female. 
It is in reality the nightingale of India. Just as the nightin- 
gale is agitated and noisy in the spring, so is the cry of the 
koel at the approach of the rainy season, which is the spring 
of Hindustan. Its cry is ezceedin^y pleasant and penetrat- 
ing, and the bird begins its exhilaration (mosti) when the 
mangoes ripen. It frequently sits on the mango-trees, and 
is delighted with the colour and scent of the nungo. A 
strange thing about the koel is that it does not bring up its 
young from the egg, but, finding the nest of the crow un- 
guarded at the time of laying, it breaks the crow’s eggs with 
its beak, throws them out, and lays its own in the place of 
tiion, and flies off. The crow, thinidng the eggs its own, 
hatches the young and brings them up. I have myself seen 
this strange affair at Allahabad. 

On tite ni^t of jram{i(iin &0 (Wednesday), the 29di, the 
camp was on the bank of the Mahi, and the entertainment of 
MubSmluhamba was hdd there. Two springs appeared on 
the bank of the Mahi, that had very clear water, so much so 
that if a popj^-seed fell into them the whole of it was visible. 
All tiiat day I passed with the ladies. As it was a pleasant 

* The text (pp. 227, 228) has dtewinge of the twelve Zodioeal ooina. 
See also Taveiniei'a aoeouit of their institution. 

t Text wrongly haa Saturday. 

X ProbaUy the Seyreh of Bayley’s map, m the LQiilvfda State, 
E. of Alimadabad. 



place to walk about in, I ofdend them to build a xaiaad leat 
lounH each of tbe springs. On Friday I fished In the HahT, 
and large fish with scales feU inco the net. I first told my 
son, g[^>Jalian, to try his swoxd on them. After this I 
ordered tiie Amirs to strike them with the swords they had in 
their belts. My son’s sword out better than all <d thaits. 
TSiese fish were divided am<mg the servants who were present. 
On the eve of Saturday, the Istof Urdibihijiit, matching from 
the above-mentioned stage, I ordered* the niHce-bearers 
(ifasSwutSn] taid^awScMyan to collect the widows and poor 
people from the villages on the toad and neat it, and bnng 
them before me, so that I might bestow charity on tibem 
with my own hand, which would be an occupation, and the 
helpless ones might also find grace. 'What better occupation 
could there be than this 1 On Monday, the 3rd, Siaja’at K. 
‘Arab, and Himmat K., and other servants who belonged to 
the Deccan and Gujarat, had the good fortune to Irina the 
threshold. The holy men and the possessors of blessing 
(faqirs, etc.) who lived at Ahmadabad paid their respects to 
me. On Tuesday, the 4th, the bank of the river at MahmQda- 
b&d became the alighting place. Rustam E., whom my son, 
%ah-Jahan, had left in the Government ot Gujarat, was 
honoured by paying his respects. The entertabon^t of 
Thursday, the 0th, was held on the bank of the Kinkri 3 ra 
tank. N^ir K., according to order, came from the Deccan 
and raised the head of honour with the good fortune of pros- 
trating himself before me. 

A diamond ring was presented to my son, 9iah-Jahan, as 
l>art of the offering of Qutbu-l-mulk. It was of the value of 
1,000 muhars, and on it there appeared three letters of equal 
size and of good form, such that they made tbe word Lillahi 
(for God). This diamond had been sent, as it was reckoned 
one of the marvels of the world. In fact, veins and scratdies 
arc flaws in precious stones, but it was generally thought that 
tbe marks on this one were fabricated. Moreover, the diamond 
did not come from any celebrated mine. As my son, ^h- 
Jahan, wished that it should be sent to my brother, 9iah 

* Quoted by Bloohmann, Oatealto RmtUm, IMW, 188. 



9 


*Abbi8, as a soavanix of the ocmqueat of the Deooan it was 
sent to the Shah along with other gifts.* 

On this day I presented Biikha Bay bSd-faruth (panegTtiat) 
withBs. 1,000. HeisaOnjatatiby origin, and ia folly versed 
in the chtonioles and okoamstaaosB of that country. His 
nune was Bflnta — that is, a sapling {wihSl). It seemed to 
me that it was anomalous to call an old man BQntf , espeoiaUy 
now that he had beomne verdant (sar‘sa6s) and frait>bearing 
through the irrigotion (so^db, literaUy, doud, or mirage) of our 
kindness. 1 therefore ordered that henceforth he should be 
called Brikha Bay. Btikha means “tree^ in HindL On 
Friday, the 7th of the aforesaid month, corresponding with 
the 1st Jumada^l-awwal, at a chosen propitious hour, I 
entered the city of ^th all enjoyment. At the 

time of mounting, my son of prosperous fortune, gsih- Jahan, 
had brought 20,000 eboran, or Bs. 6,000, for the Mwdr (scatter* 
ing), and I scattered them as I hastened to the palsoe. When 
I alij^ted there he laid before me by way of an offering a 
jewelled furra (aigrette) of the value of Bs. 25,000, and those 
of hie officers whom he had left in this Subah also presented 
offerings. They altogether amounted to nearly Bs. 40,000. 
As it was represented tomethathfawajaBegMlrzaSaiawi had 
reached the neighbouriiood of the forgiveness of God— 4.e., 
had died — at Ahmadnagar, 1 promoted to a mansab of 2,000 
personal and horse, original and i ncre ase d , KbuijM K., whom 
he had adopted as bis son, and, indeed, held dearer tban a 
son of his knns, and iriio was in troth, an intelligent, am* 
bitioos youth, and a servant worthy patronage, and an* 
trusted him with tike dbatgs the fort of Ahmadnagar. 

* The t«itliaBdersW-^(**endseit**)hiaBiBtianiBgtlisposlllon 
of the letten, bet the LO^ lO. No. 181, has iar uiur {**ilbon" or 

**i»it.*’). ThswoidsAlhOIN4iMharrofaai|htaMaB*'iaifartedsrtiaat* 
l^leMetB," sad Ifr. BogHems takm the fsasags to atari tlwatoosf 
tlw Isttaa eea on a Una with one anothac, and that the thtad was 
InvMted aad hstow the oCfair two. Batsni^.athawMdaaayala 
ha mad, ba the asanhw of ** hsadsaass,” and X thhdt tUs h tiia saan* 
fag hwa. PealtiythsaBBaid^fothat tlwaiaoalsttaoraarit 
etew v ia., th stsj| dl A. liosthsraaniinssaybsthatanthsalstteer 
nea aqaal hi riaa, and in a ilaiiliag poaitiM on the stOBO. 



10 


In these days, in consequence of the great heat and the 
corruption of the air, sickness had broken out among the 
people, and of those in the city and the camp there were few 
who for two or three dajs had not been ill. Inflammatory 
fever or pains in the limbs attacked them, and in the course of 
two or three days they became exceedingly ill — so mu^^^ so 
that even after recovery they remained for a long time weak 
and languid. They mostly at last recovered, so that but few 
were in danger of their lives. T heard from old men who 
resided in this country that thirty years before this the same 
kind of fever prevailed, and passed away happily. Anyhow, 
there appeared some deterioration in the climate of Gujarat, 
and I much regretted having come here. I trust that the 
great and glorious Gk>d, in His mercy and grace, will lift up 
this burden, which is a source of uneasiness to my mind, from 
off the people. On Mubdrak-^amba (Thursday), the 13th, 
Badru-z-zaman, s. Mirza %ahrulA, was promoted to the 
mansab of 1,500 personal and horse, and presented with a 
standard, and appointed faujdar of Sarkar Patan. Sayyid 
Ni^m, faujdar of Sarkar Lucknow, was raised to the mansab 
of 1,000 personal and 700 horse. The mansab of ‘Ali Quli 
Darman, who was attached to the province of Qandahar, at 
the request of Bahadur K., the governor thereof, was ordered 
to be 1,000 personal and 700 horse. Sayyid Hizbar K. Barha 
was dignified with the man^b of 1,000 personal and 400 horse. 
I promoted Zabardast K. to the rank of 800 personal and 
350 horse. On this day Qasim IQiwaja of Dihbid* hai sent 
from Ma-wara’a-n-nahr (Transoxiana) by the hand of one of 
his tribesmen by way of supplication five tuyghun (white) 
falcons. One died on the road, and four arrived at Ujjain 
in safety. I ordered them to hand over the sum of Rs. 5,000 
to someone among them, that he might purchase and take 
with him whatever things would be agreeable to the |Qiwaja, 
and gave a reward of Bs. 1,000 to himself. At this time 
n^n *Alam, who had been tent as ambassador to the ruler of 
Persia, sent an a^ydni falcon (bird from the nest), which in 

• Dihbid, “the village of the willow,** a well-known place in 
Transoxiana. It is* Dihband in text. 



11 


the Persian language they call ukna* Outwardly one cannot 
distinguish between these and bdz damif falcons by any par- 
ticular mark, but after they have been flown the difference 
is clear. On Thursday^ the 20th, Mir Abu-s-%lih, a relation 
(? son-in-law) of the deceased Mirza Yusuf K., came from 
the Deccan by order, and enjoyed the good fortune of kissing 
the threshold. He presented as an offering 100 muharaX and 
a jewelled plume (kalgl). Mirza Yusuf K.§ was one of the 
Bizawi Sa3ryids of Mashhad, and his family was always held 
in great honour in Khurasan, and just now my brother 
‘Abbas has given his daughter in marriage to the younger 
brother of the aforesaid Abfi-9-^lih. His father, Mirza 
Ata^,|| was the head of the attendants of the mausoleum of 
Ri^, the 8th Imam. Mirza Yusuf IQian, by means of the 
patronage of H.M. (Akbar), had risen to nobility, and attained 
to the mansab of 5,000. Without doubt he was a good Mir, 
and held his many servants in good order. A number of rela- 
tions gathered round him. He died in the Deccan. Al- 
though he left many sons, who obtained favours in considera- 
tion of former services, special attention was paid to the de- 
velopment of his eldest son. In a short time I advanced him 
to the rank of nobility. Certainly there is a great difference 
between him and his father. 

On Mubdrak-ahamba (Thursday), the 27th, I presented 
^akim Masibu-z-zaman with 20,000 daaha (8 anna pieces), 
and to Qakim Bubu-llah 100 muhara and Bs, 1,000. As he 
had thoroughly diagnosed my constitution, he perceived that 
the climate of Gujarat was very inimical to it. Hesaid : “ As 
soon as you moderate your habit of taking wine and opium, 

* Ukna. The word appears to be Arabic, and signifies a nest. It 
is commonly written umktia, 

t Bdz dtlml apparently means hawks reared in captiTity, or it may 
mean hawks brought by dealers — d&mu Information about hawks may. 
he found in Bloohmann, 293, etc., and in Col. Phillott’s recent articles 
bi the J.AJ9.B., May, 1907, etc. 

t The LO.MS. has ** mpees.*’ 

I Blochmann, 340. || Ulngh in MSS. 

H Blochmann, 346. YOsuf died in NoTember, 1601. His eldest son 
was M. Laflbkarf . 



12 


all these troubles of yours will disappear/* Indeed, when I 
in one day diminished (the quantity I took of) both of them, 
there was a great gain on that first day. On Mubdrak-sjuimba 
(Thursday), the 3rd ^urdad, Qizilb^ K. was promoted to 
the mansab. original and increased, of 1,500 personal and 
1,200 horse. A report was received from 6a j pat K., super- 
intendent of the elephant stables, and Baluch K., chief hunts- 
man {Qardwul Beg)y that up to this time sixty-nine elephants, 
male and female, had been caught. Whatever took place 
after this would be reported. I ordered them to beware not 
to take old or small elephants ; but with this exception they 
should catch all they saw, male or female. On Monday, the 
14th.* the sum of Rs. 2,000 was presented for Shah ‘Alam*s an- 
niversary, to Sayyid Muhammad, his representative. A special 
Kachh horse, one of the good hoi^ses of the Jam which had 
been presented to me, was given to Raja Bir Singh Deo. I 
made a present of Rs. 1,000 to Baluch K., the chief huntsman, 
who is engaged in capturing elephants. On Tuesday, 15th, 
I found I had a severe headache, which at last ended in fever. 
At night I did not drink my usual number of cups, and after 
midnight crop-sicknessf was added to my fever, and till 
morning I rolled about on my couch. On Wednesday, the 
16th, at the end of the day, the fever diminished,, and, after 
asking the advice of my doctors, I took my usual number of 
cups on the third night. Although they urged me to take 
some broth of pulse and rice, I could not make up my mind to 
do so. Since I arrived at the age of discretion, I never remem- 
ber having taken bughdnX broth, and hope that I may not 
want it in future. When they brought food for me this day, 
I had no inclination for it. In short, for three days and two 

* The MSS. have 24th and 25th for the following day, but 14th and 
15th Boom right. 

t The passage is translated in Elliot, vL 357, but the mention of 
Saturday and of Multan doctors there is a mistake. Text has afiudapit 
** 1 increased my intoxication,** but this seems wrong. The MSS. have 
afzud. Jah&ngir means that the stoppage of his wine inoreased 
orapulousness. See Elliot, yi. 357. 

t Apparently this should be whioh is a Turki word meaning 

thick:* 



13 


nights I remained fasting. Though I had fever for a day and 
a night, and my weakness was such that it appeared as if I 
had been confined to bed for a long time, I had no appetite 
left, and had no inclination towards food. 

I* am amazed to think what pleasure or goodness the 
founder of this city could have seen in a spot so devoid of the 
favour (of God) as to build a city on it. After him, others, 
too, have passed their lives in precious trouble in this dust- 
bin. Its air is poisonous, and its soil has little water, and is of 
sand and dust, as has alreadyf been described. Its water is 
very bad and unpalatable, and the river, which is by the side 
of the city, is always dry except in the rainy season. Its wells 
are mostly salt and bitter, and the tanks in the neighbourhood 
of the city have become like buttermilk from washermen’s 
soap. The upper classes who have some property have made 
reservoirs in their houses, which they fill with rainwater in 
the rainy season, and they drink that water until the next 
year. The evils of water to which the air never penetrates, 
and which has no way for the vapour to come out by, are 
evident. Outside the city, in place of green grass and flowers, 
all is an open plain full of thorn-brakes (zaqqum), and as for 
the breeze that blows oil the thorns, its excellence is known : 

“JO thou, oompendium of goodness, by which of thy names shall 1 
call thee ? 

I had already called Ahmidibid Card&bSd (theabodr of dust)/' 

Now, I do not know whether to call it Samumistdn (the 
place of the samum or simoom) or Bimarlstan (abode of sick- 
ness), or Zaqqum-zar (the thorn-bed), or Jahannamabad (the 
house of Hell), for it contains all these varieties. If the rainy 
season had not prevented me, I would not have debiyed one 
day in this abode of trouble, but, like Solomon, would have 
seated myself on the throne of the wind, and hastened out, 
iind released the people of God from this pain and trouble. 
As the men of this city are exceedingly weak-hearted and 
wretched, in order to guard against any of the men from the 
ramp entering their houses with a view to oppress them, or 

^ Elliot, vi. 358. t See Vol. I., p. 414. 

t The Iqb&l-nimn, 115, has a different rending of this line. 


32 



14 


interfering with the affairs of the poor and miserable : and 
lest the Qa0 and Mir *Adi (judge) should, from fear of the face 
of men (ru-dtda^i), temporize and not stop such oppression, I, 
from the date on which I entered the city, notwithstanding 
the heat of the air, every day, after completing the midday 
prayer, went and sat in the Jharoka. It was towards the river, 
and had no impediment in the shape of gate, or wall, or watch- 
men {yasdund), or chobddra (mace-bearers). For the sake of 
administering justice, I sate there for two or three sidereal 
hours and listened to the cries for redress, and ordered punish- 
ments on the oppressors according to their faults and crimes. 
Even in the time of weakness I have gone every day to the 
jharohay though in great pain and sorrow, according to my 
fixed custom, and have looked on ease of body as something 
unlawful* ((tardm) for me. 

'* For the caro of the people of God 
At night I make not mine eyes acquainted with sleep ; 

For the ease of the bodies of all 
I approve of pain for my own body.** 

By the grace of Allah, it has become my habit not to sur- 
render the nycthemeron, for more than two or three sidereal 
hours of the coin of Time, to the plundering of sleep. In this 
there are two advantages— one, the knowledge of the king- 
dom ; the other, wakefulness of heart in calling God to mind. 
God forbid that this life of a few days should pass in care- 
lessness. As a heavy sleep is in front, I must reckon as a gain 
this time of my wakefulness, which I shall not see again in sleep, 
and must not be careless of recollecting God for a single wink. 
** Be wakeful, for a wondrousf sleep is ahead.” On the same 
day that I contracted fever, my son Shah-Jahan, who is close 
to my heart, also contracted it. His attack lasted a long time, 
and for ten days he could not come to pay his respects. He 
came on Thursday, the 24th, and waited on me, and appeared 
very w'eak and powerless, so much so that if anyone had not 
explained the matter, one might have supposed he had been 
ill for a month or more. I am grateful that at last all ended 

* It should bo rooorded to Jahinf^'s eredit that he has a leputatloo 
oven at the presont day for his love of justioa. 

t 'ajabl. The MSS. have *a/sl, “ lasting.** which soenis better. 



16 


well. On Thursday:, the Slst, Mir Jumla, who had come 
from Iran — a summary of what had happened to him has 
been already written — ^was honoured with the mansab of 1,600 
personal and 200 horse. On this day, in consequence of the 
weakness I suffered from, I bestowed as alms on deserving 
people an elephant, a horse, and varieties of quadrupeds, 
with a quantity of gold and silver and other valuable things. 
Most of my servants also brought alms according to their 
means. I told them that if their object was to parade their 
loyalty, their proceeding was not acceptable, and if they were 
acting from genuine piety there was no need for bringing their 
alms into the Presence ; they could secretly and personally 
distribute them to the poor and needy. On Mubdrak-sfuimba 
(Thursday), the 7th Tir, Divine month, ^diq K. Ba khsh i was 
promoted to the mansab of 2,000 personal and horse, original 
and increased ; Iradat K., the Mir Saman, to that of 2,000 
and 1,000 horse, Mir Abu ^lih Ri^awi to the mansab of 2,000 
and 1,000 horse, with the title of Ri^awl IQian, and, being 
honoured with a standard and an elephant, he took leave for 
the Deccan. 

At this time it was represented to methattheCommandcr- 
in-Chief, the Ataliq fOian-ldianan, as a sequel to the celebrated 
line, ** For every rose one must bear the pain of a hundred 
thorns,'’ had written an ode, and that Mirza Rustam l^afawi 
and Mirza Murad, his son, h id also tried their skill. An 
impromptu opening couplet came into my mind : 

** A oup of wine should be poured* on the cheek of the rosebed. 

There are many clouds, much wine should be poured.’* 

Of those who were present at the entertainment who had 
the poetic temperament each compqsed^an ode. and presented 
it. It became known that the hemistich was from Maulana 
‘Abdu-r-Rahmaii Jami. I loorted at the whole of his ode (or 
odes). Except this hemistich, which like a proverb has 
become famous over the world, he has not written anything 

* Compare Elliot, vi 369. HuH-i-fuigtir also means (be cheek of 
the rosebud (t.e., the beloved one). Apparently the conceit Is that the 
cheek of the fair one is clouded over, so it ebould be reddened by pouring 
wine on it. 



16 


epigrammatic. All is very simple and smooth.* On this day 
arrived the news of the death of Ahmad Beg K., governor of 
Kashmir. His sons, who were of the house-bom ones of the 
Court, and on whose foreheads the signs of intelligence and 
zeal were manifest, obtained smtable mansabs, and were sent 
to do duty in the ^uba of Banga§k and Kabul. His mansab 
was that of 2,500 ; his eldest son obtained that of 3,000 (?),j‘ 
and three other sons that of 900 each. On Thursday, the 
14th, lAwaja Baqi K., who was adorned with the high qualities 
of dignity, honour, generosity, and valour, under whose rule 
was one of the thanas of the country of Berar, was promoted 
to the mansab of 1,500 and 1,000 horse, original and increased, 
and the title of BaqI K. Ray Kahnur (Kunwar ?), who was 
formerly Diwan of Gujarat, was chosen for the dlwanship of 
Malwa. 

At this time the pairing of the sdros, which I had never seen 
before, and is reported never to have been seen by man, was 
witnessed by me. The Bdraa is a creature of the crane genus, 
but somewhat larger.]: On the top of the head it has no 
feathers, and the skin is drawn over the bones of the head. 
From the back of the eye to six finger-breadths of the neck it 
is red. They mostly live in pairs on the plains, but are occa- 
sionally seen in flocks. People bring a pair in from the fields, 
and keep them in their houses, and they become familiar with 
men. In fact, there was a pair of sdras in my establishment 
to which I had given the names of Laila and Majnun. One 
day a eunuch informed me that (the) two had paired in his 
presence. I ordered that if they showed an inclination to 
pair again they should inform me. At dawn he came and 
told me that they were about to pair again. I immediately 
hastened to look on. The female having straightened its 
legs bent down a little : the m^le then lifted up one of its feet 
from the ground and placed it on her back, and afterwards the 

* hamwar. Porhaps it means ** mediocre *’ here, but we have the 
word a little lower down, p. 240, used in a laudatory sense. 

t According to the Ma^Igir and Blochmann, 405, it was the second 
son who attained the highest rank. 

t dah inwazdah, ** 10, 12 t.e., it is one-fifth larger. The sSraa 

is the Ardea Antigone of naturalist 



17 


second foot, and, immediately seating himself on her back, 
paired with her. He then came down, and, stretching out 
his neck, put his beak to the ground, and walked once round 
the female. It is possible they may have an egg and produce 
a young one. Many strange tales of the afEection of the 
sdras for its mate have been heard. The following case has 
been recorded because it is very strange. Qiyam K., who is 
one of the Uanazads (housebom ones) of this Court, and is 
well acquainted with the arts of hunting and scouting, in- 
formed me that one day he had gone out to hunt, and found 
a sdrcbs sitting. When he approached, it got up and went off. 
From its manner of walking he perceived signs of weakness 
and pain. He went to the place where it had been sitting, 
and saw some bones and a handful of feathers on which it 
had been sitting. He threw a net round it, and drew himself 
into a comer, and it tried to go and sit in the same place. 
Its foot was caught in the net, and he went forward and seized 
it. It appeared extremely light, and when he looked minutely 
he saw there were no feathers on its breast and belly : its flesl 
and skin had separated, and there were maggots. Moreover, 
there was no sign of flesh left on any of its members : a haiidful 
of feathers and bone came into his hand. It was clear that 
its mate had died, and that it had sate there from the day it 
lost its companion. 

*' My burning heart hath melted my body with sopaiation's pang ; 
A soul-consuming sigh burnt mr, as twere a lamp. 

The day of my joy became black like the night of grief. 
Separation from thee hath made my day like this.** 

Himmat K., who is one oi my best servants, and whose word 
is worthy of reliance, told me that in the Dohad* pargana he 
had seen a pair of sdras on the bank of a tank. One of his 
gunners shot one of them, and in the same place cut off its 
head and strippedf it of its feathers (? ). By chance we halted 

* Two boundaries. The name signifies that it is on the borders of 
Mfilwa and Gujaru, I. G. XI. 366. 

t pak sdkkf. Lit. cleaned it, which may mean also that he dis- 
embowelled it, or even that he cooked it. Probably the gunner left 
the body or part of it there, and it was this that the male circum- 
ambulated. 



18 


two or three days at that place, and its mate continually 
walked round it, and uttered cries and lamentation. ** My 
heart,” he said, ” ached at its distress, but there was no 
remedy for it save regret.” By chance, twenty-five days 
afterwards, he passed by the same spot, and asked the inhabi- 
tants what had become of that saros. They said it died on 
the same day, and there were still remains of feathers and 
bones on the spot. He went there himself, and saw it was 
as th^ said. There are many tales of this kind among the 
people, which it would take too long to tell. 

On Saturday, the 16th, there came the news of the death of 
Rawat Shankar, who was one of those on duty in Bihar. 
Man Singh, his eldest son, was raised to the man^ab of 2,000 
personal and 600 horse : his other sons and connections were 
also raised in man§ab, and were directed to obey him. On 
Thursday, the 21st, the elephant Bavan,* the pick of my catch, 
which had been left in the pargana of Dohad to be tamed, 
was brought to Court. I ordered him to be kept near the 
jharoka on the river side, that he might be constantly under 
my eye. In the elephant-stables of H.M. Akbar the largest 
elephant I saw was Durjan Sal. It was long the premier 
dephant. Its height was 4 yards (cfara't), and SJ quarters 
of the IlSm gazy which is 8 yards and 3 fingers of the ordinary 
gaz. At present, among the elephants of my establishment, 
the largest athlete is 'Alam-Gajraj, which H.M. Akbar himself 
had caught. It is the chief of my special elephants. Its 
height is 4^ yards, or 7 yards and 7 fingers^ of the ordinary 
yard. The ordinary gaz has been fixed at 24 fingers’ breadtli 
of an average-sized man, and the Ildhx ghz is 40 fingers' 
breadth. 

On this day Muzailar K., who had been promoted to the 
Subadarship of Thatta (Sind), had the good fortune to kiss 
the threshold. He presented 100 muhars and Rs. 100 as 

* Apparently this shoold bp Pavsn. It was one of those caught in 
the elephant hunt. It is written Bivan in the MSS. 

t For meaning of ^ra, “ yard,” see text (15th year), pp. 298 and 
303. For 31 quarters (pdo) the text wrongly has 31 feet (pd). 

} MSS. has 17. Text hM 7. According to Elliot, Supplement II., 
i77y ihe/^ailpsz waeoneofil fiagecs. 



19 


nazr, and the equivalent of Rs. 100,000 in jewels and jewelled 
things. At this time news came that God Almighty had 
bestowed on my son Parwiz a son* by the daughter of Shah 
Murad, deceased. It is to be hoped that his coming will be of 
good omen to this State. 

On Sunday, the 24th, Bay Biharif had the good fortune to 
kiss the threshold : there is not a greater Zamindar than this 
in the country of Gujarat. His country is close to the sea 
Biharl and the Jam are from one stem. They were united 
ten generations ago. As far as territory and forces go, the 
standing of Bihari is greater than that of the Jam. They 
say that he never came to see any of the Sultans of Gujarat. 
Sultan Mahmud had sent an army against him, but in the 
fight the army of Ma^ud was defeated. At the time 
when fOian A^^am went to conquer the fort of Jnnagarh in 
the country of Surat, Nannu, who was called Sultan Muzaffar, 
and gave himself out as heir to the kingdom, was passing his 
days in a state of misery under the protection of the zamindars. 
After this the Jam was defeated in battle with the victorious 
(Royal) army, and Nannu took refuge with Ray Bihari. ^an 
A*zam demanded Nannu from Ray Bihari, and as he could 
not oppose the Royal army, he gave him up, and by this 
piece of loyalty was saved from the blov/s of the victorious 
army. At the timej when Ahmadabad was adorned by th** 
presence of the retinue of fortune for a short time, he did not 
come to wait on me. His country was somewhat distant, and 
time did not admit of the appointing of a force (against him). 
When it happened that I returned there, my son %ah-Jahan 
appointed Raja Bikramajit with an army (for this purpose), 
and he, seeing his own safety in coming in hastened to receive 
the honour of kissing the threshold, giving 200 muh/trs and 

* This was not the son who died in the following year. Sec text 
p. 282. That son was ttie eldest son, and probably was the one born 
in the 9th year. See Tuzuk, p. 137. 

t The Zamindar of Cutch, whose residence was at Bhuj. S«>«* 
Jarrett, ii. 250, where it is said tiat the JSm loft his original country 
60 years ago. 

Jah&ngir is referring to his visit to Gujarat in the 12th year of Ins 
reign. 



20 


Rb. 2,000 as naCT, and 100 horses. However, there was not 
one of his horses that I approved of. His age appeared to me 
to be more than eighty* years, and he himself said he was 
ninety. In his senses and powers there was no appearance 
of decay. Among his men there was an old man with white 
beard, moustaches, and eyebrows. He said that Ray Bihari 
remembered him when he (the old man) was a child (infant), 
and that he had grown up from childhood in his service. 

On this day Abu-1-Ha8an,f the painter, who has been 
honoured with the title of Nadiru-z-zaman, drew the picture 
of my accession as the frontispiece to the Jahangir-nama, and 
brou^t it to me. As it was worthy of all praise, he received 
endless favours. His work was perfect, and his picture is one 
of the chefs d^csuvre of the age. At the present time he has 
no rival or equal. If at this day the masters *Abdu-l-Hayy 
and Bihzad were alive, they would have done him justice. 
His father, Aqa Ri^’i, of Herat,]: at the time when I was 
Prince, joined my service. He (Abu-l-^asan) was a khdnazdd 
of my Court. There is, however, no comparison between his 
work and that of his father (t.e., he is far better than his 
father). One cannot put them into the same category. My 
connection was based on my having reared him. Froih his 
earliest years up to the present time I have always looked 
after him, till his art has arrived at this rank. Truly he has 
become Nadira-i-zaman ('* the wonder of the age ”). Also, 
Ustad Man9ur§ has become such a master in painting that he 
has the title of Nadini-l-*Afr, and in the art of drawing is 
imique in his generation. In the time of my father’s reign and 
my own these two have had no third. As regards myself, my 
liking fox painting and my practice in judging it have arrived at 
such a point that when any work is brought before me, either of 
deceased artists or of those of the present day, without the 
names being told me, I say on the spur of the moment that 
it is the work of such and such a man. And if there be a 

* MSS. haTe this 70 or 80. t Elliot, vi. 359. 

X Text “ of Merv,” but the MSS. have Herat. 

f Maneur NaqqM is one of the illustrators to the B&bar-n&ma in 
the British Museum. Rieu Supplement, p. 52. There is also a Husain 
NaqqXih mentioned in the MS. there described. 



21 


picture containing many portraits, and each face be the work 
of a different master, I can discover which face is the work of 
each of them. If any other person has put in the eye and 
eyebrow of a face, I can perceive whose work the original face 
is, and who has painted the eye and eyebrows. 

On the eve of Sunday, the 31st of the month of Tir, heavy 
rain fell, and it went on raining with great violence till Tues- 
day, the 1st of Amurdad.* For sixteen days there were con- 
stantly clouds and (? of) rain. As this is a sandy country, 
and the buildings in it are weak, many houses fell, and many 
lives wore lost. 1 heard from the inhabitants of the city that 
they remembered no rain like that of this year. Although 
the channel of the Sabarmatif appears full of water, it is in 
most places fordable, and elephants can always cross it. If 
for a day there has been no rain, horses and men can ford it. 
The fountain head of this river is in the hill-country of the 
Rana. It comes out from the ravine of Eokra(?),{ and, 
having traversed 1| kosa, passes below Mirpur,§ and in this 
place they call it the Wakal (?). After passing 3 hass beyond 
Mirpur, they call it the Sabarmati. 

On Thursday, the 10th, Ray Bihari was exalted with the 
favour of a male and a female elephant, a jewelled dagger, and 
four rings, of red ruby and yellow ruby (topaz), sapphire, and 
emerald. Before this, the Atallq Jan-sipar (life-jeoparding), 
[^n-]Aanan (*Abdu-r- Rahim), Commander-in-Chief, by order, 
had sent a force under the leadership of his son Amru-llah|| 
towards Gondwana, in order to seize the diamond mine of 
Barakar^ (?) that was in the possession of Panju, a Zamindar 
of Khandesh. On this day a report came from him that the 
aforesaid Zamindar, knowing that opposition to the victorious 
army was beyond his power, had made an offering of the mine, 

♦ Apparently there were 32 days in this Tir. 

t The SSbarmati rises in the hills of MewSr. 

t I cannot find this Kokia or Gogra. The SSbarmatt /alls into the 
Gulf of Cambay. Possibly Kokra thereby means ** mountains.** 

I Apparently the Mairpur of Bayley*s map. || Blochmann, 330. 

^ Perhaps this is the BlrSgam of the A*in A. (Jarreit, ii. 230). 
Panju Zamindftr may be the Bab-jiti, Zamindar of the Gond tribe, 
whom AbU'I FazI mentions. The word Bar&kar is omitted in test. 



22 


and a royal superintendent had been appointed to manage it. 
The diamonds of that place are superior in kind and beauty 
to all other kinds of diamonds, and much esteemed by jewellers. 
They are of good shape, and larger, and superior. Of the 
second rank is the mine of Eokhra,* which is on the borders 
of Bihar ; but the diamonds of that place are not obtained 
from the mine, but from a river which in the rainy season 
comes down in flood from the hills. Before that they dam it 
up, and when the flood has passed over the dam and there is 
little water, a number of men who are skilled in this art go 
into the river bed and bring out the diamonds. It is now 
three years since this country came into the possession of the 
Stitte. The Zamindar of the place is in confinement. The 
climate of that land is excessively poisonous, and strangers 
cannot live there. The third place is in the province of the 
Kamatik (Carnatic), near the frontier of Qutbu-l-mulk. At 
a distance of 50 A:osst there are four mines. Many very fine;}: 
diamonds are obtained there. 

On Thursday, the 10th, Nahir E. was promoted to the 
mansab of 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse, and he was pre- 
sented with an elephant. Maktub E., superintendent of the 
KutiA-hbana (library), was given the mansab of 1,500 personal. 
As I had ordered that on the ^ab-i-Barat they should place 
lamps round the EAnknya tank, at the end of the day on 
Monday, the 14th Sha*ban, I went out to look at them. The 
buildings all round the tank they had arranged with lanterns 
of different colours and all kinds of artifices that are practicable 
with lamps, and fireworks. Although at this season there 
were continually clouds and rain, by Qod’s favour from the 
beginning of the night the air had become clear, and not a 
trace of cloud remained, and the lights shone just as one could 
wish. My domestic servants were regaled with the cups of 

* See Blochraann, 480 n., Elliot, vi. 344, and the Tuzuk, annals of 
10th year. 

t Probably the meaning is that the four mines occur within a space 
of 50 koM. Tavernier, vol. ii., may be consulted. 

X Puhkta in text, but the MSS. have not this word.' Instead, they 
have a word which seems to be iakntia, ** beautiful.” The R.A.S. MS. 
also seems to have tahaina. 



23 


joy. I ordered them to light lamps in the same manner on 
the eve of Friday, and a strange thing was that at the close of 
the day of Thursday, the 17th, it continually rained {muUofil 
bandafi)^ but at the time of lighting the lamps the rain ceased, 
and the show was well seen. On this day I^timadu-d-daula 
presented an ofEering of a quilH (1) sapphire exceedingly deli- 
cate, and an elephant without tu^ with silver housings. As 
it was handsome-looking and of good shape, it was put among 
my private elephants. On the bank of the Eankiiya tank a 
sanyaA, one of the most austere sects of Hindus, had made 
a hut after the dervish manner, and lived as a hermit. As I 
was always inclined to associate with dervishes, I hastened 
without ceremony to interview him, and for a while enjoyed 
his society. He was not wanting in information and reason- 
ableness, and was well informed according to the rules of his 
own faith in the doctrines of Sufism. He had conformed to 
the ways of people of religious poverty and mortification, and 
given up all desires and ambitions. One might say that a 
better than he of his class was never seen. 

On Monday, the 21st (Amurdad), the sdras, the pairing of 
which has been related in the preceding pages, collected 
together some straw and rubbish in the little garden, and laid 
first of all one egg. On the third day (afterwards) it laid a 
second egg. This pair of sdras were caught when they were 
a month old,* and had been in my establishment for five years. 
After five and a half years they paired, and continued doing 
so for a month ; on the 21st of the month of Amurdad, which 
the Hindus call Sawan (Sravan) the hen laid the eggs. The 
female used to sit on the eggs the whole night alone, and the 
male stood near her on guard. It was so alert that it was 
impossible for any living thing to pass near her. Once a 
large weasel made its appearance, and he ran at it with the 
greatest impetuosity, and did not stop until the weasel got into 
a hole. When the sun illuminated the world with his rays, 
the male went to the female and pecked her back with his 
beak. The female then rose, and the male sate in her place. 

* miikagi ? Probably it means that they were caught wh«‘n a 
lonth old, and Elliot's translator so took it. 



24 


She retained, and in the same manner made him rise, and 
seated herself. In short, the female sits the whole night, and 
takes care of the eggs, and by day the male and female sit by 
turns. When they rise and sit down they take great precau- 
tions that no harm shall come to the eggs. 

During this season, as there was still some of the hunting 
time left, Gajpat K., the darogha, and Baluch K., the head 
huntsman, had been left to hunt elephants, to catch as many 
as they possibly could. In the same manner the huntsmen of 
my son, Shah-Jahan, had also been employed. On this day 
they came and waited on me. Altogether 185 elephants had 
been caught, male and female : of these, 73 were males and 
112 females. Out of these, 47 males and 75 females, or 122, 
the imperial huntsmen and faujdars had secured, while the 
huntsmen and elephant-drivers of my son, Shah-Jahan, had 
taken 26 males and 37 females, or 63 altogether. 

On Thursday, the 24th, I went to see the BagJi-i-Fath,* and 
spent two days there in enjoyment and pleasure. At the end 
of the day on Saturday I returned to the palace. As Asaf K. 
had represented that his f^awiU (house) garden was exceedingly 
green and pleasant, and all sorts of flowers and scented plants 
had bloomed there, at his request I went to it on Mubarak- 
ahofnba (Thursday), the 3l8t. In truth, it was a very nice 
villa, and I was much pleased. His offering of jewels and 
jewelled things, and cloth, of the value of Rs. 35,000, was 
accepted. Muzaffar K. was favoured with a dress of honour 
and an elephant, and, as before, was entrusted with the charge 
of the government of Thatta (Sind). My brother Shah ‘Abbas 
sent a letter with some trifling presents by ‘Abdu-l-Karim of 
Gflan, who had come with merchandise from Iran. On this 
day I presented him with a dress of honour and an elephant, 
and gave him leave to return, and sent an answer to the 
Shah’s letter with a memorandum. [Qian ‘Alam was also 
honoured with a gracious farman and a special dress of 
honour. Friday was the 1st of the month of Shahriwar. 

* This was the garden which *Abdu-r-Rahim made after his victory 
over Muzaffar Gujarati. In Price's Jahftngir, pp. 115-16, there is an 
account of an entertainment given there to Jahangir by *Abdu-r- 
Rahim's daughter. 



25 


From Sunday, the 3rd, till the eve of Thursday (the 7th) rain 
fell. It is strange that on other days the pair of sdras sate on 
the eggs five or six times in turn, but during this twenty-four 
hours, when there was constant rain and the air was somewhat 
cold, the male, in order to keep the eggs warm, sate from early 
in the morning until midday, and from that time until the 
next morning the female sat without an interval, for fear that 
in rising and sitting again the cold air should affect them, and 
the eggs become wet and be spoilt. Briefly, men are led by the 
guidance of Reason, and animals according to the Divine 
wisdom implanted in them by Nature. Stranger still is it 
that at first they keep their eggs together underneath the 
breakt, and after fourteen or fifteen days have passed they 
leave a little space between them, for fear the heat should 
become too great from their contact with each other. Many 
become addled in consequence of (too great) heat. 

On Thursday, the 7th, with great joy and congratulation, 
the advance camp was started towards Agra. The astrologers 
and astronomers had already fixed the auspicious hour for 
the march. As excessive rain fell, the main camp could not 
cross the river of Mahmudabad (the Vatrak) and the Mahi at 
this hour. Out of necessity, the advanced camp was started 
at the appointed hour, and the 2l8t Shahriwar* was fixed for 
the march of the main camp. 

My son Shah-Jah.:«n took upon himself the responsibility of 
the conquest of the fort of Kangra, over which the noose of 
victory had not been thrown by any of the Sultans of lofty 
dignity, and an army under the leadership of Baja Suraj Mai, 
s. Raja Baso, and Taqi, who was one of his attached servants, 
had before this been sent for that purpose. It was now clear 
that the conquest could not be achieved by the force that had 
been previously appointed. Raja Bikramajit,t who was one 
of his principal officers, with 2,000 horse who were present of 
his private attendants, and a force of Jahangiri servants, 
such as 9iah-baz K. Lodi, Hard! Narayan Hada, Ray Prithi 
Chand, and the sons of Ram Chand, with 200 mounted mus- 
keteers and 500 foot-musketeers (lopchh perhaps cannoniers), 

* Or22 Ramafftn, 1027-8opteinoer2, 1618. f C/. Iqbil nSimi, 117. 



26 


in addition to the force that had previously been sent, were 
appointed to the duty. As the hour for departure was fixed 
on this day, the aforesaid (Bikramajit) presented as an offering 
a rosazy of emeralds of the value of Bs. 10,000. He was 
honoured with the gift of a dress of honour and a sword, and 
took his leave for this duty. As he had not a jagir in that 
Subah, my son Shah-Jahan asked for him as a jagir the par- 
gana of Barhana (?),* the revenue of which was 2,200,000 of 
dams, whichf he himself (? ^h-Jahan) held in in 'am.} 
iOiwaja TaqI, the Diwan-i-Buyutat, who had been appointed 
to the Diwani of the Deccan, was honoured with the title of 
Mu‘taq)d§ K., a dress of honour, and an elephant. 1 appointed 
Himmat K. to the faujdarship of the Sarkar of Bharuch 
(Broach) and that neighbourhood, with the gift of a horse 
and a special pam natm (shawl), and despatched him. The 
pargana of Bharuch (Broach) was also bestowed on him 
as jagir. Ray PrithI Chand, who had been nominated for 
service at Eangra, was promoted to the rank of 700 and 450 
horse. As the anniversary of %ailA Muhammad ^aus || had 
arrived, I gave his sons 1,000 darbs (Bs. 500) for its expense. 
Muzafiar, s. Bahaduru-I-mulk, who was attached to the Dec- 
can, was given the mansab of 1,000 personal and 500 horse. 

As the events of twelve years of JaMunir-Tidma have been 
recorded, I ordered^ the clerks of my private library to make 
one volume of these twelve years, and to prepare a number of 
copies so that I might give them to my special servants, and 

* In MSS. written Marh&na or Sarhftna. Perhaps Harh&na in the 
Bet Jalandhar Du’&b, Jarrett, II. 317. Though the text says 22 lakhs 
of dams, the MSS. only say 22 lakhs, and possibly rupees are meant. 

f £knd bi in^lm iltimaa namud, ** As a favour to himself.*' It is 
not likely that ^ah Jahan would ask for the pargana for Bikramftjit if 
it was already his own. I presume the meaning is that Shih Jah&n asked 
that this pargana should be given to Bikram&jit as a favour to himself. 
But perhaps the meaning is " which he (gh&h Jahfo) had asked for, for 
himself." 

X In the MSS. the word l^ud follows tn'dm instead of preceding it. 
Perhaps the meaning is, " a'hich was his own appanage,** " and he 
requested,' ' etc. 

§ Text wrongly has Mu'tamid. 

II The saint who is buried at Gwalior. He died September 14, 1562. 

t Elliot. VI. 360. 



27 


that they might be sent to the varions cities, so that adminis- 
trators (arbab-i-daulat) and the auspicious might adopt them 
as their code. On Friday, the 8th, *** one of the news-writers 
had written the whole and made a volume, which he produced 
to me. As it was the first copy that had been prepared, I 
gave it to my son Shah-Jahan, whom 1 consider to be in all 
respects the first of my sons. On the back of it 1 wrote with 
my own hand that I had given it him on a certain day and at 
a certain place. I hope that the favour of the receipt of those 
writings which are intended for the satisfaction of the creature 
and for supplication to the Creator m^y be a cause of good 
fortune. 

On Tuesday, the 12th, Sub^an Quli, huntsman, was brought 
to punishment. The details of this are that lie is the son of 
^ji Jamal Baluch, who was my father’s best huntsman, and 
after his (the King’s death) he entered the service of Islam K., 
and went with him to Bengal. Islam [Qian, on account of 
his (Subhan Quli’s) connection with this Court, showed him 
proper consideration, and considering him trustworthy always 
kept him near him when travelling or hunting. ‘Usman, the 
Afghan, who for many years passed his days in that Subah 
in disobedience and stubbornness, and the end of whose affairs 
has been recorded in the preceding pages, being much troubled 
by Islam j^n, sent someone to this wretch, and made proposals 
for his murdering Islam. He undertook the business, and 
associated two or three other men with himself . By chance, 
before the futile idea of this ungrateful fellow was carried into 
execution, one of them came and informed him (Islam K.). 
Islam K. immediately seized and imprisoned the scoundrel. 
After the latter’s death he came to Court. As his brothers 
and relatives were included among the huntsmen, he was also 
ordered to be enrolled among them. At this time the son 
(Ikram K.) of Islam K. represented in an enigmatical way that 
he was unworthy of service near my person. After explana- 
tion it appeared what the charge was. Notwithstanding this, 

* The 8th Shahri war August 20, 1618. The departure had been 
fixed for the 21st, and having mentioned this, JahAngir goes on to 
describe what occurred between the 7th and the 21st. 



as his brothers strenuously represented that there was <mlf 
suspicion, and BalCLch K., the head huntsman, became security 
for him, I forbore to put him to death, and ordered him to do 
duty with Baliich K. In spite of this grace and the gift of his 
life, without cause or motive he fled from the Court, and went 
to Agra and that neighbourhood. Baliich K., having become 
his security, was ordered to produce him. He sent people to 
inquire for him. In one of the villages of Agra, which was 
not wanting in sedition, and is called Jahanda,* the brother 
of Baliich [Qun, who had gone to make inquiries, found him, 
and although he endeavoured to bring him by persuasion to 
Court, he would in no way consent, and the people mse to 
assist him. 

Being without remedy, he (the brother) went to IQiwaja 
Jahan at Agra, and told him the circumstances. He sent a 
detachment against that village to take him by force and 
bring him. The people of the village, seeing their own min 
in the mirror of the case, handed him over to him. This day 
he came to Court in chains. I gave an order for his execution. 
The man of wrath (the executioner) took him to the place 
of punishment with all haste. After a while, through the 
intercession of one of the courtiers, I gave him his life, and 
ordered his feet to be cut off, but according to his destiny 
(what was written on his head) before the order arrived he 
had been punished. Although that doomed man was deserv- 
ing of punishment, yet I regrettedf the circumstance, and 
directed that whenever an order was given for anyone’s 
execution, notwithstanding that the command were impera- 
tive, they should wait till sunset before putting him to death. 

If up to that time no order for release arrived, he should with- 
out fail be capitally punished. 

On Sunday there was a great commotion in the River Mahi, 
and very large waves were visible. Although there formerly 
had been (great) rains, yet such violence, or even the half of it, 
had never been known. From the beginning of the day the 
flood began to come, and at the end of the day began to 

* So in text, but MSS. give Jahanda an the name of the brother of 
Baluoh. t Elliot. VI. 301. 



29 


decrease. Old inhabitants of this city represented that once, 
during the government of Murtafa E. (Farid BuJAari), a 
similar great flood had occurred. But with that exception 
they did not remember another such flood. 

In these days mention was made of an ode by Mu*izzi,* the 
panegyrist of Sultan Sanjar, and his Poet-laureate. It is a 
very smooth and equablef composition. It begins thus : 

** 0 thou whose oommands heaven obeys 
Ancient Saturn is the slave of thy young Fortune.*’ 

Sa*ida4 the chief goldsmith, has a poetical temperament 
and he imitated this ode, and.presented his paraphrase to me. 
It was very well composed. The following are some verses 
from it ; 

“ 0 thou, of whose threshold the nine spheres are an ezamplar 
Aged Time hath grown young in thy reign 
Thy heart is bounteous as the Sun, and like it needs no cause 
(for bounty). 

AU lives are devoted to thy gracious heart 

Heaven is but a greenf orange from the garden of Power 

Tossed by thy gardener into the atmosphere, 

0 God, Thy ossen*^ has shone from eternity 
The souls of all the saints receive light from Thine, 

0 king, may the world ever be at thy beck. 

May thy Shah- JahSn ever rejoice in thy shade 
O Shadow of God, may the world be filled with thy light 
May the Light of God ever be thy canopy.’* 

Text w*rongly has Maghribi, who was a much later poet, for he died 
in 809 A.H. « 1416. Sultin Sanjar belonged to the sixth century of the 
Hijra, and MuizzI, who is the poet meant by Jahfin^r, died in 542 a.b. 
(1147-48), having been accidentally killed with an arrow by SultSn 
Sanjar. See Rieu, II. 6526. The ode quoted by Jahingir is to be 
lound at p. 1 386 of British Museum MS. Add. 10588. 

t hamwdr used here in a favourable sense, though some pages farther 
back, 233 of Persian text> it seems to be used, when speaking of Jimf, 
in disparagement. 

{ See Beale art. Saldi-i-GilinL He was styled Bf-badal. The date 
1 1 16 in Beale is manifestly wrong. Ho m the MnlU g^idiof Rieu, HI., 
1083a See also Sprenger’e Chtalogue, 124 ; there isa notice of him in 
the Ma*i|iru-1-Fmarl, 1. 405. He was tim ar^t of the Peacock-throne. 

I Ter vn;, rendered by VuUers as ** cition.’* Probab^ the refermee 
is to the ookmr of the sky, which is often spoken of by Orientals as 
green. The concluding lines ploy upon Jahingir’s title of Nfim-d-db. 

33 on hisson’s title of Sb^h-Jahin, and his name of lOiuriam. 




30 


On Mubdrak-^wba^ the 14th, in reward for this ode, I 
ordered Sa'ida to be weighed against money (sor, perhaps 
gold). At the end of the day I went to walk about the garden 
of Rustam-baii,* which appeared to me very gieen and 
pleasant. Sitting in a boat in the evening, I returned to the 
palace. 

On Friday, the 15th, a Mulla of the name of Amin, an 
old man, came from Ma-wara*a-n-nahr (Transoziana), and 
had the good fortune to kiss the threshold. He repre- 
sented to me that he was one of the ancient (servants) 
of "Abdu-llah Hian Usbeg, and from the days of infancyf 
and youth was brou^t up by the Uan until his death. 
He had been included among his old servants, and had 
been a confidential friend.^ After the death of the IQian 
until now he had passed his days respected in that country. 
He had left his native country with a view to visit the 
blessed house (Mecca), and had come to pay his respects 
to me. I made him free to remain or go. He asked to 
remain in attendance on me for some days. Bs. 1,000 
for expenses and a dress of honour were given him. He 
is an old man of very pleasing face, and full of talk and 
anecdote. My son ^^-Jahan also gave him Bs. 600 and 
a robe of honour. 

In t'^c middle of the gard^ of {Qhurram (Shah-Jahan*s> 
idsiae.ice there is a bench and a reservoir. On one side§ of 
that bench there is a Mulsari-tree (Jfimtisops dengi) against 
which to lean the back. As in one side of its trunk there was 
a hollow to the extent of three-fourths of a yard, it had an 
ugly look. I ordered them to cut a tablet of marble and fix 
it firmly in that place, so that one could lean one’s back on 
it and sit there. At this time an impromptu couplet came 
to my tongue, and I ordered the stone-cutters to engrave it 

* Bdrt is a Hindu word meaning gsidsn. 

t ogyam-f-fatsani. The MSS. have gondgi, ** raids.** The name of 
the Mulla there seems to be.Asiti. 

X dtur hftald wa-mald maluram buda. 

I MS. 306. On every side there are BAlsarl-trees.** Both LO. 
MSS. have BQlsari, for which see Blochmann, 70. Apparently there 
was only one tree. 



31 


on that stone, that it might remain as a memento on the 
page of time. This is the couplet * 

** The seat of the Sb&h of the seyen worlds (kigliwar), 
Jahtngir, son of Akbar S^hinASh. 

On the eve of Tuesday,* the 19th, a bazaar was arranged 
in the private palace. Up to this time the custom has been 
for the people of the bazaar and the artificers of the city in 
every place to bring their shops according to order into the 
courtyard of the palace (royal abode, whether in camp or 
elsewhere), and bring jewels and jewelled things and various 
kinds of cloth and other goods such as are sold in the bazaar. 
It occurred to me that if a bazaar were prepared in the night- 
time, and a number of lamps were arranged in front of the 
shops, it would look well. Undoubtedly it came off well 
and was unusual. Going round all the shops, whatever jewels 
and jewelled things pleased me I bought. I gave some 
present from each shop to Mulla Amiri, and he received so 
many things that he was unable to hold them. 

On Mvbdrak-^l^fnba (Thursday) the 21st of the Divine 
month of Shahriwar, in the thirteenth year from my accession, 
corresponding with the 22nd Rama^n (September 2, 1618), 
in the Hijri year 1027, when two and a half hours of day had 
passed, in prosperity and happiness, the standards of purpose 
turned towards the capital of Agra. From the palace as far 
as the Kankriya tank, the place of alighting, I passed along 
in the usual manner, scattering money (nisdr-itundn). On 
the same day the feast of my solar weighment took place, and 
according to solar reckoning the fiftieth year of the age of 
his suppliant at the throne of God commenced auspiciously. 
Accoi^ng to my usual rule I weighed myself against gold and 
other valuables. I scattered pearls and golden roses, and 
looking at night at the show of lamps passed my time in the 
private apartments of the royal abode in enjoyment. On 
Friday, the 22nd, I ordered that all the Shaildis and men of 
piety who lived in the city should be brought in order that 
they might break their fastf in attendance on me. Three 

^ EUiot, VI. 361. 

t This was not the ‘Id> for the month was not over. It was the 
feasting after nightfall usoal in the Kamstan. 



32 


nights were passed after this manner, and every night at the 
end of the meeting I stood up and recited with the tongue of 
ecstasy : 

Thou art the mighty One, 0 Lord, 

Thou art the cherisher of rich and poor ; 

Fm not a world-conqueror or law-giver, 

I*m one of the beggars at this gate. 

Help me in what is good and right. 

Else what good comes from me to any one ? 

I*m a master* to my servants, 

To the Lord I*m a loyal servant.’* 

AH the Faqirs who as yet had not waited on me prayed for 
allowances. According to their merits I gave to each of them 
land or money for expenses, and gratified them. 

On the eve of Mttbdrak-^atnba (Thursday) the 21st, the 
Saras hatched one young one, and on the eve of Monday, the 
2f3th, a second : that is, one young one was hatched after 
thirty-four t days, and the other after thirty-six days. One 
might say that they were one-tenth larger than the young of 
a goose, or equal to the young of the peafowl at the age of a 
month. Their skin was of a blue colour. On the first day 
they ate nothing, and from the second day the mother, taking 
small locusts (or grasshoppers) in her mouth, sometimes fed 
them like a pigeon, or sometimes like a fowl threw them 
before them for them to pick up of themselves. If the locust 
were small, it went ofE well, but if it were large, she sometimes 
made two or three pieces of it so that the young ones might 
eat it with ease. As I had a great liking for seeing them I 
ordered them to be brought before me with every precaution 
that no harm might happen to them. After I had seen them 
I ordered them to be taken back to the same little garden inside 

* l^uddwandi-gdr. For which vrord see Vullers and the Bahir-i- 
‘Ajam. Perhaps it means here a locum-tcnens or officiating master. 

t Apparently this should be thirty-two. The egg was laid on 
21 Amurdad, see p. 237, and the interval between the hatching of the 
two chicks was three or four days. 

X Text dah ydzdah, ten to eleven. But MS. 305 has dah pdtudah, 
tf‘11 to fifteen, wliich is more likely. The meaning then would be that 
t ho. youriL' of tlie saru-s wore 50 per cent., or one-half larger than goslings. 
'I'he com moil fX|>ies.sioii for one -tenth is dah yak. 



33 


the royal enclosure, and to be preserved with the greatest 
care, and that they should be brought to me again whenever 
they were able to walk. 

On this day Hakim Ruhu-llah was exalted w’ith the gift of 
Rs. 1,000. Badru-z-zaman, s. M. Shahriilh, came from his 
jagir and waited on me. On Tuesday, the 26th, marching 
from the Kankriya tank, I halted at the village of Kaj.* On 
Wednesday, the 27th, I pitched my camp on the bank of the 
river at Mahmudabad called the Izakf (now called Meshva). 
As the water and air of Ahmadabad were very bad. Mahmud 
Bigara, by the advice of his physicians, founded a city on the 
bank of the aforesaid ri\'er and lived there. After he con- 
quered Champaner, he made that place his capital, and until 
the time of Mahmud the martvredj the rulers of Gujarat 
chiefly lived there. This Mahmud was the last of the Sultans 
of Gujarat, and he took up his residence at Mahmudabad. 
Undoubtedly the water and air of Mahmudabad have no 
resemblance to those of .\hmadabad. By way of testing this 
I ordered them to hang up a sheep on the bank of the Kankriya 
tank after taking off its skin, and at the same time one at 
Mahmudabad, that the difference of the air miglit be ascer- 
tained. It happened that after seven gharls of day had passed 
in that place (Ahmadabad) they hung up the sheep. When 
three gkaris ol day remained it became so changed and putrid 
that it was difficult to pass near it. They hung up the sheep 
at Mahmudabad in the morning, and it was altogether un- 
changed until the evening, and began to be putrid when one 
and a half watches of night had ]>assed. Bric'fly, in the 
neighbourhood of Ahmadabad it became putrid in eight 
sidereal hours, and in Mahmudabad in fourteen hours. 

On Thursday, the 28th, Rustam K., whc»m my son of 
prosperous fortune, Shah-Jahan. had ap{>ointed to the charge 

* Ganj in No. 181. Perhaps it should l>o G.*ijiia, see !.(«.. 17. p. II. 

t MSS. Atrak. It is the Wfttrak of Ikiylcy's (iiijarat . )». 201. and the 
Vitrak of I.G.. XXL .344. 

t Sultin Mahniud 11 f.. killed l»y Burhiii in February. Bayky's 
(jiijarat, pp. 440 an<l 1.33. Jahangir him tin* list .SulrSn of 
Gujarat, because .\hiiiad II. .'tiid .3fii/.nfrar III. wrn* n^^irde^l as 
^puricus. See .^yin i-.Akliarf. .larreft. II. 2l»l. 



34 


and goveniment of Gujarat, was honoured with the gift of an 
elephant, a horse, and a special parm tiam (shawl), and given 
leave to depart, and the Jahangiri officers who were attached 
to that Subah were presented with horses and dresses of 
honour according to the rank and standing of each. On 
Friday, 29th Shahiiwar, corresponding with 1st Shawwal, 
Ray Biharl was honoured with the bestowal of a dress of 
honour, a jewelled sword and a special horse, and took leave 
to go to his native place. His sons were also honoured with 
horses and dresses of honour. On Saturday I ordered Sayyid 
Muhammad, grandson’*' (?)of Shah ‘Alam, to ask for whatever 
he desired without concealment, and I took an oath on the 
Qoran to this effect. He said that as I had sworn on the 
Qoran he would ask for a Qoran that he might always have 
it by him, and that the merit of reading it might accrue to 
His Majesty. Accordingly, I gave the Mir a Qoran in Yaqut’sf 
handwriting. It was a small, elegant^ volume, and was the 
wonder of the age. On the back of it I wrote with my own 
hand that I had made this gift on a certain day and in a certain 
place to Sayyid Muhammad. The real reason for this is that 
the Mir is of an exceedingly good disposition, endowed with 
personal nobility and acquired excellencies, of good manners 
and approved ways, witli a very pleasing face and open fore- 
head. I have never seen a man of this country of such a 
pleasing disposition as the Mir. I told him to translate this 
Qoran into plain language without ornament, and that 

* Probably great-grandson, for SUh 'Alam died in 880 (1475-70), 
ns Jah&ngir tells us sicpra, and he says that he questioned Sayyid 
Mubaiiimad about Shah 'Alam’s raising the dead, and that Sayyid 
Muhammad said he had the story from his father and grandfather. 
The Ma'asiru-l-Uinura, 111. 447, says Sayyid Muhammad was fine 
removes from Su&h 'Al&m. 

t For Yaqiit, see Blochinann, 09-100. He was a famous calli- 
grapher. and lived in the thirteenth century. It appears, however, 
that YSquti is also the name of a particular kind of writing. 

t Ba-qi^'-i-mafhiVa-i-mul^asar. MaffiiVa is used in modem times 
to mean ** printed/' but here, 1 think, it means elegant.** It is 
so used in the annals of the 12tb year, p. 208, line IS, where it is applied 
lo a biiikling. Qita' probably refers to the shape of the volume, and 
miikkfafar to its small .size, ur to the minuteness of the writing. 



35 


without occupying himself with explanations or fine language 
he* should translate the Qoran in simple language {lughat^i- 
ftkJUa) word by word into Persian, and should not add one 
letter to its exact purport. After he had completed it he 
should send it by his son Jalalu-d-din Sayyid to the Court. 
The Mir’s son is also a young man of external and internal 
intelligence. The signs of piety and blessedness are distinct 
on his forehead. The Mir is proud of hig son, and in truth he 
is worthy, as he is an excellent youth. As I had repeatedly 
shown kindness to the holy men of Gujarat, according to their 
merits, I again bestowed on each cash and jeweb, and dis- 
missed them to their homes. 

As the climatef of this country was not suited to my tem- 
perament, the physicians thought it right that I should 
decrease somewhat my usual number of cups. According to 
their advice I began to decrease their number, and in the 
course of a week reduced them by the weight of one cup. At 
first it was six cups every evening, each cup being 7} tola, 
or altogether 45 tolas. The wine was usually mixed with 
water. Now I drank six cups, each of which was 6 toUu and 
3 altogether 37| tolas. 

Sixteen or seventeen years ago I had vowed with my God at 
Allahabad that when I reached fifty I would give up shooting 
with gun and bullet, and would injure no living thing with my 
own hand. Muqarrab K.. who was one of my confidants, knew 
of my determination. At this date I have reached the com- 
mencement of my fiftieth year, and one day, in consequence 
of excessive fever {dud- u huhhdr) my breath was short and I 
was very unwell. While in this condition the compact 1 had 

* Sayyid Bluhani mad, the Mir referred to by Jah&ngir, lived intogbih- 
Jahlna reign, not dying till 1045 (1635-30). Sco Picl^h-nima, I., 
Part II., p. 329. But we do not hear anything more of his transbtion. 
Perhaps hia ill-health prevented him. It ia also the fact that orthodox 
Muhammadans object to tninabtioiia of the Qoran. regarding it as an 
impoaaible t ask. The Mlr'a son became chief eeclesiastica 1 officer (Sadr) 
under gbih-Jahan. See Ma'Ssiru-l-Umnri, III. 447, and PSdehah- 
nSnm, I., Part. II., p. 328. 

t Elliot. V. 361. 

t There were twelve inishs* ui a tola : the six cups, then, of 6 tolas 
and a quarter came to 37.1 tolas. 



36 


made with my Grod came, by Divine inspiration, into my mind, 
and I resolved that when my fiftieth year was completed and 
the period of fulfilling my vow had arrived, I would, on the 
day* on which I visited my father’s tomb — may the light of 
God be his testimony — ^by (rod’s help, seek the confirmation of 
my resolve from my father’s holy elements, and renounce the 
practice (of shooting). As soon as this thought occurred to 
me, my illness and trouble disappeared. I revived, and 
opened my mouth to praise God, and tasted the joy of thanks- 
giving for His mercies. I hope that I shall be sustained. 

** How well said Firdusi of pure nature 
May meroy rest on that (his) pure tomb. 

** Ah ! spare yon emmetf rich in hoarded grain , 

He lives with pleasure, and he dies with pain.*’ 

On Thursday, the 4th of the Divine month, Sayyid Kabii 
and Bal^tar K., the Wakils of *Adil K., who had brought his 
offering to the exalted Court, obtained leave to return. 
Say 3 rid Eabir was honoured with a dress of honour, a horse, 
and a jewelled dagger, and Balhtar E. with a horse, a dress 
of honour, and a jewelled which the people of that 

country (the Deccan 1) wear round their necks, and a present 
of 6,000 darbs was given to each of them for expenses. 

As ‘Adil E. was constantly asking for a likeness of myself 
through my prosperous son %ah-Jahan, I sent him one with a 
ruby of great value and a special elephant. A gracious 

* Jah&ngir visited his father’s tomb in the following year (the I4th). 
The passage describing the renunciation of shooting (not of hunting) is 
translated in Elliot, VI. 362. 

t The version of the last two lines is by Sir William Jones, and is 
given by him in his Tenth Anniversary Discourse, delivered on 
February 28, 1793. As my friend Mr Whin field has pointed out to me, 
the quotation comes from the stoiy of Shibli and the ant in the second 
chapter of the Bustan. It occurs in the sixth story of the second book 
and p. 161 of Graf’s edition. Sir William Jones’s remark is : ** Nor 
shall I ever forget the couplet of Firdausi, for which Sadi, who cites it 
with applause, pours blessings on his departed spirit.” The quotation 
from Firdusi occurs on p. 67 of Vol. 1. in Macan’s edition of the Sh&h- 
nama. 

t 0 rvasi is the name of a celestial nymph. It is also stated by Forbes 
to be thr namr of an ornament worn on the breast. 



37 


faiman was issued that he should be presented with whatever 
territory of Ni^mu-l-mulk or Qutbu-l-mulk he might get 
into his possession, and whenever he should require any 
support and assistance, ^ah-nawaz E. should prepare an 
army and appoint it to assist him. In former days Nizamu-1- 
mulk was the largest of the rulers of the Deccan, a superior 
whom all acknowledged, and whom they considered as 
their eldest brother. At this period ‘Adil E. did approved 
service, and was honoured with the exalted title of ** son.*’ 
I appointed him the head and leader of the whole country 
of the Deccan, and wrote this quatrain on the portrait with 
my own hand : 

0 thou towards whoui is always (turned) the eye of my kindness 

Repose at ease under the shadow of my fortune. 

1 have sent thee my oaii portrait. 

That thou mayest see me spiritually from my picture.” 

My son Stmh-Jahan sent Hakim l^ush-hal, son of Hakim 
Humam, who was one of the excellent house-bom ones of this 
Court, and from his early years had been in my son’s service, 
in company with the Wakils of *Adil E. to convey to him the 
good news of the Jahangirl favour towards him. On the same 
day Mir Jumla was honoured with the duty of ^Arz-muhanir. 
As Eifayat E., the Diwan of Gujarat, at the time when he was 
employed in the Diwani of Bengal, in consequence of certain 
accidents, had lost property {az adman uftdda), a sum of 
Rs. 15,000 was presented to him. 

At this time two copies of the Jahangir-nama that had been 
prepared were laid before me. One of these I had some days 
previously given to the Maddru-l-mulk (centre of the king- 
dom), I'timadu-d-daula, and the other I on this day bestowed 
on (my adopted) son (farzandl), Asaf E. On Friday, the 
5tb. Bahram, son of Jahangir Quli Man, came from the 
province of Bihar, and had the good fortune to pay his 
respects. He laid before me some diamonds he had obtained 
from the mine of Eokra. .Approved service had not been 
performed in that province by Jahangir Qiill K.. and it was 
also frequently reported that certain of his brothers and sons- 
in-law had stretched out the hand of tyranny in that country, 



38 


and were oppressing the servants of Grod (the people), and 
that each of them, cutting out a governorship for himself, did 
not regard the authority of Jahangir Qull. On this account 
a farman written with my own hand was given to Muqarrab 
K., one of my confidential old servants, stating that he was 
appointed Grovemor of Bihar. I ordered that immediately 
on receipt of the farman he should hasten to that quarter. 
Some of the diamonds that Ibrahim Fath-jang had sent to 
Court after the taking of the mine had been given to the 
Ghivemment lapidaries to cut. At this time Bahram suddenly 
came to Agra, and was going on to the Court (in Gujarat). 
Khwaja Jahan (the Governor of Agra) sent along with him 
some diamonds that were ready. One of them is of a violet* 
colour, and cannot be outwardly distinguished from a sapphire. 
Up to this time I had not seen a diamond of this colour. It 
weighed several and jewellers estimated its value at 

Ks. 3,000, and represented that if it had been white (sajkd) 
and had had perfect marks, it would have been worth 
Rs. 20,000. 

This year I had mangoes up to the 6th Mihr (middle of 
September). In this country there is abundance of lemons 
{Itmun), and they are large {bdtida ?), A Hindu brought some 
from a garden called Kaku (or* Gangu), which were very 
pleasant and large {batida, perhaps ripe). 1 ordered them to 
weigh the largest of them, and it came to 7 tolas. 

On Saturday, the 6th, the Dasahra festival took place. 
First, they decked out my horses, and paraded them before 
me. After that they produced the elephants, decorated in a 
similar way. 

As the Mahi had not become fordable, so that the sublime 
camp could cross it, and the climate of Mal^udabad was 
quite different (t.e., it was better) from that of other stages, 
I remained here for tsn more days. On Monday, the 8th, I 
marched and encamped at Muda.$ I had already sent 
JAwaja Abu-l-Hasan Ba khah i with an active body of servants, 

* Text hd naq^ by mistake for hanafstM. 

t I.O. MS. 181 has “ thirty surl^*' 

t Perhaps the Moondah of Bayley’s map, east of MabmudSbld. 



39 


such as boatmen, and also oars,* to make a bridge over the 
Mahi, with instructions not to wait till it was tordable, so that 
the victorious camp might cross at ease. On Tuesday, the 
9th, there was a halt, and on Kamahamba (Wednesday), the 
10th, the camp was at the villag.. of Aina.f 
At first the male sartu used to hold its young one by 
its leg upside down in his beak, and there was a fear 
that he might be unkind to it and it might be destroyed. 
I accordingly ordered them to keep the male separately, 
and not allow it near its young ones. I now ordered by 
way of experiment that it should be allowed near them, 
that the real degree of its unkindness and affection might 
be ascertained. After allowing it, he displayed much at- 
tachment and kindness, and his affection was found to be 
no less than that of the female; I thus knew that this perform- 
ance was out of real love. On Thursday, the 1 1th, there was 
a halt, and at the end of the day I went to hunt with cheetahs, 
and two black buck, four does, and a chikdra were caught. 
On Sunday, the 14th, I also went to hunt with cheetahs, and 
caught fifteen head of male and female antelopes. 1 had 
ordered Rustam and Suhrab| Hian, his son, to go out hunting 
and shoot as many nilgaw as they could. The father and son 
together killed seven head, male and female. As it was 
represented to me that there was a tiger in this neighbourhood, 
a man-killer that had taken to eating men’s flesh, and the 
people of Grod were afflicted by it, I ordered my son Shah- 
Jahan to save them from its wickedness. He, as ordered, 
shot it with his gun, and brought it to me at night. I ordered 
them to skin it in my presence. Although large in appear- 
ance, as it was thin, it turned out less in weight than the large 
tigers I had myself killed. On Monday, the 15th, and Tuesday , 
the 16th, I went to shoot nilgaw, and on each day shot two 
blue bulls. On Thursday, the 18th, on the bank of a tank at 
which I pitched, a feast of cups was held. Rare lotus (kanwal ) 

* The text has lolik Wiodih **an oar,'* but tho word is perhap.s 
khdrwa, ** a sailor." I.O. MS. 161, has khanoa. 

f The 1.0. MSS. have Albatta. 

* The youth who was afterwards drowned in the Jhclain. 



40 


flowers had blossomed on the face of the water. My private 
servants enjoyed themselves greatly with cups of wine. 
Jahangir Quli had sent twenty elephants from Bihar, and 
Muruwwat K. eight from Bengal, and these were brought 
before me. One of Jahangir Quli^s and two of Muruwwat’s 
were placed in my private stud, and the rest were divided 
amongst my followers. Mir K., s. Mirza Abu-l-Qasim 
Namakin, who was one of the khanazads of this Court, was 
promoted to the mansab, original and increased, of 800 
personal and 600 horse. Qiyam K. was appointed to the 
duty of chief huntsman, and had given him the rank of 
600 personal and 150 horse. ^Izzat* K., one of the Barha 
Sayyids, who was distinguished for bravery and ambition, is 
attached to the province of Bangash. At the request of 
Mahabat K., the Governor of that Subah, he was promoted 
to the mansab of 1,500 personal and 800 horse. Kifayat K., 
Diwan of Gujarat, had an elephant given him, and was 
allowed to depart. I conferred a sword on ^afi K., Bakshi of 
that Subah. On Friday, the 19th, I went to hunt, and killed 
a blue bull. I do not remember a bullet passing through a 
large male nilgaw. Many have passed through females. On 
this day, at a distance of forty-five paces (qadam)^ it went 
through both skins. In the language of hunters a qadam 
means two feet {gam'f) placed one in front of the other. On 
Sunday, the 21st, I enjoyed myself with hawking, and ordered 
Mirza Rustam, Darab K., Mir Miran, and other servants to 
go and shoot as many nilgaw as they could. They killed 
nineteen head, male and female. Ten head of antelope were 
also caught with cheetahs. Ibrahim K., Bakhshi of the 
Deccan, was, at the request of the Commander-in-Chief, Khan 
Hianan, promoted to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 200 
horse. On Monday, the 22nd, a march was made, and on 
Tuesday, the 23rd, I again marched. The huntsmen repre- 
sented that there had been seen in the neighbourhood a tigress 
with three cubs. As it was on the road I went myself after 

« LO.. No. 181. has Ghairat K. 

t gtlm somotimes means a step, but here it seems to mean one Idot- 
longth. The diManor mentioned by Jarrett appears to be 90 feet. 



41 


them and shot all four, and then went on to the next stage. I 
crossed the Mahi by the bridge that had been made. Though 
there were no boats on this river of which a bridge could be 
made, and the water was very deep and flowing rapidly, 
fbwaja Abu-l-Hasan, the chief Bakhshi, had built with 
great exertions a very strong bridge two or* three days before. 
Its length was 140 yards and its breadth 4 yards (dara% By 
way of testing it I ordered the elephant Gun Sundar 
which is one of the large and strong elephants, with three 
females, to be sent across it. It was so firmly built that its 
supports did not shake with the weight of elephants of 
mountainous form. 

From the most honoured lips of my father I heard as 
follows : In early youth I had taken two or three cups (of 
wine), and had mounted a full-blooded (n\ast) elephant. 
Though I was in my senses, and the elephant in very good 
training, and was under my control, I pretended that I was 
out of my senses, and that the elephant was refractory and 
vicious, and that I was making him charge the people; After 
that, I sent for another elephant, and made the two fight. 
They fought, and in doing so went to the head of the bridge 
that had been made over the Jumna. It happened that the 
other elephant ran away, and as there was no other escape, he 
went towards the bridge. The elephant I was pn pursued 
him, and although 1 had him under control, and he would 
have halted at the slightest signal, I thought that if I held 
him back from the bridge the people would regard those 
drunken ways (of mine) as a sham, and would believe that 
neither was I beside mjrself, nor was the elephant violent and 
headstrong. Such pretences on the part of kings are dis-* 
approved of, and so after imploring the aid of God — Glory be 
to Him — ^I did not restrain my elephatot. Both of them 
went upon the bridge, and as it was made of boats, when- 
ever an elephant put his forefeet on the edge of a boat, 
half of it sank, and the other half stood up. At each 
step there came the thought that the lashings might give 
way. People on seeing this were overwhelmed in the sea 

* No. 181 has ** in three dsTa" 



42 


of porplexitj and alann. As the care and gnazdianship of 
the Great and Glorious God is ever and in all places the 
protection of this suppliant, both elephants crossed the bridge 
in safety.” ♦ 

On Thursday, the 25th, a wine-feast was held on the banks 
of the Mahi, and some of my intimate servants who had 
admittance to such assemblies had their hearts delighted by 
brimming cups and ample favours. Certainly it was an 
entrancing halting-ground. I stayed here four days for two 
reasons — ^first, because of the beauty of the spot, and secondly 
in order- that the people might not be confused in crossing the 
river. 

On Sunday, the 28th, 1 marched from the bank of the 
Mahi. On Monday I marched again. On this day a strange 
siglit was witnessed. The pair of saras that had had young 
ones had been brought from A^madabad on Thursday (the 
25th). In the C*ourt of the royal enclosure, which had been 
placed on the bank of a tank, they were walking about with 
their young ones. By chance both the male and female 
raised a cry, and a pair of wild saras hearing it, and crying 
out from the other side of the tank, came flying, tovrards 
them. The male with the male, and the female with the 
female, engaged in a fight, and although some people were 
standing about, the birds paid no heed to them, ibe eunuchs 
who had been told off to protect them hastened to seise them. 
One clung to the male and the other to the female. He who 
had caught the male kept hold of it after much struggling, 
but the one who seised the female could not hold her, and 
she escaped from his hand. I with my own hand put rings 
in his beak and on his legs, and set him free. Both went 
and settled in their own place.t Whenever the domestic 
saras raised a cry they responded. I saw a sij^t of this kind 
in wild antelopes when I had gone to hunt in the pargana of 

* Compare account in Akbar-nlma, IL 150. Akbar was then 
twenty years old. There is a picture of the two elephants crossing the 
bridge with Akbar bn the elephant HawS'i in the Clarke MS. in the 
Viotoria and Albert Museum, South Kensington. 

t Presumably the other side of the tank ; it was the wild male siias 
that Jahftngfr put rings upon. 



43 


Kamal. About thirty oi my huntsmen and servants were in 
attendance when a black buck with some does came in si^t, 
and we let loose the decoy-antelope* to fight him. They 
butted two or three times, and then the decoy came back. A 
second time I wanted to put a noose on its horns and to let 
it go, that it might capture (the wild one). Meanwhile the wild 
antelope, in the excess of its rage, not looking at the crowd of 
men, ran without regard to anything, and butting the tame 
buck two or three times fought with it till it fled. The wild 
antelope thereupon made its escape. 

On this day news came of the death of Tnayat E. He was 
one of my intimate attendants. As he was addicted to opium, 
and when he had the chance, to drinking as well, by degrees 
he became maddened with wine. As he was weakly built, he 
took more than he could digest, and was attacked by the 
disease of diarrhcaa, and in this weak state he two or three 
times fainted. By my order ^akim Rukna applied remedies, 
but whatever methods were resorted to gave no profit. At 
the same time a strange hunger came over him, and although 
the doctor exerted himself in order that he should not eat 
more than once in twenty-four hours, he could not restrain 
himself. He also would throwf himself like a madman on 
water and fire until he fell into a bad{ state of body. At last 
he became dropsical, and exceedingly low and weak. Some 
days before this he had petitioned that he mif^t go to Agra. 
I ordered him to come into my presence and obtain leave. 
They put him into a palanquin and brought him. He 
appeared so low and weak that 1 was astonished. 

** WM skin dirnwn ovor hones.*' 

Or rather his bones, too, had dissolved. Though painters 
have striven much in drawing an emaciated face, yet I 
have never seen an]rthing like this, nor even approaching 
^o it. Good God, can a son of man come to such a diape 

^ The hvnting of deer with decoys is deeeribed in Blodimenn's 
Ayia, 291 . 

t Apparently a melaphoriosl expression, "food^t with fire and 
water." 

t efi'tt-l-sispB, " Bed state of the body, csohexy *’ (SteingMS). 



44 

and fashion ? These two couplets of Ustad* occurred as 
appropriate : 

** If my shadow do not hold my leg 
1 shall not be able to stand till the Resurrection 
Nor, from weakness, does my soul see a refuge 
Where it may for a while rest on my lips.” 

As it was a very extraordinary case I directed painters to 
take his portrait. In fact, I found him wonderfully changed. 
I said to him : ** Beware ; in your present state do not for a 
moment forget Cknl, nor despair of His mercy !• If Death 
grant you quarter (amdn), regard the reprieve as a time for 
apologizing and for amendment. If your life has come to 
its close, consider every moment passed in remembrance of 
God as gain. Trouble not your head about those you are 
leaving behind. A slight claim of service is a great thing 
with us.” As they had spoken to me about his poverty, I 
gave him Rs. 2,000 for road-expenses, and let him go. Next 
day he travelled the road of non-existcnce. 

On Tuesday, the 30th, the bank of the River Manabf 
became the halting-place for the sublime camp. The New 
Year’s^ feast of Thursday was prepared at this plape on the 
2nd of the Ilahi month of Aban. Amanu-llah, s. llfahabat E., 
at his request, was promoted to the hiansab of 1,000 personal 
and 300 § horse, and Girdhar, s.*'Ray Sal, to that of 1,000 

* I do not know of any poet with the takhaffHf UstSd. Possibly 
Jim! is referred to. The lines are obscure, and I am not certain of the 
meaning. The 1.0. MSS. omit the negatives in the lirst two lines. 

t Not identified. 1.0. MS. 305, seems to have Pftnib. Gan it be 
the MSnehan or Majham ? Possibly we should read Banfis. 

X The I.O. MSS. have not the Words Wan ifns, " New Year,’* and I 
am not sure what New Year s dky is meant. The time was October. 
Perhaps it was the first day of 2*l>Qa*da> that was celebrated, or it 
may be what is described in Richardson as the New Year's day of the 
Balance — viz., the entry of the Sun into the Sign of the bianco, 
Jahftngfr may have had special rejiiard to that Sign as he was bom under 
it. Perhaps all that is meant is t hat the feast of 1 Abftn was celebrated. 
Abftn was a sacred month because Akbar was bom in it, and it may be 
that the feast waa celebrated on Thursday the 2nd because the previous 
day, Wednesday, was regarded by Jabln^r as unlucky, and was always 
spoken of as Kam Bjjamba, But most probably Nau RQz is simply a 
niKHitake of the toTt. § LO. MS. have 600. 



45 


personal and 800 horse. ‘Abdu-Ilah, son of iOian A’^am, 
obtained the mansab of 1,000 personal and 300 horse. Dillr 
K., who was one of the jagirdars of Gujarat, I presented with 
a iiorse and an elephant. Ran-baz K., s. Shah-baz K. Kambu, 
came by order from the Deccan, and w^as promoted to the 
post of Bakhshi and Recorder of the army of Bangash, and his 
mansab was fixed at 800 personal and 400 horse. I marched 
on Friday, the 3rd. At this stage* Prince Shujil', the beloved 
son (liver-comer) of my son Shah-Jahan. who was being 
brought up in the chaste lap of NQr-Jahan Begam, and 
towards whom I have so much affection that he is dearer to 
me than life, was attacked by a specially infantile disease 
which they call *‘ummu s-sibyan,”t ^or a long time his 
senses left him. Although experienced people devised many 
remedies, they were unprofitable, and his insensibility 
(bi-hu^t) took away my senses (husi). As visiide remedies 
were hopeless, by way of humility and submission 1 rubbed 
the head of supplication on the Court of the gracious Ruler 
who cherishes his slaves, and begged for the child’s recovery. 
In this state it occurred to me that as I had made a vow| to 
my God that after I had passed my fiftieth year, this suppliant 
would give up hunting with bullet and gun, and would injure 
no creature with his own hand, if for the sake of his safety 
I were to give up shooting from the present date, it were 
possible that his life would become the means of preserving 
the lives of many animals, and God Almighty might give him 
to me. In fine, with true purpose, and sincere belief I vowed§ 
to God that I would thenceforward not harm any living thing 
with my own hand. By the grace of Allah his illness 
diminished. At the time w'hen this suppliant was in his 
mother’s womb, one day I made no movement after the 
manlier that other children make The attendants were 

* The name of the stage is not given. 

t Literally the mother of ehildfen, hat ezpbincd as meaning a female 
demon (larva) who torments children See Lane's Diotioiiafy, 10.50. 
where it is described as ** flatulence.'* 

See almvc, p. 243 of text. 

$ Apparently the vow applied only to ohooting. Uhftnglr was not 
34 :it t hat time fifty-one years of age by solar computation. 



46 


amazed, and inquiring into the cause stated the case to my 
father (Akbar). At that time my father was engaged in 
hunting with cheetahs. As that day was a Friday, for the 
purpose of my safety he made a vow that during his life he 
would not hunt with cheetahs on a Friday. Till the end of 
his life he remained firm in this determination, and I also in 
obedience to him until now have never hunted with cheetahs 
on a Friday. Finally, on account of the weakness of the liglit 
of my eye, %ah Shuja‘, for three days I halted at this stage, 
that Qod Almighty might give him his natural* life. 

On Tuesday, tiie 7th, I marched. One day the son of 
Ijhikim f *AlI was praising the milk of a camel. It occurred to 
me that if I could continue that for some days, it was possible 
that it might do some good, and it might prove agreeable to 
me. Asaf [Qiw had a Persian camel in milk, and I took a 
little of it. Contrary to the milk of other camels, which is 
not devoid of saltness, it appeared to my taste sweet and 
delicious, and now for a month past I have been drinking eveiy 
day a cup of it, equal in quantity to half a water*cup, and it 
is clearly advantageous, for it quenches my thirst. It is 
strange that two years ago Asaf K. bought this camel, but 
at that time it had not a young one, and had no sign of milk. 
At this time by chance milk flowed from its dugs. They gave 
it every day to drink four seers of cow’s milk with five seers 
of wheat, one seer of blacky sugar, and one seer of fennel 
{bddydn), to make its milk delicious, sweet, and profitable. 
Certainly it suited me admirably, and was to my taste. By 
way of testing it, I sent for some cow’s and buffalo s milk, 
and tasted all three. There was no comparison in sweetness 
and flavour with the milk of this camel. I ordered them to 
give the same kind of food to some other female camels, that 
it might become clear whether the purity w'as in consequence 
of eating good food, or whether it was due to the natural 
sweetness of this (particular) camel’s milk.§ 

* The natural term of life, which some Orientals regarded as being 
120 years. 

t The name *Ali is omitted in text. 

X i{and-i-aiyah (! treacle). 

$ We are not told what was the result of this experiment. 



47 


On Wednesday, the 8th, I marched, and halted on the 
9th. The royal tent was pitched near a large tank. St»h* 
Jahan presented me with a boat made after the Kashmir 
fashion, the sitting-place of which they had made of silver. 
At the end of that day I embarked in that boat and went 
round the tank. On this day 'Abid K., Bakhshi of Bangaeh, 
who had been summoned, came and had the good fortune 
to kiss the threshold, and was honoured with the post of 
Diwan-i-buyutat. Sar-faraz ^an, who was one of the 
auxiliaries of Gujarat, received a standard, a private tipchaq 
horse, and an elephant, and, overwhelmed with honour, 
obtained leave to go. ‘Izzat* IQian, who was one of those 
attached to the army of Bangash, was exalted with the gift 
of a standard. Marching was ordered on Friday, the 10th. 
Mir Miran was promoted to the mansab of 2,000 personal and 
600 horse. On Saturday, the 11th, the auspicious equipage 
alighted in the pargana of Dol^ad. On the eve of Sunday, 
the 12th of the Ilahi month of Aban, in the thirteenth year 
from my accession, corresponding with the fifteenth Z!-1-Qa'da 
of the Hijri year 1027, in the nineteenth degree of Libra, the 
Giver of blessings gave my prosperous son Shah- Jahan a 
precious son by the daughter of Asaf K. I hope that hisf 
advent may be auspicious and blessed to this everlasting 
State. Halting for three dajrs at this place, on Wednesday,]: 
the 15th Aban, the camp was pitched at the village of 
Samarna.§ As it was necessary that the Mubarak-Aamba 
entertainment should as far as possible be arranged for on the 
bank of a river and a clean place, and there was in this neigh- 
bourhood no spot which met those requirements, there was 
no help for it but to order a start when half of the night of 
Thursday (i.e., Wednesday), the 16th, had passed, and when 

* MSS., as before, have Ql^irat instead of 'Izzat. 

I This son was Aurangzib. See Khafl K., I. 20(). Kh^fi K. has 11th 
instead of 15th Zi‘l'Q4*da. The 11th Zi‘l-Qa*da corresponds to 
20th October, 1018. 

t Text lias Sunday, but Wednesday must be the correct day, for 
immediately after Friday is spoken of as the 17th (Abin). 

{ Perhaps the Samarni of Jarrett, II. 207. The I.O. MSS. have 
Tamama. 



48 


the sun rose the camp was pitched on the bank of the tank 
of Bakhur. At the end of the day, the feast of cups was held 
and I presented cups to some of my private servants. On 
Friday; the 17th, I ordered a march. Ke^o Das Maru is a 
jagirdar in that neighbourhood. According to orders, he 
came from the Deccan, and was honoured by doing homage. 

On Saturday, the 18th (Aban), the camp was at Bam- 
garh. For some nights before this there appeared, at three 
gharis before sunrise, in the atmosphere, a (luminous) vapour 
in the shape of a pillar.* At each succeeding night it rose a 
ghari earlier. When it assumed its full form, it took the 
shape of a spear {liarha), thin at the two ends, and thick in 
the middle. It was curved like a sickle, and had its back to 
the south, and its face to the north. It now showed itself a 
watch (pahar) before sunrise. Astronomers took its shape 
and size by the astrolabe, and ascertained that with differences 
of appearance (?) it extended over twenty-four degrees. It 
moved in high heaven, but it had a movement of its own, 
differing from that of high heaven, for it was first in Scorpio 
and afterwards in Libra. Its declination (l^arakcU-i-"ar^ ?) 
was mainly southerly. Astrologers call such a phenomenon 
a spear {harba) in their books, and have written that its 
appearance portends weakness to the kings of Arabia, and 
points to their enemies prevailing over them. God knows ! 
Sixteen nights after this phenomenon, a star showed itself 
in the same quarter. Its head was luminous, and its tail 
was two or three yards long, but the tail was not luminous. 
It has now appeared for eight nights ; when it disappears, the 
fact will be noticed, as well as the results of it. 

I halted on Sunday, the 19th, and on Monday I alighted a c, 
the village of Sltalkhera.f On Tuesday, the 21st, there was 

* I huve been assisted by the translation in Elliot, VI. 363. Sco 
;ilso Iqbftl-n&ma, 117. The author there expatiates on the calamities 
which fuilowed these celestial appearances. Elliot, loe. cit, p. 364, has 
eight yturs, but the text of the Tuzuk and all the MSS. have ** eight 
nights'' The Iqb&l-n&ma lias Dai instead of Abin, but probably Dai 
is a mistake for Zi l'(q&'da). Perhaps the first phenomenon aws tho 
Zodiac.ll Light. 

+ The MSS. have Snmbhalkhera. 



49 


again a halt. I presented RaAid K., the Afghan, with a robe 
of honour and an elephant, sending them to him by Ran-baz 
K. On Wednesday, the 22nd, the camp rested in pargana 
Madanpur.* On Thursday, the 23rd, I halted and had a 
feast of cups, and Darab K. had a nddifi dress of honour given 
to him. Halting on Friday, on Saturday the camp was 
pitched in the pargana of Nawari.f On Sunday, the 26th, 
I pitched on the bank of the River Chambal, and on Monday 
on the bank of the River Kahnar:|: (?). On Tuesday, the 
28th, the royal standards were raised in the neighbourhood 
of the city of Ujain. From A^madabad to Ujain is a distance 
of ninety-eight kos. It was traversed in twenty-eight marches 
and forty-one halts — ^that is, in two months and nine days. 
On Wednesday, the 29th, I had an interview with Jadrup, 
who is one of the austere ones of the Hindu religion, and the 
particulars of whose circumstances have been described in 
the preceding pages, and went with him to see ELaliyadaha. 
Certainly association with him is a great privilege. 

On this day it was made known to me in the contents of a 
report from Bahadur E., the Governor of Qandahar, that in 
the Hijri year 1026 — that is, last year — the number of mice 
in Qandahar and the neighbourhood was so great that thev 
destroyed all the crops and grain and cultivation and the 
fruits of the trees of the province, so that there had been no 
produce. They (the mice) cut off the ears of com and ate 
them. When the cultivators gathered their crops, before 
they were threshed and cleaned, another§ half was destroyexl, 
so that perhaps one-fourth of the crops only came to hand. 
In the same way no vestige was left of the melons (melon- 
beds) or garden produce. After some time the mice di^ 
appeared. 

* MSS. have BadhnQr. Perhaps it is the Badhniwar of Jarrctt. II. 

t Pargana NulS'i in MSS., and this seems right as NolS’i, is mentioned 
in Jarrett, II. 198, as liaving a brick fort and as being on the Chambal. 

t It seems to be Gambhir in the MSS. 

§ There seems to bo an omission in the recital. We are not told of 
the first half, but evidently the meaning is that the mice (or rats) ate 
half the crop on the field, and half of what was brought into the thsesb- 
iiig floor. Sco also Iqliil-nSma, p. 118. 



50 


Ab my son Shah- Jahan had not made a birthday entertain- 
ment for his son (Aurangzib), he petitioned at Ujain, which 
is the place of his jagir, fchat the Thursday entertainment of 
the 30th should be held at his abode. Of necessity, having 
consented to the canying out of his wish, the day was passed 
in enjoyment at his quarters. My private servants who have 
the evUree into this kind of parties and assemblies were de- 
lighted with brimming cups. My son Shah- Jahan brought 
that auspicious child before me, and, presenting as offerings 
a tray of jewels, and jewelled ornaments, and fifty elephants, 
thirty male and twenty female, asked me for a name for him. 
Please God it will be given him in a favourable hour. Of 
his elephants seven were included in my private stud ; the 
rest were distributed among the faujdars. The value of the 
offerings that were accepted will be Rs. 200,000. 

On this day *A^du-d-daula (Jamalu-d-din Husain Anju) 
came from his jagir, and had the good fortune to kiss the 
threshold. He gave eighty-one muhars as na^r, and an 
elephant as an offering. Qasim K., whom I had dismissed 
from the government of Bengal, had been sent for, and 
having had the good fortune to do homage, presented 1,000 
muhars as fuizr. On Friday, the 1st of Azar, I amused 
myself with hawking. As the retinue passed along, a field 
of millet {jwdr) was met with. Though generally a stem has 
only one head, each of them had twelve. I was astonished, 
and at this time the tale of “ The King and the Gardener ” 
occurred to me. 

Tale of The King and the Gardener.”* 

A King came to the gate of a garden in the heat of the day. 
He saw an old gardener standing at the gate, and asked him 
if there were any pomegranates in the garden. He said : 
** There i^re.” He told him to bring a cup of pomegranate 
juice. The gardener had a daughter adorned with grace of 
person, and beauty of disposition. He made a sign to her to 
bring the pomegranate juice. The girl went and at once 


* EUiot, VI. 364. 



51 


brought a cup full of pomegranate juice, and placed some 
leaves upon it. The King took it from her hand and drank it. 
Then he asked the girl what was her reason for placing leaves 
on the top of the juice. She, with an eloquent tong4e and 
a sweet voice, represented that it was not wise at once to 
drink o£E a quantity of liquid when he was bathed in perspira- 
tion, and in such a hot air. On this account she had placed 
the leaves on the liquid by way of precaution, so that he might 
drink it slowly. The King was greatly pleased with her sweet 
ways, and it crossed his mind to admit the girl into his Palace. 
After this he asked the gardener : How much profit do you 
derive from this garden every year ?” He answered : ‘‘ Three 
hundred dfndra.*' The King asked : What do you pay the 
Diwan (tax-collector) ?” He answered : “ The King takes 

nothing from the trees, but takes a tenth of the cultivated 
crops.’' It came into the King’s mind that there were in his 
dominions many gardens and countless trees. If he were to 
get a tenth of the garden produce as well, it would amount 
to a large sum, and there wwld be no great loss to the culti- 
vator. Hereafter he would order a tax to be levied on garden 
produce. He said then : ** Bring me a little more pomegranate 
juice.” The girl went, and after a long time brought a small 
quantity. The King said : The first time thou earnest 
quickly, and broughtest more. This time thou didst stay a 
long time, and broughtest less.” The girl said : ” The first 
time I had filled the cup with the juice of one pomegranate, 
and brought it ; this time I pressed out five or six pomegranutrs 
and did not get as much juice.” The astonishment of the 
King increased. The gardener represented : “ The blessing of 
produce depends on the goodwill of the King. It occurs to 
me that you must be a King. At the time when you in- 
quired of me the income from the garden, your disposition 
must have changed. Consequently the blessing passed away 
from the fruit." The Sultan was impressed, and drove that 
idea out of his heart. He then said : ” Bring me once more a 
cup of pomegranate juice.” The girl went again, and quickly 
bringing a cup full to the brim, gave it. smiling and gladly, 
into the Sultan's hand. He praised ^he intelligence of the 



52 


gardener, and e^lained the actual state of affairs, and begged 
the girl of him in marriage, and married her. 

This true tale of that truth-preserving Eling has remained as 
a memento on the page of time. In truth, the manifestation of 
such spiritual (?)’^ results is the mark of good intentions, and 
the fruit of justice. Whenever all the energies and purposes 
of justice-observing Kings are devoted to the comfort of the 
people and the contentment of their subjects, the manifesta- 
tions of well-being and the productions of fields and gardens 
are not far off. Gk>d be praised that in this age-enduring 
State no tax has ever been levied on the fruit of trees, and 
is not levied now. In the whole of the dominion not a dam 
nor one grain (4a&&a)t on this account enters the public 
treasury, or is collected by the State. Moreover, there is an 
order that whoever makes a garden on arable land, its produce 
is exempted. I trust that God (to whom be glory !) will 
always incline this suppliant towards what is good. 

** When my purpose is good, do Thou grant me good.*’^ 

On Saturday, for the second time, my desire for the com- 
pany of Jadrup increased. After performing the midday 
devotions, I embarked in a boat and hastened to meet him, 
and at the close of day I ran and enjoyed his society in the 
retirement of his cell. I heard many sublime words of 
religious duties and knowledge of divine things. Without 
immoderate praise, he sets forth clearly the doctrmes of 
wholesome Sufism, and one can find delight in his society. 
He is sixty years old. He was twenty-two years of age, when, 
forsaking all external attachments, he placed the foot of 
determination on the highroad of asceticism, and for thirty- 
eight years he had lived in the garment of nakedness. When 
I took leave he said : In what language can I return thanks 
for this gift of Allah that I am engaged in the reign of such a 
just King in the worship of my own Deity in ease and con- 

^ The word ma'nl^ ** spiritual,** does not ooour in the I.O. MSS., and 
does not appear to be wanted. 

t Also a weight se two barley -grains. Blochmann, 36. 

. t The line is wanting in some MSS. In I.O. MS. 181. the oon- 
junction tea is omitted (p. 1456). 



tentment, and that the duet of discomposure from any 
accident settles not on the skirt of my purpose V* 

On Sunday, the 3rd, marching from Kaliyadaha, I en- 
camped at the village of Qasimkhera. I employed myself 
on the road in hawking. By chance a crane rose, and the 
tuyqhun falcon, of which I am very fond, was let fly after it. 
The crane sou^t to escape, and the falcon soared and flew 
so high as to disappear from sight. Although the huntsmen 
and the head-beaters ran after it in all directions, they found 
no trace of it, and it was impossible for the falcon to be caught 
in such a desert. La^ar Mfr Kadunirl, who is the head of 
the Kashmir huntsmen, in whose charge the falcon was, ran 
in a bewildered state through the desert in all directions 
without flnding a sign or trace. Suddenly he saw a tree in 
the distance, and when he went up to it he found the falcon 
sitting on the end of a branch. Showing a domestic fowl, 
he called to the falcon. Three gharis more had not passed 
when he brought it to me. This gift from the hidden world, 
that had entered into the thoughts of no one, increased the 
joy of my mind, Increasing his mansab as a reward for this 
service, I gave him a horse and a dress of honour. 

On Monday, the 4th, Tuesday, the 5th, Wednesday, the 
6th, I marched continuously, and, halting on Thursday, the 
7th, I arranged a feast of pleasure, on the bank of a tank. 
Nur-Jahan Begam had been ill for some time, and the 
physicians who had the good fortune to be chosen to attend 
on her, Musalmans and Hindus, perceived no gain from all 
the medicines they gave her, and confessed their helplessness 
in treating her. At this time ^aklm Ruhn-llah began to 
wait upon her, and undertook (to find) a remedy. By the aid 
of God (Glory be to His name !), in a short time she quite 
recovered. In reward for this excellent service I increased 
his mansab and bestowed on the Hakim three villages in his 
native countr}* as his private property, and an order was given 
that he should be weighed against silver, which should be 
given him as a reward. From Friday, the 8th, umil Sund.iy.* 

♦ So in trxt, but* Sunday was either the inth or the 17th. Apfwr 
ciitly Sunday is a mistake for Wednesday, as, later on, Thursitiy iS 
mentioned as the 14th. 



54 


the 13th, I made successive marches, and every day up to the 
end of the stage employed myself in hunting with hawks 
and falcons ijbdz u jurra). Many durrdj (partridges) were 
caught. On last Sunday, Kunwar Karan, s. Rana Amar 
Singh, having enjoyed the good fortune of kissing the ground, 
presented his congratulations on the conquest of the Deccan, 
offering 100 mukars and Bs. 1,000 by way of nazr^ and 
the value of Be. 21,000 in jewelled vessels, with some horses 
and elephants as The horses and elephants I 

returned to him, and the rest was accepted. The next day 
I presented him with a dress of honour. To Mir %arif. 
Vakil of Qutbu-l-mulk, and to Iradat K., the chief butler, 
an elephant each was given. Sayyid Hizabr K. was given 
the faujdari of Mewat, and his mansab, original and increased, 
was fixed at 1,000 personal and 500 horse, leaving selected 
Sayyid Mubarak for the charge of the fort of Rohtas, I con- 
ferred on him the mansab of 500 personal and 200 horse. On 
Thursday, the 14th, the camp was pitched on the bank of the 
tank of the village of Sandhara, and the feast of cups was held, 
and chosen servants were made happy with cups of pleasure. 
Tlie birds of chase, “ that had been shut up in Agra to moult ” 
ijba-kunz basla budand), were this day brought to me by 
IGiwaja ‘Abdu-l-Latif, the Chief Fowler. Picking out those 
that were fit for my own use, the rest were given to the 
Amirs and other servants. 

On this day the news of the revolt and ingratitude for 
favours of Raja Suraj Mai, s. Raja Baso, came to my ear. 
Baso had several* sons. Although the above-mentioned was 
the eldest, his father mostly kept him in confinement on 
account of his evil thoughts and mischievous tendencies, and 
regarded him with displeasure. After his (B^o s) death, as 
this wretch was the eldest, and he had no other capable or 
intelligent son, I, looking to the services rendered by Raja 
Baso, for the purpose of preserving the family of a Zamindar, 
and the protection of his hereditary property and country, 
conferred on this wretch the title of Raja, with a mansab of 
2,000, and gave him the position and jagir of his father, 

* Iqb&l-n&ma, 119, “ Three sons.'* 



55 


which the latter had obtained by his loyalty and good service. 
I also gave him the sums of money and goods that his father 
had collected during long years. When the deceased Mur* 
ta^ K. was sent o£E on the duty of conquering Kangr.a, as 
this wretch was the chief Zamtndar of that hill country, he 
outwardly displayed zeal in the service and loyalty, and was 
nominated as an auxiliary. After he reached the spot, 
Murta^ E. pressed the siege tightly against the garrison. 
This evil-minded fellow discovered from the appearance of 
things that he would soon be victorious, and began to dis- 
agree and be troublesome. He took off the veil of respect 
from his face, and proceeded to quarrel and be hostile to 
Murta^ E.’s men. Murta^ E. read the writing of misery and 
ruin on the page of the wretch’s forehead, and reported un- 
favourably of him to the Court, or rather wrote plainly that 
the signs of rebellion and want of loyalty were clear in his 
conduct. As there was there such an ofiScer as Murtaza K. 
and a large army in the hill-country, the wretch did not find 
the time convenient for the preparation of a disturbance. 
He sent a report to my son Shah-Jahan that Murtam E., at 
the instigation of interested parties, had turned against him, 
and desired to overthrow and ruin him, and was accusing him 
of wrong-doing and rebellion. He hoped that he would sum- 
mon him to Court, and thus provide a means for his escape 
and (the prolonging of) his life. Although I had every con- 
fidence in the words of Murtaza E., yet as he (Suraj Mai) 
begged to be sent for to Court, a doubt passed into my mind 
that possibly MurtazA E., at the instigation of seditious 
people, might cause a confusion, and might have accused him 
without due reflection. Briefly, at the request of my son 
Shah-Jahan, passing over his offence, I summoned him 
(Suraj Mai) to Court. Just at this time Murtam K. died, 
and the conquest of the fort of Eangra was delayed till the 
dispatch of another leader. When this seditious fellow 
arrived at Court, I, under the pressure of affairs, rapidly 
encompassed him with favours and sent him off to do duty 
with my son %ah-Jahan in the conquest of the Deccan. 
After this, when the Deccan had come into the possession of 



56 


the servants of the enduring State, he, having acquired in- 
fluence in my son’s service, was appointed to superintend the 
taking of the fort of mngra. Although the sending back of 
this ungrateful and untruthful one into that hill-country 
showed a want of caution and care, yet as my son had taken 
on himself the responsibility of the undertaking, 1 was obliged 
to give in to his wish and to leave the matter to him. My 
fortunate son appointed him, along with one of his own 
servants of the name of Taqi and a suitable army of vnan^h- 
ddrs, ahiO/SRs^ and royal musketeers, as has already been 
related summarily in these pages. When he arrived at the 
place, he began to show enmity and trickery toward Taqi also, 
and displayed his natural disposition. He continually re- 
ported unfavourably of him (Taqi), until he wrote plainly 
that he could not get on with him, and that Taqi could not 
do the work. If another general were appointed, the fort 
would be quickly conquered. In fine, he (Shah-Jahan) had 
no choice but to summon Taqi to Court, and to appoint 
Raja Bikramajit, who was one of his chief servants, with an 
army of fresh men on this service. When the wretch dis- 
covered that his stratagems could no longer continue, and his 
deceit go no farther, he, before the arrival of Bikramajit, 
gave leave to a number of the servants of the Court, on the 
pretence that they had been on service a long time without 
proper arrangements (commissariat), to hasten to their jagirs 
and provide themselves with their equipments before the 
arrival of Raja Bikramajit. As palpably this came to a 
dispersion of the forces of the loyal, and most of them left 
for their own jagirs, only a few experienced men remained 
there. Seeing his opportunity, he showed the signs of revolt 
and sedition. Sayyid §afi Barha, who was distinguished for 
his bravery, with some of his brothers and relatives, advanced 
the feet of courage, and tasted the wholesome draught of 
martyrdom, and some who were wounded with severe wounds, 
which are the adornment of the lions of battle, that rascal 
took captive from the field of strife and carried off to his own 
house of calamity.* Some from lovef of life hastily withdrew 

* Apparently the meaning ia that he carried them off as prisoners. 

t Text jdda-ditstl by mistake for jan-dOstL 



57 


themselves to the comer of safety. That rascal stretched out 
the hand of oppression and possession over the parganas on 
the skirts of the hill-country (darmn-i-kuh)y which mostly 
belonged to the jagii of I'timadu-d-daula, and did not abate 
a hair’s breadth from attacking and plundering. It is hoped 
that with the same swiftness, he will be caught with the 
reward of his deeds and the recompense of his actions, and 
that the spirit* of this State will do its work, please God ! 

On Sunday, the 17th, I crossed Ghati Chanda. On Monday, 
the 18th, the Jan-sipar Ataliq Khan-khanan, Comma nder-in- 
Chief, had the honour of kissing the threshold. As he had 
been absent from my presence for a long time, and the vic- 
torious retinue was passing by near the Sarkars of Khandesh 
and Burhanpur, he asked to wait upon me, and an older was 
given that if his mind were at ease in all respects, he should 
come unattended and return quickly He accordingly came 
with all speed, and had the good fortune to pay his respects 
on this day, and, having been exalted by the receipt of all 
kinds of royal favours and kingly benefits, he presented an 
offering of 1,000 muhars and Rs. 1,000. 

As the camp had undergone great hardship in crossing the 
Ghati, I ordered a halt for the refreshment of the people on 
Tuesday, the 19th. I marched on Wednesday, the 20th, and 
on Thursday, the 2l8t, halted again and held a feast of cups 
on the bank of a river that is known as the Sind.f I gave a 
special horse, of the name of Sumer, which was one of the 
finest horses, to the JOian-IAanan. In the Hindi language they 
call a hill of gold Sumer (Sumeru), and he was called by this 
name on account of his colour and size. On Friday, the 22nd, 
and Saturday, the 23rd, two successive marches were made. 
On this day a wonderful waterfall was seen. The water is 
exceedingly clear, and pours down with boiling and noise 
from a lofty place. On all sides of it there are halting places 

* Natnak, **salt.** See for a similar expression, p. 149, in the 
account of Chin Qiiij. Perhaps the phrase is a reminiscence of the 
answer given by Muf^ammad ^usain M. when asked who had captured 
him. ** The king's salt,’* was his reply. 

t The Sind is mentioned in Tieffenthaler, 1. 184. See also I.G., new 
cd., XXII., p. 432. It is one of the chief rivers of Central India. 



&8 


where one may praise (Jod. Certainly I have not recently 
seen such another fine waterfall, and it is a delightful recrea- 
tion-place. I was delighted with the spectacle for a while. 
On Sunday, the 24th, I halted, and, sitting in a boat on a 
tank which was in front of the royal enclosure (daulat-'J^na), 
were shot* ducks {mur^haln). On Monday, the 25th, Tuesday, 
the 26th, and Wednesday, the 27th, I marched one after the 
other. I bestowed on the Khan -ldi&n&n the fusion (sheep-skin 
coat) I had on my own person, and seven horses from my 
stable, on which I always rode, were also given him. On 
Sunday, the 2nd of the Ilahl month of Dai, the royal standards 
were raised at the fort of Banthambur. This is one of the 
great forts of the Indians. In the time of Sultan 'Ala’u-d- 
din iOialji, Ray Pitambar Deo was in possession of it. The 
Sultan besieged it for a long time, and conquered it with labour 
and great exertions, and in the beginningf of the reign of 
H.M. (Akbar) — ^may the light of Grod be his witness ! — ^Ray 
Surjan Hada had it in his possession. He had always 6,000 
or 7,000 horse in attendance on him. That revered one, by 
the aid of the glorious Gk)d, conquered it in the space of one 
month and twelve days, and Ray Surjan, by the guidance of 
fortune, having had the good fortune to kiss the threshold, 
was enrolled among the number of the loyal, and . became 
one of his respectable and trusted Amirs. After him 
his son Ray Bhoj also was included among the great Amirs. 
Now his grandson, Sar-buland Ray, is among the chief officers. 
On Monday,:]: the 3rd, I went to inspect the fort. There are 
two hills close to each other. They call one Ran, and the 
other Thanbur. The fort is built on the top of Thanbur, 
and, putting these two names together, they have called it 
Ranthanbur. Although the fort is exceedingly strong, and 
has plenty of water, the hill of Ran is a specially strong fortress 

* The word is shikar • Either the ducks were caught in nets and not 
shot, or the shooting was done by others, for Jahingir had vowed to 
give up shooting from the time of Shuj&'*B illness. 

t Akbar really took it in the 14th year of his reign (March, 1669). 
The siege lasted a month, according to Abu-l-Fa^l. Akbar-n&ma, 
ir. 339. 

t Elliot, VI. 366. 



59 


(in itself), and the capture of the fortress depends upon the 
possession of this hill. Accordingly, my i^evered father 
ordered that they should plant cannon on the top of the hill 
of Ran, and aim at {majrd glrand) the buildings inside the 
fort. The first gun they fired reached the square building 
(chaukandt)* of the palace of Ray Surjan. From the fall of 
that building, a trembling found its way into the foundations 
of his courage, and a great perplexity overpowered his heart, 
and thinking he would best consult his own safety in deliver- 
ing up the fort, he rubbed the head of worship and humility 
on the throne of the king of kings, who forgave faults and 
accepted excuses. 

I had intended to pass the night in the fort, and the next 
day to return to camp. As the buildings inside the fort had 
been built after the fashion of the Hindus, and the rooms 
were without air and with little space, they did not please 
me, nor was I disposed to stay there. I saw a bath house, 
which one of the servants of Dastamf lAan had built near the 
wall of the fort. A little garden and a lodging {ni^iman) 
which overlooks {mimirif) the open space is not wanting in 
space and air, and there is no better place in the whole fort.:|: 
Dastam K. was one of the Amirs of the late King (Akbar), 
and from his early years had been brought up in his service. 
His connection with him was confidential and intimate. 
H.M. had entrusted this fort to him from his exceeding con- 
fidence in him. 

After completing my inspection of the fort and houses, 
T ordered that they should bring before me the criminals who 
were confined in the fort, so that I might look into the case 
of each of them and give an order in accordance with justice. 
In brief, with the exception of affairs of murder, and of any 
person through whose release disturbance or calamity might 
ensue in the country, I freea them all. and to each one in 

* For notes about the meaning of tbe word ehaukandi, “fotir- 
comered,*' see Elliot, V. 347 aiid 603. 

t Text Rustam, but it is Dastam in MS. 181, and it appears from 
Blochmann that Dastam or Dostam i.s the proper spelling. See pp. 398 
and 620. 

X Apparently Jah&ngir spent the night in this summer-house. 



60 


accordance with his circumstances gave his expenses and 
dresses* of honour. On the eve of Tuesday, the 4th, I 
returned to the royal abode after a watch and three gharis 
had passed. On Sunday (properly Wednesday), the 5th, 
having marched nearly 5 koss, I halted on Thursday, the 
6th. On this day the Khan-khanan presented his offering of 
jewels, ornamented vessels, cloth, and an elephant. Of these 
I chose whatever pleased me, and returned the rest. What 
was accepted of his offering was of the value of Rs. 150,000. 
On Friday, the 7th, I marched 5 koss. I had before this 
captured a sdras with a falcon, but until now I had never seen 
the hunting of a dumaf (crane). As my son Shah-Jahan had 
great pleasure in dumd himting with the falcon (shdhin), and 
his falcons were well grown, at his request I rode out early in 
the morning, and caught one dumd myself, whilst the falcon 
my son had on his wrist caught another. Certainly, of all 
good hunting amusements, this is the best. I was exceedingly 
pleased with it. Although the sdfoa is large, it is lazy and 
heavy on the wing. The chase of the dumd has no resemblance 
to it. I praise the heart and courage of the falcon that can 
seize such strong-bodied animals, and with the strength of 
his talons can subdue them. Hasan K,, the chief hunstman 
of my son, was honoured with au elephant, a horse, and a 
dress of honour, as a reward for this exhibition of sport, and 
his son also received a horse and a dress of honour. On 
Saturday, the 8th, having marched 4J koss, I halted on 
Sunday, the 9th On this day the Hian-IAanan, the Com- 
mander-in-Chief, having raised the head of dignity through 
the gift of a special dress of honour, a jewelled waist-sword, 
and a private elephant with trappings, was reappointed to 
Khandesh and the Deccan. The mansab of that pillar of 
the kingdom, original and increase, was fixed at 7,000 per- 
sonal and horse. As he did not get on with LaAkar K., 
at his request I assigned to ‘Abid K. the duty of Diwan-i- 

* surely used here oh account of the olliteration kharfi u 

ZAifaV?/. At p. 10 of Price’s “ Jahangir *’ it is stated that he released 
7.000 prisoners from Gwalior Port ! 

t dumd, or turnd, a crane. It is a Turki word. 



61 


buyutat,* and having given him the mansab of 1,000 personal 
and 400 horse, as well as a horse, an elephant, and a dress of 
honour, sent him to that Subah. On the same day IQ»n 
Dauran arrived from Kabul, and had the good fortune to pay 
his respects, and presented as nasr 1,000 inuhars and Rs. 1,000, 
as well as an offering of a pearl rosary, fifty horses, ten Persian 
male and female camels, and some hawks, and china, f and 
porcelain (?), and other things. On Monday, the 10th, I 
marched 3^ koss, and on Tuesday, the 11th, 5| koss. On 
this day the i^n Dauran arranged his men before me, and 
passed ih review a thousand Mu^al cavalry, most of whom 
had Turk! horses, and some "Iraq and some Mujannas^ horses. 
Though his troopers had been mostly dispeised, some going 
into the service of Mahabat K. and remaining in that Subah, 
whilst a number left him at Lahore and went into different 
parts of the dominion, yet he could show this body of well- 
mounted men. Certainly the lOian Dauran for valour and 
generalship is one of the unique of the ages, but alas ! I found 
he had become a decrepit old man, and his sight was very 
weak. He has two intelligent young sons, who are not 
wanting in reasonableness, but it will certainly be a great 
and difficult thing for them to show themselves his equals. 
On this day I gave him and his sons dresses of honour and 
swords. On Sunday, the 12th, traversing 3} koss, I alighted 
on the bank of the tank of Mandu.§ In the middle of the 

* The words dlwdn’i-lmyniit are repeated. It looks as if the word 
buyiitdt io the second place was a mistake, or if some word implying 
that Lashkar K. had been appointed director of buildings (diiedn-t- 
huyiUdi) had been omitted. Apparently *Abid K. went to the Deccan 
as Diw&n, and not as Diw&n-i-bo}iitat. Compare Iqbai-nSma, 122. 

t No. 181 has no conjunction, and makes tlie moaning ** porcelain 
from Tartaiy.” 

t See Blochmann, 140 and 233. Abu>l>Fa?l says the mujannas 
horaffs resemble Persian homes, and are mostly Turk! or Pereian 
aekUngs. 

i ^6 in text, but evidently MAiulu, or at least Mindu in Malwa cannot 
be correct. The MSS. seem to have Hindaun, and possibly this is the 
place meant. Or it may he the place called Mandawar or Hindaun 
Road (see I.O.. new ed.. XIII. 135). The position of Hindaun agrees 
35 fairly well aith JahiiigirV itinerary, for Tieffnitlialcr. I., 172,iia>w that 



62 


tank there is a stone building, and on one of the pillars the 
quatrain of someone had been engraved. I saw it, and was 
amazed. In truth, it is a fine verse : 

** My congenial friends have left me : 

One by one they've fallen into the hands of death. 

They were poor drinkers at the banquet of life. 

A moment sooner than us they became drunken.”* 

At this time I also heard another quatrain of the same 
description, which I have recorded because it was very well 
said : 

” Alas ! that people of intelligence and wisdom have passed away. 
They have been forgotten in the minds of their contempoiaries. 
Those who spoke with a hundred tongues 
Ah ! what heard they that they became silent.” 

On Thursday, the 13th, I made a halt. ‘Abdu-l-^Azlz K., 
having come from Banga^, had the good fortune to kiss the 
threshold. Ikram K., who was in charge of the faujdari of 
Fathpur and the neighbourhood, was honoured with waiting 
on me. Khwaja Ibrahim K., Ba ldishI of the Deccan, was 

Hiiidaun is 12 leagues— t.e., koss— S.S.>W. from Bi&ia, and Jahingfr 
gives the distance from M&ndu dr Hindaun to the neighbourhood of 
Bay&n& as 81 koss. Bay&n& is in the Bhartpur State, and apparently 
about 21 miles from Hindaun. 

• The quatrain w'hich Jahangir describes as that of someone 
is included in *Umar lyia^'y&m'.s poems, and is thus translated by 
VVhinfield : 

” My comrades all are gone. Death, deadly foe. 

Hath caught them one by one, and trampled low ; 

They shared life’s feast, and drank its wine with me. 

But lost their heads and dropped a while ago.” 

(Quatrain 219, p. 148.) 

Fitzgerald has it as Quatrain XXII., and his version is : 

** For some we loved, the loveliest and the licst 
That from his Vintage rolling Time hath prest. 

Have drunk their Cup a Round or two before. 

And one by one crept silently to rest.” 

The quatrain is also quoted by Badayuni, Lowe’s translation, p. 192. 
The phrase tang-sharab in the third line means ”poor drinkers.” 
Whin6eld has ba-yak shanab. But tang-^arab is given in Johnson’s 
dictionary w'ith the meaning of being easily made drunk, unable to 
uirry much liquor. 




63 


exalted with the title of ‘Aqldat K. Mir Hajj, who is one of 
the auxiliaries attached to that Subah, and one of the brave 
young officers, was promoted to the title of Sharza (tiger- 
whelp) K., and received a standard. On Friday, the 14th, I 
marched 5^ koss. On Saturday, the 15th. having marched 
3 koss, I halted in the neighbourhood of Bayana.* There 1 
hastened with the ladies to see the spectacle of the top of the 
fort. Muhammad, the Ba khsh I of Humayun. who was en- 
trusted with the charge of the fort, had built a fine house 
overlooking the plain, of great height and with line air. The 
tomb of ShailA Bahlul is also in that neighbouihood, and is 
not wanting in excellence. The Shaikh was the elder brother 
of Shail^ Muhammad ^aus, and was much versed in the 
science of incantations by names (of God). Humayun had 
great affection for him, and the most perfect reliance on him. 
When he conquered the province of Bengal, he took up his 
abode there for some time. Mirza Hindal, by his order, had 
remained t at Agra. A body of avaricious servants (qulluq- 
chiyan), whose character was mischievous and seditious, 
taking to the way of faithlessness, came from Bengal to the 
Mirza, and, working upon his base nature (shaking the chain 
of his vile heart), led the Mirza on the road of rebellion and 
ingratitude for favours, and of irrecognition of duty. The 
thoughtless Mirza had the recited in his own name 

(proclaimed himself king), and openly raised the .standard of 
rebellion and strife. When the royal ear heard what had 
taken place from the reports of those who were loyal, he sent 
ShailA Bahlul to admonish the Mirza, and to turn him back 
from his vain purpose, and to establish his feet on the high- 
road of sincerity and concord. As these wretches had made 

* Bayinft (Bi&na) is desoribed in I.G., new ed., VII. 137. It is 
stated there that it used to liave a fort with a very high touier. Bahliirs 
tomb still exists. It was his brother, M. Gfiaiis, who u-as most known 
for his skill in incantations, and who wrote a book on the subject. > 

t The story is told in the Akbor-nlLnia, \'ol. I. Jahangir is not 
correct in saying that Humiyun had ordered Hindll to remain in Agra. 
Hindal went then* without permission, and doubtless in order to rcbeL 
See also Gul-badan Bcgain's ** Memoirs.'* who. naturully. tries to 
excucii* her brother. 



64 


the flavour of royalty sweet to the Mirza’s palate, he became 
imbued with futile ideas^ and would not be loyal. At the 
instigation of these seditious people he made %aiU Bahllil a 
martyr with the sword of recklessness at the Gharba^ji (garden) 
which H.M. Babar had made on the bank of the Jumna. As 
Muhammad B aldieh! was a disciple of the Shai ldi. he carried 
the body into the fort of Bayaha, and buried it there. 

On Sunday, the 16th, marching 4]^ koss, 1 came to the 
stage of Barah.* As the garden and well which had been 
built by the order of Maryam-samani ( Jahanj^r’s mother) in 
the pargana of Jusat was on the road, I went to inspect them. 
Certainly the hSoU (step-well) was a grand building, and had 
been built exceedingly well. I ascertained from the officials 
that a sum of Bs. 20,000 had been expended on this well. 
As there was much game in this neighbourhood, I halted on 
Monday, the 17th. 

On Tuesday, the 18th, marching 3^ koss, the host of pros- 
perity halted at the village of DayaTmVfl.t On Wednesday, 
the 19th, marching 2} koss, the victorious standards were 
raised on the bank of the Lake of Fathpiir. As at the time 
when the conquest of the Deccan was meditated, the stages 
and distances from Ranthambur to Ujain were recorded, it 
appears unnecessary to repeat them. From RanthambQrt to 

* This must bo tho Barmadh Mata mentioned by Beale (see 
Prooc«ding8 A.S.B. for August, 1873, p. 159). Beale says there is a 
placit of worship of tho Hindus about 1^ koss from Biana in the district 
of Bhart pur called Barmadh Mata. In the 7th year of Jahingir, 1022, 
1013, Jah&ngir 8 mother Maryani-zamftni made a garden and a 6d*of« 
(step- well) hero at a cost of Rs. 20,000. The garden has disappeared, 
but tho building which is over tho 5d*ofi still exists. Beale gives the 
iiiMcription. William Finch (Hakluyt Society) speaks of a place called 
Meiihnpur, near Biaim, where tliero was a garden made by the Queen- 
Mother. It was a great sartly, Tho pargana Jflsat of the text is no 
doubt the Chausath of Jnrrott, II. 183, and of Elliot's Supp. Gloss., 
1 1., p. 83. Baruli may be tho Parath or Bemth of Jarrstt, II. 181. 

t Apparently this is the Dg'ir or Dftbar of BadayOni, II. 171, and 
Akbar-nftma, III. 145. It is described by Badayuni as bring 4 koss 
from Fat^pQr. Dft'ir may also be read DIbar in MSS., and it is DAbsr 
in the map. It is in the llhartpur State. 

$ So in tho MSS. and tlie text, hut nuiKt 1 a> a mistake for Ahmadabad, 
which Jahftngir loft on 21 SbahriwSr er 22 Ramsfgn. See also 



Fat^pQr by the toad I 7 which I came waa a diatance of 
281 koaa, in abcfy-three matchea and fiftymn halta, tiaveised 
in 119 daya, or, according to aolar reckoning, in one day under 
four mohtha, and by lunar four full montha. From the date 
on which the army of fortune atarted from the capital for 
the oonqueat of the Bana and the acquiaition of the Deccan 
until now, when the victorioua and proaperoua atandarda have 
been planted again in the centre of the onpire, it ia five yeaia 
and four months. The astrologers and astronomers chose 
the day of Mtibarak-tiimba (Thursday), tike 28th of the 
Divine month of Dai, in my tUrteenth year, corresponding 
with the last day of the Mu)^krram in ^e Hijri year 1028 
(January 7, 1619), as the proper time at which to enter the 
capital of Agra. 

At this time, agoin, it appeared from the reports of the 
loyal that the disease of the plague was prevalent in Agra, so 
that daily about 100 people, more or leu, were dying of it. 
Under the armpits, or in the groin, or below the throat, buboes 
formed, and they died. This is tike third year tiiat it has 
raged in the cold weather, and disappeared in the commence- 
ment of the hot season. It is a strange toing that in these 
three years the infection has spread to aU the towns and 
villages in tiie neighboudiood of Agra, while there has been 
no trace of it at Fathp&r. It has come as fai as Amanabad, 
which is 2} koss from Fatl^pQr, and the people of that place 
(Amanabid) have forsaken their homer and gone to other 
villages. There bemg no choice, and considering the obser- 
vance of caution neceasary, it was decided that at this pro- 
pitious* hour the victorious army should enter the inhabited 
pact of Fatl^pOr in aU joy and auspiciousness, and after the 

IqUI-alma. 117. He sfrired at the Mivicone of Vsthpfir on 19 Dei, 
or about SS Ifnhanam, 1688 (end of Deoember, 1618). Appaientiy he 
oonakleied that be arrived at FathpQr on 80 Dai. He remained on ^ 
onteUrts and did not enter tba town till the 88th (antarentijr should 
be 26th or 87th). The Itbll*nlaia 188 mahae Jahlnjdr arrive at the 
ootekirts of Hathp&r on M Dai, and it givee the date of his entering 
thetounaa86I>aiorl$afar,1088(Jaanai78, 1619). 8eep.l8S. 

* Via., the propitious hour of the S8tb Dai, whieh had been 6asd foi 
the entry into Agm, but was now msds the time for entering PlathpOr. 




66 


sickness and scarcity had subsided and another auspicious 
hour had been chosen, I should enter the capital, please the 
Almighty and most holy Allah ! 

The Thursday entertainment took place on the bank of 
the Lake of Fatbpur. As the time for entering the town (of 
Fathpur) was fixed for the 28th, I halted eight days in this 
|>lace. I ordered them to measure the circumference of the 
lake,* and it came to 7 boss. At this stage, with the excep- 
tion of the revered Maryam-zamani, who had become very 
weak, all the Begams and inhabitants of the enclosure of 
chastity and all the palace employes came out to meet me 
(istiqbal). The daughterf of Asaf E., deceased, who is in 
the house of ‘Abdu-Ilah K. — i.e., is married to ‘Abdu-llah), 
s. I^n A"^m, told me a strange and wonderful tale, and 
strongly insisted upon its truth.. I write it on account of its 
strangeness. She said : One day in the courtyard of the 
house I saw a mouse rising and falling in a distracted state. 
It was running about in every direction after the manner of 
drunkards, and did not know where to go. I said to one of 
my girls : ‘ Take it by the tail and throw it to the cat The 
rat was delighted, and jumped up from its place and seized 
it in its mouth, but immediately dropped it and showed dis- 
gust. By degrees an expression of pain and trouble showed 
itself in its face. The next day it was nearly dead, when it 
entered into my mind to give it a little treacle^ {tiryaq^ opium ? ). 
When its mouth was opened, the palate and tongue appeared 
black. It passed three days in a state of misery, and on the 
fourth day came to its senses. After this the grain {ddna) of 
the plague (buboes) appeared in the girl, and from excess of 
temperature and increase of pain she had no rest Her colour 
became changed — it was yellow inclining to black — and the 

* The lake was to the north of the city, and is now dried up. It had 
been made by damming up a stream. 

t Apparently this lady was relating. what had occurred in Agra, for 
Jahangir has just told us that the plague did not come to Fatbpur. 
Her father was the Asaf K.. known also as JaTar K. The ladies seem 
to have oome out from Agra to welcome Jahlngir. His mother cam© 
later from Agra, see infra. 

X 8ee Lane’s Diet., p. 304, oul. 3. 



67 


fever was high (t(vp muhriq gardid). The next day she vomited* 
and had motions, and died. Seven or eight people in that 
household died in the same way, and so many were ill that 
I went to the garden from that lodging. Those who were ill 
died in the garden, but in that place there were no buboes. 
In brief, in the space of eight or nine days seventeen people 
became travellers on the road of annihilation.” She also said : 

Those in whom the buboes appeared, if they called another 
person for water to drink or wash in, the latter also caught 
the infection {rirayal)^ and at last it came to such a pass 
that through excessive apprehension no one would come near 
them.” 

On Saturday, the 22nd, IQiwaja Jahan, who had had the 
charge of Agra, having had the good fortune to kiss the 
threshold, presented SOO muhars by way of nazr, and Rs. 400t 
as charity. On Monday, the 24th, a special dress of honour 
was conferred on him. On Mubarak-^iafnkiX (Thureday), 
the 28th (? 27th), after iom ghari^ or nearly two sidereal 
hours (sa^at), had passed, 

** In an hour which agreed with two almanacs (?) (or which marked 
two erents),” 


* I.O. MSS. have az baldradduaz pdyrln ilUdq skud, ** there was vomit- 
ng from above and evacuations from lielow.*’ The text miRscs out t he 
words az bald radd, 
t 4,000 in No. 181. 

X Ceitai.ily Thursday was the 27th according to JahSngir. The 
2Sth must be a copyist's miRtake. here and prcviouHly. 

{ Jahlngir says four are nearly equal to two sidereal hours. 
Acoovdingto Abu-l-Fa^l.a qhari is the sixteenth part of a nychfhemeron. 
or 360 out of the 21,600 breathings which make up a nychlhenieron— « 
».f., 24 hours. See Jarrett, III. 16 and 17, and II. 16, n. 4. According 
to the Bahftr-i-*ajam, 2} one sidereal hour, ho ih.it, correcllx 

speaking, Ave gtorisitwo sidereal hours. Each ghari is 24 minutes 
(Jarrott, II. 16, n. 4). Here it should bo noted that there is a mistake 
in the translation at p. 17, line 2, of Jarrott, vol. III., due to a faulty 
reading in the Bib. Ind. edition of the text. Instead of gaki w*e should 
road pair, as in two MSS. in my possession. Ahri l-Fa^rs meaning 
then becomes clear. What he says is, a ghari is .360 brcii things, const* 
quently (pmt) every pal (alrr*a<ly dehiied as the sixtieth fisiri of n ghani 
is 360 divided by 60. and equ!il t(»six breathings (no/a <). Jahinpir’.s 
line, however, is obscure. In tw«» I.O. >|S,S. we have hfi tf'da'i instead 




68 


the royal standards auspiciously and happily entered the in- 
habited part of Fat^pur. At the same hour the entertain- 
ment (of weighing) for my prosperous and noble son, Shah- 
JaLan, was held. I ordered him to be weighed against gold 
and other things, and his twenty-eighth year according to the 
solar* months began auspiciously. It is hoped that he may 
reach the naturalf limit of life. On the same day H.M. the 
revered Maryam-zamani (his mother) came from Agra, and I 
acquired eternal good fortune from the blessing of waiting on 
her. I hope that the shadow of her bringing up and afEection 
may be perennial on the head of this suppliant. As Ikram K., 
8. Islam K., had performed the duties of faujdar of this neigh- 
bourhood in a proper manner, I bestowed on him the mansab 
of 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse, original and increased. 
Suhrab^ K., s. Mirza Rustam §afavi, was promoted to the 
mansab of 1,000 personal and 300 horse. 

On this day, going over in detail the buildings of the palace 
of the late King (Akbar), I showed them to my son, Sh^- 
Jahau. Inside of them a large and very clear reservoir of 
cut stone has been constructed, and is called the Kapur- 
taldo (camphor tank). It is a square of 36 yards by 36,§ with 

of ba-8d*aih I think the meaning probably is that the same day which 
marked Jahing^'s arrival at FathpQr also marked Sbfth-Jahin's 
birthday. 

TawaUd is defined in the Bahar-i-*ajam as meaning to have friend- 
ship with anyone. It also says that it is used in the sense of taqarruh-^ 
i.e., nearness. It may be therefore that Jah&ngir’s line means At a 
moment which nearly corresponded to two (hours).'* Taqwim would 
then mean established or fixed, and not a calendar. Taqwim hardan is a 
fdtirase which means “to adjust, to arrange.’* 

^ Shfth Jahfin was bom on January 5, 1692, so that in January, 1619, 
he began to be in his 28th year— he was 27 complete. 

t That is, 120 according to Muhammadan idea* 

} Afterwards drowned in the Jhelam. 

I Text dar'at MSS. gird’. See text 298, account of fifteenth year, 
where a dor’a is defined. The lidhl gaz or dora' consisted of 40 digits 
(fingerbreadths), according to Jahftngir. If the Kapfir tank be the 
one described in the Arohmological Surrey Reports, Vol. XVIIL, for 
1894, yards seem to be required here, for the tank is mentioned in the 
Report as being 95 feet 7 inches square. According to JahAng^, 
34 krors odd Of dams— t.e., I presume, /Was, in copper money, and 




69 


a depth of 4} yards. By the order of that revered one, the 
oflEicials of the public treasury had filled it with fulus (copper 
coins) and rupees. It came to 34 krors, and 48 lakhs, and 
46,000 dams, and 1,679,400 rupees, or a total of 10,300,000 
(one kror and three lakhs) accord ‘ng to Hindustani reckoning, 
and 343,000 tuman according to Persian. For a long time 
the thirsty-lipped ones of the desert of desire were satisfied 
from that fountain of benignity. 

On Sunday, the Ist Bahman, a reward of 1,000 darb 
(Rs. 500) was given to Hafiz Nad 'All,* the reciter. For a 
long time past Muhibb ‘Ali, s. Buda|j[it K. Chikani, and 
Abu-l-Qasim OilanI, whom the Ruler of Iran had blinded and 
driven into the desert of exile, have passed their days in ease 
under the refuge of this State. To each of them, according 
to his condition, an allowance for living had been granted. 
On this day they came from Agra, and had the good fortune 
to kiss the threshold, and each of them was presented with 
Rs. 1,000. The M^fMrak-^amba entertainment was held 
in state in the palace, and my private .servants were gladdened 
with cups of pleasure. Nasru-llah, whom my son, Sultan 

16 lakhs and 80,000 nipees in silver were poured into the tank, making 
a total of 1 kror and 3 lakhs of rupees, or 3 lakhs 43,000 tumdns. 
Apparently the tumdn, which was a gold coin, was, in Jahangir’s time, 
reckoned as worth 30 rupees, and Wollaston, in his Dictionary, says 
it was worth £3 in Shah *Abba8 I.’s time. Jahangir*s account of the 
tank should be compared with that given in the Akbar-nlma, III. 246 
and 257, where the tank is called the Anup-talio, or the ** Unequalled 
Tank.’* 

In the text, difficulty has, I think, been made by the introduction o f 
the word kih in p. 260, six lines from foot, and bdahad in the fifth line 
from the foot. The.se words moke the sense to be that 34 krors odd 
of dams were only equal to 16 labks odd of nipees. But this cannot be, 
for the dam was the fortieth part of a rupee, and so 34 krors of dams 
would be not far short of one kror— f.f., 1(K) lakhs of nipees. The MSS. 
have not the kih and hashad in question, and have only a conjunction 
after the word dam. Thirty-four krors odd of copper and 16 lakhs 
of silver were poured into the tank, making a total, in round numbers, 
of 1 kror, 3 lakhs of rupees. According to Abu-I-Fa^l gold was also 
thrown in. 

* Text YSd *Ali. but the MSS. have Nid. See also Bloohmanu, 608. 

t This name is Bairilm or Sir&m in MSS. Chikani may be a trade 
designation, and mean embroiderer, or worker in gold thread. 



70 


Parwiz, had sent to Court with the elephant KQh-dainan,* 
took his leave and returned. A copy {jUd) of the Jaha/n/fir~ 

together with a special tipchaq horse, were given to 
him to take to my son. On Sunday, the 8th, Kunwar Karan, 
son of Rana Amar Singh, was presented with a horse, an 
elephant, a dress of honour, a jewelled IcJuvfwa^ and a p&uf- 
katam. I gave him leave to go to his jagir, and sent a horse 
with him for the Rana. On the same day I went out sporting 
to Amanabad. As there was an order that no one should kill 
the antelope of that region, in the course of six years many 
antelope had conie together, and they had grown very tame. 
On Thursday, the 12th, I returned to the palace, and on that 
day, according to custom, a feast of cups was prepared. 

On the eve of Friday, the 18th (Bahman), I went to the 
mausoleum of the refuge of pardon, ShailA Salun Chi^tl, a 
little concerning whose blessed qualities has been written in 
the prefacet record of prosperity, and the fdti^a was 

recited. Although the manifestation of miracles and wonde] s 
is not approved by the elect of the throne of God, and from 
humility and a feeling of their low rank (as saints) they avoid 
such display, yet occasionally in the excitement of ecstasy an 
appearance is manifested unintentionally and without con- 
trol,:^ teaching someone the exhibition is 

made. Among these was this, that be before my birth gave 
my father the good news of the advent of this suppliant and 
of my two brothers. Again, one day my father incidentally 
asked him how old he was, and when would he depart to the 
abiding regions. He replied : ** The glorious God knows what 
is secret and hidden.*’ After much urgency he indicated this 
suppliant (Prince Salim), and said : When the Prince, by 
the instruction of a teacher or in any other way, shall commit 
something to memory and shall recite it, this will be a sign 
of my union with God.” In consequence of this. His Majesty 
gave strict orders to all who were in attendance on me that 
no one should teach me anything in prose or verse. At length 

* Kuh-damdn, ** hill -subduing.’* 

f dtbdcha* Here meaning the early part- of the Memoirs. 

I The text has 6d by mislakr for yd. 



71 


when two years and seven months had passed away, it hap- 
pened one day that one of the privileged* women was in the 
palace. She used to bum rue constantly in order to avert 
the evil eye, and on this pretext had access to me. She used 
to partake of the alms and charities. She found me alone 
and regardless of (or ignorant of) what had been said (by 
Akbar), she taught me this couplet : 

** O God, open the rosebud of hope 
Display a flower from the everlasting garden.** f 

I went to the Suiildi and repeated this couplet. He involun- 
tarily rose up and hastened to wait on the King; and informed 
him of what had occurred. In accordance with Fate, the 
same night the traces of fever appeared, and the next day he 
sent someone to the King (with the request) to call Tan Sen 
Kalawant, who was unequalled as a singer. Tan Sen, having 
gone to wait upon him, began to sing. After this he sent 
some one to call the King. When H.M. came, he said : “ The 
promised time of union has come, and I must take leave of 
you.” Taking bis turban from his head, he placed it on mine, 
and said : ** We have made Sul^n Salim our successor, and 
have made him over to God, the protector and preserver.” 
Gradually his weakness increased, and the sigris of passing J 
away became more evident, till be attained union with the 
” True Beloved.” 

One of the greatest monuments of my father s reign is this 
mosque and cemetery (rau^a). Certainly they are exceedingly 
lofty and solid buildings. There is nothing like this mosque 
in any other country. It is all built of beautiful stone, and 
five lakhs of rupees were expended from the public treasury 
upon it. Qutbu-d-din K. Kokaltaah made the marble railing 
{maJ^jar) round § the cemetery, the flooring (farsj^) of the 

* *aurdi-i-muHalumqa. pBrliaps ** pensioned women.** 

t These are the opening lines of Jamfs Yusuf and ZulaiJiha (note by 
Mr. Rogers). 

i Saiim Chiihti died on 29 Rainafftn 979, or February 15, 1672. 
Jahingfr was bom on 17 Rabi* 1st, 977 : and so he would be about, 
two years and seven months old at the time of Salim's death. See 
B^^ale and IQiadnatu-l-asflya, I. p. 436. 

j Tho conjunction tea in text, p. 282 , line 18 , is a iiiist.*ke. 



72 


dome and portico, and these are not included in the five lakhs. 
The mosque has two great gateways. The one* towards the 
south is extremely lofty, and is very beautiful. The archway 
is 12 yards broad, 16 long, and S2 high. One must 
mount thirty-two steps to get to the top of it. The other 
gateway is smaller, and is towards the east. The length of 
the mosque from east to west, including the width of the 
walls, is 212 yards. Out of this, the Maqsura (the chancel) 
is 25) yards, the middle is 15 yards by 15, the portico (pUktaq) 
is 7 yards broad, 14 yards long, and 25 yards high. On each 
side of the large dome are two smaller domes 10 yards by 10. 
Then there is a veranda {aiwan) which is pillared. The breadth 
of the mosque from north to south is 172 yards. Round it 
are ninety verandas (aiwan) and eighty-four cells. The 
breadth of each cell is 4 yards, f and the length 6 yards. 
The verandas are 7^ yards broad. The courtyard (^ain) of 
the mosque, exclusive of the maq^ray and the verandas, and 
the gates, is 169 yards long and 143 yards broad. Above the 
verandas, the gates, and the mosque, small domes have been 
constructed, and on the eves of aaniversaries and on holy 
days lamps are placed in these, and they .are enveloped in 
coloured { cloths, so that they look like lamp-shades (?). 
Under the courtyard they have made a weU, and they fill 
this with rainwater. As Fat^pur has little- water, and what 
there is is bad, this well) yields a sufficient supply for the 

^ This is the Buland DarwSia. It was built many years after the 
mosque. For an account of it, see Mr. Edmund Smith’s Fatbpur 
Sikrf. The gateway is there said to be 134 feet high from the pave- 
ment and 176 feet from the roadway. The thirty-two steps mentioned 
in text must be those from the roadway to the gate. There are two 
flights of steps, and the total number, up to the top, is 193. The 
quadrangle or court is stated by Keene to be 433 feet by 366. Another 
statement (in the Arohwologioal Report) is 438*9 hy 369*10 feet. 
Salim’s tomb was ereeted in 1681 (988). It is47feet 11 mcheseacb way 

t 4), Iqbil-nSma, 124. 

t Test atwda, but should be ofisdn, ” colouied.” See l^bil- 
nima, 124. 

I >' noh says : Under the courtyaid is a good tank of exodlent 
water.” He also speaks of the lake and of its being covered wHh the 
efsggra {Trofa hienmis). 



78 


whole year for the members of the family (of Salim ChiAti) 
and for the dervishes who are the mujawin (caretakers) of 
the mosque. Opposite the great entrance and towards the 
north-north-east is the tomb of the %ailA. The middle dome 
is 7 yards, and round the dome is a portico of marble, and on 
the front side of this is a marble lattice. It is very beautiful. 
Opposite this tomb on the west, at a little distance, is another 
dome, in which are laid to rest the sons-in-law and sons of 
the ^ilA, such as Qu^bu-d-din K., Islam K., Mu'as^am K.,* 
and others, who were all connected with this family, and rose 
to the position of Amirs and to lofty rank. Accordingly, the 
circumstances of each have been recorded in their places. 
At present the son of Islam K., who is distinguished by the 
title of Ikram K., is the lord of the prayer-carpet. The signs 
of auspiciousness are manifest in him ; I am much inclined to 
cherish him. 

On Thursday, the 19th, I promoted *Abdu-l-'AzIz K. to the 
mansab of 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse, and nominated him 
to the duty of taking the fort of Kang|*a, and the overthrow 
of the ungrateful Suraj Mai. 1 bestowed on him an elephant, 
a horse, and a dress of honour. Tursun Bahadur was also 
dispatched on this duty, and his mansab was fixed at 1,200 
personal and 460 horse. He was given a horse, and took his 
leave. As the house of I*timadu-d-daula was on the bank of 
a tank, and people praised it greatiy as a deUghtful place and 
enchanting residence, at his request on Thursday, the 26th, 
an entertainment was held there. That pillar of the kingdom 
engaged in the dues of prostration and offerings, and prepared 
a grand meeting. At night, after eating food, I returned to 
the palace On Thursday, the 3rd of the Divine month of 
Isfand-armus, Sayjrid *Abdu-l-Wahhab Barha, who had done 
active service in Gujarat, was promoted to the mansab of 
1,000 personal and 600 horse, and was honoured with the 
title of Dilir K. On Saturday, the 12fh, I went out to 
Amanabad for sport, and until Sunday, with the ladies, 

^ That is, BSyazid, a grandson of the saint. Dorim K. is another 
name lor HQdiang- Bis mother was AbC-l-Fafrs sister. Aoooiding 
to the Mia’gsir, I. 120, he vas a tyr^t. AooovdUng to local tiadiiion, 
Otttbu-d-din is buried in Bardfrln nmt ShlT-^gMi. 



74 


employed myself in the pleasure of hunting. On the eve of 
Thursday, the 27th* (17th), I returned to the palace. 

By chance, on Tuesday, during the hunting, a string of 
pearls and rubies that Nur-Jahan Begam had on her neck 
was broken, and a ruby of the value of Bs. 10,000 and a pearl 
worth Rs. 1,000 were lost. Although the huntsmen made 
every search for it on Wednesday, it did not fall into their 
hands. It occurred to me that as the name of the day was 
Kam-^amba, it was impossible to find it on that day. On 
the contrary, as Mubdrah-sbafriba (Thursday) was always a 
lucky day for me, and had been blessed to me, the huntsmen 
on that day with but a little search found both in that track- 
less place (without head or foundation) and brought them to 
me. The best of coincidences was that on the same pro- 
pitious day the entertainment for my lunar weighing and the 
feast of Basar t-barl (Spring festival) also took place, and the 
good news of the conquest of the fort of Man and the defeat 
of that evil-fortuned Suraj Mai arrived. 

The particulars of this are that when Raja Bikramajit with 
the victorious army arrived in that region, the ill-fated Suraj 
>Ial desired to delay him for some days by trickery and 
babblement, but the aforesaid knew the real state of the case 
and did not pay attention to his words, but advanced with 
the foot of valour. That abandoned one, letting fall from 
his hand the thread of plan, neither planted the foot of 
intrepidity firmly for battle nor had the courage to defend 
the fort. After a slight struggle, and when many of his 
people had been slaughtered, he took to flight, and the forts 
of Mauf and Mahii (?), which were the chief reliance of that 
ill-fated man, were both taken without difficulty. A country 

* So in text, but ought to be the 17th. 

t Mau was a Himalayan fort. Blochmann. 345. The text has 
Mau u ^ahri, and so have the MSS. The Iqbai-nlma has Maud u 
.Ifaiiri, p. 124, and so has the Ma'asir U., II. 178. Evidently from what 
followa there were two places, unless one was the fort and the other the 
city. See also Tuziik, 304, 1. 10, which has pargana Maud Mahri. In 
the Ayin, Jarrett, II. 319, wo have Mau and Nabah, and the ne.ct name 
ill the list is Mahror. Gladwin has Mowd, and possibly we should 
translate ** Mowd, a city on which he relied.** 



75 


which he had held by hereditary right ^rcm his fathers was 
trodden under foot by the victorious troops, and he became 
a wanderer and a vagabond. He retired to the ravines of 
the hills, and cast the dust of ruin and contempt on the head 
of his Fortune. Raja Bikramajit, leaving his country behind, 
hastened in pursuit of him with the victorious army. When 
the state of affairs reached the royal ears, in reward for this 
becoming service 1 ordered drums for the Raja, and a fateful 
farman was issued from the Sovereign of Wrath that they 
should overthrow from their foundation the fort and build- 
ings that had been erected by Suraj Mai’s father and himself, 
and leave not a trace of them on the face of the earth. A 
strange thing is that the unfortunate Suraj Mai had a brother 
called Jagat Singh. When I promoted Suraj Mai to the 
title of Raja, and made him an Amir, and gave him dominion, 
etc., without a partner or sharer, I, in order to please him, 
gave a small mansab to Jagat Singh, who did not get on well 
with him, and sent him to Bengal. This wretched one was 
passing his days in a poor condition far from his home, in 
contempt, and to the delight of his enemies, and waiting for 
some hidden aid, until by his good fortune this affair took 
place, and that unblessed one struck an axe on his own foot. 
Summoning Jagat Singh in all haste to Court, I honoured him 
with the title of Raja and the mansab of 1,000 personal and 
500 horse, and bestowed 20,000 darbs* on him out of the 
public treasury for his expenses. Giving him a jewelled 
khapwa, a robe of honour, a horse, and an elephant, I sent 
him to Raja Bikramajit, and issued a farman that if the 
aforesaid, by the guidance of a good destiny, should perform 
laudable service, and display loyalty, that country should be 
given over into his hand.f 

As the praise of the garden of NOr-manzil and the buildings 
that had been newly-erected there continually reached me, I 

* The Iqbil-nama, 125, says Ra. 20,000 which would be 40,000 darbs. 

t Jagat Singn afterwards became a rebel, joining Sk5h-Jahin, as 
also did Raja Bikramijit, or Sundar. He rebelled also in §hah-Jahan*8 
reign, but was pardoned, and did good service in Kabul and Badakhshan. 
He died in Peshawar in 1055 (1645). See Ma’Isir U., 11. 238, and* 
Padinhah-nams, IF. 481. 



76 


on Monday mounted my steed, and went to the stage of Bustsii- 
saray, and passed Tuesday in pleasure and at ease in that 
entrancing rose-garden. On the eve of Wednesday the garden 
of Nur-manzil (the abode of light) was adorned by the alight- 
ing of the hosts of prosperity. This garden contains 330 
jartbs (bighas), according to the Ilaht gaz. Around it there 
has been built a wall, lofty and broad, of bricks and cement, 
exceedingly strong. In the garden there is a lofty building 
and a residence, highly decorated. Pleasant reservoirs have 
been constructed, and outside the gate a large well has been 
made, from which thirty-two pairs of bullocks continually 
draw water. The canal passes through the garden, and pours 
water into the reservoirs. Besides this, there arc other wells, 
the water of which is distributed to the reservoirs and plots. 
The beauty is increased by all kinds of fountains and cascades 
and there is a tank in the exact middle of the garden which is 
filled by rainwater. If by chance its water should fail in the 
extreme heat, they supplement it by water from the wells, so 
that it may always be full to the brim. Nearly Rs. 150,000 
have been spent up to now on this garden, and it is still un- 
finished, and large sums will be expended in making avenues 
and laying down plants. It has also been settled that the 
middle garden shall be newly walled* roimd, and the channels 
for the coming and going of the water shall be made so strong 
that it may always remain full of water and the water shall 
not leak out in any way, and no damage accrue. It is possible 
that before it is complete nearly Rs. 200,000 will have been 
spent on it. 

On Thursday, the 24th, Khwaja Jahan presented an offer- 
ing of jewels, jewelled vessels, cloths, an elephant, and a horse, 
of the value of Rs. 150,000. Having made a selection from 
them, I gave him the remainder. Until Saturday I passed 
my time in that garden of delight in enjojTnent. On the eve 
of Sunday, the 27th, I incline the reins of returning towards 

* It is in text, but surely this is a mistake for ^a/r, and the 
meaning is that a new pit or well should be made in the middle of the 
garden. It appears to be hajr in MSS. The Nur-manzil garden is the 
saiiio as the Hftgti Dahra, and wns c*ar Agra. Blochniann, 490. 



77 


Fat^pur, and an order waa given that the great Amirs, 
according to annual custom, should decorate the palace. On 
Monday, the 28th, I found that something had gone wrong 
with my eye. As it arose from too much blood, I ordered 
‘All Akbar, the surgeon, to open a vein. On the next day 
the benefit of this was apparent. I bestowed Rs. 1,000 on 
him. On Tuesday, the 29th, Muqarrab K. came from his 
native place, and had the good fortune to kiss the threshold, 
and I favoured him with many sorts of kindness. 



THE FOURTEENTH 
NEW YEAR’S FEAST FROM THE 
AUSPICIOUS ACCESSION 

On the morning of Thursday, the 4th of the month of 
Rabi‘u-l-aldiir, Hijri 1028 (March 10, 1619), the world-en- 
lightening sun entered his house of honour in Aries, and the 
fourteenth year of the reign of this suppliant commenced in 
all prosperity and happiness. On Thursday, the Ist of the 
New Year, my prosperous son, Shah-Jahan, who is the star 
of the forehead of accomplished desires, and the brilliancy of 
the brow of prosperity, prepared a grand entertainment, and 
presented me as ofleriiigs with a selection of the precious 
things of the age, and rareties and curiosities of every countiy. 
One of these is a ruby, weighing 22 aufjAa, of good, colour, 
and water, and shape. The jewellers have valued it at 
Rs. 40,000. Another is a Quffii^ (?) ruby, in weight 3 fdnits, 
and very delicate, valued at Rs. 40,000. Further, six pearls, 
one of them 1* tank and 8 surkjis in weight. The Vakils of 
my son had bought it in Gujarat for Rs. 25,000, and the five 
others hit* Rs. 33,000. Also one diamond, the price of which 
was Rs. 18,(^0. Also a jewelled parda (sash), a sword-hilt 
made in his own goldsmith’s shop ; most of the jewels he had 
himself set and cut. He had brought great dexterity to 
bear on the design. Its value was fixed as Rs. 50,000. The 
designsf were his own ; no one else had up to this day thought 

* Egyptian. H ithrrto this has been read Qutbi, but it really is, I 
think, Qibti, Egyptian.'* Chardin, IV. 70, cd. 1723, says that the 
l*iTsiana state that thv ruby of the East conies from Egypt. The 
etymology, hou’ever, is doubtful. 

t l*o8sibly the prtii.8c of ^ah<JahSn*s inwntive powers refers to 
liis arrangementH for the orchestra. The ku^carga is defined in the 
.Vin, Bloehmann. .'SO, as a damdma — i.e., n large drum. See iliustim- 

78 



79 


of them. Undoubtedly it was a fine piece of workmanship. 
There was also a pair of drums made of gold foi playing the 
munal (overture?) with a whole orchestra — ^viz., kuwarga, 
fhaqqara, harqndj swmd^ etc. — ^whatever was required for the 
na^ra-kkdna (music-hall) of great princes, and all made of 
silver. At the auspicious hour at which I had seated myself 
on the throne of success these were all sounded. The whole 
of them came to a value of Rs. 65,000. Another was a seat 
for riding an elephant, called by modems a howdah (hauda), 
made of gold, worth Rs. 30,000. Beside this there were two 
large elephants and five elephant-trappings of the offerings 
of Qulibu-I-mulk, ruler of Gblconda. The first elephant was 
named Dad-i-Ilahi (the gift of God). As it entered the 
private elephant-house on New Year s Day, I gave it the 
name of Nur-i-Nauruz (the Light of New Year’s Day). In 
truth he is a grand elephant, and lacks nothing of size, beauty, 
and dignity. As he looked well to my eye, I mounted him 
and rode him into the courtyard of the palace. His value 
was fixed at Rs. 80,000, and the value of six* others at 
Rs. 20,000. Its golden trappings, consisting of golden chains, 
etc., my son had had made for the elephant Nur-i-Nauruz, 
were worth Rs. 30,000. The second elephant, with silver 
housings, was also piesented, with Rs. 10,000 more in various 
choice jewels. The kurharaqa'f .of my son had also prepared 
and sent delicate cloths from Gujarat. If all details were to 
be written, it would take too long. Briefly, the whole of his 
offerings was of the value of Rs. 450,000. It is hoped that 
he will eat the fruit of long life and prosperity. 

tion in Plate VIII. to Blochmann’s Ain. The karand and aurnd aie 
wind-instrumenta, and are also represented in Plate VIII. With 
regard to the mursal, Blochmann, p. 61, has: *‘The mursali, which 
is the name of a tune played by the mursil." Apparently the munal 
is the overture, or some introductory strain, and played only by a 
portion of the band. 

* MS. No. 181 has ten instead of two. as the number of elephants 
presented by Qutbu-l-mulk, and this seems likely to be correct, else 
where do the six now mentioned come from ? But six should probe bly 
be eight. 

t Kurkardqa, See Blochmann, 87, n. 2, and p. 616. Kurk means 
fur, and kurkairdqdn may be translated furriers. 



80 


On Friday, the 2nd, %ajs*at E. *Axab, and Nflzu-d*dui 
Quli, the kotwal, laid their offerings before me. On Saturday, 
the 3rd, Darab K., son of the g|^>]g|$n&n, and on Sunday, 
the 4th, l^an Jahan, prayed to be allowed to entertain me. 
Out of the latter’s offerings I accepted one pearl, bought for 
Bs. 20,000, with other rareties, altogether of the value of 
Bs. 130,000, and presented him ^th the rest. On Monday, 
the 5th, Baja Ei^an Dfis and ^akim E., on Tuesday, the 
6th, Sardar E., and on Wednesday, the 7th, Muflafii E. and 
Amanat EL, presented their offerings. From each of these 1 
took a trifle in order to dignify them. On Thursday, the 8th, 
rtimadu‘4-daula, MadSr-tiUmutJe (tiie pivot of the country), 
having prepared a royal entertainment, bogged to be allowed 
to receive me. In accepting this request his standing was 
raised. In fact, in decorating the assembty and the largeness 
of his offering, he had exceeded himself, and made many 
decorations, and illuminated all sides of the lake as far as the 
eye could reach, and decorated the streets both near and far 
with all kinds of lights and coloured lanterns. Among the 
offerings of that Madar-iu-gdUana there was a throne of gold 
and silver, much ornamented and decorated, the supports of 
which were in the form of tigers. It had been completed 
with great assiduity in the space of three years, and was made 
at the cost of Bs. 450,000. This throne had been made by 
a skilful European of the name of Hunannand (skilful), who 
had no rival in the arts of a goldsmith and a jeweller, and in 
all sorts of skill {hunarmaniX). He had made it very well, 
and I gave him this name. In addition to the offerings he 
had brought for me, he offered the value of Bs. 100,000 in 
jewelled ornaments and cloths to the Begams and other ladies 
of the Palace. Without exaggeration, from the beginn in g 
of the reign of the late king (may the light of Allah be his 
testimony !) until now, which is the fourteenth year of the 
rule of this suppliant, not one of the great Amirs has presented 
such offerings. In fact, what comparison is there between 
him and others 1 

On this day Iktam E., s. Isl&m E. was honoured witii the 
mansab, original and increased, of 2,000 personal and 1,000 



81 


hone, and Anual Singh-daUn with that of 2,000 penonal 
and 1,600 horse, original and increased. On Friday, die 9th, 
rtibar K. presented his ofiering, and on the same day l^an 
Dauran, having been presented with a horse and an elephant, 
took leave to go to the government of Patna.* His manaab, 
according to a previous rule, was fixed at 6,000 personal and 
5,000 horse. Saturday, the 10th, Fa^ K., on Sunday, 
the 11th, Hir Miran, on Monday, the 12th, I'tiqad K. on 
Tuesday, the 13th, Tatar K. and Aniral Singh-dalan, and 
on We^esday, the 14th, Mlrza Baja Bhao Singh, presented 
their offerings. Selecting from th^ what was delicate and 
new, I gave the remaindw to them. On Thursday, the 16th, 
Afaf iAan prepared a grand assembfy and a royal entertain- 
ment in his own house, which is a very fine and pleasant 
place, and begged to bo allowed to recmve me. A.t his request, 
giving him the dignity of acceptance, I w«it there with the 
ladies. That pillar of the kingdom looked on this as a bounty 
from the secret Giver, and in the increase of his offering and 
preparation of the entertainment displayed great magnificence. 
Of jeweb of great price and delicate gold brocades and all 
sorts of gifts, that which was approved was selected, and I 
presented him with the remainder. Among the offerings was 
a ruby weighing 12} tanka, which was bought for Bs. 126,000. 
The value of the offerings that w«m accepted was Bs. 167,000. 
On this day Khwaja Jahan was raised to the mansab of 
5,000 personal and 2,600 horse. 

LafUar K., having come, by order, from the Deccan, had 
the honour of waiting on me. As I had determined, after the 
rainy season had passed and in the beginning of the good 
weather, to go to the perpetual spring garden of Kashmir 
under the favour of Almighty God, it seemed right to me that 
the guardianship and administration of the fort and city of 
Agra and the faujdarship of the district, after the manner in 
which they had b^ held by lOjan Jahan, should be entrust^ 
to La^tjkar K., and 1 honoured him with the good news 
Amanat K. was entrusted with the duty of superintendent of 

* So in text, but it shonld be Tatts— Sind. See Bloohimuui 
378, N. 2, sod sIm tbe Tasok, p. 270. 

« 



82 


branding (of horses) and of parading the troopers.* On Friday, 
the 16th, Khwaja Abu-l-Hasan, Chief Ba ldbahi . on Saturday, 
the 17th, ^diq K. Ba ldisM . on Sunday, the 18th, Iradat K., 
Chief Butler, and on Monday, the 19th, which was the day of 
the sun’s culmination, ^A^udu-d^-daula E., presented ofierings, 
and 1 accepted from each of them, by way of exalting their 
dignity, what 1 approved. At this New Tear the value of 
the accepted ofEerings of the servants of the Court came to 
Rs. 2,000,060. On the day of culmination 1 conferred on my 
auspicious son Sul^n Parwizf the mansab of 20,000 personal 
and 10,000 horse, original and increased. I‘timadu-d-daula 
was promoted to that of 7,000 personal and horse. 1 selected 
‘A^du-d-daula for the duty of tutor to the pupil of the eye 
of the Sultanate, Shah %uja‘. 1 hope that he (the latter) 
may endure for his natural term of life and may be one of the 
prosperous ones. Qasim K. was raised to the mansab of 
1,500 personal and 500 horse, and Baqir E. to that of 1,000 
personal and 400 horse. As Mahabat E. had asked for 
reinforcements, I appointed 500 horse to Bangash, and 

presented 'Izzat K., who had done approved service in that 
province, with a horse and a jewelled khaptva. At this time 
'Abdu-s-Sattar| presented as an offering a compendium in 
the handwriting of the late king Humayun (may the lights 
of Allah be his testimony!), containing some prayers, an 
introduction to the science of astronomy, and other marvellous 
things, most of which he had studied and carried into practice. 
After reverently inspecting his auspicious handwriting, I 
felt a joy such as I had seldom experienced. I was exceed- 
ingly rejoiced, for, by God, no precious thing I have can be 
compared with this. In return I increased his mansab 
beyond what he had imagined possible, and gave him a present 
of Bs. 1,000. Hunarmand, the European who had made 

* Suwiirdn-i-l^ud~mahoUa, I do not Joiow the exact force of the 
last two words. Possibly they are pleonastic. The word mafjutUa 
isezplained in Irvine A. of M. 46. 

t IqbSl-nlma, 127, mentions that Parwlz came from Allahabad 
to pay his respects. See infra, Ti&zuk, 268, and 273. 

t Probably this is the friend of Father Jerome Xavier and the 
abridger of the J^far-nima. See Rieu, I77b and 1077a. 



83 


the jewelled throne, I pnjsented with 3.000 Jarh, a horse and 
an elephant. I gave Rs. 1,000 to ^waja IQiawund Mahmud, 
who is a pilgrim of the Path of the Khwajas, and is not void of 
dervishism and spirituality. La^kar K. was promoted to 
the mansab of 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse, Ma^mur K. 
to that of 900 personal and 450 horse, Khwajagi Tahir to 
that of 800 personal and 300 horse, and Sayyid Ahmad Qadiri 
to that of 800 and 60 horse. On Raja Sarang Deo was con- 
ferred the mansab of 700 personal and 30 horse, on Mir Rhalil- 
u-llah, 8. ‘Azudu-d-daula, that of 600 personal and 250 horse, 
on the eunuch Firuz K., that of 600 and 150 horse, on IQiidmat 
^an that of 550 and 130 horse^ on Mahram K. that of 500 
and 120 horse, on Tzzat K. that of 600 personal and 100 horse, 
on Ray Newali Das, the accountant of the elephant depart- 
ment, that of 600 personal and 120 horse, on Ray Mani Das, 
the superintendent of the Palace, that of 600 personal and 
100 horse, on Nathmal and Jagmai, sons of Kishan Singh, 
that of 600 and 225 horse each. If the increase of mansab 
given to those of less than 500 were to be Written in full it 
would be too long. Rs. 2,000 were given to ^izr K., who 
belonged* to Khandesh. 

On Wednesday, the 2l8t, I went to Amanabad for the 
purpose of sport. »Some days before this, in accordance 
with orders, Khwaja Jahan, and Qiyam K., the head 
huntsman, had chosen a wide plain for a qnmarg^ hunt, 
and drawn an enclosure round it, and driven within it many 
antelope from the neighbouring plains. As I had vowed that 
I would hereafter not kill any living thing with my own 
hand, it occurred to me to take them all alive, and place them 
within the Chaugan (polo-ground) of Fathpur, so that 1 
might both enjoy the pleasure of sport and that at the same 
time no harm should happen to them. I accordingly took 
700 head and sent them to Fathpur. As the hour for entering 
the capital was near, I ordered Ray Man, khidfncU%yya,'\ to 
put up a screen on two sides, like a lane, from the hunting- 

* He was of the royal houre of Khandesh. 

t See Blochniann. 252, and n. 1. JahSngir himself mow 700 antelope 
taken, and RSy Man afUirwurds made a drive of 800 inon*. 



84 


place to the plam of Fathpnx, and to ^ve the antelope them. 
About 800 antelope weie eent in this way, or altogether 1,000. 
On the ni^t of Wedneaday, the 28th, manihhig &om Amina* 
had, I halted in BOatin Sariy, and on the eve of Thuiaday, 
the 29th, 1 halted at the NOr-nunuil garden. 

On Friday, the 30th, the mother* of g^ih-Jaiian attained 
the met^ of God. The next day I myaelf went to the honm 
of that predona aon, and having condoled with him m every 
way, took with me to the palace. On Sunday, the 
let UidilnhiAt, at the auapicions hour choaen by the aatzo- 
logeia and aatronomefa, I mounted a apecial elephant of the 
name of Diltr, and in aO ptoaperity and happineaa entered 
the city. A great crowd of people, men and women, had 
collected together in the atieeta and baaaaia, and at the 
gates and walk, expecting me. According to custom, T went 
on, scattering num^ on the way, to inside the palace. From 
the date on which the army of prosperity started for this 
happily terminated jouin^ until now, when I letumed in 
happineaa and good fortune, it was five years, seven months, 
and nine days. At this time I ordered my eon Sultan Patwia 
that, as a long time had passed during which he had been 
deprived of waiting on me personally, or had been fortunate 
enough to pay his respects, if he were desirons of meeting me, 
he should come to Court. On the arrival of tiie gracious 
fannan, that aon, considering the manifestation of this favour 
a gift from the hidden world, turned the face of hk hope 
towards the sphere-resembling Court. At this time I gave 
away, as a means of livelihood, to Faqirs and deserving people 
44,786 bif^ias of land, and two entire villages, with 320 ass- 
loads {l^annSr, a weight) of gtaih from Kaidunir, and seven 
pkmglttf of luid in Kabul. I hope that the Grace of the 
Beetoww of desires and-benevoknoe may be their daily lot. 

* Tbis vat Jodh Bl’I, 4. the Mote (fat) BSija* 8s* Bkxtaaaa, 
61A 

t Gske* plimid**- Hen appanntly need tie a ava sun of, land. 
But the ezpmaioa ia obaeun. ha Wilton’s Gloamry hulta k slated 
to be a ateatun of land in Bylhet, and equal to 1,004 ouUta by 144. 
The eoneaponding ^anekiit void Kr ('*a jploii^ ”) it heed to UMan 
land held ly the laadh o ldeTiB hit own poetee t ion. 



86 


One of the oocotniioeB of this time IB the ravolt of AUalidid, 
son of Jalil, the Ai^^han. The detaib of this an that when 
Ifaiabat K. obtained lea^ to go and take poBaeBaion of 
Bai ^aah and orerthiow the from an idea that that 

wie '>ch would do some aervioe in letnm for the faTOUiB and 
kinmesB I had conferred <m him, he prayed tiiat he mi(^t take 
him with him. As the natural tendeni^ of Buoh ungratefal 
men who do not tecognim what is right, tenda to enmity and 
malevolence, by way of precaution it waa decided to aend hia 
son and brother to the Court that they might be aa hoetagea. 
After the arrival there of hia aon and brother, I, ty way of 
comforting them, did them all kinda of Idndneaa, but, aa they 
have said : 

'* The blanket of fortune of anyone that has been woven black 
Cannot be whitened even by the waters of Zamsam and Kau|ar.” 

From the day on which he arrived in that oountiy the aigna 
of rascality and want of recognition of the right began to be 
apparent on the cheeks of his affaira, and Hah&bat K., in 
order to control matters, did not loose from hia hand the rope 
of forbearance until, at this time, he sent a force under the 
leadership of his son against a band of Afghnnn, and sent 
AUihdad with him. When they reached the purposed placa, 
from the enmity and malevolence of the aforesaid, that attack 
did not succceed. and they returned with their aim uncom* 
pleted. The eviMiapoaitioned A^lahdad, from a auspioion 
lest this time Mahabat BL should aband«m hia method of con* 
oiliatiai, and ascertain the real state of afiaira, and that he 
should be caught m recompense for his evil deeds, lifted ity 
the veil of tevermoe, and betrayed involuntatity the faitb- 
kaenesa to his salt, which he had till then conoeided. When 
I heard from Mahabat K.’s letter the true state of affairs, I 
ordered them to imprison hia. aon and brother in the fort of 
Qwalior. Aa it had happened (Jalil Tidki), the father of 
this wretch had also fled from the sirvioe of the late king, 
and for years passed hia time m thieviag and hi^iiway robbety, 
until ho waa caught in the recompense of hia own evil dee<^ 
It is hoped that this taical still alao soon obtain the reward 
of hk bad actions. 



86 


On Thursday, tha 6th, Man Singh, s. Bawat %ankar, who 
was -one of the auxiliaries of Bihar, was promoted to the 
mansab of 1,000 personal and 600 horse. I sent off ‘Aqil K. 
to look after the cavalry,* and inquire into the corps of the 
mansabdars who had been appointed for duty in Bangash, 
and gave him an elephant. I sent as a gift to Mahabat K. a 
private dagger made after the Mazandaran fashion, along 
with Dust Beg. The offering of Monday was given as a present 
to Mahmud Ab-dar, who from the time when I was a prince 
and the days of my childhood had served me. Miran (not 
Bizan,t as in the printed book), son-in-law of Payanda K. 
Moghul, was promoted to the mansab of 700 personal and 460 
horse. Muhammad Husain, brother of Khwaja Jahan, who 
was Bakhshi of Kangra, was promoted to the mansab of 600 
personal and 460 horse. On this day Tarbiyat K., who is one 
of the hereditary housebom ones of this Court, .and had been 
enrolled among the Amirs by reason;]: of his good disposition, 
died. He was not devoid of sluggishness (nd-muradi, literally 
want of desires) and self-indulgence (s(ddmai-i-9iaf$)f and was a 
young man fond of pleasure {^ayydsh-(abVat). He wished to 
pass his whole life at ease, and was devoted to Hindu music 
and did not understand it badly. He was a man void of evil. 
Raja Suraj Singh was raised to the mansab of 2,000. personal 
and horse. To Karamu-llah, s. 'Ali Mardan K. Bahadur, 
Baqir K., Faujdar of Multan, Malik Muhibb Afghan, and 
Maktub K. were given elephants. Sayyi4 Bayazld Bhakkarl, 
to whom was entrusted the charge of the fort of Bhakkar and 
the faujdarship of that region, was also honoured with an 

* MahaUa, Here u3od apparently for musters. 

t Mr. Rogers corrects this to Mirftn on the authority of R.A.S., 
MS. It is, however, Bi^an in I.O. MS., 181, and as Blochmunn points 
out, BIzan or Bi^an is twice referred to in the Tuzuk, pp. 307, 300. 
He was son of Nfid *A1i Maid&ni. 

J I.O. MS. has “ by favour of my rearing ” (tarbiyat) and probably 
the words in text rather mean that he was promoted by virtue of 
Jahftngirs liking for him, than that ho was of good disposition. His 
r«al name was ‘Abdu-r-RahIm. He was the son of Qft*im K., and 
his sister 2$&liha Banu was one of -TahftnglrV wives, and had the title 
of Pfidish&h' Mahall. Blorhmann, 371. Before Nfir-JahUn .nhe was 
the chief wife. 



87 


elephant. Amanu-Uah, s. Mahabat K. was distinguished 
with the gift of a jewelled dagger. 1 gave elephants to ShailA 
Ahmad Hansi, %aM 'Abdu-l-LatIf SambhaB, the eunuch 
Firasat K., and Ray Kunwar Chand Mustaufi (auditor). 
Muhammad %afi‘ Bakhshi of the Panjab, was raised to the 
mansab of 500 personal and 300 horse. The mansab of 500 
personal and 160 horse was conferred on Munis, s. Mihtar* E. 
He (Munis) had charge of the fort of Kalinjar. 

On this day arrived the news of the death of Shah-nawaz K. 
s. the Commander-in-Chief Khan IQianan. It was the cause 
of distress of mind to me. At the time when that Ataliq 
(lAan IQianan) took leave from waiting on me, it had been 
strictly impressed upon him that, as it had been. repeatedly 
brought to my ear that ^ah-nawaz E. had been maddened 
with wine and drank immoderately, if there was truth in this 
it was a pity that he should destroy himself at his age. It 
was necessary that he should not leave him to his own way, 
but look after his case properly. If he could not leave his 
charge himself, he should write a clear report, so that, having 
summoned him into my presence, I might give the best order 
practicable under the circumstances. When be arrived at 
Burbanpur, having found ^ah-nawaz ^an very weak and 
low, he tried to make some remedy for him. After some days’ 
confinement to bed (literally, lord of the carpet) he fell on the 
couch of powerlessness. Whatever remedies and plans the 
physicians employed were of no avail, and in the best time of 
his youth and prosperity, in the thirty-third year of his age, 
to the sorrow and grief of the world, he went to the place of 
the mercy and pardon of God. On hearing this unpleasant 
news I was greatly grieved, for in truth he was an intelligent 
youth and bom in the house. He would have performed 
important services in this State, and left great traces behind 
him. Although this road is before all. and there is no escape 
for anyone out of the command of destiny, yet it appears 
sad to depart in this fashion. It is hoped he will be among 
those who are pardoned. I sent Baja Sarang Deo, who was 

* Mihtar K. was a very old servant, and died in the third year of 
Jahangir. Blochmann. 417. 



88 


one of my close attendants and is a tactful person, to the 
Ataliq, and favoured and consoled him in every way. The 
mansab of 5,000 held by S^h-nawaz I added on to those of 
his brothers and sons. To Darab, his younger brother, I gave 
the mansab of 5,000 personal, original and increased, and 
presented him with a dress of honour, an elephant, a horse, 
and a jewelled sword, and gave him leave to go to his father 
to fill, in place of 3iah-nawaz, the post of governor of Berar 
and Ahmadnagar. Rahman-dad, another brother, I promoted 
to the mansab of 2,000 and 800 horse. Manuchahr, 'S. Shah- 
nawaz, was given the mansab of 2,000 personal and 1,000 
horse. Tagjizal (To|^ril ?), s. ^lah-nawaz’*' K. was promoted 
to the mansab of 1^000 personal and 500 horse. On Thursday, 
the 12th, Qasim K., son-in-law of I‘timadu-d-daula, was 
honoured with the favour of a standard. Asadn-llah, s. 
Sayyid ^ji, who had come with the intention of obtaining 
service, had the mansab bestowed on him of 600 personal 
and 100 horse. I^adr Jahan, son-in-law of the deceased 
Murta^ K., received that of 700 personal and 600 horse, 
and was appointed to the faujdarship of Sambhal, and, having 
had an elephant bestowed on him, X gave him leave. .Bharat 
Bandila was also presented with the mansab of 600 personal 
and 400 horse, and had an elephant given him, and an elephant 
was bestowed on Sangram, the Raja of Jammu 

In Ahmadabad I had two male mdrlJiur goats. As I had 
not a female in my establishment to pair with them, it occurred 
to me that if 1 could pair them with Barb'ary goats, which 
they bring from Arabia, especially from the port of the city 
of Darkhar,t young of their form and qualities might be 
obtained. In short, I paired them with seven Barbary ewes, 
and after six months had elapsed each of the latter had a 
young one at Fathpur : there were four females and three 
males, very pleasing in appearance, of good shape and good 
colour. In their colour, those (kids) which resembled the 

^ Text wrongly has Sh&h Nur. 

t This is the ancient Dhafur or Dofar on the south coast of Arabia 
now know nas Mirb&|. The properspclling was Zaff. SeeKedhouse*s 
Annotations to the Histoiy* of Yemen, pubIi^hc d by the Gibb Trust. 
Noh. 349, 578, and 83B. See also d’Herbedot, 280. and Jarrett, III. 51. 



89 


male {taka, not haka, as in the printed copy) were dun-coloured 
with black stripes on their backs. Bed,* indeed, appears to 
me a more pleasing colour than any other, and it is the mark 
of a better breed. Of their liveliness and laughable ways and 
their manner of gamboling and leaping, what can be written ? 
Some of their ways are such that the mind derived uncontrolled 
pleasure from looking at them. It is notorious that painters 
cannot draw properly the motions of a kid. Granting that 
they may chance to draw the movements of an ordinary kid 
after a fashion, they certainly would have to acknowledge 
themselves at a loss how to draw the motions of these kids. 
When one month, or even twenty days old, they would leap 
up upon high places and throw themselves on to the ground 
in a way that if any other but a kid were to do so, not one 
limb would be left whole. As it pleased me, I ordered them 
always to be kept near me, and I gave each of them an 
appropriate name. I am much delighted with them, and 
pay great attention to bringing together marl^ur males and 
well-bred she-goats. I desire to have many young ones from 
them, and that they may become well known among men. 
After their young shall have paired, most probably more 
delicate ones will be obtained. One of their peculiarities is 
that ordinary kids immediately they are bom, and until they 
begin to suck, make a great bleating, whilst these, on the 
contrary, make no sound, and '^stand quite contented and 
without wailing. Perhaps their flesh would be very pleasant 
to the taste. 

Before this, an order had been given that Muqarrab K., 
having been appointed to Bihar, should hasten off there. He 
came to Court in order to pay his respects before he repaired 
to his destination, and accordingly, on Thursday, the 2nd 
H^tirdad, an elephant with trappings, two -horses, and a 
jewelled khapwa were conferred on him, and he took leave. 
Bs. 60,000 were given him as an advance of pay. On the 
same day Sardar lAan received a dress of honour, an elephant, 
and a horse, and obtained the Sarkar of Monghyr, which is in 

* Tlu) description is rather obscure. Apparently Jahingir regards 
bamand (dun- or bay-coloured) as equal to n^d (Murldi ). 



90 


the province of Bihar and Bengal, and took leave. Mir 
^aiif,* the Vakil of Qutbu-l-mulk, who was at Court, took 
leave. My fortunate son, Shah-Jahan, sent with him the 
brother of Afzal K., his Diwan. As Qujbu-l-mulk had shown 
attachment and desire to please, and repeatedly importuned 
me 4or a portrait, I presented him, at his request, with my 
likeness, a jewelled khapwa, and a fhSl Jcatara. 24,000 
darby a jewelled dagger, a horse, and a dress of honour were 
also given to the aforesaid Mir Sharif. Fazil K., director of 
buildings, was advanced to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 
600 horse, and ^akim Bagho Nath to that of 600 personal and 
60 horse. As at this time the anniversary of the late king 
(Akbar) occurred, Rs. 5,000 were handed over to some of my 
chief servants to divide among poor and deserving peo])le. 
Hasan ‘Ali K., jagirdar of the Sarkar of Monghyr, was 
honoured with the mansab of 2»500 personal and horse, and 
sent to the assistance of Ibrahim K. Fath-jang, governor of 
the province of Bengal, and he was presented with a sword. 
As Mirza ^arafu-d-din Husain Ka diA ari sacrificed his life 
on duty in Bangash, I promoted his son Ibrahim Husain to 
the mansab of 1,000 personal and 500 horse. At this time 
Ibrahim K. constructed two boats, f which in the language 
of the country they call Kosha, one of gold and the other of 
silver, and sent them to me by way of offering. Undoubtedly, 
of their own kind they are the finest. One of these I gave 
to my son Shah-Jahan. On Thursday, the 9th, Sadat K. was 
granted the mansab of 1,000 personal and 60 horse. On this 
day *A 2 nidu*d-daula and Shaja'at K, ‘Arab took leave for 
their ja^rs. On this Thursday I presented Asaf K. with a 
jewelled khapwa and a phtil ka4dra. As my fortunate son 
Sul^w Parwiz proposed to come to Court, he asked for a 
special nadirl dress of honour, a ditra, and a /oto, so that he 
might wear them and be distinguished on the day of meeting 
me and of having the good fortune to pay his respects. Ac- 
cording to his request, I sent by the hand of his Vakil, Sharif, 

* Text has Mughrif. 

t Du manzif kiMi must surely mean “ tray ** here ; or pt^rliajiK 
they were models. Koshd is a well-known Bengali name for a swift 
boat. 



91 


a sumptuous dress of honour with a cHlra and a special sash. 
On Thursday, the 23rd, MIrza Wall, son of the aunt of this 
suppliant, came by order from the Deccan, and had the good 
fortune to kiss the threshold. His father, IQiwaja J^asan 
(Oialdar (the freckled ?), was one df the Naqehbandl JOiwajas. 
My uncle, Mirza Muhammad Hakim, gave his sister in mar- 
riage to the IQiwaja. I heard much praise of the IQiwaja from 
people : he had both good family and got on well with every 
one, and for a long time the management of the affairs of my 
uncle Mirza Muhammad Hakim had been in his hands, and he 
was on very good terms with him. Before the Mirza’s death 
he had himself delivered* over the deposit of his life. Two sons 
survived him — viz., Mirza Badi'u-z-zaman and Mirza Waii. 
M. Badi*u-z-zaman, after the death of the Mirza, ran away, 
and went to Ma-wara’a-n-nahr (Transoxania), and in that 
exile became a traveller on the road of non-existence. The 
Begam and Mirza AVali came to the glorious Court, and H.M. 
(Akbar) behaved very kindly to the Begam. The Mirza also 
is a steady and sedate young man, not devoid of reasonable- 
ness and understanding. He is very skilled in the science of 
music. At this time it occurred to me to marry the daughter 
of the deceased Prince Daniyal to the Mirza, and my reason 
for sending for the Mirza to Court was this. This girl (Bulaqi 
Begam) is the offspring of the daughter of Qilij Muhammad K. 
It is hoped that the grace of striving to please and to serve, 
which is the means of good fortune and prosperity, may be 
his (M. Wali’s) lot and fortune. 

On this day Sarbuland Ray, who had been sent on duty 
to the Deccan, was promoted to the mansab of 2,500 personal 
and 1,500 horse. 

At this time it was reported to me that a Shayyai (a loud 
talker, a cheat) of the name of ShaijAf A^mad had spread the 

* Apparently Khwfija Hasan died in Badakhshan. Ma’isir, III., 
459. 

t Thia S. Aliniad is a well-known man. He is mentioned in Beale 
ad Ahmad Sirhindi (.^aildi). and as having had the title of Mujaddid-i- 
Alf-i-Sftni, because he* believed that he was the man of the second 
niillenium. In other words, ho claimed to be a Mahdi. He was 
s. *Abdu-l-Wahid Fftruqi. and bom in 1563. He died 29 November, 



92 


net of hypocrisy and deceit in Sirhind, and caught in it many 
of the apparent worshippers without spirituality, and had 
sent into every city and country one of his disciples, whom 
he called his deputy flihallfa). and whom he considered more 
skilled, than others in the adorning of shops (of deceit) and 
selling of religious knowledge, and in deceiving men. He had 
also written a number of idle tales to his disciples and his 
believers, and had made them into a book which he called 
Maktubat (letters). In that album {Jung) of absurdities 
many unprofitable things had been written that drag (people) 
into infidelity and impiety. Amongst these he had written 
in a letter as follows : '' In the course of my travels I had 
come to the dwelling of the Two Lights (the Sun and Moon), 
and saw a very lofty and very splendid building. From there 
T passed to the abode of Discrimination (Faruq), and from 
there I passed to the abode of Truth (^iddiq), and to each I 
wrote a suitable explanation (or perhaps, of each I wrote a 
suitable description). From there I reached the abode of 
Love, and I beheld a brilliant dwelling. It had divers colours 
and lights and reflected glories. That is to say (God forgive 
us ! — on exclamation of Jahangir’s), I passed from the abode 
of the Vicegerents (khulafa) and attained to the highest rank.” 
There were other presumptuous expressions which it would 
be too long to write, and would be contrary to good manners. 

I according gave an order that they should bring him to the 
Court that is based on justice. According to order he came 
to pay his respects. To all that 1 asked him he could give 
no reasonable answer, and appeared to me to be extremely 

1624, and is buried at SithincL The I.Q. new edition, XXIll. 21., 
says there are two tombs in Sirhind known as those of the Master and 
the Disciple, and it may be that one of them is 8. Ahmad’s, although 
the Gasetteer says they jjprobably belong to jlhe fourteenth century*. 
There is also a reference to him in Rieu’s Catalogue, III. 1068a., 
fol. 16. He belonged to the Naq d^ bandi order, and one ol his writings 
is calM Majmil*atu-t-ta|awwuf. There is a veiy long account of 
him, and of his interviews with Jahingir in the KkeMnatu-l-Auliyi, 

I. 607, etc. It is said the|e that he was imprisoned for two years, 
and then ndeased, and that he died on the last day of Safer, 1036, 
November 20, 1025, at the age of sixty-three. Jahingir afterwards 
pardoned S. Ahmad. See Tusuk, 308, account of Oftrenth year. 



proud and aelf-satisfied, with all hia ignorance. I oonaiderod 
the beat thing for him would be that he ahould remain aome. 
time in the prison of correction until the heat of hia tem- 
perament and confusion of his brain were somewhat qumiohed, 
and the excitement of the people also should subside. He 
was accordingly handed over to Aniral Singh-dalan to be 
imprisoned in Qwalior fort. 

On Saturday, the 25th [Qi&rdad, my fortunate son Sultin 
Parwix came from Allahabad, and with prostration at the 
threshold of the Khalifate illuminated the forehead of sin- 
cerily. After he had performed the ceremony of kissing the 
ground and been honoured with special favour, I bade him 
sit. He presented 2,000 muhars and 2,000 rupees way 
of near, and made an offering of a diamond. As his elephants 
had not yet arrived, he would produce them on another 
occasion. He had brought with him to the Court, which is 
the asylum of the world, Baja Elalyan, Zamindar of BatanpOr, 
against whom this my son had by order sent an army, and 
had taken from him as an offering 80 elephants and Bs. 
100,000. My son brought him with him, and he had the good 
fortune to kiss the threshold Waar K., my son’s Diwan 
who is one of the old servants of the Court, having had the 
good fortune to pay his respects to me, presented as offerings 
28 elephants, male and female. Of these nine were accepted, 
and the rest bestowed on him. 

As it had been represented to me .that Muruwwat K., s, 
IftiJ^&r K., who was one bom and bred up at this Court, had 
fought with a band of Maghs on the borders of Bengal and had 
sacrificed his life, 1 promoted AUah-yar, his brother, to the 
mansab of 1,000 personal and 500 horse, and anotiiw brother 
to that of 400 personal and horse, so that those he had left 
behind should not be distressed. On Monday, the Srd of tho 
Divine month of Tbr, in the neighbourhood <A the city four 
black bucks, a doe, and a fawn were taken. As I passed 
the house of my fortunate son, Sultan Parwis, he presented 
two tusked elephants with th^ir by way of ofleiii^; 

both ware ordered to be j^eed in the private dephantatod. 

37 On Thursday, the 13th, Siyyid Qasan. the ambassador of 



94 


my happy brother, SUh ‘Abbas, ruler of Persia, having had 
the good fortune to kiss the threshold, produced a letter, 
together with a crystal drinking-cup, on the cover of which 
wap a ruby. As it was given from excessive friendship and 
sincerity it was the cause of the increase of amity and good 
fellowship. On this day Fida’i K. was promoted to the 
mansab of 1,000 personal and 500 horse, and Na^m-llah, s. 
Fathu-llah, in whose charge was the fort of Ambar, that of 
1,500 peregnal and 400 horse. On Thursday, the 20th, 
Amanu-Ilah, s. Mahabat K., wap promoted to the mansab of 
1,500 personal and 800 horse. Having conferred on Wazir K. 
the Diwanship of Bengal, I gave him a horse, a dress of 
honour, and a jewelled dagger. Elephants were given to Mir 
Husamu-d-din and Zabar-dast K. On this day Qafi^ ^asan, 
a servant of Khan Alam, came to Court with a precious letter 
from my brother ^ah ‘Abbas, and a report from that pillar 
of the Sultanate (Khan ‘Alam). He laid before me a dagger 
the hilt of which was made of a fish’s’*' tooth spotted with 
black, that my brother had given to Khan ‘Alam. As it was 
a great rarity, he (Khan ‘Alam) had sent it to me. I greatly 
approved of it ; in fact, it is a rare present. I had never seen 
a spotted one until now, and I was much pleased. 

On Thursday, the 27th, M. Wali was promoted to the 
mansab of 2,000 personal and 1,0(X> horse. On the 24th, I 
gave 1,000 darbs as a present to Sayyid Hasan, the ambas- 
sador. and an elephant to ‘Abdu-llah K. Bahadur FIruz-jang. 
On Thursday, the 2nd of the Divine month of Amurdad, a 
horse was presented to I‘tibar K. ‘Aqil K. was promoted 
to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 800 horse. 

On the night of Saturday, the 4th of the Ilahi month of 
Amurdad, corresponding with 15 Sha‘ban, was the feast of 
the %ab-i-barat. By order, they decorated and brought 

* Danddn-i-mdhl, explained in dictionary as the canine tooth of 
the Walrus (Trichechua rosKioms). But there is nothing black or 
piebald about walrus-teeth, and JahSngir would surely not admire 
greatly a kind of ivory which was inferior to that of the elephant. 

1 incline to think that what is here meant is tortoise-shell. Jauhat -ddr 
has two meanings — it may mcm jewelled and also ** striated." See 
Viillers, 542a. 



95 


before me on the river, boate with lamps and all kinds of fire- 
works. In truth, the lamps they had arranged appeared very 
pretty, and for a long time I enjoyed myself in going round 
and looking at them. On Tuesday, Miran,* s. Nad *Ali 
Maidanl, who was one of the well-brought-up khanazads, 
was selected for the mansab of 700 personal and 500 horse, 
and Khwaja Zainu-d-dlh for that of 700 personal and 300 
horse, and Khwaja Mubsin for that of 700 personal and 100 
horse. On Thursday, the 9th, 1 went to hunt at the village 
of Samunagar. Passing my time pleasantly in going round 
and hunting on that pleasant plain until Monday, I returned 
on the eve of Tuesday to the palace. On Thursday, the 
16th, BiAutan, grandson of ^ai^ Abu-l-Fazl (the author), 
was promoted to the manstib of 700 personal and 350 horse. 
On this day I went round to see the garden of Gul-aff^n, 
which is on the bank of the Jumna. On the way rain fell 
heavily and filled the mead with freshness and greenness. 
Pineapples had arrived at perfection, and I made a thorough 
inspection. Of the buildings that overlooked the river nonef 
that I saw were without the charm of verdure and flowing 
water. These verses of Anwan appeared appropriate to the 

V.B8.. 

’Tis a day of mirth and jollity, 

A daily market of flowers and odours ; 

The earth'heaps are suffased with ambergris. 

The zephyr sheds rose-water from his sldrt. 

From contact with the morning breeze the pool 
Is roughened and pointed, like the edge of a file.*' 

As this garden is in the charge of Mbwaja Jahan, he presented 
me as ofEerings with some pieces of brocade of a new fashion 
they had lately brought for him from Traq. Selecting what 
1 approved of, I presented the remainder to him. He had 
arranged the garden weU, and his mansab was ordered to be 
raised to 5,000 personal and 3,000 horse, original and in- 
creased. 

^ Apparently Mirin is a mistake for Bizl^an. See anre and Bloch- 
mann, fi08, and Tuzuk, 307. It is Biian in I.O. BIS., 181. 

The Imildings referred to are the garden-honses made by Hiwaja 
Jahin In the Nfir-manzil garden. 



96 


A strange ciiciixnstanoe was that I was so much delighted 
with a jewelled dagger-hilt of piebald teeth which * Alam 

had got from Shah ^Abbas and sent to me (see ante), that I 
appointed several skilful men to go to Iran and Turin to look 
for them and to be consistently searching for them, and to 
bring some from anywhere and any person, anyhow, and at 
any price. Many of my servants who knew my disposition, 
and dignified Amirs in the course of their duty, engaged in the 
search. It happened that in this city a stupid stranger bought 
in the open bazaar a coloured tooth of great beauty and 
delicacy for a trifle ; he believed that some time or other it 
had fallen into the fire, and that the black on it was the 
mark of burning ! After some time he showed it to one of 
the carpenters on the establishment of my prosperous son 
9£h-Jahan, desiring that he should take off a piece of the 
tooth in order to make a ring {dml), and pointed out that 
he should remove the marks of burning and the blacknesses, 
being ignorant that the blackness enhanced the value and 
price of the whiteness. Those moles and patches were what 
the tirewoman of destiny had given as an adornment of its 
beauty. The carpenter at once went to the Superintendent 
of his workshop, and gave him the good news that such a 
rare and precious thing, in search of which people were 
wandering and going long distances, and hastening to all 
comers and in all directions in various countries, had fallen 
for nothing into the hands of an ignorant man, who did not 
know its value. It could be easily and cheaply obtained 
from him. The Superintendent went off with him and 
immediately procured it, and next day produced it before 
my son. '^en my son ^h-Jahan came to wait on me, he 
at first showed great delight, and after his brain had become 
free from the intoxication of the wine of joy, produced it, and 
greatly pleased me— 

VnsB. 

«« Thy Time is happy in that thou hast made mine happy,’* 

I invoked so many blessings on him that if one of them out ot 
a hundred obtain acceptance, it will suffice for his spiritual 
and material well-being. 



97 


On thiffday Bahlim K., one of the chief servants of *Adil K. 
came and waited on me. As he had chosen my service out of 
sincerity, I bestowed on him unstinted favours, and presented 
him with a dress of honour, a horse, a sword, and 10,000 darbs, 
with the mansab of 1,000 personal and 500 horse. At this 
time a petition came from IQmn Dauran, stating that ; ** Your 
Majesty, from the perfection of kindness and knowledge of 
his worth, had appointed to the government of Thatta (Sind) 
an old slave, notwithstanding his great age and weak sight. 
As this weak old man was exceedingly bent and decrepit, and 
had not in him the ability to . exert himself or to ride, he 
prays that he may be excused military service, and that he 
may be enrolled in the army of prayer.” At his request, I 
ordered the chief Diwans to confirm him in the pargana of 
Khushab,* with a revenue of 3,000,000 of dams, and which 
he for a long time had held as a tanj^wah jagir, and which 
had become peopled and cultivated, by way of providing for 
his expenses, so that he might pass his time in easy circum- 
stances. His eldest son, by name Stmh Muhammad, was 
promoted to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 600 horse, 
his second son, Ta*qub Beg, obtaining that of 700 personal 
and 350 horse. The third son, Asad Beg, was promoted to 
the mansab of 300 personal and 50 horse. 

On Saturday, the 1st of the Divine month of ^ahriwar, I 
sent dresses of honour for the rainy season to the Ataliq 
Commander-in-Chief ^an-l^anan Jan-sipar and the dther 
great Amirs, who had been sent on duty to the Deccan, by 
the hand of Yazdan.t 

As the purpose of visiting the eternal sprmg of the rose- 
garden of ELashmir was settled in my mind, I sent off Nuru-d- 
din Quli to hasten on before, to repair as far as was possible 
the ups and downs of the Punch} route to it, and to prepare 

^ See Janett, n. 323 ; it wm near the Jhelam. Seo also I.G., new 
edition, XV. 297- It is in the Shlhpflr district. The land revenue 
of it was 2*4 lakhs of rupees in 1903-1904. 30 lakhs of dSnis would 
be equal to Rs. 76,000. USn Daurin's name was ShSh Bog K. The 
lfa*isir says his resignation was not altogether voluntary. Sec 
Blochmann, 378. 

t In the MSS. the name is written Nardinf. 

t The route from the South. See Jarrctt, II. 347, n. 3. 



98 


it, so that the passage of laden beasts over difficult hilltops 
might be accomplished with ease, and that the men should 
not undergo labour and hardship. A large number of arti- 
ficers, such as stone-cutters, carpenters, spadesmm, etc., 
were despatched with him, to whom an elephant was also 
given. On the eve of Thursday, the 13th, having gone to the 
garden of Nur-manzil, I passed the time in enjoyment in that 
rose-garden of delight until Sunday, the 16th. Baja Bikrama- 
jit Baghela came from the fort of Mandpur, which is his 
native place, and had the good fortune to kiss the threshold, 
and by way of offering presented an elephant and a jewelled 
plume. Maq^ud K. was honoured with the mansab of 1,000 
personal and 130 horse. On Thursday, the 20th, my son 
^^h Parwiz produced two elephants as an ofEering, and they 
were ordered to be included in the private stud. On the 24th 
of the aforesaid month the feast of the solar weighing took 
place in the palace of Maryamu-z-zamani, and my Slat year 
according to the solar months began in gladness and victory. 
It is hoped that the period of my life may be passed in obe- 
dience to God (to whom be glory!). To Sayyid Jalal, s. 
Sayyid Muhammad, the grandaon (?) of g[^h *Alam Bul^ri, 
an account of whom has been written among the events of 
my Gujarat expedition, I gave leave to return. I gave him 
a female elephant for his riding, as well as his expenses. On 
the eve of Sunday,* the 30th, corresponding with the 14th 
Shawwal, when the disk of the moon was perfect (at full 
moon) a moonlight feast was prepared in the buildings of the 
garden which overlook the River Jumna, and a very pleasant 
entertainment took place. On the 1st of the Divine month, 
out of the veined {jauhar-idr) spotted tooth (walrus) which my 
son Shah-Jahan had given me as an offering, I ordered to be 
cut off sufficient for two dagger-hilts and a thumb-stall :t it 
came out of a beautiful colour and was very choice. I ordered 
the VstadM (masters) Pfiran and Kalyan, who had no rivals 
in the art of engraving, { to make dagger-hilts of a shape that 

* 1.0. MSS. haw) Monday. 

* t The word in text is is a thumbstall, but it may 

also mean a ring. »See Blockmann, 160 and n. 1. 

X thAlam-bandi. It also means ** inlaying.” 



99 


was approved at this time, and has become known as the 
Jahan^ri fashion. At the same time the blade and the sheath 
and fastenings were given to skilful men, each of whom was 
unique in his age in his art. Truly, it was all carried out 
according to my wish. One hilt came out coloured in such 
a way as to create astonishment. It turned out of all the 
seven colours, and some of the flowers looked as if a skilful 
painter* had depicted them in black lines round it with a 
wonder-working pencil. In short, it was so delicate that I 
never wish it to be apart from me for a moment. Of all the 
gems of great price that are in the treasury I consider it the 
most precious. On Thursday I girded it auspiciously and 
with joy round my waist, and the masters who in their com- 
pletion had exercised great skill and taken great pains were 
rewarded, Ustad Puran with the gift of an elephant, a dress 
of honour, and a golden bracelet for the wrist, which the 
people of India call Kara,^ and .Kalyan with the title of 
*A]a’ib-dast (wondrous hand), and increased mansab, a dress 
of honour, and a jewelled bracelet (jxihunchV^, and in the 
same way every one according to his circumstances and skill 
received favours. 

As it had been represented to me that Amanu-llah, s. 
Mahabat K.. ha^nng fought with the rebel Ahdad, had 
defeated his army, and had made many of the Afghans — 
who are black-faced and black-hearted — the harvest of his 
blood-drinking sword. I sent him a special sword in order to 
dignify him. 

On Saturday the 5th, news came of the death of Raja 
Suraj Singh, who had died a natural death in the Deccan. 
He was the descendant of Maldeo, who was one of the principal 
Zamindars of Hindustan, and had a zamindari which equalled 
that of the Rana, and he had even overcome him in one 
battle. There is a full account of him (Maldeo) in the Akbar- 
nama. Raja Suraj Singh, through the advantage of his 
being bmught up by the late king (Akbar), and this suppliant 

* Band^ bdfi. In I.O. MSS. it 18 btnitia hdrdn. Perhaps '*Akilful 
pnintt^r** should be Painter of I'reation.* 

t Should be Kard. Sec Herklots Qtnwi-i-Islini, Appendix X\I\\ 



100 


at the thione of Grod, reached high rank and great dignities. 
His territory surpassed that of his father or grandfather.* 
He had a son called Gaj Singh, f whom he entrusted with all 
his administrative affairs. As I knew him to be capable 
and worthy of favour, I promoted him to the mansab of 
3,000 personal and 2,000 horse, with a standard and the 
title of Baja, and his younger brother to that of 500 personal 
and 250 horse, and gave him a jagir in his native country. 

On Thursday, the 10th of Mihr, at the request of A^af K., I 
went to his house built on the bank of the Jumna. He has 
erected a very fine bath-house (hammam), with which I 
was much delighted. After bathing, a feast of cups was 
held, and my private servants were made happy with cups 
of delight. Having chosen out of his offerings what I 
approved, 1 gave the remainder to him. What I took of his 
offering might be of the value of Rs. 30,000. Baqir K., 
faujdar of Multan, was honoured with a standard. 

Previously to this, according to order, they had planted 
trees on both sides from Agra as far as the River of Attock 
(the Indus), and had made an avenue, and in the same way 
from Agra to Bengal. 1 now ordered that from Agra to 
Lahore they should put up a piUar:|: (mtZ) at every koss, to 
be the sign of a koss, and at every three koss make a well, 
so that wayfarers might travel in ease and contentment, 
and not endure hardships from thirst or the heat of the sun. 

On Thursday, the 24th of Mihr, the festival of the Dasahra 
was held. After the custom of India, they decorated the 
horses and produced them before me. After 1 had seen the 
horses they brought some of the elephants. As Mu‘tamid K. 
on last New Year’s Day had not made any offering, at this 
festival he presented a golden tablet a ruby ring, a 

* Nafnra here cannot mean grandson, for Suraj Singh, commonly 
called Sur Singh, was fifth in descent from Maldeo (Blochmann, 369). 
Suraj or Sur was s. R&y My Singh of Biksner. See Tod, who aayt: 
Sur Singh passed nearly all his life as an alien. 

t Tod has much to say about Gaj Singh, but the account seems 
hardly trustworthy 

I The text, p. 277, has a representation of one of these milestones 
which was outside Delhi. 



101 


piece of coral [buasad), and other items. The tablet was 
beautifully made. The total value of the offering was As. 
16,000. As he had brought the things from pure sincerity 
and loyalty, they were accepted. On this day Zabar-dast K. 
was promoted to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 400 horse. 
As the day of the Dasahia hai been fixed as the time of 
starting, I embarked on a boat with all happy omens and 
pleasure in the evening, and went on to my goal. I halted 
for eight days at the first stage that the men might come on, 
after making all preparations at leisure. Mahabat E. had 
sent apples from Bangash by runners {dah-chokl). They 
arrived very fresh, and were of excellent flavour. I was 
greatly pleased in eating them. They cannot be compared 
with the sib-f-i&tib the good* apples ”?) of Kabul which 
I ate there, or with the Samarkand apples that they bring 
every year. For sweetness and delicacy of flavour they 
cannot be compared with either of the latter (f.6., the Bangash 
apples were far better). I had until now never seen such 
deUcate and delicious apples. They say that in Upper 
Bangash, near Lashkar-dara,! there is a village called Siv 
Bam, in which there are three trees of this apple, and although 
they have made many trials, they have never found so gocd 
ones in any other place. I gave Sayyid JEIasan, ambassador 
of my brother Shah ^Abbas, a dish of these apples in order 
that he might tell me if there were any better apples in Iraq. 
He said : In the whole of Persia the apples of Isfahan are 
preferred, and they are of the same quality as these.’* 

On Thursday, the 1st of the Divine month of Aban, I 
went on pilgrimage to the mausoleum of the late king (Akbar) 
(may the lights of Allah be his testimony !), and rubbed the 
head of supplication on the threshold, the abode of angels, 
and presented 100 muhars as nazar. All the Begams and 
other ladies, having sought the blessing of circulating round 
that shrine, which is the circling-place of angels, presented 
offerings. On the eve of Friday a lofty assembly was held 

* Perhaps stb-i-Hub is the name of a kind.of apple. 

f 1.0. MS. 181 has i^ukr-darS and the name of the village nn ^in 
warin. The printed text has Siwarin. 



of the holy men (Masba'il^), the tiirbaned people (ar6ab-t- 
"amaHm — ».e., ecclesiastics, etc.), Huffdz (those who recite 
the Qoran), and singing people, assembled in numbers, and 
practised ecstasies and religious dancing (tcajd and satna*), 
to each of whom, according to the circumstances of his merit 
and skill, I gave a dress of honour, afarjt. and a shawl. The 
buildings of this blessed mausoleum have been made very 
lofty. At this time the money expended satisfied me, and 
was far more than it had previously been. (The MS.* here is 
clear, and the printed words wrong.) 

On the 3rd, after four gharis of day had passed, I marched 
on from that stage, and having traversed 5]^ koss by the 
river at four gharis of the day, arrived at the next stage. 
After midday I left the boat and caught seven partridges 
(durrdj). At the end of the day I gave Rs. 20,000 to Sayyid 
Hasan, the ambassador (of Persia), as a present, and a dress 
of honour of gold brocade with a jewelled jlgha (turban- 
omament), and an elephant, and gave him leave to return, 
and sent for my brother with him a jewelled jug made in the 
shape of a cock, which could hold my iisnal stint of wine. 
It is hoped that it may reach its destination in safety. I 
gave leave to Lashkar K., who had been appointed to the 
defence and government of Agra, with a gift of a dress of 
honour, a horse, an elephant, drums, and a jewelled dagger. 
Ikram K. was promoted to the mansab of 2,000 personal and 
1,500 horse, and to the duty of faujdar of the Sarkar of 
Mewat. He is s. Islam K., who was the grandson of the 
venerable asylum of pardon Shaildi »Sal!m, whose excellency 
of person and approved disposition and connection in blessing 
with this illustrious family have been descTibed in these 
pages with the pen of sincerity. 

At this time I heard from a certain person whose words 
are adorned with the light of truth that at the time when 
I was sick and weak at Ajmir, before this evil news arrived 

* Mr. Rogers here refers to the R.A.S. MS. The I.O. MSS. are not 
clear. Apparently what Jahangir says is : Chi this occasion fresh 
items of expenditure occurred to me, and the former outlay was greatly 
increased.*' The word tamrmfdt (** expenditure '*) is omitted in the 
printed ropy. 



103 


in the province of Bengal, one day Islam K. was sitting in 
private, when he suddenly became unconscious. When he 
came to himself he said to one of his confidants, of the name 
of Bhikan, that it had been shown him from the world of 
mysteries that the holy person of the Emperor had been 
attacked by sickness, and that the remedy for it was to 
sacrifice for him something that was exceedingly dear and 
preciour to himself. It at first occurred to him to sacrifice 
for the head of the revered one his own son Hfishang, but 
as he was young in years and as yet had derived no profit 
from life, and not attained to the desire of his heart, he had 
compassion on him, and would sacrifice himself for his lord 
and master. He hoped that as this was from the bottom 
of his heart, and the sincerity of his being, it would be accepted 
at the throne of Allah. The arrow of prayer at once reached 
the target of acceptance, and he perceived himself afflicted 
with weakness and disease. Verily, verily, the disease in- 
creased till he reached the neighbourhood of the compassion 
of Ood (he died). The Great Physician bestowed from the 
hidden dispensary complete recovery on this suppliant. 
Although the late king (the lights of Allah be his testimony !), 
was* much attached to the children and grandchildren of 
the Shailchu-l-Islam. and bestowed favours on them all 
according to the capacity and aptitude of each, yet when 
the turn of rule came to this suppliant, they received great 
kindnesses in order to perform what was due to that 
revered one (Salim ChiAti), and many of them attained 
to the hi^ nobility, and were advanced to the posts of 
head of Subahs, as has been brought to record each in its 
own place. 

As in this village the eunuch Hilal K.,* who was one of 
my attendants from the time when I was prince, had built 
a saray, and made a garden, he made an offering to me. In 
order to dignify him I took a trifle from him. After marching 
four stages from this halting-place, the army of prosperity 
encamped outside Mathura. On Thursday, the 8th, I went 
to see Bindraban and the idol temples of that place. 

* Tlio vilhigu muni be Hiblabad, near Rankatta (Blochmann, 33*2). 



104 


Although* in the time of the late king the Kajput nobles had 
built temples after their fashion, and ornamented them highl}* 
on the outside, inside them bats and owls {ahalnl) had made 
their abode to such an extent, that on account of the mal- 
odours one could not breathe. 

Vbbsx. 

Outside, like an infiders grave, full of cracks, f 
Inside, the anger of God, the honoured and glorioun." 

On this day MuJAli^ E., according to order, came from 
Bengal, and had the good fortune to kiss the threshold. 
He gave 100 muhars and 100 rupees as nazar, and by way 
of offering, a ruby and jewelled aigrette (turra). On Friday, 
the 9th, Rs. 600,000 of treasure for the maintenance (zakHira) 
of the fort of Asir were sent to the Commander-in-Chief, 
[Q^n-khanan. 

In the foregoing pages, something has been written about 
Gosa’in Jadrup,:|: who lived as a hermit in Ujain. At this 
time he changed his residence to Mathura, which is one of 
the greatest places of worship of' the Hindus, and employed 
himself in the worship of the true God on the bank of the 
Jumna. As 1 valued his society, I hastened to wait on him, 
and for a long time enjoyed his company without the presence 
of any stranger. In truth, his existence is a great gain to 
me : one can be greatly benefited and delighted. 

On Saturday, the 10th, the huntsmen represented that 
there was in that neighbourhood a tiger that greatly troubled 

* Jah&ngii* says nothing about tho permiBsion that he gave to Bir 
Singh Doo — as a reward for murdering Abu-1-Fazl — to build a very 
splendid temple at Mathura. It was destroyed by Aurangzib. See 
Growse\s “ Mathura.” 

t Text hatal, which means ‘-weakness,” or i^u/o/ (“striped gar- 
ments”). But according to the MSS., tho true reading ia Jshalal, 
which iiieans “a crack” and also “corruption.” 

X The I((b&l-nfima, 128, calls liim Achadrup, and says that the 
Shun A*K.ain wemt privately to him and begged him to use his influence 
with Jiilifingir for the rclea.so of Kbusrau. Achadrup spoke accordingly, 
and |Sliu.*<raii was rclca.'icd and allowed to pay his respects. • See it fra 
for account of his release. After Jadrup rc^moved to Mathura, he 
was cruelly Ijf'aten by J^ftkini Beg. See Ma'Sairu-MTmarS, I. 576. 



105 


and injured the ryots and wayfarers. I immediately oidered 
them to bring together a number of elephants and surround 
the forest and at the end of the day m3^elf rode out with 
my ladies. As I had vowed that I would not injure any 
living thing with my own hand, I told Nur-Jahan*** to shoot 
at him. An elepnant is not at ease when it smells a tiger, 
and is continually in movement, and to hit with a gun from 
a litter (*%mdr%) is a very difficult matter, insomuch that 
Mirza Rustam, who, after me, is unequalled in shooting, has 
several times missed three or four shots from an elephant. 
Tet Nur-Jahan B. so hit the tiger with one shot that it was 
immediately killed. 

On Monday, the 12th, my desire to see the Goea’In Jadrup 
again increased, and hastening to his hut, without ceremony, 
I enjoyed his society. Sublime words were spoken between 
us. God Almighty has granted him an unusual grace, a 
lofty understanding, an exalted nature, and sharp intellectual 
powers, with a God-given knowledge and a heart free from 
the attachments of the world, so that, putting behind his 
back the world and all that is in it, he sits content in the 
comer of solitude and without wants. He has chosen of 
worldly goods half a gaz of old cotton (hirpas) like a woman’s 
veil, and a piece of earthenware from which to drink water, 
and in winter and summer and the rainy season lives naked 
and with his head and feet bare. He has made a hole in 
which he can turn round with a hundred difficulties and 
tortures, with a passage such that a suckling could hardly 
be put through it. These two or three couplets of Hakim 
Sana’I (may God have mercy on him !) appeared appropriate : 

VXBSB.t 

Luqmftn had a narrow hut. 

Like the hollow of a flute or the Iiokoiii of a harp. 

A noodle put the question to him — 

^ What is this house— two feel and a span ?’ 

Hotly and with tears the sage replied — 

* Ample for him who has to die.' '* 

• Elliot, VI. 367. 

t Luqmln is the Eastern A£sop, and there is much about him in 

D'Herbelot. In the second line the word translated ** hollo\\ is 




106 


On Wednesday, the 14th, I again went to visit the Gosalh 
and bade him good-bye. Undoubted^ parting from him 

guliigdKt literally throat place,” and the word for bosom is sima, 
the whole expression being ttina-i-ehang. Chang is a harp or lyre, 
and apparently the expression refers to the narrowness of the space 
between the horns of a lyre (change which appears to be the Jew’s 
harp), or the sides of a harp. The fourth line is obscure, and the 
version in text seems corrupt. The words ^>idasi du pdy seem 
unintelligible. They, however, occur in I.O. MS. 181, f. 161a, and 
in I.O. MS. 305, f. 225a. The only difference is that they have a 
conjunction after hidaaL On the other hand, the Iqbftl-nftma, which 
inserts the lines into the record of the eleventh year, has, at p. 05, a 
different reading for the fourth line. The woi^ there are S^na 
yak hidaat u aih pay. Bidaai is given in Richardson, and the Farhang-i - 
Radildf as meaning a span, so the line as given in the Iqbftl-nima 
may mean 3 feet and 1 span. The author of the* Iqb&l-n&ma was so 
struck with the verse of Qakim San&’i and the appearance of Jadrup’s 
dwelling, that he composed a mafinavl on the subject, which he gives 
at pp. 05, 06. There is a third version in Daulat Shfth’s anthology, 
p. 07 of Professor Browne’s edition. There, in the second line we, 
have Ipdqa (”ring”), or perhaps ” plectrum” instead of slna. Wo 
have also twd lines not given in the Tuzuk or the Iqb&l-n&ma, and the 
line containing the noodle’s question is given thus : ” Kin chih j&yast 
yak phst u dft pay.” 

** What place is this, one skin (?) and two feet.” 

As if the meaning was that Luqm&n lived in a tent propped up by 
two sticks. In the first line, also, we have instead of; kurichl. 

The lines may be versified thus : 

Luqm&n’s cell was small and narrow to boot. 

Like the throat of a pipe, or the breast of a lute. 

A foolish one said to the grand old man — 

* What house is this — three feet and six span ?* 

With tears and emotion the sage made reply — 

* Ample for him whose task is to die.’ ” 

In the Nawalkuhor edition of ^aldm San&’fs poem the lines are 
entered as in the seventh book of the Qadlqa, but in two B.M. MSS. 
(Add. 25^329, f. 145a, and Or. 358, f. 1726), they are placed in 
the fifth book. Both of these MS& have hidoA apparently, and 
Add. 25,329, has AaA (‘*aix”), but Or. 358 has iftoM. There is 
subh a word, meaning hard ground. Both MSS. have sik (” three ”)• 
Bidaai may properly be bad^pmti/i (** bad-baeked ”), or it may be 
6ad-pasf (” bad and mean ”). The reference in verse may be rather 
to the curvature of the ekang (Arabie, ganf) than to its narrowness, 
for JamI sneaks of the back ” beikg bent Him a harp.” 




3107 


weighed upon my mind, that desixes the truth. On Thursday 
the 16th, 1 marched and pitched near Brindaban. At this 
stage my fortunate son Sultan Parwiz took leave of me for 
Allahabad, and went to his jagir. I had intended that he 
should accompany me on this expedition, but as he had 
already shown symptoms of distress, I could not avoid letting 
him go. I presented him with a tipchaq horse, a waist 
dagger with a veined (/atiAar-rfdr) walrus-tooth (hilt), and 
a sword and special shidd. I hope he wilt come again soon, 
and have the good fortune of my presence. As the period 
of IQiusrau’s imprisonment had been a long* one, it seemed 
to me that to keep him longer in confinement and deprive 
him of the good fortune of waiting on me, would be wanting 
in kindness. I accordingly sent* for him and bade him salute 
me. Once again the marks of his offences were washed with 
the pure water of forgiveness, and the dust of disgrace and 
humiliation was rubbed off his brow. I hope that the 
blessing of pleasing me, and the grace of service may be 
his lot. 

On Friday, the 16th, I gave leave to Mu^iliff K., whom I 
had sent for to take up the duties of diwan to ^h Panunz, 
and I gave him the rank he hadf had in Bengal— viz., 2,000 
with 700 horse. On Saturday I halted. At this stage Sayyid 
Ni^am s. Mir Miran $adr Jahan, who was faujdar of Kanauj, 
waited upon me, and presented'^ two elephants, and some 
hawks. 1 accepted one elephant and a pair of hawks. On 
Sunday, the 18th, we marched. At this time the King of 
Persia had sent with Pari Beg Mir Sjiikar (chief hunstman) 
one falcon (^unqar) of good colour. There was another 
which had been given to the I^n *Alam. Thb one was sent 
along with the gbshi falcon (t .e., the one intended for J ahangir), 
and it died on the road. The Sl*hi falcon, too, got mauled 
by a oat owing to the carelessneso of the Mir Spkar. Though 
it was brought to Ckrazt, it did not live more than a week. 

« Comiiate Pries, 128. 

t Ba diuaiM kih dar Bsa g K I a digit. . 

I think this must maan that his man ware allowed the Bongsl baits, 
ot eaDsptional allowaaoet whieh used to be 60 p.o. of pay elsewliere. 
See A.N., IIL 203, the eis|hth reason lorthe rebellion. 



108 


What can I write* of the beauty and colour of this falcon T 
There were many beautiful black markings on each wing, 
and back, and sides. As it was something out of the common, 
I ordered Ustad Man§ur, who has the title of Nadifu-lra^ 
(wonder of the age) to paint and preservef its likeness. I 
gave the Mir ^har Bs. 2,000 and dismissed him. 

In my father’s reign (the light of God be his testimony !) 
the weight of the seer was 30 dams.{ About this time it came 
into my mind : ‘‘ Why should I act contrary to his rules ?” 
It would be better to have it still of 30 dams. One day 
Gosa’m Jadrup said that in the book of the Vedas, which the 
lords of his faith had written, the weight of the sir was 36 
dams. ** As from the coincidences of the hidden world your 
order has fallen in with what is laid down in our book, if it 
be fixed at 36 dams, it will be well.” It was ordered that 
hereafter throughout the whole territory it should be 36 dams. 

On Monday, the 19th, I marched. A horse and dress of 
honour were given to Raja Bhao Singh, who had been ordered 
to the support of the army of the Deccan. From this day, 
till Wednesday, the 28th, I made successive marches. On 
Thursday, the 29th, Delhi, the abode of blessings, was adorned 

* This passage has been translated by Colonel Phillbtt in the A.S.B. J. 
for February, 1907, p. 113. There is something wrong in the text. 
Kli&n 'Alam certainly did not die on the road. (see Blodnhann, 513), 
for he waited upon Jahftngir at Kal&n ur (Tuzuk, 284) ; nor did 
the Mir Shikftr, for Jahingir says he gave him a present B,nd dismissed 
him. 1 presume, therefore, that the word '* aforesaid ** refers to 
Ifli&n *Alam*s hawk. 

t Nigdh-ddrad, Perhaps this means that the painter was after- 
wards to stuff the bird. 

I This is an obscure passage, and Jadrflp's reference to the mention 
of ddms in the Vedas is curious, for ddm is said to bo derived irom the 
Greek drachma. However, it appears from the Ayih (Blochmann, 31 ), 
that the dam, though in value only the fortieth part of a rupee, weighed 
5 idnka or 1 /ofd, 8 fndgiias, 7 durihs. The rupee, we are told there, 
weighed 11^ mashas — ».e., half a masha less than a tola. Coiifc- 
quently the dam weighed over 20 mashas, and so was not far from 
being equal in weight to 2 rupees. The weight of a seer varied, uiid 
it may be 30 or 36 copper dams wore reckoned as equal to a s^^r. 
By dam Jaliangir probably meant paM, or double pdM. According 
to Gladwin, 3} tanks an^ by jewc<llrr*s weightsssone tolft, and a tank is 
70*112 grs. Troy. 



109 


bf the alighthif^ of ^e armj of good fortune. At first I 
hastMaed' Kitii my ehfidran and the ladies on a visit to the 
enlighten^ thirihe of Humiyfin (may the lights of God be his 
tes^nony !), and Having ‘made our offerings there, went off 
to eiroumambulate the blotted mausoleum of the king of 
holy men YSiaildi Nii^u-d<Kl&i Chi^ti), and strengthened 
my courage, and at the end of the day alighted at the palace, 
which had been got ready in SaHmgarh. On Friday, the 
30th, I halted. As they had at this time preserved the 
hunting-place of the par^na of Palam, according to order, 
it was represented that a great number of antelope had 
collected there. Accordingly, on the 1st of the Divine month 
of Azar I started to hunt* with cheetahs. At the end of 
the day, during the hunt, much hail fell of the size of apples, 
and made the air very cold. On this day three antelope 
were caught. On Sunday, the find, 1 hunted 46 antelope, 
and on Monday, the 3rd, 24 antelope were caught with 
cheetahs. My son 9|ah*Jahin killed two antelope with his 
ffm. On Tuesday, the 4th, five antelope were oaught. 
Wednesday, the 6th, 27 antelope were caught. On Thursday, 
the 6tit, Sayyid ]fohwa Buljiari, who was in charge of tlie 
government of Delhi, made an offering of three elephants 
and'eij^teen horses, and other things. One elephant and 
other things were accepted, and I gave the rest to him. 
Hajj^m of ^oet, faujdhr of some parganas in Mewat, had 
the honour of kiesing the threshold. I employed myself 
within the limits of Pfilam until Thursday, the 13th, in hunting 
with cheetahs. In the space of twelve days 426 antelopes 
were caught, and 1 returned, to Delhi. I had heard, when 
in attendance, on my father, that it is impossible for an 
antdope that has escaped from the grasp of a cheetah to live, 
although it has not b^n injured by its claws. In this hunt 
I, in order to ascertain the fact, released several antelopes 
of handsome appearance and strong bodies, before they had 
receivad^any wounds from teeth or daws, and ordered them 
to be kept in my presence, and diat thqr should be taken the 

* As stated bslow, tlw antelope which were caught all eventually 
tt died. 



110 


greatest care of. For a whole day and night they remained at 
ease in their natural conditions : on the second day a change 
was observed, and they threw about their legs as if they were 
drunk, without any reason, and fell down and rose up. How- 
ever much tiryaq^i-fdruqt (preparation of opium) and other 
suitable medicines were administered to them, they had no 
efiEect. and when one watch had passed in this condition, they 
died 

On this day the bad news arrived that the eldest son of 
Smb PaiwIz^Had died at Agra. As he was somewhat grown- 
up,* and was very attached and affectionate towards his 
father the latter was exceedingly grieved and wounded at 
heart at this event, and great bewilderment and weakness 
manifested themselves in him. In order to console and please 
him, I sent him gracious letters, and covered over the deadly 
wound of his heart with the balm of affection and kindness. I 
hope that God, the gi-eat and glorious, may grant him patience 
and resignation, for in this kind of calamities there can be no 
better driver away of grief than endurance and resignation. 

On Friday, the 14th, at the request of Aqaf Aqayan, I 
went to her house. On account of her previous service and 
her hei-editary attachment to this illustrious family, when 
the late king made me a married man, he took her from my 
sister Sliah-zada Hianam, and placed her in charge of my 
Zanana. It is 33 years from that date that she has been 
in my service, and I esteem her greatly, for she has served 
me with sincerity. In no journey or expedition had the of 
her oaii will remained absent from attendance on me. 'When 
she felt her increasing age, she requested me to order her 
to remain at Delhi, and to spend the remainder of her life 
in prayer for me, for she had no longer the power to move 
about, and found it a great hardship and trouble to come 

* Text gtU-rang^ which Heeins unintelligible. No. 181 MS. han 
hMnak ('* somewhat grown-up**). The child was presumably the 
Sultan Dikr-andiahf bom at the end of the ninth year (Tuxuk, 137), 
and HO was now about hve yeani old. Qul-rang occurs in B.M. MS., 
and may mean ** ruddy.*' 

t Text lias Aghft-i-Agh8niftn. The MSS. have AqS Aq^ySn (** Agba 
of .\gli8S **). 



Ill 


and go (as she used). One of her felicities was that she was 
of the same age* as *A/8h-ashvani (Akbar). In brief, with a 
view to giving her rest, I ordered her to reniuinat Delhi, 
and in that place she had made for herself a garden, a saray, 
and a tomb, in the constructing which she has employed 
herself for some time past. In short, to please this ancient 
servitor, I went to her house, and strictly ordered Sayyid 
Bahwa, the governor of the city, to serve and guard her in 
such a manner that no dust from any road of vexation might 
settle on the hem of her contentment. 

On this day Raja Ki&han Das was promoted to the mansab 
of 2,000 personal and 300 horse, original and increased. As 
Sayyid Bahwaf had performed satisfactorily the duties of 
faujdar of Delhi, and the people of the place were much 
pleased with his excellent conduct, according to previous 
custom, the protection and administration of the city of 
Delhi and the faujdarship of the surrounding country were 
entrusted to him, and he was promoted to the mansab of 
1,000 personal and 600 horse, original and increased, and he 
was presented with ;»n elephant, and allowed to take leave. 
On Saturday, the 15th, I honoured Mirza Wall with the 
mansab of 2,000 and 1,000 horse, and presenting him with 
a standard and an elephant, appointed him to the Deccan. 
Shaildi ‘Abdu-l-^aqq Dihlawi,^ who was a pious and estimable 
man, had the good fortune to pay his respects to me. He 
had composed a book containing the biographies of the 
Shaikhs of India, and produced it to me. He had endured 
some hardships, and for a long time had lived in Delhi in 
seclusion, and the practice of i-eliance on God. and of asceticism. 
He is a very worthy man, and his company is not without 
pleasure (for me). Bestowing various kind.s of kindno.s8C8 
on him, 1 dismissed him. 

On Sunday, the 16th, I marched from Delhi, and on Friday, 

* Akbar was bom in October, 1542. so sue was now seventy-Hcvon 
years old. 

t Sayyid Bahwa is commonly known as Din-dSr K. Buhhtri, and 
is described under that name in the Ma'&sir, II. 23. 

I Elliot, VI. 366, and Kieu, 1. 14 und 355 The book is csllsd 
Aj^biru-l-AkhvSr. id. 



112 


the 2l8t, halted in the pargana of Kaiiana.* This pargana 
is the native place of Muqarrab K. Its climate is equable 
and its soil good. Muqarrab had made buildings and gardens 
there. As I had often heard praise of his garden, I wished 
much to see it. On Saturday, the 22nd, I and my ladies were 
much pleased in going round it.. Truly, it is a very fine and 
enjoyable garden. Within a masonry (puJd^i pucca) wall, 
flowcr-bods have been laid out to the extent of 140 bighas. 
In the middle of the garden he has constructed a pond, in 
length 220 yards, and in breadth 200 yards. In the middle 
of the [)ond is a mah-tab terrace (for use in moonli^t) 22 
yards ^.quare. There is no kind of tree bdonging to a warm 
or cold climate that is not to be found in it. Of fruit-bearing 
trees belonging to Persia I saw green pistachio-trees, and 
cypresses of graceful form, such as I have never seen before. 
I ordered the cypresses to be counted, and they came to «500. 
Ail round the pond suitable buildings have b^ begun and 
are in progress. 

On Monday, the 24th, l^anjar K., in whose charge is the 
Fort of Ahmadnagar, was promoted to the mansab of 2,500 
personal and 1,600 horse. On Wednesday, the 26^, tibc 
Giver of Bounties gave my son S^iah-Jahan a son by the 
daughter of Asaf j^an. He presented an offering of 1,000 
muhars, and begged for a name for him. I gave him the 
name of Umld-baldieh (bestower of hope). I hope his advent f 
may be auspicious to this State. On Thursday, the 27th, 
I halted. In these few days I was delighted with hawking 
the jarzi (bustard or florican) and tuqh-ddn (also a kind of 
bustard). I ordered the jarz-i-bur (the red bustard ?) to 
be weighed. It came to 2| Jahdngm sirs, and the varie- 
gated {abiUiq) one to 2| sirs. The large tu^j^-dari was |> 
sir heavier than the jarz-i-bur. On Thuisday, the 5th of 
the Divine month of Day, I left the boat at Akbarpur, and 

* In SarkSr SahSranpur. Elliot, Supp. Gloee., II. 129. 1.0. new 
edition, XIV. 287. 

t The child was horn at Sirhind on Wednesday, 11 Miiharram, 
1029 (December 8, 1619), and died at Burhlnpui in Rab!*u-f-sini, 
1031 (Fobruary-March), 1622. PSdi^h-nSma, I. 392. 

t Soc Erskino's B&bur, p. 321. 



113 


-the victorious army then marched by land. From Agra to 
this halting-place» which is situated within two koss of the 
pargana of Buriya,*^ is by river 123 koss or 91 koss by road. 
I did it in 34 marches and 17 halts. In addition to this T 
delayed a week in leaving the city, and 12 days in sporting 
in Palam : altogether (I took) 70 days. On this day Jahangir 
Quli K. came from Bihar, and had the good fortune to pay 
his respects. He presented 100 muhars and Rs. 100. From 
the last Thursday to Wednesday, the 11th, I marched every 
day. On Thursday, the 12th, I was pleased with going 
round to see the garden of Sirhind. Tt is one of the old 
gardens, and has old trees in it. It has not the freshness it 
formerly had, but it is still valuable. Kbwaja WaisI, who 
is well acquainted with agriculture and buildings, was 
appointed the Jkorori of Sirhind for the purpose of keeping the 
garden in order. I had sent him off from Agra before I 
marched from the capital, and he had put it somewhat in 
order. I strictly enjoined him again that he should remove 
aH the old trees that had no freshness in them, and put in 
fresh plants, to clean up the Hrqban^-f (it is Hraq-bandi in the 
text. The word does not occur in the B.M. MS. but is in 
the I.O. MS.), and repair the old buildings, and erect other 
buildings in the shape of baths, etc., in fitting places. On 
this date Dfist Beg, who was one of the auxiliaries of ‘Abdu- 
llah K., was promoted to the mansab of 700 personal and 
50 horse, Musaffar ^usain, s. Wazir K., to that of 600 personal 
and 300 horse. Shaildi Qasim was sent to duty in the Deccan. 
On Thursday, the 19th, at the request of my auspicious son 
Shah-Jahan, I went to his house. On account of the birth 
of the son that God Almighty had bestowed on him a grand 
entertainment was given, and he presented offerings. Among 
these was a short, broad sword} (^msAtr-i-ntmcAa), whicli 

* Perhaps this is Bir&'i in Sambhal, Jarrutt, II. 200. Or it may 
bo the MiySni Nuriya of Jarrett, II. 317. 

t To clear the roots ? Or is it to let the sap flow ? Or iM 
bandi right, meaning footpaths ? Jabingfr'a order then won Id br 
to clear out the brick footpaths. 

t Fdb-dtsis. Defined in Vullers as a short, broad sword, niul also 
as a two-edged knife. See Vullers, 151 Os. The wua|M>n is ilesn ilnsd 
in text as A^mjktr-i*nlmeha-i-t^k-diciz. 



114 


was of Venetian workmanship. The hilt and fastenings were 
made of a sapphire*^ cut in Europe : in short, it had been 
beautifully made. Another offering was an elephant which 
the Raja of Baglana had presented to my son in Burhanpur. 
As that elephant was handsome and well-behaved, it was 
ordered to' be included among the private elephants. The 
value of the offerings that were accepted was Bs. 130,000, 
and he offered about Rs. 4,000 to his mothers and benefactors. 
On this day Sayyid Bayazid Bul^ari, faujdar of Bhakkar, 
sent as an offering a rang (ibex), which he had brought from 
the hills when it was small and brought up in his house. It 
pleased me greatly. Of mar-^ur and hill sheep I have seen 
many brought up in the house, but I never saw a rang (tame). 
I ordered them to keep it with the Barbary goats, in order 
that they might pair and produce young ones. Without 
doubt, it is not allied to the mar-khur or the quchqar. Sayyid 
Bayazid was raised to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 
700 horse. On Monday, the 23rd, having honoured Muqim K. 
with a robe of honour, a horse, an elephant, and jewelled 
Ichapwa, I appointed him to Bihar. On Sunday, the 29th. 
a feast was prepared for my auspicious son Shah- Jahan on 
the Dank of the Biya (Beas), and on the same day Raja 
Bikramajit, who was employed in the siege of Kangra, came 
tct Court, by order, to represent certain requirements, and 
had the good fortune to kiss the threshold. On Monday, 
the 30tk. my son Shah-tTahan took ten days’ leave, and 
hastened to Lahore in order to see the palace buildings lately 
erected. Raja Bikramajit was presented with a special 
dagger, a robe of honour, and a horse, and returned to duty 
on th<>. siege of Kangra. On Wednesday, the 2nd of the 
Divine month of Bahman, the garden of Kalanaur was 
honoured by my halting there. At this place my father had 
ascended the throne. 

When the news of the speedy arrival of [Q)to ‘Alam reached 

* Ai nilatn i-farang-lardii,. It is difiicult to suppose that the hilt 
was a PusHibly nilam is the European artist's names or 

nUam-i Jaratt^ m€»> b«* kind of Kiiropean work or matorial. 

Query iiirlUi 7 



115 


the Court, every day I sent one of my servants to meet him. 
1 loaded him with all kinds of favours and kindnesses, and 
added to his rank and dignity, and I decked the headings 
of the faimans sent to him with an impromptu hemistich 
or couplet suitable to the occadion, and so filled him with 
favours. Once I sent him some JahSn^n (otto of roses), 
and this opening verse came on ray tongue : 

Vebse.* 

“To th(K< (ive wnt the seent of inyMolf. 

That I may bring thee the more quickly to mysolf." 

On Thursday, the 3rd (Bahman), at the garden of Kalanaur, 
IQian ‘Alam was honoured by kissing the threshold. By way 
of nasar he brought 100 muhars and Rs. 1,000, and (stated 
that he) Avould present his offerings in due course. Zambil 
Beg, the ambassador of my brother ^ah *Abbas, was following 
him with the royal letter and the rarities of that country 
(Persia), which he had sent as presents. Of the favours and 
kindnees conferred by my brother on Jgtan ‘Alam, if I were 
to write of them in detail, I should be accused of exaggeration. 
In conversation he always gave him the title of {Qs&n ‘Alam, 
and never had him out of his presence. 'If he ever volun> 
tarity stayed in his own quarter, he CAbbas) would go there 
without ceremony, and show him mote and more favour. 
One day there was a qamurgha hunt at Fartukhabad, and 
he ordered f^n ‘Alam to shoot with a bow. Out of good 
manners he brought a bow with -two arrows (only). The 
Shah gave him SO other arrows from his own quiver. It 
happened that 50 of these arrows struck the game, and two 
arrows missed. Then he ordered some of his attendants who 
had the entree at feasts and assemblies to shoot with arrows. 
Moat shot well Among them Muhammad Yusuf (qaiftwul), 
shot an arrow which went through two boars, and those 
who were standing by bmhe out without control into a|^lause. 
At the tioM KhfiB *Alam took hia leave, he seiaed him in the 

* (“my own scent *>. The scent (otto of rases) 

was invented by Jehingir's niother-in>ia w (tbe^ mother of Nfir-Jehtn). 
She called it alter •Isbaiigfr s name. 



lltf 


embrace of bonour, and ahowed him great affection. After 
he had left the city, he went to his hair.: :^'plaoe, and made 
many apologies and bade him farewell As for the beautiful 
and costly things that the Sfefa *Alam brortght, it was indeed 
the assistance of his destiny that gave such rare things into 
his hand. Among them was the picture of the fight of 
,$ahib Qiran (Umar) with Tuqtamii^ K., and the likenesses 
of him an<L^ glorious children and the great Amirs who 
had the good fortune to be with him in that fight, and near 
each figure was written whose portrait it was. In this picture 
there were 240 figures. The painter had uTitten his name 
as Opdil Mirsa ^pihru^ii (in the MS. it is Savaj and not 
Shahru]^). The work was very complete and grand, and 
resembled greatly the paint-brush of Ustad Bihzad. If the 
name of the painter had not been written, the work would 
have been believed to be his. As it was executed before 
Bihzad’s date it is probable that the latter was one of |Q>alil 
Mirza’s pupils, and had adopted his style. This precious 
relic had been obtained from the illustrious library of 
gtuh Isma'il (the 1st), or had come to my brother Shah 
‘Abb&s from ^h 7<^hmasp. A person of tire name of 
^diqi, a librarian of his, had stolen it, and sold it to 
someone. By chance (the painting) fell into the hands of 
IQian 'Alam at Isfahan. The Shah heard that he had found 
such a rare prize, and asked it of him on the pretence of 
looking at it. |Q|an ‘Alam tried to evade this hy artful 
stratagems, but when he repeatedly insisted on it, he sent 
it to him. The Shah recognized it immediately he saw it. 
He kept it by him for a day, but at last, as he knew how great 
was our liking for such rtritieB, he — (Sod be praised — ^made 
no request* whatever for it, but told the facts of the case 
(about its being stolen) to SbSn ‘Alam, and made the picture 
over to him. 

At the time when I sent fSian ‘Alam to Persia, I had sent 
with him a painter of the name of Bi|j|an Das, who was un- 
equalled in his age for taking lik^esses, to take the portraits 
of the Shah and the chief men of his State, and bring them. 

^ Tho moaning of tho elaubo in ol>s«'ure. 



117 


He had drawn the likenesses of most of them, and especially 
had taken that of my brother the Shah exceedhigly well, so 
that when I showed it to any of his servants, they said it was 
exceedingly well drawn. 

On the same day Qasim K., with the Bakhshi and Diwati 
of Lahore, had the good fortune to do homage. Bifhan Das, 
the painter, was honoured with the gift of an elephant. 
Baba Ij^waja, who was one of the auxiliaries of Qandahar, 
was accorded the mansab of 1,000 personal and 550 horse. 
On Tuesday, the 3rd, Madaru4rfnahdfnm% (centre of impor- 
tant affairs) rtimadu-d-daula made ready his army. Inas- 
much as the charge of the Panjab is entrusted, to his agents, 
and he has also various jagirs in Hindustan, he held a review 
of 5,000 horsemen. As the area of Kashmir is not such that 
its produce may suffice for the expenses of the force that is 
always on service with the servants of the army of prosperity, 
and as, in consequence of the teport (of the approach) of the 
glorious and victorious standards, the price of grains and 
v^tables had risen very high, an ordet was given, for th(S 
comfort of the public, that those servants who were in attend- 
ance on the royal stirrup should arrange their retinues, and 
only taking with them those who were indisp^sable, should 
send the remainder to their jagirs, and In the same way 
should take every precaution to reducfe ae far as possible 
the number of their beasts and followers. On Thursday, the 
lOth, my fortunate son, ^h-Jahin letumed from Lahore, 
and had the good fortune to do homage. Having honoured 
Jahan^r QuK K. with a dress of honour, a horse and an 
elephant, I gave him leave to proceed with his brothers and 
sons to the Deccan. On this day X&ii^ Amuli received the 
title of (king of poets), and was clothed 

in a dress of honour. His origin was from Amul. For some 
time he was with rtimadu-d-daula. As the merits of his 
style surpassed that of his contemporaries, he was enrolled . 
among the poem of the throne. The following couplets nre 
by him : 



118 


Vbbss.* 

' Spring longs to rifle thy parterre. 

For the flowers in thy hand ate fresher than those on his 
branch. 

Tve so closed my lips from speech that you’d say 
* His mouth is but a scar on his face.* ”t 

Vbrss. 

Both first and lost. Love is aye music and joy — 

A plfuisant wine both when fresh and when mellow. 

V^BRSX. 

Were I glass instead of body» 

Fd reveal thee to thyself without thy unveiling. 

Two lips have I ; one for drinking. 

And one to apologize for drunkenness.” 

On Monday, the 14th, s. Sulfan Qiwam produced 

thifi quatrain : 

Quatraik. 

” A speck of dust sprinkled on thee from thy skirt 
Becomes Solomon’s oollyiium ; from the moisture of thy facet 
Were the earth at thy door examined. 

The sweat of kings’ brows would exude.” 

At this time Mu^tamid K. repeated a quatrain which greatly 
pleased me, and which I entered in my common-place book : 

QUATRAZH.f 

” You give me the poison of parting to taste, (And say) ' What 
matters it ?’ 

You shed my blood and expel me (and say), * Iflliut matters It ?* 

O, heedless of what your dividing sword can do. 

Sift my dust and then you’ll know.” 

* The first line is obscure and the MSS. do not help. Possibly 
the meaning is Spring thanks thee for robbing his garden, or it may 
be. Spring is exhorted to rob thy gtkrden. The quatrain is also given 
in the Iqbil-nfima, 132, 

t Meaning that the lips were so closed that the mouth iiM>ksd like 
a thin soar. 

t The collyrium of Solomon was something which omibled one to see 
bidden treasures. • 

$ This quatrain is stated in the Iqbai-nflmo, 133, to be by -Blba 
7aiib Isfahan!. Ho is a quite different persem from 1%lib Anitili. 
Tho same quatrain ia given by Abfl-l-Shvl, and I am indebted to 
Mr. Blochmann, p. HOT, for lading able to understand it. Bfibg 




119 


Xalib {i.e.y Baba is family an Isfahan!. In his 

early youth he went to Kashmir clothed as an ascetic and 
calendar, and from the beauty of the place and the pleasant- 
ness of the climate set his heart on the country and settled 
there. After the conquest of Kashmir he joined the service of 
the late king (Akbar), and became e).rolled among the servants 
of the Presence. His age is now nearly 100 years, and he is 
now with his sons and dependants in Kashmir, engaged in 
praying for the everlasting State. 

As it was reported to me that in Lahore one Miyan Shail^ 
Muhammad IVDr by name, who was a Darvish, a Sind! by 
origin, very eloquent, virtuous, austere, of auspicious tem- 
perament, a lord of ecstasy, had seated himself in the comer 
of reliance upon God and retirement, and was rich in his 
poverty and independent of the world, my truth-seeking mind 
was not at rest without meeting him, and my desire to see 
him increased. As it was impossible to go to Lahore, I 
wrote a note to him, and explained to him the desite of my 
heart, and that saint, notwithstanding his great age and 
weakness, took the trouble to come. I sate with him for 
a long time alone, and enjoyed a thorough interview with 
him. Truly he is a noble personage, and in this Age he is 
a great gain and a delightful existence. This suppliant for 
Grace was taken out of himself by companionship with him,* 
and heard from him sublime words of tmth and religious 
knowledge. Although I desired to make him sonie gift, I found 
that his spirit was too high for this, and so did not express 
my wish. I left him the skin of a white antelope to pray upon, 
and he immediately bade me farewell and went back to 
Lahore. 

On Wednesday, the 23rd, I pitched my camp at Daulat- 
abad. A daughter of a gardener was brought before me 

TftKb IsfshSiiI is not mentioned by Dr. Rieii. At Vol. IT., 6796, 
of his Ostakgue, tbetre is an aoeoiint of T^bb Amulf. iiho, it is said, 
died young. BEbS Xilib died somewhat later, and at the age of 
over 100. 8ee Iqbil-uAma, loe. etl., and BsdayQni, 111. 265. 

* A Muhammad k SMmtionod in Beak* as tho author of 

two botdn (siw p. 273, eol. 2). One of thorn was the J&m-i-Juliln- 
numS,and is perhaps the work mentioned in Rk*u, 11. SOOe, V. 




lao 


who had a moustache and a thick beard as big as the hilt 
of a sword. Her appearance was like that of a man. There 
was hair in the middle of her chest as well, but she had no 
breasts.* I discovered by her appearance that she ought 
not to have children. I told some women to take her aside 
and examine her, as perhaps she might be a hermaphrodite. 
They found she was in no way different from other women. 
I have recorded this in this volume on account of its strange- 
ness. 

On Thursday, the 24th, Baqir K., having come from Multan, 
had the good fortune to pay his respects. In the preceding 
pages it has been recorded that Allah-dad, s. Jalala TarikI, 
had deserted from the victorious army and taken the road 
to ruin. He now repented, and through Baqir E. petitioned 
I*timadu-d-daula for pardon. At the latter’s request I 
ordered that if he repented of what he had done, and turned 
his face in hope towards the Court, his crimes would be for- 
given. On this day Baqir K. brought him to Court, and at 
the intercession of I'timadu-d-daula, the traces of disgrace 
and the dust of sorrow were washed off his forehead with the 
pure water of pardon. Sangram, Zamindar of Jammu, was 
honoured with the title of Baja and the xnansab of 1,000 
personal and 500 horse, and was exalted with the gift of an 
elephant and a dress of honour, ^airat E., faujdar of the 
Dft-ab, was promoted to the manssb of 800 personal and 500 
horse. IQiwaja Q&sim received the rank of 700 and 250 horse, 
and Taham-tan Beg, s. Qasim Eoka, received that of 500 
personal and 300 horse. I gave jOian *Alam a private elephant 
with trappings. From this stage, having given Baqir E. the 
mansab of 1,500 personal and 500 horse, I dismissed him 
again to his Subadarship. 

On Monday, the 28th, I pitched in the pargana of Earohi, 
which is on the bank of the Bihat (Jhelam). As this hilly 
country is one of the established hunting-places, the hunts- 
men, according to order, had come on in advance and pre^ 
pared a jarga (ring in ‘which game is enclosed). On Wednes- 
day, the let of the Divine month of Lffandarmuz, they drove 

* Some unnecessary details have been omitted here. 



121 


in the game from six koss. On Thursday, the 2nd, they 
brought them into the enclosure, where 101 head of mountain 
sheep and gazelles were taken. As Mahabat K. had b^n 
prevmted from the good fortune of coming before me for 
a long time, I ordered, at his request, that if he was satisfied 
with the order of afEairs, and was not troubled with regard 
to any occurrence, he should leave his forces at their posts 
(fAofias), and come to Court unattended. On this day he 
had the good fortune to kiss the threshold, and presented 
100 muhars as nazar. IQian ^Alarn was promoted to the 
mansab of 6,000 personal and 3,000 horse. About this time 
a written report came from Nuru-d-din QuB that he had 
repaired the Punch road, and levelled the defiles as far as 
possible, but that snow fell for some days and nights, and 
lay on the hoMs to the d^th of three cubits. It Was 
falling, and if I would delay outside the hiHs for a month, 
I eoidd cross by Idiat route, otherwise it appeared difficult. 
As my intention in tlds undertaking was to see the spring 
and the sprouting of bloom, my chance of seeing this was 
lost by this delay, and I necessarily turned my rein, and the 
royal standards proceeded by the way of PakB and Damtfir. 
On Friday, the 3id, I crossed the River Bihat (Jhelam]r, 
although the water was waist-deep. As it was running very 
fast, and men crossed with great trouble, I ordered them to 
take 200 elephants to the fords, and cross the dEEects of the 
people over, and take across as well those who were weak 
and feeble, so that there might be no loss of life or goods. 

On this day news arrived of the death of Khwaja Jahftn. 
He was one of the old servants, and from the time when I 
was prince. Although at last he left my service, and was for 
some time in that of my father, yet as he had not gone to 
any strange place, this did not weigh heavily on my mind. 
Accordingly, after my accession, I did him such kindness as 
hi. had never conceived possible, and gave him the mansab 
of 5,000- personal and 3,000 horse. I take this opportunity 
to record in this volume an account of hiR idios 3 mcrasy. He 
became practised in great affairs and acquired a wonderful 
skill in business. His capabilities were the result of labour, 



122 


and he was void of natural ability, and of the other qualities 
which are the adornment of men’s nature. On this journey 
he suffered from heart-failure, but for some days, in spite of 
illness and breakdown, he kept up with the mai*ch. When 
his weakness increased, he was allowed to go back at Kalanaur, 
and went to Lahore, and there died a natural death.* 

On Saturday, the 4th of the aforesaid month, the eain{. 
was pitched at the Fort of Bohtas (in the Panjab). I favoured 
Qasim K. with a horse, a sword, and a special shawl (pam- 
narm, literally very soft, and Akbar’s name for a shawl, see 
Blochmann, 90). I gave him leave to go to Lahore. There 
was a small garden by the roadside, and I inspected the 
blossoms. 

At this stage tlhu\ were obtained. The flesh jf the tXhu 
is better than that of the partridge (kabah). 

On Sunday, the 5th, M. Hasan s. MIrza Rustam, was 
promoted to the rank of 1,000 with 400 horse, and was 
appointed to the Deccan. Khwaja ‘Abdu-l-Latif, the chief 
fowler, also received the rank of 1,000 with 400 horse. At 
this place 1 saw a flower, white inside, and red outside, while 
some of them were red inside and yellow outside. In Persian 
they call it La'la-i-hlgdnay and in Hindi thoU kanci.^ Thai 
means land, and as the lotus (kanal) is an aquatic plant, 
they have called this land-lotus.;]; 

On Thursday, the 9th, a report came from Dilawar K., 
Governor of Kashmir, containing the good news of the con- 
quest of Ki^twar Details will be recorded by the pen of 
the newswriter after he (Dilawar) comes to the foot of the 
throne. I sent him a gracious farman with a special dress 
of honour and a jewelled dagger, and granted him the revenue 

♦ Khwftja Jah&n's real name was Dust Muh., and he was from 
Kabul. See. Blochmann, 424. Jahftngir's characterization of him 
is rather obscure, and I am not sure if my translation is correct. 
Jah&ngir had married his daughter. Blochmann, 477, n. 2. 

•f This is the .secKco partridge or Ammnperdrix Bonhami of Jerdon, 
p. 567 of first edition. Jerdon statt^s that in Afghanistan it is called 
the teehoo, and that its flesh is K<iid tf) be delicious. 

+ Apparently this is the Hibiscus mufabilia, for which the Bengali 
name is thal padnvi ( ** l.mcl hitiis “). 



123 


of the conquered province for a year, as a reward for this 
acceptable service. On Tuesday, the 14th, I halted at 
9asan Abdal. As the occurrences on this road and part iculars 
of the stages have been related in detail in the account of the 
expedition to Kabul, I shall not repeat them. From this 
place as far as Kashmir, they will be written stage by stage, 
please Almighty God. From the date on which, disembarking 
from a boat, I reached Akbarpur in safety and prosperity, 
up to Qasan Abdal, a distance of 178 koss, I took 69 days 
in 48 marches and 21 halts.* As at this place there is a 
spring full of water, and a cascade, and a very beautiful 
reservoir, I halted here two days, and on Thursday, the 16th 
(Isfandarmuz), the feast of my lunar weighing took place. 
The 53rd year, according to lunar calculation, of this suppliant 
at the throne commenced auspiciously As beyond this 
stage, hills, passes, and many ups and downs were before us, 
the passage of the camp appeared a difficult matter, and it, 
was settled that H. M. Maryamu-z-zamanI and the other 
Begams should delay for some days, and come on at leisure. 
Madaru*bmulk I'timadu-d-daula al-lQiaqani, $adiq K. 
Ba ldishi . and Iradat K. Mir-Saman, with the directors of the 
buildings and other offices, should attend to their transit. 
At the same time Rustam Mirza ^afawl, ^an-A‘^m, and 
H number of other servants, obtained leave to go by the 
Punch road, while the royal retinue went on with some 
privileged courtiers (manzurdn-t-bisd^n-^arb) and the neces- 
sary servants. On Friday, the 17th, we marched 3| koss, 
and halted at the village of Sultanpur.f On this day came 
the news of the death of Rana Amar Singh, who hi^d died 
a natural death at Udaipur (become a traveller on the road 
of non-existence). Jagat Singh, his grandson, and Bhlm,:^ 
his son, who were in attendance on me, were presented with 
dresses of honour, and an order was given that Raja Kishan 
I/as should proceed with a gracious farman conferring the 

* The word for twenty is omitted in text, and also in Elliot, VI. :167. 

t ** On the southern bank of the Harroh Riv<fr,*' Elliot, VI. .307. 

t Bhim was the younger brother of Karan (Tod). The passage 
is translated in Elliot, VI. 367. 



124 


title of Baiu, a dnss of hoiioar, a hone, and a private elephant 
for Kttnar Karan, to perform the dees of condolence and 
congratulation. I heard* people of this country that 
when it is not the rainy season, uid there is no sign of a 
cloud or lightning, a noise like the voice of the clouds comes 
from this hill, which they caUed Garj (thunder). This noise 
is heard every year or at least every two yean. I had 
repeatedly heard of this also when I was in attendance on 
the late king. I have written this as it is not devoid of 
strangeness,^ but wisdom is from Allah. On Saturday, the 
18th, marching 4| koss, I halted at the village of Sanji. 
From this stage I entered the pargana of Haaara Qarlugh.t 
On Sunday, the 19th, marching 3} koss, I halted at the 
village of Naushahra.$ From this place we entered Dhant&r. 
As far as the eye could reach there were green meadowsK 
intenpCned with the thid^hanmd hibiscus) and other flowen 
in bloom. It was a very befjMifnl «|^t. On Monday, the 
20tbi mtttiehMg 3^ Imasi the cMsrp was pitcAied at the viflage 
of Salhat.*^ Mahabut K. prsIblfitM^aa effCrii^ jefwek aftit 
inlaid vessels to the value of Be. 60^000. Vhfa cewHtfy 
I saw a flower of the redness of fire, of the shape of 
kAoimi,** but smaller, 'andlseVeMl' fliOir^ Mooraing together 
in one place, lookedirom a distance as if they were one flower. 
Its stem u of the size of the apricot-tiee. On the hiil-iriopes 
here there are many wild violet8,ft with a very sweet scent, 
but paler than the violet. On Tuesday, the 21st, marching 
3 koss, I halted at the village of MalgalB. On this day 
I dismissed Mahabat K. to his duty in Bangash, uid con- 

* ElUot. VI. 308 and «. 1. t Elliot, VI. 368. and note. 

X Elliot has Hazftra F&ngh- 

§ On tho oMtem bank of tho Dhor. Elliot, toe. eh. 

II Elliot has : As far as the pyo pould reach, tho blos^pm^ of the 
ihal kanwait and other flowers were glowing between the green foliage. 
It was a beautiful scene.' * 

|[ Salhas in text, but Sflihar in Elliot. 

•• Ifanh-mallow of Stoingass and Elliot. Query Hollyliock '/ 
tt The word violeta cibcani in MS. Ifll and also in Elliot, 
it The Bib. Ind. edition. Iqldll-n&ma. p. 135, changes this into 
Plskli. MS. 181 has Bankli (?) apparently. P^hkli is probably not 
right, for the entrance to it ia mentioned lower down. 



126 


fencd on him a special elephant and dress ol honour with 
a puBdin (sheepskin coat). This day there was a drizzling 
rain till the end of the march. On the eve of Wednesday, 
the 22nd, also there was rain. In the morning snow fell, 
and as most of the roads had become very slippery, the weak 
animals fell in every place, and could not rise again, and 
25 of my own elephants were lent to assist* them. 1 halted 
for two days on account of the snow. On Thursday, the 
23nl, Sultan l^usain, Zamindar of Pakli, had the good fortune 
to pay his respects: this is the entrance to the Pakli country. 
It is a strange thing that when H. M. Akbar came here it 
snowed at this stage, and it has now snowed as well. For 
many years no snow has fallen, and there has even been 
little rain. On Friday, the 24th, I marched 4 koss and 
pitched at the village of Sawadnagar.f On this road, too 
there was much mud.{ Apricot and peach trees were bloom- 
ing on all sides, and fir-trees like cypresses rejoiced the eye. 
On Saturday, the 25th, having marched nearly 3} koss, the 
camp was pitched near Pakli. On Sunday, the 26th, I rode 
out to hunt partridges (habak), and at the end of the day, at 
the request of Sultan ^usain, went to his house, and increased 
his dignity among his equals and neighbours. H. M. Akbar 
had also gone to his house. He offered several kinds of 
horses, daggers, hawks, and falcons. I presented him with 
the horses and daggers. I ordered the hawks and falcons 
to be got ready! {iomar bar baita)^ and shown, everything 

* Tofodduq Aud. This is how Mr. Rogers has translated the 
passage, and this seems to me to be right* Elliot has **lost^'* but 
surely Jahingfr would not pass over so lightly the loss of 26 elephants. 
Tofodduq is often used in the sense of afansgiving, or of granting a 
favour. The text 290, line 2, has ol^-ft-rdh haMa biUL The woil 
basta seems unintelligible, and in the corresponding passage of the 
Iqiaf^nZma, 136, the words are akuard-rdh ajama hid. This word 
perhaps moans muddy,*' and this would fit the sense. 

t Elliot has Tawfidkar. 

t Aehamba, But MS. 306 has ajamat» and this may mean forest, 
or woods. Perhaps Elliot’s "mud” is a clerical error for woodi 
but ajamai means pools as well as woods. Perhaps this Is the same 
word as ooonrs in the Iqbfil-nima, 136, and means ” muddy.” 

i So in text» but the MSS, ha garoB haiia ("loosely tied ”), so that 
39 tliey could be thrown off if any game appeared. 



126 


that might fly up. The Surkar of Pakli is 35 kow in length 
and 25 in hieadth. On the east, on two sides, is the hill 
oountiy of Kashmir; on the west, Atak Benares (Atak); on 
the north, Kator; and on the south, the Oakkar country. 
At the time when .Timur, after conquering Hindustan, turned 
his rein haokwards towards ther capital of TOran, they say 
that he placed in these regions this body of people, who were 
in attendance on the victorious stirrup. They say them- 
selves that they are Qarlughs, hut do not know for certain 
who was their leader at that time. In ^Mst, they are pure 
Lahauris, and speak the same language. The people of 
Dhantflr think the same thing. In the time of my &ther, 
one of the name of ^hru^ was Zamindar of Plumtar; now 
it is Bahidur, his son. Although they are all related to one 
another, there are always disputes, as is usual with Zamindars, 
about boundaries. They have always been loyal. Sultan 
Mahmad, the father of Sultan H^uutin and ^hrul^, both 
came to wai^ on me when I was prince. Although Sultan 
Husain is sevmity years old, to all outward appearance there 
is no diminution in his powers, and he can still ride and be 
as active as possible. In this country they make huza (a 
beverage) from bread and rice, which they call tor.* It is 
much stronger than hum, and the older it is the better. This 
tor is their chief sustenance. They put this sor into a jar, 
and fastening it up, keep it for two or three years in the house. 
Then they take off the scum and call the liquor oeUa. The 
dcMi can be kept for ten years, and according to them, the 
older it is the better, and the shortest time in which they use 
it is a year. Sultan MahmQd used to take cup after cup of 
this sor; nay I he would drink a jar of it. Sulljan Husain is 
also addicted tc it, and brought me some of his choicest 
quality. I took some in order to try it. I had also drunk 
it before. Its intoxicating effects are aphrodisiac, but its 
taste is harsh. It appeared that they mix some Mdnp (bang) 
with it, which increases its intoxicating power. If them 
were no wine, it could in case of iteoessity bs used as a sub- 
stitute. The fruits are apricots, peadies, and pears (t) (amrBd). 

* Elliot hM sir 



127 


As they do not cultivate them, but they spring up of them- 
selves, they ate haish-flavouied and unpleasant. Their 
blossoms ate a joy. Their houses are of wood, and are built 
after the Kashmiri fashion. They have hawks, and horses, 
cameb. oattk, and buffaloes, and many goats and fowb. 
Their mules ate small and ate not fit for heavy loads. As it 
was represented to me that some stages krther on the 
cultivation was not such as to provide sufficient grain for 
the royal camp, I gave an order tlut they should only 
take a small advanced camp, sufficient for our needs 
and the necessary establishments, and diminish the number 
of ebphants, and take with them provisions for three or 
four days; that they should take with them only some of 
the immediate attendants on the royal stirrup, and that 
the rest of the men should come on some stages behind 
under the command of fQ^waja Abft-l-^MAii, the Bakhshi. 
In spite of precautions and injunctions, it was found necessary 
to have 700 ebphants for the advanced camp and the 
establishments. 

The mansab of Su’(an 9^^*^ 400 personal and 300 

horse; I now promoted him to 600 personal and 350 horse, 
and conferred on him a robe of honour, a jeweUed dagger, 
and an ebphant. Bahadur DhantQri was an auxiliary of 
the army of Bangash. An order was given that he should 
hold the mansab, original and increased, of 200 personal and 
100 horse. On Wednesday, the 27th. having marched 5^ koss, 
and crossing by bridges the Nainsukh,* I chose a halting* 
pbce. Thu Nainsukh (repose of the eyes) flows from the 
North, and comes down from the hilb of Dardf (1), which 
b between the country of Badskhshan and Tilwt. As at 
this place it forms two branches, they had, according to order, 
prepared two wooden bridges for the crossing of the victorious 
army, one 18 cubits and the other 14 cubits in bngth, with 
a breadth each of 5 cubits. The way in which they make 

* Now known as the Kunhkr. It riaes in Lake Lohusur at the 
head of the Klgln glen. See LG., oM edition, VUI. .165, and ditto 
new edition, XI V. S7S, for Klgin Valley. 

t Text WM. IqhU*nlina' 136 hat Kah-i-WItah. MS. 181 
aecma to hnre Dtrd. 



128 


bridges in this countrj.ia to throw pine-trees* on tlw surface 
of tbe water, and fasten the two ends strongly to rooks, and 
having thrown on to these, thick planks w(^, make them 
firm with p^ and ropes, an^ these, with a little repair, 
last for years. Briefly, they made the elephants ford, 
whilst the horsemen and foot passed over the bridge. 
Sul|an Malpnfld called this river Nainsukh — that is, “ Repose 
of the eye.” On Thursday, the 80th, having marched about 
3| koss, a halt was made on the bank of the Ej^^an Gangs. 
On this road there is a kotei of great height, the ascent being 
1 koBs, and the descent 1} koss, which they call Pim dorang. 
The reason for this name is that in the language of Kashmir 
they call cotton (pomba) fiim. As the rulers of Kashmir had 
placed a superintendent there, who took duties from loads 
of cotton, and delay takes place here for the collection of the 
duty, it has become known as the Pirn ddranyf (cotton delay). 
•After traversing the pass, there is a very fine and clear water- 
fall. Having drunk my usual cups on the edge of the water 
in the shade of the trees, I went on to my halting-plaoe in' 
the evening. There was an old bridge over this river, 64 yards 
long and 1| yards wide, which footmen crossed 1^. Accord- 
ing to orders, another bridge was prepared parallel tp this, 
in length 53 yards and breadth 3 yards. As the water was 
deep and swift, they took the elephants across without loads, 
and the footmen and horses crossed by the bridge. By 
order of my father, a very strong saray of stone and lime was 
erected on the top of the ridge overlooking the river. One 
day before New Tear’s Day we had sent Mutamid K. forward 
to select a spot for the placing of the throne and preparing 
the New Year’s entertainment. This had to be lofty and 
choice. By chance, as he crossed the bridge, there was a 
ridge overlooking the water, green and pleasant. On the 
top of this was a flat place of 50 cubits which one might say 

* Text tkdUdSr ('* with branchM but the true reading sooms 
to be edf (» pine ”). ElUot has “ atl.” 

t TUi ia a fanoifnl deriration. The word ia not daiang, but drang, 
which means a watch-station. See Stein, A.S.B.J., for 1899, p. 84. 
The Bamba-drang, however, was near the Kiihsa GangS, and so is 
not the drang mentioned by Stein. 



129 


the rulers of fate had speoially prepared for such a day. The 
aforesaid officer had made ready everything necessary for 
the New Year’s feast on the top of that ridge, which was 
much approved. Mu'tamid K. was much applauded for this. 
The river Blie^an Ghuiga comes from the south’^ and flows 
northwards. The Bihat (Jhelam) comes from the ESast, and 
joining the Ki^an Ganga, flows to the North. 

* A mistaka. See Elliot VL 379» note. 



THE FIFTEENTH 
NEW-YEAR’S FEAST AFTER THE 
AUSPICIOUS ACCESSION 

The tfjuasit of the aun, that 'fulfils the hopes of the world, 
into his house of honour in Aries, took place on Friday, the 
15th of the month of Rabru-§-gani in the Hijri year 1029, 
(10 March), 1620, after 12J gharis, or 6 sidereal hours,* had 
passed, and the 15th year of the reign of this suppliant at the 
throne of Allah commenced happily and auspiciously. On 
Saturday, the 2nd (FarwanUn), having marched 4^ koss, I 
halted at the village of Baldcar. On this road there was no 
hiU-pass (iola{), but it was rather stony. I . saw peacocks, 
black partridges, and monkeys (fangur), such as exist in the 
Garmsir country (Afghanistan). It is evident that these 
can also exist in cold countries. From this place to 
K a shmir the road is along the bank of the river Bihat. 
There are hills on both sides, and in the bottom of the 
valley the water flows with great force, boiling and raging. 
However large an elephant may be, he cannot hold his feet 
firmly in it, but immediately rolls over, and is carried away. 
There are also watei^dogst in the river. On Sunday, the 
3rd, marching 4| koss, I pitched at MOsaran. On the eve 
of Friday the merchants who live in the pargana of Bara 
Mfila came and paid their respects. I asked the reason of 
the name of Bara mfila, and they represented that in the 
Hindi language they call a boar Barah {Varaha) and mfila 

* Each sideieal hour being equal to 2) gharis. 
t Sag-i-M. Probably otters are meant, as a name for them is 
pdni huUA (** water-dogs **). Butin the dictionaries sog-t-dbi is given 
as meaning the beaver. The otter occurs in Kashmir, and is known 
as wudar. Lawrence, Valley of Kashmir, ill. 

180 



131 


a plaofi— 4hat is, the boars* plaoe. Among the inoamations 
that belong to the religion of the Hindus, one is the boar 
incarnation, and Barah mtUa by constant use has become 
Bara mula. On Monday, the 4th, marching 2) koss, 1 
pitched at Bhulbas. As they said these hills were very 
narrow and diflEleult (to pass), and they could be crossed 
by a crowd of men only with great trouble, 1 gave orders to 
Mu'tamid K. that, with the exception of A^af K. and a few 
of the necessary attendants, no one should be allowed to 
march along with the prosperous stirrup (with the king 
personaUy), and the camp should be kept one stage behind. 
By chance, before this order was given, he had sent on his 
own tent. After this he wrote to his men that this order 
had been given with regard to him, and they should halt at 
whatever spot they had reached. His brothers heard this 
at the foot of the kotal of BhiUbas,*^ and pitched their own 
tent there. When the royal host reached the place, snow 
and rain began to fall. One plain of the road had not been 
crossed when his tent became visible. Looking on this as 
a gift from the hidden world, I and the ladies alighted, and 
remained protected from the cold and snow and rain. His 
brothers, according to orders, sent someone in haste to summon 
him. When the news reached him that the elephants and the 
advance camp had arrived -at the top of the fotof, and blocked 
up the road, as it was impossible to ride, with great zeal, he, 
not knowing his head from his feet, traversed a distance of 
2( koss on foot in two hours, and came to wait on me, and 
repeated this couplet with the tongue of gesture.f 

VXBSE. 

** At midnight came the thought of Uiee. .1 was ashamed and resigned, 
my life. 

The poor man was abashed when suddenly the guest arrived.** 


* Properly BUliylsa. See Stein, A.S.B.J., for 1809, p. 85. It* is 
tlio Peliasa of the maps. Later on, Jahlngir indicates its position by 
saying that it is 11 koss on the Kashmir side of the Kishan GangS. 

t That is, I presume, he did not really utter the words, but his 
appearance represented them. The Iqbai-n&ma has, p. 138, tnihmdn 
chu Biga (**a guest such as a Begani*'). MS. 181 lins ndgah chu 




132 


All that was in his store QAtat) in the way of money and 
goods, of live stock or dead, he offered for me to tread upon. 
1 gave them all back, and said: “ What do worldly goods 
appear worth to the eye of our magnanimity % We buy the 
jewel of loyalty at a high ffgiro. Such an event arising 
out of his devotion should be reckoned as the rising of his 
good star, in that a king like me with the people of his harem 
should remain in his house in comfort and at ease for a night 
and a day. It would be a cause of honour to him among 
his contemporaries and comrades.’’ On Tuesday, the 5th, 
having traversed 2 koss, I alighted at the village of Kaha’i.* 
1 presented the dress (sar u pay) I had on to Mu*tamid K., 
and an order was given assigning him the mansab of 1,500 
personal and l,500f horse. From this stage we entered 
within the boundary of Kashmir. In the same kotal of 
Bhfflhas, Ya*qub, s. Yusuf K. Ka^mlri, fought with the 
victorious army of my father, of which Raja Bhagwan Das, 
father of Raja Man Singh, was the leader. 

On this day, the news came that Suhrab K., s. Rustam 
Htrza, had been drowned in the Jhelam. The details are 
as follows: He, according to orders, was coming up one stage 
in the rear, and on the road it came into his mind that he 
would have a bathe in the river, though warm water was 
ready The people forbade him, and said that when the air 
was so cold, unnecessarily to get into a river so agitated and 
bloodthirsty that it would roll over a war-elephant, was 
contrary to the dictates of caution. He* was not restrained 
by their words, and as the unavoidable destined time had 
arrived, got in. From excessive self-will and pride and care- 
lessness, in reliance on his powers of swimming, in which art 
he was unequalled, he was more determined than ever, and 
with a !^idma£iyya (Blochmann 252) and another servant, 
both of whom could swim, mounted a rock on the river bank 

Svtfdn. I.O. MS. 306 has ndgah chu mihmdn. The reading Begs or 
Begam certainly seems preferable. The text is wrong as usual^ and 
lias mihdn C*the great”), unless it is to be read mahdn^ and taken 
in the sense of Moons — i.c» ladies. 

« The IqbSl nima, 139, has KahtS'i. 

t The IqbSl-nIma, 139, has 600 horse. 




133 


and threw himself in. Immediately he fell, from the violent 
movement of the waves, he could not pull himself together 
or try to swim; to fall in and go were the same thing, and 
Suhrab K.* and the IMdmaiRyjfa thus gave away the goods 
of their lives to the flood of destruction. The boatman, f 
with a hundred difficulties, brought the boat of his being 
(himself) in safety to the shore. Mirza Rustam was much 
attached to this son. On hearing of this fatal news on the 
Punch road, he rent the robe of patience, and showed great 
agitation. With all his dependants, clothed in mourning 
garments, with head and feet bare, he came to wait on me. 
What shall 1 write of the grief of the mother ? Although 
the Mirza has other sons, his heart was bound up in this one. 
His age was twenty-six years. In shooting with a gun he was 
an excellent pupil of his father, and knew well how to drive 
elephants and carriages. On the expedition to Qujarat he 
was often ordered to ride on the front part of my private 
elephant, and he was an active soldier.^ 

On Wednesday, the 6th, marching 3 koss, I pitched at the 
village of Biwand. On Thursday, the 7th, crossing the hatal 
of Kuwarmat,§ which is the most difficult on this road (MS.), 

I alighted at the village of Wachaha (MS. and print differ). 
The distance of this stage is 4^ koss. The hotal of Kuwarmat 
(Kulamat in the MS.) is a difficult one, and is the last of the 
kaUda on the road. On Friday, the 8th, having traversed 
nearly 4 koss, I halted at the village of Baltar.|| There was 

* The name ot M. Rustam’s son, who was drowned. 

t which means a wrestler. But Jahftngir puns on the 

word as if it wore (“a boatman”). Perhaps kughtigir was 

his name. I presume that the person meant is the other servant. There 
was no boat there. The IqbU-nima nas either kiahtlgir, or kuaktigir. 

t There is an extraordinary account of the Minft’s death Sn Price's 
Jahangir” which quite differs from the story told here, See Price, 
p. 138. It is also stated there that he had been married six months 
before to a daughter of I‘timidu-d-daula. There is also an account 
of the accident in the IqbZl-nZma, p. 139. | Or Kuwinnast. 

I) Perhaps we should read Buniyftr. See Stein, loc, cif, p. 87. 
Jahingir seems co have crossed over to the left bank of the Jhelam 
in the course ot his march. Pierhaps he did so at Ooriu of toe map 
(Ori). Buniyar seems to be the Bhaniar of th«» map. 1.0. MS. 181 
has Butiyftr. 



134 


no koteH on this toad. It was broad, and plain after plain, 
and mead after mead, of flowers. Sweet-smelling plants of 
narcissus, violet, and strange flowers that grow in this country , 
came to view. Among these flowers I saw (noticed espewUy) 
one extraordinary one. It had five or six orange flowers 
blooming with their heads downwards. From the middle of 
the flowers there came out some green leaves, as in the case* * * § 
of the pineapple (!). This is the buZ&ilht flower. There is 
another flower like the puy (?), round w;hioh are small flowers 
of the shape and colour of the jessamine, some blue in colour 
and some red, with yellow points in the middle, exceedingly 
pretty in appearance: its name is “ Zadar pu4i.” They call it 
puj^-i-*aZtyyu-Z-‘umum| (the common pu^ f). There are many 
yellow curghawan (Judas-trees) on the road as well. The 
flowers of Kashmir are beyond counting and calculation. 
Which shall I write of 1 And how many can 1 describe ? I 
have only mentioned the most remarkable. There is a water- 
fall on this road, very high and fine. It flows down from a 
high place. No other waterfall of such beauty was seen on 
the road. I delayed a moment at it, and filled my eye and 
heart with gasing on it from a high spot. On Saturday, 
the 9th, I marched 4f koss, and crossed over at Baramfila.§ 
It is one of the noted towns of Kashmir, and 14 koss|f distant 
from the city, situated on the bank of the Bihat. A munber 
of the merchants of Kashmir live in it, imd have built houses 
and mosques on the bank of the river, and spend their days 
in ease and contentment. According to orders, before the 
arrival of the host of prosperity, they had prepared decorated 

* The allusion may be to the tuft of leaves at the top o( a pine- 
apple. 

t Peiliaps bfilS att. 

X PSik nteane flower in Kashmiri. Does ths name mean “ flower 
of ‘AH the Perfect” T 

§ BSiamflla is on the left hank of the Jhelam according to the LG., 
new edition. But maps and travellers see m to place it on the right 
bank. 

!| Fourteen koss seem too little. The distance to Srinagar seems 
to be 31 miles by the road. The old city Vicamaia was on the ri(ht 
hank. Stein. 201. It is 32 miles from Srinagar. 



135 


boats at the plaoe. A&* the hour lor entry (into Srinagar) 
had been fix^ for Monday, when two watohes of the day 
had passed, on Sunday, the 10th, I entered 9iihabu-d-din-pllr. 
On this day Dilawar E. Eakar, the (Governor of Kashmir, 
came from Ejflhtwar,t and had the good fortune to kiss the 
threshold. He was exalted with various royal favours and 
all kinds of imperial gratifications. He had done his duty here 
in an acceptable manner, and it is hoped that the great Giver 
of favours'may light up the foreheads of all my servants with 
honour. 

Ei Atwar is to the south of Kashmir. From the city of 
Kashmir (Srinagar) to the stage of Alkah (?)4 which is the 
capital of Euhtwar, the distance is 60 koss by measurement. 
On the 10th of the Ilahi month of S^hriwar, in my 14th year, 
Dilawar E., with 10,000 horse and foot, determined to conquer 
Eiehtwar. He appointed his son, Hasan by name, with Gird 
'All Mlr^hr (admiral) to guard the city and administer the 
territory. And as Gohar Chak and Alba Chak laid claim to 
Kashmir as heirs, and were stirring up strife in EiAtwar, and 
were Wandering in the valley of confusion and ruin, he left 
Haibat, one of his brothers, with a force at Desfi, which is 
near the Jcotal of Fir Panjal, by way of caution, and, dividing 
his forces at that place, he himself hastened with a force by 
the road of San^pur, sending his son Jalal, with Nafru-Ualk 
"Arab, and "Ali Malik Eaehmiri, and a band of Jahangiri 
servants by another road, and his elder son Jamal with a 
band of zealous young men as an advanced guard to his own 
force. At the same time he placed two other forces to move 
forward on his right and left. As no horses could go on the 
road, by way of precaution he took some with him, but left 

^ There is an omission in the text here. The MSS. have : ** As 
Monday had been fumd for entering Srinagar, I did not think it 
advisable to halt at this stage, but immediately entered boats with 
the ladies and proceeded on with blessings towards the goal. On 
Sundayt the lOth, when two watches of the day had passed, I arrived 
at ShiUbu-d-dih-p&r.*’ 

t See Jarrett, II. 310, a. 7. 

X The MSS. have LS ? Apparently the kah of text is a relative 
pronoun and not part of the name. F^rhups in Liid.'ikh is ‘the 
place meant. 



136 


nearly* all his sipahis’ horses behind, and sent them to Kash- 
mir (t.6., Srinagar). The young men girded the belt of duty 
on their waists, and went up the hills on foot. The gjhazia 
of the army of Islam fought from post to post with the ill- 
fated unbelievers as far as Narkot, which was one of the 
enemy’s strongholds. There the corps of Jalal and Jamal, 
which had been sent by different roads, met, and the enemy, 
not having the power to oppose them, took to flight. The 
brave ones who offered their lives traversed many ups and 
downs with the courage of determination, and hastened on 
to the Maru river. On the bank of that river the fire of 
slaughter was lighted, and the ghazts of the army of Islam 
displayed approved activity. The ill-iated Aiba Chak, 
with many of the people of ruin, were slain. By the death 
of Aiba the Raja became powerless and without heart, and 
took the road of flight, and, crossing by the bridge, stopped 
at Bhandarkot, which is on the other side. A band of the 
brave ones (bahddurdn) quickly advanced, wishing to cross the 
bridge. A great fight took place at its head, and some of the 
young men attained to martyrdom. In this way for twenty 
days and nights the servants of the Court tried to. cross the 
river, and the unbelievers of darkened fortune did not fail 
to attack and try to drive them back, until Dilawat K., after 
establishing thdnaa and arranging for the commissariat, 
arrived with his army. The Raja, by way of stratagem and 
vulpine trickery, sent his Vakils to Dilawar K., and begged 
that he might send his brother with offerings to the Court, 
so that when his offences obtained pardon, and his mind 
were freed from tear and trouble, he could also himself proceed 
to the Court, the refuge of the world, and kiss the threshold. 
Dilawar K. did not lend his ear to these deceitful words, and 
did not throw away from his hand the coin of opportunity. 
He dismissed the envoys of the Raja without the attainmejit 
of their object, and m^e every exertion to cross the bridge. 
His eldest son Jamal, with a band of the crocodiles of the sea 
of bravery and valour, went up the river, and by bravely 
swimming it although svv'oUen crossed over, and engaged in 

* Dor hdL (*' in gc>neral, in bulk *’) (T). 



137 


a fierce battle with the enemy. The devoted servants of the 
Court made an attack from the other side, and made matters 
tight for these ruined people. These, when they found they 
had no longer the strength to oppose them, broke down the 
planking of the bridge, and took to flight. The victorious 
servants made the bridge strong again, and transported the 
remainder of the army. Dilawar H^n drew up his forces at 
Bhandarkot. From the aforesaid river (the Maru) to the 
Chenab, which is a strong support of these unfortunate 
people, is a distance of two bow-shots, and on the bank of 
the Chenab there is a lofty hill. The crossing of the water is 
a difficult matter, and, with a view to the coming and going 
of people on foot, they attach strong ropes, and place planks 
of the width of a cubit between two ropes, and fasten one 
rope’s end to the top of the hill, and the other on the other 
side of the water. Then they attach two other ropes a gaz 
higher than these, that foot-passengers may place their feet 
on the planks, and, taking hold of the upper ropes, may 
descend from the top of the hill to the bottom, and so cross 
the river. This bridge they call zampa, in the language of 
the people of the hill country. Wherever they apprehended 
that a rope bridge might be constructed, they stationed mus- 
keteers and archers and men-at-arms, and so felt secure. 
Dilawar K. made rafts (jhala)y and, placing on them eighty of 
his valiant young men, sent them across the river at night. 
Aa the water was flowing with great violence, the rafts were 
carried down by the flood of destriction, and sixty-eight of 
these gallant men were drowned in the sea of non-existence, 
and obtained the renown of martyrdom, whilst ten, by the 
aid of swimming, reached the shore of safety (t.e., returned), 
and two on the other side became prisoners in the hands of the 
infidek. In short, foi four months and ten days Dilawar 
Khan, having planted the foot of courage at Bhandarkot, 
r^ade endeavours to cross over; but the arrow of stratagem 
did not reach the target of intent until a Zamindar pointed 
out a place which the enemy had no idea of. There, having 
constructed a zampah, in the heart of night, Jalal, Dilawar 
K/s son, with some of the servants of the Court and a band of 



1S8 


Aighans, about 200 in number, aoesed over in safety, made 
unawares in the morning an attadc on tbe Raja, and blew 
loudly tbe trumpets of victory. A few who were around and 
before the Raja rudied out, bewildered, half asleep and half 
awake, and most of them became the harvest of the blood- 
drinking sword, while the rest quickly withdx^ themselves 
from that whirlpool of calamity. . In that encounter one of the 
soldiers came upon the Raja, and wished to finish him with a 
sword. He called put: “I am the Raja; take me alive to 
Dilawar j^an.” Thb men rushed on him and made him 
prisoner. After die Raja was made prisoner, his people all 
fled. T^ai Dilawar giin heard this good news of victory, 
he prostrate himself in thankfulness to Allidi, and, having 
crossed the river-with the victorious army, came to Mandal 
Badr,* which was the capital of the country, and is 3 koss 
from the river. The daughterf of Sangram Raja of Jammu, 
and the daughter of the abandoned Sfiraj Mai, s. Raja Baso, 
were in the Raja’s house ^*. 0 ., married to him). By San- 
grim’s daughter he had children. Before the victory he had, 
by way of caution, sent his family for refuge to the Baja of 
Jaswil and Other Zamindars. 'l^en my victorious retinue 
approached, Dilawar according to order, took tbe Raja 
with him, and came to kiss the threshold, leaving Naftu-Uah 
’Arab with a body of horse and foot to guard the country. 

In Ei|j^twfir there ate produced much wheat, barley, lentils, 
millet, and pulse. Differing from Kashmir, it produces little 
rice. Its saffron is finer than that of Kashmir. About a 
hundred hawks and folcons ate caught there (annually). 
Oranges, citrons, and water-melons of the finest kind are 
obtained. Its melons are of the same kind as those of Kash- 
mir, and other fruits, such as grapes, apricots, pead^,- and' 
sour peats, ate grown. If they were oultiyated, it is possible 
thpy 'would improve. A ooin{ of the name of is a 

relic of the old rulers of Kashmir, one and a half of which 

* Tlw MSS. h»v« also Msndsl Bsdr. They have not Mulk after 
Badr ae in text. 

t Sister in MSS. 

i Bor here does not, I think, mean gold. 

I The silver sdsnd of Jariett, II. 354, and n. ii. 



189 


egnal • rnpee. In iheir basineas transactions they tedron 
fiteen tcmkeuS, or ten mpees, as one pad^SKi mnhar. They 
call two seers of Hmdustani weight a mon(maiind). It is not 
the custom for the Baja to take revenue bom cultivation; 
he tains annually six sonAotv— that is^ four rupees— from each 
house. All the saffron is assigned, as pay, to a body of Ba)> 
puts and to 700 musketeers {tujxdS) who are old retainets. 
When die saffron is sold, four rupees per maund, or two seers, 
are taken from the purchaser. The whole income of the Baja 
consists of fines, and for a smaU offence he takes a heavy sum. 
From whomsoever is wealthy and in comfortable. circum- 
stances the Baja, on some pretext, dears out all that he has. 
From all sources his income is about Bs. 100,000. In time of 
war 6,000 or 7,000 men on. foot coDeot together; there are but 
few horses among them. The Baja and the chief men have 
about fifty between them. I bestowed a year’s revorae on 
Dilawar E. by way of reward. By conjecture, his jagir was 
worth about 1,000 personal and 1,000 horse, according to the 
JahSnfiti rules. When the chief diwans calculate the allow- 
ances to the jagirdars, the exact amount will be ascertained. 

On Ifonday, the 11th, after two watches and four gharis 
had passed, the royal cortege alighted auspiciously and happify 
at the buildings lately erected on the bank of the lake (the 
Dal lake). By order of my hither, a very strong fort of stone 
and lime had been built. It is not quite completed, one side 
being unfinished. It is hoped that hereafter it will be com- 
pleted. From Qasan Abdal to Kashmir by the road I came 
is a distance of 75 koss; dus was accomplidied in nineteen 
marches and six halts — that is, in twen^-five days. SVom 
Agra to Kashmir, in the space of 168 ^ys, a distanoe ol 
376 koss was traversed in 102 marches and 68 halts, ^y 
hud* and the ordinary route the distance is 80^ koaa, 

<ki Tuesday, the 12th, Dil&war K., according to order, 
brought the Bajaf of Ki^itwir, chained, into my p r e o e n ce i 
and did homage. He (the Baja) is not wanting in dignify. 

* JaUogir went pert flf dw way by water. 

t Foriiapa he ia the Baja Bhagwia meatioasd 
bookon Kadunir, p. 119.* 


by Drew in his 



140 


Hia dieM is . after tbe Indian lasliion, and Iw knows botii 
the Hindi and the Kashmiri languages. Oontiaiy to other 
Zamindars of these, regions, he looked lib the inbhitant of 
a town. I told him that, notwithstanding his offences, if he 
would bring his sons to Court, he should be released from 
confinement, and might live at ease under the shadow of the 
eternal State, or else he would be imprisoned in one of the 
forts of Hindustan. He said that he would bring his people, 
his fam^jr, and his sons to wait on me, and was hopeful of my 
demenoy. 

I shall now give a brief account of the country of Kashmir 
and of its peculiarities. 

Kashmir* belongs to the fourth climate. Its latitude is 
36* N., and its longitude, from the White Islands, 105*. 
In old times the country was in the possession of Rajas. Their 
dynasty lasted for 4,000 years. An account of them, and 
a list of their names, are given in the Baja-tarang, which, by 
my father’s order, was translatedf from the Sanskrit (Hindi 
in text) into Persian. In the Hijri year 712 (1312>13) Kash* 
mir was illumined 1^ the rel^on of Islam. Thirty-two 
Muhammadan princes reigned over it for 282 years, until, 
in 994 (1586), my father conquered it. Prom that date till 
now, being a period of thirty-five years, the country has been 
in the possession-of the Crown. Kashmir, from the Pass of 
Bnliyasal to Qambarbar, is 66 /oUn^irf koss long, ' and its 

* Ab&-l>F!asl, Jsnett, II. 347, puts Ksshmir into the third Mid fourth 
oHmstss, but st Vol. m, p. 89, he puts Kadimir into the fodrth 
dimste. Pcobsbly both he Mid Jehln^r mean by Kashmir Sri- 
nagar. The appellation “White Islands” is probably a mistake 
for “The Fortunate Islands,” sa/id (white) being written instead of 
ea'dds, which is the word in the Iqb81-n8ma. JaxA'ir-i-Sa'Uda (“The 
XJprtttnate Isles ”) is also the expression used in the jjafar-nbna, 
n. 178, which is probably the source of the Aylh and die TOsuk. 
In the extract from the Zafar-nlma given in the T. BaitfiB translation. 
430, the longitude is given as 105* from the “Fortunate Islands.” 
The feat of the Ayih, Bib. Lid. edition, H. 4% gives 105*40* as the 
longitude. 

t See Rieu, I. 890. The translator was Multt ghk h Mub. of- 
Blihibid. See also Blochwiann, 108. 

t The Feliasa of the maps and the Bolvasaka of Stein. Qambarbar 
is Farfitar in text. The IqbCl-nlma, 147, has Qambarbar. It is 



141 


Ineadth is neTsr more thsn 27 InM, or less tium 10 koss. 
SbaiJdi Aba-l-Fsfl iias, in the Akbernime, stated, by guess 
and oonjeoture, that the length of Tf—liniii* from the Kijjan 
Ganga to Qambarbar is 120 koss, and its breadth from 10 to 
25 koss. I, out of prudence and caution, appointed a number 
of trustworthy and intelligent men to measure the length 
and . breadth with ropes {jlqnSb). The result was that what 
the Shaikh wrote as 120 koss came out as 67. As it is agreed 
that the boundary of a country is the place up to which 
people speak the language of that country, it follows that 
the boundary of Kashmir is BuliySsa, wldch is 11 Iross on 
this side (t.s., east) of the Eij^an Gangs. So, according to 
the preceding figures, the length of Kashmir is 56 (67— ll)koas. 
The variations in breadth were found to be not more than 
2 koss. The koss* which is in use during my reign is that 
prescribed by my father. That is, a koss is 5,000 yards, and 
the yard is 2 fjor*! yards, each of the latter (yards) being 
24 digHef (anpuf^). Wherever the koss m gaz is men* 
tioned, the reference is to the above lows and the above gaz. 
The name of the city u Srinagar, and the Bihat rivet flows 


evidently the Qamberber of Jenrett, IL 347 and 361. It lies in the 
•onth-eaet of Kashmir. Measured by the compass, Jahinglr’s 67 is 
much more correct than AbU-l-Fapl’s 120. The I.O. new edition gives 
the area of Kadimir and Jammu as 80,900 square miles. Lawrence 
states the approximate length of the valley as 84 miles, and.the breadth 
as from 20 to 25 milea. 

* The word used by Jahingir is dora*, which is given by Steingass 
as Arabic, and as meaning a yard. Asm* again, is given as equal to a 
cubit, dearly Jahingir uses the w^ here as equivalent to a gas 
or yard, for he says that there are 5,000 dam' in the koss adopted by 
Umself and bis father, and Abu-bFagl in the Ayin (Jarrett, IL 414J 
says the koss is 5,000 gat. The word dam' is also rendered pas in 
the Hindustani translation of the Memoirs. There is an important 
discrepancy between the two LO. MSS. and the printed text of the 
Memoirs. The former, instead of saying that tiw dam' or yard isa- 
2 tjkar'i dam', say that If dara' an ■■2 thar'f dam'. In the Ayfa 
(Jarrett, IL 417) the pns is given as equal to 24 digits. See later 
on, p. 303 of text, where, in deserihing Bhih fliujl's accident, 7 
dam' are said to be equal to 10 shar% or ordinary, pss. 

f See text (ttirteenth year), p. &4, udwre it is stated that the IldU 
40 gas is 40 Anger-bieadths. 




142 


through the midst of it. They call its fountain-head Vir-nag.^ 
It is 14 koss to the south. By my order they have made 
a building and a garden at that source. There have 
been built in the city four very strong stone and wooden 
bridges, over which people come and go. They call a 
bridge in the language of this country haddl. There is a 
very lofty mosque in the city, one of the marks of Sultan 
Sikandar,t made in 796 (1393). After a time it was burnt, 
but was rebuilt by Sul^n Husain. It had not been com- 
pleted wiien the mansion of his life fell down. In 909 
(1503-04) Ibrahim Maqrl, Vizier of Sul^n Husain, finished it 
handsomely. From that day till now it is 120 years since it 
has been in existence. From the MH^rab to the eastern wall 
it is 145 yards, and its breadth is 144 yards, containing four 
(idq) alcoves. On all sides of the hall they have erected 
beautiful cloisters and pillars. In short, no better memorial 
of the rulers of Kashmir has been left than this. Mir 
Sayyid ^Al! of Hamadan (may his grave be sanctified !) was 
for some time in this city. There is a monastery} to his 
memory. Near the city there are two§ large lakes full of 
water all the year round. Their flavour|| does not vary; 
they are the means for coming and going of the people, and 
for the conveyance of grain and firewood on boats. In the 
city and parganas there are 5,700 boats, with 7,400^ boatmen. 

* Vir is willow, so Vir-nSg means Willow-fountain. 

t Jarrett, II. 387. The I.G., XXIII. 100, says it was built by 
Zainu-]-‘Sbidin. The inscription shows that &inu4-‘abidm built 
it (Lawrence, 290). It is stated there that it was also burnt in 1029. 
A.H. — i,e„ in the year of JahSngir's visit. 

X K^naqdhi. Lawrence, 292. 

} So in text and MSS., but perhaps du is a mistake for Dal. How* 
ever, the I.O. speaks of two lakes, the Dal and the Anchar (north of 
Srinagar). See also Lawrence, 20 and 36. 

II Probably the meaning is that the water hover causes indigestion. 
Abu-LFafl speaks of the streams being Idiush-gnwlr — t.e., their water 
is digestible. 

f The number of boatmen, when compared with the number of 
boats, seems very small, but the figures are the same in the I.O. MSS. 
and in the Iqb&l-nftma, 149. Perhaps the word hist, 20, has been 
omitU'd. and we should read -27,400 boatmen. Lawrence states the 
number of boatmen at 33,870, and the boats, exclusive of private 



143 


The couiiuiy of Kashmir has thirty-eight parganas. It is 
divided into two provinces; the territory on the upper part of 
the river they call Marrdj^ and that on the lower Kdmrdj. 
It is not the custom to use gold and silver for payment 
of the revenue from land or in commerce, except for a 
portion of the cesses (sd'tr-jihdt).* They reckon the value 
of things in J^rwdra of rice, each J^arwdr being three 
maunds and eight seers of the current weight. The Kash- 
miris reckon two seers as one maund, and four maunds, 
or eight seers, make one lark. The revenue of Kashmir is 
30,63,050 lhancars and 11 tarks, which , in cash represents 
7,46,70,000 dams. Ordinarily it maintains 8,500 horse. It is 
very difficult to enter Kashmir. The routes by Bhimbharf 
and Pakli are the best. Though that by Bhimbhar is the 
shorter, yet if one wishes to find spring in Kashmir, he is con- 
fined to the road by Pakli, for the other roads at this season are 
blocked with snow. If one were to take to praise Kashmir, 
whole books would have to be written. Accordingly a mere 
summary will be recorded. 

Elashmir is a garden^ of eternal spring, or an iron fort to a 
palace of kings — a delightful flower-bed, and a heart-expand- 
ing heritage for dervishes. Its pleasant meads and enchanting 
cascades are beyond all description. There are running 
streams and fountains beyond count. Wherever the eye 
reaches, there are verdure and running water. The red rose, 
the violet, and the narcissus g *owof themselves; in the fields, 

ones, at 2,417. The revenue of Kashmir, as stated by JahSngir. is 
that mentioned in the Ayin, Jarrett, II. 366, and is according to the 
assessment of Qftsi ’All. In th . two I.O. MSS. the corresponding 
number of d&ms is given as 7,4(s70,400 (Rs. 1,866,760), being only 
11 less than that given in Jarrett, II. 367, line 3. The figures given 
in Lawrence, 234, are taken appar mtly from the Persian text (compare 
Bib. Ind. edition, I. 571), corr< spending to Jarrett, II. 368. The 
pargana Der, which Lawrence failed to trace, is n mistake for the well- 
known Ver, dal having been w rittf-n or read by mistake for uhi. 

* Compare Jarrett, II. 306. ''Some part of the Sair Jihat cesse.*^ 
are taken in cash.** t Jarrett, II. 347. 

{ Compare Jarrett, II. 348. whore we have **the country is en- 
chanting. and might be fittingly called a garden of perpetual spring 
surrounding a citadel terraced to the skies.*' 




144 


there are all kincUi of flowetrs and all sorts of sweet-scented 
herbs more than can be calculated. In the soul-enchanting 
spring the hills and plains are filled with blossoms; the gates, 
the walls, the courts, the roofs, are lighted up by the torches 
of banquet-adorning tulips. What shall we say of these 
things or of the wide meadows {pdgahd) and the fragrant 
trefoil ? 

Vbbsb. 

** The garden-nymphs* were brilliant. 

Their cheeks shone like lamps ; 

There were fragrant buds on their stems (or * under theii 
rind *), 

Like dark amulets on the arms of the beloved. 

The. wakeful, ode-rehearsing nig^tingiile 
Whetted the desires of wme-drinkers ; 

At each fountain the duck dipped his beak 
Like golden scissors cutting silk ; 

There were flower-carpets and fresh rosebuds. 

The wind fanned the lamps of the roses, 

The violet braided her locks. 

The buds tied a knot in the heart.*’ 

The finest inflorescence is that of the almond and the 
peach. Outside the hill-country the commencement of blos- 
soming is the 1st Isfandarmuz (February 10). In the territory 
of Kashmir it is let Farwardin (March 10), and in the city 
gardens it is the 9th and 10th of that month, and the end of 
their blooming joins on to the commencement of that of the 
blue jessamine. In attendance on my revered father I 
frequently Went round the saffron fields, and beheld the 
spectacle of the autumn. Thank God that on this occasion I 
l)eheld the beautiesf of the spring. The beauties of the 
autumn shall be described in their place. The buildings of 
Kashmir aio all of wood; they make them two-, three-, and 
four-storied, and covering the roofs with earth, they plant 
bulbs of the chatbghadffi tulip, which blooms year after year 

* That in, the flowers. 

t Text iawdnlhdt but I.O. MSS. have J^uhthd, 

X Apparently the proper spelling is jugfaSdl^* ^ Vullers’ s. v. 
and Bah&r-i-’ajam, 368, col. a. It is a black tulip. Sir Qeoige 
King thought it might be the Friiittwria imperialia. See Jarrett, 
.349. and n. 1. 



145 


in the spring season, and is exceedingly beautiful. This 
custom is peculiar to the people of Kashmir. This year, in the 
little garden* of the pakee and on the roof of the chief mosque, 
the tulips blossomed luxuriantly. There 4re many blue 
jessamines in the gardens, and the white jessamines that the 
people of India call ehamtOH are sweet-scented. Another kind 
is of the colour of sandal-wood, and this is also very sweet- 
scented. This is special to Kashmir. I saw several sorts of 
red roses: one is specially sweet-scented, and another is a 
flower of the colour of sandal (light yellow), with an exceed- 
ingly delicate scent. It (the scent ?) is of the nature of (that 
of) the red rose, and its stem is like that of the red rose. 
There are two kinds of lilies. That which is grown in gardens 
is vigorous (bdRda) and fresh (lit. green) coloured, the other 
is a wild kind. Although the latter has less colour it is very 
Sweet-scented. The flower of the Ja'fan'f (a yellow flower) is 
large and sweet-scented; its stem is above a man’s height, 
but in some years, when it has grown large and has flowered, 
a worm is produced, and spreads over the flower a kind of 
spider’s web, and destroys it and dries up its stem. This 
year it has so happened. The flowers that are seen in the 
territories of Kashmir are beyond all calculation. Those 
that Nadiru-l-‘acn Ustad Mansur, ^ has painted are more 
than 100. Before my father’s time there were no 
alu (cherries).§ Mubammad|| Qull AfflUr brought them from 
Kabul and planted them, and there are now ten or fifteen 
fruit-bearing trees. There were also some apricot-trees. The 
aforesaid made them known in this country, and now there are 
many of them. In fact, the apricot |f of Kashmir is good. 

* NUr-afsa garden. See infra, 

t TagtUs Tpatida, The genda of Bengal ? 

t Compare text, p. 235. 

§ Compare Jarrett, II. 349, where the words ** Besides plums and 
mulberries” should be “except cherries (shah-Slu) and 
(a large mulberry). 

j| Blochmann, 411. Abu-l-Faah Ayin. Bloohmann, 65, speaks of 
cherries coming from Kabul. But cherries both sweet and sour are 
mentioned in the T. Rafliidi as growing in Kashmir (Translation, 
p. 425). 

^ &rd-ilU-i-paiwandI. 



146 


There was a tree in the ^hr-ara garden at Kabul, called 
Mma% better fruit than which I had not eaten, but in 
Kjmhniir there are trees equal to this in the gardens. There 
are pears (nSibpSR) of the best kind, better than those of 
Kabul, or Badakhshan, and nearly equal to those of Samar- 
kand. The apples of Kashmir are celebrated for their good- 
ness. The guavas (ofiirfid) are middling. Grapes are plenti- 
ful, but most of them are harsh and inferior, and the pome- 
granates are not worth much. Water-melons of the best kind 
can be obtained. The melons are very sweet and creased, 
(? iSftfamofN&s)*, but for the most part when they become ripe 
a worm is found in them that spoils them. If by chance they 
are preserved from this misfortune they are very delicate. 
There are no lAdk-fuTf (some kind of large mulWry), but 
there are other {tii) mulbmies everywhere. From the foot of 
every mulberry-tree a vine-creeper grows{ up. In fact, the 
mull^rries of Kashmir are not fit to eat, with the exception of 
some on trees grown in gardens, but the leaves are used to feed 
the silkworm. They bring the silkworms’ eggs from Gilgit and 
Tibet. There is plenty of wine and vinegar, but the wine is 
sour and inferior, and in the Kashmir language is called mas. 
After they take cups of it some heat of head ensues. They 
make various pickles with the vinegar. As the garlic of 
Kashmir is good, the best pickle is that of garlic. There are 
all kinds of crops except peas. If they sow peas, they give a 
crop the first year, in the second they are inferior, and in the 
third year they are like muahang.^ Rice is the principal 
crop. Probably there are three parts under rice and one under 
all other grains. The chief food of the people of Kashmir is 
rice, but it is inferior. They boil it fresh, || and allow it to 
get cold, and then eat it, and call it batha. It is not usual to 
* Shikananda^ query, melting. The word occurs also in Iqbll 
n&ma, 152. Poaeibly it means ** with good markings." 

t But see I.G., XV. 124, where ^fth-tut is mentioned. See also 
I^wrence, 348. 

X Compare Jarrett. II. 349. 

§ MuA^ng or mu^nj, a small pea (** pisum arvense **). 

II Text jAas&ka-/ar. MSS. have Hiu^ka norm. Perhaps we should 
translate *Mt is inferior and dry. They boil till it is soft, etc." Th( 
Iqbaf-nima has hJavAka narm mhpazand. 



147 


take their food warm, but people of small means keep a 
portion of the hatha for a night, and eat it next day. Salt is 
brought from India It is not the* custom to put salt into the 
hatha. They boil vegetables in water, and throw in a little 
salt in order to alter the flavour, and then eat them along with 
the hatha. Those who want to have something tasty put a 
little walnut-oil into the vegetables. Walnut-oil soon becomes 
bittei and evil-flbvoured. They also use cow-oil {raug^n — 
%.e., ghi), but this is taken fresh, and fresh from newly-made 
butter {maaha). They throw this into the food, and call it 
** sada-p&k ” in the Kashmiri language. As the atmosphere 
is cold and damp, it becomes altered by being kept for three 
or four days. There are no buffaloes, and the cattle are small 
and inferior. The wheat* is small and of little substance 
{kam maghz). It is not the custom to eat bread (nan). There 
are tailless sheep, resembling the kadi\ (or gaddX) of India 
They are called handu, and their flesh is not without flavour. 
Fowls, geese, and ducks (murgAoK) — golden and others — are 
plentiful. There are all kinds of fish, both with and without 
scales, but they are inferior. The woollen cloths are well 
known. Men and women wear a woollen tunic (kurtd), and 
call it pattu. If they do not put on a tunic, they believe that 
the air affects them, and even that it is impossible to digest 
their food without it. The shawls of Kashmir, to which my 
father gave the name of parm-narm, are very famous : there 
is no need to praise them. Another kind is tahamna (naharma- 
in the printed version); it is thicker than a shawl, and soft.]: 

* The sentence about wheat is omitted in the text. 

t Text kohl (*'hiir’) ; but this is opposed to the MSS and also to 
the Aym-i-Akbari which Jahangir is evidently copying. See Jarrett 
II. 350, and n. 3, and Persian text, I. 503. The i.O. MSS. of Tuzuk 
have haddl or gadH. Oaddl is the name of a pastoral tribe (see 
Lawrence, 12), and there is a Turkish word kedi meaning a oat, and 
A word gaddi which means ‘‘homed.*' The IqbSl-nama, 153, has 
'* kadl-i-Hindwtdn'' Jarrett, loc. cit, states that handu-\n Kashmiri 
nieans a domestic ram. The word for tailless is bi-dumba, and porluips 
means that the sheep luivc not the enormously thick tails of some 
kinds of hill sheep. 

X Possibly nahrma (“like a river"), is right, for the garment Is 
said to b(% tnauj-ddr (‘ having waves**). The word mauj-ddr occurs 
in the Iqbal iiAina. 15.3. and in the two I.O. MSS. 



148 


Another is called datma. It is like a jul-irl^irsak/^ and is 
put over carpets. With the exception of shawls they make 
other woollen materials better in Tibet. Though they bring 
the wool for the shawls from Tibet they do not make them 
there. The wool for shawls comes from a goat which is 
peculiar to Tibet. In Kashmir they weave the pcdtu shawl 
from wool, and sewing two shawls together they smooth them 
into a kind of sagatUU (broad-cloth), which is not bad for a 
rain-eoat. The men of Kashmir shave the head and put on 
a round turban, and the common women do not wear clean, 
washed clothes. They use a tunic of pattu for three or four 
years; they bring it unwashed from the house of the weaver, 
and sew it into a tunic, and it does not reach the water till 
it falls to pieces. It is considered wrong to wear drawers 
(udr); they wear the tunic long and ample as far as the head 
and falling down to the feet and they also wearf a belt. 
Although most of the houses are on the river-bank not a drop 
of water touches their bodies. In short, they are as dirty 
outside as inside, without any cleanliness. In the time of 
IGrza Qaidar there were many skilled people there. They 
were skilled in music, and their lutes, dulcimers, harps, drums, 
and flutes were celebrated. In former times they had a 
musical instrument like a lute, and used to sing in the 
Kashmiri language compositions according to Hindi musical 
modes, there being even two or three modes combined to- 
gether. Moreover, many sing together in chorus. In fact, 
Elashmir is much indebted to Mirza Gaidar for its excellencies. 
Before the reign of my father the chief method by which the 
people of these parts rode was on gunts (ponies). They had 
no large horses, but used to bring 'Iraq and Turki horses by 
way of rare gifts for their rulers. Ount means a yabut (pony). 

* Ja/ 18 a coverlet, and iAirtak means a little bear, but is applied 
to a rough woollen coverlet — ^a drugget. Darma is a name in &nga] 
for a reed mat. 

I Perhaps **tie it at the waist." But see Lawrence, 252 : "The 
l^nditana wears a girdle, but no drawers." 

X The MSS. have taifu. Both they and the text have also the words 
chahdr sidiia ha-zam\n nazdik. Cluihdr fldfia means a dwarf. Uter- 
ally it means "four shoutders," and Vullers following, the Bahftr-i> 



149 


They have thick shoulders, and are low in the body. They 
are common in other of the hill-countries of India. For the 
most part they are vicious* and hard-mouthed. When this 
Ood-created flower-garden acquired eternal beauty under the 
auspices of the State, and by the blessing of the teaching of 
the Alexander-minded I^qan, many of the Aimaqs (cavalry) 
were presented with jagirs in this Subah, and herds of *Iraqi 
and iSirki horses were given them to breed from {hih hurra 
bafirand). The soldiers also brought horsesf on their own 
account, and in a short time horses were obtainable, so that 
many Kashmiri horses were bought and sold for 200 and 
Rs. 300, and even for Rs. 1,000. 

The merchants and artificers of this country are mostly 
Sunnis, while the soldiers are Imami}rya Shias. There is also 
the sect of Nur-ba ldiahi s.j: There is also a body of Faqirs 
whom they call Though they have not religious 

knowledge or learning of any sort, yet they possess simplicity, 
and are without pretence. They abuse no one, they restrain 

*Ajaiii, defines it as a man of small stature with thick shoulders. 
Evidently the words ba-zamln nazdik are meant as an explanation or 
addition to Chahdr-d^iui, and signify that the ydhu or faffu has his 
withers near the ground. The words also occur in the Iqbai-nSma, 154. 

* Jangrah u Aaih^jilau, Jangrah, however, may refer to their 
gait, and may mean that they don't go straight, and very likely we 
should read chaT^grah ** going crookedly/* Shakh-jilau is not in the 
dictionaries, and I only guess at the meaning. The phrase is also in 
the Iqbftl-n&ma, 154. 

f Text Uchi-i-admdn, The real word is ifjAi, which is also spelt 
llgi and and is a Turki word meaning a horse, and also a troop 
of horses. See Pa vet de Courteillo Dictionary, p. 132, and Vullers 
1. 1496, who refers to the Burh&n-i-q&ti*, Appendix. See also Zenker, 
p. 152. The Iqb&l-nftma, p. 1.55, top line, wrongly has halHikd (from 
Balkh?). 

* t Jarrett, 11. 352, and n. 1, also T. Raahldi, translation, 435. But 
perhaps all that is meant is the followers of the national saint Shaikfaf 
Nuru-d-din. lAwronce, 287. 

i Taken from the Ayin, see Jarrett, 11. 353. There they are called 
brahmans, but this seems to be an error of the Bib. Ind. text. Gladwin 
haig ** Rishi.*’ The Ri^hb* were Muhammadans. See Jarrett, 11. 359, 
where mention is made of B&bft Zainu-d-dln Risbf* See also Colonel 
Newairs paper on the RishT.<s or Ifermits of Kashmir, A.S.B-J-, 1870, 
p. 265. 




150 


the tongue of desire, and the foot of seeking; they eat no fleshy 
they have no wives, and always plant fruit-bearing trees in 
the fields, so that inen may benefit by them, themselves 
deriving no advantage. There are about 2,000 of these 
people. There is also a bodv of brahmans living from of old 
in this countiy, who still remain there and talk in the Eash- 
miri tongue. Outwardly one cannot distinguish them from 
Mussulmans. They have, however, books in the Sanskrit 
language, and read them. They cany into practice what- 
ever relates to the worship of idols. Sanskrit is a language in 
which the learned of India have composed books, and esteem 
them greatly. The lofty idol temples which were built before 
the manifestation of Islam are still in existence, and are all 
built of stones, which from foundation to roof are large, and 
weigh 30 or 40 maunds, placed one on the other. Near the 
city there is a small hill which they call Euh-i-Maran* (‘*The 
Wicked Hill,” Lawrence 298), as well as Hari Parbat. On the 
east side of the hill there is the Dal Lake, which measures 
round a little more than 6| koss.f My father (may the lights 
of Allah be his testimony !) gave an order that they should 
build in this place a very strong fort of stone and lime; this 
has been nearly completed during the reign of this suppliant, 
90 that the little hill has been brought into the midst of the 
fortifications, and the wall of the fort built round it. The lake 
is close to the fort, snd the palace overlooks the water. In 
the palace there was a little garden, with a small building in 
it in which my revered father used constantly to sit. At this 
period it appeared to me to be very much out of order and 
ruinous. As it was the place where that veritable qMa (place 
turned towards in prayer) and visible Deity used to sit, and 
it is really a place of prostration for this suppliant, therefore 
its neglected state did not appear right to me. 1 ordered 
Mu*tamid K., who is a servant who knows my temperament, 

* Text B&r&n. MSS. have Marfai, and Eastwick has Koh-i- 
Mahran. He calls it an isolated hill 250 feet high. It is on the north 
Outskirts of the city. See also Lawrence, 184, and a. 2, and Stein. 
147-48. 

t The Dal Lake is 3*87 miles long and 2*58 broad, the Anchar Dal 
is 3‘51 miles long and 2*1.5 broad. Liwrcnce, 20. 



151 


to moke every effort to put the little garden in order and 
repair the buildings. In a short space of time, through his 
great assiduity, it acquired new beauty. In the garden he 
put up a lofty terrace 32 yards square, in three divisions 
and having repuied the building he adorned it with pictures 
by masterhands, and so made it the envy of the picture gallery 
of China. I called this garden Nur-t^ (Ught increasing). 

On Friday, the 15th of the Divine month of Farwardin, 
two gttjSos oxen, out of the offerings of the Zamindar of Tibet, 
were brought before me. In form and appearance they closely 
resemble the buffalo. All the limbs are covered with wool 
which property belongs to animak in a cold country. For 
instance, the rang goats (ibex), which they brought from the 
country of Bhakkar (Sind) and the hill-country of the Cbrmnr 
(in Afghanistan ) were very handsome, and had but little wool, 
and those that are met with in these hills, on account of the 
excessive cold and snow, are covered with hair and ugly. The 
Kashmiris call the rang kapai* On this day they brou{^t a 
musk deer as an offering. As I had not tasted its fledr, I 
ordered it to be cooked; it appeared very tasteless and bad 
for food. The flesh of no other wild animal is so inferior. 
The musk-bag when fresh has no scent, but when it is left 
for some days and becomes dry, it is sweet-scented. The 
female has no musk-bag. In these two or three days I fre- 
quently embarked in a boat, and war delighted to gof round 
and look at the flowers of Phak and fflialamar. Phak is the 
name of a pargana situated on the other side of the lake. 
Sialamar is near the lake. It has a pleasant stream, which 
comes down from the hills, and flows into the Dal Lake. I 
bade my son fburram dam it up and make a waterfall, which it 
would be a pleasure to behold. This place is one of the sights 
of Kashmir. 

On Sunday, the 17th, a strange affair took place. Shah 
^uja* was playing in the buildings of the palace. By chance 
there was a window with a screen in front of it looking towards 

* MSS. have kU, and ao haa the Iqbil-nima. KU ia given in 
Lawrence. 1 14, aa the Kaahmir name for the ibex. 

+ Jarre tt, II. 360. 



152 


the liver. They had put a screen in front, but had not 
fastened the door, and the prince in play went towards the 
window to look out. As soon as he arrived there he fell 
headlong. By chance they had laid down a carpet below the 
wall, and a farraA (carpet-spreader) was sitting near it. The 
child’s head fell on this carpet, and his feet on the back and 
shoulders of the farra^, and so came to the ground. Though 
the height was 7 yards* {dara% the compassion of God, the 
Great and Glorious, came to his aid. and the carpet and the 
farrash became the means of saving his life. God forbid, but 
if it had not been so it would have been a serious matter for 
him. At the time Ray Man, the head of the ^idmatiyyaf 
piyadas, was standing below the jharoha. He immediately 
ran and picked him up, and holding him in his arms, was 
taking him upstairs. In that condition he asked: ** Whither 
are you carrying me He replied: ** Into the presence of 
His Majesty.” Then weakness overcame him, and he could 
speak no more. I was lying down when this alarming news 
reached me, and ran out in a state of bewilderment. When 
I saw him in this state my senses forsook me, and for a long 
time holding him in my affectionate embrace I was distracted 
with this favour from Allah. When a child of four years of 
age falls headlong from a place ten ordinary {shar'i) gaz in 
height, and no harm happens to his limbs, it is a cause for 
amazement. Having performed my prostrations for this 
fresh act of goodness, I distributed alms, and ordered that 
deserving people and the poor who lived in the city should be 
brought before me in order that I might assure them their 
means of livelihood. A strange thing was that three or 
four months before this event Jotik Ray, the astrologer, who 
is one of the most skilled of the class in astrology, had repre- 
sented to me, without any intermediary, that it was predicted 
from the Prince’s horoscope that these three or four months 
were unpropitions to him, and it was possible he might fall 
down from some high place, but that the dust of calamity 
would not settle on the skirt of his life. As his prognosti 
cations had repeatedly proved correct, this dread dwelt in 
* ThiH is tho Ildht gaz. t Blochmann, 252. and note. 



153 


my mind, and on these dangerous roads and difficult mountain 
passes I was never for a moment forgetful of that nursling of 
the •parterre of Fortune. I continually kept him in sight, and 
took the greatest precautions with regard to him. When I 
arrived in Kashmir this unavoidable* catastrophe occurred. 
His nurses {anagohd) and wet-nurses must have been very 
careless. God be praised that it ended well ! 

In the garden of ‘AieMbadf (abode of pleasure) I saw a 
tree which had numerous!!! blossoms. They were very large 
and beautiful, but the apples that the tree produced were 
bitter. 

As excellent service had been dond by Dilawar K. Kakar, I 
promoted him to the mansab of 4,000 personal and 3,000 horse, 
and also conferred mansabs on his sons, fflmildi Farid, s. 
Qutbu-d-dm K. was raised to the mansab of 1,000 personal 
and 400 horse. The mansab of Sar-barah K. was ordered to 
be 700 personal and 250 horse, and I promoted Nuru-llah 
Kurkiraq (in charge of furriery ?) to that of 600 personal and 
100 horse, bestowing on him the title of Taehrlf K. The 
offerings of Thursday, the 21st, were handed over as a reward 
to Qiyam K., the chief huntsman. As Allah-dad Afghan, s. 
the Tariki,§ had repented of his evil deeds and come to Court 
at the request of I'tmadu-d-daula I pardoned his offences ; 
*;he signs of disgrace and shame were evident on his forehead 
and, according to the pre^rious arrangement, I bestowed on 
him the mansab of 2,500 and 200 horse. Mirak Jalayir, one of 
the auxiliaries of Bengal, was promoted to the mansab of 
1,000 persoxial and 400 horse. 

As it was reported that the juqhoH (t.e., black) tulips were 
in good bloom on the roof of the Jami' mosque, on Saturday, 
the 23rd, I went to see them. In truth, one side of that 

* So called because in Shuji^’s horoscope. 

t A villa^ called AiA'inaqim is mentioned in Jarrett, II. 359, 
«. 1, but it is probably not the *Aigbftbid here mentioned, for ‘Aidj- 
maqim was on the Lidar and a long way S.S.E. Srinagar. 

X ^igufa-i-sad-barg (**th6 blossoms of the hundred-leaved rose '*?). 

f Allah-did Was s. Jalilu-d-dih Tiriki, also called Rau^&ni, and he 
became a distinguished officer of Shih- Jahin under the title of 
Raghid K. See Bla'isir. II. 248, and Dabistan, 390. 



164 


flower-garden was very beautiful. Tbe parganas of Mau* 
and Mihii (?) (text has Maud Mibri), whicb previously to this 
had been granted to Raja Baso, and afterwards continued to 
his rebel son SSiaj Mai, were now bestowed on Ja^t Singh, 
his brother, who had not obtained the tUn (marh of royal 
succession), and 1 gave the pargana of Jammfl to R&ja 
Sangram. On Monday, the 1st of Urdibih4j{t, I went to t)^ 
house of Niunam, and entered his batili-honse, and when I 
came out he presented his off^ings. Of these I accepted a 
trifle in order to pliase him. On Thursday, the 4th, lifirJumla 
was promoted to the mansabof 2,000 personaland 300 horse. 
On Sunday, the 7th, I rode to the village of Chsrdata,t which 
is the native country of Gaidar Malik, to hunt partridges. 
In truth this is a very pleasant spot of ground, and has 
flowing streams and lofty plane-trees. At his request I gave 
it the name of NtLrp&r| (city of light). On the road there was 
a tree§ called halthal; when one takes one of the branches and 
shakes it, the whole of the tree comes into movement. The 
common people believe that this movement is peculiar to 
that tree. By chance in the said village I saw another tree 
of the same kind, which was in similar movement, and I 
ascertained that it was common to that species of tree> and 
not confined to one tree. In the village of Bawalpflr, 2| koes 
from the city towards Hindustan, there is a plane-trw, burnt 
in the inside. Twenty-five years before this, when I myself 

* There are diflerent readings. No. 181 has Maud and Mihil. 
Apparently it is the Man and Nabah of Jarrett, n. 319, where also 
there are various readings. See also Tfizuk, 263, where the text has 
Mau u sbshra. 

t Or Chirvara. See Rieu Oatalogue, I. 297. Dbidar Malik 
wrote a history of Kashmir. It was he who protected N&r-Jahin 
after her first husband’s murder. Stein has Oadura, reefs Isldnr 
p.43: it in 10 miles south of Srinagar. 

t An allusion to Nfir-Jahln and to Nfiru-d-^h Jabln^. 

§ See Akbar nftma, III. 642, and Tsbaq&t-i-Akbail extract in 
Appendix, translation 'of Tldkh-i-Befl^dl, p. 490. The place was 
BlSnpfir or near it. Perhaps tiie tree is the AdansonU. See also 
Jarrett, II. 363. According to Stein, 191, Helthal is the name of the 
village, and is a corruption of Salasthala. This agrees with the Ayfia 
I. 569, but not with Akbar-nima III. 542, where halthal is given as 
the name of the tree. 



155 


was riding on a hone, with five other saddled hones and two 
eunuchs, we went imde it. Whenever I had chanced to 
mention this people were surprised. This time I again 
ordered some of the men to go inside, and what 1 had in my 
mind came to pass in the same manner. It has been noted in 
the Akbar-nama that my father took* thirty-four people inside 
and made them stand close to each other. 

On this day it was represented to me that Prithi-ohand, s. 
B&y Ibnohar, who was one of the auxiliaries of the army 
against Eangta, had sacrificed his life in a useless (bi-|arfat) 
battle with the enemy. 

On Thursday, the 11th, certain servants of the State were 
promoted in t^ following manner: Tatar K. to 2,000 personal 
and 500 horse; *Abdu-l-*Am K. to. 2,000 personal and 1,000 
horse; Delfi Chand of Gwalior to 1,500 personal and 500 horse; 
Mir n&n, s. AbO-l-Qasim K. Namaldn to 1,000 personal and 
600 horse; Mirsa Muhammad to 700 personal and 300 horse; 
Lutifu-Uah to 300 personal and 500 horse; Na^ru-llah ‘Arab to 
500 personal and 250 horse; and Tahawwur K. was appointed 
to the faujdarship of Mewit. On Thursday, the 25th, Sa 3 ryid 
Bayarid Bu^aii, faujdar of Bhakkar, raised his head of honour 
with the Subadarship of Sind, and his mansab, original and 
increased, was fixed at 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse, and 
he was also presented with a standard, ^aja'at K. ‘Arab 
obtained the honour of exaltation to the mansab of 2,500 
personal and 2,000 horse. Anira’i Singh-dalan, at the request 
of Mahabat K., was appointed to Bangash. Jan-sipar K. was 
promoted to the mansab of 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse. 

At this time, on the representation of the Commander’in* 
Chief, IPian-ftanan. and all the loyal people, it was shown to 
me that ‘Ambar, the black-fated one (he was an Al^ssiniar.), 
had again placed his foot beyond the bounds of good behaviour, 

* I have not found tUs paeiaga in the Akbar-nlma. The Iqbll- 
nhna, 1S9, says that 70 people stood erect inside of. tite trunk. Mwal- 
pftr is marked on the map of Kashmir, a little to the south of Srinagar. 
Mi|lmn-d-dih, in his diapter on Kashmir in the T*ba<lht-i-Akbari, 
speaks of a tree under the shade of which 200 horsemen could stand. 

t Possibly bt-for/h only means ** nnsnoceosful.*’ But it is used 
losrer down (text 308, line 8). in the sense of immoderate or unprofitable. 



156 


ftnd had, according to his nature, laid a foundation for trouble 
and sedition, and as the victorious army had proceeded to a 
distant part of the country, he, considering it a good oppor- 
tunity, had broken the pledges he had given to the servants 
of the Court, and had stretched out his hand to take possession 
of royal territory. It is hoped that he will soon be entangled 
in the disgrace of his deeds. As he (the Commander-in-Chief ) 
had asked for treasure, it was ordered that the diwans of Agra 
should send Rs. 20,00,000 to the Commander-in-Chief. Close 
upon this news came that the Amirs had left their posts, and 
come together to Darab K., and that the (the Mah- 

rattas) were surrounding his camp, and that ^njar K. had 
taken refuge in Ahmadnagar. Two or three battles had 
already taken place between the rebels and the servants of 
the Court, and each time the enemy had been defeated, and 
many of them killed. On the last occasion Darab K., taking 
with him well-mounted young men, attacked the rebels’ 
camp. A fierce battle ensued, and the enemy being defeated 
turned the face of ruin towards the valley of flight. Their 
camp had been plundered, and the victorious army had 
returned in safety to their camp. As difficulty and distress 
had fallen on the victorious army, those who were loyal came 
to the conclusion that they should go down by the Pass of 
Rohangarhf and remain below the ghaty so that forage and 
grain might be easily obtained, and the men not incur any 
labour or distress. Having no choice, they prepared the army 
of prosperity at Balapur, and the rebels of black fortune, 
with impertinence and importunity, appeared near Balapur. 
Raja Bir Singh Deo, with some of the devoted servants, pluck- 
ing up courage in order to beat back the enemy, slew many of 
them. An Abyssinian of the name of Manfur, who was in the 
rebel army, fell into their hands, and although they wished 
to put him on an elephant (see Iqbal-nama 161, the text 
wrongly has ztr under”), he would not agree, and was 
insolent.^ Raja Bir Singh Deo ordered them to separate his 

* Text has Turks (TarkiySn). 

t Apparently the RohankJictI of I.G.. XXT. 3(U. 

X Literallv. raised tho ol i^nori^mr.** 



157 


head from his body. It is hoped that the circling sphere will 
lay the recompense of improper deeds on the skirt of life of 
all who do not recognize the right. 

On the 3rd Urdibihisht I rode to see the Sukh Nag.* It is 
a beautiful summer residence (il^q). This waterfall is in the 
midst of a valley, and flows down from a lofty place. There 
was still ice on its sides. The entertainment of Thursday 
was arranged for in that flower-land, and I was delighted at 
drinking my usual cups on the edge of the water. In this 
stream I saw a bird like a saj.f A saj is of a black colour and 
has white spots, while this bird is of the same colour as a 
bulhul with white spots, and it dives and remains for a long 
time underneath, and then comes up from a different place. 
I ordered them to catch and bring two or three of these birds, 
that I might ascertain whether they were waterfowl and were 
web-footed, or had open feet like land birds. They caught 
two and brought them. One died immediately, and the other 
lived for a day. Its feet were not webbed like a duck’s. I 
ordered Naditu-l-^ai^r Ustad Mansur to draw its likeness. 
The Kashmiris call it galkart — ^that is, water saj.” 

On this day the Qazi and the Chief Justice represented to 
me that ’Abdu-I-Wahhab, the son of Hakim 'AH, claimed 
Rs. 80.000 from the Sayyids of Lahore, and produced a bond 
with the seal of Qa^i Nuru-Ilah. He said that his father had 
placed that sum in deposit with Sayyid Wall, the father of 
these men, who denied it.§ If an order were given, the 

* Perhaps Sukh N&g is the Shaki r Nag of Jarrett, JI. 361. The 
Sukh Nag River is mentioned in Lawrence, 16. It may also be the 
waterfall mentioned by Bernier, which he says Jahangir visited and 
levelled a rock in order to see properly. 

t From Dr. Scully's list it appears that this is the sach, the rose- 
coloured starling, Paator roseus. See also Vullers, Dictionary, s. v. 
The bird seen by Jahangir may have been a dipper, Lawrence, 153. 

{ The MSS. have hulhai, 

{ According to the two I.O. MSS. -which are corroborated by the 
Iqbal-nama — the text has here omitted an important part of the 
rcport^presumably a written one — submitted by the Qazi and the 
MTr *Adl. After the words *' denied it," there comes in the MSS. 
the statement: "The ^akim-zada (Qaldm's son) produced two 
witnesses in court. The Sayyids invalidated (or impeached) the 
41 testimony of one of them, and the Ha dm-zada brought a third witness 



158 


^aklm’s Bon, by way of caution,* would swear an oath on the 
Qoran, and would take what was his due from them. I told 
them to do whatever was right by the Divine Law. The next 
day Mu‘tamid ^n represented that the Sayyids showed great 
humility and submissiveness. The matter was a complicatedf 
one. The greater reflection shown in ascertaining the truth 
in the matter the better. 1 accordingly ordered that A^af K. 
should take exceeding trouble and forethought in fuscertaining 
the truth of this quarrel, and point out such a way (of un* 
ravelling it) that no doubt whatever should remain. With 
all this, if it could not be cleared up, I would examine them 
in my own presence. Immediately he heard these words, 
the Qaldm’s son lost both his hands and his heart in the 
affair, and made a number of his friends intercessors, and 
proposed a withdrawal. His representation was that if the 
Sayyids would noH refer the matter to A^af K. he would give 
a release, and that hereafter he would have no right against 
nor claim from them. Whenever Affaf K. sent to fetch him, 
as he was a low deceiver, he passed his time in making excuses, 
and did not appear until he handed over the deed of release to 
one of his friends, and the true state of affairs became evident 
to A^af E. They brought him by force into the place of 
examination, and, having no choice^ he confessed that the 
deed had been prepared by one of his servants, who himself 
witnessed it, and had misled him. He gave a writing to this 
effect. When Afaf K. informed me of the real state of 
matters, I took away his nmnsab and jagir, and cast him out 
of my presence, and gave the Sayyids leave to return to 
Lahore in all honour and respect. 


and proved hig case according to law/' The Iqbai-nlma, p. 161, hss 
not the whole of this, and it has H&rij instead of jdrih* hot it has the 
words guwdh-i-sdli^t (** a third witness *'). 

* The meaning scorns to be that he would in corroboration and 
ex osafefa take the oath. He had already proved his claim in the 
ordinary way by witnesses and the production of the bond. See 
the account in the Iqbil-nima, 160-63, which is fuller than that in text. 

t Mu*dmala~i-Mii aet, **The case was involved" (Kkeabud?), 
or perhaps ** tbe case was important." 

X The text wrongly omits the negative. See Iqbil-nima, 1. 62. 




159 


On Mubaiak-^mba (Thursday), the 8th of |Q^5rdad, 
1‘tiqad jOAn was promoted to the mansab of 4,000 personal 
and 1,500 horse, and ^adiq Hian to that of 2,500 personal 
and 1,400 horse. 2iamu-l-*abidm, son of the deceased leaf 
[Am (JTa^far), was promoted to be Bakhshi of Ahadia, Baja 
Bir Singh Deo Bandila raised his head of honour with the 
high mansab of 5,000 personal and horse. 

In Kashmir the most juic]r(?) fruit is the oAhan (?) {aekaml 
in the MSS.). It is subaoid {fnai-j^uA), smaller than the 
alu balu (sour cherry), much better flavoured, and more 
delicate. When drinking wine, one cannot eat more than 
three or four diu &dlu, but of these one can take as many as 
a hundred in twenty-four hours, especially of the paiwandi (?) 
sort. I ordered that the €uhkan should hereafter be called 
the lAuAkan. It grows in the hills of Badakhshan and in 
Khurasan; the people there call it jaimdamu The largest of 
them weigh } The ^h-alu (cherry), on the 4th Urdi- 

bihiflht, appeared 6f the size of a grain of pulse; on the 27th it 
reddened, and on the 15th Ulirdad it was ripe, and new fruit 
[nau-bar) had formed (?). The AflJholu (cherry), to my taste, 
is better than most fruits. Four trees had Dome fruit in the 
Nur-afza garden. I called one of these Sb^nn-bdr, the second 
Eb^^^-guwdfj the third, which bore the most fruit, Pur4)dr, 
and the fourth, which had less, Kam-bdr. One tree in 
lAurram’s garden had also borne fruit, and 1 called it Skdhwdr. 
There was a young plant in the little garden of "I^rat-afzd 
(joy enhancing), and this I called Nau-bdr (new fruit). Every 
day I plucked with my own hand sufElcient to give a flavour 
to my cups. Although they sent them by runners from 
Kabul as well, yet to pick them oneself from one’s home garden 
gave additional sweetness. The ^h-dlu of Kashmir is not 
inferior to that of Kabul; it is even better grown. The 
largest of them weighed one tdnk, five surl^. 

On Tuesday, the 2lst, Pad|^h* Banfi Begam died (became 
a sitter in the bridal chamber of the permanent world), and 

^ Apparently this was 9ftliha BiJi& d. Qa’im K. Blochmann, 371, 
and 477. n, 2. She had the name of Pidfliih-mahall. See Hawkins' 
account in Parches, IV. 31, and KhafI K. I. 239. He calls the father 
Qistm. 



160 


grief for this heart-rending event laid a heavy load on my 
mind. I hope that Almighty God may give her a place near 
his own forgiveness. A strange thing is — ^that Jotik Ray, 
the astrologer, two months before this, had informed some of 
my servants that one of the chief sitters in the harem of 
chastity would hasten to the hidden abode of non-existence. 
He had discovered this from the horoscope of my destiny, 
and it feU out accordingly. 

One of the events (that now took place) was the martyrdom 
of Sayyid ‘Izzat* E. and of Jalal K. Gakhar in the army of 
Bangash. The particulars of this are that when the season 
for the collection of revenue arrived, Mahabat E. appointed a 
force to go into the hill-country to eat up the crops of the 
Afghans, and not omit one tittle of raiding and plundering, 
and killing and binding. When the servants of the Court 
arrived at the foot of the Pass the ill-fated Afghans attacked 
them from all sides, and took the head of the Pass, and fortified 
it. Jalal E., who was an experienced man, and an old man 
that had undergone labours, thought it better to delay for a 
few days, so that the Afghans might expend the few days’ 
provisions they had brought with them on their backs, and 
necessarily disperse of their own accord ; that then his men 
would be able to cross with ease over the head of the difficult 
Pass. When he once passed the head of the defile they would 
be unable to do any more, and would be punished. ‘Izzat K., 
who was a battle-lighting flame and a foe-burning lightning, 
(lid not fall in with Jalal E.’s idea, and excited the steed of 
roiiragc of some ot the Sayyids of Barha. The Afghans, 
'swarming round on all sides, like ants and locusts, attacked 
him, and caught him in their midst. Though the battle- 
field was not fit for cavalry, yet wherever the forehead of bis 
wrath shone, he consumed many with the fire of his sword. 
In the midst of the fighting they hamstringed his horse, but 
he fought on foot and as long as he had breath, and at last 
fell bravely. At the time when "Izzat E. made his attack, 
Jalal K. Gakharf and Mas'ud, s. Ahmad Beg E., and Bizan 
* It is (ihiirat K. in 1.0. MS., 181. 

t For Jalu! K., SCO Blochmann, 455 and 486. He was grandson 
of Sultan Adam. 



161 


(or Bizhan), s. Nad ‘Ali MaidanI, and other servants, lost 
restraint, and rushed on from all sides of the pass, and the 
rebek seized the tops of the hills, and fought with stones and 
arrows. The devoted young men, both of the servants of the 
Court and the retainers of Mahabat K., performed the duties 
of valour, and slaughtered many of the Afghans. In this 
contest Jalal K. and Mas^ud, with many other brave men, 
sacrificed their lives. Owing to the rashness of ‘Izzat K. 
such a disaster as this befell the Imperial army. 

When Mahabat K. heard this fearful news, he sent a fresh 
body of men to assist, and strengthened the posts. Wherever 
they found a trace of those ill-fortuned ones, tlicy did not fail 
to slay or bind them. When I heard this news, I sunrimoned 
Akbar Quli, s. Jalal K. who had been told off for duty in the 
conquest of the fort of Kangra, to my presence, and gave him 
the mansab of 1,000 personal and 1,000 horse, and confirmed to 
him, according to custom, his hereditary territory (the Gakhar 
country) in jagir, presented him with a dress of hemour and a 
horse, and sent him to the support of the army of Bangash. 
As *Izzat K. had left a son of very tender years, keeping before 
my eyes, that discerned the truth, his life-sacrifice, I gave 
him (the child) a mansab and a jagir, so that those left behind 
should not be scattered abroad, and others might have 
increased hope. 

On this day Shaikh Ahmad of 'Sirhind, who had for some 
time been placed in the prison of correction on account of his 
pretentiousness (literally, adorning his shop and soiling him- 
self) and immoderate language, was summoned to my pre- 
sence, and I released him, giving him a dress of honour and 
Rs. 1,000 for expenses, and making him free to go or 
remain. He justly represented that his punishment had 
really been a valuable lesson to him, and that his desire was 
to wait on me. 

On the 27th IQiurdad apricots arrived* (from Kabul). The 
picture-gallery in the garden had been ordered to be repaired ; 
it was now adorned with pictures by master hands In the 

* Roald. See lower down text 308, where it in noted that tht* 
cherried, civmo to an end. 



162 


most honoured positions were the likenesses of Humayun 
and of my father opposite to my own, and that of my Inotiner 
^h ‘Abbas. After them were the likenesses of Mirza 
Omran, Mirza Muhammad Hakim, ^ah Murad, and Sultan 
Daniyal. On the second storey (row ?) were the likenesses 
of the Amirs and special servants. On walls of the outer hall 
the stages of the road to Kashmir were recorded in the order 
in which I had come to them. A poet fixed the date by this 
hemistich: 

PictureH of kings of Solomon-like glor^' * 

On Thursday, the 4th of the Ilahi month of Tir, the Feast 
of httnyd'kfi&if took place. On this day the Kashmir cherries 
came to an end. From the four trees of the Nur-afza garden, 
1,500, and from other trees 500 had been plucked. I strictly 
ordered the officials of Kashmir to plant Aflh-alu (cherry) trees 
in all the gardens. On this day Bhim, s. Rana Amar Singh 
was honoured with the title of Baja, and Dilir K., brother of 
the brave ‘Izzat K., was promoted to the mansat) of 1,000 
personal and 800 horse, Muhammad Said, s. Ahmad Beg K., 
to that of 600 personal and 400 horse, and Mujhlif-ullah, his 
brother, to that of 500 personal and 250 horse. On Sa 3 ryid. 
Ahmad l^adr the mansab of 1,000, and on Mirza Husain, s 
IGrza Rustam ^fawr, that of 1,000 personal and 500 horse, 
were bestowed, and the last-named was despatched for duty 
to the Deccan. On Sunday, the 14th of the Divine month 
of Tir, ^asan ‘Ali Turkman was made Governor of Orissa, 
and his personal and horse mansab was raised to 3,000. On 
this day Bahadur K., Governor of Qandahar, sent offerings of 
nine Iraq horses, some nine pieces of gold bfocade, some 
brocaded satin, and some marten]: skins, and other things; 
these were laid before me. 

On Monday, the ISth, I rode to see the summer quarters 

* This repreaento a.b. 1029, or 1620. 

t Ifat-troading or heating house-warming. This was in honour 
of the new picture-gallery. 

t Ddnaha i-kish. See Vullers. s.v. Kesh. The Insh is a marten 
of whose skin neckcloths, etc., arc made. This note corrects the one 
at p. C21 of translation, as also the text there. 



163 


oi Tnd-maig* (1). Arriving in two mandies at the foot of 
the total, on Wednesday, the 17th, I reached the top of the 
pass. For a distance of 2 koss very elbvated gtonnd was 
crossed with difficulty. From the top of the total to the /iSf 
(sonuner quarters) was another koss of high and low land. 
Although here and there flowers of various ookmis had 
bloomed, yet 1 did not see so many as they had represented 
to me, and as I had expected. 1 heard that in this neighbour- 
hood there was a very beautiful valley, and on Thursday, the 
18th, 1 went to see it. Undoubtedly, whatever praise they 
mi(^t use in speaking of that flowery land would be per- 
missible. As far as the eye reached flowers of all colours were 
blooming. There were picked fifty lands of flowers in my 
presence. Probably there were others that I did not see. 
At the end of the day I turned my reins in order to return. 
That night an account was given in my presence of the siege 
of Ahmadnagar. H^n-Jahan told a Strang tale, which 1 
had also heard before, and it is writteh on account of its 
strangeness. At the time when my brother Daniy&l was 
besieging the fort of Ahmadnagar, one day the garrison laid 
the gun AfaUt-maidanf (king of the plain) agunst the Prince’s 
camp, and fired it. The ball reached nearly to the Prince’s 
tent; from that place it bounded (ricocheted), and went to 
the lodging of Qa?i Bayazid, who was one of the Prince’s 
companions, and fell there. They had tied up the Qazi’s 
horse at a distance of 3 or 4 gaz. As the ball touched the 
ground, the horse’s tongue| was tom out l^ the root and 
fell on the ground. The ball was of stone, reighing 10 mannds 
as current in Hindustan, or 80 Ehuraswr maunds. The said 
gun is so large that a man can sit comfoi ably in it. 

On this day I promoted Abu-l-Uasan, ^he chief Bakshi, to 
the mansab of 5,000 personal and 2,000 orse, Mubariz K. to 
that of 2,000 {MCBonal and 1,700 horse Bizan (or Bizhan) 

* It is Bfisi-marg in the I.O. MSS. But perhaps the test is right, 
and the place is the Tosh Maidin of Lawrence, IS. 

t The gun is now at Bijapur, I.G., VIII. 186. 

f Compare IqUU-nCma, 108-64. The test has rds (“thigh”) 
instead of tah&n. 



164 


A. Nad *AIi, to that of 1,000 personal and 500 horse, and 
Amanat K to that of 2,000 personal and 400 horse. On 
Thursday, the 25th, I gave Nawazieh E., s. Sa^id E., the 
mansab of 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse, Himmat E. that 
of 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse, and Sayyid Ya'qub E., 
s. Sayyid Eamal BuIAari, that of 800 personal and 500 
horse. Mir 'Ali 'Askar,* s. Mir ^Ali Akbar Mtisawi, was 
dignified with the title of Musawi E. As I had repeatedly 
heard praise of the llaq of Euri-marg,f I felt much disposed 
to visit it at this time, and on Tuesday, the 7th Amurdad, 
rode in that direction. How shall I write its praise ? As 
far as the eye could reach fiowers of various hue were blooming, 
and in the midst of the flowers and verdure beautiful streams 
of water were flowing: one might say it was a page that the 
painter of destiny had drawn with the pencil of creation. 
The buds of hearts break into flower from beholding it. 
Undoubtedly there is no comparison between this and o^her 
Jldjs, and it may be said to be the place most worth seeing in 
Eashmir. 

In Hindustan (t.e., Upper India) there is a bird called 
PapihdtX of a sweet voice, which in the rainy season utters 
soul-piercing (jdn-suz, lit. soul-buming) laments. As the 
ko^al lays its egg in the nest of the crow, and the latter brings 
up its young, so I have seen in Kashmir that the paplhd lays 
its egg in the nest of the (ring-dove ?) and the 

gbiaugbfft brings up its young. 

* Blochmann, 382. The name of the son is given in the MSS. as 
Mir ‘Ali Asgfaar. 

t Perhaps this is the Guraie Valley of Lawrence. 16, for Kuri may 
be road Giiri. 

t See Jarrett, III. 121 and n. 5. The bird is either the common 
hawk-cuckoo of Jerdon {HUroeoecyx iwriae) or his Coceyatea tnalano- 
leueoa — t.e., the pied-crested cuckoo, for both birds seem to have 
the native name of Pafnhd, The Hierococcyx variua is the brain- 
lever’* bird of the Anglo-Indian, I.G., I. 250. The piod-crested 
cuckoo occurs in Kashmir, and so also apparently does a bird of the 
genus Hierococeyx, Lawrence, pp. 138, 139. 

§ I am not sure what bird this is. Qinughd'i means a turtle dove 
in Benghl, but I doul>t if this be the bird meant by Jahftngir. 
Ohauijhd'i would moan a noisy bird, and perhaps is the Bengal Babblei 



165 


On Thursday, the 17tb, Fida’i E. was promoted to the 
mansab of 1,500 personal and TOOJbiorse. On this day the 
ambassador of Izzat* K., ruler of Urganj, by name Muham- 
mad Zahid, came to the Court, and presented a petition, 
accompanied with some trifling presents, and recalled the 
existence of hereditary relations (lit., shook the chain of 
hereditary connection). I distinguished him with the eye of 
kindness, and on the spur of the moment gave the ambassador 

10.000 darbs (Rs. 5,000) as a present, and ordered the officials 
of the buyutat (household) to prepare and send (by him) such 
things as he might ask for. 

At this time a strange act of grace occurred to my sonf 
Iffian-Jahan (Lodi). He had become very ill from the mad- 
ness of wine, and from the overpowering of this man-destroying 
intoxication things had come to such a pass that it threatened 
his precious life. Suddenly he reformed, and God directed 
him, and he made a vow that thereafter he would not defile 
the fringe of his lip with wine. Although I warned him that 
it was not good to give it up all at once, and that he should 
leave it off gradually, he would not consent, but g^ve it up 
manfully. 

On the 25th of Amurdad Bahadur E., Governor of Qanda- 
har, was promoted to the mansab of 5,000 personal and 

4.000 horse, and on the 2nd of the Divine month of ^[lahriwar, 
Alan Singh, s. Rawat ^nkar, tp that of 1,600 and 800 
horse, Mir ^usamu-d-din to that of 1,500 and 500 horse, 
and £[aramu-llah, s. "Ali Mardan K.X to that of 600 with 
300 horse. 

of Jerdon, or tho fildt Bhd'l (»oven brothers) of the Indians. It belongs 
to tho Malaccrireus genus, and Jerdon, I. 340, states that tho pied* 
cresU'd cuckoo generally lays her egg in the nest of the Malacocirci. 
The babbling thrushes occur in Kashmir. In Blochmann,. 290, there 
is an account of how gkaugkd'U are caught. 

* MS. 305 has flhttirat K., but No. 181 has ‘Arab K., and this agrees 
with Stanley Lane Poole’s Muhammadan dynasties (p. 279), which 
has ’Arab Muhammad as ruling down to 1823. Organj is in Bhiva. 

t Jahftngir called IS^ftn-Jahin his/hrssiuf (son). 

X Not the famous *Ali Mardftn, but ‘All Mardin, who was killed in 
the D<M:ca II . Bloch mann. 496. 




166 


Ab at this time I was much inclined to parti-colouied* 
veined teeth, the great Amin exerted themselves greatly in 
looking out for them. Of these, ‘Abdu-l-'Asdz K. NaqAban^ 
sent a servant of the name of ‘Ahdu-llah with a letter to 
[Awaja Qasan and j^waja ‘Abdu-r-ttakim, ss. {Qiwaja Kal&n 
J&yb&ti, who ate to^y the leading holy mmi of Ttansoziana, 
containing a request for these things. By chance, 

Qaaan had a perfect tooth, exceedingly delicate, and imme* 
diatdy sent it with the aforesaid (servant) to the Court, 
which it reached this day. I was greatly pleased, and ordered 
them to send the value of Rs. 30,(XX> in choice goods to the 
Ibwajas, a service for which Mir Baraka Bukhari was fixed 
upon. On Thursday, the 12th Shahriwar, Ifir Ifiran ob* 
tained leave to take up the &ujdarsbip of Mewat, and his 
mansab, original and increased, was fixed at 2,000 with 1,600 
horse. I gave him a special horse, with a dress of honour 
and a sword. 

At this time it was made clear from a report of Sundarf 
that Jauhar Mai, the rebel, had delivered his soul to the 
lords of hell (had died). It was also reported that a force 
sent against one of the Zamindars had abandoned the path 
of caution, and without fortifying the way of entrance and 
exit, or taking possession of the hill-tops, had entered into 
the fastnesses of the hills, and had fought without any good 
result. As the day drew towards its close, they had turned 
their reins with their object unaccomplished, and in turning 
back, had made every haste. Many people had been killed, 
especially those who would not put up with the disgrace of 
flight. They purchased martyrdom with, their lives. Out of 
them Sa h-baz K. Dalftmaiu^ (1), which is a tribe of Lodi 

* DandAn-i-abtaq-i-jmihar-dllr. Jauhar-dSr here does not mean 
“ jewelled," but veined or striped. See VaUere, I. 84Sa. Wabus- 
teeth may be meant by Jahtngir, but tortoiee^hell ia more likely. 

t Sundar ie another name for Rlja Bikramijit, and the leieienoe 
must be to the Siege of Kingia. JanbarMalwaeaemtof BljaBlao,and 
appears to be thesame peteon as Suraj Mai. It la Janhar in I.O. MS., 181 . 

I Deotinl in No. 181. Bloohmann baa the name Dutinl, apparently 
as a tribal name (p. 804), and Elfdtinstone speaks in vol.ii., p. 82. of a 
small tribe called Dumtauny. 



167 


Afghans, sacrificed his life with a band of his servants and 
tribesmen. In truth he was a good servant, and had intel- 
ligence combined with modesty. Another report was that 
Jamal Afghan, Rustam, his brother, Sayyid Naipb Barha, 
and some others had come in wounded. It was also reported 
that the siege (of Eangra) had become a close one, and the 
affair was going hard with the besieged. They had sent 
(literally thrown out) men as mediators, and had asked for 
quarter. It was hoped that by the blessing of increasing 
fortune the fort would be subdu^. 

On Wednesday, the 18th of the same month (Shahriwar), 
Dilawar K. Kakar died a natural death. Beyond all the 
other Amirs of high rank, he combined valour with leader- 
ship and knowledge of affairs, and from the time when I was 
a prince carried away from aU the ball of superiority in my 
service. He acted constantly with the perfection of sincerity 
and the jewel of doing right, and had thus arrived at the 
dignity of Amirship. In the end of his life God Almighty 
bestowed grace upon him, and the conquest of Eliehtwar, 
which was an exemplary service, was accomplished by his 
courage. It is hoped he may be one of the pardoned. His 
sons and the others that he left behind him I exalted with 
all kinds of favours and patronage, and enrolled those of hig 
people who were fit for mansabs amongst the servants of the 
Court. I ordered the rest, to remain as usual with his sons, 
so that his company might not be split up. 

On this day Qfir Yasawul came with a diamond that 
Ibrahim E. Fat^-jang had obtained from the .Bengal mine, 
and waited on me. Wazir K., diwan of Bengal, who was 
an old servant of the Court, died a natural death. 

On the night of Thursday, the 19th, the Kashmiris had 
lined with lamps both sides of the Bihat. It is an ancient 
custom that every year on this day everyone, whether rich 
or poor, whoever has a house on the bank of the river, should 
light lamps as on the §Biab-i-barat. I asked the brahmans 
the reason of this, and they said that on this day the fountain- 
head of the Jhelam was disclosed, and the custom had come 
down from old days that on this date must take place the 



168 


feast of Veth tarwah.'^ Veth means the Jbelam, and they 
call thirteen tarwdh; as this day is the 13th of Siawwal, 
they light lamps. In this way they call it the Veth tarwdh. 
Undoubtedly the lamp-lighting was good. I sate in a boat 
and went roimd to see it. On this day the feast of my solar 
weighing took place, and according to the usual custom, I 
weighed myself against gold and other things, which I dis- 
tributed among deserving people. The 5l6t year of the age 
of this suppliant at the throne of Allah came to an end; the 
52nd year lit up the face of expectation. It is hoped that 
the period of my life will be spent in pleasing God. The 
entertainment of Thursday, the 26th, was held in the lodging 
of Asaf K. (N fir- Jahan’s brother), and that pillar of the Sul- 
tanate fulfilled the duties of homage, and of offerings, and 
thereby acquired eternal bliss. 

On 1 ^ahiiwar (about 11 August) ducks (murgbdhi) 
appeared on the Wular lake, and on the 24th of that month 
they appeared on the Dal lake. The following is the list 
of birds which are no^ met with in Kashmir : 

List. 

1. Cranof (kulang), 

2. Saras (grus Antigone). 

3. Peacock. 


* Veth is the Kashmiri name for the Jholam (Lawrence, 18). It is 
contracted from Vitasta. It is curious that the date of the festival 
should be given according to a Muhammadan month (ghaww&l), 
which must recur at different seasons. Apparently the meaning is 
that the birth of the Jlielain took place on that day. 

Apparently the festival is not much celebrated nowadays, for it is 
not mentioned by Lawrence (2G4-206), except that in a note to p. 266 
tbe Vathtrwah is mentioned as a day on which dsnghters receive 
presents. The 19th Shahriwar, the corresponding dtU mentioned by 
Jahangir, would answ er to the end of August or beginning of September, 
and to the Hindu month of Asin. 13 Shaww&l, 1029. would corre.spond 
to 1 September, 1620. Possibly the Shawwal of text is a mistake for 
the Hindu month Sftwan — t.c., Sr&van. The legend of the birth of the 
Jholam is told in Stein, 97. Possibly Shawwftl docs not here mean 
the month, and we should road sliagh<U‘i-chirdghdn, ** the business of 
lamps.’* 

The crane visits Kashmir in winter, but Jahftngir was never there 
in that season. 



169 


4. Bustard {jotz or chart). 

5. Stork (laglag). 

6. Bustard {tuqf^rl), 

7. Bustard (tyqhd&gh). 

8. Karw&nak (kind of crane ?). 

9. Zard'tilak (golden oriole ?). 

10. Nuqra-p&y (silver-foot). 

11. *Azain-pfiy. 

12. Boza'laglag (royal curlew). 

13. Pelican {hawMl). 

14. Makisa (Ardea indica ?). 

15. Baghl& (paddy-bird). 

16. Qoose (qdz). 

17. Konkla {kokilA, the blank cunkoo ?). 

18. Partridge (durr&j). 

19. Sh&vak (starling). 

20. Nol-i-surl^ (redbeak* [parrot] ?). 

21. Musicha (wood-pigeon ?). 

22. Hariyal (green pigeon 7). 

23. Dhing (adjutant). 

24. Koyal (Eudynamys Orientalis). 

26. (sugar-eater, [parrot] 7). 

26. MahokhA (cuculus castaneus ?). 

27. Mahirl&t (7). 

28. Dhane^ (honibill). 

29. Qulchafi (quail ?). 

30. Tatirl, which tlio Turks call (blank in MSS.) and 

I have named bad~dufdt, ** evil-voiced.’* (It is 
perhaps the s.i.ud piper.) 


As the Persian names of some of these are not known, or 
rather, these birds don’t exist in Persia {WUdycU), I have 
written the Hindi names.* The names of the carnivorous 

* The text wrongly gives this as a list of birds which are found in 
Kashmir. The Iqbftl-ninia 159 and the MSS. show that the text has 
omitted a negative, and that the list consists of Indian birds which are 
not met with in Kashmir. Several of the names do not occur in the 
dictionaries. No 2 (the s&ros) is described in Babur’s Memoirs, 321. 
No. 4 is the florikan, or Otic BcngalmaiB, For Nos. 5-7 see Babur’s 
Memoirs. 321. Karawftn is a crane in Arabic, apparently, and so 
Karwftnak should be a little crane. It is also described as a kind of 
partridge. Perhaps the Karwinak is the demoiselle crane. No. 9 
may be the oriole, or mango-bird, but that, too, is common in Kashmir. 
For No. 12, which may be the ibis, see Babur’s Memoirs, 322. For 
No. 14 see Babur’s Memoirs, p. 321, and for No. 18 Babur's Memoirs, 
320. For the Shtrak (No. 19), see Babur’s Memoirs, 319. No 22 mny ■ 



170 


and herbivorous animals that are noi in Kashmir are as 
follows: The tiger, the panther (yus), the rhinoceros,* the 
wild buffalo, the black antelope, the gazelle, the hoiSh fdcha 
(hog-deer), the vRl-gdw^ the wild ass, the hare, the lyn:c, the 
wild cat, the miUhak’^ka/vhdla^ (1),f the porpoise, and the 
porcupine. 

On this day peaches came from Kabul by runners. The 
largest of these weighed 26 t6laa,X or 66 misqals. As long as 
their season lasted, such a number came that I gave them to 
most of the Amirs, and to the private servants fed from the 
royal table. 

On Friday, § the 27th, I went out to see Vimag,|| the source 
of the Bihat. Going up the river 5 koss in a boat, I alighted 
at the village of Pamplir. 

On this day unpleasant news came from Kiflhtwar. The 
details of this are that when Dilawar K. conquered it and 
returned to Court, he left Na^ru-llah 'Arab, with some of the 
mansabdars to guard it. Na^ru-llah made two mistakes. 
One was that he treated the Zamindars and the people of 
the place harshly, and did not observe a conciliatory demeanour 
towards them. The second was that the forces sent as 
auxiliaries to him, in expectation of increase of mansab, asked 
him for leave to go to Court and transact their affairs. He 
yielded to their representations, i| and gave them leave one 


possibly be the bee-eater (Jfsropf tnridia). No. 23 see Babur's 
Memoirs, 267 and 321. No. 26 may be one ot the parrots, as 
called the Indian parrots and poets fufijfdm-i-^ihaiar-iifkan. See 
AySh-i-Akbail, Persian text, 1. 415, and Jarrett, II. 150. The tatiff. 
No. 30, is apparently the black partridge Franeeiinue vnlgene. IHie 
names of the birds seem to be often wrong in the text, and so I have 
followed the I.O. MSS. 

* Kurg, but perhaps Gurg, ** the wolf,*’ is meant. The a*o1f is very 
rare in Kashmir (Lawrence, 100). 
t Query, mCdiak-i-kar— 4.S., mole. 

i According to Wilson’s Glossary, the tola is« 180 grains Troy, and 
the migqil a03} grains Troy, 
i Elliot, vi. 373, and Iqbil-nima 165. 
i| Vemag of Lawrence, 23. 

I Text w da ; in MSS. 5. 




171 


after the other. When only a small force was left with him, 
the Zamindars, whose hearts had been wounded by him, 
and were on the look out for a disturbance, found their oppor- 
tunity and made an attack from all quarters. Having burnt 
the bridge by which the army had crossed, and by which 
assistance could come, they lighted the fire of disturbance 
and sedition. Nai^ru-llah shut himself up, and for two or 
three days defended himself with the greatest difficulty (liter- 
ally, with a thousand life-extractions). As he had no pro- 
visions, and they had closed the road, he determined to 
accept martyrdom, and manfuUy, with some of those who 
were with him, performed the dues of bravery and valour 
until most of his men were killed, and some became captives 
in the hands of destiny. 

When this news reached my ear, I appointed Jalal, s. 
Dilawar K., on whose forehead the traces of bravery and 
ambition were manifest, and who had done good service in 
the conquest of Ki§htwar, with the mansab of 1,000 personal 
and 600 horse, giving him the attendants of his father who 
were enrolled among the servants of the Court, and an army 
of the soldiers of Kashmir, with many of the Zamindars and 
men on foot with muskets, to assist him in overcoming that 
mob, doomed to a vile end. An order was also given that 
Raja Sangram, the Ziunindar of Jammu, with his own men, 
should come in by the hill-road from Jammu. It is hoped 
that the rebels will quickly obtain the recompense for their 
deeds. 

On Saturday, the 28th, I inarched 4} koss. Passing one 
koss beyond Eakftp&r, 1 came to the. bank of the river. The 
han^ {bhang) of Kakapfir is weU-known. It grows wild on 
the ba^ of the river in quantities. On Sunday, the 29th, 
I halted at the village of Panj Brara.f This village^ has 
been bestowed on my fortunate son giah Parwiz. His Vakils 
had prepared a small building and a little garden overlooking 
the river. In the neighbourhood of Ptoj Brara there is a 

* lawienos^ 67. 

t Janett, IL 366, where it is written Vej Brira. 

t Iqbai-nSma, 164. 



172 


meadow {julga)* exceedingly clean and pleasant, with seven 
lofty plane-trees in the middle of it, and a stream of the 
river flowing round it. The Kashmiris call it Sathd BhuR (?)t 
It is one of the great resorts of Kashmir. 

On this day arrived the news of the death of lOianDauran,^ 
who died a natural death at Lahore. He had nearly reached 
ninety years of age. He was one of the brave men of the 
age and valiant in the battlefield. He combined bravery 
with leadership. He performed great services for the d 3 masty. 
It is hoped that he will be among the pardoned ones. He left 
four sons, but none of them was worthy to be his son. He 
left about Rs. 400,000 in cash and goods, which were given 
to his sons. 

On Monday, the 30th, I first visited the fountain of Inch. 
This village had been given by my father to Ram Das 
Kachhwaha,§ and he had erected buildings and basins at the 
spring. Undoubtedly, it is an exceedingly sweet and delightful 
place. Its water is perfectly clear and pure, and many fish 
swim in it. 

Verse. 

Su clear the water that the grains of sand at bottom 
Could be counted at midnight by a blind man. 

As I gave II the village to my son lOian Jahan, he prepared 
an entertainment there, and presented offerings. 1 chose a 
trifle in order to please him. Half a koss from this spring, 
there is a fountain that they call Machhi Bhawan, || above 
which Ray Biharl Chand, one of the servants of my father, 

* This must be the Nandimarg of Jarrett II. 357 and of Akbar-n&raa 
111. 551. In the Ayin (Jarrett II. 356), mention is made of a place 
where there are seven fountains, Stein, 182, speaks of a spring sacred 
to the seven Riahis. Is it possible that eJM^ma in the A.N. (Persian 
text, I. 565) is a mistake for Mndr f 

t Satlia phuli ? Seven fountains 7 

t IQian Daurfin is the Sh&h-Beg K. Arghun of Blochmann, 377. 

§ See Ahr&sir, II. 155, and Blochmann, 483, for an account of R&m 
Das. Inch is mentioned in Jarrett, II. 356. Perhaps Inch is the 
Yech pargaiia of Stein, 190>191. 

II RSm D&s had died eight years before this. 

;i Akbar-n&ma, III. 725, last line; Lawrence, 298: Stein, loc, cit„ 
176, 177. 



17S 


built an idol-temple. The beauty of this spring is more than 
one can describe, and large trees of ancient years, planes, 
white and black poplars, have grown up roimd it. I passed 
the night at this place, and on Tuesday, the 31st, pitched at 
the fountain of Achval.* The water of this spring is more 
plentiful than that of the other, and it has a fine waterfall. 
Around it lofty plane-trees and graceful white poplars, 
bringing their heads together, have made enchanting places 
to sit in. As far as one could see, in a beautiful garden, 
Ja'fan flowers had bloomed, so that one might say it was a 
piece of Paradise. On Wednesday, the 1st of Mihr, marching 
from Achval, I pitched camp near the fountain of Virnag.f 
On Thursday, the 2nd, the feast of cups was prepared at the 
spring. I gave my private attendants permission to sit 
down. Filling brimming cups, I gave them Kabul peaches 
as a relish, and in the evening they returned drunk 
(fnostdn, exhilarated ?) to their abodes. This spring is 
the source of the River Bihat, and is situated at the foot of 
a hill, the soil of which, from the abundance of trees and the 
extent of green and grass, is not seen. When 1 was a prince> 
I had given an order that they should erect a building at this 
spring suitable to the place. It was now completed. There 
was a reservoir of an octagonal shape, forty-two yards in area 
and fourteen:|; gaz in depth. Its water, from the reflection of 
the grass and plants on the hill, had assumed a hue of verdure. 
Many fish swam in it, round it halls with domes had been 
erected, and there was a garden in front of them. From the 
edge of the pond to'the gate§ of the garden there was a canal 
i gaz in width and 180|| gaz in length, and 2 gaz in depth. 
Round the reservoir was a stone walk (lA%yabdn4-8ang), 

* The Achh Dal of Jarrett, II. 358, and the Achabal of Lawronce. 22. 

t Jarrett, II. 361. The Dir Nig of Iqbihnima, 165. Sec also 
Jarrett, II. 361. The Vemag of Lawrence, 23. Jabingir interpolates 
an account of Vlimig into the annals of the second year. Sec p. *02 
exf translation. 

} So in text, but a few lines lower down the depth is spoken of as 
four gaa. The Ibqil-n&ma has ** fourteen yards.’* 

f The Iqbil-nima has ” to the end of the garden.” 

42 II Iqbll-nima, 165, has ” 186 yards.” 



174 


The water of the reservoir was so clear that, notwithstanding 
its 4 gaz of depth, if a pea had fallen into it, it could have 
been seen. Of the trimness of the canal and the verdure of 
the grass that grew below the fountain, what can one write ? 
Various* sorts of plants and sweet-smelling herbs grew there 
in profusion, and among them was seen a stem which 

had exactly the appearance of the variegated tail of a peacock. 
It waved about in the ripple, and bore flowers here and there. 
In short, in the whole of Kashmir there is no sight of 
such beauty and enchanting character. It appears to me 
that what is upstreamf in Kashmir bears no comparison with 
(i.e., is far superior to) what is downstream. One should 
stay some days in these regions, and go round them so as to 
enjoy oneself thoroughly. As the hour for marching was 
near, and snow was beginning to fall at the head of the passes, 
I had not the leisure to linger there, and was obliged to turn 
my rein towards the city. I gave an order that plane-trees 
should be planted on both sides, on the banks of the canal 
above mentioned. On Saturday, the 4th, I encamped at the 
spring of Loka Bhawan.| This spring is also a pleasant spot. 
Although at present it is not equal to the others, if it were 
to be repaired it would be very good. I ordered them to 
construct a biiilding worthy of the place, and to repair the 
reservoir in front of it. On the road I passed by a spring 
which they call Andha Nag§ (blind fountain. See Iqbal- 
naina, IGO). It is well known that the fish in this fountain are 
blind. I delayed a while near this spring, and threw in a net 
and caught twelve of the fish. Of these, three were blind and 
nine had eyes. Evidently the water of this spring has the 
effect of making them blind. Certainly this is not devoid 
of strangeness. On Sunday, the 5th, 1 again passed by 

* Compare Iqb&l-nima, 166. 

t The meaning is that the Marij (or Marrij), the upper part of 
Kashmir, is superior to the lower part, or Kamrij. See Tuzuk, 296. 

X Iqbai-naina, 166. Perhaps the Bawan Send of Jarrett, U. 361. 
Loka Bhavan (bhavan means ** abode”) is mentioDed in Stein, 180. 
It is the Lokapunya of the RljataranginL It is fire mUes south of 
Acbbal. 

§ Is this a corruption of Anantanlg Isllmlbld t 



176 

the springs of Machhi Bhawan and Inch, and went to 
the city. 

On Wednesday, the 8th, news arrived of the death of 
HaAim, s. Qasim K. On Thursday, the 9th, Iradat K. was 
promoted to the governorship of Kashmir. Mir Jumla in 
his place was chosen for the duty of Khansdman^ and Mu'tamid* 
K. to that of *ATK-wuqarnr. The mansab of 2.000 personal 
and 500 horse was ordered for Mir Jumla. On the night of 
Saturday, the 11th, I entered the city. A^af K. was appointed 
to the duty of Diwan of Gujarat. Sangram, Raja of Jammu, 
was promoted to the mansab of 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse. 

On this day I saw an urusual kind of fishing on the part 
of the fishermen of Kashmir. In a place where the water 
was up to a man’s chest, they propelled tw^o boats that were 
side by side, and so that at one end. they were in contact, and 
at the other end they were 14 or 15 yards apart. Two boat- 
men hold long poles in their hands, and sate on the outside 
edge of each boat (?) so as to regulate the space between 
each boat, and that they should proceed equally. Then 
ten or twelve boatmen got down into the water, and laying 
hold of the ends of the two boats that were joinedf together 
with their hands, trampled the bottom with their feet, and 
moved on. The fish which were between the boats wanted 
to get out of the narrow space, and came against the feet of 
the boatmen. Immediately one of the boatmen dived, and 
another one pressed upon his back, and with his two hands 
kept him from coming to the surface. The latter caught a 
fish and produced it. Some who are skilful in the art catch 
two fish with their hands, and bring them to the surface. 
Among them was an old boatman, who generally at each dive 
brought up two fish. This kind of fishing occurs at Panj 
Brara.t and is peculiar to the Jhelam. It is not used in 

* Author of Iqbabnlma, 166. The appointment was that of exam- 
mer of petitions. 

t I presume that the ends laid hold of by the boatmen weie the 
disengaged ends— t.e., the ends 14 or IS jrards apart. But see IqbSl- 
nSma. 166-167. 

t Text Panj Hazirs. The MSS. are not clear. It may be the 
Se^brary of Bernier. 



176 


ponds or in other streams. It also only takes place in the 
spring when the water is not cold or impetuous (gaza/niat 
‘‘bitmg” 1). 

On Monday, the 18th, the feast of the Dasahra took place. 
According to the annual custom, they decorated the horses 
in the special stables, and those that had been entrusted to 
Amirs, and brought them out. At this time I experienced in 
myself a shortness of breath and difficulty in breathing. I 
hope that in the end, please Qod, it may all go well. 

On Wednesday, the 15th, I went to make an autumn tour 
in the direction of ^apur and the valley of Lar, situated 
downstream of the Kashmir River. In Safapur there is a 
fine tank, and on the north side of it a hill full of trees. It 
being the beginning of autumn, it had a wonderful appearance, 
with trees of all colours, such as the planes, the apricot, and 
others, reflected in the middle of the tank, and very beautiful. 
Undoubtedly the beauties of autumn are not less than those 
of spring. 

Vbbsb. 

Tbeie*8 no exhilaration in decay, but to the oye 
The glory of autumn is more brilliant than the Spring. 

As the time was short and the hour of marching near, I 
took a short circuit and returned. These few days I passed 
pleasantly in catching* ducks. One day, in the midst of 
the sport, a boatman caught and brought me a young gwqofa 
(the demoiselle crane, Ardea nitgo). It was very thin and 
miserable. It did not live longer than one night. The 
qarqafa do^ not live in Kashmir. This had become ill and 
thin at the time of coming from, or going to, Hindustan, and 
fallen there. 

On Friday news came of the death of Mirza Rabman- 
dad, 8. the Khan-khanan. He died a natural death at Balapur. 
It appears that hs had been suffering from fever for some 
days. When he was recovering, the Deccanis one day 
appeared with an army. His elder brother, Darab K., 
mounted with the intention of fighting. When the news 

* The word is but, as he had renounoed shooting, netting is 

l>robably what is meant. 



177 


reached Bahman-dad, with great braveiy, notwithstanding 
his weakness and failing health, he went to his brother. After 
he had beaten the enemy, he returned and in taking off his 
jvibba (quilted waistcoat) was not sufficiently careful. The 
wind immediately caught him, and he was seized with con- 
vulsions, and his tongue became powerless to speak. He 
remained two or three days in this state and died. He was 
a good and brave youth, was fond of sword-play, and was very 
zealous. In every place it was his idea to display his skill 
with the sword. Although fire bums equally what is green 
and what is dry, yet it appeared very grievous to me, and 
what must it have been to his broken-hearted old father ? 
Hardly had the wound from the calamity of %ah-nawaz K. 
healed, when he received this fresh wound. I trust that 
Ood Almighty may give him patience and resignation. 

On Thursday, the 16th, j^anjar K. was promoted to the 
mansab of 3,000 personal and horse, Q^im K. to that of 
2,000 personal and 1,000 horse, and Muhammad Husain, 
brother of Iffiwaja Jahan, who held the post of Ba ldiehi to 
the army of Kangra, that of 800 personal and horse. On 
the night* of Monday, the 27th of the Divine month of Mihr, 
after one watch and seven gharis had passed, the royal 
standards were raised auspiciously and happily to return 
towards Hindustan. As the saffron had blossomed, a march 
was made from the neighbourhood of the city to the village 
of Pampur.f In the whole country of Kashmir there is 
saffron only in this place. On Thursday, the 30th, the feast 
of cups was held in a saffron field. Groves on groves, and 
plains on plains were in bloom. The breeze in that place 
scented one’s brain. The stem is attached (close ?) to the 
ground. The flower has four petals, and its colour is that 
of a violet. It is of the size of a champa flower, and from the 
middle of it three stigmas of saffron grow. They plant the 
bulbs, and in a good year obtain 400 maunds of the current 

* Iqbal-nEma, 169. 

f Or PImpsr, the ancient Padmapura. See Stein, J.A.S.B. for 1609. 
p. 167; Elliot, VI. 376. But the passage, as in Elliot, docs not come 
directly from. the Tuzuk or tho Iqbal-nlma. 



178 


weight or 3,002* Khuniaan mannds. The custom is for 
half to go to the government, and half to the cultivators. 
A seer is bought and sold for Bs. 10. Occasionally its 
market price is more or less, and it is an established custom 
that they bring the saffron flowns plucked, and according to 
the plan they have adopted from of old, they take half its 
weight in salt as wages. There is no salt in Kashmir, and 
they bring it from Hindustan. Again, among the excellencies 
of Kashmir are the plumes of feathers (halgi) and the hawks 
(jat*war-i-^ScS*i). As much as 10,700 feathers are yearly 
obtained. Hawks and falcons are taken in nets to the number 
of 260. It has also nest sparrow-hawks (&^a),t and the 
nest sparrow-hawk is not bad. On Friday, the 1st of the 
divine month of Aban, marching from Pamp&r, I pitched 
my camp at jQ^pQr. As it was reported to me that Zambill 
Beg, ambassador from my brother Siah ‘Abbas, had reached 
the neighbourhood of Lahore, a dress of honour and Rs. 30,000 
for expenses were sent to him by Mir Qusamu-d-din s. 
‘Afudu-d-daula Inja.§ I ordered that whatever he might 
expend on entertaining the ambassador should be sent to 
him to the extent of Rs. 5,000.|| Bhfore this I had directed 
that from Kashmir to the end of the hilly country buildingB 
should be erected at each stage for the accommodation of 
myself and the ladies, for in the cold weather one should not 
be in tents. Although the buildings at this stage had been 
completed, as they were still damp and there was a smell of 
lime, we put up in tents. On Saturday, the 2nd, I halted 
at KalampOr. As it had repeatedly been represented to 
me that in the neighbourhood of BSrapfir there was a waterfall H 
very high and wonderful, as it was 3 or 4 koss off on the left 

• MSS. have 3,200. 

t I.e., hawks taken from the nest, and not bom in oaptmty. 

X Iqb&l-n&ma, 169, 

§ This is Mir Jam&lu-d-din, the dibtionary-maker and friend of 
Sir*Thoina8 Roe. 

II The sentence appears obscure, but probably it was an order to 
the authorities at Labors to supply J^usimu-d-dlh with the cost of en- 
tertaining the ambassador up to tlie amount of Rs. 0,000. 

^ Perhaps the waterfall described by Bernier in his ninth letter, 
and mentioned as having been admired by Jahftngir. 



179 


of the road, 1 hastened there to see it. What can be written 
in its praise ? The water pours down in three or four grada- 
tions (?). 1 had never seen such a beautiful waterfall. 

Without hesitation, it is a sight to be seen, very strange and 
wonderful. I passed the time there in enjoyment till the 
third watch of the day, and filled my eye and heart with the 
sight; but in the cloudy and rainy season it is not devoid of 
wildness. After the third watch had passed, in the evening 
I rode back to Hirapur,'*' and passed the night at that stage. 
On Monday, the 4th. crossing over the hoUd of Bari Brar!,t 
I chose Pirpanjal. at the head of the koUd, for a halting-place. 
Of the roughnesses of the pass and the difficulties of this road 
what shall I write ? It is difficult for thought even to cross 
it. In these last few days snow had repeatedly fallen, the 
hills had become white, and in the middle of the path in some 
places ice had formed, so that the hoof of a horse had no 
hold, and a rider could only pass with difficulty. God 
Almighty bestowed upon us His mercy, for it did not snow 
on this day. The advantage was for those who went on in 
front. Those who followed came in for snow. On Tuesday, 
the 5th, going by the pass of Pirpanjal the camp was pitched 
at Pofihana. Although on this side there is a descent, yet 
as it is high, most of the people passed it on foot. On 
Wednesday, the 6th. we pitched at Bahramgalla. Near this 
village there is a waterfall and a very fine spring. According 
to orders, they had made a terrace for me to sit upon; indeed, 
this is a sight to be seen. I ordered that they should engrave 
on a stone tablet the date of the crossing, and place it on the 
top of the terrace Bi-badal K.X composed some 

couplets, and this mark of my fortune remains on the path 
of poetry as a memorial on the tablet of Time (?). There are 
two Zamindars on this road in whose charge are the arrange- 

* HlrlpOr is Hurapur and the ancient Surapura. 

t Mari or Niri Brira in the MSS. 

i Bl-badal K. ia the name given by Jahangir to Sa*idi or Sbsida 
who was chief goidamitb. See end of IStb year, p. 326 of text. For 
Siskia, who died in Kashmir in 1080 (a.d. 1669-70). see Riru, 111. 
1083a, and 1. 261, and Kupp. (^'atalogue, p. 207, and Sprcnger's Citaloguc 
•24. 



180 


ments for the traffic on it, and they are in reality the keys 
of the country of Kashmir. They call one Mahdi Nayak and 
the other Husain Nayak. The charge of the road from 
Hirapur to Bahramgalla is in their hands. Bahram Nayak, 
the father of IfahdJ Nayak, during the Kashmiri government, 
was an important person. When the authority passed to 
the imperial servants, Mirza Yusuf K., during his government, 
made Bahram Nayak a traveller to the country of non- 
existence. It is now equally in the possession and charge of 
the two.* Although outwardly they are on good terms, 
they really bear great enmity towards each other. On this 
day ^il^ Ibn Yamln, who was one of the old trusted servants, 
went to the neighbourhood of God’s mercy (died).t On 
account of my great reliance on him, my opium and drinking 
water| were in his charge. On the night when we were 
encamped above the kotal of Pirpanjal, the tents and furniture 
had not arrived. He was rather infirm and the cold affected 
him, and he became cramped so that he could not speak. 
He remained alive for two days in this state and then died. 
I gave over the private opium to Hiawa^ K., and the 
Sthddf-ldiflna (the water department) to Musawi K. On 
Thursday, the 7th, the village of Thana§ became the en- 
camping place. Many monkeys (mawnun) were seen in 
Bahramgalla, and from that stage a great difference was 
apparent in the climate, the language, the clothing, the 
animals, and whatever properly belongs to a warm country. 
The people here apeak both Persian and Hindi. Evidently 
Hindi is their real language, and they have acquired Kashmiri 
on account of the proximity of Kashmir. Briefly, one onters 
India at this place. The women do not wear woollen clothing, 
and like Indian women, they wear nose-rings. 

On Friday, the 8th, Bajaur was the camping-ground. The 

* Text calls them brothers, but the MSS. show that birddar is a 
mistake for hardbaTf equally.** 

t The MSS. add: ** He was a good youth {jawdn) and without 
guile." 

t Ab-i<^ylt. ^ water of life,’* a name given by Akbar to his lb- 
dir-khina, or supply of drinking-water, etc. See Blochmann, 61. 

i Text wrongly has ThattS. 



181 


people of this country were in old times Hindus, and the 
landholders are called Rajas. Sul^n Firuz made them 
Muhammadans, but they are still called Rajas. They still 
have the marks of the times of ignorance. One of these is 
that just as some Hindu womei bum themselves along with 
their husbands (bodies), so these women (the Rajaur women) 
are put into the grave along with their (dead) husbands. I 
heard that recently they put alive into the grave a girl of 
ten or twelve along with her (dead) husband, who was of the 
same age. Also, when a daughter is born to a man without 
means, they put her to death by strangulation.* They ally 
themselves with Hindus, and both give and take girls. Taking 
them is good, but giving them, Ood forbid ! I gave an order 
that hereafter they should not do such things, and whoever 
was guilty of them, should be capitally punished. There is 
a river at Rajaur. Its water during the rainy season becomes 
much poisoned. Many of the people there get a swelling 
(bui/fima) under the throat, and are yellow and weak. The 
rice of Rajaur is muchf better than the rice of Kashmir. 
There are self-grown and sweet-scented violets in this skirt 
of the hills. 

On Sunday, the 10th, I encamped at Nauehahra. At this 
place, by order of my father, they had built a stone fort, and 
there is constantly here, by way of a station (thdna), a body 
of men from the governor of Kashmir. On Monday the 
camp was at Chauki Hatti. A chda named Murad had 
exerted himself to complete the buildings at this place, and 
had done it well. In the middle of the royal abode there was 
a fine terrace, superior to those of other stages. I increased 
his mansab. On Tuesday, the 12th, I halted at Bhimbar. 
Passing this day out of hotals and hills, we entered the broad 
plains of Hindustan. The hunters had previously been dis- 
patched to form qaimurgbcu, so as to prepare jirgas (hunting 
rings) in Bhimbar and Girjhik} and Makhiyala. On Wednes- 

* Elliott, VI. 370. Ap|>arently Sati was not practinod by burning, 
but by burying. 

t Biayir bihtar, MS., 181. 

X GirjhSk in said to be the Hindu name for Jalilpur, and the proba bio 
site of Bukcphala, Jarrett, II. 324. MftkhiySla is also mentioned there. 



182 


day and Thursday they drove in the game. On Friday I 
rejoiced in a hunt. Hill quchqar,* etc., to the number of 
56 head were taken. On this day Baja Sarang Deo, who was 
one of the intimate attendants, was promoted to the mansab 
of 800 personal and 400 horse. On Saturday, the 16th, 
I went towards Oirjhak, and in five marches encamped on 
the bank of the Bihat. On Thursday, tbe 21st, I hunted 
in the hunting-ring of Girjhak. Less game than usual was 
taken, and I was not satisfied. On Monday, the 25th, I 
hunted with much enjoyment in the hunting-ring of Makhi- 
yala,t thence in ten stages I encamped at the stage of the 
hunting-place of Jahangirabad. When I was prince, this 
was my hunting-place. Afterwards, I founded a village 
with my own name, and erecting a small building, placed it 
in charge of Sikaiidar Mu‘in, who was one of my best hunts- 
men. After I came to the throne I made a pargana of it, 
and bestowed it as a jagir on him. I gave an order that they 
should construct there a building as a royal residence, with 
a tank arid a minaret^ (manara). After bis death this par- 
gana was given in jagir to Iradat K., and the charge of the 
Wldings was given to him. It has now been handsomely 
completed. Undoubtedly the tank was very broad, § and 
in the middle there is a delightful building. Altogether the 
buildings here cost Bs. 1,50,000. Beally it is a kingly 
hunting-place. On Thursday and Friday, having halted, I 
enjoyed myself with various kinds of sport. Qasim K., who 
was honoured with the charge of Lahore, had the good fortune 
to pay his respects to me, and presented 50 muhars. 

In one march after this stage I encamped at the garden of 
Mumin ‘IAq-baz,|| which is on the bank of the Lahore Biver 

It seems that Mukhyaia is the famous Mftnikiy&la, where the Buddhist 
tope is which was first described by Elphinstone. Abul-l-Fa^l says in 
the Ayin that it was a place of worship. See l.(x., new cd.. XVII. 182. 

* Mountain-sheep. Apparently three rings were made. 

t The I.O. MSS. add here 76 head of mdrl^wur, etc., w'ore taken. 

t Perhaps the reference is to the tomb he formerly put up over a 
favourite deer. § MSS. have “ is very noble.” 

II Pigeon-fancier. He belonged to Herat, and is mentioned in 
Blochmann, 302. 



183 


(the Ravi), and has some lofty plane-trees and handsome 
cypresses. It is certainly a rare garden. On Monday, the 
9th of the Divine month of A^r, corresponding with the 
5th Muharram of a.h. 1030* (20 November, 1620), mounting 
an elephant of the name of Indra, I went towards the city, 
scattering coin as I proceeded. After three watches and two 
gharis of day had passed, at the selected auspicious hour, 
having enter^ the royal residence, I alighted happily and 
auspiciously at the building recently brought to completion 
and finished handsomely by the exertions of Ma'mfir E. 
Without exaggeration, charming residences and soul-exciting 
sitting places had been erected in great beauty and delicacy, 
adorned and embellished with paintings by rare artists. 
Pleasant green gardens with all kinds of flowers and sweet- 
scented herbs deceived the sight. 

VBRSB.f 

From head to foot, wherever 1 look, 

A glance plucks at the heart's skirt (saying), 

** This is the place *' (to stop at). 

Altogether, there had been expended on these buildings the 
sum of Rs. 700,000 or 23,000 current tumans of Persia.^ 

On this day 'the joy-enhancing news of the conquest of the 
fort of Kangra rejoiced our mind. In thankfulness for this 
great boon and important victory, which was one of the 
renewed favours of the Bestower of Gifts, I bowed the head 
of humility at the throne of the merciful Creator, and beat 
with loud sounds the drum of gladness and pleasure. Kangra 
is an ancient fort to the North of Lahore, situated in the 
midst of the hill country, famous for its strength and the 
difficulty of conquering it. Who was the founder of this 
fort Gk>d only knows. The belief of the Zamindars of the 
province of the Panjab is that, during this period the said 
fort has never passed to any other tribe, and no stranger has 
stretched out to it the hand of dominion. Wisdom is from 

* Text wrongly has 1031. It should be 1030, as in the Iqbai-nSma, 
171. 

t The couplet is given in iqbll-nanui, 171, with some verbal differ- 
ences. t Elliott, VI. 374. 



184 


Allah ! But certainly from the time when the voice of Islam 
and tile sound of the established religion of Mul^mmad 
reached Hindustan, not one of the Sultans of lofty dignity 
has obtained the victory over it. Sultan Uruz-ehah, with 
all his power and might, himself went to conquer it, and 
besieged it for a long time. As he knew that the strength of 
the fort was such that as long as the means for holding it and 
provisions were with the besieged, victory over them was 
unattainable, nofetw volens he was contented with the coming 
of the Raja to pay his respects to him, and withheld his hand. 
They say that the Raja prepared an offering and an enter- 
tainment, and at his request took the Sultan inside the fort. 
The Sultan, after going round and inspecting it, said to the 
Raja that to bring a king like him inside the fort was not 
according to the dictates of caution. What could he do if 
the body of men who were in attendance were to attack him 
and take possession of the fort ? The Raja made a sign to 
his men, and instantaneously an army of valiant men armed 
and accoutred, came out from a concealed place and saluted 
the Sultan. The Sultan became suspicious and anxious 
about an attack from these men, and suspected some strata- 
gem. The Raja came forward and kissed the ground of 
service, and said: ** 1 have no thought but that of service 
and obedience, but as has been spoken by the auspicious 
tongue, I observe far-sighted caution, for all times are not the 
same.” The Sultan applauded him. The Raja, having 
accompanied him for some stages, obtained leave to return. 
After this, whoever sat on the throne of Delhi sent an army 
to subdue Kangfa, but the thing went no further. My 
revered father also sent a large army once under the leader- 
ship of ^usain Quli K., who, after approved service, was 
honoured with the title of Khan Jahan. Whibt the siege was 
in progress, the outbreak of Ibrahim Husain Mirza took place 
That ingrate fled from Gujarat, and raised the flag of rebellion 
and calamity towards the Panjab. IQian Jahan was com- 
pelled to raise the siege, and to turn to extinguish the flame 
of his sedition. Thus the acquisition of the fort fell into the 
knot of delay. The thought was continually lurking in the 



185 


royal mind: Tlie longed-for Fair one does not show her 
face from the secret place of Destiny.” When by the Grace 
of the Glorious Gk>d the throne of the State was adorned by 
the existence of this suppliant, this was one of the holy wars 
which I considered incumbent on me. In the first instance 
I dispatched Murtaza K., who was governor of the Panjab, 
with a force of brave men skilled in war, to conquer the fort. 
This important matter had not been completed when Mur- 
tajja K. attained to the mercy of Gk>d (died). After this 
Jauhar Mai,* s. Raja Baso, undertook this duty. 1 sent 
him, giving him the command of the army. That wicked 
one, taking to evil revolt and ingratitude, committed sin, 
and dispersion found its way into that army, and the acquisi- 
tion of the fort fell into the knot of delay. No long time 
elapsed before that ingrate received the recompense of his 
deeds and went to hell, as has been described in its own place.f 
In fine, at this time Khurram undertook that duty, and sent 
his own servant Sundar| with all haste, and many of the 
royal servants obtained leave to go to his support. On the 
16th ^awwal, a.h. 1029, (5 September, 1620), the armies, 
having invested the fort, erected batteries. Looking to the 
ways of entrance into and exit from the fort with the eye 
of caution, they closed the road for the entrance of provisions. 
By degrees the besieged became straitened, and when there 
remained in the fort no grain that they could eat, for four 
months more they boiled dry grasses§ with salt and ate it. 
When destruction was imminent, and no hope of escape was 
left, they asked for quarter and surrendered the fort. 

On Thursday, the 1st Mu^arram, a.h. 1030, || Hijri 
(16 November, 1620), the victory unattainable by all preceding 

* Jaubsr Mai is mentioned at p. 310. Perhaps he was not Suraj 
Mai, but it looks as if he was the same person. C/. corresponding 
passage in IqbAl-nSma, 173, where he is dalled Suraj Mai. 

P. 310 of text. 

X RAJA BikramAjit. See ante, p. 310. 

f Text wrongly has qhatta grain, instead of *alafhd fodder, grasses, 
etc. See MSS. and IqbAl-nAma, 174. 

II Text wrongly has 1031, but it is 1031 in the MSS. and in Klliot, 
VI., 375. See, however, Elliot, VI. 378, and text, 326, which shew that 
the 16th year began in 1030. 



186 


Sultans of lofty dignity, and which appeared distant to the 
short-sighted, God Almighty of His own grace and mercy 
granted to this suppliant. The troops, who had displayed 
praiseworthy activity in this service, were exalted according 
to their exertions and fitness increase of mansab and 
dignities. 

On Thursday, the 11th, I went, at the request of Khurram, 
to his newly-built house. I took those of his offerings that 
pleased me. Three elephants were placed in the private 
stud. On the same day I appointed 'Abdu-l-‘Aziz K. 
Naq^bandl to the faujdarship of the district of Kangra, and 
his mansab was fixed at 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse. I 
gave a private elephant to I'tiqad K. Alf K. Qiyam-lAani K. 
obtained leave to take charge of the fort of Kangra. and his 
mansab, original and increased, was fixed at 1,500 personal 
and 1,000 horse. Shaikh Fai^-llah, son-in-law of Murtaza K., 
was appointed in company with him to stay at the top of the 
fort {bdla-i-qiVa). 

On the night of Saturday, the 13th of the same month, a 
lunar eclipse took place. Having performed the dues of 
humility at the throne of the highest and most powerful God, 
cash and goods were distributed by way of charity among 
the faqirs and poor, and deserving people. On this day 
Zambil Beg, ambassador of the ruler of Persia, had the good 
fortune to kiss the thred^old. After performing salutation, 
be laid before me the gracious letter of that brother of high 
degree, containing expressions of sincerity and perfect friend- 
ship. He presented 12 *Abbast* (coin) as nagar, four horses 
with trappings, three tuyghun (white) falcons, five mules, five 
camels, nine bows, and nine scimitars. The Shah had given him 
leave, in company with IQian *Alam, but for certain necessary 
matters he could not come with him. On this day he arrived 
at Court. I presented him with a superb dress of honour, 
with a plume and a jewelled turban fringe, and a jewelled 
dagger. Wi^al Beg and l^ji Ni‘mat, who had come with 

* The 'AbbM is also the name of a dress. The MSS. have fourteen, 
instead of four, horses. Apparently the presents were Zambil's op-n 
offering, not that of his master. See below. 



187 


him, were honoured by waiting on me. Amanu-llah, s. Maha* 
bat K., was promoted to the mansab, original and increased, 
of 2,000 and 1,500 horse. At the request of Mahabat K., 

I added 300 hoise to the mansab of Mubariz K. Afjjian, and 
brought it up to 2,000 personal and 1,700 horse. One hundred 
horse were also added to the mansab of Kabak* (?). I sent 
winter dresses of honour to ‘Abdu-llah K. and Laebkar K. 
At the request of Qasim K. I went to his garden in the neigh- 
bourhood of the city, and in the course of the procession, 
scattered 10,000 charans (4-anna pieces). Out of his offerings 
I selected one ruby and one diamond, and some cloths. 

On the night of Sunday, the 21st, the advanced camp pro- 
ceeded auspiciously and happily towards Agra. Barq- 
andaz K. was appointed superintendent of artillery with 
the army of the Deccan. Shail^ Is^aq (Isaac) was appointed 
to duty at Kangra. The brother of Allah-dad, the Afghan, 

I released from prison, and made him a present of Ks. 10,000. 
1 gave also a tuyghun falcon to ^urram. On Thursday, 
the 26th, the usual entertainment took place. The presents 
from the ruler of Persia, which had been sent by Zambil Beg, 
were laid before me. I gave an elephant to Sul^n Husain, 
and made a present of Rs. 1,000 to Mulla Muhammad 
Ka^min.f The mansab of Sardar Af(2^n, at the request 
of Mahabat K., was fixed at 1,000 personal and 400 horse. 
As Baja Rup Ghand of Qwalior:^ had been very active in his 
service at Kangra, an order was given to the chief diwans to 
hand over half of his native place to him in free gift, and the 
remaining half as a tanl^wah jagir. 

On the 3rd I demanded in marriage for my son ^lahriyar 
the daughter’s daughter§ of Madaru-l-mulk Ptimadu-d-daula, . 
and sent Rs. 100,000 in cash and goods by way of adchaq 

^ MafUab‘t-kabak. Perhaps we should read kaiak^ and regard the 
in«';rease as made to the office of guarding the palace. It is katak, ap- 
parently, in 1.0. MSS. It may, however, be Kang or Gang and a 
man’s name. 

t Apparently the translator of the RljataranginS. 

i Doubtless the Gwtflior in the Panjab. 

§ Nur Jahin's daughter by Sbir-afgan. The date of the asking is 
given in the text as the third, 'but should be the 30th, as in the J.O. MSS. 



188 


(dowiy given as part of the marriage rites). Most of the 
Amirs and the chief servants went to his house with gifts. 
He prepared i grand entertainment with much ceremony. 
It is hoped that it may be auspicious to him. As that Chief 
of the State had erected lofty buildings, and highly decorated 
bowers in his house, he invited me to an entertainment. I 
went there with the ladies. He had prepared a great feast, 
and laid before me appropriate offerings of all kinds. In order 
to please him, I took such as I approved of. On this day 
Rs. 60,000 were presented tc Zambil Beg, the ambassador. 
The mansab of Zabar-dast K. was fixed at 1,000 personal 
and 500 horse, original and increased. Maqsud, brother of 
Qasim K., was promoted to the mansab of 500 personal and 
300 horse, and Mirza Dakhani, s. Mirza Rustam, to that of 
500 personal and 200 horse. 

At this auspicious time* when the standards of victory 
and conquest were in Kashmir, the province of eternal spring, 
happily employed in sight-seeing and sport, representations 
constantly came from the officials in the Southern territories 
to the effect that when the victorious standards went to a 
distance from the centre of the Kbalifate^ the rulers of the 
Deccan, owing to their wickedness, broke their promises 
and raised their heads by giving trouble and exciting sedition, 
and placing their feet beyond their own boundary, took 
possession of many of the districts of Ahmadnagar and Berar. 
It was constantly reported that the chief object of these 
evU-fortuned ones was to plunder and ruin the cultivated 
fields and the grazing-lands. When at the first time the 
world-opening standards had proceeded to the conquest of 
the regions of the south and the overthrow of that band, 
and Khurram. with the vanguard, had gone to Burhanpur, 
they, by feline tricks suitable to such seditious people, made 
him their intercessor and evacuated the royal dominions. 
They also sent by way.of tribute large sums in cash and goods, 
and promised that they would not let loose from their hands 
the rope of service, and would not place their feet beyond the 
boundary of respect, as has been recorded in the preceding 
• Elliot, VI. 376. 



189 


pages. At the request of l^urram, I had halted for a few 
days at the Fort of Stadfabad Mand9, and at his inter- 
cession, and on their humiliation and bewailing, they were 
pardoned. 

As they had now broken their agreement through evil dis- 
position and quarrelsomeness, and had turned back from the 
way of obedience and service, I sent off the hosts of good 
fortune again under his leadership, that they might receive 
retribution for their evil deeds, and be an example to all those 
of crooked fortune and turned heads. But as the important 
business of Kangra had been entrusted to nim, he had sent 
most of his experienced men there. For some days accord- 
ingly, he could not arrange the matter. At last, report followed 
on report one after another, that the enemy had gathered 
strength, and that nearly 60,000 vagabond horsemen had 
collected together and taken possession of royal territory, 
and wherever there were posts, had removed them, and joined 
together in the town of Mahakar. For three months the 
imperialists had passed their days in strife and fighting with 
their rascally enemies, and during this time three pitched 
battles had taken place, and each time the self-sacrificing 
servants (of the State) had proved superior to the cvil- 
fortuned rebels. As grain and provisions could not reach the 
camp by any road, and the enemy was plundering on all sides 
of the army of good fortune, a great scarcity of grain resulted, 
and the animals were in bad plight. Having no choice, 
they came down from the Balagiiat, and took up their position 
at Balapur. The rebels, waxing valiant in their pursuit, 
engaged in plundering in the neighbourhood of Balapur. Of 
the servants of the Court 6,000or 7,000 horsemen, well mounted, 
were selected, and they made an attack on the enemy's camp. 
They (the enemy) numbered about 60,000 cavalry. Briefly, 
a great fight took place, and their camp was plundered. 
Having killed and taken prisoners many of them, they re- 
turned in safety and with plunder. When they turned hack 
those wretches agftin attacked them from all sides, and they 
came on, fighting as far as the camp. On both sides about 
43 1,000 were killed. After this fight they (the imperialists) 



190 


remained about four months at Balaptir. When the scarcity 
of grain became excessive, many of the qulaqchis (servants) 
ran away and joined the enemy, and constantly bands of 
them, taking to the road of disloyalty, were enrolled among 
the rel)eLs. On this account, not considering it advisable to 
delay any longer,' they (the imperialists) came to Burhanpur. 
Again, those wretches followed them and besieged Burhanpur, 
and they were six months shut up there. Many parganas 
of the provinces of Berar and Khandesh passed into their 
possession, and they stretched out the hand of oppression 
over the cultivators and poor, and engaged in collecting the 
revenues. As the army had undergone great hardships and 
the animals had fallen into bad condition, they could not 
leave the city to inflict substantial punishment. Thus the 
pride and conceit of those short-sighted ones became greater. 
Just at this time the royal standards returned to the capital, 
and by the gr^ce of God Kangra was conquered. 

Accordingly, on Friday, the 4th of Dai, I despatched 
I^urram in that direction, bestowing on him a dress of honour, 
a sword, and an elephant. Nur Jahan Begam also gave him 
an elephant. I told him after he had conquered the province 
of the Deccan he should take as a reward two* crores of dams 
from the conquered country. 650 mansabdars, 1,000 A/iadJSf 
1,000 Turkish musketeers, and l,000t gunners on foot, in 
addition to the 31,000 horse already in that quarter, and a 
large force of artillery, and many elephants, were appointed 
to accompany him. 1 also gave him a crore of rupees for the 
expenses of the victorious army. The servants (of the Couit) 
who were appointed on this duty received each, according 
to his standing as a reward, horses, elephants, and dresses of 
honour. 

At the same auspicious hour and favourable time, the 
standards of the expedition were turned toward Agra, and 
a halt was made at Nau^ahr.j; Muhammad Ri?a Jabiri 

* The Iqb&l n&ma, 176, htm ** tea cior«8.'* 

t The MSS. have 5.000. The word for ** gunners ** ia tupM, 

X The MSS., instead of Naugkahr, have sawthf-i-Aakr, the eii* 
rirons of the city (c/. Lahore ?). 



191 


was appointed Diwan to Bengal, and ^waja Mulki to the 
post of Bakhshi in the same, and were promoted in mansab. 
Jagat Singh, s. Rana Karan, camu from his native place, and 
had the good fortune to kiss the threshold. On the 6th of 
the same month the open space ^n the bank of Kaja Todar 
MaFs tank* became the alighting place of the Court of good 
fortune. Here I halted for four days. On this day some 
of the mansabdars who had obtained leave to go to the con- 
quest of the Deccan were promoted as follows: Zahid K. 
held the mansab of 1,000 and 400 horse; he received that of 
1,000 and 500 horse; Hardi, Narayan Ila^a I promoted to 
900 and 600 horse, original and increased; Ya'qub, s. IQmn 
Daurau, was given that of 800 and 400 horse, and in the same 
manner a great number of the servants of the State received 
increase of mansab according to their capabilities. Mu'tamid 
K. was appointed to the post of Bakhshi and newswriter to 
the royal army, and was horn ured with a The offering 

of Lachmi Chand, Baja of Kumaon, consisting of hawks and 
falcons and other hunting animals, was brought before me. 
Jagat Singh, s. Rana Karan, obtained leave to proceed as an 
auxiliary to the army of the Deccan, being presented with 
a private horse and saddle. Baja Rup Chand, having been 
honoured with the gift of an elephant and a horse, took leave 
to go to his jagir. On the 12th my son ^an Jahan (Lodi) 
was made governor of Multan^ and was given leave. There 
were conferred on him a c- mplete dress together with a 
nddifi (a robe of Jahangir’s nvention), a jewelled dagger, a 
special elephant with trappings, a female elephant, a special 
horse of the name of i^di^ng (i*.e., Arrow), and a pair of 
hawks. Sayyid Hizabr K. ^eld the mansab of 1,000 and 
400 horse. Increasing these by 600 and 200 horse, I gave 
him leave to accompany H In Jahan. Muhammad Shafi' 
was appointed Bakhshi and newswnter to the Subah of 
Multan. Bhawal (or Bahwal), who was one of the old servants, 
was made A^raf-i-tup-l^na (head of the artillery ?), and 
received the title of Ray. On the 13th the bank of the 
river Gobindwal became the amp of the army of prosperity, 

* It was in the vicinity of L diore. Akbar-ntma, 111 . 569. 



192 


•nd a halt of fear days was made. A special elephant oalled 
Jai Singh, odth a female, were given to Mahibat K., and sent 
to him by Qafiyyi his servant. Robes of honour were also 
forwarded to the Amirs of the Sabah of Bangash by ‘left 
Bag. 

On the 17th* the feast of my Innar weighing took place. 
As Ma*tamid K. had been appointed Bakhshi to the army 
of the Deccan and given leave, the post of 'Arf-mnqarrix 
was given to Uiwaja Qasim. Mb giataf was made 
of the Ahadis, and F&til Beg made Bakhshi of the Panjab. 
As Bahadur K., governor of Qandahar, in consequence of 
a disease in his eyes, had requested to be allowed to kus the 
threshold, entrusting the government of Qandahar this day 
to ‘Abdu'l-'Ads K., an order was issued to Bah&dur K., that 
when he arrived La should hand over the fort to him and come 
himself to Court. On the 21st of the same month I took up 
my quarters at Nhr-saray.t At this spot the Vakils of Nhr 
Jah&n Begam had built a lofty house, and made a royal 
garden. It was now completed. On this account the Begam, 
having begged for an entertainment, prepared a grand feast, 
and by way of offering, with great pains produced all kinds 
of delicate and rare things. In order to please her, I took 
what I approved. I halted two days at this place. It was 
settled that the officials of the Panjab should send Bs, 200,000, 
in addition to the Bs 60,000 already ordered for provisions 
for the fort of Qandahar. hfir Qiwamu-d-din, the diwan of 
the Panjab, obtained leave to go to Lahore, and received 
a dress of honour. Qasim E., with a view to punish the 

* But the next page of text records another feast of the lunar weigh- 
ment. Gan it be that the lunar weighment refers to Nilr Jahin*8 
birthday, not to Jahingir*s ? The 17th here mentioned is the 17ih 
of the solar month of Dai, and corresponded to about December 28, 
1620, In the following page (324) we are told that the lunar weigh- 
ment took place on 30 Bahman, correaponding to 25 Rabru-l-aw^ 
February 8, 1621: Jahingir’s birthday waa on 1^brn-l-awwal if. 
so the anniveraary fell this year on 22 Bahman. Oonaequently, if he 
oelebrated it, as stated on p. 323, on 17 Dai, he did so more than a 
month too soon I Beidsntly there is a mistake somewhere. 

t This place Is msntioned again in the account of the 16th year, 
p. 338. It evidently leoeived its name from Nikr Jahin. 



193 


seditioas in the nei^boorhood of Eingra, and to pieserre 
Older in thoee xegionB, ms given leave to go, and I presented 
him with a speoial nddtri, a horse, a dagger, and an elephant. 
His mansab, origbal and increased, was fixed at 2,000 personal 
and 600 horse. At his request, I allowed Baja Ingram 
((rf Janunn) to proceed to ^t region, conferring on him a 
robe of hononr, a. horse, and an elephant. 

On Thursday the camp was jntohed outside the town of 
Sihrind. I hidted one day, and amused myself with going 
round the gurden. On Snmlay, the 4th, Aba-l-^Man was 
sent on service for the oonqueet of the Deccan. A dress of 
honour, with a nddiri, a speoial shawl, an elephant named 
9ab^-dam (breath of mom), a horsetail banner, and drums, 
being given him. I g»ve iMve to Mn‘tamid E., presenting 
him with a dress of honour, and a speoial horse called I^Ut^-i* 
9 idiq (the true dawn). On the 7th of the same -month the 
bank of tbe river Sarasat! (Saraswatl) was the place of 
encampment of good fortune in the neif^tbourhood of the 
of muftafii’ibid. The next day I encamped at Akbar> 
pfir,* whence I sat in a boat on the river Jumna, to reach 
my object. On this day *Is»t E. Chacld,f with the faujdar 
of that repon, had the good fortune to kiss the threshold. 
Giving Mn^Aintnaii leave to proceed to Multan, I pre- 
sented with a horse, a dress of hononr, and a 
tmthir, and sent by him a speoial turban (e^ra) to ^]an 
Jahin, my son {fartand). 

Thence, in five marches, 1 reached the par^uia of Eorina, 
the native country of Muqanab E., and the Court encamped 
there. By way of offering, his Valdls laid before me fil rabiesj; 
and 4 diamonds, 1,000 gu of tmifyital (satin) as a pit-andSz 
(foot-carpet), rnidi a petition from him, presenting also 100 
cameb as charity. 1 ordered them to be distributed among 
deserving people. From this place, in five marches Delhi 

* AMwrplir. twelve mike N.W. Ma^url. J. Serker’s Indie of 
Aorengaeb, 171. 

t That is, of Chleli in Trensoniene, bat eooording to I.O. MS. 181, 
the word ia Biffl— from QM or IBwif. 

t Ninety-one rubieB is surely a mistake. The Iqhil-nftma, 177* 
only speaks of one. It is, howeyer. 91 ydqiii in I.O. MS., 181. 



194 


became the halting-place of the etandarda of good fortune 
I aent lt*imadu-d-daula to my fortunate aon ^h Parwiz 
with a apecial/ofTf (a dresa), for him, and it waa aettled that 
he ahould. return in the apace of one month and wait on me. 
Having halted for two daya at Salirngp^rh, on Thursday, the 
SBrd, I passed through the district of Delhi with the intention 
of hunting in the pargana of Palam, and halted on the 
bank of the S^msi tank. On the road 1 scattered 4,000 
cAaruns (Bs. 1,000) with my own hand. Twenty-two 
elephants, male and female, had arrived from Bengal as 
an offering from AUah-yar, s. Iftil^r K., and were passed 
before me. 

2h-l-Qamain* obtained leave to proceed to the faujdarship 
of Sambhar. He is the son of lalmndar, the Armenian, and 
his father had the good fortune to be in the service of ‘Ardi- 
a^ani (Akbar), who gave him in marriage the daughter 
of ‘Abdu-l-9ayy,t the Armenian, who was in service in the 
royal harem. By her he had two sons. One was Zd-l-Qamain, 
who was intelligent and fond of work, and to him, during my 
reign, the chief diwans had entrusted the charge of the 
government salt works at Sambhar, a duty which he per- 
formed efficiently. He was now appointed to the faudjar- 
ship of that region. He is an accomplished composer of 
Hindi songs. His method in this art was correct, and his 
compositions were frequently brought to my notice and were 
approved. La*l Beg^ was selected for the daroghahship of 
the records in the place of NOm-d-din Quli. 1 passed four 
days pleasantly in sporting in the neighbourhood of Palam 
and returned to Salimgarh. On the 29th, 19 elephants, 

^ This is the Armenian of whom so much is said by Father Botelho 
and other missionaries. It is mentioned in M. WSris's continuation 
of the Pididiih-n&ma, p. S92, of B.M. MS., that Zu’i Qsmain Faran^ 
came from Bengal and presented poems which he had composed on 
SlSh Jahin’s name, and got a present of Rs. 4.000. He it was, prob- 
ably, who entertained Coryat. The passage in the text seems to show 
that Akbar had an Armenian wife. 

t He is mentioned in some MSS. of the Akbar-nftma, vol. iii., as 
takiim part in the religious discussions. 

t.Robably this is the La*l Beg who wrote a book about the Naqdl- 
banffi order. See Ma'Ssiru l-Uniarl, II., 382. 



195 


2 eunuchs,* 1 slave, 41 1 fighting cocks, 12 buUocks, and 
7 bufEaloes were brought before mt as offerings from Ibrahim 
K. Fat^-jang. On Thursday, the 30th, corresponding with 
the 26th Babru-l-awwal, the ceremony of my lunar weighing^ 
was performed. I had sent Koka K. to the Uan-yianan> 
and forwarded some messages by him. On this day a petition 
from him arrived. Mir IGran, who had been appointed to 
the faujdarship of Mewat, on this day came and paid his 
respects, and was dignified with the governorship of Delhi, 
in the room of Sayyid Bahwa. 

On this day Aqa Beg and MuUbb *Ali, the envoys of the 
nile of Persia, paid their respects, and presented a loving 
letter from that noble brother, together with a black and 
white plume valued by the jewellers at 

Ks. 50,000. My brother also sent me a ruby weighing 12 
tanks, % which had belonged to the jewel-chamber of M. Ulu^ 
lieg, the successor of M. Shah-ruMi. In the course of time, 
and by the revolutions of fate, it had come into the hands of 
t he ^fawi family. On this ruby there were engraved in the 
Nasl^W character the words: Uhi^ Beg b. M. ^ah-rul^ 
Bahadur b. Mir Timur Gurgan.” My brother, Shah ‘Abbas, 
tlirected that in another comer they should cut the words: 

Banda-i-Shih-i-Wiliyat || 'Abbas 
" The slave of the King of Holiness, *Abbis.*' 

in the Nasla'Rq character He had this ruby inserted in a 
jigba (turban ornament), and sent to me as a souvenir. As 
the ruby bore the names of my ancestors, I took it as a blessing 
for m}rBelf, and bade Sa‘ida, the superintendent of the gold- 

* The Iqbai-nama has " 42 eunuchs.'* 

t The MSS. have 40 cocks, 12 buffaloes, and 7 buffalo-horns. The 
(ext also has horns, but this has been taken as a pleonasm. 

* But there was such a ceremony a few days before (see p. 323 of 
text). 

I For Idaksce Blochmann, 16 n. The Iqb&l-nftma, 178, has " twelVo 
:iiisq&ls.** 

II For the character soo Blochmann, 09-100, and for the 

Nasta'llq, 101. See also the elaborate article on Writing In Hughes* 
Dictionary of Islam. 

j By Shdh-i- WUatfat is meant the Caliph 'All b. Abf TIlib. 



196 


smith** deputanent. eagm^e in another oomer the words 
" Jahingtr g||lh b. Akbar ^h,” and the current date. 
After some days, when the news of theconquest of the Deccan 
arrived, 1 gave that mby to Sjarram, and sent it to him. 

On Saturday, the of Isfandiimnt, I marched from 
SaKmgarh, and going first to the i^orions mausolenm of 
Hnmayfin (may the lights of Allah be his testimony !), per- 
formed tile dues of humility, and presented 2,000 quuter 
rupees (ekarm) to those who sat in seclusion in that pure 
cemetery. I encamped twice <m the bank of the Jumna 
in the environs of the city. Sayyid Hizabr K.,* who had 
been appointed an anzOiaiy to Sian Jahan, was sent otf 
with the distinction of a dress of honour, a sword, a dagger, 
a hone, and a standard. Sayyids ‘Alim and 'Abdn-l-Hidi, 
his brothers, were also each honoured with a horse and a 
dress of honour. Wt Baraka Bi^i&ri was allowed to rio 
to Transoxiana. I entrusted Bs. 10,000 to him, 6.000 of 
them to be conveyed to Swija 9&lib Dihbidi, who from his 
fathers was ime of the well-wishers of this State, and the 
other 5,000 to be divided among the mujSwin (custodians) 
attached to the tomb of Tlmtlr (may the lights of Allah be 
his testimony!). 1 also gave a special turban (chiro)' to 
Mahabat K., and sent it to him by Mir Baraka. I also 
ordered IGr Baraka to make every effort to procure mottled 
fish-teeth, and to procure them from any possible quarter, 
and at any price. 

I w«at ly boat from Delhi, and in six stages reached the 
plain Brindaban. 1 gave an elephant to Mir Mitan, and 
permitted him to go to Delhi. Zabardast K. was selected 
to be Mr TQzuk (master of ceremonies) in the place of Fidil 
E., and I presented him with a special shawl (parm-Morm). 
Next day, Ooknlf was the place of encampment. Atthisstage, 
K., the governor of Agra, *Abdn-l-Wahhab Kwin, 
Raja Nath Mai, j^fr K. FbOqi, ruler (deposed) of Inr and 
Burhanpur, Ahmad K., his brother, the Q&ti* the Mufti, and 
other chief men of the city (of Agra), had the good fortune 

* The Houahsbarchsn of Hswkiiis. 

t Msbibsn, five or six miles from Mathura. 



197 


to wait* on me. On the 11th 1 halted anepknonaty at the 
gaidei^ whioh is on the opposite side (rf the 
Jumna. As the anspioious honr for entering the <dty had 
been fixed fox the 14th, I halted here, and at the seleoted 
ausineious hour pxooeeded to the foxt, and entered the paiaoe 
happily and victoriously. The pzopitioiis jounisy foom 
Lahore to Agra was accomplished in the period of two months 
and two} days, with 49 marches and 21 halts. No day 
either of marching or halting, on land ox water, passed without 
sport. 114 deer, 51 duck, 4 heron (iSneSnai), 10 black 
partridge (dufrSj), and 200 bodnoj were, taken on the way. 

As Laf^kar K. had satisfoctorily performed his duties at 
Agra, I increased his inansab by 1,000 personal and 600 horse, 
and made it 4,000 personal and 2,500 horse, and sent him 
as an auxiliary to the army of the Deccan. Sa*idi, super* 
intendent of the goldsmith’s department, was dignified with 
the title of K*badal K. Four horses, some silver ornaments 
and cloths, which the ruler of Persia had sent me by iqa 
Beg and Muhammad Muhibb *Afi, were produced before me 
on this day. The entertainment of Thursday, the 20tb, took 
place in the NOr-mansil garden. I gave a present of Bs. 
1,00,000 to my son ^hriyar. Muj^ffar K., according to 
order, came from Thatta, and had the good fortune to wait 
on me. He offered 100 muhats and Bs. 100. Laj^kar K. 
produced a ruby as an offering. It was valued at Bs. 4,000. 
A special horse of the name of Muf&hib (companion) was 
given to ‘Abdu-llah K. ‘Abdu*e*Salam, s. Mu'aj^m K., 
having arrived from Orissa, had the good fortune to wait 
on me: 100 muhars and Bs. 100 were laid before me as his 
Maaar. The mansab of DQst Beg, s. Tfilak E., was fixed at 

* They hod made an uiiglM, or visit of weloome, from Agra. 

t This was Babar's garden. It was on the opposite side of the 
Jumna to Agra. 

$ So in text, bat two (dS) must be a mistake for ** ten,” as 2 months, 
2 daysK02, and the marobes and halts 40+21 amount to 70, or 8 
ssora. It is 10 in I.O. MSS. 

I The bddna, or bodm, is a speeies of qpail. See Baber’s Memoirs. 
BrsUna p. 320, udiere it is spelt btMnah. There is a description in 
the Ayin, Blodimann. 200. of the mode of eatehing them. 



198 


900 personal and 400 horse. The entertainment of Thursday, 
the 27th, was held in the Nur-af^an garden. A special dress 
of honour was given to M. Rustam, and a horse to his son, 
who was called Dakhani, and a special horse and an elephant 
to. Laf^ar K. 

On Friday, the 28th, I went to hunt to the village of Samona- 
gar, and returned at night. Seven Persian horses, with their 
trappings, were laid before me as an offering from Aqa Beg 
and Muhibb ‘AH. I presented Zambll Beg, the ambassador, 
with a Nur-jahanI muhar of the weight of 100 tolas, and gave 
a jewelled penholder to Sadiq K., the chief Bakhshi. I also 
gave a village* in Agra, by w'ay of Mam, to Khizr K. Faruqj. 
In this year 85,000 highas of land, 3,325 khar-wdrs (of rice), 
4 villages, 2 ploughs (of land), and a garden, Rs. 2,327, 
1 muhar, 6,200 darhs (half rupees), 7,880 quarter rupees 
{cha/ran), 1,512 tola^ of gold and silver, and 10,000 dams from 
the treasury were given, in my pi^esence, as alms to faqirs 
and necessitous people. Thirty-eight elephants, of the value 
of Rs. 2,41, 000, f were presented as offerings, and were placed 
in the special elephant house, whibt 51 were presented by 
me to the great Amirs and the servants of the Court. 

• Tho word “ village '* is omitted in both the I.O. MSS. 

f This gives an average of Rs. 6,342 for each animal. 



THE SIXTEENTH 
NEW YEAR’S FEAST AFTER THE 
AUSPICIOUS ACCESSION 

On Monday,* the 27tli Babi‘a-l-a]^r, a.h. 1030 (10 March, 
1621), the sun that bestows bounty on the world lit up the 
abode of fortune of Aries with his world-illuminating light, 
and gladdened the world and its inhabitants. The sixteenth 
year of the reign of this suppliant at the throne of Allah com- 
menced with gladness and victory, and at the auspicious 
hour and blessed time 1 sat on the throne of success in the 
capital of Agra. On this joy-enhancing day my fortunate 
son ^hriyar lifted up his head with the honour of the mansab 
of 8,000 and 4,000 horse. My revered father bestowed, for 
the first time, this mansabf on my brothers. It is hoped that 
in the shadow of my education and in carrying out my 
pleasure, he may reach the extreme of life and prosperity. 
On this day Baqir K. arrayed his men and passed them before 
me in order. The great Bakhshis recorded (the number as) 
1,000 horse and 2,000 foot, and reported to me. Having 
promoted him to the mansab of 2,000 personal and 1,000- 
horse, I entrusted the duties of faujdar of Agra to him. 

On Wednesday, together with the ladies seated in a boat, 
I went to t>he Nur-afe^n garden, and rested there at night. 
As the garden belongs to the establishment of Nur Jahan B., 
on Thursday, the 4th, she held the royal:^ entertainment and 

* The I.O. MSS. have *' Saturday.” But Monday seems right, as 
Thursday was 4 Farwardin, 

t In the Ayin, which was composed in the 40th year of Akbar’s 
reign, Salim’s rank is given as'lO.OOO. Murid's as 8,000, and Diniyil’s 
as 7.000 (p. 308). 

{ In celebration of the cqihmencement of the 18th year of the reign. 

199 



200 


presented great offerings. Of jewels, jewelled ornaments, 
and all sorts of precious goods, I selected what I approved 
of, of the value of Rs. 100,000. During these days, every 
day after midday I embarked in a boat, and went to Samo- 
nagar, 4 koss distant from the city, for sport, returning to 
the palace at night. Sending Baja Sarang Deo to my pros- 
perous son ^igh Parwiz, I sent with him a special dress of 
honour, with a jewelled belt, which contained a sapphire* 
and several rubies. As I had given Behar to that son in 
the place of Muqarrab E., I started off a sazaund to conduct 
him from Allahabad to Behar. Mir Zahid,t son-in-law of 
Mu^ffar E., having come from Thatta, waited on me. As 
Mir *Azudu-d-daulat had become very old and decrepit, he 
could not carry out the duties of the camp and his jagir. I 
released him from the trouble of service and active work. 
I ordered that he should receive Bs. 4,000 every month out 
of the public treasury, and living at ease and in comfort at 
Agra or Lahore, or wherever he wished, should employ himself 
in prayers for my increased life and welfare. 

On the 9th Farwardin the offering of I'tibar E. was laid 
before me. Of jewels, cloths, etc., the value of Bs. 70,000, 
was accepted, and I returned the remainder to him. Mu^ibb 
'All and Aqa Beg, envoys of the ruler of Persia, presented 
twenty-four horses, two mules, three camels, seven greyhounds 
{sag-i-tdzl), twenty-seven pieces {tjaq) of brocade, a sjkiindnia§ 
of ambergris, two pairs of carpets, and two nomad takya\\ 
(woollen coverlets). Two mares with foals that my brother 
had sent with them were also brought before me. 

On Thursday, at the request of A^af &., I went to his house 
with the ladies. Having prepared a grand entertainment, 
he submitted to me many delicate gems and wonders in 
cloths, and rare gifts. Choosing out of these to the value of 
Bs. 130,000, 1 gave the rest to him. Mukarram E., governor 

• YOqiU-i-hahud^ “ a blue ruby.” 

t The I.O. MSS. have Mirza Mu ^ m m ad. 

t Jamaiu-d-din ^usain InjU. 

{ See Vullere, s.v. It is a smelling-bottle or case containing om- 
bergris. 

II Bloch mann. 55. 



20 ] 


of Orissa, sent hy way of offering thirty - two elephants, 
male and female, and these had the honour of being accepted. 
At this time I saw a wild ass ^ {gw4duvr), exceedingly strange 
in appearance, exactly like a lion. From the tip of the nose 
to the end of the tail, and from the point of the ear to the 
top of the hoof, black markings, large or small, suitable to 
their position, were seen on it. Bound the eyes there was 
an exceedingly fine black line. One might say the painter 
of fate, with a strange brush, had left it on the page of the 
world. As it was strange, some people imagined that it had 
been coloured. After minute inquiry into the truth, it 
became known that the Lord of the world was the Creator 
thereof. As it was a rarity, it was included among the royal 
gifts sent to my brother Shah ^Abbas. Bahadur K. Uzbeg 
had sent as an offering some tipchaq horses and cloth stuffs 
from Iraq, and they were produced before me. Dresses of 
honour for the winter were sent foi Ibrahim K. Fath-jang 
and the Amirs of Bengal by Mfimin ^irazi. On the 15th 
the offering of ^diq E. was produced It was of all sorts. 
Having taken what was worth Rs. 15,000, I gave the re* 
mainder to him. Fazil E. on this day also gave an offering 
according to his condition. Of this a trifle was taken. On 
Thursday (19th Farwardin) the feast of the culmination was 
held, and when two watches and one ghari of the day had 
passed. I took my seat on the . throne. According to the 
request of Madar*ul*mulk I*timadu*d*daula, the feast of the 
culmination was held in his house. He presented a remark- 
able offering of rare and choice things from all countries. 
Altogether I took the value of Rs. 138,000. On this day 
I gave Zambil Beg, the ambassador, a muharf equal to 
200 tola$ in weight. At this time Ibrahim E. had sent some 
eunuchs from Bengal. One of these was a hermaphrodite. 
Among the offerings of the above-mentioned were two boats 

* Apparently a aebra. See Iqbftl-nftma, 179. where it is stated that 
it was brought by sea. Thetestof the Tuzuk is wrong, as usual. What 
we should read is: It was like a tiger (MS. 181 and IqbZl-nima have 
i|{r, not habar), but the markings on a tiger are black and yellow, and 
these were black and white *’ 

t Perimpe this is the muhar now in Germany. 



202 


made in Bengal, of a very pleasant shape, on the decoration 
of which a sum of Rs. 10,000 had been expended. They 
were really kingly boats. Having made ^i]A Qasim E. 
governor of Allahabad, I honoured him with the title of 
Muhtafihim K. and the mansab of 5,000, and gave an order 
that the Diwans should give him an increase to his jagir out 
of the unappropriated {ma(idU~i-ghair-i-afnaIi) estates. Raja 
Shvam Singh, Zamindar of Srinagar (in Garhwal) was given 
a horse and an elephant. 

At this time it was reported to me that Yusuf K., s. Husain 
K.,* had died in the victorious army of the Deccan a sudden 
death. The report said that when he was at his jagir he 
had become so fat that he got out of breath with the least 
exertion. One day when he was paying his respects to 
IQiurrara, in coming and going his breathingf became difficult. 
When a dress of honour was given him, in putting it on and 
saluting he became helpless, and a trembling affected all his 
limbs, and with a hundred labours and exertions he saluted 
and stumbled out and fell under the shelter of the tent 
enclosure, and became unconscious. His servants placed 
him in a palanquin, and took him home, and as he arrived, 
the messenger of death came also. He received his command, 
and left his heavy lump of earth in the perishable dustbin. 
On 1st Urdibihifht, I gave a special dagger to Zambil Beg, 
the ambassador. On the 4th of the same month the feast 
of the Kdr-i-khair (consummation of marriage) of my son 
Shahriyar increased the joy of my heart. The l^inna-bandi 
(putting on henna) assembly took place in the palace of 
Maiyamu-z-zamanl. The feast of the nikait (marriage) was 
held in the house of I‘timadu-d-daula. I myself went there 
with the ladies and adorned the feast of joy. After seven 
gharis of night had passed, on Friday the marriage took 
place with rejoicings. I hope that it will be propitious to this 
daily-increasing State. On Tuesday, the 19th, in the Nfir- 
afs^n garden, I presented my son Shahriyar with a jewelled 
chdrqab (coat), with a turban and waist-belt (kafnar-hand)^ 

• Qufiain K. Tukriya. t ml auzad. 

% Thursday night or Friday cyu is what is meant. 



203 


and two horses, one an ‘Iraqi, with a gold saddle, and the 
other a Turki, with an embroidered saddle. 

In these days Shah Shuja* had an eruption so violent that 
water would not go down his throat, and his life was despaired 
of. As it had been recorded in his father’s horoscope that his 
son would die this year, all the astrologers were unanimous 
that he would not live, but Jotik Ray said, on the contrary, 
that the dust of calamity would not settle on the skirt of his 
life. I asked: “By what proof He said that in the 
horoscope of my destiny it was recorded that in this year no 
distress or trouble would find its way to the royal mind from 
JM\y road^ and as I had a great affection for. the child, it 
behoved that no calamity should happen to him, and some 
other child would die. It came to pass as he said, and he 
( iirried his life out of this deadly place, and a son that he 
(Shah Jahan) had by the daughter of Sjah-nawaz K., died 
at Burhanpur. Besides this, many of Jotik Ray’s judgments 
(ahkam) turned out correct. This is not without strangeness, 
and it is therefore recorded in these memoirs. I accordingly 
ordered him (Jotik Ray) to be weighed against money and 
the weight came to Rs. 6,600. This was given him as a 
reward. 

Muhammad Husain Jabir! was appointed Bakhshi and 
newswriter of the Subah of Orissa. The ihansab of Lachin 
Munajjim (astrologer) Qaq^l, at the request of Mahabat K., 
was fixed, original and increased, at 1,000 personal and 
500 horse. Muhammad ^usain, brother of Hiwaja Jahan, 
came from Kang(a and waited on me. Having presented 
an elephant to Bahadur K. Uzbeg, I sent it with his Vakil. 
Hurmuz and HuAang, grandsons of the asylum of pardon 
Mirza Mubaxninad Hakim, by reason of the caution that is 
fitting to rulers, had been imprisoned in the fort of Gwalior. 
At this time, having summoned them into my presence, I 
ordered them to remain in Agra, and a daily allowance 
sufficient for their expenses was allowed for them. At this 
time d brahman of the name of Rfidar Bhattacharaj, who 
was one of the learned ones of this caste, and was engaged 
at Benares in teaching, had the good fortune to pay his 



204 


respects to me. In truth, he has studied well, both in the 
rational and traditional sciences, and is perfect in his own line^ 
One of the strange events of this time* was that on 30 
Farwardin (about 10 April, 1621) in the present year, in a 
certain village of the pargana of Jalandhar, in the morning, 
a terrible noise arose from the East, such that its ini^ ibitants, 
from Mght at that terror-increasing sound, nearly deserted 
their bodies. Whilst this noise and disturbance were going 
on, a light fell from above on the ground, and the people 
thought that fire was raining down from heaven. After a 
moment, when that noise ceased, and their troubled hearts 
recovered from their bewilderment and terror, they sent a 
quick runner to the collector ydmil) Muhammad Sa‘!d, and 
informed him oi what had occurred. He immediately rode 
there himself, and went to look at the spot. For ten or twelve 
yards in length and breadth the land was so burnt that no 
trace of any grass or green was left, and there were still signs 
of heat and burning. He ordered them to dig up the soil, 
and the more they dug the greater the heat appeared to be 
till they came to a place where a piece of heated iron appeared. 
It was as hot as if it had been taken out of a furnace. After 
a while it became cold, and taking it up, he conveyed it to 
his house, and placing it in a J^arVa (cover), which he sealed, 
he sent it to Court. I ordered them to weigh it in my presence, 
and it came to 160 tolas, I ordered Master (Ustiid) Da’udf 
to make a sword, a dagger, and a knife of it, and bring theiu 
to me. He represented that it would not stand below the 
hammer, and fell to pieces. I told him in that case to mix 
it with other iron and make use of it. As I had told him, he 
mixed three parts of lightning-iron and one of other iron, 
and having made two swords, one dagger, and one knife, 
brought them to me. From the mixing of other iron he had 
brought out its quality (watering). According to the manner 
of the excellent swords of Yaman]: and the South, it could 
be bent, and became straight again. I ordered them to test 

♦ Elliot. VI. 378. 

t King David was said to be a maker of ouirasses. 

t Yamdnl, Elliot has almSsl (adamant>like). 



205 


it in my presence. It cut very well, equal to true swords. 
I called one the &^m§^r-i-qati' (keen sword) and the other 
Barq-siri^t (lightning-natur^). Bi-badal K. composed a 
quatrain which demonstrated* these particulars, and re- 
cited it : 

By Shi5 JahAngfr the world acquired order. 

There fell in his reign raw iron from Ughtning. 

Etom that iron were made by hie world-taking command, 

A dagger, a knife, and two acimitare. 

And Spark of royal lightning ” gave the date (a.h. 1030). 

At this time Raja Sarang Deo, who had gone to my 
fortunate son 9iah Parwiz, came and waited on me. Parwis 
represented that he, according to order, had proceeded from 
Allahabad to Behar. I hope he will be prosperous (there). 
Qasim K. was dignified with the gift of drums. On this day 
one ‘Alimu-d-din, a servant of I^urram, brought a report 
from him containing the good news of the* victory, with a 
jewelled thumbstall (s^f, perhaps a rin^), which he had 
sent as nomr. I gave him leave, sending by him a dress 
of honour. Amii Beg, brother of Fasil Beg. E., was 
appointed Diwan to my son ^hriyar and Muhammad 
Husain, brother of IQiwaja Jahan, was made Bakhshi, and 
Ma^Sfim was appointed Mlr-S&man, Sayyid 9aji obtained 
leave to go as an axuiliary to the army of the Deccan, and 
I gave him a horse. Mu^ilar K., was ako promoted to the 
post of Bakhshi. 

As at this time the motherf c Imam-qul! E., the ruler of 
Ttlran, had sent to Nur Jahan Begam a letter containing 
expressions of good will and the dues of acquaintanceship, 
and sent some rarities from tl at country, hh^^j^ Na^ir, 
who was one of the old servants and one of my attendants 
from the time when I was a prince wassentby way of embassy 
on the pare of Nflr Jahan Begem with a letter, with choice 
gifts from this country. At the time when the ladies were 

* See Blockmann’s trausktion and remarks in ^oceedings A.S.B. 
for 1809, p. 167. It is there stated that the date of the fall of the 
meteorite was Friday, April 10, 1621, 0.8 , and that the weight would 
be naarly 6*271 pounds troy. 

44 t A widow of Bftql Muhammad. 



206 


staying in tlie NOi-a^an garden, a rang ^bex) fawn eight 
days old, jumped down from the terrace of the palace, which 
is 8 gas in height, on to the ground, and began to leap about, 
no sign of injury or pain being perceptible in it. 

On the 4th of the Divine month* of fburdad, Afsal K., 
I^urram’s Diwan brought a letter from him containing the 
good news of his victory, and kissed the threshold. The 
details are as follows: When the victorious army reached 
Ujain, a band of the servants of the Court, who were in the 
fort of Mand&, sent a report that an army of the rebels, 
putting forward the foot of audacity, had crossed the Nar- 
hbda, and burning several villages that were underf the fort, 
were busy with rapine and plunder. Madim-l*mahamm 
Uwaja Ab&-l-!l9^a8an, with 5,000 cavalry, were appointed to 
go in all haste and inflict punishment on that vain lot of 
people. The Sj^waja made a night march, and at the dawn 
of day reached the bank of the Narbada. MHien the enemy 
learnt this, they in one moment threw themselves into the 
river and reached the bank of safefy. The brave cavalry 
galloped after them, and pursued themfornearty41nMB,| and 
with the sword of vengeance, made many of them travellers 
on the road oi non*existence. The ill*foted rebels did not 
turn back the reins of haste till they reached Burhanpur. 
jjburram wrote to Abfl'l'^asan to remain on that (the South) 
side of the river till he came. Soon he, with his army, joined 
this advanced force, and hastened on, march 1^ match, till 
he reached Burhanpur. The graceless lebels were still 
keeping§ their ground, and were encamped round the city. 

* Elliot, VI. 370. 

t Elliot, VI. 370, has “ in siflht of the fort.” Perhspe the meenicg 
is that the villages were in the jurisdiction of the fort. 

$ The IqbU-ntma, 181, has '* fourteen.” 

f The aoeount of S|>h Jahin’s sphited attaok on the Deooanis is 
in some places rather obsouieljr worded, and the printed edition is not 
always ooiiaot. Help can be obtained from the IqbU-nima, 181, ete.. 
and from EUiot, VI. 370. The text has firir, ” ffic^t,” and tib has 
been followed by Elliot, who has “on their approaeh the re b els took to 
flight, and removed to a distance from Burhanpur.” But the true 
reading, as shown by the Iqb8I-n8ma, is gsfdr, “ firmness,” not /ftdr. 
and the words are bar dbur-t-iftaAr, “ round the city,” not bar ddr, “ far 



207 


Ab the imperial aervante had been contending with the lebeb 
for two years, they had sufEeted mu^ hardship fiwm want 
of land non-possession of fiefs, landlessness) and 

scarcity of com,_and their horses were worn out by continued 
service. Acoordingty, they had to delay nine days in order 
to recruit. During this period, thirty lakhs of rupees and 
many cuirassesf were distributed among the soldiers, and 
aazavnda had been sent out and had brought many men out 
of the city (Burhanpur). The gnllant troops had not yet 
put their hands to the work, when the black-fated rebels felt 
that they could not resist, and scattered like “ the daughters 
of the Bier ” (the stars of the constellation of the Great Bear, 
which are dispersed over the heavens, instead of being ohs- 
tered like the Pleiades). The brave and swift cavaliers 
followed them, and with the sword of vengeance cast many 
of them upon the earth of perdition. They gave them no 
rest, but smiting and slaying them, pursued them as br as 
Ehirld, which was the residence of the Nixamn-l-mulk and 
the other rebels. One day before this the ill-starred one 
(Malik ‘Ambar) had got ii^rmation of the approach of the 
imperialists, and had removed the Niamu-I-mulk and his 
family and effects to the fort of Daulatabad. There he had 
encamped, with his back resting on the fort, while in front 
of him there were marshes and quagmires.^ Most of his 
men became scattered in all directions. The leaders of the 
victorious army, with their veogeuice-iieeking soldiers, halted 
three days in the town of Khirki, and so destroyed a city 

from.” The nbels were, m the Iql>U-ii<nia atetee, ** in the eaTuone 
of the oity,” ” dar aeieSd-f-Mshr,” but apfierently not in anch foroe 
aa to prevent Sbfh Jahin’a aaadtmb:— *.a., hia apparitors and sum- 
moners — from going into the city and bringing out reeruita. 

* In the LO. MSS. the word ktoka like tH-jdgtni (want of settled home 
or residence t). 

t Text has eftsas. The word may be faMMs, given in Vullera, Sltt, 
os meaning robes or garments, and this is the meaning given to it by 
Elliot, but the IqUU-ngma has fuMp, ** cuirasses.” and this I lut%’e 
adopted. ItisfuUoinl.O.No.Igl. 

X Text, ekiUa u f^meka. The lost word should, I think, bo jam- 
fama. ChiUd in Hindustani, means a “slimy place.” It is jamjama 
in 1.0. M&, No. 181. 




208 


which had taken twenty yean to Imild, that it is not known 
il it win legain its spkoidonr in other twenty years. In 
fine, after throwing down its buildiqgs, aU agreed in opinion 
that as an army of rebels was stiU besieging Ahmadnagar, 
thty mnst at once go there, and inflict condign punishment 
<m the originators of the disturbance, renew the snpplies 
(of the Ahmadnagar gaitison), - and leave asdstance there, 
and then retnm. With this view they set ont, and' came 
as &r as the town of Patan (in Berar, Jarrett II. 233). Mean- 
while, the crafty ‘Arnbar* sent agents and oflBoers, and said: 
“ After this I will not drop the thread of service and !o 3 ralty 
from my hand, nor pat oat my foot beyond orders, and will 
regard whatever tribate and fine be commanded as a favonr, 
and will send it to the government.** It happened that just 
then there was great scarcity in the camp in consequence of 
the dearness of provisions, and .also that news came thtt the 
rebel force which was besieging Ahmadnagar had withdrawn 
on hearing of the approach of the imperiahsts. Accordingly, 
a force was sent to help g^anjar K. (the governor of Port 
Ahmadnagar), and a sum <d money for his charges. There- 
upon the imperialists were relieved from all anxiety and 
returned (across the Narbada t). After much entreaty and 
lamentation (on the part of 'Amber) it was settled ;that in 
addition to the teixitoiy which of old had belonged to the 
empire, the rebele should surrender 14 koss of the adjoining 
country, and should pay into the public treasury fifty lakhs 
of rupees as tribate. 

I gave Afgal K. fShah Jahan’s diwan) leave to return, and 
smt with him, for f^uriam, the ruby plume {kal^hi4a*R) 
which the King of Persia had soit to me, and which has been 
already described, and I gave to the aforesaid (Af$al) a dress 
of honour, an elephant, an inkpot, and a jewdled pen. 
i^njar K., who, when besi^ed in the Fort of Ahmadnagar, 
had performed approved services, and shown proper activity, 
was promoted to the mansab 4,000 personal and 1,000 
horse. 

Mukartam K., having come hy order from Orissa, had, 
* Text has ghair imtead uf ‘Amber. 



209 


with his hiothen, the good fortune to wait upon me. He 
presented a string of pearls by way of offering. Hoj!a&ru*l> 
mnlk, B. Bahadum-bmulk, was honoured with the title of 
Nufrat K. A standard was conferred on Oda Bam, 
Dakhani, and to ‘Amu-Uah, s. Yusuf K., was given the 
mansab of 1,000 personal and 500 horse. On Thursday, the 
21st, Huqarrab K. arrived from Behar, .urd had the good 
fortune to wait upon me. At this time iLqa ‘Ah, Huhibb 
‘Ah Beg, 9aji Beg, and Fafil Beg, the envoys of the ruler of 
Persia, who had oome at different times, were allowed to 
depart. To lq& Beg I made a present of a dress of honour, 
a jewelled dagger, and Bs. 40,000 in cash; to Huhibb *Ah 
Beg a dress of honour and Bs. 30,000; and to the others in 
the same way 1 presented gifts according to their positions. 
I also sent a suitable souvenir by them to my brother. On 
this day Mokartam K. was appointed Bubahdar of Delhi, 
and faujdar of Mewat. ^ja‘&t K. ‘Arab was dignified with 
the mansab of 3,000 personal and 2,600 horse, origina. and 
inoreased; %arsa K. with that of 2,000 and 1,000 horse; 
Girdhar, s. Bay Sil Kachhwaha, with that of 1,200 and 900 
horse. 

On the 29th, Qisim Beg, an envoy of the ruler of Persia, 
came and waited on me, bringing a letter from that brother 
of lof^ digni^, containing expressions of sincerity and 
friendship. What he had seat by way of royal gifts was laid 
before me. On the 1st of Tir, I sent a special elephant called 
Gaj Batan, for my son (/arsand) Sb&n Jahan. Na;^ Beg, 
a servant of K^urram, laid before me a letter from him asking 
for the gift of horses. I ordered Baja Ei|fean Das, the mu^rif 
(accountant) to prepare within fift^ days 1,000 horses from 
the ro 3 ral stables, and to send them off with him. I sent to 
^urram as a present a horse of the name of BQm-ratan* 
(“ the jewel of Turkey ”), which the ruler of Persia had sent 
me out of the spoils of the Turkish camp. 

On this day a servant of Iradat-K.,*of the name of Gh iySsu- 
d-dm, laid before me a report from him containing the good 
news of his victory. In the preceding pages there has been 
* Text wrongly has Rup-raian. 



210 


written with the pen of demonstration an account of the 
rabelHini of the Zamindan of Ei^||twar and of tiie despatch 
of Jalal, s. Oilawar K. As this important matter had not 
been propor^ managed I 7 him, an order was given to Iradat 
K. to hasten to talm np that duty, and to inflict severe pnnish> 
ment on the leheb, and make such arrangements in the hill* 
country that the dust of dispersion and calamity might not 
settle on its frontiers. He as ordered, hastened there and 
did approved service, and the xieople of sedition and disturb- 
ance, having turned their heads towards the desert of exile, 
escaped half dead. Thus once more was the thorn of calamity 
and mischief tooted out (rf that country, and having estab- 
lished the oflSeials and established posts, he returned to 
Kashmk. As a rewani for tliis service I added 500 horse 
to his mansab. 

As Uwaja Abfl-l-Qasan had done good service and shown 
proper activity in the affair of the Deccan, I increased his 
mansab hj 1,000 horse. Ahmad Beg, nephew of Ibrahim K. 
Fath-jsng, being exalted to the Subahdarship of Orissa, was 
dignifled with the title of SbSn, and had given him a standard 
and drums. His mansab also was raised to 2,000 with 500 
horse. 

As 1 had often heard of the virtues and good qualities of 
Qafi Naqir of Burhanpur, my truth-eeddng mind had a 
desire for his society. At this time he came, according to 
summons, to the Court. Doing honour to his learning, I 
paid him great regard. The Qa^ is one of the unique of the 
age for rational and traditional sciences, and there are few 
books that he has not read, but his exterior did not agree 
with his . interior, and I could not be deli{^ted with his 
company. As I found him much devoted to being a dervish 
and seclusion, I respected his feelings, and did not give him 
the trouble of serving me. I gave him Bs. 5,000, and dis- 
missed him to his native country to pass his days in ease. 

On the 1st of the Divine month of Amurd&d Biqir £. 
was promoted to the mansab of 2,000 personal and 1,200 
horse, and of the Amirs and royal servants who had dis- 
tinguished themselves in the conquest of the Deccan, thirty- 



211 


two individuals were exalted bj having their mansabs raised. 
‘Abdu-l/Aziz K. NaaAbandi. who had been appointed to 
the governorship of Qandahar at the request of mj son f^an 
Jahan, was promoted to that of 3,000 personal and 2,000 
horse. On the Ist 9iahriwar I gave the ambassador Zambil 
Beg a jewelled sword, and also presented him with a village 
under the jurisdiction of the capital, the revenue of which 
was Bs. 16,000. 

At this time, knowing that he was unfit for duty on account 
of his bad temper and want of knowledge, I dismissed ^alrim 
Bukna,* and told him he might go wherever he wished. 
As it was reported to me that Hfi^ng, the brother’s son of 
‘Alam, had committed an unjust murder, having sum- 
moned him to my presence, I investigated the charge, oud 
after it was established, gave an order for his execution. 
God forbid that in such affairs I should consider princes, and 
far less that I should consider Amirs. I hope that the grace 
of God nmy support me in this. On 1st Shahriwar. at the 
request of A^af K., I went to his house and bathed in the 
bath-house that he has lately built. It is beautifully finished. 
After I had done bathing he laid before me offerings fit for 
a naior. I took what I approved of uid gave him the rest. 
The Wazifa (pension) of l^r ^an (late ruler) of Khandesh, 
was fixed at Bs. 30,000,t original and increased. 

At this time it was reported to me that a blacksmith of 
the name of Kalyan was much in love with a woman of his 
own caste, and was always laying his head at her feet, and 
showing symptoms of infatuation. The woman, though she 
was a widow, would in no way consent to accept him, and 
the love of this wretch who had given his heart to her made 
no impression on her. Having summoned both of them into 
my presence, 1 cross-examined them, and however much I 
advised her to unite herself to him, she did not agtee. At 
this time the blacksmith said that if he could make sure that 
I wouldt give her to him, he would throw himself down from 

* Pidi^Sh-iiCma, I., P»rt IL. p. 349. 

t The text wrongly has 1.000. 

i The Bib. Ind. ed. of IqbSl-nXiiia. 184, inaerte a negative here, hot 
this seems wrong. In a MS. in my possession there is no negative. 



212 


the fbhli-hiizj of the loit. I said by way of jest: “ Never 
mimi the StUt’boij; if your love be genuine, fling. yourself 
from tile roof of this house, and I’ll make her submit herself 
to yon.” I had not ended before he ran like lightning and 
thr^ liiin—tf down. When he fell, blood began to flow from 
his eyes and mouth. I repented mjrself greatly of that jest, 
and was grieved in my mind, and bade Afaf Khan take him 
to his house and look after him. As the cup of his life was 
brimming over, he died from tiie injury. 

VaasB. 

The Uftnseriftringlovir who stood on thetthisshold 
Ckve up his life with joy and legsided death as a teifle. 

At the request of Mahabat E. the mansab of TAahfn 
Qaqjbftl, original and increased, was fixed at 1,000 personal 
and 600 horse. 

It has been mentioned* that on the day of the Dasahara 
festival in Kashmir, I had perceived in myself a catching and 
shortness of breath. Briefly, from excessive rain and the 
dampness ci the air, a dUBculfy in drawing breath showed 
Hadf on my left side near the heart. This by degrees increased 
and became intensified. Of the physicians who were in 
waiting on me, l^fakTm Raj^n-llah fim tried his remedies, 
and for some time warm, soothing medicines were of use, for 
there was evidently a slight diminution (of the symptoms). 
When I came down from the hiQs, they came on again 
violently. This time for some days I took goats’ milk, and 
again camel’s milk, but I found no profit whatever from them. 
About this time fjUdm Bukna, who had been excused from 
the journey to Eashmir, and whom 1 had left at Agra, joined 
me, and confidently and with a show of power, undertook 
my cure, and relied on warm and dry medicines. From his 
remedies, too, I derived no advantage; on the contrary, they 
appeared to increase the heat and dryness of my brain and 
temperament, and I became very weak. The disease in- 
creased and the pain was prolonged. At such a time and 
in this state, at which a heart of stone would have burnt 
• EUiot, VI. 380. 



213 


(been distressed) about me, Qadxs,* s. Qaldm Mirza 
ttn^mmad, wbo was one of the chief physicians of Persia 
(was in attendance on me). He had come from Persia in 
the reign of my revered father, and after the throne of role 
had been adorned by this suppliant, as he was distinguished 
above all others natural skill and experience {tatorruf-i- 
UUftA), I was attended to by him, and I distingoished him 
with the title of Mad(iu-z-ramfin (Messiah of the Age). I 
made his position more honourable than that of the other 
Court-physicians, with the idea that at some crisis he would 
help me. That ungrateful man, in spite of the daims which 
I had on him, though he saw me in such a state, did not give 
me medicines or treat me. Notwithstanding that 1 dis- 
tinguished him beyond aU the physicians who were waiting 
on me, he would not undertake my cure. However great 
attention I showed him and troubled myself to soothe him, 
he became mote obstinate {futtab), and said; “ I have no such 
reliance on mj knowledge that I can undertake the cure.” 
It was the same with Abil-l-l^asim, s. ^aldmu-l- 

mulk, notwithstanding his being a ^anasad, and what was 
due for his bringing up ; he professed himself suspicions and 
afraid, and that iSonsidering the matter in his mind, he was 
terrified and vexed, and how, then, could he prescribe a 
remedy ? As there was no help for it, I gave them all up, 
and weaning my heart from aU visible remedies, gave myself 
up to the Supreme Physician. As drinking alleviated my 
sufferings, I took to it in the daytime, contrary to my habit, 
and gradually I carried this to excess. When the weather 
became hot, the evil effects of this increased, and my weak- 
ness and laboured breathing were augmented. Nur Jahan 
Begam, whose skill and experience are greater than those of 
the physicians, especially as they are brought to bear through 
affection and sympathy, endeavoured to diminish the number 
of my cups, and to carry out the remedies that appeared 
appropriate to the time, and soothing to the condition. 
Although previously to this she had approved of the remedies 
* Elliot, VI. 448, the Bb’i|iru l-Umari, I. 877, and Pidhhab-DSma 
I.. Part II., 347. 



214 


made use of by the physicians, yet at this time 1 lelied 
on hei kindness. She, by degrees, lessened my wine, and 
kept me from things that did not suit me, and food that 
disagreed with me. I hope that the True Physician will 
grant me perfect recovery from the hospital of the hidden 
world. 

On Monday, the 22nd* of the same month, corresponding 
with the 25th of Siawwal, a.h. 1030 (2 September, 1621), the 
feast of my solar weighing took place auspiciously and happily. 
As in the past year (of my life) 1 had sufEered from severe 
illness, I had passed it in continuous pain and trouble. In 
thankfulness that such a year ended well and in safety, and 
that in the commencement of the present year the signs of 
health became apparent, Nut Jaban Begani begged that her 
Vakils might make the arrangements for the entertainment 
(of the solar weighment). In truth, they prepared one which 
increased the astonishment of beholders. Prom the date 
on which Nur Jaban Begam entered into the bond of marriage 
with this suppliant, although in all weighing entertainments, 
both solar and lunar, she had made such arrangements as 
were becoming to the State, and knew what were the require- 
ments of good fortune and prosperity; yet on this occasion 
she had paid greater attention than ever to adorn the assembly, 
and arrange the feast. All the servants of approved service 
and the domestics who knew my temperament, who in that 
time of weakness had constantly been present and been ready 
to sacrifice their lives, and had fluttered round my head like 
moths, were now honoured with suitable kindnesses, such 
as dresses of honour, jewelled sword-belts, jewelled daggers, 
horses, elephants, and trays full of money, each according 
to their positions. And though the physicians had not done 
good service, yet in consideration of the slight contemptf 
with which they had been treated for two or three days, they 

* Text wrongly has 12th. Jahangir’s birthday was on the 18th 
Shahrfwar. 

t I am not sure of the reading. One B.M. MS. seems to 

have iaqfit and perhaps the meaning is that the physicians had already 
been abundantly recompensed for their labour for two or three days, 
being taken as equal to haqq-i-sa'l. 



215 


received various favours, and on the occasion of this feast also* 
they received presents in jewels and cash. 

After the conclusion of the weighment, trays of gold and 
silver were poured out by way of fiitfir (coin-scattering) into 
the hope-skirts of the ministers of amusement 
and of the poor. Jotik Bay* astrologer, who hi^ given the 
glad news of my recoveiy and restoration to health, I had 
weighed against muhars and rupees, and by this method a 
present was made* him of 500 muhars and 7,000 rupees. 
At the end of the entertainment the offerings she (Nur Jahan) 
had prepared for me were produced. Of the jewels, jewelled 
ornaments, cloths and various rarities I selected what I 
approved of. Altogether the cost of this great entertainment 
which Nur Jahan Begam gave was recorded to be two lacs 
of rupees, exclusive of what she laid before me as offerings. 
In previous years, when I was in health, I weired 3 maunds 
and 1 or 2 seers more or less, but this year, as a result of my 
weakness and leanness, I was only 2 maunds and 27 seers. 

OnThurBday,the let of the Divine month of Mihr,I‘tiqad K., 
the Governor of Kashmir, was promoted to the mansab of 
4,000 and 2,500 horse, and Raja Gaj Singh to that of 4,000 
and 3,000 horse. When the news of my illness reached my 
son, Shah Farwiz, without waiting for a farman he came to 
see me, being unable to restrain himself. On the Hthf of 
the same month (September 25, 1621), at an auspicious hour 
and propitious time, that fortunate son had the good fortune 
to kiss the threshold, and went three times round the couch 
However much I adjured him and forbade him to 
do so, he insisted the more in lamentation and importunity. 

I took him by the hand and drew him towards me, and by 
wi^y of kindness and affection held him fast in an embrace, 
and displayed great love to him. I hope that he may enjoy a 
long life with prosperity. 

At this time Rs. 20,00,000 were sent to ^urram for the 
expenses of the army of the Deccan by Allah-dad K., who 

* A little before his weight came only to Rs. 6.500 (p. 329 of text). 
But possibly Jahingir means that he had himself weighed for Jotik's 
benefit t Elliot, VI. 381. 



216 


was honoured with an elephant and a standard. On tiie 
28th Qiyam K., chief huntsman, died a natural death. He 
was a confidential servant, and apart from his skill in hunting, 
looked over every trifiing detail relating to it, and consulted 
my pleasure in it. In short, I was much grieved at this 
event. I hope that God may grant him forgiveness. 

On the 29th the mother of Nflr Jahan Begam died. Of 
the amiable qualities of this matron {Kad-hSim) of the family 
of chastity what can I write ? Without exaggeration, in 
purity of disposition and in wisdom and the ezcdlendes that 
are the ornament of women no Mother of the Age* was ever 
bom equal to her, and I did not valuef her lees than my own 
mother. With regard to the attadunent that IHamfidu-d- 
daula bore towards her it is certain that no husband was 
equal to him. Here one must imagine what had happened 
to that grief-stricken old man. Also with regard to the 
attachment of NQr Jahan Begam to her mother what can 
one write ! A son like A^af K., exceedingly intelligent and 
clever, rent in pieces his robe of patience and left off the 
drees of men of the social state (lit., men of dependence, or 
connection). At the sight of his dear son, the grid and sorrow 
of the fother, wounded at heart, increased more and more. 
However much we admonished him, it had no result. On 
the day on which I went to condole with him, as tke disturb- 
ance of his mind and grief of his heart had commenced, I spoke 
a few words of admonition by way of affection and kindness, 
but did not urge him. I left him until (the sense (ff) his 
calamity should abate. After some days I ministered to his 
inward wound the balm of kindness, and brouj^t him hade 
to the position of sociable beings. Although in order to 
please me and satisfy my mind he outwardly controlled 
himself, and made a show of resignation, yet with regard to 
his affection for her what resignation could there be ? 

* JU4ar-i~dahr. 

t Text and MSS. have Mddar-i-Srd, " her mother" (?) Pechape we 
ehtmM read md Srd, “ we (esteemed) her not lees than our own mother." 
Or it may be that the ** her " means Nflr Jihan, and that Jahlngir 
means he esteemed Ms mother-in-law as much as hie own mother. 



217 


On the let of the Divine month of Abin, Sar-buland K., 
Jan-eipar K., and Biq! K., were honoured with the gift of 
drums. 'Abdu-Uah K. had gone to his jagir without the leave 
of the Subahdar* of the Deccan: I accordingly told the Chief 
Diwans to deprive him of his jagir, and I'timad Bay was 
ordered to act as a sosdiouf, and to send him back to the 
Deccan. 

It has been recorded with r^rd to the case of Maslijiu-z* 
saman (^aldm Qadra) that, notwithstanding what was due 
from him for his bringing*up and my kindness to him, he had 
not the grace to attend upon me in such an illness, and more 
strange still is it that he suddenly threw off the veil of modesty 
and asked for leave to undertake a journey to the Hijaz, and 
make a pilgrimage to the holy house, Inasmuch as at all 
times and under all circumstances the reliance of this suppliant 
is on the Lord, that needs no return, and the gracious Creator, 
I gave him leave with an open brow. Though he had all 
lands of things (for the journey) I made him a present of 
Bs. 20,000 in aid of his expenses, and I hope that the Supreme 
Physician, without the assistance of physicians and the means 
of medicine, may grant this suppliant complete recovery 
from the Dispensary of His men^. 

As the air of Agra, in consequence of the increase of the 
temperature, did not agree with me, on Monday, the 13th of the 
Divine month of Ab&n and 16th year (of my reign), the stand- 
ards were raised to go towards the hill country of the North, 
BO that if the air of that quarter should be equable, I might 
choose some spot of ground on the bank of the Biver Gkmges, 
and found a city there, to make a permanent place of resi- 
dence for the hot weather, or else turn the reins of purpose in 
the direction of Kashmir. Leaving Mucaffar K. to guard and 
administer Agra, I dignified him with dmms, a horse, and an 
elephant, living appointed h» nephew, M. Muhammad 
faujdar of the city, I gave him the title of Asad K., and 
■aliMted him for increase cf maasab. Having exalted B&qirK. 
to the duty of tim Subah of Ondh, I diuiiBBed him. On 
the 26th of the said month my pro s perou s son ftUt Parwis 
* That is. aWh Jahla (sas IqbU-nlasa, IM). 



218 


obtained leave to proceed from Mathura to Bihar and his jagir. 
I gave him leave after presenting him with a special dress of 
honour, a nadin^ a jewelled dagger, a horse, and an elephant. 
1 hope that he may enjoy long life. On 4 A^r, Mukarram K., 
governor of Delhi, was exalted with the good fortune of paying 
his respects. On the 6th I alighted at Delhi, and having 
halted two days in Salimgarh I employed myself with the 
pleasure of sport. At this time it was reported to me that Jado 
Ray Kaitha (or Eathiya), who is one of the leading Sardars 
of the Deccan, by the guidance of good fortune and reliance 
on Gk>d, had elected for loyalty, and had been enrolled amongst 
the loyal servants. Bestowing on him a dress of honour and 
a jewelled dagger, I sent a gracious farman to him by the 
hand of Narayan Das Rather. On the Ist of the Divine month 
of Dai, corresponding with the 7th Qafar, a.h. 1031, Maqfud, 
brother of Qasim K., was honoured with the title of Ha^m 
E. and Hafhim Beg with that of Jan-nigar E. 

On the 7th of the same month the camp was pitched at 
Hardwar on the bank of the Ganges. It is one of the most 
famous places of worship of the Hindus, and many brahmans 
and recluses have chosen a comer of retirement in this place 
and worship God according to the rule of their religion. I 
gave alms in cash and goods to each of them according to his 
requirements. As the climate of this skirt of the hills was 
not approved by me, and I could not see a spot of ground on 
which to make a permanent residence, I proceeded towards 
the skirt of the hill country of Jammu and Eangra. 

At this time it was reported to me that Raja Bhao Singh 
had died in the Deccan (become a traveller on the road of non- 
existence). From excess of wine-drinking he had become 
very weak and low. Suddenly a faintness came over him. 
However much the physicians tried remedies for him and 
burnt scars on the top of his head, he did not come to his 
senses: for a night and a day he lay without perception, and 
died the next day. Two wives and eight concubines burnt 
themselves in the fire of fidelity for him. Jagat Singh, his 
elder brother, and Maha Singh, his nephew, had spent the 
* The MSS. seem to have Bbosti — ».e., of Bhost. 



219 


coin of their lives in the wine-business, and the aforesaid, not 
taking warning from them, sold sweet life for bitter fluid. 
He was of very good disposition and sedate. From the days 
when I was a prince he was constantly in my service, and by 
the blessing of my education had reached the high rank of 
5,000. As he left no son, I dignifled the grandson of his 
elder brother, though of tender years, with the title of Baja, 
and gave him the mansab of 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse. 
The pargana of Amber, bis native place, was assigned to him 
as jagir, according to former custom, in order that his family 
might not be dispersed. Aipalat K., s. H^n Jahan, was pro- 
moted to the mansab of 1,000 peiBonal and 500 horse. On 
the 20th* of the same month I halted at the saray of Alwatu.f 
As I am constantly engaged in the pleasure of hunting, and 
the flesh of animals I have killed with my own hand is very 
much to my taste, in consequence of the suspicions and 
caution that I have in such matters, I order them to be 
cleaned in my presence, and m 3 nBelf inspect their stomachs to 
see what they have eaten and what the food of the animals is. 
If by chance I see anything to which I have a dislike I forbear 
from tsating the flesh. Before this 1 was not inclined towards 
any kind of waterfowl except the sona (golden duck ?). 
When I was at Ajmir I saw a tame sona duck eating horrible 
worms. From seeing this, my taste turned against it, and 
I gave up eating tame sona ducks until now, when a duck was 
caught, and I ordered them to clean it in my presence. From 
its crop there first came out a small} fish: after this there 
appeared a bug{ so large that I could not believe till I saw 
it with my own eye that it could swallow a thing of such a sise. 
Briefly I this day determined that I would not eat water- 
fowl. I^an ^Alam represented that the flesh of the white 
heron (^ujob-wa^td) was very delicious and tender. I accord- 
ingly sent for a white heron, and ordered them to clean it 
ill my presence. By chance there came out of its crop ten 

* Text Sth, but should be 20th. 

t AlwaaU in MSS. It appears to be Aluwa, 11 m. S.-E. of Sirhind. 

t Text pakangH, which seems unintelligible. The MSS. have 
a small fish.*' 

I Baiga. 



220 


bugs in a manner disgusting to me, at the remembrance of 
which I am distressed and disgusted. 

On the 21st the garden of Sirhind brought joy to my senses, 
and on the day of halt there I delighted myself by going round 
and looking at it. At this time IQiwaja Abii-l-l^busan came 
from the Deccan, and had the good fortime to wait on me. 
He had great favour shown him. On the 1st of the Divine 
month of Bahman I halted at Nur-Saray.* The mansab of 
Mu'tamid K., original and increased, was ordered to be 2,000 
personal and 600 horse. IDmn ‘Alam was made governor ot 
Allahabad,*f and having been presented with a horse, a dress 
of honour, and a< jewelled sword, took his leave. Muqarrab 
K. was selected for the mansab of 5,000 personal and horse. 
On Thursday, when I was encamped on the bank of the Biyah 
(Beas), Qasim K. came from Lahore, and had the good fortune 
to wait on me. Hashim K., his brother, with the Zamindars 
of the country bordering on the hills, had the honour of 
kissing the threshold. 

Baso’i,^ the zamindar of Talwara, brought me a bird, 
which the hill-people call jdn-bahan. Its tail resembles the 
tail of the qirqdwul. (pheasant), which is also called the tazrUt 
and its colour is exactly like that of the hen-pheasant, but it 
is half as large again. The circle round the eyes of this bird 
is red, while the orbit of the pheasant is white. The said 
Baso’i stated that this bird lived in the snow-mountains, and 
that its food was grass and other stuff. I have kept pheasants 
and have reared young ones, and have often eaten the flesh 
both of young birds and of mature ones. One may say that 
there is no comparison between the flesh of the pheasant and 
this bird. The flesh of the latter is much more delicate. 
Among the birds which I saw in the hill-country one was the 
phiil-paikdry^ which the Kashmiris call sanlu. It is one- 

* Founded by Nur JahSn (see Cunningham, *' Arehmological 
Reports;* XIV. 62). t Spelt Ilah-bis. 

t I have translated this passage from the MSS., which differ a good 
deal from the text. Talwira was in the BSri D&*ah Sarktr (Janett, 
II. 318.) 

{ Apparently this is the pulpaikar of Bfthar (Erskine, 32Q), though 
the two desiTiptions do not altogether ogreo. Perhaps it is a hombill. 



221 


(nim ^ than s pea>hen. The back, tail, and 
wings naemble those of the bustard, and an blackish, with 
white spots. Ths bnast to the end of the bosom is black, 
with white spots, and some red ones. The ends of the 
feathers an red, and histnus and beautiful. Fnm 
the end of the back of the neck it is also biilliantly blade. 
On the top. of its head it hsa two fleshy horns of a turquoise 
colour. The skin of its orbits and nund its mouth is red. 
Below its throat then is. skin round it enough to covet the 
palms of two hands, and in the middle of this the skin is of a 
violet colour of the sine of a hand, with blue spots in the 
middle. .Around it each streak is of a blue colour, con- 
sisting (rf eight plumes; round the blue streak it is red to the 
breadth of two togeis, like the peach flower, and again round 
its neck is that blue-coloured screak: it has red legs also. 
The live bird, which was weighed^ came to 162 tolahs. After 
it was killed and cleaned it weighed 139 tolahs. Another bird 
is of a goldmi colour: this the people of Lahon call £iian* (?) 
and the Kashmiris put. Its colour is like that of a peacock’s 
breast. Above its hc?d is a tuft {kahd). Its tail of the width 
of five fingers is yellow, and is like the long feather (a^oA-por) 
of the peacock, and its body as large as that of a goose. The 
neck of the goose is long and shapeless: that of this one is 
short, and has a shape. 

My brother, ^h ‘Abbas, had asked for golden birds,f and 
I sent some to him by his ambassador. Qn Monday^ the 
ceremony of my lunar weighing took place. At this entertain- 
ment Mflr Jahim Begam gave dresses of honour to forfy-five 
of the great Amirs and priTste servants. On the 14th of the 
same month the camp .was pitched at the village of Bahlwan § 
belonging to the Siba district. As I constantly longed for the 

* The MSS. have eel and liU, le it the ddM of BSbar f (Enkine, 
320). 

t Miirfk-i-zarin, goldfinch or golden oriole (T). 

i The date and month are not mentioned, but it appears from tae 
Iqbai-nima, whioh gives the next entry ae 14 Bahman, that the month 
wee Bahman, and that the date was probably about 20 January, 1622. 

I The Bhakm of Jarrett, II. 316. fflbah is mentioned at p. 317, 
45 ibid. The text has SItS. 



222 


air of Kangia and the hilhcountiy above-mentioned, I left 
the large camp at thia place, and proceeded to inspect the 
said fort with some of my spedal servants and attradants. 
As 1‘timadu-d-daula was ill 1 left him in the camp, and kept 
9adiq K.,the chief Bakhshi, thereto look after him and guard 
the camp. The next day news came that his state had under- 
gone a ehange,and that the signsof hopelessness were apparent. 
I could not hear the agitation of Nflr Jah&n Begam, and, 
considering the affection which I bore towards him, I retumed 
to the camp. At the end of the day I wmxt to see him. It 
was the hour of his death agony, ^metimes he became un- 
oonscions and sometimes came back to his senses. NtlrJahSn 
Begam indicated me, and said: “ Do you recognise (him) f” 
At such a time he recited this couplet of Anwari: 

Were a mother-bom biiad maa present 
He’d leoognise Majesty in the World-Adomer. 

I was for two hours at his jnllow; Whenever he was con- 
scious, whatever he said was intelligent and raticmal; In fine, 
on the 17th of the said month (Bahman) (about the end of 
January, 1^), aftor three gharw had. passed he attained to 
eternal men^. What shall I say about my feeHngs thnfiigh 
this terrible event ? He was a wise and perfect Viaier, and 
a learned and affectionate conqumion. 

VxasB.* 

By the ndoming of the sya there’s one frame lees : 

Tty fcMtiiig, «li> Tnnr» thmn tliwiiMwA 

Though the weight of such a kingdom was <ni his shoaUen, 
and it is not possible for or within the poww of a mortal to 
make everyone contented, yet no one ever went to IHitnidu- 
d-daula with a petitiem or on business who turned from him 
in an injured frame ai mind. He showed loyalty to the 
sovereign, and yet left pleased and hopeful him who was in 
need. In fact, this was a speciality of his. From the day 
on which his companion (his wife) attidned to the mett^ of 
Qod he cared no longer for himself, but melted away fom 

* The couplet oomes from Budage's elegy On Aba-l-Hassn Mahfci 
BalUiL See Aofi’s LaboAu-t-AUab. Biowne’sed, Pert II., p. 3. 



223 


day to day. Although outwardly he looked after the affaiia 
of the kingdom, and taking paths with the ordering of civil 
matters, did not withdraw his hand from business, yet in his 
heart he grieved at the separation, and at last, after three 
months and twenty days, he passed away. The next day I 
went to condole with his sons and sons>in>law, and, presenting 
41 of his children and connections and 12 of his dependents with 
dresses of honour, I took them out of their mourning garments. 

The next day I marched with the same purpose (as before), 
and went to see the fort of Kangra. In four stages the camp 
was pitched at the river Banganga. Alf K. and 9iai^ Faifu- 
llah, the guards of the fort, had the good fortune to pay their 
respects. At this stage the offering of the Raja of Chamba* 
was laid before me. His country is 25 koss beyond Kangra. 
There is no greater Zamindari in these hills than this. The 
country is the asylum of all the Zemindars of the country. 
It has passes (‘ojaioAd) difficult to cross. Until now he had not 
obeyed any king nor sent offerings. EBs brother also was 
honoured by paying his respects, and on his part performed 
the dues of service and loyalty. He seemed to me to be 
reasonable and intelligent and urbane. I exalted him with 
all kinds of patronage and favour. 

On the 24tht of the same month I went to see the fort of 
Kangra, and gave an order th^t the Qa0, the Chief Justice 
(JKir *Adl), and other learned men of Islam should accompany 
me and carry out in the tort whatever was customary, accord* 
ing to the religion of Muf^mmad. Briefly, having traversed 
about one koss, I went up to the top of the fort, and by the 
grace of God, the call to prayer and the reading of the B^uf]ba 
and the slaughter of a bullock, which had not taken place 
from the commencement of the building of the fort till now, 
were carried out in my presence. I prostrated m 3 rself in 
thanksgiving for this great gift, which no king had hoped to 
receive, and ordraed a lofty mosque to be built inside the fott. 
The fort of Kangra is situated on a high hill, and is so strong 
that if famished with provisions and the necessaries for a fort 

* Text wrongly has ChlUL Chamba is N.-W. of KSngra. 

t EUiot. VI. 382. 



224 


the hand of fone caimot leadi its skirt, and tiie noose ci 
stiatagem must &11 short of it. Althoof^ thore aze hei{pits 
in some places, and gone and muskets might reach 
(the fort) faom them, yet no harm enmld acerae to the garrison, 
for th^ oonld move to another part of the fort,* and be safe. 
It has 23 bastions and seven gates. Its inner oiroamfeienoe 
is 1 koss and 16 ropes, its length is } koss and 2 ropes (fondb), 
its breadth not more than 22 ropes nor less than 15. Its hei^t 
is 114 cnbits. There are two reeervoiiB inside the fort, one 
2 topes long and 1| broad ; the other is ci the same kmgth (f ).f 

After going round the fort I went to see the temple Dnzg&, 
which is known as Bhawan.| A worid has here wandered in 
the desert of error. Setting aside the infidels whose custom 
is the worship of idols, crowds on crowds of the people of 
Islam, traversing long distances, bring thrir ofierings and 
pray to the blade stone (image). Near the temple, and on 
the slope of the hill there is a sulphur^mine (Idn), and its heat 
causes fiames to continually burst forth. They call it Jwila 
Bfokhif (Flame>Face or Burning Mouth), and regard it as one 
of the idol’s maades. In fact, BQndus, while knowing tiie 
truth,|| deceive the common people. BQndus sayll that when 
the life of Mahideo’s wife came to an end and ^e d»aw> the 
drau{^t <d deatii, Mahadeo, in his great love and attachment 

* The fort WM destroyed by the earthquake of IMS (I.O.,XlV. 807). 
Psesomably Jahlngir’e mosque was also dtstaoyed then. 

t The breadth of the second tank is not mentioned in the MSS. 

{ “The present temple of Bajreawari Devi is at Bhawan, a anborb 
of KIngra “ (I.O.. XIV. 386). 

'§ See LQ., ZIV. 86, and Jaiiett, II. 314 and n. 1. Jariett states 
that JwUi HukhI is two days* journey from' KIngra. Apparently 
Jahingir took his statement from the Aj^, which has the words “in 
the vicinity ’’ (Jarrett, Hrid.). Jarrett’s statement that JwUS Mukhl 
is two days’ journey from KIngra is taken from Tieffenthaler, 1. 108. 
Tieffenthaler adds that the diatance is 14tol6si*HiM(leagnes, orkosees). 
He speaks of the Fort of Kangra as being only ane-fourth of a wUU 
in circumference. The image, he states, was that of Bhownni, and 
represented the lower part of the goddess’s body. The head was 
alleged to be at JwAli HukU. 

II i.a, know the idiysicalcauseof the flame. The MSS, do not m e n t ion 
Hindus in this clause. 

* See Jarrett, il. 313, and note 2. 



S26 


to her, took her deed body on hk bock, and imt •boot the 
erorid Maying htt ooipM. When some time bad pMNd in 
tine, m a nner , her iosm dimolved and dropped aaa]^er, and 
each limb fell in a diffemnt plaee: they give honour and 
dignity to the place according to the dignity and gnue ci the 
member. As the breast, rdiieh when compared wHh other 
membem has the greatest dignity, fell in this place, they hold 
it more precions than any other. Some that this 

stone, whidi is now a jdace of wombip for the dk infidels, is 
not the stone which was there ori|^ll|y, but that a body of 
the peo]^* of Islam came and carried off the oric^l stones 
and threw it mto the bottom of the imr, with the intent that 
no one conU get at it. Vat a kmg time the tnmnlt of tiie 
infidels and idol-worshippea had died away in the world, till 
a lying brahman hid a stone for hie own ends, and going to the 
Baja of the time said: “ 1 saw Dutgi in a dream, and she said 
to me: * They hsTO thrown me into a certain ]^aoe: qniokty 
go and take me up.*” The Baja, in the simplicity of his heart, 
and greedy for tiie offerings oi gold that would come to him, 
accepted the tale <ri the brahman, and sent a number of 
people with him, and brooght that stone, and kept it in tills 
place with hononr, and started again the shop error and 
misleading. But Qod uriy knows I 

From the temple I went to see the valley which is known 
as Ktlh-i-Madlr.t It is a dtii^^tfiil place. From its cUmate, 
the frtohnees of its verdure, and its delightful position it is a 
place of pleasure worthy to be seen. There is a waterfaU here 
whidi poum down water from the top of the hill. I ordered 
them to put up a symmetrical building there. On the 26th 

* The temple me eeoked by Meh<nto of fibunln. 

t This miiht be Koh-i-Headlr, tile bill whioh wee need ee a ehunung' 
etiek by the gods. Them ie m bill of this mme in Bhegelpur district 
. whidi ie known as Mendlrgiil Bat piobeblyKfih-i-lCadlr here meene 
tlwoeBtn'liilkforintheBib.Ind.testoftlMAyln-i-Akbeil. 1.638, two 
lines horn foot, it ie said that the pleoe is celled JUendherl, end e nets (7) 
gives tiwvaiione reading, “ this spot is tegsidedes tbecentie." “ser>»- 
aamln-rd ModSr piiuUnmi," Apparently it is regsided as the central 
plecebeeaaaethebienBtfsIlhete, Jsnett, II. 314, n. Accoidingtothe 
list g i ven there the rtykt breast fell at JSIandkara and the tongus at 
JwSUMnkU. 



of the month the standaidB weze turned back to letom. 
Having piesented Alf K. and 9itul^ Fai^-Uah with hones 
and elephants 1 left them to defend the fort. Next day I 
encamp^ at the fcnrt of NQzptir.* It was reported to me 
that in this neighbourhood there were many jungle fowl. As 
1 had never yet caught these, I made a halt of another day, 
and enjoyed myself with the sport, having caught four. One 
cannot distinguish them in shape and colour from domestic 
fowls. One of the peculiarities of these birds is that if they 
are caught by the feet and turned upside down, wherever they 
are taken they make no sound, and remain silent, contrary to 
the domestic fowl, which makes an outcry. Until the 
domestic fowl is plunged into hot water its feathers do not 
come off easily. The jungle fowl, like the partridge and 
poina^'f can be plucked when dry. I ordered them to roast 
them. It was found that the flesh of the full-grown ones 
was very tasteless and dry. The chickens had some juiciness, 
but were not good to eat. They cannot fly farther than a 
bow-shot. The cocl4 is chiefly red, and the hen black and 
yellow. There are many in this Nflrpilr jungk. The ancient 
name of Nurptir is Dhameri.§ Since Baja Baso built the fort 
and made houses and gardens they call it Nuipur, after my 
name. About Rs. 30,000 were expended on the building. 
Certes, the buildings Hindus construct after their fashion, 
however much they decorate them, are not pleasant. As the 
place was fit and the locality enchanting, I ordered them to 
spend Rs. 1,00,000 out of the public treasury, and to erect 
buildings at it, and to make lofty edifices suited to the spot. 

At tl^ time it was reported to me that there was a Sannydsl 
Mod in the neighbourhood who had entirely renounced 

* I.G.,newed.,XIX.232. 

t PodnOf or budana. The quail. 

X Text IdtirdaAt which 1 presume is a mistake for j^urHs, 

§ Dhameri. See I.Q., XIX. 232. 

II Mautl might mean ** dead,” but probably the word means ” Pearl.” 
and was the title assumed by a tribe or family among the Sann} ftsis. 

infra. The statement that this order put themselves into the 
Hgure of a cross doubtless means that they belong to the Urdu Idhii 
(arms-aloft) sect — t.s., the sect who raise their arms above thoir heads. 



227 


control over himself. I ordered them to bring him that I 
might ascertain the real state of affairs. They call Hindu 
devotees Sarb bast.* By usage the word has become San- 
nySst (laying down everything). There are many degrees 
among them, and there are several orders among the Sarb 
basi. Among them there is the Moit order. They put 
themselves into the figure of a cross (?)(W& ilMiyar mtkunand) 
and surrender themselves (tastiM\ misaxani). For instance, 
they never speak. If for ten days and nights they stand in 
one place, they do not move their feet forwards or backwards ; 
in fact, make no movement sA, all, and remain like fossils. 
When he came into my presence I examined him, and found 
a wonderful state of persistence. It occurred to me that in 
a state of drunkenness and absence of mind and delirium, 
some change might be wrought in him. Accordingly I ordered 
them to give him some cups of spirit Caraq) of double strength. 
This was done in royal fashion (liberally ?), but not the least 
change took place, and he remained in the same impassive 
state. At last his senses leit him, and they carried him out 
like a corpse. God Almighty granted him mercy so that he 
did not lose his life. Certainly there was great persistence 
in his nature. 

At this time Bi-badal K. presented me with the chronogram 
of the conquest of Kangra, and that of the foundation of the 
mosque which I had ordered. As he had hit it off well, I 
here record it: 

VXBSE. 

World-gripper, World-giver, World-holder, World-king, 

With the Bword of gkdri-ship he conquered thie fort. 

Wisdom spoke the date** The Jahangiri Fortune opened this 
fort.” 


in the figure of a cross. In Tavernier, II. 378, of ed. of 1676, this 
is the 8th posture of ascetics, and at that page and at 376 there art 
figures of such ascetics. The I.O. MS& have salab, 'mourning/' 
instead of palb. 

* Sana vdsi means ** all-abiding.** Perhaps the >fFord should be 
Sana ndsi, ** all destroying.” 

t For iastlMt sec Hughes’ Diet, of Islam. Possibly we should 
ia^ib, ** make the sign of the cross.” 



228 


He oomposed the dinmogism* of the bnildiiig of the 
moeqne es fdlowi: 

ShSi JaUoglr a. ahUi Akbur 
is a Ung wlio in fhe Ago hath no aqnaL 
He todi Vort'Kaagia by tba aid of Ood« 

A drop fmn the olend of bit amnd is • tempwfc 
As by his oidir this illnmined moeqne was l^t. 

Hey his f ofshaad shins by his ptosteatian. 

A hiddsn mssasngsr said: ** In sseUng for the date 
(Ssy) The sMoqne of fiblh Jabingfr was lllnmfaied.**t 

On the first ol the Divine month of Isfandannus I gave the 
•iij[ everything belonging to the government 
Afnimbip of Itunidn-d-daols to Nflr JahSn Begem, 
and ordered that her dxnmB and orchestra shoold be sounded 
after these, of the king. On the 4th of the same month I 
pitched in the neighbourhood <d the pargana of Ka^fina.^ 
On this day Sbirfija Abfi-l>Heeen was raised to the lofty 
dignity of supreme Diwan. I conferred dresses <d honour on 
SS individuali of the Deccan Amirs. Abft Said, grandson of 
I*timidn*d*dau]a, was raised to the mansab of 1,000 perscmal 
and OOO'horse. At this time a report came from jSpirrm that 
Hiustan, on the 8th{ (20th) at the month, had died of the 
disease at oolie pains (gSlanj), and gone to the mercy of God. 

On tiM 19th of the month I pitched <m the bank (d the 
Bihat (Jhelam). Qisim K. vras raised to the mansab of 
3,000 personal and 2,000 horse. Baja Kif^n Das was 
sdected for the duty of faujdar of Delhi, and his mansab was 
fixed at 2,000 personal and 600 horse. or^;inal and increased. 

* The chronogram ol the taking of the fort yielde 1029, and that of 
the bnildiiig of the moeque 1031. 

t ifAdni. “ illumined,*’ an allnaion to Jahaugir’e name. 

t The MBS. have Kahtflma apparently, t KahOta in BSwalpindl 

I This shoold be, 1 think, the 20fh, and though the name of the 
asonth is not given, it should be Bahman. - flsetWH. and IqbUnima* 
191> Ihnaran died in the Deeoan, and pieenmably at Bnrhanpnr or 
Jldr. 20 Bahman, 1031, corresponds to January 20, 1622, OB. But 
the date of hit death has not been quite dete rmin ed. See J.B.A.S. 
IM 1007, p. 001. 



229 


Fievioasly to tluB, buntsmen and ywdmdan (gnaxda) had 
been oide^ to piepaie a jarga (bunting-ring) in the ^tbA">giSl 
(bunting>plaGe of) Qiijbak. When it waa reported to me 
that they had biou^t the game into the enclosure, on the 
24th of the month I went out to hunt with some of my special 
servants. Of hiU quehqibr.{Ta,msi) and gaselles 124* head 
wen taken. On t]^ day it was reported that Zahtr K. s. 
Zain K., had died. I ^omoted Sa'&dat Umid, his son, to the 
mimsab of 800 pet8<nid uid 400 horse. 

* The LO. 1188. have 181 instead of 124, and th^ add to the infer 
motion about ^afarK. that he died in Ohasnin. Therahogivehiasoii’s 
name as 8a‘ldata-llah. The IqfaU-ntma, p. 191, has 121 hill aheep, 
mirkhfir and deer. 



THE SEVENTEENTH 
NEW YEARS FEAST AFTER THE 
AUSPICIOUS ACCESSION 

On the eve of Monday, the ,*** of the month of Jumada- 

1-awwal, A.H. 1031, March 10-12, 1622, after one watch, 
five gharis and a fraction had passed, the snn that illuminates 
the world lighted the mansion of Aries, and the 17th year of 
the reign of this suppliant began auspiciously and happily. 
On this joy-increasing day l^f K. was promoted to the 
mansab of 6,000 personal and horse. Having given Qasim 
K. leave to proceed to the government of the Fanjab, I pre- 
sented him with a horse, an elephant, and a dress of honour. 
Eighty thousand darbs were given to Zambll Beg, ambassador 
of the ruler of Persia. On the 6th of the san)^ month (Far- 
wardin) the royal camp was at Bawalpindi. Faidl K. was 
promoted to the post of Bakhshi. Zambil Beg was ordered to 
remain at ease in Lahore until the return of the victorious 
army from Kashmir. An elephant was conferred on Akbar- 
quli K. Gakkar. 

At this time I frequently heard that the ruler of Persia 
had hastened from Khurasan for the purpose of conquering 
Qandahar. Although looking to our previous and present 
connections, it appeared very unhkely, and beyond all calcu- 
lation, that such a great king should entertain such light and 
crude ideas, and himself come against one of my humble 
slaves who was in Qandahar with 300 or 400}* servants, yet as 

« Date not given. The Iqbil-nima, 191, has ** the 8th.” 

t The Iqbftl-naxna, p. 192, speaks of a report of Eh^n. JahSn that 
Uwftja ‘Abdn-l-'Aaiz Naqshbandi, the governor of Qandahar, had a 
garrison of 3.000 men. 


230 



231 


caution is one of the duties of a ruler and becoming to a king> 
I sent Zainu-l-*Abid]h, Bakhshi of AhoiRs^ with a gracious 
farman to ^urram to come and wait on me with all possible 
speed with a victorious host, and elephants of mountain 
hugeness, and the numerous artilleiy that were assigned for 
his support in that Subah. So that, if these words should be 
near the truth, he might come and be despatched with an 
innumerable army and countfess treasure, in order that he 
(the king of Persia) might discover the result of breaking faith 
and of wrong-doing. 

On the 8th I halted at the fountain of Qasan Abdal. Fida*! 
K. was promoted to the mansab of 2,000 personal and 1,000 
horse, and BadiSi-s-zaman was appointed Bakhshi of the 
Abedis. On Friday, the 12th, Mahabat K., having come 
from Kabul, waited on me and had the good fortune to pay 
his respects, and became the recipient of daily-increasing 
favours. He presented 100 muhrs as a present and Us. 10,000 
as alms. Kwaja Abu-l-l^asan passed his followers before 
me in review; 2,600 well-horsed cavalry were enrolled of 
whom 400 were matchlock men. At this stage a qamur^a 
hunt was arranged, and I shot* 33 hill qwhqjaf (mountain 
sheep), etc. At this time ^klm Mumina, at th4 recom- 
mendation of the pillar of the State, Mahabat K., had the 
good fortune to wait on me. With power and courage he 
undertook my cure, and 1 hope that his coming may prove 
auspicious to me. The mansab of Amanu-llah, S. Mahabat 
K., was fixed at 2,000 personal and 1,800 horse. On the 19th 
I encamped near Pakhfi, and the feast of the culmination was 
held there. Having given Mahabat K. leave to return to 
Kabul, I gave him a horse, an elephant, and a dress of honour. 
The mansab of I*tibar K. was ordered to be -5,000 personal 
and 4,000 horse. As he was an old servant, and had become 
very weak and old, I promoted him to the Subah of Agra, 
and entrusted to him the defence of the fort and the treasury, 
and, presenting him with an elephant, a horse, and a dress of 

* Jahangir appears on this occasion to have forgotten the vow he 
made in the 13th year. See Elliot, VI. 362. Jahangir's words are 
clear: ha fir a tujang anddlMam** 



honour, dismined him. At the Fms of Knnwsz* Hast, 
Iiadat K. came from Kashmir, and had the good fortnnr to 
kiss the threshold. On the 2nd of the IHvine month of 
Urdibihi^, I entered the endianting lepon of Kashmir. 

IGcan eras promoted to tiie mansab (d 2,600 personal and 
1,400 horse. At this time, in order to ease the otmdition of 
the ryots and soldiery’, I did away with the fsajdari oess, 
and gave an order that in the whole of my dominions they 
shonld not impose anything on accoont of brajdaii. Zabar-dast 
K., Master of the Ceremonies (Mir TOsuk), was promoted to 
the mansab of 2,000 posonal and 700 horse. On the 13th, by 
the advice of the physicians, and especially of Qakun MOmina, 
I was lightened by being bled from my Mt leg. A present of 
a dress of honour was made to Muqarrab K., and one of 
1,000 darbs to ^akimMQmina. At the request of fQiarram the 
mansab of ‘Ab^-llah K. was fixed at 6,000. Sar-farasf K. 
was honoured with the pft of drums. Bahadur K. Usbeg 
having come from Qandahar, had the good fortune to pay 
his respects: by way of nasar he gave 100 muhis, and by way 
of diaiity offer^ Bs. 4,000. Mustafa K., governor of Thatta, 
had Sent as an offering a gliah-nama and a Hisirma (quintet) 
of Ssbil^ Nirami illustrated by masters (of painting), along 
with other presents: these were laid before me. On the 1st 
of the Divine month of ^utdad La^kar K. was exalted to 
the mansab of 4,000 personal and 3,000 horse, and to Ifir 
Jumla was given that of 2,500 personal and 1,000 horse. 
Some of the Amirs of the Deccan were sinularly honoured with 
an increase of mansab. Promotion was also ipven as follows: 
Satdar K., 3,000 and 2,600 horse; SaF>buland K., 2,600 per- 
sonal and 2,200 horse; Baqt K., 2,500 and 2,000 horse; 
^rza K., 2,500 and 1,200 horse; Jan-sipar K., 2,000 personal 
and 2,000 horse; Hirzs Wall, 2,600 and 1,000 horse; Mirza 
Badi‘u-z-zaman s. Mirza Shah mld>. 1,500 personal and horoe; 
Zahid K., 1,600 and 700 horse; ‘Aqidat K., 1,200 and 300 

* Appanntly this is the BenhmuJa Pus. It is msntioiMd in the 
Akbar*ntma, IIL 480.81 and 888, but does not appeu on modern 
maps. Jahangir nfera to it in the account of the 18th year, p. S04. and 
says it is the lut of. the passes. 

f Ssr-afrSs in No. 181. 



233 


hoxse; Ibi&hun Qiuaiil Ei^^liari, 1,200 and 000 hone; and 
gO.-1-^ax K., 1,000 penonal and 600 hone. Baja Gaj Singh 
and Hiinniat K. were aeleoted for dinnui. On the 2nd of 
the Divine month of TEt, Sayyid Bayard waa honoured 'with 
the title of Muftafa K., and waa abo preaented with drama. 
AtthiatimeTahawwar K., who ia one of the penonal aervanta, 
waa despatched with a giaciona faiman to summon my 
fortunate son Snh Parwia. 

Some days before this, petitions came from the ofiSciala in 
reporting the intention of the ruler of Persia to 
conquer Qandahar, but my mind, which ia actuated by sin- 
cerity, looking to past and present relatiCua, placed no reliance 
on the truth of this until the report of my son S^n Jahan 
arrived that giah ‘Abbas, with the armies of Iraq aud 
Khurasan, had come and besieged Qandahar. I ordered 
them to fix an hour for leaving Kashmir. Khwaja Abll-1- 
WxuiTi, the Diwan, and Baldidii ^iq K. hastened to ^hore 
in ad'vance of the victorious army to expedite the arrival of 
the princes of high degree with the'armiea of the Deccan, 
Qujarat, Bengal, and Behar, and to send on the Amirs who 
were present with the 'victorious atuiups, and those who 
one after another should come in from the districta of their 
jagirs to my son Kha n Jah&n at Multan. At the same time 
the artilleiy, with the strings of warlike elephants, and the 
armoury* were to bo prepared and forwarded. As there was 
tittle cultivation between Multan and Qandahar, the despatch 
of a large army without provisions was not to be thought of. 
It 'was therefore demded to wicourage the grain-sellers, who 
in the language of India are called bon/flrd, and, providing 
them with money, to take them along with the victorious 
army, so that there might be no difBculty about supplies. 
TheBanjarastareatribe. Some of them have 1,000 buUocks, 
and some more or leas. They take grain from diffe^ 
.’istricts (bulSkSt) into the towns and sell it. They go ^ng 
with the armies, and with such an army there would be 


• TLe LO. MS., No. 181, adds “ and twasuie.” 
t “ Wibon” Oluasaiy, p. 80. Elliot, Sapp. Ototsatjr, 
word seema oonnectad with barinjt “ rico. 


L 08. 


The 



284 


100,000 buUoeks or more. It k hoped that by the grace of 
the Creator, the umy will be fumkhed with numbera and 
arms ao that there may be no dday or heatatkm until it 
reach lafahan, which k hk (the Sludi’a) capital. A latman 
waa cent to Jah&n to beware and not atart in that 
direction (Qandahar) from Mnhan before the arrival of the 
victoriona army, and not be dktnrbed, bnt attend to ordeta. 
Bahadur K. Uabeg waa aeleeted to go aa an auziliaiy to the 
army of Qandahar, and favoured with a horae and dreaa of 
honour. Fi^il K. waa given the manaab of- 2,000 peraonal 
and 750 horae. 

As it bad been brought to notice that the poor of Kashmir 
sufkr hardshipa in the winter fnm the noeaaive cold, and 
live with difficulty, I ordered that a village of the rmtal of 
Rs. 3,000 or Ra. 4,000 should be entmated to Mulla 
I^fah&ni,* to be expended in providing clothes for the poor, 
and for warming water, for purposes of ablution, in the 
mosques. 

As it was repotted that the Zamindara of Skhtwar had 
again raked their heads in disobedience and sin, and engaged 
in sedition and disturbance, Ir&dat K. was oideted to proceed 
hot-foot, before th^ had time to estabHsh themselveB fim^, 
and having inflicted condign punishment on them to tear up 
the root of sedition. On thk day Zainu-l-*Alndhi, who had 
been sent to summon |^[urtam, came and wuted on me, and 
reported that the stipuktion he made waa that he should pass 
the runy season in the fort of Hindu, and then come to 
Court. report was read. If did not like the styk of 
its purport nor the request he made, and, on the cmittaty, the 
traces of didoyalty {IMauhtS} were apparent. There bong 
no remedy, an order was given that as he proposed to come 
after the taina, he should despatch the great Amirs, the 
servants of the Court who were em|doyed in assisting him, and 
especialty the Sayyids of Birha and Bukhara, the ^ai]^-sidas, 
the Afghans, and the Rajputs. Hfrii Rustam and Itiqid K. ^ 
were ordered to go to Lahore in advance, and aaakt the army ' 

* This is the port BtbS XUib IsMiIbI of Blodunaiiii. 607. 

t EUiot,VI.883. 



235 


of Qaadahu. Ba. l.PO,000 were ^ven them as advance of 
pay, and I also granted drums to ‘Inayat K. and 1‘timad K. 
Ii&dat K., who had hastened to punish the lebek of Eishtwar, 
having killed many of them and regained the 'mastery and 
establnhed himsdf firmly, returned to dufy. Mu'tamid K. 
liaii been appointed to the army of the Deccan. As 

that matter was over* he was sent for at his own request. 
He came on this day, and on his arrival kissed the 
threshold. 

It is a strange tlung that when a pearl of the value of 
Rs. 14,000 or 15,000 was lost in the harem, Jotik Bay, the 
astrologer, represented that it would be found in two or three 
days, ^adiq E. Bammal (soothsayer) r^resented that in 
the same two or three days it would come from a place which 
was perfectly clean and pure, such as the place of worship or 
oratory. A female soothsayer represented that it would soon 
be found, and that a woman with white skin would bring it 
in a state of ecstasy, and give it into the hand of the ^a^rat 
(the king). It happened that on the third day one of the 
Turkish giris found it in the oratory, and all in smiles and in 
a happy frame of mind gave it to me. As the words of alt 
three came true each one was favoured with an acceptable 
reward. This is written because it is not devoid of strange- 
ness. 

At this time 1 appointed Eaukab and ^dmatgar E., and 
others to the number of twelve in all, of the familiar servants 
to be seaSwids of the Amirs in the Doccan in order that thqr 
mi{^ exert themselves and send them forward as soon as 
possible to Court, so that th^ (the Ambs) might be sent 
to the victorious army at Qandahar.f At this time it was 
frequently reported to me that S^rram had taken into 
his possesnon some of the estates of the jagir of NQr Jahan 
Begam and ^hriyar, and especially the patgana of Dholpur, 
which had by the High Diwan b^n assigned to glpdiriyar, 

* Mot that the qaastfon of the DeooMi had bean aettlad. but that 
Sllh JahInhadlaftBailiaiqparaiidaouietollIndfi. 8ae Iqbll'iiiiua, 
198 

t BDiot, VI. 383. 



and had sent there an Aif^ian of the name of Daiya, me of 
his own servants, wii^ a body of men. Darya fon^t with 
a servant of ^hriyir, who had been aj^umted 
to the fanjdaii of that region, and many were killed on both 
sides. Although in consequence of his (Bm rtam’rt remaining 
in the fort of Mandh, and the unreasonable requests made in 
his letter it appeared that his reason was tamed, yet from 
hearing this iiews it became clear tiiat he was unworthy of all 
the favours and cherishing I had bestowed on him, and that 
his brain had gone wrong. Accordingly I sent Baja BOs- 
afzQn, who was 'a confidential servant, to him, and made 
inquiries as to the cause of this boldness. He was ordered 
hereafter to behave properly, and not place his foot beyond 
the path of reasonableness and the high road of politeness, 
and content himself with the districts of his own jagir that 
he had obtained from the High Diwan. He must also beware 
not to form any intention of coming to wait upon me, but to 
send the body of the servants of the State I had requisitioned 
on account of the disturbance at Qandahar to the Court. If 
anything contrary to this order should come to notice, he would 
repent it. 

At this time Hh ^aluru>d-(Un, the grandson d IHt IBtan, 
s. the famoiu giah Ni‘matu>llah, came from Persia and 
waited on me, and received as a present a dress of hononr 
and 8,000 darbs. Ujala Dakhani obtained leave to go to 
Bija Bir Singh Deo with a gracious &nnan in order that he 
should act as taxSiwul and collect the men. Previously to this, 
on account of the great regard and abundant affection I bore 
to S^nnam and his sons, at the time when his son f^hu ji*) 
was very ill, I had determined that if Qod Almighty wtmld 
grant him to me I would not again sport with a gun, and 
would infiict no injury on a living thing with my own hand. 
Notwithstanding my inclination and love for hunting, especi- 
ally with a gun, I had given it up for five yearn. At this time, 
when I was greatly distressed at his unkind behavioor, I took 
again to sporting with a gun, and gave otdem that nobody 
should remain in the palace without one. £nash<«ttimemost 
of the servants took a liking to shooting with guns, and the 



2S7 

uqIwis,* in order to perform their dntm, beoune mv$by 
eoUkre. 

On the 26th of the numth, ooeieepoading irith the 7th 
Sbi^wwil, at the favoiuable hoax that had been duiaen, I 
tamed towards Lahore from Kaahmir (aj^iaxentlj mesne 
Srinagar, the capital). I sent Bihori Doe Brahman with a 
gracions faxman to Bins to the effect that he ahoold 
bnng hie son with a bodj of men to paj his respects to n». 

Zahitn-d'din was promoted to the mansab of 1,000 per* 
sonal and 400 horse. As he represented to me that he was 
iu debt, I made him a present of Rs. 10,000. On the 1st of 
Sbdiriwar I encamped at the fountain of Adlibal,t and on 
Thursday 1 had a feast of cups beside the foimtain.^ On 
this auspidons day my fortunate son ^hiiyir was appointed 
to the <^dahar expe^tion, and was promoted to the mansab 
of 12,000 personal and 8,000 horse. A special dress of honour, 
with a nSdin with pearl buttons, was also given him. At 
this time a merchant had brought two large pearls fitom the 
country of Turkey, one of them weighing 1} tmgjSU, and 
the second 1 «ur^ kns. NOr Jahan Begam bought the two 
for Bs. 60,000, and presented them to me as an offering on 
the same day. On Friday, the 10th, by the advice of ^akim 
MQmini,§ I was relieved bj bleeding from the atm. Huqar* 
tab K., who has great skill in this f t, always used to bleed me, 
and possibly never faded before, but now failed twice. After- 
wards Qis^, his nephew, bled me. I gave him a dress of 
honour and Bs. 2,000, and gave 1,000 darbs to 
Mfimini. Mir Ibbi, at the request of Iban Jahin. was 
promoted to the mansab' of 1,500 and 900 horse. 

* Tte’faM'&MidSa.iiteially quivsT-holders. Appanatly OMBMUiiiig 
is that the aiohscs lAo mre footmer. (see Bloahmann, SiM, abont 
i>4|«|{tioops)losttheirvocationwhangDnsoaiBeintonaahaiid beoame 
oavabysoldim But the meaning in text may be that the atehmtoob 
to piaotising with bows and arrows on honebaek. It appaan Cram a 
DasMra-b'amal in the LO., Mb. l,8M (B. 2736) that the tarhoA-^tmit 
were an inferffw order of sereants receiving 1,0M dams or lem a year. 
They probably wwe not neeeesaiily arehece. 
t The Aehh Dal of the Ayhi,Janett, 11.166. 
t Mo.l81has"atVlmlg.” 

46 I PIdshIh-nSma, T., Part 11., p. 349. 



238 


On the 2 let of the month the feast of my solar weighing 
took place, and the 54th year of the age of this suppliant 
at the throne of God began auspiciously and happily. I 
hope that the whole of my life will be spent in fulfilling the 
will of God. On the 28th, I went to see the waterfall of 
Ashar* (?). As this spring is famous for its sweetness and 
agreeable flavour, I weighed it in my presence against Ganges 
water, and thatf of the valley of Lar. The water of Ashar was 
3 tnd^a heavier than that of the Ganges, and the latter was 
i madia lighter than that of the valley of Lar. On the 30th 
the camp was at Hirapur. Though Iradat K. had done his 
duty in Kishtwar weU, yet as the ryots and inhabitants of 
Kashmir complained of his treatment of them, I promoted 
[‘tiqad K. to the governorship of Kashmir. I bestowed on 
him a horse, a dress of honour, and a special enemy-piercing^ 
i^.word, and appointed Iradat K. to do duty with the army of 
Qandahar. Having brought Kunwar Singh, the Raja of 
Kishtwar, out of the fortress of Gwalior, where he was im- 
prisoned, I bestowed Kishtwar on him, and gave him a horse 
and a dress of honour, with the title of Raja. I sent Qaidar 
Malik to Kashmir (t.e., Srinagar) to bring a canal from the 
valley of Lar to the Nur-afza garden, giving him Rs. 30,000 
for the materials and labour. On the 12th of the month I 
came down from the hill country of Jammu, and pitched at 
Bhimbhar. The next day I had a gamurgha hunt. To 
Dawar-ba kfash . s. IQiusrau, I gave the mansab of 5,000 personal 
and 2,000 horse. On the 24th I crossed the Chenab.§ Mirza 
Rustam came froni Lahore, and waited on me. On the same 
day Afzalll K., jOiurram’s Diwan, bringing a petition from 
him, waited on me. He had clothed his immoderate acts in 
the garment of apology, and had sent him with the idea that 
perhaps he might caiT\' hit* point by flatter}^ and smooth 

* May also be read IThar and Adhar. It w Adhar or Udhar in 1.0. 
MSS. 

t The Sind River of Kashmir Ls meant. Jarrett II. 364. 

t This seems a translation of Akbar s word arlnds (enemy-destroying). 

{ Elliot, VI. 384, where Jhelani is a mistake. 

II Pftdshfth-nftma, L, Part II., p. 330. His name was Mullft Shukni- 
Hall, and he was from Shiraz. He is the Mirza Sorocolla of Roe. 



2S9 


speeches, and so correct his improprieties. I* paid no atten- 
tion, and did not listen to him. The Diwan Khwaja Abu-h 
l^asan and ^adiq K. BaUbfU, who had hastened to Lahore 
to make provision for the army of Qandahar, had the good 
iortune to kiss the threshold. On the 1st of the Divine month 
of Aban, Amanu-llah, s. Hahabat K., was promoted to the 
mansab of 3,000 personal and 1,700 horse. A gracious 
farman was sent to summon Mahabat K. At this time 
‘Abdu-llah K., whom I had sent for for service at Qandahar, 
having come from the district of his jagir, paid his respects. 
On the 4th of the same month I entered the city of Lahore 
auspiciously and happily. Alf K. was promoted to the mansab 
of 2,000 and 1,500 horse. I gavef an order to the chief 
Diwans to levy the pay of the force of servants of the State 
who had been appointed for service at Qandahar out of the 
jagirs of IQiurram, which were in the Sarkar of Hi^ar, and in 
the Du-ab and those regions. In the place of these he might 
take possession of districts from the Subah of Malwa and the 
Deccan, and Gujarat and Khandesh, wherever he wished. 
Presenting Af^l K. with a dress of honour I gave him leave 
to go. An order was passed that the Subahs of Gujarat, 
Malwa, the Deccan and Khandesh should be handed over to 
him (Hburram), and he might take up a permanent residence 
wherever he might wish, and employ himself in the adminis- 
tration of those regions. He was to send quickly the sazawuls 
who had been appointed to bring the servants of the State 
who had been summoned to my presence on account of the 
disturbance at Qandahar. After that he was to look after 
his own charge, and not depart from order: otherwise, he 
would repent. On this day I gave the best tipchdq horse that 
was in my private stable to 'Abdu-llah K. On the 26t}) 
Gaidar Beg and Wall Beg, envoys of the ruler of Persia, had 
an audience. After performing the ceremony of salutation 
they produced a letter from the »Shah. My son f^an Jahan, 

* Compare IqbAl-nSma, 194 and 196. It is stated there that Nur 
Jahin would not allow Af?al K. to have an audience, and that ho was 
dismissed without gaining his object. 

t See Iqb&l'n&ma, 196, where it is said that «hcsc orders were imt 
really given by Jahangir, but were Nur Jahan'b. 



240 


aoooi^g to (Oder, having come post fitom Mnhan, vtuted 
on me. He j^eeented as ofieiings 1,000 mnhn, 1,000 rapeee, 
and 18 hinaee. Mah&hat K. was joomoted to the mansah of 
6,000 pemcmal and 6,000 hotse. I gave an elephant to Minh 
Rustam. B&ja Sitang Deo was appointed sasawul to Rija 
Bix Singh Deo. I-toId him to produce him at Court as quickly 
as possible. On* the 7th of the Divine month of Agar the 
ambassadors of ^h ‘Abbas, who had come at difieient times, 
were presented with dresses of honour and their expenses, 
and given leave to go. The letter he had sent by l^dar Beg 
making excuses in the matter of Qandahar has been (pven in 
this record of good fortune (Iqb&l-nama) along with my reply. 

Litter ov thx Ejnc ox Persia. 

(After compliments, and good wishes for that “brother 
dear as life *' the letter proceeds as foUows): 

“You will be aware that after the death of the Nawab ^ah 
Jannat-makan (^lah ^iahmasp) great misfortunes befel Persia. 
Many territories which belonged to our saintly family passed 
out of possession, but when this suppliant at the throne of 
Grace b^me sovereign, he, by God’s help, and the excellent 
measures of friends, recovered the hereditary lands which 
were in the possession at enemies. As Qandahar was held by 
the agents of your lofty famity, I regarded you as myself, and 
did not make any objection. Prom feelings of unity and 
brotherhood we waited, thinking that yon would, after the 
manner of your anoestoisf who are in Paradise, voluntarily 
take the matter into your consideration. When you nej^oeted 
to do this, I repeated^, by writing and verbal messages, 
directly and indirectly, asked fox the disposal of the questioir, 
thinlring that perhaps that petty country (QandaW) was 
not regarded as worthy your notice. Yon said several 
times that by makbg over the territory to our family, the 
notions of enemies and censurers would be disposed of, and 

• EUiot. VI. 280. 

t This sUndM to the facts that Humiyfia promised flhkb T*hinlsp 
that he would restore the fort after he hed ooaquarod India, and that 
Akbar had acknowledged the justice of Persia'a claim. 



241 


prateiB, envien, and &iilt>finden would be put to silence. 
A isetion* fonnerly delayed the aettkinent <d this matter. 
As the truth of the affair was known to friends and enemies, 
and as no clear answer, either of refusal or concession, came 
from you, it occurred to me that I would go to Qandahar 
to see it, and to hunt. In this way the agents of my dis- 
tinguished brother, in accordance with the ties of friendship 
which exist between ns, might welcome us and wait upon us. 
By this means the relationship of union would be renewed, 
and would be made evident to the world, and the tongues of 
the envious and the evil-spealdng be shortened. With this 
view, I set off without apparatus for taking forts, and when 
I came to Fatah I sent a rescript to the governor of Qandahar, 
mentioning that I intended to see the place and hunt there. 
I did this in order that he mi^t treat me as a guest. We also 
called the honourable ^waja Baqi Kurkaraq, and sent a 
message to the governor and the other officers in the fort tc 
the effect that there was no difference betwem Your Majesty 
and ourselves, and that we were aware of each other’s terri- 
tories, and that we were coming to see the country. There- 
fore they were not to act in such a way as to give umbrage or 
to vex anyone. They did not receive the conciliatory order 
and message in the proper way, but showed obstinacy and a 
rebellious spirit. When I came to the fort I again called the 
honourable aforesaid (E. Baqi), and sent him with the message 
that I had directed my troops not to invest the fort till the 
lapse of ten days. They did not receive the wholesome ad vice, 
and were stubborn in their opposition. As there was nothing 
more to be done, the Persian army set about taking the fort, 
though it was in want of appliances, and soon levelled the 
walls and bastions with the ground. The garrison became 
straitened, and asked for quarter. We, too, maintained the 
ties of love which had existed from of old between the two 
exalted dynasties, and the brotherly relation which whs 
formed between you and me when you were prince (Mina), 
and which was an object of envy to contemporary sovereigns, 

* The olauee is very obaeuie. Perhaps it is part of what Jahangir 
had said. 



242 


and from my innate kindness forgave their errors and ofiEences. 
Encompassing them with favours, I sent them safe and sound 
to your Court along with l^idar Beg QurbaeU, who is one of 
the sincere $ufis of this family. Of a truth, the foundation 
of love and union, both inherited and acquired, on the part 
of this seeker after affection, hae not grown old or decayed, 
and is strong so that no rupture in it can take place on account 
of any things which may have transpired owing to the action 
of Fate. 

VXBSX. 

Between us and you there cannot be trouble. 

There can be naught but love and trust. 

It is hoped that you, too, will preserve your affection 
tor us, and that you will not approve of certain strange actions, 
and that if any suspicion about friendship arise you will 
endeavour by your innate goodness and continual love to 
efface it. May the ever- vernal flower of union and cordiality 
remain in bloom, and every effort be made to strengthen the 
foundations of concord, and to cleanse the fountains of agree- 
ment which regulate temperaments and territories. You 
will regard all our dominions as belonging to you, and will 
extend your friendship to everyone (in them ?), and will 
proclaim that it (Qandahar) has been given up to him (‘Abbas) 
without any objection, and that such trifles are of no import- 
ance, and that though the governor and officers who were 
in the fort did some things which were obstacles to friendship, 
yet what took place was done by you and me. They per- 
formed the duties of service and life devotion. It is certain, 
too, that Your Majesty will be gracious to them, and will 
treat them with royal kindness, and will not shame me before 
them. What more need 1 write? May thy star-brushing 
standards ever be associated with the Divine aids I” 

Reply to the Letter of Shah ‘Abbas. 

“ Unfeigned thanks, and pure thanksgivings are due to the 
sole object of worship (God) lor that the maintenance of the 
c^unpacts and treaties of great princes is the cause of the order 
oi Creation and the repose of mankind. A proof of this is 



243 


the haimony and unity which existed between us and the 
exalted family (of Persia), and which were increased during 
our time. These things were the envy of contemporary 
sovereigns. The glorious Shah — ^the r>tar of heaven’s army, 
the ruler of the nations, the adomei of the Kayani tiara, the 
fitting occupant of the throne of Chosroes, the fnutful tree 
of the gardens of sovereignty, the splendid nursling of the 
parterres of prophecy and saintship, the cream of the &fawi 
dynasty — hath without ground or reason, engaged in dis- 
turbing the rose-garden of love and friendship and brother- 
hood in which for long periods there has been no possibility 
of a breath of confusion. Clearly the methods of union and 
concord among princes require that they make oaths of 
friendship to one another, and that there should be perfect 
spiritual agreement between them. There should be no need 
of physical contact, and still less should there be any necessity 
for visiting one another’s countries for ^ shooting and spec- 
tacle ’ (aair u Mkdr). 

VXBSX. 

Alas, a hundred times for the love passing thought ! 

“ By the arrival of your loving letter apologizing for the 
‘ spectacle and shooting ’ {sair u ^ikdr) of Qandahar, which 
came with the honourable Haidar Beg and Wall Beg, I became 
apprised of the bodily health of your angelic personality, and 
the flowers of joy were scattered over the world. Let it not 
be hidden from the world-adorning mind of my exalted and 
prosperous brother that until the arrival of the letter and 
messages brought by Zambil Beg no mention had been made b} 
you in letters or verbal messages of your wish for Qarulahai . 
At the time when we were engaged in visiting the delightful 
land of Kashmir, the Deccan lords, in their shortsightedness 
extended their feet beyond the limits of obedience, and trod 
the path of rebellion. Accordingly it became necessary' for 
me to chastise them. I moved my standards to Lahore, and 
appointed my worthy* son Shah Jahan to proceed again; • 
them with a victorious army. I myself was proceeding 
* Fanatid-t’baryiurddr. 



244 


Agi» wh«n Zambfl airived, and prednoed your loving 
letter. I took it aa a good omen, and went to Agra to put 
down the enemiea and the rebels. In the jewelled and pearl- 
dxc^ing letter there was no mmition of a wish for Qandahar. 
It was mentioned verbally by ZambU Beg. In reply, I said 
to him that I made no difficulty with regard to anything that 
my brother unshed. Please God, after settling the Deccan 
afiair, I would send him back in a manner suitable to my 
sovereignty. I also said that as he had made long matches 
he shoidd repose for some days in Lahore, and that I would 
aftmwards send for him. After coming to Agra, I sent for 
him and gave him leave to depart. As the favour of God 
attaches to this suppliant, I withdrew my mind from victories 
and proceeded to the Panjab. My intention was to smd him 
away, but after disposing of some necessary matters I went 
td ICA«ltinir on account of the hot weather. After coming 
there I sent for Zambil Beg in order to give him his leave. 
I also wished to show bim something of that delightful country . 
Meanwhile news came that my prosperous brother had come 
to take Qandahar. This idea had never entered my mind, 
and I was entirely astonished. What could there be in a 
petty village that he should set out to take it, and that he 
should shut his eyes to so much itiendship and brotherly 
feeling f Though truthful reporters sent the news, I could 
not credit it I Whmi it became certain I immediately gave 
orders to *Abdu-l-*A:ds K, not to transgress in any way the 
good pkaente of that prosperous brother. Up to now the 
relationahip of brotherhood stands firm, and I do not value 
the world in comparison therewith, nor do I consider any 
gift equal to it. But it would have been right and brotheriy 
that he should have waited till the arrival of the ambassador. 
Perhaps he would be successful in the object* and claim for 

* It is noteworthy that Jahangir does not attempt to. controvert the 
statement of ffiiih ‘Abbis that Qaniiahar rightfully belonged to Persia. 
Then is a veiy long aoeount in the 'Alam-Irft’l of the elaims of PMsia 
to Qandahar, and of tiie variona attempts made to realise than, until 
at last it was taken by Sbdh ‘Abble. See the account of the SSth year 
in the Teheran lithograph, p. 682, etc. The fort of aur- 

lendered on 11 fiba'bin, 1081, or June 11, 1622. The Shah’s letter 



246 


vrhich he had come. When he (^Abbas) takes such steps 
before the return of the ambassador, to whom will mankind 
ascribe the merit of keeping compacts and of preserving the 
capital of humanity and liberality 1 May Qod preserve you 
at aU times T* 

After I had given leave to the ambassadors, I devoted all 
my energy to urging on the Qandahar force, and presented 
my son ^an Jahan, who had been sent for for certain matters, 
with an elephant, a special horse, a jewelled sword and dagger, 
and a dress of honour. I sent him on as an advance guard, 
and directed him to remain in Multan until the arrival of 
Prince ^ahriyar with the victorious army. Baqir K., who 
was faujdar of Multan, was summoned to Court, and I ap- 
pointed *Ali-quli Beg Darman to assist him ( Kha n Jahan), 
and raised him to the mansab of 1,500. In the same manner, 
having raised M. Bustam to the mansab of 5,000, 1 appointed 
him to the duty of assisting that son with the (Qandahar) 
army. Laj^kar K. came from the Deccan, and waited on 
me, and was^also attached to tli:;t army. Allah-dad K. 
Af|]|jan, M. *Isa Tarkhan, Mukarram K., Ikram K., and 
other Amirs, who had come from the Deccan and from their 
fieb, after being presented with horses and dresses of honour, 
were sent with I^n Jahan. *Umdatu-s-saltona Ai^f K. was 
sent to Agra to bring to Court the whole of the treasure in 
muhrs and rupees which had accumulated from the beginning 
of the reign of my father. Afalat K., s. Htan Jahan, was 
promoted to the mansab of 2,000 and l,0(X) horse. Mu^m- 
mad Siafl^a, Bakhshi of Multan, had the title of Khan con- 
ferred on him. I gave leave to ^rif. Vakil of my fortunate 
son gb^-Parwis, to go with all possible haste, and bring my 
son to wait on me with the army of Behar, and writing a 
gracious farman with my own hand I urged him to come. 

On this day Mir Miran, the grandson of Shah Ni"matu-llah, 
died suddenly. I hope that he will be among the pardoned. 

announcing the fact and explaining hia procedure was presented by 
gaMar on 26 Abin, 1031 — early in November, 1622. He 
brought the officers of the garrison with him. See ^Alam-SrS*! and 
the Tuzuk text, 348 (annals of the 17th year). 




246 


A raging elephant threw down the huntsman Mirza Beg and 
killed him: I assigned his duties to Imam-wirdl. 

As in consequence of the weakness that came over me 
two years ago and still continues, heart and brain do not 
accord. I cannot* make notes of events and occurrences. 
Mow that Mu^tamid K. has come from the Deccan, and has 
liad the good fortune to kiss the threshold, as he is a servant 
who knows my temperament and understands my words, 
and was also formerly entrusted with this duty, I gave an 
order that from the date which I have written he shall here- 
after write them with his own hand, and attach them to my 
Memoranda. Whatever events may occur hereafter he should 
note after the manner of a diary, and submit them for my 
verification, and then they should be copied into a book. 

From this Place the Notes are Written by 
Mu‘tamid ^an.*}: 

As the whole of my world-opening mind was taken up with 
the preparation of the Qandahar army, and the remedy for 
that business, the unpleasant news that reached me of a 
change in the condition of I^urram, and his want of modera- 
tion, became a cause for aversion and dissension. 1 accord- 
ingly sent Musawi K., who is one of the sincere servants who 
knows my temperament, to that wretch (bt-davlat) to lay 
before him the threatening messages and my wishes, and to 
give admonitions that might sharpen his intelligence, so that 
by the guidance of good fortune he might awake from the 
dream of carelessness and pride, and that he (Musawi) having 
gained a (true) knowledge of his futile ideas and aims might 
hasten to my presence, and carry out whatever appeared to 
be necessary. On the Ist of the Divine month of Bahman 
the feast of my lunar weighing took place. At this auspicious 
ceremony Mahabat K., having come from Kabul, paid his 
respects, and was the recipient of special favours. I appointed 

♦ Elliot. VI. 280 . 

t Those words do not appear in the 1.0. MSS. And what is written 
in this chapter about t)io fates of Bbalil and Muhtariiu, etc., does not 
agree with Mu*tainid's writing in Iqb&l-nama. 



247 


Ya*qub K. Bada ldishi to Kabul, exalting him with the gift 
of drums. About this time report came from I'tibar K. 
from Agra that lAuriam, with the army of adversity, had left 
Mandu and started in that direction. He had evidently 
heard the news that the treasure had been sent for, and fire 
had fallen into his mind, and having let fall from his hand 
the reins of self-control, had started (with the idea) that on 
the road he might lay hold of the treasure. Accordingly I 
thought it best to proceed for a tour, and in order to hunt to 
the bank of the river of Sul^n-pur (the Beas). If that wretch 
by the guidance of error should place his foot in the desert of 
audacity, I might hasten farther forward and place the 
punishment of his unbecoming behaviour in the skirt of his 
fortune. If matters turned out in any other way I might take 
steps accordingly. With this purpose, on the 17th of the 
same month, at an auspicious hour, I marched. Mahabat K 
was dignified with a dress of honour. Rs. 1,00,000 were 
ordered to be given to Mirza Rustam and Rs. 2,00,000 to 
‘Abdu-llah K. by way of advance of pay. I sent Mirza IQian, 
s. Zain K., with a gracious farman to my fortunate son Shah 
Parwiz, and renewed my urgency for his attendance. Raja 
Sarang Deo had gone to summon Raja Bir Singh Deo: he 
came, and having paid his respects, reported that the Raja, 
with a proper force and an equipped army, would join me at 
Thanesar. At this time constant reports* came from I‘tibar 
K. and other servants of the State from Agia that IQiurram 
in revolt and disloyalty {fi%-daulai£%) had changed what was 
due by him for rearing into undutifulnes8es,t and having 
placed the foot of ruin in the valley of ignorance and error, 
had started in that direction. They therefore did not con- 
sider it advisable to bring the treasure, and were engaged in 
strengthening the towers and gates, and providing things 
necessary for the defence of the fort. Similarly a report 
came from Asaf K. that the wretch had tom oil the veil of 
respect, and turned his face towards the valley of ruin, and 
that the odour of good came not from the manner of his 

• Elliot, VI. 384. 

t IJuqftq ba ^nqiiq. “rights into wrongs.’* 



248 


•ppzoach. As it was not for the advantage of the State to 
bring the treasure, he had entrusted it to Qod, and waa 
himseU on the way to wait on me. Aeoordingly, having 
oroBsed the river at Sul^pSr, suooeesive marches I pro* 
seeded to punish that one of dadc fortune, and gave an order 
that hencdorth they should call him Bi-iaviat (wretch). 
Wherever in this record of fortune " Bi-daulat ** is mentioned 
it will r^er to him. From the Irindnesses and favours he* 
stowed upon him I can say that up till the present time no 
king has conferred such on his son. What my reverend father 
did for my brothers I have done for his servants, ^ving them 
titles, standards, and drums, as has been recorded in the 
preceding pages. It will not be hidden from the readers 
of this record of prosperity what affection and interest I have 
bestowed on him. My pen’s tongue foils in ability to set them 
forth. What shall I say of my own sufferings t In pain and 
weakness, in a warm atmosphere that is extremely unsuited 
to my health, 1 must still ride and be active, and in this state 
must proceed against such an undutiful son. Many servants 
cherished by me for long years and raised to the dignity of 
nobility, whom I ought to employ to-day in war against the 
Uzbeg or the Persian, I must punish* for his vilmiess and 
destroy with my own hand. Thank God that he has given 
me such capacity to bear my burdens that I can put up with 
all this, and go on in the same path, and reckon them as light. 
But that which weighs heavily on my heart, and places my 
eager temperament in sorrow is this, that at such a time when 
my prosperous sons and lo 3 ral officers should be vying with 
each other in the service against Qandahar and Khurasan, 
which would be to the renown of the Sultanate, this inaus- 
picious one has struck with an axe the foot of his own 
dominion, and become a stumbling-block in the path of the 
enterprise. The momentous affair of Qandahar must now 
be postponed, but I trust that Almighty God will remove 
these griefs from my heart. 

* 1 rather think the meaning is ** he by hie baaeness and iUfatednees 
has capitally pnnished them, and has (as it ware) slain them by his 
own hand,” the meaning being that they will fall in the civil war about 
to take place. 



249 


At this time it was leported to me that Mu^tarim K., the 
eonuoh, Beg Zil>l<qadT, and Fida’i K., the Master of the 
Ceremonies, had allied themselves with Bi-daulat, and opened 
the gates of correspondence with him. As it was no time 
for mildness and winking at matters, I imprisoned all three, 
and as, after malring inquiry into the circumstances, no doubt 
remained as to their falseness to their salt, and about the evil 
designs and malevolence of IQulil and Muhtarim, and as 
Amirs like Httzi Rustam swore to the insincerity and 
malevolence of Sj^lil, having no remedy I punished them* 
capitally. Fida’i K., the dust of whose sincerity was free 
uf suspicion and pure, I brought out- of confinement and 
promoted. I sent Baja R&z-afzun by post (iak-chaukt) to 
my son 9iah Parwiz that he might bring him with all haste 
to wait on me; so that Bi-daulat might be brought to punish- 
ment for his improper conduct. Jawahir K., the eunuch, was 
appointed to the post of Iktmam-i-datb&r-i-tna^aU (superin- 
tendent of the harem). 

On the 1st of Isfandarm&s the royal army arrived at Nur- 
saray. On this day a report came from I’tibar K., that 
Bi-daulat had arrived in all haste in the neighbourhood of 
Agra, in the hope that before the fort was strengthened, the 
gates of strife and mischief might be opened, and he might 
attain his end. When he arrived at Fathpfir, he found the 
gates closed against him, and, being struck with the disgrace of 
min, he had halted. The ^n-^anan and his son and many 
of the royal Amirs attached to the Deccan and Qujarat had 
come with him as companions on the road of rebellion and 
ingratitude. MQsavd K. saw him at Fathp&r, and showed 
him the royal orders, and it was settled that he should send 
his servant Q&ti ’Abdu-l-*Aaz with him to Court to put his 
requests before me. He sent to Agra his servant Sundar,t who 
was the ringleader of the people 'of error and the chief of the 
se>litioos, to take possession of the treasures and hidden wealth 
of those servants of the State who were at Agra. Amongst^ 

* Oompeie IqUU-nlma, 190. 

t This is the men whom Jahangir had mads Btja BifcramSjit . 

t Elliot. VI. 38S. 



250 


nthers he entered the house of Lae^ar K., and seized 
Rs. 1».00,(X)0. In the same manner, wherever he suspected 
t here was property in the houses of other servants (of the 
C oiiFt), he stretched out his hand to seize it, and took posses- 
sion of all that he found. When nobles like IQmn-Uianan, who 
had been distinguished with the rank of Atalik and arrived at 
the age of seventy years, made their faces black with rebellion 
and ingratitude, how could one complain of others ? It may 
be said that his very nature was seditious and ungrateful. 
His father (Bairam K.) at the end of his life behaved in the 
same unbecoming way towards my reverend father. He, 
following the example of his father, at his age made himself 
accursed and rejected to all eternity. 

In the end a wolf's cub becomes a wolf 

Although he grow up with man. (Sa*di.) 

On this day Musawi K. arrived with *Abdu-l-*Aziz, the 
envoy of Bi-daulat. As his requests were unreasonable, I did 
not allow him to speak, but handed him over to Mahabat to 
be kept in prison. On the 5th of the month I pitched on the 
bank of the river of Ludiyana (the Sutlej). I promoted I^n 
A'zam to the mansab of 7,0(K) with 5,000 horse. Raja 
Bharat, the Bandila, from the Deccan, and Dayanat K. from 
Agra, came and waited on me. I pardoned the (fences of 
Dayanat K., and gave him the same mansab that he had 
previously held. Baja Bharat was raised to the mansab of 
1,500 and 1,000 horse, and Musawi K. to that of 1,000 and 
:^()0 horse. On Thursday, the 12th, in the pargana of 
Thanesar, Raja Bir Singh Deo, having waited on me, reviewed 
liis army and elicited great praise. Raja Sarang Deo was 
promoted to the mansab of 1,5(X) with 6(X) horse. In Kama! 
Asaf K., coming from Agra, lifted up the head of honour in 
kissing my stirrup. His coming at this time was the herald of 
victory. Nawazi^ K., s. Sa‘id K., having arrived from 
Gujarat, paid his respects. When Bl-daulat was at Burhan- 
pur, at his request T had appointed Baqi K. to Junagafh. He 
had been ordered to come to Court, and now came and shared 
n my service. As my march from Lahore took place without 



251 


previous notice, and time did not admit of delay or reflection, 

I came with the few Amirs who were in attendance. Until I 
arrived at Sihrind only a few men had the good fortune to 
accompany me, but after passing beyond it, great numbers 
of the army came in from all sides and quarters. Before 
arrival at Delhi such a force had come together that in any 
direction in which one looked the whole plain was occupied by 
troops. 

As it was reported that Bl-daulat had left Fathpfir and was 
coming in this direction, and making continuous marches 
towards Delhi, I gave the victorious army orders to ]>ut on 
their chUtcks (quilted coats) In tliis disturbaiu'e the pivot of 
the management of affairs and the aiTangement of the army 
were entrusted to Mahabat K. The command of the van- 
guard was given to ‘Abdu-llah K. Of the selected young men 
and experienced sipdhis, whoever was asked for by him was 
enrolled in his corps. I ordered him to march a koss ahead 
of the other forces. He was also entrusted with the intelli- 
gence department and the control of the routes. I was 
ignorant of the fact that he was in league with Bl-daulat, and 
that the real object of that evil-natured one was to send 
news from my army to him. Previously to this he used to 
bring long written slips of true and false news, saying that his 
spies had sent them from that place. The purport was that 
they (the spies) suspected some. of my servants of being in 
league with Bi-daulat, and of sending him news. Had I been 
led away by his intrigues and become alarmed at this time 
when the wind of disturbance was blowing strongly I would 
have been obliged to destroy many of my servants. Although 
some faithful servants suspected his evil intentions and 
untruthfulness, the time was not one for removing the Jveil 
openly from the face of his deeds. I guarded my eye and 
tongue from doing anything which might carry terror into his 
ev^I mind, and showed him more attention and favour than 
before, with the idea that possibly he would be struck with 
shame, and might turn away from his evil deeds, and give up 
his evil nature and sedition. That rejected one to all eternity, 
in whom a tendency to vileness and falsity was natural, did 



252 

not fail to do what was in accordance with himself, as will be 
related hereafter. 

The tree* that is bitter in its nature 
If you plant it in the garden of Paradiae. 

And water it from the eternal stream thereof. 

If you pour on its root pure Honey, 

In the end it shows its natural (quality. 

And it bears the same bitter fruit. 

In fine, when I was near Delhi, Say3dd Bahwa Bui^ari, 
$adr K., and Raja Eaehan Das came out of the city, and had 
the good fortune to kiss my stirrup. Baqir K., faujdar of 
Oudh, also on this day came to the victorious camp. On the 
25th of the month, passing by Delhi, I pitched my camp on 
the bank of the Junma. Oirdhar, s. Ray Sal Darbari, having 
come from the Deccan, had the honour to pay his respects 
He was promoted to the mansab of 2,000 and 1,500 horse, and 
obtained the title of Raja, and was clothed in a dress of 
honour. Ziabar-dast K., Master of the Ceremonies, was 
honoured with a standard. 

^ The lines come from Firdusfs satire on MabmQd of Ghasni. 



THE EIGHTEENTH 
NEW YEAR’S FEAST AFTER THE 
AUSPICIOUS ACCESSION 

On the eve of Tuesday, the 20th of Jumada-l-awwal, a.h. 1032 
(March 10, 1623), the sun that lights the world entered his 
house of honour in Aries, and the eighteenth year from the 
beginning of my reign commenced auspiciously and happily. 
On this ^y I heard that Bi-daulat, having gone to the neigh- 
bourhood of Mathura, had encamped the army tainted with 
ruin in the pargana of 9^hp6r, and reviewed 27,000 cavalry. 
It is hoped that they will soon be subdued and miserable. 
Raja Jay Singh, grandson* of Raja Man Singh, came from his 
native country, and had the good fortune to kiss my stirrup. 
I dignified R&ja Bir Singh Deo, than whom in the Rajput 
caste there is no greater Amir, with the title of Maharaja, and 
promoted his son Jograj to the mansab of 2,000 with 1,000 
horse. Sayyid Bahwa was printed with an elephant. As 
it was report to me that Bi-daulat was commg by the bank 
of the Jumna, the march of the victorious army in that 
direction was also decided on. The array of the army that 
resembled the waves of the sea was divided into the van, the 
right and left wings, the aOmuh, the tara^ (reserve), the 
chandawul (rear), etc., and arranged in a manner suitable to 
the circumstances and according to the locality. CSose upon 
this came the news that Bi-daulat, with the wretch 
Upuian, had turned his reins from the right road and gone 
towards the pargana Kotila, 20 koss towards the left, along 
with the brahman Sundar, who was his guide to the desert of 

^ He was the great-grandmm, being the son of Mahi Singh s. Jagat 
Sin^s. IflnSin^ 


47 


253 



254 


etroT, with Duab, s. Sian-]Asnsn, and many of the Amiwi 
who had accompanied him on the load of rebellion and 
rascality, such as Himmat E., Sar-buland E., ^rza E. 
‘Abid E., Jado Ray, Oday Ram, Ata^ E., Man^Qr E., and 
other mansabdars, who were attached to the Deccan, Gujarat, 
and Malwa, the recital of whom would take too long, and all 
his own servants, such as Raja Bhim, a. Rani, Rustam E., 
Bairam Beg, the Afghan Darya, Taqi, and others whom he 
had left to confront the royal army. There were five* armies 
(corps 1). Although nominally the command was in the 
hands of the wretch {bar-ga^^i-^rmgdr) Darab, yet in reality 
the leader and centre of the whole afiair was Sundar, of evil 
deeds. These men of darkened fortime pitched in the 
neighbourhood of Balfichpfir to their ruin. On the 8th I 
pitched at QabQlpQr. On this day the turn to take the tear 
feU upon Baqir E. We had left him behind all the rest. A 
body of the rebels attacked him on the match, and stretched 
out the hand of plunder. Baqir planted firmly the foot of 
courage, and succeeded in beating them back, ^waja Abfi>l> 
Qasan got news of this, and turned his reins to support him. 
^fote the arrival of the Ehwaja the tebeb {mardudSn), not 
being able to stand, had taken to flight. On Wednesday, the 
9th of the month, having separated 26,000 horse under the 
leadership of Afaf E., Ehwaja Abfi-l>]{^jssan, and ‘Abdu>llah 
E., I sent them to attack the rebels who did not look to the 
end of things. Qisim E., Lajhlcar E., Iradat E., Fida’i E., 
and other servants, to the number of 8,000 horse, were 
appointed to Ayaf E.’s force. Baqir E., Nfiru-d-d&i Quli, 
Ibralum Qusain Ead»|^ri. and others, to the number of 
8,000 horse, were appointed to support Abtl-l>9MHUi. 
Nawaa^ E., *Abdu*l-‘Adi E., ‘Az&su-llah, and many of the 
Barha and Amroha Sayyids, were ordered to accompany 
'Abdu-llah. In this army 10,000 horse were enrolled. 
Sundar had arranged the army of ruin and put forward thq 
foot of shamelessness. At this time 1 sent my special quiver 

* Put^fauf, Bat periiaps tiie word is binf, or Mtjh “root.** Oi 
it may be jUMd/aMj, " the hinder army.'* Appeiently the retaenoe 
is to the srrsngement of the royal army into five divisions. 



256 


by Zabar-das( K., Master of CemnoniSB, to *Abdu-llab K., 
t^t it might be the means of animating his seal. When the 
encounter the two sides took place, that black-faced one 
to all eternity, in whom the tendency to rebellion and ingrati- 
tude wan innate, taking to fli^t, joined the rebels. ‘AMu-1- 
*Ads K., the son of the I^n Dsuran, God knows whether 
knowingly or not, went off with him. Nawazi|l| K., Zabar- 
dast K., and ^r-l^unla, who weie in the corps of that shame- 
less one (*Abdu-]lah K.), planted firmly the foot of courage, 
and were not disturbed at his going. As the aid of Almighty 
God is ever near this suppliant, at this crisis, when a leader of 
the army such as ‘Adbu-llah K. threw 10,000 cavalry into 
confusion and joined the enemy, and there was nearty a great 
disaster, a shot from a -mysterious hand reached Sundar. At 
his fall the pUlats of the courage of the rebels shook. Ebwaja 
Abfi-l-Qasan also drove before him the army in front ef him 
and defeated it. Igaf K., when Baqir K. arrived, showing 
great activity, finished the affair, and a victory which nught 
the (ogn manual) of the victories of the age showed 
its htoe purpose Iiom the hidden world. Zabar-dast K.., 
Si^*)>amla, Silr-bacha, his son, and the son of Asad K., the 
architect, and Muhammad Qusain, brother of Khwaja Jahan, 
and a number of the Sayyids of Barha who were in the corps 
the black-fiused ‘Abdu-llah, having tasted the sweet 
flavoured wine of martyrdom, obtained everlasting life. 
‘Aasu-Uah, grandson of K. (Tukriya), being wounded 

by a gun-shot, got off safely. Although at this time the 
desertion that rejected hypocrite was a secret help, yet it 
is probable that if he had not performed this detestable action 
in the crisis of the hottle, many of the rebel leaders would 
have been killed or captured. It chanced that he was known 
to the common people by the title of La‘natu-llah (God’s 
curse), and as he h^ received this name from the hidden 
world I also called him by it. Hereafter, wherever the ezpres- 
non La*net»4Uk is used it refers to him. Briefly, after the 
rebels, whose end was evil, took to flight from the field of 
battle, and turned their faces towards the valley of ruin and 
could not reassemble, La*natu-llah, with all the rebeb, did not 



356 

ium his till he readied Bi-daulat, who was at a distance 
of 20 koss. 

When the news of the Tictozy of the seryants of the State 
reached this suppliant to Qod, he piostiated himself in thank- 
fulness for this gift, which was from the renewed fayour of 
A.l]ah. and summoned the loyal ones into his presence. On 
the next day they brought before me the head of Sundar. 
It appeared that when the ball struck him he gaye up his 
soul to the lords of hell, and they took his body to a neigh- 
bouring yillage to be burnt. When they were about to light 
the fire, an army appeared in the distance, and for fear lest 
they should be taken prisoners, eyeryone took to flifh^. The 
Muqaddam (head man) of the yillage cut off his head, and 
tor his own acquittal took it to IQia u A'gam, as it occurred in 
his jagir, He was brought to ine (with the head); the head 
was quite recognisable and had as yet undergone no change, 
Ittt they had cut off the eats for the sake of the pearls in them. 
No one knew by whose hand he had been shot. In conse- 
quence of his destruction, B!-daulat did not gird his loins 
again. One might say his good fortune and courage and under- 
standing lay in that dog of a Hindu. When, with a father like 
me, who in truth am his ostensible creator, and in my own 
lifetime haye raised him to the great dignity cd Sultanship, 
and denied him nothing, he acts in this manner, I appeal to 
the justice of Allah that He may neyer again regard him with 
fayour. Those servants who in this disturbance had done 
fitting service were honoured with more and more favour^ 
each according to his degree, ^waja Abfi-l-Hasan was 
raised to the mansab of 6,000, original and increased, Nawaa|h 
K. to that of 4,000 and 3,000 horse, Baqir K. to that of 3,0(X> 
and 500 horse, with drums, Ibrahim H^oain Ksf^i^an to that 
of 2,000 and 1,000 horse, ‘Aitoi-llah to that of 2,000 and 
1,000 horse, Nfim-d-din Quli to that of 2,000 and 700 horse, 
Baja Bam Das to that ci 2,000 and 1,000 horse, Ln^-Uah to 
that of 1,000 and 600 horse, Parwariflt K. to that of 1,000 and 
500 horse. If ail the servants were to be written in detail it 
would take too long. Briefly I remained at that place one 
day and marched on the next. Qian ‘Alam, having marched 



257 


from Allahabad, had the good fortune to kiss the threshold* 
On the 12th of the month 1 encamped at the village of 
Jhansa (?). 

On this day Sar-buland Ray came from the Deccan and 
waited on me, and was honoured with a special jewelled 
dagger, with a phul katara. ^Abdu-l-'AzIz K. and some of 
those who had gone with La^natu-IIah released themselves 
from the hand of Bi-daulat, and paid their respects, and 
represented that when La*natiidlah charged, they thought it 
was for a cavalry encounter. When they found themselves 
in the midst of the rebels they saw nothing for it but to 8ub> 
mit and pay their respects, but now they had found an oppor- 
tunity and had obtained the good fortune of kissing the 
threshold. Though they had taken 2,000 muhrs from 
Bi-daulat for their expenses, as the times were critical I made 
no inquiry, but accepted* their statement. 

On the 19th the Feast of the culmination was held, and 
many of the servants of the State were raised in mansab, and 
had suitable favours confcmd on them. 

Mir ‘A^du-d-daulah, having come from Agra, waited on 
me. He brought a vocabulary f of words that he had pre- 
pared. In truth he had taken much pains, and collected 
together all the words from the writings of ancient poets. 
There is no book like this in the science. 

Raja Jay Singh was raised to the mansab of 3,000 with 
1,400 horse, and a special elephant was presented to my son 
Shahriyar. The post of ' Arz-mukarrir (examiner of petitions) 
was conferred on Musawi K. Amanu-llah, s. Mahabat K,. 
was given the title of Hhan-zad [Qian, was favoured with a 
mansab of 4,000 personal and horse, and was honoured with a 
flag and drums. 

On the 1st of the Divine mouth of Urdibihi^t I pitched on 
the bank of the lake at Fathpur. Ttibar K. came from Agra 
and waited on me, and was graciously received. Mu^flar 
K., Mukarram K., and his brfither also came from Agra, and 
had the good fortune to wait on me. As I'tibar K. had done 

• “ Bought it as if it were genuine.” 
t Tho Farhang-i-Juh&ngiri, Rieu Cal., p. 496 b. 



258 


approved sen'ioe in the chaige of the Agta fort he was dignified 
with the title of Humtaz K., and I gave him the mansab of 
6,000 personal and 5,000 horse, and having bestowed on him 
a dress of honour, a jewelled sword, a horse, and a special 
elephant, I sent .him hack to his duty. Sayyid Bahwa was 
promoted to the mansab of 2,000 and 1,600 horse, Mukarram 
K. to that of 3,000 and 2,000 horse, and Hiwaja Qasim to 
that of 1.000 with 400 horse. On the 4th Mansur K. Farangi, 
whose circumstances have been recorded* in the procediiig 
pages (?). with his brotherf and Naubatt K. Dakhani, by the 
guidance of good fortune separated themselves from B!*daulat, 
and came into my service. T sent IQiawasf K. to my fortunate 
son %ah Parwiz. Mirza Isa Tarl^an, having come from 
Multan, had the good fortune to kiss the threshold. A special 
sword was given to Mahabat K. On the 10th the camp was 
pitched in the pargana of Hindaun. Mansur K. (the Farangi} 
was raised to the mansab of 4,000 personal and 3,000 horse, 
and that of Naubat§ K. to that of 2,000 and 1,000 horse. On 
the 11th was a halt. As on this day a meeting with my 
fortunate son ^ah Parwiz had been arranged, I ordered that 
the powerful princes and the illustrious Amirs and all the 
devoted servants should go out to meet him, and bring him 
to wait on me in a fitting manner. After midday had passed, 
at an auspicious chosen hour he kissed the ground and 
illuminated the forehead of his sincerity. After the usual 
salutations had been performed and the customary ceremonies 
gone through I embraced my fortunate son with the greatest 
pleasure and affection, and loaded him with more and more 
favours. At this time news came that Bi-daulat, when he 
was passing through the township (hawSCi) of the pargana of 
Amber, which was the hereditary abode of Raja Man Singh, had 
sent a band of scoundrels and plundered that cultivated spot. 

* Whei'e is this account ? He ia mentioned later, p. 359 of text. 
'Perhaps ha is the Armenian mentioned in the 15th year os Zu-l- 
Qarnain. But an Armenian would hardly be called a Farangi. 

t The MSS. have his brother Maidirur.’' 

% The MSS. have a name that is hot Naubat, and perliaps is Yunas 
or Yuna^ KhSu. 

§ Yunas or Yunash in MSS. 



On the 12th I pitched outside the village of Sarwali, I 
had pieviously sent l^bash K. (Abyssinian) to repair the 
buildings at Ajmir.* I promoted my fortunate son Wiah 
Parwiz to the high mansab of 40,000 and 30,000 horse. As it 
was reported that Bl-daulat had sent off Jagat Singh, s. Raja 
Base, to his own country to raise disturbances in the hills 
of the Fanjab, I promoted ^diq K., chief Bakh8hi,to the 
governorship of that province, and ordered him to punish him, 
giving him a dress of honour, with a sword and an elephant, 
and making up his mansab, original and increased, to 4,000 
personal and 3,000 horse. I abo honoured him with a stan- 
dard (iugh) and drums. 

At thf r time it was reported to me that the younger brothei-s 
of MirzS Badi'u-z-zaman, s. Ulrza ^ahnilA, who was known 
as Fathpuri, had attacked him unawares and killed him. About 
this time his brothers came to Court and paid their respects. 
His own mother also waited on me, but did not make a claim, 
as was proper, for her son’s blood, and (so) proceedings''^ 
could not be taken according to law. Although his dis[x>si- 
tion was so bad that his murder was not to be regretted, J)iit 
on the contrary was opportune and advantageous, yet, as 
these wretches had shown such audacity with regard to theii 
elder brother, who was to them in the position of a father. 
I ordered them to be put in gaol, and afterwards what wss 
deemed proper should be done to them. On the 21st Kaja 
Gaj Singh and Ray Suraj Singh arrived from their jagiis, 
and had the good fortune to kiss my stirrup. Mu'izzu-I-niiilk. 
whom I had sent to Multan to summon niy son iftan JahAn. 
came and waited on me, and presented me with a letter about 
his severe illness and weakness. He had sent his son A^alat K . 
with 1,000 horee to wait on me, and expressed great i;cgret at 
being deprived of the honour of meeting me. As his apology 
was evidently sincere, I accepted it. On the 25th my fort unu te 
son Prince Panviz, with the victorious army, was sent in 

* Itehaps it means that qifdf or retaliatum cuuJd not be inflicted. 
See Ma'&siriirl.umara, III. 335, and Iqbftl-iiania, 204. B'vidciitly tlie 
mother did not want to prosecute. It is prolxible that his iniirdc*ii>r.<: 
were only hi.s half-brothers. 



260 


pursuit to overthrow Bi-daulat. The reins of authority over 
the powerful Prince, and the centre of the ordering of the 
victorious army, were 'given into the hand of Mu’taminu-d- 
daula Mahabat K. Of the illustrious Amirs and life-sacri- 
ficing brave men who were in attendance on the Prince of 
lofty fortune, this is the detail. 

IBian "Alam, Maharaja* Gaj Singh, Fa^l E., Ba§j^d K., 
Raja Oirdhar, Raja Ram Das Kachhwaha, Khwaja Mir 
‘AMu-l-'Asiz, *Arizu-llah, Asad K., Parwarifh K., Ikram K., 
Sayyid Hisbar K., Lu|fu-llah, Ray Narayan Das, and others 
to the number of 40,000 horse, with much artillery. Rs. 
2,000,000 (twenty lakhs) of treasure were sent with them. 
At a projiitious hour they were started with my son, and 
bridle to bridle with victory. Fa^I E. was appointed Bakhshi 
and newBwriter to the victorious army. A special dress of 
honour was bestowed on the Prince, with a nadin of gold 
brocade, and pearls on the collar and skirt worth Rs. 41,000, 
prepared in the royal establishment, and a private elephant 
of the name Ratan Gaj, tenf female elephants, a private horse, 
and a jewelled sword, the value of the whole of which was 
Rs 77,000. These were all given to the Prince. Nfir Jahan 
Begam also gave him a dress of honour, a horse, and an ele- 
phant, as is the custom. To Mahabat E. and the other Amirs, 
according to their standing, horses, elephants, and dresses of 
honour were presented . The immediate attendants of the prince 
were also honoured with favours. On this day Musaflar E. 
received a dress of honour on appointment to the post of 
chief Bakhshi. On the first of the Divine month of ^urdad 
Prince Dawar-ba ldiflh . s. Hhusrau, was appointed to Gujarat, 
and Hian A'um to the high dignity of tutor to him. I con- 
ferred on the prince a horse, an elephant, a dress of honour, 
a private jewelled dagger, a standard (<ugh), and drums. 
Mian A'^m, NawaziA E. and other servants were honoured 
with presents according to their standing. Iradat K. was 
appointed Bakhshi in place of Fa^l E. Ruknu-s-sal(ana 

* The MSS. have Mahlrija Oaj Singh, and they also have the names 
Mansur hhSn, Sar-buland RSy and Lasbhar K. 

f “Two” in MSS. 



261 


Afbf K. exalted hie head with the dignity of the Subadaiahip 
of Bengal and Orissa. A special dress of honour, with a 
jewelled sword, were conferred on him. Abh Talib (f.e., 
^ista K.), his son, was appointed to accompany him, and 
promoted to the mansab of 2,000 with 1,000 horse. On 
Saturday, the 9th, corresponding with the 19th Bajab, a.h. 
1032 (May^9, 1623), the camp was pitched at the Ana-Sagar 
lake outside Ajmir. Prince Dawar^ba ldiA . being honoured 
with the mansab of 8,000, and 3,000 horse, was granted 
Rb. 2,00,000 of treasure for the expenses of the army which 
accompanied him. Rs. 1,00,000 I also gave as an advance 
to H^n A‘^m. Allah^yar. s. Iftil^ar Beg, who was in the 
service of my fortunate son ^lah Parwiz, was at his request 
granted a standard. Tatar K. took leave on his appointment 
to the charge of Fort Gwalior. Raja Gaj Singh was appointed 
to the mansab of 5,000, with 4,000 horse. 

On this day news came from Agra that Her Highness 
(hamt) Maryaniu-z-zaniani,* by the decree of God, had died. 
I trust that Almighty God will envelop her in the ocean of 
His mercy. Jagat Singh, s. Rana Karan, having come from 
his native place, had the good fortune to pay his respects. 
Ibrahim K. Fath-jang, governor of Bengal, had sent thirty- 
four elephants by way of offering, and they were submitted to 
me. Baqir K. was appointed faujdar of Oudh, and Sadat K. 
to the Du-ab. The Mir Mushrif was made Diwan-i-buyutat. 

On the 12th of the Divine month of Tir a report came from 
the officials of Gujarat with the good news of victory and 
conquest. The particulars of this summary are that I had 
granted the Subah of Gujarat, the abode of Sultans of high 
dignity, to Bi-daulat as a revrard for his victory over the Rana, 
as has been fully I'elated in the preceding pages. Sundar. 
the brahman, administered and protected the country. When 
futile ideas entered his ungrateful mind, he sent for that dog 
of a Hindu, who was always shaking the chain of enmity and 
perversity, along with Himniat K., Sharza K., Sar-afraa K.,and 
many of the royal servants who were fiefholders in the pro- 
vince. Sundar*8 brother Kunhar was appointed in his room 
* Jahangir’9 mother. 



When Suiidar was killed, and Bi-daulat retreated after his 
defeat to Mandh, the province of Gujarat was put in the 
charge of La‘natu-llah as his fief, and Kunhar was sent for 
along with ^fi K., the diwan. At the same time the treasure, 
the jewelled throne on which five lakhs had been expended, 
and the pardala (belt) on which two lakhs had been spent — and 
which things had been prepared as a present for myself — ^were 
also sent for. $afi K. was the brother’s son (text says 
“ brother ”) of Ja‘far Beg, who received in my father’s service 
the title of Asaf K., and was married to a daughter of 
Nur Jahan’s brother, who by my favour had received 
the title of Asaf K. An elder daughter was the wife of Bi- 
daulat. Both daughters were by one mother, and Bl-daulat 
expected that on account of this connection K. would be 
on his side. But an eternal decree had gone forth for ^afi K.’s 
loyalty and prosperity, and that he should attain to high rank ! 
Accordingly, Almighty God made him loyal and the performer 
of good deeds, as will now be described. In short, the faithless 
(bl-foafd) La"natu-llah sent his eunuch named Wafa-dar to be 
governor of that country, and he, with a few ragamuffins 
(hi-sar-u-fd) entered Ahmadabad, and took possession of the 
city. As ^fi K. had made up his mind to be loyal, he 
courageously looked after the servants, and collected a force, 
and won the hearts of the people. Some days before Kunhar 
came out of the city he (^fi) encamped on tlie bank, of the 
Kankariya lake, and thence hastened to Mahmudabad, giving 
out openly that he w^as going to Bi-daulat. Seei'etly, he 
opened communication and made arrangements to be loyal 
with Nahir K., Sayyid Dilir K., Nanu* K., Afghan, and other 
devoted servants of the State, who were waiting in their own 
jagirs. He awaited his opportunity, ^lih, a servant of BI- 
daulat, who w'as faujdar of the Sarkar of Pitlad, and had a 
good force with him, heard rumours that ^fi K. entertained 
other ideas. Kunharf had ako discovered this, but as l^fi K. 
soothed them and w^as very cautious and careful in his conduct, 

* MS. 181 has B&bfilQiSn. 

t MS. 181 has Kuhnar or Kunhar, and it seems that it is a name, 
and not merely ** younger brother.” The Iqbal-nftma, 205, has 
Kuuliar 



263 


they could not move hand or foot. §alih. for fear leif. §afi K.: 
abandoning dissimulation, should stretch his hand towards 
the treasure, exercised foresight, and went farther on with 
the treasure, taking nearly Rs. 10,00,000 to Bi-daulat at 
Mandii. Kunhar (or the younger brother ?) also, having 
seized the jewelled pardo/a, started after him, but could not 
take the throne on account of its weight. §afT K., knowing, 
this was his opportunity, changed his place from Mahmhdabad 
to the pargana of Karang,* which is to the left of the usual 
road, where Nanu K. was, and armnged by letter and verbal 
messages with Nahir K. and other loyal Servants that each of 
them should ride from his jagir with the force that lie had, 
and at the hour of sunrise; which was the morning of prosperity 
for people of good fortune, and the evening of ruin to those 
who practised villainy, enter the city by the gate to which 
each was opposite. He (^f!) left his women in tlie aforesaid 
pargana, and, in company with Nanfi (Babu ?) K.. came at 
dawn to the outskirts of the city. He halted for a short time 
in the Sha'banf garden until it had hoconie light and friend 
could be distinguished from enemy. After the world-illumi- 
nating sun of good foitune (had risen), when he found the gate 
of prosperity open, though he could see no trace of Nilhir K. 
and the other loyalists, yet lest possibly the enemy might 
obtain information and fasten the gates of the fort ho placed 
his confidence in God who gives victory, and entered the 
city by the Sarangpur gate. About this time Nahir K. also 
arrived, and, entering by the gate, came into the city. The 
eunuch of La'natu-llah. having ascertained the unfailing good 
fort'Une of (Jahangir), took refuge in the house of ^aij^ Hai-* 
dar, grandson of Ni^^m Wajihu-d-din. The royal servants 

♦ Ksrij in lext. See Jarrett. II. 253. But pt^rheps it Should bo 
Kaira. 

t It is Sha"b&ii in Nos. 181 and 305. The Umous garden of Ahma- 
dabad is the Shahi, for which see the Bombay Gazetteer, vol. f<u* 
Ahmadabad, p. 283. But besides being Sha blii in the MSS. it is 
also Sha'bAn in the Iqbai-nZma, 207. The Sb^hl garden lies to the 
north of Ahmadabad, and Sail was at the south or south -cast of the city. 
Phrhaps the Sb%*b8n garden was near the Malik Sha'hAii lake, which 
was east of the city, and is referred to in Bombaj' Gazette-er, p. 18. 
The Bitgb ^a^bftn is also rofoned to in Bayley s Gujarat. 236. 



264 


of approved aervice, having proclaimed their victory with 
loud voices, set to work to strengthen the towers and gates. 
They sent men to the houses of Mu^mmad Taqi, Bi*daulat*8 
diwan, and of lEjhsan Beg, his Bakhshi, and seized them, 
^i]^ Gaidar himself came and informed K. that the 
eunuch of La*natu-llah was in his house, and they tied his 
hands to his neck, and brought him. Having imprisoned a 
number of Bi-daulafls servants and dependants, they engaged, 
in keeping order in the city. The jewelled throne, the cash 
of Bs. 2,00,000, and the property and effects of Bi*daulat and 
his men in the city, came into their possession. When this 
news reached Bi-daulat, he sent off La‘natu-llah with Himmat 
K., Sharza K., Sar-afraz K., Qabil Beg, Bustam Bahadur, 
§alih Bada khshi . and other criminals. What with royal ser- 
vants and his own men, he had some 5,000 or 6,000 horse, 
i^fi K. and Nahir K., becoming aware of this, planted firmly 
the foot of courage, and employed themselves in encouraging 
their men and collecting forces. Whatever cash and valuabldii 
they could obtain, even to the throne, which they broke up, 
they divided amongst both the old and new troopers as pay. 
Baja Ealyan, Zamindar of fdar (printed wrongly Andfir 
and the son of Lai Gopi and all the Zamindars from every 
quarter, were summoned into the city. A good number was 
thus assembled. La'natu-Uah did not wait for auxiliaries, 
and in the space of eight days came from Mandii to Baroda. 
The loyal party, by the guidance of their courage, and in 
reliance on God, came out of the city and encamped on the 
bank of the Kankariya Lake. It occurred to Us^natu-llah that 
if he came on quickly, the rope of order of the loyal might 
be broken. When he obtained news of the coming out of the 
loyal servants, drawing in the reins of ruin, he delayed in 
Baroda till the arrival of help. After the evil-ending criminals 
collected together at that chief place of mischief, he put 
forward the foot of error and deviation from the right path, 
and the loyal party, marching from the Kankariya tank, en- 
camped outside the \dllage of Batoh, near the mausoleum of 

* Name very doubtful. MSS. seem to have Pir Lai KoU, or it may 
be Bir LSI 



265 


Qu^b ‘Alam. La*nstu-]lah ttsveised a toad of three daya in 
two,* and arrived at ftabmudabid. As Sayyid Dilir K. had 
seised the women of '^jarsa K. and brought them from Baroda 
to the city, and the women of Sar>aftaz K. were also in the 
city, 9afi K. sent a secret message to both of them that if by 
the guidance of good fortune they would rub off the stain of 
sin (rebellion) from the tablet of their foreheads, and would 
enrol themselves among the loyal servants, their position in 
the present and future worlds would approach salvation; 
otherwise he would subject their wives and children to all 
kinds of indignities. Hearing this, La'natu-Uah sent (or 
Bar-afraz K. on some excuse to his house, and imprisoned him. 
As Siarza K., Himmat K., and ^elib Bada lifaAi were in league 
together, and had alighted at the same place, he could not get 
Sharza K. into his liands. Briefly, on the 21st of Sha'ban, 
A.H. 1032, June 10, 1623, La'natu-Uah mounted and arrayed 
the forces tinged with calamity. Those who were loyal also 
arrayed their forces and prepared for the fight. It occurred 
to La'natu-Uah that if he were to go, then foot of courage 
would not stand firm, and, without a battle taking place, 
they would be dispersed in a miserable condition. When he 
saw the firm attitude of the loyal, he could not screw up his 
courage (iSb nayawarda), but turned his rein towards the left, 
and g^ve out that they had hidden gunpowder under the 
ground of that plain, and that )iis men would be destroyed 
by it — ^that it would therefore be better to go into the plain 
of Sarkhej and deUver battle there. - These futile ideas were 
due to the aid of good fortime, for on the turning back of his 
rein a rumour of ^ defeat was spread abroad, and the hoise- 
vaaa. of the plain of victory attacked him in flank, and that 
iU-omened one was unable to reach Sarkhej, and halted in the 
village of N&ranja. The loyal party arrang^ their forces in the 
village cd BalQd, which is nearly three koes off. At dawn on 
the next day they went to battle after the approved manner, 
their forces being drawn up in this way. In the vangnart 
were Nihir K., Raja Kalyfin, the Zamindar of Idar, and othe 
vaUant men; on the left wii^ Sayyid Dilir K., Sayyid Sldl 
*TlieM8S.lMv«"inten.” 



266 


and other loyal servants were statjoned; and <m the ri|^t 
wing Nanfi K., Sayjdd Ya‘qQb, Sayyid ^ulim Mu^mmad, 
and the zest of the life-sacrificing devoted ones, whilst in the 
centre were K.. Kifayat K. B alduhL and some other 
servants of approved service. It so happened, fortunately, 
that in the place where La*natn-Ilah had halted, the land was 
undulating, full of thorn brakes and narrow lanes. The forces, 
accordingly, were not in compact order. He had sent on 
most of the experienced men with Rustam Bahadur* and 
Himmat K., and ^alil^ Beg were amongst the foremost in 
(the ranks of) error. The army doomed to calamity first of 
ail came in contact with Nahir K. and gj^una K., and a 
notable fight took place. By chance Himmat K. fell in the 
dust of destruction from a gun-shot wound, and a fight ensued 
between Beg, and Ninfi K., Sayyid Ya‘qfib, Sayyid 
^ul&m Mut^amiuad, and other servants. In the height of 
the battle the elephant of Sayyid (Qiulam Muhammad came 
and threw him (9alif^) from his ^rse; he fell severely wounded 
to the ground, and about a hundred of his men were slain. At 
this moment an elephant which was in the van of the rebel army 
turned round at the nmse of the rockets and the lightning of 
the guns, and got into a narrow lane, on both sides of which 
were thorn brakes, and trod down many of the rebels. By 
the turning back of the elephant the tanks of the: enemy were 
disordered. At this moment Sayyid Dilir K. came fighting 
from the rij^t wing. La*natu-llah did not know of the Ulling 
of Himmat K. and and, with the idea of heljung them, 
urged on the steed of rum. As the brave ones in the van, 
having displayed activity, had been mostly wounded, thqr 
could not stand the onset of La‘natu-liah, and turned back 
thmz rm, and it neurly happened that there was a great 
disaster. At this time the assistance (3od displayed itself, 
and 9afiK. hastened from the centre to the support the van. 
Just then La'natu-llah heard of the killing of Himmat K and 
$alih Beg, and, on the appearance the centre and the 
attack of Safi K., his courage failed him, and he became a 
vagabond in the desert of defeat and disaster. Sayjdd IKBr 
K. pursued him tor a koss, and made many of the defeated 



267 


tin hwest of the sword of vengeance. Qabil Beg, unfaithful 
to his salt, with a body of rebeb, became captives in the claws 
ci retribution. As La*natu>llah was not sure aliout Sar>sfraz 
K., he on the day of battle placed him in chains on an elephant 
and put him in charge of one of his slaves, with orders that if 
a defeat occurred he should kill him. In like manner he 
placed in chains on one of the elepliants Bahadur, s. Sul^u 
Alpnad, and gave permission to kill him. When the fight 
took place the man in charge of Sultan Ahmatl’s son put him 
to death with a dagger, bitt Sar-afraz K. thmw himself down 
oil the elephant. The man in charge of him in that confusion 
aimed a blow at him in his bewilderment, but it was not 
effectual. 9afi K., finding him in the fight, sent him into the 
dty. La'^tu-Uah did not turn back till he arrived at Baroda 
As the women of ^larza K were captives of those who were 
loyal, he was helpless, and came and 'waited upon ^sfl K. 
Briefly, Laiiatu-lbh hastened from Baroda to Broach. The 
sons of Himmat E. were in the fort there. Although they 
did not admit him, yet they sent him 6,000 by way 

of maintenanoe. For three days he remained outside the fort of 
Broach in a wretched state, and on the fourth went to Surat 
by sea. For nearly two months he renuuned there assembling 
his scikttered men. As Surat was in Bi-danlafs jagir, he took 
nearly 4 lakhs of fNa^miidw from his ofliciab there, and took 
possession of whatever he could, by oppression and injustice, 
ke again collected together those whose fortune was reversed 
and whose stars had been burnt, and betook himself to Bl> 
danlat at Burhanpur. 

In flne, when this approved service jierformed by 9*6 K. 
and other loyal servants in Qujarat became known, each one 
was exalted with favours and Idndnesses. K. held the 
maitsab (d 700 perstmal Mid 300 hone: having {pven him that 
of 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse, I honoured him with the 
tide (d Saif K. Jahin|^lb2hl, and conferred on him a standard 
and drums. Nihir K. had 1,000 with 200 horse; having given 
him the manaab of 8,000 with 2,000 h<nse, I bei^wed on him 
the titie of Si^ K., and raised his head of honour with a horse, 
an elephant, and a jewelled sword. He is the (descendant ?) 



268 


grandson of (?)^, the brother of P&ran Hal LQlli (?)t who 
was governor of Baysin and Chanderi. When ^r K., 
the Afghan (i.e., Shir %ah), besieged the fort of Baysm, it 
is well known that he killed him (Pfiran Mai) after promising 
him quarter, and that his women burnt themselves, com- 
mitting JoAar,” according to the Hindu custom, in the fire 
of fame and modesty, so that the hand of no unlawful person 
should touch the skirt of their chastity. His sons and caste 
fellows went off to variousf places. The father of Nahir K., 
whose title was>I0^n Jahan, having gone to Muhammad K., 
governor of Asir and Burhanpur, became a Musalman, and 
‘when Muhammad K. died, J^^usan, his son, when in tender 
years, succeeded him. Baja ^Ali K., brother of Muhammad 
K., put the child in confinement, and took possession of the 
government. After some time news reached Baja *Ali K 
that IQian Jahan and a body of the servants of Muhammad K. 
had leagued together to attack him, and had determined to 
take ];Jbsan K. out of the fort and raise him to power. He 
was beforehand with them, and sent ^ayat IQian ^abad^, 
with many brave men, to the house of i^n Jahan, either to 
take him alike or to kill him. He, plafiting his foot firmly on 
his good fame, took to fighting, and when things went badly 
with him committed Johatj and passed from this borrowed 
life. At that time Nahir K. was very young. Qayat ^n 
Abyssinmn, having asked 'All K.’s permission, adopted him 
as his son, and made him a Musalman. After his death Baja 
‘All K. brought up Nahir K., and took good care of him. 
Whcln my revered father conquered AsIr, Nahir K. joined his 
service. He (Akbar) disceriwd the signs of bravery on his 
forehead, and raised him to a suitable mansab, and gave him 
in jagir the pargana of Muhammadpfir in Malwa. In my 
service he advanced more and more. Now that the grace of 
gratitude has been bestowed upon him, he has found the 
advantage of doing what was right. 

* Text, Mar Singh Deo. But the I^ISS. seem to have another name, 
Silliadi Deo (?) The name Lulfi is also doubtful; The MSS. seem to 
have Bulur. In Elliot, IV. 402, Puran Mai is called Bhala. 

+ Har kuddm ha-fiurafi apthfgvfd/ 



K. is of the Sayyids of fiarhs;,fonnerly his 
name was Sayyid *Abdu-l-WaUiab. I laised him from the 
maiisab of 1,000 and 800 horse to 2',000 and l,20b,hotBe, and 
presented him with a standard. They oaU.'CwelTe bSra in 
Hindi. As in the Dh-ab there are twdve villages: near each 
other which are the native country of these Sayyids, they 
have become known as the Sayyids of BSrha. Some people 
make remarks about their lineage, but their bravery is a con- 
vincing proof of their being Sayjnds, for there has never beer, 
a battle in this reign in which they have not been conspicuous, 
and in which some have not been killed. Mirsi ‘A^ Koka 
always said the Sayyids of Barha were the ave'rters of calamity 
from this dominion, and such is in reality the case. 

Nanh K. Afghan held the mansab of 800 personal and horse : 
it was ordered to be one of 1,500 personal and 1,200 horse. In 
the same manner the other loyai servants, according to their 
services and sacrifices, were promoted to high mansabs, and 
obtained the desire of their hearts in lofty employments. At 
this time A^alat K., s. ]^n Jahan, was deput^ to the assist- 
ance ci my son (grandson) Dawar-ba Miah in Gujarat, and I 
sent Nfiru-d-din Quli into the Subah to bring ^tsa K., 
Sar-afraa K., and the other leaders of the rebel army who had 
been made captive in the land of retribution, chained, to the 
Court. 

On this day it was reporter^ to me that Minfl-chihr,- s. 
Stib-nawfis K., had separated himself feom Bl-daulat under 
the guidance of good fortune, and had joined the service of my 
fortunate son ^&h Farwis. Itiq&d K., governor of Kashmir, 
was jaomoted to the mansab of 4,000 personal and 8,000 
horse. 

As the huntsmen brought neaa that in this neighbourhood 
a tiger had made its appearance, I felt, disposed to hunt it. 
After entering the forest three other tigers became visible. 
Having killed all four, I returned to the palace, t luye such 
a liking for tiger shooting that whilst I can get it I do not 
go after othih sport. Sul^ Mas‘ad. s. Sultfin HafjmUd (<rf 
Ghamin) (may the lights of Allah be his testimony t), was 
48 aho much inclined to tiger sh«NAing. With regsrd to his 



270 


killing of tigers strange tales lia%'e been recorded, especiaU/ 
in the History of Baihaql,* who has kept a diary of what he 
saw with his own eyes. Among these things he wntes that 
one day he (Mas'ud) went to hunt tigers in the borders of 
Hindustan, and was riding an elephant. A very large tiger 
oame out from the wood, and made for the elephant. He 
threw a javelin and struck the tiger’s chest. The 

tiger, enraged at the pain, came up on the elephant’s back, 
and the Amir knelt down and struck him such a blow with 
his sword that he cut off both the tiger’s fore-feet, and the 
tiger fell backwaids and died. It happened to me once when 
I was prince that I had gone out in the Punjab to hunt tigers. 
A powerful tigej* appeared out of the wood, I fired at him 
from the elephant and the tiger in great fury rose and came 
on the elephant’s back, and I had not time to put down my 
gun and seize my sword. Inverting the gun, I knelt, and 
with both hands struck him w-ith the stock over the head 
and face so that he fell on to the ground and died. 

One of the strange things that happened was that one day 
I was on an elephant, and was hunting wolves in Aligarhf in 
the Nfih forest. A wolf appeared, and I struck it with a 
bullet on its face ffStf-sa) near the lobe of the ear. The bullet 
penetrated for about a span. From that bullet it fell and 
gave up its life. It has often happened in my presence that 
powerful ijawanan) men, good shots with the bow, have shot 
twenty or thirty arrows at them, and not killed. As it is not 
right to write about oneself, I must restrain the tongue of my 
pen from saying mow. 

On the 2Mh of the month I presented a string of pearls to 
Jagat Singh, s. Rana Kaiuii. At this time it was reported to 

* Rieu, Cat., 1. 158 b. 

f Text has Kuh^i-Kul. But the 1.0. MSS. vhow that the true 
reading is Kul Null ban. and it appears from the Ayin, Jarrett, 11. 186, 
that NQh is a district in KCil— i Aligarh. Ourg is a wolf, and Kvrag 
a rhinoceros, but probably a wolf is here iiicant. It is not likely that 
there were rlunocwos in Aligarh, though Abd-l-fafl says there were 
rhinoeeroe in SafnBliai (.lairett, 11.261). Tfr means an arrow as well 
as a ballet. The word mfinif, **lece,** is not in text, but oocuis in 
both the I.O. MSS. 



271 


me that Sultw Qusaiii. Zamiadar of Pakli. had died. I gave 
his mansab and jagir to Shadinan, his eldest son. 

On the 7th of the month of Amurdad Ibrahim Husain, a 
servant of my fortunate son ^|^h ParwJz, came from the vic- 
torious army, and brought news of the victory of the chiefs of 
the everlasting State. The report of my son laid before me the 
paiticulars of the fight, and the exertions of the biave and 
distinguished men in it. I periorined the dues of thanksgiving 
for this favour, which was of Ood*s grace alone. The detaib 
of this are as follows: When the royal troops in the army 
of the prince of high degree crossed the pass of Chanda,* and 
entered the province of Malwa, Bf-daulat, with 20,000 horse. 
300 fighting elephants, and a laige force of artillery, left 
Mandu in order to fight. He dispatched a body of the Bargls 
(Mahrattas) of the Deccan with Jadu Ray and fiday Ram. 
AlaA K., and other rebels to make a raid {qatzap) on the 
royal camp. Mahabat K. made proper arrangements. He 
placed the illustrious prince in the gbaid (centre), and he him- 
self proceeded with the whole army, and in marching and in 
halting observed the conditions of caution. The Baigis kept 
at a great distance, and did not put forward the foot of bravery. 
One day it was Man9fir K. Farangfs turn to be with the rear- 
guard. At the time of pitching the camp Mahfibat K., by 
way of caution, was standing with his army draarn up outside 
the camp, in order that the men might fence it in at their ease. 
Aa Manfur K. had been drinking on the load, he was coming 
to the stage drunk with^ the wine of pride. It liappened 
an army was seen in the distance, and the wine put the 
idea into his head that he must charge. Without telling his 
brothers or his men, he mounted and charged, and drove 
off two or three Bar^, and came to where Jadu Ray and TJday 
Ram were standing with two or three thousand cavalry 
drawn up. As was their custom, they attacked him from all 
sides and surrounded him. He fought as long as there was 
breath in his body, and gave up his life on the path of loyalty. 

During these days Hahabat K. was continually capturiug, 
by messages letters, the afflicted hearts of a number of 
^ Ghindl Ohit between AJmeieand Slslwa. 



272 


men who out of timidity and confusion had accom{>anied 
daiilat. When mm read the lines of despair on the page of 
his (^h Jahan’s) condition, letters also came from that 
side, asking for agreements (qattl). After B!-dauIat came out 
of the fort of Mandu, he in the first instance sent forward a 
body of Bargis, and after them he sent Rustam K., TaqI, and 
Barq-andaz K. with a body of musketeers. Then he sent 
Darab K., Bhim, Bairam Beg, and his other active men. As 
he could not resolve to give battle in person, he was con* 
tinually looking backwards. He crossed the war*elephants 
over the Narbadda with the artillery waggons, and went him- 
self unattended behind Darab and Bhim, turning his' face of 
ruin towards the battle. On the day when the royal camp 
was pitched at Kaliyadaha, Bi-daulat sent his army against 
the victorious forces, and stationed himself with Uian-J^nan 
and a few men at the distance of a koss in the rear. Barq- 
andaz K., who had made an agreement with Mahabat K., 
was lying in wait. When the armies were ranged opposite 
to each other, he got his opportunit}% and attacked with a 
body of musketeers, and joined the royal army, crying out, 
“ Success to King Jahangir 1” When he reached Mah&bat K., 
the latter took him to wait on my fortunate sou Parwiz, who 
bestowed royal favours upon him. Previously he bore the 
oftme of Ba!^’u-d-din, and was a servant of Slain K- After 
the latter’s death he enlisted among the Turkish gimnern. As 
he was active in the performance of his duty, and had a band 
of Inen with him, considering him worthy of patronage, I 
gave him the title of Barq-andaz K. When I sent Bi-daulat 
to the Deccan, I put him at the head of the artillery, and 
sent him with him. Although in the beginning he placed the 
scar of curse on the forehead <d his obedience, yet in the end 
he turned out well rad came at a good time. On the same 
day Rustam, who was one of his fglji h Jahan’s) chief servants 
and on whom he had perfect reliance, when he found thar 
Fortune had turned away from him, made a compact with 
Mahibat K. By the guidance of good fortune and reliance 
on God, he, with Hu^mmad Murid BadaHy^ and other 
mrasabdars, left the ill-fated army, and jcuned that oi the 



273 


illustrious prince. B!-daulat*s hand and heart were paralyzed 
on hearing this news, and he suspected all his own servants, 
and stiO more the royal servants he had with him, of faithless- 
ness and unreliability.. During the night he sejnt for the men 
who were in front, and decided on flight, and in bewilderment 
crossed the Narbadda. At this time, again, some of his 
servants took the opportunity of separating themselves from 
him, and joined the service of my fortunate son. Each of 
them received favours according to his condition. On the 
day that he crossed the river Narbadda, a letter fell into the 
hand of one of his men, that Mahabat K. had written in 
answer to Zahid^s K. letter, making him hopeful of the royal 
favour, and urging him to come in. This they sent direct to 
Bi-daulat, and he, becoming suspicious of Zahid K., im- 
prisoned him with his three sons. Zahid K. is s. Shaja'at K., 
who was one of the Amirs and trusted servants of my revered 
father. I had patronized this wretch in consideration of liis 
claims of service and of his position as a house-bom one 
{hhana-zSd), and given him the title of Khan and the rank of 
1,300, and had sent him with Bi-daulat for the conquest of 
the Deccan. When I summoned the Amim of that quaiter 
oil account of the business of Qaiidahar, although a special 
famian of urgency was sent to him, the wretch did not come 
to Court, and gave himself out as an adherent and devoted 
servant of Bl-daulat. After the defeat )iear Delhi, he turned 
back. Though* he had not a family, he had nut the good 
fortune to pay his respects, or to cleanse the dust of shame 
and the stain of sin from the tablet of his forehead. At last 
the True Recompenser caught him on this day, and his prop, 
erty, to the extent of one lac and Rs. 30,000, was confiscated 
by Bi-daulat. 

Whenf thou hast done eviJ, think not tb^welf free of caJaniitif.s 

For retribution is according to natural law. 

* Apparently the meaning is that he had no family with Shl^h 
Jahln’s army» and so could not be deterred from leaving Sblh Jnhaii 
through fear of their fate. See below, the reference to S. SalSbat's 
arrangements about his family. 

t This couplet comes from Nizami's hhusrau u Sbirin, and is quoted 
by Babur, 




274 


Briefly, Bl-daulat having quickly crossed the Narbadda, 
drew all the boats over to that side, and having secured the 
fords with men that he trusted, he left Bairam Beg, his 
Bakhshi, with a force of trustworthy men and a body of the 
Bargls from the Deccan on the bank of the river. Taking the 
artillery-waggons, he himself went towards the fort of Asir 
and to Burhanpur. Meanwhile Taqi, his servant, caught the 
runner whom ^n-^nan had sent to Mahabat K., and took 
him to Bi-daulat. This couplet was written on the margin 
of the letter: 

Hundreds are watching me 
Otherwise l*d fly away from troubleu 

Bi-daulat sent for him with his sons from his quartets, and 
showed him the writing. Although he made excuses, he could 
give no answer that could be listened to. In short, he kept 
him with Darab and his other sons in surveillance near his 
own station, and the lot he had himself drawn — viz., that 
hundreds were watching him — ^happened to him. At this time 
I gave Ibrahim Qusain, the servant of my prosperous son who 
had brought the report of the victory, the title of Hbfldi- 
l^abar K., with a dress of honour, and an elephant, and sent 
a gracious farman to the Prince and Mahabat K. by Umwa^s 
K. I also sent with him a pdkunch^ (bracelet) of great value 
to my son (Parwiz) and a jewelled sword to Mahabat K. As 
Mahabat K. had done approved service, I gave him the mansab 
of 7,000 personal and horse. 

Sayyid ^labat K., having come from the Deccan, had the 
good fortune to pay his respects, and received special favours. 
He was one of those employed in the Deccan. When Bl- 
daulat. having been defeated near Delhi, went to the fort of 
Mandu, he placed his children in independent territory under 
the protection of God, and went off by secret routes to pay 
his respects (to me). Mirza Hasan, s. Mirza Rustam ^fawi, 
having obtained leave to proceed to his appointment as faujdar 
of Bahraich, was given the mansab of 1,500 personal and 600 
horse, original and increased. Having sent La*l Beg, Super- 
intendent of the Record Department, to my fortunate son 
* See .Ja*far ^nrifs Q&nun-i-Islani. App., p. zxiv. 



275 


Parwiz, I sent with him a special dress of honour and a 
nddirl for him, and a turban for Mahabat K. H^wa^f K., 
who had previously been sent to him and had returned, 
waited upon me with good news (of him). H^na-sad K., s. 
Mahabat K., was given the mansab of 6, (XX) personal and 
horse. 

At this time I enjoyed myself for a day with hunting 
nilgaw. Whilst I was hunting I saw a snake the length of 
which was 2^ yards, and its girth equal to three cubits {dost). 
He had swallowed half a hare, and was in the act of swallowing 
the other half. When the huntsmen picked him up and 
brought him to me, the hare fell out of his mouth. I ordered 
them to put it into its mouth again, but they could not do it, 
however much they exerted themselves; but by using great 
violence the corner of his mouth was tom to pieces. After 
this I ordered them to open its belly. Thereupon another 
entire hare came out. They call this kind of snake chUal^ in 
Hindustan, and it grows so large that it swallows a hog-deer 
(kotah-pacha) entire; but it is not poisonous, and does not 
bite. One day during the same hunt I shot a female nilgaw, 
and two fully formed young ones were found inside. A.s 
I heard that the flesh of nilgaw fawns was delicate and 
delicious, I ordered the royal cooks to prepare a du-piyaza^ 
(a kind of rich fricassee). Certainly it was not without flavour. 

On the 15th of the Divine month of SImhriwar Rustam K., 
Muhammad Murad, and several other servants of Bi-daulat, 
who under the guidance of good luck had separated them- 
selves from him and entered the service of my fortunate son 
Shah Parwiz, according to orders came to Court, and had the 
good fortune to kiss the threshold. Having promoted 
Rustam K. to the mansab of 5,()(X) personal and 4,000 horse, 
and Muhammad Murad to that of 1,(X)0 personal and 500 
horse^ I made them hopeful of daily increasing favours; Rus- 
tam K. by extraction is a Bada ldiah i. His name was Yufiuf 
Beg. He is connected with Mubanmiad-quli of Isfahan, who 
was agent for and prime minister of Mirza Sulaiman (of 
Badakhshan). He was first of all in the service of the Court, 

• DhSmin, python (?) t Sec Blochmapn. 60. 



276 


and paaaed his days mostly in the Subahs. He was included 
among the smaller mansabdars. Having been deprived of 
his jagir for some reason, he came to Bi-daulat, and entered 
his service. He had a perfect knowledge of tiger-himting. 
He also did good service with him, espedally in the affair of 
the Rina. Bi-daulat selected him out of all his servants, and 
made him an Amir. As I bestowed much favour on him 
<9|lh Jahin), at his request I him the title of Khan, with 

a standard and drums. For some time he conducted as his 
agent the government of Gujarat, and did not manage badly. 
Mutananad Murid is the son of Maq^lid Mv-ib (butler), who 
was one d the old servants of Mirzs Sulaiman and Mirzi 
9iih-rn|b, 

On this day Sayyid Bahwa came from Gujarat, and waited 
on me. Nfim-d-din Qnli brought in chains to the Court forty- 
one of the rebek, who had been taken prisoners at Ahmadabad. 
SjarSa K. and Qibil Beg, who were ring-leaders of the sedi- 
tious, 1 executed by throwing them under the feet of warlike 
{nuut) ekphants. On the 20th of the same month, corre- 
sponding with the 18th of the month of Zi-qa'da, a daughter 
was given by the grace of God to my son Shahriy&r by the 
granddaughter* of I*timadu-d-dauls. I hope that her advent-f 
will be propitious and blessed to this State. On the 22nd 
of the month the feast of my solar weighment took place, 
and the 65th year of the age of this suppliant began auspi- 
ciously and happily. According to annual custom, I had 
mysetf weighed against gold and other valuables, and gave 
them to deserving people. Among these I gave Bs. 2,000 
to ^i^ Abmad} of Sihrind. On the 1st of the Divine 
month of Mihr Mir Jumla was promoted to the mansab of 
3,000 personal and 300 horse. Muqim, the Bakhshi of Gu- 
jarat, was given the title of Kifayat K. As the innocence of 
Sar-faraz K.§ was established to my satisfaction, I took him 

* Daughter of Kfir Jahin. 

t Blochmaan, p. 311, ealls her ArzCnl Begam. The IqbU-nCma 
(306) oalb her U|dill Begem. A MS. of tiie IqbU-ntma in my poeaes* 
tion catte her Wall Begam. She was bom on September 4, 1023. 

$ The holy man formerly mentioned. 

{ He had been captured in Gujarat when Safi K. defeated ‘Abdu-llah. 



277 


out of piiBon, and allowed him to pay his respects. At the 
request of my son ^hriyar, I went to his house He had 
prepared a grand entertainment, and presented suitable offer- 
ings, and gave dresses of honour to most of the servants. 

At this time a report came from my fortunate son %ah 
Parwis that Bi-daulat had crossed the river of Burhanpur 
(the Tapti), and was wandering in the desert of error. The 
particulars are that when he crossed the Narbadda and drew 
all the boats to that side, and fortified the banks of the river 
and the ferries with cannon and muskets, he left Bairam Beg 
on the bank with a large number of the rebels, and withdrew 
towards Asir and Burhanpur. The IQian-ldianan and Darab 
he took with him under surveillance. 

And now, for the sake of enlivening my narrative, a few 
words must be said about AsIr. The said fort, in its great 
height and strength, is not in want of my praise. Before Bi- 
daulat went to the Deccan it was in the charge of ^waja 
Na^ru-Uah, s. lAwaja Fat^u-llah, who was one of the house- 
hold slaves and ancient servants. Afterwards, at the request 
of Bi-daulat, it was handed over to Mir ^usamu-d-din, s. Mir 
Jamalu-d-din Husain.* As the daughter of Nur Jah&n 
Begam's maternal uncle (tayhal) was marriedf to him, when 
Bi-daulat, having been defeated in the neighbourhood of Delhi, 
turned his rein towards Malwa and Mandu, Nur Jahan Begam 
wrote to him and strictly urged him, saying; “Beware, a 
thousand times beware, not to allow Bi-daulat and his men to 
come near the fort, but strengthen the towers and gates, and 
do your duty, and do not act in such a manner that the stain 
of a curse and ingratitude for favours should fall on the 
honour or the forehead of a Sayyid In truth, he strengthened 
it well, and the arrangements of the fort were not of such a sort 
that Bi-daulat's bird of thought could fly up to its border, 
or the conquest of it be quickly accomplished. In brief, 
when Bi-daulat sent one of his attendants, of the name 

* The author of the dictionary. 

t See Ma’a^iru-l-UmarS, III. 382. Hi.s wife was the sister of Ahmad 
the “brother's non of Ibr&lilni K. Fath-jang. But if so would 
she not be the daughter of snfl niece of N’ur Jahftn ? See 

Blochmaiin, 512. 



278 


of Sianfa, to the above-mentioned, he (Sharifa) seduced him 
by means of promises and threats, and it was settled (between 
Sh$h Jahan and Sharifa) that when l^usamu-d-dln should come 
down to take the letter and dress of honour which had been 
sent, he should not be allowed to go up again. That wretch, 
immediately Siarifa arrived, put away on the shelf of forgetful- 
ness what he owed on account of his bringing up and the 
favours conferred on him, and without opposition or effort 
handed over the fort to ^laiifa, and with his wife* and child 
went to Bi-daulat, who made him accursed of the Faith and 
in the world by bestowing on him the mansab of 4,000 per- 
sonal, and a standard and drums, and the title of Murta?a K. 
— ^a disgraceful name to all eternity. 

In short, when that one of reversed tortune reached the 
foot of the fort of Asir, he took with him H^n-I^anan, Darab, 
and all his evil-minded offspring up to the fort, and remaining 
there for three or four days, and having set his mind at ease 
about provisions, etc., handed it over to one Qopal Das, a 
Rajput, who had formerly been an attendant of Sar-buland 
Ray, and entered his service when he went to the Deccan. He 
left the women and his superfluous baggage, and took with 
him his three wives with their children and some maid- 
servants. At first he proposed to imprison IQ^n-lAanan and 
Darab in the fort, but at last changed his mind, and bringing 
them down with him, hastened to Burhanpur. At this time 
La‘natu-llah, after suffering disgrace and contempt, came 
from Surat and joined him. In great perplexity, Bi-daulat 
employed Sar-buland Ray, the son of Ray Bhoj Hara, who is 
one of the brave Rajput servants, and who is fed from the 
royal table (?), as his mediator, and by letters and messages 
made proposals of peace. Mahabat K. said that until 
khanan came, peace was impossible. His (Mahabat*s) sole 
purpose was by these means to separate from him that head 
of deceivers who was the ring-leader of trouble and sedition. 
Being helpless, Bi-daulat brought him (IQmn-l^anan) out of 
prison, and satisfied himself by taking an oath from him on 
the Qoran. In order to please him and strengthen his 

* I.O. MS., 381, and the lcjbSt*n&nia mention the wife. 



279 


pxomises and oath, he took him inside the female apartment 
and made a confidant* of him, and brought his own wife 
and son to him, and made use of all kinds of entreaty and 
Ufeientation. The gist of his (^h Jahan's) remarks was: 

My times are hard, and my position di£Gicult; I make myself 
over to you, and make you the guardian of my honour. You 
must act so that I no longer undergo contempt and confusion.’* 
The H^-]^anan, with a view to bring about peace, parted 
from Bi-daulat and proceeded to the royal army. It was 
settled that he should remain on the other side of the river, 
and arrange matters relating to peace in writing. According 
to fate, before Ij^n-lAanan arrived on the bank of the river, 
some of the brave warriors and victorious youths one night 
found an opportunity and crossed over at a place where the 
rebels were careless. On hearing this news the pillars of their 
courage trembled, and Bairain Beg could not keep firm the 
foot of error and ignorance, or engage in driving them back. 
Whilst he was in this agitationf many crossed the river, and 
on the same night the rebek of evil fortune were separated 
from each other like the Banalu-n-na'dA,%hXiiitoo\ito flight. 
By the unfailing good fortune (of Jahangir) the Iflian-lAtoan 
fell into perplexity (lit. fell into the Aa^-dar^ position), and 
could neither go nor stay where he was. At this time again 
letters arrived from my prosperous son mingling threats with 
promises. The Khan-I^anan, finding only despair and ruin 
in the page of Bi-daulat’s affairs, hastened, through the 
mediation of Mahabat K., to wait upon my fortunate son. 
Bi-daulat, on hearing of the departure of Hban-lAanan and 
the crossing of the Narbadda by the victorious army and 
the flight of Bairam Beg, lost courage, and, notwithstanding 
a flood in the river and the violence of the rain, crossed the 
Tapti in a state of wretchedness, and went off towards the 
Deccan. In this confusion many of the royal servants and 
his own attendants willingly or unwillingly separated, and 

* Jiahram made him one who could enter the Hnreni.'* 

t The text wrongly has ha-dkand instead of ba-jambut, 
t Daughters of the Bier— f'.s., the constellation of the Ploufch. 

§ is the name of an itnpaase in the game of nard. 



280 


did not accompany him. As the native conntiy of Jado Ray 
and Uday Ram and Atach K. was on the route, they thought 
it better for themselves to keep with him for some stages, but 
Jado Ray did not come into his camp, and followed him at the 
distance of one stage. He took possession of such property 
as the men in this confusion and fear for their lives abandoned. 
On the day he (%ah Jahan) started from the other side of 
the river (the Tapti) he sent a message by one of his immediate 
attendants of the name of Zu-l-faqar K. Turkman, sum- 
moning Sar-buland K. Afghan, with the message that it 
seemed to him contrary to courage and the due performance 
of his engagements that he had as yet not crossed the river. 

Fidelity was the glory of men; the faithlessness of no one 
has touched me (Shah Jahan) so much as yours.’' He 
(Sar-buland) was standing on horseback on the river-bank 
when Zu-l-faqar^ K. came and delivered the message. Sar- 
buland did not give a precise answer, and was undecided as to 
whether to stay or go. In his perplexity and by way of 
objection he told Zu-l-faqar to let go his bridle. Zu-l-faqar 
drew his sword, and struclc at his waist. At this crisis an 
Afghan interposed a short spear which the people of India 
call a harchhd, and the blow of the sword caught the. shaft, 
and the point of the sword did not reach Sar-buland’s waist. 
After swords were drawn, the Afghans attacked Zu-l-faqar and 
cut him in pieces. The son of Sultan Muhammad, the 
treasurer, who was Bi-daulat’s page, for friendship’s sake had 
come (with Zu-l-faqar) without Bi-daulat’s permission, and 
was also killed. 

Briefly, when the news of his leaving Burhanpur and of the 
victorious army’s approaching that city reached me, I sent 
iQiawas§ K. on the wings of haste to my loyal son, and strongly 
impressed upon him that he must not relax his efforts, but 
must determine either to take him alive or to drive him out 
of the imperial territory. It was said that if things went 
badly with him on this side, it was probable that he would 
throw himself by the road of Qutbu-l-mulk’s country into the 
provinces of Orissa and Bengal. This, too, was in accordance 
* The Muhammad Bog of Roo *. 



281 


with miUtsiy plans. So out of caution, which is becoming to 
a Tukr, I appointed Mtrza Rustam to be governor of Allahabad 
and dismissed him with orders that if such circumstances 
should so occur (as ^h Jahan’s going to Bengal), he should 
rectify matters. 

At this time my son (fanand) Jahan came from Multan, 

and had the good fortune to pay his respects. By way of 
nasar he presented 1,000 muhrs and a ruby of the value of 
Rs. 100,000, a pearl, and other jewels. I gave an elephant 
to Rustam K. Oh the 9th of the Divine month of Aban 
Khaway K. brought a report from the prince and Mahabat K. 
to the effect that when my son (Pftrwiz) reached Burhanpur, 
though many of his men had remained behind in consequence 
of the heavy rains, he, according to orders, without delay had 
crossed the river (TaptI), and gone in pursuit of Bi-daulat. 
Bi'daulat, on hearing this terrible news, was marching on. 
On account of the heaviness of the rain and the excessive 
quantity of mud and constant marching his beasts of burden 
had become exhausted. If any baggage was left behind no 
inquiries were made, and he (Shah Jahan) and his children 
and dependents thought themselves lucky to save their lives 
and did not trouble about their goods. The army of good 
fortune having come down the pass of Bhangar, hastened 
after him as far as the pargana of Ankot,* about forty koss 
from Burhanpur. Bi-daulat in this state reached the fort 
of MahOr, and when he knew that Jado Ray and t^day Ram 
and the other Dakhanis would not go with hint any farther, 
he did not disgrace them, but let them go. Leaving the heavy 
elephants with the goods and chattels with tJday Ram in the 
fort, he himself started for Qu^bu-l-mulk’s territory. When 
his departure from the royal territory was ascertained, my 
fortunate son, with the approval of Mahabat K. and other 
loyaluts, turned rein from that pargana. On the first of the 
Divine month of Ab&n he entered Burhanpur. Raja Sarang 
Deo was sent to my son with a gracious farman. 

Qisim K. was raised to the mansab of 4,000 personal and 
2.000 horse. Ifitak Mutn, Bakhsbi of Kabul, at the request 
* Jamtt, II. 239. 



282 


of Maliabat K., was honoured with the title of Khan. Alf K. 
Qiyam-ldiani, having come from the Subah of Patna, paid his 
respects, and was appointed to the charge of the fort of 
Kangia. I presented him with a standard. On the Ist of 
the Divine month of Azar Baqi K. came from Junagarh and 
waited on me. 

As I was at ease with regard to the affair of Bi-daulat, and 
the heat of Hindustan did not agree with my constitution, 
on the 2nd of the month, corresponding with the Ist of l^far* 
my camp started from Ajmir for a tour and to hunt in the 
pleasant regions of Kashmir. Befom this I had appointed 
the chief of the state A^af K. Subahdar of Bengal, and gave 
him leave. As I had taken a great liking to his society, and 
he was distinguished above all the other servants for ability 
and good disposition and tact, and is moreover unequalled in 
all kinds of propriety, and I regretted separation from him, 
I had broken through that purpose, and had sent for him to 
wait upon me. He came on this day, and had the good fortune 
to kiss the threshold. Jagat Singh, s. Rani Karan, took 
leave on his return to his native country, and was given a 
dress of honour and a jewelled dagger. Raja Sarang Deo 
brought a report from my fortunate son Shah Farwiz and 
Mahabat K. Madaru-s-salfjana, and kissed the threshold. It 
was written that their minds were at ease with regard to the 
affair of Bi-daulat, and that the rulers of the Deccan, willingly 
or unwillingly, were performing the dues of obedience and 
submission. His Majesty (Jahangir) might make his mind 
at ease about that quarter and enjoy himself in hunting and 
travelling in whatever place in the royal dominions he might 
approve of and which was good for his health. On the 20th 
of the month Mirza Wall, having come from Sironj, vraited 
on me. Qakim Mtbnina was raised to the mansab of 
1,000. A9alat K., s. IQ^n Jahan., according to order, 
came from Gujarat, and had the good fortune to pay 
his respects. 

At this time a report came from *AqIdat K., Bakhshi of the 
Deccan, containing the news of Raja Oirdhar^s having been 
* 1 8iifar, J033^.Noveni»x)r 14 , 102.3. 



283 


killed. The particulars of this event are. that one of the 
brothers of Sayyid Kabir Barha, who was an attendant of my 
fortunate son Shah Parwiz, gave his sword to brighten and put 
on the wheel (to sharpen) to a cutler who had a shop close 
to the house of Baja Girdhar. The next day, when he came 
to fetch his sword, a conversation took place as to the charge 
for the work, and the people of the Sayyid struck the cutler 
some blows with a stick. The Raja’s people in supporting 
him used their whips on them. By chance two or three young 
Sayyids of Barha had lodgings in that neighbourhood, and 
hearing of this disturbance, went to the assistance of the 
aforesaid Sayyid . The fire of strife was lighted, and a fight took 
place between the Sayyids and Rajputs, ending in an encounter 
with arrows and swords. Sayyid Kabir, becoming aware of 
this, came to assist with thirty or forty horsemen, and at 
this time Raja Girdhar, with a body of Rajputs and his caste 
people, according to the custom of the Hindus, were sitting 
baiebodied and eating their food. Becoming aware of the 
coming of Sayyid Kabir and the violence of the Sayyids, he 
brought his men inside the house and firmly closed the door. 
The Sayyids, setting fire to the door, forced their way inside 
and the fight went to such a length that Raja Girdhar and 
twenty-six of his servants were killed and forty others 
wounded. Four of the Sayyids were also killed. After Raja 
Girdhar was killed, Sayyid Kabir took the horses out of his 
stable to his own house and returned. The Rajput officers, 
when informed of the slaying of Raja Girdhar, came on horse- 
back in great numbers from their houses, and all the Barha 
Sayyids came to the aid of Sayyid Kabir. They assembled 
in the plain outside the citadel, and the fire of trouble and 
calamity increased, and it nearly came to a great disturbance. 
Mahabat K., being informed of it, immediately mounted and 
went there, and bringing the Sayyids into the citadel, and 
soothing the Rajputs in a manne suitable to the occasion, 
took some of their chief men with him and went to the house 
of ^Alarn, which was near there. He soothed them down 
in a proper way, and promised and became security for an 
inquiry into the matter. When this news reached the prince 



he aho went to the quartets of the Igian *Alam, and soothed 
them with words appropriate to the state of affairs, and sent 
the Rajputs to their own houses. Next day Mahabat K. 
went to the house of Raja Oirdhar, condoled and sympathised 
with his sons, and having contrived to get hold of Sayy^ 
Kabir put him into confinement. As the Rajputs would not 
be consoled without his being put to death, after a few days 
he executed him. 

On the 23rd I appointed Muhammad Murad faujdar of 
Ajmir, and sent him off. On this road I continually enjoyed 
myself in sporting. One day, while hunting, a tuyffi^un 
(albino) partridge, which till now I had never seen, came to 
my sight, and I caught it with a hawk. By chance the hawk 
that caught it was also a tuyghun. I ascertained by trial thf 
the flesh of the black partridge was better than that of tL* 
white, and that the flesh of the large quail (budana), whic: 
the people of India call ghagharj* is better than that of tlv 
quail, which is a fighter. I compared the flesh of a fat ki<^ 
with that of a lamb ; the flesh of the fat kid is more delicious. 
By way of test 1 ordered them both to be cooked in the same 
way, so that I might discern the matter accurately. On this 
account I have recorded it. 

On the 10th of the month of Dai, in the neighbourhood of 
the pargana of Rahfmabad.f the huntsmen brought in news 
of a tiger. I ordered Iradat K. and Fida^i K. to take with 
them some of the guards (ahl-i-yati^ and surround the wood, 
and mounting (an elephant) I followed them and went towards 
the hunt. From the number of trees and thickness of the 
jungle it could not be well seen. Driving the elephant forward, 
the tiger's flank came into view, and with one wound from 
my gun he fell and gave up his life. Of all the tigers I have 
shot from the time when I was a prince until now I never saw 
a tiger like this for size and majesty and the symmetry of its 
limbs. I ordered the artists to take its portrait according to 
its real form and body. He weighed 8^ Jahangfri maunds; 

* Jordon atste« that the biscJc partridge is esJled ghdqhar about 
Bonaros. 

t Probably RaKimUbAd in tlie Kilri Dfi-ab. Jarrell. II. 332. 



285 


his length, from the top of his heed to the end of his.toil, was 
3^ cubits* and 2 of a ya^). 

On the 16th it was reported tliat Mumtazt K., the governor 
if Agra, had died. At first he was in the service of Bah&dwf 
the brother of Shan Zaman. After they were fidlled he 
sntered the service of my revered father. When I placed my 
foot in the world of eziatence that revered person favoured 
me with making him the Nagir (Superintendent) of my 
establishment. For a period of fifty>eix years he served me 
sincerely and zealously and in a manner to please me, and at 
no time did a speck of dust from him settle on the fringe of 
my heart. What is due to him for the excellence of his 
service is more than a clerk could write. May GkxL Almighty 
j}verwhelm him in the ocean of His forgiveness ! 

Having conferred on Huqarrab K., who is one of the old 
£ciak,{ the government and administration of Agra, I gave 
im his leave. In the neighbourhood of Fathpfir, Mukarram 
L. and his brother ‘Abdu-s-Salam had the good fortune to 
pay their respects. On the 22nd the entertainment for my 
hmar weighment took place in the town of Mathura, and the 
fifty-seventh year of my age began auspiciously and happily. 
At Mathura I went on by boat seeing what was to be seen, and 
hunting. On the way the huntsmen reported that a tigress 
with three cubs had appeared. Disembarking from the boat 
I engaged in the pleasure of sp rt.. As the cubs were small I 
ordered them to taken by hand, and killed the mother with 
my gun. At this time it was reported to me that the villamrs $ 
and cultivators on the other side of the river Jumna had not 
given up stealing and highway robbery, and, passing their 
time in the shelter of thick jun gles and difficult strong places 
in stubbornness and fearlessneta, would not pay their rents 
to the jagirdan. I gave an o.der to ghin Jahan to take a 
* Dora' or saioV yards 7 The text gives his wei^t as 20f, but biM 

most be a mistake for AoMt 

t He was a eunuch, and origbullv had the name of I*tibir K. He 
received tht title of Mnmtfs K. in this year. TOsnk^ 3W. See 
Bloehmann, 433. 

t At qatOmdn u MAoriyd* (properly Miriyda). 

49 I OaHtaMn « mutdri^in. 



286 


force of mansabdars with him and give them exemplar}*' 
punishment, and liaving slaughtered, imprisoned, and plun- 
dered them, raze to the ground theii strongholds and forts, 
and tear up from the root their thom-brakes of mischief and 
disturbance. The next day the force crossed the river and 
made a hot attack on them. As. they had no time for escape 
by flight they planted firmly the foot of folly, and showed 
fighi. Many of them were slaughtered: their women and 
children were taken prisoners, and much booty fell into the 
hands of the victorious army. 

On Ist Bahman, having promoted Rustam K. to the 
faujdarship of the Sarkar of Qanauj, I sent him there. 

On the 2nd ‘Abdu-llah, s. Hakim Nfiru-d-dm, of Teheran, 
was ordered to be capitally punished in my presence. The 
explanation of this brief announcement is as follows : When 
the ruler of Persia, on suspicion of his having money and other 
property, tortured his father, the aforesaid fled from Persia, 
and with a hundred miseries and adversities threw himself 
into Hindustan, and by the patronage of I‘timadu>d*daula 
was enrolled among the servants of the Court. By the aid 
of good fortune, having in a short time become well known, he 
was included among those who were in immediate attendance, 
and obtained a niansab of 500 and a fertile jagir, but as his 
capacity was small (lit., his digestion was narrow) he could 
not stand such great good fortune, and assumed ingratitude 
and unthankfulnes and constantly defiled his tongue with 
abuse* of his lord and master. At this time it was con- 
tinually reported to me that as my kindness to him and 
observance of what was due to him increased, that ungrateful 
one blamed and abused me the more. When I considered 
the favours I had bestowed upon him, I could not believe 
these stories about him, but at last I heard from impartial 
and disinterested persons the disrespectful language which 
he had used with respect to me in assemblies and companies. 

* Text ha u ^uktth, but the Iqb^l-nfima, 213, has ha-^ahta^ 
“ with complaints/' and this must be correct. ^Abdu-Jliih indulged in 
abuse of his lord and master, Ishnda u l^udtluand-i’l^mA — ic., 
iTdhangir. 



287 


The charge was thus confiimed, and accordingly I summoned 
him to my presence and had him executed.* 

A redf tongue gives the green head to the winds.’* As the 
huntsmen reported that there was a tigress in this neighbour- 
hood, by the mischief caused by which the inhabitants were 
oppressed, I ordered Fida’i K. to take elephants with him 
and surround it. Mounting myself, I followed him into the 
forest. It soon came to view, and with one shot from my 
gim its affairs were finished. One day I was enjoying mj'self 
with sport, and caught a black partridge with a hawk. I 
ordered them to openits crop in my presence. A mouse it had 
swallowed whole came out of its crop, and which was not yet 
digested. I was greatly astonished that the pipe of its gullet, 
small as it was, should swallow a whole mouse and how 
it had done so. Without exaggeration, if anyone had 
told me the tale I should not have believed it. As I saw 
this myself I have recorded it on account of its strangeness. 
On the 6th of the month Delhi became the abode of good 
fortune. 

As Jagat Singh, s. Raja Baso, at the instigation of Bi-daulat. 
had gone out into the hills in the north of the Panjab, which 
are his hereditaiy abode, and raised a disturbance there, 1 
appointed $adiq K. to punish him, as has been related in the 
preceding pages. At this time Madho Singh, his younger 
brother, was promoted to the title of Raja, and given a horse 
and robe of honour. An order was given for him to go to 
»Sadiq K. and attack the rebels with him. 

Next day I inarched from the outskirts of the city, and 
alighted at Salfmgarh. As the house of Raja Ki^an Das was 
on the road, and he had made great efforts and entreated me 
to do so, I at his request threw the shadow of prosi)erity on 
his dwelling, and gratified the desire of that old servant. A few 
of his offerings were accepted in order to dignify him. March- 
ing on the 20th from Salimgarh, I appointed Sayvid Bahwa 
Buldiari to the governorship of Delhi, which is his ordinary 

* Cf. Iqbai.n&ma, 213-214. 

t A proverbial expre^Aioii. It is quoted by Nisjaiiiu-d-diii in the 



288 

residence. In feci, he had already done this service well, and 
I had given him high lank. 

At this time 'Afi Muk^mmad, s. ‘AU Bay,* ruler of Tibet, 
by his father’s order came to Court, and had the good fortune 
to pay his respects. It was clear that ‘AB Biy had a great 
affection for and attachment to this son, and held him dearer 
than his other chlldten. He wished to make him his successor, 
and he was consequently envied by his brothers, and disputes 
arose between them. Abdil, s. ‘AB Bay, who was the eldest 
of his children,- through this jealousy sought the patroiutge of 
hhe Khan of Kashghar and made him his prote^r, so that 
when ‘Ali Biy, who was very old and decrepit, should die, he 
might, under the protection of the Wali of Kashghar, become 
ruler of Tibet. ‘AB Bay, suspecting that the brothers might 
attack ‘AB Muluunmad, and a disturbance might arise in his 
country, sent him to Court, hk desire being that he might be 
attached to this Court, and his affairs might prosper by service 
to and kindneei ahoUrn by the Court. 

On the 1st of the Ilihi month of Isfandatmuz I pitched in 
the pacgana of Umbala. La^kar!, s. Imam>wirdi, who had 
ran a#ay from Bi-daulat, and joined the service of my 
auapicioaB son §)(iih Parwis, having come on this date to 
Court, kissed the threshold. A report came from my son and 
■ahibat K. It contained the recommendation and the offer 
of service of ‘Adil K., with a letter which he had sent to 
ttahihat, in iThich were Set forth his submissiveness and 
loyalty. La^karf was sent back to Parwhs with a dress ci 
honour, a WMBt With pearl buttons for the prince, and a 
dMi of honour far i^an ‘Alam and Mahibat K. At the 
leqheSk of my son I wrote a gtacious farman to ‘Adil K. 
showing great favour to him, and sent him a robe trf honour 
with a special Wddirf . I gave an order that if they thought 
fit they should send the above^mentionedt to ‘Adil K. 

On the 5th I akghted at the garden of fiihrind. On the 

• 'Ah nay wse tkWt at little Tibet (Baltistan). Jalus«ir had 
asaM hit daughter. Blo^sunn, 310, and Akbar-ntma, IIL 003. 
The laaitiaSb took piM in A.n: 1000 (1502). 

t That is, liaiftkarl. 



bank of the Boas l^iq K., MuJ^tar E., Isfandiyar, Rija 
Rdp Chand of Gwalior, and other Amirs who had been 
appointed to support him, having succeeded in lestoiing 
order in the northern Ull-countxy, had the good fortune to 
kiss the threshold. The facts, briefly, are that Jagat Singh, 
at the instigation of Bi-daulat, had taken to the hiUs above- 
mentioned, and engaged in stirring up sedition and strife. As ' 
the field was clear (t.e., there was no one to oppose him) 
he passed over difficult mountains and defiles, and by attacking 
and plundering peasantry and the weak, heaped misfortune 
on them until ^adiq K. arrived. He brought the Zamindars 
under control by means of fears and hopes, and made the 
overthrow of that wretched creature the object of his exertions. 
Jagat Singh strengthened 'the fort of Mau, and was protected 
by it. Whenever he found an opportunity he left that fortress 
and fought with the royal servants. At last his provisions were 
exhausted, and he came to despair of assistance from the 
other Zamindars. The elevation of his younger brother became 
a source of disturbance and anxiety to him. Helplessly he 
then sought for patronage, and begged the protection of Nfir 
Jahan Begam, expressing shame and contrition, and sought 
a refuge in her mediation. In order to please and satisfy 
her, the pen of pardon was drawn through the record of 
his faults. 

On this day reports came in from the officiab in the Deccan 
that Bi-daulat, with La'natu-Uah, Darab, and other wretched 
(with broken wing and feathers) creatuies in miserable con- 
dition, with blackened faces, had gone from the borders of 
Qutbu-l-mulk’s territory towards Orissa and Bengal. In this 
journey great loss fell on him and his companions, many of 
whom, when a chance offered, ^ith bare heads and feet, and 
having washed their hands of life (desperate), took to flight. 
Out of these one day Mirza Muhammad, s. Af^l K., his 
Diwan, with his mother and his family, ran away during the 
march, and when the news reached Bi daiilat, he Feut Jaiai 
and Khan-quli Uzbeg and some others of his confidential nieit 
in pursuit of him, that, if they could take him alive, well and 
good, or otherwise they should cut off his head and bring it 



290 


into his piesenoe. They with all speed proceeded and caught 
him up on the road. Becoming aware of this, he sent his 
mother and family into the jungles and hid them there, and 
himself with a body of young men whom he relied on as 
companions, planted manfully the foot of courage and stood 
with their bows' In front of them there was a canal and a 
swamp (chihid). Sayyid JaTar K. wished to approach near 
him and take him with him by deceiWng him, but however 
much he tried to persuade him by threatening and holding 
out hopes, it had no effect, and he answered him with life- 
taking arrows. He made a good fight of it, and sent Hian-quli 
and some others of Bl-daulat*s men to hell. Sayyid Ja‘far 
also was wounded. Finally Mirza Mul^mmad received 
severe wounds and gambled away the cash of his life. 
But as long as he had breath he deprived many thereof. 
After he was killed, they cut off his head and took it to 
Bi-daulat. 

When Bi-daulat was defeated near Delhi and went to 
Mandu, he sent Afzal K. to get assistance and support from 
"Adil K. and others, forwarding with him an armlet (bazu-band) 
for *Adil K., and a horse, an elephant, and a jewelled sword 
for *Ambar. He first went to ‘Ambar. .After delivering his 
message he produced what Bi-daulat had sent for him. but 
'Ambar would not accept them, saying he was the servant of 
‘Adil K., who was at present the head of those in power in 
the Deccan: he should go first to him and explain what he 
desired. If he agreed, his slave would ally himself to and 
obey him, and in that case he would take whatever was sent, 
otherwise not. Af^l K. went to ‘Adil K., who received him 
very badly, and for a long time kept him outside the city and 
did not look into his affair, but put all kinds of slights upon 
him, but secretly asked for what Bi-daulat had sent for him 
and "Ambar, and took possession of it. The aforesaid (Af^l 
K.) was there when he heard the news of the killing of his ilon 
and the ruin of his family, and so fell upon evil days. In short, 
Bi-daulat, in spite of all his (original) good fortune and happy 
auspices, undertook a long and distant journey, and came to 
the port of Machhli Patan (Masulipatam), which belongs to 



291 


Qu^bu-l-mulk. Before reaching this place, he Bent some of 
his men to Qu^bu-l-mulk, and besought him for all sorts of 
assistance and companionship. Qutbu-l-mulk sent him a 
small amount of cash and goods for his support, and wrote to 
the warden of his frontier to conduct him in safety out of his 
territory, and encourage the grain-sellers and Zamindars to 
send grain and all other necessaries to his camp. 

On the 27th of the month a strange event took place. 
Returning from the hunting-place, I had come back to the 
camp at night. By chance I crossed a stream of water, the 
bed of which was very rocky and the water running violently. 
One of the servants of the Aarbat-I^na (wine-cellar) was 
conveying a huntsman’s relish. He had a gold tray, wliich 
contained a salver and five cups. There were covers to the 
cups, and the whole was in a cotton bag. When he was 
crossing, his foot slipped and the tray fell out of his hand. 
As the water was deep and running rapidly, however much they 
searched and beat their hards and feet (exerted themselves), 
no trace of it could be found. Next day the state of the 
case was reported to me, and I ordered a number of boatmen 
and huntsmen to go to the place and make a careful search, 
and it perhaps might appear. 6>’ chance, in the place where 
it had fallen it was found, and more strange still, it had not 
been turned upside down, and not a drop of water had got 
into the cups. This affair is similar to what happened when 
Had! was seated on the throne of the Khalifate. A ruby ring 
had been inherited by Harun from his father. Had! sent a 
slave to Harun and asked for it. It happened that at that 
time Harun was seated on the bank of the Tigris. The slave 
gave the message, and Harun, enraged, said : I have allowed 
thee* to have the Khalifate. and thou dost not allow me one 
ring.” In his rage he threw the ring into the Tigris. After 
some months by the decree of fate Had! died, and the turn of 
the Khalifate came to Harun. He ordered divers to look for 
the ring in the place where he had thrown it. By the chances 
of destiny, and the aid of good fortune, at the first dive the 
ring was found, and brought and given into Harun’s hand ! 

♦ H&di was HSrunii-r-R^ghiH'#- rJder brother. 



292 


At this tiwiA om day on tho hunting ground tho ohiof 
huntaman Iniain*wudi brought before me a partridge that 
had a spur on one leg and not on the other. Ab the way to 
the femafe lies in the spur* by way of testing me 
he asked whether this was a male or a female. I said at once 
“ A female.’* When they opened it an egg appeared inside 
(p^^na) its belly. The people who were in attendance asked 
with surprise by what sign I had discovered this: I said that 
the head and beak of the female are shorter than the male’s. 
By investigation and often seeing (the birds) I had acquired 
this dexterity.* It is a strange thing that the windpipe in all 
animals (iaiwanai), which the Turks call is single from 
the top of the throat to the crop (ehtna^dan)^ while in the case 
of the bustard {jofz) it is difEerent. In the bustard it is for 
four finger-breadths from the top of the throat single and 
then it divides into two blanches and in this form reaches the 
crop. Also at the place where it divides into two branches 
there is a stoppage {smr-bani) and a knot (girih) is felt by 
the hand. In the kulang (crane) it is stiU stranger. In it 
the windpipe passes in a serpentine manner between the 
bones of the breast to the rump and then turns back from 
there and joins the throat. The jarz or chart (bustard) is 
of two kinds : one is a mottled black and the other bur (a kind 
of dun colour). I nowj discovered that there are not two 
kinds, but that which is a mottled black is the male, and 
that which is dun-coloured is the female. The proof of 
it is this, that in the piebald there are testicles and in 
the dun one there are eggs; this has been repeatedly found 
on examination. 

I have a great liking for fish, and all kinds of good fish are 
brought for me; the ^t fish in Hindustan is the rohu, and 

* Teat mulka. Perhaps the word may be malka i dn, ** possession 
of it'* — t.e., possession of such knowledge. The MSS. have dn alter 
malba. 

t Text hanag. Bat the MSS. have merely and it is said in the 
diotionariss that there is a bird called the bagg- 

t This eorreots a previous statement to the effect that the black and 
red bustards were two species. 



after that the horia.* Both have aoalee, and in appeaianoe 
and shape are Glee each other. BveiTone cannot at once 
distinguish between them. The differed in their flesh also 
is vetjr small, bat the oonnnissenr disoovets that the flesh of 
the rahit is rather more agreeable of the two. 

* The heve either bsibi ot paifn. I oennot find the neme in 
the dintinneiinei but my Mend Sir K. 0. Gnpte enggnite that the word 
mey be Um .(£atee eeltaeB). Thie fleh is eleo • oerp, end lesembles 
the rohfi roMto), bat is ematter. Itmeyehwbetbeeetle. 



THE NINETEENTH 
NEW YEAR’S FEAST AFTER THE 
AUSPICIOUS ACCESSION 

On Wednesday, the 29th Jiimada-l-awwal, a h. 1033, 
March 10, 1624, after one watch and two gharia of day had 
passed, the sun, that bestows bounty on the world, passed into 
its house of honour in Aries. The royal servants obtained 
promotions and increase of inansab. Al^anu-Ilah, s. iOiwaja 
Abu-l-Haean, received as original and increase that of 1,000 
and 300 horse. Muhammad Sa^Id, s. Ahmad Beg K. Kabuli, 
the same, Mir Sharaf Diwan-i-buyutat, and ^awa^ K., each 
of them that of 1,000. Sardar E., having come from Kangra, 
had the good fortune to pay his respects. At this time I gave 
orders to the yasdwvls and men of the yasdq (guards) that 
hereafter at the time when I came out of the palace they 
should keep away defective people, such as the blind, and 
those whose noses and ears had been cut oS, the leprous and 
the maimed, and all kinds of sick people, and not permit them 
to be seen. On the 19th the feast of the culmination was 
held. Ilah-wirdi, the brother of Imam-wirdi, had run away 
from Bl-daulat and came to Court, and was honoured with 
great favours. 

As the news of B!-daulat’s coming to the border of Orissa 
was constantly repeated, a farman was issued to the prince 
and Mahabat K. and the Amirs who had been sent to the 
support of my son, that they should set their minds at ease 
about the administering the provinces (of the Deccan), and 
go quickly to Allahabad and Behar, and if the Subahdar of 
Bengal could not forestall him, and he should put forward the 
foot of audacity, he must be made a wanderer in the desert 

294 



295 


of disappointment by the blows of the viotorious army which 
is in the shadow of the flag of my son. By way of precaution 
on the 2nd UrdibihiAt I gave my son l^n Jahan leave to 
proceed to Agra to remain in that neighbourhood and wait 
for a sign. If there should happen to be any necessity for a 
particular service and an order should be given him, he must 
act as occasion might require. I sent him a special dress of 
honour, with a nadiri with pearl buttons, a special jewelled 
sword, and to Asalat K., his son, a horse, and a dress of 
honour. 

On this day a report came from ^Aqidat K., Bakhshi of the 
Deccan. He wrote that, according to order, my prosperous 
son ^ah Parwiz had married the sister of Raja Gaj Singh. 
I hope that her coming wiU be auspicious to the State. He 
also wrote that, having sent for Turkumto K. from Pattan 
he had appointed 'Azizu-Uah in his place. Jan-sipar K.,also 
by order, came and waited on me. When Bi-daulat crossed 
the Burhanpur river and took the road of ruin, Mir Husamu* 
d-din, considering his own evil deeds, could not remain at 
Burhanpur. Taking his children with him, he conveyed the 
goods of ruin to the Deccan, in order that he might pass his 
days under the protection of *Adil K. By chance, as he passed 
by Bir, Jan-sipar K. obtained information, and sent a body 
of men to head him off. He seized him and his dependants, 
and brought them before Mahabat. Mahabat placed him in 
confinement, and took from him Rs. 1,00,000 in cash and 
goods. (Also) Jado Ray and Uday Ram had taken the 
elephants which Bi>daulat had left in Burhanpur and brought 
them to the prince (Parwiz). 

Qazi 'Abdu-l-"Aziz, who had come to Delhi from Bi-daulat 
in order to state his objects, had not been allowed by me an 
opportunity to speak and I had handed him over to Mahabat 
K. After his (Bi-daulat's) defeat and ruin Mahabat K. had 
made him his own servant. As he was an old friend of ‘Adil 
K., and was for some years at Bijapur as Vakil of jflian Jahan. 
Mahabat K. now sent him again as his representative* to 
'Adil Khan, and the leading men of the ^ccan, nclerUes 
* Ba-rim-i-iaidbai. 



296 


volenie$, lookiog to the neeesntieB of the time and the npshot 
of sffsiiB, weie contented and piofeaced loyalty and ^iie 
fox service. The rebel ‘Ambar sent one of his confidential 
men of the name of 'AK and dispkjred great humility. 
He ( Ambar) wrote in the capacity of a servant to Mahabat 
K.r and engaged that he (‘Ambar) should come to Dewalgaon* 
and wait upon Mah&bat. He would make his eldest son a 
servant of the State, and keep him in the service of my 
auspicious son. About this time there arrived a letter from 
Qa^i ‘Abdu>I*‘AiH that ‘Adil K. from the bottom of his 
heart had elected for service and loyalty, and agreed that he 
would send MuUa Hul^tnimad Lari, who was his principal 
agent and minister, and whom both in spoken and written 
messages he called Mull& Baba, with 5,000 hoise, that he 
might remain continually on duty, and they might know 
that otherf troops would follow (1). Urgent farmans had 
been sent that my son should proceed to Allahabad and Behar 
in order to overthrow B!-daulat. At this time news arrived 
that notwithstanding the rainy season and the violence of 
the rain, that son, on the 6th Faxwardin had marched out of 
Burhanpur with the army of fortune, and had taken up his 
quarters in Lai Ba{^,| and that Mahibat K. was awaiting at 
Burhanpur the arrival of Mulla Mubammad Lari, so that 
when he arrived he would relieve himself of the care of the 
maintenance of order in that neighbourhood, and come with 
him (Mubammad Lari) to wait on -my son. Laf^ar K., 
Jado Ray, tJday Bam, and other servants of the State had 
been ordered to go to the Balaghat (the country above the 
Ghats), and remain at ^famagar. Having given Jan-sip&r 
E. leave as before, he (Parwiz) kept Asad K. Ma'mfiri at 
Elichpur. MinSchihr, s. gjah-nawas K., was appointed to 
JalnapQr. He sent Rfrawi K. to Thalner, to guard the 
province of Khandesh. 

On this day news came that La^ari had taken the farman 

* Dewalglon is about 60 milea S. of Burhanpur, Elliot, VII. II. 

t Or, perhaps, they might be sure he was coming shortly. 

t Ul BSgfa was on tiie outskirts of Burhanpur. Though the rainy 
season is spoken of, the date Farwardlii is in Bfamh. 



297 


to *AdU K.t and he, having decorated the city,.had gone out 
four koes to meet him, and had performed salutations and 
prostrations for the farman and the drees of honour. On the 
21st I sent dresses of honour for my son Dawar-ba lAah and 
Shia A*sam and ^fi K. Having appointed ^adiq K. to the 
government of- Lahore, and given him a dress of honour 
and an elephant, I gave him leave. An order was given 
that he should have the mansab of 400 personal and 
400 horse. Multafat K., s. Mirta Rustam, raised the head 
of distinction with the mansab of 1,500 personal and 
300 horse. 

One day while hunting it was reported to me that a snake 
with a black hood (hafeka) had swallowed another hooded 
snake and gone into a hole. I ordered them to 
dig up tile place and bring out the snake. Without 
exaggeration I had never seen a snake of this su4. When 
they opened its belly, the hood of the snake that it 
had swallowed came out whole. Although this snake was 
of another kind, in length and girth little difference waa 
visible. 

At this time it was represented to me in a report* by the 
news writer of the Deccan that liah&bat K. had ordered 'Arif 
s. Zihid to be executed, and had put him (».e., Zahid), with 
two other sons, in prison. It appeared that that wretched 
man had written with his own hand a petitiim to Bi-daulat 
repnceaenting on the part of his father and himself his loyalty, 
sinoerity, repentance, and shame. By fate that letter feU 
into the hands of Hahabat K. Having sent for 'Arif into 
his presence he showed him the letter. As he had written a 
decree for his own blood, he could not make any aeoeptabls 
excuse, and of necessity he was executed, and his father and 
facothers imprisoned. 

On tbe 1st {j^uidid it was reported that Staji'at K. 'Arab, 
htd died a natural death in the Deccan. 

* Firiuips the nri*Tn*~c is that Mehlbat had impcisooed *Arif, the 
eon of the MfcM t^om Jahaacir had «««»««— to death, for in the 
Mth year Jahangir speaks of Zihid ae a lebeL Batthesmtenoeisnot 
elear. 



At this time a report came from Ibrahim K. Fat^-jang that 
Bi-daulat had entered Orissa. The particulars of this are that 
between the boundary* of Orissa and the Deccan there is a 
barrier. On one side there are lofty mountains, and on the 
other swamps and a river. The ruler of Qolconda had also 
erected a wall (dar-hand) and a fort, and armed it with 
muskets and cannon The passage of men by that closed 
route was impracticable without the leave of Qutbu-l-mulk. 
Bi-daulat, with the guidance of Qutbu-l-mulk, having passed 
by that route, entered the country of Orissa. It happened 
that at this time Ahmad Beg K., nephew of Ibiahim K.. had 
attacked the Zamindars of Ehurda. At this strange occur- 
rence, which happened without precedent or news or infonna- 
tion, he became confused and bewildered and without seeing 
a remedy gave up his campaign, and came to the village of 
Bulbullf (Pipli)} the seat of the governor of that Subah 
(Orissa). He then took his women with him and hastened to 
CHittack, which is 12 koss from Fipli towards Bengal. As 
the time was short, he had not leisure to collect troops and 
arrange his affairs. He did not feel himself equal to a war 
with Bi-daulat, and he had not with him associates such as 
were necessary, so he went on from Cuttack to Bard wan, of 
which §alih, nephew of A^af K. deceased, was the Jagirdar. 

* Elliot. VI. 390. It seems probable that this is the place rnentioned 
in the Ma’ftsiru-l-uinarft, 1. 410, in the biography of BaqirK. Najm ^ni, 
and also in 'the PadlMh-nAma, I. 333. It is called there “ the IVss 
of Chhatar DiwSr/* and is described as the boundary between Orissa 
and Tolingana, and is two koss from KhairapSra. One Maii 9 ur, a 
servant 'of Qutbu-l-mulk, had built a fort there, and called it Monfur- 
garh. 

t Bulbnlu [ had supposed this to be PIplI, but the latter place is 
in the Balasore district, and nearer Bengal than Cuttack. Curiously 
enough Pipli or Pippli is not given in the I.G. new ed., though it Ip 
given as Pippli in the old. There is also a Pipli in the Puri district 
(I.G., now ed., XX. 404). In the Ma*isiru-]-umar&, 1. 137 and 104, ui 
the biographies of Ibrfthini Fath K. and A^imad Beg, the place is 
taken to be Pipli. It is also Pipli in the Iqbftl-nlma, 217, where 
also ('Uttack is described as being 12 koss off, towards Bengal. The 
maps show a Pipalgaon between Puri and Cuttack, and about 30 m. 
from the latter place. A Pipli in the Puri district is mentioned in 
the I.G., new ed. 



299 


At first ^lih was astonished*, and did not believe that Bi- 
daulat was coming, until a letter came from La'natu-llah to 
conciliate him. ^lih fortified Bardwan and remained in it. 
Ibrahim K. was surprised on hearing the terrible news. 
Though most of his auxiliaries and soldiers were scattered in 
the villages round about and unprocurable, he yet planted the 
foot of courage firmly in Akbamagar (Rajmahal), and set 
himself to strengthen the fort and collect troops, 'and en- 
courage the heads of tribes and retainers. He prepared the 
things necessary for his guns and other weapons and for 
battle. In the meanwhile a notice came to him from Bi- 
daulat that by the decree of God and the Ordinances of heaven 
what was not suitable to him had appeared from the womb 
of non-existence. By the revolving of crooked-moving time 
and the changes of night and day his passage towards these 
regions had come to pass. Although to the view of manly 
courage the extent and breadth of that country were not more 
than an exercising-ground, or rather than a rubbish-heap 
(puf-hahu “ full of straw ”), and his aims were higher, yet 
as he had to pass by this way, he could not pass for nothing. 
If it were Ibrahim’s determination to go to the royal Court, 
he (^h Jahan) would hold back the hand of injury from 
him and his family', and he might go to Court with an easy 
mind. If he considered it advisable to stay, he would bestow 
upon him any comer of the country he might ask for. 

* Text but the true reapding is Istib'dd namuda, 

“ regarded the thing as at a distance,’* or “ was surprised.” The 1.0. 
MSS. end here, their last words being ”Till at length there came a con- 
ciliatory letter from La’natu-llah (*Abdu-Uah). The R.A.S. MS. con- 
tinues with Muhammad Hidfs supplement. 


ADDENDUM BY MIRZA MUHAMMAD HADI, THE 
WRITER OP THE PREFACE 

The MS. states: “ Up to this place is the writing (ta’RJ ) of 
the deceased IHtig Jahing^. The rest, up to the end of the 
book, is written by Mukunmad HSdi from some trustworthy 
MS. collected together to complete the book. 



aoo 


ADDENDUM 

Mr. Berthold Lanfer’s paper on “ Walrus and Narwhal 
Ivory/’ reprinted at Leyden, 1913, from the Tamg Pao^ 
throvrs light on Jahan^’s remarks about fish-tooth dagger- 
hilts. It now seems certain that they were made of the 
canine tooth of the walrus, or the horn of the narwhal. 
Possibly one reason why J&h&n^ attached so much value to 
the fish-teeth was because they were supposed to be an anti- 
dote to poison. He was fond of such things, and one day, 
when he was heir-apparent. Father Jerome Xavier found him 
engaged at Fathpfir in extracting copper from peacocks’ tails» 
on account of its supposed antitoxine properties. 

It is stated in Mr. Laufer’s paper, pp. 13 and 15, that waltns- 
teeth were supposed to be also useM in reducing swellings. 
As they were often made into knife-handles, it is not improbable 
that the knife which a Bajah of Cochin appears to have sent 
to Akbar in 1569 (Akbar-n&ma, i. 342) was, wholly or in 
part, made of walrus ivory. The Bajah said that whenever 
it was applied to a swelling it reduced it, and Akbar told Abfl- 
l-Fagl that over 200 persons had benefited by touching it. 

In the British Museum there is a fascinating set of chessmen 
made of walrus or narwhal ivory. They were discovered in 
the island of Lewis in 1831, but are supposed to be as old as 
the twelfth century. 



INDEX 


A 

‘Abbis I., S|ih of Persi*, his 
letter to J., 2; faTOurs Mir 
Jumia Mah. Amin, 3; letters to 
J., 24, 94, 96, 240; friendship 
for Khin 'Alam, 116, 116, 162; 
sends presents, 196; birds sent 
to, 221 ; besieges Qandah&r, 
233 ; describes its capture, 241 ; 
J.’s reply, 242 

'Abdu-l-^Azis Naqjibandl pro* 
moted and sent to take Kls(];ra, 
73; promoted, 166, 166; fau- 
jdftr Kingra, 186; gov. Qan- 
dahftr, 192, 244, 260, 267 

*Abda-l-'Aziz, •. gh^n Damln, 
26667 

*Abda-l-9s7yf Armenian, 194 

‘Abdu-1-Kaiim of Qilftn, presents 
Sh6b*^ letter, 24 

‘Abdu l-Wahhib, s. 9ak!m *Ali, 
hisfalse bond, 167 

*Abdu.l-Wahh&b Birha, styled 
DilirK.,73,269 

*Abdtt • 'T • Raj^im KbKn - Khioin 
Aiftliq sends army Gondwina, 
21; does homage, 67; J. gives 
hiiA his own' pUsiin and seven 
horses, 58; appointed Deccan, 
70; reports against *Ambar 
Abyssii^, 166; misconduct of, 
260, etc. See also under Khan- 
l^gngn* 

*Abda-s-Sattftr (associated with 
Father Jerome Xavier) presents 

301 


a manuscript of Hnmiyfln*s, 82 
and note 

'Abdo-llah, s. Khsn A'gam 'Aziz 
Koka, 66 (also <mlled Sarfa- 
rftz K., see Blochmann, 492); 
gets gift of drums, 232; does 
homage, 239 (?); chained and 
placed on elephant at battle 
in Gnjarit, but escapes, 267 
'Abdudlah K. fTr&z Jang given 
elephant, 94, 239 (?); his 
tre^ery, 261 ; joinsrebels, 265 ; 
styled La'natu-llah (accursed of 
God) henceforth, 266, 267, 262- 
266; defeated in Gujaxit, 266- 
267,289,299 

'Abdu-llah Uzbeg ruler in Centra] 
Asia, 30 

'Abdudlah, i..9akim NOrad-din, 
executed for disrespect, 286 
'Abid K., BaUubI of Bangsab, 
made director of buildings, 47 ; 
sent D^can, 60, 61 
Abu-1-Fafl, author, mistake about 
Kashmir, 140 note, l41 
Abul-^asan, s.AqiR46*lf painter, 
draws frontispiece to Jahin^r-, 
nima, styledNIdiru-z-aamIn,*20 
Ab&-l-9«^Ot Shwija, B akhiiii i, 
6, 82,127; bridges the Mihl, 156, 
163; sent Deccan, 193, 220, 261, 
264. 

Abfi l-Qisim GilAni blinded by 
fihih ' Abbis, 69 

Ab6-1-Qlsim Namakln promoted, 
166 



802 


Ab& Sa'fd promoted, 228 
AbQ- 9 .- 9 Ali)^ does homage, 11; 

styled Bi^wi K., 15, 296 
Aohbal fountain, 237 
Aoihld, drink used in Pakll, 126 
Adhar, or Ashar, waterfall in 
Kashmir, 238 

*Adil K. BIj5pttii, JC’s portrait 
sent to, 36, 37, 288, 200, 206, 
207 

Af«al K., Shah Jahln*s Dlwin, 
brings report of viotoxy, 206, 
208; refused an audience, 238; 
given drees of honour, 239; his 
aon killed, 280 200; visits ^Am- 
bar Abyminian and *Adil BIji- 
pari, 200 

Agra, plague at, 65 
AbmA^l^ unhealthy, 6; 10; J.’a 
nickname for, 13; hMvy rains 
at, 21, 33; bad climate, 35 
A^pnad B^ of Kabul, gov. Kash- 
mir, 5; ^th, 16 

Abmad Beg, nephew Ibiihim 
Fat|i Jang, made gov. Orissa, 
210,208 

Ahmad £yi<4h of Sirliind. im- 
postor, 91, 93; pardoned, 101; 
gets preeent, 276 
Ahmad Sultan’s son killed, 267 
Ahmadnagar, accident at siage 
of, 163 

Ahsanu-llah, s. Kb- Aba-l-^asan, 
promoted, 294 
‘Aiihabid garden, 153 
Ajmir, j.’s illness at, and Islim 
K.*a devotion, 102-103 
Akbar, emperor, Jaigest elephant 
Diixjan SAl, 18; tells story of 
adventure with elephant. 4l; 
vows not to hunt with leopards 
on Fridays, 40; took Rantham- 
bQr, 58; orders that Salhn 
should not be taught any reci- 
tation, 70; recogniaig him as 
his successo r , 71; his FathpOr 
mosque described, 71 ; bis aani- 
veisaiy, 00; tomb visited by 


J. and Bagsms, 101, 110, 111, 
125; ordered translation Rija 
tarang, 140; built Srinagar Fort, 
150; used to sit in garden there, 
150, 155,-194; promotes Nihir 

K. ,268 

Akbaniagar (Rgjmahal), Shah 
jTahin at, 200 
Akbar-nima, 155 
Akbarpur, 112, 123, 103 
Akbarquli Oakkar, s. JaUl K., 
161 ; given elephant, 230 
Album (Jung), 02; Alf. K. Qiyim- 
Bhlftid made gov. KAngra, 282 
‘AU Akbar, surgeon, 77 
*AHHuh., s. ^AliRAy,of Tibeli,288 
*Ali Quli Barman promoted, 10, 
245 

Aligarh, J. hunts wolves in, 270 
Alkah (T), Cap. Kishtwir, 135 
AllAh-dAd,s. JalilATitIkl, rebels^ 
85;repents, 120; pardoned, 153; 
sent Deccan, 215; does honmga, 
245 

Alms to the poor, 198 
AmAnibid village, 65, 70, 73, 89 
AmAnat K., superintendent brim- 
ding, 82; promoted, 164 . 
AmAnu llah, s. MaUbat, pro- 
moted, 44, 87, 04, 90, 231, 239; 
styled KhAn sAd K., 257; pro- 
moted, 275 

Amar Singh, RAnA, his death, 
123;his8onBhim, 162 
*Ambar. Malik, Abyssinian, mis- 
conduct of, 155-156; defeated, 
207-208, 200, 206 
Ambi, old servant of ‘AbdQ-llah 
K. Uabeg, 30, 31 

Amru-llah, s. BlAn-UlAnAn, aent 
GondwAna. 21 

Andha Nag (Blind Fountain), 174 
AnIrA*! Sii^h-dalan gets p t e se nk 
2; promoted, 81 ; Ahmad BhajHi 
made oyer to, 93; appointed 
Bangash, 155 

Antelopes, 42, 43, 70. 109; 1,500 
caught, 83. 84 



303 


Anwiii's vmeB, 95, 222 
Apples {rom Baogash, 101; of 
Kashmir, 146 
Apricots 161 

Aqft Aqftyiu, old female sonrant, 
account of, 110-111 
Aq& Beg, Persian envoy, 106 
Aqft Rifi'i, painter, 20 
‘Aqidat K. title of 

Shw&ja Ibrfthim, 63, 232, 282, 
295 

'Aqil K., 4; promoted, 94 
Archers made horsemen, 237 and 
note 

‘Arif, s. Zfthid, executed, 297 
Armenians, 194 

A^el K. III. (of Blochmann) — that 
is, Ja‘far-- story told by his 
daughter's wife, ‘Abdu-lli^, s. 
‘Aziskoka, about moose and 
plague, 66, 67 

A^f K. IV., brother Nfir-Jahin, 
orig. name ‘Abu • 1 • Hasan, 
styled by S3l6h.Jah&n Yaminu 
d-daulah, promoted, 1, 24; 
gets early copy Jah&n^r-nft- 
ma, 37; procures camel's milk 
for J., 46; entertains J., 81 ; J. 
visits him at Agra, taking 
ladies with him, 81, 90, 100, 
131; investigates forgery case, 
168, 168; gov. Gujarftt, 175; 
J. and his ladies visit him, 200;, 
promoted, 230; sent to Agra to 
bring treasure, 245, 247, 250, 
254, 262; gov. Bengal, 282 
Afilat EL., s. Ehin Jahln, pro- 
moted, 245, 259; sent to assist 
Diwar - Ba]iigt|, 269; comes 
from CKiJaiit, 282; given a 
horse and dress, 296 
Asir Fort, 277, 278 
Am, wild, 201 

Aurangzlb, birth of at Do^^mI, 47, 
50 

Avenue from Agra to Attock and 
to Bengal, 100 

*Afuda-d-dMila, or Jamiln-d-diii 


9u8ain Inju, author, presented 
offerings and made tutor to 
Shih Shuji*, 82, 90; pensioned, 
200; presents dictionary, 257 

Azls Koka, Akbar's foster- 
brother. See Khin A*|am. 

B 

Badru-zZain&ii, s. gh^hrujih, does 
homage, 6; promoted and made 
faujdir Patan, 10; waits on J., 
33; promoted, 231; murdered 
by half-brothers, 259 

Badi'u-s.Zamin, a Khwija 
disappears, 91 

Bigh Dahra, another name for 
Nur-manzil garden, 75, 76 and 
note 

Bigh-i-Fat^ at A^niadibid, 24 
and note 

Bahidur, gov. Qandahlr, reports 
destruction of crops by mice, 
49; sends presents, 162: pro- 
moted, 165; eyes affected, 192; 
comes Court, 233, 234 

Bahidur, a Saltin Ahmad, killed, 
267 

Bahidur, landliolder Dhantur, 
126, 127 

Bahllm K. serves *Adil Bijipurl, 
97 

Bahlul s. put to death by Hindil, 
tomb at Bayini, 63 

Bahrim' a Jahingir Quli. and 
grandson ‘AsTxkoka, oomMxiom 
Bihar with diamonds from 
Kokra,37 

Bahramgalla, 179, 180 

Bahwa, Sayyid, or Din-dir K. 
BuJshPri, gov. Delhi, presents 
elephants, 109: takes care of 
Aqi Aqiyin, 111; his good 
administration, 287, 288 

Baihuqi, his story about Mas'id's 
tiger hunt, 270 

Bakhjdii Muh- buries Bahlil 8., 
63,64 



304 


BaUitar Wakil ‘Adil K , 36 
B&lftpur, Battle of, 189 
Baluch K., chief huntsman, 12, 
24, 28 

Banj&r& tribe, 233 
B&'oJi (step-well) built by J/s 
mother, 64 

B&qi, ISiw&ja, promoted, 16, 250 
282 

B&qir, faujdar Multan, 4, 82, 86; 
gets standard, 100; produces 
Allahdkl, 120, 199, 210; gov. 
Oudh. 217, 252. 254 
Baruh, a stage, 64 and note 
Bar&kar, diamond mine, 21 
B&ramula, etymology, 134 
Barbary goats, 88 
Bargis (Mahrattas). 156, 272 
Barq-and&z K., guimer, formerly 
Bah&u-d-din, deserts to Maha* 
bat. 272 

B&rha, origin of title, 269 
Bta) Rfija of K&ngiu, 25, 54, 154 
Bivan, elephant, 18 
Biyazid Hhakkari, faujdar Bhak> 
kar, gets elephant, 30; sends 
tame jbex (rang), 114; gov. 
Sind, 153; given title ot Mu- 
Stifa K., 233 

Begams meet ,1. .at Fathpur Lake, 
66; at Akbar's tomb, 101 
Bhandarkot in Kiakitwar, 137 
Bhio Singh, s. Min Singh, 81; 
honoured. 108; dies of drink, 
218 

Bahrim, grandson *Azizkoka, 37, 
38 

Bhirat BandJla promoted, 88 
Bhim, a. Amar Singh, 123; made 
Kini, 162 

Bhimbhar, route, 143 
Bi-badal, title of Sa*idi, 197; 
goldsmith and poet, 179, 205; 
chroncgcams, 227, 228 
Bl-daulat, J.'s subsequent nick- 
name for Shih-Jahin, 248 
Bihiri Riy. Gujariti landholder, 
delivered up Nannu (Mu^^affor 


Gujariti), 19, 20; gets presenta, 
21, 34 

Bihat ( Jhelam) crossed, 121 ; 
water waist deep, festival con- 
nected with, 167-186: source of 
Bihat at Vitnig, 140; mode of 
fishing in Bihat, 175 
Bihzid, painter, 116 
Bikramijit Baghela, Rija, real 
name Sundar Dis, serves Sfllkb- 
Jahin, 19, 25, 26, 56, 74, 75 
and note, 98, 114, 166, 185, 263; 
killed, 250 

Biids, 112, 157; list of, 168-169; 

dcscriptioh of one, 220 
Bit Singh Deo gets horse, 12, 166, 
159; sent for, 247; waits on J. 
at Thinesar, 250; made a Ma- 
harajah, 253 

Bi^an Dis, painter, 116, 117 
Bishutan, grandson Abul Fa^U 
promoted, 95 

Blacksmith, tragic death of, 211 
Blind, three men, whom the 
had blinded, arrive at Goiirt, 69 
Bridges over Nainsukh how made, 
128 

Brikha, panegyrist, gets present. 9 
Brindiban visited, 103 
Bugliin, a broth, 12 
Buildings at Sikandra, 102 
Buland Dara'iza. Fat^ipur, 72 and 
note 

Buliqi Begam, d. Prince Daniel, 
marriod to Mirzi Will, 91 
Bully isa in Kashmir, 131 and 
note. 132, 140 and note; bound- 
ary of Kashmir, 141 
Buriyi - kubi (mat - treading) 
festival, 162 
Bustard (jarz), 112 

C 

Camera milki 46 
Chamba, Rija of, 223 
Chimpinir, former cap. Gujarit, 
33 



305 


€lhftn4& Qhfti, a Pass, 57 
Chftidaia village, 154 
ChauU HafcU, 181 
Cheetahs, Abkar did not use on 
Fridays, 116 effect on antelopes, 
109-110 

Cherries, t45 and note, 159, 162 
Chital, name of snake, 275 
Coinage Zodiacal 6, 7 
Comet (7), 48 
Conspiracy, 249 
Cuttack, 2W 

D 

Dagger with fish-tooth hilt, 94, 
96, 98, 99 

Dal Lake, 139, 150, 168 
Dftrfib, 8. iOitn-Jdffinfin, 40; gets a 
dress, 49, 88; defeats rebels, 
156, 176; a rebel, 254 
DAid (7), hills of, 127 
Darkhar, 88. Dofar. 

Dasahra festival celebrated, 38, 
100, 101, 176 

Dastam K., reference to, 59 
DA*Qd, craftsman, 204 
DAwar B abfaA . s. Kbusrau, ap- 
pointed to GujarAt, 200, 261; 
dress of honour sent to, 297 
DayAnat K. pardoned, 250 
Dcccan, troubles in, 188 
Decoy-antelope, 43 
Dhantur and Damtur, 121, 124 
Diamond mines, 21, 22, 37 
Diamonds, remarkable one, 8, 9; 
violet one, 38 

DilAwar K. XAkar arrives from 
Dcccan, 4; gov. Kashmir, 6; 
promises to take Tibet and 
KishtwAr, 6; reports conquest 
of Ki^twAr, 122, 135-140; pro- 
moted. 153; death of, 167, 
170 

Dilir K., real name Abdu 1- 
U'ahhab, 73, 162, 2t{2. 2C9 
Dofar or Dbafur, |)ort in Arabia. 
88 and note 


Dohad paigana, 4; Aurangslb'a 
birth at, 47 

DuxgA, also called Bhawan, an 
idol, account of. 224-225 

£ 

Eighteenth year, 253 
Elephant hunts, 4, 5 
Elephants: caught, 12; heights 
of, 18, 24; bridge tested by, 41 ; 
Akbar's story of elephant ride, 
41 ; New Year's Day elephants, 
79 

Eunuchs sent from Bengal, 195 
201 

European artist, 80, 82 
P 

Faqirs, gilts to, 84 
Falcons, white, 10, 11, 107 
Farid BukhAri, 29, 55 
Farid Shaikh, s. Qu(bu>d-din, 153 
Fathpur Lake, size of (no longer 
exists), 6 

Fatbpur Palace, etc., 68, 71 
FaujdAr cess abolished, 232 
FAzil K., director of buildings, 90 
Feathers from Kashmir. 178 
FidA'i K. gives homes, promote<l. 

94, 165. 284. 287 
Fifteenth year. 130 
Firdusi. his M)AhnAma quoted, 36 ; 

satire quoti^d, 252 
Firinghi, artist, ndmed Hunar 
mand, HO, 82 
Flriiz K., eunuch. 83 
Fish. J.'s partiality for, 292 
Fishing in Kashmir. 175 
Flowers, 122, 124, 134. 144, 145. 

16,3. 173. 174 
Fourt«M»nth year. 78 
Fruits of Kashmir, 14.5, 159 

C 

Gajpat K., elephant darogha. K'. 
24 


20 



S06 


Qaj Siqgh. s. SOraj Singh* 100 and 
nota; Parwis marries his sister, 
205 

Qaidibid, J.*s name for 
dAbId, 13 

Ohafit length of, 67 and note 
QhitlChindA. 67 
Qlmi 9 Muh*» his annivefsacy, 26 
Oirdhar, Raja, promoted, 44, 252; 
killed, 282, 283 

Oiijhlk, hunting at, 181, 182, 220 
Goats: Barhacy, 88; M&rU|ur, 88 
Gid-al|b5n garden, 06 
Gfints, Kashmir ponies, 148, 140 

H 

Midi, elder brother HArunn-r- 
Rad^, 201 

HAdI, M. Mi^-f Addendum by, 200 
Qaidar Malik, historian, 154 and 
note; sent to make canal at 
Srinagar, 238 

Qaidw MteA, benefits oonfened 
by him on Kashmir, 148 
9aklm *Ali, physician. 157 
gAkim Beg, Nur-Jaliin's brother- 
in-law (his wife was HpuBja 
Begam), made a UiAn, 5; ill- 
treats Jadriip, 104 and note 
Jtfakim Qakim Hu 

mAm, 37 

Hakim Rukni, misconduct of, 21 1 
Hakim 9adr«. 217 
Halthal-tree, 154 
Handu sheep, 147 
HardwAr, J. visits, 218 
Hari Parbat, 150 
Hmmi AbdAl, account of, 123, 
231 

Hasan *Ali TurkmAn made gov. 
Orissa, 162 

H— inM., s. M. Rustam, promoted, 
122, 274 

Hasan Sayyid. ambassador of 
^AbbAs, 04, 102 

Hawking, 50. 53, 54. 60. 112, 125 
HilAI, eunuch, 103 


Himmat K. arrives, 8; stoiy about 
SAras, 17; appointed Broach, 
26; promoted, 164; arebel, 265; 
killed in battle, 266 
HindAl M. puts Bahlfil S. to death, 
63 

Hindaun, 61 ; inscription at, 63 
Hisbar K. promoted, 10; faujdAr 
MewAt, 54; receives dress oA 
honour, 106 
HumAyfin MS.. 82 
Hunarmand, title of European 
artist (7 Austin of Bordeaux). 
80,82 

Hunting, 107, 220 
Hurmus and Hu^ang, grandsons 
M. M. Hakim, 203 
HtuttinM., a Rustam Safawi. 162 
HuBAma-d-dSn. a Mir JamAlu-d- 
dih Husain and husband of 
Nur*Jahia*s cousin, conveys 
dress of honour and Rs. 30,000 
to Zambil Beg, 178, 277; sur* 
renders Asir to S^-JahAn, 
278; imprisoned MahAbat. 
205 

I 

Ibex {rung), 114; jump of, 206 
Ibn Yaroin, death of, 180 
IbrAhim, Khu^ja and Ba hhshi of 
the Deccan, promoted, 40: gets 
title of ^Aqldat K., which see 63 
IbrAhim K Fat^ jaog, gov. 
Bengal, 00; sends diamond, 
167 ; sends thirty-four elephants, 
261, 208,200 

lkrAmK., a IslAm. K, also called 
Huahabg, 27; faujdAr Fat^pur, 
62; praised, 73; promoted, 80: 
faujdAr MewAt, 102, 103 
ImAm-Quli of TfirAn, his mother 
writes to Nfir- JahAn, 205 
ImAm-Wirdi. huntsman, tests J.’a 
skill, 202 

*lnAyat K. Bajdgb> uf Atiacfis, 4 ; 
given to drink and opium, dies. 
43, 44 



SOT 


Iiicli.Foiiiitamof, 172 

Iiidat K. IGr Simia promoted, 
15, 82, 123; gival fief, 162; 
made gor. Kadimlr, 175; vio- 
U>ry in KUltwir, 209-210: doee 
homage, 232, 235, 284 
*laiTaill|8ii,245,258 
lelim K., gOT. Bengal, 27; plot 
•gtinat, 37; tomb at Fa^pQr, 
73; death, 103 

liibir K. xeoeiires present, 04*; 
promoted and macfo gov. Agra, 
231; does homage, 257; re- 
oeiyes title of Momtfta K., 268 
rtimfidu • d • danlah Madftru-1- 
Mnlk, father of Nur- Jahin, gov. 
Panjgb, 2; presents sapphire, 
23; splendid entertainment by« 
80; reviews 5,000 hone, 117; 
patron of Tfilib Amulf, 117; 
death of his wife, 218; his own 
illness and death, 222 
rtiqgd K. promoted, 2; given 
standard, 7; gov. Kashmir, 215; 
promoted, 269 

I'Kzat K. (perhaps his name 
should be (Jhairat) promoted, 
40; gets presents, 82, 83; killed 
by Afghans, 100-162 
Mzzat K., ruler Urganj, 165 

J 

Jodrup Qosain, J.'s interviews 
with at Ujjain, 49, 52; at Ma- 
thuri, 104, 105, 108 
Jagat Singh, s. Raja Blao, made 
Raja of Kfingra, 75 and note, 
154; rebels, 287; pardoned at 
instance of NOr-JahIn, 280 
Jag^ Singh, s. Rfinfi Karan, 191 ; 
Joins J., 261 ; receives a string 
of pearls, 270 
Jahai^a village, 28 
Jahini^, Emperor, eldest s. Ak- 
bar, celebrates thirteenth year 
of reign at Dobad in Gujarat, 
1: fifty first lunar birthday, 1; 


makes gifts and appointments, 
1-4; goes elephant-bnntii^ 4-5; 
proce^ Abmadlhld, 6; Zo- 
diacal coinage, 6-7; entertain- 
ment on bank Mfihl, 7; fishea 
and distributes charity , 8 ; sends 
inscribed diamond to S. * Ab- 
bis, 8-9; enters Abmadibid, 9; 
sicImM in camp, 10; appoint- 
ments, 10-12; abuses Abmadfi- 
bid a^ gives it nicknames, 13; 
in spite of illness attends In 
iharokot 14 ; impromptu couplet, 
15; pairing of Siras, 16-18; de- 
scribes some elephants, 18; 
frontiqpaece Jahinfl^-nima, 20; 
violent rain, 21; about dia- 
monds, 21-22; rriers again to 
Siraa, 23, 25, 32, 39, 42; ele 
phant-catoh, 24; leaves for 
Agra, 25; copies of Vol. 1. 
Jahintfr-nima, 26; orders exe- 
cutions postponed till sipiaet, 
28; an impromptu, 30, 31; re- 
cites verse at meeting of ^ aiHie. 
32; bids a 8ayyid translate 
Qotin, .*14-35; resolves to give 
up shooting at end of fiftieth 
year, 36; sends portrait and 
quatrain BijipQr, 37 ; copiev 
Jahing^nima given 1‘timiaa- 
d-daula and Asaf K., 37; hunt- 
ing, 39; anecdote of Akbar, 41 ; 
*lnlyat'a death, 43; illness of 
Prince Shujl.’ 45; anecdote of 
Akbar, 45-46; Aurangsib bom 
at Dobad, 47; three days* halt 
47; comet (?), 48; interviews 
Jodrup, Siih-Jahin presents 
his child (Aurangsib) s^ fifty 
elephants, 50; story of gar- 
dener's daughter, 50-52; inter- 
views JsdrQp, 52-53: inspects 
hawks, 54 ; crosses Gbati Chin- 
65. 57 ; duck-shooting, 58; gives 
his puHin to iyi|5n khfinin, 58; 
visits Rantambur. 58; descdhgp 
Akbar*s siege of it, 68-59* 



906 


learn many priaonen and givea 
them gratuities* 59; enjoys 
hawking, 60; Hindaun quatrain 
(Umar Kha'}:y&m*B) at, 62; 
▼isits BayinI, 63; his mother*a 
well and garden, 64; arriTee 
FathpOr, 64; plague at Agra, 
65-67; has & Jahin weighed, 
68; J.*s mother aniTOS, 68; 
Salim Chhlitrs tomb, 70; hunt- 
ing, 70; Fat^pQr mosque,' 71; 
AmftnAbftd, 73; NO? Jahin’s 
necklace, 74; N6r Manzil Gar- 
den, 76; fourteenth year, 78; 
Aminibld, * 83; 8 . Jahin'o 
mother (Jodh Bi’I) dies, 84; 
enters Agra, 84; death of fihkh 
Nawfta, 87 ; hononrs |||)bi- 
hbAnln's other ados, 88; Mir- 
hhur goals, 88-89; aooount of 
8h4i|dl Atmad, 91 ; Sultan 
Parwiz airlTea, 93; fine speci- 
men of. 6sh teeth (? walrus 
tooth), 94; arranges Tisit to 
Kashmir, 97; plants avenues, 
100; visits AkW’s tomb, 101; 
Brindiban, 103; viaite Jsdr&p 
at Mathurt, 104-06, 108; gets 
NQr-Jahln to shoot tiger, 105; 
releases Bhnsrau, 107; orders 
painting of a falcon, 1()8; visits 
Delhi and Rumayun’s tomb 
with children and ladies, 109; 
hunts at Pllam, 109; visits old 
female servant, 110; Kairina 
Garden, 112; hawking, 112; 
Sirhind Garden, 113; Sh8h.Ja- 
han's son, 112, 113; Kalanaur, 
114; Timor's portrait, 116; 
verses, 118; visit of a Lahore 
Mint (Miyan 8.) (This was the 
teacher of Mullah Sh^h, known 
as Miyan Mir, after whom 
Meean Mir was named), 119; 
ring- hunt made, 120; on way 
to Kashmir, 123, etc.; fifteenth 
jrear, 130; account of Kashmir 
and Ki^twar, 1.30-151 ; SSiuja's 


accident, 151; death of J.’a 
wife, Padrillh BanO Begam 
(also known as Saliva BanQ), 
150; defeat at Bangish, 160; 
8. A^mi^ pardoned, 161 ; pio- 
tnre gall^, 162; appointmenta 
made, 162, 164, 165; gets parti- 
coloured fish-tooth from Trans - 
okiana, 166; list of birds and 
beasts Hot found in Kashmir, 
168, 170: visits Yimag, the 
aomoe of Jbelam, 170; viaita 
Inch, 172; viidts Achval, 173; 
B ui iera from shortness of breath, 
176; visite Lar Valley, 176; 
returns India, 177; arrives La- 
hore, 183; Delhi, 104; HUma- 
yfin's tomb, 106; bunting, 107; 
Agra, 107 ; punishes murderer, 
lefieetiobs thereon, 211; tra- 
gical fate of blacksmith, 211; 
illness, 212; bad conduct of 
physicians, 213; Nlir - Jahan 
prescribes for him, 214; Parwia 
arrives, 215; death of Nfir- 
Jahan's mother, 216: leaves 
Agra, 217; Haidwar, 218; 8ir- 
hind, 220; Kangra, 222; ^ath 
of Nfir-Jahan’s father, 222; in- 
spects Kangra fort, 223; has 
bullocks slaughtered on top. 
223; describes jungle-fowl, 226; 
experiments on a 8annyasl, 
227; entrusts Nur- Jahan with 
her father 8 power, 228; hunt- 
ing, 229; in Kashndr, 232; 
abolishes faujdgri cess, 232; 
leaves Kashmir, 237 ; corre- 
spondence with Sll3b* Abbas 
about Qandahar, 240-45; gives 
up journal, 246; bad news 
about Sh4h.Jahan*8 disloyalty, 
246-48; styles him henceforth 
Bidaulat (wretch), 248; a con- 
spiracy detected and punished, 
249 ; near Delhi, 252 ; eighteenth 
year, 253; sends his quiver to 
‘Abdullah RrQz Jang, who sud- 



309 


denly joiDB the rebels, 255; 
death of Sundar (Bikramftjit), 
256; victory over Bidaulat 
(Sh^h-Jah&n) and La'natu-llah 
Abdallah), 256; rewards to 
faithful servants, 256; Mansur 
Faran^ and brother join J., 
258; Badi'u-z-Zam5n murdered 
by his brothers, 259; Parwiz 
starts with large force to pursue 
Bidaulat, 260; death of J*.8 
mother, 261; Ig^afi K.'s victoiy 
over La*natu llah, 261-67; J. 
kills four tigers, 260; death of 
Manstir Faran^, 271 ; Right of 
Bidaulat, 273; birth of ^fthri- 
ykr's daughter, 276; Bidaulat 
at Anr, 278; J. sets out for 
Kashmir, 282; a remarkably 
fine tigcer, 284 ; *Abdu - llah. 
a. Qakim Nuru d din, exe- 
cuted lor disrespectful language, 
286; J. arrives Delhi, 287; 
Kdaulat takes refuge in Qutbu- 
^ Malk*s territory, and proceeds 
towards Orissa and Bengal, 289 ; 
nineteenth year, 294 ; orders 
that the blind and mutilated 
should be kept away from his 
presence, 294; Parwiz ordered 
to proceed towards Allahabad 
and Bihftr, 296 ; Bidaulat at 
Rftjmalljial, 299 

Jahi^ribftd, hunting lodge. 182 
Jahangir Quli, a. ^Azlzkoka, re. 
moved from Bihfir, 38; pays 
his respects, 113; receives ciress 
of honour, 117 

JalftI, s. Dil&war, 135, 136, 137 
171 

Jalftl Gakhar, father of Afcoar 
Quli, killed in battle with 
Afghans, 160, 161 
Jalftl Sayyid, descend. Slfih Alam 
Bukkftri, given elephant, 98 
Jalftl TftrikI, 85 
Jftni, the, 2, 19 

Jamftl. eldest s. Dilftwar, 135, 136 


Jamftl Baluch, Abkaris huntsman. 
27 

Jamftla d din l^usain Inju. See 
*Afudu d daula. 

Jftmi, his verses, 15, 71 
Jftn.bahan, name of a bird, 220 
Jareja tribe, 4 

Jauhar Mai, rebel, 185 (? Suraj 
Mai) 

Jay Singh, grandson M&n Singh, 
253, 257 

JharokJf, J. sits in for hours at 
A^madabad, 14 
Jogrftj promoted, 253 
Jones, Sir W., 36 and note 
Jotik Rfty, astrologer, 152, 160, 
203, 215, 235 
Jughkai tulips, 153 
Jumla, Mir, proper name Mub 
Amin, arrives from Persia, 3 
and note; promoted, 15; made 
Examiner of Petitions, 37 ; pro- 
moted, 154; made Khitns&niftn. 
175; promoted, 276 
Jungle fowl, 220 
Jw&lft Mukhi, 224 

K 

Kabir Bftrha, rioter, executed, 284 
Kairftna pargaiia, 112, 193 
Kftkftpur bhang, 171 
Kid&iiaur visited, 114, 115 
Kalyftn, Raja of Ratanpur, 93 
Kalyftn. blacksmith, tragic fate 
of, 211 

Kftngra, 25, 114, 107; laking of, 
183; J. visits, 223 
Kftnkriya tank, 22, 23, 33 
Kftpur tank. 08 
Karohi, ring hunt at, 120 
Kashmir, account of, 130 el se^. ; 
praise of, 143; gifts to poor 
of. 234 

Kashmiris dirty habits, 148; 
merchants and artificers Sun- 
nis, soldiers Shias, 149 
Khalil Mirza, painting by, llO 



310 


[Qialilu llah 8. Afdu d-daula^ 83 
IQiAn *Alam, ambassador to Per- 
sia, 10, 24, 115, 211, 219 
Khftn A'gam, or *AzIs Koka, cap- 
tures Mufuffar GlujaritL 19, 
250, 256; guardian of DEwor- 
Bakhdi. 260, 261 

IQlin Daurin, real name Sbih 
Beg, anives from Kabul, 61; 
appointed Sind, 81 ; his petition, 
97; his sons, 97; death, 172 
BhEn JahEn Lodi entertains J., 
80; gov. Agra, 81 ; anecdote by, 
163; renounces wine, 165; vil- 
lage given to, 172; gov. Multan, 
191, 233, 234; illness, 259; comes 
from Multan, 281, 285, 295 
Shanjar K., gov. Abmadnagar, 9, 
112 

KhEn - MiEnfin *Abdu - r - Ra^im 
(which see), ode by, 15, 21, 
57; appointed Deccan, 60, 155; 
misconduct of, 250, 253, 273, 
274, 277, 278. 279 
ISlidmat K.. 83 

ISlifr K. of Khandesh, 83, 196, 198, 
211 

KhushEb given KhEn DaurEn, 97 
Biusrau released, 107; death of, 
228 

ISlwEja ^asan hhEldEr, 91 
KhwEja JahEn, real name Dost 
Muh, 28; in charge Agra, 67; 
presents gifts, 76; promoted, 
81 ; arranges ring hunt, 83;.pro- 
moted, 95 ; death and character, 
121, 122 

KhwEja .Beg Safawi, s. Ma'sum 
Beg. death of, 9 

Kifayat K., Diwan Gujarat, 37, 40 
King and Gardener’s d. stoiy. 50 
Ki^an DEs Raja, 111, 123, 287 
KiAfwEr, 135 138; Raja of, 139- 
140, 171,234,238 
Koel, The, 7 

Kokhra, diamond mine, 22 
Kos, correct length of, 141 and note 
Kuh i-MadEr 225 


Kunhar, bnrther of Sundar, 261 . 
Kunwar Singh Raja of Ki^twEr. 
.released from Gwalior, 238 
(probably be is the Raja men- 
tioned at pp. 139-140) 
KuwErmat Kotal, 133 

L 

Lachml NarEyan, Raja KEch 
BiliEr, receives present and 
allowed to depart 2 
Lahore, 183 

La*l Beg made record- keeper, 194, 
274 

La'natu-llah. J.’s nickname for 
’Abdullah FIruz Jang, 255, 262, 
298, etc. 

LEr visited, 176 

La^kar K., gov. Agra, comes 
from Deccan, 81, 83, 102, 196, 
197; nine lakhs taken from his 
house by S. JahEn, 250, 296 
Laikkari, s. YEsuf, 11 and note, 
81, 83, 102 

I^kari, a ImEm-wIrdl, 288 
Loka Bhawan, spring, 174 
Luqman, lines about, 105 and note 

M 

Machhi Bhawan fountain, 172 
MEdbo Singh made Raja, 287 
Maghs,93 

MahEbat K., gov. BangEsh, 40; 
reinforcements sent to, 82, 85, 
sends apples, 101 ; does hom- 
age, 101, 124; gets elephant, 
125, ICl; visits J.. 231; victory 
over SliEh - JahEn, 271 ; pro- 
moted, 275, 279. 281, 282, 284, 
288, 294. 295, 296, 297 
MEM River, 7, S, 28; bridged, 41 
Mabmud 111., 33 
Mabmud Bigara, 33 
MahmudEbEd, 33 
Maktub, librarian, promoted, 22 
MEldeo. landholder. 90 



311 


Mftlik-maidfta giiii» 103 | 

Ma*m0r K.» •lohiteoit 183 
Min Singh, t. Riwnt SiUihar. 

promoh^ 18. 165 
MamOr. punter, etylnd Nldir-ul* 
*A«r.80.108.145.167 
MuifOr K. Facingl. 258; death 
of. 271 

ManOchahr. a. ShOhNawii, 88. 
260; Joins Panrb. 269; ap- 
pointed Jllnip&r. 296 
MlrU^ur goata. 88 
Mad)^u z zamln (also called 
kim 9Adrl), physician, 11; had 
behaviour of. 213, 217 
Masnlipatam. Shih Jahin viaita. 
200 

Meteoric atone, fall of, 204 
Moaque built by J. at KIngra, 
227.228 

Maryam samlnl, J.*a mother, her 
well. 64 and note; too ill to 
come, 66; viaita J., 68; goes 
Kashmir, 123, 202; death, 261 
Mir MMn made gov. Delhi, 106. 

196; promoted, 232 
MbilMu^.. a. Af^, diwIn, killed, 
289 290 

Miyin SiptiUi of Mu^. Mir, 119 
Monkeys. 180 
Mouse and plague, 66 
Mubiriz K. promoted, 163 
Muh* Sayyid gets Qoran, told to 
translate it. 34 
Mu*iEzI, poet, his ode, 29 
Mukarram K. comes from Orissa, 
8; gov. Delhi, 200, 218 
Mnttli9 K comes from Bengal. 

104; diwIn of Parwls, 107 
Mulberries. 146 

MuUI Mi4. KaAii^ (T tranala or 
RIjatarangini), 187 
M&mini. physician, 231, 232; pro- 
moted, 282 

Mumtiz K, gov. Agra, death, 285 
'^uqarrab, gov. Bihar, 35, 38, 72 
78, 89; his garden, 112. 193; 
gov. Agra, 285 


Muqlm styled Kiflyat 

K. 276 

Mur^.i-zaifn, golden pheasant 

(?),221 

Mnrta^ K.. real name Farid 
BuJihlri, 29; at aiego KIngra, 
55; death, 55 

Muruwwat K sends elephants 
from Bengal, 2; promoted, 7; 
sends eight elephants, 40; death 
in battle with the Magha 93 
MQsIwl, 164, 249, 250; made 
examiner of petitions, 257 
Musk deer, 151 
MttslafI K, gov. Sind, 232 
Mu'tamid, author Iqbllnlma. in 
charge artillery. 1; promoted, 
2; makes offering, 100*01; in 
Kashmir, 128; sent to select a 
site, 129, 131-132, 158; examiner 
petitions, 175; obtoins leave, 193 ; 

Deccan and sent for, 
235; continues J.*s journal, 246 
Mttsaffar, gov. Sind, comes Court, 
18; honoured, 24, 26 (?) 

N 

NIdir-ul-'Atr, painter, title of 
Ustid MansClr, 20 and note, 157 
NIhir K. comes from Deccan, 8; 
promoted, 22; of Hindu origin, 
bis history, 267, 268 
Nainsukh River, 127 
Nafru'llah ‘Arab, 135, 138, 170 
Naugb^hra, in Kashmir, 181 
NIyaks, two Kashmiri land- 
holders, 180 

New Year FeasU. 1, 78. 130. 199. 

230, 253, 294 
Niglmi quoted, 273 
NOh Forest in Aligarh, 270 
Vfir.b aldidil s sect, 149 
NOr- Jahin. wife J., nurses 
45; illness of, 74; shwits tiger. 
105; daughter s fttarringc, 187, 
190; gives entertainment, 192. 
I 199; writes ImlmQulI smotlier. 



312 


205; grand entoHainment, 214; 
mothcr'B death, 210: father s 
death, 221, 222; powers granted 
to. 228; Sh&h.Jah&n seizes her 
fief, 235; buys two pearls, 237» 
239 and note; writes to her 
cousin's husband, ]fj[us&ma d- 
din, 277; intercedes for Jagat 
Singh, 289 

Nur-Afghiin garden, 197 
Nur-manzil garden, same as 
Dohra ganlen, 277 
NQrpur, 154. 226 
Nuru d-din Quii. kotw&l. makes 
offerings. 80 

O 

Orissa, ^asan *Ali I'urkinftn 
made gov. of, 102, 208 
Otto of roses (atar Jah&ngiri). 

1 15 and note 

P 

Painters, account of, 20 
Pakli, accourit of, 120 
Pftlam. hunting-ground. 109 
P&mpfir, 170 

Panj Bi &ra in Kashmir. 171 
Panju, landholder of Khandesh, 21, 
Paplha bird, Ui4 
Pari Beg. chief huntsman, 107 
Paru'iz Sultan, s. <7., birth of a 
son, 19: sends elephant, 70; 
pn)inoted. 82; sent for, 84; 
asks for dross, 90; waits on J., 
93; takes leave, 107; gets vil- 
lage in Kashmir, 171; death of 
eldest son, 110; dress sent to, 
194; made* gov. Bihar, 200; 
visits J., 215; J. meets him, 
258; ])roinoted to 40.000 with 
.30.000 horse, 259; gifts to. 200, 
271. 272, 275; rcjiort from. 277, 
282, 2S8, 294; marries K&ja 
Gnj .Singh's sister, 295, 296 
Partridge, .albino. 284 


Peaches, 170, 205 
Pearl, lost and found, 235 
PhOl paikEr, name of a bird, 220* 
221 

Picture gallery, 161-162 
Pillars (ml/) erected at each koss. 
100 

Pirn darang, 128 and note 
PiplI, 208 

Pirpanjal Pass, 179 
Plague in Agra, 6, 66-07 
Prithi Chand, s. Manohar, 25, 20; 
killed, 155 

Promotions, 83, 153, 155, 232. 

250. 254, 256, 258, 261 
PQnch route, 07 

Q 

Qarqara, crane, 176 
Qftsim K.. s. MirMur&d, formerly 
Mir Qftsim and Bajdishi of the 
Altadis, made gov. of Punjab 
and given title of Qftsim K., 2; 
he was son in law of rtim&dii- 
d dnula’. having married Mft- 
nijS Begam. elder sister of 
Nur.Jahftn (Beale), and so 
I timftdii d daula induced J. to 
make Qftsim gov. Punjab, 2: 
reinovwl ii’om gov. Bengal. 50; 
do(‘s homage. 117; gov. Liihore, 
182; sept K&ngra. 192; gov 
Punjab and given elephant, 
etc., 230 (ho is the man who 
took Hugh in ^&h - Jah&n's 
reign) : promoted, 281 
Qftsim K. Shaildl. of Path pur 
Sikii, gov. Allahabad, and given 
title of Mu|]ita^im K.. 202 
Qftsim hbwftja of Dihhid semds 
falcons. 10 

Qftzl ‘AIkIu-I-'Aziz sent by Sh&h- 
Jnh&n to Delhi, 295, 290 
Qa/.i Xftsir of Burhanpur visits 
J., 210 

Qiyfim K., story about Sfiras, 17 
QizilbA^K. promoted, 12 



313 


Quails, 197 
Qutls oxen, 151 

Qutbu-d-di4 Kokaltiflb (killed by 
Sherftlgan), 71, 79 snd note 
Qtt(bu4 mulk, 'ruler Qolconda, 
3; sends diamond ring, 8, 90. 
281; assists Shkb-Jahftn to 
maroh into Orissa. 201, 298, 298 

R 

Rafiq ^Ajf brings 8. 'AbbAs's 
letter and gets title of King of 
Merchants, 2 

Ra^mAndAd, a KkAn-ldiAnAQ, death 
of, 170 

RAja-tarangini translated by Ak 
bar's order, 140 
RAJaur in Kashmir, 180-181 
RAmgarh, 48 

Ran-bAz. s. ShOh-bAz KAmbfi, pro- 
moted, 45 

RanthambOr Fort, 58 
RAy M An Kkidmatiyya, 83 ; oollectH 
800 antelopes at AmAnAbAd, 
83; picks up 8. ShujA', 152 
Revenue of KightwAr, 139; of 
Kashmir, 143 
RUlb In Kashmir, 149 
Routes in and to Kashmir, 130, 
149 

Rul^, remarkable, 195 
Rndagi quoted, 222 
Radar BhattachAraj, 203 
RiMia-llah, pjfysician, rewarded, 
11; receives gifts, 33; cures 
NOr-JahAn, 53 

Ruknl 9akim, 43; dismissed, 211. 
212 

Rustam- bAri, garden at A^mad- 
abad, 30 

Rustam K. in charge Qujarat, 8, 
dif 

Rustam MIrzA 8afawi promoted, 
2; attempts verse, 15: pro- 
moted* 68; skill in shooting, 
106, 123, 133, 162,245,247,249, 
274; ma^ gov. Allahabad, 281 


I ROs-afsun, RAja, sent to remon- 
strate with Khurram (Sh5h- 
JahAn), 236, 249 

8 

SAbarmati River, 21 
gAbit K. (also called DayAnat), 
examiner of petitions, 1, 250 
Sadi quoted, 30 
8Adiq, soothsayer, 235 
8Adiq K. promoted, 15, 82; Chief 
B akhshi . 222; gov. Punjab. 259 
8adr JahAn, 88; faujdAr Kanauj, 
107 

8adrA ^aklm. bad behaviour of, 
213,217 

9afApur. in Kashmir. 170 
Saffron, account of, 177-178 
8alt K., 262; his victory, 264-287 
l^'idA, goldsmith and poet, 
known as Bi-badal. 29, 30, 170 
105. 197, 227, 228 
8alAbatK., 274 
9A1% Beg killed. 200 
8Alih, nephew JA'far promoted. 3 : 

at BnrdwAn. 208. 209 
^Ali^a BAnfi. d. QA’iin K.. one of 
J.’s wives, also known as PA- 
didlAh BAnu Bcgam. 80 and 
note; death, 159 

Salim ChiflhtI* visits tomb, 70; 

account of, saint's death, 70, 71 
SanA'i 9akim. poet, verse of. 105 
SangrAm, landholder. Punjab, 5, 
88, 120. 138, 154. 171: pro- 
moted. 175, 193 

SArang Deo RAja promoted. 182- 
250. 281 

SAras, birds, 10. 18. 23, 25, 32, 39. 
42,00 

SardAr K., title of UwAja YAdgAr, 
b. of 'Abdu llah Ffruz Jang 
(Blochniajm, 492). 89 
Sar-farAz K.. title of .Xbdu llah. 

s, 'Aziz Koka. 2. 47 
Sayyid ‘.AJi HamadAnl. saint. 
142 



S14 


Sayyid Mi^., dfisoend. 9|ih *A1 mb» 
34 

SaBftwuls, twelve appointed Dec- 
can, 235 

Seer, weight of, 108 and note 
Seventeenth Year, 230 
Sl&b-i-BarSt festival, 22, 94 
ShAh.Jaliftn, s. J., tries his sword, 
8; attack of fever, 14; his dia- 
mond ring, 14, 19; undertakes 
conquest of Kftngra, 25; asks a 
paigana for BikramAjIt, 26 ; re- 
ceives copy of JahAn^-n&ma, 
27; sends to S. ‘Adil, 

37, 39; presents Kashmiri boat 
to his father, 47; birth of 
Aurangaib, 47; birthday feaht, 
50; asks pardon for Siiraj Mai, 
55; hawking, 60; is weighed, 
68; grand entertainment, offer- 
ings to his father on New Year’s 
Day, 78-79; death of mother, 
84, 90; presents tooth (walrus ?) 
to his father, 96, 98; birth of 
son (Umid-baUA), 112, 113; 
gives his father a sword of 
Venetian workmanship, 114; 
pays his respects, 117, IM, 189, 
100; death of daughter, 203; 
letter from him, 206; J. sends 
presents to, 208; twenty lakhs 
sent to, 215; reports 
death, 228; J. orders him to 
come with army, 231; report 
of his misconduct, 235, 236» 
238, 239, 243; disloyalty, 247; 
8tyl4d Bl-daulat, 248, 249, 
250, 251, 253, 256, 257, 258, 
262, 264; levies four lakhs of 
Ma^mudls in Surat, 267, 269, 
271, 272, 273, 274, ^6, 277. 
278, 279. 280, 281, 289, 290, 
294,295,298,299 
Shkh Nawffa K.» a. Bikn-Uifaila, 
promoted, 5, 37; account of 
his death, 87; d. married to 
aikb-Jehln. 203 

Siahriyir, s. J. marries NOr 
Jahftn’s daughter, 187; gets 


pment, 107; promoted, 199, 
202; daughter bom to, 276; ap- 
poiiited to Qandahar ezpedj- 
tloii,237 

Siajft’at JL *Aiab does homage, 
8; gifts, 80; promoted, 155, 
209; death of, 297 
Sh^lamir garden in Kashmir, 151 
Siankar BIwat, death of, 18; his 
son, 86 

S^rim Singh, Raja of GariiwU, 
202 

Stkandar-Mn*&i, huntsman, 182 
Shvija* s. Sh8b-Jahin, illness, 45- 
46; accident to, 151 ; illness 203 
Sirhind, garden of, 113, 193, 220 
Sixteenth year, 199 
Snake, account of, 275, 297 
Srinagar, 141 

Star (?), appearance of, 48 
Subbin Qnli, huntsman, put to 
death, 27-28 

Suhrib, s. M. Rustam, 39; pro- 
moted, 68; drowned, 132 
Sukh Nig waterfall, 157 
Sullin Qusain of Pakll, 125; 
death of, 271 

Sultin Sikandar, his mosque, 142 
Sundar (see Bikiamijit), serv. 
Slih-Jahin, 185; 249, death of, 
256,261 

Suraj Mal,s. Bisi, 25; misoonduot, 
54, 74, 75, 138 
Siraj Singh, death of, .99 
Surjan Hi^i of RanthambAr, 58, 
59 

T 

Tilib AmaU, poet, 117, 118 
fUib (Biba) Iqpahini, 118, 119 
and note, 234 
Tin Sen, singer, 71 
Tiql, serves Skih- Jahln, 25, 56 
Tiql Ehwija, director of buildings, 
made diwan of Deccan and 
styled MutaqidK., 126 
Tarblyat Km s. Qi*lm, death of, 
86 and note (his real name was 
*Abdu-r-RabIm, and his sister. 



315 


Binu, WM married to J. 
and known as Pldigblb Maball) 
Tarkaijb-baiidAn, 237 and note 
Thirteenth year, 1 
Tlmilr, portrait of, 116 
Tulips, 144, 153 
TOd-maig, 163 

U 

Ukna, a nest-hawk, 11 
‘Umar quatrain by, 62 

Umld BskhA. Sbi^'JuhAn's son, 
112 

Uigsnj, 166 

UmsI, an ornament used in 
Deocan, 36 

‘Ufmln Afghan plots Islftm’s 
death, 27 

UBtld(?),apoet,44 
Ustids Kalyin and P0rin, en- 
gravers, 28r 20 

V 

Vitrak River, 33 and note 
Vedas, reformists, 108 
Venetian sword, 114 
Voth Tarw&h Festival, 168 
Vir-n&g, source of Jhelam, 142, 
170, 173 

iV 

Waul Khwftja, agricultural author- 
ity, made Karorl of Sirhind in 
order to look alter garden, 113 
Wakils of *Adil Bijapuri, 36 
Wall M., s. Kh. Uasan Nagriibandi 
marries Prince Daniers daugh- 
ter, 91 ; promoted, 94; appointed 
Deocan, 111 

Waterfall at Oh&ti Ch6n<}a, 57; 
in Kashmir, 178 

Warir K., Parwiz's diwin, pre- 
sents, 28; elephants, 93; made 
diwIn Bengal, 04; death, 167 


Wild ass, 201 
Wolf story, 270 
I Wular Lake, 168 

Y 

Ya*qub Kasnmiii, his battle with 
Rija Bhagw&n Dis, 132 
Yusuf, s. Qusain Tukriya, sudden 
death of, 202 

Yusuf Beg a Bada kfashl . named 
Rustam, promoted, 275 

Z 

Zabardast K. promoted, 10; gets 
elephant, 94; promoted, 101; 
made master of ceremonies, 
198; gets standard, 252 
Zalar K., s. Zain K., death of, 229 
Zihid K., s. Shuji*it ‘Arab, 194; 
his letter, 273; imprisoned by 
Mahibat and his son executed, 
297 

Zahlru d-din Mir promoted and 
given a present, 236, 237 (ho 
was descended from a saint 
and came from Persia) 

Zambil Beg, Persian, ambassa- 
dor ; Rs. 30,000 and dress sent 
to; 17S, 18G, 198, 201; given a 
village yielding Rs. 16,000, 211 : 
bidden to wait in Lahore 230 
Zainu-1- 'Abidin, s. Ja'fir Asaf K. 
111. made Ba kfash i of ahadU. 
159; ; having been sent to 

summon S3|ih Jah&n rcfiorts 
that he stipulated to be allowed 
to stay in Mindu for the rainy 
season 234 
Zebra, account of 20 
Zodiacal coinage, 7 
Zu-l-faqftr Turkman promoted, 
233; killed, 280 

Zu-1 Qamain, Armenian, account 
of. 194 



rmt AtMA’i’ic sucK,rt 




fm Mumcaoam 

TfiO Old