Some Problems of Philosophy: A Beginning of an Introduction to Philosophy (William James, 1911)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/SomeProblemsOfPhilosophy). Posthumous unfinished introduction to philosophy: substance, design, free will, and the pragmatic method.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


writes, the man who stays on particular feel¬
ing must remain outside philosophy.’ The
philosopher’s business, according to Mr. Brad¬
ley, is to qualify the real ‘ideally ’ (i. e . by con¬
cepts), and never to look back. The ‘ideas ’
meanwhile yield nothing but a patchwork, and
show no unity like that which the living per¬
ception gave. What shall one do in these per¬
plexing circumstances? Unwilling to go back,
Bradley only goes more desperately forward.
He makes a flying leap ahead, and assumes,
beyond the vanishing point of the whole con¬
ceptual perspective, an ‘absolute’ reality, in
which the coherency of feeling and the com¬
pleteness of the intellectual ideal shall unite in
some indescribable way. Such an absolute
totality-in unity can be, it must be, it shall be,
it u he says. Upon this incomprehensible
metaphysical object the Bradleyan metaphysic
establishes its domain . 1


The sincerity of Bradley’s’criticisms has
cleared the air of metaphysics and made havoc

Minip.m. Se* hi, Appnranc, md
94


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


future time in the person of numberless per-
ceivers, is to substitute our various conceptual
systems which, monstrous abridgments though
they be, are nevertheless each an equivalent,
for some partial aspect of the full perceptual
reality which we can never grasp.

This, essentially, is Bergson’s view of the
matter, and with it I think that we should rest
content . 1

I will now sum up compendiously the result
of what precedes. If the aim of philosophy
Summary were the taking full possession of all
reality by the mind, then nothing short of
the whole of immediate perceptual experience
could be the subject-matter of philosophy, for
only in such experience is reality intimately
and concretely found. But the philosopher,
although he is unable as a finite being to com¬
pass more than a few passing moments of such
experience, is yet able to extend his knowledge
beyond such moments by the ideal symbol of

1 Bergson’s most compendious statement of Mi doctrine is in the
4 Introduction 4 la Mltapbyiiqtte/ in the Rems is M&taphysique si d$
Morals, 190$, p. i. For a brief companion between Mm and Bradley,
see an essay by W# &m*s» b tbe Journal of Philosophy, vol vii, no, t*

m


CHAPTER VI


PERCEPT AND CONCEPT —SOME
COROLLARIES

The first corollary of the conclusions of the
foregoing chapter is that the tendency known in
philosophy as empiricism, becomes confirmed.
Empiricism proceeds from parts to wholes,
treating the parts as fundamental both in the
order of being and in the order of our know¬
ledge . 1 In human experience the parts are per-
i. Novelty cepts, built out into wholes by our

becomes

possible conceptual additions. The percepts
are singulars that change incessantly and never
return exactly as they were before. This brings
an element of concrete novelty into our experi¬
ence. This novelty finds no representation in
the conceptual method, for concepts are ab¬
stracted from experiences already seen or given,

1 Naturally tW* appt m in the present place only to the greater
whole which phioaophy eonsidera; the universe namely, and its parti,
for there are plenty of minor wholes (jmmd md 1 organisms, fur
example) in which both the being of the part* and our understanding
of the parts are founded.


08


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

the pretension to an all-inclusive vision. It
ekes out the narrowness of personal experience
by concepts which it finds useful but not
sovereign; but it stays inside the flux of life
expectantly, recording facts, not formulat¬
ing laws, and never pretending that man’s
relation to the totality of things as a philoso¬
pher is essentially different from his relation
to the parts of things as a daily patient or
agent in the practical current of events. Phi¬
losophy, like life, must keep the doors and
windows open.

In the remainder of this book we shall hold
fast to this empiricist view. We shall insist
that, as reality is created temporally day by
day, concepts, although a magnificent sketch-
map for showing us our bearings, can never
fitly supersede perception, and that the ‘eter¬
nal’ systems which they form should least of
all be regarded as realms of being to know
which is a kind of knowing that casts the know¬
ledge of particulars altogether into the shade.
That rationalist assumption is quite beside the
mark. Thus does philosophy prove again that

100


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


which mutually interpenetrate. The concept¬
ual systems of mathematics, logic, aesthetics,
ethics, are such realms, each strung upon some
peculiar form of relation, and each differing
from perceptual reality in that in no one of
them is history or happening displayed. Per¬
ceptual reality involves and contains all these
ideal systems, and vastly more besides.

A concept, it was said above, means always

the same thing: Change means always change,

3. The white always white, a circle always a

self-same- circle. On this self-sameness of con-
ness of

ideal eeptual objects the static and ‘eter-
objeet* na j»character of our systems of ideal
truth is based; for a relation, once perceived to
obtain, must obtain always, between terms
that do not alter. But many persons Aad
difficulty in admitting that a concept ussd fc
different contexts can be intrinsically the same.
When we call both snow and paper * white * it is
supposed by these thinkers that there must be
two predicates in the field. As James Mill
says: 1 ‘Every colour is an individual colour,

1 Amlym* qf tfo Emm Mind ( 1888 ), i, 248 .

I02


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

for the other in certain operations without
changing the result. If we are to discuss same¬
ness profitably we must bear these pragmatic
meanings in mind.

Do then the snow and the paper show no
difference in color? And can we use them in¬
differently in operations? They may certainly
replace each other for reflecting light, or be
used indifferently as backgrounds to set off
anything dark, or serve as equally good samples
of what the word ‘white’ signifies. But the
snow may be dirty, and the paper pinkish or
yellowish without ceasing to be called ‘white
or both snow and paper in one light may differ
from their own selves in another and still be
‘white,* — so the no-difference criterion seems
to be at fault. This physical difficulty (which all
house painters know) of matching two tints so
exactly as to show no difference seems to be
the sort of fact that nominalists have in mind
when they say that our ideal meanings are
never twice the same. Must we therefore ad¬
mit that such a concept as ‘white’ can never
keep exactly the same meaning?

104


SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY

white is always the same white. What sense
can there be in insisting that although we our¬
selves have fixed it as the same, it cannot be
the same twice over? It works perfectly for
us on the supposition that it is there self-
identically; so the nominalist doctrine is false
of things of that conceptual sort, and true only
of things in the perceptual flux.

What I am affirming here is the platonic
doctrine that concepts are singulars, that con¬
cept-stuff is inalterable, and that physical
realities are constituted by the various con-
cept-stuffsof which they ‘partake.’ It is known
as ‘ logical realism ’ in the history of philosophy;
and has usually been more favored by rational¬
istic than by empiricist minds. For rational¬
ism, concept-stuff is primordial and perceptual
things are secondary in nature. The present
book, which treats concrete percepts as pri¬
mordial and concepts as of secondary origin,
may be regarded as somewhat eccentric in its
attempt to combine logical realism with an
otherwise empiricist mode of thought. 1

1 PoraddiUc«^reai*rJt»kila.vor»f tlwiameattMiofeoiioeptaAldb-
lCKJ


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


in which a painted background continues a real
foreground so cunningly that one fails to de¬
tect the joint. The world we practically live
in is one in which it is impossible, except by
theoretic retrospection, to disentangle the con¬
tributions of intellect from those of sense. They
are wrapt and rolled together as a gunshot in
the mountains is wrapt and rolled in fold on
fold of echo and reverberative clamor. Even
so do intellectual reverberations enlarge and
prolong the perceptual experience which they
envelop, associating it with remoter parts of
existence. And the ideas of these in turn work
like those resonators that pick out partial
tones in complex sounds. They help us to
decompose our percept into parts and to ab¬
stract and isolate its elements.

The two mental functions thus play into
each other’s hands. Perception prompts our
thought, and thought in turn enriches our per¬
ception. The more we see, the more we think;
while the more we think, the more we see in
our immediate experiences, and the greater
grows the detail and the more significant the

108


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

real. Rationalistic thought, with its exclusive
interest in the unchanging and the general,
has always de-realized the passing pulses of
our life. It is no small service on empiricism’s
part to have exorcised rationalism’s veto, and
reflectively justified our instinctive feeling
about immediate experience. ‘Other world?’
says Emerson, ‘there is no other world,’ —
than this one, namely, in which our several
biographies are founded.

‘Natur hat wc<k»r Kern noch Sehale;

Alles ist sic mit einem male.

Dieh priife <lu nur allmnmt.

Oh du Kern wier Hehale wist.’

The belief in the genuineness of each particular
moment in which we feel the squeeze of this
world’s life, as we actually do work here, or
work is done upon us, is an Eden from which
rationalists seek in vain to expel us, now that
we have criticized their state of mind.

But they still make one last attempt, and
charge us with self-stultification.

‘ Your belief in the particular moments/ they
insist, ‘so far as it is based on reflective argu-
. 110 '


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

original seat as if nothing had happened. That
concepts can neutralize other concepts is one
of their great practical functions. This an¬
swers also the charge that it is self-contradic¬
tory to use concepts to undermine the credit
of conception in general. The best way to show
that a knife will not cut is to try to cut with it.
Rationalism itself it is that has so fatally un¬
dermined conception, by finding that, when
worked beyond a certain point, it only piles up
dialectic contradictions. 1

1 Compare further, as to this objection, a note in W. James: A Plu¬
ralistic XIniveru, pp*


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


that the parts are distinct and that the whole
is a resultant.

4 This doctrine rationalism opposes, contend¬
ing that the whole is fundamental, that the
parts derive from it and all belong with one-
another, that the separations we uncritically
accept are illusory, and that the entire uni¬
verse, instead of being a sum, is the only gen¬
uine unit in existence, constituting (in the
words often quoted from d’Alembert) ‘un aeul
fait et une grande veritS.’

The alternative here is known as that be¬
tween pluralism and monism. It is the most
pregnant of all the dilemmas of philosophy,
although it is only in our time that it has been
articulated distinctly. Does reality exist dis-
tributively? or collectively? — in the shape of
eachea,- every a, anya, either a f or only in the
shape of an all or whole? An identical content
is compatible with either form obtaining, the
Latin omnes, or cuncti, or the Gexm&r car
a&mmtliche expressing the alternatives famil¬
iarly. Pluralism stands for the distributive,
monism for the collective form of being.

114


SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY


erally kept itself vague and mystical as regards
tlxe ultimate principle of unity. To be One is
TTfarfc of more wonderful than to be many, so
momsm ^ p r j no jpi e 0 f things must be One,
but of that One no exact account is given.
Plotinus simply calls it the One. ‘The One is
ail things and yet no one of them. . . . For
the very reason that none of them was in the
One, are all derived from it. Furthermore, in
order that they may be real existences, the One
Mystical is not an existence, but the father
monism () f existences. And the generation of
existence is as it were the first act of gener¬
ation. Being perfect by reason of neither
seeking nor possessing nor needing anything,
the One overflows, as it were, and what over¬
flows forms another hypostasis. . . ♦ How
should the most perfect and primal good
stay shut up in itself as if it were envious or
impotent? . . . Necessarily then something
comes from it.’ 1

Tins is like the Hindoo doctrine of the Brah-

1 Compare th« passages in C. M. BakewelTaSourca-Boofe in Andmt
Pkilotopky, pp. MS-870, or the first four books of the Vth Ennead
generally, in ft SoaSlier’g tmasktioa.

lie


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

mon men. Thus Porphyry, in his life of Plo¬
tinus, after saying that he himself once had
such an insight, when 68 years old, adds that
whilst he lived with Plotinus, the latter four
times had the happiness of approaching the su¬
preme God and consciously uniting with him
in a real and ineffable act.

The regular mystical way of attaining the
vision of the One is by ascetic training, funda¬
mentally the same in all religious systems. But
this ineffable kind of Oneness is not strictly
philosophical, for philosophy is essentially
talkative and explicit, so I must pass it by.

The usual philosophic way of reaching deeper
oneness has been by the conception of sub¬
stance. First used by the Greeks, this notion

aright and the leaderiurtrayjhe doe# what he will# md decides what he
wither, there In no oppcmr of hii decision and no repeller nl hie decree.
He mated the Garden, Mid mated for it a people* then md them in
obedience. And he mated the Fire, and created for it a people, then
mdl them in rebellion. * * . Then he said, a# has been handed down
from the Prophet: “These are in the Garden, and I care not; md these
are to the Ftoe, and I care not/* Bo he is Allah* the Most High* the
Etog, the Reality. He is not asked concerning what he does; but they
are asked/ (D. B. MaeDocudd*# to Hartford Brnimonry Be*

&*&, January* 1010,) Compare for other quotations, W. James: fh$
VarittwQfMigiow Itoperlsm, pp«

118


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


Spinoza broke away from the scholastic doc¬
trine. He began his ‘ Ethics ’ by demonstrating
that only one substance is possible, and that
that substance can only be the infinite and
necessary God. 1 This heresy brought reproba-

1 Spinoza has expressed his doctrine briefly in part i of the Appendix
to his Ethics: ‘ 1 have now explained,' he says, 'the nature of God, and
his properties; such as that he exists necessarily; that he is unique;
that what he is and does flows from the sole necessity of his nature;
that he is the free cause of all things whatever; that all things are in
God and depend on him in such wise that they can neither he nor be
conceived without him; and finally, that all things have been predeter¬
mined by God, not indeed by the freedom of his will, or according to
his good pleasure, hut in virtue of his absolute nature or his infinite
potentiality.’ — Spinoza goes on to refute the vulgar notion of fined
mum . God pursues no ends — if he did he would lack something, lit
acts out of the logical necessity of the fulness of his nature. — I find
another good monistic statement in a book of the spmomtk type: —
\ « . The existence of every compound objwt in manifestation does
not lie in the object itself, but lies in the universal existence which
is an absolute unit, containing in itself all that is manifested. AH the
particularised beings, therefore, . . . are incessantly changing one
into the other, coming and going, forming and dissolving through the
one universal cause of the polmtud trnimrm , which is the absolute unit
of universal existence, depending on the one general law, the one math¬
ematical bond, which is the absolute being, and it changes not in all
eternity. Thus, ... St Is the universe as a whole, in ii* potential
being, from which the physical universe is individualised; and its being
Is a mathkcatlcal inference from a madmmatiad or an Intellectual
universe which was and ever Is previously formed by an intellect
standing and acting by Itself. This imthenaatical or intcilectual uni¬
verse I e$J| Absolute Intellectuality, the God of the Universe.*

(Solomon J. Siiberstein: Tils iMedmtm qf H# Unipewd Mytteriet,

Hew York, 1W, pp. 1W|)

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

ness in our different minds. Experientially , our
personal identity consists, he said, in nothing
more than the functional and perceptible fact
that our later states of mind continue and re¬
member our earlier ones. 1

Berkeley applied the same sort of criticism
to the notion of bodily substance. ‘When I
consider,’ he says, ‘the two parts (“being” in
general, and “supporting accidents”) which
make the signification of the words “material
substance,” I am convinced there is no distinct
meaning annexed to them. . . . Suppose an
intelligence without the help of external bodies
to l>e affected with the same train of sensations
that you are, imprinted in the same order, and
with like vividness in his mind. I ask whether
that intelligence hath not all the reason to be¬
lieve the existence of corporeal substances,
represented by his ideas, and exciting them in
Ms mind, that you can possibly have for be-
Heviag the Mime thing .’ 2 Certain grouped mnmr
Mom, in short, are all that corporeal sub-

1 W&, book ii. ch*j>. «asvii, II M7.

* PHn t lpl m tf Bmm XnowMb* part i, H17, IS.

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


assigned them by which we are able to recall
that collection.’ 1 Kant’s treatment of sub¬
stance agrees with Hume’s in denying all posi¬
tive content to the notion. It differs in insist¬
ing that, by attaching shifting percepts to the
permanent name, the category of substance
unites them necessarily together, and thus
makes nature intelligible. 2 It is impossible to
assent to this. The grouping of qualities be¬
comes no more intelligible when you call sub¬
stance a ‘category’ than when you call it a
bare word.

Let us now turn our backs upon ineffable

or unintelligible ways of accounting for the

Pragmatic world’s oneness, and inquire whether,
anulyais of

mmmm i nstead of being a principle, the ‘ one¬
ness* affirmed may not merely be a name like
‘substance/ descriptive of the fact that certain
specific and verifiable connections are found
among the parts of the experiential flux. This

1 Tr&xttoon Swum Mtfwre, part 1 , 16 .

* Aadk^ofSxparkiMse, fWtetttr

ft* aabtimo«-ooeetgpt *ee 3. 8. Mai: A S$*m jlegi*,
Mb: i, &«$, 8, II 6-§t B. P. Borne: MAapkyrist, part I, dap-1
B@wa» mm da Wad Mdf $mi atom aa eyawiymota.

m


SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY

prehcnsible. We must seek something better in
the way of oneness than this susceptibility of
being mentally considered together, and named
by a collective noun.

What connections may be perceived con¬
cretely or in point of fact, among the parts
of the collection abstractly designated as our
‘world’?

There are innumerable modes of union
among its parts, some obtaining on a larger,
some on a smaller scale. Not all the parts of
our world are united mechanically, for some
can move without the others moving. They all
seem united by gravitation, however, so far as
vt „ Am a they are material things. Some again
oneneM c f these are united chemically, while
others are not; and the like is true of thermic,
optical, electrical, and other physical connec¬
tions. These connections are specifications of
what we mean by the word oneness when we
apply it to our world. We should not call it on©
unless its part® were connected in these and
other ways. But then it is clear that by the
same lope we ought to call it ‘many.’ so far as

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


more to be called £ one ’ or £ many ’ in this spatial
or temporal regard.

The like is true of the generic oneness which
comes from so many of the world’s parts being
similar. When two things are similar you can
make inferences from the one which will hold
good of the other, so that this kind of union
among things, so far as it obtains, is inexpres¬
sibly precious from the logical point of view.
But an infinite heterogeneity among things
exists alongside of whatever likeness of kind,
we discover; and our world appears no more
distinctly or essentially as a One than as a
Many, from this generic point of view.

We have touched on the noetic unity pre¬
dicable of the world in consequence of our
being able to mean the whole of it at once.
Widely different from unification by an ab¬
stract designation, would be the concrete noetic
union wrought by an all-knower of perceptual
type who should be acquainted at one stroke
with every part of what exists. In such an ab¬
solute a!i~£mower idealists believe. Kant* they


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

next, is altogether different from the ‘ consoli¬
dated’ knowing supposed to be exercised by
the absolute mind. It makes a coherent type
of universe in which the widest knower that
exists may yet remain ignorant of much that
is known to others.

There are other systems of concatenation
besides the noetic concatenation. We ourselves
are constantly adding to the connections of
things, organizing labor-unions, establishing
postal, consular, mercantile, railroad, tele-,
graph, colonial, and other systems that bind
us and things together in ever wider reticula¬
tions. Some of these systems involve others,
some do not. You cannot have a telephone
system without air and copper connections,
but you can have air and copper connections
without telephones. You cannot hsrt
without acquaintance, but you can havt'ac-
quaintance without love, etc. The same thing,
moreover, can belong to many systems, as
when a man is connected with other objects by
heat, by gravitation, by love, and by know¬
ledge.

ISO


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


or in atoms all equally old. There is no
real novelty, it is believed, in the universe,
Unity of the new things that appear having
ongin either been eternally prefigured in
the absolute, or being results of the same pri-
mordia rerum , atoms, or monads, getting into
new mixtures. But the question of being is so
obscure anyhow, that whether realities have
burst into existence all at once, by a single
‘bang,* as it were; or whether they came piece¬
meal, and have different ages (so that real
novelties may be leaking into our universe all
the time), may here be left an open question,
though it is undoubtedly intellectually eco¬
nomical to suppose that all things are equally
old, ,„.'d that no novelties leak in.

These results are what the Oneness of the
Universe is known-as. They are the oneness,
Boaamj pragmatically considered. A world
coherent in any of these ways would be no
chaos, but a universe of such or such a
grade. (The grades might differ, however. The'
parts, e. g., might have spaoe-rektions, but
nothing more; or they might also gravitate; or

li*


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

the question of the One or the Many may well
cease to appear important. The amount either
of unity or of plurality is in short only a matter
for observation to ascertain and write down,
in statements which will have to be compli¬
cated, in spite of every effort to be concise.


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


belong together, instead of being connected by
the bare conjunctions ‘with’ or ‘and.’ The
notion that this latter pluralistic arrangement
may obtain is deemed ‘irrational’; and of
course it does make the world partly alogical
or non-rational from a purely intellectual point
of view.

Monism thus holds the oneness to be the
more vital and essential element. The entire
The value cosmos must be a consolidated unit,
luteone- within which each member is deter-
nMS mined by the whole to be just that,
and from which the slightest incipiency of in¬
dependence anywhere is ruled out. With Spin¬
oza, monism likes to believe that all things
follow from the essence of God as necessarily
as from the nature of a triangle it follows that
the angles are equal to two right angles; The
whole is what yields the parts, not the parts the
whole. The universe is tight, monism claims,
not loose; and you must take the irreducible
whole of it just as it is offered, or have no
part or lot in it at all. The only alternative
allowed by monistic writers is to confess the

130


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

cept unconditionally carried out, it introduces
its defects into philosophy puzzles peculiar to
itself, as follows: —

1 . It does not account for our finite con¬
sciousness. If nothing exists but as the Abso¬
lute Mind knows it, how can anything exist
otherwise than as that Mind knows it? That
Mind knows each thing in one act of know¬
ledge, along with every other thing. Finite
minds know things without other things, and
this ignorance is the source of most of their

. woes. We are thus not simply objects to an all¬
knowing subject: we are subjects on our own
account and know differently from its knowing.

2 . It creates a problem of evil. Evil, for plu¬
ralism, presents only the practical problem of
how to get rid of it. For monism the puzzle is
theoretical: How —if Perfection be the source,
should there be Imperfection? If the world
as known to the Absolute be perfect, why
should it be known otherwise, in myriad! of
inferior finite editions also? The perfect edi¬
tion surely was enough. How do the breakage
and dispersion and # ignorance get in?

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


addable in one shape or another, so that the
next turn in events can at any given moment
genuinely be ambiguous, i. e., possibly this,
but also possibly that.

Monism rules out this whole conception of
possibles, so native to our common-sense. The
future and the past are linked, she is obliged
to say; there can be no genuine novelty any¬
where, for to suppose that the universe has a
constitution simply additive, with nothing to
link things together save what the words
‘plus,’ ‘with,’ or ‘and’ stand for, is repugnant
to our reason.

Pluralism, on the other hand, taking per¬
ceptual experience at its face-value, is free from
all these difficulties. It protests against work¬
ing our ideas in a vacuum made of conceptual
abstractions. Some parts of our world, it ad¬
mits, cannot exist out of their wholes; hut
the others, it says, can. To scan® extent

ralistic

fhec*y the world seems genuinely additive:
it may really be so. We cannot explain con¬
ceptually how genuine novelties can come; but
if one did come we could experience that it came.

140


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


A world working out an uncertain destiny,
its de- as the phenomenal world appears
fects to be doing, is an intolerable idea
to the rationalistic mind.

Pluralism, on the other hand, is neither
optimistic nor pessimistic, but melioristic,
rather. The world, it thinks, may be saved,
on condition that its parts shall do their best.
But shipwreck in detail, or even on the whole,
Is among the open possibilities.

There is thus a practical lack of balance
about pluralism, which contrasts with mon¬
ism’s peace of mind. The one is a more moral,
the other a more religious view; and different
men usually let this sort of consideration deter¬
mine their belief. 1

So far I have sought only to show the respect¬
ive implications of the rival doctrines without
it« ad- dogmatically deciding which k the

*“**“*“ more true. It is obvious that plural¬
ism has three great advantages:—■

1 . It is more 'scientific/ in that it insists

Pwgmattm.

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

So far has our use of the pragmatic rule
brought us towards understanding this di¬
lemma. The reader will by this time feel for
himself the essential practical difference which
it involves. The word ‘absence’ seems to in¬
dicate it. The monistic principle implies that
nothing that is can in any way whatever be
absent from anything else that is. The plural¬
istic principle, on the other hand, is quite com¬
patible with some things being absent from
operations in which other things find them¬
selves singly or collectively engaged. Whick
things are absent from which other things, and
when, — these of course are questions which a
pluralistic philosophy can settle only by an
exact study of details. The past, the present,
and the future in perception, for example, are
absent from one another, while in imagination
they are present or absent as the case may be.
If the time-content of the world be not one
monistic block of being, if some part, at least,
of the future, is-added to the past without be¬
ing virtually one therewith, or implicitly con¬
tained therein, then it is absent really as well

144


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

at once or beg it bit by bit or in instalments.
The latter is the more consistently empiricist
view, and I shall begin to defend it in the chap¬
ter that follows.


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

ferent.’ Time keeps budding into new*mo¬
ments, every one of which presents a content
Percept- which in its individuality never was

ual nov- „

eity before and will never be again. Of
no concrete bit of experience was an exact du¬
plicate ever framed. ‘My youth/ writes Del-
boeuf, ‘has it not taken flight, carrying away
with it love, illusion, poetry, and freedom from
care, and leaving with me instead science, aus¬
tere always, often sad and morose, which some¬
times I would willingly forget, which repeats to
me hour by hour its grave lessons, or chills me
by its threats? Will time, which untiringly piles
deaths on births, and births on deaths, ever re¬
make an Aristotle or an Archimedes, a Newton
or a Descartes? Can our earth ever cover itself
again with those gigantic ferns, those immense
equisetaceans, in the midst of which the same
antediluvian monsters will crawl and wallow
as they did of yore? . . . No, what has been
will npt, cannot, be again. Time moves on
with an unfaltering tread, and never striket
twice an identical hour. The instants of which
ihe ejrietence of the world i, oompowd ere ell

148


SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY


So far as physical nature goes few of us ex¬
perience any temptation to postulate real
novelty. The notion of eternal elements and
their mixture serves us in so many ways, that
we adopt unhesitatingly the theory that pri¬
mordial being is inalterable in its attributes as
well as in its quantity, and that the laws by
which we describe its habits are uniform in the
strictest mathematical sense. These are the
absolute conceptual foundations, we think,

died. 870 b. c* His life overlapped that of Aristotle, who took what on
the whole may be called a biological view of the world, and for whom
‘forms ’ were as real as elements. The conflict of the two modes of ex¬
planation has lasted to our day, for some chemists still defend the
Aristotelian tradition which the authority of Descartes had inter
rupted for so long, and deny our right to say that ‘water * is not e
simple entity, or that oxygen and hydrogen atoms persist in it un
changed. Compare W. Ostwald: Die Ueberwindung dee mssensckaft
lichen Ma&erialismus (1895), p. 12. ‘The atomistic view assumes tha
when in iron-oxide, for example, all the sensible properties both o
iron and oxygen have vanished, iron and oxygen are nevertheles
there but now manifest other properties. We are so used to this as
sumption that it is hard for us to feel its oddity, nay, even its ah
surdity. When, however, we reflect that all we know of a given kin'
of matter is its properties, we realize that the assertion that the matte
is still there, but without any of those properties, is not far remove
from, nonsense/ Compare the same author’s Principles of Inorgan
Chemistry, English translation, 2d ed. (1904), p. 149 f. Also 1
Duhem: ‘La Notion de Mixte/ in the Revue de PhUosophie, voL i, ]
452 ff. (1901). — 1 The whole notion of the eternal fixity of elemen
is melting away before the new discoveries about radiant matter. S
for radical statements G. Le Bon: revolution de la Mati&re.

150


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


ments, or to say that they belong to ancient
kinds, so long as no one of them in its full indi¬
viduality ever was here before or will ever come
again. Men of science and philosophy, the
moment they forget their theoretic abstrac¬
tions, live in their biographies as much as any
one else, and believe as naively that fact even
now is making, and that they themselves, by
doing ‘original work,’ help to determine what
the future shall become.

I have already compared the live or percept¬
ual order with the conceptual order from this
point of view. Conception knows no way of
explaining save by deducing the identical from
the identical, so if the world is to be concept¬
ually rationalized no novelty can really come.
This is one of the traits in that general bank¬
ruptcy of conceptualism, which I enumerated
in Chapter V — conceptualism can name
change and growth, but can translate them
into no terms of its own, and is forced to con¬
tradict the indestructible sense of life within
us by denying that reality grows.

It may seem to the youthful student a rather
15 *


CHAPTER X


NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE —THE
CONCEPTUAL VIEW 1

The problem is as to which is the more rational
supposition, that of continuous or that of dis¬
continuous additions to whatever amount or
kind of reality already exists.

On the discontinuity-theory, time, change,

etc., would grow by finite buds or drops, either

nothing coming at all, or certain units of

Thedis- amount bursting into being ‘at a
continuity-

theory stroke.’ Every feature of the uni¬
verse would on this view have a finite numer¬
ical constitution. Just as atoms, not half- or
quarter-atoms are the minimum of matter that
can be, and every finite amount of matter con¬
tains a finite number of atoms, so any amounts
of time, space, change, etc., which we might
assume would be composed of a finite number
of minimal amounts of time, space, and change.

Such a discrete composition is what actually

* [In the author’s manuscript this chapter and the succeeding chap¬
ters were labelled ‘sub-problems,’ and this chapter was entitled ‘The
Continuum and the Infinite.’ Bn.]

154


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


halves must themselves have halves, and so on
ad infinitum , so that with the notion that the
constitution of things is continuous and not
discrete, that of a divisibility ad infinitum is
inseparably bound up. This infinite divisibil¬
ity of some facts, coupled with the infinite
expansibility of others (space, time, and num¬
ber) has given rise to one of the most obstinate
of philosophy’s dialectic problems. Let me
take up, in as simple a way as I am able to, the
problem of the infinite.

There is a pseudo-problem, ‘How can the
finite know the infinite?’ which has troubled
some English heads . 1 But one might as well
make a problem of ‘How can the fat know the
lean? ’ When we come to treat of knowledge,
such problems will vanish. The real problem
of the infinite began with the famous argu¬
ments against motion, of Zeno the Eleatic.
The school of Pythagoras was pluralistic.
‘Things are numbers,’ the master had said,
meaning apparently that reality was made of

* In Hi Calderwood’a Philosophy of ths Infinite one will find the
subordinate difficulties discussed, with almost no comdmmm si om
of the important ones.

150


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


ously form a convergent series of distances
from the starting point of Achilles. Measured
in inches, these distances would run as follows:

1 + J + 4 + J + -j 1 !! • - • • +n • • • • cd

Zeno now assumes that space must be infinitely
divisible. But if so, then the number of points
to be occupied cannot all be enumerated in
succession, for the series begun above is inter¬
minable. Each time that Achilles gets to the
tortoise’s last point it is but to find that the
tortoise has already moved to a further point;
and although the interval between the points
quickly grows infinitesimal, it is mathematic¬
ally impossible that the two racers should
reach any one point at the same moment. If
Achilles could overtake the tortoise, it would
be at the end of two inches; and if Ms speed
were two inches a second, it would be at the
end of the first second ; 1 but the argument
shows that he simply cannot overtake the ani¬
mal. To do so would oblige Mm to exhaust,

1 This shows how shallow is that common ‘exposure’ of Zeno's
‘sophism,’ which charges it with trying to prove that to Overtake tfa*
tortoise, would require m iniMtely long time.

1 m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


determinate existence may be regarded as an
axiom in ontology. We may be dim as to just
Kant’s bow many stars we see in the Pleiades,

antino¬
mies or doubtful whose count to believe

regarding them; but seeing and belief are
subjective affections, and the stars by them¬
selves, we are sure, exist in definite numbers.
‘Even the hairs of our head are numbered/ we
feel certain, though no man shall ever count
them. 1 Any existent reality, taken in itself,
must therefore be countable, and to any group
of such realities some definite number must be
applicable.

2. Kant defines infinity as ‘that which can
never be completely measured by the succes¬
sive addition of units’ — in other words, as
that which defies complete enumeration.

S. Kant lays it down as axiomatic that if
anything is ‘given/ as an existent reality, the
whole sum of the ‘conditions’ required to ac¬
count for it must similarly be given, or have
been given. Thus if a cubic yard of space be

1 01 the origin in our experience of this singularly solid postulate, I
will say nothing here*


160


SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY


Such was the form of the puzzle of the in¬
finite, as Kant propounded it. The reader will
observe a bad ambiguity in the statement.
When he speaks of the ‘absolute totality of the
synthesis’ of the conditions, the words suggest
that a completed collection of them must exist
or have existed. When we hear that ‘the whole
sum of them must be given,’ we interpret it to
mean that they must be given in the form of a
whole sum, whereas all that the logical situa¬
tion requires is that no one of them should he
lacking, an entirely different demand, and one
that can be gratified as well in an infinitely
growing as in a terminated series. The same
Ambigu- things can always be taken either
K^t> s collectively or distributively, can be
talked of either as ‘all,’ or as ‘each,’
problem or as ‘any.’ Either statement can be
applied equally well to what exists in finite

world without end* It does not mean that what we go on thus to re¬
present shaU have been there already by itself, apart from our acts of
representation. Experience, for idealism, thus falls into two parts, a
phenomena! given part which is finite, and a conditioning infinite part
which is not given, but only possible to experience hereafter. Kjuut
distinguishes this second part, as only aufgegebm (or set to us as a
task), farm the feat part as gegebm (or already extant).

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


merical determinateness of reality (supra, page
160) — the ‘principe du nombre,’ as he called
it — and recognizing that the series of num¬
bers 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . etc., leads to no final ‘in¬
finite’ number, he concluded that such reali-
Renou- ties as present beings, past events
solution and causes, steps of change and parts
of matter, must needs exist in limited amount.
This made of him a radical pluralist. Better,
he said, admit that being gives itself to us ab¬
ruptly, that there are first beginnings, abso¬
lute numbers, and definite cessations, however
intellectually opaque to us they may seem to
be, than try to rationalize all this arbitrariness
of fact by working-in explanatory conditions
which would involve in every case the self-
contradiction of things being paid-in and com¬
pleted, although they are infinite in formal
composition.

With these principles, Renouvier could be¬
lieve in absolute novelties, unmeditated be-
toSois ginnings, gifts, chance, freedom, and
tmaty acts of faith. Fact, for him, over¬
lapped; conceptual explanation fell short; real-

164


CHAPTER XI 1


NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE —THE
PERCEPTUAL VIEW

Kant’s and Renouvier’s dealings with the in¬
finite are fine examples of the way in which
philosophers have always been wont to infer
matters of fact from conceptual considerations.
Real novelty would be a matter of fact; and so
would be the idealistic constitution of experi¬
ence; 2 but Kant and Renouvier deduce these
facts from the purely logical impossibility of
an infinite number of conditions getting com¬
pleted. It seems a very short out to truth; but
if the logic holds firm, it may be a fair cut, 3
and the possibility obliges us to scrutinize the
situation with increasing care. Proceeding so

1 [This chapter was not indicated as a separate chapter in the manth
script. Ed.']

* For an account of idealism the reader is referred to chapter below.
[Never written. Ed.]

* Let me now say that we shall ourselves conclude that change
completed by steps infinite in number is inadmissible. This is hardly
inferring fact from conceptual considerations, it is only concluding that
a certain conceptual hypothesis regarding the fact of change will not
work satisfactorily. The field is thus open for any other hypothesis;
and the one which we shall adopt Is simply that which the face of pm*
ceptu&l experience suggests*


108


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


oblige the whole class ‘star’ to be of one num¬
ber rather than of another, or require it to be
of any terminated number. What I say here
of stars applies to the component parts of
space and matter, and to those of past time. 1

So long as we keep taking such facts piece¬
meal, and talk of them distribulively as ‘any’

itsprag- or ‘each,’ the existence of them in
matic

definition infinite form offers no logical diffi¬
culty. But there is a psychological tendency to
slip from the distributive to the collective way
of talking, and this produces a sort of mental
flicker and dazzle out of which the dialectic
difficulties emerge. ‘If each condition be there,’
— we say, ‘then all are there, for there cannot


1 Past time may offer difficulty to the student as it has to better
men! It has terminated in the present moment, paid itself out and
made an ‘amount.* But this amount can be counted in both directions;
and in both, one may think it ought to give the same result. If, when
counted forward, it came to an end in the present, then when counted
backward, it must, we are told, come to a like end in the past. It must
have had a beginning, therefore, and its amount must be finite. The
sophism here is gross, and amounts to saying that what has one bound
must have two. The ‘end * of the forward counting u the * beginning *
of the badkward counting, and is the only beginning logically implied.
The ending of a series in no way prejudices the question whether it
were beginningiess or not; and this applies as well to tracts of time as
to the abstract regression which ‘negative * numbers form.

168


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


absolutely too big to be; but that some amounts
are too big for our imagination to wish to ca¬
ress them. So we fall back with a feeling of
relief on some form or other of the finitist hy¬
pothesis. 1

If now we turn from static to growing forms
of being, we find ourselves confronted by much
more serious difficulties. Zeno’s and Kant’s
dialectic holds good wherever, before an end
The grow- can be reached, a succession of terms,

ing in**

finite endless by definit ion, must needs have

been successively counted out. This is the
ease with every process of change, however
small; with every event which we conceive as
unrolling itself continuously. What is contin¬
uous must be divisible ad infinitum; and from
division to division here you cannot proceed
by addition (or by what Kant calls the succes-

1 The reader will mote how emphatically in all this dbcmsifcm* I am
insisting on the distributive or piecemeal point of view. The distrib¬
utive is identical with the pluralistic, as the collective is with the
monistic conception. We shall, I think, perceive more and moreckariy
as this book proceeds, that ‘piecemeal exietetm i* independent of complete
oodectibilUp, and that some facts, at any rate, exist only distributively,
or in form of a set of caches which (even if in infinite number) need not
in any intelligible sense either experience themselves, or get experi¬
enced by anythhfg 4m, m members of m All.

170


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


sophic imagination, but for any real agent who
might try physically to compass the entire
performance. Such an agent is bound by logic
to find always a remainder, something ever
yet to be paid, like the balance due on a debt
with even the interest of which we do not


catch up.

‘‘Infinitum in actu pertramiri nequit said

scholasticism; and every continuous quantum

n, gcov _ to be gradually traversed is conceived

ing infin- ag guc jj an infinite. The quickest way
ite must *

b« treated to avoid the contradiction would
as dis-

continu- seem to be to give up that coneep-
ous tion, and to treat real processes of

change no longer as being continuous, but as
taking place by finite not infinitesimal steps,
like the successive drops by which a cask of
water is filled, when whole drops fall into it at
once or nothing. This is the radically pluralist,
empiricist, or perceptualist position, which I
characterized in speaking of Renouvier (above,
pages 164-165), We shall have to end by adopt¬
ing it in principle ourselves, qualifying it so as
to fit it closely to perceptual experience.

17*


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

line in space, and halve its halves and so on.
But between the cuts thus made and numbered,
room is left for infinite others created by using
3 as a divisor, for infinite others still by using
5, 7, etc., until all possible ‘rational’ divisions
of the line shall have been made. Between
these it is now shown that interpolation of cuts
numbered ‘irrationally’ is still possible ad
infinitum, and that with these the line at last
gets filled full, its continuity now being wholly-
translated into these numbered cuts, and their
number being infinite. ‘ Of the celebrated for¬
mula that continuity means “ unity in multi¬
plicity,” the multiplicity alone subsists, the
unity disappears,’ 1 —as indeed it does in all
conceptual translations — and the original in¬
tuition of the line’s extent gets treated, from
the mathematical point of view, as a ‘mass of
uncriticized prejudice’ by Russell, or sneered
at by Cantor as a ‘ kind of religious dogma/*
So much for the number-continuum. As for
‘the new infinite*: that means only a new defi-

1 H. Poincart: la taimet at Ckypoikm, p. 90.

* B. RuweH: Tha Philoaophy ef Matkematki, i. *60,287.

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


the even numbers thus produced cannot in the
nature of things be less multitudinous than
that series of both odd and even numbers of
which the whole natural series consists.

These paradoxical consequences result, as
one sees immediately, from the fact that the
The new infinity of the number-series is of the
paradox;- growing variety (above, page 170).
^ They were long treated as a reductio

ad absurdum of the notion that such a variable
series spells infinity in act, or can ever be
translated into standing or collective form . 1
But contemporary mathematicians have taken
the bull by the horns. Instead of treating such
paradoxical properties of indefinitely growing
series as reduciionea ad absurdum, they have
turned them into the proper definition of in¬
finite classes of things. Any class is now oalW

1 The fact that, taken diatributiveiy, or paired each he each, the
terms one endlessly growing series should be made & match for those
ia mother (or ‘similar* to them) h quite compatible with the two
series being collectively of vastly unequal amounts. Tim need only
make the steps of difference, or distances, between the terms me#
longer In one series than in the other, to get numerically similar multi¬
tudes, with greatly unequal magnitudes of content. Moreover the
moment either series should stop growing, the ‘similarity 1 would cease
tomdit

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

ing could not terminate. Or again it would be
the number of miles away at which parallel lines
meet —if they do meet. It is, in short, a
‘limit ’ to the whole class of numbers that grow
one by one, and like other limits, it proves a
useful conceptual bridge for passing us from
one range of facts to another.

The first sort of fact we pass to with its
help is the number of the number-continuum
Their uses or point-continuum described above
fits 46 ’ (P a § e 17S ) as generated by infinitely
repeated subdivision. The making of the subdi¬
visions is an infinitely growing process; but the
number of subdivisions that can be made has
for its limit the transfinite number Omega just
imagined and defined; thus is a growing assimi¬
lated to a standing multitude; thus is a number
that is variable practically equated (by the
process of passing to the limit) with one that
is fixed; thus do we circumvent the law of in¬
definite addition, or division which previously
was the only way in which infinity was con-
structable, and reach a constant infinite at a
bound. This infinite number may now be sub-

MS


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


paths traversed by the two runners (measured

after the race is run, and assumed then to con-

Russell’s sist of nothing but points of position

of Zeno’s coincident with points upon a com-

paradox mon scale of time) should have the
by their '

means same time-measure if they be not
themselves of the same length. But the two
paths are of different lengths; for owing to the
tortoise’s head-start, the tortoise’s path is only
a part of the path of Achilles. How, then, if
time-points are to be the medium of measure¬
ment, can the longer path not take the longer
time?


The remedy, for Mr. Russell, if I rightly
understand him, lies in noting that the sets of
points in question are conceived as being in¬
finitely numerous in both paths, and that
where infinite multitudes are in question, to,
say that the whole is greater than the part is
false. For each and every point traversed by
the torioise there is one point traversed by
Achilles, at the corresponding point of time;
and the exact correspondence, point by point,
of either one of the three sets of points with

ISO


SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY

called physical, for it attends the process of
formation of the paths. Moreover, two paths
are not needed — that of either runner alone,
or even the lapse of empty time, involves the
difficulty, which is that of touching a goal
when an interval needing to be traversed first
keeps permanently reproducing itself and get¬
ting in your way. Of course the same quantum
can be produced in various manners. This page
which I am now painfully writing, letter after
letter, will be printed at a single stroke. God,
as the orthodox believe, created the space-
continuum, with its infinite parts already
standing in it, by an instantaneous fiat. Past
time now stands in infinite perspective, and
may conceivably have been created so, as
Kant imagined, for our retrospection only, * od
all at once. ‘Omega’ was created by a single
decree, a single act of definition in Prof. Cam
tor’s mind. But whoso actually traverses a con¬
tinuum, can do so by no process continuous in
the mathematical sense. Be it short or long,
eaeh point must be occupied in its due order erf

succession; and if the points are necessarily

IKS


HOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


After this disagreeable polemic, I conclude
that the new infinite need no longer block the
Conciu- way to the empiricist opinion which
sions we reac h e d provisionally on page
172. Irrelevant though they be to facts the
‘conditions’ of which are of the ‘standing’
sort, the criticisms of Leibnitz, Kant, Cauchy,
Renouvier, Evellin and others, apply legiti¬
mately to all cases of supposedly continuous
growth or change. The ‘conditions ’ here have
to be fulfilled seriatim; and if the series which
they form were endless, its limit, if ‘successive
synthesis ’ were the only way of reaching it,
could simply not be reached. Either we must

A mill more rigorous exposition may be found in E. V. Huntington,
77/e Continuum an a Type of Order , in the Annals of Mathematics* vols.
vi and vii (reprint for sale at ptiblieat ion-office, Harvard University).
Compare also C. S Peirce's paper in the Mon id, ii, 557-540, as well as
the presidential address of K. W. Hobson in the Proceedings of the Lon¬
don Mathematical Society* vol. xxxv. For more papular discussions me
J Royce, The World and the Indimdual* vol. i. Supplementary Essay;
Keyser: Journal of Philosophy* etc,* i, 29, and Hibberi Journal* vii, $80**
800; S. Watcrton in Aristotelian Soc. Proceedings , 1810; Leighton;
Philosophical Renew* xiii, 487; and finally the tables of contents of H.
Poincares three recent little books, La science et I'hypothhe, Paris ;
The Value of Science (authorised translation by G. B. Mated), New
York, 1807 ; Science & MUkode* Parts, 1808. The liveliest short at¬
tack which I know upon infinites completed by successive synthesis,
h that in G. M. Fullerton's System of Metaphysics* chapter xi.

184


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

.which an onlooking intellect fails to under¬
stand; but that being should be identified
with the consummation of an endless chain
of units (such as ‘points’), no one of which
contains any amount whatever of the being
(such as ‘space’) expected to result, this is
something which our intellect not only fails
to understand, but which it finds absurd. The
substitution of ‘arithmetization’ for intuition
thus seems, if taken as a description of reality,
to be only a partial success. Better accept,
as Renouvier says, the opaquely given data of
perception, than concepts inwardly absurd. 1

1 The point-continuum illustrates beautifully my complaint that
the intellectualist method turns the flowing into the static and discrete*
The buds or steps of process which perception accepts as primal gifts
of being, correspond logically to the * infinitesimals 1 (minutest quanta
of notion, change or what not) of which the latest mathematics is sup¬
posed to have got rid. Mr. Bussell accordingly finds himself obliged,
|ust film Zeno, to treat motion as an unreality: * Weierstrass/ he says,
‘by strictly banishing all infinitesimals has at last shown that m five
it m unchanging world, and that the arrow, at every moment of its
flight, is truly at rest 1 (op. cit., p. $47). ‘We must entirely reject the
notion of a state of motion/ he says elsewhere; ‘motion consist#
merely in the occupation of different places at different times* * * .
There is no transition from place to place, no consecutive moment,
or consecutive position, no such thing as velocity except in the sense
of a real number which is the limit of a certain set of quotients* (p.
47$). The mathematical ‘continuum/ so called, becomes thus an
absolute discoutinnum in any" physical or experiential sense. Bx-

m


SOME PKOBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

Our business lies hereafter with the perceptual
account, but before we settle definitively to its
discussion, another classic problem of philoso¬
phy had better be got out of the way. This is
the ‘problem of causation.’


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

taken to mean that the effect in some way al¬
ready exists in the cause. If this be so, the
effect cannot be absolutely novel, and in no
radical sense can pluralism be true.

We must therefore review the facts of causa¬
tion. I take them in conceptual translation
before considering them in perceptual form. The
first definite inquiry into causes was made by
Aristotle . 1

The ‘why’ of anything, he said, is furnished
by four principles: the material cause of it (as
Aristotie when bronze makes a statue); the

on causa-

tios formal cause (as when the ratio of
two to one makes an octave); the efficient
cause (as when a father makes a child) and the
final cause (as when one exercises for the sake
of health). Christian philosophy adopted the
four causes; but what one generally means by
the cause of anything is its ‘efficient* cause,
and in what immediately follows I shall speak
of that alone.

An efficient cause is scholastically defined as

1 Book 2, or book 5 , dbap. ii of his MMaphftkt, or chap. iti of bit
Phytici, give what is eweafcW la M» views.

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


when one motion causes another motion; vir¬
tually means that the cause somehow involves
that effect, without resembling it, as when an
artist causes a statue but possesses not himself
its beauty; ‘eminently’ means that the cause,
though unlike the effect, is superior to it in
perfection, as when a man overcomes a lion’s
strength by greater cunning.)

Nemo dot quod non habet is the real principle
from which the causal philosophy flows; and
the proposition causa (squat effectum practi¬
cally sums up the whole of it. 1

It is plain that each mdment of the universe
must contain all the causes of which the next
moment contains effects, or to put it with ex¬
treme concision, it is plain that each moment
in its totality causes the next moment.® But

1 Head for a concise statement of the sch<K>l-doctrine of causation
the account In J. Rickaby: General Meiaphyttm, book % chap. Hi. 1
omit from my text various subordinate maxima which have played a
great part In causal philosophy, as ‘The cause of a cause is the cause
of its effects 4 The same causes produce the same effects *; ‘Causes
ad only when present * A cause must exist before It can tot/ etc.

* This notion follows also from the consideration of conditioning dr*
cumat&nces being at bot^pm as tudfapMamblo m causes far producing
effects. ‘The cause, philosophicdly speaking, Is the sum total of the
conditions positive and negative,* says l 8. Mill (Lagde, 8th oditba, 1/

1M


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


must be generieally one, in spite of the per¬
ceptual appearances; and causation changes
thus from a concretely experienced relation
between differents into one between similars
abstractly thought of as more real . 1

The overthrow of perception by conception
took a long time to complete itself in this field.
Occasion- The first step was the theory of ‘ oc-
* u * m casionalism,’ to which Descartes led
the way by his doctrine that mental and phys¬
ical substance, the one consisting purely of
thought, the other purely of extension, were
absolutely dissimilar. If this were so, any such
causal intercourse as we instinctively perceive
between mind and body ceased to be rational.


1 Sir William Hamilton expresses this very compactly : ‘What is the
law of Causality? Simply this, — that when an object is presented
phenomenally as commencing, w© cannot but suppose that the com¬
plement (L e. the amount) of existence, which it now contain*, has
previously been; — in other words, that all that we at present know m
an effect must previously have existed in its causes; though what these
causes are we may perhaps be altogether unable to surmise/ (Itedef
Lactase 3£ of the MMaphymcs.) The cause become^
a consequence; and since logical consequence follow* ooly from the

ttftrrw tA f nl fbfl * tragti»r

the sharp rationalistic dogma that causeandeffeotaretwonanwsfor

one pereiutent being, and that If the successive moments of thenfii-
ver^ be causally <wnnected, no genuine novelty leaks b.

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

complete. Instead of the dramatic flux of per¬
sonal life, a bare ‘one to one correspondence’
between the terms of two causally uncon¬
nected series is set up. God is the sole cause of
anything, and the cause of everything at once.
The theory is as monistic as the rationalist
heart can desire, and of course novelty would
be impossible if it were true.

David Hume made the next step in discredit¬
ing common-sense causation. In the chapters
on ‘the idea of necessary connection’ both in
his ‘Treatise on Human Nature,’ and in his
‘Essays,’ he sought for a positive picture of
the ‘efficacy of the power’ which causes are
Hume assumed to exert, and failed to find
it. He shows that neither in the physical nor
in the mental worm can we abstract or isolate
the ‘ energy ’ transmitted from causes to effects.
This is as true of perception as it is of imagina¬
tion. ‘All ideas are derived from and represent
impressions. We never have any impression
that contains any power or efficacy. We never
therefore have any idea of power/ 1 We never
can by our utmost scrutiny disoover anything

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

sary connection. Nothing farther is in the case.’
‘A cause is an object precedent and contiguous
to another, and so united with it that the idea
of the one determines the idea of the other.’

Nothing could be more essentially plural¬
istic than the elements of Hume’s philosophy.
He makes events rattle against their neighbors
as drily as if they were dice in a box. He might
with perfect consistency have believed in real
novelties, and upheld freewill. But I said
awhile ago that most empiricists had been half¬
hearted; and Hume was perhaps the most
half-hearted of the lot. In his essay ‘on liberty
and necessity,’ he insists that the sequences
which we experience, though between events
absolutely disconnected, are yet absolutely
uniform, and that nothing genuinely new can
flower out of our lives.

The reader will recognize in Hume’s famous
pages a fresh example of the way in which eon-
ceptual translations always maltw&t
of Btee fact. Perceptually or concretely (as
we shall notice in more detail later)causation
names the manner in which some fields of eon-

198


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

Concepts are notes, views taken on reality , 1
not pieces of it, as bricks are of a house. Causal
activity, in short, may play its part in growing
fact, even though no substantive ‘impression’
of it should stand out by itself. Hume’s as¬
sumption that any factor of reality must be
separable, leads to his preposterous view, that
no relation can be real. ‘All events,’ he writes,
‘seem entirely loose and separate. One event
follows another, but we never can observe any
tie between them. They seem conjoined, but
never connected.’ Nothing, in short, belongs
with anything else. Thus does the intellectual-
ist method pulverize perception and triumph
over life. Kant and his successors all espoused
Hume’s opinion that the immediately given is
a disconnected ‘manifold.’ But unwilling sim¬
ply to accept the manifold, as Hume did, they
invoked a superior agent in the shape of what
Kant called the ‘ transcendental ego of apper¬
ception’ to patch its bits together by synthetic
‘categories.’ Among these categories Kant in¬
scribes that of ‘causality,’ and in many quar-

* Thaw ttpMMknt Betpon’a.

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

The word Verstand in Kant’s account must
not be taken as if the rule it is supposed to set
to sensation made us understand things any
better. It is a brute rule of sequence which
reveals no ‘tie.’ The non-rationality of such a
‘category’ leaves it worthless for purposes of
insight. It removes dynamic causation and
substitutes no other explanation for the se¬
quences found. It yields external descriptions
only, and assimilates all cases to those where
we discover no reason for the law ascertained.

Our ‘laws of nature’ do indeed in large part
enumerate bare coexistences and successions.
Yellowness and malleability coexist in gold;
redness succeeds on boiling in lobsters; coagu-


(the ‘effect ’) we fall back into the popular dynamic view* and any
single mm would exhibit causal action* even were there no other eases
in the world, — Or docs it bind the observer of the single case? But
his own sensations of sequence aw what bind him.*' Be a sequence

causal or non-causa!, if it k sensible, he cannot turn it backwards m he
can his ideas. Or does the rule bind future sequences and determine
them to follow in the same order which the first sequence observed?
Since it obviously does not do this when the observer judges wrongly
that the fiwt sequence is causal, ail we can say is that it Isa rule where¬
by his expf&tation* of uniformity follow his causa! judgments, be these
latter true orfalae. But wherein would tins differ from tb© hatnean po¬
sition? Kant, msfc^Sounder*,aadmno^^
repeating that he has 'refuted Hume/

m


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


pretation has recently been urged. If the later
member of a succession could be deduced
Deductive by logic from the earlier member,

theories of

causation in tlie particular sequence the "tie"
would be unmistakable. But logical ties carry
us only from sames to sanies; so this last phase
of scientific method is at, bottom only the
scholastic principle of ('awa, irquai effectum,
brought into sharper focus and illustrated
more concretely. It is thoroughly monistic in
its aims, and if it could be worked out in detail
it would turn the real world into the procession
of an eternal identity, with the appearances,
of which we are perceptually conscious, oc¬
curring as a sort of by-product to which no
‘scientific’ importance should be attached . 1
In any case no real growth and no real novelty
could effect an entrance into life.*

* 4 Consdousness/ writes M. Coutumt, to die a handy expression of
this mode of thought, * is properly speaking, the realm of the unreal. *..
What remains hi our subjective after all objective facts

have been projected and located In space and time. Is the rubbh& and
residuum of the construction of the universe, the formless mail of
images that were unable to ante into the system of nature and put on
rise garment of reality * (Bmt$ d& Mkaphyriqut, etc,, v, $44).

8 I avoid amplifying this conception of cause and effect. An Immense
number of facts cet* be fipiidgwd satisfactorily by as*


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


But as nothing corresponding to the concept
of power can be insulated, the activity-feature
of the sequence erelong gets suppressed, and
the vague latency, supposed to exist aliquo
modo in the causal phenomenon, of the effect
about to be produced, is developed into a sta¬
tic relation of identity between two concepts
which the mind substitutes for the percepts
between which the causal tie originally was
found . 1

The resultant state of ‘enlightened opinion’
about cause, is, as I have called it before, con¬
fused and unsatisfactory. Few philosophers
hold radically to the identity view. The view
of the logicians of science is easier to believe

I

1 I omit saying anything in my text about 'energetics.’ Popular
writers often appear to think that ‘science’ has demonstrated a monis¬
tic principle called 'energy/ which they connect with activity on the
one hand and with quantity on the other. So far as I understand this
difficult subject, 'energy ’ is not a principle at ail, still less m active
one. It is only a collective name for certain amounts of imxncdkte
perceptual reality, when such reality is measured Sn definite ways that
allow its changes to be written so as to get constant sums. It is not an
datalogical theory at all, but a magnificent economic schematic device
to keeping account of the functional variations of the surface phe¬
nomena. It is evidently a case of 'non jingo hypotheses/ and since it
tolmt«»yHMqptnatx tew

cauaal debate.


CHAPTER XIII


NOVELTY AND CAUSATION — THE
PERCEPTUAL VIEW

Most persons remain quite incredulous when
they are told that the rational principle of
causality has exploded our native belief in naif
activity as something real, and our assumption
that genuinely new fact can be created by
work done. ‘Le sens de la vie qui s’indigne de
tant de discours,’ awakens in them and snaps
its fingers at the ‘critical’ view. The present
writer has also just called the critical view an
incomplete abstraction. But its ‘functional
laws’ and schematisms are splendidly useful,
and its negations are true oftener than is com¬
monly supposed. We feel as if our ‘will* im¬
mediately moved our members, and we ignore
the brain-cells whose activity that will rttost
first arouse; we think we cause the beU-ring,
but we only close a contact and tike battery in
the cellar rings the bell; we thistle a certain
star’s light is the cause of our now seeing it,
but ether-waves are the causes, wad the star


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


really standing still, or falsely we feel ourselves
to be moving, when we are giddy, without such
errors leading us to deny that motion anywhere
exists. It exists elsewhere; and the problem is
to place it rightly. It is the same with all other
illusions of sense.

There is doubtless somewhere an original
perceptual experience of the kind of thing we
mean by causation, and that kind of thing
we locate in various other places, rightly or
wrongly as the case may be. Where now is the
typical experience originally got?

Evidently it is got in our own personal activ¬
ity-situations. In all of these what we feel is
that a previous field of ‘consciousness* con¬
taining (in the midst of its complexity) the
Tie per- ^ ea °* a re8U ^» develops gradually
c8 P taal into another field in which that re-

experience

of causa- suit either appears as accomplished,

ttffl

or else is prevented by obstacles
against which we still feel ourselves to press.
As I now write, I am in on© of these activity
situations. I ‘strive* after words, which I only
half prefigure, but which, when they shall haw®

fit


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


The experiencer of such a situation feels the
push, the obstacle, the will, the strain, the
triumph, or the passive giving up, just as he
feels the time, the space, the swiftness of intens¬
ity, the movement, the weight and color, the
xilgasure, the complexity, or what-
*’*-racters the situation may
-ough all that can ever
'vity is supposed. The
» content save these
s %d/uctlon, striving,
jualia as they are of
aown. No matter what
, there may really be in
s extraordinary universe it is im-
>ssible to conceive of any one of
them being either lived through or
^thentically known otherwise than in this
dramatic shape of something sustaining a felt
purpose against felt obstacles, and overcoming
or being overcome. What ‘sustaining* means
here is clear to anyone who has lived through
the experience, but to no one else; just as
‘loud/ ‘red/ ‘sweet/ mean something only to

tut


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

only their harmony and continuity with my
general aim. They ‘fill the bill’ and I accept
them, but the exact shape of them seems deter¬
mined by something outside of my explicit will.

If we look at the general mass of things in
the midst of which the life of men is passed,
and ask HIow came they here?’ the only broad
answer is that man’s desires preceded and pro¬
duced them. If not all-sufficient causes, desire
and will were at any rate what John Mill calls
unconditional causes, indispensable causes
namely, without which the effects eould not
have come at all. Human causal activity is the
only known unconditional antecedent of the
works of civilization; so we find, as Edward
Carpenter says , 1 something like a law of na¬
ture, the law that a movement from feeling to
thought and thence to action, from the world
of dreams to the world of things, is everywhere
going on. Since at each phase of this move¬
ment novelties turn up, we may fairly ask, with
Ciapeater, whether we are not hare witnessing
in our owm personal experience what is really

* TUAHcfGnattm ISM, d*p. i.
ai4


SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY


effect as in our activity-experiences was made
to appear. There is disruption rather; and
what we naively assume to be continuous is
separated by causal successions of which per¬
ception is wholly unaware.

The logical conclusion would seem to be that
even if the kind of thing that causation is, were
revealed to us in our own activity, we should
be mistaken on the very threshold if we sup¬
posed that the fact of it is there. In other
words we seem in this line of experience to start
with an illusion of place. It is as if a baby were
born at a kinetoscope-show and his first experi¬
ences were of the illusions of movement that
reigned in the place. The nature of movement
would indeed be revealed to him, but the real
facts of movement he would have to seek out¬
side. Even so our will-acts may reveal the na¬
ture of causation, but just where the fact® of
causation are located may be a further pro¬
blem . 1 With this further problem, philosophy

* With tide cause-and-effeet tm in what t§ cdfkd a tmifflMm rela¬
tion:*^ 4 nmm than more m mm than km* 9& of

of effect/ In a chain of causes mtermedkries can drop out md (logi¬
cally at ka«t) the relation still hold between term#* the

m


SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY

substitution for it of the bare descriptive no¬
tion of uniform sequence among events. Thus
intellectualist philosophy once more has had
to butcher our perceptual life in order to make
it ‘comprehensible.’ Meanwhile the concrete
perceptual flux, taken just as it comes, offers
in our own activity-situations perfectly com¬
prehensible instances of causal agency. The
transitive causation in them does not, it is
true, stick out as a separate piece of fact for
conception to fix upon. Rather does a whole
subsequent field grow continuously out of a
whole antecedent field because it seems to yield
new being of the nature called for, while the
feeling of causality-at-work flavors the entire
concrete sequence as salt flavors the water in
which it is dissolved.

If we took these experiences as the type of
what actual causation is, we should have to as¬
cribe to cases of causation outside of our mm
life, to physical cases also, an inwardly experi¬
ential nature. In other words we should have to
espouse a so-called ‘pan-psychic' philosophy.
This complication, and the fact that hidden

fit


APPENDIX


FAITH AND THE RIGHT TO BELIEVE 1

* InteliiECtuausm ’ is the belief that our mind
comes upon a world complete in itself, and has the
duty of ascertaining its contents; but has no power
of re-determining its character, for that is already
given.

Among intellectualists two parties may be dis¬
tinguished. Rationalizing intellectualists lay stress
on deductive and ‘dialectic’ arguments, making
large use of abstract concepts and pure logic (Hegel,
Bradley, Taylor, Royee). Empiricist, intellect ual-
ists are more ‘scientific,’ and think that the char¬
acter of the world must be sought in our sensible
experiences, and found in hypotheses based exclu¬
sively thereon (Clifford, Pearson).

Both sides insist that in our conclusions personal
preferences should play no part, and that no argu¬
ment from what ought to be to what u, is valid.
‘Faith,’ being the greeting of our whole nature to
a kind of world conceived us well adapted to that
nature, is forbidden, until purely intellectual mi-

1 (The following purl of a *y Ilttbw prints! for Hie tm of

ittsdmto In m intmlurtwy murm In philosophy, wtw found with
the M& of this hook, with the words, *T«> h* printed Hi purl of tie In*

to l*hilom>phy/ noted thereon in the author’* himdwrit*

§®1


APPENDIX


although the world without them is unfinished, are
yet such mere externalities as not to alter in any
way the significance of the rest of the world when
they are added to it.

In our dealings with many details of fact these
postulates work well. Such details exist in advance
of our opinion; truth concerning them is often of no
pressing importance; and by believing nothing, we
(■scape error while we wait. But even here we often
cannot wait but must act, somehow; so we act on
the most probable hypothesis, trusting that the
event may prove us wise. Moreover, not to act on
one belief, is often equivalent to acting as if the
opjjosite belief were true, so inaction would not
always be as ‘passive’ as the intelleetualists as¬
sume. It is one altitude of will.

Again, Philosophy and Religion have to interpret
t he total character of the world, and it is by no
moans clear that here t he intelleetuulist jmstulates
obtain. It. may Ik* true all the while (even though
the evidence be still imperfect) that, as Paulsen
says, * t he natural order is at, bottom a moral order.’


APPENDIX


theoretical as well as practical, of all concerned, to
make it ‘come true.’

Intellectualism thus contradicts itself. It is a
sufficient objection to it, that if a ‘pluralistically’
organized, or ‘eo-operative’ universe or the ‘melio-
ristic’ universe above, were really here, the veto
of intellectualism on letting our good-will ever have


bore. But in this particular kind of risk, the com¬
pany helps him out. It translates his one chance in
5000 of a big loss, into a certain loss 5000 times
smaller, and the bargain is a fair one on both sides.
It is clearly better for the man to lose certainly , but
fractionally , than to (rust to his 400!) chances of no
loss, and then have the improbable chance befall.

But for most of our emergencies there is no insur¬


ance company at, hand, and fractional solutions are
impossible. Seldom can we act fractionally. If llie
probability that a friend is waiting for you in Bos¬
ton is 1-2, how should you act on that probability?
By going as far as the bridge? Better stay at home!
Or if the probability is 1-2 that your partner is a
villain, how should you act on that probability?
By treating him as a villain one day, and confiding
your money and your secrets to him the next?
That would Ikj tint worst of all solutions. In all such
cases we must act wholly for one or t he other horn of
the dilemma. We must, go in for the more probable
alternative as if the other one did not exist, arid


ties and necessities, insists on the contrary on their
lasing categorical.)

As individual members of a pluralistic universe,
we must recognize that, even though we do our best,
the other factors also will have a voice in the result.
If they refuse to conspire, our good-will and labor


universe will fail, lei it fail; or

IS0


APPENDIX


no ‘vicious circle’ unless a circle of poles holding
themselves upright by leaning on one another, or a
circle of dancers revolving by holding each other’s
hands, be ‘vicious.’

The faith circle is so congruous with human
nature that the only explanation of the veto that
intelleetualists pass upon it must be sought in the
offensive character to them of the faiths of certain
concrete persons.

Such possibilities of offense have, however, to be
put up with on empiricist principles. The long run
of experience may weed out the more foolish faiths.
Those who held them will then have failed: but
without the wiser faiths of the others the world
could never be perfected.

(Compare G. Lowes Dickinson: “Religion, a
Criticism and a Forecast,” N. Y. 1905, Introduc¬
tion; and chaps, iii, iv.)


INDEX


consuls tan tial with percepts,
107 ; dcsignativc only, 111.

Conceptual knowledge, rational¬
ist view of, 55; empiricist view
of, 57,

Conceptual order, the, 50; unlim¬
ited, 52; a topographic system,

06.

Conceptual systems, distinct

realms of reality, 101.

Conceptual translation, defects of,
78; examples of puzzles intro¬
duced by, 85,

Conservation vb, creation, 45.

Continuity theory, the, 155.

Cordemoy, 195.

Coutur^t, L., 188 note, 204 note*

Creed, the mtellectuaiist, 75,

Oudworth, H., 54 note, 57 note*

Dalton, 20.

Delbauif* 148, 149 note.

Democritiui, 11,84, 35, 149 note.

Descartes, 18, 20, £1, 22, 24, 86,
43 note, 148 , 150 note. 104 ,
195*

Dewey* *I.» 0, 87.

Dickinson, <»♦ Lowes, 281.

Direction, concept of, impossible
till process completed, 88.

Discontinuity theory* the, 154.

Dresser, II. W.» 92 note.

Dubem* 91 note , 150 note.

Emerson, 50, 70,72 note*

Empedocles, 11,

Empiricism* confirmed by de¬
fects of concepts, 98; willing to
use hyjKithetlcmls, 229,

Empiricists, contrasted with ra¬
tionalists, $5*

Enoqptiei, 206 note.


Evellin, 184.

Evil, problem of, 188.

Faith, m* evidence, 221; — ten¬
dencies, 221; a practical atti¬
tude, 225.

Fawcett, hi 11, 101 note,

Fichte, 187 note,

Frazer, J. <*„ 18 note.

Freedom, 189; opposed by mon¬
ism, 149.

Fullerton, Cl M„ 184 note,

Galileo, 20, 21, 22.

Green* 85.

Guclmex* 195,

Habits of thought* origins of* 16*
Hamilton, Bir W., 50 m(o, 194
note*

Harper, T. Jf., 12 note.

Harvey, 20.

Hegel, 90* 48, 4H note, 57, 91, 92*
197 note. 1119 , Wk
Helvetian, 55 note*

I feraoleituw, 11.

Hey mam* G., 205 note*

Hiblsm, 81 note* 82 note*

Hobson* E, W», 184 note,
Hodgson* 8, I!., 51 wff, 219
note,

Hume, 14, 87, 85* 121, 128, 124,
190* 197, 198, 190, 200 # »ll #
202 note*

Huntington, E, V*, 184 note.
Huygens, 20,

Huxley, 20.

Infinite, the standing, I07j
malic dtfinltiottt of* 10B; fit#
growing* 170; must in? treated

as dis«mtl)tti*«i»*I72; *tlit mw*


m


INDEX


definitions ol infinite, 1ST; and
causation, 189; negated by con¬
ceptual view of causation, 205;
arises in perceptual experience
of causation, 213.
Number-continuum, tbe, 173,

Objection, an, replied to, 109.
Occasionalism, 194.

1 Omega/ 177; its value, 178.
Oneness, pragmatic analysis of,
124; kinds of, 120; concatenated,
129; value of absolute, 180.
Oswald, W., 71 note, 90 note, 150
note,

Paradoxes, Zeno’s, 157; Russell's
solution of, 180; criticism of
Russell’s solution of, 181.
Parmenides, 11, 41.

Pascal, 20, 21.

Paulsen, F„ 15 note, 223.

Pearson, 90 note, 203 note, 221,
Peirce, 0. S„, 184 note*

Percepts, distinguished from con¬
cept, 48; complexity of, 49; in¬
terpenetrate with concepts, 52;
Bradley on, 92; eonsubstantial
with concepts, 107.

Personal identity, conceptually
impossible, 87.

Philosophers, attitude of, to dia¬
lectical difficulties, 91.
Philosophy, defined, 4,5; its value,
0; its enemies, 8; first objection
to,9;as man thinking, 15; ‘posi¬
tive/10; m sympathetic magic,
17; and science, 21; as residuum
of unanswered scientific pro-
• btes* 23 ; second objection to,
24; third, 20; as metaphysics,


Plato, 7,11,85, 30,54 note, 76,77.

Plotinus, 118.

Pluralism, vs. monism, 118; mean¬
ing of, 114,140; defects of, 142;
advantages of, 142; and novel¬
ty, 145.

Plutarch, 77.

Poinc&r6, 11., 91 note, 174 note,
184 note.

Porphyry, 118.

Positivism, 208.

Pragmatic Rule, the, 00; examples
of application of, 02; used in
critique of substance, 121*
"Principe du nombre/ 164.

* Principle of Causality/ the, 189,
191.

Principles, meaning of, 31*
Probabilities, how acted on, 225.
Protagoras, 34, 85.

Pyrrho, 92 note.

Pythagoras, 11, 150.

Rationalists, contrasted with em¬
piricists, 35.

Reality, 78; conceptual systems
distinct realms of, 101.

lUglu, 197.

Relations, multiplicity of, of real
things, 89; unreality of apjamfr
anceof,89; of subject and predi¬
cate, unintelligible, 70.
Renouvier, 108; solution of
problem of infinite by, 164,
105 note, 100,171, 184,180*
Resmnbkttce, an illusion, 88*
Riekaby, <l*» 12, 119 <wk# 102
note.

Rkhl A., 206 note*

Romans, 0*, 60

Royee, 37, 72 note, 85, 137 tide,

141 note* 184 nGk, 22U
