James VI and I, Daemonologie (1597)
=====================================
James VI of Scotland (later James I of England). Daemonologie, in forme of a dialogue — the royal demonology in three books (on magic/necromancy, witchcraft/sorcery, and spirits), written after the North Berwick trials. Text: London 1603 reprint (William Cotton). Raw OCR via Internet Archive; print artifacts removed. Public Domain.

LOGIE, IN FORME
OF A DIALOGVE,

Diuided into three bookes.

Written by the high and mightie Prince, Iam es by
the grace of God King of England, Scotland,
France,and Ireland,Defender
of the faith.&c,

AT LONDON,

Printed for Wiliam Cotton, ana Will,eAfpley,
according to the copie printed at Edenburgh,
and are tobe fold at Lendon bridge.

I 60 3.

ji
i
¢ È |
f
i
d

x

f
t

P . 6) SS) DA
IRS Sy

The PrefacetotheReader.
264 Hefeareful abounding at this

= timein this countrie, of thefe
y q

YE deteftable flaues of the Diuel,

Cle the Witches or enchaunters,
hath moued me (beloued rea-
der) to difpatch in poft, this following T rea- |

tifeofmine, not in any wife (as F proteft) to
Jerue for afhewe of my learning and ingine,
but onely ( moued of-confcience ) to preafe
thereby, fo farre as I can, to refolue the doub-

ting hearts of manie ; both that Juch afaules
of Sathan are moft certainly prattifed , and :
that the instruments thereof, merits moft |
Jeuerely to be punifhed : against the dam- ] |

nable opinions of twoprincipally in our age,
whereof the one called Scot, an Englifhman,

eA 2 1s

N
a VE

A

TO THE READER:

is not afhamed in publtke print to deme, that
there can be fuch a thing as Witch-craft:and
fo maintaines the old errour of the Sadduces
in denying of [pirits. T he other called VV ie-
rus, a German Phy/fition, ets out a publike
apologie for all thefe craft{-folkes, whereby,
procuring for their impunitie, he plainely
bewrayes himfelfe to haue beene one of that
profefsion. And for to make this Treatife the
more pleafant ¿s factll,1 baue put it in forme
of a Dialogue , which F haue diuided into
three bookes : T he first fþeaking of <M apie
ingenerall, and N ecromancie in fpectall,
Thefecond, of Sorcerie and Writch-craft :
and the third, containes a difcourfeo fal thefe
kinds of fpirits , and Spectres that appeares
and troubles perfons : together with a con-
clufion of the whole worke. y intention
in th:s labour is onely to proue two things, as I
haue alreadte faid : the one that Juch diuelifh
artes hauebeene and are. Theother, what
exact trialland fenere punifhment they me-
Vil?

TO THE READER,

rit :ana. therefore rea) ca F,

thinos are pofsibleto bee pe: fonics in
Arts, and ky. what natura LY.
be, KOE it ak enteric pai iad ar thi

of the Dinels power for shativere
onely, to [peake fc Ic holaftick!s CaN
not be fpoken in our language ) i ycafon upon
genus leaning fpecies, and renta ta
be comprehended therein eA forex mole,
peaking of the power of Magiciens; in
ft bcoke and fixt chapter : [fay,that they
can [uddenly caufe be brought unto them, all
kinds of dainty difhes, by their familiar fi-
rit:fince asa be delights to feale as
a fpirit be can fubtilly and fodainly enough
tranfport the Jame. N ow under this genus,
-may be comprehended all particulars depen-
ding therupon: fuch asthe bringing wine out
ofa wal (as we haue heard oft to hauebin pra
stifed fuch others -which particulars, are

fuffictently proued by the reafons of the gene-
rah And fuch like in the fecod book of Witch-
ef 3

craft

TO THE READER.
craftin fpecial, and fift Chap.L fay, proue
by dinerfe arguments, that Witches can by
the power of their Maister, cure or cast cn
difeafes: N ow by thefe fame reafons, that
proues their power by the Diuell of difeafes in
generall , is afwell proned their power tn fhe-
ciall:asof weakning the nature of Jome men,
to make them unable for women: and making
itto abound in others, more then the ordina-
rie cour/e of nature would permit. And fuch
like in all other particular frcknefes. But one
thing F will pray thee to obferue in all thefe
places where Freafonypon the deuils power,
which is the different ends and /copes, that
God as the firft caufe,andthe Diuell as hisin-
ftrument fecond caufe,fhoots atin allthefe
actions of the Diuell, (as Gods hang-man:)
For where the diuels intention in them is euer
to perifh either the Joule or the bodie, or both
of them,that heis fa permitted to deale with:
God by the contrarie,drawes ener out of that
euil glory to himfelfe either by the wracke
ihe

4 Í
fir!

TO THE READER.

the wicked in his iuftice, or by the triall of the
patient, and amendment of the faithfull, be-
ing wakened p with thatrod of correction.
Haning thus declared vnto thee then, my full
intention inthis T reatife thou wilt eafily ex-
cufe, [doubt not, afwell my pretermitting, to
declare the whole particular rites and fecrets
of thefe vnlawful arts:as alfotheir infinit and
wonderfull prattifes, as being neither of them
pertinent to my purpofe : the reafon whereof,
is giuen in the hinder end of the firft Chapter
ofibe third booke : and who likes to be curious
in thefe things, be may reade, if he will, bere
of their prattifes, Bodinus Demonoma-
nie, colletted with greater diligence, then
written with mdgement, together with their
confefsions, that haue beene at this time ap-
prebended. Ffhe would know what hath been
the opinion of the eAuncients , concerning
their power : heefhall fee it well defcribed by
Hyperius Hemmingius,hyo late Ger-
mane Writers : Befides innumerable other

neo-

`

i

i

P

TO THE READER,
neotericke Theologues, that writes largehe
upon that fubject: And if he would know what
are the particular rites <x curiofittes of thefe
blacke Arts (which ts both vnneceffarie and
perilous) he will find it in the fourth Booke
of Cornelius Agrippa, and in WVierus,
whom-of. [ fpake. A nd fowifhing my
in this Treati ife (beloued Reader ) to be effe-
Hual, in arming all them that reads the Jame,

againfl thefe aboue. mentioned errours, and

ng. my good will to thy

-IAMES

é
r
è ‘

DÆM ONOLOGIE,
IN FORME OF ANE
DIA LOGVE

Firft Booke:

ARGV MENT.
The exord of the whole.T he defcription
of Magie in fpeciall,

Cuar. 1 ARGYMENY®Y,
Pronen by the Scripure , that thefe unlawful arts in
 genere bene and may be put ie practife.

reafon the matter.

PHILOMATHES,

TA 4AM furelie verie glad to haue
mette with you thisdaie , for I
* am of opinion, that ye can bet-
ÆG% ter refolue me of fome thing,
F5—L< whereof I ftand in great doubr,
EÑ nor anie other whom.with I

CA could haue mette,
Epr, InwhatLcan,thatyee

like to , fpei at me, I wiliwillinglie and freelie tell
B my

i

NG AYA Or À

2 Demonologie. First Booke

my opinion, and if I proue it not fufficiently, I am
heartily content that a better reafon carie it away
then.

Pur. What thinke ye of thefe ftrange newes,
which now onely furnifhes purpofe to all men at
their meeting : I meane of thefe Witches ?

Surely they are wonderfull: And I thinke
fo cleare and plaine confeffions in that purpofe,
haue neuer fallen out in anie age or cuntrey.

Pu1. Noqueftion if they be true, but thereof
the Doétours doubts.

E px. What part of it doubt ye of ?

Pu 1, Euenofall,for ought I can yet perceaue:
and namely, that there is {fuch athing as Witch-
craft or Witches,andI would pray you to refolue
me thereof if ye may :for I haue reafoned with fun-
drie inthat matter,and yet could neuer be fatisfied
therein.

Err. Ifhall with good will doe the beft I can:
But I chink it the difficiller, fince ye denie the thing
it felfe in general] :for as it is faidin the Logicke

{chooles, Contra negantem principia non eft difpu-

tandum: Alwayes for that part,that Witchcraft,and

Witches haue beene, and are, the former part is

clearely proued by the Scriptures, and the laftby

dailie experience and confeffions.
Pur Iknowye will alleage me Sanles: Pytho-
nife . butthatas appeares will not make much

foryou. ~>
E px, Not only that place, but diuers others:But

I maruell why that fhouldnot make much for me ?:
Put, The:

£
d
f
i

Demonologie. Firft Booke.
Pur, The reafons are thefe , firft yee may
confider, that Sanl being troubled in fpirit , andha- ¢.5am.28.
uing fafted long before, as the text teftifieth,and be-
ing come toa woman that was bruted to haue fuch
knowledge, and that to enquire fo importantnews, |
he hauing fo guiltie a conicience for his hainous
offences, and {peciallie,for that fame vnlawful curi-
ofitie, and horrible defeGtion : and then the woman
crying out vpon the fuddaine in great admiration,
for the vncouth ficht that fhe alledged to haue fene
difcouering him to be the King, though difguifed,
& denied by him before : it was no woonder I fay ,
thathis fenfes being thus diftra¢ted, he couldnot
perceaue her faining of her voice, hee being him-
felfe in another chalmer, and feeing nothing.Next
whatcould be, or was raifed ? The fpirit of Samuel ? |
Prophane and againft all Theologie : the Diuellin |
his likenes ? as vnappeirant , that either God would —
permit him to come in the fhape of his Saintes (for i
then could neuer the Prophets in thofe daies haue |
bene fure, what Spirit {pake to them in their vifi- |
ones) or then that he could fore-tell what was to | |
come thereafter ; for Prophecie proceedeth one- |
lic of G O D:and the Deuill hath no knowledge of |
thingsto come,
Err, Yet if yee will marke the wordes of the
text , yee will findeclearelie, that Saul faw that ap-
parition ; for giuing you that Saul was in an other |
Chalmer, at the making of the circles & coniura-
tiones , needfull for that purpofe (as none of that |
craft will permit any vthers to behold at that time) |
| B 2 yet |

f:

è

t

4 Demonologie. First Booke,

yet it is euident by the text, that how fone that once
that vncleane fpirit was fully rifen, fhe called in vp-
on Saul, For it is faide inthe text, that Saule knew
him to be Samuel , which couide not haue beene, by
the hearing tell onelie of anclde man with ane
mantill, fince there was manie mo old men dead in
Ifrael nor Samuel : And the common weid ofthat
whole countrey was mantils. As tothe next,that
it was not the {pirit of Samuel , I grant:In the pro-
uing whereof ye neede not to infift fince all Chrifti-

ans of whatfo-euer religion agrees vpon that: and

none but either mere ignorants,or Necromanciers

or Witches doubtes thereof, And that che Diuel is

permitted at fometiimes to put himfelfin the likenes

of the Saintes , itis plaine in the Scriptures, where
itis faid,that Sathan ean tranf-forme bimfelfe into an
Angell of light. Neither could that bring any incon-

uenient with the vifiones of the prophets , fince itis

moftcertaine, that God will not permit him foro

deceiue his own: butonliefuch, as firft wilfully de-
-ceiuesthem-felues, by runving vnto him, whome
God then fuffers to fall in their owne {nares, and

inftlie permittes them to be illuded with great effi.
cacy of deceit, becaufe they. would not beleeue the
trueth(as Paul fayth). And as tothe diuelles foretel-
ling of things to come, itis true that heknowes noe
all hinges future , but yet that he knowes parte, the
Tragicall event ofthis hiftorie declares it, (which
the witof woman could neuer haue fore-{poken )
not that he hath any prefcience , which is only pro-

per to God : or yetknows anie thing by loking vp-

t, |

f

t

t

Damonologie. Firft Booke, §
on God, as in a mirrour (as the good Angels doe)
he being for euer debarred trom the fauorable pre-
fence & countenance of his creator,but only by one
ofthefe two meanes, either as being worldly wife,
and taught by acontinuall experience, euer fince
the cration , indges by likelie- hood of thinges to
come,according to the like that hath paffed before,
and the natural! caufes, in refpect of the viciffitude
ofall thinges worldly : Or elfe by Gods employing
ofhim in a turne, and fo forefeene thereof: as ap-
peares to haue bin in this, whereof we finde the ve-
xie like in Micheas prophetique aifcourfe to King
Achab. Butto prooue this my firft propofition that
there can be fuchathing as witch-craft, & witches,
tiere are manie mo places in the Scriptures then
this (as I faid before). As firft in the law of cod, ic is
plainelie prohibited:But certaincit is thatthe Law gxod.2a,
of God fpeakes nothing in vaine, neither doth it lay
curfes, or inioine puni{hments vpon fhaddowes ,
condemning that to be il,which is not ineffence or
being as we callic. Secondlie itis plaine, where
wicked Pharaohs wife-men imitated ane number of £x0d.7.¢ 8
Mofes miracles , to hardenthe tyrants heart there. 7°75
by. Thirdly,faid not Samuel to Saul, that difobedi-
ence is as the fin of Witch-craft ? Tocompare ittoa
thing that were nor,it were too too ablurd, Fourth-
lie, was not. Simon Magus, aman of that craft? And ¢.
fiftlie , what was fhe that had the fpirit of Python? Asas.
befide innumerable other places that were irkefom

torecite, |
B 3 Cuar IT,

IKINZ.2 3.

t
f
j
Š

Gen.2.

6 Demonologie. Firft Booke.
Crap. II arcy.
What kind of fin the practixers of thefe wnlawfull artes

committes, The diuifion of thefe artes. e And what
are the meanes that allures any to practixe them.

PHILOMATHES,

| B VT Ichinke itverie ftrange, that God fhould

permit any man-kinde (fince they beare his
owne Image) to fall in fo groffe and filthie a de-
fection.

Err, Although man in his Creation was
made to the image of the Creator, yet through his
fall hauing once loft it, it is but reftored againe ina
part by grace onelieto theelect : So all the reft fal-
ling away from God , are giuen ouer in the handes
of the Deuill that enemy , to beare his Image; and
being once fo giuen ouer, the greateft and the grof-
feft impietie , is the pleafanteft,and moft delytefull
vnrothem.
But may itnot fuffice him to haue indi-
rectlie the rule, and procure the perdition of fo
manie foules by alluring them to vices , andto the
following of their own appetites, fuppofe he abule
not fo maniefimple foules, in making them direct-
lie acknowledge him for their maifter.

Err. No furelie, for hee vfes euerieman,
whom of hehath therule,according to their com-
plexion and knowledge : And fo, whom he findes
moft fimple, he plainelieft difcouers himfelfe vnto
them. For he beeing the enimie of mans Salua-

tion, vi¢s al the meanes he can to intrappe them fo
-farre

a

f

f PE-
Í
T

f

Demonologie. Firft Booke, 7

far in his fnares,as it may bee vnable to them there-
after (fuppofe they would) to rid themfelues our of
the fame,

Pur. Thenthis finneis a {ime againft the ho-
ly Ghott. | |

Itisinfome,but notin all,

P u1. How that? Arenot all thefe that runnes
directly tothe diuell in one Categorie ?

Epx, God forbid,forthe finne againft the ho-
ly Ghoft hath two branches: The one a falling back.
from the whole feruice of God, and arefufall of all.
his precepts, The other is the doing of the firft with:
knowledge, knowingthat they doe wrong againft
their owne confcience, and the teftimonie of the |
holy Spirit hauing once had atafte ofthe fweetnes
of Gods mercies. Now in the firft of thefe two,
all forts of Necromancets, Enchaunters or Wit-
ches , are comprehended : but in the laft, none
but fuch as erres with this knowledge that I haue
{poken of.

Pur. Then it appeares that there are more forts
nor one,that are directly profeflours of his fernice:
and if fo be,I pray you tell mehow manie, & what
are they ? |

Ep, Thereare principally two forts, where-
unto all the parts of that vnhappie Arte are reda-
&ed ; whereof the one is called Afagie or Necro-
mancie ihe other Sorcerie or Witch-craft. - |

Pur, WhatI pray youand how manieare the
meanes,whereby the Diuell allures perfons in anie-
of thefe {nares ? | 5

PI,

P

8 Demonologie. Firft Booke.

Err. Euen by thefe three paffions chat ate with-
in our felues; Curiofitie in great ingines ; thirft of
reuenge, forfome tortes dcepely apprehended : or
greedie appetite of geare, caufed through great po-
uvertie.As to the firft of thefe,Curiofitie, itis onelie
the inticement of Magiciens or Necromanciers: and

the other two are the allurers of the Sorcerers or

Witches;tor that old and craftie ferpent being a Spi-
rit,he eafilie {pies our affections, and fo conformes
himfelfe thereto, to deceiue vs to our wracke.

Cuar. III, arcvy.

The fignifications and etymologies of the words of Ma-
gic and Necromancie, The difference betwixt
Necromancie and Witch-craft: What are the en-
trefsis and beginnings that brings any to the know-
ledge |

PuILOMATHES,

‘Would gladlie firft heare, what thing is it that
Bye call Magie or Necromancie.

Ep1. This word Mag? in the Perfian tongue,
imports as much as to be ane contemplator or
Iinterpretour of Divine and heauenlie {ciences:
which being firft vied amogs the Chaldees through
their ignorance of the true diuinitie, was efteemed

and amongft them, as a principall vertue:

Andt

rerefore, was named vniuftly with an hono-

rable ftile, which name the Greeks imitated, gene-
rally importing all thefe kinds of vnlawfull artes,

Foii
è
a4
i
f
f

Demonologie. Firft Booke.

And this word Necromancie is a Greek word,com-
ounded of néng av & uavfex which is to fay,the pro-
phecie by the dead, Tiis laft name is giuen, to this
black & vnlawfull {cienceby the figure Synedoche,
becaufe it isaprincipall part ofthat art, to ferue
chemfelues with dead carcages in their diuinations.

P uz. Whatdifference is there betwixt this arte,
and Witch-craft? |

Epi. Surelie, the difference vulgare put be-

twixtthem , is verrie merrie, and in a manner true;
for they fay, that the Witches are feruants onely,
and flaues to the Diuel;but the Necromanciers are
his Maifters and commanders.

Pur. How can that be true,that any men being fpe-
cially addicted to his feruice,can be his comanders?

Err. Yea they may be: butit isonely fecundum
quid : For itis not by any power that they can haue
ouer him, but ex paé¥e allanerlie : whereby he obli-
ces himfelfin fome trifles tothem, thathe may on
the other part obreine the fruition oftheir body &
foule,which is the onlie thing he huntes for.

Puur. An verie in-æquitable contract forfooth :
But I pray you difcourfe vnto mee, what is the ef-
fect and fecrets of that arte? |

Epi. That is ouer largeane field ye giue mee:
hale fhall doe good-will, the moft fummarly that

can, torunne through the principal points there-
of, As there are two forts of folkes, that may be en-
tifed to this art , towit ,learned or vnlearned : fo
is there two meanes, which are the firft {teerers vp

& feeders of their curiofitie, thereby to make them
to

j

i

40 Demonologie. First Booke,

to giue themfelues ouer to the fame : Which two
meanes, | call the Diuels {Choole, and his rudi-
ments, The learned haue their curtofitie wakened
vp; and fedde by that which I call his fchoole:
this is the e< /frologie judiciar,For diueis men ha-
uing attained to a great perfection in learning, and
yetremaining ouer-bare(alas) of the Spirit of ree

E À generation and fruits thereof : finding all naturall
Hic things common, afwell to the ftupide pedants as
WE vnto them, they affay to vendicate vnto them a
Pkg greater name,by not onely knowing the courfe of
he things heauenly,butlikewife to clim to the know-
iui ledge of things to come thereby.Which, at the firft
| face appearing lawfull vnto them, in refpedct the

ground thereof feemeth to proceed of natural] cau-

fes onelie: they are fo allured thereby, that finding
their praCtife to proue true infundrie things, they
i ftudie toknow the caufe thercof : and fo mounting
from degree to degree, vpon the flipperie and vn-
certaine icale of curiofitie ; they are at laft entifed,
chat where lawfull artes or {ciences failes, to fatisfie
i their reltiefe minds,euen to feeke to that black and
4 vnlawfull- fcience of Magie- Where, finding at
the firft, thar fuch d:uers formes of circles and con«
jurations r:ghtlie ioined thereunto, will raife fuch
H diuers formes of {pirits , to refolue them of their
doubts : and attributing the doing thereof, tothe
power infeparably tied, or inherent in the circles:
and many words of God, confufedlie wrappedin 5
they blindly glorie of themfelues, as if they had by
their quicknes of ingine,made a conquett of iaee
| omi-

—
TE
hid i
i

Demonologie. Firft Booke. 1
dominion, and were become Emperours ouer the
Stygianhabitacles, Where,in the meane time(mi-
ferable wretches ) they are become in verie deede,
bond-flaues to their mortall enemie : and their
knowledge, for all that they prefume thereof,ts no-
thing increafed, exceptin knowing euill, and the

horrors of Hell tor punifhment thereof,as 4 dams ba

was by the eating of the forbidden tree,

Cuap, IIII arcy.

The Defcription of the Rudiments and Schoole, which
are the entreffes tothe arte of Magie : And in fpeti-
all the differences betwixt Aftronomie and Aftro-
logie:Dinifion of Altrologie in diners partes.

Pur LOMATHES..

VT I pray you likewife forget notto tel what
are the Deuilles rudimentes,

Ep. His rudiments, I call firftin general], all
that which is called vulgarly the vertue of worde ,
herbe, & ftone:which is vfed by vnlawfull charmes ,
without naturall caufes. As Jikewife all kinde of
practicques, freites,or other like extraordinarie a-
Ctiones, which cannot abide the true touche of na-
turall reafon. l |

Pur. I would haue you to make that plainer , by
fome particular examples ; for your propofition is
verie generall, | 7

Epi. I meanceither by fuch kinde of Charmes

as common!ie dafte wives vies, for healing of for-
fpoken goodes, for pteferuing them from euill
2 CICS,

—

Be

i

-i2  Damonologie, First Booke,
eyes, by knitting roun trees, or funcricft kinde of
hearbes,to the haire or tailes of the goods : by cu-
ring the worme, by ftemming ofbloud, by hea-
ling of Horfe-crookes,by turning of the riddle, or
doing of fuch like innumerable things by words,
without applying anie thing, meete to the part of-
fended,as Mediciners doe: Or elfe by ftaying mar-
ried folkes, to haue naturally adoe with other ( by
knitting fo manieknottes vpon a point at the time
oftheir mariage) And fuch-like things, which men
vfeto practife in their merrineffe: For fra vnlear-
ned men (being naturally curious, and lacking the
true knowledge of God) finde thefe practifes to
proue true,asfundrie of them will do,by the power
ofthe diuellfor deceiuing men, and not by anie
inherent vertue in thefe vaine words and freites ;
and being defirous to winne a reputation to them-
felues in fuch-like turnes,they either(ifthey be of the
fhamefafter fort) feeketo be learned by fome that
are experimented inthae Arte (not knowing it to
bee enill at the firft) or elfe being of the groffer
forte, runnes directly to the diuell for ambition or
defire of gaine, and plainely contracts with him

_ thereupon.

Pur. But me thinks thefe means which yee call
the Schoole and rudiments of the Diuell, are
things [awfull,and haue beene approoued for fuch
in all times and ages : as in fpeciall, this fcience of
Aftrolegie, which is one of the {pecia]l members of
the Mathematieques,

Thereare two things which the

aue

Ok
aty
ive
g à
ae
F

Demonologie. Booke. 13
haue obferued from the beginning, inthe fcience
ofthe Heauenly Creatures, the Planets, Starres,
and fuch like :The one is their courfe and ordina
motions, which for that caufe is called —4ftrono-
mia. VVhich word is a compound of vuG@ and
aséowv,that is to fay,the law of the Starres: And this
Arte indeedeis one of the members of the Mathe- _
maticques,and not only lawfull, but moft neceffary
& commédable, The other is called 4/rologia be-
ing compounded of «steav & Adyocwhich is to fay,
the word and preaching of the ftarres: Which is
divided in two parts: The firft, by knowing there-
by the powers of fimples, and. ficknefles , the
courfe of the feafons and the weather, being ruled:
by their influence ; which part depending vpon
the former, although it be notof it felfa part of Ma-
thematicques:yet it is not vnlawful, being moderate-
ly vied, fuppofe not fo neceffarie and commenda-
ble as the former. The fecond part is to truft fo
much to their influences, as thereby to fore-tell.
what common-weales fhall flourifh or decay: what:
perfons fhallbee fortunate or vnfortunate: what
fide fhall winne in anie batrell : what man fhall
obtaine vi&orie at fingular combate : what way,
and of what agefhall men die : what horfe fhall.
winne at match-running ; and diuerfe fuch like
incredible things, wherein Cardanus , Cornelius A-
grippa, and diuers others haue more curiouflie
then profitablie written atlarge. Ofthis roore lat
{poken of fprings innumerable branches 5 {uch as
the knowledge by the natiuities; the Cheiromancie,

C 3 Geg-

i
j
J
j

ah

N
F
bss

gerem.

14 Demonoiogie. First Booke.
Geomantie,Hydromantie, Arithmantie,Phyfiocnomte:
&a thoufand others: which were much practifed,
& holden in great reuerence by the Gentiles of old.
And this laft part of 4/frologte whereof I haue fpo-
ken. „which is the root of their branches, was called
by them pars fortune . This pare now is vtterlie vn-
lawful to be trufted in,or practized amongft chrifti-
ans, as leaning to no ground of naturall reafon : & it
is this pare which I called before the deuils fchoole.

Pu. But yet manie of thelearned are ofthe

contrarie opinion. |

Ert. l grant,yet I could gine my reafons to forti-
fie & maintaine my opinion, if to enter into this dif-
putation it wold not draw me quite off the ground
of our difcours 5 befides the mif-pending of the
whole daie thereupon : One word onely J will an-

- fwertothem, & thatin the Scriptures (which muft

be an infallible ground to all true Chriftians ) That

_ inthe Prophet Jeremie itis plainelie forbidden , to’

beleeue or harken vntothem chat Prophecies and
fore-{peaks by the courfe of the Planets & Statres,

Cuar. V. ARGV.
Howfarrethevfing of Charmes is lawful or vnlawfull
The defcription of the formes of Circles and Coniu-
rationes, And what caufeth the Magicians them-
Seluestowearte thereof.

PuHILOMATHES.

PEL, Ye haue faide far inough in that argu-
ment. But how prooue yenow that thefe
charmes

wi d
i
ke
TE
Ta
É
k

Demonologie. Firff Booke. Ts
charmes or vnnaturall practicques are vnlawfull:
For fo, manie hone‘t and merrie men and women
haue publickly practized fome of them, that I think
it ve would accufe them al of witch-craft,ye would
affirme more nor ye will be be!ecued in. |

lfeeif you had taken good tent(to the.nas
ture of thatword, whereby L named it,) ye would
not haue beene in this doubt, nor miftaken me, fo
farre as ye haue done: For although,as none canbe
{chollers in afchoole, & not be fubie& to the ma-
{ter thereof :fo none can ftudie and put inpractize
(for ftudie the alone,and knowledge, is more peril-
lous nor offenfiues anditis the practife onely that
makes the greatnelfle of the offence.) The cirkles &
art of Magre without committing an horrible defe-
tion from God: And yetas they that reades and
learnes their rudiments,are not the more fubjectro
anie {chool-mafter, if it pleafe not their parents: to.
put them ro the fchoole thereafter ; So they who
ignoractly proues thefe practicques, which I cal the
diuels rudiments, vnknowing them to-be baits; ca-
ften out by him, for trapping {uch as God will per-
mit to fall into hishands : This kind of folks I fay,
no doubt, areto be iudged the beft of, inrefpect
they vfeno inuocation nor helpe.of him (by their
knowledge at leatt)in thefe rurnes, & fo haue neuer
entred thé{elues into Sathans feruice; Yet tofpeake
trulie formine owne part(L-{peake but for my {elfe}
I delire not to make fo neereriding: Por in my opi-
nion our enemie is ouer craftie,and we ouer weake-
(except the greater grace of God) toaffay fuch. has
zards wherein he preales to trap vs, s

f

16 Demonologie. First Booke.

Pui. Yehauereafon forfooth; for as the com-
mon Prouerbe fayth: They that fuppe keile with
the Deuill, haue neede of long fpoones, But now
I praie you goe forwarde in the defcribing of this
arte of Magte,

Epx, Fra they bee come once vnto this per-
fection in euill, in hauing any knowledge (whether
learned or vnlearned) of this black art: they then be-
p" to bee wearie of the raifiug of their Maifter ,

y coniured circkles ; being both fo difficile and pe-
rilous, and fo commeth plainlie to a contraé& with
him, wherein is {peciallie conteined formes and
effectes.

Pur. But Iprayeyou oreueryou goe further,
difcourfe me fome-what of their circkles and coniu-
rationes ; And what fhould bee the caufe of their
wearying thereof: For it fhould feeme that that
forme fhould be leffe fearefull yet , than the direct
haunting and focietie, with that foule and vncleane |
Spirite.

_Ep1,] thinke ye take me to be a Witch my felfe,
or at the leaft would faine {weare your felfe pren-
tife to that craft: Alwaies as I may, I fhall fhortlie
fatisfie you, in that kinde of coniurations , which
are conteined infuch bookes , which I call the De-
uilles Schoole : There are foure principal] parts ;

the perfons of the coniurers ; the ation of the con-

iuration 5 the wordes andrites vied to that effect;
and the Spirites that areconiured, Ye mutt firit re-
member to laye the grounde, that I tould you be-

fore ; whichis, that itisno power inherent in the

Cir-

i
it
i
E
viz
EH
CE $f
pi
Be
T
A
‘

ww O lv

& jb We ys.,

Deamonologie.Firft Booke. 17
citcles,or in the holines of the names of God blaf-
phemonuflie vfed: nor in whatfocuer rites or ce-
remonies at that time vfed,that either can raife any
infernall fpirit, or yet limitat him perforce within
or without thefe circles, For itis he onelie, the fa-
ther of alllyes, who hauing firft of all prefcribed
that forme of doing, feining himfelfe to be com-
manded & reftreined thereby, wil be loath to paffe
the boundes of thefe injunctiones; afwell thereby
to make them glory in the impiring ouer him(as I
faide before: ) As likewife to make himfelfe fo to
be trufted in thefe little thinges, that he may haue
the better commoditie thereafter, to deceiue them
in the end with atricke once for all; I meane the e-
uerlafting perdition of their foul & body. Then lay-
ing this ground,as I haue faid, thefe conjurationes
muft haue few or mo in number of the perfones
conjurers(alwaies pafling the finguler number) ac-
cording to the qualitie of the circle, and forme of
apparition. Two principall thinges cannot well in
that errand be wanted : holie-water ( whereby the
Diuill mockes the Papi/fes ) and fome prefent of a

—diuing thing vnto him. There ar likewife cerraine

feafons,dayes and houres, that they obferue in this
purpofe: Thefe things being all readie, and prepa-
red, circles are made triangular, quadranguiar,
round,double or fingle, according to the forme of
apparition that they craue, Butto fpeake of the di-
uerfe formes of the circles, of the innumerable
characters and croffes that are within and without,
and out-through the faine, of the diuers formes of

D appa.

A
S
r
3 H
f
t
ł

18 Demonologie.Firft booke.

apparitiones, that that craftie fpirit illudes them
with,and of all fuch. particulars in that action,| re-
mit it to ouer-manie that haue bufied their heades |
in defcribing of the fame3as being but curious,and
altogether vnprofitable. And this farre onelie I
touch, that when the conjured Spirit appeares,
which will not be while after manie circumftan-
ces,long praiers, and much muttring and murmu-

ring ofthe conjurersslike a Paps/f prieft,difpatching

a hunting Maffe:show fone I fay, he appeares, if they
haue miffed one iote of all their rites; or ifany of
their feete once flyd ouer the circle through terror
of his feareful apparition,he payes himfelfe at that
time in hisownehande, of that due debe which
they ought him; and other-wife would haue de-
layed longer to haue payedhim: I meane hee
carries them with him bodieand foule. If this be
notnow a juft caufe to make them wearie of thefe
formes.of conjuration , I leaue it to youto judge
vpon; confidering the long-fomeneffe of the la-
bour,the precifekeeping of dayes and houres (as I
haue faid) The terribleneffe of apparition, and the
prefent perrell that they ftande in, in miffing the
leaft circumftance or freite,that they ought to obe
ferue:And on the other parte, the Deuil is glad to
mooue them to a plaine and fquare dealing with
him as I faid before.

é
f
H
Beet
aa -
TE
S
ig?
t
i
f
DF

Demonologie. Firft booke. 19

| VI. arov
T be Denilles contract with the Magicians:T he dinifion
thereof in two partes: What is the difference betwixt
Gods miracles and the Deuil,
PHI LOMATHES.
FNdeed there is caufe inough,but rather to leave
$ him at all,then to runne more plainlie to him, if
they were wife he dealt with- But. goe forwarde
now! pray you to thefe turnes, fra they become
once deacons in this craft.

Epr. From time thatthey once plainlie begin
to contract with him: The effe& of their contract
confiftes in two thinges,in formes and effe&es, as
I began to tell alreadie, were it not yee inter-
rupted me (for although the contraé& be mutuall ;
I {peake firit of that part, wherein the Deuill obli-
fhes himfelfe to them) by formes, I meane in what
fhape or fafhion he fhall come vnto them, when
they call vpon him, And by effe&tes,I vnderftand,
in what fpecial forts or feruices he binds himfelfe
to be fubject vnto them. The qualitie of thefe
formes and effectes, is leffe or greater,according to
the skil & art of the Magician, For as to the formes,
to fome of the bafer fort of them he oblifhes him-
felfe to appeare at their calling vpon him,by fuch a
proper name which he fhewes vnto them, either in
likenes of a dog,a Catte,an Ape,or fuch-like other
beaft;or elfe to anfwere by a voice onelie, The ef
fects are to an{were to fuch demands,as concernes
curing of diffeafes,their owne particular menage»

ry:or {uch other bafe things as they require of him.
| | D 2 But

l

J

20 Firft booke.

But to the moft curious forte,in the formes he will
oblith himfelfe,to enter in a dead bodie, and there
out of to giue fuch anfwers, of the euent of battels,
of maters c6cerning the eftate of commonwelths,
and fuch like other great queftions:yea,to fome he
will be acontinuall attender, in forme of aPage:
He will permit himfelfe to be conjured, for the
{pace of fo many yeres,ether in a tablet or aring,or
fuch like thing which they may eafely carrie about
with them: He giues them power to fel fuch wares
to others,whereof {fome will bee dearer, and fome
better cheape;according to the lying or true {peak
ing of the Spirit that is conjured therein, Not but
that in verie deede,all Devils muft be lyars; but fo
they abufethe fimplicitie of thefe wretches, that
becomes their {chollers, that they make them be-
leeue,that at the fall of Lucifer fome Spirites fell in
the aire,fome in the fire, {fome in the water,fome in
the lande: In which Elementes they ftill remaine.
Whereupon they build,that fuch as fell in the fire,
or in the aire, are truer then they, who fell in the
water or in the land,which is all but meare trattles,
& forged be the author of al deceit.For they fel not
be weight, as a folide fubftance, to ftick in any one
parce:But the principall part of their fal, confifting
in qualitie, by the falling from the grace of God
wherein they were created, they continued ftill
thereafter,and fhal do while the latter daie,in wans
dring through the worlde, as Gods hang-men, to
execute fuch turnes as he employes them in. And
when anie of them are not occupied in that, re-

turne

AG
-E
Wi
«
thy
AES
i
j
a
S
iE
E j
a

Demonologie. Firft booke. 21

turne they muft to their prifon in hel (as itis plaine

inthe miracle that Curis wrought at Genne- 144.8.

zareth) therein atthe latter daie to be all enclofed
for euer:and as they deceiue their fchollers in this,
fo do they, in imprinting in them the opinion that
there are fo manie Princes, Dukes, and Kinges a.
mongft them, euerie one commaunding fewer
or mo Legions, and impyring in diuers artes,
and quarters of the earth. For though that I will
not denie that there be a forme of ordour amongft
the Angels in Heauen, and confequentlie, was a-
mongtt them before their fall; yet, either that they
bruike the fame fenfines or that God will permit
vs to know by damned Deuils, fuch heauenlie
myfteries of his, which he would not reueale to vs
neither by Scripture nor Prophetes, I thinke no
Chriftiane will once thinke it, But by the contra-
rieofallfuch myfterics,as he hath clofed vp with
his feale of fecrecie; it becommeth vs to be con.
tented with an humble ignoraunce, they being
things notneceffarie forour faluation, Buttore.
turne to the purpofe, as thefe formes, wherein Sa»
than oblifhes himfelfe to the greateft of the oMa-
gicians, are wonderfull curious; fo are the effectes
correfpondent vntothe fame: For he will oblifh
himfelfe to teach them artes and fciences, which
he may eafelie doe, being fo learned a knaue as he
is: To carrie them newes from ante parte of the
worlde, which theagilitie of a Spirite inay eafelie
performe : to reueale to them the fecretes of anie
perfons , fo being they bee once {poken, for the

D 3 thought

i
j

22 Deamonologie . Firft booke.

thought none knowes but GO D, except fo

far as yee may ghefie by their countenance, as one
who is doubtleflie learned inough-in the Phyfiog-
nomie: Yea, he will make his {chollers to creepe in

credite with Princes , by fore.telling them ma-

nie great things ; parte true, parte falfe : For ifall
were falfe,he would tyne credite at all handes; but
alwaies doubtfome, as his Oracles were. Andhe
will alfo make them to pleafePrinces,by faire ban-
quets and daintie difhes, carried in fhort {pace fra
the fartheft pare of the world. Forno man doubts
but he is a thiefe,and his agilitie(as I {pake before)
makes him tocome fuche fpeede. Such-like, he
will guard his {chollers with faire armies of horfe-
men and foote-men in appearance , Caftles. and

fortes : Which all are but impreffiones in theaire,

eafelie gathered by a {pirite, drawing fo neare to
that fubftance himfelfe: Asin like maner he will
learne them manie juglarie.trickes at Cardes, dice,
and fuch like,to deceiue mens fenfes thereby: and
{uch innumerable falfe pra&ticquesswhich are pro-
uen by over-manie in this age: As they who ar ac-
quainted with that Jtaban called S c o ro yet liuing,
canreport, And yet are all thefe things but delu-
ding of the fenfes, and no waies true in fubftance,

as were the falfe miracles wrought by King Phi

raos Magicians, for cotiterfeiting Moyfes: For that
is the difference betwixt Gods myracles and the
Deuils,God is a creator,what he makes appeare in
myracle, itis foin effe&, As Moyfes rod being ca-

Ren downe,was no.doubt turned ina naturall Ser.

‘pent:

HIE
pi
Wg
$i
| E
f
tei
N
1E
a
H

Ra
j

Demonologte.Firft Booke. 23

pent: where as the Deuiil( as Gods Ape) counter-

fetting that by his Magicians, maid their wandes to
appeare fo,onclic to mennes outward fenfes:as ky-
thed in effec by their being deuoured by the o-
ther.For it isno wonder, that the Deuill may de-
lude our fenfes, fince we fee by common proofe,
that fimple juglars will make an hundreth thinges
feeme both to our eies and eares otherwaies then
they are.Now as tothe Magicians part of the con.
tract,it is in a word that thing,whichI faid before,
the Deuill hunts for in all men. |

Pur. Surelie ye haue faid much to me in this
e all that you:haue faid be astrue as wounder-

Il.

E r1.For the trueth in thefe actiones, it willbe
ealelie confirmed,to anie that pleafes to take paine
vpon the reading of diuerfe authenticque hifto-
ries,and the inquiring of daily experiences,Andas
for the trueth of their poffibilitie,that they may be,
and in what maner, I truft I haue alleaged nothin

whereunto [ haue not joyned fuch probable rea-

fons,asI leaue to your difcretion,to waie and con-

fidder:One word onlie I omitted; concerning the:

forme of making of this contra, which is either
written with the Magicians owne bloud : orelfe bes
ing agreed vpon(in termes his {chole-mafter) tou- -
ches him in {ome parte, though peraduenture no.
markeremaine ; as it doth with all Witches.

D4. Cir,

i
j

full,

—

monologie.Firft booke.

Cuar. VIIL ARGV

The reafon why the art of Magic i vnlawfull What pu-
nifbment they merite: And who may be accounted
guilty of that crime,

24. De

PHILOMATHES,
ELIE Ye haue made this arte to appeare
verie monftruous & deteftable. But what I pray
you {hal be faid to fuch as mainteines this art to be
lawfull,for as euill as you haue madeit?

Err. I fay,they fauour of the panne them felues,
or at leaft little better, And yet I would be glad to
hearetheirreafons.

Pur, There are two principallie, that euer I
heard vfed; befide that which is founded vpon the
comon Prouerb(that the Necromancers commands

the Deuill,which ye haue already refuted) The one
is grounded vpon areceiued cuftome : The other

vpon an authoritie, which fome thinkes infallible.
Vpon cuftome, we fee that diuerfe Chriftian Prin-
ces and Magiftrates feuere punifhers of Witches,
will notonelie ouer-fee ¿Magicians to liue within
their dominions; but euen fome-times delight to
fee them prooue fome of their praGticques, The o-
ther reafon is,that Moyfes being brought vp(as itis
expreflie faid in the Scriptures ) all the ferences of
the A Egyptians, whereof no doubt, this was one of
the principalles : And he notwithftanding of this
arte,pleafing God,as he did,confequentlie that art
profefied by fo godlie a man,coulde not be vnlaw-

Eri.

Hil
its
5s
i
H
if
f
f ‘
t
“a 5
F
é
HE

Demonologie.Firft booke. 25
_ Err. Asto the firft ofyourrealones, grounded
vpon cuftome: I faie, an euill cuftomecan neuer
be accepted for a good law, for the ouer great ig-
norance of the worde in {fome Princes and Magi-
{trates,and the contempt thereof in others, moues
them to finne heavelie againft their office in that
poynt. As to the other reafone,which feemes to be
of greater weight, it it were formed ina Syllo-
gifme;it behooued to be in manie termes, and full
of fallacies(to {peake in termes of Logicque)for firft,
that that generall propofition; affirming Moyfes

to be taught in all she fciences of the A Egyptians,

fhould conclude that he was taught in Mazie, I fee
no neceffity.For we muft vnderftand that the fpirit
of God there, fpeaking of {ciences, vnderftandes
them that are lawfull; for except they be lawfull,
they are but abufive called {ciences,& are but igno-
rances,indeede: Nam homo pictus, non eft homo. Ses
condlie,giuing that he had bene taught in it, there
is great difference, betwixtknowledge and practi-
fing of athing(as I faid before ). For God knoweth
all thinges, being alwaies good, and of our finne
& our infirmitie proceedeth ourignorance, Third-
lie, giuing that he had both ftudied and practifed
the f{ame(which is more nor monftruous to be bes
leeued by any Chriftian ) yet wee know well i-
nough,that before that euer the fpirite of God be-
gan to call Moyfes, he was fled out of AEgypt, be-
ing fourtie yeares of age , for the flaughter of an
A Egyptian , andin his good. father Je:brees lande,

firft called at the firie buthe,hauing remained there
| E other

Fi |
a
b
Es
i
A |
f
P

26 Daemonologie.Firft booke.

other fourtie yeares in exile :fo that fuppofe he had
beene the wickeddeft man in the worlde before,he
then became a changed and regenerat man,and ve»
ry litle of olde Moyfes remained in him. 4 braham
was an Idolater in Yr ofChaldea before he was cal-
led: And Paule being called Saule,was a moft {harp
perfecutor of the Saintes of God, while that name
was changed. |

Par, What punifhment then thinke ye merites
thefe Magicians and Necromancers?

Err. The like no doubt, that Sorcerers and Wita
ches merites; and rather fo much greater, as their
error proceedes of the greater knowledge, and fo
drawes nerer to the fin againft the holy Ghoft.And
as I faye of them, fo fay I the like of all fuch as con-
fults,enquires,entertaines,& ouerfees them, which
is {eene by the miferable endes of many that askes
co uncell of them - For che Deuill hath neucr bet-
ter tydings to tell to any,then he tolde to Sav/e:nei-.
ther is it lawfullto vfe fo vniawfull inftrumentes,

were itneuer tor fo gooda purpofe : for that

axiome in Theologie is moft certaine
and infallible: Nunquam faciena
 dumef malumvibonum
inde eueniat.

THE

att
ing
af
‘
a $
ti!
a
q
| i
t
ARS
in
1E
4 Abt
3°
j
AS
E ; r
i
Hi
Fi 4,
F]

THE SECO

BOOKE

monologie

ARGVMENT.
T be defcription of Sorcery ér Witch-
craftin fpeciall,

Cuap. I. ARGV.
Proued by the Scripture, that fuch a thing canbe: And
the reafons refuted of all fuch as would callit but an
imagination and Melancholicque humor,

P HILOMATHBS,

OW Since yee haue fatisfied

S A g me nowe fo fullie, concerning

P

Magie or Necromancie, I will

SAE pray youto doe the like in Sorce-

or Witchcraft.

That fielde is like-

wife verie large: and althought
in the mouthes and pennes of

manie, yet fewe knowes oo. trueth thereof , a

2 w

E SAT

“pa ~
4, ANN
l
à
e.
c

H
I
»
iE,
Be

fecond affirmative vpon Phyficke: And the thirde

28 Deamonologie. Second booke.

wel as they beleeue themfelues,as I (hall fo fhortly
as I can, make you (God willing) as eafelie to per-
ceiuc.

Put. But I pray you before ye goe further, Iet
mee interrupt you here with a fhorte digreffion :
which is,that many can fcarcely beleeue that there
is {uch a thing as Witch-craft,Whofe reafons I wil
fhortly alleage vnto you, thatye may fatishie me as
well in that, as ye haue done inthe reft, For firft,
whereas the Scripture feemes to prooue Witch-
craft to be, by diuerfe examples, and {peciallie by
fundrie of the fame, which yee haue alleaged; it is
thought by fome, that thefe places fpeakes of Ma-
gicians and Necromancers onlie, & not of Witches.
As in {pecial, thefe wife men of Pharaohs, that coti-
terfcited Moyfes miracles, were Magicians fay they,
& not Witches:As likewife that Pythoniffe that Saul
confulted with: And fo was Simon Magus in the
new Teftament,as that very ftile imports. Second-
lie,;where ye would oppone the dailie practicque,
& confefli6 of fo manie, thatis thought likewife to
be but verie melancholicque imaginations of fim-
plerauing creatures, Thirdly,if Witches had fuch
power of Witching of folkes to death, (as they fay
they haue ) there had bene none left aliue long
fence in the world, but they : at the leaft,no good
or godlie perfon of whatfoeuer eftate, could haue
e{caped their deuilrie,

Fer. Yourthree reafons as I take,ar grounded
the firt of them zegativè vpon the Scripture: The

vpon

í i
RH
TER
A
aif
iis
Leh
j |
|»
P
ji
if
i$
T

Demonologie. Second booke. 29

‘ vpon the certaine proofe of experiéce, As to your
| firft,it is moft crue indeede, that all thefe wife men
of Pharaoh were Magicians of art: As likewife it ap-
peares wel that the Pythoniffe,with whom con-
{ulted,was of that fame profeffion : & fo was Simon
Magas. But yee omitted to fpeake of the Lawe of
God,wherein are all Magicians, Diuines, Enchan-
ters Sorcerers, witches, & whatfoeuer of that kind
that confultes with the Deuil,plainelie prohibited,
and alike threatned againft. And befides that, fhe

b who had the Spirite of Python, in the Actes, whofe 4. 16.
Spirite was put to filence by the Apoftle,could be
no other thing but a verie Sorcerer or Witche,
if yee admit the vulgare diftinétion, to be in a ma-
| ner true, whereof I {pake in the beginning of our
conference. For that fpirite whereby fhe conque-
f fted fuch gaine to her Mafter, was not at her rai-
fing or commading,as fhe pleafed to appoint, but
fpake by her toung,afwell publicklie, as priuatelie:
| Whereby fhee feemed to draw nearer to the fort
; of Demoniakes or poflefied, if that conjunction be-
| twixt them, had not bene of her owne confent:
as it appeared by her, not being tormented theres
| with : And by her conquefting of fuch gaine to her
| mafters(as I haue alreadie faid.)As to your fecond
reafon grounded vpon Phyfick,in attributing their
confefliones or apprehenfiones, to a naturall me-
lancholicque humour: Anie that pleafes Phyfical-
lieto condet vpon the natural humour of melan-

: cholie, according toall the Phyficians, that euer
, writ thereupon, they fall finde that that will be
E 3 ouer

fa
f
d
E
iss
q
t
iy
é 4
ik
f
i |
t
By

30 Damonologie. Second booke.

ouer fhortacloak to couertheir knauery with: For
as the humor of Melancholie in the felfe is blacke, ‘
heauieand terrene, fo are the fymptomes thereof, | :
in any perfones that are fubje&t therevnto,leannes, 5
palenes,defire of folitude: andif they cometo the
higheft degree therof,mere folie and Manie: where
as by the contrarie, a great number of them that e-
uer haue bene convict or c6feffors of Witchcraft,
as may be prefently feene by manie that haue at i
this time confefled : they are by the contrarie,] fay, Fs
fome of them rich and worldly-wife, fome of them »
fatte or corpulent in their bodies, and moft part of
them altogether giuen ouer to the pleafures of the
flefh,continual haunting of companie,and all kind
of merrines, both lawfull and vnlawfull, which are
things dire@ly contrarie to the fymptomes of Me-
lancholie,whereofI {pake, and further experience a
daylie proues how loath they are to confefle with-
out corture,which witnefleth their guiltines, where
by the contrary, the Melancholicques neuer {pares :
to bewray themfelues, by their continual] difcour. |,
fes feeding thereby their humor in that which the
thinke no crime. As to your third reafon, it {carfe-
lie merites an an{were,For if the deuill their mafter a
| were not bridled,as the {criptures teacheth vs,fup- |
i pofethere were no men nor women to be his in-
al {truments, hee could finde waies inough without
| anie helpe of others to wrack all mankinde: where-
i vnto he employes his whole ftudy, and zoeth about
z. Pet.s. like a roaring Lyon( as Perer faith) to that effe&,but
the limites of his power were {et down before the
founs

`

Fi
Att

PR

f

f

i

Ai

i.

Hi F

Demonologie.S econd booke. 31

foundations of the world were laid, whichhe hath
not power in the leaft jote to tranfgreffe. But be-
fide all this,there is ouer greate a certainty to proue
that they are, by the daily experience of the harms
that they do, both to men, and whatfoeuer thing
men pofleffes,whome God will permit them to be
the inftruments, foto trouble or vifite, asin my
difcourfe of that arte,yee fhall heare clearelie pro-
ued, |

Cuar. II
T he Etymologie and fignification of that word of Sorce-
rie. Thefirft entreffe and prentifbippe of them that
giues themfelues to that craft.

PHILOMATHES,

= me onthen I pray you,and returne where ye

left.
Err. This word of Sorcerie is a Latine worde,
which is taken from cafting of the lot, & therefore
he that vfeth it,is called Sortiarius aforte, As to the
word of Witchcraft,it is nothing but a proper name
giuen in our language. The caufe wherefore they
were called /ortiary, proceeded of their practiques
{eeming to come of lot orchance:Such as the tur.
ning of the riddle: the knowing of the forme of
prayers, or fuch like tokens: If aperfon deceafed
wouldeliue or dye. Andin generall, that name
was giuen them for vfing of fuchcharmes, and

freites , as that Crafte teacheth them . Manie.

poynts of their craftand practicques are common

E4 bes -

‘
be
¢
Ags &
< ‘

peu

» des

a

32 Daemonologie.Second booke.

betuixe the Magicians and them:for they ferue both
one Mafter,althought in diuerfe fafhions- And as
I deuided the Necromancers, into two forts, learned
and vnlearned; fo muft I denie them in other two,
riche and of better accompt, poore and of baffer
degree. Thefe two degrees now of perfones, that
practifes this craft,anfwers tothe paffions in them,
which(I told you before)the Deuil vfed as meanes
to intyfe them to his feruice,for fuch of them as are
in great miferie and pouertie, he allures to follow
him, by promifing vnto them greate riches, and
worldlie commoditie. Such as though riche, yee
burnes in a defperate defire of reuenge, hee allures
= themby promifes, to get their turne fatisfied to
their hartes contentment. Itis tobe noted nowe,
that thatolde andcraftie enemie of ours, affailes
none, thoughtouched with any of thefe two exe
tremities,except he firft finde an entrefle reddy for
him, either by the great ignorance of the perfon he
deales with, ioyned with an euill life, or elfe by
their carelefnes and contempt of God: And fin-
ding them in an veter defpair,for one of thefe two
former caufesthatlhaue fpoken of; hee prepares
the way by feeding them craftely in their humour,
and filling them further and further with defpaire,
while he Eade the time proper to difcouer himielf
vnto them.At which time, either vpon their walk-
ing folitarie in the fieldes, or elfe lying panfing in
their bed;but alwaies without the company of any
other,he either by avoyce,or in likeneffe of a man
inquires of them, what troubles them: and pror:
eth

F i
j

it
fir

f fi H »

f

f

‘Demonologie. Second Booke, 33

feth them’, a fuddaine and certaine waie of reme-
die, vpon conditionon the other parte , that they
follow his advife, and doe fuch things as hee will re-

uireof them : Theirmindes beeing prepared be-

ore hand, as I haue already {poken , they eafely
agreed vnto that demaund ofhis : And fyne fettes
an othertryift , where they may meete againe. At
which time, before hee proceede any further with
them, hee firft per{wades them to addié themfelues
to his feruice : which being eafely obtained,he then
difcouers whathe is vnto them : makes them to re-
nounce their God and Baptifme directly, and giues
them his marke vppon fome fecreit place of their
bodie, which remaines foare vnhealed , while his
next meeting with them , and thereafter euer infen-
fible, howfoeuer it be nipped or pricked by any,
as is daily prooued, to giue them a proofe thereby,
that as in that dooing , hee coulde hurte and heale ©
them; fo all their illand well doing thereafter, muft
dependvponhim. Andbefides that, the intollera-
ble dolour that they feele in that place, where hee
hath marked them, ferues to waken them , and not
to let them reft, while their next meeting againe :
fearing left otherwayes they might eyther forget

_ him, being as new Prentifes , and not well enough

founded yet, in that fiendly follie : or elfe remem-
bring of that horrible promife they made him, at
their laft meeting, they might skunner at the fame,
and preaffeto callit backe. At their third meeting,
hee makesa fhew to be carefull to performe his pro-
mifes, either by teaching them at how p get

em

e
i
i
i
f
ald
j
f
a

34. Daemonologie. Firft Booke.
themfelues reuenged, if they be of that fort : Or elfe
by teaching them leffons, howe by moft vilde and
vnlawfull meanes, they may obtaine gaine, and
worldly commodity, ifthey be of the other fort.

Cuap. III. arey.

The Witches actions dinided in two partes. The adti-
ons proper to their owne peter . Their attions to-
ward others. T he forme of their conuentions, andado-
ving of their Maifter.

HILOMATHE Se

sd Ee haue faid now inoughof their initiating in
that ordour. Itrefts then that yee difcourfe vp-

on their practifes, fra they be pafled Prentifes : for
I would faine heare what is poffible to them to
performeinverydeede. Although they ferue a
common Maifter with the Necromancers, (as Ihaue
before faide) yet ferue they him in an other forme.
Foras the meanes are diuerfe, which allures them
to thefe vnlawfull artes of feruing of the Diuell; fo
by diuerfe wayes vie they their practifes, anfwering
tothefemeanes, which firftthe Diuell vied as in-
ftruments inthem; though all tending to oneend :
Towit, the enlarging of Sathans tyrannie , and
trofling of the propagation of the Kingdome of
Curis r, fofarreaslyeth in the poffibilitie, either
of the oneor other forte, or of the Deuil their Ma-
iter. For where the cMagitians, as allured by curio-
{itie, in the moft part of their practifes, feekes prin-
cipally the fatisfying ofthe fame, and to winne ta
themiclues a popular honour and- maser
efe

j
ti
y
1¢
ik

He

ae

`

ji |

ti

i

t}

r +
t-
i
an

i
i
an i
an

ie

i

if |

H

ati.

Demonologie. Second Booke, 33

Thefe Witches on the other parte, beeing inticed,
either for the defire of reuenge,or of worldly riches,
their whole practifes, are either to hurte men and
their gudes, or what they poffefle, for fatisfying of

their cruell mindes in the former , or elfe by the

wracke in quhatfoeuer fort,of anie whom God will
permit them to haue power of, to fatisfie their gree-
dy defire in the laft point.

Er 1. In twoparts their actions may bee diui-

ded; the actions of their owne perfons, and the

actions proceeding from them towardes anie o-
ther. And this diuifion being wel vnderftood , will
eafilie refolue you, what is poflible to them to doe.
For although all that they confeffe is no lie vppon
their parte, yet doubtlefly, in my opinion,a parte of
it is not indeede, sani as they take it to be:
And in this I meane by the actions of their owne
perfons. Foras I faide before, {peaking of Magie,
that the Diuellilludes the fenfes of thefe fchellers of
his, in mary things, fo fay I the like of thefe Wit-
ches.

Pur.ThenI pray you firlt to fpeakofthat part of

their owne perfons, and {yne yee may comenext to
Err. Tothe effect that they may performe fuch
{eruices of their falfe Maifter, as he employes them
in, the Diuelas Gods Ape, counterfeites in his fer-
uants, this feruice and forme of adoration; that God
prefcribed and made his. feruantes tapractife. . For

as the feruantsof GO D,, publikelie vfes.to con- —

veche for feruing of him, fo makes hethenin great
2 QUM-

j
f
Ẹ
f
| £
P i
ia?
f
H
f
»
if
Hp

36 Damonologie. Firft Booke.

numbers to conveene (though publikely they dare
not) for his feruice. As none conueenes to the ado-
ration and worfhipping of God , except they bee
marked with his {eale , the Sacrament of Baptifme:
Sonone ferues Sathan , and conueenes to theado-
ring of him, thatare not marked with that marke,
wherof I already {fpake. As the Minifterfent by God
teacheth plainely at the time of their publike con-
uentions,how to ferue him in fpiritand truth:fo that
vncleane {pirite, in his owne perfon teacheth his
Difciples, atthe time of their conueening, how to
worke all kinde of mifchiefe : And craues coumpt
of all their horrible and deteftable proceedinges
pafled, for aduauncement ofhis feruice. Yea that he
may the more viuely counterfeit and fcorne God,
hee oft times makes his flaues to conveene in thefe
very places, which are deftinate and ordained for
the conveening of the feruants of God ( I meane

by Churches) But this farre,which I haue yet faide,

I not onely take it to be true in their opinions,
but euen fo to be indeede. For the forme that hee
vied in counterfeiting God amongeft the Gentiles,
makes mee fo to thinke : As God fpake by his Ora-
cles, fpake heenotfo by his? As GOD had afwell
bloudie Sacrifices , as others without bloud , had
not hee thelike As God had Churches fanétified
to his feruice, with Altars, Priefts, Sacrifices, Cere-
moniesand Prayers’; had heenot the like polluted
to his {eruice God gaue refponfes by and
Thummim , gaue he not his refponfes by the intralls
_ of beaftes} by the finging of Fowles , and by their

actions

Á. }
iis
; * E
f
i
à
Lire
j
”
it
r
A
j
i }
ig
H
ti
H
FUF
TRE
HIS
a

Demonologie. Second Booke. 37

actions in theaire? As God by vifions, dreames,
and extafies reuealed what was to come , and what
was his will vnto his feruantes; vfed hee not the like
meanes to forewarne his flaues of things to come? .
Yea, euen as God loued cleaneneffle, hated vice, and

| impuritie, andappoynted punifhments therefore :
‘ vied henot the like (though falfely I graunt, and but
in efchewing the leffe inconuenient, to drawe them
vpon agreater) yet diffimuled henot, I fay, {o farre
r as to appoynt his Prieftes to keepe their bodies
Í cleane and vndefiled , before their asking refpon-

i {fesofhim? And fained he not God to be a Prote-

_ Gour of euery vertue, and a iuft reuenger of the

| contrarie? This reafon then mooues me, thatas he
is that fame Diuell , and as craftienow as hee was
then, fo will he not {pare as pertely in thefe actions
that I haue {poken of, concerning the Witches per-
fons : But further, Witches oft times confeffes, not
onely his conueening in the Church with them,
but his occupying of the Pulpit : Yea, their forme

; = of adoration , tobe thekiffing of his hinder partes.
a Which though it feeme ridiculous , yet may itlike-

| wife be true, feeing we reade that in Cakcute, hee ap-
; pearing in forme ofa Goate-bucke, hath publikely
>; that vn-honeft homage done vnto him , by euerie
2 one ofthe people : Soambitious is hee, and greedy

. of honour (which procured his fall ) that hee will
euen imitate it is faid , that
cMofes could feebut the hinder partes of God, for
fi poken but |

3 Cuar.

F
Í
i
¢
f
f

38 Daemonologie. Second Booke.

Cuar. III. arev.
What are the waies pofible wherby the witches may tranf-
port themfelues to places far diftant.And what are impof-
fible & meere illufions of Sathan.And the reafons therof.
PHILOMATHES.

Vt by what way fay they,or thinke yeit poffible i
they can comé to thefe vnlawfull conuentions? e
Err. There isthething whichI efteeme their a
fenfes to be deluded in, and though they lie notin
confefling of it, becaufe they thinke it tobe true,
yetnot to be fo in fubftance or effect : for they fay,
that by diuerfe meanes they may conueene, either :
to the adoring of their Maifter , orto the putting in |
practife any feruiceof his, committed vnto their
charge:one way isnaturall, which is naturall riding,

_ going or fayling, at what houre their Maifter comes
and aduertifesthem. And this way may beeafilie
belieued:an other way is fome-what more ftrange:
and yetis it poffible to be true : which is by being ;
carryed by the forcejof the Spirite which is their j
conduéter, either aboue the earth,or aboue the Sea
{wiftly, to the place where they are to meete : which :
I am per{waded to be likewayes poffible, in refpect
that as Habakkuk was carryed by the Angell in that
forme, to the denne where Dawzellay; fo thinke I,
the Deuill will be readie to imitate God , as wellin
thatas inotherthings : whichismuchmore pofi-
HA Apocrypha ble to him to doe, being a Spirite, then to a mighty i
of Bel and winde, being but a naturallmeteore, to tranfporte
Hi the Dragon from one place toan other, a folide bodie, as is com- f-
i monlie and dayly feene in pra&tife:But in this vio- T
| | | | lent

F

i;
«

`

Deamonologie. Second Booke. 39

lent forme they cannot be carryed, but a fhorte
bounds, agreeing with the fpace that they may re-
taine their breath : forifit were longer, their breath
could not remaine vnextinguifhed, their body be-
ing carryed in fuch a violent and forcible maner, as
byexample : Ifone fall offan {mall height, hislife is
but in perill, according to the hard orfoft light-
ing : But ifone fall from an high and {tay rocke, his
breath will be forcibly bannifhed from the bodie,
before he can win to the earth , as is oft feene by ex-
perience. Andin this tranfporting they fay them-
felues, that they are inuifibleto any other, except
amongtt themfelues; which may alfo bee poffible in
my opinion. For if the diuell may forme what kind

ofimpreffions he pleafes inthe ayre , as I haue faid

before, {peaking of Magie, why may henot far eali-
lier thicken & obfcure {o theaire, that isnextabout
them, by contracting it ftraite together, that the
beames of any other mans eyes can not pearce
thorow the fame, to fee them? But the third way of
their comming to their conuentions , is that wher-
in I thinke them deluded : forfomeofthem fayeth,
that beeing transformedin the likenefle of a little
beaft or foule, they will come and pearce through
whatfoeuer houfe or Church’, though all ordinarie

paffages be clofed, by whatfoeuer open, the ayre —
mayenterinat. And{fomefayeth, that their bodies

lying ftil,as in an extafie, their {pirits wil be rauifhed
outof their bodies,& carryed'to fuch places.And for
verifying thereof, wil giue euident tokens, afwel by
witneffes that haue {gene theirbody lying fencelefle

4 im

y z? ~

d |
f
te
H
E
j

Ailes 12.

4.0 Demonologie. S econd Booke.

in the meanetime, as by naming perfons, whome-

with they mette, and giuing tokens quhat purpofe
was amoneftthem, whome otherwayes they could
not haue knowen:for this forme of journeying, they
affirme to vie moft, when they are tranfported from
one Country toanother. =

Put. Surely I longto heare your owne opini-
onof this : For they are likeold wiues trattles about
the fire, The reafons that mooues me to thinke that
thefe are meere illufions, are thefe. Firft, for them
that are transformed in likenefle of beaftes or foules,
can enter through fo narrow paflages , although I
may eafily beleeue that the Diuell coulde, by his
woorkemanfhippe vppon the ayre, make them ap-
peare to be in fuch formes, eyther to themfelues, or
to others : Yet how he can contract a folide bodie
within {o little roome, I thinke it is dire&ly contra-

rie to it felfe , for tobe made folittle , and yet not —

diminifhed : To be fo ftraitly drawen together,
and yetfeele no paine; I thinkeit is fo contrary to
the qualitie of a naturallbodie, and fo like to the
little tranfubftantiate god in the Papiftes Maffe, that
I can neuer beleeueit. Sotohaue a quantitie , is
{o proper to a folidebodie, thatas all Philofophers
concludes, it cannot be any more without one,
thenafpiritecanhaueone. For, when Peter came
out of the prifon, and the doores all locked : It was not by
any contracting of his bodie in fo little roome : but
by the giuing place of the doore,though vn-efpyed
by the Gaylors. And yet is there no comparifon ,

when this is done, betwixsthepowerof God, and

of

f

Bree

TH
H
i |
rh i
ci |
i
i
Hf
j
mit. |
‘Bh
Hi |
H
TEF
ik

p"

to their fpirites, asit were ina dreame,

mette; that all their reportes ay tokens, thou

Demonolugie. Second Booke, 4.
of the Diuel. Asto their ferme of extafie and {piri-
tuall tran{porting, it is certaine the foules going
out of the bodie , is thie onely definition of naturall
death : and who are once dead, God forbid wee
fhould thinke that it fhould lie in the power of all
the Diuells in Hell, to reftore them to their life a-
gaine : Although heecan put his owne fpirite ina

deadbodie, which the Necromancers commoniic

practife, as yee haue heard. For that is the office
properly belonging to God; and befides that, the
foule once parting from the bodie, can not wan-
der any longer in the worlde , but to the owne reft-
ing place muft it goe immediately, abiding the:con-
iunction of thebodieagaine, at the latterday.
And what Chriftor the Prophets did miracu-
loufly in this cafe, it can not inno Chriftian mans
opinion be made common with the Diuell. As for
any tokens that they giue for proouing ofthis, it
is verie poffible to the Diuelles craft, to perfwade
them to thefe meanes. For hee being a f{pirite, may
hee not fo rauifh their thoughts , and dull their fen-
ces, thar their bodie lying as dead , hee = obieét
(as the

Poets write of eMorpheus:) reprefent fuch formes
of perfons, of places, and other circumftances, as

hee pleafés to illude them with? Yea, that hee may

deceiue them with the greater efficacie, may hee
not atthat fame inftant, by fellowe Angelles ofhis,

illude fuch other perfons fo in that fame fafhion,

whome-with hee makes them to beleeue that nw

{eue.

a |
aa
i
li
f
Aj
j
ge
i
pii
E:
| ik
A

42 Daemonologie. Firft Booke.

feuerally examined, may euery one agree with an
other. And that whatfoeuer actions , either in
hurting men or beafts ; or whatfoeuer other thing
that they falfelie a , atthat time to haue
done, may by himfelfeorhis marrowes, atthat
time be indecde ; foas if they would
giue fora token of their being rauifhed at the death
of fuch a perfon within fo fhorte {pace thereafter,
whom they beleeue to haue poyfoned , or witched -
at thatinftant, might hee notat that fame houre,
haue {mitten that fame perfon, by the permiffi-
onofGOD, to the farther decetuing of them,
and to mooucothers tobeleeue theme And thisis
furely the liklieftway , and moft according to rea-
fon, which my judgement can finde out in this,
and whatfoeuer other vnnaturall poyntes of theit
confeffion. And by thefe meanes fhall we faile fure-
ly, betwixt Charybdisand-Scylla, in efchewing the
not beleeuing of them altogether on the one parte, -
left that drawe vs to the errour , that there is no
Witches : and on the other parte in beleeuing of it,
Hi | make vs to efchewe the falling into innumerable
ai abfurdities , both monftroufly againft all Theolo-

gie diuine, and Philofophie humane.

V:
Witches actions towards others. Why there are more
women of shat craft then men? What things arepof-
fible to them to effectuate by the power of their master.
The reafons thereof. What is the furef remedie of the
barmes done by them.
Pur-

AE
A
+t
j
l
‘Zz
A
ate

Deamonologie. Second Booke, 43

PHILOMATHES.
F° rfooth your opinion in this, feemes to carrie
moft reafon with it, and fince yee haue ended,
then the actions belonging properly to their owne
perfons - fay forward now to their actions vied to-
wards others.
Err. In their ations vfed towardes othefs,
three things tobeconfidered : -Firft, the ma-
ner oftheir confulting thereupon : Next,their part
as inftruments : And laft, their maifters part, who
puts the fameinexecution. ‘Asto their confultati-
ons thereuppon, they vfe them ofteft inthe Chur- —
ches, where they conveene for adoring : at what
time their maifter. enquiring at them what they
would be at : euerie one of them propones vnto
him, what wicked turne they would haue. done,
cither for obtaining of riches, or for reuenging
them vppon any whom they haue maliceat : who
raunting their demaund, as no doubtwillingly
Be will,fince it is to doe euill,hee teacheth them the
‘meanes whereby they may do thefame. As for litle
trifling turnes that women haue adoe with,hee cau-
feth them to ioynt deadcorpfes,and to make pow- —
ders thereof, mixing fuch other things there-a-
mongft, ashe giues vnto them. 7
P u 1. Butbefore yee goe further, permit me, I
pray you, to interrupt you one word, which yee
aue put mee in memoricof, by {peaking of Wo-
men. What can be the caufe that there are twenties
women given to that craft,where there is one man?
Er. The reafonis eafie , for as that fex

G2

j
i
f
i
hy t$
i?
¢
«
H
TE
f
PE

John 9.

44. Demonologie. Firft Booke.
is frailer then manis, fois it eafier to be intrapped
in thefe groffe {nares of the Diuell, as was ouer well
prooued to be true, by the Serpents deceiuing of E-
ua at the beginning, which makes him the homelier
with that fex fenfine..

Pur. Returne now whereye left.

. Err. Tofome others atthefe times hee teach-
eth, howto make Pi€tures of waxe or clay : That
by theroafting thereof, the perfons that they beare
the name of, may be continually melted or dryed
away by continuall fickenefle. To fome hee giues
fuch {tones or poulders, as wil helpe to cure or
caft on difeafes. : And to fome hee teacheth kindes
of vncouthe poyfons , which Mediciners vnder-
ftandes not (for hee is farre cunninger then man in
the knowledge of all the occult proprieties of na-

ture) not thatany of thefe meanes which hee tea-

cheth them (except the poyfens which are compo-
fed of thinges naturall) can , of themfelues , helpe
any thing to thefe turnes , that they are employed
in, butonely being Gods Ape , as well in that, asin.

allother things. Euen as God by his Sacraments

which aré earthly of themfelues workes a heauenlie
effet, though no wayes by any cooperation in
them : Andas Chrift by clay and fpettle wrought
together, opened the eyes of the blinde man , fuppofe
there was no vertue in that which hee outwardly
applied , fo the Diuell will haue his out-warde
meanes to be fhewes, as it were of his doing, which
hath no parte of cooperation in his turnes with
him , how farre that euer the ignorants beabufed

in

H
WEG
F FF,
he
Aa
F:
å
E
Tike
i
i}
al
i F
| it
f
i
if
$ í

Deamonologie. Second Booke. 4.5
in the contrarie. And as to the effectes of thefe two
former partes, to wit, the confultations and the cut-
warde meancs , they are {o woonderfull , as I dare
notalleadge any of them, without toyning a futhici-
ent reafon of the poffibilitie thereof . For leaving
all the {mall trifles among wiues , and to fpeake ot
the principall poyntes of their craft. For the com-
mon trifles thereof, they can doe without conuer-
— ting well enough by themfelues : Thefe principall
poyntes I fay are thefe : They can make men or wo-
mento loue or hate other , which may be verie pof-
fibleto the Diuell to effectuate, feeing hee being a
fubtile {pirite, knowes wel enough how to perfwade
the corrupted affection of them whome God will
permit him fo to deale with: They can lay the ficke-
neffeof one vpon another, which likewife is verie
Say vnto him : For fince by Gods permiffion,

ee layed fickenefle vpon Job, why may he not farre
eafilier lay it vppon any other : Fors an old practiti-
an, he knowes wel enough what humour domines
moftin any of vs, and asa {pirite he can fubtillie
walken vp the fame, making‘it peccant, or to a-
bounde, as hee. thinkes mecete for troubling of vs,
when God will fo permit him. And for the taking
offof it, no doubt hee will be glad to relieue fuch of
preent paine, as hee may thinke by thefe meanes to
perfwade to be catched in his.euerlafting {nares and
fetters . They can bewitch and take the life of
menorwomen, by roaftingofthe Pictures, asI
{pake of before, which likewife is verie poffible to
their Maifter to performe,. for although ( ee
3 c-

`
f
ni
í
‘
f
at
Ta
i,
f
EA
Hi
AS

46 Demonologie. Second Booke.

before) that inftrument of waxe haue no vertue
in that turne dooing, yet may hee notvery well,
euen by the fame meafiire that his conjured
{laues melts that wax atthe fire, may hee not,I fay,
at thefe fame times, fubtily, as a'fpirite, fo weaken
and fcatter the fpirites of life of the patient, as may
make him on the one parte, for faintnefle, to fiweate
outthe humour ofhis bodie : Andon the other
parte, for the not concurrence of thefe {pirites,
which caufes his digeftion, {oò debilitate his ftomak,
that this humour radicall continually, fweating out
on the one parte, and no new good fùcke being put
in theplace thereof, for lacke of digeftion on the
other, hee at laft fhall vanifh away, euen as his
picture willdoe at the fire. And that knauifh and
cunning workeman , by troubling him , onely at
{ome times, makes a palaa: neerebetwixt
thewoorking ofthe one andtheother, that both
fhallende asit were at onetime. They can rayfe
ftormesand tempefts in theayre, eyther vpon Sea
orland, though notvniuerfally , butin fuch aparti-
cular place and prefcribed boundes, as Go p will
permitte them foto trouble : Which likewife is
verie eafie to be difcerned from any other natural!
tempefts that-are meteores , in refpect of the
fuddaine and violent raifing thereof, together with
the fhort induring ofthe fame. And this is likewife
very poffible to their Maifter todo, he hauing fuch
afhnitie with the ayre as being a {pirite, and ha-
uing fuch power of the forming and moouing
thereof, as ye haue heard mealready declare : For

Ths: |
a
fi
j
Hy
aii
Í
aa
j
ads
| HE
1E
‘4
l
in
aie
E

Deamonologie. Second Booke. 4.7

in the Scripture, that ftile of, the Prince of the ayre,
is giuen vnto him. They can make tolkes to become
Phrenticque or Maniacque, which likewife is verie
 poffible to their Matter to do, fince they are but na-
tural! fickneffes :and fo he may lay on thefe kindes,
afwell asany others. They can make {pirits, eyther
to follow and trouble perfons, or haunt certaine
houfes, and affray oftentimes the inhabitants : as
hath beene knowen to be done by our Witches at
this time. And likewife they can make fometo bee
pofleffed with {pirits, & fo to become very Demo-
niacques : and this laftforte is very poffible likewife
to the Diuell their Maifter to doe, fince he may ea-
fily {end his owne Angels to trouble in what forme
he pleafes, any whom God wil permit him fo to vfe.

Put. But will God permit thefe wicked inftru-
ments by the power of the Diuell their Maifter, to
trouble by anie of thefe meanes, anie that beleeues

in him? po

= Epx. Nodoubt, for there are three kindeof
folkes whom God will permit fo to be tempted or
troubled ; the wicked for their horrible finnes, to
punifh them inthe like meafure; The godly that
are fleeping in any great finnes or infirmities and
weakeneffe in faith, to waken them vp the fafter by
- fuch an vncouth forme : and euen fome of the
beft, that their patience may be tryed before the

world,as Io s s was.For why may not God vfeany _

kinde of extraordinarie punifhment, when itplea-
fes him; as wellas the ordinary rods of fickneffe or
otheraduer‘ities.. F

Ee

Ephef.2.

A

*»
if

t b

i

pi

Èf :

—

s -
U
i

43 Deæmonologie. Second Booke.
Par. Whothen may be free from thefe diuel-

lith practifes?

© Err. No manoughtto prefume fo farre as to

promife any impunitie to himfelfe : for God hath

before all beginnings, preordinated,as well the par-

ticular fortes of plagues, as of benefites for eueric

man, whichin theownetime hee ordaines them to
be vifited with, and yet ought we not to be the more
afraide for that, of anie thing that the Diuel and his
wicked inftruments can doe again{t vs : For wee
daily fight againft the Diuel in a hundreth other
wayes : And therefore,asa valiant Captaine affraies
no more being at the combate, nor ftayes from his
purpofe for the rummifhing fhotte of a canon, nor
the fmal clacke of aPiftolet : fuppofehe be not cer-
taine what may lightvponhim; Euen fo ought we
boldely to goe forwarde in fighting again the Di-
uel without any greaterterrour, for thefe his rareft

weapons, nor for the ordinarie whereof wee haue

daily the proofe. 7 |
P u1. Is it not lawful then, by the helpeoffome

other Witch, to cure the difeafe that is caften on by
that craft? |

Ep 1... Nowayes lawful: For I gaue you the rea-
fon thereof in that axiome of Theologie , Which
was the laft wordes I fpake of Magie.

Pur. How then may thefe difeafes be lawfully

Err. Onelie by carneft prayer vnto God, by
amendement of their liues, and by fharpe purfuing
eucrie one, according to his calling of thefe inftru-
Lra ments

Rn
a

Demonologie.Second booke. 4.9

mentes of Sathan,whofe punifhment to the death
willbe a falucarie factifice for the patient. And this
is not onely the lawfull way,but likewife the moft
fure: For by the Deuils meanes,can neuer the Diuell
be caflen outas Chrift fayeth,And when fuch a cure
is vfed,it may wel {erue for a fhort time, but atthe
lait, it will doubtleflie tend to the vtter perdition of
the patient,both in bodie and foule. a

Cuar VI. ARGV.

What forie of folkes are leaf? or moft [ubiect to receive
harme by Witchcrafi.What pew they haue to harme
the Magiftrate,ana upon what refpects they hane any
power in prifon: And to what end may or will the De-
aill appeare to them therein, Vpon what refpettes the
Dewuill appeires infundry fhapes to fundry of them at
any time,

PHILOMATHES,

BY who dare take vpon him to punifh them, if
J no man can be fure to be free from their vnna-
turall inuafiones?
Ep 1.VVe ought not the more of that reftraine
from vertue,that the way wherby.we.climbe there-
unto be ftraight and pertilous. But befides that, as
there is no kinde of perfones fo fubje& to receiue
harme of them , as thefe that are. of infirme and
weake faith(which is the beft buckler againft fuch
inuafiones:)[o haue they fo {mal power quer none,
as ouer fuch as zealouflie and earneftlie perfewes
them, without {paring for anie worldlie refpet,
Pur. Then they are like the Peft,which {mites
thefe fickareft,chat flies it fartheft, and apprehends

deeplieft

Mark?

¢
IF
i
P
a
f

50 Dæmonologie.S econd booke.

deeplieft the perrell thereof,
WG ~ E r1.It is euen fo with them: For neither is it a-
ble to them to vfe anie falfe cure vpon a patient ex-
cept the patient firft beleeue in their power,and fo
hazard the tinfell of his own foule,nor yet can they
haue leffe power to hurt any,nor fuch as contemns
moft their doinges,fo being it comes of faith, and
not ofanie vaine arrogancie in themfelues,
Pur. But whatistheir power againft the Ma-
giftrate?
Er 1. Leffe or greater, according as he deales
with them. For if hebeflouthfull towardes them,

God is verie able to make them. inftrumentes to

waken & punifh his flouth.Butif he be the contras

rie,he according to the iuft law of God, and allow-

able law of al Nations, wil be diligentin examining
and punifhing of them: GO D will not permit
their mafter to trouble or hinder fo good a worke,
Pu 1.Butfra they be oncein handsand firmance,
haue they any further power in theircraft?

Ep. That is according to the forme of their |
detention. Ifthey be but apprehended and deteie
Ha ned by anie priuate perfon,vpon other priuate ref-
Hi -pectes, their power no doubt either in efcaping,
orin'doing hurte, isno leffe nor euer it was be-
1 -fore.But if on the other parte, their apprehending
ie and detention be by the lawfull Magiftrate, vpon
the juftrefpe@es of their guilrinefle in that craft,

their power is theri no greater-then before that

H _ever they medled with their mafter. For where |
Al, God beginnes iuftlie to ftrike by his lawfull Lieu-

_tennentes, itisnotin the Deuillés power tode-
fraude

oft ~
P
HP.
i inf
‘taf
$ å

Demonologie. Second booke. 51
fraude or bereaue him of the office, or effect of his
powerfull and reuenging Scepter.

P u1. But wil never their mafter come to vifit thé,

fra they be once apprehended & put in firmance?

Err. Thatis according to the eftaite that thefe
miferable wretches are in: For if they be obftinate
in {till denying, he will not {pare, when hee findes
time to fpeake with thé, either if he find thé in any
coimfort,to fil them more and more with the vaine
hope of fome maner of reliefe» or elfe if he finde
them in a deepe difpaire,by all meanes to augment
the fame, & to perfwade them by fome extracrdi-

narie meanes to put themfelues downe,which very

commonlie they doe. Butif they be: pénireat and

confefle,God will not permit him to trouble them

anie more with his prefence and allurements.
Pur. Itisnot good vfing his counfell I fee chen.

But I would earneftly know when he appeares to:

them in prifon,what formes vies he then to take ?
E r 1. Diuers formes,eué as he vfes to do at other
times vnto them,For as I told you,fpeaking of Ma-
gieshe appeares to that kind of craftef-men ordina-
rily in an forme, according as they agree vpon ita-
mongft themfelues: Or if they be but prentifes,ac-
cording to the qualitie of their circles or conjura-
tions Yet to thefe capped creatures, he appeares
as he pleafes, and as he findes meeteft for their hu-
mors.For euen at their publicke conuentiones, he
appeares to diuersof them in diuers formes,as we

haue found by the difference of their confeflions

in that point:For he deluding them with vaine im-

preffions in the aire ,. makes himfelfe to feeme
H 2 more

mz:

nad

Ld

52 Damonologie. Second booke.

more terrible to the grofler forte; that they maie
thereby be moued to feare and reverence him the |
more: And les monftrous and vncouth like againe
to the craftier forte, leaft otherwaies they might
fturre and skunner at his vglineffe,

Pur. Howcan hethen be felt, as they confefle
they haue done him, if his bodie be but of aire?

E pr. I heare little of that amongft their cofef-
fions,yet may he make himfelfe palpable,cither by
affuming anie dead bodie, and vfing the miniftrie
therof,or elfe by deluding as well their fence of fee-
ling as feeing; which is not impoffible to him to do,
fince all our fenfes,as we are fo. weake,and euen b
He ordinarie fickneffes will be often times deluded.
ih : Pur, But! would {peere one word further yet,
i cõcerning his appearing to them in prifon, which.
a is this May anie other that chances to be prefent
ii i | at that time in the prifon,fee him as well as they,
ant ‘Epa, .Some-times.they will, and fome-times:
not,as it pleafes God.

Cuar. VII. arcv.
Tit Two formes of the deuils vifible conuerfing in the earth,
- wih the reafons wherefore thé one of them was com-
_ muneft inthe time of Papiltrie: And the other fen-
frre. T hefe that denies the power of the Dewill denies
_ the power of God, and are guiltie of the errour of the

on

PHILOMATHESe
4} | | : H Ath the Deuill then power to appeare to any
other, except to fuch as are:his tworne difci-
ples:efpecially finceal Oracles,& {uch like kinds of
illufions

f
h
m
at

illufions were taken away and abolifhed by the
cumming ofCurisr?

Err. Although it be true indeede, that the
brightneffe of the Gofpell at his cumming, fcaled
the cloudes ofall thefe grofle errors in the Genti»
lifme:yet that thefe abufing fpirites,ceafes not fen
fine at fometimes to appeare,dailie experiencetea.
ches vs, Indeed this difference is to be marked be-
twixtthe formes of Sathans conuerfing vifibly in
the world, For of two different for mes thereof,the
one of them by the fpreading of the Euangell,and
conqueft of the white horfe, in the fixt Chapter of
the Reuelation,is much hindred and become ra-
ther there through.This his appearing to anyChri-
{tians, troubling of them outwardly, or paffeffing
of them conftrainedly, The other of them is be-
come cOmuner and more vfed fenfine, I meaneb
their vnlawfull artes,wherupon our whole purpole
hath bene, This we finde by experience. in this He
to bè true, For as we know, moe Ghofts & fpirites
were feene,nor tongue can tell,in the time of blind
Papiftriein thefe Countries,where pow by the con-
trary,aman fhalkfcarcely all histime heare once of
fuch thinges. And yet were thefe vnlawfull artes
farre rarer at that time: and neuer were fo much
harde of,nor fo rife as they are now.

Par., What fhould be the caufe of that?

- Ep1. The diuerfe nature of our finnes procures
at the Luftice of God, diuerfe forts of punifhments.
an{wering thereunto, And therefore as in the time:
of Papiffrie, our fathers erring grofiely, & through

igno-

Deamonologie. Second booke. 53

a
H
‘
j
T
i
E

ee

54. Damonologie. Second booke.

ignorance,that mift of errours ouerfhaddowed the
Deuill to walke the more familiarlie amongf
them: And as it were by barnelie and affraying
terrours, to mocke and accufe their barnelie er-
rours: By thecontrarie, we now being founde of
Religion, and in our life rebelling to our profeffi.

‘on,God iuftly by that finne of rebellion, as Samuel

calleth it, accufeth our life fo wilfullie fighting a
gainft our profeffion.
Pur. Since yeeareentred nowe to fpeake of
the appearing of {pirites: I would be glad to heare
your opinion in that matter. For manie denies
that any fuch fpirites can appeare inthefe daies as
I haue faid.
Err. Doubtleflie who denieth the power of
the Deuil,would likewife denie the power of God,
if they could for fhame, For fince the Deuill is
the verie contrarie oppofite to God, there can be
no better way to know God, then by the contraries
as by the ones power(though a creature)to admire
the power of the great Creator: by the falfhood of
the one to confidder the truth of the other, by the
injuftice of the one, to confidder the Iuftice of the
other: And by the crueltie of the one, to confidder
the mercifplneffe of the other: And fo foorth in al
the reft of the effence of God, and qualities of the
Deuill.ButI feare indeed,there be‘oner many Sad-
duces in this. world, that denies all kindes of {pirits:
For conviGing of whofe errour, there is caufe +

nough if there were no more,that God fhould per-

mit at fometimes fpirites vifibly tokyith.
THE

kt:
Fi
$ j
Tey
Hi
A if
HR
f l
HE
i
| ti
È,
A ! TR
AK !
i> =
aF

‘ AY r
~ \ ” t y
`
Nez

BOOKE

nologie».

The of all thefè kindes
Spirites that, troubles men or wo-
men. The conclufion ion of the whole
Dialogue.

Cuar, [L ARGV.

The dinifi on of (pirites in foure principali T he de-

__feription of the firft kinde of them, caled Spectt’s &
vmbrz mortuorum, What s the beft way to be free
of their trouble,

= aa Pray you now then go forward i in

<] telling what ye thinke fabulous,or

D mdy be trowedin that cafe.
ya) Err. That kinde of the De-
| hils conuerfing.in the: earth,may
bee diuided in foure differente
kindes n whereby hee affrayeth and troubleth
the bodies of men: For of the buling of the E

H4

H
T
al
if
i
g
ji
Lae
iE

56 Damonologie.T hird booke.

I haue fpoken alreadie, The firftis, where fpirites
troubles fome houfes or folitarie places : The fe-
cond, where fpirites followes vpon certaine per-

fones, and at diuers houres troubles them : The

thirde, when they enter within themand poflefle
them: The fourth is thefe kinde of fpirites that are
called vulgarlie the Fayrie. Of the three former
kindes, ye harde alreadie, how they may artificial.
lie be made by Witch-craft to trouble folke: Now
itreftesto fpeake of their naturall comming as tt
were,and not rayfed by Witch-craft.But generally
I muft for-warne you of one thing before I enter in
this purpofe:that is,that although in my difcourfe-
ing ofthem, I deuyde them in diuers kindes , yee
muft notwithf{tanding there of note my Phrafe of
{peaking in that : For doubtleflie they are in effet,
butall one kinde of {pirites, who for abufing the
more of mankinde, takes on thefe fundrie fhapes,
and vfes diuerfe formes of out-ward a&iones, as if

fome were of nature better then other. Nowe I

returne to my purpofe:As to thefirft kinde of thefe
{pirites,that were called by the auncients by diuers
names,according as their actions were,For if they
were fpirites that haunted fome houfes, by appea-
ring in diuers and horrible formes , and makin

greate dinne: they were called Lemures or Spectra,

-Jf they appeared inlikenefle of anie defun& to

{ome friends of his,they werecalled vmbr« mortuo-
rum : And {fo innumerable ftiles they got , accor-
ding to their actiones,as I haue faid alreadie.As we
jee by experience , how manic ftiles they haue gi-

ucn

Pi
¥
Í;
tF s: |
E
i
j
f
TEES
‘
i
t
EES
Sr e.
if
f:
ti
if
i
Pa å
d
f
if
a
if j
å .
4 Ab ~

Damonologie. Third Booke- 57

tien them in our language in the like maner : Of

the appearing of thefe fpitites wee are certified

by the Scriptures, where the I Efay.13>
Jere,

34. chap. threatning the deftruction o
declares , thatitfhall notonely bee wracked , but
fhalt become fo greatafolitude , as it fhall be the
habitackle of Howlettes , and of Ziim and lim,
which are the proper Hebrew names for thefe
Spirites. The caufe why they haunte follitarie
places, it is by reafon , that they may aftraye and
brangle the more the faith of fuch as them a-
lone hauntes {uch places... Forournatureisfuch,
as in companies wee are not fo foone mooued
to any fuchkinde of feare,as being follitaric, which
the Diuell knowing well inough , hee will not
therefore aflaile vs but when wee are wéake : And
befides that, will not permit him fo to
difhonour the focieties and companies of Chri-
ftians , as in publike times and places to walke
vifibly among them. Ontheother part, when
hetroubles certaine houfésthatare dweltin, itisa
fure token either of groffe ignorance, orof fome
groffe and flaunderous finnes amongft the inhabi-
taunts thereof : which Godby that extraordinary
Pure Butby what way or-paflage can thefe
Spirites enter in thefe houfes, feeing they alledge
that they willenter , Doore-and Windowe being
fleiked'?

Erre They willchoofe the'paflage for theyr
entrefle, according tothe forme thatthey ateinat

that

AS
ĝ
‘
i
a
f
if
H

—

58 Demonologic. Third Booke.
thattime. For if they haue affumeda deade bo-
die, whercinto they:lodge. themfelues, they cam
eafcly inough open . without dinne any Doore

Window, and enter in thereat. And if they
enter as a {pirite onely, any place where the aire
may come in at,is large inough an entry for them :.
For as | faid before,a{pirite canoccupie no quan-
titie. | |
P u 1. And will God then permit thefe wicked
{pirites totrouble the reft of a dead body, before
the refurrectionthereof? Orif he will fo, I thinke
ii fhould be of the reprobate onely.

Er 1.. What more is the reft troubled of &
dead bodie , when the Diuell carries it out of
the graue to ferue his turne for a fpace, nor
when the Witches takes it vp and ioyntes it, or
when as Swine wortes vppe the graues? The reft
ofthem that the Scripture fpeakes of, isnot meaa
ned by a locall remaining continually in one
place, but by their refting from their. trauelles
and miferies of this world, while their latter cone
junétion againe with-the fouleat that time to’ re-
ceiue full glory in both. And that the Diuell may.
vfeafwellthe miniftrie of the bodies of the faith-
full in thefe cafes, as of the vn-faithfull, there is.
no inconvenient;forhis haunting with their bos
dies after they are deade, can no-waies defyle
them: In:refpect of the foules abfence. And for
any difhonourit can be vnto them, by what realon.
can it be greater then the hanging,heading, or ma-
gy fuch fhameful deaths, that good men will
| OF:

f
A
IMEE

f
if
if
t
‘
i 3

ti
IHH |
i
i

Wamonologie. Third Booke.. F9

for there is nothing in the bodies of the faithfull,

more worthie of honour, or freer from corruption

by nature,nor in thefe ofthevnfaithfull,while time

they be purged and glorified in the latter daic, as is
dayly feene by the vilde difeafes and corruptions,
that the bodies of the faithfull are fubiect vnto, as

yce will fee clearely proued, when I {peake ofthe.

pofletled and Demoniacques.
Put. Yettherearefundry thatafirmesto haue

haunted fuch places, where thefe {pirites are allea-
ged to be; And could neuer heare nor fee anie
thing. |
ES Ithinke well: Forthat is only referued to
the fecrete knowledge of God, whom he will per-
mitto fee fuch things,and whom not. gee
P 1.But where thefe fpirites hauntes and trou-
bles any houfes, what is the beft:way to banith

‘Ep 1. Bytwo meanes may onely theremeid of
fuch things be procured: Theone isardent prays

erto God,both of thefe perfones thataretroubled

with them, and of that Church whereof tliey are.
The otheris the purging of themfelucsby amend
ment of life from fuch finnes,as haue procured that
Pwr. And what meanes then thefe kindes of
fpirites, when they appeare in the fhadow of-a
perfon newly dead, or to die, to his fricirdes ? +.
-Ep 1. Whenthey appeare vpon that occafion,
thcy are called Wraithes in our language. Amo
the Geztiles the Diuell vfed that: much, to maki
then

a

“4
j
i

q
ag
r if
Ps v
ia
p.
(E

tá

“2

`
“

60  Dènoologie. Third Booke,
them beleenė that it was fome good fpirite that
appeared to them then, cither to forewarne them

the death of thcir friend; or elfe ta difcouer vnto

them, the will ofthe defund@, or what was the way
of his flauchter,asic is written in.the booke of the
hiftories Prodigious. And this way he cafily de-
cciued the Gesteles, becaufe they knew not God:
And to that fameefted is it, that he now appeares
in that maner to fome ignorant Chriftians. Forhe
dare not fo illude any that knoweth that, neither
can the {pirite of the defun& returne to his friend,
an Angell vfefuch formes.

> P mr. Andare not our war-woolfes:one forte
of thefefpirits alfo, that hauntes and troubles fome
houfesordwelling places?
Er 1. There hath indeedebene an old opinion.
of fuchlike:thinges ;:For bythe Creckes: they were
called which fignifieth men-woolfes-
Burt totel you fimplie my opinion in this, if anie
fuch thing hath beene, I take it to haue proceeded
but of a natural fuper-abundance.of Melancho-
lie, which as. we reade,. that it-hath made fome
thinkethemfelues Pitchers, and fome horfes, and
fome one kinde of beaft or other : So-fuppofe I
that it hath fo viciat the imagination and memorie
of fome, as per lucida interualia,ithath fo highly oc-
cupied them, that they haue thought themfelues.
very Woolfes indeedeat thefetimes: and fo haue
counterfeited. their a&iones in goeing on their
handes and feete,preaffing to deuoure women and
barnes, fighting and fnasching withall the towne
dogges,

£

EA
Pras
ij
f
H
t4
j
| th
t
P

Damonologie. Third Boke. 6i

dopees, andin vfing fuch like other bruitith a&i-

ones, and fo to become beaftes by a trong appre-

henfion, as Nebucad-netzar was {euen yeares : but
as to their hauing and hiding of their hard and’
{chellie fluiches, I take that to be but eiked, by vn-
certaine report, the author of all lyes. De

Cuar, IL arcve

The defcription of the next two kindes of Spirites,
whereof the one followes outwardlie , the other
polfelfes inwardlie the perfones that they trona

=- - ble. That. fince all Prophecies and vifions are
now ceafed, all fpirites that appeares in thee
formes are enill,

PHILOMATHE Se

Ome formard now tothe reft of thefe kindes
fpirites.
 Ept. As tothenext twokindes, that is, either
thefe that outwardly troubles and followes fome
perfones, or elfe inwardly-poffefles them: I will
conioyne them in one, becaufe afwel the caufes are
alike in the perfons that they are permitted to trou-
ble : as alfo the waies whereby they may bereme-

Pua. What kinde of perfones are they that

vies to befo troubled

being guildioof grecuons offences, God puniihes

Dan.4,

t
d
g
ii
Er r. Two kindes in fpectall: Either fuch as |

62 Demonologie. Third Booke.

by that horrible kinde of fcourge , or elle being
perfons of the beft nature peraduenture , that
yee fhall finde in all the Countrey about them,
G OD permittes them to be troubled in that fort,
for the triall oftheir patience, and wakening vp of
their zeale , for admonifhing of the beholders,
nottotrnft ouer-much in themfelues , fince they
are made of no better ftuffe,and peraduenture blot-

ted with no {maller finnes (as Chrift faide, {peaking

of them vpon whom the Towerof Sylo fell: ) And
for giuing likewife to the fpectators , matter
to praife GOD , that they meriting no better,
are yet {paredfrom being corrected in that fearefull
forme.

Pur. Thefe are good reafons for the parte
of GOD, which apparantly mooues him {o to
permit the Diuell to trouble fuch perfons. But

fince the Diuell hath euer acontrary refpe& in all

the actions that G O D imployes him in : which
is I pray you the end and marke he fhoots at in this
Err. Itistoobtaineaneoftwo things there-
by, if hee may : The oneis the tinfell of their life,

_ by inducing them to fuch perillous places at fuch:

time as he either followes or pofleffes them, which.
may procure the fame : And fuch like, {o farre
as G O D will permithim, by tormenting tħem
to weaken theyr body , and caft them in intu-
rable difeafes. The other thing that hee prea-
fes to obtaine by troubling of them , is the tine
fell of theyr foule , by intifing them to miftruft
and

rg
JEE
H
th
be
f
d
i
i .
H
ati
H
AF | J

Damonologie. Third Booke. 63

and blafpheme God : Either for the intollerable-
nefle of theirtorments , as heaffayed to haue done

with Zob; or elfe for his promifing vnto them to obit,

leaue the troubling of them, incafethey would fo

do, as is knowne by experience at this fame time

ti me confeffion ofa young one that was {o trou-
ed. |

Put. Sinee ye haue fpoken now of both thefe
kindes of {pirites comprehending them in one:
I muft now goe backe againe in {peering fome
queftions of euery one of thefe kindes in {peciall.
And firft for thefe that followes certaine perfons,
yee know thatthereare two fortes of them : One
forte that troubles and tormentes the perfons that
they haunt wisk : An other fort thatare feruiceable
vnto them in all kinde of their neceflaries , and o-
` mittes neuer to forewarne them of any fuddaine
perillthattheyaretobein. And fointhiscafe, I
would vnderftand whether both thefe fortes bee
but wicked and damned fpirites : Or ifthe laft fore
berather Angelles, (as fhould appeare by their acti-
ons) fent by God to affift {uch as hee {pecially fae
uoures. For itis written in theScriptures, that God
Legions of Angels to guarde and watch ouer his

ect.
Err. Iknow welinough where frathaterrour
which ye alledge hath proceeded : For it wasthe
ignorant Gentiles that were the fountaine thereof.
Who forthatthey knew not God , they forged in
their owne imaginations , euery man to be ftill ac-
companied with two fpirites, whereof they called

i
j
J
| King.
al,3 de

a

i

F

i

be

Á-

64 Damonologie. Third Booke.

the one genius bonus , the other genius malus : the
Greckes callled them & where-

oftheformer they faid , perfwaded him to all the -

good he did: the other entifed him to all the euill.
But praifed be God, we that are Chriftians,& walks
not amongft the Cymmerian conicctures of man,
knowes well inough, that it is the good [pirite of
Godonely,who is the fountain ofall goodnes,that
perfwades vs to the thinking or doing of any good:
and that itis our corrupted flefh and Sathan, that
intifeth vstothecontrary. And yetthe Diuell for
confirming in the heades of ignorant Chiriftians,
that errour firft maintained among the Gentiles,
he whiles among thefirftkind of {pirits that I {peak
of , appeared in time of Papiftricand blindnefle,
and haunted diuers.houfes , without doing any e-
uill , but doing as it were neceflary turnes vp and
downcethe houfe:and this fpirit they called Brownie
inourlanguage, who appeared likearough-man:
yea, fome werefoblinded, as to beleeue thattheir
oufe was all their fonfier,as they called it,that {uch
{pirites reforted there. |
P u 1. Butfincethe Diuels intention inall his ae-
tions,is euer to do euill, what cuill was there in that
forme of doing, fince their actions outwardly were
good?
Ep1. Wasitnoteuill inough to deceiuefimple
ignorants , in making them to take him for an An-
gell oflight, andfotoaccounrof Gods enemie, as
oftheirparticular friend where by the contrarie,

__allwethatare Chriftians,oughtafluredlyzoknowe

that

- CES

j
UE
HE
i
ME

Demonologie. Third Booke.
that fince the comming of Chrift in the flefh, and
eftablifhing of his Church by the Apoftles, all mi-
racles, vifions, prophecies, & appearances of :An-
gels or good (pirites are ccafed. Which ferued one-
ly forthe firft fowing of faith, and planting ofthe
Church. Where now the Church being eftabli-
fhed,and the white Horfe whereof I [pake before,
hauing made his conqueft, the Law and Prophets
are thought fufficient-to ferue vs, or make vs inex-
‘cufable,as Chrift faith in his parable of Lazarus and
the rich man. :

Cuar. III. ARGY.
The defcription of a particular fort ofthat kind of follow~
ing [pirites,called Incubi and Succubi : And what
isthe reafon wherefore thefe kindes of fpirites hauntes

—

mofi the Northerne and barbarous parts of the world.

| | PHILOMATHES,
T H E nextqueftion that I would fpeere, is like-
wife concerning this firft of thefe two kindes
of fpirites that ye haue conioyned: and itis this; ye
know how itis commonly written and reported,
that amongft the reft of the fortes of {pirites that
followes certaine perfons, there is one more mon-
ftrousnor al the reft:in refpectas it is alleaged, they
conuerfe naturally with them whom they trouble
and hauntes with : and therefore I would knowin
twothinges your opinion herein: Firfltif fuch a
thing can be : and next if it be : whethertherebea

difference of {exes amongftthefe fpiritesornot?

Eps, That abhominable kinde ofthe Diuels
| K abufing

A
iy
A
y
i

Cine

66 Damonologie. Third Booke.

abufing of men or women, was called of old, Jncubé
and Succubi , according to the difference of the

fexesthatthey conuerfed with. By two meanes

this great kinde of abufe might poffibly be perfor-

med : Theone,whenthe Diuell onely asa {pirite,
and ftealing outthe fperme of a dead body , abu-

fes them that way , they not graithly feeing any
fhape or feeling any thing , but that which he {0

conueyes in that part: As we reade of a Monafterie
of Nunnes which were burnt for their being that:
wayabufed. Fheothermeancis, when he bor-
rowesa dead bodyandfovifibly , andasitfeemes

vnto them naturally as a man conuerfes with
them. Butit isto benoted,that in whatfocuer way
he vfeth it,that {perme feemes intollerably colde to
the perfon abufed. For if he fteale out the nature of
a quicke perfon , it cannot be fo quickly carried,
butit will both tine the ftrength and heate by the
way , which it could never haue had for lacke of
agitation , which in the timeof procreation isthe
procurerand wakener vp ofthefe two natural qua-
lities, Andif heoccupying the dead body as his
lodging, expel the fame out thereof in thedue
time, it muftlikewife be colde by the participarion
with the qualities of the dead body whereout of

itcomes. And whereas ye.enquire if thefe {pis

rites be diuided in fexes or not , I thinke the rules
of Philofophie may eafily refolue a man of the
-contrarie : For it isa fure principle of that Art,
that nothing can be diuidedin {exes , except fuch
ining bodies as mult hauc anaturall {cede to ge-

nere

E
f
> if
Lit
Hed
t
H
f
IE
if
j
ERINI
Let 4

Demonologie. Third Booke. 6y

nereby. But we know fpirits hath no {cede proper

to themfelues,nor yet can they gender one with an
other.
P u 1. Howisitthen that they fay fundry mon-
fters haue bene gotten by that way? l
Epi. Thefe tales are nothing but 4niles fabule.
For that they haue no nature of their owne, I baue
fhewed you alreadie. And thatthe cold nature ota
dead body, can worke nothing in generation , it
is more nor plaine,as being already dead of it felfe
as wellas the reft ofthe body is, wanting the natu-
rall heate, and fuch other naturalloperation, as is
neceflarie for working that effect , angin cafe fuch
a thing were poffible( which wereallutterly againft
all the rules of nature) it would breed no monfter,
but onely fuch a naturall off-{pring, as would haue
cummed betuixt that manor woman and thato-
ther abufed perfon , in cafe they both being aliue
had had a doe with other. For the Diuels parte
therein , is but the naked carrying or expelling of
that fubftance : And fo it could not participate
with noqualitie ofthe fame, Indeede, itis poffible

tothe craft of the Diuell to make a womans belley.

to {well after he hath that way abufed her,which he
may do either by ftirring vp her owne humor,or by
hearbes,as we fee begger, daily do. And when the
time of her deliuery fhould come to make her thoil
great dolours , like vntothat naturall courfe , and
then fubtilly to flippe in the Mid-wiues handes,
ftockes, ftones, or fome monftrous barne brought
from fome other place , but this is more es

2 and

f
t
f:
§
j
i
it
ty
if
+i
i}
W pi
uf

68 Damonologie. Third Boke:
and geffed at by others,nor beleeued by me. -
; P u 1. But what is the caufe. that this kinde of
abufe is thought to be moft common in fuch wilde
parts of the worlde, as Lap. land, and Fin-land, orin
our North Iles of Orknay and Schet-land? |
KAM Ep1. Becaufe where the Diuell findes greateft
Hi ignoranee and barbaritie,thereaffailes hee grofleli-
| iH cht, as I gaueyouthereafon wherefore there was
p moe Witchesofwomen-kinde nor men.
P u r. Canan any be {o vnháppy asto giuc their
E. willing confent to the Diuels vilde abufing them in
| this forme? | |
4 Err. Yea fome ofthe Witches haue confefled,
that he hath perfwaded them to giue their willing
confent therevnto, that he may thereby haue them
it | feltred the fikarer in his {nares ; Butas the other cõ-
ie : pelled fort is to be pittied and prayed for, fo is this
if : moft highly to be punifhed and detefted. |
iin P u 1. Itis not the thing which we call the Mare,
HHN which takes folkes fleeping in their beds, akinde of
thefe fpirits,;whereof ye are fpeaking?
Epx. No,thatis buta naturallficknefle, which
the Mediciners hath giuen that name of Jzcubas
vnto ab incubando, becaufe it being athicke fleume,
falling into our breaft vpon the heart, while we are
fleeping, intercludes fo our vitall {pirits, and takes
all power from vs,as makes vs thinkthat there were
fome vnnaturall burden or {pirit,lying vpon vs,and
holdingvsdowne,

Cuar

BEY

Demonolacie. Third Booke. 69

Cuar., IIIf. arevy.

T he defcription of the Damoniackes cy poffeffed.By what

reafonthe Papifts may hane power to cure them,

PHILOMATHES.

WV EL, I hauetolde younowall my doubts,

-Y andyehaue fatisfied me therein , concer-
ning the firft of thefe two kindes of {pirites that yee
haueconioyned, Now lam toinquire onely two
thinges at you concerning thelaftkinde, I meane
the Demoniackes. The firft is, whereby fhall thefe
polleffed folks be difcerned fra thé that are trobled
with a natural Phrenfie or Manie. The next isjhow
can it be that they can be remedied by the Papiftes
Church , whome wee counting as Hereticques, it
fhould appeare that one Diuell fhould notcaft out
an other, for then would 4s kingdome be diuided m it
feffe,as Chrift faid,

Er r. Astoyour firft queftion; thereare diuers
{fymptomes, whereby that heauic trouble may bee
difcerned from a naturall fickneffe , and fpecial-
lythree , omitting the diuers vaine fignes that the
Papifts attributes vnto it: Such as the raging at ho-
ly water,their fleeinga backe from the Crofle,their
not abiding the hearing of Godnamed, and innu-
merable fuch like vaine thinges that were alike fae
fhiousand fecklesto recite. Buttocometothefe
three fymptomes then, whereof I fpake, account

Math. 32
Mark. 3+

the oneof them to be the incredible ftrength ofthe

poffeffed creature , which will farre exceede the

ftrength of fixe of the wighteft and wodeft of any

other menthatare not fo troubled. The nextis -
Kogo bo!

j
it
h
i$
i}
f
l
A
i$

zo  -Demonologie. Third Booke.

boldning vp fo far of the patients breaft and bellie,
with {fuch an vnnaturall iturring and vehement a-
gitation within them : And fuch an ironie hardnes
of his finnowes fo ftiffelie bended out, that ie were
not poffible to pricke out as it were the skinne of a-
ny otherperfon fo far : fo mightely works the Di-
uell in all the members & fentes of his body,he be-
ing locallie within the fame, fuppofe of his foule
and affections thereof, he haue no more power
then ofany other mans. The laftis,the {peaking of

fundry languagues,which the patientis knowen by

them that were acquainte with him neuer to haue
learned, and that with an vncouth and hollowe
voice, &all the time of his {peaking,a greater mo-
tion beingin hisbreaft then in his mouth. But fra

thislaft fymptome is excepted fuch, asarealtoge-

therin the time of their poffefling bereft ofall their
fenfes being poflefled with a dumbe and blinde
fpirite, whereof Chrift releiued one, inthe 12. of
Mathew. Andasto your next demande, it is firft to
be doubted if the Papistes or any not profeffing the
only true Religion,canrelieue any of that trouble.
And next, in-cafe they can, vpon what refpectes
it is poflible vato them. As to the former vpon
two reafons, it is grounded: firft that it is knowen
fo many of them to be counterfite, which wyle
the Clergie inuentes for confirming of their rot-
ten Religion. The next is, that by experience we
finde that fewe, who are poflefled indeede, are
fully cured by them : butrather the Diuellis con-
tentto rcleafe the bodely hurting of them, for a
fhort

ae
H
t
F
Erir
ik
Hi
Ep.
i
j
¢
ir
HE
; T
i

Damonologie. Third Booke. 71

fhort fpace, thereby to obteine the perpetual! hurt
of the foules of fo many that by thefe falfe miracles
may be induced or confirmed in the profeffion of
that erroncous Religion: euen as [told you before
that he doth in the talfe cures, or cafting off of dif-
- eafes by Witches, Asto the other part of the argu-
ment in.cafe they can, which rather ( with reue-
rence of the learned thinking otherwaies) I am in-
duced to beleeue, by reafon of the faithfull report
that men found of religion, haue made according
to their fight thereof, I think if fo be, I fay thefe may
be the re{pectes, whereupon the Papisfes may haue
that power. Chrift gauea commiffion and power
to his Apoftlcs. to caft out Diuels, which they ac-
cording thereunto put inexecution: Therules he
bad them obferue in that action, was fafting and
prater:& the action itfelfeto be done in his name.
This power of theirs- proceeded not then ofany
vertue in them, but onely in him: who directed
them, As was clearly proued by Judas his hauing as
great power in that commiflion, as any of the
reft. It is eafie then tobe vnderftand that the caft.
ing outof Diuelles, is by the vertue of fafting and
prayer, and in-calling of the name of God, fùp-
pofe many imperfectiones be inthe perfon that is
the inftrument, as Chrift himfelfe teacheth vs of
the power that falfe Prophets fhall haue tocaft out
Diuels. Itis no wonder then, thefe refpe&s of this
action being confidered, that it may be poffible
to the Papiites, though erring in fundry pointesof
Religion toaccomplith this, if they vie —
forme:

— ~-

j
é
a

€

- J

Mark,

72 Demonologie. Third Booke.

forme prefcribed by Chriftherein. For what the
worlcis thataction that they erre in other thinges,
more then their Baptifme is the worfe that they
errein the other Sacrament, and haue ciked many
vaine freittes to the Baptifme it felfe.

© Puna. Surely it is no little wonder that God
fhould permit the bodies of any of the fairhfull to
be fo difhonoured,asto bea dwelling place tothat

-vncleane fpirite.

Er 1. Thereisit which I told right now, would
prooueand ftrengthen my argument of the diuels
entring in the dead bodies of the faithfull.For if he
is permitted to enter in their liuing bodies, euen

=- whenthey are 1oyned withthe foule : how much

more will God permit him to enter in their dead
carions, which is no more man, but the filthie and
corruptible caile of man, Foras Chrift faith, /¢ # not
any thing that enterswithin man that defiles him, but
onely that which proceedes and commeth out of him,

Crap. Ve ARGV.
The defcription of the fourth kinde of Spirites calledthe
Phairie: What is poffible therein, and what is but
illufiones. Hom far this Dialogue entreates of allthefe
thinges,andto what end. |
PHI LOMATHES.
Ow I pray youcomeon tothat fourth kinde
of {pirites.
Epi, That fourth kinde of fpirites, which by
the Gentiles was called Diaza, and her wandring
court, andamongftvs was called the Phairie(asI
told

‘
i |
&3 j
| i
r;
it
t}
if
HAR’
f
aie $
HEN

Damonslovie. Third Booke:
to!d you ) or our good neighboures , was one of
the fortes of illuftons that was rifeft in the time
of Papiftrie : for although itwas holden odious to
- Prophefie by thediucll , yet whom thefe kinde of
Spirits carried away , and informed , they were
thought to be fonfieftand of beft life. To fpeake of

the many vainetrattles founded vpon thatillufion:
How there was a Kingand Queene of Phairie , of
{fuch aiolly court & trainasthey had,how they had
ateynd,& dutie, as it were, of all goods : how they
naturally rode and went, eate and dranke, and did
all other actions like naturall men and women : I
think itliker Virgils Campi Elysy,nor any thing that
‘oughttobe beleeued by Chriftians, except in ge-
nerall,that as I {pake fundry times before,the diuell
illuded the fenfes of fundry fimple creatures,in ma-
king them beleeue that they fawe andheard fuch
things as were nothing foindeed

Put. Buthowcanitbethen,that fundrie Wit-
ches haue goneto death with that confefion, that
they haue bin tranfported with the Phairie to fuch
a hill,which opening,they went in,and there faw a
faire Queene, who being now lighter, gaue thema
{tone that had fundry vertues , which at fundrie
times hath bene produced in iudgement ?

Er 1. I fay that,euenas I faid before of thatima-
ginar rauifhing of the fpirite foorth of the body.
For may not the diuell obiect to their fantafie,their
fenfes being dulled , andas it wereafleepe , fuch
hilles & houfes withinthem,fuch gliftering courtes
and traines , and whatfoeuer {uch like where-

with he pleafeth to deludethem.And inthe meane
L time

ji

“~ —

74 Daemonologie. Third Booke.

time their bodies being fenfelefle, to conuay in
their hand any ftone or fuch like thing,which he

makes them to imagine to haue receiued in iucha

place.
Pur. Butwhatfay ye to their fore-telling the

death of fundry perfones, whom they alleage to
haue feene in thefe places? That is, afooth-dreame

(as they fay) fince they fee it walking.

Er. I thinke that either they haue not beene
fharply inough examined, that gaue fo blunt a rea-
fon for their Prophefie, or otherwaies,I thinke it
likewife as poffiblethat the Deuill may prophefie
to them when he deceiues their imaginationes in
that fort, as wellas when heplainely fpeakes vnto_
them at other times for their prophefying, is but
by a kinde of vifion, as it were, wherein he com-
monly counterfeites God among the Ethnicks,as

I told you before,
Put. I would know now whetherthefe kinds

of {pirites may onely appeare to Witches, orifthey

may alfo appeare to any other.
E r 1. They may dotoboth,to the innocent fort,

. either to affraie them, or to feeme to bea better

forte of folkes nor vncleane {pirites are, and to the
Witches, to be a cullour of fafetic for them, that

_ ignorant Magiftrates may not punifh them for it,as

Itold euen now.Butas the one fort, for being per-
force troubled with them ought to be pittied,fo
ought the other fort (who may be difcerned by
their taking vppon them to Prophefie by them,)
That fort I fay, ought as feuerely to be punifhed

as any other Witches, and rather the more, that

they

Al ig
f
i$
XA
$ t
EN
i }
IHIN,
HE.
Wi
An
an
THA
bil
chi

Demonologie. Third Booke. 75

that they goe diffemblingly to worke.
And whatmakesthe fpirites haue fo dif-
ferent names from others ? :

Ep 1.Euen the knauerie of that fame deuil;who
as hee illudes the Necromancers with innumera-
ble feyned names for himand his angels, as in fpe-
ciall making Sathan,Beelzebub,& Lucifer,to be three
fundry {pirites,where we finde the two former, but
diuers names giuen to the prince of all the rebel-
ling angels by the Scripture. As by Chrift, the
Prince ofall the Diuelles is called Beelzebub in that
pace, which I alleaged againft the power of any

ereticques to caft out deuils. By John in the Reue-
lation, the old tempter iscalled Sathan the Prince of
all the euill angels. And thelaft,to wit, Lucifer, is but
by allegorie taken from the day Starre (fo named in
diuers places of the Scriptures) becaufe of his ex-
cellencic ( I meanethe Prince of them) in his crea-
tion before his fall. Euen fol fay he deceiues the
Witches, by attributing to himfelfe diuers names :

as if euery diuers fhape that hetransformes hime _

felfe in, were a diuers kinde of {pirit.

P u 1.But I hauc hard many moe ftrange tales of
this Phairie norye hauc yettold me.

E r 1.As well I do inthat,as I didin all the reft of
my difcourfe, For becaufe the ground of this con-
ference of ours, proceeded of your {peering at me
atour meeting, if there was fuch a thing as Witches
or {pirites: And if they had any power : I therefore
haueframed my wholedifcours,only to proue that
fuch things are and may be, by fuch number of ex.

amples as I fhow to be poflible by reafon:& keepes
-L2 me

f
A
t

76 Damonologie. Third Booke.

me from dipping any furtherin playing the part of
a Dictionary,to tell what euer I haue read or heard
in that purpofe, which both would exceede faith,

and rather would feeme to teach {fuch volawfull

artes, norto difallow and condemne them, as itis
the ductie of all Chriftians to doe.

Of the tryalland punifhment of Witches. What fort of
accifation ought to be admitted againft them What i
the caufe of the increafing fo. farre of their number

in thisage.
PHTLOMATHES.

T HEN to make an ende of our conference,
= fince! fee itdrawes late, what forme of pu-
nifhment thinke yee merites thefe Magicians and
Witches? For I feethatye account them to beall

alikeguiltie.

_ Epr, They oughtto be putto death according

to the Law of God, the cinill and imperial! Law,.

and municipall Law ofall Chriftian nations. _
Pur. Butwhatkinde of death! pray you ?
Er r.. Ițis commonly vied by fire,but thatisan

indifferent thing to be vfed in euery countrey, ac-

cording tothe Law orcuftome thereof.

Pur. But oughtno fexe,age nor rancke to be
exempted?
Er 1.Noneatal (being fo vied by the lawful magi-
ftrate) for it is the higheft point of Idolatry, where-
in no exception isadmitted by the law of God.

P u 1. Then bairnes may not be {pared ?

1.Xea,notahairc the lefle of my

| "OF

TE
i>’ i i
Hi
ti
ti
H
AE i
TIERE
f }
a

Damonologte. Third Booke. yy

For they are not that capable of reafon as to prac.
tife fuch thinges. And for any being in company
and notreueiling thereof, their lefle and ignorant
age will no doubtexcufe them. |
Put. I fee ye condemne them all that are of the
counfell of {uch craftes.

Er r. Nodoubt,foras I faid,fpeaking of Magie,
the confulters, trufters in, ouer-feers, interteiners-

or fturrers vp of thefe craftes:folkes, are equally
guiltie with themfelues thatarethe practifers.
1.Whether may the Prince then, or fupreame

Magiftrate, fpare or ouer-fee any that are guilty of

that craft? vpő fome great refpects knowen to:him?
Er 1. The Prtnce or Magiftrate for further trials
caufe, may continue the punifhing of them fucha
certaine {pace as he thinkes conuenient: Butin the
_endeto fpare the life, and not to ftrike when God
bids ftrike, and fo feuerely punifh in fo odious a
fault and treafon againft God, it isnot onely vn-
lawfull,but doubtleffe no lefle finne in that Magi-
{trate, nor ig was in Saules {paringofAgag. Andfo
comparable tothe finne of Witch-craft it felfe, as
Samucl alleaged at that time.
P 1. Surely then,! think finee this crime ought
tobe fo feuercly punifhed,fudges oughtto beware
to'condemne any, but fuch as they are fure are
guiltie, neither fhould the clattering report of a
carling ferue in fo weighticacafe.
Ep 1. Iudges ought indeede to beware whom
they condemne: forit is as great a crime (as Salo-

mon {aith,) To condemne the innocent, as to let the Pro, 17i.

guiltic efcape free, acitherought the report of any

L-3; Oone

t
©

=e.
F

Pi ~

H

78 Damonologie. Third Booke.

oneinfamous perfon , be admitted for a fufficient
proofe,which can ftand of no lawe.

Pus.And what may a number then of guilty per-

fons confeffions,worke againft one that isaccufed?¢

Er 1. The Afife mutt ferue for interpretour of
our law in thatre{fpect.Butin my opinion,finceina
matter of treaf6 againft the Prince,barnes or wiues,
or neuer fo diffamed perfons, may of our law ferue

for fufficient witnefles and proofes. I thinke furely

that by afar greater reafon , fuch witnefles may be
{ufficient in matters of high treafonagainft God :
For who but Witches can be prooues, and fo wit-
nefles of the doings of Witches.
Pur. Indeed,] trow they wil be loath to putany
honeft man vpon theif counfell. But whatif they
accule folke to haue bene prefent at their Imaginar
conuentiones in the {pirite, when their bodies lyes
fenceleffe,asyehauelaid. _
Er 1. Ithinkehey arenota haire the leffe guiltie:
For the Diuell durft neuer haue borrowed their

_fhadow or fimilitude to that turne, if their confent

had norbeneatit: Andthe confentin thefeturnes

is death of the lawe.

P u1. Then Samuel was a Witch: Forthe Diuell-
refembled his fhape, & played his perfon in giuing
refponfe to Saul, |

Ep 1. Samuel was deadas wellbeforethat; and
fo none could flaunder him with medling in that

 ynlawfull Art. Forthecaufe why,asI take it, that

God will not permit Sathan to vie the fhapes of fi-
militudes of any innocent perfons at fuch vnlaw-
ful umes, is that God wilnot permit thatany inno-

cent

Pt 4
Fi
‘
“4
T
HRE
l
EF
tH
d
tha
AR
TIRE
HIH
uit

Damonologie. Third Booke. 79
cent perfons fhalbe flandered with that vile defec-
tion:for then the diuel would finde waics anew, to

- calumniate the beft. And this we haue in proofe by

them thatare carried with the Phairie , whoncuer
fee che fhaddowes of any in that Courte , but of
them that thereafter are tryed to haue bene bre-
thren and fifters of that crate, And this was likewife
roued by the confeffid of a young Laffe, troubled
with {pirites,laide on her by Witch-craft. Thatal- |
though fhe fawethe fhapes of diuers men and woe
men troubling her,and naming the perfons whom
thefe fhaddowes reprefents:yct neuer one ofthem
are found to be innocent,butall clearely tried tobe-
moft guiltie,& the moft part of them confeffing the
fame.And befides that, I think ithath bene feldome |
heardtell of , that any whome perfons guiltie of
that crimeaccufed, as hauing knowne them to be
their marrowes by eye-fight,and not by heare-fay,
but fuch as werc foaccufed of Witch.craft, could
not be clearely tryed vpon them, were at the leaft
publickly knowne tobe of a very euill life & repu-
tation : fo iealousis God I fay,of the fame of them |
that areinnocentin fuch caufes. And befides thar,
there are two other good helpes that may beevied
for their triall: the one isthe finding of their marke,

and the trying the infenfiblenes thereof-The other

is them fleeting on the water: for as ina fecret mure
ther , if the dead carkafle be at any time thereafter

handled by the murtherer,it wil guth out of bloud,

as if the bloud were crying to the heaué for reuége
ofthe murtherer , God hauing appoynted that {ee

cret fupernaturall figne , for tryall of that fecret
Vile

t
a
a.
è

Third Boke:

= kenoffthem the facred Water of Baptifme , and

_ ateuery light occafio when they will,yea,although

vnnaturall crime, fo itappeares that God hath ap?
pointed ( for a fupernaturall figne of the mon-
{trous impietie of Witches) that the water fhall
refufe to receive them in her bofome, that haue fha-

wilfully retufed-the benefite thereof : No, notfo
much as theireies are able to fhead teares (threaten
and torturethem as yee pleafe) while firft they ree
pent (God not permitting them to diffemble their
obftinacie in fo horriblea crime) albeit the women
kind efpecially, beable other-waiesto fhead teares

it were diflemblingly like the Crocodiles. |
Put. Well, wehaue made this conference to
laft as long as leifure would permite: And tocon-
clude thé,fince Iam to take my leaue of you,! pray
God tó purge this country of thefe diuellith prafti«
fes:forthey were neuer fo rife in thefe parts,as they
arenow.
I pray Godthatfo beto. But thecaufesare
over-manifeft, that makes thé to befo rife. For the
great wickednes of the people on the one part,pro-
cures this horrible defection, whereby God iuftly
punifheth finne,by a greater iniquitie. And onthe
other part,the confummation of the world,and our
deliuerance drawing neare, makes Sathanto rage
the more in his inftraméts, knowing his kingdome
tobe fonearean end.And fo farewel for this time.

ete
Ate
he
g:
i jè 4 A
‘
H i4
‘ :
F
Hi
a
f
A
è
f ia” r$
ides
ty
Í
? e
(IRRE,
Ti
y
i? 2
THENE E
È
: ye
it
IES
5 w?
E itii
| l
FINIS
F
Hi
HH i
isy h £

