The Moral Equivalent of War (William James, 1910)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/the-moral-equivalent-of-war-by-william-james-international-conciliation-no.-27-f). James's famous 1910 address: channel martial virtues into a peacetime moral equivalent of war.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

INTERNATIONAL CONCILIATION


Baulished: maori hly by the
American Association for International Cope teen
Entered as second cli a ratice at New
Postoflico, February 23, 1009, under act of July is, isoi


THE MORAL EQUIVALENT OF WAR


WILLIAM JAMES


FEBRUARY, 1910, No. 27


American Association for International Conciliation
Sub-station 84 (501 West 116th Street)
New York City


The Executive Committee of the Association
for International Conciliation wish to arouse the
interest of the American people in the progress of
the movement for promoting international peace
and relations of comity and good fellowship
between nations. To this end they print and
circulate documents giving information as to the
progress of these movements, in order that
individual citizens, the newspaper press, and
organizations of various kinds may have readily
available accurate information on these subjects.

For the information of those who are not familiar
with the work of the Association for International
Conciliation, a list of its publications will be
found on page 21.


THE MORAL EQUIVALENT OF WAR
By WILLIAM JAMES


The war against war is going to be no holiday ex-
cursion or camping party. The military feelings are
too deeply grounded to abdicate their place among
our ideals until better substitutes are offered than the
glory and shame that come to nations as well as to
individuals from the ups and downs of politics and the
vicissitudes of trade. There is something highly para-
doxical in the modern man’s relation to war. Ask all
our millions, north and south, whether they would
vote now (were such a thing possible) to have our
war for the Union expunged from history, and the
record of a peaceful transition to the present time sub-
stituted for that of its marches and battles, and prob-
ably hardly a handful of eccentrics would say yes.
Those ancestors, those efforts, those memories and
legends, are the most ideal part of what we now own
together, a sacred spiritual possession worth more
than all the blood poured out. Yet ask those same
people whether they would be willing in cold blood to
start another civil war now to gain another similar
possession, and not one man or women would vote
for the proposition. In modern eyes, precious though
wars may be, they must not be waged solely for the
sake of the ideal harvest. Only when forced upon
one, only when an enemy’s injustice Ieaves us no al-
ternative, is a war now thought permissible. .

It was not thus in ancient times. The earlier men
were hunting men, and to hunt a neighboring tribe,


8


kill the males, loot the village and possess the females,
was the most profitable, as well as the most exciting,
way of living. .Thus were the more martial tribes
selected, and in chiefs and peoples a pure pugnacity
and love of glory came to mingle with the moré fund-
amental appetite for plunder. °

Modern .war is so expensive that we feel trade to
be a better avenue to plunder; ‘but modern man in-
herits all the innate pugnacity and all the love of
glory of his ancestors. Showing war’s irrationality
and horror is of no effect upon him. The horrors
make the fascination. War is the stroig life; it is life
in extremis; war-taxes are the only ones men never
hesitate to pay, as the budgets of all nations show us.

History is a bath of blood. The Iliad is one long
recital of how Diomedes and Ajax, Sarpedon and
Hector killed. No detail of the wounds they made is
spared us, and the Greek mind fed upon the story.
Greek history is a panorama of jingoism and im-
perialism—war for war’s sake, all the citizens being
warriors. It is horrible reading, because of the irra-
tionality of it all—save for the purpose.of making
“history’—and the history is that of the utter ruin of
a civilization in intellectual respec’s perhaps the high-
est the earth has ever seen.

Those wars were purely piratical. Pride, gold,
women, slaves, excitement, were their only motives.
In the Peloponnesian war, for example, the Athenians
ask the inhabitants of Melos (the island where the
“Venus of Milo”. was found, hitherto neutral, to
own their lordship. The envoys meet, and hold a de-
bate which Thucydides gives in full, and which, for
sweet reasonableness of form, would have satisfied


4


Matthew Arnold. “The powerful exact what they
can,” said the Athenians, “and the weak grant what
they must.” When the Meleans say that sooner than
be slaves they will appeal to the gods, the Athenians
reply: “Of the gods we believe and of men we know
that, by a law of their nature, wherever they can rule
they will. This law was not made by us, and we are
not the first to have acted upon it; we did but inherit
it, and we know that you and all mankind, if you
were as strong as we are, would do as we do. So
much for the gods; we have told you why we expect
to stand as high in their good opinion as you.” Well,
the Meleans still refused, and their town was taken.
“The Athenians,” Thucydides quietly says, “thereupon
put to death all who were of military age and made
slaves of the women and children. They then colo-
nized the island, sending thither five hundred settlers
of their own.”

Alexander’s career. was piracy pure and simple,
nothing but an orgy of power and plunder, made ro-
mantic by the character of the hero. There was no
rational principle in it, and the moment he died his
generals and governors attacked one another. The
cruelty of those times is incredible. When Rome
finally conquered Greece, Paulus Aemilius, was told
by the Roman Senate to reward his soldiers for their
toil by “giving” them the old kingdom of Epirus.
They sacked seventy cities and carried off a hundred
and fifty thousand inhabitants as slaves. How many
they killed I know not; but in Etolia they killed all
the senators, five hundred and fifty in number. Brutus
was “the noblest Roman of them all,” but to reanimate
his soldiers on the eve of Philippi he similarly prom-


5


ises to give them the cities of Sparta and T hessalonica
to ravage, if they win the fight.

' Such was the gory nurse that trained societies to
cohesiveness. We inherit the warlike type; and for
most of the capacities of heroism that the human race
is full of we have to thank this cruel history. Dead
men tell no tales, and if there were any tribes of other
type than this they have left no survivors. Our an-
cestors have bred pugnacity into our bone and mar-
row, and thousands of years of peace won't breed it
out of us. The popular imagination fairly fattens on
the thought of wars. Let public opinion once reach
a certain fighting pitch, and no ruler can withstand it.
In the Boer war both governments began with bluff,
bit couldn’t stay there, the military tension was too
much for them. In 1898 our people had read the
word WAR in letters three inches high for three
months in every newspaper. The pliant politician
McKinley was swept away by their eagerness, and our
squalid war with Spain became a necessity.

At the present day, civilized opinion is a curious
mental mixture. The military instincts and ideals are
as strong as ever, but are confronted by reflective
criticisms which sorely curb their ancient freedom.
Innumerable writers are showing up the bestial side
of military service. Pure loot and mastery seem no
longer morally avowable motives, and pretexts must
be found for attributing them solely to the enemy.
England and we, our army and navy authorities re-
peat without ceasing, arm solely for “peace,” Germany
and Japan it is who are bent on loot and glory. “Peace”
in military mouths to-day is a synonym for “war ex:
pected.” The word has become a pure provocative,


6


and no government wishing peace sincerely should
allow it ever to be printed in a newspaper. Every up-
to-date Dictionary should say that “peace”. and “war”
mean the same thing, now im posse, now in actu. It
may even reasonably be said that the intensely sharp
competitive preparation for war by the nations is the
real war, permamént, unceasing; and that the battles
are only a sort of public verification of the mastery
gained during the “peace’’-interval.

It is plain that on this: subject civilized man has
developed a sort of double personality. If we take
European nations, no legitimate interest of any one
of them would seem to justify the tremendous de-
structions which a war to compass it would neces-
sarily entail. It would seem as though common sense
and reason ought to find a way to reach agreement in
every conflict of honest interests. I myself think it
our bounden duty to believe in such international ra-
tionality as possible. But, as things stand, I see how
desperately hard it is to bring the peace-party and the
war-party together, and I believe that the difficulty
is due to certain deficiencies in the program of paci-
ficism which set the militarist imagination strongly,
and to a certain extent justifiably, against it. In the
whole discussion both sides are on imaginative and
sentimental ground. It is but one utopia against an-
other, and everything one says. must be abstract and
hypothetical. Subject to this criticism and caution, I
will try to characterize in abstract strokes the opposite
imaginative forces, and point out what to my own
very fallible mind seems the best utopian hypothesis,
the most promising line of conciliation.

In my remarks, pacificist tho’ I am, I will refuse to


7


speak of the bestial side of the war-régime (already
done justice to by many writers) and. consider only
the higher aspects of militaristic sentiment. Patriot-
ism no one thinks discreditable; nor does any one
deny that war is the romance of history. But inordi-
nate ambitions are the soul of. every patriotism, and
the possibility of violent death the soul of all romance.
The militarily patriotic and romantic-minded every-
where, and especially the professional military class,
refuse to admit for a moment that war may be a-tran-
sitory phenomenon in social evolution. The notion of
a sheep’s paradise like that revolts, they say, our
higher imagination. Where then would be the steeps


of life? If war had ever stopped, we should have to”


re-invent it, on this view, to redeem life from flat
degeneration. :

Reflective apologists for war at the present day all
take it religiously. It is a sort of sacrament. Its
profits are to the vanquished as well as to the victor ;
and quite apart from any question of profit, it is an
absolute good, we are told, for it is human nature at its
highest dynamic. Its “horrors” are a cheap price to pay
for resctie from the only alternative supposed, of a
world of clerks and teachers, of co-education and
zoophily, of “consumer’s leagues” and “associated
charities,” of industrialism unlimited, and feminism
unabashed. No scorn, no hardness, no valor any more !
Fie upon such a cattleyard of a planet!

So far as the central essence of this feeling goes, no
healthy minded person, it seems to me, can help to
some degree partaking of it. Militarism is the great
preserver of our ideals of hardihood, and human life
with no use for hardihood would be contemptible.


8


Without risks or prizes for the darer, history would
be insipid indeed; and there is a type of military
character which every one feels that the race should
never cease to breed, for every one is sensitive to its
superiority. The duty is incumbent on mankind, of
keeping military characters in stock—of keeping them,
if not for use, then as ends in themselves and as pure
pieces of perfection,—so that Roosevelt’s weaklings
and mollycoddles may not end by making everything
else disappear from the face of nature.

This natural sort of feeling forms, I think, the in-
nermost soul of army-writings. Without any excep-
tion known to me, militarist authors take a highly
mystical view of their subject, and regard war as a
biological or sociological necessity, ‘uncontrolled by
ordinary psychological checks and motives. When the
time of development is ripe the war must come, reason
or no reason, for the justifications pleaded are invaria-
bly fictitious. War is, in short, a permanent human
obligation. General Homer Lea, in his recent book
“the Valor of Ignorance,” plants himself squarely on
this ground. Readiness for war is for him the essence


. of nationality, and ability in it the supreme measure


of the health of nations.

Nations, General Lea says, are never stationary—
they must necessarily expand or shrink, according to
their vitality or decrepitude. Japan now is culminat-
ing; and by the fatal law in question it is impossible
that her statesmen should not long since have entered,
with extraordinary foresight, upon a vast policy of
conquest—the game in which the first moves were her
wars with China and Russia and her treaty with Eng-
land, and of which the final objective is the capture of


ES)


the Philippines, the Hawaiian Islands, Alaska, and the
whole of our Coast west of the Sierra Passes. This
will give Japan what her ineluctable vocation as a state
absolutely forces her to claim, the possession of the
entire Pacific Ocean; and to oppose these deep de-
signs we Americans have, according to our author,
nothing but our conceit, our ignorance, our commer-
cialism, our corruption, and our feminism. General
Lea makes a minute technical ‘comparison of the mili-
tary strength which we at-present could oppose to the
strength of Japan, and concludes that the islands,
Alaska, Oregon, and Southern California, would fall
almost without resistance, that San Francisco must
surrender in a fortnight to. a Japanese investment,
that in three or four months the war would be over,
and our republic, unable to regain what it had heed-
lessly neglected to protect sufficiently, would then “‘dis-
integrate,” until perhaps some Caesar should arise to
weld us again into a nation.

A dismal forecast indeed! Yet not unplausible,
if the mentality of Japan’s statesmen be of the Cae-
sarian type of which history shows so many examples,
and which is all that General Lea seems able to im-
agine. But there is no reason to think that women can
no longer be the mothers of Napoleonic or Alexan-
drian characters; and if these come in Japan and find
their opportunity, just such surprises as “the Valor of
Ignorance” paints may lurk in ambush for us. Ignor-
ant as we still are of the innermost recesses of Jap-
anese mentality, we may be foolhardy to disregard
such possibilities.

Other militarists are more complex and more
moral in their considerations. The “Philosophie des


10


Krieges,” by S. R. Steinmetz is a good example. War,


according to this author, is an ordeal instituted by
God, who weighs the nations in its balance. It is the
essential form of the State, and the only function in
which peoples can employ all their powers at once
and convergently. No victory is possible save as the
resultant of a totality of virtues, no defeat for which
some vice or weakness is not responsible. Fidelity, co-
hesiveness, tenacity, heroism, conscience, education, in-
ventiveness, economy, wealth, physical health and
vigor—there isn’t a moral or intellectual point of su-
periority that doesn’t tell, when God holds his assizes
and hurls the peoples upon one another. Die Welt-
geschichte ist. das Weltgericht; and Dr. Steinmetz
does not believe that in the long run chance and luck
play any part in apportioning the issues.

The virtues that prevail, it must be noted, are vir-
tues anyhow, superiorities that count in peaceful as
well as in military competition; but the strain on them,
being infinitely intenser in the latter case, makes war
infinitely more searching as a trial. No ordeal is
comparable to its winnowings. Its dread hammer is
the welder of men into cohesive states, and nowhere
but in such states can human nature adequately develop
its capacity. The only alternative is “degeneration.”

Dr. Steinmetz is a conscientious thinker, and his
book, short as it is, takes much into account. Its
upshot can, it seems to me, be summed up in Simon
Patten’s word, that mankind was nursed in pain and
fear, and that the transition to a “pleasure-economy”
may be fatal to a being wielding no powers of defense
against its disintegrative influences. If we speak of
the fear of emancipation from the fear-regime, we put


11


the whole situation into a single phrase; fear regard-
ing ourselves now taking the place of the ancient fear
of the enemy.

Turn. the fear over as I will in my mind, it all
seems to lead back to two unwillingnesses of the
imagination, one aesthetic, and the other moral: un-
willingness, first to envisage a future in which army-
life, with its many elements of charm, shall ‘be for-
ever impossible, and in which the destinies of peoples
shall nevermore be decided quickly, thrillingly, and
tragically, by force, but only gradually and insipidly
by “evolution” ; and, secondly, unwillingness to see the
supreme theatre of human strenuousness closed, and
the splendid military aptitudes of men doomed to keep
always in a state of latency and never show them-
selves in action. These insistent unwillingnesses, no
less than other esthetic and ethical insistencies have,
it seems to me, to be listened to and respected. One
cannot meet them effectively by mere counter-insist-
ency on war’s expensiveness and horror. The horror
makes the thrill; and when the question is of getting the
extremest and supremest out of human nature, talk of
expense sounds ignominious. The weakness of so much
merely negative criticism is evident—pacificism makes
no converts from the military party. The military party
denies neither the bestiality nor. the horror, nor the
expense; it only says that these things tell but half
the story. It only says that war is worth them; that,
taking human nature as a whole, its wars are its best
protection against its weaker and more cowardly self,
and that mankind cannot afford to adopt a peace-
economy. y

Pacificists ought to enter more deeply into the


12.


esthetical and ethical point of view of their oppo-


- nents. Do that first in any controversy, says J. J.-


Chapman, then move the point, and your opponent will
follow. So long as’anti-militarists propose no substi-
tute for war’s disciplinary function, no moral equiva-
lent of war, analogous, as one might say, to the
mechanical equivalent of heat, so long they fail to
realize the full inwardness of the situation. And as
a rule they do fail. The duties, penalties, and sanc-
tions pictured in the utopias they paint are all too
weak and tame to touch the military-minded. Tol-
stoy’s pacificism is the only exception to this rule, for
it is profoundly pessimistic as regards all this world’s
values, and makes the fear of the Lord furnish the
moral spur provided elsewhere by the fear of the
enemy. But our socialistic peace-advocates all be-
lieve absolutely in this world’s values; and instead of


the fear of the Lord and the fear of the enemy, the


only fear they reckon with is the fear of poverty if
one be lazy. This weakness pervades all the social-
istic literature with which I am acquainted. Even in
Lowes Dickinson’s exquisite dialogue,* high wages
and short hours are the only forces invoked for over-
coming man’s distaste for repulsive kinds of labor.
Meanwhile men at large still live as they always have
lived, under a pain-and-fear economy—for those of
us who live in an ease-economy are but an island in the
stormy ocean—and the whole atmosphere of present-
day utopian literature tastes mawkish and dishwatery
to people who still keep a sense for life’s more bit-
ter flavors. It suggests, in truth, ubiquitous inferiority.

Inferiority is always with us, and merciless scorn


* Justice and Liberty, N. Y., 1909.
18


of it is the keynote of the military temper. “Dogs,
would you live forever?” shouted Frederick the Great.
“Yes,” say our utopians, “let us live forever, and raise
our level gradually.” The best thing about our “in-
feriors” to-day is that they are as tough as nails, and
physically and morally almost as insensitive. Utopian-
ism would see them soft and squeamish, while mili-
tarism would keep their callousness, but transfigure it
into a meritorious characteristic, needed by “the serv-
ice,’ and redeemed by that from the suspicion of in-
feriority. All the qualities of a man acquire dignity
when he knows that the service of-the collectivity that
owns him needs them. If proud of the collectivity, his
own pride rises in proportion. No collectivity is like,
an army for nourishing such pride; but it has to be
confessed that the only sentiment which the image of
pacific cosmopolitan industrialism is capable of arous-
ing in countless worthy breasts is shame at the idea
of belonging to such a collectivity. It is obvious that
the United States of America as they exist to-day im-
press a mind like General Lea’s as so much human
blubber. Where is the sharpness and precipitousness,
the contempt for life, whether one’s own, or another’s?
Where is the savage “yes” and “no,” the unconditional
duty? Where is the conscription? Where is the
blood-tax? Where is anything that one feels honored
by belonging to?

Having said thus much in preparation, I will now
confess my own utopia. I devoutly believe in the
reign of peace and in the gradual advent of some sort
of a socialistic equilibrium. The fatalistic view of the
war-function is to me nonsense, for I know that war-
making is due to definite motives and subject to pru-


14


dential checks and reasonable criticisms, jus: like any
other form of enterprise. And when whole nations
are the armies, and the science of destruction vies in
intellectual refinement with the sciences of produc-
tion, I see that war becomes absurd and impossible
from its own monstrosity. Extravagant ambitious
will have to be replaced by reasonable claims, and
nations must make common cause against them. I see
no reason why all this should not apply to yellow as
well as to white countries, and I look forward to a
future when acts of war shall be formally outlawed as
between civilized peoples.

All these beliefs of mine put me squarely into the
anti-militarist party. . But I do not believe that peace
~ither ought to be or will be permanent on this globe,
unless the states pacifically organized preserve some
of the old elements of army-discipline. A permanently
successful peace-economy cannot be-a simple pleasure-
economy. In the more or less socialistic future towards
which mankind seems drifting we must still subject
ourselves collectively to those severities which answer
to our real position upon this only partly hospitable
globe. We must make new energies and hardihoods
continue the manliness to which the military mind so
faithfully clings. Martial virtues must be the enduring
cement; intrepidity, contempt of softness, surrender of
private interest, obedience to command, must still re-
main the rock upon which states are built—unless,
indeed, we wish for dangerous reactions against com-
monwealths fit only for-contempt, and liable to invite
attack whenever a centre of crystallization for military-
minded enterprise gets formed anywhere in their
neighborhood.


The war-party is assuredly right in affirming and
reaffirming that the martial virtues, although originally
gained by the race through war, are absolute and per-
manent human goods. Patriotic pride and ambition
in their military form are, after all, only specifications
of a more general competitive passion. They are its
first- form, but that is no reason for supposing them
to be its last form. Men now are proud of belonging
to a conquering nation, and without a murmur they
lay down their persons and their wealth, if by so doing
they may fend off subjection. But who can be sure
that other aspects of one’s country may not, with time
and education and suggestion enough, come to be re-
garded with similarly effective feelings of pride and
shame? Why should men not some day feel that it is
worth a blood-tax to belong to a collectivity superior in
any ideal respect? Why should they not blush with
indignant shame if the community that owns them is
vile in any way whatsoever? Individuals, daily more
numerous, now feel this civic passion. It is only a
question of blowing on the spark till the whole popula-
tion gets incandescent, and on the ruins of the old
morals of military honour, a stable system of morals
of civic honour builds itself up. What the whole com-
munity comes to believe in grasps the individual as in
a vise. The war-function has graspt us so far; but
constructive interests may some day seem no less im-
perative, and impose on the individual a hardly lighter
burden.

Let me illustrate my idea more concretely. There
is nothing to make one indignant in the mere fact that
life is hard, that men should toil and suffer pain. The
planetary conditions once for all are such, and we can


16


stand it. But that so many men, by mere accidents of
birth and opportunity, should have a life of nothing
else but toil and pain and hardness and inferiority im- .
posed upon them, should have no vacation, while
others natively no more deserving never get any taste
of this campaigning life at all—this is capable of
arousing indignation in reflective minds. It may end
by seeming shameful to all of us that some of us have
nothing but campaigning, and others nothing but


‘ unmanly ease. If now—and this is my idea—there


were, instead of military conscription a conscription of
the whole youthful population to form for a certain
number of years a part of the army enlisted against
Nature, the injustice would tend to be evened out, and
numerous other goods to the commonwealth would
follow. The military ideals of hardihood and discipline
would be wrought into the growing fibre of the peo-
ple; no one would remain blind as the luxurious classes
now are blind, to man’s real relations to the globe he
lives on, and to the permanently sour and hard founda-
tions of his higher life. To coal and iron mines, to
freight trains, to fishing fleets in December, to dish-
washing, clothes-washing, and window-washing, to
road-building and tunnel-making, to foundries and
stoke-holes, and to the frames of skyscrapers, would
our gilded youths be drafted off, according to their
choice, to get the childishness knocked out of them, and
to come back into society with healthier sympathies
and soberer ideas. They would have paid their blood-
tax, done their own part in the immemorial human


- warfare against nature, they would tread the earth


more proudly, the women would value them more high-
17


ly, they would be better fathers and teachers of the
following generation.

Such a conscription, with the state of public opin-
ion that would have required it, and the many moral
fruits it would bear, would preserve in the midst of a
pacific civilization the manly virtues which the military
party is so afraid of seeing disappear in peace. We
should get toughness without callousness, authority
with as little criminal cruelty as possible, and painful
work done cheerily because the duty is temporary, and
threatens not, as now, to degrade the whole remainder
of one’s life. I spoke of the “moral equivalent” of war.
So far, war has been the only force that can discipline
a whole community, and until an equivalent discipline
is organized, I believe that war must have its way. But
I have no serious doubt that the ordinary prides and
shames of social man, once developed to a certain
intensity, are capable of organizing such a moral
equivalent as I have sketched, or some other just as
effective for preserving manliness of type. It is but a
question of time, of skillful propagandism, and of
opinion-making men seizing historic opportunities.

The martial type of character can be bred without
war. Strenuous honour and disinterestedness abound
elsewhere. Priests and medical men are in a
fashion educated to it, and we should all feel some
degree of it imperative if we were conscious of our
work as an obligatory service to the state. We should
be owned, as soldiers are by the army, and our pride
would rise accordingly. We could be poor, then, with-
out humiliation, as army officers now are. The only
thing needed henceforward is to inflame the civic
temper as past history has inflamed the military


18


temper. H. G. Wells, as usual, sees the centre of
the situation. “In many ways,” he says, “military or-
ganization is the most peaceful of activities. When
the contemporary man steps from the street, of clam-
orous insincere advertisement, push, adulteration, un-
derselling and intermittent employment, into the bar-
rack-yard, he steps on to a higher social plane, into
an atmosphere of service and co-operation and of
infinitely more honourable emulations. Here at least
men are not flung out of employment to degenerate
because there is no immediate work for them to do.
They are fed and drilled and trained for better serv-
ices. Here at least a man is supposed to win promo-
tion by self-forgetfulness and not by self-seeking.
And beside the feeble and irregular endowment of
research by commercialism, its little short-sighted
snatches at profit by innovation and scientific economy,
see how remarkable is the steady and rapid develop-
ment of method and appliances in naval and military
affairs! Nothing is more striking than to compare the
progress of civil conveniences which has been left
almost entirely to the trader, to the progress in mili-
tary apparatus during the last few decades. The
house-appliancés of to-day for example, are little bet-
ter than they were fifty years ago. A house of to-
day is still almost as ill-ventilated, badly heated by
wasteful fires, clumsily arranged and furnished as the
house of 1858. Houses a couple of hundred years
old are still satisfactory places of residence, so little
have our standards risen. But the rifle or battleship
of fifty years ago was beyond all comparison inferior
to those we possess; in power, in speed, in conveni-


19


ence alike. No one has a use now for such superan-
nuated things.” *

Wells adds ** that he thinks that the conceptions
of order and discipline, the tradition of service and
devotion, of physical fitness, unstinted exertion, and
universal responsibility, which universal military duty
is now, teaching European nations, will remain a per-
manent acquisition, when the last ammunition has been
used in the fireworks that celebrate the final peace. I
believe as he does. It would be simply preposterous
if the only force that could work ideals of honour
and standards of efficiency into English or American
natures should be the fear of being killed by the Ger-
mans or the Japanese. Great indéed is Fear; but it is
not, as our military enthusiasts believe and try to make
us believe, the only stimulus known for awakening the
higher ranges of men’s spiritual energy. The amount
of alteration in public opinion which my utopia postu-
lates is vastly less than the difference between the
mentality of those black warriors who pursued Stan-
ley’s party on the Congo with their cannibal war-cry of
“Meat! Meat” and that of the “general-staff” of any
civilized nation. History has seen the latter interval
bridged over: the former one can be bridged over
much more easily.

WILLIAM JAMES.


* First and Last Things, 1908, p. 215.
** Thid., p. 226.


PUBLICATIONS OF THE


AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR INTERNATIONAL CONCILIATION


x. Program of the Association, by Baron d’Estournelles de Constant, April,
1907. ,

2, Results of the National Arbitration and Peace Congress, by Andrew Car-
negie. April, 1907.

3- A League of Peace, by Andrew Carnegie. November, 1907


4. The results of the Second Hague Conference, by Baron d’Estournelles de
Constant and Hon. David Jayne Hilt January, 1908.


5. The Work of the Second Hague Conference, by James Brown Scott. Jan-
uary, 1908,

6. Possibilities of Intellectual Co-operation Between North and South America,
by L. S. Rowe. April, 1908.


7. America and Japan, by George Trumbull Ladd. June, 1908.

8. The Sanction of International Law, by Elihu Root. July, 1908.

9. The United States and France, by Barrett Wendell. August, 1908,
ae The Approach of the Two Americas, by Joaquim Nabuco. September,
1908.

1x. The United States and Canada, by J. S. Willison. October, 1908,

i The Policy of the United States and Japan in the Far East. November,
1908,


13. European Sobriety in the Presence of the Balkan Crisis, by Charles Austin
Beard. December, 1908. 7


14. The Logic of International Co-operation, by F. W. Hirst. January, 1909.

15. American Ignorance of Oriental Languages, by J. H. DeForest. Feb-
Tuary, 1909.

16, America and the New Diplomacy, by James Brown Scott. March, rgog.

17. The Delusion of Militarism, by Charles E. Jefferson. April, 1909.

18. The Causes of War, by Elihu Root= May, rgo9.

19. The United States and China, by Wei-ching Yen. June, 1909.


20, Opening Address at the Lake Mohonk Conference on International Arbi-
tration, by Nicholas Murray Butler. July, r909.


21. Journalism and International Affairs, by Edward Cary. August, x909.


22. Influence of Commerce in the Promotion of International Peace, by John
Ball Osborne. September, x99.


23. The United States and Spain, by Martin Hume. October, r909.


24. The American Public School as a Factor in International Conciliation, by
Myra Kelly. November, 1909.


25. Cecil Rhodes and His Scholars as Factors in International Conciliation,
by ir J. Wylie. December, r909.


26, The East and the West, by Seth Low. January, 1910.
27. The Moral Equivalent of War, by William James, February, rgt0.


A small edition of a monthly bibliography of articles having to
do with international matters is also published and distributed to
libraries, magazines and newspapers.

Up to the limit of the editions printed, any one of the above will
be sent postpaid upon receipt of a request addressed to the Secretary
of the American Association for International Conciliation, Post
Office Sub-Station 84, New York, N. Y.


Executive ComMMIrTer


NicnoLas Murray Butter STEPHEN Henry OLIN

RICHARD BARTHOLDT SetTH

Lyman ABBOTT Rosert A. Franxs

James SPEYER Paut Morton
Grorce BLUMENTHAL


: > COUNCIL OF DIRECTION OF THE
' AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR INTERNATIONAL CONCILIATION


Lyman Asnotr, New York.
Cuarves Francis ADAMS, Boston.
Epwin A. ALDERMAN, CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va.
Cnares H. Ames, Boston, Mass.
Ricuarp Bartuopt, M. C., St. Louis, Mo.
Gzorce BLUMENTHAL, New York.
Cuirron R. BRECKENRIDGE, Foxr SmiTH, ARKANSAS.
Wituiam J. Bryan, Lincotn, NzB.
T.'E. Burton, Creverann, Ouro,
NicHotas Murray Butter, New York.
Anprew CarnecieE, New York.
Epwarp Cary, New York.

osePpH H. CHoate, New York.

ICHARD H. Dana, Boston, Mass.
Arruur L. Dasner, Macon. Ga:
Horace E, Deminc, New York.
Cuartes W. Exiot, Campripce, Mass.

OHN W. Foster, Wasnincton, D.C

oBERT A. Franks, ORANGE, N. J.

OHN ArTHUR GREENE, New York.

AMES M. GREENWOOD, Kansas City, Mo.

RANKLIN H. Heap, Cuicaco, Itt.

Wittiam J. Hoivanp, Pittspurcu, Pa.
Hamitton Hott, New York.
yeues L. Houcutetinc, Cuicaco, Itt,

AvID STARR JORDAN, STANFORD University, Car.
J. H. Kirxranp, Nasuvitie, Tenn.
ApotpeH Lewisoun, New York.

SetH Low, New York.

Crarence H. Mackay, New York.
THEOpoRE Marburc, BALTIMoRE, Mp3
Branper Matruews, New York.

W. W. Morrow, San Francisco, Car.
Georce B. McC.Lettan, New York.
Paut Morton, New York.

Levi P. Morron, New York.

S1tas McBee, New York.

StevHen H. Ovin, New York.

A. V. V. Raymonp, Burrato, N. Y.
Tra Remsen, BALTIMORE, Mp.

anes Forp Ruoogs, Boston, Mass.

OWARD J. Rocers, ALpany, N. Y.

Exixu Root, Wasuincton, D. C.
J. G. Scirurman, ItHaca, N.
SAAC _N, SEticmMan, New York.
FE. J. V. Skirr, Cuicaco, Itt,
Witiiam M. Stoane, New York.
Avpert K, Smitxy, Lake Mononk, N. Y.
James Spzver, NEw York.
Oscar S, Straus, Wasuincton, D. C.
Mrs. Mary Woop Swirt, BERKELEY, CAL.
Grorce W. Tay or, M. C., Demoro.is, ALA.
O. H. Trrrman, Wasuincton, D. C,
W. H. Torman, New York.
BENJAMIN TRUEBLOOD, Boston, Mass,
Epwarp Tuck, Paris, FRANCE.
Witiiam D. WHEELWRIGHT, PoRTLAND, OrzE.


CONCILIATION INTERNATIONALE
x19 RuE pE LA Tour, Paris, FRANCE
President Fondateur, BAkon D'EstourNELLES DE CONSTANT
Member Hague Court, Senator
Honorary Presidents: BERTHELOT and Leon Bourceois, Senators
Secretaries General: A, Metin and Juves Rats
Treasurer: ALBERT KAHN


IRVING PRESS
119 and r2r East Thirty-first Strect
New York
