Human Immortality: Two Supposed Objections to the Doctrine (William James, 1898)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/humanimmortalit00jamegoog). The 1897 Ingersoll Lecture at Harvard: James's transmission theory of consciousness as an argument for immortality.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


^J?/


">


c


J


%? tit $ame ^vttiwc*


THE LITERARY REMAINS OF HENRY JAMES.
Edited, with an Introduction, by William Jambs.
With Portrait. Crown 8vo, jla.oo.

HUMAN IMMORTALITY. Two Supposed Objec-
tions to the Doctrine. x6mo, ^z.oo. «

HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & CO.
Boston AND New York.


THE PRINCIPLES OF PSYCHOLOGY, a vols.

8vo. New York : Henry Holt & Co. 1890.
PSYCHOLOGY. Briefer Course, lamo. New York:

Henry Holt & Co. 1893.

IS LIFE WORTH LIVING? i8mo. Philadelphia:

S. B. Weston, 1305 Arch St. 1896.
THE WILL TO BELIEVE, AND OTHER ESSAYS

IN POPULAR PHILOSOPHY.'":- New York:

Longmans, Green & Co. 1897.


C


HUMAN IMMORTALITY

TWO SUPPOSED OBJECTIONS
TO THE DOCTRINE


WILLIAM JAMES


SECOtfD EDITIOS


BOSTON AND HEW YORK
HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY

ISM


LIBRARY OF THE
LELAHO smFORD JR. UHimSlVf.

a. 1^7^*^*


CDFVRXGHT, l8^, BY ^LUAM JAMBS
ALL RIGHTS RBSBRVED


JAN 16 1901


THE INGERSOLL LECTURESHIP


Extract from the will of Miss Caroline Haskell IngersoU^

who died in Keene, County of Cheshire^ New

Hampshire f Jan, 26, tB<)3,

First In carrying out the wishes of my late
beloved father, George Goldthwait IngersoU, as
declared by him in his last will and testament, I

five and bequeath to Harvard University in Cam-
ridge, Mass., where my late father was fi;raduated,
and which he always held in love and honor, the
sum of Five thousand dollars ($5,000) as a fund for
the establishment of a Lectureship on a plan some-
what similar to that of the Dudleian lecture, that is
^one lecture to be delivered each year, on any con-
venient day between the last day of May and the
first day of December, on this subject, "the Im-
mortality of Man," said lecture not to form a part
of the usual college course, nor to be delivered by
any Professor or Tutor as part of his usual routine
of instruction, though any such Professor or Tutor
may be appointed to sucn service. The choice of
said lecturer is not to be limited to any one religious
denomination, nor to any one profession, but may
be that of either clergyman or layman, the appoint-
ment to take place at least six months before the
deliveiy of said lecture. The above sum to be
safely invested and three fourths of the annual in-
terest thereof to be paid to the lecturer for his
services and the remaining fourth to be expended
in the publishment and gratuitous distribution of
the lecture, a copy of which is always to be fur-
nished by the lecturer for such purpose. The same
lecture to be named and known as " the IngersoU
lecture on the Immortality of Man."


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION


O many critics have made one and
the same objection to the door-
way to immortality which my lec-
ture claims to be left open by the "trans-
mission-theory" of cerebral action, that I
feel tempted, as the book is again going
to press, to add a word of explanation.

If our finite personality here below, th^
objectors say, be due to the transmission-
through the brain of portions of a preex-
isting larger consciousness, all that can
remain after the brain expires is the larger'
consciousness itself as such, with which
we should thenceforth be perforce recon-;
founded, the only means of our existence


in finite personal form having ceased.


But this, the critics continue, is the


vi Preface to Second Edition

pantheistic idea of immortality, survival,
namely, in the soul of the world ; not the
Christian idea of immortality, which means
survival in strictly personal form.

In showing the possibility of a mental
life after the brain's death, they conclude,
the lecture has thus at the same time
shown the impossibility of its identity with
the personal life, which is the brain's func-
tion.

Now I am myself anything but a pan-
theist of the monistic pattern ; yet for sim-
plicity's sake I did in the lecture speak of
the " mother-sea " in terms that must have
sounded pantheistic, and suggested that I
thought of it myself as a unit. On page
30, I even added that future lecturers
might prove the loss of some of our per-
sonal limitations after death not to be mat-
ter for absolute regre^. The interpretation
of my critics was therefore not unnatural ;
and I ought to have been more careful to
guard against its being made.

In note 5 on page 58 I partially guarded


I


Preface to Second Edition vii

against it by saying that the "mother-
sea" from which the finite mind is sup-
posed to be strained by the brain, need
not be conceived of in pantheistic terms
exclusively. There might be, I said, many
minds behind the scenes as well as one.
The plain truth is that one may conceive the
mental world behind the veil in as individ-
ualistic a form as one pleases ^ without any
detriment to the general scheme by which
the brain is represented as a transmissive
organ.

If the extreme individualistic view were
taken, one's finite mundane consciousness
would be an extract from one's larger,
truer personality, the latter having even
now some sort of reality behind the
scenes. And in transmitting it — to keep
to our extremely mechanical metaphor,
which confessedly throws no light on the
actual modus operandi — one's brain would
also leave effects upon the part remaining
behind the veil ; for when a thing is torn,
both fragments feel the operation.


L^^


«!rf Pfiface to Second Edition

And just as (to use a very coarse figure)
the stubs remain in a check-book whenever
a check is used, to register the transaction,
so these impressions on the transcendent
self might constitute so many vouchers of
the finite experiences of which the brain
had been the mediator; and ultimately
they might form that collection within the
larger self of memories of our earthly pas-
sage, which is all that, since Locke's day,
the continuance of our personal identity
beyond the grave has by psychology been
recognized to mean.

It is true that all this would seem to
have affinities rather with preexistence
and with possible re-incarnations than
with the Christian notion of immortality.
But my concern in the lecture was not to
discuss immortality in general. It was
confined to showing it to be not incompati-
ble with the brain-function theory of our
present mundane consciousness. I hold
that it is so compatible, and compatible
moreover in fully individualized form. The


Preface to Second Edition ( «r^

reader would be in accord with everything
that the text of my lecture intended to say,
were he to assert that every memory and
affection of his present life is""t5n!)e pre-
served; aiid that he shall never in scecula
^^^«7&'mw~ceaseTort)^ to say tu him-
self: "I am the "same personal being who
in old times" upon the earth had those
experiences." "^


HUMAN IMMORTALITY


T is a matter unfortunately too
often seen in history to call for
much remark, that when a living
want of mankind has got itself officially
protected and organized in an institution,
one of the things which the institution
most surely tends to do is to stand in the
way of the natural gratification of the want
itself. We see this in laws and courts
of justice; we see it in ecclesiasticisms ;
we see it in academies of the fine arts, in
the medical and other professions, and we
even see it in the universities themselves.

Too often do the place-holders of such
institutions frustrate the spiritual purpose
to which they were appointed to minister,
by the technical light which soon becomes


2 Human Immortality

the only light in which they seem able to
see the purpose, and the narrow way which
is the only way in which they can work in
its service.

I confess that I thought of this for a
moment when the Corporation of our Uni-
versity invited me last spring to give this
IngersoU lecture. Immortality is one of
■^ the great spiritual needs of man. The
churches have constituted themselves the
official guardians of the need, with the re-
sult that some of them actually pretend to
accord or to withhold it from the individ-
ual by their conventional sacraments, —
withhold it at least in the only shape in
which it can be an object of desire. And
now comes the IngersoU lectureship. Its
high-minded founder evidently thought that
our University might serve the cause he
had at heart more liberally than the
churches do, because a university is a body
so much less trammeled by traditions and
by impossibilities in regard to choice of
persons. And yet one of the first things


Human Immortality ^

which the university does is to appoint a
man like him who stands before you, cer-
tainly not because he is known as an en-
thusiastic messenger of the future life,
burning to publish the good tidings to his
fellow-men, but apparently because he is
a university official

Thinking in this way, I felt at first as if
I ought to decline the appointment. The
whole subject of immortal life has its prime
roots in personal feeling. I have to con-
fess that my own personal feeling about
immortality has never been of the keenest
order, and that, among the problems that
give my mind solicitude, this one does not
take the very foremost place. Yet there
are individuals with a real passion for the
matter, men and women for whom a life
hereafter is a pungent craving, and the
thought of it an obsession ; and in whom
keenness of interest has bred an insight
into the relations of the subject that no one
less penetrated with the mystery of it can
attain. Some of these people are known


4 Human Immortality

to me. They are not official personages ;
they do not speak as the scribes, but as
havmg direct authority. And surely, if
anywhere a prophet clad in goatskins, and
not a uniformed official, should be called to
give inspiration, assurance, and instruction,
it would seem to be here, on such a theme.
Office, at any rate, ought not to displace
spiritual calling.

And yet, in spite of these reflections,
which I could not avoid making, I am
here to-night, all uninspired and official as
I am. I am sure that prophets clad in
goatskins, or, to speak less figuratively, lay-
men inspired with emotional messages on
the subject, will often enough be invited
by our Corporation to give the IngersoU
lecture hereafter. Meanwhile, all negative
and deadening as the remarks of a mere
professional psychologist like myself may
be in comparison with the vital lessons they
will give, I am sure, upon mature reflec-
tion, that those who have the responsibility
of administering the IngersoU foundation


Human Immortality 5

are in duty bound to let the most various
kinds of official personages take their turn
as well. The subject is really an enor-
mous subject. At the back of Mr. Alger's
* Critical History of the Doctrine of a Fu-
ture Life/ there is a bibliography of more
than five thousand titles of books in which
it is treated. Our Corporation cannot think
only of the single lecture : it must think
of the whole series of lectures in futuro.
Single lectures, however emotionally in-
spired and inspiring they may be, will not
be enough. The lectures must remedy
each other, so that out of the series there
shall emerge a collective literature worthy
of the importance of the theme. This
unquestionably was what the founder had
in mind. He wished the subject to be
turned over in all possible aspects, so
that at last results might ponderate har-
moniously in the true direction. Seen in
this long perspective, the IngersoU foun-
dation calls for nothing so much as for
minute division of labor. Orators must


6 Human Immortality

take their turn, and prophets ; but narrow
specialists as well. Theologians of every
creed, metaphysicians, anthropologists, and
psychologists must alternate with biologists
and physicists and psychical researchers, —
even with mathematicians. If any one of
them presents a grain of truth, seen from
his point of view, that will remain and
accrete with truths brought by the others,
his will have been a good appointment.

In the hour that lies before us, then, I
shall seek to justify my appointment by
offering what seem to me tw6 such grains
of truth, two points well fitted, if I am not
mistaken, to combine with anything that
other lecturers may bring.

These points are both of them in the
nature of replies to objections, to difficul-
ties which our modem culture finds in the
old notion of a life hereafter, — difficulties
that I am sure rob the notion of much of
its old power to draw belief, in the scien-
tifically cultivated circles to which this
audience belong.


Human Immortality 7

The first of these difficulties is relative
to the absolute dependence of our spiritual
life, as we know it here, upon the brain.
One hears not only physiologists, but num-
bers of laymen who read the popular sci-
ence books and magazines, saying all about
us, How can we believe in life hereafter
when Science has once for all attained to
proving, beyond possibility of escape, that
our inner life is a function of that fa-
mous material, the so-called 'gray mat-
ter' of our cerebral convolutions? How
can the function possibly persist after its
organ has undergone decay ?

Thus physiological psychology is what
is supposed to bar the way to the old
faith. And it is now as a physiological
psychologist that I ask you to look at the.
question with me a little more closely.

It is indeed true that physiological sci-
ence has come to the conclusion cited ;
and we must confess that in so doing she
has only carried out a little farther the
common belief of mankind. Every one


8 Human Immortality

knows that arrests of brain development
occasion imbecility, that blows on the
head abolish memory or consciousness, and
that brain-stimulants and poisons change
the quality of our ideas. The anatomists,
physiologists, and pathologists have only
shown this generally admitted fact of a
dependence to be detailed and minute.
What the laboratories and hospitals have
lately' been teaching us is not only that
thought in general is one of the brain's
functions, but that the various special
forms of thinking are functions of special
portions of the brain. When we are think-
ing of things seen, it is our occipital convo-
lutions that are active; when of things
heard, it is a certain portion of our tem-
poral lobes ; when of things to be spoken,
it is one of our frontal convolutions. Pro-
fessor Flechsig of Leipzig (who perhaps
more than any one may claim to have
made the subject his own) considers that
in other special convolutions those pro-
cesses of association go on, which permit


Human Immortality 9

the more abstract processes of thought, to
take place. I could easily show you these
regions if I had here a picture of the
brain.^ Moreover, the diminished or exag-
gerated associations of what this author
calls the Korpeffiihlsphdre with the other
regions, accounts, according to him, for
the complexion of our emotional life, and
eventually decides whether one shall be a
callous brute or criminal, an unbalanced
sentimentalist, or a character accessible to
feeling, and yet well poised. Such special
opinions may have to be corrected ; yet so
firmly established do the main positions
worked out by the anatomists, physiolo-
gists, and pathologists of the brain appear,
that the youth of our medical schools are
everywhere taught unhesitatingly to be-
lieve them. The assurance that observa-
tion will go on to establish them ever more
and more minutely is the inspirer of all
contemporary research. And almost any
of our young psychologists will tell you
that only a few belated scholastics, or pos-


lo Human Immortality

sibly some crack-brained theosophist or
psychical researcher, can be found hold-
ing back, and still talking as if mental
phenomena might exist as independent
variables in the world.

For the purposes of my argument, now,
I wish to adopt this general doctrine as
if it were established absolutely, with no
possibility of restriction. During this hour
I wish you also to accept it as a postulate,
whether you think it incontrovertibly es-
tablished or not ; so I beg you to agree
with me to-day in subscribing to the great
psycho-physiological formula: Thought is
a function of the brain.

The question is, then. Does this doctrine
logically compel us to disbelieve in immor-
tality ? Ought it to force every truly con-
sistent thinker to sacrifice his hopes of an
hereafter to what he takes to be his duty
of accepting all the consequences of a sci-
entific truth 2

Most persons imbued with what one may
call the Puritanism of science would feel


Human Immortality ti

themselves bound to answer this question
with a yes. If any medically or psycho-
logically bred young scientists feel other-
wise, it is probably in consequence of that
incoherency of mind of which the majority
of mankind happily enjoy the privilege.
At one hour scientists, at another they are
Christians or common men, with the will to
live burning hot in their breasts ; and, hold-
ing thus the two ends of the chain, they
are careless of the intermediate connection.
But the more radical and uncompromising
disciple of science makes the sacrifice, and,
sorrowfully or not, according to his tem-
perament, submits to giving up his hopes
of heaven.2

This, then, is the objection to immortal-
ity; and the next thing in order for me
is to try to make plain to you why I be-
lieve that it has in strict logic no deter-
rent power. I must show you that the fatal
consequence is not coercive, as is com-
monly imagined ; and that, even though our
soul's life (as here below it is revealed to


12 Human Immortality

us) may be in literal strictness the function
of a brain that perishes, yet it is not at all
impossible, but on the contrary quite pos-
sible, that the life may still continue when
the brain itself is dead.

The supposed impossibility of its contin-
uing comes from too superficial a look at
the admitted fact of functional dependence.
The moment we inquire more closely into
the notion of functional dependence, and
ask ourselves, for example, how many kinds
of functional dependence there may be, we
immediately perceive that there is one kind
at least that does not exclude a life here-
after at all. The fatal conclusion of the
physiologist flows from his assuming off-
hand another kind of functional depend-
ence, and treating it as the only imagina-
ble kind.^

When the physiologist who thinks that
his science cuts off all hope of immortality
pronounces the phrase, " Thought is a
function of the brain," he thinks of the
matter just as he thinks when he says.


Human Immortality i)

"Steam is a function of the tea-kettle/'
"Light is a function of the electric cir-
cuit," " Power is a function of the moving
waterfall." In these latter cases the sev-
eral material objects have the function of
inwardly creating or engendering their
effects, and their function must be called
prodmtive function. Just so, he thinks, it
must be with the brain. Engendering con-
sciousness in its interior, much as it engen-
ders cholesterin and creatin and carbonic
acid, its relation to our soul's life must also
be called productive function. Of course,
if such production be the function, then
when the organ perishes, since the produc-
tion can no longer continue,, the soul must
surely die. Such a conclusion as this is
indeed inevitable from that particular con-
ception of the facts.*

But in the world of physical nature pro-
ductive function of this sort is not the
only kind of function with which we are
familiar. We have also releasing or per-
missive function; and we have transmis-
sive function.


i4 Human Immortality

The trigger of a crossbow has a releas-
ing function : it removes the obstacle that
holds the string, and lets the bow fly back
to its natural shape. So when the hammer
falls upon a detonating compound. By
knocking out the inner molecular obstruc-
tions, it lets the constituent gases resume
their normal bulk, and so permits the ex-
plosion to take place.

In the case of a colored glass, a prism,
or a refracting lens, we have transmissive
function. The energy of light, no mat-
ter how produced, is by the glass sifted
and limited in color, and by the lens or
prism determined to a certain path and
shape. Similarly, the keys of an organ
have only a transmissive function. They
open successively the various pipes and let
the wind in the air-chest escape in various
ways. The voices of the various pipes are
constituted by the columns of air trembling
as they emerge. But the air is not engen-
dered in the organ. The organ proper, as
distinguished from its air-chest, is only an


Human Immortality 75

apparatus for letting portions of it loose
upon the world in these peculiarly limited
shapes.

My thesis now is this : that, when we
think of the law that thought is a function
of the brain, we are not required to think
of productive function only ; we are entitled
also to consider permissive or transmissive
function. And this the ordinary psycho-
physiologist leaves out of his account.

Suppose, for example, that the whole uni-
verse of material things — the furniture of
earth and choir of heaven — should turn
out to be a mere surface-veil of pheno-
mena, hiding and keeping back the world
of genuine realities. Such a supposition is
foreign neither to common sense nor to
philosophy. Common sense believes in
realities behind the veil even too supersti-
tiously ; and idealistic philosophy declares
the whole world of natural experience, as
we get it, to be but a time-mask, shatter-
ing or refracting the one infinite Thought
which is the sole reality into those millions


1 6 Human Immortality

of finite streams of consciousness known to
us as our private selves. i

" Life, like a dome of many-colored glass,
Stains the white radiance of eternity."

Suppose, now, that this were really so,
and suppose, moreover, that the dome,
opaque enough at all times to the full su-
per-solar blaze, could at certain times and
places grow less so, and let certain beams
pierce through into this sublunary world.
These beams would be so many finite rays,
so to speak, of consciousness, and they would
vary in quantity and quality as the opacity
varied in degree. Only at particular times
and places would it seem that, as a matter
of fact, the veil of nature can grow thin and
rupturable enough for such effects to occur.
But in those places gleams, however finite
and unsatisfying, of the absolute life of the
universe, are from time to time vouchsafed.
Glows of feeling, glimpses of insight, and
streams of knowledge and perception float
into our finite world.

Admit now that our brains are such thin


Human Immortality ly

and half - transparent places in the veil.
What will happen ? Why, as the white
radiance comes through the dome, with all
sorts of staining and distortion imprinted
on it by the glass, or as the air now comes
through my glottis determined and limited
in its force and quality of its vibrations
by the peculiarities of those vocal chords
which form its gate of egress and shape it
inter my personal voice, even so the genuine
matter of reality, the life of souls as it is
in its fullness, will break through our sev-
eral brains into this world in all sorts of
restricted forms, and with all the imperfec-
tions and queemesses that characterize our
finite individualities here below.

According to the state in which the
brain finds itself, the barrier of its obstruc-
tiveness may also be supposed to rise or
fall. It sinks so low, when the brain is in
full activity, that a comparative flood of
spiritual energy pours over. At other times,
only such occasional waves of thought as
heavy sleep permits get by. And when


1 8 Human Immortality

finally a brain stops acting altogether, or
decays, that special stream of conscious-
ness which it subserved will vanish entirely
from this natural world. But the sphere
of being that supplied the consciousness
would still be intact ; and in that more real
world with which, even whilst here, it was
continuous, the consciousness might, in
ways unknown to us, continue still.

You see that, on all these suppositions,
our soul's life, as we here know it, would
none the less in literal strictness be the
function of the brain. The brain would
be the independent variable, the mind
would vary dependently on it. But such
dependence on the brain for this natural
life weuld in no wise make immortal life
impossible, — it might be quite compatible
with supernatural life behind the veil here-
after.

As I said, then, the fatal consequence is
not coercive, the conclusion which mate-
rialism draws being due solely to its one-
sided way of taking the word 'function.*


•r


Human Immortality ig

And, whether we care or not for immortal-
ity in itself, we ought, as mere critics doing
police duty among the vagaries of man-
kind, to insist on the illogicality of a denial
based on the flat ignoring of a palpable
alternative. How much more ought we to
insist, as lovers of truth, when the denial
is that of such a vital hope of mankind !

In strict logic, then, the fangs of cere-
bralistic materialism are drawn. My words
ought consequently already to exert a re-
leasing function on your hopes. You may
believe henceforward, whether you care to
profit by the permission or not. But, as
this is a very abstract argument, I think it
will help its effect to say a word or two
about the more concrete conditions of the
case.

All abstract hypotheses sound unreal;
and the abstract notion that our brains are
colored lenses in the wall of nature, admit-
ting light from the super-solar source, but
at the same time tingeing and restricting
it, has a thoroughly fantastic sound. What


i ^i^i^iS^^


20 Human Immortality

is it, you may ask, but a toolish metaphor ?
And how can such a function be ima-
gined ? Is n't the common materialistic
notion vastly simpler ? Is not conscious-
ness really more comparable to a sort of
steam, or perfume, or electricity, or nerve-
glow, generated on the spot in its own
peculiar vessel ? Is it not more rigorously
scientific to treat the brain's function as
function of production ?

The immediate reply is, that, if we are
talking of science positively understood,
function can mean nothing more than bare
concomitant variation. When the brain-
activities change in one way, conscious-
ness changes in another; when the cur-
rents pour through the occipital lobes,
consciousness sees things ; when through
the lower frontal region, consciousness
says things to itself ; when they stop, she
goes to sleep, etc. In strict science, we
can only write down the bare fact of con-
comitance ; and all talk about either pro-
duction or transmission, as the mode of


Human Immortality 21

taking place, is pure superadded hypothe-
sis, and metaphysical hypothesis at that,
for we can frame no more notion of the
details on the one alternative than on
the other. Ask for any indication of the
exact process either of transmission or
of production, and Science confesses her
imagination to be bankrupt. She has, so
far, not the least glimmer of a conjecture
or suggestion, — not even a bad verbal
metaphor or pun to offer. Ignoramus^
ignorabimuSy is what most physiologists, in
the words of one of their number, will say
here. The production of such a thing as
consciousness in the brain, they will reply
with the late Berlin professor of physio-
logy, is the absolute world-enigma, — some-
thing so paradoxical and abnormal as to be
a stumbling block to Nature, and almost a
self-contradiction. Into the mode of- pro-
duction of steam in a tea-kettle we have
conjectural insight, for the terms that
change are physically homogeneous one
with another, and we can easily imagine


22 Human Immortality

the case to consist of nothing but altera-
tions of molecular motion. But in the
production of consciousness by the brain,
the terras are heterogeneous natures alto-
gether; and as far as our understanding
goes, it is as great a miracle as if we said.
Thought is 'spontaneously generated,' or
* created out of nothing.'

The theory of production is therefore
not a jot more simple or credible in itself
than any other conceivable theory. It is
only a little more popular. All that one
need do, therefore, if the ordinary materi-
alist should challenge one to explain how
the brain can be an organ for limiting and
determining to a certain form a conscious-
ness elsewhere produced, is to retort with
a tu quoqucy asking him in turn to ex-
plain how it can be an organ for producing
consciousness out of whole cloth. For
polemic purposes, the two theories are thus
exactly on a par.

But if we consider the theory of trans-
mission in a wider way, we see that it has


Human Immortality /2)

certain positive superiorities, quite apart
from its connection with the immortality
question.

Just how the process of transmission
may be carried on, is indeed unimagina-
ble; but the outer relations, so to speak,
of the process, encourage our belief. Con^
sciousness in this process does not have
to be generated de novo in a vast number
of places. It exists already, behind the
scenes, coeval with the worlds THetrans-
mission-theory not only^avbids in this way
multiplying miracles, but it puts itself in
touch with general idealistic philosophy
better than the production-theory does.
It should always be reckoned a good thing
when science and philosophy thus meet.^

It puts itself also in touch with the con-
ception of a 'threshold,' — a word with
which, since Fechner wrote his book called
* Psychophysik,' the so-called * new Psycho-
logy ' has rung. Fechner imagines as the
condition of consciousness a certain kind
of psycho-physical movement, as he terms


.,v


24 Human Immortality

it. Before consciousness can come, a cer-
tain degree of activity in the movement
must be reached. This requisite degree
is called the 'threshold;* but the height
of the threshold varies under different cir-
cumstances : it may rise or fall. When it
falls, as in states of great lucidity, we
grow conscious of things of which we
should be unconscious at other times ;
when it rises, as in drowsiness, conscious-
ness sinks in amount. This rising and
lowering of a psycho - physical threshold
exactly conforms to our notion of a per-
manent obstruction to the transmission
of consciousness, which obstruction may,
in our brains, grow alternately greater or
less.®

The transmission-theory also puts itself
in touch with a whole class of experi-
ences that are with difficulty explained by
the production-theory. I refer to those ob-
scure and exceptional phenomena reported
at all times throughout human history,
which the * psychical - researchers,' with


Human Immortality 2^

Mr. Frederic Myers at their head, are do-
ing so much to rehabilitate ; ^ such phe-
nomena, namely, as religious conversions,
providential leadings in answer to prayer,
instantaneous healings, premonitions, ap-
paritions at time of death, clairvoyant vi-
sions or impressions, and the whole range
of mediumistic capacities, to say nothing
of still more exceptional and incomprehen-
sible things. If all our human thought be
a function of the brain, then of course, if
any of these things are facts, — and to my
own mind some of them are facts, — we may
not suppose that they can occur without
preliminary brain-action. But the ordinary
production-theory of consciousness is knit
up with a peculiar notion of how brain-
action ^<3:« occur, — that notion being that
all brain-action, without exception, is due to
a prior action, immediate or remote, of the
bodily sense-organs on the brain. Such
action makes the brain produce sensations
and mental images, and out of the sensations
and images the higher forms of thought and


26 Human Immortality

knowledge in their turn are framed. As
transmissionists, we also must admit this to
be the condition of all our usual thought.
Sense-action is what lowers the brain-bar-
rier. My voice and aspect, for instance,
strike upon your ears and eyes ; your brain
thereupon becomes more pervious, and
an awareness on your part of what I say
and who I am slips into this world from the
world behind the veil. But, in the mys-
terious phenomena to which I allude, it is
often hard to see where the sense-organs
can come in. A medium, for example, will
show knowledge of his sitter's private af-
fairs which it seems impossible he should
have acquired through sight or hearing, or
inference therefrom. Or you will have an
apparition of some one who is now dying
hundreds of miles away. On the produc-
tion-theory one does not see from what
sensations such odd bits of knowledge are
produced. On the transmission - theory,
they don't have to be 'produced,' — they
exist ready - made in the transcendental


Human Immortality 27

world, and all that is needed is an abnor-
mal lowering of the brain-threshold to let
them through. In cases of conversion, in
providential leadings, sudden mental heal-
ings, etc., it seems to the subjects them-
selves of the experience as if a power
from without, quite different from the ordi-
nary action of the senses or of the sense-
led mind, came into their life, as if the
latter suddenly opened into that greater
life in which it has its source. The word
'influx,' used in Swedenborgian circles, well
describes this impression of new insight,
or new willingness, sweeping over us like
a tide. All such experiences, quite para-
doxical and meaningless on the production-
theory, fall very naturally into place on
the other theory. We need only suppose
the continuity of our consciousness with a
mother sea, to allow for exceptional waves
occasionally pouring over the dam. Of
course the causes of these odd lowerings
of the brain's threshold still remain a mys-
tery on any terms.


28 Human Immortality

Add, then, this advantage to the trans-
/ mission-theory, — an advantage which I am
well aware that some of you will not rate
very high, — and also add the advantage of
not conflicting with a life hereafter, and I
hope you will agree with me that it has
many points of superiority to the more
familiar theory.J It is a theory which, in
the history of opinion on such matters,
has never been wholly left out of account,
though never developed at any great length.
In the great orthodox philosophic tradition,
the body is treated as an essential condition
to the sours life in this world of sense ; but
after death, it is said, the soul is set free,
and becomes a purely intellectual and non-
appetitive being. Kant expresses this idea
in terms that come singularly close to those
of our transmission-theory. The death of
the body, he says, may indeed be the end
of the sensational use of our mind, but only
the beginning of the intellectual use. " The
body,'* he continues, "would thus be, not
the cause of our thinking, but merely a


Human Immortality r 2g

condition restrictive thereof, and, although
essential to our sensuous and animal con-
sciousness, it may be regarded as an im-
peder of our pure spiritual life.® And in
a recent book of great suggestiveness and
power, less well-known as yet than it de-
serves, — I mean ' Riddles of the Sphinx,'
by Mr. F. C. S. Schiller of Oxford, late
of Cornell University, — the transmission-
theory is defended at some length.^

But still, you will ask, in what positive
way does this theory help us to realize our
immortality in imagination } Wh^t^weall
wish to keep is just these individual restric-
tions, these selfsame tendencies and pecu-
liarities that define us to ourselves and oth-
ers, and constitute our identity, so called.
Ourfiiritenesses arid limitations seem to be
our personal essence ; and when the finitmg
organ drops away, and our several spirits
revert to their original source and resume
their unrestricted condition, will they then
be anything like those sweet stream.^ of
feeling which we know, and which even now


( ^ Human Immortality

our brains are sifting out from the great
reservoir for our enjoyment here below ? .
Such questions are truly living questions,
and surely they must be seriously discussed
by future lecturers upon this IngersoU
foundation. I hope, for my part, that more
than one such lecturer will penetratingly
discuss the conditions of our immortal-
ity, and tell us how much we may lose,
and how much we may possibly gain, if
its finiting outlines should be changed?
If all determination is negation, as the phi-
losophers say, it might well prove that the
loss of some of the particular determina-
tions which the brain imposes would not
appear a matter for such absolute regret.

But into these higher and more tran-
scendental matters I refuse to enter upon
this occasion ; and I proceed, during the
remainder of the hour, to treat of my sec-
ond point. Fragmentary and negative it
is, as my first one has been. Yet, between
them, they do give to our belief in immor-
tality a freer wing.


Human Immortality 31

My second point is relative to the in-
credible and intolerable number of beings
which, with our modem imagination, we
must believe to be immortal, if immortal-
ity be true. I cannot but suspect that
this, too, is a stumbling-block to many of
my present audience. And it is a stum-
bling-block which I should thoroughly like
to clear away.

It is, I fancy, a stumbling-block of alto-
gether modern origin, due to the strain
upon the quantitative imagination which
recent scientific theories, and the moral
feelings consequent upon them, have
brought in their train.

For our ancestors the world was a small,
and — compared with our modern sense
of it — a comparatively snug affair. Six
thousand years at most it had lasted. In
its history a few particular human he-
roes, kings, ecclesiarchs, and saints stood
forth very prominent, overshadowing the
imagination with their claims and merits,
so that not only they, but all who were


f


)2 Human Immortality

associated familiarly with them, shone with
a glamour which even the Almighty, it
was supposed, must recognize and respect.
These prominent personages and their as-
sociates were the nucleus of the immortal
group ; the minor heroes and saints of
minor sects came next, and people with-
out distinction formed a sort of background
and filling in. The whole scene of eter-
nity (so far, at least, as Heaven and not
the nether place was concerned in it)
never struck to the believer's fancy as an
overwhelmingly large or inconveniently
crowded stage. One might call this an
aristocratic view of immortality ; the im-
mortals — I speak of Heaven exclusively,
for an immortality of torment need not
now concern us — were always an 61ite, a
select and manageable number.

But, with our own generation, an entirely
new quantitative imagination has swept
over our western world. The theory of
evolution now requires us to suppose a far
vaster scale of times, spaces, and numbers


Human Immortality j)

than our forefathers ever dreamed the cos-
mic process to involve. Human history
grows continuously out of animal history,
and goes back possibly even to the tertiary
epoch. From this there has emerged in-
sensibly a democratic view, instead of the
old aristocratic view, of immortality. For
our minds, though in one sense they may
have grown a little cynical, in another they
have been made sympathetic by the evolu-
tionary perspective. Bone of our bone and
flesh of our flesh are these half -brutish pre-
"historic brothers. Girdled about with the
immense darkness of this mysterious uni-
verse even as we are, they were bom and
died, suffered and struggled. JGiven over
to fearful crime and passion, plunged in the
blackest ignorance, preyed upon by hide-
ous and grotesque delusions, yet steadfastly
serving the profoundest of ideals in their
fixed faith that existence in any form is
better than non-existence, they ever res-
cued trimphantly from the jaws of ever-im-
minent destruction the torch of life, which,


)4 Human Immortality

thanks to them, now lights the world
for us. 7 How small indeed seem individ-
ual distinctions when we look back on
these overwhelming numbers of human
beings panting and straining under the
pressure of that vital want ! And how
inessential in the eyes of God must be
the small surplus of the individual's merit,
swamped as it is in the vast ocean of the
common merit of mankind, dumbly and
undauntedly doing the fundamental duty
and living the heroic life ! We grow hum-
ble and reverent as we contemplate the
prodigious spectacle. Not our differences
and distinctions, — we feel — no, but our
common animal essence of patience under
suffering and enduring effort must be what
redeems us in the Deity's sight. An im-
mense compassion and kinship fill the
heart. An immortality from which these
inconceivable billions of fellow - strivers
should be excluded becomes an irrational
idea for us. That our superiority in per-
sonal refinement or in religious creed


Human Immortality ^5

should constitute a difference between our-
selves and our messmates at life's banquet,
fit to entail such a consequential difference
of destiny as eternal life for us, and for
them torment hereafter, or death with the
beasts that perish, is a notion too absurd
to be considered serious. Nay, more, the
very beasts themselves — the wild ones
at any rate — are leading the heroic life
at all times. And a modern mind, ex-
panded as some minds are by cosmic emo-
tion, by the great evolutionist vision of
universal continuity, hesitates to draw the
line even at man. If any creature lives
forever, why not all ? — why not the pa-
tient brutes ? So that a faith in immortal-
ity, if we are to indulge it, demands of us
nowadays a scale of representation so stu-
pendous that our imagination faints before
it, and our personal feelings refuse to rise
up and face the task. The supposition we
are swept along to is too vast, and, rather
than face the conclusion, we abandon the
premise from which it starts. We give up


S6 Human Immortality

our own immortality sooner than believe
that all the hosts of Hottentots and Aus-
tralians that have been, and shall ever be,
should share it with us in secula seculorum.
Life is a good thing on a reasonably copi-
ous scale ; but the very heavens themselves,
and the cosmic times and spaces, would
stand aghast, we think, at the notion of
preserving eternally such an ever-swelling
plethora and glut of it.

Having myself, as a recipient of modern
scientific culture, gone through a subjec-
tive experience like this, I feel sure that
it must also have been the experience of
many, perhaps of most, of you who listen
to my words. But I have also come to see
that it harbors a tremendous fallacy ; and,
since the noting of the fallacy has set my
own mind free again, I have felt that one
service I might render to my listeners to-
night would be to point out where it lies.

It is the most obvious fallacy in the
world, and the only wonder is that all the
world should not see through it. It is the


Human Immortality ^7

result of nothing but an invincible blind-
ness from which we suffer, an insensibility
to the inner significance of alien lives, and
a conceit that would project our own inca-
pacity into the vast cosmos, and measure
the wants of the Absolute by our own
puny needs. Our christian ancestors dealt
with the problem more easily than we do.
We, indeed, lack sympathy ; but they had
a positive antipathy for these alien human
creatures, and they naYvely supposed the
Deity to have the antipathy, too. Being,
as they were, 'heathen,' our forefathers
felt a certain sort of joy in thinking that
their Creator made them as so much mere
fuel for the fires of hell. Our culture
has humanized us beyond that point, but
we cannot yet conceive them as our com-
rades in the fields of heaven. We have, as
the phrase goes, no use for thenty and it
oppresses us to think of their survival
Take, for instance, all the Chinamen.
Which of you here, my friends, sees any
fitness in their eternal perpetuation unre-


^8 Human Immortality

duced in numbers ? Surely not one of you.
At most, you might deem it well to keep a
few chosen specimens alive to represent an
interesting and peculiar variety of human-
ity ; but as for the rest, what comes in such
surpassing numbers, and what you can
only imagine in this abstract summary
collective manner, must be something of
which the units, you are sure, can have no
individual preciousness. God himself, you
think, can have no use for them. An im-
mortality of every separate specimen must
be to him and to the universe as indiges-
tible a load to carry as it is to you. So,
engulfing the whole subject in a sort of
mental giddiness and nausea, you drift
along, first doubting that the mass can be
immortal, then losing all assurance in the
immortality of your own particular person,
precious as you all the while feel and real-
ize the latter to be. This, I am sure, is
the attitude of mind of some of you before
me.
But is not such an attitude due to the


Human Immortality 59

veriest lack and dearth of your imagina-
tion ? You take these swarms of alien
kinsmen as they are for you : an external
picture painted on your retina, represent-
ing a crowd oppressive by its vastness and
confusion. As they are for you, so you
think they positively and absolutely are. /
feel no call for them, you say; therefore
there is no call for them. But all the
while, beyond this externality which is
your way of realizing them, they realize
themselves with the acutest intemality,
with the most violent thrills of life. 'Tis
you who are dead, stone-dead and blind
and senseless, in your way of looking on.
You open your eyes upon a scene of which
you miss the whole significance. Each of
these grotesque or even repulsive aliens is
animated by an inner joy of living as hot
or hotter than that which you feel beating
in your private breast. The sun rises and
beauty beams to light his path. To miss
the inner joy of him, as Stevenson says, is
to miss the whole of him.^^ Not a being


Qo^ Human Immortality

of the countless throng is there whose con-
tmued life is not called for, and called for
intensely, by the consciousness that ani-
mates the being's form. That you neither
realize nor understand nor call for it, that
you have no use for it, is an absolutely
irrelevant circumstance. That you have
a saturation-point of interest tells us no*
thing of the interests that absolutely are.
The Universe, with every living entity


■ ■iM««*ii li^rfMMtW


which her resources create, creates at the
same time a call for that entity, arir an
appetite for its continuance, — creates it,
if nowhere else, at lea^t within ^he^b^e^
the entity itself. It is absurd to suppose,
simply because our private power of sym-
pathetic vibration with other lives gives
out s6^oon^r^atTn*TKe^ 1^^^
being itself there can be such a thing as
plethora, or glut, or supersaturation. It
is not as if there were a bounded room
where the minds in possession had to

move up or make place and crowd together

-■■■J

to accommodate new occupants. Each new


|l •#(.•* **,«v*»»*f **»■.*< M


Human Immortality (ai

mind_brings its own edition of ibe universe
of space along with it, its own room to in-
habit'y'a5ia"tircsre~space» -never -crowd each
other, — the space of my imagination, for
exaiSipIerinr no way interferes Witli 'yours.
The amount of possiBIe c5onsciousness
seems to be governed by no law analogous
to that of the so-called conservation of en-
ergy in the material world. When one
man wakes up, or one is bom, another does
not have to go to sleep, or die, in order to
keep the consciousness of the universe a
constant quantity. Professor Wundt, in
fact, in his * System of Philosophy,' has
formulated a law of the universe which he
calls the law of increase of spiritual en-
ergy, and which he expressly opposes to
the law of conservation of energy in physi-
cal things.^ There seems no formal limit

III ir I ^1 ■ i j i n n il ■ ■mm ii m ii n 11 ^ ^

to the positive increase of being iii spir-
itual '' respects rarST'smce^splfflii^^


whenever it comes, affirms .it$elt«^ands

and xraxfiajSQBiiiuiaiiicyer >^^

literally say, regardless of the defects of


,^(,»._,— .M*!-.!!,,,,^,.^^,.^,^,,,^,^ ».>».>»«»,


( 42 J Human Immortality

our own private sympathy, that the supply
of individual life in the uiuy ef S-^jESF "^ever
possibly, however immeasurable it may
become, exceed the demand. The de-
mand for that supply is there the moment
the supply itself comes into being, for the
beings supplied demand their own con-
tinuance.

I speak, you see, from the point of view
of all the other individual beings, real-
izing and enjoying inwardly their own ex-
istence. If we are pantheists, we can
stop there. We need, then, only say that
through them, as through so many diver-
sified channels of expression, the eternal
Spirit of the Universe aifirms and realizes
its own infinite life. But if we are theists,
we can go farther without altering the
result. God, we can then say, has so in-
exhaustible a capacity for love that his call
and need is for a Hterally endless accu-
mulation of created lives. He can never
faint or grow weary, as we should, under
the increasing supply. His scale is infinite


Human Immortality 4)

in all things. His sympathy can never
know satiety or glut.

I hope now that you agree with me
that the tiresomeness of an over -peopled
Heaven is a purely subjective and illusory
notion, a sign of human incapacity, a rem-
nant of the old narrow-hearted aristocratic
creed. " Revere the Maker, lift thine eye
up to his style and manners of the sky,"
and you will believe that this is indeed a
democratic universe, in which your paltry
exclusions play no regulative part. Was
your taste consulted in the peopling of this
globe } How, then, should it be consulted
as to the peopling of the vast City of God ?
Let us put our hand over our mouth, like
Job, and be thankful that in our personal
littleness we ourselves are here at all^
The Deity that suffers us, we may be sure,
can suffer many another queer and won-
drous and only half-delightful thing.

For my own part, then, so far as logic
goes, I am willing that every leaf that ever
grew in this world's forests "and rustled in


•m*— a^i^A- Bto.wwMM*»b«A ^^^t9»*m^rmt


Human Immortality
the breeze should become immortaL It is

J n^._iHij._Ui|WM -II MiW-iLll ■ inn II

purely^aT^quesitioii of fact : are the leaves
so, or not ? Abstract quantity, and the ab-
stract needlessness in our eyes of so much
reduplication of things so much alike, have
no connection with the subject. For big-
ness and number and generic similarity
are only manners of our finite way of think-
ing ; and, considered in itself and apart
from our imagination, one scale of dimen-
sions and of numbers for the Universe is
no more miraculous or inconceivable than
another, the moment you grant to a uni-
verse the liberty to be at all, in place of the
Non-entity that might conceivably have
reigned.

The heart of being can have no exclu-
sions akin to those which our poor little
hearts set up. The inner significance of
other lives exceeds all our powers of sym-
pathy and insight. If we feel a signifi-
cance in our own life which would lead us
spontaneously to claim its perpetuity, let
us be at least tolerant of like claims made


Human Immortality /^^^

by other lives, however numerous, however
unideal they may seem to us to be. Let
us at any rate not decide adversely on our
own claim, whose grounds we feel directly,
because we cannot decide favorably on the
alien claims, whose grounds we cannot feel
at all. That would be letting blindness
lay down the law to sight.


WW»^iMiWWWi*»^*^— ^'W


^^i^ir*


*JUM«M** *!*•*- »^**«^ *»*■■■ ^•■'"'


NOTES


Note i, page 9.

The gaps between the centres first recognized as
motor and sensory — gaps which form in man two
thirds of the surface of the hemispheres — are thus
positively interpreted by Flechsig as intellectual
centres strictly so called. [Compare his Gehirn
und Seele, 2te Ausgabe, 1896, p. 23.] They have,
he considers, a common type of microscopic struc-
* ture ; and the fibres connected with them are a
month later in gaining their medullary sheath than
are the fibres connected with the other centres.
When disordered, they are the starting-point of the
insanitiS^roperly so called. Already Wernicke
had defineBnsanity as disease of the organ of asso-
ciation^^^^Ht so definitely pretending to circum-
scribe the latWfc- compare his Grundriss der Psy-
chiatric^ 1894, p. 7. Flechsig goes so far as to say
that he finds a difference of symptoms in general pai^
alytics according as their frontal or their more poste-
rior association-centres are diseased. Where it is


48 Notes

the frontal centres, the patient 's consciousness of self
is more deranged than is his perception of purely
objecti\'e relations. Wliere the posterior assoda-
tive regions su£[er, it is rather the patient^s system
of objective ideas that undergoes disintegration
(/iH\ a'/, pp. 89-91). In rodents Flechsig thinks
there is a complete absence of association-centres,
— the sensor}' centres touch each other. In car-
nivora and the lower monkeys the latter centre^
still exceed the association -centres in volume.
Only in the katarhinal apes do we b^n to find
anything like the human type (p. 84).

In his little pamphlet, Die Grenzen geistiger
GesundJuit und Krankheit, Leipzig, 1896, Flech-
sig ascribes the moral insensibility which is found
in certain criminals to a diminution of internal
pain-feeling due to degeneration of the *K6rper-
fiihlsphare,' that extensive anterior region first
so named by Munk, in which he lays the seat of
all the emotions and of the consciousness of self
[Gehirn und Seele, pp. 62-68 ; die Grenzen, etc^
pp. 31-39, 48]. — I give these references to Flechsig
for concreteness' sake, not because his views are
irreversibly made out.

Note 2, page 11.

So widespread is this conclusion in positivistic
circles, so abundantly is it expressed in conversa-


Notes 4g

tion, and so frequently implied in things that are
written, that I confess that my surprise was great
when I came to 16ok into books for a passage
explicitly denjdng immortality on physiological
grounds, which I might quote to make my text
more concrete. I was unable to find an)rthing
blunt and distinct enough to serve. I looked
through all the books that would naturally suggest
themselves, with no effect ; and I vainly asked vari-
ous psychological colleagues. And yet I should al-
most have been ready to take oath that I had read
several such passages of the most categoric sort
within the last decade. Very likely this is a false
impression, and it may be with this opinion as with
many others. The atmosphere is full of them;
many a writer's pages logically presuppose and
involve them ; yet, if you wish to refer a student
to an express and radical statement that he may
employ as a text to comment on, you find almost
nothing that will do. In the present case there
are plenty of passages in which, in a general way,
mind is said to be conterminous with brain-func-
tion, but hardly one in which the author thereupon
explicitly denies the possibility of immortality.
The best one I have found is perhaps this : " Not
only consciousness, but every stirring of life, de-
pends on functions that go out like a flame when
nourishment is cut off. . . . The phenomena of


^2 Notes

and massing these into resultant minds of personal
form. Or it may exist

{b) In vaster unities (absolute 'world- soul,' or
something less) ; and then our brains are organs
for separating it into parts and giving them finite
form.

There are thus three possible theories of the
brain's function, and no more. We may name
them, severally, —

I. The theory of production;
2a» The theory of combination ;
2b, The theory of separation.
In the text of the lecture, theory number 2b (spe-
cified more particularly as the transmission-theory)
is defended against theory number i. Theory 2«,
otherwise known as the mind-dust or mind-stu£E
theory, is left entirely unnoticed for lack of time.
I also leave it uncriticised in these notes, having
already considered it, as fully as the so-far pub*
lished forms of it may seem to call for, in my
work, The Principles of Psychology, New York,
Holt & Co., 1892, chapter VI. I may say here,
however, that Professor W. K. ClifEord, one of the
ablest champions of the combination-theory, and
originator of the useful term * mind-stujff,' considers
that theory incompatible with individual immortal-
ity, and in his review of Stewart's and Tait's book,
The Unseen Universe, thus expresses his convic-
tion: —


Notes 5/

stuff 9r substance, physical facts of another. An
absolute phenomenism, not believing such a dual-
ism to be ultimate, may possibly end by solving
some of the problems that are insoluble when pro-
pounded in dualistic terms. Meanwhile, since the
physiological objection to immortality has arisen
on the ordinary dualistic plane of thought, and
since absolute phenomenism has as yet said nothing
articulate enough to count about the matter, it is
proper that my reply to the objection should be
expressed in dualistic terms — leaving me free, of
course, on any later occasion to make an attempt^
if I wish, to transcend them and use difiEerent cate-
gories.

Now, on the dualistic assumption, one cannot set
more than two really different sorts of dependence
of our mind on our brain : Either

(i) The brain brings into being the very stuff
of consciousness of which our mind consists ; or
else

(2) Consciousness preexists as an entity, and the
various brains give to it its various special forms.

If supposition 2 be the true one, and the stuff of
mind preexists, there are, again, only two ways of
conceiving that our brain confers upon it the spe-
cifically human form. It may exist

{a) In disseminated particles ; and then our brains
are organs of concentration, organs for combining


^4 Notes

ual body must die at the same time with the natu-
ral one." [Lectures and Essays, vol. i. p. 247-49,
Compare also passages of similar purport in voL ii.
pp. 65-70.]

Note 4, page 13.

The theory of production, or materialistic the-
ory, seldom ventures to formulate itself very dis-
tinctly. Perhaps the following passage from Ca-
banis is as explicit as anything one can find : —

" To acquire a just idea of the operations from
which thought results, we must consider the brain
as a particular organ specially destined to produce
it ; just as the stomach and intestines are destined
to operate digestion, the liver to filter bile, the pa-
rotid and maxillary glands to prepare the salivary
juices. The impressions, arriving in the brain,
force it to enter into activity ; just as the alimen-
tary materials, falling into the stomach, excite it to
a more abundant secretion of gastric juice, and to
the movements which result in their own solution.
The function proper to the first organ is that of re-
ceiving [percevoir] each particular impression, of
attaching signs to it, of combining the different im-
pressions, of comparing them with each other, of
drawing from them judgments and resolves ; just
as the function of the other organ is to act upon
the nutritive substances whose presence excites it.


Notes 5^

to dissolve them, and to assimilate their juices to
our nature.

"Do you say that the organic movements by
which the brain exercises these functions are un-
known ? I reply that the action by which the
nerves of the stomach determine the different oper-
ations which constitute digestion, and the manner
in which they confer so active a solvent power upon
the gastric juice, are equally hidden from our scru-
tiny. We see the food-materials fall into this vis-
cus with their own proper qualities ; we see them
emerge with new qualities, and we infer that the
stomach is really the author of this alteration.
Similarly we see the impressions reaching the brain
by the intermediation of the nerves ; they then are
isolated and without coherence. The viscus en-
ters into action; it acts upon them, and soon it
emits [renvoie\ them metamorphosed into ideas,
to which the language of physiognomy or gesture,
or the signs of speech and writing, give an outward
expression. We conclude, then, with an equal
certitude, that the brain digests, as it were, the im-
pressions ; that it performs organically the secre-
tion of thought." [Rapports du Physique et du
Moral, 8th edition, 1844, p. 137.]

It is to the ambiguity of the word * impression *
that such an account owes whatever plausibility it
may seem to have. More recent forms of the pro-


duction-theory have shown a tendency to liken
thought to a ' force ' which the brain exerts, or to a
' state ' into which it passes. Herbert Spencer, for


" The law of metamorphosis, which holds among
the physical forces, holds equally between them
and the mental forces. . . . How this metamor-
phosis takes place; how a force existing as mo-
tion, heat, or light can become a mode of con-
sciousness ; how it is possible for aerial vibrations
to generate the sensation we call sound, or for the
forces liberated by chemical changes in the brain
to give rise to emotion, — these are mysteries
which it is impossible to lathora. But they are
not profounder mysteries than the transformations
of the physical forces into each other." Ifirsi
Principles, snd Edilwii, p, 217.3

So Buchaer says ; " Thinking must be regarded
as a special mode of general natural motion, which
is as characteristic of the substance of the central
nervous elements as the motion of contraction is
of the nerve-substance, or the motion of light is of
the universal-ether. . . . That thinking is and must
be a mode of motion is not merely a postulate of
logic, but a proposition which has of late been
demonstrated experimentally. . . . Various ingen-
ious experiments have proved that the swiftest
thought that we are able to evolve occupies at least


Notes ^7

the eighth or tenth part of a second." [Force and
Matter^ New York, 1891, p. 241.]

Heat and light, being modes of motion, * phos-
phorescence ' and * incandescence ' are phenomena
to which consciousness has been likened by the
production-theory: "As one sees a metallic rod,
placed in a glowing furnace, gradually heat itself,
and — as the imdulations of the caloric grow more
and more frequent — pass successively from the
shades of bright red to dark red {sic)^ to white,
and develope, as its temperature rises, heat and
light, — so the living sensitive cells, in presence of
the incitations that solicit them, exalt themselves
progressively as to their most interior sensibility,
enter into a phase of erethism, and at a certain
number of vibrations, set free {digagent) pain as a
physiological expression of this same sensibility
superheated to a red-white." [J. Luys: le Cer*
veau, p. 91.]

In a similar vein Mr. Percival Lowell writes:
" When we have, as we say, an idea, what happens
inside of us is probably something like this : the
neural current of molecular change passes up the
nerves, and through the ganglia reaches at last
the cortical cells. . . . When it reaches the cor-
tical cells, it finds a set of molecules which are not
so accustomed to this special change. The cur-
rent encounters resistance, and in overcoming this


$8 Notes

resistance it causes the cells to glow. This white-
heating of the cells we call consciousness. Con-
sciousness, in short, is probably nerve-glow." [^OC'
cult Japatiy Boston, 1895, p. 311.]

Note 5, page 23.

The transmission - theory connects itself very
naturally with that whole tendency of thought
known as transcendentalism. Emerson, for exam-
ple, writes : " We lie in the lap of immense intelli-
ii^nce, which makes us receivers of its truth and
organs of its activity. When we discern justicCv
when we discern truth, we do nothing of ourselves^
but .vllow a passage to its beams." \Self-Relianct^
p. 50,] lUit it is not necessary to identify the con-
sciousness postulated in the lecture, as preexisting
behind the scenes, with the Absolute Mind of tran^
5v>fndent;vl Idealism, although, indeed, the notion of
'.: r-i'^hi lead in that direction. The absolute Mind
Cit transcendental Idealism is one integral Unit, one
*;r,5:ie World-mind. For the purposes of my lec-
t;sf . hv>wever, there might be many minds behind
the scenes as well as one. All that the transmis-
$k\r.-:>.cory absolutely requires is that they should
ta^sctr.*! our minds, — which thus come from
simiiSUvc mental that pre-exists, and is larger
^fct:: ibicsaselves.


Notes 59

Note 6, page 24.

Fechner's conception of a * psycho - physical
threshold' as connected with his * wave-scheme '
is little known to English readers. I accordingly
subjoin it, in his own words, abridged : —

" The psychically one is connected with a physi-
cally many ; the physically many contract psychi-
cally into a one, a simple, or at least a more sim-
ple. Otherwise expressed : the psychically unified
and simple are resultants of physical multiplicity ;
the physically manifold gives unified or simple re-
sults. . . .

"The facts which are grouped together under
these expressions, and which give them their mean-
ing, are as follows : . . . With our two hemispheres
we think singly ; with the identical parts of our two
retinae we see singly. . . . The simplest sensation
of light or sound in us is connected with processes
which, since they are started and kept up by outer
oscillations, must themselves be somehow of an
oscillatory nature, although we are wholly unaware
of the separate phases and oscillations. . . .

*' It is certain, then, that some unified or sim-
ple psychic resultants depend on physical multipli-
city. But, on the other hand, it is equally certain
that the multiplicities of the physical world do not
always combine into a simple psychical resultant.


6o


Notes


— no, not even wlien they are compounded in a
single bodily system. Whether they may not nev-
ertheless combine into a unified residtant is a
matter for opinion, since one is always free to ask
whether the entire world, as such, may not have
some unified psychic resultant. But of any such
resultant we at least have no consciousness. . . .

"For brevity's sake, let us distinguish psycho-
physical continuity and discontinuity from each
other. Continuity, let us say, takes place so far as
a physical manifold gives a unified or simple psy-
chic resultant ; discontinuity, so far as it gives a
distinguishable multiplicity of such resultants. In-
asmuch, however, as, within the unity of a more
general consciousness or phenomenon of conscious-
ness, there still may be a multiplicity distinguished,
the continuity of a more general consciousness
does not exclude the discontinuity of particular
phenomena.

" One of the most important problems and tasks
of Psycho-physics now is this : to determine the
conditions {Gesichtspunkte) under which the cases
of continuity and of discontinuity occur.

"Whence comes it that different organisms have
separate consciousnesses, although their bodies
are just as much connected by general Nature
as the parts of a single organism are with each
Other, and these Utter give a single conscious


A


Notes 6i

sultant ? Of course we can say that the connec-
tion is more intimate between the parts of an
organism than between the organisms of Nature.
But what do we mean by a more intimate connec-
tion ? Can an absolute difference of result depend
on anything so relative ? And does not Nature as
a whole show as strict a connection as any organism
does, — yea, one even more indissoluble ? And the
same questions come up within each organism.
How comes it that, with different nerve-fibres of
touch and sight, we distinguish different space-
points, but with one fibre distinguish nothing,
although the different fibres are connected in the
brain just as much as the parts are in the single
fibre? We may again call the latter connection
the more intimate, but then the same sort of ques-
tion will arise again.

" Unquestionably the problem which here lies
before Psycho - physics cannot be sharply an-
swered ; but we may establish a general point of
view for its treatment, consistently with what we
laid down in a former chapter on the relations of
more general with more particular phenomena of
consciousness."

[The earlier passage is here inserted :] " The
essential principle is this: That human psycho-
physical activity must exceed a certain intensity
for any waking consciousness at all to occur, and


^ \


63


Notes


that during the waking state any particular speclii
cation of the said activity (whether spontaneous or
due to stimulation), which is capable of occasion-
ing a particuiar specification of consciousness, must
exceed in its turn a certain further degree of inten-
sity for the consciousness actually to arise. . . .

" This stale of things (in itself a mere fact need-
ing no picture) may be made dearer by an image
or scheme, and also more concisely spoken ot.
Imagine the whole psycho-physical activity of man
to be a wave, and the degree of this activity to be
symbolized by the height of the wave above a hori-
zontal basal line or surface, to which every psycho-
physically active point contributes an ordinate. . . .
The whole form and evolution of the conscious-
ness will then depend on the rising and falling of
this wave ; the intensity of the consciousness at
any time on the wave's height at that time; and
the height must always somewhere exceed a certain
limit, which we will call a tkreskold, if waking con-
sciousness is to exist at all.

" Let us call this wave the tola! ■niave, and the
threshold in question ^e principal tJiriskoliV

[Since our various states of consciousness recur,
some in long, some in short periods], "we may
represent such a long period as that of the slowly
fluctuating condition of our general wakefulness and
the general direction of c


Notes 63

that slowly changes the place of its summit. If we
call this the under-wave, then the movements of
shorter period, on which the more special con-
scious states depend, can be s)mibolized by wave-
lets superposed upon the under-wave, and we can
call these over-waves. They will cause all sorts of
modifications of the under-wave's surface, and the
total wave will be the resultant of both sets of
waves.

"The greater, now, the strength of the move-
ments of short period, the amplitude of the oscil-
lations of the psycho-physical activity, the higher
will the crests of the wavelets that represent them
rise above, and the lower will their valleys sink be-
low the surface of the under-wave that bears them.
And these heights and depressions must exceed a
certain limit of quantity which we may call the
upper threshold, before the special mental state
which is correlated with them can appear in con-
sciousness " [pp. 454-456].

" So far now as we symbolize any system of psy-
cho-physical activity, to which a generally unified or
principal consciousness corresponds, by the image
of a total wave rising with its crest above a certain
* threshold,* we have a means of schematizing in a
single diagram the physical solidarity of all these
psycho-physical systems throughout Nature, to-
gether with their pyscho - physical discontinuity.


64

For we need only draw all tlie waves so thai they
run into each other below tlie threshold, whilst
above it they appear distinct, aa in the figure be-


~7^


" In this figure a,d, c stand for three organisms,
or rather for the total waves of psycho-physical ac-
tivity of three organisms, whilst A B represents the
threshold. In each wave the part that rises above
the threshold is an integrated thing, and is con-
nected with a single consciousness. Whatever lies
below the tlireshold, being unconscious, separates
the conscious crests, although it is still the means
of physical connection.

"In genera! terms: wherever a psycho-physical
total wave is continuous with itself above the
threshold, there we fi.nd the unity or identity of a
consciousness, inasmuch as the connection of the
psychical phenomena which correspond to the parts
of the wave also appears in consciousness. When-
ever, on the contrary, total waves are disconnected,
or connected only underneath the threshold, the
corresponding consciousness is broken, and no con-
nection between its several parts appears. More
briefly : consciousness is continuous or discontinu-


Notes 65

ous, unified or discrete, according as the psycho-
physical total waves that subserve it are them-
selves continuous or discontinuous above the
threshold. . . .

" If, in the diagram, we should raise the entire
line of waves so that not only the crests but the
valleys appeared above the threshold, then these
latter would appear only as depressions in one
great continuous wave above the threshold, and the
discontinuity of the consciousness would be con-
verted into continuity. We of course cannot bring
this about. We might also squeeze the wave to-
gether so that the valleys should be pressed up,
and the crests above the threshold flow into a line ;
then the discretely-feeling organisms would have
become a singly - feeling organism. This, again,
Man cannot voluntarily bring about, but it is
brought about .in Man's nature. His two halves,
the right one and the left one, are thus united ; and
the number of segments of radiates and articulates
show that more than two parts can be thus psycho-
physically conjoined. One need only cut them
asunder, i, e. interpolate another part of nature
between them under the threshold, and they break
into two separately conscious beings." . . . \_Ele'
mente der Psychophysik, i860, vol. ii. pp. 526-

530.]
One sees easily how, on Fechner's wave-scheme,


66


Notes


a world-soul may be expressed. All psycho-phy-
sical activity being continuous 'below the thresh-
old,' the consciousness might also become contin-
uous if the threshold sank low enough to u
all the waves. The tlireshold throughout a
in general is, however, very high, so
ness that gets over it is of the discontinuous form.


Note 7, page 25.
See the long series of articles by Mr. Myers ii


the


Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research,
beginning in the third volume with automatic writ-
ing, and ending in the latest volumes with the
higher manifestations of knowledge by mediums.
Mr. Myers's theory of the whole range of pheno-
mena is, that our normal con.sciousness is in con-
tinuous connection with a greater consciousness
of wliich we do not know the extent, and to which
he gives, in its relation to the particular person,
the not very felicitous name — though no better one
has been proposed — of his or her 'subliminal' self.

Note 8, page 29.
See Kritik derreinen VernuMft, secoad edition,

Note 9, page 29.

I subjoin a few extracts from Mr. Schiller's

work: " Matter is an admirably calculated madun-


Notes 67

ery for regulating, limiting, and restraining the
consciousness which it encases. ... If the mate-
rial encasement be coarse and simple, as in the
lower organisms, it permits only a little intelligence
to permeate through it; if it is delicate and com-
plex, it leaves more pores and exits, as it were,
for the manifestations of consciousness. . . . On
this analogy, then, we may say that the lower ani-
mals are still entranced in the lower stage of brute
lethargy, while we have passed into the higher
phase of somnambulism^ which already permits us
strange glimpses of a lucidity that divines the real-
ities of a transcendent world. And this gives the
final answer to Materialism : it consists in showing
in detail . . . that Materialism is a hysteron prote-
ron, a putting of the cart before the horse, which
may be rectified by just inverting the connection
between Matter and Consciousness. Matter is not
that which produces Consciousness, but that which
limits it, and confines its intensity within certain
limits : material organization does not construct
consciousness out of arrangements of atoms, but
contracts its manifestation within the sphere which
it permits. This explanation . . . admits the con-
nection of Matter and Consciousness, but contends
that the course of interpretation must proceed in
the contrary direction. Thus it will fit the facts
alleged in favor of Materialism equally well, be-


68 Notes

sides enabling us to understand facts which Mate-
rialism rejected as * supernatural.* It explains the
lower by the higher, Matter by Spirit, instead of
vtcg versa, and thereby attains to an explanation
which is ultimately tenable, instead of one which
is ultimately absurd. And it is an explanation the
possibility of which no evidence in favor of Mate-
rialism can possibly affect. For if, e. g,^ a man
loses consciousness as soon as his brain is injured,
it is clearly as good an explanation to say the
injury to the brain destroyed the mechanism by
which the manifestation of the consciousness was
rendered possible, as to say that it destro3red the
seat of consciousness. On the other hand, there
are facts which the former theory suits far better.
If, e.g., as sometimes happens, the man, after a
time, more or less, recovers the faculties of which
the injury to his brain had deprived him, and that
not in consequence of a renewal of the injured part,
but in consequence of the inhibited functions being
performed by the vicarious action of other parts,
the easiest explanation certainly is that, after a
time, consciousness constitutes the remaining parts
into a mechanism capable of acting as a substitute
for the lost parts. And again, if the body is a me-
chanism for inhibiting consciousness, for prevent-
ing the full powers of the Ego from being prema-
turely actualized, it will be necessary to invert also


Notes 69

our ordinary ideas on the subject of memory, and
to account for forgetfulness instead of for mem-
ory. It will be during life that we drink the bitter
cup of Lethe, it will be with our brain that we are
enabled to forget And this will serve to explain
not only the extraordinary memories of the drown-
ing and the d3nng generally, but also the curious
hints which experimental psychology occasionally
affords us that nothing is ever forgotten wholly
and beyond recall." [Riddles of the Sphinx^ Lon-
don, Swan Sonnenschein, 1891, p. 293 ff.]

Mr. Schiller's conception is much more com-
plex in its relations than the simple 'theory of
transmission ' postulated in my lecture, and to do
justice to it the reader should constdt the original
work.

Note 10, page 39.

I beg the reader to peruse R. L. Stevenson's
magnificent little essay entitled 'The Lantern
Bearers,' reprinted in the collection entitled Across
the Plains. The truth is that we are doomed, by
the fact that we are practical beings with very
limited tasks to attend to, and special ideals to
look after, to be absolutely blind and insensible
to the inner feelings, and to the whole inner sig-
nificance of lives that are different from our own.
Our opinion of the worth of such lives is abso-


JO Notes

lutely wide of the mark, and unfit to be counted at
aU.

Note ii, page 41.

W. Wundt: System der Philosophies Leipzig,
Engelmann, 1889, p. 3i5'


THE END.


CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS U. S. A.

BLECTROTYPBD AND PRINTED BY

H. O. HOUGHTON AND CO.


^Hl


1

1


p==iH=-^™


1


d


Vm °*TE DUE


5


arKiHu


APR 1 1


)9]


1


1


1


1


riBrni


HI


1


^^■^^^^■H


■
