Japanese Instrument of Surrender
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Wikisource <https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Japanese_Instrument_of_Surrender>. Public domain.

We hereby proclaim the unconditional surrender to the Allied Powers of the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters and of all Japanese armed forces and all armed forces under the Japanese control wherever situated.


We hereby command all Japanese forces wherever situated and the Japanese people to cease hostilities forthwith, to preserve and save from damage all ships, aircraft, and military and civil property and to comply with all requirements which may be imposed by the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers or by agencies of the Japanese Government at his direction.


We hereby command the Japanese Imperial Headquarters to issue at once orders to the Commanders of all Japanese forces and all forces under Japanese control wherever situated to surrender unconditionally themselves and all forces under their control.


We hereby command all civil, military and naval officials to obey and enforce all proclamations, and orders and directives deemed by the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers to be proper to effectuate this surrender and issued by him or under his authority and we direct all such officials to remain at their posts and to continue to perform their non-combatant duties unless specifically relieved by him or under his authority.


We hereby undertake for the Emperor, the Japanese Government and their successors to carry out the provisions of the Potsdam Declaration in good faith, and to issue whatever orders and take whatever actions may be required by the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers or by any other designated representative of the Allied Powers for the purpose of giving effect to that Declaration.


We hereby command the Japanese Imperial Government and the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters at once to liberate all allied prisoners of war and civilian internees now under Japanese control and to provide for their protection, care, maintenance and immediate transportation to places as directed.


The authority of the Emperor and the Japanese Government to rule the state shall be subject to the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers who will take such steps as he deems proper to effectuate these terms of surrender.


MAMORU SHIGMITSU


By Command and in behalf of the Emperor of Japan and the Japanese Government.


YOSHIJIRO UMEZU


By Command and in behalf of the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters.


Accepted at TOKYO BAY, JAPAN at 0908 I on the SECOND day of SEPTEMBER, 1945, for the United States, Republic of China, United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and in the interests of the other United Nations at war with Japan.


DOUGLAS MAC ARTHUR


Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers.


C.W. NIMITZ


United States Representative


HSU YUNG-CH'ANG


Republic of China Representative


BRUCE FRASER


United Kingdom Representative


KUZMA DEREVYANKO


Union of Soviet Socialist Republics Representative


THOMAS BLAMEY


Commonwealth of Australia Representative


L. MOORE COSGRAVE


Dominion of Canada Representative


JACQUES LE CLERC


Provisional Government of the French Republic Representative


C.E.L. HELFRICH


Kingdom of the Netherlands Representative


LEONARD M. ISITT


Dominion of New Zealand Representative


This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).


Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
