The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria (Morris Jastrow, 1898)
==========================================================
Jastrow's 1898 Religion of Babylonia and Assyria — the American Assyriologist's comprehensive account of Mesopotamian faith. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

St

20


president white libkary

Corneli, University


Date Due


•


Mllii ij» 1) Vffl


pmt^


114**1 ^ w J V


B6rM P


4^*t


iiy/e^Ki


PRINTED IN


U. £. A.


(fcgf CAT


NO. 23233


Cornell University Library
BL80 .M78
Religions of the past and ..present;


olin


3 1924 029 055 098


Cornell University
Library


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


RELIGIONS OF THE
PAST AND PRESENT


RELIGIONS OF THE
PAST AND PRESENT

A SERIES OF LECTURES DELIVERED
BY MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY OF
THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA


EDITED BY

JAMES A. MONTGOMERY, Ph.D., S.T.D.


PHILADELPHIA AND LONDON

J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY

1918


if


|\.^ll^


PUBLISHED JANUARY, 1918


Eleclrotyped and Printed by J. B. Lippincott Company
At the Washington Square Press, Philadelphia, U.S.A.


U


\ v v


TO
PROVOST EDGAR FAHS SMITH

IN GRATEFUL RECOGNITION OF HIS SERVICES FOR
THE WIDER USEFULNESS OF THE UNIVERSITY,
THIS VOLUME IS DEDICATED BY THE LECTURERS


PREFACE

The widespread interest in the history of religion was
well attested by the enthusiasm and interest aroused by
the following lectures delivered during the winter of 191 6-
19 1 7 by members of the Faculty of the Graduate School
of the University of Pennsylvania.

We believe that the reader will find a peculiar merit
in the volume as each religion is treated by one who has
made a specialty of that field. It was left to each man
to set forth his subject according to his own ideas of
matter and proportion — the result is the bracing individ-
uality of each chapter, and the spontaneity of the whole.

To bring home to our readers the ideals, the history,
and the significance of certain great religions has been
our aim, and in our endeavor simplicity, directness, and
accuracy have been our standards. We have not gone
beyond the original group of University lectures in order
to secure a treatment of religions not herein discussed;
the book remains therefore entirely a product of the
Faculty of the University of Pennsylvania.

James A. Montgomery

Chairman (1916-1917) of the
Group of the History of Religions,
University of Pennsylvania
December 1, 1917


CONTENTS

Chapikk PaCB

I. PRIMITIVE RELIGION 9

Definition of Religion ; diversity of the Primitive field,
p. 9 — science, philosophy, advanced conceptions in
Primitive religion, 10-13 — varieties in cult, 14-15 —
Animism, 15-18 — Totemism, 18-20 — Fetishism, 20-21 —
Taboo, 21-23 — Primitive ethics, 23-26 — the Culture
Hero, 26-28 — the Gluskabe Cycle, 28-30 — absence of
original monotheism, belief in life after death, 3of —
Bibliography, 32.

Prank G. Speck, Ph.D.

II. THE EGYPTIAN RELIGION 33

Over-estimation of the religious wisdom of the Egyptians,
P- 33 — conservatism preserved primitive forms and ideas,
34 — revolution effected in Egyptology by the Pyramid
Texts, 34-36 — primitive animism of the Egyptians, the
gods localized spirits, 36-39 — partial elevation of the
gods to cosmic sphere, 38 — the sun-god and gods, 39 —
moon, planets, 40 — the sky, 41-43 — the earth and ocean
gods, 43 — retention of many ancient gods without a
mythology, 44 — the Osirian circle, Osiris, Isis, Horus,
Seth, 45-48 — explanation of the deep impression made
by the Egyptian religion upon the Greeks and Romans,
48f— Bibliography, 49.

W. Max Mcller, Ph.D.

III. THE RELIGION OP BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA... 50

The Sumerian and Akkadian elements in Babylonia, p.
50y-their civilizations, 51-53 — Assyria 53 — primitive
animism of the religion, 54 — early local gods, Ea, Enlil,
Ningirsu, 'etc., 55f— Marduk, 56— absorption of deities
into one, differentiation of divine functions into many
deities, 57 — centralization of pantheons, triads, 58f — the
Assyrian pantheon, Ashur, etc., 59-61 — monotheizing
tendencies, 61 — the cult, 62ff — incantations, 64-65 —
their spiritual elements, 65-67 — divination, 67ft — liver
divination, 68-70 — astrology, 70-72 — omens, 72 — festi-
vals, 73— ethical ideals, 73ft — Bibliography, 75.

Morris Jastrow, Jr., Ph.D., LL.D

3


CONTENTS

IV. THE HEBREW RELIGION 76

Rediscovery of the ancient world, p. 76 — geographical
position of Palestine and its effects on Hebrew religion,
78-80 — divisions of the history into the 1st century A. D.,
80-82 — the God of the Hebrews, his intense personality,
82ff — criticism of "Ethical Monotheism," 82 — his self-
revelation, 83 — his particularism, 84 — his unique relation
with Israel, 86 — relation with other divine beings, 87-
89 — his hypostases, 89 — origin of Hebrew monotheism,
9°~93 — inner logic, 93 — his relation to the world, 94-96
— the problem of evil, 96 — a God of history, 97-101 —
man's moral relation to Yahwe, 101-103 — position of the
cult, 103 — Prophecy, 104-106— the ritual and its his-
torical stages, 106-109 — eschatology, 109ft — Bibliog-
raphy, 112.

James A. Montgomery, Ph.D., S.T.D.

V. THE RELIGION OP THE VEDA 114

The Vedic literature, p. 114-116 — the rila and the cult,
116-118 — the incantations and hymns, 118 — the fire-cult,
119 — the soma-calt, 120 — the Rig-veda the hymn-book
of the fire cult, 121-123 — the deities ritualistic entities,
123-125 — Indra, 125 — the sacrifice the end in itself, 126 —
popular religion, 127 — Ritualistic Henotheism, 128-130 —
an abstract universal Deity 129 — philosophic Monism,
130 — doctrine of the Upanishads, 131 — appreciation of
the Upanishads, I32ff — Bibliography, 134.

Franklin Edgerton, Ph.D.

VI. BUDDHISM 135

Contrast of Buddhism with Brahmanism, their common
basis, p. 135-137 — the languages of Buddhism, the Pali
literature, 137-139 — Buddhism thoroughly Hindu, 139 —
in its three fundamental doctrines, (1) Pessimism, 14O —
(2) Transmigration and Karma, 141-144 — (3) Salvation,
Nirvana, 144-157 — the Buddhist doctrine of the°Bu33Ka,
his life, i4Vf— of* the Congregation, 148 — of the Law, and
the Four Noble Truths, 150-152 — the ethics of Bud-
dhism, 153-155 — Buddhism and Christianity, I56f —
Jainism, 157ft — its origin, its asceticism, 157-159 — its
present condition and literature, 159 — Bibliography, 160,

Franklin Edgerton, Ph.D.

VII. BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM 161

Brahmanism, the old Vedic religion enlarged by adoption
of popular ceremonies, p. 161-163 — caste, 163-166— the
Brahman caste, 166 — the outcasts, i67f — Hinduism, its
definition, 168-170 — the sect of fiva, 170-171 — his con-
sort Parvati, 172 — Vishnu, 172 — Krishna, 173 — identifi-

4


CONTENTS

Cation with Vishnu, 174 — essential monotheism of
Hinduism, 175 — the worship, 176 — intellectual basis:
pessimism, transmigration, salvation, 176 — the "way ; of
knowledge" and the "way of works," 177 — the doctrine
of bhakti, 178 — syncretizing tendencies, 178-181 — sum-
mary, 181 — Bibliography, 182.

Franklin Edgerton, Ph.D.

VIII ZOROASTRIANISM 183

The Parsis, or Fire-Worshipers" of India, p. 183 — the three
conspicuous features of their religion, 183-186 — Zoroaster
and his preaching, 186 — the spread of his religion, 187 —
the origin of the Parsi community, 188-190 — the Zoro-
astrian literature, Avesta, Gathas, etc., 190 — the discov-
ery and study of the Avesta, 191-193 — the theology,
Ahuramazda, 193 — dualism the Evil Spirit, 194-196 —
the archangels, 196-199 — the arch-demons, 199 — -man in
his relation to these two spheres, 200 — teleology, 201-203
— the good deeds, a pastoral religion, 203-205 — the pre-
Zoroastrian religion, 205-207 — Zoroaster, his life and
doctrine, 207ft — Bibliography, 210,

Roland G. Kent, Ph.D.

IX. MOHAMMEDANISM 211

Sources of the study, p. 211 — life of Mohammed, 211-
213 — his mission religious and political, spread of Islam,
213-215 — the problem of the religion, 215 — Arabia and
the Arabs, 216-218 — Mohammed's monotheism, 218-
221 — his early sincerity, first converts, 221 — the Hejira
and his later development, 222 — founder of a Pan-
Arabic empire, his death, 223 — definition of Islam,
climax of earlier revelation, 224 — the Koran, 225-227 —
an unsystematic book, open to variety of interpretations,
227 — the Sunnites and Shi'ites, 228 — rites of Islam,
229ft — prayer, 229— -fasting, Ramadan, 230 — the Haj,
231-234 — its primitive origin, 234-236 — the poor tax,
236 — the Caliphate, theoretical union of Church and
State, 237-239 — simplicity of doctrines, 239 — of ethics,
240 — future of Islam, 241ft — Bibliography, 243.
Morris Jastrow, Jr., Ph.D., LL.D.

X. THE RELIGION OF GREECE 244

General characteristics: absence of fixed institutions,
freedom of Greek religion, p. 244-249 — pomp and joyous-
ness of the religion, 249f — the darker side, 250 — religious-
ness of the Greeks, 252 — importance of the study, 253-
255 — its earlier neglect, 255 — increased knowledge of the
religion, archaeology, the /Egean civilization, 256-260—
the iEgean religion, 260-264 — * ts environment and
influence on the mainland, 265-267 — prehistoric religion
of the mainland, animism, polytheism, gradual condensa-

5


CONTENTS

tion, 267-270 — origin of the Greek gods, original fetish-
ism, 270-273 — primitive Pelasgian beliefs and practices,
274-278 — oriental influences, 278 — the Hellenic invasion,
279 — the Olympians, 280-282 — the Homeric poems and
the Olympian system, 282-287 — the Homeric hell, 287-
289 — the mystery cults, 290s — the Dionysiac cult, 290 —
Orphic mysticism, 291-293 — its influence, 293-295 — the
Eleusinian mysteries, 295-297 — religion in Athens in 5th
and 4th centuries, 298ft — the philosophical protest, 300-
302 — Plato, 302-304 — religion in Hellenistic and Roman
ages, 304ff — failure of Greek ideals, 305-307 — personal
religion, religious communities, foreign cults, 307-310 —
immortality, deification of men, 310-312 — Gnosticism,
312 — philosophical refinement, 313 — Bibliography, 314.

Walter Woodburn Hyde, Ph.D.

XI. THE RELIGION OP THE ROMANS 316

Pour epochs of Roman religious experience, p. 316-319 —
the primitive characteristics: magic, 319 — dread of
nature, 320 — the numina, 321-323 — Numa, 323 — gods of
the Roman state, 324-326 — impersonal individualities,
326 — the traditional rites, 327-330 — importation of other
Italian gods, 330-332 — the triad of Jupiter, Juno and
Minerva, 332 — adoption of Greek cults, 332 — Greek
anthropomorphism and rites, 332-334 — depression of the
Punic Wars, introduction of Magna Mater, 334-336 —
degeneration of religion, 336 — religious philosophies, 337
— the official religion, 338-340 — revival of religion under
Augustus, the Olympians, Jupiter as omnipotent father,
340-342 — introduction of emperor-worship, 342 — moral
insufficiency of the religion, 342 — cult the expression of its
genius, its final failure, 343 — Bibliography, 344.

George Depue Hadzsits, Ph.D.

XII. THE RELIGION OP THE TEUTONS 345

Definitions, p. 345 — Teutonic dualism, cosmic concep-
tions, the giants, 346f — advent of the gods, 3476 — the
Norns, dwarfs, etc., 249 — the cosmic divisions, 350-352 —
the gods, 352ff— Wodan, 353— Thor, 354-356— Tyr, 356
Loki, 357 — other deities, 358 — the cult, 3598 — sacrifice,
359f — prayer, 360 — magic, temples, idols, 361 — escha-
tology, Valhall, 361 — end of the world, 362 — Bibliog-
raphy, 363.

Amandus Johnson, Ph.D.

XIII. EARLY CHRISTIANITY 364

The three stages of the subject ; the Gospel of Jesus, 364ft
— repentance, the Kingdom of Heaven, 364-366 — Jesus'
place in his own Gospel, 366 — the Gospel preached by the
6


CONTENTS

Apostles, 3676? — their doctrine of the resurrection of Jesus,
of Him as Messiah and Saviour, 367 — the problem of the
Christian experience of salvation from sin, 368 — its mani-
festations, 369 — testimony of Mozoomdar, 370 — of
Ignatius, 371 — the Day of Pentecost, 372 — various phases
of the conception of salvation, 373 — doctrine of the Spirit,
374 — of the sacrificial death of Christ, 374 — spiritual
phenomena of the early Church, 375 — worship, baptism,
the Eucharist, 376-379 — spiritual gifts and their disci-
pline, 379 — organization of the Church, prophets, deacons
bishops, elders, 380-382 — break with Judaism, 382 —
Paul, 383 — doctrine of the resurrection, 384 — of the
person of Jesus, 38sf — the Gospel among the Gentiles,
386ft — contact with current systems of religion and
philosophy, Philo, Hermetic literature, Alexandrian
philosophy, 386-389 — Gnosticism, 389 — reactions, 389-
393 — ideas of the sacraments, 393-395 — of the Church,
395— summary, 397— Bibliography, 398.

William Romaine Newbold, Ph.D.

XIV. MEDLEVAL CHRISTIANITY 399

Characteristics of the Church of the Middle Ages:
elaborate and unified organization, ignorance of the laws
of nature, superiority to the State, p. 399ff— the organiza-
tion of the Church in a half-converted world tended to
formality, 400 — the danger counterbalanced by monasti-
cism, standing for spiritual things, 400-402 — and existing
alongside the secular life, 401-403 — its contributions to
civilization, 404 — its democratic character, 404-407 —
recognition of women, 407 — its elasticity in producing
and including various types of religious experience, 408 —
final conventionalization of monasticism, Francis of
Assisi, 409 — the Church 's authority unrivalled, resultant
liberty of opinion, 410-412 — religion part of every-day
life, 412-414 — conception of the universe as dependent
upon arbitrary forces, demons, 414 — the saints as patrons,
415 — magic, 416 — identity of Church and State, 417ft —
divine superiority of the Church, 418-421 — a check to the
unlimited sovereignty of the State, 421 — its social and
economic control of life, 422 — difference of modern con-
ditions, 423 — Bibliography, 424.

Arthur C. Howland, Ph.D.


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST
AND PRESENT

CHAPTER I

PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS
BY FRANK G. SPECK

Before undertaking the study, brief as it may be, of
primitive religions, or more exactly, the religions of primi-
tive man, we must accept the broadest conceivable defini-
tion of the term, one which defines religion as that
which expresses in life the relationship between man
and the supernatural realm. We need a definition of
this broad character if we intend to analyze and discuss
the various types of philosophy, the rites of worship and
the beliefs expressing the inter-activity between man and
the supernatural beings, which play such an important
part in the mental life of so-called savages. We shall
proceed then, recognizing the idea that the fetish worship
of the West 'Coast African negroes, the universalism of
the Algonquian and Iroquois Indians, the demonism
of the Eskimo, the ancestor worship of the South African
Zulu, as well as that of the Chinese, are as much the
manifestations of religion in the real sense as are the
phenomena of the more advanced types — what we may
term Messianic types because of the importance of the
semi-divine revealer personage in them. Some idea may
be gained of the astonishing diversity of the field when
one realizes that, for instance, in North America alone
one encounters several hundred different native languages
and most of these are the avenues of expression for as

9


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

many varieties of religious belief and practice, while
again in Africa, Australia, Oceania and Asia, types of
religion are about as numerous as the tribes themselves.
Is it any wonder, then, that until present-day methods
of analysis, classification and definition are introduced
into the study of primitive religions the attitude of the
student is as yet that of the pioneer classifier of data in
a new science?

In dealing with a subject so bewilderingly diffuse, I
propose to systematize by presenting first some discussion
of primitive philosophy and mythology, then to touch
upon the present status of the doctrines of animism,
naturism, totemism, fetishism, the taboo, and primitive
ethics as religious phenomena, then to give a discussion
of the culture-hero concept with a concrete original illus-
tration of the same from a primitive tribe in America.
It is rather unfortunate, considering our limitations, that
before passing to a concrete presentation of what primi-
tive religion actually is, we shall have to give attention
to fallacious concepts regarding the life of primitive man
in general. Unfortunately again, he who speaks of the
philosophical concepts of the so-called savage must adopt
an apologetic attitude by proving, if indeed he can, that
the savage has any philosophy at all.

How surprising then it must seem to the uninformed
to become aware for the first time, that in the conception
of savage mankind the idea of evolution in nature, for
instance, is an exceedingly old one. Quoting material
presented by Dr. Kroeber, we find in Polynesian mythol-
ogy, as an illustration, that a series of origins by birth
is an explanation of cosmic features. 1 In Samoan, fire
and water married and begat earth, rocks and trees. In
Hawaiian mythology a protracted period of primeval
night gave birth to eight periods which were literally

1 A. L. Kroeber ' Inheritance by Magic,' American Anthropolo-
gist, vol. 18, No. i (1916).

10


PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS

born from each other. In the first, appeared worms,
corals, shells, seaweed, kelp and grass; in the second,
insects and birds; in the third, trees, jelly fish, fishes and
whales; in the fourth, turtles and cultivable plants; in
the fifth, pigs and human arts; in the sixth, mice and
porpoises; in the seventh, visions, sound, thoughts and
sayings; in the eighth, man. Among the California In-
dians, Solitude and Emptiness appeared first in the cos-
mic series; Being and Existence then found themselves
there.

In American Indian mythologies, almost universally,
the germ of the evolutionary scheme is apparent in the
frequent reference to pre-existing times when men were
animals and became transformed, through accidental
stages, into their present-day form. One might safely
say, indeed, that the idea of an out-and-out creation of
matter is rather inconsistent with American Indian nature
philosophy. The idea of a natural unfolding of stages
of life is certainly the dominant one here. In fact, the
human mind appears to have employed only two idea
processes in explaining to itself the origin of the world,
the idea of evolution and the idea of creation. Both are
presumably derived from analogies of concrete events wit-
nessed in nature : the process of birth and organic growth
and the process of construction by human hands. So in
the mythology of many savage peoples, the evolutionary
idea of growth has equalled in strength that of absolute
creation, and we have the apparent paradox that the
savage is more scientific in his way of thinking about
origins than is the civilized philosopher of more recent
times. It required, as it seems, the influence of a Semitic
people to turn the modern world's thought into thinking
of creational origin. The primitive pattern of thought
persists even into the more advanced religions, for there
is a striking quasi-scientific tone in early Japanese Shinto
mythology, in early Greek cosmogony, in the narratives

ii


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

of the Australian aborigines, while even the Hindu con-
cept of transmigration embodies a similar explanatory
thought.

The ethnologist is moreover often obliged to claim
dignified consideration for his field of research by bring-
ing forth data showing how the concept of the magical,
even the immaculate conception and birth of a culture
hero, or of a mythical world-transformer, is an age-old
concept in the primitive world, how the fulfilment of an
altruistic mission during his life, and his final departure,
with the promise of an ultimate return, all figure as
episodes in the career of a mythical personage whose
attributes may, in part, even be compared with those of
Christ, Moses, Hercules, Achilles, Balder, and also, in
places, with those of Barbarossa and Arthur of the Round
Table. What could be more bewildering to the student
than to find, for instance, in a typically indigenous set of
American Indian myths, many elements which are cog-
nate in substance with the episode of the disobedience
of Eve, the world Flood, the Ark, and the like.

Not from the mythology of one American tribe, but
from the traditions of many could be quoted specimen
versions in which a disobedient virgin gives birth by
magical impregnation to a being who at an early age de-
velops the characteristics of a miracle-worker. Then,
and after, in the same mythical hero-cycle, occur episodes
which parallel in a crude but significant fashion the epi-
sodes of the more modern Messianic versions, if we may
refer to the versions of Christianity and Hinduism in this
category. We have the manifestation of altruism on the
part of the hero personage in behalf of human beings,
the destruction of existing monsters and personified evils,
the transformation of objects in Nature by means of
miraculous power, and, finally, most significantly, the
departure of the hero to another world, after leaving his
promise to return again in some future time of need to

12


PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS

benefit his people. Can anyone fail to stand and marvel
before an array of evidence of this sort, testifying to the
antiquity of the concept of the supernatural deliverer in
the realm of primitive thought ! We need not indeed halt
our comparisons with these correlations. To every stu-
dent of American Indian mythology instances of the oc-
currence in America of the following roughly assembled
list of classical and old Testament mythical motives are
very familiar. We have parallels for the narrative of
Joshua stopping the course of the sun, Jonah and the
whale, Lot's wife, the Potiphar story, Cain and Abel
(or the murder between twins personifying good and
evil), and the Flood. To cite a few instances from the
classical field one might also mention correspondences in
America with such tales as the animal foster-mother
(Romulus and Remuls), Pandora, Achilles, Orpheus,
Prometheus (not only fire being obtained by theft in
American mythology, but the sun, summer and tobacco
among the tales of the eastern tribes), the world fire,
Atlantis or Medea, and the Magic Flight, Phaeton, the
Symplegades, and many more for which quotations might
be cited from published American collections. Besides
these, could be mentioned a number of correspondences
with familiar European nursery tales, such as Jack and
the Bean Stalk, the Abandoned Children, Big Claus and
Little Claus, the Werwolf, the race between the hare and
the tortoise, Loki, in Scandinavian, Tom Thumb, and the
Roc. It is difficult to resist the temptation of discussing
at this point whether, like Graebner and Ratzel, we may
interpret the occurrence of these parallels as being due to
an early process of culture diffusion or whether like
Spencer, Tylor, Lubbock, Frazier and Lang, we are to
repose confidence in the familiar theories of ' independent
origin ' and ' fundamental mental unity.' So much for
what time permits us to mention regarding primitive
man's philosophy of nature.

13


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Savage religion is, to proceed to another topic, no less
rich in forms of worship than in ideas of philosophy.
Through a maze of practices in idolatry, human, animal
and object sacrifice, cannibalism, invocation, expiation
and bribery, we gain an insight into the attitude of wor-
ship of the savage, which might lead us, as it has some
others, into the feeling that the worship of primitive man
is the outgrowth of the emotion of fear. While fear is
unquestionably an element in the religious activity of
primitive man at large, I feel that it would be unfair to
exclude from consideration instances evidencing higher
feelings, such as those of gratitude, of reverence and
affection for supernatural beings, occurring in the wor-
ship of some primitive peoples. Savage worship is at
bottom characterized by emotions, so far as we know
them, remarkably like those underlying modern worship.
'"In the primitive tribe we find, moreover, the worshippers
varying in the intensity of their devotional activities.
Some are deeply religious most of the time, others are
intermittently religious, and still others are indifferently
religious. It is undoubtedly true, however, that, if we
may assume the sense of an average feeling in respect to
religion, the savage is in the long run rather more re-
ligious than the civilized man, for the former realizes
his greater dependence upon the attitude which the super-
natural beings maintain toward him than does the latter
who has his sense of spiritual independence magnified by
the knowledge of his mechanical powers.

The rites and forms of worship of primitive man
often exhibit an elaborate and complex religious con-
sciousness. Through prayers, through sacrifices, through
emulatory dances and ritualized ceremonies, influence is
sought with the supernatural beings. The rites of wor-
ship of primitive groups have often been regarded by
speculators as activities to be classed in the very lowest
nascent stages of human culture. While many of them

14


PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS

may be simple and irrational in concept, historically they
must be as ancient and in many cases as much the product
of specialized development as the modern types of re-
ligion. Cannibalism, for instance, might be casually
thought, at first blush, to be a nascent activity. An in-
vestigation of cannibalism in the region of fetish worship
in Central Africa shows on the contrary that this rite is
the result of a long process, its inception capable of being
traced back through acts of sacrifice to a starting point
in the concept of expiation. Cannibal tribes frequently
have derived their craving for human flesh through an
earlier custom of eating, with ceremonial motives, the
sacrifices intended for deities. In some of the most highly
developed ritualistic regions of Africa such sacrifices
consist of human beings. The connection here is obvi-
ous. Sacrifice in itself may be in accord with a deeply
religious consciousness since it provides gifts, acceptable
in proportion to their importance, to the supernatural
beings. Cannibalism then may in some regions be viewed
as an evolved rite.

In the primitive world ceremonies of a religious
character play a part in most of the current events of
life. Pre-natal and birth rites, ceremonial procedures
at the period of adolescence, at initiation into certain
secret organizations, at the occasions of marriage, death
and burial, characterize the passage of life among savages
from before the cradle until after the grave. Assuredly
the savage impresses us as an essentially very religious
creature in so far as his ceremonial obligations toward
the beings of the supernatural world are concerned. The
great play of fancy in such ceremonies, bringing into life
symbolism in art, music and dancing, overshadows the
crudities of superstition and the acts which would be con-
sidered profane and obscene in civilized communities.

It is not within the legitimate scope of this paper to
deal extensively with the various theories of the origin of

IS


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

religion, for although primitive religions may be said to
be religions of an early type, there is nothing to warrant
the critical student in going so far as to fall into the
pitfall of assuming that even the crudest religions with
which we are acquainted through ethnology are in any
sense near to any truly original form of religious life.
They are a comparatively late and advanced product of
religious growth, with a complexity corresponding to that
of Egyptian, early Semitic or Indian religion, which is
developmental instead of primary. Having exonerated
ourselves then from the thankless burden of dealing with
religious origins, we may relieve our minds by attempting
the legitimate and more profitable task of discussing the
leading concepts which characterize the religions of primi-
tive tribes, all of whom, in this age of the globe, have
ascended to their own variously evolved states of being.

ANIMISM

If any one concept could be regarded as fundamental
to both primitive belief and religious 'practice it would
seem to be that of animism. Animism is perhaps the most
elementary and universal concept in primitive religious
life. The term, while it does not necessarily define primi-
tive religion in general, does at least temporarily char-
acterize it. It is, as Tylor asserted many years ago, 2 the
groundwork of the philosophy of religion from that of
savages up to that of civilized man. The doctrine of
animism as a concept of spirits may, to be sure, afford
only a bare and meagre definition of religion at its mini-
mum, but where the root is the branches will generally
be produced. \ Tylor defines animism as including the
belief in souls and in a future state, in controlling deities
and subordinate spirits ; these doctrines practically result-
ing in some kind of active worship. \

a E. B. Tylor Primitive Culture, London (1903) vol. 1.

16


PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS

Tylor and Jevons derived the animistic concept from
the transitional character of beliefs regarding the soul
(made conscious to the primitive mind through dreams),
and those concerning supernatural spirits. The doctrine
is based upon an assumption of primitive man's inability
to distinguish the animate from the inanimate. Spencer
modifies Tylor's original concept by denying the latter
assumption, showing, by certain examples, that since
animals can distinguish the animate from the inanimate
it is an injustice to attribute a lower stage of discriminat-
ing intelligence to man. Durkheim again treats animism
critically and recasts Tylor's and Spencer's later views by
creating two categories of thought, naturism, which " ad-
dresses itself to the phenomena of nature, either the great
cosmic forces, such as winds, rivers, stars or the sky,
etc., or else the objects of various sorts which cover the
surface of the earth, such as plants, animals, rocks, etc.,"
and animism, " which has spiritual beings as its object,
spirits, souls, geniuses, demons, divinities, properly so-
called, animated and conscious agents like men . „, ...
ordinarily not visible to human eyes." For some thinkers
animism is the earlier phase of thought, naturism being
a derived secondary form, and for others "the nature
cult was the point of departure for religious evolution."
So it appears, in regard to animism itself, as elementary
and fundamental as the concept is as an original starting
point for religious thought, that the several points of
view concerning both its definition and its place in re-
ligious growth render the position of one who attempts to
deal dogmatically with the animistic doctrine open to criti-
cism until the contested questions have been settled.

Later researches, however, show animism to be more
than the older conception, embraced, that it is based on the
concept of magical power believed to be inherent in the
phenomena of nature whether animate or inanimate. A
more recent characterization of animism has been given
2 17


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

by Doctor Boas. He says : 3 " The fundamental concept
bearing on the religious life of the individual is the belief
in the existence of magic power, which may iniiuence the
life of man and which in turn might be influenced by
human activity. In this sense magic power must be under-
stood as the wonderful qualities which are believed to
exist in objects, animals, men, spirits and deities and
which are superior to the natural qualities of man. This
idea of magic power is one of the fundamental concepts
which occur among all Indian tribes. It is what is called
manito by the Algonquian tribes ; wakanda by the Siouan
tribes, orenda by the Iroquois." By acquiring varying
degrees of this supernatural force the various deities be-
lieved in by the American Indians are thought to derive
their power. Objects in nature which are conceived also
to be imbued with some of this spiritual force also come
to be classified, by the same means, as incipient deities.
This stage, called the pre-animistic stage, in which rites
are addressed to impersonal forces has been classed by
some religious theorists as one of the earliest phases of
human religion. Human beings who through the pos-
session of magic power become able to impress their
fellows with their ability to work miracles in healing dis-
ease or in controlling the action of spirits are likewise
regarded as possessing some of this supernatural force.
Hence, we find in all primitive groups individuals to
whom are attributed supernatural powers who are known
as medicine men, magicians, witch-doctors or, more tech-
nically, as Shamans. Shamanism then may be said to
be a practise based on the use of supernatural force.

TOTEMISM

Totemism has, like animism, figured prominently in
the classification of elementary religious concepts. A

" Article 'Religion,' Handbook of The American Indians, Bulle-
tin 30, Bureau of American Ethnology.

18


PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS

better understanding of the great diversity of totemic
phenomena in various parts of the world has left students
today in a more critical frame of mind, with a less definite
feeling as to what totemism really is than they had a
decade ago. Tylor, Morgan, Hill-Tout, Robertson Smith,
Haddon, Frazer, Lang, McLennan and Durkheim have
within the last thirty years elaborated various explanatory
theories which, on account of their attempted universal
application, have been superseded in more recent years by
those of Boas, Goldenweiser, Rivers, and other philoso-
phers whose method has been more inductive.

Goldenweiser, allowing for the cases, which are en 7
countered frequently, where the religious side of the to-
temic complex is nothing, ventures the definition : " To- -
temism is the tendency of definite social units (bound
together through descent) to become associated with-
objects and symbols of emotional value." 4

Totemism implies the association of so many cultural
traits which are not strictly concerned with religion that
it never embraces the whole of religion, even when, as in
the case of Polynesia, it has developed into a type of re-
ligion. For instance, in various regions of the globe we
find the concept more characteristically based on the
association of social units with belief in descent, taboo,
dramatization of myths, ceremonies to multiply the to-
temic animal, with prerogatives in the ownership of
myths, songs, dances, family crests, and the like. Most
commonly associated with totemism, however, is exogamy.
This is the "prohibition of marriage within certain social
divisions whose members regard themselves as relatives
through maternal or paternal descent, as the case may be,
from a common ancestor generally of the animal or plant
kingdom. The explanation of this identity of social
group and animal has been attempted by theorists in

* A. A. Goldenweiser, 'Totemism, an Analytical Study,' Journal
of American Folk-Lore, vol. 23, No. 88 (1916), p. 275.

19


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

several ways. For instance, Haddon believed that totem-
ism originated from the idea that groups of people
developed out of an earlier stage of their life when cer-
tain animals were hunted for food, into an attitude of
reverence toward the creature and so came to abstain from
killing or eating it. Frazer in a later work suggested
that the institution originated in an economic arrange-
ment by which the various clans contributed to each
other's support by refraining from killing certain animals
in order to multiply each other's game supply, and con-
sequently developing a certain religious attitude toward
the animal so protected. And there are other theories.

The concept is much too varied to accept any of these
theories, none of which reconstructs any absolutely satis-
factory universal theory of origin. The best recent
authorities show that totemism must have started from
many different origins in different regions and developed
certain comparable characteristics through a process of
convergence. It would be unwise, even if it were possible
in this paper, to discuss further the question of the origin
of totemism, and it seems inadvisable to prolong a dis-
cussion of the religious side of so complex and subjective
a concept.

.,„ FETISHISM

The belief that all things in Nature are animate and
that they possess volition, immortality and other mysteri-
ous attributes has developed in the mind of primitive
man an attitude of reverence and worship which students
of religion denote by the term fetishism, a derivative from
the Portuguese feitiqo, a charm, sorcery. Fetishism is
the doctrine that objects, either natural or artificial,
possess an essential magical power which converts them
into creatures capable of responding to acts of influence
such as invocation, sacrifice, flattery, bribery, supplica-
tion, imitative magic and the like. Accordingly, various
objects in Nature, which appeal to the imagination of

20


PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS

superstitious human beings either by their curious appear-
ance, it may be through dreams or visions, or through
supposedly supernatural associations, become regarded
as abodes of such animce. Such objects are cherished as
material helpers, guides or protectors, or are held in
fear as malevolent forces which have to be appeased by
the various means of cajolery which man since time im-
memorial has known and practiced to deceive supernatural
beings in his own favor. Fetishes may be acquired by
individuals, by groups, or by nations for the promotion
of their welfare. Fetishes may be small portable objects
of every imaginable sort, or they may occur as artificial
objects made with every device of ingenuity and art that
man is capable of employing. In the former class we
learn of such fetishes as bones, stones, fossils, feathers,
sticks plain or decorated, hair, roots, berries, seeds, parts
of animals and human beings, in fact anything, no matter
how insignificant in itself, which has in the owner's mind
at least some symbolic connection with occult power.
Such minor fetishes are frequently known as charms,
amulets, talismans, and luck-pieces. And indeed we of
to-day have not entirely outgrown their use. Fetishes
are often large and elaborate artifacts, representations or
images which have become generally known as idols. The
phenomenon of idolatry or image worship is thus a close
associate of fetishism and so, also, is sacrifice. Africa is
generally regarded as the region of the globe where fetish-
ism has been most elaborately developed. Here it consti-
tutes the greater part of religion, its devotees being or-
ganized into many fetish cults whose power is often of
a political as well as of a religious nature. 5

TABOO

Another manifestation of the primitive religious com-
plex is taboo, a word of Polynesian origin. The term is

* R. H. Nassau, Fetichism in West Africa, N. Y., 1904.

21


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

applied to an interdiction belonging to or placed upon a
person, place, day, name, act, thought or any conceivable
thing and idea which is thereby rendered sacred. In the
case of objects, communication with the tabooed thing
is forbidden under ordinary circumstances to all except a
few persons having special privileges. Taboo may have
a negative and a positive side ; the former, denoting re-
ligious prohibition, is the more conspicuous in primitive
life. In either aspect the term may be applied to definite
periods of the life of the individual in connection with
important events. It operates by governing the regula-
tions observed by boys and girls at puberty; by parents
before and after the birth of a child (couvade) ; by rela-
tives after the decease of a person; by hunters and fisher-
men in their occupations; by shamans, doctors, or magi-
cians desiring power to cure the sick, to prophesy or to
conjure; and by novices about to enter secret societies.
Such are only a few of the instances where taboo operates.
The typical negative prohibitions which every student first
associates with the taboo proper, however, consist in
abstinence from hunting, fishing, war, women, sleep, cer-
tain kinds of work, and so forth, but especially in
refraining from eating certain foods. The latter prohibi-
tion may be applied permanently in the life of an indi-
vidual or a group in regard to the totemic animal, and it
often applies similarly to the killing of certain animals.
In primitive society the taboo of name mention and the
taboo of intercourse are very common. The prohibition
frequently covers the mention of the name of the dead,
the mention of one's own name, the right of addressing
the mother-in-law directly or vice versa, and the pro-
hibition of intercourse between fathers-in-law and daugh-
ters-in-law as well.

Thus it may be seen that taboo is an important aspect
of the phenomena of religion, influencing primitive ethi-
cal and social behaviour in general to an extent that makes

22


PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS

it in some regions as broad a concept as that of religion
itself. In Polynesia, particularly, the taboo was largely
a method of government and the fear of retribution from
supernatural sources was the direct cause of obedience
to it.

PRIMITIVE ETHICS

Thus far in our discussion it must have been apparent
to all that the question of the moral influence of religion
upon primitive life has been left unmentioned. The rea-
son for this is that we are dealing with primitive, not
with civilized religions. The ethical characteristics of
primitive man's religion are indeed as diverse in their
types as are the ethnical types themselves. If, however,
we separate, by a somewhat arbitrary line of division, the
sphere of primitive life from that of civilized life, we
find that in the primitive world relationship with the su-
pernatural beings does not seem to involve the considera-
tion of morals in the least. In the religious systems
prevailing throughout primitive America, Asia, Africa,
and Australia there occur very few signs to indicate a
belief in retribution during the soul's future life, for
the deeds done in this life. As ubiquitous as the belief
in a heaven of some sort may be in the primitive world at
large, the absence of the concept of reward and punish-
ment for behavior during life leaves the matter of ethical
control entirely outside the pale of religion. Custom is
thus left to control community as well as individual be-
havior. One could indeed define most primitive types
of religion as being ceremonial systems of non-ethical
philosophy and worship. This is a very thorough-going
differential feature. It throws into glaring contrast the
primitive as against the more advanced Messianic types
of religion, and again leaves us to struggle with a theory
as to whether the Messiah concept would have been pro-
duced independently by a process of gradual thought evo-

23


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

lution or whether it is to be accounted for by the hypoth-
esis of supernatural revelation.

We do indeed find instances in the primitive world
of the concept of sin, but sin is in such cases merely the
violation of a taboo or an arbitrary custom, finding its
settlement in an immediate reaction by the community
or by the performance of a ceremony of expiation in-
tended to placate the supernatural force which has been
offended. It is only among the Eskimo that any cere-
monial atonement comparable to that of modern religions
is required for a sin, and atonement there curiously
enough is obtained by confession addressed to an anthro-
pomorphic goddess, the Mistress of the Sea Mammals.
In the case of these people there exist a number of arbi-
trary restrictions the transgression and subsequent con-
cealment of which constitute sin. Such restrictions con-
cern food and work. It is, for example, a transgression
to perform certain work after a seal has been killed, or
after a death has occurred ; no work on caribou skin is
allowed until sea ice has formed, and none on seal skins
after the sea ice has commenced to melt. An elaborate
code of social punishment also exists in primitive Africa
where a highly organized system of legislation is, and
has been for ages, in operation, though as a social-eco-
nomic not a religious element of culture. Here again is
something of a paradox in the fact that the savage is a
creature of social self-control more strictly than is the
civilized man who requires belief in a religious code
threatening eternal punishment or reward for the mainte-
nance of his good behavior.

There remains, accordingly, the impression in the mind
of every thinker who studies the relationship between
ethics and religion, that a tremendous gap lies between
the primitive and the modern types of religion. Even
allowing for great diversities in primitive tribal religions
it may be generally asserted as true that the primitive

24


PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS

types are characteristically not ethical, since their systems
do not embody ethical codes. Apparently this is due to
the fact that the savage's conception of the superior beings
rates them as too important, too egoistic to be concerned
at all with what good or bad men may do to each other.
This lack of association between religion and the control
of behavior in life is so marked that we may generally
regard the gap as the dividing line between the -primitive
and the advanced. Classifying the primitive types as non-
ethical, non-retributive systems of philosophy we might
attempt to account for the reason why the modern creeds
instigated by Messianic personages, such as Moses, Christ,
Mohammed or Buddha, bring the doctrines of religion to
bear upon life as a moral power. Coordinating results
in these speculations, it would seem that where primitive
religions are strictly non-ethical the Messiah concept is
also lacking. Should one attempt to claim that the cul-
ture hero or transformer might in the process of time
have developed into a Messiah-personage, he would have
to confront the difficulty of explaining why field investi-
gations among savages have failed to disclose evidences
to show where culture heroes, shamans or semi-super-
natural figures have metamorphosed directly into
such Messiah-personages. The chief function of the
Messiah being, as we have seen, to pVeach the doc-i
trine of ethics as a part of religion, we cannot point
to cases where a culture hero or mythical trans-
former does appear in any such capacity. The prob-
lem still remains, however, whether or not this con-
clusion may be due to lack of information from certain
regions of the primitive world and whether future re-
search will bring forth material showing how the primi-
tive concept could develop into the concept of a Messiah.
We must be content as yet with investigating the field
to secure material covering the gaps of our knowledge

25


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

before we can hope to draw safe conclusions on a problem
so greatly involving the comprehension of primitive
man's history, as well as an understanding of his mind.

THE CULTURE HERO

The culture hero or transformer concept, which has
already been frequently mentioned, is another concept
as fundamental in the primitive world as that of animism.
Particularly in America, where we have critical and
abundant material collected from many regions, can the
culture hero character be studied with advantage, so we
shall use this field for drawing some concrete illustra-
tions. The story of the so-called culture hero who gave
; the world its present shape, killing obnoxious monsters,
giving man the arts and industries of his culture, is one
of the most widely distributed myth-cycles on the conti-
- nent. The culture hero or transformer, if we choose
to call him such, appears first in a period when men are
not differentiated from animals. With the appearance
of the hero a new historic era is ushered in and we have
the story of how men are given their culture and sepa-
rated from their animal kindred. The transformer teaches
men how to kill animals, to make fire and to clothe them-
selves, posing as a benevolent helper of mankind. But
the same culture hero often appears in other groups of
tales as a sly, low-principled trickster, even a marplot
who vaingloriously thinks himself superior to all other
beings whom he tries to deceive. Again, in the words
of Boas, 6 " he appears as the victim of his own wiles who
is often punished for his malevolence by the superiority
of his intended victims. No method of warfare is too
mean for him. No trick is too low to be resorted to pro-
vided it helps him to reach his selfish end. Often the
end sought for is entirely unworthy of the hero who

"Introduction to "Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,"
James Teit, Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society.

26


PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS

shows such lofty altruism at other times in his career,
for his chief aim in his baser moods is the acquisition
of riches and women."

It seems difficult to harmonize two such different
aspects of the culture hero myth. Some investigators
have tried to show that a gradual deterioration from a
purer, earlier form of the myth explains how the more
vulgar tales come in as additions to the old cycle of myths.
An explanation, however, which does not necessarily in-
volve the idea of literary degeneration would seem to be
natural, an explanation by which the speculator would ac-
count for the dual aspect of the culture hero concept by
some process of evolution. To my mind we may seek
for such an explanation by regarding the base and vulgar
aspects of the culture-hero stories as accretions which
have grown up around the central figure of mythology,
like stories clustering around a point of attraction. In
many of the tales where the culture hero frames his
actions for the benefit of mankind he is not prompted by
altruistic motives but only by the desire to satisfy his
own needs. Nevertheless, these tales are often inter-
preted as indications of an altruistic intention on the part
of the hero. The latter attitude, however, does not
obscure the purely egotistical motives which the hero
possesses, because many of the changes which he accom-
plishes for the benefit of mankind are only incidentally
beneficial. The less the altruistic idea is developed the
less will be the consciousness of a discrepancy between
the tales representing the transformer as a benefactor and
as a trickster. The higher it is developed the greater
will be the discrepancy between these two groups of tales.
Accordingly, we find that where the altruistic idea is
emphasized the tales of the trickster are separated from
the transformer tales and ascribed to another secondary
hero. The personage of the hero character is then split
into several parts, the one representing the high-principled

27


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

hero, the other retaining the basic features of the trick-
ster cycle. The higher the civilization of the tribe, natu-
rally the sharper the line seems to be drawn between the
culture hero and the trickster.

Since there is a certain advantage in being able to
refer to a specific case on this point, I should like to sum-
marize from material gathered by myself, with which I
am consequently more familiar, namely, the character-
istics of the culture-hero tale as it is related by one of
the tribes of the lower St. Lawrence region, the Penob-
scot Indians of northern Maine. 7 Bearing upon the dis-
cussion just presented the points to be noted here are,
the commingling of altruism with selfishness, and secondly
the importance of mere accident in determining the char-
acter of transformations in nature. To the Penobscot
mind, it would seem, the incongruity of the various parts
of the transformer myth has not been very striking,
although there is a tendency manifested in this direction,
in the separation of the myths into a primary and a
secondary, profane, group by the native narrators.

The culture hero, in the tales of the tribes of this
region, bears the name of Gluskdbe which, literally trans-
lated, means ' The Man of Deceit,' ' The Liar.' The
term, however, is not applied in a derogatory sense for
it implies ' one who overcomes his opponents by strategy.'
The sections following under separate numbers are ab-
stracts of independent recitations in the order as given,
forming the culture-hero cycle of myths.

Summary of the Penobscot Version of the Cul-
ture-hero (Gluskabe) Cycle.
i. Gluskabe's Childhood. He lives with grandmother,
Woodchuck. He develops into a prodigious hunter as a

'The summary presented here is arranged from part of a col-
lection of phonetically recorded texts with translations submitted
by the writer several years ago to the Anthropological Division of
the Geological Survey of Canada.


PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS

child. His grandmother prophesies a great future for
him as the benefactor of posterity.

2. Gluskabe deceives the Game Animals. He induces
them to enter his game bag by lying to them, prophesying
the end of the world. His grandmother disapproves.
Gluskabe releases the animals from the game close.

3. Gluskabe traps all the fish by a similar hoax. His
grandmother reprimands him, and Gluskabe releases the
fish.

4. Gluskabe employs a stone canoe. He seeks the
home of the Wind Bird. His hair is blown off by the
force of the wind. He deceives the Wind Bird, and
cripples him. The waters then become too calm, Glus-
kabe is obliged to cure and restore Wind Bird, who
properly regulates the winds of the world thereafter.

5. Gluskabe seeks Grasshopper, the retainer of the
world's tobacco. He steals his tobacco and seeds, be-
stows it abroad for mankind, and punishes Grasshopper
by giving him only a temporary supply.

6. Gluskabe travels among the lakes and rivers of the
north, reducing their dangers for the safety of posterity.

7. Gluskabe discovers people suffering from thirst.
He seeks the monster Aglebemu who withholds the
world's water, and kills him. Then from the released
water originates the Penobscot River, and the dying
people, plunging into the flood, are transformed into
various fish and amphibians. From these originate the
present day family totemic groups.

8. Gluskabe pursues a monster cannibal moose.
Squatty-woman (Pukdjinskwess) attempts to hinder
him. He escapes her. Their snowshoe footprints be-
come imprinted in the rock. Gluskabe kills the moose.
He transforms the moose's intestines, and his own dog
into stone, and also his kettle, which is now Mt. Kineo.

9. Gluskabe goes in search of the Winter Deity. He
is overcome and frozen by Winter.

39


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

10. Gluskabe's grandmother, during his absence, is
plagued by Foxes. Gluskabe returns, and punishes them.

ii. Gluskabe seeks the source of Summer. He hides
his eye leaving it in the care of the Chickadee. He
encounters his father and his malevolent brothers. He
undergoes a smoking test, and a gaming test, and wins
both.

12. Gluskabe approaches the dancers whd guard the
Summer Fluid. He transforms two girls into toads. He
steals the Summer Fluid, and escapes his pursuers by a
ruse. He recovers an eye from Owl, who has stolen
his. He then proceeds to the home of the Winter Deity
with the Summer Fluid, and overcomes him by the heat.

13. Gluskabe finishes his earthly mission. With his
grandmother he departs to the immortal realm where they
work, preparing weapons for the future world war, to
aid posterity.

The following three episodes are told in detached
form as supplements to the story of the hero's career.
They are correctly felt, in the minds of the native myth
narrators, to be incongruous with the character of the
main transformer episodes.

14. Gluskabe fails to stop a Baby crying. He is de-
feated by the Baby in a filth-eating contest.

15. Gluskabe aids his uncle Turtle to secure women.
Turtle projects part of himself beneath the river: this
portion is swallowed by a fish. Gluskabe recovers it for
him.

16. Gluskabe aids Turtle to marry the daughter of
Kellu, a bird chief. At the wedding- feast Turtle violates
Gluskabe's rules and is scorched in the fire, whence origi-
nates the Turtle's shell. Turtle tries vengeance on Glus-
kabe. Gluskabe in payment causes Turtle to stab him-
self.

It seems advisable, in connection with tales like the
preceding, since the question often arises among students

30


PRIMITIVE RELIGIONS

of primitive religion, to mention a common fallacy which
has come into vogue in literature concerning the supposed
belief of an anthropomorphic supreme deity among the
American Indians. The Indians are often cited as illus-
trating the case of a primitive people paying reverence
to a Great Spirit as a creator and controller of the world.
No such monotheistic concept, however, does exist in
aboriginal Indian religious beliefs in general, until the
concept has been taught the natives by the missionaries.
The zeal of the latter has often led them to " read in "
their own ideas into their records, with the result that the
great supernatural force, and oftentimes the mythical cul-
ture-hero figures, like the one just dealt with, have been
misconstrued through the bias of the investigator. We
should not overlook the fact, however, that the missionaries
have correctly understood the situation when they have
claimed that the primitive Americans possessed a conscious-
ness of the life after death. The soul of the individual, in
American mythology, is generally supposed to travel to a
spirit land resembling ours. The journey thither is be-
lieved to be beset with many lurking dangers to be over-
come by the soul. In some mythologies a slippery log
has to be crossed, in others terrific precipices must be
skirted, while in others we learn of colliding clouds
which are to be avoided. The success of the soul in this
journey depends largely upon good fortune, sometimes
upon the strength of experience gained by having led a
respectable life on earth, and sometimes upon the per-
formance of mortuary rites by the surviving relatives.
As describing the realm of departed spirits, the term
" Happy Hunting Ground " seems to have been fairly well
chosen. Life there is believed to be one of happiness and
repletion.

The treatment of so complex a realm of thought has
really no natural ending, as the student will learn for

31


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

himself if he undertakes to penetrate the literature of it.
An arbitrary ending has to be made somewhere. There
is, moreover, no single textbook to be used with implicit
confidence as a guide. So until the time comes when
scholars in the field of primitive religions, through inten-
sive methods similar to those employed in classical and
Semitic research, produce an adequate text and reference
work, the few who stand before the panorama of the
savage world can, I fear, do little more than surrender
to the spectacle of its possibilities.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

The beginner in this subject is recommended to consult W. I.
Thomas, Source Book for Social Origins (University of Chicago
Press), Part VI (Magic, Religion, Myth). An extensive bibliog-
raphy of primitive religions is given here. E. B. Tylor, Primitive
Culture, Vol. 2, is valuable for general material and E. Durkheim,
The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, translated from the
French by J. W. Swain, is useful for the more theoretical treatment
of the whole field.


32


CHAPTER II

THE EGYPTIAN RELIGION

BY W. MAX MULLER

Many of my readers will feel that it means an in-
justice to the ancient Egyptians, the bearers of the highest
civilization of the ancient Orient, to introduce their re-
ligion directly after the sketch of the religious thinking
of primitive peoples. I am sorry to confess that I cannot
join any protest of these admirers of ancient Egypt.
While I gladly agree with them in praising highly the art,
the literature, the architecture, and many other achieve-
ments of this remarkable nation, I must state that the
popular overestimation of its " religious wisdom" is a
great error. Certainly its religious thought is extremely
interesting to students of the history of religion, who may
see in it even the most precious bequest of ancient Egypt
to modern science.

This valuation rests, however, not on its philosophical
depths, as so many admirers of Egypt think, but on the
extremely primitive character of that ancient religion
which makes it an inestimable source of information for
the origin and growth of religion in general. It is an
interesting link between the most rudimentary state of
religious thinking and the development reached by other
nations of the ancient western Orient. Whoever thinks
that this skeptical valuation is incompatible with the high
civilization of Egypt, may be reminded that the religious
development of nations is often quite incongruous with
their progress in other lines. Compare the low religious
development of China, while, on the other hand, Israel,
which could boast only of a very moderate and little
original civilization before the dispersion among the
3 33


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

nations, has been the leader of the whole world in re-
ligious thought.

Furthermore, if conservatism is a most important ele-
ment in all religions, it is nowhere so important as in
ancient Egypt. Its creed is not what the highly civilized
Egyptians after 3000 B.C. might have thought out if they
had been free to think. It is rather the bequest of their
barbarous forefathers from fabulously ancient periods.
These traditions of the ancestors, who must have lived
at the time when the gods walked on earth or who were
even gods themselves, seemed so venerable to later gener-
ations that they did not dare to change them much. Thus
extremelyprimitive ideas are draggedalong to the very end
of heathenism in Egypt, exactly as the art of the Nile-
land carried the fetters of tradition from the age of the
earliest, childish beginnings, as the official costume even
of the latest Pharaohs showed that it dated from a time
when the Egyptians were more or less completely naked.
If it seemed sinful to change such things, how much more
necessary seemed it to the priests to worship the same
gods and in the same way as the blessed forefathers had
done, perhaps back to 10,000 B.C., a time which the mod-
ern archaeologist must divest of all romantic ideas and
consider as an age of complete barbarism.

The older school of Egyptology was very reluctant to
admit this low valuation of a religion which the classical
world had viewed with so much interest and respect. In-
stead of recognizing its crude character, scholars clung
to isolated statements of some priestly writers which
showed (or seemed to show) a tendency towards panthe-
ism or even monotheism. Emphasizing and generalizing
these passages, they came to the conclusion that the
Egyptians, or at least the earliest Egyptians, were great
thinkers, believing in a pantheistic monotheism which they
only hid under the symbols of polytheism. That the later
Egyptians, indeed, misunderstood this symbolism very

34


THE EGYPTIAN RELIGION

much, some of these apologists used to admit; above all
they claimed the meaning of the sacred animals was
forgotten in later ages and those divine symbols were
misunderstood as divine personalities in themselves. And
so they maintained, we must not follow later misinter-
pretations of the ignorant masses, we must look at the
pure, original creed as preserved in those isolated passages ;
if ever we should find religious texts from a sufficiently
old time we should find there the pure solar or pantheistic
monotheism which befitted such a high civilization.

These apologetic theories had their day as long as
Egyptologists had no fuller religious texts from the time
before 2000 B.C. They became more and more difficult
when such texts were found, revealing not a simpler re-
ligion but all those characteristics which had been excused
as later degenerations. The decisive blow was dealt to
that apologetic school when in the winter of 1880-81
the opening of the inscribed pyramids of Dynasties 5
and 6 furnished to scholars an immense mass of religious
texts engraved about 2500 B.C., but taken from so much
older books that even scholars of the pyramid-age under-
stood them only imperfectly. We may safely consider them
as the representation of the religious beliefs of the fourth,
partly, it may be, even of the fifth millennium B.C. In
this rich material we found nothing of monotheism, but
we met with all those objectionable sides of the Egyptian
religion which its apologists had tried to excuse as later
degenerations. The objectionable worship of animals
proved to be a very prominent part of this earliest phase
of religion, and instead of finding a smaller and more sys-
tematized number of gods, we discovered hundreds of
new deities, mostly of a very meaningless character. In
one word : the crude superstitions of the masses in later
time have proved to be the faithful survival of the oldest
religious traditions, while the few passages which may
be adduced as a proof of higher religious speculations

35


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

belong only to much later periods and represent the iso-
lated efforts of a few thinkers among the most learned
priests, efforts which can less be treated as the religion
of Egypt than the writings of some radical philosophers
of our age may claim to represent Christianity. Thus
the view is winning more and more ground that the end-
less, unsystematic and confused polytheism of the earliest
Egyptians can be understood only as a development from
animism (as first had been proposed by R. Pietschmann
in 1878). The difficult and obscure character of Egyp-
tian religion is due to the fact that it hovered forever
between the animistic and the cosmic stage. Even in
prehistoric time elements of the latter development had
been mingled with the more primitive traditions, but
they could never sufficiently modify them. The modern
scholars, therefore, found signs of a cosmic conception of
religion, but in applying it to the pantheon it was impos-
sible for them to discover a harmonious cosmic system.
And so this transitional character of the religion of
Egypt is the reason that we have such widely divergent
views on it in modern books.

We assume that the prehistoric Egyptians, when they
began to make the first feeble progress towards civiliza-
tion, were on the same basis as that on which we find
many savage tribes of Africa. This most primitive stage
of animism lacks a clear conception of what we should
call gods. It considers the whole world filled with spirits
some roaming freely about, some sedentary, some big
and powerful, some rather insignificant. They appear,
rather as transient incarnations than as permanent souls,
in men or in animals, the more sedentary spirits also in
trees, rocks or other objects. Disappearing from living
creatures, at the time when the possession of these ends or
at their death, they lead over to the idea that all souls
of the defunct are such ghosts ; however, neither the pure
cult of ancestors nor the Indian transmigration theories

36


THE EGYPTIAN RELIGION

ever developed in Egypt. It is difficult to draw the line
betwen the evil and the good ghosts. Primitive men
holding the animistic theory live in constant fear of all
ghosts and try to be on good terms with them all. That
wish leads so easily to magical customs for winning or
warding off the spirits that many modern scholars be-
lieve magic an inseparable part of all animistic religions.
Fetishism is merely a specially characteristic representa-
tive of this magical development of animism.

The primitive Egyptians thus once had endless gods,
if we may call them gods. The more the inhabitants of
Egypt settled down and became agricultural, the more
they paid attention to the local spirits. Originally every
settlement seems to have had at least one local spirit which
it worshiped exclusively by sacrifices and magical cere-
monies, not asking what its relation to the spirits of the
neighboring village or town was, much less its relation
to nature. Many of these cults survived in historical time
without change and often also the various taboos at-
tached to them. Sun, moon, stars, etc., probably were
considered to have souls and may have been recognized
as divine but seem to have found very little worship in
earliest time. Perhaps the town spirit (or spirits) seemed
nearer to men and more interested in them than those
immovable phenomena of nature. Thus, the great major-
ity of the old local gods of Egypt had no cosmical mean-
ing at all, or where such a meaning was given to them
we can easily see that it had been developed only later
and mostly very unsuccessfully. The many contradictions
in those cosmical explanations betray this. Such local
gods also rarely have any mythology attached to them,
because mythology needs a cosmic basis. The best proof
of the animistic origin of the local cults is that the major-
ity of their gods have animal form. No theories of
fear or of utility explain these forms ; and while terrible
animals like the lion and crocodile or the strong bull and

37


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the mysterious serpent appear frequently, we find also
the little shrewmouse, the frog, the dung-beetle, small fish
and birds, etc., as gods. Where the animal worship had
been preserved in its primitive form, the later Egyptians
connected the sacred animal with the supernatural world
by explaining it as possessed by a divine spirit. These
later theologians, living in the age of cosmic religion,
expounded that spirit as having come from heaven, incar-
nating some great celestial god. The famous Apis bull
of Memphis was explained as the incarnation of the sun,
of the moon, of the many-sided god Osiris, of the neigh-
boring local gods Sokaris and Ptah. These contradictions,
which we find quite analogously in the case of other sacred
animals, betray that these animals originally were inde-
pendent from all celestial ideas; only the incarnation of
some unusual ghost is a good remnant of the original
view, betraying clearly the most primitive animism. The
extension of the sacredness from one divine animal to
the whole species {e.g., in the case of the cat) is mostly
a later development, although some old local taboos on
animals may allow us to infer it also for the primitive
period.

In historic time the condition of a tutelary spirit for
every village or, perhaps, even every house, cannot be
found, but at least every town has its local god. This
still leaves several hundred local gods whom we find on
the monuments as actually worshiped, thousands of other
gods (or ' souls,' as, significantly, all gods, great and
small, are often called) are admitted to exist but have
no cult. These more or less ' unknown gods ' are, evi-
dently, the local gods of smaller communities. The vil-
lage god with a straw hut as chapel could not compete
with the town god with his stately temple and rich priest-
hood, which attracted the villagers so much that they set
up a shrine of the ' great god ' in their settlement and
then neglected or even in time forgot the old local di-

38


THE EGYPTIAN RELIGION

vinity. We can trace to a certain extent how the local
ghost of a small village or town may, along with the
increasing population and power of that settlement, grow
into a ' great god ' and eventually into a god of the king
so that he consequently was worshiped over all Egypt
and placed at the head of the whole pantheon. To pre-
serve the worship of lesser gods they were, from very
old times, united with greater gods. Thus many triads
arose, exactly as in Babylonia. Usually the triad con-
sisted of father, mother and son (never daughter), more
rarely of a god with two wives. The famous ennead of
Heliopolis seems to signify a looser company of gods
forming a triple triad. Great goddesses associating with
a male god made him their son.

While we find many gods (or at least their names)
lost by assimilation with more important divinities, the
process of dissimilation is very rare. One of the few
examples is the local dissimilation of Min(u) of Koptos
into the younger Amon of Thebes. This latter god illus-
trates also that development described above, from an
obscure god of a small town to the highest god of Egypt,
who even subsequently remained great, while other gods
had only temporarily a wider reaching importance.

However, even before the beginning of historic time,
the tendency began to develop in Egypt, be it by progress
of thought or through foreign influences, to remove the
gods from the narrow, local sphere to heaven or to make
them cosmic. But this tendency never was carried
through as successfully and systematically as in Baby-
lonia. Sun, moon and stars may have been the factors
connecting the old gods with heaven.

Characteristic of Egypt is the prominence given to the
sun-god which dominated all other gods in a way hardly
known in any other country. Many theories are attached
to him. He is described as a god in human form walking
over the celestial roads; the sun is his face or eye or

39


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

head-ornament or the royal serpent wound around his
forehead. Or he sails in a ship over the blue heavenly
ocean, rowing himself or the sundisk as passenger or he
is rowed by divine sailors, that is by the stars who be-
come his crew in daytime. The sundisk may then be
in the cabin or as a fiery serpent may wind itself around
the prow. Very early the hawk-god Horus became
solar; this led to the explanation of the sun as a hawk
flying across the sky and to a blending with the older,
human, form Re', who becomes likewise a hawk sitting
in the ship of the sun, or at least a hawk-headed man.
Also a beetle-shaped god Khepri became at an early time
solar and thus the sun was explained as a scarab rolling
its egg across the sky. The ichneumon god Atum(u) of
Heliopolis, however, had to assume human form at his
solarization. To harmonize these various forms and
names later theology teaches that Re' is the general name,
Hor(us) that of the rising, Atum(u) that of the descend-
ing sun, Khepri the sun below the horizon as dead (like
Osiris) or as rising or as the embryonic sun-god pre-
paring to rise. Also the name Shu especially at noon-
time occurs, and also other names (Khnumu, on which
see below, Euf , etc. ) , for the nocturnal sun in the lower
world. Later many other gods were solarized. Because
the words ' eye ' and ' serpent ' are feminine, an endless
number of goddesses were also explained as female forms
of the sun and called the eye, crown, or daughter of the
sun-god. These female explanations, however, never be-
came popular; the prevailing theory remained that the
sun-god was masculine. The myth explaining why the
sun-god has only one eye, a myth which has wandered far
in the world's mythology, occurs in various forms. The
lost eye dropped into the depths of the ocean; how it
was recovered thence is told in many varying Egyptian
myths.

The moon,, the most prominent personality of the

40


THE EGYPTIAN RELIGION

Babylonian pantheon, found remarkably little respect in
Egypt, although identified with the ibis-god Thout(i), he
became also the god of wisdom, of chronology (because
the lunar year is most obvious to primitive man) and of
letters, the secretary of the gods and their physician, who
heals the sun's eye when it is torn out or damaged. Later
he had also the form of the baboon ascribed to him. Only
a few minor deities, like Khons(u) of Thebes, became
lunar.

Neither have the planets as important a part as we
should expect. Originally all were treated as manifesta-
tions of the heavenly good Horus, i.e., they were not
clearly distinguished. The morning star was known only
as masculine, as the husband of the greatest fixed star,
the dog star (Sothis). The constellations were different
from those of the Babylonians, except that Orion repre-
sented also in Egypt the celestial hero, and therefore often
was identified with the conqueror Horus. The Great
Dipper was his adversary, the ship Argo held the dead or
the infant Osiris, and the Pleiades seem to have been
the constellation of fate ('the seven Hat-hors'). The
Babylonian zodiacal constellations became known only in
very late time; originally 36 so-called decan stars held
their place, dividing the year into 36 weeks of ten days
(the remaining last five days of the year forming a half
decade of special sacredness). The Milky Way does not
seem to have played any part in mythology. While late
Egyptian astronomy shows clear Babylonian influences,
these are very feeble in earlier time.

The sky originally seems to have been depicted as a
black {i.e., according to Oriental notions blue) bull,
exactly as in Asia, but soon it assumed feminine gender,
according to the Egyptian word for it. The heavenly
cow, between the horns of which the sun-god shows him-
self, was early identified with an old cow-goddess, Hat-
hor. She assumed later the character of the Asiatic queen

41


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

of heaven, becoming mistress of love, joy, music, finery,
etc., and the names of many other Egyptian goddesses
were connected with her. Heaven at night-time was, in
earlier time, mostly understood as a tree rising at evening-
time from the ocean ; the stars were its leaves or fruits or
represented the gods dwelling and moving in it. This
starry tree allows man to read both the past and the future
(therefore the goddess of fate, who sits in the depths of
the sky writing the fate of the whole world, is connected
with it). It also gives eternal life in its fruit to the gods
who eat it every day, and also to the souls of the dead
who approach this tree in the lower or the higher regions.
The celestial tree can also be double, symbolizing morning
and evening, the summer and winter solstice, etc. As the
sun rises from the tree at morning and hides itself in it
at evening, the tree can also be understood as a goddess
and thus is only another form of the cow Hat-hor, or of
Nut, who in woman's form bends over the earth be-
getting with this consort the sun as her child anew every
night as she had begotten him at the creation of the
world. At evening her child returns into her bosom or
mouth re-begetting himself. While thus the sky is under-
stood as the star-beset body of the heavenly goddess at
night or as her blue hair at daytime, we find it also ex-
plained as water, the heavenly ocean forming a continua-
tion of the ocean which flows around and under the earth
or of the Nile. At the same time it is also a metal roof
and thunder is the resounding of this immense sheet
of metal from which the meteorites fall as chips and
from which the similar ore below is derived. All these
theories are boldly harmonized so that, for example, the
heavenly cow is held to consist of water and the heavenly
ocean to flow over the metal roof. The aether or empty
space between sky and earth is identified with the god
Shu, whose strong arms uphold the sky-goddess or at
the creation separated her from her consort, the earth.

42


THE EGYPTIAN RELIGION

Shu, however, was originally a lion god; he was first
understood as a form of the sun, then as solar ruler of
the sky or as the sky himself, so that we see that his role as
the aether was a secondary differentiation of the last-
mentioned development. His sister and wife, the lioness
Tefenet, confirms this development, because she retained
the character of a female sun, i.e., the eye or daughter
of the heavenly god.

The earth-god (Qeb or Geb), the husband of the sky,
is thought of as a man stretched on his back ; all vegeta-
tion grows from his flesh. A later theological etymology
then makes him a gander, the great cackler who lays the
sun-egg at night and cackles over it. An earlier form of
the earth-god was Aker(u), a double-faced lion; one
mouth swallows up the sun-god at evening and the other
mouth spits him out in the morning. Later theologians
distinguished him as the depth of the earth from Qeb.
The prevailing idea of the sun's origin is, however, that
he was born or begat himself, proceeding from the oldest
of all gods, Nun, the ocean, or, more particularly, the
abyss into which the sun still sinks every night. This
wise father of the sun and of all gods shows that the cos-
mogony deriving the whole world from the chaotic prim-
eval waters and recognizing the sunlight as the cause of
all organic life and of the present order of the world,
belongs to the earliest results of human thought. The
Egyptian mind, however, did not always distinguish the
great ocean from the local ocean, the beneficent Nile, the
father of all fatness, or from the local god who presided
over the extreme south, the ram-shaped cataract god
Khnum(u), because the source of the Nile (single, or
double, i.e., representing the Egyptian and the Ethiopic
Nile, or quadruple, i.e., the four sources representing the
water system of the world in so many mythologies of
other nations) was placed at the first cataract and was
connected with the abyss. Likewise, the Osiris myth led

43


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

to two contradictory explanations of the ocean and its
smaller counterpart streaming from the cataract.

We thus find an extremely rich mythology attached to
the forces of nature in a way which betrays a long de-
velopment of struggling speculations. That these could
not be successfully harmonized and not even systematized
as far as in most mythologies of Western Asia, was not
felt to be a great disadvantage. All mythologies have
somewhat a kaleidoscopic character; the ancients con-
sidered this as attractive and did not worry over contra-
dictions as much as the children of more rationalistic
ages. That the kaleidoscopic features are so very promi-
nent in Egypt was less caused by lack of systematic sense
in the Egyptian mind than by its over-conservative cling-
ing to the old local gods of the forefathers. Originally
destitute of all cosmic meaning and all mythology, as we
have said above, those old pictures, fetishes and sacred
animals admitted various interpretations. Thus it became
possible that the theories of the later cosmic conception
of religion were attached to different local names. The
priests were so very reluctant to admit that another god
than the one of their own town held some important
function in nature (especially the embodiment in the sun
and the rule over the sky), that many competing ex-
planations were never or only incompletely reconciled.

A great part of the pantheon never could be adapted
to any cosmic explanation or develop a mythology. Thus,
the extremely old worship of Min(u) at Koptos never
received any such explanation, although his rock-chapel
and sacred grove would seem to us to suggest specula-
tions. Only when the obscene statue of this god was
compared with Osiris, he gained a little mythological life.
The white bull attached to that cult, however, remained
meaningless and mysterious. And the similarly old and
primitive statue of Ptah at Memphis admitted no other
explanation for later thinkers than that arising from the

44


THE EGYPTIAN RELIGION

pale (yellow) skin of this god and from a forced ety-
mology of his name, namely, that he was a god much
confined to his home, an artist who produced works in
stone, wood and metal, hence the Greeks compared him
with their smith-god Hephaestus, and the later Egyptians
tried to ascribe to him a poorly defined activity at the
creation of the world. An identification with the wise
god of the abyss Nun, the father of all gods, is a product
of these late attempts to give some meaning to the old,
obscure cult. But with some less prominent gods it is
questionable whether any serious attempts were made to
lift them beyond the conception of the primitive, animistic
age. For the masses of worshipers this was not neces-
sary; the veneration was mostly founded more on the
antiquity than on the meaning of the divinities.

We have omitted so far to discuss the group of gods
which found the richest development of mythology in all
Egypt and the widest worship, extending even beyond
the soil of Egypt. This is the Osirian divine circle.
While the names of all its gods are old and purely Egyp-
tian, we must express doubts whether their mythological
meaning and connection belonged to prehistoric Egypt.
We find that the Osirian mythology is closely connected
with the myth of the dying god who appears as Tam-
muz-Adonis in Canaan, as Duzu in Babylonia, as Attis
in Asia Minor, etc. The Egyptians themselves were con-
scious that the cult of Osiris had a close parallel in
Phoenicia (especially at Gebal or Byblos), and partly even
seem to have admitted that the Phoenician cult was more
original. We find it fully developed in Egypt in the pyra-
mid texts before 2500 and can thus trace it to the time
about 3000 B.C., but we cannot establish it with certainty
before that time, at least not in Upper Egypt. It may
have had a long prior development in Lower Egypt where
the principal figure, the god Osiris, was identified with
the local god at Busirjs, whose oldest symbol was a very

43


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

peculiar wooden pillar. Possibly, there the neighboring
goddess Isis was associated with him as his wife and the
hawk-god Horus as his son even before this triad was
connected in any way with that Asiatic myth of the god
of dying and reviving nature.

On the other hand, this myth was nowhere else so
richly developed as in Egypt. There we find Osiris ex-
plained as manifesting himself in every change of nature,
above all in the sun which dies, is buried, and revives
every day ; the dissection of Osiris into many pieces seems
to connect the sun with the stars. He shows himself
also in the moon, the most changeable of all heavenly
bodies, and in some of the principal stars and constella-
tions (Orion, Argo), even in the whole sky, so that he
becomes god of the sky, manifesting himself in the celes-
tial tree as god of the year or of eternal life. As year-
god he appears also in plant-life or in the water, awaken-
ing the seeds every year; hence this god of the spring
season in northern countries takes the specifically Egyp-
tian character of the inundation water. This leads to
complete identification with the Nile, as this springs from
the dark netherworld. Osiris can be explained also as the
abyss or even as the great ocean and as the quickening
element of water in general. As god of the lower world
and the realm of the dead, this black (i.e., dead) god re-
ceives the character of judge of the dead, which idea is
nowhere as fully developed as in Egypt. He procures
resurrection to the dead, for the water of life and plant of
life (often identified with the vine) are in his hand ; there-
fore every dead man wishes to become one with Osiris.
There are, however, some traces that his responsibility
for bringing death into the world and becoming fore-
father of mortal humanity was sometimes felt and the
question of a guilt was raised. After all, this was the
most complicated and, therefore, the most attractive char-
acter among all the gods, as the ruler both of light and

46


THE EGYPTIAN RELIGION

darkness, both of life and death, the beginning and the
end of everything, forefather of mankind and of civiliza-
tion. His judicial seat may be found in the stars or in
the lower world, or near or in the source of the Nile,
either farther south in Nubia or in the depths of the cata-
ract waters, or in other remote regions. So he lends
himself easily to the character of a god of all nature.

His faithful wife Isis bears the traits of the Asiatic
queen of heaven and like her appears as mourning end-
lessly over her lost lover, reviving him directly or at
least in his son Horus or in the Nile (springing from or
swelling by her tears) or in heavenly phenomena. The
hawk-god, Horus, before his connection with Osiris, god
of the sun or of heaven, frequently is declared to be
identical with Osiris, as reborn form of the latter; this
gives a satisfactory explanation of all his other cosmic
explanations parallel to that of Osiris.

Somewhat later in origin seems to be the part of Seth
as adversary of this good triad and murderer of his
brother Osiris. This god, once the chief of the South-
land or even of the whole Egyptian pantheon, who was,
it seems, venerated in a strange animal which was later
interpreted as wild ass, boar, etc., came into political con-
trast to Horus. Identified with the storm and thunder
he became thus a wicked god, but nevertheless remained
popular especially as a manly divinity well suited for
soldiers. It is interesting to observe that his development
into a real Satan began only with the introduction of the
Babylonian myth of the abysmal serpent Tiamat, after
2500 B.C. Seth was more and more identified with that
enemy of the sun-god (called Apop in Egypt) and thus
the impersonation of the ocean passed from good Osiris
to wicked Seth. The influence of that myth, which cre-
ated the idea of a Satan in so many other religions, had
the same effect also in Egypt. Thus after 1000 b.c. Seth
had developed into a real devil worshiped only by
sorcerers.

47


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

We cannot discuss the connection of the obscure god-
dess Nephthy3 with Seth as his wife, or of an earlier
god of all dead, Anubis, with Osiris as his son or at least
his assistant in judging the dead, nor the rich develop-
ment of the many theories about life after death. Egyp-
tian religion after the ancient introduction of the Osirian
myth often received Asiatic motifs and even some Asiatic
gods, but no further influences so far-reaching as those
mentioned above.

The autochthonous development of thought was slow
and timid. The syncretism of similar gods was, indeed,
old and the early solar explanations of so many gods
prepared the ground for the theory, found after 1600 B.C.,
that all forces of nature were only manifestations of one
great god of the universe, the sun. Thus the imperfect
solar monotheism of the short-lived religious reform of
Pharaoh Amenhotep IV (about 1400 b.c.) was, after all,
not as novel an undertaking as it seems at firs,t; some
pantheistic and almost monotheistic tendencies can be
traced some centuries farther back. The masses, how-
ever, successfully resisted that reform, clinging to the
old local names and cults. It cannot be repeated too
strongly that all deviations from their conservatism were
isolated and timid steps of a few most advanced scholars.

The question remains : Why did this religion effect
such a favorable and deep impression upon the Greeks
and Romans that it extended over the whole Roman
empire, so that in the last centuries of heathenism many
hoped to find in the popular cult of Osiris an antidote
against the spreading Christian creed? True, that Egyp-
tian religion in foreign lands was strongly influenced by
ideas from other religions, above all from Greek phi-
losophy, but still it tried to keep the outward forms of
Egyptian cult, temples with hieroglyphic inscriptions,
obelisks, sacred animals, etc. We cannot explain this
success with the non-Egyptian masses from the moral

48


THE EGYPTIAN RELIGION

influence of the Egyptian religion. It brought no new
ethical ideas to the gentile world. Much less can we
explain that success from profound metaphysical specula-
tions. We have not discovered a single line of philosophy
like that of the Greeks in hieroglyphic writing, and must
doubt whether such a literature ever was attempted. The
Egyptian priests were too much keepers of the old tradi-
tions to open such new paths of thinking.

However, it seems that it was this very conservatism
and the simple, blind faith of the Egyptian masses which
impressed the classical people so very deeply. Greek
religion had become a shadowy remembrance and was
treated with skepticism and frivolity, while the Egyptians
firmly insisted on the bodily presence of the gods in their
temples. So the Greeks concluded that such an earnest
faith must have some deeper, secret reasons and that the
Egyptian gods, notwithstanding all their strange features,
possessed more reality than the shadowy gods of Greece.
The wonderful civilization, above all, the architecture of
the Egyptians and the attractiveness of everything un-
intelligible added to this impression that the mysterious
creed of Egypt deserved special esteem. This over-
valuation of the alleged religious wisdom hidden in the
hieroglyphs has remained to this day and still influences
many modern scholars ; but it cannot stand any unpreju-
diced criticism, as we have here tried to show.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

H. Brugsch : Religion und Theologie der alten Aegypten, 1888.

E. A. W. Budge : The Gods of the Egyptians, 1904.

Georg Steindorff : The Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, 1004
(American Lectures on the History of Religions).

Alfred Wiedemann : Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, 1907.

Adolf Erman : A Handbook of Egyptian Religion, English Transla-
tion by A. S. Griffith, 1907.

In de la Saussaye's Religionsgeschichte, article by H. O. Lange : " Die
^Egypten," vol. 1, pp. 172-245.

The volume by W. Max Miiller, " The Mythology of the Egyptians "
in the series The Mythology of All Races is now in press.

49


CHAPTER III

THE RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA
BY MORRIS JASTROW, JR

I.

Our interest in the religion of Babylonia and Assyria
is threefold : for its antiquity ; for its connection with one
of the most remarkable of ancient civilizations j 1 and for
its bearings, in part direct, in part indirect, on the un-
folding of religious thought among the ancient Hebrews.

We are now able to trace the history of the Euphrates
Valley back to a period considerably beyond 3000 B.C.
At that early date there were two distinct ethnic groups
forming the main body of the population. As depicted
on the monuments and works of art the one group is
clean shaven, the other bearded, though not infrequently
with the upper lip shaved. 2 The former group is marked
by obliquely set eyes and a long but not thick nose, and
by thin lips and rather high cheek bones, the other has
the fleshy nose and thick lips as well as other features
characteristic of the Semitic race. The variation extends
to the dress, a flounced garment hanging from the waist
in the one case, a plaid thrown across the shoulder and
draping the entire body in the other. The group with
the racial characteristics of the Semites was known as
the Akkadians ; the other, a non-Semitic group, but whose
possible affinities with other races has not yet been de-
termined, bore the name Sumerian. The centre of the
Semitic settlements, at the time when the monumental

1 See Jastrow, The Civilization of Babylonia and Assyria, for a
full account of the history, religion, commerce, law, art and literature
of the region.

'See Eduard Meyer, Sumerier und Semiten in Babylonien (Ber-
lin, 1906), for a full exposition of the subject with many illustrations.

SO


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

material comes into view, was in the northern section
of the Euphrates Valley, while the strongholds of the
Sumerians were in the south. 3 The Semites appear to
have entered the valley from the northwest, coming down
from the mountain regions of Syria, while the Sumerians
— also a people of mountainous origin — probably came
from the northeast, though this is still a mooted point.
Which of the two groups came first is likewise a question
to which as yet no definite answer can be given, though
there is much in favor of Eduard Meyer's view that the
Semites or Akkadians were the first on the ground and
that the Sumerians entered the land as conquerors, hold-
ing the Akkadians in subjection for many centuries, until,
about 2500 B.C., the tide began to turn. At about 2100
b.c. we find the Akkadians definitely in control in the
entire Euphrates Valley and maintaining the supremacy
over the Sumerians, though not without some periods of
temporary reaction especially in the extreme southern
section where the Sumerians managed to retain a sem-
blance of political independence.

More important than the question of the original
settlement of the Valley is the rivalry between Sumerians
and Akkadians which directly stimulated the intellectual
qualities of both groups and led to the high order of
culture for which the Euphrates Valley became distin-
guished. It will be found to be a general rule that civili-
zations of the first rank develop through the comming-
ling of two distinct races, entering into rivalry with each
other. Such a commingling develops the best qualities
in both. To distinguish in detail the elements contributed
by each is a task that lies beyond the scope of a survey
of the religious views and practices unfolded in the
Euphrates Valley. Obviously, the share of the Sumerians

8 On these divisions of the Euphrates Valley and on the early
and later history of the Sumerians and Akkadians see Jastrow,
op. cit. c. iii.

Si


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

in the earlier periods was far greater. The cuneiform
script developing from picture writing is of Sumerian
origin. The oldest documents of all kinds are written in
Sumerian. Later, when the Akkadians began to obtain
control, the script was adapted to conveying thoughts,
facts and data in Akkadian, while the Sumerian, though
for a long time surviving in the cult, became archaic, and
even before this stage was reached, was modified by the
introduction of Akkadian elements. In return many dis-
tinctly Sumerian features passed over into Akkadian, and
externally in the use of hundreds of characters used
ideographically, 4 the Akkadian continued to show a
Sumerian aspect.

In the domain of architecture, one may see the result
of the commingling of the two races in the two types
of religious edifices that arose in- the important centres
of the Euphrates Valley, (i) the house as the dwelling
of the deity modelled after the human habitation, and
(2) the stage tower, a huge brick construction of con-
siderable height with a winding ascent, clearly in imi-
tation of a mountain with a road leading to the top, as
the seat of the deity. The house-motif for the temple is
of Semitic origin, while the stage tower is the contri-
bution of the Sumerians who, accustomed in their moun-
tain homes to worship their deities on mountain tops,
endeavored to symbolize this belief by the imitation of a
mountain when they came to a perfectly flat country like
the Euphrates Valley.

In passing, it may be well to remind the reader that
the course of civilization in Mesopotamia is from the
south to the north, that Assyria as a northern offshoot
of Babylonia — the common designation of the south —
represents merely an extension of the culture produced
in Babylonia. The language of Assyria is identical with

*I.e., each sign representing an entire word and not a mere
syllable. See for details, Jastrow, op. cit. c. ii, especially p. 99 seq.

52


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

that of Babylonia, the art is largely borrowed from the
south, though in temple and palace architecture some
original contributions were made. The literature pro-
duced in Babylonia was copied by the royal scribes of
Assyria, and in the domain of religious conceptions only
minor modifications are to be noted in the aspect taken
on by the transfer of the religion from Babylonia to
Assyria.

Outwardly, to be sure, and practically Babylonia and
Assyria present a striking contrast. Corresponding to
the more rugged region of northern Mesopotamia, the
Assyrians, mixed with some non-Semitic groups that came
down from Asia Minor, appear to have been from the
time that they appear on the horizon, a little before 2000
B.C., of a more martial disposition. Warfare became
the expression of the genius of Assyria. A rivalry ensued
between the north and south which led to serious en-
counters as early as 1500 B.C. and eventually brought
about the subjection of the more pacific, though by no
means weak, south to the north. The seven centuries
from c. 1 100 b.c. to 600 b.c. represent the period of
Assyria's greatness, going hand in hand with her greatest
martial activity; but in return she exhausted her vitality
quicker than Babylonia. In 606 B.C. Nineveh fell as a
result of a combination against her in which hordes from
Asia Minor joined with the Babylonians to rid the world
of a menace that threatened the existence of large and
small nations as well. A new, though short, era of inde-
pendence dawned for Babylonia which came to an end
with Cyrus' triumphal entry into Babylon in 539 b.c.
Persia fell heir to the glorious legacy of Babylonia.
During this long stretch of three millenniums, the Eu-
phrates Valley had undergone many vicissitudes of for-
tune. Not infrequently foreign invaders sat on the
throne. Indeed, for five centuries (c. 1700-1200 b.c.)
a people coming from the mountainous region to the

S3


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

east and known as the Cassites retained the mastery over
the Euphrates Valley; but the Sumero- Akkadian civili-
zation, though suffering a temporary decline, was too
firmly established to be swept away. Religion, art, litera-
ture and commerce continued to flourish, though showing
changed aspects, as a period of upward tendency was
followed by a reaction during the centuries of Cassite
control,

II

The Babylonian-Assyrian religion in its oldest form
as revealed by the votive inscriptions of Sumerian rulers
and by specimens of literature that may with great proba-
bility be carried back to the earliest period, is long past
the stage of primitive beliefs, though it shows traces that
in its conception of divine government of the universe
it started from what is commonly termed animism. By
this term is meant a view of nature ascribing life to all
phenomena and of the same order as the vital force that
manifests itself in human and animal activity. 5 Under
this view the gods worshiped by man are personifications
either of phenomena of nature or of objects in nature,
primarily the sun, the moon, the storm (with its accom-
paniment of rain, thunder and lightning), the earth,
water (including streams and wells), trees and rocks.
Religion being the partly emotional, partly intellectual
response to an instinct, confirmed by experience, that
man is not the arbiter of his fate, it is natural for him
to make the effort to supplement his inherent and self-
evident weakness in the presence of nature by securing the
aid of powers upon whose favor he is dependent. The
storm destroys his handiwork, and therefore to avoid the
catastrophe he seeks the favor of the power manifesting
itself in the storm. The stream may sink his primitive

' See Chapter I of this work for a more detailed discussion of
animism, as a stage through which primitive culture passes every-
where.

54


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

craft and therefore, before trusting himself to the treach-
erous element, he endeavors to assure himself of the favor
of the spirit or power residing in the water. When he
advances to the agricultural stage, the earth and the
sun are the two forces that in the main condition his
welfare; and as a consequence he personifies the earth
as a mother in whose womb the seed has been placed,
which with the cooperation of the sun is brought to
fruition.

Starting from this animistic conception of nature,
the Sumerians and Akkadians developed a pantheon, all
the members of which take theif rise as personified
powers of nature. In thus grouping the gods into a more
or less definite relationship — and that is involved in the
creation of a pantheon — the religion passes beyond the
animistic stage. The gods in the larger centres become,
primarily, the protectors of the place, and as the group
enlarges its geographical boundaries, the jurisdiction and
the attributes of a local god are correspondingly in-
creased. He becomes, irrespective of his original char-
acter, the protector of the fields, the guardian of the
army; it is he who gives victory over the enemy and
when misfortunes come, it is the god who sends the
punishment because of anger that has been aroused in
him. The combination of little groups into a powerful
. state brings about further changes, and as one state comes
to exercise a sovereignty over other combinations of
groups, the gods of the various localities are organized
after the pattern of human society into a royal court
with gradations in rank, corresponding to the class dis-
tinctions that grow in complication as combinations of
groups result in the formation of a political unit.

Of the chief local gods which thus take on a larger
character we mav single out Enki. whom the Akkadians
designated as Ea, and who from being the patron deity
of Eridu, lying at the head of the Persian Gulf, becomes

55


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the god of waters in general. Another deity, Enlil,
originally a storm-god and associated with the old Su-
merian centre, Nippur, becomes the head of the Sumerian
pantheon because of the importance which Nippur ac-
quired, in part political, in part due to the position of
Nippur as a religious centre. As such, Enlil acquires
attributes originally foreign to his nature. He becomes
an agricultural deity and is addressed in terms which
show that he has absorbed the power ascribed to the sun
and water as well. At Shirpurla, another Sumerian
centre, the chief deity is Ningirsu, a personification of
the sun, who becomes a powerful warrior, with a mighty
net in which he catches the soldiers of the enemy. In
Uruk we find a great mother goddess, Nana, worshiped
as the patron of the place by the side of Anu, originally
likewise a sun-god who becomes the god of the heavens
in general and the father of all the gods. At Ur, which
in an early period was the seat of a powerful Sumerian
dynasty, the patron of the place was Sin, a personifica-
tion of the moon, pictured as an old man with a flowing
beard and sailing along the heavens in a bark. Wisdom
was associated with him and he too becomes in one of
the systems that arose the " father " of the gods and the
guide of the universe. Ut or Babbar at Larsa is again
a sun-god, as is Shamash in the Akkadian centre Sippar
to the north. Justice is one of the chief attributes as-
signed to him. He is described as the great judge who
brings wrongdoings to light and saves the innocent from
the machinations of the wicked.

In the later period Marduk, again a solar deity, as
the patron of the city of Babylon, becomes supreme over
all the gods when Babylon rises to the position of the
capital of the Babylonian empire. With this step, finally
achieved by the great Hammurapi (2 123-2081 B.C.), the
attributes of all the other great gods are bestowed on
Marduk, and such tendencies toward a monotheistic con-

56


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

ception of the universe as are to be noted in the course of
the development of the Babylonian religion gather about
his cult. The proximity of Borsippa to Babylon (lying
almost opposite the latter) brought about a close associa-
tion between Marduk and the local deity of Borsippa,
known as Nabu, who may have been originally a personi-
fication of the watery element — perhaps the god of the
Euphrates more particularly. The relationship between
Marduk and Nabu is pictured as that of father to son,
and to such an extent are the original traits of Nabu
obscured that he becomes merely a somewhat pale reflec-
tion of Marduk — a junior Marduk by the side of a senior.
In the same way we have in the many other localities
of southern and northern Babylonia deities closely asso-
ciated with a place as patron and guardian who are
originally personifications of the sun, moon, water, earth
or the storm, but whose original character tends to be-
come obscured through one circumstance or another,
concomitant with changes in the political kaleidoscope
and with advancing social conditions. A result of this
growth in the conception of the divine government of the
universe — for it is to be regarded as a growth — is the
tendency, on the one hand, for minor local deities to be-
come absorbed by those in the larger centres, while, on
the other hand, we note a disposition to differentiate the
functions of a nature deity and to divide his various mani-
festations among those originally personifying the same
power. Many of the local deities were, for obvious rea-
sons, solar gods. When Shamash, the sun-god of Sip-
par, became, with the rise of that city to supreme politi-
cal importance, the chief solar deity, the minor sun-gods
were identified with Shamash. They became mere epi-
thets; a place was provided for them in the systems
devised in the temple schools, as children, messengers, at-
tendants and servitors, — down to such human function-
aries as vezirs, throne-bearers, scribes, and even bakers

57


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

and butlers. Again, when a solar deity was too impor-
tant to be entirely absorbed in this fashion, the mani-
festations of the sun were differentiated, and a solar deity
like Ningirsu of Shirpurla or Ninib of Nippur was re-
garded as the sun of the morning and of springtime,
while Nergal, the sun-god of Cuthah, was regarded as
the personification of the sun of high noon and of mid-
summer. The former was regarded as a beneficent
power, driving away the storms of the rainy season and
bringing about the revivification of nature in the spring,
the latter as a destructive power, bringing suffering, dis-
ease and death to mankind through the scorching heat
and drought of the mid-summer season.

It thus happens that a widely diffused polytheism con-
tinues to be the striking feature of the Babylonian-
Assyrian religion, despite the counter endeavors to devise
theological systems that aimed to reduce the many gods
to a limited number of superior powers in actual control
of the universe. Between these two tendencies, the one
towards providing a place for literally hundreds of deities,
the other towards concentrating actual divine power in a
limited number, the Babylonian- Assyrian religion runs its
course. The former tendency leads further towards
recognizing, besides hundreds of deities, a large number
of minor divine beings, demons pictured in human or
animal form to whom diseases and all kinds of mishaps
are assigned. We shall see presently how this belief
led to divination practices of all kinds, which form a
very prominent part of the practical religion. The latter
tendency has its outcome in the division of divine gov-
ernment among three powers. There are several groups
of such triads. Foremost stands a triad composed of
Anu, to whom the control of the heavens is assigned;
Enlil, who rules the earth and the atmosphere above it,
and Ea, who represents the watery element surrounding
the earth, and on which the earth is supposed to float

58


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

like a rubber ball. In the case of all three gods all local
limitations have entirely disappeared, as have all traces
of the specific power of nature originally personified by
each of them. In fact, they have become almost abstrac-
tions, representing or symbolizing three divisions of the
visible universe. The triad reminds one of the injunction
added to the second of the Biblical ten " Words," not to
make any image for worship of anything in the heavens
above, on the earth beneath or in the waters under the
earth, and which reads like a protest against the Babylon-
ian triad. Less artificial in character and of more prac-
tical import is another triad frequently occurring in in-
scriptions and invariably depicted by symbols on the
boundary stones, 6 consisting of Sin, the moon-god, Sha-
mash, the sun-god, and Ishtar, the planet Venus, symbol-
izing the great mother goddess, the source of life and fer-
tility. These three gods represent the chief powers upon
which man is dependent, summing up, as it were, the
chief protectors of human life and the chief guides of
his being. In place of Ishtar, Adad, a general god of
storms who never appears to have had any specific local
cult, is introduced, and not infrequently we have, instead
of a triad, a group of four,— Sin, Shamash, Adad and
Ishtar, in which combination the latter represents the
female element in general, essential as a complement to
the male to produce the manifestations of life in the uni-
verse. Around these triads as around the group of four
gods, speculations were developed in the temple schools
which led to giving the Babylonian-Assyrian religion
certain mystic aspects, albeit of a purely theological
character.

In general, however, and for the purposes of the cult,
a much larger group of great gods was recognized, the

8 See Jastrow, op. cit., plate Ixii, and for many specimens, King,
Babylonian Boundary Stones and Memorial Tablets in the British
Museum (London, 1912).

59


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

number of which in Assyrian days was fixed at thirteen.
So far as these chief gods are concerned, the Assyrian
pantheon, it may be noted in passing, is identical with that
of Babylonia, but for the single figure of Ashur, origi-
nally a solar deity and the patron of the city of Ashur,
the earliest capital of Assyria, who naturally became the
head of the Assyrian pantheon. In keeping with the
martial spirit of the Assyrians, on which we have dwelt,
Ashur became primarily a god of war. He does not
appear to have been ordinarily represented by a human
figure, as were the other gods of Babylonia and Assyria,
but by a rather refined symbol, a disc representing the
sun, with rays streaming in both directions. 7 The symbol
reveals the association of Ashur with the sun? but it also
points to an attempt to rise beyond purely animistic con-
ceptions. The winged disc becomes a general symbol of
divine power, arising at a time when the seats of all the
great gods, under the influence of astrological specula-
tions, were placed in the heavens. In this respect Ashur
reminds us of Anu, who, it will be recalled, became the
god of the heavens par excellence; and indeed there are
some reasons for believing that Ashur, the chief god of
Assyria, was originally Anu and that Ashur is an epithet,
having the force originally of the god of the city of
Ashur. At all events we know that Anu was worshiped
in Ashur and that the god Ashur like Anu was a personi-
fication of the sun, enlarged in both cases to a very general
conception of divine government of the universe.

Ashur, naturally, takes the place in Assyria which in
Babylonia belongs to Marduk, but such was the force of
tradition that Marduk continues to be invoked by the
Assyrian rulers as their patron deity by the side of Ashur,
particularly after Babylonia fell under Assyrian control.
The Assyrian conquerors did not regard their inaugura-
tion complete until they had proceeded to the southern

7 See the illustrations in Jastrow, op. cit., plate xxxi.

60


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

capital and there in a ceremony that involved " taking the
hand of Marduk " or Bel, i.e., " the lord," as Marduk
came to be called, confirmed their rule over the south
as well as over the north. The gods thus recognized as
the chief figures of the pantheon and commonly invoked
by the Assyrian rulers were Ashur, Sin, Shamash, Adad,
Marduk, Nabu, Ishtar, Ninib, Nergal, Nusku. 8 Adding
to these Anu, Enlil and Ea, we obtain the number thir-
teen as the pantheon. Each of these gods had a female
consort, but these associates are merely pale reflections
of their male companions and, with the exception of
Ishtar, who is, as we have seen, an independent figure,
play a very minor role in the cult. The Assyrians, it
should be added, recognized three Ishtars : one the god-
dess of Nineveh; another, the goddess of Arbela (not
far distant from Nineveh), and the third designated as
the " queen of Kitmuru," the origin of which term is
obscure. But Ishtar as the chief and, in a sense, the
only goddess becomes naturally the consort of the head
of the pantheon. So in Babylonia Ishtar is associated
with Marduk and in Assyria with Ashur, although Mar-
duk's consort has also another name, Sarpanit, that is,
" the resplendent one," while Ashur standing above all the
gods is generally spoken of in a manner to suggest soli-
tary grandeur, brooking no one — not even a consort —
by his side.

We have already indicated that such tendencies as
exist towards recognizing a single power as the sole
arbiter of the universe centre in Babylonia around Mar-
duk. Correspondingly, we find in Assyria, Ashur rising
to a position which suggests that the Assyrians too were
groping their way to a conception of the unity of the
universe. The thought that all phenomena are to be traced
to a single source was at least grasped, though never in
so definite a manner as to lead to a genuine monotheistic

"The god of fire — originally, again, a solar deity.

61


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

conception of divine government. Steps in this direction
were made, but after all the force of the old animistic
conceptions of the gods was too strong to lead to a definite
change in the religion. Ashur remains, like Marduk, a
primus inter pares, though so much more pronounced in
his personality that all the other gods impress one like
little Ashurs by the side of the great one. There is none
like Ashur, just as in Babylonia there is none like Marduk.
The higher spiritual conception of the presence of the
divine in the universe thus encountered decided limita-
tions, and despite considerable speculation of a relatively
advanced theological character in the temple schools, the
religion of the masses remained on a low level. This is
particularly illustrated in the cult to which we may now
turn.

Ill
The gcds exist according to the Babylonian-Assyrian
point of view in order to be worshiped. They feel lonely
without temples, and in one of the accounts of creation
the gods are represented as creating mankind in order
to have temples and worshipers. In return, the gods
act as protectors of humanity, although in the early period
of predominating local cults each god is interested only
in those who dwell within his jurisdiction. Success in
undertakings, good crops, business ventures, health, pos-
sessions, victory in arms — all come through the favor of
the gods. The aim of the cult, therefore, is to secure and
happily to retain the good-will of the gods. The gods
must be kept in good humor. They crave homage, ami
woe to the ruler or people who neglect to pay the prop
respect to the gods. By a natural corollary, all misfo
tunes are ascribed to the anger of the gods. Bad crop
defeat in battle, pestilence, destructive storms, mishap
of all kinds, including failure in business, are the punish-
ments sent by offended gods. The theory was a con-
venient one, for it shifted the responsibility from one's

62


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

own shoulders for ill-fortune and placed it on the gods,
but on the other hand there was also some reason for the
anger of the superior powers, albeit one was not always
able to fathom it.

This theory of the alternate favor and anger of the
gods formed the basis of religious ethics as well ; it domi-
nates the view taken of sin, for sin meant the commission
of an act or an omission of one, resulting in arousing the
anger of some deity. Such an omission might consist in
not bringing tribute or in not asking for his assistance in
any undertaking, while the commission might be an error
in pronouncing certain formulas or a mistake in the per-
formance of some religious rite.

By the side of such acts or misdeeds, not involving a
breach of ethics from our point of view, there were also
actual transgressions, such as lying, cheating, stealing,
adultery, treachery, cruelty, failure to show proper con-
sideration for one's parents or for one's fellows or neglect
of other duties that would arouse the displeasure of a god.
The genuine ethical element thus enters into the religion,
but it is characteristic of the status of the religion that
down to the latest period no distinction is made between
an ethical misdeed and a purely ritualistic transgression
or omission. 9 The appeal to the gods was made by cer-
tain acts and rites, more or less symbolical, accompanied
by the recital of certain formulae supposed to have the
power of making a direct appeal either for the manifesta-
tion of divine power or for the removal of a god's dis-
pleasure. The aspects of the cult thus resulting may be
grouped under two categories, ( i ) incantations, shading
off into prayers and hymns, accompanied by rites to sym-
bolize the release of a sufferer from disease or from some
other evil, and (2) divination methods to ascertain the
disposition and by implication the intention of a deity,

.' See as an example the category of " sins " in Jastrow, Religion
of Babylonia and Assyria^ p. 291.

63


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

and thus to forestall impending evil, or at all events to be
prepared for the blow, if it was inevitable.

The hoped-for release from sickness — the most com-
mon punishment sent by an angered god or goddess —
naturally plays a very large part in the incantations, as
well as in compositions of a higher order, properly to be
classed as hymns but in which the incantation motif is
always discernible. Demoniac possession as the essential
reason for bodily pain and tortures was accepted by the
Babylonians and Assyrians throughout all periods, de-
spite considerable progress made in the medicinal treat-
ment of disease, through the use of numerous drugs and
concoctions as well as observance of diet, and through
such more advanced methods as massage, poultices, ene-
mas and surgical operations. 10 The aim of the physician
was always represented as an endeavor to drive the demon
of disease out of the body, or to remove the ban resting
upon the sufferer through the power of a sorcerer or
witch. The cure was incidental to the expulsion of the
demon or to the release from bewitchment. Incantations
continued, therefore, to form part of the treatment of dis-
ease and are introduced into texts that are distinctly medi-
cal in character. Medical treatment is supplementary to
the use of incantations and of the symbolical rites, such
as burning effigies of the demons or sorcerers made of
wax, wood or the like, or drowning them or inflicting
tortures upon them in the hope of inducing them to aban-
don their hold on their victims.

The use of incantations rested upon the wide-spread
view held by people in a primitive state of culture and
surviving into advanced periods, of the power supposed
to reside in words as such, when uttered by the properly
authorized persons. They generally consisted of a direct

"See details in the writer's paper, "The Medicine of the Baby-
lonians and Assyrians," in the Transactions of the Royal Society of
Medicine (Section for the History of Medicine) for March, 1914.

64


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

appeal or command or of a jumble of more or less mystic
formulae.

As a specimen of symbolical rite to accompany the
incantations, a brief extract from a series known as
Shurpu, i.e., " burning," in which the destruction of the
demons or sorcerers by fire in various ways forms the
chief feature, may suffice.

As this onion is peeled and thrown into the fire,

burned by the consuming fire,
Never again to be planted in a garden,

never again to be harrowed,
Its root never again to be stuck into the ground,
Its stalk never to grow, never again to see the light,
Never again to appear on the table of a god or king,
So may the crime, pain, anguish,
Sickness, sighing, sin, misdeed, transgression

and wrongdoing,
The sickness in my body, in my flesh and in my limbs,
Be peeled like this onion.

On this day may it be burned by the scorching fire,
May the bar be removed! May I see the light!

From such a jumble to genuine prayer seems a long
step, and yet the incantation is virtually a prayer; and
the interesting feature of the Babylonian cult is the
process which led to higher and worthier conceptions of
the gods, despite the fact that the earlier and crude ones
were retained.

These higher ideas cluster to a large extent around
the sun-gods, though moon-gods and water deities and
the great goddess of earth come in for their share. Sha-
mash, as the sun-god par excellence, becomes the symbol
of light and justice. He is extolled as the great "Judge"
— a title very frequently assigned to him — who brings
the evil that lurks in dark places to the light, whose rays
give health, who seeks out the oppressed and the unfor-
tunate to restore them to honor and happiness. He is
above all a just judge who takes no bribes, who frees
the innocent and punishes the wrong-doers, whose aim
5 65


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

is to let justice and right prevail in the world. A hymn
to Shamash reads : u

The mighty mountains are filled with thy splendor,

Thy brightness fills all lands;

Thou reachest to the mountains, thou gazest upon the entire earth.

Thou watchest over all the inhabitants of the earth.

***** ***

Thou seekest out the transgressor, the utterance of the wicked thou

rejectest.
Everyone, whoever he be, is in thy keeping.
Thou guidest judgment, the imprisoned thou releasest.
Thou dost give ear to lament, to prayer, invocation and petition.
The one in anguish cries to thee,
The weak, the powerless, the oppressed and the wronged.

While such hymns touch the high-water mark of re-
ligious compositions, the ideas embodied in them find
expression in songs of praise and appeal and thanksgiving
to other gods — to Sin, to Ea, to Marduk and to Ishtar.
Ea, more particularly, is appealed to in the cult as the god
of humanity who saves even when others fail. It is he
who intercedes with the gods when they decide to bring
on a destructive deluge. Through him a favorite is saved
from whom a new generation is produced. Ishtar is
viewed in hymns composed in her honor as the loving
mother of mankind, and Sin as a merciful father.

The direct result of these higher conceptions was to
lead to a deepening of the consciousness of man's prone-
ness to sin, of the weakness of the flesh in resisting
temptations. The thought, of the justice, mercy and
kindness of the gods reacts on man's realization of his
own responsibility for the sufferings that befall him. In
illustration of this we have a large number of composi-
tions in which this consciousness of sin is emphasized.
The sense of guilt, rather than the misfortune itself —
generally again sickness of some kind — weighs upon
the soul of the penitent, who pours out his lament in

B For further specimens of hymns and prayers to Shamash and
to other gods, see Jastrow, Civilization of Babylonia and Assyria,
p. 465 et seq., and Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, c. xvii.

66


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

a most pathetic and impressive manner. He is pictured
as bent down with grief — not daring to look upon the
face of his god ; he breaks forth in bitter weeping. The
priest intercedes in his behalf, —

Because his god and his goddess are angry with him, he cries to thee.
Turn thy countenance to him, take hold of his hand!

The penitent responds :

Outside of thee there is no guiding divinity,
Graciously look upon me, and accept my petition !
How long yet, O my goddess! Turn thy countenance to me!
Like a dove I moan, satiated with sighs. 1 "
y
Accompanying these appeals is the confession of sins,

and what is particularly noteworthy the admission of

wrong-doing, even though one may not be aware of the

particular sin for which one has been punished. The

underlying thought is that the gods are just. Suffering

is not sent without a cause, even though one be unable

to discover it.

IV

The old, however, survives by the side of the new.
Older methods of ascertaining the disposition of the gods
are retained, despite their inconsistency with the higher
conceptions of divine government that find an expression
in hymns and penitential psalms, just as in the midst of
the finest religious compositions jumbles of primitive in-
cantations are introduced that bring us at a bound to a
much lower level.

In illustration, we have throughout all periods of
Babylonian-Assyrian history the uninterrupted and un-
limited sway of various divination methods as a means
of peering into the worship of the gods to see what they
purpose to bring about and to forestall, if possible, any
mischief that may be brewing.

B For further specimens see Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and
Assyria, c. xviii, and also Morgenstern, Doctrine of Sin in the Baby-
lonian Religion (Berlin, 1905).

67


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Incantation and divination supplement one another.
The incantation, as we have seen, forms part of a system
of remedial treatment; divination falls within the cate-
gory of preventive measures. The anger of the gods
might manifest itself in many other ways besides send-
ing a demon or a sorcerer to plague the body. Natural
catastrophes, such as failure of crops, a wide-spread
pestilence, invasion of the land, an earthquake, destruc-
tive storms, would be symptoms of divine displeasure. In
such event rulers and people would repair to the temples,
to take part in the purification ceremonies conducted by
the priests to rid the land of uncleanness and, in other
ways, to remove the cause of divine wrath. Critical
junctures would arise, foreboding certain events, and at
such times it would be of prime importance to ascertain
the mood of the gods.

There were in the main three methods of divination
employed in Babylonia and Assyria. The oldest of these
and the most primitive in character was the inspection of
the liver of a sacrificial animal — usually a sheep ; secondly,
the observance of signs in the heavens, and, third, the
drawing of omens from abnormal phenomena, such as
anomalies in the young of animals or in infants, move-
ments of animals, dreams, and from all kinds of happen-
ings that deviated from normal experiences or contained
elements of a striking or even merely noticeable char-
acter. Let us briefly consider these three methods.

To prognosticate the future by an inspection of a
sheep's liver seems at first blush to be as irrational a
method as could well be devised. For all that, hepatos-
copy, or liver divination, rested on an order of ideas
which, while primitive, was nevertheless logical. The
liver as the bloodiest organ in the body was regarded by
all peoples in a primitive state of culture as the source
of life, which was naturally associated with the blood.
The liver was in this stage of belief the seat of the in-

68


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

tellect and of the emotions — the higher as well as the
lower. Functions that were at a later juncture in popu-
lar beliefs divided among three organs of the body — in-
tellect centring in the brain, the higher emotions in the
heart and the lower in the liver — were at one time con-
centrated in a single organ — the liver. The liver was,
therefore, also the soul of the animal, and in the case
of a sheep offered to a deity the soul or mind of the god
was supposed to be reflected in the liver of the animal thus
sanctified. By the observance of the character of the
lobes, of the two appendices of the liver, of the gall-
bladder and the cystic and hepatic ducts, as well as by the
forms of the markings that appear on livers of freshly
slaughtered animals, all manner of conclusions were
drawn. Natural association of ideas formed one basis
for drawing conclusions. Enlarged lobes or ducts would
be a favorable sign, abnormally small ones unfavorable.
Peculiarities on the left side of the gall-bladder or of the
appendices to the liver would be unfavorable to your
enemy, the same signs on the right side would be un-
favorable towards you; and so on. Another basis of in-
terpretation would be furnished by the records of events
that happened — favorable or unfavorable — on previous
occasions when certain signs on a liver or certain shapes
of the markings on the liver had been noted. Post hoc,
propter hoc is a fundamental principle in all systems of
divination. A single occurrence would furnish a criterion
for the future. An elaborate scheme of liver interpreta-
tion was thus evolved which, set forth in handbooks, has
come down to us among the remains of Babylonian-
Assyrian religious literature. Through such interpreta-
tion of signs on the liver it was possible at any moment
by the sacrifice of a sheep/ to ascertain whether the
moment was auspicious for going to battle, for under-
taking a journey, for laying the foundation of a temple,
for planting, and what not. If the signs or a majority

69


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

of them were favorable, it would indicate that the gods
were well disposed. If, however, the signs were un-
favorable, it portended that the god was angry and must
be propitiated before one could venture on any under-
taking, no matter of what nature.

A second form of divination, also playing an impor-
tant part in the practical exercise of the religion, involved
the observation of phenomena in the heavens. In this
case the sign was forced upon one's attention — not de-
liberately sought out as in the case of liver divination.
Astrology, which resulted from this form of involuntary
divination as we might designate it, was also of a far
higher order, for it rested upon the identification of all
the heavenly bodies — sun, moon, the planets, and the
prominent stars — with the gods, irrespective of the orig-
inal character of these gods. The five planets were
identified with five of the chief deities, Jupiter with
Marduk, Saturn with Ninib, Mercury with Nebo, Mars
with Nergal, and Venus with the goddess Ishtar. The
theory underlying the endeavor to prognosticate the fu-
ture from the appearance of the sun, moon, and planets,
from phenomena observed in connection with their posi-
tion and their movements in the heavens, was the belief
in a correspondence between conditions existing in the
heavens and events on earth. All happenings below being
ascribed to the gods, the phenomena to be observed in
the heavens were interpreted as the activity of the gods
preparing future events. Observation of the heavens
afforded a peep into the worship of the gods, and if one
could see what they were doing, one could conclude what
was going to happen as the outcome of their activity.
In contrast to liver divination which rested on primitive
beliefs, astrology was a form of divination that resulted
from an intellectual advance which led man to the study
of movements in the heavens. Astrology was thus an
outcome of the science of the day, though it developed

70


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

into a pseudo-science. Even when astronomy arose as
an independent and purely scientific study, astrology or
the interpretation of heavenly phenomena with reference
to man's condition and fate on earth continued to be
cultivated; and it was not till we reach the threshold
of modern science that the partnership between the two is
dissolved. Greek and mediaeval astrology reverts to the
system evolved in the Babylonian temples for connecting
the activities of the gods in heaven with events on earth
directly affecting man's welfare.

This system was again based as in the case of liver
divination on two leading principles, (i) association of
ideas, (2) observation of what actually happened, fol-
lowing upon certain phenomena in the heavens, or upon
the appearance and relative position to one another of
the heavenly bodies — more particularly of the moon and
the five planets. So, for example, obscurations of the
moon or of a part of it were by a natural association gen-
erally regarded as unfavorable signs. The " transition "
periods in the phases of the moon were particularly noted.
Since down to the neo-Babylonian period the Babylon-
ians had no means of calculating the exact period of the
appearance of the new moon or of the time of full moon
or of the disappearance of the moon at the end of each
month, what to a people depending entirely upon em-
pirical observation seemed a too early or too belated ap-
pearance of the new crescent or of the full moon or of its
disappearance at the end of the month would assume great
importance. Again, by a natural association of ideas, a
too early or a too belated appearance or disappearance
would be on the whole unfavorable, while the normal or
expected would be favorable. The same was true with the
movements of the planets and more particularly their ap-
pearance at any given moment — whether bright or dull, as
well as their exact position in the heavens. In the case of
the sun and moon there were other kinds of phenomena,

71


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

such as halos, spots, peculiar colors and various forms
of obscurations, besides actual eclipses. The sphere of
observation was extended to the formation and color of
the clouds, to the character of storms, to the number of
thunderclaps in a storm, to the course and the brilliancy
of lightning flashes, to rainbows and much more of the
like. In time the field of observation thus grew into
enormous proportions, as is shown by the hundreds upon
hundreds of clay tablets grouped into series and detailing
in a more or less methodical arrangement all kinds of
phenomena with the interpretation attached. 13

A third miscellaneous division of the almost boundless
field of divination was formed by the importance attached
to all manner of striking and abnormal phenomena in
the case of anomalies, in infants or animals, at the time
of birth, 14 to the flight of birds, to the movements of ser-
pents, dogs, sheep, swine, ravens, locusts, roaches, etc., to
strange mishaps and encounters, to dreams, to the action
of flames. In short, almost any occurrence that deviated
from the normal was regarded as an omen ; it portended
something and it was the business of the diviner to whom
people would come with their inquiries to be ready with
an interpretation. The upshot was that the people felt
themselves hemmed in by the many superstitions to which
they clung, though it must be borne in mind that not all
of the vast territory of divination lore was embodied in
the official cult. This was restricted to liver divination,
to astrology and in some measure to dreams and ex-
traordinary happenings, which had a bearing on the gen-
eral welfare. The interpretations in all such cases bore
on matters of general concern, the crops, pestilence, re-
bellion, invasion and defeat. Only in so far as what
happened to the king or to members of the royal family

™ See for copious specimens in the author's (German) work, Die
Religion Babvloniens und Assyriens, vol. ii, c. xix-xx.

" See a monograph by the writer, " Babylonian-Assyrian Birth
Omens and their Cultural Significance" (Giessen, 1914).

72


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

was looked upon as an omen for the country at large
because of the special position accorded to the rulers by
virtue of their standing closer to the gods than the rest
of the population, did the individual play any part in the
official cult.

Included in the cult was the observation of numerous
festivals in honor of the gods. Each divinity appears to
have had a series of special days during the year set aside
for one reason or the other, on which occasions sacrifices
would be offered in the temples, accompanied by the
singing of hymns or the recital of litanies. The festivals
were not always joyous in character. Indeed, there was
to most of them an undercurrent of sombreness. Com-
ing usually at transition periods, the gods were implored
to be favorably disposed in the impending seasonal
changes. This sombre character was naturally more pro-
nounced when misfortune threatened.

If, in conclusion, the question be raised as to the influ-
ence which the religion with its elaborate form of divina-
tion, with its variegated incantation ritual, its festivals
and special occasions, its days of contrition and days of
thanksgiving, exercised on the life of the people, the gen-
eral verdict must be given that the ethical ideals, as voiced
in the extensive religious literature, in the myths of which
we have a considerable number, 15 in creation and deluge
tales, 16 in the exploits of heroes, human but with semi-
divine traits, 17 are relatively high. Obedience to the gods
led to placing the emphasis on fair dealings with one's
fellows. Reverence for the superior powers upon whose
favor the general as well as the individual welfare de-
pended entailed, as a corollary, respect for the laws de-
veloped for the government of the country, albeit that the

M See Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, c. xxiv.

" See Jastrow, Civilisation of Babylonia and Assyria, pp. 427-452.

17 See Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, c. xxiii, for
an analysis of the Gilgsmesh Epic — the chief literary production of
Babylonia.

73


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

people had little direct share in such government, which
remained autocratic to the latest period. The gods,
though often depicted as arbitrary, yet on the whole
appear to have had a real concern for the welfare of
humanity. Ea is the protector of humanity even against
the wilfulness of gods, while Shamash, the sun-god, as
we have seen, becomes a synonym of right and justice.
The rulers themselves set the example to their sub-
jects. Hammurapi knows of no higher ambition than
to become celebrated for all times as a " father " to his
people. He codifies the laws to govern his people, in
order, as he says, " that the strong may not oppress the
weak, that the innocent may be protected against violence
and that the man with a righteous cause may secure
justice." 18 Business practices were based on a spirit of
fairness and family relationships were regulated accord-
ing to principles of mutual helpfulness. Even the Assy-
rian rulers who were most ruthless in their ambition for
conquests and insatiable in their lust of power pride
themselves upon having maintained the laws providing
protection to their subjects. We have ethical precepts 19
— little collections of ethical sayings — which inculcate
kindness, fidelity, truthfulness as the highest virtues by
the side of piety and devotion to the gods. The hymns
and penitential songs, as well as the prayers attached to
the inscriptions of the rulers, breathe this same ethical
spirit, even while asking the superior powers for purely
material blessings. On the whole, the verdict must be
given that the religion of the Babylonians and Assyrians
while never rising to any genuine spirituality and failing
to lead to any relationship between man and the gods
whom he worshiped other than that of a " give and

M See the introduction to the code in R. F. Harper's translation,
The Code of Hammurapi, and the analysis in Jastrow, Civilisation
of Babylonia and Assyria, pp. 283-315. _

" See the specimen in Jastrow, Civilisation of Babylonia and
Assyria, p. 464 et seq.

74


RELIGION OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

take " compact, expecting divine favor in return for
homage to the gods and punctilious performance of rites
and the offering of tribute, yet acted as a spur towards
unfolding the best in human nature. We cannot go so
far as to say that ethics was the sovereign force in the
religion, but the beliefs and practices of the people had
as their outcome the creation of equitable standards of
life, with respect for law, fair dealings with one's fel-
lows, reverence for the gods, kindness towards the poor
and consideration for the weak, as among the duties which
were to be illustrated in daily conduct.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Morris Jastrow, Jr. : The Cimlization of Babylonia and Assyria
(Philadelphia, 1915). Chapters on the Excavations, the Decipher-
ment of Cuneiform Inscriptions, on the History and Religion
of Babylonia and Assyria, on Law, Commerce and Art, with
copious specimens of Babylonian art and literature.

Morris Jastrow, Jr. : Religion of Babylonia and Assyria (Boston,
1898).

Morris Jastrow, Jr. : Aspects of Religious Belief and Practice in
Babylonia and Assyria (New York, 1911). Illustrated, and with
translations of Babylonian religious texts interspersed.

G. A. Barton: Religions of the World, chap. 2 (Chicago, 1917.)

R. W. Rogers : History of Babylonia and Assyria (6th ed., New
York, 1915). 2 vols. Illustrated.

L. W. King: History of Sumer and Akkad (London, 1910). Illus-
trated.

L. W. King: History of Babylon (London, 1915). Illustrated.

R. F. Harper, Ed.: Assyrian and Babylonian Literature (New York,
1901).

R. W. Rogers : Cuneiform Parallels to the Old Testament (New
York, 1912). Contains many translations of Historical and
Religious texts of Babylonia and Assyria.


75


CHAPTER IV

THE HEBREW RELIGION
BY JAMES A. MONTGOMERY

A far-off land near the end of the world — that is the
tradition we have received from our fathers of the region
where was born the religion of the Hebrews, which in its
own right as well as the mother of our Western religion
peculiarly claims the student's attention. Out of the hazy-
East comes the Jew, then the Christ, — they settle in the
West, and the land of their nativity fades from sight.
Only loosely and for a few centuries attached to the
world of Hellenic-Roman civilization, it disappears in the
limbo of the Orient. Apart from the scanty history, or
tradition, or legend, contained in its sacred books, the
oblivion of the human mind and the rack of ages have
covered up the history of that sacred land and as well
of the great empires among which it nested. " God was
pleased to reveal himself to the Jew first," so the Gentile
convert was taught, but in a land and circumstances so
strange that the revelation appeared sole and unique. No
science could be made out of that sacred history, for there
were no similars with which to compare it.

Gradually since the 17th century, when Biblical
scholarship and oriental philology began to attack the
secrets of the Orient, the veil has been gradually re-
moved. In our own time it has been literally rent. The
religion of the Old Testament stands forth as one of
many great religions or religious systems which were
its neighbors and with which it vied. The mist in which
moved its actors, at least down to the time of Cyrus,
has been dispelled, and Abraham, Moses, David and the
Prophets no longer) walk the stage alone. We have

76


THE HEBREW RELIGION

discovered the setting for the picture, or rather where
once only a few lonely persona? dramatis appeared, now
the stage is crowded with the actors of the tremendous
drama of the ancient Orient. We can study the history
of that religion from outside, apart from its own authori-
tative sources, with documents which parallel them, which
in their contemporaneity often far excel them in historic
fact. The Old Testament religion has been confronted
with its ancient peers, we can compare them together,
appreciate their relative values, mark their interplay and
mutual influences. We might think we were nigh to rob
it of its secret and explain it all, but as in the advance
of all true science with each discovery made we only
uncover a greater mystery.

Let us place the geography of that ancient religion.
It arose in the northwest corner of Arabia and developed
in the adjacent land of Palestine, a country about the
fourth of the size of Pennsylvania. Not far away, to
the west, was Egypt with its hoary civilization and fasci-
nating religion. Farther to the east were the empires of
the Euphrates valley, whose civilization and imperium
dominated the land at many epochs for two millenniums.
Over the sea was the ^Egean civilization, the mother of
the Hellenic arts, which now we date as far back as 3000
B.C., and whose peoples came into contact with the Pales-
tinians before the Hebrews invaded the land. With the
settlement of the ^Egean Philistines in Canaan began the
eternal conflict of Greek and Hebrew. From the far
north stretched the arms of the mighty Hittite empire,
whose advance guards reached as far as Jerusalem and
Hebron. At the back of this world of competing and
eager young civilizations lay the womb of Arabia, which
sent forth its swarms of splendid desert sons to conquer
and be conquered by those advanced civilizations. Un-
named hordes came out thence, Canaanites, Amorites,
Hebrews, Aramaeans, later the Minaeans and Sabseans

77


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

of great native empires in the far south of the land, all
these the precursors of that greatest of Arab invasions
which was stimulated by Mohammed. Then when the
Hebrews are settled in the land they come into contact
with the commercial Phoenicians on the coast and the
opulent and martial Aramaean states to the north, like
Damascus. There follows the sweeping of the great
empires over these lands, of the Assyrian, the Baby-
lonian, the Persian, each with its own characteristic.
Finally came the Greek conquest or rather the overflow-
ing of the Greek civilization, Which gave more to and
took more from that religion than did any of its prede-
cessors. It is a strange fact that none of those kindred
Semitic religions, but an alien civilization from the west,
became the solvent for the best in the religion of the
Hebrews.

What produced this religion in that welter of the
ancient Semitic world? Was it only a precipitate of the
best in one of the great religious systems of antiquity —
of Egypt, as philosophers of the 18th century proposed,
or of Babylon, as some modern scholars dogmatically
claim? Or was it chance commingling of certain elements
in that one spot, the comparatively unimportant land of
Palestine, which fortuitously produced the supreme
product of ancient oriental religion? Was it a native
characteristic — wherein we might run the risk of making
Renan's mistake in claiming that the Semites were natu-
rally monotheistic ? Or was it a great personality or series
of great personalities who experienced spiritual truth in
their hearts and lives and enforced it upon an unwilling
people — as the Old Testament itself holds ?

This problem I will not seek to unravel, although I
have my prejudices. The purpose of this course is not
so much to give the history of the great religions as to
present their great contents, especially as these have had
effect and value in the world. But the survey of Israel's

78


THE HEBREW RELIGION

geographical and historical place in the world teaches this,
that the religion of the Hebrew from an early point in
its development had obtained a definite place in his con-
sciousness which made it a summum bonum. And fur-
ther, his relations in the midst of those ancient empires
and civilizations are to be studied not only in the light
of the amalgamations which he may have effected with
other systems of thought, but rather in the obstinate
opposition which he ever presented to them. With all
their modifying influences, the part of those other civili-
zations and religions is to be compared with the strokes
upon the blade lying on the anvil ; they tried it out, tested
it, gave it its edge. We do not have to go to very ancient
history to remark this. The story of the Maccabsean
revolt against Hellenism, the most glorious episode in
Hebrew history, shows how, despite all the subtle influ-
ences of fascinating Hellenism, when the danger was
apprehended, the Hebrew religion reacted. It gave the
world the finest thing its politics has ever seen, the man
of religious conscience refusing to worship the deity of
the state and insisting on worshiping the God of his heart
alone. Some deep-ingrained conviction, originated and
developed however we may surmise, along with an ethical
obstinacy which supported that conviction even to death,
was the characteristic of the Hebrew religion. Later
religions have shown like tendencies, although rarely with
such a permanent history. This quality has given to mod-
ern minds a harsh aspect to the Hebrew religion, espe-
cially to the loose thinking and light living of us mod-
erns. The fantastic systems of Egypt and Babylonia and
the mythologies of Greece have been more agreeable to
philosophic and aesthetic tastes; they have perished ex-
cept so far as they have been sublimated into poetry.
But the idea of a definite conviction in religion, with the
grim ethical purpose to live and die by it, that is the con-
tribution of the Hebrew religion to the world. Within

79


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the sphere of our western civilization only one other
religion, excepting Israel's daughter Christianity, has
shown the like characteristic : the religion of Mohammed.
And his religion was born in the same region as that of
Moses, in the deserts of western Arabia. If we inquire
for geographical and ethnical causes for these two great
phenomena of religion, we are driven back to Sinai and
the wastes about Mecca, and to some stock of people
morally capable of possession by a great religious enthu-
siasm.

There is not time in these two lectures to present the
Hebrew religion within each of the successive phases and
to examine their connecting links. Further, I feel that
with the many excellent books on the subject accessible
to the layman, many coming from the best hands, it
would be tedious to reader and writer to repeat what
must be largely commonplace. I will indicate the broad
divisions of the history, and then pursue a few chapters
of the religion, noticing where necessary the historical
development. This method involves our treating the re-
sults at the end of the process rather than the process
itself; it will station us largely in the age of the Prophets
of the Assyrian period, or in the Post-exilic age when
theology and cult were permanently institutionalized. We
shall have to take the Old Testament as it stands as the
authoritative pronouncement upon itself by the Hebrew
religion, and largely avoid the problems of origins and
criticism. But this summary procedure is inevitable in a
brief sketch of any historical institution. Greece is the
age of Pericles, and Rome the days of the end of the
Republic and the rise of the Empire. Only when a
people has expressed itself in final conscious form of
politics, art and religion can it exert its influence on
others and pass on its hard-won heritage.

My broad divisions are as follows :

( i ) The Mosaic Age, to about 750 b.c.

80


THE HEBREW RELIGION

(2) The Age of the Prophets, to the destruction of
Jerusalem, 586 b.c.

(3) The Post-exilic Period, into the first century a.d.
Some notes are necessary on this summary division.

The Mosaic Age includes the prehistoric period, repre-
sented by the patriarchal traditions, while the age after
Moses is naturally subdivided by the settlement in Canaan,
about 1200 b.c, and the rise of the monarchy, about 1000
B.C. The Post-exilic Age has a momentous epoch in
Alexander's conquest, 332 b.c, and the following era may
be called the Hellenistic Age.

Defence is to be made for my carrying on the history
of the Hebrew religion into the first Christian century.
It transgresses the traditional view that the Old Testa-
ment was codified by Ezra in the 5th century, an almost
dogma which has been explicitly or implicitly accepted
by Judaism and by Christendom, especially in the Protest-
ant wing. But the Old Testament Scriptures themselves
come down into the 2d century b.c. ; the Book of Daniel,
165 b.c, and Ecclesiastes are typical of the characteristic
development of Judaism in the late Hellenistic period,
the former of eschatology, the most striking offshoot of
late Jewish theology, the latter a product of one school
of thought which orthodox Pharisaism drove out. But
we must not stop with that 2d century. The history of
an institution demands that it be carried on to the end
or until the epoch when fresh developments require a new
scientific division. And unless we leave two centuries of
remarkable religious experience hanging unattached in
the air, our history finds its goal in the first Christian
century, when the rise of the Christian Church, and the
fall of Jerusalem, a.d. 70, radically changed the fate and
the constitution of Israel. From this point we have the
histories of Christianity and of Judaism. Not that there
is any consciousness in Judaism of a break at any of these
epochs, but scientific distinction requires of us a definite

6 81


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

conclusion, where a beginning may be made by subsequent
historical science. Accordingly, the late Judaistic litera-
ture must be taken into account; a history of the Hebrew
religion must include the Apocrypha of the Christian
Biblical canons, the Apocalyptic literature, the writings of
Philo which fed Christian theology, and the beginnings
of the rabbinical literature.

I proceed to sketch some distinctive features of the
Hebrew religion. In view of the summary character of
this course I develop my theme from the chief centres of
gravity.

I. The God of the Hebrew Religion
The Hollander scholar Kuenen invented the term
" Ethical Monotheism " as descriptive of the character-
istic of the religion of the Prophets. That is, the God
was one and was an ethical being, and there was neces-
sary relation between the unity and the moral character.
This term, still largely employed, is absolutely inadequate.
The History of Religion runs the same danger that
wrecked much of the old dogmatic theology in trying to
present such a religion as that of the Bible in arid philo-
sophical terms. For the Hebrew Deity did not become
one in the sense of aloneness, as modern Theism or Deism
requires, until the age of the Exile; while even after
that period there were survivals and revivals of the older
plurality or multiformity of deity, which condition
Hebrew theology until at least the schism of the Christian
Church, while it persisted later in Judaism in the form of
Kabbalism. Nor, with all appreciation of the ethical
character of the God of the Hebrews, is it correct to
absolute ethics or to comparative Semitic religion to
regard his ethical character, except in degree, as one of
his absolute and unique differentia. When we think of
the morality of the deities of paganism, we too spontane-
ously call up the fascinating but often morally degenerate


THE HEBREW RELIGION

gods of Greek mythology, with which creatures of the
poetic fancy the stern, moral deities of the Semites had
little in common. In consequence of the undue stress
laid upon the ethical note in the character of the Hebrew
God, the scholarship subsequent to Kuenen has been
almost startled by the lofty ethical characteristics of the
Babylonian deities, as presented in hymns and litanies,
even in such a legal document as the Code Hammurapi.
The fallacy of the science of religion has lain in attempt-
ing, in consonance with modern thought, to make religion
a by-product of ethics.

The unique characteristic of the God of the Hebrews
is his intense personality. In part this is expressed in cer-
tain terms and phrases ; thus he is the Living God. There
is the divine insistence on his ego, as in the refrain of
one of the Levitical Codes, " I am Yahwe," 1 or in the
Second Isaiah, of the 6th century, " I am He," " I am
Yahwe," " There is none other than He." There is the
divine jealousy which brooks no other gods, not so much
on the ground that they do not exist but for the self-
assertive egotism which will stand the company of no
others. But the unique personality of Yahwe appears
most strikingly in Jhe Old Testament record of his
divine revelation through history. This is not so much
a revelation of things about a God, a creed, a metaphysics,
but the revelation primarily of a person, knowledge of
whom will reveal his character and commands. We learn
nothing about Yahwe in the traditions of his appearance
to Moses in Ex. 3 and 6, only know that a Deity has re-
vealed himself. Indeed, the substance of the revelation
lies in his name, which to the Semitic mind was the symbol

"For this pronunciation of the Divine Name, with accent on
the last syllable, as generally accepted by modern scholars, see Enc.
Biblica, col. 33201 . The current " Jehovah " is a fairly modern bar-
barous formation, but pre-Protestant ; see G. F. Moore, in American
Journal of Theology, 1908, 34ff, and American Journal of Semitic
Languages and Literatures, 25 : 3i2ff.

83


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

and vehicle of personality, "I am Yah we." The people
learn of him further not as the One or the Righteous God
but as the Saving God. In one sense the Old Testament
is reticent in describing his characteristics, and hence per-
haps in part the difficulty modern thought feels in analyz-
ing him in categories. On the other hand, that volume
lays its stress upon his self -revelation through history — ■
always in a personal way — to Abraham, Moses, the
Prophets, Priests and Apocalyptists ; the accent is rather
upon how he revealed himself than what he revealed,
as though the discovery of his person was the important
thing.

This characteristic of personality appears peculiarly
in his relation to his people. Pie is first of all a tribal
God, of that I have no question, perhaps only a god of
a family, perhaps, with one theory an alien God whose
acquaintance was made by chance in the desert. And he
remains always a deity particularistic in his relations, he
is the God of Israel quite as much as the Creator and God
of the whole world. His full name is " Yahwe of Hosts,
the God of Israel." This particularism, which offends
our modern cosmopolitanism, is an expression of his es-
sential personality. It is a limitation, we say, on the pure
idea of God, but a limitation which is necessary to the
idea of the personal. For it is of the essence of per-
sonality that it is independent of other personalities, inde-
pendent and self -existent, and can only come into contact
with other persons through acts of the will and of desire.
It is a mistake to try to push the loftiest of the Prophets
to a more abstract idea of his person. Amos, who states
Yahwe's control of the world as strongly as any, and
perhaps more clearly {e.g., cc. 1-2; 9:7), nevertheless
holds to the divine particularism. "You alone," he says for
his God, " have I known of all the races of the earth."
For the loftiest of the theologians, the Second Isaiah (Is.
40-66), Israel was Yahwe's Servant, alone admitted to

84


THE HEBREW RELIGION

the arcana of his knowledge and mysteries, hence alone
furnished to preach his gospel to the world.

From a tribal God he becomes a national God: his
relationship remains a personal one, now to all Israel.
To the people grown into a nation, the faraway question
of the God of the whole world still lies in the academic
field. There are early apperceptions of his cosmic and
universal character, but these, on the basis of compara-
tive religion, we must take with a caution, for the same
powers are attributed by the pious Babylonian to many
a god, almost in the same breath. And to avoid pro-
longed argument, I must avoid depending on these early
assertions. The reform of the religion of Northern
Israel, known under Elijah's name, in the 9th century,
consisted only in the expurgation of the intruded worship
of a foreign deity. The Prophets of the 8th and 7th
centuries concerned themselves with the elimination of the
polytheistic and immoral Baalism of Canaan. Their
interest lay in establishing him as sole deity for Israel,
and that meant on Palestinian soil, for other than Yahwe's
soil was unclean and profane, unconsecrated by his pres-
ence {e.g., Amos, 7:17). The dispersion of the Exile and
the spiritual discovery of their God's presence in unclean
lands, developing the implications rather than explicit
doctrines of the Prophets, gave Israel its first absolute idea
of the World-God. The Church after the Exile appears
to our taste to have sadly degenerated from the Prophets
by its accent on holiness. Yet it remained true to the
core of Israel's spiritual development, because that idea
of holiness was an expression of the personality of God
and of Israel's sole intimacy with him. For the idea of
holiness is not only a taboo doctrine; it may fall into
the utter mechanical and become magic, but it is con-
sonant with the highest spiritual religion. To the devout
mind holiness is the aura of the divine presence, into
which only the consecrated can enter. The New Testa-

8s


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

ment word hagios, " holy, saint," retains the antique
notion, and it is not there primarily an ethical term.

Further, this characteristic of personality appears not
merely in the relation of Yahwe to the nation as a whole,
which relation must have remained psychologically im-
personal, except so far as it was mediated by the officers
of religion, king and seer and priest. From the beginning
to the end of the Old Testament we have the stories of
the divine communication with persons apart from sacred
office. Israel is not descended from a race of priests —
as the Epistle to the Hebrews makes the point ; Abraham
was an old-fashioned Sheich. That Moses possessed his
revelation through some other right than birth is pre-
sented by the fiction of the Scriptures that the hierarchy
was descended not from him but his brother. Only two
kings appear as organs of revelation, David and Solo-
mon, although the royal right thereto, as in the pagan
religions, was doubtless professionally claimed; this ap-
pears from the Royal Psalms and in the pretensions of
Simon Maccabee. But Yahwe worked through grace not
by privilege, even as in the Patriarchal history he chose
the younger sons by his arbitrary choice. He spoke by
the child Samuel to the priest Eli; he took Amos from
following the sheep, and the priest Jeremiah when he was
still too young to officiate and one of a degraded family.
It is only with the Exile that the priest becomes the
prophet, and then comes the decadence of prophecy. But
even after this the priest is replaced by the authority
of the Wise Man and then of the Rabbi, and Judaism
still is ruled by the intellectuals of the democracy.
The mediation of the Hebrew religion has been made
through revelation to the individual — into which no
science can pry.

This unique personal relation with Israel, whose
dogma was, " Him alone shalt thou serve," is the founda-
tion of Israel's monotheism. That result sprang out of

86


THE HEBREW RELIGION

Israel's spiritual experience with its one God, not from
a philosophical or political monism, as has been the his-
tory with henotheisms and monotheisms. What we may
call the credal statements of Israel's faith show its con-
trast with anything like absolute monotheism, and this
difference must be recognized in order to avoid the ap-
parent antinomies of Hebrew theology. Compare the
First Commandment of the Decalogue, " Thou shalt have
no other gods but me," with the Mohammedan con-
fession, " There is no God but God," and you observe
the lack of absolute monotheism in the Hebrew religion.
To this day the complete statement of Israel's faith is
the so-called Shema, " Hear, O Israel : Yahwe thy God
is one Yahwe " (Deut. 6:4), but this was in its origin the
denial of the local Baalism of Canaan which divided the
national God into as many deities as there were local
shrines — like the competitive Madonnas of a Latin coun-
try ; so Jeremiah indignantly exclaimed : " According to
the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah " (Jer.
2:28). Yet Israel's over-much religiousness was ad-
dressed to Yahwe.

Yahwe indeed appears as the creator of the Kosmos,
but that, as I have said, cannot be too far pressed as an
assertion of monotheism. Numerous passages reveal
the admission of other gods and assume the legitimacy
of their worship in .their own lands. David reproaches
Saul for driving him into foreign lands to worship strange
gods. Elijah permits the Syrian Naaman to worship
Ramman of Damascus, and the latter takes with him
loads of earth from Yahwe's soil to worship withal the
Hebrew God. The one thing noticeable is that Yahwe
has no social relationships with other divine peers. But
solitary as to divine peers, he is by no means a lonely
God. With him are associated the Bene Elohim, the Sons
of God, who are not angels in the Christian sense of the
word, but divinities, as the name implies, members of

87


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the category of deity over against creatures. These
beings appear not only in such a thorough-going myth
as that of their cohabitation with human women, " the
daughters of men" (Gen. 6), but all through the Scrip-
tures as God's attendant court. With them he consults
as upon man's creation. " Let us make man in our own
image," and over man's presumption in building the zik-
kurat of Babylon : " Let us go down and confound their
language" (Gen. 1:26; 11:7). This heavenly court,
" the host of heaven," is revealed to the prophet Micaiah,
among them the Spirit of Lying, who is to seduce the
prophets of Ahab (I Ki. 22: ioff). The book of Job
opens with a similar scene when the Sons of God report
to him like satraps or the Eye of the King to a Persian
monarch (cf. Zech. 1: 7ft). In Second Isaiah we do
find practically absolute monotheism, but the process of
Israel's conversion to the denial of polytheism seems to
have been largely based upon the absurdity of idol wor-
ship. In fact, after the Exile, and particularly in the
Greek age, in some part, no doubt, under Greek influ-
ence, there is a recrudescence of the inherited notion of
the Sons of God. The monotheism that was possible
even under the strain of the Babylonian conquest could
not maintain itself absolutely with the tremendous vision
of the world empire which Alexander instituted. The
fates of the innumerable peoples, and with the growth
of science the manifold and contradictory forces of the
world, could not be adequately explained from science by
monism. The doctrine of Princes (Dan. io:2of), of
Angels {e.g., the Apocalyptic literature), of the innumer-
able spirits of nature (Ps. 148: the Benedicite in the
Greek of Daniel 3) — which are not simply to be poetically
interpreted any more than the Greek nature divinities —
this whole development was not altogether alien to He-
brew thought. The one abiding principle was that no


THE HEBREW RELIGION

worship should be rendered by Israel to this heavenly
host (Deut. 4: 19; cf the Greek of 32:8).

Still more interesting to us because of its relations
with many striking phases of philosophy, with Greek and
Christian theology, Gnosticism, Neo-Platonism, Jewish
Kabbalism, was the belief, under various forms, in in-
termediate essences, hypostases, which mediated between
the spiritual and intangible Deity and the world of matter.
Such hypostatizations are ancient in Hebrew thought. It
appears classically in the Angel of Yahwe (never an
angel in our sense), who is the manifestation form of
Deity for sight and sound in the older traditions. He
is not a distinct personality, and his vagueness is due to
the grappling with a heavy problem, that of God's rela-
tion with the world. We might think of the Angel of
Yahwe as the composition with the ancient polytheistic
legends, at the same time we know of like species of
thought in the other Semitic religions which never at-
tained to monotheism but are striving after a certain
systematization in theology. So the Angel of Bel (Mal-
'ak-Bel) appears as a Palmyrene deity. And in both the
Phoenician and the Hebrew religion we have the Face
of God, temporarily hypostatized in the latter, personified
in a separate deity in the former. What the Face, Pro-
sopon, implied is clear when we recall that it became
the term for the Persons of the Christian Trinity. The
" Name " is another hypostasis ; he " lodged his Name
in Jerusalem."

In the Hellenistic age we find a concept of an inter-
mediate hypostasis congruous to the new world of
thought, that of Wisdom, e.g., Proverbs, 8, Book of
Wisdom, 7 : 22ff. Theological students dispute whether
we have here more hypostatization or more personifica-
tion or personalization ; the purpose of the concept is evi-
dent. A more generally Semitic concept of an interme-
diate to the divine action upon the world is that of the

89


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Word; it can be traced back into the Babylonian and
Old Arabic religions. In this concept Hebrew thought
shared catholicly with Stoicism : its great Greek philoso-
pher Philo developed it with puzzling ambiguity in his
treatises, and laid the foundations, along with his school
of thought, to the Christian doctrine of the Logos. In
a more prosaic way the Jewish Targums mediate all
the divine relations to the world by the Memra, the
Word of the Lord. Such were the metaphysical possi-
bilities of the Hebrew idea of the one God.

I have made this long excursion on the Hebrew idea
of Deity in order to point out the peculiar quality of its
monotheism. It was not attained by abstraction, as was
the Mohammedan monotheism; nor did it proceed
through a political henotheism to a supreme monarchy
of one god, as in the ancient empires. The monism of
the Hebrew faith was practical, experimental, economical ;
it lay in the unique personal relation of Israel to its God.
He was one to them, to their obedience and affection,
and became ultimately to their intellect the only one. He
saved them at the Red Sea ; he marched with them from
his home on Sinai; he brought them into the promised
land, where he was a stranger like them ; he made them
a nation and was their monarch, expecting their sole ser-
vice as monarchs are wont to do, but with a passion and
jealousy which no gods of paganism ever affected. When
the vision of the larger Kosmos snatched them out of
their provincialism in the coming cataclysm from Assyria,
their seers had the vision to hold that the same God
would be true to them if they were true to him. In fact,
their vision preceded historical experience, which proves
that religious logic was working on ancient principles. It
was a tremendous stretch of faith which shocked Israel's
provincialism even as it challenged the nations and re-
ligions of the world. But the lesson was driven home
deep enough into the heart of the people so that they

90


THE HEBREW RELIGION

withstood the shock of the Exile — the one known case
of the survival of a conquered and transported people
preserving and purifying its religion in ancient history.
The fall of Babylon, the Return, the survival of the
remnant in the dark ages that followed, the triumph over
the deadly persecution of Hellenism for faith's sake,
corroborated and hardened the faith that stood the early
tests. Wherever they went, whatever their experiences,
Yahwe remained their God. It was the result of this
experience that brought them to the dogmatic assertion
of him as the God of the whole world.

There seem to have existed ancient elements in this
faith in their particularistic God which tended to the
resultant monotheism. To worship only the tribal gods
was practically the rule of ancient communities. These
wandered rarely into the folds of other gods. But the
rise of nations and empires and the establishment of
closer social contact among peoples introduced syncretism.
It was the common logic that a traveller or sojourner in
a foreign land should worship its gods. But from the
beginning of Israel's religious history there appears to
have been an exclusive demand made upon their faith
by their God. Lesser deities were associated with him
in popular cults, this development occurred at times in
Jerusalem, but he never submitted to becoming a member
of a pantheon, one of many gods. 2 Even when David
cries that he is being driven into foreign lands to serve
strange gods, there is expressed his heart's pang that he
must abandon Yahwe. In some way, and why not by the
Moses of tradition — for great religions have always per-
sonal founders — the exclusiveness of Yahwe in his rela-
tion to Israel was pressed in upon them. There may
have been some theological economy in the old Arabian

'In the recently discovered papyri of the Jewish colony at
Elephantine in Upper Egypt several lesser deities, mostly personified
cult objects, accompany the Hebrew god.

91


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

religion with which the Hebrews were early connected —
the same region brought forth monotheistic Islam. Prob-
ably the peculiar migratory history of the Hebrews who
found a wandering God in the desert, who travels with
them, involving a detachment on his part from a local
habitat, may have chained their affection to him, like the
love of two friends wandering in a foreign land, like
the love of bridegroom and bride, as Hosea idyllically
pictures it. And this detachment of their God from mere
place gave them a larger view of Deity than is the lot
of the ordinary tribe whose god is locally confined and
which picks up new gods wherever it travels. It is inter-
esting to notice that even in Palestine he remained a
peculiarly supersensuous God. His ark was not neces-
sary to his religion, it suffered ignominious capture, and
his early sanctuary Shilo was destroyed (I Sam. 4; Jer.
7). It was long before he found a home at Jerusalem;
even then the home was not necessary to him. He could
endure the burning of his house, the destruction of his
sacred ark, and Ezekiel sees his glory moving majestically
away from his abandoned temple. If, after the Exile,
there is more than ever before an insistence on locating
his presence in the holy city, nevertheless the higher reach
of faith had been made; his holy temple is in the heav-
ens (Hab. 2:20). The Hebrew did not proceed in his
thought from what God must be in his relation to the
world, but rather finding him everywhere, and always
ready to serve his people and to rise above their enemies,
he found him through experience a cosmic God. But
their deepest interest lay always in their experience, what
they had found in him for themselves, only secondarily,
and so far as this served them, in his relation to the world.
They learned of him as World-God only when they be-
came world-citizens; but their faith was ready for the
ordeal. This very particularism of the Hebrew religion,
this particularism of Yahwe, seemingly the very pole to a

92


THE HEBREW RELIGION

starting point of a cosmic and monistic theology, was the
secret and safeguard of what Israel ultimately effected
in the world's monotheism. In the study of the history
of religion we have to begin not with preconceptions as
to what God is, but to follow the method in which he
revealed himself, that is, the way in which men or a race
came to believe in him. Monotheism grew up in Israel,
but almost in the opposite way to that which our philos-
ophy would expect.

We are compelled to the position that from the first
of Israel's known religious history there was working an
inner logic which binds together its beginning and climax.
There is an intellectual foundation to that religion the
ignoring of which has led to the assumption of all kinds
of chances to explain the product, which really came of
inner necessity. It was Wellhausen who made the classic
remark that the Mosaic religion was summed up in this
word : " Yahwe Israel's God, Israel Yahwe's people."
This axiom developed its logic. The worship of one
Deity alone, or the conscience of his jealousy, led to the
denial of competitive or antagonistic deities. For if other
gods there were, as gods they implicitly deserved service
in their lands and empires. If those gods were not to
be worshiped, it was a confession by implication that they
did not exist. It was a similar and withal uniquely dras-
tic application of logic which shut up all the shrines of
the land under King Josiah to teach the one national God
through the single sanctuary at Jerusalem. And it was
by a similar logic that Judaism proceeded to the sense of
its missionary duty to the world, as set forth in the
Evangelist of the Second Isaiah and the parable of
Jonah. If there was only the one God and Israel alone
knew him, it was Israel's commission, if there were any
pride and humanity, to make him known to the world.
The religion of Israel was led on by the same unconscious
logic that has driven every monistic religion into claiming

93


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

and preaching a Gospel for the world. The same single-
ness of mind which marks the home religion forces it into
the exclusiveness, intolerance, bigotry, if you will, which
is the antinomy in every religion which will be catholic.

II. Yahwe's Relation to the World
iYahwe appears as the sole creator of the world, from
the two stories of Creation in Gen. 1-2 and through the
Old Testament. No " partner " is associated with him
in his creative acts, except in the passage, " Let us make
man in our image," a reminiscence of earlier polytheism,
but a phrase which remained acceptable to the late hand
which finally redacted that chapter. The Hebrew verb
we translate " create " is used exclusively of the divine
action, but our theological content of creatio ex nihilo is
not to be read into it; the raw matter of the universe
exists from the beginning; on its origin Hebrew thought
did not speculate. Yahwe is the artist of the Kosmos,
actually a Protoplast with his own hands in the Yahwistic
Creation Story. The mythical aboriginal monsters of
Chaos survive in the poetry of the books of Isaiah and
Job, again almost entirely as literary reminiscences and
often given an historical interpretation. The Tiamat of
the Babylonian legend appears in Gen. 1 as Tehom, " the
deep," but without personification; it js the Chaos.
Yahwe's lordship over the universe is expressed in vari-
ous epithets : he is " the Possessor of heaven and earth "
(Gen. 14: 19) ; Yahwe Sebaoth, understood at least sub-
sequently as the God of the heavenly hosts; the King
of the world, as in the application to him of the title of
the Persian monarch, "the Great King" (Ps. 48:2);
"the Judge of all the earth" (Gen. 18:25). Some of
his titles are of most antique origin, as the Highest
(Elyon, Gen. 14: 19), and in themselves predicated
nothing as to his absoluteness ; their content must be ob-
tained from the sum of the theology.

94


THE HEBREW RELIGION

There exists accordingly in the Old Testament a re-
markable singleness of mind and religious equanimity;
there is no distraction as among a number of possible or
rival powers or objects of obligation. It is noticeable
that that sphere wherein magic is the opus operandum and
the cult of the dead from early fell under the ban of the
official religion {e.g., I Sam. 28: 3) ; both elements con-
tinued and had their renascence in the Judaistic period,
but the spirit of Yahwism forbade their entrance into the
public religion. This monism affected as well the moral
sphere of the conflict of good and evil. What was else-
where attributed to demons and ghosts or to fates higher
than the gods was logically assigned to the one divine
power. The physical evil of the world was assigned to
him, always in explanation of it man's sin being given;
not only so, but, where it suits his purpose to punish men,
he is the ultimate ground of their sin, as when he hardens
Pharaoh's heart (Ex. 4:21) or sends his Lying Spirit
into the mouth of his prophets (I Ki. 22). But as physical
evil was always held to be the exact correspondent and
equivalent of moral fault, this doctrine had its fateful
result. In the earlier age when Israel was on the whole
prosperous and the accent lay upon the community and
not at all on the individual, the easy calculus of good
and evil was borne without too great difficulty. After
all, it still exists in all popular religion, while its logic
is hard to avoid in any theology of a one God. But the
crash of the ancient system of moral philosophy came
with the age which saw the fall of the monarchy and its
dispersal of the scattered individuals from whom as spir-
itual units was constructed the Jewish Church; it was
the age, too, of that prophet of individualism, Jeremiah.
The crisis is marked in the experiences of this prophet
and in the spiritual drama of Job. The hero defies his
friends' contention that his evil lot is the result of his sin
and denies that they speak for God. He finds no answer

95


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

for his problem except in resignation to the God of un-
speakable ways. Theologically the drama ends in skep-
ticism, but mystically Job has learnt that his Champion
lives.

However, this stubborn higher faith in the one God
who must be withal righteous, so that a man appeals to
him as against him, was not practicable in the mass of
the religious folk, even in the official religion. It is a
dramatic coincidence that in this tremendous trial of the
simple Hebrew faith Persia with its dualistic religion
became mistress of the Jewish people. Without doubt
that new, sternly moral religion had its effect upon Juda-
ism, although not, I believe, to the extent that many
scholars suppose. Rather, Zoroastrianism was itself a
symptom of the breakdown of the older simple-minded
faith's.*- Judaism equally but not to the same extreme met
the problem with a projection of dualism. The survivals
of ancient polytheism were revamped for the explanation
of the evil and sin of the world. Satan, one of Yahwe's
chief ministers, became his antagonist ; the celestial hosts
are divided into good and bad angels, there is war in
heaven. The ancient myth of the marriage of the Sons
of God with the daughters of men — in its framework in
Genesis set forth as a crowning act of audacity, and then
forgotten — is rediscovered to give a celestial explanation
of sin, a factor brought in from an outside sphere into
God's good world. The ancient Serpent of Chaos had
become a rationalistic snake in the Garden of Eden, but
he now again flashes out in his true colors as the old
Dragon. The drama of good and evil is carried into the
heavens. There we must leave it where Christianity
accepts it, proclaiming a Saviour from the Prince of the
power of the air and the forces of darkness. In the rich-
ness of its experience the Hebrew religion met, even if
it did not escape unscathed, the fiercest of doubts con-

96


THE HEBREW RELIGION

cerning a one good God, but after all left its monotheism
a heritage for the world.

But we err much if we think that the doctrine of the
Creator God was the chief element in the Hebrew theology
concerning the world. This was made a cardinal tenet
in the early Jewish proselytism and in the preaching of
the Christian Gospel, where the doctrine almost precedes
that of the Saviour. Cosmic speculation must connect
the origins of things with the responsible deities of the
universe, the one God must be the creator at least of the
Kosmos in its original plan. But the cardinal, the unique
characteristic of the Hebrew doctrine of Yahwe's relation
to the world consists in making him not so much the God
of its beginnings as the God of its history. Here we lay
the finger upon what I am inclined to think is the most
original thing in the Hebrew religion.

Where other sacred volumes are theologies, meta-
physics, revelations, the Old Testament is primarily a
history. And the creed of Israel is a historical confes-
sion. One thinks first of the prayers and liturgies of
the Jewish Church, in which the sacred history of the
race is recited as the basis of present faith and future
hope — a precedent carried on into the Christian liturgy
of the Eucharist. We can carry these confessional retro-
spects in their almost stereotyped form back to the Psalms
and the prayers in Ezra and Nehemiah. But the same
historical faith is equally strong in the Second Isaiah and
Deuteronomy and it colors all the Prophets, in their re-
bukes as well as in their promises. It is most striking in
the earliest of the canonical Prophets, Amos and Hosea :
both books are full of reminiscences of the sacred story
and of God's working through history, for it is an abso-
lutely false view of the Prophets which would make them
abstract theologians and moralists, without a country
and without a tradition. But more striking than this
prophetic literature are those great historical cycles, now
7 97


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

incorporated in the canon, from Genesis into Samuel, with
their legitimate descendants stretching down into Kings.
These books we scholars prosaically call Yahwist and
Elohist, or, curtly, with abstract symbols J and E.
Scholarship has hardly reread the Scriptures enough to
appreciate them. But these writings which go back to the
age before the monarchy in their origin, and which often
are the finer the earlier they are, as is true of all classics,
are pervaded by the theme of the stately march of Yahwe
through human history. He is a living God, pulsating
along with man in human events. And the earliest monu-
ments we have of Hebrew literature tell the same story;
the Song of Deborah bids sing of the " righteous acts of
Yahwe," that is, of his victories, since the day he came
out of the desert, and the Song of Moses recites how
" the horse and the rider he threw into the sea." There
is a golden thread binding the earliest literature with the
latest, the most stereotyped and conventional forms of
ecclesiastical vogue.

In studying the Hebrew religion we have, I believe, to
understand the spirit of its sacred volume as a whole.
It is absurd to hold that the composition of that volume
as late is representative only of the latest period, what we
call Judaism. It is a compilation of earliest and latest
sources, in that sense the volume is not one, but a varie-
gated library. But it is one in its presentation of one
great Consistent theme, that of the historical providence
of God, of a God with a purpose for his people and finally
also for the world.

Equally the writer of the second story of creation,
whom we summarily call J, and the writer of the first,
symbolized with P, writing perhaps centuries apart, set
their stage for a world drama. In the one we have man
as the lord of God's creation, given his dominion over
the world ; in the other the first man and the first woman
set in the paradise made for them, with all things good,

98


THE HEBREW RELIGION

and only the possibility of evil present in the fateful tree.
In the two stories together we have man as the child-
like yet godlike intelligence, the relations of man and
woman, the beginnings of society, virtue and the possi-
bility of sin. The reader feels that God himself was
interested in that first chapter of the human race, even
as he himself is. He reads on into the second act and sin
comes into the world. But God still continues his plan
despite the sinful race. With its degeneration he destroys
it by the flood, but continues his purpose by saving one
righteous man. Even the dry Table of the Nations (Gen.
10) has its place in the drama because it reveals the God
of all human history, who, as Amos says, " led up the
Philistines from Caphtor (or Crete) and the Syrians from
Kir as he led up Israel from Egypt" (Amos 9:7).
Israel never denied but claimed its partnership in the
world's history. The story narrows in its scope with the
selection of Abraham as the hero, but it is no mere pro-
vincial history that we follow as it stretches on. " The
Friend of God" issues into a family, and this into a
nation, which we pursue in its vicissitudes and migrations,
its triumphs and failures. The gods of the Gentiles love
success, they cling to their chosen people when these are
triumphant, they fail them when these succumb ; or rather
they live and die with the fortunes of their people. This
was not the case with Israel and its God. As he had no
birthplace, so he has no tomb. He possesses a divine
claim upon them, what is called the Covenant, which
involves a mutual responsibility between them: he will
not let them go, pursues them with the fierceness of his
love ; they cannot lose him or they themselves are lost.

The political history enters into a church history. The
nation dies and the people are raised to life again, for
Yahwe Sebaoth's purpose in history will not be frustrated,
whether it is to save his honor, as the Calvinistic Ezekiel
claimed, or because he has a world purpose for his servant

99


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Jacob, as the Second Isaiah preached. The nation be-
comes a church, with a history on its political side sordid
enough, as church history is wont to be. But the feeble
folk takes its place in the world as a spiritual com-
munity, living in this world and not of this world, and
yet worldly enough, we may thank God, to fight for its
life against Greek Kultur, in its one gross exhibition, as
it once fought the Philistines. The volume comes to an
end, but its latest book is one of visions for the future,
and the divine purpose is not concluded. In the full view
of history it gives birth to a daughter which becomes the
nursing mother of our western world, and both the vener-
able mother and the more vigorous child each cherishes
that sacred history as prophetic of its future. In the
hearts of both is written deep the belief in a God of his-
tory who fulfils himself in many ways and who still
guides toward a more glorious future only to be accom-
plished in the heavens. This other-worldly thought comes
in with the Apocalyptists of Judaism and the early Chris-
tian Church ; their imagination, fed on the history of the
past, would break through the veil of eternity and carry
on God's purposes to infinity. The history of religion
dare not ignore such a tremendous historical and cosmical
consciousness as has been developed in those long cen-
turies, still so potent and imperative on men. It is the
idea of the Kingdom of God.

I am not discussing the historic truth of this historical
consciousness. My point is that Israel regarded itself
from early days as a people with a future and a destiny,
and ultimately with a mission in the world. This idea
appears in the antique odes called the Blessings of Jacob
and Moses, and in the cycle of the Balaam poems (Gen.
49 ; Deut. 33 ; Num. 21 ff ). It is by no means adequately
explained from Israel's political or intellectual genius.
Neither Egypt nor Babylon produced such a conscious-
ness; the likest to it is that of Greece or Rome, but the

100


THE HEBREW RELIGION

greatness of those peoples is the explanation of their
claims. Israel's consciousness is due to its religion, to an
original idea concerning its God's purpose which it never
let go and which it always amplified in historic connection
with the past. In this consciousness Israel has given the
world one of the greatest contributions to common re-
ligion ; it may be called Theism, in opposition to the arid
Deism into which most philosophies and the refinements
of the higher religions empty. Better, it is the doctrine
of the God in history, or, as the Hebrew simply put it,
of " the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob."

III. Man in His Relation to God
Man was created as the climax of creation, absolutely
distinguished from the beasts, and possessing the breath
or spirit of Yahwe. Except for the subtle serpent of the
Yahwistic creation story and Balaam's speaking ass,
there is an absolute gulf between man and the lower
orders of creation. The whole human race is derived
from one original pair, and the relationship of the Chosen
People to all humanity is stressed in the early part of
Genesis. Israel is not different in origin or character
from the rest of the world, but is elected of the divine
will. In the oldest legend man was created for the fel-
lowship of God. God walked and conversed with him in
Paradise, was hospitably entertained by Abraham, and
the subsequent history of divine communication and reve-
lation sets forth the divine fellowship of Deity with his
human creatures. The relation between the two is a
moral one, the merely ritual element is in the origins
suppressed. The maintenance of the relationship was
dependent upon man's disobedience; human sin sprang
from disobedience.

The Old Testament religion is often represented as
an aspect of oriental servility, the human creature cring-
ing before the divine king and despot. This view is based

IOI


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

upon an ignorance of early Semitism and its social life.
The Arab is not a serf or a slave ; the actual Arabian of
historical knowledge is an essentially independent and
skeptical being. To him, as to the Hebrew, kingship was
a later and secondary institution: the elder society was
based on the fiction of a great family, the leader of
which was the eldest and best. Even when the monarchy
developed in Israel, it remained what we may call a lim-
ited and, according to Deuteronomy, a constitutional
monarchy ; its claims were not easily brooked, as the atti-
tude of the prophets shows. Messianism itself grew up
not so much as a result of the monarchy as in opposition
to it. Again, there is the parallel in early Islam, where
we find the Caliphs reigning not by inherent right but
through the assent of the people. The pattern of a divine
despot was not given by Israel's early constitutions;
rather this idea came in with the later experiences under
the world empires. Then Yahwe becomes the king. The
reverence before Deity is to be referred to natural awe,
need not have been patterned after earthly institutions.

Hence the Hebrew God is not originally a king. As
the ancient names show, equally for the Hebrews, the old
Arabians and the Amorites who established the first dy-
nasty of Babylon, he was represented under terms of the
tribal life. In Abraham's name he is the " lofty father,"
in Hammurapi's he is the " Uncle," i.e., " Patron," or
the " Brother," as in Ahimelek. He is given the title
Adon, " Lord," or Adonay, " my Lord," which expressed
conventionally something like the English " Sir," or
" Milord," and this becomes one of his standing epithets,
but the name Ba'al, which was indigenous to Canaan,
meaning the owner of the district, with the inference that
its citizens were serfs or chattels, was never easily accli-
matized, and the Prophets reacted against the epithet on
good constitutional tradition.

Probably we dare not press too much the terms of

102


THE HEBREW RELIGION

almost easy familiarity on which the Patriarchs con-
versed with Yahwe. That is more or less common to all
ancient mythology and folk-legend. Still they are to be
noticed as presenting the personal relation subsisting be-
tween Yahwe and his human friends even in the austere
official history of Israel. When Abraham pleads so
humanly for the lives of the people in Sodom and Gomor-
rah—" Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? "—
he is taking the democratic liberty of counselling the chief
who admits him to his intimacy.

But we have to observe this significant fact that the
media of communication between Yahwe and his people
were not confined to an aristocracy or hierarchy. The
Hebrew tradition in regard to cults and sacred castes is
ancient and genuine. The temples were not the first
things built, as in the Babylonian legend, nor was man
created in order to provide sacrifices for the gods, as in
Greek thought. It is a strange thing that a religion
which appears to culminate in the elaborate ritual of
Judaism actually held that this was not the original status ;
it introduced the whole elaborate cult at a given moment
of history. And when we recall the long line of individual
organs of revelation in that sacred history, and also the
democratic phases of spiritual life which have manifested
themselves through subsequent Judaism and Christianity,
we are forced to admit that there were ancient elements
of great spiritual liberty in that religion which, however
obscured at times, nevertheless persisted for the world's
use. We are accustomed to think of early Semitic re-
ligion as entirely composed of ritual, taboo, magic, with a
consequent elaborate system of sacred officiants. The
Hebrew historical tradition does not bear this out. The
Patriarchs are not priests, and Amos and Jeremiah deny
that sacrifices were offered in the Mosaic age (Amos
5:25; Jer. 7:2iff). I fear the history of religion will
deny the statements of the Prophets, but the important

103


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

fact is that there existed wide-spread such an unsacerdotal,
anti-caste idea among the Hebrews at an early age.

Recognizing this element which is not discoverable
from archaeology and which appears to be denied by the
later ritual development in Judaism, we may be able to
understand a phenomenon in Hebrew religion which gen-
erally challenges explanation. I refer to the institution
of Prophecy, the most distinctive order in Hebrew life,
and without a compeer in the world's religion. The
present tendency of religious criticism is to postulate a
spiritual marvel in the Prophets of the 8th century, which
almost approximates the admiration for Jesus Christ.
It is presented as having no roots in the past, to have
been confined to a small circle of men, and yet to have
had such an effect upon the subsequent religion that it
tremendously modified it and left an enduring pure im-
pression which lasted through the ages with its fruition
in Christianity. But I wonder whether, if we are to
attempt a scientific treatment of the subject, it is not wiser
to allow some early original element in the crucible of the
Hebrew religion which made the soil from which the
Prophets grew. Is the Hebrew history all in the wrong
when it points to a series of men who, apart from cult
and caste, talked with God, received his inspirations and
revelations? Again, it is not the question whether these
stories are to be taken at their face value, whether Abra-
ham entertained God in his tent or Moses saw his face.
But the presence of this tradition, not merely in the
Prophets themselves, for they have almost nothing to
say about the earlier heroes, but in popular story-books,
points to another capacity of religion than that which we
sum up in a devotion to cults and taboos. Abraham,
Joseph, Moses, Samuel, Nathan, Elijah, were not the
figments of later writers, if the taste of their hearers was
entirely different. We should then hear more of rol-
licking heroes like Samson, or for religious tastes more

104


THE HEBREW RELIGION

of the tales of temples and priests. But their subject
matter must somewhat gauge for us their audience and
its tastes. Evidently there was a stream of religion
stretching behind the Prophets in which lay in embryo
some of the higher spiritual goods of mankind. This
position does not deny the existence in predominance of
every other strain of religion, to the most mechanical and
unspiritual, to taboo and fetich systems, these often inex-
tricably entwined with the highest elements. But as none
can deny that in the atmosphere of Jewish cult and legal-
ism have grown up some of the great saints of the world,
or that Jesus of Nazareth cannot be historically explained
except from that Judaism, so we must allow higher strains
in the earlier religion of which we should have no echo
but for the Prophets and the Biblical story-books. We
are too much possessed with the evolutionistic theory so-
called and think that the order is always first the lower,
then the higher ; modern science denies this in the physical
world, and equally the study of ancient civilizations
denies it.

I suggest, therefore, that while we regard Prophecy
as creative in the absolute sense and diminish not a whit
from its honor, nevertheless we look at it also as sympto-
matic of the Hebrew religion. Moses and the great
Prophets and certain Psalmists and Jesus are certainly
not so many isolated individuals : that were an unscientific
attitude. Rather, if we may use scientific categories of
spiritualities, they are to be explained together.

For these men who make the Bible religion what it
is represent the essential character of that religion, its
note of the personal God who comes into communication
with his creatures made for godlikeness. The note is the
same whether Abraham is the Friend of God, or Moses
his Steward, whether Elijah hears his voice at Horeb, or
Isaiah sees his glory in the earthly temple, or Jesus calls
him Father. It is the personal God, often acting un-

i°5


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

accountably as personalities do, who selects those whom
he will for his intimacy and disregards the conventions
of men and ecclesiastical castes. As he selected his own
chosen people, so ever and again he elects chosen indi-
viduals and admits them to his counsel. And as that
chosen people was to be his servant to the world, so he
elects this " goodly fellowship of the Prophets " to preach
his law and gospel to the world, for it is only through
human personality that the divine Person can be made
known. The Prophets sublimate the religion of Israel,
but they are also its necessary corollaries.

I pass on to that phase of man's Godward side which
may be summed up in the word " cult," the ritual, formal
service of Deity. In most religions, higher as well as
lower, the cult plays quantitatively the greatest part, in
its practice, and for the great masses of humanity cult
is religion. A quantitative predominance holds as truly
for the Hebrew religion. The Old Testament is actually
the greatest manual of archaic religion which science
possesses. Outside of the scanty monuments and chance
references of classical and Arabic writers we actually
know very little of the early Semitic ritual, for the Baby-
lonian is not to be taken into account as presenting pure
Semitism, it is too greatly charged with the Sumerian
element, and is too highly elaborated; at the best this
parallel is good only for studying the latest phases of
Jewish cult when there was possibility of extensive Baby-
lonian influence. The Hebrew cult is a phase of the old
Semitic cult, with its origin in North Arabia and its
further developments in Syria, also a land of genuine
Semitism. As the cult does not for the most part dis-
tinguish the Hebrew religion from its affiliated rites, I
give it less proportion in this study, which must deal
with the differentiating characteristics of that religion.

In one important respect the phenomenon of the cult
in the Hebrew religion is remarkable; that cult was not

106


THE HEBREW RELIGION

static, as in the case of Babylonia, it was ever in flux;
and further there was in the Hebrew religion the con-
sciousness of this flux and of the epochs of its history.
We might best compare the Greek consciousness, in the
form of legend, of the introduction of the Orphic and
Dionysiac cults. Several clearly marked stages may be
marked out in our field.

(i) The primitive period, illustrated by the Patri-
archal and Mosaic traditions ; here we have many reminis-
cences of the antique Arabian cult.

(2) The period of assimilation with the elaborate
cult-system of Canaan; this system, which also probably
contained elements that had filtered in from Babylonia,
the Mediterranean, possibly Egypt, was the principal
alien factor in the history, although there was too much
of an identity among the various phases of the Semitic
cult to allow us to distinguish exactly between Arabian
and Canaanitish.

(3) The age of reaction, chiefly represented by the
Prophets of the 8th century, although earlier prophetic
men had taken stand against the Canaanite innovations,
for example the prophets who opposed the building of the
temple in Jerusalem.

(4) The compromise betwen the Jerusalem hierarchy
and the prophetic reformers, appearing in Deuteronomy
and carried on into the so-called Law of Holiness (Lev.
17-26) and Ezekiel. The elements of Canaanite re-
ligion regarded as antagonistic to the worship of Yahwe
were done away with in the drastic reform of Josiah;
the cult was absolutely centralized at the temple at Jeru-
salem. But this centralization only intensified the ritual-
istic elements of the religion, and these triumphed with
the acceptance by the prophetic element of the purification
of patently objectionable features. As in the case of
the reforming Akenaten of Egypt, the reform broke down
with the death of King Josiah, but, unlike the Egyptian

107


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

precedent, a composition of contrary forces had been
formed which set the order for the future. For it was
the element that accepted this reformed order which per-
sisted through the cataclysm of the Exile. Ezekiel, a
prophet but still more a priest, and withal an apocalyptist,
laid down a typical ritual scheme for the security of holi-
ness in the future.

(5) The ecclesiastical establishment of the Post-exilic
Age. This conserved the chief theological results of the
Prophets, provided them with a shell the world could
not break, but made Judaism a typically ritualistic insti-
tution. It continued the unobjectionable elements of the
elder cult, restored ancient forms of practice, added new
elements to perfect the scheme, probably introduced
Babylonian elements, and in general theorized at will.
And the flux-like character of the Law was continued by
those High-Church Progressives, the Pharisees. But the
same age which saw the intensification of the ritual of
the community to an abnormal degree witnessed the rise
of its antinomy, the Synagogue, the cultless meeting-
house of the Jews. It was the centralization of the cult
in Jerusalem which in part produced this pole to itself ;
but the phenomenon also grew out of older spiritual ele-
ments of the religion which the later crystallization could
not harden or control. Prayer and praise, in forms which
have become classical, took the place of the sacrificial
cult for the greater part of life; the Sabbath with its
rest and worship stood for the elaborate calendar of sacri-
fice ; the teacher, wise man and rabbi became the spiritual
leaders of Judaism, and ultimately laid down the law to
the hierarchy. These spiritual elements kept their place
in or made their way into the cult itself. The Psalter
of the Christian Church was the hymnal of the temple,
many of its songs being the actual accompaniments of the
temple ritual ; the theologians met in the temple, and there
Jesus could preach, for it was his " Father's House."

108


THE HEBREW RELIGION

After all, the spiritual religion of the Jew found nothing
incongruous to itself in that temple ritual which we mod-
erns so superciliously treat. It was reserved for the late
Epistle to the Hebrews for the Christian Church to learn
that it could dispense with that stay of the paternal
religion.

The Hebrew cult is of tremendous interest to the
archaeologist; it is of equal value to the student of re-
ligious thought and life. For in this religion which
issued so loftily, whether we consider later Judaism or
Christianity, we can mark stage by stage the growth of
a wonderful germ, in part struggling with, in part sub-
mitting to, outward forms which descended to the utmost
superstition, transforming them and yet compromising
with them where essentials were not concerned. It was
the cult which conserved that religion for us. And in
preserving its cult that religion consciously recognized
that its truth was not a pure philosophy or an abstract
ethic but a religious life for a people as a whole, to be
incorporated in forms and symbols of the world.

I pass finally to that phase of the Hebrew religion
which regards man's relation to his God in the prospect
of the end of things, what is called eschatology. In our
field this falls into two categories : the thought concerning
" the latter days," to use the Biblical term, as they con-
cerned the community as a whole; and the expectations
concerning the final fate of the individual.

It is the former idea which bulks in the Old Testa-
ment. From the beginning throughout it is a volume of
expectations; we mark this in the ancient Blessings at-
tributed to Jacob and Moses, the antique cycle put in
Balaam's mouth, as well as in the later Apocalyptists.
The historical sense in that religion concerned itself
equally with the future as with the past, for if the past
had a meaning, so the future was in a sense intelligible,
was logically discoverable ; this is an element in the pre-

109


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

dictive phase of Prophetism. And this expectation was
first of all and always primarily national; for Yahwe
was the God of Israel and Israel's life was bound up
in his eternity. The expectation of the future assumes
every variety of form and has been an inexhaustible
treasure-house for all religion since. Ancient dreams
of a Golden Age survived; to these the monarchy and
national pride gave the touch of personal loyalty and
enthusiasm in the figure of the Messiah of the house of
David ; the thought was uncertain as between a Messianic
line or a single, almost mystical person. The prosaic
age after the Exile was content with the prospect of a
sacred asylum land, protected by Deity in its absolute
holiness. Transcendental features were introduced, as
in the idea that there was to be a supernatural elevation
of the land, that it might become a veritable Mountain
of God (Is. 2 : iff, etc.). By the hierarchy and the Has-
monsean house the Messianic idea was suppressed as
far as possible, to live in the under-currents of popular
and religious thought. And when the world's pressure
became too hard, and a new order was imperatively
demanded, the Apocalyptists revealed a new heaven and
a new earth, with a strange mingling of transcendental
and earthly elements. Daniel sees the Son of Man
brought before the Ancient of Days in the heavens ; the
seer meant Israel, but religion turned the figure into that
of a supernatural Messiah.

In view of this elaborate development of thought
which was ready with a new vision for every emergency
of the national life, it is most strange to mark the utter
absence until a late day of any form of an adequate idea
of personal immortality — a concept which marks all
higher religion and which had its remarkable flowering
in the neighboring religion of Egypt. There was only
the ancient animistic view of belief in the survival of
the dead as shades in dreary Sheol, without real life or

no


THE HEBREW RELIGION

merited retribution. The Sadducees and Samaritans
continued this comfortless creed into the Christian era.
The absence of belief in a real immortality may be ex-
plained negatively by the persistence with which orthodoxy
set itself against all mortuary cults, which with all their
comfort and transport involved superstitions intolerable
to the religion of the Living God {e.g., Is. 8: 19). And
the Jew showed his fealty to his religion by sticking to
that faith though it brought him no hope that he should
live forever. Only in late books and most rarely is
there any certain reference to immortality, as in Daniel's
assertion of " the resurrection of some to everlasting life
and of some to everlasting contempt " (Dan. 12 : 2).

The Jew did not learn the individual hope through
magical rites, as did the Egyptian, nor through mystery
rites like the Greek, but in a way peculiar to the character
of his religion, the keynote of which was personal ex-
perience. It was the immediate personal, and we may
say mystical, experience of him who is called " my God,"
and " the God of my life " (Ps. 42), that gave the pious
Israelite the sense not so much of immortality as of eternal
relationship with his God. The bond with the Living
God was the guarantee of an unbroken fellowship. A
few utterances breathe this mystical logic of revelation.
Job's spirit faints when he rises to the unreachable thought
that " apart from my flesh I shall see God " (Job. 19 : 25-
27) . A Psalmist sings : " Thou wilt not leave my soul to
Sheol . . . Thou wilt show me the path of life. In
thy right hand are pleasures for evermore" (Ps. 16:
iof ) . And another Psalmist : " As for me, I shall behold
thy face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied, when I
wake, with thy likeness" (17:15). And yet another:
" Thou shalt guide with me with thy counsel, and after-
ward receive me to glory. Whom have I in heaven but
thee and there is none upon earth that I desire beside
thee " (73 : 24f). He is a soul which declares it had en-

iii


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

tered into the " mysteries "of God (v. 17). And for an-
other saint God will be found of him even in hell : " If I
make my bed in Sheol, behold, thou art there " (139: 8).
It is with these spiritual apperceptions of eternal life, and
not with the mere animistic semi-physical notions of con-
tinued animation, that the intensity of the Jewish and
Christian belief in a fulness of life hereafter with God
and his saints is related. It is eternal life, not immor-
tality, a continuity of the relationship with God which
the quantity of time cannot dissolve.

Such is this strange religion. It abounds in inner
antinomies, it runs against the usual processes of religious
thought. It defies philosophy. It is the riddle of the
student of religion. He may whittle it down to its lowest
terms, finding in it the most primitive forms of religion
common to every folk. But it will not be explained in
that way. If it has its feet on the earth, it holds its
head in the heavens.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Texts :

To the several Revised Versions of the Old Testament is now to be
added the new Jewish Version of the Hebrew Scriptures just
published by the Jewish Publication Society in Philadelphia.

For the Apocrypha of the English Bible the translation in the Eng-
lish Revision should be used: it may be obtained separately.
R. H. Charles with the collaboration of other British scholars
has published the various Jewish Apocrypha which have enjoyed
sacred authority in the Christian Church and the other parallel
Judaistic literature known as the Pseudepigrapha, in English
translation and with commentary, in two sumptuous volumes
under the title, The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old
Testament, Cambridge, 1913. A similar work, although not as
extensive, is Kautzsch : Die Apokryphen u. Pseudepigraphen
des Alten Testaments, Tubingen, 1900.

Works on Old Testament Religion :

A. Kuenen : The Religion of Israel, 3 vols., London, 1874.

J. Wellhausen : art. " Israel " in Enc. Britannica, 9th ed. (primarily
a history, but classical for its sketch of the religion).

C. F. Burney: Outlines of Old Testament Theology (Oxford
Church Text Books), New York, 1902.

E. Kautzsch : art. " Religion of Israel," in Extra Volume of Hast-
ings' Dictionary of the Bible, pp. 612-734.

112


THE HEBREW RELIGION

B. Stade and A. Bertholet: Biblische Theologie des Alten Testa-
merits, 2 vols., Tubingen, 1904, 1911 (including the Judaistic
period).

Henry Preserved Smith : The Religion of Israel, New York, 1914.

John P. Peters : The Religion of the Hebrews, Boston, 1914.

Special Studies :

M. Jastrow, Jr. : Hebrew and Babylonian Traditions, New York,

1914.
K. Budde: The Religion of Israel to the Exile, New York, 1899.
T. K. Cheyne: Jewish Religious Life after the Exile, New York,

1898.

The Judaistic Period:

W. Bousset: Die Religion des Judentums im neutestamentlichen
Zeitalter, 2d ed., Berlin, 1906.

H. J. Wicks : # The Doctrine of God in the Jewish Apocryphal and
Apocalyptic Literature, London, 1915.

R. H. Charles: A Critical History of the Doctrine of a Future
Life in Israel, in Judaism, and in Christianity, 2d ed., Edin-
burgh, 1913-


113


CHAPTER V

THE RELIGION OF THE VEDA
BY FRANKLIN EDGERTON

The Veda is the collective name given to the most
ancient literature of India. It is at the same time the
sacred literature of the orthodox Hindus. For many-
centuries the Brahmans, and those Hindus of lower caste
who believed with them, have regarded the Veda as holy,
inspired revelation; not the work of any man, nor cre-
ated in time and space, but divinely revealed in fabulously
ancient times to holy and semi-divine seers, called rishis,
through whom it was made known to mankind.

When we speak of the religion of the Veda, how-
ever, we do not mean the religion of the later Hindus who
made the Veda their Bible. That religion is flailed
Brahmanism. We mean instead the contemporary re-
ligion which we find displayed in the Veda itself, the
religion of the composers of the Veda; which is a very
different thing.

We speak of the Veda as a unit, and compare it to
the Bible. But if even the Bible is unified only by the
pious faith of the believer this is much more emphatically
true of the Veda. The Veda is a great literature rather
than a book; a literature of vast and indefinite extent.
And there is no recognized canon of authenticity in the
case of the Veda. The composition of the works included
in the Veda extended over many centuries ; and in the later
periods the question what is Vedic and what is not be-
comes increasingly difficult. Fortunately, it is also
increasingly unimportant.

There are certain recognized types of literature into
which all Vedic works are divided. In order to be Vedic,
any work must at least claim to belong to one of these

114


THE RELIGION OF THE VEDA

types. They are: i. The Samhitas or " Collections " of
mantras or " sacred utterances." These are the oldest
and most basic parts of the Veda. There are primarily
four of these Samhitas; but each of the four exists, or
else originally did exist, in several more or less different
recensions, cultivated in different priestly schools. The
four recognized Samhitas, or types of Samhita, are: (a)
the Rig-veda, consisting mainly of hymns of praise and
prayer intended to be used at the sacrifices to the various
gods; (b) the Atharva-veda, consisting mostly of incan-
tations designed to be used in connection with magic rites
for the attainment of all manner of natural human de-
sires, both innocent and sinister; (c) the Yajur-veda,
consisting of sacrificial formulse and litanies, exclusively
intended for use at certain important sacrificial cere-
monies ; (d) the Sama-veda, consisting of chants, and also
purely ritual in application. 2. The second grand divi-
sion of the Vedic literature consists of what are called
the Brahmanas. They are theological text-books, like
the Jewish Talmud, explaining from the priestly stand-
point the texts found in the Samhitas, and the rites with
which they were connected. 3. The third division con-
sists of the Aranyakas or " forest-books," and the Upani-
shads or " intimate, secret expositions." Both of these
were originally appendices to the Brahmanas. But the
Upanishads soon acquired an independent existence and
value, owing to the distinctive character and importance
of their contents. They contain the first extensive specu-
lations in philosophy known in India. As such they are
at the same time the culmination of the higher thought
of the Vedic period, and the foundation on which all
the philosophic speculation of later India ultimately rests.
Chronologically there are vast differences in different
parts of the Veda. We do not know how old the oldest
parts of the Rig-veda are; we may guess, perhaps, that
they go back to about 2000 b.c. Vedic composition

"S


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

stretches from about that time down almost or quite to
the Christian era, in which the later Upanishads are
placed.

There is room in this long period of time for extensive
variations and developments in religion. And, in fact, the
religion of the early Vedic works differs enormously from
that of the later ones. But that is not all. Radically
different types of religion appear to have existed side by
side in some periods ; and at times we find signs of curious
and puzzling blends between them. We ought really to
speak of the " religions " — instead of " religion " — of
the Veda.

At the very outset the student of Indian religions is
struck by a peculiar feature which may be said to remain
through all time, in general, characteristic of them all.
Namely : on the intellectual side they are free, speculative,
active, receptive, and not dogmatically crystallized. Hence
on the one hand the bewilderingly Protean forms which
most Indian religions assume, seeming to defy any con-
sistent and logical arrangement of their intellectual be-
liefs ; and on the other hand, the striking tolerance which
they show to new ideas and even to rival contemporary
sects. But if Hindu religions are free in thought, they
are anything but free in action. To be religiously cor-
rect is to live correctly; it matters little what you think.
Proper observances and performances seem to be the
essence of religion in India, rather than an orthodox
system of belief. The Hindus are intellectually tolerant,
but they are intolerant and narrow in their insistence
on formal rites and actions.

There is a well-known and prominent concept of
Vedic ethics, about which I wish space permitted me to
speak at length, but which I must at least mention because
it so strikingly illustrates this point. Right living, ac-
cording to the Rig-veda, is living in accordance with the
rita. The rita means the Way of the Universe ; it is essen-

116


THE RELIGION OF THE VEDA

tially the Tao of the Chinese. All the established events
of the visible world are parts of the'rita, or take place in
accordance with it. And the whole duty of man is to
govern his life after the pattern of this cosmic law. It
is a really noble concept, and might have been made the
basis for a truly inspiring moral system. But in the
hands of the Vedic poets the rita becomes little more than
an apotheosis of the system of sacrifice around which
Rigvedic religion centers. To live in accordance with the
rita one must perform all the ceremonies of the cult,
and little more. That is practically the whole duty of
man.

This cult, which is the be-all and end-all of the hymns
which devote themselves to it, presents itself to us in the
Vedic hymns in anything but a primitive form. It ap-
pears there as the last precipitate of centuries of compli-
cated development.

The primitive, prehistoric ancestors of the Vedic
Aryans (that is the name by which the authors of the
hymns call themselves) had a religion which may be called
a naturalistic polytheism, or animism. Man saw in
all nature constant manifestations of volitional acts, which
he interpreted in terms of his own acts. He inferred
that whatever went on in the world was due to the con-
scious activity of spirits — sentient beings more or less
like his fellow-men. All animate and inanimate objects,
all natural processes, and even abstractions of qualities
or activities as such, were naively conceived as being, or
as inhabited by, spirits — that is, sentient beings capable
of volitional acts.

The prehistoric Aryan dealt with these powers, which
he supposed existed in the world about him, in the two
ways which are familiar in primitive religions the world
over, namely, by devotional propitiation, and by compul-
sory magic. My position in this course makes it un-
necessary for me to take time to dwell on these two

"7


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

methods, or to analyze their relationship to each other;
you already know what they mean; and in Aryan re-
ligion they bear the aspect of ultimate and irreducible
data (which is not saying that one may not in fact have
developed out of the other) . It appears that the primitive
Aryan undertook to control by magic, and so to make
subject to his will, those spiritual agencies which he
thought he could so control; while the more powerful
spirits — gods, if you like — he sought to propitiate by sac-
rifices, thus securing their assistance by winning their good
will, since he felt he had not the power to compel them.
Since very early prehistoric times these sacrificial rites
of propitiation were accompanied by spoken words. Their
purpose, as we still see clearly from the hymns of the
Rig-veda, was to call the attention of the gods to the
offering, and invite them to enjoy it. At probably an
equally early time, the magic rites were also provided
with spoken charms or incantations, although here the
motive cannot have been the same, since in many of them,
at least, no sacrifice was offered and no deity was in-
voked to aid. But in any case the original meaning of
the words spoken, even at the sacrifice — their function
as an invitation to the gods — soon became obscured, or
was relegated to the background. Before historic times,
the invocation or " hymn," as we may now call it, had
come through ancient custom to be regarded as an in-
tegral and very necessary part of the religious perform-
ance; an end in itself, just as much as the actual sacrifice
which it accompanied. One is no more and no less
important than the other. 1

'For example, the hymns of the Rig-veda show clearly that
they themselves go back to a type of invocations to the gods.
Nevertheless, the consciousness of this fact was so faint in the
authors' minds that they felt it necessary to create a special class of
hymns of invocation (called 'aprl hymns'), whose sole and express
purpose is to invite the gods to the service ; that is, to the sacrifice
and the accompanying hymns of praise and prayer, now felt as a
kind of offerings in themselves.

118


THE RELIGION OF THE VEDA

Originally it appears that any person was qualified to
engage in sacrifices and magic performances, and to recite
the accompanying hymns or charms. To a certain extent,
indeed, this was true even in the historic Vedic period.
Down to its very end there were some simple domestic
rites of sacrifice which every Aryan might, or even had
to, perform. And certainly many magic rites could be
performed by anyone. But all such matters quickly be-
come traditional, and it is then required that they be
performed precisely in accord with inherited usage; else
they may fail of the desired result. Accordingly, ordinary
people continued to perform for themselves only such
rites as could conveniently be performed by anyone, by
reason of their simplicity or regularity. And for the per-
formance of the more occasional or elaborate ceremonies,
long before the times of the earliest Vedic literature people
began more and more to call to their aid religious special^
ists, priests or medicine-men, who, of course, came into
existence as a class in response to this natural demand.
These priests and magic-masters made it their business
to advise and assist those who would engage in any re-
ligious performance. And in the case of the more com-
plicated ones, the participation of these persons became
so usual that in the times of the Rig-veda it was gradually
coming — if it had not already come — to be felt as a neces-
sity to the proper observance of the rites. Thus, finally,
the priests became the definite custodians of the impor-
tant ceremonies of the Aryan cult.

They strengthened their hold on them, whether con-
sciously or unconsciously, by means of the ever-increasing
elaboration with which they, or a certain group of them,
surrounded the rites they employed. There were, of
course, priests and priests; just as there were rites and
rites. The priests of the fire-cult, or of a certain fire-
cult, seem to have become the recognized aristocracy of
the priesthood, even in prehistoric times. For it had early

119


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

become fashionable to pour the articles of food and drink,
which were the most usual sacrificial offerings, into fire. 3
The fire that consumed the offerings became thereby spe-
cially sacred ; and the ritual of the fire offering began to
be distinguished, by those who practised it, as a particu-
larly holy and pious performance. It naturally followed
that the fire-ritual soon became especially elaborate, and
its priests especially respected.

There was another very ancient special cult, distin-
guished not by the method of presenting the offering but
by the offering itself : the cult of the sacred drink Soma.
The common ancestors of the Vedic Hindus and the
Persians had offered this beverage, and had even deified
the drink itself ; it appears in the Avesta, the sacred book
of the Zoroastrian Persians, under the name of Haoma.
This is the same word as the Vedic Soma, which likewise
is both beverage and god. It was a highly prized intoxi-
cating liquor obtained by a pressing process from the
shoots of a plant which cannot now be identified. Among
Iranians and Hindus alike it was regarded as the most
acceptable means of gratifying the gods. One entire book
of the Rig-veda (the ninth) is devoted to hymns to this
divine drink. The poets never weary of singing its
praises.

Now it is an interesting fact, and one of the highest
importance in the development of Vedic religion, that the
fire-priests, or a group of them, succeeded at an early time
in capturing or assimilating this soma-cult, and making it
the centre of their most ambitious and pretentious cere-
monies. In fact, the soma-cult became a kind of hall-
mark of distinction for a certain class of fire-ceremonies,
which distinguished them from their less aristocratic rela-
tives. It was especially in connection with them that one

2 Other methods of disposing of the offerings were known, and
were practised to some extent even in historic times; but they were
of comparatively slight importance.

I20


THE RELIGION OF THE VEDA

group of fire-priests succeeded in appropriating to them-
selves a predominant position in the religious life of the
Vedic Aryans.

Among these fire-priests who cultivated the soma-cult
there was elaborated a ceremonial which required the use
not of one, but of three sacred fires at every sacrificial
performance, and which was more complicated in other
ways also. Not only more complicated, but more ex-
pensive ; and thereby hangs a tale. This three-fire ritual,
centering about the soma-sacrifice, acquired by the times
of the Rig-veda such a degree of elaborateness and conse-
quent expensiveness that the ordinary poor man could not
in the nature of things engage in it. Only princes and
wealthy men could afford it. It was, therefore, of neces-
sity not required for the performance of the simpler daily
rites which every pious Aryan had to perform ; nor for
such occasional rites as birth, marriage, and funeral cere-
monies, which, though not of periodic occurrence, neces-
sarily formed part of the religious duty of all the people.

The Rig-veda is, in general, a hymn-book for use at
these three-fire ceremonies. That is, its hymns were,
in the main, composed for the express purpose of being
chanted at these elaborate rites, soma-sacrifices and others,
which had to be performed with the three sacred fires.
These hymns were composed by the fire-soma-priests
themselves, for their own use. They are therefore a
hieratic literature in a very extreme sense. Not only
do they reflect constantly the class interests and the class
viewpoint of their priestly authors, but they devote them-
selves exclusively to this ultra-hieratic phase of religion,
the religion centering about the three-fire cult. Not only
are secular matters not primarily considered at all, but
even those more popular religious performances are
ignored, which did not require this elaborate ritual, and
which formed the staple religion of the great mass of the

121


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Aryan people. 3 In short, let me make this point very
emphatic : the religion portrayed by the great mass of
the hymns of the Rig-veda is very far from being the re-
ligion of the Vedic Aryans. It is not even the religion of
any considerable section of them. Nay, it is probably not
the whole religion of any of them. The group of rites
with which it is (one may practically say) exclusively
concerned was itself a sort of work of supererogation —
not absolutely required of anyone, and never performed
at all except by the aristocracy of the people.

The theory of this hieratic cult was a very simple
one of commercial bargaining between gods and men. It
is frequently stated in pretty bald terms in the texts them-
selves. " Give to me ; I give to thee." " Enjoy the soma,
satisfy thyself with it; then turn thy mind to the giving
of riches," says a Rigvedic poet. The gods want sacri-
fices, of food and drink, accompanied by hymns, which
are by this time an integral part of the sacrifice, and in
which the gods take an aesthetic pleasure. These things
it is in the power of men to provide. Men, on the other
hand, want wealth, long life, and the discomfiture of their
enemies. Such boons are in the gift of the mighty gods
to whom the three-fire soma-cult devotes itself. The
whole transaction is then a commercial one. The priests
are the middle-men. And their commission is the sacri-
ficial fee (dakshina), which was a very necessary part of
every sacrifice; without it no sacrifice is complete. The
very human wants of the priests are, in fact, quite promi-
nent in most of the hymns; we are seldom allowed to
forget for long that the poet-priests are after all men,
and that they make their living by offering these sacrifices
and chanting these hymns.

As might be expected, and as I have already hinted,

' Nearly all of the few Rigvedic hymns of which this is not true
are later additions to the collection as it stands ; though this does
not necessarily mean that the hymns themselves are late.

122


THE RELIGION OF THE VEDA

the gods to whom this aristocratic and hieratic cult ad-
dresses its sacrifices and hymns are a somewhat select
company. Although they do not form any sharply defined
class, it may be said of them in general that they are all
great and powerful gods ; and most of them are originally
personifications of major powers of nature. The powers
of the sun, the moon, the sky, the rain, and so on, are
the naturalistic elements which would most easily im-
press the consciousness of primitive man. They seem
most obviously to have the capacity of working man's
weal or woe. Minor spirits are nearly or quite ignored
in this hieratic cult of the Rig-veda ; they find a place in
the lower religion of the people.

But, very significantly as it seems to me, the most
transparent personifications among the hieratic deities are
not so much naturalistic as ritualistic entities. The very
pantheon is made to center more and more about the sacri-
fice, preparing the way for the later stage in which the
sacrifice absorbs the whole content of religion. We have
already alluded to the fact that the soma-drink, the most
aristocratic offering, becomes the god« Soma, one of the
most prominent of the Rigvedic gods. 4 Another god of
prime importance is Agni, who is, most transparently,
Fire; the word agni is the common noun for " fire." A
naturalistic concept, of course; and, indeed, there is no
Vedic god of whom it is more true that the poets think
of him all the time as both element and personal god.
They even at times recognize him in the sun and the
lightning, in the forest fire, and wherever else fiery ele-
ments are found. Nevertheless, he is to them first and

* Later Soma is identified with the moon ; but this seems to me,
as to most scholars, a secondary development. Professor Hille-
brandt, however, believes that the identification goes back to the
earliest times. The question is not important for my present point ;
there is no doubt that, whatever Soma was originally, most of the
Rigvedic poets think of him primarily as the deified sacrificial drink ;
so that he is a primarily ritualistic god to them.

123


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

foremost the sacred fire of sacrifice; the Messenger be-
tween men and gods, who carries the offerings to heaven,
or who by his beacon-flame attracts the gods to them.
Countless are the epithets and descriptions of Agni which
refer clearly to his ritualistic character. They overwhelm
and almost obliterate references to him in his mere natu-
ralistic guise. It is to this deified Fire of Sacrifice, not
to fire in general, that one-fifth of all the hymns of the
Rig-veda are addressed. And the same is true of another
of the transparent personifications in the Vedic pantheon,
the goddess Dawn, Ushas. Again the word means simply
Dawn; but again the concept is a thoroughly ritualistic
one, as the hymns show. Dawn is the goddess who
gives the signal for the morning sacrifice to start; who
wakes the pious and generous man that pays the priest
for the sacrifice (she is besought to let the stingy man
sleep on!) ; who is the mother of Agni, because the Fire
of sacrifice is kindled at dawn. 5

There are, to be sure, other gods, and some of equal
importance with these, who cannot be said to be personi-
fications of powers inherently related to the ritual. I
think, however, that it is no accident that we find it diffi-
cult to say just what these other gods do personify. They
are for the most part gods whose original nature was
already forgotten, probably, even in the times of the
Rigvedic poets themselves. Some of them are allowed
a somewhat questionable position in the hieratic cult in
spite of their non-ritualistic character. For one reason
or another their position in the general Aryan pantheon
made it impossible for the hieratic cult to ignore them;
but it treats them in a rather step-motherly fashion.
There is, for instance, the majestic Varuna — perhaps the
leading god of the prehistoric Indo-Iranians, as he at

8 The ritualistic character of this interesting goddess was first
clearly shown by Professor Bloomfield, in his book, The Religion of
the Veda, pages 66 ff.

124


THE RELIGION OF THE VEDA

least became the leading god of the historic Persians
(under the name of Ahura Mazda). It is declared in
the Veda, too, that he is the greatest of gods, the guardian
of the world-order, the righteous king and judge of the
universe, the punisher of all evil. In short, he is described
as a veritable Hindu Yahweh. Yet he has very few
hymns addressed to him. His share in the hieratic cult
was insignificant compared to the grandeur attributed to
him. And his prestige waned as time went on. Why?
Apparently because he had no special connection with the
three-fire ritual.

Most of the old naturalistic gods are treated thus, or
worse, in the Rigvedic cult. But there is one god who
has managed to make himself the favorite of the whole
pantheon in the Rig-veda, at least judging by the number
of his hymns, and who yet was not originally ritualistic
at all, as it seems. This is Indra, 6 to whom about a fourth
of all the Rigvedic hymns are addressed. He is as differ-
ent from the other gods as can well be imagined. He is a
god of warriors, not of priests. In fact, he is a perfect
impersonation of all that we should imagine the rude,
half -barbarous Aryan chieftains of the time to have been,
magnified to superhuman size. He is an ideal patron saint
for the men of war of that time. He is boisterous,
ferocious, and boastful. He is an enormous eater and
especially drinker; he is the chief drinker of the soma,
the sacred tipple, of which he swallows whole lakes. Most
of all, his strength and warlike prowess are inconceivably
great; the poets lose themselves completely in trying to
describe them. He gets thoroughly drunk on soma, and

6 His origin is obscure ; tut he almost certainly represented some
power of nature. The traditional interpretation makes him a god of
the thunder-storm. Of late Hillebrandt's theory that he was a
sun-god has been making some headway against the older one. In
any case he is the most thoroughly anthropomorphized of all the
Vedic gods, and therefore the least transparent. We can hardly
imagine that the poets thought of him in terms of any power of
nature, as a rule.

125


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

then goes out and slaughters the demons by the hundreds.
Of course he also helps his worshipers in battle against
their enemies, the heathen Dasas, the dark-skinned abo-
rigines whom the Aryans subdued. In short, Indra is the
national war-god of the conquering Aryans, especially
of their fighting chieftains. Now we must remember that
it was just these chieftains and leaders of the people who
kept the hieratic cult in operation. Its elaborate and
expensive rites depended on their munificence for sup-
port; and the priests' living came from the rites. Need
it surprise us, then, that Indra was made the very head
and front of the whole cult, the chief beneficiary of the
soma-sacrifice, its greatest performance ?

Thus, as finally constituted, the soma-sacrifice comes
to mean almost the same thing as a sacrifice to Indra.
Indra, though originally not peculiar to the three-fire
ritual, becomes the very most typical exponent of it, suc-
cessfully rivaling Agni, the sacred Fire in person. And in
the last resort the religion of the great mass of the hymns
of the Rig-veda appears not as a naturalistic but as a
ritualistic polytheism. The importance of a god depends
not on his natural qualities and powers but first and fore-
most on his position in the hieratic ritual, around which
everything centers.

The logical conclusion — or, as one is tempted to call
it, the reductio ad absurdum — of this tendency is found
not in the Vedic hymns, but in the pure ritualism of the
Brahmanas, the later liturgic texts. Even in the hymns,
however, the way is marked out. The original idea of the
sacrifice as an appeal to the good will of the gods tends
to become obliterated. The gods begin to be thought of
as dependent on the sacrifice for their powers, nay even
for their very existence. The sacrifice no longer per-
suades, but compels them. The correct sacrificer owns
the gods ; they can not choose but grant his wish. Finally,
after the gods have been reduced to this position of help-

126


THE RELIGION OF THE VEDA

less agents of the sacrifice, it becomes apparent that they
are no longer needed at all. If the sacrifice can abso-
lutely control the gods, why can it not just as well work
the desired result without them? Accordingly, in many
parts of the Brahmanas the sacrifice (to whom? is a
question that cannot be rationally answered) is itself
a direct cosmic force of the first magnitude. If religion
started with magic, it has now completed the circle and
returned to magic again. For what is it but pure magic,
if by correct performance of a ritual act a man can not
only obtain any desired boon, but directly control the
operations of all cosmic forces? This is the twilight of
Vedic ritualism; it is preparing to die of its own inner
dry-rot. Every vestige of devotion has left it. A system
of sacrifices with none to sacrifice to is too absurd to live.
Meanwhile, let us not forget that this hieratic ritual-
istic religion of the three-fire ceremonies, centering in the
soma-cult, probably played a very small role in the re-
ligious life of the people as a whole. It was, as we saw, a
supererogatory system, which in the nature of things could
concern only the upper classes of society. All the time
there existed a whole complex of simpler rites, more or
less engaged in by the whole people, even by the devotees
of the three-fire cult, which latter ignored but did not by
any means oppose them. There was no rigid distinction
between the two systems. In the popular cult as well
there were many fire sacrifices; only these were simple
and required but one sacred fire instead of three. 7 But
the popular religion included a vast deal that was not
included in the hieratic three-fire cult. It revered many
gods, godlings, and spirits whom the other ignored. It
was still primitively animistic; every object, animate or
inanimate, was or contained a potential deity. In it, too,

' Some ceremonies belonged to both cults, and could be per-
formed with either one or three fires, and with a simpler or more
elaborate ritual, according to the inclinations and the social and
financial standing of the sacrificer.

127


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

we find magical practices, both good and bad, " white "
and " black," in full swing. Moreover, it contained cere-
monies connected with birth, marriage, and death, and
with other standard and regular occurrences in the life
of every man, which for that very reason found no place
in the aristocratic and hieratic three-fire cult. The great
repository of materials for this popular religion is the
Atharva-veda, which was at the beginning not hieratic but
popular. From it we can get an astonishingly complete
and very interesting account of the real fundamental
religious beliefs and practices of the Vedic Aryans, much
better than from the hieratic Rig-veda ; 8 although for
historic reasons the " higher " hieratic religion generally
occupies the attention of students to a much greater extent,
since mainly out of it grew the later higher systems of
religion and philosophy. 9

But I must resist the temptation to say more about the
homely but perennially interesting popular religion of
the Atharva-veda.

Out of the ritualistic polytheism of the Rig-veda there

8 In later times the hieratic cult tried to save itself from dying
of inanition by assimilating such of the popular rites as were not
too glaringly out of sympathy with it. The Rig-veda itself, in its
present form, contains marriage and funeral hymns, and even magic
charms. But their position — mostly in the tenth book, a late addition
to the collection — shows that they did not originally belong to it.
Later many other popular rites were adopted and made part of
the hieratic system, although they were kept carefully separated
from the original parts of the system ; they were treated in special
ritual books, the Grihya Sutras. The fact that it is in these, and
not in the strictly hieratic C^uta Sutras, that marriage and funeral
ceremonies are treated, confirms us in regarding the marriage and
funeral hymns of the Rig-veda as intrusions in the hieratic collection.
This subject requires for adequate treatment more space than I
have at my disposal.

* Sectarian Hinduism, however, with its cults of Vishnu and Qiva,
has its chief source rather in popular beliefs and practices. Traces
of the beginnings of the Qiva cult at least are found in the Atharva-
veda. Vishnu is indeed a Rigvedic deity (as for that matter £iva is,
too, under the name of Rudra) ; but he is a very minor one. His
later apotheosis into the Supreme God of his sectarians can only
partly be traced in later Vedic texts. The subject is very intricate
and obscure. We shall return to it briefly in Chapter VII.

128


THE RELIGION OF THE VEDA

developed, as we saw, a pure ritualism in the Brahmanas,
which make the sacrifice itself the whole thing, practically
to the exclusion of the gods to whom the sacrifice after
all must have been made. By the side of this logical
monstrosity there was developing out of the same soil a
growth of much more promise. In quite a considerable
minority of the hymns of the Rig-veda itself, we find signs
of a new view of the gods, to which we may give the
name of Ritualistic Henotheism. By henotheism is meant
a religious point of view in which the old plurality of gods
still exists, but is mitigated, so to speak. It is as if the
religious consciousness, when dealing for the moment
with any particular god, felt it as an insult to his dignity
to admit the competition of other deities. And so, either
the particular god of the moment is identified with all the
other gods, or rather, they are identified with him, ad
major em gloriam; 10 or else he is given attributes which
in strict logic could not be given to any but a sole mono-
theistic deity. Thus at different moments Indra or Varuna
or Agni is said to be the sole lord of the universe and of
all beings, the creator, preserver, and animator of the
world, the ruler of gods and men, and so on. 11 We are,
however, still dealing with a ritualistic religion; Vedic
henotheism is rooted in the ritual. It clearly originated
in the ritual treatment of various gods. As each god
came upon the stage in the procession of rites, he was
accorded impartially this increasingly extravagant praise,
until finally everything that could be said of all the gods
collectively is said of each of them in turn, individually.
Now, however, the henotheistic position was too glar-
ingly illogical to prevail for long. Such things as the
creation of the world and the bverlordship of all crea-

u As in R. V. 5.3, where Agni is successively identified with all
the chief gods of the pantheon, as if they were all but manifestations
of Agni. In other hymns other gods are similarly glorified.

"One of the best examples of his type is the Indra hymn
R. V. 2.12.

9 129


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

tures could in reality be predicated of only one person-
ality. But which one? There was no more reason for
singling out one of the old ritualistic gods than another.
All had been tarred with the same stick. The problem
evidently occupied the attention of the most advanced
minds of the age. And already in the Rig-veda there
are a number of attempts to answer it. Two groups of
ideas may be distinguished in the answers. The one set
of ideas is developing towards a tentative Monotheism —
a belief in one sole or at least supreme God; the other
towards a tentative Monism — a belief in one primal and
supreme, but not theistic, principle. Both have their roots
in the ritualistic henotheism to which we have been re-
ferring. And the two together furnish the keynotes to all
the higher thought of the later Vedic periods. The best
of the Upanishads only elaborate and expand and com-
bine and discuss ideas which are found in essence in the
quasi-monotheistic and monistic hymns of the Rig-veda.

One attempt to cut the Gordian knot of Henotheism
resulted in the setting up of some new and purely abstract,
non-ritualistic, but still personal, figure, and predicating
of it, and of it alone, all the things which had been heno-
theistically predicated of Indra, Agni, or Varuna. The
new deity is differently named in different compositions
of this school ; Prajapati, the Lord of Creatures, 12 or Vig-
vakarman, the All-maker, 13 and so on. In each case it is
he, and he alone, who created the world and now sup-
ports and rules it, and the like. Yet it is still a God who
does this ; a kind of Yahweh or Allah he might well have
become, if this idea had taken permanent root in Hindu
soil. It is an abortive attempt at Monotheism, not yet
Monism.

More significant for the later history of Indian
thought is the tentative Monism which rivals the mono-

"R.V.io.121.

U R. V. 10.81 and 82.

130


THE RELIGION OF THE VEDA

theistic movement even in the Rig-veda, though only in
one or two hymns, notably the famous 10.129. That
remarkable hymn derives the universe not from any god
or gods, monotheistic or otherwise. It knows no Yahweh
or Allah, any more than Indra or Varuna. It definitely
brushes aside all gods ; in fact, it says in terms that they
are all of late and secondary origin, and know nothing
about the real beginnings of things. The First Principle
of this hymn is Tad Ekam — " That One " ; neuter gender,
lest some theologian should get hold of it and insist on
falling down and worshiping it. It is wholly impersonal,
and non-theistic. It is furthermore uncharacterizable
and indescribable ; without qualities or attributes — without
even negative characteristics ; it was " neither existent
nor non-existent." .Yet other than It there was nothing
at all.

This monistic concept is nothing else than the Brah-
man of the Upanishads, the One without a second, of
which, as the later texts say, nothing can be said except
" No, no " — it is not this, it is not that. To apply any
description to it is to limit and bound that which is limit-
less and boundless. " It is inconceivable, for it cannot be
conceived; unknowable, for it cannot be known." This
philosophic scepticism, too, is clearly heralded in the last
verses of the Rigvedic hymn 10.129; there is no one that
can know the beginnings of things.

It should be made clear that neither the quasi-monistic
passages of the Rig-veda, nor those of the later Vedic
texts, down through the Upanishads, which contain the
final consummation of Vedic thought, hold fast to this
or any other definite and systematic idea. This idea and
many others appear and disappear moment by moment,
and constantly jostle each other. Sometimes they are
more or less synthetized, but more often they are left
baldly unreconciled side by side.

We sometimes hear that the identification of the
131


RELIGIONS OF! THE PAST AND PRESENT

One Being with the atman or human soul is the unifying
thought of the Upanishads. It is true that the Upanishads
proclaim clearly enough this idea — which, by the way, like
practically every other doctrine found in the older Upani-
shads, goes back to the times of the Vedic hymns. 14 Says
the Upanishadic teacher Uddalaka Aruni to his son : 15
" What that subtle essence is, a having-that-as-its-nature
is this universe; that is the Real, that is the Soul, that art
Thou, Cvetaketu ! " And even more clearly and mag-
nificently the great teacher Yajfiavalkya declares : 16
" That which rests in all things and is distinct from all
things, which all things know not, of which all things
are the 'body (that is, the material representation or
form), which controls all things within, that is thy Self
(atman), the immortal Inner Controller . . . The Un-
seen Seer, the Unheard Hearer, the Unthought Thinker,
the Unknown Knower. There is no other Seer; there is
no other Hearer; there is no other Thinker; there is no
other Knower. This is thy Self, the immortal Inner
Controller. Whatever is other than this is evil."

These are brave words. And they did not fail to
bring forth fruit. For they later became the kernel, the
unifying thought, of the Vedanta, one of the greatest
philosophic systems of later India — perhaps of the world.
In the last sentence of the quotation, hinting at the evil-
ness of all that is not the One, that is of all empiric exist-
ence, we have a foretaste of the Hindu pessimistic view
of life. But this, as well as the doctrine of transmigra-
tion, concerns more especially post- Vedic Hindu thought ;
I shall have more to say of both of these subjects in my
next lecture.
, What I want now to emphasize in closing is the fact

"Its beginnings are discernible in the Rig-veda (cf. R. V. 10.90),
and still more clearly in the Atharva-veda (cf. A. V. 10.8.44).
a Chandogya Upanishad 6.8 and following.
" Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad 3.7.

132


THE RELIGION OF THE VEDA

that, in my opinion, there is no unifying thought in the
Upanishads. There is no philosophic or religious system
in them, although there are steps towards, or fragments
of, many philosophic and religious systems. That is,
many systems could be constructed or developed out of se-
lected passages in them ; and, in fact, this was done in later
India. But I think we misunderstand the Upanishads if we
try to systematize them. Just as in the old Vedic hymns
we find all of these illustrated in at least equal fulness
ritualistic, henotheistic, monotheistic, and monistic — so
we find all of these illustrated in at least eqtoal fullness
in the Upanishads. They (or at least the older ones)
contain nothing, or hardly anything, essentially new ; they
merely carry on further all the numerous lines of thought
started in the Vedic hymns — the lines of thought whose
interrelationship I have tried briefly to sketch. The in-
tellectual average of the Upanishads is higher than that
of the hymns, because they are later and more advanced ;
but even the lowest depths of Vedic ritualism can be
illustrated by Upanishad passages. They are, in their
essential spirit, tentative, struggling, searching; not dog-
matic, final, or positive. They are never satisfied with
any degree of attainment in the formulation of their
thoughts. Instead they are constantly searching for new
points of view. With a restless yearning after truth
which has perhaps never been surpassed and seldom
equalled, they struggle towards peak after peak of mental
achievement, only to abandon them unhesitatingly and
unregretfully, in the hope of finding a higher peak beyond.
Between the peaks they sometimes descend ' into what
seem to us low swamps of the commonplace, and some-
times they relapse into states of mind which ought to
have been long since forgotten; but who can live con-
stantly on the heights? Absolute Truth is what they
seek. If they do not find it, that is not their fault. It
should rather be put down to their credit that they do

i33


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

not delude themselves into thinking that they have found
it permanently. Let him who has found it permanently
cast the first stone at them !

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Indian Religions in General:

A. Barth : Les Religions de I'Inde; translated by J. Wood, The
Religions of India. Boston, 1882. Though now out of date in
some respects, this book still remains one of prime value, and is
the best introduction to the subject.

E. W. Hopkins : The Religion of India. Boston, 1895.

Vedic Religion :

M. Bloomfield : The Religion of the Veda. New York, 1908. The

best work on the hieratic religion of the Rig-veda; it does not

attempt to cover the popular religion.
H. Oldenberg: Die Religion des Veda. Berlin, 1894.
A. B. Keith : The Religion and Philosophy of the Veda. [In press.]

Cambridge, Mass., 1917.
The following are more for the advanced student:
A. Hillebrandt: Vedische M'ythologie; 3 vols., Breslau, 1891-1902.

Same work, Kleinere Ausgabe (abridged in one small volume),

Breslau, 1910.
A. Bergaigne: La religion vedique. 3 vols., Paris, 1878-1883. Vol.

4, Index by M. Bloomfield, Paris, 1897.
A. A. Macdonell : Vedic Mythology. Strassburg, 1897.
M. Bloomfield: The Atharva Veda. Strassburg, 1899. Source-
book for the popular religion.

Higher Thought:

P. Deussen: Allgemeine Geschichte der Philosophie. Band I.
Abteilung 1 : Allgemeine Einleitung und Philosophie des Veda.
Leipzig, 1894. Abteilung 2 : Die Philosophie der Upanishaden.
Leipzig, 1899.

P. Deussen : [Abteilung 2 of the above work, translated into Eng-
lish by] A. S. Geden, The Philosophy of the Upanishads. Edin-
burgh, 1906.

Translations :

R. T. H. Griffith : The Rigveda. 2d Ed., 2 vols. Benares, 1896.

W. D. Whitney and C. R. Lanman: The Atharva Veda. Cam-
bridge, Mass., 1905- , , „ , rr , -. , . o

M Bloomfield: Hymns of the Atharva Veda. Oxford, 1897.
[Sacred Books of the East, vol. xlii.] Selection of the most
interesting materials. .,,,.,, T . . „ „ .

P. Deussen : Sechzig Upanishads des Veda. Leipzig, 1897. By tar
the best interpretation of the Upanishads.

FMaxMuller: Upanishads. Oxford, 1879- 1884. [Sacred Books
of the East, vols, i, xv.] Twelve Upanishads.


134


CHAPTER VI

BUDDHISM
WITH AN ADDENDUM ON JAINISM

BY FRANKLIN EDGERTON

Buddhism may properly be called a Protestant faith.
It sprang up at a time when Hinduism in the wide sense
— Indian thought as a whole — had since long passed the
tentative stage of the old and genuine Upanishads. Those
works were already enshrined with the still older Vedic
hymns and the Brahmanas as works of sacred revelation.
The Brahmanical system was pretty well established in its
classic form, as we shall try to describe it in our next
lecture. The common characteristic features of the higher
Hindu religious and philosophical thought of later times
were all firmly established. In fact, we shall presently
see that Buddhism never thought of questioning any of
those intellectual features of the higher Hinduism. In
that respect it presented nothing inherently new or hereti-
cal. Moralizing philosophers, like the Buddha, teaching
doctrines leading to salvation through right knowledge or
intuition, are found already in the Upanishads ; and there
are many such in later orthodox Hinduism.

Nor is there anything in the Buddhist attitude towards
the brahmanical rites and ceremonies which made it new
or necessarily heretical. This may seem strange'; for
certainly the Buddhists absolutely threw overboard all
sacrifices and other features of the Brahmans' cult. But
all the monistic passages of the Veda, and especially those
of the Upanishads, preach contempt for all earthly things,
or at least indifference to them. And they do not scruple
to include, sometimes in definite terms, the priestly cult
among these earthly things, not indeed as evil, but rather

135


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

as simply beneath the notice of the enlightened. Sacri-
fices, gifts, prayers, and so on are all nothing to the
Upanishads in their loftiest moments. Likewise all the
best of the later systems of Indian philosophy — Sankhya,
Yoga, Vaiqeshika, Vedanta — imply if they do not exactly
preach a total neglect of the ritual.

But there is this difference between those systems on
the one hand and Buddhism, as well as the rival Protest-
ant sect of Jainism, on the other. The Upanishads, and
all the orthodox Hindu systems, formally acknowledge
the authority of the Vedas. In fact, more accurately,
the Upanishads are themselves part of the Veda. They
regard themselves, and are regarded in later times, as the
culmination, the last word, the New Testament, of the
Vedic religion. As Jesus said, " I came not to destroy
but to fulfil," referring to the Mosaic law and the books
of the Hebrew prophets ; as Jesus, in altering or reversing
in some points the previous religion of the Jews, regarded
himself as only perfecting, and by no means as opposing,
the Jewish religion; just so the Upanishads take the
position that the Vedic religion is all right as far as it
goes, but that its final consummation is the Upanishad
doctrine. And so all the later orthodox Hindu systems
at least formally recognize the authority of the Vedas,
and pay lip-service to them, however inconsistent with
them their real spirit may be.

The attitude of Buddhism and Jainism is wholly
different. They definitely and in polemic terms reject
the Vedas. Not only the Vedas, but the whole religious
and even the social system of the Brahmans. Not that
they reject the caste system (as they are sometimes
erroneously said to have done) ; but they are not willing,
as a rule, to admit the superiority of the Brahman caste,
which was a fundamental social dogma of Brahmanism.
Instead the Buddhists frequently, and often rather po-
lemically, assert that the kshatriyas or nobles are the first

136


BUDDHISM

caste, instead of being second to the Brahmans, as they
are in the Brahmanical scheme. The fact is that both
Buddhism and Jainism sprang up among kshatriya or
noble circles. The founders of both sects are reputed
to have been kshatriyas ; and the tradition, whether liter-
ally true or not, is certainly significant. Their first appeal
was to kshatriyas, to nobles — although they sought to
include all castes within their orders, and, in fact, found
many ready converts among the Brahmans.

It is for these reasons, rather than because of the
metaphysical, theological, or ethical views they main-
tained, that the Buddhists and Jains were and are re-
garded by the orthodox Hindus as heterodox, and ex-
cluded from the pale of Hinduism. Had they been will-
ing to pay lip-homage to the Vedas, and especially to
recognize the Brahman caste as the nominal leaders of
society, they might have believed in anything they pleased
and still passed as respectable, as did various other sects
whose real opinions differ in no important respect (except
these) from those of the Buddhists and Jains.

The Protestant attitude of the Buddhists and Jains
towards Brahmanism is strikingly illustrated by the lan-
guages they used in their gospels. They rebelled against
the Brahman theory that religion was only for the upper
classes, a theory which finds expression in the well-
known Brahmanical dogma that Qudras an( j outcasts
might not even hear or read the Vedas, the sacred texts,
much less take part in the services of the ritual. Bud-
dhism and Jainism were open to all castes and to those of
no caste. And that their message might be intelligible
to all mankind, they discarded the Sanskrit language, the
artificial vehicle of Brahmanical learning and culture,
and laid down the principle that their gospels should be
preached in every land in the dialect of the land itself. So,
whereas all the books of Brahmanical wisdom are in San-
skrit, which was no popular speech but had a position like

i37


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

that of Latin in mediaeval Europe, the earliest texts of the
Buddhists and Jains were composed in popular dialects.
The Buddhists of the northern or Mahayana school
did not keep to this practice, but in later times took up
the use of Sanskrit, imitating the Brahmans. But the
southern or Hlnayana school kept closer to primitive
Buddhism in this respect, as well as in respect of doc-
trines. It is the southern school that prevails to-day in
Ceylon, Burma, Siam, and Cambodja, while the Buddhists
of Nepal, Tibet, China, Japan, and Korea adhere to the
northern Mahayana. ( In India proper Buddhism is now
practically extinct.) The language in which the South-
ern Buddhist texts are written is then not Sanskrit, but
an ancient popular dialect called Pali. This is an Indian,
not a Ceylonese, dialect; and we do not know just where
it originally flourished as a spoken language. To be sure,
it too has become in the course of time a literary or
rather sacred and learned language, more or less like
what Sanskrit was to the Brahmans. The Buddhist monks
used it for writing and speaking even (occasionally) on
non-religious subjects. But they never wholly severed
themselves from the traditions of their religion, which
demanded that the religion be presented to all peoples in
their own popular idioms. For although the canon became
too sacred to be translated into popular dialects, the
monks composed extensive commentaries in the languages
of the various countries to which they came. And these
commentaries served the purpose of making the essence of
the religion presentable to the common folk, though the
sacred texts themselves were accessible only to the monks
and the learned.

The Pali literature of the Southern Buddhists con-
tains, then, first and foremost, the sacred texts of the
Buddhist; religion, in the form accepted by this school;
and secondly, an extensive literature (as yet not very fully
explored by Europeans) 1 of commentaries and other

138


BUDDHISM

works, mostly of a religious character, at least nominally.
The sacred canon of the Buddhists is called in Pali the
Tipitaka (in Sanskrit Tripitaka), which means the Three
Baskets or Collections. It consists, as the name indicates,
of three grand divisions: first, the Vinaya Pitaka, or
Discipline Basket, consisting primarily of rules for the
behavior of the order of monks said to have been founded
by the Buddha; secondly, the Sutta (Sanskrit Sutra)
Pitaka, or Sermon Basket, consisting in the first instance
of addresses supposed to have been delivered by the
Buddha, and of other utterances of his, with a not incon-
siderable amount of other material, whose original right
to be in the collection is at times questionable ; and thirdly,
the Abhidhamma (Sanskrit Abhidharma) Pitaka, some-
times, though questionably, rendered the Metaphysical
Basket, which contains more technical and scholastic dis-
quisitions on Buddhist dogmatics and on formal logic.
All that we can say with an approach to certainty of the
date of this canonical literature is that probably few if
any changes have been introduced into it since a few cen-
turies after Christ, while its oldest parts may well go
back to the times of the Buddha himself, and may even
contain some of his very words. His dates are computed
on the basis of the best Buddhist tradition as approxi-
mately 560 to 480 B.C.

I have mentioned the chief particulars in which Bud-
dhism differentiated itself sharply from the general run
of Hindu systems. It is none the less true, in spite of
these elements of Protestantism, that it remained a thor-
oughly Hindu sect. Its most fundamental dogmas — one
might better say axioms or intellectual points of view — are
common to all of the higher post-Vedic systems of Indian
philosophy and religion. In order to understand Buddhism
at all, it seems to me necessary at the start briefly to out-
line a few of these basic axioms. It is true that they
are no more characteristic of Buddhism than of almost

139


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

all other Hindu sects; but it is none the less true that
they are absolutely fundamental in Buddhism. I shall
present them under three headings: first, pessimism;
second, transmigration (or, as it is better to say in Bud-
dhism, rebirth), with which is inseparably intertwined
the doctrine familiarly known as karma or " deed ;" and
third, salvation or release.

i. Pessimism. — That all existence — at least all em-
piric existence in the ordinary sense — is evil, is taken for
granted without question and almost without argument
by all the great Hindu systems. Already in the Upani-
shads this belief is seen in process of development. But
in them, or at least in the oldest of them, it is hardly
expressed in a clear way. In them it usually takes the
form of a depreciative view of the empiric world as
contrasted with the One Ultimate Reality, whatever it
may be called, Brahman or Atman or Sat (Existent) or
the like. In their admiration of the perfection of the
Absolute it seems to them that " Whatever is other than
That is evil," as in the passage previously * quoted and
in various similar passages. But this is still rather inci-
dental, almost parenthetical. With the later Hindus it is
a very different matter. Bred in their bone and marrow,
and part of their inmost nature, is this belief that all
life is inherently worthless and base and evil. What are
commonly regarded as the pleasures of existence are
not genuine pleasures. For one thing, many of them are
or may be attended by pain, which, or the fear of which,
either counterbalances or destroys the enjoyment of them.
But besides this, all these so-called pleasures are, like
everything that exists, transitory and undependable, sub-
ject to destruction at any moment; and when they are
gone, the recollection of them leaves the misery of life
darker than ever by contrast. Moreover, the creatures of
this round of existence are so constructed that even a life

1 Page 132 of this volume.

140


BUDDHISM

of perfect and continuous indulgence would pall at last ;
these joys, as they are vulgarly called, are all illusory
and bring disgust in the end. Thus in brief do the Hindus,
when they take the trouble to argue the point at all,
defend their great thesis that whatever is (in the ordinary,
empiric sense) is bad. This thesis is formally stated by
the Buddhists in the first of the four great "Noble
Truths " upon which their system rests, as we shall see
presently.

(2) Transmigration and Karma. — But if life is
all evil, does not death bring release from it? By no
means, say the Hindus. The way out is not so easy as
that. Death is not cessation of existence. It is only
passing from one existence into another. " Just as a
caterpillar, when it comes to the end of a blade of grass,
gathers itself up together (to go over to another grass-
blade), even so this Spirit, when it has rid itself of this
body and cast off ignorance, gathers itself up together
(to go over into another body) ;" so speaks already an
Upanishad text. 2 In fact, the history of the belief in re-
birth after death goes back much further than the Upani-
shads. But I cannot here trace its interesting early de-
velopment ; it must suffice to say that the later Hindu doc-
trine of transmigration appears for the first time clearly
stated in the Upanishads ; and even there only tentatively,
for older views still persist side by side with it. The
Upanishads also begin to join with this doctrine of trans-
migration the old doctrine of retribution for good and evil
deeds in a life after death. The belief in such retribution,
in some form or other, is found all over the world, and
various forms of it are found in different stages of Vedic
religion. With the transference of the future life from
a mythical other world to this earth, and with the ex-
tension or multiplication of it to an indefinite series of
future lives more or less like the present life, the way is

'Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad 4.4.4.
141


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT,

prepared for the characteristically Hindu doctrine of
karma or " deed." According to this doctrine, which all
Hindus regard as axiomatic, the state of each existence
of each individual is absolutely conditioned and deter-
mined by that individual's morality in previous existences.
A man is exactly what he has made himself and what he
therefore deserves to be. One of the earliest clear ex-
pressions of this view is found in this Upanishad pas-
sage: 3 "Just as (the Soul) is (in this life) of this or
that sort; just as it acts, just as it operates, even so pre-
cisely it becomes (in the next life). If it acts well it
becomes good; if it acts ill it becomes evil. As a result
of right action it becomes what is good ; as a result of evil
action it becomes what is evil." In short, the law of the
conservation of energy is rigidly applied to the moral
world. Every action, whether good or bad, must of
necessity have its result for the performer of the action.
If in the present life a man is on the whole good, his next
existence is better by just so much as his good deeds
have outweighed his evil deeds. Better — that is, less
painful; we must not forget that these are merely com-
parative terms, and that all existence, even the best, is
really evil. Men of very exceptional virtues may make
themselves gods; for there are gods, yes and heavens,
many of them, according to the Hindu view. Only all
the gods are strictly mortal and are just as much bound
up in the chain of existences as are men. The life of the
gods differs from life on earth only in that it is compara-
tively less wretched, and, to be sure, a little longer ; but
what is a few thousand years more or less in comparison
with the infinity of seons over which the misery of exist-
ence stretches? Conversely, those men who are excep-
tionally wicked either are reborn as lower animals, or fall
to one of the numerous hells which counterbalance the
system of heavens. And all this is not carried out by
• Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad 44-6.

142


BUDDHISM

decree of some omnipotent and sternly just Power. It
is a natural law. It operates of itself, just as much as the
law of gravitation. It is therefore wholly dispassionate,
neither merciful nor vindictive. It is absolutely inescapa-
ble; but at the same time it never cuts off hope. A man
is what he has made himself; but by that same token he
may make himself what he will. The soul tormented in
the lowest hell may raise himself in time to the highest
heaven, simply by doing right. Perfect justice is made
the basic law of the universe. Opinions may differ as
to the absolute truth of this theory — I am not discussing
that; but as to its moral grandeur and perfection I
really do not see how there can be a difference of opin-
ion. How clumsy, as an instrument of moral retribution,
seems in comparison with this the belief of our ancestors
in a sharp separation of the " sheep " from the " goats "
and a once-for-all Day of Judgment, with its final and
unappealable decree and its sentence for all eternity!

Transmigration and retribution by karma are then,
like pessimism, common features of Hinduism which are
retained in Buddhism and made part of its fundamental
verities. The Buddhist formulation of the chain of exist-
ence is found in the second of its four " Noble Truths,"
as we shall see later. This same formulation declares that
the root of existence, and so of evil, is desire, based on
ignorance. Because men do not know the truth, they
cling with their desires to the false joys of existence;
this causes them to perform acts, and these acts (karma)
have, as we have seen, their necessary fruition in rebirth.
Even this full statement is rooted in general Hinduism.
Already in the Upanishads 4 we hear: "This Spirit
of Man consists simply of desire. As is his desire, so is
his resolve; as is his resolve, so is the deed (karma) that
he does; as is the deed that he does, so is that (fate)
which he attains unto." And again, the perfected soul

4 Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad 4.4.7.

143


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

is that which " has no desires," 5 which " is beyond de-
sire, has dispensed with evil, knows no fear, is free from
sorrow." 6

This unquestioning acceptance by Buddhism of the
doctrines of transmigration and karma as basic axioms
is all the more remarkable because of the Buddhistic
attitude on the subject of the soul. Strange to say, the
usual Buddhist view is that there is no soul at all, neither
individual soul nor world soul. How then can there be
transmigration? Transmigration in the literal sense,
perhaps not; but there is rebirth, nevertheless. Each liv-
ing being, according to Buddhism, is made up of five
constituent elements, called in Pali khandhas (Sanskrit
skandhas), which compose his personality; there is no
ego in any other sense. These elements resolve themselves
at death; but nevertheless, in some way which the texts
themselves admit to be " mysterious " and which is, in
fact, quite inconceivable, they are compelled by the karma
or actions of the individual in the preceding existence
to reunite and form a new individual, who is, however,
the very same as the old, because the karma is imperish-
able and keeps up the continuity of existence. Buddhism
is very weak metaphysically ; in fact, we shall see that in
its best and most typical moods it declines to enter into
metaphysics at all. It might better have stuck to this rule.
The doctrine of the khandhas as a substitute for the soul
is interesting principally because it shows how ingrained
was the belief in rebirth. It was so ingrained that the
Buddhists never thought of questioning it, but, in fact,
based their whole system upon it — although according to
them there is no soul to transmigrate ! And this forced
them into the shallow mystery of the khandhas.

(3) Salvation. — Is there, however, no way in which
one may finally escape from all existence? Since even

' Ibid., 4.321.

• Ibid., 4.3.22.

144


BUDDHISM

the best of it is evil, are we hopelessly chained to an eter-
nity of misery? Is there no salvation? All sects answer
yes ; and, in fact, each sect makes it its prime business to
point the way to it. That is the aim of religion and
philosophy in India : to show how man may be released
from this round of existences, consisting wholly of mis-
ery. One who has reached the goal, and freed himself
from the last links of the chain binding him to existence,
attains Nirvana. This is a term common to all sects;
and the concept which it covers is practically about the
same in all, though philosophically there are widely differ-
ent definitions. Generally speaking, it is at least a cessa-
tion of conscious individual existence. This need not
mean what it does mean to strict and original Buddhism,
absolute annihilation. It may mean perfect fusion of the
individual personality in the World-soul, the All, the
Brahman; so in the Vedanta philosophy. It may mean
total and final separation of the soul from all matter and
so from all material processes, which include all of what
we call mentality and consciousness; so in the Sankhya
philosophy. At any rate, it is always what may for pra'c-
tical purposes be called non-existence. If we neverthe-
less find Nirvana referred to and described, even in
Buddhist texts, as a state of perfect bliss, which after all
in strict logic must imply being, we must not press those
passages too far. They may be merely poetic expressions
of the devotee's yearning; or they may mark an occa-
sional lapse into the every-day language of man's more
primitive feelings and emotions.

The method by which one may attain Nirvana varies
to some extent in the several sects. Generally speaking,
however, the basis of the method is intellectual, or per-
haps rather intuitive; at least in most cases the sine qua
non is the knowledge or realization of some truth. Ignor-
ance (avidya.) is generally the root of existence and so
of evil ; we have already seen that in Buddhism, for in-
10 145


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

stance, it is ignorance that causes desire, which causes
action, which leads to continued existence. Good deeds in
themselves, certainly, can never bring release ; they result
in less unhappy existences, but that is all.

All systems, however, prescribe various preliminary
steps and practices which they regard as being useful
in preparing the soul for the reception of the enlighten-
ment which will finally bring release. And occasionally
these preliminary steps become so prominent in the minds
of some sectaries that they obscure, and in some cases
even obliterate, what was originally the true goal. Chief
among these avenues of approach to true knowledge,
which, however, occasionally lead off into seductive by-
paths, are two. One is devotion to the personality of
some god or prophet, who is regarded as a kind of per-
sonal savior or helper on the way to release. The other
is the practice of asceticism in some form or other, re-
garded as helping to prepare for enlightenment by freeing
the individual from attachment to the world, by gradually
conquering the natural desires of the flesh.

The three standard Hindu means or aids to attaining
Nirvana are, then, first and foremost, knowledge of the
religious truth; second, personal devotion to some god
or saint around whom the religion centers, and who helps
his devotees to gain enlightenment; third, the ascetic
life in some form. Now the regular Buddhist confession
of faith, repeated by all who adhere to the religion, is
the thrice-repeated formula called the Three Jewels, or
gems of the faith : " I go to the Buddha for refuge ; I
go to the Law (dhamma) for refuge; I go to the Con-
gregation for refuge." Here are all the three items—-
but with the significant change that personal devotion to
the Buddha, which implies acceptance of his life as an
example, is put first. Only second comes the Law — that
is, the religious truth proclaimed by him. And finally,
there is adhesion to the order of monks which he is said

146


BUDDHISM

to have founded, the communion of saints; which involves
a monastic mode of life.

We can hardly believe that this creed dates from the
earliest times. The glorification of the person of the
Buddha in particular looks secondary ; it has no place in
the scheme of salvation as it is represented to have been
laid down by the Buddha himself. It was, by the way,
carried much farther by the Mahayana or Northern
Buddhists ; they deified the Buddha outright, and offered
quasi-brahmanical sacrifices to him, in imitation of the
Vishnuite cults which make so much of bhakti, " devo-
tion " to the god or saint.

Let us, however, follow the accepted statement of
the creed, and look into the content of each of its terms
as they present themselves to the pious believer.

( i ) The Buddha. — For a long time it has been cus-
tomary to speak of the date of the death of Buddha,
traditionally put at about 480 B.C., as the first approxi-
mately certain date in the history of India. In very recent
times, however, doubts have been expressed, or rather
doubts which were expressed much earlier have been
revived on the basis of new evidence, as to the historicity of
the Buddha. It is now doubted by some students of
Buddhism, whether all the traditional details of the life
of the Master are not myths, and even whether he existed
at all as a historical personage.

Whether these doubts are justified or not, I cannot
decide. Furthermore, I cannot feel that it is a matter
of much practical importance. If the Buddha is a myth,
he is a great and noble myth, and he has played the role
of a reality in the lives of many hundreds of millions of
people, who have derived from the example of his sup-
posed life, as much as from the teachings which pass
under his name, religious comfort, inspiration, and
guidance.

According to Buddhist belief, then, the founder of
147


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Buddhism was a man named Siddhartha, of the family
Gautama. He was a member of a minor kshatriya or
noble tribe called the Qakyas, who lived at Kapila-vastu,
in the foothills of the Himalayas, near the modern Nepal.
From the tribal name Cakya is derived one of the
■Buddha's most common titles, Qakyamum, the Sage of
the Cakyas. While quite a young man he determined to
abandon the world, and sought refuge in an ascetic order;
but he found no peace in it, and left it again. After
many spiritual struggles he finally discovered that he
had a new message to proclaim, a new gospel of salva-
tion. It is at this point, properly, that the title Buddha
becomes applicable to him ; the word means the Enlight-
ened One, and is, like Christ, a title referring to him as
founder of the religion. Resisting the temptations of
Mara, the Evil One, who tempted him to use his new
knowledge for his own benefit by attaining Nirvana at
once, he set out to proclaim his message to the world.
Converting first a few disciples, he founded his order of
monks (afterwards of nuns also), and thereafter spent
his life alternately in wandering about and in resting
with his followers in various places — always preaching
and teaching. He is said to have lived to be eighty
years old.

(2) The Congregation (Sangha). — Departing
from the accepted order of the Buddhist confession, we
shall take up next the third of the " Three Jewels," the
congregation, that is the order of monks and nuns. For
Buddhism is essentially a monastic religion. It teaches
that the life of a monk, who has severed all connection
with temporal affairs, abandoned home, possessions, and
family-ties, and taken up the homeless life; who subsists
wholly on alms, and is forbidden to own any property,
forbidden even to accept in alms anything except the bare
necessities of life, and of them only barely enough at
any one time for his own immediate needs, — that this life

148


BUDDHISM

is the one and only mode of life in which one can hope to
obtain release. And this mode of life is open to all men,
not limited to any select group or caste. Within the
order caste-lines are abolished; all monks are brothers.
Some of the Buddha's immediate disciples are said to
have been persons of low-caste origin.

But Buddhism makes a great and all-important dis-
tinction between monasticism and extreme asceticism.
What distinguishes the Buddhist order from the numer-
ous other orders of Indian ascetics, and sects of un-
organized holy men, as well as from many orders of
Christian monks, is that the others, or at least many of
them, regarded self-mortification, sometimes in very ex-
treme forms, as the most meritorious thing. Buddhism,
on the other hand, stands definitely opposed to such harsh
and unnatural practices. Simplicity is rigorously insisted
upon; but self-torture is as rigorously forbidden. The
Middle Way, the Way of Peace, Calm, and Composure,
is what Buddha preaches. Avoid all extremes, the ex-
treme of asceticism as well as the extreme of worldliness !

Why, then, you may ask, should Buddhism advocate
the monkish life at all ? Why not let men live like normal
human beings, enjoining them merely to uprightness and
justice in their dealings with their fellow-men ? Buddhism
answers: because it is impossible to live in the world
without taking part in it; without having, at least to
some extent, worldly interests and so worldly desires.
Desire is the root of existence, and existence is all evil.
No one can hope to free himself completely from desire,
which is the only way to salvation, except by withdrawing
from the world.

It should be said that the Buddhist order of monks
was not, like most Christian orders, a hard and fast
group, which having once entered one could never leave.
On the contrary, it was recognized as possible for a man
to enter the order temporarily, with not even any inten-

149


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

tion of remaining in it permanently. The great Buddhist
emperor Agoka is said thus to have entered the order
several times, for periods of time; and the same was
frequently done by others. The salutary effect which
membership in the order brings can be acquired in a lesser
degree by temporary association with it. Buddhism has
this feature in common with a number of other Indian
orders. Of course such temporary association cannot
lead to the final goal, to the complete cessation of desires
and so of existence. But, then, neither does permanent
membership in the order of itself confer this benefit.
Only a certain state of mind can do that. The monastic
life is important as one of the necessary preliminaries
leading to this state of mind ; it is only a means, not an
end in itself.

What the real end of the religion is, we learn when
we take up the third (in the Buddhist formulation the
second) of the three " Jewels " of the Buddhist faith,
namely :

(3) The Law. — The cardinal doctrine of Buddhism
is summed up in the formula of the Four Noble Truths,
attributed to the Buddha himself. These are :

1. The Noble Truth of Suffering, namely:

Birth is suffering; old age is suffering; disease is
suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, misery,
grief, and despair are suffering; union with the unloved
is suffering; separation from the loved is suffering; any
unsatisfied desire is suffering ; in short, all the five attach-
ment groups (the five elements of sentient existence, that
is, collectively, all forms of sentient existence) are
suffering.

In this first Noble Truth we have the Buddhistic
formulation of the common Hindu pessimism with regard
to the world.

2. The Noble Truth of the Cause of Suffering,
namely :

150


BUDDHISM

It is desire, leading to rebirth, joining itself to pleas-
ure and passion, and finding delight in every existence;
desire, namely, for sensual pleasure, desire for future
life, desire for prosperity in this life.

Here we have the common Hindu view that desire
is the root of existence, because (though this is not
clearly stated in the formula) it leads to action, which
must bear fruit in continued existence. The third Truth
is a necessary inference from the first two :

3. The Noble Truth of the Release from Suffering,
namely :

It is the complete fading-out and cessation of this de-
sire, a giving-up, a getting rid, a relinquishment, an
emancipation from this desire.

Finally,

4. The Noble Truth of the Way to the Release from
Suffering, namely:

It is the noble eight-fold path, to wit, right belief,
right resolve, right speech, right behavior, right occupa-
tion, right effort, right contemplation, right concentration.

All of the elements of these four Noble Truths are
elaborated at great length in the technical Buddhist
works ; especially the last, the eight- fold Noble Path lead-,
ing to the Release from Suffering, which of course is the!
final goal — in short, Nirvana. Its eight stages are made
to include a complete program of moral and intellectual
advance, leading to final perfection. Thus, right belief,
the first of the eight stages, is defined as belief in the
Four Noble Truths themselves. This is necessary as a
starting-point. Then, right resolve is the resolve to re-
nounce sensual pleasures, to have malice towards none,
and to harm no living creature. Right speech is absten-
tion from falsehood, slander, harsh language, and fri-
volity of speech. Right behavior is abstention from the
taking of life, from theft, and from fornication. Right
occupation is the shunning of professions and means of

isi


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

livelihood which are in themselves bad and the cleaving
to those that are good. Right effort is the strenuous and
heroic and constant endeavor of the mind to get rid of
all evil and impure qualities and to cultivate the good and
pure qualities (which are carefully denned in great de-
tail). Right contemplation is the life of one that is
actively conscious of the elements of being without allow-
ing them to affect him with joy or sorrow. Right concen-
tration is a state, or rather a series of states, of mystic
trance, culminating in the fourth and highest of the
states of trance, " which has neither joy nor sorrow,
but is contemplation refined by indifference." This last
state is practically a foretaste of Nirvana — although to
describe it as such would not be consistent with the Bud-
dhist theory, for Nirvana can only come after death,
with the dissolution of all " form."

This -simple-scheme- of salvation is the central point of
primitive Buddhism. As time went on it became more
and more developed and elaborated and schematized in
all its details. Indeed, the later Buddhist schools went
much farther, and attempted to construct elaborate sys-
tems of metaphysics and psychology, to match the other
Hindu systems. It seems to have been characteristic of
early Buddhism that it not only failed to provide much
of a metaphysical theory, but distinctly took the ground
that metaphysics was useless, worse than useless, in fact,
since it distracted the attention from the things that are
alone worth while. In a very interesting old dialogue 7
found in the Sutta Pitaka or " Sermon Basket," a monk
named Malunkyaputta is represented as coming to the
Buddha and complaining that the Buddha has not eluci-
dated such questions as these: Is the world eternal or
not? Is the world infinite (in space) or finite? Are

'The Lesser Malunkyaputta _ Sutta, in the Majjhima Nikaya;
translated by Warren, Buddhism in Translations (Cambridge, Mass.,
1896), p. 117 ff.

IS2


BUDDHISM

the soul and the body identical or not? Dbes the saint
continue to exist after death or not? The monk is
offended by this neglect of questions which he considers
important, and states frankly his feeling that he cannot
continue to adhere to the Buddha's doctrine unless the
'Buddha explains these questions. The Buddha answers
him in this wise : " Suppose a man were wounded with a
poisoned arrow. His friends would urge him to have it
treated by a physician or surgeon. Suppose then the
wounded man should say : ' I will not have this arrow
taken out until I learn to what caste the man who wounded
me belonged, what his name and family were, what his
size, physical appearance, and place of residence were,
and the exact nature of the materials used in making the
arrow, the bowstring, and the bow.' What would be-
come of such a man? Would he not die of the poisoned
wound before he found out the answers to all these ques-
tions? And what difference do all the questions really
make? It is just so with the Buddha's doctrine of the
religious life. The religious life does not depend on the
nature of the world or on the nature of the soul. What-
ever the nature of the world or of the soul may be, there
still remains existence, which is suffering, and the elimina-
tion of which it is my business to teach. I have not
elucidated the questions you refer to because they profit
not, nor do they have anything to do with the fundamen-
tals of religion, nor do they tend to Nirvana. What I
have elucidated is only that which does profit, which does
concern the fundamentals of religion, and which does lead
to Nirvana, namely this : the truth of suffering, the origin
of suffering, the release from suffering, and the way to
the release from suffering."

The practical ethics of Buddhism, like its most funda-
mental beliefs, is essentially the same as that of all the
higher forms of Hinduism. It enjoins patience, kind-

i53


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

ness, long-suffering, meekness, love of all creatures, and
especially the abstention from doing any wilful injury to
living beings; the abandonment of all unkindness and
malice, even towards one's enemies; truthfulness, justice,
and in short all the virtues generally accepted by the
highest ethical systems of the world, including that of
Jesus. Over all is cast as it were the veil of moderation.
This may almost be called the cardinal Buddhist virtue,
or rather a qualification of its entire code of virtues.
•If Buddhism has a distinctive quality on the ethical side,
it is this. Excessive zeal, even in a cause which is in
itself righteous, is deprecated, as apt to defeat its own
ends. This moderation, this avoidance of extremes and
readiness to meet human nature half way, is probably one
of the secrets of the enormous success of Buddhism as a
missionary religion. To mention one example : like all
higher forms of Hinduism, Buddhism preaches ahinsa. or
non-injury of any living being. This implies, of course,
abstention from the eating of meat. And good Buddhists
are therefore specifically commanded to observe a vege-
tarian diet. Nevertheless, if one is offered hospitality,
and the meal set before one by the host consists of meat, it
is not sinful to partake of it. To refuse to do so would
injure and insult the host, and would do no good, since
it would not restore life to the slaughtered animal. The
statement is still found in some even very recent authori-
ties that the Buddha himself died from indigestion caused
by a hearty meal of roast pork, offered him by a simple
peasant (a "son of a smith") at whose hut the aged
saint stopped one evening. It is too bad that this state-
ment cannot now be accepted. It illustrates in a very true
and poignant way the Buddha's attitude on just this sub-
ject; we can hardly doubt that the Buddha would have
eaten the meal if it had consisted of pork (even though
pork is a particularly unclean meat in India, eaten only
by the lowest classes). But the fact is that the story is

154


BUDDHISM

based on a misunderstanding of an ambiguous Pali word.
The Chinese version of the story proves that it was a
meal of mushrooms, not of pork, which, according to
Buddhist tradition, caused the death of the Master.

Buddhism and Christianity. — In recent years it has
been much discussed whether early Christianity shows any
signs of influence from Buddhism. The similarities be-
tween the ethical doctrines of the two religions are obvi-
ous. But it is now generally admitted that there is no
particular reason to suspect any interinfluence on that
ground. It simply means that the highest ethical prin-
ciples of different parts of the human race tend to co-
incide. More significant seem to be coincidences in cer-
tain stories, legends, or narratives, found in the sacred
or semi-sacred books of the two faiths. There is no
doubt at all that in the second, third, and fourth centuries
a.d., if not earlier, some Buddhist legends wandered to
the west and became incorporated in Christian literature.
The apocryphal gospels and the lives of the saints contain
a number of such Hindu — and generally Buddhistic —
legends. Nay, the story of the life of the Buddha him-
self is found, in unmistakable form, as the story of St.
Josaphat ; which name is itself a corruption of the Sanskrit
Bodhisattva, the title of the Buddha before he became
buddha (" enlightened ")— that is, the " Future Buddha."
In other words, the figure of St. Josaphat, who is found
in the calendar of both the Greek and the Roman
churches, presents the remarkable spectacle of the incor-
poration in Christianity, as a saint, of the founder of
Christianity's greatest rival for world-supremacy — Bud-
dhism. If there are any Greek or Roman Catholic churches
dedicated to St. Josaphat, they are really dedicated to the
Buddha, little as the worshipers may guess the fact.

Such borrowings as these are, however, comparatively
late in the history of Christianity. With the canonical

iSS


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

gospels the case is much less clear. Some striking paral-
lels have been pointed out even in them. According to
the latest pronouncement by the highest authority on this
subject now living in the world, Professor Garbe, of the
University of Tubingen, 8 there are four narratives in
the Christian gospels which are probably derived from
Buddhist sources, through indirect channels of oral tra-
dition. These are : ( i ) the angel chorus which announces
the miraculous birth of the Saviour; (2) the temptation;
(3) the miraculous walking on the water of the disciple
(Peter), with his rescue by the Master when by reason
of insufficient faith he began to sink; (4) the miraculous
feeding of the multitude. 9

The question whether particular stories in the Chris-
tian gospels are borrowed from similar Buddhistic stories
or not is a difficult one to decide, because of the lack of
definite criteria for judging. There is as yet no agree-
ment among scholars on the subject. Such borrowing as
may have taken place must have been mostly from Bud-
dhism into Christianity, and not vice versa, because most
of the sacred texts of Buddhism go back to pre-Christian
times. 10 But at any rate, if there were such borrowings,
we may be sure that they were not numerous. In the
main, Buddhism and Christianity are certainly inde-
pendent of each other, in their sacred stories as well as
in their ethical principles.

8 In his book Indien und das Christentum, Tubingen, 1914.

"The most complete collection of parallels between the sacred
books of Buddhism and Christianity is found in the work of Albert J.
Edmunds, Buddhist and Christian Gospels, Philadelphia, 2 vols.,
1908. Edmunds, however, does not believe that most of his parallels
are borrowed. To him they mostly indicate only the general simi-
larity between the two religions. Garbe, in the above-mentioned
work, acknowledges his indebtedness to the work of Edmunds.

10 The contrary has been maintained by some in the past, and
is argued very recently by J. Kennedy in the Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society for April and July, 1917. Kennedy, whose articles
have appeared since I wrote the above, thinks such borrowings as
occurred in the earliest Christian times were in the other direction —
from West to East. His arguments do not convince me.

156


BUDDHISM

Addendum : A Brief Note on Jainism.

About the same time that Buddhism was founded,
another very similar heretical sect arose, which is known
as Jainism. It is said to have been founded by a some-
what older contemporary of the Buddha, named Vardha-
mana; he is commonly called Mahavira, which means
Great Hero, and is, like Buddha, only a title of respect
given to the Master by his followers. Like Buddha,
Vardhamana was a kshatriya, and his religion is similar
to Buddhism in its attitude towards Hindu orthodoxy.
Indeed, its tenets generally are very close to those of
Buddhism. It does not, however, emphasize the virtue
of moderation which is so important in Buddhism. And
in its canonical texts, at least in their present form, there
is not the aversion to abstract philosophy that is found
in early Buddhism. There is, on the contrary, a great
deal of speculation, though of a very crude sort; meta-
physically, Jainism ranks low among Hindu systems. I
will mention only one of its most curious beliefs; it is
that there are individual, separate, living souls in abso-
lutely all parts of nature. Fire, wind, stones, wood, in
short all vegetable and inanimate nature is peopled by
souls, just like animal souls, and like them included in
the range of transmigration, so that it is conceivable
that a man might be reborn not only as a worm or a
gnat (as all Hindus believe) but even as a stick or a
stone. This is not a primitive animism, though it is
equally crude when stated thus baldly, and has not the
excuse of the naivete and ignorance of primitive ani-
mistic tribes. But the Jainistic theory is simply a rednc-
tio ad absurdum of the Hindu theory of transmigration.

On the practical side, Jainism is characterized on the
one hand by an extreme asceticism, and on the other
by an extreme devotion to the doctrine of ahinsa or non-
injury of living beings. This latter doctrine, as we have
seen, is common to all higher f orm,s of Hinduism, includ-

i57


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

ing Buddhism. But perhaps no other sect has carried
it as far as Jainism. The saving grace of Moderation,
the Middle Way to which Buddhism is devoted, is lack-
ing in Jainism. No Jain monk ( for there is an order of
monks in Jainism, too) is allowed to travel about during
the rainy season, though at all other seasons he is, on the
contrary, forbidden to stay in any one place for more
than a very short time. The reason for this is that in
the rainy season, in India, it is impossible to walk abroad
at all without involuntarily crushing many of the tiny
insects which swarm underfoot in the soggy earth. 11
Similarly, good Jains are supposed to use, and many of
them still do use, strainers in drinking water, lest inad-
vertently they should swallow imperceptibly small insects
in the draft. They devote themselves to building hos-
pitals for animals, in which there are wards for insects,
fleas, lice, and so on. In short, they almost make a laud-
able virtue into a ridiculous absurdity.

Another sign of the marked lack of moderation among
the Jains is their extreme asceticism. This, of course,
they have in common with many Hindu sects, some of
which fully equal them in it; but, as aforesaid, they
differ markedly from the Buddhists on this point. It is
a meritorious act to the Jains to perform or submit to
almost any kind of self-torture. Some of them regard
suicide by slow starvation as the crowning merit of all,
and as insuring Nirvana. (Buddhism definitely forbids
suicide in any form.) One of the two Jain sects, which
claims, apparently with some show of justice, to be the
more original in its doctrines and habits, requires that
its monks shall go absolutely naked. This branch,
called the Digambaras or " Sky-clothed," is to be sure the
less numerous of the two ; most present-day Jains belong

" To be sure, this particular manifestation of ahinsa is shared
by many other Indian orders ; and Buddhist monks are not wont to
travel during the rains.

158


BUDDHISM

to the other sect, the £vetambaras, or " White-clothed."
Women are admitted to the order of the (Jvetambaras,
whereas for obvious reasons they are excluded from the
Digambara order, and hence denied the possibility of lead-
ing the religious life. Apparently the only hope for a
woman of the Digambara sect to attain Nirvana is to
acquire enough merit to be reborn as a man. Even among
the less extreme Qvetambara Jains, violent asceticism
is regarded as one of the most certain ways of acquiring
merit.

Jainism, unlike Buddhism, has never been carried out-
side the bounds of India. But it has scored at least this
triumph over Buddhism, that whereas the latter is now
practically extinct in India proper, Jainism still flourishes
there. There are between one and two million Jains in
India, largely in the west and southwest. They are, in
spite of their extreme tenets, on the whole, a highly re-
spectable and prosperous class, consisting largely of mer-
chants, and to a great extent making very ordinary and
prosaic works of charity take the place of the originally
much more ascetic performances required by the prin-
ciples of their religion. These principles tend nowadays
to show themselves for the most part only in what seem
to us somewhat whimsical and fantastic occasional appli-
cations of charity, as in their insect-hospitals and the like.

The sacred texts of Jainism are written in a popular
or Prakritic dialect, which has become for Jainism what
Pali is for Buddhism. In eschewing the cultivated San-
skrit the original Jains signalized their opposition to Brah-
manism and their appeal to all classes of the population
without regard to caste, just as the Buddhists did. In
later times, however, again like the Buddhists (of the
northern school), growth of respectability among the
Jains brought with it to some extent conformity in the
matter of language as in other respects ; and in mediaeval
times Sanskrit was to a large extent used by Jain writers,

159


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

although, to be sure, it was more in secular than in re-
ligious works that it was used. The Jains of mediseval
India concerned themselves very extensively with the
literature of fables and stories; we owe to them a large
number of collections of this type of literature, which
average a very high degree of artistic excellence.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Buddhism :

H. C. Warren : Buddhism in Translations. Cambridge, Mass., 1896.
An admirable work, giving a systematic view of Buddhism by
carefully chosen and well-arranged selections of translations
from the original sources, with sufficient introductory and ex-
planatory materials to enable the beginner to follow intelligently.

Hermann Oldenberg : Buddha. Translation of the 1st German edi-
tion, by Hoey, London, 1882.

T. W. Rhys Davids : Buddhism. London, 1894.

T. W. Rhys Davids : Buddhism. New York, 1896.

H. Kern: Manual of Indian Buddhism. Strassburg, 1896. This
book is more useful for the scholar and advanced student than
for the beginner.

Mahayana or Northern Buddhism :

D. T. Suzuki : Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism. London, 1907.

Buddhism and Christianity:
(See notes 8 and 9 above.)

Tainism : , „ , . _ ,

Mrs S Stevenson: The Heart of Patmsm. London, 1915.
H Jacobi- Gaina Sutras. Oxford, 1884, 1895. [Sacred Books of
' the East, vols, xxii and xlv.] Translation of texts, with valuable
general introduction.


160


CHAPTER VII

BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM.
BY FRANKLIN EDGERTON

I. BRAHMANISM

We have seen how the hieratic cult of the Veda de-
veloped into a formalistic, cut-and-dried system of cere-
monies, lacking in both truly intellectual and truly devo-
tional elements, and centered entirely in the hands of a
class of priests. In so far as the ceremonies of this
priestly cult concerned only the original hieratic ritual
of the three sacred fires, centering in the soma-sacrifices,
its doom was sealed. It was too specialized, too remote
from the great mass of the people, to survive after it had
been deprived of all intellectual and devotional back-
ground. The soma-offerings and the other performances
of the three-fire cult fell into disuse at an early date.
For many centuries now they have played no real part
in the religious life of India. Nominally they are still in
effect. The Vedic texts which prescribe them are still
extant and are still supposedly sacred and binding. From
time to time isolated enthusiasts have continued to per-
form some of them. In mediaeval India an attempt was
even made to provide them with a philosophic basis, in
the form of the Mimansa. system of philosophy. But it
has had little practical effect.

Perhaps the priestly custodians of this cult saw the
writing on the wall, and cast about for some means of
safety from the impending doom. At any rate, with or
without such intention, there was grafted on to the old
stock a thriving branch from the living religion of the
people, which infused a new life into the whole, and which
in time virtually became the whole — as the old, strictly
11 161


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

sacerdotal part of the cult gradually perished. As we
have seen, the popular religion of Vedic times contained
(along with many less innocent features) a large num-
ber of regular ceremonies pertaining to definite points in
the life of every normal man, such as birth-rites, rites
performed at reaching puberty, marriage and funeral rites,
and others. All Aryans were expected to perform these,
as a matter of course. The hieratic cult did not deal
with them, not because it opposed them at all, but because
they were simply none of its business. But in later times
the priests perhaps saw how much they could gain by
making these popular rites their business. At any rate,
whether with this conscious purpose or not, they adopted
them and made them a regular part of their system, al-
though they kept them carefully distinct from the other,
strictly hieratic rites. And once undertaken, the work
of adoption was carried out with the utmost thorough-
ness. The entire stock of priestly learning was put at
the disposal of these popular ceremonies. They are de-
scribed in the Grihya Sutras or books of the " domestic "
rites (as distinguished from the Crauta Sutras, the books
of the hieratic or " revelational " rites, qruti). These
Grihya Sutras are compilations made in the latest Vedic
age. But they employ the sacred mantras or texts of the
early Vedic literature in conducting these originally un-
hieratic, domestic rites.

The classical law-books (dharma-castras), which are
the real authorities of institutional Brahmanism, make a
list of twelve of these personal ceremonies, which they
call samskaras, and which are supposed to be particu-
larly pious and efficacious. They begin with the rite of
impregnation and end with marriage. Among the more
important of the intermediate ceremonies are those that
pertain to birth and name-giving, and to the upanayana
or " initiation." This last is supposed to be performed
for every boy of the three upper castes, that is every

162


BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM

Aryan boy, 1 about the age of puberty. It consists in the
boy's formal induction into the life of a student of the
Veda, which is the first of the four agramas or regular
stages in the life of an Aryan. During the period of stu-
dentship, whose duration was indefinite, the student
(called a brahmacarin) lived with his guru or teacher
and acted as a sort of body-servant to him. At the end
thereof he returned to his father's house, and shortly
after was expected to marry and set up a home of his
own. By so doing he entered the second agrama or stage
of life, that of the householder (grihastha). To beget a
son was a religious duty to the ancestors of the family,
that the rites to the Manes might be performed. 2

Marriage was the last of the twelve samskaras. Entry
into the two last agramas or stages of life was not marked
by any special ceremony. These last two stages were
those of the forest-dwelling ascetic (vanaprastha) and
the homeless wandering mendicant (parivrajaka, sam-
nyasin). And as a matter of fact they were probably
always more or less theoretical and certainly optional.
But there were certain other ceremonies, not called sam-
skaras, which were nevertheless quite as important as
any of the samskaras; especially the funeral rites, and
the oblations to deceased ancestors, as well as a large
number of minor and recurrent rites and observances.

These domestic observances still form the center of
Brahmanism as a formal religion. The extent to which
they are observed differs in different castes, and also
to a large extent in different localities and families. All
Brahmans in good standing observe at least the more im-
portant of the samskaras, as well as the funeral rites and
the oblations to ancestors, and also some simple daily

'Compare page 166. Women were not allowed to study the
Veda, and therefore this rite was not performed for them.

In case no son was born to a man, he might adopt or purchase
one; or his daughter's son, or some collateral male relative, might
under certain conditions be regarded as belonging to him.

163


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

rites. Other castes are less strict in these observances.
And, generally speaking, the lower a caste is, the less its
members attend to them. No samskara or other impor-
tant rite can be performed without the aid of at least
one Brahman as officiating priest ; at some of them many
Brahmans are or may be employed. Some of the lower
castes are, however, regarded as too degraded to be
allowed to have any such rites performed for them. No
self-respecting Brahman would perform any rite for an
outcaste or a man of a very low caste. The law-books
themselves exclude all Cudras from the study of the Veda,
and therefore from the upanayana or " initiation," which
marks the beginning of the studentship.

From these remarks it will be already apparent that
the institution of caste is a matter of prime importance
in Brahmanism. In fact, it has been said that to many
Hindus their caste is their religion. Some of them
hardly have any other. Brahmanism is a form of society,
a social institution or system of institutions, quite as
much as a religion. As I pointed out, the Hindus are
too apt to think of the whole duty of man as consisting
in the correct observance of formal rules of conduct;
and for a Hindu this always means the rules in force in
the caste to which he happens to belong. Even the ob-
servance of the brahmanical domestic rites is less a per-
sonal than a caste matter. One observes more or less
of them, not in accordance with his personal convictions
or pious desires, but in accordance with the custom of
his caste or sub-caste. To violate caste custom is to run
the risk of being excommunicated, that is, expelled from
the caste; and this is the most terrible fate that can
befall a Hindu, since it practically cuts him off from all
intercourse with men, unless Europeans will associate
with him. Now one may believe practically anything he
pleases without losing caste standing. One may believe
in any god, or disbelieve in all. But one must live cor*

164


BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM

rectly, eat and drink correctly, go through a certain mini-
mum of formal ritual observances (mostly implying little
or no actual belief), and, above all, marry correctly.
Anyone who marries outside his own caste is instantly
expelled. But one may lose his caste-purity even by quite
involuntary contamination from lower castes. If the
shadow of a low-caste man falls on a Brahman, the
Brahman is polluted and must go through a ceremonial
of expiation. Some castes are so low that their mere
presence within a certain distance of those of higher
caste is defiling. Naturally, a high-caste man must of
necessity give a great deal of thought and care to the
observance of the enormous mass of these caste regula-
tions, some of which are by no means simple. It is not
strange that some such men hardly find time to think
of any other sort of religion.

We cannot now concern ourselves with the origin of
caste as a social institution. It is rather with its religious
aspects, as a part of the brahmanical theory, that we
have to deal. That theory holds that caste differences
are biological, not social. Men can no more change their
caste than they can their species, in this life. A Qudra
may by virtuous deeds become a Brahman in his next
existence, by the operation of " karma;" 3 so may a sheep
or an ape become a man, in exactly the same way. Even
the Rig-veda, in a very late stanza, 4 says that the four
main castes were created from different parts of the
body of the First Being; Brahmans from his head, ra-
janyas or kshatriyas from his arms, vaiqyas from his
thighs, and ^udras from his feet. This theory remained
standard throughout all the later brahmanical literature.
It indicates the permanence of caste divisions, as well
as the relations of the four supposedly original castes.

* See page 142 ff.

* Rig-veda, 10.90.12. This is the only clear reference to caste in
the Rig-veda. In all other Vedic works it is well known.

16S


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

First of all come the Brahmans, the priests. Next come
the kshatriyas or rajanyas, theoretically warriors, or as
we should say nobles ; kings belong to this caste. Thirdly
come the vaicyas, originally all of the free Aryan popu-
lation not included in the first two castes, agriculturists,
merchants, and free artisans. Last come the cudras,
originally identical with the dark-skinned aborigines
whom the Aryans subdued and enslaved, and so theo-
retically serfs. The first three castes, who alone are sup-
posed to be of Aryan descent, are called " twice-born,"
because only they, and not the qudras, can go through the
ceremony of upanayana or brahmanical initiation, which
is regarded as constituting a spiritual " second birth."

The Brahmans did not secure their position at the
head of society without opposition. You will remember
that the Buddhist texts show signs of a definite rejection
of their claims on the part of the kshatriyas, the nobles.
The Brahmanical books themselves throw out dark hints
which suggest that even bloody conflicts may have signal-
ized the struggle between the spiritual and the lay nobility.
But probably religious rather than worldly weapons were
the principal deciding factors. The steps of the process
are not discernible. This much is clear, that already in
the Brahmanas, 5 that is in the chronological period im-
mediately following that of the early Vedic hymns, the
caste system was well developed, and the claims of the
priestly caste had already attained the extravagance of
later times. The priests are already called " gods on
earth," an epithet which is given to them throughout all
the later Sanskrit literature. Indeed, this startlingly bold
term, and the position of the Brahman caste generally,
can best be made to appear reasonable and logical in con-
nection with the theory of the ritualistic religion of the
Brahmanas. As we have seen 8 this ritualistic religion

8 See page 115.
"See page 126.

166


BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM

regards the sacrifice as the all in all. The sacrifice con-
trols the gods, and usurps their functions; we sometimes
hear even that it brought the gods into existence or raised
them to divine rank. But the sacrifice, in turn, is abso-
lutely in the control of the Brahmans. From this point
of view, then, it is no wonder that the Brahmans can
claim to be fully equal in rank to the old naturalistic gods.
It is convenient to apply the term Brahmanism to this
social-religious system, the very heart of which is the
hierarchy of castes, with the Brahmans at the head.
Other castes obtain a place in the system by giving full
recognition to the Brahmanical supremacy, and by employ-
ing the Brahmans to perform for them the domestic
rites and observances which constitute practically the
whole religious content of Brahmanism, outside of the
strict social laws of caste per se.

But as we have hinted, it is not all castes that are
fortunate enough to be allowed even this qualified posi-
tion in Brahmanism. Instead of the four theoretically
original castes, Hindu society is now split up into very
numerous castes and subcastes. 7 And many of them are
so low that Brahmans will not perform any rite for them.
This automatically shuts them out from the fold of
Brahmanism.

What remains then for these unfortunates by way of
religion? Of course they may embrace a heterodox, non-
Brahmanical sect, like Buddhism, or (since that is now
extinct in India proper) Jainism. Since the invasion of
the Turks, Mohammedanism, too, offers them a refuge;
and since very modern times, Christian missionaries have
worked among them. Most of the converts to Christian-
ity, as a matter of fact, belong to these " despised and
rejected " classes.

' Sir A. Baines, in his book on Ethnology and Caste, gives a
tabular list of over four hundred, with a list of their numbers, based
on census returns.

167


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Nevertheless, to become a Christian or a Mohamme-
dan, or even a Jain, means separation from caste, with
all the spiritual misery which that momentous step is apt
to occasion in India. It is possible to embrace a more
democratic, as well as more living, form of religion than
Brahmanism, with its dead formalities and lack of real
devotion; and that, too, without definitely breaking with
the Brahmanical system. There are religious sects in
India which are open to all castes and to those of no caste ;
which, moreover, understand religion as a very different
matter from a mere set of formal observances ; and which
are yet tolerated by Brahmanism. In fact, many Bran-
mans, perhaps even most Brahmans, belong to one or
another of these sects, in sympathy at least, if not in
open and formal allegiance. And yet they remain mem-
bers of the Brahman caste, in good and regular standing.

II. HINDUISM

These sects are called by the collective name of Hin-
duism; and nearly all of them are devoted primarily to
the worship of one of the two great gods Vishnu and
Cjva, or of gods identified with one of them, or of
their feminine counterparts, or of goddesses identified
therewith.

The name Hinduism properly applies to these sec-
tarian religions as a group, because nearly all Hindus
belong to one or another of them. By Hindus in this
sense I mean all natives of India who are neither Moham-
medans nor Christians, nor yet adherents of some sect
(such as Jainism) which is regarded as unorthodox and
so outside the pale of Hinduism in the strict sense. The
tests of orthodoxy are not always simple or easily defined.
As we saw in the case of Buddhism, they tend to be more
formal than intellectual. 8 They are apt to include a vague
homage to the Veda as a supposedly holy literature, and

s Cf. page 135 ff-

168


BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM

a practical acceptance of the caste system, with the su-
premacy of the Brahmans, as far as every-day life is
concerned. The first requirement is the more easily com-
plied with since few people, even among the Brahmans
themselves, have much idea of what is really contained
in the Veda. The second may be made of slight im-
portance by the device of centering the religion around
an ascetic or monastic order. For ascetics are regarded,
even by the most orthodox of Brahmans, as more or less
outside of caste, or perhaps as forming a sort of distinct
caste or castes of their own. Thus the Lingayats, a large
sect of (^ivaite sectarians in South India, regard them-
selves as a separate and distinct caste. And most ascetic
orders, of whatever sect, are pretty free in admitting men
of any caste. This does not prevent those sectaries who
keep to the lay or worldly life from being rigid adherents
of caste.

The Hindu sects result from very different tendencies,
more or less intermingled, and really united only by a
common inclination for something in the way of religion
which Brahmanism could not furnish. At least three
such streams of influence seem to be discernible from
the start. One comes from above, so to speak. It is
the spiritual heir of the Upanishads. It is speculative and
intellectual, or mystical, or both by turns. The second,
on the other hand, comes from below. It is popular and
emotional. It seeks a religious haven for the humble
and oppressed, and for all those who stand without the
pale of Brahmanism from necessity, as contrasted with
the intellectual leaders, who were inclined to neglect
Brahmanism from choice.

For their numerical strength, the Hindu sects are
of course much more indebted to the second of these two
influences than to the first; although it has frequently
happened that at least the original leaders of sects have
been men of high social position, and of rather reflective

169


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

than emotional types of mind. But there is still a third
source of Hindu sects, somewhat related to the second,
which may have been, all in all, more important than
either of the other two. Many of the deities which are
worshiped in modern India, though they are usually re-
garded as incarnations or forms of Hindu deities, are in
fact originally the gods of old non- Aryan tribes, or, at
any rate, gods who at first had no place in the Hindu
pantheon, thinly veiled by their adopted Hindu guise.
There is reason to believe that this process of adoption
has very ancient precedents.

All three of these elements seem to be discernible
with especial clearness in the history of the sects of Qiva.
This god is identical with the Vedic Rudra, who in the
Rig-veda is a malevolent, destructive deity, a god of
pestilences and horrors, whose wrath is deprecated, and
in whom there are few signs of the graciousness which
most of the Vedic gods are capable of showing. In
later times the name £iva came to be given to him eu-
phemistically ; it is an epithet meaning "kindly," and its
application to Rudra means not that he was kindly, but
that his worshipers wished he would be. The god has
a great many other names — a thousand are enumerated
later — and many of them are found already in the later
Vedic Samhitas, where Rudra in his various " forms "
already has a noticeably greater importance than in the
Rig-veda. In the Yajur-veda he is a god of mountains
and forests, of wayfarers, travelers, and merchants, of
soldiers and (therefore) of brigands and thieves; also of
ascetics who dwell in forest solitudes or wander about
without homes ; and in general of people who are not in
good society — of abandoned, desperate characters, the
offscourings of the lands. Already we see him assuming
the forms of the later £iva, whose detractors called him
the god of outcasts and people of no account. There is
little doubt that in the figure of this wild, morose deity

170


BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM

there are blended some old barbarous gods of the pre-
Aryan inhabitants of India. It may even be that Rudra
himself, the Vedic prototype of Civa, was a barbarian
god who thus early intruded into the very sanctuary of the
hieratic religion. At any rate, Qiva remains, throughout
all his history, most of all a stern, rather harsh god.
To be sure, many of his devotees see the other side in
him. To some of them he appears as kindly and loving.
Even his kindness, however, is most apt to be won by
stern acts of asceticism and even self-torture. He is the
great favorite of ascetics; in fact, he is himself their
heavenly prototype. Ashes are one of his emblems ; his
devotees smear their bodies with them. Other signs are
the human skull and the trident, and the berries called
rudraksha ("Rudra's Eye"), which are strung together
in rosaries and worn by his worshipers.

Yet Civa the stern Destroyer, who to his devotees is
of course All-in-all, is also in another aspect particularly
a creator, a god of generation. As such his emblem is the
phallus, the linga as it is called. These lingas or phallic
images are worn to this day by many hundreds of thou-
sands of Cjvaites. This side of Civa is one of the clearest
indications of his barbaric, non-Aryan connections. For
phallic worship never found a place in any form of Brah-
manism; and on the other hand there are one or two
obscure references in the Veda which are believed to indi-
cate that the dark-skinned aborigines whom the Vedic
Aryans conquered did devote themselves to such forms
of religion. However this may be, as it appears in Civa-
ism to-day it is all very much softened down. The linga
is scarcely more than a conventional symbol of Qiva;
most people hardly ever think of its original significance.
As a rule, it can hardly be said to be in any way indecent
or repellent, even to a European mind. Nor are there
any obscene or indecent rites connected with most sects
of Civaites,

171


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

The same cannot be said for C/iva's consort and femi-
nine counterpart, Parvati. She has if possible even more
names than her husband; and she is certainly quite as
composite as he. But even more in her case than in his
there are apt to come to the surface the two phases of
character which are least sympathetic to westerners, the
terrible, and the obscene. One of her stock names, Uma,
is thought by some to be a Dravidian name. 9 And cer-
tainly it is with her, if with any Hindu goddess, that
those ferocious goddesses are identified, who even yet
exact bloody sacrifices from the imperfectly Hinduized
Dravidian villagers of Southern India. All over India
she is known as Devi — that is, The Goddess, par excel-
lence. All over India, too, she is known as the notorious
and bloodthirsty Kali or Durga, in whose honor the for-
mer brigand sect of the Thugs used to slaughter their
victims. As the Cakti or " Energy " of her consort Cjva,
she is moreover a personification of the female power of
generation. In this form she is the chief deity of the
sects called Caktas or Tantrists, who regard her as su-
perior even to Cjva, and worship her symbol — sometimes
a living symbol — in ways which may perhaps best be left
to the imagination. It should be said, however, that the
extreme branch of this sect does not dare show its head
openly. No Hindu dares to admit that he belongs to it.
It is, in fact, merely a form of debauchery, whose secret
adherents probably for the most part are either degener-
ates or arrant hypocrites. It is safe to say that few of
them honestly conceive that they are conducting a form
of religion. It would, however, be most unfair to de-
scribe all Caktas thus. Their less extreme division un-
doubtedly includes many thoroughly sincere and not im-
pure persons.

More sympathetic to our western minds is the cult

9 At present, to be sure, Uma is one of the kindly, not one of the
terrible, forms of Parvati.

172


BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM

of Vishnu, the other great god of Hinduism. He, too,
was originally a Vedic deity, this time under the same
name. He was apparently a sun-god in origin ; even the
later Vishnu is symbolized by the disk (originally of the
sun), and rides upon the heavenly eagle, who is clearly
the sun-bird. But the Vedic Vishnu is a very minor
and colorless figure. It is still one of the great puzzles
of Indian scholarship, how he happened to be chosen for
such an exalted destiny. About all we hear of him in the
Rig-veda is that he traverses the universe in three enor-
mous strides (a figurative reference to the sun's progress
across the sky), and that the last of these strides lands
him in the " highest place of Vishnu," the zenith, a kind
of solar paradise, where the departed souls of the blessed
are sometimes thought of as enjoying bliss with him. It
has been conjectured that this feature may be connected
with his later position as supreme god.

But, although he increases in importance in the
times of the Brahmanas and the later Vedic texts, he
seems not to have become a popular deity of the first
rank until post- Vedic times. In fact, it appears that he
gained this rank rather indirectly than directly. Certainly
his hold on the popular consciousness seems to date from
the time when he absorbed the cult of Krishna.

At least as early as the second century B.C. we have
definite proof that there was in existence a popular re-
ligious cult centering about a sort of demi-god named
Vasudeva or Krishna. Most scholars hold that this cult
itself was composite; that there were to start with at
least two, perhaps three, Krishnas. One of them at least
was apparently a deified national hero of a local tribe.
This whole matter is so complicated and obscure that it
is quite impossible to discuss it now. In its final form,
as it appears a few centuries after Christ, Krishnaism
appears as a substantially monotheistic and highly devo-
tional adoration of Vasudeva-Krishna, who is half

173


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

shepherd and half warrior, but always truly man as well
as truly God. In the Athanasian character of this wor-
ship lies its great strength. In the famous Bhagavad
Gita or Song of the Blessed One, an ancient Krishnaite
tract imbedded in the great Hindu epic, the Mahabharata,
we have the doctrine clearly set forth : " In order to save
the righteous, to destroy the wicked, and to set religion
on a firm footing, I come into being from age to age." 10
God condescends to become man Himself, for the benefit
of mankind. No Christian audience needs to be told how
such a gospel can conquer the hearts of men.

Now in some way or other, we cannot say exactly
how or why, this Krishna or Vasudeva became identified
with Vishnu. As the later theorists put it, the Supreme
God, who is Vishnu, in his great love for man, made him-
self man in the form of Krishna. But, as the stanza I
just quoted indicates, this was not the only time when
this loving deity became incarnate for a benevolent pur-
pose. So presently we have the theory of the avataras,
literally " descents," that is earthly incarnations, of
Vishnu. This is perhaps the most characteristic feature
of Vishnuism. At a time much later than the identifica-
tion of Krishna with Vishnu, another popular human
hero, Rama, was similarly made into, an avatara of the
same god, and so his cult, too, was received into Hindu-
ism. The ancient myth of the fish who saved Manu, the
Hindu Noah, from the world flood, was utilized in the
same way ; the fish now becomes a recognized incarnation
of Vishnu. And so other myths, old and new, became
absorbed into the general cult of Vishnu by the same
convenient method. To this day Vishnu is worshiped
mostly in particular forms or incarnations. Each Vish-
nuite sect devotes itself as a rule to one special avatara.
The most popular ones are Krishna and Rama. There
are usually said to have been nine such incarnations in

" BhagavjicJ £ita 4.8.

174


BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM

all. There will some day be another, the idea of which is
of great interest, because it gives a Messianic tinge to
Vishnuism. The tenth and final incarnation of Vishnu
will be in the form of Kalkin, or Kalki, a glorious Savior,
who will appear and free India from barbarian rule, and
finally establish his own true religion upon earth. The
barbarians referred to were probably originally the Sakas
or the Huns ; later the Mohammedans were understood ;
and now it is the English who, in the hopes of many Vish-
nuites of nationalistic tendencies, will be expelled by the
Hindu Messiah, Kalkin.

The spirit of sectarian Hinduism is essentially mono-
theistic, although the forms it assumes sometimes seem to
us curious. Most Hindus, at least practically all the
more enlightened ones, believe that there is in reality but
one God, though He is called by many names. To the
Vishnuite his true or most perfect form is Vishnu —
usually under the guise of Krishna or Rama. The Vish-
nuite, however, neither denies the existence of Qiva
nor has any hostility to him as a rule. The essential
tolerance of India shows itself most strikingly here.
There are exceptions; instances have occurred of even
bloody conflicts^ between opposing sectaries; but they
are rare. Qiva may be thought of as another form of
God, that is of Vishnu ; or he is represented as an emana-
tion of Vishnu, and perhaps even as the first of his
worshipers. Qivaites, of course, think of Vishnu in simi-
lar ways. A Hindu regards himself as belonging to one
particular sect, the one into which he has been initiated
by a guru or teacher, and whose mantra or sacred formula
(usually kept secret) he has learned. It is the god of
this sect whose name he will call upon in his hour of
death, and through whom he hopes for final salvation.
But during his lifetime he is apt to pay homage at many
shrines of other gods. Already in the Bhagavad Gita,
Krishna declares that any worship performed with sincere

i7S


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT ,

devotion will reach Him, even though not addressed to
Him by name — a striking doctrine and one which must
be constantly borne in mind by anyone who wishes really
to understand Hinduism.

The worship of the Hindu deities is generally simple
and innocent. Flowers, food, and other simple offerings
are deposited in the shrines, before the images of the
gods. Even the bloody Kali is now most frequently wor-
shiped, at least in North India, with offerings of animal
figures made of dough or the like, instead of the former
living victims. Wealthy devotees of course may give
more expensive presents; and some noted shrines have
thus become very rich. Some temples and holy places,
which have acquired more than a local celebrity, are
visited by pilgrims from far and wide; in some cases
from all over India. Many rivers also are especially
sacred, notably the Ganges, on which is located Benares,
Civa's favorite home. The shrines are tended by priests,
who are sometimes men of low castes. The images or
idols are theoretically supposed to be actually inhabited
by the presence of the god, after a fixed ceremony of
consecration has been performed, the adhivasa or " mak-
ing (the god) to dwell in (the image)." To the more
intellectual classes, however, the image is a mere con-
ventional symbol, just as the saint's image or crucifix is
to intelligent Greek and Roman Catholics.

The intellectual basis of all the sects is the same, in
so far as it concerns the three great postulates of all
Indian systems, to which I referred in my chapter on
Buddhism: 11 pessimism, transmigration (with karma),
and salvation viewed as a release from the ceaseless evils
of the round of existence. But when it comes to the
means for obtaining this release, there are marked differ-
ences. We saw that Buddhism recognizes three such
means: personal devotion to the Founder (who takes

u Page 140 ff.

176


BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM

the place of God to the Buddhists) ; intellectual cognition
or realization of the religious truth he proclaims; and
an ascetic or monastic life. It may be said that in this
formula Buddhism includes all the ways to salvation
known in India. But most Indian systems are not so
catholic.

For instance, there are some rigidly intellectual sys-
tems, like Cankara's school of the Vedanta, or like the
Sankhya, in which the intellectual factor is the only one.
" The truth shall make you free," they say ; and they
interpret this in the strictest sort of intellectual sense.
As soon as one attains to a genuine realization of the
metaphysical truth which these systems claim to teach,
he is thereby saved. And no amount of asceticism avails,
nor yet of devotional fervor to any being ( these systems
have no God). These are commonly and rightly called
systems of philosophy, rather than of religion. Yet since
they profess to teach a scheme of salvation it seems hardly
possible to deny to them the name of religion also.

On this question the Vishnuite and Civaite sects have
a certain negative agreement among themselves, to this
extent, that they do not regard this pure intellectualism,
to which I have just alluded, as the highest or best way
to salvation.

The general position of Vishnuism is made clear once
and for all in the Bhagavad Gita, which may fairly be
called the Vishnuite Bible. In it Krishna speaks of the
" way of knowledge " as one road to the highest goal ;
but he regards it as less desirable than the "way of
works." He also refers to the argument used by Bud-
dhism 12 and other sects in favor of monasticism or
asceticism, that participation in worldly life necessitates
action prompted by desire, and so leads to the fruit
thereof, continued existence in rebirth. Krishna's coun-
ter-argument to this is, th at one should live in the world

"Page 149.
12 177


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

performing such acts as are required by Duty (a sort of
categorical imperative) without desire for or interest in
the results of the action. Actions so performed, he says,
do not lead to continued existence ; they have no binding
effect, such as other actions, performed for interested
motives, have. Above all, however, the Gita exalts
bhakti, " devotion " to God, that is to Krishna- Vasudeva.
The God of Vishnuism is neither an abstract principle
nor a remote and purely heavenly being. He is not only
philosophically immanent in the entire universe; more
than that, he is a personal, tender-hearted lover of man-
kind. He made himself man to save the world. And
he is the direct and personal Savior of those who trust
in him. He brings his devotees immediately to salva-
tion. Accordingly, the chief refuge and hope of man
should be warm, fervent, even ecstatic love for Him.
This is what is meant by bhakti, which has been the main
reliance of the Vishnuite sects in all ages. No wonder
that it has suggested Christianity to many scholars. But
it is now generally recognized that the concept of bhakti
in India antedates the Christian era, so that it cannot have
been derived from early Christian missionaries, as was
once held by some.

The idea of bhakti has played an important role in
the later Civaite sects, too. But on the whole the Cjvaites
have been rather more inclined to the practice of ascet-
icism as a means to salvation. This is indeed more in
keeping with the originally sterner and gloomier aspect of
their god.

III. SYNCRETIZING TENDENCIES

If we restrict the term Brahmanism, as it seems to me
best to do, to a system of ritual practices and social
observances, then we may fairly say that Brahmanism
has never fully satisfied the religious needs of any very
considerable proportion of the Indian people. Brahman-

178


BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM

ism has survived, in fact, only by a constant course of
compromise. Its strength has lain in its willingness to
wink at and tolerate what it could not destroy. It has
always been ready to yield the substance, if only it might
keep the form. It has had to stoop to conquer.

I have illustrated, rather than sketched, the history
of sectarian influences threatening Brahmanism from be-
low, from more popular cults. Quite as important have
been the influences from above, from the intellectual and
spiritual leaders of India, often members of the Brah-
man caste itself. Since the days of the Upanishads, if
not before, these leaders have been inclined to treat rather
contemptuously the sterile cult of Brahmanism. There
is certainly no place for a ritual of sacrifice in the mystical
contemplation of the One Reality which constitutes the
religion or philosophy of the Upanishads in their best
moments. But Brahmanism is not perturbed. It promptly
declares that the impersonal, neuter Brahman of the
Upanishads, the unqualified, unknowable Absolute, is
nothing but a personal, masculine god Brahma, whom
the Brahmans have long since known under the name of
Prajapati, the principal god of the later Vedic pantheon,
and under other similar names, all of which have in fact
long since been philosophized as names for the Brahman.

A little later came Buddhismand Jainism, which were
openly heretical and refused to be compromised with.
This attitude on their part nearly proved fatal to Brah-
manism. But the cult of Krishna arose in the nick of
time. Wholly non-Brahmanical, perhaps even anti-Brah-
manical, in origin; a monotheistic, fervently devotional
worship of a god who originally had no Brahmanical con-
nections; Krishnaism nevertheless allowed itself to be
reconciled to Brahmanism by the identification of Krishna
with the ancient Vedic god Vishnu, who already had
• pretentions to rank as a name for the absolute Brahman.
And thereafter the cult of Krishna- Vishnu proved a most

179


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

effective weapon against Buddhism. Krishna, too,
whether by this means or (more likely) even before his
fusion with Vishnu, was philosophized as a personal
manifestation of the metaphysical Absolute. The same
treatment was accorded to Civa, who as the heir of the
Vedic Rudra already had a position in the Brahmanical
pantheon.

The last step in this triple fusion of popular Hindu-
ism, Brahmanism, and the higher philosophy, was the
construction of the so-called Trimurti, the " Three-
form," or the Hindu Trinity. This theory regards the
three names, Brahma, Vishnu, and Ova, as three forms
of the One God, three aspects of the personalized Abso-
lute, who is Brahma as Creator, Vishnu as Preserver, and
Civa as Destroyer. Commonplace as this doctrine is in
all the literature, it has never gained much foothold in
popular belief. In spite of it, the great mass of Hindus
are still either Vishnuites, who regard Brahma as born
from a lotus on Vishnu's navel and Qiva as equally
subordinate to Vishnu, or else Cjvaites, who likewise make
Ova supreme over the other two. Brahma has no sect,
and almost no independent worship.

In spite of all this reconciliation, the forms of wor-
ship of Brahmanism and Hinduism are kept absolutely
distinct, even among those who more or less engage in
both. The classical Brahmanical lawbooks forbid Brah-
mans to act as priests in Hindu temples. This pre-
scription is now only partly enforced; but at least in
parts of India, such Brahmans as disregard it are de-
spised by their brother-Brahmans. And a very large
number of Brahmans affect a sort of mild and tolerant
contempt for the sectarian worship, even though they
may to some extent take part in it.

The early identification of both Vishnu and £iva w ^h
the philosophical Absolute, the Brahman, is by no means
the end of the story of the relations between the higher

180


BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM

thought of India and the sectarian cults. Especially the
later Vedanta philosophy is intimately associated with
various sects of Vishnuism, and also, in a less degree,
with Civaite sects. As taught by the great Cankara, the
Vedanta is a pure idealistic pantheism, or better, idealistic
monism, with no place for a personal God at all, except
as a part of what it calls Maya, the World-Illusion, to
which all individual personality is assigned. But the
Vishnuite teacher and sect-founder Ramanuja had a dif-
ferent interpretation of the Vedanta, and of the Upani-
shads on which it claims to rest. He taught what is
called a "qualified monism," in which God is real, and
even individual souls have a partial reality as " parts "
of Him. Out of this school have sprung indirectly most
of the modern sects of Vishnuism. Some of them even
go so far as openly to renounce the monistic position and
declare themselves dualists, believing in the independent
reality of God, the world, and the individual soul. Some
of these sects, even, still profess to follow the Vedanta
system. Their doctrines, in point of fact, come much
closer to those of the ancient Sankhya system, or rather
of its offshoot, the Yoga.

I have felt compelled to slight some important phases
of my subject, and even to omit altogether some, which
may perhaps be considered as important as certain of the
phases to which I have referred. 13 But the subject of
modern Indian religions is so large and so desperately
complicated that it is hard enough to unravel its historic
aspects even with unlimited time. Those who are at all

™ I might allude here by way of example to one of these neg-
lected phases, viz., the cult of Radha, favorite of Krishna, who is
quite extensively worshiped either alone or with her lover. The
love of Krishna for her is sometimes allegorized as the passionate
longing of the human soul seeking God. The famous Gita Govinda
of Jayadeva is an exquisite lyric poem describing in passionately sen-
suous and highly erotic terms the romance of Krishna and Radha.
It has been beautifully rendered into English by Sir Edwin Arnold.

181


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

familiar with the field will, I am sure, be lenient in their
judgment of me.

As for those to whom the subject is new, I will ask
them in conclusion to carry away with them this final
thought :

Hinduism is a gigantic Proteus, the very essence of
which is its innumerable forms. Yet there is somehow
an underlying sense of unity in these forms — " if dimly,
yet indeed revealed." To state in words a generalization
of Hinduism may be bold. Some may doubt whether
there is any such thing. Yet I will venture on the follow-
ing as an expression of what seems after all to come out
of Hinduism — sometimes plainly stated, perhaps more
often vaguely felt :

You may call God by whatever name you will; but
in truth God is One.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Barth-Wood (see page 134), Parts II and V.

Hopkins (see page 134), Chapters ix-xi and xiv-xvii.

M. Monier Williams : Brahmanism and Hinduism, 4th ed., New
York, 1891.

L. D. Barnett : Hinduism. London, 1906. Very brief summary.

J. N. Farquhar : Primer of Hinduism. London, 1912. Compact and
very useful.

M. Monier Williams: Hinduism. London, 1906.

N. Macnicol: Indian Theism. London, 1915.

J. B. Pratt: India and its Faiths. Boston and New York, 1915. Ad-
mirable sketch of present-day conditions in historical aspects.

R. G. Bhandarkar : Vaishnavism, Saivism, etc. Strassburg, 1913.

W. Crooke: Religions [of India] ; in Imperial Gazetteer of India,
2nd Edition, Vol. I, pages 402-445. Oxford, 1909.

Translations :
The bhagavad gita :

1. Sir Edwin Arnold: The Song Celestial. Like all of Arnold's

numerous translations from the Sanskrit, this cannot be too
highly recommended for the success with which it reproduces
the spirit of the original, and transfuses it into a most charming
poetic English form. Those who want to enjoy the thought of
the Gita, beautifully expressed in English, can find no better ren-
dering. But it is not meticulously accurate.

2. K. T. Telang: The Bhagavad Gita, with Introduction. Oxford,

1882. [Sacred Books of the East, vol. viii.]

3. L. D. Barnett: The Bhagavad Gita, with introduction. Lon-

don, 1905. Perhaps the best scholarly translation in English.

182


CHAPTER VIII

ZOROASTRIANISM.
BY ROLAND G. KENT

The modern traveler, coming from the lands of
western civilization and setting foot for the first time in
India, the land of many religions, finds himself in a maze
of brilliant color, far surpassing that which he may have
seen in the Nearer East. Through this kaleidoscopic
panorama move the dignified white-robed figures of the
Parsis, the so-called " Fire-worshipers." Should the
Occidental traveler make inquiries concerning them, he
would find that they are held in the highest esteem for
their generosity toward all philanthropic movements ; they
are famed for their liberality toward relief funds of all
kinds, for their assistance to hospitals, for their patron-
age of education, even of education for the female sex —
a cause which can hardly be expected to have progressed
very rapidly in the Orient. By occupation they are mostly
merchants, though they are well known also as ship-
builders; in the latter capacity they provide the means
for their carrying on of commerce. In number they are
about one hundred thousand; but this is only one-thir-
tieth of one per cent, of the teeming millions forming
the population of British India and Burma, and the
prominence of this tiny fraction of Parsis is a testimony
to their industry and capabilities, justifying us in giving
to them, the followers of Zoroaster, a place in the list
of the great religions that is denied to other faiths whose
followers are many times as numerous ; for example, the
Sikhs and the Jains, of India, and the Mormons, of the
Western United States.

There are three conspicuous features of Parsi re-
183


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

ligion, as it impresses the superficial observer to-day:
fire-worship, a thorough-going duality of good and bad,
and the disposal of the dead. But the Parsi himself
indignantly denies that he worships the fire : the Sacred
Fire is only the symbol of the supreme god, Ahura Maz-
dah (Ormuzd), and is not worshiped nor revered ex-
cept in that capacity — somewhat as the Cross of Chris-
tianity is not in itself the object of worship. Yet both
among Parsis and among Christians there is the danger
that the symbol may be taken for the reality; and with
the less educated or less thoughtful of the Parsis there
can be no doubt that there is in truth a worship of the
Fire, rather than of the Supreme God represented by it.
The places of worship of the Parsis are known as Fire-
Temples, since it is there that the Sacred Fire is kept
and the ritual is performed; but there is no congrega-
tional worship, and the ritual is performed privately in
the temple by the priests. These priests must be sons
of priests, though sons of priests may choose other call-
ings ; and as the livelihood of the priest is a scanty one,
compared with that of the Parsi in the business world,
the more able and energetic of the sons of priests are
likely to follow secular callings, so that the priests are
..rather drawn from the indolent and incompetent. They
must memorize the sacred writings, known as the A vesta,
for purposes of recitation in the ritual ; and since this is
in a tongue now long extinct as a spoken language, and
decipherable by scholars only with difficulty and doubt,
the priests are many of them in entire ignorance of the
meaning of those passages which they recite, though of
recent years there has been a movement for the better
instruction of candidates for the priesthood. In these
temples, the Sacred Fire is maintained by the priests
and never allowed to go out; it is fed with holy fuel,
including sandalwood, which burns with a fragrance.
The most notable ceremony is that connected with the

184


ZOROASTRIANISM

preparation and drinking oi the Haoma-juice (hom-
juice), which is in origin and in etymology the same as
the Soma of the Veda.

The duality of the theology of the Parsis may be
explained briefly: the entire universe is composed of
good and bad creations; when ever the Good Spirit cre-
ated any thing or creature, the^B Spirit, Angra Manyu
(Ahriman) created its evil cc^^rpart. The develop-
ment of the world is then a battle between the good and
the bad, which is to eventuate in the final victory of the
good and the subjection of the Evil Spirit. Here, again,
the modern Parsi objects to this interpretation of his
faith, saying that the Evil Spirit is not coordinate with
the Good Spirit, but is distinctly inferior at all times.
That, however, the modern believer is attempting to bring
a strict monotheism into a religion which was by its
founder endowed with this very dualism, will appear later,
when we consider the testimony of that founder, Zoro-
aster, from his own words.

To the Parsi, earth, fire, and water are all possessed
of holiness which must not suffer pollution; therefore
dead bodies may not be buried, nor burned, nor allowed
to rest in the waters where the living person may have
met with death, accidental or otherwise. For the dis-
posal of the dead, without rendering unclean these ele-
ments (holy because they are creations of the Good
Spirit), they have constructed the so-called Towers of
Silence, great round structures open to the sky, with a
metal grating at some distance from the earth. Into
these they carry the dead body, and place it on the
gratings ; within a few minutes the vultures swoop down
and strip the flesh from the corpse, while the bones fall
through the grating and an ingenious arrangement pre-
vents the ritual contamination of the earth beneath. Hor-
rible as this seems to us, it is a matter of pride to the
Parsi that it is sanitary, for he claims — and I have no

i85


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

facts with which to contest his claim — that no contagious
disease has ever spread among the Parsis, nor has this
disposal of the dead ever spread contagion to others,
though India is ever the home of plague and epidemic.
But, if we may again anticipate, Zoroaster himself did
not contemplate this mode of disposal of the dead, but
burial, the holy EartM^ding indestructibility until the
Day of the Last Judgl^pt.

But let us turn now and take a survey of the tra-
ditional history of this religion, as recounted by its own
followers, from its inception to the present day, before
we attempt to glean from the oldest portions of theAvesta,
the Parsi Bible, the doctrines and practices which Zoro-
aster himself sought to propagate.

Sketch of the History of the Religion

At a very early date, somewhere in Persia, and prob-
ably in the northwest, Zoroaster was born ; the tradition
sets this as late as 660 B.C. His birth was heralded by
marvelous happenings, and for some years the powers
of Evil sought to destroy him, but his life was on every
occasion miraculously preserved. ) Seeing that the child
was marked for a great future, his father placed him
under the care of a wise teacher. To the Persian, fifteen
is the ideal age for attaining to manhood; at this age
Zoroaster retired from the world for solitary meditation
and preparation for his great calling. When he was
thirty years of age, he received the revelation, and within
a short time had his seven visions, the first a conference
with Ahuramazda himself, the succeeding ones with the
six archangels successively: Vohu Manah or Good
Thought, Asha Vahishta or Best Righteousness, Khsha-
fhra Varya or Desirable Sovereignty, Spenta Armati or
Holy Devotion, Harvatat or Welfare, and AmrtSt or
Immortality. In obedience to the instructions received
in these visions,, and by virtue of the powers which he

186


ZOROASTRIANISM

had therein received, Zoroaster set out to preach the true
religion. But it was a slow and discouraging mission;
at the end of ten years he won his first convert, his own
cousin. Two years later he secured a hearing before the
Kavi or Lord Vishtaspa, King of Balkh in northeastern
Persia, where he contests with the wise men of the
court and comes off victor; but a conspiracy lands him
in prison, from which he escapes only by the offer to
restore from a mysterious illness the favorite black horse
of the king. This done, Vishtaspa is converted, and
with him his family and his court. The critical moment
of the Zoroastrian faith had been successfully passed.

With the support of the royal circle at Balkh, the
faith entered into the missionary stage. There are
echoes of conversions among the Turanians of the north,
among the Hindus and among the Greeks ; we even hear
that the sacred writings of Zoroaster were translated
into a Greek version. Whether the Prophet himself
went on these missions we may doubt ; his time he may
rather have spent in organizing the religion and in estab-
lishing the ritual at home, where he was Chief Priest in
charge of the Sacred Fire. But the propagation of the
faith led to enmities, and war came on with Arjath-aspa,
King of the Hyaonians, a Turanian people. The first
war ends in the rout of the Turanians, but in the second
war, before the final victory of the true believers, Balkh
was taken, and the aged Zoroaster slain as he stood by
the Sacred Fire in ministration. Zoroaster was seventy-
seven years of age at his death, which the traditional
chronology makes 583 b.c.

The death of the Prophet did not interfere with the
onward career of the faith which he had proclaimed ; a
series of high-priests followed him, down to the time of
the invasion of the Macedonian Alexander. The sacred
writings of Zoroaster, known as the Avesta, were of
great extent, and were reputed to have contained over two

187


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

million verses; they were written in golden letters on
'twelve thousand cowhides, tied together with golden
bands. This precious archetype of the Avesta was de-
stroyed by Alexander when he burned the palace at Per-
sepolis ; and it was only fragments and portions preserved
by the memories of the priests, which escaped and were
later gathered together. The Zoroastrian faith persisted
through the time of the semi-Greek dynasties, and seems
to have been again the state religion under the Parthian
kingdom, one of whose rulers appears to have attempted
to gather together the more or less scattered holy writ-
ings; this was in the first century a.d. But the coming
in of the Sassanian kings brought about a new golden
age for the faith; the first ruler of this line, Ardashir
Babagan (226-240) directed his chief priest to collect
the scattered portions of the Avesta and to compile a
new Avesta, as nearly like the original as was possible.
Shapur II (309-380) had it brought into complete or-
der, and gave it the definitive form which it now has.
The overthrow of the Sassanians and the subjection of
Persia in 652 by the Mohammedan invaders ended this
period of prosperity, and the Zoroastrian was forced to
accept the beliefs of his conqueror or to be treated as an
outlaw. Some few have indeed survived centuries of
oppression and persecution in their native land, though
even to-day they dread to have their neighbors know
their religious faith. They number perhaps ten thousand.
But to-day the greater portion of the Zoroastrians
make their home in India. A certain number of those
who shunned forced conversion to Islam, made their way
presently to the island of Ormuz at the mouth of the
Persian Gulf, where they remained for fifteen years;
then they resolved to go on farther, to India, and voy-
aged to the island of Diu, where they remained for nine-
teen years, during which they learned to speak Gujerati,
the language of the country. They then set sail again,

188


ZOROASTRIANISM

for reasons not definitely known. On the voyage they
were caught by a terrific storm, and they seemed destined
to perish; but in response to a devout prayer, the text
of which has come down to us, the storm abated, and
they arrived in safety at Sanjan, on the coast of Gujerat.
The newcomers sent a venerable priest to the chief of
the district, to ask permission to land and make a settle-
ment, but though he detailed the sufferings and hard-
ships which had driven them thither, the local chief,
observing the hardy appearance of the refugees, feared
for his throne, and asked the priest to make a statement
of the tenets of their faith. This he did, cleverly select-
ing those features which harmonized most closely with
Hindu practices; and the desired permission was then
given, on condition that they should adopt the language
of the country, giving up their own; should wear no
armor; should dress their women in the Hindu fashion,
and should perform marriage ceremonies at night. The
conditions were accepted. The Parsis, as they were now
called, a word which means nothing more nor less than
Persians, prospered in their new surroundings for several
centuries, until the approach of Mohammedan forces
soon after 1300 released them from their promise not
to wear armor, for they enrolled themselves under the
chief of Sanjan and won a great victory for him, though
this was avenged speedily by the Mohammedans, and the
Parsis became refugees in the mountains. From that time
there were various persecutions of the Parsis, wherever
they settled, mostly at the hands of the Mohammedans,
but sometimes from the Hindu rulers.

A new period of prosperity bloomed for them in
Bombay, to which some Parsi merchants emigrated from
Surat in the seventeenth century, probably not long before
the Portuguese ceded that region to the English, in 1668.
Since that time,, Bombay has been the chief Parsi center;
here they have flourished, have built their temples and

189


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

their tower of silence, have spread out as merchants
through the East, and have been prominent in works of
charity, public spirit, and education. They have not
forgotten their coreligionists in Persia, whose condition
they have notably ameliorated. In essentials they have
remained faithful to the principles of their religion, though
changed circumstances must always bring changes in
practice.

The Zoroastrian Literature

The sacred books of the Parsis are known as the
Avesta, or, more commonly but wrongly, as the Zend-
avesta. In its present form it is composed of five parts :
the Yasna contains the Gathas or metrical hymns of Zoro-
aster himself, of varying content, giving the main tenets
of the religion in the form in which it was promulgated
by its founder; the remainder is composed mainly of
various invocations used in the ritual. The Vispered con-
tains additional material used in the liturgy. The third
portion, the Vendidad, is the priestly code, with detailed
injunction as to what the faithful should 'do and should
avoid doing, and the penalties for transgression ; it gives
also an interesting account of the creation, the golden age,
and the first destructive winter. The Vendidad also is
used in the liturgy, and like the Yasna and the Vispered
belongs to the priests only. The Yashts are songs of
praise, with invocations of separate angels of the religion,
and the best of them may be considered to represent the
old religious poetry of the Iranians. The Khordah Avesta
or Little Avesta is a collection of shorter prayers and the
like, destined for the use of laity as well as of the clergy.

But these five books are only a tiny portion of the
original Avesta, which, we are told, contained two mil-
lion verses. The destruction by Alexander, if historical,
of the great official copy, and the eclipse of the religion
until the Sassanian revival, some half-dozen centuries

igo


ZOROASTRIANISM

later, are responsible for the loss of the greatest portion
of the original text. Even much of the canon which was
compiled by die Sassanians, was lost in the Mohammedan
persecutions; yet what to-day survives makes in trans-
lation a volume of about five hundred large pages.

The Persian language spoken in Sassanian times is
known as Pahlavi, and is quite different from the earlier
language. Consequently, a translation of the Avesta wasi
made into Pahlavi, since the orginal speech was quite
unintelligible except to those priests to whom the tra-
ditional meaning had been handed down by word of
mouth, and this translation into Pahlavi was known as the
Zand or Zend. From this came the common but errone-
ous term Zendavesta — an inversion of Avesta and Zend,
the Avesta and Pahlavi translation. There was written
also a Pahlavi Commentary, known as the Pazand; and
there was a whole series of other writings in Pahlavi,
on topics relating to the religion.

The study of the Avesta in the Occidental world
begins soon after the middle of the eighteenth century.
A few texts of portions had been brought to Europe,
but they were utterly unintelligible, as even the alphabet
was unknown. Some tracings made from a manuscript
at Oxford were sent to Paris as a specimen, and there,
in 1754, were seen by a young Frenchman named Anque-
til du Perron. They fired him with an unquenchable
desire to solve their mysteries, and in an effort to reach
the Orient he enlisted as a soldier in troops going to
India; but his object becoming known, the French gov-
ernment presented him with his discharge and a free
passage to India. There, at Surat, he succeeded in over-
coming the distrust of the Parsi priests, and after he had
learned Persian, he was instructed in the Avesta and in
their ceremonies, and was presented with some of their
manuscripts. After seven years in India, Anquetil re-
turned to France, and in 1771, after ten years more of

191


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

study, he issued in three volumes the first edition of the
Avesta, with translation and commentary.

But pioneer work in any field leads to errors. The
traditional knowledge of the priests was sadly corrupted
by the lapse of time, and the zealous Frenchman was
greatly handicapped by having to learn one strange lan-
guage, Avestan, through the medium of another strange
language, Persian, which he understood but imperfectly.
Anquetil, also, was not a trained scholar. The Avesta,
further, has a great amount of tiresome and futile repe-
titions. As a result, the subject matter presented by this
first edition was in part so obscure, in part so lacking in
high philosophical and religious ideas, that English and
German scholars mostly attacked it as a forgery, if not
of Anquetil's own making, then foisted upon him by the
Parsi priests. But the authenticity of the work was ac-
cepted in France from the very first, and in 1825, when
Sanskrit studies had progressed, Sanskritists began to
examine the Avesta, and they observed that there was
a close kinship of the two languages. With this began
the real interpretation of the Avesta. Since then, a
fairly numerous company of scholars, one of the most
eminent of whom, I am happy to say, is an American,
Professor A. V. W. Jackson of Columbia University,
have devoted themselves to the study of the Avesta ; and
while there is of course much divergence in detail, the
variations are not often of fundamental importance for
our conclusions. We must remember that the traditional
teachings of the Parsi priests must not be taken at their
face value, though they must always receive due con-
sideration; the tradition has suffered much in the cen-
turies of persecution. But we have the help of the Pah-
lavi translation and commentary which have been men-
tioned (though these are often more difficult to interpret
than the Avesta itself) ; there are translations of the
Avesta into modern Persian and into Sanskrit — both of

19a


ZOROASTRIANISM

course depending upon the more or less faulty under-
standing of the Avesta by the priests at the time of
the making of the translations. The great aid to inter-
pretation is that which is brought by comparative phi-
lology, with its scientific methods of etymologizing, and
this is the corrective to the errors in the tradition. What
may be said as to the original doctrines of the Zoroastrian
faith in the remaining portion of this lecture should be
understood as based on the study of the Avesta in the
light of these various means of interpretation, by which
scholars may arrive at reasonably accurate conclusions.

I have earlier stated that certain practices of the
Parsis of to-day, such as the manner of disposal of the
dead, cannot be traced back to Zoroaster himself. For
the actual teachings of the prophet, we should restrict
ourselves to those portions of the Avesta which may be
regarded as his very words, the chapters of the Yasna
which are known as the Gathas, and are distinguished
from the other writings by style, language, and form.
What, therefore, is next to be said, concerning the original
nature of Zoroastrianism, will be limited to what we can

find in the Gathas.

\

The Theology.
The religion of Zoroaster has a supreme God, later
known as Ahuramazda, or Ormuzd. But while both
Ahura and Mazdah are used in the Gathas as names of
the God, neither name is definitely and exclusively ap-
plied in this way. The word Ahura is still at times a
common noun meaning Lord, referring sometimes to an
earthly prince, though usually to the God; Mazdah, which
means either Wisdom or The Wise One, is in one passage
coupled with another noun, so that the God is addressed
as " Mazdah and King," showing that the name is not
yet specialized as a peculiar personal name of the Deity. l
Still less is the combination Ahuramazda a fixed ex-
13 193


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

pression in the Gathas. In three-fourths of the stanzas
where both Ahura and Mazdah occur, the two words are
separated by intervening words; when they occur to-
gether the order is always Masdah Ahura, never Ahura-
mazda as in the later writings of the religion, unless a
metrical pause intervenes. Both portions of the combina-
tion receive separate case endings, and the group is a
phrase, not a compound. Further, the plural of Mazdah
Ahura is used apparently to denote the Deity and the
chief archangels, of whom something will be said later.
And the name Mazdah alone is used very frequently,
while Ahura alone is used occasionally to denote the Deity.
From this lack of specialization in the name, we may
conclude that the employment of these names in this mean-
ing originated with the Prophet Zoroaster himself. Ahura
is, of course, an old word, used in application to a deity
of more than human power ; but there is no such meaning
for Mazdah until it was applied to the God by the Prophet.
In the use of this word, we see the work of Zoroaster
himself.

Mazdah, to give him the original name, was the cre-
ator of the Universe : of the sun, the moon and the stars,
the earth, the sky, the waters, the plants, the winds and
the clouds; of man; of the cattle; of morning, noon and
night; of light and darkness; sleeping and waking; of
wisdom; of the obedience of son to father, and of all
things. He is primeval and eternal, ever one and the
same, all powerful and all-knowing; he sees afar, and
cannot be deceived. He knows the past and the future ;
he is just, assigning rewards and punishment to men
after death in accord with their deserts ; but he is merciful
to the good and stern to the evil. In his mercy, he made
Zoroaster his prophet and sent him to teach men how
they might attain to the good reward in the next world.

But Mazdah, though omnipotent, has an enemy, whom
he is apparently unable to overcome without the help of

194


ZOROASTRIANISM

righteous men. For in the beginning of all things, Zoro-
aster tells us ( Yasna 30 : 3-4) , there were two primal
Spirits, the Good and the Bad, good and bad respectively
in thought and word and deed. They were twins; and
the holier of the twain said to the other, his destined
enemy, " Neither the thoughts nor the teachings nor the
wisdoms nor the beliefs nor the words nor the deeds
nor the selves nor the souls of us two agree." So began
the conflict of good and evil : the Good Spirit created Life,
and the Evil Spirit countered by creating Non-Life. Thus
all the world is made up of two opposing forces and crea-
tions, the good created by the Good Spirit and the evil
created by the Evil Spirit.

It seems almost inevitable to identify the Good Spirit
of this story with Mazdah himself, and to conclude that
there is a duality in the Zoroastrian religion, under
which the Evil Spirit hampers the supremacy of Mazdah.
Such is the impression given to the unphilosophic mind,
at least. It is true that the Evil Spirit is to be overcome
at the Last Judgment, but in the meantime he is an inde-
pendent power, at times reducing the prophet quite to
despair by the activity and successes of his followers.
There is in this situation the difficult problem how the
presence of victorious evil — though the victory may be •
only for the present — is reconcilable with belief in an all-
powerful God of mercy and goodness; and Zoroaster's
solution is perhaps a presentation of the problem rather
than a solution. The most successful interpretation that
has been suggested to remove the difficulty is that which
makes Mazdah the Deity in his universal aspect, creator
of everything; as soon as the good is created, that im-
plies the creation of its evil counterpart ; the Good Spirit
is therefore the aspect of Mazdah in which he created
what is good, and the Evil Spirit follows as a corollary
to complete the picture, being an aspect of Mazdah neces-
sarily implied by his creation of the good. Yet the making

195


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

of the Evil Spirit a part of the great and beneficent
Deity is hardly one that appeals to our minds, and while
the logic may be valid, such a doctrine repels rather than
attracts.

The Evil Spirit is known in the Gathas as the Druj,
the Lie or (perhaps better) Deceit. He is always the
enemy of the good, seeking to destroy it and its followers ;
his decisions, his thoughts, words and deeds are evil, and
his home is in the place of punishment, as that of Mazdah
is in Paradise. All these qualities will appear more clearly
when we come to the character of the followers of the
Evil Spirit.

Now about Mazdah, in later times, there were ranged
certain archangels known as Amshaspands (amesha
spentas) or Immortal Holy Ones. All of these appear
in the Gathas, but they are not all distinctly persons in
those texts. So far as they are personified, they are
personifications of the attributes of Mazdah himself ; but
they constantly appear also as attributes of the follower
of Mazdah. Let us take them up one by one.

Asha is the personification of right-doing; at times the
word is distinctly not a person, but means merely the
good deeds or the righteousness of the man in question.
At other times, Asha is so personified as to be celebrated
with prayer and with offering, invoked, praised and
worshiped. It is through Asha that Mazdah makes his
revelation to Zoroaster, and instructs him in the principles
of the religion which he is to proclaim on earth; Asha
is the creation, even the child, of Mazdah; Asha is of
one will with Mazdah; Asha gives help to man against
the Evil Spirit and his followers, helps the righteous to
attain to blessings, both temporal and spiritual; Asha is
Mazdah's chief assistant at the Last Judgment. By an
easy transfer, Asha at times is used as a synonym of Para-
dise ; once at least, the name has the meaning of its etymo-
logical equivalent in Sanskrit, rita, namely, cosmic order.

196


ZOROASTRIANISM

Vohu Manah or Good Thought, is the personification
of right thinking. At times the term means merely the
good thought of the believers; sometimes it denotes the
good thinkers or believers, as a body; at other times,
Good Thought, or the abode, the dominion, or the bless-
ings of Good Thought, and is a mere equivalent for
Paradise. As a person, however, Good Thought runs
through almost the same range of function as Asha,
with a somewhat less active participation in them. Maz-
dah, Asha, and Good Thought are a triad so constantly/
mentioned within the limits of a single stanza, that they
form almost a Trinity.

The other Amshaspands are much less frequently men-
tioned. Devotion, or Armati, is the daughter of Mazdah,
pleads with the wavering spirit, blesses man in this life
and in the next ; but again there is little in these functions
to differentiate this archangel from the preceding two.
The name is applied now to the Devotion of the indi-
vidual, now to the personification of that quality; and in
one passage Silent Thinking (tushnamati) seems to be
used as a synonym.

The next three are much less definitely personified.
Sovereignty or Dominion (Khshathra) means in most
instances rulership on earth, either good or bad; but it
denotes also the sway of the religion of Mazdah, and
Paradise. Its activity is of a most vague nature. The
fifth and sixth of the list are Welfare (Harvatat) and
Immortality (Amrtat), and are in the Gathas hardly per-
sonified at all, except in one passage, where they are sup-
plicated to confer themselves as blessings.

To these six, which are in fact somewhat singled out
in the Gathas (though the last two much less distinctly
so), there was added, when the later list of seven Amsha-
spands was made up, the figure of Obedience (Sraosha),
which appears in these early texts as a partly personified
representation of the act of obeying Mazdah, and in one

197


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

passage as an Angel of Judgment. The germs of the
later doctrines that Asha was in special charge of the
Fire (sacred and profane alike), Good Thought in charge
of cattle and other useful animals, and Armati of the
earth, may be found in the Gathas, but they have no
prominence; the provinces of the other Amshaspands,
metals as belonging to Sovereignty, water to Welfare,
and plants to Immortality, are not hinted at in the Gathas.
That the personifications are still but half-complete
is seen in many stanzas, as in the following, where Good
Thought is but the thinking of the righteous, and Piety
is coordinated with worship and zeal, while Sovereignty
is but an attribute of Mazdah (Yasna 49: 10) : "And
this, O Mazdah, I will bring to thy house for shelter : the
Good Thought and the souls of the righteous, their wor-
ship, their Piety and their zeal, O thou of mighty Sov-
ereignty, that thou mayest watch over them with abiding
power."

But again study shows that there is not in the Gathas
1 a closed band of seven Amshaspands, to which no others
1 might be added ; for the following stanza ( Yasna 45 : 10)
not only names all of them except Obedience, some rather
thinly personified, but uses the terms Strength (tevishl)
and Permanence (utayuti) in a manner quite parallel to
Welfare and Immortality :

" For us thou (= the believer in the true religion) shalt
exalt with prayers of Devotion him who is enduringly
famed as Mazdah Ahura; for through his Righteousness
(Asha) and Good Thought he has taught that in his
Sovereignty Welfare and Immortality shall be ours, and
in his house Strength and Permanence shall be ours."

We may observe that here, also, only Asha and Good
Thought, besides Mazdah, are persons, and that a different
translation is possible, by which even they are but ab-
stracts : " For he has for himself taught that for Right-
doing and for Good Thinking, Welfare and Immortality

ip8


ZOROASTRIANISM

shall be ours in his Sovereignty (= paradise) ..." More
than that, the word which is rendered " enduringly " is
only an oblique case form of a word (annum) which in
another passage is coupled with Permanence in precisely
the manner in which we here have " Strength and Per-
manence." Similarly, oblique cases of the words for Per-
manence and Immortality are used as adverbs, once in
close combination; and in another pasasge, Immortality
(as an abstract) and Happy Life (hujyatl) are combined
in the same way as the usual " Welfare and Immortality."
Other concepts which might have been promoted to the
dignity of archangels, but were not, are to be found in
Atar, the Fire on the altar, and Ashi, the Lot assigned
after death as reward for the deserts of life: these last
two did, however, become in later times angels of a grade
inferior to the Amshaspands.

Now over against Mazdah and the seven Amsha-
spands we find in the later writings of the Avesta a set
of seven arch-demons attending the Evil Spirit; but only
two or three of these appear in the Gathas, and they are
1 not strongly personified. Evil Thought (Aka Manah)
is the special opponent of Good Thought, and represents
the ideas which may be deduced from the name. Violence
(aeshma) denotes the violence which the nomadic raiders
from the north exercised upon the herdsmen of Persia,
and in especial the cruelty towards the herds of cattle,
which they slaughtered or drove off as booty ; Violence is
the particular opponent of Obedience. Heresy (taro-
mati) is named once, and is at a later time spoken of as
the opponent of Devotion, though Devotion's special
enemy is regularly Naonghathya (etymologically identical
with Sanskrit Nasatya) ; but the two are perhaps to be
identified. Other ideas in the Gathas which might have
been advanced to the position of arch-demons are Arro-
gance (parimati), which later became a minor demon,
and Disobedience (asrushti), which is given in a list with

199


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the Druj, Evil Thought, and Heresy, but receives no
additional prominence in later times.

To turn now from the supernatural hosts, Man was
created by Mazdah as an independent agent, endowed
with free will, and with the power and also the obliga-
tion of making a choice between the two spirits, the good
and the evil. He should hear gladly the preaching of
Zoroaster in his effort to lead him to the right way, and
on having made the right choice is designated as wise,
possessed of understanding and of' insight, worthy, faith-
ful. He will practice good thoughts, good words, and
good deeds; he will please Mazdah by dutiful actions,
will uphold Righteousness, cherish Devotion, cling to the
hope of everlasting blessedness in paradise. He will
offer worship to Mazdah with prayers of praise and of
entreaty, and with sacrifice. He will avoid committing
the sins which the followers of the Druj or Evil Spirit
practice; he will even shun all fellowship with them,
and work ill to them, smiting them with the weapon and
overcoming them, never seeking to propitiate them be-
cause of some temporary exigency, for the triumph of the
righteous man is assured even on earth, in this life, in
addition to the reward of blessedness after death. In
only one relation may he have dealings with the followers
lof the Druj, and that is in an effort to convert them to
the true faith; in such missionary work he should be
zealous, and then he should be resolute in protecting the
new converts from the resentment of the infidels. Tem-
poral prosperity, as well as spiritual, shall be the posses-
sion of the faithful believer, though there are times of
trial and depression, as Zoroaster well knew himself.

The follower of the Druj is the direct opposite of the
Believer, in character and in actions ; he is the seed of the
Lie, Evil Thought and Arrogance ; he chooses wrong, for
he hates the words of Zoroaster ; he opposes the blessings
of Mazdah, and scorns devotion ; when in power, he exer-

200


ZOROASTRIANISM

cises evil rule, bringing misery and destruction to the
house, the clan, the district and the land ; he uses violence,
seeking to slay Zoroaster and the true believers, but shall
himself be smitten down in this world, and at the Last ,
Judgment be condemned to everlasting punishment.
There are teachers of the Evil Spirit, who destroy the
teachings of Zoroaster, and the designs of life established
by Mazdah, and cause Good Thinking to be held in low
repute; and the warfare against them is continually
waged by Zoroaster in his missionary work. The posi-
tive doctrines of the Z)m/-followers we shall take up
presently.

Before considering the teleology of the Zoroastrian
religion, we may first observe that there is no provision
for the exposure of the dead body to the beasts and birds, f
which seems to be a later engrafting on the faith. For
Zoroaster says ( Yasna 30 : 7 ; I paraphrase slightly, to
secure clearness) : " And to man Sovereignty came, and
Good Thought and Asha (Right) ; and Devotion gave
to his body permanence and duration, that at the Last
Judgment he may be first of all." In this we have an
allusion to persistence of the physical body after death
until the day of judgment, which is quite incompatible
with the later practice; and as the archangel Devotion,
who confers permanence upon the body, is that archangel
in special charge of the earth, we must infer that the
original Zoroastrian practice was that of burial, and that
therefore the doctrine of pollution by contact with dead
bodies was not taught by Zoroaster ; or else that the earth
was immune to such contamination by the contact — unless
indeed the holiness of earth is a later development in
the religion.

But after death the souls of the dead pass on to the
place of the great judgment, when Mazdah, attended by
Asha, Good Thought, and Sovereignty, are waiting to
pronounce the sentence of bliss or torment. Here is the

- 301


RELIGIONS QF THE PAST AND PRESENT

treasure-house in which all the good thoughts, words, and
deeds — for this triad is constantly insisted on — have been
stored up against this day ; we must assume that the evil
also has been stored up, for the two are placed in a
balance, and that which is heavier decides the fate of
the soul. Yet if there is a perfect balance between the
two, the soul goes to a third place, neither heaven nor
hell, reserved for those whose perfect equality of good
and bad in this earthly life puts them in a position of
neutrality in the contest of right and wrong. At this
weighing, Zoroaster is present as the advocate of the
I faithful, that none of their merits may be forgotten; some
'passages seem even to place him in the position of the
Judge, instead of Mazdah. Then the Judge, with a point-
ing of the hand, indicates the destiny of the soul. Next
comes the crossing of the Bridge of the Separator : the
righteous find it easy to traverse, and arrive on the other
side at Paradise; but the evil find it growing narrower
and narrower, until at last they fall off into hell below,
where they are to subsist upon evil food, and to undergo
everlasting torment.

It cannot be too strongly insisted upon that the in-
evitability of the reward for good and bad is a dominant
feature of Zoroaster's teaching ; it appears throughout the
Gathas. The awful punishment of the bad is kept con-
tinually before the mind of his auditor, that terror may
be one influence toward conversion ; yet there are also for
the believer the promises of blessedness in the next life,
and of prosperity on earth, as well as the desirability of
doing right deeds for their own sake. Further, though
there is this personal judgment on the individual after
death, there is a constant looking forward to the day
when the world will be cleansed of sin ; this will accom-
plish the final defeat and subjection of the Evil Spirit,
when he no longer has followers. At this time, all souls
will pass through a flood of molten metal, which will

202


ZOROASTRIANISM

seem a bath of pleasant warmth to the righteous, but will
either destroy or purge of evil the souls of the wicked:
Zoroaster does not make the point clear. Thus the re-

j generation of the world should come ; and to this process
Zoroaster termed himself a Saoshyant, or future deliverer,
almost Saviour, and he bestowed this title on those who
were already or should later become active in the process.
In fact, the prophet expected this millennium to come
soon, even in his lifetime; but when such did not take
place, later Zoroastrianism interpreted these deliverers,
of whom Zoroaster spoke, as miraculously born sons of
the Prophet, the last of whom will bring about the
regeneration.

Now what are the good deeds which are enjoined
upon the faithful follower of Mazdah, according to the
preaching of his prophet? They are the care and the
protection of the herds of cattle: in other words, Zoro-
aster preached a religion for a community of herdsmen,
whose prosperity depended upon the welfare of the herds.
Later Avestan writings include with cattle-tending the
culture of the fields, and enjoin upon the faithful works
of irrigation and the slaying of noxious beasts — crea-
tions of the Evil Spirit — that would injure the crops;
but in the Gathas there is no trace of the precepts on
agriculture. Zoroaster's own preachings, so far as his
extant sermons indicate, were for a pastoral people pure
and simple, not for one that had advanced to the stage
combining agriculture with cattle-tending. The impor-
tance of these instructions to care for the herds may be
seen in the attitude taken by the followers of the Evil
Spirit; they are foes of cattle-nurture, desolating the
pasture lands, and doing violence to the cow, whose life
they take with joy. This violence is personified as the
archdemon who is the especial enemy of the archangel
Obedience, a matter already mentioned. On the other
/(hand, the follower of Right diligently cares for the Cow ;

^^W 303


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the archangel Good Thought is the patron of cattle, and
Devotion, whose special province is the earth, cares for
the pasture lands. Plants were created by Mazdah to be
the food of the cattle. Zoroaster prays to Mazdah that
the husbandman may receive increased skill in his care
for the herds. In return, the herds furnish men with
meat and with milk (Yasna, 29: 7).

Somewhat contradictory to this is the interesting hint
at a story of the Fall of Man ( Yasna 32 : 8) : Yima, son
of Vivahvant, in a desire to gratify men, gave them the
flesh of the Cow to eat. This he did with the idea that
the food would confer immortal life upon his subjects ;
but he had been deceived into this false belief by the
demons of the Evil Spirit, who wished men to follow
the evil course. Thereby sin became rife among men,
not wholly because of the violence to the cattle in order
to get the flesh for eating, but because of the attempt to
seek immortality in a wrongful way. The preachings
of Zoroaster, we must remember, distinctly permit the
use of flesh of the Cow as food, as well as that of the milk.

For these reasons, the Cow, and more especially the
Cow with calf, became in the language of Zoroaster a
symbol of prosperity in this earthly life, and by an easy
extension of meaning, the symbol of blessedness in the
life after death; paradise is spoken of as "happy dwell-
ings rich with pasture." The same figure is illustrated
again when he says that the righteous man shall hereafter
dwell in the pasture of Right and Good Thought, and
in a time of despondency he says, " I know, O Mazdah,
why I am powerless; it is because few cattle are mine,
and few men."

Now the establishment of a religion for herdsmen
is represented in this manner {Yasna, 29) : The Cow is
like man, endowed with the power of making a free
choice between good and evil; for her the choice is be-
tween the herdsman and the raider. She chooses the

204


.ZOROASTRIANISM

herdsman. In distress from the raids of the barbarians,
the personified Spirit of the Kine comes before the Creator
of the Kine, an aspect of Mazdah and yet not identical
with Mazdah, and asks for a protector against the op-
pressors. The Creator of the Kine appeals to Asha to
know if there is a judge and lord who may tend the
kine, provide them with fodder, and drive off the violence
of the followers of the Evil Spirit. Asha replies that
there is none, and refers the Kine-Creator to Mazdah
himself for help. At the appeal, Mazdah appoints Zoro-
aster to reveal his will and to serve as lord and judge
over the herds. But the Kine-Spirit utters a sad lament
that a weakling man should be set in a position demanding
power, and fears that Zoroaster's help will not be effect-
ual. Hereupon Zoroaster prays humbly to Mazdah for
strength to execute his mission ; and the Kine-Spirit, im-
pressed by the evident sincerity of his prayer, expresses
confidence that effectual help will now come to the herds.
Such is, in summary form, Zoroaster's own account of
his appointment as missioner of a herdmen's religion.

An interesting point about the Zoroastrian faith is
that the word for demon, daeva, is the word which in
\most kindred languages designates a deity of good char-
acter. 'This has occasioned much discussion, the more
so because the word for a good divinity in the Avesta
is Ahura, while the same word etymologically in Sanskrit,
Asura, denotes a demon. The latter point is of no con-
sequence, for the Sanskrit word has independently
acquired a bad meaning ; the difficulty lies with the former
word. We might inquire first, in this connection, what
we can glean about the religion of the Persians before
the coming of Zoroaster. The Gathas give us but a few
points (Yasna 32: 12, 14; 48: 10) ; they hint at orgies in
which the life of the Cow is slain, and the haoma or fer-
mented juice of some plant is used. The haoma is not
indeed mentioned by name in the Gathas, but the allusions

»5


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

are unmistakable. One passage represents the followers
of the false religion as saying, " Slay the Cow, that it
may inspire the Death-Averter to help us." As Death-
Averter (duraosha) is a constant epithet of the haoma
in the later portions of the Avesta, there can be no doubt
that the use of the haoma belongs to the religious rites
which Zoroaster assails. Again, there can be no question
of the meaning when he appeals to Mazdah to " smite
the filth of the intoxicant, with which the false religion-
ists evilly deceive." The slaying of the Cow in the orgies
of this religion may perhaps point to some practice like
the slaying of the bull in the rites of Mithra; but the
indications are too scant for certainty. Yet we know
that the deities Mithra and Anahita do not appear in
Zoroaster's own teaching, but become prominent in the
later Avesta; which unfortunately gives us no clue as
to the date. The two are, however, given a place along-
side Ahuramazda in the inscriptions of Artaxerxes I,
who ruled the Persian Empire in the middle of the fifth
century before Christ, where the three are a formal triad;
but the added two are not to be found in the inscriptions
of Xerxes, father of Artaxerxes, who celebrates Ahura-
mazda alone. This is important for our understanding
of the development of Zoroastrianism. I have earlier
stated that the ceremony with the haoma or hom-juice is
the most evident portion of the Parsi ritual of to-day,
as in fact it was in the time of the later sections of the
Avesta; and as Zoroaster himself denounced its use in
the strong terms which have been quoted, the use of
the haoma wp.s, like Mithra and Anahita, an importation
into the new religion from the older and supplanted faith,
which though defeated must still have kept a powerful
hold on the individual mind. To this older faith may with
plausibility be ascribed also the institution of the Towers
of Silence for the disposal of the bodies of the dead.
Indeed, it is quite likely that the priests of the older

206


ZOROASTRIANISM

religion, when definitely defeated in the struggle, accepted
the situation, and bent their energies towards getting
control of the priesthood of the new faith. That a class
of men trained in the practice of ceremonies should have
achieved their purpose is not astonishing, and we may
well believe that they then shaped the new religion by
importing some of the old practices which its founder
had condemned. And this brings us back to the problem
of the meaning of daeva, "demon" in Persian, but "kindly
deity " in other languages. If we grant such a religion
as we find hints of in the Gathas, a religion having at
its head, presumably, the old nature gods, whose name
was daeva in Persian, Zoroaster might fitly use their name
with abhorrence, and degrade it to the meaning of demon.
His own religion had personifications of abstractions at
its head ; the very' word daeva, being connected with the
word meaning sky, with Jupiter, Zeus, and the like, was
not suitable to express his idea of a supernatural being,
but was the verjr word to denote a false deity, evil and
maleficent. This word, then, remains as a memorial of
the fight waged by Zoroaster against the older religion;
but many of the features of that older religion crept into
the new faith in later times, as we have just seen.

*

The Prophet Zoroaster.

And what of Zoroaster himself? Must he remain a
vague personality, surrounded by the myths attached to
him in the later writings of the religion which he founded ?
Or can we learn something of his life and of his experi-
ences, out of his own words? A certain amount we do
find there, but not enough to give more than a sketch;
yet ample for a glimpse at the vigorous manhood, the
trying career, the militant ministry of the prophet.

Zarathushtra, as his name was originally, was of the
Spitama family, and was a descendant of one Haecathaspa.
His mission to the world came to him in the form of a

207


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

series of seven visions. The first was one of Mazdah at
the Last Judgment; the second that of Mazdah at the
Creation. The other five were of the archangel Good
Thought, who asked him whether he belonged to the evil
or to the good, and for which party he would decide;
who in the next vision instructed Zoroaster in the words
of Mazdah; who then came to Zoroaster to observe his
zeal for the right, and in the last vision to send him out
upon his preaching. Thus ordained by Mazdah, he be-
gan his mission, proclaiming his appointment as protector
of the herdsmen and of the cattle, and announcing the
certainty of reward in the next life, for the good and
the evil done in this bodily life. It was no easy task : in
his endeavor to proselyte the world he incurred the hos-
tility of the former religion, its priests the Karapans and
the Usij, and its chieftains the Kavis. Foremost of his
opponents were the priest Grehma and the chief Bendva.
Often his life was sought; but Mazdah protected him.
Often the Prophet was plunged into the deepest discour-
agement. Once he says ( Yasna, 46 : 1 ) , " Whither, to
what land, shall I go to escape? They keep me from
the noble and from the priest, nor do the traders please
me, nor the princes of the land, who follow the Druj.
How shall I please thee, Mazdah Ahura? " Even specific
occurrences find mention in his sermons: once (Yasna
44: 18) he had been promised a reward of ten mares,
a stallion, and a camel — a bounty in keeping with a pas-
toral civilization — and had failed to receive it; he
threatens the unnamed breaker of his word with the
penalty that comes for such misconduct. Again ( Yasna
51: 12), he instances the action of the favorite youth
of a hostile chief or Kavi, who kept him and his two
horses out shivering in the bitter cold, not allowing them
to come in for refuge; even the place is named, the
iWinter Gate. But still the prophet persisted in his ser-
vice of Mazdah, with prayer and praise and preaching,

208


ZOROASTRIANISM

proselyting and watching over the souls of men, and, in
his own words, " presenting to Mazdah the life of his own
body as an offering." Always thinking that the regenera-
tion of the world would come soon, even within his life-
time, he asks that as a visible sign of Mazdah's power
there be given to him at once the conversion of the world
and the coming of the millennium ; but this, alas, he was
not to see. Until that time, he is the custodian of the
good deeds of men, and at the Last Judgment he will
present the faithful to the Judges, and will plead their
cause; sometimes he even pictures himself as the judge,
but that post he usually reserves for Mazdah.

In course of time he won converts, ultimately in no
small number. Amongst these he mentions a kinsman,
Madyoimaongha, whom later tradition represents as the
first convert of all ; and the Kavi or chief Vishtaspa and
members of his court. The conversion of the chief was
the turning point of his career, and may justly be termed
his great success. Jamaspa, prime minister of Vishtaspa,
accepted the faith, and received in marriage Porucista,
daughter of the Prophet. Frashaoshtra, brother of Ja-
maspa, gave to the Prophet his daughter as wife ; not his
first wife certainly, for Zoroaster speaks of a son and
of daughters, one of whom, as we have just seen, was
of marriageable age. Besides these, he mentions as con-
verts the family of Fryana, a Turanian, one of the bar-
barian tribes to the north who were afterwards the arch-
enemies of the faith; a precious bit of evidence that
Zoroaster did not limit his religion to any one people.

Such is the picture of the Prophet which we get in the
Gathas, the poetical sermons which have come down from
him to the present day, giving the impression of a vivid
personality, and preaching the doctrines of a religion
destined for a nation of herdsmen, who must deal justly
and forcefully to preserve themselves and their flocks
from the enemy, both temporal and spiritual. To the
14 209


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

later alterations and perversions of the faith, it has been
impossible here to give more than a passing allusion.
But let us remember that in its inception the religion of
Zoroaster was one designed to meet a situation which
was mainly economic, but that this religion had at its head
a series of personifications of noble abstractions.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

J. B. Pratt: India and its Faiths, 1915, pp. 318-39, on present-day
aspects of Parsiism.

A. V. W. Jackson : Zoroaster the Prophet of Ancient Iran, 1899,
for the life of Zoroaster as portrayed in the ancient sources.

K. Geldner : articles " Zoroaster," for the life of the Prophet, and
" Zendavesta," for the contents and history of the Avesta, in the
Encyclopedia Britannica, ed. 11, vol. 28.

Doshabhai Framji Karaka : History of the Parsis, 2 vols., 1884,
for the subject from the Parsi standpoint.

A. V. W. Jackson : An Avestan Grammar, 1892 : the introduction
contains a convenient account of the contents, history, and inter-
pretation of the Avesta.

A. V. W. Jackson : " Die iranische Religion," in Geiger and Kuhn's
Grundriss der iranischen Philologie, vol. 2, 1896-1904; a com-
plete picture of the religion as seen in the Avestan and Pahlavi
sources.

J. H. Moulton : Early Zoroastrianism, 1913, a most valuable study
of the earlier aspects of the faith, with copious citations of
sources and of modern authorities, and a translation of the
ancient sources, including the most recent and best translation
of the Gathas into English.

Older translations of the Avesta are in the Sacred Books of the
East, vols. 4 (1880) and 23 (1883), by J. Darmesteter, and vol.
31 (1887), by L. H. Mills; into French, by J. Darmesteter, Le
Zendavesta, 3 vols., 1892-93 ; into German, by Chr. Bartholomae,
Die Gatha's der Awestu, 1905, and by Fritz Wolff, Avesta, die
heiligen Bilcher der Parsen, 1910 (except the Gathas).


210


CHAPTER IX

MOHAMMEDANISM
BY MORRIS JASTROW, JR.


Mohammedanism or Islam is ushered into existence
in the "full ~ daylight of history. Despite this fact we
know only little more of its founder, Mohammed, that
Ts" authentic than we know of Jesus and not as much
as we know of Buddha. To be sure, the pious Moham-
medan will resent this assertion, and claim that we have
the details of the prrohet's career down to the rrroit
trivial incidents, handed down by reliable witnesses and
embodied in an extensive literature known as Hadith, i.e.,
" tradition." Alas ! that this " tradition " about Moham-
med breaks down under the test of critical examination,
and the reported doings and sayings of the prophet turn
out to be for the larger part inventions to reinforce ortho-
dox beliefs and minutiae in religious practices. 1 The
generation which knew Mohammed was devoid of the
historic sense and left no record of his doings and sayings
except the one which is furnished in the imperfect col-
lection of his sporadic utterances known as the Koran.
Through the Koran we can penetrate into the psychology
of the prophet's intricate personality, but it does not
suffice for tracing his career in detail. Out of the mass
of late and untrustworthy traditions, we can supplement
the Koran by some details — but only enough to sketch
his life in general outlines.

He was born of humble parentage in Mecca and in. all
probability in the year 570 a.d. There is an.-jisolated

1 See Goldziher's elaborate study of the Hadith Literature in his
Muhammedanische Studien, 2, pp. 1-274.

211


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

tradition that his real name was Kutam. Mohammed (or
better Muhammad, " the praised one " or " blessed ") ap-
pears to be an epithet given to.him. His father's name
was Abdallah (servant of Allah), though the second ele-
ment may have been a substitute for the name of some
Arab god; and his mother is said to have been Amina
(" the faithful one "). At a tender age Mohammed was
# left an orphan, the care of whom devolved first on his
grandfather, Abd el-Muttalib, and after the death of the
latter upon his maternal uncle, Abu Talib. Of his early
years we know nothing till as a young man he entered the
services of a rich widow, Khadijah, and as her agent en-
teredupon mercantile- pursuits. He subsequently mar-
ried the widow, though she was considerably older, and
had a large family — three sons and four daughters. The
sons appear to have diedbefore. reaching manhood.

We next hear of him as a preacher, exhorting the
people of Mecca to cast aside the traditional worship of
gods and to recognize Allah alone as the one god of the
universe. This, the burden of his message, is repeated
in many keys and In endless variations throughout his
public career. " There is no god but Allah " becomes the
inspiration of his life," while the corollary " Mohammed
is the messenger of Allah " merely emphasizes his posi-
tion as the mouthpiece of Allah, sent to proclaim him to
his own people, as at other times messengers had been
sent to other peoples ; — notably to Jews and Christians.
He appears to have been about 40 years old when he
first made his public appearance. The twenty-two years ■ *. n
of his career as a " warner," as he likes to call himself, "
are divided into two almost equal periods. The first
twelve are spent in Mecca, where he succeeds in gather-
ing a small circle of followers about him, but also arouses
considerable opposition by his denunciation of estab-
lished customs. This opposition, as well as brighter pros-
pects of meeting with success elsewhere, prompts him to

212


MOHAMMEDANISM

leave Mecca for Medina in the year 622— an event desig-
nated as the Hejira, i.e., " the flight," from which the ]
Mohammedans date their official era. In Medina, situated
some distance to the north of Mecca, he attracts great
attention. His followers increase, and combining in a
strange manner worldly ambitions with missionary zeal
he acquires an influential position which in time makes
him the virtual ruler of the place. We may trust the
tradition which depicts him as the prophet militant in
Medina, organizing marauding bands and dividing the
booty derived from attacking caravans among his sol-
diery. He occasionally meets with reverses, but on the
whole gains in power until he feels strong enough to
make an attack on Mecca, He enters the city in triumph
and proceeds with his followers to the ancient sanctuary
in the city, known as the Caaba ( from its " cube "-like
shape), and proclaims it as the " house of Allah." It be-
comes from this time on the central sanctuary of Moham- <
niedanism.

In the closing years of Mohammed's career the
religious movement inaugurated by him begins to assume
the dimensions of a national uprising. The Arabic tribes
scattered throughout the Peninsula become conscious of
their unity.- -Mohammed as" the prophet proclaiming a
divine message to the Arabic people gives to the many
separate groups a rallying cry that unites them under the
standard of Islam. He fires their ambition of bringing
the whole world to a recognition of Allah. Before Mo-
hammed passed away at Medina in the year 632, at the
age of sixty-two, practically all of Arabia had come under
his control. He gathers able lieutenants about him who
aid in the work of the organization of the Arabs into a
great military camp, though the work is not perfected till
after his death.

Mohammed's mission thus takes on a two-fold aspect
— religious and political. The time was ripe as a result

213


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

of the disintegration of the old faith for a forward step,
involving the recognition of unity in the universe in place
of a diversity of more or less independent powers. The
presence of Jews and Christians in large numbers in vari-
ous parts of Arabia was an important factor in leading
to the decline of Arabic heathendom. Mohammed no
doubt came into contact with Jews and Christians, from
whom he acquired an imperfect knowledge of these higher
faiths, together with smatterings of Old and New Testa-
ment stories, though in their Midrashic rather than in
their Biblical garb. The Jews, more particularly, had
amplified the Biblical tales of the Patriarchs and of such
figures as Moses and Aaron with fanciful accretions,
spun out with homiletic intent. ! Mi3hammei--accepte(l
these tales with little appreciation of their deeper import
just as the Christian doctrines of the Trinity and of the
Pauline conception of Jesus lay beyond his mental hori
zon. The attempt to assimilate what he could not under-
stand led to a frightful confusion and to most crude in-
terpretations of both Judaism and Christianity, though,
in so far as these faiths followed along the lines of
Semitic thought, they appealed to his mental make-up
and gave him much of what was valuable in his religious
message. It is more difficult to account for the political
union of the Arabs which Mohammed succeeded in bring-
ing about. No doubt the hope of plunder and the ambi-
tion of conquest were aroused by him, but as one of those
rare individuals, born to leadership, he must also have
stirred up feelings of a higher order that had lain dormant
among the Arabs. Stirred to the depths, the Arabs be
came an irresistible force, carrying the new faith with the
help of the sword to Persia on the east, to Palestine,
Syria, Asia Minor, Egypt on the west. Northern Africa
and southern Spain as well as Sicily became Mohammedan
states, and although a definite limit was set to further
northern expansion by the victory of Charles Martel at

214


3


MOHAMMEDANISM

Tours in 732, Mohammedanism within the conquered dis-
tricts not only maintained its hold but spread northward
throughout Africa and eastward to India, to China and to
the islands of the Malay Archipelago, as well as through-
out the section of Europe that became part of the Turkish
Empire at its height. To this day, Mohammedanism,
though split up into large divisions and various sects,
retains its hold upon more than two hundred millions.

II

How are we to account for Mohammed, how explain
\the profound impression made upon his surroundings by
, one who as he himself admits — and as the Koran shows —
was an ignorant man? Without position to enforce his
authority, without a powerful clique to aid him in his
mission, without a John the Baptist as his forerunner,
without a Paul to formulate his doctrine into an elaborate
theological system, though that was eventually done by
Mohammedan theologians and philosophers^ Mohammed
stands forth a solitary figure, crying to unwilling ears,
derided at first, denounced as a madman, subject to per-
secution, and yet destined to triumph in a manner that
makes him still almost 1300 years after his death the cen-
tral figure of Islam. Here, indeed, is a problem for the
psychologist, the historian and the student of religions to
grapple with.

Until a century ago, to be sure, the problem did not
exist. The prejudices of Christian Europe, reinforced
by ignorance, had made of Mohammed a strange mixture
of a cunning fanatic and a cruel, almost bestial tyrant,
with scarcely a redeeming feature, unless it were his suc-
cess in imposing pernicious teachings upon benighted
masses.

It was left for Carlyle to see with his keen psychologi-
cal insight that the picture drawn by European writers
could not be true. As a historical portrait, Carlyle's

215


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

essay on Mohammed in his "Heroes and Hero Wor-
ship," depicting Mohammed as the Priest-Hero, has at the
present time little value. It has been superseded by the
active researches of able European and American scholars
and by the publication of native Arabic sources for the
study of Mohammedanism which when Carlyle wrote
were unknown. As a study, however, of the problem pre-
sented by the appearance of Mohammed in surroundings
where one would least have expected him, Carlyle is most
suggestive and still worth reading.

In the seventh century of our era, Arabia was still
the centre of Semitic hordes as it had been from time
immemorial, though settlements of Arabs had been made
throughout Palestine and Syria, in Egypt and Meso-
potamia. Despite the strong cultural influences emanating
from these lands, to which must be added southern
Arabia, where a high order of civilization was reached
as early as the second millennium before this era, the bulk
of the Arabs had kept to the nomadic life ; and even in
the settlements within Arabia where, along the route
leading from Syria to Yemen, cities had sprung up, the
old animistic beliefs, investing trees, wells and stones
with sanctity, still held sway. The sacred sites to which
visits continued to be paid remained the same, except
that at those which had acquired a prominence above the
average the simple habitat of the guardian of the site had
become a shrine of larger proportions. There was no
central sanctuary, as there was no union among the tribes.
Mecca in the_days of Mohammed was merely one of sev-
eral prominent towns that had a sanctuary of more than
local importance — due in the case of Mecca in part to
the fact that the city lay on the route to Okaz, where an
annual market was held which brought Arabic tribes
together from all parts of Arabia. In addition barter
and exchange were carried on, tribal councils met, inter-
tribal disputes were adjusted and contests of strength and

216


MOHAMMEDANISM

skill held. Such reunions served to keep alive the con-
sciousness of the common bond of descent and tradition
among the tribes. There was, to be sure, a marked dif-
ference between the nomadic Arabs and those who had
been weaned to settled conditions of life; and it is not
accidental that Mohammed's family had been residents
of a city for several generations past. As already sug-
gested, the presence of many Jews and Christians in the
settled portions of Arabia acted as a leaven and led to a
weakening of faith in the ancient beliefs, though the rites
arising from them continued to be practised. Such in-
fluences may well have continued quietly for centuries
without producing marked external changes. Stories are
told of Arabs, who had embraced Judaism or Christian-
ity, but even after making full allowance for the influence
exerted on Mohammed by the presence of higher faiths,
the secret of the hold which the new belief reached must
be sought in the study of his own mental and emotional
equipment.

The Arab, even the unlettered, is given to contem-
plation. As a child of nature he is impressed by the phe-
nomena around him, and we may assume that the wild-
fress and alternate impressiveness and melancholy of
austere mountain ranges with long stretches of for-
bidding wastes were factors in leading to this contem-
plative disposition upon which many writers have dwelt
since Renan first emphasized the trait. Viewing Moham-
med in this light we can understand how an impression-
able nature, gifted with imagination, and swayed by emo-
tions all the stronger for being uncontrolled, should have
passed through a mental struggle of which tradition has
preserved a record that is in part, at least, reliable. He is
said to have retired to a cave outside of Mecca from time
to time and there to have meditated amidst the solitude
of the wild, rocky region on the mysteries of the universe
and of human existence. What did it all mean — this

217


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

never-ending play of nature, this regular succession of
phenomena in the heavens and on earth, this surging
mass of humanity, struggling and toiling as though driven
by a hidden force, endeavoring to rise superior to sur-
roundings and ever thrown back by stronger and appar-
, enfly hostile powers'? Renan„to whose views a reference
\ has been made, set up the thesis many years ago that the
\ monotony of nature in Arabia, the home of, the Semites,
* led naturally to the thought of a single power controlling
the universe. 2 In this extreme form the thesis, though
defended with a wealth of learning and an ingenuity and
brilliancy that challenges admiration, has not been ac-
cepted. A monotheistic conception of divine government
appears on the surface to be. a philosophical abstraction
developed in schools of thought rather than an intuition
suggested by the impression made by nature upon man.
We find the thought suggested by the theologians of
ancient Babylonia who superimposed their comparatively
advanced speculations on a basis of primitive myths. We
find a remarkable movement in the direction of monothe-
ism setting in in Egypt as early as the fifteenth century
before this era, though likewise as the outcome of specu-
lation in a land that had attained a high order of civiliza-
tion. In the case of the Hebrews we find a genuine
monotheism developed not by the priest of the sanctuaries
but by a body of men who, while not schooled in philo-
sophic thought, yet transformed a national Yahweh into a
Power of universal scope through an emotional rather
than an intellectual process, through the inward realiza-
tion that the fate of mankind was in the hands of a Being,
acting by self-imposed laws of righteousness. What the
Hebrew Prophets taught was ethical rather than specu-
lative monotheism. It was precisely this kind of mono-
theism that Mohammed preached. His early utter-

'Histoire Generate et Systeme Compare des Langues SSmitiques
( 4 th ed), p. 6 ff.

318


MOHAMMEDANISM

ances convey the impression of burning thoughts that
seek for an expression, and that are marked by their spon-
taneous emotionalism in combination with a strong ethical
tinge. Mohammed was incapable of realizing the philo-
sophical or theological implications of his central doctrine
that " there is no god but Allah," but his strong emotional
nature, stirred by the majesty of divine Power as it mani-
fested itself in the impressive nature about him, and
moved by an intense sympathy with the struggles and suf-
ferings of mankind, was able to penetrate to the thought
of the unity behind the phenomena of nature and to con-
ceive of this unity as a great Father, stern at times as a
father must be to wayward children and yet filled with
love and tenderness for his offspring. Power in har-
monious combination with love and justice is the domi-
nant note in Mohammed's conception of Allah.

It is of the essence of a monotheistic view of the
universe, interpreted in terms of ethics, that it brushes
aside difficulties which a purely philosophical concept
would encounter, such as the question of free will in a
world controlled by an omnipotent .and omniscient. Power,
ordaining and foreseeing all that happens, or the still
more perplexing conundrum how to account for unneces-
sary and unmerited suffering and the flourishing of in-
justice and of wickedness in a world created by a benevo-
lent Being. To Mohammed as to the Hebrew prophets,
reaching their conclusions by the strength of their emo-
tional nature, these difficulties did not exist, though the
Mohammedan theologians of later generations were
obliged to grapple with them, when the attempt was made
to formulate the teachings of Mohammed into a system.
Mohammed produced no system; he was incapable of
doing so. To him the alpha and omega of the faith which
after internal struggles he attained was an equation —
Allah is Allah, the most high, the merciful, the just and
the forgiving.

219


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

There was nothing original in his teaching about
Allah, except the force with which he enunciated his
conviction throughout his public career that there was
only one supreme Being to whom worship was to be paid.
Even the name Allah, " the God," paralleled in the
Hebrew eloah, which in a plural form becomes a generic
designation for " god," is not original with Mohammed.
It appears to have been in general use among the Arabs
as an epithet of any god conceived as powerful and
strong. Mohammed tempered the austerity of the con-
ception of a single all-powerful Being above and behind
the phenomena of the Universe by the attributes of love
and mercy, and the readiness to listen to appeal which his
intense sympathy with struggling and suffering mankind
led him to associate with Allah. If, therefore, we find
him in this respect following in the footsteps of the
Hebrew prophets, as also in those of Jesus, who seeks
entirely to set aside the austerity involved in the con-
ception of a strong god by a still more decided emphasis
on His love and mercy, are we not justified in assuming
that there is something in the temper created under natu-
ral surroundings that produces men of the type of Amos
and Hosea; of Jesus and Mohammed — men not marked
by intense intellectualism, certainly not profound
thinkers as that term is ordinarily understood, but domi-
nated by strong emotions, gifted with spiritual insight, of
a contemplative arid~somewhat melancholy disposition,
and impelled by their intense human sympathies? All
these qualities taken together give to the utterances of
Mohammed the stamp of an elemental force; and this
applies more particularly to the earlier Suras of the
Koran in which the sentences, loosely strung together,
are blurted out with the power of an impetuous stream,
seeking for an outlet. The revelation of Allah so far
as Mohammed had any conception of it was of the order

220


MOHAMMEDANISM

voiced by Amos to justify his denunciation of the sins
of his people and his warnings of coming disaster:

The lion roars, who is not afraid?

Yahweh speaks, who will not prophesy? (Amos 3: 8.)

Allah had spoken to Mohammed — through the Angel
Gabriel, as tradition has it — therefore, he must speak.

There can, be no question of. the profound sincerity
of the man during the early stages of his career. The
vehemence of his denunciation of those who refused to
listen to his message, who persisted in recognizing other
Beings by the side of Allah, clinging to practices incom-
patible with the demands made by a god like Allah, and,
above all, the poetical character of those snatches of his
early utterances that have been preserved, testify to this
sincerity. The courage of Mohammed, which is one of
the outstanding traits throughout his career, points in
the same direction. The opposition which his rebellious
utterances aroused and which in time became threatening
did not swerve him from his path. He appears disheart-
ened at times, but continues to speak out. The converts
to the cause were few during the first years. Tradition
has it that a slave in Mohammed's household was his
first follower and it seems certain that his wife Khadijah
stood by her husband, when those about him assailed
him. In return he remained faithful to her and even
after she had passed away and he took other wives, more
attractive in their person, the memory of Khadijah ap-
pears to have exercised its influence over him, though
many of the stories told of their relationship are clearly
apocryphal. Another early convert who was destined
to play a most prominent role was a relative Ali who
became his son-in-law. It would also appear that the
conversion of Abu Bekr, a prominent merchant of Mecca,
was a decisive factor in bringing the movement to more
prominent notice. All the early followers of Mohammed

221


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

who became known in tradition as his " Companions "
showed their attachment to him. Only a sincere man
can arouse such devoted followers as Mohammed gath-
ered about him, and who, when the opposition to him
reached a climax in the year 622 a.d., were ready to
follow him to Medina, where, as we have seen, he laid
the foundation of the Mohammedan state.

The Hejira (or so-called "flight") marks in almost
every respect a turning-point in Mohammed's career. The
struggles of the Mecca period were followed by the rapid
successes that marked the change of his activities to
Medina, but even glorifying tradition cannot conceal the
weakness which he displayed in his new role as a secular
leader. The Mohammed of Medina justifies the appeal to
force as a means of securing the triumph of Islam. Acts
of cruelty, particularly towards the Jews settled in and
near Medina — who angered him by opposing his claim to
being a follower of Abraham — are recorded that sug-
gest a profound change of mental development in order
to account for the transition of the Mohammed of
Mecca to the Mohammed of Medina. His " revelations "
degenerate into the ordres du jour of a general, self-
conscious utterances to aid in carrying out worldly am-
bitions. He also becomes prolix and the later Suras in
contrast to the earlier ones are long and prosy, catering
to the fondness of Arabs for tales, in order to regale
his hearers rather than to edify and instruct them. He
adds nothing to the message of earlier days, and yet
it must be confessed that but for the policy that he pur-
sued in Medina he would not have aroused the national
consciousness of the Arabs. He fired their imagination
with the prospect of a world-empire under the domina-
tion of the religion that he founded ; and though he him-
self, like Moses, was not permitted to enter the Holy
Land, he left to his successors as a legacy the policy
of spreading the Koran with the power of the sword.

222


MOHAMMEDANISM

Mohammed thus presents the unique phenomenon of
a founder of a religion who also leads to the establish-
ment of a vast empire. Jesus breaks the national bond
uniting his people by substituting for it a spiritual union,
freed from national or racial limitations. Buddha is
totally indifferent to national interests and becomes the
preacher of individual salvation, irrespective of political
or social associations. Zarathustra preaches his doctrine
to his people alone. Moses creates the Hebrew nation,
but although the political ideal is bound up with the
exclusive worship of Yahweh as the protector of the
nation, he can hardly be said to be the founder of the
larger Yahwism — certainly not the founder of a uni-
versal monotheism. Mohammed creates a world religion,
Islam, and the Arabic nation as well. In Mecca he lays
the foundation of a religion, capable of making its appeal
to humanity at large ; in Medina he stirs up the imagina-
tion of his followers to a pan-Arabic movement which
was destined in the course of a few generations to exceed
the fondest dreams of its promoters.

Tradition reports that Mohammed was busy during
the last year of his career in planning an expedition that
was to carry the religion beyond the bounds of Arabia.
This is open to question, though the example of Chris-
tianity may have led him to indulge in such a hope. The
year 632 put an end to any further ambitions that he
may have harbored. At the beginning of that year he
was seized with an illness that never left him. Worn
out by a life of toil and excitement, he was in no con-
dition to withstand the ravages of disease. His condition
grew steadily worse and on the morning of the 8th of
June he passed away. The story goes that just before
he died he dragged his weary body to the courtyard of
his house to give a final greeting to the congregation
assembled for prayer, led by Abu Bekr. A few hours
later he sank into the lap of his wife, Ayesha, and closed

283


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

his eyes in death. Impressive though hardly authentic
is the tradition which represents Abu Bekr declaring to
those who would not believe that Mohammed had passed
away, " He who worships Mohammed let him know
that Mohammed is dead, but he who worships Allah, let
him know that Allah lives and will not die."

Ill

The name given to the religion which Mohammed
founded was Islam, based on the frequent use of the
verb in this form in the Koran. It conveys the idea
of " making one's peace " with Allah by a voluntary
surrender to Allah's will. " Submit yourselves to Allah,"
says the prophet on many occasions. Islam is, therefore,
a religion of submission. The name of the religion re-
flects the simplicity and naivete of Mohammed's concep-
tion of Divine Government. He feels the presence of the
superior Power. To him Allah is something intensely
real, almost tangible, and yet it can hardly be said that
there is any mystic element involved in his thoroughly
emotional submission to the will of Allah.

The relationship in which Mohammed places himself
towards Allah throws further light upon his conception
of the divine arbiter of fates. Though devoid of any
historical spirit in the proper sense of the term, the con-
viction is strong enough with him that Allah, the eternal,
has at all times revealed himself to chosen messengers.
Man could not through the effort of his reason alone
reach to a knowledge of Allah. Mohammed's Allah is
the same who manifested Himself to a long series of
messengers beginning with Adam and ending with Mo-
hammed as the one who put the " seal " on the utter-
ances of his long line of predecessors. Divine revelation
is thus a continuous process ; and it will readily be seen
how on the basis of such a view Mohammedan theologians
could build up a system in which Islam would be the

234


MOHAMMEDANISM

coping stone. The chain of prophets leading in unbroken
links through Jesus, John the Baptist, the Hebrew
prophets, Elijah, Eamuel, Joshua, Moses, Abraham, Noah
back to Adam, forms his strongest plea for calling upon
Jews and Christians to heed his message to " submit
themselves," even though he was primarily sent to preach
to his own people. It is significant that even at the
present time the rock on which the temple of Solomon
stood in Jerusalem and around which the Mosque Haram
esh-Sherif is built is almost as sacred to Arabs as the
black stone in the corner of the Caaba at Mecca. Strange
that in both Jerusalem and Mecca a stone, as a trace of
the primitive Semitic stone cult, should form the sacred
object, which suggests that in one sense Islam is a more
direct expression of a genuine Semitic evolution of re-
ligion than either Judaism or Christianity, into both of
which, and more particularly into Christianity, other than
purely Semitic elements have entered.

This marked trait of Islam finds its strongest illustra-
tion in the Koran, which, containing the authentic utter-
ances of Mohammed, forms for this reason our main
source, in some respects our only source, for Mohammed's
view of the religion which he founded. The circum-
stances under which the collection was made within a
few years after Mohammed's death are detailed in the
Hadith literature, but only so much of the " tradition "
can be regarded as reliable which associates the gathering
of Mohammed's utterances during the Mecca and Medina
periods with the three lieutenants of the prophet who in
turn became the head of the new state after Mohammed's
death, namely, Abu Bekr, Omar and Othman, 3 and with
Mohammed's secretary, Zaid ibn-Thabit. There is every
reason to believe that shortly after Mohammed had ac-

"The title " Caliph " given to those who assume the authority of
Mohammed designates them as the " successor " or " substitute " of
Mohammed.

15 225


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

quired a leading position in Medina his utterances were
written down by some of his followers, because of the
supreme importance that came to be attached to his words.
In the earlier years this was not the case, but the im-
pression made by the novel style of his warnings and
denunciations, by his allusions to Biblical characters and
tales, by his descriptions of the glories of Paradise in
store for those who followed in the path of Allah was
sufficiently pronounced to ensure their oral transmission,
especially among a people accustomed to handing down
stories, poems and sayings by word of mouth.

The Koran is not a large book. By a rough estimate
it is about one- fourth the size of the Old Testament, and,
considering that it comprises utterances stretching over
twenty years, the small size is in itself a guarantee of its
authenticity, as it is also a proof that we have not a
complete record of all that the prophet said during his
public career. The style of the Koran is individualistic.
Mohammed could well challenge those who made sport
of him to produce anything like it. Frankly admitting
himself to be an ignorant man — he probably could neither
read nor write — he points to the style of his utterances
as a proof that what he says is imparted to him by a
Divine revelation. In its final form the Koran was di-
vided into 114 Suras, the larger ones at the beginning,
the shorter ones at the end, 4 with a headline to each, indi-
cating whether a Sura was revealed at Mecca or Me-
dina. 5 There is, however, no further attempt at chrono-
logical order, and so we are left to unreliable tradition
regarding the circumstances under which a Sura was pro-
nounced or to a critical estimate of internal evidence for
the more precise order of the chapters. 6

* An exception is made in the case of the first Sura, which, con-
sisting of seven verses, is the "doxology" of Mohammedanism.

6 In the case of some there is a doubt whether they belong to
the first or second period.

"Noldeke, Geschichte des Qorans, 2d ed. ( by F. Schwally (1909).

226


MOHAMMEDANISM

At first blush, a confusing blending of statements and
arguments, interspersed with sharp denunciations, bits of
stories, word pictures of Allah's power and of his mercy,
eloquent appeals, and endless repetitions, it seems amazing
that such a collection of utterances should have acquired
a sacred character. Yet here is the fact that at the present
time more than two hundred millions of worshipers still
regard the Koran as divinely inspired from beginning to
end, and as the supreme guide of life. The explanation
of the phenomenon is to be found in the profound im-
pression made by Mohammed upon his contemporaries.
What he says comes to be viewed by his followers as
a revelation, hecause he says it. The Islamic theory of
revelation thus rests entirely upon the impression made
by a single personality, in contrast to Judaism where it
develops from the belief in a group chosen by the Deity,
and to the Christian doctrine, which rests upon the annul-
ment of an old covenant in favor of a new one, but like-
wise deriving its initiative from a supreme ruler and not
as the reflection of any single personality.

Viewed in this light, as an expression of Mohammed's
personality, the Koran at closer range becomes a re-
markably interesting and in some respects a fascinating
work. As we make the attempt in a sympathetic spirit to
allow the influence of the prophet's personality play on
our emotions, we discover many passages of striking
power and not a few of a certain strange beauty. 7

The miscellaneous contents of the Suras of the Koran
make it impossible to give more than a general char-
acterization of the collection. There is no logical arrange-
ment within a Sura, no gradual unfolding of an argu-
ment, nothing in short which we would associate with
either an essay or a sermon. There is in all the Suras,
and particularly in the longer ones, a sudden transition
from one subject to the other, often so sudden as to be

7 E.g.— Sura 2, 15-19; 3. 112-114; 22, 1-4; 38, 1-9; 56, 1-34.

227


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

perplexing. All is in confusion, and the general im-
pression conveyed is that the Suras are a conglomeration
of fragments, loosely put together. It is not surprising,
therefore, that in the task of systematizing the teachings
of Mohammed on the basis of the Koran, differences of
opinion arose which led to the formation of sects, though
other factors contributed to the splitting up of the Mo-
hammedans into many groups. Almost any philosophical
opinion or theological interpretation of the doctrines of
Islam could find a support in the Koran. Advocates of
the freedom of the will appealed to the utterances of the
prophet, equally with those who carried to an extreme
the belief that all was preordained by Allah. 8 After a
struggle lasting for several centuries, in the course of
which a large variety of " heresies " came to the fore,
Mohammedan orthodoxy triumphed, free discussion was
virtually suppressed, and Islam settled down to a division
into two large groups, the followers of Sunna, or " tra-
dition," and those who deviated therefrom, chiefly, in
not recognizing the first three " successors " or caliphs,
Abu Bekr, Omar and Othman, as legitimate and making
Mohammed's second cousin and son-in-law Ali his direct
..heir. This was the party known as Shi'a — a term which
conveys the force of " partisan." The strength of the
Shiites lay in Persia, and this, perhaps for the reason
that although the movement is of Arabic origin the idea
of the incarnation of the deity in a human being, which
became a leading principle of Shi'ism, fitted in with
inherited Aryan beliefs in the divine character of king-
ship. To the Shi'ites Ali became such an " incarnation "
— a thought abhorrent to the followers of Sunna. Only
one who was divinely chosen could, according to them,
be the successor of Mohammed. That person, it was

* See for details Goldziher's authoritative work, Mohammed and
Islam (English translation by Mrs. L. H. Seelye), especially chapters
3 and 4.


MOHAMMEDANISM

claimed, was AH and after him in a regular family line
other successors known as Imams or " leaders." Several
other religious beliefs, of an Aryan rather than Semitic
stripe, were introduced into Islam by the Persian fol-
lowers of Mohammed.

Within the circles of Sunna, which comprise the
Mohammedans of Arabia, Palestine, most of Syria, Egypt
and northern Africa, as well as of India, four divisions,
or rather " rites," are recognized as orthodox, known
from their founders as Hanbalites, Shafi'ites, Malikites
and Hanifites. 9 They differ from one another in matters
of ritual, while agreeing substantially in their doctrinal
interpretations.

IV

Taking up, in conclusion, the chief rites of Islam in
further illustration of the general character of the re-
ligion, we must again bear in mind that the systematiza-
tion of these rites is the work of the theologians on the
basis of the Koran, to meet the requirements of the grow-
ing communities of followers and the organization of
the Mohammedan state.

It is not easy to follow this process of organization
in detail, though it would seem that prayer (salat) in
unison was one of the first steps to be taken. There is
no adjuration more frequently repeated in the Koran than
the one to " be steadfast in prayer." The institution of
daily prayers in imitation of Jews and Christians was
one of the most radical innovations introduced, by Mo-
hammed into the lives of the Arabs. Exactly why he
fixed upon five periods daily, instead of the three observed
by pious Jews, we do not know. 10 The prayer was at

"On the geographical distribution of these divisions, see Gold-
ziher, op. cit., p. 55 ff.

10 On the most sacred day of the Jewish calendar, the Day of
Atonement, the Jews have five prayer periods, and it may be that this
suggested to Mohammed that number for daily worship.

229


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

first merely a gathering of the faithful with Mohammed
as the leader. The example of the prophet became the
pattern followed to this day. Public prayer in the mosques
is offered always under a leader who takes his place in
front of the worshipers and leads in the exercise, much
as the head of a company gives his commands. Leader
and worshiper direct their faces towards the Caaba at
Mecca. The service consists of several " cycles " of
prayers, and each cycle of a number of postures, carried
out in unison by the leader— with the worshipers ar-
ranged in rows behind him. 11 Prayer thus convention-
alized and having the appearance of a military drill is a
religious exercise rather than a spontaneous prompting
of the desire for communion with a higher Being. The
form and formulas of prayers are thus alike stereotyped,
with the praise of Allah and a recital of his majesty as
the main features, and the individual request conspicuous
for its absence. The salat (prayer) is essentially a
humble acknowledgment five times daily of Allah's great-
ness and of his supreme control of everything.

So far as the external form of Islam is concerned, the
influence of Judaism is strongest perhaps in the public
service. On the other hand, Christian influence is be-
trayed in the institution of a fast period patterned after
the Lenten season and extending for a period of one
lunar month. Mohammed fixed upon a month, known as
Ramadan, which even in pagan Arabic had acquired a
special significance as a period of truce from all hostil-
ities. Abstention from food from sunrise to sunset made
this fast the most arduous requirement imposed upon
the prophet's followers, only to some extent relieved by
the permission to indulge in eating and drinking during
the night, so as to prepare for the daily fast. Inasmuch
as the Mohammedans still follow the lunar calendar of

" See Lane, Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern
Egyptians, i, pp. 90-113.

230


MOHAMMEDANISM

ancient days, with no adjustment to the solar year, the
season in which Ramadan falls varies constantly. When
it falls during the hot summer months, the hardship in-
volved in abstaining daily from water as well as from
food for a period of considerably more than twelve hours
is a terrible strain, particularly since the labors of the
day go on uninterruptedly. Indeed, outside of the festi-
vals in memory of the saints which are times of feasting,
of processions and of jollifications, and generally repre-
sent old local cults to which a Mohammedan character
has been given, 12 Islam has neither festivals nor an insti-
tution like the Christian and Jewish Sabbath. Friday,
to be sure, has acquired a special significance but merely
as a day of " gathering," 13 when the obligation to attend
the public service is more strictly observed, without,
however, any cessation of the daily toil.

The fast (saum) of Ramadan, though strictly ob-
served throughout the Mohammedan world, has never
acted as a factor in preserving the hold of the religion
upon its adherents as is the case with the daily prayer,
nor does it serve to impress upon the individual the sense
of belonging to a world-wide community as does a third
" pillar " of the faith — the pilgrimage to Mecca. In
making this visit to the holy city in which Mohammed
saw the light of day obligatory upon every Mohammedan,
Islam buifded probably better than it knew. With the
spread of Islam by conquest throughout the East and into
parts of western Europe, the religion became international
in scope, and the allegiance to Mecca emphasized' by the
pilgrimage was the chief factor in maintaining amidst
all vicissitudes through the succession of centuries down
to our days the ideas and ideals of catholic Islam. The
Mecca pilgrimage, a s it forms the most striking visible

u Such saints' days are common in Egypt, Palestine and Persia—
but not in Arabia.

" It is known as the Yaum el-Jam?, " day of gathering."
231


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

bond among all those who in whatever part of the world
follow the standard of the prophet, is also the strongest
. bulwark against the entrance of modern currents of
^thought into the religion. This_is,all the more note-
worthy because the Haj 14 — as the pilgrimage is called —
has so little about it which is connected with the higher
and essential aspects of Islam. It represents the grafting
of an old ceremonial antedating the time of Mohammed
by many centuries on to a religion which has Its roots
in a revolt against the very conceptions of religion of
which the ceremonial is an expression. The researches
of European scholars 1B have shown that the real goal of
the pilgrimage was originally a sacred mountain Muz-
dalifa in the valley of Mina, just outside of Mecca. Se-
mitic hordes living in mountainous regions placed the seat
of their gods on the mountain tops, in addition to seeing
manifestations of the divine in trees, wells and stones.
In a sense every mountain was sacred and one need only
recall the sanctity attaching in Palestine to Sinai, Nebo,
Gerizim, Seir, Zion and Carmel to realize how deeply
ingrained the conception was among the Semites. It
became customary for Arabs to pay an annual visit to
Muzdalifa. Three days were spent at the Mount, the
ceremonies culminating in a general sacrifice of sheep
to the deity to whom the Mount was sacred. In Mecca
there was an ancient sanctuary, built around a stone that
had acquired special sanctity, and it was natural for those
who came from various parts of Arabia by this way to
the mountain.. to .stop at the sanctuary to pay their re-
spects to the god of the Caaba. Mecca thus acquired con-
siderable importance long before the days of Mohammed.
It was, however, the accident of Mohammed's birth in
Mecca and his own attachment to the Caaba, of which

"Meaning "circuit," i.e., around a sanctuary.
M See especially Snouck Hurgronje, Het Mekkaansch Feest,
Leiden, 1880.

232


MOHAMMEDANISM

the clan Kqreish to which he belonged were the guard-
ians, that transformed the old pilgrimage to Muzdalifa
to an act of worship centring around the Mecca sanctu-
ary. Mohammed could not cut himself entirely loose
from time-honored associations and so the Caaba became
for him the " house of Allah " par excellence. His ex-
ample in performing the traditional rites at Mecca and
on the way to Muzdalifa on the occasion of his last visit
to his native town became established usage among his
followers,. leading to the duty resting upon every Moham-
medan to make the pilgrimage to Mecca at least once in
his lifetime.

There was, to be sure, just as much or just as little
reason for connecting Islam with Muzdalifa as with the
Caaba. The rites performed at both belong to the same
order and are survivals of primitive Semitic religion.
At Muzdalifa the chief rite was, as we have seen, an
animal sacrifice; at Mecca it was the circuit around the
Cataba, generally seven times, and kissing the sacred black
stone 16 at each turn. There were other sacred stones
near the sanctuary, and to this day it is customary to
stand on these stones or to touch them so as to acquire
their beneficent influence. Little chapels have been built
around four of such sacred stones in the large courtyard
surrounding the Caaba, each chapel being dedicated to one
of the four orthodox sects or divisions of Islam. A fur-
ther trace of stone cult is to be seen in the ceremony of
throwing stones at three strange-looking rocks in the valley
of Miha, for the purpose, as it is now said, of driving off
evil demons personified by these rocks, but which at one
time must have been regarded as sacred. Further, within
the colonnadecf enclosure around the Caaba 17 there is a

™ On the character of this stone as for all details regarding the
pilgrimage, see Burton's classical work, Personal Narrative of a
Pilgrimage toAl Medinah and Meccah (many editions)— one of the
most fascinating works that have ever been written.

"See the illustration in Snouck Hurgronje's Mekka (The
Hague, 1888), PI. 2, or Traugott Mann, Der Islam (Leipzig, 1914),
p. 11.

233


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

sacred well, known as Zemzem, out of which it is regarded
to be both a privilege and sacred duty to drink as part of
the pilgrimage ceremonial. We have thus a combination
of stone, water and mountain worship in connection with
the pilgrimage, and only the fourth element of primitive
Semitic worship, the sacred tree, is lacking to make the
cycle complete. Finally, besides the sacred Mount Muz-
dalifa, there are two small hills just outside of the en-
closure around the Caaba at a distance of a few hundred
feet from one another and known as Sawa and Marwa.
Between these hills the pilgrim runs forward and back-
ward seven times.

Now, to connect these strange and purely primitive
rites with Islam, the Mohammedan theologians evolved
series of formulae, prayers, if you choose, containing the
praise of Allah and extracts from the Koran, to be recited
frequently by the pilgrims and in connection with the
rather complicated ceremonies, 18 but the ceremonies them-
selves are far older and of independent origin. The Haj
or pilgrimage thus turns out to be artificially grafted on
to Islam. Even the month selected for it, known as the
Zu-l-Haj, "month of Haj," is the traditional period in
which the visit to Muzdalifa was performed generations
and centuries before the appearance of Mohammed ; and
as a final proof that the attachment of a visit to the
Caaba is an after-thought, one may instance the fact that
the circuit round the Caaba may be made at any time
during the year, as may also the running between Sawa
and Marwa and drinking out of Zemzem or standing on
the stones around the Caaba, whereas the journey through
the valley of Mina to the sacred Mount can be undertaken
only during the " month of pilgrimage." It is more

" Snouck Hurgronje in his standard work on Mecca, chapter 2,
pp. 2&-47, has shown how an elaborate organization was perfected
in the city to provide for the pilgrims coming from all parts of the
Mohammedan world 1 and to guide them in the correct performance
of the various rites and ceremonies.

234


MOHAMMEDANISM

particularly the ioth day of this month which must be
passed on Muzdalifa. The night of the 9th is spent at
the foot of the mountain and early the next morning the
ascent is made to greet the sun at its rise. In order to
give also this rite of worship a Mohammedan character,
it is provided that the pilgrims must listen to a long
sermon on Islam while gathered on the mountain.

Mohammed in thus setting the example for all times
of observing rites that had merely the sanction of an-
tiquity to commend them, shows himself to be a child of
the age in which he lived, despite, his departure from
ancient beliefs. The power of traditional custom was
too strong for him, but on the other hand his retention
of old rites, though foreign to his religious teachings,
made it easier for the Arabs to accept his message. Islam,
in fact, was never hostile to the retention of popular
beliefs, sueh as the one in jinns or demons, as long as they
did not interfere with the central doctrine of Allah's
supreme power. Popular customs having their roots in a
distant antiquity, such as hanging votive objects on sacred
trees, 19 were retained with little or no consciousness of
their being survivals of beliefs inconsistent with advanced
religious conceptions. The hold that the Haj has upon
Mohammedans everywhere is amazingly strong. The
greatest longing of every believer is to see the Caaba, to
kiss the black stone and to perform the other rites. He
who has once performed the pilgrimage is secure against
any temptation to be weaned from the faith of his fore-
fathers. Each year tens of thousands 20 do not shun the
hardship of wandering on foot for months to- reach the
sacred spot. No sacrifice is too great, no exertion too
heavy; and if one cannot go oneself, one scrapes enough

" See many examples of the survival of primitive rites in Pales-
tine and Syria among the Mohammedan population in Curtiss, Primi-
tive Semitic Religion To-day (Chicago, 1902).

20 It is estimated that the Haj brings over one hundred thousand
Moslems each year to Mecca.

235


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

money together to purchase a substitute. The railroad
communication now established from Damascus to Medina
will further stimulate the pious to increased efforts to
obtain the wherewithal to carry out the obligation to
imitate the example set by the prophet. To acquire the
title of Hajji, bestowed on the one who has been to
Mecca, insures a through passage at death to Paradise.

If the Haj is the visible bond uniting all Moslems
into a single vast community, another requirement served
to establish the economic basis of Mohammedanism —
the sakat or " poor tax." In the case of the three " pillars
of the faith " that we have been discussing — prayer, fast-
ing in the month of Ramadan, and the Haj — we have
illustrations of the powerful personal influence of the
prophet. These duties are obligatory because of the ex-
ample set by the prophet. Two of them are due to direct
adaptations from Judaism and Christianity respectively,
while the third is of native origin, emphasizing a dis-
tinctively Arabic phase of the religion. The zakat has
a more complicated history. At its start it appears to
have been a " charity " contribution for the support of
the poor. As such it is a tribute to the prophet's humani-
tarian instincts, and indeed throughout the Koran there
is the strongest possible emphasis upon kindness to the
poor, and protection for the widow and orphan. " The
poor ye will always have with you " is accepted as an
axiom and it is assumed that every follower of Moham-
med is charitably inclined. " Prayer," a caliph is made
to say, " carries us half-way to Allah, fasting brings us
to the door of His palace, but alms-giving procures us
admission."

To understand this emphasis we must take into con-
sideration the unregulated economic conditions of the
ancient East, which still exist at the present time. The
poor are an element of the copulation in every town and
village as distinct as are the traders, the workers, the

236


MOHAMMEDANISM

learned and the state officials. The view is not uncommon
that the poor exist in order to evoke the charitable spirit
of mankind. It is Allah who makes the poor and the
rich. The poor man is in some respects a privileged
character, since he is the cause of storing up " merit " 21
for oneself by dispensing charity, a merit of which one
will reap the reward when the day of judgment comes.

The zakat, however, came to serve an entirely different
purpose, dictated by the conditions that arose with the
two- fold aspect of Islam as a religion and a state. Instead
of being a voluntary contribution for the support of the
poor, the zakat was made a legal assessment to form part
of a revenue for the state — a tax imposed upon every one,
which in ' time led to many ramifications. The zakat
was the starting-point for the development of a com-
munity or state budget. To this day the legal fiction
of the zakat is maintained as the basis of governmental
taxes and a distinction was introduced between the zakat
as a compulsory contribution, and sadakat (" charity")
as voluntary alms-giving in addition to the zakat. This
"pillar" of the faith thus furnishes an illustration of
the combination of state functions with religious duties,
so characteristic of the theocratic form of government
which developed with the spread of political power
through the conquests of the Arabs.

The combination of church and state in Islam led to
other features, quite distinct from those which resulted
from the same process in Christianity. Islam never de-
veloped a priesthood in any real sense. The civil and
religious authority was concentrated in the caliph to an
extent for which no parallel exists in the Christian states
of Europe. As the Mohammedan power split up into
several caliphates, in rivalry with one another, complica-
tions, to be sure, ensued which were only partially set

M Zakat conveys the idea of " merit " ; as does the corresponding
word in Hebrew, sekuth.

237


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

aside by the establishment of the Turkish Empire in
control of the entire Mohammedan world. In theory,
however, the Sultan is the head of the church as well as
of the state. Opposition to that authority is based on its
supposed illegitimacy, for neither the Shiites nor a great
body of those who follow Sunna were ever reconciled to

._- recognizing the Sultan of Turkey as the real successor
of Mohammed. That opposition grew in strength as the
Turkish Empire began to crumble, until to-day only a
small proportion of the Mohammedan world feels bound
to follow the authority of the Sultan, even when he calls
the faithful to enter upon a jihad — a crusade for the
preservation of the faith. As a concession to the religious
supremacy of Islam, the Sultan nominally recognizes the
authority of an official known as the Sheikh el-Islam,

- " the Chief of Islam," who enforces the decisions of the
Turkish state by an endorsement in the name of the re-
ligion. Naturally such a " chief," resident in Constanti-
nople, is merely a creature of the state, so that his author-
ity is largely nominal. The revolt of Arabia since the
outbreak of the war 22 is merely the last of various at-
tempts to reestablish a central form of theocratic gov-

n ernment with the religious factor as the dominating one.
A union, however, of Mohammedans that should be
at once political and religious is a hopeless task, as hope-
less as any such union in Christendom. Even under the
dominion of orthodoxy such unions were condemned to
failure. The rise of Protestantism marked the failure
in the greatest attempt at such a combination that had
ever been made. Catholicism came nearer to success,
because of its efficient organization and because of the
powerful aid given by a strong priesthood. But even
Catholicism could not prevent a split between Eastern
and Western Christianity. With the growing strength of

a See Snouck Hurgronje's account, The Revolt in Arabia. Eng-
lish translation by Prof. Richard Gottheil, New York, 1916.

238


MOHAMMEDANISM

national consciousness in the states of Western Europe,
its power even over Western Christianity steadily declined
until the final break between Church and State came,
inaugurated by the Protestant Reformation. As indi-
cated, the process proceeded along different lines in Islam,
but the issue was identical. The Mohammedan state
projected by Mohammed was doomed to failure, but the
religion founded by him will survive this failure, as Chris-
tianity survived the separation of Church and State,
which, with the growing force of democracy in govern-
ment, becomes an absolute divorce.

At present, with the infusion of Western ideas and
strong Western influences into Mohammedan lands, Islam
may be said to be on trial, even in a more decided sense
. than Christianity, which is feeling the force of the new
currents of thought, brought on by the discoveries in the
realm of the natural sciences. Will Islam be able to adapt
itself after its long intellectual isolation from outside cur-
rents to the new conditions demanded by the inevitable
changes, superinduced by rhode'rn thought, "modern ihodes
of life and modern political drift?

The strength of Islam has always consisted in the
simplicity of its doctrines, despite the elaborate theological
systems constructed in the course of centuries around
these doctrines. The first " pillarof faith," a3 the procla-
mation of the unity of Allah, emphasizing the thought of
unity in the phenomena of the universe, is not difficult to
grasp in its Islamic form, which leaves room, as we have
seen, for the persistent popular beliefs in good and evil
demons that alternately aid and check the efforts of man.
The ritual, except for the obligation of prayer five times
daily, is not burdensome. Life hitherto in the East has
not been over-strenuous. Time is a cheap commodity,

"The five " pillars," as above set forth, are usually enumerated
as follows: (i) Shahada, the witness to the faith in the unity of
Allah; (2) Salat, prayer; (3) Zakat, the poor-tax; (4) Saum, fast-
ing during Ramadan; and (5) the Haj, the pilgrimage to Mecca.

239


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

and to turn aside from one's toil for a brief prayer ser-
vice which may be performed anywhere is not as onerous
as it would be in our over-busy Western world. Besides,
the obligation has never been strictly observed by the
great masses. The pilgrimage to Mecca is a wonderful
excursion — a great experience in one's life; and a religion
that thus imposes travel as an obligation need have no
fear of diminishing the attachment to it. The fasting in
Ramadan is a burden, though cheerfully borne, as is the
sakat because of the assurance of reward for the " merit "
thus acquired. Taking over from Jews and Christians
the doctrine of enjoyment of a perpetual Paradise for
the pious, Mohammed improved upon the models by
painting the joys of eternal bliss in colors specially adapted
to lure the untutored nomads, living in a land where the
dearth of water entails hardships and where life suffers
from its monotony. To look forward to life in a garden
where luscious fruits are to be had for the picking, where
water flows in abundance and where black-eyed damsels
are ready to serve and to attend to all one's needs, wa9
calculated to make a strong appeal to others as well as to
the nomad, by its contrast to agriculture, with its rela-
tively hard conditions of life. In the Biblical description
of primeval Paradise, on which the picture of the joys
in store after death for those who have lived a life
according to the dictates of religion is based, there is the
same contrast between the ideal state of the gardener
who has merely to stretch forth his hand to obtain his
food, lying under the shadow of trees on the banks of
cooling rivers, as against the agriculturist who cultivates
the soil in the sweat of his brow.

The ethics of Islajm are simple. Fair dealings with
one's neighbors and kindness towards animals may be
said to sum up the chief virtues, though they must be
supplemented by the performance of the religious duties
and the obligation to have one's children instructed in the

240


MOHAMMEDANISM

teachings of Islam. Abstinence from strong drink, em-
phasized by Mohammed in connection with his general
Opposition towards the luxuries that accompany a higher
culture, 24 made for simple habits of life and encouraged
a self-restraint that acted wholesomely in other respects.
Though on the whole an austere religion, Islam did not
discourage the cultivation of the fine arts, 25 though with
a restriction against the reproduction of the human figure.
It directly promoted literature, with the exclusion, to be
sure, of the drama, and furthered science, more particu-
larly medicine and mathematics, by the side of historiog-
raphy, geography and jurisprudence, bound up, however,
with the theological legalism. Nor should we forget our
debt to the Mohammedan theologians and thinkers who
transmitted the teachings of Aristotle, albeit that they
gave to his speculations a Mohammedan garb.

Up to the present the indications are that Moham-
medanism can absorb Western influences to a certain
extent without either losing its character or its hold on
the masses. The impression one receives on a visit to
Egypt where contact with the West is direct is that merely
the surface of Islam has been touched by the infusion of
Western modes of life. The old incrustated culture of
the East, so indissolubly bound up with Islam, stands
proof against attacks, at least to the extent of preserving
all its essential features.

Just here is the crux of the problem. Islam is more
than a religion — it is a distinct form of civilization, just
as Christianity is part and parcel of European and Amer-
ican civilization, and as Buddhism is bound up with the

24 Viniculture encounters opposition in the Old Testament as
against agriculture, which is the ideal state — to be preferred to
commerce and city life. See a paper by the writer, " Wine in the
Pentateuchal Codes," Journal of the American Oriental Society,
33: 180-192.

a On Mohammedan art in its various ramifications, see the
magnificent work of Sarre and Martin, Muhammedanische Kunst
(3 vols., Munich, 1912).

16 241


/


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Hindu attitude towards life. In a contact between two
civilizations as distinct from one another as the Islamic
East and the Christian West there seems to be no possi-
bility of a mutual approach. Certainly, one may question
whether missionary efforts, however praiseworthy and
however zealously and skilfully conducted, will ever
bring about such an approach — perhaps in part for the
reason that on the purely religious and ethical side Islam
has so much in common with Christianity, though differ-
ing, to be sure, in some essentials. Professor Snouck
Hurgronje, 26 indeed, looks hopefully towards the future.
He believes that an understanding between Islam and the
modern world (which is the Western world) is possible,
though he does not tell us what this understanding will be.
He resents the implication of Kipling's poetical despair,

East is East, and West is West,
And never the twain shall meet,

and regards it as " almost a blasphemy " so far as the
Moslem world, which he knows so well, is concerned.
And yet one cannot see how Islamic (which is Oriental)
culture can yield to Western influences beyond a certain
limit without entering upon a distintegrating process.

This from many points of view would be regrettable.
After all, are we not in danger of over-emphasizing the
value of unity which may lead to a dull uniformity? Our
aim should rather be a unity of ideals, while recognizing
that there are various paths leading to these ideals.
Mohammedan culture, tied to Islamic beliefs, is one of
these paths, mapped out by the course of history in
Eastern lands. The failure of Islam to find a footing
in Western Europe or in this country is a significant in-
dication of its limitation, while responding instinctively
to the Eastern outlook on life. Looking on Islam as
an expression of the Eastern mood, it seems safe to pre-

29 Mohammedanism, p. 177.

242


MOHAMMEDANISM

diet that it will disappear only with the eclipse of the
civilization of which it forms an integral part. One may
conceive of a complete conquest of the East by the West
without a disappearance of Eastern civilization or the
extinction of the Oriental spirit — so totally different from
its Occidental counterpart.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

The Koran, best English translation by E. H. Palmer, in The Sacred

Books of the East, vols. 6 and 9, Oxford, 1880.
C. Snouck Hurgronje: Mohammedanism, New York, 1916.

C. Snouck Hurgronje : Mekka, The Hague, 1888, 2 vols, and port-

folio of Illustrations.

D. S. Margoliouth : Early Development of Mohammedanism, Lon-

don, IQ14.
D. S. Margoliouth : Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, New York,

190S.

Ignaz Goldziher: Mohammed and Islam, translated from the Ger-
man by Mrs. L. H. Seelye, Yale Press, 1917. (Corrected edition
to be issued in 1918.)

Traugott Mann: Der Islam: Einst und Jetst, Leipzig, 1914 (elab-
orately illustrated).

Richard F. Burton: Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to Al-
Medinah and Meccah (many editions).

T. W. Arnold: The Preaching of Islam, second edition, London,
1914. An admirable survey of the spread of Islam throughout
the world and its present status.

The Mohammedan World of To-day (papers on present-day con-
ditions by'Christian Missionaries), New York, 1906.


343


CHAPTER X

THE RELIGION OF GREECE
BY WALTER WOODBURN HYDE

In this chapter it is my task to treat the first of the
historical religions which grew up on European soil —
that of the Greeks. In many fundamentals of its de-
veloped form it differed from the religions already
treated, although it was profoundly influenced through-
out its history by the religious ideas of the near Orient,
especially Egypt. The record is a long and varied one,
for Greek religion continued on the higher plane of an-
thropomorphic polytheism for a period of at least two
thousand years, back of which stretched long ages of a
pre-anthropomorphic past. During its whole evolution
it was quite unchecked by any tradition of revelation or
by sacerdotal dogma. It adapted itself easily to all the
changes in the social, political and intellectual history of
the most gifted of peoples, continually assimilating new
and foreign ideas, and in its later periods it was pro-
foundly influenced by the greatest poets, philosophers and
artists. It was, in fact, part and parcel of Greek civiliza-
tion and outlook on life and it shows the same mobility,
the same love of freedom and capability of progress which
we see in all phases of Greek culture, — characteristics in
general absent from the Oriental religions, which tended*
to crystallize early into fixed and dogmatic types.

GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS

At the outset, before entering upon a historical ac-
count of this religion, I will indicate a few of these char-
acteristics of the developed form which it assumed in the
Classical period of Greece. The first thing to strike us

244


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

is the absence of many ideas common to most of the
Eastern religions. Whereas these generally emphasized
certain dogmas, Greek religion was primarily a matter
not of belief at all, but of practice. The Greeks had no
dogmas, no creeds, no sacred writings. Their religion
had no founder and never felt the need of a reformer.
They had no idea of any revelation of the divine will to
men except in particular instances, and their religion
never pretended to judge the lives of men from an ethical
standpoint ; it acted far more as a stimulus than as a re-
straint to their consciences. It left little room, therefore,
for a Hebrew prophet or an inspired preacher or teacher.
The Greek gods were not looked upon as holy nor omnipo-
tent; they were removed but a little way in character and
power from mortals. The idea of deifying living men,
which assumed such proportions in the later centuries,
was itself an evidence of the almost human character of
these gods. The idea that the gods cared for men was a
late conception. There were, to be sure, certain hymns
to the gods, like the so-called Homeric Hymns, and there
were prayer formulae for special occasions, like the rain-
prayer of the Athenians, along with elaborate rituals at
various shrines for certain festivals and expiations for
public and private use. Perhaps certain views of the God-
head and versions of legends about the gods and heroes
might enjoy exceptional authority, such as would justify
their being called, in a very qualified sense, orthodox. But
even if, in this sense, Homer and Hesiod were repre-
sentative of Greek orthodoxy, their poems never formed
a Bible; nothing was systematized nor compiled in writ-
ing even for a single state; the priesthood was never
hereditary, as were those of the Brahmans and Egyptians,
and, furthermore, the priests never had any office of in-
struction or exhortation.

This absence of a founder, sacred writings and uni-
form priesthood resulted in the extreme freedom of Greek

245


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

religion. This was merely a reflection of Greek political
freedom. The contrast between the physical features of
the Balkan peninsula, in which Hellenic civilization
evolved, and those of Egypt and Mesopotamia, has often
been made. Whereas the valleys of the Nile and Eu-
phrates, unbroken by natural boundaries and enjoying the
same climate and products, were predestined by their
configuration to become not only cradles of culture, but
early to be united into powerful states, which developed
a uniformity of culture largely excluding change, Greece,
on the other hand, broken up into valleys by intersecting
ranges of hills and surrounded on three sides by the sea,
whose gulfs and bays penetrated far into the land and
made natural ways of communication, was predestined to
just the opposite — variety of climate, products and occu-
pations, and consequently had a different history. The
City-State grew up to live its own life in its own sur-
roundings. This political particularism was nowhere
better reflected than in Greek religion. As each City-
State had its own constitution, just so it had its own
worship and cycle of gods. As there was no political
centralization, no national state until the latest days, there
was no national religion. Instead there was a great di-
versity of cults in various towns and the only authority
in religious matters was the local shrine tradition. To
be sure, a community of beliefs and practices among neigh-
boring states might at times result in larger units, religious
confederacies or amphictyonies around a common shrine.
A few such shrines, like those of Apollo at Delphi and
Zeus at Dodona, might in course of time become recognized
by all Greeks and vitally influence their religious and
moral ideas. Such unions were always exceptional and
seldom made for much unity of ideas or conformity in
externals. Everything in Greece — physical conditions,
differences in blood, in dialect, in culture — tended to pro-
duce variety and idiosyncrasy in states and individuals

246


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

and these were all reflected in religion. However, I
must add that amid all this local variation there was a
certain uniformity of religious psychology which uncon-
sciously tended toward similar beliefs and practices, and,
consequently, in a summary account of Greek religion, we
can loosely speak as if there were a uniform system more
or less true of all Greece, even if it does not apply in
detail to any one state. As a whole, then, the religion of
the Greeks had a physiognomy of its own, very different
on the one hand from that of the Vedic Hindus, or that
of the Romans on the other.

Another characteristic was the marked tendency in
Greece to subordinate the priest to the civil magistrate.
Priests were appointed as state officials; temples were
built and maintained by state moneys and religious law
was administered by state courts. Thus the priests, chosen
by lot or elected for a time by the community, were in no
sense the final authority in religious matters ; they merely
carried out the vote of the assembly under the direction
of the magistrates, so that religious authority was really
vested in the people and no Greek City-State ever became
theocratic. The priests were in no sense teachers, but
were bound only to maintain and perform the traditional
ritual service at the altar they served. This shrine ritual
was the result of centuries of evolution, constantly chang-
ing as it passed from generation to generation, ever tend-
ing toward unity of belief in the worshipers, but never
compelling it. It could not stand for long in the way of
secular advance nor moral progress. On the contrary,
speculation and progress were looked upon as divine
attributes. As Farnell says: "The religion of Hellas
penetrated the whole life of the people, but rather as a
servant than as a master." Apart from the public wor-
ship there were many mystic cults where newer and more
advanced ideas might be taught, thus breaking the bar-
riers of tribal and civic cults. Consequently every Greek

247


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

had great latitude in his beliefs. We may infer from a
remark of the Platonic Socrates that the Athenians in
general cared little what a man believed so long as he
did not proselyte. Aristophanes could ridicule and Eurip-
ides could doubt the popular beliefs; but no one could
openly proclaim disbelief in the existence of the gods or
refuse to join in the public worship. As religious beliefs
were never settled, there was no danger of a Greek being
cast out of the synagogue or the priesthood for holding
views different from those of other people. He merely
had to refrain from publicly preaching doctrines which
might be construed as interfering with the orders of the
State. Religious persecution, then, occupies little space
in the story of the Greeks. Before Alexander's time it
was dangerous to introduce foreign cults into Greece, not
only because they were at variance with the recognized
State worship, but also because their orgiastic spirit was
repellent to Greek taste. Anaxagoras, the philosopher,
was tried for doubting the gods and Protagoras, the
sophist, was banished, and, worst of all, Socrates was put
to death on the ground of ridiculing them. However,
these were all exceptional cases and none of them can be
shown to have been wholly inspired by religious feelings.
The slaying of Socrates was unique and, whatever may
be said, was a stain on the history of Athens, entirely
out of place in a city so vaunting of its freedom. To us
Socrates seems a noble character,- the greatest glory of
the city which saw fit to kill him. Dogmatic intolerance,
however, had little to do with this crime, which appears to
have been mainly political. He was not a thorough-going
democrat and did not believe in the " bean " ; anything
savoring of oligarchy in 399 B.C., only a few years after
the expulsion of the Thirty Tyrants, was odious and this
doubtless aroused the suspicions of his judges. But the im-
mediate cause of so strange a verdict may be found rather
in the circumstances of his trial — the independent bearing

248


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

of the old man, his flat refusal to change his mode of life,
his contempt of resorting to the usual appeals to pity,
and, above all, the insolence of his counter penalty — to be
kept for the rest of his life at the Prytaneum at the public
expense as the honored guest and benefactor of Athens, —
in short, his careless, defiant attitude, which fanned into
flame the old embers of political distrust.

In the Classical period the chief thing to impress the
worshiper was the pomp and ceremony of the public
worship — the beautiful temples, the artistic cult statues,
the stately processions and the solemn ritual. In all this
we see the characteristics of a people endowed beyond all
others with a sense of the beautiful and a capacity to enjoy
life, who worshiped gods in whom they saw their own
ideals. Consider the glorious frieze of the Parthenon and
imagine how in the days of Pericles the great Panathenaic
procession, the most brilliant worship with which Athena
was honored at Athens, moved in stately wise from the
lower city up through the Propylaea to the Acropolis
and then along both sides of this most beautiful of all
Greek temples to its eastern front. Such a procession,
leading beasts for sacrifice and carrying the sacred robe
of the virgin goddess, which had been woven by chosen
matrons and maidens, was representative of all that was
noblest in Athenian worship. Archons and lesser magis-
trates, bands of men and youths chosen for their beauty,
maidens of the noblest families carrying sacrificial vessels
and implements, representatives of allied and tributary
states, resident aliens, musicians and attendants — all took
part, escorted by chariots and knights with military pomp.
In their midst, at the sacrifice and offering of the robe,
sat the invisible gods in assembly, the guests of Athena.
No god was ever worshiped more gloriously than by this
galaxy of beautiful forms moving along with its wealth
of color in the luminous atmosphere of the city of the

249


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

violet crown amid the immortal monuments of those
mortal men.

Beauty was not the only feature of Greek worship, for
joyousness was also there. Religion rested lightly on the
shoulders of the Greek. He was not oppressed by any
deep sense of sin; he thought well of himself and not
too well of his gods. If he only avoided the graver
offenses against morality and especially the amour propre
of his gods, he had little to fear. The ever-recurring
festivals, celebrated with music and processions, accom-
panied by theatrical, gymnastic or orchestral competitions,
were real holidays. Even if the opening days of some
of these festivals, like the Spartan Hyacinthia, were sad,
they generally ended with feasting and dancing. Sacri-

i fices and prayers were intended not so much for expiation
as for asking and acknowledging blessings received from
the gods. When in sickness or danger the Greek made
his vows, and on recovery or escape he religiously paid
them. Plato tells us he prayed morning and evening and
concluded every meal with hymn and prayer ; but of course
such devotions would become as perfunctory to the Greeks
as our table blessings have become to us.

The Greek, then, delighted in the beautiful and joyous
side of worship, but we must not fall into the mistake of
concluding that his religion was all beauty and joy, just
because that side of it meets us most often in his literature
and art. As sunlight cannot exist without shadow, Greek
worship also had a darker side. Calamities would come

/ upon individuals and states and these would be laid at the
door of malignant or offended deities. Great criminals
were followed then as now by the avenging furies of con-
science. There was also much in Greek religion that was
repulsive and ugly. Many lower forms were retained,
even if moribund, to the latest times side by side with
higher ones. These cannot be ascribed to Oriental origin,
for nothing is more Greek than some of the grossest of

250


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

them. Nor is it reasonable to class as foreign everything
in Greek civilization which clashes with our ideal of the
Greeks. Greek mythology contained many repulsive ele-
ments, which were constantly denounced by ancient
writers like Pindar, Euripides and Plato. Many of these
beliefs must have had a deleterious effect on morality.
The forms of worship and the sacred formulae were, how-
ever, in the main pure and refined. There was never
any orgiastic spirit in Greek religion. There was no sex-
ual defilement in the early temples, no licentiousness in the
" sacred marriage " at Eleusis or elsewhere, even if the
Church Fathers insinuated it. There is little evidence to
show that the worship of Aphrodite was, generally speak-
ing, any less decorous than that of other goddesses. Her
statues were draped down to the time of Praxiteles and
the Hellenistic sculptures which realistically portray the
physical charms of the Phrynes of the time are no more
concerned with the real religion of the Greeks than the
fleshy voluptuous Magdalenes of Rubens are with
Christianity. We hear much of sanctified prostitution in
her honor, but it was mostly late and confined to a few
temples, as those of Cyprus and Eryx, Cythera and
Corinth. Phallic ritual was rare and for the most part
confined to vegetation cults and the philosophical litera-
ture of Greece made little protest against it. In short,
if Greek religion had a dark side, it was never prominent.
Great artists, thinkers and poets found deep meaning
in the popular worship. Such minds as ^Eschylus,
Sophocles, Socrates and Plato were deeply religious and
found both truth and comfort in the people's faith. Aris-
totle said the name " father " applied to Zeus included
the idea of his loving care of men. St. Paul (Acts 18:
28) quoted a late Greek poet, Aratus, to the effect that
" we are his offspring." The Stoic Cleanthes, in his beau-
tiful hymn, says much the same words — even if he meant
thereby that human reason was a fragment of the divine.

251


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

/ The humanness of the gods and the divineness of men
were never more clearly felt than by the Greeks. While
the Hebrew taught that man was made in God's image,
the Greek made his gods in the image of men. Where
men are mortal gods, the gods are merely immortal men.
With all the freedom and formalism of Greek worship,
the question has often been raised as to whether the
Greeks were really religious. If religion consists in a
belief in a power or powers higher than men ; if it is a
longing for protection and sympathy from them, and if
prayer and sacrifice and the wish to propitiate them are
religious acts, the Greeks were truly religious. The mate-
rial of religion in its two departments of theology and
ritual was much the same in Greece as elsewhere — sacri-
fice and offering, prayer and hymn, propitiation and
thanksgiving, purification and expiation, magical rites,
belief in ghosts and demons, ancestor and clan worship
and the formation of a pantheon. These elements are the
common stock of religion among all peoples of similar
degrees of culture ; what was characteristic of the Greeks
was not the material, but the way in which it was handled.
Where the Australian stopped, the Greek passed on.
Every Greek town had more shrines than a modern city
has churches. You remember how Paul's spirit was
provoked within him as he beheld Athens full of idols
and found the Athenians " somewhat superstitious "
,(Acts 16: 16, 23). He came upon altars not only to
many gods but to an " Unknown God " erected in Athens
as elsewhere to correct any possible omission. The Greek
calendar was at first invented merely to determine the
festivals. Greek religious imagination was continually
tending to become the impulse to two other forms of
activity — art, both literary and plastic, and philosophy.
Greek art was always the handmaid of religion and would
have satisfied even Tolstoy's definition. Greek literature
was saturated with religion. The drama was religious

252


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

in origin and development. Greek philosophy was always
theological in character. Greek law was religious in its
origin and development. Even the athletic games were
religious in origin and spirit, always associated with the
worship of gods and heroes, and were among the strong-
est Pan-Hellenic influences, making not only for nation-
ality, but also for a broader religion than that of tribe
or city.

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE STUDY OF GREEK RELIGION

The scientific study of Greek religion as distinct from
mythology is very recent; it may almost be said to be
the work of the last generation of scholars. Only through
the recent development of anthropology and comparative
religion has it become possible finally to classify it in
the world's creeds and appreciate its importance for the
history of culture. It seems strange that the religions
of India and China — to say nothing of those of savage
races — should have been studied so long to the almost
total neglect of the religions of Greece and Rome. Even
yet, most people, to whom the superiority of Greek
poetry, philosophy and art is an axiom, doubt whether
the study of Greek religion is really worth while. Through
its association with a romantic, though not always edify-
ing mythology, it has been looked upon as an inferior
product of the gifted Greeks. Yet we know now that it
has the same beauty and imagination which we have long
recognized in other phases of Greek civilization and that
the Hellenic spirit shows itself here quite as worthily
as elsewhere. Apart from any such general considera-
tion, there are also very definite reasons why we should
study the religion of the Greeks. The student of re-
ligious origins finds in it material which, for variety and
detail, has no equal in any other religion. The student
of history finds that in this phase of her culture, as in
all others, Greece began at the beginning and struggled

253


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

slowly upwards to the mountain tops. During its long
course over centuries Greek religion never suffered from
any internal revolution so that the deposits of earlier ages
were never entirely obliterated, but to the last these im-
prints of the successive periods of culture through which
the Hellenic race passed were preserved; thus their re-
ligion reveals to us more clearly than anything else the
evolution of the Greeks from savagery. As Gilbert Mur-
ray says : " There is hardly any horror of primitive super-
stition of which we cannot find some distant trace in our
Greek record. There is hardly any height of spiritual
thought attained in the world that has not its archetype
or its echo in the stretch of Greek literature that lies
between Thales and St. Paul." 1

Lastly, we must not forget that the potency of this
religion did not end with the greatness of Greece, but con-
tinued on into later Europe. It was not blotted out by
Christianity. On the contrary, whatever real power it
had, passed over into the ideas and forms of our own
religion to such an extent that one could maintain that
Greek religion has exercised indirectly as much influence
on the various phases of modern religious life as mythol-
ogy has on modern literatures. The influence of the re-
ligion of Greece on Christianity is too complex a subject
to be more than hinted at in this connection. That ancient
rites should have persisted in the Eastern Church under
the cover of the new religion, and that ancient gods and
heroes should reappear as saints, is not so surprising when
we reflect on the summary way in which Constantine
established the new faith. It was not difficult to convert
the Parthenon into a Christian church, when the virgin
goddess of wisdom was supplanted first by St. Sophia and
later by Mary. Similarly, it was easy to replace Apollo
by St. George and Poseidon by St. Nicholas, the patron
saint of sailors. Nor should we be surprised when we

1 Four Stages of Greek Religion, 1912, p. 16.

254


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

see an old Greek rite celebrated now by a Greek priest.
The influence of Greek theology and philosophy on Chris-
tian belief can be directly traced in the changes wrought
in the concept of Christianity, when it had to be cast into
a new mould to meet the changed atmosphere from Pales-
tine to Europe. Though the influence of the old ritual
on the plastic ritual of the early church cannot be traced
so easily, it may be said in general that the simplicity
of the primitive Christian sacrament gradually had given
way by the fifth century to the richly developed ritual of
the church, which was only an evolution of ancient Greek
rites.

Miss Harrison has shown why this study has been
neglected until these later years. In the first place it was
not studied as a whole but in only one phase — mythology.
As Greek myths were necessary to an understanding of
Greek literature, the confusion between mythology and
religion was fatal to a proper appreciation of the latter.
As every reader of the classics learned about the Greek
gods through the myths, it was easy to think that mythol-
ogy and religion were identical, though, as a matter of
fact, there is little connection between them. Myths,
however beautiful, can hardly have inspired religious
sentiments. Sometimes they reflect the ritual and again
they were invented to explain it and thus contain im-
portant cult ideas. But in general Greek myths were
utterly irresponsible; poets could select or change them
at will to suit their immediate purpose. Thus in the Iliad
the Apollo of Book I, worshiped by Chryses, and the
Apollo of Book XVI, who wounds Patroclus from behind
on the field of battle, have little in common. Myths fre-
quently fell below the level of the current worship which
was always free of the impurities which we see in the
former. Again, the mythology which was studied by
classical students was looked upon as ancillary to litera-
ture and not to religion. Moreover, it was distorted by

2SS


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Alexandrine and Roman literature. It is not so long ago
that scholars called the Greek gods by Latin names, and
the mistake still keeps up among lovers of classical litera-
ture. We now know that even if Zeus and Jupiter,
Athena and Minerva, were akin, they were not identical.
Scholars have by now largely corrected the nomenclature,
but we are still prone to give Alexandrine or Roman
natures to the Greek gods, making them the ornamental
gods of an artificial literature. We no longer call Eros
Cupid, but we do think of him as a naughty little cherub
with bow and arrows, just as the Alexandrine poets and
Ovid conceived him. Such an idea would surely have
astonished the worshipers of his own city of Thespise,
where his most ancient image was an unwrought stone.
We now know also that Dionysus was not a beautiful god
of wine, but an ancient tree-spirit once worshiped as a
pillar, and that the Sirens, instead of being bewitching
mermaids, were curious bird-demons with women's heads.

RECENT ACCESSIONS TO OUR KNOWLEDGE OF GREEK
RELIGION

A change has come. The religions of Greece and
Rome are now scientifically studied and are no longer
looked upon as identical, but almost as different as any
two religions can be. Greek religion is no longer studied
for the purposes of mythology only, but as an important
factor in the spiritual history of the race, an integral part
of Greek civilization. However, it does not owe every-
thing to a reform in the methods of study, but also to
recent accessions of material through archaeological in-
vestigations. Instead of now going to Alexandrine or
Roman literature to learn about the Greek gods, we supple-
ment the knowledge we gain from the Greek writers by
a study of every particle of evidence unearthed by the
spade — vase paintings, wall paintings, statues, bronzes,
terra-cottas, cult objects, inscriptions. Especially have

256


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

the earlier periods of Greek religion been enriched by ex-
cavations on prehistoric sites. The revelation of a pre-
Hellenic culture in the .3£gean area, due, in the first
instance, to the discoveries of Schliemann beginning in
the seventies at Troy, Tiryns, Mycenae and elsewhere and
culminating in those of Evans and others carried on since
1900 on the island of Crete, has! revolutionized our
knowledge of prehistoric Greece and added new and
striking chapters not only to Greek history but to Greek
religion. We can no longer call the Greeks young in com-
parison with the Oriental peoples, nor can we any longer
indulge our fancy into believing that Greek civilization
was a thing unexampled in history, rising almost at a
bound out of nothing to its heights of splendor, as the
walls of Ilium were fabled to have risen beneath the
hands of their divine builders, for we now know that
obscure millennia preceded its supposedly sudden bloom.
The recent discoveries in Crete have profoundly changed
all our ideas of the antiquity of the earliest European
culture. Not even have the remarkable discoveries of the
last generation made in Egypt and in Mesopotamia re-
vealed to us a world so new and unexpected as that dis-
closed to us in the palaces of Crete. To classical students
of twenty years ago Crete was hardly more than a land
of legendary heroes. Many stories told us of Cnossus, of
Minos's realm, of his Labyrinth and its strange prisoner
the Minotaur, of Theseus and Ariadne, of Dsedalus and
Icarus, the first aeronauts. Historians, like Grote, had
looked upon the period between these legends and the
historical age as a great gulf of darkness behind which
we could never hope to go. Greek history began with
the first Olympiad; even the return of the Heraclidse
and the Dorian invasion were looked upon as chiefly
fanciful. Homer's poems were read because of their
transcendent poetic value, but the scenes which he de-
scribes were supposed to be imaginary projections on the

25Z


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

past of his own age, behind which lay the wasteland of
legend. When, in 1878, Schliemann discovered the tombs
of Mycenae he naively imagined that he had found the
actual skeletons of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra and
beheld their features in the gold-foil death masks found
with them, and that he had recovered the very cup out of
which Nestor had drunk, the pigeons still intact on the
handles. This arouses our humor now, for we know that
these were the tombs of the first kings of Mycenae, who,
perhaps, had come from Crete long before when the town
was built. But the historicity of the golden court of the
Atridse cannot be disposed of so easily. Walter Leaf,
in his very recent book on Homer, finds it reasonable to
look upon the Homeric heroes as historical characters
instead of " faded gods," and believes it quite possible
that the quarrel of Agamemnon and Achilles, as staged in
the Iliad, was an actual incident which took place in the
Achaean camp and that it may have seriously affected the
campaign against Ilium. la

Though Schliemann's discoveries produced in his day
more wonder than scientific results, we now know that he
proved the existence of a civilization which was the origi-
nal of Homer's descriptions, though far older, for the
divine poet sang of a golden past. It was not, however,
until Evans and Halbherr, followed by scholars of Eng-
land, Italy and America, had unearthed the palaces of
the sea-kings of Crete, that we discovered that we —
with more daring than the fabled Icarus — had flown
right over the heads, not only of the historical Greeks,
but of Homer's heroes as well, for we learned that this
^gean culture must have antedated by many centuries
the building of the walls and galleries of Tiryns. We
then learned that the period which Schliemann had called
Mycenaean — the term applied to the palaces, houses,
tombs, pottery, weapons, gems and ornaments which,

*• Homer and History, 1915, p. 29.

258


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

wherever found, exhibit a more or less striking similarity
to those laid bare on the citadel of Mycenas — was merely
the decadence of a far richer culture whose centre was
Crete, and that behind Homer's pictures were centuries
of development of which neither he nor the historical
Greeks had any inkling. We now know that this ^Egean
civilization, properly so-called, extended over Crete,
Southern Greece and the isles of the .ZEgean, while an-
other, proven by its pottery to be different, grew up
subsidiary to or parallel with it in Central and Northern
Greece, at Troy and on the island of Cyprus. In the Late
Bronze Age — corresponding to the " Great Palace "
period at Cnossus and the succeeding Mycenaean period
of the mainland, and contemporary with the XVIII
and XIX Egyptian dynasties (c. 1 600-1 200 b.c.) — the
^Egean civilization, radiating from Crete, influenced this
other independent culture at Troy, in the sixth of the
nine buried cities on the hill at Hissarlik, and replaced or
overlaid it in Thessaly and Cyprus. The JEgean culture,
though borrowing much from Egypt and probably from
the Hittite peoples of Asia Minor, was an indigenous one,
evolved among the primitive dark-skinned peoples who
inhabited the whole eastern basin of the Mediterranean
for countless centuries before Homer's fair-skinned
Achseans wrested the sovereignty from their degenerate
descendants. A brief account, therefore, of the iEgean
religious ideas and practices, as we learn of them espe-
cially in Crete, forms a necessary preface to the early re-
ligion of the same Mediterranean stock, which grew up
more or less independently on the mainland of Greece,
where it formed the substratum of the historical Greek
religion. The problems of this Minoan-Mycenaean relig-
ion are not yet ready for final settlement, but we can draw
certain definite conclusions from the evidence so far ac-
cumulated. We can understand something of the ritual
of those early days and something of the deities to whom

259


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

it was addressed ; but until the script, now lying unread on
the tablets from the Cretan palaces, shall have found its
Champollion, we shall know little of its theology.

THE PREHISTORIC jEGEAN RELIGION

One of the chief characteristics of this Mediterranean
cult is the fact that palace and temple were not yet differ-
entiated. Sacred caves and gorges were venerated as the
dwelling of deity, but the only religious structures dis-
covered are a small chapel in the palace at Cnossus and
miniature shrines for domestic worship. But the re-
ligious element in the frescoes which decorated the palace
walls tells us that a large part of the building was devoted
to cult purposes and has led Sir Arthur Evans to believe,
on the analogy of the priest-king in the characteristic
Anatolian cult of Cybele, that the king was at the same
time the high-priest.

It is certain that the Minoans had arrived at the stage
of theism in very early days and their religion appears
to have been from the beginning a nature cult. They
embodied their chief concept of deity in feminine form,
a sort of Great Mother, whom the later Greeks identified
with Rhea. Most scholars, following the lead of Evans
and Hogarth, have interpreted this deity as a nature
goddess, whose care, like that of Browning's Artemis,
embraced all creatures of land and sea during their earthly
existence, and later became their ruler in the underworld.
For representations of her on clay impressions of intaglio
gems from both Crete and Mycense show her crowned
with doves, the emblems of heaven, while primitive, rude
terra-cotta idols from Gournia and Prinias, and the group
of two polychrome faience figurines of advanced art, dis-
covered at Cnossus in 1903, show her with snakes, the
usual emblems of the underworld powers. In these
statuettes, which probably were the furniture of a royal
household shrine of the end of the Middle Minoan period

260


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

(c. 1800-1600 B.C.), and which are among the most
remarkable that archaeology has recovered from the pre-
historic ^gean culture, the Minoan artist, by delicate
modelling and use of color, has represented the goddess
in the characteristic Cretan fashion, with tight bodice,
low neck, short sleeves and well-shaped, full-flounced
skirt. She holds at arms' length writhing, twisted snakes ;
a spotted serpent curls round the high headdress of one
figure, while a spotted cat is seated above a wreath on
the head of the other. In general, the Cretan deity
appears in beneficent guise ; but sometimes she has a more
fearful aspect, as on a certain seal impression from Cnos-
sus, where she is represented as standing on a cairn of
stones with hair dishevelled and fierce gaze, accompanied
by rampant lionesses. It has generally been assumed that
when the later Greeks found this divinity in possession
of the island, they identified her, in the various aspects
of her many-sided nature, with various deities of their
pantheon — not only with Rhea, the mother of the gods,
who fled to Crete to bear her son Zeus, but with Artemis
as " Lady of the Wilds," with Aphrodite and her doves,
with Hera, Demeter, Athena and others. Perhaps a more
rational interpretation is the recent one of H. R. Hall,
who believes that the various forms under which she is
depicted in art are really different deities of a Cretan
pantheon, and that even if these forms are to be explained
as those of one goddess, they were popularly regarded as
distinct divinities. 2

This mother-goddess was associated with a satellite
male god, who is represented on gems and frescoes as an
armed youth with spear and shield. No idol of this god,
who was evidently the only male deity worshiped by the
Minoans, has been found. When the Cretans went north,
the Hellenic Zeus best corresponded to this god, and when
the Achaean and Dorians came to Crete, this native war-

'JEgean Archceology, 1915, pp. 149 ff.

261


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

rior god Velchanos, as the only representative of the male
godhead, was easily identified with their Zeus. It is not
difficult for us to distinguish between the Aryan Zeus of
the Greeks, the Father-God ruling from Olympus, and
this Mediterranean Zeus of Crete. The legend of the
youth of Velchanos — how he was suckled in the Dictaean
cave by the goat Amalthea, while the Kouretes danced
around his cradle and lulled him to sleep with martial
clash of spear and shield, and how he was brought up by
Rhea on Mount Ida — was easily appropriated by the
Olympian Zeus, while many others, like the un-Greek
legend of his death, were preserved by his Minoan counter-
part. One can also see something of Apollo in Vel-
chanos, which harmonizes with the tradition that the oracle
and worship of Apollo at Delphi came from Crete.

We know something of the ritual of this early cult.
Scenes representing worshipers or priestesses in various
attitudes of adoration, pouring libations, sacrificing and
playing upon musical instruments, are common. Though
images of the mother-goddess were known apparently
from the earliest times — as idols of steatite just sug-
gesting the human form have been found in the neolithic
deposits at Cnossus — the chief cult objects were taken
from the natural world, especially stones, trees and pil-
lars, the fetish forms of the original divine mountain —
the cone-shaped Mount Iuktas, south of Cnossus, which
seems to have been sacred from the beginning, and which
in course of time gave birth both in Crete and on the
mainland of Greece to altars and statues. Sacred pillars
with nothing to uphold are common objects of worship
to the end of Minoan times.

Intimately associated with the TEgean deities was the
national emblem known as the " Double Axe," which
appears everywhere as a hieroglyph on altars and pillars,
while great quantities of bronze axes, full-sized and mini-
ature, were found in the cave of Dicte. the legendary

262


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

birthplace of the Cretan Zeus. Thus it is carved thirty
times on two small pillars of one room of the palace at
Phsestos, and in a small chapel at Cnossus it was found be-
tween the bull " horns of consecration." A complete scene
of worship, in which a sacrifice is taking place before the
" Double Axe," is seen on a late painted sarcophagus from
Hagia Triada, and it appears as the central object of a cult
scene on a painted clay coffin from Palsecastro. This em-
blem has generally been looked upon as the fetish form of
the associated goddess and god, who were supposed to
form what Hogarth calls a " dual monotheism." Though
evidence of its cult use is overwhelming, it also appears
where no religious significance can be proven. Perhaps
at first the axe was merely a tool or weapon typifying
human strength ; later, by an easy transition, it came to
typify divine power. Plutarch says the " Double Axe "
was a royal emblem of Lydia down to the seventh century
b.c. Apart from its religious connection in Minoan art,
therefore, it may also be the blazon of royalty. Its native
name, labrys, was the special emblem of the Carian Zeus
at Labrandea, a fact which may point to its having been
in Crete the emblem of the god and not of the goddess.
It may be the original of the Latin labarum, the Roman
military standard upon which Constantine in 312 a.d.
placed the cross and which he carried before his armies.
Already on philological grounds it had been suggested
that the Greek word Labyrinthos was derived from labrys.
The discovery that the great foundation at Cnossus was
both a palace and a sanctuary of the " Double Axe" seems
to confirm this view, and we may now recognize in this
huge building, which covers four acres of ground and
contains vast mazes of rooms, baths, winding corridors
and subterranean passages, all grouped around open
courts, the famous Labyrinth of Greek tradition.

Among other sacred objects discovered was a marble
cross of equal limbs found in a repository of the Great

263


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Palace at Cnossus, which Dr. Evans believes may have
been the central object of worship in the Cretan cult. This
discovery shows that a cross of orthodox Greek form was
an object of worship centuries before Christianity. It
may also help to explain why the Greek Church has always
preferred this to the Latin form of the cross. Similarly
the Svastika, the common emblem sculptured on Buddhist
monuments of India and China and known in prehistoric
Europe, was discovered in great numbers by Schliemann
at Troy and elsewhere in Mycenaean strata. Like the cross,
it never appears in classical Greece, but reappears in the
Christian period in the catacombs of Rome and on funeral
stelae of Asia Minor.

"f~~ The bull was the emblem of Velchanos and was the
chief victim of sacrifice. Like the elephant of Siam, he
was both royal and sacred ; his actual horns or clay copies
of them adorned altars and shrines, and almost every
religious scene on gems and frescoes that has been dis-
covered. These were doubtless fetish objects, conven-
tional reductions of the bull's head, which, in turn, was a
convention for the whole animal. Bull's blood was
poured in libation from vessels fashioned in the shape
of his head, and goldsmiths fashioned great heads of
the animal, like the well-known silver one with a golden
X rosette on its forehead, found at Mycenae. The sport of
leaping over bulls, pictured in the frescoes from both
Crete and South Greece, was doubtless connected with
the worship of the god. Besides the bull there were many
other sacred animals depicted in Minoan art — serpents,
doves, lions, goats. It also pictured monsters, such as
the Minotaur, griffins, sphinxes, lion-headed demons and
human figures, with lions' and asses' heads. Minoan re-
ligion appears to have been weird, perhaps weirder than
the mysteries of Egyptian worship. On intaglios from
Zakro we see an extraordinary medley of queer animals —

264


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

butterfly-winged sphinxes, stag-headed women, antlered
men and other such combinations.

A larger view of the significance of this Minoan-
Mycenaean religion shows that in many of its funda-
mentals it had its counterpart among many of the early
peoples who bordered the Mediterranean. A great
Nature-goddess with a subordinate youthful god com-
panion — who was sometimes conceived as both husband
and son — appears in Carthaginian Africa as Tanit and
her son, in Egypt as Isis and Horus, in Phoenicia as Ash-
tart and Tammuz or Adonis, in Asia Minor as Cybele
and Attis, and in Greece in the old legend of Rhea and
Zeus. Though a virgin, she is generally looked upon
as the mother, by immaculate conception, of her com-
panion, and later by him of all gods and all life. She
is the spirit of nature; her son dies and she renews her-
self by continued offspring. Similarly the ^Egean ritual
and cult are paralleled among all early nations. The
indwelling of a deity in stones and trees and pillars is
characteristic of an early stage of development every-
where. The Canaanite Ashtart, the female counterpart
of Baal, was often adored under the symbol of a tree —
the asherah or " grove " denounced in the Old Testa-
ment. The Greeks of Delphi, still in the second century
a.d., poured oil each day on an un wrought stone and
placed unspun wool upon it in times of festival. When
Jacob, the ancestor of the Israelites, fell asleep and
dreamed of a ladder between earth and heaven, with its
angels ascending and descending, he set up his pillow
stone " for a pillar and poured oil upon the top of it"
and called the place Beth-El, literally the House of God.
A Greek legend makes Cronus swallow a sacred stone
or bcetylos in the belief that it was his son Zeus. It seems
clear that this Greek word is derived from the Semitic
beth-el, through a Phoenician form bait-ul. The use
of weapons, like the " Double Axe," existed among the

265


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Hittites. The bull's " horns of consecration " appear in
early Hebrew ritual as the " horns of the altar." Belief
in sacred animals is common to all primitive peoples and
survived down into historic Greece. The serpent, as the
embodiment of the powers of the underworld, was com-
mon to Egypt and Greece. Perhaps the serpents of the
snake-goddesses may have had something to do with
household worship, like the household snakes of later
Rome. The dove is both Semitic and Christian; lion-
esses were Cybele's guardians ; the bull was the dwelling
of divinity in Egyptian Memphis and was common in
early Greek cult ; the goat was a sacred animal until late
days in Asia Minor. Monsters, like those depicted on
Minoan cult-scenes, were common in Egypt, and even in
historic days in Greece a horse-headed Demeter was wor-
shiped in Arcadia and a ram-headed Apollo in Laconia.
When we turn to an account of the development of
religion on the mainland of Greece, the question arises
as to what influence the JEgeari religion centring in
Crete exerted on it. The influence of the later periods of
Crete on Greece, reflected in the Greek belief that Crete
was the cradle of its law, art and religion, must have
been immense. But it would be unreasonable to follow
Gruppe in his belief that Crete was the main source of
early Greek religion, unless we could prove at the same
time that it was also the source of all other phases of
Greek civilization. We must rather, therefore, look upon
the early religion of the Mediterranean mainland as a
more or less independent development of the same ^Egean
product, which grew up under different conditions in
Crete. A good deal of this difference can be explained
by the different social structure of Greece, with its City-
State, and of Crete, with its Sea-Empire. Crete, though
herself influenced for centuries by Egypt and the East,
could have influenced the cult of the mainland but little
before the latest period of her life, when the hegemony

. 266


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

was transferred from Cnossus to Mycenae. We know that
the Hellenic invaders of Greece found a dominant god-
dess cult similar to that of Crete in many places on the
mainland — its portion of the common ^Egean tradition.
The American excavations at the Heraeum near Argos
have shown that a powerful goddess was worshiped there
long before the Hellenes came. At Olympia Hera was
worshiped for centuries before Zeus. At Dodona in
Epirus Zeus and Dione appear to have succeeded an older
pair of powers whose presence was recognized in the
springs and oak forests and who were probably resorted^
to for omens. Wherever, then, we find in Greece a god-
dess cult, especially that of a virgin goddess, we are
generally safe in recognizing the earlier Mediterranean
tradition in antagonism to the later Aryan, which in-
variably gave preeminence to the male god. Thus the
cults of Artemis in Attica and Arcadia, of Athena in
Attica, of Hera in Samos, Argos and Olympia, were sur-
vivals of an earlier period. However, this is not a fixed
phenomenon in early Greek religion, for we cannot always
assume a non-Hellenic divinity where we find a dominant
goddess cult. \Nothing, for example, is more Aryan than
the cult of Demeter at Eleusis, and we know that many
Aryan religions gave prominence to an earth-goddess.

THE PREHISTORIC RELIGION OF THE MAINLAND OF GREECE

Let us rapidly survey the early religious development
of the mainland and distinguish the component factors
which went to make what we historically call Greek re-
ligion. Here the evidence is not wholly archaeological,
as in the case of Crete, for we also have the help of
philology and literature to guide us. Ethnology has
proven nothing more conclusively than the fact that the
race we call Greek was, like others great in history, the
product of a blend of populations — conquering Aryan
tribes from central Europe, the Hellenes or Eurasians

267


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

j

or-Nordics of ethnology, settling among the indigenous

\ stocks, the Eurafricans or Mediterraneans of whom we
have been speaking. We must conclude, then, that the re-
ligion of historic Greece was likewise a product of a blend
of early Indo-European or Aryan beliefs with the older
cult ideas and practices of these peoples. These two
sources continued interwoven all through the history of
Greek religion and are discernible in the later strata of
both theology and ritual. To disentangle them is the first
problem for the historian of Greek religion. The problem
is to find out what the tall, fair-haired, round-headed
northerners found indigenous in the lands they conquered,
before we can say what part of the historic religion was
Aryan. It is a very difficult problem and we can do little
more than distinguish lower from higher forms in the
developed religion and, generally speaking, look upon the
former as survivals of an earlier animistic past, rather
than explain them as having grown up spontaneously in
later days, when civic and social life was in an advanced
stage. IjMost of these cruder beliefs and practices were,
of course, gradually abandoned in the presence of the
later, higher forms, but others were tolerated to the end
of paganism. A good deal of such persistent conserva-
tism in the Greek record must be laid to the door of
nothing else than inertia. It was often easier to keep
the old forms side by side with developed ones than to get
rid of them. \,

In many" ways the early animistic stage of Greek re-
ligion is characteristically Greek, while in others it is
typical of a similar stage of thought everywhere. Thus
we may call it the normal beginning of all religions, the
raw material — to use the phrase of Gilbert Murray — out
of which they are made. The German scholar Preuss has
applied to it the expressive term " Urdummheit " or " Pri-
mal Stupidity." In Greece this prehistoric stage is both
repulsive and attractive. We can see how crude notions

268


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

slowly were either gotten rid of or at last transformed
into things of beauty.

In treating this early stage, it has been the habit until
recently to look upon the poems of Homer as primitive
and thus to start with the idea of gods. Whenever we
speak of Greek mythology, we inevitably think of Homer's
man-gods — of Zeus with his thunderbolt, father of gods
and men, of Hera, his turbulent queen, of Poseidon with
his trident, the lord of the sea, of Athena and her panoply
of arms. Greek literature, vase paintings and sculpture
are all dominated by this idea of anthropomorphism, the
strongest trend in Greek religion ; we, sharing the similar
mistake of the classical Greeks, think of these gods as
magnified humans. Homer's gods are not vague numina^
as the old Roman divinities were in the main, dimly out-
lined, animate though scarcely personal; they are con-
crete individuals correlated into a hierarchy organized
under a supreme god. In other words, the poets of the
Iliad and Odyssey do not give us a picture of primitive
religion at all, but of an advanced polytheism. If we con-
sider how slow of growth religious ideas are, we see they
must have inherited an age-long tradition of polytheism
and we must, therefore, assume a long evolution which
ended in humanly conceived deities. Just how these gods
were evolved is a question which has been much dis-
cussed. Older critics contended, for instance, that the
Aryan Sky-god, common to the Vedic Hindoos, the
Greeks and the Romans, was brought into the Balkan
peninsula and split up into the countless forms under
which Zeus was worshiped in every hamlet. More scien-
tific scholars, like Eduard Meyer, 3 believe the process was
just the opposite, one of " condensation " rather than
expansion. Thus similar gods worshiped by different
groups would gradually merge into one ; each cult would
emphasize its own Zeus in accordance with its influence,

3 Geschichte des Altertums II, 96.

369


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

but, on the other hand, the character of Zeus would be
modified by the general Greek conception. The long
accepted belief that the unity of Zeus was original and
the variety of local Zeuses was accidental is opposed to
the historical fact that the unity of the Greek people was
the result of development. Probably Zeus and Poseidon
and all the other gods of the later Epic were merely
" composite photographs" of many earlier Zeuses and
Poseidons. The Epic poets finally unified and standard-
ized the earlier concepts and, putting an end to the primi-
tive vagueness, created a universal Hellenic religion.
It is only in this sense that we understand the statement
of Herodotus that Homer and Hesiod framed the theog-
ony of the Greeks, giving to the gods their names and
powers and forms. Even if we assume that the appear-
ance o! personal gods is a very early fact in religious de-
velopment, still the idea of gods dwelling far away in
the sky like Homer's Olympians is by no means an easy
one for primitive peoples to grasp, while the idea of
their omnipotence and omnipresence simply transcends the
barriers of all local religions. One of the world's greatest
religions has dispensed with the idea of God altogether
and yet has risen to great heights of moral and intel-
lectual power. Such a development is, of course, ex-
ceptional, for even the most primitive peoples regularly
evolve gods with " body, parts and passions " ; in the
higher stage of religions, even if the gods do not have the
bodies of men, they are sure to have their mental attri-
butes.

THE ORIGIN OF THE GREEK GODS

If Homer and Hesiod, then, in no sense created the
theogony of the Greeks, how did the gods originate?
Herodotus tells us that a people, whom he calls Pelasgians,
once inhabited Greece long before Homer and that at
their sacrifices, though they called on theoi " gods," these

270


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

gods had neither names nor titles. This means that there
was a time in Greece, as everywhere else in the ^Egean
area, when men of Mediterranean stock, the Pelasgians
of Herodotus, the Eurafricans of modern ethnology,
worshiped unindividualized powers. These "gods" were
things and not persons, a statement borne out by Plato,
who says that the earliest Greeks, like other barbarians,
worshiped the sun, moon, stars, heaven and earth. These
theoi were the germs of the later gods whom we meet in
Homer. The Mediterraneans of the mainland were sim-
ply more backward than their brothers of Crete and ap-
pear to have evolved anthropomorphic personal gods at
a much later time. That Herodotus was right in his
statement about the origin of the Greek gods is borne
out both by comparative religion and archaeology.

The comparative study of religions shows us that
everywhere men do not at first attribute personality to the
things they worship, but that this is an idea saturated
with ages of reflection. Long before gods are clothed
with animal or human forms is the stage of religious
development known as animism, when gods are intangible
things dwelling everywhere in nature — in stones, rocks,
trees, rivers. Thus the early inhabitants of Greece,
living in a region of great beauty and variety, were led
to sympathize strongly with the material world about
them and saw agencies full of energy in every object.
In this way they gave a soul and will to the all-nourishing
earth, the benevolent sun, the restless sea, the whispering
wind and irresistible storm. Everything that moved or
grew seemed to them to be full of life. In course of time,
instead of continuing to deify these things, they tried to
set a personal god above them, who directs them. J At first
they conceived these spirits as animals, like" Apollo's
Pegasus, who caused the fountain of Hippocrene to gush
forth on the top of Helicon by the blow of his hoof;
later they imagined them as men, or men and animals

271


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

combined, like the River-gods, which were conceived as
bulls with human heads, to typify the tremendous power
of the onsweeping current and at the same time the in-
genuity of mind which directs it. Thus the early Greeks
peopled all nature with spirits — nymphs, dryads, satyrs,
fauns, spirits of wood and mountain and river. Later on,
in historical times, this process was helped by art and in
the final stages included abstract ideas, as we hear of
statues erected to such personifications as " Peace,"
" Concord " and " Mercy." [As Reinach puts it, the
Greeks, beginning with endowing all bodies with thought,
ended by endowing all thoughts with body. Such animis-
tic notions survived into the latest daysj Certain of the
Arcadians, for example, who were always more backward
than the rest of the Greeks, sacrificed at Trapezus still
in the second century of our era to " lightning, thunder
and hurricanes," as if to live beings. The cult of Hestia
is perhaps the best example. Originally Hestia meant
simply " Holy Hearth " and to the end of polytheism
never became a separate personality. These animistic
notions in historical days became transformed by the
imagination of poets into the beautiful stories which have
colored all modern literatures.

Fetishism grew out of animism — the superstitious
use of objects invested with mysterious potency, either
for protective magic or higher communion with a deity.
From the earlier yEgean days down to our time this has
been an important factor in the religion of the Graeco-
Roman world. I have already spoken of the " bsetylic "
cult of sacred stones and pillars in the Minoan-Mycensean
period. In Greece such rude pillars survived to the latest
days side by side with masterpieces of sculpture. Pau-
sanias, a Greek who travelled over the mainland in the
age of the Antonines, and who has left us an invaluable
record of religious customs, mentions several. Thus at
Pharae, a town of Achsea, he records an image of Hermes,

272


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

which was nothing but a square block surmounted by a
bearded head. He says that thirty square stones revered
as gods stood near it, and adds that in ancient days all
the Greeks worshiped such unwrought stones. He also
says that the images in an old shrine of the Graces were
meteoric stones, as also one of Eros at Thespiae. Now
the square herm at Pharae was merely a step in advance
over these unwrought stones. Hermes, who appears in
Homer as a beautiful messenger with golden rod and
winged sandals, was, therefore, originally only a boundary (
stone. Thus there can be no doubt of his Mediterranean
origin in herm form, just as there is none concerning
that of the Graces and many other divinities. In the
earliest days, then, in Pelasgian Arcadia and elsewhere,
tree trunks, unwrought stones and limbless pillars were
objects of worship just as they were in Crete. Though
the trees are gone, some of the pillars have survived and
we can see them both at Cnossus and Mycenae. The
best example of such a pillar on the mainland is the
famous " Lion Gate " of Mycenae. There on the pedi-
ment over the gate is a Doric column, resting on an altar-
like base, with a lion on either side. This is not a " Lion
Gate " at all, but a pillar shrine guarded by lions ; the
pillar is a god and has a peculiar shape, tapering down-
wards like the human form. The same pillar has come to
life in a seal impression found at Cnossus; for here it
has become a goddess standing on a cairn of stones, who
is guarded by lionesses. The undifferentiated Pelasgian
god has already developed in Crete personality and sex.
Probably all such early anthropomorphized images — long
existent in Crete but just emerging in the Greece of
Homer's time — were evolved like this Cnossian " Lion
Goddess," from just such upright sacred columns as
that of Mycenae. And doubtless the tree preceded the
pillar.

18 273


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

PRIMITIVE PELASGIAN BELIEFS AND PRACTICES

We can recover something of the Pelasgian, i.e.,
^gean ritual as it was practiced in Greece. The Homeric
ritual of sacrifice was simple and uniform, consisting of
prayer, the sprinkling of grain and a burnt offering; a
part of the flesh of the victim was tasted by the wor-
shipers and then given to the gods, sublimated by fire in
order to reach them, and the rest was eaten at a banquet
with wine. This ritual is not essentially Greek nor even
Aryan. We find that Jahweh enjoys burnt sacrifices and
that his worshipers have a sacrificial feast. There was also
a different ritual, one in honor of the powers of the
underworld, i.e., to dead men or heroes. Pausanias tells
us of it and shows us that the dead required all the
sacrificial animal and the worshipers were not allowed
even to taste it. The victim was slain over a trench with
his head downward, just as Odysseus sacrifices in the
Odyssey before he descends into Hell. In the Olympian
sacrifice, on the contrary, the head was always turned
upward. Where rites were performed to both heroes and
Olympians, the former, as we learn from Pausanias's
account of the change in ritual at the sacrifice to Heracles
at Sicyon from hero to god, were older and went back
to the Mediterranean stratum, the Olympian replacing
the hero rites later. Thus the two rituals often, as at
Sicyon, came into conflict, the Olympian ousting the
earlier.

\ The hero cult at the tomb presupposed that the dead
man's spirit was hovering nearby ready to be appeased.
Wherever the dead are buried, such a belief in the world
of ghosts is sure to be found. The dead man becomes a
sort of god to whom his descendants sacrifice J Now the
invading Hellenes did not bury their dead, but burnt
them: consequently the spirit did not hover about the
tomb, but fled to some faraway place, as the soul of
Patroclus does in the Iliad, where it could exert no influ-

274


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

ence on the living. The custom of cremation came with
the invaders from Central Europe, where their ancestors
were accustomed to great forests for use in building
funeral pyres. Thus Tacitus tells us that the ancient
Germans burned their chiefs. In this way the survivors
were freed from the greatest fear which haunts primitive
men — the fear of the ghost- world. Mycenaean tombs, on
the other hand, show that the Mediterraneans buried their
dead. Many objects found in them — arms, ornaments
and the usual funeral furniture — supplied the dead with
things which belonged to them on earth and prove that
the Mycensean Greeks believed in an after-life. But
even at Mycenae there seems to be no evidence of a large
ghost element such as we find in Egypt and Babylon and
even in Christianity. Perhaps the prehistoric Greek was
worse off in this respect than his successor, the classical
Greek, but even so he seems to have worried little about
his future. Most of the early terror inspired by the
powers of the lower world fortunately later was changed
into the action of the benign functions of vegetation gods
or else faded away, surviving only here and there in
folk-lore.

The ghost of a murdered man, according to the Greek
view of homicide, still held in ^Eschylus's day, became an
embodied curse, personified as a Fury, and continued to
haunt the murderer to the end of his life. The blood
of the slain man caused a pollution which, according to
the old lex talionis, could only be expelled by the blood of
his murderer. But such an idea of an unending feud
is not Homeric. The Epic Achaeans, like the old Germans,
believed that atonement could be made by the payment of
blood money — wergeld. Thus, in this respect, also, the
Homeric and the Pelasgian ideas were opposed. There
are also evidences in this older ritual of a more sombre
side — human sacrifice and blood magic. Though the facts
about human sacrifice are not yet fully explained, we

275


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

know it existed in Mediterranean times in Greece, if not
in Crete, and it is equally certain that survivals of it re-
mained into historical days. In Mycenaean graves human
bones have been found at the doorways. Whether they
symbolize an act of worship or merely imply rites of
tendance, a feeling that the dead needed companions on
their journey below, is of little consequence; for in any
case they must be the remains of slain captives or slaves.
By Homer's time a change had begun, for the poet blames
Achilles for his cruelty in slaying Trojan captives at
the grave of Patroclus. Encouraged once by the Delphic
oracle, by the fifth and fourth centuries B.C. the custom
had become rare and repellent, as we see from the Platonic
dialogue Minos, where Greeks and barbarians are con-
trasted in this respect. Still it was kept up in the ghastly
rites of Zeus Lycseus in Arcadia and in the barbarous
sacrament of Zeus Laphystius in Bceotia and Thessaly.
Euripides, in his drama Iphigenia among the Taurians,
attests that a similar sacrifice existed in Brauron in Attica
before his day. The Locrian sacrifice of maidens to
appease Athena Ilias had fallen into disuse by the fourth
century B.C. The inhuman custom was continued in cer-
tain parts of the Roman Empire down to Hadrian's day.
Generally such rites were piacular, the sacrifice to an
offended god being a scapegoat for the life of the whole
people as a vicarious offering; again it was agricultural
in motive, blood being shed as a form of magic to pro-
mote fertility.

Though Homer says nothing about magical rites, we
know how primitive they are. The old cult of sacred
stones taught that such objects had magical powers to cure
diseases and purge homicides of guilt. Certain statues of
Olympic victors of the fifth and fourth centuries B.C.,
like those of the Thasian Theagenes and the Thessalian
Polydamus, were supposed to heal fevers. Many a Greek
myth is the child of magic. Thus Danae is not to be

2f6


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

explained as an allegory meaning that " gold opens all
doors," but merely as a golden rain with which Zeus visits
Earth. The Thesmophoria — one of the oldest festivals
at Athens — was still in historical days largely concerned
with magical rites aimed at increasing fertility, such as
strewing the fields with the remains of pigs consecrated
to the goddesses of earth. The Thargelia, another Athen-
ian festival, was concerned with the scapegoat, with a
ritualistic scourging and transference of sin. All such
phenomena are magical. Certain Athenian officials in
historical times were called " Windlullers," because they
had magical powers to lull the winds to sleep. In the fifth
century b.c. the efficacy of magic was recognized by law.
Thus a Tean inscription gives a law which threatens
those who used magic against individuals or state. This
" black " magic was still practised in Pausanias's day at
Haliartus, in Bceotia, and it was probably a lineal de-
scendant of Mediterranean magic. Plato, in his last work,
the Laws, is not certain whether he believes in the efficacy
of magic or not. Despite all this and similar evi-
dence it may be said that magic was never so prevalent
in Greece as in Mesopotamia and Egypt, and that what
did exist was generally beneficent in character and its
ceremonies were refined.

We see, then, that there are not only two strata of
theology in the historic religion of Greece, but two of
ritual : an upper stratum, belonging to the Olympian sys-
tem, which had little notion of the ghost- world, placation
of the angry dead nor magical rites of purification — in
short, no ceremonies of " aversion " or riddance, and a
lower stratum of the indigenous Southerners which in-
cluded elements common to the Mgean and early Eastern
religions, stone, pillar and tree worship, belief in the
world of spirits and the efficacy of magic. Many other
crude, though harmless, survivals of this later stratum
might be mentioned, such as the sacrifice known as the

277


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Buphonia, kept up to a late period at the altar of Zeus
Polieus on the Acropolis, which was a medley of magical
rites; or the court held at the Prytaneum in Athens, at
which animals and lifeless things were tried, condemned
and punished, a court having its origin in the dim ani-
mistic past and still flourishing in the time of Demosthenes
and surviving for centuries later.

ORIENTAL INFLUENCES ON EARLY GREEK RELIGION

We have seen, then, that within its own limits the
early Mediterranean religion had begun even on the
mainland of Greece to give form and personality to its
undifferentiated gods. But we are still a long way from
Homer's gods. It was not the Epic poets who completed
the work of differentiation. The process was helped on
by another factor — the second in the makeup of Greek
religion — influences from the Oriental nations. The
priestesses of Zeus at Dodona, the oldest Greek oracle,
told Herodotus that the Pelasgians in course of time
adopted the names of their theoi from Egypt and the
credulous historian believed that the names of all the
Greek gods, with few exceptions, had always existed in
Egypt. Many modern scholars, like Foucart, have over-
estimated this Egyptian influence on the early religion of
Greece. The truth is that the early Greeks were influ-
enced by religious ideas not only from Egypt but from
the whole East. Many Greek legends, like those of Io,
Danaus and Cadmus, tell us of this Eastern influence,
and the later world of the Iliad and Odyssey was touched
at every point by the South — Crete, Egypt and Libya,
and by the East — Phoenicia, Syria and Asia Minor. The
recent excavations in Egypt and on the prehistoric sites
of the ^Egean area have shown that this contact was far
older than Homer. The pre-Hellenic civilization was
saturated with Oriental influences. Flinders Petrie, in
1887, discovered at Kahun in Middle Egypt foreign pot-

278


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

tery which he called JEgean, and later discoveries in Crete
showed that he was right. This pottery, found in deposits
of the XII and XIII dynasties (before 1800 to about
1700 B.C.), is of the type known as Kamarais ware and
belongs to the Middle Minoan period of Crete. Again,
in 1899, the same archaeologist found at Tell-el-Amarna
in Egypt, in deposits of the early fourteenth century b.c,
many fragments of Mycenaean pottery. Mycenaean vases
were also found in Phoenician Sidon in 1885, and later
the tombs of Enkomi in Cyprus disclosed articles of
Mycenaean art of the fourteenth and thirteenth centuries
B.C. On the beautiful inlaid sword blades from the shaft
graves of Mycenae Egyptian animals are represented —
ichneumons — commonly known as Pharaoh's rats — hunt-
ing duck. Conversely, vases from Mycenae have been
found in Egypt, Phoenicia and Cyprus. Thus we see that
if the Pelasgians did not borrow, it was not from a lack
of opportunity; the wonder is that all this foreign influ-
ence was not too great for them to assimilate.

THE HELLENIC INVASION

Before reaching Homer's pantheon, a third and last
step must be noted in the prehistoric development of
Greek religion. This Mediterranean religion, after de-
veloping from within and assimilating foreign influences
for centuries, was finally taken over by the Hellenic in-
vaders, and the resultant union of religious beliefs and
practices formed what we call the historic religion of
Greece. Who these Hellenes were and when they estab-
lished themselves in the Balkans has given rise to endless
discussion. For many reasons it is certain they came
from the North, being gradually pushed southward by
successive waves of migration of Indo-European tribes
from the Danube valley. When they first appeared in
Greece we cannot definitely say, as tradition preserves
no memory of the movement. The first migration seems

279


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

to have been followed, after an interval of some centuries,
by a second, which came by way of the Northwest, to
which many traditions bear witness. These Dorians, as
we call them, instead of dispossessing their predecessors,
passed straight on across Central Greece and the Corin-
thian Gulf into the Peloponnesus, where, blending with
the Mediterraneans, they formed the bulk of the later
Greek population in the peninsula ; thence they passed on
into Crete, the isles of the Archipelago and south-
eastern Asia Minor. This later movement took place not
later than the twelfth century. Whether the walls, palaces
and tombs of Argos, Tiryns and Mycenae were built by
them or wrested from the earlier peoples is not important,
for the civilization which they reflect was certainly not
Hellenic. The Greek historians Herodotus and Thucyd-
ides were both aware of the fact that these Hellenes
were late-comers into Greece. The latter says that they,
rather than the Pelasgians, were the leaders of the war-
riors against Troy, the first collective enterprise which
gave unity to Greece, and that the Greeks owed to this
unity their Pantheon and differentiated gods. Long ago
Gladstone remarked on the analogies between the Achaeans
of Homer and the Germans of Tacitus — their tall stature,
fair hair and blue eyes. Ridgeway, Hall and many other
more scientific scholars have since shown that the Achaeans
of Homer differed also in many essentials of their material
culture — in their armor, dress and customs of burial —
from the Mycenaean Mediterraneans, but agreed with that
of the northern barbarians of Central Europe. The Hel-
lenes, then, were merely a branch of those northerners
who, as Dorians or later Gauls, have repeatedly invaded
the south and blended with the indigenous peoples.

Miss Harrison professes to see the atmosphere of the
Norse Eddas in Homer's Olympians. They are often
depicted as big and turbulent because they are, in part,
northern gods, and size and excess are Teutonic rather

280


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

than Greek characteristics. Thus Poseidon, the Earth-
shaker, goes into battle on the plains of Ilium shouting as
" loud as nine or ten thousand men shout in battle," and
this cry " puts strength into the Achaeans' hearts." Just
so Tacitus was surprised at the " harsh note and con-
fused roar " of the German warriors, which was " not
so much an articulate sound as a general cry of valor "
(Germania, iii). The same god takes three strides from
Samothrace and with the fourth is in yEgae of Achaaa —
surely the stride of a northern giant. The brutal rage
of Zeus is northern, as when he " wills to dash the other
gods from their seats" (II. i, 580-1), or when he
" caught his son by the foot and hurled him from the
divine threshold of Olympus " (II. i, 591). Zeus " beats
his wife with stripes and hangs her up with anvils to
her feet" (II. xv, 17 seq.) — a scene which immediately
suggests the well-known plight of Gunther on his wedding
night in the Song of the Nibelungs. Zeus tells Hera she
is so vengeful that " she would like to eat Priam alive "
(II. iv, 34). But, as Miss Harrison says, such is the
magic of Homer's verse that we forget these are not the
ways of Greek gods. Homer's gods are simply, in the
main, foreigners ; they make no claim to having created
the world like other gods have done, but only to have
conquered it. They are royal robbers, who attend neither
to agriculture nor government, but fill their time with
feasting and fighting, with love-making and intrigue.

Long_brf.oreJiislQryJbegan J _iheri J these^iactors^^primi-
tive_Pelasgian beliefs, .Oriental influences, and after _mtt-_
lennia, it may be, of this fusion, successive impulses from
the north, were transformed by the Epic poets into the
Olympian system. With the Homeric age the fusion was
complete and the Greek religious spirit had acquired its
characteristic trend. The poets gathered the mountain
gods of the Hellenic invaders into a family on Olympus,
their old sacred hill. The gods were called Olympian

281


■J


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

from this mountain and from Olympia in Elis, where the
greatest of them had his greatest festival, two places at
opposite ends of Greece, showing the Hellenic migrations
southwards— migrations which are proven by history and
dialect, j For a long time we believed they were primi-
tive ; their bright forms dazzled us into believing that they
had no background. We now know that centuries of de-
velopment lay behind them, that they were late comers
imposed on a very different background which has been
disclosed to us by the kind of evidence we have outlined. ;

THE HOMERIC POEMS AND THE OLYMPIAN SYSTEM

Under this title I shall not introduce you to the age-long
Homeric question — thedate and authorship of the Iliad and
Odyssey. Suffice it tosaythattheseincomparable poems are
the meagre survivors of an immense Epic literature which
slowly grew up in Greece and Ionia in the Heroic Age —
a period roughly comprising the twelfth to the eighth
centuries B.C., and that they reflect largely the tradition
of the Hellenic invaders. Modern destructive .criticism
has doubted the existence of a poet named Homer and
contents itself with the belief that the Epics which bear
that name are, in their existing form, the product of
various bards and ages, and that they received substan-
tially their present form under Peisistratus, the tyrant of
Athens, who, in the sixth pre-Christian century, had them
arranged to be recited at the Panathenaic festival in
Athens.

Sir Gilbert Murray has shown that the Olympian re-
ligion came to Greece as a sort of reformation, for with
all its imperfections it brought a kind of order into the
chaos of gods which had slowly evolved among the Medi-
terranean inhabitants of the vEgean area. The new sys-
tem was patriarchal and monogamous in character; that
of the jEgeans and Hittites had been matrilinear and
saturated with ideas of polygamy, sex-emblems and fer-

282


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

tility rites and goddesses. It was also aristocratic, for
the Homeric poems were the literature of the chieftains
and consequently largely free of popular superstitions.
However, in their present form they were never court
poems, though they may have originated in lays sung by
travelling bards in royal castles. Only in their latest
strata do they show traces of earlier Mediterranean be-
liefs — ancestor worship, propitiation of the dead and be-
lief in the ghost world. In the main they were Ionian
in origin and it was the progressive and sceptical Ionians
who were best fitted to lead in a reform against the older
popular beliefs and practices. These Ionians were de-
scended from the men who had fled across the ^Egean
before the later Hellenes and they possessed the same
spirit of freedom which the men of the Heroic Age had
displayed. Surrounded by barbarous tribes of the interior
of Asia Minor, they were the first to feel that they were
Hellenes as opposed to barbarians, and, long before the
greatness of Athens, had become the most cultured
representatives of the Hellenic race.

Whereas in most countries the oldest surviving litera-
ture is religious in character — like the Hindu Vedas, col-
lections of hymns to the gods for purposes of worship,
or the Gathas of the Avesta, containing the utterances
of the Iranian prophet — the Greek Epic was secular in
origin. The old robber kings of the Heroic Age had
had little interest in building up a powerful religion, but
left this, like all honest work, to the common folk. Nor
was it to be expected that the educated bards of Ionia,
who sang of the glorious deeds of these kings long since
passed away, should have added much religious sentiment
to a system which they looked upon more as romance than
religion. They had little faith or reverence for the
Olympians and consequently the gods play a far more
human role in the poems than that assigned to them by
later Greek religion. The Ionian rhapsodes merely trans-

283


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

formed with their magic minstrelsy the kings and gods
of the barbarous past and changed the old era of bru-
tality into one of chivalrous adventure. Whatever was
good in the old tradition was kept, while all the rest
was either passed over or refined away. They tried to
bring order into the old religious chaos and adapt it
to a new social order. Though the Epic largely failed in
its aims, the Olympian religion by iooo B.C. had super-
seded the Pelasgian at its ancient sacred centres — Delphi,
Argos, Olympia — and was publicly professed. The poems,
which at first had been composed for the amusement of
the nobles, became in course of time the literature of the
people, and were recited to the multitudes at the various
festivals. The Olympian divinities, radiating especially
from the recitation of the poems at the Panathenaic festi-
val at Athens, became not only for the Athenians but for
all the Greeks ideals of humanity and the foundation of
the religion of the historical Greeks.

Let us rapidly survey the chief characteristics of

Homer's system. Though much of the picture is missing,
still the poet gives us a fairly complete and consistent
account of an advanced polytheism. The Olympians are
sharply defined personalities, clear-cut individuals, colos-
sal men and women, fairer and stronger than mortals, but
still conceived in their glorified image. They are so
humanly conceived that the later artist could embody in
sculpture or painting ideas straight from Homer's de-
scriptions. This is exemplified by the tradition handed
down by Strabo that those well-known lines in the first
book of the Iliad (528-30), which close the scene in
which Thetis importunes Zeus in behalf of her son
Achilles, suggested to Phidias the conception of his most
famous work, the gold and ivory statue of the father of
gods and men for the temple at Olympia : " He spake
and with his steel-grey brows Cronus' son nodded assent,

284


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

and the immortal locks fell waving from his divine head,
and he shook mighty Olympus."

These human gods are able to work wonders and to
take on any shape they will. They dwell together on the
lofty crowned Olympus in Thessaly and form a political
community with its hierarchy of rank and duty, its con-
tentions for honor and power, its occasional revolutions
and political intrigues, its public meetings and festivals.
In a word, life on Olympus is a magnified picture of life
on earth. Though superhuman, they are like mortals in
the ordinary necessities of life, requiring food and drink
and sleep. The highest of them — Zeus, Apollo, Hera,
Hermes, Athena — were not nature gods like the person-
alities of the Vedas, bound up with the forces of the
natural world. Apollo was not the Sun nor Athena the
Sky, but they were beings with powers as real to the
Greeks as Christ and Mary are to Christians. Even Zeus,
though responsible for the phenomena of sky and air, was
not the thunder nor the sky — even if a few indications
point to the influence of earlier animistic conceptions of
the divine sky. A few lesser divinities, like the gods of
the winds and rivers, the nymphs and fauns, were pure
nature powers and never became fully anthropomorphic.
Thus Hestia, " Holy Hearth," Helios the Sun, Selene
the Moon, Gsea the Earth, never became fully personal,
for these had their origin in the remote animistic period
and survived to the latest times. Though animate, they
had little religious value and exerted little influence on
the moral, social and spiritual natures of the Greeks.
Like mortals, the Olympians were subject to moral weak-
ness and Olympus merely reflected earthly ethical notions.
The Ionian bards did not always take them seriously,
but often used them in their poetry for purposes of orna-
ment, and, sometimes, as in the later strata of the Odys-
sey, even for burlesque. They accorded little reverence
to Zeius or Hera. Zeus is as majestic as his thunder in


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

his celestial aspect, but is far below mortals when viewed
as father and husband, while Hera is anything but a duti-
ful consort. Ares is despised as a bloodthirsty Thracian
coward, while Aphrodite is rebuked for joining in the
fray of men. These two are the subjects of a very melo-
dramatic scene in a famous passage of the Odyssey. In
, short, only three Olympians are respectfully handled —
\l Apollo, Poseidon and Athena. Gladstone summed it up
well by saying that none of Homer's gods was as good
as the swineherd Eumaeus.

The blend of the religious ideas of the northerners
and southerners explains some of these incongruities.
The nearer the Olympians approach to the old Mediter-
ranean nature gods, the more reverend do they become.
We laugh at the lame smith of the gods puffing and
blowing through Olympus' halls, but we find Hephaestus,
the old fire-god, in combat with the river-god Xanthus,
a truly majestic figure. The greater the interference of
the gods in the affairs of men, the later is the composi-
tion. However, despite all the levity displayed in the
poems, Homer's deeper utterances impute an advanced
morality to the supreme god Zeus, who, though revengeful
and jealous like Jahweh, is generally pictured as a god
of righteousness and pity toward men. In the opening
lines of the Odyssey he says it is not the gods but the
wickedness of men's hearts which brings evil. He is the
protector of the good and the punisher of the wicked;
whoever neglects the prayers of the unfortunate or vio-
lates the sanctity of suppliant or guest receives his recom-
pense of punishment. There is even a glimmering in the
poems of the dark powers of the underworld, which
send forth the Erinyes to punish the perjurer.

On the whole, then, the religious tone of Homer is
in harmony with advanced notions of morality. The atmos
phere of the poems is bright and cheerful, the service is
beautiful though solemn with hymn and dance. The rela-

286


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

tionship existing between the gods and men is generally
sociable. The ritual is simple and on a high plane of the-
ism; it shows but little trace of savage rites and is far
freer from magic than that of later ages. Sacrifice is a
friendly communion with the god revealing a sense of sin
and need of expiation. The favor of the Olympians, like
that of northern gods, is gained by the offering of meat
and wine. The cult has altars, temples, the beginning
of priesthoods and even idols.

THE HOMERIC HELL

We moderns have a feeling that religion ought to
concern itself with the question of life after death. But
the Homeric system, while telling us much of theology
and ritual, gives us little notion of eschatology. The gods,
to be sure, are immortal, but good men do not go to
Olympus to live with them nor bad ones to Tartarus.
If we except certain late additions to the poems, we find
that these are little concerned with any concept of the
soul-life after death, and that they show neither any
cult of the dead nor need of propitiating them, though
we know that the Mycenaean Greek had such beliefs and
practices. The fear of the ghost world seems, for cer-
tain reasons, to have grown strong in the seventh cen-
tury, and we have a reflection of it in the later strata of
the Odyssey, especially in the Nekyia or Descent of
Odysseus into Hell in the eleventh book, and the scene
copied from it at the opening of the last book, in which
the wooers are escorted down the dank ways by Hermes.
The Descent, the most striking episode of the Epic, seems
to have little in common with the Olympian system, but
rather, in the main, to be the recrudescence of older
'Pelasgian beliefs of the hereafter. Christ believes it was
influenced by Egyptian ideas. The catalogue of famous
women (xi, 225-332) is manifestly the composition of a
bard of the Hesiodic School. The description of Hades

287


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

itself, which Odysseus, represented as still seated at the
trench without, could not have entered, and especially
the picture of retributive punishment meted out by
Minos to certain exemplary sinners — Tantalus, Sisyphus,
Tityus (566-627) — are quite out of harmony with Hom-
er's spirit and have been assigned by scholars to a late
rhapsodist — perhaps to Onomacritus, the poet of Peisis-
tratus's time, as Wilamowitz believes — who took the
scenes from Orphism, the new religion which had de-
veloped by the sixth century, when Orphic mystic societies
were teaching that only initiated and purified souls could
escape the torments of Hell.

This Homeric picture of Hades' realm is dark and
gloomy in the extreme and had a tremendous influence,
not only on all succeeding poets, but on the minds of the
ordinary worshipers, an influence which can be traced
all through the subsequent centuries of Greek history.
It has often been remarked that Homer's picture of life
on earth is hopeless and melancholy. Almost every re-
flective passage contains a note of sadness. Thus Glaucus
(II. vi, 146 seq.), says to Diomedes: " Even as are the
generations of leaves, such are those likewise of men."
But if life on earth was hard and cheerless, it was far
more desirable than death; if man were the plaything of
the gods on earth, there was no hope that the hereafter
would right these wrongs and inequalities, no hope that
he who had lived a pious life would receive any reward.
As Gruppe has said : " Behind the woe in which he thinks
he lives, the Homeric Greek sees a greater never-ending
woe before." 5 For all the hopeless fancies conjured
up by the imagination of man as to his future state, none
is so hopeless as that depicted in the Nekyia. Erebos, the
realm of King Hades, is either far to the West, or, like
the mediaeval Hell, deep down below the earth. Tartarus,
the deepest abyss, is a penitentiary hell not for the wicked,

4 Griechische Mythologie und Religions<feschichte, 1, p. 1010.

288


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

but for rebellious Titans. The Elysian Fields are men-
tioned only once in the poems (Od. iv, 561 ) and the Isles
of the Blest not at all — for these happy abodes were not
yet definitely conceived. The meads of asphodel, on
which the spirits tread, are frequently mentioned; the
gray leaves and yellow blossoms of this plant, to-day so
frequently seen on Greek graves, should leave little doubt
that they were symbolic of the pallor of death and the
gloom of the underworld. Homer's heroes, good and bad,
are sent to this cheerless abode, where their existence is
even more terrible than their dwelling place. Rohde
says it is wrong to speak of a future life in Homer at
all; the spirits below lead only a shadowy copy of life on
earth, an existence almost as neutral as Sheol. Even
this shadowy existence is not everlasting — its one ray
of hope ; for Odysseus sees no ghost older than the second
or third generation before his time. Pindar's account
(frag. 129) of the dead entertaining themselves with
horse-racing and athletic contests, with games of draughts
and music of the lyre, has no counterpart here. The ghost
world had gained much additional vigor by his time.
The very utterance of the " strengthless heads of the
dead " is but a timorous, inarticulate squeak, which the
poet likens to the gibbering of bats. Their spectral forms,
bereft of bones and sinews, " sweep shadow-like around "
and all, with the exception of the old Theban seer Teire-
sias, are devoid of intelligence and can be recalled only
to a momentary consciousness by drinking the blood of
the victim which Odysseus had slain over the trench. Here
there is no bliss, no rest, no peace. Amid such gruesome
surroundings Achilles could well reply to Odysseus's words
of praise for his former renown ( Od. xi, 488 seq. ) : " Nay,
speak not comfortably to me of death, oh great Odysseus.
Rather would I live on ground the hireling of another,
with a landless man who has no great livelihood, than
bear sway among all the dead that be departed."
19 289


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

THE MYSTERY CULTS

It is no wonder, then, that the dark features of such
a view of the hereafter should have called forth a protest
which proclaimed a definite hope of future happiness and
a less definite fear of future misery. Such ideas were
communicated by the Mysteries, a class of rites not men-
tioned by Homer, the greatest of them connected with a
god and goddess — Dionysus and Demeter — who had no
seat on Olympus. These ceremonies were practised by
voluntary associations of individuals who pledged them-
selves not to disclose anything seen or heard at the secret
meetings. Each mystery had its own apparatus of sym-
bols and formularies, so that the initiates knew one an-
other just as Free Masons do now; each consisted of two
parts — a sacrifice and rites in which certain foods were
tasted, objects seen and handled and words spoken. Why
certain Greek cults were secret and others public is not
clear. The older explanation that the mysteries were
pre-Hellenic and the conquered Pelasgians wished to hide
their ancient ceremonies is hardly tenable, since in that
case we should find them not in the hands of the nobles,
but of the common folk. Furthermore, the divinities
chiefly worshiped were Aryan and not Pelasgian. There
were mysteries in honor of Gasa, Aglaurus, and the
Graces in Attica, of Hecate in ^Egina and of Themis.
These may all be related forms of the Earth-mother,
powers connected with the underworld. The most im-
portant were the Orphic and Eleusinian mysteries. Those
of Samothrace, which later rivalled these in attraction,
were neither entirely Hellenic in origin nor ever com-
pletely Hellenized.

THE ORPHIC MYSTIC SOCIETIES

The Orphic mystic societies introduced a Thraco-
Phrygian religious tradition into Greece, which was orig-
inally connected with the wine-god Dionysus and with

290


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

Sabazius. An account of these mysteries would mean
an account of the Dionysiac religion; here we can only
touch upon the main doctrines of the sect and their in-
fluence. The worship of Dionysus, originally a nature-
god of northern origin, revealing his power over the vine
and in the underworld, had found its way into Greece as
early as the tenth century b.c., and by the sixth had been
accepted by most of the Greek communities. The rites
were mystic and secret and were performed mostly at
night; they were characterized by ecstatic and orgiastic
self-abandonment, in which his votaries — especially
women — believed they were united with the god and
possessed his power for a time. A savage sacrament
consisted in eating the raw flesh of an animal regarded
as the incarnation of the god. Thus the idea of a god
dying and being born again was inculcated in this non-
Greek worship. The taming of this wild god of the
north into a civic deity, and the disciplining of his wild
bands of Maenads into a Greek cult, was a long and
difficult process. But slowly the savage elements dis-
appeared, though the cult ever afterwards remained
more emotional than any other.

This process of transformation was arrested by a wave
of religious fervor which spread over the mainland in
the seventh and sixth centuries b.c. — under the name
of Orpheus, the legendary minstrel of Thrace, to whom
the new mystic doctrines were ascribed. This later eso-
teric worship probably also came from the north, even
if indubitable evidence of Cretan and Egyptian influence
is found in it. We know the ideas and hopes of the
initiates chiefly from a series of gold foil tablets which
were found in tombs at Sybaris, in South Italy, one from
Crete and one from near Rome, which preserve fragments
of a metrical liturgy or creed dating from the third cen-
tury B.C., if not earlier. These were buried with the
Orphic dead as charms against the dangers which beset

291


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

their journey below and to open to them the gates of
Heaven, and they form what Gomperz has rightly called
an "Orphic Book of the Dead." The initiated soul
proclaims its divine descent in these words : " I am the
son of Earth and Starry Heaven " ; "I come from the
pure " ; " I have paid the penalty of sin " ; " I have flown
out of the weary, sorrowful circle of life." Its future
reward is made certain by these words : " O blessed and
happy one, thou hast put off thy mortality and shalt be-
come divine."

This was a new and strange message to the Greeks, a
direct protest against the Homeric concept of the soul's
hereafter. Though Homer's picture of life is melan-
choly, still life is the centre of interest and far preferable
to death. But to the Orphic, life here in the body is not
life, but a living death. What we call death is merely
the door of freedom for the soul from the body, its prison-
house. The real life, then, is hereafter, when the soul
rejoins its former communion with the gods, for it is
divine like them both in its origin and nature.

When it enters into a human body it contracts sin
and its constant aim, like that of a fallen angel, is release
and recovery of its former glory. Since it lost its power
through sin, it can regain it only through purification,
which is accomplished by the observance of a certain con-
duct of life — the avoidance of the taint of meat, of
funerals, of childbirth. The eating of flesh was regarded
as mere cannibalism, for according to the Orphic doctrine
of metempsychosis, " the circle of life," all animals were
kin. After cycles of lives the soul finally reaches its goal
and lives on keeping its personality — for the Orphics
had no notion of absorption like the Buddhists. Thus
under the term Orphism we class all the elements lack-
ing in the Epic tradition: a sense of original sin, the
soul being condemned to earthly existence as a punish-
ment for the early crime of the Titans, man's ancestors,

age


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

who had treacherously slain the young god Zagreus;
the need of purification for that sin; the idea of the
incarnate man-god; escape from evil and immortality.
These elements, foreign to the Olympian system, were
un-Greek influences from the north, from Crete, Egypt
and Asia Minor, elements which easily fused with the
older Mediterranean beliefs.

These doctrines were especially strong in Crete and
Athens. In South Italy they were early crossed by Pythag-
oreanism, the influence probably being mutual. The
Pythagorean brotherhoods became its militant orders and
their priests were the first European missionaries. The
downfall of these societies certainly saved Greece from
the danger of establishing Orphism as a secular power,
which would have strangled the free Greek spirit with
sacerdotalism and all that goes with it. Henceforth its
influence was private, and some of the greatest Greek
minds were attracted by it. Pindar's eschatology seems
to have been largely inspired by it ; his idea of the next
world as a Purgatory, or place of penance and purgation
from personal and ancestral taint, was Orphic, as also
his doctrine of reincarnation and final reward for the
purified soul. The Orphic idea of the divine origin of
the soul is seen in one of his fragments ( 102) : " Blessed
is he who, having seen these things, goes below the
hollow earth; he sees the end of life and the beginning of
the gods." Though ^schylus and Sophocles held aloof
from Orphism, Euripides, true to his nature, was both
attracted to and repelled by it. In his inspired drama,
the Bacchanals, he makes the votaries rejoice to be one
with the god and to be called by his name. The philoso-
pher Empedocles borrowed much from the new faith — his
insistence on guilt and purification, and his cycle of rein-
carnations.

Plato, though protesting, like Theophrastus and Plu-
tarch after him, against the professional mystery mongers

293


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

and spiritual quacks, who, under the name of Orpheus,
went about in the fourth century vending incantations
and promises of indulgences through purifications and
mystic initiations, still was intensely interested in the real
beliefs of the Orphics and deeply indebted to them for
some of his deepest thinking. His doctrine of the soul
in the Phsedrus is Orphic; his cosmic Eros or Love in
that dialogue and in the Timseus was an Orphic god ; his
glorification of inspired madness, which he calls one of
Heaven's blessings, certainly came from the Thracian
cult of Dionysus ; his immortal soul striving to reach the
heights of the god-life, in its several incarnations im-
proving through righteousness and deteriorating through
unrighteousness, making man in the one case and beast
in the other, was based on the Orphic " wheel of life."
According to Plato, each soul has the choice to> go upwards
or downwards each thousand years, and it must pass
through a cycle of ten thousand years before it reaches
its original state again, for only the souls of philosophers
and lovers are enabled, after choosing the better life
three times, to escape in three thousand. Plato's doctrine
of the soul's anamnesis or remembrance of the glorious
sights of justice, truth, wisdom and temperance among
the gods is also based on the Orphic well of remembrance,
Mnemosyne. In the Phaedo he makes Socrates quote the
founder of the mysteries as saying that (69c, Jowett)
" he who passed unsanctified and uninitiated into the
world below will live in a slough, but he who arrives there,,
after initiation and purification, will dwell among the
gods." For " many, as they say in the mysteries, are the
thyrsus-bearers, but few are the mystics," meaning, as
I interpret the words, the true philosophers. In brief,
it may be said that this mystery religion influenced the
poet-philosopher far more than all the gods of Homer.
In Hellenistic days, as we shall see, Orphism received

294


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

a fresh lease of life at the beginning of the new era
of individualism, and as late as Plutarch's time continued
to give consolation to the afflicted. Its lofty ideals of
morality also contributed much to Christianity. The
Orphic Hell influenced the picture of similar tortures
depicted in the Apocalyptic literature. Even in the Middle
Ages its influence was still felt, when the horrors of the
Christian ghost world were increased by the barbarous
imagination of the north.

THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES

The most pan-Hellenic of the mysteries were those
celebrated at Eleusis, near Athens, in honor of Demeter
and Kore, with a third figure in the background — the
god of the lower world, euphemistically called Eubouleus
or Pluto, the ravisher and husband of Kore. These rites
were originally agrarian and tribal and seem to have been
restricted to certain Eleusinian clans. By the fifth cen-
tury B.C., however, they had become a recognized branch
of Athenian public worship, though only initiates were
allowed to be present at the ceremonies. By that time,
in contrast to the Orphic mysteries, which always re-
mained sectarian, they were opened to all Athenians and
all Greeks without distinction of city or tribe, to " all
of intelligible speech and pure of blood." Afterwards
they were open even to women and children and slaves,
and, later, to Romans. When Athens became the focus
of Greek life, the Eleusinia became as truly pan-Hellenic
in character as the oracle at Delphi or the games at
Olympia, and their power did not wane until the advent
of Christianity.

To-day we know much more about the Eleusinian
mysteries than did the scholars of a generation ago, and
yet we know but little. Modern students of comparative
religion and anthropology have helped us a good deal in

29s


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

making reasonable hypotheses, while archaeology — the
study of vases, reliefs, inscriptions, and especially the re-
sults of the excavations carried on at Eleusis — has told
us much of their external organization and shown us the
deities exactly as they appeared to the ancient initiates.
We know that a mimetic drama of the nature of a mediae-
val Passion Play took place, in which was represented
the story of Demeter's sorrowful search for her ravished
daughter, and the subsequent marriage of Kore and
Pluto and possibly the birth of a sacred child. In the
production of such a play we know that no elaborate
scenic effects took place in the Eleusinium to represent
Heaven and Hell, since the excavations there have dis-
clo6ed neifher substructures nor underground passages.
We also know that something more than this drama took
place; that the hierophant revealed certain sacred objects
and celebrated a holy communion. We have no proof,
however, that a more mystic sacrament took place, in
which the initiates believed they were partaking of the
body of deity, as many scholars have assumed. We also
are assured that these rites were not mere magical ones
intended to promote the fertility of the fields or the well-
being of the mystic. The secret of their tremendous influ-
ence cannot be thus explained.

Scholars have made unwearying efforts to solve the
problem of the inner esoteric meaning of the ritual.
Eleusinian scenes on fifth century vases help very little,
since it was sacrilegious for the painter to' reveal the
mystery. Pagan writers, though showing the good influ-
ence of these secret rites, are equally reticent. Few of the
Church Fathers, though they were not bound by scruples,
were pagans in their youth — like Clement and Arnobius —
and so could have been initiated. What was this cen-
tral' mystery? There was certainly a sacred discourse,
which could not have been concerned merely with corn

296


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

symbolism, as Varro implies, nor with nature philosophy,
as certain passages in Cicero seem to indicate. A part
of it may have explained the sacred symbols and it may
have been colored by the philosophy of the day. But
that could not have been all ; it is safe to affirm that this
discourse held out to the initiates a promise of future
happiness. Just how this was done we cannot say. Fou-
cart's notion that the whole object of the mysteries was,
like that of the Egyptian Book of the Dead, to provide
the initiates mere passwords and magic formulae to help
them on their road below and deliver them from the ter-
rors of Hell, is in harmony with his Egyptianizing theory
of their origin, but can no longer be maintained, even if
Egyptian influence can be traced in them. A passage in
Aristotle helps us in solving the mystery. He says that
the initiates " do not learn anything so much as feel cer-
tain emotions and are put into a certain mental attitude."
Thus the appeal must have been to the eye and imagina-
tion — perhaps through a sort of religious mesmerism in-
duced by the solemnity of the occasion, something akin
to our Christian communion service or Catholic mass, a
phenomenon not difficult to understand when we remem-
ber how susceptible Greek imagination was to the solemn
pomp of religious pageantry. The initiates would go
away, then, with a sense of closer union with the Powers
of the underworld and a conviction of their future weal.
These mysteries gave to Greek religion an atmosphere of
awe and mystery and promise which was largely absent
from the public cult. They must have awakened the
imagination of the initiates to great heights of spiritual
and moral grandeur — even if our knowledge of them does
not let us definitely postulate just what the moral or
spiritual dogmas were which they inculcated. They truly
were, as Dr. Farnell has said, " the highest and purest and
most spiritual product of Greek religion."

297


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

THE STATE OF RELIGION IN ATHENS IN THE FIFTH AND
FOURTH CENTURIES B.C.

The period roughly extending from 500 to 338 B.C.,
i.e., from the beginning of the Persian wars to the final
loss of Greek independence at the battle of Chseronea,
witnessed in secular history the ever-memorable struggle
of Greek and barbarian, the gradual rise and the down-
fall of the imperial city of Athens, the Peloponnesian war,
which, viewed from its results, was the greatest in history,
the emergence of the Macedonians as the first world
power. In the history of culture it saw the bloom of the
Attic drama and of Greek lyric in Pindar, the acme of
the world's greatest sculpture and architecture, the diffu-
sion of education and the rise of the scientific spirit
engendered by the Sophists, and the highest development
of philosophy in Plato. In brief, not only the restricted
Periclean age, but the two centuries taken together were
the greatest in the world's history. Consequently, it is
interesting for us to know what the cultivated Greeks in.
general and their greatest community, Athens, in particu-
lar thought about religion.

It is a popular fallacy that the old Homeric polytheism
had lost its hold on men's minds by the end of the fifth
century. But if we compare the beliefs then held with
those of Homer, we shall find that the same deities were
still worshiped, that no cult had disappeared nor any
of the popular rites fallen into decay. On the contrary,
during most of the century, the old system was stronger
than ever — even the old animistic belief in the river gods
being retained. New deities were added, as Pan from
Arcadia at the beginning of the century, and Asclepius
from Epidaurus toward the close. While the struggle
against Hannibal in Italy had caused the old Roman
faith to be shaken, the Greek struggle against Persia had
increased belief in the gods who had given them victory.
Zeus then received such titles as Hellenios, " the god of

298


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

the Greeks," his highest political title, and Eleutherios,
" the god of freedom." A deep conviction of the part
which the gods played in men's affairs grew up. Herod-
otus, Pindar and iEschylus looked upon the Persian
struggle as a conflict of moral forces, much as the Allies
look upon the present European struggle. Only the Del-
phic oracle, which had shown a vacillating un-Hellenic
spirit during the struggle, had lost its political influence.
Again during the Peloponnesian war it had openly taken
the side of Athens' enemies, and so thereafter lost all
reverence from the Attic people. In the fourth century
b.c v Demosthenes contemptuously speaks of it as " the
shadow of Delphi." The only influence it exerted hence-
forth was ethical and religious, when it became a sort of
private confessional, which gave sacerdotal advice.

The Modernist spirit of Ionia had not yet vitally
influenced the popular notions of religion. The fact that
Anaxagoras and Protagoras were tried and Socrates put
to death shows how strong the old polytheism still re-
mained. The mutilation of the Hermes on the eve of
the sailing of the Sicilian expedition toward the end of
the century caused such a commotion at Athens as indi-
rectly to destroy its hopes of success and entail the sub-
sequent downfall of the imperial city. People who laughed
at Aristophanes's and Euripides's burlesques of the gods
in the theatre were none the less devoted to the worship
of these deities. Art made anthropomorphism still
stronger throughout the fourth century; sculptures, vase
paintings and glyptics of this age are still the most per-
fect examples of religious art. Perhaps a more spiritual
belief than that of Greece would not have endured even
such masterpieces with equal patience. In any case, art
certainly helped to keep Greek religion from earlier yield-
ing to the influence of alien cults. The philosophers as
yet had made little protest against idolatry; Xenophanes

299


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

in the sixth century made the most notable, while in the
fourth the Stoics condemned both temples and idols.

The influence of literature in these centuries was no
less marked than that of art. The subject is too vast to
f more than adumbrate here. It is easy enough to collect
passages from Greek writers which bear on religion, but
it is difficult to say how much such material modified the
popular beliefs. Pindar, ^Eschylus and Sophocles seem
to have accepted the existing system with but little pro-
test and they tried to ennoble rather than to destroy it.
Pindar was the first literary preacher of Greece ; his Or-
phic eschatology first raised the subject of Paradise to
the level afterwards attained by Dante and Milton.
Sophocles and vEschylus, on the other hand, say little of
the hereafter; but all three writers clearly teach the maj-
/ esty and the mercy of Zeus and Destiny. Pindar gives
^is the brighter side, while ^Eschylus pictures the gloomy
forces of the world of shades. Pindar antedates Plato
in protesting against the ignoble features of the Epic
myths. Euripides belonged to a different period, to the
Age of Enlightenment, the mental attitude of Modern-
ism. Himself no philosopher, incapable of formulating
a system of thought or ethics and with few convictions,
he merely stimulated others by his doubts to think. We
cannot say what he believed, for he believed different
things at different times ; but it seems clear that his ulti-
mate idea of God was pantheistic. He protested strongly
against immoral myths, but his religious influence on the
people must have been small. Aristophanes, his contem-
porary, never understood him nor his position, but cham-
pioned the reaction against Modernism, holding it up to
ridicule with unparalleled sarcasm.

The influence of the philosophical protest in Greece
against religion is a subject on which many volumes
have been written. The physical notions of the early
Ionians, which gave birth to the free secular science of

300


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

Europe, were concerned with theories of cosmogony
and could not have clashed seriously with religion, be-
cause there were no sacred writings. Though finding
little in Zeus, they did not break with the popular faith,
but in their explanations went back to the Pelasgian
nature gods before Zeus. Thus Thales, the' first to seek
unity in things, taught that the world came from water,
i.e., the old nature deity Oceanus. In the sixth century,
however, thinkers became directly concerned with theology
and began to speculate on the nature of the godhead.
Many of their fragments disclose ideas hostile to the
concepts of polytheism, and the main trend of their specu-
lation was against anthropomorphism, tending to define
the godhead not as a person but as a spiritual power —
a tendency from theism to pantheism. Pythagoras, the
mathematician and Orphic mystic, was hostile to the pub-
lic worship, even though his followers compromised with
it. He explained the godhead in mathematical terms and
was willing to accept the gods, if he could only find their
mathematical equations. The strongest and severest pro-
test against the Homeric system was made in the name
of reason and morals by Xenophanes, the poet, theologian
and philosopher. In his famous fragments, preserved
to us by Clement of Alexandria, he thus assails polythe-
istic notions : " Mortals think the gods are born and
have dress and voice and form like their own." " The
Ethiopians imagine their gods are black and flat-nosed;
the Thracians make theirs blue-eyed and red-haired."
"If oxen or lions had hands or could draw with their
hands and make works of art like men, horses would
draw figures of gods like horses, oxen like oxen, giving
them bodies like the form which they themselves pos-
sessed." In another fragment he says, " Homer and
Hesiod ascribed to the gods everything disgraceful and
shameful among men, theft, adultery and deceit." Over
against such vulgar notions he sets his own idea that

301


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

" There is one God, greatest both among gods and men,
resembling mortals neither in form nor in thought." Thus
he rejected not only physical but mental anthropomor-
phism. This God " without effort swings the universe by
the purpose of his mind," and " ever abides in the same
place nor moves at all," for he is " all-seeing, all-hearing,
all mind." Thus Xenophanes's god is the Universe itself,
endued with sense and design. Heraclitus is contemptu-
ous in about the same way, denying that the universe
had a creator or a beginning : " This cosmic order, the
same for all beings, no god nor man made, but it always
was and is and shall be, ever-living fire, blazing up and
dying down." His scorn of the popular notions of re-
ligion is seen in this passage: " Men pray to idols, just
as if one were to converse with houses, not knowing what
is the nature of gods and houses." He called the Bac-
chanalian devotees " night roamers, magians, wild
women, mystse," and pronounced the initiations unholy.
He despised all the poets in general as the guides of the
populace, and in particular Homer and Hesiod, the former
of whom he said "ought to be cast out of the arena
and scourged."

Religion, however, had not parted company with phi-
losophy in the sixth and early years of the fifth centuries
B.c., for speculation as yet had only influenced the few.
But by the second half of the fifth century the state wor-
ship had to notice the philosophical protest, for this was
the period in which Anaxagoras, Protagoras and Socrates
(the latter in 399) were haled into the courts. By the
fourth century the need of religion was more real than
the state worship could satisfy, and so a strong impulse
was given to philosophical speculation. From Plato on-
wards philosophers were inspired with a desire to explain
the world religiously as well as metaphysically, and men
turned to philosophy for religious comfort. It is interest-
ing to know the attitude of Plato, the greatest of

302


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

Greek thinkers, toward the contemporary religion. Plato
was no revolutionary iconoclast of the popular notions
as Xenophanes and Heraclitis had been in the sixth or
Empedocles in the fifth century. He merely believed in
reforming the Homeric mythology, purging it of its im-
moral features — the stories of the conflict of wills among
the gods, their vengeance, jealousy and amours. In the
Republic (377~8, Jowett) he blames the poets for these
ignoble elements and says that they " ought not to be
lightly told to young and simple persons; if possible,
they had better be buried in silence." For " the young
man should not be told that in committing the worst
of crimes he is far from doing anything outrageous.
. . . and in this will only be following the example of
the first and greatest among the gods." He had no idea
of abolishing idols nor sacrifices — though, like his teacher
Socrates, he inculcated simple offerings. In the Epinomis
he says the legislator will not change a single detail of the
ritual, because he knows nothing of the inner truth back
of the form. Even in his most advanced metaphysical
speculations he leaves a place for the popular pantheon.
His last work, the Laws, reflects strongly the popular be-
liefs and a sympathy with them. Here he accepts most
of the religion of the old City-State, only purging the
myths about the godhead. In the Timceus he ranges the
Olympians below the supreme transcendental God of the
universe. Here, in the scale of divine creation, they are
given the third place, after the Sun and Moon and Planets,
which are the second works of the Creator, the first being
Cosmic Heaven. They are not altogether immortal nor
indissoluble, but are held together eternally by the will of
the highest God. To them was given the labor of creat-
ing man by weaving mortal and immortal together, and
God gave even a part of his own divinity and immortality
for this purpose. In this way the morality of mortals
is explained, which would have been inexplicable if man

303


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

had sprung directly from God. Thus we see Plato's
esoteric system left Olympianism almost unimpaired.
The old system was enough if it were only strengthened
morally. Later schools, which went by his name, were
more interested in purely religious speculations and finally
degenerated into the mystic superstition of Neo-Platonism.
Plato, then, contributed much to the dissemination in
Greece of belief in God's spiritual nature, and much to
the cleansing of the old Homeric pantheon of its cruder
and lower elements.

RELIGION IN THE HELLENISTIC AND ROMAN AGE

In conclusion let us briefly consider the state of re-
ligion in Greece after the loss of independence at the
hands of the Macedonians, during the so-called Hellenistic
and Grseco- Roman periods down to the time of St. Paul
and the earlier Gnostics.

With the establishment of the Macedonian empire
and the conquests of Alexander great changes were
wrought not only in the political and social life of
Greece, but in religion. Some of these changes were
in the direction of decay, while others heralded a new
life. From this period on the internal development of
Hellenism was practically at an end and its further his-
tory was concerned only with external changes. The
scene now shifts from the Balkan peninsula to an im-
perial world stretching from Spain to India, from the
sands of the Sahara to the steppes of Russia. Its centre
is no longer Athens, but in succession Alexandria, Per-
gamum, Antioch. It is not very difficult to understand
why the Greek language followed the armies of Alex-
ander and finally became the means of communication in
Egypt, Syria and the East. It is more difficult to under-
stand how Greek culture spread everywhere — even if we
do not feel obliged to believe the statement of Plutarch
that Homer was commonly read in Asia and that " the

304


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

children of the Persians, of the inhabitants of Susa and
Gedrosia played the tragedies of Euripides and Sophocles"
and that the " inhabitants of India, Bactria and the
Caucasus worshiped Greek gods." The explanation
has been succinctly given in these words of the historian
Burckhardt: "Greek culture alone had the capacity
to embrace and interpret all the rest of the world; its
spirit made a universal appeal through poetry, art and
philosophy."

Behind all the changes of this period was the con-
sciousness of a wide-spread failure of Greek ideals, which
changed the whole viewpoint of men's ideas of life and of
the soul. First, there was the failure of the City-State,
which was crushed by Philip and later by the military
monarchies set up by Alexander's successors. The decay
of local patriotism meant the decay of the idea of patriot-
ism as a Greek ideal. Cosmopolitanism means devotion
to no state. Consequently, politics, the lode-stone of the
older Greeks, no longer attracted men of ability or char-
acter. The failure of the City-State also caused men to
lose faith in government in general. It made little differ-
ence how opulent the kingdom of Egypt might be or how
powerful or stable the empire of Rome might become;
still to a thoughtful Greek of this age, with memories of
the old independence and liberty, life seemed hardly worth
living. Even the propaganda of Hellenism, instituted by
Alexander with the idea of teaching Greek ideas to bar-
barians, seemed to be resulting slowly in the destruction
of the ideas it tried to spread. Worst of all, with the
loss of the City-State the influence of the old Olympian
theology waned, for the two were bound up together.
Even before Philip's conquest the philosophical assault
on the ancient system had slowly gained ground and had
undermined the popular faith without putting an adequate
substitute in its place. Men still perfunctorily observed
the outward forms of religion but had lost faith in their
20 30s


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

efficacy. With unbelief came superstition, and comfort
was sought in foreign cults.

Amid the debris of ancient ideals the Hellenistic Greek
•/ looked to himself, to his own feelings and thoughts. In-
stead of trying to live justly, as Socrates had inculcated,
and to help his fellow-men by the example of a pious life,
it was now his aim to seek personal holiness and salvation.
Whereas the aim of the old religion had been the family,
the tribe and the City, the aim of the new was the indi-
vidual. The old Greek had gloried in good works; the
later gloried in his personal faith. The loss of political
hope, the despair of hoping to arrive at truth through
patient inquiry, gave birth to a new ideal — mysticism,
asceticism, selfish individualism. Consequently, although
the new age was one of enlightenment, of great thinkers
like Zeno, Cleanthes, Chrysippus, still it was full of
morbidity and pessimism. The Greek now turned to
revelations and mysteries, to the neglect of this transitory
life in the hope of an eternal sinless one to come. The
' physical and political wdrld was no longer the interest of
religion ; its horizon from now on was beyond the tomb.

The decay of Olympianism was very gradual. Though
long despised by educated men, it did not lose its hold on
the people all at once. Polytheism — the belief that the
world was mercifully and justly governed by a number
of gods — was hard to get rid of even when it could not
withstand criticism and when it no longer satisfied the
moral yearnings of men. Thus for some time yet there
were no deserted temples nor any decline in the old State
festivals. Olympianism was still able to make conquests
even in the .fo urth century B.C. — even in faraway Car-
thage. In the next century "rFgot a new lease of life in
Rome, where its last chapter was to be written centuries
later in the Imperial Age. In these later centuries mothers
gave to their babies personal names which show they still
believed in the old gods — Apollodorus, " the gift of

306


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

Apollo," Hermodorus, the " gift of Hermes," Apollonius,
Athenseus, Dionysius and many others. Zeus, Athena
and Apollo, the leaders and guardians of the old City-
State, were the first of the deities to disappear when their
citadels fell. But Athena, though shorn of all civic and
political power, was destined for centuries yet to be the
Madonna of Athens, and Zeus was still to enjoy his old
religious character. Pausanias, who wrote in the second
century of our era, probably reflects the religious belief
of ordinary men of his day when he says : " All men
agree that Zeus reigns in heaven" (ii, 24, 4). The
Mainotes of Laconia, dwelling on the rugged slopes of
Taygetus, still worshiped some of the Olympians five
hundred years after the rest of the Roman Empire had
accepted the religion of Jesus, finally becoming Christian-
ized only in the reign of Basil towards the end of the ninth
century. It might be added that modern Greek folk-lore
still shows indubitable traces of the old polytheism, such
as belief in Nereids, Satyrs, Dryads and even the Fates.
iWhen a Greek calls the thunder " starry axe " or says
" God is raining," he is still unconsciously believing in
the powers of the old Sky-god Zeus, as he is in those of
Poseidon, when he says, as on the island of Zante, that
earthquakes are caused by " God shaking his locks."
Such popular ideas have little in common with those of
the Christian heaven; for it is as joyless and gloomy
a realm to the modern peasant as it was to the men of
Homer's day. Coins are still placed in the mouths of
the dead in Smyrna and parts of Macedonia. Even
Charon himself lives on as Charos, though he is no longer
the grim ferryman, but the black angel of death riding
a great black horse. Similarly many of the modern festi-
vals are the direct descendants of those of the ancient
Greeks.

The dominant note, then, of the latter centuries of
Hellenism was personal religion. As the older cults

307


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

slowly lost their hold and a craving was born in the
individual for an intimate union with deity, a great im-
pulse was given to the old mysteries. Thus in the fourth
century the Eleusinia were extended, those of Andania
were reorganized, and those of Megalopolis were instil
tuted. In the later centuries foreign ones were added,
as those of Samothrace, of Attis, of Isis, of the Great
Mother, and finally of Mithra. Some of their ideas
passed over into Christianity, such as the saving grace of
baptism, the communion with God by a holy sacrament,
the mystic death and rebirth of the neophyte. Such rites
and beliefs satisfied men's yearning for immortality or
absorption in the deity. Sometimes, as in the mysteries
of Cybele and Sabazius, the sense of divinity was com-
municated by the simulation of a holy marriage or sex
communion with goddess or god. Mainly for such rea-
sons all these mysteries were indiscriminately condemned
by the Church Fathers.

Apart from the mysteries, many brotherhoods — thiasi
— were formed, devoted to special cults. Secret societies
devoted to the Olympian gods had existed in Greece, as
we have seen, from early times, but none was instituted
for the service of alien deities till the very end of the
fifth century. In the Macedonian period we have many
inscriptional records of such guilds. They show the de-
velopment of humanitarian ideas in religion, since for-
eigners were fully admitted, whereas in the older mysteries
only Greeks could be initiates. Thus it was no longer
blood relationship which brought men together, but a feel-
ing of fellowship with some god. Such brotherhoods
were born of personal religion, and also quickened its
progress and became models for the early Christian so-
cieties. They bear witness to the fusion of ideas between
the West and East, of which Alexander had dreamed; for
they were missionaries in the movement which we call
theocrasia — the blending of the religions of West and

308


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

East. This was no new idea of the Hellenistic Age, for
Herodotus shows it was natural in the fifth century to
interpret foreign gods in terms of Greek, and Euripides
had actually commended Cybele as Demeter. But before
Alexander's day it was dangerous to introduce foreign
cults into Greece. Some few had gotten in about the time
of the fifth century, and even earlier Aphrodite's wor-
ship at Corinth had become contaminated with the im-
pure ritual of an Oriental cult. But the inevitable was
sure to come and Greece, though already rich in gods,-
became hospitable to the gods of strangers, ultimately
receiving them from Egypt, Phoenicia, Syria, Assyria,
Persia and Asia Minor. With the new gods alien rituals
came and they were open to Greeks and foreigners, to
women and slaves. Before the fourth century had passed
Athens became alarmed at the invasion. Phryne, the
model of Praxiteles, was tried on a charge of affiliating
with an alien cult. But the legal barriers were weak
and we see the Phrygian Sabazius introduced at the end
of the fifth, and the Syrian Aphrodite, the Thracian
Cotytto and others in the fourth.

These new worships were generally mystic and con-
sequently were viewed with suspicion and generally con-
demned, though without reason, as immoral. After
Alexander's time things got worse. With the establish-
ment of the kingdoms of his successors, the old gentile
barriers of religion broke down completely. The whole
later history of paganism is concerned with the gradual
influx of Eastern ideas. So far as religion was concerned
it was Asia conquering Greece, for Greece was far more
open to Oriental influences than Asia was to Hellenic.
Some of these princes instituted cults for both Greeks
and Orientals. Thus Ptolemy, for political reasons,
founded the temple of the god Serapis, who had been
worshiped for centuries at Sinope, and who was trans-
ported to Alexandria with great ceremony; the Syrian

309


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

town of Bambyce was resettled by Seleucus as Hierapolis,
the " sacred city " ; the personality of Atargatis, a Hittite
goddess worshiped in Carchemish and corresponding to
the Canaanite Ashtart, became blended with Aphrodite,
Artemis and other deities. In later centuries Egyptian,
Syrian and Greek gods were fused together by the same
sacrifices and ritual formulae. The name Zeus was finally
applied to so many Eastern gods that it quite lost its
personal meaning and simply meant " God." Varro, the
most learned of the Romans, in the first century b.c. said
it made little difference what name was used if the same
thing was thereby understood. He looked upon Jahweh
and Jupiter as the same god. Thus the theocrasia resulted
not only in more mysticism, but also in a tendency toward
monotheism and helped prepare the way for the advent of
Christianity. We owe this great idea of tolerance, then,
to the Greeks ; it was an idea impossible for the Hebrews
to attain. The process of fusion was completed when
finally Christianity entered Greece in the wake of these
Eastern creeds. Theodosius II ordered the destruction
of all temples, like that of the Serapeum, and in 529 a.d.
Justinian closed the schools of Athens, the last refuge of
Hellenic thought.

Another characteristic of this age of personal re-
ligion was the proclaiming of immortality. The initiate
into the faith of Osiris, of Attis, of Mithra, was con-
forted with the promise of a happy future. But the
doctrine of immortality taught by the old Orphic sects
was the most popular of all. Orphism lasted on into
the first century a.d. Its success was due partly to the
fact that its god had been Hellenized centuries' before,
and because its ritual and its divine names — Phanes,
Zagreus, etc. — had long been familiar. Furthermore, its
picture of the hereafter was Greek in spirit.

One of the most monstrous beliefs which grew to
great proportions in this age was the deification of men

310


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

living and dead. Germs of this belief are found in the
sixth and fifth centuries, when heroic honors were paid
to certain great men after death. Though the idea is
foreign to Homer — for even Castor and Pollux in the
Iliad were merely the mortal brothers of Helen and had
died before the Trojan expedition — it may go back to
the Mycenaean Greeks, as attendance at the tombs of
heroes shows. 5 The first example of it which we have
in literature is the apotheosis of Achilles in the ZEthiopis
by Arctinus of Miletus, composed at the close of the
eighth century b.c. The first historical example we have
of a living man receiving worship is the cult of the Spar-
tan general Lysander on the island of Samos at the end
of the fifth century B.C., mentioned by Plutarch. The
same writer also says that the Thasians in the next cen-
tury wished to apotheosize the Spartan King Agesilaus,
but that he refused the honor. Later at the end of the
fourth century the Athenians attributed divinity to both
Alexander and Demetrius Poliorcetes. It was easy for a
people accustomed to the idea of man-gods to feel such a
conception realized in Alexander. His great power, bril-
liant personality and incredible conquests put men into
the right attitude of mind to worship him. Besides, most
of the kings he conquered were looked upon by their
subjects as gods, and it was therefore felt that he was
no man but a greater god who had destroyed them. His
successors were men of similar power; they had huge
armies and wealth and could accomplish seemingly im-
possible things — rebuild by their will cities which had
been destroyed by war or earthquake, allay without effort
devastating famines, destroy or save by their armies
whole provinces. Thus in his lifetime Ptolemy was offi-
cially called Soter, "Savior," or Euergetes, "benefactor" ;

"Homer, II. ii, 550 seq., knew the Attic worship of Erechtheus.
This, however, is in the late Catalogue of the Ships.

311


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Seleucus was called Nicator, " Victor," and Antiochus,
Epiphanes, the " God Manifest." When we read that
Aristotle, the soberest of philosophers, erected an altar
to Plato, we have a different phenomenon, for this was
no superstitious worship. He did not call his master a
god, but merely recognized the divine element in his soul.
It is a great mind indeed which makes its divine man
out of such material as Plato ; it is a far commoner sort
which makes gods out of kings and conquerors.

Eastern polydaemonism infected the mystic, theosophi-
cal literature of these later centuries. The early Greeks
were not believers in good and evil spirits, but we find
the later Greeks using exorcisms and conjurations against
them. This superstitition has been inherited by the
Greeks of to-day. The priests of the Orthodox Church
still exorcise " daemons " at baptisms, which is surely
a reminiscence of the beliefs of the Hellenistic Age.
We must also not neglect to mention the most curious
record of the fusion of later Hellenism with Oriental
worship — the so-called Hermetic literature, which Dr. Far-
nell calls the "most fantastic product of the human
mind." It pretends to go back to Hermes Trismegistus,
the Greek name of the Egyptian god Thoth, the reputed
author of many works on occult science, especially al-
chemy, theosophy and astrology. These were lost and
other books by Alexandrine Neo-Platonists appeared in
the second century as a jumble of philosophical and theo-
sophical ideas. The philosophical doctrine of this litera-
ture is not, however, earlier than the third century B.C.,
and most of it is later. The need of a mediator between
God and man is constantly felt in these rituals. The
formula, "I am Thou and Thou art I," is the key-note
of these writings and their spirit is an unnatural fusion
of Greek philosophy and Oriental theosophy and magic.
It had some influence on Christian metaphysics. Gilbert

312


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

Murray happily sums up the influence of this fantastic
superstition on Greece by saying that " Astrology fell
on the Hellenic mind as a new disease falls upon some
remote island people." 6

THE PHILOSOPHICAL REFINEMENT OF RELIGION

In concluding this summary sketch of the religious
ideas of later Hellenism, it will be interesting very briefly
to notice what substitutes philosophy gave after the
downfall of Olympianism. Aristotle guides us in our
inquiry by stating that the origin of human knowledge
of the divine is two- fold — the phenomena of the sky
and the phenomena of the soul. Since it was felt that
there must be a mind behind the regular motions of the
heavenly body, it was easy to regard the sun and moon
as divine. This step had already been taken by Pythag-
oras, Plato and Aristotle. If these are divine, then the
Earth and the planets and stars as well as the elements,
Water, Air, and especially Fire — for Plato affirmed that
the gods were made of Fire — must also be divine. Most
of the Hellenistic thinkers, then, like Chrysippus, regarded
the " Sun and Moon and Stars " as divine, conceiving
them as "animate, divine and eternal beings," i.e., as
gods. As to the phenomena of the soul, the speculations
of philosophers after Plato, with a few notable exceptions
like the Roman Stoics, tended away from the outer world
to the inner world of the soul. The Stoics made the soul
a part of the divine life and taught that the savior of
mankind was not the earthly prince, but he who saved
men's souls. For he revealed to mortals the knowledge
of God — a knowledge which was not merely intellectual
in nature, but a complete union. And the method used by

'Four Stages of Greek Religion, p. 125. I am greatly indebted
*? tt « • cha P ter > " The Failure of Nerve," in my treatment of
the Hellenistic Age, as well as for the article by Farnell in Hast-
ings Dictionary.

313


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

all Hellenistic and later thinking in their efforts to make
the people understand this knowledge can be summed up,
as Gilbert Murray says, in the one word Allegory. From
the earlier Stoics onward they all apply this method to
everything — to Homer, to religious traditions, to rituals
and to the world. Thus, at the beginning of the period,
Cleanthes looked upon the universe as a great mystic
pageant in which the divine Stars were the dancers and
the Sun the torch-bearing priest. His pupil, Chrysippus,
reduced Homer's Olympians to physical and ethical prin-
ciples. Finally Sallustius, the contemporary of the em-
peror Julian in the fourth century of our era, came to
look upon the whole world of matter as a great myth.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

General Works : L. R. Farnell : Cults of the Greek States, 5 vols.,
1896-1908 (the best study of the gods) ; id. article Greek Re-
ligion, in Hastings' Dictionary of Religion and Ethics, vol. 6,
392-425; id. article in Encycl. Brit., nth ed., 12 : 527-30; A. Fair-
banks : Handbook of Greek Religion, 1910 ; J. Harrison : Re-
ligion of Ancient Greece (primer), 1905; Sir Gilbert Murray:
Pour Stages of Greek Religion, 1912 ; G. F. Moore : History
of Religions, I (1913), 406 ff; L. F. A. Maury: Histoire des
religions de la Grece Antique^ 3 vols., 1857-59 (the most readable
history); E. Meyer: Geschichte des Altertums, II, 1893-1902
(the best historical account, treating the subject in relation to the
political, social and economic development of the Greeks) ; P. D.
Chantepie de la Saussaye : Lehrbuch der Religionsgeschichte, 3d
ed., 1906 (Greek Section).

Early Period : D. G. Hogarth : art. " vEgean Religion,'' in Hastings'
Dictionary of Religion and Ethics (1908), I, 141 seq.; H. R.
Hall : JEgean Archeology, 1915 ; A. Evans : Mycenaan Tree
and Pillar Cult, tooi ; T. D. Seymour : Life in the Homeric Age,
1908, ch. xiv ; De Visser : Die nicht menschengestaltigen Gotter
der Griechen, 1903.

Eschatology and Mysteries : Farnell : Cults. 3 : 127-213, 343-367; id.
art. "Mystery," Encycl. Brit., 19: 1 17-123; J. Harrison: Prole-
gomena to the Study of Greek Religion, 2d ed., 1908 (Orphic
formulae); Goblet d'Alviella; Eleusinia, 1903; P. Foucart: Les
Grands Mysteres d'Eleusis, 1900; id. Les associations religieuses
chez les Grecs, 1873; E. Rohde: Psyche, 6th ed., 1903; A.
Dietrich : Nekyia, 1893 ; H. K. E. de Jong : Das antike Mys-
terienwesen, 1909; L. Weniger: Vber das Collegium der
Thyiaden, 1876.

Divination : W. R. Halliday : Greek Divination, 1912 ; A. Bouche
Leclercq: Histoire de la Divination, 4 vols., 1879-81.

314


THE RELIGION OF GREECE

Speculation: L. Campbell: Religion in Greek Literature, 1898; J.
Adam: Religious Thinkers of Greece, 1908; E. Caird: Evolu-
tion of Theology in the Greek Philosophers, 2 vols., 1904; T.
Gomperz : The Greek Thinkers, 1912 ; P. Decharme : La
Critique des traditions religeuses chez les Grecs, 1904; J.
Girard: Le Sentiment religieux en Grece, 1879; E. Zeller: Die
Philosophie der Griechen, 5 vols.

Worship and Monuments : W. H. D. Rouse : Greek Votive Offer-
ings, 1902; E. Reisch: Griech. Weihgeschencke, 1890; P. Sten-
gel: Die griech. Kultusaltertiimer, 2d ed., 1898; J. Overbeck:
Griech. Kunstmythologie, 1871-87.

Festivals : A. Mommsen : Feste der Stadt Athen im Altertum, 1898;
M. P. Nilsson : Griechische Feste, 1906.

Influence on Christianity: E. Hatch: The Influence of Greek
Ideas and Usages Upon the Christian Church, 1890.

In writing the above chapter I wish particularly to express my
indebtedness to the works of Fairbanks, J. Harrison (especially
the primer), Hogarth, Hall, Murray, Farnell (especially the art. in
Hastings' Dictionary), and articles in the EncycL Brit.


3IS


CHAPTER XI

RELIGION OF THE ROMANS
BY GEORGE DEPUE HADZSITS

The history of the religious experiences of the Roman
people falls quite naturally into four epochs which we
can distinguish temporally and temperamentally :

(i) The long period, indefinite in time, antecedent
to the foundation of Rome, when the ancestors of the
Romans were migrating from the Danube Valley and
the Northland of Italy and were occupying the plains of
Latium to which they were led not by any divine guid-
ance but by instinct, by the laws of Nature and of eco-
nomic necessity. The mists of this pre-historic period
have lifted, and, thanks to the science of the archaeologist,
the anthropologist and the philologist we can discern with
amazing clarity the main outlines of the civilization of
a people living in the iron and bronze ages; a belief in
magic, a worship of objects and of spirits controlled the
consciousness and the conscience of a primitive people
who in large measure handed on their own primitive
dreads to their descendants, the Romans.

(2) The regal period of Rome, falling traditionally
between 754 and 509 B.C., within which there were two
moments of special consequence to the evolution of
Roman religion, the first of which we associate with the
name of the pious King Numa and the second of which
was determined by an Etruscan conquest of Rome. The
Romans always held the name of Numa in particular
reverence. They had already passed from the animistic
stage to that of theism and, as far as it has ever been
given by Providence to any one man to formulate the
religious habits of a people so that these remained — >

316


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

surveyed in the large — for centuries in the mold in which
he had cast them, such was the opportunity, or the mis-
sion, as you will, of the statesman who brought out of
the chaos of earlier beliefs and practices the cosmic order
of a state religion. The Etruscan influence confirmed
the earlier, inherent tendency toward organization of
ritual but the building of the Etruscan temple to Jupiter
on the Capitoline hill with a statue of that God repre-
sented the imposition of a new idea upon Roman religious
beliefs, of epochal importance in its consequences. This
imposing temple, reared on the Capitoline and proudly
surveying the future growth of the whole city, became
and remained the centre of religious aspirations through-
out the 500 years of the Republic; it became the symbol
of republican Rome and to our imagination looms as
large as the Parthenon in Athens or the Temple at
Jerusalem. By the close of the sixth century B.C., the
genuine Roman religion, the pure religious expression
of the native stock, had almost attained the limit of
its growth which in itself was an augury of impending,
momentous changes.

(3) In the long stretch of 300 years, following 500
B.C., from 500 to 200 B.C., there came into Roman life
a series of national crises with which the old religion was
not able to cope ; in moments of intense emotional strain
the cry went forth for the help of foreign gods and from
Greece Rome learned to worship gods in human form,
with human virtues and human frailties. The resultant
humanization of the Roman gods stripped them of theii
mystery which had been the essence and the secret of their
power. Far from enriching an earlier barren concept of
deus, plastic and sensuous representations and mythologies
of gods merely placed them in a clearer air without in-
creasing their distinction. The old machinery of wor-
ship did not break under the strain though admitting
of some modifications, and religiosity was still deter-

317


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

mined by faithful observance of established ritual. The
adoption of the sensational cult of Magna Mater from
Asia Minor — near the close of this period — was fraught
with gravest peril to the religion of the Roman state
which with the year 200 b.c. (approximately) entered
upon the last stage of its evolution.

(4) The deep-seated religious distrust and discontent,
implied in the establishment of the Great Mother's wor-
ship upon the Palatine, the very cradle of Roman life,
bore abundant fruit in the next 150 years, when politics
corrupted religious institutions and philosophies men-
aced the very existence of all orthodox faith by their
contradictory, rival definitions of that Unknown Power,
outside, which man calls God. Civil wars, besides, shook
men's faith in man and in government, and the cataclysm
threatened to engulf the gods who had carried Rome
through earlier tragic experiences. There appear upon
the horizon the faces of strange gods from the Orient
who seemed to satisfy a personal craving and an indi-
vidual yearning for a closer touch with God.

(5) But when Rome emerged triumphant from her
bloody trial, there followed a reaction in favor of the old
gods, and the will and the skill of Augustus easily directed
a revival of such depth and magnitude as almost tobewith-
out a parallel in history. Underneath the turbulent waters
of politics and philosophy there had flowed a deeper current
of religious trust which had, almost insensibly, brought
about an adjustment betweer the Greek and the Roman
religions so that a fusion of these arose in the " Grseco-
Roman orthodoxy " of the close of the first century b.c.
and of the imperial period. There still remained a sub-
stratum of genuine Roman beliefs, and Numa's genius
still presided over Rome in a continuation of ceremonies
and of forms of worship as old as Rome herself. Even
with new ceremonies and with the organization of the
Emperor worship, the idea of formalism remained para-

318


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

mount in the state religion. The way to salvation for
the primitive Italian, to whom the good will of the gods
was a burning question, seemed to lie along the road of
ritual, and likewise it was through cult that the imperial
Roman thought to save his soul. The extraordinary
hold of Roman religion, extending over a space of iooo
years and more, rests as much upon the Roman's practical
nature and his essential lack of imagination as upon his
respect for state authority and tradition. Through king-
ship, through republic and through empire the religion
of the state survived, never democratic in any real sense,
never spiritual in any deep sense. Constantine beheld
the sign of the cross in the skies and in 325 a.d. the Nicene
creed was adopted, but it was not till 394 a.d. that Theo-
dosius closed the doors of the ancient and venerable temple
of Vesta, and forbade the worship of the Lares and the
Penates. Some festivals survived for another 100 years
and others have remained with change of content to the
present time. In its formalism, Catholicism has inherited
Rome's greatest legacy to religious history.

As we pause for a moment on the threshold of
Roman religion, we become aware of the existence there
of a belief in magic, a worship of objects, and of spirits, —
a triple inheritance from past ages which a tenacious,
religious conservatism of the following centuries never
completely disowned throughout the political, social and
intellectual development of the Roman people. Many
survivals of a primitive age persisted, some with force,
some archaic and the targets of fault-finding arrows, some
remaining to the eternal enslavement of Roman freedom
and the Roman religious nature. Sympathetic magic
was at the very root of Roman religion and to the latest
days to the minds of the superstitious at the festival of
the Carmentalia the spells of the wise -women, the Car-
mentes, assisted at child-birth, while at the Fordicidia

319


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the sacrifice of pregnant cows in the middle of April
aided the sprouting seed. To be sure, a Cynic of the age
of Nero laughed at the folly of the antiquated institution
of the Aqtuelicium, but the pontiffs solemnly carried the
sacred stone to the Capitoline and prayed to Jupiter for
rain until the people were drenched like rats by the
responsive rain that fell in bucketfuls. The influence
of the early magician must have been almost boundless
as we learn from J. G. Frazer, and the perversity of
human nature not to recognize the proper relation between
cause and effect gave even in historic times power to the
Luperci whose magic strips of goat-skin lashed the un-
offending backs of hopeful women who placed themselves
in the way of priests celebrating holiday in February.
The fascination of magic runs through the miraculous
tale that is told of the acquisition by the Romans of a
shield from the sky which was to be a pledge of Rome's
empire. Faunus and Picus were dwellers in a grove at
the foot of the Aventine hill and by their incantations
brought Jupiter down from his habitation above ; Jupiter
promised Numa a pledge of empire^ and on the following
day in the presence of a startled people the God thrice
thundered without a cloud, thrice darted his lightnings
and — behold! a shield, gently poised on the breeze, fell
at their feet. To the magician, prayer and propitiation
were unknown, but the countless moods of the primitive
Italian responded variously to his mysterious environ-
ment; failure of magic gave birth to a degree of humility
and reverence in the presence of dissociate and uncon-
trollable phenomena of lightning, thunder, clouds, moan-
ing winds, earthquakes, volcanic disturbances, floods and
echoes.

The majesty of the primeval forest inspired a venera-
tion that lived in the worship of the sacred fig-tree of the
Palatine and the sacred oak of Jupiter Feretrius on the
Capitoline. It was near an ancient cypress -tree that had

320


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

been guarded through many years by the religious awe
of his fathers, that ./Eneas appointed a meeting place for
his refugees from burning Troy. The worship of bound-
ary stones, too, was never lost even in the later fully
developed cult of the god Terminus whose symbol —
marking the point at which the properties of two or
three owners converged — was holy in the eyes of the coun-
try people who had buried fruits of the earth, bones,
ashes and blood of a victim where the symbol was firmly
fixed in the ground. That worship of animals also ex-
isted among the primitive Latins is the belief of Reinach,
although Wissowa is equally emphatic that such was not
the case. The cult of other natural objects doubtless
played a more prominent part in Roman religion than the
worship of animals, but all the circumstances of the
Latin Festival strongly suggest that in that ancient cere-
mony on the Alban mountain we have — continued from
primitive times to the third century a.d. — a common
meal of a sacred victim, a sacrament, a communion on
the part of the deputies with the god, the victim, and each
other. The, peculiarly solemn nature of this ceremony
on the hills that dominate the whole Latin plain carries
us back to the ancient days when cattle were sacred
animals, when a pastoral people were groping about for
objects upon which to fasten a sentiment, profounder than
any secular feeling, until they could conceive the idea of
a spirit haunting objects and could transfer the emotion
of awe and reverence to the spirit of the thing.

Lucretius was well aware that there was a stage in the
evolution of Roman religion when a life, analogous to
human life — inspired by a fearful contemplation of in-
comprehensible phenomena and confirmed by the mysteries
of dreams — was attributed to aspects of Nature. The
primitive Latin came to feel that his whole world was
filled with vague, ill-defined spirits or Powers, invisible
and intangible, more potent in the Universe than himself
21 321


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

or his magic. It was a fantastic world in which he lived,
a world through which these spirits or hob-goblins danced
and with whom he must needs make his peace. These
forces were the products of an animistic stage, and the
significant term of nitmina defined the Will that was
theirs. Numina lived in the trees, in the springs, in the
fields, at the hearth, in the cupboard, at the threshold;
they were associated with women and child-birth, with
men and procreation, with the crops, with the woodland,
with the cattle and the fruits, with the earth and the
boundaries of the fields. This polydaemonism was a poly-
theism in germ, the natural product of a manifold world
that was pluralistic in its variety and suggestiveness. In
this entanglement of the real and the visionary, fear was
a constant element, the real spring as Petronius thought
of Roman religious feeling. Virgil caught the dramatic
spirit of this situation which he represented as follows :

E'en then rude hinds the spot revered;
E'en then the wood, the rock they feared.
Here in this grove, these wooded steeps,
Some god unknown his mansion keeps.

The first theology of the ancestors of the Romans con-
sisted in his knowledge of these numina and their dwell-
ing places, and his ritual was determined by a need of
propitiation and expiation through the performance of
proper rites and sacrifices upon the fields and in the home.
There must have been constant fear of trespassing upon
forbidden territory, of offending or of alienating, and of
suffering from wrongs committed wittingly or unwit-
tingly. The whole future history of Roman ritual is an
eloquent monument to the ancient, deep emotional dis-
turbance upon which the Roman religion rests. Many
numina survived to a later age, quite as vague and in-
definite as they were at the beginning ; so, too, that orig-
inal impelling and compelling fear manifested itself re-
peatedly in the most startling ways, constantly revealed

322


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

in the pages of Livy's descriptions of innumerable prodi-
gies and expiations. Furrina, a goddess of the state
pantheon, who had a priest of her own and a special
festival in her honor, remained to the end a vague numen,
whose nature and functions in Cicero's day were a pure
matter of conjecture. We read of a ceremony connected
with the worship of the household in historic times that
well reflects the early anxiety and scruple that filled the
life of the primitive Latin in the midst of the wild forests
and in the presence of imposing mountains. Following
the birth of a child three gods were thought of as guard-
ing the home against the intrusion by night of the half-
wild deity, Silvanus ; three men took their places as guards
at the threshold and with the symbols of the three pro-
tecting divinities the one hews at the threshold with his
axe, the second pounds with his pestle, and the third
sweeps with his branches or twigs that serve as a broom —
all intended to keep away the malevolent numen, Silvanus,
who never in the later history of Roman religion passed
into the higher rank of a real god. The guardian deities,
Intercidona, Pilumnus and Deverra, likewise remained
shadowy numina such as originally had filled the life of
the primitive settler before he had even invented names
for these spirits, before he had lifted himself out of a
life of extreme superstition and uncertainty into a clearer
knowledge of gods and a clearer conception of his proper
relations with those gods. But gradually through a deeper
consciousness and a riper experience gods were evolved
out of the numina, the regular succession of the seasons
inspired festivals, the worship upon the fields and in the
home was highly developed, and all of these elements were
essential material ready at hand to serve as the basis for
Rome's State worship.

Numa might be said to have given Rome her " re-
ligious charter," so deep, and profound upon the whole
subsequent religious history of the city was the influence

323


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

of this organization of beliefs and practices on behalf
of the State which we associate with the name of the
second traditional king whose rule, following the chron-
ology of Livy, fell within the years of 717-674 B.C. Rome
had her gods, the gods of the fathers and ancestors of
the Romans, who had all the sanction of an ancient,
hereditary belief. Rome's gods, whether they became
such at the time of Numa or before, represented a selec-
tion from the larger number of gods worshiped upon
the fields and in the home; these gods of the State were
called her di indigetes, or native divinities, and although
the number of gods whose cults were adopted by the City-
State during the centuries that followed, was great, yet
the circle of original deities remained for over 500 years
a closed circle, held in peculiar veneration. Although a
matter of gradual growth, the final elaborate organization
of state priesthoods, the incorporation into the body of
state-ritual of earlier field and home cults and ceremonials
for the divine protection of the corporate life of the com-
munity was due — as all Roman tradition had it — to the
master mind of a great statesman. Neither seer nor
prophet, but a practical Roman, he laid the permanent
foundations for the Roman state's Jus Divinum, that
highly organized legal code defining all the relations be-
tween man and his gods. The inherent Roman genius for
order and discipline is no less apparent in all of this than
a fundamental concept of reasonableness.

The gods of the Roman people, the gods of the City-
State, reflect very clearly the great, vital interests of a
pastoral and agricultural community which was concerned
for the welfare of its cattle, the success of its crops, and
the safety of its homes. The practical daily life, the
struggle for existence, the strife with rival neighboring
settlements are eloquently recorded in the names of divini-
ties who had been closely identified with definite areas
and who had presided over the life of their worshipers in

324


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

its totality. As gods of the state, they became the pro-
tectors and guarantors of that new experiment in civic life
upon the banks of the Tiber, destined to such an ex-
traordinary career. At a later time the credit for that
miracle of growth and success was given to the gods by
an unquestioning people whose firm, deep faith finds ex-
pression in the eloquent preface of one of Rome's greatest
historians; if it be allowed any people to consecrate its
origins and to refer to the gods as their authors, the
Roman people are entitled to such a glorification of their
success in war.

Representing a stage of evolution from the earlier
numina of pre-history, these gods were not as yet definitely
anthropomorphic, but as mysterious gods they exercised
unlimited power within definite domains. There was
among these departmental gods a clear and sharp differ-
entiation and specialization of duties and functions, for
the ripening grain, the harvest, the woodland and the
forest, the flowers, the springs and rivers, the pastures,
the mildew, the seed in the ground, the earth, the bound-
aries of the field, fire, birth and death, the door-way and
the hearth were among the spheres within which these
divinities exercised their influence. Three gods, how-
ever, loomed large and in Jupiter, Mars and Quirinus we
recognize a superior and dominating quality that dis-
tinguished them above all the rest. Jupiter, the great sky-
god of light, of rain and of sunshine, whose favor was
so essential for the fields and for the vineyards, who
gave dramatic signs of approval or of disapproval through
the thunder and the lightnings, was the one god far re-
moved from the immediate environment of man which had
given birth to his numerous other divinities. When the
gods of the fields and of the home became state divinities,
as state gods they assumed the responsibility for the com-
mon welfare of all whose life was dependent upon the
products of field and stream and who resided within the

325


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

City-home within which they themselves had metaphori-
cally taken up their own residence.

Characterized chiefly by a Power which it was natural
for the Romans to deify, these gods, " impersonal indi-
vidualities," knew no plastic representations. The Roman
showed little imagination about his gods, and he was as
slightly concerned with their personality as he was with
attachment of ethical qualities to them. Though nature-
gods, there was no personification in any real sense of
nature and her forces that we find here. The epithet of
pater betrays no real sense of the fatherhood of god nor
was there any revelation of human relationships between
the gods. No fairy tales or mythologies sprang into
existence as the expression of a speculative tendency, nor
psalms and hymns as the lyrical outburst of religious
emotion. There were no further creeds or dogmas except
such as defined the provenance of these functional deities.
Eminently practical, these gods were not the product of
soaring phantasies about the stars, the sun and the moon,
the storm, the ocean-roar or forest darkness ; it was not
a yearning of the spirit for the infinite, it was not a lifting
of self over the mountains to the skies that suggested the
nature of these gods. Least of all was the sublimity of
the Hebraic phrase present : " In the beginning God
created the heavens and the earth," nor the consciousness
of a cosmogony in which the spirit of God moved through
the darkness and created light. Yet these gods were
sufficient unto the needs of Numa's day as they carried
all the responsibilities of a narrow, realistic universe in
becoming the divine champions of the City-State. Out
of a deep anxiety they had been born, and upon the fields
and in the home the flame of a genuine religious feeling
burned upon the altars, where the ritualistic fulfillment
of religious obligations was scrupulously observed. What
degree of sentiment or enthusiasm there existed is beyond
our ken. But the state supplemented the poverty of the

326


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

god-idea with an elaboration of ritual which reacted upon
the worship in the home and which through ceremony
cultivated deeper reverence. It was toward the side of
ritual, for better or for worse, that Rome threw all her
influence; it was toward the side of ritualistic develop-
ment that her instinct carried her. Through all the sub-
sequent phases of the god-idea, through all the later
changes in feeling toward those gods, the machinery of
worship grew, — an imposing institution, at times threaten-
ing to lull to rest and to smother real religious feeling,
but to the end carrying the burden laid upon it. Rome,
by the nature of her people, was predestined to a formal-
ism that at the very beginning was antithetic to any
spiritualization of her state-religion. More than that,
" man's obligatory part in the ritual of the state was abso-
lutely nil," since the state assigned the duties and respon-
sibilities of dealing with the gods of the state on behalf
of the state to the properly constituted authorities.

Flamens, augurs, Fetial priests, Vestals, pontiffs, the
Luperci, the Salii, the Arval brotherhood, — in part ante-
dating Numa, to be sure, — conducted the state worship
at altars, in sacred precincts and in groves. So complete
was the organization of these priesthoods whose function
it was to communicate with the gods and learn their will,
that they almost sufficed throughout the later religious
history of Rome which added but very few major priest-
hoods. Prayers, sacrifices, festivals, solemn vota and no
less solemn lustrations, dedications of sacred sites, all re-
ligious ceremonial exhibited an exact orderliness that re-
mained as the very essence of Roman religion. A char-
acteristic narrative was told of the king Tullus Hostilius,
successor of Numa, of whom it was said that afflicted
with a fever, he lost his former high spirit of independ-
ence and sought to " get religion." Consulting the com-
mentaries of Numa, he Became deeply interested in some
occult rites to Jupiter Elicius but was struck down by

32?


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

lightning, by the offended deity, because of some error
in the ritual. There lay danger in the slightest infrac-
tion of the rules, lest the pax deorum might be disturbed.
No Brahman or Pharisee was more scrupulous than the
ancient Roman with whom the idea of Pietas (in its
religious sense) — a permanent contribution to Roman
religion — came to clear consciousness, synonymous with
the due fulfillment of all the details of worship. So
strong was this feeling that we know that at least on four
occasions the solemnity of the Latin Festival was inter-
rupted because evil omens and oversight in the conduct
of the ceremony threatened the validity of the religious
performance.

Another striking result is recorded in Quintilian, who
writes that in his day the songs of the Salii were scarce
understood by the priests themselves, who, however, were
obligated to employ the ancient sacred rites, handed down
from generation to generation, by a religious feeling
which forbade any modernization of those prayers. In
the city of the Four Regions of Numa there were sites
made over to the gods on the hills and in the valleys at
points of significance to the city-life; not that all the di-
vinities had their own sanctuaries, nor that there were
temples (in the true sense) erected as yet to any, but in-
cense burned on altars and in the Forum the god of im-
memorial antiquity, Saturnus, received worship, on the
Capitoline there was a shrine for Jupiter Feretrius, on
the Palatine the old festival of the Parilia was conducted,
Vesta had her rude-covered hut to guard the eternal fire
and a gateway sufficed for Janus. First fruits of the
fields and of the trees, wreaths, incense, sacrificial cakes,
offerings of milk, beans and spelt were the favorite offer-
ings, although animal sacrifices — notably of the pig, sheep
and ox — were also doubtless ancient. As characteristic
of the simplicity of the early state worship of Numa's
day I may quote Ovid's account of the festival of the

328


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

Terminalia as it was celebrated in the country districts
in his own day ; though a few modifications of the ancient
country festival appear, in general it maintains the ancient
spirit :

" When the night hath passed, let the god who by his
landmark divides the fields be worshiped with accustomed
honors. O Terminus, whether thou art a stone or a stock
sunk deep in the ground, even from the time of the
ancients dost thou possess divinity. Thee the two owners
of the fields crown with chaplets from their opposite
sides; to thee they each present two garlands and two
cakes. An altar is erected ; to this the peasant country-
woman brings on a bit of broken clay fire taken from the
warm hearths. An old man cuts up the fire-wood and
splitting it piles it on high. . . . While he is arousing
the first flames with dried bark, a boy stands by and
holds in his hands broad baskets. When he has thrice
thrown fruits of the earth out of the baskets into the
midst of the flames, his little daughter offers sliced honey-
combs. Others hold wine; . . . the crowd all arrayed
in white looks on and maintains a religious silence. The
common landmark is also sprinkled with the blood of a
slain lamb ; and the god makes no complaint when a suck-
ing pig is given to him. The simple-minded neighbors
meet and celebrate this feast and sing thy praises, O holy
Terminus ! "

Such is the charming picture that we have, and in
the rustic ministrants we see the predecessors of the king,
the state flamens and the Vestal virgins. The state was
but the household on a larger scale and the king had by
analogy there the secular and religious authority of the
pater familias in his own smaller home. £The priests
of the state did not become a hierarchical caste but were S
simply administrative officials with the pontifex maxi-
mus as their august head, who ultimately was vested with
supreme authority in all matters of religion. JNever were

329


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the interests of a state, secular and religious, more closely
bound together, never were religion and patriotism more
completely fused.

This extended account of the religion of Numa as
we call it, has been essential in order to be able to follow
the more readily the whole subsequent history of Roman
religion. The early concept of deus, the early original
organization of the methods of worship, were the true
expression of genuine Roman religion, never completely
lost through all of the transformations that time, wider
experience, and contacts with other people brought about.

Before the close of the regal period Rome increased
her original state pantheon by the adoption of several new
gods whose cults had been in previous existence in other
towns in Latium and in southern Etruria. Before the
close of the century that marked the end of kingship in
Rome, the city had become mistress of Latium and this
military, political advance had brought about an exten-
sion of Rome's economic and social horizon. Trade rela-
tions had been established with other communities, a re-
organization of the cavalry had been effected, there had
developed in the city an artisan class, and Rome had her
first experience with the dangerous game of international
politics. But this new situation required the friendly co-
operation of new gods, because the native gods of Numa
could not by any extension of their restricted functions
become the patron deities of these new interests. The
first adoption of new gods into Rome cannot be ascribed
to religious tolerance but must be explained as due to the
limitations of the old religious conceptions. There was
opportunity for growth for Roman religion from within
by the adoption of epithets and through the worship of
abstractions, but the polytheism of Rome permitted an ex-
pansion by accretions from without and such expansion did
no violence to accepted religious principles. On the con-
trary, the naivete of this process of accretions from with-

330


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

out was in entire harmony with the spirit of the old Roman
religion which not only permitted but demanded divine
protection over every occupation, over every interest and
over all endeavor of life whether individual or public.

From Tibuf, therefore, came the cult of Hercules,
from Tusculum, the worship of Castor, from Falerii the
goddess Minerva, and from Aricia the new divinity,
Diana. The arrival of these new-comer gods was attended
with no emotional disturbance; Diana was an Italic
divinity, Minerva though subject to Etruscan influences
in Falerii was in origin Italic, while Hercules and Castor
— though in origin Greek — had become so thoroughly
Latinized in Tibur and Tusculum that Rome regarded
them as native and established their altars within the
sacred line of the pomerium, that inviolate boundary
line between native and foreign religious ideas. There
was something of kinship between these new divinities
and the family of older gods, and accidental considera-
tions resulted in the establishment of Diana's and Miner-
va's cults on the Aventine outside the pomerium. Later
Roman traditions played fast and loose with the facts of
these adoptions; Castor and Pollux, for example, were
represented in legend — as we read in Dionysius of Hali-
carnassus — as having led the Romans to victory at the
battle of Lake Regillus early in the republican period;
after the battle, these two splendid gods, in shining armor,
fair to behold and of imposing stature, appeared in the
Roman Forum where at the Spring of Juturna they an-
nounced the Roman victory, disappearing as miraculously
as they had appeared to the astonished Roman gaze;
legend found no trouble in crediting their actual observa-
tion by mortal eyes and pointed to the handsome temple
of the 5th century as evidence for the incredulous of
their arrival at that time. Castor, however, in point of
fact came to Rome with the reorganization of the cavalry
in the time of Servius Tullius galloping in on horse-back,

331


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

as it were, to become the patron saint of the knights.
Rome did not at random officially accept all Latin cults,
but permitted the private worship of many deities not
incorporated within her state pantheon. But in the case
of Castor, not satisfied with the preparedness visible in
her armed horsemen, she needs must have besides the
divine sanction of an invisible god for her ambitions. To
Diana there was built a temple on the Aventine, as the
common sanctuary of all the Latins. But the significance
of the cult of Diana lies rather in the temple structure
which contained a statue, for this departure meant a great
break with older traditions.

This break was intensified by the erection of the Etrus-
can temple on the Capitoline to the new triad of Jupiter,
Juno and Minerva; this temple also held a sensuous repre-
sentation of a god, Jupiter Optimus Maximus. At the
very moment that Rome was triumphant, politically, her
older concept of god was on the point of vanishing. Rome
was on the threshold of that career of conquest by which
she in time gained the whole world, but unconsciously
she was in danger of losing her own soul with a sur-
render of her old-time gods and her former simplicities
of worship. The Etruscan domination that came to a
political end with the inauguration of a republic, per-
sisted in the influence of the temple which paradoxically
rose serene on the Capitol as the very centre of public
worship and the centre of republican aspirations. The
inevitable revolution in religious thought came in due
season.

Rome had established a precedent in the inauguration
of the cults of Hercules, Castor, Minerva and Diana that
made the adoption of Greek cults during the next period,
from circa 500 to 200 B.C., seem a logical step. The
Sibylline books, which had arrived in Rome early in
the republican period and were cherished in the temple
of Jupiter Optimus Maximus, were responsible for the

332


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

seemingly harmless, apparently analogous adoption of
the worship of Greek divinities, Apollo, Demeter, Hermes,
Poseidon, Asclepios, Pluto and Persephone. Real crises,
such as a grain famine, the need of carrying grain across
the seas, pestilence, and destruction of a part of the
city-wall by lightning were the sufficient causes for con-
sulting this new body of religious prescriptions to meet
the ills for which the old gods — in the nature of things —
could not furnish the remedy. This did not necessarily
carry with it loss of confidence in older divinities within
their anciently defined spheres, but was equivalent to
increasing the state's total of insurance through payment
of premiums in the form of gifts and sacrifices to the
newly accepted divine protectors.

But the influence of the Greek concept of anthropo-
morphic deities spread insidiously throughout the whole
structure of Roman religious beliefs so that in the course
of three hundred years the rank growth that had grown
from the seed, arresting the power of an independent
native growth, all but choked the earlier conception of a
mysterious power working in the world. That transfor-
mation of the old Roman god-idea through mythologies
— partly creditable, but in equal part, discreditable! —
through statues which as Varro recognized took away
fear of god, and finally through the -Grcectts ritus, spared
only a few of the native gods ; in time the Greek epidemic
developed a feverish passion for identifying the old with
the new (sometimes on the basis of similarities but often
on the most arbitrary basis) and for merging the Italic
gods in the more human but less mysterious Greek di-
vinities. The aesthetic and spiritual values of anthropo-
morphic deity were lost upon the Roman in large degree
before 200 b.c. ; Rome introduced Greek lectistemia and
supplicationes, even while forgetting the native invisible
numen, who had worked with force in a particular de-
partment of human life and who had represented a nobler

333


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

conception and for the Roman a far more effective con-
ception of divinity. In 399 b.c, in pursuance of the
directions of the Sibylline books, a Greek lectistemium
was for the first time conducted in Rome ; images of gods
and goddesses in human form reclined on their couches
and appeared to partake of dinner, in human need of food
and drink. What made this doubly significant was that
the Senate had recourse to this device for bringing to an
end a pestilence, admitting thereby the insufficiency of the
old cults, of old native forms of prayer and sacrifice. In
217 B.C. a lectistemium on a grand scale was conducted,
and it was a virtual " turning point in the religious his-
tory of Rome," for at six couches twelve great gods
were seen with no distinction between native gods and
Greek divinities ; the twelve gods thereafter were the cen-
tral figures of the Grseco-Roman pantheon which resulted
from this contact between Greece and Rome. Long be-
fore Rome conquered Greece politically Greece had com-
pleted the conquest of Rome religiously — a phenomenon
second in importance only to the astounding religious
revival of Augustus' day. But so completely lost in Greek
gods were the Roman, that Roman scholarship of the first
century B.C. had the utmost difficulty in distinguishing the
original outlines and qualities.

This abandonment of the old theology, which neces-
sarily involved the disappearance of many of the old cults,
was hastened by the events of the Second Punic War dur-
ing which prodigies of an unparalleled and terrifying
nature were reported from all over Italy. The dreari-
ness of war, protracted almost through the entire third
century, with the Samnites, with Pyrrhus and with the
Carthaginians, resulted in religious depression and shook
the foundations of the entire structure of organized wor-
ship. Ships were seen in the skies, a temple of Hope was
struck by lightning, divination tablets shrunk, statues
and shields sweated blood, bloody ears of grain fell into

334


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

reapers' baskets, armed forces were seen storming the
Janiculum, and in terror, in bewildered uncertainty as to
where God might be or what his true nature was, the
Roman state found its chief religious consolation in the
foreign books of oracles resting in Jupiter's great temple.
Most extraordinary offerings were made to the gods, a
ver sacrum was declared and human sacrifices of Greeks
and Gauls were made. The hysteria grew and the Roman
rites fell into disuse, not only in private but in public
also ; in the Forum and on the Capitol crowds of women
sacrificed according to new rites and prayed to the gods
in modes new to Rome. This rebellion against the re-
ligion of the state was stayed by the defeat and death
of Hasdrubal, when finally the shadows seemed dispelled
from Latium. The Senate expressed its joy through the
medium of a Greek ceremony, a supplication, and the
people's confidence in their gods was temporarily restored
by this success while thanksgivings were offered to their
" immortal " gods — Grseco-Roman gods to be sure, but
gods, none the less, who seemed to have saved the state.
But the arch-enemy, whom Rome accused of having
no fear of the gods, no religious scruples, who had swept
through the Italian cities like a flame through the pine
forests, remained in Italy in defiance, as it were, of the
gods in whom Rome still placed her trust. Finally, it
was the Sibylline books, again, that declared that the
foreign foe could be driven from Italy only if the Idsean
Mother were brought from Pessinus to Rome. With the
adoption of the worship of the Phrygian goddess, Magna
Mater, in 204 b.c, the last chapter was written in the
religious drama of Rome of these three hundred years
between 500-200 B.C. With the expulsion of Hannibal,
Rome's supremacy in Italy was undisputed but not only
had she in the interim lost her own religion but by re-
ceiving Cybele within the pomerium she effaced all dis-
tinctions between the Grseco-Roman deities and foreign

335


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

gods, who were now free to settle upon her soil. With
great state and ceremony, in which equites, senators,
plebs, mothers, daughters, Vestals took part, the stranger
divinity was hailed with gladness and the image of a
sacred stone conveyed with pomp into the temple of Vic-
tory. The very antithesis of the sobriety of Roman ritual,
the ecstatic ceremony of mutilated priests of Magna
Mater found a welcome in Rome which thus practically
became the worthy retreat of every divinity. The mock-
ery of this rejoicing was unconsciously rendered com-
plete by a celebration of another lectisternium, that opiate
which Rome had come to find so indispensable.

As we come to the next period in Roman religious
history, 200 b.c. to Augustus, we find a condition of re-
ligious unrest which must have been fatal had there not
been a saving element of genuine religious feeling that
flowed as a deep stream underneath the surface phe-
nomena. The gods had become so Humanized that they
were upon a low level of humanity, "while the acceptance
Of the exotic cult of the Great Mother into the body of
Roman religious organization afforded only a temporary
relief. The religion of the state was at its lowest ebb
of meaning, influenceand inspiration. It gained no new
informing spirit to illumine or to exalt the accepted
Grseco-Roman conception of gods; the old notion of
religious obligations was enshrined in ceremonies that
became fossilized, while priesthoods were involved in the
degradation of base politics. Temples fell into ruin,
priesthoods were vacant for years, a debauchee was elected
(209 B.C.) fiamen Dialis in order that the taboos restrict-
ing the life of that great priest might lead to his reforma-
tion; the story of Cato is well known that he marveled
how one haruspex upon meeting another could refrain
from scornful, ironical laughter. The pontiffs had
neglected the calendar to the mischief of the festivals.
Varro feared the old Roman religion would perish through

336


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

neglect ; Sallust satirically contrasted the men of his own
day with their ancestors, religiosissumi mortales. With
unerring accuracy the stage attacked two fundamental
defects: the metamorphosis of the Roman gods into di-
vinities with human frailties did not escape the cleverness
of the comic poet, who did not shrink from representing
the amours of Jupiter upon the stage; equally blase was
the tragedy that openly proclaimed the indifference of
the gods to the fate of mankind.

Such degradation of the gods and denial of their
power left to the orthodox-minded after 200 B.C. who in-
herited the evil consequences of the previous period, little
comfort. He had the refuge of his home with its cults
where religion " had placed a certain consecration upon
the simple life of the family," and during the following
150 years the household cults escaped the corrupting
influence of ridicule and of indifference. But the state
maintained its soul-less machinery of worship all the time
it was advancing beyond the seas to Mediterranean em-
pire ; and all the power of the state was back of traditional
forms of worship that seemed to the unimaginative Ro-
man the very essence of religion. But emotional, spiritual
and intellectual rebellions manifested themselves in Diony-
siac orgies, in Pythagoreanism, in Stoicism and Epicur-
eanism and in the private worship of gods from the
Orient. The dignity of Roman ceremonials could not
satisfy the deeper craving for emotional worship, the
sincerer yearning to know the truth about God and the
desire to' be in closer communion with him. Constraint
of habit prevented the state from seizing opportunities
that existed for its own spiritual reformation.

Stoic and Epicurean philosophies of religion breathed
a freer spirit, bound neither by the scruple of cult nor by
fear of the gods. Each had rediscovered God — one in
the eternal fire, the other in the remote intermundia. The
state religion might have been illumined by adoption of
22 337


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the Stoic concept of Fate, and from Stoicism the state
theology might have acquired a prof ounder understanding
of Providence. With all of the bitter Epicurean denuncia-
tion of the old conception of providential divine regard,
the Epicurean theory of god had the power, though not
the opportunity, of purging the old polytheism of its un-
worthy mythologies and of raising the Grseco-Roman
gods to a more exalted level. A pontifex maximus had
declared it expedient to deceive the masses because the
truth of philosophic speculation was harmful — which
meant that it was dangerous for the organized systems
of worship. Thus, because of the self-sufficiency of the
state institution, there was but little reaction upon the
religion of the state from these philosophies of religion.
Philosophic speculation did not release man from the
necessity of remaining a conformist in worship; while
mental reservations made such external conformity a
possibility, the drama of salvation was enacted only in
individual souls and the magnificent state machinery of
religion remained an imposing institution placed above
the laws of reason.

It was the strict and ceremonious observation of all
of the minutise of worship that made up the background
of this period of unrest, during which the state main-
tained all the traditions of the letter with no regard to
the decline in faith. In the absence of the spirit that
had originally prompted and animated the ceremonials,
the inheritance of a multiplication of formulae and of an
elaboration of prayers hardly contributed to the vitality
of those ceremonies. The votum, a contract between man
and god, and implying the strongest belief in divinity,
cast in legal mold, lost its validity in an age of skepticism
and distrust. Lustrationes, which once had restored the
disturbed equilibrium between men and gods and reestab-
lished the pax deorum, became a spectacle for the eye
without appealing to the heart. The sunrise offering of

338


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

fruits and incense, the wearing of wreaths of grain, the
solemn " procession of victims . . . round the fields,
driven by a garlanded crowd, carrying olive branches and
chanting " retained for the Ambarvalia, at best, a senti-
ment of affection. Sacrifices, whether honorific, piacular
or sacramental became a sham, with a decline in belief
in the providential regard of the gods — and the char-
acteristically Roman scrupulous care exercised at sacrifices
could not save such ceremonies from debasement; there
were the strictest regulations concerning the sex, age
and color of the victim, the dress and veiled head of
the priests, the silence of the bystanders — all of which
were significant in an age of belief, but equally a delusion
in a time that was threatened with a collapse of old
beliefs. Such an age hardly required the services of the
Indigitamenta or pontiffs' artificially elaborated lists of
the names of the gods and methods of properly addressing
them. These books grew originally out of the " old
national belief in the ubiquity of a world of spirits," but
were out of harmony with an age that required simplicity
rather than over-development of ritual. Varro had, to
the amusement of St. Augustine, enumerated the gods
who watched over man's life in all its details from the
time of conception to the time of death.

The age was out of sympathy, too, with the multi-
plicity of prayers that previous conditions had required.
These showed little desire to conform one's life to the
will of the gods and had been offered for material rather
than for moral blessings. The mumbling of prayers by
priests who performed their state function in religion
purely through ritual, was the final touch revealing the
paradoxical betrayal of real religious feeling into the
possession of ceremonial and cult. Lucretius had elo-
quently protested that piety did not consist in being often
seen with veiled head turning to a stone, approaching
every altar, falling prostrate on the ground, spreading

339


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

out the palms before the shrines of the gods, sprinkling
the altars with much blood of beasts and linking vow
to vow, but so deeply fixed was this belief in the state
ritual that it survived this period of tribulation and in the
time of Augustus piety was once more defined in the old
terms of right performance rather than by any new con-
cept of the right spirit. Even the enlightened Cicero,
" although he- could not believe in the old theology, put
the jus divinum in the forefront," and boasted of Rome's
superiority in religion, i.e., the cult of the gods.

But even during the time of apparent disintegration,
ritual had carried along the burden of religion and in-
sensibly forces had been at work that resulted in the
salvation of the Greeco-Roman gods. The Greek gods
had arrived in Rome at the time of their decadence, and
the uncultured Roman could appreciate only the baser
qualities of that theology. As Rome, herself, however,
became tutored in the finer arts and feelings, through the
processes of Greek education, the Olympian gods once
more became brilliant deities to the imagination of the
orthodox. The deplorable loss of faith of the preceding
period was followed by a revival under Augustus. The
glowing poetry of the period represents these human
Graco-Roman gods, even with their humanity, far above
the level of man, exalted and truly divine — gods in whose
living presence there was actual, deep belief and to whom
prayer could rise with the spontaneity of an unques-
tioning veneration. Contemporary poetry thrills with a
recovery of the conviction in the immortality of the
gods — and from the beginning Jupiter had known of
Rome's greatness, at length about to be realized. " Pro-
tect us by thy might, Great God our King," expresses
a sentiment that trembled upon pagan lips and came
from pagan hearts which believed in an omnipotent father
who from azure heights gazed calmly down upon his
chosen people and in whose justice their destinies were

340


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS

safe. Jupiter came as near to infinity as it was possible
for a finite, nature god to come. The academic debate
of Cicero's De Natura Deorum is far removed from
Virgil's passionate belief in a divine sanction assured the
state and pales in the glow of enthusiasm that resulted
under Augustus of a revival of many old priesthoods,
a rebuilding of many temples and a revitalization of ritual
more ornate than ever before.

The gods whose neglect had brought many a woe upon
Hesperia in her sorrow, were now duly worshiped by
augurs, quindecemviri, Vestals and pontiffs, while in
the home the domestic cults of Vesta and of the Penates
were renewed with deeper confidence. The continuance
of morning prayers and of libations to household deities
at meals had kept the flame of religious belief alive
during all the storm and stress of state affairs. The
intimately beloved Faunus of the fields along with goat-
footed Satyrs and nymphs occupied his haunts to the
delight of rustics, when Pan shook the piny covering of
his semi-savage head as he raced over the reeds with
his sensuously curved lips in order not to cease his wood-
land melody — all, in spite of Lucretius' skepticism and
Plutarch's elegy. Festivals proceeded more orderly with
Caesar's correction of the calendar and even in the " light
artistic half-belief " of the poet from Sulmo we can
readily read the sanctification of patriotism for which
Augustus was striving.

The " Father of his country " directed the stream
of religious belief in channels of devotion to the new
empire, by a rededication of the Arval brotherhood to
the imperial cult, by a conspicuous favoritism for the
cult of Mars the Avenger, for the cult of the deified
Csesar and of the Palatine Apollo. The festival of the
Parilia — maintaining an unbroken contact with the days
of Rome's beginnings — the Secular games, celebrated
with unparalleled splendor and charged with a new spirit,

34i


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

fortified the patriotism of the new era. This patriotism
had come out of the travail of a hundred years and saw
its justification in blessings of secure peace.

But there was impending a new cult that presently
cast its ominous shadow over these auspicious days. Out
of the 500 years' acquaintance with gods, human in
aspect though not mortal, Rome finally came to take the
step that Greece had taken before, of deifying man ; from
the worship of god-men the step was easy to the adora-
tion of the man-god. Ennius had 200 years before trans-
lated that baneful romance of Euhemerus which had
taught the mortal origin of all gods, and Emperor worship
became a conspicuous centre of all state religious cere-
monies. Though there eventuated the cult of Roma
Aeterna, rich with possibilities, the days for the worship
of abstractions had long since passed, and marble temples
and imposing ceremonies could not guarantee life to
cults that failed to correspond to a growing yearning for
a more personal contact with God.

The earlier deification of such abstractions as Honor,
Virtue, Concord, Faith, had given a religious sanction
to these moralities but redemption of Roman society,
private or public, had not been secured thereby — either
in the first century B.C., as is abundantly testified by
Lucretius, Sallust and Cicero, or in the first century a.d.,
as Juvenal knew only too well. It had not at an earlier
time prevented the breaking of a treaty with Tarentum
nor had it mitigated the horrors of the Civil War. Horace
had indulged the vain hope that these cults had borne
permanent fruitage in the hearts of men, but all Roman
cult had the fatal defect of not inspiring an individual
sense of right or wrong. " The Inside of the Cup " had
to be purged as Lucretius ardently exclaimed but this
reforming principle found no entrance into the circle of
Roman religious ideas. Cicero believed pietas and justitia
to be complementary; the binding force of the oath in

342


RELIGION OF THE ROMANS ,

social and political life was strong; the disciplinary value
of ritual was great and the sense of responsibility it cul-
tivated was an important contribution to virtus,but neither
humility nor a contrite spirit were characteristic products
of the Roman's relations with his gods. The vain re-
grets over the disappearance of the old simplicities of
worship far outweighed in Roman consciousness any
sting of remorse over the real secret of the failure of
Roman cult and ritual. Cicero's lament that no one
prayed to the gods for virtus did not recall Roman re-
ligion to its own reformation. St. Augustine's observa-
tion that the pagan Roman did not pray for immortality
called attention to another shortcoming that an age given
more and more to otherworldliness could not condone.
It was not in religion that the orthodox Roman sought
abiding peace; the comfort and the solace that the world
craved in the first and second centuries a.d. we*e not
there.

Cult had carried Roman religion along the stream of
time but the insufficiency of its content was not concealed
by the rich cloak that the Roman state wrapped about it.
Rome had become more and more resplendent in the
empire period with glittering temples of marble but all
the externals of cult could not satisfy the growing spirit-
ual yearning for a deeper and more personal knowledge
of God and for a greater sanctity of life. Stoicism,
Pythagoreanism, Mithraism ) and Christianity were all
better equipped to meet the human need. Roman religion
could not affect any real synthesis of these variously ideal
systems with itself; her own tolerance of a variety of
religious beliefs was conditioned by a conformity in wor-
ship — an impossible barrier for Christianity — yet one in-
evitably set up by a state that had finally come to Emperor
worship and State worship as the final expression of its
religious aspiration. To the end, cult, the real expression
of the Roman genius, was in the fore-front of Roman

343


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

religion; the inherent binding quality of religio, manifest
in ritual, had long ago cramped Rome's religious imagina-
tion ; it now abstracted all real liberty from Rome's vision
of religious duties that must needs remain subservient
to the state. With the inability of the cult to carry the
new triumphant ideas, the gods of Rome faded in the
twilight of unbelief and the paganism of the Eternal City
became as a tale that is told.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Emil Aust: Die Religion der Romer, Miinster i. W. (Aschendorff,
1899).

Cyril Bailey: The Religion of Ancient Rome, Chicago (The Open
Court Publishing Co., 1907).

G. Boissier: La Religion Romaine d'Auguste aux Antonins, Paris
(Hachette et Cie, 2 vols. 1874).

J. B. Carter : The Religion of Numa, New York (The Macmillan
Co., 1906).

J. B. Carter: The Religious Life of Ancient Rome, Boston (Hough-
ton, Mifflin & Co., 1911).

F. Cumont : Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism, Chicago (The
Open Court Publishing Co., 1911).

F. Cumont: Astrology and Religion Among the Greeks and Ro-
mans, New York (G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1912).

W. Warde Fowler: The Roman Festivals, London (Macmillan &
Co., 1908).

W. Warde Fowler : The Religious Experience of the Roman People,
London (Macmillan & Co., 1911).

W. Warde Fowler: Roman Ideas of Deity, London (Macmillan
& Co., 1914).

T. R. Glover : The Conflict of Religions in- the Early Roman Em-
pire, London (Methuen & Co., 1909). /

A. DeMarchi: It Culto Privato di RomgrAntica, Milano (Hoepli,
1896). \

C. H. Moore: The Religions Thought of the Greeks, c. vii, "Vic-
tory of Greece over Rome ;" o. viii, " Oriental Religions," Cam-
bridge (Harvard University Press, 1916).

S. Reinach : Orpheus: A General History of Religions, c. iii, " The
Greeks and the Romans," New York (G. P. Putnam's Sons,
1909).

Georg Wissowa: Religion u. Kultus der Romer, Munich (C. H.
Beck, 1912).


MA


CHAPTER XII

THE RELIGION OF THE TEUTONS
BY AMANDUS JOHNSON

The purpose of this brief sketch is to outline the main
features of the religion of the primitive Germanic peoples,
as it appears (from available sources) in the first cen-
turies of our era, not to reconstruct earlier forms nor
to discuss individual theories of origin or possible lines
of development.

By religion I here mean man's total conceptions of
the world beyond his material environment and material
self, in other words, "man's attitude towards the un-
known," not necessarily including a spiritual relation with
a higher power. Under this head (of religion) will fall
two divisions, < mythology and theology.

Mythology (without any reference to the popular
meaning as to the truth or untruth of the conceptions in
question) includes: (i) the theory and history of crea-
tion {cosmogony) ; (2) the arrangement, order and man-
agement of the world {cosmology) ; (3) the transmigra-
tion of souls, the life after this, the end of the world
and final judgment (eschatology) . Theology on the other
hand — possible of application only in higher forms of
religion — includes: (1) the theory of man's relation to
the gods and indirectly his relation to his fellow-man, in
other words, cult, rites, ethics (sacrifices, prayers, man-
ner of life, etc.) ; (2) and, in the case of highly civilized
peoples, a systematic or philosophical arrangement of re-
ligious conceptions (this being absent in primitive re-
ligions is found only to a limited extent in Scandinavian
Religion, the so-called Norse Mythology, as presented
in the Edda).

345


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

A kind of dualism permeates Teutonic religion. Life
or spirit and matter were coexisting and eternal; there
were two elements, fire and water; two conditions or
states, heat and cold ; two kinds of good powers or gods,
the Vanir and Aesir (the gods proper) ; two kinds of
evil powers, the Thursar and the J dinar (the giants
proper), etc., — other examples will appear in the follow-
ing paragraphs.

No other primitive religion is so logical and conse-
quential in its development along its basic idea, and as we
shall see, is singularly in accord with modern scientific
thought in its fundamental conception about the origin of
the universe, namely the reaction of heat and cold.

As in the case of many other religions, several ages
or periods can be distinguished: (i) the age of chaos,

(2) the first period of creation with the age of bliss,

(3) the second period of creation or the age of growth
and development, (4) and finally the destruction and the
new age.

The religion sprang from the soul of the people, was
an outgrowth of their " inner life " and reflects their
longing for spiritual and mystic communion with nature
and " the supernatural world." In their religion we thus
have a key to their nature ; a mirror of their inmost self.
It is therefore an interesting and important product that
cannot be neglected by any student of the civilization of
England, of Germany or of the Scandinavian countries
(and, shall I say, of the United States of America, the
civilization of which is largely a child of the above-
mentioned nations?). 1

The cosmic conceptions of the early Teutons were
briefly as follows : Before " the morning of time " " there
was neither sand nor lake nor cool billows; there was

1 The writer, some years ago an adherent of what might be called
the " wanderlust " theory, championed by many scholars of the last
century and of today, is now firmly convinced 1 of the tenability of
the "spontaneous theory."

346


THE RELIGION OF THE TEUTONS

neither earth nor lofty heaven." But there was a gaping
or yawning abyss called Ginnungagap on opposite sides of
which, to the north and south, were two worlds, Mus-
pellsheim (the home of heat) and Niflheim (the home of
mist or cold). In the midst of the latter was the great
spring Hvergelmir (the noisy kettle), whence flowed
twelve streams (Elivagar) southward towards Ginnunga-
gap. On their course through the regions of eternal cold
the waters of these streams froze and during unnumbered
ages layer was added to layer. But the forces of heat
were also at work in the world of fire. Sparks thence
never ceased flying and with increasing size and power
they crossed the abyss and fell on the ice fields of southern
Niflheim. The ice began to melt and the water to drip.
The spirit, which was embedded in the ice and which
gave it a salty taste, was liberated. The result was a
living being Ymir, the first of the giants and of living
things (the evil power thus being earlier than the good).
A cow, Authhumbla, also sprang into life from the con-
tact of heat and cold and from her milk Ymir obtained
his nourishment.

The cow, on the other hand, lived from the salty ice-
blocks which she licked. Thereby other creative forces
came into operation. The purer spirit in the hardened
element was set free. On the first day of Authhumbla's
licking a man's hair came out of the ice, the second day
a man's head and, in the evening of the third day, a
complete man stood forth, strong, large and handsome,
the father of the gods, Buri by name.

In the meantime the giant race began to multiply.
During a heavy sleep Ymir fell into a sweat. A man and
woman grew under his left arm and his feet brought
forth a son. The giants increased rapidly and furnished
a wife to Buri, who had three sons from his marriage,
Othen (Wodan), Honir, Lothur. Wodan was the first-
born and became the father of all other gods.

347


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

With the advent of the gods creation proper began.
They killed Ymir, threw his immense body into the abyss
which was completely filled, and created the world there.
The events are described thus in the Edda:

From Ymir's giant flesh

The earth was made;

The billows [the seas and all the waters] from his blood,

The mountains from his bones,

The bushes from his hair,

And the heaven from his skull;


But of his brains

All terrible clouds in the sky

Were made.

The earth was round and completely encircled by the
mighty oceans. Four dwarfs, north, south, east, west,
were directed by the gods to support the skull and keep
it in place above the world.

Then the gods assigned courses to the heavenly bodies,
which were originally sparks flying irregularly through
space from Muspellsheim. In this manner night and day
were established and the two seasons, summer and winter;
were determined and conditioned. Grass began to grow
and the earth to prosper and bring forth fruit. At the
horizon in the far north was placed a large giant in the
shape of an eagle. Every time he flapped his huge wings
the wind blew over the world. The gods selected the
middle of the world for themselves and called it Asgarth
(the home of the Aesir, Gods). Between earth and
Asgarth they spanned a wonderful seven-colored bridge,
Bi frost, — mortals call it the rainbow.

When the world thus had been, made habitable, the
gods assembled on a plain in Asgarth, took counsel, made
dwellings for themselves and constructed all kinds of
necessary things. This finished the first period of crea-
tion and now followed the golden age or " millennium,"

348


THE RELIGION OF THE TEUTONS

when happiness and bliss were the daily companions of
the immortals.

But the happiness came to an end, a disturbing ele-
ment arrived among the gods. When Ymir fell the giants
were all drowned in his blood, except Bergelmir, who
escaped with his wife in a skiff, thus keeping alive the
race of giants. From these, says the Edda,

Came to the High Ones,

Three mighty Giantesses [the Nornir, fates],

The one is called Urth,

The other Verthandi,

The third Skuld.

The lots of fortune.

Life and death,

The fate of heroes, —

Everything comes from them.

With the arrival of the Norns or Fates the second
period of creation began. The activities of the gods were
now directed to definite purposes and aims and their lives
and energies were divided between a constant struggle
against the powers of darkness (the giants) and the main-
tenance of the world organization.

Then the mighty ones,
The holy gods,

Went to their judgment seats
To take counsel.

As they were insufficient unto themselves and in need
of aid they gave human form and understanding to the
Dvergar (dwarfs), who came into existence at the death
of Ymir. The dwarfs (sometimes called black-elves in
contrast to the elves proper) were skillful workers, espe-
cially in metals, and many of the treasures in Asgarth
were of their manufacture. Later they also became
friendly to man and often contributed to his happiness.
The dwarfs were small and swarthy, lived under the
earth and were really " children of darkness," although
their labors were for the benefit of gods and men.

349


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

In somewhat of a contrast to them stood the elves,
" airy and light," and their home was in the air. Like
the dwarfs they were propitious to the inhabitants of the
earth and of Asgarth.

One day after the creation of the dwarfs and elves,

Three gods.

Mighty and benevolent,

Went to Midgarth,

Found on the ground

Powerless

Ask [ash] and Embla [elm]

Without destiny.

They possessed neither soul

Nor understanding,

Neither blood nor motion

Nor a blooming complexion.

Othen [Wodan] gave them the spirit,

Honir, understanding,

Lothur gave them blood [life]

And a rosy complexion.

Thereupon the mighty ones,
The holy gods, again,
Went to their judgment seats
To take counsel.

The universe was now divided into nine districts or
worlds, in which the various living beings were to reside.
The upper part of the world the gods had already appro-
priated for themselves and in the centre of the earth they
prepared a home for man, Mithgarth (middle home).
The giants were assigned to the regions of the open sea
and the mountains, these places being called Jotunheim
(home of giants) or Ut garth (the outer dwelling). A
great stream divided Jottmheim and Asgarth. Says the

Edda:

Ifing [doubt] is called the stream,

Which forever divides

The home of giants and of gods.

It shall run on

Through all eternity.

Never ice will form upon it.

This stream undoubtedly refers to the air.

350


THE RELIGION OF THE TEUTONS

The interior of the earth, as we have seen, was the
home of the dwarfs, Dvergaheim or Svartalfheim (the
home of the black elves), and the space in the air imme-
diately above the earth was designated as Alfheim (the
home of the elves). The other worlds were : Vanaheim
near the seashore; Muspellsheim (already mentioned was
the upper heaven) ; Helheim (home of Hel, the goddess
of death, a portion of Niflheim) ; and Niflheim (the home
of cold and mist).

A curious conception, obscure as to its origin and diffi-
cult to explain, was the tree Yggdrasil (probably Wodan's
horse). It finally came to represent the universe and
with its destruction the world would come to an end.
Its branches spread over the whole earth and reached
up to heaven. It drew nourishment from three roots,
one leading to the spring Hvergelmir in Niflheim (or
home of mists), the other to the fountain of Mimer,
in Jotunheim and the third to the spring of Urth ( Urthar-
brunn), in Asgarth. At Urth's spring the gods assembled
daily for consultation and the pure clear waters from this
fountain gave life and growth to the tree; but at the
fountain in Niflheim the dragon Nithhogg (hate-cut)
gnawed at its root.

Another conception that has given rise to much dis-
cussion was the world snake (Mithgarthsorm) , thrown
by Wodan into the sea, where it grew until it finally
encircled the earth and bit its tail. It has been stated
that the world-snake idea was an eastern importation
adopted by the Norsemen. However, the snake cult is
of such universal occurrence as to suggest individual
origin and development among many primitive tribes.
The snake or serpent must have been of peculiar interest
to early man and certainly aroused his curiosity and
wonder. It is different from all other animals and pro-
pels itself without feet equally well on land and on
water. The smaller species known in Scandinavia can

35i


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

appear as from nowhere and disappear quickly in holes
and crevices, thus baffling its pursuers.

The notion of a monstrously large snake inhabiting
the waters and encircling the earth could easily have
developed in Sweden. On Lake Vettern the waves in
connection with a peculiar light combination at a certain
time of the year have often caused people to think that
they see a tremendous serpent coiling its gigantic form
across the water, and the tales from trustworthy sources
puzzled the scientists until the natural phenomenon was
explained. The tales of the " sea-serpent " or of a great
sea monster are so numerous in early Scandinavian litera-
ture and in modern tradition, that the idea must have been
of native conception. Olaus Magnus in his History
( X SSS)' 21:24, describes the monster as being 200 feet
long and about 6y 2 feet in diameter. " It even disturbs
ships," he says, " rising up like a mast and sometimes
snaps some of the men from the deck."

As time went on the Aesir or gods increased by birth
and by adoption from the Vanir and the giants. In Scan-
dinavian religion they were twelve (although fourteen
are also mentioned) with the same number of goddesses.
The number among the other Germanic peoples is uncer-
tain and only a few of the divinities can be ascribed as
common to all the early Teutons, among them being
Wodan, Thor and Tyr.

These Teuton gods were all-powerful, but they were
not in themselves omnipotent, for they were limited to
time and space and subject to the dictates of the Norns
(Fates), the hammer of Thor was essential to the safety
of Asgarth, and the eight-footed horse of Othen (Wo-
dan) was a necessary agent for swift transition from
place to place ; they were " all-wise," but they were not
in themselves omniscient, for a drink in Miner's foun-
tain of wisdom was required by Wodan and two ravens
brought him news of all human and world events; they

352


THE RELIGION OF THE TEUTONS

were not " all-good," for they were partly of giant origin
and hence carried the germ of evil in their souls ; meas-
ured by the short span of human lives, they were eternal
as they lived on for innumerable ages, but they were not
immortal, for their power was destroyed in Ragnarok
and the majority went under in that catastrophe.

The chief divinity was Wodan (Othen). He was
the first-born, the " all-father," the special friend of man,
the incarnation of wisdom and the protector and ruler
of the universe. He was the inventor of runes, and
the originator of poetry; he inspired the skalds and
taught man the art of letters. Wodan was one-eyed.
He desired to drink from the spring of wisdom, guarded
by Miner; but this he could do only by giving away one
eye. He was thought of as tall and stately, with a grave
countenance, aged and bearded. On his arm hung a
heavy gold ring, draupnir (dripping) ; in battle or on
his journeys he wore " a mantle of blue and a helmet
of gold " and in his right hand he carried the wondrous
spear, gungnir. From him we have Wednesday, Wodan's
day. Two wolves lay at his feet and two ravens, Hugin
(thought) and Muninn (longing), sat on his shoulders.
The ravens "flew out over the world every morning"
and returned with news to their master and thus Wodan
knew what mortals did. His horse Sleipnir (slippery),
on which he rushed through the air, was the noblest and
swiftest of animals, with eight legs and with runes on
his teeth.

Wodan was thrice married. His first wife was Jorth
(the earth), who became the mother of Thor, the eldest
son of Wodan and the strongest inhabitant of Asgarth.
Frigg was his second and most important wife. " Nine
maids waited upon her and three others were at her
service." " She knows the destiny of all beings, although
she never talks of such things herself." She was the
goddess of motherly love, the protector of marriage and

23 353


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the guardian of women and their domestic duties. Friday
is called after her and she was highly honored, especially
in Sweden. Her nine maids were engaged in nine occu-
pations in which she took interest and which she super-
vised and regarded as her own. Thus Sjofn lighted the
flame of love in human breasts; Var guarded over the
promises and oaths given by men and women and pun-
ished all those who broke their troths. Rindr, who was
white as the sun, became Wodan's third wife, and only
with great difficulty did he win her.

The wives of Wodan apparently represented the earth
in various aspects and thus seem to indicate that Wodan
was originally a sun or sky god. Jorth (earth) was the
uncultivated earth in its primitive state, Frigg denoted
the cultivated fruitful earth, and Rindr represented the
earth in the frozen wintry condition of the north, before
the spring sun had softened her hardened surface.

The most beloved of the gods, especially in Scandi-
navia, was Thor, the thunderer, after whom Thursday
was named. He was broad-shouldered and tall, red-
haired and fierce-eyed. He possessed three treasures of
inestimable worth: the hammer Mjolnir (the crusher), a
pair of iron gloves, always worn in battle, and a belt
which redoubled his tremendous power, every time he
buckled it on. As a rule he was gentle, kind-hearted and
peaceful. But, when his anger was aroused, he grew
fierce and terrible and his eyes flamed like bolts of thun-
der. He was the synonym of openness and the incar-
nation of truth, " the god who never uttered a false-
hood." His hammer was the symbol of faithfulness, the
sign of the hammer (really a cross) was a protection
against all evil things. He was the impersonation of
strength, the undaunted defender of gods and men against
evil powers. The cultivators of the soil called for his
blessings and warriors prayed for his aid. He was

354


THE RELIGION OF THE TEUTONS

engaged in continuous struggles with the giants, whom he
always conquered with his mighty hammer that never
missed its mark and always returned to the hand of its
owner. In these fights lightning and thunder shook the
world. Sparks from the hammer, as it crushed the hard,
stony heads of the giants, were the ragged streaks of
lightning which crossed the heavens during thunder-
storms. Thor rode in a chariot drawn hy two goats —
the rumbling of thunder was the rattle of the chariot
wheels — and he was generally followed on his tours by
two servants. Sif was his wife, the goddess of fruit-
fulness and plenty, and he had three sons, Mothi (the
courageous), Magni (the strong), and Ullr (O. E. Wul-
dor, glory) . He is the most characteristic god in Norse
religion and his life and activities were the subject of
numerous tales.

Once his hammer was stolen, as he slept. Angry
indeed was Thor when he discovered his loss. Loki was
at once despatched to find and return the invaluable
weapon. But the giant Thrym, who had it hidden eight
miles below the earth, would return it only on condition
that Freyja, the goddess of love, became his wife. Freyja,
however, indignantly refused the proposal and trembled
in her anger, so that the foundations of the earth shook.
The gods took counsel, the safety of the universe being
in the balance, for without Thor's hammer the gods could
not maintain their power. It was suggested that Thor
himself should dress in bridal clothes and go to the giant
disguised as Freyja. Thor at first refused, but there
was no escape, the hammer had to be recovered. Accord-
ingly Thor was dressed for marriage, his goats were
hitched to the chariot and Loki followed as bridal maid.
Thunder and lightning raged violently on this journey,
" the earth stood in flames," for Thor was angry and
drove like mad.

355


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT
A great feast was prepared in the home of the giant.

One ox Thor ate,
Eight salmon
And all the delicacies
For the woman intended.

He also " drank three barrels of mead." In astonishment
then spoke Thrym :

Where hast thou seen such a hungry bride?
I ne'er saw a bride
Eat so much,
And never a maid
Drink more mead.

The crafty maid (Loki), however, put the giant off
his guard. " The poor maiden," said he, " has not eaten
for eight days, out of longing for this place." There-
upon Thrym tried to kiss his bride, " but sprang back
the length of the hall," exclaiming,

Why are Freyja's eyes so wild?
From her eyes it seems
That fire doth burn.

" Oh," answered Loki, " the poor girl has not slept for
eight nights, so much did she long for Jotunheim."

Then said Thrym,

The king of giants,

Bring in the hammer

My bride to hallow ;

Place' Mjolnir [the hammer]

In the maid's lap,

Wed us together

With the hand of Var.'

But now Thor came into his own again. He grasped the
short handle of his trusty hammer and slew Thrym and
" all that race of giants." The world was saved and
Thor returned in triumph to his hall in Asgarth.

Another god common to all Teutonic tribes was

1 The goddess of marriage, servant maid of Frigg.

356


THE RELIGION OF THE TEUTONS

Tyr 3 (O. E. Tiw, O. H. G. Ziu, the high, the glorious.
Cp. Lat. deus, Gr. Zeus) from whom we have Tuesday.
In the beginning he was preeminently the god of war,
and he was the personification of bravery and courage.
References to him are found in Roman and other early
writers and as late as the Edda he is still described as the
god of war, although he at that time had been largely
superseded by Thor and Wodan. Tyr alone had the
courage to feed the Fenris-wolf, a huge monster brought
up in Asgarth. When the gods perceived that the wolf
was growing dangerous through his strength and ferocity,
they decided to bind him. But the wolf would not consent
to this, unless one of the immortals placed a hand in
his mouth, as a pledge that there was no deceit in the
matter. None of the gods seemed disposed to risk a limb.
But when Tyr heard of the conditions, he did not hesi-
tate to put his hand between the monster's jaws. How-
ever, as the wolf discovered that he had been tricked, he
bit off the hand of Tyr and therefore the god had but
one hand.

Loki 4 occupied a large space in Scandinavian re-
ligion; whether he appeared among all the other Ger-
manic tribes is beyond proof. Originally he seems to
have been "a good being," a member of the pantheon;
some have even tried to make him a brother o>f Wodan
and one of the three gods who created man. Gradually
he drifted away from the gods and came to be the repre-
sentation of evil, the embryo of a devil. He often caused
worry and trouble among the immortals, but he also
helped them out of many difficulties, as for instance by
the recovery of the hammer, and at times gave valuable
advice. Finally, however, his wickedness and overbearing
became intolerable. He was captured, dragged into a

' He was the son of Wodan.

*The account of Loki, by Pfofessor Anderson in Norse My-
thology, p. 371, is quite erroneous.

357


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

cavern and tied on three sharp-pointed rocks. Above
his head a poisonous serpent was suspended in such a
manner that the venom fell into his face. But his faithful
wife Sigyn sat at his side and collected the deadly drops
in a cup. When the cup was full and she went away
to empty it, the venom fell upon Lbki, who then shrieked
with horror and twisted his body so violently that the
whole earth shook — thus the earthquake was produced.
There Loki will lie until Ragnarok (the destruction of
the world).

Other gods, especially in Scandinavian religion, some
of whom occupied a significant position in the pantheon,
were Balder, the god of purity and light; Forsete, the
god of justice; Brage, the god of poetry and oratory;
Heimdallr, the guardian of Asgarth and the founder of
civilization among men; Freyj, the god of fertility, the
ruler of rain and sunshine.

Some of the most important of the goddesses besides
those already mentioned (the wives of Wodan: Jorth,
Frigg, with her maids, and Rindr ; Sif , the wife of Thor,
and Sigyn, the wife of Loki) were Froja, Gef jon, Fulla,
Ithun and Nanna. They were the counterparts of the
gods and the guardians of womanhood.

The Vanir were gods, but of a lower order than the
Aesir (Wodan, Thor, Tyr, etc.) and of different and
apparently unknown origin. Their home was Vanaheim,
the lakes and rivers and the waters of the sea near the
coasts. In the beginning the Vanir were the cause of
war with the gods, but peace was made, hostages were
exchanged and a mutual good-will was established and
maintained between them for the benefit of the whole
world.

The giants were the powers of evil in general; the
wild nature, the cold winds, storms and all destructive
forces in the world were of their making. They were

358


THE RELIGION OF THE TEUTONS

of two kinds, the Thursar and the Jotnar (giants proper).
They were generally described as ugly, ungainly and
fierce; their heads were often of stone or as hard as
stone and their stature was immense. They were the
enemies of the gods and men and they were nearly an
equal match for the inhabitants of Asgarth. But indi-
viduals among them were often beautiful, and friendly
disposed towards man " and the sons of Wodan."

The Thursar were the rulers of the wild open sea, over
which Ran was queen, while the Jotnar were the inhabit-
ants of the mountains and the barren parts of the earth.

Besides the giants, dwarfs, elves, Vanir and gods
proper, there were several other beings, which played an
important part in early Teutonic religion, and which in
some cases have survived in the folk belief down to the
present day.

In the Saga of Hakon the Good we read : " It was
the custom in olden times, when sacrifice was about to
be made, that the freemen should go to the temple with
the supplies they would need while the feast of sacrifice
lasted. They were all to have ale. All kinds of small
domestic animals and horses were slain, and all the blood
that came from them was called hlaut and was preserved
in so-called hlaut-bowh. With the hlaut-teins, which were
made in the fashion of a sprinkler broom, all the stalls and
the inside and outside walls of the temple should be
reddened, and the people should be sprinkled. The
meat was boiled for the feasting of those present.
In the middle of the floor there were fires, above
which hung caldrons, and the drinking cups should be
carried around the fire. The one who made the feast
and was the chieftain should bless the cups and all the
sacrificial food. First they should drink a cup to Othen
(Wodan) for victory and, the dominion of their king,

359


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

then to Njorth 5 and Freyj 6 for prosperity and peace.
Thereupon many drank the cup of Brage. 7 They also
used to drink their cups to their dead kinsmen, who had
distinguished themselves." This description of a public
sacrifice-feast refers to late historic times, but contains
many primitive elements.

The early Teutons were plain materialists and had
no hankering for a life beyond the grave, but they were
extremely religious and they never began an important
undertaking of any kind in war or peace without offer-
ings and prayers to the gods. The object to be sacrificed
was determined by the importance of the object to be
obtained. Small animals, food, drink, etc., would be
offered to the gods and the other spirits on ordinary Occa-
sions or when ordinary things were requested. Large
animals, especially horses, were offered on public occa-
sions, in emergencies or in trying times; in stress and
danger or when victories were obtained or called for,
human beings were often sacrificed. Then kings even
offered up their sons and we have records of a people
sacrificing their king to propitiate the gods. Besides
" occasional sacrifices " the Teutons celebrated three great
festivals, at which large offerings were made. The first
of these was in the middle of October, the Germanic
thanksgiving; the second took place in the beginning
of January, the Yule time ; and the third fell towards the
middle of April, at which sacrifices were made especially
to Wodan, in order to obtain his blessings for victories
and successful expeditions.

Prayers to the gods were also common, but it was a
general principle not to sacrifice or pray to excess. In
prayer the suppliant turned towards the north, and some-

6 The god of the wind and fishing.

6 The god of fertility and the ruler of the rain and sunshine.

' The god of poetry.

360


THE RELIGION OF THE TEUTONS

times kneeled or threw himself on the ground before
divine images.

Magic or sorcery in which the runes played an impor-
tant part was common and even the gods made use of it.
Divination was also employed.

Temples were apparently built by nearly all Germanic
tribes in the early centuries of our era; but we have
definite information of such only in the north. They
were built in forests, which were the original places of
worship, and which continued to be held in reverence, and
trees were often sacred among the people. The temples
of Scandinavia were of two kinds, one round (the earlier
type) and another of oblong shape with a semicircular
prolongation which was separated from the former by a
wall. The prolongation was a remnant of the earlier form
to which was added the feast hall for the convenience of
the people.

They were surrounded by an enclosure and looked
after by a priest, king or chieftain, as the case might be.
Priests without other office were not original among the
Teutons, but the priesthood was fully developed in the
Viking period. Images of the gods were general. They
were of wood, sometimes made of stone or metal, and
placed on a kind of pedestal, in the semicircular prolonga-
tion, mentioned above, or even in the open.

The earliest conception about the " homes of the
dead " was Helheim, a misty, cold and horrifying region,
where dragons and other hideous monsters terrified the
arrivals from the upper world. This, did not satisfy later
generations, who demanded a more, cheerful abode " after
their labors." Accordingly, the idea of Valhall grew up.

Valhall was fhe largest and most gorgeous hall in
Asgarth, where 'Wodan received the heroes who had fallen
bravely in battle. It was covered with shields and lighted
by sparkling swords. It had 640 doors, through each
one of which 960 champions could march abreast. In

361


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

this hall the chosen heroes led a life of activity and happi-
ness. Every morning they put on their armor and marched
out to a plain, where they engaged in mortal combat and
slew one another. However, when mealtime came they
all arose again and returned to Valhall, as the best of
friends, and partook of the boar Saehrimnir, and the
heavenly mead served by the Valkyrior, the female ser-
vants of Wodan. This was repeated in eternal monotony.
In the early morning the boar was ready to be made
into a new meal, as he came to life again every evening
as fat and healthy as ever. Not all fallen heroes could
enter Valhall: only those whose lives were noble and
spotless were worthy of such honor. These were se-
lected by the Valkyrior, and brought in triumph into the
great hall before the god of battle.

The Teutons believed that the material world with
its inhabitants, including the gods, would sometime come
to an end. This catastrophe was to be preceded by long
periods of continuous winter and by disturbances in
nature and by degeneration in the moral world. Then
comes the fatal hour. The gods are lined up in battle
array for their last mighty struggle. They are met by
the giants and by all, the forces of darkness. The world
shakes in its foundations. The ash Yggdrasil perishes.

The sun darkens,

The earth sinks into the sea.

The bright stars

Are hurled from heaven.

Fire roars

Against flaming fire;

High play the flames

Against the very sky.

But from the ruins a new world shall arise " and
prosper forever." New gods will appear and a new race
of men will inhabit the new earth. Evil is banished
eternally and goodness and virtue shall live perpetually
among mortals and gods.

362


THE RELIGION OF THE TEUTONS

BIBLIOGRAPHY

The Edda, translated by B. Thorpe (1866), G. Vigfusson in his
Corpus poeticum boreale (1883), B. Olive Bray, i-ii (1908).

Anderson, Rasmus B. : Norse Mythology (Chicago, 1901).

De la Saussaye, P. D. Chantepie: The Religion of the Teutons
(Boston and London, 1002).

Helm, Karl: Altgermanische Religionsgeschichte (1913).

Golther, Wolfgang : Handbuch der germanischen Mythologie (Leip-
zig, 1895)-

Grimm, Jacob: Deutsche Mythologie, i-iii (4th ed., Berlin, 1875-78).

Gummere, F. B. : Germanic Origins (New York, 1892).

Meyer, E. H. : Germanische Mythologie (Berlin, 1891).

Meyer, E. H. : Mythologie der Germanen (Strassburg, 1902).

Meyer, R. M. : Altgermanische Religionsgeschichte (191a).

Mogk, E. : Germanische Mythologie (2d ed., Strassburg, 1898) .

Petersen, Henry: On Nordboernes Gudedyrkelse og Gudetro i
Hedenold (Copenhagen, 1876). A rather poor German transla-
tion (Ober den Gottesdienst, etc.) was published at Gardelegen
in 1882.

Rydberg, Viktor : Undersokningar i germansk mythologi, i-ii
(Stockholm, 1886, 1889). Vol. i was translated by R. B. Ander-
son and published in London in 1889.

Thorpe, Benjamin: Northern Mythology, i-iii (1851-1852).


363


CHAPTER XIII

EARLY CHRISTIANITY
BY WILLIAM ROMAINE NEWBOLD,

I must ask you at the outset to remember that I can
do no more within the narrow compass of a single lecture
than sketch the broad outlines of a picture, omitting
details which would modify to some extent the general
impression of the whole and which strict accuracy would
require me to introduce.

One may recognize in the development of early Chris-
tianity three important stages : first, the Gospel preached
by Jesus ; second, the Gospel preached, for the most part
to the Jews, by the Apostles and other early converts;
third, the form which this Gospel assumed after it had
been preached by Paul, Peter and others among the Gen-
tiles and had been subjected to the influences of Hellenistic
culture.

The Gospel of Jesus

The Gospel which Jesus preached was very simple,
both in substance and in form. Its burden was that of
the preaching of John the Baptist — Repent: for the king-
dom of heaven is at hand (Mt. 4:17). By the Kingdom
of Heaven or the Kingdom of God Jesus meant any sphere
in which the will of God is obeyed. Thus, heaven be-
longs to the Kingdom of God; so also does earth in so
far as God's will is obeyed on earth. And, in a slightly
different sense, the heart of every man who obeys God's
will belongs to the Kingdom of God — the kingdom of
God is within you (Luke 17:21). Just what Jesus
meant by His declaration that the coming of the Kingdom
is at hand is difficult to determine. At least two con-
ceptions of it can be distinguished in the Gospels. Ac-

364


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

cording to one, which is virtually identical with a preva-
lent Jewish conception, Jesus, as the Messiah, will return
to earth at some time in the future with power and glory
and institute Messiah's kingdom. According to the other,
the Kingdom comes for each man when he begins to do
God's will. Hence it was being initiated by Jesus' min-
istry, and its coming was to be prolonged throughout the
period during which the mustard seed which He had come
to plant would be growing up, the leaven which He was
to introduce into the world would be leavening the whole
lump.

Thus repentance and a change of heart by which man's
will comes into conformity with God's will is the sole
and sufficient condition of admission to the Kingdom
of God.

Jesus also declared Himself authorized to> reveal the
nature of God, in so far as it concerns His creatures.
God's attitude towards them is that of love, like that of a
father towards his children. And His will, therefore, is
that men should try to become like Him arid should be
actuated in all their conduct by no other motive than
love to God and to their fellow-men.

Jesus frequently declared that the fate of those who
fail to enter the Kingdom will be eternal death, but He
never explains precisely what He meant by it. It is obvi-
ous however that he conceived it to be a very terrible
fate indeed; so terrible that it was the only reason for
His mission — the Son of Man is come, He said, to seek
and to save that which was lost (Luke 19 :iq). And the
eternal life which is to be the reward of those who do
enter the Kingdom is in like manner left unexplained. It
certainly extends beyond the grave, and Jesus frequently
intimates that He knows just what it is, but He never
dwells upon it. It would seem that He felt, and wished
His disciples to feel, that membership in the Kingdom is
the only thing of importance and that the change of scene

36s


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

occasioned by death should not be an object of too much
interest and concern.

Jesus preached this Gospel with authority. He de-
clared that He and He alone knew the nature of God and
was able to reveal it to men. He called Himself " Son of
God " and also " Son of Man," a title which probably had
much the same meaning to His hearers, for in the Book
of Enoch, which was written about a hundred years
before Jesus' time and certainly was known to some of
the writers of the New Testament, the " Son of Man "
is a celestial being who dwells in heaven with God await-
ing the time when he is to be sent down to earth as the
Messiah. Jesus also forgave sins on His own authority.
He acknowledged the inspiration of the Old Testament,
yet He dared on His own authority to amend the sacred
Law of Moses — Ye have heard that it was said by them
of old time, . . . but I say unto you.

Yet, notwithstanding these extraordinary claims for
Himself, He never made Himself a part of His Gospel.
He demanded that men should accept His message as
authoritative, but He never demanded that they should
accept even His own statements about Himself as part
of the message. Even in the Gospel of John, where
Jesus says more about Himself than in all the others
put together, it is always the acceptance of His authority
as the messenger of God that He has in mind, not of any
views about Himself. Indeed, He explicitly warns His
hearers that no mere paying of reverence to Himself can
be offered as a substitute for acceptance of His Gospel —
Not every one that saith unto vie, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will
of my Father which is in heaven (Mt. 7 : 21 ) .

This Gospel was not new. Every point in it, except
the imminence of the coming of the Kingdom and Jesus'
own connection with it, had been taught by the prophets
and was even taught in Jesus' time by the more spiritually -

366


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

minded among the Rabbis. Yet it impressed His hearers
as startlingly new and dangerously revolutionary. The
popular religion conceived of God, not as loving, but as
stern, jealous and irascible. Salvation was supposed to
depend, not upon repentance and reformation, but upon
the faithful observance of the contract made by God with
Moses by which He had pledged Himself to give the Jews
the land of Palestine and other blessings in consideration
of performance of the Law. Religion, therefore, con-
sisted chiefly in obedience to the Law, and especially to
the ritual Law. This conception of religion Jesus sternly
denounced.

The Gospel Preached by the Apostles

Turning now to the Gospel preached by the Apostles :
it included all that Jesus had taught, but it contained also
other principles which Jesus had not publicly taught.

The Apostles proclaimed the resurrection of Jesus,
of which they declared themselves the witnesses. They
laid great emphasis upon it as affording conclusive proof,
first, of God's approval of Jesus' life and work, and,
second, of the doctrine of the resurrection of the body,
already widely accepted among the Jews. Thus that doc-
trine became a part of the Christian religion.

The Apostles also preached Jesus as the Messiah.
Jesus had Himself admitted that He was the person fore-
told by the prophets and usually called the Messiah, but
He had kept the fact in the background until just before
His death. His disciples made it one of the foremost
principles of their religion. In this way such of the
Jewish ideas of the person and work of the Messiah as
were not obviously incompatible with the facts of Jesus'
life were introduced into the minds of Christians and
exerted considerable influence upon later speculation.

The Apostles also preached Jesus as the Saviour of
men from sin and the consequences of sin. This is beyond

367


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

all comparison the most important of the elements which
distinguish the Gospel of the Apostles from the Gospel
of Jesus. Not that they invented it themselves. Even
the Synoptic Gospels put it beyond question that Jesus
conceived of Himself as a Saviour, and there is no rea-
son to doubt that John is true to the facts when he repre-
sents Jesus as at times speaking of the subject at greater
length than is reported in the Synoptics. But, certainly,
if Jesus had made it a prominent feature of His public
teaching, which is the impression given by John's Gospel
taken alone, it could not have been so consistently ignored
by the eye-witnesses whose stories have been incorporated
into our Synoptics.

It is not hard to understand why the Apostles attached
such importance to Jesus' resurrection, for that was to
their minds the final proof of His authority, nor why they
thought of Him chiefly as the Messiah, for the idea was
a familiar one to every Jewish mind and fraught with
hope as no other. But what gave them this new realiza-
tion of His power as a Saviour from sin?

In the answer to this question is to be found the key
to the comprehension of primitive Christianity, and not
only of primitive Christianity but of Christianity as one
of the world religions. For if there is any single trait
which distinguishes Christianity from all other religions
it is its proclamation of Jesus as a Saviour. Other re-
ligions have their prophets and teachers, but Christianity
alone proclaims its Founder as a Saviour. Myriads of
men have avowed their belief in this doctrine, and al-
though by far the greater number have meant no more
by their avowal than formal assent to a more or less well
understood statement, there remains a countless multitude
for whom it has been the expression of an experience so
profound, so compelling, that no persuasion, no argument,
no threats, not even torture and death, could avail to
shake their assurance of its reality.

368


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

As the theory which I am putting before you is prob-
ably novel to many of you, I must dwell briefly upon the
facts upon which it is based.

Religious people, if they can be persuaded to talk on
the subject, will often say that they are aware of a new
kind of consciousness within their souls, a kind of which
they knew nothing before they became religious,' and this
they call "the spiritual life." If they are Christians,
they usually attribute the initiation of the spiritual life
to Jesus. Now, just what do they mean by this " spiritual
life " and what reason have they for ascribing it to Jesus?

There are many manifestations of the spiritual life
and I cannot now attempt to describe them at length. A
good survey of the more important will be found in Prof.
William James' famous book, The Varieties of Religious
Experience. It will be enough for my present purpose
if I call your attention to two of the more common types.

The most characteristic trait, perhaps, is a genuine
distaste for all that is recognized as sin, even for those
sins which had formerly seemed most attractive. Often
the attraction disappears and is replaced by repulsion.
More often, probably, it still survives and wages warfare
with the new repugnance.

The second trait is one of which there are many de-
scriptions, yet all agree that the experience is essentially
indescribable. It is felt as an inflow into the deepest
depths of one's interior self of a mighty stream of con-
scious life, independent of and foreign to one's self and
utterly unlike anything ever before experienced. It is
usually described in terms derived from the emotions —
it is a "love" that embraces all sentient beings and
even inanimate objects ; it is a " joy " beside which all
the pleasures of life pale into nothingness ; it is a " peace "
so profound that no earthly vicissitudes can trouble it.
But it has an intensity, a vividness, possessed by no
emotion and superior to that of any sensation, a " burning
24 369


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

sweetness," which poor fallen human nature finds all but
insupportable. To the man who has had such an experi-
ence his former life seems like an arid waste, a living
death, nay, like death itself.

These experiences and others of the same general
type are not peculiar to Christianity ; they are found to
some extent in other religions. But Christians usually
ascribe them to Jesus, or to the Spirit of God, which He
is conceived to use as His agent. Why do they do so?
Usually, perhaps, it is simply because they have received
these experiences while under Christian influences and
have been taught to explain them in this way. But in
many cases the agency of Jesus is itself a part of the
experience. And as this also is probably a new and
strange idea to many of you I must take the time to give
a typical illustration of such an experience. Let me quote
the words of a Hindu who never called himself a Chris-
tian but remained to the end of his life a member of the
Brahmo Somaj — the late P. C. Mozoomdar. After re-
lating how, in his early life, although he had never been
exposed to Christian influences, the sense of sin grew
upon him, and how he was " mysteriously led to feel a
personal affinity to the spirit of Christ," he proceeds :

The whole subject of the life and death of Christ had
for me a marvellous sweetness and fascination. I repeat,
I can never account for this. Untaught by any one, not
sympathised with by even the best of my friends, often
discouraged axnd ridiaded, I persisted in according to
Christ a tenderness of honor which arose in my heart
unbidden. I prayed, I fasted at Christmas and Easter
times. I secretly hunted the bookshops of Calcutta to
gather the so-called likenesses of Christ. I did not know,
I cared not to think, whither all this woidd lead. About
the year 1867 a very painfid period of spiritual isolation
overtook me. . . . I was almost alone in Calcutta. . . .
It was a weekday evening. ,. . . I sat near the large lake

370


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

in the Hindu College compound. . . . I was meditating
upon tJie state of my soul, on the cure of all spiritual
wretchedness, the brightness and peace unknown to me
which was the lot of God's children. I prayed and be-
sought heaven. I cried, and shed hot tears. It might be
said I was almost in a state of trance. Suddenly, it seemed
to me, let me own that it was revealed to me, that close
to me there was a holier, more blessed, most loving per-
sonality upon which I might repose my troubled head.
Jesus lay discovered in my heart as a strange, human, kin-
dred love, as a repose, a sympathetic consolation, an un-
purchased treasure to which I was freely invited. The
response of my nature was unhesitating and immediate.
Jesus, from that day, to me became a reality whereon I
might lean. It was an impulse then, a flood of light, love,
and consolation. It is no longer an impulse now. It is a
faith and principle; it is an experience verified by a thou-
sand trials. . . . In the midst of these crumbling systems
of Hindu error and superstition, in the midst of this self-
righteous dogmatism and acrimonious controversy, in the
midst of these cold, spectral shadows of transition, secu-
larism, and agnostic doubt, to me Christ has been like
the meat and drink of my soul. (The Oriental Christ,
Boston, 1888, pp. 9-13.)

It will be, I think, obvious to those of you who are
familiar with the New Testament that the experience of
Mozoomdar must have been very much the same as the
experience of Paul. Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, must
have had some such experience to inspire the language
which he uses in the letters which he wrote while on his
way to Rome to be exposed to the beasts in the Coliseum —
Jesus Christ, our true Life (Smyrn. 4:1); Jesus Christ,
our inseparable life (Eph. 2:2); if any one has (Jesus)
within him let him understand what I mean and sympa-
thise with me, knowing what things constrain me (Rom.
6 : 3) ; W love, in the stainless joy which is Jesus Christ,

37i


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

than whom there is nothing better (Mag. 7:1). Again,
it is some such experience as this which has been crystal-
lized into the apocryphal saying of Jesus preserved by
Origen {in Jer. horn. lat. 3:3): He that is near Me is
near the fire; he that is far from Me is far from the
Kingdom.

I am not, I will ask you to observe, urging upon you
any particular interpretation of these phenomena. But
I do hold that these experiences constitute a class of phe-
nomena which occur spontaneously, which are sufficiently
well defined to be made an object of study, and which,
alone, supply the key to the comprehension of early Chris-
tianity. In fact, a man who has never had any such
experience himself and has never tried, by diligent study
of the statements of those who have had them, to acquire
some sympathetic insight into what they are like, will
find in the writings of the early Christians, and of many
later ones, little but unintelligible jargon.

It was on the day of Pentecost that the Christian
religion really came into being. There came to the com-
pany of the disciples, as they sat together indoors at
about nine o'clock in the morning, a mighty, transforming
experience. Whether the account which has come down
to us gives a faithful picture of what happened upon that
memorable day or not, whether there really was heard
the sound as of a rushing, mighty wind, whether there
really appeared tongues as of fire which sat upon each
of them, whether they really spoke foreign languages
of which they had before been ignorant — these are ques-
tions which each of us will answer in accordance with his
preconceived standards as to what is possible and what
is not possible in this world of ours. But of the central
fact, of the mighty, transforming experience, there can
be no doubt whatever, for it has changed the whole
course of history. Nothing else can explain why it was
that these humble and ignorant Jews, who but a few

372


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

days before, at the time of Jesus' arrest, had shown them-
selves arrant cowards, were transformed into veritable
firebrands. Sacrificing home, family, friends, all that
makes life worth living, they devoted their lives to the
preaching of a doctrine which must have seemed to its
first hearers an insult to their intelligence ; they fearlessly
faced ridicule, insult, mob-violence, imprisonment, torture
and death ; some of them certainly finally laid down their
lives in testimony to the constancy of their conviction.

But it was not only the first disciples to whom this
strange experience came. When they began their preach-
ing it seemed as though the same power that had given
them strength and courage was cooperating with them,
opening the ears of their hearers, forcing conviction upon
unwilling minds, turning sinners from their sins, support-
ing them in their efforts to tread the unaccustomed way
of holiness, shedding abroad in their hearts, love, joy and
the "peace of God which passeth all understanding."
These earliest Jewish Christians, long before the time of
Paul, to whose initiative some scholars would ascribe
the introduction into the Church of this type of Chris-
tianity, dwelt together, we are told, in joy and singleness
of heart. In the light of the new love which now suffused
them all distinctions of rank and wealth faded away and
those that had property sold it and distributed it among
the brethren so that all shared alike.

These were the facts which gave the Apostles their
new appreciation of the significance of Jesus as a Saviour.
Just why they attributed these new and wonderful spirit-
ual blessings to His agency we do not definitely know,
but nothing is more certain than that they did. And not
they only. Throughout all the early Christian literature
this idea recurs again and again. It is the most constant
and the most characteristic trait of the Christian religion.

But, however universal the recognition of Jesus'
agency, it is by no means always conceived in the same

373


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

way; indeed, it is often expressed in such vague terms
that it is impossible to gather from them a clear idea of
what the author's conception is. Sometimes love, joy,
knowledge, light, life, immortality, salvation, are de->
scribed as the gifts of God " through" Jesus, sometimes
as Jesus' own gifts. Sometimes, instead of love, joy,
knowledge, life, light, immortality, God Himself or Jesus
Himself are conceived to be given to men and caused to
dwell in their hearts. Or, instead of God or Jesus it is
the Spirit of God or the Spirit of Jesus which gives men
these blessings or dwells in their hearts. The identifica-
tion between two of these different points of view is well
shown by the statement of John — he that dwelleth in love
dwelleth in God, and God in him (I John, 4: 16).

Of these conceptions the one that eventually became
dominant was that of the " Spirit." For the early Chris-
tians were compelled by the very law of their being, just
as we are compelled, to interpret new experiences in terms
of received conceptions, and the conception of the
" Spirit " was familiar, not only to Jews, through the
Old Testament, but also to Gentiles, for it had long
played a prominent part in Greek philosophy.

It will be observed that all the conceptions of Jesus'
office as Saviour which I have so far touched upon center
in one point, that He is in some way responsible for the
marvellous new experiences which were appearing in the
Christian Church. But side by side with these ideas there
grew up another and quite independent group centering
in His death upon the Cross. Here again the associa-
tion was not first made by the Apostles. Jesus had more
than once referred to His death and had connected it
with His work as a Saviour. But the nature of the con-
nection He had never explained. To the Christians, how-
ever, His shameful death was a fact imperatively de-
manding explanation, and many explanations for it were
advanced which I have not the time to enumerate.

374


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

Among them the one which became most widely ac-
cepted was based upon the notion of sacrifice. Jew and
Gentile alike accepted as axiomatic the principle enunci-
ated by the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews (9: 22)
— Without shedding of blood there is no remission, and
many would accept as reasonable his further statement —
it is not possible that the blood of bidls and of goats
should take away sins (10:4). The necessary inference
is that if sins are to be forgiven a more precious sacrifice
must be offered than any provided in the Mosaic Law.
This is the reasoning which led to the doctrine that Jesus'
death upon the cross was a sacrifice offered to God, a doc-
trine which, interpreted in various ways, has played so
important a part in Christian theology.

Besides the experiences of which I have above spoken
and which may be grouped together under the term
" spiritual life," there occurred in the primitive Christian
community a number of other phenomena which also the
Christians attributed to the operation of the Spirit.
Among them were prophecy or inspired speech, fore-
telling the future, symbolic acts, " speaking with tongues,"
healing diseases, casting out demons and the performance
of sundry miracles. Time will not permit me to discuss
these phenomena ; I can only say that most of them have
been reported as occurring in modern times — some years
ago, indeed, I had myself the opportunity of studying a
case of " speaking with tongues " which presented all the
characteristics described by Paul in the 12th chapter of
1st Corinthians — and that efforts have been made of
late to explain them. But so far these efforts have been
attended, in my opinion, with little or no success. And
if we cannot explain them, it is not surprising that the
first Christians could not, except by falling back upon
the generally accepted explanation of their age, that they
were due to " spirits."

Turning now from the earliest forms of Christian
375


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND. PRESENT

thought and experience, let me sketch the modes of com-
mon action in which they found expression.

As the first converts were Jews, accustomed to the
worship of the synagogue, they no doubt continued it,
making such changes only as their new ideas suggested.
They also continued to observe the Mosaic Law and the
rites and customs sanctioned by tradition. Among these
were two which were destined to develop into the chief
rites of the Christian Church — baptism and the common
meal.

Baptism was at this time practiced by the Jews as
a part of the ceremonies by which a proselyte was ad-
mitted to Judaism. But it had been used by John the
Baptist with a special significance — as a symbol of repent-
ance and the remission of sins, and it was in this sig-
nificance that it was taken over by the Christian Church.
Jesus never Himself baptized, but it was practiced by
His disciples during His lifetime and with His approval.
In the Didache * it is preceded by instruction of the
candidate, by fasting on the part both of the candidate
and the person who is to perform the ceremony. It was
administered either by dipping or by pouring and either
in running or still water, but preferably the former. The
only prescribed ritual was the use of the name of the
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.

The common meal was no?, strictly speaking, a re-
ligious ceremony among the Jews. But it was required
that at every meal certain " Blessings " or thanksgivings
should be uttered over the food, and the rules prescribing
what they should be are preserved in the Mishna. It is
believed that the Blessings now used by orthodox Jews
differ little in form from those in use in Jesus' time.

1 The Didache, or Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, was dis-
covered in Constantinople by Philotheos Bryennios in 1875 and pub-
lished in 1883. It is a brief manual of instruction in the duties of
Christians as individuals and as church members and concludes with
an eschatological chapter.

376


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

But Jesus had Himself, at the last meal which He
ate with His disciples before His crucifixion, invested
this simple ritual with a new significance. After pro-
nouncing the usual blessings over the wine, He said — This
is my " blood of the covenant " which is shed for many,
and in like manner He said of the bread — This is my
body. It would be vain for me to attempt now to discuss
what meaning Jesus attached to these words or in what
sense the disciples understood them. This much is cer-
tain, that by this act Jesus transformed the ordinary Jew-
ish meal, with its customary Blessings, into the Common
Meal or " Love-feast " which was from the beginning
the chief religious service of the Christian Church and
which at a very early date received the name " Eucharist,"
i.e., " Thanksgiving."

In form the Eucharist originally differed very little
from any ordinary Jewish meal of the period. A simple
liturgy was provided for its celebration conforming in
general to the prescriptions of the Mishna for the prayers
to be said at every meal, namely, a thanksgiving over
the wine, usually at the beginning of the meal, although
it might be said at the end, another over the bread, which
was regarded as including any other food upon the table,
and a longer thanksgiving, in three sections, at the close
of the meal. But there is one striking difference between
the Jewish prayers and those of the Didache — the former
are thanksgivings for food and drink and prayers for
material blessings, the latter, with the exception of a
single sentence, speak only of spiritual blessings, espe-
cially those made known through Jesus.

From the very beginning the Eucharist has been
associated in the minds of Christians with the sustenance
and renewal of the spiritual life much as the body is
by food and drink. Even in the Didache, which is recog-
nized by many scholars as one of the oldest Christian
documents and which I believe to have been written in

377


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

Jerusalem before the year 70 (although in this I shall
find few to agree with me), the idea of spiritual food
and drink is found in the prayer offered after the Euchar-
istic meal : We thank Thee, Holy Father, for Thy holy
Name which Thou hast made to dwell in our hearts, and
for the knowledge and faith and immortality which Thou
hast made known to us through Jesus Thy servant: Thine
be the glory for ever. Thou, Master Almighty, hast cre-
ated all things for Thy Name's sake; food and drink
hast Thou given to men for enjoyment that they might
give thanks to Thee; but to us Thou hast given spiritual
food and drink and eternal life through Thy Servant.

It is a strange fact that the liturgy of the Didache
contains no consecration of the elements. The prayers
are, as the word " Eucharist " implies, for the most part
thanksgivings for spiritual blessings. They contain no
request that such blessings be given to the congregation
at the meal in question but only that the Church may be
sanctified and gathered together into the Kingdom and
that " Grace," i.e., the Kingdom of Grace, may come and
this world pass away.

Still more strange is it that in the Didache the food
on the table is regarded as a symbol of the spiritual bless-
ings conferred by Jesus and of nothing else. There is
no allusion to His death or to the bread and wine as rep-
resenting His body and blood.

That the author could have been ignorant of this asso-
ciation is impossible and the reasons for his silence can
only be conjectured. It is the more surprising because
in all our other sources for the earliest period the ideas
of the bread and wine, the broken body and shed blood
of the crucified Jesus, the glorified body of the risen Lord,
.the spiritual sustenance received through the sacrament,
are all inextricably intertwined. These are the ideas
which color the 10th and nth chapters of Paul's first
epistle to the Corinthians, and the 6th chapter of John's

378


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

Gospel. They occur also very frequently in the letters of
Ignatius, which are more deeply dyed with sacramental
ideas than are any other writings of the early age, and in
the writings of Justin and Irenaeus. But it is needless
to multiply illustrations from later writers, for these
ideas are familiar and occur in nearly all before the
Reformation.' The usual explanation, that they are due
exclusively to a literal interpretation of Jesus' words
of institution, is quite inadequate to account for the
strange vitality of a most paradoxical doctrine. It is not
because those words admit of no other than a literal
interpretation, but because the formula, however super-
ficially repugnant to reason, has been felt to express a
truth of experience that so many efforts have been made,
century after century, to provide for it a satisfactory
explanation in terms of the science accepted at the time.
The strangest aspect of the primitive Christian ser-
vices was the exercise of the " spiritual gifts " with
which sundry members believed themselves to be en-
dowed. All these gifts, as I have above remarked, were
supposed to be due to some spirit's possessing the indi-
vidual manifesting them. But it was soon perceived that
the words and deeds of the spirits were not all equally
edifying. Some were incoherent, others merely silly,
others inconsistent with the accepted principles of the
faith, others offensive to good taste or even to good
morals. Moreover, many scoundrels attached themselves
to the Christian community and, by pretending to the
possession of the spiritual gifts, abused the trust of the
brethren to their own selfish ends. Hence arose the
need of a criterion by which to distinguish the utter-
ances of the Spirit of God from those of evil spirits or of
deliberate swindlers. The usual criterion was the Gospel
principle, By their fruits ye shall know them. In the
Didache it is stated that if an itinerant prophet stays
with his host more than two days, if he accepts any-

379


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

thing in addition to enough food to last until he reaches
his next lodging, if he asks money, he is a false prophet.
If a prophet, speaking by a spirit, orders a meal, that
is, a celebration of the Eucharist, and then eats of it
himself, if he does not practice what he preaches, he is
a false prophet. Sometimes the principle is applied to
the words uttered by the Spirit. Paul gives as a test
the words Jesus is accursed and Lord Jesus, the Spirit of
God never says the former and no spirit except the Holy
Spirit can say the latter (7 Cor. 12: 3).

When any man's spiritual gifts had been thus tested
and approved by the Church, he was recognized as a
"true" prophet {Did. 11: 11). Thereafter he was not
to be further tested or criticized, for disapproval of the
utterances of the Holy Spirit constitutes the unpardon-
able sin (Did. 11 : 7; cf. Mk. 3 : 28-30).

Nevertheless, Paul lays down (7 Cor. 12 and 14)
two other restrictions — namely, that the utterances of the
spirits must be edifying and that the spirits of the prophets
are subject to the prophets. This latter, as McGiffert
acutely observes (The Apostolic Age, p. 524) marks an
epoch in the history of Christian worship. For, in fact,
the so-called automatic phenomena are seldom beyond the
control of the will ; they are usually induced by expectancy
and refusal to exercise voluntary control, as any one can
easily test by experiment. If then the prophet is to prac-
tice none save those which commend themselves to his
judgment as edifying, the very condition of their being
is taken away and they will disappear. If Paul's advice
had been followed the charismatic ministry would soon
have become a thing of the past.

The prophets therefore constituted, in a sense, an
order of clergy. In fact, they were the only " clergy "
of the early Church, if the word be taken to mean a class
of men set apart for the performance of religious
functions. Deacons had already been appointed, but

380


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

their duty was the distribution of the alms to the poor.
EniaxoTzot or bishops, also were appointed at an early date.
They were, as the word indicates, " overseers " or " trus-
tees " who had charge primarily of the temporal inter-
ests of the churches and in particular had the custody
of the alms and the responsibility for their disposition.
It was also expected that the bishop would discharge
the duties of hospitality which were owed by the Church
to any travelling Christian. Yet it is probable that almost
from the beginning the bishops performed religious func-
tions also. Since the prophets were the most honored
members of the Church, it would be natural to select
a prophet for the office of bishop and hence the two
officers were no doubt usually held by the same man.
Moreover, the Didache expressly states that the bishops
and deacons exercise the same ministry as the prophets
and teachers {Did. 15:1). Ilpsa^uzspoc , or "elders,"
are frequently mentioned in the earliest sources but
their functions are not definitely specified.

The constitution of the earliest churches was un-
doubtedly due to the Apostles, and it is extremely prob-
able that that of the church of Jerusalem, which had
been directly instituted by them and of which I believe
the Didache gives us a sketch, served as a model for the
others. Every church was supposed to appoint its own
officers, for, since every church possessed the gift of the
Holy Spirit, it was felt that the selection of the officers
should be left to the Spirit, as, for example, the Holy
Spirit, speaking through the church of Antioch, selected
Saul and Barnabas for the mission to the Gentiles (Acts
13:2-3). But the Apostles were not only possessed of
the Holy Spirit in a preeminent degree but were also
directly commissioned by the Lord Himself to preach the
Gospel and found churches, hence in any church where
the wishes of an Apostle were known it is probable that
they would be regarded as authoritative, and persons se-

381


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

lected and approved by an Apostle would be regarded as
possessed of similar authority, especially when confirmed
by the voice of the Holy Spirit speaking through the
church to which he was appointed. Persons thus selected
were in some cases and probably in all set aside for their
work by the rite of ordination, or- " laying on of hands,"
in which all the elders took part and which was regarded,
certainly by Paul and probably universally, as conferring
the gift of the Holy Spirit.

I have been endeavoring to describe the primitive
Christian Church as it was in the days while it was still
chiefly a Jewish sect, when most Christians observed
the Mosaic Law not less strictly than their Jewish breth-
ren, shared their national hopes, looking to the return of
the Messiah for their realization, and never dreaming
that the religion of Jesus was to become an almost ex-
clusively Gentile faith, spreading to the remotest corners
of the earth and for centuries to come moulding the
evolution of nations as yet unborn. And as I turn from
the narrow confines of Palestine and look abroad upon
the brilliant Graeco-Roman world, as I see the Christian
faith with its rudimentary theology, its pure morality,
its fervent devotion to the living Lord, its ardent spiritual
life, entering into that busy pagan civilization, coming
into manifold relations of attraction or repulsion with
its innumerable religions and philosophies, with its politi-
cal institutions, its moral principles and social customs,
I feel that any picture which I may be able to sketch
in a few paragraphs will be hopelessly inadequate.

If Christianity was to become a world religion it
must renounce a large part of its Jewish inheritance.
The Mosaic Law, already sufficiently burdensome, had
been so enlarged by new distinctions and restrictions
accumulated in the course of centuries that it had become
a burden too heavy to be borne. That any large number
of Gentiles would be induced to accept it was a vain

382


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

dream. But the rejection of the ritual Law necessitated
a radical revision of the traditional Jewish plan of salva-
tion. According to that theory, as I have said, God had
made a covenant on Mount Sinai with Moses as the
representative of the Jewish nation according to which
God, in considefation of obedience on the part of the
Jews to the entire Law then revealed, both ritual and
moral, contracted to give them the land of Palestine
together with sundry worldly and material blessings.
Breach of this contract had brought upon the Jews all
the disasters with which they had been afflicted ; faithful
observance of its terms, such as the Pharisees made
their aim, would lead to the restitution by the Messiah of
all that they had lost and very much more. Such was
the primitive Jewish conception, and it was still the belief,
probably, of the majority of the nation. But it must not
be forgotten that many entertained nobler ideals than
this.

It was to Paul, the Apostle of the Gentiles, that the
Church owed the theory of the relation between the Old
Covenant and the New which later became the orthodox
doctrine. Paul admitted the existence of a contract be-
tween God and the Jewish nation ; he held, however, that
it was made, not with Moses, but with Abraham. The
consideration was, not obedience to the ritual Law, but
simply faith in God. Abraham represented, not the
Jews as such, but only those Jews who had that faith.
The significance of the New Covenant is this: faith in
God implies faith in His Son, Jesus, and that faith is
rewarded by the gift of the Spirit which carries with it
sanctification and salvation. The Mosaic Law, which
Paul conceives as primarily a moral Law, was designed
to take the place temporarily of the influence of the
Spirit, demanding that obedience which the regenerated
soul gives willingly and necessarily; it is therefore not
abrogated, but it is superfluous. The ritual elements of

383


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the Law Paul regards as types of the New Covenant, but
he does not develop the conception in detail. This is,
however, done by one of his followers, the author of the
anonymous Epistle to the Hebrews, who expounds the
significance of the more important rites and shows that
their fulfilment in Jesus makes unnecessary their further
observance. The author of the Epistle of Barnabas car-
ries out the same conception to an extravagant extreme.
Not only is the ritual Law symbolic; it was never in-
tended by God to be put into practice at all. But at the
moment when it was being given the Jews sinned by
worshiping the golden calf, and by way of punishment
an evil spirit was permitted to deceive them into the
belief that the observance of this mass of useless and
burdensome ceremonies would be rewarded by all imagin-
able blessings.

The conceptions of the rewards of virtue and the pun-
ishments of sin which Christianity had inherited from
Judaism also demanded definition and revision. The older
Judaism had had no definite belief in a life after death;
all the sanctions of conduct which it proclaimed related
to the life on earth. Hence the necessity of a resurrec-
tion of the body, if all pious Jews were to share in the
glories of Messiah's Kingdom. But, before the time of
Christ, the belief that the souls of the just enjoy a purely
immaterial, spiritual life after death was gaining ground
among the Jews, and the attempt to reconcile it with
the accepted belief in the coming Kingdom had led some
thinkers to represent the latter as rather a spiritual than
a material Kingdom. This was the solution of the prob-
lem adopted by Paul, and, seemingly, by John. Paul
teaches most emphatically the doctrine of the Resurrec-
tion, of which the resurrection of Jesus was the guarantee,
but teaches not less emphatically that at the Resurrection
our material bodies will be transformed into spiritual
bodies such as was the body of Jesus after His resurrec-

384


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

tion. Thus the traditional conception of the Messiah's
Kingdom merges into the conception of a purely spiritual
life after death. But even Paul's authority was not
sufficient to give this doctrine universal currency. For
many centuries the belief in the resurrection of the gross
material body was one of the most distinctive features
of the Christian faith and was defended by some of its
representatives with all the resources of ancient science.
Indeed, I think one may say that the issue has never
been definitely settled, that these essentially incompatible
conceptions still maintain their ancient rivalry in certain
circles of the Christian Church.

It would seem that the problems connected with the
nature of Jesus' own person and His relation to God
provoked no acute discussion until Christianity came into
contact with Greek thought. He had called Himself the
"Messiah," "Son of God," and "Son of Man," and
had declared that He alone knew God, but there is nothing
to indicate that He gave any detailed explanation of His
meaning. In default of any such explanation His dis-
ciples would naturally interpret such expressions in ac-
cordance with the ideas which they already attached to
them.

These ideas were themselves diverse and lacking in
definition. Some conceived the Messiah as a man, a
descendant of David, who was to be anointed with the
Spirit of God to enable him to perform the work to
which he was called. So also was Jesus conceived by
some to be a man who had been anointed by the Spirit
at the time of His baptism by John. Others thought
that the Messiah was a spiritual being, existing in heaven
before his appearance on earth. Jesus was conceived by
some in the same way, and various theories were pro-
posed to explain the relation between the preexisting
Christ and the man Jesus. According to one, Jesus was
a man upon whom the Christ descended at His baptism ;
25 38s


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

according to another, the Christ was united to Jesus from
His conception or birth, taking the place of the ordinary-
human soul; according to yet another, the Jesus who
walked and taught in Palestine was not a man, possessed
of a material body, but was the Christ himself, His
body being merely an apparition or phantom. And of
each of these theories there arose in later ages many di-
verse forms.

The most influential of the Christian thinkers, Paul
and John, taught that Jesus was a Divine Being whose
relation to God might be symbolized or expressed — it is
not clear which — by the word " Son " ; that He had come
down to earth in order to save mankind; that He had
now returned to heaven and had been invested with su-
preme power in order to continue the work which He had
begun on earth. This doctrine Paul taught, not on his
personal authority, but. upon the authority of certain
" visions " and " revelations " which had been given di-
rectly to him. The precise nature of the relation signified
by the word " Son " Paul does not fully explain, but
he intimates that the revelations contained more than he
sees fit to tell in his letters.

The Development of the Gospel Among the
Gentiles

When Christianity came in contact with Hellenism its
fundamental conceptions at once entered upon a course
of further definition and enlargement. Many of the
Gentile converts were familiar with current systems of
theology and philosophy, and it was inevitable that they
should endeavor to assimilate their new faith to their
old convictions. And it so happened that the ideas of
some of these systems resembled those of Christianity
sufficiently to make the identification comparatively easy.

For three hundred years before the time of Christ
the ideas of the Greek philosophers, and in particular

386


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

those of the Orphics, Pythagoreans, Platonists and Stoics,
had been spread far and wide throughout the Orient by
the dissemination of the Greek language and literature
which followed the conquests of Alexander. They had
met and mingled with other ideas of the most diverse
origin, with the religions of Anatolia, of Persia, of Baby-
lonia and of Egypt, with astrology, itself a complex
product, and with many elements the origin of which
can no longer be traced. And, most important of all,
in the mind of Philo, the devout and brilliant Jew of
Alexandria, whose long life comprised that of Jesus
within its confines, these ideas had effected their most
perfect amalgamation with the Hebrew theology. About
the same time, in the middle or latter half of the first
century, there was produced in Egypt that strange little
book Poemander, the most important and perhaps the
first of a group of tractates of uncertain dates, now pass-
ing under the name of " Thrice Greatest Hermes," the
purpose of which is to propagate, under the ostensible
authority of the Egyptian god Tat or Hermes, a philo-
sophical religion derived chiefly from Plato and the
Stoics.

These two, the works of Philo and the Hermetic
books, are the most important surviving monuments of
a movement which must have exerted considerable influ-
ence upon the speculations of the years immediately pre-
ceding and following the Christian era. The systems
which they present are much alike in their fundamental
ideas and both resemble in a very striking way the teach-
ings of the primitive Christian faith. Both recognize
one God, the Father of the All, whose essence is Light,
Intellect and Goodness, and a Son of God, the Logos,
commonly translated " Word " but more properly
" Thought," also called the " Tmage of God " and the
" Wisdom of God," who is the Maker and Sustainer of
the universe. Both speak of a " Breath " or " Spirit "

387


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

of God to which various attributes are assigned but
which is not clearly distinguished from the Logos. Both
regard man as containing or capable of receiving a por-
tion of the Logos or Spirit of God and therefore as him-
self, actually or potentially, a " son of God," although in
an inferior sense. Both conceive man's salvation as con-
sisting in return to God ; both teach that salvation neces-
sarily implies repentance for sin and conversion to a holy
life through which man becomes more and more like
God. And, most significant of all, both teach that man's
aspirations towards holiness are initiated and supported
by the inflow of a divine power into his soul, called by
Philo the Logos or Spirit, by Hermes the Nous or Intel-
lect. The Hermetic books even describe the transforma-
tion of the evil soul into a holy soul in the very lan-
guage of the New Testament, as a " new birth," or
" regeneration."

So strong was the affinity between Christianity and
this type of thinking, which is generally known as " Alex-
andrian," that some measure of coalescence between them
was inevitable. Even the Epistle to the Hebrews de-
scribes Jesus' person and office in language nearly the
same as that used by Philo of the Logos, and towards
the end of the first century John, in the Prologue to his
Gospel, identifies Jesus of Nazareth with the Incarnate
Logos, the Maker of the universe, in whom is Life and
Light.

This was but the beginning of a process which con-
tinued in unabated activity for nearly two hundred years.
Christian thinkers eagerly studied, not only the Alex-
andrian philosophy, but also its sources in the writings
of Plato and the Stoics, and found so much that seemed to
them true, and helpful in formulating and explaining the
truths of Christianity, that some were driven to accept
Philo's theory, that Plato had known the books of Moses,
while others took the more liberal view, that the Spirit

388


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

of God had not disdained to enlighten the minds even of
pagans, enabling them to attain to truths beyond their
unaided powers. This movement reached its climax in
Clement of Alexandria and his pupil Origen, the latter of
whom, by far the most learned man and the most able
thinker produced by ancient Christianity, developed a
system of Christian philosophy into which so much of
pagan origin had been introduced that its author was
branded a heretic by the generations that followed him.

But the borrowing was not all on the side of the
Christians. There arose in the course of the late first
and early second centuries a number of sects, usually
described as Christian, many of which really have little
in common with traditional Christianity except the recog-
nition of Jesus as the manifestation on earth of a superior
spiritual being, come with a message of salvation to man-
kind, while others are wholly pagan. These sects are
usually called " Gnostic," a word derived from the Greek
word Y<Tdwv t which means " knowledge," more especially
some knowledge not possessed by most men. The knowl-
edge which the Gnostics professed to possess was knowl-
edge of the spiritual universe, of its origin, nature and
relation to this material world and to man. In develop-
ing their systems they used with truly catholic impartiality
material drawn from Greek philosophy, from the Old
and New Testaments and from all the mythologies of the
ancient world. They also pinned their faith to the utter-
ances of certain " prophets " or " seers " — we would call
them nowadays " mediums " and " clairvoyants " — and
wove into their systems the supposed revelations thus
obtained of the spiritual world. Many of them, more-
over, claimed that their doctrines had been derived by
tradition from the Apostles themselves.

Gnosticism exerted a veritable fascination upon many
minds and for a time it seemed as though Christianity
were in danger of being dissolved into a multitude of

389


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

semi-pagan sects. But the leaders of the Church met
the danger by an appeal from fancy to fact. They had
in their hands the writings of the men who had seen
the Lord and had been taught by Him — in which of
them were these strange doctrines to be found? In the
early part of the second century, when Gnosticism first
became influential, men still survived who had heard
the Apostles, and in the latter part there were many
who had learned their Christanity from those first hearers
— as for example Irenaeus, who refers with deep feeling
to his memories of the aged Polycarp's anecdotes of
John, the Disciple of the Lord— these men were asked
to say whether these fantastic theories had ever been
part of the genuine oral tradition of the Church.

Thus the reaction against Gnosticism checked the
tendency to interpret Christianity in terms of Greek phi-
losophy and threw Christian theologians back upon the
Old Testament and the Apostolic tradition, especially as
handed down in written form. And if this was true
of the eastern Greek-speaking half of the Empire, where
the influence of Greek culture had always been strongest,
it was still more true of the Latin-speaking western
half. It was not that the barrier of language had pre-
vented the spread of Alexandrian ideas, for Greek was
the language of the western as well as of the eastern
Christians for a hundred years or more, but rather that
the genius of the Latin mind was different from that
of the Greek. Its bent was rather towards law and state-
craft than towards metaphysical speculation, and it found
more congenial occupation in drawing from the Scriptures
a definite system of doctrine and code of practice, a theory
of the Church's rights and duties, than in peering into
the mysteries of the spiritual world.

The struggle with Gnosticism was also a chief cause
for the transformation of the theory of the work of the
Spirit which was taking place during the second century,

390


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

and which may be summed up by saying that in the first
century the Spirit inspired whomsoever He would, while
in the third He worked only through the medium of the
sacraments.

I have already shown that from the beginning it had
been found necessary to put some restrictions upon the
" liberty of prophesying." The utterances of supposedly
inspired speakers were to be judged by the standard of
the accepted doctrines of the Church ; if they were found
inconsistent with them, the " spirits " possessing the
prophets were adjudged evil spirits. The progressive
development and definition of the doctrine of the Church
which resulted in part from contact with Greek thought
and in part from the Jbattle against Gnosticism imposed
still more restrictions upon the utterances of the prophets,
and inclined the Church authorities to look with disfavor
upon manifestations which might at any moment get
beyond control. Moreover, the credence given by the
Gnostics to prophets and seers tended to bring prophecy
into still greater discredit with the Church authorities
and still further disposed them to rest their case ex-
clusively upon the Old Testament and the written and
oral tradition of the Apostles.

One important result of this depreciation of contem-
porary prophecy was the formation of the canon of the
New Testament. The theory entertained by many schol-
ars that the writings of the Apostles and other men
of the first generation only gradually became recognized
as inspired is at variance with all that we know of the
point of view of the early Christians. Paul, John the
author of the Apocalypse, Clement of Rome, Hermas,
" Barnabas," Ignatius, all claim the authority of inspira-
tion for their writings, and it is not in the least probable
that those to whom those writings were addressed dis-
allowed the claim. There were many other works now
lost which laid claim to inspiration and their number was

39i


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

constantly increasing; indeed every new movement gave
rise to a flood of such works, some the product of sincere
visionaries, but most of them deliberate forgeries. The
formation of the canon of the New Testament was there-
fore rather a process of exclusion than of inclusion, of
rejecting books regarded more or less generally as in-
spired, not of recognizing in the writings accepted an
inspiration not formerly acknowledged.

The decline of the ministry of the Spirit was also
furthered by the gradual disappearance of the spiritual
gifts themselves, at least in their more striking and sensa-
tional forms. These phenomena are apt to attend crises
in the spiritual life of the individual and were, no doubt,
most frequent among converts won from the outside
world. But when the new generations came into being,
children of Christian parents, born and bred in a Chris-
tian atmosphere, they could have felt no need for any
such violent wrench or conversion from the habits and
tastes of a lifetime. Their religious life probably pur-
sued, as we see to-day in Christian families, a more calm
and equable course.

Protests against this tendency were not lacking. In
the latter part of the second century Montanus, a pres-
byter of Phrygia, tried to restore the waning ministry
of the Spirit to its pristine position of importance and
founded a denomination which for several generations
remained outside the Catholic Church. Yet even among
the Montanists the same factors were operating, and the
attempt failed. The spiritual gifts, however, long con-
tinued to appear more or less frequently. They must
have been fairly common throughout the second century
— Irenaeus speaks of them several times — and even in the
third, Origen testifies to their occurrence. One of them,
at least, the power of casting out demons, the Church
officially recognized in the creation of an order of the
ministry, the exorcists, with an appropriate ritual. But

35B


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

by the fourth century they were unusual and had entirely
lost their original position of importance.

Yet faith in the reality of the indwelling Spirit did
not pass away with the decline in frequency of the more
extraordinary phenomena and depreciation in the value
formerly ascribed to them. Even in the very beginning
of the Gospel Paul had taught that the fruit of the Spirit
is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness,
faithfulness, meekness, temperance {Gal. 5:22); that
whether there be prophecies, they shall be done away;
whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there
be knowledge, it shall be done away; but that love never
faileth (I Cor. 13:8). And so, now that the prophecies
and the tongues and the " gnosis " were passing away,
the more spiritually minded among Christians came, with
Paul, to see that love to God and man and the holy life
which love inspires constituted the best evidence of the
Spirit's presence.

But that not all were capable of such spiritual in-
sight is indicated by the growing tendency to regard the
sacraments as not merely an occasion upon which or a
means through which the Spirit was received but as in-
struments which necessarily conveyed the Spirit to the
recipient. I shall be able to speak of the Eucharist only;
the development was of the same general character in
the case of the other sacraments.

The primitive Eucharist, or Common Meal, of the
Jewish Christian Church, was a peculiarly Christian rite.
The idea of using food in a sacramental way, that is,
as a means of conveying spiritual blessings to the par-
ticipant, was foreign to the Jewish mind. But when
the Eucharist was transplanted into the Gentile world,
the ideas originally associated with it encountered in the
minds of Gentile converts conceptions of different origin
which were sufficiently akin to them to make their fusion
inevitable. Of these conceptions three call for special

393


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

mention. The first is the notion that by eating a sacri-
ficial animal which a god had entered into and possessed,
one may participate in the very substance of the god and
acquire his immortality. The second is the principle
upon which much of the ritual of magic was based, that
by repeating certain formulae of consecration over given
substances certain properties may be conferred upon them,
and, especially, that otherwise inert substances may in
this way be given medicinal virtue. The third is the
theory which is implied in a " Mystery " in the original
sense of the word. A " Mystery " was a pantomime,
representing some event, usually some tragic event, in
the life of a god. It was believed that the persons
participating in the Mystery, or, at a later date, merely
witnessing its performance, acquired thereby special favor
in the eyes of the god and would receive from him bless-
ings not granted to others.

There is no doubt that these ideas were prevalent
in the ancient world, although much uncertainty still
hangs over their origin, the extent of their diffusion and
the nature of the rites in which they were expressed.
And there is also no doubt that the later development
of the doctrine of the sacraments and especially the lan-
guage in which it was formulated were influenced by
these ideas. The unceasing efforts to define the relation
between the body and blood of Jesus and the elements
of the Eucharist, the increasing importance of the act
of consecration, the tendency to regard the elements as
mechanically communicating grace, the development of
the theory that the Eucharist is not merely a commemora-
tion but an actual repetition of the sacrifice on the Cross —
these are all indications of the influence of these ideas upon
Christian thought. Yet they were not the only or the
chief reasons for the supreme sanctity which was and
still is attached to the Eucharist by the Church. These

394


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

reasons lie, as I have shown, much deeper, in the personal
experience of individuals.

It was this feeling of reverence for the Eucharist
which ultimately led to its separation from the Common
Meal. It was difficult to maintain throughout a meal in
which many persons took part the atmosphere of devo-
tion which was appropriate to the occasion, and hence
the custom arose of observing the two rites at different
times, the Common Meal coming more and more to be
regarded as a work of charity only at which the poor of
the Church were fed. It is probable that this distinction
had come to be observed by some churches in the second
century, but the details of the process are unknown. It is,
however, certain that meals resembling the primitive
Eucharist survived in some branches of the Church for
many centuries.

It was largely under the influence of the foreign
ideas to which I have above referred that the vague con-
ceptions of the first and second centuries were finally
defined and worked up into the carefully reasoned theory
of the Catholic Church as the sole dispenser of salvation
which meets us in an advanced stage of development in
the early part of the third century and was completed
in the fourth. The fundamental principle of this theory
is the doctrine that supernatural virtue can be conferred
in no other way than by one who possesses it. The
layman can receive the Spirit only through the sacra-
ments, the sacraments derive their virtue only from their
consecration, the consecration is effective only when per-
formed by an ordained priest, a priest can be ordained
only by another ordained priest, and if one follows back
the series of ordinations one ultimately reaches the
Apostles. The first fairly consistent presentation of
this theory is found in the writings of Cyprian, Bishop
of Carthage and Martyr, in the middle of the third cen-

395


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

tury. For example, in Letter 73 he says, speaking of
the Church : She it is who alone holds and possesses all
the authority of her Spouse and Lord; over her we pre-
side, for her honor and unity we tight, her good name
and fame alike we defend with faithful devotion. We,
with the divine permission, water the thirsty people of
God, we guard the margins of the fountains of Life.

While these changes in the ideas of Christians as to
the conditions under which the Spirit, which was the life
of the Church, was to be obtained undoubtedly had much
to do with the increase in the power of the clergy which
took place between the first and the third centuries, and
is, from my present point of view, the most interesting of
the factors working towards that end, it was by no means
the only one. Probably of equal and possibly of greater
weight was the imperative need of a central authority
making for unity, to counteract the numerous disruptive
tendencies of the period. The multiplication of new doc-
trinal theories, the insidious attractions of pagan civili-
zation, the furious, if intermittent, blasts of persecution,
made it necessary to vest somewhere the right to define
what the Church believed, to discipline offenders against
morality, to strengthen weak brethren and to fix the con-
ditions upon which the lapsed might be received back into
the fold. Eventually these and other powers were
lodged in the hands of the bishops, either as individuals,
or, collectively, in council assembled.

Whatever the causes, the practical result of their
operation was the emergence of a conception of the Chris-
tian Church as a close corporation, consisting primarily
O'f a body of ordained clergy who possessed the ex-
clusive right of giving or of withholding the Holy Spirit,
that is to say, eternal salvation, at their discretion. And
this doctrine was the cornerstone upon which was erected
the imposing fabric of the mediaeval Church.

396


EARLY CHRISTIANITY

Let me sum up briefly the important features of the
theory which I have been putting before you. The es-
sence of early Christianity is not to be found in its insti-
tutions, ritual or doctrine. Of these, those which it
received from Jesus were few and simple. Others it
inherited from Judaism, others it borrowed with more
or less modification from contemporary Hellenistic cul-
ture, still others it devised itself. But at the very out-
set it essentially was the kindling of the spiritual life
in the hearts of many men under the same conditions —
namely, the preaching of Jesus as Lord and Saviour.
This was then and still is an extraordinary and inex-
plicable phenomenon. Never before, so far as is known,
had such multitudes been affected, never before had such
fruits in the way of reformation of character and puri-
fication of moral ideals been observed. This spiritual
life was accompanied in the beginning with other mani-
festations of little or no moral value, which in time passed
away. It was associated even in the minds of the first
Christians with the sacraments, and ecclesiastical theory
in time sought to chain it down to them, but it has never
been bound by the bond. It has been more conspicuously
manifested at certain times and among certain persons,
but its essential elements, namely, a new attitude towards
God, a new aversion towards sin, the inflow of a new
consciousness pervaded by joy and love, seemingly com-
ing from without, sustained and from time to time re-
newed by fresh inflows, especially in connection with the
Eucharist — these have never disappeared from any
branch of the Christian Church. It has created a new
terminology, inspired a new literature, found expression
in new liturgies, rituals and doctrines, and has exercised
incalculable influence upon the evolution of the Western
world.

397


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

BIBLIOGRAPHY

(Only books accessible in English are mentioned and only a few

of the more important of them.)

Sources :

The New Testament.

The Apostolic Fathers. Complete editions, with text and trans-
lations by J. B. Lightfoot and J. R. Harmar, 1891, and by Kir-
sopp Lake in The Loeb Library, 2 vols., 191.2, 1913. Editions of
the several works, with notes and translations : Clement of
Rome, Ignatius and Polycarp, by J. B. Lightfoot in The Apostolic
Fathers, 5 vols., 1885^90 ; TJte Epistle of Barnabas, by W. Cun-
ningham, 1877: The Didache, by P. Schaff in The O-ldest
Church Manual, 1886. Translations, usually not very good, of
nearly all the early literature will be found in The Ante-Nicene
Fathers, American edition, 1885, et seq.

Histories : A. C. McGiffert, The Apostolic Age, and R. Rainy, The
Ancient Catholic Church, both in The International Theological
Library; L. M. O. Duchesne, Early History of the Christian
Church, 2 vols., 1909, 1913; P. Wernle, The Beginnings of
Christianity, 2 vols., 1903, 1904; S. J. Case, The Evolution of
Early Christianity, 191 4.

The Jewish and Hellenistic Environment: J. Drummond, The
Jewish Messiah, 1877; Philo ludaus and the Jewish Alex-
andrian Philosophy, 2 vols., 1888; E. Schiirer, The History of
the Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ, 3 vols, in 5,
1890-91 ; C. A. Briggs, The Messiah of the Aj>ostles; Sir Wil-
liam M. Ramsay, The Church in the Roman Empire; E. Hatch,
The Influence of Greek Ideas and Usages upon the Christian
Church, being The Hibbert Lectures, 1888; C. Clemen, Primitive
Christianity and its non-Jewish Sources, 1912; W. M. Groton,
The Christian Eucharist and the Pagan Cults, being The Bohlen
Lectures, 1913 ; C. Bigg, The Christian Platonists of Alex-
andria, being The Bampton Lectures, 1886, 2d edition, 1913;
F. Cumont, Astronomy and Religion among the Greeks and
Romans, 1912 ; G. R. S. Mead, Thrice Greatest Hermes, 3 vols.,
1916, and, Fragments of a Faith Forgotten {i.e., Gnosticism),
1906 ; F. Legge, Forerunners and Rivals of Christianity, 2 vols.,
I9I5-


398


CHAPTER XIV

MEDIEVAL CHRISTIANITY
BY ARTHUR C. HOWLAND

In discussing a religion which is considered by its
adherents as God's direct and final revelation of truth
delivered through his own person, the selection of a par-
ticular period within which the religion assumed a char-
acter of its own capable of being designated by any
such descriptive term as mediaeval might at first sight
appear illogical. Yet while it can be said that Chris-
tianity is the same to-day as it was in the Middle Ages,
and the same in the Middle Ages as it was in the time of
the Apostles, it is equally true that, like any other living
thing, Christianity is constantly changing and developing,
and that it is not the same in any two succeeding genera-
tions. Under different environments the human mind
reacts in different ways towards the same body of
principles.

The Middle Ages as generally understood comprise
the thousand years that intervened between the collapse
of the Roman imperial organization in Western Europe
and the Reformation or, in round numbers, the period
from 500 to 1 500. The old idea that this was a stagnant
epoch, that such a cycle of years could be fittingly char-
acterized by any such term as the Dark Ages, has long
been given up. We now know that the human mind
was as active then as at any other time, that the deepest
questions of philosophy and life were propounded and
answered, that constant change and readjustment were
going on as at other times. Nevertheless, there were
in the Middle Ages certain traits and certain conditions
that serve to mark them off both from the ancient and

399


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

from the modern world. These formed an environment
which caused the men of that age to envisage their re-
ligion and its mission in a particular way and gave to
mediaeval Christianity a character of its own.

The mediaeval Church was distinguished from primi-
tive Christianity by a systematized theology and a highly
developed form of organization ; and from modern Chris-
tianity by the absence of the competition and rivalry that
has existed since the appearance of Protestantism. From
both ancient and modern times it was distinguished by
the fact that it did not exist side by side with a highly
developed political society and so did not have to modify
its rules or its theories at the behest of the State but could
confidently assume a superiority to national organizations.
Finally, the ignorance of natural science and of the
modern conception of the laws of nature gave to the
religion of that day a character in some respects far
different from that of modern religion. By keeping these
three features of the Middle Ages in mind — first, an
elaborate church organization that had no rivals ; second,
the conception of a physical universe governed and con-
trolled by the caprice of supernatural powers rather than
by immutable law ; and third, a primitive and incoherent
state organization incapable of performing the most im-
portant tasks of society — we are in a position to under-
stand some of the special features of mediaeval
Christianity.

When the religion of Christ became the universal
faith of Europe, the development of an elaborate insti-
tutional life became a necessity of existence. Its wide
and rapid extension after the days of Constantine meant
for the mass of the inhabitants of Europe a conversion
in name only. Pagan habits of thought, old standards
of conduct and morality, could not be changed with the
same ease as the practice of the pagan cults had been
abolished at the command of the Roman government.

400


MEDIEVAL CHRISTIANITY

It was possible, however, to enforce an outward con-
formity to elaborate ceremonies and rites, the observance
of which could be enforced on a population however
indifferent to the inner spirit of Christ's teachings, and
thus to create a concrete institution that would command
the loyalty and devotion of a half -barbarous world. This
development took place largely at the hands of Italian
churchmen imbued with the ideas, and inheriting the
genius of the men who had created the Roman Empire.
The creative genius of Rome, as is well known, lay chiefly
in law and administration. It is not strange, therefore,
that church institutions took on a strongly legalized tinge
and that the conception of formal law rather than that
of the inspiration of the Spirit should have governed the
relations of the ordinary man to God. A degree of for-
mality grew up which threatened to impoverish spiritual
life; an insistence on external acts in the religious cult
which seemed capable of developing into a contract be-
tween the Church and its members whereby the former
would guarantee ultimate salvation in return for the
performance of specified acts of worship. In other
words, mediaeval Christianity was threatened with the
evil inherent in every highly developed institution, the
danger of sacrificing the spirit to the form.

That this danger did not overwhelm the Church, that
Christianity did not cease to embody the highest spiritual
ideals of the age, is largely due to the influence of that
most characteristic form of mediaeval religion — Mon-
asticism. In origin a revolt from the Church, a protest
against the worldliness that threatened to overwhelm it
after the conversion of Constantine, monasticism was
soon reconciled to the general organization and promptly
took its place as the expression of the highest ideal of
Christianity. Withdrawn from the world, interested only
indirectly in questions of government and discipline in
the Church at large, the monk could devote himself to
26 401


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the interests of the mind and the spirit to a degree im-
possible for the bishop or the secular priest.

The type of piety thus developed does, indeed, strike
us as something exotic. With its passivism, its asceti-
cism, its pessimistic views of the world, it was more
oriental than occidental. But Christianity was an eastern
religion, and the logical mind of the Middle Ages saw in
monasticism the true expression of its inner spirit. The
great problem of Christianity in all ages has been to recon-
cile Christ's teachings with the standards of conduct im-
posed by practical life; to adapt the doctrine of brotherly
love to the exigencies of the struggle for existence; and
to determine what compromise, if any, shall be accepted
between the rules of conduct laid down by Jesus and
the needs of those who wish to succeed in the world.
These questions are no less pressing to-day in the midst
of the economic competition of the modern world and
the bloodshed of national war than they were under the
feudal regime. Each age has sought its own answer to
the problem with greater or less success. What that an-
swer shall be to-day is baffling the greatest religious
leaders. But in the Middle Ages, it was found in monas-
ticism. For the man of the world whether layman or
secular priest or bishop, the answer was found in the
standard of conduct that seemed to be required by the
necessities of active life, by the desire for wealth, the
love of power, the need of pleasure, the demands of am-
bition. For the monk it lay in the renunciation of all
these things, the voluntary acceptance of poverty, the sac-
rifice of the domestic affections, the complete surrender
of the will to a human superior and with it all thought of
human ambition ; and within the walls of the monastery
absolute equality among the brothers without regard to
their former rank in the outer world.

Thus two types of Christianity were recognized in the
Middle Ages. One was for the world at large, where

402


MEDIEVAL CHRISTIANITY

though the teachings of Christ were held up as an ideal,
a certain compromise was recognized as necessary, the
Church with its rites and sacraments serving as mediator
and providing for the ultimate salvation of its children
notwithstanding their maculation by the world. The
other was for the chosen of God whose spiritual strength
enabled them to follow literally what the men of that age
conceived as the pure teachings of Christ. As to which
of these two types was the higher, the Middle Ages did
not hesitate to pronounce. To them the monk was the
true exemplifier of religion. The term by which he was
designated and which served to distinguish him not only
from the laity but from the ordinary clergy was religiosus,
" the religious man." The choice of the monastic life
by one who was already a Christian and a member of the
Church was described as conversion, a term that reminds
us curiously of Puritan phraseology and at bottom means
the same thing — a deep religious experience that sets one
apart from the world and makes him a participant in the
communion of saints. To the Puritan no man was a
member of Christ's Church who had not felt a conviction
of sin in his own person, who had not cast off the old
man and thus been born again into the Kingdom. But
to the Middle Ages this Christian rebirth took place at
baptism. It was then that the old Adam was cast off
and the devil and all his works were renounced. Thus
all men found themselves members of the Church with-
out conscious choice of their own and secure of ultimate
salvation, provided they remained her faithful children
and followed the rites she prescribed. In monasticism
was to> be found the higher spiritual life of the age, while
the doctrine of purgatory developed to reconcile the de-
mands of divine justice with the acceptance of such
diverse standards of life for different elements in the
Church.

Thus monasticism stands forth as one of the char-
403


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

acteristic features of mediaeval Christianity, a feature the
significance of which was due to the elaborate develop-
ment of the Church as an institution and to the mechani-
cal nature of the religious life which institutionalism fos-
ters among the great mass of mankind.

Though the monks formed an integral part of the
Church they followed ideals and adopted customs which
dissociated them from the general life. The cure of souls
and the management of the property and of the political
interests of the Church were tasks quite foreign to their
fundamental interests. Hence, shut off and protected
from such cares, they were free to devote themselves to
other and more altruistic interests. It was they who were
the leading scholars and the chief educators of the Middle
Ages. It was they who revived the arts which had almost
perished on the downfall of ancient civilization, and con-
tinued to foster them until culture began again to revive.
Their charity was the chief solace of the poor when the
wealth of the secular church was largely devoted to
worldly ends. And it was they who furnished the mis-
sionaries who converted heathen and barbarous Europe
to Christianity.

Since the monks, unlike the secular clergy, did not
enter into competition with lay society, they were free
to adopt principles of organization elsewhere unknown
in the Middle Ages. The Church at large, like feudal
society in general, was thoroughly aristocratic. Small
chance therein for the poor man save as a parish priest
who had no hope of preferment, and who was subject
to the whims and caprice of the rich lay patron to whom
he owed his place. The bishop's office, the cathedral pre-
bend, the rich benefice, were reserved for the sons of
the aristocracy who but too often used the ecclesiastical
revenues to rival the pride and pomp of the lay nobles.
The government of the Church, then, would have been
in the hands of the nobility as fully as was the government

404


MEDIEVAL CHRISTIANITY

of lay society if it had not been for the counteracting
influence of monasticism. The veneration in which the
monks as a class were held because of their exemplifica-
tion of the ideals of mediaeval Christianity caused them
to be summoned in large numbers to the highest positions
in the hierarchy; and in the monastery itself low birth
was no bar to preferment. In fact, the monastic organi-
zation was in theory purely democratic. The virtue of
humility was supposed to be a bar to any claim of birth
or family. We are told for instance of a king of the
Franks, the uncle of Charlemagne, who took up the
monastic profession at Monte Cassino and was promptly
set to a scullion's tasks in the abbey kitchen to prove the
genuineness of his religious calling; and similar stories
abound in the literature of the age. On the other hand,
however humble his origin, a monk of piety and ability
might rise to the highest position in his own house and
thence be drafted into the secular hierarchy of the Church.
In this way it was constantly acquiring new blood and
renewing its strength. For a man without family influ-
ence there was little opportunity in the Middle Ages
save in the Church and even there the door to influence
opened only through the monastery. It has been re-
marked that just as in Napoleon's army every soldier felt
that he carried in his knapsack the baton of a field mar-
shal, so in the Middle Ages every monk realized that the
highest positions in the Church lay within his reach. The
Church could thus command the best ability of the age ;
the State could not. And this is one of the reasons for
the superiority of the former over the latter in that period.
To pass over the case of bishops, the papal chair was
more than once occupied by men of humble origin and
in every instance, so far as I know, these men rose through
the monastery. The mighty Gregory VII was the son
of a poor artisan of Northern Italy; Benedict XI was
said to have started life as a shepherd boy; Benedict XII

405


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

as a baker; Nicholas V as a poor doctor; Sixtus V as a
swineherd; John XXII as a cobbler; Nicholas IV, Coe-
lestine V and Sixtus IV were the sons of peasants ; while
Alexander V and Hadrian IV were once outcasts and
beggars. The case of the last-named, Hadrian IV, is
especially interesting as he was the only Englishman who
ever occupied the papal chair. It should be noted, said an
exulting monastic chronicler of his own day, how this
man was raised up out of the very dust to sit among
princes. Hadrian's father was a poor English clerk who
deserted his wife and family in order to enter the abbey
of St. Albans, thus reducing them to such poverty that
the son was obliged to apply daily at the door of his
father's monastery for alms. Much scandalized at such
conduct the father drove him away with vituperation and
the young lad, ashamed to beg or to dig in his own coun-
try, crossed over to France. Here, too, his begging met
with scant returns and he wandered south into Provence
where he had the good fortune to excite the pity and
interest of a house of regular canons. Being a youth
of pleasing appearance and ready tongue he was finally
invited to join the order. He applied himself to learning
and finally acquired so great a, reputation for eloquence
and wisdom that he was elected abbot. His administra-
tion did not run smoothly, however, and his monks twice
cited him to Rome to answer charges of misgovernment.
On the second occasion, the pope acceded to the petition
of the brothers and sent them home to choose themselves
a new abbot while he retained their deposed chief at his
own court, made him bishop of Albano and later, be-
cause of his abilities, sent him as papal legate to Den-
mark and Norway to compose the ecclesiastical troubles
of those kingdoms. Shortly after his return there oc-
curred a vacancy in the papacy and this one-time beggar
ascended the chair of St. Peter by unanimous choice of
the cardinals. Our English chronicler adds an unexpected

406


MEDIAEVAL CHRISTIANITY

note to the effect that when he had become head of the
Church, Hadrian richly endowed the abbey of St. Albans
" out of reverence for his father's memory."

But the opening of a career to talent, whatever its
origin, was not the only democratic feature of monasti-
cism. Nowhere can that characteristic be better observed
than in its treatment of women. To the modern mind
the Church has always seemed somewhat unfair in its
attitude toward women in spite of their devotion to re-
ligion. It has always denied them a share in its govern-
ment. In their hands the sacraments would be dese-
crated. Entrance into the holy of holies has been for-
bidden them. The priesthood would be degraded by
the ordination of such candidates. In fact, though in
all ages the Church has received its greatest support and
devotion from women, its government and its offices
and emoluments have been reserved for men. Not only
this, but too often it has looked upon woman as the chief
seat and instrument of the devil in his warfare upon
man. Now in theory monasticism shared this view and
in fact did much to foster and spread it, as was perhaps
natural in an institution that laid such stress upon the
virtue of chastity. But in practice it followed a different
line and gave almost as much opportunity to women
as to men. The convent of nuns is as characteristic a
feature as the men's monastery, and that institution fur-
nished a long list of saints canonized by the Church,
which thus admitted that women might be mediators for
humanity in heaven, although they were not fit thus to
serve in the earthly church. Even on earth, monasticism
allowed women a place among the rulers, for they headed
and directed the convents and the lady abbess was often
as distinguished a figure as the lord abbot. Nay, there
was one monastic order, that of Fontevrauld, composed
of both men and women, wherein the monks as well
as the nuns were ruled by an abbess and none but a

407


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

woman could exercise authority over the combined estab-
lishments.

The position afforded to women is but one of many
examples of the elasticity and adaptability of monastic
institutions. These qualities were largely due to the
remarkable organization worked out by St. Benedict of
Nursia in the sixth century. He succeeded in establish-
ing for his followers certain fundamental and clearly
marked principles of life and conduct, and in creating
an ideal that changed little from age to age, while allow-
ing a freedom in details and practice that permitted west-
ern monasticism to adjust itself to varying conditions of
environment and varying needs of spiritual life. In this
respect it differed from the other institutions of the
Church which tended to become fixed and rigid and in-
capable of change. Herein lies the explanation of a phe-
nomenon that has struck most observers, namely, that
the mediaeval Church, in spite of a rigid system of theol-
ogy and an elaborate sacramental machinery, was able to
make use of all forms of religious enthusiasm, and to
employ and direct ardent spiritual impulses that under
other conditions would have led to revolt from the
Church and the destruction of religious unity. Hence
arose those reforms and revivals that so often recalled
the Church to a consciousness of its mission and kept
alive its influence in the hearts of men. Not a single
reform arose in the Middle Ages, not a single new aspect
of religious experience and practice, but had its inception
in monasticism and found expression most often in the
establishment of new orders or the reorganization of old
ones.

Protestantism has never shown an equal ability to
make use of and profit by the varieties of religious ex-
perience. Too often its leaders and prophets have found
no place in the existing organization and have found
themselves driven out and compelled to create new and

408


MEDLEVAL CHRISTIANITY

competing churches. It has been remarked more than
once that in the Middle Ages John Wesley and White-
field would have found their places in the existing Church
and the movement they inspired have been embodied in a
reform finding expression in a new monastic order. The
same thing might be said of the great founder of the
Salvation Army and his followers. I am not sure but
that even Christian Science, had it arisen in the Middle
Ages, might not have been shorn of some of its peculiar-
ities and use made of the undoubted spiritual force that
characterizes the movement. We might even have had,
in place of Mother Eddy, a new Saint Mary and the
cures wrought by her followers might have been attributed
to her intercession in heaven instead of to what is humor-
ously designated as Science.

This power of expansion and adaptability which mon-
asticism showed in its best days gradually declined as the
Middle Ages drew toward a close. It was itself an in-
stitution with rules and forms and ceremonies, and as
these hardened and became conventionalized monasticism
displayed less and less ability to meet the new demands,
the new intellectual and spiritual interests that marked
the beginnings of the modern world. The last great de-
velopment in mediaeval monasticism occurred at the be-
ginning of the thirteenth century under the leadership of
that most lovable and most Christ-like character of the
Middle Ages, St. Francis of Assisi. But that much of
the vitality of monasticism was already spent is seen in
the rapid deterioration of his order. Scarcely was their
founder dead when a bitter struggle broke out among the
Franciscans, some wishing to follow out the literal pre-
cepts and imitate the spirit of St. Francis, while the ma-
jority sought to assimilate the order to the older monastic
institutions. The latter were successful and the Spirituals,
as their opponents were fittingly designated, fell under

409


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

ecclesiastical censure and were forced either to submit
or to be burned as heretics.

This incident shows how monasticism was losing the
power to embody and express new needs and impulses.
That power once lost, there was no other organ then
existing within the Church that could accomplish a re-
adjustment between its institutions and the demands of a
changing world. Herein lies one of the many causes of
the Reformation. During the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries Europe was undergoing some of the greatest
changes in its history and with the loss of the power of
internal development the Church was no longer able to
meet fully the requirements of the new age. There fol-
lowed the disruption of the Church. Four hundred years
earlier, Luther might have been the founder of a new
monastic order instead of the leader of a revolt, but at
the beginning of the sixteenth century no other course
was possible for a man of his peculiar temper and fierce
ardor than the one he followed. It is true that the shock
of the Reformation led to a great reaction within the
older Church and to the formation of a new monastic
institution, in some respects the most remarkable of all,
the Society of Jesus. But with the coming of the Jesuits
the Church had left the Middle Ages behind and entered
upon its modern period.

I have pointed out that the institutional development
of the mediaeval Church threatened it with a legalistic
conception of salvation highly prejudicial to the highest
spiritual development, and have indicated some of the
ways in which this tendency was counterbalanced by
monasticism. Another characteristic of the period which
had an influence on religious life was the universal char-
acter of the Church's authority. It had no rivals. No
other form of church organization existed in Europe and
heresy was at all times and in nearly all places absolutely
negligible. From this circumstance we can trace two

410


MEDIEVAL CHRISTIANITY

consequences : on the part of the Church, an attitude of
tolerance; and on the part of the masses, a simple and
child-like attitude toward religion which made the Chris-
tian cult an integral part of their lives to an extent
scarcely to be found to-day.

It may sound strange to some ears to speak of the
mediaeval Church as tolerant, and yet within certain limits
this statement is true. So long as the principle of author-
ity was maintained the Church felt no interest in the sup-
pression of opinion and discussion or even of criticism
directed against itself. The line was drawn at any denial
of the Church's divine power and right to control the
means and methods of salvation. Outside of the Church
there is no salvation ; such was the statement of St. Cy-
prian in the third century, and to this principle the Church
gave unqualified adhesion throughout the Middle Ages.
Let anyone deny the efficacy of the sacraments adminis-
tered by a duly qualified priest, even though that priest
were a sinner of the worst type, and no mercy would be
shown the rebel; but once the ultimate authority of the
Church as the mediator of salvation was acknowledged,
the widest range of discussion and speculation was per-
mitted to those who were clever enough to reconcile their
positions with this fundamental assumption. Even the
basic doctrines of theology were freely handled and dis-
cussed without restraint, and a Berengar of Tours could
attack such a fundamental doctrine of the Church as
transubstantiation without stirring up a Gregory VII to
persecution, for Berengar admitted the final authority of
the Church. With this reservation there were no ideas
and no arguments but that could be and were put forward
and defended by scholars.

As to criticism of the Church, its practices, acts, and
shortcomings, there was no attempt at suppression, and
attacks on ecclesiastical abuses were as open and bitter as
anything brought forward by the Protestants in the six-

411


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

teenth century. That such attacks could be tolerated, in
fact welcomed in some quarters, was due to the absence
of rival churches. Everyone accepted the institution as
divinely ordained by Heaven and these criticisms were
regarded with much the same tolerance that we show to
the bitter tirades of reformers against the corruption and
incompetence of our own government because we know
that the general principles of our political institutions are
loyally accepted by the critics themselves. In the midst of
this general confidence in the Church even the short-
comings of Divine Providence might be referred to with-
out danger of punishment. A popular preacher of the
thirteenth century in one of his sermons thus alludes to
the mismanagement of human affairs. A certain mounte-
bank, he said, was on his deathbed and called to him a
priest who warned him to make his will. " Very well,"
said the mountebank, " I have two horses. One of them
I give to the bishop, the other to the king. As to my
clothing, it is to be divided between the baron and the
other rich men." " But," cried the priest, " what about
the poor? " " Why," replied the mountebank, " do you
not preach to us every day that we should imitate God?
I am imitating Him, for He gives everything to the rich
and nothing to the poor." It would be hard to find a more
caustic comment from a modern socialist.

Universal acceptance of the Church had another con-
sequence, namely, the attitude of the common man toward
religion. It was so much a part of his daily life and
was accepted as so natural an element of human experi-
ence that there was none of that half-timid, half-apolo-
getic attitude sometimes met with to-day when the subject
of religion is broached. There was no separation be-
tween religion and business or between religion and pleas-
ure. Sunday was not the Sabbath of the Jews nor the
Sabbath of the Puritans. It was of itself scarcely more
sacred to religion than the other six days of the week,

412


MEDIAEVAL CHRISTIANITY

save that the compulsory cessation of labor gave a greater
opportunity for attendance at divine service. When mass
had been heard, the remainder of the day was frankly
devoted to pleasure and social enjoyment. But if Sunday
was not set aside exclusively for religion, neither was
religion reserved for Sunday. The doors of the church
stood open all days alike and at any hour one might step
within to meditate or satisfy the impulse of worship, or
to use the sacred edifice for any of the ordinary purposes
of daily life. " Such customs," says a French historian,
" which seem to us like a violation of the sanctuary were
fully authorized in the Middle Ages. The Church al-
lowed the people to amuse themselves and the clergy
were one with the people in this matter. Religion in
those days was not sad and austere. Life was not divided
into two parts, a religious and a worldly. Nothing was
profane, for religion embraced all of human existence.
People journeyed along the road of salvation with gay
hearts. Pilgrimages were often pleasant excursions. Re-
ligious assemblies, pardons as they are still called in
Brittany, were noisy and crowded gatherings where
peddlers, wandering minstrels and clowns opened their
booths or set up their platforms. One did not pull a
long face when he entered a church, for the church was a
continuation of the street and the common meeting place
of all. The choir, indeed, was reserved for worship, but
the nave belonged to the people. There meetings were
held, even councils of war and assemblies of insurgent
citizens. One went there to stroll about, to exchange
gossip, to talk business. There on rainy days the fairs
were held for lack of a better place. The church bell
was rung for the opening of the market, for town meet-
ings and for insurrections, as well as for the divine offices.
The churchman, whether priest or canon, was as worldly
as the layman, and the laymen were as religious as the
priests. Even among the monks there were jolly souls

4i3


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

who were invited to the weddings and the family festivals,
and who enjoyed good stories even when told against
themselves. Holy men these, nevertheless, and in spite
of all very edifying, since they rendered religion lovable
and caused some Christian ideas to penetrate into the
rude mass of the people. None of the monks were more
popular than the Franciscans. In the garb of their order,
which seems strange to us to-day but differed little from
the costume of that period, they went about preaching,
collecting, begging, entering the homes, inquiring about
the wife and children, giving advice, prescribing reme-
dies, distributing blessings. Mingling closely with the
common people they shared all their instincts, even the
instinct of revolt against the great lords of the Church,
and naturally sided with the communes against their
lord bishops."

Any consideration of the popular religious life of
the Middle Ages would be incomplete that did not take
into account their conception of the physical universe and
of the forces which governed it. Those centuries have
often been designated as the Age of Faith, but their
superiority to modern times in respect to this virtue was
due in some degree to their lack of knowledge. The con-
ception of natural phenomena governed by fixed and
unchanging laws was unknown. Every occurrence in
nature was the result of the arbitrary act of some higher
power, friendly or malignant. The air was the special
domain of demons who sought thence to work their
evil wills on men. Every unpropitious event was the
work of devils — the storm, the drought, the pest of
insects, the attack of savage beasts; so, too, disease and
misfortune of every kind, war, pestilence and famine,
lightning and shipwreck. To-day, with increasing con-
trol over the forces of nature and greater knowledge of
the laws under which the physical universe functions,
man has been enabled to modify his material environ-

414


MEDIEVAL CHRISTIANITY

ment, to avoid many catastrophes and to secure fairly-
adequate and regular means of sustaining life. We have
harnessed the forces of nature and feel that we know the
proximate causes of physical phenomena even though the
ultimate cause still escapes us. The knowledge that the
heavenly bodies move in orbits that can be mathematically
determined, that the spread of malaria is due to mos-
quitoes whose elimination causes the disease to disappear,
that small-pox is a germ disease that can be combatted
by sanitation and vaccination — facts such as these tend
to weaken a belief in the arbitrary interference of good
or bad spirits in the orderly course of nature. But in the
Middle Ages the conception of the reign of law was
wanting. Each occurrence was due to the interference
of supernatural powers actuated by the same sort of
motives as man himself and differing from him chiefly
only in the possession of greater powers. The influence
of Satan and his hosts was measured by the extent of the
evils of daily life, and mediaeval man would have lived
in an atmosphere of terror had he not been able to sum-
mon to his aid the help that God placed within his reach
through the mediation of the Church.

To the popular mind this divine protection and assist-
ance could most readily be secured by appeal to the saints.
For their subordinate position in heaven, for their want
of divine authority, for their possession of intermediary
powers only, compensation was found in their numbers,
their human qualities and the restriction of their interests
in so many cases to particular fields of activity. Thus
each guild of workmen was placed under the protection
of a particular saint, each district had its patron
in heaven. Some saints instead of looking after a
local group of people interested themselves in some
special field of work. St. Nicholas saved shipwrecked
sailors ; St. Eligius cured sick horses, probably because
he was the patron of blacksmiths; St. Didier was ap-

415


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

pealed to for protection of the crops from moles and ver-
min; in Beam there was a local saint, Plouradou, who
kept children from crying. In fact, there was not a
danger nor an annoyance that could threaten the people
of the Middle Ages but there was some saint whose busi-
ness it was to furnish protection when properly appealed
to. Nations, too, had their heavenly advocates. Thus
St. George fought for England and St. Michael for
France, so that when these two countries were at war
there must have been something like commotion in heaven.

In popular religion pagan ideas of magic survived
throughout the Middle Ages. Honor paid to the heavenly
powers was supposed to secure their intervention without
regard to the moral condition or spiritual state of the
suppliant, as may be seen in the story of the robber who
had such veneration for the Virgin that he never set out
to commit a crime without first repeating an Ave Maria
and praying her not to permit him to die in that sin.
When at last he was captured and hung he remained
alive three days on the gallows and when taken down
by the astonished authorities declared that his feet had
been supported by a beautiful virgin all that time so that
he did not choke. On promising amendment, he was
allowed to go free. Another story showing the magic
effect of formula is that of the bird owned by a pious
old woman who had such a veneration for St. Thomas
of Canterbury that she was always repeating, " St.
Thomas, have mercy on me," until the bird had learned
the phrase. One day a hawk seized the old woman's pet
and was flying away with it when it cried out the magic
words and was released in safety by the interposition of
the saint.

Like examples of superstition might be multiplied in-
definitely ; and proofs of the use by the ignorant masses
of relics, holy water, the Eucharist, etc., as fetishes pure
and simple abound in mediaeval literature. Such practices,

416


MEDLEVAL CHRISTIANITY

however, were never sanctioned by the official teaching
of the Church, though it must be admitted that its officers
often made use of these superstitions and even encouraged
them as a means of restraint and control over the turbu-
lent masses. And this cannot be reckoned as cunning or
hypocrisy on their part, for the clergy shared with the
people their culture and their outlook upon the world.

In considering various characteristics of mediaeval
Christianity we cannot help observing that most of them
have come down in some form and to some extent into
the religious society of our own day. Manifestations of
superstition and religious terror are by no means rare
among the ignorant. In many directions the deadening
effects of ceremonial observances on the free develop-
ment of spiritual life may be noted. In the matter of
tolerance toward religious discussion and criticism, we
make claim to a still greater amount of liberality even
though it may sometimes be based on indifference rather
than on conviction. But there was one respect in which
the position of the mediaeval Church was unique, since it
resulted from a condition of society never likely to be
seen again. I refer to the relations of the Church to the
State and the theories upon which the relation was based.

Throughout the Middle Ages the Church and the State
were united and the two institutions were considered
simply as two aspects of a common and unified organiza-
tion of mankind. Both depended for their sanction on
the divine will, and inasmuch as that will could not be
conceived as expressing itself in heterogeneous forms any
real dissociation of Church and State seemed like a denial
of the divine unity. The two were, it is true, separate
organizations and each pursued certain ends peculiar to
itself, but both existed for one ultimate purpose, the sal-
vation of man. St. Augustine, in the fifth century, had
been the first to consider their relation to each otfier as
parts of the same divine plan. In one of the great books
27 417


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

of earlier Christian literature, De Civitate Dei, " God's
State," he taught that the various empires of the ancient
world had come into existence by the will of God in order
that mankind might be brought together in unity and dis-
ciplined so as to prepare the world for the appearance of
Christ and the reception of His message. Now that Christ
had come, the Church He founded was the true and the
higher State to which all His followers owed their first
allegiance. Not that Augustine conceived that the new
dispensation had removed all need of the temporal state.
It still existed to suppress crime, to preserve order, to
defend the Church of God against its enemies and main-
tain the unity of the faith. But its position was to be a
subordinate one and its authority dependent on obedience
to God's will. This view of the inferior and ancillary
position of the State in relation to the Church was never
lost sight of, though it was obscured in the following
centuries by the confusion and anarchy attendant on the
fall of the Roman empire and the setting up of the new
Germanic governments. For a time, indeed, it seemed
as though the position of the two organizations was to
be reversed, for the secular powers had need, of the
Church's wealth and authority, and its separate life was
in danger of being absorbed by feudalism. Toward the
end of the eleventh century, however, the ecclesiastical
theory was reestablished and maintained its ascendancy
in the realm of political speculation throughout the re-
mainder of the mediaeval period.

It was an age when men's minds were completely
dominated by the conception of unity. The universe was
a single whole ruled by one Lord, Jesus Christ. So,
too, each part of the universe was a unit under the same
Ruler. Mankind itself was one mystic body ruled by
Christ and organized in one Church of which He was
the head. His representative and vice-regent on earth,
however, was the pope to whom men owed obedience in

418


MEDLEVAL CHRISTIANITY

all things as to God. If it had not been for Adam's dis-
obedience and fall, no other organization would have been
necessary. But with sin came violence and with violence,
domination of man over his fellows. Thus arose political
government, which was permitted, indeed, but not or-
dained, by God. " Who does not know," wrote Pope
Gregory VII, " that kings and dukes have inherited their
power from those who, ignorant of God, have succeeded
with blind presumption in establishing domination over
their equals by means of pride, rapine, perfidy, murder,
and all wickedness, at the instigation of the devil, the
prince of this world ? "

Such being the origin of secular government, the
creature of ambition and injustice, it could find a legiti-
mate place in the scheme of Divine Providence only by
being sanctified and hallowed by the Church. Worldly
power was instituted by man, the ecclesiastical power by
God, which thus has the right and the duty to supervise
secular government. The humblest priest, through the
authority given him to administer the sacraments and
thus nourish the spiritual life of man, is superior to the
greatest king or emperor whose activities are limited to
mundane interests; while the pope, who unites in himself
the whole sum of sacerdotal power, is the supervisor
and ruler of all mankind. It is by his hands, as the
divinely appointed head of the Church, that God transmits
to princes their authority over their subjects, and thus
consecrates the State so far as it is capable of consecra-
tion. If, however, the prince neglects his duty, if he is
unjust or tyrannical, if he is unmindful of the spiritual
welfare of his subjects or of the interests of the
superior body, the Church, it is for the pope to depose
him, to release his subjects from their oaths of allegiance
and to secure a new ruler who is willing to promote their
eternal welfare.

These views of the subordination of the temporal to
419


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

the spiritual power were expressed most clearly in the
Middle Ages by Boniface VIII in the famous bull Unam
Sanctam. There is, he said, but one universal Church,
of which Christ is head, whose vicar on earth is the
successor of St. Peter. In this Church and under its
control are two kinds of authority, spiritual and tem-
poral. Whoever claims that the temporal power is not in
the hands of the pope has ill understood God's ordi-
nances. Both are under the control of the Church. The
spiritual power is wielded directly by the priest, but the
temporal by the hands of kings and soldiers, yet only
for the benefit of the Church and at its will and suffer-
ance. It is fitting that temporal authority should be sub-
ject to the spiritual power for it is a divine ordinance
that the lower should be ruled by the higher. " It be-
hooves us, therefore," he goes on, " the more freely to
confess that the spiritual power excels in dignity and
nobility any form whatsoever of earthly power, as spirit-
ual interests exceed the temporal in importance. . . .
For the truth bearing witness, it is for the spiritual power
to establish the earthly power and to judge it, if it be
not good. ... If the earthly power shall err, it shall be
judged by the spiritual power ; if the lesser spiritual power
err, it shall be judged by the higher. But if the supreme
power {i.e., the papacy) err, it can be judged by God
alone and not by man, the apostles bearing witness, say-
ing, the spiritual man judges all things but he himself is
judged by no one. . . . We, moreover, proclaim, declare
and pronounce that it is altogether necessary to salvation
for every human being to be subject to the Roman
Pontiff."

Though this famous exposition of the position of the
Church in its relation to the State was not made until
the close of the thirteenth century, the same theory was
implied and acted upon in the eleventh by Gregory VII.
His ideal was that of a pope supervising, as God's agent,

420


MEDIAEVAL CHRISTIANITY

the administration of the world, protecting the weak,
encouraging the upright, warning and deposing the despot
and ushering in the reign of justice and righteousness.
It was a lofty ideal, " and could his dreams have been
carried out in the purity and scope of their creator they
would have constituted ' almost the highest earthly form
in which mankind could have seen the expression of its
unity and harmony.' " That they were impossible of
realization was due to the fallible human nature of the
men who directed the destinies of the Church. What-
ever may be our beliefs as to its divine inspiration, it
would be a bold student of history who would claim that
this inspiration extended to the political activities of the
popes in their relations with the princes of Europe. The
position of the head of Christendom as temporal ruler of
a state in Central Italy, the struggles and intrigues neces-
sary to protect his political independence, first against the
claims of Germany and later against those of France and
Spain, as well as the worldly ambitions and temporal
interests of churchmen elsewhere, demonstrated the weak-
ness of their claim to be acting as the unbiased arbiters
of Europe.

And yet, though the Church's claim to the supervision
of the State's activities and to the right of judging the
justice of its conduct was impossible of realization, we
should not blind ourselves either to the greatness of its
motives or the value of what it really accomplished in
this direction. Outside the papal domain in Italy the
Church was an international institution, standing above
all secular governments. Its universal recognition made
it a power whose moral judgments had more weight than
positive laws and the fear of its condemnation restrained
many an unjust ruler and made the lot of the common
people more endurable. It was a standing protest against
the doctrine of the unlimited sovereignty of the State.
To-day the State stands above everything. The life and

421


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

fate of every one of its citizens is subject to its absolute
commands and there is no appeal from its decisions, how-
ever unjust they may be. This was a situation unknown
in the Middle Ages, and we are suffering to-day for the
want of some institution through which the moral sense
of mankind may assert itself against the demands of
political force.

The Church still holds to-day to the general premises
on which it based the theory of its relations to the State
in the Middle Ages. These premises include a belief in
the divine governance of human affairs, the divine insti-
tution of all human authority and the right of the Church
to the free exercise of its functions as the guardian of
the eternal interests of mankind as opposed to their tem-
poral interests, which are the care of the State. The prac-
tical difference in the application of these principles,
then and now, is due first, to the greater emphasis laid
in the Middle Ages on the claims of the future life,
owing partly to the hard conditions under which men
lived and the need of offering a compensation in the
world to come for the evils and sufferings of this life;
and, second, to the low stage of mediaeval political or-
ganization which disqualified the State from performing
many of the functions which it undertakes to-day. This
weakness enabled the Church to set what limits it chose
to its own activities and even forced it to assume the
control of many interests which in modern times are con-
sidered either partly or entirely secular and so under the
jurisdiction of the State. Thus, in the Middle Ages,
the Church attended to the relief of the poor and super-
vised all charitable activities. Education, whether re-
ligious or secular, was in its charge and it preserved a
strict censorship of ideas. It maintained a system of
courts which followed a more enlightened procedure than
the courts of the state and had a wider jurisdiction.
Not only did they claim exclusive control over Church

422


MEDIEVAL CHRISTIANITY

property and over all cases, whether civil or criminal, in
which the members of the clergy were interested, and
in cases involving the rites or sacraments of the Church,
such as marriage, legitimacy, and the probate of wills;
but these Church courts were also open for the ad-
judication of all affairs of the weak and helpless, such as
widows and orphans and for all who claimed to be the
victims of injustice in the secular courts. In addition
to the wide jurisdiction of its courts, the Church claimed
the exclusive control of the immense wealth which the
piety of ages had bestowed upon it until it was estimated
that it possessed one-quarter of the land of Europe. It
denied the right of the State to tax this property or to
have any voice in its management or disposition. It even
went farther and sought to determine, to a considerable
extent, the economic conditions under which the people of
Europe lived. It forbade the charging of interest on loans ;
it advocated the theory of the just price for commodities,
which tended to interfere with the natural laws of supply
and demand ; it was interested in questions of competition
and sought to< maintain an equality of economic oppor-
tunity among members of the same class or trade; and
it attempted to prevent the exploitation of the weak by
the strong, so that a form of Christian socialism may b<r
said to have existed in the Middle Ages.

Although the exercise of all these forms of secular
authority was largely forced upon the Church by the inca-
pacity of the temporal power, they gave rise to claims and
ambitions which the ecclesiastical organization refused
to abandon voluntarily when Europe emerged from feu-
dalism and the State attempted to resume those functions
which it had allowed to fall from its grasp since the days
of the Roman empire. There is an instinct in human
nature which prevents any body of men from willingly
surrendering such powers or authority as they have once
possessed and so the Church clung to its secular preroga-

423


RELIGIONS OF THE PAST AND PRESENT

tives long after the conditions which created them had
ceased to exist. Before the close of the Middle Ages
the modern State had come into existence, with its strong
national feeling, its intense patriotism, its secularization
of interests and its jealousy of outside interference. It
demanded the exclusive control of its own destinies and
strongly resented the interference of the Church. There
followed from the thirteenth century down a series of
struggles between the secular and the ecclesiastical powers'
in which the Church yielded step by step, but only under
the pressure of superior force. It never willingly sur-
rendered a single position and its reluctance to grant con-
cessions, to recognize the changed conditions that had
given the new states the power and the will to admin-
ister the temporal affairs of their own citizens, created in
those bodies a spirit of suspicion and hostility that was
the political cause of the Reformation. When to these
causes of disaffection there were added the secular pre-
occupations following the Renaissance, the economic
rivalries that arose after the Age of Discovery and the
theological disputes of the sixteenth century, the Great
Revolt occurred, and the mediaeval ecclesiastical system
disappeared.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Milman, H. H. : History of Latin Christianity, 8 vols, in 4., N. Y.,
1893.

Schaff, P.: History of the Christian Church, 7 vols., N. Y., 1882-
1914.

Alzog, J.: Manual of Universal Church History, 3 vols., Cincin-
nati, 1899.

Workman, H. B.: The Church of the West in the Middle Ages,
2 vols., London, 1900.

Heimbucher, M. : Die Orden und Kongregationen der katholischen
Kirche, 3 vols., Paderborn, 1907.

Montalembert, C. F. R. de : The Monks of the West (Ed. Gas-
quet), 6 vols. London, 1896.

Workman, H. B. : The Evolution of the Monastic Ideal, London,

1913-
GASQUET, F. A. : English Monastic Life (2d ed.) , London, 1904.

424


MEDLEVAL CHRISTIANITY

Rule of St. Benedict (transl. with introduction by Gasquet), London,

1909.
Sabatier, P. : St. Francis of Assisi, N. Y., 1903.
Muzzey, D. S. : The Spiritual Franciscans. Washington, 1907.
The Little Flowers of St. Francis (transl. by T. W. Arnold in Temple

Classics), London, 1903.
Jessopp, A. : The Coming of the Friars and Other Essays, 5th ed.,

N. Y., 1892.
Delahaye, H. : The Legends of the Saints, London, 1907.
Gregorovius, F. : History of the City of Rome in the Middle Ages,

8 vols., London, 1894-1902.
Mann, H. K. : Lives of the Popes in the Early Middle Ages (657-

1216), 12 vols., London., 1903-1915.
Poole, R. L. : Illustrations of the History of Medieval Thought,

London, 1884.
Taylor, H. O. : The Mediaeval Mind, 2 vols., London, 1911.
Rashdall, H. : Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages, 3 vols.,

London, 1895.
Workman, H. B. : Christian Thought to the Reformation, London,

1911.
Crane, T. F. : The Exempla of J agues de Vitry: Illustrative Stories

from the sermones vulgares. London, 1890.
Cutts, E. L. . Scenes and Characters of the Middle Ages, London,

1872.
Cutts, E. L. : Parish Priests and their People, London, 1890.
Fournier, P. : Les OKcialites au moyen age, Paris, 1880.
Gierke, O. : Political Theories of the Middle Ages, transl. with

Introduction by F. W. Maitland, Cambridge, 1900.
Carlyle, R. W., and A. J. : A History of Medieval Political Theory

in the West (in course of publication), 3 vols., 1915-
Burr, G. L. : Anent the Middle Ages, art. in Am. Hist. Rev., vol.

xviii (1913), 710-726.


42S
