Jay's Treaty
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Wikisource <https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_New_International_Encyclop%C3%A6dia/Jay_Treaty>. Public domain.

JAY TREATY. In American history, the
name applied to a treaty negotiated in 1794 by
John Jay on the part of the United States and
Lord Grenville on the part of Great Britain. The
refusal of Great Britain to observe several of
the obligations imposed by the definitive treaty
of peace signed in Paris in 1783, among them
the compensation for negroes carried away by
the retiring British army and the continuation
of garrisons in the forts on the northwestern
frontier, had produced a hostile feeling in America
that was increased by Great Britain's
continued insistence on the right of search and
impressment, and in the winter of 1793-94 actually
threatened war. On April 7, 1794, a proposal was
made in Congress, in accordance with a
recommendation for retaliatory legislation made by the
Secretary of State, Jefferson, to prohibit all
commercial intercourse with England after November
1, 1794, unless before that date the
northwestern forts should be evacuated, and pledges
given of a cessation of search and impressment.
Before this resolution passed, however, Washington,
who feared the result of such an enactment,
intervened, and on April 16th sent to the Senate
the nomination of Chief Justice John Jay as a
special ambassador to negotiate a treaty adjusting
the difficulties. The nomination was
immediately confirmed by a vote of 18 to 8, and the
House non-intercourse resolution was defeated in
the Senate by the casting vote of Vice-President
Adams. Jay reached London June 15th, and on
November 19th signed with Lord Grenville a
treaty of twenty-eight articles. The evacuation
of the forts was the only one of the American
claims definitely decided. Nothing whatever was
said about either the right of search or impressment,
or the question of compensation for the
negroes. The settlement of the boundaries on the
northeastern and northwestern frontiers was to
be decided by a joint commission, as was the
question of the collection of British debts. The
last eighteen articles constituted a treaty of
commerce, by the provisions of which, with certain
qualifications, trade was to be allowed with
Great Britain and the East and West Indies.
Further provisions related to the fitting out
of privateers, defined contraband goods, and
contained a renunciation of all American-European
trade in West Indian products such as sugar,
molasses, cocoa, and cotton. On June 8, 1795,
the treaty was laid before the Senate in executive
session, and it was ratified June 24th by a vote
of 20 to 10. On July 2d, before the terms of the
treaty had been officially made public, its text
was published in the Aurora, the Anti-Federalist
organ in Philadelphia. An outbreak of public
wrath and denunciation followed such as has
seldom occurred in the history of the Republic.
Jay was burned in effigy from New England to
Georgia, and both he and Washington were
declared to have been bought with British gold.
Even Washington's impeachment was suggested,
and the attacks were of such a character as to
draw from him the protest that they were “so
exaggerated and indecent as could scarcely be
applied to a Nero, a defaulter, or even to a
common pickpocket.” But the outbreak subsided
almost as quickly as it had begun, the defenses and
explanations of the treaty in the press, particularly
in the famous Camillus letters of Hamilton
and King, brought about a saner state of public
opinion, and on April 30, 1796, the House, after
debating the question for several months and
listening to the able speeches of Fisher Ames and
others in its defense, resolved by a vote of 51 to
48 that the terms of the treaty ought to be
carried into effect.
Consult: Trescot, Diplomacy of the Administrations
of Washington and Adams (Boston,
1857); Jay, Life of John Jay (New York, 1833);
Pellew, John Jay (Boston, 1890), in the “American
Statesmen Series;” and an article by Alexander
Johnston in Lalor's Cyclopedia of Political
Science (Chicago, 1881-84). For the text of the
treaty consult Treaties and Conventions
(Washington, 1889).
