The Mysterious Universe (James Jeans, 1930)
==========================================================
Jeans's Rede lecture: the universe as 'more like a great thought'; quantum mystique begins. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (mysteriousuniver0000jame).

bie yy)
edarday


ua


gerber
Py pers ree


sass
Syatesiear
eateaa


Fa


aes


iaae


Sehiea tr
er


iat
es


ie


eee


eureaiay


— MME GLASHAN. —
; IgsO. |


sit.


Wink
Sia


Kahle/Austin Foundation


- https://archive.org/details/mysteriousuniverOO00jame


THE MYSTERIOUS UNIVERSE


Cambridge University Press
Fetter Lane, London


Bombay, Calcutia, Madras
Toronto
Macmillan


Tokyo
Maruzen Company, Ltd


Copyrighted in the United
States of America by the
Macmillan Company


All rights reserved


IPIUNAVID) Ns GELID) JOA IPIMES, Clin Cw Acia


A Cluster of Nebulae in Coma Berenices.
piece of the sky
100-inch), The majority of objects are nebulae. at
light takes 50 million years to reach us.
of millions of stars, or the material
such nebulae

millions of others beyond the r


This is a photograph of a minute
, taken with the largest telescope in existence (Mount Wilson,
a distance such that their
Wach nebula contains some thousands
for their formation. About two million
can be photographed in all, and there are probably millions of


ange of any telescope (see p. 64)


TH EE
MYSTERIOUS
UNIVERSE


by


SIR JAMES JEANS
M.A., D.Sc., Sc.D.
LL.D., F.R.8,


CAMBRIDGE
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS
1930


First Edition November 1930
Reprinted November 1930


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


CONTENTS


Foreword page Vij
Chapters
I The Dying Sun 1
II The New World of Modern Physics 15
III Matter and Radiation A5
IV Relativity and the Ether 79
V_ Into the Deep Waters LE
Index ; 151
Plates
I The Depths of Space frontispiece


II The Diffraction of Light and of
Electrons facing page 42


FOREWORD


The present book contains an expansion of the
Rede Lecture delivered before the University of
Cambridge in November 1930.

There is a widespread conviction that the new
teachings of astronomy and physical science are
destined to produce an immense change on our out-
look on the universe as a whole, and on our views as
to the significance of human life. The question at
issue is ultimately one for philosophic discussion,
but before the philosophers have a right to speak,
science ought first to be asked to tell all she can as to
ascertained facts and provisional hypotheses. Then,
and then only, may discussion legitimately pass into
the realms of philosophy.

With some such thoughts as these in my mind, I
wrote the present book, obsessed by frequent
doubts as to whether I could justify an addition to
the great amount which has already been written on
the subject. I can claim no special qualifications
beyond the proverbially advantageous position of
the mere onlooker; I am not a philosopher either
by training or inclination, and for many years my
scientific work has lain outside the arena of con-
tending physical theories.

The first four chapters, which form the main part
of the book, contain brief discussions, on very broad
lines, of such scientific questions as seem to me to be


vill FOREWORD


of interest, and to provide useful material, for the
discussion of the ultimate philosophical problem.
As far as possible I have avoided overlapping my
former book, The Universe Around Us, because I
hope the present book may be read as a sequel to
that. But an exception has been made in favour of
material which is essential to the main argument, so
as to make the present book complete in itself.
The last chapter stands on a different level. Every
one may claim the right to draw his own conclusions
from the facts presented by modern science. This
chapter merely contains the interpretations which I,
a stranger in the realms of philosophical thought,
feel inclined to place on the scientific facts and
hypotheses discussed in the main part of the book.
Many will disagree with it—it was written to this
end.
J. H. JEANS


DORKING, 1930


tis


*


a now, I said, let me show in a figure how far our nature is
ightened or unenlightened :—Behold! human beings living in
an underground cave, which has a mouth open towards the light
and reaching all along the cave; here they have been from their
childhood, and have their legs and necks chained so that they can-
not move, and can only see before them, being prevented by the
chains from turning round their heads. Above and behind them
a fire is blazing at a distance, and between the fire and the
prisoners there is a raised way; and you will see, if you look,
a low wall built along the way, like the screen which marionette
players have in front of them, over which they show the puppets.

I see.

And do you see, I said, men passing along the wall carrying
all sorts of vessels, and statues and figures of animals made of
wood and stone and various materials, which appear over the
wall?...

You have shown me a strange image, and they are strange
prisoners.

Like ourselves, I replied; and they see only their own
shadows, or the other shadows which the fire throws on the
opposite wall of the cave?

True, he said; how could they see anything but the shadows if
they were never allowed to move their heads?

And of the objects which are being carried in like manner
they would only see the shadows?

Yes, he said.

To them, I said, the truth would be literally nothing but the
shadows of the images.

PLaTo, Republic, Book VIL


Chapter I
THE DYING SUN


A few stars are known which are hardly bigger than
the earth, but the majority are so large that hundreds
of thousands of earths could be packed inside each
and leave room to spare; here and there we come
upon a giant star large enough to contain millions of
millions of earths. And the total number of stars in
the universe is probably something like the total
number of grains of sand on all the sea-shores of the
world. Such is the littleness of our home in space
when measured up against the total substance of the
universe.

This vast multitude of stars are wandering about
in space. A few form groups which journey in com-
pany, but the majority are solitary travellers.
And they travel through a universe so spacious that
it is an event of almost unimaginable rarity for a star
to come anywhere near to another star. For the
most part each voyages in splendid isolation, like a
ship on an empty ocean. In a scale model in which
the stars are ships, the average ship will be well over
a million miles from its nearest neighbour, whence it
is easy to understand why a ship seldom finds an-
other within hailing distance.

We believe, nevertheless, that some two thousand
million years ago this rare event took place, and that
a second star, wandering blindly through space,


JMU I


2 THE DYING SUN


happened to come within hailing distance of the sun.
Just as the sun and moon raise tides on the earth,
so this second star must have raised tides on the
surface of the sun. But they would be very different
from the puny tides which the small mass of the
moon raises in our oceans; a huge tidal wave must
have travelled over the surface of the sun, ultimately
forming a mountain of prodigious height, which
would rise ever higher and higher as the cause of the
disturbance came nearer and nearer. And, before
the second star began to recede, its tidal pull had
become so powerful that this mountain was torn to
pieces and threw off small fragments of itself, much
as the crest of a wave throws off spray. These small
fragments have been circulating around their parent
sun ever since. They are the planets, great and small,
of which our earth is one.

The sun and the other stars we see in the sky are
all intensely hot—far too hot for life to be able to
obtain or retain a footing on them. So also no doubt
were the ejected fragments of the sun when they
were first thrown off. Gradually they cooled, until
now they have but little intrinsic heat left, their
warmth being derived almost entirely from the
radiation which the sun pours down upon them. In
course of time, we know not how, when, or why, one
of these cooling fragments gave birth to life. It
started in simple organisms whose vital capacities
consisted of little beyond reproduction and death.
But from these humble beginnings emerged a stream
of life which, advancing through ever greater and


THE DYING SUN 3


greater complexity, has culminated in beings whose
lives are largely centred in their emotions and am-
bitions, their aesthetic appreciations, and the re-
ligions in which their highest hopes and noblest
aspirations lie enshrined.

Although we cannot speak with any certainty, it
seems most likely that humanity came into existence
in some such way as this. Standing on our micro-
scopic fragment of a grain of sand, we attempt to
discover the nature and purpose of the universe
which surrounds our home in space and time. Our
first impression is something akin to terror. We find
the universe terrifying because of its vast meaning-
less distances, terrifying because of its inconceivably
long vistas of time which dwarf human history to the
twinkling of an eye, terrifying because of our extreme
loneliness, and because of the material insignificance
of our home in space—a millionth part of a grain of
sand out of all the sea-sand in the world. But above
all else, we find the universe terrifying because it
appears to be indifferent to life like our own;
emotion, ambition and achievement, art and re-
ligion all seem equally foreign to its plan. Perhaps
indeed we ought to say it appears to be actively
hostile to life like our own. For the most part, empty
space is so cold that all life in it would be frozen;
most of the matter in space is so hot as to make
life on it impossible; space is traversed, and astro-
nomical bodies continually bombarded, by radiation
of a variety of kinds, much of which is probably
inimical to, or even destructive of, life.


4 THE DYING SUN


Into such a universe we have stumbled, if not
exactly by mistake, at least as the result of what
may properly be described as an accident. The use
of such a word need not imply any surprise that our
earth exists, for accidents will happen, and if the
universe goes on for long enough, every conceivable
accident is likely to happen in time. It was, I think,
Huxley who said that six monkeys, set to strum
unintelligently on typewriters for millions of millions
of years, would be bound in time to write all the
books in the British Museum. If we examined the
last page which a particular monkey had typed, and
found that it had chanced, in its blind strumming,
to type a Shakespeare sonnet, we should rightly
regard the occurrence as a remarkable accident, but
if we looked through all the millions of pages the
monkeys had turned off in untold millions of years,
we might be sure of finding a Shakespeare sonnet
somewhere amongst them, the product of the blind
play of chance. In the same way, millions of millions
of stars wandering blindly through space for millions
of millions of years are bound to meet with every
sort of accident, and so are bound to produce a
certain limited number of planetary systems in
time. Yet the number of these must be very small
in comparison with the total number of stars in
the sky.

This rarity of planetary systems is important,
because so far as we can see, life of the kind we know
on earth could only originate on planets like the
earth. It needs suitable physical conditions for its


THE DYING SUN 5


appearance, the most important of which is a tem-
perature at which substances can exist in the liquid
state.

The stars themselves are disqualified by being far
too hot. We may think of them as a vast collection
of fires scattered throughout space, providing warmth
in a climate which is at most some four degrees above
absolute zero—about 484 degrees of frost on our
Fahrenheit scale—and is even lower in the vast
stretches of space which lie out beyond the Milky
Way. Away from the fires there is this unimaginable
cold of hundreds of degrees of frost, close up to them
there is a temperature of thousands of degrees, at
which all solids melt, all liquids boil.

Life can only exist inside a narrow temperate zone
which surrounds each of these fires at a very definite
distance. Outside these zones life would be frozen;
inside it would be shrivelled up. At a rough com-
putation, these zones within which life is possible,
all added together, constitute less than a thousand
million millionth part of the whole of space. And
even inside them, life must be of very rare occur-
rence, for it is so unusual an accident for suns to
throw off planets as our own sun has done, that
probably only about one star in 100,000 has a planet
revolving round it in the small zone in which life is
possible.

Just for this reason it seems incredible that the
universe can have been designed primarily to produce
life like our own; had it been so, surely we might
have expected to find a better proportion between


6 THE DYING SUN


the magnitude of the mechanism and the amount of
the product. At first glance at least, life seems to
be an utterly unimportant bye-product; we living
things are somehow off the main line.

We do not know whether suitable physical con-
ditions are sufficient in themselves to produce
life. One school of thought holds that as the earth
gradually cooled, it was natural, and indeed almost
inevitable, that life should come. Another holds that
after one accident had brought the earth into being,
a second was necessary to produce life. The material
constituents of a living body are perfectly ordinary
chemical atoms—carbon, such as we find in soot or
lampblack; hydrogen and oxygen, such as we find in
water; nitrogen, such as forms the greater part of
the atmosphere; and so on. Every kind of atom
necessary for life must have existed on the new born
earth. At intervals, a group of atoms might happen
to arrange themselves in the way in which they are
arranged in the living cell. Indeed, given sufficient
time, they would be certain to do so, just as certain
as the six monkeys would be certain, given sufficient
time, to type off a Shakespeare sonnet. But would
they then be a living cell? In other words, is a living
cell merely a group of ordinary atoms arranged in
some non-ordinary way, or is it something more? Is
it merely atoms, or is it atoms plus life? Or, to put
it in another way, could a sufficiently skilful chemist
create life out of the necessary atoms, as a boy can
create a machine out of Meccano, and then make it
go? We do not know the answer. When it comes it


THE DYING SUN 7


will give us some indication whether other worlds
in space are inhabited like ours, and so must have
the greatest influence on our interpretation of the
meaning of life—it may -well produce a greater
revolution of thought than Galileo’s astronomy or
Darwin’s biology.

We do, however, know that while living matter
consists of quite ordinary atoms, it consists in the
main of atoms which have a special capacity for
coagulating into extraordinary large bunches or
“molecules.”

Most atoms do not possess this property. The
atoms of hydrogen and oxygen, for instance, may
combine to form molecules of hydrogen (H, or Hs),
of oxygen or ozone (O, or O,), of water (H,O), or of
hydrogen peroxide (H,O,), but none of these com-
pounds contains more than four atoms. The addition
of nitrogen does not greatly change the situation;
the compounds of hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen
all contain comparatively few atoms. But the
further addition of carbon completely transforms
the picture; the atoms of hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen
and carbon combine to form molecules containing
hundreds, thousands, and even tens of thousands, of
atoms. It is of such molecules that living bodies are
mainly formed. Until a century ago it was commonly
supposed that some “vital force” was necessary
to produce these and the other substances which
entered into the composition of the living body.
Then Wohler produced urea (CO(NH,),), which is a
typical animal product, in his laboratory, by the


8 THE DYING SUN


ordinary processes of chemical synthesis, and other
constituents of the living body followed in due
course. To-day one phenomenon after another which
was at one time attributed to “vital force” is being
traced to the action of the ordinary processes of
physics and chemistry. Although the problem is
still far from solution, it is becoming increasingly
likely that what specially distinguishes the matter of
living bodies is the presence not of a “vital force,”
but of the quite commonplace element carbon,
always in conjunction with other atoms with which
it forms exceptionally large molecules.

If this is so, life exists in the universe only be-
cause the carbon atom possesses certain exceptional
properties. Perhaps carbon is rather noteworthy
chemically as forming a sort of transition between
the metals and non-metals, but so far nothing in the
physical constitution of the carbon atom is known
to account for its very special capacity for binding
other atoms together. The carbon atom consists
of six electrons revolving around the appropriate
central nucleus, like six planets revolving round a
central sun; it appears to differ from its two nearest
neighbours in the table of chemical elements, the
atoms of boron and nitrogen, only in having one
electron more than the former and one electron fewer
than the latter. Yet this slight difference must
account in the last resort for all the difference be-
tween life and absence of life. No doubt the reason
why the six-electron atom possesses these remark-
able properties resides somewhere in the ultimate


THE DYING SUN 9


laws of nature, but mathematical physics has not
yet fathomed it.

Other similar cases are known to chemistry. The
phenomenon of permanent magnetism appears in a
tremendous degree in iron, and in a lesser degree in
its neighbours, nickel and cobalt. The atoms of these
elements have 26, 27 and 28 electrons respectively.
The magnetic properties of all other atoms are
almost negligible in comparison. Somehow, then,
although again mathematical physics has not yet
unravelled how, magnetism depends on the peculiar
properties of the 26, 27 and 28 electron atoms,
especially the first. Radio-activity provides a third
instance, being confined, with insignificant excep-
tions, to atoms having from 83 to 92 electrons;
again we do not know why.

Thus chemistry can only tell us to place life in the
same category as magnetism and radio-activity. The
universe is built so as to operate according to certain
laws. As a consequence of these laws, atoms having
certain definite numbers of electrons, namely 6, 26
to 28, and 83 to 92, have certain special properties,
which shew themselves in the phenomena of life,
magnetism and radio-activity respectively. An om-
nipotent creator, subject to no limitations whatever,
would not have been restricted to the laws which
prevail in the present universe; he might have elected
to build the universe to conform to any one of in-
numerable other sets of laws. If some other set of
laws had been chosen, other special atoms might
have had other special properties associated with


10 THE DYING SUN


them. We cannot say what, but it seems a priors
unlikely that either radio-activity or magnetism or
life would have figured amongst them. Chemistry
suggests that, like magnetism and radio-activity,
life may merely be an accidental consequence of the
special set of laws by which the present universe is
governed.

Again the word “accidental” may be challenged.
For what if the creator of the universe selected one
special set of laws just because they led to the
appearance of life? What if this were his way of
creating life? So long as we think of the creator as
a magnified man-like being, activated by feelings
and interests like our own, the challenge cannot be
met, except perhaps by the remark that, when such
a creator has once been postulated, no argument can
add much to what has already been assumed. If,
however, we dismiss every trace of anthropomor-
phism from our minds, there remains no reason for
supposing that the present laws were specially
selected in order to produce life. They are just as
likely, for instance, to have been selected in order to
produce magnetism or radio-activity—indeed more
likely, since to all appearances physics plays an
incomparably greater part in the universe than
biology. Viewed from a strictly material standpoint,
the utter insignificance of life would seem to go far
towards dispelling any idea that it forms a special
interest of the Great Architect of the universe.

A trivial analogy may exhibit the situation in a
clearer light. An unimaginative sailor, accustomed


THE DYING SUN 11


to tying knots, might think it would be impossible
to cross the ocean if tying knots were impossible.
Now the capacity for tying knots is limited to space
of three dimensions; no knot can be tied in a space
of 1, 2, 4, 5 or any other number of dimensions.
From this fact our unimaginative sailor might reason
that a beneficent creator must have had sailors
under his special patronage, and have chosen that
space should have three dimensions in order that
tying knots and crossing the ocean should be possi-
bilities in the universe he had created—in brief,
space was of three dimensions so that there could be
sailors. This and the argument outlined above seem
to be much ona level, because life as a whole and the
tying of knots are pretty much on a level in that
neither of them forms more than an utterly insig-
nificant fraction of the total activity of the material
universe.

So much for the surprising manner in which, so
far as science can at present inform us, we came
into being. And our bewilderment is only increased
when we attempt to pass from our origins to an
understanding of the purpose of our existence, or to
foresee the destiny which fate has in store for our
race.

Life of the kind we know can only exist under
suitable conditions of light and heat; we only exist
ourselves because the earth receives exactly the
right amount of radiation from the sun; upset the
balance in either direction, of excess or defect, and
life must disappear from the earth. And the essence


12 THE DYING SUN


of the situation is that the balance is very easily
upset.

Primitive man, living in the temperate zone of the
earth, must have watched the ice-age descending on
his homes with something like terror; each year the
glaciers came further down into the valleys; each
winter the sun seemed less able to provide the warmth
needed for life. To him, as to us, the universe must
have seemed hostile to life.

We of these later days, living in the narrow tem-
perate zone surrounding our sun and peering into
the far future, see an ice-age of a different kind
threatening us. Just as Tantalus, standing in a lake
so deep that he only just escaped drowning, was yet
destined to die of thirst, so it is the tragedy of our
race that it is probably destined to die of cold, while
the greater part of the substance of the universe still
remains too hot for life to obtain a footing. The sun,
having no extraneous supply of heat, must neces-
sarily emit ever less and less of its life-giving
radiation, and, as it does so, the temperate zone of
space, within which alone life can exist, must close in
around it. To remain a possible abode of life, our
earth would need to move in ever nearer and nearer
to the dying sun. Yet, science tells us that, so far
from its moving inwards, inexorable dynamical laws
are even now driving it ever further away from the
sun into the outer cold and darkness. And, so far
as we can see, they must continue to do so until
life is frozen off the earth, unless indeed some celestial
collision or cataclysm intervenes to destroy life even


THE DYING SUN 13


earlier by a more speedy death. This prospective
fate is not peculiar to our earth; other suns must die
like our own, and any life there may be on other
planets must meet the same inglorious end.

Physics tells the same story as astronomy. For,
independently of all astronomical considerations,
the general physical principle known as the second
law of thermodynamics predicts that there can be
but one end to the universe—a ‘“‘heat-death” in
which the total energy of the universe is uniformly
distributed, and all the substance of the universe is
at the same temperature. This temperature will be
so low as to make life impossible. It matters little
by what particular road this final state is reached;
all roads lead to Rome, and the end of the journey
cannot be other than universal death.

Is this, then, all that life amounts to? To stumble,
almost by mistake, into a universe which was clearly
not designed for life, and which, to all appearances,
is either totally indifferent or definitely hostile to it,
to stay clinging on to a fragment of a grain of sand
until we are frozen off, to strut our tiny hour on our
tiny stage with the knowledge that our aspirations
are all doomed to final frustration, and that our
achievements must perish with our race, leaving the
universe as though we had never been?

Astronomy suggests the question, but itis, I think,
mainly to physics that we must turn for an answer.
For astronomy can tell us of the present arrange-
ment of the universe, of the vastness and vacuity of
space, and of our own insignificance therein; it can


14 THE DYING SUN


even tell us something as to the nature of the
changes produced by the passage of time. But we
must probe deep into the fundamental nature of
things before we can expect to find the answer to
our question. And this is not the province of as-
tronomy; rather we shall find that our quest takes
us right into the heart of modern physical science.


Chapter II


THE NEW WORLD OF
MODERN PHYSICS


Primitive man must have found nature singularly
puzzling and intricate. The simplest phenomena
could be trusted to recur indefinitely; an unsup-
ported body invariably fell, a stone thrown into
water sank, while a piece of wood floated. Yet other
more complicated phenomena shewed no such uni-
formity—the lightning struck one tree in the grove
while its neighbour of similar growth and equal size
escaped unharmed; one month the new moon brought
fair weather, the next month foul.

Confronted with a natural world which was to all
appearances as capricious as himself, man’s first im-
pulse was to create Nature in his own image; he
attributed the seemingly erratic and unordered course
of the universe to the whims and passions of gods,
or of benevolent or malevolent lesser spirits. Only
after much study did the great principle of causa-
tion emerge. In time it was found to dominate the
whole of inanimate nature: a cause which could be
completely isolated in its action was found invariably
to produce the same effect. What happened at any
instant did not depend on the volitions of extraneous
beings, but followed inevitably by inexorable laws
from the state of things at the preceding instant.


16 THE NEW WORLD OF


And this state of things had in turn been inevitably
determined by an earlier state, and so on inde-
finitely, so that the whole course of events had been
unalterably determined by the state in which the
world found itself at the first instant of its history;
once this had been fixed, Nature could move only
along one road to a predestined end. In brief, the
act of creation had created not only the universe but
its whole future history. Man, it is true, still believed
that he himself was able to affect the course of events
by his own volition, although in this he was guided
by instinct rather than by logic, science, or experience,
but henceforth the law of causation took charge of
all such events as he had previously assigned to the
actions of supernatural beings.

The final establishment of this law as the primary
guiding principle in Nature was the triumph of the
seventeenth century, the great century of Galileo and
Newton. Apparitions in the sky were shewn to result
merely from the universal laws of optics; comets,
which had hitherto been regarded as portents of the
fall of empires or the death of kings, were proved to
have their motions prescribed by the universal law
of gravitation. And, wrote Newton, “‘would that
the rest of the phenomena of nature could be de-
duced by a like kind of reasoning from mechanical
principles.”

Out of this, resulted a movement to interpret the
whole material universe as a machine, a movement
which steadily gained force until its culmination in
the latter half of the nineteenth century. It was


MODERN PHYSICS alive


then that Helmholtz declared that “the final aim of
all natural science is to resolve itself into mechanics,”’
and Lord Kelvin confessed that he could understand
nothing of which he could not make a mechanical
model. He, like many of the’ great scientists of the
nineteenth century, stood high in the engineering
profession; many others could have done so had they
tried. It was the age of the engineer-scientist, whose
primary ambition was to make mechanical models of
the whole of nature. Waterston, Maxwell and others
had explained the properties of a gas as machine-
like properties with great success; the machine con-
sisted of a vast multitude of tiny round, smooth
spheres, harder than the hardest steel, flying about
like a hail of bullets on a battlefield. The pressure
of a gas, for instance, was caused by the impact of
the speedily-flying bullets; it was like the pressure
which a hailstorm exerts on the roof of a tent.
When sound was transmitted through a gas, these
bullets were the messengers. Similar attempts were
made to explain the properties of liquids and solids
as machine-like properties, although with consider-
ably less success, and also on light and gravi-
tation—with no success at all. Yet this want of
success failed to shake the belief that the universe —
must in the last resort admit of a purely mechanical
interpretation. It was felt that only greater efforts
were needed, and the whole of inanimate nature
would at last stand revealed as a perfectly-acting
machine.

All this had an obvious bearing on the interpre-


JMU 2


18 THE NEW WORLD OF


tation of human life.y Each extension of the law of
causation, and each success of the mechanical inter-
pretation of nature, made the belief in free-will more
difficult. For if all nature obeyed the law of causa-
tion, why should life be exempt? Out of such con-
siderations arose the mechanistic philosophies of
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and their
natural reactions, the idealist philosophies which
succeeded them. Yet until early in the nineteenth
century life could still be regarded as something
standing entirely apart from inanimate nature. Then
came the discovery that living cells were formed of
precisely the same chemical atoms as non-living
matter, and so were presumably governed by the
same natural laws. This led to the question why the
particular atoms of which our bodies and brains were
formed should be exempt from the laws of causation.
It began to be not only conjectured, but even
fiercely maintained, that life itself must, in the last
resort, prove to be purely mechanical in its nature.
The mind of a Newton, a Bach or a Michelangelo, it
was said, differed only in complexity from a printing
press, a whistle or a steam saw; their whole function
was to respond exactly to the stimuli they received
from without. Because such a creed left no room for
the operation of choice and free-will, it removed all
basis for morality. Paul did not choose to be different
from Saul; he could not help being different; he was
affected by a different set of external stimuli.

An almost kaleidoscopic re-arrangement of scien-
tific thought came with the change of century. The


MODERN PHYSICS 19


nineteenth century had lasted just long enough for
science to discover that certain phenomena, radia-
tion and gravitation in particular, defied all attempts
at a purely mechanical explanation. While philo-
sophers were still debating whether a machine could
be constructed to reproduce the thoughts of Newton,
the emotions of Bach or the inspiration of Michel-
angelo, the average man of science was rapidly
becoming convinced that no machine could be
constructed to reproduce the light of a candle or the
fall of an apple. Then, in the closing months of the
century, Professor Max Planck of Berlin brought
forward a tentative explanation of certain pheno-
mena of radiation which had so far completely defied
interpretation. Not only was his explanation non-
mechanical in its nature; it seemed impossible to
connect it up with any mechanical line of thought.
Largely for this reason, it was criticised, attacked
and even ridiculed. But it proved brilliantly
successful, and ultimately developed into the modern
“quantum-theory,” which forms one of the great
dominating principles of modern physics. Also,
although this was not apparent at the time, it marked
the end of the mechanical age in science, and the
opening of a new era.

Planck’s original theory hardly went beyond sug-
gesting that the course of nature proceeded by tiny
jumps and jerks, like the hands of a clock. Yet,
although it does not advance continuously, a clock
is purely mechanical in its ultimate nature, and
follows the law of causation absolutely. Einstein


2-2


20 THE NEW WORLD OF


shewed in 1917 that the theory founded by Planck
appeared, at first sight at least, to entail consequences
far more revolutionary than mere discontinuity. It
appeared to dethrone the law of causation from the
position it had heretofore held as guiding the course
of the natural world. The old science had confidently
proclaimed that nature could follow only one road,
the road which was mapped out from the beginning
of time to its end by the continuous chain of cause
and effect; state A was inevitably succeeded by
state B. So far the new science has only been able
to say that state A may be followed by state B or C
or D or by innumerable other states. It can, it is
true, say that B is more likely than C, C than D, and
so on; it can even specify the relative probabilities
of states B, C and D. But, just because it has to
speak in terms of probabilities, it cannot predict
with certainty which state will follow which; this is
a matter which lies on the knees of the gods—
whatever gods there be.

A concrete example will explain this more clearly.
It is known that the atoms of radium, and of other
radio-active substances, disintegrate into atoms of
lead and helium with the mere passage of time, so
that a mass of radium continually diminishes in
amount, being replaced by lead and helium. The
law which governs the rate of diminution is very
remarkable. The amount of radium decreases in
precisely the same way as a population would if
there were no births, and a uniform death rate
which was the same for every individual, regardless


MODERN PHYSICS 21


of his age. Or again, it decreases in the same way
as the numbers of a battalion of soldiers who are
exposed to absolutely random undirected fire. In
brief, old age appears to mean nothing to the indi-
vidual radium atom; it does not die because it has
lived its life, but rather because in some way fate
knocks at the door.

To take a concrete illustration, suppose that
our room contains two thousand atoms of radium.
Science cannot say how many of these will survive
after a year’s time, it can only tell us the relative
odds in favour of the number being 2000, 1999, 1998,
and so on. Actually there are rather long odds in
favour of the number being 1999; in all probability
one, and only one, of the 2000 atoms is destined to
break up within the next year.

We do not know in what way this particular atom
is selected out of the 2000. We may at first feel
tempted to conjecture it will be the atom that gets
knocked about most or gets into the hottest places, or
what not, in the coming year. Yet this cannot be,
for if blows or heat could disintegrate one atom, they
could disintegrate the other 1999, and we should be
able to expedite the disintegration of radium merely .
by compressing it or heating it up. Every physicist
believes this to be impossible; he rather believes that
every year fate knocks at the door of one radium
atom in every 2000, and compels it to break up; this
is the hypothesis of ‘spontaneous disintegration”
advanced by Rutherford and Soddy in 1903.

History of course may repeat itself, and once again


ne, THE NEW WORLD OF


an apparent capriciousness in nature may be found,
in the light of fuller knowledge, to arise out of the
inevitable operation of the law of cause and effect.
When we speak in terms of probabilities in ordinary
life, we merely shew that our knowledge is incom-
plete; we may say it appears probable that it will
rain to-morrow, while the meteorological expert,
knowing that a deep depression is coming eastward
from the Atlantic, can say with confidence that it
will be wet. We may speak of the odds on a horse,
while the owner knows it has broken its leg. In the
same way, the appeal of the new physics to prob-
abilities may merely cloak its ignorance of the true
mechanism of nature.

An illustration will suggest how this might be.
Karly in the present century, McLennan, Rutherford
and others detected in the earth’s atmosphere a new
type of radiation, distinguished by its extremely high
powers of penetrating solid matter. Ordinary light
will penetrate only a fraction of an inch through
opaque matter; we can shield our faces from the rays
of the sun with a sheet of paper, or an even thinner
screen of metal. The X-rays have a far greater pene-
trating power; they can be made to pass through our
hands, or even our whole bodies, so that the surgeon
can photograph our bones. Yet metal of the thick-
ness of a coin stops them completely. But the radia-
tion discovered by McLennan and Rutherford could
penetrate through several yards of lead or other
dense metal.

We now know that a large part of this radiation,


MODERN PHYSICS 23


generally described as “cosmic radiation,” has its
origin in outer space. It falls on the earth in large
quantities, and its powers of destruction are immense.
Every second it breaks up about twenty atoms in
every cubic inch of our atmosphere, and millions
of atoms in each of our bodies. It has been suggested
that this radiation, falling on germ-plasm, may
produce the spasmodic biological variations which
the modern theory of evolution demands; it may
have been cosmic radiation that turned monkeys
into men.

In the same way, it was at one time conjectured
that the falling of cosmic radiation on radio-active
atoms might be the cause of their disintegration.
The rays fell like fate, striking now one atom and now
another, so that the atoms fell like soldiers exposed
to random fire, and the law which governed their
rate of disappearance was explained. The hypothesis
was disproved by the simple device of taking radio-
active matter down a coal-mine. It was now com-
pletely shielded from the cosmic rays, but continued
to disintegrate at the same rate as before.

This hypothesis failed, but probably many physi-
cists expect that some other physical agency may
yet be found to act the réle of fate in radio-active
disintegration. The death-rate of atoms would
obviously then be proportional to the strength of
this agency. But other similar phenomena present
far greater difficulties.

Amongst these is the familiar phenomenon of the
emission of light by an ordinary electric light bulb.


24, THE NEW WORLD OF


The essentials are that a hot filament receives energy
from a dynamo and discharges it as radiation. In-
side the filament, the electrons of millions of atoms
are whirling round in their orbits, every now and
then jumping, suddenly and almost discontinuously,
from one orbit to another, sometimes emitting, and
sometimes absorbing, radiation in the process. In
1917, Einstein investigated what may be described
as the statistics of these jumps. Some are of course
caused by the radiation itself and the heat of the
filament. But these are not enough to account for
the whole of the radiation emitted by the filament.
Einstein found that there must be other jumps as
well, and that these must occur spontaneously, like
the disintegration of the radium atom. In brief,
it appears as though fate must be invoked here also.
Now if some ordinary physical agency played the
part of fate in this case, its strength ought to affect
the intensity of the emission of radiation by the
filament. But, so far as we know, the intensity of
the radiation depends only on known constants of
nature, which are the same here as in the remotest
stars. And this seems to leave no room for the
intervention of an external agency.

We can perhaps form some sort of a picture of the
nature of these spontaneous disintegrations or jumps,
by comparing the atom to a party of four card-
players who agree to break up as soon as a hand is
dealt in which each player receives just one complete
suit. A room containing millions of such parties may
be taken to represent a mass of radio-active sub-


MODERN PHYSICS 25


stance. Then it can be shewn that the number of
card parties will decrease according to the exact law
of radio-active decay on one condition—that the
cards are well shuffled between each deal. If there is
adequate shuffling of the cards, the passage of time
and the past will mean nothing to the card players,
for the situation is born afresh each time the cards
are shuffled. Thus the death-rate per thousand will
be constant, as with atoms of radium. But if the
cards are merely taken up after each deal, without
shuffling, each deal follows inevitably from the
preceding, and we have the analogue of the old law
of causation. Here the rate of diminution in the
number of players would be different from that
actually observed in radio-active disintegration. We
can only reproduce this by supposing the cards to
be continually shuffled, and the shuffler is he whom
we have called fate.

Thus, although we are still far from any positive
knowledge, it seems possible that there may be some
factor, for which wehave so far found no better name
than fate, operating in nature to neutralise the
cast-iron inevitability of the old law of causation.
The future may not be as unalterably determined
by the past as we used to think; in part at least it
may rest on the knees of whatever gods there be.

Many other considerations point in the same
direction. For instance, Professor Heisenberg has
shewn that the concepts of the modern quantum
theory involve what he calls a “principle of inde-
terminacy.” We have long thought of the workings


26 THE NEW WORLD OF


of nature as exemplifying the acme of precision.
Our man-made machines are, we know, imperfect
and inaccurate, but we have cherished a belief that
the innermost workings of the atom would exemplify
absolute accuracy and precision. Yet Heisenberg
now makes it appear that nature abhors accuracy
and precision above all things.

According to the old science, the state of a par-
ticle, such as an electron, was completely specified
when we knew its position in space at a single instant
and its speed of motion through space at the same
instant. These data, together with a knowledge of
any forces which might act on it from outside, deter-
mined the whole future of the electron. If these data
were given for all the particles in the universe, the
whole future of the universe could be predicted.

The new science, as interpreted by Heisenberg,
asserts that these data are, from the nature of
things, unprocurable. If we know that an electron
is at a certain point in space, we cannot specify
exactly the speed with which it is moving—nature
permits a certain “‘margin of error,” and if we try
to get within this margin, nature will give us no
help: she knows nothing, apparently, of absolutely
exact measurements. In the same way, if we know
the exact speed of motion of an electron, nature
refuses to let us discover its exact position in space.
It is as though the position and motion of the elec-
tron had been marked on the two different faces of
a lantern slide. If we put the slide in a bad lantern,
we can focus half-way between the two faces, and


MODERN PHYSICS Of


shall see both the position and motion of the electron
tolerably clearly. With a perfect lantern, we could
not do this; the more we focussed on one, the more
blurred the other would become.

The imperfect lantern is the old science. It gave
us the illusion that, if only we had a perfect lantern,
we should be able to determine both the position
and motion of a particle at a given instant with
perfect sharpness, and it was this illusion that intro-
duced determinism into science. But now that we
have the more perfect lantern in the new science, it
merely shews us that the specifications of position
and motion lie in two different planes of reality, which
cannot be brought simultaneously into sharp focus.
In so doing, it cuts away the ground on which the
old determinism was based.

Or again, to take another analogy, it is almost
as though the joints of the universe had somehow
worked loose, as though its mechanism had de-
veloped a certain amount of “play,” such as we
find in a well-worn engine. Yet the analogy is
misleading if it suggests that the universe is in any
way worn out or imperfect. In an old or worn
engine, the degree of “play” or “‘loose jointedness”’
varies from point to point; in the natural world it is
measured by the mysterious quantity known as
‘*Planck’s constant h,”’ which proves to be absolutely
uniform throughout the universe. Its value, both in
the laboratory and in the stars, can be measured in
innumerable ways, and always proves to be precisely
the same. Yet the fact that “loose jointedness,”’


28 THE NEW WORLD OF


_ of any type whatever, pervades the whole universe
destroys the case for absolutely strict causation,
this latter being the characteristic of perfectly-fitting
machinery.

These and other considerations to which we shall
return below (p. 123) have led many physicists to
suppose that there is no determinism in events in
which atoms and electrons are involved singly, and
that the apparent determinism in large scale events
is only of a statistical nature. When we are dealing
with atoms and electrons in crowds, the mathema-
tical law of averages imposes the determinism which
physical laws have failed to provide.

We can illustrate the concept by an analogous
situation in the large-scale world. If we spin a half-
penny, nothing within our knowledge may be able to
decide whether it will come down heads or tails, yet
if we throw up a million tons of half-pence, we know
there will be 500,000 tons of heads and 500,000 tons
of tails. The experiment may be repeated indefinitely,
and will always give the same result. We may be
tempted to instance it as evidence of the uniformity
of nature, and to infer the action of an underlying law
of causation: inactual fact it is an instance only ofthe
operation of the purely mathematical laws of chance.

Yet the number of half-pence in a million tons is
nothing in comparison with the number of atoms in
even the smallest piece of matter with which the
earlier physicists could experiment. It is easy to see
how the illusion of determinacy—if it is an illusion—
crept into science.


MODERN PHYSICS 29


We have still no definite knowledge on any of
these problems. Probably the majority of physicists
expect that in some way the law of strict causation
will in the end be restored to its old place in the
natural world. So far it has not been restored, with
the result that, up to the present at least, the
picture of the universe presented by the new physics
contains more room than did the old mechanical
picture for life and consciousness to exist within
the picture itself, together with the attributes which
we commonly associate with them, such as free-will,
and the capacity to make the universe in some small
degree different by our presence. For, for aught we
know, or for aught that the new science can say to
the contrary, the gods which play the part of fate to
the atoms of our brains may be our own minds.
Through these atoms our minds may perchance
affect the motions of our bodies and so the state of
the world around us. To-day science can no longer
shut the door on this possibility; she has no longer
any unanswerable arguments to bring against our
innate conviction of free-will. On the other hand,
she gives no hint as to what absence of determinism
or causation may mean. If we, and nature in
general, do not respond in a unique way to external
stimuli, what determines the course of events? If
anything at all, we are thrown back on determinism
and causation; if nothing at all, how can anything
ever occur?

As I see it, we are unlikely to reach any definite
conclusions on these questions until we have a better


380 THE NEW WORLD OF


understanding of the true nature of time. The
fundamental laws of nature, in so far as we are at
present acquainted with them, give no reason why
time should flow steadily on: they are equally pre-
pared to consider the possibility of time standing
still or flowing backwards. The steady onward flow
-of time, which is the essence of the cause-effect
relation, is something which we superpose on to the
ascertained laws of nature out of our own experience;
whether or not it is inherent in the nature of time,
we simply do not know, although, as we shall see
shortly, the theory of relativity goes at any rate
some distance towards stigmatising this steady on-
ward flow of time and the cause-effect relation as
illusions; it regards time merely as a fourth dimen-
sion to be added to the three dimensions of space,
so that post hoc ergo propter hoc may be no more
true of a sequence of happenings in time than it is
of the sequence of telegraph-poles along the Great
North road.

It is always the puzzle of the nature of time that
brings our thoughts to a standstill. And if time is
so fundamental that an understanding of its true
nature is for ever beyond our reach, then so also in
all probability is a decision in the age-long con-
troversy between determinism and free-will.

The possible abolition of determinism and the law
of causation from physics are, however, compara-
tively recent developments in the history of the
quantum theory. The primary object of the theory
was to explain certain phenomena of radiation, and


MODERN PHYSICS 31


to understand the question at issue we must retrace
our steps as far back as Newton and the seventeenth
century.

The most obvious fact about a ray of light, at any
rate to superficial observation, is its tendency to
travel in a straight line; everyone is familiar with the
straight edges of a sunbeam in a dusty room. As a
rapidly-moving particle of matter also tends to
travel in a straight line, the early scientists, rather
naturally, thought of light as a stream of particles
thrown out from a luminous source, like shot from
a gun. Newton adopted this view, and added pre-
cision to it in his ‘“‘corpuscular theory of light.”

Yet it is a matter of common observation that a
ray of light does not always travel in a straight line.
It can be abruptly turned by reflection, such as
occurs when it falls on the surface of a mirror. Or
its path may be bent by refraction, such as occurs
when it enters water or any liquid medium; it is
refraction that makes our oar look broken at the
point where it enters the water, and makes the river
look shallower than it proves to be when we step
into it. Even in Newton’s time the laws which
governed these phenomena were well known. In the
case of reflection the angle at which the ray of light
struck the mirror was exactly the same as that at
which it came off after reflection; in other words,
light bounces off a mirror like a tennis ball bouncing
off a perfectly hard tennis-court. Inthe case of reflec-
tion, the sine of the angle of incidence stood in a con-
stant ratio to the sine of the angle of reflection. We


382 THE NEW WORLD OF


find Newton at pains to shew that his light-corpuscles
would move in accordance with these laws, if they
were subjected to certain definite forces at the
surfaces of a mirror or a refracting liquid. Here are
propositions xciv and xcvi of the Principia:


PROPOSITION XCIV


If two similar mediums be separated from each other by
a space terminated on both sides by parallel planes, and
a body in its passage through that space be attracted
or impelled perpendicularly towards either of those
mediums, and not agitated or hindered by any other
force; and the attraction be every where the same at
equal distances from either plane, taken towards the
same hand of the plane; I say, that the sine of incidence
upon either plane will be to the sine of emergence from
the other plane in a given ratio.


PROPOSITION XCVI


The same things being supposed, and that the motion
before incidence is swifter than afterwards; I say, that
if the line of incidence be inclined continually, the body
will be at last reflected, and the angle of reflexion will be
equal to the angle of incidence.


Newton’s corpuscular theory met its doom in the
fact that when a ray of light falls on the surface of
water, only part of it is refracted. The remainder is
reflected, and it is this latter part that produces the
ordinary reflections of objects in a lake, or the ripple
of moonlight on the sea. It was objected that
Newton’s theory failed to account for this reflection,
for if light had consisted of corpuscles, the forces


MODERN PHYSICS 33


at the surface of the water ought to have treated all
corpuscles alike; when one corpuscle was refracted
all ought to be, and this left water with no power to
reflect the sun, moon or stars. Newton tried to
obviate this objection by attributing “alternate fits
of transmission and reflection” to the surface of
the water—the corpuscle which fell on the surface
at one instant was admitted, but the next instant the
gates were shut, and its companion was turned away
to form reflected light. This concept was strangely
and strikingly anticipatory of modern quantum
theory, in its abandonment of the uniformity of
nature and its replacement of determinism by prob-
abilities, but it failed to carry conviction at the time.

And, in any case, the corpuscular theory was con-
fronted by other and graver difficulties. When studied
in sufficiently minute detail, ightis not found to travel
in such absolutely straight lines as to suggest the
motions of particles. A big object, such as a house
or a mountain, throws a definite shadow, and so
gives as good protection from the glare of the sun as
it would from a shower of bullets. But a tiny object,
such as a very thin wire, hair or fibre, throws no such
shadow. When we hold it in front of a screen, no
part of the screen remains unilluminated. In some
way, the light contrives to bend round it, and,
instead of a definite shadow, we see an alternation
of light and comparatively dark parallel bands,
known as ‘“‘interference bands.” To take another
instance, a large circular hole in a screen lets
through a circular patch of light. But make the hole


JMU J 3


84 THE NEW WORLD OF


as small as the smallest of pinholes, and the pattern
thrown on a screen beyond is not a tiny circular
patch of light, but a far larger pattern of concentric
rings, in which light and dark rings alternate—
“ diffraction rings.” Fig. 1 of Plate II (p. 42) shews the
pattern obtained by allowing a beam of light to pass
through a pinhole on to a photographic plate. All
the light which is more than a pinhole’s radius from
the centre has in some way bent round the edge of
the hole.

Newton regarded these phenomena as evidence
that his “‘light-corpuscles” were attracted by solid
matter. He wrote:


The rays of light that are in our air, in their passage near
the angles of bodies, whether transparent or opaque
(such as the circular and rectangular edges of coins, or of
knives, or broken pieces of stone or glass), are bent or
inflected round those bodies, as if they were attracted
to them; and those rays which in their passage came
nearest to the bodies are the most inflected, as if they
were most attracted.


Here again Newton was strangely anticipatory of
present-day science, his supposed forces being closely
analogous to the “‘quantum forces” of the modern
wave-mechanics. But they failed to give any detailed
explanation of diffraction-phenomena, and so met
with no favour.

In time all these and similar phenomena were
adequately explained by supposing that light con-
sists of waves, somewhat similar to those which the
wind blows up on the sea, except that, instead of


MODERN PHYSICS 35


each wave being many yards long, many thousands of
waves go toa single inch. Waves of light bend round
a small obstacle in exactly the way in which waves
of the sea bend round a small rock. A rocky reef
miles long gives almost perfect shelter from the sea,
but a small rock gives no such protection—the
waves pass rounditon either side, and re-unite behind
it, just as waves of light re-unite behind our thin
hair or fibre. In the same way sea-waves which fall on
the entrance to a harbour do not travel in a straight
line across the harbour but bend round the edges of
the breakwater, and make the whole surface of the
water in the harbour rough. Fig. 1 of Plate II (p. 42)
shews the “ roughness” beyond a pinhole produced by
waves of light which have bent round the edges of
the pinhole like sea-waves bending round a break-
water. The seventeenth century regarded light as a
shower of particles, the eighteenth century, discover-
ing that this was inadequate to account for small-
scale phenomena such as we have just described,
replaced the showers of particles by trains of waves.
Yet the replacement brought its own difficulties
with it. When sunlight is passed through a prism,
it is broken up into a rainbow-like “‘spectrum” of
colours—red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and
violet. If light consisted of waves like the waves of
the sea, it can be shewn that all the light of the
analysed sunlight ought to be found at the extreme
violet end of the spectrum. Not only so, but ex-
treme violet waves have an unlimited capacity for
absorbing energy, and as they have their mouths


3-2


86 THE NEW WORLD OF


permanently wide open, all the energy of the uni-
verse would rapidly pass into the form of violet, or
ultra-violet, radiation travelling through space.

The “quantum theory” came into being as an
effort to cure the wave theory of light of these de-
fects. It has been completely successful. It has shewn
that Newton was not wholly wrong in regarding
light as corpuscular, for it has proved that a beam
of light may be regarded as broken up into discrete
units, called “light-quanta” or “‘photons,” with
almost the definiteness with which a shower of rain
may be broken up into drops of water, a shower of
bullets into separate pieces of lead, or a gas into
' separate molecules.

At the same time, the light does not lose its
undulatory character. Each little parcel of light has
a definite quantity, of the nature of a length, asso-
ciated with it. We call this its “wave-length,”
because when the light in question is passed through
a prism, it behaves exactly as waves of this par-
ticular length of wave would do. Light of long
wave-length is made up of small parcels, and vice-
versa, the amount of energy in each parcel being
inversely proportional to this wave-length, so that
we can always calculate the energy of a photon
from its wave-length, and vice-versa.

It is impossible even to summarise the great mass
of evidence on which these concepts are based.
It all, absolutely without exception, indicates that
light travels through laboratory apparatus in un-
broken photons; no observation yet made has re-


MODERN PHYSICS 37


vealed the existence of a fraction of a photon, or
given any reason for suspecting that such a thing
can exist. Two examples may typify the whole.

Radiation may, under suitable conditions, break
up the atoms on which it falls. A study of the
shattered atoms discloses how much energy has been
let loose on each to do the work of breaking it up.
Invariably the energy proves to be exactly that of
a complete photon, as calculated from its known
wave-length. It is as though an army of light had
come into conflict with an army of matter. It has
long been known that the latter army consists of
individual soldiers, the atoms; it now appears that
the former also consists of individual soldiers, the
photons, a study of the battlefield shewing that
the conflict has consisted of individual man-to-man
encounters.

As a second example, Professor Compton of
Chicago has recently studied what happens when
X-radiation falls on electrons. He finds that the
radiation is scattered exactly as though it consisted
of material particles of light, or photons, moving
as separate detached units, this time like bullets on a
battlefield, and hitting all electrons which stand in
their way. The extent to whieh individual photons are
deflected from their courses at these collisions makes
it possible to calculate the energy of the photons,
and again this is found to agree exactly with that
calculated from their wave-length.

This concept of indivisible photons again leads us
back to indeterminacy. There are various methods


38 THE NEW WORLD OF


of splitting up a beam of light into two parts which
follow different paths. When the beam is reduced to
a single photon, it must follow either one path or the
other; it cannot distribute itself over both because
the photon is indivisible. And its choice of path
proves to be a matter of probability, and not of
determinacy.

In this way it appears that the seventeenth
century, which regarded light as mere particles, and
the nineteenth century, which regarded it as mere
waves, were both wrong—or, if we prefer, both
right. Light, and indeed radiation of all kinds, is
both particles and waves at the same time. In
Professor Compton’s experiments, X-radiation falls
on single electrons and behaves like a shower of
discrete particles; in the experiments of Laue, Bragg
and others, exactly similar radiation falls on a solid
crystal and behaves in all respects like a succession
of waves. And it is the same throughout nature; the
same radiation can simulate both particles and waves
at the same time. Now it behaves lke particles,
now like waves; no general principle yet known can
tell us what behaviour it will choose in any particular
instance.

Clearly we can only preserve our belief in the
uniformity of nature by making the supposition that
particles and waves are in essence the same thing.
And this brings us to the second, and far more
exciting, half of our story. The first half, which has
just been told, is that radiation can appear now as
waves and now as particles; the second is that


MODERN PHYSICS 39


electrons and protons, the fundamental units of
which all matter is composed (p. 52), can also appear
now as particles, and now as waves. A duality has
recently been discovered in the nature of electrons
and protons similar to that already known to exist
in the nature of radiation; these also appear to be
particles and waves at the same time.

When Newton’s corpuscular theory of light first
gave place to the undulatory theory, it became
necessary to explain how a succession of waves could
simulate the behaviour of a shower of particles,
and move in a straight line except where it was
deflected from its course by reflection or refraction.
For if the sunbeam let in through a crack in the
shutter consisted of waves, it was natural to expect
that they would spread through the whole of the
room, just as a ripple spreads over the whole surface
of a pond, or as the very narrow beam which has
passed through a pinhole has spread out in Fig. 1
of Plate II. Yet Young and Fresnel shewed that an
undisturbed succession of waves of sufficient width
would move as a beam, without appreciable sideways
spread—like a shower of freely moving particles—
and would be reflected from a mirror in the same
way in which a projectile bounces off a perfectly hard
surface. It was also shewn that such a system of
waves would be refracted according to the known
laws of refraction of light. Finally, if such a system of
waves travelled through a medium whose refracting
power changed continuously, its path would be
similar to that of a particle which was made to


40 THE NEW WORLD OF


deviate from a straight path by continuously acting
forces. Indeed the two paths could be made identical
by taking the force at every point proportional to the
change in the square of the refractive index. This
explained the success of Newton’s Propositions XcIv
and xcvi which we have quoted on p. 382.

Thus whatever the particles of Newton’s cor-
puscular theory could do, a succession of waves could
do the same. But, just because of their greater com-
plexity, they were able to do more, and in every case
in which the particles failed to simulate the be-
haviour of light, it was found that a system of waves
could fill the part completely. In this way Newton’s
supposed particles became resolved into systems of
waves.

The last few years have seen the particles of which
ordinary matter is formed—i.e. protons and elec-
trons—resolved into systems of wavés in a somewhat
similar way. In many circumstances, the behaviour
of an electron or proton is found to be too complex
to permit of explanation as the motion of a mere
particle; Louis de Broglie, Schrédinger and others
have accordingly tried to interpret it as the be-
haviour of a group of waves and, in so doing, have
founded the branch of mathematical physics which
is now known as ‘‘ Wave-Mechanics.”

If we watch an ordinary tennis ball bouncing off
the surface of a perfectly hard tennis-court, we shall
find that its motion is the same as that of a beam of
light reflected at the surface of a mirror, so that we
may properly speak of the ball as being “‘reflected”’


MODERN PHYSICS 4d


from the surface of the court. But there is not much
gained by the discovery. No doubt it would permit
us to interpret a tennis ball as a system of waves if
we desired to do so, but we do not; for one thing we
can see, or think we can see; that a tennis ball is not
a system of waves.

The case would be different if the moving object
were not a tennis ball but an electron. If the motion
of an electron bouncing off a surface were observed
to be like that of a system of waves, nothing could
preclude the possibility of the electron being a system
of waves. No one can now say—“ This does not in-
terest me—I can see the electron, and it clearly is not
a system of waves,” for no one has ever seen an elec-
tron, or has the remotest conception as to what it
would look like. We are just as free @ priori to
consider an electron as a system of waves, as to con-
sider Newton’s light-corpuscles as systems of waves.
And to find out whether anelectron really is a system
of waves, we must turn to phenomena in which a
hard particle and a system of waves would behave
differently.

Now the phenomena in which the electron did not
behave at all as it was expected to, so long as it was
regarded as a particle, provide precisely the group
of phenomena we want, and in every case the electron
is found to behave exactly like a system of waves.
One particular phenomenon is that of a shower of
electrons bouncing off a metal plate; they do not
bounce off like a shower of hailstones or tennis balls
would do, but produce a diffraction pattern (p. 34) as


42 THE NEW WORLD OF


a system of waves would do (see Plate I, Fig. 3). And
it is the same when the shower of electrons is shot
through a tiny aperture; they spread laterally and
produce a diffraction pattern very similar to that
produced by waves of light (see Plate II, Figs. land 2).
This does not of course prove that an electron
actually consists of waves, but it raises the question
whether a system of waves does not provide a better
picture of the electron than the hard particle
does. Actually a system of waves provides a
picture which has never yet failed to predict the
behaviour of the electron, while the conception of an
electron as a hard particle has failed on innumerable
occasions

The new wave-mechanics shews that a moving
electron or proton ought to behave like a system of
waves of quite definite wave-length; this depends
on the mass of the moving particle, and on its speed
of motion, but on nothing else. And the wave-
lengths it assigns to electrons and protons moving
under ordinary laboratory conditions are such as
can be easily measured with ordinary laboratory
apparatus,

Experiments on what may properly be described
as the reflection and refraction of electrons have been
performed by Davisson and Germer in America, by
Professor G. P. Thomson at Aberdeen, by Rupp in
Germany, by Kikuchi in Japan, and by Dauvillier
in France. Moving electrons are shot, as a parallel
beam, either on to or through a metallic surface.
And in each case the effect recorded on a suitably


PIA De LL Hie DUE Ry Ace I OND Ole iG EELS AN Nis
OF ELECTRONS


Fig. 1. Diffraction rings produced by light passing through a
minute aperture (a pinhole) in an opaque screen (N. R. Fowler)


Big. 2. Diffraction rings produced by electrons passing through
a minute area of a gold film (G. P. Thomson)


Fig. 38. Diffraction rings produced by electrons reflected off a
minute area of a gold surface (G. P, Thomson)


MODERN PHYSICS 43


placed photographic plate is not at all that which
would be observed if the electrons behaved like
a shower of small shot or other hard particles.
A diffraction pattern is invariably obtained, con-
sisting of a system of concentric rings, light and
dark rings alternating. The pattern is the same as
would have been produced if waves of a certain
definite wave-length had fallen on the metal, and
when the wave-length is measured it proves to be
exactly that predicted by the wave-mechanics for-
mula already mentioned. Recently Professor A. J.
Dempster of Chicago has had a similar success with
moving protons.

These and other experiments make it clear that
the waves and wave-lengths associated with moving
electrons and protons are at least something more
than a pure myth. Something of an undulatory
nature is certainly involved, and the picture which
represents moving electrons and protons as systems
of waves explains their behaviour far better, both
inside and outside atoms, than did the old picture
which regarded them merely as charged particles.

We may sum up by saying that the ingredients of
matter (electrons and protons) and radiation both
exhibit a dual nature. So long as science deals only
with large scale phenomena, an adequate picture can
generally be obtained by supposing both to be of the
nature of particles. But when science comes to closer
grips with nature, and passes to the study of small
scale phenomena, matter and radiation are found
equally to resolve themselves into waves.


/


44, NEW WORLD OF MODERN PHYSICS


If we want to understand the fundamental nature
of things, it is to these small scale phenomena that
we must turn our attention. Here the ultimate
nature of things lies hidden, and what we are finding
is waves.

In this way, we are beginning to suspect that we
live in a universe of waves, and nothing but waves.
We shall discuss the nature of these waves below.
At the moment it is enough to notice that modern
science has travelled very far from the old view
which regarded the universe merely as a collection
of hard bits of matter in which waves of radiation
occasionally appeared as an incident. And the next
chapter will carry us farther along the same road.


Chapter III
MATTER AND RADIATION


In the early days of science, the unquestioning
acceptance of the law of causation as a guiding
principle in the natural world led to the discovery
and formulation of laws of the general type ‘“‘an
assigned cause A leads to a known effect B.”’ For
instance the addition of heat to ice causes it to melt,
or stated in more detail, heat decreases the amount
of ice in the universe and increases the amount of
water.

Primitive man would become acquainted with this
law very easily—he had only to watch the action of
the sun on hoarfrost, or the effect of the long summer
days on the mountain glaciers. In winter he would
notice that cold changed water back into ice. At a
further stage it might be discovered that the re-
frozen ice was equal in amount to the original ice
before melting. It would then be a natural inference
that something belonging to a more general category
than either water or ice had remained unaffected in
amount throughout the transformation


ice - water — ice.


Modern physics is familiar with laws of this type,
which it describes as “‘conservation laws.” The
discovery we have just attributed to primitive man


46 MATTER AND RADIATION


is a special case of the law of conservation of matter.
The law of ‘“‘conservation of X,’’ whatever X may
be, means that the total amount of X in the universe
remains perpetually the same: nothing can change
X into something which is not X. Every such law is
of necessity hypothetical; what it actually expresses
is that nothing we have so far done has succeeded
in changing the total amount of X. And if we have
tried enough things and failed every time, it is
legitimate to propound a law of conservation of X,
at any rate as a working hypothesis.

At the end of last century, physical science
recognised three major conservation laws:


A The conservation of matter,
B e Pe mass,
C ss ~ energy.


Other minor laws, such as those of the conservation
of linear and angular momenta, need not enter our
discussion, since they are mere deductions from the
three major laws already mentioned.

Of the three major laws, the conservation of
matter was the most venerable. It had been implied
in the atomistic philosophy of Democritus and
Lucretius, which supposed all matter to be made up
of uncreatable, unalterable and indestructible atoms.
It asserted that the matter content of the universe
remained always the same, and the matter content
of any bit of the universe or of any region of space
remained the same except in so far as it was altered
by the ingress or egress of atoms. The universe was


MATTER AND RADIATION AT


a stage in which always the same actors—the atoms
—played their parts, differing in disguises and
groupings, but without change of identity. And
these actors were endowed with immortality.

The second law, that of the conservation of mass,
was of more modern growth. Newton had supposed
every body or piece of substance to have associated
with it an unvarying quantity, its mass, which gave
a measure of its “inertia” or reluctance to change
its motion. If one motor-car requires twice the
engine power of another to give us equal control
over its motion, we say that it has twice the mass
of the latter car. The law of gravitation asserts that
the gravitational pulls on two bodies are in exact
proportion to their masses, so that if the earth’s
attraction on two bodies proves to be the same, their
“‘masses”? must be the same, whence it follows that
the simplest way of measuring the mass of any body
is by weighing it.

In the course of time, chemistry shewed that the
Lucretian ‘“‘atoms” had no right to their name
(a-réuvewv, incapable of being cut). They proved
not to be “‘uncuttable” at all, and so were hence-
forth called “‘molecules,” the name atom being
reserved for the smaller units into which the mole-
cules could be broken up. There are many ways in
which molecules may be broken up and their atoms
rearranged. Mere contiguity with other molecules
may suffice, as for instance when iron rusts or acid
is poured on to metal. Molecules may also be broken
up by burning, exploding, heating, or by the incidence


48 MATTER AND RADIATION


of light. For instance, if a bottle of hydrogen
peroxide is stood in a light place, the mere passage
of light through the liquid breaks up each molecule
of hydrogen peroxide (H,O,) into a molecule of
water (H,O) and an atom of oxygen (O). When we
take the cork out of our bottle we shall hear a pop
caused by the escape of the oxygen gas, and find that
some of the hydrogen peroxide has been changed
into water. Molecules of silver bromide are also
re-arranged by the incidence of light, this change
forming the basis of photography.

Towards the end of the eighteenth century
Lavoisier believed he had found that the total weight
of matter remained unaltered throughout all the
chemical changes at his command. In due course the
law of “‘conservation of mass” became accepted as
an integral part of science. We know now that it is
not altogether exact; the weight of the oxygen
which escapes from our bottle of peroxide added to
that of the fluid which remains, is slightly greater
than the weight of the original peroxide, and a
photographic plate gains in weight by being exposed
to the light. We shall see shortly that the law is
inexact because it neglects the weight of the light
absorbed by the molecules of hydrogen peroxide or
silver bromide.

The third principle, that of the conservation of
energy, is the most recent of all. Energy can exist
in a vast variety of forms, of which the simplest is
pure energy of motion—the motion of a train along
a level track, or of a billiard ball over a table.


MATTER AND RADIATION 49


Newton had shewn that this purely mechanica.
energy is “conserved.” For instance, when two
billiard balls collide, the energy of each is changed,
but the total energy of the two remains unaltered;
one gives energy to the other, but no energy is lost
or gained in the transaction. This, however, is only
true if the balls are “perfectly elastic,” an ideal
condition in which the balls spring back from one
another with the same speed with which they
approached. Under actual conditions such as occur
in nature, mechanical energy invariably appears to
be lost; a bullet loses speed on passing through the
air, and a train comes to rest in time if the engine
is shut off. In all such cases heat and sound are
produced. Now a long series of investigations has
shewn that heat and sound are themselves forms of
energy. In a classical series of experiments made in
1840-50, Joule measured the energy of heat, and
tried to measure the energy of sound with the rudi-
mentary apparatus of a violoncello string. Imperfect
though his experiments were, they resulted in the
recognition of “conservation of energy” as a prin-
ciple which covered all known transformations of
energy through its various modes of mechanical
energy, heat, sound, and electrical energy. They
shewed in brief that energy is transformed rather
than lost, an apparent loss of energy of motion
being compensated by the appearance of an exactly
equal energy of heat and sound; the energy of
motion of the rushing train is replaced by the
equivalent energy of the noise of the shrieking
JMU 4
/


50 MATTER AND RADIATION


brakes, and of the heating of wheels, brake-blocks
and rails.

Throughout the second half of the nineteenth
century these three conservation laws stood un-
challenged. The conservation of mass was supposed
to be the same thing as the conservation of matter,
because the mass of any body was regarded as the
sum of the masses of its atoms; this of course
explained simply—all too simply, as we now know
—why total mass could not be altered by chemical
action. But the newly discovered principle of con-
servation of energy stood apart from the two older
laws, a thing by itself. The universe was still en-
visaged as a stage in which the players were atoms,
each of which conserved its identity and mass
through all time. To complete the picture, an en-
tity known as energy was bandied about from one
player to another, and this, like the actors them-
selves, was incapable of either creation or anni-
hilation.

These three conservation laws ought of course to
have been treated merely as working hypotheses, to
be tested in every conceivable way and discarded as
soon as they shewed signs of failing. Yet so securely
did they seem to be established that they were
treated as indisputable universal laws. Nineteenth
century physicists were accustomed to write of them
as though they governed the whole of creation, and
on this basis philosophers dogmatised as to the
fundamental nature of the universe.

It was the calm before the hurricane. The first


MATTER AND RADIATION 51


rumble of the approaching storm was a theoretical
investigation by Sir J. J. Thomson, which shewed
that the mass of an electrified body could be changed
by setting it into motion; the faster such a body
moved the greater its mass became, in opposition to
Newton’s concept of a fixed unalterable mass. For
the moment, the principle of conservation of mass
appeared to have abandoned science.

For a time this conclusion remained of merely
academic interest; it could not be tested observa-
tionally because ordinary bodies could neither be
charged with sufficient electricity, nor set into motion
with sufficient speed, for the variations of mass
predicted by theory to become appreciable in amount.
Then, just as the nineteenth century was drawing to
a close, Sir J. J. Thomson and his followers began to
break up the atom, which now proved to be no more
uncuttable, and so no more entitled to the name of
‘‘atom,”’ than the molecule to which the name had
previously been attached. They were only able to
detach small fragments, and even now the complete
break-up of the atom into its ultimate constituents
has not been fully achieved. These fragments were
found to be all precisely similar, and charged with
negative electricity. They were accordingly named
electrons.

These electrons are far more intensely electrified
than an ordinary body can ever be. A gramme of
gold, beaten as thin as it will go, into a gold leaf a
yard square, can with luck be made to hold a charge
of about 60,000 electrostatic units of electricity, but


4-2


52 MATTER AND RADIATION


a gramme of electrons carries a permanent charge
which is about nine million million times greater.
Because of this, and because electrons can be set
into motion by electrical means with speeds of more
than a hundred thousand miles a second, it is easy
to verify that an electron’s mass varies with its
speed. Exact experiments have shewn that the
variation is precisely that predicted by theory.

Thanks mainly to the researches of Sir Ernest
Rutherford, it has now been established that every
atom is built up entirely of negatively-charged
electrons, and of positively-charged particles called
“protons”; matter proves to be nothing but a
collection of particles charged with electricity. With
one turn of the kaleidoscope all the sciences which
deal with the properties and structure of matter have
become ramifications of the single science of elec-
tricity. Before this, Faraday and Maxwell had shewn
that all radiation was electrical in its nature, so that
the whole of physical science is now comprised
within the single science of electricity.

Since every body is a collection of electrically-
charged particles, the theoretical investigation
already mentioned shews that the mass of every
moving body must vary with its speed of motion.
The mass of a moving body may be regarded as made
up of two parts—a fixed part which the body retains
even when at rest, known as its ‘‘rest-mass,”’ and a
variable part which depends on the speed of its
motion. Both observation and theory have shewn
that this second part is exactly proportional to the


MATTER AND RADIATION 53


energy of motion of the body; the masses of two
electrons, or any two other bodies similar to one
another, differ to just aS extent to which their
energies differ.

In 1905 Einstein extended this into a tremendous
generalisation. He shewed that not only energy of
motion but energy of every conceivable kind must
possess mass of its own; if it were not so, the theory
of relativity could not be true. In this way every
observational test of the theory of relativity was
made a witness to the truth of the hypothesis
that energy possesses mass. Hinstein’s investigation
shewed that the mass of energy of any kind what-
ever depends solely on the amount of the energy,
to which it is exactly proportional. It is also exceed-
ingly small. The Mauretania, fully loaded, weighs
about 50,000 tons; when she is travelling at 25 knots,
her motion only increases her weight by about a
millionth part of an ounce. The energy that a man
puts into a long life-time of heavy manual labour
weighs only a 60,000th part of an ounce.

This discovery made it possible to reinstate the
principle of conservation of mass. For mass is the
aggregate of rest-mass and energy-mass, and as each
of these is conserved separately (the former because
matter is conserved, and the latter because energy
is conserved), there must be a conservation of total
mass. Nineteenth-century physics had regarded the
conservation of mass as a consequence solely of the
conservation of matter. Twentieth-century physics
discovered that the conservation of energy was also


54 MATTER AND RADIATION


involved; mass is now seen to be conserved only
because matter and energy are conserved separately.

So long as atoms were regarded as permanent and
indestructible—“ the imperishable foundation-stones
of the universe,” to use Maxwell’s phrase—it
was natural to treat them as the fundamental con-
stituents of the universe. The universe was, in brief,
a universe of atoms, radiation being of quite second-
ary importance. Every now and then an atom was
supposed to be set in vibration, as a bell is struck,
and emitted radiation for a brief time, as a bell
emits sound, until it lapsed back to its normal state
of quiescence. But radiation was no more regarded
as a primary constituent of matter than sound is of
a carillon of bells. Incidentally this explains why it
was found impossible to imagine how the sun could
continue to radiate for thousands of millions of years
or more. Sunlight was believed to be produced by
the agitation of atoms, but no one could imagine
what maintained the agitation.

The scene began to change as soon as it was
recognised that the atom was built up of electrified
particles. For no matter how far we retreat from an
electrified particle, we cannot get outside the range
of its attractions and repulsions. This shews that an
electron must, in a certain sense at least, occupy the
whole of space. Faraday and Maxwell made the
matter more explicit than this; they pictured an
electrified particle as an octopus-like structure, a _
small concrete body which threw out a sort of feelers
or tentacles, called “lines of force,” throughout the


MATTER AND RADIATION 55


whole of space. When two electrified particles
attracted or repelled one another, it was because
their tentacles had somehow taken hold of one
another, and pushed or pulled. These tentacles were
supposed to be formed out of electric and magnetic
forces, of which radiation is also formed. When an
atom emitted radiation it merely discharged some
of its tentacles into space, much as a porcupine is
said to throw out its quills. This concept placed
radiation and matter in more intimate relations than
ever before.

Since all types of radiation are forms of energy,
they must, in accordance with Einstein’s principle,
carry mass associated with them. When an atom
emits radiation, its mass diminishes by the mass of
the emitted radiation, just as, if a porcupine were to
throw out its quills, its weight would diminish by the
weight of the quills. Thus when a piece of coal is
burnt, its weight is not altogether reproduced in the
ashes and the smoke; we must add to these the
weight of the light and heat emitted in the process
of combustion. Only then will the total be exactly
the weight of the original piece of coal.

As far back as 1878, Maxwell had shewn that
radiation would exert a pressure on any surface on
which it fell. We now regard this as a necessary
consequence of the fact that radiation carries mass
about with it; a beam of light consists of mass
moving with the speed of light—186,000 miles a
second. Lebedew, and subsequently Nichols and
Hull, measured this pressure, and found its amount


56 MATTER AND RADIATION


to be that calculated by Maxwell. A target could be
seen to flinch under the impact of the radiation from
a bright light, just as though a bullet had been fired
into it. But the impact of such light as we experience
on earth is extremely slight; to see the full implica-
tions of the phenomenon we must leave the earth and
the physics which has been developed in terrestrial
laboratories, in favour of the sky and the wider
physics which we see in operation in the colossal
crucibles of the stars. Heat an ordinary six-inch
cannon-ball up to 50 million degrees, the temperature
of the centre of the sun, and the radiation it emits
would suffice to mow down—by its mere impact, like
the jet of water from a fire-hose—anyone who ap-
proached within 50 miles of it. Indeed inside the
stars this pressure of radiation is so large that it
supports an appreciable fraction of the weight of
the stars.

Calculation shews that about a ten-thousandth of
an ounce of sunlight falls every minute on every
square mile of land directly under the sun; it falls
with the speed of light, and in being brought to rest
it exerts a pressure of about 0-000,000,000,04 atmo-
spheres on the land. The figures look absurdly small
—the weight of sunshine which falls in a century is
less than the weight of rain which falls in a fiftieth
of a second of a heavy shower. Yet the amount is
small only because a field a mile square is such a
minute object in astronomical space. The total
emission of radiation by the sun is almost exactly
250 million tons a minute, which is something like


MATTER AND RADIATION 57


10,000 times the average rate at which water flows
under London Bridge. And, incidentally, if our
factor of 10,000 is wrong, it is not because we do
not know the exact weight of solar radiation, but
because we do not know the average flow of the
Thames with very great precision. Astronomical
physics is a far more exact science than terrestrial
hydraulics.

A certain weight of radiation falls on to the sun
from other stars, but this is quite inappreciable in
comparison with the weight of the radiation which
streams out, so that the sun can only maintain its
weight if actual matter is streaming into it at the
rate of close upon 250 million tons a minute.

As the sun journeys through space it must con-
tinually sweep up stray matter in the form of odd
atoms and molecules, of dust particles and of
meteors. These last are small solid objects which
exist in enormous numbers in the solar system,
revolving round the sun in orbits like those of the
planets. Occasionally they dash into the earth’s
atmosphere, when the air-resistance of their earth-
ward fall raises them to incandescence, and they
appear as shooting-stars. Generally these dissolve
into vapour before reaching the earth’s surface; only
occasionally is one massive enough to survive the
disintegrating effect of this air-resistance, and it then
strikes the earth in the form of a stone, known as a
meteorite. These are sometimes of enormoussize. The
fall of a meteorite in Siberia in 1908 set up blasts of air
which devastated the forests over an enormous area,


58 MATTER AND RADIATION


while the shock of its impact on the solid earth
caused waves which were recorded thousands of
miles away. And a vast crater-shaped depression in
Arizona, three miles in circumference, is believed to
have been caused by the fall of a still larger meteorite
in prehistoric times. Yet such giants are rare, and
the average meteor is a puny affair, generally no
larger than a cherry or a pea.

Shapley has estimated that many thousands of
millions of shooting-stars enter the earth’s atmo-
sphere every day; each of these is turned into
dust and vapour, and the earth’s weight is corre-
spondingly increased. An incomparably greater
number must fall into the sun, measured by millions
of millions per second, and these probably provide by
far the largest contribution to the sun’s bag of stray
matter. Yet Shapley estimates that the total weight
of meteoric matter falling into the sun can hardly
exceed 2000 tons a second, which is less than a
2000th part of the weight it loses by radiation. Thus
it seems fairly certain that on the balance the sun
must be losing weight at a rate of very near 250
million tons a minute; it is a wasting structure,
gradually disappearing before our eyes; it is melting
away like an ice-berg in the Gulf Stream. And the
same must be true of other stars.

This conclusion accords well with the general
broad facts of astronomy. Although there is no
absolute proof, a large accumulation of evidence goes
to shew that young stars are heavier than old stars,
They are not heavier merely by a few million tons,


MATTER AND RADIATION 59


but several times heavier, often 10, 50 or even 100
times heavier. By far the simplest explanation is
that the stars lose the greater part of their weight
in the course of their lives. Now a simple calcula-
tion shews that the sun, losing weight at a rate of
about 250 million tons a minute, would require
millions of millions of years to lose the greater part,
or even a considerable part, of its weight. And, as
other stars tell much the same story, we are led to
assign lives of millions of millions of years tothe stars
in general.

We have other means of estimating the length of
stellar lives. In particular, the motion of the stars
in space proclaims their extreme antiquity, and
again assigns to them lives of millions of millions of
years. We have seen how far removed from one
another in space the stars are—so far that it is very
rare for two stars to approach each other at all
closely. Yet if the stars have lived these tremen-
dously long lives of millions of millions of years, each
star ought to have experienced a number of fairly
close approaches. The gravitational pulls which the
stars would exert on one another on these occasions
would not generally be intense enough to tear out
planets, but would suffice to deflect the stars from
their courses and change the speeds of their motions.
In the case of binary systems, which consist of two
separate masses moving through space in double
harness like a single star, the gravitational pull of
a near star would rearrange the orbits of the two
constituents of the binary star.


60 MATTER AND RADIATION


Now all these effects can be calculated in detail,
so that we know exactly what to expect if the stars
have really lived the terrifically long lives of millions
of millions of years we are provisionally allotting to
them. And everything we look for we find. All the
anticipated effects are there, and, so far as we can
tell, their magnitudes indicate that the stars have
lived for millions of millions of years.

Against all this, there is evidence of another kind,
which seems at first sight to point to a very different
conclusion, and so must be discussed in some detail
even though it is of a highly technical nature, and
takes us into the most difficult parts of the difficult
theory of relativity.

As we shall see in the next chapter, this theory
tells us that space itself is curved, much in the same
way in which the surface of the earth is curved. The
curvature of space is responsible for the curving of
rays of light which is observed at a solar eclipse, and
for the curvature in the paths of planets and comets,
which we used to attribute to a “force” of gravita-
tion. On this theory, the presence of matter does not
produce “‘force,”’ which is an illusion, but a curving
of space. The more matter there is in the universe,
the more curved space is, the more rapidly it bends
back on itself, and as a consequence the smaller the
size of the universe—just as a circle which curves
rapidly is smaller than one which curves more
gradually.

Einstein’s original theory of relativity supposed
the presence of matter to be the only cause of the


MATTER AND RADIATION 61


bending of space. An empty universe, totally devoid
of matter, would have its space entirely uncurved,
because there would be no matter to curve it, and so
would be of infinite size. As the universe is not empty,
its size is determined by the amount of matter it
contains, the greater the amount of matter the
smaller the universe.

The well-known experiment of electrifying a
soap-bubble may make the concept clearer. A soap-
bubble, blown in the ordinary way, is allowed to rest
on the plate of an electrical machine. As the machine
is worked, and the bubble becomes more and more
highly charged with electricity, its size increases
steadily until finally it bursts. Here (apart from its
final bursting) the soap-bubble is analogous to the
universe; its size depends on the amount of elec-
tricity it carries, just as the size of the universe
depends on the amount of matter it contains. There
is, however, the essential difference that an increased
charge of electricity increases the size of the soap-
bubble, whereas an increased charge of matter
decreases the size of the universe. This difference is
easily traced to its source. The electrical charges on
the soap-bubble are all of similar electricity, being
all positive or all negative, and so repel one another;
when the charge is increased, the particles of the
soap-bubble repel one another more fiercely than
before, and the bubble expands. But gravitative
masses do not repel, but attract, one another. Thus
if the charges of matter in the universe are in-
creased, the various parts of the universe attract one


/


62 MATTER AND RADIATION


another more fiercely than before, and the universe
contracts.

The difference between the repulsion of electric
charges and the attraction of gravitating matter
entails a further consequence. The electrified soap-
bubble is a thoroughly stable structure. Add a little
more charge and it calmly adjusts itself to a new,
slightly expanded, position of equilibrium. Shake it,
and, after trembling for a bit, it settles down to rest
again. But, just because of the difference between
attraction and repulsion, a soap-bubble charged with
attracting matter would be unstable. The mathe-
matician will see why this must be so. And although
it is a long step from a two-dimensional soap-bubble
of liquid film to a universe, a recent investigation
by a Belgian mathematician, the Abbé Lemaitre,
has shewn that the analogy holds, and that the kind
of universe we have just been discussing would be
an unstable structure; it could not stay at rest for
long, but would start at once to expand to infinite
size or contract to a point. Hence the actual space
of an aged universe ought to be either expanding or
contracting, and the various objects in it all rushing
away from one another, or all rushing at one another,
at a great rate.

Lemaitre’s conclusions are based upon Einstein’s
concept of a universe whose size, when at rest,
depends on the amount of matter it contains.
Previously to this, however, a very different concept
of the universe had been put forward by Professor
de Sitter of Leiden. He supposed that even a uni-


MATTER AND RADIATION 63


verse totally devoid of matter would possess a certain
amount of curvature, impressed upon it by the in-
herent properties of space and time. The presence
of matter would add an additional curvature, but
matter is so sparsely distributed in the actual universe
that this would be insignificant in comparison with
the curvature resulting from the nature of space
and time. When de Sitter studied the properties of
his universe mathematically, he also found a tendency
for its space to expand or contract, and for all the
objects in it either to drift apart or to rush towards
one another.

At first de Sitter’s concept of the universe ap-
peared to be entirely antagonistic to Ejinstein’s
earlier concept, and mathematicians were content to
wait for something to decide between them. But
Lemaitre’s work now shews that the two con-
cepts are not so much competitive as comple-
mentary. As Einstein’s unstable universe expands,
the matter in it becomes more and more sparse until
it ends up as an empty universe of the kind pictured
by de Sitter. The universes of Einstein and de Sitter
may rightly be imagined as placed at the two ends of
a chain, but we shall go wrong if we imagine them
engaged in a tug-of-war. They merely mark the
limits of possible universes, and a universe which
starts at or near the Einstein end of the chain must
gradually slip along the chain to the de Sitter end.
If our universe is built on these lines at all, the
question before us is not at which end of the chain
it is, but how far along the chain it has travelled.


64 MATTER AND RADIATION


The two ideal universes at the two ends of the
chain are similar in that the objects in them must be
either all rushing away from one another or else all
rushing towards one another. This is not only true
at the two extreme ends of the chain, but all along
the chain. If the universe is built in accordance
with the theory of relativity, as it almost certainly
is, then the objects in it must be running all away
from one another or all towards one another.

These conclusions are of great interest, because it
has for some years been remarked that the remote
spiral nebulae are, to all appearances, rushing away
from the earth, and so presumably also from one
another, at terrific speeds, which range up to 7200
miles a second. Dr Hubble and Dr Humason,
who have made a special study of the question at
Mount Wilson, find that the speeds at which the
individual nebulae are receding from us are, roughly
speaking, proportional to their distances from us, as
they ought to be, if the cosmology of the theory of
relativity is correct. A nebula whose light takes ten
million years to reach us, has a speed of about 900
miles a second, and the speeds of other nebulae are,
approximately at least, proportional to their dis-
tances. For instance, the light from the nebulae
shewn in Plate I takes fifty million years to reach
us, and the nebulae shew speeds of recession
of about 4500 miles a second.

The actual figures are important, becauseif we trace
the implied nebular motions backwards, we find that
all the nebulae must have been congregated in the


MATTER AND RADIATION 65


neighbourhood of the sun only a few thousands of
millions of years ago. All this goes to suggest that we
are living in an expanding universe, which started to
expand only a few thousands of millions of years ago.

If this were the whole story, it would be very
difficult to assign ages of millions of millions of years
to the stars; this would imply that they had been
packed close together, or had been converging into
a small region of space, for millions of millions of
years, and only just recently, during the last thou-
sandth part or so of their existence, had begun to
scatter. If the supposed motions of recession ulti-
mately prove to be real, it will hardly be possible to
attribute an age of more than a few thousands of
million years to the universe.

But there is room for a good deal of doubt as to
whether these huge speeds are real or not. They have
not been obtained by any direct process of measure-
ment, but are deduced by an application of what is
known as Doppler’s principle. It is a matter of
common observation that the noise emitted by a
motor-car horn sounds deeper in pitch when it is
receding from us than when it is coming towards us.
On the same principle the light emitted by a receding
body appears redder in colour than that emitted by
a body approaching us, colour in light corresponding
to pitch in sound. By accurately measuring the
colour of well-defined spectral lines, the astronomer
is able to discover whether the body emitting them
is approaching us orreceding from us, and can estimate
the speed of the motion. And the only reason for


JMU 5


66 MATTER AND RADIATION


thinking that the distant nebulae are receding from
us is that the light we receive from them appears
redder than it ought normally to be.

Yet other things than speed are capable of red-
dening light; for instance, sunlight is reddened by
the mere weight of the sun, it is reddened still more
by the pressure of the sun’s atmosphere; it is further
reddened, although in a different way, in its passage
through the earth’s atmosphere, as we see at sunrise
or sunset. The light emitted by certain stars of a
different kind is reddened in a mysterious way we
do not yet understand. Furthermore, on de Sitter’s
theory of the universe, distance alone produces a
reddening of light, so that even if the distant nebulae
were standing still in space, their light would appear
unduly red, and we should be tempted to infer that
they were receding from us. None of these causes
seems capable of explaining the observed reddening
of nebular light, but quite recently Dr Zwicky of the
California Institute has suggested that still another
cause of reddening may be found in the gravitational
pull of stars and nebulae on light passing near them
—the same pull as causes the observed bending of
starlight at an eclipse of the sun. Compton’s experi-
ments (p. 87) shew that radiation is both deflected
and reddened when it encounters electrons in space.
When radiation interacts gravitationally with stars
or other matter in space, it is known to be deflected,
and Zwicky’s suggestion is that it is reddened as well.

To test this suggestion, ten Bruggencate has ex-
amined the light from a number of globular clusters,


MATTER AND RADIATION 67


all at about equal distances from us, but so selected
that the amount of intervening gravitational matter
varied greatly. The light from these shewed a red-
dening, and if this were caused by the expansion of
space, it ought to have been the same for all the
clusters. Actually it proved to be far from uniform;
it was much more nearly proportional to the
amount of intervening matter, exactly as required
by Zwicky’s theory, and its actual amount agreed
well enough with that predicted by the theoretical
formula. As we can hardly imagine that the globular
clusters, which belong to our own galactic system
of stars, can be systematically running away from
us, the case for supposing that the spiral nebulae
are running away becomes very much weaker,
Zwicky’s theory providing a possible explanation
of the observed reddening of the light.

Other lines of evidence also suggest that the
suspected recessions of the nebulae may be spurious.
For instance the light from the nearest nebulae is not
redder but bluer than normal, and as light can only
be made bluer by an actual physical approach, this
can only mean that the nearest nebulae are actually
coming towards us. Moreover, the apparent speeds
of the nebulae are byno means strictly proportional
to their distances; for instance, nebulae believed to
be at the same distance of seven million light years
shew deviations averaging 240 miles a second out of
total speeds of 640 miles a second.

Nevertheless, if the universe is built in the way
we have described, the nebulae as a whole must


5-2


68 MATTER AND RADIATION


undoubtedly be running away from us; theoretical
considerations demand this and cannot be satisfied
with anything less, but they do not tell us the speeds
of the nebular motions. The work of Zwicky and
ten Bruggencate in no way throws doubt on there
being a real motion of recession; what it lays open
to doubt is whether this motion is the same as
astronomers have deduced from the reddening of the
spectral lines. Possibly most of this reddening may
be attributed to the effect suggested by Zwicky, or
to some similar cause, while only a small residual
represents a real motion of recession. It is impossible
to determine the speed of this motion because the
smaller effect is entirely masked by the greater.
The question is still an open one, but if once it
is accepted that the greater part of the apparent
velocities of recession may be treated as spurious,
the argument in favour of short lives for the stars
disappears, and we become free to assign to them the
long lives of millions of millions of years which the
general evidence of astronomy seems to demand.
As we have already seen, this general evidence
suggests that the sun has been pouring away mass
in the form of radiation at a rate of 250 million tons
a minute for a period of some millions of millions of
years. Detailed calculation shews that the new born
sun must have had many times the mass of the present
sun, in conformity with the general fact of observation
that young stars are many times more massive than
old stars. In what form could it store all the mass
which has since disappeared in the form of radiation?


MATTER AND RADIATION 69


The rest-mass of an electron or other charged
particle is generally enormously greater than its
energy-mass, the latter assuming its greatest im-
portance at high temperatures. Now the tempera-
ture at the centre of the sun is about 50,000,000
degrees, and even here the rest-mass accounts for
all but about one part in 200,000 of the total mass.
It is improbable that the new born sun can have
been much hotter than this, so that it seems likely
that the greater part of the mass of the primaeval sun
also must have resided in its rest-mass. If so there
is only one conclusion possible: the primaeval sun
must have contained many more electrons and
protons, and therefore many more atoms, than now.
These atoms can only have disappeared in one way:
they must have been annihilated, and their mass
must be represented by the mass of the radiation
which the sun has emitted in its long life of millions
of millions of years.

This argument may be thought somewhat pre-
carious, because it deals with concepts so far out of
the range of laboratory physics. Fortunately labora-
tory physics has quite recently obtained evidence,
which, although far from being absolutely conclusive,
provides valuable confirmation that this annihilation
of matter is actually taking place on a vast scale out
in the depths of space.

We could hardly expect to obtain direct evidence
of the annihilation of matter going on in stellar
interiors, because the radiation produced in the
process could only travel a very short distance


/


70 MATTER AND RADIATION


before being absorbed by the substance of the star.
This would be heated up, and the corresponding
energy would ultimately be emitted by the star in
the form of quite ordinary light and heat.

A mathematical analysis of the facts of astronomy
suggests that the process of atomic annihilation would
probably be spontaneous in the same way in which
radio-active disintegration is spontaneous. If so, it
would not be limited to the hot interiors of stars, but
ought to be in progress wherever astronomical matter
exists in sufficient abundance.

In its simplest form the process would consist of
the simultaneous annihilation of a single electron
and a single proton. We can picture it vividly if we
think of these two charged particles rushing together
under their mutual attraction with ever-increasing
speed, until finally they coalesce; their electric
charges then neutralise one another, and their com-
bined energy is set free in a single flash of radiation
—a “photon” of the kind discussed on p. 36.

In accordance with the general principle of con-
servation of mass, the mass of the proton and electron
would be conserved in the mass of the resulting
photon. Now the combined mass of a proton and
electron is known with great accuracy, for it is
exactly equal to the mass of the hydrogen atom.
Thus if the annihilation of matter really occurs,
photons of mass exactly equal to that of the
hydrogen atom ought to be traversing space in great
numbers, and some of these ought to fall on the
earth. They ought to be immediately recognisable,


MATTER AND RADIATION 71


because their energy would be of terrific amount.
We have already seen how the greater the energy of
a photon, the shorter is its wave-length, so that these
photons ought to be of extremely short wave-length.

In music, a sound which has half the wave-length
of another is said to be an octave higher in pitch, and
the same concept may conveniently be applied to
radiation; we find for instance that light at the
extreme violet end of the visible spectrum is just
about an octave higher than light at the extreme red
end. Calculation shews that photons of the same mass
as the hydrogen atom would have a pitch 28 octaves
higher than violet light, or 29 octaves higher than
red light.

Now high pitch in radiation is accompanied by
the power of penetrating far into and through solid
matter; it is as though the waves wriggled so rapidly
that the atoms could get no grip on them to stop
them. For instance, we know that ultra-violet
radiation will penetrate further into the human skin
than ordinary sunlight; this is because it is of shorter
wave-length and so of higher pitch. X-rays with a
pitch a full 9 octaves above that of ordinary sun-
light have a still greater penetrating power. And we
can calculate what would be the penetrating power
of the terrifically energetic radiation whose photons
each had the same mass as a hydrogen atom, and
whose pitch was consequently 284 octaves above that
of average sunlight. We find that it ought to pass
through several yards of lead before being reduced to
half its original amount.


72 MATTER AND RADIATION


We have already spoken of the highly-penetrating
radiation, commonly called ‘‘cosmie radiation,”
which falls on the earth from outer space, and is able
to penetrate several yards of lead. It is not alto-
gether certain whether this is a true radiation or
merely streams of electrons, but the former alterna-
tiveseems by far the more probable because electrons
would have to move with almost unthinkably high
energy to force their way through many yards of
lead before being brought to rest.

Professor Millikan and his colleagues have studied
the penetrating power of this radiation in great
detail. It proves to be a mixture of several types
of radiation of different penetrating powers, and so
of different pitches, the various kinds being fairly
clearly separated. And it is highly significant that
one conspicuous ingredient of the mixture hasa pitch
of about 284 octaves above average sunlight, which is
exactly that to be expected in radiation resulting
from the annihilation of a proton and an electron.
Indeed the two pitches agree to within one-thirtieth
part of an octave. This is almost too good an agree-
ment to be dismissed as a mere coincidence, so that
it seems highly probable that this radiation has its
origin in the actual annihilation of protons and
electrons.

The amount of this radiation which falls on the
earth is tremendous. Millikan and Cameron have
estimated it at about a tenth of the total radiation
received from all the stars in the sky, the sun of
course excepted. Out in the depths of space, beyond


MATTER AND RADIATION 73


the Milky Way, the highly-penetrating radiation
must still be about as plentiful as it is at the earth’s
surface, but starlight is far less plentiful, so that, on
taking an average through space as a whole, this
highly-penetrating radiation is probably the com-
monest kind of radiation. If we are right as to its
origin and nature, its total amount requires us to
suppose that the transformation of matter into
radiation is proceeding vigorously throughout the
universe. Not only so, but it is extremely difficult
to imagine any other origin for the radiation which
would be consistent with its reaching the earth in
such profusion.

If we accept the astronomical evidence of the ages
of the stars and the physical evidence of the highly-
penetrating radiation as jointly establishing that
matter is really being annihilated, or rather trans-
formed into radiation, then this transformation
becomes one of the fundamental processes of the
universe. The conservation of matter disappears
entirely from science, while the conservation of mass
and of energy become identical. Thus the three
major conservation laws, those of the conservation of
matter, mass and energy, reduce to one. One simple
fundamental entity which may take many forms,
matter and radiation in particular, is conserved
through allchanges; the sum total of this entity forms
the whole activity of the universe, which does not
change its total quantity. But it continually changes
its quality, and this change of quality appears to be the
main operation going on in the universe which forms


74, MATTER AND RADIATION


our material home. The whole of the available
evidence seems to me to indicate that the change
is, with possible insignificant exceptions, for ever in
the same direction—for ever solid matter melts into
insubstantial radiation: for ever the tangible changes
into the intangible.

Some scientists, although not, I think, very many,
would dissent from this last view. They do not
dispute that the stars are melting away into radiation,
nor that this is the origin of the light and heat
which is poured out in such profusion, but they
maintain that, somewhere out in the remote depths
of space, the radiation set free by this process
may be reconsolidating itself again into matter.
A new heaven and a new earth may, they suggest, be
in process of being built, not out of the ashes of the
old, but out of the radiation set free by the com-
bustion of the old. In this way they advocate what
may be described as a cyclic universe; while it dies
in one place the products of its death are busy
producing new life in others.

We shall discuss this question more fully below
(p. 144). For the present it may suffice to remark
that this concept of a cyclic universe is entirely at
variance with the well-established principle of the
second law of thermodynamics, which teaches that
cyclic universes are impossible in the same way, and
for much the same reason, as perpetual motion
machines are impossible. That this law may fail
under astronomical conditions of which we have no
knowledge is certainly conceivable, although I ima-


MATTER AND RADIATION 75


gine the majority of serious scientists consider it very
improbable. There is of course no denying that the
concept of a cyclic universe is far the more popular
of the two. Most men find the final dissolution of
the universe as distasteful a thought as the disso-
lution of their own personality, and man’s strivings
after personal immortality have their macroscopic
counterpart in these more sophisticated strivings
after an imperishable universe.

Professor Millikan in particular considers that the
cosmic radiation may originate in the process of
building up heavy atoms out of simpler light atoms,
and so interprets it as evidence that “‘the creator is
still on the job.” To take the simplest illustration,
a helium atom contains exactly the same ingredients
as four hydrogen atoms—namely four electrons and
four protons—but its weight is only equal to that
of 3-97 hydrogen atoms. Thus if four hydrogen
atoms could somehow be hammered together to form
a helium atom, the superfluous weight, that of
0:03 hydrogen atoms, would take the form of radia-
tion, and a photon with three per cent. of the
weight of the hydrogen atom might be discharged.
We cannot say it would be discharged, because if
ever four hydrogen atoms fall together to form a
helium atom, it seems likely that the process would
occur in several stages and so would result in the
emission of a number of small photons rather than
of one big one. Yet even if the whole of the liberated
energy were to form one big photon, this would
have less penetrating power than the actual cosmic


/


76 MATTER AND RADIATION


radiation. But if we imagine 129 atoms of hydrogen
to fall together to form an atom of xenon, and if we
imagine one solitary big photon to be emitted in the
process, this photon would have just about the same
penetrating power as the most penetrating part of
the cosmic radiation, while the similar production of
atoms less complex than xenon might conceivably
produce the less penetrating constituents of the
radiation. The scheme proposed by Millikan is en-
tirely logical and self-consistent, but the probabilities
seem to me enormously against it.

These concepts have been discussed at some length
because they obviously have a very special bearing
on the fundamental structure of the universe. In
the last chapter we saw how the wave-mechanics
reduced the whole universe to systems of waves.
Electrons and protons consisted of waves of one kind;
radiation of waves of a different kind. The discussion
of the present chapter has suggested that matter and
radiation may not constitute two distinct and non-
interchangeable forms of waves. The two may be
interchangeable, one passing into the other as the
chrysalis passes into the butterfly—to which some
scientists would think it necessary to add “and as
we can imagine the butterfly to pass back into the
chrysalis.”’

This does not of course mean that matter and
radiation are the same thing. The transformation of
matter into radiation still means something, al-
though the concept now looks incomparably less
revolutionary than it looked when first I advanced


MATTER AND RADIATION Meds


it twenty-six years ago. Even if we knew all the facts
with certainty, which we do not, it would be difficult
to express the situation accurately in non-technical
language, but possibly we may come fairly near to the
truthif we think of matter and radiation as two kinds
of waves—a kind which goes round and round in
circles, and a kind which travels in straight lines.
The latter waves of course travel with the velocity
of light, but those which constitute matter travel
more slowly. It has even been suggested, by Mos-
harrafa and others, that this may express the whole
difference between matter and radiation, matter
being nothing but a sort of congealed radiation
travelling at less than its normal speed. We have
already seen (p. 42) how the wave-length of a moving
particle depends on its speed. The dependence is such
that a particle travelling with the speed of light
would have precisely the same wave-length as a
photon of equal mass. This remarkable fact, as well
as others, goes a long way towards suggesting that
radiation may ultimately prove to be merely matter
moving with the speed of light, and matter to be
radiation moving with a speed less than that of
light. But science is a long way from this as yet.
To sum up the main results of this and the pre-
ceding chapter, the tendency of modern physics is
to resolve the whole material universe into waves,
and nothing but waves. These waves are of two
kinds: bottled-up waves, which we call matter, and
unbottled waves, which we call radiation or light.
If annihilation of matter occurs, the process is


78 MATTER AND RADIATION


merely that of unbottling imprisoned wave-energy
and setting it free to travel through space. These
concepts reduce the whole universe to a world of
light, potential or existent, so that the whole story
of its creation can be told with perfect accuracy and
completeness in the six words: “‘God said, ‘Let
there be light.’”


Chapter IV
RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


‘We have seen how modern physics reduces the
universe to systems of waves. If we find it hard to
imagine waves unless they travel through something
concrete, let us say waves in an ether or ethers.
I believe it was the late Lord Salisbury who defined
the ether as the nominative of the verb “to undulate.”’
If this definition will serve for the moment, we can
have our ether without committing ourselves very far
as to its nature. And this makes it possible to sum
up the tendency of modern physics very concisely:
modern physics is pushing the whole universe into one
or more ethers. It will be well, then, to scrutinise the
physical properties of these ethers with some care,
since in them the true nature of the universe must be
hidden.

It may be well to state our conclusion in advance.
It is, in brief, that the ethers and their undula-
tions, the waves which form the universe, are in all
probability fictitious. This is not to say that they
have no existence at all: they exist in our minds, or
we should not be discussing them; and something
must exist outside our minds to put this or any other
concept into our minds. To this something we may
temporarily assign the name “reality,” and it is this
reality which it is the object of science to study. But


80 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


we shall find that this reality is something very
different from what the scientist of fifty years ago
meant by ether, undulations and waves, so much so
that, judged by his standards and speaking his
language for a moment, the ethers and their waves are
not realities at all. And yet they are the most real
things of which we have any knowledge or experience,
and so are as real as anything possibly can be for us.

The concept of an ether entered science some two
centuries ago or more. When the known properties
of gross matter failed to explain a phenomenon,
scientists met the difficulty by creating ahypothetical
all-pervading ether, to which they attributed exactly
the properties necessary to provide an explanation.
There was of course a special temptation to resort to
this procedure in problems which appeared to call
for ‘‘action-at-a-distance.”’ It is, on the face of it,
such good sound sense to assert that matter can only
act where it is, and cannot possibly act where it is
not, that he who argues to the contrary can hardly
hope to carry the majority of his fellows with him.
Descartes had gone so far as to argue that the bare
existence of bodies separated by distance was a
sufficient proof of the existence of a medium between
them.

Thus when no gross material was present to trans-
mit a mechanical action, such as that exerted by a
magnet on a steel-bar, or by the earth on a falling
apple, the temptation to invoke an all-pervading
ether became well-nigh irresistible, and what may be
called the ether-habit invaded science. So that, as


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 81


Maxwell expressed it: ‘‘ Ethers were invented for the
planets to swim in, to constitute electric atmospheres
and magnetic effluvia, to convey sensations from one
part of our body to another, till all space was filled
several times over with ether.” In the end there
were almost as many ethers as unsolved problems in
physics.

Fifty years ago only one of these ethers survived
in serious scientific thought—the luminiferous ether,
which was supposed to transmit radiation. The
properties it needed to fulfil this function had been
defined with ever-increasing precision by Huyghens,
Thomas Young, Faraday and Maxwell. It was
thought of as a jelly-like sea through which waves
could travel, just as vibrations or undulations travel
through a jelly. These waves were radiation which,
as we now know, can take any one of the many
forms of light, heat, infra-red or ultra-violet radia-
tion, electromagnetic waves, X-rays, y-rays, and
cosmic radiation.

The astronomical phenomenon of the “aberration
of light,”’ as well as a number of others, shew that, if
such an ether exists, the earth and all other moving
bodies must pass through it without disturbing it.
Or, if we take our position on the earth and study
the phenomena from that standpoint, the ether must
pass through the interstices of the earth and other
solid bodies without hindrance—“‘like the wind
through a grove of trees,”’ to borrow the famous but
inadequate simile of Thomas Young. It is inade-
quate because wind does in actual fact affect trees;


JMU 6


82 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


the motions of their leaves, twigs and branches give
some indication of its strength. But it can be
shewn that motion through the ether cannot in the
least degree disturb solid bodies which are at rest on
the earth, or affect their motions if they are moving;
we need not add ether-resistance to air-resistance in
discussing what prevents our motor-car making
better speed.

Thus, if an ether exists, it is all the same whether
the ether-wind is blowing past us at one mile an
hour or a thousand miles an hour. This is in accord-
ance with a dynamical principle which Newton had
enunciated in his. Principia:


COROLLARY V: The motions of bodies included in a
given space are the same among themselves, whether
that space is at rest, or moves uniformly forwards in a
right line without any circular motion.


Newton continues:


A clear proof of which we have from the experiment
of a ship, where all motions happen after the same
manner whether the ship is at rest, or is carried uni-
formly forward in a right line.


This general principle shews that no experiment
performed on board ship and confined to the ship
alone can ever reveal the ship’s velocity through a
still sea. Indeed it is a matter of common observa-
tion that in calm weather we cannot even tellin which
direction a ship is moving without looking at the sea.

If the ether-wind had affected terrestrial bodies,
the disturbance it created would have given an indi-


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 83


cation of the speed with which it was blowing, just
as the motions of the twigs of trees give an indica-
tion of ordinary wind-velocity. As things are, it is
necessary to resort to other methods.

Although an ocean traveller cannot determine the
speed of his ship by any observation which is con-
fined to the ship, he can easily do so if he is free to
observe the sea as well. If he drops a line and
sounding-lead into the sea, a circular ripple will
spread out; but every sailor knows that the point
at which the line enters the water will not remain at
the centre of this circle. The centre of the circle stays
fixed in the water, but the point of entry of the line
is dragged forward by the motion of the ship, so that
the rate at which the point of entry advances from
the centre of the circle will disclose the speed of the
ship through the sea.

If the earth is ploughing its way through a sea of
ether, an experiment conceived on similar lines
ought to reveal the speed of its progress. The famous
Michelson-Morley experiment was designed to pre-
cisely this end. Our earth was the ship, and the
physical laboratory of the University of Chicago was
the point of entry of the lead into the sea. The
dropping of the lead was represented by the emission
of a light-signal, and it was supposed that the light-
waves which constituted this signal would make
ripples on the sea of ether.

The progress of the ripples could not be followed
directly, but sufficient information could be obtained
by arranging for mirrors to reflect the signal back to

6-2


84 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


the starting-point. This made it possible to determine
in effect the time which the light took to perform the
double journey to-and-fro. Ifthe earth were standing


B


D


Fig. 1. Diagram to illustrate the Michelson-Morley
experiment
Light from a source A is projected onto a half-silvered mirror O,
so that half is reflected along OB and the rest continues along
OC, of length equal to OB, actually about 12 yards. Mirrors at B
and C reflect the light back to O, and half of each beam then
passes into a small telescope D. The amount by which one lags
behind the other is compared with the lag when the whole appar-
atus has been turned through 90°. This procedure eliminates
any error caused by OB and OC being slightly different in length.


still in the ether, the time of a double journey of
given length would of course always be the same,
regardless of its direction in space. But if the earth
were moving through a sea of ether in an easterly
direction, it is easy to see that a double journey,


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 85


first from east to west and then from west to east,
ought to take slightly more time than one of equal
length in north-south and south-north directions.
No more recondite principle is involved than in the
common experience that it takes longer to row a
boat 100 yards up-stream and 100 yards down-stream
than to row 200 yards across the stream; in the
former case we go slowly up-stream, and come
quickly down-stream, but the gain of time in rowing
down with the current is not sufficient to make good
the time previously lost in rowing up against the
current. If two oarsmen of equal speed set out
simultaneously to row the two courses, the cross-
stream rower will arrive first, and the difference
between their times of arrival will disclose the speed
of the current. It was anticipated that, in precisely
the same way, the difference in the times taken by
the two beams of light in the Michelson-Morley
experiment would disclose the speed of the earth’s
motion through the ether.

The experiment was performed many times, but
no time-difference at all could be detected. Thus on
the hypothesis that our earth was surrounded by a
sea of ether, the experiments seemed to shew that its
speed of motion through this sea of ether was nil. To
all appearances, the earth stood permanently at rest
in the ether, while the sun and the whole of creation
circled round it; the experiments seemed to bring
back the geocentric universe of pre-Copernican days.
Yet it was impossible that this should be their true
interpretation, for the earth was known to be moving


86 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


round the sun at a speed of nearly twenty miles a
second, and the experiments were sensitive enough
to detect a speed of one-hundredth part of this.
Fitzgerald in 1893 and Lorentz independently in
1895 suggested an alternative interpretation. The
experimenters had in effect tried to make two rays of
light travel simultaneously to-and-fro over two
courses of equal length. Without losing anything of
the essence of the experiment, we may imagine that
the lengths of the two courses had been measured or
compared by ordinary measuring rods—foot-rules, if
we like. How was it known, Fitzgerald and Lorentz
asked, that these rods, or the course laid out by them,
retained their exact length while they were moving
forward through a sea of ether? When a ship moves _
through the ocean, the pressure of the sea on its bows
causes it to contract its length; it is, so to speak,
squeezed up a little bit—a minute fraction of an inch
—between the sea trying to hold its bows back and
its screw trying to push its stern forward. In the
same way a motor-car moving through the air con-
tracts as it is squeezed between the backward
pressure of the wind on its windscreen, and the
forward drive of its rear wheels. If the apparatus
used by Michelson and Morley contracted in the same
way, the up-and-down stream course would always
be shorter than the cross-stream course. This reduc-
tion of length would do something to compensate
for the other disadvantages of the up-and-down
stream course. A contraction of exactly the right
amount would compensate for them completely, so


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 87


that this and the cross-stream course would require
precisely equal times. In this way, Fitzgerald and
Lorentz suggested, it might be possible to account
for the nul result of the experiment.

The idea was not wholly fanciful or hypothetical,
for Lorentz shewed very shortly afterwards that
the electrodynamical theory then current demanded
that just such a contraction should actually occur.
Although the contraction was not altogether analo-
gous to those of ships or motor-cars, these give a good
enough idea of the mechanism involved. Actually
Lorentz shewed that if matter were a_ purely
electrical structure, consisting solely of electrically
charged particles, motion through the ether would
cause the particles to readjust their positions, and
they would not come to relative rest again until
the body had contracted by a certain calculable
amount. And this amount proved to be precisely
that needed to account for the nul result of the
Michelson-Morley experiment.

This not only explained, fully and completely,
why the Michelson-Morley experiment had failed,
but it further shewed that every material measuring
rod would necessarily contract just sufficiently to
conceal the earth’s motion through the ether, so that
all similar experiments were doomed to failure in
advance. But other types of measuring rods are
known to science; beams of light, electric forces, and
so on, can be made to span the distances from point
to point, and so provide the means for measuring
distances. It was thought that where material


¢ ayes} . ros §


88 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


measuring rods had failed, optical and electrical
measuring rods might succeed. The trial was made,
repeatedly and in many forms—the names of the late
Lord Rayleigh, of Brace and of Trouton are eminent
in this connection. And every time it failed. If the
earth had a speed @ through the ether, every
apparatus that the wit of man could devise confused
the measurement of w by adding a spurious speed
exactly equal to — 2, and so reiterating the apparent
zero answer of the original Michelson-Morley ex-
periment.

The upshot of many years’ arduous experimenting
was that the forces of nature seemed without
exception to be parties to a perfectly organised
conspiracy to conceal the earth’s motion through the
ether. This of course is the language of the layman,
not of the man of science. The latter prefers to say
that the laws of nature make it impossible to detect
the earth’s motion through the ether. The philo-
sophical contents of the two statements are precisely
identical. In the same way the unscientific inventor
may exclaim in despair that the forces of nature are
in a conspiracy to prevent his perpetual motion
machine from working, while the scientist knows
that the obstacle is a far more serious barrier than
a conspiracy; it is a natural law. And so, again, the
zealous but unenlightened social reformer and the
ignorant politician are alike apt to see conspiracies
of the deepest dye behind the operation of those
economic laws which make it impossible to extract
a quart out of a pint pot.


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 89


In 1905 Einstein propounded the supposed new
law of nature in the form—“‘nature is such that it is
impossible to determine absolute motion by any
experiment whatever.” It was the first formulation
of the principle of relativity.

Oddly enough, it was a reversion to the thought
and doctrine of Newton. In his Principia, Newton
had written:


It is possible that in the remote regions of the fixed
stars or perhaps far beyond them, there may be some
body absolutely at rest, but impossible to know, from
the positions of bodies to one another in our regions,
whether any of these do not keep the same position to
that remote body. It follows that absolute rest cannot
be determined from the position of bodies in our regions.


He had qualified this by adding:


I have no regard in this place to a medium, if any such
there is, that freely pervades the interstices between the
parts of bodies.


In other words, Newton had realised that without
an all-pervading ether, it would be impossible to
determine the absolute speed of motion through
space, and had also seen that such a medium would
provide an unmoving standard by reference to which
the motions of all bodies could be measured.

The two intervening centuries had seen science
busily engaged in discussing the properties of this
supposed medium, and now Einstein at one blow
deprived it of its most important property of all,
that of providing a standard of rest, by reference


90 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


to which the true speed of any motion could be
measured.

Einstein’s principle can be stated in another way,
which makes its significance stand out more clearly.
Astronomy has so far failed to discover Newton’s
body absolutely at rest, “‘in the remote regions of the
fixed stars, or perhaps far beyond them,” so that rest
and motion are still merely relative terms. A ship
which is becalmed is at rest only in a relative sense—
relative to the earth; but the earth is in motion
relative to the sun, and the ship with it. If the earth
were stayed in its course round the sun, the ship
would become at rest relative to the sun, but both
would still be moving through the surrounding stars.
Check the sun’s motion through the stars and there
still remains the motion of the whole galactic system
of stars relative to the remote nebulae. And these
remote nebulae move towards or away from one
another with speeds of hundreds of miles a second or
more; by going further into space we not only find
no standard of absolute rest, but encounter greater
and greater speeds of motion. Unless we have an
all-pervading ether to guide us, we cannot even say
what we mean by absolute rest, still less can we find
it. Einstein’s principle now tells us that, so far as all
the observable phenomena of nature are concerned,
we are free to define “absolute rest” in any way we
please.

It is a sensational message. We have a perfect
right to say, if we so choose, that this room is at rest,
and Nature will not say us nay. If the earth has a


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 91


speed of 1000 miles a second through the ether, then
we must suppose that the ether is blowing through
this room “like the wind through a grove of trees,”
at 1000 miles a second. And the principle of rela-
tivity assures us that all the phenomena of nature in
this room are absolutely unaffected by this 1000
miles-a-second wind, and would indeed be just the
same if the wind blew at 100,000 miles a second—or
indeed if there were no wind at all.

It is not surprising or even novel that all mechani-
cal phenomena, which have nothing to do with the
supposed ether, should be the same; we have seen
how this was known to Newton. But if an ether
really exists, it seems amazing that the phenomena
of optics and of electricity should be the same
whether the ether which propagates them is standing
still or blowing past and through us at thousands
of miles a second. It quite inevitably raises the
questions as to whether the ether, whose blowing is
supposed to cause the wind, has any existence, or is a
mere fiction of our imagination. For we must always
remember that the existence of the ether is only an
hypothesis, introduced into science by physicists
who, taking it for granted that everything must
admit of a mechanical explanation, argued that
there must be a mechanical medium to transmit
waves of light, and all other electrical and magnetic
phenomena.

To justify their belief, they had to shew that a
system of pushes, pulls and twists could be devised
in the ether to transmit all the phenomena of nature


92 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


through space and deliver them up at the far end
exactly as they are observed—much as a system of
bell-wires transmits mechanical force from a bell-pull
to a bell. The requisite system of pushes, pulls and
twists was found in time, but proved to be exceedingly
complicated. Perhaps this was not surprising; the
ether had not only to transmit the observed effects,
but to conceal its own existence while so doing. It
could hardly be a simple matter to arrange that one
single mechanism should transmit precisely the same
phenomena whether the experimenter sat at rest or
dashed through the ether at 1000 miles a second
while conducting his experiments. And, in point of
fact, the mechanism thus devised proved to be open
to the fatal objection that it could only make the
two sets of phenomena the same by postulating two
distinct mechanisms in these two cases.

We can illustrate the objection by discussing a
simple phenomenon in detail. According to this
scheme of ethereal transmission, charging a body with
electricity sets up a state of strain in the surrounding
ether, just like forcing a foreign body into a sea
of jelly. When two bodies both at rest in the ether
are charged with similar electricity, they repel one
another, and their repulsion is supposed to be trans-
mitted through the pressures which this state of
strain establishes in the ether.

Suppose, however, that the two charged bodies,
instead of being at rest in the ether, are moving
through it with precisely the same speed of say 1000
miles a second from east to west. As the bodies are


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 93


still at rest relatively to one another, the principle of
relativity shews that the observable phenomena will
still be precisely the same as when they were both
at absolute rest in the ether. But a quite different
mechanism produces the phenomena in this second
case. Part of the repulsion is still the result of a
strained state of the ether, but not all. The remainder
is due to magnetic forces, and these cannot be ex-
plained as pressures or tensions in the ether, but
have to be attributed to a complicated system of
cyclones or whirlwinds.

More complicated electromagnetic phenomena are
in general produced by a combination of electric and
magnetic forces, and the two kinds of mechanism
enter in different proportions with different speeds
of motion through the ether. Thus the attempt to
find a mechanical explanation of these phenomena
involves the need for two distinct mechanisms to
produce identically the same phenomenon. It has
yet to be shewn that any conceivable ether can
accommodate both these mechanisms. But even if
this could be proved, sucha duality in the mechanism
required to produce a single observable phenomenon
is so contrary to the usual workings of nature that
we cannot but feel that we are on the wrong track.
Newton’s theory of gravitation would have had little
chance of acceptance if it had postulated a dual
mechanism to explain why an apple fell from a tree,
adding that one operated in summer and the other
in autumn.

Newton himself laid stress on the necessity for


94 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


avoiding duplicate mechanisms of this kind. His
Principia contains a set of “‘ Rules of reasoning in
Philosophy,” of which the first two read as follows:


RULE I
We are to admit no more causes of natural things than
such as are both true and sufficient to explain their
appearances.

To this purpose the philosophers say that Nature does
nothing in vain, and more is in vain when less will serve;
for Nature is pleased with simplicity, and affects not the
pomp of superfluous causes.


RULE II


Therefore to the same natural effects we must, as far as
possible, assign the same causes.

As to respiration in a man and in a beast; the descent
of stones in Europe and America; the light of our
culinary fire and of the sun; the reflection of light in the
earth, and in the planets.


There is, however, a stronger case than this against
supposing the luminiferous ether to transmit radia-
tion and electrical action.

We have seen how electricity, magnetism, and
light all seem to be in a conspiracy to prevent our
detecting motion through the ether, but gravitation
remains; this has always stood apart from the other
phenomena of physics, and has seemed to be of an
entirely different nature. Now the law of gravitation
involves the idea of distance; it asserts that the
gravitational forces between two bodies depend on
their distance apart, and so are equal at equal dis-


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 95


tances. Thus, in theory at least, the law of gravita-
tion provides a measuring rod for the measurement
of distances.

An ether which transmits electrical action can
hardly transmit gravitational action as well, since all
the properties with which we can endow it are used
up in accounting for its transmission of electric and
magnetic forces. The measuring-rod which the law
of gravitation provides may therefore be expected to
be immune from the Fitzgerald-Lorentz contraction,
and with such a measuring-rod at our disposal we
ought to be able to measure the earth’s velocity
through space.

Let us examine the possibility in terms of the
simplest possible concrete case. Let us idealise our
earth, and think of it as a perfect globe. As every
point on its surface is now at the same distance
from its centre, the force of gravity will be the
same at all. If this idealised earth is now set in
motion through the ether with a speed of a thousand
miles a second, the ordinary Fitzgerald-Lorentz con-
traction would cause its diameter to shrink by about
80 feet in the direction of motion, and as the points
at the end of this contracted diameter are now nearer
to the earth’s centre than other points on the earth’s
surface, all movable objects on the earth’s sur-
face would tend to slide downhill to these two
points.

Even if it existed, this particular effect would be
too small to be observed on our actual earth, because
the irregularities of mountains and valleys, which we


96 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


have idealised out of existence, far outweigh a
possible 30-foot contraction. Yet other gravitational
phenomena of a similar kind are large enough to
admit of observation, in particular the motions
of the perihelia of the planets. And these shew that
gravitation is, so to speak, in league with the other
forces of nature to conceal motion through the ether;
if material measuring-rods experience the Fitzgerald-
Lorentz contraction, then the measures of length
provided by the law of gravitation do the same. Yet
as gravitation cannot be transmitted through the
ether, it is hard to see how the measuring-rods of the
law of gravitation can be subject to this contraction.
We can only conclude that the Fitzgerald-Lorentz
contraction does not occur at all, and this compels
us to abandon the mechanical ether.

We are compelled to start afresh. Our difficulties
have all arisen from our initial assumption that
everything in nature, and waves of light in particular,
admitted of mechanical explanation: we tried in
brief to treat the universe as a huge machine. As
this has led us into a wrong path, we must look for
some other guiding principle.

A safer guide than the will-of-the-wisp of me-
chanical explanations is provided by William of
Occam’s principle: “Entia non sunt multiplicanda
praeter necessitatem.”’ (We must not assume the
existence of any entity until we are compelled to do
so.) Its philosophical content is identical with that
of Newton’s first “‘ Rule of Philosophical Reasoning”
quoted above. It is purely destructive; it takes


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 97


something away, in the present instance the assump-
tion of a mechanical universe with an underlying
ether transmitting mechanical action through “empty
space,” and provides nothing to put in its place.

The obvious way of filling the gap is to introduce
the relativity principle: “nature is such that it is
impossible to determine absolute motion by any
experiment whatever.” At first sight this may seem
strange matter with which to fill the void caused by
the withdrawal of the ether: the two hypotheses are
of such different natures that it may seem incredible
that the second should be able to fill the same hole as
the first. Yet in actual fact one is almost exactly the
antithesis of the other: the primary function of the
ether was to provide a fixed frame of reference—all
its other properties were ancillaries necessitated by
our efforts to reconcile the observed scheme of nature
with our preliminary assumption. In its essence, the
theory of relativity merely implies the negation of
this preliminary assumption, so that the two are
exactly antithetical.

Just because this is so, the issue between them is
clear cut, and the experiment is capable of deciding
it. The verdict is quite unambiguous; we have seen
how all experimental efforts to detect an ether have
failed, andinso doing have added confirmation to the
hypothesis of relativity. Every single experiment
ever performed has, so far as we know, decided in
favour of the relativity hypothesis.

In this way the hypothesis of a mechanical ether
was dethroned, and the principle of relativity set to


JMU 7


98 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


reign in its stead. The signal for the revolution was
a short paper which Einstein published in June 1905.
And with its publication, the study of the inner
workings of nature passed from the engineer-scientist
to the mathematician.

Until this time, we had thought of space as some-
thing around us, and of time as something that
flowed past us, or even through us. The two seemed
to be in every way fundamentally different. We can
retrace our steps in space, but never in time; we can
move quickly, or slowly, or not at all, in space as we
choose, but no one can regulate the rate of flow of
time—it rolls on at the same even uncontrollable
rate for all of us. Yet Ejinstein’s first results, as
interpreted by Minkowsky four years later, involved
the amazing conclusion that nature knew nothing of
all this.

We have already seen how matter is electrical in
structure, so that all physical phenomena are ulti-
mately electrical. Minkowsky shewed that the theory
of relativity required all electrical phenomena to be
thought of as occurring, not in space and time
separately, as had hitherto been thought, but in
space and time welded together so thoroughly that
it was impossible to detect any traces of a join, so
thoroughly that the whole of the phenomena of
nature were unable to divide the product into space
and time separately.

When we weld together length and breadth, we
get an area—let us say a cricket field. The different
players divide it up into its two dimensions in


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 99


different ways; the direction which is “‘forwards” for
the bowler is “backwards” for the batsman and is
right-to-left for the umpire. But the cricket-ball
knows nothing of these distinctions: it goes where
it is hit, directed only by laws of nature which treat
the area of the cricket field as an indivisible whole,
length and breadth being welded into a single un-
differentiated unit.

If we further weld together an area (such as a
cricket field) of two dimensions, and height (of one
dimension) we obtain a space of three dimensions.
So long as we do this near the earth, we can always
call on gravity to separate our space out into“ height”
and “‘area”’; for instance the direction of height is
that direction in which it is hardest to throw a cricket
ball a given distance. But out in space, nature pro-
vides no means of effecting this separation; her laws
know nothing of our purely local concepts of hori-
zontal and vertical, and treat space as consisting of
three dimensions between which no differentiation is
possible.

By a process of welding we have passed in imagina-
tion from one dimension to two, and again from two
to three. It is harder to pass from three to four
because we have no direct experience of a four-
dimensional space. And the four-dimensional space
which we particularly want to discuss is peculiarly
difficult to imagine because one of its dimensions
does not consist of ordinary space at all, but of time;
to understand the theory of relativity, we are
called on to imagine a four-dimensional space in


7-2


100 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


which three dimensions of ordinary space are welded
on to one dimension of time.

Let us confront our difficulties singly, by first
imagining a two-dimensional space obtained by


2.80


20


10


Time —


12.0

11.0

a 700 200 996

London Exeter Plymouth
Space —>


Fig. 2. Diagram to illustrate the motion of a train
in space and time


welding together one dimension of ordinary space,
namely length, and one dimension of time. Fig. 2
may help us to understand the concept. It repre-
sents, in diagrammatic form, the running schedule of


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 101


the Cornish Riviera Express, which leaves Padding-
ton at 10.30 a.m. and reaches Plymouth, 226 miles
distant, at 2.80 p.m. The horizontal line repre-
sents the 226 miles of track connecting the two
stations, and the vertical line represents the in-
terval of time from 10.30 a.m. to 2.80 p.m. on any
day on which the train is running.

The thick line represents the progress of the train.
For instance the point P on this line is opposite the
time 12.0 noon, and above the distance 914 miles from
Paddington, indicating that the train has travelled
914 miles bynoon. On the other hand a point suchas
Q represents a spot somewhere near Exeter at noon;
it does not lie on the thick line, because the train does
not reach Exeter by noon. The whole area of the
diagram represents all possible spots on the line
between Paddington and Plymouth at all times
between 10.30 and 2.30. Thus by welding together a
length, namely 226 miles of track, and a time, namely
four hours around mid-day, we have obtained an
area having one dimension of space and one of time.

In the same way we can imagine the three dimen-
sions of space and one dimension of time welded
together, forming a four-dimensional volume which
we shall describe as a “‘continuum.”’ Then the prin-
ciple of relativity, as interpreted by Minkowsky,
states that all the phenomena of electromagnetism
may be thought of as occurring ina continuum of four
dimensions—three dimensions of space and one of
time—in which it is impossible to separate the space
from the time in any absolute manner. In other words


102 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


the continuum is one in which space and time are
so completely welded together, so perfectly merged
into one, that the laws of nature make no distinction
between them, just as, on the cricket field, length and
breadth are so perfectly merged into one that the
flying cricket-ball makes no distinction between
them, treating the field merely as an area in which
length and breadth separately have lost all meaning.

It may be objected that Fig. 2 gives no help
towards imagining this continuum; that it is merely
diagrammatic; that it does not really represent the
welding together of true time and length, but merely
of one length with another length, which as every-
one knows gives an area—in this case the page of
the book. We need not linger over this objection
because our final conclusion will be that the four-
dimensional continuum is, in much the same sense,
also purely diagrammatic. It merely provides acon-
venient framework in which to exhibit the workings
of nature, just as Fig. 2 provides a convenient
framework in which to exhibit the running of a train.

Yet, just because we can exhibit all nature within
this framework, it must correspond to some sort of
an objective reality. But its division into space and
time is not objective; it is merely subjective. If you
and I happen to be moving with different speeds,
space and time mean something different to you
from what they mean to me; we divide the con-
tinuum into space and time in different ways, just
as, if we happen to be facing in different directions,
“in front” and “‘to the left”? have different mean-


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 103


ings for the two of us, or just as the bowler and
batsman divide up a cricket field in different ways
of which the cricket-ball knows nothing. Even if
I change my own speed of motion, by putting on the
brakes of my car, or jumping on to a moving bus, lam
rearranging the division of the continuum into space
and time for myself. And the essence of the theory
of relativity is that nature knows nothing of these
divisions of the continuum into space and time; in
Minkowsky’s words: “‘space and time separately have
vanished into the merest shadows, and only a sort
of combination of the two preserves any reality.”

This shews in a flash why the old luminiferous
ether had inevitably to fade out of the picture—it
claimed to fill “‘all space,”’ and so to divide up the
continuum objectively into time and space. And
the laws of nature, not recognising such divisions as
a possibility, cannot recognise the existence of the
ether as a possibility.

Thus if we want to visualise the propagation of
light-waves and electromagnetic forces by think-
ing of them as disturbances in an ether, our ether
must be something very different from the mechan-
ical ether of Maxwell and Faraday. It may be
thought of as a four-dimensional structure, filling
up the whole continuum, and so extending through
all space and all time, in which case we can all enjoy
the same ether. Or, if we want a three-dimensional
ether, it must be subjective in a way in which the
Maxwell-Faraday ether was not. Each of us must
then carry his own ether about with him, much as


104 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


in a shower of rain each observer carries his own
rainbow about with him. If I change my speed of
motion I create a new ether for myself, just as, if
I step a few paces in a sunny shower, I acquire a
new rainbow for myself. And unless the expanding
universe described above (p. 65) is a pure illusion,
everyone’s ether must incessantly expand and stretch.
Whether a structure of this kind ought to be called an
ether, is open to question; it would be hard to find
any property it has in common with the old nine-
teenth century ether. Indeed as the hypothesis of
relativity is the exact negation of the existence of
the old ether, it is clear that any ether that rela-
tivity can allow to remain in being must be the exact
opposite of the old ether. This being so, it seems a
mistaken effort to call them by the same name.

I do not think there is any real divergence of
opinion among competent scientists on all this. Sir
Arthur Eddington truly says that about half the
leading physicists assert that the ether exists and
the other half deny its existence, but continues:
“both parties mean exactly the same thing, and are
divided only by words.” Sir Oliver Lodge, who has
been the staunchest supporter of the objective exist-
ence of an ether in recent years, writes:


The ether in its various forms of energy dominates
modern physics, though many prefer to avoid the term
“ether” because of its nineteenth century associations,
and use the term “‘space.’’ The term used does not much
matter,


Clearly if it is a matter of indifference whether


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 105


we speak of the ether or of space, of the existence or
non-existence of the ether, then even its most ardent
devotees cannot claim much objective reality for it.
I think the best way of regarding the ether is as a
frame of reference, just as the diagram on p. 100 isa
frame of reference; its existence is just as real, and
just as unreal, as that of the equator, or the north
pole, or the meridian of Greenwich. It is a creation
of thought, not of solid substance. We have seen
how the ether, which is the same for all of us, as
distinguished from your ether or my ether, must be
supposed to pervade all time as well as all space,
and that no valid distinction can be drawn between
its occupancy of time and space. The framework in
time to which we must compare the time-dimension
of the ether is of course ready to hand—it is the
division of the day into hours, minutes and seconds.
And unless we think of this division as material,
which no one ever does or has done, we are not
justified in thinking of the ether as material. In the
new light which the theory of relativity has cast
over science, we see that a material ether filling
space could only be accompanied by a material
ether filling time—the two stand or fall together.
Thus we seem on fairly safe ground in thinking of
the ether as a pure abstraction; it is at best “‘a local
habitation and a name.” Yet a local habitation for
what? The universe consists only of waves, and we
first introduced the ether as the nominative of the
verb “to undulate.” This conception must now be
abandoned, for the utterly unsubstantial ether we


106 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


are now considering is as incapable of undulation
as is the equator or the Greenwich meridian. It
does not of course follow that nothing undulatory
can be propagated through this immaterial medium.
We speak of a heat-wave, or a suicide-wave, and
do not ask for an undulating medium to convey
them. The heat-wave might be propagated round the
equator, and the suicide-wave along the meridian
of Greenwich. Every year the disease of potato-
blight travels across England as a wave from west
to east. The passage of this disease across the meri-
dians of longitude may be compared to the passage
of a wave through the ether. Potato plants are not
the medium of its passage for they are not con-
tinuous; they merely indicate the extent of its
progress, like specks of dust in a ray of sunshine.
It may be thought that, although we can obtain
no direct evidence of the existence of the ether, yet
we can find evidence of something of the nature
of waves passing through it, in all the phenomena
which are generally taken to prove the undulatory
nature of light—Newton’s rings, diffraction patterns,
and interference phenomena in general. This, how-
ever, is not so, for again we have no knowledge of
the supposed waves except where there are particles
of matter to reveal them to us. The phenomena just
mentioned give us no knowledge of things passing
through the ether, but only of things falling on
matter. So far as we know, nothing at all is pro-
pagated that is more concrete than a mathematical
abstraction—it is like astronomical noon being


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 107


propagated over the surface of the earth as the earth
turns round under the sun. Yet I can imagine a
physicist intervening with an objection at this stage;
it would be something like this:

Physicist. The sunshine out of doors represents
energy which was generated in the sun. Eight
minutes ago it was in the sun; now it is here. Con-
sequently it must have come from the sun, and so
must have travelled through the space which inter-
venes between the sun and us. It seems to me, then,
that energy must be propagated through space.

Mathematician. Let us make the question at issue
as precise as possible. Let us fix our attention on
a definite parcel of sunlight, say that which falls
on my book in the space of a second, as I sit reading
out in the bright sunshine. This, you say, was in
the sun eight minutes ago. Four minutes ago it was,
I suppose, out in space, half-way between the sun
and ourselves. Six minutes ago it was three-quarters
of the way towards us?

Physicist. Yes; and that is what I call being propa-
gated through space; energy moves from one bit of
space to another.

Mathematician. Your concept implies that at any
instant the different little bits of space are occupied
by different amounts of energy. If so, it ought of
course to be possible to calculate or measure how
much is in a given bit of space at a given instant. If
you assume that the sun is at rest in an ether, and
that sunlight is energy propagated through this
ether, then, I admit you can get a quite definite


108 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


answer to the problem; Maxwell gave it in 1863.
Also if you assume that the sun, and of course
the whole solar system with it, is moving steadily
through the ether at a known speed, say 1000 miles
a second, you can also get a definite answer to your
problem. But—and this is the crux of the matter—
the two answers are different. Will you _ me which
is the right one?

Physicist. Obviously the first is right if the sun is
at rest in the ether, and the second if the sun has a
steady speed of 1000 miles a second through the
ether.

Mathematician. Yes, but we are in agreement that
“at rest in the ether’? means nothing at all, and
‘a, steady speed of 1000 miles a second through the
ether”? means nothing at all. If we try to attach any
meaning to them, all the phenomena of nature insist
that the same meaning must be attached to both.
Consequently I find your answer meaningless.

In some such way as this we find that the attempt
to parcel out energy amongst the different parts of
space leads to an ambiguity which cannot be re-
solved. It seems natural to suppose that our attempt
is a misguided one, and that the partition of energy
through space is illusory.

And again, the attempt to regard the flow of energy
as a concrete stream always defeats itself. With a
stream of water, we can say that a certain particle
of water is now here, now there; with energy it is not
so. The concept of energy flowing about through
space is useful as a picture, but leads to absurdities


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 109


and contradictions if we treat it as a reality. Pro-
fessor Poynting gave a well-known formula which
tells us how energy may be pictured as flowing in a
certain way, but the picture is far too artificial to
be treated as a reality; for instance if an ordinary
bar-magnet is electrified and left standing at rest,
the formula pictures energy flowing endlessly round
and round the magnet, rather like innumerable rings
of children joining hands and dancing to all eternity
round a maypole. The mathematician brings the
whole problem back to reality by treating this flow
of energy as a mere mathematical abstraction. In-
deed he is almost compelled to go further and treat
energy itself as a mere mathematical abstraction—
the constant of integration in a differential equation.
If he does this, it becomes no more absurd that
there should be two different values for the amounts
of energy in a given region of space than that there
should be two different times at the same place,
such as standard and daylight-saving times in New
York, or civil and sidereal times in an observatory.
If he declines to do this, he is left to defend the un-
tenable position that the universe is built, in a con-
crete way, of energy in its alternative forms of
matter and radiation, and that energy cannot be
localised in space. We shall discuss this situation
further below (p. 140).

Before proceeding to consider other developments
of the theory of relativity, it seems appropriate to
discard the word “ether” in favour of the term
continuum,” this meaning the four-dimensional


110 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


“space”? we have already imagined, in which the
three dimensions of ordinary space are supplemented
by time acting as a fourth dimension.

Laws of nature express happenings in time and
space, and so can of course be stated with reference
to this four-dimensional continuum. In discussing
these laws quantitatively, it is found convenient to
imagine both time and space measured in a very
special and a very artificial manner. We shall not
measure lengths in terms of feet or centimetres,
but in terms of a unit of about 186,000 miles, which
is the distance that light travels in a second. And
we shall not measure time in ordinary seconds, but
in terms of a mysterious unit equal to a second
multiplied by V — 1 (the square root of — 1).
Mathematicians speak of V — 1 as an “‘imaginary”
number, because it has no existence outside their
imaginations, so that we are measuring time in a
highly artificial manner. If we are asked why we
adopt these weird methods of measurement, the
answer is that they appear to be nature’s own
system of measurement; at any rate they enable
us to express the results of the theory of relativity
in the simplest possible form. If we are further
asked why this is so, we can give no answer—if
we could, we should see far deeper than we now do
into the inner mysteries of nature.

Let us, then, agree to use the weird system of
measurement just described, and construct our
continuum accordingly. Minkowsky shewed that
if the hypothesis of relativity is true, the statement


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 111


of the laws of nature must shew no distinction
between time and space; if the continuum is con-
structed in the way just described, the three
dimensions of space and one of time enter as ab-
solutely equal partners into the formulation of every
natural law. If they did not, the law would be at
variance with the principle of relativity.

It was soon noticed that Newton’s famous law of
gravitation did not conform to the condition just
stated, so that either Newton’s law or the hypothesis
of relativity was wrong. Einstein examined what
alterations would have to be applied to Newton’s
law to bring it into conformity with the hypothesis
of relativity, and found that the necessary changes
involved the appearance of three new phenomena
which were not implied in Newton’s old law. In
other words, nature provided three distinct ways of
deciding observationally between the laws of Ein-
stein and Newton. When the test was made, the
decision was favourable to Einstein in every case.

What we call the “law of gravitation” is, strictly
speaking, nothing more than a mathematical formula
giving the acceleration of a moving body—the rate
at which it changes its speed of motion. Newton’s
law lent itself to a rather obvious mechanical in-
terpretation: a body moved in the same way as it
would if it were ‘‘drawn off from its rectilinear
motion ”’ (to use Newton’s phrase) by a force pro-
portional to the inverse square of the distance.
Newton accordingly supposed such a force to exist;
it was called the “force of gravity.’ Einstein’s law


112 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


did not lend itself to any such interpretation in
terms of forces, or indeed to any mechanical in-
terpretation whatever—still another indication, if
one were needed, that the age of mechanical science
had passed. But it was found to admit of an easy
interpretation in terms of geometry. The effect of a
mass of gravitating matter was not, as Newton had
imagined, to exude a “force,” but to distort the
four-dimensional continuum in its neighbourhood.
The moving planet or cricket-ball was no longer
drawn off from its rectilinear motion by the pull of
a force, but by a curvature of the continuum.

It is difficult enough to imagine the four-dimen-
sional continuum even when undistorted, and still
more so to imagine its distortions, but the two-
dimensional analogy of an area may help. Surfaces
such as a cricket field or the skin of our hand are
two-dimensional continua; the analogies of the dis-
tortions produced by gravitating masses are mole-
hills or blisters. The cricket-ball which rolls over
a mole-hill is “‘drawn off from its rectilinear motion”
like a comet or a ray of light passing near the sun.
And the combined distortions of the four-dimensional
continuum produced by all the matter in the uni-
verse causes the continuum to bend back on itself to
form a closed surface, so that space becomes “‘finite,”’
with the results that have been already discussed
in Chapter IT.

Space and time as separate entities have already
disappeared from the universe; gravitational forces
now disappear also, leaving nothing but a crumpled


RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER 113


continuum. It is natural to wonder why electro-
magnetic forces happen to survive, and how they
figure in the continuum. Although the question is
not finally settled, it seems likely that these too are
destined to go the way of gravitational forces. Weyl
and Eddington successively propounded theories of
this type which have proved open to objections; the
fate of a more recent theory by Einstein is still in the
balance. But whatever theory finally prevails, it
seems fairly certain that in some way or other electro-
magnetic forces will ere long be resolved merely
into a new type of crumpling of the continuum,
essentially different in its geometry, but in no other
respect, from that whose effects we describe as
gravitation. If so, the universe will have resolved
itself into an empty four-dimensional space, totally
devoid of substance, and totally featureless except
for the crumplings, some large and some small, some
intense and some feeble, in the configuration of the
space itself.

What we have hitherto spoken of as the propaga-
tion of energy, such as the passage of sunlight from
sun to earth, now reduces to nothing more than the
continuity of a corrugated crumpling along a line
in the continuum which extends over about eight
minutes of time and about 92,500,000 miles of
length. We now see that we cannot picture it as
the propagation of anything concrete or objective
through space unless we first divide the continuum
objectively into space and time, and this is precisely
what we are forbidden to do.


JMU 8


114 RELATIVITY AND THE ETHER


To sum up, a soap-bubble with irregularities and
corrugations on its surface is perhaps the best
representation, in terms of simple and familiar
materials, of the new universe revealed to us by
the theory of relativity. The universe is not the
interior of the soap-bubble but its surface, and we
must always remember that, while the surface of the
soap-bubble has only two dimensions, the universe-
bubble has four—three dimensions of space and one
of time. And the substance out of which this bubble
is blown, the soap-film, is empty space welded onto
empty time.


Chapter V
INTO THE DEEP WATERS


Let us study in.more detail this soap-bubble, blown
of emptiness, by which modern science portrays
the universe. Its surface is richly marked with
irregularities and corrugations. Two main kinds may
be discerned, which we interpret as matter and
radiation, the ingredients of which the universe
appears to us to be built.

The first kind represent radiation. All radiation
travels at the same uniform speed of about 186,000
miles a second. If the train in Fig. 2 (p. 100) had
travelled at a uniform speed of a mile a minute, its
motion would have been represented by a perfectly
straight line inclined at an angle of 45° to the vertical.
A succession of trains all moving uniformly at a mile
a minute would be represented by a lot of lines all
parallel to this. Now let us change our standard
speed from a mile a minute to 186,000 miles a second,
and replace the one direction from London to
‘Plymouth by all the directions in space. The diagram
on p. 100 now becomes replaced by the four-dimen-
sional continuum, and radiation is represented by a
set of lines all making the same angle (45°) with the
direction of time advancing.

The second kind of markings represent matter.
This moves through space at all kinds of different

8-2


116 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


speeds, but all are small in comparison with the
speed of light. To a first rough approximation, we
may regard all matter as standing still in space, and
moving forward only in time, so that the markings
which represent it run in the direction of time
advancing, just as, if the train whose journey is shewn
in Fig. 2 (p. 100) were to stop at a station, its stay
there would be represented by a bit of vertical line.

The markings which represent matter tend to
form broad bands across the surface of the soap-
bubble, like broad streaks of paint on a canvas.
This is because the matter of the universe tends to
aggregate into large masses—stars and other astro-
nomical bodies. These bands or streaks are known as
‘*world lines’’; the world line of the sun traces out
the position of the sun in space which corresponds
to each instant of time. We can picture this diagram-
matically as in Fig. 3, opposite.

Just as a cable is formed of a great number of fine
threads, so the world line of a large body like the sun
is formed of innumerable smaller world lines, the
world lines of the separate atoms of which the sun is
composed. Here and there these fine threads enter
or leave the main cable as an atom is swallowed up
by, or ejected from, the sun.

We may think of the surface of the bubble as a
tapestry whose threads are the world lines of atoms.
In so far as atoms are permanent and indestructible,
the thread-like world lines of the atoms traverse the
whole length of the picture in the direction of time
advancing. But if atoms are annihilated, the threads


INTO THE DEEP WATERS i


may end abruptly and tassels of world lines of
radiation spread out from their broken ends. As we


Space ——>


Fig. 3. Diagram to illustrate the motion of the Sun and its
radiation in space and time (cf. Fig. 2 on p. 100)


move timewards along the tapestry, its various
threads for ever shift about in space and so change
their places relative to one another. The loom has


118 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


been set so that they are compelled to do this
according to definite rules which we call the “laws of
nature.”

The world line of the earth is a smaller cable,
made up of several strands, these representing the
mountains, trees, aeroplanes, human bodies and so
on, the aggregate of which makes up the earth.
Each strand is made up of many threads—the world
lines of its atoms. A strand which represents a
human body does not differ in any observable
essentials from the other strands. It shifts about,
relatively to the other strands, less freely than an
aeroplane, but more freely than a tree. Like the tree,
it begins as a small thing and increases by continual
absorption of atoms from outside—its food. The
atoms of which it is formed do not differ in essentials
from other atoms; exactly similar atoms enter into
the composition of mountains, aeroplanes and trees.

Yet the threads which represent the atoms of a
human body have the special capacity of conveying
impressions through our senses to our minds. These
atoms affect our consciousness directly, while all the
other atoms of the universe can only affect it in-
directly, through the intermediary of these atoms.
We can most simply interpret consciousness as
something residing entirely outside the picture, and
making contact with it only along the world lines of
our bodies.

Your consciousness touches the picture only along
your world line, mine along my world line, and so on.
The effect produced by this contact is primarily one


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 119


of the passage of time; we feel as if we were being
dragged along our world line so as to experience the
different points on it, which represent our states at
the different instants of time, in turn.

It may be that time, from its beginning to the end
of eternity, is spread before us in the picture, but we
are in contact with only one instant, just as the
bicycle-wheel is in contact with only one point of the
road. Then, as Weyl puts it, events do not happen;
we merely come across them. Or, as Plato expressed
it twenty-three centuries earlier in the Timaeus:

The past and future are created species of time which

we unconsciously but wrongly transfer to the eternal
essence. We say “was,” “is,” “will be,” but the truth
is that “‘is” can alone properly be used.
In this case, our consciousness is like that of a fly
caught in a dusting-mop which is being drawn over
the surface of the picture; the whole picture is there,
but the fly can only experience the one instant of
time with which it is in immediate contact, although
it may remember a bit of the picture just behind it,
and may even delude itself into imagining it is help-
ing to paint those parts of the picture which lie in
front of it.

Or again, it may be that our consciousness should
be compared to the feeling in the finger of the
painter as he guides the brush forward over the still
unfinished picture. If so, the impression of influenc-
ing the parts of the picture yet to come is something
more than a pure illusion. At present science can tell
us very little as to the way in which our consciousness


120 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


apprehends the picture; it is concerned mainly with
the nature of the picture.

We have seen how the ether which was at one
time supposed to fill the universe has been reduced
to an abstraction, a frame-work of empty space,
amounting to nothing more than the spatial dimen-
sions of a soap-bubble, whose soap-film consists of
vacancy. The waves which were at one time supposed
to traverse this ether have also been reduced to little
more than an abstraction: they are corrugations on a
cross-section of the bubble by time.

This quality of abstractness in what were at one
time regarded as material “ether-waves”’ recurs in
a far more acute form when we turn to the system of
waves which make up an electron. The “ether” in
terms of which we find it convenient to explain
ordinary radiation—say sunlight—has three dimen-
sions in space, in addition to its one dimension of
time. So also has the ether in which we describe
the waves which constitute a single electron isolated
in space; this may or may not be the same ether as
before, but it is similar in having three dimensions
of space and one of time. But a single electron
isolated in space provides a perfectly eventless uni-
verse, the simplest conceivable event occurring when
two electrons meet one another. And to describe, in
its simplest terms, what happens when two electrons
meet one another, the wave-mechanics asks for a
system of waves in an ether which has seven dimen-
sions; six are of space, three for each of the electrons,
and one is of time. To describe a meeting of three


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 121


electrons, we need an ether of ten dimensions, nine
of space (again three for each electron) and one of
time. Were it not for the last dimension of time
which binds all the others’ together, the various
electrons would all exist in separate non-communi-
cating three-dimensional spaces. Thus time figures as
the mortar which binds the bricks of matter together,
much as, on the spiritual plane, the “‘ windowless
monads” of Leibnitz were bound together by the
universal mind. Or, perhaps with a nearer approach
to actuality, we may think of the electrons as objects
of thought, and time as the process of thinking.
Most physicists would, Ithink, agree that the seven-
dimensional space in which the wave-mechanics
pictures the meeting of two electrons is purely
fictitious, in which case the waves which accompany
the electrons must also be regarded as fictitious.
Thus Professor Schrédinger, writing of the seven-
dimensional space, says that although it


has quite a definite physical meaning, it cannot very
well be said to ‘‘exist’’; hence a wave-motion in this
space cannot be said to “‘exist”’ in the ordinary sense of
the word either. It is merely an adequate mathematical
description of what happens. It may be that also in the
case of one single [electron], the wave-motion must not
be taken to “‘exist”’ in Zoo literal a sense, although the
configuration-space happens to coincide with ordinary
space in this particularly simple case.


Yet it is hard to see how we can attribute a lower
degree of reality to the one set of waves than to the
other: it is absurd to say that the waves of one


122 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


electron are real, while those of two electrons are
fictitious. And the waves of a single electron are real
enough to record themselves on a photographic plate
and produce the patterns shewn in Plate II. We can
only regain complete consistency by supposing all the
waves, those of two electrons, those of one electron,
and the waves on Professor Thomson’s photographic
plate, to have the same degree of reality or
unreality.

Some physicists mect this situation by regarding
the electron-waves as waves of probability. When
we speak of a tidal-wave we mean a material wave
of water which wets everything in its path. When
we speak of a heat-wave we mean something which,
although not material, warms up everything in its
path. But when the evening papers speak of a
suicide-wave, they do not mean that each person
in the path of the wave will commit suicide; they
merely mean that the likelihood of his doing so is
increased. If a suicide-wave passes over London, the
death-rate from suicide goes up; if it passes over
Robinson Crusoe’s island, the probability that the
sole inhabitant will kill himself goes up. The waves
which represent an electron in the wave-mechanics
may, it is suggested, be probability-waves, whose
intensity at any point measures the probability of
the electron being at that point.

Thus at each point on Prof. Thomson’s plate
(Figs. 2 and 3, Plate II), the wave-intensity measures
the probability that a single diffracted electron
would hit the plate at that spot. When a whole


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 123


crowd of electrons is diffracted, the total number
which hit any spot is of course proportional to the
probability of each individual hitting the spot, so
that the darkening of the plate gives a measure of
the probability per electron.

This view has the great merit that it enables the
electrons to preserve their identity. If the electron-
waves were true material waves, each system of waves
would probably be dispersed by the experiment, so
that no electrified particles would survive as such in
the diffracted beam. Indeed, any encounter with
matter would break up electrons, which could not be
regarded as permanent structures. Actually of course
it is the shower of electrons, rather than the indi-
vidual, that is diffracted; the individual electrons
move as particles and retain their identity as such.

All this is in accordance with Heisenberg’s ‘‘un-
certainty principle’’ (p. 26), which makes it impossible
ever to say: an electron is here, at this precise spot,
and is moving at just so many miles an hour; we can
only speak in terms of probabilities.

Dirac finds it necessary to extend this indeter-
minacy and uncertainty of knowledge over the
whole of atomic physics. He writes:


When an observation is made on any atomic system...
in a given state, the result will not in general be deter-
minate, t.e. if the experiment is repeated several times
under identical conditions, several different results may
be obtained. If the experiment is repeated a large
number of times, it will be found that each particular
result will be obtained a definite fraction of the total


124 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


number of times, so that one can say there is a definite
probability of its being obtained any time the experi-
ment is performed. This probability the theory enables
one to calculate. In special cases, the probability may
be unity, and the result of the experiment is then quite
determinate.


Heisenberg and Bohr have suggested that electron-
waves must be regarded merely as a sort of symbolic
representation of our knowledge as to the probable
state and position of an electron. If so, they change
as our knowledge changes, and so become largely
subjective. Thus we need hardly think of the waves
as being located in space and time at all; they are
mere visualisations of a mathematical formula of an
undulatory, but wholly abstract, nature.

A still more drastic possibility, again arising out
of a suggestion made by Bohr, is that the minutest
phenomena of nature do not admit of representation
in the space-time framework at all. On this view the
four-dimensional continuum of the theory of rela-
tivity is adequate only for some of the phenomena
of nature, these including large scale phenomena and
radiation in free space; other phenomena can only
be represented by going outside the continuum.
We have, for instance, already tentatively pictured
consciousness as something outside the continuum,
and have seen how the meeting of two electrons can
most simply be pictured in seven dimensions. It is
conceivable that happenings entirely outside the
continuum determine what we describe as the
‘“course of events” inside the continuum, and that


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 125


the apparent indeterminacy of nature may arise
merely from our trying to force happenings which
occur in many dimensions into a smaller number of
dimensions. Imagine, for instance, a race of blind
worms, whose perceptions were limited to the two-
dimensional surface of the earth. Now and then
spots of the earth would sporadically become wet.
We, whose faculties range through three dimensions
of space, call the phenomenon a rain-shower, and
know that events in the third dimension of space
determine, absolutely and uniquely, which spots
shall become wet and which shall remain dry. But
if the worms, unconscious even of the existence of
the third dimension of space, tried to thrust all
nature into their two-dimensional framework, they
would be unable to discover any determinism in the
distribution of wet and dry spots; the worm-
scientists would only be able to discuss the wetness
and dryness of minute areas in terms of prob-
abilities, which they would be tempted to treat as
ultimate truth. Although the time is not yet ripe
for a decision, this seems to me, personally, the most
promising interpretation of the situation. Just as the
shadows on a wall form the projection of a three-
dimensional reality into two dimensions, so the
phenomena of the space-time continuum are four-
dimensional projections of realities which occupy
more than four dimensions, so that events in time
and space become


**no other than a moving row
of Magic Shadow-shapes that come and go ”


126 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


It may perhaps be objected that we have paid alto-
gether too much attention to the wave-mechanics,
which after all is only a mathematical picture, when
probably innumerable other mat’ ematical pictures
might serve equally well, and might lead to entirely
different conclusions.

It is true that the wave-mechanics picture can
make no claim to uniqueness. Other systems are in
the field, particularly those of Heisenberg and Dirac.
Yet in the main these only say the same thing in
other, and frequently more complicated, words. No
other system yet devised explains things so simply,
or seems to be so true to nature, as the wave-
mechanics of de Broglie and Schrédinger. Photo-
graphs such as those shewn in Plate II bear witness
that waves of definite wave-length are somehow
fundamental in nature’s scheme; these waves form
the fundamental concept of the wave-mechanics,
but only appear as rather far-fetched by-products in
the other systems. Also, just because of its inherent
simplicity, the wave-mechanics has shewn a capacity
for penetrating much further into the secrets of
nature than any other system, so that other systems
are already falling somewhat into the background.
To vary our metaphor, they have served a valuable
purpose as scaffolding, but there seems to be but little
inclination to add to them further.

If then we are to concentrate on one picture, we
seem justified in selecting that provided by the wave-
mechanics, although in point of fact either the
system of Heisenberg or that of Dirac would lead us


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 127


tovery much the same conclusion. The essential fact is
simply that all the pictures which science now draws
of nature, and which alone seem capable of according
with observational fact, are mathematical pictures.
Most scientists would agree that they are nothing
more than pictures—fictions if you like, if by fiction
you mean that science is not yet in contact with ulti- —
mate reality. Many would hold that, from the broad
philosophical standpoint, the outstanding achieve-
ment of twentieth century physics is not the theory
of relativity with its welding together of space and
time, or the theory of quanta with its present
apparent negation of the laws of causation, or the
dissection of the atom with the resultant discovery
that things are not what they seem; it is the general
recognition that we are not yet in contact with
ultimate reality. To speak in terms of Plato’s well-
known simile, we are still imprisoned in our cave,
with our backs to the light, and can only watch the
shadows on the wall. At present the only task
immediately before science is to study these shadows,
to classify them and explain them in the simplest
possible way. And what we are finding, in a whole
torrent of surprising new knowledge, is that the
way which explains them more clearly, more fully
and more naturally than any other is the mathe-
matical way, the explanation in terms of mathe-
matical concepts. It is true, in a sense somewhat
different from that intended by Galileo, that
‘“‘Nature’s great book is written in mathematical
language.” So true is it that no one except a mathe-


128 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


matician need ever hope fully to understand those
branches of science which try to unravel the funda-
mental nature of the universe—the theory of rela-
tivity, the theory of quanta and the wave-mechanics.

The shadows which reality throws on to the wall of
our cave might d@ priori have been of many kinds.
They might conceivably have been perfectly mean-
ingless to us, as meaningless as a cinematograph film
shewing the growth of microscopic tissues would
be to a dog who had strayed into a lecture-room
by mistake. Indeed our earth is so infinitesimal in
comparison with the whole universe; we, the only
thinking beings, so far as we know, in the whole
of space, are to all appearances so accidental, so far
removed from the main scheme of the universe, that
it is d priori all too probable that any meaning that
the universe as a whole may have, would entirely
transcend our terrestrial experience, and so be
totally unintelligible to us. In this event, we should
have had no foothold from which to start our explora-
tion of the true meaning of the universe.

Although this is the most likely event, it is not im-
possible that some of the shadows thrown on the
walls of our cave might suggest objects and operations
with which we cave-dwellers were already familiar in
our caves. The shadow of a falling body behaves likea
falling body, and so would remind us of bodies we
had ourselves let fall; we should be tempted to
interpret such shadows in mechanical terms. This
explains the mechanical physics of the last century;
the shadows reminded our scientific predecessors of


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 129


the behaviour of jellies, spinning tops, thrust-bars,
and cogwheels, so that they, mistaking the shadow for
the substance, believed they saw before them a uni-
verse of jellies and mechanicaldevices. We know now
that the interpretation is conspicuously inadequate: it
fails to explain the simplest phenomena, the propa-
gation of a sunbeam, the composition of radiation,
the fall of an apple, or the whirl of electrons in the
atom.

Again, the shadow of a game of chess, played by
the actors out in the sunlight, would remind us of
the games of chess we had played in our cave. Now
and then we might recognise knights’ moves, or
observe castles moving simultaneously with kings
and queens, or discern other characteristic moves so
similar to those we were accustomed to play that
they could not be attributed to chance. We would no
longer think of the external reality as a machine; the
details of its operation might be mechanical, but in
essence it would be a reality of thought: we should
recognise the chess players out in the sunlight as beings
governed by minds like our own; we should find the
counterpart of our own thoughts in the reality which
was for ever inaccessible to our direct observation.

And when scientists study the world of pheno-
mena, the shadows which nature throws on the wall
of our cave, they do not find these shadows totally
unintelligible, and neither do they seem to represent
unknown or unfamiliar objects. Rather, it seems to
me, we can recognise chess-players outside in the
sunshine who appear to be very well acquainted with


JMU 9


130 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


the rules of the game as we have formulated them in our
cave. To drop our metaphor, nature seems very con-
versant with the rules of pure mathematics, as our
mathematicians have formulated them in their
studies, out of their own inner consciousness and
without drawing to any appreciable extent on their
experience of the outer world. By “‘pure mathe-
matics” is meant those departments of mathematics
which are creations of pure thought, of reason
operating solely within her own sphere, as contrasted
with “‘applied mathematics”? which reasons about
the external world, after first taking some supposed
property of the external world as its raw material.
Descartes, looking round for an example of the
produce of pure thought uncontaminated by obser-
vation (rationalism) chose the fact that the sum of
the three angles of a triangle were necessarily equal
to two right angles. It was, as we now know, a
singularly unfortunate choice. Other choices, far
less open to objection, might easily have been made,
as, for instance, the laws of probability, the rules
of manipulation of ‘imaginary’? numbers—i.e.
numbers containing the square roots of negative
quantities—or multi-dimensional geometry. All these
branches of mathematics were originally worked out
by the mathematician in terms of abstract thought,
practically uninfluenced by contact with the outer
world, and drawing nothing from experience; they
formed


an independent world
created out of pure intelligence.


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 131


And now it emerges that the shadow-play which
we describe as the fall of an apple to the ground, the
ebb and flow of the tides, the motion of electrons in
the atom, are produced by actors who seem very
conversant with these purely mathematical con-
cepts—with our rules of our game of chess, which we
formulated long before we discovered that the
shadows on the wall were also playing chess.

When we try to discover the nature of the reality
behind the shadows, we are confronted with the
fact that all discussion of the ultimate nature of
things must necessarily be barren unless we have
some extraneous standards against which to com-
pare them. For this reason, to borrow Locke’s
phrase, “‘the real essence of substances ”’ is for ever
unknowable. We can only progress by discussing the
laws which govern the changes of substances, and so
produce the phenomena of the external world. These
we can compare with the abstract creations of our
own minds.

For instance, a deaf engineer studying the action of
a pianola might first try to interpret it as a machine,
but would be baffled by the continuous reiteration
of the intervals 1, 5, 8, 18 in the motions of its
trackers. A deaf musician, although he could hear
nothing, would immediately recognise this succes-
sion of numbers as the intervals of the common chord,
while other successions of less frequent occurrence
would suggest other musical chords. In this way he
would recognise a kinship between his own thoughts
and the thoughts which had resulted in the making


9-2


132 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


of the pianola; he would say that it had come into
existence through the thought of a musician. In the
same way, a scientific study of the action of the
universe has suggested a conclusion which may be
summed up, though very crudely and quite in-
adequately, because we have no language at our
command except that derived from our terrestrial
concepts and experiences, in the statement that the
universe appears to have been designed by a pure
mathematician.

This statement can hardly hope to escape challenge
on two grounds. In the first place, it may be
objected that we are merely moulding nature to our
preconceived ideas. The musician, it will be said,
may be so engrossed in music that he would contrive
to interpret every piece of mechanism as a musical
instrument; the habit of thinking of all intervals as
musical intervals may be so ingrained in him that if
he fell downstairs and bumped on stairs numbered
1, 5, 8 and 13 he would see music in his fall. In the
same way, a cubist painter can see nothing but cubes
in the indescribable richness of nature—and the un-
reality of his pictures shews how far he is from
understanding nature; his cubist spectacles are mere
blinkers which prevent his seeing more than a
minute fraction of the great world around him. So,
it may be suggested, the mathematician only sees
nature through the mathematical blinkers he has
fashioned for himself.

A moment’s reflection will shew that this can
hardly be the whole story. Our remote ancestors


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 133


tried to interpret nature in terms of anthropo-
morphic concepts of their own creation and failed.
The efforts of our nearer ancestors to interpret
nature on engineering lines proved equally inade-
quate. Nature has refused to accommodate herself
to either of these man-made moulds. On the other
hand, our efforts to interpret nature in terms of the
concepts of pure mathematics have, so far, proved
brilliantly successful. It would now seem to be
beyond dispute that in some way nature is more
closely allied to the concepts of pure mathematics
than to those of biology or of engineering, and even
if the mathematical interpretation is only a third
man-made mould, it at least fits nature incom-
parably better than the two previously tried.

Fifty years ago, when there was much discussion
on the problem of communicating with Mars, it was
desired to notify the supposed Martians that think-
ing beings existed on the planet Earth, but the
difficulty was to find a language understood by both
parties. The suggestion was made that the most
suitable language was that of pure mathematics; it
was proposed to light chains of bonfires in the
Sahara, to form a diagram illustrating the famous
theorem of Pythagoras, that the squares on the
two smaller sides of a right-angled triangle are
together equal to the square on the greatest side.
To most of the inhabitants of Mars such signals
would convey no meaning, but it was argued that
mathematicians on Mars, if such existed, would
surely recognise them as the handiwork of mathe-


134 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


maticians on earth. In so doing, they would not
be open to the reproach that they saw mathematics
in everything. And so it is mutatis mutandis with
the signals from the outer world of reality, which
are the shadows on the walls of the cave in which
we are imprisoned. We have already considered
with disfavour the possibility of the universe having
been planned by a biologist or an engineer; from
the intrinsic evidence of his creation, the Great
Architect of the Universe now begins to appear as
a pure mathematician.

In the second place, our statement may be
challenged on the ground that there is no absolutely
sharp line of demarcation between pure and applied
mathematics. It would of course have proved
nothing, if nature had merely been found to act in
accordance with the concepts of applied mathematics ;
these concepts were specially and deliberately de-
signed by man to fit the workings of nature. And it
may be objected that even our pure mathematics
does not in actual fact represent a creation of our
own minds so much as an effort, based on forgotten
or subconscious memories, to understand the work-
ings of nature. If so, it is not surprising that nature
should be found to work according to the laws of
pure mathematics. It cannot of course be denied
that some of the concepts with which the pure
mathematician works are taken direct from his ex-
perience of nature. An obvious instance is the
concept of quantity, but this is so fundamental that
it is hard to imagine any scheme of nature from


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 135


which it was entirely excluded. Other concepts
borrow at least something from experience; for
instance multi-dimensional geometry, which clearly
originated out of experience of the three dimensions
of space. If, however, the more intricate concepts
of pure mathematics have been transplanted from
the workings of nature, they must have been buried
very deep indeed in our sub-conscious minds. This
very controversial possibility is one which cannot be
entirely dismissed, but in any event it can hardly be
disputed that nature and our conscious mathematical
minds work according to the same laws. She does not
model her behaviour, so to speak, on that forced on
us by our whims and passions, or on that of our
muscles and joints, but on that of our thinking minds.
This remains true whether our minds impress their
laws on nature, or she impresses her laws on us, and
provides a sufficient justification for thinking of the
designer of the universe as a mathematician.
Personally I feel that this train of thought may,
very tentatively, be carried a stage further, although
it is difficult to express it in exact words, again
because our mundane vocabulary is circumscribed
by our mundane experience. The terrestrial pure
mathematician does not concern himself with
material substance, but with pure thought. His
creations are not only created by thought but
consist of thought, just as the creations of the
engineer consist of engines. And the concepts which
now prove to be fundamental to our understanding
of nature—a space which is finite; a space which


136 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


is empty, so that one point differs from another
solely in the properties of the space itself; four-
dimensional, seven and more dimensional spaces; a
space which for ever expands; a sequence of events
which follows the laws of probability instead of the
law of causation—or, alternatively, a sequence of
events which can only be fully and consistently
described by going outside space and time, all these
concepts seem to my mind to be structures of pure
thought, incapable of realisation in any sense which
would properly be described as material. To these I
would add other more technical concepts, typified
by the ‘exclusion principle,’’ which seem to imply
a sort of ‘‘action-at-a-distance”’ in both space and
time—as though every bit of the universe knew
what other distant bits were doing, and acted
accordingly. To my mind, the laws which nature
obeys are less suggestive of those which a machine
obeys in its motion than of those which a musician
obeys in writing a fugue, or a poet in composing a
sonnet. The motions of electrons and atoms do not
resemble those of the parts of a locomotive so much
as those of the dancers in a cotillion. And if the
‘‘true essence of substances” is for ever unknowable,
it does not matter whether the cotillion is danced
at a ball in real life, or on a cinematograph screen,
or in a story of Boccaccio. If all this is so, then the
universe can be best pictured, although still very
imperfectly and inadequately, as consisting of pure
thought, the thought of what, for want of a wider
word, we must describe as a mathematical thinker.


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 137


In the stately and sonorous diction of a bygone
age, Bishop Berkeley summed up his philosophy in
the words:


All the choir of heaven and furniture of earth, in
a word all those bodies which compose the mighty
frame of the world, have not any substance without the
mind....So long as they are not actually perceived by
me, or do not exist in my mind, or that of any other
created spirit, they must either have no existence at all,
or else subsist in the mind of some Eternal Spirit.


Modern science seems to me to lead, by a very
different road, to a not altogether dissimilar con-
clusion. Because of our different line of approach we
have reached the last of the above three alternatives
first, and the others appear unimportant by com-
parison. It does not matter whether objects “exist
in my mind, or that of any other created spirit” or
not; their objectivity arises from their subsisting
“‘in the mind of some Eternal Spirit.”

This may suggest that we are proposing to discard
realism entirely, and enthrone a_ thoroughgoing
idealism in its place. Yet this, I think, would be
too crude a statement of the situation. If it is true
that the ‘“‘real essence of substances” is beyond our
knowledge, then the line of demarcation between
realism and idealism becomes very blurred indeed;
it is little more than a relic of a past age in which
reality was believed to be identical with mechanism.
Objective realities exist, because certain things affect
your consciousness and mine in the same way, but
we are assuming something we have no right to


188 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


assume if we label them as either “‘real” or “ideal.”
The true label is, I think, ‘“‘ mathematical” if we can
agree that this is to connote the whole of pure
thought, and not merely the studies of the pro-
fessional mathematician. Such a label does not
imply anything as to what things are in their ulti-
mate essence, but merely something as to how they
behave.

The label we have selected does not of course
relegate matter into the category of hallucination or
dreams. The material universe remains as substantial
as ever it was, and this statement must, I think,
remain true through all changes of scientific or philo-
sophical thought.

For substantiality is a purely mental concept
measuring the direct effect of objects on our sense of
touch. We say that a stone or a motor-car is sub-
stantial, while an echo or a rainbow is not. This is
the ordinary definition of the word, and it is a mere
absurdity, a contradiction in terms, to say that
stones and motor-cars can in any way become un-
substantial, or even less substantial, because we now
associate them with mathematical formulae and
thoughts, or kinks in empty space, rather than with
crowds of hard particles. Dr Johnson is reported to
have expressed his opinion on Berkeley’s philosophy
by dashing his foot against a stone and saying: ‘‘ No,
Sir, I disprove it thus.”’ This little experiment had
of course not the slightest bearing on the philoso-
phical problem it claimed to solve; it merely verified
the substantiality of matter. And, however science


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 139


may progress, stones must always remain substantial
bodies, just because they and their class form the
standard by which we define the quality of sub-
stantiality.

It has been suggested that the lexicographer might
really have disproved the Berkeleian philosophy if
he had chanced to kick, not a stone but a hat, in
which some small boy had surreptitiously placed a
brick. As Sir Peter Chalmers Mitchell puts it, “‘the
element of surprise is sufficient warrant for external
reality,” and ‘“‘a second warrant is permanence with
change—permanence in your own memory, change
in externality.”’ This of course merely disproves the
solipsist error of ‘‘all this is a creation of my own
mind, and exists in no other mind,”’ but it is hard to
do anything in life which does not disprove this.
The argument from surprise, and from new know-
ledge in general, is powerless against the concept of
a universal mind of which your mind and mine, the
mind which surprises and that which is surprised,
are units or even excrescences. Each individual
brain cell cannot be acquainted with all the thoughts
which are passing through the brain as a whole.

Yet the fact that we possess no absolute ex-
traneous standard against which to measure sub-
stantiality, does not preclude our saying that two
things have the same degree, or different degrees, of
substantiality. If I dash my foot against a stone in
my dreams, I shall probably waken up with a pain
in my foot, to discover that the stone of my dreams
was literally a creation of my mind and of mine


140 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


alone, prompted by a nerve-impulse originating in
my foot. This stone may typify the category of
hallucinations or dreams; it is clearly less substan-
tial than that which Johnson kicked. Creations of an
individual mind may reasonably be called less sub-
stantial than creations of a universal mind. A
similar distinction must be made between the space
we see in a dream and the space of everyday
life; the latter, which is the same for us all, is the
space of the universal mind. It is the same with
time, the time of waking life, which flows at the same
even rate for us all, being the time of the universal
mind. Again we may think of the laws to which
phenomena conform in our waking hours, the laws
of nature, as the laws of thought of a universal
mind. The uniformity of nature proclaims the self-
consistency of this mind.

This concept of the universe as a world of pure
thought throws a new light on many of the situations
we have encountered in our survey of modern
physics. We can now see how the ether, in which all
the events of the universe take place, could reduce
to a mathematical abstraction, and become as ab-
stract and as mathematical as parallels of latitude
and meridians of longitude. We can also see why
energy, the fundamental entity of the universe, had
again to be treated as a mathematical abstraction—
the constant of integration of a differential equa-
tion.

The same concept implies of course that the final
truth about a phenomenon resides in the mathe-


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 141


matical description of it; so long as there is no im-
perfection in this our knowledge of the phenomenon
is complete. We go beyond the mathematical for-
mula at our own risk; we may find a model or picture
which helps us to understand it, but we have no
right to expect this, and our failure to find such a
model or picture need not indicate that either our
reasoning or our knowledge is at fault. The making
of models or pictures to explain mathematical for-
mulae and the phenomena they describe, is not a
step towards, but a step away from, reality; it is
like making graven images of a spirit. And it is
as unreasonable to expect these various models to
be consistent with one another as it would be to
expect all the statues of Hermes, representing the
god in all his varied activities—as messenger, herald,
musician, thief, and so on—to look alike. Some say
that Hermes is the wind; if so, all his attributes are
wrapped up in his mathematical description, which
is neither more nor less than the equation of motion
of a compressible fluid. The mathematician will know
how to pick out the different aspects of this equation
which represent the conveying and announcing of
messages, the creation of musical tones, the blowing
away of our papers, and so forth. He will hardly
need statues of Hermes to remind him of them, al-
though, if he is to rely on statues, nothing less than
a whole row, all different, will suffice. All the same,
the mathematical physicist is still busily at work
making graven images of the concepts of the wave-
mechanics.


142 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


In brief, a mathematical formula can never tell
us what a thing is, but only how it behaves; it can
only specify an object through its properties. And
these are unlikely to coincide im toto with the
properties of any single macroscopic object of our
everyday life.

This point of view brings us relief from many
of the difficulties and apparent inconsistencies of
present-day physics. We need no longer discuss
whether light consists of particles or waves; we know
all there is to be known about it if we have found
a mathematical formula which accurately describes
its behaviour, and we can think of it as either
particles or waves according to our mood and the
convenience of the moment. On our days of think-
ing of it as waves, we may if we please imagine an
ether to transmit the waves, but this ether will vary
from day to day; we have seen how it will vary each
time our speed of motion varies. In the same way,
we need not discuss whether the wave-system of a
group of electrons exists in a three-dimensional
space, or in a many-dimensional space, or not at all.
It exists in a mathematical formula; this, and
nothing else, expresses the ultimate reality, and we
can picture it as representing waves in three, six or
more dimensions whenever we so please. We can
also interpret it as not representing waves at all; in
so doing we shall be following Heisenberg and Dirac.
It is generally simplest to interpret it as repre-
senting waves in a space having three dimensions
for each electron, just as it is simplest to interpret


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 1438


the macroscopic universe as an array of objects in
three dimensions only, and its phenomena as an
array of events in four dimensions, but none of these
interpretations possesses any unique or absolute
validity.

On this view, we need find no mystery in the
nature of the rolling contact of our consciousness
with the empty soap-bubble we call space-time
(p. 119), for it reduces merely to a contact between
mind and a creation of mind—like the reading of a
book, or listening to music. Itis probably unnecessary
to add that, on this view of things, the apparent vast-
ness and emptiness of the universe, and our own
insignificant size therein, need cause us neither be-
wilderment nor concern. We are not terrified by the
sizes of the structures which our own thoughts create,
nor by those that others imagine and describe to
us. In du Maurier’s story, Peter Ibbetson and the
Duchess of Towers continued to build vast dream-
palaces and dream-gardens of ever-increasing size,
but felt no terror at the size of their mental creations.
The immensity of the Universe becomes a matter of
satisfaction rather than awe; we are citizens of no
mean city. Again, we need not puzzle over the
finiteness of space; we feel no curiosity as to what
lies beyond the four walls which bound our vision
in a dream.

It is the same with time, which, like space, we must
think of as of finite extent. As we trace the stream of
time backwards, we encounter many indications that,
after a long enough journey, we must come to its


144 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


source, a time before which the present universe did
not exist. Nature frowns upon perpetual motion
machines and it is @ priori very unlikely that her
universe will provide an example, on the grand scale,
of the mechanism she abhors. And a detailed con-
sideration of nature confirms this. The science of
thermodynamics explains how everything in nature
passes to its final state by a process which is desig-
nated the “‘increase of entropy.’ Entropy must for
ever increase: it cannot stand still until it has in-
creased so far that it can increase no further. When
this stage is reached, further progress will be impos-
sible, and the universe will be dead. Thus, unless this
whole branch of science is wrong, nature permits
herself, quite literally, only two alternatives, pro-
gress and death: the only standing still she permits
is in the stillness of the grave.

Now the entropy of the universe has not yet
reached its final maximum: we should not be
thinking about it if it had. It is still increasing
rapidly, and so must have had a beginning; there
must have been what we may describe as a “‘crea-
tion” at a time not infinitely remote.

If the universe is a universe of thought, then its
creation must have been an act of thought. Indeed
the finiteness of time and space almost compel us,
of themselves, to picture the creation as an act of
thought; the determination of the constants such as
the radius of the universe and the number of elec-
trons it contained imply thought, whose richness is
measured by the immensity of these quantities.


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 145


Time and space, which form the setting for the
thought, must have come into being as part of this
act. Primitive cosmologies pictured a creator work-
ing in space and time, forging sun, moon and stars
out of already existent raw material. Modern scien-
tific theory compels us to think of the creator as
working outside time and space, which are part of
his creation, just as the artist is outside his canvas.
“Non in tempore, sed cum tempore, finxit Deus
mundum.” Indeed, the doctrine dates back as far as
Plato:

Time and the heavens came into being at the same
instant, in order that, if they were ever to dissolve, they
might be dissolved together. Such was the mind and
thought of God in the creation of time.


And yet, so little do we understand time that perhaps
we ought to compare the whole of time to the act of
creation, the materialisation of the thought.

It may be objected that our whole argument is
based on the assumption that the present mathe-
matical interpretation of the physical world is in some
way unique, and will prove to be final. To resume our
metaphor, it may be said that to describe the reality
as a game of chess is only a convenient fiction:
other fictions might describe the motions of the
shadows equally well. The answer is that, so far as
our present knowledge goes, other fictions would not
describe them so fully, so simply, or so adequately.
The man who does not play chess says: “‘a piece of
white wood, carved to look rather like a horse’s head
stuck on a pedestal, was taken from the bottom


JMU Io


146 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


square next but one to the right-hand corner and
moved to...”” and so on. The chess-player says,
‘““White: Kt to K Bp 3,” and his account not only
explains the move fully and briefly, but also relates
it to a larger scheme of things. In science, so long
as our knowledge remains incomplete, the simplest
explanation carries conviction in proportion to its
simplicity. And it has merit beyond that of mere
simplicity; it has the highest probability of being
the true explanation. Thus while it must be fully
admitted that the mathematical explanation may
prove neither to be final nor the simplest possible,
we can unhesitatingly say that it is the simplest and
most complete so far found, so that, relative to our
present knowledge, it has the greatest chance of
being the explanation which lies nearest to the truth.

Some readers may not assent to this, on the grounds
that the present-day mathematical interpretation of
nature is likely to prove a mere half-way house to
anew mechanical interpretation. Our modern minds
have, I think, a bias towards mechanical interpreta-
tions. Part may be due to our early scientific training;
part perhaps to our continually seeing everyday
objects behaving in a mechanical way; a mechanical
explanation looks natural and is easily comprehended.
Yet in a completely objective survey of the situation,
the outstanding fact would seem to be that mechanics
has already shot its bolt and has failed dismally, on
both the scientific and philosophical side. If anything
is destined to replace mathematics, there would seem
to be specially long odds against it being mechanics.


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 147


It is too often overlooked that we can only
discuss these questions in terms of probabilities.
The man of science is accustomed to the reproach
that he changes his views all the time, with the
accompanying implication that what he says need
not be taken too seriously. It is no true reproach
that in exploring the river of knowledge he occasion-
ally goes down a backwater instead of continuing
along the main stream; no explorer can be sure
that a backwater is such, and nothing more, until
he has been down it. What is more serious, and
beyond the control of the explorer, is that the river
is a winding one, flowing now east, now west, At
one moment the explorer says: “‘I am going down-
stream, and, as I am going towards the west, the
ocean which is reality seems most likely to lie in the
westerly direction.”’ And later, when the river has
turned east, he says: “It now looks as though
reality is in the east.” No scientist who has lived
through the last thirty years is likely to be too
dogmatic either to the future course of the stream
or as to the direction in which reality lies: he
knows from his own experience how the river not
only for ever broadens but also repeatedly winds,
and, after many disappointments, he has given up
thinking at every turn that he is at last in the
presence of the


murmurs and scents of the infinite sea.
With this caution in mind, it seems at least safe to


say that the river of knowledge has made a sharp


10-2


148 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


bend in the last few years. Thirty years ago, we
thought, or assumed, that we were heading towards
an ultimate reality of a mechanical kind. It seemed
to consist of a fortuitous jumble of atoms, which was
destined to perform meaningless dances for a time
under the action of blind purposeless forces, and then ~
fall back to form a dead world. Into this wholly me-
chanical world, through the play of the same blind
forces, life had stumbled by accident. One tiny
corner at least, and possibly several tiny corners,
of this universe of atoms had chanced to become
conscious for a time, but was destined in the end,
still under the action of blind mechanical forces, to
be frozen out and again leave a lifeless world.
To-day there is a wide measure of agreement,
which on the physical side of science approaches
almost to unanimity, that the stream of knowledge
is heading towards a non-mechanical reality; the
universe begins to look more like a great thought
than like a great machine. Mind no longer appears
as an accidental intruder into the realm of matter;
we are beginning to suspect that we ought rather
to hail it as the creator and governor of the realm
of matter—not of course our individual minds,
but the mind in which the atoms out of which our
individual minds have grown exist as thoughts.
The new knowledge compels us to revise our hasty
first impressions that we had stumbled into a uni-
verse which either did not concern itself with life or
was actively hostile to life. The old dualism of mind
and matter, which was mainly responsible for the


INTO THE DEEP WATERS 149


supposed hostility, seems likely to disappear, not
through matter becoming in any way more shadowy
or insubstantial than heretofore, or through mind
becoming resolved into a function of the working of
matter, but through substantial matter resolving
itself into a creation and manifestation of mind.
We discover that the universe shews evidence of a
designing or controlling power that has something
in common with our own individual minds—not, so
far as we have discovered, emotion, morality, or
aesthetic appreciation, but the tendency to think
in the way which, for want of a better word, we
describe as mathematical. And while much in it
may be hostile to the material appendages of life,
much also is akin to the fundamental activities of
life; we are not so much strangers or intruders in the
universe as we at first thought. Those inert atoms
in the primaeval slime which first began to fore-
shadow the attributes of life were putting themselves
more, and not less, in accord with the fundamental
nature of the universe.

So at least we are tempted to conjecture to-day,
and yet who knows how many more times the stream
of knowledge may turn on itself? And with this
reflection before us, we may well conclude by adding,
what might well have been interlined into every
paragraph, that everything that has been said, and
every conclusion that has been tentatively put for-
ward, is quite frankly speculative and uncertain.
We have tried to discuss whether present-day science
has anything to say on certain difficult questions,


150 INTO THE DEEP WATERS


which are perhaps set for ever beyond the reach of
human understanding. We cannot claim to have
discerned more than a very faint glimmer of light
at the best; perhaps it was wholly illusory, for cer-
tainly we had to strain our eyes very hard to see
anything at all. So that our main contention can
hardly be that the science of to-day has a pronounce-
ment to make, perhaps it ought rather to be that
science should leave off making pronouncements:
the river of knowledge has too often turned back
on itself.


INDEX


Aberration of light, 81

Absolute rest, 89, 90, 108

Accidents in nature, 4, 5, 6, 10

Action-at-a-distance, 80, 97,
1386

Ages of stars, 59, 60, 65, 68

Annihilation of matter, 69, 70,
73, 77, 116

Atoms, nature of, 46, 47, 52,
116


Berkeley, philosophy of, 137,
188, 189

Bohr, N. 124

Brace, D. B., 88

Bragg, Sir W., 38


Cameron, G. H., 72

Carbon atom, 7, 8

Causation, 15, 18, 20, 25, 28,
29, 45, 127

Cave, Plato’s simile of the, ix,
127, 128

Compton, A. H., 37, 38, 66

Consciousness, 118, 119, 124,
143

Conservation laws, 45, 46, 50,
73

Conservation of energy, 46, 48,
49, 50, 58, 73

Conservation of mass, 46, 47,
48, 50, 51, 58, 70, 73

Conservation of matter, 46, 50,
73

Continuum, defined, 101, 109

nature of, 102, 112, 115, 125,

143

Corpuscular theory of light, 31,
82, 38, 86, 38, 39, 40, 41


Cosmic radiation, 23, 72, '75, 81


Curvature of space, 60, 112


Dauvillier, A., 42
Davisson, C. J., 42
Democritus, 46
Dempster, A. J., 43
de Broglie, Louis, 40
de Sitter, W., 63, 66
Descartes, 81, 130
Determinism, 16, 28, 29, 119,
123, 125
Diffraction, of electrons, 41, 42,
122, 123
of light, 34, 42
of protons, 43
Dirac, P. A. M., 128, 126, 142
Doppler’s principle, 65


Earth, future of, 12
origin of, 2
size of, 1, 128
Eddington, Sir A. S., 104, 113
Einstein, A., 53, 55, 60, 62, 638,
89, 90, 98, 111, 113
Electrons, diffraction of, 41, 42,
122, 123
nature of, 39, 40, 42, 48, 51,
76, 142
wave-systems of, 40 ff., 77,
120, 122, 142
Emission of radiation, 24, 69,
117
Energy, conservation of, 46,
48, 49, 50, 58, 73
definition of, 48, 49
mass of, 58, 55, 70
mechanical, 49
source of stellar, 54, 69


152


Entropy, 144
Ether, definition of, 79, 104
existence of, 91, 96, 97, 104
nature of, 81, 89, 92, 95, 103,
105
Exclusion-principle, 136
Expanding universe, 62 ff., 136


Faraday, M., 52, 54, 81, 103

Finiteness of space, 60, 61, 112,
135, 143

Fitzgerald, G. F., 86

Fitzgerald-Lorentz contraction,
86, 87, 95, 96

Force, physical nature of, 55,
56, 60, 92, 112

Free-will, 16, 29

Fresnel, A., 39


Galileo, 16, 127

Gas, properties of a, 17

Geometrical interpretation of
force, 112, 113

Germer, L. H., 42

Gravitation, interpretation of,
16, 17, 19, 60, 93, 94,
111

law of, 16, 94, 111 ff.


Heat-death, 13, 144

Heisenberg, W., 25, 26, 123,
124, 126, 142

Helmholtz, H. von, 17

Highly penetrating radiation,
22, '71, 72

Hubble, E., 64

Hull, G. F., 55

Humason, 64

Huyghens, C., 81

Huxley, T. H., 4


Imaginary numbers, 110, 130
Indeterminacy in nature, 25,
28, 37, 128, 125


INDEX


Indeterminacy principle of
Heisenberg, 25, 123
Interference bands, 33


Joule, J. P., 49


Kelvin, Lord (Sir W. Thomson),
17
Kikuchi, S., 43


Laue, M., 38
Lavoisier, A. L., 48
Laws of nature, 45, 118, 140
Lebedew, P., 55
Leibnitz, G. W., 121
Lemaitre, G., 62, 63
Life, beginnings of, 2, 148
end of, 11, 12
hostility of universe to, 3, 12,
18, 148, 149
Light, aberration of, 81
diffraction of, 34, 42
nature of, 31 ff., 36, '77, 142
Light-quanta, 36, 37, 70,75, 142
Lines of force, 54
Lives of stars, length of, 59, 60,
65, 68
Locke, J., 131
Lodge, Sir O., 104
Lorentz, H. A., 86, 87
Lucretius, 46, 47
Luminiferous ether, 81 ff., 104,
120, 142


McLennan, J. C., 22
Magnetism, 9
Mass, conservation of, 48, 49,
51, 538
definition of, 47
of energy (energy-mass), 53
rest-, 52, 58, 69
Mathematical interpretation of
nature, 127, 131, 138, 141,
142, 145, 146


INDEX


Matter, annihilation of, 69, 70,

VS O77, 116
conservation of, 46, 50, '73

Maxwell, J. Clerk, 17, 52, 54,
55, 81, 108

Mechanical interpretation of
nature, 16, 17, 19, 128,
138, 146

Meteorites, 57, 58

Meteors, 57, 58

Michelson, A. A., 83

Michelson-Morley experiment,
83 ff., 87

Millikan, R. A., 72, 75, 76

Minkowski, H., 98, 101, 103

Mitchell, Sir P. C., 189

Molecules, 7, 47

Morley, E. W., 83

Mosharrafa, A. M., 77


Nature, laws of, 45, 118, 140

Nebulae, extra-galactic, Plate I,
64 ff.

Newton, Sir Isaac, 16, 31, 32,
34, 36, 39, 40, 41, 47, 49,
51, 82, 89, 90, 98, 94, 106,
111

Nichols, E. F., 55


Occam, William of, 96


Perpetual motion machines,
74, 88, 144
Photons, 36, 37, 70, '75, 142
Planck, M., 19, 20, 27
Planets, birth of, 2, 59
Plato, ix, 119, 127, 145
Pressure of radiation, 55, 56
Probability in knowledge, 22,
147
in nature, 20, 22, 122, 124
waves of, 122
Protons, nature of, 39, 43, 76


1538


Quantum theory, 19, 25, 30, 36
Quotations:
Arnold, Matthew, 147
Berkeley, Bishop, 137
Dirac, P. A. M., 123
Eddington, Sir A. S., 104
Fitzgerald, E. (Omar), 125
Galileo, 127
Huxley, T. H., 4
Johnson, Samuel, 138
Lodge, Sir O., 104
Maxwell, J. Clerk, 54
Minkowski, H., 103
Mitchell, Sir P. C., 139
Newton, Sir Isaac, 16, 32, 34,
82, 89, 94
Occam, William of, 96
Plato, ix, 145
Schrédinger, E., 121
Wordsworth, W., 130


Radiation, mass of, 55, 56, 57
mechanical interpretation of,
17, 129
pressure of, 55, 56
quantum theory of, 24, 30, 36
Radioactive disintegration, 20,
21, 23
Radioactivity, 9
Rayleigh (3rd Baron), 88
Reflection and refraction of
electrons, 41, 42, 122, 123
and refraction of light, 31,
32, 33, 40
Relativity, theory of, 60, 64,
89, 97 ff.
Rest-mass, 52, 53, 69
Rupp, E., 43
Rutherford, Sir E., 21, 22, 52


Salisbury, Lord, 79
Schrédinger, E., 40, 121
Shapley, H., 58
Shooting-stars, 57, 58


154


Soap-bubble analogy, 61, 114,
115
Soddy, F., 21
Space, nature of, 60, 98, 113,
143
Spectrum of light, 35
Spontaneous disintegration, 21,
23, '70
Stars, length of lives of, 59, 60,
65, 68
number and size of, 1
source of energy of, 54, 69


ten Bruggencate, P., 66

Thermodynamics, 13, 74, 144

Thomson, G. P., 42, 122

Thomson, Sir J. J., 51

Time, nature of, 30, 98, 119,
143, 145

Trouton, F. T., 88


Uncertainty principle of Hei-
senberg, 25, 123


INDEX


Undulatory theory of light, 34,
39, 81

Uniformity of nature, 15, 140

Universe, size of, Plate I, 1,
143


Vital force, 7, 8


Waterston, J. J., 17
Wave-length of radiation, 36,
42, 77
Wave-mechanics,
126, 142
Weyl, H., 118, 119


40 ff., 120,


X-radiation, 22, 37, 38, '71, 81
Young, Thomas, 39, 81


Zwicky, F., 66, 67, 68


CAMBRIDGE. PRINTED BY
W. LEWIS, M.A.
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS


-


sia
att


ss


Teyk3
nitist


warerees
SAS


ait


ae


Be
ence


ee
ate
ass


si
artist


eas


segs at
Ti: § anti be


crane
ve


sea


=raeeeeige
ue


a


i


pests


Si7


Bebe he sie ea


js


ae


