A Continuation of Facts and Observations Relative to the Variolae Vaccinae, or Cow Pox
Edward Jenner (1800)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Jenner's 1800 third vaccination tract, consolidating the evidence that cowpox protects against smallpox. 1800 London edition. This edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

wD OBSERVATI ONS -


Samii. (RELATIVE TO


rte Mi


ia Ss ; An A
CONTINUATION


OTF


%


FACTS AND OBSERVATIONS ~ ee


RN OE ae a


RELATIVE TO THE


Pe VARIOLZ VACCINE,


OR


COW POX.


By EDWARD JENNER, M.D. F.R.S. F.L.S. &c.


“4
P
“| *
ae
ee London:
! x : ee
PRINTED, FOR THE AUTHOR,
BY SAMFSON LOW, Ne, > BERWICK STREET, SOHO:
AND SOLD BX¥ LAW, AVE-MARIA LANE; AND MURRAY AND HIGHLEY, FLEET STREET, L
=
1800.
og
4. .
: ~
- - t *


F 3; a eh as * "


a


\' Ri A Lt rh


&


A CONTINUATION OF
FACTS AND OBSERVATIONS,


ee, Fe,


SINCE my former publications on the Vaccine Inoculation, I

have had the fatisfaction of feeing it extend very widely. Not

only in this country is the fubject purfued with ardour, but from

my Seciporibad: with many refpectable medical gentlemen

is on the Continent, (among whom are. Dr. De Carro of Vienna,


and Dr. Bal/horn of Hanover) I find it is as: warmly adopted


abroad, where it has afforded the greateft fatisfaction. I have
the


'
“i
y”


E, Sh


‘the pleafure too of feeing that the feeble efforts of a few in-


dividuals to depreciate the new practice, are finking faft into
contempt beneath the immenfe mafs of evidence which has rifen


up in fupport of oi


Upwards of fix thoufand perfons have now been inoculated
with the virus of Cow Pox, and the far greater part of them
have fince been inoculated with that of Small Pox, and expofed


to its infection in every rational way that could be devifed, with-
out effect.


It was very improbable that the inveftigation of a difeafe fo
analagous-to the Small Pox, fhould go forward without engaging —
the attention of the Phyfician of the Small Pox Hofpital in


London.


Accordingly, Dr. Woodville, who fills that department with
fo much refpectability, took an early opportunity of inftituting


an Inquiry into the nature of the Cow Pox. This Inquiry was


began in the early part of the prefent year, and in May, Dr.’
2 Woodville


p73
Woodville publifhed the refult, which differs effentially from


mine in a point of much importance. It appears that three-fifths
of the patients inoculated were affected with eruptions, for the
moft part fo perfectly refembling the Small Pox, as not to be
diftinguifhed from them, On this fubject it is neceffary that


I thould make fome comments.


When I confider that out of the great number of Cafes of
cafual inoculation immediately from cows, which have from
time to time prefented themfelves to my obfervation, and the
many fimilar inftances which have been communicated to me
by medical gentlemen in this neighbourhood ; when I con-
fider too that the matter with which my inoculations were
conducted in the years 1797, 98, and 99, was taken from
different cows, and that in no inftance any thing like a vario-
lous puftule appeared, I cannot feel difpofed to imagine that
eruptions, fimilar to thofe defcribed by Dr. Woodville, have
ever been produced by the pure uncontaminated Cow Pock


virus: on the contrary, I do fuppofe that thofe which the


Doctor {peaks of, originated in the action of variolous matter,


which


4
t
"


Cy Se]


which crept into the conftitution with the vaccine. And this
I prefume happened from the inoculation of a great numberof the
patients with variolous matter (fome on the third, others on the
fifth day) after the vaccine had been applied ; and it fhould be
obferved, that the matter thus propagated became the fource of
future inoculations in the hands of many medical gentlemen
who appeared to have been previoufly unacquainted with the


nature of the Cow Pox.


Another circumftance ftrongly, in my opinion, fupporting
this fuppofition, is the following: The Cow Pox has been
known among our dairies time immemorial. — If puftules then,
like the variolous, were to follow the Corfthullieation of it
from the cow to the milker, would not fuch a fact have been
known, and recorded at our farms? Yet, neither our farmers
nor the medical people of the neighbourhood have noticed fuch


an occurrence,


A few fcattered pimples I have fometimes, though very rarely


feen, the greater part of which have generally difappeared |


quickly,


t ed


quickly," but fome have remained long enough to fuppurate at
their apex. That local cuticular inflammation, whether fpring-
ing up fpontaneoufly, or arifing from the application of acrid
fubftances, fuch, for inftance, as Cantharides, Pix Burgundica,
Antimonium Tartarizatum, &c. will often produce cutaneous
affections, not only near the feat of the inflammation, but on fome
parts oe the fkin far beyond its boundary, is a well-known fact.
It is, doubtlefs, on this principle that the inoculated Cow-pock
puftule and its concomitant efflorefcence may in very irritable
conftitutions produce this affection, The eruption I allude to, —
has commonly appeared fome time in the third week after
inoculation. But this appearance is too trivial to excite the


leaft regard.


The change which took place in the general appearance
during the progrefs of the vaccine inoculation at the Small Pox
Hofpital fhould likewife be confidered. i


2
f


Although at firft it took on fo much of the variolous character


as to produce puftules in three Cafes out of five, yet in Dr.
B Woodville’s


T io a
Woodville’s laft report, publifhed in June, he fays, ‘* fince the
publication of my reports of inoculations for the Cow Pox,
upwards of three hundred Cafes have been. under my care ; and


out of this number, only thirty-nine had puftules that fup-


_purated: viz. out of the firft hundred, nineteen had puftules ;


out of the fecond, thirteen; and out of the laft hundred and
ten, only feven had puftules, Thus it appears that the difeafe
has become confiderably milder ; which I am inclined to at-
tribute toa greater caution ufed in the choice of the matter,
with which the infection was communicated; for lately, that
wilich has been employed for this purpofe has been taken only
from thofe patients in whom the Cow Pox proved very mild


and well characterifed*.”


The inference I am induced to draw from thefe premifes is very


different. The decline, and finally, the total extin¢tion nearly of


* In a few weeks after the Cow Pox inoculation was introduced at the Small
Pox Hofpital, I was favoured with fome virus from this ftock. In the firft
inftance it produced a few puftules, which did not maturate ; but in the fubfe-
quent cafes none appeared. E. 72


puftules,


[ ‘aa. @


thefe puftules, in my opinion, are more fairly attributable to the
Cow Pox virus, aflimilating the variolous*, the former probably
being the original, the latter the fame difeafe under a peculiar,


and at prefent an inexplicable modification.


One experiment tending to elucidate the point under difcuffion,
I had myfelf an opportunity of inftituting. On the fuppofition
of its being poflible that the Cow which ranges over the fertile
meadows in the vale of Gloucefter, might generate a virus
differing in fome refpects in its qualities from that produced by
the animal artificially pampered for the production of milk for
the metropolis, I procured, during my refidence there in the
fpring, fome Cow Pock virus from a cow at one of the London


milk-farms}. It was immediately conveyed into Gloucefter-


* In my firft publication on this fubjeét, I expreffed an opinion that the Small
Pox and the Cow Pox were the fame difeafes under different modifications. In
this opinion Dr. Woodville has concurred. The axiom of the immortal Hauter,
that ‘wo difeafed actions cannot take place at the fame time in one and the fame part,
will not be injured by the admiffion of this theory.


+ It was taken by Mr. Tanner, then a ftudent at the Veterinary College, from


a cow at Mr. Clark’s farm at Kentifh Town.


B2 fhire


|
4
\
{


[ x2]
fhire to Dr. Marfhall, who was then extenfively engaged in the
inoculation of the Cow Pox, the general refult of which, and
of the inoculation in particular with this matter, I fhall lay
before my Readers in the following communication from the


Doctor.


“ Dear SIR,

‘« My neighbour Mr. Hicks having mentioned your with
to be informed of the progrefs of the inoculation here for the
Cow Pox, and he alfo having taken the trouble to tranfmit to
you my minutes of the Cafes which have fallen under my care, —
I hope you will pardon the further trouble I now give you in
ftating the obfervations I have made upon the fubjeét. When firft
informed of it, having two children who had not had the Small
Pox, I determined to inoculate them for the Cow Pox when-
ever I fhould be fo fortunate as to procure matter proper for the
purpofe. I was therefore particularly happy when I was in-
formed that I could procure matter from fome of thofe whom
you had inoculated. In the firft inftance, I had no intention


of extending the difeafe further than my own family, but the


3 | very


Lage


very extenfive influence which the conviction of its efficacy
in refifting the Small Pox has had upon the minds of the people
in general, has rendered that intention nugatory, as you will
perceive by the continuation of my Cafes enclofed in this
letter*, by which it will appear, that fince the 22d of March,
I have inoculated an hundred and feven perfons ; which, con-
fidering the retired fituation I refide in, is a very great number.
There are alfo other confiderations which, befides that of its
influence in refifting the Small Pox, appear to have had their
weight ; namely, the peculiar mildnefs of the difeafe, the
known fafety of it, and its not having in any inftance prevented
the patient from following his ordinary bufinefs, In all the
Cafes under my care, there have only occurred two or three
which required any application owing to eryfipelatous inflam-—
mation on the arm, and they immediately yielded to it. In the
remainder the conftitutional illnefs has been flight but fufficiently


marked, and confiderably lefs than I ever obferved in the fame


* Do&or Marfhall has detailed thefe Cafes with great accuracy, but their
publication would now be deemed fuperfluous. Bey.


number


[ 14 ]
number inoculated with the Small Pox. In only one or two of
the Cafes have any other eruptions appeated than thofe around
the fpot where the matter was inferted, and thofe near the
infected part. Neither does there appear in the Cow Pox to be
the leaft exciting caufe to any other difeafe, which in the Small
Pox has been frequently obferved, the conftitution remaining
in as full health and vigour after the termination of the difeafe as
before the infection. Another important confideration appears
to be the impoffibility of the difeafe being communicated except
by the actual contact of the matter of the puftule, and confe-
quently the perfect fafety of the remaining part of the family,
fuppofing only one or two fhould wifh to be inoculated at the


fame time.


“* Upon the whole it appears evident to me, that the Cow
Pox is a pleafanter, fhorter, and infinitely more fafe difeafe
than the inoculated Small Pox when sondage in the moft
careful and approved manner ; neither is the local affection of
the inoculated part, or the conftitutional illnefs. near fo violent.


I {peak with confidence on the fubject, having had an oppor-


tunity


{ a 7


tunity of obferving its effects upon a. variety of conftitutions,
from three months old to fxty years ; and to which I have paid
particular attention. In the Cafes alluded to here, you will
obferve that the removal from the original fource of the matter
has made no alteration or change in the nature or appearance of
the difeafe, and that it may be continued, ad infinitum, (I
imagine) from one perfon to another (if care be obferved in
taking the matter at a proper period) without any neceflity of


recurring to the original matter of the cow.


‘< T fhould be happy if any endeavours of mine could tend
further to elucidate the fubject, and fhall be much gratified in:


fending you any further obfervations I may be enabled to make.


** T have the pleafure to fubfcribe myfelf,


é¢ Dear, Sir, Gee,
Eaftington, Gloucefterfhire,


April 26th, 1799. ‘‘ JosepH H, MarsHatt.”


The gentleman who favoured me with the above account, has.


continued to profecute his inquiries with unremitting induftry,
and


[ 16 ]


and has communicated the refult in another letter, which at his


requeft I lay before the public without abbreviation.


Dr. MARSHALL’S SECOND LETTER.


** Dear Sir,

«¢ Since the date of my former letter, I have continued to
inoculate with the Cow Pox virus. Including the cafes before.
enumerated, the number now amounts to four hundred and
twenty-three. It would be tedious and ufelefs to detail the
progrefs of the difeafe in each individual—it is fufficient to
obferve, that I noticed no deviation in any refpect from the
Cafes I formerly adduced. The general appearances of the arm —
exactly correfponded with the account given in your firft
- publication. When they were difpofed to become troublefome
by eryfipelatous inflammation, an application of equal parts of
vinegar and water always anfwered the defired intention. I
muft not omit to inform you that when the difeafe had duly
acted upon the conftitution, I have frequently ufed the vitriolic


acid. A portion of a drop applied with the head of a probe or


any


[ er J

any convenient utenfil upon the puftule, fuffered to remain
about forty feconds, and afterwards wathed off with fponge and
water, never failed to {top its progrefs, and expedite the for-


mation of a f{cab.


‘«¢ T have already fubjected two hundred and eleven of my


patients to the action of variolous matter, but every one re-


fifted it.


«« The refult of my experiments (which were made with
every requifite caution) has fully convinced me that the true
Cow Pox isa fafe and infallible preventive from the Small Pox ;
that in no cafe which has fallen under my obfervation has it
been in any confiderable degree troublefome, much lefs have I
feen any thing like danger ; for in no inftance were the patients


prevented from following their ordinary employments.


“In Dr. Woodville’s publication on the Cow Pox, I notice an
extraordinary fact. He fays that the generality of his patients
had puftules. It certainly appears extremely extraordinary that

C in


[ 8 J
in all my Cafes there never was but one puftule, which appeared


on a patient’s elbow on the inoculated arm, and maturated. It


appeared exaétly like that on the incifed part.


‘¢ The whole of my obfervations, founded as It appears on an
extenfive experience, leads me to thefe obvious conclufions ;
that thofe Cafes which have been or may be adduced againft
the preventive powers of the Cow Pox, could not have been
thofe of the true kind, fince it muft appear to be abfolutely
impoflible that I fhould have fucceeded in fuch a number of
Cafes without a fingle exception, if fuch a preventive power did
not exift. I cannot entertain a doubt that the inoculated Cow
Pox muft quickly fupercede that of Small Pox. If the many
important advantages which muft refult from the new practice
are duly confidered, we may reafonably infer that public benefit,
the fure teft of the real. merit of difcoveries, will render it


generally extenfive.


“* To you, Sir, as the difcoverer of this highly beneficial


practice, mankind are under the higheft obligations. As a


private


cua)
private individual I participate in the general feeling; more
particularly as you have afforded me an opportunity of noticing
the effects of a fingular difeafe, and of viewing the progrefs of
the moft curious experiment that ever was recorded in the


Hiftory of Phyfiology.


«¢ T remain, Dear Sir, &c.


* JosepH H. Marsuatt.


«©P.S. I fhould have obferved, that of the patients I ino-
culated and enumerated in my letter, one hundred and twenty-
feven were infected with the matter you fent me from-the
London cow. I difcovered no diffimilarity of fymptoms «in
thefe cafes, from thofe which I inoculated from matter procured
in this country. No puftules have occurred, except in one or
two cafes, where a fingle one appeared on the inoculated arm.
No difference was apparent in the local inflammation. There was
no fufpenfion of ordinary employment among the labouring
people, nor was any medicine required,


€ 4 «¢ T have


os We Loom we) Ge A cee oe


[ # ]


‘‘ I Bave frequently inoculated one or two in a family, and
the remaining part of it fome weeks afterwards. The unin-
fected have flept with the infeéted during the whole courfe of
the difeafe without being affected ; fo that I am fully convinced
that the difeafe cannot be taken but by actual contact with the
matter.

‘* A curious fact has lately fallen under my obfervation,


on which I leave you to comment.


«* I vifited a patient with the confluent Small Pox, and
charged a lancet with fome of the matter. Two days afterwards
I was defired to inoculate a woman and four children with the
Cow Pox, and I inadvertently took the vaccine matter on the
fame lancet which was before charged with that of Small Pox.
In three days I difcovered the miftake, and fully expected that
my five pb ticati would be infected with Small Pox; but I was


agreeably furprifed to find the difeafe to be the genuine Cow


Pox, which proceeded without deviating in any particular from


ny,


a


- 5


Page


my former cafes, I afterwards inoculated thefe patients with


variolous matter, but all of them refitted ‘its action.


‘¢ I omitted mentioning another great advantage that now
occurs to me in the inoculated Cow Pox; I mean the fafety
with which pregnant women may have the difeafe communicated
tothem. I have inoculated a great number of females in that
fituation, and never obferved their cafes to differ in any refpedt
from thofe of my other patients. Indeed the difeafe is fo mild,
that it feems as if it might at all times be communicated with


the moft perfect fafety.”


I fhall here take the opportunity of thanking Dr. Marfhall
and thofe other gentlemen who have obligingly prefented me
with the refult of their inoculations ; but, as they all agree in
the fame point as that given in the above communication,


namely, the fecurity of the patient from the effects of the Small


Pox after the Cow Pox, their perufal, I prefume, would afford


us fatisfaction that has not been amply given already. Particular
occurrences I fhall of courfe detail. Some of my corref-


pondents


[ pe @


pondents have mentioned the appearance of Small Pox-like
eruptions at the commencement of their inoculations ; but in
thefe cafes the matter was derived from the original ftock at the


Small Pox Hofpital.


I have myfelf inoculated a very confiderable number from the
matter produced by Dr. Marthall’s patients; originating in the
London cow, without obferving puftules of any kind, and have
difperfed it among others who have ufed it with a fimilar
effect. From this fource Mr. H. Jenner informs me, he has
inoculated above an hundred patients without obferving eruptions.
Whether the nature of the virus will undergo any change from
being farther removed from its original fource in paffing fuc-
ceflively from one perfon to another, time alone can determine.
That which I am now employing has been in ufe near eight
months, and not the leaft change is perceptible in its mode of
action either locally or conftitutionally. There is therefore
every reafon to expect that its effects will remain unaltered,
and that we fhall not be under the _neceffity of feeking frefh


fupplies from the cow.


The


E523
The following obfervations were obligingly fent me by Mr.
Tierny, Affiftant Surgeon to the South Gloucefter Regiment of


Militia, to whom I am indebted for a former report on this


fubject.


<¢ J inoculated with the Cow Pox matter from the 11th to
the latter part of April, twenty-five perfons, including women
and children. Some on the 11th were inoculated with the
matter Mr. Shrapnell (Surgeon to the Regiment) had from you,
the others with matter taken from thefe. The progrefs of the
puncture was accurately obferved, and its appearance feemed to
differ from the Small Pox in having lefs inflammation around its
bafis on the firft days, that is, from the third to the feventh ;
but after this the inflammation increafed, extending on the tenth
or eleventh day to a circle of an inch and a half from its centre,
and threatening very fore arms; but this I am happy to fay was
not the cafe; for, by applying mercurial ointment to the in-
flamed part, which was repeated daily until the inflammation
went off, the arm got well without any further application or


trouble.


a ee


5% .
. > an — . by .—
~ : “ a eee eee EN RS Ne Sl Cee


a a
trouble. The conftitutional fymptoms which appeared on
the eighth or ninth day after inoculation, fcarcely deferved the
name of difeafe, as they were fo flight as to be {carcely per-
ceptible, except that I could connect a flight head-ache and
langour, with a ftiffnefs and rather painful fenfation in the
axilla. This latter fymptom was the moft ftriking, it re-
mained from twelve to forty-eight hours. In no cafe did I
obferve the {malleft puftule, or even difcolouration of the fkin
like an incipient puftule, except about the part where the virus


had been applied.


‘« After all thefe fymptoms had fubfided, and the arms were.


well, I inoculated four of this number with variolous matter,
taken from a patient in another regiment. In each of thefe it
was inferted feveral times under the cuticle, producing flight
inflammation on the fecond or third day, and always difappear-
ing before the fifth or ixth; except in one who had the Cow
Pox in Gloucefterfhire before he joined us, and who alfo


received it at this time by inoculation, In this man the puncture


3 inflamed


el 25 J
_ inflamed, and his arm was much forer than from the infertion of


the Cow Pox virus ; but there was no pain in the axilla, nor


could any conftitutional affection be obferved,


‘« T have only to add, that I am now fully fatisfied of the
efficacy of the Cow Pox in preventing the appearance of the
Small Pox, and that it is:a moft happy and falutary fubftitute


for it,


‘¢’'-T remain, &c.


‘¢M. J. Trerny.”


Although the fufceptibility of the virus of the Cow Pox is
- for the moft part loft in thofe who have had the Small Pox, yet
in fome conftitutions it is only partially deftroyed, and in others


it does not appear to be in the leaft diminifhed.


By far the greater number, on whom trials were made, re-


fitted it entirely ; yet I found fome on whofe arms the puftule


from inoculation was formed completely, but without producing


D the


f 26 ]


the common efflorefcent bluth around it, or any conftitutional
illnefs, while others have had the difeafe in the moft perfect
manner. A cafe of the latter kind having been prefented to me


by Mr. Fewfter, Surgeon, of Thornbury, I fhall infert it.


‘¢ Three children were inoculated with the vaccine matter you
obligingly fent me. On calling to look at their arms three days
after, I was told that John Hodges, one of the three, had been
inoculated with the Small Pox when a a old, and that he had
a full burthen, of which his face produced plentiful marks,
a circumftance I was not before made acquainted with. On the
fixth day the arm of this boy appeared as if inoculated with
variolous matter, but the puftule was rather more elevated. On
the ninth day he complained of violent pain in his head and
back, accompanied with vomiting and much fever. The next
day he was very well, and went to work as ufual. The punc-
tured part began to fpread, and there was the areola around the


inoculated part to a confiderable extent.


‘« As this is contrary to an affertion made in the Medical and
2 Phyfical


i ar anor el


Leah J
Phyfical Journal, No. 8, I thought it right to give you this


information, and remain,


“¢ Dear Sir, Kc.


‘¢ J. FEwSTER.”


It appears then that the animal economy with regard to the
action of this virus is under the fame laws as it is with refpect
to the variolous virus, after previoufly feeling its influence, as


far as comparifons can be made between the two difeafes.


Some ftriking inftances of the power of the Cow Pox in
fufpending the progrefs of the Small Pox after the patients had
been feveral days cafually expofed to the abn have been
laid before me, by Mr. Lyford, Surgeon, of _Winchefter, and
my nephew the Rev. G. C. Jenner. Mr. Lyford, after giving
an account of his extenfive and fuccefsful practice in the vaccine -


inoculation in Hampfhire, writes as follows :


‘© The following Cafe occurred to me a fhort time fince, and


Da - may


[ 28 J
may probably be worth your notice. I was fent for to a patient
with the Small Pox, and on inquiry found that five’ days
previous to my feeing him the eruption began to appear.
During the whole of this time two children, who had not had
the Small Pox, were conftantly in the room with their father,
and frequently on the bed with him. The mother confulted
me on the propriety of iaacuteeene them, but objected to my
taking the matter from their father, as he was fubject to eryfi-
pelas. I advifed her by all means to have them inoculated at
that time, as I could not procure any variolous matter elfewhere.
However, they were inoculated with vaccine matter, but I
cannot fay I flattered myfelf with its proving fuccefsful, as they
had previoufly been fo Jong and ftill continued to be expofed to
the variolous infection. Notwithftanding this I was agreeably
furprifed to find the vaccine difeafe advance and go through its
regular courfe; and, if I may be allowed the expreflion, to the


total extinction of the Small Pox.”


Mr. Jenner’s Cafes were not lefs fatisfactory. He writes as
follows :


«¢ A fon


ty


[ 29 J
« A fon of Thomas Stinchcomb of Woodford, near Berkeley,
was infe¢ted with the natural Small Pox at Briftol, and came
home to his father’s cottage. Four days after the eruptions had


appeared upon the boy, the family (none of which had ever had


the Small Pox) confifting of the father, mother, and five.


children, was inoculated with vaccine virus. On the arm of
the mother it failed to produce the leaft effect, and fhe of courfe
had the Small Pox*, but the reft of the family had the Cow
Pox in the ufual mild way, and were not affected w th the Small
Pox, although they were in the fame room, and the children
flept in the fame bed with their brother who was confined to it


with the natural Small Pox ; and fubfequently with their mother.


*« T attended this family with my brother Mr. H. Jenner.”


The following Cafes are of too fingular a nature to remain:


unnoticed.


* Under fimilar circumftances I think it would be advifeable to infert the
matter into each arm, which would be more likely to infure the fuccefs of the
operation. E..f-


Mifs.


re |


Mifs R , ayoung lady about five years old, was feized


on the evening of the eighth day after inoculation with vaccine
virus, with fuch fymptoms as commonly denote the acceffion
of violent fever. Her throat was alfo a little fore, and there
were fome uneafy fenfations about the mufcles of the neck.
The day following a rafh was perceptible on her face and neck,
fo much refembling the efflorefcence of the Scarlatina Angi-
had been


expofed to the contagion of that difeafe. An anfwer in the


nofa, that I was induced to afk whether Mifs R


affirmative, and the rapid fpreading of the rednefs over the
{kin, at once relieved me from much anxiety refpecting the
nature of the malady, which went through its courfe in the
ordinary way, but not without fymptoms which were alarming,
both to myfelf and Mr. Lyford, who attended with me. There
was no apparent deviation in the ordinary progrefs of the puftule
to a ftate of maturity, from what we fee in general ; yet there
was a total fufpenfion of the Arcola or florid difcolouration


around it, until the Scarlatina had retired from the con-


f{titution.


[* ‘Sas 4


ftitution. As foon as the patient-was freed from this difeafe,


this appearance advanced in the ufual way*.


The Cafe of Mifs H—— R—— is not lefs interefting than
that of ‘hed fifter above related. She was expofed to the con-
tagion of the Scarlatina at the fame time, and fickened almoft
at the fame hour. The fymptoms continued fevere about twelve
hours when the Scarlatine-rafh fhewed itfelf faintly upon her
face, and partly upon her neck. After remaining two or three
hours it fuddenly difappeared, and fhe became perfectly free
from every complaint. My furprife at this fudden tranfition
from extreme ficknefs to health, in great meafure ceafed when
I obferved that the inoculated puftule had occafioned, in this
cafe, the common efflorefcent appearance around it, and that
as it approached the centre it was nearly in an eryfipelatous


* I witneffed a fimilar fat in a cafe of Meafles*. The puftule from the Cow
Pock virus advanced to maturity, while the Meafles exifted in the conftitution,


but no efflore/cence appeared around it until the Meafles had ceafed to exert its


influence.


* See page 55.


ftate..


wii, > * <=


[ 32 J
ftate. But the moft remarkable part of this hiftory is, that on
the fourth day afterwards, as foon as the efflorefcence began to
die away upon the arm, and the puftule to dry up, the Scar-
latina again ncn her throat became fore, the rafh fpread
all over her. She went fairly through the difeafe, with its


common fymptoms.


That thefe were actually Cafes of Scarlatina, was rendered
certain by two fervants in the family falling ill at the fame time
with the diftemper, who had been expofed to the infection with


the young ladies.


Some there are who fuppofe the fecurity from the Small Pox
obtained through the Cow Pox will be of a temporary nature
only. This fuppofition is refuted not only by analogy with
refpect to the habits of difeafes of a fimilar nature, but by in-
controvertible facts, which appear in great numbers againft it.


To thofe already adduced in the former part of my firft Treatife*


* See pages g, 11, 12, 13, 14, 20, &c.


many


ATE eS ta atta Kad


bh i933)


many more might be added were it deemed neceflary; but
among the Cafes I refer to, one will be found of a perfon who
had the Cow Pox fifty-three years before the effect of the Small
Pox was tried upon him. As he completely refifted it, elit
intervening period I conceive muft neceflarily fatisfy any reafon-
‘able mind, Should further evidence be thought neceflary, I
fhall obferve that among the Cafes prefented to me by Mr. Fry,
Mr. Darke, Mr. Tierny, Mr. H. Jenner, and others, there were
many whom they inoculated ineffectually with variolous matter,
who had gone through the Cow Pox many years before this trial


was made.


It has been imagined that the Cow Pox is capable of being
communicated from one perfon to another by effluvia without
the intervention of inoculation’ My experiments, made with
the defign of afcertaining this important point, all tend to
eftablifh my original pofition, that it is not infectious, except by
contact. I have never hefitated to fuffer thofe on whofe arms
there were puftules exhaling the effluvia, from aflociating or even
fleeping with others who never had experienced either the Cow


E Pox


C 34 ]


Pox or the Small Pox, And further, I have repeatedly, among
children caufed the uninfected to breathe over the inoculated
vaccine puftules during their whole progrefs, yet thefe experi-
ments were tried without the leaft effect.: However, to fubmit
a matter fo important to a till further, {crutiny, I defired Mr..
H. Jenner to make any. further experiments which might
ftrike him as moft likely to eftablith or refute what had been
advanced on this fubject.. He has fince informed me, ‘* that he
inoculated children at the breaft, whofe mothers had not gone
through either the Small Pox or the Cow Pox; that he had
inoculated mothers whofe fucking infants had never undergone
either of thefe difeafes; that the effluvia from the inoculated:
puftules, in either cafe, had been inhaled from day to day during
the whole progrefs of their maturation, and that there was not
the leaft perceptible effect from thefe expofures. One woman
he inoculated about a week previous to her Accouchment, that
her infant might be the more fully and conveniently expofed to
the puftule; but, as in the former inftances, no infection was


given, although ‘the child frequently flept. on the, arm of its


mother with its noftrils and mouth expofed to the puftule in the


-fulleft


fulleft ftate of maturity. Ina word, is it not impoflible for the


Cow Pox, whofe only manifeftation appears to confift in the


puftules created by contad, to produce itfelf by effluvia ?


In the courfe of a late inoculation, I obferved an appearance
which it may be proper here to relate. The punctured part
on a boy’s arm (who was inoculated with frefh limpid virus)


on the fixth day, inftead of fhewing a beginning veficle,


which is ufual in the Cow Pox at that period, was en-


crufted over with a rugged amber-coloured feab. The fcab
continued to fpread and increafe in thicknefs for fome days,
when at its edges a veficated ring appeared, and the difeafe went
through its ordinary courfe, the boy having had forenefs in the
axilla, and fome flight indifpofition. With the fluid matter
taken from his arm, five perfons were inoculated. In one it
took no effect. In another it produced a perfect puftule without
any deviation from the common appearance ; but in the other
three the progrefs of the inflammation was exactly fimilar to the
inftance which afforded the virus for their inoculation ; tie
was a creeping fcab of a loofe texture, and fubfequently the


E 2 formation


- ae


{ 36 ]
formation of limpid fluid at its edges. As thefe people wereall em- _
ployed im laborious exercifes, itis poflible that thefe anomalous
appearances might owe their origin to the friction of the clothes .
on the newly-inflamed part of the arm. I have not yet had an


opportunity of expofing them to the Small Pox.


In the early part of this Inquiry I felt far more anxious re-
{pecting the inflammation of the inoculated arm than at prefent ;
yet that this affection will go on to a greater extent than could
be wifhed is a circumftance fometimes to be expected. As this
can be checked, or even entirely fubdued by very fimple means,
I fee no reafon why the patient fhould feel an uneafy hottr
becaufe an application may not be abfolutely neceffary. About
the tenth or eleventh aay" if the puftule has proceeded regularly, |
the appearance ofthe arm will almoft to a certainty indicate
whether this is to be expected or not, Should it happen,
nothing more need be done than td apply a fingle drop of the
Aqua Lythargyr. Acctati* upon the puftule, and having fuffer-


ed it to remain two or three minutes, to cover the efflorefcence


* Extra@t of Saturn.


furrounding


toa J
furrounding the puftule with a picce of linen dipped in the
Aqua Lythargyr. Compos.* The former may be repeated
twice or thrice during the day, the latter as often as it may feel


agreeableto the patient, |


When the feab is prematurely rubbed off, (a circumftance
not unfrequent among children and working people) the ap-
plication of a little 4gua Lythargyrt Acct. to the part, immedi-
ately coagulates the furface, which fupplies its place; and


prevents a fore.


_ In my former Treatifes on this fubject I have remarked that
the human cortiiciiiien frequently retains its fufceptibility of the
Small Pox contagion (both from effluvia and contact) after
previouily feeling its influence. In further corroboration of
this declaration, many facts have been communicated to me. by


various correfpondents. I fhall felect one of them.


* Goulard. Water. For further information on this fubjeét fee the firft
Treatife on the Var. Vac. Dr. Marfhall’s Letters, &c.


‘s DEAR


4


[C 38 J
‘¢ Dear Sir,


‘« Society at large muft I think feel much irdebted to you


for your Inquiries and Obfervations on the Nature and Effects


of the Variole Vaccine, &c. &c. As I conceive what I am
now about to communicate to be of fome importance, I imagine
it cannot be uninterefting to you, efpecially as it will ferve to
corroborate your affertion of the fufceptibility of the human
fyftem of the variolous contagion, although it has previoufly
been made fenfible of its action, In November 1793, I was
defired to inoculate a perfon with the Small Pox. I took the
variolous matter from a child under the difeafe in the natural
way, who had a large burthen of diftinct puftules. The mother
of the child being defirous of feeing my method of communi-:
cating the difeafe by inoculation, after having opened a pultule,
I introduced the point of my lancet in the ufual way on the
back part of my own hand, and thought no more of it until I
felt a fenfation mm the part, which reminded me of the tranfac-.
tion. This happened upon the third day ; on the fourth there


were all the appearances common to inoculation, at which I was


2 not


Cao W
not at all furprifed, nor did I feel myfelf uneafy upon  per-
ceiving the inflammation continue to increafe to the fixth and
feventh day, accompanied with a very {mall quantity of fluid,
repeated experiments having taught me it might happen fo with
perfons who had undergone the difeafe, and yet would efcape
any conftitutional affection : but I was not fo fortunate ; for on
the eighth day I was feized with all the fymptoms of the eruptive
fever, but in a much more violent degree than when I was before
inoculated, which was about eighteen years previous to this, when
I had a confiderable number of puftules. I muft confefs I was
now greatly alarmed, although, I had been much engaged in the
Small Pox, having at’ different times inoculated not lefs than
two thoufand perfons. I was convinced my prefent indifpofi-
tion’ proceeded from the: infertion: of the variolous matter, and
therefore anxioufly looked for an eruption. On the tenth day I
felt a very unpleafant fenfation of ftiffnefs, and heat on each


fide of my face near my ear, and the fever began to decline.


The affeCtion in my face foon terminated in three or four


puftules


r


[ 40 J
puftules attended with inflammation, but which did not ma-


turate, and I was prefently well.


«<< Tremain, Dear Sir, &c. 4190


“ Tuomas MILEs,”


This Inquiry is not now fo much in its infancy as to reftrain
me from {peaking more pofitively than formerly on the im-


portant point of Scrophula as connected with the Small Pox, —


Every practitioner in medicine, who has éxtenfively inocu-
lated with the Small Pox, or has attended many of thofe who
have had the diftemper in the natural way, muft acknowledge
that he has frequently feen fcrophulous affections, in fome form
or another, fometimes rather quickly fhewing themfelves after
the recovery of the patients. Conceiving this fa&t to be ad-
mitted, as I prefume it muft be by all who have carefully attend-


ed to the fubjeét, may I net afk whether it does not appear


probable


[ uJ


i probable that the general introduction of the Small Pox into


“Europe has not been among the moft conducive means in ex-
citing that formidable foe to health? Having attentively watched


_.{ the effects of the Cow Pox in this refpect, Iam happy in being


' able to eines that the difeafe does not appear to have the leaft


tendency to produce this deftructive malady.


The fcepticifm that appeared even among the moft enlightened
of medical men when my fentiments on the important fubject of
a the Cow Pox were firft promulgated, was highly laudable.


To have admitted the truth of a doctrine, at once fo novel and


fo unlike any thing that ever had appeared in the Annals of |


Medicine, without the teft of the moft rigid {crutiny, would
have bordered upon temerity ; but now, when that {crutiny has
| taken place, not only among ourfelves but in the firft profeffional

circles in Europe, and when it has been uniformly found in fuch

abundant inftances that the human frame, when once it has felt
= the influence of the genuine Cow Pox in the way that has been
defcribed, is never afterwards at any period of its exiftence


cae aflailable by the Small Pox, may I not with perfect confidence


F _ congratulate


congratulate my country and fociety at large on hen boholding,


\e


in the mild form’ of the Cow Pox, an antidote that i AS Cé Bay
extirpating from the earth a difeafe which is every hour des
ia | vouring its victims ; a difeafe that has ever. been confidered as


4 : _ the-fevereft fcourge ofthe human race! Hg, A
