Further Observations on the Variolae Vaccinae, or Cow Pox
Edward Jenner (1799)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Jenner's 1799 sequel to the Inquiry: additional cases and replies to early critics of vaccination. 1799 London edition. This edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

FURTHER
OBSERVATIONS
-VARIOLA VACCINE,


COW POX.


By EDWARD JENNER, M.D. F.R.S. F.LS. &.


London :
PRINTED, FOR THE AUTHOR,


BY SAMPSON LOW, Nd 7, BERWICK STREET, SOHO:


AND SOLD BY LAW, AVE-MARIA LANE, AND MURRAY AND HIGHLEY, FLEET STREET.


er


1799.


: aes)
iP


a Mee
sat eeyeue ae Oy
Pe gay Tat ie ea gf AAG) eee


vodavoo
> OREO On


" i i


be t,
. ‘filly fr


E10 SAAT CHANEL
BM oe ay tee KS i iar ee a Sal


© ¥
OER To 2°; ne f
ATE AOR,


1


a '


TO


C. HW. PARRY, M.D.


AT BATH.


MY DEAR FRIEND,


"THE fame motives which impelled
me to dedicate to you my firft Effay on the Variolee
Vaccine, induce me to offer you my further Obfer-


vations on the fame fubject.


I am pleafed at feeing the inveftigation fo generally
entered into, and I hope that the fpirit with which
this important inquiry wil be profecuted, may be
tempered with that calmnefs and moderation which


fhould ever accompany philofophical refearches.


With the greateft regard
I remain


Your’s, very fincerely,


EDWARD JENNER.
Berkeley, Gloucefterfhire,
5th April, 1799.


you
Mead a:


ahd
i


ny
ft


ila a


Olt
an


j wD £ a


FURTHER


OBSERVATIONS,


.


ESc. E8c,


Auruoucu it has hot ‘been in my power to extend the
Inquiry into the caufes and effects of the Variole Vaccine much
beyond its original limits, yet, perceiving that it is beginning to
excite a general {pirit of inveftigation, I think it of importance,
without delay, to communicate fuch facts as have fince occur-
red, and to point out the fallacious fources from whence a difeafe
imitative of the true Variole Vaccine might arife, with the
view of preventing thofe who may inoculate, from producing a
fpurious difeafe ; and further, to enforce the precaution fuggefted
in the former Treatife-on the fubject, of fubduing the inoculated


B puftule


[ 23


puftule as foon as it has fufficiently produced its influence on the
conftitution. From a want of due difcrimination of the real exift-
ence of the difeafe either in the brute or in the human fubje&, and
alfo of that ftage of it in which it is capable of producing the
change in the animal economy which renders it unfufceptible —
of the contagion of the Small Pox, unpleafant confequences
might enfue, the fource of which, perhaps, might not be fuf-


pected by one inexperienced in conducting fuch experiments..


My late publication contains a relation of moft of the facts
_whichhad come under my own infpection at the time it was writ-
rant interfperfed with fome conjectural obfervations. Since then
Dr. G. Pearfon has eftablifhed an inquiry into the validity of my
‘principal affertion, the refult of which cannot but be highly
flattering to my feelings. It contains not a fingle cafe which I
think can be called an exception to the fact I was fo firmly
impreffed with —that the Cow Pox protects the human body

from the Small Pox. I have myfelf received fome further con-
firmations, which fhall be fubjoined. I have lately alfo been
favoured, with. a letter from a gentleman of great refpectability
(Dr. Ingenhoufz), informing me that, on making an inquiry
into the fubject in the county of Wilts, he difeovered that a


farmer


LEE Sa


farmer fiéar Calne had been infected with the Small Pox after


having had the Cow Pox, and that the difeafe in each inftanice -


was fo ftrongly characterifed as to render the facts incon-
trovertible. The Cow Pox, it feems, from the Doctor’s infor-
mation, was communicated to the farmer from his cows at the


time that they gave out an offenfive fiench from their udders.


Sottie’ other inflances have likewifé been reprefented to me of
the appearance of the difeafe, apparently marked with its cha-
racteriftic fymptoms, and yet that the patients have afterwards
had the Small Pox. On thefe Cafes I fhall, for the prefent,
fufpend any particular remarks, but hope that the general
obfervations I have to offer in the fequel will prove of fufficient
weight to render the idea of their ever having had exiftence,


but as cafes of fpurious Cow Pox, extremely doubtful.


Ere I proceed Jet me be permitted to obferve, that Truth, in
this and every other phyfiological Inquiry that has occupied my


attention, has ever been the object of my purfuit ; and fhould it


appear‘in the prefent inftance that I have been led into error, -


. fond as I may appear of the offspring of my labours, I had


rather fee it perifh at once, than exift and do a public injury.


B 2 1 fhall


i i


aye]


I fhall proceed to enumerate the fources, or what, appear to:


me as fuch, of a fpurious Cow Pox.


ift. That arifing from puftules on the nipples or udder of the.,
cow ; which puftules contain no {pecific virus..

edly. From matter (although originally poffefling the fpecific
virus) which has fuffered a decompofition, either from. putre-.
faction or from any other caufe lefs obvious to the fenfes.

gdly. From matter taken from an ulcer in an advanced ftage,.


which ulcer arofe froma true Cow Pock.


4thly. From matter produced on-the human fkin from contaét


with fome peculiar morbid matter generated by a horfe..


On thefe fubjeéts I fhall offer fome comments. Firft—-To.
what length puftulous difeafes of the udder and nipples of the
“cow may extend, it is not in my power to. determine ; but.
certain it is, that thefe parts of the animal are fubject to fome
variety of maladies of this nature; and as many of thefe erup-.
tions (probably all of them) are capable of giving a difeafe to. the


; | human


[5 ]


human body, would it not be difcreet for thofe engaged in this:


inveftigation to fufpend controverfy and cavil) until. they can


afcertain.with precifion what 2s and what.zs. not the Cow Pox ?


_ For example.— A farmer who is not converfant with any of
thefe Gniuas: but who may have heard of the Cow Pox in
general terms, may acquaint a neighbouring furgeon that the
diftemper appears at his farm. The furgeon, eager to. make'an
experiment, takes away matter, inoculates, produces a fore,
uneafinefs in the axilla, and perhaps fome affection of the fyftem.
This is one way in which a fallacious idea of fecurity both in
the mind of the inoculator and the patient may. arife; for a
difeafe may thus have been propagated from a fimple eruption.


only Lb


One of the firft objects then of this purfuit, as I have
obferved, fhould be, to learn how to diftinguifh with accuracy
between that peculiar puftule which is the true Cow Pock,’ and
that which is fpurious. Until experience has determined this,
we view our object through a mift,.. Let us for inftance fuppofe,
that. the Small Pox and the Chicken Pox were at the fame time
to fpread among the inhabitants of a country which ‘had never


been:


a


[ @ ]


‘been vifited by ‘either of 'thefe diftempers, and where they were
quite unknown before : what confufion would arife? ‘The re-
femblance between the fymptoms of the eruptive fever and
between the puftules in either cafe would be fo ftriking, that a
patient, who had-gone through the Chicken Pox to any extent,
would feel equally eafy with regard to his future fecurity from
the Small Pox as the perfon who had atually paffed through
that difeafe. Time and future obfervation would draw the line


of diftinction.


‘So T prefume it will be with the Cow Pox until it is more
generally underftood, All cavilling therefore on the mere report
of thofe who tellus they have had this diftemper, and are after-
wards found to be fufceptible of the Small Pox, fhould be fuf-
pended, To illuftrate this, I beg leave to give the fallowine
hiftory :


SARAH MERLIN) of! thé’ parift ef! Haftineton’ in: this
county, when about thirteen or fourteen years of age lived as a
fervant with farmer Clarke, who kept a dairy confifting of about
eighteen cows at Stonehoufe, a neighbouring village. The nip-
ples and udders of three of the cows were extenfively affected


with


C@
with large white blifters. Thefe cows the girl milked daily, and
at the fame time fhe affifted, with two others, in milking the
reft of the herd. It foon appeared that the difeafe was communi-
cated to the girl. The reft of the cows efcaped the infection, al-
though they were milked feveral days after the three above {peci-
fied had thefe eruptions on the nipples and udders, and even after
the girl’s hand became fore. The two others who. were engaged
in milking, although they milked the cows indifcriminately, re-
ceived no injury. On the fingers of each of the girl’s hands
there appeared. feveral large white blifters, fhe fuppofes about
three or four on each finger, The hands and arms inflamed and
fwelled, but no conftitutional indifpofition followed. The fores
were anointed with fome domeftic ointment, and got well with-


out ulcerating.


As this malady was called the Cow Pox, and recorded as fuch
in the mind_of the patient, fhe became regardlefs of the Small.
Pox; but, on being expofed to it fome years afterwards, fhe was


infected, and had a full burthen..


Now had any one converfant with the habits of the difeafe
heard this hiftory, they would have had no hefitation in pro-


nouncing


{8.4


youncing it a cafe of fpurious Cow Pox ; confidering its de-
viation in the numerous blifters which appeared on the’ girl’s
hands ; their termination without ulceration ; its not proving
more generally contagious at the farm either among the cattle or
thofe employed in milking ; ‘and confidering alfo that the patient
felt no general indifpoft ition, although there was fo te a
number of veficles..


This is er the moft deceptious form in which an erup="
tive difeafe can be communicated from the cow, and it certainly
requires fome tention ih difcriminating it. The moft perfect
criterion by which the judgement may be guided, is perhaps |
that adopted by thofe who attend infected cattle, Thefe white
blifters on the nipples, they fay, never eat nto the flefhy parts
like thofe which are commonly of. a blueifh caft, and hick
conftitute the true Cow Pox, but that they affect the fkin only, |


quickly end in feabs, and are not nearly fo infectious.


That which appeared to mé as one caufe of {purious eruptions,
I have already remarked in the former Treatife, namely, the
tranfition that the cow makes in the {pring from a poor tOo/-a
nutritious aig and from thé ace s becoming at this time more


vatcular


GAs: ee


vafcular than ufual for the fupply of milk. But there is another
fource of inflammation and puftules which I believe is not
uncommon in all the dairy counties in the weft of England. A
cow intended ‘to be expofed for fale, having naturally a {mall
udder, is previoufly for a day or two’ neither milked artificially,
nor is her calf fuffered to have accefs to her. Thus the milk is
pigrepadcavally accumulated, and the udder-and nipples become
greatly diftended. The confequences frequently are, inflam-


mation and eruptions which maturate,


‘Whether’a difeafe generated in this: way has the power of
affecting the conftitution in any peculzar manner, I cannot pre-
fume pofitively to determine. It has been conjectured to hive
been a caufe of the true Cow Pox, though my inquiries have
not led me to adopt this fuppofition in any one inftance ; on the
contrary, I have known the milkers affected by it, but always
found that an affection thus induced left the fyftem as fufcep-

tible of the Small Pox as before.


What is advanced. in my fecond. -pofition, I eaulider alfo of
very great importance, and: I could wifh it to be ftrongly im-
prefled oy the minds of all who may be difpofed to conclude

C haftily


Ra

haftily, on my obfervalions: whether engaged in their invefti-
gation by experiments or not.—To place this in its cleareft
-point of view (as the fimilarity between the action.of the Small
Pox and the Cow Pox matter is fo obvious) it will be neceflary.
to confider what we fometimes obferve to take place in» inocula-
tion for the Small Pox when imperfect variolous matter is made
ufe of. | The concife hiftory on this fubject, that was brought
forward re{pecting what I had obferved in this neighbourhood*,
I perceive by a reference fince made to the Memoirs of the
Medical Society of London, may be confidered as no more than
a corroboration of the facts very clearly detailed by Mr. Kite +.
To this copious evidence I have to add {till more in the
following communications from . Mr. Earle, furgeon, of
Frampton-upon-Severn, in this county, which I deem the more

valuable, as he has with much candour permitted me to make |


them public.


* Inquiry into the Caufes and Effects of the Variole Vaccine, page 56.


+ See an account of fome anomalous appearances confequent to the inocula-
tion of the Small Pox, by Charles Kite, Surgeon, of Gravefend, in the
Memoirs of the Medical Society of London. Vol. iv. page 114.


‘se,


La J
‘$ Sire,

J have read with fatisfaction your late publication on the
Variole Vaccine, and being, among many other curious cir-
cumftances, particularly ftruck with that relating to the inefficacy
of Small Pox matter in a. particular fates I think it proper to
lay before you the following facts which came within my own
knowledge, and which certainly tend to f{trengthen the opinions


advanced in pages 56 and 57 of your Treatife.


‘In March 1784, a general inoculation took. place at
Arlingham in this county. I inoculated feveral patients with
active variolous ereutoit all of whom had the difeafe in a favour-
able way ; but my matter being all ufed, and not being able to
procure any more in the ftate I wifhed, I was under the neceflity
of taking it froma puftule aah experience has fince proved,
was advanced too far to anfwer the purpofe I intended. Of five
perfons inoculated with this laft matter, four took the Small tex
afterwards in the natural way ; one of whom died, three reco-.
_vered, and the other, being cautioned by me to avoid as much as
poffible the chance of catching it, efcaped from the difeafe
through life. He died of another diforder about two years ago.

: Pog | Although


fw J


«« Although one of thefe cafes ended unfortunate, yet I cannot
fuppofe that any medical man will think me carelefs-or inattentive
in their management; for I conceive the appearances were fuch
as might have induced any one to fuppofe that the perfons were
perfectly fafe from future infe@tion. Inflammation, in. every, |
cafe took place in the arm, and fever came on with.a confiderable
degree of pain in the axilla. In feist of their arms the inflam-
mation and fuppuration were more violent than. is commonly
obferved when perfect matter is made ufe of; in one there was
an ulcer which caft off feveral large floughs. ' About the ninth
day ‘eruptions appeared, which died away earlier than common
without maturation.—From thefe circumftances I fhould fuppofe
that no medical practitioner would fcarcely have entertained a
doubt but that thefe patients. had been infected with a true Small
Pox; yet I muft confefs that fome {mall degree of doubt pre-
fented itfelf to me at the {peedy difappearance of the eruptions ;
and in order, as far.as I could, to afcertain. their fafety, I fen
one of them to a much older practitioner than myfelf... This
gentleman, on hearing the circumftances of the cafe, pronounced


the patient perfectly fecure from future infection.


Gb The


[ ps J


‘« The following facts are alfo a ftriking proof of the truth of


your obfervations on this fubject: —


‘« In the year 1789 I inoculated three ahitdven of Mr. Coaley,
of Hurft farm in this county. The arms inflamed properly,
fever and pain in the axillz came on precifely the fame as in the
former cafes, and in’ ten days eruptions appeared, which difap-
aiid in the courfe of two days. I muft obferve that the
matter here made ufe of was procured for me by a friend: but
no doubt it was in an improper ftate; for, from the fimilarity of
thefe cafes to thofe which happened at Arlingham five. years
before, | was fomewhat alarmed for their fafety, and defired to
inoculate them again ; which being permitted, I was particularly
careful Mi procure matter in its moft perfect. ftate... All the
children took the Small Pox from this fecond inoculation, and
all had a very full burthen. Thefe facts I conceive ftrikingly
eoambowaté your opinion relative to the different ftates of matter 3
for in both: the inftances that I have mentioned it was capable
of producing fomething ftrongly refembling the true Small Pox,


although it afterwards proved not to be fo.


L 14 J}.


‘© As I think the communication of thefe Cafes is a duty I
owe to the public, you are at liberty to make what ufe you pleafe
- of this letter.

‘< T remain, &c.


Frampton-upon-Severn, Gloucefterfhire, . . ce Jou N EARLE.
November.10, 1798. - ‘


‘«P.S, I think it neceflary to obferve, that I can pronounce with
the greateft certainty, that the matter with which the Arlingham
patients were inoculated was taken from a true Small Pox
puftule. I took it myfelf from a fubjeét that had a very full


burthen.”


Certain then it is that variolous matter_may undergo fuch a
change from the putrefactive procefs, as well as from fome of.
the more obfcure and latent proceffes of nature, as will render it
incapable of giving the Small Pox in fuch a manner as to fecure
the human ‘eonftitition from future infection, although we fee at
the fame time it is capable of exciting a difeafe which bears fo
{trong a refemblance to it, as to produce inflammation and matter
in the incifed kin (frequently indeed more violent than when it


produces its effects perfectly), {welling of the axillary glands,


general


Pass)


general indifpofition, and eruptions. So ftrongly perfuaded was
the gentleman, whofe practice I have mentioned in page 56 of the
late Treatife, that he could produce a mild Small Pox by his
mode of managing the matter, that he {poke of it.as a ufeful
difcovery, until convinced of his error by the fatal confequence


which enfued. Win


After this ought we to be in the fmalleft degree furprifed to
find, Pe a great number of individuals who by living in
dairies have been cafually expofed to the Cow Pox virus when
“in a ftate analogous to that of the Small Pox above defcribed,
fome, who may have had the difeafe fo imperfectly as not to
render them fecure from variolous attacks? For the matter,
when burft from the puftules on the nipples of the cow, by being
expofed, from its lodgment there, to the heat of an inflamed
{urface, and from being at the fame time in a fituation to be
occafionally moiftened with milk, is often likely to be in a ftate
conducive to putrefaction; and thus, under fome modification
of decompofition, it muft of courfe fometimes find accefs to the
hand of the milker in fuch a way as to infect him. What con-
fufion fhould we have; were there no other mode of inoculating
the Small Pox than fuch’ as would happen from handling


1 the


fl. 8


the difeafed fkin' of a perfon labouring under: that diflemper in
fome of its advanced and loathfome ftages | It’ muft be obferved
that every cafe of Cow Pox in the human fpecies, whether com-
municated by defign or otherwife, \1s\to be confidered as a cafe of
inoculation. And here I may be:allowed to make an obfervation
on the cafe of the Blane communicated to me by Dr. Ingenhoufz.
That he was expofed to the matter enn had undergone the
putrefactive change, is highly probable from the Doctor’s obiery-
ing that the fick cows at the farm gave out an offenfive tench
from their udders. However, I muft remark, that it is unufual for
cattle to fuffer to fuch an extent, when difordered with the Cow
Pox, as to make a by-ftander fenfible of any ill {mell. I have often
ftood among a herd which had the diftemper without being con-
{cious of its prefence from any particular effluvia. Indeed, in this
neighbourhood it commonly receives an early check from efcha-
rotic applications of the cow leech. It has been conceived to be
contagious without contact; but this idea cannot be well founded,
becaufe the cattle in one meadow do not infect thofe in another
(although there may be no other partition Wan a hedge)- unlefs
they be handled or milked by thofe who bring the infectious -
matter with them; and of courfe the fmallett particle imaginable,
when applied to a part fufceptible of its influence, may produce


the


ti 2


the effect. Among the human fpecies it appears to be very clear,
that the difeafe is produced by contact only. All my attempts,
at leaft, to communicate it by effluvia have hitherto proved


ineffectual.


As well as the perfect change from that ftate in which
variolous matter is capable of producing full and decifive effects
on the conftitution, to that wherein its fpecific properties are
entirely loft, it may reafonably be fuppofed that it is capable of
undergoing a variety of intermediate changes, The following
fingular occurrences in ten cult of inoculation, obligingly
communicated to me by Mr. Trye, Senior Surgeon to the
Infirmary at Glocefter, feem to indicate that the variolous matter,
previoufly to its being taken from the patient for the intended
purpofe, was beginning to part with fome of its original pro-
perties, or, in other words, that it had fuffered a partial decom-
pofition. Mr, Trye fays, ‘‘ I inoculated ten children with mat-
ter taken at one time and from the fame fubject. I obferved no
peculiarity in any of them previoufly to their inoculation, nor
did any. thing remarkable appear in their ariife till after the
decline of the difeafe. Two infants of three months old had


eryfipelas about the incifions, in one of them extending from


D the


[ 3


the fhoulders to the fingers ends. Another infant had abfceffes
in the cellular fubftance in the neighbourhood of the incifions,
and five or fix of the reft had axillary abfceffes.. The matter oe
taken from the diftinét Small Pox late in its progrefs, and when
fome puftules had been dried. It was received upon glafs, and
{lowly dried by the fire. All the children had puftules which
maturated, fo that I fuppofe them all fecure from future infec-
tion; at leaft, as fecure as any others whom I have ever inocu;


lated, My practice never afforded a fore arm before.”


In regard to my former obfervation on the improper and
dangerous mode of preferving variolous matter, 1 fhall here
remark, that it feems not to have been clearly underftood.
Finding that it has been confounded with the more eligible
modes of prefervation, I will explain myfelf further. When the
matter is taken from a fit puftule and properly prepared for
prefervation, it may certainly be kept without lofing its f{pecific
properties a great length of time; for inftance, when it is pre-
vioufly dried in the open air on fome compact body, as a quill


or a piece of glafs, and afterwards fecured in a {mall vial*. But


* Thus prepared, the Cow Pox virus was found perfe@ly ‘a€tive, and pof-
fefling allits {pecific properties, at the end of three months.


when


f.#9.4


when kept feveral days in a ftate of moifture, and during that
time expofed to a warm temperature, I do not think it can be
relied upon as capable of giving a perfec difeafe, although, as I
have before obferved, the progrefs of the fymptoms arifing from
the action of the imperfect matter’ bear fo ftrong a refemblance


to the Small Pox when excited completely.


gdly. That the firft formed virus, or what conftitutes the true
Cow Pock puftule, invariably poffeffes the power I have
afcribed to it, namely, that of affecting the conftitution with
a f{pecific difeafe, is a truth that no fubfequent occurrence has
yet led me to doubt. But as I am now endeavouring to guard
the public as much as poffible againft erroneous conclufions,. I
fhall obferve, that when this puftule has degenerated into an
ulcer (to which ftate it is often difpofed to pafs unlefs timely
checked). I fufpec& that matter poffefling very different properties
may fooner or later be produced ;: and although it may have
paffed that ftage wherein the fpecific properties of the matter
fecreted are no longer prefent in it, yet when applied to a fore
(as in the cafual way) it might difpofe that fore to ulcerate,
‘and. from its ifritation the fyftem would probably become
D2 affected ;


[ae 3


affected ; and thus, by affuming fome of its ftrongeft.charaéters,


it would imitate the genuine Caw Pox.


From the preceding obfervations on the matter of Small Pox
when decompofed, it muft, I conceive, be admitted, that Cow Pox
matter in the ftate now deferibed may produce a difeafe, the
effects of which may be felt both locally and generally, yet that
the difeafe thus Ladvindit may not be effectual in obviating the
future effects of variolous contagion. In the cafe of Mary Miller,
related by Mr. Kite in.the volume above alluded to, it appears
that the inflammation and fuppuration of the inoculated arm
were more than ufually fevere, although the fyftem underwent
no fpecific change from the action of the virus; which appears.
from the patient’s fickening feven weeks afterwards with the
natural Small Pox, which went through its courfe. Some of
the Cafes communicated by Mr. Farle tend further to confirm
this fact, as the matter there manifeftly produced ulceration on


the inoculated part to a confiderable extent.


Athly. Whether the Cow Pox is a fpontaneous difeafe in the
cow, ors is to be attributed to matter conveyed to the animal, as


I have


Secs Bd


I have conceived, from the horfe, is a queftion, which though
I fhall not attempt now fully to difcufs, yet I fhall digrefs fo far
as to adduce fome further obfervations, and to give my reafons
more at large for taking up an opinion that to fome has appeared
fanciful. The aggregate of thefe obfervations, though not
amounting to pofitive proof, forms prefumptive evidence of fo
forcible a kind, that I imagine it might on any other perfon
have made the fame impreffion it did on me, without fixing


the imputation of credulity.


Firft, I conceived this was its fource, from obferving that
where the Cow Pox had appeared among the dairies here (unlefs
it could be traced to the introduction of an infected cow or fer-
vant) it had been preceded at the farm by a horfe difeafed in the
manner already defcribed, which horfe had been attended’ by


fome of the milkers.


Secondly. From its being a popular opinion throughout this
great dairy country, and from its being infifted on by thofe who


here attend fick cattle.


Thirdly.


£2 3 ji
Thirdly. From the total abfence of the difeafe in Ireland and


Scotland, where the men fervants are not employed in the


dairies *.


Fourthly. From having obferved that morbid matter generated
by the horfe frequently communicates, in a cafual way, a difeafe
to the human fubject fo like the Cow Pox, that in many cafes it
would be difficult to make the diftinction between one and the
other


Fifthly. From being induced to fuppofe from experiments,
that fome of thofe who had been thus affected from the horfe
refifted the Small Pox.


Sixthly. From the progrefs and general appearance of the
puftule on the arm of the boy whom I inoculated with matter


taken from the hand of a man infected by a horfe; and from the


* This information was communicated to me from the firft authority.


+ The found fkin does not appear to be fufceptible of this virus when inferted
into it, but, when previoufly difeafed from little accidents, its effeéts are often
confpicuous.

_ fimilarity


[ gs J


fimilarity to the Cow Pox of the general conftitutional fymp-


toms which followed ™*. -


I fear it would be trefpafling too far to adduce the general
teftimony of our farmers in fupport of this opinion; yet I beg


leave to introduce an extract of a letter on this fubject from
the Rev. Mr. Moore, of Chalford Hill, in this county.

hat In the month of November 1797, my horfe had difeafed
heels, which was certainly what is termed the greafe; and at a
fhort fubfequent period my cow was alfo affected with what a
neighbouring farmer (who was converfant with the complaints
of cattle) pronounced to be the Cow Pox, which he at the fame
time obferved my fervant would be infected with: and this
proved to be the cafe; for he had eruptions on his hands, face,
and many parts of the body, the puftules appearing large, and not


much unlike the Small Pox, for which he had been inoculated


* This Cafe (on which I laid no inconfiderable ftrefs in my late Treatife, as
prefumptive evidence of the fa€t adduced) feems to have been either miflaken
or overlooked by thofe who have commented upon it.—See Cafe xviii, page 36. ©
The boy unfortunately died of a fever at a parifh workhoufe before I had an
opportunity of obferving what effe€ts would have been produced by the matter
of Small Pox.


1 a year


[ese


ayear anda half before, and had thena very heavy burthen. The
puftules on the face might arife from contact with his hands,
as he had a habit of rubbing his forehead, where the fores were


the largeft and the thickeft.


‘¢ The boy affociated with the farmer’s fons during the conti-
nuance of the difeafe, neither of whom had had the Small Pox,
but they felt no ill effects whatever. He was not much indif- ~
pofed, as the difeafe did not prevent him from following his
occupations as ufual.. No other perfon attended the horfe or
milked the cow, but the lad above mentioned. I am firmly of
opinion that the difeafe in the heels of the horfe, which was a
virulent greafe, was the origin of the fervant’s and the cow’s


malady,”


But to return to the more immediate object of this pro-


pofition.


From the fimilarity of fymptoms, both conftitutional and
local, between the Cow Pox and the difeafe received from
morbid matter generated by a horfe, the common people in this
neighbourhood when infected with this difeafe, through a

:  ftrange


[ 2% J
ftrange aerenath of terms, frequently call it the Cow Pox.
Let us fuppofe then fuch a malady to appear among fome of the
fervants at a farm, and at the fame time that the Cow Pox were
to break out among the cattle; and let us fuppofe too that fome
of the fervants were infected in this way, and that others re-
ceived the infection from the cows. It would be recorded at
the farm, and among the fervants themfelves wherever they
might afterwards be difperfed, that they had all had the Cow
Pox. But it is clcar that an individual thus infected from the
horfe, would neither be for a certainty fecure himfelf, nor would
he impart fecurity to others were they inoculated by virus thus
generated. He ftill would be in danger of taking the Small Pox.
Yet were this to happen before the nature of the Cow Pox be
more maturely confidered by the public, my evidence on the
fubje&t might be depreciated unjuftly. For an exemplification
of what is here advanced relative to the natiire of the infection
when received directly from the horfe, fee Inquiry into the
Caufes and Effects of the Variole Vaccine, pages 27, 28, 29, 30,
and page 35; and by way of further example, I beg leave to
{ubjoin the following intelligence received from Mr. Fewfter,


Surgeon, of Thornbury, in this county, a gentleman perfectly
E well


[ 26 |


well acquainted with the appearances of the Cow Pox on the


human fubject.


‘WILLIAM MORRIS, aged thirty-two, fervant to Mr. Cox
of Almondfbury, in this county, applied to me the 2d of April,
1708. He told me, that four days before he found a ftiffnefs
and fwelling in both his hands, which were fo painful, it was
with difficulty he continued his work ; that he had been feized
with pain in his head, fmall of the back and limbs, and with ~
frequent chilly fits fucceeded by fever. On examination I
found him ftill affected with thefe fymptoms, and that there
woot great proftration of ftrength. Many parts of his hands on
the infide were chapped, and on the middle joint of the thumb
of the right hand there was a {mall phagedenic ulcer, about the
fize of a large pea, difcharging an ichorous fluid. On the
middle finger of the fame hand there was another ‘ulcer of ‘a
fGimilar kind, Thefe {ores ‘were of¢a: circular form, and he
defcribed their firft appearance as being fomewhat like blifters
arifing from a burn. He complained of exceflive pain, which
extended up his arm into the axilla. Thefe fymptoms and
appearances of the fores were fo exactly like the Cow Pox, that
{ pronounced he had taken the diftemper from milking cows.


He


[ty J


He aMired me he had not milked a cow for more than half a year,
and that his mafter’s cows had nothing the matter with them.
I then afked him if his mafter had a greafy horfe ? which he
anfwered in the affirmative, and further faid, that he had con-
ftantly dreffed him twice a day for the laft three weeks or more,
and remarked that the fmell of his hands was much like that of
the horfe’s heels. On the 5th of April I again faw him, and
found him ftill complaining of pain in both his hands, nor were
his febrile fymptoms at all relieved. The ulcers had now {fpread:
to the fize of a feven fhilling gold coin, and another ulcer, which
I had not noticed before, appeared on the firft joint of the fore-
finger of the left hand, equally painful with that on the right. I
ordered him to bathe his hands in warm bran and water, applied
efcharotics to the ulcers, and wrapped his hands up in a foft
cataplafm. The next day he was much relieved, and in fome-
thing more than a fortnight got well. He loft his nails from
the thumb and fingers that were ulcerated.”

The fudden difappearance of the fymptoms in this cafe after
the application of the efcharotics to the fores is worthy of obfer-
vation ; it feems to fhew that they were kept up by the irritation


of the. ulcers;.
E 2 The


[| 28 |

The general fymptoms which I have already defcribed of the
Cow Pox, when communicated in a cafual way to any great
extent, will, Iam convinced, from the many Cafes I have feen,
be found accurate; but from the very flight indifpofition which
enfues in cafes of inoculation, where the puftule after affecting
the conftitution, quickly runs into a {cab {pontaneoufly , or is
artificially fuppreffed by fome proper application, I am indice
to believe that the violence of the fymptoms may be afcribed to
the inflammation and irritation of the ulcers (when ulceration
takes place to any extent, as in the cafual Cow Pox), and that
the conftitutional fymptoms which appear during the prefence
of the fore while it affumes the charaéter of a puftule only, are
felt but in a very trifling degree. This mild affection of the —
fyftem happens when the difeafe makes but a flight local impref-
fion on thofe who have been accidentally infected by cows; and,
as faras I have feen, it. has unitormly happened among thofe
who have been inoculated, when a puftule only and no great |
degree of inflamntation or any ulceration has taken place from


the inoculation. | The following Cafes will ftrengthen this opinion.


The Cow Pox appeared at a farm in the village of Stonehoufe,
in this county, about. Michaelmas laft, and continued gradually


to


{C 29 1


to pafs from one cow to another till the end of November. On
the 26th of that month fome ichorous matter was taken from a
cow and dried upon a quill. On the ad of December fome
of it was inferted into a fcratch, made fo fuperficial that no
blood appeared, on the arm of Sufan Phipps, a child feven
years old. The common inflammatory appearances took place
in confequence, and advanced till the fifth day, when they had
fo much fubfided, that I did not conceive any thing further


would enfue.


6th. Appearances ftationary.
- gth. The inflammation began to advance.
8th. A vefication perceptible'on the edges, forming, as in the
inoculated Small Pox, an appearance not unlike a grain of
wheat, with the cleft or indention in the centre.
oth. Pain in the axilla.
10th. A little head-ache; pulfe 110; tongue not difcoloured ;
countenance in health. |
11th.—12th. No perceptible illnefs ; pulfe about 100.
13th. The puftule was now furrounded by an efflorefcence,
inter{perfed with very minute confluent puftules to the extent of
about an inch. Some of thefe puftules advanced in fize and


maturated.


Ld O85 7


maturated. So exact was the refemblance of the arm at this
{tage to the general appearance of the inoculated Small Pox, that
Mr, D. a neighbouring Surgeon, who took fome matter from
it, and who had never feen the Cow Pox before, declared he
could not perceive any difference*. The ‘child’s arm now
fhewed a difpofition to fcab, and remained nearly ftationary for
two or three days, when it dian to run into an ulcerous ftate ;
and then commenced a febrile indifpofition accompanied with an
increafe of axillary tumor. The ulcer. continued fpreading near
a week, during which time the child continued ill, when it
increafed to a fize nearly as large as a fhilling. It began now to
difcharge pus; granulations fprang up, and it healed. This
child had before been of a remarkably fickly conftitution, but is
now in very high health. |


* That the Cow Pox was a fuppofed guardian of the conftitution from the
ation of the Small Pox, has been a prevalent idea for a long time paft; but
the fimilarity in the conftitutional effe€&ts between one difeafe and the other
could never have been fo accurately obferyed, had not the inoculation. of the
Cow Pox placed it in a new and ftronger point of view. This pra€tice too
has fhewn us what before lay concealed, the rife and progrefs of the puftule
formed by the infertion of the virus, which places in a moft confpicuous light |


its ftriking refemblance to the puftule formed from the inoculated Small Pox.


MARY


[en a


MARY HEARN, twelve years of age, was inoculated with
matter taken from the arm of Sufan Phipps.

6th day. A puftule beginning to appear, flight pain in the

axilla.

ath. A diftiné veficle formed,

8th. The veficle increafing ; edges very red; no deviation in
its appearance at this time from the inoculated Small Pox.

gth. No indifpofition: puftule advancing.

roth. The patient felt this evening a flight febrile attack.

rtth. Free from indifpofition.

rath.—13th. © The fame.

i4th. An efflorefcence of a faint red colour extending feveral
inches round the arm, The puftule beginning to fhew a dif-
pofition to fpread, was dreffed with an ointment compofed of
hydrarg. nit. rub. 8 ung. cere. The efflorefcence itfelf was
covered with a ‘plafter of wng. hydr. fort.—In fix hours it was
examined, when it was found that the efflorefcence had totally
difappeared. The application of the ointment with the Aydr.
nit. rub, was made ufe of for three days, when the ftate of the
puftule remaining {tationary, it was exchanged for the ung.
hydr. nit. ‘This appeared to have a more active effect than the
former, and in two or three days the virus feemed to be fubdued,


1 when


Eat: 3


when a fimple drefling was made ufe of; but the fore again
fhewing a difpofition to inflame, the wng. hydr. nit. was again
applied, and foon anfwered the intended purpofe effectually.
The girl ae the tenth day, when, as has been obferved, fhe .
became a little ill, fhewed not the leaft fymptom of indifpofition.
She was afterwards expofed to the action of variolous matter, and
completely refifted it. Sufan Phipps alfo went through a fimilar
trial. Conceiving thefe Cafes'to be important, I have given them
in detail; firft, to urge the precaution of ufing fuch means as
may {top the progrefs of the puftule; and fecondly, to point out
(what appears to be the fact) that fhe moft material indifpofition,
or at leaft that which is felt moft fenfibly, does not arife pri-
marily from the firft ation of the virus on the conflitution,
but that rt often comes on, if the puftule is left to chance, as a
jecondary difeafe. This leads me to conjecture, what expe-
riment muft finally determine, that they who have had the
Small Pox are not afterwards fufceptible of the primary action of
‘the Cow Pox virus; for feeing that the fimple virus itfelf when
it has not paffed beyond the boundary of a veficle, excites in
the fyftem fo little commotion, is it not probable the trifling
illnefs thus induced may be loft in that which fo quickly, and
oftentimes fo feverely, follows in the cafual Cow Pox from the


prefence


[ 33 J
prefence of corroding ulcers? This confideration induces me to


fuppofe that I may have been miftaken in my former obfervation


on this fubject.


In this refpect, as well as many thier’ a parallel may be
drawn between this difeafe and the Small Pox, In the latter,
the patient firft feels the effed of what is.called the abforption of
the virus. The fymptoms then often nearly retire, when a
frefth attack commences different from the firft,. and the illnefs
keeps pace with the progrefs of the puftules through their
different ftages of maturation, | ulceration, C&EN

Although the application I have mentioned in the cafe of
Mary Hearn proved fufficient to check the progrefs of ulceration
and prevent any fecondary fymptoms, yet, after the puftule has
duly exerted its influence, L-fhould prefer the deftroying it
quickly and:effectually to any other mode. « The. term: cauttic to
a tender ear (and I conceive none will feel more interefted in this

Inquiry than the anxious guardians of a nurfery) may found
| harfh and unpleafing, but every folicitude that ae Meera a
account will no longer exift, when it is underftood that the


K puit ule


{ jaa. J.


puftule in a ftate fit to be acted upon is then quite fuperficial,
and that it does not occupy the fpace of a filver penny *.

Asa proof of the efficacy of this practice, even before the
virus has fully exerted itfelf on the fyftem, I fhall lay before my
reader-the following hiftory.


By a reference to the Treatife on the Variole Vaccine it will
be feen, that in the month of April 1798, four children were
inoculated with the matter of Cow Pox, and that in two of
thefe cafes the virus on the arm was deftroyed foon after it had
produced a perceptible fickening. Mary James, aged feven
years, one of the children alluded to, was inoculated in the
month of December following with frefh variolous matter, and
at the fame time was expofed to the effluvia of a patient affected
with the Small Pox, The appearance and progrefs of the


infected arm was, in every refpect, fimilar to that which we


* T mention efcharotics for ftopping the progrefs of the puftule, becanfe I
‘am acquainted with their efhcacy ; probably more fimple means might anf{wer


the purpofe quite as well, fuch as might be found among the mineral and
vegetable aflringents.


generally


“ae a Rn A.


Pag


generally obferve when variolous matter has been inferted inco
the {kin of a perfon who has not previoufly undergone either
the Cow Pox or the Small Pox, On the eighth day conceiving
there was infection in it, fhe was removed from her refidence
among thofe who had not had the Small Pox. I was now
anxioufly waiting the refult, conceiving from the fate of the
girl’s arm fhe would fall fick about this time, On vifiting her
on the evening of the following’ day (the ninth) all [ could
learn from the woman who attended her was, that the felt
fomewhat hotter than ufual during the night, but was not
reftlefa; and that in the morning there was the faint appearance
of a rath about her wrifts, ‘Phis went off in a few hours, and
was not at all perceptible to me on my vifit in the evening. Not
a fingle eruption appeared, the fkin having been repeatedly and
carefully examined, ‘I'he inoculated arm continued to make the
ufual progrefs to the end, through all the flages of inflammation,


maturation, and feabbing.


On the eighth day, matter was taken from the arm of this
girl (Mary James) and inferted into the arms of her mother and
brother (neither of whom had had either the Small Pox or the


Cow Pox) the former about fifty years of age, the latter fix.
i a On


[ 86 J
On the eighth day after the infertion, the boy felt indifpofed,
and continued unwell two days, when a meafles-like rath
appeared on his hands.and wrifts, and was thinly fcattered over
his arms. The day following his body was marbled over with
an appearance fomewhat fimilar, but he did not complain, nor
did he appear indifpofed. A few puftules now appeared, the


greater part of which went away without maturating.


On the ninth day the mother began to complain. She was a
little chilly and had a head-ache for two days, but no puftule


appeared on the fhin, nor had fhe any appearance of a raf.


The family was attended by an elderly woman as a nurfe,’ who
in her infancy had been: expofed to the contagion ae the Small
Pox, but had refifted it. -This woman was now infeéted, but
liad the difeafe in the flighteft manner, a very few eruptions


appearing, two or three of which only maturated.


From a folitary inftance like that adduced of Mary: James,
whofe conftitution appears to have refifted the aétion’ of the
variolous virus, after the influence of the Cow Pox virus had
been fo foon arrefted in its:progrefs, no pofitive conclufion can


be


Ean]


be fairly drawn ; nor from the hiftory of the three other patients
who were fubfequently infected, but neverthelefs, the facts


collectively may be deemed interefting.


That one mild variety of the Small Pox has appeared, I have
already plainly fhewn*; and by the means now mentioned we


probably may have it in our power to produce at will another.


_ At the time when the puftule was deftroyed in the arm of
Mary James, I was informed fhe had been indifpofed about
twelve hours; but I am now affured by thofe who were with
her, that the fpace of time was much lefs, Be that as it may,
in cafes of Cow Pox inoculation, I would not Spieed any
application to fubdue the action of the puftule until convincing —
proofs had appeared of the patient’s having felt its effects at leaft
twelve ‘hours: No harm indeed could enfue were a longer -
period to elapfe before the application was made ufe of. In
fhort, it fhould be fuffered. to have as full an effect as it could,


confiftently with the ftate of the arm.


#* See Inquiry into the Caufes and Effedts of the Variole Vaccine, page 54.
As


L38. J

As the cafes of inoculation multiply, I am more and more
convinced of the extreme mildnefs of the fymptoms arifing
merely from the primary action of the virus on the conftitution,
and that thofe fymptoms which (as in the accidental Cow Pox)
affect the patient with feverity, are entirely fecondary, excited
by the irritating proceffes of inflammation and ulceration; and
it appears to'me that this fingular virus poffeffes an irritating
quality of a peculiar kind, but as a fingle Cow Pox puttule is all
that is neceflary to render the variolous virus ineffectual, and as
we poflefs the means bf allaying the irritation, fhould any arife,


it becomes of little or no confequence.


It appears then. (as far as an inference:can be drawn from the
prefent progrefs of Cow Pox inoculation) that it is an accidental
circumftance only, which can render. this a violent difeafe, and
a circumftance ofthat nature, which fortunately it is in the
power of almoft every one to avoid. I allude to the commu-
nication of the difeafe from cows. In this cafe fhould the hands
of the milker be affected with little accidental fores to any extent, |
every fore would become the nidus of infection, and feel the
influence of the virus; and the degree of violence in the confti-


tutional


L 39 J
tutional iymptoms would be in proportion to the number and to


the ftate of thefe local affections. Hence it follows that a per-


fon, either by accident or defign, might be fo filled with thefe .


wounds from conta¢t with the virus, that the conftitution might


fink under the preffure.


Seeing that we poffefs the means of rendering the action of the


fores mild, which, when left to chance, are capable of pro- |


_ ducing violent effects; and feeing too that thefe fores bear a
refemblance to the Small Pox, efpecially the confluent, fhould it
not encourage the hope that fome topical application might be
ufed with advantage to counteract the fatal tendency of that
difeafe, when it appears in this terrific form? At what ftage or
ftages of the difeafe this may be done with the moft promifing
expectation of fuccefs, I will not pretend now to determine. I
only throw out this idea as the bafis of further reafoning and


experiment.


I have often been foiled in my endeavours to communicate the
Cow Pox by inoculation, An inflammation -will fometimes
fucceed the {cratch or puncture, and in a few days difappear
without producing any further effect. Sometimes it will even


produce


a a 4 -
= : as A — Pe ae r abate F . t~ 9? .
nd es ete ete ro TS bo oe at 2. SS a ee oe eS ee


_


ante die


[ 40. ]
produce an ichorous fluid, and yet the fyftem will not be af-


fected. The fame thing we know happens with the Small Pox


virus.


Four or five fervants were inoculated at a farm contiguous to
this place, lat Ginter, with matter juft taken from an infected
cow. A little inflammation appeared on all their arms, but
died away without’ producing a puftule; yet all thefe fervants
caught the difeafe within a month afterwards from milking the
infected cows, and fome of them had it feverely. At prefent,
no other mode than that conimonly practiced for inoculating the
Small Pox has been ufed™for! giving the ‘Cow’ Pox but it’ is 3
probable this might be varied with advantage. © We fhould
imitate the cafual Communication more cléarly:were-we firft, by
. making the {malleft fuperficial incifior or puncture on the fkin,
to produce a little fcab, and then, removing it, to touch the
abraded part with the virus. A {mall portion of a thread im-
brued in the virus (as in the old method of inoculating the
Small Pox) and laid upon the flightly incifed {kin, might pro-
bably prove a fuccefsful way of giving the difeafe ;. or the cutis
might be expofed in a minute point by:an:atom of bliftering
plafter, and the virus brought in contact with it. In the Cafes


ja jutt


[ 4t ]


juft alluded to, where I did not fucceed in giving the difeafe
conftitutionally, the experiment was made with matter taken in


a purulent ftate from a puftule on the nipple of a cow.


Is pure pus, though contained in a Small Pox puftule, ever
capable of producing the Small Pox perfectly? I fufpect it is
not.—Let us confider that it is always preceded by the limpid
fluid, which, in conftitutions fufceptible of variolous con-
tagion, is always infeétious; and though on opening a puftule
its contents may appear perfectly purulent, yet a given quantity
of the limpid fluid may at the fame time be blended with it,
though it would be imperceptible to the only teft of our fenfes,
the eye. | The prefence then of this fluid, or its mechanical dif;
fufion through pus, may at all times render active, what is ap-
parently mere pus, while its total abfence (as in ftale puftules)


may be attended with the imperfect effects we have feen.


‘It would be digrefling too widely to go far into the doctrine
of fecretion, ‘but as it will not be quite extraneous, I fhall juft
obferve, that I confider both) the pus and;the limpid. fluid of
the puftule as fecretions, but that the organs eftablifhed by


nature to perform the office of fecreting thefe fluids may differ


G effentially


ee oa

effentially in their mechanical ftruéture. What but a difference
in the organization of glandular bodies, conftitutes the difference
in the qualities of the fluids fecreted? From fome peculiar
derangement in the ftructure, or, in other words, fome deviation
_in the natural action of a gland deftined to fecrete a mild,
Innoxious fluid, a poifon of the moft deadly nature may be
created: for example — That gland, which in its found
ftate fecretes pure faliva, may, from being thrown. into
difeafed ation, produce a poifon of the moft deftructive
quality. Nature appears to have no more difficulty in forming
minute glands among the vafcular parts of the body, than fhe
has in forming blood veffels, and millions of thefe can be
called into exiftence; when inflammation is excited, in a few.
hours *, | f

In the prefent early ftage of the Inquiry (for early it certainly
muft be deemed) before we know for an abfolute certainty
how foon the virus of the Cow Pox may fuffer a change in its
{pecific properties, after it has quitted the limpid ftate it poffeffes


when forming a puftule, it would be prudent for thofe who


* Mr. Home, in his excellent differtation on pus and mucus, juftifies this


affertion.


have >


C 43-9


have been inoculated with it to fubmit to variolous inoculation.
No injury or inconvenience can accrue from this; and were the
fame method practiced among thofe, who, from inoculation
have felt the Small Pox in an unfatisfactory manner at any
period of their lives, it might appear that I had not been too
officious in offering a cautionary hint in recommending a fecond


inoculation with matter in its moft perfect ftate.


And here let me fuppofe for argument’s fake (not from con-
viction) that one perfon in an hundred after having had the
Cow Pox fhould be found fufceptible of the Small Pox, would
this invalidate the utility of the practice? For, waving all other


confiderations, who will deny that the inoculated Small. Pox,


although abftractedly it.may be confidered as harmlefs, does


G 2 As
x
cs
4, -
= e
Sy tv : a: *.
a. Wire —— teed le a. am


not involve in itfelf fomething that in numberlefs ,inftances


proves baneful to the human frame.


That in delicate conftitutions it fometimes excites {crofula, -is -


a fact that muft generally be fubfcribed,to, as it is fo obvious to


common obfervation. This confideration is important.


Ke


E 4a 9


As the effects of the Small Pox innoculation on thofe who
have had the Cow Pox will be watched with the moft {fcrupulous
eye by thofe who profecute this Inquiry; it may be proper to
bring to'their recollection fome facts relative to the Small Pox,
which I muft ohiad here as of confequence, but which


hitherto feem not ‘to have made a due impreffion.


It {hould be remembered that the conftitution cannot by pre-
vious infection be rendered totally unfufceptible of the variolous
poifon, neither the bs faa nor the inoculated Small Pox, whether
it pradueest the difeafe in a mild or in a violent way, can per-
feétly extinguifh the fufceptibility. The {kin, we know, is
ever ready to exhibit, though often in a very limited degree, the
effects of the poifon when inferted there ; ala how frequently do
we fee among nurfes, when ‘much expofed to the contagion,
eruptions, and thefe fometimes preceded by fenfible illnefs !
yet fhould any thing like an eruption appear, or the fmalleft
degree of indifpofition, upon the infertion of the variolous
matter on thofe who have gone through the Cow Pox, my af-
fertions refpecting the peculiarities of the difeafe might be un-
juftly difcredited.,


I know -


-


L 45 J


I know a gentleman, who many years ago was inoculated for
the Small Pox, but having no puftules, or fearcely any confti-
tutional affection that was Hem siable) he was diffatisfied, and
has fince been repeatedly inoculated. A veficle has always been
produced in the arm in confequence, with axillary {welling and
a flight indifpofition: this is by no means a rare occurrence. — It
is probable that a fluid thus excited upon the fkin, would always


produce the Small Pox.


On the arm of a perfon who had gone through the Cow Pox
many years before, I once produced a vefication by the infer-
tion of variolous matter, and with a little of the fluid, inoculated
a young woman who had a mild, but very efficacious Small
Pox in confequence, although no conftitutional effect was pro-
duced on the patient from whom the matter was taken. The
following communication’ from , Mr.. Fewfter affords. a fill
clearer elucidation of this fact.—Mr. Fewfter fays, ‘‘ on the


, aged fourteen


gd of April 1797, I inoculated Mafter H


- months, for the Small Pox. At the ufual time he fickened,


had a plentiful eruption, particularly on his face, and got well.
His nurfemaid, aged twenty-four, had many years before gone


through the Small Pox, in the natural way, which was evident


from


{ 46 |


from her being’ much pitted with it. She had ufed the child to
fleep on her left arm, with her left cheek in contact with his
face, and during his inoculation he had moftly flept in that
manner. About a week after the child got well, fhe (the
| nurfe) defired me to look at her face, which fhe faid was very
Hainkelt There was'a plentiful eruption on the left cheek, dut
not on any other part of the body, which went on to matura-


tion.


“On enquiry I found that three days before the appearance of
the eruption, fhe was taken with flight chilly fits, ‘pain in her
head and limbs, and fome fever. On the appearance of ‘the
eruption thefe pains went off, and now (the fecond day of the
eruption) fhe complains of a little fore throat. Whether ‘the
above fymptoms’are the effects of the Small Pox dir 6 recent cold,
Ido not know. On'the fifth day of the eruption I charged a
lancet from two of the puftules, and on the next day I inoculated |
two children, one two years, the other four months old, with
the matter. At the fame time I inoculated the mother ‘and
- eldeft fifter with variolous matter taken from Mafter H——.
On the fifth day of their inoculation al/ their arms ‘were ‘in-
flamed alike; and on the eighth day, the eldeft of thofe ino-


“9 7 culated —


L tap


culated from the nurfe fickened, and the youngeft on the


eleventh, They had both a plentiful eruption, from which J


inoculated feveral others, who had the difeafe very favourably.


The mother and the other child fickened about the fame time,


and likewife had a plentiful eruption.


‘¢ Soon after a man in the village fickened with the Small Pox
and had a confluent kind. To be convinced that the children
had had the difeafe effectually, I took them to his houfe and
inoculated them in both arms with matter taken from him, but


without effect.”


Thefe are not brought forward as uncommon occurrences, but


as exemplifications of the human fy{tem’s fufceptibility of the .


variolous contagion, although it has been previoufly fenfible of


its action.


Happy is it for mankind that the appearance of the Small Pox


-a fecond time on the fame perfon beyond a trivial extent, is fo


extremely rare, that it is looked upon as a phcenomenon, In-
deed, fince the publication of Dr. Heberden’s paper on the
Varicelle or Chicken Pox, the idea of fuch an occurrence, in


hs deference


- te <r = we a ny pall to > gis . ie Sy ale Be,


[ 48 J


deference to authority fo truly refpectable, has been generally
relinquifhed. This I conceive has been without juft reafon; for
after we have feen, among many others, fo ftrong a Cafe as
that recorded by Mr. Edward Withers, Surgeon, of Newbury,
Berks, in the Fourth Volume of the Memoirs of the Medical
Society of London (from which I take the following Extracts)


no one I think will again doubt'the fact.


‘¢Mr. RICHARD LANGFORD); a farmer of Weft Shef-
ford, in this county: (Berks) about fifty years of, age, when
about a month old had the Small Pox at a time when three others
of the family had the fame difeafe, one of whom, a fervant man,
died of it. Mr. Langford’s countenance was ftrongly. indicative
of the malignity of the diftemper, his face being fo remarkably
pitted and feamed as to attrack the notice of all who faw him,
fo that no one could entertain a doubt of his having had that
difeafe in a moft inveterate manner.” Mr. Withers proceeds to.
ftate that Mr. Langford was feized a fecond. time, had a bad
confluent Small Pox, and died on the twenty-firft day from the
feizure: and that four of the family, .as alfo a fifter of the pa-
tients, to whom the difeafe was conveyed by her fon’s vifiting
his uncle, falling down with the Small Pox, fully fatisfied the


* country


[ 49 ]


country with regard to the nature of the difeafe, which nothing
fhort of this would have done: . the fifter died.


‘«« This cafe was thought fo extraordinary a one, as to induce
the rector of the parifh to record the particulars in the parifh


regifter.”


It is fingular that in moft cafes of this kind, the difeafe in
the firft inftance has been confluent; fo that the extent of the
ulceration on the fkin (as in the Cow Pox) is not the procefs in


nature which affords fecurity to the conftitution.


As the fubject of the Small Pox is fo interwoven with that


which is the more immediate object of my prefent concern, it


‘muft plead my excufe for fo often introducing it. At prefent it


muft be confidered as a diftemper not well underftood. The


Inguiry I have inftituted into the nature of the Cow Pox, will


probably promote its more perfect inveftigation.


‘The Inquiry of Dr, Pearfon into the Hiftory of the Cow Pox


having produced fo great a number of atteftations in favour of my


affertion that it proves a protection to the human body from the


H Small


E 5° J


Small Pox,.I have not been affiduous in feeking for more ; but as
fome of my friends have been fo good as to: communicate the fol-


lowing, I fhall conclude thefe obfervations with their infertion,


Extract of a letter from Mr. Darke, Surgeon, at Stroud, in
this county, and late Surgeon to the North Glocefter Regiment
of Militia.


“« In the {pring of the year 1796, I inoculated’: men, women,
and children; fo' the amount of about feventy. Many of the
men did not recéive the infection, although inoculated: at leaft
three times and kept in the fame room with thofe who actually
underwent the difeafe during the whole time occupied by them
in .paffing’ through’ it. Being anxious they fhould in future
be (eeinte tdpaintt it, I was very particular in my Inquiries to
find out whether they ever had previoufly had. it, or at any
time been in’ the neighbourhood of people labouring under it.
But after all, the only fatisfactory infarmhatioa 1 could obtain
was, that they had had the Cow Pox. As I was then ignorant
of fuch a difeafe affecting the human fubje@, I flattered myfelf
what they imagined to be the Cow Pox'was in reality the Small
Pox in avery flight degree, I mentioned the circumftance in


2 | - the


C gt 7


the prefence of feveral of the officers, at the fame time exprefling


my doubts if it were not Small Pox, and was not a little fur- —


prifed when I was told by the Colonel, that he had, frequently
heard you mention the Cow Pox asa difeafe endemial to
Glocefterfhire, and that 1f a perfon were ever affected by it, you
fuppofed him afterwards fecure from the Small Pox. This
excited my curiofity, and when I vifited Glocefterfhire I was
very inquifitive concerning the fubject, and from the informa-
tion I have fince received, both from your publication and from
converfation with medical men of the greateft accuracy in their
obfervations, I am fully convinced that what the men fuppofed
to be the Cow Pox was actually fo, and I can fafely affirm that


they effectually refifted the Small Pox.”


Mr. Fry, Surgeon, at Durfley in this county, favours me


with the following communication: .


‘* During the {pring of the year 1797, I inoculated fourteen
hundred and feventy-five patients, of all ages, froma fortnight
old to feventy years; among{t whom there were many. who had


previoufly gone through the Cow Pox. The exact number I


H 2 cannot


[52 J


cannot ftate ; but if I fay they were near thirty, I am certainly
within the number, There was not a fingle inftance of the
variolous matter producing any conftitutional effect on thefe
people, nor any greater degree of local inflammation than it
would have done in the arm of a perfon who had before gone
through the Small Pox, notwithftanding it was invariably
inferted four, five, and fometimes fix different times, to fatisfy
the minds of the patients. In the common courfe of inoculation
previous to the general one, {carcely a year paffed without my
meeting with one or two dnftances: of perfons who had gone
through the Cow Pox, refifting the action of the variolous con-
tagion. I may fairly fay, that the number of people I have feen
inoculated with the Small Pox, who at former periods had gone
through the Cow Pox, are not lefs than forty ; and in no one
inftance have I known a patient receive the SinaltiPoxt notwith-
ftanding they invariably continued to affociate with other inocu-
lated patients during the progrefs of the difeafe, and many of
them purpofely expofed themfelves to the contagion of the natural
Small Pox ; whence I am fully convinced, that a perfon who had
fairly had the Cow Pox, is no longer capable of being acted
upon by the variolous matter, |


** Talfo


[6a


‘* Talfo inoculated a very confiderable number of thofe who had
had a difeafe which ran through the neighbourhood a few years
ago, and was called by the common people the Swine Pox, not


one of whom received the Small Pox *.


‘¢ There were about half a dozen inftances of people who
never had either the Cow or Swine Pox, yet did not receive the
Small Pox, the fyftem not being in the leaft deranged, or the
arms baelstied) although they were repeatedly inoculated, and
affociated with others who were labouring under the difeafe ;


one of them was the fon of a farrier.”’


Mr. Tierny, Affiftant Surgeon of the South Glocefter Regi-
ment of Militia, has obliged me with the following informa-


tion:


‘«« That in the fummer of the year 1798, he inoculated a great
number of the men belonging to the Regiment, and that among


them he found eleven, who, from having lived in dairies, had


* This was that mild variety of the Small Pox which I have noticed in the


late Treatife on the Cow Pox, page 54.


gone


ah


C 54 J


gone through the Cow Pox. That all of them refifted the
Small Pox, except one, but fiatlati making the moft rigid and
ferupulous enquiry at the farm in Glocefterfhire, where the man
faid he lived when he had the difeafe, and among thofe with
whom at the fame time he declared he had affociated, and parti-
cularly of a perfom in the parifh, whom he faid had dreffed his
fingers, it: moft clearly appeared that he aimed at an impofition,
and that he never had been affected with the Cow Pox*. Mr.
Tierny remarks, that the arms of many who -were inoculated
after having had the Cow Pox inflamed very quickly, and that


in feveral a little ichorous fluid was formed.”


Mr. Cline, who in July laft was fo obliging at my requeft as
to try the efficacy of the Cow Pox virus, was kind enough to give
me a letter on the refult of it, from which the following is an


extract.


“© My DEAR SiR,
‘« The Cow Pox experiment has fucceeded admirably. The


child fickened on the feventh day, and the fever, which was


* The public cannot be too much upon their guard refpeéting perfons of this
defcription. :


moderate,


[ 65 J


moderate, fubfided on the eleventh. The inflammation arifing
from the infertion of the virus extended to about four inches in
diameter, and then gradually fubfided, without having been
attended with pain or other inconvenience. There were no


eruptions,


‘* | have fince inoculated him with Small Pox matter in three
places, which were flightly inflamed on the third day, and then
fubfided.


“© Dr. Lifter, who was formerly Phyfician to the Small Pox


Hofpital, attended the child with me, and he is convinced that :


it is not poflible to give him the Small Pox. I think the fub-


{tituting the Cow Pox poifon for the Small Pox, promifes to be


one of the greateft improvements that has ever been made in
medicine ; and the more I think on the fubject, the more Iam


impreffed with its importance.


‘¢ With great efteem
‘© Tam; &c.


Lincoln’s Inn Fields, ‘Henry. CLINE.”
Auguft 2, 1798. 7
From


[ 56 |]


From communications, with which I have been favoured
from Dr. Pearfon, who has occafionally reported to me the
refult of his private practice with the vaccine virus in London,
and from Dr, Woodville, who has alfo favoured me with
“an account of his more extenfive inoculation with the fame
virus at the Small Pox Hofpital, it appears that many of their
patients have been affected with eruptions, and that thefe erup-
tions have maturated in a manner very fimilar to the variolous.
The matter they made ufe of, was taken in the firft inftance
from a cow belonging to one of the great milk farms in London.
Having never feen maturated puftules produced either in my
own practice among thofe who were cafually infected by Cows,
or thofe to whom the difeafe had been communicated by inocu-
lation, I was defirous of feeing the effect of the matter generated
in London, on fubjects living in the country. A thread im-
brued in fome of this matter was fent to me, and with it two


children were inoculated, whofe Cafes I fhall tranfcribe from


my notes.


STEPHEN JENNER, three years and a half old.


gd. Day. The arm fhewed a proper and decifive inflammation,
6th. A veficle —


[ 37

6th. A veficle arifing.

qth. The puftule of a cherry colour.

8th. Increafing in elevation.—A few {pots now appear on
each arm near the infertion of the inferior tendons of the biceps
mufcles, They are very fmall, and of a vivid red colour. The
pulfe natural ; tongue of its natural hue; no lofs of appetite, or
any fymptom of indifpofition.

gth. The inoculated puftule on the arm this evening began to
inflame, and gave the child uneafinefs: he cried, and pointed
to the feat of it, and was immediately afterwards affected with
febrile fymptoms. At the expiration of two hours after the
feizure, a plafter of ung. hydrarg. fort. was applied, and its
effect was very quickly perceptible; for in ten minutes he
refumed his ufual looks and playfulnefs, On examining the
arm about three hours after the application of the plafter, its
effects in fubduing the iAarnntatich were very manifeft.

10th. The fpots on the arms have difappeared, but there
are three vifible in the face.

1ith. Two fpots on the face are gone; the other barely per-
ceptible. .

13th. The puftule delineated in the ad Plate in the Treatife
en the Variole Vaccine, is a correct reprefentation of that on


the child’s arm, as it appears at this time.


I 14th. Two


[ 58 J]


14th. Two frefh {pots appear on the face. The puftule on
the arm nearly converted into a feab. As long as any fluid re-


mained in it, it was limpid.


JAMES HILL, four years old, was inoculated on the fame
day, and with part of the fame matter which infected Stephen
Jenner.. It did not appear to have taken effect till the fifth day.

7th. A perceptible veficle: this evening the patient became a.
little chilly ; no pain or tumor difcoverable in the axilla.

8th, Perfectly well. -

gth.. The fame.

1oth. The veficle more elevated than I have been accuftomed
to fee it, and affuming more perfe@ly the variolous cme
than is common with the Cow Pox at this ftage, | |

11th, Surrounded by an inflammatory rednefs, about the
fize of a fhilling, ftudded over with minute i ofalen The —
puftule contained. a limpid fluid till the fourteenth day, after
which it was incrufted over in the ufual manner; but this in-


cruftation or {cab being accidentally rubbed off, it was flow in


healing.


Thefe children were afterwards fully expofed to the Small Pox


contagion without effect,


Having


Lo J


Having been requefted by my friend Mr. Henry Hicks, of
Eaftington, in this county, to inoculate two of his children, and
at the fame time fome of his fervants and the people employed
in his manufactory, matter was taken from the arm of this boy


for the purpofe. The numbers inoculated were eighteen. They


all took the infection, and either on the fifth or fixth day a .


veficle was perceptible on the punctured part. Some of them
began to feel a little unwell on the eighth day, but the greater

number on the ninth. Their illnefs, as in the former Cafes
defcribed, was of fhort duration, and not fufficient to interrupt,
but at very fhort intervals, the children from their amufements,


or the fervants and manufacturers from following their ordinary


bufinefs.


_ Three of the children, whofe employment in the manufactory
was in fome degree laborious, had an inflammation on their
arms beyond the common boundary about the eleventh or
twelfth day, when the feverifh fymptoms, which before were
nearly gone off, again returned, accompanied with increafe of
axillary tumour. ‘In thefe Cafes, (clearly perceiving that the fymp-
toms were governed by the ftate of the arms) I applied on the
inoculated puftules, and renewed the application three or four times


fas within


a


[ 60 ]


within an hour, a pledget of lint, previoufly foaked in aqua
lithargyrt acetatt*, and covered the hot efflorefcence furround-


ing them, with cloths dipped in cold water.


The next day I found this fimple mode of treatment had
fucceeded perfectly. The inflammation was nearly gone off,


and with it the fymptoms which it had produced.


Some of thefe patients have fince been inoculated with vario-
lous matter, without any effeét, beyond a little inflammation


on the part where it was inferted.


Why the arms of thofe inoculated with the vaccine matter
in the country fhould be more difpofed to inflame than thofe
inoculated in London, it may be difficult to determine. From
comparing my own Cafes with fome tranfmitted to me by
Dr. Pearfon and Dr. Woodville, this appears to be the fact: and
what ftrikes me as {till more extraordinary with refpect to
thofe inoculated in London, is the appearance of maturating
eruptions, In the two inftances only, which I have men-


tioned (the one from the inoculated, the other from the


* Goulard’s Extra& of Saturn.


cafual


Co)


cafual Cow Pox) a few red fpots appeared, which quickly went
off without maturating. The Cafe of the Rev. Mr. Moore’s
fervant may, indeed, feem like a deviation from the common
appearances in the country, but the nature of thefe eruptions
was not afcertained beyond their not poffefling the property of —
communicating the difeafe by their efluvia. Perhaps the dif-
ference we perceive may be owing to fome variety in the mode
of action of the virus upon the fkin of thofe who breathe the air
of London, and thofe who live in the country. That the eryfi-
pelas affumes a different form in London from what we fee it
'. put on in the country, is a fact very generally acknowledged.
In calling the inflammation, that is excited by the Cow Pox
virus, eryfipelatous, perhaps I may not be critically exact, but
it certainly approaches near to it. Now, as the difeafed action
going forward in the part infected with the virus may undergo
different modifications, according to the peculiarities ae the con-
ftitution on which it is to produce its effect, may it not account


for the variation which has been obferved ?


To this it may probably be objected, that fome of the patients
inoculated, and’ who had puftules in confequence, were newly
come from the country; but I conceive that the changes


wrought


[. 62 J


wrought in the human body through the medium of the lungs,
may be extremely rapid. Yet, after all, further experiments
made in London with vaccine virus generated in the country,
muft finally throw a light on what now certainly appears obfcure


and myfterious.


The principal variation perceptible to me in the action of the
vaccine virus generated in London from that produced in the
country, was its proving more certainly infe&tious and giving a
lefs difpofition in the arm to inflame. There appears alfo a greater
clevation of the puftule above the furrounding fkin. In my
former cafes, the puftule produced by the infertion of the virus
was more like one of thofe which are fo thickly {pread over the
body in a bad kind of confluent Small Pox. This was more
like a puftule of the diftiné& Small Pox, except that I faw no
inftance of pus being formed in it, the matter remaining limpid


till the period of {cabbing.


Wifhing to fee the effects of the difeafe on an infant newly
born, my nephew, Mr. Henry Jenner, at my requeft, inferted
the vaccine virus into the arm of a child about twenty hours old.
His report tome is, that the child went through the difeafe with-


out


£469'2)


out apparent illnefs, yet that it was found effectually to refift the
action of variolous matter with which it was fubfequently ino-


culated.


I have had an opportunity of trying the effects of the Cow Pox
matter on a boy, who, the day preceding its infertion, fickened
with the meafles. The eruption of the meafles, attended with
cough, a little pain in the cheft, andthe ufual fymptoms accom-
panying that difeafe, appeared on the third day, and {fpread all
over him. The difeafe went through its courfe without any
deviation from its ufual habits; and, notwithftanding this, the
Cow Pox virus excited its common appearances, both on the
arm and on the conftitution, without any fenfible interruption;
on the fixth day there was a veficle.

8th. Pain in the axilla, chilly, and affected with head-ache.

gth. Nearly well.

12th. The puftule {pread to the fize of a large fplit pea, but
without any furrounding efflorefcence. It foon afterwards


{cabbed, and the boy recovered his general health rapidly.


Here we fee a deviation from the ordinary habits of the Small
Pox, as it has been obferved that the prefence of the meatfles


fufpends the action of variolous matter. 7
2 The


[64 J

The very general inveftigation that is now taking place, chiefly
through inoculation (and I again repeat my earneft hope that it
may be conducted with that calmnefs and moderation which
fhould ever accompany a philofophical refearch) muft foon
place the vaccine difeafe in its juft point of view. The refult
of all my trials with the virus on the human fubject, has been
uniform. In every inftance, the patient who has felt its in-
fluence, has completely loft the fufceptibility for the variolous
contagion; and as thefe inftances are now become numerous, I
conceive that, joined to the Obfervations in the former part of:
this paper, they fufficiently preclude me from the necefflity of
entering into controverfies with thofe who have circulated
reports adverfe to my affertions, on no other evidence than what


has been cafually collected.


FINIS.
