Prefaces to the Vulgate and Other Works (Jerome)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, 1892. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 ------------------------

 The Prefaces to Jerome's works have in many cases a special value. This
 value is sometimes personal; they are the free expressions of his
 feelings to those whom he trusts. Sometimes it lies in the mention of
 particular events; sometimes in showing the special difficulties he
 encountered as a translator, or the state of mind of those for whom he
 wrote; sometimes in making us understand the extent and limits of his
 own knowledge, and the views on points such as the inspiration of
 Scripture which actuated him as a translator or commentator; sometimes,
 again, in the particular interpretations which he gives. These things
 gain a great importance from the fact that Jerome's influence and that
 of his Vulgate was preponderant in Western Europe for more than a
 thousand years.

 We have had to make a selection, not only from want of space, but also
 because the Prefaces are of very unequal value, and sometimes are mere
 repetitions of previous statements. We have therefore given specimens
 of each class of Preface; we have given also all which bears on the
 better understanding of the life and views of Jerome; but where a
 Preface repeats what has been said before, or where it gives facts or
 interpretations which are well known or of no particular value, we have
 contented ourselves with a short statement of its contents.

 The Prefaces fall under three heads: 1st. Those prefixed to Jerome's
 early works bearing on Church history or Scripture. 2d. The Prefaces to
 the Vulgate translation. 3d. Those prefixed to the Commentaries.

 Prefaces to Jerome's Early Works.

 Preface to the Chronicle of Eusebius.

 The "Chronicle" is a book of universal history, giving the dates from
 the call of Abraham, and the Olympiads. For an account of it the reader
 is referred to the article of Dr. Salmon in the "Dictionary of
 Christian Antiquities." It was translated by Jerome in the years
 381-82, at Constantinople, where he was staying for the Council. This
 Preface shows that Jerome was already becoming aware of the
 difficulties arising from the various versions of the Old Testament,
 and of the necessity of going back to the Hebrew.

 Jerome to his friends [5372] Vincentius and Gallienus, Greeting:

 1. It has long been the practice of learned men to exercise their minds
 by rendering into Latin the works of Greek writers, and, what is more
 difficult, to translate the poems of illustrious authors though
 trammelled by the farther requirements of verse. It was thus that our
 Tully literally translated whole books of Plato; and after publishing
 an edition of [5373] Aratus (who may now be considered a Roman) in
 hexameter verse, he amused himself with the economics of Xenophon. In
 this latter work the golden river of eloquence again and again meets
 with obstacles, around which its waters break and foam to such an
 extent that persons unacquainted with the original would not believe
 they were reading Cicero's words. And no wonder! It is hard to follow
 another man's lines and everywhere keep within bounds. It is an arduous
 task to preserve felicity and grace unimpaired in a translation. Some
 word has forcibly expressed a given thought; I have no word of my own
 to convey the meaning; and while I am seeking to satisfy the sense I
 may go a long way round and accomplish but a small distance of my
 journey. Then we must take into account the ins and outs of
 transposition, the variations in cases, the diversity of figures, and,
 lastly, the peculiar, and, so to speak, the native idiom of the
 language. A literal translation sounds absurd; if, on the other hand, I
 am obliged to change either the order or the words themselves, I shall
 appear to have forsaken the duty of a translator.

 2. So, my dear Vincentius, and you, Gallienus, whom I love as my own
 soul, I beseech you, whatever may be the value of this hurried piece of
 work, to read it with the feelings of a friend rather than with those
 of a critic. And I ask this all the more earnestly because, as you
 know, I dictated with great rapidity to my amanuensis; and how
 difficult the task is, the sacred records testify; for the old flavour
 is not preserved in the Greek version by the Seventy. It was this that
 stimulated Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion; and the result of their
 labors was to impart a totally different character to one and the same
 work; one strove to give word for word, another the general meaning,
 while the third desired to avoid any great divergency from the
 ancients. A fifth, sixth, and seventh edition, though no one knows to
 what authors they are to be attributed, exhibit so pleasing a variety
 of their own that, in spite of their being anonymous, they have won an
 authoritative position. Hence, some go so far as to consider the sacred
 writings somewhat harsh and grating to the ear; which arises from the
 fact that the persons of whom I speak are not aware that the writings
 in question are a translation from the Hebrew, and therefore, looking
 at the surface not at the substance, they shudder at the squalid dress
 before they discover the fair body which the language clothes. In fact,
 what can be more musical than the Psalter? Like the writings of our own
 [5374] Flaccus and the Grecian Pindar it now trips along in iambics,
 now flows in sonorous alcaics, now swells into sapphics, now [5375]
 marches in half-foot metre. What can be more lovely than the strains of
 Deuteronomy and Isaiah? What more grave than Solomon's words? What more
 finished than Job? All these, as Josephus and Origen tell us, were
 composed in hexameters and pentameters, and so circulated amongst their
 own people. When we read these in Greek they have some meaning; when in
 Latin they are utterly incoherent. But if any one thinks that the grace
 of language does not suffer through translation, let him render Homer
 word for word into Latin. I will go farther and say that, if he will
 translate this author into the prose of his own language, the order of
 the words will seem ridiculous, and the most eloquent of poets almost
 dumb.

 3. What is the drift of all this? I would not have you think it strange
 if here and there we stumble; if the language lag; if it bristle with
 consonants or present gaping chasms of vowels; or be cramped by
 condensation of the narrative. The most learned among men have toiled
 at the same task; and in addition to the difficulty which all
 experience, and which we have alleged to attend all translation, it
 must not be forgotten that a peculiar difficulty besets us, inasmuch as
 the history is manifold, is full of barbarous names, circumstances of
 which the Latins know nothing, dates which are tangled knots, critical
 marks blended alike with the events and the numbers, so that it is
 almost harder to discern the sequence of the words than to come to a
 knowledge of what is related.

 [Here follows a long passage showing an arrangement according to which
 the dates are distinguished by certain colours as belonging to one or
 another of the kingdoms, the history of which is dealt with. This
 passage seems unintelligible in the absence of the coloured figures,
 and would be of no use unless the book with its original arrangement
 were being studied.]

 I am well aware that there will be many who, with their customary
 fondness for universal detraction (from which the only escape is by
 writing nothing at all), will drive their fangs into this volume. They
 will cavil at the dates, change the order, impugn the accuracy of
 events, winnow the syllables, and, as is very frequently the case, will
 impute the negligence of copyists to the authors. I should be within my
 right if I were to rebut them by saying that they need not read unless
 they choose; but I would rather send them away in a calm state of mind,
 so that they may attribute to the Greek author the credit which is his
 due, and may recognize that any insertions for which we are responsible
 have been taken from other men of the highest repute. The truth is that
 I have partly discharged the office of a translator and partly that of
 a writer. I have with the utmost fidelity rendered the Greek portion,
 and at the same time have added certain things which appeared to me to
 have been allowed to slip, particularly in the Roman history, which
 Eusebius, the author of this book, as it seems to me, only glanced at;
 not so much because of ignorance, for he was a learned man, as because,
 writing in Greek, he thought them of slight importance to his
 countrymen. So again from Ninus and Abraham, right up to the captivity
 of Troy, the translation is from the Greek only. From Troy to the
 twentieth year of Constantine there is much, at one time separately
 added, at another intermingled, which I have gleaned with great
 diligence from Tranquillus and other famous historians. Moreover, the
 portion from the aforesaid year of Constantine to the sixth consulship
 of the Emperor Valens and the second of Valentinianus is entirely my
 own. Content to end here, I have reserved the remaining period, that of
 Gratianus and Theodosius, for a wider historical survey; not that I am
 afraid to discuss the living freely and truthfully, for the fear of God
 banishes the fear of man; but because while our country is still
 exposed to the fury of the barbarians everything is in confusion.

 [5372] Vincentius appears to have attached himself to Jerome at
 Constantinople and remained with him till the end of the century.
 (Jerome, Against John of Jerusalem, 41; Apol., iii. 22; Letter
 LXXXVIII.) Nothing is known of Gallienus.

 [5373] Flourished b.c. 270.

 [5374] That is, Horace.

 [5375] Sublimia debent ingredi.--Quint, 9, 4 fin.

 Preface to the Translation of Origen's Two Homilies on the Song of
 Songs.

 Written at Rome, a.d. 383.

 Jerome to the most holy Pope Damasus:

 Origen, whilst in his other books he has surpassed all others, has in
 the Song of Songs surpassed himself. He wrote ten volumes upon it,
 which amount to almost twenty thousand lines, and in these he
 discussed, first the version of the Seventy Translators, then those of
 Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, and lastly, a fifth version which he
 states that he found on the coast of Atrium, with such magnificence and
 fulness, that he appears to me to have realized what is said in the
 poem: "The king brought me into his chamber." I have left that work on
 one side, since it would require almost boundless leisure and labour
 and money to translate so great a work into Latin, even if it could be
 worthily done; and I have translated these two short treatises, which
 he composed in the form of daily lectures for those who were still like
 babes and sucklings, and I have studied faithfulness rather than
 elegance. You can conceive how great a value the larger work possesses,
 when the smaller gives you such satisfaction.

 Preface to the Book on Hebrew Names.

 The origin and scope of this book is described in the Preface itself.
 It was written in the year 388, two years after Jerome had settled at
 Bethlehem. He had, immediately on arriving in Palestine, three years
 previously, set to work to improve his knowledge of Hebrew, with a view
 to his translation of the Old Testament, which was begun in 391. This
 book, therefore, and the two which follow, may be taken as records of
 studies preparatory to the Vulgate.

 Philo, the most erudite man among the Jews, is declared by Origen to
 have done what I am now doing; he set forth a book of Hebrew Names,
 classing them under their initial letters, and placing the etymology of
 each at the side. This work I originally proposed to translate into
 Latin. It is well known in the Greek world, and is to be found in all
 libraries. But I found that the copies were so discordant to one
 another, and the order so confused, that I judged it to be better to
 say nothing, rather than to write what would justly be condemned. A
 work of this kind, however, appeared likely to be of use; and my
 friends Lupulianus and Valerianus [5376] urged me to attempt it,
 because, as they thought, I had made some progress in the knowledge of
 Hebrew. I, therefore, went through all the books of Scripture in order,
 and in the restoration which I have now made of the ancient fabric, I
 think that I have produced a work which may be found valuable by Greeks
 as well as Latins.

 I here in the Preface beg the reader to take notice that, if he finds
 anything omitted in this work, it is reserved for mention in another. I
 have at this moment on hand a book of Hebrew Questions, an undertaking
 of a new kind such as has never until now been heard of amongst either
 the Greeks or the Latins. I say this, not with a view of arrogantly
 puffing up my own work, but because I know how much labour I have spent
 on it, and wish to provoke those whose knowledge is deficient to read
 it. I recommend all those who wish to possess both that work and the
 present one, and also the book of Hebrew Places, which I am about to
 publish, to make no account of the Jews and all their ebullitions of
 vexation. Moreover, I have added the meaning of the words and names in
 the New Testament, so that the fabric might receive its last touch and
 might stand complete. I wished also in this to imitate Origen, whom all
 but the ignorant acknowledge as the greatest teacher of the Churches
 next to the Apostles; for in this work, which stands among the noblest
 monuments of his genius, he endeavoured as a Christian to supply what
 Philo, as a Jew, had omitted.

 [5376] Nothing is known of these men. It is very improbable that this
 Valerianus was the bishop of Apuleia, who must, however, have been
 known to Jerome.

 Preface to the Book on the Sites and Names of Hebrew Places.

 For the scope and value of this book see Prolegomena. It was written
 a.d. 388.

 Eusebius, who took his second name from the blessed Martyr Pamphilus,
 after he had written the ten books of his "Ecclesiastical History," the
 Chronicle of Dates, of which I published a Latin version, the book in
 which he set forth the names of the different nations and those given
 to them of old by the Jews and by those of the present day, the
 topography of the land of Judæa and the portions allotted to the
 tribes, together with a representation of Jerusalem itself and its
 temple, which he accompanied with a very short explanation, bestowed
 his labour at the end of his life upon this little work, of which the
 design is to gather for us out of the Holy Scriptures the names of
 almost all the cities, mountains, rivers, hamlets, and other places,
 whether they remain the same or have since been changed or in some
 degree corrupted. I have taken up the work of this admirable man, and
 have translated it, following the arrangement of the Greeks, and taking
 the words in the order of their initial letters, but leaving out those
 names which did not seem worthy of mention, and making a considerable
 number of alterations. I have explained my method once for all in the
 Preface to my translation of the Chronicle, where I said that I might
 be called at once a translator and the composer of a new work; but I
 repeat this especially because one who had hardly the first tincture of
 letters has ventured upon a translation of this very book into Latin,
 though his language is hardly to be called Latin. His lack of
 scholarship will be seen by the observant reader as soon as he compares
 it with my translation. I do not pretend to a style which soars to the
 skies; but I hope that I can rise above one which grovels on the earth.

 Preface to the Book of Hebrew Questions.

 Written a.d. 388. For the scope and character of this work, see
 Prolegomena.

 The object of the Preface to a book is to set forth the argument of the
 work which follows; but I am compelled to begin by answering what has
 been said against me. My case is somewhat like that of Terence, who
 turned the scenic prologues of his plays into a defence of himself. We
 have a [5377] Luscius Lanuvinus, like the one who worried him, and who
 brought charges against the poet as if he had been a plunderer of the
 treasury. The bard of Mantua suffered in the same way; he had
 translated a few verses of Homer very exactly, and they said that he
 was nothing but a plagiarist from the ancients. But he answered them
 that it was no small proof of strength to wrest the club of Hercules
 from his hands. Why, even Tully, who stands on the pinnacle of Roman
 eloquence, that king of orators and glory of the Latin tongue, has
 actions for embezzlement [5378] brought against him by the Greeks. I
 cannot, therefore, be surprised if a poor little fellow like me is
 exposed to the gruntings of vile swine who trample our pearls under
 their feet, when some of the most learned of men, men whose glory ought
 to have hushed the voice of ill will, have felt the flames of envy. It
 is true, this happened by a kind of justice to men whose eloquence had
 filled with its resonance the theatres and the senate, the public
 assembly and the rostra; hardihood always courts detraction, and (as
 Horace says):

 "The [5379] highest peaks invoke

 The lightning's stroke."

 But I am in a corner, remote from the city and the forum, and the
 wranglings of crowded courts; yet, even so (as Quintilian says)
 ill-will has sought me out. Therefore, I beseech the reader,

 "If [5380] one there be, if one,

 Who, rapt by strong desire, these lines shall read,"

 not to expect eloquence or oratorical grace in those Books of Hebrew
 Questions, which I propose to write on all the sacred books; but
 rather, that he should himself answer my detractors for me, and tell
 them that a work of a new kind can claim some indulgence. I am poor and
 of low estate; I neither possess riches nor do I think it right to
 accept them if they are offered me; and, similarly, let me tell them
 that it is impossible for them to have the riches of Christ, that is,
 the knowledge of the Scriptures, and the world's riches as well. It
 will be my simple aim, therefore, first, to point out the mistakes of
 those who suspect some fault in the Hebrew Scriptures, and, secondly,
 to correct the faults, which evidently teem in the Greek and Latin
 copies, by a reference to the original authority; and, further, to
 explain the etymology of things, names, and countries, when it is not
 apparent from the sound of the Latin words, by giving a paraphrase in
 the vulgar tongue. To enable the student more easily to take note of
 these emendations, I propose, in the first place, to set out the true
 [5381] reading itself, as I am now able to do, and then, by bringing
 the later readings into comparison with it, to [5382] indicate what has
 been omitted or added or altered. It is not my purpose, as snarling
 ill-will pretends, to convict the LXX. of error, nor do I look upon my
 own labour as a disparagement of theirs. The fact is that they, since
 their work was undertaken for King Ptolemy of Alexandria, did not
 choose to bring to light all the mysteries which the sacred writings
 contain, and especially those which give the promise of the advent of
 Christ, for fear that he who held the Jews in esteem because they were
 believed to worship one God, would come to think that they worshipped a
 second. But we find that the Evangelists, and even our Lord and
 Saviour, and the Apostle Paul, also, bring forward many citations as
 coming from the Old Testament which are not contained in our copies;
 and on these I shall dilate more fully in their proper places. But it
 is clear from this fact that those are the best mss. which most
 correspond with the authoritative words of the New Testament. Add to
 this that Josephus, who gives the story of the Seventy Translators,
 reports them as translating only the five books of Moses; and we also
 acknowledge that these are more in harmony with the Hebrew than the
 rest. And, further, those who afterward came into the field as
 translators--I mean Aquila and Symmachus and Theodotion--give a version
 very different from that which we use. [5383]

 I have but one word more to say, and it may calm my detractors. Foreign
 goods are to be imported only to the regions where there is a demand
 for them. Country people are not obliged to buy balsam, pepper, and
 dates. As to Origen, I say nothing. His name (if I may compare small
 things with great) is even more than my own the object of ill-will,
 because, though following the common version in his Homilies, which
 were spoken to common people, yet, in his Tomes, [5384] that is, in his
 fuller discussion of Scripture, he yields to the Hebrew as the truth,
 and, though surrounded by his own forces, occasionally seeks the
 foreign tongue as his ally. I will only say this about him: that I
 should gladly have his knowledge of the Scriptures, even if accompanied
 with all the ill-will which clings to his name, and that I do not care
 a straw for these shades and spectral ghosts, whose nature is said to
 be to chatter in dark corners and be a terror to babies.

 [5377] Terence's rival, to whom he makes allusions in the Prologi to
 the Eunuchus, Heoutontimoroumenos and Phormio.

 [5378] Repetundarum. Properly an action to compel one who has left
 office to restore public money which he had embezzled.

 [5379] Hor. Odes II., x. 19, 20.

 [5380] Virgil, Ec., vi. 10.

 [5381] Ipsa testimonia. This is what he calls in other places Hebraica
 veritas. Jerome was right in the main in correcting the LXX, and other
 Greek versions by the Hebrew. He was not aware (as has been since made
 clear) that there are various readings in the Hebrew itself, and that
 these may sometimes be corrected by the LXX., which was made from older
 mss.

 [5382] That is, by the obeli (), to show what has been left out, and
 the asterisk (*), to show what has been inserted.

 [5383] That is, from the copies of the LXX. commonly used in the fourth
 century.

 [5384] Larger Commentaries.

 Preface to the Commentary on Ecclesiastes.

 Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, Bethlehem, a.d. 388.

 I remember that, about five years ago, when I was still living at Rome,
 I read Ecclesiastes to the saintly Blesilla, [5385] so that I might
 provoke her to the contempt of this earthly scene, and to count as
 nothing all that she saw in the world; and that she asked me to throw
 my remarks upon all the more obscure passages into the form of a short
 commentary, so that, when I was absent, she might still understand what
 she read. She was withdrawn from us by her sudden death, while girding
 herself for our work; we were not counted worthy to have such an one as
 the partner of our life; and, therefore, Paula and Eustochium, I kept
 silence under the stroke of such a wound. But now, living as I do in
 the smaller community of Bethlehem, I pay what I owe to her memory and
 to you. I would only point out this, that I have followed no one's
 authority. I have translated direct from the Hebrew, adapting my words
 as much as possible to the form of the Septuagint, but only in those
 places in which they did not diverge far from the Hebrew. I have
 occasionally referred also to the versions of Aquila, Symmachus, and
 Theodotion, but so as not to alarm the zealous student by too many
 novelties, nor yet to let my commentary follow the side streams of
 opinion, turning aside, against my conscientious conviction, from the
 fountainhead of truth.

 [5385] Daughter of Paula. See Letter XXXIX.

 Prefaces to the Vulgate Version of the New Testament.

 This version was made at Rome between the years 382 and 385. The only
 Preface remaining is that to the translation of the Gospels, but Jerome
 speaks of, and quotes from, his version of the other parts also. The
 work was undertaken at the request and under the sanction of Pope
 Damasus, who had consulted Jerome in a.d. 383 on certain points of
 Scriptural criticism, and apparently in the same year urged him to
 revise the current Latin version by help of the Greek original. It is
 to be observed that Jerome's aim was "to revise the old Latin, and not
 to make a new version. When Augustin expressed to him his gratitude for
 his translation of the Gospels,' he tacitly corrected him by
 substituting for this phrase the correction of the New Testament.' Yet,
 although he proposed to himself this limited object, the various forms
 of corruption which had been introduced were, as he describes, so
 numerous that the difference of the old and revised (Hieronymian) text
 is throughout clear and striking." See article by Westcott in
 "Dictionary of Bible," on the Vulgate, and Fremantle's article on
 Jerome in "Dictionary of Christian Biography."

 The Four Gospels.

 Addressed to Pope [5386] Damasus, a.d. 383.

 You urge me to revise the old Latin version, and, as it were, to sit in
 judgment on the copies of the Scriptures which are now scattered
 throughout the whole world; and, inasmuch as they differ from one
 another, you would have me decide which of them agree with the Greek
 original. The labour is one of love, but at the same time both perilous
 and presumptuous; for in judging others I must be content to be judged
 by all; and how can I dare to change the language of the world in its
 hoary old age, and carry it back to the early days of its infancy? Is
 there a man, learned or unlearned, who will not, when he takes the
 volume into his hands, and perceives that what he reads does not suit
 his settled tastes, break out immediately into violent language, and
 call me a forger and a profane person for having the audacity to add
 anything to the ancient books, or to make any changes or corrections
 therein? Now there are two consoling reflections which enable me to
 bear the odium--in the first place, the command is given by you who are
 the supreme bishop; and secondly, even on the showing of those who
 revile us, readings at variance with the early copies cannot be right.
 For if we are to pin our faith to the Latin texts, it is for our
 opponents to tell us which; for there are almost as many forms of texts
 as there are copies. If, on the other hand, we are to glean the truth
 from a comparison of many, why not go back to the original Greek and
 correct the mistakes introduced by inaccurate translators, and the
 blundering alterations of confident but ignorant critics, and, further,
 all that has been inserted or changed by copyists more asleep than
 awake? I am not discussing the Old Testament, which was turned into
 Greek by the Seventy elders, and [5387] has reached us by a descent of
 three steps. I do not ask what [5388] Aquila and [5389] Symmachus
 think, or why [5390] Theodotion takes a middle course between the
 ancients and the moderns. I am willing to let that be the true
 translation which had apostolic approval. I am now speaking of the New
 Testament. This was undoubtedly composed in Greek, with the exception
 of the work of Matthew the Apostle, who was the first to commit to
 writing the Gospel of Christ, and who published his work in Judæa in
 Hebrew characters. We must confess that as we have it in our language
 it is marked by discrepancies, and now that the stream is distributed
 into different channels we must go back to the fountainhead. I pass
 over those manuscripts which are associated with the names of [5391]
 Lucian and Hesychius, and the authority of which is perversely
 maintained by a handful of disputatious persons. It is obvious that
 these writers could not amend anything in the Old Testament after the
 labours of the Seventy; and it was useless to correct the New, for
 versions of Scripture which already exist in the languages of many
 nations show that their additions are false. I therefore promise in
 this short Preface the four Gospels only, which are to be taken in the
 following order, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, as they have been revised
 by a comparison of the Greek manuscripts. Only early ones have been
 used. But to avoid any great divergences from the Latin which we are
 accustomed to read, I have used my pen with some restraint, and while I
 have corrected only such passages as seemed to convey a different
 meaning, I have allowed the rest to remain as they are.

 The Preface concludes with a description of lists of words made by
 Eusebius and translated by Jerome, designed to show what passages occur
 in two or more of the Gospels.

 [5386] Made pope 366, died 384. Jerome had been his secretary at the
 Council held at Rome in 382, and continued is literary services till
 the pope's death, in 385.

 [5387] That is, after being translated from Hebrew into Greek, and from
 Greek into Latin.

 [5388] Aquila belonged to the second century, but whether to the first
 half, or to the early part of the second half, cannot be determined. He
 was a Jewish proselyte, of Sinope in Pontus, and is supposed to have
 translated the books of the Old Testament into Greek in order to assist
 the Hellenistic Jews in their controversies with Christians. Jerome's
 estimate of him varied from time to time. In his commentary on Hos.
 ii., Is. xlix., and Letter XXVIII., etc., he treats him as worthy of
 credit. On the other hand, in the letter to Pammachius, De Opt. Gen.
 Interp. (LVII. 11), he describes him as contentiosus; but in Letter
 XXXVI. 12, he denies that he is such. In the preface to Job he speaks
 of Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion as "Judaising heretics, who by
 their deceitful translation have concealed many mysteries of
 salvation." The second edition of Aquila's version, which was extremely
 literal, was highly esteemed by the Jews, and was called by them the
 Hebrew verity. See Davidson's "Biblical Criticism," p. 215, etc.

 [5389] Symmachus was the author of the third Greek version. He is said
 to have been a Samaritan by birth. The date of his version cannot be
 accurately fixed; but, apparently, it appeared after Theodotion's. "He
 does not adhere to the text so closely as to render it verbatim into
 Greek; but chooses to express the same in perspicuous and intelligible
 language."--Davidson.

 [5390] Theodotion, the author of the second Greek version, was a native
 of Ephesus. His version is thought to have been made before 160. "The
 mode of translation adopted by him holds an intermediate place between
 the scrupulous literality of Aquila and the free interpretation of
 Symmachus," and his work was more highly valued by Christians than that
 of either Aquila or Symmachus. Daniel was read in his version in the
 churches (Pref. to Joshua).

 [5391] Lucian in Syria and Hesychius in Egypt attempted their
 recensions about the middle of the third century, the time when Origen
 also began to labour in the same direction. Lucian's recension, also
 called the Constantinopolitan, and to which the Slavonian and Gothic
 versions belong, spread over Asia Minor and Thrace. See the Preface to
 the Chronicles. It was decreed by a council held under Pope Gelasius,
 a.d. 494, that "the Gospels which Lucian and Hesychius falsified are
 apocryphal."

 Prefaces to the Books of the Vulgate Version of the Old Testament.

 This version was not undertaken with ecclesiastical sanction as was the
 case with the Gospels, but at the request of private friends, or from
 Jerome's "own sense of the imperious necessity of the work." It was
 wholly made at Bethlehem, and was begun about a.d. 391, and finished
 about a.d. 404. The approximate dates of the several books are given
 before each Preface in the following pages.

 Preface to Genesis.

 This Preface was addressed to Desiderius, but which of the three
 correspondents of Jerome who bore this name is uncertain (See Article
 Desiderius in Smith and Wace's "Dictionary of Christian Biography"). We
 do not give it because it has been given at length as a specimen of the
 rest, in Jerome's "Apology," book ii., vol. iii. of this series, pp.
 515-516. Jerome in it complains that he is accused of forging a new
 version. He justifies his undertaking by showing that in the versions
 then current many passages were left out (though they exist in our
 copies of the LXX.), such as "Out of Egypt" (Hos. xi. 1); "They shall
 look on him whom they pierced" (Zech. xii. 10), etc., which are quoted
 in the New Testament and are found in the Hebrew. He accounts for these
 omissions by the suggestion that the LXX. were afraid of offending
 Ptolemy Lagus for whom they worked, and who was a Platonist. He rejects
 the fable of the LXX. being shut up in separate cells and producing an
 identical version, and protests against the notion that they were
 inspired, and he urges his calumniators, by applying to those who knew
 Hebrew, to test the correctness of his version.

 There is no Preface to the other books of the Pentateuch. From the
 allusion to the work on the Pentateuch as lately finished, in the
 Preface to Joshua, which was published in 404, it is presumed that the
 date of the translation of the Pentateuch is 403.

 Joshua, Judges, and Ruth.

 The Preface to these books was written a.d. 404; Jerome speaks of the
 death of Paula, which took place in that year, and the work is
 addressed to Eustochium alone. The Preface is chiefly occupied with a
 defence of his translation. He tells those who carp at it that they are
 not bound to read it, and mentions that the Church had given no final
 sanction to the LXX., but read the book of Daniel in Theodotion's
 version. The books of Joshua, Judges, and Ruth, were probably the last
 of the Vulgate translation; the Preface declares Jerome's intention of
 devoting himself henceforward to the Commentaries on the Prophets, a
 work which took up the remainder of his life.

 The Books of Samuel and Kings.

 This Preface was the first in order of publication. It was set forth as
 an exposition of the principles adopted by Jerome in all his
 translations from the Hebrew--the "Helmeted Preface," as he calls it in
 the beginning of the last paragraph, with which he was prepared to do
 battle against all who impugn his design and methods. It was addressed
 to Paula and Eustochium, and published about a.d. 391.

 That the Hebrews have twenty-two letters is testified by the Syrian and
 Chaldæan languages which are nearly related to the Hebrew, for they
 have twenty-two elementary sounds which are pronounced the same way,
 but are differently written. The Samaritans also employ just the same
 number of letters in their copies of the Pentateuch of Moses, and
 differ only in the shape and outline of the letters. And it is certain
 that Esdras, the scribe and teacher of the law, after the capture of
 Jerusalem and the restoration of the temple by Zerubbabel, invented
 [5392] other letters which we now use, although up to that time the
 Samaritan and Hebrew characters were the same. In the [5393] book of
 Numbers, also, where we have the census of the Levites and priests, the
 mystic teaching of Scripture conducts us to the same result. And we
 find the four-lettered name of the Lord in certain Greek books written
 to this day in the ancient characters. The thirty-seventh Psalm,
 moreover, the one hundred and eleventh, the one hundred and twelfth,
 the one hundred and nineteenth, and the one hundred and forty-fifth,
 although they are written in different metres, have for their [5394]
 acrostic framework an alphabet of the same number of letters. The
 Lamentations of Jeremiah, and his Prayer, the Proverbs of Solomon also,
 towards the end, from the place where we read "Who will find a brave
 woman?" are instances of the same number of letters forming the
 division into sections. And, again, five are double letters, viz.,
 Caph, Mem, Nun, Phe, Sade, for at the beginning and in the middle of
 words they are written one way, and at the end another way. Whence it
 happens that, by most people, five of the books are reckoned as double,
 viz., Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, Ezra, Jeremiah, with Kinoth, i.e., his
 Lamentations. As, then, there are twenty-two elementary characters by
 means of which we write in Hebrew all we say, and the compass of the
 human voice is contained within their limits, so we reckon twenty-two
 books, by which, as by the alphabet of the doctrine of God, a righteous
 man is instructed in tender infancy, and, as it were, while still at
 the breast.

 The first of these books is called Bresith, to which we give the name
 Genesis. The second, Elle Smoth, which bears the name Exodus; the
 third, Vaiecra, that is Leviticus; the fourth, Vaiedabber, which we
 call Numbers; the fifth, Elle Addabarim, which is entitled Deuteronomy.
 These are the five books of Moses, which they properly call [5395]
 Thorath, that is law.

 The second class is composed of the Prophets, and they begin with Jesus
 the son of Nave, who among them is called Joshua the son of Nun. Next
 in the series is Sophtim, that is the book of Judges; and in the same
 book they include Ruth, because the events narrated occurred in the
 days of the Judges. Then comes Samuel, which we call First and Second
 Kings. The fourth is Malachim, that is, Kings, which is contained in
 the third and fourth volumes of Kings. And it is far better to say
 Malachim, that is Kings, than Malachoth, that is Kingdoms. For the
 author does not describe the Kingdoms of many nations, but that of one
 people, the people of Israel, which is comprised in the twelve tribes.
 The fifth is Isaiah, the sixth, Jeremiah, the seventh, Ezekiel, the
 eighth is the book of the Twelve Prophets, which is called among the
 Jews [5396] Thare Asra.

 To the third class belong the Hagiographa, of which the first book
 begins with Job, the second with David, whose writings they divide into
 five parts and comprise in one volume of Psalms; the third is Solomon,
 in three books, Proverbs, which they call Parables, that is Masaloth,
 Ecclesiastes, that is Coeleth, the Song of Songs, which they denote by
 the title Sir Assirim; the sixth is Daniel; the seventh, Dabre Aiamim,
 that is, Words of Days, which we may more expressively call a chronicle
 of the whole of the sacred history, the book that amongst us is called
 First and Second [5397] Chronicles; the eighth, Ezra, which itself is
 likewise divided amongst Greeks and Latins into [5398] two books; the
 ninth is Esther.

 And so there are also twenty-two books of the Old Testament; that is,
 five of Moses, eight of the prophets, nine of the Hagiographa, though
 some include Ruth and Kinoth (Lamentations) amongst the Hagiographa,
 and think that these books ought to be reckoned separately; we should
 thus have twenty-four books of the old law. And these the Apocalypse of
 John represents by the twenty-four elders, who adore the Lamb, and with
 downcast looks offer their crowns, while in their presence stand the
 four living creatures with eyes before and behind, that is, looking to
 the past and the future, and with unwearied voice crying, Holy, Holy,
 Holy, Lord God Almighty, who wast, and art, and art to come.

 This preface to the Scriptures may serve as a "helmeted" introduction
 to all the books which we turn from Hebrew into Latin, so that we may
 be assured that what is not found in our list must be placed amongst
 the Apocryphal writings. Wisdom, therefore, which generally bears the
 name of Solomon, and the book of Jesus, the Son of Sirach, and Judith,
 and Tobias, and the Shepherd are not in the canon. The first book of
 Maccabees I have found to be Hebrew, the second is Greek, as can be
 proved from the very style. Seeing that all this is so, I beseech you,
 my reader, not to think that my labours are in any sense intended to
 disparage the old translators. For the service of the tabernacle of God
 each one offers what he can; some gold and silver and precious stones,
 others linen and blue and purple and scarlet; we shall do well if we
 offer skins and goats' hair. And yet the Apostle pronounces our more
 contemptible parts more necessary than others. Accordingly, the beauty
 of the tabernacle as a whole and in its several kinds (and the
 ornaments of the church present and future) was covered with skins and
 goats'-hair cloths, and the heat of the sun and the injurious rain were
 warded off by those things which are of less account. First read, then,
 my Samuel and Kings; mine, I say, mine. For whatever by diligent
 translation and by anxious emendation we have learnt and made our own,
 is ours. And when you understand that whereof you were before ignorant,
 either, if you are grateful, reckon me a translator, or, if ungrateful,
 a paraphraser, albeit I am not in the least conscious of having
 deviated from the Hebrew original. At all events, if you are
 incredulous, read the Greek and Latin manuscripts and compare them with
 these poor efforts of mine, and wherever you see they disagree, ask
 some Hebrew (though you ought rather to place confidence in me), and if
 he confirm our view, I suppose you will not think him a soothsayer and
 suppose that he and I have, in rendering the same passage, divined
 alike. But I ask you also, the [5399] handmaidens of Christ, who anoint
 the head of your reclining Lord with the most precious ointment of
 faith, who by no means seek the Saviour in the tomb, for whom Christ
 has long since ascended to the Father--I beg you to confront with the
 shields of your prayers the mad dogs who bark and rage against me, and
 go about the city, and think themselves learned if they disparage
 others. I, knowing my lowliness, will always remember what we are told.
 [5400] "I said, I will take heed to my ways that I offend not in my
 tongue. I have set a guard upon my mouth while the sinner standeth
 against me. I became dumb, and was humbled, and kept silence from good
 words."

 [5392] That is, the square character which was of Assyrian origin. As
 to how far the tradition is true, see Davidson's "Biblical Criticisms"
 (1854), p. 22, and the authorities there referred to.

 [5393] iii. 39. All the males from a month old and upwards are said to
 have been twenty-two thousand.

 [5394] These are the alphabetical Psalms which, being mainly didactic,
 were written acrostically to assist the memory. Others partially
 acrostic are ix., x., xxv., xxxiv., to make the alphabet complete in
 xxxvii. in verse 28 must be supposed to be represented by lrlm, and t
 in verse 39 by rtshych

 [5395] More correctly Torah.

 [5396] The laws or instructions of Ezra. By many of the Jews Ezra was
 regarded as the author of the Twelve Prophets.

 [5397] Jerome has in the text the Greek equivalent paraleipomenon .

 [5398] That is, Ezra and Nehemiah.

 [5399] Paula and Eustochium.

 [5400] Ps. xxxix. 2 sq.

 Chronicles.

 This Preface is almost wholly a repetition of the arguments adduced in
 the Preface to Genesis. It is addressed to Chromatius, bishop of
 Aquileia, who took great interest in the work and provided funds for
 its continuance. The date is a.d. 395.

 Ezra and Nehemiah.

 This Preface is addressed to Domnio (a Roman presbyter. See Letters L.,
 and XLVII. 3, Paulinus, Ep. 3) and Rogatianus, of whom nothing is
 known. It was written a.d. 394. It is a repetition of his constant
 ground of self-defence, and contains a noble expression of his
 determination to carry the work through. "The serpent may hiss, and

 "Victorious Sinon hurl his brand of fire,'

 but never shall my mouth be closed. Cut off my tongue; it will still
 stammer out something.

 Esther.

 To Paula and Eustochium, early in 404. Merely assures them that he is
 acting as a faithful translator, adding nothing of his own; whereas in
 the version then in common use (vulgata), "the book is drawn out into
 all kinds of perplexing entanglements of language."

 Job.

 This was put into circulation about the same time as the sixteen
 prophets, that is, about the year 393. It was written in 392. It has no
 dedication, but is full of personal interest, and shows the deplorable
 state in which the text of many parts of Scripture was before his time,
 thus justifying his boast, "I have rescued Job from the dunghill."

 I am compelled at every step in my treatment of the books of Holy
 Scripture to reply to the abuse of my opponents, who charge my
 translation with being a censure of the Seventy; as though Aquila among
 Greek authors, and Symmachus and Theodotion, had not rendered word for
 word, or paraphrased, or combined the two methods in a sort of
 translation which is neither the one nor the other; and as though
 Origen had not marked all the books of the Old Testament with obeli and
 asterisks, which he either introduced or adopted from Theodotion, and
 inserted in the old translation, thus showing that what he added was
 deficient in the older version. My detractors must therefore learn
 either to receive altogether what they have in part admitted, or they
 must erase my translation and at the same time their own asterisks. For
 they must allow that those translators who it is clear have left out
 numerous details, have erred in some points; especially in the book of
 Job, where, if you withdraw such passages as have been added and marked
 with asterisks, the greater part of the book will be cut away. This, at
 all events, will be so in Greek. On the other hand, previous to the
 publication of our recent translation with asterisks and obeli, about
 seven or eight hundred lines were missing in the Latin, so that the
 book, mutilated, torn, and disintegrated, exhibits its deformity to
 those who publicly read it. The present translation follows no ancient
 translator, but will be found to reproduce now the exact words, now the
 meaning, now both together of the original Hebrew, Arabic, and
 occasionally the Syriac. For an indirectness and a slipperiness
 attaches to the whole book, even in the Hebrew; and, as orators say in
 Greek, it [5401] is tricked out with figures of speech, and while it
 says one thing, it does another; just as if you close your hand to hold
 an eel or a little [5402] muræna, the more you squeeze it, the sooner
 it escapes. I remember that in order to understand this volume, I paid
 a not inconsiderable sum for the services of a teacher, a native of
 Lydda, who was amongst the Hebrews reckoned to be in the front rank;
 whether I profited at all by his teaching, I do not know; of this one
 thing I am sure, that I could translate only that which I previously
 understood. Well, then, from the beginning of the book to the words of
 Job, the Hebrew version is in prose. Further, from the words of Job
 where he says, [5403] "May the day perish wherein I was born, and the
 night in which it was said, a man-child is conceived," to the place
 where before the close of the book it is written [5404] "Therefore I
 blame myself and repent in dust and ashes," we have hexameter verses
 running in dactyl and spondee: and owing to the idiom of the language
 other feet are frequently introduced not containing the same number of
 syllables, but the same quantities. Sometimes, also, a sweet and
 musical rhythm is produced by the breaking up of the verses in
 accordance with the laws of metre, a fact better known to prosodists
 than to the ordinary reader. But from the aforesaid verse to the end of
 the book the small remaining section is a prose composition. And if it
 seem incredible to any one that the Hebrews really have metres, and
 that, whether we consider the Psalter or the Lamentations of Jeremiah,
 or almost all the songs of Scripture, they bear a resemblance to our
 Flaccus, and the Greek Pindar, and Alcæus, and Sappho, let him read
 Philo, Josephus, Origen, Eusebius of Cæsarea, and with the aid of their
 testimony he will find that I speak the truth. Wherefore, let my
 barking critics listen as I tell them that my motive in toiling at this
 book was not to censure the ancient translation, but that those
 passages in it which are obscure, or those which have been omitted, or
 at all events, through the fault of copyists have been corrupted, might
 have light thrown upon them by our translation; for we have some slight
 knowledge of Hebrew, and, as regards Latin, my life, almost from the
 cradle, has been spent in the company of grammarians, rhetoricians, and
 philosophers. But if, since the version of the Seventy was published,
 and even now, when the Gospel of Christ is beaming forth, the Jewish
 Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, judaising heretics, have been
 welcomed amongst the Greeks--heretics, who, by their deceitful
 translation, have concealed many mysteries of salvation, and yet, in
 the Hexapla are found in the Churches and are expounded by churchmen;
 ought not I, a Christian, born of Christian parents, and who carry the
 standard of the cross on my brow, and am zealous to recover what is
 lost, to correct what is corrupt, and to disclose in pure and faithful
 language the mysteries of the Church, ought not I, let me ask, much
 more to escape the reprobation of fastidious or malicious readers? Let
 those who will keep the old books with their gold and silver letters on
 purple skins, or, to follow the ordinary phrase, in "uncial
 characters," loads of writing rather than manuscripts, if only they
 will leave for me and mine, our poor pages and copies which are less
 remarkable for beauty than for accuracy. I have toiled to translate
 both the Greek versions of the Seventy, and the Hebrew which is the
 basis of my own, into Latin. Let every one choose which he likes, and
 [5405] he will find out that what he objects to in me, is the result of
 sound learning, not of malice.

 [5401] eschematismenos .

 [5402] A small fish well known to the ancients, but apparently not
 identified with any species known to us.

 [5403] Job iii. 3.

 [5404] xlii. 6.

 [5405] Reading studiosum me magis quam malevolum probet. Substituting
 se for me, according to some manuscripts, we must translate "and thus
 show that he is actuated more by a love of learning than by malice."

 Psalms.

 Dedicated to Sophronius about the year 392. Jerome had, while at Rome,
 made a translation of the Psalms from the LXX., which he had afterwards
 corrected by collation with the Hebrew text (see the Preface addressed
 to Paula and Eustochium, infra). His friend Sophronius, in quoting the
 Psalms to the Jews, was constantly met with the reply, "It does not so
 stand in the Hebrew." He, therefore, urged Jerome to translate them
 direct from the original. Jerome, in presenting the translation to his
 friend, records the intention which he had expressed of translating the
 new Latin version into Greek. This we know was done by Sophronius, not
 only for the Psalms, but also for the rest of the Vulgate, and was
 valued by the Greeks (Apol. ii. 24, vol. iii. of this series, p. 515).

 Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs.

 Dedicated to Chromatius and Heliodorus, a.d. 393. The Preface is
 important as showing the help given to Jerome by his friends, the
 rapidity of his work, and his view of the Apocrypha. We give the two
 chief passages.

 It is well that my letter should couple those who are coupled in the
 episcopate; and that I should not separate on paper those who are bound
 in one by the law of Christ. I would have written the commentaries on
 Hosea, Amos, Zechariah, and the Kings, which you ask of me, if I had
 not been prevented by illness. You give me comfort by the supplies you
 send me; you support my secretaries and copyists, so that the efforts
 of all my powers may be given to you. And then all at once comes a
 thick crowd of people with all sorts of demands, as if it was just that
 I should neglect your hunger and work for others, or as if, in the
 matter of giving and receiving, I had a debt to any one but you. And
 so, though I am broken by a long illness, yet, not to be altogether
 silent and dumb amongst you this year, I have dedicated to you three
 days' work, that is to say, the translation of the three books of
 Solomon.

 After speaking of the books of the Wisdom of Solomon and
 Ecclesiasticus, which were sent at the same time, the Preface
 continues:

 As, then, the Church reads Judith, Tobit, and the books of Maccabees,
 but does not admit them among the canonical Scriptures, so let it read
 these two volumes for the edification of the people, not to give
 authority to doctrines of the Church. If any one is better pleased with
 the edition of the Seventy, there it is, long since corrected by me.
 For it is not our aim in producing the new to destroy the old. And yet
 if our friend reads carefully, he will find that our version is the
 more intelligible, for it has not turned sour by being poured three
 times over into different vessels, but has been drawn straight from the
 press, and stored in a clean jar, and has thus preserved its own
 flavour.

 Isaiah.

 Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, about a.d. 393. This Preface speaks
 of Isaiah as using the polished diction natural to a man of rank and
 refinement, as an Evangelist more than a prophet, and a poet rather
 than a prose writer. He then reiterates his defence of his translation,
 saying that now, "The Jews can no longer scoff at our Churches because
 of the falsity of our Scriptures."

 Jeremiah and Ezekiel.

 Short Prefaces without dedication, but probably addressed to Paula and
 Eustochium, about a.d. 393.

 Daniel.

 The Preface is interesting as showing the difficulties caused by the
 incorporation of apocryphal matter into this book, the fact that
 Theodotion's version, not the LXX., was read in the Churches, and that
 the book was reckoned by the Jews not among the prophets but among the
 Hagiographa. It was addressed to Paula and Eustochium about a.d. 392.

 The Septuagint version of Daniel the prophet is not read by the
 Churches of our Lord and Saviour. They use Theodotion's version, but
 how this came to pass I cannot tell. Whether it be that the language is
 Chaldee, which differs in certain peculiarities from our speech, and
 the Seventy were unwilling to follow those deviations in a translation;
 or that the book was published in the name of the Seventy, by some one
 or other not familiar with Chaldee, or if there be some other reason, I
 know not; this one thing I can affirm--that it differs widely from the
 original, and is rightly rejected. For we must bear in mind that Daniel
 and Ezra, the former especially, were written in Hebrew letters, but in
 the Chaldee language, as was [5406] one section of Jeremiah; and,
 further, that Job has much affinity with Arabic. As for myself, when,
 in lily youth, after reading the flowery rhetoric of Quintilian and
 Tully, I entered on the vigorous study of this language, the
 expenditure of much time and energy barely enabled me to utter the
 puffing and hissing words; I seemed to be walking in a sort of
 underground chamber with a few scattered rays of light shining down
 upon me; and when at last I met with Daniel, such a sense of weariness
 came over me that, in a fit of despair, I could have counted all my
 former toil as useless. But there was a certain Hebrew who encouraged
 me, and was for ever quoting for my benefit the saying that "Persistent
 labour conquers all things"; and so, conscious that among Hebrews I was
 only a smatterer, I once more began to study Chaldee. And, to confess
 the truth, to this day I can read and understand Chaldee better than I
 can pronounce it. I say this to show you how hard it is to master the
 book of Daniel, which in Hebrew contains neither the history of
 Susanna, nor the hymn of the three youths, nor the fables of Bel and
 the Dragon; because, however, they are to be found everywhere, we have
 formed them into an appendix, prefixing to them an obelus, and thus
 making an end of them, so as not to seem to the uninformed to have cut
 off a large portion of the volume. I heard a certain Jewish teacher,
 when mocking at the history of Susanna, and saying that it was the
 fiction of some Greek or other, raise the same objection which
 Africanus brought against Origen--that these etymologies of [5407]
 schisai from [5408] schinos, and [5409] prisai from [5410] prinos, are
 to be traced to the Greek. To make the point clear to Latin readers: It
 is as if he were to say, playing upon the word ilex, illico pereas; or
 upon lentiscus, may the angel make a lentil of you, or may you perish
 nan lente, or may you lentus (that is pliant or compliant) be led to
 death, or anything else suiting the name of the tree. Then he would
 captiously maintain that the three youths in the furnace of raging fire
 had leisure enough to amuse themselves with making poetry, and to
 summon all the elements in turn to praise God. Or what was there
 miraculous, he would say, or what indication of divine inspiration, in
 the slaying of the dragon with a lump of pitch, or in frustrating the
 schemes of the priests of Bel? Such deeds were more the results of an
 able man's forethought than of a prophetic spirit. But when he came to
 [5411] Habakkuk and read that he was carried from Judæa into Chaldæa to
 bring a dish of food to Daniel, he asked where we found an instance in
 the whole of the Old Testament of any saint with an ordinary body
 flying through the air, and in a quarter of an hour traversing vast
 tracts of country. And when one of us who was rather too ready to speak
 adduced the instance of Ezekiel, and said that he was transported from
 Chaldæa into Judæa, he derided the man and proved from the book itself
 that Ezekiel, in spirit, saw himself carried over. And he argued that
 even our own Apostle, being an accomplished man and one who had been
 taught the law by Hebrews, had not dared to affirm that he was bodily
 rapt away, but had said: [5412] "Whether in the body, or out of the
 body, I know not; God knoweth." By these and similar arguments he used
 to refute the apocryphal fables in the Church's book. Leaving this for
 the reader to pronounce upon as he may think fit, I give warning that
 Daniel in Hebrew is not found among the prophets, but amongst the
 writers of the Hagiographa; for all Scripture is by them divided into
 three parts: the law, the Prophets, and the Hagiographa, which have
 respectively five, eight, and eleven books, a point which we cannot now
 discuss. But as to the objections which [5413] Porphyry raises against
 this prophet, or rather brings against the book, [5414] Methodius,
 Eusebius, and Apollinaris may be cited as witnesses, for they replied
 to his folly in many thousand lines of writing, whether with
 satisfaction to the curious reader I know not. Therefore, I beseech
 you, Paula and Eustochium, to pour out your supplications for me to the
 Lord, that so long as I am in this poor body, I may write something
 pleasing to you, useful to the Church, worthy of posterity. As for my
 contemporaries, I am indifferent to their opinions, for they pass from
 side to side as they are moved by love or hatred.

 [5406] x. 11.

 [5407] To split. The word has no sort of etymological connection with
 schinos. Susanna 54, 55, 58, 59. When the first elder says the crime
 was committed under a mastich tree (schinos), Daniel answers, "God
 shall cut thee in two" (schisei).

 [5408] The mastich tree.

 [5409] To saw.

 [5410] The holm-oak.

 [5411] In the LXX. the story of Bel and the Dragon bears a special
 heading as "part of the prophecy of Habakkuk."--Westcott. The angel is
 said to have carried Habakkuk with a dish of food in his hand for
 Daniel from Judæa to Babylon.

 [5412] 2 Cor. xii. 2.

 [5413] The bitter enemy of the Christian faith. Born at Tyre 223. Died
 at Rome about 304.

 [5414] Bishop of Patara in Lycia, and afterwards of Tyre. Suffered
 martyrdom 302 or 303.

 The Twelve Minor Prophets.

 This Preface, dedicated to Paula and Eustochium in a.d. 392, contains
 nothing of importance, merely mentioning the dates of a few of the
 prophets. and the fact that the Twelve Prophets were counted by the
 Hebrews as forming a single book.

 Translations from the Septuagint and Chaldee.

 There are three stages of Jerome's work of Scripture Translation. The
 first is during his stay at Rome, a.d. 382-385, when he translated only
 from the Greek--the New Testament from the Greek mss., and the Book of
 Psalms from the LXX. The second is the period immediately after his
 settlement at Bethlehem, when he translated still from the LXX., but
 marked with obeli and asterisks the passages in which that version
 differed from the Hebrew: the third from a.d. 390-404, in which he
 translated directly from the Hebrew. The work of the second period is
 that which is now before us. The whole of the Old Testament was
 translated from the LXX. (see his Apology, book ii. c. 24), but most of
 it was lost during his lifetime (see Letters CXXXIV. (end) and CXVI. 34
 (in Augustin Letter, 62)). What remains is the Book of Job, the Psalms,
 Chronicles, the Books of Solomon, and Tobit and Judith.

 Chronicles.

 This book was dedicated to [5415] Domnion and Rogatianus, about a.d.
 388. Jerome points out the advantages he enjoyed, in living in
 Palestine, for obtaining correct information on matters illustrative of
 Scripture, especially the names of places. The mss. of the LXX. on such
 points were so corrupt that occasionally three names were run into one,
 and "you would think that you had before you, not a heap of Hebrew
 names, but those of some foreign and Sarmatian tribe." Jerome had sent
 for a Jew, highly esteemed among his brethren, from Tiberias, and,
 after "examining him from top to toe," had, by his aid, emended the
 text and made the translation. But he had not the critical knowledge to
 guard him against supposing that the Books of Chronicles are "the Book
 of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah," referred to in the Books of
 Kings.

 [5415] See Preface to Ezra (Vulgate).

 Book of Job.

 This translation was dedicated to Paula and Eustochium, about the year
 388. He complains that even the revision he was now making was the
 subject of many cavils. Men prefer ancient faults to new truths, and
 would rather have handsome copies than correct ones; but he boasts that
 "the blessed Job, who, as far as the Latins are concerned, was till now
 lying amidst filth and swarming with the worms of error, is now whole
 and free from stain."

 The Psalms.

 Jerome first undertook a revision of the Psalter with the help of the
 Septuagint about the year 383, when living at Rome. This revision,
 which obtained the name of the Roman Psalter "probably because it was
 made for the use of the Roman Church at the request of Damasus," was
 retained until the pontificate of Pius V. (a.d. 1566). Before long "the
 old error prevailed over the new correction," the faults of the old
 version crept in again through the negligence of copyists; and at the
 request of Paula and Eustochium, Jerome commenced a new and more
 thorough revision. The exact date is not known; the work was in all
 probability done at Bethlehem in the years 387 and 388. This edition,
 which soon became popular, was introduced by Gregory of Tours into the
 services of the Church of France, and thus obtained the name of the
 Gallican Psalter. In 1566 it superseded the Roman in all churches
 except those of the Vatican, Milan, and St. Mark's, Venice.

 Long ago, when I was living at Rome, I revised the Psalter, and
 corrected it in a great measure, though but cursorily, in accordance
 with the Septuagint version. You now find it, Paula and Eustochium,
 again corrupted through the fault of copyists, and realise the fact
 that ancient error is more powerful than modern correction; and you
 therefore urge me, as it were, to cross-plough the land which has
 already been broken up, and, by means of the transverse furrows, to
 root out the thorns which are beginning to spring again; it is only
 right, you say, that rank and noxious growths should be cut down as
 often as they appear. And so I issue my customary admonition by way of
 preface both to you, for whom it happens that I am undertaking the
 labour, and to those persons who desire to have copies such as I
 describe. Pray see that what I have carefully revised be transcribed
 with similar painstaking care. Every reader can observe for himself
 where there is placed either a horizontal line or mark issuing from the
 centre, that is, either an obelus () or an asterisk (*). And wherever
 he sees the former, he is to understand that between this mark and the
 two stops (:) which I have introduced, the Septuagint translation
 contains superfluous matter. But where he sees the asterisk (*), an
 addition to the Hebrew books is indicated, which also goes as far as
 the two stops.

 Books of Solomon.

 This is addressed to Paula and Eustochium. Jerome describes the
 numerous emendations he has had to make in what was then the received
 Latin text, but says he has not found the same necessity in dealing
 with Ecclesiasticus. He adds, "All I aim at is to give you a revised
 edition of the Canonical Scriptures, and to employ my Latin on what is
 certain rather than on what is doubtful."

 Tobit and Judith.

 The Preface is to Chromatius and Heliodorus. It recognizes that the
 books are apocryphal. After his usual complaints of "the Pharisees" who
 impugned his translations, he says: "Inasmuch as the Chaldee is closely
 allied to the Hebrew, I procured the help of the most skilful speaker
 of both languages I could find, and gave to the subject one day's hasty
 labour, my method being to explain in Latin, with the aid of a
 secretary, whatever an interpreter expressed to me in Hebrew words." As
 to Judith, he notes that the Council of Nicæa had, contrary to the
 Hebrew tradition, included it in the Canon of Scripture, and this, with
 his friends' requests, had induced him to undertake the labour of
 emendation and translation.

 The Commentaries.

 The extant commentaries by Jerome on the books of Holy Scripture may be
 arranged thus, chronological sequence being observed as far as
 possible:

 A. New Testament:

 The Epistles to Philemon, Galatians, Ephesians, Titus. a.d. 387.

 Origen on St. Luke. a.d. 389.

 St. Matthew. a.d. 398.

 B. Old Testament:

 Ecclesiastes. a.d. 388.

 1. The Twelve Minor Prophets:

 Nahum, Michah, Zephaniah, Haggai, Habakkuk. a.d. 392.

 Jonah. Begun three years after the foregoing (Preface). Finished
 between a.d. 395 and a.d. 397.

 Obadiah. a.d. 403.

 Zechariah, Malachi, Hosea, Joel, Amos. Finished by a.d. 406.

 2. The Four Greater Prophets:

 Daniel. a.d. 407.

 Isaiah. a.d. 408-410.

 Ezekiel. a.d. 410-414.

 Jeremiah. Commenced after the death of Eustochium in a.d. 418. The
 commentary on this book, which stops short at chapter xxxii., was
 therefore written in a.d. 419, the year which intervened between
 Eustochium's death and Jerome's own.

 We have thought it best to give the Prefaces, as in those to the
 Vulgate, in the order of the books as they stand in our Bible, not in
 the order in which they were written.

 Matthew.

 The Preface, addressed to Eusebius of Cremona, was written a.d. 398.
 Eusebius was at this time starting for Rome, and he was charged to give
 a copy of this Commentary to Principia, the friend of Marcella, for
 whom he had been unable through sickness to write on the Song of Songs
 as he had wished. Jerome begins by distinguishing the Canonical from
 the Apocryphal Gospels, quoting the words of St. Luke, that many had
 taken in hand to write the life of Christ. He gives his view of the
 origin of the Gospels as follows:

 The first evangelist is Matthew, the publican, who was surnamed Levi.
 He published his Gospel in Judæa in the Hebrew language, chiefly for
 the sake of Jewish believers in Christ, who adhered in vain to the
 shadow of the law, although the substance of the Gospel had come. The
 second is Mark, the [5416] amanuensis of the Apostle Peter, and first
 bishop of the Church of Alexandria. He did not himself see our Lord and
 Saviour, but he related the matter of his Master's preaching with more
 regard to minute detail than to historical sequence. The third is Luke,
 the physician, by birth a native of Antioch, in Syria, whose praise is
 in the Gospel. He was himself a disciple of the Apostle Paul, and
 composed his book in Achaia and Boeotia. He thoroughly investigates
 certain particulars and, as he himself confesses in the preface,
 describes what he had heard rather than what he had seen. The last is
 John, the Apostle and Evangelist, whom Jesus loved most, who, reclining
 on the Lord's bosom, drank the purest streams of doctrine, and was the
 only one thought worthy of the words from the cross, "Behold! thy
 mother." When he was in Asia, at the time when the seeds of heresy were
 springing up (I refer to Cerinthus, Ebion, and the rest who say that
 Christ has not come in the flesh, whom he in his own epistle calls
 Antichrists, and whom the Apostle Paul frequently assails), he was
 urged by almost all the bishops of Asia then living, and by deputations
 from many Churches, to write more profoundly concerning the divinity of
 the Saviour, and to break through all obstacles so as to attain to the
 very Word of God (if I may so speak) with a boldness as successful as
 it appears audacious. Ecclesiastical history relates that, when he was
 urged by the brethren to write, he replied that he would do so if a
 general fast were proclaimed and all would offer up prayer to God; and
 when the fast was over, the narrative goes on to say, being filled with
 revelation, he burst into the heaven-sent Preface: "In the beginning
 was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God: this was
 in the beginning with God."

 Jerome then applies the four symbolical figures of Ezekiel to the
 Gospels: the Man is Matthew, the Lion, Mark, the Calf, Luke, "because
 he began with Zacharias the priest," and the Eagle, John. He then
 describes the works of his predecessors: Origen with his twenty-five
 volumes, Theophilus of Antioch, Hippolytus the martyr, Theodorus of
 Heraclea, Apollinaris of Laodicæa, Didymus of Alexandria, and of the
 Latins, Hilary, Victorinus, and Fortunatianus; from these last, he
 says, he had gained but little. He continues as follows:

 But you urge me to finish the composition in a fortnight, when Easter
 is now rapidly approaching, and the spring breezes are blowing; you do
 not consider when the shorthand writers are to take notes, when the
 sheets are to be written, when corrected, how long it takes to make a
 really accurate copy; and this is the more surprising, since you know
 that for the last three months I have been so ill that I am now hardly
 beginning to walk; and I could not adequately perform so great a task
 in so short a time. Therefore, neglecting the authority of ancient
 writers, since I have no opportunity of reading or following them, I
 have confined myself to the brief exposition and translation of the
 narrative which you particularly requested; and I have sometimes thrown
 in a few of the flowers of the [5417] spiritual interpretation, while I
 reserve the perfect work for a future day.

 [5416] Interpres.

 [5417] That is, the allegorical or mystical sense.

 Preface to Translation of Origen on St. Luke.

 Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 388.

 A few days ago you told me that you had read some commentaries on
 Matthew and Luke, of which one was equally dull in perception and
 expression, the other frivolous in expression, sleepy in sense.
 Accordingly you requested me to translate, without regarding such
 rubbish, our Adamantius' thirty-nine "homilies" on Luke, just as they
 are found in the original Greek; I replied that it was an irksome task
 and a mental torment to write, as Cicero phrases it, with another man's
 heart [5418] not one's own; but yet I will undertake it, as your
 requests reach no higher than this. The demand which the sainted
 Blesilla once made, at Rome, that I should translate into our language
 his twenty-five volumes on Matthew, five on Luke, and thirty-two on
 John is beyond my powers, my leisure, and my energy. You see what
 weight your influence and wishes have with me. I have laid aside for a
 time my books on Hebrew Questions because you think my labour will not
 be in vain, and turn to the translation of these commentaries, which,
 good or bad, are his work and not mine. I do this all the more readily
 because I hear on the left of me the raven--that ominous bird--croaking
 and mocking in all extraordinary way at the colours of all the other
 birds, though he himself is nothing if not a bird of gloom. And so,
 before he change his note, I confess that in these treatises Origen is
 like a boy amusing himself with the dice-box; there is a wide
 difference between his mature efforts and the serious studies of his
 old age. If my proposal meet with your approbation, if I am still able
 to undertake the task, and if the Lord grant me opportunity to
 translate them into Latin after completing the work I have now
 deferred, you will then be able to see--aye, and all who speak Latin
 will learn through you--how much good they knew not, and how much they
 have now begun to know. Besides this, I have arranged to send you
 shortly the Commentaries of Hilary, that master of eloquence, and of
 the blessed martyr Victorinus, on the Gospel of Matthew. Their style is
 different, but the grace of the Spirit which wrought in them is one.
 These will give you some idea of the study which our Latins also have,
 in former days, bestowed upon the Holy Scriptures.

 [5418] Alieno stomacho.

 Galatians.

 The Commentary is in three books, with full Prefaces.

 Book I., Ch. i. 1-iii. 9.

 Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 387.

 The Preface to this book begins with a striking description of the
 noble Roman lady Albina, which is as follows:

 Only a few days have elapsed since, having finished my exposition of
 the Epistle of Paul to Philemon, I had passed to Galatians, turning my
 course backwards and passing over many intervening subjects. But all at
 once letters unexpectedly arrived from Rome with the news that the
 venerable Albina has been recalled to the presence of the Lord, and
 that the saintly Marcella, bereft of the company of her mother, demands
 more than ever such solace as you can give, my dear Paula and
 Eustochium. This for the present is impossible on account of the great
 distance to be traversed by sea and land, and I could, therefore, wish
 to apply to the wound so suddenly inflicted at least the healing virtue
 of Scripture. I know full well her zeal and faith; I know how brightly
 the fire burns in her bosom, how she rises superior to her sex, and
 soars so far above human nature itself, that she crosses the Red Sea of
 this world, sounding the loud timbrel of the inspired volumes.
 Certainly, when I was at Rome, she never saw me for ever so short a
 time without putting some question to me respecting the Scriptures, and
 she did not, like the Pythagoreans, accept the "Ipse dixit" of her
 teacher, nor did authority, unsupported by the verdict of reason,
 influence her; but she tested all things, and weighed the whole matter
 so sagaciously that I perceived I had not a disciple so much as a
 judge. And so, believing that my labours would be most acceptable to
 her who is at a distance, and profitable for you who are with me here,
 I will approach a work unattempted by any writers in our language
 before me, and which scarcely any of the Greeks themselves have handled
 in a manner worthy of the dignity of the subject.

 Jerome then speaks of Victorinus, who had published a commentary on St.
 Paul, but "was busily engaged with secular literature and knew nothing
 of the Scriptures," and of the great Greek writers, Origen, [5419]
 Didymus, and [5420] Appolinaris, Eusebius of Emessa, and Theodorus of
 Heraclea, and says he has plucked flowers out of their gardens, so that
 the Commentary is more theirs than his. The expository part of the
 Preface is chiefly remarkable as giving the view of St. Paul's rebuke
 of St. Peter in Galatians ii., which occasioned the controversy between
 Jerome and Augustin. Jerome says:

 Paul does not go straight to the point, but is like a man walking in
 secret passages: his object is to exhibit Peter as doing what was
 expedient for the people of the circumcision committed to him, since,
 if a too sudden revolt took place from their ancient mode of life, they
 might be offended and not believe in the Cross; he wished, moreover, to
 show, inasmuch as the evangelisation of the Gentiles had been entrusted
 to himself that he had justice on his side in defending as true that
 which another only pretended was a dispensation. That wretch Porphyry
 [5421] Bataneotes by no means understood this, and, therefore, in the
 first book of the work which he wrote against us, he raised the
 objection that Peter was rebuked by Paul for not walking uprightly as
 an evangelical teacher. His desire was to brand the former with error
 and the latter with impudence, and to bring against us as a body the
 charge of erroneous notions and false doctrine, on the ground that the
 leaders of the Churches are at variance among themselves.

 In the Preface to Book II. Jerome describes the origin of the Galatians
 as a Gaulish tribe settled in Asia; but he takes them as slow of
 understanding, and says that the Gauls still preserve this character,
 just as the Roman Church preserves the character for which it was
 praised by St. Paul, for it still has crowds frequenting its churches
 and the tombs of its martyrs, and "nowhere else does the Amen resound
 so loudly, like spiritual thunder, and shake the temples of the idols";
 and similarly the traits of the churches of Corinth and Thessalonica
 are still preserved; in the first, the looseness of behaviour and of
 doctrine, and the conceit of worldly knowledge; in the second, the love
 of the brethren side by side with the disorderly conduct of busybodies.
 And he speaks of the condition of Galatia in his own day as follows:

 Any one who has seen by how many schisms Ancyra, the metropolis of
 Galatia, is rent and torn, and by how many differences and false
 doctrines the place is debauched, knows this as well as I do. I say
 nothing of [5422] Cataphrygians, [5423] Ophites, Borborites, and
 Manichæans; for these are familiar names of human woe. Who ever heard
 of Passaloryncitæ, and [5424] Ascodrobi, and [5425] Artotyritæ, and
 other portents--I can hardly call them names--in any part of the Roman
 Empire? The traces of the ancient foolishness remain to this day. One
 remark I must make, and so fulfil the promise with which I started.
 While the Galatians, in common with the whole East, speak Greek, their
 own language is almost identical with that of the [5426] Treviri; and
 if through contact with the Greek they have acquired a few corruptions,
 it is a matter of no moment. The Africans have to some extent changed
 the Phenician language, and Latin itself is daily undergoing changes
 through differences of place and time.

 The Preface to Book III. opens with the following passage, describing,
 in contrast with his own simple exposition, the arts of the preachers
 of his day.

 We are now busily occupied with our third book on Galatians, and, my
 friends, Paula and Eustochium, we are well aware of our weakness, and
 are conscious that our slender ability flows in but a small stream and
 makes little roar and rattle. For these are the qualities (to such a
 pass have we come) which are now expected even in the Churches; the
 simplicity and purity of apostolic language is neglected; we meet as if
 we were in the [5427] Athenæum, or the lecture rooms, to kindle the
 applause of the bystanders; what is now required is a discourse painted
 and tricked out with spurious rhetorical skill, and which, like a
 strumpet in the streets, does not aim at instructing the public, but at
 winning their favour; like a psaltery or a sweet-sounding lute, it must
 soothe the ears of the audience; and the passage of the prophet Ezekiel
 is suitable for our times, where the Lord says to him, "Thou art become
 unto them as the sound of a pleasant lute which is well made, for they
 hear thy words but do them not."

 Jerome then speaks of the composition of his commentaries as follows:

 How far I have profited by my unflagging study of Hebrew I leave to
 others to decide; what I have lost in my own language, I can tell. In
 addition to this, on account of the weakness of my eyes and bodily
 infirmity generally, I do not write with my own hand; and I cannot make
 up for my slowness of utterance by greater pains and diligence, as is
 said to have been the case with Virgil, of whom it is related that he
 treated his books as a bear treats her cubs, and licked them into
 shape. I must summon a secretary, and either say whatever comes
 uppermost; or, if I wish to think a little and hope to produce
 something superior, my helper silently reproves me, clenches his fist,
 wrinkles his brow, and plainly declares by his whole bearing that he
 has come for nothing.

 He then points out how the Scriptures have dispossessed the great
 writers of the pre-Christian world.

 How few there are who now read Aristotle. How many are there who know
 the books, or even the name of Plato? You may find here and there a few
 old men, who have nothing else to do, who study them in a corner.
 [5428] But the whole world speaks the language of our Christian
 peasants and fishermen, the whole world re-echoes their words. And so
 their simple words must be set forth with simplicity of style; for the
 word simple applies to their words, not their meaning. But if, in
 response to your prayers, I could, in expounding their epistles, have
 the same spirit which they had when they dictated them, you would then
 see in the Apostles as much majesty and breadth of true wisdom as there
 is arrogance and vanity in the learned men of the world. To make a
 brief confession of the secrets of my heart, I should not like any one
 who wished to understand the Apostle to find a difficulty in
 understanding my writings, and so be compelled to find some one to
 interpret the interpreter.

 [5419] Didymus, the blind teacher of Alexandria.

 [5420] He became bishop of Laodicea about 362. About 376 his followers
 became a sect, and about the same time he set up bishops of his own at
 Antioch and elsewhere.

 [5421] Probably from Batanea, the ancient Bashan, where Porphyry is
 said to have been born.

 [5422] "The patriarch (of the Montanists) resided at Pepuza, a small
 town or village in Phrygia, to which the sectaries gave the mystical
 name of Jerusalem, as believing that it would be the seat of the
 Millennial Kingdom, which was the chief subject of their hopes. Hence
 they derived the names of Pepuzians and Cataphrygians."--Robertson, Ch.
 Hist., vol. i. p. 76.

 [5423] The Ophites, who took their name from ophis, a serpent, supposed
 the serpent of Genesis iii. to have been either the Divine Wisdom or
 the Christ Himself, come to set men free from the ignorance in which
 the Demiurge wished to keep them. The sect began in the second century
 and lasted until the sixth.

 [5424] The Ben. editor prefers the form Tascodrogi, and states that it
 is the Phrygian or Galatian equivalent for Passaloryncitæ. The sect is
 said to have been so called from their habit of putting the finger to
 the nose when praying.

 [5425] Heretics who made offerings of bread and cheese (arto-turos.
 Arto-tyros).--Aug. de Hæres, No. 28.

 [5426] The people who lived between the Moselle and the Forest of
 Ardennes in and about the modern Treves.

 [5427] The Athenæum was the name specially given to a school founded by
 the Emperor Hadrian at Rome, about a.d. 133, for the promotion of
 literary and scientific studies. The word denoted in general any place
 consecrated to the goddess Athena.

 [5428] Angulis. So. Cic. Rep. i. 2.

 Ephesians.

 This Commentary was specially prized by Jerome as exhibiting his true
 views (Letter LXXXIV. 2), and they became in consequence one of the
 chief subjects of controversy between him and Rufinus, who traced in
 them, not unjustly, the influence of Origen. It was written immediately
 after that on the Epistle to the Galatians, in a.d. 387, and, like
 that, addressed to Paula and Eustochium. In the Preface to Book i.
 Jerome defends himself against various accusations. He declares that he
 has been, in the main, his own instructor, but yet that he has
 constantly consulted others as to Scriptural difficulties, and that he
 had, not long before, been to Alexandria to consult Didymus. "I
 questioned him about everything which was not clear to me in the whole
 range of Scripture." As to his indebtedness to Origen, he speaks as
 follows, certainly not blaming his doctrines: "I remark in the
 Prefaces, for your information, that Origen composed three volumes on
 this Epistle, and I have partly followed him. Apollinaris and Didymus
 also published some commentaries, and, though we have gleaned a few
 things from them, we have added or omitted such as we thought fit. The
 studious reader will, therefore, understand at the outset that this
 work is partly my own, and that I am in part indebted to others." The
 Preface to Books ii. and iii. is short. It speaks in praise of
 Marcella, who had invited him to his task, and declares that he in his
 monastery could not accomplish as much as that noble woman amidst the
 cares of her household. "I beseech you," he says, "to bear in mind that
 the language of this publication has not been long thought over or
 highly polished. In revealing the mysteries of Scripture I use almost
 the language of the street, and sometimes get through a thousand lines
 a day, in order that the explanation of the Apostle which I have begun
 may be completed with the aid of the prayers of Paul himself, whose
 Epistles I am endeavouring to explain."

 Philemon.

 Written for Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 387. The Preface is a defence of
 the genuineness of the Epistle against those who thought its subject
 beneath the dignity of inspiration. "There are many degrees of
 inspiration," Jerome says, "though in Christ alone it is seen in its
 fulness." Many of the other Epistles touch upon small affairs of life,
 like the cloak left at Troas. To suppose that common life is separate
 from God is Manichæanism. Jerome mentions that Marcion, who altered
 many of the Epistles, did not touch that of Philemon; and brevity in a
 document which has in it so much of the beauty of the Gospel is a mark
 of its inspiration.

 Titus.

 Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 387. The Preface speaks of the
 rejection of the Epistle by Marcion and Basilides, its acceptance by
 Tatius, but without assigning reasons. It ought, Jerome says, to be of
 special interest to Paula and Eustochium, as being written from
 Nicopolis, near Actium, where their property lay.

 Isaiah.

 The Commentary in eighteen books, each with its Preface. It was written
 in the years 404-410, and addressed to Eustochium alone, her mother
 Paula having died in 404.

 The Preface to Book i. touches generally upon the character and
 contents of Isaiah, asserting that many of the prophecies are directly
 applicable to Christ, and that the nations who are dealt with have a
 spiritual meaning. Those to the following books mostly give a short
 statement of the contents of the chapters commented on, and entreat the
 prayers of Eustochium for the work. The Fifth Book (or chapters xiii.
 to xxiii.) had been published before by itself, at the instance of a
 bishop named Amabilis, but he says he must add the metaphorical and
 spiritual meaning of the Visions of the various nations, which is done
 in Books vi. and vii. The Preface to Book x. contains a bitter allusion
 to Rufinus, "the Scorpion, a dumb and poisonous brute, still grumbling
 over my former reply," and speaks of Pammachius as joining in the
 request for the continuation of the Commentaries.

 The Preface to Book xi. intimates that his commentary upon Daniel,
 which expounded the statue with feet of iron and clay as the Roman
 Empire, and announced its fall, had been known at the court and
 resented by Stilicho, but that all danger from that source had been
 removed by the judgment of God, that is, through the death of Stilicho
 by the command of his son in-law Honorius. The Preface to Book xiii.
 records a severe illness which had stopped his work, though he was
 restored to health suddenly; and that to Book xiv. thanks Eustochium
 for her kind offices during this illness. The remaining Prefaces,
 though they have occasionally some interest in the history of the
 interpretation of Scripture, need not delay us.

 Jeremiah.

 The Commentary on Jeremiah is in six books; but Jerome did not live to
 finish it. It was written between the years 317 and 319, but only
 extends to chapter xxxii. It was dedicated to Eusebius of Cremona. The
 Prefaces, which are full of vigour, contain many allusions to the
 events and controversies of the last years of Jerome's life. In the
 Preface to Book i., after speaking of the Book of Daniel and the
 apocryphal Letter of Jeremiah as not belonging to the prophet's
 writings, he continues:

 I pay little heed to the ravings of disparaging critics who revile not
 only my words, but the very syllables of my words, and suppose they
 give evidence of some little knowledge if they discredit another man's
 work, as was exemplified in that [5429] ignorant traducer who lately
 broke out, and thought it worth his while to censure my commentaries on
 Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians. He does not understand the rules of
 commenting (for he is more asleep than awake and seems utterly dazed),
 and is not aware that in our books we give the opinions of many
 different writers, the authors' names being either expressed or
 understood, so that it is open to the reader to decide which he may
 prefer to adopt; although I must add that, in my Preface to the First
 Book of that work, I gave fair notice that my remarks would be partly
 my own, partly those of other commentators, and that thus the
 commentary would be the work conjointly of the ancient writers and of
 myself. [5430] Grunnius, his precursor, overlooked the same fact, and
 once upon a time did his best to cavil. I replied to him in two books,
 and there I cleared away the objections which he adduced in his own
 name, though the real traducer was some one else; to say nothing of my
 treatises against Jovinianus where, you may remember, I show that he
 (Jovinianus) laments that virginity is preferred to marriage, single
 marriage to digamy, digamy to polygamy. The stupid fool, [5431]
 labouring under his load of Scotch porridge, does not recollect that we
 said, in that very work, "I do not condemn the twice married, nor the
 thrice married, and, if it so be, the eight times married; I will go a
 step farther, and say that I welcome even a penitent whoremonger; for
 things equally lawful must be weighed in an even balance." Let him read
 the Apology [5432] for the same work which was directed against his
 [5433] master, and was received by Rome with acclamation many years
 ago. He will then observe that his revilings are but the echoes of
 other men's voices, and that his ignorance is so deep that even his
 abuse is not his own, but that he employs against us the ravings of
 foes long since dead and buried.

 The Preface to Book ii. is short and contains nothing of special
 importance. In that to Book iii. Jerome declares that he will, like
 Ulysses with the Sirens, close his ears to the adversary. The devil,
 who once spoke through Jovinianus, "now barks through the hound of
 Albion (Pelagius), who is like a mountain of fat, and whose fury is
 more in his heels than in his teeth; for his offspring is among the
 Scots, in the neighbourhood of Britain; and, according to the fables of
 the poet, he must, like Cerberus, be smitten to death with a spiritual
 club, that, in company with his master Pluto, he may forever hold his
 peace."

 In the Preface to Book iv. Jerome says he has been hindered in his work
 by the harassing of the Pelagian controversy. He regards Pelagius as
 reproducing the doctrines of impassibility and sinlessness taught by
 Pythagoras and Zeno, and revived by Origen, Rufinus, Evagrius Ponticus,
 and Jovinian. Their doctrines, he says, were promulgated chiefly in
 Sicily, Rhodes, and other islands; they were propagated secretly, and
 denied in public. They were full of malice, but were but dumb dogs, and
 were refuted in "certain writings," probably those of Augustin; but he
 declares his intention of writing against them, which he did in his
 anti-Pelagian Dialogue.

 The Prefaces to Books v. and vi. contain nothing noteworthy.

 [5429] Pelagius.

 [5430] That is, Rufinus. See Preface to Book xii. of Isaiah, where
 Rufinus is called Grunnius Corocotta Porcellus, and Preface to Book iv.
 of Jeremiah.

 [5431] Scotorum pultibus prægravatus. The words have been translated
 "made fat with Scotch flummery" (Stillingfleet). Another rendering is,
 "having his belly filled and his head bedulled with Scotch porridge"
 (Wall on Infant Baptism, pt. i. c. 19, § 3). Some think the words refer
 to Celestius, Pelagius' supporter.

 [5432] The letter to Pammachius (Jer. Letter XLVIII.) in defence of the
 book against Jovinianus.

 [5433] Jovinian was condemned in a Synod at Rome about 390. Thirty
 years had thus passed since the events occurred to which Jerome refers.
 See Preface to the treatise against Jovinian.

 Ezekiel.

 The Commentary on Ezekiel is in fourteen Books. It was dedicated to
 Eustochium, and was written between the years 410 and 414. The Prefaces
 gain a special interest from their descriptions of the sack of Rome by
 Alaric and the consequent immigration into Palestine. We give several
 passages.

 In Preface to Book i.

 Having completed the eighteen books of the exposition of Isaiah, I was
 very desirous, Eustochium, Christ's virgin, to go on to Ezekiel, in
 accordance with my frequent promises to you and your mother Paula, of
 saintly memory, and thus, as the saying is, put the finishing touches
 to the work on the prophets; but alas! intelligence was suddenly
 brought me of the death of Pammachius and [5434] Marcella, [5435] the
 siege of Rome, and the falling asleep of many of my brethren and
 sisters. I was so stupefied and dismayed that day and night I could
 think of nothing but the welfare of the community; it seemed as though
 I was sharing the captivity of the saints, and I could not open my lips
 until I knew something more definite; and all the while, full of
 anxiety, I was wavering between hope and despair, and was torturing
 myself with the misfortunes of other people. But when the bright light
 of all the world was put out, or, rather, when the Roman Empire was
 decapitated, and, to speak more correctly, the whole world perished in
 one city, [5436] "I became dumb and humbled myself, and kept silence
 from good words, but my grief broke out afresh, my heart glowed within
 me, and while I meditated the fire was kindled;" and I thought I ought
 not to disregard the saying, [5437] "An untimely story is like music in
 a time of grief." But seeing that you persist in making this request,
 and a wound, though deep, heals by degrees; and [5438] the scorpion
 lies beneath the ground with [5439] Enceladus and Porphyrion, and the
 many-headed Hydra has at length ceased to hiss at us; and since
 opportunity has been given me which I ought to use, not for replying to
 insidious heretics, but for devoting myself to the exposition of
 Scripture, I will resume my work upon the prophet Ezekiel.

 Book ii. has, instead of a Preface, merely a line calling the attention
 of Eustochium to its opening words.

 The Preface to Book iii. has a noteworthy passage on the sack of Rome
 and its results.

 Who would believe that Rome, built up by the conquest of the whole
 world, had collapsed, that the mother of nations had become also their
 tomb; that the shores of the whole East, of Egypt, of Africa, which
 once belonged to the imperial city, were filled with the hosts of her
 men-servants and maid-servants, that we should every day be receiving
 in this holy Bethlehem men and women who once were noble and abounding
 in every kind of wealth but are now reduced to poverty? We cannot
 relieve these sufferers: all we can do is to sympathise with them, and
 unite our tears with theirs. The burden of this holy work was as much
 as we could carry; the sight of the wanderers, coming in crowds, caused
 us deep pain; and we therefore abandoned the exposition of Ezekiel, and
 almost all study, and were filled with a longing to turn the words of
 Scripture into action, and not to say holy things but to do them. Now,
 however, in response to your admonition, Eustochium, Christ's virgin,
 we resume the interrupted labour, and approach our third Book.

 The Prefaces to Books iv., v., and vi. contain nothing remarkable. The
 following is the important part of the Preface to Book vii.

 There is not a single hour, nor a single moment, in which we are not
 relieving crowds of brethren, and the quiet of the monastery has been
 changed into the bustle of a guest house. And so much is this the case
 that we must either close our doors, or abandon the study of the
 Scriptures on which we depend for keeping the doors open. And so,
 turning to profit, or rather stealing the hours of the nights, which,
 now that winter is approaching, begin to lengthen somewhat, I am
 endeavouring by the light of the lamp to dictate these comments,
 whatever they maybe worth, and am trying to mitigate with exposition
 the weariness of a mind which is a stranger to rest. I am not boasting,
 as some perhaps suspect, of the welcome given to the brethren, but I am
 simply confessing the causes of the delay. Who could boast when the
 flight of the people of the West, and the holy places, crowded as they
 are with penniless fugitives, naked and wounded, plainly reveal the
 ravages of the Barbarians? We cannot see what has occurred, without
 tears and moans. Who would have believed that mighty Rome, with its
 careless security of wealth, would be reduced to such extremities as to
 need shelter, food, and clothing? And yet, some are so hard-hearted and
 cruel that, instead of showing compassion, they break up the rags and
 bundles of the captives, and expect to find gold about those who are
 nothing than prisoners. In addition to this hindrance to my dictating,
 my eyes are growing dim with age and to some extent I share the
 suffering of the saintly Isaac: I am quite unable to go through the
 Hebrew books with such light as I have at night, for even in the full
 light of day they are hidden from my eyes owing to the smallness of the
 letters. In fact, it is only the voice of the brethren which enables me
 to master the commentaries of Greek writers.

 The Prefaces to Books viii. to xiv. contain nothing of special
 interest.

 [5434] Under whose care Eustochium had been trained.

 [5435] By the Goths under Alaric. The city was taken in a.d. 410.

 [5436] Ps. xxxix. 3, 4.

 [5437] Ecclus. xxii. 6.

 [5438] Rufinus who died a.d. 410, in Sicily, on his way to the Holy
 Land from Aquileia and Rome, whence he had been driven by the troubles
 in Italy.

 [5439] The giants who bore those names. See Hor. III. od. 4.

 Daniel.

 The Commentary on Daniel was dedicated to Pammachius and Marcella in
 the year 407. It is in a single book, and is aimed at the criticisms of
 Porphyry, who, like most modern critics, took the predictions in the
 Book of Daniel as relating to the time of Antiochus Epiphanes and the
 Maccabees, and written near that date. The Preface is very similar to
 that prefixed to the Vulgate translation of Daniel.

 Prefaces to the Commentaries on the Minor Prophets.

 For the order and date of writing of these Commentaries see the Preface
 to Amos, Book iii., and the note there.

 Hosea.

 This Commentary was dedicated to Pammachius, a.d. 406 (sixth consulate
 of Arcadius--Preface to Amos, Book iii. The Preface to Book i. is
 chiefly taken up with a discussion on Hosea's "wife of whoredoms." He
 takes the story as allegorical; it cannot be literal, for "God commands
 nothing but what is honourable, nor does he, by bidding men do
 disgraceful things, make that conduct honourable which is disgraceful."
 Jerome then describes, as in former Prefaces, the chief Greek
 commentators, of whom Apollinaris and Origen had written very shortly
 on Hosea, Pierius at great length, but to little purpose; and says that
 he had himself obtained from Didymus of Alexandria that he should
 complete the Commentary of Origen. He had himself often judged
 independently, though with little knowledge of Hebrew, but he had been
 in earnest, while most scholars were "more concerned for their bellies
 than their hearts, and thought themselves learned if in the doctors'
 waiting rooms they could disparage other men's works."

 In the Preface to Book ii. Jerome complains of his detractors, and
 appeals from the present favour of high-placed men to the posthumous
 authority of sound ability.

 In Book iii. he claims Pammachius as his defender, though he fears the
 judgment of his great learning.

 Joel.

 This Commentary also is addressed to Pammachius, a.d. 406. It is in one
 book. It gives the order of the Twelve Prophets adopted by the LXX. and
 the Hebrew respectively, the Hebrew order being that now in use. It
 also gives the etymological meaning of their names.

 Amos.

 In three books, addressed also to Pammachius, a.d. 406 (Preface to
 Amos, Book iii.). The Preface to Book i. merely gives a description of
 Tekoa, Amos' birthplace. That to Book ii. speaks of old age, with its
 advantages for self-control and its trials in various infirmities, such
 as phlegm, dim eyesight, loosened teeth, colic, and gout. That to Book
 iii. contains the passage several times referred to for the order of
 these Commentaries, which is as follows:

 We have not discussed them in regular sequence from the first to the
 ninth, as they are read, but as we have been able, and in accordance
 with requests made to us. Nahum, Micah, Zephaniah, Haggai, [5440] I
 first addressed to Paula and Eustochium, her daughter, who are never
 weary; I next dedicated two books on Habakkuk to Chromatius, bishop of
 Aquileia; I then proceeded to explain, at your command, Pammachius, and
 after a long interval of silence, Obadiah and Jonah. [5441] In the
 [5442] present year, which bears in the calendar the name of the sixth
 consulate of Arcadius Augustus and Anitius Probus, I interpreted
 Malachi for Exsuperius, bishop of Toulouse, and Minervius and
 Alexander, monks of that city. Unable to refuse your request I
 immediately went back to the beginning of the volume, and expounded
 Hosea, Joel, and Amos. A severe sickness followed, and I showed my
 rashness in resuming the dictation of this work too hastily; and,
 whereas others hesitate to write and frequently correct their work, I
 entrusted mine to the fortune which attends those who employ a
 secretary, and hazarded my reputation for ability and orthodoxy; for,
 as I have often testified, I cannot endure the toil of writing with my
 own hand; and, in expounding the Holy Scriptures, what we want is not a
 polished style and oratorical flourishes, but learning and simple
 truth.

 Obadiah.

 Addressed to Pammachius a.d. 403. The Preface records how in early
 youth (some thirty years before), he had attempted an allegorical
 commentary of Obadiah, of which he was now ashamed, though it has
 lately been praised by a youth of similar years.

 Jonah.

 This was addressed to Chromatius, [5443] but belongs to the year 395.
 It is said in the Preface to be three years after the commentary on
 Micah, Nahum, etc. The Preface merely touches on the various places of
 Scripture in which Jonah is named.

 Micah.

 Addressed to Paula and Eustochium. a.d. 392. It is in two books. In the
 Preface to Book ii., Jerome vindicates himself against the charge of
 making mere compilations from Origen. He confesses, however, his great
 admiration for him. "What they consider a reproach," he says, "I regard
 as the highest praise, since I desire to imitate him who, I doubt not,
 is acceptable to all wise men, and to you."

 Nahum.

 Also to Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 392. The Preface contains little of
 importance. Jerome mentions that the village of Elkosh, Nahum's
 birthplace, was pointed out to him by a guide in Galilee.

 Habakkuk.

 Addressed to Chromatius, a.d. 392. The commentary is in two books. The
 Preface to Book i. is long, but merely describes the contents of the
 book. That to Book ii. mentions among his adversaries, "The Serpent,
 and Sardanapalus, whose character is worse than his name"--expressions
 which have been referred to Rufinus; but the enmity between Jerome and
 Rufinus had not broken out in 392.

 Zephaniah.

 Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 392. In the Preface Jerome
 defends himself for writing for women, bringing many examples from
 Scripture and from classical writers to show the capacity of women.

 Haggai.

 Also to Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 392. The preface merely describes
 the occasion of the book, but says that Haggai's prophecy was
 contemporary with the reign of Tarquinius Superbus (b.c. 535-510).

 Zechariah.

 Addressed to Exsuperius, bishop of Toulouse, a.d. 406, in three books,
 and sent, "in the closing days of autumn, by the monk, Sisinnius, who
 had been sent with presents for the poor saints at Jerusalem, and was
 hastening to Egypt on a similar errand." The Prefaces to the three
 books mention these facts, but have nothing in them of note which has
 not been said before.

 Malachi.

 Addressed, a.d. 406, to Minervius and Alexander, presbyters of the
 diocese of Toulouse. The Jews, the Preface says, believe Malachi to be
 a name for Ezra. Origen and his followers believe that (according to
 his name) he was an angel. But we reject this view altogether, lest we
 be compelled to accept the doctrine of the fall of souls from heaven.

 [5440] These four and Habakkuk are mentioned in the De Vir. Ill. (a.d.
 492), and were written about that date, Jonah three years after, but
 Obadiah probably not till 403. The rest are fixed to the Sixth
 Consulate of Arcadius, 406.

 [5441] But see Preface to Jonah, which is addressed to Chromatius.

 [5442] The year a.d. 406.

 [5443] Chromatius is named in this Preface distinctly. But see Preface
 to Amos, Book iii., which says that the Commentaries to Obadiah and
 Jonah were written at the request of Pammachius.

 Indexes

Index of Scripture References

 Genesis

 [1]1 [2]1:1 [3]1:2 [4]1:2 [5]1:7 [6]1:10 [7]1:26
 [8]1:26 [9]1:27 [10]1:28 [11]1:28 [12]1:28 [13]1:28
 [14]1:28 [15]1:28 [16]1:28 [17]1:28 [18]1:28 [19]1:28
 [20]1:28 [21]1:31 [22]2 [23]2 [24]2:7 [25]2:8 [26]2:10
 [27]2:10 [28]2:10-11 [29]2:11 [30]2:11 [31]2:13 [32]2:16
 [33]2:17 [34]2:21-22 [35]2:21-22 [36]2:23 [37]2:24 [38]2:24
 [39]3 [40]3 [41]3:1 [42]3:1-6 [43]3:7 [44]3:14 [45]3:14
 [46]3:14 [47]3:16 [48]3:16 [49]3:16 [50]3:18 [51]3:18
 [52]3:18-19 [53]3:19 [54]3:19 [55]3:20 [56]3:21 [57]3:21
 [58]3:23 [59]3:24 [60]3:24 [61]3:24 [62]3:25 [63]4:5
 [64]4:7 [65]4:7 [66]4:15 [67]4:17 [68]4:19 [69]4:25
 [70]4:26 [71]5 [72]5:3 [73]5:27 [74]6:3 [75]6:3 [76]6:3
 [77]6:4 [78]6:5 [79]7 [80]7:2 [81]7:2 [82]7:2 [83]7:11
 [84]7:13 [85]7:23 [86]8 [87]8:8 [88]8:11 [89]8:20
 [90]8:21 [91]8:21 [92]8:21 [93]9:1 [94]9:1 [95]9:3
 [96]9:3 [97]9:4-6 [98]9:7 [99]9:7 [100]9:20-21 [101]9:20-21
 [102]10 [103]10:11 [104]11 [105]11:2 [106]11:4 [107]11:9
 [108]11:10-26 [109]11:31 [110]12:1 [111]12:1 [112]12:1
 [113]12:1 [114]12:1 [115]12:1-4 [116]12:4 [117]13:5-11
 [118]13:8 [119]13:10 [120]13:11 [121]14:2 [122]14:13-16
 [123]14:14 [124]14:18 [125]15:16 [126]15:16 [127]16:12
 [128]17:1 [129]17:1-2 [130]17:17 [131]18:1 [132]18:1
 [133]18:1-8 [134]18:11 [135]18:12 [136]18:23 [137]18:23-33
 [138]19:15-26 [139]19:17 [140]19:18-21 [141]19:26
 [142]19:30-38 [143]19:30-38 [144]19:30-38 [145]20 [146]20:11
 [147]21:3 [148]21:6 [149]21:12 [150]21:31 [151]22 [152]22
 [153]22:1 [154]23 [155]23:19 [156]24 [157]24:15-16
 [158]24:42 [159]25:1 [160]25:22 [161]25:22-23 [162]25:23
 [163]25:34 [164]26 [165]26:8 [166]26:12 [167]26:15
 [168]26:18 [169]27 [170]27 [171]27:36 [172]27:41-46
 [173]28:1-5 [174]28:11-13 [175]28:12 [176]28:12 [177]28:12
 [178]28:12-13 [179]28:12-13 [180]28:20 [181]28:20-21
 [182]29:10-11 [183]29:11 [184]29:15 [185]29:17-18 [186]29:20
 [187]30:1 [188]30:1-2 [189]30:2 [190]30:14-16 [191]30:33
 [192]31:36-37 [193]31:40 [194]31:41 [195]31:46-49 [196]32:2
 [197]32:5 [198]32:7 [199]32:10 [200]32:10 [201]32:14
 [202]32:24-25 [203]32:25 [204]32:28 [205]32:30 [206]32:30
 [207]32:31 [208]32:31 [209]33 [210]33:18-20 [211]34 [212]34
 [213]34:30 [214]35:4 [215]35:16 [216]35:16 [217]35:18-19
 [218]35:20 [219]35:21 [220]37:23 [221]37:23 [222]37:25
 [223]37:28 [224]37:35 [225]37:35 [226]37:36 [227]38
 [228]38:9 [229]38:12-18 [230]38:26 [231]38:26 [232]38:27-30
 [233]38:28-29 [234]39:12 [235]39:12 [236]39:12 [237]39:12
 [238]39:12-13 [239]39:23 [240]41:42-44 [241]41:45
 [242]41:50-52 [243]43:16 [244]46 [245]46:3-4 [246]46:26
 [247]46:26 [248]48:10 [249]49:10 [250]49:10 [251]49:11
 [252]49:17 [253]49:27 [254]49:27 [255]49:27 [256]49:31

 Exodus

 [257]1:1 [258]2:16-17 [259]3:3 [260]3:3 [261]3:5 [262]3:5
 [263]3:5 [264]3:14 [265]3:14 [266]3:14 [267]4:6 [268]4:20
 [269]4:24-26 [270]5:2 [271]7:13 [272]7:16 [273]11 [274]12
 [275]12:8 [276]12:8 [277]12:11 [278]12:11 [279]12:21-23
 [280]12:22 [281]12:23 [282]12:29 [283]12:29 [284]12:29-30
 [285]12:38 [286]12:46 [287]13:2 [288]13:2 [289]13:18
 [290]13:18 [291]14:19 [292]15:1 [293]15:20-21 [294]15:21
 [295]15:23 [296]15:23-25 [297]15:23-27 [298]15:27 [299]16:3
 [300]17:4 [301]17:8 [302]17:8-14 [303]17:11 [304]18:3
 [305]19:15 [306]20:5 [307]20:5 [308]20:12 [309]20:12
 [310]21:2 [311]21:10 [312]21:12-13 [313]22:28 [314]23:20
 [315]23:26 [316]25:11 [317]25:22 [318]27:20 [319]28
 [320]31:2-3 [321]32:4 [322]32:6 [323]32:10 [324]32:30
 [325]32:30-35 [326]32:31-32 [327]32:32 [328]33:3 [329]33:20
 [330]33:21-23 [331]34:29 [332]34:33 [333]34:35 [334]37
 [335]38:8

 Leviticus

 [336]2:11 [337]2:11 [338]2:13 [339]4:2 [340]4:27 [341]5:3
 [342]9:1 [343]9:7 [344]10:6 [345]10:9 [346]10:9 [347]10:9
 [348]10:12 [349]12:2-3 [350]12:6 [351]12:7 [352]14:1
 [353]14:6 [354]15:31 [355]16:2 [356]16:2 [357]16:5
 [358]16:6 [359]16:29 [360]18:9 [361]19:2 [362]19:15
 [363]21:3 [364]21:7 [365]21:10-12 [366]21:12 [367]21:13
 [368]21:13-14 [369]21:14 [370]21:17 [371]21:17-23
 [372]22:12-13 [373]22:13 [374]22:14 [375]23:27 [376]23:29
 [377]23:40-42 [378]25:8 [379]25:13

 Numbers

 [380]3:39 [381]4:3 [382]4:3 [383]4:23 [384]4:30 [385]4:35
 [386]4:39 [387]5:11 [388]5:17 [389]6:1 [390]7:5 [391]7:24
 [392]7:28-29 [393]11:4 [394]11:4-6 [395]11:16 [396]11:16
 [397]11:20 [398]11:20 [399]11:31 [400]11:31-4 [401]11:34
 [402]12:1 [403]12:3 [404]12:14 [405]13:23-24 [406]14:7
 [407]14:18 [408]16:26 [409]16:46-48 [410]18:15 [411]18:16
 [412]18:20 [413]18:20-24 [414]18:24 [415]19:1-10 [416]20:10
 [417]20:12 [418]20:13 [419]20:17 [420]20:17 [421]20:29
 [422]20:29 [423]21:9 [424]23:21 [425]23:21 [426]24:15-19
 [427]25:6-8 [428]25:7-8 [429]28:15 [430]28:22 [431]29:5
 [432]33 [433]33:47-48 [434]34:15 [435]35:6 [436]35:13
 [437]35:30

 Deuteronomy

 [438]5:14-15 [439]5:31 [440]7:13 [441]8:3 [442]8:12-14
 [443]8:15 [444]8:15 [445]9:6 [446]11:10 [447]11:11
 [448]11:14 [449]13:3 [450]13:5 [451]13:6-9 [452]15:12
 [453]15:21 [454]16:5 [455]17:5 [456]17:6 [457]17:9-11
 [458]17:12 [459]17:15 [460]18:2 [461]18:9-12 [462]18:13
 [463]18:13 [464]20:6-7 [465]20:7 [466]21:10-13 [467]21:11-12
 [468]21:17 [469]22:1 [470]22:4 [471]22:8 [472]22:10
 [473]22:23-24 [474]22:23-27 [475]22:24-25 [476]23:2 [477]23:3
 [478]24:1-4 [479]27:9 [480]27:9 [481]29:23 [482]32:7
 [483]32:15 [484]33:9 [485]34:5-6 [486]34:6 [487]34:6
 [488]34:6-8 [489]34:8 [490]34:8

 Joshua

 [491]2:18 [492]3 [493]3:17 [494]4:3 [495]4:20 [496]5:2
 [497]5:3 [498]5:9 [499]5:15 [500]5:15 [501]6:20 [502]7
 [503]7:12 [504]7:24-26 [505]8 [506]9 [507]9:27 [508]10:1
 [509]10:3 [510]10:12-14 [511]10:13 [512]10:16 [513]10:26
 [514]11:10 [515]11:19-20 [516]14:3 [517]14:15 [518]15:13-15
 [519]15:14 [520]19:50 [521]22:27 [522]24:28 [523]24:29
 [524]24:30 [525]24:30 [526]24:30 [527]24:33

 Judges

 [528]1:13-15 [529]2:9 [530]5:21 [531]6:2 [532]6:36-40
 [533]6:37 [534]11:1 [535]11:30-31 [536]11:34-40 [537]15:17-19
 [538]17:5 [539]19 [540]20 [541]20:47 [542]21:19-23

 Ruth

 [543]1 [544]1:14 [545]1:16

 1 Samuel

 [546]1:3 [547]1:15 [548]1:17 [549]1:27-28 [550]2
 [551]2:12-17 [552]2:12-17 [553]2:18 [554]2:18 [555]2:21
 [556]2:22 [557]2:22 [558]2:22 [559]2:22 [560]2:24 [561]2:25
 [562]2:27-36 [563]2:30 [564]4 [565]4 [566]4:18 [567]4:19-22
 [568]7:7 [569]8:1-4 [570]8:3 [571]9 [572]9:9 [573]12:3
 [574]12:3-5 [575]14:24 [576]14:24 [577]14:27 [578]15:11
 [579]15:11 [580]15:17 [581]15:35 [582]16:6 [583]16:7
 [584]16:7 [585]16:7 [586]16:7 [587]16:11-13 [588]17:49
 [589]17:50-51 [590]18:6-7 [591]21:1 [592]21:4 [593]21:4-5
 [594]21:10 [595]22:16-18 [596]22:17-19 [597]25:38 [598]28:13
 [599]30:1

 2 Samuel

 [600]4:11 [601]5:7 [602]5:9 [603]6:6-7 [604]6:6-7
 [605]6:7-8 [606]8:13-14 [607]11 [608]11:4 [609]12:13
 [610]12:13 [611]12:16 [612]13 [613]13:14 [614]16:10
 [615]17:1-4 [616]17:14 [617]18:33 [618]21:1 [619]24
 [620]24:10

 1 Kings

 [621]1:1-4 [622]1:4 [623]1:38 [624]2:10 [625]3:3
 [626]3:16-28 [627]4:33 [628]7:14 [629]8:9 [630]8:46
 [631]8:46 [632]11:1-4 [633]11:3 [634]11:14 [635]12:10
 [636]13:24 [637]14:5 [638]14:8 [639]15:11 [640]16:34
 [641]17 [642]17:4 [643]17:6 [644]17:8-16 [645]17:9-16
 [646]18:3-4 [647]18:4 [648]18:21 [649]18:40 [650]19:4
 [651]19:4-6 [652]19:8-11 [653]19:11-13 [654]19:21 [655]21:10
 [656]21:13 [657]21:19 [658]21:19 [659]21:21 [660]21:23
 [661]21:25 [662]21:27 [663]21:27-29 [664]21:27-29
 [665]21:28-29 [666]21:29 [667]22:19

 2 Kings

 [668]1:8 [669]2:11 [670]2:11 [671]2:11 [672]2:11 [673]2:13
 [674]2:13 [675]2:13 [676]2:19-22 [677]4:27 [678]4:38-39
 [679]4:38-41 [680]6:1-2 [681]6:1-2 [682]6:5-6 [683]6:16
 [684]6:17 [685]6:18-23 [686]10:15-16 [687]13:21 [688]18
 [689]18:3-4 [690]18:7 [691]18:14 [692]19:28 [693]19:35
 [694]20 [695]20:1 [696]20:5 [697]20:12-13 [698]20:13
 [699]20:17 [700]20:18 [701]22:14 [702]23:29 [703]23:29
 [704]23:29

 1 Chronicles

 [705]2:32 [706]2:55 [707]6:34-38 [708]11:5-6 [709]15:21
 [710]21:15 [711]21:18 [712]22:8 [713]23:14 [714]28:3

 2 Chronicles

 [715]3:1 [716]6:36 [717]8:5 [718]15:2 [719]17:3 [720]19:2
 [721]20:5-25 [722]20:26 [723]22:9 [724]32:26 [725]32:30
 [726]33:12-13 [727]33:12-13 [728]34:2 [729]34:22-23
 [730]35:20 [731]35:20-24 [732]35:22

 Nehemiah

 [733]4:16

 Esther

 [734]2:1-4 [735]6:1 [736]7:10 [737]9:20-32 [738]14:11
 [739]14:16

 Job

 [740]1:1 [741]1:16 [742]1:20-21 [743]1:21 [744]1:21
 [745]1:21 [746]1:21 [747]1:21 [748]2:3 [749]2:3 [750]2:4-5
 [751]2:4-5 [752]2:4-5 [753]2:6 [754]3:3 [755]3:3
 [756]4:17-21 [757]4:18 [758]4:18 [759]5:17 [760]7:1
 [761]7:1 [762]7:1 [763]7:20-21 [764]9:9 [765]9:15-16
 [766]9:20 [767]9:20 [768]9:29-31 [769]9:30 [770]9:30
 [771]9:31 [772]10:15 [773]14:4 [774]14:4-5 [775]14:4-5
 [776]14:4-5 [777]14:5 [778]16:21 [779]18:14-15 [780]19:23
 [781]19:25-27 [782]25:5 [783]25:5 [784]25:5-6 [785]25:5-6
 [786]31:35 [787]38:3 [788]38:32 [789]40:4 [790]40:8
 [791]40:16 [792]40:16 [793]40:16 [794]40:16 [795]40:21
 [796]41:13 [797]41:27 [798]41:34 [799]42:6 [800]42:6

 Psalms

 [801]1 [802]1:2 [803]1:2 [804]1:2 [805]1:2 [806]1:2
 [807]1:2 [808]1:2 [809]1:5 [810]2:4 [811]2:8 [812]2:9
 [813]4:4 [814]4:4 [815]4:4 [816]4:6 [817]5:8 [818]5:12
 [819]6 [820]6:5 [821]6:5 [822]6:5 [823]6:6 [824]6:6
 [825]6:6 [826]7:9 [827]8:3 [828]8:5 [829]9:6 [830]10
 [831]10:8-9 [832]11:2 [833]12 [834]12:1 [835]12:1 [836]12:7
 [837]14:1 [838]14:1 [839]14:3 [840]14:4 [841]15:2-3
 [842]16:4 [843]16:5 [844]16:5 [845]16:5-6 [846]16:7
 [847]16:9 [848]17:4 [849]18:15 [850]18:37 [851]18:45
 [852]19:4 [853]19:6 [854]19:9 [855]19:12-13 [856]19:12-13
 [857]19:12-14 [858]19:13 [859]19:13 [860]20:7 [861]21:1
 [862]22:1 [863]22:2 [864]22:22 [865]22:29-30 [866]23:5
 [867]24:1 [868]24:1 [869]24:1 [870]25:7 [871]25:15
 [872]26:1-2 [873]26:2 [874]26:8 [875]26:8 [876]27:4
 [877]27:13 [878]27:13 [879]29:3 [880]29:10 [881]30:5
 [882]30:6-7 [883]30:7 [884]30:9 [885]30:11 [886]32:1
 [887]32:1-2 [888]32:4 [889]32:4 [890]32:5 [891]32:5
 [892]32:5-6 [893]32:9 [894]32:9 [895]32:10 [896]33:6
 [897]33:15 [898]34:2 [899]34:8 [900]34:8 [901]34:8
 [902]34:14 [903]35:13 [904]35:13 [905]36:6 [906]36:6
 [907]36:7 [908]36:27 [909]37:5-6 [910]37:25 [911]37:28
 [912]37:39 [913]37:39 [914]38:2 [915]38:5 [916]38:5
 [917]38:7 [918]38:7 [919]38:8 [920]38:13 [921]38:13-14
 [922]38:14 [923]39:1-2 [924]39:1-2 [925]39:2 [926]39:3-4
 [927]39:4 [928]39:5 [929]39:6 [930]39:6 [931]39:12
 [932]39:12 [933]40:2 [934]40:2 [935]41 [936]41:3 [937]41:7
 [938]41:9 [939]42:1-2 [940]42:1-3 [941]42:3 [942]42:6
 [943]42:11 [944]42:11 [945]44:8 [946]44:17-18 [947]44:21
 [948]44:21 [949]44:22 [950]44:22 [951]44:23 [952]44:23
 [953]45 [954]45 [955]45:1 [956]45:1 [957]45:3 [958]45:9
 [959]45:9 [960]45:10 [961]45:10 [962]45:10 [963]45:10-11
 [964]45:10-11 [965]45:13 [966]45:13 [967]45:13 [968]45:13
 [969]45:13 [970]45:14 [971]45:14 [972]45:16-17 [973]46:4
 [974]47:7 [975]48:2 [976]48:8 [977]48:8 [978]48:8 [979]49:7
 [980]50:16-17 [981]50:18 [982]50:20 [983]50:20 [984]50:20
 [985]50:20-21 [986]51:1 [987]51:1 [988]51:1 [989]51:2-4
 [990]51:4 [991]51:4 [992]51:4 [993]51:5 [994]51:5 [995]51:5
 [996]51:5 [997]51:7 [998]51:7 [999]51:12 [1000]51:12
 [1001]51:13 [1002]51:17 [1003]53:4 [1004]53:5 [1005]55:6
 [1006]55:6 [1007]55:6 [1008]55:6 [1009]55:6 [1010]55:7-8
 [1011]55:13 [1012]55:21 [1013]56:4 [1014]57:4 [1015]57:4
 [1016]57:6 [1017]57:7-8 [1018]58:3 [1019]58:4 [1020]62:1
 [1021]62:2 [1022]63:1 [1023]63:1-2 [1024]63:1-2 [1025]63:1-3
 [1026]63:8 [1027]63:8 [1028]68:13 [1029]68:14 [1030]68:27
 [1031]68:30 [1032]69:4 [1033]69:5 [1034]69:5 [1035]69:5
 [1036]69:10 [1037]69:11 [1038]69:12 [1039]71:7 [1040]72:1
 [1041]72:15 [1042]72:20 [1043]73 [1044]73 [1045]73:2
 [1046]73:2-3 [1047]73:3-9 [1048]73:11 [1049]73:11-12
 [1050]73:12 [1051]73:13 [1052]73:13 [1053]73:13-14
 [1054]73:15 [1055]73:15 [1056]73:15 [1057]73:16-17
 [1058]73:16-17 [1059]73:17 [1060]73:20 [1061]73:22-23
 [1062]73:22-23 [1063]73:25 [1064]73:26 [1065]73:26
 [1066]73:26 [1067]73:28 [1068]74:13-14 [1069]74:19 [1070]75:5
 [1071]76:1 [1072]76:1 [1073]76:2 [1074]76:2 [1075]76:2
 [1076]77:2 [1077]77:4 [1078]77:4 [1079]77:10 [1080]78:12
 [1081]78:25 [1082]78:57 [1083]79:1 [1084]79:1-3 [1085]79:11
 [1086]80:5 [1087]82:1 [1088]82:6-7 [1089]83:8 [1090]83:9-10
 [1091]84:1-2 [1092]84:6 [1093]84:6 [1094]84:7 [1095]84:10
 [1096]85:4 [1097]85:10 [1098]85:11 [1099]85:11-12
 [1100]87:1-2 [1101]87:1-2 [1102]87:5 [1103]88:21 [1104]89:2
 [1105]89:48 [1106]90:10 [1107]90:10 [1108]91:5-7 [1109]91:6
 [1110]91:10 [1111]92:14 [1112]92:15 [1113]94:20 [1114]95:4-5
 [1115]95:6 [1116]96:6 [1117]97:8 [1118]97:8 [1119]99:6
 [1120]101:6 [1121]101:8 [1122]102:5 [1123]102:7 [1124]102:9
 [1125]102:9 [1126]102:9 [1127]102:9 [1128]103:2-4 [1129]103:8
 [1130]103:10 [1131]104:4 [1132]104:18 [1133]104:18
 [1134]104:20-21 [1135]104:24 [1136]104:26 [1137]104:29
 [1138]104:35 [1139]105:37 [1140]106:32 [1141]109:24
 [1142]109:24 [1143]110:3 [1144]111:10 [1145]112:9
 [1146]113:7-8 [1147]115:4 [1148]116:7 [1149]116:7 [1150]116:7
 [1151]116:9 [1152]116:11 [1153]116:11 [1154]116:11
 [1155]116:12-13 [1156]116:14-15 [1157]116:15 [1158]116:15
 [1159]118:6 [1160]118:6 [1161]118:6 [1162]118:6 [1163]118:8-9
 [1164]118:25 [1165]119 [1166]119:1 [1167]119:1 [1168]119:11
 [1169]119:11 [1170]119:18 [1171]119:18 [1172]119:18
 [1173]119:18 [1174]119:20 [1175]119:54 [1176]119:62
 [1177]119:67 [1178]119:67 [1179]119:67 [1180]119:83
 [1181]119:103 [1182]119:104 [1183]119:105 [1184]119:105
 [1185]119:123 [1186]119:136 [1187]119:137 [1188]119:140
 [1189]119:176 [1190]120 [1191]120 [1192]120 [1193]120:3
 [1194]120:5 [1195]120:5 [1196]120:5-6 [1197]120:5-6
 [1198]121:1 [1199]121:4 [1200]121:4 [1201]121:6 [1202]123:2
 [1203]124:7 [1204]126:5 [1205]126:5 [1206]126:5-6 [1207]127
 [1208]127:1 [1209]127:1 [1210]127:2 [1211]127:3 [1212]127:4
 [1213]127:5 [1214]128:2 [1215]128:3 [1216]128:3 [1217]128:3
 [1218]128:6 [1219]131:1 [1220]131:2 [1221]132:1 [1222]132:1
 [1223]132:2-5 [1224]132:6 [1225]132:7 [1226]132:7
 [1227]132:11 [1228]132:14 [1229]132:17 [1230]133:1
 [1231]134:1 [1232]137:1 [1233]137:3 [1234]137:4 [1235]137:9
 [1236]137:9 [1237]139:6 [1238]139:11-12 [1239]139:12
 [1240]139:13 [1241]139:21 [1242]139:21-22 [1243]139:21-22
 [1244]140:6 [1245]141:3-4 [1246]141:4 [1247]141:4 [1248]141:4
 [1249]141:5 [1250]141:6 [1251]142:4 [1252]142:7 [1253]142:7
 [1254]142:7 [1255]143:2 [1256]143:2 [1257]143:2 [1258]143:2
 [1259]143:4 [1260]146:4 [1261]146:7 [1262]146:7-8 [1263]161:4

 Proverbs

 [1264]1:1-6 [1265]1:3 [1266]1:7 [1267]3:5-6 [1268]3:9
 [1269]3:21 [1270]4:5-9 [1271]4:23 [1272]4:23 [1273]4:23
 [1274]4:23 [1275]5:3 [1276]5:15 [1277]5:22 [1278]6:8
 [1279]6:20 [1280]6:26 [1281]6:27-28 [1282]6:27-28 [1283]7:2
 [1284]7:3 [1285]7:27 [1286]9:18 [1287]10:1 [1288]10:9
 [1289]10:9 [1290]10:19 [1291]13:4 [1292]13:4 [1293]13:8
 [1294]13:8 [1295]13:8 [1296]14:1 [1297]14:12 [1298]14:12
 [1299]14:12 [1300]14:28 [1301]14:29 [1302]15:1 [1303]16:3
 [1304]16:5 [1305]16:9 [1306]16:26 [1307]16:26 [1308]18:3
 [1309]18:12 [1310]18:17 [1311]18:17 [1312]19:21 [1313]19:25
 [1314]20:1 [1315]20:9 [1316]20:9 [1317]20:9 [1318]20:9
 [1319]20:9 [1320]20:17 [1321]20:24 [1322]21:9 [1323]21:19
 [1324]24:16 [1325]24:16 [1326]24:16 [1327]24:21-22
 [1328]24:21-22 [1329]25:23 [1330]25:24 [1331]27:15
 [1332]28:13 [1333]30:15-16 [1334]31:10-11

 Ecclesiastes

 [1335]1:2 [1336]1:9 [1337]1:9-10 [1338]1:13 [1339]1:18
 [1340]3:1-2 [1341]3:4 [1342]3:5 [1343]3:5 [1344]3:5
 [1345]3:7 [1346]3:10 [1347]3:16-22 [1348]4:9-12 [1349]4:12
 [1350]7:10 [1351]7:12 [1352]7:16 [1353]7:16 [1354]7:16
 [1355]7:16 [1356]7:16 [1357]7:20 [1358]7:21 [1359]7:24-25
 [1360]7:28-29 [1361]8:63 [1362]9:2 [1363]9:4 [1364]9:8
 [1365]9:8 [1366]9:8 [1367]9:8 [1368]9:8 [1369]9:8
 [1370]9:51 [1371]9:54 [1372]9:55 [1373]10:1 [1374]10:4
 [1375]10:4 [1376]10:4 [1377]10:11 [1378]11:2 [1379]11:19
 [1380]12:7 [1381]12:7 [1382]12:7 [1383]35

 Song of Solomon

 [1384]1:3-4 [1385]1:4 [1386]1:4 [1387]1:4 [1388]1:4
 [1389]1:4 [1390]1:5 [1391]1:7 [1392]1:7 [1393]1:7 [1394]1:7
 [1395]1:7 [1396]1:7 [1397]1:8 [1398]1:10-11 [1399]1:13
 [1400]2:1 [1401]2:1 [1402]2:1 [1403]2:1 [1404]2:3 [1405]2:4
 [1406]2:5 [1407]2:6 [1408]2:6 [1409]2:10-11 [1410]2:10-12
 [1411]2:10-12 [1412]2:12 [1413]2:13 [1414]2:13-14 [1415]2:15
 [1416]2:16 [1417]2:16 [1418]3:1 [1419]3:1 [1420]3:1
 [1421]3:1 [1422]3:2 [1423]3:2-3 [1424]3:4 [1425]3:4
 [1426]3:7-8 [1427]4:2 [1428]4:6 [1429]4:7 [1430]4:7
 [1431]4:8 [1432]4:9 [1433]4:9 [1434]4:9-10 [1435]4:12
 [1436]4:12 [1437]4:12 [1438]4:12-13 [1439]5:1 [1440]5:2
 [1441]5:2 [1442]5:2 [1443]5:2 [1444]5:2 [1445]5:2 [1446]5:2
 [1447]5:2 [1448]5:2-3 [1449]5:3 [1450]5:4 [1451]5:6
 [1452]5:6 [1453]5:7 [1454]5:7 [1455]5:8 [1456]5:10
 [1457]5:10 [1458]5:10 [1459]5:16 [1460]6:8 [1461]6:8-9
 [1462]6:9 [1463]6:9 [1464]6:10 [1465]7:1 [1466]8:5
 [1467]8:5 [1468]8:5 [1469]8:6 [1470]8:7 [1471]8:10

 Isaiah

 [1472]1:3 [1473]1:9 [1474]1:15 [1475]1:21 [1476]1:28
 [1477]3:12 [1478]3:12 [1479]3:12 [1480]3:16 [1481]4:3
 [1482]5:20 [1483]5:20 [1484]5:20 [1485]5:21 [1486]6
 [1487]6:2 [1488]6:2 [1489]6:2-3 [1490]6:5 [1491]6:5
 [1492]6:6 [1493]7:14 [1494]7:14 [1495]7:14 [1496]7:14
 [1497]7:14 [1498]7:14-15 [1499]7:20 [1500]8:1 [1501]8:1
 [1502]8:1 [1503]8:3 [1504]8:18 [1505]8:20 [1506]9:6
 [1507]11:1 [1508]11:1 [1509]11:1 [1510]11:1 [1511]11:3
 [1512]11:6-8 [1513]11:10 [1514]13:21-22 [1515]13:22
 [1516]14:12 [1517]14:12 [1518]14:12 [1519]14:12-13
 [1520]14:13 [1521]14:13-14 [1522]14:13-14 [1523]14:13-14
 [1524]14:14 [1525]14:14 [1526]15:1 [1527]15:5 [1528]16:1
 [1529]16:1 [1530]16:6 [1531]18:2 [1532]19:18 [1533]19:19
 [1534]19:21 [1535]20:2 [1536]21:9 [1537]22:12-13
 [1538]22:12-14 [1539]23:15-16 [1540]24:2 [1541]24:16
 [1542]24:21 [1543]26:12 [1544]26:18 [1545]26:20 [1546]26:20
 [1547]27:11 [1548]28:9-10 [1549]28:9-11 [1550]28:12
 [1551]28:15 [1552]28:16 [1553]28:24 [1554]29:1 [1555]29:11
 [1556]29:14 [1557]30:15 [1558]30:15 [1559]30:17 [1560]31:6
 [1561]31:9 [1562]31:9 [1563]32:6 [1564]32:6 [1565]32:9
 [1566]32:20 [1567]32:20 [1568]33:15 [1569]33:15 [1570]34:5
 [1571]34:5 [1572]34:5 [1573]34:14-16 [1574]34:15 [1575]37:22
 [1576]38 [1577]38:19 [1578]38:19 [1579]40:3 [1580]40:3
 [1581]40:5 [1582]40:6 [1583]40:12 [1584]40:12 [1585]40:15
 [1586]40:17 [1587]41:8 [1588]42:14 [1589]43:26 [1590]45:9
 [1591]45:21-22 [1592]46:4 [1593]46:8-9 [1594]47:1-2
 [1595]47:1-3 [1596]47:14 [1597]49 [1598]49:2 [1599]49:8
 [1600]50:6 [1601]50:6 [1602]51:7-8 [1603]53:6 [1604]53:8
 [1605]54:1 [1606]54:1 [1607]54:1 [1608]56:3 [1609]56:3
 [1610]58:3-4 [1611]58:5 [1612]58:5 [1613]60:1 [1614]60:6
 [1615]63:1 [1616]63:3 [1617]63:3 [1618]64:4 [1619]65:5
 [1620]65:5 [1621]65:13-14 [1622]65:17 [1623]66:1-2 [1624]66:2
 [1625]66:2 [1626]66:2 [1627]66:5 [1628]66:7-8 [1629]66:22
 [1630]66:24

 Jeremiah

 [1631]1 [1632]1 [1633]1:5 [1634]1:5 [1635]1:5 [1636]1:7
 [1637]1:10 [1638]1:11 [1639]1:13 [1640]1:18 [1641]1:20
 [1642]2 [1643]2:13 [1644]2:13 [1645]2:18 [1646]2:18
 [1647]2:21 [1648]2:22 [1649]2:22 [1650]2:25 [1651]2:27
 [1652]2:32 [1653]3:1 [1654]3:3 [1655]3:3 [1656]3:3
 [1657]3:3 [1658]3:6-7 [1659]3:10 [1660]3:20 [1661]3:22
 [1662]5:1-2 [1663]5:8 [1664]5:8 [1665]5:8 [1666]5:8
 [1667]6:14 [1668]6:16 [1669]7:4 [1670]7:4 [1671]7:16
 [1672]7:21-22 [1673]8:4 [1674]8:4 [1675]8:22 [1676]9:1
 [1677]9:1 [1678]9:21 [1679]9:21 [1680]9:21 [1681]9:24
 [1682]10:11 [1683]10:14 [1684]10:23 [1685]10:23 [1686]10:23
 [1687]10:23 [1688]11:14 [1689]12:1 [1690]12:13 [1691]12:13
 [1692]13:4-5 [1693]13:6-7 [1694]13:23 [1695]13:23 [1696]13:23
 [1697]13:23 [1698]13:23 [1699]13:26 [1700]14:11-12
 [1701]14:15 [1702]15:10 [1703]15:17 [1704]16:2 [1705]16:2
 [1706]17:9 [1707]17:11 [1708]17:13 [1709]17:14 [1710]17:16
 [1711]18:3-4 [1712]18:7-8 [1713]18:7-12 [1714]20:14
 [1715]20:14 [1716]20:17 [1717]20:18 [1718]22:10 [1719]23:23
 [1720]23:28 [1721]23:28 [1722]24:1-3 [1723]24:3 [1724]24:6-7
 [1725]26:21-24 [1726]27:6 [1727]28:13 [1728]29:14-20
 [1729]29:20-23 [1730]29:22 [1731]30:10-11 [1732]31:22
 [1733]31:31 [1734]31:33 [1735]31:33-34 [1736]31:34
 [1737]32:30 [1738]35 [1739]35:6-7 [1740]35:11 [1741]35:18
 [1742]35:19 [1743]36 [1744]36:23 [1745]37:18-19 [1746]38:7
 [1747]39:11 [1748]40 [1749]50:23 [1750]51:6 [1751]51:6
 [1752]51:6

 Lamentations

 [1753]1 [1754]2:18 [1755]2:18 [1756]3:24 [1757]3:26-42
 [1758]3:27-28 [1759]3:27-28 [1760]3:30 [1761]3:31 [1762]4:4
 [1763]4:6 [1764]4:20

 Ezekiel

 [1765]1:4 [1766]1:7 [1767]1:7 [1768]1:11 [1769]1:14
 [1770]1:15-20 [1771]1:16 [1772]1:18 [1773]1:20 [1774]1:22
 [1775]2:1 [1776]2:6 [1777]2:9-10 [1778]2:10 [1779]3:1
 [1780]3:8-9 [1781]4:9-16 [1782]5:1-5 [1783]8:1 [1784]8:3
 [1785]8:14 [1786]10:8-22 [1787]10:18-19 [1788]12:27-28
 [1789]13:10-16 [1790]14:14 [1791]14:14 [1792]14:20
 [1793]16:1-10 [1794]16:4-6 [1795]16:6 [1796]16:11 [1797]16:12
 [1798]16:14 [1799]16:25 [1800]16:25 [1801]16:25 [1802]16:42
 [1803]16:55 [1804]16:55 [1805]16:60-61 [1806]16:62-63
 [1807]18:4 [1808]18:4 [1809]18:4 [1810]18:4 [1811]18:4
 [1812]18:20 [1813]18:20 [1814]18:20 [1815]18:23 [1816]18:23
 [1817]18:23 [1818]18:30-32 [1819]20:25 [1820]20:43-44
 [1821]23:3 [1822]24:15-18 [1823]24:16-18 [1824]24:18
 [1825]24:27 [1826]25:13 [1827]28:3 [1828]28:13 [1829]32:17
 [1830]33:10-11 [1831]33:11 [1832]33:11 [1833]33:11
 [1834]33:12 [1835]33:12 [1836]33:12 [1837]34:17 [1838]34:18
 [1839]34:20 [1840]34:21 [1841]34:31 [1842]36:24-26
 [1843]36:31-32 [1844]37:1 [1845]44:2 [1846]44:2-3 [1847]44:10
 [1848]44:15-16 [1849]44:22 [1850]46:20 [1851]47:1 [1852]47:8

 Daniel

 [1853]1 [1854]1:3-4 [1855]1:8 [1856]1:16 [1857]2 [1858]2:34
 [1859]2:45 [1860]2:45 [1861]2:45 [1862]3:25 [1863]3:25
 [1864]4:13 [1865]4:13 [1866]4:16 [1867]4:17 [1868]4:25
 [1869]4:27 [1870]4:27 [1871]4:32 [1872]4:33-37 [1873]5:1-3
 [1874]6 [1875]6:10 [1876]7:7-8 [1877]9:5 [1878]9:20
 [1879]9:23 [1880]9:23 [1881]9:23 [1882]9:24 [1883]12:2
 [1884]12:3

 Hosea

 [1885]1:2 [1886]1:2-3 [1887]1:2-4 [1888]2 [1889]2:6
 [1890]2:7 [1891]2:7-9 [1892]2:19 [1893]3:1 [1894]3:3
 [1895]3:3 [1896]3:4 [1897]6:5 [1898]7:4 [1899]7:4 [1900]7:6
 [1901]7:11 [1902]9:4 [1903]9:11 [1904]9:14 [1905]11:1
 [1906]11:1 [1907]11:8-9 [1908]11:9 [1909]13:14 [1910]13:14-15
 [1911]13:15 [1912]13:15

 Joel

 [1913]1:4 [1914]1:14 [1915]2:12-13 [1916]2:15 [1917]2:15
 [1918]2:29 [1919]3:13 [1920]3:18

 Amos

 [1921]1:1 [1922]1:1 [1923]1:3 [1924]1:3 [1925]2:12
 [1926]3:2 [1927]3:83 [1928]4:1 [1929]5:2 [1930]5:19
 [1931]6:4-6 [1932]6:11 [1933]6:13 [1934]6:14 [1935]7:1
 [1936]7:7 [1937]7:12-13 [1938]7:14 [1939]7:14 [1940]8:1
 [1941]8:11 [1942]8:13

 Obadiah

 [1943]1:4

 Jonah

 [1944]1:3 [1945]1:12 [1946]1:14 [1947]2:1-2 [1948]2:2-7
 [1949]3:4 [1950]3:5 [1951]3:5-10 [1952]3:10 [1953]4:10-11
 [1954]4:11

 Micah

 [1955]1:1 [1956]1:14 [1957]4:8 [1958]5:1 [1959]5:2
 [1960]5:2-3 [1961]6:8 [1962]7:2 [1963]7:19

 Nahum

 [1964]1:3 [1965]1:9 [1966]1:15 [1967]3:1

 Habakkuk

 [1968]1:2-4 [1969]1:8 [1970]1:9 [1971]1:10 [1972]1:16
 [1973]1:16 [1974]2:1 [1975]3:1 [1976]3:3 [1977]3:3-4
 [1978]3:4 [1979]3:8 [1980]3:14 [1981]3:16

 Zephaniah

 [1982]1:10 [1983]1:11

 Haggai

 [1984]1:1 [1985]1:6 [1986]2:6-7 [1987]2:11

 Zechariah

 [1988]3:1 [1989]3:1 [1990]3:3 [1991]3:9 [1992]3:9
 [1993]4:2-3 [1994]6:1-3 [1995]8:5 [1996]9:9 [1997]9:9
 [1998]9:10 [1999]9:16 [2000]9:16 [2001]9:16 [2002]9:17
 [2003]11:12-13 [2004]11:12-13 [2005]11:15 [2006]12:1
 [2007]12:10 [2008]12:10 [2009]13:7

 Malachi

 [2010]1:2-3 [2011]1:2-3 [2012]1:6 [2013]1:10-11 [2014]2:11-12
 [2015]3:1 [2016]3:6 [2017]3:7 [2018]3:14-15 [2019]3:18
 [2020]4:2 [2021]4:2 [2022]4:2 [2023]4:2

 Matthew

 [2024]1:5 [2025]1:6 [2026]1:17 [2027]1:18-25 [2028]1:20
 [2029]1:20 [2030]1:20 [2031]1:22-23 [2032]1:24-25 [2033]2:5-6
 [2034]2:6 [2035]2:6 [2036]2:13-15 [2037]2:23 [2038]3:2
 [2039]3:2 [2040]3:2 [2041]3:3 [2042]3:4 [2043]3:4 [2044]3:4
 [2045]3:4 [2046]3:7 [2047]3:9 [2048]3:10 [2049]3:10
 [2050]3:10 [2051]3:11 [2052]3:12 [2053]3:13 [2054]3:13
 [2055]3:16 [2056]3:16 [2057]3:17 [2058]4:1 [2059]4:1
 [2060]4:1-4 [2061]4:2-3 [2062]4:3 [2063]4:4 [2064]4:17
 [2065]4:18-20 [2066]4:18-22 [2067]4:18-22 [2068]4:18-22
 [2069]4:19 [2070]4:19 [2071]4:23 [2072]5:6 [2073]5:7
 [2074]5:8 [2075]5:8 [2076]5:8 [2077]5:9 [2078]5:10
 [2079]5:13 [2080]5:13 [2081]5:13 [2082]5:13 [2083]5:14
 [2084]5:14 [2085]5:14 [2086]5:14 [2087]5:15 [2088]5:19
 [2089]5:19 [2090]5:21-22 [2091]5:22 [2092]5:22 [2093]5:22
 [2094]5:22 [2095]5:23-24 [2096]5:23-24 [2097]5:23-24
 [2098]5:25 [2099]5:25-26 [2100]5:26 [2101]5:27 [2102]5:28
 [2103]5:28 [2104]5:28 [2105]5:28 [2106]5:32 [2107]5:34
 [2108]5:35 [2109]5:37 [2110]5:38-39 [2111]5:39 [2112]5:39
 [2113]5:40 [2114]5:42 [2115]5:44 [2116]5:44 [2117]5:48
 [2118]6:2 [2119]6:2 [2120]6:3 [2121]6:5 [2122]6:6
 [2123]6:10 [2124]6:12 [2125]6:12 [2126]6:13 [2127]6:16
 [2128]6:16-18 [2129]6:17 [2130]6:19-20 [2131]6:20 [2132]6:20
 [2133]6:21 [2134]6:23 [2135]6:23-24 [2136]6:23-24 [2137]6:24
 [2138]6:24 [2139]6:24 [2140]6:24 [2141]6:25 [2142]6:25
 [2143]6:25-26 [2144]6:26 [2145]6:27 [2146]6:28 [2147]6:32
 [2148]6:33 [2149]6:33 [2150]6:33 [2151]6:34 [2152]6:34
 [2153]6:34 [2154]6:34 [2155]6:34 [2156]7:1 [2157]7:3
 [2158]7:3-5 [2159]7:3-5 [2160]7:5 [2161]7:6 [2162]7:6
 [2163]7:7 [2164]7:8 [2165]7:11 [2166]7:13 [2167]7:14
 [2168]7:14 [2169]7:15 [2170]7:15 [2171]7:22 [2172]7:24-27
 [2173]8 [2174]8:10 [2175]8:10 [2176]8:11 [2177]8:12
 [2178]8:20 [2179]8:20-22 [2180]8:21 [2181]8:22 [2182]8:22
 [2183]8:22 [2184]8:25 [2185]8:25 [2186]8:25 [2187]8:26
 [2188]9:1-7 [2189]9:9 [2190]9:9 [2191]9:9 [2192]9:12-13
 [2193]9:12-13 [2194]9:13 [2195]9:17 [2196]9:20 [2197]9:21
 [2198]9:22 [2199]9:24 [2200]9:27 [2201]9:29 [2202]10:7
 [2203]10:8 [2204]10:9 [2205]10:9 [2206]10:9-10 [2207]10:10
 [2208]10:10 [2209]10:10 [2210]10:14 [2211]10:16
 [2212]10:22-34 [2213]10:23 [2214]10:23 [2215]10:24-25
 [2216]10:25 [2217]10:34 [2218]10:37 [2219]10:37 [2220]10:37
 [2221]10:40 [2222]10:40 [2223]11:7-14 [2224]11:8 [2225]11:10
 [2226]11:11 [2227]11:11 [2228]11:12 [2229]11:12 [2230]11:12
 [2231]11:13 [2232]11:13 [2233]11:14 [2234]11:18 [2235]11:25
 [2236]11:29 [2237]11:29 [2238]11:29 [2239]11:30 [2240]12:1-9
 [2241]12:20 [2242]12:24 [2243]12:25-26 [2244]12:30
 [2245]12:30 [2246]12:32 [2247]12:32 [2248]12:35 [2249]12:36
 [2250]12:36 [2251]12:36 [2252]12:36 [2253]12:39-40
 [2254]12:41 [2255]12:46 [2256]12:49 [2257]12:50 [2258]12:50
 [2259]13:3 [2260]13:7 [2261]13:7 [2262]13:8 [2263]13:8
 [2264]13:8 [2265]13:8 [2266]13:8 [2267]13:10-17 [2268]13:11
 [2269]13:22 [2270]13:22-23 [2271]13:24 [2272]13:25
 [2273]13:31 [2274]13:31-32 [2275]13:33 [2276]13:44
 [2277]13:45 [2278]13:45-46 [2279]13:45-46 [2280]13:46
 [2281]13:46 [2282]13:46 [2283]13:54-55 [2284]13:55
 [2285]13:58 [2286]14:13-21 [2287]14:15 [2288]14:15-21
 [2289]14:25 [2290]14:25-33 [2291]14:28 [2292]14:28
 [2293]14:29 [2294]14:31 [2295]14:31 [2296]14:31 [2297]14:32
 [2298]15:19 [2299]15:19-20 [2300]15:22 [2301]15:24
 [2302]15:26 [2303]15:27 [2304]15:28 [2305]15:32 [2306]15:32
 [2307]15:32-38 [2308]16:17-18 [2309]16:18 [2310]16:18
 [2311]16:18 [2312]16:18 [2313]16:18 [2314]16:23 [2315]16:23
 [2316]16:24 [2317]16:25 [2318]16:26 [2319]17:1-9 [2320]17:2
 [2321]17:15 [2322]17:19 [2323]17:20 [2324]17:20 [2325]17:21
 [2326]18:3 [2327]18:6 [2328]18:7 [2329]18:8-9 [2330]18:8-9
 [2331]18:10 [2332]18:11 [2333]18:15-17 [2334]18:18
 [2335]18:21-22 [2336]19:4 [2337]19:5 [2338]19:5 [2339]19:6
 [2340]19:9 [2341]19:9 [2342]19:10 [2343]19:10-12
 [2344]19:11-12 [2345]19:12 [2346]19:12 [2347]19:12
 [2348]19:12 [2349]19:12 [2350]19:12 [2351]19:16 [2352]19:21
 [2353]19:21 [2354]19:21 [2355]19:21 [2356]19:21 [2357]19:21
 [2358]19:21 [2359]19:21 [2360]19:21 [2361]19:21 [2362]19:21
 [2363]19:21 [2364]19:21 [2365]19:23-24 [2366]19:24
 [2367]19:24 [2368]19:26 [2369]19:27 [2370]19:28 [2371]19:28
 [2372]19:29 [2373]19:29 [2374]19:29 [2375]19:30 [2376]20:15
 [2377]20:15 [2378]20:15 [2379]20:16 [2380]20:16 [2381]20:23
 [2382]20:26 [2383]20:27 [2384]20:28 [2385]20:30-34
 [2386]21:1-3 [2387]21:1-7 [2388]21:1-9 [2389]21:2-5
 [2390]21:9 [2391]21:12-13 [2392]21:12-13 [2393]21:33
 [2394]22:11-13 [2395]22:13 [2396]22:13 [2397]22:14
 [2398]22:14 [2399]22:29-30 [2400]22:30 [2401]22:30
 [2402]22:30 [2403]22:30 [2404]22:32 [2405]23:5 [2406]23:6-7
 [2407]23:10 [2408]23:23-24 [2409]23:26-28 [2410]23:27
 [2411]23:27 [2412]23:37 [2413]23:37 [2414]23:37-38
 [2415]23:38 [2416]23:38 [2417]24:12 [2418]24:12 [2419]24:13
 [2420]24:17-18 [2421]24:17-18 [2422]24:17-18 [2423]24:19
 [2424]24:19 [2425]24:19 [2426]24:19-20 [2427]24:24
 [2428]24:28 [2429]24:46 [2430]25:1 [2431]25:1 [2432]25:1-10
 [2433]25:1-12 [2434]25:3 [2435]25:4 [2436]25:4 [2437]25:10
 [2438]25:13 [2439]25:15 [2440]25:31 [2441]25:33 [2442]25:34
 [2443]25:34-40 [2444]25:35-36 [2445]25:40 [2446]25:41
 [2447]25:41 [2448]25:41 [2449]26 [2450]26:6 [2451]26:8
 [2452]26:15 [2453]26:15 [2454]26:26 [2455]26:29 [2456]26:29
 [2457]26:31 [2458]26:33-35 [2459]26:39 [2460]26:40
 [2461]26:40-41 [2462]26:41 [2463]26:41 [2464]26:48-49
 [2465]26:49 [2466]26:52 [2467]26:74 [2468]27:6 [2469]27:9-10
 [2470]27:28-29 [2471]27:29 [2472]27:46 [2473]27:50-51
 [2474]27:51 [2475]27:51 [2476]27:51 [2477]27:51 [2478]27:52
 [2479]27:52-53 [2480]27:53 [2481]27:55-56 [2482]27:64
 [2483]27:66 [2484]28:1 [2485]28:1 [2486]28:2 [2487]28:9
 [2488]28:9 [2489]28:9 [2490]28:9 [2491]28:19 [2492]28:19
 [2493]28:20

 Mark

 [2494]1:1-3 [2495]1:4 [2496]1:5 [2497]1:6 [2498]1:30-31
 [2499]2:25-26 [2500]3:17 [2501]3:21 [2502]3:27 [2503]4:34
 [2504]5 [2505]5 [2506]5:39 [2507]5:39 [2508]5:41 [2509]5:43
 [2510]5:43 [2511]6:1-3 [2512]6:3 [2513]6:5 [2514]6:8
 [2515]7:11 [2516]7:24 [2517]8:34 [2518]9:5 [2519]9:29
 [2520]9:44 [2521]10:21 [2522]10:27 [2523]10:28-30
 [2524]10:29-30 [2525]10:30 [2526]10:50 [2527]12:41-44
 [2528]12:43 [2529]12:43-44 [2530]13:17 [2531]13:32 [2532]14
 [2533]14:4 [2534]14:8 [2535]14:35 [2536]14:37 [2537]14:51-52
 [2538]15:40-41 [2539]15:47 [2540]16:1 [2541]16:1-2 [2542]16:14

 Luke

 [2543]1 [2544]1:5 [2545]1:15 [2546]1:17 [2547]1:18
 [2548]1:18 [2549]1:20 [2550]1:20 [2551]1:20-22 [2552]1:20-22
 [2553]1:26-31 [2554]1:28 [2555]1:29 [2556]1:34 [2557]1:35
 [2558]1:39 [2559]1:41 [2560]1:41 [2561]1:41 [2562]1:41
 [2563]1:43 [2564]1:48 [2565]1:79 [2566]2:4 [2567]2:7
 [2568]2:7 [2569]2:7 [2570]2:8 [2571]2:10 [2572]2:14
 [2573]2:14 [2574]2:14 [2575]2:15 [2576]2:22 [2577]2:27
 [2578]2:29 [2579]2:33 [2580]2:34 [2581]2:36 [2582]2:36
 [2583]2:36 [2584]2:36 [2585]2:36-37 [2586]2:36-37
 [2587]2:36-37 [2588]2:36-37 [2589]2:36-38 [2590]2:41
 [2591]2:43 [2592]2:43-46 [2593]2:46 [2594]2:48 [2595]2:51
 [2596]2:51 [2597]2:51 [2598]2:51-52 [2599]2:52 [2600]3:11
 [2601]4:24 [2602]5:8 [2603]5:31 [2604]5:31 [2605]6
 [2606]6:12 [2607]6:15 [2608]6:20 [2609]6:21 [2610]6:42
 [2611]6:44 [2612]7 [2613]7:11 [2614]7:11-15 [2615]7:11-15
 [2616]7:18-19 [2617]7:27 [2618]7:27 [2619]7:28 [2620]7:28
 [2621]7:37 [2622]7:38 [2623]7:40 [2624]7:47 [2625]7:47
 [2626]7:47 [2627]7:47 [2628]7:47 [2629]7:47 [2630]7:48
 [2631]8:8 [2632]8:10 [2633]8:21 [2634]8:21 [2635]8:24
 [2636]8:24 [2637]8:55 [2638]9:23 [2639]9:23 [2640]9:23
 [2641]9:24 [2642]9:26 [2643]9:31 [2644]9:48 [2645]9:53
 [2646]9:54 [2647]9:58 [2648]9:59-60 [2649]9:59-62
 [2650]9:61-62 [2651]9:62 [2652]9:62 [2653]9:62 [2654]9:62
 [2655]9:62 [2656]9:62 [2657]10 [2658]10:5 [2659]10:18
 [2660]10:18 [2661]10:18 [2662]10:19 [2663]10:30
 [2664]10:30-34 [2665]10:30-35 [2666]10:30-35 [2667]10:34
 [2668]10:41-42 [2669]11:5 [2670]11:5-8 [2671]11:5-8
 [2672]11:7-8 [2673]11:8 [2674]11:15 [2675]11:34 [2676]11:41
 [2677]12:3 [2678]12:7 [2679]12:15 [2680]12:20 [2681]12:20
 [2682]12:20 [2683]12:35 [2684]12:35 [2685]12:47-48
 [2686]12:48 [2687]12:49 [2688]13:4 [2689]13:11-13 [2690]13:29
 [2691]13:32 [2692]14:9 [2693]14:10 [2694]14:10 [2695]14:11
 [2696]14:26 [2697]14:26 [2698]14:26-27 [2699]14:26-27
 [2700]14:27 [2701]14:28 [2702]14:28 [2703]14:33 [2704]14:33
 [2705]14:35 [2706]15:3 [2707]15:3-5 [2708]15:4-5 [2709]15:4-5
 [2710]15:5 [2711]15:5 [2712]15:5 [2713]15:7 [2714]15:7
 [2715]15:8-10 [2716]15:10 [2717]15:10 [2718]15:10
 [2719]15:11-24 [2720]15:11-32 [2721]15:19-31 [2722]15:20
 [2723]15:20 [2724]15:20-23 [2725]16:8 [2726]16:9 [2727]16:9
 [2728]16:9 [2729]16:9 [2730]16:9 [2731]16:9 [2732]16:9
 [2733]16:9 [2734]16:9 [2735]16:9 [2736]16:12 [2737]16:12
 [2738]16:13 [2739]16:13 [2740]16:15 [2741]16:16 [2742]16:19
 [2743]16:19-24 [2744]16:19-24 [2745]16:19-25 [2746]16:22
 [2747]16:23 [2748]16:25 [2749]16:25 [2750]16:29 [2751]17:1
 [2752]17:5 [2753]17:6 [2754]17:10 [2755]17:10 [2756]17:21
 [2757]17:21 [2758]17:21 [2759]17:27-29 [2760]17:37 [2761]18:1
 [2762]18:1 [2763]18:1 [2764]18:1-5 [2765]18:2-5 [2766]18:5
 [2767]18:8 [2768]18:8 [2769]18:9 [2770]18:10-14 [2771]18:11
 [2772]18:13 [2773]18:13 [2774]18:14 [2775]18:22 [2776]18:27
 [2777]18:27 [2778]18:28 [2779]18:29-30 [2780]18:29-30
 [2781]18:30 [2782]18:35-38 [2783]19:2-9 [2784]19:4 [2785]19:5
 [2786]19:10 [2787]19:23 [2788]19:41 [2789]19:41 [2790]19:41
 [2791]20:35 [2792]20:35-36 [2793]20:38 [2794]21:1-4
 [2795]21:1-4 [2796]21:19 [2797]21:31 [2798]21:33 [2799]21:34
 [2800]22:24 [2801]22:26 [2802]22:31 [2803]22:31-32
 [2804]22:42 [2805]22:43 [2806]22:46 [2807]22:47
 [2808]22:54-62 [2809]22:62 [2810]23:28 [2811]23:31
 [2812]23:34 [2813]23:34 [2814]23:38 [2815]23:42-43
 [2816]23:43 [2817]23:43 [2818]23:43 [2819]23:46 [2820]24:5
 [2821]24:10 [2822]24:13 [2823]24:16 [2824]24:28-31
 [2825]24:32 [2826]24:32 [2827]24:32 [2828]24:39 [2829]24:39
 [2830]24:39-40 [2831]24:42 [2832]24:42-43 [2833]24:50-51

 John

 [2834]1:1 [2835]1:1 [2836]1:1 [2837]1:5 [2838]1:5
 [2839]1:7-8 [2840]1:12-13 [2841]1:14 [2842]1:18 [2843]1:29
 [2844]1:29 [2845]1:29 [2846]1:36 [2847]1:41 [2848]1:42
 [2849]1:45 [2850]1:45 [2851]1:47 [2852]2:1 [2853]2:1-2
 [2854]2:1-11 [2855]2:11 [2856]2:12 [2857]2:14-16 [2858]3:2
 [2859]3:3 [2860]3:5 [2861]3:8 [2862]3:23 [2863]3:30
 [2864]3:31 [2865]4 [2866]4:5 [2867]4:6 [2868]4:7
 [2869]4:13-14 [2870]4:14 [2871]4:14 [2872]4:16-18 [2873]4:18
 [2874]4:24 [2875]4:32 [2876]4:35 [2877]5:2 [2878]5:14
 [2879]5:17 [2880]5:17 [2881]5:17 [2882]5:19 [2883]5:25
 [2884]5:28-29 [2885]5:30 [2886]5:35 [2887]5:44 [2888]6:5-13
 [2889]6:15 [2890]6:38 [2891]6:39 [2892]6:44 [2893]6:51
 [2894]6:56 [2895]6:57 [2896]6:60 [2897]6:66 [2898]6:70
 [2899]7:3-4 [2900]7:5 [2901]7:10 [2902]7:19 [2903]7:24
 [2904]7:37 [2905]8:3 [2906]8:12 [2907]8:23 [2908]8:44
 [2909]8:44 [2910]8:48 [2911]8:48 [2912]8:48 [2913]8:49
 [2914]8:56 [2915]8:56 [2916]9:2 [2917]9:2-3 [2918]9:3
 [2919]9:21 [2920]10:8 [2921]10:11 [2922]10:18 [2923]11:11
 [2924]11:11 [2925]11:35 [2926]11:35-36 [2927]11:35-36
 [2928]11:38 [2929]11:38-44 [2930]11:39 [2931]11:39
 [2932]11:43 [2933]11:43 [2934]11:43 [2935]11:43-44
 [2936]11:44 [2937]11:44 [2938]12 [2939]12 [2940]12:2
 [2941]12:2 [2942]12:2 [2943]12:2 [2944]12:10 [2945]12:24
 [2946]12:32 [2947]12:41 [2948]13:5 [2949]13:10 [2950]13:10
 [2951]13:15 [2952]13:20 [2953]13:23 [2954]13:25 [2955]13:26
 [2956]13:38 [2957]14:2 [2958]14:2 [2959]14:2 [2960]14:2-3
 [2961]14:3 [2962]14:6 [2963]14:6 [2964]14:23 [2965]14:27
 [2966]14:27 [2967]14:27 [2968]14:28 [2969]14:28 [2970]14:30
 [2971]14:30 [2972]14:31 [2973]15:5 [2974]15:18 [2975]15:19
 [2976]15:19 [2977]15:19 [2978]15:26 [2979]16:12-13
 [2980]16:33 [2981]17:12 [2982]17:20-21 [2983]17:20-23
 [2984]17:21 [2985]17:23 [2986]18:15-16 [2987]18:15-27
 [2988]18:23 [2989]18:28 [2990]19:6 [2991]19:6 [2992]19:6
 [2993]19:15 [2994]19:23 [2995]19:23 [2996]19:23-24
 [2997]19:23-24 [2998]19:25 [2999]19:25 [3000]19:26-27
 [3001]19:26-27 [3002]19:26-27 [3003]19:34 [3004]19:34
 [3005]19:37 [3006]19:38 [3007]19:38 [3008]19:41 [3009]20
 [3010]20:1-8 [3011]20:1-18 [3012]20:4 [3013]20:6-7
 [3014]20:11 [3015]20:12 [3016]20:17 [3017]20:17 [3018]20:17
 [3019]20:17 [3020]20:19 [3021]20:19 [3022]20:19 [3023]20:19
 [3024]20:20 [3025]20:22 [3026]20:22-23 [3027]20:26-28
 [3028]20:27 [3029]20:27 [3030]20:27 [3031]21:4 [3032]21:7
 [3033]21:7 [3034]21:9 [3035]21:12 [3036]21:13 [3037]21:15-17
 [3038]21:15-17 [3039]21:15-17 [3040]21:16 [3041]21:18

 Acts

 [3042]1:1 [3043]1:1 [3044]1:3 [3045]1:7 [3046]1:9
 [3047]1:9-12 [3048]1:11 [3049]1:12 [3050]1:13 [3051]1:14
 [3052]1:15 [3053]1:24 [3054]2:14-18 [3055]2:16-21 [3056]2:31
 [3057]2:38 [3058]2:40 [3059]2:40 [3060]3:6 [3061]3:6
 [3062]3:6 [3063]3:21 [3064]4:34-35 [3065]4:34-35 [3066]4:37
 [3067]5 [3068]5 [3069]5:1-10 [3070]5:1-10 [3071]5:1-10
 [3072]5:4 [3073]5:29 [3074]5:37 [3075]6 [3076]6:1-2
 [3077]6:2 [3078]6:5 [3079]6:5 [3080]6:15 [3081]7:15-16
 [3082]7:29-30 [3083]7:45 [3084]7:55 [3085]7:56 [3086]7:59-60
 [3087]8:2 [3088]8:2 [3089]8:3 [3090]8:10 [3091]8:20
 [3092]8:26 [3093]8:26-30 [3094]8:27 [3095]8:27 [3096]8:27-38
 [3097]8:27-39 [3098]8:30-31 [3099]8:36 [3100]9:3-18 [3101]9:8
 [3102]9:15 [3103]9:15 [3104]9:15 [3105]9:15 [3106]9:15
 [3107]9:15 [3108]9:15 [3109]9:15 [3110]9:15 [3111]9:17
 [3112]9:17 [3113]9:17-18 [3114]9:32-34 [3115]9:36-41
 [3116]9:39 [3117]10 [3118]10:1 [3119]10:1-2 [3120]10:3-16
 [3121]10:4 [3122]10:10 [3123]10:15 [3124]10:26 [3125]10:34-35
 [3126]11:28 [3127]12 [3128]12:8 [3129]13:8-11 [3130]13:32
 [3131]13:46 [3132]13:46 [3133]14:11 [3134]15:10
 [3135]15:28-29 [3136]15:39 [3137]16:6-7 [3138]16:16
 [3139]16:25-38 [3140]17:22 [3141]17:28 [3142]17:28
 [3143]17:30 [3144]19:1 [3145]19:1-7 [3146]19:2 [3147]20:16
 [3148]20:28 [3149]20:28 [3150]20:35 [3151]21:5 [3152]21:8-9
 [3153]21:9 [3154]21:9 [3155]21:9 [3156]21:9 [3157]21:10-11
 [3158]21:13 [3159]21:13 [3160]23:2 [3161]23:5 [3162]24:17-18
 [3163]26:2-3 [3164]26:24 [3165]27:23 [3166]27:37 [3167]28:7
 [3168]28:30

 Romans

 [3169]1:7 [3170]1:8 [3171]1:8 [3172]1:8 [3173]1:8 [3174]1:8
 [3175]1:25 [3176]1:26-27 [3177]2:4-5 [3178]2:4-5 [3179]2:12
 [3180]2:24 [3181]2:28-29 [3182]3:1 [3183]3:2 [3184]3:4
 [3185]3:4 [3186]3:12 [3187]3:20 [3188]3:23 [3189]3:23
 [3190]3:23-24 [3191]3:24 [3192]3:28 [3193]3:30 [3194]4:11
 [3195]5:3-5 [3196]5:3-5 [3197]5:3-5 [3198]5:7 [3199]5:14
 [3200]5:14 [3201]5:14 [3202]5:14 [3203]5:14 [3204]5:14
 [3205]5:20 [3206]5:20 [3207]5:20 [3208]5:20 [3209]6:3-4
 [3210]6:4 [3211]6:4 [3212]6:4 [3213]6:11 [3214]6:14
 [3215]6:21-22 [3216]7 [3217]7:1-3 [3218]7:2 [3219]7:2
 [3220]7:2 [3221]7:2-3 [3222]7:4 [3223]7:6 [3224]7:6
 [3225]7:8 [3226]7:14 [3227]7:14 [3228]7:14 [3229]7:14-20
 [3230]7:18 [3231]7:18 [3232]7:18 [3233]7:19 [3234]7:19
 [3235]7:19 [3236]7:19 [3237]7:22-25 [3238]7:23 [3239]7:23
 [3240]7:23 [3241]7:23 [3242]7:24 [3243]7:24 [3244]7:24
 [3245]7:24 [3246]7:24 [3247]7:24 [3248]7:24 [3249]7:24
 [3250]7:25 [3251]8:1-2 [3252]8:3 [3253]8:5 [3254]8:8
 [3255]8:8-9 [3256]8:9 [3257]8:11 [3258]8:11 [3259]8:11
 [3260]8:14 [3261]8:17 [3262]8:18 [3263]8:18 [3264]8:18
 [3265]8:18 [3266]8:19-21 [3267]8:20 [3268]8:20 [3269]8:21
 [3270]8:26 [3271]8:28 [3272]8:35 [3273]8:35-36 [3274]8:38
 [3275]8:39 [3276]9:3 [3277]9:3 [3278]9:3-4 [3279]9:3-4
 [3280]9:11 [3281]9:13 [3282]9:14-29 [3283]9:16 [3284]9:16
 [3285]9:16 [3286]9:16 [3287]9:16 [3288]9:16 [3289]9:16
 [3290]9:20 [3291]9:20-21 [3292]9:21 [3293]9:22-23
 [3294]9:30-32 [3295]9:33 [3296]10:2 [3297]10:2 [3298]10:2
 [3299]10:2 [3300]10:2 [3301]10:10 [3302]11:6 [3303]11:20
 [3304]11:25-26 [3305]11:32 [3306]11:32 [3307]11:32
 [3308]11:32 [3309]11:32 [3310]11:33 [3311]11:33
 [3312]11:33-34 [3313]11:33-34 [3314]12:1 [3315]12:1
 [3316]12:1 [3317]12:1 [3318]12:1 [3319]12:1 [3320]12:1-3
 [3321]12:3 [3322]12:9 [3323]12:11 [3324]12:11-12 [3325]12:13
 [3326]12:15 [3327]12:15 [3328]12:17 [3329]12:17 [3330]12:18
 [3331]12:20 [3332]12:21 [3333]12:21 [3334]13:11-12
 [3335]13:12 [3336]13:14 [3337]13:14 [3338]14:2 [3339]14:2
 [3340]14:2 [3341]14:3 [3342]14:4 [3343]14:4 [3344]14:4
 [3345]14:4 [3346]14:4 [3347]14:5 [3348]14:5 [3349]14:5
 [3350]14:5 [3351]14:5 [3352]14:6 [3353]14:10 [3354]14:14
 [3355]14:20 [3356]14:21 [3357]14:21 [3358]14:21 [3359]14:21
 [3360]14:21 [3361]15:19 [3362]15:24 [3363]16:18 [3364]16:20
 [3365]16:20

 1 Corinthians

 [3366]1:1-3 [3367]1:7-8 [3368]1:19 [3369]1:19 [3370]1:21
 [3371]1:24 [3372]1:24 [3373]1:25 [3374]1:25 [3375]1:25
 [3376]1:25 [3377]1:25 [3378]1:26 [3379]1:27 [3380]1:30
 [3381]1:31 [3382]1:31 [3383]2:6-7 [3384]2:8-9 [3385]2:9
 [3386]2:9 [3387]2:9 [3388]2:9 [3389]2:9 [3390]2:13
 [3391]2:14 [3392]3:1-3 [3393]3:2 [3394]3:2 [3395]3:3
 [3396]3:6 [3397]3:6 [3398]3:6 [3399]3:6-10 [3400]3:10
 [3401]3:10 [3402]3:10-12 [3403]3:14 [3404]3:16 [3405]3:16-17
 [3406]3:17 [3407]3:17 [3408]3:17 [3409]3:18-19 [3410]4:1-2
 [3411]4:4 [3412]4:4 [3413]4:5 [3414]4:7 [3415]4:7 [3416]4:7
 [3417]4:8 [3418]4:9 [3419]4:10 [3420]4:12 [3421]4:12
 [3422]4:12 [3423]4:19 [3424]4:19 [3425]4:21 [3426]4:21
 [3427]5:1 [3428]5:1-2 [3429]5:4-5 [3430]5:5 [3431]5:5
 [3432]5:8 [3433]5:11 [3434]6:11 [3435]6:12 [3436]6:12
 [3437]6:12 [3438]6:12 [3439]6:12 [3440]6:13 [3441]6:13
 [3442]6:13 [3443]6:13 [3444]6:13-18 [3445]6:15 [3446]6:16
 [3447]6:16 [3448]6:17 [3449]6:17 [3450]6:17 [3451]6:18
 [3452]6:18 [3453]6:18 [3454]6:19 [3455]6:19 [3456]6:19
 [3457]6:20 [3458]7 [3459]7 [3460]7:1 [3461]7:1 [3462]7:1
 [3463]7:1-2 [3464]7:3 [3465]7:3 [3466]7:4 [3467]7:4
 [3468]7:5 [3469]7:5 [3470]7:5 [3471]7:5 [3472]7:5 [3473]7:6
 [3474]7:7 [3475]7:7 [3476]7:7 [3477]7:7 [3478]7:7
 [3479]7:7-8 [3480]7:8 [3481]7:8 [3482]7:8-9 [3483]7:8-9
 [3484]7:8-9 [3485]7:8-10 [3486]7:9 [3487]7:9 [3488]7:9
 [3489]7:9 [3490]7:10 [3491]7:11 [3492]7:13-14 [3493]7:14
 [3494]7:14 [3495]7:15 [3496]7:18 [3497]7:18 [3498]7:18
 [3499]7:19 [3500]7:20 [3501]7:21 [3502]7:21 [3503]7:21-22
 [3504]7:23 [3505]7:24 [3506]7:25 [3507]7:25 [3508]7:25
 [3509]7:25 [3510]7:25 [3511]7:25 [3512]7:25-26 [3513]7:26
 [3514]7:26 [3515]7:27 [3516]7:27 [3517]7:28 [3518]7:29
 [3519]7:29 [3520]7:29 [3521]7:29 [3522]7:29 [3523]7:29
 [3524]7:29 [3525]7:29 [3526]7:30 [3527]7:32-33 [3528]7:32-34
 [3529]7:34 [3530]7:34 [3531]7:34 [3532]7:34 [3533]7:35
 [3534]7:35 [3535]7:35 [3536]7:35 [3537]7:37-38 [3538]7:39
 [3539]7:39 [3540]7:39 [3541]7:39 [3542]7:39-40 [3543]7:39-40
 [3544]7:40 [3545]7:40 [3546]8:10 [3547]8:13 [3548]9:4-5
 [3549]9:5 [3550]9:5 [3551]9:5 [3552]9:5 [3553]9:5 [3554]9:9
 [3555]9:11 [3556]9:11 [3557]9:13 [3558]9:13 [3559]9:13
 [3560]9:13-14 [3561]9:14 [3562]9:14 [3563]9:19 [3564]9:24
 [3565]9:24 [3566]9:26 [3567]9:27 [3568]9:27 [3569]9:27
 [3570]9:27 [3571]9:27 [3572]9:27 [3573]9:27 [3574]10:4
 [3575]10:4 [3576]10:10 [3577]10:11 [3578]10:11 [3579]10:11
 [3580]10:12 [3581]10:12 [3582]10:13 [3583]10:13 [3584]10:21
 [3585]10:21 [3586]10:29 [3587]10:31 [3588]10:31 [3589]11:5-6
 [3590]11:6 [3591]11:7 [3592]11:14 [3593]11:16 [3594]11:27
 [3595]11:27 [3596]11:27-28 [3597]11:28 [3598]11:28
 [3599]11:28 [3600]12:4 [3601]12:4 [3602]12:4-5 [3603]12:11
 [3604]12:12 [3605]12:12-27 [3606]12:21 [3607]12:22-24
 [3608]12:28 [3609]12:28 [3610]12:29 [3611]13:4 [3612]13:4-7
 [3613]13:5 [3614]13:7 [3615]13:7 [3616]13:7 [3617]13:8
 [3618]13:8-10 [3619]13:9 [3620]13:9 [3621]13:9-10
 [3622]13:9-10 [3623]13:12 [3624]13:12 [3625]13:13 [3626]13:18
 [3627]14:1 [3628]14:5 [3629]14:15 [3630]14:15 [3631]14:16
 [3632]14:18 [3633]14:19 [3634]14:30-33 [3635]15:8-9
 [3636]15:9 [3637]15:9-10 [3638]15:9-10 [3639]15:10
 [3640]15:22 [3641]15:23 [3642]15:25-26 [3643]15:25-28
 [3644]15:28 [3645]15:31 [3646]15:31 [3647]15:33 [3648]15:33
 [3649]15:33 [3650]15:33 [3651]15:33 [3652]15:35 [3653]15:37
 [3654]15:39 [3655]15:40 [3656]15:41 [3657]15:41 [3658]15:42
 [3659]15:44 [3660]15:44 [3661]15:44 [3662]15:44 [3663]15:44
 [3664]15:47 [3665]15:50 [3666]15:50 [3667]15:50 [3668]15:51
 [3669]15:53 [3670]15:53 [3671]15:53 [3672]15:53
 [3673]15:53-54 [3674]15:54 [3675]15:54 [3676]15:55
 [3677]15:58 [3678]15:85

 2 Corinthians

 [3679]1:5 [3680]1:7 [3681]1:12 [3682]2:4 [3683]2:7
 [3684]2:7 [3685]2:7 [3686]2:7 [3687]2:7 [3688]2:10
 [3689]2:10 [3690]2:10 [3691]2:10-11 [3692]2:11 [3693]2:15
 [3694]2:16 [3695]2:16 [3696]3:2 [3697]3:2 [3698]3:4-6
 [3699]3:4-6 [3700]3:6 [3701]3:6 [3702]3:6 [3703]3:7
 [3704]3:7 [3705]3:10 [3706]3:11 [3707]3:14-15 [3708]3:18
 [3709]3:18 [3710]3:18 [3711]4:7 [3712]4:7 [3713]4:7
 [3714]4:7 [3715]4:7 [3716]4:16 [3717]4:16 [3718]4:16
 [3719]4:17-18 [3720]4:18 [3721]5:1 [3722]5:4 [3723]5:6
 [3724]5:6 [3725]5:10 [3726]5:17 [3727]5:17 [3728]6:8
 [3729]6:8 [3730]6:9 [3731]6:10 [3732]6:10 [3733]6:14
 [3734]6:14 [3735]6:14-15 [3736]6:14-15 [3737]6:14-15
 [3738]6:14-15 [3739]6:14-15 [3740]6:14-16 [3741]6:16
 [3742]8:12 [3743]8:13-14 [3744]8:14 [3745]8:14 [3746]8:14
 [3747]8:18 [3748]9:6 [3749]10:3 [3750]10:4-6 [3751]10:8
 [3752]10:12 [3753]10:14 [3754]10:14 [3755]10:17-18 [3756]11:2
 [3757]11:2 [3758]11:2 [3759]11:2 [3760]11:3 [3761]11:6
 [3762]11:14 [3763]11:14-15 [3764]11:23-27 [3765]11:27
 [3766]11:27 [3767]12:2 [3768]12:2 [3769]12:4 [3770]12:4
 [3771]12:7 [3772]12:7 [3773]12:7 [3774]12:8-10 [3775]12:9
 [3776]12:10 [3777]12:10 [3778]12:10 [3779]12:10 [3780]12:11
 [3781]12:14 [3782]12:14 [3783]12:21 [3784]13:1 [3785]13:3
 [3786]13:3

 Galatians

 [3787]1:8 [3788]1:8 [3789]1:8 [3790]1:10 [3791]1:10
 [3792]1:10 [3793]1:10 [3794]1:15 [3795]1:16 [3796]1:17-18
 [3797]1:18-19 [3798]1:19 [3799]2 [3800]2 [3801]2:1-2
 [3802]2:2 [3803]2:2 [3804]2:9 [3805]2:9-10 [3806]2:13
 [3807]2:16 [3808]2:16 [3809]2:16 [3810]2:20 [3811]2:21
 [3812]3:3-4 [3813]3:10 [3814]3:13 [3815]3:13 [3816]3:22
 [3817]3:24 [3818]3:27 [3819]3:27 [3820]3:28 [3821]4:16
 [3822]4:16 [3823]4:16 [3824]4:19 [3825]4:19 [3826]4:22-26
 [3827]4:26 [3828]4:26 [3829]4:26 [3830]4:26 [3831]5:4
 [3832]5:7 [3833]5:15 [3834]5:15 [3835]5:15 [3836]5:16-17
 [3837]5:16-17 [3838]5:17 [3839]5:17 [3840]5:17 [3841]5:19
 [3842]5:19 [3843]5:19-23 [3844]5:24 [3845]5:24-25 [3846]6:2
 [3847]6:7 [3848]6:7-8 [3849]6:10 [3850]6:10 [3851]6:10
 [3852]6:10 [3853]6:14 [3854]6:14 [3855]6:15

 Ephesians

 [3856]1:4 [3857]1:10 [3858]1:21 [3859]1:21 [3860]1:23
 [3861]2:3-4 [3862]2:5 [3863]2:14 [3864]3:10 [3865]3:20
 [3866]4:7 [3867]4:11 [3868]4:13 [3869]4:14 [3870]4:14
 [3871]4:22 [3872]4:22 [3873]4:26 [3874]4:26 [3875]4:26
 [3876]4:26 [3877]5:5 [3878]5:5 [3879]5:8 [3880]5:13
 [3881]5:14 [3882]5:14 [3883]5:18 [3884]5:18 [3885]5:18
 [3886]5:18 [3887]5:18 [3888]5:19 [3889]5:22 [3890]5:23-24
 [3891]5:25 [3892]5:27 [3893]5:27 [3894]5:27 [3895]5:31
 [3896]5:31-32 [3897]5:31-32 [3898]5:32 [3899]6:1 [3900]6:4
 [3901]6:6 [3902]6:12 [3903]6:12 [3904]6:12 [3905]6:12
 [3906]6:12 [3907]6:13-17 [3908]6:14-17 [3909]6:16 [3910]6:16
 [3911]6:16 [3912]6:16 [3913]6:24

 Philippians

 [3914]1:1 [3915]1:21 [3916]1:23 [3917]1:23 [3918]1:23
 [3919]1:23 [3920]1:23 [3921]1:23 [3922]2:6 [3923]2:6-8
 [3924]2:7-8 [3925]2:13 [3926]2:13 [3927]2:14-15 [3928]2:15
 [3929]2:18 [3930]2:21 [3931]2:27 [3932]2:44 [3933]3:8
 [3934]3:12-13 [3935]3:12-16 [3936]3:13 [3937]3:13 [3938]3:13
 [3939]3:13 [3940]3:14 [3941]3:19 [3942]3:19 [3943]3:19
 [3944]3:19 [3945]3:19 [3946]3:20 [3947]3:20 [3948]3:20
 [3949]3:20 [3950]3:20-21 [3951]3:21 [3952]4:7 [3953]4:8
 [3954]4:18

 Colossians

 [3955]1:16 [3956]1:18 [3957]1:21-22 [3958]1:26 [3959]2:5
 [3960]2:5 [3961]2:11 [3962]2:11 [3963]2:13-14 [3964]2:14-15
 [3965]2:18 [3966]3:1 [3967]3:5 [3968]3:5 [3969]3:5-6
 [3970]3:9-11 [3971]3:14 [3972]4:2 [3973]4:6 [3974]4:14

 1 Thessalonians

 [3975]2:9 [3976]2:9 [3977]2:18 [3978]3:4 [3979]4:4
 [3980]4:7 [3981]4:9 [3982]4:13 [3983]4:13 [3984]4:13
 [3985]4:13 [3986]4:13 [3987]4:15 [3988]4:16 [3989]4:17
 [3990]4:17 [3991]4:17 [3992]5:15 [3993]5:17 [3994]5:17
 [3995]5:17 [3996]5:17 [3997]5:17 [3998]5:21 [3999]5:21
 [4000]5:21 [4001]5:23 [4002]5:23

 2 Thessalonians

 [4003]2:3 [4004]2:7 [4005]2:7 [4006]2:7-8 [4007]3:3
 [4008]3:10 [4009]3:10 [4010]3:10

 1 Timothy

 [4011]1:15 [4012]1:17 [4013]1:19 [4014]1:19-20 [4015]2:4
 [4016]2:8 [4017]2:10 [4018]2:12 [4019]2:13 [4020]2:14
 [4021]2:15 [4022]2:15 [4023]2:15 [4024]3:1 [4025]3:1
 [4026]3:1-7 [4027]3:1-7 [4028]3:2 [4029]3:2 [4030]3:2
 [4031]3:2 [4032]3:2 [4033]3:2-3 [4034]3:3 [4035]3:4
 [4036]3:4 [4037]3:4 [4038]3:6 [4039]3:8-10 [4040]3:11
 [4041]3:12 [4042]3:13 [4043]4:3 [4044]4:3 [4045]4:3
 [4046]4:3 [4047]4:4 [4048]4:4 [4049]4:4 [4050]4:4 [4051]4:5
 [4052]4:12 [4053]4:12 [4054]4:14 [4055]4:14 [4056]5:2
 [4057]5:2 [4058]5:3 [4059]5:3-5 [4060]5:5 [4061]5:5
 [4062]5:6 [4063]5:6 [4064]5:6 [4065]5:6 [4066]5:6 [4067]5:9
 [4068]5:9 [4069]5:9-10 [4070]5:9-10 [4071]5:11 [4072]5:11
 [4073]5:11 [4074]5:11-12 [4075]5:11-12 [4076]5:11-12
 [4077]5:11-12 [4078]5:13 [4079]5:14 [4080]5:14 [4081]5:14
 [4082]5:14-15 [4083]5:14-15 [4084]5:14-15 [4085]5:14-15
 [4086]5:15 [4087]5:15 [4088]5:15 [4089]5:15 [4090]5:16
 [4091]5:17 [4092]5:18 [4093]5:19-20 [4094]5:19-20 [4095]5:22
 [4096]5:23 [4097]5:23 [4098]5:23 [4099]5:23 [4100]5:23
 [4101]5:24 [4102]5:24-25 [4103]6:7 [4104]6:8 [4105]6:8
 [4106]6:8 [4107]6:8 [4108]6:8 [4109]6:8 [4110]6:8 [4111]6:8
 [4112]6:9 [4113]6:9 [4114]6:10 [4115]6:10 [4116]6:15
 [4117]6:16 [4118]6:16 [4119]6:17-19 [4120]6:20-21

 2 Timothy

 [4121]1:15 [4122]2:4 [4123]2:20 [4124]2:20 [4125]2:20
 [4126]2:20 [4127]2:20 [4128]2:20-21 [4129]2:20-21
 [4130]2:20-21 [4131]2:21 [4132]2:23 [4133]3:6-7 [4134]3:6-7
 [4135]3:6-7 [4136]3:7 [4137]3:14 [4138]3:14-15 [4139]4:2
 [4140]4:3 [4141]4:7-8 [4142]4:7-8 [4143]4:7-8 [4144]4:13
 [4145]4:14

 Titus

 [4146]1:5 [4147]1:5-7 [4148]1:5-9 [4149]1:6 [4150]1:6
 [4151]1:7 [4152]1:7 [4153]1:9 [4154]1:9 [4155]1:9-14
 [4156]1:12 [4157]1:12 [4158]1:15 [4159]1:15 [4160]2:11-12
 [4161]2:15 [4162]3:4-7 [4163]3:10 [4164]3:10-11

 Philemon

 [4165]1:10 [4166]1:12 [4167]1:12

 Hebrews

 [4168]1:3 [4169]2:1 [4170]2:1 [4171]4:13 [4172]5:10 [4173]6
 [4174]6:4 [4175]6:9 [4176]7:3 [4177]9:3-5 [4178]9:7
 [4179]11:8 [4180]11:17-19 [4181]11:32 [4182]11:32 [4183]12:6
 [4184]12:6 [4185]12:6 [4186]12:6 [4187]12:6 [4188]12:6
 [4189]12:14 [4190]12:14 [4191]12:18 [4192]13 [4193]13:4
 [4194]13:4 [4195]13:4 [4196]13:4 [4197]13:4 [4198]13:4
 [4199]13:4

 James

 [4200]1:12 [4201]1:16-18 [4202]1:19 [4203]1:20 [4204]1:20
 [4205]1:22 [4206]2:10 [4207]2:10 [4208]2:10 [4209]2:10
 [4210]2:10 [4211]2:11 [4212]2:17 [4213]2:23 [4214]2:23
 [4215]2:25 [4216]2:26 [4217]3:2 [4218]3:2 [4219]3:2
 [4220]3:2 [4221]3:2 [4222]3:2 [4223]3:2 [4224]3:5 [4225]3:6
 [4226]3:7 [4227]3:8 [4228]3:8-9 [4229]4:1 [4230]4:6
 [4231]4:6 [4232]4:11 [4233]4:13-16

 1 Peter

 [4234]1:2 [4235]1:3-5 [4236]1:13-16 [4237]1:16 [4238]1:18-19
 [4239]1:22-23 [4240]1:24 [4241]2:8 [4242]2:9 [4243]2:9
 [4244]2:9 [4245]2:17-18 [4246]2:21 [4247]2:22 [4248]2:22
 [4249]2:22 [4250]2:22 [4251]2:23 [4252]2:23 [4253]3:2-3
 [4254]3:3 [4255]3:7 [4256]3:7 [4257]3:7 [4258]3:7 [4259]3:7
 [4260]3:15 [4261]3:15 [4262]3:20 [4263]3:20 [4264]3:20-21
 [4265]3:20-21 [4266]4:1 [4267]4:8 [4268]4:10 [4269]4:10
 [4270]5:1 [4271]5:1-2 [4272]5:4 [4273]5:5 [4274]5:5
 [4275]5:6 [4276]5:8 [4277]5:8 [4278]5:8

 2 Peter

 [4279]1:4 [4280]1:4 [4281]2:4 [4282]2:7-8 [4283]2:9
 [4284]2:9 [4285]2:17-18 [4286]3:3 [4287]3:9

 1 John

 [4288]1:5 [4289]1:7 [4290]1:8 [4291]1:8 [4292]1:8 [4293]1:9
 [4294]2:1 [4295]2:1-2 [4296]2:4 [4297]2:6 [4298]2:6
 [4299]2:6 [4300]2:15 [4301]2:15-17 [4302]2:19 [4303]2:27
 [4304]3:2 [4305]3:2 [4306]3:2-3 [4307]3:8 [4308]3:9-10
 [4309]3:15 [4310]4:3 [4311]4:7 [4312]4:13 [4313]4:15
 [4314]4:18 [4315]4:18 [4316]4:18 [4317]5:3 [4318]5:16
 [4319]5:18 [4320]5:18-19 [4321]5:19 [4322]5:19 [4323]5:19
 [4324]5:21 [4325]14:6

 2 John

 [4326]1:1 [4327]1:1 [4328]1:10

 3 John

 [4329]1:1

 Jude

 [4330]1:5 [4331]1:5 [4332]1:6 [4333]1:6 [4334]1:7 [4335]1:9
 [4336]1:23 [4337]1:24

 Revelation

 [4338]1:4 [4339]1:5 [4340]1:6 [4341]1:7 [4342]1:8
 [4343]1:9-10 [4344]1:12 [4345]1:14 [4346]1:15 [4347]1:16
 [4348]2:2 [4349]2:4 [4350]2:5 [4351]2:6 [4352]2:6 [4353]2:6
 [4354]2:8 [4355]2:8 [4356]2:9 [4357]2:9 [4358]2:10
 [4359]2:13 [4360]2:14 [4361]2:14 [4362]2:15 [4363]2:15
 [4364]2:15 [4365]2:16 [4366]2:17 [4367]2:20 [4368]2:23
 [4369]2:25-26 [4370]2:27 [4371]3:4 [4372]3:4 [4373]3:7
 [4374]3:7 [4375]3:15-16 [4376]3:16 [4377]3:17 [4378]3:19
 [4379]3:20 [4380]3:22 [4381]3:33 [4382]3:33 [4383]5:1
 [4384]6:10 [4385]7:5 [4386]10:9-10 [4387]10:9-10 [4388]11:2
 [4389]11:7-8 [4390]11:7-8 [4391]12:9 [4392]14:1 [4393]14:1
 [4394]14:1-4 [4395]14:3 [4396]14:3 [4397]14:3-4 [4398]14:4
 [4399]14:4 [4400]14:4 [4401]14:4 [4402]14:4 [4403]14:4
 [4404]14:4 [4405]14:4 [4406]14:6 [4407]17 [4408]17:4-5
 [4409]17:9 [4410]18 [4411]18:2 [4412]18:4 [4413]19:11-16
 [4414]21:2 [4415]21:14 [4416]21:14 [4417]21:16-18
 [4418]21:19-20 [4419]21:19-21 [4420]22:13 [4421]22:14
 [4422]22:18-19

 Judith

 [4423]13 [4424]13 [4425]13

 Wisdom of Solomon

 [4426]1:11 [4427]1:11 [4428]2:23 [4429]2:24 [4430]3:21
 [4431]4:9 [4432]4:9 [4433]4:9 [4434]4:11 [4435]4:11
 [4436]4:11 [4437]4:11-14 [4438]4:13 [4439]4:13 [4440]4:14
 [4441]4:14 [4442]4:14 [4443]5:4 [4444]6:6 [4445]6:7
 [4446]7:1 [4447]8:7 [4448]8:7 [4449]9:15 [4450]10:1
 [4451]10:1 [4452]10:7

 Baruch

 [4453]5:5 [4454]6

 Susanna

 [4455]1:54 [4456]1:55 [4457]1:58 [4458]1:59

 Bel and the Dragon

 [4459]1:33-36 [4460]1:33-39

 2 Maccabees

 [4461]5:17 [4462]7

 2 Esdras

 [4463]1:30

 Sirach

 [4464]1:18 [4465]2:1 [4466]2:1 [4467]3:30 [4468]3:30
 [4469]3:30 [4470]4:25 [4471]7:36 [4472]8:7 [4473]8:14
 [4474]8:17 [4475]9:2-3 [4476]10:1 [4477]10:9 [4478]10:30
 [4479]11:25 [4480]13:1 [4481]13:2 [4482]22:6 [4483]22:6
 [4484]25:9 [4485]27:5 [4486]27:25 [4487]46:1

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

 * agapetos: [4488]1
 * agonothetes: [4489]1
 * adiaphora: [4490]1
 * aei: [4491]1
 * anamartetos: [4492]1
 * anachorein: [4493]1
 * apo tou ponerou: [4494]1
 * aperispastos: [4495]1
 * aponia: [4496]1
 * arto-turos: [4497]1
 * archaios: [4498]1
 * ataraxia: [4499]1
 * autarkes: [4500]1
 * eis to sophronein: [4501]1
 * ento poneeo: [4502]1
 * episkopos: [4503]1
 * eschematismenos: [4504]1
 * erhista: [4505]1
 * hedone: [4506]1
 * ono lura: [4507]1
 * onterione: [4508]1
 * ho protoplastos: [4509]1
 * omoiousios: [4510]1
 * ophis: [4511]1 [4512]2
 * homoousios: [4513]1
 * hudrophobous: [4514]1
 * hupostasis: [4515]1 [4516]2
 * hupotuposeis: [4517]1
 * 'olbios: [4518]1
 * 'Adamantios: [4519]1
 * 'Apatheia: [4520]1
 * 'Arche: [4521]1
 * 'Iesous Christos Theou Uos Soter: [4522]1
 * 'agoranmoi: [4523]1
 * 'epitome: [4524]1
 * Edei hemas, agapete, me te oi& 208;sei ton kleron pheresthai:
 [4525]1
 * onos luras ekouse kai salpingos hus: [4526]1
 * Ono lura: [4527]1
 * A'genealogetos: [4528]1
 * Theoboule: [4529]1
 * Therapeia: [4530]1 [4531]2
 * IChThUS: [4532]1
 * Meden agan: [4533]1
 * Meden 'agan: [4534]1
 * Oidema: [4535]1
 * Peri apatheias: [4536]1
 * Peri apoches empsuchion: [4537]1
 * Peri 'Archon: [4538]1 [4539]2 [4540]3 [4541]4
 * Peri Archon: [4542]1
 * Pros to euschemon kai euprosedron to Kuri& 251; aperispastos':
 [4543]1
 * aidesimotate Pappa: [4544]1
 * autexousion: [4545]1
 * anamartetos: [4546]1
 * banausoi: [4547]1
 * gumnastikos: [4548]1
 * gune: [4549]1
 * gunaikas: [4550]1
 * demas: [4551]1
 * deo: [4552]1
 * diapsalma: [4553]1
 * didaktikon: [4554]1
 * dogmatikos: [4555]1
 * episkopountes: [4556]1
 * kai memeristai: [4557]1
 * kosmion: [4558]1
 * kairo: [4559]1
 * kakia: [4560]1 [4561]2 [4562]3
 * kakozelian: [4563]1
 * kakosin: [4564]1
 * katastreniasosi: [4565]1
 * kleros: [4566]1 [4567]2 [4568]3 [4569]4
 * koinos bios: [4570]1
 * kurio: [4571]1
 * logos: [4572]1
 * lupe: [4573]1
 * logismoi: [4574]1
 * meden agan: [4575]1
 * nephaleon: [4576]1
 * nephalios: [4577]1
 * nephalios: [4578]1
 * nous: [4579]1
 * oidema: [4580]1
 * oi& 208;sis: [4581]1
 * oiesis: [4582]1
 * ouk erista: [4583]1
 * ousia: [4584]1 [4585]2 [4586]3 [4587]4
 * pathe: [4588]1 [4589]2
 * piptein: [4590]1
 * parakeklemene: [4591]1
 * paraleipomenon: [4592]1
 * pararruomai: [4593]1
 * patria: [4594]1
 * perates: [4595]1
 * peri archon: [4596]1
 * peri 'Archon: [4597]1 [4598]2 [4599]3 [4600]4
 * peri 'Archon: [4601]1
 * pelos: [4602]1
 * poikile: [4603]1
 * poikiles: [4604]1
 * polu pleiona: [4605]1
 * prinos: [4606]1
 * prisai: [4607]1
 * proarthra: [4608]1
 * prosopon: [4609]1
 * proegmena: [4610]1
 * propatheiai: [4611]1
 * ptoma: [4612]1
 * rema: [4613]1
 * sabbaton deuteroproton: [4614]1
 * sun ton ouranon kai sun ten gen: [4615]1
 * sunodos: [4616]1
 * sophrona: [4617]1
 * sema: [4618]1
 * soma: [4619]1
 * skopos: [4620]1
 * stromateis: [4621]1
 * stromateis: [4622]1
 * scheptomai: [4623]1
 * schinos: [4624]1
 * schisai: [4625]1
 * schinos: [4626]1
 * sophrosune: [4627]1
 * to prepon: [4628]1
 * tomoi: [4629]1
 * te energei& 139;: [4630]1
 * te dunamei: [4631]1
 * ton anabaOmon: [4632]1
 * tou gar kai genos esmen: [4633]1
 * chalkenteros: [4634]1
 * chara: [4635]1
 * cheima oporismos stilpnotes: [4636]1
 * psuchai apo tou psuchesthai: [4637]1

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

 * 'lh smvt: [4638]1
 * hrs: [4639]1
 * lrlm: [4640]1
 * nll: [4641]1
 * nlh: [4642]1
 * nmy: [4643]1
 * ntmy: [4644]1
 * : [4645]1
 * l ssygyt: [4646]1
 * yr: [4647]1
 * tsl': [4648]1
 * qvl: [4649]1
 * rtshych: [4650]1
 * t: [4651]1

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

 [4652]i  [4653]iii  [4654]v  [4655]xi  [4656]xii  [4657]xiii
 [4658]xiv  [4659]xv  [4660]xvi  [4661]xvii  [4662]xviii  [4663]xix
 [4664]xx  [4665]xxi  [4666]xxii  [4667]xxiii  [4668]xxiv  [4669]xxv
 [4670]xxvi  [4671]xxvii  [4672]xxviii  [4673]xxix  [4674]xxx
 [4675]xxxi  [4676]xxxii  [4677]xxxiii  [4678]xxxiv  [4679]1  [4680]2
 [4681]3  [4682]4  [4683]5  [4684]6  [4685]7  [4686]8  [4687]9
 [4688]10  [4689]11  [4690]12  [4691]13  [4692]14  [4693]15  [4694]16
 [4695]17  [4696]18  [4697]19  [4698]20  [4699]21  [4700]22  [4701]23
 [4702]24  [4703]25  [4704]26  [4705]27  [4706]28  [4707]29  [4708]30
 [4709]31  [4710]32  [4711]33  [4712]34  [4713]35  [4714]36  [4715]37
 [4716]38  [4717]39  [4718]40  [4719]41  [4720]42  [4721]43  [4722]44
 [4723]45  [4724]46  [4725]47  [4726]48  [4727]49  [4728]50  [4729]51
 [4730]52  [4731]53  [4732]54  [4733]55  [4734]56  [4735]57  [4736]58
 [4737]59  [4738]60  [4739]61  [4740]62  [4741]63  [4742]64  [4743]65
 [4744]66  [4745]67  [4746]68  [4747]69  [4748]70  [4749]71  [4750]72
 [4751]73  [4752]74  [4753]75  [4754]76  [4755]77  [4756]78  [4757]79
 [4758]80  [4759]81  [4760]82  [4761]83  [4762]84  [4763]85  [4764]86
 [4765]87  [4766]88  [4767]89  [4768]90  [4769]91  [4770]92  [4771]93
 [4772]94  [4773]95  [4774]96  [4775]97  [4776]98  [4777]99  [4778]100
 [4779]101  [4780]102  [4781]103  [4782]104  [4783]105  [4784]106
 [4785]107  [4786]108  [4787]109  [4788]110  [4789]111  [4790]112
 [4791]113  [4792]114  [4793]115  [4794]116  [4795]117  [4796]118
 [4797]119  [4798]120  [4799]121  [4800]122  [4801]123  [4802]124
 [4803]125  [4804]126  [4805]127  [4806]128  [4807]129  [4808]130
 [4809]131  [4810]132  [4811]133  [4812]134  [4813]135  [4814]136
 [4815]137  [4816]138  [4817]139  [4818]140  [4819]141  [4820]142
 [4821]143  [4822]144  [4823]145  [4824]146  [4825]147  [4826]148
 [4827]149  [4828]150  [4829]151  [4830]152  [4831]153  [4832]154
 [4833]155  [4834]156  [4835]157  [4836]158  [4837]159  [4838]160
 [4839]161  [4840]162  [4841]163  [4842]164  [4843]165  [4844]166
 [4845]167  [4846]168  [4847]169  [4848]170  [4849]171  [4850]172
 [4851]173  [4852]174  [4853]175  [4854]176  [4855]177  [4856]178
 [4857]179  [4858]180  [4859]181  [4860]182  [4861]183  [4862]184
 [4863]185  [4864]186  [4865]187  [4866]188  [4867]189  [4868]190
 [4869]191  [4870]192  [4871]193  [4872]194  [4873]195  [4874]196
 [4875]197  [4876]198  [4877]199  [4878]200  [4879]201  [4880]202
 [4881]203  [4882]204  [4883]205  [4884]206  [4885]207  [4886]208
 [4887]209  [4888]210  [4889]211  [4890]212  [4891]213  [4892]214
 [4893]215  [4894]216  [4895]217  [4896]218  [4897]219  [4898]220
 [4899]221  [4900]222  [4901]223  [4902]224  [4903]225  [4904]226
 [4905]227  [4906]228  [4907]229  [4908]230  [4909]231  [4910]232
 [4911]233  [4912]234  [4913]235  [4914]236  [4915]237  [4916]238
 [4917]239  [4918]240  [4919]241  [4920]242  [4921]243  [4922]244
 [4923]245  [4924]246  [4925]247  [4926]248  [4927]249  [4928]250
 [4929]251  [4930]252  [4931]253  [4932]254  [4933]255  [4934]256
 [4935]257  [4936]258  [4937]259  [4938]260  [4939]261  [4940]262
 [4941]263  [4942]264  [4943]265  [4944]266  [4945]267  [4946]268
 [4947]269  [4948]270  [4949]271  [4950]272  [4951]273  [4952]274
 [4953]275  [4954]276  [4955]277  [4956]278  [4957]279  [4958]280
 [4959]281  [4960]282  [4961]283  [4962]284  [4963]285  [4964]286
 [4965]287  [4966]288  [4967]289  [4968]290  [4969]291  [4970]292
 [4971]293  [4972]294  [4973]295  [4974]297  [4975]299  [4976]300
 [4977]301  [4978]302  [4979]303  [4980]304  [4981]305  [4982]306
 [4983]307  [4984]308  [4985]309  [4986]310  [4987]311  [4988]312
 [4989]313  [4990]314  [4991]315  [4992]316  [4993]317  [4994]318
 [4995]319  [4996]320  [4997]321  [4998]322  [4999]323  [5000]324
 [5001]325  [5002]326  [5003]327  [5004]328  [5005]329  [5006]330
 [5007]331  [5008]332  [5009]333  [5010]334  [5011]335  [5012]336
 [5013]337  [5014]338  [5015]339  [5016]340  [5017]341  [5018]342
 [5019]343  [5020]344  [5021]345  [5022]346  [5023]347  [5024]348
 [5025]349  [5026]350  [5027]351  [5028]352  [5029]353  [5030]354
 [5031]355  [5032]356  [5033]357  [5034]358  [5035]359  [5036]360
 [5037]361  [5038]362  [5039]363  [5040]364  [5041]365  [5042]366
 [5043]367  [5044]368  [5045]369  [5046]370  [5047]371  [5048]372
 [5049]373  [5050]374  [5051]375  [5052]376  [5053]377  [5054]378
 [5055]379  [5056]380  [5057]381  [5058]382  [5059]383  [5060]384
 [5061]385  [5062]386  [5063]387  [5064]388  [5065]389  [5066]390
 [5067]391  [5068]392  [5069]393  [5070]394  [5071]395  [5072]396
 [5073]397  [5074]398  [5075]399  [5076]400  [5077]401  [5078]402
 [5079]403  [5080]404  [5081]405  [5082]406  [5083]407  [5084]408
 [5085]409  [5086]410  [5087]411  [5088]412  [5089]413  [5090]414
 [5091]415  [5092]416  [5093]417  [5094]418  [5095]419  [5096]420
 [5097]421  [5098]422  [5099]423  [5100]424  [5101]425  [5102]426
 [5103]427  [5104]428  [5105]429  [5106]430  [5107]431  [5108]432
 [5109]433  [5110]434  [5111]435  [5112]436  [5113]437  [5114]438
 [5115]439  [5116]440  [5117]441  [5118]442  [5119]443  [5120]444
 [5121]445  [5122]446  [5123]447  [5124]448  [5125]449  [5126]450
 [5127]451  [5128]452  [5129]453  [5130]454  [5131]455  [5132]456
 [5133]457  [5134]458  [5135]459  [5136]460  [5137]461  [5138]462
 [5139]463  [5140]464  [5141]465  [5142]466  [5143]467  [5144]468
 [5145]469  [5146]470  [5147]471  [5148]472  [5149]473  [5150]474
 [5151]475  [5152]476  [5153]477  [5154]478  [5155]479  [5156]480
 [5157]481  [5158]482  [5159]483  [5160]484  [5161]485  [5162]486
 [5163]487  [5164]488  [5165]489  [5166]490  [5167]491  [5168]492
 [5169]493  [5170]494  [5171]495  [5172]496  [5173]497  [5174]498
 [5175]499  [5176]500  [5177]501  [5178]502

 This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
 Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
 generated on demand from ThML source.

References
