■iTt^:rt:::]K]i}:]rl::r::!:
THE  JESUIT  RELATIONS
AND
ALLIED  DOCUMENTS
Vol.  XVIII
The  edition  consists  of  sev-
en hundred  and  fifty  sets
all  numbered
No.
All
••".  .  riwrchi  \ Or
'.  Sts^  the  law  society
The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents
Travels  and  Explorations
OF  THE  Jesuit  Missionaries
IN  New  France
1610-1791
THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH,  LATIN,  AND  ITAL-
IAN  TEXTS,  WITH  ENGLISH  TRANSLA-
TIONS AND  NOTES  ;  ILLUSTRATED  BY
PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  FACSIMILES
EDITED  BY
REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES
Secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin
Vol.  XVIIl
HuRONS  AND  Quebec  : 1640
CLEVELAND: XTbe  3Burrow0 JStotbcw
Compan)2,  publishers,  mdcccxcviii
Copyright, 1898
BY
The  Burrows  Brothers  Co
ALL  RIGHTS RESERVED
The  Imperial  Press,  Cleveland
EDITORIAL  STAFF
Editor
Translators
Assistant  Editor


Reuben  Gold  Thwaites
FiNLOw  Alexander
Percy  Favor  Bicknell
William  Frederic  Giese
Crawford  Lindsay
William  Price
Hiram  Allen  Sober
Emma  Helen  Blair


Bibliographical  Adviser Victor  Hugo  Paltsits


CONTENTS  OF  VOL  XVIII


Preface  to  Volume  XVIII

Documents: —

XXXVIII.  Lettre  au  T.  R.  P.  Mutio  VitellescH,
General  de  la  Compagnie  de  J^sus,
h.  Rome.  Joseph-Marie  Chaumonot;
Pays  des  Hurons,  May  24,  1640
XXXIX.  Lettre  au  R.  P.  Philippe  Nappi,
Superieur  de  la  Maison  Professe,
k  Rome.  Joseph-Marie  Chaumonot;
Pays  des  Hurons,  May  26,  1640
XL.  Lettre  au  R.  P.  Philippe  Nappi,
Superieur  de  la  Maison  Professe,
k  Rome.  Joseph- Marie  Chaumonot;
Sainte- Marie  aux  Hurons,  August
3,  1640  ....
XLI.  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe  en  la
Novvelle  P'rance,  en  Tann^e  1640.
[Chaps,  i.-x.  of  Part  I.]  Paul  le
Jeune;  Kebec,  September  10,  1640

Bibliographical  Data:  Volume  XVIII

Notes .  .  .  .  .


10


14


36


47
251

255


ILLUSTRATION  TO  VOL  XVIII

L Photographic  facsimile  of  title-page,  Relation

of  1640 .  .  .  .  'SO


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVlll


Following  is  a  synopsis  of  tlie  documents  contained
in  the  present  volume :

XXXVIII.  Joseph  Marie  Chaumonot  writes  to
the  Father  General  (May  24,  1640)  a  brief  letter,
sketching  the  state  of  the  Huron  mission.  It  has
thirteen  priests,  with  several  donnes ;  it  comprises
thirty-two  villages,  "  in  which  not  a  single  cabin  re-
mains where  the  Gospel  has  not  been  proclaimed."
The  missionaries  have  been  frequently  persecuted,
but  none  have  yet  perished.

XXXIX.  Two  days  later  (May  26),  Chaumonot
writes  to  Father  Nappi,  of  Rome,  a  more  detailed
account  of  the  mission, — the  manner  in  which  the
Fathers  live,  their  methods  of  work,  the  characteris-
tics of  the  savages,  the  persecution  experienced  from
them,  and  the  ravages  of  the  epidemic.  He  then  nar-
rates the  miraculous  cure  of  two  blind  persons  by
one  of  the  missionaries,  and  the  details  of  several
baptisms.  The  death  of  an  Iroquois  prisoner,  by
torture,  is  described;  and  allusion  is  made  to  the
possibility  that  some  of  the  missionaries  may  meet
similar  treatment  from  the  Iroquois.  Chaumonot
sends  greetings  to  many  of  his  friends  by  name,  and
closes  by  asking  for  some  masses  and  communions,
of  which  the  missionaries  are  often  deprived.


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVIII


XL.  This  is  another  letter  by  Chaumonot  to  Nap-
pi,  dated  August  3  of  the  same  year.  The  writer
describes  a  missionary  journey  made  by  him  with
Brebeuf  to  a  tribe  where  the  Gospel  has  not  before
been  preached.  Here  they  are  met  with  distrust  and
aversion,  arising  from  the  same  calumnies  that  had
so  endangered  them  among  the  Hurons.  Their
books  are  considered  as  repositories  of  magic  spells;
and  the  missionaries  are  suspected  of  concocting
these  spells  even  when  they  kneel  in  prayer.  They
are  repeatedly  threatened  with  death ;  but  God  pro-
tects them  from  their  enemies.  This  mission  has
little  effect,  except  that  they  succeed  in  baptizing
many  sick  children,  without  the  knowledge  of  their
relatives;  many  of  these  are  now  in  heaven.  Chau-
monot does  not  give  the  name  of  this  tribe;  but,
from  the  Huron  Relation  of  1641  (chap,  vi.)  we  learn
that  it  was  the  Attiwandaronk  or  Neutral  Nation.
The  letter  closes  by  relating  several  acts  of  heroism,
among  the  Hurons,  remarkable  in  ' '  poor  infidels
without  morality. '  *

XLI.  The  Relation  of  1640  is  a  composite.  In
1639,  Barthelemy  Vimont  succeeded  Le  Jeune  as
superior  of  the  order  in  New  France,  and  his  name
appears  on  the  title-page  of  the  annual  volume.  He
seems,  however,  to  have  only  edited  the  Relation,  or
perhaps  only  forwarded  the  matter  to  Paris  for  pub-
lication by  the  provincial;  for  Part  I.,  the  Quebec
portion,  is  still  from  the  pen  of  Le  Jeune  (dated  Sep-
tember 10);  and  Part  H.,  the  Huron  report,  is  by
Jerome  Lalemant  (dated  May  27,  with  a  postscript
written  August  3).  In  our  present  volume,  we  pub-
lish the  first  ten  chapters  of  Part  I.,  by  Le  Jeune.

The  report  opens  with  a  synopsis  of  Father  M6-


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVIII


nard's  account  of  the  voyage  made  by  the  French
fleet  this  year,  which  also  brought  over  Joseph  du
Peron  and  some  lay  brethren,  and  additional  nuns
for  both  convents  at  Quebec ;  all  these  were  heartily
welcomed  there.  The  writer  warns  the  nuns  who
desire  to  come  to  Canada  that  the  country  is  not
ready  for  them,  and  that  they  must  await  its  devel-
opment. The  great  object  of  the  missionaries  now
is,  to  render  the  savages  sedentary ;  four  families  of
them  are  at  present  living  in  the  cabins  built  for
them  by  the  French.

Le  Jeune  praises  the  virtue  and  piety  of  the  colo-
nists. He  relates  that  a  plague  of  grasshoppers  and
other  insects  was  immediately  driven  away  by  some
prayers  and  processions.  The  people  enjoy  good
health;  the  soil  is  prolific;  peace  and  content  pre-
vail. By  way  of  diversion  for  the  people,  and  honor
to  the  infant  Dauphin  of  France,  Montmagny  has  a
miracle  play  or  '*  tragi- comedy  "  performed,  under
the  charge  of  Martial  Piraube.  For  the  benefit  of
the  savages,  there  is  introduced  therein  "  the  soul
of  an  unbeliever,  pursued  by  two  demons,  who  finally
hurl  it  into  a  hell  which  vomits  forth  flames.  The
struggles,  cries,  and  shrieks  of  this  soul  and  of  these
demons,  who  speak  in  the  Algonquin  tongue,  so  deep-
ly penetrates  the  hearts  of  some,"  that  a  savage,  two
days  later,  tells  of  hideous  dreams,  inspired  by  the
spectacle.

Now  that  the  epidemic  of  smallpox  (described  in
the  Relation  of  1639)  is  over,  the  savages  reassemble
at  St.  Joseph  (Sillery),  and  resume  their  effort  to
become  sedentary.  Those  who  are  converted  decide
among  themselves  to  drive  away  from  this  settlement
all  who  do  not  believe  as  they  do. Acting  on  the


PREFACE  TO  VOL,  XVIII


advice  of  the  Fathers  and  a  suggestion  from  Montma-
gny,  the  governor,  they  elect,  by  secret  ballot,  some
chiefs  to  rule  over  them, — the  head  of  these  being
Etinechkavat,  a  Christian.  They  not  only  make  all
necessary  arrangements  for  the  conduct  of  their
affairs,  but  summon  the  women  to  a  council  and
admonish  them  to  be  forthwith  baptized  —  the  disin-
clination of  the  latter  to  that  rite  having  been  '  *  the
cause  of  all  their  misfortunes."  The  women  are
warned  that  hereafter  they  must  obey  their  hus-
bands; one  of  them,  having  run  away,  is  caught,  and
the  chiefs  ask  the  Fathers  if  she  would  not  better
be  chained  by  one  foot,  and  whether  four  days  and
nights  of  fasting  would  be  sufficient  penance  for  her
fault.

The  Indians  have  now  begun  to  cultivate  the  land.
Father  Vimont,  the  new  superior,  is  residing  at  Sil-
lery,  in  order  to  aid  them ;  and  the  French  colonists
have  also  done  much  in  this  direction.  Some  Algon-
kins  also  are  settling  at  Three  Rivers.  At  both  set-
tlements, the  converts  desire  to  interest  their  tribes-
men in  their  undertaking,  and  to  gather  them  into
the  colonies,  to  be  aided  by  the  French,  and  to  have
but  one  God.  Several  instances  are  given  of  the
faith,  obedience,  and  virtue  displayed  by  these  neo-
phytes. The  chief  difficulty  anticipated  by  the  Fa-
thers is,  in  the  enforcement  of  single  marriage,  to
which  the  savages  are  unaccustomed.  In  this,  as  in
all  other  matters,  Montmagny  aids  the  missionaries
to  the  utmost, — causing  three  marriages  of  Sillery
Indians  to  take  place  at  Quebec,  with  a  magnificent
feast  and  rich  gifts  for  the  bridal  party.  Many  of
the  young  Indians  come  to  the  Fathers  * '  in  private,
and  ask  us  to  find  them  wives,  or  to  speak  for  them


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVIII


to  those  whom  they  desire  to  marry ;  some  widows,
and  even  some  young  girls,  ask  tis  secretly  to  find
them  husbands,  confiding  in  us  more  than  in  those
of  their  own  nation. "  All  the  converts  show  great
solicitude  to  avoid  the  sins  they  have  abandoned,
especially  the  licentious  acts  and  speech  so  prevalent
among  their  countrymen ;  and  the  girls  drive  away
their  pagan  suitors  with  firebrands.

Madame  de  la  Peltrie  comes  to  Sillery  at  Christ-
mas, to  attend  the  midnight  mass  with  the  savages ;
the  latter  go  to  escort  her  thither,  and  '  *  vie  in  caress-
ing her."  She  often  visits  them,  at  other  seasons,
and  takes  with  her  some  Indian  girls  from  the  Ursu-
line  seminary,  who  have  learned  to  sing  very  sweet-
ly, both  in  their  own  language  and  in  French.  The
converts  show  great  zeal, —  they  refuse  to  eat  on
fast  days,  even  when  in  great  need;  they  thank
God  when  successful  in  hunting ;  they  are  very  con-
trite for  their  faults,  and  even  for  their  evil  dreams.
The  children  are  ready  to  fight  one  another  for  their
belief.  A  young  man  is  severely  punished  by  the
Sillery  converts,  for  having  married  an  unbaptized
girl ;  and  ' '  two  boys,  who  came  late  to  prayers  in  the
morning,  were  punished  by  having  a  handful  of  hot
cinders  thrown  upon  their  heads,  with  threats  of
greater  chastisement  in  case  the  offense  were  repeat-
ed." Another  man  gives  up  tobacco,  when  reproved
by  a  priest.  Pigarouich,  erstwhile  a  medicine  man,
is  immediately  cured  of  an  illness,  by  prayer;  and
the  same  agency  enables  him  to  make  a  canoe  (the
first  he  had  ever  built),  ''  as  well  as  the  most  expert
person  could  have  done."  Even  the  unbelieving
Indians  show  the  utmost  respect  for  the  Christian
mysteries  and  belief,  and  imitate  the  actions  of  those


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVIII


who  have  been  converted ;  some  even  have  visions
of  heaven.  A  young  Christian,  having  lost  at  gam-
bling, confesses  to  the  priest  with  great  contrition ;
and  "  with  charming  simplicity  "  adds,  ''  I  will  stake
nothing  hereafter,  except  some  article  of  small  value. "

Buteux  sends  to  his  superior  similar  accounts  from
the  residence  at  Three  Rivers.  Many  widows  and
orphans,  made  such  by  the  fatal  epidemic  of  last
year,  have  come  hither,  to  seek  aid  from  the  French.
The  missionaries  aid  these,  as  far  as  their  own
poverty  will  allow,  and,  in  the  spring,  set  them  to
raising  corn  for  their  supplies.

Le  Jeune  relates  a  terrible  tragedy  occurring
among  a  household  of  savages  who  had  been  attacked
by  smallpox  in  the  forests.  Most  of  them  died ;  the
head  of  the  family, —  who  had  recently  married  in
the  savage  fashion,  without  waiting  for  the  Church's
benediction,  and  whom,  in  consequence,  "  God  was
sharply  pursuing  with  his  judgments, ' ' —  ill  and  help-
less, was  murdered  by  his  sister,  to  avoid  further
care  for  him,  and  to  flee  with  her  own  son.  She  at
first  abandoned  her  brother's  children,  but  afterward
compelled  the  elder  of  these  to  strangle  his  own  little
sister.  ''  But  God,  in  whose  sight  all  this  fatal  trag-
edy was  played,  willed  that  this  Proserpina  should
play  one  act  of  it.  He  struck  her  with  the  contagion
from  which  she  was  fleeing;  and,  before  reaching  the
place  where  she  wished  to  bring  her  son,  she  died
like  a  beast.  Finally,  her  son  was  brought  to  the
hospital,  where  he  died  in  an  intolerable  stench,  but
with  strong  indications  of  salvation."

Le  Jeune  proceeds  to  enumerate  the  Indian  tribes
of  whom  the  French  have  knowledge,  from  Labra-
dor to Hudson  Bay, and from the Mississippi  to


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVIII


Virginia.  This  survey  reveals  a  boundless  field  for
missionary  labor,  and  he  asks  the  aid  of  Christians
in  France  to  help  spread  the  Gospel  therein.

In  this  connection  he  states  an  interesting  oc-
currence—  the  arrival  on  the  St.  Lawrence  of  an
Englishman,  brought  hither  by  Abenaki  Indians,  who
is  * '  searching  for  a  route  through  these  countries  to
the  sea  of  the  North,"  in  which  quest  he  has  "  for
two  years  ranged  the  whole  Southern  coast,  from
Virginia  to  Quinebiqui."  Montmagny  sends  him  to
Tadoussac,  that  he  may  return  to  England  by  way
of  France.

R.  G.  T.

Madison,  Wis.,  March,  1898.


XXXVIII^XL
Three  Letters  by  Joseph  Marie  Chaumonot

XXXVIII.— Au  T.  R.  P.  General  de  la  Compagnie  de  Jesus ;
Pays  des  Hurons,  24  Mai,  1640

XXXIX. —  Au  R.  P.  Philippe  Nappi,  Superieur  de  la  Maison
Professe,  a  Rome ;  Pays  des  Hurons,  26  Mai,
1640

XL. —  Au  meme  ; Sainte-Marie  aux  Hurons,  3  Aout,
1640


Source  :  The  originals  were  in  Italian,  and  deposited  in
the  archives  of  the  Society  in  Rome.  Father  Martin  copied
them  there  in  1858,  and  translated  them  into  French  ;  these
translations  being  published  in  Carayon's  Premiere  Mission
des  J  Suites  au  Canada^  pp.  195-215.  We  follow  Carayon
for  the  French  text,  and  our  English  translations  are  there-
from.


10  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.18


[195]  Lettre  du  P.  Joseph-Marie  Chaumonot,  au
T.  R.  P.  Mutio  Vitelleschi,  General
de  la  Compagnie  de  Je-
sus, a  Rome.

(Traduite  de  Vitalien  sur  V original  conservi  h.  Rome.)

Du  pays  des  Hurons,  24  mai  1640.

MON  Tres-Reverend  Pere,
Pax  Christi.
Le  10  de  septembre  1639,  j' arrival  dans  le
pays  des  Hurons  en  la  Nouvelle- France,  apres  une
navigation  de  trois  mois  tres-p6nible  et  tres-dange-
reuse,  qui  fut  suivie  d'un  voyage  d'un  autre  mois  sur
les  rivieres,  les  lacs  et  k  travers  les  forets.

Nous  sommes  ici  treize  Peres,  tons  frangais,  avec
quelques  jeunes  gens  qui  se  donnent  ^  nous  pour  le
soin  du  temporel,  et  qui  nous  tiennent  lieu  de  fr^res
coadjuteurs.  Notre  maniere  de  vivre  paraitra  en
Europe  tres-etrange  et  tres-p6nible,  mais  nous  la  trou-
vons  fort  douce  et  fort  agreable.  Nous  n'avons  ni
sel,  ni  huile,  ni  fruits,  ni  pain,  ni  vin,  except^  celui
que  nous  gardons  pour  la  messe.  Toute  notre  nour-
riture  se  compose  d'un  grand  [196]  plat  de  bois  rem-
pli  d'une  espece  de  soupe  faite  de  h\€  d'Inde,  ecras6
entre  deux  pierres  ou  pile  dans  un  mortier,  et  assai-
sonnee  avec  quelques  poissons  fumes.  Notre  lit  est
la  terre,  couverte  d'une  ecorce  d'arbre  ou  tout  au
plus  d'une  natte.

L'^tendue  de  notre  mission  comprend  cette  ann^e


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  THE  GENERAL  11


[195]  Letter  from  Father  Joseph  Marie  Chaumonot

to  the  Very  Reverend  Father  Mutio  Vi-

telleschi,  General  of  the  Society

of  Jesus,  at  Rome.

(  Translated  from  the  Italian  original  preserved  at  Rome.)

From  the  Huron  country,  May  24,  1640.

MY  Very  Reverend  Father,
Pax  Christi.
I  arrived  in  the  Huron  country,  in  New
France,  on  the  loth  of  September,  1639,  after  a  very
painful  and  dangerous  voyage  of  three  months,  which
was  followed  by  a  journey  of  another  month  upon
rivers  and  lakes,  and  through  forests.

There  are  thirteen  Fathers  of  us  here,  all  French,
with  some  young  men  who  are  given  to  us  for  the
care  of  temporal  matters,  and  who  with  us  take  the
place  of  lay  brethren.  Our  manner  of  living  will
seem  in  Europe  very  strange  and  full  of  hardship,
but  we  find  it  quite  easy  and  agreeable.  We  have
neither  salt,  oil,  fruits,  bread,  nor  wine,  except  what
we  keep  for  the  mass.  Our  entire  nourishment  con-
sists of  [196]  a  sort  of  soup  made  of  Indian  corn,
crushed  between  two  stones,  or  pounded  in  a  mor-
tar, and  seasoned  with  smoked  fish, — this  served  in
a  large  wooden  dish.  Our  bed  is  the  ground,  cov-
ered with  a  piece  of  bark,  or,  at  the  most,  with  a  mat.

The  extent  of  our  mission  comprises  this  year
thirty-two  hamlets  or  villages,  in  which  not  a  single


12  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  18

trente-deux  bourgs  on  villages,  dans  lesqnels  il  ne
reste  pas  nne  senle  cabane  on  I'Evangile  n'ait  6t6
annonce.  Beanconp  de  sauvages  ont  regn  le  bapteme.
La  plnpart,  victimes  d'nne  epidemie  qni  a  ravage
tont  le  pays,  sont  an  ciel,  nons  I'esperons.  Cette  ma-
ladie  a  ete  T  occasion  de  bien  des  calomnies  et  de  per-
s6cntions  excit^es  contre  nons  sons  le  pr6texte  qne
nons  6tions  les  antenrs  dn  flean.  Tontefois  ancnn
de  nons  n'a  peri  dans  cette  tempete,  bien  qne  qnel-
qnes-nns  aient  €t€  batonnes  et  qne  d'antres  aient  vn
la  hacbe  levee  snr  enx,  et  bien  pr^s  de  lenr  tete.

Nons  avons  tons  besoin  dn  seconrs  de  vos  pri^res ;
e'est  ponrquoi  nons  nons  recommandons  hnmblement
h.  vos  saints  Sacrifices.

Je  snis,

de  Votre  Paternity,
Le  tr^s-indigne  servitenr  et  fils  en

Notre-Seignenr.
Joseph-Marie  CHAUMONOT.

Dn  pays  des  Hnrons,  le  24  mai  1640.


I


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  THE  GENERAL  18

cabin  remains  where  the  Gospel  has  not  been  pro-
claimed. Many  savages  have  received  baptism ;  most
of  these,  the  victims  of  an  epidemic  which  has
ravaged  the  whole  country,  are  in  heaven,  we  hope.
This  malady  has  been  the  occasion  for  many  calum-
nies and  persecutions,  excited  against  us  under  the
pretext  that  we  were  the  authors  of  the  scourge.
None  of  us,  however,  have  perished  in  this  tem-
pest, although  some  have  been  beaten,  and  others
have  seen  the  hatchet  raised  over  them,  and  very  near
to  their  heads.

We  all  have  need  of  the  help  of  your  prayers,
hence  we  commend  ourselves  humbly  to  your  holy
Sacrifices.

I  am

Your  Paternity's
Very  unworthy  servant  and  son  in

Our  Lord,
Joseph  Marie  CHAUMONOT.^

From  the  country  of  the  Hurons,  May  24,  1640.


14  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18


{197]  Lettre  du  P.  Joseph-Marie  Chaumonot  au

R.  P.  Philippe  Nappi,  Superieur  de  la

Maison  Professe  a  Rome.

(Traduite  de  Vitalien  sur  V original  conservd  d,  Rome.)

Du  pays  des  Hurons,  26  mai  1640.

MON  Reverend  Pere,
Pax  Christi.
Je  ne  pourrai  jamais  remercier  assez  la  di-
vine bonte  de  la  faveur  qu'elle  m*a  faite,  en  me
conduisant  k  travers  tant  de  dangers,  dans  le  lieu  le
plus  favorable  qui  soit  au  monde,  pour  perfectionner
un  religieux.  Je  dois  en  faire  part  ^  Votre  Reverence,
afin  qu'elle  veuille  bien  m'aider  k  en  remercier  le
bon  Dieu.  L'annee  derniere,  j'ai  ecrit  que,  apr^s  trois
mois  d'une  navigation  trfes-p6nible,  je  suis  arriv6
dans  la  Nouvelle-France,  mais  qu'il  me  fallait  encore
m'avancer  trois  cents  lieues  plus  loin  dans  le  desert.
Voici  le  r6cit  de  ce  voyage.

La  veille  de  saint  Laurent,  je  m'embarquai  dans
un  canot  de  sauvages  Hurons  (ainsi  s'appelle  ce  peu-
ple)  sur  la  grande  riviere,  qui  porte  le  nom  de  [198]
ce  glorieux  martyr ;  dans  quelques  endroits,  elle  est
large  de  dix,  treize,  vingt  lieues.  Pendant  cent
lieues  de  son  cours,  ses  eaux  sont  salees,  et  le  flux  et
reflux  s'y  font  sentir:  aussi  est-elle  sujette,  vu  sa
largeur,  k  des  tempetes,  comme  rOc6an.

Le  P.  Poncet  s'embarqua  en  meme  temps  que  moi ;
mais  quatre  jours  apr^s  le  depart,  nous  fumes  obli-


1640]  CHAUMONOT  ro  NAPPI  15


[197]  Letter  of  Father  Joseph  Marie  Chaumonot
to  the  Reverend  Father  Philippe  Nappi,  Supe-
rior of  the  Professed  House  at  Rome.

(Translated  from  the  Italian  original  preserved  at  Rome.)

From  the  country  of  the  Hurons,  May  26,  1640.

MY  Reverend  Father,
Pax  Christi.
I  shall  never  be  able  sufficiently  to  thank  the
divine  goodness  for  the  favor  that  it  has  done  me,
by  leading  me  through  so  many  dangers  into  the
most  favorable  place  in  the  world  for  perfecting  a
religious.  I  am  obliged  to  acquaint  Your  Reverence
therewith,  to  the  end  that  you  may  kindly  consent  to
aid  me  in  thanking  the  good  God  for  it.  Last  year,
I  wrote  that  after  three  months  of  very  difficult  navi-
gation I  arrived  in  New  France,  but  that  I  still  had
to  proceed  three  hundred  leagues  further  into  the
wilderness. Here  follows  the  account  of  this  journey.

On  the  eve  of  saint  Lawrence,  I  embarked  in  a
canoe  of  Huron  savages  (thus  this  people  is  called),
on  the  great  river  which  bears  the  name  of  [198]  that
glorious  martyr ;  in  some  places  it  is  ten,  thirteen,
twenty  leagues  wide.  For  a  hundred  leagues  of  its
course  its  waters  are  salt,  and  the  flow  and  ebb  of
tides  is  there  perceptible :  it  is  also  subject,  by  reason
of  its  width,  to  storms,  like  the  Ocean.

Father  Poncet  embarked  at  the  same  time  with
me ;  but  four  days  after  the  departure  we  were  obliged


16  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  j£SUITES [Vol.18

g6s  de  nous  s6parer,  laissant  notre  premier  canot
pour  monter  s6par6ment  dans  deux  autres.  Nous
devious  cependant  aller  de  compagnie,  de  telle  sorte
que  presque  chaque  soir,  nous  nous  trouvions  en-
semble pour  souper  et  passer  la  nuit,  avec  les  conduc-
teurs  de  nos  canot  s  d'ecorce,  et  sou  vent  meme  nous
avions  la  grande  consolation  de  dire  la  sainte  messe,
le  matin,  avant  de  partir ;  mais  ce  fut  la  seule  pen-
dant tout  le  voyage,  qui  fut  de  trente  jours  pour  moi
et  de  trente-deux  pour  le  P.  Poncet :  voyage  on  ne

pent  plus  laborieux

Arrive  au  but  de  ce  voyage,  je  trouvai  onze  de  nos
Pferes,  distribu6s  dans  trois  Residences  pour  etre  plus
pr^s  des  bourgs  importants,  qu'ils  veulent  instruire
et  civiliser.  Nos  habitations  sont  d'ecorce,  comme
celle  des  sauvages,  sans  divisions  int6rieures,  except^
pour  la  chapelle.  Faute  de  table  et  d'ustensiles  de
manage,  nous  mangeons  par  terre  et  nous  buvons
dans  des  decrees  d'arbres.  Tout  I'appareil  de  notre
cuisine  et  de  notre  refectoire  [199]  consiste  dans  un
grand  plat  de  bois,  plein  de  sagamit^,  ^  laquelle  je  ne
vois  rien  de  plus  semblable  que  la  colle  qui  sert  k
tapisser  les  murs.  La  soif  ne  nous  gene  guere,  soit
parce  que  nous  ne  nous  servons  jamais  de  sel,  soit
parce  que  notre  nourriture  est  tou jours  trfes-liquide.
Pour  moi,  depuis  que  je  suis  ici,  je  n'ai  pas  bu  en  tout
un  verre  d'eau,  quoiqu'il  y  ait  d6jk  huit  mois  que  je
sois  arrive.  Notre  lit  est  form6  d'une  ecorce  d'arbre,
sur  laquelle  nous  mettons  une  couverture,  6paisse  ^
peu  pr^s  comme  une  piastre  de  Florence.  Pour  les
draps,  on  n'en  parle  pas,  meme  pour  les  malades.
Mais  la  plus  grande  incommodit^,  c'est  la  fum6e  qui,
faute  de  cheminee,  remplit  toute  la  cabane  et  gate


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  17

to  separate,  leaving  our  first  canoe  in  order  to  get
into  two  others,  singly.  We  were,  however,  to  go  in
company,  so  that  almost  every  evening  we  found
ourselves  together  to  sup  and  pass  the  night  with  the
guides  of  our  bark  canoes ;  and  often  we  even  had
the  great  consolation  of  saying  the  holy  mass  in  the
morning  before  starting ;  but  this  was  the  only  con-
solation during  the  whole  voyage,  which  was  thirty
days  for  me  and  thirty-two  for  Father  Poncet, — the

most  laborious  journey  possible

Having  arrived  at  the  end  of  this  voyage,  I  found
eleven  of  our  Fathers,  distributed  in  three  Residences
in  order  to  be  nearer  to  important  villages,  which
they  desire  to  instruct  and  civilize.  Our  habitations
are  of  bark,  like  those  of  the  savages,  and  without
interior  partitions,  except  for  the  chapel.  For  want
of  a  table  and  household  utensils,  we  eat  on  the
ground,  and  drink  from  the  bark  of  trees.  The
whole  apparatus  of  our  kitchen  and  of  our  refectory
[199]  consists  of  a  great  wooden  dish,  full  of  saga-
mit^,  whereto  I  see  nothing  more  similar  than  the
paste  which  is  used  in  covering  walls.  Thirst  hard-
ly annoys  us, —  either  because  we  never  use  salt,  or
because  our  food  is  always  very  liquid.  As  for  me,
since  I  have  been  here,  I  have  not  drunk  in  all  a  glass
of  water,  although  it  is  now  eight  months  since  I
arrived.  Our  bed  is  made  with  a  piece  of  bark,  upon
which  we  put  a  blanket  nearly  the  thickness  of  a
Florentine  piastre.  Respecting  sheets,  there  is  no
mention  of  them,  even  for  the  sick.  But  the  great-
est inconvenience  is  the  smoke,  which,  for  want  of  a
chimney,  fills  the  whole  cabin  and  spoils  everything
that  one  would  keep.  When  certain  winds  blow,  it
is  no  longer  possible  to  stay  therein,  because  of  the


18  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

tout  ce  qu'on  voudrait  garder.  Quand  certains  vents
soufflent,  il  n'est  plus  possible  d'y  tenir,  k  cause  de
la  douleur  que  ressentent  les  yeux.  En  biver  nous
n'avons  pas  la  nuit  d' autre  lumiere  que  celle  du  feu
de  la  cabane,  qui  nous  sert  pour  reciter  notre  br6-
viaire,  pour  6tudier  la  langue  et  pour  toute  chose.
Le  jour,  nous  nous  servons  de  I'ouverture  laiss6e  au
baut  de  la  cabane,  et  qui  est  k  la  fois  cbeminee  et
fenetre.  Voilk  la  maniere  de  vivre  dans  notre  resi-
dence ;  pour  celle  que  nous  gardons  quand  nous  allons
en  mission,  Votre  Reverence  doit  savoir  d'abord  que,
quoique  ces  sauvages  observent  entre  eux  certaines
regies  d'bospitalit6,  avec  nous  ils  ne  [200]  les  obser-
vent pas.  Nous  sommes  done  obliges  de  porter  avec
nous  quelques  petits  couteaux,  des  aleines,  des
bagues,  des  aiguilles,  des  pendants  d'oreille  et  cboses
semblables,  pour  payer  nos  botes.  Nous  portons  en
outre  une  couverture  en  guise  de  manteau,  qui  sert
^  nous  envelopper  la  nuit.

La  maniere  d'annoncer  la  parole  de  Dieu  aux  sau-
vages n'est  pas  de  monter  en  cbaire  et  de  precber
sur  une  place  publique ;  il  nous  f aut  visiter  cbaque
cabane  en  parti culier,  et  aupres  du  feu,  exposer  k
ceux  qui  veulent  nous  ecouter  les  mysteres  de  notre
sainte  foi.  lis  n'ont  en  effet  aucun  autre  lieu  de
reunion  pour  traiter  leurs  affaires,  que  la  cabane  de
quelqu'un  de  leurs  capitaines.

Je  ne  me  serais  jamais  imaging  une  duret6  comme
celle  d'un  coeur  sauvage  elev6  dans  Tinfidelit^.  Quand
ils  sont  convaincus  de  la  folic  de  leurs  superstitions
et  de  leurs  fables,  et  qu'on  leur  a  prouve  la  verit6  et
la  sagesse  de  la  foi,  il  faudrait,  pour  achever  de  les
gagner,  leur  promettre  que  le  bapteme  leur  donnera


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  19

pain  felt  by  the  eyes.  In  winter,  we  have  no  other
light  by  night  than  that  of  the  cabin  fire,  which  serves
us  for  reciting  our  breviary,  for  studying  the  lan-
guage, and  for  everything.  By  day  we  use  the  open-
ing left  at  the  top  of  the  cabin, —  which  is  at  once
chimney  and  window.  Such  is  the  manner  of  living
in  our  residence ;  as  for  the  one  that  we  observe  when
we  go  on  a  mission,  Your  Reverence  must  know,  to
begin  with,  that  although  these  savages  practice
among  themselves  certain  rules  of  hospitality,  with
us  they  [200]  apply  them  not.  We  are,  therefore,
obliged  to  carry  with  us  a  few  little  knives,  awls,
rings,  needles,  earrings,  and  such  like  things,  to
pay  our  hosts.  We  carry  furthermore  a  blanket  in
the  guise  of  a  cloak,  which  serves  to  wrap  us  in  at
night.

The  way  of  announcing  the  word  of  God  to  the
savages  is  not  to  mount  a  pulpit  and  preach  in  a  pub-
lic square ;  we  must  visit  each  cabin  in  private,  and
beside  the  fire  expound,  to  those  who  are  willing  to
listen  to  us,  the  mysteries  of  our  holy  faith.  They
have,  in  fact,  no  other  place  of  meeting,  for  transact-
ing their  affairs,  than  the  cabin  of  some  one  of  their
captains.

I  should  never  have  imagined  a  hardness  like  that
of  a  savage  heart,  brought  up  in  infidelity.  When
they  are  convinced  of  the  folly  of  their  superstitions
and  of  their  fables,  and  when  one  has  proved  to
them  the  truth  and  the  wisdom  of  the  faith,  it  would
be  necessary,  in  order  to  finish  winning  them,  to
promise  them  that  baptism  will  give  them  prosperity
and  long  life, — these  poor  peoples  being  susceptible
only  to  temporal  goods. That  does  not  result  from


20  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

prosp6rit6  et  longue  vie,  ces  paiivres  gens  n'etant  sen-
sibles  qu'aux  biens  temporels :  cela  ne  vient  pas  de
stupidite;  ils  sont  meme  plus  intelligents  que  nos
campagnards,  et  il  y  a  certains  capitaines,  dont  nous
admirons  I'^loquence,  acquise  sans  beaucoup  de  pr6-
ceptes  de  rh6torique.  [201]  Leur  obstination  dans
rinfidelit6  est  produite  par  la  difficult^  qu'ils  croient
trouver  dans  T  observation  des  commandements  et
surtout  du  sixieme.

Le  petit  nombre  de  fideles,  que  Notre- Seigneur
s'est  cboisi,  est  une  preuve  de  ce  que  pent  la  grace
dans  les  coeurs  les  plus  barbares  de  la  terre.  J 'en
connais  un  qui,  cette  ann^e,  au  moment  ou  les  hosti-
lit6s  contre  la  religion  ^taient  plus  vives,  n'a  pas
craint  de  parcourir  en  apotre  presque  tous  les  vil-
lages. II  allait  dans  les  assemblies  et  les  conseils
des  capitaines,  lorsqu'ils  traitaient  quelque  affaire,
et  blamait  hardiment  leurs  folies.  II  exaltait  la  soli-
dity de  la  doctrine,  que  les  robes  noires  (c'est  ainsi
qu'ils  nous  appellent)  6taient  venus  leur  enseigner,
protestant  qu'il  6tait  pret  k  donner  sa  vie  pour  la
d6fendre.  Ses  auditeurs  applaudissaient  alors  h,  ses
discours;  mais  ils  n'embrassaient  pas  pour  cela  la
v6rit6,  qu'ils  reconnaissaient.  Ce  meme  Sauvage  de-
man  da  k  faire  les  exercices,  et  il  en  profita  si  bien,
que  le  Pere,  qui  lui  donnait  les  meditations,  en  6tait
6trangement  6merveille.  Si  on  6crit  dans  la  Rela-
tion frangaise  ses  reflexions  spirituelles,  elles  pour-
ront  servir  de  le^on,  meme  aux  religieux  les  plus
pieux  et  les  plus  fervents.  II  avait  dans  sa  famille
une  niece,  attaqu^e  de  je  ne  sais  quelle  maladie,  qui,
la  nuit,  lui  faisait  pousser  des  cris  effrayants,  comme
si  elle  avait  vu  quelque  spectre. [202]  Pour  la  d^li-


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  21

stupidity ;  they  are  even  more  intelligent  than  our
rustics,  and  there  are  certain  captains  whose  eloquence
we  admire, — acquired  without  many  precepts  of
rhetoric.  [201]  Their  obstinacy  in  infidelity  is  pro-
duced by  the  difficulty  which  they  think  to  find  in
the  observance  of  the  commandments,  and  especially
of  the  sixth.

The  small  number  of  faithful  ones  whom  Our  Lord
has  chosen  for  himself,  is  a  proof  of  what  grace  can
do  in  the  most  barbarous  hearts  on  the  earth.  I  know
one  who  this  year,  at  the  moment  when  the  hostili-
ties against  religion  were  most  keen,  did  not  fear  to
make  the  round,  as  an  apostle,  of  nearly  all  the  vil-
lages. He  went  into  the  assemblies  and  the  councils
of  the  captains,  when  they  were  transacting  some
business,  and  boldly  censured  their  follies.  He  ex-
alted the  solidity  of  the  doctrine  which  the  '  *  black
gowns"  (thus  they  call  us)  had  come  to  teach  them;
protesting  that  he  was  ready  to  give  his  life  to  de-
fend it.  His  hearers  then  applauded  his  remarks ;  but
they  did  not  therefore  embrace  the  truth  which  they
acknowledged.  This  same  Savage  requested  to  make
a  retreat,  and  he  profited  by  this  so  well  that  the
Father,  who  gave  him  the  meditations,  was  strangely
amazed  thereat.  If  his  spiritual  reflections  be  writ-
ten in  the  French  Relation,  they  may  serve  as  a  les-
son even  to  the  most  pious  and  to  the  most  fervent
religious.  He  had  in  his  family  a  niece,  attacked  by
some  sickness  or  other,  which  at  night  caused  her  to
utter  frightful  cries,  as  if  she  had  seen  some  spectre.
[202]  To  relieve  her,  he  put  his  chaplet  about  her
neck,  saying  to  her:  ''  Remember  that  thou  art  a
Christian,  and  that  thou  belongest  no  more  to  the  de-
mon ;  and  make  the  sign  of  the  cross. ' ' She  did  so,


22  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

vrer,  il  lui  mit  au  cou  son  chapelet,  en  lui  disant:
«  Rappelle-toi  que  tii  es  cliretienne,  et  que  tu  n'ap-
«  partiens  plus  au  d6nion,  et  fais  le  signe  de  la  croix. »
Elle  le  fit,  et  k  partir  de  ce  moment,  elle  n'a  plus  6t6
tourmentee  de  semblable  mal.

II  serait  trop  long  de  raconter  tous  les  exemples
heroiques  de  Constance  que  ce  Sauvage  et  quelques
autres  de  nos  convertis,  bien  qu'en  petit  nombre,
nous  ont  donnes.  Mais  e'en  est  assez  pour  montrer
k  Votre  R6v6rence  que  Dieu  ne  refuse  pas  sa  grace,
meme  aux  plus  sauvages  des  hommes,  et  que  ces
peuples  sont  capables  de  recevoir  la  doctrine  de
TEvangile,  malgre  la  tres-grande  difficulte  qu'il  y  a  k
I'expliquer,  k  cause  de  la  pauvret6  de  la  langue;  car
ils  n'ont  ni  vignes,  ni  troupeaux,  ni  tours,  ni  villes,
ni  sel,  ni  lampes,  ni  temples,  ni  maitres  d'aucune
science  ou  art.  lis  ne  savent  ni  lire  ni  ecrire,  et  nous
avons  beaucoup  de  peine  k  leur  faire  comprendre  les
paraboles  qui  sont  sur  ces  matieres  dans  le  saint
Evangile.  II  est  vrai  que  ce  defaut  et  cette  pauvretd
de  leur  langue  n'a  jamais  6te  cause  du  retard  de  leur
conversion;  car  les  P^res  qui  savent  leur  langue,
leur  font  assez  bien  connaitre  ce  qui  est  n^cessaire
pour  le  salut,  sans  ce  servir  de  ces  comparaisons.

L'hiver  dernier,  il  n'y  a  pas  eu  une  seule  cabane
[203]  dans  nos  trente-deux  bourgs,  ou  la  parole  de
Dieu  n'ait  €t€  portee;  mais  les  fruits  ont  et6  plus
grands  pour  I'Eglise  triomphante  que  pour  I'Eglise
militante.  Comme  il  regnait  une  maladie  conta-
gieuse  qui  n'^pargnait  ni  age  ni  sexe,  tout  notre  soin
6tait  de  catechiser  les  malades,  pour  leur  donner  \
la  fin  de  leur  vie  un  passe-port  pour  le  ciel.  Le  plus
grand  nombre  de  ceux  que  cette  maladie  a  enleves,
apres  le  saint  bapteme,  6taient  les  petits  enfants


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  23

and  from  that  moment  forward,  she  was  not  again  tor-
mented by  the  like  trouble.

It  would  be  too  tedious  to  relate  all  the  heroic
examples  of  constancy  which  this  Savage  and  some
others  of  our  converts,  though  in  small  number,  have
given  us.  But  this  is  enough  to  show  Your  Rever-
ence that  God  does  not  refuse  his  grace,  even  to  the
most  savage  of  men,  and  that  these  peoples  are  cap-
able of  receiving  the  doctrine  of  the  Gospel,  notwith-
standing the  very  great  difficulty  of  explaining  it,
on  account  of  the  poverty  of  the  language ;  for  they
have  neither  vineyards  nor  flocks,  nor  towers  nor
cities,  nor  salt,  nor  lamps,  nor  temples,  nor  masters
of  any  science  or  art.  They  can  neither  read  nor
write,  and  we  have  much  difficulty  in  making  them
understand  the  parables  which  are  related  to  these
matters  in  the  holy  Gospel.  It  is  true  that  this  de-
fect and  this  poverty  of  their  language  has  never  been
a  cause  of  the  delay  in  their  conversion;  for  the
Fathers  who  know  their  language  enable  them  to
understand  well  enough  that  which  is  necessary  for
salvation,  without  using  these  comparisons.

Last  winter,  there  was  not  a  single  cabin  [203]  in
our  thirty-two  villages  into  which  the  word  of  God
was  not  carried ;  but  the  results  have  been  greater
for  the  Church  triumphant  than  for  the  Church  mili-
tant. As  there  prevailed  a  contagious  disease  which
spared  neither  age  nor  sex,  all  our  care  was  to  cate-
chize the  sick,  in  order  to  give  them  at  the  end  of
their  life  a  passport  for  heaven.  The  greatest  num-
ber of  those  whom  this  malady  carried  off,  after  holy
baptism,  were  the  little  children

The  Savages  have  held  several  very  crowded  as-
semblies, to  consider  means  for compelling us to


24  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.  18

Les  Sauvages  ont  tenu  plusieurs  assemblees  tres-
nombreuses  pour  aviser  aux  moyens  de  nous  forcer  k
quitter  le  pays.  Beaucoup  de  capitaines  ont  vot6
notremort;  mais  pas  un  n'a  ose  s'en  faire  Tex^cu-
teur,  et  jusqu'^  present  Dieu  nous  a  preserve  de  leurs
coups.  Pendant  tout  Thiver  nous  nous  attendions
chaque  jour  h.  apprendre  la  mort  de  quelqu'un  de
nos  missionnaires,  et  chaque  jour  en  disant  la  sainte
messe,  nous  faisions  la  communion,  comme  devant
nous  servir  de  viatique.  Tout  s'est  born6  h.  quelques
coups  de  baton,  et  au  chagrin  de  voir  renverser  les
croix  que  nous  avions  dressees,  et  reduire  en  cendres
une  de  nos  cabanes.  Un  seul  des  notres  a  vu  couler
son  sang,  sed  non  usque  ad  mortem

Quand  nous  visitons  ces  pauvres  gens,  s'ils  n'ar-
rivent  pas  k  temps  pour  nous  fermer  la  porte  [204]
au  nez,  ils  se  bouchent  les  oreilles  et  se  couvrent  la
figure  de  peur  d'etre  ensorcel6s.  Tout  cela  nous
donne  beaucoup  d'esperance  qu'un  jour  la  foi  fleurira
dans  cette  malheureuse  terre,  puisque  les  persecu-
tions dont  Dieu  se  sert  pour  I'^tablir  et  la  cultiver  ne
nous  font  pas  d^faut.

La  moisson  promet  beaucoup,  non  pas  seulement  'k
cause  du  nombre  de  nos  Sauvages,  mais  parce  qu'il
y  a  bien  d'autres  nations  repandues  dans  ces  im-
menses  solitudes.  Nous  connaissons  d6jk  les  noms  de
plus  de  vingt,  qui  sont  dans  la  direction  de  la  mer  du
Nord,  toutefois  peu  considerables :  on  nous  fait  esp6-
rer  qu'au-delk,  nous  trouverons  des  contr^es  plus
peuplees.  Pour  y  arriver  il  faudra  souffrir  encore
plus  que  nous  ne  I'avons  fait  pour  venir  ici.

Avant  de  finir,  je  veux  raconter  k  Votre  R6v6rence
quelques  faits  extraordinaires arrives cette  ann6e.


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  26

leave  the  country.  Many  captains  have  voted  our
death ;  but  not  one  has  dared  to  become  the  execu-
tioner therein,  and  hitherto  God  has  preserved  us
from  their  attacks.  During  the  whole  winter  we
were  expecting  every  day  to  learn  the  death  of  some
one  of  our  missionaries ;  and  each  day,  while  saying
the  holy  mass,  we  received  the  communion,  as  if  it
were  to  serve  as  viaticum.  Everything  ended  in  a
few  blows  from  a  club,  and  in  the  vexation  of  see-
ing the  crosses  overturned  which  we  had  set  up,  and
one  of  our  cabins  reduced  to  ashes.  A  single  one  of
ours  has  seen  his  blood  flow,  sed  non  usque  ad  mor-
tem

When  we  visit  these  poor  people,  if  they  do  not
arrive  in  time  to  close  the  door  [204]  to  our  noses,
they  stop  their  ears  and  cover  their  faces,  for  fear  of
being  bewitched.  All  that  gives  us  much  hope  that
one  day  the  faith  will  flourish  in  this  unhappy  land,
since  the  persecutions  which  God  uses  to  establish
and  cultivate  it  are  not  wanting  for  us.

The  harvest  promises  much,  not  only  on  account
of  the  number  of  our  Savages,  but  because  there  are
many  other  nations  spread  abroad  in  these  immense
solitudes.  We  already  know  the  names  of  more  than
twenty,  which  are  in  the  direction  of  the  Northern
sea, — not  at  all  considerable,  however;  we  are  led  to
hope  that,  beyond,  we  shall  find  more  populous  re-
gions. To  arrive  there,  it  will  be  necessary  to  suffer
still  more  than  we  have  done  in  order  to  come  here.

Before  finishing,  I  wish  to  relate  to  Your  Rever-
ence some  extraordinary  incidents  which  happened
this  year.  A  poor  man,  baptized  in  his  sickness,
having  recovered  health,  was  attacked  with  an  in-
flammation which  deprived  him  of  sight. One  of  our


2«  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

Un  pauvre  homme,  baptis6  dans  sa  maladie,  ayant
recouvre  la  sante,  fut  attaque  d'une  fluxion  qui  le
priva  de  la  vue.  Un  de  nos  Peres,  le  f61icitant  un
jour  d'avoir  echappe  h.  la  mort,  eut  pour  reponse  que
main  tenant  la  vie  etait  pour  lui  un  fardeau,  puisqu'il
6tait  aveugle.  Le  Pere  lui  lava  les  yeux  avec  de
Teau  benite,  en  disant:  «Que  le  Pere,  le  Fils,  et  le
Saint- Esprit,  en  qui  tu  crois,  te  gu^rissent»,  et  au
meme  moment  la  fluxion  cessa,  [205]  et  le  lendemain
la  vue  lui  fut  rendue  completement. —  Une  femme
n*  ayant  pas  voulu  se  soumettre  h.  certaines  supersti-
tions, fut  frapp6e  de  excite  par  le  demon,  pour  la
punir.  Le  meme  Pere  I'engagea  k  mettre  sa  con-
fiance  en  Dieu,  et  ^  se  laver  avec  de  I'eau  b6nite,  et
elle  recouvra  parfaitement  la  vue. —  Un  jeune  hom-
me, ayant  6t6  k  la  peche  avec  son  jeune  fr^re,  et
quelques  autres,  fut  attaqu6  par  les  ennemis  de  leur
nation.  Comme  il  craignait  plus  la  mort  de  son  jeune
fr^re  que  la  sienne,  il  le  couvrit  de  son  corps,  le  pro-
tegeant  ainsi  contre  les  coups  qu'il  re9Ut  lui-meme.
On  le  ramena  demi-mort  k  son  village.  Un  de  nos
P^res  s'y  trouvait.  Voyant  qu'il  etait  sans  mouve-
ment  et  sans  parole,  il  ne  pouvait  pas  1' aider  k  bien
mourir.  Malgr6  cela,  il  ne  perdit  pas  courage,  et  fit
voeu  de  quelques  messes  en  I'honneur  de  saint  Fran-
gois-Xavier,  pour  le  soulagement  de  ce  pauvre  infi-
dele.  Au  meme  moment  la  langue  du  moribond  se
d^lie,  ses  yeux  s'ouvrent  et  regardant  le  ciel,  il  s'6-
crie  (nAondechichiai  Taitene.  Toi  qui  as  fait  la  terre,
aie  piti6  de  moi. »  Aussitot  le  Pere  I'instruit,  le  bap-
tise, et  il  mourut  peu  apres. —  Un  autre  jeune  homme
avait,  je  ne  sais  par  quel  d6pit,  mange  une  racine
v6neneuse  pour  se  donner  la  mort,  et  il  etait  d6jk


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  27

Fathers,  congratulating  him  one  day  for  having  es-
caped death,  received  the  answer  that  now  life  was  a
burden  for  him,  since  he  was  blind.  The  Father
washed  his  eyes  with  holy  water,  saying :  ' '  May  the
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  whom  thou
believest,  heal  thee ;  ' '  and  at  the  same  moment  the
inflammation  ceased,  [205]  and  the  next  day  his  sight
was  completely  restored.  A  woman  having  been
unwilling  to  submit  to  certain  superstitions,  was
struck  with  blindness  by  the  demon,  to  punish  her.
The  same  Father  persuaded  her  to  put  her  confidence
in  God,  and  to  bathe  herself  with  holy  water,  and
she  perfectly  recovered  sight.  A  young  man,  hav-
ing been  fishing  with  his  young  brother  and  certain
others,  was  attacked  by  the  enemies  of  their  nation.
As  he  feared  noore  for  his  young  brother's  death  than
his  own,  he  covered  him  with  his  own  body,  thus  pro-
tecting him  against  the  blows  that  he  himself  re-
ceived. He  was  led  back  half  dead  to  his  village.  One
of  our  Fathers  happened  to  be  there.  Seeing  that  he
was  without  motion  and  without  speech,  he  could  not
aid  him  to  die  well.  Notwithstanding  that,  he  did
not  lose  courage,  and  vowed  some  masses  in  honor
of  saint  Frangois  Xavier,  for  the  relief  of  this  poor
infidel.  At  the  same  moment  the  dying  man's
tongue  is  loosed,  his  eyes  open,  and  looking  at  heav-
en, he  exclaims:  Aondechichiai  Taitene,  **  Thou  who
hast  made  the  earth,  have  pity  on  me."  Immediate-
ly the  Father  instructs  and  baptizes  him ;  and  he  died
soon  afterward.  Another  young  man  had,  from  I
know  not  what  chagrin,  eaten  a  poisonous  root,  in
order  to  commit  suicide;  and  he  was  already  tor-
mented by  the  violence  of  the  poison  when  he  came
to  our  cabin. Having  there  succumbed,  he  flings


28  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.18

tourmente  par  la  violence  du  poison  qnand  il  vint  k
notre  cabane.  Rendu  1^,  il  se  jette  k  terre,  en  [206]
^cumant,  avec  tons  les  signes  d'une  mort  prochaine.
Interroge  sur  la  cause  de  son  mal,  pour  toute  r6-
ponse,  il  pr6sente  le  reste  de  la  racine  qu'il  avait
mangle,  en  disant  de  la  montrer  k  ses  parents  apres
sa  mort.  Nos  P^res,  avertis  par  quelques  Sauvages
que  ce  poison  etait  mortel,  s'empressent  d'instruire
au  plus  vite  ce  malheureux,  et  le  baptisent,  apres
avoir  pris  toutes  les  precautions  necessaires,  quand  il
s'agit  du  bapteme  des  adultes.  Environ  une  demi-
beure  apr^s,  il  mourut  en  chemin,  pendant  que  ses
parents  le  reportaient  ^  sa  cabane. — Un  homme,
attaqu6  par  la  contagion  et  voyant  I'inefficacit^  des
remedes  des  medecins  du  pays,  c'est-^-dire  des  sor-
ciers  (vrais  ou  faux),  se  donna  plusieurs  coups  de
couteau  dans  la  poitrine.  Un  des  Notres  entre  alors
par  basard  dans  sa  cabane,  et  aussitot  celui-ci  I'ap-
pelle  et  lui  demande  le  bapteme.  Le  Pere  le  cate-
chise et  le  baptise  sans  tarder.  Le  nouveau  chretien
lui  dit:  «Ne  crois  pas  que  j'aie  demande  le  bapteme
dans  I'esperance  de  prolonger  ma  vie,  puisque  je  suis
presque  dej^  mort;  regarde  mes  blessures,  et  vois  s'il
est  possible  d'echapper;  ce  n'est  que  I'esperance  du
ciel  qui  m'a  pouss6  k  me  faire  baptiser.w  Le  Pere
I'engagea  ^  faire  un  acte  de  regret  de  s'etre  donn6  la
mort. Peu  de  temps  apr^s,  il  mourut.

Nos  Sauvages  prirent,  il  n'y  a  pas  un  mois,  un  [207]
de  leurs  ennemis ;  mais  avant  d'etre  mis  k  mort,  il
fut  baptise  par  un  des  Notres,  qui  venait  par  hasard
d'arriver  dans  le  village.  Pendant  que  les  Sauvages
tourmentaient  ce  captif,  il  chantait  qu'il  devait  aller
au  ciel. Je  voudrais  pouvoir  decrire  les  supplices


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  29

himself  to  the  ground,  [206]  foaming,  with  all  the
signs  of  an  approaching  death.  Being  questioned
about  the  cause  of  his  trouble,  his  only  answer  was
to  present  the  remainder  of  the  root  that  he  had  eat-
en,—  bidding  to  show  it  to  his  parents  after  his  death.
Our  Fathers,  warned  by  some  Savages  that  this  poi-
son was  deadly,  make  haste  to  instruct  this  wretch
as  quickly  as  possible,  and  baptize  him,  after  having
taken  all  the  precautions  necessary  when  it  is  a
question  of  the  baptism  of  adults.  About  half  an
hour  later,  he  died  by  the  wayside,  while  his  parents
were  carrying  him  back  to  his  cabin.  A  man,  at-
tacked by  the  contagion,  and  seeing  the  inefficiency
of  the  remedies  of  the  physicians  of  the  country  —
that  is  to  say,  wizards  (true  or  false)  —  stabbed  him-
self several  times  in  the  breast.  One  of  Ours  then
enters  by  chance  into  his  cabin,  and  straightway  this
man  calls  him  and  asks  him  for  baptism.  The  Fa-
ther catechizes  him,  and  baptizes  him  without  delay.
The  new  Christian  says  to  him:  ''  Do  not  believe
that  I  have  asked  for  baptism  in  the  hope  of  prolong-
ing my  life,  since  I  am  already  almost  dead, — look
at  my  wounds,  and  see  if  it  is  possible  to  escape  it ;
it  is  only  the  hope  of  heaven  which  has  impelled  me
to  become  baptized."  The  Father  induced  him  to
offer  an  act  of  regret  for  having  caused  his  own
death. Soon  afterward,  he  died.

Our  Savages  captured,  less  than  a  month  ago,  one
[207]  of  their  enemies;  but,  before  being  put  to
death,  he  was  baptized  by  one  of  Ours,  who  by
chance  had  just  arrived  in  the  village.  While  the
Savages  were  tormenting  this  captive,  he  sang  that
he  was  to  go  to  heaven.  I  would  I  could  describe
the  tortures  which  they  inflict  upon  those  of  the  ene-


so  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

qu'ils  font  souffrir  k  ceux  des  ennemis  qui  tombent
entre  leurs  mains;  mais  il  n'est  pas  possible  de  voir
€n  ce  monde  quelque  chose  qui  represente  mieux  la
mani^re  dont  les  demons  tourmentent  les  damn6s.
Des  qu'ils  ont  fait  un  prisonnier,  ils  lui  coupent  les
doigts  des  mains,  ils  lui  d^cliirent  avec  un  couteau
les  6paules  et  le  dos,  ils  le  garrottent  avec  des  liens
tr^s-serres,  et  le  conduisent  en  chantant  et  en  se  mo-
quant  de  lui,  avec  tout  le  mepris  imaginable.  Arri-
ves k  leur  village,  ils  le  font  adopter  par  quelqu'un
de  ceux  qui  ont  perdu  leur  fils  "k  la  guerre.  Ce
parent  simule  est  charge  de  caresser  le  prisonnier.
Vous  le  verrez  venir  avec  un  collier  en  fer  chaud,  et
lui  dire:  «Tiens,  mon  fils,  tu  aimes,  je  crois,  ^  etre
bien  orn6,  k  paraitre  beau. »  En  le  raillant  ainsi,  il
commence  ^  le  tourmenter  depuis  la  plante  des  pieds,
jusqu'au  sommet  de  la  tete,  avec  des  tisons  ardents,
avec  la  cendre  chaude,  en  pergant  ses  pieds  et  ses
mains  avec  des  roseaux  ou  des  pointes  de  fer.  Quand
la  faiblesse  ne  permet  plus  au  captif  de  se  tenir  de-
bout,  on  lui  donne  k  manger,  et  puis  [208]  on  le  fait
marcher  sur  les  charbons  de  plusieurs  brasiers  plac6s
en  rang.  S'il  est  6puis6,  ils  le  prennent  par  les  mains
et  les  pieds,  et  le  portent  sur  ces  brasiers.  Enfin  ils
le  conduisent  hors  du  village,  et  le  font  monter  sur
une  estrade  pour  que  tons  les  Sauvages,  le  voyant
dans  ce  pitoyable  6tat,  puissent  satisfaire  la  rage  de
leur  coeur.  Au  milieu  de  tons  ces  supplices,  ils  I'in-
vitent  k  chanter,  et  le  patient  chante  afin  de  ne  pas
passer  pour  lache.  Tr^s-rarement  ils  se  plaignent  de
la  cruaute  qu'on  exerce  sur  eux.  Pour  couronner
toute  cette  rage  infernale,  ils  enl^vent  la  peau  de  la
tete  ^  ces  infortun^s. Apres  leur  mort,  ils  mettent


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  31

mies  who  fall  into  their  hands ;  but  it  is  not  possible
to  see  in  this  world  anything  that  better  represents
the  way  in  which  the  demons  torment  the  damned.
As  soon  as  they  have  taken  a  prisoner,  they  cut  off
his  fingers;  they  tear  his  shoulders  and  his  back
with  a  knife ;  they  bind  him  with  very  tight  bonds,
and  lead  him, — singing,  and  mocking  at  him  with
all  the  contempt  imaginable.  Having  arrived  at
their  village,  they  have  him  adopted  by  some  one  of
those  who  have  lost  their  son  in  the  war.  This
feigned  parent  is  charged  with  caressing  the  prisoner.
You  will  see  him  come  with  a  necklace  in  the  form
of  hot  iron,  and  say  to  him:  "  See  here,  my  son;
you  love,  I  am  sure,  to  be  adorned,  to  appear  beauti-
ful." While  thus  deriding  him,  he  begins  to  tor-
ment him  from  the  sole  of  the  feet  even  to  the  crown
of  the  head,  with  firebrands,  with  hot  cinders, — pierc-
ing his  feet  and  his  hands  with  reeds  or  with  sharp
irons.  When  weakness  no  longer  permits  the  cap-
tive to  stand  upright,  they  give  him  to  eat,  and  then
[208]  they  make  him  walk  over  the  coals  of  several
fires  placed  in  a  row.  If  he  is  exhausted,  they
take  him  by  the  hands  and  the  feet,  and  carry  him
over  these  fires.  Finally,  they  conduct  him  outside
the  village,  and  make  him  ascend  a  platform,  so  that
all  the  Savages,  seeing  him  in  this  lamentable  plight,
may  satisfy  their  heart's  rage.  In  the  midst  of  all
these  tortures,  they  invite  him  to  sing,  and  the  suf-
ferer sings  in  order  not  to  pass  for  a  coward.  Very
rarely  do  they  complain  of  the  cruelty  which  is  prac-
ticed upon  them.  To  crown  all  this  infernal  rage,
they  remove  the  scalp  from  these  unfortunates.
After  their  death,  they  cut  their  bodies  to  pieces,
and  give  to  the  principal  captains the heart,  the


32  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

leurs  corps  en  pieces,  et  ils  donnent  aux  principaux
capitaines,  le  coeur,  la  tete,  etc.  Cenx-ci  en  font  pre-
sent h,  d'autres  pour  assaisonner  leur  soupe,  et  pour
s'en  nourrir,  comme  si  c'etait  la  viande  de  quelque
cerf  ou  autre  animal  sauvage.

Nous  courons  maintenant  le  danger  d'etre  pris  et
trait6s  de  la  meme  maniere  que  les  Hurons,  avec  qui
nous  vivons ;  car  nous  passons  chaque  ann^e,  soit  en
descendant  k  Quebec,  soit  en  remontant,  par  les  lieux
memes,  oh.  les  ennemis  de  nos  Sauvages  sont  k  I'affut
pour  les  saisir  dans  leur  voyage;  et  il  n*y  a  [presque]
pas  d'annee  oti  plusieurs  Hurons  ne  soient  pris  ou
tues,  comme  je  viens  de  dire.

V.  R.  voit  par  Ik  que  nous  avons  besoin  de  secours
[209]  spirituels  pour  etre  k  I'abri  de  tant  d*  ennemis
domestiques  et  etrangers,  visibles  et  invisibles  que
nous  rencontrons  au  milieu  de  ces  peuples  feroces.

Je  devrais  6crire  k  beaucoup  de  Peres  qui  sont  dans
votre  Province ;  mais  le  papier  et  le  temps  me  man-
quent.  C'est  pourquoi  je  conjure  V.  R.  de  supplier
k  ce  silence,  en  montrant  la  pr6sente  k  ceux  qui  de-
manderont  de  mes  nouvelles,  mais  surtout  k  N.  T.  R.
P.  G6n6ral  et  au  P.  Assistant  de  France,  k  qui  j'a-
dresse  cette  lettre ;  mais  faites-moi  la  cliarit6  de  la
corriger  auparavant,  et  ensuite  de  la  faire  copier
par  quelqu'un,  car  elle  est  trop  mal  6crite  pour  etre
pr6sent6e  k  sa  Paternity.

V.  R.  voudra  bien  me  rappeler  au  souvenir  du  R.
P.  Pensa,  Provincial,  du  P.  Oliva,  des  PP.  Zucchi,
Caravita,  Gottefroid,  Lampugnano,  Fieramonti,  Ara-
fia,  Oddone,  Conti,  Giustino,  Ricci  et  autres,  outre
les  PP.  de  Magistris  et  Finetti.

Mon  Reverend  P^re,  demandez  pour  moi  quelques


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  33

head,  etc.  The  latter  make  presents  of  the  same  to
others,  to  season  their  soup,  and  to  feed  themselves
therewith,  as  if  it  were  the  meat  of  some  stag  or
other  wild  animal.

We  now  run  the  risk  of  being  captured  and  treated
in  the  same  manner  as  the  Hurons,  with  whom  we
live;  for  we  pass,  each  year, —  either  while  going
down  to  Quebec,  or  in  coming  up, —  by  the  very
places  where  the  enemies  of  our  Savages  are  on  the
watch  to  seize  them  in  their  journey;  and  there  is
hardly  a  year  when  several  Hurons  are  not  captured
or  killed  as  I  have  just  described.

Your  Reverence  thereby  sees  that  we  have  need  of
spiritual  aid,  [209]  in  order  to  be  sheltered  from  so
many  enemies,  domestic  and  foreign,  visible  and
invisible,  whom  we  encounter  in  the  midst  of  these
ferocious  tribes.

I  ought  to  write  to  many  Fathers  who  are  in  your
Province;  but  the  paper  and  the  time  fail  me.
Wherefore  I  beseech  Your  Reverence  to  make  good
this  silence,  by  showing  this  to  those  who  shall  ask
about  me :  but  especially  to  Our  Very  Reverend  Fa-
ther General,  and  to  the  Father  Assistant  for  France,
to  whom  I  address  this  letter ;  but  do  me  the  kindness
of  correcting  it  beforehand,  and  of  then  having  it
copied  by  some  one, — for  it  is  too  badly  written  to
be  presented  to  his  Paternity.

Your  Reverence  will  be  kind  enough  to  remember
me  to  the  Reverend  Father  Pensa,  Provincial;  to
Father  Oliva,  Fathers  Zucchi,  Caravita,  Gottefroid,
Lampugnano,  Fieramonti,  Arana,  Oddone,  Conti,
Giustino,  Ricci,  and  others;  besides  the  Fathers  de
Magistris  and  Finetti.

My  Reverend  Father,  ask  for  me  some  masses  and


34  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ^SUITES [Vol.18

messes  et  quelques  communions,  pour  I'amour  de
Dieu;  car,  dans  cette  Mission,  nous  sommes  expo-
ses ^  en  etre  souvent  priv6s.

Je  suis,  de  Votre  Reverence,
Le  tres-indigne  serviteur  en  Jesus-Christ,
Joseph-Marie  CALVONOTTI  (Chaumonot).

Au  Pays  des  Hurons,  dans  la  Nouvelle- France,  le
26  mai  1640.


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  85

some  communions,  for  the  love  of  God;  for,  in  this
Mission,  we  are  liable  to  be  often  deprived  of  them.

I  am  Your  Reverence's
Very  unworthy  servant  in  Jesus  Christ,
Joseph  Marie  CALVONOTTP  (Chaumonot).

In  the  Country  of  the  Hurons,  in  New  France,  the
56th  of  May,  1640.


S6  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18


[210]  Lettre  du  P.Joseph-Marie  Chaumonot,  au

R.  P.  Philippe  Nappi,  Superieur  de  la

Maison  Professe  de  Rome.

(Traduite  de  Vitalien  sur  V original  conservi  a  Rome.)

De  Sainte-Marie  aux  Hurons,  3  aout  1640.

MON  R^V^REND  PiRE,
Pax  Christi.
J'ai  regu  en  meme  temps,  I'annee  derniere,
deux  lettres  de  Votre  R6v6rence,  Tune  de  I'ann^e
1638,  Taiitre  de  Tann^e  1639.  La  premiere  m'appre-
nait  trois  choses:  d'abord  qu'elle  se  souvenait  de  moi
^  Tautel  et  qu'elle  a  c61ebre  la  sainte  Messe  pour  moi
sur  le  tombeau  du  B.  Louis  de  Gonzague,  comme  je
Ten  avais  pri6e.  En  second  lieu,  que  Son  Eminence
le  cardinal  Pallotto  continue  sans  relache  k  propager
la  d6votion  k  la  sainte  maison  de  Lorette  ou  mieux  ^
la  sainte  Famille  qui  Ta  sanctifi^e.  Enfin  que  le  P.
Ange  de  Magistris  est  parti  pour  le  Paraguay,  aussi-
tot  apres  son  ordination  et  sa  premiere  messe,  c616-
br6e  dans  I'eglise  de  Lorette  dite  de  Ripetta

[211]  Pour  reconnaitre  en  quelque  fagon  la  cliarit6
que  vous  avez  de  me  donner  des  nouvelles  de  Rome,
je  vous  tiendrai  au  courant  des  choses  capables
d'int^resser  votre  curiosite,  et  de  plus  je  presserai  le
P.  Bressani  de  traduire  en  italien  la  Relation  enti^re
que  cliaque  ann6e  nous  envoyons  a  notre  Pere  Assis-
tant.

L'ann^e  derniere,  j'accompagnai  I'un  des  Notres


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  37


[210]  Letter  of  Father  Joseph  Marie  Chaumonot
to  the  Reverend  Father  Philippe  Nappi,  Supe-
rior of  the  Professed  House  at  Rome.

(Translated  from the  Italian  original  preserved  at  Rome.)

From  Sainte  Marie  of  the  Hurons,  August  3,  1640.

MY  Reverend  Father,
Pax  Christi.
I  received  at  the  same  time,  last  year,  two
letters  from  Your  Reverence:  one  of  the  year  1638;
the  other,  of  the  year  1639.  '^^^  first  apprised  me  of
three  things:  to  begin  with,  that  you  remembered
me  at  the  altar  and  that  you  celebrated  holy  Mass  for
me  on  the  tomb  of  the  Blessed  Louis  de  Gonzague,^
as  I  had  begged  you  to.  In  the  second  place,  that
His  Eminence  the  cardinal  Pallotto  continues,  with-
out relaxation,  to  propagate  the  devotion  to  the  holy
house  of  Lorette;  or  better,  to  the  holy  Family
which  sanctified  it.^  Finally,  that  Father  Ange  de
Magistris  started  for  Paraguay  directly  after  his  or-
dination and  his  first  mass  —  celebrated  in  the  church
of  Lorette  called  de  Ripetta

[211]  To  acknowledge  in  some  fashion  your  char-
ity in  giving  me  news  of  Rome,  I  will  keep  j'-ou  in-
formed of  the  matters  likely  to  interest  your  curiosi-
ty; and,  moreover,  I  will  urge  Father  Bressani  to
translate  into  Italian  the  whole  Relation  which  we
send  each  year  to  our  Father  Assistant.

Last  year,  I  accompanied  one  of  Ours  (Father  de


38  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.18

(le  P.  de  Br^beuf)  dans  un  pays  ou  I'Evangile  n'avait
pas  encore  6t6  annonc6.  Partant  de  notre  Residence
au  pays  des  Hnrons,  nous  fimes  six  jours  de  route,
tou jours  dans  les  bois,  et  sans  trouver  aucun  endroit
pour  nous  reposer  ou  refugier.  Nous  6tions  obliges
de  porter  k  dos  tout  ce  qui  nous  6tait  n^cessaire  pour
notre  nourriture.  Les  sentiers  de  ces  forets  sont
tres-difficiles,  6tant  fort  peu  battus,  remplis  de  brous-
sailles  et  de  branches,  coupes  de  marais,  de  ruisseaux,
de  rivieres  sans  autres  ponts  que  quelques  arbres,
brisks  par  I'age  ou  par  le  vent.  L'hiver  est  la  meil-
leure  saison  pour  voyager,  parce  que  la  neige  rend
les  sentiers  plus  unis.  Mais  il  faut  qu'elle  soit  dur-
cie,  comme  nous  I'avons  trouv6e  k  notre  retour,  ^
I'exception  de  deux  journ6es:  sans  cela,  on  enfonce
k  chaque  pas.  II  y  a  encore  un  avantage  k  voyager
en  hiver:  c'est  que  les  cours  d'eau  sont  glaces,  et
que  nous  avons  pu,  pendant  soixante  milles,  trainer
nos  bagages.  [212]  II  est  vrai  qu'on  ne  trouve  aucun
abri  contre  les  vents  qui  sont  trfes-violents  et  tr^s-
froids.  Mais,  grace  k  Celui  a  qui  la  mer  et  les  vents  ob^-
issent,  nous  avons  marcli6  courageusement  et  joyeuse-
ment,  malgr6  le  froid,  la  fatigue  et  des  chutes  sans
nombre  sur  la  glace ;  ce  dont  mes  genoux  ont  conser-
ve bon  souvenir.  Mais  qu'est-ce  que  cela  en  compa-
raison  de  ce  que  Notre- Seigneur  a  souffert  pour  moi?
Je  m'estimerais  heureux  de  me  briser  bras  et  jambes
h.  son  service.

Les  petits  enfants  en  danger  de  mort  ont  recuelli
les  premiers  fruits  de  notre  apostolat.  Nous  en
avons  baptise  un  grand  nombre  k  Tinsu  de  leurs  pa-
rents, qui  s'y  seraient  opposes  certainement.  Beau-
coup  de  ces  enfants  sont  dejk  partis  pour  le  ciel.


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  39

Br6beuf)  to  a  country  where  the  Gospel  had  not  yet
been  announced.  Starting  from  our  Residence  in
the  land  of  the  Hurons,  we  made  six  days'  route,
continually  in  the  woods,  and  without  finding  any
place  in  which  to  rest  ourselves  or  to  take  refuge.
We  were  obliged  to  carry  on  our  backs  whatever  was
necessary  to  us  in  the  way  of  our  food.  The  paths
in  these  forests  are  very  difficult,  being  very  little
worn, —  filled  with  brushwood  and  branches;  cut  up
with  swamps,  brooks,  and  rivers,  without  other  bridges
than  a  few  trees,  broken  off  by  age  or  by  the  wind.
The  winter  is  the  best  season  for  traveling,  because
the  snow  renders  the  paths  more  even.  But  it  must
needs  be  hardened,  as  we  found  it  on  our  return,
with  the  exception  of  two  days :  otherwise,  one  sinks
in  at  every  step.  There  is  still  another  advantage  in
traveling  in  winter, — namely,  because  the  water-
courses are  frozen,  and  we  were  able  to  drag  our  bag-
gage for  sixty  miles.  [212]  It  is  true  that  one  finds
no  shelter  from  the  winds,  which  are  very  violent
and  very  cold.  But  thanks  to  Him  whom  the  sea  and
the  winds  obey,  we  proceeded  bravely  and  joyfully,
despite  the  cold,  the  fatigue,  and  countless  falls  on
the  ice,  whereof  my  knees  have  retained  a  goo  d  re-
minder. But  what  is  that  in  comparison  with  what
Our  Lord  has  suffered  for  me  ?  I  should  esteem  my-
self happy  to  break  my  arms  and  legs  in  his  service.
The  little  children  in  danger  of  death  have  reaped
the  first  fruits  of  our  apostolate.  We  have  baptized
a  great  number  of  them  without  the  knowledge  of
their  parents,  who  would  certainly  have  opposed  it.
Many  of  these  children  have  already  departed  for
heaven.  As  for  the  adults,  not  only  have  they  not
been  willing  to  listen  to  the  good  news,  but  they  even


40  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.18

Quant  aux  adultes,  non-seulement  ils  n'ont  pas  vou-
lu  6couter  la  bonne  nouvelle,  mais  ils  nous  empe-
chaient  d'entrer  dans  leurs  bourgades,  nous  mena-
9ant  de  nous  tuer  et  de  nous  manger,  comme  ils  font
k  leurs  plus  cruels  ennemis.  La  cause  de  cette
grande  aversion  venait  des  calomnies  propagees  par
quelques  mauvais  habitants  du  pays  d'oti  nous  ve-
nions.  Par  suite  de  ces  calomnies,  ils  etaient  con-
vaincus  que  nous  etions  des  sorciers,  des  imposteurs
venus  pour  s'emparer  de  leur  pays,  apres  les  avoir
fait  perir  par  nos  sortileges,  lesquels  etaient  enfer-
m6s  dans  nos  ecritoires,  dans  nos  livres,  etc. ;  de
[213]  sorte  que  nous  n'osions  pas,  sans  nous  cacher,
ouvrir  un  livre  ou  ecrire  quelque  chose.  Non-seule-
ment nos  livres  et  nos  papiers  6taient  suspects  de
magie,  mais  encore  nos  moindres  gestes  et  mouve-
ments.  Je  voulus  une  fois  me  mettre  k  genoux  dans
une  cabane,  oti  nous  nous  6tions  retires  pour  prior
avec  plus  de  recueillement.  Aussitot  le  bruit  se
repandit  que  Oronhiaguehre,  c'est-k-dire,  porte-ciel
comme  ils  m'appellent,  avait  passe  une  partie  de  la
nuit  k  faire  ses  sortileges  et  qu'en  consequence  tons
devaient  se  mettre  en  garde  et  se  defier  de  lui.
Mais,  en  depit  du  diable  et  de  ses  suppots,  nous
avons  pu  employer  tout  notre  hiver  ^  parcourir  les
bourgades  des  sauvages,  les  menagant  de  I'enfer,
s'ils  ne  se  convertissaient,  sans  que  personne  ait  os6
toucher  un  seul  de  nos  cheveux.  Chacun  d'eux
cependant  desirait  notre  mort  et  excitait  les  autres  k
nous  tuer,  mais  aucun  n'avait  le  courage  de  le  faire,
quoique  cela  fut  la  chose  la  plus  facile  du  monde :
nous  n'etions  que  deux  hommes  faibles,  sans  armes,
loin  de  tout  secours  humain;  Dieu  seul  6tait  pour


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  41

prevented  us  from  entering  their  villages,  threatening
to  kill  and  eat  us,  as  they  do  with  their  most  cruel
enemies.  The  reason  of  this  great  aversion  arose
from  the  calumnies  disseminated  by  some  evil  inhab-
itants of  the  country  from  which  we  came.  In  con-
sequence of  these  calumnies,  they  were  convinced
that  we  were  sorcerers,  impostors  come  to  take  pos-
session of  their  country,  after  having  made  them  per-
ish by  our  spells,  which  were  shut  up  in  our  ink-
stands, in  our  books,  etc., —  [213]  insomuch  that  we
dared  not,  without  hiding  ourselves,  open  a  book  or
write  anything.  Not  only  were  our  books  and  our
papers  suspected  of  magic,  but  even  our  slightest
gestures  and  motions.  I  once  attempted  to  kneel  down
in  a  cabin,  where  we  had  withdrawn  in  order  more
collectedly  to  pray.  Straightway  the  noise  spread
that  Oronhiaguehre  —  that  is  to  say,  heaven-bearer,
as  they  call  me  —  had  spent  a  part  of  the  night  in
devising  his  spells,  and  that  in  consequence  all  were
bound  to  put  themselves  on  guard  and  distrust  him.
But,  in  spite  of  the  devil  and  of  his  imps,  we  have
been  able  to  spend  our  whole  winter  in  making  the
round  of  the  savages'  villages, —  threatening  them
with  hell  if  they  would  not  be  converted,  —  and
nobody  has  dared  to  touch  a  single  one  of  our  hairs.
Each  one  of  them,  however,  was  desiring  our  death
and  exciting  the  others  to  kill  us ;  but  none  had  the
courage  to  do  so,  although  that  was  the  easiest  thing
in  the  world, —  we  were  only  two  weak  men,  without
weapons,  far  from  all  human  assistance.  God  alone
was  for  us,  and  he  paralyzed  the  ill-will  of  so  many
enemies.  May  Your  Reverence  help  me  to  thank  the
Lord  for  having  preserved  me  from  so  many  trials
and  dangers.


42  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.  Ig

nous,  et  il  a  paralyse  le  mauvais  vouloir  de  tant
d'ennemis.  Que  Votre  Reverence  m'aide  k  remer-
cier  le  Seigneur  de  m'avoir  pr6serv6  de  tant  d'e-
preuves  et  de  dangers.

L'automne  prochain,  j'espere  passer  un  second
liiver  au  milieu  de  ces  pauvres  sauvages:  aussi  [214]
je  compte  obtenir  le  secours  de  vos  priferes

Pour  finir  cette  lettre  j'ajouterai  trois  faits  assez
remarquables  arrives  cette  ann6e,  vu  surtout  qu'il  s'a-
git  de  pauvres  infideles,  sans  morality.  Le  premier
fait  est  celui  d'un  jeune  homme  qui,  voyageant  par
un  grand  froid  avec  sa  soeur  et  la  voyant  pres  de  suc-
comber,  se  depouilla  d'une  grande  peau  qui  le  cou-
vrait  pour  Ten  revetir ;  puis  I'encourageant  ^  hater  le
pas  afin  d'6viter  la  mort  qui  la  menagait,  il  resta  avec
le  mauvais  vetement  de  sa  soeur.  La  jeune  fille  le
laissant,  se  mit  k  courir  jusqu'k  son  village,  et  pen-
dant ce  temps-Ik  son  pauvre  fr^re  mourait  de  froid,
victime  de  son  h^roisme  fraternel.  Soixante  autres
environ,  durant  cet  liiver,  p^rirent  dans  les  neiges.

Le  second  fait  est  celui  d'un  petit  enfant  de  huit  k
neuf  ans  qui,  jouant  sur  la  glace,  tomba  dans  I'eau.
Un  de  ses  freres,  k  peu  pres  du  meme  age,  se  jeta
dans  la  riviere  par  le  trou  ou  son  frere  avait  disparu,
le  saisit,  et  nageant  sous  la  glace,  eut  I'adresse  de
remonter  avec  son  fardeau  par  une  autre  ouverture
assez  eloign^e  de  la  premiere  et  lui  sauva  ainsi  la
vie.  Ce  fait  arriva  dans  un  village  ou  nous  nous
trouvions.

Le  troisieme  est  un  fait  de  guerre.  Nos  sauvages,
6tant  all6  combattre,  furent  surpris  par  I'ennemi
dans  une  embuscade.  Voyant  Timpossibilite  de  se
[215]  d6fendre,  les  anciens  dirent  aux  plus  jeunes:


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  43

Next  autumn  I  hope  to  spend  a  second  winter  in
the  midst  of  these  poor  savages;  accordingly,  [214]
I  count  on  obtaining  the  help  of  your  prayers

To  conclude  this  letter,  I  will  add  three  quite
remarkable  occurrences  which  happened  this  year, —
especially  since  they  concern  poor  infidels  without
morality.  The  first  is  that  of  a  young  man  who,
traveling  during  intense  cold  with  his  sister,  and  see-
ing her  almost  succumb,  stripped  himself  of  a  great
skin  which  covered  him,  in  order  to  clothe  her  with
it;  then,  encouraging  her  to  quicken  her  pace  in
order  to  avoid  the  death  which  was  threatening  her,
he  stayed  behind,  with  his  sister's  thin  garment.
The  young  girl,  leaving  him,  began  to  run  even  to
her  village,  and  during  that  time  her  poor  brother
was  dying  of  cold,  the  victim  of  his  fraternal  hero-
ism. About  sixty  others,  during  this  winter,  per-
ished in  the  snows.

The  second  instance  is  that  of  a  little  child  of  eight
or  nine  years  who,  playing  on  the  ice,  fell  into  the
water.  One  of  his  brothers,  of  almost  the  same  age,
jumped  into  the  river  through  the  hole  where  his
brother  had  disappeared,  seized  him,  and  swimming
beneath  the  ice,  had  the  skill  to  come  up  again  with
his  burden,  through  another  opening  quite  distant
from  the  first,  and  thus  saved  his  life.  This  deed
happened  in  a  village  where  we  chanced  to  be.

The  third  is  an  incident  of  war.  Our  savages,  hav-
ing gone  to  fight,  were  surprised  by  the  enemy  in  an
ambush.  Seeing  the  impossibility  of  [215]  defend-
ing themselves,  the  elders  said  to  the  younger  men :
*'  Since  you  can  render  services  to  our  nation,  take
flight,  while  we  shall  check  the  enemy."  This  is
what  happened:  those  old  savages  were  taken,  led


44  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.18

((Puisque  vous  pouvez  rendre  des  services  k  notre
nation,  prenez  la  fuite,  pendant  que  nous  arreterons
Tennemi.))  C'est  ce  qui  arriva:  ces  vieux  sauvages
furent  pris,  emmenes  captifs,  cruellement  tourmen-
t6s,  brules,  rotis  et  devores,  selon  la  coutume  de  cette
contree,  habitee  par  des  anthropophages,  comme  je
vous  I'ai  dejk  6crit.

N'ayant  rien  autre  chose  ^  raconter  ^  Votre  R6v6-
rence,  je  finis,  en  la  priant,  si  elle  trouve  quelque
chose  dans  ma  lettre  qui  puisse  interesser  notre  T.
R.  P.  General,  de  vouloir  bien  le  lui  communiquer,
mais  de  bouche  seulement,  ma  lettre  ^tant  6crite  trop
mis6rablement  pour  la  mettre  sous  les  yeux  de  Sa
Paternit6.  Que  Votre  Reverence  veuille  bien  I'assu-
rer  que  je  ne  dis  jamais  la  sainte  messe  sans  la  recom-
mander  ^  Notre  Seigneur.

Je  suis,  de  Votre  Reverence,

le  tr^s-humble  serviteur  en  Notre-Seigneur.
Joseph-Marie  CHAUMONOT.

De  la  residence  de  Ste-Marie  aux  Hurons,  le  3
aout  1640.


I


1640]  CHAUMONOT  TO  NAPPI  45

away  captive,  cruelly  tormented,  burned,  roasted,
and  devoured, — according  to  the  custom  of  this  coun-
try, inhabited  by  cannibals,  as  I  have  already  writ-
ten to  you.

Having  nothing  else  to  relate  to  Your  Reverence,
I  close ;  requesting  you,  if  you  find  anything  in  my
letter  which  can  interest  our  Very  Reverend  Father
General,  to  be  so  kind  as  to  make  it  known  to  him :
but  orally  alone, — my  letter  being  written  too
wretchedly  to  put  it  beneath  His  Paternity's  eyes.
Will  Your  Reverence  kindly  assure  him  that  I  never
say  holy  mass  without  commending  him  to  Our  Lord  ?

I  am  Your  Reverence's

very  humble  servant  in  Our  Lord.

Joseph  Marie  CHAUMONOT.

From  the  residence  of  Ste.  Marie  among  the
Hurons,  the  3rd  of  August,  1640.


XLI

Relation  of  1640

Paris:  SEBASTIEN  CRAMOISY,  1641


Source  f'  We  reprint  from  the  original  edition  (H.  76),  in
Lenox  Library.

The  document  consists  of  two  parts  :  Part  L,  by  Le  Jeune,
dated  at  Quebec,  September  10,  1640;  Part  IL,  by  Jerome
Lalemant,  dated  in  the  Huron  country,  May  27,  1640,  with
a  postscript  dated  August  3.  In  the  present  volume,  we  give
chaps,  i.-x.  of  Part  I.;  this  part  will  be  concluded  in  our
Volume  XIX.,  and  Part  II.  commenced  ;  Volume  XX.  will  see
the  conclusion  of  the  entire  document.


RELATION

DECEQVI  S'EST  PASSE'
^ EN LA  .

NOVVELLM  FRANCE

EN  UANNEE  M.  DC  XL.

Enuoy^c  au  R.P.Prouincia!  de  la  Com-

pagnie  dc  LesvS  dc  la  Prduincc

de  France.

Par  le  P.  Bartbelemy  Vimont^de  U

mepne  Compagnie,  Superieur  de  la

Refdmce'de  Kiebec.


A  TARIS,

Chez S  E  B  A  S  T  I  E  M C  R  A  M  O  I S  Y

IiBprimeur  ordinaire  du  Roy ,  rue
S,  lacques  jaux  Cicognes.
~^^^^^"M. DC. XLL
^i4€C  Frmilim  d$$  May.


RELATION

OF  WHAT  TOOK  PLACE

IN

NEW FRANCE

IN  THE  YEAR  M.  DC.  XL.

Sent  to  the  Reverend  Father  Provincial

of  the  Society  of  J  esus  of  the

Province  of  France.

By  Father  Bartbelemy  yimont,  of  the

same  Society,  Superior  of  the

Residence  of  Kibec.


PARIS,

Sebastien Cramoisy, Printer  in
ordinary  to  the  King,  rue  St.  Jac-
ques, at  the  Sign  of  the  Storks.

M. DC. XLI.
By  Royal  License,


52  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.18


Extraidt  du  Priuilege  du  Roy.

PAR  grace  &  Priuilege  du  Roy,  il  eft  permis  k
Sebastien  Cramoisy,  Marchand  Libraire  Iur6,
Imprimeur  ordinaire  du  Roy,  Bourgeois  de
Paris,  d'imprimer  ou  faire  imprimer  vn  liure  intitul6,
Relation  de  ce  qui  s' eft  paff^  en  la  nouuelle  France  en
r ann^e  1640.  enuoy^e  au  Reuerend  Pere  Prouincial  de  la
Compagnie  de  lESVS  en  la  Prouince  de  France,  par  le  Pere
Barthelemy  Vimont  de  la  me/me  Compagnie,  Superieur
de  la  Rejidence  h  K^bec :  &  ce  pendant  le  temps  &  ef pace
de  quinze  annees  conf ecutiues :  Auec  defences  k  tous
Libraires  &  Imprimeurs  d'imprimer  ou  faire  impri-
mer ladite  Relation  fous  pretexte  de  d^guifement  ou
changement  qu'ils  y  pourroient  faire,  k  peine  de  con-
fif cation,  &  de  Tamande  port6e  par  ledit  Priuilege.
Donn6  k  Paris,  ce  20.  Septembre  1640.  Par  le  Roy
en  fon  Confeil, Sign6,

Ceberet.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  5)1


Extract  from  the  Royal  License.

BY  the  grace  and  License  of  the  King,  permis-
sion is  granted  to  Sebastien  Cramoisy,  Book-
seller under  Oath,  Printer  in  ordinary  to  the
King,  Citizen  of  Paris,  to  print  or  to  have  printed  a
book  entitled  Relation  de  ce  qui  s' est  pass^  en  la  nouvelle
France  en  r  ann^e  1640.  envoy  de  au  Reverend  Pere  Pro-
vincial de  la  Compagnie  de  Jesus  en  la  Province  de  France y
par  le  Pere  Barthelemy  Vimont  de  la  mesnte  Compagniey
Superieur  de  la  Residence  h  Kdbec;  and  this  during  the
time  and  space  of  fifteen  consecutive  years.  Pro-
hibiting all  Booksellers  and  Printers  from  printing
or  having  printed  the  said  Relation  under  pretext  of
disguise  or  change  that  may  be  made  therein,  on
penalty  of  confiscation,  and  of  the  fine  provided  by
the  said  License.  Given  at  Paris,  this  20th  of  Sep-
tember, 1640. By  the  King  in  Council. Signed,

Ceberet.


64  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JJ&SUJTES [Vol.  18


Permiffion  du  P.  Prouincial.

NOVS  Iacqves  Dinet  Prouincial  de  la  Compagnie
de  Iesvs  en  la  Pronince de  France: Auons
accords pour  Taduenir  au Sieur Sebastien
Cramoisy  Marchand  Libraire,  Imprimeur  ordinaire
du  Roy,  rimpreffion des  Relations  de  la  Nouuelle
France. Fait  k  Paris,  le  12.  Decembre  1640.

Iacqves  Dinet.


1640]  RELATION  OF  1640  66


Permission  of  the  Father  Provincial.

WE,  Jacques  Dinet,  Provincial  of  the  Society
of  Jesus  in  the  Province  of  France,  have
for  the  future  granted  to  Sieur  Sebastien
Cramoisy, Bookseller, Printer  in ordinary to the
King,  the  printing  of  the  Relations  of  New  France.
Done  at  Paris,  this  12th  of  December,  1640.

Jacques  Dinet.


56  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  18


Table  des  Chapitres  contenus  en  cette  Relation.

RELA  TION  de  ce  qui  s'eji  pafi^  en  la  nouuelle
France  en  r ann^e  1640. .  . /^^- !•

Chapitre  I,  Du  voyage  &  de  V  arriu^e de la
flotte  en  la  nouuelle  France.  .  • 3*

Chap.  II.  De  r ejlat  general  de  la  Colonie  Fran^oi/ej

&  de  la  conuerjion  des  Sauuages.  .  .16

Chap.  III. Les  Sauuages  fe  r  ajfemblent  a  S.  lofeph

apres  la  maladicy  ejlifent  quelques Capitaines  ^

&  font  par oijlre  leur  Zele  pour  la  Fay.  . 22

Chap.  IV.  Des Sauuages bapti/ez, & des bonnes

actions  de  cette  nouuelle  Eglife.  .  . 44

Chap. V. Continuation  du  me/me  difcours.  . 58

Chap. VI. Continuation  du  me/me  fujet. .  . 72

Chap. VII. Continuation  des  actions  de  nos  nouueaux

Chretiens. .  .  .  .  -9^

Chap. VIII. De la bonne difpojition de quelques

Sauuages  non  encore  baptifez.  .  .105

Chap.  IX.  De la  prouidence  de  Dieu  au  choix  de

quelques-vnSy  &  au  rebut  de  quelques  autres. . 117
Chap.  X.  De  V esperance  qu  on  a  de  la  conuerjion  de

plujieurs  Sauuages. .  .  .  .128

Chap.  XL De  V hospital. .  .  .  .146

Chap.  XII.  Du  fommaire  \sc.  feminaire]  des  Meres

Vrfulines. .  .  .  .  .168

Chap.  XIII. Diuerfes chofes qui nont pH e^re

rapporties  aux  Chapitres  precedens. .  .187


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  57


Table  of  the  Chapters  contained  in  this  Relation.

RELA  TION  of  what  occurred  in  new  France
in  the  year  1640. .  .  . page I.

Chapter  I. Of  the  voyage  of  the  fleets  and  its
arrival  in  new  France.  .  .  • 3*

Chap.  II. Of  the  general  condition  of  the  French

Colony,  and  the  conversion  of  the  Savages. . 16
Chap.  III. The Savages  reassemble at  St.  foseph
after  the  epidemic,  elect  several  Captains, and
show  their  Zeal  for  the  Faith.  .  .22

Chap.  IV. Of  the  Savages  baptized,  and  the  good

deeds  in  this  new  Church.  .  .  -44

Chap. V. Continuation  of  the  sam.e  subject.  . 58

Chap. VI. Continuation  of  the  same  subject.  . 72

Chap. VII. Continuation  of  the  actions  of  our  new

Christians. .  .  .  .  '91

Chap. VIII. Of  the  good  disposition  of  some  Savages

not  yet  baptized.  .  .  .  .105

Chap.  IX. Of  the  providence  of  God  in  the  choice  of

some,  and  the  rejection  of  others.  .  • 1 1 7

Chap.  X. Of  the  hope  we  have  for  the  conversion  of

m,any  Savages.  .  .  .  .128

Chap.  XL Of  the  hospital.  .  .  .146

Chap.  XII. Of  the  seminary  of  the  Ursuline  Mothers. 168
Chap.  XI  11. Various  things  which  could  not  be  re-
ported in  the  preceding  Chapters.  .  .187


68  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /J&SUITES [Vol.  18


Table  des  Chapitres  contenus  en  la  Relation  de

ce  qui  s'eft  paffe  dans  le  pays  des

Huron  en  Tannee  1640.

CHAPITRE  I.  De  V ejlat  du  pays.  pag, 4.

Chapitre  II.  Des  perfecutions  excit^es  contre
nous. .  .  .  .  .11.

Chap.  III.  De  V ejlat  general  du Chri^ianifme  en

ces  contr^es. .  .  .  .  •33-

Chap.  IV. De  la  Rejidence  fixe  de  fain6te  Marie. . 42.
Chap. V. De  la  mifiion  de  fain6le  Marie  aux  Ata-

ronchronons. .  .  .  .  .68.

Chap. VI.  De  la  refidence  &  mifiion  de  S.  Jofeph

aux  Attingneenongnahac.  .  .  • 79-

Chap. VII,  De  la  mifiion  de  la  Conception  aux  Atti-

gnaouentan. .  .  .  .  '99

Chap. VI I L  Des  Chrejliens  de  cette  me/me  mifiion

de  la  Conception.  .  .  .  .118.

Chap.  IX.  De  la  mijjion  de  fain6l  lean  Baptijle  aux

Arendaronons.  .  .  .  • HS-

Chap.  X.  De  la  mifiion  furnomm^e  des  Apojlres  aux

Khionontateronons. .... 164.
Lettre  efcritte  au  P. Vimont  depuis  la  Relation. . 192


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  59


Table  of  the  Chapters  contained  in  the  Relation

of  what  took  place  in  the  country  of

the  Hurons,  in  the  year  1640.

CHAPTER  I. Of  the  condition of  the  coun-
try. .... page 4

Chapter  11.  Of  the  persecutions  excited  against

us.  .  .  .  .  .II

Chap.  III. Of  the  general  condition  of  Christianity

in  these  countries.  .  .  .  -33

Chap.  IV. Of the  permanent  Residence  of  sainte

Marie.  .  .  .  .  .42

Chap. V. Of  the  mission  of  sainte  Marie  to  the  Ata-

ronchronons. .  .  . . .68

Chap.  VI. Of  the  residence  and  mission  of  St.  foseph

to  the  Attingneenongnahac . .  .  -79

Chap. VII. Of  the  mission  of  la Conception  to  the

Attignaouentan.  .  .  .  -99

Chap. VIII. Of  the  Christians  of  this  same  mission

of  la  Conception.  .  .  .  .118.

Chap.  IX. Of  the  mission  of  saint  Jean  Baptiste  to

the  Arendaronons. .... 145.
Chap.  X. Of  the  mission  surnamed  ' '  of  the  Apos-
tles,'' to  the  Khionontateronons.  .  . 164.
Letter  written  to  Father  Vimont  after  the  Relation

was  finished. .  .  .  .  .192


eO  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ^SUITES [Vol.18


[i]  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'eft  paffe  en  la  Nouuelle
France,  en  TAnnee  1640.

MON  R.  Pere,
le  croyois  qu'eftant  def charge  du  fardeau
de  la  Superiority,  ie  ferois  en  fuite  deliur6  des
foins  de  la  Relation  que  V.  R.  exige  de  nous,  &
qu'vne  grande  partie  de  la  France  attend  auec  quel-
que  paffion:  mais  noflre  R.  P.  Superieur  ma  fait
veoir  que  cede  confequence  n'eftoit  point  neceffaire,
fi  bien  que  nonobflant  qu'il  la  put  drelTer  auec  auan-
tage  ayant  defia  vne  grande  cognoiffance  du  pays  &
des  Sauuages,  il  s'eft  encor  repof6  fur  moy  pour  [2]
cefte  ann6e  dans  remprefTement  de  fes  affaires  du
tribut  dont  les  affedtions  de  V.  R.  &  d'vne  infinite
de  perfonnes  de  merite  &  de  condition  nous  rendent
redeuables.  Ie  doute  fort  fi  nous  aurons  vn  aflez
grand  fond  pour  faire  cefte  rente  annuelle,  fi  ce  n'efl
qu'on  ayme  les  redites  car  les  fubiets  fe  trouuans  fort
femblables,  les  difcours  ne  fgauroient  pas  auoir  vne
grande  diuerfite  quand  les  fauuages  fe  feront  tous
reduits  comme  il  arriuera  quelque  iour  fi  on  les
fecoure  fortement  ie  ne  fgay  plus  ce  qu'on  pourroit
remarquer  fmon  leurs  bonnes  adtios  qui  pour  auoir
beaucoup  de  relTemblances  pourroient  caufer  du
degouft.  Pleut  k  Dieu  que  noUs  fulTions  dans  cefte
peine,  &  que  tous  ces  pauures  Barbares  fuflent  au
point  que  nous  les  fouhaittons,  k  peine  de  ne  pro-


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  61


[i]  Relation  of  what  occurred  in  New  France,
in  the  Year  1640.

MY  Reverend  Father,
I  thought  that,  when  I  was  relieved  from
the  burdens  of  a  Superior,  I  would  conse-
quently be  freed  from  the  responsibility  of  the  Rela-
tion which  Your  Reverence  exacts  from  us,  and
which  a  large  part  of  France  awaits  with  some  eager-
ness. But  our  Reverend  Father  Superior  has  shown
me  that  this  is  not  a  necessary  consequence ;  and  so,
although  he  could  have  done  it  advantageously,  as
he  has  already  an  extensive  knowledge  of  the  coun-
try and  of  the  Savages,  there  again  devolves  upon
me  [2]  this  year,  in  the  pressure  of  his  business,  the
tribute  which  Your  Reverence's  affection  and  that  of
an  infinite  number  of  persons  of  merit  and  rank  make
it  incumbent  upon  us  to  render.  I  doubt  very  much
whether  we  shall  have  enough  material  to  make  up
this  annual  rent,  unless  our  readers  like  repetitions.
For  as  the  subjects  are  very  similar,  the  narratives
cannot  have  a  great  variety  when  the  savages  shall
all  be  converted, — as  will  happen  some  day,  if  they
are  energetically  aided.  I  do  not  know  what  one  can
record  then,  unless  it  be  their  good  actions,  which,
from  their  great  similarity,  may  cause  some  feeling
of  surfeit.  Would  to  God  that  we  might  have  this
difficulty,  and  that  all  these  poor  Barbarians  were  at
the  point  where  we  wish  them  to  be,  reluctant  to  make
known  their  actions  except  to  the  sight  of  Heaven,


62  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES [Vol.18

duire  leurs  adtions  qu'k  la  veue  du  Ciel,  &  de  n'en
parler  qu*^  celuy  auquel  on  ne  les  pent  cacher,  mais
entrons  en  difcours.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  68

and  to  speak  of  them  except  to  him  from  whom  they
cannot  be  concealed.  But  let  us  begin  our  nar-
rative.


64  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  18


[3]  CHAPITRE  PREMIER.

DU VOYAGE & DE L'ARRIUEE DE LA FLOTTE EN LA
NOUUELLE FRANCE.

LE  Pere  Ren6  Menart  eflant  arriu6  ^  Kebec  nous
a  racont6  quelques  particularitez  du  Voyage
de  la  Flotte  de  cefte  ann^e,  lefquelles  m'ont
fembl6  tres-dignes  de  compofer  ce  premier  chapitre.
Nos  vaiffeaux,  difoit-il,  fe  mirent  en  Rade  le  vingt-
fixiefme  de  Mars.  Madame  la  Dncheffe  d'Aiguillon
ayant  augment^  la  fondation  de  fon  Hofpital  en  la
Nouuelle  France,  &  delirant  en  fuite  que  deux  Reli-
gieufes  de  la  maifon  de  la  Mifericorde  eftablie  k
Dieppe  vinlTent  donner  du  fecours  ^  leurs  bonnes
fceurs,  Monfeigneur  TArclieuefque  de  Roiien  leur
accorda  leur  cong6  auee  autant  d' amour  &  d'affedtion
qu'il  delire  raccroiffement  de  la  gloire  de  noftre  Sei-
gneur en  la  conuerfion  des  pauures  Sauuages :  [4]  la
Mere  de  faindle  Marie  &  la  fceur  de  faindt  Nicolas
toutes  deux  profeffes  de  ce  Monaftere  furent  choifies
auec  vne  tres-fenfible  confolation  de  leur  bon-heur,
&  auec  les  regrets  de  quantity  d'autres  qui  foufpi-
roient  apres  cefte  croix  qu'ils  enuifageoient  comme
vn  Paradis.  Madame  de  la  Pelletrie  fondatrice  d'vn
Seminaire  de  petites  filles  fauuages  &  des  Religieufes
Vrfulines  qu'elle  k  fait  pafTer  en  ces  contr^es,  dell-
rant  qu'on  leur  amenaft  vne  Prof  elf  e  du  Conuent  de
Paris,  Monfeigneur  TArcheuefque  s'intereffant  dans
la  caufe  de  Dieu,  &  voulant  auoir  part  ^  I'inftrudtion


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  66


[3]  CHAPTER  FIRST.

OF THE VOYAGE OF THE FLEET, AND ITS ARRIVAL
IN NEW FRANCE.

FATHER  Ren6  Menart,^  having  arrived  at  Kebec,
related  to  us  some  details  of  the  Voyage  of
the  Fleet  this  year,  which  seem  to  me  very
worthy  to  compose  this  first  chapter.  **  Our  ships,"
said  he,  "  set  out  from  their  Anchorage  on  the  twen-
ty-sixth of  March.  Madame  the  Duchess  d'Aiguil-
lon  having  increased  the  endowment  of  her  Hospital
in  New  France,  and  desiring,  consequently,  that  two
Nuns  of  the  house  of  Mercy  established  at  Dieppe
should  come  and  give  some  help  to  their  good  sis-
ters, Monseigneur  the  Archbishop  of  Rouen  granted
them  their  dismissal,  with  a  love  and  affection  pro-
portionate to  his  desire  for  the  increase  of  the  glory
of  our  Lord  in  the  conversion  of  the  poor  Savages.
[4]  Mother  de  sainte  Marie  and  sister  de  saint  Nicho-
las, both  professed  nuns  of  this  Monastery,  were
chosen,  with  very  keen  appreciation  of  their  good
fortune,  and  with  regrets  for  the  many  others  who
were  sighing  for  this  cross,  which  they  regarded  as
a  Paradise.  As  Madame  de  la  Pelletrie,  foundress
of  a  Seminary  for  little  savage  girls  and  for  the  Ur-
suline  Nuns  whom  she  has  had  cross  over  into  these
countries,  desired  that  there  should  be  brought  to
them  a  Professed  Nun  of  the  Convent  of  Paris, ^  and
as  Monseigneur  the  Archbishop,  who  interests  him-
self in  the  cause  of  God,  and  wishes  to  participate  in


66  LBS  RELATIONS  DBS  jASUITES [Vol.18

&  au  falut  des  ames  que  ces  bonnes  filles  cultiueront,
ne  iugeant  pas  h.  propos  qu'vne  feule  fortit  de  fon
Conuent  en  enuoya  deux,  fgauoir  efl  la  Mere  Anne
de  fainc5te  Claire,  &  la  Mere  Marguerite  de  faindte
Athanafe  qui  enleuerent  auec  elles  tous  les  coeurs  de
cefte  grande  Maifon.  Voyla  done  quatre  Religieufes
embarquees  dans  le  vaifleau  nomme  I'Efperance,
conduit  par  Monfieur  de  Courpon  fort  honefle  Gentil-
homme,  lequel  k  oblig6  ces  [5]  bonnes  ames  au  der-
nier point:  ie  ne  fgay  fi  les  demons  preuoyoient
quelque  grand  bien  de  ce  palTage,  mais  il  femble
qu'il  nous  ayent  voulu  abyfmer  d6s  la  rade,  ils
foufleuerent  tout  1' Ocean,  defchainerent  les  vents,
exciterent  des  tempefles  fi  horribles  &  fi  continues
qu' elles  nous  penferent  perdre  k  la  veue  de  Dieppe:
nous  fufmes  dans  ces  dangers  racontoit  le  Pere,
depuis  le  vingt-fixiefme  de  Mars  iufques  au  vingt-
huidliefme  d'Auril  battus  de  pluye  &  de  neige  aufll
pres  de  la  mort  que  nous  I'eflions  des  cofles  de  France,
vn  vaiffeau  de  faindt  Valery  qui  eftoit  en  rade  auec
nous  fe  detachant  de  fes  ancres  s'alla  brifer  k  nos  yeux,
tout  ce  qui  effcoit  dedans  fe  perdit,  les  hommes  furent
engloutis  dans  les  ondes  &  de  vingt  ou  enuiron  qu'ils
efloient  dans  ce  Nauire  il  ne  s'en  fauua  que  trois,  la
mort  qui  moilfonnoit  ces  corps  f embloit  nous  attendre  k
tous  moments  pour  nous  deuorer,  i'entendois  plufieurs
perfonnes  detefher  I'heure  &  le  moment  que  la  penf6e
leur  eftoit  venue  en  I'efprit  [6]  de  monter  fur  mer,  &
de  confier  leur  vie  k  la  mercy  d*vn  cable,  la  vertu
anime  puilTamment  vn  coeur,  ces  bonnes  filles  qui  en
autre  temps  auroient  tremble  dans  vn  bafteau  defl^us
la  Seine,  fe  mocquoient  de  la  mort,  &  de  fes  appro-
cbes,  en  effet  il  importe  peu  qu'on  meure  fur  la  terre


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  67

the  instruction  and  salvation  of  the  souls  that  these
good  sisters  will  cultivate,  did  not  judge  it  proper  for
one  alone  to  leave  her  Convent,  he  sent  two,  namely,
Mother  Anne  de  sainte  Claire  and  Mother  Marguerite
de  sainte  Athanase,  and  all  the  hearts  of  this  great
House  went  with  them.  Accordingly,  there  were
four  Nuns  who  embarked  in  the  vessel  called  the
"  Esperance,"  under  the  command  of  Monsieur  de
Courpon,  a  very  honest  Gentleman,  who  favored
these  [5]  good  souls  to  the  utmost.  I  do  not  know
whether  the  demons  foresaw  some  great  blessing
from  this  passage,  but  it  seems  as  if  they  desired  to
engulf  us  from  the  time  we  left  the  roadstead.  They
raised  up  the  whole  Ocean,  unchained  the  winds,
and  excited  such  horrible  and  continuous  tempests
that  they  almost  made  us  perish  in  sight  of  Dieppe.
We  were  in  the  midst  of  these  dangers, ' '  related  the
Father,  "  from  the  twenty-sixth  of  March  until  the
twenty-eighth  of  April,  beaten  upon  by  rain  and
snow,  as  near  to  death  as  we  were  to  the  coasts  of
France.  A  ship  of  saint  Valery,  which  was  in  the
roadstead  with  us,  detaching  itself  from  its  anchors,
went  to  pieces  before  our  eyes,  everything  that  was
within  being  carried  away.  The  men  were  engulfed
in  the  waves ;  and,  of  twenty  or  thereabout  who  were
in  this  Ship,  only  three  were  saved.  The  death  that
reaped  these  bodies,  seemed  at  every  moment  wait-
ing to  devour  us.  I  heard  many  persons  cursing  the
hour  and  the  moment  when  the  thought  entered
their  minds  [6]  to  go  upon  the  sea,  and  to  entrust  their
lives  to  the  mercy  of  a  cable.  Virtue  animates  a
heart  powerfully.  These  good  sisters,  who,  at  other
times,  would  have  trembled  in  a  boat  upon  the  Seine,
mocked  at  death  and  its  approaches. In  fact,  it  mat-


68  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

ou  dans  les  eaux,  pourueu  qu'on  meure  auec  Dieu.
Cefte  tempefle  eftant  paff^e  il  s'en  efleua  vne  autre
auffi  furieufe  que  la  premiere  comme  on  la  vit  naifbre
dans  I'air,  nos  mariniers  ietterent  le  fecond  an  ere  qui
nous  fauua  la  vie,  car  le  cable  du  premier  qui  nous
auoit  tenu  iufques  alors  fe  rompit  en  vn  moment,  &
noftrc  vaiffeau  fe  fuft  perdu  fans  refource,  li  le
fecond  ancre  ne  I'eufl  arrefte.  Si  nous  euitions  vn
peril  nous  tobions  dans  T autre,  le  cable  manquant  k
noflre  Vice- Admiral  vn  coup  de  mer  le  ietta  fur  nous
auec  vne  telle  fureur  que  les  plus  coftans  penfoiet
eflre  perdus,  iamais  ie  n'ay  enuifag^  la  mort  de  fl
pr6s,  i'eu  recours  au  grand  faindt  lofeph,  patron  des
contr6es  ou  nous  voulions  aller,  li  ce  vaiffeau  fe  fuft
auanc6  de  vingt  pas  nous  nous  fulTions  brif6s,  &  I'O-
cean  [7]  nous  auroit  enfeuelis  dedans  fes  ondes.  Au
point  que  ie  prefentois  mes  voeux  h.  Dieu  par  I'entre-
mife  de  ce  grand  Saindt,  on  nous  vint  dire  que  le
vent  auoit  efcart6  ce  vaiffeau,  Dieu  conferua  les  trois
de  noflre  Flotte  qui  efloient  en  rade  fans  autre  perte
que  d'vn  cable  &  d'vn  bafteau  que  la  tempefle  nous
enleua,  quelques  vns  auoient  fait  courre  le  bruit  qu'vne
des  Religieufes  efloit  morte,  &  que  Tautre  efloit  k
rextremit6.  Ie  defcendy  en  terre,  difoit  le  Pere,
pour  affeurer  du  contraire ;  il  eft  vray  qu'elles  eurent
de  I'exercice  vn  grand  mois  durant  pendant  ces  tem-
pefles,  que  Dieu  efprouua  leur  conflance,  mais  pas
vne  ne  recula  en  arriere.  Ah !  qu'il  fait  bon  fe  ietter
entre  les  bras  de  fa  douce  prouidence,  &  receuoir
auec  amour  les  coups  que  fa  main  nous  donne,  les
Anges  conferuoient  noflre  Flotte  par  les  mefmes
tempefles  que  les  demons  excitoient  pour  la  perdre,
ie  ne  f9ay  fl  depuis  cent  ans  on  a  veu  des  vaiffeaux  fl


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  69

ters  little  whether  one  die  upon  the  land  or  upon  the
sea,  provided  one  die  with  God.  This  tempest  hav-
ing passed  over,  another  arose  as  furious  as  the  first.
As  they  saw  it  arising  in  the  air,  our  sailors  cast  the
second  anchor,  which  saved  our  lives ;  for  the  cable
of  the  first,  which,  until  then,  had  secured  us,  broke
in  a  moment,  and  our  ship  would  have  been  hope-
lessly lost  if  the  second  anchor  had  not  held  us  fast.
If  we  avoided  one  danger,  we  fell  into  another.  Our
Vice  Admiral  missing  the  cable,  a  wave  dashed  it
upon  us  with  such  fury  that  the  most  steadfast
thought  they  were  lost.  Never  have  I  confronted
death  so  near.  I  had  recourse  to  the  great  saint
Joseph,  patron  of  the  countries  where  we  wished  to
go.  If  this  ship  had  advanced  twenty  paces,  we
would  have  been  dashed  to  pieces,  and  the  Ocean  [7]
would  have  swallowed  us  in  its  waves.  At  the
moment  when  I  was  offering  my  vows  to  God  through
the  medium  of  this  great  Saint,  they  came  to  tell  me
that  the  wind  had  passed  by  this  vessel.  God  pre-
served the  three  of  our  Fleet  which  were  in  the  road-
stead, without  other  loss  than  that  of  a  cable,  and  of
a  boat  that  the  tempest  carried  away  from  us.  Some
had  circulated  the  report  that  one  of  the  Nuns  was
dead,  and  that  another  was  dying.  I  landed,"  said
the  Father,  '  *  to  assure  them  of  the  contrary.  It  is
true  they  were  in  some  anxiety  during  the  long
month  of  these  tempests  when  God  was  proving
their  constancy,  but  not  one  of  them  drew  back.
Ah !  how  good  it  is  to  cast  oneself  into  the  arms  of
his  sweet  providence,  and  to  receive  with  love  the
strokes  that  his  hands  give  us !  The  Angels  pre-
served our  Fleet  through  the  same  tempests  that  the
demons  excited  to  destroy  it. I  do  not  know  that


VO  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES  [Vol.18

long  temps  en  rade  ny  batus  de  vents  fi  fortement
contraires,  cefte  fnrie  nous  enchaifnat  pr^s  du  port
nous  deffendoit  [8]  contre  des  fregates  ennemyes
€quipees  en  guerre  qui  nous  attendoient  au  paffage,
li  bien  que  fi  nous  euffions  leu6  I'ancre  vn  iour  deuant
noftre  defpart,  nous  fuflions  infailliblement  tombez
entre  les  mains  de  I'ennemy.  Madame  la  Ducheffe
d'Aiguillon  ayant  eu  aduis  de  cet  embufcade  fit  en
forte  que  Monfeigneur  le  Cardinal  de  Richelieu  com-
manda  aux  vaiileaux  du  Havre  de  nous  donner
efcorte,  comme  nous  nous  mettions  en  deuoir  de  les
aller  ioindre,  nous  rencontrafmes  cinq  fregates  Dun-
querquoifes,  aulTi  toft  on  met  la  main  aux  armes,  on
iette  les  canons  hors  des  fabors,  chacun  fe  difpofe  au
combat,  Monfieur  de  Courpon  noftre  Admiral  s'a-
uance,  mais  ces  fregates  eflant  embaraffees  de  deux
vaiffeaux  Hollandois  qui  nous  auoient  quittez  la  nuidt
precedente,  &  qui  venoient  d'eflre  pris  vn  peu  auant
que  nous  paruflions  s'efcarterent  de  nous  voyans  k
noftre  contenance  que  nous  eftions  pour  leur  difpu-
ter  fortement  la  vidtoire,  nous  arriuafmes  au  Havre
incontinent  apres,  oti  nous  trouuafmes  cinquante  Na-
uires  k  Tancre  [9]  qui  nous  attendoient,  le  vent  nous
fauorifant  Monfieur  de  Beaulieu  qui  commandoit  la
flotte  Roiale,  nous  fit  entourer  de  quarante  vaifl^eaux.
le  ne  penfois  pas  eftre  en  mer,  difoit  le  Pere,  me
voyat  enuironn6  de  tant  de  bois,  comme  nous  vogui-
ons  dans  cette  alTeurance,  les  vaiileaux  du  Roy  def-
couurirent  huidl  fregates  ennemies  aufquelles  ils  don-
nerent  la  chalTe ;  mais  elles  euaderent  k  la  faueur  du
vent,  r efcorte  Royale  nous  voyans  hors  de  la  manche
&  hors  du  danger  nous  quitta.  Voila  comme  les
tempeftes  nous  voulant  perdre  au  port  nous  prote-


1640]  RELATION  OF  1640  71

for  a  hundred  years  vessels  have  been  seen  so  long
anchored,  or  assailed  by  winds  so  very  contrary.
This  fury,  chaining  us  near  the  port,  defended  us  [8]
against  hostile  frigates  equipped  for  war,  which  were
awaiting  us  at  the  passage, — so  that,  if  we  had
weighed  anchor  one  day  before  our  departure,  we
would  infallibly  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the
enemy.  Madame  the  Duchess  d'Aiguillon,  having
been  advised  of  this  ambuscade,  so  arranged  that
Monseigneur  the  Cardinal  de  Richelieu  ordered  the
ships  of  Havre  to  convoy  us.  As  we  were  about
to  go  and  join  them,  we  encountered  fiYO,  Dunkirk
frigates.  Immediately  the  weapons  are  grasped,  the
cannons  are  thrust  out  of  the  portholes, —  every  one
is  ready  for  the  combat.  Monsieur  de  Courpon,  our
Admiral,  advances.  But  these  frigates  —  being  em-
barrassed by  two  Dutch  ships  that  had  left  us  the
previous  night,  and  which  had  just  been  captured  a
little  while  before  we  appeared  —  turned  away  from
us,  seeing  in  our  faces  that  we  were  ready  stubbornly
to  dispute  the  victory  with  them.  We  reached  Havre
directly  afterwards,  where  we  found  fifty  Ships  at
anchor  [9]  which  were  awaiting  us.  The  wind  fa-
voring us,  Monsieur  de  Beaulieu,  who  commanded
the  Royal  fleet,  had  us  surrounded  by  forty  ships.  I
did  not  think  that  I  was  upon  the  sea, ' '  said  the  Fa-
ther, '  *  seeing  myself  encompassed  by  so  much  wood.
As  we  floated  along  in  this  security,  the  ships  of  the
King  discovered  eight  hostile  frigates,  to  which  they
gave  chase.  But  they  escaped,  owing  to  a  favorable
wind.  The  Royal  escort,  seeing  us  out  of  the  chan-
nel and  out  of  danger,  left  us.  Thus  the  tempests,
ready  to  destroy  us  in  the  port,  protected  us  against
our  enemies. As  soon  as  we  were  upon  the  high


72  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

geoient  centre  les  ennemis,  li-toft  que  nous  fufmes
en  haute  mer  les  vents  nous  fauoriferent  pour  la
plufpart  du  temps,  nous  eufmes  quelques  petites  bou-
rafques;  mais  de  peu  de  dur6e.  le  n' ay  point  veu
plus  de  deuotion  fur  la  terre  que  fur  la  mer,  les  prin-
cipaux  de  noftre  fiotte,  les  palTagers  &  les  matelots
afllftoient  au  diuin  feruice  que  nous  cliantions  fort
fouuent,  ils  frequentoient  les  Sacremens,  fe  trou-
uoient  aux  prieres  &  aux  ledtures  publiques  qu'on
faifoit  en  fon  temps,  mais  la  deuotion  fut  tres-fen-
llble  &  tres-remarquable  [lo]  le  iour  du  faindt  Sacre-
met,  on  prepara  vn  autel  magnifique  dans  la  cbambre
de  noftre  Admiral,  tout  T  equipage  drelTa  vn  repofoir
fur  I'auant  du  vailTeau,  noftre  Seigneur  voulant  eftre
ador6  fur  cet  element  fi  mobile,  nous  donna  vn  calme
li  doux  que  nous  penfions  voguer  fur  vn  eftang,  nous
fifmes  vne  proceffion  vrayement  folemnelle,  puis  que
tout  le  monde  y  alTifta  &  que  la  piete  &  la  deuotion
la  faifoient  marcher  en  bel  ordre  toute  k  Ten  tour  du
vailleau,  noftre  frere  Dominique  Scot  reueftu  d'vn
furplis  portoit  la  croix,  aux  deux  coft6s  de  laquelle
marchoient  deux  enfans  portans  vn  flambeau  ardent
en  la  main,  fuiuoient  les  Religieufes  auec  leurs
cierges  blancs  &  vne  modeftie  Angelique,  apres  le
Preftre  qui  portoit  le  faindt  Sacrement  marchoit
I'Admiral  de  la  flotte,  8c  en  fuitte  tout  I'equipage,  les
canons  firent  retentir  I'air  &  les  ondes  de  leur  ton-
nerre,  &  les  Anges  prenoient  plaifir  d' entendre  les
loiianges  que  nos  coeurs  &  nos  bouches  donnoiet  k
leur  Prince  &  k  noftre  fouuerain  Roy.  II  n'y  eut
que  fept  perfonnes  qui  n'approchafl!ent  [ii]  de  la
faindle  table,  &  encor  s'eftoient  ils  repus  vn  peu
auparauant  de  cette  viande  facree ;  enfin  apres  auoir


1640]  RELATION  OF  1640  73

sea,  the  wind  favored  us  during  most  of  the  time ;
we  had  some  slight  squalls,  but  they  were  of  short
duration.  I  have  not  seen  more  devotion  upon  the
land  than  there  was  upon  the  sea ;  the  chief  person-
ages of  our  fleet,  the  passengers,  and  the  sailors
attended  divine  service,  which  we  celebrated  very
often.  They  frequented  the  Sacraments,  and  were
present  at  prayers  and  the  public  readings  that  were
given  at  suitable  times.  But  the  devotion  was  most
profound  and  most  conspicuous  [10]  on  the  day  of
the  blessed  Sacrament.  A  magnificent  altar  was  pre-
pared in  the  chamber  of  our  Admiral;  the  whole
crew  erected  an  altar  at  the  prow  of  the  ship ;  our
Lord,  desiring  to  be  adored  upon  this  so  unstable
element,  gave  us  a  calm  so  peaceful  that  we  could
imagine  ourselves  floating  upon  a  pond.  We  formed
a  procession  truly  solemn,  since  every  one  took  part
in  it,  and  their  piety  and  devotion  caused  them  to
march  in  fine  order  all  around  the  ship.  Our  broth-
er Dominique  Scot,  wearing  a  surplice,  bore  the
cross,  on  either  side  of  which  marched  two  children,
each  bearing  a  lighted  torch  in  his  hands ;  the  Nuns
followed  with  their  white  wax  tapers,  in  Angelic
modesty;  after  the  Priest,  who  carried  the  blessed
Sacrament,  walked  the  Admiral  of  the  fleet,  and
then  the  whole  crew.  The  cannons  made  the  air
and  the  waves  resound  with  their  thunder,  and  the
Angels  took  pleasure  in  hearing  the  praises  that  our
hearts  and  our  lips  gave  to  their  Prince  and  to  our
sovereign  King.  There  were  only  seven  persons
who  did  not  approach  [11]  the  holy  table,  and  yet
they  had  feasted  upon  this  sacred  food  a  little  while
before."  Finally,  after  having  enjoyed  very  fair
weather  after  this  act  so  imbued  with  piety,  the  Ad-


74  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.18

iouy  d'affez  beau-temps  depuis  cette  adlion,  toute
plaine  de  piete,  TAdmiral  arriua  k  Tadouffac  le  der-
nier de  luin,  oh.  le  faindt  lacques  effcoit  entre  deux
iours  auparauant,  le  Pere  Menard  s'embarquant  dans
vne  chalouppe  auec  noftre  frere  Dominique  Scot,
lailTa  le  Pere  lofeph  Duperron  &  nofhre  frere  laques
Ratel  auec  les  Religieufes,  pour  nous  venir  donner
promptement  nouuelles  de  I'arriuee  de  la  fiotte,  href  le
Dimanche  au  matin  le  fainct  lacques  commande  par
le  Capitaine  Ancelot,  vint  moiiiller  I'ancre  deuant
Kebec,  Monfieur  noflre  Gouuerneur  defcendit  fur  le
port  auec  noftre  R.  P.  Superieur,  pour  receuoir  nos
Peres  &  pour  conduire  ces  fiUes  vrayement  genereufes
en  leurs  maifons,  au  fortir  du  vaiffeau  elles  fe  iettent
h.  genoux,  baife  la  terre  tant  defir^e,  chantent  vn
Laudate  Dominum  omnes  Gentes,  &  Madame  de  la  Pel-
letrie  accompagn^e  de  fes  petites  Seminariftes  genti-
ment  ve flues,  embrafle  ces  bonnes  Religieufes,  [12]
les  conduit  premierement  en  la  Chappelle  des  Vrfu-
lines,  comme  eftant  la  plus  proche  du  Quay,  noflre
Eglife  &  noflre  maifon  ayant  efl^  brufl^es,  on  les
mena  en  cette  Chappelle  pour  adorer  noflre  Seigneur,
&  pour  le  remercier  des  faueurs  qu'elles  auoient
receues  de  fa  bont6,  delk  elle  vont  faluer  Monfieur
noflre  Gouuerneur  en  fon  fort,  puis  on  les  mena  cha-
qu'vnes  dans  leurs  maifons,  ou  la  ioye  &  la  charity
leur  donna  entree,  elles  fortirent  du  vaiffeau  plus
faines  qu'elles  n'y  efloient  entries,  la  pauuret6  &  les
incommoditez  des  maifons  baflies  fur  la  terre,  femble
des  palais  &  des  richeffes  ^  ceux  qui  fortent  d'vne
maifon  de  bois  flottante  au  gr^  des  vents  &  des  vagues,
le  landemain  on  les  conduiflt  k  S.  lofeph,  pour  leur
faire  veoir  les  Sauuages,  qui  les  ont  attir6es  en  ce


1640]  RELATION  OF  1640  76-

miral  arrived  at  Tadoussac  on  the  last  of  June,  where
the  '  *  saint  Jacques ' '  had  entered  two  days  before.
Father  Menard,  embarking  in  a  shallop  with  our
brother,  Dominique  Scot,  left  Father  Joseph  Duper-
ron  and  our  brother  Jacques  Ratel  with  the  Nuns,
that  he  might  promptly  come  to  give  us  news  of  the
fleet's  arrival.  In  brief,  on  Sunday  morning  the
*'  saint  Jacques,"  commanded  by  Captain  Ancelot,
came  and  cast  anchor  opposite  Kebec ;  Monsieur  our
Governor  went  down  to  the  wharf  with  our  Rever-
end Father  Superior,  to  receive  our  Fathers,  and  to
escort  these  truly  generous  sisters  to  their  houses.
Upon  leaving  the  ship  they  fell  upon  their  knees,
kissed  the  ground  so  long  desired,  and  sang  the  Lau-
date  Dominum  omnes  Gentes;  and  Madame  de  la  Pelle-
trie,  accompanied  by  her  little  Seminarists,  neatly
dressed,  embraced  these  good  Nuns,  [12]  whom  she
conducted  first  to  the  Chapel  of  the  Ursulines,  this
being  the  nearest  to  the  Quay,  as  our  Church  and
house  had  been  burned.  They  were  taken  to  this
Chapel  to  adore  our  Lord,  and  to  thank  him  for  the
favors  they  had  received  from  his  goodness.  Thence
they  went  to  salute  Monsieur  our  Governor  in  his
fort;  then  they  were  taken  to  their  own  houses,
where  joy  and  love  welcomed  them.  They  left  the
ship  in  better  health  than  when  they  had  entered  it.
Poverty  and  discomfort,  in  houses  that  are  built  upon
the  land  seem  palaces  and  riches  to  those  who  come
forth  from  a  house  of  wood  floating  at  the  will  of  the
winds  and  the  waves.  The  next  day,  we  took  them
to  St.  Joseph,  to  show  them  the  Savages  who  have
attracted  them  to  this  new  world.  They  were  pres-
ent at  prayers,  and  at  the  instruction  that  was  being


76  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES [Vol.18

nouueau  monde,  elles  alfiflerent  aux  prieres  &  k  Tin-
ftrudlion  qu'on  leur  fit.  La  ioye  deroboit  leurs  coeurs
&  leurs  yeux,  ce  pauure  peuple  admiroit  la  genereuf e
conftance  de  ces  ieunes  Amazones,  qui  malgre  TO-
cean  viennent  chercher  le  [13]  falut  de  ces  barbares
en  ces  derniers  confins  du  monde,  bref  ay  ant  vifit6
les  pauures  demeures  de  ce  peuple ;  elles  f e  retire-
rent  en  leur  cloflure,  pour  la  garder  fuiuant  leurs
Reigles  &  leurs  Inflituts.  Quelques  iours  apres  leur
arriu6e,  la  Mere  de  fainc5te  Marie  Hofpitaliere  efl
tomb6e  malade,  c'eft  vn  petit  agneau  tout  difpofe
pour  entrer  dans  le  bercail  du  vray  Berger,  il  femble
neantmoins  que  Dieu  luy  veille  rendre  la  fante.

Pour  conclufion  de  ce  Chapitre,  ie  diray  ces  deux
mots  ^  vne  infinite  de  Religieufes,  qui  bruflent  dVn
dellr  de  fuiure  celles  qui  font  pallees.  Ce  n'efl  pas
tout  d'eftre  enuoy6es  de  la  France,  il  faut  eftre
appellee  de  la  nouuelle,  pour  faire  icy  plus  de  fruidt
que  de  bruit.  Les  filles  ne  fgauroient  penetrer  dans
les  Nations  plus  eloign6es  &  plus  peupl6es ;  il  en  efl
venu  tres-fuffifamment  pour  les  occupations  qu'elles
peuuent  auoir  dans  vn  pais  qui  ne  fait  que  de  naiflre.
Celles  k  qui  1' humility,  1' obey  fiance  &  Tappel  leurs
ont  [14]  donn6  des  patent es,  ont  efl6  receues  h.  bras
ouuerts  des  Anges  gardiens  de  ces  contr6es,  elles  co-
operent  fainctement  auec  ces  bien-beureux  ef prits  au
falut  de  ces  peuples,  en  eff et  &  les  Hofpitalieres  &  les
Vrfulines  font  dans  la  ioye,  elles  ont  paffe  rann6e
das  vne  profonde  paix,  cheries  des  Frangois  &  des
Sauuages,  tres-zel6es  pour  les  fondtions  de  leur  infli-
tut.  Ce  bon-heur  n'en  doit  point  attirer  dauantage,
puis  qu'vn  plus  grand  nombre  n'eft  pas  de  faifon,  le
pais  fe  faifant  tous  les  iours  ouurira  en  fon  temps  la


1640]  RELATION  OF  1640  77

given.  Joy  stole  away  their  hearts  and  their  eyes.
These  poor  peoples  admired  the  noble  constancy  of
these  young  Amazons,  who,  in  spite  of  the  Ocean,
came  to  seek  the  [13]  salvation  of  these  barbarians  in
these  farthest  confines  of  the  earth.  In  brief,  having
visited  the  poor  dwellings  of  these  people,  they
retired  to  their  own  seclusion,  to  observe  it  according
to  their  Rules  and  their  Institutes.  Some  days  after
their  arrival,  Mother  de  sainte  Marie,  a  Hospital
Nun,  fell  sick.  Here  was  a  dear  lamb  all  ready  to
enter  the  fold  of  the  true  Shepherd.  It  seems,  how-
ever, that  God  willed  her  to  be  restored  to  health.

As  a  conclusion  to  this  Chapter,  I  will  say  these
few  words  to  a  vast  number  of  Nuns,  who  burn  with
a  desire  to  follow  those  who  have  crossed  over.  It
is  not  everything  to  be  sent  from  France ;  one  must
be  called  by  new  [France],  in  order  to  produce  more
fruit  here  than  noise.  The  sisters  cannot  penetrate
into  the  more  distant  and  more  populous  Nations;
those  who  have  come  are  amply  sufficient  for  the
occupations  they  can  have  in  a  country  which  has
accomplished  only  its  birth.  Those  to  whom  humil-
ity, obedience,  and  vocation  have  [14]  given  diplo-
mas, have  been  received  with  open  arms  by  the
guardian  Angels  of  these  countries.  They  cooperate
piously  with  those  blessed  spirits  in  the  salvation  of
these  peoples.  In  fact,  both  the  Hospital  Nuns  and
the  Ursulines  are  full  of  joy.  They  have  passed  the
year  in  profound  peace,  cherished  by  the  French  and
Savages,  very  zealous  in  the  functions  of  their  order.
This  happiness  ought  not  to  attract  more  of  them,
since  a  greater  number  would  be  unseasonable ;  as
the  country  grows  every  day,  it  will,  at  the  proper


78  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.18

porte  aux  autres.  II  faut  pour  le  prefent  bander  tons
nos  nerfs  pour  arrefler  les  Sauuages,  au  commence-
ment que  nous  vinfmes  en  ces  contr^es,  comme  nous
n'efperions  quail  rien  des  vieux  arbres,  nous  emploi-
ons  toutes  nos  forces  k  cultiuer  les  ieunes  plates,
mais  noftre  Seigneur  nous  donnant  les  adultes  nous
couertilTons  les  grades  defpeces,  que  nous  faifios
pour  les  enfas,  au  fecours  de  leurs  peres  &  de  leurs
meres,  les  aydant  ^  cultiuer  la  terre  &  k  fe  loger
dans  vne  maifon  fixe  &  permanente,  nous  retenons
neantmoins  encor  auec  nous  quelques  [15]  petits  or-
phelins  delailTes.  Mais  noftre  plus  grand  effort  doit
tendre  k  rallier  ces  pauures  brebis  egarees,  fans  cela
il  n'y  a  point  d* occupation  en  ces  contrees  pour  des
Religieufes,  notamment  pour  les  Vrfulines,  il  n'en
eft  pas  de  mef me  de  nous  autres ;  car  nous  penetrons
€s  nations  fedentaires,  oh.  les  filles  n'ont  aucun  acc6s,
tant  pour  Teloignement  de  nos  Fran9ois  qui  les
conferuent,  que  pour  Thorreur  des  chemins,  &
pour  les  grands  trauaux  &  dangers  qui  furpaffent
leur  fexe,  les  filles  &  les  femmes  ne  fgauroient
monter  plus  haut  que  Tlfle  de  Montreal,  ou  le
fault  faindt  Louys :  or  eft  il  que  depuis  T  embouchure
du  fleuue  S.  Laurens  iufques  k  cette  Ifle,  tous  les
Sauuages  font  errans,  il  les  faut  done  reduire  k  vne
vie  fedetaire,  fi  on  veut  auoir  leurs  enfans,  ceux  qui
prenoient  plaifir  de  fecourir  noftre  feminaire  feront
confol6s,  voyant  que  les  depenfes  qu'on  faifoit  pour
des  enfans,  eftant  employees  k  faire  vne  petite  mai-
fon, arreftent  &  gaignent  ^  lefus-Chrift  le  pere,  la
mere  &  les  enfans.  Nous  auons  fait  quatre  petits
logemens  cette  ann^e,  voila  pour  quatre  [16]  families,
ces  bonnes  gens  font  rauis  voyant  cette  charit6,  le


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  ^9

time,  open  the  door  to  the  others.  At  present,  we
must  strain  every  nerve  to  arrest  the  Savages.  When
we  first  came  into  these  countries,  as  we  hoped  for
scarcely  anything  from  the  old  trees,  we  employed
all  our  forces  in  cultivating  the  young  plants ;  but,
as  our  Lord  gave  us  the  adults,  we  are  turning  the
great  outlay  we  made  for  the  children  to  the  succor
of  their  fathers  and  mothers, — helping  them  to  cul-
tivate the  land,  and  to  locate  in  a  fixed  and  perma-
nent home ;  we  still  retain  with  us,  however,  some
[15]  little  abandoned  orphans.  But  our  strongest
efforts  ought  to  tend  towards  rallying  these  poor  lost
sheep.  Without  this,  there  is  no  occupation  in  these
countries  for  Nuns,  especially  for  the  Ursulines.  It  is
not  the  same  with  us ;  for  we  penetrate  into  the  sed-
entary nations,  where  the  sisters  have  no  access, —
not  only  on  account  of  the  remoteness  of  our  French
who  have  charge  of  them,  but  of  the  horrors  of  the
roads,  and  the  great  hardships  and  dangers,  which
are  beyond  their  sex.  The  girls  and  women  cannot
go  up  farther  than  the  Island  of  Montreal,  or  the
sault  saint  Louys.  Now  it  happens  that  from  the
mouth  of  the  river  St.  Lawrence  up  to  this  Island,
all  the  Savages  are  wanderers ;  hence  they  must  be
brought  to  a  sedentary  life,  if  we  wish  to  have  their
children.  Those  who  took  pleasure  in  assisting  our
seminary  will  be  consoled  by  seeing  that  the  outlays
made  for  the  children,  being  employed  in  erecting  a
little  house,  arrest  and  win  for  Jesus  Christ  the
father,  the  mother,  and  the  children.  We  have  built
four  little  lodgings  this  year,  and  in  these  there  are
four  [16]  families.  These  good  people  are  delighted
at  seeing  this  charity. The  whole  may  amount  to


80  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ&SUITES [Vol.18

tout  pent  reuenir  k  quatre  ou  cinq  cens  ef cus,  helas !
ce  n'eft  qu'vn  coup  de  dez  en  France,  ou  vne  fimple
collation,  &  dans  nos  grands  bois  c'eft  le  falut  de
quatre  pauures  families,  qui  peut  eftre  ne  verroient
iamais  Dieu  li  on  ne  leur  prefloit  ce  fecours.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  81

four  or  five  hundred  6cus.  Alas !  it  is  only  one  throw
of  the  dice  in  France,  or  one  simple  collation ;  and
in  our  great  woods  it  is  the  salvation  of  four  poor
families,  who  perhaps  would  never  see  God  if  this
aid  were  not  lent  them.


82  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.  18


CHAPITRE  II.

DE L'ESTAT general DE LA COLONIE FRANgOISE, &
DE LA CONUERSION DES SAUUAGES.

LA'  paix,  ramour  &  la  bonne  intelligence  regne
parmy  nos  Frangois. La  foy  s'eflend  &  iette
de  profondes  racines  parmy  les  Sanuages,  ces
qnatre  paroles  fuffiroient  pour monflrer que  nous
viuons  icy  dans  vn  fiecle  d'or.

Ceux  qui  nous  ont  parl6  des  fiecles  dores,  ne  les
embelilToient  pas  des  mines  du  Perou,  mais  d'vne  in-
nocence preferable  aux  richeffes  de  I'vn  &  de  Tautre
hemifphere.  [17]  Si  bien  que  nous  pouuons  quail
dire  que  I'vfage  de  fer,  rend  les  fiecles  d'or,  &  Tv-
fage  de  Tor  fait  les  fiecles  de  fer.  II  eft  vray  qu'on
vit  en  ces  contr^es  dans  vne  grande  innocence,  la
vertu  y  regne  comme  dans  fon  empire,  le  vice  qui  la
pourfuit  inceffamment,  n'y  paroit  qu'en  cachette  &  ^
la  derobee,  ne  fe  produifant  iamais  fans  confufion.
Les  principaux  babitas  de  ce  nouueau  monde,  defi-
reux  de  conferuer  cette  benedidtion  du  Ciel,  fe  font
ranges  fous  les  drapeaux  de  la  faindte  Vierge,  k
rhonneur  de  laquelle  ils  entendent  tons  les  Samedis
la  faindle  MelTe,  frequentent  fouuet  les  Sacremens
de  vie,  prefle  I'oreille  aux  difcours  qu'on  leur  fait
des  grandeurs  de  cette  Princeffe,  &  du  bon-heur  de
la  paix  &  de  I'vnion  qui  les  allie  9a  bas  en  terre,
pour  les  rendre  vne  mefme  chofe  auec  Dieu  dedans
les  Cieux,  cette  deuotion  a  banny  les  inimiti^s  &  les


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  83


CHAPTER  II.

OF  THE  GENERAL  CONDITION  OF  THE  FRENCH  COLO-
NY, AND  THE  CONVERSION  OF  THE  SAVAGES.

PEACE, love, and good understanding reign
among our French people. The faith is
extending,  and  taking  deep  root  among  the
Savages. These  few  words  might  suffice  to  show
that  we  are  living  here  in  a  golden  age.

Those  who  have  told  us  about  golden  ages  did  not
embellish  them  with  Peruvian  mines,  but  with  an
innocence  preferable  to  the  riches  of  either  hemi-
sphere; [17]  so  that  we  can  almost  say  that  the  use
of  iron  renders  the  ages  golden,  and  the  use  of  gold
makes  the  ages  iron.  Verily,  one  lives  in  these
countries  in  great  innocency, —  virtue  reigns  here  as
if  in  its  empire ;  vice,  which  pursues  it  incessantly,
only  appears  secretly  and  by  stealth,  never  introduc-
ing itself  without  humiliation.  The  principal  inhab-
itants of  this  new  world,  desiring  to  preserve  this
blessing  of  Heaven,  have  ranged  themselves  under
the  banner  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  in  whose  honor  they
hear  the  holy  Mass  every  Saturday,  often  frequent
the  Sacraments  of  life,  and  lend  ear  to  the  discourses
that  are  given  them  on  the  dignities  of  this  Princess,
and  on  the  blessedness  of  the  peace  and  union  that
bind  them  here  below  on  earth,  to  render  them  one
with  God  in  Heaven.  This  devotion  has  banished
enmities  and  coldness;  it  has  introduced  pure  dis-
course in  the  place  of  too  licentious  language ;  it  has


84  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

froideurs,  elle  a  introduit  de  bons  difcours,  au  lieu
des  paroles  trop  libertines,  elle  a  fait  reuiure  la  cou-
ftume  de  prier  Dieu  publiquemet  foir  &  matin  dans
les  families,  elle  a  donne  des  affedtions  de  la  puret6
^  quelques  [i8]  perfonnes  dans  le  mariage,  iufqties  k
pref enter  leurs  voeux  par  mutuel  accord,  h.  1' integrity
de  la  faindle  Vierge,  &  les  renouueller  de  temp  en
temps,  pour  receuoir  plus  faindtement  fon  fils  bien
ayme  dedans  leurs  coeurs.  L'ann6e  palT^  les  che-
nilles, les  fauterelles  &  les  autres  vermines,  man-
geant  tout  ce  qui  fortoit  de  la  terre,  on  fit  quelques
proceffions  &  quelques  prieres  publiques  pour  cet
effet,  chofe  eftrange,  le  iour  fuiuant  ces  beflioles
moururent  &  difparurent  en  telle  forte,  que  telle  per-
fonne  a  recueilly  plus  de  trente  poiniTons  de  froment,
n'en  efperant  pas  dix  boilTeaux.

Au  refle  nous  viuons  icy  fort  contens  &  fort  fatis-
faits,  les  Frangois  font  en  bonne  fant6,  Tair  du  pays
leur  eft  bon,  aufTi  eft-il  pur  &  fain,  la  terre  commence
h.  leur  donner  des  grains  abondamment,  les  guerres,
les  procez,  les  debats  &  les  querelles  ne  I'empeftent
point,  en  vn  mot,  le  chemin  du  Ciel  femble  plus  court
&  plus  alfeur^  de  nos  grands  bois,  que  de  vos  grandes
villes,  il  eft  vray  que  nous  ne  penfons  point  eflre
feuls  dans  vn  pays  eflranger,  aulTi  n*y  fommes  nous
[19]  pas,  puis  que  nous  n'auons  tous  qu'vn  mefme
Prince  &  qu'vn  mefme  Roy,  que  nous  aymons  &  que
nous  honorons  vniquement,  nous  fifmes  I'an  pafle  des
f eux  de  refiouylTance  pour  la  naiifance  de  Monf eigneur
le  Dauphin,  nous  priafmes  Dieu  par  vne  proceffion
folemnelle,  de  rendre  cet  enfant  femblable  k  fon
pere,  noftre  ioye  &  noftre  affedtion,  ne  s'eft  pas  con-
tenues  dans  les  limites  d'vne  ann^e,  Monfieur  le  Che-


1640]  RELATION  OF  1640  . 85

revived  the  custom  in  families  of  publicly  praying  to
God,  evening  and  morning ;  it  lias  given  desires  for
purity  to  some  [18]  persons  in  marriage,  even  to
offering  their  vows  by  mutual  accord  to  the  chastity
of  the  blessed  Virgin,  and  to  renewing  these,  from
time  to  tinie,  that  they  may  more  holily  receive  her
well-beloved  son  in  their  hearts.  Last  year,  the
caterpillars,  grasshoppers,  and  other  insects  eating
all  that  came  out  of  the  earth,  some  processions  and
public  prayers  were  made  on  this  account ;  strange
to  say,  the  following  day  these  little  animals  died,
and  disappeared  so  entirely,  that  a  certain  person
reaped  more  than  thirty  puncheons  of  grain,  though
not  expecting  over  ten  bushels.

Moreover,  we  live  here  in  great  contentment  and
satisfaction.  The  French  are  in  good  health;  the
air  of  the  country  agrees  with  them,  as  it  is  pure  and
salubrious;  the  soil  is  beginning  to  yield  them
grain  in  abundance;  wars,  lawsuits,  disputes,  and
quarrels  do  not  infect  them.  In  a  word,  the  road  to
Heaven  seems  shorter  and  surer  from  our  great  for-
ests than  from  your  large  cities.  True,  we  do  not
think  of  ourselves  as  being  alone  in  a  strange  coun-
try; nor  are  we  so,  [19]  since  we  all  have  only  one
and  the  same  Prince  and  the  same  King,  whom  alone
we  love  and  honor.  Last  year,  we  made  bonJ&res  for
the  birth  of  Monseigneur,  the  Dauphin ;  we  entreated
God,  by  a  solemn  procession  to  make  this  child  like
his  father.  Our  joy  and  our  affection  were  not  kept
within  the  bounds  of  one  year ;  Monsieur  the  Cheva-
lier de  Montmagny,  our  Governor,  wishing  to  prolong
it,  has  had  a  Tragi-comedy  represented  this  year,  in
honor  of  this  newborn  Prince.  I  would  not  have  be-
lieved that  so  handsome  apparel  and  so  good  actors


86  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

ualier  de  Montmagny  noftre  Gouuerneur  la  voulant
prolonger,  k  fait  reprefenter  cette  annee  vne  Tragi-
comedie  en  Thonneur  de  ce  Prince  nouueau  n6,  ie
n'aurois  pas  creu  qu'on  eut  pen  tronner  vn  li  gentil
appareil,  &  de  fi  bons  acteurs  k  Kebec,  le  fienr
Martial  Piranbe  qui  conduifoit  cette  adtion  &  qui  en
reprefentoitle  premier  per fonnage,  reuffit  auec  excel-
lence ;  mais  afin  que  nous  Sauuages  en  peulTent  reti-
rer  quelque  vtilit6,  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  doii6
d'vn  zele  &  d'vne  prudence  non  commune,  nous  in-
uita  d'y  mefler  quelque  chofe  qui  leur  put  donner  dans
la  veue  &  f rapper  leurs  oreilles,  nous  fifmes  pour-
fuiure  Tame  d'vn  infidelle  par  [20]  deux  demons,
qui  enfin  la  precipiterent  dans  vn  enfer,  qui  vomilToit
des  flames,  les  refiftances,  les  cris  &  les  hurlemens
de  cette  ame  &  de  ces  demons,  qui  parloient  en
langue  Algonquine,  donnerent  s'y  auant  dans  le  coeur
de  quelques  vns,  qu'vn  Sauuage  nous  dit  k  deux  iours
de  Ik,  qu'il  auoit  efl6  fort  efpouuant^  la  nuic5l  par  vn
fonge  tres-affreux,  ie  voyois  difoit-il,  vn  gouffre  hor-
rible, d'ou  fortoient  des  flames  &  des  demons,  il  me
fembloit  qu'ils  me  vouloient  perdre,  ce  qui  me  donna
bien  de  la  terreur,  bref  ce  pauure  peuple  fe  vient
rendre  k  lefus-Chrift  de  iour  en  iour,  le  fecours
qu'on  leur  donne  pour  def richer  &  pour  cultiuer  la
terre  les  encourage  fi  fort,  que  c'eft  vne  benedidtion
de  les  voir  prier  &  trauailler  [en]  fon  temps.
«  Les  bons  exemples  des  principaux  de  cette  colonic
les  gagnent  puiffamment,  Monfieur  noftre  Gouuer-
neur approche  par  fois  de  la  faindte  table  auec  eux,
il  les  honore  de  fa  prefence,  les  venant  vifiter  k  S.
lofeph,  ayant  appris  que  ces  bons  Neophites  deuoient
communier  le  iour  de  fefte  de  noftre  Pere  &  Patri-


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  87

could  be  found  in  Kebec.  Sieur  Martial  Piraub6/
who  had  charge  of  this  performance,  and  who  repre-
sented the  chief  personage,  succeeded  excellently;
but  in  order  that  our  Savages  might  derive  some
benefit  from  it.  Monsieur  the  Governor,  endowed
with  uncommon  zeal  and  prudence,  invited  us  to  put
something  into  it  which  might  strike  their  eyes  and
their  ears.  We  had  the  soul  of  an  unbeliever  pur-
sued by  [20]  two  demons,  who  finally  hurled  it  into
^  hell  that  vomited  forth  flames;  the  struggles,  cries,
and  shrieks  of  this  soul  and  of  these  demons,  who
spoke  in  the  Algonquin  tongue,  penetrated  so  deeply
into  the  hearts  of  some  of  them,  that  a  Savage  told
us,  two  days  afterward,  that  he  had  been  greatly
frightened  that  night  by  a  very  horrible  dream.  "  I
saw,"  said  he,  ''  a  hideous  gulf  whence  issued  flames
and  demons.  It  seemed  to  me  that  they  tried  to
destroy  me,  and  this  filled  me  with  great  terror."  In
brief,  these  poor  peoples  are  giving  themselves  up  to
Jesus  Christ  from  day  to  day ;  the  help  that  is  given
them  in  clearing  and  cultivating  the  land  encourages
them  so  greatly,  that  it  is  a  blessing  to  see  them
praying  and  working,  each  in  due  time.

The  good  examples  of  the  chief  men  of  this  colony
strongly  influence  them;  Monsieur  our  Governor
sometimes  approaches  the  holy  table  with  them ;  he
honors  them  by  his  presence,  coming  to  visit  them
at  St.  Joseph.  Having  learned  that  these  good  Neo-
phytes were  to  receive  communion  on  the  day  of  the
feast  of  our  Father  and  Patriarch,  St.  [21]  Ignace,
he  came  to  perform  his  devotions  with  them  in  our
Chapel  of  St.  Joseph.  Madame  de  la  Peltrie  was
there  at  the  same  time,  to  be  godmother  to  some  chil-
dren that  were  to  be  baptized. Was  it  not  beautiful


88  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  18

arche  S.  [21]  Ignace,  il  vint  faire  fes  deuotions  auec
eux  en  noflre  Chapelle  de  S.  lofeph,  Madame  de  la
Peltrie  s'y  trouua  en  mefme  temps,  pour  eflre  mar-
raine  de  quelques  enfans  qu'on  deuoit  baptifer,  ne
faifoit-il  pas  beau  voir  ces  perfonnes  de  merite  &  de
qualite,  meflees  parmy  des  Sauuages  approcher  tous
enfemble  de  lefus-Chrift,  cette  innocence  nous  fait
vn  fiecle  d'or.

II  y  a  quel  que  temps  que  nous  difions  aux  Sauuages,
que  des  perfonnes  de  condition  auoient  defir6  d'eftre
recommandes  k  leurs  prieres  quand  ils  communie-
roient,  que  la  Royne  mefme  auoit  fouliaitt6  qu'ils
priafTent  Dieu  pour  fon  Dauphin,  comme  ie  I'ay  ap-
pris  de  bonne  part,  cela  les  eftonne  &  les  confole,  &
donne  vne  apprehenfion  de  la  grandeur  de  Dieu,  &
vne  eftime  des  prieres,  voyas  que  des  perfonnes  fi
releu6es  en  font  tant  d'eftat,  leur  difant  que  cette
bonne  Princelle  auoit  fait  quelque  aumofne  pour  les
fecourir,  que  d'autres  Dames  ou  femmes  de  Capitaines
faifoient  le  mefme,  qu'on  prioit  Dieu  pour  eux  par
toute  la  France,  ils  admiroient  la  bont6  [22]  &  la  no-
bleffe  du  chriflianifme,  qui  abbailTe  les  chofes  grandes
&  releue  les  plus  baffes.  Quelques  vns  d'eux  me
dirent  que  tous  les  iours  ils  ne  manquoient  pas  de
prier  pour  les  perfonnes  qui  les  affiftoient,  me  nom-
mant  fort  bien  ceux  qui  ont  eftably  quelque  fecours
folide,  pour  les  tirer  de  leurs  grandes  miferes.  Les
Chapitres  fuyuans  donneront  de  la  confolation  ^  ceux
qui  ont  coopere  au  fang  de  lefus-Chrift,  dont  la  vertu
paroit  auec  eflonnement  en  ces  pauures  barbares.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  89

to  see  these  worthy  and  titled  persons,  mingling  with
the  Savages, — and  all  together  approaching  Jesus
Christ?  This  simplicity  creates  for  us  a  golden  age.
Some  time  ago,  we  told  the  Savages  that  persons
of  rank  had  desired  to  be  recommended  to  their  pray-
ers when  they  received  communion, — that  even  the
Queen  had  wished  them  to  pray  to  God  for  her  Dau-
phin, as  I  have  learned  on  good  authority.  This
surprises  and  consoles  them,  and  gives  them  an  idea
of  the  greatness  of  God,  and  an  esteem  for  prayer,
seeing  that  personages  so  eminent  value  it  so  high-
ly. Upon  telling  them  that  this  good  Princess  had
given  some  alms  to  succor  them,  that  other  Ladies
or  wives  of  Captains  had  done  the  same,  that  pray-
ers for  them  were  offered  to  God  throughout  all
France, — they  admired  the  goodness  [22]  and  lofty
character  of  Christianity,  which  abases  great  things
and  exalts  the  most  humble.  Some  of  them  told  me
that  they  would  not  fail  to  pray  daily  for  the  persons
who  helped  them,  naming  to  me  very  well  those  who
have  given  substantial  help  to  draw  them  out  of  their
great  miseries.  The  following  Chapters  will  afford
some  consolation  to  those  who  have  cooperated  with
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  virtue  of  which  appears
wonderfully  in  these  poor  barbarians.


90  LES  RELATIONS  DESjASUITES [Vol.18


CHAPITRE  III.

LES  SAUUAGES  SE  RASSEMBLENT  A  SAINCT  TOSEPH  APRES

LA MALADIE, ELISENT QUELQUES CAPITAINES, &

FONT  PAROISTRE  LEUR  ZELE  POUR  LA  FOY.

I  5  AY  veu  quelquefois  des  pigeons  effarez  battus
d'vn  faucon,  ces  pauures  oyfeaux  voloient  qui
deg^  qui  del^  k  [23]  lentour  de  leur  colombier
fans  y  entrer,  puis  leur  ennemy  venant  k  difparoiftre
ils  venoient  fondre  tout  k  coup  dans  leur  petite  mai-
fon,  voila  iuftement  I'id^e  du  pitoyable  eftat  auquel
fe  trouuoient  Tan  palT^  nos  Sauuages,  la  maladie  les
pourfuiuoit  comme  k  tire  d'aifles,  ils  tournoient  k  1' en-
tour  de  la  maifon  S.  lofeph,  paffoient  &  repaffoient
dans  leurs  petites  gondoles  &  canots,  &  voyant  encor
r  ombre  du  Vautour  qui  les  chalToit,  ils  s'enfuyoient
derechef,  mais  enfin  ce  fleau  venant  ^  ceffer,  ils  fe
font  venus  rejetter  dans  la  demeure  qu'ils  ont  choifis,
Et  Deus  fecit  cum  tentatione  prouentum^  Dieu  leur  a
donn6  plus  de  courage  qu'auparauant.  Au  temps
qu'ils  fe  ralfembloient  le  R.  P.  Vimont  noffcre  Supe-
rieur,  montant  aux  trois  Riuieres  en  rencontra  quel-
ques  vns  en  chemin,  def quels  il  m'efcriuit  en  ces
termes,  Nous  arriuafmes  hier  fur  le  midy  chez  Mon-
lleur  de  la  Poterie,  nous  n'en  pourrons  partir  que  ce
iourd'huy  prefque  ^  mefme  heure,  pource  que  nos
mattelots  ont  laiffe  efchouer  noflre  chalouppe  trop
haut,  ie  n'ay  peu  trouuer  de  canot  pour  gaigner  le
deuant,  [24]  car  il  n'y  en  a  icy  que  deux;  dont  I'vn


1640]  RELATION  OF  1640  91


CHAPTER  III.

THE SAVAGES REASSEMBLE AT SAINT JOSEPH AFTER

THE  EPIDEMIC,  ELECT  SEVERAL  CAPTAINS,  AND

SHOW THEIR ZEAL FOR THE FAITH.

1HAVE  sometimes  seen  frightened  pigeons  at-
tacked by  a  hawk.  These  poor  birds  would  fly
here  and  there  [23]  around  their  dovecote,  with-
out entering  it ;  then,  their  enemy  happening  to  dis-
appear, they  would  suddenly  dart  into  their  little
home.  This  is  precisely  the  image  of  the  pitiable
condition  in  which  our  Savages  were  last  year.  The
malady  pursued  them  with  flapping  wings,  as  it
were ;  they  hovered  around  the  house  of  St.  Joseph,
passed  and  repassed  in  their  little  gondolas  and
canoes,  and,  still  seeing  the  shadow  of  the  Vulture
that  pursued  them,  they  again  took  flight;  but  final-
ly, as  this  scourge  began  to  abate,  they  came  and
took  refuge  in  the  dwelling  they  have  chosen,  Et
Deus  fecit  cum  tentatione  proventum^  God  has  given
them  more  courage  than  before.  At  the  time  they
were  reassembling,  the  Reverend  Father  Vimont,
our  Superior,  going  up  to  the  three  Rivers,  encoun-
tered some  of  them  on  the  way,  of  whom  he  wrote
me  in  these  terms:  *'  We  reached  Monsieur  de  la
Poterie's^  house  yesterday  about  noon;  we  shall  not
be  able  to  leave  until  to-day  at  about  the  same  hour,
because  our  sailors  have  let  our  shallop  run  aground
too  far  up.  I  could  not  find  a  canoe,  to  go  on  ahead
of  it,  [24]  for  there  are  only  two  here, — one  of  which


92  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

s'en  va  ^  S.  lofeph,  1' autre  doit  feruir  k  trente  Sau-
uages  ou  enuiron,  que  ie  rencontray  icy  hier  au  foir,
ie  les  fis  prier  Dieu  &  les  enfeignay  le  mieux  que  ie
peu,  ils  me  forcerent  de  clianter  Irinitik,  (c'efl  vn
Cantique  compof6  en  leur  langue)  Dieu  fgait  comme
ie  m'en  acquit^,  ie  paffay  pourtant  iufques  au  bout
auec  les  Litanies,  ie  leur  expofay  comme  voftre  Re-
uerence  &  moy,  leur  anions  procure  la  Gribane,  pour
mener  leur  petit  bagage  k  S.  lofeph,  &  que  Monfieur
le  Gouuerneur  leur  accordoit  cette  faueur  pour  les
obliger  k  def richer  la  terre,  ils  s'y  tefmoignerent  fort
portez,  apres  que  i'eu  parle,  ils  me  dirent  d'eux
mefmes  qu'ils  eftoient  parens  du  Capitaine  de  I'lfle;
mais  cependant  qu'ils  ne  I'aymoiet  pas,  pource  qu'ils
fgauoient  bien  qu'il  ne  fe  montroit  affectionn6  ^  la
culture  de  la  terre  &  k  I'inflrudlion  qu'en  apparence,
prenant  cong6  d'eux  ie  les  affeuray  que  ie  prefferois
mon  voyage,  pour  les  venir  prendre  au  retour  «&  me
faire  leur  Capitaine  iufques  ^  S.  lofeph,  i'ay  veu
quelques  vieilles  femmes  infirmes  &  [25]  quelques  en-
fans,  qui  pourront  augmenter  1' occupation  des  meres
Hofpitalieres  &  des  meres  Vrfulines,  ie  defire  auec
paffion  de  retourner  bien  vifle,  &  de  contribuer  quel-
que  chofe  a  Tarreft  de  ces  pauures  Sauuages,  i'oubliois
vn  mot  qui  me  confola  bien  fort,  ils  adiouflerent  k
leur  harangue,  qu'ils  n'auoient  point  d'efprit  pour
retenir  ce  qu'on  leur  enfeignoit,  pource  qu'ils  n'e-
ftoient  point  baptifez,  &  qu'ils  fgauoient  bien  que  le
baptefme  ayde  h.  bien  comprendre  &  k  bien  retenir,  &
que  s'ils  eftoient  baptifez  ils  auroient  plus  de  force  &
plus  d'efprit,  pour  apprendre  les  chofes  de  la  foy,
&  pour  faire  comme  les  Frangois,  ie  vous  prie  faluer
de  ma  part  V. Ces  bonnes  gens  &  pluiieurs  autres  de


1640]  RELA  TJON  OF  1640  9a

goes  to  St.  Joseph,  the  other  must  serve  about  thirty
Savages  whom  I  encountered  here  last  evening.  I
had  them  pray  to  God,  and  taught  them  as  well
as  I  could.  They  made  me  sing  the  Irinitik  (a  Song
composed  in  their  language).  God  knows  how  I
acquitted  myself  of  this;  however,  I  proceeded  to
the  end  with  the  Litanies.  I  explained  to  them  how
your  Reverence  and  I  had  procured  for  them  the
Gribane,^  to  take  their  little  baggage  to  St.  Joseph^
and  that  Monsieur  the  Governor  was  granting  them
this  favor,  in  order  to  induce  them  to  clear  the  land.
They  declared  themselves  very  favorably  inclined  to
this.  After  I  had  spoken,  they  told  me  that,  as  for
themselves,  they  were  relatives  of  the  Captain  of  the
Island;  but  that,  however,  they  did  not  like  him,
because  they  knew  very  well  that  he  showed  himself
interested  in  the  cultivation  of  the  land  and  in  the
instruction,  only  in  appearance.  Upon  taking  leave
of  them,  I  assured  them  that  I  would  hasten  my
journey,  in  order  to  come  and  take  them  on  my
return,  and  make  myself  their  Captain  as  far  as  St.
Joseph.  I  saw  some  infirm  old  women  and  [25]  some
children,  who  may  give  the  Hospital  mothers  and  the
Ursuline  mothers  more  occupation.  I  desire  ear-
nestly to  return  very  soon  and  contribute  something
towards  the  permanent  settlement  of  these  poor  Sav-
ages. I  forgot  one  thought  which  consoled  me  very
much.  They  added,  in  their  address,  that  they  had
not  the  sense  to  retain  what  was  taught  them,  be-
cause they  were  not  baptized, — that  they  were  well
aware  that  baptism  aids  in  comprehending  clearly  and
in  remembering  well ;  and  that,  if  they  were  baptized,
they  would  have  more  strength  and  more  intelligence
to  learn  the  things  pertaining  to  the  faith,  and  to  do


94  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

diners  endroits  fe  font  enfin  raffemblez  k  S.  lofeph,
oh  ils  ont  fait  ce  qne  ie  vay  dire,  tons  les  Chreftiens
qni  font  les  principanx  d'entre  enx,  firent  vn  corn-
plot,  fans  nons  en  rien  dire,  d'affembler  les  Sannages
ponr  les  indnire  fortement  ^  croire  qne  fi  qnelqu'vn
fe  monftroit  formellement  ennemy  de  la  foy,  ils  pri-
rent  refolntion  de  la  chaffer  de  la  bonrgade  qn'ils
[26]  commencent.  Nons  ayant  donn6  adnis  de  lenr
deffein,  nons  ingeafmes  qn'il  les  falloit  laiffer  faire,
&  qne  cette  adtion  fi  extraordinaire  anx  Sannages,
qni  ne  fe  contredifent  qnafi  iamais,  s'eftimas  tons
anffi  grands  feignenrs  les  vns  qne  les  antres,  ponnoit
pronenir  de  I'efprit  de  Dien.  L'affemblee  faite  trois
Chreftiens  harangnerent,  le  premier  fnt  Eftienne  Pi-
garonik,  iadis  famenx  forcier  parmy  enx,  il  aigrit  vn
petit  les  efpris  de  qnelqnes  pay  ens  par  fa  fernenr,
car  apres  anoir  tefmoign^  qn'il  ne  craignoit  point  la
mort,  qn'il  tiendroit  k  fanenr  qn'on  le  maffacrafl  ponr
la  foy,  il  dit  qn'il  falloit  bannir  le  diable  de  lenr  non-
nelle  refidence,  &  qne  les  mefcreans  le  retenoient
anec  enx,  notamment  cenx  qni  vonloiet  anoir  denx
femmes,  &  par  confeqnent  qn'il  falloit  on  croire  on
fe  feparer,  &  qne  cenx  qni  anoient  dn  conrage  de-
noient  dire  franchement  lenrs  penfees  fnr  ce  fnjet.

Apres  celny-cy  Noel  Negabamat  parla ;  mais  pins
moderement.  L'experience  fit  il,  nons  apprend  qne
Monfienr  le  Gonnernenr,  qne  les  Peres  &  tons  les  [27]
Frangois  nons  ayment,  vons  voyez  qn'ils  ne  feconrent
pas  fenlement  cenx  qni  font  baptifez,  ils  nons  aydent
tons  k  cnltiner  la  terre  &  h.  nons  loger,  ils  nons  fonla-
gent  en  nos  maladies,  ils  fnbniennent  k  nos  difettes
fans  nons  rien  demander,  ny  fans  attendre  de  nons
ancnne  recompenfe,  vons  appronnez  tons  ces  bonnes


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  95

as  the  French  do.  I  beg  you,  salute  for  me  Yours."
These  good  people,  and  many  others  from  various
places,  finally  gathered  at  St.  Joseph,  where  they
did  what  I  am  about  to  tell.  All  the  Christians
who  are  prominent  among  them  mutually  agreed,
without  telling  us  anything  about  it,  to  get  the  Sav-
ages together  and  offer  them  strong  inducements  to
believe;  if  any  one  showed  himself  an  open  enemy
to  the  faith,  they  resolved  to  drive  him  away  from
the  village  that  they  [26]  are  beginning.  Having
informed  us  of  their  intention,  we  judged  that  it  was
best  to  let  them  proceed,  and  that  this  action,  so
extraordinary  among  the  Savages,  who  hardly  ever
contradict  one  another,  each  considering  himself  as
great  a  lord  as  the  other,  might  proceed  from  the
spirit  of  God.  The  people  being  assembled,  three
Christians  addressed  them.  The  first  was  Estienne
Pigarouik,  formerly  a  famous  sorcerer  among  them.
He  somewhat  irritated  the  minds  of  some  of  the
pagans  by  his  fervor ;  for  —  after  having  testified  that
he  did  not  fear  death,  that  he  would  consider  it  a
favor  if  they  should  murder  him  for  the  faith  —  he
said  that  they  must  banish  the  devil  from  their  new
residence,  and  that  the  unbelievers  retained  him
with  them,  especially  those  who  wished  to  have  two
wives ;  and,  consequently,  that  it  was  necessary  either
to  believe  or  to  separate,  and  that  those  who  had
courage  ought  frankly  to  express  their  opinions  upon
this  subject.

After  this  one,  Noel  Negabamat  spoke,  but  more
moderately.  "  Experience,"  he  began,  "  teaches  us
that  Monsieur  the  Governor,  that  the  Fathers,  and
all  the  [27]  French  love  us.  You  see  that  they  suc-
cor not  only  those  who  are  baptized,  they  aid  us  all


56  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

adtions,  vous  dites  tons,  cela  eft  bien,  ces  gens  Ik  nous
ayment;  mais  fgacliez  que  fi  ce  qu'ils  font  eft  bon,  ce
qu'ils  enfeignent  eft  encore  meilleur,  ils  ne  difent
pas  qu'ils  iront  tons  feuls  au  Ciel,  ils  difent  que  nous
fommes  tons  freres,  que  nous  n'auons  qu'vn  mefme
Pere,  que  les  plaiflrs  de  I'autre  vie  font  aufli-bien
pour  nous  que  pour  eux,  vous  f^auez  ce  qu'ils  enfei-
gnent, vous  les  efcoutez  tous  les  iours,  il  me  femble
que  nous  deurions  nous  vnir  tous  d'vne  mefme
creance,  puis  que  nous  voulons  nous  raffembler  dans
vne  mefme  bourgade.

lean  Baptifte  Etinechkadat  qui  eft  Capitaine  d'ex-
tradlion,  parla  le  dernier.  Vous  fgauez  (dit-il)  que  ie
ne  fuis  pas  grand  difcoureur,  que  ma  langue  tient
[28]  mon  palais,  &  qu'k  peine  ma  bouche  eft  elle
perc6e,  ie  fuis  defia  age,  ie  commance  k  penfer  plus
qu'k  parler:  or  ie  vous  alTeure  que  i'ay  bien  confidere
la  Foy  deuant  que  de  I'embraffer,  ie  ne  me  fuis  pas
rendu  k  la  premiere  femonce,  mais  i'en  fuis  mainte-
nant  fi  fatisfait  que  plus  ie  la  confidere,  &  plus  ie
I'ayme,  &  par  confequent  fi  vous  auez  quelque  cre-
ance en  moy  ne  craignez  point  de  I'embraffer,  ie
croy  que  I'vnique  moy  en  de  reffufciter  voftre  nation
qui  fe  va  perdre  c'eft  de  vous  r'affembler  tous,  &  de
croire  en  Dieu,  non  par  feintife,  mais  du  fond  du
cceur;  &  comme  il  eft  bon,  &  qu'il  pent  tout,  il  nous
fera  reuiure,  &  nous  conferuera.  Voyla  ce  que  dirent
nos  Chreftiens  en  cefte  premiere  affembl6e  qui  fe  fit
la  nuidt  en  laquelle  nous  ne  nous  trouuafme  point
non  plus  qu'aux  autre  fuiuantes,  nos  Neophytes  ou
pluftoft  noftre  Seigneur  conduifoit  tout  cet  affaire.

Vn  Pay  en  feul,  homme  arrogant,  mais  qui  la  autre-
fois  eft6 dauantage,  prit la  parole apres  ces  trois


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  97

to  cultivate  the  land,  and  to  furnish  ourselves  with
lodgings ;  they  relieve  us  in  our  sicknesses,  they  pro-
vide for  us  in  our  want,  without  asking  us  for  any-
thing, nor  expecting  any  recompense  from  us.  You
all  approve  of  these  good  actions ;  you  all  say  *  That
is  good,  those  people  love  us.'  But  know  that  if
what  they  do  is  good,  what  they  teach  is  still  better.
They  do  not  say  that  they  all  will  go  alone  to  Heav-
en ;  they  say  that  we  all  are  brothers,  that  we  have
only  one  and  the  same  Father,  that  the  pleasures  of
the  other  life  are  for  us  as  well  as  for  them.  You
know  what  they  teach, — you  listen  to  them  every
day.  It  seems  to  me  we  all  ought  to  unite  in  one
and  the  same  belief,  since  we  wish  to  assemble  in
one  and  the  same  village."

Jean  Baptiste  Etinechkavat,  who  is  a  Captain  by
descent,  spoke  last.  ''You  know"  (said  he)  ''that
I  am  not  a  great  talker, —  that  my  tongue  clings
[28]  to  my  palate,  and  that  it  is  hard  to  open  my
lips.  I  am  already  old,  I  am  beginning  to  think
more  than  to  speak.  Now  I  assure  you  that  I  con-
sidered the  Faith  well  before  embracing  it,  I  did  not
yield  to  the  first  invitation ;  but  I  am  now  so  satisfied
that,  the  more  I  consider  it,  the  more  I  love  it ;  and
consequently,  if  you  have  any  faith  in  me,  do  not
fear  to  embrace  it.  I  believe  that  the  only  means  of
restoring  your  nation,  which  is  going  to  destruction,
is  for  you  all  to  assemble  and  to  believe  in  God, —
not  hypocritically,  but  from  the  depths  of  your  hearts ;
and  as  he  is  good,  and  as  he  can  do  all,  he  will  re-
store and  preserve  us."  That  was  what  our  Chris-
tians said  in  this  first  assembly,  which  took  place  at
night ;  we  were  not  present  there,  nor  were  we  at  the
following  ones.  Our  Neophytes,  or  rather  our  Lord,
conducted  this  whole  affair.


98  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

harangues.  le  voy  bien,  dit-il,  qu'on  nous  veut
chaffer,  il  eft  vray  qu'on  ne  s'attaqua  pas  fi  direc5te-
ment  [29]  h.  moy  qu'^  vn  tel,  qui  eft  mon  parent,
mais  il  faut  qu'on  fgache  qu'on  ne  le  pent  heurter
fans  me  choquer,  on  crie  qu'il  ayme  deux  femmes,
n'auons  nous  pas  cefte  liberty  depuis  vn  long  temps
d'en  prendre  tant  que  nous  voudrons?  Si  on  penfe
nous  faire  fortir  de  force,  il  faut  ioiier  a  qui  I'empor-
tera,  celuy  qui  perdra  la  partie  cedera :  Nous  ef cou-
tons  tous  les  iours  les  Peres,  nous  n'improuuos  pas
ce  qu'ils  difent,  mais  nous  ne  croyos  pas  pouuoir  re-
tenir  ce  qu'ils  enfeignent,  ny  garder  ce  qu'ils  recom-
mandent,  il  ne  fe  faut  pas  hafter  les  forces  viennet
auec  I'age :  I'ay  eu  de  grands  degoufhs  de  ce  qu'ils
prefchent,  ie  me  fuis  autrefois  mocqu^  d'eux,  ie  les
ay  querellez  &  menace,  ie  n'auois  que  la  bouche  en
ce  temps-Ik,  maintenant  ie  commence  k  auoir  des
oreilles,  fi  elles  ne  font  pas  encore  fl  bien  percees  que
les  voftres,  ce  qu'on  dit  ne  laiffe  pas  d'y  entrer:
Pour  moy  11  i'eflois  parent  des  Frangois  comme  vous
qui  auez  receu  leur  creance,  ie  ne  voudrois  pas  pour-
tant  offencer  mes  compatriotes,  la  conclufion  fut
qu'on  penferoit  k  cet  affaire.  Nos  Chreftiens  [30]  ne
quitterent  pas  leur  poindte,  ils  nous  vindrent  prier
d'agir  fecrettement  auec  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur,
afin  qu'il  les  portaft  k  cr6er  quelques  Chefs  pour  les
conduire  dans  leurs  petites  affaires,  iugeas  bien  que
le  petit  nombre  des  Chefs  eftant  gagne  tout  le  refte
fuiuroit  aifement  apres.  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur
qui  ne  laiffe  efcouler  aucune  occafion  d'amplifier  la
Foy  &  le  Royaume  de  lefus-Chrift,  fit  appeller  les
principaux,  &  apres  les  auoir  loiiez,  les  vns  d'auoir
receu  le  fainc5t  Baptefme,  les  autres  de  fe  difpofer  k


1640]  RELATION  OF  1640  99

One  Pagan  alone  —  an  arrogant  man,  but  who  had
formerly  been  more  so  —  began  to  speak  after  these
three  harangues.  "I  see  clearly,"  said  he,  "that
they  wish  to  drive  us  away.  True,  they  do  not
attack  me  so  directly  [29]  as  they  do  such  a  one,  who
is  my  relative.  But  it  must  be  known  that  one  can-
not strike  him  without  hurting  me.  They  cry  out
that  he  loves  two  women ;  have  we  not  had  the  priv-
ilege for  a  long  time  to  take  as  many  of  them  as  we
wish  ?  If  they  think  to  make  us  go  out  by  force,  we
shall  have  to  play  at  *  who  shall  fetch  ? '  and  the  one
who  loses  the  game  shall  give  up.  We  listen  every
day  to  the  Fathers, — we  do  not  disapprove  what  they
say ;  but  we  do  not  think  that  we  can  remember  what
they  teach,  or  observe  what  they  recommend;  we
must  not  be  in  haste,  strength  comes  with  age.  I
did  feel  great  distaste  for  what  they  preach, —  I  used
to  make  sport  of  them,  I  have  quarreled  with  and
threatened  them ;  I  had  nothing  but  a  mouth  at  that
time,  but  now  I  am  beginning  to  have  ears ;  if  they
are  not  yet  so  sensitive  as  yours,  nevertheless,  what
is  said  goes  into  them.  As  for  me,  if  I  were  related
to  the  French  as  you  are  who  have  received  their
belief,  I  would  not  be  willing,  however,  to  offend  my
countrymen."  The  conclusion  was  that  they  would
think  the  matter  over.  Our  Christians  [30]  did  not
give  up  their  point.  They  came  to  beg  us  to  treat
secretly  with  Monsieur  the  Governor,  that  he  might
prompt  them  to  appoint  some  Captains  to  lead  them
in  their  little  affairs, — judging  rightly  that,  the  few
Captains  being  gained  over,  all  the  rest  would  readily
follow.  Monsieur  the  Governor,  who  does  not  let
slip  any  occasion  for  extending  the  Faith  and  the
Kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ, had  the principal  ones


100  LEti  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

le  receuoir,  apres  les  auoir  exhortez  k  tenir  ferme
dans  la  refolution  qu'ils  ont  prife,  &  qu'ils  ont  defia
mis  en  pradtique  de  cultiuer  la  terre  &  de  s'arrefter.
Apres  auoir  recommande  aux  Chreftiens  la  conflance
en  leurs  raariages,  il  lenr  fit  entendre  qu'il  feroit  k
propos  qu'ils  efleulTent  quelques  chefs  pour  les  gou-
uerner,  «&  que  fi  les  femmes  &  la  ieuneffe  viuoient
dans  rindependance,  que  ce  n'eftoit  pas  le  moyen  de
fe  conferuer,  ils  promirent  tous  de  s'affembler  k  S.
lofeph  fur  ce  fubjet.

A  trois  iours  delk  ils  nous  vindrent  [31]  trouuer  en
noftre  maifon,  &  nous  demaderent  comme  ils  proce-
deroient  en  cefte  affaire,  leur  ayant  expliqu6  comme
cela  fe  pourtoit  faire  par  bul[le]tins  fecrets,  ils  con-
clurent  tout  fur  Theure  qu'il  falloit  qu'ils  entraffent
Tvn  apres  Tautre  en  la  chambre  de  I'vn  de  nous  pour
nommer  au  Pere  qui  feroit  Ik  trois  des  principaux
qu'ils  iugeroient  plus  propres  pour  commander ;  cela
fe  fifl  fur  I'heure,  le  Pere  efcriuit  leur  voix  fecrete-
ment,  puis  il  leur  declara  tout  haut  combien  chacun
d'eux  auoit  de  fuff rages,  fans  nommer  ceux  qui  les
auoient  donnez,  les  Chreftiens  I'emporterent  par
deffus  les  Payes,  lea  Baptifle  Etinechkadat  n'entra
point  dans  I'efledtion ;  car  eflant  Capitaine  d'ex-
tradtion  chacun  luy  dona  le  premier  rang,  vn  feul
Payen  approcha  du  nombre  des  voix  qu'eurent  les
Chreftiens.

L'eledlion  faite  ils  fe  regardoient  I'vn  I'autre  bien
eftonnez,  n'ayans  iamais  proced6  en  cefte  fagon,  pas
vn  ne  prenoit  la  parole,  en  fin  vn  Chreftien  eftro-
piat  d'vne  iambe  qui  s'eftoit  trouu6  auec  les  autres
s'efcria,  A  quoy  penfons  nous?  pourquoy  perfonne
ne  parle-il?  voyla  voflre  [32]  ouurage,  c'eft  nous  qui


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  101

called  together;  and  —  having  praised  them,  some
for  having  received  holy  Baptism,  others  for  prepar-
ing themselves  to  receive  it ;  having  exhorted  them
to  hold  fast  to  the  resolution  they  have  taken,  and
which  they  have  already  put  into  practice,  to  culti-
vate the  land  and  to  settle  down ;  and  having  recom-
mended to  the  Christians  constancy  in  their  mar-
riages —  he  gave  them  to  understand  that  it  would
be  well  if  they  should  elect  some  chiefs  to  govern
them ;  and  that,  if  the  women  and  the  youth  lived
independently,  this  was  not  the  way  to  preserve  them-
selves. They  all  promised  to  assemble  at  St.  Joseph
to  consider  this  matter.

Three  days  afterward  they  came  [31]  to  our  house
to  see  us,  and  asked  us  how  they  should  proceed  in
this  affair.  Having  explained  to  them  how  it  could
be  done  through  secret  votes,  they  immediately  con-
cluded that  they  must  enter,  one  after  the  other,  the
chamber  of  one  of  us,  to  name,  to  the  Father  who
should  be  there,  three  of  the  principal  men  whom
they  might  consider  best  qualified  to  command.  This
was  done  without  delay;  the  Father  wrote  their
votes  secretly,  then  he  declared  to  them  aloud  how
many  ballots  each  of  them  had,  without  naming  those
who  had  given  them.  The  Christians  prevailed  over
the  Pagans.  Jean  Baptiste  Etinechkavat  did  not
compete  in  the  election,  for,  being  a  Captain  by
descent,  every  one  gave  him  the  first  rank.  One
Pagan  alone  approached  the  number  of  votes  that
the  Christians  had.

The  election  over,  they  looked  at  one  another  in
great  astonishment,  never  having  proceeded  in  this
manner.  No  one  broke  the  silence.  Finally  a  Chris-
tian, crippled  in  one  leg,  who  happened  to  be  present


102  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES [Vol.18

venons  de  conclure  qu'il  faut  que  tels  &  tels  comman-
dent,  ou  pluftoft  c'eft  Dieu  qui  la  ainfi  ordonn^,  il
a  conduit  nos  voix  &  nos  fuffrages,  il  ne  refhe  plus
qu'^  obeyr,  puis  fe  tournant  vers  nous,  ie  voy  bien
cliacun  regarde  fon  compagnon  k  qui  commencera  de
parler,  mes  Peres,  nous  dit-il,  permettez  nous  de  nous
retirer  en  quelque  endroit  hors  de  voflre  maif on ;  afin
que  nous  puilTions  nous  confulter  les  vns  &  les  autres,
fur  ce  que  nous  venons  de  faire,  &  qu'vn  chacun  dife
librement  ce  qu'il  en  penfe,  on  les  congedia  fur  le
champ,  eux  s'efkans  affemblez  en  I'vne  de  leur
cabanes  k  part,  ce  boiteux  poulT^  comme  ie  croy,  de
Tefprit  de  Dieu,  parla  d'vne  fi  grande  ferueur  des
grandeurs  de  la  Foy,  &  fur  tout  des  biens  de  I'obe-
iffance,  qu'il  les  eflonna  tous,  ils  parlementerent
entr'eux  &  conclurent.  Premierement  que  ce
pauure  boiteux,  qui  parloit  fi  bien  de  Dieu,  feroit
Capitaine  des  prieres,  qu'il  feroit  efcout6,  qu'il
apprendroit  de  nous  tout  ce  qu'il  pourroit  des  veri-
tez  de  noflre  creance  pour  leur  expliquer,  [33]  &  que
cliacun  fe  difpoferoit  ^  la  receuoir.

Secondement  ils  en  deftinerent  deux,  qui  tien-
droient  la  ieuneffe  dans  leur  deuoir,  I'vn  eftoit  Chre-
ftien  &  r  autre  encore  Pay  en.

En  troifiefme  lieu  ils  conclurent,  que  les  trois  qui
auoient  eu  plus  de  voix  determineroient  de  leurs
affaires,  auec  lean  Baptifte  def-ja  Capitaine,  &  que
ces  nouueaux  Magiftrats  ne  feroient  qu'vn  an  en
charge,  leur  terme  expir6  qu'on  procederoit  k  vne
nouuelle  eflecftion.

En  quatriefme  lieu,  ils  confirmerent  la  refolution
qu'ils  auoient  prife  de  cultiuer  la  terre,  cela  fai(5l  ils
allerent  trouuer  Monlieur  le  Gouuerneur  pour  luy  ren-


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  1^8

with  the  others,  exclaimed,  "  What  are  we  thinking
about?  Why  does  no  one  speak?  This  is  your  own
[32]  work.  It  is  we  who  have  just  concluded  that
such  and  such  persons  should  command,  or  rather  it
is  God  who  has  so  ordered  it, —  he  has  guided  our
opinions  and  our  ballots;  nothing  more  remains  but
to  obey."  Then,  turning  toward  us,  **  I  see  plainly
that  each  one  is  looking  at  his  companion  to  see  who
will  begin  to  speak.  My  Fathers, ' '  he  said  to  us,
*  *  permit  us  to  withdraw  to  some  place  outside  of  your
house,  that  we  may  consult  among  ourselves  upon
what  we  have  just  done,  and  that  each  one  may  say
freely  what  he  thinks  of  it."  They  were  immedi-
ately dismissed,  and,  having  assembled  apart  in  one  of
their  cabins,  this  lame  man,  urged  on,  as  I  believe,  by
the  spirit  of  God,  spoke  with  so  great  fervor  of  the
grandeurs  of  the  Faith,  and  above  all  of  the  blessings
of  obedience,  that  he  astonished  them  all.  They
parleyed  among  themselves,  and  concluded:  First,
that  this  poor  cripple,  who  spoke  so  well  of  God,
should  be  Captain  of  prayers ;  that  he  should  be  lis-
tened to ;  that  he  should  learn  from  us  what  he  could
of  the  truths  of  our  belief,  to  explain  these  to  them ;
[33]  and  that  each  one  should  dispose  himself  to
receive  it.

Secondly,  they  appointed  two  of  them,  who  should
keep  the  young  men  to  their  duty ;  one  was  a  Chris-
tian, and  the  other  still  a  Pagan.

In  the  third  place,  they  concluded  that  the  three
who  had  received  the  most  votes  should  decide  their
affairs,  with  Jean  Baptiste,  already  a  Captain,  and
that  these  new  Magistrates  should  be  in  charge  only
one  year ;  that,  when  their  term  expired,  they  should
proceed  to  a  new  election.


104  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

dre  raifon  de  leur  precede,  &  pour  le  fupplier  d'au-
thorifer  ceux  qu'ils  auoient  eflens,  il  leur  promit  de  les
maintenir,  &  comme  il  fait  rendre  obeyffance  h.  chaque
pere  de  famille  dans  fa  maifon,  qu'il  tiendra  la  main
s'ils  Ten  requierent,  que  leurs  compatriottes  obeyff ent
h.  ce  qu'ils  ont  conclud  par  entr'eux.  Quand  tout  fut
arrefl6,  la  ieuneffe  paffant  Tarquebufe  [34]  fur  Tef-
paule  k  I'entour  de  la  cabane,  oil  les  Capitaines  auoient
efl6  efleus,  fit  vne  gentile  falue  pour  les  honnorer.

Le  lendemain  I'vn  de  nous  interrogeant  vn  Payen
affez  efloign6  de  la  foy  s'il  ne  penfoit  point  a  fe  faire
inflruire.  N'auez  vous  pas,  dit-il,  ouy  ces  coups
d'arquebufes  qu'on  tira  hier  au  foir,  ce  bruit  vous
aff euroit  de  la  volonte  que  i'ay  de  croire  en  Dieu ;
car  nous  conclumes  tous  qu'il  falloit  vous  efcouter,
&  embraffer  vos  fagons  de  faire.

Comme  tout  cecy  s'efloit  paff6  feulement  entre
les  hommes,  ils  refolurent  d'affembler  les  femmes
pour  les  prelTer  de  fe  faire  inflruire,  &  de  receuoir
le  faindt  Baptefme,  on  les  fit  done  venir,  &  les  ieunes
gens  aufil,  le  bon  fut  qu'on  les  prefcha  fi  bien,  que
le  iour  fuiuant  vne  partie  de  ces  pauures  femmes  ren-
contrant  le  Pere  de  Quen  luy  dirent,  ou  eft  vn  tel
Pere,  nous  le  venons  prier  de  nous  baptifer,  bier  les
hommes  nous  appellerent  en  Confeil,  c'eft  la  pre-
miere f ois  que  iamais  les  femmes  y  font  entries ;  mais
ils  nous  traidlerent  fi  rudement,  [35]  que  nous  en
eflions  toutes  eftonn^es,  c'eft  vous  autres  nous  di-
foient-ils,  qui  eftes  caufes  de  tous  nos  malheurs,  c'eft
vous  qui  retenez  les  demos  parmy  nous,  vous  ne
prefTez  point  pour  eftre  baptifees,  il  ne  fe  faut  pas
contenter  de  demander  vne  feule  fois  cette  faueur
aux  Peres,  il  les  faut  importuner,  vous  eftes  paref-


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  105

In  the  fourth  place,  they  confirmed  the  resolution
they  had  made  to  cultivate  the  land.  This  done,
they  went  to  see  Monsieur  the  Governor  to  give  him
an  account  of  their  proceedings,  and  to  entreat  him
to  authorize  those  whom  they  had  elected.  He  prom-
ised them  that  he  would  support  these ;  and,  as  he
has  obedience  rendered  to  every  head  of  a  family  in
his  own  house,  that  he  would  lend  a  helping  hand  if
they  required  it  of  him,  to  the  end  that  their  coun-
trymen should  obey  what  they  have  mutually  con-
cluded. When  all  was  resolved  upon,  the  young
men,  passing,  with  arquebuses  [34]  upon  their  shoul-
ders, around  the  cabin  where  the  Captains  had  been
elected,  fired  a  neat  salute  in  their  honor.

The  next  day,  when  one  of  us  asked  a  Pagan,  who
was  somewhat  averse  to  the  faith,  if  he  were  not
thinking  of  being  instructed,  '  *  Did  you  not  hear  the
arquebus  shots  last  evening?"  said  he.  ''That
noise  assured  you  of  my  willingness  to  believe  in
God;  for  we  all  concluded  that  we  must  listen  to
you,  and  embrace  your  customs."

As  all  this  took  place  only  among  the  men,  they
resolved  to  call  together  the  women,  to  urge  them
to  be  instructed  and  to  receive  holy  Baptism.  Ac-
cordingly, they  were  brought  together,  and  the  young
people  also.  The  best  of  it  was  that  they  preached
to  them  so  well  that  the  following  day  some  of  these
poor  women,  encountering  Father  de  Quen,  said  to
him,  "  Where  is  such  a  Father?  we  have  come  to  beg
him  to  baptize  us.  Yesterday  the  men  summoned
us  to  a  Council,  the  first  time  that  women  have  ever
entered  one;  but  they  treated  us  so  rudely  [35]  that
we  were  greatly  astonished.  '  It  is  you  women,'
they  said  to  us,  '  who  are  the  cause  of  all  our  misfor-


106  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.18

feufes  d'aller  aux  prieres,  quant  vous  palTez  deuant
la  croix,  vous  ne  la  falues  point,  vous  voulez  eftre
independantes,  or  fgachez  que  vous  obeirez  k  vos
maris,  &  vous  ieuneffe  vous  obeirez  a  vos  parens  &
k  nos  Capitaines,  &  11  quelqu'vn  y  manque  nous  auons
conclud  qu'on  ne  luy  doneroit  point  k  manger.  Voila
vne  partie  du  fermon  de  ces  nouueaux  Predicateurs,
lef quels  k  mon  aduis  font  d'autant  plus  eflonnans
qu'ils  font  nouueaux,  &  tres-efloignez  des  fagons  d'a-
gir  des  Sauuages.  le  croy  bien  qu'ils  n'entreront  pas
tout  d'vn  coup  dans  cette  grande  foufmiffion  qu'ils  fe
promettent ;  mais  il  en  f era  de  cet  article  comme  des
autres,  ils  I'embralTeront  petit  "k  petit.  Vne  ieune
femme  vn  peu  apres  ces  e{lec5tions,  s'en  eflant  fuye
dans  [36]  le  bois  ne  voulant  pas  obeyr  k  fon  mary,
les  Capitaines  la  firent  chercher,  &  nous  vindrent
demander  11  I'ayant  trouu6e  il  ne  feroit  pas  bon  de
Tenchainer  par  vn  pied,  &  fi  ce  feroit  affez  de  la  faire
ieufner  quatre  iours  &  quatre  nuidls  fans  manger,
pour  penitence  de  fa  faute.

II  arriua  au  mefme  temps  vn  traidt  d' edification,
deux  femmes  aueugles,  ayans  ouy  dire  qu'il  falloit
honorer  la  croix  qui  efloit  entre  leurs  cabanes  &  la
Chappelle,  la  cberchoient  auec  leurs  baftons  quant
elles  venoient  ^  la  MefTe,  &  comme  elle  efl  plant6e
dans  vne  pallifTade  de  pieux,  ils  palToient  leurs  bas-
tons  fur  ces  pieux,  fe  doutat  bien  que  cette  croix  eftant
plus  baute,  elles  la  rencontreroient,  quelques  vns  de
nos  Fran9ois  les  voyans  fi  attentiues  k  chercher,  s'ar-
refterent  pour  veoir  ce  qu' elles  vouloient  faire,  apres
auoir  bien  fuyui  la  palliffade,  enfin  elles  rencontrerent
la  croix,  &  toutes  deux  luy  firent  vne  grande  reue-
rence,  cela fit  rire  nos  Francois,  qui  ne  laifTerent


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  107

tunes, — it  is  you  who  keep  the  demons  among  us.
You  do  not  urge  to  be  baptized ;  you  must  not  be  sat-
isfied to  ask  this  favor  only  once  from  the  Fathers,
you  must  importune  them.  You  are  lazy  about  go-
ing to  prayers ;  when  you  pass  before  the  cross,  you
never  salute  it;  you  wish  to  be  independent.  Now
know  that  you  will  obey  your  husbands;  and  you
young  people,  you  will  obey  your  parents  and  our
Captains ;  and,  if  any  fail  to  do  so,  we  have  concluded
to  give  them  nothing  to  eat. '  ' '  This  is  a  part  of  the
sermon  of  these  new  Preachers,  who,  in  my  opinion,
are  so  much  the  more  wonderful  as  they  are  new  and
very  far  removed  from  the  Savage  methods  of  action.
I  believe,  indeed,  that  they  will  not  all  at  once  enter
into  this  great  submissiveness  that  they  promise
themselves ;  but  it  will  be  in  this  point  as  in  others,
they  will  embrace  it  little  by  little.  A  young  woman
having  fled,  shortly  after  these  elections,  into  [36]
the  woods,  not  wishing  to  obey  her  husband,  the
Captains  had  her  searched  for,  and  came  to  ask  us,
if,  having  found  her,  it  would  not  be  well  to  chain
her  by  one  foot ;  and  if  it  would  be  enough  to  make
her  pass  four  days  and  four  nights  without  eating,
as  penance  for  her  fault.

There  occurred  at  the  same  time  an  edifying  inci-
dent. Two  blind  women  having  heard  that  they
must  honor  the  cross  which  was  between  their  cabins
and  the  Chapel,  felt  for  it  with  their  staffs  when  they
came  to  Mass ;  and,  as  it  is  planted  within  a  palisade
of  stakes,  they  passed  their  staffs  over  these  stakes,
wondering  if,  this  cross  being  higher,  they  could
touch  it.  Some  of  our  Frenchmen,  seeing  them  so
earnestly  searching,  stopped  to  see  what  they  in-
tended to  do. After  having  carefully  followed  the


108  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

pas  d'eftre  bien  ediffiez  de  la  limplicit^  de  ces  bonnes
gens.

En  fuite  de  toutes  ces  conclnfions,  ils  [37]  fe  mi-
rent  k  trauailler  k  lenrs  deferts,  de  verite  ie  croy  que
leiirs  Anges  fe  relionyfToient  bien  fort,  les  voyant  li
feruens  dans  vne  occupation  li  innocente  &  fi  vtile,
pour  le  bien  de  leurs  corps  &  de  leurs  ames,  noftre
Reuerend  Pere  Superieur  qui  auoit  palle  I'Hyuer  k
Kebec,  voulut  iouyr  de  cette  confolation,  il  s'en  vint
demeurer  k  S.  lofeph,  &  fit  merueille  pour  les  fecou-
rir.  Nous  somes  extremement  obligez  k  V.  R.  de
nous  auoir  enuoye  vn  homme  fi  prudent,  fi  charitable
&  fi  zel6  pour  le  falut  des  pauures  Sauuages.  Non-
obflant  les  diuertifl^emens  de  fa  charge,  il  a  tellement
aduanc^  en  la  cognoiffance  de  la  langue  qu'il  fe  faict
defia  entendre,  expliquant  le  catechifme  auec  fruidt,
il  s'en  alloit  luy-mefme  auec  nos  hommes  fecourir
ces  bons  Neophites,  leur  donnant  par  fois  k  manger
k  la  fin  de  leur  trauail,  leur  procurant  du  bled  d'Inde
pour  femer,  ie  vous  laifl^e  k  penfer  fi  ces  pauures
Sauuages  eftoient  confolez,  voyans  ces  glands  adtes
de  charite.

Quelques  Frangois  voulans  participer  ^  ce  bon
oeuure,  donnerent  aufll  [38]  quelques  iourn^es  de
leurs  homes  pour  aduancer  cet  ouurage,  &  ayder  ces
pauures  gens  ^  femer  leurs  bleds,  la  graine  de  chari-
ty, produit  des  fruidts  de  gloire.

A  mefme  temps  qu'on  trauailloit  9a  bas  auec  fer-
ueur,  quelques  Algonquins  de  I'lfle  faifoient  le
mefme  aux  trois  riuieres,  le  defert  qu'ils  ont  fait,  eft
I'vne  des  plus  fortes  chaifnes  qui  les  puillent  arre-
fter,  ils  auoient  donn6  parole  k  N.  R.  P.  Superieur
qui  les  alia  vifiter,  de  fe  faire  inftruire,  &  de  cultiuer


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  lOJ^

palisade,  they  finally  encountered  the  cross,  and  both
made  a  deep  reverence  to  it.  This  made  our  French-
men laugh,  yet  they  were  greatly  edified  at  the  sim-
plicity of  these  good  people.

In  consequence  of  all  these  conclusions,  they  [37]
set  to  work  at  their  meadows.  In  truth,  I  believe  that
their  Angels  rejoiced  greatly,  seeing  them  so  fervent
in  an  occupation  so  innocent,  and  so  useful  to  the  wel-
fare of  their  bodies  and  their  souls.  Our  Reverend
Father  Superior,  who  had  passed  the  Winter  at  Kebec,
wishing  to  enjoy  this  consolation,  came  to  live  at  St.
Joseph,  where  he  did  wonders  in  aiding  them.  We
are  extremely  obliged  to  Your  Reverence  for  having
sent  us  a  man  so  prudent,  so  charitable,  and  so  zeal-
ous for  the  salvation  of  the  poor  Savages.  Notwith-
standing the  distractions  of  his  office,  he  has  so
advanced  in  the  knowledge  of  the  language  that  he
already  makes  himself  understood,  explaining  the
catechism  profitably.  He  went  himself  with  our
men  to  succor  these  good  Neophytes,  sometimes  giv-
ing them  food  at  the  end  of  their  work,  and  procur-
ing Indian  corn  for  them  to  plant.  I  leave  you  ta
imagine  whether  these  poor  Savages  were  comforted,
at  seeing  these  great  acts  of  charity.

Some  Frenchmen,  wishing  to  participate  in  this
good  work,  also  gave  [38]  a  few  days'  labor  of  their
men  to  advance  it,  and  to  help  these  poor  people
plant  their  corn.  The  seed  of  charity  produces  fruits
of  glory.

At  the  same  time  that  they  were  working  down
here  with  fervor,  some  Algonquins  of  the  Island
were  doing  the  same  thing  at  the  three  rivers.  The
clearing  they  have  made  is  one  of  the  strongest  chains
that  can  hold  them  there. They  had  given  their


110  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

la  terre,  ie  croy  qu'ils  la  garderont,  fi  la  crainte  de
leurs  ennemis  ne  les  faidt  quitter  prife.  Le  Pere
lacques  Buteux  &  le  Pere  Charles  Raimbault  qui
trauaillent  en  cette  refidence,  les  gaignent  fortement
h.  noffcre  Seigneur.

Quand  nos  Sauuages  eurent  enfemence  leur  champs,
ils  nous  diret  qu'ils  auoient  delTein  de  defcendre  k
TadoujDCac,  en  partie  pour  aller  en  marchandife  aux
peuples  du  Saguene ;  mais  principalement  pour  inui-
ter  le  Capitaine  de  TadoulTac  &  fes  gens,  d'em-
bralTer  la  foy  &  de  venir  demeurer  aupres  d'eux,  &
pource  [39]  qu'en  telles  occaflons  les  prefens  parlent
plus  que  la  bouche,  ils  amalTerent  quantity  de  porce-
laine,  pour  prefenter  k  ce  Capitaine,  nous  y  cotribu-
afmes  quelque  chofe  de  noftre  part,  ils  nous  dirent
encore  que  fi  ceux  de  TadoulTac  fe  rangeoient  auec
eux,  qu'ils  iroient  inuiter  les  autres  nations  plus
efloignees  h.  f aire  le  mef me ;  afin  adioufloient  ils  que
nous  n'ayons  tous  qu'vn  Dieu,  &  qu'vne  fago  de  faire,
nos  paroles  difoient  les  Chrefliens,  ne  feront  point
nouuelles ;  car  le  bruit  de  noftre  creance  f e  ref pend
delia  par  tout,  ha!  qu'il  eft  vray  que,  Deus  fiojier  ignis
con/umens  ejly  que  Dieu  eft  vn  feu  confommant,  &  que
Nemo  ejl  qui  fe  abfcondat  a  calore  eius,  qu'il  n'y  a  mar-
bre  qu'il  n'echauffe.  EuiTay-ie  iamais  creu,  que  des
Barbares  n6s  dans  la  cruaute,  nourris  de  chair  hu-
maine,  fuflent  deuenus  Predicateurs  de  lefus-Chrift,
ie  puis  affeurer  que  ie  ne  fgache  perfonne  qui  leur  ayt
donn6  ces  penf^es,  d'aller  inuiter  les  autres  nations
de  croire  en  Dieu,  c'eft  vn  pur  ouurage  du  faindt
Efprit,  &  afin  qu'on  voye  que  c'efl  I'efprit.  Qui
continet  omnia  &  rep  let  orbem  t  err  arum  fcientiam  [40]
habens  vocis. Voyci  ce  qu'il  a  fait  dire  aux  Sauuages


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  111

word  to  Our  Reverend  Father  Superior,  who  went  to
visit  them,  that  they  would  receive  instruction,  and
would  cultivate  the  land;  I  believe  that  they  will
keep  it,  if  the  fear  of  their  enemies  does  not  cause
them  to  let  go  the  prize.  Father  Jacques  Buteux
and  Father  Charles  Raimbault,  who  labor  in  this  resi-
dence, exert  a  strong  influence  upon  them  for  our
Lord.

When  our  Savages  had  planted  their  fields,  they
told  us  that  they  intended  to  go  down  to  Tadoussac,
partly  to  trade  with  the  peoples  of  the  Saguene,  but
principally  to  invite  the  Captain  of  Tadoussac  and
his  people  to  embrace  the  faith  and  to  come  to  live
near  them ;  and  since  [39]  on  such  occasions  presents
speak  louder  than  words,  they  collected  a  quantity
of  porcelain  to  present  to  this  Captain.  We  con-
tributed something  thereto,  on  our  part.  They  told
us,  besides,  that  if  the  people  of  Tadoussac  ranged
themselves  on  their  side,  they  would  go  and  invite
the  other  more  distant  nations  to  do  the  same,  "  In
order,"  they  added,  "  that  we  may  all  have  only  one
God,  and  one  way  of  doing  things."  '*  Our  words,"
said  the  Christians,  "  will  not  be  new,  for  the  report
of  our  belief  is  already  spread  everywhere."  Ah,
how  true  it  is  that  Deus  noster  ignis  consumens  esty  that
God  is  a  consuming  fire;  and  that  Nemo  est  qui  se
abscondat  a  calore  ejus,  that  there  is  no  marble  that  it
does  not  heat.  Would  I  ever  have  believed  that
Barbarians  born  in  cruelty,  and  fed  upon  human
flesh,  would  become  Preachers  of  Jesus  Christ?  I
can  assure  you  that  I  do  not  know  any  one  who  has
given  them  these  ideas  of  going  to  invite  other
nations  to  believe  in  God, —  it  is  purely  the  work  of
the  holy  Spirit;  and,  in  order  that  it  may  be  seen


112  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

des  trois  Riuieres.  Quelques  canots  d'Attikamegues
(ce  font  peuples  qui  habitent  ordinairement  an  deffus
du  fleuue  des  trois  Riuieres)  eftas  defcendus  vers  nos
Frangois,  les  Algonquins  les  inuiterent  de  venir  de-
meurer  auec  eux  pour  auoir  la  cognoiffance  de  Dieu,
leur  difant  mille  biens  du  fecours  que  nous  leur  ren-
dons  felon  noftre  petit  pouuoir,  ces  nouueaux  hofbes
ne  repartirent  rien  h,  cela ;  mais  s'en  allans  trouuer  le
Pere  Buteux,  ils  luy  tefmoignerent  qu'ils  auoient  vn
grand  defir  d'eftre  inflruidts,  &  de  cultiuer  la  terre,
non  pas  auec  les  Algonquins,  k  raifon  qu'ils  efloient
differens  d'humeur  &  de  langue,  le  Pere  leur  deman-
da  s'ils  ne  voudroient  pas  bien  choifir  vne  place,  vne
iourn^e  de  chemin  ou  enuiron,  dans  le  fleuue  Meta-
ber^tin,  que  nous  appellos  les  trois  Riuieres,  &  que
Ik  deux  Peres  de  noftre  Copagnie  les  iroient  inflruire,
belas!  firent  ils,  c'effc  bien  ce  que  nous  fouhaitte-
rions.  Voicy  les  propres  termes  de  la  lettre  du  Pere
Buteux,  qui  nous  refcriuit  ces  bonnes  nouuelles,
affeure  toy,  me  [41]  dit  le  Capitaine  de  cette  nation,
que  ie  f eray  ce  que  ie  pourray  enuers  mes  gens ;  afin
que  cela  fe  fafle,  tu  en  f§auras  des  nouuelles  deuant
TAutomne,  afin  qu'on  fe  puifl!e  difpofer  pour  defer-
ter  au  Printemps,  prends  courage,  moy  &  mon  oncle
que  voila  parlerons  fortement  de  cet  affaire,  cet  oncle
dont  il  parloit  &  qui  eftoit  Ik  prefent,  efl  vn  bon
vieillard  que  ie  baptifay  Tan  paff6,  &  que  le  fieur
Marfolet  nomma  Nicolas,  ie  luy  auois  dit  qu'il  taf-
chafl  de  fe  venir  confeffer  au  Printemps,  il  n'y  a  pas
manqu6,  il  a  rompu  expres  le  deffein  qu'il  auoit  d'al-
ler  plus  haut,  cet  homme  eft  fort  affectionn6  k  la
faindte  Foy,  ce  qui  luy  donne  vne  grande  confiance
en  Dieu,  dont  en  voicy  vn  effedt  qu'il  me  raconta  lors


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  113

that  it  is  the  spirit,  Qui  continet  omnia  et  replet  orbem
terrarum  scientiam  [40]  habens  vocis,  behold  what  it
has  caused  the  Savages  of  the  three  Rivers  to  say.
Some  canoes  of  Attikamegues  (these  are  tribes  that
live  ordinarily  above  the  river  of  the  three  Riv-
ers) having  come  down  towards  our  French,  the
Algonquins  invited  them  to  come  and  live  with  them,
in  order  to  obtain  a  knowledge  of  God, —  telling  them
a  thousand  good  things  about  the  help  that  we  ren-
der them  according  to  our  limited  power.  These
new  guests  answered  nothing  to  this;  but,  going  to
see  Father  Buteux,  they  testified  to  him  that  they
had  a  great  desire  to  be  instructed  and  to  cultivate
the  land, — but  not  with  the  Algonquins,  because
they  were  of  different  natures  and  language.  The
Father  asked  them  if  they  would  not  like  to  choose
a  place,  distant  one  day's  journey  or  thereabout,  on
the  river  Metaberoutin,  which  we  call  the  three
Rivers,  and  that  there  two  Fathers  of  our  Society
would  go  to  instruct  them.  *'  Ah,"  they  replied,
**  that  is  just  what  we  would  like."  Here  are  the
exact  words  of  the  letter  of  Father  Buteux,  who
wrote  us  this  good  news :  "  *  Rest  thee  assured, '  [41]
the  Captain  of  this  nation  said  to  me,  '  that  I  shall
do  what  I  can  with  my  people,  in  order  that  this  may
be  accomplished ;  thou  shalt  hear  news  of  it  before
Autumn,  so  that  arrangements  may  be  made  to  clear
the  land  in  the  Spring.  Take  courage !  I  and  my
uncle,  whom  you  see,  will  speak  urgently  of  this
matter.'  This  uncle  of  whom  he  spoke  and  who  was
present  there,  is  a  good  old  man  whom  I  baptized
last  year,  and  whom  sieur  Marsolet  named  Nicholas.
I  had  told  him  that  he  should  try  to  come  and  con-
fess in  the  Spring. He  did  not  fail  to  do  so,  purposely


114  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

que  ie  le  voulois  congedier,  apres  s'efhre  confeffe,
attend  encor  vn  petit  me  dit-il,  ie  te  veux  dire  ce
que  m'a  fait  noflre  Pere,  c'eft  ainfi  qu'il  appelloit
Dieu,  les  neiges  n'ont  pas  efte  bonnes  cette  annee,  ce
qui  a  efl6  caufe  qu'a  la  fin  de  I'Hyuer  ie  me  fuis
trouu6  vne  fois  bien  en  peine,  ie  n'auois  rien  ^  man-
ger, &  ie  n'efperois  pas  d'en  trouuer  auec  mes  iambes
della  vieilles,  [42]  veu  que  de  meilleurs  chaffeurs  que
moy  perdoient  courage,  ie  m'addrellay  pour  lors,
comme  ie  fay  en  toutes  mes  neceflites  h.  noftre  Pere,
&  luy  dis  i'efpere  en  toy,  tu  es  le  maiftre  de  tout,
ayde  nous,  fais  ce  qu'il  te  plaira,  quelque  teps  apres
ma  priere,  ie  rencontray  inopinement  deux  Orignaux,
dont  i'en  tuay  vn  fur  le  champ,  &  donnay  charge  ^
de  ieunes  gens  d'aller  tuer  I'autre,  ce  qu'ils  firent,
ainfi  i'efpere  que  celuy  qui  eft  bon  me  logera  au  ciel
auec  luy.  Ie  puis  dire  en  verit6  que  le  P.  R[a]im-
bault  &  moy  voyans  comme  ce  bon  homme  s'eftoit  fl
bien  conferue  dans  les  forefts  &  parmy  des  Barbares,
n'ayant  eu  que  fort  peu  d'inftrudtion,  n'admirafmes
la  h6t€  de  Dieu ;  le  faindt  Efprit  eft  vn  grand  maiftre.
Nos  Algonquins  font  allez  en  traidte  vers  vne  na-
tion qui  fe  nomme  les  Vtakd'amivek  [sc.  8tak«'ami-
iiek],  ceux-cy  traidlent  auec  d'autres  qui  viennent  du
Nord,  &  qui  s'appellent  Papiraga«'ek,  ils  ont  vn  ren-
dez-vous,  oh.  ils  s'allemblet  au  mois  d'Aouft,  il  fait
s'y  froid  au  pays  de  ceux-cy  que  les  arbres  ne  vien-
nent pas  k  iufte  grandeur,  pour  donner  de  I'efcorce
fuffifante  pour  [43]  leur  faire  des  canots,  qu'ils  achep-
tent  des  autres  peuples,  i'efpere  que  la  Foy  fera  por-
t6e  dans  ces  nations,  qu'on  pourra  attirer  &  arrefter
ga-bas  auec  le  temps.  Ce  font  les  paroles  du  Pere,
Dieu  le  veille  exaucer.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  115

breaking  off  his  plan  of  going  farther  up.  This  man
takes  a  deep  interest  in  the  holy  Faith,  and  this
gives  him  great  confidence  in  God,  of  which  here  is
one  result  that  he  related  to  me  when  I  would  have
dismissed  him.  After  having  confessed,  he  said  to
me,  *  Wait  a  little  longer;  I  wish  to  tell  thee  what
our  Father  has  done  for  me' —  it  is  thus  he  called  God —
'The  snows  have  not  been  favorable  this  year,  which
caused  me  once  at  the  end  of  the  Winter  to  be  in
great  distress ;  I  had  nothing  to  eat,  and  I  did  not
expect  to  find  any  game  with  my  legs  already  old,
[42]  seeing  that  better  hunters  than  I  had  lost  cour-
age. I  addressed  myself  then,  as  I  do  in  all  my  ne-
cessities, to  our  Father,  and  said  to  him,  "My  hope
is  in  thee,  thou  art  the  master  of  all ;  help  us ;  do
what  shall  please  thee.  * '  Some  time  after  my  pray-
er, I  encountered  unexpectedly  two  Moose, — one  of
which  I  killed  immediately,  and  charged  some  young
men  to  go  and  kill  the  other  one,  which  they  did.
So  I  hope  that  he  who  is  good  will  lodge  me  in
heaven  with  him.'  I  can  say  truly  that  Father
R[a]imbault  and  I,  seeing  how  this  good  man  had
been  preserved  in  the  forests  and  among  Barbarians,
though  he  had  had  but  very  little  instruction,  admired
the  goodness  of  God.  The  holy  Ghost  is  a  great
master.

* '  Our  Algonquins  have  gone  to  trade  in  the  vicin-
ity of  a  nation  called  the  Outakw'amiwek.^^  The
latter  trade  with  others  who  come  from  the  North,
and  who  are  called  Papiragaw'ek.^^  They  have  a
rendezvous  where  they  assemble  in  the  month  of
August.  It  is  so  cold  in  the  country  of  the  latter
that  the  trees  do  not  attain  the  proper  size  to  furnish
them  bark  enough  for [43] making their canoes.


116  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.18

I'ay  defia  dit,  qu'vne  piece  de  cent  efcus  efl  capable
d'arrefter  &  de  conuertir  toute  vne  famille,  par  vne
petite  maifonnette  qu'on  luy  dreffe,  partie  ^  la  Fran-
9oife,  partie  k  la  fagon  des  Sauuages,  pleuft  k  Dieu
que  la  ftiperfluit6  des  baftimens  de  France,  fut
conuertie  en  ces  petits  edifices,  &  que  la  deuotion
d'arrefter  &  fixer  ces  pauures  peuples,  entraft  dans
le  coeur  des  puiffans  du  monde.  Qui  reduit  vne
famille  conuertit  tons  fes  defcendans,  &  fait  vn  petit
peuple  Cbreftien.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  117

whicli  they  buy  from  other  tribes.  I  hope  the  Faith
will  be  carried  into  these  nations,  that  we  may  be
able  to  attract  and  locate  them  down  here  in  the
course  of  time. "  These  are  the  words  of  the  Father;
may  God  hearken  to  them.

I  have  already  said  that  the  sum  of  a  hundred  6cus
is  sufficient  to  hold  and  convert  an  entire  family,  by
means  of  a  little  house  that  is  built  for  it,  partly
in  the  French  way,  partly  in  the  fashion  of  the
Savages.  Would  to  God  that  the  superfluity  of
buildings  in  France  were  converted  into  these  little
edifices;  and  that  zeal  to  render  these  poor  peoples
permanently  settled  would  enter  the  hearts  of  the
mighty  ones  of  the  earth.  He  who  civilizes  one  family
converts  all  its  descendants,  and  makes  a  miniature
Christian  people.


118  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.18


[44]  CHAPITRE  IV.

DES SAUUAGES BAPTISES,  & DES BONNES ACTIONS DE
CETTE NOUUELLE EGLISE.

NOUS  auons  baptif6  cette  ann^e  enuiron  douze
cens  Sauuages,  tant  aux  Hurons  qu'icy  bas,
ceux  qui  ont  receu  ce  Sacrement  6s  refidences
de  Kebec,  de  S.  lofeph,  &  des  trois  Riuieres,  font  la
plufpart  perfonnes  adultes,  qui  ont  embraff6  la  Foy
de  lefus-Chrifl,  dans  vne  bonne  fant6,  apres  vne  fuffi-
fante  inflrudtion  qu'on  leur  a  donn6e,  ils  viuent
maintenant  dans  vne  ioye  &  dans  vne  innocence  tres-
aymable.  le  ne  m'arrefleray  pas  k  d'efcrire  les  par-
ticularit^s  de  leurs  baptefmes,  ie  me  contenteray  de
coucber  quelques  vnes  de  leurs  bonnes  adtions,  &
des  bons  fentimens  que  Dieu  leur  donne.  C'efl  main-
tenant  qu'on  pent  dire  que,  Samaria  recipit  Verbum
[45]  Dei,  qu'il  n'y  a  point  de  barbaric  k  I'efpreuue
des  bont6s  de  Dieu,  les  ames  faindtes  qui  ont  arrouf6
ces  nouuelles  plantes  de  leurs  larmes,  &  qui  les  ont
fait  germer  &  pouffer  par  leurs  fainctes  prieres,  &
par  leurs  f ecours  cbari tables :  goufterot  auec  plaifir
ces  fruidts  du  fang  de  lefus-Chrift,  que  ie  leur  pre-
fente  de  tout  mon  cceur.

Nous  auons  done  en  la  refidence  de  faindt  lofeph,
vne  nouuelle  Eglife  de  Sauuages,  qui  fe  rallemblent
petit  k  petit  en  ce  lieu  1^,  tant  pour  eflre  inflruidts,
que  pour  cultiuer  la  terre.  Nous  en  auos  vn  autre
aux  trois  Riuieres,  qui  pour  eflre  plus  ieune  n'a  pas


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  119


[44]  CHAPTER  IV.

OF THE SAVAGES BAPTIZED, AND THE GOOD DEEDS
IN THIS NEW CHURCH.

WE  have  baptized  this  year  about  twelve  hun-
dred Savages,  including  those  among  the
Hurons  as  well  as  those  down  here.  Those
who  have  received  this  Sacrament  at  the  residences
of  Kebec,  St.  Joseph,  and  the  three  Rivers,  are  for
the  most  part  adults,  who  have  embraced  the  Faith
of  Jesus  Christ  in  good  health,  after  they  have  been
given  sufficient  instruction.  They  are  living  now  in
most  delightful  happiness  and  innocence.  I  will  not
stop  to  describe  the  particulars  of  their  baptisms,
but  will  content  myself  with  mentioning  some  of
their  good  actions  and  some  of  the  good  sentiments
that  God  gives  them.  It  is  now  that  we  can  say,
Samaria  recipit  Verbum  [45]  Dei,  there  is  no  barbarian
condition  that  is  proof  against  God's  goodness.  The
pious  souls  who  have  watered  these  new  plants  with
their  tears,  and  who  have  made  them  germinate  and
grow  by  their  holy  prayers  and  by  their  kindly  assist-
ance, will  taste  with  pleasure  these  fruits  of  the
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  I  present  to  them  with
all  my  heart.

We  have,  then,  at  the  residence  of  saint  Joseph,  a
new  Church  of  Savages,  who  are  gradually  collecting
in  that  place,  both  to  be  instructed  and  to  cultivate
the  land.  We  have  another  at  the  three  Rivers,
which,  being  younger,  is  not  as  yet  so  strong. The


120  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.  18

encor  tant  de  force.  Les  principaux  Sauuages  d'icy-
bas  font  delia  Chrefliens,  les  autres  afpirent  h,  cette
faueur,  c'efb  vne  confolation  bien  douce  de  veoir  la
candeur  de  ces  nouueaux  enfans  de  Dieu.

Premierement  il  n'y  a  nulle  difficulte  de  porter  ces
bons  Neophites,  k  frequeter  les  Sacremens  les  iours
qu'on  dellre  qu'ils  s'en  approchent,  vn  [des]  Peres  s'en
va  la  veille  par  les  cabanes,  ou  bien  leur  dit  aux  pri-
eres,  &  k  I'inflrudtion  qu'on  leur  [46]  fait  tous  les
foirs  en  la  Chappelle,  ou  ils  s'affemblent,  demain  ne
manques  pas  de  vous  venir  confeffer,  &  ceux  h.  qui
on  accordera  la  faindle  Communion  la  receuront  auec
reuerence,  ho  !  refpondent-ils,  cela  fait  tenez  vous
prefks  li  vous  voulez  des  quatre  beures  du  matin ;  car
vous  ne  manquerez  pas  de  voir  des  Sauuages  k  voftre
porte,  tous  prefts  de  fe  confeffer,  cette  obeyffance  eft
elle  pas  bien  aymable?

Comme  on  leur  recommande  de  ne  laiffer  croupir
dans  leur  coeur  aucune  offence  qu'ils  iugent  tant  foit
peu  grief ue;  i'en  ay  veu  s'en  venir  d6s  le  point  du
iour  en  noftre  maifon,  &  dire  k  Tvn  de  nous,  mon
Pere,  mon  coeur  eft  mechant,  i'ay  fach6  Dieu,  i'ay
fait  telle  offence,  difant  tout  baut  leur  pech6,  par
exemple,  i'ay  fait  vn  feflin  h.  tout  manger,  le  Diable
ma  tromp6,  ie  me  viens  confeffer,  ie  n'auray  point
de  repos  que  ie  n'aye  vomy  la  malice  de  mon  ame ;
s'eftans  confeffez  ils  s'en  vont  foulagez,  fe  croyans
purifiez  dans  le  fang  de  lefus-Chrifl  qui  leur  eft
appliqu6  par  ce  Sacrement,  dont  ils  con9oiuent  fort
bien  la  vertu.

[47]  II  y  en  a  qui  ne  manquent  point  de  fe  con-
feffer tous  les  huidt  iours,  &  de  fe  communier  autant
de  fois  qu'on  leur  permet,  car  ils  ne  le  font  point
fans  cong6.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  121

principal  Savages  down  here  are  already  Christians,
and  the  others  aspire  to  this  grace.  It  is  a  very-
sweet  consolation  to  see  the  candor  of  these  new  chil-
dren of  God.

First,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  inducing  these  good
Neophytes  to  frequent  the  Sacraments  on  the  days
when  they  are  desired  to  approach  them.  One  of
the  Fathers  goes  through  the  cabins,  the  evening
before,  or  says  to  them  at  prayers,  and  at  the  in-
struction that  is  [46]  given  them  every  evening,  in
the  Chapel  where  they  assemble,  **  Do  not  fail  to
come  to-morrow  to  confess ;  and  those  to  whom  the
holy  Communion  shall  be  granted,  shall  receive  it
with  reverence."  Ho!  they  respond.  This  done,
hold  yourselves  in  readiness,  if  you  please,  at  four
o'clock  in  the  morning,  for  you  will  be  sure  to  see
Savages  at  your  door,  all  ready  to  confess.  Is  not
this  obedience  very  pleasing?

When  they  were  urged  to  allow  no  offense,  how-
ever insignificant  they  might  consider  it,  to  stagnate
in  their  hearts,  I  have  seen  them  come  to  our  house
at  the  break  of  day,  and  say  to  one  of  us,  "  My  Father,
my  heart  is  wicked;  I  have  offended  God;  I  have
committed  such  an  offense, "  naming  their  sin  aloud, —
for  example,  **  I  have  made  an  eat-all  feast;  the
Devil  has  deluded  me.  I  am  going  to  confess;  I
shall  have  no  rest  until  I  have  vomited  forth  the
malice  of  my  soul."  Having  confessed,  they  go
away  relieved,  believing  themselves  purified  in  the
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  applied  to  them
through  this  Sacrament,  the  virtue  of  which  they
very  well  comprehend.

[47]  There  are  some  who  do  not  fail  to  confess
every  week, and  to receive communion as many


122  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

I'ay  defia  remarqii6  aux  Relations  precedentes,
que  plufieurs  quittent  leur  ieu,  ou  leur  difner,  ou  leur
fouper,  c'efl  k  dire  leur  manger,  quand  on  les  appelle
aux  prieres  oh  k  I'inflrucftion  qui  f e  fait  tons  les  iours
vne  fois  ou  deux  ^  I'Eglife,  quand  ils  ne  font  point
k  la  chaff  e.

Vn  de  nos  Frangois  effcant  venu  certain  iour  de
grand  matin  k  Sillery,  &  ay  at  iette  les  yeux  par  les
cabanes,  vit  encor  les  Sauuages  tous  endormis,  Ik
deffus  on  fonne  la  premiere  Melfe,  laquelle  aflez
fouuent  fe  dit  deuant  que  le  Soleil  fe  leue.  En  vn
moment  il  vit  la  plufpart  des  Clirefties  debouts,  &  en
vn  tour  de  main  s'eflans  enueloppez  de  leurs  cou-
uertes  qui  leur  feruetde  robbes  &  de  lidts,  ils  s'e  vin-
dret  droit  a  la  Chappelle  en  cet  equipage  fans  mot
dire,  ce  bon  homme  qui  les  regardoit  reffca  tout  eflon-
ne  les  ayant  pluftoft  veu  en  la  Maifon  de  Dieu  qu'vn
Frangois  ne  fe  feroit  liabill6,  la  plufpart  [48]  des
Chreftiens  font  ialoux  d' entendre  tous  les  iours  la
Melfe,  cet  auatage  qu'ils  ont  par  deffus  les  Payens  de
pouuoir  affifter  k  ces  myfteres  facrez  les  confole
fort.

Nous  auons  eft6  long-temps  en  doute  fi  nous  bap-
tizerions  les  ieunes  gens  prefts  de  fe  marier  deuant
qu'ils  ayent  pris  party.  L' experience  nous  fait  veoir
que  la  grace  du  Baptefme  opere  puiffamment  dans
vn  cceur,  la  loy  qui  deffend  au  Chreftien  de  s'allier
d'vne  infidelle  efl  fi  bien  receue  parmy  ces  bonnes
gens,  que  fi  vn  ieune  homme  Payen  recherche  vne
fille  Chreflienne,  pour  T ordinaire  il  s'addrelfera  k
nous  pour  eftre  inftruit,  &  pour  receuoir  le  Baptefme
deuant  que  parler  k  la  fille,  car  il  fgait  bien  qu'elle
le  mefprifera  comme  vn  infidele,  ou  fi  elle  a  quelque


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  128

times  as  they  are  permitted,  for  they  do  not  do  so
without  leave.

I  have  already  remarked  in  the  preceding  Rela-
tions that  many  quit  their  games,  or  their  dinner  or
supper, —  that  is  to  say,  their  food, —  when  they  are
called  to  prayers,  or  to  the  instruction  that  is  given
once  or  twice  every  day  in  the  Church,  when  they
are  not  away  hunting.

One  of  our  Frenchmen  having  come  to  Sillery  one
day,  early  in  the  morning,  and  having  glanced
through  the  cabins,  saw  all  the  Savages  still  sleep-
ing. At  that  moment  the  bell  was  rung  for  the  first
Mass,  which  is  often  said  before  the  Sun  rises.  In
a  moment,  he  saw  the  greater  part  of  the  Christians
upon  their  feet;  and  in  the  turn  of  one's  hand  they
had  wrapped  themselves  in  their  blankets,  which
serve  as  garments  and  as  beds ;  they  came  straight  to
the  Chapel,  in  this  costume,  in  complete  silence.
The  good  man  who  was  looking  at  them  was  greatly
astonished  at  seeing  them  in  the  House  of  God
before  a  Frenchman  would  have  been  dressed.  The
majority  [48]  of  the  Christians  are  anxious  to  hear
Mass  every  day.  The  advantage  they  have  over  the
Pagans,  of  being  able  to  attend  these  sacred  mys-
teries, consoles  them  greatly.

We  have  been  long  in  doubt  whether  we  should
baptize  young  people  of  marriageable  age  before
they  have  made  their  choice.  Experience  has  shown
us  that  the  grace  of  Baptism  operates  powerfully  in
a  heart.  The  law  which  forbids  the  Christian  to
ally  himself  with  an  unbeliever  is  so  well  received
among  these  simple  people  that,  if  a  young  Pagan  is
seeking  a  Christian  girl,  he  will  usually  apply  to  us
to  be  instructed  and  to  receive  Baptism  before  speak-


124  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  j£SUITES [Vol.18

bonne  inclination  pour  luy  elle  ne  manquera  pas  de
luy  dire  qu'elle  ne  fe  pent  pas  marier  fans  le  confen-
tement  du  Pere  qui  I'aura  baptifee  ou  inflruidte.

Nous  viuons  maintenant  dans  vne  profonde  paix,
la  Foy  eft  refpect^e  des  Pay  ens  mefme,  les  nouueaux
Cbreftiens  font  dans  la  ferueur,  il  eft  vray  que  Dieu
[49]  a  efprouue  ces  pauures  peuples  par  de  grandes
calamitez,  mais  comme  la  nuidt  retourne  apres  le
iour,  &  I'Hyuer  apres  I'Eft^,  ie  m 'attend  bien  qu'il
s'efleuera  quelque  tempefte  apres  cefte  bonace.  Ie
me  perfuade  quafi  que  ces  bourrafques  prouiendront
des  mariages  faits  a  la  fagon  des  Chreftiens,  les  Sau-
uages  font  depuis  plufieurs  fiecles  dans  la  poffelTion
d'vne  pleine  liberty  brutale  changeans  de  femmes
quand  il  leur  plaift,  n'en  prenant  quVne  ou  plufieurs,
felon  leur  palTion,  maintenant  qu'ils  fe  font  Chreftiens,
il  faut  qu'ils  baiffent  le  col  fous  le  ioug  d'vn  mariage,
qui  pent  eftre  leur  feblera  vn  iour  bien  rude,  il  eft
vray  qu'il  ne  s'eft  iamais  trouu6  au  monde  d' alliances
plus  faindtes  &  plus  parfaictes,  &  plus  propre  pour
conferuer  I'amiti^,  que  celles  des  Chreftiens;  mais
cela  n'empefche  pas  que  les  mari6s  tribulationem  carnis
habeanty  ne  foient  affez  fouuent  troubles  dans  leurs
mefnages,  &  que  ce  ne  foit  vne  efpece  de  martyr,
d' eftre  116  infeparablement  auec  vn  homme  ou  vne
femme,  qui  aura  plus  d'apret6  qu'vn  [50]  chardon,
&  moins  de  douceur  qu'vne  epine.

Or  ce  n'eft  pas  que  iufques  k  prefent  nous  ayons
grand  sublet  de  nous  plaindre  de  nos  Neophites  en
ce  point,  au  contraire,  ie  dirois  volotiers  que  1' amour
que  fe  portent  ceux  que  nous  auons  mari6s  en  face
de  I'Eglife,  apres  la  publication  des  bancs  [sc.  bans],
&  le  defir  qu'ils  ont  de  perfeuerer  iufques  ^  leur


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  125

ing  to  the  girl ;  for  lie  knows  very  well  that  she  will
scorn  him  as  an  unbeliever,  or,  if  she  be  well  inclined
toward  him,  she  will  not  hesitate  to  tell  him  that  she
cannot  marry  him  without  the  consent  of  the  Father
who  may  have  baptized  or  instructed  her.

We  are  living  now  in  profound  peace ;  the  Faith
is  respected  even  by  the  Pagans,  and  the  new  Chris-
tians are  fervent.  True,  God  [49]  has  tried  these
poor  people  by  great  calamities ;  and,  as  night  returns
after  day,  and  Winter  after  Summer,  I  am  expecting
with  certainty  that  he  will  raise  up  some  storm
after  this  calm.  I  am  almost  persuaded  that  these
tempests  will  arise  from  the  marriages  made  in  the
Christian  way.  The  Savages  have  been  for  many
ages  in  possession  of  a  complete  brutal  liberty,  chang-
ing wives  when  they  pleased, — taking  only  one  or
several,  according  to  their  inclinations.  Now  that
they  have  become  Christians,  they  must  bend  their
heads  under  the  yoke  of  single  marriage,  which  per-
haps will,  some  day,  seem  to  them  very  hard.  It  is
true  that  no  alliances  have  ever  been  found  in  the
world  more  holy  and  more  perfect,  and  better  adapted
for  preserving  affection,  than  those  of  Christians.
But  that  does  not  prevent  that  those  who  are  married
tribulationem  carnis  habeant,  and  be  often  annoyed  in
their  households,  and  that  it  should  be  a  sort  of
martyrdom,  to  be  inseparably  bound  to  a  man  or  a
woman  who  may  have  more  sharpness  than  a  [50]
thistle,  and  less  softness  than  a  thorn  bush.

Now  it  is  not  that,  hitherto,  we  have  great  reason
to  complain  of  our  Neophytes  in  this  matter.  On
the  contrary,  I  can  readily  say  that  the  love  which
inspires  those  who  have  married  with  the  rites  of
the  Church,  after  the  publication  of  the  banns,  and


126  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.18

mort  dans  cette  amiti6,  eft  vn  miracle  de  la  Religion
Chreftienne,  il  eft  bien  vray  que  deuant  que  de  les
baptifer,  &  par  apres  deuant  que  de  les  marier,  nous
leur  faifons  fortement  apprebender  les  loix  du  ma-
nage, leur  faifant  voir  1' importance  qu'il  y  a  d'obeir
aux  ordonnances  de  Dieu  &  de  fon  Eglife,  &  la  dif-
grace  qu'ils  encourreroient  de  choquer  I'autborite  de
Monlieur  le  Cheualier  de  Montmagny  noftre  Gouuer-
neur,  lequel  ne  manqueroit  pas  de  faire  punir  feuere-
ment  ceux  qui  rebuteroient  leurs  femmes  pour  en
prendre  d'autres.

Veritablement  Dieu  nous  a  fauorife  d'vn  homme
felon  fon  coeur,  tres  zele  [51]  pour  fa  gloire  &  pour
fon  feruice,  comme  il  voit  1* importance  qu'il  y  a
d'authorifer  ce  Sacrement,  &  de  le  redre  venerable
parmy  ces  peuples,  il  defira  que  la  ceremonie  de  trois
mariages  que  nous  auons  publics  ^  Sillery,  fe  paffat
k  Kebec,  &  voulut  luy  mefme  faire  vn  magnifique
feftin  k  tous  les  conuies  aux  nopces,  Madame  de  la
Pelletrie  &  quelques  autres  Dames  Frangoif es  prirent
charge  d'accommoder  les  6pouf6es,  &  pour  les  hom-
mes  on  les  fit  ricbement  veflir,  portans  les  dons  pre-
cieux,  que  fa  Maieft6  fit  Tan  pafl^e  ^  quelques  vns  de
nos  Sauuages,  les  principaux  de  nos  Frangois  les  con-
duirent  auec  honneur  iufques  a  T  Eglife,  ayant  receu
le  Sacrement  de  mariage,  ils  les  menerent  en  vne
fale,  oh.  ils  furent  tres-bien  traictes.  Les  Sauuages
voyant  cet  appareil  eftoient  rauis,  nos  Frangois  bien
edifies,  &  les  cieux  prenoient  plaifir  k  vne  adlion  qui
fe  faifoit  pour  la  gloire  de  celuy  qui  les  a  baftis.
Quelques  Montagnets  &  Algonquins,  non  conuies
aux  nopces,  regardoient  ces  ceremonies  auec  eftonne-
ment,  &  leurs  femmes  voyant  les  ieunes  filles  &  [52]


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  127

their  desire  to  persevere  until  death  in  this  affection-
ate relation,  is  a  miracle  of  the  Christian  Religion.
It  is  indeed  true  that  before  baptizing  them,  and
afterwards  before  marrying  them,  we  clearly  ex-
plain to  them  the  laws  of  marriage,  showing  them
the  importance  of  obeying  the  ordinances  of  God
and  of  the  Church,  and  the  disgrace  they  incur  by
clashing  with  the  authority  of  Monsieur  the  Cheva-
lier de  Montmagny,  our  Governor,  who  would  not
hesitate  to  have  those  severely  punished  who  should
discard  their  wives  in  order  to  take  others.

Truly,  God  has  favored  us  with  a  man  after  his
own  heart,  very  zealous  [51]  for  his  glory  and  for
his  service.  As  he  saw  the  importance  of  authoriz-
ing this  Sacrament,  and  of  making  it  reverenced
among  these  peoples,  he  desired  that  the  ceremony
for  three  marriages  that  we  had  published  at  Sillery
should  take  place  at  Kebec,  and  wished  himself  to
make  a  magnificent  feast  for  all  those  invited  to  the
nuptials.  Madame  de  la  Pelletrie  and  some  other
French  Ladies  took  charge  of  dressing  the  brides ;
and  as  for  the  men,  we  had  them  richly  clothed,
wearing  the  precious  gifts  which  his  Majesty  made
last  year  to  some  of  our  Savages.  Our  leading
Frenchmen  conducted  them  with  honor  to  the  Church,
and,  after  they  had  received  the  Sacrament  of  mar-
riage, took  them  into  a  hall,  where  they  were  hand-
somely entertained.  The  Savages,  when  they  saw
this  ceremoniousness,  were  enraptured,  and  our
French  people  greatly  edified ;  and  the  heavens  took
delight  in  an  act  which  was  done  for  the  glory  of
him  who  built  them.  Some  Montagnais  and  Algon-
quins,  not  invited  to  the  wedding,  regarded  these
ceremonies  with  astonishment ;  and  their  wives,  see-


128  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  JJ^SUITES [Vol.18

femmes  qu'on  alloit  marier  reueftues  des  petites
richelles  du  pays,  dont  ils  font  grande  eftime,  fe  di-
foient  Tvne  k  Tautre,  on  cognoifl  bien  que  ces  epou-
f6es  ne  font  point  orphelines,  que  leurs  peres  ne  font
pas  morts,  elles  ne  feroient  pas  fi  braues  li  elle
n'auoient  de  bons  parens,  loiiant  par  cette  admiration
le  foin  qu'on  a  de  ces  nouuelles  plantes  du  iardin  de
TEglife.  I'entendy  de  mes  oreillesces  paroles  fortir
de  la  bouche  de  quelques  vns  de  nos  Frangois,  nous
n'attendions  pas  cette  benedic5tion  de  nos  lours,  en
verit6  c'eft  vne  confolation  bien  fenflble,  de  voir  vn
Barbare  efleu6  dans  la  liberty  qu'ont  les  ames  \sc.  anes]
fauuages,  fe  captiuer  doucement  fous  le  ioug  de
lefus-Chrift  noflre  Sauueur.

L'vn  de  ces  mari^s  eftoit  Vincent  Xauier,  fils  de
deff  undt  Frangois  Xauier  Nenaskvmato,  ieune  homme
ag6  d'enuiron  vingt  deux  ans,  fe  voyant  priu6  de  fon
pere  &  de  fa  belle  mere,  emport^s  de  1' epidemic  com-
mune, nous  vint  dire  qu'il  auoit  befoin  du  fecours
d'vne  femme,  qui  luy  fes  raquettes  &  fes  robes,  bref
qui  prit  garde  k  fon  mefnage,  i'ay  de  [53]  I'affedtion,
difoit-il,  pour  vne  ieune  fille,  ie  vous  prie  d'aflembler
mes  parens,  &  de  considerer  fi  elle  m'effc  propre,  fi
vous  iug^s  que  ce  foit  mon  bien  ie  Tefpouferay,
llnon  ie  fuiuray  voftre  conf eil :  fes  parens  &  fes  amis
conclurent  que  ce  party  luy  efloit  fortable.  Or
comme  I'Aduent  approcboit,  nous  luy  difmes  qu'^  la
verity  il  fe  pouuoit  bien  marier  en  ce  faindt  temps,
mais  que  les  plus  fages  Cbreftiens  ne  le  faifoit  pas,
ouy,  mais  difoit-il,  le  temps  me  preffe  d'aller  k  la
cbaffe,  vous  me  remettez  k  quarante  iours  d'icy,  qui
me  fera  mes  raquettes,  priez  en  voftre  promife,  luy
difmes  nous,  il  fe  mit  k  rire,  ie  me  feray  refpondit-


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  129

ing  the  young  girls  and  [52]  women  who  were  about
to  be  married  arrayed  in  the  small  treasures  of  the
country,  which  they  greatly  value,  said  to  one  an-
other, "■  One  could  easily  tell  that  these  brides  are
not  orphans,  that  their  fathers  are  not  dead;  that
they  would  not  be  so  fine  if  they  did  not  have  good
parents,"  praising  by  this  admiration  the  care  that
is  taken  of  these  new  plants  in  the  garden  of  the
Church.  I  heard  with  my  own  ears  these  words
come  from  the  lips  of  some  of  our  French  people, —
'  *  We  did  not  expect  this  blessing  in  our  time ;  in
truth,  it  is  a  very  touching  consolation  to  see  a  Bar-
barian, reared  in  the  freedom  of  the  wild  asses,  bring
himself  meekly  under  the  yoke  of  Jesus  Christ,  our
Savior."

One  of  these  bridegrooms  was  Vincent  Xavier,  son
of  the  deceased  Frangois  Xavier  Nenaskumato,  a
young  man  about  twenty-two  years  old.  Finding
himself  deprived  of  his  father  and  stepmother,  who
were  carried  off  in  the  general  epidemic,  he  came  to
tell  us  that  he  needed  the  help  of  a  woman  to  make
his  snowshoes  and  clothes, — in  brief,  to  take  care  of
his  household.  ""  I  am  [53]  in  love  with  a  young
girl,  * '  said  he ;  "I  beg  you  to  call  my  relatives  to-
gether, and  to  consider  whether  she  is  suitable  for
me.  If  you  decide  that  it  is  for  my  good,  I  will
marry  her;  if  not,  I  will  follow  your  advice."  His
relatives  and  friends  decided  that  this  choice  would
be  a  suitable  one  for  him.  Now  as  Advent  was  draw-
ing near,  we  told  him  that,  in  truth,  he  could  very
properly  marry  at  this  holy  season,  but  that  the  most
prudent  Christians  did  not  do  it.  "  Yes,"  said  he,
*  *  but  I  am  in  a  hurry  to  go  hunting.  If  you  put  me
off  until  forty  days  hence,  who  will  make  my  snow-


130  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.  Ig

il,  gauffer  de  moy :  car  ce  n'eft  pas  la  couftume  de
noflre  nation  d'emploier  les  filles  deuant  leur  ma-
nage, mais  il  n'importe  fit  il,  qnoy  que  le  terme  que
vous  me  donnez  foit  bien  long,  il  vaut  mieux  attendre
&  fe  mettre  en  danger  d'eftre  moqu6  que  de  ne  pas
vous  obeir,  ce  bon  ieune  homme  attendit,  «&  fe  com-
porta  auec  vne  innocence  vrayement  Chreflienne  pen-
dant tout  ce  teps-lk,  fe  confeffant  fort  fouuent,  pour
fe  [54]  fortifier  contre  les  embufches  de  fathan,  qui
ne  dort  pas  en  telles  occafions.

le  ne  fgay  fi  ce  que  ie  vay  dire,  ne  fera  point  trou-
u6  ridicule  en  vofbre  France ;  mais  il  eft  icy  &  dans
I'innocence  &  dans  la  bien-feance.  Les  Sauuages
qui  vont  k  Tentour  de  nos  habitations,  s'addreffent  k
nous  pour  tous  leurs  petits  negoces,  comme  feroient
des  enfans  k  leurs  peres,  ils  viennent  par  fois  deman-
der  s'ils  iront  chaffer  en  tel  endroit,  s'ils  prendront
medecine,  s'ils  feront  fuerie,  s'ils  danceront,  s'ils  fe
marieront,  les  ieunes  gens  nous  viennent  trouuer  en
particulier  &  nous  prient  de  leurs  trouuer  femme,  ou
de  parler  pour  eux  k  celles  qu'ils  defirent  epoufer,
quelques  femmes  veufues,  &  mefme  encor  quelques
filles  nous  prient  en  fecret  de  leurs  trouuer  mary,  fe
confians  plus  en  nous  qu'a  ceux  de  leur  nation,  &  nous
difent  fort  bien  que  nous  agiflions  comme  de  noftre
part,  fans  faire  femblant  qu'ils  nous  ont  parl^,  le  tout
gift  k  fe  comporter  en  forte  dans  ces  offices  de  cha-
rite,  qu'eux  mefmes  fe  lient  &  qu'ils  concluent  leurs
affaires  fans  nous  engager,  finon  k  les  [55]  conduire
dans  les  voyes  des  enfans  de  Dieu.  Les  Pay  ens
mefme  qui  ont  quelque  inclination  k  la  Foy,  fe  com-
portent  ainfi  enuers  nous.

II  y  a  quelque  temps  qu'vn  ieune Sauuage  non


1640]  RELATION  OF  1640  131

shoes?  "  "  Ask  your  promised  bride  to  do  it,"  we
said  to  him.  He  began  to  laugh,  and  replied,  "  I
shall  make  myself  a  laughingstock,  for  it  is  not  the
custom  in  our  country  to  employ  girls  before  their
marriage;  but  it  does  not  matter,"  he  continued;
*  *  although  the  term  you  set  me  is  a  very  long  one,
it  is  better  to  wait,  and  to  risk  being  made  sport  of,
than  not  to  obey  you."  This  good  young  man  wait-
ed, and  behaved  with  a  truly  Christian  innocence
during  all  that  time, —  confessing  very  often,  in  order
[54]  to  fortify  himself  against  the  snares  of  satan,
who  does  not  sleep  at  such  times.

I  do  not  know  if  what  I  am  going  to  say  will  not
be  considered  absurd  in  your  France,  but  it  is  looked
upon  here  as  both  innocent  and  proper.  The  Sav-
ages who  come  about  our  settlements  apply  to  us  in
all  their  little  affairs,  as  children  would  to  their  fa-
thers. They  come  sometimes  to  ask  if  they  shall  go
hunting  in  such  a  place,  if  they  shall  take  medicine,
if  they  shall  have  a  sweat,  if  they  shall  dance,  if  they
shall  marry.  The  young  men  come  to  see  us  in
private  and  ask  us  to  find  them  wives,  or  to  speak  for
them  to  those  whom  they  desire  to  marry;  some
widows,  and  even  some  young  girls,  ask  us  secretly
to  find  them  husbands,  confiding  in  us  more  than  in
those  of  their  own  nation,  and  tell  us  emphatically
that  we  are  to  act  as  if  on  our  own  account,  without
making  it  appear  that  they  had  spoken  to  us.  The
whole  point  lies  in  so  behaving  in  these  offices  of
charity  that  they  themselves  become  intimate  and
conclude  the  affair  without  involving  us,  except  in
[55]  leading  them  in  the  paths  of  the  children  of
God.  Even  the  Pagans  who  are  well  disposed  towards
the  Faith  behave  thus  toward  us.


132  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

encor  baptif6,  nous  fit  demander  par  quelques  vns  de
fes  parens  Chreftiens,  li  nous  trouuerions  bon  qu'il
fe  mariat  ^  vne  fille  qu'il  nommoit.  Or  comme  ny
I'vn  ny  I'autre  n'eftoient  pas  Chreftiens,  nous  ref-
pondifmes  que  nous  n'entrions  point  dans  ces  co-
gnoilTances,  &  que  nous  ne  nous  meflions  point  des
manages,  linon  pour  prendre  garde  qu'ils  fe  traic5tent
^  la  fagon  des  Chreftiens  quand  on  eft  baptife,  ce
ieune  homme  ne  palTa  pas  outre.  L'ayant  rencontr6
^  quelques  iours  de  delk,  ie  luy  demanday  s'il  n'e-
ftoit  point  mari6,  ie  n'ay  garde  fit-il,  de  me  marier
fans  voftre  confentement,  vous  eftes  mon  pere,  c'eft
^  vous  non  feulement  de  me  dire  fi  vous  trouu6s  bons
que  ie  me  marie,  mais  encor  de  m'affigner  Ie  iour
que  ie  Ie  dois  faire,  ouy,  mais  luy  dy-ie,  vous  n'eftes
pas  Chreftien?  ie  ne  Ie  fuis  pas  encor  repartit-il,  mais
i'ay  grande  enuie  de  I'eftre,  &  [56]  celle  que  ie
recherche  ^  la  mefme  volont6,  c'eft  pourquoy  ie  vous
fupplie  de  nous  baptifer  tous  deux  deuant  noftre  ma-
nage, nous  attendrons  tant  qu'il  vous  plaira,  fi  nous
ne  fommes  pas  encor  alTez  inftruidts.  Les  ames
fainc5tes,  qui  prient  pour  la  conuerllon  de  ces  peuples
&  qui  fe  voient  exauc6es,  pourront  elles  ouir  parler
de  cette  candeur  fans  que  leurs  coeurs  s'amolliffent
ou  fe  fonde  das  Ie  cceur  de  Dieu.  Comme  nous  voy-
ons  que  noftre  Seigneur  va  beniflant  les  manages  de
ces  bons  Neophites,  nous  baptifafmes  ces  deux  ieunes
gens,  bien  inftruidts,  &  puis  les  mariafmes  en  face
de  I'Eglife,  nous  auons  fait  plufieurs  autres  mariages,
ils  font  tous  par  la  grace  de  noftre  Seigneur  dans  vne
bonne  refolution  de  ne  fe  point  quitter  iufques  h  la
mort,  except^  vn  ou  deux,  qui  commencent  k  tous
donner  de  la  peine.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  133

Some  time  ago  a  young  Savage,  not  yet  baptized,
had  us  asked  by  some  of  his  Christian  relatives  if  we
would  approve  of  his  marrying  a  girl  whom  he  named.
Now  as  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  was  a  Chris-
tian, we  replied  that  we  would  not  take  part  in  such
connections,  and  that  we  did  not  meddle  with  mar-
riages, except  to  see  that  they  live  in  a  Christian
manner  when  they  have  been  baptized.  This  young
man  did  not  press  the  matter  farther.  Having  met
him  some  days  later,  I  asked  him  if  he  were  not  mar-
ried. *'  I  have  no  inclination,"  he  replied,  **  to  mar-
ry without  your  consent.  You  are  my  father ;  it  is
for  you  not  only  to  tell  me  whether  you  approve
my  marrying,  but  also  to  appoint  the  day  when  I
shall  do  so."  "Yes,"  I  said  to  him,  ''but  you  are
not  a  Christian."  ''  I  am  not  one  yet,"  he  replied,
**  but  I  am  very  desirous  of  becoming  one,  and  [56]
the  girl  whom  I  am  seeking  has  the  same  desire;
this  is  why  I  beg  you  to  baptize  us  both  before  our
marriage.  We  will  wait  as  long  as  you  please,  if
we  are  not  yet  sufficiently  instructed."  Can  the
holy  souls  who  pray  for  the  conversion  of  these  peo-
ples, and  who  feel  that  they  are  heard,  hear  of  this
candor  without  their  hearts  softening  or  melting  in
the  heart  of  God?  As  we  see  that  our  Lord  keeps
blessing  the  marriages  of  these  good  Neophytes,  we
baptized  these  two  young  people,  well  instructed,
and  then  married  them  with  the  rites  of  the  Church.
We  have  arranged  several  other  marriages.  All
these  pairs  are,  by  the  grace  of  our  Lord,  firmly  re-
solved not  to  forsake  each  other  until  death, —  except
one  or  two,  who  are  beginning  to  cause  us  some
trouble.


134  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

Quand  il  arriue  quelque  different  entr'eux,  il  nous
viennent  tronuer,  ou  nous  en  font  donner  aduis,  vne
femme  Chreftienne  apprenant  qu'on  faifoit  ie  ne  fjay
quels  ieux  ou  recreations  publiques  dans  vne  cabane,
s'y  voulut  trouuer,  fon  [57]  mary  tefmoigna  qu'il  ne
Taggreoit  pas,  elle  ne  laiffa  pas  d'y  aller  contre  fa
volont6,  eflant  de  retour  fon  mary  luy  dit,  fi  ie  n'e-
flois  pas  Chreftien,  ie  vous  dirois  que  fi  vous  n'auez
point  d'affedtion  pour  moy,  que  vous  cherchaffiez  vn
autre  mary  k  qui  vous  rendiffiez  plus  d'obeilfance;
mais  ayant  promis  h.  Dieu  de  ne  vous  point  quitter
iufques  k  la  mort,  ie  ne  f^aurois  vous  tenir  ce  langage
quoy  que  vous  m'offencies,  cette  pauure  femme  luy
demanda  pardon  tout  fur  Theure,  &  des  Ie  matin  du
iour  fuiuant,  elle  s'en  vint  trouuer  Ie  Pere  qui  la  bap-
tif6e,  &  luy  dit  mon  Pere,  i'ay  facli6  Dieu,  ie  n'ay
pas  obey  ^  mon  mary,  i'en  ay  Ie  coeur  tout  trifte,  ie
voudrois  bien  m'en  confeffer,  cette  candeur  eft:  rauif-
fante.  C'eft  affez  pour  ce  Chapitre,  palfons  ^  quel-
ques  autres  adtions  de  ces  bons  Neopbites.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  135

When  some  difference  occurs  among  them,  they
come  to  see  us,  or  have  us  give  them  some  advice.
A  Christian  woman,  learning  that  I  know  not  what
games  or  public  recreations  were  in  progress  in  a
cabin,  wished  to  be  present  there;  her  [57]  husband
declared  that  he  did  not  approve  this;  she  went,
however,  against  his  wish.  Having  returned,  her
husband  said  to  her,  ''  If  I  were  not  a  Christian,  I
would  tell  you  that,  if  you  did  not  care  for  me,  you
should  seek  another  husband  to  whom  you  would
render  more  obedience;  but,  having  promised  God
not  to  leave  you  until  death,  I  cannot  speak  to  you
thus,  although  you  have  offended  me.  *  *  This  poor
woman  asked  his  forgiveness,  without  delay,  and  on
the  following  morning  came  to  see  the  Father  who
had  baptized  her,  and  said  to  him,  '*  My  Father,  I
have  offended  God,  I  have  not  obeyed  my  husband ;
my  heart  is  very  sad ;  I  greatly  desire  to  make  my
confession  of  this."  Such  frankness  is  delightful.
Enough  for  this  Chapter;  let  us  pass  on  to  some
other  acts  of  these  good  Neophytes.


136  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18


[58]  CHAPITRE  V.

CONTINUATION DU MESME DISCOURS.

VN  ieune  Sauuage  malade,  ayant  efl6  abandonn6
de  fes  gens  enuiron  dix  lieues  an  delTus  de  la
refidence  S.  lofeph,  le  Pere  de  Quen,  qui  a
grandement  trauaille  toute  cette  ann6e  en  cette  refi-
dence, prit  vn  Frangois  auec  foy  &  s'en  alia  cherclier
ce  pauure  malade,  T ayant  trouu6  auec  bien  de  la
peine,  le  fit  amener  k  I'Hofpital,  ou  ce  pauure  gargon
fut  fi  bien  afllfl6,  qu'il  en  guerit,  la  charity  fait  des
miracles,  elle  change  les  Sauuages  en  enfans  de  Dieu,
ce  ieune  Sauuage  voyant  vn  fi  grand  amour  en  fon
endroit,  fe  fait  inftruire,  prefTe  qu'on  le  baptife,  on
en  fait  quelque  difficult^,  pource  qu'eftant  preft  k  fe
marier,  on  craignoit  qu'il  ne  s'alliafb  de  quelque  infi-
dele,  s'il  ne  pouuoit  trouuer  de  fille  Chreflienne ;  il
promet  de  garder  toutes  les  loix  de  Dieu  &  de  fon
Eglife,  [59]  tant  qu'il  luy  fera  poflible,  mais  il  le  pro-
met  de  fi  bonne  grace,  &  d'vn  fi  bon  coeur,  qu'on  le
baptife,  la  grace  k  de  puiffans  effedts,  depuis  ce
temps-1^  ce  ieune  homme  ne  s'eft  iamais  dementi  de
fa  parole,  il  n'a  pas  la  feule  penf^e  d'epoufer  vne
infidele,  il  eft  fi  ennemy  des  diffolutions  de  la  ieu-
nefl!e,  qu'vn  certain  iour  quelques  Sauuages  eftans
arriues  du  pays  des  Algonquins,  il  nous  vint  dire  en
fecret,  &  fur  le  foir,  ie  vous  fupplie  de  me  donner  le
couuert  cette  nuit  &  les  autres  fuiuantes,  tant  que  ces
ieunes  gens  ferot  parmy  nous,  pource  que  ie  ferois


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  137


[58]  CHAPTER  V.

CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT.

AS  a  sick  young  Savage  had  been  abandoned  by
his  people  about  ten  leagues  above  the  resi-
dence of  St.  Joseph,  Father  de  Quen,  who  has
labored  diligently  all  this  year  in  this  residence,  took
a  Frenchman  with  him  and  went  in  search  of  this
poor  sufferer.  They  found  him  after  a  great  deal  of
trouble,  and  had  him  brought  to  the  Hospital,  where
the  poor  boy  was  so  well  cared  for  that  he  recovered.
Charity  works  miracles ;  it  changes  Savages  into  chil-
dren of  God.  This  young  Savage,  seeing  so  great
love  toward  him,  received  instruction,  and  urged  us
to  baptize  him.  There  were  some  objections  to  this,
because,  being  of  a  marriageable  age,  it  was  feared
that  he  might  ally  himself  with  some  unbeliever  if
he  could  not  find  a  Christian  girl.  He  promised  to
obey  all  the  laws  of  God  and  of  his  Church,  [59]  in
so  far  as  it  should  be  possible  to  him ;  and  he  prom-
ised it  with  such  good  grace  and  so  good  a  heart,
that  he  was  baptized.  Grace  has  powerful  effects.
Since  that  time  this  young  man  has  never  belied  his
promise, — he  has  no  thought  of  marrying  an  unbe-
liever, and  is  such  an  enemy  of  the  dissoluteness  of
the  young  men  that  one  day,  when  some  Savages
arrived  from  the  Algonquin  country,  he  came  toward
evening,  and  said  to  us,  secretly,  ''  I  entreat  you  to
give  me  shelter  this  night  and  the  following  ones,
as  long  as  these  young  men  shall  be  among  us ;  for


138  LES  RELATIONS  DESj£SUITES [Vol.18

oblige  par  bien-feance  de  les  accompagner,  &  comme
ils  ne  font  pas  baptifez,  ils  pourront  faire  quelque
cbofe  que  Dieu  hayt,  &  moy  ie  ne  fgauroit  plus
Toffencer,  car  c'efl  tout  de  bon  que  ie  croy,  &  que  ie
luy  ay  dit  que  ie  luy  obeyrois.

Vn  autre  ieune  bomme  nous  difoit  que  fon  bap-
tefme  luy  auoit  boucli6  les  oreilles,  ie  n'entends  plus
faifoit-il,  les  paroles  dilTolues  que  quelques  eftourdis
proferent  par  fois  en  noftre  cabane,  mon  coeur  eft  fi
content  de  fe  voir  libre  de  fes  offences,  qu'il  ne  fe
pent  comprendre,  [60]  ie  fgay  de  bonne  part  ce  que
ie  vay  dire,  vn  ieune  bomme  ag6  d'enuiron  vingt-
cinq  k  trente  ans,  paffant  chemin  coucba  dans  vne
cabane  de  Sauuages;  la  nuit  vne  femme  I'aborda,
luy  voyant  fon  deffein,  courut  au  deuant  de  la  tenta-
tio,  retires  vous  luy  dit-il,  car  ie  fuis  Cbreftien,  ceux
qui  prient  Dieu  ne  commettent  point  ces  pechez-1^.

I'ay  delia  dit  ailleurs,  que  les  ieunes  Sauuages  qui
cherchent  femme,  vont  voir  la  nuit  leur  maiflreffes,
nous  crions  fortement  contre  cette  couftume  tres-
pernicieufe,  car  encor  que  pour  1' ordinaire  tout  fe
paffe  dans  vne  grande  honeftet6,  neantmoins  Ie  dan-
ger d'offencer  Dieu  y  efl  trop  grand.

Or  tout  aulTi-tofl  qu'il  arriue  quelques  ieunes  Sau-
uages de  debors,  nos  Cbreftiens  nous  en  donnent
aduis,  afin  que  nous  tenions  la  main  que  tons  fe  con-
tiennent  dans  leur  deuoir,  eux  mefmes  orient  contre
la  ieuneffe  qui  s'emancipe,  leurs  reprochans  qu'ils
appellent  les  demons  dans  leurs  cabanes,  &  qu'ils
attirent  la  maledi(5tion  de  Dieu  deffus  leurs  teftes.
II  efl  arriu6  vne  chofe  bien  [61]  remarquable  en  cet
endroit,  vn  ieune  bomme  non  encor  baptif6  recber-
cbant  vne  fille  Cbreflienne  I'alla  voir  la  nuit ;  cette


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  139

I  shall  be  obliged  by  courtesy  to  accompany  them,
and,  as  they  are  not  baptized,  they  will  be  likely  to
do  something  that  God  hates;  and,  for  my  part,  I
can  no  more  offend  him,  for  it  is  in  earnest  that  I
believe,  and  that  I  told  him  I  would  obey  him."

Another  young  man  told  us  that  his  baptism  had
stopped  his  ears.  ''  I  no  longer  hear,"  said  he,  "  the
licentious  words  that  heedless  youths  sometimes  utter
in  our  cabin.  It  is  impossible  to  understand  how
glad  my  heart  is  to  see  itself  free  from  its  sins."  [60]
I  learned  from  good  authority  what  I  am  about  to
relate.  A  young  man  between  twenty-five  and  thir-
ty years  old,  while  pursuing  his  way,  lay  down  to
sleep  in  a  cabin  of  Savages.  In  the  night,  a  woman
approached  him.  He,  perceiving  her  purpose,  antici-
pated temptation  by  saying  to  her,  *'  Go  away,  for
I  am  a  Christian;  those  who  pray  to  God  do  not
commit  such  sins."

I  have  said  elsewhere  that  the  young  Savages  who
are  seeking  a  wife  go  to  visit  their  mistresses  at
night.  We  forcibly  denounce  this  most  pernicious
custom ;  for  although,  in  general,  all  is  done  with
great  decency,  yet  the  risk  of  offending  God  is  too
great.

Now,  when  any  young  Savages  arrive  from  out-
side, our  Christians  immediately  inform  us  of  it,  that
we  may  watch  and  see  that  all  keep  within  the
bounds  of  duty.  They  themselves  rebuke  the  young
men  who  take  too  much  liberty,  reproaching  them
with  calling  the  demons  into  their  cabins,  and  with
drawing  down  the  curse  of  God  upon  their  heads.
There  happened  a  very  [61]  remarkable  thing  in  re-
gard to  this.  A  young  man  not  yet  baptized,  who
was  wooing  a  Christian  girl,  went  to  see  her  at  night.


140  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

fille  ne  le  rebuta  point  de  prime  abord,  elle  I'efcouta
difcourir,  ce  qui  fcandalifa  tellement  les  Chrefliens,
que  nous  en  fufmes  incontinens  aduertis,  nous  la
fifmes  venir  &  la  tan^afmes  vertement,  luy  repro-
chant  qu'elle  fe  comportoit  comme  vne  perfonne  aban-
donn^e,  qui  ne  croyoit  point  en  Dieu,  &  que  les
feules  careffes  de  ce  ieune  homme  en  tel  temps,
efloient  coulpables.  Cette  pauure  fille  bien  eftonn^e
repartit  au  Pere  qui  la  tangoit ;  mon  Pere  il  eft  vray
que  i'ay  efcout6  ce  ieune  homme,  mais  il  ne  m'a
point  carefree,  ie  ne  fuis  point  Frangoife,  i'ay  veu  des
Frangois  badiner  auec  des  filles,  &  les  careller  &  bai-
f oter :  ce  n'efl  point  noflre  couftume,  ceux  qui  nous
recherchent,  nous  parlent  feulement  &  puis  s'en
vont,  croy6s  moy  difoit  elle,  quand  ce  ieune  homme
me  parloit  ie  me  fouuenois  fort  bien  que  i'eflois
Chreftienne,  &  que  ie  ne  voulois  pas  offencer  Dieu,
ie  luy  ay  dit  feulement  qu'il  s'addrellat  k  vous  pour
cet  affaire,  le  [62]  bruit  eft  cependant  luy  dit  le  Pere,
que  vous  ne  vous  eftes  pas  bien  comport6e,  ceux  qui
prient  Dieu  refpondit  elle,  ne  diront  pas  cela;  car  ie
vous  affeure  que  ie  n'ay  fait  autre  mal  que  de  Tefcou-
ter,  me  comportant  felon  noftre  ancienne  fa96  de
faire.  L^  deffus,  vn  certain  qui  voulut  rire,  &  tout
enfemble  s'affeurer  de  T innocence  de  la  fille  en  fa
fimplicit^,  ie  f9auray  bien  luy  dit-il,  fi  ce  ieune
homme  vous  a  tromp^e,  car  ie  vous  feray  prendre
vn  breuage  qui  vous  fera  vomir  tout  fur  le  champ
s'il  vous  a  touch6e,  ne  vomiray-ie  point,  dit-elle,  au
cas  qu'il  ne  m'ait  point  touch^e?  point  du  tout:  5a
done  donnez  le  moy  tout  maintenant,  &  vous  verrez
mon  innocence,  le  compagnon  luy  donne  vne  ceuil-
ler^e  de  firop  fort  noir,  elle  le  prend  d'vn  vifage  tout


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  141

At  first  this  girl  did  not  rebuff  him,  but  listened  to
his  conversation,  which  so  scandalized  the  Christians
that  we  were  immediately  informed  of  it.  We  sum-
moned her  and  reprimanded  her  sharply,  reproach-
ing her  with  behaving  like  a  profligate  who  did  not
believe  in  God,  and  telling  her  that  even  the  caresses
of  this  young  man  at  such  a  time  were  sinful.  This
poor  girl,  greatly  surprised,  replied  to  the  Father
who  chided  her,  **  My  Father,  it  is  true  that  I  have
listened  to  this  young  man,  but  he  did  not  caress  me.
I  am  not  French ;  I  have  seen  Frenchmen  trifling
with  girls,  caressing  and  kissing  them,  but  this  is  not
our  custom, — those  who  seek  us  only  talk  to  us,  and
then  go  away.  Believe  me,"  said  she,  '*  when  this
young  man  was  speaking  to  me  I  remembered  very
well  that  I  was  a  Christian,  and  that  I  was  unwilling
to  offend  God.  I  merely  told  him  that  he  should
address  himself  to  you  in  this  matter. "  "  The  [62]
report  is,  however,  * '  said  the  Father,  *  *  that  you  did
not  behave  properly."  *'  Those  who  pray  to  God,**^
she  replied,  "  will  not  say  that.  For  I  assure  you
that  I  have  done  nothing  wrong,  beyond  listening
to  him,  conducting  myself  according  to  our  ancient
customs."  Thereupon,  a  certain  person,  for  the
sake  of  a  joke  and  also  to  assure  himself  of  the  gen-
uineness of  the  girl's  simplicity,  said  to  her,  ''  I  shall
know  truly  whether  this  young  man  has  deceived
you,  for  I  will  have  you  take  a  potion  that  will  make
you  vomit  immediately  if  he  has  touched  you."
'  *  Shall  I  not  vomit,  * '  said  she,  ' '  unless  he  has  touched
me?"  ''  Not  at  all."  "  Well,  then,  give  it  to  me
now  and  you  will  see  my  innocence."  His  compan-
ion gave  her  a  spoonful  of  very  black  syrup,  which
she  took  with  a  very  cheerful  face,  and  swallowed


142  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.18

guay,  I'auale  auec  affeurance,  fi  ie  ne  dois  point  vo-
mir  s'efcrie  elle,  qu'au  cas  que  i'aye  commis  quelque
mal  ie  ne  crains  rien.  Elle  fut  loiiee  de  fa  con  fiance,
marque  de  fa  purete ;  mais  on  luy  fit  fi  bien  entendre
Ie  mal  que  c'eftoit  de  fcandalifer  fon  prochain,  &  de
fe  mettre  en  danger  d'eflre  trompee  [63]  du  diable,
qu'elle  &  fes  compagnes  en  profiterent.  Et  k  quel-
ques  fepmaines  delk,  d'autres  ieunes  gens  les  eflans
venus  rechercher  la  nuit,  elles  leur  dirent  auffi-toft
qu'ils  fe  retiraffent,  &  qu'elles  eftoient  Chreftiennes,
qu'ils  s'addrelTairent  aux  Peres  qui  les  auoient  bap-
tif6es,  pour  parler  de  mariage  s'ils  en  vouloiet  6pou-
fer  quelques  vnes,  ces  ieunes  gens  ne  s'en  allans
point,  elles  prirent  des  tifons  de  feu  &  les  menacerent
de  leur  porter  k  la  face  s'ils  ne  fe  retiroient,  eftre  n6
dans  la  barbaric  &  faire  ces  actions,  c'eft  prefcher
liautement  lefus-Chrift.

Vne  femme  Chreftienne  croyant  qu'vn  Fran9ois  luy
donnoit  vn  coufleau  affez  gentil,  qu'il  luy  preftoit
feulement,  Ie  retint,  Ie  Francois  s'en  oublia  pour  lors,
fl  bien  qu'il  creut  Tauoir  perdu,  mais  I'ayant  reco-
gnu  entre  les  mains  de  cette  femme,  il  luy  voulu
ofler,  elle  refifte,  proteflant  qu'il  luy  a  donne,  la
diuerfite  de  langage  fait  affez  fouuent  de  fauffes
ententes,  enfin  cette  femme  entre  11  bien  en  colere,
qu'elle  fit  coniec5turer  au  Pere  de  Quen,  qui  efloit  Ik
prefent,  que  la  Foy  n'eftoit  pas  profondement  enra-
cinee  [64]  dans  fon  ame,  c'efl  pourquoy  il  luy  demanda
H  elle  auoit  voulu  tromper  Dieu  en  fon  baptefme,  k
ces  paroles  elle  entre  en  foy  mefme  &  luy  dit,  mon
Pere  c'eft  la  colere  qui  m'a  tranfportee,  i'ay  facbe
Dieu,  ie  m'iray  confeffer,  ce  n'eft  pas  I'amour  que  ie
porte  au  coufleau,  mais  la  peur  que  i'ay  eu  que  vous


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  148

confidently.  "If  I  do  not  vomit,"  she  exclaimed,
"  except  in  case  I  have  done  wrong,  I  fear  nothing."
She  was  praised  for  her  firmness,  a  sign  of  her  puri-
ty. But  she  was  made  to  understand  so  clearly  the
harm  there  was  in  scandalizing  her  neighbor,  and
placing  herself  in  danger  of  being  deluded  [63]  by
the  devil,  that  she  and  her  companions  profited  by
it.  And  a  few  weeks  afterwards,  when  other  young
men  came  to  visit  them  at  night,  they  straightway
told  them  that  they  should  go  away, — that  they  were
Christians,  and  that,  if  the  men  wished  to  marry  any
of  them,  they  should  address  themselves  on  that  sub-
ject to  the  Fathers  who  had  baptized  the  girls.  But,
as  these  young  men  did  not  go  away,  the  girls  took
firebrands  and  threatened  to  thrust  them  in  their
faces  if  they  did  not  leave.  To  be  born  in  barbar-
ism and  act  in  this  manner,  is  to  preach  Jesus  Christ
boldly.

A  Christian  woman,  believing  that  a  Frenchman
gave  her  a  very  pretty  knife,  that  he  had  only  loaned
her,  kept  it.  The  Frenchman  forgot  it  for  the  time,
so  that  he  thought  he  had  lost  it.  But  having  recog-
nized it  in  the  hands  of  this  woman,  he  tried  to  take
it  away.  She  resisted,  protesting  that  he  had  given
it  to  her.  A  difference  in  language  often  results  in
misunderstandings.  Finally,  this  woman  became  so
angry  that  she  made  Father  de  Quen,  who  was  pres-
ent, imagine  that  the  Faith  was  not  deeply  rooted
[64]  in  her  soul.  Hence  he  asked  her  if  she  had
wished  to  deceive  God  in  her  baptism.  At  these
words,  she  recovered  herself  and  said  to  him,  "  My
Father,  I  have  been  carried  away  by  my  anger.  I
have  displeased  God,  I  will  go  and  confess.  It  was
not  my  love  for  the  knife,  but  the  fear  I  had  that


144  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ&SUITES [Vol.18

ne  me  tinlles  pour  vne  larronnefle,  ie  vous  affure  que
i'ay  precede  de  coeur  deuant  Dieu  en  mon  baptefme,
&  c'eft  ce  qui  m'afflige,  qu'on  croie  que  ie  commette
les  peches  que  ceux  qui  font  baptifes  ne  commettent
point,  Ik-deffus  elle  fe  mit  k  prefcher  les  ieunes  filles
qui  efloient  Ik,  leurs  declarant  ce  qu'elles  deuoient
quitter,  au  cas  qu'elles  vouluiTent  eftre  Chreftiennes.

Quelques  Sauuages  nous  ont  propof6  ces  cas  de
confcience  bien  aifes  k  refoudre,  par  exemple,  fi  c'e-
ftoit  vn  grand  peche  de  fonger  la  nuit  quelque  mal,
quoy  qu'en  dormant  mefme  on  y  reliftaft.  Quand  Ie
diable  nous  porte  k  croire  nos  fonges,  fi  nous  les  re-
jettons,  difoient-ils,  la  penfee  que  nous  auons  eue  de
les  croire,  eft-elle  vn  grand  mal?  I'ay  eu  peine  [65]
quelque  fois  de  demand er  certains  pech^s  k  quelques
Sauuages,  de  peur  de  leur  faire  entendre  que  des
perfonnes  baptif^es  les  pouuoient  commettre.

On  baptifa  certain  iour  cinq  vieilles  femmes  en-
femble,  dont  la  plus  ieune  auoit  plus  de  foixante  ans,
apres  Ie  baptefme  I'vne  de  ces  bonnes  Neophites  prit
Ie  Pere  qui  les  auoit  baptif^es  par  la  main,  &  luy  dit
mon  fils  tu  nous  as  fait  reuiure,  noftre  coeur  eft  tout
refiouy,  il  nous  dit  que  tes  paroles  font  veritables,  &
que  nous  irons  au  ciel,  I'autres  s'efcrioit  6  que  ie  prie-
ray  Dieu  maintenant  de  bon  coeur!  en  effet  11-tofl
qu'on  parloit  de  Dieu  dans  leurs  cabanes,  elles  fe
mettoient  k  genoux  &  ioignoient  les  mains,  la  plus
ag6e  difoit  k  fes  gens,  il  me  femble  que  nos  An-
ceflres  croyoient  quelque  chofe  de  ce  qu'enfeignent
les  Peres,  car  il  me  fouuient,  qu'eflant  bien  ieune,
mon  pere  fort  ag6  nous  racomptoit  que  celuy  qui  a
tout  fait,  &  qui  donne  k  manger,  fe  fafchoit  quand


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  146

you  might  look  upon  me  as  a  thief.  I  assure  you
that  I  acted  sincerely  before  God  in  my  baptism ;  and
what  afflicts  me  is  that  it  should  be  thought  that  I
commit  sins  that  those  who  are  baptized  do  not  com-
mit. ' '  Thereupon,  she  began  to  preach  to  the  young
girls  who  were  present,  declaring  to  them  what  they
would  have  to  give  up  if  they  wished  to  be  Chris-
tians.

Some  of  the  Savages  have  proposed  to  us  these
cases  of  conscience,  which  are  very  easy  to  solve, —
for  example,  if  it  be  a  great  sin  to  dream  some-
thing wrong  at  night,  although  even  in  dreaming
one  should  resist  it  ?  "If  the  devil  incline  us  to  be-
lieve our  dreams,  if  we  reject  them,"  they  ask,  ''  is
the  thought  we  had,  of  believing  them,  a  great  sin? "
I  have  been  troubled  [65]  sometimes  in  asking  Sav-
ages about  certain  sins,  lest  I  might  cause  them  to
infer  that  baptized  persons  could  commit  these.

One  day  five  old  women  were  baptized  together,
the  youngest  of  whom  was  more  than  sixty  years  old.
After  baptism,  one  of  these  good  Neophytes  took  the
Father  who  had  baptized  them  by  the  hand,  and  said
to  him,  "  My  son,  thou  hast  made  us  live  again;  our
hearts  are  full  of  joy, — they  tell  us  that  thy  words
are  true,  and  that  we  shall  go  to  heaven."  The
others  cried  out,  *'  Oh,  how  fervently  I  will  now  pray
to  God!  "  In  fact,  as  soon  as  one  spoke  of  God  in
their  cabins,  they  fell  upon  their  knees,  and  clasped
their  hands.  The  most  aged  one  said  to  her  people,
*  *  It  seems  to  me  that  our  Ancestors  believed  some-
thing of  what  the  Fathers  teach ;  for  I  remember
that  when  I  was  quite  young,  my  father,  who  was
very  old,  related  to  us  that  he  who  has  made  all,  and
who provides our food,  was  displeased  when  any


146  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

on  faifoit  quelque  mal,  &  qu'il  hai'ffoit  les  mefchans,
&  qu'il  les  puniffoit  apres  leur  mort.

Apres  le  baptefme  de  ces  bonnes  {66]  vieilles,
comme  nous  renuoions  vn  grad  homme  bien  fait,
rejettans  fon  baptefme  en  autre  temps  pour  ne  nous
fembler  alfez  inftruidt,  il  parut  fort  trifle,  ie  fuis
afflige  nous  difoit-il,  vous  me  dites  que  ie  ne  fuis  pas
encor  affez  inflruidt,  n'en  fgay  ie  pas  autant  que  ces
bonnes  vieilles  que  vous  auez  baptif ees  ?  permettez
moy  que  ie  reuienne  demain  matin,  &  vous  m' exa-
miner's encor  vne  fois,  nous  luy  permifmes  &  ce  bon
homme,  iadis  fort  orgueilleux,  mais  maintenant  fort
bon  Chreftien,  fe  faifoit  inftruire  par  vn  enfant,  des
principaux  articles  du  Catecbifme,  enfin  il  nous  prefla
fi  bien,  alleguat  qu'il  s'en  alloit  faire  vn  voiage,  &
qu'il  n'ofoit  partir  fans  eflre  def charge  de  fes  pech6s,
que  nous  le  baptifafmes  auec  quelques  autres  qu'on
fit  Chreftiens  k  mefme  temps,  vn  peu  de  cognoilfance
Chreftienne  auec  vne  bonne  volont6,  vaut  plus  que
toute  la  Philofophie  d'Ariflote.

Le  feiziefme  de  lanuier,  ayant  appris  qu'vne  pau-
ure  vieille  femme  eftant  partie  de  la  refidence  de  S.
lofeph,  pour  aller  aux  trois  Riuieres,  eftoit  demeur'e
malade  \(>^'\  en  chemin  auec  deux  enfans,  incapables
de  la  fecourir,  nous  enuoiafmes  deux  Sauuages  pour
I'amener  k  I'Hofpital,  comme  ils  n'auoient  point  de
traifnes  ils  amenerent  les  deux  enfans,  &  laifferent
la  malade  toute  feule  au  milieu  des  bois,  nous  tangaf-
mes  fort  ces  deux  meffagers,  &  leur  difmes  qu'il  falloit
retourner  querir  cette  pauure  creature,  I'vn  d'eux  qui
n'efloit  pas  encor  Chreftien,  entendant  parler  de  re-
tourner, efquiue  au  pluflofl,  celuy  qui  eftoit  baptif6,
rebrouff e  chemin  auec  vn  de  nos  Peres  &  noftre  frere


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  147

one  did  wrong,  and  that  he  hated  the  wicked  and
punished  them  after  their  death."

After  the  baptism  of  these  good  [66]  old  women,
as  we  were  sending  away  a  tall,  well-formed  man, —
postponing  his  baptism  until  another  time,  because
he  did  not  seem  well  enough  instructed, —  he  ap-
peared very  sad.  **  I  am  grieved,"  he  said  to  lis.
' '  You  tell  me  that  I  am  not  yet  sufficiently  instructed ;
do  I  not  know  as  much  as  these  simple  old  women
whom  you  have  baptized?  Permit  me  to  return  to-
morrow morning,  and  examine  me  once  more."  We
allowed  him  to  do  so,  and  this  good  man,  once  very
proud,  but  now  a  very  good  Christian,  reconciled
himself  to  be  instructed  by  a  child  in  the  principal
articles  of  the  Catechism.  Finally,  he  urged  us  so
strongly  —  alleging  that  he  was  going  away  on  a
journey,  and  that  he  dared  not  depart  without  being
freed  from  his  sins  —  that  we  baptized  him,  with  a
few  others  who  were  made  Christians  at  the  same
time.  A  little  Christian  knowledge,  together  with
good  will,  avails  more  than  all  the  Philosophy  of
Aristotle.

On  the  sixteenth  of  January,  having  learned  that  a
poor  old  woman,  who  had  left  the  residence  of  St.
Joseph  to  go  to  the  three  Rivers,  was  lying  ill  \(iy'\
by  the  wayside,  with  two  children  who  were  incapable
of  helping  her,  we  sent  two  Savages  to  bring  her  to
the  Hospital.  As  they  had  no  sleds,  they  brought
the  two  children,  and  left  the  sick  woman  all  alone
in  the  depths  of  the  woods.  We  chided  these  two
messengers  severely,  and  told  them  that  they  must
return  and  get  this  poor  creature.  One  of  them  who
was  not  yet  a  Christian,  hearing  us  say  ''return,"
stole  away  as  quickly  as  possible. The  one  who  was


148  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES [Vol.18

lean  Ligeois,  arriu6es  qu'ils  furent  ou  efloit  la  malade,
ils  la  trouuerent  en  vn  trou  fait  dans  la  neige,  couch^e
fur  qnelque  branche  de  pin,  fans  autre  abry  que  le
Ciel,  elle  n'auoit  point  d'ecorces  pour  fe  deffendre  de
riniure  de  I'air,  il  fallut  coucher  en  cette  mefme
hoftellerie,  ou  on  ne  trouue  rien  a  foupper  que  ce
qu'on  y  porte,  Dieu  donna  vn  nouuel  abry  k  ces  nou-
ueaux  boftes,  il  neiga  tant  toute  la  nuit,  qu'ils  eftoient
couuerts  &  enfeuelis  dans  la  neige  de  tous  coffces.  Ces
trauaux  qui  paroiffent  grands  en  France,  [68]  pafTent
icy  pour  legers,  en  eff et  on  les  f ouffre  fans  peine,  le
iour  venu  la  malade  fe  confeffe,  on  la  lie  fur  vne  petite
traifne,  noflre  frere  Ligeois  &  ce  bon  ieune  Sauuage
la  tirent  &  la  pouffent  tant  qu'ils  peuuent,  mais  comme
le  temps  eftoit  fafcheux  &  qu'elle  auoit  beaucoup
endur6,  elle  mourut  deuant  que  d'arriuer  k  I'Hofpital,
11  ces  adtions  touchent  les  Sauuages,  elles  touchent
aufll  le  Ciel,  qui  dat  niuem  Jicut  lanam,  qui  fait  trouuer
vn  manteau  de  neige  aufll  cbaud  qu'vn  manteau  de
laine.

C'efl  vne  chofe  alTez  ordinaire  aux  Chrefliens  de
fe  mettre  k  genoux  fi-toft  qu'ils  ont  tu6  quelque  ani-
mal, &  d'en  remercier  Dieu  fur  le  champ,  vne  bonne
vieille  femme  fgachant  cette  couftume  la  prattiqua  ^
fa  mode  s'en  allant  chercber  des  racines  pour  man-
ger, en  ayant  trouu6  elle  fe  mitk  genoux  fur  la  neige,
tenant  ce  dif cours  k  noflre  Seigneur,  grand  Capitaine
c'efl  vous  qui  auez  fait  le  ciel  &  la  terre,  &  ces
racines,  vous  les  auez  faidles  pour  noflre  nourriture,
vous  me  les  auez  enfeignes  afin  que  i'en  mangeaffe,
ie  vous  en  remercie,  fl  vous  m'en  [69]  voul^s  encor
donner  ie  les  prendray,  llnon  ie  ne  lailTeray  pas  de
croire  en  vous,  voila  fa  priere.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  149

baptized  retraced  his  steps,  with  one  of  our  Fathers
and  our  brother  Jean  Ligeois.  When  they  reached
the  place  where  the  sick  woman  was,  they  found  her
in  a  hole  made  in  the  snow,  lying  upon  a  few  branches
of  pine,  with  no  shelter  but  Heaven,  and  with  no
bark  to  protect  herself  from  the  wind.  They  had  to
sleep  in  this  same  hostelry,  where  nothing  was  to  be
found  for  supper  except  what  they  brought  with
them.  God  gave  a  new  shelter  to  these  new  guests ;
it  snowed  so  hard,  all  night,  that  they  were  covered
and  shrouded  in  snow  on  all  sides.  These  hardships,
which  seem  great  in  France,  [68]  are  considered  here
as  light, —  in  fact,  they  are  easily  borne.  When
morning  came,  the  sick  woman  confessed;  they
bound  her  to  a  little  sled,  and  our  brother  Ligeois,
and  this  good  young  Savage  hauled  and  pushed  her
as  well  as  they  could.  But,  as  the  weather  was  very
severe,  and  as  she  had  suffered  a  great  deal,  she  died
before  reaching  the  Hospital.  If  these  actions  touch
the  Savages,  they  also  touch  Heaven,  qui  dat  nivem
sicut  lanam,  who  causes  a  mantle  of  snow  to  be  found
as  warm  as  a  mantle  of  wool.

It  is  a  very  common  practice  with  the  Christians
to  fall  upon  their  knees  as  soon  as  they  have  killed
some  animal,  and  to  thank  God  for  it  upon  the  spot.
A  good  old  woman,  knowing  this  custom,  practiced  it
in  her  own  way.  Going  in  search  of  some  roots  to  eat,
and  finding  some,  she  knelt  upon  the  snow  and  ad-
dressed these  words  to  our  Lord :  ' '  Great  Captain,  it
is  you  who  have  made  heaven  and  earth,  and  these
roots.  You  have  made  them  for  our  nourishment,
you  have  shown  them  to  me  that  I  might  eat  them.
I  thank  you  for  them ;  if  you  [69]  are  willing  to  give
me  more,  I  will  take  them ;  if  not,  I  will  not  give  up
believing  in  you." This  was  her  prayer.


160  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ&SUITES  [Vol.18

Vn  Sauuage  pafTant  fur  le  bord  du  grand  fleuue,
comme  les  vents  fouffloiet  anec  violence  vne  affez
belle  tortue  poulT^e  par  la  tempefle,  fortit  dii  fond
de  I'eau  &  fut  iett6e  k  fes  pieds  comme  vne  pierre,
luy  la  voyant  fe  met  k  genoux,  &  lenant  les  yeux  an
Ciel  dit  ces  paroles;  Mon  Pere  ie  vons  remercie,  c'efl
vous  qui  m'auez  donne  cet  animal,  vous  Tauez  fait
pour  me  nourrir,  &  maintenant  vous  me  le  pref ent^s,
ie  vous  en  remercie.

De  verit6  ces  bonnes  gens  ont  vne  candeur  bien
aymable,  ce  feroit  vne  chofe  bien  nouuelle  en  France,
li  quelqu'vn  des  auditeurs  allembles  pour  entendre
la  predication,  arreftoit  le  predicateur  au  milieu  de
fon  difcours,  ou  pour  luy  parler,  ou  pour  luy  deman-
der  r  explication  de  quelque  point  de  fa  dodtrine,
cela  fe  fait  tons  les  iours  icy  fans  mefeance.  Quel-
qu'vn de  nous  pre f chant  de  la  confeffion,  &  declarant
rimportance  qu'il  y  a  de  purifier  fon  coeur  dans  ce
Sacremet,  [70]  «&  de  ne  rien  cacher  k  Dieu,  vn  Capi-
taine  s'efcria  tout  haut,  mon  Pere  on  ne  fait  que  iouer
dans  nos  cabanes,  efcout^s  ieunelle,  entendez-vous
bien  ce  que  nous  dit  le  Pere,  vous  ne  faidtes  pas  bien,
amandez-vous,  vous  ioiiez  trop,  venez-vous  confeffer,
&  gardez-vous  bien  de  celer  aucun  de  vos  pechez,
cette  parenthefe  fermee,  le  Predicateur  continue  fon
difcours.

Vne  autrefois  le  Pere  parlant  de  la  Communion,  &
difant  que  le  Fils  de  Dieu  fe  cachoit  fous  la  blan-
cheur  du  pain  pour  efprouuer  noflre  foy,  vne  bonne
vieille  leuant  fa  voix,  dit  aux  autres  femmes  qui
efloient  1^,  nous  auons  beau  nous  deguifer,  il  vient
expr6s  en  noflre  coeur  pour  voir  tout  ce  qui  s'y  palle,
il  cognoifl  bien  fi  nous  croyons  par  feintife  ou  non,


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  161

As  a  Savage  was  passing  along  the  bank  of  the
great  river  while  the  wind  was  blowing  violently,  a
very  fine  turtle,  stirred  up  by  the  tempest,  came  forth
from  the  depths  of  the  water,  and  was  thrown  at  his
feet  like  a  stone.  When  he  saw  it,  he  fell  upon  his
knees  and,  raising  his  eyes  to  Heaven,  uttered  these
words,  **  My  Father,  I  thank  you.  It  is  you  who
have  given  me  this  animal.  You  have  made  it  to
nourish  me,  and  now  you  present  it  to  me.  I  thank
you  for  it."

Verily,  these  good  people  possess  a  truly  engaging
candor.  It  would  be  a  very  novel  thing  in  France  if
one  of  the  audience  assembled  to  hear  a  sermon  were
to  stop  the  preacher  in  the  middle  of  the  discourse, —
either  to  talk  with  him,  or  to  ask  him  for  the  ex-
planation of  some  point  of  his  doctrine.  This  hap-
pens here  every  day  without  any  impropriety.  One
of  us  preaching  on  confession,  and  declaring  the  im-
portance of  purifying  one's  heart  in  this  Sacrament,
[70]  and  of  concealing  nothing  from  God,  a  Captain
exclaimed  aloud,  ' '  My  Father,  they  do  nothing  but
gamble  in  our  cabins.  Listen,  young  men,  do  you
understand  clearly  what  the  Father  is  telling  us?
You  are  not  doing  right;  mend  your  ways!  You
gamble  too  much ;  come  and  confess,  and  be  careful
not  to  hide  any  of  your  sins. ' '  This  parenthetical
speech  finished,  the  Preacher  continued  his  sermon.

At  another  time, —  when  the  Father  was  speaking
of  the  Communion,  and  saying  that  the  Son  of  God
concealed  himself  under  the  whiteness  of  the  bread
to  try  our  faith, —  a  good  old  woman,  raising  her
voice,  said  to  the  other  women  who  were  there,  **  It
is  in  vain  for  us  to  hide  anything ;  he  comes  into  our
hearts  purposely  to  see  all  that  is  going  on  there.


152  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

c'efl  pour  cela  qii'il  fe  cache,  afin  de  defcouurir  fi  nous
auons  de  la  malice  en  Tame.

Quand  on  dit  quelque  chofe  qu'ils  approuuent  fort,
ils  le  tefmoignent  par  fois  tout  au  milieu  de  la  predi-
cation ho- ho,  difent-ils,  ou  bien,  mi  hi,  voila  qui  va
[71]  bien :  ou  bien  encor,  mi  ke  tiang,  nous  ferons  cela.

Vous  en  verrez  qui  diront  au  Predicateur,  mon
Pere  n'allez  pas  11  vifle,  parlez  plus  doucement,  fi  le
Pere  ne  fe  fert  pas  bien  ^  propos  de  quelque  mot  en
leur  langue,  ils  luy  fuggerent  le  vray  mot  qu'il  faut
dire,  &  perfonne  ne  trouue  cela  eftrange.  Fay  autre-
fois remarqu6,  que  les  Sauuages  pour  fe  faire  beaux,
fe  rougillent  ou  fe  noircilTent  la  face,  ou  fe  la  pei-
gnent  d'vne  autre  couleur,  or  comme  quelqu'vn  de
nous  cryoit  certain  iour  contre  cette  mauuaife  cou-
flume.  L'vn  de  fes  auditeurs  indign6  contre  ceux  qui
la  retenoient,  s'efcria,  mon  Pere  il  n'y  a  que  les
difformes  &  les  malotrus  qui  fe  peignent,  nous  autres
qui  fommes  beaux  naturellement,  nous  auons  quitt6
cette  vieille  mode,  voila  leur  francbife.  Mais  remar-
quez  s'il  vous  plaift,  qu'il  n'y  a  que  les  principaux  de
Tauditoire  qui  fe  donnent  I'autorit^  de  parler,  c'efl
afles  pour  ce  Cbapitre.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  168

He  knows  very  well  whether  we  are  only  pretending
to  believe, —  it  is  for  this  purpose  that  he  conceals
himself,  to  discover  whether  we  have  any  malice  in
our  souls. ' '

When  one  says  something  which  they  greatly  ap-
prove, they  show  it  sometimes  in  the  very  midst  of
the  preaching.  Ho-ho,  they  say,  or  mi  hi,  **  that  is
[71]  good ;  "  or,  again,  mi  ke  tiang,  ' '  we  will  do  that.

There  are  some  who  will  say  to  the  Preacher,  *  *  My
Father,  do  not  go  so  fast;  speak  more  slowly."  If
the  Father  does  not  correctly  use  some  word  of  their
language,  they  will  suggest  to  him  the  right  word
that  he  should  use,  and  no  one  finds  this  strange.  I
have  previously  remarked  that  the  Savages,  to  adorn
themselves,  redden  or  blacken  their  faces,  or  paint
them  in  some  other  color.  Now  as  one  of  us  rebuked
this  mischievous  custom  on  a  certain  day,  one  of  his
auditors,  indignant  at  those  who  retained  it,  ex-
claimed, *'  My  Father,  it  is  only  the  deformed  and
the  uncouth  who  paint  themselves.  The  rest  of  us,
who  are  naturally  handsome,  have  given  up  this  old
custom."  See  how  frank  they  are.  But  observe,  if
you  please,  that  it  is  only  the  chief  persons  of  the
audience  who  assume  authority  in  speaking.  This
is  enough  for  this  Chapter.


154  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  18


[72]  CHAPITRE  VI.

CONTINUATION DU MESME SUJET.

VN  ieune  homme  Chreftien  s'eflant  mis  en  col  ere
battit  fa  femme,  qui  I'auoit  infolemment  pro-
uoque,  il  n'efloit  pas  encor  hors  de  fougue,  que
fe  repentant  de  fon  peche,  il  fe  gliffe  en  noftre  chap-
pelle  pour  en  crier  mercy  h,  Dieu,  il  y  rencontra  le
Pere  de  Quen  auquel  il  dit,  ie  fuis  trifle,  ie  viens  de
fafcher  Dieu,  priez-le  pour  moy,  or  comme  cela  s'e-
ftoit  fait  deuant  plufieurs  perfonnes,  il  s'efleue  vne
grande  rumeur  dans  les  cabanes,  plulleurs  Chrefliens
&  plufieurs  Payens  tous  enfemble,  s'en  viennent
chez  nous  fe  plaindre  de  ce  fcandale,  ces  gens  Ik  ne
refpedtent  pas  leur  baptefme,  difoient  les  Chrefliens,
lis  viuent  comme  s'ils  ne  croyoient  pas  en  Dieu.  Les
infideles  nous  reprochoient  que  nous  ne  les  baptifions
pas,  &  qu'ils  faifoient  mieux  que  plufieurs  qui  Tefloiet,
[73]  on  leur  enf eigne  du  bien,  difoient-ils,  &  ils  ne
le  font  pas :  ils  prient  Dieu  &  cependant  ils  f e  met-
tent  en  colere,  ils  font  baptif6s  &  neantmoins  ils  ne
laiffent  pas  de  fe  battre,  comme  nous  leurs  eufmes  dit
que  nous  les  aduertirions  de  leur  deuoir,  ils  les  allerent
querir  tout  fur  Theure,  fans  attendre  dauantage,  ils
furent  vefperiz^s  comme  il  faut,  notamment  la  fem-
me, qui  efloit  plus  coulpable  que  fon  mary,  cette  con-
fufion  leur  feruit,  &  ne  fit  point  de  mal  aux  autres ;
les  infideles  ne  f9auroient  fupporter  les  deffauts  des
Chrefliens,  ils  croyent  qu'ayant  embralT^  vne  Loy  fi


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  166


[72]  CHAPTER  VI.

CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT.

A  YOUNG  Christian,  getting  into  a  passion,  beat
his  wife,  who  had  insolently  provoked  him.
He  had  not  yet  recovered  from  his  rage,  when,
repenting  of  his  sin,  he  slipped  into  our  chapel  to
cry  to  God  for  mercy ;  encountering  Father  de  Quen
there,  he  said  to  him,  "  I  am  sad,  I  have  just  offended
God,  pray  to  him  for  me."  Now  as  that  had  hap-
pened in  the  presence  of  several  persons,  a  great
clamor  arose  in  the  cabins, — many  Christians  and
Pagans  coming  together  to  us,  to  complain  of  this
scandal.  ' '  Those  people  do  not  respect  their  bap-
tism, '  *  said  the  Christians ;  ' '  they  live  as  if  they  did
not  believe  in  God."  The  unbelievers  reproached
us  with  not  having  baptized  them,  when  they  be-
haved better  than  many  who  were  baptized.  [73]
"  They  are  taught  what  is  right,"  said  these,  *'  and
they  do  not  do  it.  They  pray  to  God,  and  yet  they
get  angry.  They  are  baptized,  and  yet  they  do  not
hesitate  to  beat  one  another. ' '  When  we  had  told
them  that  we  would  admonish  those  persons  con-
cerning their  duty,  they  went  and  brought  them
without  delay,  waiting  for  nothing  more.  They
were  properly  reprimanded,  especially  the  woman,
who  was  more  guilty  than  her  husband.  This  humil-
iation was  useful  to  them,  and  did  no  harm  to  the
others.  The  unbelievers  cannot  tolerate  the  faults
of  the  Christians ;  they  believe  that,  having  embraced


156  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JASUITES [Vol.18

faindte,  ils  doiuent  eftre  exempts  de  toute  fragility,
il  eft  vray  que  la  grace  du  baptefme  fait  d'eftranges
metamorphofes,  quand  on  y  correfpond.

Vn  Sauuage  Chreftien,  voulant  entrer  en  quelque
maifon,  vn  Frangois  le  repoufla  auec  violence,  ils  fe
parloient  tons  deux  fans  s' entendre,  le  Sauuage  fe
voyant  mal  traidt6,  difoit,  li  ie  n'eftois  baptif6  ie  t'ac-
commoderois  bien,  ie  fuis  plus  grand  &  plus  fort  que
toy,  ie  t'aurois  bien-toft  renuerf6  par  terre,  mais  le
[74]  Pere  qui  m*a  baptife  m*a  dit  que  la  colere  ne
valoit  rien,  &  qu'il  ne  falloit  point  faire  de  mal,
mefme  k  ceux  qui  nous  en  faifoient,  c'eft  pourquoy
ie  me  retireray.

Vn  ieune  Neophite  ayant  fait  rencontre  d'vn  cari-
bou, le  tua  d'vn  coup  d'arquebufe,  auffi-toft  il  fe  mit
k  genoux  pour  en  remercier  Dieu,  couftume  qu'il
gardoit  mefme  deuant  que  d' eftre  baptife,  mais  ce
qu'il  fit  en  fuitte  eft  fort  remarquable ;  premierement
il  enuoya  aux  pauures  malades  de  I'Hofpital,  vne
partie  de  fa  chafTe,  off  rant  ces  premices  k  noftre  Sei-
gneur, f  econdement  comme  il  auoit  tu6  cet  animal  le
leudy  au  foir,  &  qu'il  en  deuoit  faire  feftin  le  iour
fuiuant  felon  la  couftume  du  pays,  il  voulut  attendre
iufques  au  Dimanche,  de  peur  que  les  Chreftiens  ne
mangeaffent  de  la  chair  les  iours  deffendus,  il  voyoit
bien  que  la  neceffit^  en  laquelle  ils  eftoient  les  difpen-
foient  affez,  on  luy  difoit  auffi  que  les  hommes  de-
uoient  partir  le  Samedy  pour  aller  k  la  chalTe,  &
qu'ils  ne  goufteroient  point  de  fon  feftin  s'il  ne  fe
baftoit  de  le  faire,  nonobftant  tout  cela,  [75]  il  tint
ferme,  aymant  mieux  plaire  k  Dieu  qu'aux  hommes.
La  veille  de  Noel  quelques  Sauuages  non  encor  bap-
tifez,  eftans  arriu6s  k  S.  lofeph  firent  feftin  de  grefle


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  167

a  Law  so  holy,  the  latter  ought  to  be  exempt  from  all
frailties.  It  is  true  that  the  grace  of  baptism  causes
strange  transformations,  when  one  acts  in  accord
with  it.

A  Christian  Savage,  who  wished  to  enter  a  certain
house,  was  violently  repulsed  by  a  Frenchman.  They
both  talked,  but  neither  understood  the  other.  The
Savage,  j&nding  himself  badly  treated,  said,  **  If  I
were  not  baptized,  I  would  thrash  thee  well.  I  am
larger  and  stronger  than  thou  art, —  I  would  soon
have  thrown  thee  to  the  ground ;  but  the  [74]  Father
who  baptized  me  told  me  that  anger  avails  nothing,
and  that  one  must  not  do  evil  even  to  those  who  have
done  it  to  us ;  hence  I  will  go  away. ' '

A  young  Neophyte,  having  encountered  a  caribou,
killed  it  with  a  shot  from  his  arquebus.  He  imme-
diately fell  upon  his  knees  and  thanked  God  for  it, —
a  custom  which  he  observed  even  before  his  bap-
tism; but  what  he  did  afterward  is  very  remarkable.
First,  he  sent  to  the  poor  sick  persons  at  the  Hospi-
tal a  portion  of  his  game,  offering  these  first  fruits  to
our  Lord.  Secondly,  as  he  had  killed  this  animal
Tuesday  evening,  and  as  he  ought  to  make  a  feast  of
it  the  following  day,  according  to  the  custom  of  the
country,  he  wished  to  wait  until  Sunday,  lest  the
Christians  would  not  eat  meat  on  the  forbidden  days.
He  saw,  indeed,  that  the  necessity  in  which  they
found  themselves  sufficiently  dispensed  them;  and
he  was  also  told  that  the  men  were  to  leave  on  Sat-
urday, to  go  hunting,  and  that  they  would  not  taste
his  feast  if  he  did  not  hasten  to  give  it.  Notwith-
standing all  this,  [75]  he  held  firm,  preferring  to
please  God  rather  than  man.  On  Christmas  eve,
some  Savages,  not  yet  baptized,  having  arrived  at  St.


158  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.18

d'ottrs,  ce  font  leurs  grandes  delices,  comme  on  y
inuitoit  quelques  vns  de  nos  Chrefkiens,  I'vn  deux
refpondit,  encor  que  veritablement  nous  foyons  dans
la  neceffite,  neantmoins  nous  ne  mangerons  point  de
chair  auiourd'huy,  nous  ieufnons  tous,  c'efl  pourquoy
nous  n'irons  point  au  feftin,  nous  aprifmes  cette
refponce  quelques  iours  apres  par  cas  fortuit,  cela
nous  ediffia  &  confola  dautant  plus  que  ces  pauures
gens  foufroient  de  la  difette.

Madame  de  la  Pelterie  fondatrice  des  Vrfulines,
tres-zelee  pour  les  Sauuages,  voulut  venir  ^  fainct
lofeph  k  la  fefle  de  Noel,  pour  fe  trouuer  k  la  MefTe
de  minuidt  auec  eux,  elle  a  vne  ioye  &  vne  confola-
tion  nompareille  quand  elle  pent  communier  auec
ces  bons  Neophites,  elle  fe  trouua  certain  iour  entou-
ree  de  plus  de  quarante  Sauuages,  qui  approchoient
tous  de  la  faindte  table  auec  elle,  cela  ne  fe  pafTa  pas
fans  larmes  de  [^76]  ioye,  aulTi  faut-il  auoiier  que  le
changement  fi  fubit  de  ces  pauures  barbares,  donne
bien  du  contentement  au  cceur  qui  ay  me  lefus-Chrifl.

Quand  les  Sauuages  Chreftiens  euret  aduis  qu'elle
leur  vouloit  faire  cet  honneur  de  les  venir  vifiter  k
cette  bonne  fefle,  ils  I'allerent  querir  hommes,  fem-
mes  &  filles,  auec  vne  telle  ardeur  que  nous  en  eftions
eflonnes,  c'eftoit  k  qui  la  carefleroit  dauantage,  11  par
fois  elle  les  vient  vifiter  par  eau,  ces  bonnes  gens  luy
font  vne  petite  falue  d'arquebuzades  lors  qu'elle  fe
defembarque,  I'accompagnant  iufques  k  leurs  mai-
fons  ou  cabanes,  auec  beaucoup  d'affedtion,  elle  amene
toufiours  auec  foy  quelques  petites  filles  Sauuages
feminariftes  bien  gentiment  couuertes,  ce  qui  agr6e
fort  aux  Sauuages,  or  comme  ces  enfans  entendent
tous  les  iours  la  faincfte  Melle  auec  fes  Religieufes,  &


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  159

Joseph,  made  a  feast  of  bear's  fat,  which  is  their
great  delicacy.  When  some  of  our  Christians  were
invited  to  this,  one  of  them  replied,  "  Although  we
are  truly  in  need,  nevertheless  we  will  not  eat  meat
to-day.  We  are  all  fasting,  and  for  that  reason  we
shall  not  go  to  the  feast. ' '  We  learned  of  this  an-
swer a  few  days  later  by  mere  chance,  and  it  edified
and  consoled  us  all  the  more,  because  these  poor
people  were  suffering  from  want.

Madame  de  la  Pelterie,  foundress  of  the  Ursulines,
very  zealous  in  behalf  of  the  Savages,  wished  to
come  to  saint  Joseph  at  the  Christmas  feast,  in
order  to  be  present  with  them  at  the  midnight  Mass.
She  experiences  a  matchless  joy  and  consolation
when  she  can  receive  communion  with  these  good
Neophytes.  She  found  herself  one  day  surrounded
by  more  than  forty  Savages,  who  all  approached  the
holy  table  with  her,  and  this  did  not  take  place  with-
out tears  of  {^6]  joy.  Indeed,  it  must  be  confessed
that  the  so  sudden  change  in  these  poor  barbarians
gives  great  satisfaction  to  the  heart  that  loves  Jesus
Christ.

When  the  Christian  Savages  learned  that  she
wished  to  do  them  the  honor  of  visiting  them  at  this
blessed  feast,  they  went  to  bring  her, —  men,  women,
and  girls, — with  an  ardor  that  greatly  surprised  us.
They  vied  with  each  other  in  caressing  her.  When
sometimes  she  comes  by  water  to  visit  them,  these
good  people  fire  a  little  arquebus  salute  for  her  when
she  disembarks, —  accompanying  her  as  far  as  their
houses  or  cabins,  and  showing  her  great  affection.
She  always  brings  with  her  some  little  Savage  semi-
nary girls,  very  prettily  dressed,  which  greatly
pleases  the  Savages. Now  as  these  children  hear  the


160  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.  18

qu'elles  les  entendent  chanter  pendant  I'eleuation  du
faindl  Sacrement,  elles  ont  li  bien  retenn  vn  de  leurs
motets,  qu'elle  le  chanterent  branement  ^  S.  lofeph
deuat  tons  leurs  parens  Chreftiens,  lors  qu'on  \j'j'\
leuoit  la  faindte  Hoftie  k  la  MefTe  de  minuidt,  elles
cbanterent  aufll  deuant  la  faindte  Meffe  vn  Cantique
fpirituel  compof6  en  leur  langue,  fur  la  Nailfance  du
Fils  de  Dieu,  tons  les  Sauuages  reprenoient  genti-
ment  le  flrophes,  cbantans  les  vns  apres  les  autres
auec  vn  bon  accord,  Dieu  fgait  li  ces  bons  Neophites
eftoient  contens  aufli-bien  que  leurs  enfans,  &  fl  Ma-
dame de  la  Pelterie  qui  en  eft  plus  ialoufe  que  leurs
pauures  meres,  eftoit  confol6e.  Deux  chofes  aug-
menterent  fa  ioye.  La  premiere  fut,  qu' entrant  fur  le
foir  en  la  maifon  de  Noel  Negabamat,  oti  elle  fe  reti-
roit,  elle  le  trouua  ^  genoux  auec  toute  fa  famille,  f ai-
fant  leurs  prieres,  elle  fut  bien  eflonn^e  &  les  Peres
aufli  qui  I'accompagnoient,  d' entendre  les  longues
oraifons  qu'ils  faifoient,  nonobftant  qu'ils  eulTent
affi£l6  aux  prieres  communes,  qu'on  fait  faire  ordi-
nairement  aux  Sauuages  en  la  Chappelle.

En  fecond  lieu,  voulant  faire  feflin  aux  Sauuages
qui  Tauoient  tant  ediffi^e,  elle  fit  pref enter  k  Noel
Negabamat  ce  qu'elle  leur  donnoit,  mais  Noel  dit  au
[78]  Fere  qui  luy  parloit,  mon  Fere  il  y  a  icy  quel-
ques  Sauuages  qui  s'en  vot  aux  trois  Riuieres,  i'ap-
prends  que  ceux  qui  font  1^  font  efbranl6s  &  qu'ils
ont  enuie  de  croire,  il  feroit  bon  que  Madame  de  la
Feltrie  fit  ce  prefent  ^  ces  Sauuages  qui  font  fur  leur
depart,  pour  les  gagner,  afin  qu'ils  parlent  bien  de
la  Foy,  &  qu'ils  portent  leurs  compatriotes  k  I'em-
braffer. le  n'aurois  pas  attendu  cette  ref ponce  ny  ce


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  161

holy  Mass  every  day  with  the  Nuns,  and  as  they  hear
them  sing  every  day  during  the  elevation  of  the
blessed  Sacrament,  they  have  remembered  one  of
their  motets  so  well  that  they  sang  it  finely  at  St.
Joseph,  in  the  presence  of  their  Christian  relatives,
when  lyy']  the  sacred  Host  was  elevated  at  the  mid-
night Mass.  They  sang  also  before  the  holy  Mass
a  spiritual  Song,  composed  in  their  own  language,
upon  the  Birth  of  the  Son  of  God.  All  the  Savages
took  up  the  strophes  finely,  and  sang  them  one  after
another  in  good  time.  God  knows  how  happy  these
good  Neophytes  were,  and  their  children  too,  and
what  consolation  Madame  de  la  Pelterie  experienced,
who  is  more  solicitous  about  them  than  are  their
poor  mothers.  Two  circumstances  added  to  her  joy.
The  first  was  that,  entering  toward  evening  the
house  of  Noel  Negabamat,  where  she  was  staying,  she
found  him  upon  his  knees  with  all  his  family,  say-
ing their  prayers.  She  was  greatly  astonished,  and
the  Fathers  also  who  accompanied  her,  to  hear  the
long  prayers  they  were  offering,  notwithstanding  the
fact  that  they  had  assisted  at  the  general  prayers
that  we  usually  have  the  Savages  offer  in  the  Chapel.
In  the  second  place,  wishing  to  make  a  feast  for
the  Savages  who  had  so  greatly  edified  her,  she  had
what  she  was  going  to  give  them  offered  to  Noel
Negabamat ;  but  Noel  said  to  the  [78]  Father  who
spoke  to  him,  "  My  Father,  there  are  some  Savages
here  who  are  going  to  the  three  Rivers.  I  learn  that
those  who  are  there  are  moved,  and  are  inclined  to
believe.  It  would  be  well  for  Madame  de  la  Peltrie
to  make  this  present  to  these  Savages  who  are  about
to  leave,  in  order  to  win  them  to  speak  well  of  the
Faith,  and  to  influence  their  compatriots  to  embrace


162  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

zele  d'vn  homme,  qui  ne  fait  que  de  naiflre  en  lefus-
Chrift.

II  n'eft  pas  iufques  aux  enfans,  qui  n'ayent  quel-
que  affection  pour  leur  creance,  fi  vn  d'entr'eux  voit
faire  quelque  mal  ^  fon  compagnon,  il  luy  dit  qu'il
faut  qu'il  fe  confelTe,  &  qu'il  a  mal  fait,  il  y  a  quel-
ques  iours  que  deux  ieunes  gargons,  I'vn  Clireflien  &
r  autre  Pay  en,  fe  penferent  gourmer  a  bon  efcient
pour  leur  creance,  le  Chreflien  parlant  k  celuy-cy
nouuellement  arriu6, 1'inuitoit  de  prier  Dieu,  il  luy  dit
comment  veux  tu  que  ie  le  prie  ne  le  voyant  pas,
r  autre  le  menace  d'aller  en  enfer  s'il  ne  le  prioit,
penfe-tudit  I'infidele,  que  ce  que  dif ent  les  Peres  foit
vray  ?  nous  irons  [79]  nous  autres  apres  noflre  mort  oh.
le  Soleil  fe  couche,  nous  n 'irons  point  dans  la  terre,
les  Peres  font  des  menteurs,  non,  fit  le  Chreflien,  ils
ne  mentent  pas,  ceux  qui  croyent  &  qui  obey ff ent  k
Dieu  irot  au  Ciel,  les  autres  iront  au  feu,  cela  n'eft
pas  vray  repart  fon  compagnon,  le  Chreflien  refifle,
I'autre  luy  tient  tefle,  bref  ils  s'animent  fi  bien,  que
fi  on  ne  fut  venu  pour  les  feparer,  ils  s'alloient  battre
bien  ferr6,  ie  trouue  ce  zele  d'autant  plus  admirable
que  les  Sauuages  font  froids  comme  glace,  &  ennemis
des  difputes  &  des  querelles,  ce  n'efl  pas  qu'ils  n'ay-
ent de  la  colere,  mais  ils  la  cachent  mieux  que  nous,
aufli  leur  fait  elle  plus  de  mal,  en  voicy  vn  exemple.

Vne  ieune  femme,  fe  voyant  preff6e  d'efpoufer  vn
homme  qu'elle  n'aymoit  point,  entre  en  telle  fureur
fans  le  faire  paroiflre  au  dehors,  qu'elle  fe  voulut
6trangler,  on  court  incontinent,  on  la  trouue  demie
morte,  on  coupe  le  licol,  on  la  reporte  toute  pafm6e
en  fa  cabane,  auffi-tofl  vn  Chreflien  nous  en  vient
donner  aduis,  nous  y  courufmes,  I'vn  de  nous  la  voy-


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  168

it."  I  would  not  have  expected  this  answer  or  this
zeal  from  a  man  who  had  only  just  been  born  in
Jesus  Christ.

There  are  none,  even  among  the  children,  who
have  not  some  affection  for  their  belief ;  if  one  of  them
sees  any  fault  in  a  companion,  he  tells  him  that  he
must  confess,  for  he  has  done  wrong.  A  few  days
ago,  two  boys,  one  a  Christian  and  the  other  a  Pagan,
were  about  to  fight  in  earnest,  on  account  of  their
beliefs.  The  Christian,  speaking  to  the  other,  who
had  just  arrived,  invited  him  to  pray  to  God.  The
latter  said  to  him,  ''  Why  dost  thou  ask  me  to  pray
to  God,  when  I  do  not  see  him  ? ' '  The  other  threat-
eningly replied  that  he  would  go  to  hell,  if  he  did
not  pray.  **  Dost  thou  think,"  said  the  unbeliever^
**  that  what  the  Fathers  say  is  true?  We  shall  go
[79]  after  our  death  to  the  place  where  the  Sun  sets, —
we  shall  not  go  into  the  ground ;  the  Fathers  are
liars. "  '  *  No, ' '  returned  the  Christian,  * '  they  do  not
lie;  those  who  believe  and  obey  God  will  go  to
Heaven,  the  others  will  go  into  the  fire."  ''  That
is  not  true,"  retorted  his  companion.  The  Christian
insisted,  the  other  was  obstinate ;  in  short,  they  be-
came so  excited  that  if  some  one  had  not  come  and
separated  them,  they  would  have  fought  very  fierce-
ly. I  found  this  zeal  all  the  more  admirable,  because
the  Savages  are  as  cold  as  ice,  and  opposed  to  dis-
putes and  quarrels.  Not  that  they  do  not  experience
anger,  but  they  conceal  it  better  than  we  do,  and  it
also  does  them  more  harm.  Here  is  an  example  of
this.

A  young  woman,  finding  herself  urged  to  marry  a
man  whom  she  did  not  love,  became  so  enraged,
without  showing  any  outward  indications  of  it,  that


164  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

ant  en  cet  eflat  deplorable,  [80]  fit  fecrettement  vn
voeu  ^  la  plus  faindte  &  plus  adorable  famille  qui  fut
iamais,  de  lefus,  de  Marie  &  de  S.  lofeph,  priant  le
cbef  de  cette  augufte  maifon,  d'empefcher  que  cette
ame  ne  fe  perdit,  elle  reuint  h.  foy,  &  nous  donna
tout  le  contentement  que  nous  eufilons  peu  efperer
d'vne  ame  qui  fortoit  des  portes  de  I'enfer,  nous  luy
demandafmes  fi  elle  ne  craignoit  point  d'eftre  d'am-
nee,  ie  ne  penfois  point  ^  cela,  difoit-elle,  mais  feule-
ment  k  me  deliurer  de  I'ennuy  de  cet  homme.

Vn  ieune  Chreflien  ay  ant  ioiie,  &  perdu  quelque
cbofe  notable  de  fon  petit  meuble,  fe  douta  bien  que
nous  en  ferios  mefcontens,  il  s'en  vint  trouuer  I'vn
de  nous  &  luy  dit,  mon  Pere,  ie  vous  prie  ne  foy 6s
point  mef content  de  ce  que  i'ay  fait,  ie  ne  le  feray
plus,  i'ay  perdu  beaucoup  au  ieu,  i'ay  mal  fait,  ie  ne
fuis  pas  trifle  de  ma  perte,  mais  de  vous  auoir  mef-
contente ;  car  ie  f9ay  bien  que  cela  vous  deplaift,  &
que  Dieu  ne  I'aggr^e  pas,  ie  ne  ioiieray  plus  que
chofe  de  petite  valeur,  cette  fimplicite  eft  aimable.

[81]  Vne  femme  Chreftienne  ay  ant  fong6  qu'elle
voyoit  le  diable,  nous  vint  trouuer  d6s  le  matin,  i'ay
penf6  venir  d6s  cette  nuit,  difoit-elle,  le  mefchant
manitou  m'eft  venu  voir,  il  m'a  voulu  donner  k  man-
ger, ie  I'ay  refuf6,  i'eflois  fi  epouuant6e  me  fouue-
nant  de  ce  que  vous  nous  auez  enfeign6,  que  ce  mef-
chant nous  vouloit  perdre,  que  m'eftant  eueillee  en
furfault,  ie  voulois  courir  en  voflre  maifon  de  peur
qu'il  ne  me  trompafb:  on  I'affeura  que  fi  elle  efloit
forte  en  la  Foy,  qu'il  ne  luy  pourroit  faire  aucun
mal,  notamment  fi  elle  ne  croyoit  plus  en  fes  fonges,
ie  les  liai's  mefme  en  dormant,  difoit  cette  pauure
creature. Voicy  vn  point  d' edification, les  neiges


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  165

she  tried  to  hang  herself.  People  ran  to  her  at  once ;
they  found  her  half  dead ;  they  cut  the  noose,  and
carried  her,  entirely  unconscious,  to  her  cabin.
A  Christian  came  straightway  and  informed  us  of
this ;  we  ran  thither,  and  one  of  us,  seeing  her  in
this  deplorable  state,  [80]  secretly  made  a  vow  to  the
most  holy  and  adorable  family  that  ever  existed, —
that  of  Jesus,  Mary,  and  St.  Joseph, —  praying  the
head  of  that  august  house  to  prevent  this  soul  from
being  lost.  She  came  to  herself,  and  gave  us  all  the
satisfaction  that  could  have  been  expected  from  a
soul  which  was  coming  forth  from  the  gates  of  hell.
We  asked  her  if  she  was  not  afraid  of  being  damned.
*'  I  was  not  thinking  of  that,"  said  she,  **  but  only  of
freeing  myself  from  the  annoyance  of  that  man."
^"  A  young  Christian  gambled,  and  lost  something
valuable  from  his  little  property.  Wondering,  right-
ly, if  we  would  not  be  displeased  with  him,  he  came
to  see  one  of  us  and  said,  "  My  Father,  I  pray  you
not  to  be  displeased  with  what  I  have  done ;  I  will
not  do  so  any  more.  I  have  lost  much  in  play ;  I
have  done  wrong.  I  am  not  sad  about  my  loss,  but
because  I  have  displeased  you ;  for  I  know  very  well
that  you  are  dissatisfied,  and  that  God  is  not  pleased.
I  will  stake  nothing  hereafter,  except  something  of
small  value." This  simplicity  is  charming.

[81]  A  Christian  woman  having  dreamed  that  she
saw  the  devil,  came  to  see  us  the  next  morning.  *'  I
almost  came  in  the  night,"  said  she;  **  the  wicked
manitou  came  to  see  me,  and  wished  to  give  me  some-
thing to  eat,  but  I  refused  him.  I  was  so  frightened
when  I  recalled  what  you  have  taught  me, — that  this
evil  one  desired  to  ruin  us, — that,  waking  with  a
start,  I  wished  to  run  to  your  house,  lest  he  should


166  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.18

eflant  vn  pen  hautes,  nos  Satitiages  s'en  allerent  dans
les  bois  pour  faire  leurs  prouifions  de  chairs  d'Elan;
comme  ils  deuoient  eftre  long-temps  nous  donafmes
aux  Chreftiens  vn  calandrier  pour  recognoiftre  les
Dimaches,  afin  de  faire  leurs  prieres  vn  petit  plus
longues  ces  iours-lk ;  or  comme  ils  ne  fgauent  ny  lire,
ny  efcrire,  on  auoit  diftingu6  les  iours  &  les  Lunes,  &
les  Feftes  par  diuerfes  marques,  [82]  leur  donnans
ce  papier  comme  k  Tauenture,  pour  voir  s'ils  s'en
pourroient  feruir,  ie  vous  alTeure  que  nous  fufmes
bien  eftonnes  k  leur  retour,  car  nous  eflans  venus
voir,  apres  auoir  remerci6  Dieu  en  la  Cbappelle,  ils
nous  apporterent  leur  papier,  &  nous  dirent,  voyez  fl
nous  ne  nous  fommes  point  mefcont6s,  voila  le  iour
oil  nous  penfons  eftre,  firent  ils,  ils  ne  s'eftoient  pas
mefpris  d'vn  feul  iour,  voila  adiouftoient-ils  les  iours
de  Dimanches,  nous  les  auons  gardez  tous,  except6
celuy-lk,  qu'ils  monftroient,  nous  T auons  marque  ex-
pres  pour  vous  le  monllrer,  nous  difmes  qu'il  falloit
vous  en  aduertir,  le  degel  nous  contraignit  de  trauail-
ler  ce  iour-lk,  nous  en  eftions  bien  marris,  mais  nous
eflions  en  danger  de  perdre  nos  prouifions :  les  iours
de  Feftes  nous  nous  affemblions  &  prions  Dieu  dans
vne  cabane,  &  nous  "chantions  ce  que  nous  fgauons,
les  autres  iours  chacun  prioit  Dieu  chez  foy.

Le  quinziefme  de  lanuier,  quelques  Sauuages  nous
vindrent  trouuer  de  plus  d'vne  lieue  loin  pour  fe  con-
feffer,  deuant  [83]  que  de  s'engager  plus  auant  dans
les  terres,  entre  autres  vne  femme  nous  toucha,  ie
n'ay  point  encor  communis,  difoit-elle,  ie  ne  f9ay  11
ie  vous  reuerray  iamais,  accordez  moy  la  Communion
deuant  mon  defpart,  onl'interrogea&l'ayant  trouu^e


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  167

beguile  me."  She  was  assured  that,  if  she  were
strong  in  the  Faith,  he  could  do  her  no  harm,  espe-
cially if  she  no  longer  believed  in  her  dreams.  "  I
hate  them  even  in  my  sleep,"  said  this  poor  creature.
In  the  following,  there  is  matter  for  edification.  The
snow  being  rather  deep,  our  Savages  went  into  the
woods  to  provide  themselves  with  Elk  meat ;  as  they
were  to  be  gone  a  long  time,  we  gave  the  Christians
a  calendar,  that  they  might  know  the  Sundays,  so
that  they  could  make  their  prayers  somewhat  longer
on  those  days.  Now  as  they  can  neither  read  nor
write,  we  had  distinguished  the  days  and  the  Months
and  the  Feasts  by  different  marks.  [82]  Giving  them
this  paper  at  random,  as  it  were,  to  see  if  they  could
use  it,  I  assure  you  that  we  were  greatly  astonished
upon  their  return;  for  when  they  came  to  see  us,
after  having  thanked  God  in  the  Chapel,  they  brought
us  their  paper,  and  said,  '*  See  if  we  have  counted
wrongly ;  there  is  the  day  where  we  think  we  are, '  *
they  continued.  They  were  not  mistaken  by  a  single
day.  "  There,"  they  added,  '*  are  the  Sundays;  we
have  kept  them  all  except  that  one,"  which  they
indicated ;  * '  we  have  marked  it  purposely  to  show  it
to  you,  for  we  said  that  we  must  tell  you  about  it.
The  thaw  obliged  us  to  work  that  day;  we  were
sorry  about  it,  but  we  were  in  danger  of  losing  our
provisions.  On  the  Feast  days,  we  assembled  and
prayed  to  God  in  one  cabin,  and  sang  what  we  knew.
On  the  other  days,  each  prayed  to  God  by  himself."
On  the  fifteenth  of  January,  some  Savages  came
to  us  from  more  than  a  league  away,  to  make  con-
fession, before  [83]  getting  still  farther  into  the  inte-
rior. Among  others,  a  woman  touched  our  hearts.
'*  I  have  not  yet  received  communion,"  said  she;  ''  I


168  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.18

affez  inftruidte,  on  luy  donna  raccomplillement  de
fon  defir.

Voicy  quelques  parolles  tires  des  lettres  que  la
Mere  Superieure  de  I'Hofpital  m'efcriuoit,  renuoy-
ant  les  malades  k  S.  lofeph.  Cette  fille  qui  retourne
^  S.  lofeph,  &  que  nous  auons  penfee  en  noffcre  Hof-
pital,  eft  I'vne  des  plus  modefles  que  i'aye  veu,  non
feulement  parmy  les  Sauuages,  mais  auffi  parmy  les
Frangoifes,  elle  s'eft  comport^e  auec  vne  tres-grande
retenue  parmy  tant  de  perfonnes  qui  font  en  I'Hofpi-
tal, dans  vne  autre  lettre.  Plufieurs  Sauuages  vin-
drent  hier  en  noftre  maifon,  comme  il  eftoit  tard,  ils
ont  coucli6  ^  I'Hofpital,  ils  m'ont  extremement  edi-
fice, au  premier  mot  des  prieres  qu'on  fait  le  foir,  ils
fe  mirent  k  genoux,  &  les  firent  auec  vne  deuotion
qui  me  touchoit,  ie  crains  que  mes  offences  [84]  ne
me  rendent  indigne  d'ayder  ce  pauure  peuple.

Vne  autrefois  elle  efcriuoit  en  ces  termes,  les  ma-
lades que  vous  nous  enuoyez  font  extremement  pa-
tiens,  ilsm'eftonnent,  ils  prient  Dieu  fort  volontiers,
nous  les  faif ons  entrer  en  noflre  Chappelle  pour  prier,
ils  le  font  auec  grande  affedtion.

I'ay  dit  cy-deffus,  que  les  Sauuages  auoient  cre6
vn  certain  ieune  Chreflien  fort  feruent,  Capitaine  des
prieres,  c'eft  k  dire  qu'il  auroit  foing  de  faire  faire  les
prieres  en  noflre  abfence,  &  de  fe  faire  inftruire  foy-
mefme,  pour  rapporter  k  fes  gens  ce  qu'on  luy  auroit
enfeigne,  or  il  arriua  que  les  Sauuages  s'en  eflant
allez  k  quelques  lieues  de  faindt  lofeph,  pour  faire
des  canots,  ce  Capitaine  les  fuiuit,  &  quelques  iours
apres  il  nous  vint  retrouuer,  &  nous  tint  ce  difcours,
nos  Capitaines  m'ont  enuoy6  vers  vous,  pour  eftre
inftruidl,  felon  que  nous  auios  conuenu  par  enfemble,


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  169

do  not  know  whether  I  shall  ever  see  you  again ;
grant  me  the  Communion  before  my  departure."
She  was  questioned,  and,  being  found  sufficiently
instructed,  she  was  granted  the  fulfillment  of  her
desire.

Here  are  some  sentences  taken  from  the  letters
that  the  Mother  Superior  of  the  Hospital  wrote  me
when  she  sent  the  patients  back  to  St.  Joseph:
"  This  girl  who  is  returning  to  St.  Joseph,  and  whom
we  have  cared  for  in  our  Hospital,  is  one  of  the  most
modest  girls  I  have  ever  seen,  not  only  among  the
Savages,  but  also  among  the  French.  She  has  con-
ducted herself  with  very  great  reserve  among  the
many  persons  who  are  in  the  Hospital."  In  another
letter,  "  Several  Savages  came  to  our  house  yester-
day ;  as  it  was  late,  they  slept  in  the  Hospital.  They
edified  me  greatly.  At  the  first  word  of  the  prayers
that  were  offered  in  the  evening,  they  knelt  down
and  said  them  with  a  devotion  that  touched  my  heart.
I  fear  that  my  own  transgressions  [84]  render  me
unworthy  of  aiding  these  poor  people."

At  another  time,  she  wrote  in  these  terms:  "  The
sick  whom  you  have  sent  are  extremely  patient ;  they
astonish  me.  They  pray  to  God  with  great  willing-
ness ;  we  had  them  enter  our  Chapel  to  pray,  which
they  did  very  gladly."

I  have  said  above,  that  the  Savages  had  created  a
certain  young  and  very  fervent  Christian,  *'  Captain
of  prayers,"  —  that  is  to  say,  he  was  to  see  that  the
prayers  were  said  in  our  absence,  and  was  to  be  him-
self instructed,  that  he  might  report  to  his  people
what  had  been  taught  him.  Now  it  happened  that,
the  Savages  having  gone  some  leagues  away  from
saint  Joseph  to  make  canoes,  this  Captain  followed


170  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jlSUITES [Vol.18

ie  leur  ay  enf eigne  tout  ce  que  ie  fgauois,  ie  m'en
viens  ^  Tefcole  pour  apprendre  quelque  autre  chofe
de  noftre  creance,  afin  de  leur  enfeigner,  [85]  ils
font  tous  extremement  contens  de  la  Foy  qu'ils  ont
embraffee,  c'efttoutde  bon  qu'ils  croyent  en  Dieu,  on
ne  fait  maintenant  non  plus  d'eftat  de  nos  vieilles
couflumes,  &  de  nos  vieilles  fuperftitions  anciennes,
dans  les  cabanes  de  ceux  qui  font  baptifes,  que  de
cette  pierre.  Quelques  Sauuages  de  Tadouffac  nous
font  venus  voir  pour  eflre  inflruidts,  &  pour  demeu-
rer  auec  nous,  &  pour  cultiuer  la  terre,  ils  nous  ont
eftonn^s,  tant  ils  tefmoignent  de  defir  d'eftre  Cbre-
fliens,  ils  nous  ont  dit  iufques  k  ces  paroles,  fi  vous
nous  voyez  chanceler  dans  la  refolution  que  nous
auons  prife  de  nous  faire  baptifer,  nous  vous  permet-
tons  de  nous  frapper,  &  de  nous  chaffer  d'auec  vous.
Voicy  vn  mot  de  lettre  du  P.  de  Quen,  touchant
ces  bons  Neophites,  lean  Baptifle  Etinechkavat  &
Effcienne  Pigarvicb,  me  vindrent  voir  hier  tout  expres
pour  fgauoir  quand  il  feroit  Dimanche  ils  me  dirent
qu'ils  eftoient  trifles  de  n'auoir  pas  ouy  la  Meffe
depuis  qu'ils  eftoient  partis  de  S.  lofeph,  ie  leur  ay
donn6  vn  papier,  oti  i'ay  marqu6  les  [86]  iours,  afin
qu'ils  peuffent  fgauoir  quand  il  fera  Dimanche,  ils
m'ont  promis  qu'ils  ne  manqueroient  pas  de  venir  k
la  Meffe  ce  iour-lk,  quoy  qu'ils  foient  efloign^s  d'icy
enuiron  trois  lieues,  en  effedl,  ils  n'y  ont  pas  man-
qu6,  ils  m'ont  affeur6  qu'on  prioit  Dieu  dans  vne
cabane,  ou  tous  les  Sauuages  Chreftiens  s'affem-
bloient,  &  qu'ils  allumoient  vne  6corce  deuant  I'i-
mage  de  noftre  Seigneur,  mais  pource  que  I'^corce
fe  confomme  trop  toft,  ils  m'ont  prie  de  leur  donner
vn  cierge,  ils  font  tous  dans  vn  contentement  incroy-


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  171

them ;  and  some  days  afterward,  coming  to  see  us,
lie  discoursed  in  this  manner :  ' '  Our  Captains  have
sent  me  to  you  to  be  instructed,  according  to  what
we  have  agreed  upon  together.  I  have  taught  them
all  I  knew.  I  am  coming  to  school  to  learn  some-
thing else  about  our  belief,  in  order  to  teach  them.
[85]  They  are  all  entirely  satisfied  with  the  Faith  that
they  have  embraced.  It  is  in  earnest  that  they  be-
lieve in  God.  Our  old  customs  and  ancient  supersti-
tions are  now  no  more  valued,  in  the  cabins  of  those
who  are  baptized,  than  this  stone.  Some  Savages  of
Tadoussac  have  come  to  us  to  be  instructed,  and  to
remain  with  us  and  cultivate  the  land.  They  have
astonished  us,  so  great  a  desire  do  they  show  to  be
Christians.  They  have  even  said  these  words  to  us,
*  If  you  see  us  waver  in  the  resolution  we  have  made,
to  be  baptized,  we  will  let  you  beat  us,  and  drive  us
away  from  you.' "

Here  is  part  of  a  letter  from  Father  de  Quen,
touching  these  good  Neophytes.  ''  Jean  Baptiste
Etinechkavat  and  Estienne  Pigaruich  came  to  me
yesterday,  expressly  to  know  when  it  would  be  Sun-
day. They  told  me  they  were  sad  at  not  having
heard  Mass  since  they  had  left  St.  Joseph.  I  gave
them  a  paper  whereon  I  marked  the  [86]  days,  that
they  might  know  when  Sunday  came.  They  prom-
ised me  that  they  would  be  sure  to  come  to  Mass  that
day,  although  they  are  about  three  leagues  distant
from  here;  and,  in  fact,  they  did  not  fail  to  come.
They  assured  me  that  prayers  were  offered  to  God
in  a  cabin  where  all  the  Christian  Savages  gathered,
and  that  they  lighted  a  piece  of  bark  before  the  im-
age of  our  Lord ;  but,  as  the  bark  burned  out  so  soon,
they  begged  me  to  give  them  a  taper. They  are  all


172  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  jASUITES [Vol.18

able  d'auoir  embraffe  la  Foy,  nous  chaftions  difoient-
ils,  les  defobei'lTans :  vne  ieune  fille  n'ayant  pas  voulu
aller  k  la  rets,  oh.  fon  pere  renuoyoit,  fut  deux  iours
fans  manger  en  punition  de  fa  def obei'ff ance :  deux
ieunes  gar9ons  eflans  venus  trop  tard  aux  prieres  du
matin,  furent  punis  par  vne  poignee  de  cendres
chaudes  qu'on  leur  ietta  fur  la  tefte,  auec  menace  de
plus  grand  cbaftiment  en  cas  de  recidiue,  le  Sauuage
qui  me  racomptoit  cette  hifloire  me  fit  rire,  eflant
difoit-il,  aux  prieres  auec  les  autres,  la  face  tourn^e
vers  r image  de  noflre  [87]  Seigneur,  iauois  grande
enuie  de  voir  fi  ces  deux  ieunes  gens  que  ie  venois
d'eueiller  efloient  venus  aux  prieres;  mais  me  fou-
uenant  que  vous  recomandiez  la  modeftie,  &  1' atten-
tion quand  on  parle  k  Dieu,  ie  n'ofois  me  mouuoir,
enfin  voulant  recognoiftre  fi  tout  le  monde  efloit  en
fon  deuoir,  ie  me  lailTay  aller,  ie  tournay  la  tefle ;
mais  tant  foit  peu  &  bien  fagement,  ie  croy,  faifoit-
il,  qu'il  n'y  a  point  de  mal  en  cela,  cette  candeur  me
fit  rire.

Voicy  vne  adtion  qui  m*a  grandement  touch6 :  vn
ieune  homme  Chreftien,  age  d'enuiron  vingt-deux
ans,  n'ayant  peu  trouuer  femme  k  S.  lofeph,  s'en
alia  en  marchandife  vers  vne  autre  nation,  dans  les
terres  d'oii  il  ramena  vne  ieune  fille,  auec  le  f can-
dale  des  nouueaux  Chrefliens,  qui  ne  veulent  pas
qu'vn  ieune  homme  baptife  epoufe  vne  Payenne,  il
demeuroit  auec  elle  comme  eflant  marie  k  la  fa9on
des  Sauuages,  fi-toft  qu'il  parut  aux  trois  Riuieres,  on
la  luy  fit  quitter,  I'ayant  quitt6  il  s'en  reuint  k  S.
lofeph  tout  plain  de  confufion.  Nous  affemblafmes
les  principaux  Chrefliens  [88]  pour  f9auoir  comme
on  fe  comporteroit en  cet affaire, ils  concluoient


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  175

in  an  incredible  state  of  satisfaction  at  having  em-
braced the  Faith.  *  We  punish  the  disobedient, '  said
they.  A  young  girl  who  would  not  go  to  the  nets,,
where  her  father  sent  her,  was  two  days  without  food
as  a  punishment  for  her  disobedience.  Two  boys,
who  came  late  to  prayers  in  the  morning,  were  pun-
ished by  having  a  handful  of  hot  cinders  thrown
upon  their  heads,  with  threats  of  greater  chastise-
ment in  case  the  offense  were  repeated.  The  Sav-
age who  related  this  next  story  to  me  made  me
laugh.  '  Being  at  prayers  with  the  others,'  said  he,
*  having  my  face  turned  towards  the  image  of  our  [87]
Lord,  I  had  a  great  desire  to  see  if  these  two  young
men  whom  I  had  just  awakened  had  come  to  pray-
ers ;  but  remembering  that  you  recommended  mod-
esty and  attention  when  one  is  speaking  to  God,  I
did  not  dare  move.  Finally,  wishing  to  find  out  if
every  one  was  doing  his  duty,  I  yielded.  I  turned
my  head,  but  ever  so  little,  and  very  discreetly;  I
believe, '  he  added,  '  that  there  was  no  harm  in  that. '
This  candor  made  me  laugh."

Here  is  an  act  which  has  greatly  touched  me.  A
young  Christian,  about  twenty-two  years  old,  not
having  been  able  to  find  a  wife  at  St.  Joseph,  went
to  trade  with  another  nation  in  the  interior,  whence
he  brought  back  a  young  girl,  to  the  scandal  of  the
new  Christians,  who  do  not  allow  a  baptized  man  to
marry  a  Pagan.  He  lived  with  her  as  if  married,  in
the  fashion  of  the  Savages.  As  soon  as  he  appeared
at  the  three  Rivers,  they  made  him  leave  her ;  and,
after  having  given  her  up,  he  returned  to  St.  Jo-
seph, greatly  humiliated.  We  assembled  the  prin-
cipal Christians,  [88]  to  ascertain  what  action  would
be  taken  in  this  matter. They  summarily  decided


174  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

nettement  qu'il  le  falloit  chaffer  &  luy  deffendre  de
iamais  plus  demeurer  auec  les  Chrefliens  pour  auoir
fait  vne  fi  mauuaife  adtion,  nous  repartifmes  que
cette  rigueur  feroit  bonne  en  cas  qu'il  voulut  perfe-
uerer  dans  fa  malice,  mais  que  Dieu  eftant  plein  de
mifericorde,  il  le  falloit  receuoir  ^  pardon  s'il  reco-
gnoiffoit  fon  offenfe,  auffi-toft  fut  ordonn^  qu'il  crie-
roit  mercy  k  Dieu  publiquement  de  fon  pecli6,  voicy
comme  la  chofe  fe  paffa,  vn  Dimanche  matin  la  pluf-
part  des  Chrefliens  eflans  affembles  en  I'Eglife  pour
ouyr  la  faindte  Meffe,  ce  pauure  ieune  homme  fe  tint
h,  r entree  de  la  porte,  &  parlant  tout  haut  dit  au
Pere  qui  fe  difpofoit  pour  celebrer;  mon  Pere  me
voulez  vous  permettre  1' entree  de  I'Eglife,  le  Pere
luy  reprocha  qu'il  auoit  commis  vn  grand  fcandale,
&  que  s'il  en  vouloit  demander  pardon  k  Dieu  qu'il
entrafl,  il  entre  done,  fe  met  k  genoux  deuant  I'Au-
tel,  &  de  foy-mefme  parlant  tout  haut  il  s'efcrie,  mon
Dieu  faidtes  moy  mifericorde,  ie  vous  ay  offenc6,
ie  vous  en  demande  [89]  pardon,  ay^s  piti6  de  moy,
i'ay  commis  vn  grand  peche,  mais  vous  efles  bon,
faites  moy  mifericorde,  ie  ne  commettray  plus  iamais
cette  offence,  ie  me  confefferay,  ayes  pitie  de  moy,
&  vous  autres  qui  efles  icy  affembl6s,  pri6s  pour
moy,  afin  que  Dieu  me  faffe  mifericorde,  ie  fuis
bien  marry  de  I'auoir  fach6,  cela  dit,  il  fe  proflerna
baifant  la  terre,  &  vn  Capitaine  Chreflien  s'ecria,
prions  pour  luy  afin  que  Dieu  luy  face  mifericorde,
tout  le  monde  fe  mit  auffi-toft  k  genoux  priant  tout
haut  noflre  Seigneur  d' auoir  piti6  de  ce  pauure  peni-
tent, ie  confeffe  ingenuement  que  cette  adlion  me
perga  le  coeur,  ce  n'efl  pas  tout,  ce  ieune  homme
m' eftant  venu  voir  fur  les  trois  heures  apres  midy.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  176

that  he  should  be  driven  away  and  forbidden  ever  to
live  again  with  the  Christians,  for  having  been  guilty
of  so  bad  an  action.  We  replied  that  this  severity
would  be  proper  in  case  he  intended  to  persevere
in  his  evil  course ;  but  that,  as  God  was  full  of  mer-
cy, he  should  be  received  and  pardoned  if  he  ac-
knowledged his  offense.  It  was  immediately  decreed
that  he  should  publicly  entreat  God  for  mercy  upon
his  sin.  The  affair  occurred  thus :  One  Sunday
morning,  the  greater  part  of  the  Christians  having
assembled  in  the  Church  to  hear  the  holy  Mass,  this
poor  young  man,  remaining  near  the  open  door,  and
speaking  loudly,  said  to  the  Father  who  was  prepar-
ing to  officiate,  **  My  Father,  will  you  permit  me
to  enter  the  Church?  "  The  Father  reproached  him,
saying  that  he  had  caused  a  great  scandal,  and  that,
if  he  would  ask  God's  pardon  for  it,  he  might  enter.
He  came  in,  then,  knelt  down  before  the  Altar,  and
of  his  own  accord,  speaking  in  a  loud  voice,  cried,
'  *  My  God,  have  mercy  upon  me ;  I  have  offended
you,  I  ask  you  [89]  for  pardon ;  have  pity  upon  me ;
I  have  committed  a  great  sin,  but  you  are  good, —
have  mercy  upon  me.  I  will  never  be  guilty  of  this
offense  again;  I  will  confess;  have  pity  upon  me.
And  you  who  are  here  assembled,  pray  for  me,  that
God  may  show  me  mercy ;  I  am  very  sorry  to  have
offended  him."  This  said,  he  prostrated  himself,
and  kissed  the  ground;  and  a  Christian  Captain
exclaimed,  **  Let  us  pray  for  him,  that  God  may  show
him  mercy. "  All  immediately  fell  upon  their  knees,
praying  aloud  to  our  Lord  to  have  compassion  on  this
poor  penitent.  I  confess  frankly  that  this  act  pierced
me  to  the  heart.  This  is  not  all.  This  young  man
coming  to  see  me,  about  three  o'clock  in  the  after-


176  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ^SUITES [Vol.18

me  toucha  plus  qu'il  n'auoit  fait  le  matin,  mon
Pere,  me  difoit-il,  i'ay  eu  vn  fi  grand  regret  de  ma
faute  que  ie  n'ay  ofe  aborder  aucun  Chreftien  depuis
mon  retour,  ie  n'oferois  feulement  les  regarder,  on
m'auoit  bien  dit  que  vous  me  tanceriez  li  ie  reuenois
h,  faindt  lofeph,  ie  n'ay  pas  laifI6  de  vous  venir  trou-
uer,  ie  vous  affeure  que  depuis  que  i'ay  quitt6  cette
femme,  i'ay  ieufn6  tous  [90]  les  iours,  ne  mangeant
qu'vne  fois  le  iour  &  encore  pas,  tant  i'ay  de  douleur
d'auoir  fafche  Dieu,  ie  n'ay  ofe  me  retirer  aux  ca-
banes  des  Clireftiens,  ie  paffe  deuant  eux  la  teffce
baiffee  fans  mot  dire,  ie  les  iray  voir  quand  ie  feray
confeil^,  voyla  comme  la  chofe  palfa,  mais  voicy  ce
qui  me  ietta  dans  vn  profond  eftonnement,  quand  ce
bon  Neopbite  eut  fatisfait  pour  ce  fcandale,  ie  luy
demanday  comme  il  efloit  laiile  aller  k  vn  li  grad
pech6,  ie  ne  luy  auois  point  voulu  parler  deuant  fa
penitence,  i'examinay  diligemment  fon  procede,  ie
le  trouuay  fi  peu  coulpable  deuat  Dieu,  que  ie  fremis
quelque  temps  en  moy-mefme  d'vne  faindte  horreur,
il  eft  vray  qu'il  auoit  amen6  cette  ieune  fille,  ayant
defia  donne  parole  k  vne  autre,  il  eft  vray  qu'il  de-
meuroit  auec  elle  comme  s'il  euft  eft6  mari6,  &  voyla
le  fcandale,  mais  il  eft  vray  auffi  que  la  crainte  qu'il
auoit  d'offencer  Dieu  &  le  refpedt  qu'il  portoit  k  fon
bapt.efme,  I'auoient  empefcb6  de  la  toucher,  quoy
qu'il  en  fut  fortement  follicit6,  delirant  qu'elle  fut
Chreftienne  deuant  que  de  luy  tefmoigner  fon  [91]
amiti6,  voyla  ^  mon  aduis  ce  qui  paffe  1' eftonnement,
eftre  dans  le  feu  &  ne  pas  brufler,  faire  vne  adtion
prefque  innocente  deuant  Dieu,  &  en  porter  la  peni-
tence auec  amour  deuant  les  hommes.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  177

noon,  affected  me  more  than  he  had  done  in  the
morning.  '*  My  Father,"  said  he,  **  I  have  so  deeply
regretted  my  fault  that  I  have  not  dared  to  approach
any  Christian  since  my  return ;  I  would  not  dare  even
to  look  at  them.  I  was  told,  indeed,  that  you  would
chide  me  if  I  returned  to  saint  Joseph ;  but  I  have
come,  nevertheless,  to  see  you.  I  assure  you  that,
since  I  left  this  woman,  I  have  fasted  every  [90]
day, —  eating  only  once  a  day  and  not  more, — so
much  have  I  grieved  for  having  offended  God.  I
have  not  dared  to  take  shelter  in  the  cabins  of  the
Christians ;  I  pass  before  them  in  silence,  with  bowed
head;  I  shall  go  and  see  them  when  I  have  con-
fessed." Thus  the  incident  passed  over,  but  now
see  what  caused  me  profound  astonishment;  when
this  good  Neophyte  had  atoned  for  this  offense,  I
asked  how  he  had  come  to  yield  to  so  great  a  sin ;  I
had  been  unwilling  to  speak  to  him  before  his  pen-
ance. I  carefully  examined  his  behavior;  I  found
him  so  little  guilty  before  God  that  I  shuddered  with-
in myself  for  some  time  with  a  holy  horror.  It  is
true  that  he  had  taken  this  young  girl,  having  al-
ready given  his  word  to  another ;  it  is  true  that  he
lived  with  her  as  if  they  were  married,  and  that  was
the  offense.  But  it  is  true  also  that  his  fear  of  offend-
ing God  and  his  respect  for  his  baptism  had  pre-
vented him  from  touching  her,  although  he  .was
urgently  solicited  to  do  so, —  desiring  that  she  should
become  a  Christian  before  showing  her  the  evidences
of  his  [91]  affection.  This,  in  my  opinion,  is  what
passes  wonder, —  to  be  in  the  fire,  and  not  be  burned;
to  do  an  act  almost  innocent  before  God,  and  patient-
ly to  bear  the  penance  for  it  before  men.


178  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.18


CHAPITRE  VII.

CONTINUATION DES ACTIONS DE NOS NOUUEAUX
CHRESTIENS.

CONCEPTUM  fermonem  tenere  quis  poterit. Puis
que  ie  fuis  en  train  de  parler  des  adtions  de
nos  Chreftiens,  il  faut  que  ie  couche  en  ce
Cliapitre  Ie  refte  des  petites  remarques  que  i'en  ay
faidtes,  ou  qu'on  m'en  a  donn^es.

Vn  Sauuage  de  I'lfle  eftant  defcendu  k  S.  lofeph
pour  trouuer  femme  k  fon  fils,  &  recherchant  la  fille
de  deffundt  Frangois  Xauier  Nenaskvmat,  Noel  Ne-
gabamat  ^  qui  cette  fille  a  efl6  fort  recommand^e,
parla  en  ces  termes  au  pere  du  ieune  homme ;  nous
ne  fommes  [92]  plus  ce  que  nous  auons  efl6,  nous
auons  quitt6  nos  anciennes  fa$ons  de  faire  pour  en
prendre  de  meilleures,  celles  que  nous  auons  prifes
nous  aggreent,  nous  les  aymons  &  nous  les  voulons
garder  iufques  k  la  mort,  c'eft  pourquoy  nous  ne  pou-
uons  donner  cette  fille,  qui  croit  en  Dieu,  &  qui  eft
baptif^e,  qu'k  vne  perfonne  de  mefme  creance,  autre-
ment  Dieu  fe  fafcheroit,  &  nous  ne  voulons  pas
I'offencer,  Ie  barbare  ne  repartit  rien  k  ce  difcours,  il
diuertit  Ie  propos,  &  s'entretint  pour  lors  de  toute
autre  chofe;  mais  Ie  landemain  matin  il  retourna
auec  vn  grand  colier  de  pourcelaine,  qu'il  prefenta  ^
Noel  Negabamat,  &  luy  dit,  voyla  qui  parle  pour
moy,  &  qui  vous  affeure  que  ie  veux  croire  en  Dieu,
&  que  ie  veux  embraffer  les  fagons  de  faire  que  vous


1640]  RELA  TJON  OF  1640  179


CHAPTER  VII.

CONTINUATION  OF  THE  ACTIONS OF OUR  NEW CHRIS-
TIANS.

CONCEPTUM  sermonem  tenere  quis  poterit? Since
I  am  speaking  of  the  actions  of  our  new  Chris-
tians, I  must  set  down  in  this Chapter  the
remainder  of  the  little  observations  that  I  have  made
of  them,  or  that  have  been  communicated  to  me.

A  Savage  of  the  Island,  who  went  down  to  St.
Joseph  to  find  a  wife  for  his  son,  asked  for  the  daughter
of  the  deceased  Frangois  Xavier  Nenaskumat.  Noel
Negabamat,  to  whom  this  girl  had  been  carefully
entrusted,  spoke  in  these  terms  to  the  father  of  the
young  man :  * '  We  are  no  [92]  longer  what  we  once
were, — we  have  given  up  our  old  customs,  to  accept
better  ones.  Those  that  we  have  adopted  please  us ;
we  love  them,  and  wish  to  observe  them  until  death.
Hence  we  cannot  give  this  girl,  who  believes  in  God
and  is  baptized,  except  to  a  person  of  the  same  belief.
Otherwise,  God  would  be  angry,  and  we  do  not  wish
to  offend  him."  The  barbarian  answered  nothing  to
this  speech ;  he  changed  the  subject,  and  conversed
for  the  time  about  some  other  matter.  But,  the
next  morning,  he  returned  with  a  large  porcelain
collar,  which  he  presented  to  Noel  Negabamat,  say-
ing to  him,  ''  This  will  speak  for  me,  and  will  assure
you  that  I  wish  to  believe  in  God,  and  that  I  wish
to  embrace  the  customs  that  you  so  cherish.  There-
fore, do  not  raise  any  difficulties  about  granting  this


180  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ^SUITES [Vol.18

cheriffez  tant,  &  par  confequent  ne  faites  nulle  diffi-
culte  d'accorder  cette  fille  k  mon  fils;  car  il  fe  fera
baptifer,  &  moy  auffi,  Noel  Negabamat  bien  eftonn6
de  cette  adtion  repartit,  nous  ne  voulons  rien  con-
clure  touchant  ce  mariage  fans  I'aduis  de  noftre
Pere,  il  eft  all6  faire  vn  tour  ^  Kebec  [93]  nous  I'at-
tendons  ce  soir,  fi-tofl  qu'il  fera  de  retour  ie  luy  por-
teray  ce  colier,  qui  luy  fera  entendre  vos  intentions,
il  n'y  man  qua  pas,  a  peine  le  Pere  efloit  il  entre  dans
fa  chambre,  que  Noel  luy  prefente  cette  pourcelaine
&  luy  expofe  toute  1' affaire,  ie  fgay  de  bonne  part
que  ce  ieune  Sauuage  preffa  fort  la  fille  pour  fgauoir
fl  elle  I'aggreoit,  mais  encor  qu'elle  eut  de  Taffedtion
pour  luy,  neantmoins  elle  ne  refpondit  autre  chofe
finon,  qu'il  ne  falloit  pas  s'addreffer  k  elle  pour  cet
affaire,  mais  au  Pere  qui  Ta  inftruidle  &  'k  fes  parens.
Or  ce  Sauuage  fe  voyant  econduit  de  ce  cofte-1^,
pour  des  iufles  raifons,  rechercha  vne  ieune  femme
Payenne  qui  venoit  de  quitter  fon  mary,  &  comma
celle-cy  efloit  parente  de  lean  Baptifle  Etinechkavat
il  s'addreffe  ^  luy,  le  tire  ^  I'ecart,  luy  fait  fes  pre  fens
&  fa  demande,  lean  Baptifle  luy  r6pondit  en  cette
forte,  ie  tiens  cette  ieune  femme  comme  ma  fille,  mais
ie  ne  te  celeray  point  que  les  eaux  du  baptefme
n'ayant  pas  encor  paff6  fur  fa  tefle,  elle  a  peu  d'efprit,
i'ay  pri6  fouuent  vn  tel  Pere  de  la  baptifer,  [94]
comme  il  recognoiffoit  qu'elle  n'aymoit  pas  fon  mary,
&  qu'elle  le  pourroit  quitter,  comme  elle  a  fait,  il  ne
I'a  pas  voulu  faire,  fi  elle  efloit  baptifde  ie  ne  la  don-
nerois  iamais  qu'^  vn  Chreflien,  puis  qu'elle  ne  I'efl
pas,  ie  te  I'accorde,  fi  elle  en  eft  contente.  Au  re  fie
encor  que  le  Pere  qui  fgait  la  valeur  des  eaux  qu'il
verfe  fur  nous,  ne  I'ait  point  voulu  baptifer,  il  ne  la


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  181

girl  to  my  son;  for  lie  will  be  baptized,  and  I  also."
Noel  Negabamat,  greatly  surprised  at  this  act,  re-
plied, "  We  will  conclude  nothing  about  this  mar-
riage without  the  advice  of  our  Father.  He  has  gone
on  a  journey  to  Kebec;  [93]  we  expect  him  this
evening.  As  soon  as  he  returns  I  will  carry  him
this  collar,  which  will  make  him  understand  your
intentions."  He  did  not  fail  to  do  so;  and  the
Father  had  scarcely  entered  his  chamber  before  Noel
presented  him  this  porcelain,  and  explained  the
whole  matter  to  him.  I  know  upon  good  authority
that  this  young  Savage  importuned  the  girl  exceed-
ingly, to  find  out  if  she  would  accept  him ;  but,
although  she  felt  some  affection  for  him,  she  would
nevertheless  give  him  no  other  answer  than  that  he
must  not  apply  to  her  in  this  matter,  but  to  the
Father  who  had  instructed  her,  and  to  her  relatives.
Now  this  Savage,  seeing  himself  put  off  in  this
quarter  for  good  reasons,  sought  a  young  Pagan
woman  who  had  just  left  her  husband ;  and  as  she
was  a  relative  of  Jean  Baptiste  Etinechkavat,  he
addressed  the  latter ;  taking  him  aside,  he  proffered
him  his  presents  and  his  request.  Jean  Baptiste  an-
swered him  thus :  ' '  I  look  upon  this  young  woman
as  my  daughter;  but  I  will  not  conceal  from  thee
that,  as  the  waters  of  baptism  have  not  passed  over
her  head,  she  has  little  sense.  I  have  often  begged
such  a  Father  to  baptize  her ;  [94]  as  he  saw  that  she
did  not  love  her  husband,  and  that  she  probably
would  leave  him,  as  she  has  done,  he  was  not  will-
ing to  do  so.  If  she  were  baptized,  I  would  never
give  her  to  any  one  but  a  Christian ;  as  she  is  not,
I  will  give  her  to  thee,  if  she  is  willing.  Moreover,
although  the  Father,  who  knows  the  value  of  the


182  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

pas  entierement  econduite,  mais  il  nous  ^  dit  feule-
ment,  qu'il  falloit  attendre  qu'elle  fut  mieux  difpo-
f6e,  c'eft  pourquoy  ie  te  fupplie  de  la  faire  inflruire
la  haul  par  les  Peres  qui  font  aux  trois  Riuieres,  &
de  luy  procurer  le  baptefme,  &  k  ton  fils  auffi,  ce  font
les  paroles  de  ce  bon  Neophite.

I'ay  parle  cy-deffus  d'vn  Chreflien  eftropiat  d'vne
iambe,  ie  puis  dire  que  la  grace  fait  vn  miracle  en
ce  ieune  homme ;  ie  penfe  auoir  defcrit  f on  baptefme
aux  relations  precedentes,  mais  cela  n'empefchera
pas  que  ie  ne  touche  icy  vne  ou  deux  de  fes  a(5tions
en  paffant,  il  eft  d'vn  naturel  prompt  &  altier,  mais
fi  le  fang  amolit  les  diamants,  la  grace  dompte  les
cceurs,  il  nous  racomptoit  [95]  vn  iour,  qu'eflant  all6
k  la  guerre,  il  fe  vit  pourfuiuy  par  trois  grands  Hiro-
quois,  comme  lors  il  auoit  de  bonnes  iambes  il  les
deuangoit  auec  aduantage,  enfin  s'eflant  apperceu
qu'ils  n'efloient  pas  tons  trois  enfemble,  il  tourne
vifage,  attaque  le  premier  &  I'arrefle  d'vn  coup  de
fleche ;  cela  fait,  il  fait  f emblant  de  fuir,  les  autres
le  pourfuiuans,  il  fe  retourne  vne  autrefois,  tranf-
perce  le  plus  proche,  puis  ay  ant  iett6  fon  arc  &  fon
carquois,  il  court  apres  le  troifiefme  I'efp^e  k  la  main,
mais  comme  il  craignoit  d'en  rencontrer  quelques
autres,  il  fe  retira  bien  ioyeux,  d' auoir  euite  vn  tel
danger.

II  auoit  pour  lors  vn  corps  de  f er,  pour  ainfi  parler,
&  vne  ame  de  feu,  mais  les  grandes  maladies  qui
I'attaquerent  par  apres  luy  firent  bien  voir  qu'il  eftoit
bafty  de  fange  &  de  boue,  comme  le  refle  des  hom-
mes;  il  attribue  toutes  fes  dif graces  k  fon  orgueil,  il
dit  hautement  deuant  fes  compatriotes  qu'k  mefme
temps  qu'il  s'efl  veu  plong6  dans  quelque  eflime  de


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  183

waters  that  he  pours  upon  us,  was  not  willing  to  bap-
tize her,  he  did  not  entirely  refuse  her,  but  merely
told  us  that  it  was  necessary  to  wait  until  she  were  bet-
ter disposed.  Hence,  I  beg  thee  to  have  her  instructed
up  there  by  the  Fathers  who  are  at  the  three  Rivers,
and  to  procure  baptism  for  her  and  for  thy  son  also. '  *
Such  were  the  words  of  this  good  Neophyte.

I  have  spoken  above  of  a  Christian  who  was  lame  in
one  leg.  I  can  say  that  grace  effected  a  miracle  in
this  young  man.  I  think  I  have  described  his  bap-
tism in  preceding  relations,  but  that  will  not  prevent
me  from  incidentally  mentioning  here  one  or  two  of
his  actions.  He  is  of  a  hasty  and  proud  disposition ;
but,  if  blood  softens  diamonds,  grace  subdues  hearts.
He  related  to  us  [95]  one  day  that,  having  gone  to
war,  he  saw  himself  pursued  by  three  stout  Hiro-
quois.  As  he  then  had  good  legs,  he  considerably
outran  them.  At  last,  perceiving  that  they  were
not  all  three  together,  he  turned  around,  attacked  the
first  one  and  stopped  him  by  an  arrow  shot.  This
done,  he  pretended  to  flee,  and  the  others  pursued
him ;  he  turned  again,  and  pierced  the  nearest  one
through;  then,  having  thrown  down  his  bow  and
quiver,  he  ran  after  the  third,  javelin  in  hand ;  but
as  he  was  afraid  of  encountering  others,  he  withdrew,
greatly  rejoiced  at  having  escaped  such  danger.

He  had  then  a  body  of  iron,  so  to  speak,  and  a
soul  of  fire.  But  the  severe  illnesses  that  afterward
attacked  him  made  him  see  plainly  that  he  was  built
of  clay  and  mud,  like  the  rest  of  humanity.  He
attributes  all  his  misfortunes  to  his  own  pride.  He
says  boldly  before  his  countrymen  that  whenever  he
has  found  himself  plunged  in  self -admiration,  at  that
very  time  some  misfortune  has  overtaken  him. We


184  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.18

foy-mefme,  ^  mefme  teps  quelque  malheur  Ta  ac-
cueilly,  nous  I'auons  [96]  fecouru  quelques  ann6es
dans  fes  miferes,  enfin  la  maifon  de  charite  &  de  mi-
fericorde  effcant  eftablie  on  Ty  fit  porter,  comme  il  efl
vrayement  touche  de  Dieu,  il  profitoit  grandement
aux  autres  malades.  Ay  ant  appris  cet  Hyuer  que
les  Peres  de  la  refidence  de  S.  lofeph  fe  retiroient,
ou  comme  parlent  maintenant  les  Sauuages  qui  nous
cognoiffent,  fe  cachoient  pour  parler  a  Dieu  dans
leurs  exercices  fpirituels,  il  pria  inftamment  qu'on  I'y
fit  porter,  n' ay  ant  plus  d' autre  incommodit6  que  fa
iambe,  dont  il  ne  fe  pent  feruir,  la  mere  Superieure
de  I'Hofpital  m'en  efcriuit  ces  mots,  Pierre  Trigatin
(c'efl  ainfi  qu'il  fe  nomme)  me  voyant  donner  ma
lettre  k  vn  Sauuage,  ma  obligee  de  mander  ^  V.  R.
qu'il  defire  auec  paffion  d'aller  ^  S.  lofeph,  pour
eflre  enf eigne  a  prier  Dieu,  «&  faire  quelque  retraidte,
il  fut  bier  vne  heure  &  demie  en  noilre  Chappelle
en  oraifon,  &  toutes  les  fois  qu'il  en  fort,  on  voit
bien  qu'il  efl  tout  remply  de  Dieu,  nous  tefmoignant
vn  mefpris  de  tout,  mefme  du  boire  &  du  manger,
il  eft  foufmis  k  tout,  on  diroit  [97]  d'vn  predicateur
le  voyant  enfeigner  les  autres,  1' affection  luy  faifant
faire  tons  les  gefles  qu'il  faut  pour  leur  imprimer  ce
qu'il  dit,  ie  croy  que  les  ames  qui  ayment  Dieu  fer-
uemment  ont  des  confolations  nompareilles  voyans
ces  bons  Neophites,  ce  font  les  paroles  de  la  Mere.

Enfin  noftre  R.  P.  Superieur  le  fit  apporter  ou
pluflofl  traifner  ^  la  fagon  du  pais,  il  conceuoit  fort
bien  les  chofes  de  Dieu,  gardoit  le  filence,  fe  retiroit
en  vn  petit  coing  pour  faire  fes  oraifons  &  fes  medi-
tations, il  s'eftonnoit  de  1' ignorance  des  hommes,  &
deploroit  la  mifere  de fes compatriotes, nous ne


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  185

have  [96]  aided  him  for  several  years  in  his  suffer-
ings ;  the  house  of  charity  and  mercy  being  finally
established,  we  had  him  carried  there,  and,  as  he  is
really  touched  by  God,  the  other  patients  profited
greatly  by  his  presence.  Having  learned  this  Win-
ter that  the  Fathers  of  the  residence  of  St.  Joseph
went  into  retreat, —  or,  as  the  Savages  who  know  us
now  say,  hid  themselves  to  speak  to  God  in  their
spiritual  exercises, —  he  begged  earnestly  that  he
should  be  carried  there,  his  only  impediment  being
his  leg,  which  he  could  not  use.  The  mother
Superior  of  the  Hospital  wrote  me  thus  about  him :
**  Pierre  Trigatin  "  (this  is  his  name),  **  seeing  me
give  my  letter  to  a  Savage,  has  constrained  me  to
send  this  message  to  Your  Reverence,  that  he  pas-
sionately desires  to  go  to  St.  Joseph  to  be  taught  to
pray  to  God,  and  to  go  into  retreat.  Yesterday  he
was  an  hour  and  a  half  in  prayer,  in  our  Chapel ;  and,
every  time  he  issues  therefrom,  it  is  very  evident
that  he  is  filled  with  God,  testifying  to  us  a  con-
tempt for  all  things,  even  for  food  and  for  drink ;  he
is  submissive  to  all;  one  would  call  him  [97]  a
preacher,  seeing  him  teach  the  others, —  his  enthu-
siasm causing  him  to  make  all  the  gestures  necessary
to  impress  upon  them  what  he  is  saying.  I  believe
that  the  souls  who  fervently  love  God  experience
incomparable  consolation  in  seeing  these  good  Neo-
phytes." These  are  the  Mother's  words.

Finally,  our  Reverend  Father  Superior  had  him
brought,  or  rather  dragged,  in  the  fashion  of  the
country.  He  very  well  understood  the  things  of  God,
kept  silent,  and  withdrew  to  a  little  corner  to  offer
his  prayers  and  meditations.  He  expressed  astonish-
ment at  the  ignorance of  men, and  deplored  the


186  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

fommes  difoit-il,  que  des  chiens,  nous  ne  penfons
qu'^  cette  vie,  quand  on  me  parle  de  Dieu  mon  ame
eft  repeue,  il  me  femble  qn'elle  efl  comme  vn
homme  qui  a  grand  appetit,  anquel  on  donne  bien  k
difner.

Le  Pere  qui  le  conduifoit  le  voyant  petuner,  luy
demanda  pourquoy  il  petunoit,  il  demeura  court  fans
refpondre,  fi  Dieu  vous  difoit  pourfuit  le  Pere,  ren-
dez  compte  de  vos  adtions,  pourquoy  [98]  auez  vous
pris  du  tabac?  que  diriez-vous?  ie  ferois  bien  en
peine ;  car  ie  n'en  ay  iamais  pris  que  pour  le  plailir
que  i'y  fentois,  mais  pourquoy  adioutoit-il,  ne  m'a-
uez  vous  pas  auerty  pluftoft  de  cette  action  deregl^e  ?
ie  n'en  prendray  iamais  plus;  en  effet  il  s'en  paffa
fort  long-teps,  iufques  k  ce  qu'vne  perfone  luy  dit
qu'il  feroit  h.  propos  qu'il  en  prit  vn  peu  pour  fa  fan-
t6,  ceux  qui  fgauent  de  quelle  manie  les  Sauuages  &
quelques  Fran$ois  font  port6s  ^  prendre  la  fumee  du
tabac,  admireront  cette  abftinence  en  vn  Canadois,
les  grands  yurongnes  n'ayment  pas  tant  le  vin  que
les  Sauuages  ayment  le  petun.

Ayant  fait  vn  tour  ce  Printemps  aux  trois  Riuieres,
le  Pere  Buteux  refcriuit  de  luy  ces  paroles  au  Pere
Claude  Pijart,  Pierre  Trigatin  efl  9a  haut  de  fort
bonne  edificatio,  il  ne  laifle  pas  d'auoir  enuie  de  cou-
rir  tout  boiteux  qu'il  efl,  il  y  a  quelque  iours  qu'vn
Frangois  nous  vint  donner  I'alarme  des  Hiroquois,
Pierre  aufli-toft  fe  prefente  pour  aller  decouurir  I'en-
nemy,  &  quoy  que  ie  luy  peufTe  alleguer,  il  deflra
s'embarquer  dans  vn  canot  [99J  de  quatre  perfonnes,
qu'il  gouuernoit  au  commancement  auec  I'vne  des
potences  dont  il  f e  f ert  pour  marcher,  &  puis  auec  vn
auiron,  ils  s'en  allerent  done  dans  le  lac  S.  Paul,  oti


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  187

misery  of  his  countrymen.  "  We  are  only  dogs,"
said  he ;  * '  we  think  of  nothing  but  this  life.  When
one  speaks  of  God,  my  soul  is  fed ;  it  seems  to  me  it
is  like  a  man  who  has  a  great  appetite,  to  whom  is
given  a  good  dinner."

The  Father  who  had  charge  of  him,  seeing  him
smoking,  asked  him  why  he  smoked.  He  stopped
short,  and  did  not  answer.  "  If  God  said  to  you,"
pursued  the  Father,  '  *  '  Render  an  account  of  your
actions ;  why  [98]  did  you  take  tobacco  ? '  what  would
you  say  ? "  ''  Indeed  I  would  be  at  a  loss;  for  I  have
never  taken  it  except  for  the  pleasure  I  felt  from  it.
But  why,"  he  added,  *'  have  you  not  informed  me
sooner  of  this  disorderly  action  ?  I  will  never  again
take  it.  * '  In  fact  he  dispensed  with  it  for  a  long  time,
until  some  one  told  him  that  it  would  be  proper  for
him  to  take  a  little  of  it  for  his  health.  Those  who
know  what  a  mania  the  Savages  and  some  Frenchmen
have  for  smoking  tobacco,  will  admire  this  abstinence
in  a  Canadian.  Intemperate  drinkers  are  not  so  fond
of  wine  as  the  Savages  are  of  tobacco.

As  he  made  a  trip  to  the  three  Rivers  this  Spring,
Father  Buteux  wrote  these  words  about  him  to
Father  Claude  Pijart:  ''  Pierre  Trigatin  affords  very
great  edification  up  here;  he  even  wishes  to  run,
lame  as  he  is.  A  few  days  ago,  a  Frenchman  came
to  give  us  the  alarm  about  the  Hiroquois.  Pierre
immediately  presented  himself  to  go  and  discover  the
enemy;  and,  however  much  I  might  argue  with
him,  he  desired  to  embark  in  a  canoe  [99]  with  four
persons,  which  he  guided  at  first  with  one  of  the
staffs  which  served  him  in  walking,  and  then  with
a  paddle.  They  went,  then,  to  lake  St.  Paul,  where
a  noise  had  been  heard. As  night  drew  on,  they  per-


188  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.18

on  anoit  entendu  du  bruit,  comme  la  nuit  approchoit
ils  appercenrent  comme  vn  canot,  auffi-tofl  croyans
que  c'eftoit  I'ennemy,  Pierre  fit  defembarquer  les
Sauuages  &  vn  Francois  qui  eftoient  auec  eux  les  fait
mettre  ^  genoux,  pour  prier  Dieu,  &  leur  priere
eflant  faite  ils  fe  rembarquent,  s'en  vont  donner  fur
ce  canot  pour  le  combat tre,  mais  en  Tapprochant  ils
trouuerent  que  c'eftoit  vn  arbre  qui  flottoit  fur  I'eau,
s'il  ne  combattit  point  ce  ne  fut  pas  faute  de  courage,
mais  d'occallon,  il  s'eft  icy  confeff^  &  communie  &
Louis  Nichvtenlls  aulfi,  les  deux  Dimanches  qu'ils  y
ont  eft6.  II  a  bonne  enuie  de  reuenir  encor  enfeigner
fes  gens,  en  verite  ie  n'eulTe  pas  creu  qu'il  eufl  eu
la  hardieffe  qu'il  a  monftr6  k  I'endroit  de  ceux  qu'il
enfeignoit,  principalement  en  ce  qu'il  leur  difoit,
qu'il  cherilloit  tons  les  hommes ;  &  mefme  les  Hiro-
quois  en  Dieu,  &  que  s'il  auoit  vn  prifonnier  il  [lOo]
auroit  plus  de  foin  de  luy  brufler  le  cceur  de  1' amour
de  Dieu,  que  de  tourmenter  fon  corps,  ^  mon  aduis  il
n'y  a  que  la  grace  qui  puiffe  faire  dire  cela,  notam-
ment  k  vn  homme  de  fon  bumeur,  voila  ce  que  porte
la  lettre  du  Pere.

I 'ay  parl6  bien  amplement  aux  ann6es  precedentes
d'vn  certain  forcier  tres-fameux  parmy  les  Sauuages,
maintenant  bon  Chreftien,  il  fut  baptif6  des  I'ann^e
paff6e,  i'en  diray  deux  mots  pour  le  prefent,  il  fe
nomme  Eftienne  Pigarovich,  il  arriua  k  S.  lofeph  le
vingt-troifiefme  d'Auril  retournant  de  fa  chaffe  de
I'Efla,  voicy  ce  qu'il  nous  raconta  k  diuerfes  ren-
contres. Voyant  que  la  petite  verole  attaquoit  ceux
auec  lef quels  il  s'eftoit  ioint  premierement,  il  reprit
les  incredules  de  n'auoir  pas  prefix  I'oreille  aux  dif-
cours  de  la  foy  que  nous  leur  anions  faidts,  en  apres


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  189

ceived  something  like  a  canoe, —  and,  at  once  sup-
posing that  it  was  the  enemy,  Pierre  had  the  Savages
and  a  Frenchman  who  was  with  them  disembark,
and  made  them  kneel  and  pray  to  God.  Their  pray-
er finished,  they  reembarked  and  proceeded  to  attack
this  canoe;  but,  upon  approaching  it,  they  perceived
that  it  was  a  tree  floating  upon  the  water.  If  he
did  not  fight  it  was  not  for  lack  of  courage,  but  of
opportunity.  He  confessed  and  received  communion
here,  and  Louis  Nichutensis  also,  the  two  Sundays
they  were  here.  He  has  a  great  desire  to  return
again,  to  teach  his  people.  In  truth,  I  would  not
have  believed  that  he  possessed  the  fearlessness  he
has  shown  toward  those  whom  he  was  teaching, —
principally  in  saying  to  them  that  he  cherished  all
men,  even  the  Hiroquois,  in  God;  and  that,  if  he
had  a  prisoner,  he  [100]  would  care  more  to  burn  his
heart  with  love  for  God,  than  to  torture  his  body.
In  my  opinion,  nothing  but  grace  can  inspire  such
words,  especially  in  a  man  of  his  nature."  Such  are
the  contents  of  the  Father's  letter.

I  have  spoken  very  fully  in  former  years  of  a  cer-
tain sorcerer  very  famous  among  the  Savages,  now
a  good  Christian.  He  was  baptized  during  the  past
year.  I  will  say  a  few  words  concerning  him  at  this
time.  His  name  is  Estienne  Pigarouich.  He  ar-
rived at  St.  Joseph  on  the  twenty-third  of  April,  on
his  return  from  Elk-hunting.  Here  is  what  he  related
to  us  at  various  times :  Seeing  that  the  smallpox  was
attacking  those  whom  he  had  first  joined,  he  re-
proved the  unbelieving  for  not  having  lent  ear  to  the
discourses  that  we  had  given  them  on  the  faith ;  then
he  exclaimed,  '  *  If  any  one  wishes  to  pray  to  God,  let
him  join  me;  I  hope  that  he  will  help  us!  " Some


190  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JASUITES  [Vol.18

il  s'efcria  fi  quelqu'vn  veut  prier  Dieu  qu'il  fe  ioigne
k  moy,  i'efpere  qu'il  nous  fecourera,  quelques  infi-
deles  fe  ietterent  de  fon  party,  tous  les  foirs  &  tous
les  matins  ils  faifoient  leurs  prieres  k  genoux,  ils
les  pronongoit  tout  haut  &  les  autres  le  fuiuoient
[loi]  mot  apres  mot,  chofe  eflrange  pas  vn  deux  ne
fut  attaqu6  de  cette  maladie  peflilente,  qui  emporta
tous  ceux  que  I'infidelite  ou  le  refpedt  humain  em-
pefclierent  d'auoir  recours  k  Dieu.

II  nous  racomptoit  que  le  Capitaine  de  Tadouffac,
nomm6  Etovait,  auec  lequel  il  s'eftoit  retire,  difoit
par  fois  deuant  fes  gens,  ie  hay  la  foy  &  les  prieres,
ny  moy  ny  mes  enfans  ne  croirons  iamais  ce  que  di-
fent  les  Frangois  de  1' autre  vie,  ie  m'eftonnois  faifoit
ce  bon  Neophite,  de  cette  malice,  Dieu  ne  la  pas
laiff^  long-temps  impunie,  car  luy,  fa  femme  &  tous
fes  enfans  &  ceux  qui  eftoient  auec  luy  furent  pris
du  mal  commun  &  enleues  en  vn  inflant,  6  que  i'e-
flois  trifte  difoit-il,  de  voir  mourir  ces  pauures  mife-
rables  fans  baptefme.  Apres  que  nous  fufmes  deli-
ur6s  de  ce  fieau  commun  ie  tombay  malade  bien
auant  dans  I'Hyuer,  &  dans  les  bois,  en  forte  que  ie
n'en  pouuois  plus,  tous  ceux  qui  eftoient  auec  moy
me  tenoient  pour  mort,  dans  cette  afflidlion  ie  me  fou-
uins  que  i'eftois  baptife  &  que  Dieu  eftoit  mo  Pere,
ie  luy  dis  pour  lors  en  mon  coeur,  tu  peux  tout  [102]  tu
fgais  bien  que  ie  n'en  puis  plus,  &  que  i'ay  la  tefte
fi  foible  que  ie  vay  perdre  I'efprit,  fi  tu  veux  tu  me
peux  guerir,  determine  neantmoints  &  faidts  ce  que
tu  voudras,  mais  ie  croy  que  tu  es  tout  puiffant,  &  que
fi  tu  voulois  tout  maintenant  tu  me  guerirois,  comma
ie  priois  en  mon  cceur,  faifoit-il,  ie  me  fenty  guery
en  vn  inftant  kaiafikat,  kaiafikat,  tout  a  coup,  tout  k


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  191

unbelievers  went  over  to  his  side,  and  every  evening
and  morning  they  said  their  prayers  on  their  knees, —
some  pronouncing  them  aloud,  and  the  others  fol-
lowing them,  [loi]  word  for  word.  Strange  to  say,
not  one  of  them  was  attacked  by  this  pestilential
malady,  which  carried  off  all  those  whom  infidelity
or  fear  of  public  opinion  prevented  from  having
recourse  to  God.

He  related  to  us  that  the  Captain  of  Tadoussac,
named  Etouait,  with  whom  he  had  taken  shelter,
said  sometimes  before  his  people,  **  I  hate  the  faith
and  prayers;  neither  I  nor  my  children  will  ever
believe  what  the  French  say  of  the  other  life."  '*  I
was  surprised  at  this  malice,"  said  this  good  Neo-
phyte. God  did  not  leave  him  long  unpunished ;  for
he,  his  wife,  and  all  his  children,  and  those  who
were  with  him,  were  seized  by  the  common  malady
and  carried  off  in  a  moment.  * '  Oh !  how  sorry  I
was,"  said  he,  ''  to  see  these  poor  wretches  die  with-
out baptism.  After  we  were  delivered  from  this
common  scourge,  I  fell  sick  late  in  the  Winter,  and
far  in  the  woods, —  so  that  I  was  utterly  helpless,  and
all  those  who  were  with  me  regarded  me  as  a  dead
man.  In  this  affliction  I  remembered  that  I  was
baptized  and  that  God  was  my  Father.  I  said  to
him  then  in  my  heart,  *  Thou  canst  do  all,  [102]  thou
knowest  well  that  I  can  do  no  more,  and  that  my
head  is  so  weak  that  I  am  about  to  lose  my  mind ;  if
thou  wilt,  thou  canst  heal  me.  Decide,  however,
and  do  what  thou  wilt ;  but  I  believe  that  thou  art
all-powerful,  and  that,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  at  this
moment  heal  me.'  While  I  was  praying  in  my
heart,"  he  continued,  **  I  felt  myself  cured  in  an
instant,  kaiasikat,  kaiasikat, suddenly,  suddenly;  I


192  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.  18

coup,  ie  me  leuay  tout  fur  I'lieure  &  mangeay  auec
reftonnement  de  ces  gens  que  tu  vols,  monftrant  ceux
qui  raccompagnoient  pour  lors,  non  eji  perfonarum
acceptatio  apud  Deum,  Dieu  ne  regarde  point  li  on  eft
Grec  ou  Barbare,  qui  a  plus  de  confiance  &  plus
d' amour  eft  le  mieux  venu  aupres  de  fa  Majefte.

Voicy  vn  autre  traidt  de  fa  prouidence,  ayant  fait
ma  prouilion  de  chair  d'Elan,  difoit  ce  bon  Neophite,
ie  me  trouuay  bien  en  peine  comme  ie  la  porterois  k
faindt  lofeph,  car  nous  n'auions  pas  alTez  de  canots
pour  nous  &  pour  noftre  bagage;  ie  penfois  dans
mon  efprit  li  ie  ne  pourrois  pas  bien  faire  vn  caieux
de  bois,  fur  lequel  ie  mettrois  [103]  mon  equipage,
mais  les  marges  font  fi  fortes,  les  vents  11  dangereux,
&  les  caieux  fi  pefans,  que  toute  ma  prouilion  s'en
fut  all6e  k  vaux  I'eau,  ne  f9acliant  quel  confeil  pren-
dre, ie  dy  ^  ma  femme,  prions  Dieu,  nous  fommes
baptif^s,  il  nous  infpirera  ce  qu'il  faut  faire,  apres
noftre  priere,  ie  me  fenty  port6  k  faire  vn  canot,  ie
n'en  auois  iamais  fait,  &  ie  defefperois  deuant  ma
priere  d'en  pouuoir  faire,  mais  ayant  dit  k  Dieu  que
tout  ce  qu'il  nous  auoit  donn6  k  manger  feroit  perdu
s'il  ne  nous  aydoit,  ie  creu  que  i'en  viendrois  k  bout,
en  effet  nous  en  fifmes  aufll  bien  que  les  plus  experts.

Ce  bon  homme  eft  li  zel6,  que  quand  il  fgait  quel-
que  defordre  parmy  fes  gens,  il  nous  en  vient  don-
ner  aduis  pour  y  remedier ;  luy  mefme  va  voir  ceux
qu'il  croit  faire  mal  &  leur  donne  bon  confeil,  il
prend  vn  tres-grand  plaillr  d'oiiir  parler  de  Dieu,  &
de  grandes  recompenfes  &  des  grands  chaftimens  de
I'autre  vie,  il  a  fi  peu  de  refpedt  bumain  qu'il  ne
craint  ny  petit  ny  grand,  &  par  fois  il  nous  tefmoi-


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  198

arose  without  delay,  and  ate  something,  to  the  aston-
ishment of  these  people  that  thou  seest '  * —  pointing
to  those  who  then  accompanied  him.  Non  est  per  so-
narum  accept atio  apud  Deum,  God  cares  not  whether
one  is  a  Greek  or  a  Barbarian ;  he  who  has  the  most
confidence  and  love  is  the  most  welcome  to  his
Majesty.

Behold  another  example  of  his  providence.  '*  Hav-
ing obtained  my  supply  of  Elk  meat,"  said  this  good
Neophyte,  **  I  was  quite  at  a  loss  how  I  should  carry
it  to  saint  Joseph,  for  we  did  not  have  enough  canoes
for  ourselves  and  our  baggage.  I  wondered  if  I  could
not  easily  make  a  wooden  raft,  upon  which  I  could
put  [103]  my  goods;  but  the  tides  are  so  strong,  the
winds  so  dangerous,  and  the  rafts  so  heavy,  that  all
my  supplies  might  go  to  the  bottom  of  the  river.
Not  knowing  what  course  to  take,  I  said  to  my  wife,
*  Let  us  pray  to  God;  we  are  baptized, — he  will  in-
spire in  us  what  must  be  done. '  After  our  prayer,
I  felt  myself  prompted  to  make  a  canoe ;  I  had  never
made  one,  and  I  despaired,  before  my  prayer,  of
being  able  to  do  so ;  but  having  told  God  that  all  he
had  given  us  to  eat  would  be  lost,  if  he  did  not  help
us,  I  believed  that  I  could  accomplish  it.  In  fact,
we  made  one  as  well  as  the  most  expert  persons  could
have  done."

This  good  man  is  so  zealous  that,  when  he  knows
of  some  irregularity  among  his  people,  he  comes  to
inform  us  of  it  that  it  may  be  remedied.  He  himself
goes  to  see  those  whom  he  believes  to  have  done
wrong,  and  gives  them  good  advice.  He  takes  a
very  great  pleasure  in  hearing  conversation  about
God,  and  about  the  great  rewards  and  severe  punish-
ments of  the  other  life. He  has  so  little  regard  for


194  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£:SUITES [Vol.18

gne  [104]  qu'il  voudroit  bien  fouffrir  la  mort  pour  fa
creance.

C'eft  vne  confolation  bien  fenfible  d' entendre  auec
quelle  innocence  ces  bonnes  gens  rendent  compte  de
leurs  confciences  quand  ils  retoument  des  bois  apres
cinq  ou  fix  mois  d'abfence,  ils  fe  conferuent  pour  la
plufpart  auec  vne  puret6  rauifTante,  encor  qu'ils
foient  auec  des  barbares,  &  qu'ils  n'ayent  autre  fe-
cours  que  du  Ciel,  comme  ils  ne  font  pas  polls  k  I'ex-
terieur,  il  n'y  a  que  ceux  qui  entendent  leur  langue
&  qui  les  conuerfent  qui  ayent  cognoiffance  de  ces
vrais  biens  incognus  aux  yeux  des  hommes;  mais
bien  cognus  de  Dieu.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  196

worldly  considerations  that  he  fears  neither  small
nor  great;  and  he  sometimes  declares  to  ns  [104]  that
he  would  willingly  suffer  death  for  his  belief.

It  is  a  very  touching  consolation  to  hear  with  what
innocence  these  good  people  render  an  account  of
their  consciences  when  they  return  from  the  woods,
after  five  or  six  months  of  absence.  They  maintain
themselves,  in  most  cases,  in  a  delightful  purity,  al-
though they  are  with  barbarians,  and  have  no  other
aid  than  that  of  Heaven.  As  they  are  not  outwardly
polished,  it  is  only  those  who  understand  their  lan-
guage and  converse  with  them  who  have  a  knowl-
edge of  these  truly  good  persons, —  unknown  to  the
eyes  of  men,  but  well  known  to  God.


196  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES [Vol.18


[105]  CHAPITRE  VIII.

DE LA BONNE DISPOSITION DE QUELQUES SAUUAGES
NON ENCOR BAPTISES.

DANS  les  grandes  refiftences  que  les  Sauuages
nous  faifoient  au  commencement  que  nous
leur  parlions  de  la  foy,  ie  fuppliois  fouuent
noftre  Seigneur  de  me  faire  cefte  grace  qu'auat  ma
mort  ie  peuffe  voir  deux  families  lauees  dedas  fon
fang,  profefler  publiquement  &  coflamment  la  Reli-
gion Chreflienne,  fa  bont6  ayant  donn6  cefte  confo-
lation  k  mes  yeux,  ie  fouhaittois  quafi  de  chanter  Ie
Cantique  de  S.  Simeon,  tant  cefte  faueur  me  fem-
bloit  grande,  mais  Dieu  qui  ne  mefure  pas  fes  dons
^  la  petitefTe  de  noftre  coeur,  a  voulu  que  ie  vilTe  en-
trer  en  fon  Eglife,  non  feulement  ces  deux  premieres
families,  mais  plufleurs  autres,  &  que  i'euffe  ce  con-
tentement  bien  doux  de  les  voir  profefTer  courageuf e-
ment  la  foy  de  lefus-Chrift ;  ce  n'efl  pas  [106]  tout,
ce  Dieu  des  mifericordes  a  tellement  difpofe  les  Sau-
uages non  encor  baptifez,  qu'il  femble  que  fa  Ma-
jeft6  veut  changer  ce  pauure  peuple,  &  faire  reluire
fes  lumieres  dans  les  tenebres.  Difons  deux  mots
des  fentiments  qu'il  donne  k  quelques  vns  de  ces
Infideles.

Plufieurs  fe  viennent  recommander  k  nos  prieres
quand  ils  entreprenent  quelque  voyage;  cet  hyuer
dernier,  voulans  trauerfer  la  grande  riuiere  toute
heriff6e  de  glaces,  ils  nous  venoient  trouuer,  &  I'vn


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  197


[105]  CHAPTER  VIII.

OF THE GOOD DISPOSITION OF SOME SAVAGES NOT
YET BAPTIZED.

IN  the  great  resistance  the  Savages  made  to  us,
when  we  first  spoke  to  them  of  the  faith,  I  often
supplicated  our  Lord  to  grant  me  this  favor, —
that  before  my  death  I  might  see  two  families  washed
in  his  blood,  publicly  and  steadfastly  profess  the
Christian  Religion.  His  goodness  having  granted
this  consolation  to  my  eyes,  I  almost  desired  to  sing
the  Canticle  of  St.  Simeon,  so  great  did  this  favor  seem
to  me.  But  God,  who  does  not  measure  his  grace  by
the  littleness  of  our  hearts,  has  willed  that  I  should
see  enter  his  Church  not  only  these  first  two  fami-
lies, but  several  others ;  and  that  I  should  have  the
satisfaction,  truly  sweet,  of  seeing  them  boldly  pro-
fess the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  not  [106]  all;
this  God  of  mercy  has  so  disposed  the  Savages  not
yet  baptized,  that  it  would  seem  that  his  Majesty
wishes  to  transform  this  poor  people,  and  to  make
his  light  shine  in  the  darkness.  Let  us  say  a  few
words  about  the  sentiments  he  has  given  to  some  of
these  Unbelievers.

Many  come  to  commend  themselves  to  our  pray-
ers, when  they  are  undertaking  a  journey.  This  last
winter,  wishing  to  cross  the  great  river  all  blocked
with  ice,  they  came  to  see  us;  and  one  of  them,  ad-
dressing the  Father  that  he  knew,  said  to  him,  *'  My
Father,  when  you  see  us  embark,  look  at  us;  raise


198  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

deux  s'addrelTant  au  Pere  qu'il  cognoiffoit,  luy  difoit,
Mon  Pere,  quand  vous  nous  verrez  embarquez  regar-
dez  nous,  leuez  les  yeux  au  Ciel,  dites  k  Dieu  ces
paroles,  gardez-les,  ouurez  leur  pallage,  efcartez  les
glaces,  deliurez  les  du  peril  ou  plufieurs  perdent  la
vie,  ne  nous  perdez  point  de  veue  tandis  que  nous
ferons  fur  la  riuiere,  difoient  ces  bonnes  gens,  &
quand  nous  ferions  efloign^s  de  vous  dedans  les  bois,
penfez  k  nous  quand  vous  prierez  Dieu.

Vn  autre  Sauuage  dont  la  mere  &  la  fille  efloient
baptif^es,  &  fe  nommoient  Magdelaine  &  Dorotb^e,
faifoit  cefte  [107]  priere  ^  Dieu  quand  il  alloit  k  la
cbalTe,  vous  qui  auez  tout  fait  regardez  Magdelaine
&  Doroth6e  vos  enfans,  elles  veulent  manger,  don-
nez  leur  dequoy,  i'en  vay  cbercher  pour  elles,  vous
les  aymez,  car  elles  font  baptif6es.  Ce  bon  homme
empruntoit  les  noms  de  fa  mere  &  de  fa  fille  pour
induire  noftre  Seigneur  k  luy  donner  bonne  cbalfe,
faifant  voir  par  cefte  action  I'eflime  qu'il  faifoit  du
baptefme,  qu'il  receura  bien-toft  s'il  plaiffc  k  Dieu.

Vn  Sauuage  nous  difoit  que  d6s  fa  ieunelTe  il  regar-
doit  le  Ciel  &  la  terre  auec  eflonnement,  mais  qui
pourroitbien  auoir  fait  tout  cela,  difoit-il?  cela  n'a
pas  efl6  fait  en  vain  &  fans  delTein.

Vn  autre  nous  racontoit  qu'eflant  malade  cet  Au-
tomne,  il  auoit  veu  dans  le  Ciel  vn  ieune  Francois
de  fa  cognoilfance  trefpalTe  depuis  peu,  ie  la  vy,  di-
foit-il, dans  vne  beaute  &  dans  vn  lieu  le  plus  rauif-
fant  du  monde,  ie  voulu  m'auancer  pour  aller  en  ce
lieu  de  delices,  mais  il  me  demanda  li  i'efhois  baptif6,
ayant  refpondu  que  non,  il  me  dit,  retire  toy,  tu  ne
fgaurois  voir  le  grand  Capitaine  du  Ciel,  [108]  ny
venir  auec  moy,  11  tu  n'es  lau6  dans  les  eaux  du  bap-


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  199

your  eyes  to  Heaven,  and  say  to  God  these  words:
'  Preserve  them ;  open  the  way  for  them,  and  part
the  ice ;  deliver  them  from  a  danger  wherein  many
lose  their  lives. '  Do  not  lose  us  from  sight  while
we  shall  be  upon  the  river, ' '  said  these  good  people ;
*'  and,  when  we  shall  be  far  away  from  you  in  the
woods,  think  of  us  when  you  pray  to  God."

Another  Savage,  whose  mother  and  daughter  were
baptized  and  were  named  Magdelaine  and  Doroth^e,
offered  this  [107]  prayer  to  God  when  he  went  hunt-
ing :  * '  You  who  have  made  all,  look  down  upon
Magdelaine  and  Doroth^e,  your  children.  They
wish  to  eat,  give  them  food.  I  am  going  away  to
seek  something  for  them ;  you  love  them,  for  they
are  baptized."  This  good  man  borrowed  the  names
of  his  mother  and  daughter,  to  induce  our  Lord  to
^ive  him  successful  hunting, —  showing  by  this  act
the  esteem  in  which  he  held  baptism,  which  he  will
receive  soon,  if  it  please  God.

A  Savage  told  us  that,  ever  since  his  youth,  he
had  looked  upon  the  Sky  and  the  earth  with  wonder.
'**  Now,  who  can  have  made  all  that?"  said  he,  *'  it
has  not  been  made  in  vain,  and  without  a  purpose."

Another  related  to  us  that,  being  sick  this  Au-
tumn, he  had  seen  in  Heaven  a  young  Frenchman  of
his  acquaintance  who  had  died  a  little  while  before.
'"'  I  saw  him,"  said  he,  ''in  most  ravishing  beauty
and  in  the  most  delightful  place  imaginable.  I
wished  to  go  forward  and  enter  this  place  of  delight,
but  he  asked  me  if  I  were  baptized.  When  I  told
him  I  was  not,  he  said  to  me,  '  Retire,  thou  canst
not  see  the  great  Captain  of  Heaven,  [108]  or  come
with  me,  if  thou  art  not  washed  in  the  waters  of  bap-
tism.' This  amazed  me  greatly,  and,  at  the  same
time,  what  I  saw  disappeared."


200  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  18

tefme,  cela  rn'eflonna  fort,  &  k  mefme  temps  ce  que
ie  voyois  difparut.

Quoy  qu'il  en  foit  de  cefle  vilion,  ce  Sauuage  a
fouftenu  publiquement  deuant  ceux  de  fa  nation  que
les  ames  pouuoient  aller  au  Ciel,  &  qu'il  y  feroit  def-
ja  s'il  euft  efle  baptife.  Vn  certain  Algonquin  racon-
toit  cet  hyuer  qu'vn  Sauuage  de  ces  pays  plus  haut
eftoit  refufcit6;  on  I'auoit  enfeuely,  difoit-il,  on  efloit
tout  prefl  de  le  mettre  en  terre  quand  il  commenga  k
fe  remuer,  on  fe  met  k  decoudre  viftement  les  robes
dans  lefquelles  on  Tauoit  enuelopp6,  ce  bon  homme
fe  leue  k  fon  feant,  racontent  qu'il  vient  du  pays  des
ames,  lequel  eft  litue  ou  le  Soleil  fe  coucbe,  alfeure
qu'il  n'a  veu  Yk  aucun  Frangois,  ce  lieu  eflant  deflin6
feulement  pour  les  Sauuages,  il  eft  en  ma  puilTance^
difoit-il,  de  viure  encore  en  terre,  mais  i'ayme  mieux
m'en  aller  au  pays  des  ames  que  refter  parmy  les
hommes,  cela  dit,  il  fe  couche,  meurt  derechef,  on
le  renueloppe  &  le  met-on  en  terre.  Le  Sauuage  qui
a  eu  la  vifion  dont  [109]  ie  viens  de  parler,  enten-
dant  cefle  fable,  dit  tout  hault  qu'il  n'en  croyoit  rien,
&  que  ce  qu'il  auoit  veu  efloit  fi  admirable  qu'il  ne  le
pouuoit  ofler  de  fon  efprit,  affeurant  toufiours  que
les  ames  pouuoient  aller  au  Ciel.

Mais  remarquez  s'il  vous  plaill  que  le  Diable  degoit
ce  pauure  homme,  donnant  vne  faufle  interpretation
aux  parolles  qu'il  a  entendues,  car  comme  ce  Fra^ois
qu'il  affeure  auoir  veu  dans  vne  grande  gloire,  luy
dit  qu'il  n'entreroit  point  au  Ciel  qu'il  ne  fut  bap-
tife, il  a  coclud  del^  qu'aulTi  toft  qu'il  fera  baptif6  il
mourra  pour  y  aller,  fi  bien  qu'il  retarde  de  iour  en
iour  ne  pouuant  fe  refoudre  h.  quitter  i^i  toft  la  terre,
i'efpere  qu'on  luy  oftera  bien  toft  cet  erreur.  II  a
fait  defia  baptifer  fa  femme  &  fes  enfans.


1640]  RELA  TION  01^  1640  201

Whatever  there  may  be  in  this  vision,  this  Savage
has  publicly  maintained  before  those  of  his  nation  that
souls  can  go  to  Heaven,  and  that  he  would  already
be  there  if  he  had  been  baptized.  A  certain  Algon-
quin related  this  winter  that  a  Savage  of  those  coun-
tries farther  up  had  been  resuscitated.  ' '  They  had
shrouded  him,"  said  he,  '*  and  were  all  ready  to  put
him  in  the  ground  when  he  began  to  move.  They
quickly  set  to  work  to  undo  the  robes  in  which  they
had  bound  him.  This  good  man,  sitting  up,  related
that  he  had  come  from  the  country  of  souls,  which
is  situated  where  the  Sun  sets,  and  that  he  had  not
seen  any  Frenchman  there, — this  place  being  des-
tined only  for  Savages.  "It  is  in  my  power,"  said
he,  *  *  to  live  again  upon  earth ;  but  I  prefer  to  go
away  to  the  country  of  souls,  rather  than  to  remain
among  men ;  "  so  saying,  he  lay  down  and  died  again.
He  was  a  second  time  enveloped,  and  placed  in  the
ground.  The  Savage  who  had  the  vision  of  which
[109]  I  have  just  spoken,  hearing  this  tale,  said  boldly
that  he  did  not  believe  it  at  all,  and  that  what  he  had
seen  was  so  wonderful  that  he  could  not  get  it  out  of
his  mind, —  continuing  to  assert  that  souls  could  go
to  Heaven.

But  observe,  if  you  please,  that  the  Devil  deludes
this  poor  man,  giving  a  false  interpretation  to  the
words  that  he  heard.  For,  since  this  Frenchman
whom  he  declares  to  have  seen  in  great  glory  said  to
him  that  he  could  not  enter  Heaven  if  he  were  not
baptized,  he  has  concluded  therefrom  that,  as  soon  as
he  shall  be  baptized,  he  will  die  in  order  to  go  there ;
so  that  he  delays  from  day  to  day,  not  being  able  to
resolve  upon  leaving  the  earth  so  soon.  I  hope  he
will  speedily  be  freed  from  this  error.  He  has
already  had  his  wife  and  children  baptized.


202  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.  18

II  y  a  des  Sauuages  non  encor  baptifez  qui  nous
viennent  donner  aduis  des  fuperftitions  qui  fe  com-
mettent  en  fecret  dans  les  cabanes,  difans  que  ceux
qui  croyent  encor  k  ces  refueries,  retiennent  les  de-
mons parmy  eux,  il  efl  vray  que  les  Infideles  n'ofe-
roient  quali  plus  diuulguer  ces  vieilles  f ottifes  qui  f e
vont  tons  [no]  les  iours  aboliffant  ^  S.  lofeph.

Vn  Sauuage,  encor  pay  en,  auoit  procure  le  bap-
tefme  k  vne  fienne  petite  fille,  cet  enfant  venant  k
mourir  nous  I'enterrafme  honorablement  en  noftre
Cimetierre,  ce  qui  le  toucha  fort,  mais  come  nous
luy  eufmes  parl6  de  la  gloire  dont  iouyffoit  fon
enfant,  il  en  fut  fi  aife  qu'il  s'efcria,  mon  cceur  eftoit
efbouff^,  &  vous  luy  auez  donn6  de  I'air,  puis  que  ma
fille  eft  fi  beureufe,  ie  veux  aller  auec  elle,  &  puis
que  vous  auez  loge  fon  corps  aupres  de  voftre  maifon,
logez  moy  aulfi  aupres  de  vous,  car  d'orefnauant  ie
tiendray  ce  lieu-cy  pour  mon  pays,  &  ie  m'arrefteray
auec  les  autres  qui  veulent  compofer  vne  bourgade,
inftruifez  moy  tons  les  iours  &  ma  femme  aulfi,  elle
a  volont6  d'eftre  baptif^e  aufli  bien  que  moy,  comme
on  les  inftruifoit  s'il  arriuoit  que  le  pere  qui  en  auoit
pris  charge  s'abfentaft  quelquefois,  ils  luy  difoient
au  retour,  vofhre  abfence  nous  attrifte  &  noftre  coeur
eft  refiouy  quand  vous  eftes  de  retour,  car  vous  eftes
noftre  pere.

Vne  femme  Sauuage  ay  ant  racommod^  quelque
chofe  pour  noftre  maifon;  [in]  quelque  canot  ou
cbofe  f emblable,  nous  luy  demadafmes  ce  qu'elles  vou-
loit  pour  fa  peine,  belas!  dit-elle,  ie  ne  demade  rien
finon  que  vous  vous  fouueniez  que  ie  ne  fuis  pas  bap-
tifee,  ie  craignois  cet  hyuer  de  mourir  dans  les  bois
fans  baptefme,  au  moindre  mal  mon  cceur  trembloit,


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  203

There  are  Savages  not  yet  baptized  who  come  to
inform  us  of  superstitious  rites  which  are  performed
secretly  in  the  cabins, —  saying  that  those  who  still
believe  in  these  delusions  retain  the  demons  among
them.  In  truth,  the  Unbelievers  would  hardly  dare
divulge  these  ancient  follies  any  more,  which  are
[no]  daily  being  abolished  at  St.  Joseph.

A  Savage,  still  pagan,  had  procured  baptism  for
one  of  his  little  girls.  This  child  happening  to  die,
we  buried  her  with  honor  in  our  Cemetery,  which
deeply  touched  him.  But,  when  we  spoke  to  him  of
the  glory  his  child  was  enjoying,  he  was  so  pleased
that  he  exclaimed,  "  My  heart  was  suffocating,  and
you  have  given  it  air.  Since  my  child  is  so  happy,
I  wish  to  go  with  her ;  and  since  you  have  placed  her
body  near  your  house,  lodge  me  also  near  you, —  for
henceforward  I  shall  look  upon  this  place  as  my
country,  and  shall  settle  with  the  others  who  wish
to  form  a  village.  Instruct  me  every  day,  and  my
wife  also.  She  wishes  to  be  baptized,  as  well  as  I."
While  they  were  being  instructed,  if  it  happened
that  the  father  who  had  taken  charge  of  them  occa-
sionally absented  himself,  they  would  say  to  him  on
his  return,  "  Your  absence  saddens  us,  and  our
hearts  are  rejoiced  when  you  have  returned,  for  you
are  our  father."

A  Savage  woman,  having  mended  some  article  for
our  house, —  [m]  a  canoe,  or  something  of  the
kind, —  we  asked  her  what  she  desired  for  her  trouble.
"  Ah,"  said  she,  ''  I  ask  nothing,  except  that  you
remember  that  I  am  not  baptized.  I  was  afraid  of
dying  in  the  woods  this  winter  without  baptism ;  my
heart  trembled  at  the  least  sickness.  Do  not  let  me
go  away  from  you  any  more  burdened  with  my  sins."


204  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

ne  me  laiffez  plus  efloigner  de  vous  chargee  de  mes
offenfes.

Deux  autres  femmes  s'eflant  efgar^es  du  chemin
fur  la  nuit,  eftoient  en  danger  de  mourir  de  froid  fur
les  neiges,  car  elles  n'auoient  point  de  raquettes  ny
de  hache  ny  de  fufil,  &  ne  fe  portoient  pas  trop  bien,
fe  voyans  dans  cefle  angoiffe  elles  ont  recours  k
Dieu,  I'vne  eftoit  Chreftienne  &  I'autre  non;  ayant
fait  leur  priere  elles  orient  k  I'auenture  pour  voir  li
elles  ne  feroient  point  entendues  de  quelqu'vn;  k
mefme  temps  vn  canot  conduit  par  deux  Chreftiens
pafToit  fur  le  grand  fleuue  k  Ten  droit  ou  eftoient  ces
femmes,  ils  refpondent  h.  leurs  cris,  les  appellent,  les
font  defcendre  au  bord  de  I'eau,  &  les  embarquent,
ces  bonnes  femmes  admiroient  ce  rencontre,  &  di-
foient  auec  eftonnement,  Dieu  nous  a  [112]  prompte-
ment  fecourues.

Vn  forcier  de  Tadouffac  fort  efkourdy  eflant  venu
k  S.  lofeph  nous  le  traic5tafmes  rudement  de  paroles,
il  nous  difoit  nettement  que  fon  art  luy  auoit  fauu6
la  vie,  &  que  s'il  croyoit  en  Dieu  qu'il  ne  pafferoit
pas  rEfl6,  nous  recommandafmes  k  Noel  Negabamat
de  luy  parler  en  fecret,  il  ny  manqua  pas,  il  pafToit
quafi  les  nuidts  k  luy  parler  de  noflre  creance.  En
fin  cet  homme  quoy  que  mediant  fut  touchy  des  dif-
cours  de  ce  bon  Neophyte,  &  des  bons  exemples  des
nouueaux  Chreftiens,  en  forte  qu'il  nous  vint  prier
de  baptifer  fon  fils,  &  nous  afleura  qu'il  fe  feroit  in-
flruire,  ie  voy  bien,  dit-il,  que  ie  ne  fay  pas  bien,  ie
veux  quitter  le  Diable,  &  croire  en  Dieu,  ie  m'en  vais
faire  vn  tour  ^  Tadouffac,  bien  toft  vous  me  verrez
de  retour.  Ie  ne  fgay  pas  ce  qui  en  fera  tous  ceux
que  Dieu  appelle  ne  refpondent  pas  k  fa  voix,  cet
homme  k  bien  des  liens  ^  rompre.


1640]  RELA  TJON  OF  1640  205

Two  other  women,  who  lost  their  way  towards
nightfall,  were  in  danger  of  dying  from  cold  upon
the  snow,  for  they  had  no  snowshoes,  hatchets,  or
tinder  box,  and  besides,  were  not  very  well.  See-
ing themselves  in  this  extremity,  they  had  recourse
to  God.  One  was  a  Christian,  and  the  other  not.
When  they  had  offered  their  prayers  they  shouted,
to  see  if,  perchance,  they  would  not  be  heard  by
some  one ;  and  at  the  same  time  a  canoe,  paddled  by
two  Christians,  made  its  way  over  the  great  river
towards  the  place  where  these  women  were.  They
answered  their  cries,  called  to  them,  had  them  come
down  to  the  edge  of  the  water,  and  took  them  on
board.  These  good  women  wondered  at  this  encoun-
ter, and  said  with  astonishment,  "God  has  [112]
promptly  aided  us. "

A  sorcerer  of  Tadoussac,  a  very  reckless  fellow,
having  come  to  St.  Joseph,  we  took  him  sharply  ta
task.  He  told  us  bluntly  that  his  art  had  preserved
his  life,  and  that  if  he  should  believe  in  God  he
would  not  survive  the  Summer.  We  requested  Noel
Negabamat  to  speak  to  him  privately.  He  did  not
fail  to  do  so ;  he  almost  spent  nights  in  talking  to
him  of  our  belief.  Finally  this  man,  although
wicked,  was  touched  by  the  discourse  of  this  good
Neophyte,  and  by  the  good  example  of  the  new
Christians,  so  that  he  came  and  pleaded  with  us  ta
baptize  his  son,  and  assured  us  that  he  would  be  in-
structed. ''  I  see  clearly,"  said  he,  ''  that  I  am  not
doing  right;  I  will  quit  the  Devil,  and  believe  in
God.  I  am  about  to  make  a  trip  to  Tadoussac,  but
you  will  soon  see  me  back  again."  I  do  not  know
how  it  will  turn  out ;  not  all  those  whom  God  calls,
respond  to  his  voice.  This  man  has  many  ties  to
sunder.


206  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

I 'ay  defia  remarqu6  qu'il  y  a  des  Sauuages  non
encor  baptifez  qui  ne  fe  veulent  pas  marier  fans
noftre  aduis,  d'autres  ne  manquent  point  de  fe  met-
tre  k  genonx  [113]  fi-toft  [ils]  ont  tue  quelque  animal
&  d'en  remercier  Dieu,  cela  fe  va  mettre  en  couftume
parmy  eux,  d'oti  naiftra  vn  grand  bien,  car  s'ils  ont
recours  h.  Dieu  fa  bont6  ne  les  abandonnera  pas.

Vn  Pay  en  allant  voir  la  nuit  vne  femme  veufue
pour  I'epoufer,  celle-cy  luy  dit  ne  fgais  tu  pas  que
les  Peres  orient  contre  cette  couftume,  de  plus  tu  as
def-ja  vne  femme,  en  voudrois  tu  auoir  deux  toy  qui
fais  eflat  d'approuuer  les  prieres?  fi  vn  tel  Pere  (di-
foit-elle)  te  trouuoit  icy  que  dirois-tu?  cet  importun
continuant  de  la  molefter  les  autres  nuits,  elle  luy  dit
tu  me  contraindras  de  m'en  aller  ailleurs,  &  de  de-
couurir  ta  malice  aux  Peres,  ne  crains  tu  point  I'en-
fer?  fgaclie  que  ie  veux  eftre  Chreflienne,  &  que  ie  ne
veux  6poufer  quVn  Chreflien,  ne  me  parle  plus,  tu
perds  tes  peines,  ie  veux  obei'r  k  Dieu.

II  n'y  a  coeur  fi  dur  que  la  parole  de  Dieu  n'amo-
liffe  k  la  longue,  vn  efprit  rude  &  fuperbe,  me  difoit
il  y  a  quelque  temps,  ie  me  fuis  moqu6  cent  fois  des
difcours  du  Pere  de  Quen,  i'ay  rellfle  au  Pere  Bu-
teux  Ie  voulant  empefcher  de  [114]  nous  inftruire,
pour  toy  ie  ne  te  pouuois  fupporter,  ie  prenois  plaifir
de  te  quereller,  &  quand  ie  Tauois  fait  ie  I'allois  ra-
compter  par  les  cabanes  comme  vne  grande  proiieffe,
mais  maintenant  vos  paroles  me  femblent  bonnes,
-elles  defcendent  petit  k  petit  dans  mon  cceur,  ie  croy
que  mes  oreilles  fe  feront  k  les  6couter.

Voicy  quelques  remarques  du  Pere  Buteux  en-
iioyees  des  trois  Riuieres,  ces  pauures  gens  font  dans


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  207

I  have  already  remarked  that  there  are  Savages  not
yet  baptized  who  will  not  marry  without  our  advice.
Others  always  fall  upon  their  knees  [113]  as  soon  as
they  have  killed  some  animal,  and  thank  God  for  it.
This  is  getting  to  be  a  custom  among  them,  whence
will  arise  great  good, —  for,  if  they  have  recourse  to
God,  his  goodness  will  not  abandon  them.

A  Pagan  went  to  see  a  widow  one  night,  to  marry
her,  when  she  said  to  him,  '*  Dost  thou  not  know
that  the  Fathers  rebuke  this  custom?  and  besides,
thou  hast  already  a  wife;  wouldst  thou  have  two, —
thou,  who  pretendest  to  approve  prayers?  If  such  a
Father"  (said  she)  **  found  thee  here,  what  wouldst
thou  say  ? ' '  This  troublesome  fellow  continuing  to
annoy  her  on  other  nights,  she  said  to  him,  **  Thou
wilt  compel  me  to  go  somewhere  else,  and  to  expose
thy  malice  to  the  Fathers.  Dost  thou  not  fear  hell?
Know  that  I  intend  to  be  a  Christian,  and  that  I  will
not  marry  any  one  but  a  Christian.  Do  not  speak
to  me  any  more ;  thou  hast  thy  trouble  for  nothing ;
I  wish  to  obey  God."

There  is  no  heart  so  hard  that  the  word  of  God
does  not  soften  it  in  time.  A  rude  and  haughty  fel-
low said  to  me  some  time  ago,  ''  I  have  a  hundred
times  made  sport  of  the  speeches  of  Father  de  Quen ;
I  have  opposed  Father  Buteux,  trying  to  prevent
him  from  [114]  instructing  us;  as  for  thee,  I  could
not  endure  thee, —  I  took  pleasure  in  quarreling  with
thee,  and,  when  I  had  done  so,  I  went  through  the
cabins  and  spoke  of  it  as  a  great  feat.  But  now  your
words  seem  good  to  me ;  they  are  going  down  little
by  little  into  my  heart ;  I  believe  my  ears  will  get
accustomed  to  hear  them."

Here  are  some  observations  of  Father  Buteux,  sent


208  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  J£SUITES [Vol.18

la  creance  que  la  maladie  les  doit  accueillir  cet  Eft6,
ils  ne  laiffent  pas  de  fe  difpofer  pour  le  baptefme,
ils  font  fort  port6s  k  prier  Dieu,  quad  nous  entrons
dans  leurs  cabanes,  ils  demandent  fi  c'efl  pour  faire
les  prieres,  fe  mettans  h.  genoux  fi-toft  qu'on  les
commance.

L'vn  de  nous  allant  faire  prier  Dieu  dans  les
cabanes,  vn  peu  efloignees  de  noftre  habitation,  ren-
contra  vn  vieillard  qui  s'en  alloit  faire  des  traifnes  il
demanda  au  Pere  ou  il  alloit,  ie  vay  faire  prier  tes
gens,  luy  dit  le  Pere,  ie  n'y  pourray  aflifler,  dit  ce
bon  Sauuage,  mais  prions  icy,  Ik  deffus  il  fe  met  k
genoux  fur  la  neige,  [115]  par  vn  temps  tres-rigou-
reux,  le  Pere  le  fit  prier  Dieu,  cela  fait  ce  bon  homme
s'en  alia  tout  content  k  fon  trauail.

Vne  femme  me  difoit  qu'eflant  dans  la  neceffit6  au
milieu  des  bois,  fon  mary  fit  mettre  ceux  de  fa  cabane
k  genoux,  &  leur  dit,  or  fus  addrelTons  nous  k  celuy
qui  nous  pent  nourrir,  il  eft  bon,  alTeurement  il  nous
fecourera  fi  nous  le  prions  de  bon  coeur,  ce  qu'ils
firent  &  incontinent  apres  ils  firent  fort  bonne  chafTe
d'ours.

Voicy  ce  qui  efl  arriu6  depuis  peu,  dit  le  Pere,  vn
Sauuage  de  confideration  parmy  les  fiens,  me  vint
dire  qu'il  auoitveu  le  manitou,  &  qu'ilme  prioitd'al-
ler  chez  luy  faire  les  prieres  inftitu6es  pour  le  chaf-
fer, il  y  fallut  aller  quoy  qu'il  fut  nuit,  ie  portay
auec  moy  vn  crucifix,  que  chacun  adora,  apres  les
auoir  alTurez  ie  laifl!ay  le  crucifix  dans  leur  cabane,
quelque  temps  apres  ce  Sauuage  qui  m'efloit  venu
querir  fe  trouua  opprelf6  d'vn  mal  de  cofl:6,  cauf6  du
trop  grand  trauail  qu'il  auoit  pris  k  fon  champ,  ce
pauure  homme  ne  f§achant  k  qui  auoir  recours,  s'ad-


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  209

from  the  three  Rivers :  ' '  These  poor  people  still  be-
lieve that  the  malady  is  to  attack  them  this  Summer.
They  do  not  cease  to  prepare  themselves  for  bap-
tism; they  are  strongly  inclined  to  pray  to  God;
when  we  enter  their  cabins  they  ask  if  it  is  to  offer
prayers,  falling  upon  their  knees  as  soon  as  these
are  begun.

* '  One  of  us,  going  into  the  cabins  at  a  little  dis-
tance from  our  settlement  to  offer  prayers,  met  an
old  man  who  was  going  away  to  make  sleds.  He
asked  the  Father  where  he  was  going.  '  I  am  going
to  get  thy  people  to  pray,'  replied  the  Father.  *  I
cannot  be  present,'  said  this  good  Savage,  '  but  let  us
pray  here.'  Thereupon  he  knelt  down  upon  the
snow,  [115]  in  the  severe  cold;  the  Father  had  him
pray  to  God,  and,  this  done,  the  good  man  went  off
to  his  work,  very  happy.

"  A  woman  told  me  that,  being  in  want  while  in
the  depths  of  the  woods,  her  husband  had  those  of
his  cabin  kneel  down,  and  said  to  them,  '  Come,  let
us  address  ourselves  to  him  who  can  feed  us ;  he  is
good, — he  will  certainly  help  us,  if  we  pray  to  him
sincerely.'  This  they  did,  and  directly  afterwards
were  successful  in  bear-hunting.

' '  Here  is  something  that  happened  a  little  while
ago,"  says  the  Father.  ''  A  Savage,  of  high  stand-
ing among  his  own  people,  came  and  told  me  that
he  had  seen  the  manitou,  and  pleaded  with  me  to  go
home  with  him  to  offer  the  prayers  appointed  to  drive
him  away.  I  was  obliged  to  go,  although  it  was
night,  taking  with  me  a  crucifix,  which  every  one
adored.  After  having  reassured  them,  I  left  the
crucifix  in  their  cabin.  Some  time  afterward,  this
Savage  who  had  come  to  get  me,  finding  himself


210  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.18

dreffa  ^  celuy  qu'il  croyoit  auffi  puiffant  [ii6]  pour
chaffer  la  maladie  que  les  diables,  il  luy  demanda  la
guerifon,  qu'il  receut  plainement  &  foudainement.

Vn  ieune  homme  nous  a  fort  edifie  demandant
le  baptefme,  ie  confefTe,  difoit-il,  que  ie  fuis  vn
coureur,  que  ie  n'ay  point  d'arrefb,  mais  depuis  que
vous  m'auez  parl6  de  1' autre  vie,  ie  porte  touf  jours
vos  paroles  dans  mon  coeur,  i'ay  beau  aller  5a  &  Ik,
ce  que  vous  m'auez  ditme  fuit  par  tout,  il  me  femble
qu'on  Ta  efcrit  dans  mon  coeur,  ie  difois  1' autre  iour
au  lieur  Oliuier,  que  ie  croyois  tout  de  bon,  &  que
i'auois  pris  refolution  de  m'arrefter,  ce  n'efl  pas  luy
difoy-ie,  que  i'efpere  qu'on  me  fera  meilleur  marcli6
au  magazin  fi  ie  fuis  baptif6,  non  ie  ne  penfe  point  k
vos  marchandifes,  ie  penfe  k  quelque  chofe  de  meil-
leur, voila,  luy  monft[r]ant  le  Ciel,  ce  que  ie  penfe,
c'eft  cela  qui  eft  efcrit  dedans  mon  coeur,  &  qui  me
fait  craindre  de  mourir  auparauant  que  mes  pechez
foient  emport^s  par  les  eaux  du  baptefme,  Dieu  luy
donne  la  perfeuerance.

II  y  a  trois  iours  quVne  femme  non  encor  baptif^e
demeuroit  k  la  porte  de  [117]  TEglife  pendant  la
Meffe,  mais  comme  fon  petit  fils  eftoit  Chreflien,  &
qu'il  n'efh  permis  qu'aux  Chreftiens  d' entendre  la
Meffe,  elle  plantoit  ce  petit  enfant  tout  debout  atta-
cli6  k  fon  berceau  k  T entree  de  la  Chappelle,  atten-
dant dehors  que  la  Meffe  fut  ditte  pour  le  prendre
faifant  voir  par  cette  adlion  Tefbime  qu'elle  faifoit  du
bon-heur  de  fon  fils,  qu'on  luy  accorderoit  h.  elle
mefme  n'eftoit  la  crainte  qu'on  a  qu'elle  6poufe  vn
Payen,  fon  mary  I'ayant  laiff^e  fort  ieune.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  211

Oppressed  by  a  pain  in  his  side,  caused  by  too  hard
work  he  had  done  in  his  field, — the  poor  man,  not
knowing  to  whom  he  should  apply,  addressed  himself
to  him  whom  he  believed  to  be  as  powerful  [116]  to
drive  away  sickness  as  devils.  He  asked  him  for  his
recovery,  which  he  received  completely  and  suddenly.

**  A  young  man  greatly  edified  us  in  his  request
for  baptism.  '  I  confess, '  said  he,  *  that  I  am  a  rover,
that  I  have  no  abiding-place;  but,  since  you  have
spoken  to  me  of  the  other  life,  I  always  bear  your
words  in  my  heart ;  it  is  vain  for  me  to  go  here  and
there, — what  you  have  said  to  me  follows  me  every-
where ;  it  seems  as  if  it  had  been  written  in  my  heart.
I  said  the  other  day  to  sieur  Olivier  that  I  believed
sincerely,  and  that  I  had  resolved  to  settle  down, —
"  not,"  I  said  to  him,  ''  because  I  hope  they  will  give
me  things  cheaper  at  the  store  if  I  am  baptized ;  I
am  not  thinking  of  your  merchandise,  I  am  thinking
of  something  better ;  that ' —  indicating  the  Sky  — '  is
what  I  think  of,  it  is  that  which  is  written  in  my  heart,
and  which  makes  me  afraid  to  die  before  my  sins  are
carried  away  by  the  waters  of  baptism.'  "  May  God
give  him  perseverance.

"  Three  days  ago  a  woman,  not  yet  baptized,  re-
mained at  the  door  of  [117]  the  Church  during  Mass.
As  her  little  son  was  a  Christian,  and  as  none  but
Christians  are  allowed  to  hear  Mass,  she  set  this  little
child, —  standing  upright,  bound  to  his  cradle, — at
the  entrance  to  the  Chapel,  waiting  outside  until
Mass  was  over,  to  take  him ;  showing  by  this  act  the
value  she  attached  to  her  son's  good  fortune,  which
would  be  granted  to  her  also  were  it  not  for  the  fear
that  she  will  marry  a  Pagan,  her  husband  having
left  her  very  young. ' '


212  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18


CHAPITRE  IX.

DE  LA  PROUIDENCE  DE  DIEU AU CHOIX  DE QUELQUES
VNS, & AU REBUT DE QUELQUES AUTRES.

QVELQUES  Sauuages  fe  conuertiffent  quelque-
fois  fi  foudainement,  &  par  des  occafions  ii
pen  premedit6es,  qu'il  femble  qu'vn  hazard
les  mene  au  [ii8]  Ciel,  &  cependant  ils  n'y  entrent
que  par  vne  fage  conduite,  &  par  vne  affur^e  proui-
dence  du  grand  Dieu.

Vn  Capitaine  Sauuage  s'eftoit  caban6  au  delTus  de
S.  lofeph  en  pleine  fant6,  le  voila  tout  ^  coup  d'vne
grande  maladie,  arriue  qu'vne  femme  palTant  deuant
noftre  maifon  dans  fon  canot,  nous  dit  deux  mots  fans
fe  defembarquer,  comme  elle  pourfuiuoit  fon  cbe-
min,  I'vn  de  nous  luy  crie,  n'y  a-il  point  de  malades
en  voftre  cabane,  helas!  fit  elle,  ie  m'oubliois  de
vous  dire  qu'vn  tel  Capitaine  effc  tomb6  ce  matin
dans  de  grandes  conuulfions,  aufll-tolt  le  Pere  de
Quen  entendant  cela  court,  prend  fa  couuerture  &
vn  morceau  de  pain  pour  tous  viure  &  s'embarque,
il  arriue  fur  la  nuit,  trouue  cet  homme  en  vn  pitoy-
able  efhat,  I'inffcruit,  le  confole,  il  demande  le  bap-
tefme,  crie  mercy  k  Dieu  de  fes  pechez,  le  Pere  ne
le  croyant  pas  fi  mal,  fe  retire  en  la  cabane  voifine
pour  faire  fes  prieres  &  prendre  vn  peu  de  repos,
mais  Dieu  qui  vouloit  auoir  cette  ame  I'empefcha  fi
bien  de  dormir,  qu'il  fut  come  cotraint  de  fe  leuer  &
d'aller  voir  so  malade,  [119]  chofe  eftrage,  il  le  trouue


1640]  RELA  TJON  OF  164.0  213


CHAPTER  IX.

OF THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD IN THE CHOICE OF
SOME, AND THE REJECTION OF OTHERS.

CERTAIN  Savages  are  sometimes  converted  so
suddenly,  and  by  means so little premedi-
tated, that  it  seems  as  if  chance  takes  them
to  [118]  Heaven;  and  yet  they  do  not  enter  it  with-
out a  wise  leading  and  a  definite  providence  of  the
great  God.

A  Savage  Captain  had  encamped  above  St.  Joseph,
in  good  health,  when  all  at  once  he  was  attacked  by
a  serious  illness.  It  happened  that  a  woman  passing
before  our  house  in  her  canoe  said  a  few  words  to
us  without  disembarking ;  as  she  continued  on  her
way,  one  of  us  called  to  her,  ' '  Are  there  not  some
sick  people  in  your  cabin?"  "Oh,"  said  she,  '*  I
forgot  to  tell  you  that  such  a  Captain  fell  sick  this
morning,  with  violent  convulsions."  Upon  hearing
this,  Father  de  Quen  immediately  ran,  seized  his
blanket,  and  a  piece  of  bread  for  his  only  food,  and
embarked.  He  arrived  toward  nightfall,  and  found
this  man  in  a  pitiable  condition ;  he  instructed  and
consoled  him ;  the  latter  asked  for  baptism,  and  cried
to  God  for  mercy  for  his  sins.  The  Father,  not  sup-
posing him  so  ill,  withdrew  to  a  neighboring  cabin,
to  offer  his  prayers  and  take  a  little  rest.  But  God,
who  intended  to  have  this  soul,  so  kept  him  from
sleeping  that  he  was  constrained,  as  it  were,  to  arise
and  go  to  see  his  patient. [119]  Strange  to  say,  he


214  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  JJ&SUJTES  [Vol.18

aux  abois,  n'ayant  plus  de  vie  qu'autant  qn'il  en
falloit  pour  demander  &  pour  receuoir  le  faindt  Bap-
tefme,  le  Pere  bien  ef(:onn6  luy  donne,  &  I'enuoie
tout  fur  rheure  en  Paradis:  vous  diriez  que  cet
homme  s'eft  fauue  par  hazard,  &  que  d'autres  fe
damnent  par  accident,  mais  il  ny  a  ny  hazard  ny  acci-
dent deuant  Dieu,  fa  bonte  &  fa  iuffcice  s'accordent
bien  auec  fa  prouidence.

Ce  n'eft  pas  tout,  quelques  enfans  efloient  malades
dans  ces  mefmes  cabanes,  le  Pere  les  veut  baptifer,
les  parens  s*y  oppofent,  vne  femme  plus  inflruite
que  les  autres  fe  trouuant  Yk  plaide  pour  le  baptefme
de  ces  pauures  enfans,  &  Dieu  gagna  fa  caufe,  car
ils  furent  faic5ts  fes  enfans,  qu'il  foit  beny  k  iamais,
laudent  eum  cceli  &  terra  &  omnia  qum  in  eis  funt.  L'vn
de  nous,  eflant  all6  dire  la  faindte  MelTe  ^  THofpi-
tal,  trouue  vne  femme  nouuellement  apport6e  bien
malade,  il  luy  vint  vne  forte  penfee  de  la  difpofer
tout  fur  rheure  au  baptefme,  mais  comme  il  efloit
preffe  &  qu'il  auoit  quelque  indifpofition  pour  lors,
il  voulut  differer,  [120]  fe  promettant  bien  de  la
reuenir  voir  das  peu  de  temps,  comme  il  la  quittoit,  il
fen  tit  ce  reproche  en  fon  coeur,  fi  cette  femme  meurt
fans  baptefme  k  qui  en  f era  la  f aute  ?  il  retourne  vers
la  malade,  luy  touche  le  poux,  &  le  trouuant  affez
bon  ^  fon  aduis,  la  quitte  encor  vne  fois,  il  n'eftoit
pas  forty  qu'vn  remords  luy  fait  prendre  refolution
de  ne  point  quitter  cette  pauure  creature,  qu'il  ne  la
vit  en  eftat  de  receuoir  ce  Sacrement  de  falut,  il
s'arrefle,  I'inftruit,  la  laifle  dans  vn  grand  dellr  d'eftre
Chreftienne,  &  dans  des  regrets  d'auoir  offenf6  fon
Dieu  &  fon  Pere,  il  ne  fut  pas  loing  qu'on  luy  vint
crier  que  cette  pauure  femme  expiroit,  il  retourne,


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  215

found  him  in  a  desperate  condition,  having  no  more
life  than  was  necessary  for  him  to  ask  and  receive
holy  Baptism.  The  Father,  greatly  surprised,  gave
it  to  him,  and  sent  him  straightway  to  Paradise.
You  might  say  that  this  man  had  escaped  by  chance,
and  that  others  damn  themselves  by  accident.  But
there  is  neither  chance  nor  accident  with  God;  his
goodness  and  justice  harmonize  with  his  providence.
This  is  not  all.  Some  children  were  sick  in  these
same  cabins.  The  Father  wished  to  baptize  them,
the  parents  opposed  him ;  a  woman,  better  instructed
than  the  others,  being  present,  pleaded  for  the
baptism  of  these  poor  children,  and  God  gained  his
cause,  for  they  were  made  his  children.  May  he  be
forever  blessed,  laudent  eum  coeli  et  terra  et  omnia  quce
in  eis  sunt.  One  of  us  having  gone  to  say  holy  Mass
at  the  Hospital,  found  a  woman  who  had  been  just
brought  there  very  sick.  A  strong  impulse  prompted
him  to  dispose  her  immediately  to  baptism,  but  as  he
was  in  haste,  and  felt  some  indisposition  at  the  time,
he  wished  to  defer  it,  [120]  promising  himself  that
he  would  certainly  return  and  see  her  in  a  little
while.  As  he  left  her,  he  was  conscious  of  this
reproach  in  his  heart,  '*  If  this  woman  dies  without
baptism,  whose  fault  will  it  be  ? "  He  returned  to
the  sick  woman,  felt  her  pulse,  and  finding  her  well
enough,  in  his  opinion,  left  her  again.  He  had  not
gone  out  before  remorse  made  him  resolve  not  to
leave  this  poor  creature,  until  he  saw  her  in  a  condi-
tion to  receive  this  Sacrament  of  salvation.  He
stopped,  instructed  her,  and  left  her  with  a  great
desire  to  be  a  Christian,  and  with  regret  at  having
offended  her  God  and  Father.  It  was  not  long
before  they  came  to  him,  exclaiming  that  this  poor


216  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JJ&SUITES [Vol.  18

la  baptife,  elle  meurt  donnant  des  indices  tres- grands
de  fa  predeflination,  le  Pere  fe  fonnenant  de  ce  qui
s'eftoit  paff6  en  fon  coeur,  refta  tout  6pouuante.  voy-
ant  qu'il  ne  s'en  eftoit  quafi  rien  fallu  qu'elle  ne  fut
morte  fans  baptefme,  il  effc  vray  qu'k  fon  regard  le
falut  de  cette  ame  paroiffoit  n'auoir  efl6  attach^  qu'au
petit  filet  fort  aif6  ^  rompre,  mais  Dieu  le  tenoit
auec  vne  chaifne  bien  forte.

[i2i]  Voicy  quelques  remarques  tirees  des  me-
moires  du  P.  Buteux,  vne  troupe  d'Algonquins  traif-
nans  quant  &  eux  beaucoup  de  pauures  veufues  &
orphelins,  fe  font  venus  ietter  entre  les  bras  de  noflre
charity,  qui  n'eftoientque  trop  ouuerts  pour  les  rece-
uoir,  il  faut  que  ie  confeffe  que  voyant  Textreme
difette  de  ces  pauures  barbares,  foit  pour  leurs  viures,
foit  pour  leurs  habits,  iamais  ie  n'eus  plus  d'enuie
d'eftre  riche,  la  premiere  cabane  o\x  i'entray,  fut  de
deux  pauures  veufues  bien  ag6es  lefquelles  auoient
recueilly  enuiron  dix  ou  douze  enfans,  &  pour  toute
prouifion  n'auoiet  pas  la  valeur  d'vn  fac  de  bled
d'Inde,  c'eft  pour  lors  que  ie  regrettay  les  viures
qu'on  nous  enuoyoit,  lef quels  ont  efl6  perdus  dans  la
barque  qui  nous  venoit  voir,  i'entrois  dans  quelque
deffiance  voyant  tant  de  pauures  creatures  fur  nos
bras  auec  11  peu  de  viures  qui  fe  rencontroient  en
noftre  maifon,  mais  celuy  qui  nourrit  les  oyfeaux  du
Ciel,  n'abandonne  pas  ceux  pour  lef  quels  il  a  cree
les  oyfeau,  &  les  poilTons  &  tous  les  animaux.  Ie
ne  fgay  par  quel  miracle  de  fa  prouidence  [122]  cela
s'eft  fait,  mais  ie  fgay  bien  que  ces  pauures  gens  ont
tous  paff6  THyuer  fains  &  gaillards,  &  fa  bont6  nous
a  fait  trouuer  dequoy  les  fecourir,  nous  en  auons  bap-
tife quelques  vns  qui  nous  confolent,  entre  autres  vne


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  217

woman  was  expiring ;  lie  returned,  and  baptized  her ;
and  she  died,  giving  very  marked  indications  of  her
predestination.  The  Father,  recalling  what  had
passed  in  his  own  heart,  was  filled  with  consternation,
considering  how  near  she  was  to  dying  without  bap-
tism. True,  in  his  eyes,  the  salvation  of  this  soul
seemed  only  attached  by  a  fine  thread,  very  easy  to
break ;  but  God  held  it  with  a  very  strong  chain.

[121]  Here  are  some  observations  taken  from  the
memoirs  of  Father  Buteux :  "  A  band  of  Algonquins,
dragging  with  them  many  poor  widows  and  orphans,
came  to  throw  themselves  into  the  arms  of  our  char-
ity, which  were  only  too  wide  open  to  receive  them.
I  must  confess  that,  when  I  saw  the  extreme  poverty
of  these  poor  barbarians,  both  as  to  their  food  and
their  clothes,  I  never  had  a  greater  desire  to  be  rich.
The  first  cabin  I  entered  was  that  of  two  poor  wid-
ows, well  advanced  in  age,  who  had  gathered  togeth-
er about  ten  or  twelve  children,  and  for  their  sole
provision  had  not  the  value  of  a  bag  of  Indian  com.
It  was  then  I  regretted  the  supplies  that  were  sent
us,  which  had  been  lost  in  the  bark  that  was  coming
to  see  us.  I  had  some  misgivings  when  I  saw  so
many  poor  creatures  upon  our  hands,  with  so  little
food  to  be  found  in  our  house ;  but  he  who  feeds  the
birds  of  the  Air,  does  not  abandon  those  for  whom
he  has  created  the  birds,  the  fish,  and  all  the  animals.
I  do  not  know  by  what  miracle  of  his  providence
[122]  this  was  done;  but  I  do  know  well  that  these
poor  people  all  passed  the  Winter  well  and  happy,
and  his  goodness  enabled  us  to  find  something  with
which  to  assist  them.  We  have  baptized  some  of
them  who  are  a  comfort  to  us, —  among  others,  a
good  widow,  who  seems  to  have  been  reserved  for


218  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  18

bonne  veufue,  qui  femble  auoir  eft6  referu^e  pour  le
Ciel  par  vne  particuliere  prouidence  de  noflre  Sei-
gneur: les  Hiroquois  venat  faire  la  guerre  en  fon
pays  Tenlenerent  en  fa  petite  ieunefle  auec  quelques
autres  prifonniers,  elle  fut  efleu6e  parmy  eux  &  repu-
t^e  par  apres  comme  vne  f emme  de  lenr  nation ;
eftant  delia  grande  les  Algonquins  allans  en  guerre
auec  deffunt  Monfieur  de  Champlain,  &  fe  iettans  fur
vne  bourgade  d' Hiroquois  ou  efloit  cette  femme,
maflacroient  tous  ceux  qu'ils  auoient  k  la  rencontre,
cette  pauure  creature  fe  trouuant  dans  la  m61ee,  vou-
lut  faire  entendre  aux  Algonquins  qu'elle  efloit  de
leur  nation,  mais  elle  auoit  oublie  fa  langue,  excep-
ts ce  mot  feul,  qu'elle  rei'teroit  de  toutes  fes  forces,
nir,  nir,  nir,  moy,  moy,  moy,  ce  mot  luy  fauua  la  vie,
vn  Algonquin  T  ay  ant  tir6e  k  part,  elle  luy  fit  enten-
dre comme  [123]  elle  put,  qu'elle  auoit  efte  prife  en
fa  ieunelTe  par  I'ennemy,  on  la  remene  en  fon  pays,
oil  s' eftant  mariee  elle  a  veu  mourir  fon  mary,  fes
enfans,  grand  nombre  de  fes  parens  &  Dieu  I'a  con-
feru^e  dans  la  grande  mortalite  qui  a  fort  afflig6  fa
nation,  la  referuant  pour  luy  donner  entree  en  fon
Eglife,  &  pour  exciter  fes  compatriotes  k  deferter  la
terre,  car  elle  feule,  auec  cinq  petits  enfans  qu'elle
a  conferuez  dans  la  calami  te  publique,  n' ay  ant  de
viure  que  ce  que  noftre  pauuret6  luy  foumit,  a  defia
fait  vn  beau  grand  champ  de  bled  d'Inde,  elle  me  fit
grande  piti6  1' autre  iour,  entrant  fur  le  foir  en  fa
cabane,  ie  la  trouuay  toute  abbatue  &  toute  6plor6e,
luy  en  demandat  la  raifon  elle  me  dit,  ie  ne  puis
tenir  mes  larmes,  iettant  les  yeux  fur  ces  pauures
orpbelins,  pour  moy  il  y  a  long-temps  que  ie  fuis
accouflumee  k  paifer  les  iournees  entieres  fans  man-


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  219

Heaven  by  a  special  providence  of  our  Lord.  The
Hiroquois,  coming  to  make  war  against  her  country,
carried  her  off  in  her  childhood  with  some  other
prisoners.  She  was  reared  among  them,  and  after-
ward reputed  as  a  woman  of  their  nation.  Once,
after  she  had  grown  up,  the  Algonquins  went  to  war
in  company  with  the  deceased  Monsieur  de  Cham-
plain,^^  and  throwing  themselves  upon  a  Hiroquois
village  where  this  woman  was,  massacred  all  those
whom  they  encountered.  This  poor  creature,  find-
ing herself  in  the  conflict,  tried  to  make  the  Algon-
quins understand  that  she  was  of  their  nation ;  but
she  had  forgotten  her  own  language,  except  this  one
word,  which  she  reiterated  with  all  her  might,  nir^
nir,  nir,  *  me,  me,  me.'  This  word  saved  her  life.
An  Algonquin  drawing  her  aside,  she  made  him  un-
derstand, as  well  as  [123]  she  could,  that  she  had  been
captured  in  her  youth  by  the  enemy.  She  was  sent
back  to  her  own  country,  where,  having  married,  she
saw  her  husband,  her  children,  and  a  great  many  of
her  relatives  die.  But  God  preserved  her  in  the
midst  of  the  great  mortality  which  has  heavily
afflicted  her  nation, — reserving  her,  in  order  to  give
her  admission  to  his  Church,  and  to  stimulate  her
compatriots  to  clear  the  land ;  for  she  alone,  with  five
little  children  that  she  has  saved  in  the  public  calam-
ity, and  having  nothing  to  live  upon  except  what
our  poverty  furnishes  her,  has  already  prepared  a
fine,  large  field  of  Indian  corn.  She  aroused  my  deep
compassion,  the  other  day.  Entering  her  cabin  to-
wards evening,  I  found  her  quite  despondent  and  in
tears.  Upon  asking  the  reason  of  this,  she  said  to
me,  *  I  cannot  restrain  my  tears  when  I  cast  my  eyes
upon  these  poor  orphans. As  for  me,  I  have  for  a


220  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.  18

ger,  comme  i'ay  fait  tout  aniourd'huy  trauaillant  k
mon  champ  fans  rien  prendre,  mais  ie  ne  puis  enten-
dre ces  enfans  crier  h.  la  faim  fans  eftre  toucli6e,
voila  difoit-elle,  le  fubiedt  de  mes  larmes,  de  vous
importuner  ie  [124]  n'oferois,  car  depuis  I'Automne
iufques  h.  maintenant  vous  nous  auez  toufiours  fecou-
riies  confommant  les  viures  qui  vous  font  grand
befoin.  Si  eft-ce  luy  dif-je  que  i'ay  donn6  ce  matin
dequoy  vovs  faire  vne  fois  k  manger  auiourd'huy,  ie
n'en  ay  rien  veu,  repart  elle,  enfin  le  Pere  trouua
que  le  Sauuage  k  qui  il  auoit  donne  cette  commilfion
ay  ant  de  quoy  difner  ce  iour-lk,  auoit  referu6  cette
aumofne  pour  le  lendemain;  la  bont6  &  la  iuflice
font  les  deux  bras  de  la  grande  prouidence  de  Dieu,
nous  auons  veu  des  effedts  de  fa  mifericorde,  voyons
vn  coup  de  fa  iuflice.

Vn  Sauuage  ayant  eft6  baptif6  en  danger  de  mort
auec  de  grands  fentimens  de  I'autre  vie,  reuint  en
fant6.  II  eftoit  d'vn  alTez  bon  naturel,  mais  T  amour
d'vne  femme  le  perdit,  il  I'aymoit  paffionnement,  &
n' ayant  pas  le  loilir  qu'elle  fut  inflruite  &  baptifee,
il  r^poufa  h.  la  fago  des  Sauuages,  fans  attendre  la
benedidtion  de  I'Eglife,  nous  le  mena9afmes  des
chaftimens  de  Dieu,  qui  le  fuiuirent  de  bien  pr6s,  ce
miferable  s'en  eftant  all6  k  la  chalTe  du  caflor  auec
fa  famille  [125]  allez  nombreufe,  vit  mourir  fa  femme,
&  les  enfans  qu'elle  auoit  d'vn  autre  lit  fans  bap-
tefme,  fes  parens  faifis  du  mefme  mal  furent  bien
toft  emportez,  en  fin  il  tombe  malade  auec  vn  fien
fils  ag6  d'enuiron  vingt  ans,  &  vne  fienne  fille  Chre-
ftienne  agee  de  douze,  fa  foeur  qui  eftoit  veufue
depuis  quelques  annees  &■  qui  auoit  pour  fils  vn  grad
ieune  homme  excellent  chafleur,  foignoit  tous  ces


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  221

long  time  been  accustomed  to  pass  whole  days  with-
out eating, —  as  I  have  done  during  this  day,  working
in  my  field  and  taking  nothing, — but  I  cannot  hear
these  children  cry  with  hunger,  without  being
touched.  This,*  said  she,  '  is  the  cause  of  my  tears.
To  importune  you  I  [124]  would  not  dare;  for,  since
Autumn  until  now,  you  have  always  helped  us,  using
up  your  supplies,  and  thus  leaving  yourselves  in
great  want. '  *  Yet  I  gave  you  food,*  said  I,  '  in  order
that  you  might  eat  once  to-day. '  '  I  have  seen  none
of  it,*  she  replied.**  Finally,  the  Father  found  that
the  Savage  to  whom  he  had  given  this  commission,
having  something  to  dine  upon  to-day,  had  reserved
this  gift  for  the  morrow.  Goodness  and  justice  are
the  two  arms  of  the  glorious  providence  of  God.  We
have  seen  some  effects  of  his  mercy ;  let  us  see  a
stroke  of  his  justice.

A  Savage  who  had  been  baptized  while  in  danger
of  death,  with  admirable  sentiments  regarding  the
other  life,  was  restored  to  health.  He  had  a  good
enough  disposition,  but  love  for  a  woman  ruined
him.  He  loved  her  passionately;  and,  not  having
the  time  to  wait  until  she  was  instructed  and  bap-
tized, he  married  her  in  the  Savage  fashion,  without
waiting  for  the  benediction  of  the  Church.  We
threatened  him  with  the  punishments  of  God,  which
followed  very  closely  upon  him.  This  unhappy  man,
having  gone  to  hunt  the  beaver  with  his  numerous
family,  [125]  saw  his  wife,  and  her  children  by  a
previous  marriage,  die  without  baptism.  Her  par-
ents, seized  by  the  same  malady,  were  soon  carried
away.  Finally,  he  fell  sick,  together  with  one  of  his
sons,  about  twenty  years  of  age,  and  one  of  his  daugh-
ters, a  Christian,  twelve  years  old. His  sister  —  who


222  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.18

malades  dans  les  bois,  mais  comme  elle  vit  fon  fils
faifi  de  ceffce  contagion,  elle  prit  vn  eftrange  confeil
pour  luy  fauuer  la  vie,  le  voulant  amener  vers  les
demeures  de  nos  Frangois  pour  trouuer  quelque  re-
mede  k  fon  mal,  &  ne  pouuant  embarqu[e]r  fon  frere,
qui  efloit  ce  miferable  apoflat  que  Dieu  pourfuiuoit
viuement,  elle  ralTomme  ^  grands  coups  de  baftons
en  la  prefence  de  fes  deux  enfans  de  fon  nepueu,  &
de  fa  niepce,  qui  n'ofoient  branler  de  peur  que  cefte
megere  ne  leur  en  fit  autant,  cela  fait  elle  embarque
fon  fils  malade  &  laifTe  k  1' abandon  fon  nepueu  &  fa
niepce  qui  fortoient  de  maladie  leur  crians  qu'ils
prifTent  vn  canot  qu'elle  leur  monflroit  [126]  s'ils  fe
vouloient  fauuer,  ces  pauures  enfans  ne  pouuans  pas
mettre  ^  I'eau  ce  canot  ny  le  gouuerner  dans  leur  foi-
blefle,  quittant  leur  pere  qu'on  venoit  d'alTommer,
fuiuent  vn  iour  en  tier  leur  tante  fur  le  bord  de  I'eau
fans  manger,  cefle  proferpine  les  regardoit  fans  com-
pafTion,  en  fin  eftant  laff6  de  ramer  elle  defcendit  en
terre  pour  fe  repofer,  fon  nepueu  la  prie  d'auoir  piti6
de  luy  &  de  fa  pauure  fceur,  cefle  cruelle  repart,  fi
tu  veux  que  ie  te  fauue  la  vie  tue  ta  fceur,  car  ie  ne
vous  f 9aurois  pas  embarquer  tous  deux :  de  plus  pro-
mets  moy  que  tu  ne  parleras  iamais  de  ce  que  i'ay
fait  k  ton  pere,  ah !  Dieu  que  fera  ce  pauure  ieune
homme,  de  tuer  fa  fceur  c'eft  cruaut6,  de  refter  auec
elle,  c'eft  choifir  la  mort  fans  luy  pouuoir  donner  la
vie,  c'eft  deux  pauures  enfans  fe  regardoiet  I'vn  I'au-
tre  parlans  des  yeux,  car  leurs  coeurs  n'auoient  pas
affez  de  forces  pour  donner  du  mouuement  k  leurs
langues :  en  fin  cefle  tigreffe  prefTa  ce  pauure  ieune
homme  d'eflre  le  bourreau  de  fa  propre  fceur.  Ma
plume  ne  peut  fans  horreur  trencher  le  mot,  il  prend


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  223

had  been  a  widow  for  some  years,  and  who  had  a  son
who  was  a  tall  young  man  and  an  excellent  hunter  —
took  care  of  all  these  patients  in  the  woods.  But
when  she  saw  her  son  assailed  by  this  contagion,  she
took  a  strange  course  in  order  to  save  his  life.  De-
siring to  bring  him  to  the  dwellings  of  our  French  to
find  some  remedy  for  his  disease,  and  not  being  able
to  take  on  board  her  brother, — the  miserable  apostate
whom  God  was  sharply  pursuing, —  she  beat  the
latter  to  death  with  heavy  blows  from  a  club,  in  the
presence  of  his  two  children,  her  nephew  and  her
niece,  who  did  not  dare  stir  lest  this  Megera  would
do  as  much  to  them.  This  done,  she  embarked  her
sick  son,  and  deserted  her  nephew  and  niece  who  were
recovering  from  the  illness, —  calling  to  them  to  take
a  canoe  that  she  showed  them,  [126]  if  they  wished
to  save  themselves.  These  poor  children, — not  be-
ing able  to  launch  this  canoe,  or  to  guide  it  in  their
weakness, — leaving  their  father  who  had  just  been
beaten  to  death,  followed  their  aunt  a  whole  day
along  the  edge  of  the  water,  without  eating.  This
Proserpina  looked  at  them  pitilessly.  At  last,  being
weary  of  paddling,  she  came  ashore  to  rest.  Her
nephew  begged  her  to  have  pity  upon  him  and  his
poor  sister.  This  cruel  woman  replied,  **  If  thou
wishest  me  to  save  thy  life,  kill  thy  sister,  for  I  can-
not embark  you  both.  Promise  me,  besides,  that
thou  wilt  never  speak  of  what  I  have  done  to  thy
father."  O  God,  what  will  this  poor  young  man
do  ?  To  kill  his  sister  is  cruel ;  to  remain  with  her  is
to  choose  death,  without  being  able  to  give  her  life.
These  two  poor  children  look  at  each  other,  speaking
with  their  eyes,  for  their  hearts  have  not  enough
strength  to  give  motion  to  their  tongues. Finally,


224  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.18

vne  corde,  la  pafTe  au  col  [127]  de  fa  foeur,  iette  cefte
pauure  innocente  par  terre,  met  vn  pied  fur  le  bout
de  ce  licol  &  tire  Tautre  bout  tant  qu'il  peut  des  deux
mains  immolant  k  la  cruaut6  de  cefle  louue  cefte
pauure  vidtime  innocete.  Quand  ce  miferable  frere
fut  de  retour  ie  luy  demandois  fl  fa  foeur  ne  I'auoit
point  fupplie  de  luy  laiffer  la  vie,  no  fit-il,  elle  ne
m'en  parla  point,  ny  ne  s'enfuit  de  moy,  elle  me
regarda  d'vn  oeil  pitoyable,  &  me  laiffa  exercer  vne
cruaute  qui  me  deuoit  fauuer  la  vie,  ce  meurtre  com-
mis,  ce  ieune  homme  s'embarque  auec  cefte  megere,
mais  Dieu  k  la  veue  duquel  fe  ioiioit  toute  cefte
funefte  tragedie,  voulut  que  cefte  proferpine  en  fit
vn  adte,  il  la  frappa  de  la  cotagion  qu'elle  fuyoit,  &
auant  que  d'arriuer  oti  elle  vouloit  mener  fon  fils,  elle
mourut  comme  vne  befte.  En  fin  fon  fils  fut  appor-
t6  k  rhofpital  oti  il  eft  mort  dans  vne  puanteur  into-
lerable, mais  auec  de  grands  indices  de  fon  falut,
nous  en  parlerons  en  fon  lieu.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  225

this  tigress  urged  the  poor  young  man  to  be  the  ex-
ecutioner of  his  own  sister.  My  pen  cannot  set  down
the  word  without  horror.  He  takes  a  cord,  passes  it
around  [127]  his  sister's  neck,  throws  this  poor  inno-
cent to  the  ground,  puts  one  foot  upon  the  end  of
this  noose,  and  draws  the  other  as  tightly  as  he  can
with  both  hands, —  sacrificing  to  the  cruelty  of  this
she- wolf  this  poor  innocent  victim.  When  this
wretched  brother  had  returned  I  asked  him  if  his  sis-
ter had  not  entreated  him  to  spare  her  life.  **  No,"
he  replied,  ''  she  did  not  speak  to  me,  nor  flee  from
me ;  she  looked  at  me  pitifully,  and  left  me  to  exer-
cise a  cruelty  which  was  to  save  my  life."  This
murder  committed,  the  young  man  embarked  with
this  Megera,  but  God,  in  whose  sight  all  this  fatal
tragedy  was  played,  willed  that  this  Proserpina  should
play  one  act  of  it.  He  struck  her  with  the  contagion
from  which  she  was  fleeing;  and,  before  reaching
the  place  where  she  wished  to  bring  her  son,  she
died  like  a  beast.  Finally,  her  son  was  brought  to
the  hospital,  where  he  died  in  an  intolerable  stench,
but  with  strong  indications  of  salvation.  We  shall
speak  of  him  in  the  proper  place.


226  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.18


[128] CHAP. X

DE L'ESPERANCE QU'ON A DE LA CONUERSION DE
PLUSIEURS SAUUAGES.

I7AURAY  de  la  peine  k  declarer  mes  penfees  dans
ce  Chapitre,  mon  efprit  croit  plus  qu'il  n'en
fcauroit  dire,  faifons  le  denombrement  de  quel-
qnes  nations  en  partie  voifmes  des  riues  du  grand
fieuue,  &  puis  ie  tafcheray  de  m'enoncer.

A  I'entr^e  du  grand  golfe  de  S.  Laurent  du  cofl6
du  Nord  on  trouue  les  Efquimaux  peuples  bien  bar-
bares  &  grads  ennemis  des  Europeans  ^  ce  qu'on  dit
fuiuant  la  mefme  cofl6  du  Nord  en  motant  on  ren-
contre les  peuples  de  Cliifedecli  &  les  Berfiamites,  ce
font  petites  nations  dont  on  a  peu  de  cognoiffance,
lefquelles  ont  commerce  auec  d'autres  qui  font  de-
dans les  terres.  En  fuite  on  trouue  les  Sauuages  de
Tadouffac,  qui  ont  cognoiffance  auec  la  nation  du
Pore  Epic,  &  par  I'entremife  de  :ceux-cy  auec  [129]
d'autres  Sauuages  encore  plus  retirez  dedans  les
terres.  Montant  toufiours  on  arriue  k  Kebec,  &  puis
aux  trois  Riuieres.  Les  Sauuages  qui  frequentent
ces  deux  habitations  vont  en  marchandife  aux  At-
tikamegues,  &  ceux-cy  k  trois  ou  quatre  petites
nations  qui  font  au  Nord  de  leur  pays.

Quand  on  arriue  au  premier  faut  qui  fe  rencontre
dans  le  grand  fieuue  S.  Laurent,  que  nous  appellons
le  fault  faindt  Louis,  on  trouue  vn  autre  fieuue  nom-
m6  la  Riuiere  des  Prairies. Ce  fieuue  fe  nomme


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  227


[128] CHAP. X.

OF THE HOPE WE HAVE FOR THE CONVERSION OF
MANY SAVAGES.

I SHALL  be  at  a  loss  to  make  known  my  thoughts
in  this  Chapter,  for  my  mind  thinks  more  than
it  can  express. Let  ns  enumerate  some  of  the
nations  partly  adjacent  to  the  banks  of  the  great  river,
and  then  I  will  try  to  express  my  thoughts.

At  the  entrance  to  the  great  gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,
on  the  Northern  shore,  we  find  the  Esquimaux
tribes, — very  barbarous,  and  hostile  to  the  Europeans,
it  is  said;  following  the  same  Northern  shore  up-
wards we  find  the  Chisedech  and  Bersiamite  peo-
ples; these  are  insignificant  nations,  of  whom  we
know  little,  who  have  dealings  with  other  inland
tribes.  Then  we  find  the  Savages  of  Tadoussac,  who
have  intercourse  with  the  Porcupine  nation,  and
through  them  with  [129]  other  Savages  farther  in-
land. Continuing  up  the  river  we  reach  Kebec,  and
then  the  three  Rivers.  The  Savages  who  frequent
these  two  settlements  go  to  trade  with  the  Attika-
megues,  and  these  with  three  or  four  other  small
nations  which  are  North  of  their  country. ^^

When  we  reach  the  first  rapid  found  in  the  great
river  St.  Lawrence,  which  we  call  '*  sault  saint
Louis,"  we  come  to  another  stream  called  the  **  River
des  Prairies. ' '  This  river  is  thus  named  because  when
a  certain  Frenchman  named  des  Prairies,  charged  with
piloting  a  bark  to  the  sault  St.  Louis, came  to  this  junc-


228  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

ainfi,  pource  qu'vn  certain  Frangois  nomm6  des  Prai-
ries ayant  charge  de  coduire  vne  barque  an  fault  S.
Louis,  quad  il  vint  k  cet  affour  ou  rencontre  de  ces
deux  fleuues  au  lieu  de  tirer  du  cofle  du  Sud,  ou  eft
le  fault  faindt  Louis  il  tira  au  Nord  vers  cet  autre
fleuue  qui  n'auoit  point  encore  de  nom  Frangois,  &
qui  depuis  ce  temps  Yk  fut  appelle  la  Riuiere  des
Prairies.  Montat  done  fur  cete  riuiere  on  rencontre
les  Ouaouechkairini,  que  nous  appellons  la  petite
nation  des  Algonquins.  Montant  toufiours  plus  haut
on  trouue  les  Kichefipirini,  les  Sauuages  [130]  de
rifle  qui  ont  ^  coft;6  dans  les  terres  au  Nord  les  Kota-
koutouemi.  Au  Sud  de  I'lfle  font  les  Kinounchepi-
rini,  les  Mataouchkarini,  les  Ountchatarounounga,
les  Sagaliiganirini,  les  Sagnitaouigama,  &  puis  les
Hurons  qui  font  h.  I'entree  de  la  mer  douce.  Ces  fix
nations  derniere  font  entre  le  fleuue  de  fainct  Lau-
rens &  la  Riuiere  des  Prairies.  Quittant  la  Riuiere
des  Prairies  quand  elle  tire  droit  au  Nord  pour  aller
au  Surouefe  on  va  trouuer  le  Lac  Nipifm  ou  font  les
Nipifiriniens :  Ceux-cy  ont  au  Nord  les  Timifcimi,
les  Outimagami,  les  Ouacliegami,  les  Mitchitamou,
les  Outurbi,  les  Kiriflinon  qui  habitent  fur  les  riues
de  la  mer  du  Nord  ou  les  Nipifiriniens  vont  en  mar-
cbandife.  Reuenons  main  tenant  h.  la  mer  douce.
Cefte  mer  n'efl  autre  chofe  qu'vn  grand  Lac  lequel
fe  venant  k  eflreffir  k  rOiieft,  ou  rOiieft  Nord-oiiefl
fait  vn  autre  plus  petit  Lac,  qui  puis  apres  fe  va  elar-
giflant  en  vn  autre  grand  Lac  ou  feconde  mer  douce.
Voicy  les  nations  qui  bordent  ces  grands  Lacs  ou  ces
mers  du  coft6  du  Nord.

I* ay  dit  qu'^  I'entree  du  premier  de  [131]  ces  Lacs
fe  rencontrent  les  Hurons,  les  quittans  pour  voguer


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  229

tion  or  meeting  of  these  two  rivers,  instead  of  coast-
ing along  the  Southern  shore,  where  the  sault  saint
Louis  is,  he  turned  to  the  North,  towards  the  other
river  which  as  yet  had  no  French  name,  and  which,
since  that  time,  has  been  called  the  "  River  des
Prairies."  Going  up  this  river,  then,  we  find  the
Ouaouechkairini,  which  we  call  the  **  petite  nation  "
of  the  Algonquins.  Going  still  farther  up  the  river
we  find  the  Kichesipirini,  the  Savages  [130]  of  the
Island,  who  have  adjacent  to  them,  in  the  territory
to  the  North,  the  Kotakoutouemi.  To  the  South  of
the  Island  are  the  Kinounchepirini,  the  Mataouchka-
rini,  the  Ountchatarounounga,  the  Sagahiganirini,
the  Sagnitaouigama,  and  then  the  Hurons,  who  are
at  the  entrance  to  the  fresh- water  sea.^^  These  last
six  nations  are  between  the  river  saint  Lawrence  and
the  River  des  Prairies.  Leaving  the  River  des  Prai-
ries when  it  turns  directly  to  the  North,  that  we  may
go  to  the  Southwest,  we  come  to  Lake  Nipisin,  where
the  Nipisiriniens  are  found.  These  have  upon  their
North  the  Timiscimi,  the  Outimagami,  the  Ouache-
gami,  the  Mitchitamou,  the  Outurbi,  the  Kiristinon,
who  live  on  the  shores  of  the  North  sea  whither
the  Nipisiriniens  go  to  trade. ^^  Let  us  return  now
to  the  fresh-water  sea.  This  sea  is  nothing  but  a
large  Lake  which,  becoming  narrower  in  the  West,
or  the  West  Northwest,  forms  another  smaller  Lake,
which  then  begins  to  enlarge  into  another  great  Lake
or  second  fresh-water  sea.  Such  are  the  nations  that
border  these  great  Lakes  or  seas  of  the  North.

I  have  said  that  at  the  entrance  to  the  first  of  [131]
these  Lakes  we  find  the  Hurons.  Leaving  them,  to
sail  farther  up  in  the  lake,  we  find  on  the  North  the
Ouasouarini ;  farther  up  are  the  Outchougai,  and  still


280  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.  18

plus  haut  dans  le  lac,  on  trouue  au  Nord  les  Ouafoua-
rini,  plus  haut  font  les  Outchougai,  plus  haut  encore
k  Temboucliure  du  fleuue  qui  vient  du  Lac  Nipilln
font  les  Atchiligoiian.  Au  delk  fur  les  mefmes  riues
de  cefte  mer  douce  font  les  Amikoiiai,  ou  la  nation
du  Caflor.  Au  Sud  defquels  eft  vne  Ifle  dans  cefle
mer  douce  longue  d'enuiron  trente  lieues  habitue  des
Outaouan,  ce  font  peuples  venus  de  la  nation  des
cheueux  releuez.  Apres  les  Amikouai  fur  les  mefmes
riues  du  grand  lac  font  les  Oumifagai,  qu'on  paffe
pour  venir  k  Baouichtigouian,  c'efb  k  dire,  k  la  nation
des  gens  du  Sault,  pource  qu'en  effedt  il  y  a  vn  Sault
qui  fe  iette  en  cet  endroit  dans  la  mer  douce.  Au
delk  de  ce  fault  on  trouue  le  petit  lac,  fur  les  bords
duquel  du  cofl6  du  Nord  font  les  Roquai.  Au  Nord
de  ceux-cy  font  les  Mantoue,  ces  peuples  ne  nauigent
guiere,  viuans  des  fruidts  de  la  terre,  paffant  ce  plus
petit  lac  on  entre  dans  la  feconde  mer  douce,  fur  les
riues  de  laquelle  font  les  Maroumine,  plus  auant  en-
core fur  les  [i  32]  mefmes  riues  habitent  les  Ouinipigou
peuples  fedentaires  qui  font  en  grand  nombre,  quel-
ques  Frangois  les  appellet  la  Nation  des  Puans,  k
caufe  que  le  mot  Algonquin  ouinipeg  fignifie  eau
puante.  Or  ils  nomment  ainfi  Teau  de  la  mer  fal6e,
fi  bien  que  ces  peuples  f e  nommet  Ouinipigou,  pource
qu'ils  viennent  des  bords  d'vne  mer  dot  nous  n'auons
point  de  cognoilTance,  &  par  confequent  il  ne  faut
pas  les  appeller  la  nation^ des  Puans,  mais  la  nation
de  la  mer,  6s  enuirons  de  cette  nation  font  les  Na-
dveHv,  les  AiTmipour,  les  Eriniouaj,  les  Rafaouakoue-
ton,  &  les  Pouutouatami.  Voila  les  noms  d'vne
partie  des  nations  qui  font  au  delk  des  riues  du  grand
fleuue  faindt  Laurent,  &  des  grands  lacs  des  Hurons


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  281

farther  up,  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  which  comes
from  Lake  Nipisin,  are  the  Atchiligouan.  Beyond,
upon  the  same  shores  of  this  fresh-water  sea,  are  the
Amikouai,  or  the  nation  of  the  Beaver.  To  the
South  of  these  is  an  Island  in  this  fresh-water  sea
about  thirty  leagues  long,  inhabited  by  the  Outaouan ;
these  are  people  who  have  come  from  the  nation  of
the  raised  hair.  After  the  Amikouai,  upon  the  same
shores  of  the  great  lake,  are  the  Oumisagai,  whom
we  pass  while  proceeding  to  Baouichtigouian, —  that
is  to  say,  to  the  nation  of  the  people  of  the  Sault,
for,  in  fact,  there  is  a  Rapid,  which  rushes  at  this
point  into  the  fresh-water  sea.  Beyond  this  rapid
we  find  the  little  lake,  upon  the  shores  of  which,  to
the  North,  are  the  Roquai.  To  the  North  of  these
are  the  Mantoue,  people  who  navigate  very  little,
living  upon  the  fruits  of  the  earth.  ^^  Passing  this
smaller  lake,  we  enter  the  second  fresh-water  sea,
upon  the  shores  of  which  are  the  Maroumine ;  and
still  farther,  upon  the  [132]  same  banks,  dwell  the
Ouinipigou,  a  sedentary  people,  who  are  very  numer-
ous; some  of  the  French  call  them  the  **  Nation  of
Stinkards,"  because  the  Algonquin  word  ''ouinipeg  "
signifies  * '  bad-smelling  water, '  *  and  they  apply  this
name  to  the  water  of  the  salt  sea, —  so  that  these  peo-
ples are  called  Ouinipigou  because  they  come  from
the  shores  of  a  sea  about  which  we  have  no  knowl-
edge; and  hence  they  ought  not  to  be  called  the
nation  of  Stinkards,  but  the  nation  of  the  sea.  In  the
neighborhood  of  this  nation  are  the  Naduesiu,  the
Assinipour,  the  Eriniouai,  the  Rasaouakoueton,  and
the  Pouutouatami.^^  These  are  the  names  of  a  part
of  the  nations  which  are  beyond  the  shores  of  the
great  river  saint  Lawrence  and  of  the  great  lakes  of


232  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JASUITES [Vol.  Ig

du  cofte  du  Nord.  le  vifiteray  tout  maintenant  le
cofl6  du  Sud,  ie  diray  en  paffant  que  le  fieur  Nicolet
interprete  en  langue  Algonquine  &  Huronne,  pour
Meflieurs  de  la  nouuelle  Frace,  m'a  donne  les  noms
de  ces  nations  qu'il  a  vifite  luy  mefme  pour  la
plufpart  dans  leur  pays,  tons  ces  peuples  entendent
r Algonquin,  except^  les  Hurons,  qui  ont  [133]  vne
langue  h.  part,  comme  auffi  les  Ouinipigou  ou  gens  de
mer.  On  nous  a  dit  cette  annee  qu'vn  Algonquin
voyageat  au  delk  de  ces  peuples,  a  rencontre  des
nations  extremement  peuplees,  ie  les  voyois  difoit-il
affembles  comme  dans  vne  foire,  achepter  &  vendre,
en  fi  grand  nombre  qu'on  ne  les  pouuoit  compter,  il
donnoit  vne  id6e  des  villes  d' Europe,  ie  ne  f9ay  pas
ce  que  s'en  eft.  Vifitons  maintenant  le  coft6  du  Sud
du  grand. fleuue  S.  Laurent.

Depuis  fon  embouchure  iufques  au  fault  S.  Louis^
on  trouue  les  Sauuages  du  Cap  Breton,  les  Souricois
font  plus  auat  dans  les  terres,  on  rencontre  les  Sau-
uages de  Mifcou  &  de  Gafpe,  entre  les  riues  de  la
mer  de  I'Acadie,  &  le  grand  fleuue  font  les  Eteche-
mins,  les  Pentagouetch,  les  Abnaquiois,  les  Nahiga-
niouetcb,  &  quelques  autres  nations,  mais  elles  font
toutes  bien  petites.

Depuis  le  fault  S.  Louis  montant  toufiours  fur  ce
grand  fleuue,  on  trouue  de  belles  nations  au  Sud,  &
toutes  fedentaires,  &  fort  nombreufes,  comme  les
Agneehrono,  les  Oneiochronon,  le  [134]  Onontaeb-
ronon,  les  Konkhandeenhronon,  les  Oniouenhronon,
les  Andaftoehronon,  les  Sonontouehronon,  les  Ando-
ouanchronon,  les  Kontareahronon,  les  Ouendat,  les
Khionontatehronon,  les  Oherokouaehronon,  les  Aon-
dironon,  les  Ongmarahronon, les  Akhrakvaeronon^


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  233

the  Hurons  on  the  North.  I  will  now  visit  the
Southern  shores.  I  will  say,  by  the  way,  that
sieur  Nicolet,  interpreter  of  the  Algonquin  and
Huron  languages  for  the  Gentlemen  of  new  France,
has  given  me  the  names  of  these  nations,  which
he  himself  has  visited,  for  the  most  part  in  their
own  country.  All  these  peoples  understand  Algon-
quin, except  the  Hurons,  who  have  [133]  a  lan-
guage of  their  own,  as  also  have  the  Ouinipigou,  or
people  of  the  sea.  We  have  been  told  this  year  that
an  Algonquin,  journeying  beyond  these  peoples,  en-
countered nations  extremely  populous.  * '  I  saw  them
assembled,"  said  he,  '*  as  if  at  a  fair,  buying  and  sell-
ing, in  numbers  so  great  that  they  could  not  be
counted ;  "  it  conveyed  an  idea  of  the  cities  of  Eu-
rope. I  do  not  know  what  there  is  in  this.  Let  us
now  visit  the  Southern  coast  of  the  great  river  St.
Lawrence.

From  its  mouth  up  to  the  sault  St.  Louis  are  to  be
found  the  Savages  of  Cape  Breton.  The  Souricois
are  farther  inland ;  we  also  meet  the  Savages  of  Mis-
cou  and  Gaspe ;  between  the  shores  of  the  Acadian
sea  and  the  great  river  are  the  Etechemins,  the  Pen-
tagouetch,  the  Abnaquiois,  the  Nahiganiouetch,  and
a  few  other  nations,  but  they  are  all  very  small. ^^

Continuing  to  ascend  this  great  river  from  the
sault  St.  Louis,  we  find  to  the  South  very  flourishing
nations,  all  sedentary  and  very  numerous, — such  as  the
Agneehrono,  the  Oneiochronon,  the  [134]  Onontaeh-
ronon,  the  Konkhandeenhronon,  the  Oniouenhronon,
the  Andastoehronon,  the  Sonontouehronon,  the  An-
doouanchronon,  the  Kontareahronon,  the  Ouendat,
the  Khionontatehronon,  the  Oherokouaehronon,  the
Aondironon,  the  Ongmarahronon,  the  Akhrakuaero-


234  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.18

les  Oneronon,  les  Ehreflaronon,  les  Attiouendaronk,
les  Eriehronon,  les  Totontaratonhronon,  les  Ahriot-
taehronon,  les  Ofcouarahronon,  les  Hvattoehronon,
les  Skencliiolironon,  les  Attiftaehronon,  les  Ontarah-
ronon,  les  Aoueatliouaenhronon,  les  Attocliingoch-
ronon,  les  Attiouendarankhronon.  Toutes  ces  na-
tions font  fedentaires,  comme  i'ay  defia  dit,  elles
cultiuent  la  terre,  &  par  confequent  font  remplies
de  peuples,  i'ay  tire  leurs  noms  d'vne  carte  Huronne,
que  le  Pere  Paul  Ragueneau  m'a  communique,  il  n'y
a  point  de  doute  que  ces  peuples  ne  foient  au  Nord
de  la  Virginie,  de  la  Floride,  &  pent  ell:re  encore  de
la  nouuelle  Mexique,  voila  vn  beau  champ  pour  les
ouuriers  Euangeliques  &  bien  parfem6  de  Croix,  la
plus  [135]  part  de  ces  peuples  entendent  la  langue
Huronne.

Le  vingt-quatriefme  iour  de  luin  eft  arriu6  icy  vn
Anglois  auec  vn  lien  feruiteur,  conduits  dans  des  ca-
nots  par  vingt  Sauuages  Abnaquiois,  il  eft  party  du
lac  ou  fleuue  Quinibequi  en  Lacadie,  ou  les  Anglois
ont  vne  habitation,  pour  venir  chercher  quelque  paf-
fage  par  ces  contr6es  vers  la  mer  du  Nord,  Monfieur
le  Gouuerneur  en  ay  ant  ouy  nouuelle,  ne  luy  permit
pas  de  venir  k  Kebec,  il  I'enuoya  garder  par  quelques
foldats,  luy  enioignant  de  preffer  fon  retour,  il  s'en
mit  en  deuoir,  mais  quelques  vns  des  principaux  Sau-
uages qui  I'auoient  amenez  eflans  tombez  malades,
&  les  riuieres  ou  ruifleaux  par  oti  il  auoit  pair6  eflat
afleich^es,  il  fe  vint  letter  entre  les  mains  des  Fran-
9ois,  pour  euiter  la  mort  qu'il  ne  pouuoit  quafi  pas
euiter  au  retour,  tant  ces  chemins  font  horribles  &
6pouuantables,  Monfieur  de  Montmagny  le  fit  con-
duire  k  Tadouifac,  pour  aller  rechercher  1' Angleterre
par  la  France.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  236

non,  the  Oneronon,  the  Ehressaronon,  the  Attiouen-
daronk,  the  Eriehronon,  the  Totontaratonhronon,  the
Ahriottaehronon,  the  Oscouarahronon,  the  Huattoeh-
ronon,  the  Skenchiohronon,  the  Attistaehronon,  the
Ontarahronon,  the  Aoueatsiouaenhronon,  the  Atto-
chingochronon,  the  Attiouendarankhronon.  All
these  nations  are  sedentary,  as  I  have  already  said.^®
They  cultivate  the  land,  and  consequently  are  very
populous.  I  have  taken  their  names  from  a  Huron
map  that  Father  Paul  Ragueneau  sent  me.  There
is  no  doubt  that  these  peoples  are  at  the  North  of  Vir-
ginia, Florida,  and  perhaps  even  new  Mexico.  Here
is  a  glorious  field  for  Gospel  laborers,  and  well  strewn
with  Crosses.  The  greater  [135]  part  of  these  tribes
understand  the  Huron  language.

On  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  June,  an  Englishman
arrived  here  with  one  of  his  servants,  brought  in
canoes  by  twenty  Abnaquiois  Savages.  He  departed
from  the  lake  or  river  Quinibequi  in  Lacadie,  where
the  English  have  a  settlement,  to  search  for  some
route  through  these  countries  to  the  sea  of  the  North.
Monsieur  the  Governor,  having  learned  of  this,  did
not  permit  him  to  come  to  Kebec ;  he  sent  him  away,
guarded  by  some  soldiers,  enjoining  him  to  hasten
his  return.  He  set  about  doing  so,  but  some  of  the
principal  Savages  who  had  brought  him  having  fallen
sick,  and  the  streams  or  brooks  by  which  he  had
journeyed  having  dried  up,  he  came  and  threw  him-
self into  the  hands  of  the  French  to  avoid  the  death
that  he  could  scarcely  escape  on  his  return,  so
horrible  and  frightful  are  the  roads.  Monsieur  de
Montmagny  had  him  taken  to  Tadoussac,  that  he
might  return  to  England  by  way  of  France.

This  good  man  related  some  wonderful  things  to


236  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES [Vol.18

Ce  bon  homme  nous  racontoit  des  merueilles  de  la
nouuelle  Mexiqiie,  i'ay  [136]  apris  difoit-il  qu'on
pent  nauiger  en  ce  pays  Ik  par  les  mers  qui  luy  font
au  Nord,  il  y  a  deux  ans  que  i'ay  rode  toute  la  cofte
du  Sud,  depuis  la  Virginie  iufques  h.  Quinebiqui,
pour  cberclier  fi  ie  ne  trouuerois  point  quel  que  grande
riuiere,  on  quel  que  grand  lac  qui  me  conduifit  k  des
peuples  qui  euffent  cognoiffance  de  cette  mer  qui  eft
au  Nord  du  Mexique,  n'en  ay  ant  point  trouue  ie  fuis
venu  en  ces  pays  cy,  pour  entrer  dans  Ie  Saguen^,  &
pour  penetrer  fi  ie  pouuois  auec  les  Sauuages  du
pays  iufques  k  la  mer  du  Nord ;  ce  pauure  homme
eufl  perdu  cinquante  vies  s'il  en  euft  eu  autant,
deuant  que  d'arriuer  en  cette  mer  du  Nord,  par  Ie
chemin  qu'il  fe  figuroit,  &  quand  il  auroit  trouu6
cette  mer,  il  n' auroit  rien  decouuert  de  nouueau,  ny
rencontre  aucune  ouuerture  au  nouueau  Mexique,  il
ne  faut  pas  eftre  grand  Geographe  pour  recognoiftre
cette  verit6.

Mais  ie  diray  en  paflant  que  nous  auons  de  grandes
probabilit6s,  qu'on  pent  defcendre  par  Ie  fecond
grand  lac  des  Hurons,  &  par  les  peuples  que  nous
[137]  auons  n6m6s  dans  cette  mer  qu'il  cherchoit,  Ie
lieur  Nicolet  qui  a  Ie  plus  auant  penetr6  dedans  ces
pays  fi  elloign^s,  m'a  affeur6  que  s'il  euft  vogu6  trois
iours  plus  auant  fur  vn  grand  fleuue  qui  fort  de  ce
lac,  qu'il  auroit  trouue  la  mer,  or  i'ay  de  fortes  con-
iedtures  que  c'efl.  la  mer  qui  refpond  au  Nord  de  la
nouuelle  Mexique,  &  que  de  cette  mer,  on  auroit  en-
tree vers  Ie  lapon  &  vers  la  Chine,  neantmoins  comma
on  ne  fgait  pas  ou  tire  ce  grand  lac,  ou  cette  mer
douce,  ce  feroit  vne  entreprife  genereufe  d'aller  def-
couurir ces contr^es. Nos Peres qui font aux


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  237

US  about  new  Mexico.  "  I  have  [136]  learned,"  said
he,  "  that  one  can  sail  to  that  country  through  seas
that  are  North  of  it.  For  two  years  I  have  ranged
the  whole  Southern  coast,  from  Virginia  to  Quinebi-
qui,  seeking  to  find  some  great  river  or  great  lake
that  might  lead  me  to  peoples  who  had  some  knowl-
edge of  this  sea  which  is  to  the  North  of  Mexico.
Not  having  found  any,  I  came  to  this  country  to  en-
ter the  Saguen6,  and  penetrate,  if  I  could,  with  the
Savages  of  the  country,  to  the  North  sea."  This
poor  man  would  have  lost  fifty  lives,  if  he  had  had  so
many,  before  reaching  this  North  sea  by  the  way  he
described ;  and,  if  he  had  found  this  sea,  he  would
have  discovered  nothing  new,  nor  found  any  passage
to  new  Mexico.  One  need  not  be  a  great  Geographer
to  recognize  this  fact.

But  I  will  say,  in  passing,  that  it  is  highly  prob-
able one  can  descend  through  the  second  great  lake
of  the  Hurons,  and  through  the  tribes  that  we  [137]
have  named,  into  this  sea  that  he  was  seeking.  Sieur
Nicolet,  who  has  advanced  farthest  into  these  so  dis-
tant countries,  has  assured  me  that,  if  he  had  sailed
three  days*  journey  farther  upon  a  great  river
which  issues  from  this  lake,  he  would  have  found  the
sea.  Now  I  have  strong  suspicions  that  this  is  the
sea  which  answers  to  that  North  of  new  Mexico,  and
that  from  this  sea  there  would  be  an  outlet  towards
Japan  and  China.  Nevertheless,  as  we  do  not  know
whither  this  great  lake  tends,  or  this  fresh-water  sea,
it  would  be  a  bold  undertaking  to  go  and  explore
those  countries.  Our  Fathers  who  are  among  the
Hurons,  invited  by  some  Algonquins,  are  about  to
extend  their  labors  to  the  people  of  the  other  sea,  of
which  I  have  spoken  above. ^ Perhaps  this  voyage


238  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  18

Hurons  inuites  par  quelques  Algonquins,  font  fur  le
point  de  donner  iufques  k  ces  gens  de  1' autre  mer,
dont  i'ay  parl6  cy-deffus,  pent  eflre  que  ce  voyage  fe
referuera  pour  I'vn  de  nous  qui  auons  quelque  petite
cognoiffance  de  la  langue  Algonquine.

On  voit  par  ce  que  ie  viens  de  dire,  la  grande  efken-
due  de  pays,  &  le  grand  nombre  de  peuples  qui  n'ont
point  ouy  parler  de  lefus-Chrifl.

Et  me  femble  que  le  temps  viendra  &  qu'il  efl
defia  venu,  auquel  Dieu  fe  veut  [138]  faire  cognoiftre
^  vne  partie  de  ces  nations,  on  ne  pent  reuoquer  en
doute  que  le  Pere  Eternel  ne  veille  mettre  fon  Fils
en  poffeffion  de  1' heritage  qu'il  luy  a  promis,  dabo  tibi
gentes  hcereditatem  tuam,  dominabitur  h  mari  eofque  \sc,
u/que]  ad  mare^  il  commandera  depuis  la  mer  du
Nord,  iufques  k  la  mer  du  Sud,  &  h  flumine  eofque  \sc,
u/que']  ad  terminos  orbis  terrarum,  &  depuis  le  grand
fieuue  de  S.  Laurens,  qui  efl  le  premier  de  tons  les
fleuues,  iufques  aux  derniers  confins  de  la  terre,  iuf-
ques au  dernieres  limites  de  I'Amerique,  &  iufques
aux  Ifles  du  lapon,  &  vltra,  &  au  delk,  omnes  gentes
feruient  ei,  toutes  les  nations  luy  rendront  hommage,
animas  pauperum  faluas  faciei^  il  fauuera  les  ames  des
pauures  Sauuages,  omnes  gentes  magnificabunt  eum^
tous  les  peuples  le  magnifieront,  &  replebitur  Maiejiate
eius  omnis  terra,  fa  Majefte  remplira  toute  la  terre,
fiat,  fiat.  Et  il  y  a  de  I'apparence,  que  nous  en
fommes  1^,  veu  le  changement  des  cceurs,  que  Dieu
fait  en  ces  qua[r]tiers,  en  eflant  follicit6  par  vne  infi-
nite de  faindtes  ames,  qui  iour  &  nuidt  employent
leurs  voeux  &  leurs  prieres,  aupres  de  fa  diuine  Ma-
jefte pour  [139]  ce  fubiet.  Le  zele  aulTi  &  la  ferueur
de  ceux  qui  y  contribuent,  &  s' off  rent  k  y  contribuer


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  239

will  be  reserved  for  one  of  us  who  has  some  little
knowledge  of  the  Algonquin  tongue.

One  sees,  from  what  I  have  just  said,  the  great
extent  of  the  country  and  the  great  number  of  peo-
ples who  have  never  heard  of  Jesus  Christ.

And  it  seems  to  me  that  the  time  will  come,  and
that  it  has  already  come,  when  God  will  [138]  make
himself  known  to  a  part  of  these  nations.  We  cannot
call  in  question  the  truth  that  the  Eternal  Father
wishes  to  put  his  Son  into  possession  of  the  heritage
that  he  has  provided  him;  dabo  tibi  gentes  hceredi-
tatem  tuam,  dominabitur  h  mdri  usque  ad  mare^  he  shall
rule  from  the  North  sea  to  the  South  sea,  et  a  flumine
usque  ad  terminos  or  bis  terrarumy  and  from  the  great
river  St.  Lawrence,  which  is  the  chief  of  all  rivers,
to  the  remotest  confines  of  the  earth,  even  to  the
farthest  boundaries  of  America  and  to  the  Islands  of
Japan,  et  ultra,  and  beyond ;  omnes  gentes  servient  ei,
all  the  nations  shall  render  him  homage;  animas
pauperum  salvas  faciet,  he  shall  save  the  souls  of  the
poor  Savages;  omnes  gentes  magnificabunt  euni,  all
peoples  shall  magnify  him,  et  replebitur  Majestate  ejus
omnis  terra,  his  Majesty  shall  fill  all  the  earth ;  fiat,
fiat.  And  it  seems  that  we  are  attaining  this,  con-
sidering the  change  of  hearts  that  God  is  effecting  in
these  quarters,  being  solicited  thereto  by  an  infinite
number  of  saintly  souls,  who  day  and  night  employ
their  vows  and  their  prayers  before  his  divine  Majes-
ty, for  [139]  this  purpose.  Moreover,  the  zeal  and
the  fervor  of  those  who  contribute  to  this,  and  offer
to  contribute  more  and  more,  also  give  us  strong
assurance  of  this.  It  is  not  without  design  that  God
inspires  so  many  good  souls  to  assist  with  their  means
this  infant  Church, which  cannot  ascend towards


240  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.18

de  plus  en  plus,  nous  en  done  auffi  de  grandes  affeu-
rances.  Ce  n'eft  pas  fans  deffein,  que  Dieu  infpire
tant  de  bonnes  ames,  k  afQfler  de  leurs  moyes  cette
Eglife  naiffante,  qui  ne  pent  s'efleuer  vers  le  ciel,  11
elle  n'ell:  fouftenue  fur  terre,  ie  veux  dire,  fi  les  biens
temporels  n'y  font  employes,  &  ne  feruet  d'attrait  aux
Sauuages,  pour  les  retirer  du  milieu  des  bois,  &  leur
donner  quelque  efperance  de  mieux  en  des  demeures
arre flees,  ou  ils  puiffent  eftre  inflruidts.  Ie  n'ofe
icy  fpecifier  ce  que  plufieurs  y  font,  parce  qu'ils  m'ont
fait  entendre,  qu'ils  ne  veulent  auoir  que  Dieu  pour
tefmoin.  Ceux  qui  auront  deuotion  de  les  imiter,
ont  par  delk  le  P.  Charles  Lalemant  Procureur  de
toutes  nos  milTios,  qui  fgaura  bien  leur  dire  ce  qui
fera  le  plus  expedient,  lors  qu'il  fera  aduerty  de  leurs
bonnes  intentions.  Mais  fi  nous  nous  promettons  le
fecours  des  Princes  &  liberalitez  des  viuants,  nous
n'auons  pas  moins  de  fujet  d'efperer  que  ceux  qui
nous  ont  honorez  de  leurs  affedtions  [140]  &  off  arts
leurs  voeux  ^  Dieu  pour  nous,  durant  le  cours  de
cette  vie,  continuerot  cet  exercice  dans  le  ciel ;  &  ce
d'autant  plus  volontiers,  qu'ils  en  cognoitront  mieux
la  necelTit^.  C'efl-icy  que  ie  fens  mon  coeur  atten-
dry,  &  fe  renouuellent  tons  les  fentimens  dont  il  fut
faify  k  la  nouuelle  du  deces  de  Monfieur  Foucquet
d'beureufe  memoire,  duquel  il  n'y  a  que  Dieu,  qui
comprit  les  tedreffes  pour  nos  pauures  Sauuages,
I'ellime  qu'il  faifoit  de  cefte  entreprife,  le  zele  &  les
liberalitez  auec  lefquelles  il  en  procuroit  1' execution,
ie  ne  doute  point  que  la  perte  d'vn  homme,  11  vtile  ^
I'Eflat,  &  dont  les  adlions  ont  merits  vne  approba-
tion fi  vniuerfelle,  n'ayt  efl6  extraordinairement  fen-
fible  k  I'ancienne  France,  mais  elle  me  permettra  de


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  241

heaven  if  it  is  not  sustained  upon  earth, —  I  mean,  if
temporal  benefits  are  not  employed  to  serve  as  an
attraction  to  the  Savages,  to  draw  them  out  of  the
woods,  and  give  them  some  hope  of  better  things  in
established  dwelling  places,  where  they  can  be  in-
structed. I  dare  not  specify  what  several  are  doing
in  this  matter,  because  they  have  given  me  to  under-
stand that  they  wish  God  to  be  their  only  witness.
Those  who  have  the  devout  wish  to  imitate  these
have  over  yonder  Father  Charles  Lalemant,  Procuror
of  all  our  missions,  who  can  very  well  tell  them  what
will  be  most  advisable,  when  he  is  informed  of  their
good  intentions.  But  if  we  promise  ourselves  the
aid  of  Princes  and  the  liberality  of  the  living,  we
have  no  less  reason  to  hope  that  those  who  have
honored  us  with  their  kind  interest  [140]  and  offered
their  vows  to  God  for  us,  during  this  life,  will  con-
tinue this  exercise  in  heaven,  and  all  the  more  will-
ingly as  they  will  then  better  know  the  need  for  it.
Here  I  feel  my  heart  softened,  and  all  those  tender
feelings  are  renewed  with  which  it  was  filled  at  the
tidings  of  the  death  of  Monsieur  Foucquet,^^  of  happy
memory,  whose  tenderness  for  our  poor  Savages,  the
value  he  placed  upon  this  enterprise,  the  zeal  and
liberality  with  which  he  procured  its  execution,  are
comprehended  by  no  one  but  God.  I  do  not  doubt
that  the  loss  of  a  man  so  useful  to  the  State,  and
whose  actions  have  merited  so  universal  approbation,
has  been  deeply  felt  by  old  France,  but  she  will  per-
mit me  to  say  that  it  has  not  been  less  felt  by  the  new.
The  consolation  of  both  is  that  uno  avulso,  non  deficit
alter;  he  has  left  a  heritage  not  only  of  his  reputation
and  offices,  but  also  of  his  virtues,  and  especially  of
his  zeal  for  the  service  of  God  in  these  countries.


242  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.18

dire  qu'elle  ne  Ta  pas  moins  eft6  k  la  nouuelle,  la
confolation  de  I'viie  &  de  Tautre  eft  que,  vno  auulfo,
non  deficit  alter,  il  a  lailT^  vn  heritier  non  feulement
de  fa  reputation  &  de  fes  charges,  mais  aufli  de  fes
vertus,  &  particulierement  de  fon  zele  pour  le  feruice
de  Dieu,  dans  ces  contr^es.  La  crainte  que  i'ay  de
faire  fouffrit  la  modeflie  des  [141]  viuans,  &  de  violer
le  fecret  dont  1' obligation  dure  mefme  apres  la  mort,
ne  me  permettra  dans  d'en  dire  dauantage.

Quant  ^  Meflleurs  de  la  Nouuelle  France,  qui  font
de  grand  frais  tous  les  ans,  pour  faire  pafTer  en  ces
contr^es  11  efloign^es  de  1' Europe,  les  chofes  necef-
faires  pour  y  fubiifter;  ils  nous  obligent  toufiours
infiniment  en  cela;  comme  aufll  en  ce  qu'ils  ont  ac-
cord6  mefme  faueurs  aux  Sauuages  Chrefliens,  qui
fe  rendront  fedentaires  qu'aux  Fran9ois,  ie  les  en  re-
mercie  de  tout  mon  coeur,  &  les  coniure  de  perfeuerer
das  leurs  faueurs.  Et  fur  ce  propos,  ils  me  permet-
tront  s'il  leur  plaift,  de  leur  dire  icy  quatre  petites
paroles,  la  plus  faine  partie  de  leurs  corps  s'efl  iett^e
dans  leur  alTociation,  non  tant  pour  retirer  les  biens
perilTables  de  ce  nouueau  monde,  que  pour  cooperer
puiffamment  au  falut  de  ces  peuples,  or  puifque
Dieu  fauorife  leur  premier  delTein,  appellant  ces
pauures  barbares  k  foy  par  leur  entremife,  il  me  fem-
ble  qu'ils  ont  fubiet  de  fe  reHouir,  &  de  benir  celuy
qui  leur  accorde  la  fin  plus  noble  qu'ils  pretendoient,
les  choififlant  pour  [142]  procurer  vn  fi  grand  ou-
urage.  Que  fi  les  fruidts  de  ces  grandes  terres  que
le  Roy  leur  a  donn6e  ne  correfpondent  pas  k  leurs
defpenfes  exceffiues,  ie  ne  croy  pas  que  le  Dieu  du
ciel,  duquel  ils  ont  procur6  &  procureront  encor  la
gloire,  s'oublie  d'eux.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  248

My  fear  of  offending  the  modesty  of  the  [141]  living,
and  of  violating  the  secret  which  continues  binding
even  after  death,  will  not  permit  me  to  say  more.

As  for  the  Gentlemen  of  New  France,  who  every
year  are  at  great  expense  in  bringing  over  to  these
countries  so  remote  from  Europe,  the  supplies  neces-
sary for  subsistence  here,  they  always  infinitely
oblige  us  in  this  matter,  as  also  in  their  having  ac-
corded the  same  favors  to  the  Christian  Savages  who
shall  make  themselves  sedentary,  as  to  the  French.
I  thank  them  for  this  with  all  my  heart,  and  adjure
them  to  persevere  in  their  favors.  And  in  regard  to
this  they  will  permit  me,  if  they  please,  to  say  here
a  few  modest  words.  Their  best  energies  are  lav-
ished upon  their  association, — not  so  much  for  the
sake  of  deriving  perishable  goods  from  this  new
world,  as  to  cooperate  efficiently  in  the  salvation  of
these  peoples.  Now  since  God  favors  their  chief
purpose,  calling  these  poor  barbarians  to  himself
through  their  agency,  it  seems  to  me  that  they  have
reason  to  rejoice  and  to  bless  him  who  grants  them
the  most  noble  object  for  which  they  are  striving,
choosing  them  to  [142]  accomplish  so  great  a  work.
And  if  the  fruits  of  these  broad  lands  that  the  King
has  given  them  do  not  correspond  to  their  excessive
outlay,  I  do  not  think  that  the  God  of  heaven,  whose
glory  they  have  procured  and  will  procure,  will  for-
get them.

How  the  spirit  of  God  is  working !  I  was  wishing
that  some  one  would  do  at  the  three  Rivers  what  we
were  doing  at  St.  Joseph  near  Kebec.  Several  Algon-
quins  presented  themselves  to  form  a  settlement,  and
we  lacked  the  means  for  this.  The  God  of  heaven,
who  saw  our  weakness,  inclined  toward  us  the  arms


244  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.18

Que  I'efprit  de  Dieu  eft  agilTant,  ie  fouhaittois  que
quelqu'vn  fit  aux  trois  Riuieres,  ce  que  nous  faifons
^  S.  lofeph  proche  de  Kebec,  plufieurs  Algonquins
fe  prefentoient  pour  s'arrefter,  &  nous  manquions  de
forces,  le  Dieu  du  ciel  qui  voyoit  nos  foiblelles,  nous
difpofoit  des  bras  d' amour  &  de  charity,  vne  perfonne
de  merite  &  de  condition,  a  faidt  palTer  cette  ann6e
quatre  hommes,  k  ce  deffein,  pour  defricher  &  pour
baftir.

Reftoit  encor  k  pouruoir  k  la  Riuiere  des  prairies
on  croit  icy  que  fi  on  drelTe  la  quelque  habitation,
plufieurs  Sauuages  y  aborderont  de  diuers  endroits.

Nous  apprenons  par  la  flotte  de  cette  ann^e,  que
des  perfonnes  de  vertu  &  de  courage,  font  en  refolu-
tion  d'y  enuoier  nombre  d'hommes  Tan  procbain,  ils
ont  defia  fait  palTer  des  viures  pour  ce  delTein,  [143]
n'eft-il  pas  done  vray  que  Dieu  fraie  le  chemin  aux
pauures  Sauuages,  pour  les  attirer  dans  les  filets  de
TEuangile.  Ouy,  mais  dira  quelqu'vn  cette  entre-
prife  eft  plaine  de  depences  &  de  difficultez,  ces
Meffieurs  trouueront  des  montagnes  ou  ils  pefent
trouuer  des  valines,  i'ay  defia  dit  cent  fois,  que  tous
ceux  qui  trauaillent  fous  I'eftendart  de  lefus-Chrift,
pour  luy  amener  des  ames,  feminant  in  lacrimis^  ie
ne  diray  pas  k  ces  Meffieurs  qu'ils  trouueront  des
cbemins  parfem6s  de  rofes,  la  croix,  les  peines  &  les
grands  frais,  font  les  pierres  fondamentales  de  la  mai-
fon  de  Dieu.  Au  refte  fi  iamais  les  Frangois  s'efta-
blifi!ent  en  cet  endroit,  i'efpere  que  les  Sauuages  qui
ont  autrefois  habits  cette  contr^e,  &  qui  font  montes
plus  haut  pour  la  crainte  de  leurs  ennemis,  retourne-
ront  dans  leur  ancien  pays,  ou  ils  trouueront  la  vie
de  I'ame,  n'y  cherchans  que  la  vie  du  corps.


1640]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  246

of  love  and  charity ;  a  personage  of  merit  and  rank
has  caused  four  men  to  be  brought  over  this  year  for
the  purpose  of  clearing  and  building.

It  remains  now  to  provide  for  the  River  des  prai-
ries. It  is  thought  here  that  if  a  habitation  is  erected
there,  many  Savages  will  come  to  it  from  different
places.

We  learn,  through  this  year's  fleet,  that  some  brave
and  virtuous  persons  have  resolved  to  send  hither  a
number  of  men  next  year,  having  already  sent  over
supplies  for  this  purpose.  [143]  Is  it  not  true  that
God  opens  the  way  to  the  poor  Savages,  to  attract
them  into  the  Gospel  nets?  ''  Yes,"  some  one  will
say,  "  but  this  enterprise  is  full  of  expenses  and  diffi-
culties; these  Gentlemen  will  find  mountains  where
they  expect  to  find  valleys."  I  have  already  said  a
hundred  times  that  all  those  who  work  under  the
standard  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  lead  souls  to  him,  semi-
nant  in  lacrimis.  I  will  not  tell  these  Gentlemen  that
they  will  find  the  way  strewn  with  roses ;  the  cross,
hardships,  and  great  expenses  are  the  foundation
stones  of  the  house  of  God.  Moreover,  if  ever  the
French  establish  themselves  in  this  place,  I  hope  that
the  Savages  who  formerly  inhabited  this  region,  and
who  have  gone  farther  up  the  river,  for  fear  of  their
enemies,  will  return  to  their  old  country,  where  they
will  find  the  life  of  the  soul,  while  seeking  only  the
life  of  the  body.

This  is  not  all.  If  ever  we  are  at  peace  with  the
tribes  of  the  South, — which  will  be  very  easily
effected  if  some  Hollanders  cede  what  they  have
usurped  [144]  in  Acadia  upon  the  territory  of  his
Majesty,  for  this  coast  belongs  to  new  France, — the
settlement  which  will  be  found  at  the  River  des  prai-


246  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  18

Ce  n'eft  pas  tout,  fi  iamais  nous  fommes  en  paix
auec  les  peuples  du  Midy,  ce  qui  fe  fera  bien  ayfe-
ment,  fi  quelques  Hollandois  cedent  ce  qu'ils  ont
vfurpe  [144]  en  TAcadie  fur  les  terres  de  fa  Majefl^,
car  cette  cofle  eft  de  la  nouuelle  France,  Thabitation
qui  fe  fera  en  la  Riuiere  des  prairies,  donnera  vn
facile  accez  a  tous  ces  peuples  qui  font  en  nombre  &
fedentaires.  Madame  la  Ducheife  d'Aiguillon  m'en
efcrit  de  fa  grace,  &  me  promet  de  s'y  emploier,
comme  elle  a  defia  commance;  d'ou  reuffira  vn  bien
nompareil  pour  ces  pauures  contr6es ;  &  il  n'y  aura
que  Dieu  feul  qui  foit  capable  de  recompenfer  cette
faindle  &  forte  entreprife.

C'eft  ce  qui  faidt  que  nous  nous  portons  k  de  nou-
uelles  decouuertures,  nos  Peres  qui  font  au  pays  des
Hurons,  combattans  tous  les  iours  contre  la  mort,  &
contre  les  demons,  ne  fcauroient  s'arrefter,  ils  par-
lent  d'aller  h.  la  nation  du  petun,  k  la  nation  neutre,
k  la  nation  des  gens  de  mer,  ceux  qui  trauaillent
pour  les  Algonquins  veulent  eftre  de  la  partie,  Dieu
leur  prefente  des  Sauuages  qui  fauorifent  leurs  def-
feins,  il  remue  leurs  coeurs,  &  anime  leur  courage.

II  me  femble  que  quand  ie  mis  le  pied  en  ces  Gen-
tries, il  y  auoit  moins  d'apparence  [145]  que  les  Sau-
uages qui  ont  receu  lefus-Chrift,  fe  deuffent  arrefter
&  fe  foufmettre  h.  fes  loix  que  ie  n'en  voy,  pour  vne
partie  des  nations  dont  i'ay  fait  mention  cy-deffus.
Pourquoy  done  les  def ef perons-nous  ?  oay,  mais  tout
le  monde  n'eft  pas  dans  ces  fentimens  Ik,  ie  refpond
excepte  ceux  qui  ne  voyent  les  Sauuages  qu'en
paffant,  &  au  lieu  oh.  ils  ne  font  pas  encor  inltruidls,
except^  quelques  efprits  mefcontens,  &  malfaits  qui
blafphemant,  qucecumque  ignorant^  qui  condamnent  ce


1640]  RELATION  OF  1640  247

ries  will  give  an  easy  access  to  all  tiiese  tribes,  which
are  numerous  and  sedentary.  Madame  the  Duchess
d'Aiguillon  has  graciously  written  to  me,  and  prom-
ised to  interest  herself  therein,  as  she  has  already  be-
gun to  do,— whence  will  arise  a  matchless  good  for
these  poor  countries.  There  is  no  one  save  God
alone  who  is  capable  of  rewarding  this  holy  and  brave
enterprise.

It  is  this  that  impels  us  to  new  discoveries.  Our
Fathers  who  are  in  the  Huron  country,  combating
daily  against  death,  and  against  the  demons,  cannot
rest.  They  talk  of  going  to  the  tobacco  nation,  to
the  neutral  nation,  to  the  nation  of  the  people  of  the
sea.  Those  who  work  among  the  Algonquins  wish
to  participate  in  this  work.  God  presents  them  Sav-
ages who  favor  their  designs ;  he  stirs  their  hearts,
and  animates  their  courage.

It  seems  to  me  that  when  I  set  foot  in  these  coun-
tries there  was  less  probability  [145]  that  the  Sav-
ages who  have  received  Jesus  Christ  would  settle
down  and  submit  to  his  laws,  than  I  see  in  regard  to
a  part  of  the  nations  I  have  mentioned  above.  Why,
then,  shall  we  despair  of  them?  Yes,  but  not  every
one  entertains  such  sentiments.  I  answer  that, — ex-
cept those  who  see  the  Savages  only  for  a  short  time,
and  in  places  where  they  are  not  yet  instructed,  and
except  some  discontented  and  perverse  minds,  who
blaspheme  qucscumque  ignorant,  who  condemn  what
they  do  not  see,  and  what  they  think  they  see, —
there  is  no  one  here  who  does  not  admire  and  bless
God  in  the  conversion  of  the  Savages.  Do  you  wish
me  to  speak  plainly?  When  I  regard,  with  my  own
eyes  of  flesh,  the  innumerable  expenses  that  must  be
incurred  in  order  to  succeed  in  this  enterprise,  the


248  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ^SUITES [Vol.18

qu'ils  ne  voyent  pas,  &  qu'ils  penfent  voir,  il  n'y  a
perfonne  icy  qui  n 'admire  &  ne  beniffe  Dieu  dans  la
conuerfion  des  Sauuages.  Voulez-vous  que  ie  vous
parle  nettement,  quand  ie  regarde  auec  mes  yeux  de
chair,  les  frais  innombrables  qu'il  faut  faire  pour  ve-
nir  k  bout  de  cette  entreprife,  les  peines,  les  trauaux,
les  fouffrances,  les  croix,  les  dangers,  les  morts,  les
calomnies  qui  fe  rencontrent,  &  qui  fe  rencontreront
de  plus  en  plus,  &  de  toutes  parts,  en  ce  chemin  ou
nous  nous  iettons,  quand  ie  contemple  auec  ces  mef-
mes  yeux  la  legerete,  rinconflance,  &  la  barbaric
[146]  des  Sauuages,  ie  tremble,  ie  fuis  foible  comme
vn  rofeau,  ie  n'ay  plus  de  coeur,  tout  me  femble  bafty
fur  Ie  fable  mouuant,  mais  quand  ie  releue  ma  pen-
f6e  &  que  ie  la  iette  en  lefus-Chrifl,  &  que  ie  I'enui-
fage  auec  les  yeux  de  la  foy,  &  de  la  confiance,  quand
ie  confidere  ce  qu'il  a  fait,  &  ce  qu'il  fait  tons  les  iours
pour  fauuer  ces  pauures  ames,  ie  fuis  tout  puiffant,
ces  difficultez  m'animent,  &  tout  cet  ouurage  me
femble  fond6  fur  la  pierre  vine,  petra  autem  erat  Chri-
Jiusy  ie  parle  dans  les  fentimens  de  tons  ceux  que
Dieu  a  appell6  k  cette  vigne,  dont  ie  fuis  Ie  moindre.


1640]  RELATION  OF  1640  249

pain,  the  labors,  the  sufferings,  the  crosses,  the  dan-
gers, the  deaths,  the  slanders  that  must  be  encoun-
tered,—  and  that  will  have  to  be  encountered  more
and  more,  and  from  all  sides,  in  this  road  where  we
have  cast  ourselves, — when  I  contemplate  with  these
same  eyes  the  frivolity,  the  inconstancy,  and  the
barbarity  [146]  of  the  Savages,  I  tremble, —  I  am  as
weak  as  a  reed,  I  have  no  more  heart ;  all  seems  to
me  to  be  built  upon  the  shifting  sand.  But  when  I
lift  up  my  thoughts,  and  cast  them  upon  Jesus  Christ,
and  when  I  look  at  him  with  the  eyes  of  faith  and
confidence,  when  I  consider  what  he  has  done,  and
what  he  is  doing  every  day  to  save  these  poor  souls, —
I  am  all-powerful, — these  difficulties  animate  me;
and  all  this  work  seems  to  me  to  be  founded  upon
the  living  rock,  petra  autem  erat  Christ  us,  I  express
the  sentiments  of  all  those  whom  God  has  called  to
this  vineyard,  of  whom  I  am  the  least.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  DATA:  VOL.  XVIII

XXXVIII -XL

These  three  documents  are  letters  in  Italian,  sent
to  Rome,  from  the  Huron  country,  by  Father  Joseph
Marie  Chaumonot, — the  first  (May  24,  1640)  to  the
Father  General,  the  other  two  (May  26  and  August
3,  1640)  to  Father  Philippe  Nappi,  superior  of  the
professed  house  at  Rome.  In  1858,  Father  Felix
Martin  found  them  in  the  Society  archives,  then  pre-
served in  Rome,  and  made  copies  of  them ;  but  these
apographs  cannot  now  be  found  with  the  other  Martin
papers  in  the  archives  of  St.  Mary's  College,  Mont-
real. We  follow  the  French  translation,  made  by
Martin,  and  published  in  Carayon's  Premiere  Mission
des  J  ^suites  au  Canada,  where  they  are  numbered  xiv. ,
XV.,  and  xvi.  respectively;  our  English  translation  is
from  the  French.

XLI

The  Relation  of  1640  (Paris,  1641),  although  having
only  Vimont's  name  on  the  title-page,  is  in  reality
a  composite.  His  share  in  the  publication  seems  to
have  been  solely  that  of  editor.  He  succeeded  Le
Jeune  as  superior  in  1639,  and  became  responsible
for  the  Relations  VLrs.\XS.  1645,  when  he  was  in  turn  suc-
ceeded by  Jerome  Lalemant.  Part  I.  was  prepared
by  Le  Jeune,  and  is  signed  "  A  K6bec,  en  la  nou-
uelle  France,  ce  10  de  Septembre  1640."  Part.  II.
is  the  report  on  the  Huron  mission  by  Jerome  Lale-


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES


mant,  which  is  dated  '*  Des  Hurons,  ce  27  de  May
1640,"  and  contains  a  postscript  that  is  dated  ''  Des
Hurons,  ce  3.  d'Aoufl  1640."

For  the  text  of  this  annual,  we  have  had  recourse
to  a  copy  of  the  original  Cramoisy  edition  in  the
Lenox  Library.  The  Relation  is  usually  designated
as  '*  H.  j6,''  because  described  in  Harrisse's  Notes ^
no.  76.

Collation:  Title  with  verso  blank,  i  leaf;  **  Priui-
lege  "  (signed  20th  September,  Le  Jeune's  letter  of
loth  September  having,  of  course,  not  yet  arrived  in
Paris),  with  ' *  Permiffion "  on  the  verso,  i  leaf;
*'  Table"  to  Part  L,  pp.  (2);  '*  Table"  to  Part  IL,
pp.  (2) ;  Le  Jeune's  Relation^  pp.  i  -  197,  with  the  verso
of  p.  197  blank, —  followed  by  Lalemant's  Huron
Relation,  which  consists  of:  half-title,  with  verso
blank,  i  leaf;  text,  pp.  1-196,  as  numbered;  one
blank  leaf.  The  signatures  are :  a  in  four,  A  -  M  in
eights,  N  in  four,  aa-mm  in  eights,  nn  in  four,  the
last  leaf  being  a  blank.  There  is  no  mispaging  in
Le  Jeune's  section;  but  in  Lalemant's,  pp.  9,  80,  and
193-  198  are  misnumbered  10,  74,  and  191  -  196.  We
have  examined  several  copies  which  agree  even  with
regard  to  turned  letters,  e.g..  Part  L,  p.  113,  1.  17  —
"I'enfej."  But  we  have  discovered  the  following
peculiarity  in  Le  Jeune's  Relation — p.  154,  1.  26,
reads  in  one  copy :  ' '  Itavichpich  nous  a  grandement, ' '
and  in  the  other:  *'  Itaovichpich  nous  a  gradement."

Copies  of  this  Relation  may  be  found  in  the  follow-
ing libraries :  Lenox  (both  variations).  Harvard,  Brown
(private),  Laval  University  (Quebec),  and  British  Mu-
seum. Copies  have  been  sold  or  priced  as  follows:
Harrassowitz  (1882),  no.  27,  priced  at  125  marks;
O'Callaghan  (1882),  no. 12 19,  sold  for  $15  —  it  had


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  DATA: VOL.  XVIII  253

cost  him  $26;  Quaritch,  General  Catalogue ^  vol.  v.,  no.
30005,  priced  at  £\^\  Dufoss6  (1891),  priced  at  150
francs;  Chadenat,  of  Paris,  priced  (1892  and  1897)  at
160  and  150  francs,  respectively.


NOTES  TO  VOL  XVIII

(Figures  in  parentheses,  following  number  of  note,  refer  to  pages
of  English  text.)

I  (p.  13). —  Pierre  Joseph  Marie  Chaumonot  was  bom  Mar.  9,  1611,
in  a  village  of  Burgundy,  France.  While  a  lad,  he  wandered  into
Italy,  and  finally,  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  resolved  to  enter  the
Jesuit  order,  in  which  he  became  a  novice  May  18,  1632,  at  Rome.
In  that  city  his  priestly  studies  were  pursued,  interrupted  by  two
years  (1635-37)  spent  as  an  instructor  at  Fermo.  In  1639,  ^e  was
assigned  to  the  Canadian  mission,  and  immediately  went  to  the  Hu-
ron country.  In  November,  1640,  he  undertook,  with  Brebeuf,  a
mission  to  the  Neutral  Nation,  where  they  remained  five  months,
until  —  suffering  the  utmost  hardships,  and  threatened  on  every  side
with  death  —  they  were  obliged  to  return  to  Ste.  Marie.  Chaumo-
not then  labored  at  the  missions,  successively,  of  St.  Jean  Baptiste,
St.  Michel,  and  La  Conception ;  of  the  last-named,  he  had  charge
when  the  Hurons  were  dispersed  by  the  Iroquois  (1649),  whereupon
he  followed  his  disciples  in  their  flight  to  Isle  St.  Joseph  (now
Charity  Island),  in  Lake  Huron.  Finding  this  retreat  no  longer
safe  from  their  enemies,  the  Hurons,  in  the  summer  of  1650,  took
refuge  at  Quebec ;  and,  in  March  following,  they  were  established
on  the  isle  of  Orleans  by  the  Jesuits,  on  an  estate  purchased  by
them  from  Eleonore  de  Grandmaison  (vol.  xi.,  note  12).  This
colony  was  under  Chaumonot' s  care;  it  numbered  at  first  about  400,
but  was  soon  increased,  by  other  refugees,  to  about  600  souls.  In
September,  1655,  Chaumonot  went  with  Dablon  to  the  Onondaga
mission,  and  labored  among  the  Iroquois  tribes  during  the  next
three  years.  Returning  to  Quebec,  he  again  took  charge  of  his
Huron  colony — remaining  in  this  post  thirty-five  years  longer,  ex-
cept one  year  in  Quebec  (1663-64),  and  two  years  (1664-66)  at  Fort
Richelieu  as  chaplain  of  its  garrison.  In  the  autumn  of  1692,  he
was  compelled  to  give  up  his  charge  and  retire  to  Quebec,  by  a
lingering  illness  which  finally  ended  his  life,  Feb.  21,  1693.

By  the  command  of  his  superior,  Chaumonot  wrote  his  autobiog-
raphy (1688),  which  will  be  given  in  this  series.  He  is  best  known
by  his  works  on  the  Huron  language,  in  which  he  was  unusually
proficient. An  English  translation  (by  Wilke)  of  his  Huron  gram-


256  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES

mar  (written  in  Latin)  was  published  in  Quebec  Lit.  and  Hist.  Soc.
Trans.,  vol.  ii.  (1831),  pp.  94-198.

2  (p.  35). — This  name  —  Calmonotti,  as  misprinted  by  Carayon  —
was  simply  an  Italianized  form  of  Chaumonot's  name,  the  root  of
which  means  "bald"  (Lat.  calvus). — A.  E.  Jones,  S.J.

3  (P«  37)- — Luigi  de  Gonzaga  was  born  at  Castiglione,  Italy,  in
1568,  and  became  a  Jesuit  at  the  age  of  eighteen.  He  did  not  live,
however,  to  complete  his  training  for  the  priesthood;  for  in  1591,  an
epidemic  appearing  in  Rome,  he  so  devoted  himself  to  the  care  of
the  sick  and  dying  that  he  fell  a  victim  to  the  pestilence.  He  was
canonized  in  1626,  under  the  name  of  St.  Aloysius.

4  (P«  37)' —  1^^^  holy  house  of  Lorette :  the  Santa  Casa, —  accord-
ing to  tradition,  the  house  of  the  Virgin  Mary  at  Nazareth,  which
was  discovered  by  Empress  Helena,  about  308  A.  D. ;  upon  the  ruin
and  subjugation  of  Palestine  by  the  Turks,  this  house  was  miracu-
lously transported  (May,  1291)  to  Tersate,  in  Dalmatia,  and  again
(1294)  in  like  manner  to  Loreto,  its  present  location.  This  is  a  city
of  about  8,000  population,  in  the  Marches  of  Italy,  13  miles  N.  E.  of
Macerata,  and  three  miles  from  the  Adriatic.  The  Santa  Casa
stands  within  a  magnificent  church,  and  its  original  rough  bricks
are  entirely  encased  in  white  marble,  exquisitely  sculptured.  Rich
and  costly  gifts  have  been  lavished  upon  it,  and  ' '  its  treasury  of
offerings  is  one  of  the  richest  in  the  Western  world. ' '  Among  these
are  certain  gifts  presented  in  1684  by  the  Christian  Hurons  of  Cana-
da. In  this  house  is  a  statue  of  the  Virgin,  in  cedar  wood,  said  to
have  been  made  in  the  time  of  the  Apostles.  About  40,000  pilgrims
visit  it  annually.  This  shrine  and  its  devotions  were  especially
favored  by  the  Jesuits. —  See  McClintock  &  Strong's  Bibl.  Cyclop,,
art.  "Loretto;"  and  "  Maison  de  Lorette,"  in  VAbeille,  vol.  viii.
(i860),  nos.  27-29.

5  (p.  65). —  Ren6  Menard  was  bom  at  Paris,  Sept.  7,  1605,  and
became  a  Jesuit  novice  Nov.  7,  1624.  He  was  a  student  at  Paris,
La  Fleche,  Bourges,  and  Rouen,  successively ;  and  an  instructor  at
Orleans  (1629-32)  and  Moulins  (1636-39).  In  1640,  he  came  to  Cana-
da ;  and,  after  spending  a  year  in  the  study  of  Algonkin,  accom-
panied Ragueneau  to  the  Huron  country.  Upon  Raymbault's
return  from  Sault  Ste.  Marie  (vol.  xi.,  note  16),  M6nard  started  with
him  to  the  country  of  the  Nipissings,  but  they  were  driven  back  by
storms.  In  April,  1642,  however,  M6nard  and  Pijart  succeeded  in
reaching  that  tribe,  with  whom  they  remained  till  Sept.,  1643.  Me-
nard was  connected  with  the  Huron  mission  until  its  destruction  in
1649,  after  which  he  was  stationed  at  Three  Rivers,  becoming  supe-
rior of  that  residence  in  June,  1651.  From  May,  1656,  to  March,  1658,
he  was  a  laborer  in  the  Iroquois  mission, — at  the  latter  date,  being


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XV III  2b1


compelled,  with  the  other  missionaries,  to  flee  for  their  lives  to  Quebec.
In  August,  1660,  Menard  was  sent  with  a  party  of  Ottawa  Indians
who  were  returning  from  Montreal  to  their  home  on  Lake  Superior.
He  spent  the  winter  with  them,  probably  in  the  neighborhood  of  the
present  L'Anse,  Mich.,  suffering  great  hardships  and  privations,—
harshly  treated  by  most  of  the  Indians,  though  converting  a  few  of
them  and  baptizing  some  at  the  point  of  death.  Hearing,  in  the
following  spring,  that  some  Hurons  who  had  fled  from  their  Iroquois
foes  had  encamped  about  the  headwaters  of  the  Black  River  in
Wisconsin,  Menard  set  out  to  visit  them.  Near  the  end  of  the  jour-
ney, he  became  separated  from  his  French  companion,  and  was
seen  no  more, —  doubtless  perishing  of  hunger  in  the  unknown  forest
(August,  1661).— See  Campbell's  excellent  monograph  on  M6nard,
Parkman  Club  Pubs.  (Milw.),  no.  11.

6  (p.  65).— Concerning  the  relations  between  the  Ursulines  of
Paris  and  of  Tours,  cf.  vol.  xvi.,  pp.  15-17;  also  Chapot's  Marie  de
r Incarnation,  t.  i.,  pp.  318-320,  354,  355.

7  (p.  87).  —  Piraube  was  royal  notary  at  Quebec,  during  the  years
1639-43;  other  information  about  him  is  not  available.

8  (p.  91). —  For  sketch  of  De  la  Poterie,  see  vol.  viii.,  note  58.

9  (p.  93). —  Gribane :  "a  bark  with  mast  and  sails,  of  50  or  60
tons,  in  use  along  the  coasts  of  Normandy  and  Picardy,  and  in  the
navigation  of  the  lower  Seine,  from  Rouen  to  Havre  "  (Littre).

10  (p.  115). — Outa^w' amiwe^  (Ontagonmois):  a  tribe  living  in
the  vicinity  of  Lake  Outakouami,  N.  E.  of  L,  Mistassini,  as  indicated
on  various  maps  of  that  time.  Some  of  these  make  it  the  source  of
the  Peribonca  River ;  in  which  case,  it  would  be  the  modern  Lake
Ouichtagani  (Bouchette's  map,  1846).

11  (p.  115). — Papiragaw'ek:  the  Papinachois,  a  Montagnais
tribe  located  far  to  the  N.  E.  of  Lake  St.  John,  mainly  about  the
headwaters  of  the  Betsiamites  River.  They  were  at  various  times
visited  by  Jesuit  missionaries  from  the  Tadoussac  mission;  and
Nouvel  spent  several  years  among  them  (1664-67).

12  (p.  219). — Concerning  Champlain's  attacks  on  the  Iroquois,  see
ATol.  v.,  note  50.

13  (p.  227). — Concerning  Eskimos,  see  vol.  ii.,  note  10;  Brinton's
American  Race  (N.  Y.,  1891),  pp.  59-64;  and  Bur.  of  Ethnol.
Rep.,  1884-85,  1887-88.

Bersiamites :  a  Montagnais  tribe,  dwelling  on  the  northern  trib-
utaries of  the  St.  Lawrence,  below  Tadoussac.  Le  Jeune  mentions
some  of  them  (vol.  viii.,  p.  41)  as  having  been  perfidiously  slain
( 1 63  5 )  by  the  savages  of  Tadoussac.  A  missionary  (probably  Jacques
de  la  Place)  wrote  in  the  Relation  of  1646  that  "a  mortal  hatred
existed  between  the  Bersiamites  and  the  savages  of  Acadia  and


258  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£S  UITES

Gaspe;  "  he  was  present,  in  that  year,  at  a  conference  held  between
these  tribes,  at  which  a  treaty  of  peace  was  concluded.  The  mis-
sionaries found  the  Bersiamites  gentle  and  docile ;  Bailloquet  visited
them  in  1661-62,  and  probably,  in  subsequent  years,  other  priests
from  the  Tadoussac  mission.  The  tribe  was  also  known  as  Ouma-
miwek.

Peuples  de  Chisedech :  dwelling  near  the  Bersiamites,  and  allied
to  them.

Regarding  the  Porc-^pics,  see  vol.  xiv.,  note  13.

14  (p.  229).— Concerning  the  Petite  Nation,  the  Island  tribe,  and
the  Iroquets  (here  named  Ountchatarounounga),  see  vol.  v.,  notes
52,  56,  57.

"  Ouaouechkairini :  these  were  the  Algonkins  proper,  and  prob-
ably were  called  '  Petite  Nation '  on  account  of  their  low  stature.
The  Petite  Nation  River  in  Ottawa  county,  Que.,  and  the  Little
Nation  River  in  Prescott  county,  Ont, —  tributaries  of  the  Ottawa
from  opposite  sides, —  preserve  the  name  of  this  tribe,  and  show
their  original  location. " — A.  F.  Hunter.

Kotakoutouemi:  Laverdiere  conjectures  this  to  be  the  Outaou-
kotwemiwek  mentioned  in  Relation  of  1650,  chap,  v.,  "whose  lan-
guage is  a  medley  of  Algonquin  and  Montagnais. "  Apropos  of  this
linguistic  feature,  Perland  says  {Cours  d'Histoire,  vol.  i.,  p.  91):
' '  There  existed,  among  the  Algonqums  and  Montagnais,  a  sort  of
patois,  by  means  of  which  they  held  communication  among  them-
selves without  the  Europeans  being  able  to  understand  them."

Mataouchkarini :  the  Relation  of  1672  mentions  this  tribe  as  then
living  near  Hudson  Bay,  apparently  having  fled  thither  for  refuge
from  their  enemies.  Their  earlier  habitat,  as  indicated  by  their
name,  was  the  Madawaska  River  of  Ontario.

"  Sagahiganirini :  their  location  may  have  been  near  the  Rideau
range  of  lakes,  where  numerous  remains  exist.  Dr.  T.  W.  Beeman
of  Perth,  Ont. ,  who  has  examined  these  remains,  says :  '  Every
small  lake  shows  one  or  more  village  sites. '  One  of  considerable
size  existed  at  Rideau  Lake  itself,  where  the  Tay  River  empties
into  it.  Here  have  been  found  evidences  of  an  extended  occupa-
tion, lasting  down  to  the  arrival  of  white  traders,  as  a  few  traces
of  European  intercourse  are  found  there.  See  Beeman 's  accounts
in  Ont.  Arch.  Mus.  Ann.  Rep. (Fifth,  Seventh,  and  Eighth).

''  Kinounchepirini:  the  situation  of  these  was  probably  in  Ren-
frew county,  Ontario,  where  the  valleys  of  tributaries  of  the  Ottawa
River  contain  remains  of  former  Indian  towns.  A  number  of  relics
from  that  district  are  in  the  Ontario  Archaeological  Museum  at
Toronto." — A.  F.  Hunter.

15  (p.  229). — These  Algonkin  tribes  extended  from  Lake  Temis-


NOTES  TO VOL.  XVIII


earning  westward  to  Hudson  Bay.  The  largest  and  most  important
was  the  Kiristinon  or  Cristinaux,  a  name  afterward  shortened  to
that  now  given  them,  Cri  or  Cree.  Druillettes  and  Dablon  estab-
lished a  mission  among  them  in  1661,  and  Allouez  was  there  in  1667.
Brinton  says  {A7ner.  Race,  p.  74)  that  this  tribe  "retained  the  lan-
guage of  the  stock  in  its  purest  form."

"  Timiscimi :  a  name  derived  from  that  of  Lake  Temiscaming  {temis
garni,  '  deep  lake').  Remains  of  early  Indian  occupation  are  found
near  the  Old  Fort,  at  the  northern  end  of  this  lake ;  but  the  above
name  has  not  been  continuously  retained  by  any  distinct  tribe." —
A.  F.  Hunter.

16  (p.  231), — The  Atchiligouan,  at  the  mouth  of  French  River,
were  visited  by  Garreau  and  Claude  Pijart  in  1646.

The  Oumisagai  (now  Mississaguas)  were  in  1670-73  a  part  of  the
Sault  Ste.  Marie  mission ;  and  Nouvel  and  Andre  were  then  laboring
among  them.  A.  F.  Hunter  says:  "This  is  the  earliest  reference
to  the  Mississaguas.  They  are  now  settled  in  Eastern  Ontario,  at
New  Credit,  Alnwick,  and  other  points,  and  number  in  all  about
800." — See  Chamberlain's  account  of  this  tribe,  in  /ourn.  Amer.
Folk-Lore,  vol.  i.,  pp.  150-160.

Baouichtigouian :  called  by  the  French  Gens  du  Saut,  or  Sau-
teurs,  because  of  their  residence  about  the  Sault  de  Ste.  Marie;
now  known  as  O  jib  was,  or  Chippewas.  The  Relatio7t  of  1670  says
that,  becoming  reduced  to  the  number  of  1 50,  they  formed  a  union
with  three  other  neighboring  tribes,  the  Nouquet,  Outchibous,  and
Marameg.  A.  F.  Hunter  says:  "A  band  of  Algonkins,  now  at
Sault  Ste.  Marie,  Ont,  is  known  as  the  Batchewaung  tribe, —  this
being  still  the  native  name  of  that  town  (written  also  Pow-e-ting).
It  is  not  probable,  however,  that  these  Indians  are  the  descendants
of  those  mentioned  in  the  text, —  few  tribes,  owing  to  wars,  migra-
tions, and  other  causes,  retaining  their  original  locations.  It  is
thought  by  some  writers  that  the  Sauteux  of  Lake  Superior,  and
westward,  are  the  descendants  of  the  original  Nation  du  Sault ;  see,
for  instance,  Maclean's  Canadian  Savage  Folk  (Toronto,  1896),
p.  171."

Concerning  the  Amikouai  (Beavers),  see  vol.  x.,  note  6;  the  Otta-
was,  vol.  xiv.,  note  9.

17  (p.  231). —  Ouinipigou=  Winnebagoes  (vol.  xv.,  tiote  7):  Nadue-
siu  =  Sioux;  Assinipour  =  Assiniboines.  All  these  are  branches  of
the  Dakota  stock.

Maroumine  =  Menomonees ;  Eriniouai  =  Illinois ;  Pouutouatami  =
Pottawatomies,— all  Algonkin  tribes.  Rasouakoueton  is  probably
equivalent  to  Mascoutins,  R  being  a  misprint  for  M.

18  (p.  233).— Concerning  the  tribes  of  Gaspe,  Acadia,  and  Maine,


260  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£S  UITES

see  vols,  i.-  iii.  of  this  series.  Souricois  =  Micmacs ;  Pentagouetch=:
Penobscots;  Etechemins  =  Tarratines.  On  the  Abenakis,  see  vol.
xii.,  note  22.

Nahiganiouetch :  the  Mahicans  or  Mohicans,  occupying  the  ter-
ritory between  the  Connecticut  and  Hudson  Rivers,  and  allied  with
the  Pequots ;  of  Algonkin  stock.

19  (p.  235).  —  For  sketches  of  the  Huron-Iroquois  tribes,  see  vol.
viii.,  note  34.

Kontareahronon  :  apparently  the  inhabitants  of  the  Huron  village
of  Contarea  (vol.  x.,  note  8).  Ouendat  (Wyandot):  the  general
appellation  of  the  Huron  clans  (vol.  ii.,  note  58  and  vol.  v.,  note  17).

"  Aondironon :  that  part  of  the  Neutrals  who  lived  nearest  to  the
Hurons;  destroyed  by  the  Senecas  in  1648  {Relation  of  1648).
Ongmarahronon  [apparently  a  misprint  for  Onguiarahronon] :  the
Niagara  portion  of  the  Neutrals.  Oneronon :  probably  the  Wen-
rohronons,  part  of  whom  took  refuge  with  the  Hurons  in  1639." —
A.  F.  Hunter.

Attiouendaronk :  the  Neutrals  (vol.  viii.,  note  41).  Sanson's
map  (1656)  gives  two  locations  for  this  tribe, —  one,  west  of  the  Nia-
gara ;  the  other,  far  south  of  Lake  Erie,  and  west  of  the  Alleghany
Mountains.  This,  and  the  similar  duplication  of  names  in  the  pres-
ent text,  suggest  the  possibility  that  a  part  of  this  nation  had  fled
southward,  to  escape  the  Iroquois.

Totontaratonhronon :  Laverdi^re  conjectures  that  this  may  be
the  Atontrataronnons,  an  Algonkin  tribe  who,  a  little  later,  fled
from  the  St.  Lawrence  to  the  Huron  country.  Among  them,  Me-
nard established  the  mission  of  Ste.  Elizabeth  (Huron  Relation  of
1644,  chap.  viii.).

In  any  attempt  to  identify  the  names  of  Indian  tribes,  as  recorded
at  so  remote  a  time,  there  are  many  difficulties,  which  must  not  be
forgotten  by  the  modern  reader  of  an  enumeration  like  that  here
given  by  Le  Jeune.  No  Indian  tongue  was  written,  at  the  time  of
the  missionaries'  arrival ;  and  they,  in  their  attempts  to  learn  and
write  a  language  utterly  different  from  any  they  had  hitherto
known,  were  met  by  almost  insuperable  obstacles, —  as  we  are  told
by  Biard  (vol.  ii.,  pp.  9-13;  iii.,  pp.  193-197),  and  by  Le  Jeune  in
earlier  Relations  {vol.  v.,  pp.  111-115;  vii.,  pp.  21-33).  Many  of
the  tribes  enumerated  in  the  text  were  known  to  the  French  only
through  the  reports  of  wandering  Indians,  fur  traders,  or  coureurs
de  bois, —  most  of  them  ignorant  men;  and  these  names  could  be
only  phonetically  noted,  —  with  great  liability  to  misunderstand-
ing, on  the  part  of  both  Frenchman  and  Indian.  At  the  same  time,
as  may  be  seen  in  the  text,  these  names  were  often  transmitted
through  other  tribes,  especially  the  Huron ;  and  when  we  add  to  all


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XVIII  261

these  complexities  the  frequent  shifting  of  residence,  on  the  part  of
the  tribesmen,  it  will  be  seen  that  great  caution  is  necessary  in
attempting  to  identify  either  tribes  or  locations  through  their  names
alone.

20  (p.  237).— This  refers  to  the  voyage  of  Jogues  and  Raymbault
to  Sault  Ste.  Marie  (vol.  xi.,  note  16).

21  (p.  241). — ^^This  was  Frangois  Fouquet,  viscount  de  Vaux,  who
was  born  in  1587,  and  died  Apr.  22,  1640.  He  was  a  member  of  the
royal  council,  and  also  of  parliament;  and,  for  his  integrity  and
ability,  was  held  in  high  esteem  by  Louis  XIII.  and  Richelieu,  who
employed  him  in  many  State  affairs  of  importance.  He  was  father
of  Nicolas  Fouquet,  the  noted  minister  of  finance  under  Louis  XIV.
