s  n
3  MK
THE  JESUIT  RELATIONS
AND
ALLIED  DOCUMENTS
vol.  xvii
The  edition  consists  of  sev-
en hundred  and  fifty  sets
all  numbered
No..
ZM.
C/5 o
SB
X
_
F
D
CQ
c/)
U
D
u
<
a
E  3
a l.
it
0 5
u
— u
<  tie
M  B
THE  PROPERTY  OF
tIJUi  THE  LAW  SOCIETY
The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents
Travels  and  Explorations
of  the  Jesuit  Missionaries
in  New  France

1610-1791

THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH,  LATIN,  AND  ITAL-
IAN TEXTS,  WITH  ENGLISH  TRANSLA-
TIONS AND  NOTES;  ILLUSTRATED  BY
PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  FACSIMILES

EDITED  BY

REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES
Secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin


Vol.  XVII
Hurons  and  Three  Rivers:  1639- 1640


Cleveland: Gbe  burrows  JBrotbew
Company,  publishers,  mdcccxcviii


Copyright, 1898

BY

The  Burrows  Brothers  Co


ALL  RIGHTS RESERVED


The  Imperial  Press,  Cleveland


EDITORIAL  STAFF


Editor


Translators  .


Assistant  Editor


Reuben  Gold  Thwaites
Finlow  Alexander
Percy  Favor  Bicknell
William  Frederic  Giese
Crawford  Lindsay
William  Price
Hiram  Allen  Sober
Emma  Helen  Blair


Bibliographical  Adviser Victor  Hugo  Paltsits


CONTENTS  OF  VOL  XVII


Preface  to  Volume  XVII .  .  i

Documents: —

XXXIV.  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe"  en  la
Novvelle  France,  en  Tann6e  1639.
[Chaps,  iii.-viii.,  of  Part  II.,  com-
pleting the  document.]  Hierosme
Lalemant;  Ossossane,  June  7,  1639  7
XXXV.  Lettre  a  Monseigneur  rEminentis-
sime  Cardinal  Due  de  Richelieu.
Hierosme  Lalemant;  Des  Hurons  en
la Nouvelle- France,  March  28,  1640  218
XXXVI.  Epistola  ad  R.  P.  Mutium  Vitelleschi,
Praepositum  Generalem  Societatis
Jesu,  Romae.  Hieronymus  Lale-
mant; ApudHurones,  April  1,  1640  226

XXXVII.  Epistola  ad  R.  P.  Mutium  Vitelleschi,
Praepositum  Generalem  Societatis
Jesu,  Romae.  Jacobus  Buteux;  Tria
Flumina,  [1640] .  .  .232

Bibliographical  Data:  Volume  XVII  .  239

Notes ......  241


ILLUSTRATION  TO  VOL.  XVII


I.  Photographic  facsimile  of  handwriting  of
Jacques  Buteux,  S.J.,  in  Register  of  Par-
ish of  Notre  Dame,  Montreal .  Frontispiece


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVII


Le  Jeune's  Relation  of  1639  (Doc.  XXXIV.)  is,  like
the  majority  of  the  regular  series,  in  two  parts, — the
first  (by  Le  Jeune)  devoted  to  the  field  at  large,  with
especial  reference  to  the  Lower  St.  Lawrence  region,
and  the  second  (by  Jerome  Lalemant)  giving  an  ac-
count of  the  year's  work  among  the  Hurons.  Part  L,
begun  in  our  Vol.  XV.,  was  concluded  in  Vol.  XVI.,
which  also  contained  the  first  two  chapters  of  Part
II.,  concluded  in  the  present  volume.

Following  is  a  synopsis  of  the  material  contained
in  this  volume :

XXXIV.  Father  Lalemant  continues  his  account
to  Le  Jeune  (his  superior,  at  Quebec)  of  the  Huron
mission.  He  briefly  reviews  the  year's  work,  and,
though  the  missionaries  still  have  many  difficulties
to  contend  with,  he  looks  forward  hopefully  to  the
future.  He  enumerates  the  baptisms  of  the  past  year.
Many  of  these  conversions  have  occurred  among  the
Wenrohronons,  a  tribe  forced  by  its  weakness  to  take
refuge  with  the  Hurons,  who  receive  the  strangers
with  the  utmost  kindness  and  hospitality, — even
meeting  them  halfway,  to  aid  them  in  carrying  their
goods  and  infant  children.  The  hardships  of  the
journey  are,  nevertheless,  so  great  that  many  of  the
refugees  die  on  the  way,  and  those  who  survive  are
afflicted  by  illness.  In  this  emergency,  the  Fathers
are  able  to  render  great  aid,  especially  as  their  do-


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVII


mestics,  or  donnas,  have  learned  in  Europe  the  use
of  the  lancet  and  other  remedies ;  thus  they  are  en-
abled to  reach  the  savages,  and  minister  at  once  to
their  temporal  and  spiritual  necessities.  Most  of  the
refugees  have  settled  at  Ossossan6,  and  the  infant
church  in  that  village  now  numbers  almost  sixty  per-
sons, which  affords  the  missionaries  great  consolation.
Valuable  aid  in  their  labors  is  given  by  the  earliest
real  convert,  Joseph  Chihwatenhwa,  who  improves
every  opportunity  to  profess  his  faith  and  to  exhort
his  countrymen  to  embrace  it.  On  Christmas  night,
' '  not  contenting  himself  with  one  Mass,  he  hears  five
in  succession, —  during  most  of  them,  on  his  knees;
this,  for  a  Barbarian,  who  has  never  known  what  that
posture  is,  might  well  pass  for  a  petty  martyrdom."
While  dangerously  ill,  and  delirious,  "  his  utterances
and  ravings  are  only  about  the  things  of  God  and  the
Faith;"  and,  going  to  the  fire,  he  defies  imaginary
enemies  to  "  burn  him,  and  see  if  it  is  in  earnest  he
believes,  or  only  with  his  lips."

Lalemant  reports  that  several  causes  have  aided
the  progress  of  their  work  —  the  patience  and  cour-
age of  the  pioneer  missionaries,  despite  persecutions
and  dangers;  the  irreproachable  lives  led  by  lay
Frenchmen  in  the  Huron  country ;  the  aid  of  Joseph
Chihwatenhwa,  just  mentioned ;  the  favors  and  graces
of  the  Virgin  Mary ;  and  finally,  ' '  the  holy  prayers
and  devotions  of  so  many  good  souls  in  France,"  —
to  which  last,  the  writer,  like  St.  Francis  Xavier,  as-
cribes great  power  and  efficacy.

The  writer  narrates  their  change  of  residence  from
Ihonatiria  to  Teanaustayae\  the  most  important  of
the  Huron  villages.  He  enumerates  the  conversions,
since  that  event ;  but  regrets  that  many  persons,  who
were  baptized  when  in  danger  of  death,  now  fail  to


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVII


appreciate  the  benefits  of  the  holy  rite.  He  then
relates  '  *  the .  most  noteworthy  particulars  of  these
baptisms."  The  Hurons,  having  captured  in  war
over  a  hundred  Iroquois  prisoners,  bring  these  home,
and,  according  to  their  custom,  put  many  of  them  to
death,  with  most  cruel  torments.  "  All  those,"  says
Lalemant,  "  who  were  assigned  to  the  Villages  where
we  have  residences,  or  which  are  near  these,  were,
thank  God,  instructed  and  baptized.  .  .  .  These
afterward  displayed  so  much  fortitude  in  their  tor-
ments that  our  Barbarians  resolved  no  longer  to  allow
us  to  baptize  these  poor  unfortunates,  reckoning  it  a
misfortune  to  their  country  when  those  whom  they
torment  shriek  not  at  all,  or  very  little.  Indeed,  this
has  given  us  so  much  trouble  since  then,  that  there
has  not  been  one  of  these  for  whose  baptism  we  have
not  been  obliged  to  give  battle  to  those  who  are  their
Masters  and  Guardians ;  and  sometimes  it  has  been
necessary  to  atone  for  this  violence  by  some  present."
One  of  these  prisoners,  an  Oneida  chieftain,  encour-
ages his  companion  in  misery  by  reminding  him  of
the  blessedness  prepared  for  them  in  heaven.  The
hideous  cruelties  inflicted  on  this  chief  are  related  at
length;  he  dies  at  last,  and  "  we  have  reason  to  be-
lieve that  this  brave  spirit  now  enjoys  in  heaven  the
freedom  of  the  children  of  God,  since  even  his  ene-
mies loudly  exclaimed  that  there  was  something  more
than  human  within  him,  and  that  without  doubt  bap-
tism had  given  him  his  strength  and  courage,  which
surpassed  all  that  they  had  ever  seen."

The  Father  then  narrates  the  birth  of  their  little
church  in  Teanaustaya6,  where  about  fifteen  per-
sons receive  baptism  on  New  Year's  day,  1639,  others
being  from  time  to  time  added  to  this  number.  He
then  describes  the  establishment  of  the  new  mission


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVII


at  Scanonaenrat,  and  states  that  it  has  gained,  since
the  beginning  of  the  year,  about  twenty  converts.
Among  those  baptized  was  l '  a  poor  Hiroquois  pris-
oner, ' '  who  ' '  during  his  last  and  fatal  night ' '  of  tor-
ments, had  endeavored  to  choke  himself.  "  This
obliged  the  Fathers  to  go  and  visit  him  a  little  while
before  the  final  cruelties  were  exercised  upon  him,  to
make  him  acknowledge  his  fault,  to  lead  him  to
accuse  himself  thereof,  and  to  ask  pardon  for  it.
Having  done  this,  he  was  granted  absolution ;  and  two
hours  later  he  was  boiling  in  a  kettle,  of  which  the
inmates  of  the  Fathers'  cabin  were  invited  to  come
and  get  their  share."

The  Fathers  had  hoped  to  begin  other  missions,  but
find  it  necessary  to  devote  all  their  care  to  the  up-
building of  the  three  churches  already  established.
In  the  summer,  the  savages  being  then  scattered  in
various  directions,  the  missionaries  spend  a  little  time
in  rest  and  spiritual  refreshment,  and  then  make
short  journeys  to  the  neighboring  villages,  baptizing
here  and  there  a  few  converts, — among  these,  several
Iroquois  prisoners,  who  are  afterward  tortured  to
death.

Lalemant  goes  on  to  describe  the  obstacles  and
difficulties  that  beset  their  work, —  hindrances  raised
by  the  evil  demons  that  rule  the  land  of  the  Hurons.
The  •  *  black  gowns  ' '  are  again  accused  of  spreading
disease  and  death,  to  the  ruin  of  the  country ;  their
instructions  to  neophytes  are  interrupted  by  infidel
blasphemies;  snowballs  or  clubs  are  flung  at  them
as  they  pass,  or  through  the  openings  in  their  cab-
ins; and  they  are  even  threatened  with  death.  The
demons  aforesaid  have  sent  certain  New  England  In-
dians into  these  regions,  who  repeat  the  calumnies
against  the  Jesuits,  that  they  have  learned  from  the


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVII


English.  Even  some  of  the  native  Christians  think
that  the  Fathers  cause  their  death,  through  love  to
them,  that  they  may  the  sooner  enter  upon  the  bliss
of  Paradise.  The  converts  also  are  persecuted,
threatened,  and  almost  ostracized  by  their  own  peo-
ple; and  from  this  arises  the  chief  anxiety  of  the
missionaries,  that  their  flock  may,  despite  all  their
efforts,  be  led  back  to  the  paths  of  evil.  Notwith-
standing the  ignorance  and  weakness  of  the  neo-
phytes, there  are  some  of  them  who,  through  their
faith  and  virtue,  daily  awaken  in  the  Fathers  feel-
ings of  consolation  and  gratitude.

Lalemant  describes  various  feasts,  dances,  and
other  superstitious  ceremonies,  especially  those  cele-
brated by  the  savages  as  a  result  of  their  dreams, —
these  latter  being  directly  inspired  by  the  devil.
This  belief  of  the  Fathers  is  confirmed  by  the  tales
of  the  old  men,  whose  traditions  state  that  these  so-
lemnities were  taught  them  by  the  demons.  They
regard  these  observances  as  affairs  of  great  impor-
tance, and  by  them  regulate  all  their  proceedings.
The  Father  describes  their  ceremony  of  lt  marrying
the  seine  ' '  to  young  girls ;  also  the  game  of  ' '  dish, ' ' —
in  which  latter  they  think  success  depends  main-
ly upon  their  charms  and  dreams.  He  recounts
their  devotion  to  their  Ascwandics,  or  "  familiar  de-
mons, ' ' —  a  sort  of  fetich,  which  is  kept  in  a  pouch,  and
to  which  its  owner  prefers  his  request  for  any  desired
article  or  event.  ' 4  Some  of  these  are  more  positive
and  efficacious  than  others.  Some  buy  them  from
the  Algonquains,  who  are  reputed  to  have  excellent
ones,  and  this  is  the  most  costly  and  precious  mer-
chandise of  the  country ;  others  have  inherited  them
from  their  relatives. ' '

Lalemant  again  mentions  the  practices  of  the  med-


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVII


icine  men ;  and  closes  by  invoking  the  prayers  of  the
faithful  to  aid  the  missionaries  in  their  struggle
against  these  several  agencies  of  the  devil.

XXXV.  Jerome  Lalemant  writes  to  Cardinal
Richelieu  (March  28,  1640),  mentioning  the  successes
and  the  hindrances  of  the  Huron  mission,  and  request-
ing that  he  will  interfere,  in  behalf  of  the  savage  allies
of  the  French,  to  check  the  hostile  advances  of  the
Iroquois,  who  are  encouraged  and  incited  by  the
English  and  Flemish  (Dutch)  colonists  on  the  coast.
If  this  be  not  done,  he  dreads  the  ruin  of  the  Hurons,
and  the  consequent  cessation  of  the  mission  work.

XXXVI.  Jerome  Lalemant  writes  (April  1,  1640)
a  brief  letter,  apparently  to  the  Father  General  at
Rome,  summarizing  the  progress  of  the  Huron  mis-
sion, and  mentioning  the  dangers,  even  to  life,  that
have  menaced  them  during  the  year.  Of  late,  perse-
cution had  prevented  any  increase  in  the  number  of
converts,  and  their  last-formed  church  has  been  near-
ly dispersed ;  but  their  faith  remains  unshaken.

XXXVII.  Jacques  Buteux  sends  (in  1640)  to  the
Father  General  a  brief  epitome  of  the  work  accom-
plished in  the  mission  at  Three  Rivers.  This  has
been  more  successful  than  that  among  the  Hurons, —
principally  because  of  the  influence  exerted  by  the
new  Indian  colony  at  Sillery,  and  of  Montmagny's
excellent  government.  He  mentions  the  great  ex-
tent of  the  field,  in  which  they  are  the  only  laborers,
and  the  need  of  additional  men,  who  should  be  "of
good  health,  excellent  memory,  and  proved  virtue."

R.  G.  T.

Madison,  Wis.,  February,  1898.


XXXIV  (concluded)

Le  Jeune's  Relation,  1639

Paris  :  SEBASTIEN  CRAMOISY,  1640


Part  I.  (Le  Jeune's  Relation  proper)  of  this  document  was
given  in  Volumes  XV.  and  XVI. ;  and,  in  Volume  XVI.,  the
first  two  chapters  of  Part  II.  (Lalemant's  Huron  report  for  the
year).  In  the  present  volume,  we  give  chaps,  iii.-viii.  of
Part  II.,  thus  concluding  the  document.


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  17


[25] CHAP. III.
DE l'estat general  du christianisme en ces

CONTREES

ENUISAGEANT  de  loin  les  affaires  du  Chriftia-
nifme  de  la  Nouuelle  France,  &  particuliere-
ment  celle  des  Hurons,  elle  me  femb[l]oient
bien  a  la  verite",  vn  ouurage  particulier  de  la  Proui-
dence  diuine.  Mais  ie  me  fuis  beaucoup  dauantage
trouue"  confirm^  en  cefte  penf6e,  les  ayant  veus  de
pres.  Qui  n'euft  dit,  lors  que  pour  la  premiere  fois,
nos  Peres  arriuerent  en  ce  pais,  que  le  meilleur  euft
eft6,  qui  en  euft  eu  le  pouuoir,  de  s'eftablir  dans  les
premieres  &  principales  places,  comme  nous  fommes
maintenant;  Mais  fi  cela  euft  eft6,  qu'y  euffions  nous
fait  n'ayans  aucune  notion  ny  ufage  de  la  langue,  ny
cognoiffance  des  couftumes  du  pais,  &  de  l'humeur
des  Barbares;  II  y  a  grande  apparence,  que  n'ayans
rien  d'ailleurs  qui  nous  peut  faire  fubfifter  dans  l'ef-
prit  &  l'eftime  de  ces  Sauuages,  nous  fuffions  tom-
bez  dans  vn  tel  mefpris  general  de  [26]  tout  le  pais,
que  nous  euflios  eu  de  la  peine  de  nous  en  releuer,  &
nous  mettre  de  long  temps  en  eftat  de  les  aflifter
effectiuement.  Et  en  effedt,  ie  ne  fcay  fi  ce  n'eft
point  de  la  qu'eft  arriu6,  qu'o  a  fi  peu  profite*  au  lieu
oii  on  s'eftoit  premierement  eftably.

Dieu  done  difpofa  les  affaires  de  la  forte,  que  nous
fufmes  contraints  au  commencement,  d'arrefter  en
vn  petit  coin  du  pais ;  ou  on  a  f orge*  les  armes  necef-


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TIONy  i639


[25] CHAP. III.

OF THE GENERAL STATE OF CHRISTIANITY IN THESE
COUNTRIES.

SURVEYING  from  afar  the  progress  of  Chris-
tianity in  New  France,  and  especially  among
the  Hurons,  it  seemed  to  me,  in  very  truth,  a
special  work  of  divine  Providence.  But  I  have  been
far  more  strongly  confirmed  in  this  idea  since  I  have
had  a  nearer  view  of  it.  Who  would  not  have  said,
when  our  Fathers  first  arrived  in  this  country,  that
it  would  be  best  for  those  who  could  do  so  to  estab-
lish themselves  in  the  chief  and  more  important  local-
ities, as  we  are  now?  But  if  that  had  been  done,
what  could  we  have  accomplished  there, — having  no
idea  of  the  language  or  experience  therein,  and  no
knowledge  of  the  customs  of  the  country  and  the  dis-
position of  the  Barbarians?  It  is  very  probable  that,
having  nothing  else  which  could  give  us  a  foothold
in  the  understanding  and  esteem  of  these  Savages,
we  would  have  incurred  so  general  contempt  [26]
throughout  the  country,  that  we  could  with  difficulty
have  recovered  therefrom,  or  for  a  long  time  have
been  in  a  position  to  give  efficient  aid  to  these  peo-
ple. And,  indeed,  I  do  not  know  if  this  were  not
the  reason  why  the  people  of  the  place  where  we
first  fixed  our  residence  profited  so  little.

God  so  arranged  matters,  then,  that  we  were
obliged  to  settle  at  first  in  a  little  corner  of  the  coun-
try, where  we  forged  the  arms  necessary  for  war, —


10  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.17

f aires  a  la  guerre,  ie  veux  dire  qu'on  s'y  eft  eftudi6
a  la  cognoiflance  &  vfage  de  la  langue,  &  qu'on  y  a
commence  a  la  reduire  en  preceptes,  en  quoy  il  a  fallu
eftre  a  foy-mefme  &  maiftre  &  efcholier  tout  enfemble,
auec  vne  peine  incroyable,  &  de  la  au  bout  de  trois
ann£es,  on  eft  venu,  pour  ainfi  parler,  enfeigne  de-
ploy ee  au  bourg  d'Ofibfane\  vn  des  plus  confiderables
de  tout  le  pais;  en  l'ann6e  d'apres  au  bourg  de  Tea-
nauftayae"  le  principal  de  tous,  laiffant  entierement,
&  abandonnant  la  premiere  demeure,  a  faute  d'habi-
tans,  &  de  perfonnes  capables  de  profiter  de  nos  tra-
uaux,  tous  prefque  eftans  diffipez  ou  morts  de  mala-
die.  Ce  qui  femble,  non  fans  fondement,  eftre  vne
punition  du  Ciel,  pour  le  mefpris  qu'ils  ont  fait  de  la
[27]  grace  de  la  vifite,  que  la  diuine  bonte"  leur  auoit
menag^e.

De  prem[i]ere  abord  on  a  eu  grand  foing  des  enfans
&  des  plus  aag£es  malades  a  l'extremit6,  qu'on  ne
laifloit  point  mourir  fans  Baptefme,  ou  au  moins
fans  inftrudtion  pour  ceux  qui  en  auoit  bef oin ;  Nos
Peres  entrant  librement  par  toutes  les  cabanes  pour
ce  fuiet.  C'eft  vn  bien  &  vn  aduantage  qui  ne  fe
peut  eftimer ;  &  ceux  a  qui  il  en  a  penf 6  coufler  la
vie  plufieurs  fois,  ainfi  qu'il  fe  peut  voir  das  la  Rela-
tion de  Tan  paff6,  font  fi  fatisfait  de  cefle  conquefte,
qu'ils  en  expoferoient  encore  mille  s'il  les  auoient,
pour  fe  la  conferuer.

Dans  les  inftrudtions  generales  &  particulieres,
comme  auffi  dans  les  courfes  ou  minions,  on  gaigne
par  fois  quelques  efprits:  quoy  que  pour  le  prefent
ce  ne  foient  d'ordinaires  que  mocqueries,  &  menaces,
qui  feront,  comme  i'efpere,  la  femence  qui  produira
en  fon  temps  le  fruidl  de  l'Euangile,  &  la  reduction
generale  de  ces  peuples  a  la  foy.


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  T/ON,  i639  .  11

I  mean  to  say  that  we  there  devoted  ourselves  to  the
study  and  practice  of  the  language,  and  began  to  re-
duce it  to  rules ;  in  this  it  was  necessary  to  be  at  once
both  master  and  pupil  to  oneself,  with  incredible
difficulty.  Thence,  at  the  end  of  three  years  we
went  with  flying  colors,  so  to  speak,  to  Ossosan6,  one
of  the  principal  villages  of  the  whole  country ;  the
next  year,  to  Teanaustaya6,  the  most  important  vil-
lage of  all,  leaving  and  entirely  abandoning  the  first
residence,  for  lack  of  inhabitants  there,  and  of  per-
sons capable  of  profiting  by  our  labors, — nearly  all
being  scattered  or  dead  from  the  malady,  which
seems  to  be,  not  without  reason,  a  punishment  from
Heaven  for  the  contempt  that  they  showed  for  the
[27]  favor  of  the  visit  that  the  divine  goodness  had
procured  for  them.

At  the  outset,  we  gave  special  care  to  the  children
and  to  elderly  sick  persons  who  were  near  death;
these  we  did  not  allow  to  die  without  Baptism,  or  at
least  without  instruction  to  those  who  most  needed
it,  our  Fathers  freely  entering  all  the  cabins  for  this
purpose.  This  is  a  boon  and  an  advantage  which
cannot  be  estimated ;  and  those  whom  it  almost  cost
their  lives  several  times,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  Rela-
tion of  last  year,  are  so  satisfied  with  this  victory  that
they  would  expose  a  thousand  more  lives,  if  they  had
them,  to  maintain  it.

In  the  general  and  individual  instructions,  as  also
in  our  journeys  or  missions,  we  occasionally  gain  a
few  souls,  although  for  the  present  there  are  usually
only  mockeries  and  threats, — which  will  be,  I  hope,
the  seed  that  shall  produce,  in  its  own  time,  the  fruit
of  tthe  Gospel,  and  the  general  subjection  of  these
people  to  the  faith.


12  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.17

Nous  auons  quelquefois  doute,  fcauoir  fi  on  pou-
uoit  efperer  la  conuerfion  de  ce  pais  fans  qu'il  y  euft
effufion  de  fang:  le  principe  receu  ce  f enable  dans
1'Eglife  de  [28]  Dieu  que  le  fang  des  Martyrs  eft  la
femence  des  Chreftiens,  me  faifoient  conclurre  pour
lors,  que  cela  n'eftoit  pas  a  efperer :  voire  mefme  qu'il
n'eftoit  pas  a  fouhaiter,  confidere  la  gloire  qui  reuient
a  Dieu  de  la  conftance  des  Martyrs,  du  fang  def quels
tout  le  refte  de  la  terre  ayant  tantoft  efte"  abreuue,  ce
feroit  vne  efpece  de  malediction,  que  ce  quartier  du
monde  ne  participaft  point  au  bon-heur  d'auoir  con-
tribue  a  l'efclat  de  cefte  gloire.

Mais  i'aduoiie  que  depuis  que  ie  fuis  icy,  &  que  ie
vois  ce  qui  fe  paffe,  fcauoir  les  combats,  les  batailles,
les  attaques,  &  les  affauts  generaux  a  toute  la  Na-
ture, que  foufTrent  tous  les  iours  icy  les  ouuriers  de
l'Euangile,  &  cependant  leur  patience,  leur  courage
&  leur  application  continuelle  a  pourfuiure  leur
pointe,  ie  commence  a  douter  fi  quelque  autre  mar-
tyre  eft  neceffaire  que  celuy-cy,  pour  1'effet  que  nous
pretendons :  &  ie  ne  doute  point  qu'il  ne  f e  trouuaft
plufieurs  perfonnes  qui  aymaflent  mieux  tout  d'vn
coup  receuoir  vn  coup  de  hache  fur  la  tefte,  que  de
mener  les  annees  durant  la  vie  qu'il  faut  mener  icy
tous  les  iours,  trauaillant  a  la  conuerfion  de  ces  bar-
bares.

[29]  Si  vous  les  allez  trouuer  dans  leurs  cabanes;  &
il  y  faut  aller  plus  fouuent  que  tous  les  iours,  fi  vous
voulez  vous  acquiter  comme  il  faut  de  voftre  deuoir :
vous  y  trouuerez  vne  petite  image  de  l'Enfer,  ny
voyant  pour  l'ordinaire  que  feu  &  fumee,  &  des  corps
nuds  dega  &  dela  noirs  &  a  demy  roftis,  pefle-meflez
auec  les  chiens,  qui  font  auffi  cheris  que  les  enfants


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  T/ON,  i639  13

We  have  sometimes  wondered  whether  we  could
hope  for  the  conversion  of  this  country  without  the
shedding  of  blood ;  the  principle  received,  it  seems,
in  the  Church  of  [28]  God,  that  the  blood  of  Martyrs
is  the  seed  of  Christians,  made  me  at  one  time  con-
clude that  this  was  not  to  be  expected, — yea,  that  it
was  not  even  to  be  desired;  considering  the  glory
that  redounds  to  God  from  the  constancy  of  the  Mar-
tyrs, with  whose  blood  all  the  rest  of  the  earth  has
been  so  lately  drenched,  it  would  be  a  sort  of  curse
if  this  quarter  of  the  world  should  not  participate  in
the  happiness  of  having  contributed  to  the  splendor
of  this  glory.

But  I  confess, — now  that  I  am  here,  and  see  what
is  taking  place,  namely,  the  combats,  battles,  attacks,
and  the  general  assaults  against  all  Nature,  which
the  Gospel  laborers  suffer  here  every  day,  and  at  the
same  time  their  patience,  their  courage,  and  their
continual  assiduity  in  pursuing  their  object, —  that
I  begin  to  wonder  whether  any  other  martyrdom  than
this  is  necessary  for  the  results  that  we  aim  at ;  and
I  do  not  doubt  that  many  persons  could  be  found  who
would  prefer  to  receive  at  once  a  hatchet  blow  upon
the  head,  than  to  spend  their  years  enduring  the  life
that  one  must  every  day  lead  here,  working  for  the
conversion  of  these  barbarians.

[29]  If  you  go  to  visit  them  in  their  cabins, —  and
you  must  go  there  oftener  than  once  a  day,  if  you
would  perform  your  duty  as  you  ought, —  you  will
find  there  a  miniature  picture  of  Hell, — seeing  noth-
ing, ordinarily,  but  fire  and  smoke,  and  on  every  side
naked  bodies,  black  and  half  roasted,  mingled  pell-
mell  with  the  dogs,  which  are  held  as  dear  as  the  chil-
dren of  the  house,  and  share  the  beds,  plates,  and


14  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

de  la  maifon,  &  dans  vne  communaut6  de  lidt,  de  plat
&  de  nourriture  auec  leurs  maiftres.  Tout  y  eft  dans
la  pouffiere,  &  fi  vous  entrez  dedans,  vous  ne  ferez
pas  an  bout  de  la  cabane,  que  vous  ferez  tout  couuert
de  noirceur  de  fuye,  d' ordure  &  de  pauurete.

Leurs  paroles  f ouuent  ne  font  que  blafphemes  con-
tre  Dieu  &  nos  myfteres ;  &  des  iniures  contre  nous
accompagn6es  d'ingratitude  incroyable,  nous  repro-
chants  que  ce  font  nos  viiites  &  nos  remedes  qui  les
font  malades  &  mourir;  &  que  noftre  fejour  icy  eft  la
feule  caufe  de  tous  leurs  maux.  Si  vous  leur  voulez
parler  pour  les  inftruire,  il  f audra  quelquef ois  attendre
les  heures  entieres  deuant  que  de  trouuer  roccafion
de  leur  dire  a  propos  vn  bon  mot ;  &  apres  toutes  vos
peines  &  vos  [30]  vifites,  vn  fonge,  qui  eft  a  propre-
ment  parler  le  Dieu  du  pais,  en  defera  plus  en  vne
nuidt,  que  vous  n'aurez  auance"  en  trente  iours:  &
vous  pourroit  bien,  pour  toute  recompenfe,  procurer
vn  coup  de  hache  ou  de  fleche.  S'ils  viennent  en
voflre  cabane,  ne  penfez  pas  que  vous  puiffiez  facile-
ment  leur  refufer  voftre  porte;  ny  quand  ils  font
dedans,  les  gouuerner  a  voftre  mode.  Ils  fe  mettent
ou  il  leur  plaifl,  &  n'en  fortent  pas  quand  il  vous
plaift,  II  faut  qu'ils  entrent  par  tout,  &  qu'ils  voiet
tout,  &  fi  vous  les  volez  empefcher,  ce  font  querelles
&  reproches  auec  iniures.  Et  dans  tout  cela  il  faut
filer  doux :  vn  coup  de  hache  eft  bien  toft  donne"  par
ces  Barbares :  &  le  feu  mis  a  vne  efcorce,  &  de  re-
cherche de  iuftice  pour  le  crime,  il  n'y  en  a  point
dans  le  pais,  &  au  plus  qu'on  en  pourroit  attendre,  ce
feroit  quelques  prefens.  De  forte  qu'il  faut  toufiours
eftre  en  garde,  &  fur  la  patience,  &  faire  eftat  qu'on
n'a  icy,  &  moins  encore  qu'en  tout  autre  lieu  du
monde,  aucun  moment  de  fa  vie  affeure\


1639-40]  LE  JEUNES  RELA  TION,  i6jg  15

food  of  their  masters.  Everything  is  in  a  cloud  of
dust,  and,  if  you  go  within,  you  will  not  reach  the
end  of  the  cabin  before  you  are  completely  befouled
with  soot,  filth,  and  dirt.

Their  words  are  often  only  blasphemies  against
God  and  our  mysteries,  and  insults  against  us,  ac-
companied with  incredible  evidences  of  ingratitude, —
hurling  at  us  the  reproach  that  it  is  our  visits  and
our  remedies  which  cause  them  to  sicken  and  die,
and  that  our  sojourn  here  is  the  sole  cause  of  all  their
troubles.  If  you  wish  to  converse,  in  order  to  in-
struct them,  it  will  sometimes  be  necessary  to  wait
whole  hours  before  finding  opportunity  to  say  to
them  at  the  right  time  one  profitable  word ;  and  after
all  your  pains  and  your  [30]  visits,  a  dream,  which  is,
properly  speaking,  the  God  of  the  country,  will  undo
more  in  one  night  than  you  will  have  accomplished
in  thirty  days ;  and  you  may,  indeed,  as  your  sole
reward,  get  a  stroke  from  the  hatchet  or  arrow.  If
they  come  to  your  cabin,  do  not  imagine  that  you  can
easily  refuse  them  admittance,  or,  when  they  are
within,  manage  them  in  your  own  way.  They  sit
down  where  they  please,  and  do  not  go  away  at  your
pleasure.  They  must  enter  everywhere,  and  see
everything,  and  if  you  try  to  prevent  them,  there  are
quarrels  and  reproaches  and  insults.  And,  in  all  this,
one  must  act  submissively ;  a  blow  from  the  hatchet
is  soon  given  by  these  Barbarians,  and  the  bark  set  on
fire ;  as  to  seeking  redress  for  the  crime,  there  is  none
in  the  country,  and  the  most  one  could  expect  would
be  a  few  presents.  In  consequence,  one  must  always
be  on  the  watch  and  be  patient,  and  consider  that
here,  still  less  than  in  any  other  place  in  the  world,
can  one  be  sure  of  a  moment  of  his  life.


16  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

Adiouftez  a  ce  que  deff us,  que  voflre  f aeon  de  loger,
de  coucher,  &  de  viure  eftant  en  tout  femblable  a
celle  des  Sauuages;  [13  i.e.,  31]  la  nature  ne  trouue
guere  de  confolation  parmy  tous  ces  trauaux.  Vn
peu  de  bled  d'Inde  boully  dedans  l'eau,  &  pour  le
meilleur  ordinaire  du  pais,  vn  peu  de  poiffon  puant
de  pourriture  dedans,  ou  de  la  pouffiere  de  poiffon  fee
pour  tout  affaifonnement,  voila  le  manger  &  le  boire
ordinaire  du  pais.  Pour  T  extraordinaire  vn  peu  de
pain  de  leur  bled,  cuit  fous  la  cendre,  fans  aucun
leuain,  ou  Ton  mefle  quelquefois  quelques  febves  ou
f ruidts  f auuages :  Voila  vne  des  grandes  regales  du
pais.  Le  poiffon  frais  &  la  chaff e,  font  chofes  fi  rares,
qu'elles  ne  valent  pas  le  parler,  y  ayant  toutes  les
peines  du  monde  d'en  recouurer  pour  les  malades.
Vne  natte  fur  la  terre,  ou  fur  vne  efcorce,  eft  voftre
coucher.  Le  feu  voftre  chandelle.  Les  trous  par
ou  paffe  la  fumee,  vos  feneftres  qui  ne  ferment
iamais.  Des  perches  courbees  couuertes  d'efcorces,
vos  murailles  &  voftre  lambris,  par  ou  le  vent  baffe
de  tous  coftez.  En  vn  mot  tout  le  refte  a  l'auenant
des  Sauuages,  excepte  le  veftir,  auquel  encore  faut-il
commencer  a  fe  reduire.

Ie  ne  d'y  rien  de  la  rigueur  des  faifons ;  de  l'incom-
modite  des  chemins  qu'on  ne  peut  faire  qu'a  pied  ou
fur  le  dos  d'vn  autre,  [32]  des  dangers  continuels  des
Ennemis  du  pais,  qui  font  tous  les  iours  a  vos  portes,
&  rempliffent  tout  de  frayeur  nouuelle,  arriuant  a
toute  heure  de  quelque  maffacre  ou  prifonnier  qu'ils
ont  enleu6,  &  de  leur  refolution  de  venir  brufler  tout
le  pais.  Ie  ne  dis  rien  dif-ie  de  tout  cela,  &  d'infi-
nies  autres  petites  difgraces  qui  accompagnent  &  s'en-
fuiuent  de  tout  ce  que  deff  us. Pour  conclurre  en  fin


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  17

Add  to  the  above  that  your  way  of  lodging,  sleep-
ing, and  eating  being  in  every  respect  similar  to  that
of  the  Savages,  [13  i.e.,  31]  nature  finds  but  few  alle-
viations amid  all  these  hardships.  A  little  Indian
corn  boiled  in  water,  and  for  the  better  fare  of  the
country  a  little  fish,  rank  with  internal  rottenness,  or
some  powdered  dried  fish  as  the  only  seasoning, —
this  is  the  usual  food  and  drink  of  the  country ;  as
something  extra,  a  little  bread  made  of  their  corn,
baked  under  the  cinders,  without  any  leaven,  in
which  they  sometimes  mix  some  beans  or  wild  fruits ;
this  is  one  of  the  great  dainties  of  the  country.  Fresh
fish  and  game  are  articles  so  rare  that  they  are  not
worth  mentioning,  it  being  all  the  trouble  imaginable
to  secure  these  for  the  sick.  A  mat  upon  the  ground,
or  upon  a  piece  of  bark,  is  your  bed ;  the  fire,  your
candle ;  the  holes  through  which  the  smoke  passes,
your  windows,  which  are  never  closed ;  bent  poles,
covered  with  bark,  your  walls  and  your  roof,  through
which  the  wind  enters  from  all  sides.  In  a  word,  all
remains  in  keeping  with  the  Savages,  except  the
clothing,  to  which  we  must  yet  begin  to  reduce  our-
selves.

I  say  nothing  of  the  severity  of  the  seasons ;  of  the
inconveniences  of  the  roads,  which  can  be  traveled
only  on  foot  or  upon  some  one's  back;  [32]  of  con-
tinual dangers  from  the  Enemies  of  the  country,  who
are  daily  at  your  gates,  filling  all  with  a  terror
renewed  every  hour  by  some  massacre,  or  some
prisoner  whom  they  have  carried  away,  and  by  their
determination  to  come  and  consume  the  whole  coun-
try,—  I  say  nothing,  I  repeat,  of  all  this,  and  of  an
infinite  number  of  other  little  misfortunes  which
accompany  and  follow  all  the  above. As  a  final  con-


18  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.  17

qu'il  femble  qu'vne  feule  ann6e  de  patience  &  de  cou-
rage, parmy  ces  combats  &  batailles  continuelles  vaut
bien  vn  petit  martyre,  &  qu'ainfi,  quoy  qu'il  n'y  ait
point  encore  de  fang  de  martyrs  refpandu,  nous  n'a-
uons  pas  toutesfois  fuiet  de  defefperer  la  conuerfion
de  ces  peuples.

II  en  fera  toutefois  tout  ce  qu'il  plaira  a  Dieu:  &
on  s'  attend  bien  que  le  fort  arm6,  qui  commande  abfo-
lument  dans  ce  pais  depuis  tant  de  fiecles,  ne  laiffera
pas  fi  f acilement  ef  chapper  de  f  es  mains  tant  de  vieilles
&  anciennes  conqueftes;  &  qu'il  fera  tout  poffible
pour  prendre  &  exterminer  tous  ceux  qui  s'oppofent
a  fon  empire,  &  qui  n'en  cherchent  que  la  mine.
Mais  qu'il  faffe  du  pis  qu'il  pourra,  toft  ou  tard  le
tout  reuffira  a  fa  plus  grande  confufion,  [33]  &  a  l'a-
uancement  de  la  gloire  de  Dieu,  quand  ce  ne  feroit
qu'en  iuftifiant  fa  bonte*  &  mifericorde,  fur  ce  pais.
Et  rien  cependant  n'arriuera  fans  fa  permiflion,  pour
l'amour  duquel  mourir,  c'eft  viure;  &  eftre  abbatu,
c'eft  vaincre  &  triompher.

Que  fi  ce  que  dit  vn  des  SS.  Peres  de  TEglife  eft
veritable,  que  les  bien-faits  prefents  de  la  diuine  Ma-
ieft6  enuers  les  hommes  feruent  de  caution  &  d'affeu-
rance  pour  ceux  de  l'aduenir;  le  repos,  la  confiance,
la  ioye  &  la  confolation  dans  laquelle  viuent  icy  les
ouuriers  de  l'Euangile  parmy  ce  premier  genre  de
martyre,  faidt  qu'on  n'a  pas  fuiet  de  redouter  dauan-
tage  le  fecond,  que  le  premier.

Mais  deuant  que  de  paffer  plus  auant  a  declarer
l'eftat  particulier,  &  le  detail  du  Chriftianifme  en  ce
pais :  ie  prie  vne  f ois  pour  toutes,  tous  ceux  &  celles
qui  iufques  icy  ont  contribue*  aux  moyens  d'inftruire
ces  Peuples,  f  oit  par  leurs  prieres,  f  oit  par  leurs  autres


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  i6jg  19

elusion,  it  seems  as  if  a  single  year  of  patience  and
courage  amid  these  continual  struggles  and  battles
is  indeed  equal  to  one  short  martyrdom ;  and  that,
therefore,  although  no  blood  of  martyrs  has  yet  been
shed,  we  have,  nevertheless,  no  reason  to  despair  of
the  conversion  of  these  peoples.

It  will  be,  however,  wholly  as  God  shall  please;
and  we  fully  expect  that  the  strong  man  armed,  who
has  commanded  absolutely  in  this  country  during  so
many  centuries,  will  not  easily  let  slip  from  his  hands
so  many  old  and  former  conquests,  and  that  he  will
do  all  he  can  to  capture  and  exterminate  all  those
who  oppose  his  empire,  and  who  seek  only  its  ruin.
But  let  him  do  the  worst  he  can ;  sooner  or  later  all
will  result  in  his  greatest  confusion,  [33]  and  in  the
advancement  of  the  glory  of  God,  if  it  be  only  in  jus-
tifying his  goodness  and  mercy  towards  this  country.
And  yet  nothing  will  happen  without  his  permission,
for  love  of  whom  to  die  is  to  live,  and  to  be  defeated
is  to  conquer  and  triumph.

And,  if  what  one  of  our  Holy  Fathers  of  the  Church
says  is  true,  that  the  present  benefactions  of  the
divine  Majesty  toward  men  serve  as  a  security  and
pledge  for  those  of  the  future,  then  the  peace,  confi-
dence, joy,  and  consolation  in  which  the  Gospel
workers  live  here  in  this  first  state  of  martyrdom  con-
vince us  that  we  have  no  reason  to  dread  the  second
more  than  the  first.

But  before  proceeding  to  make  known  in  detail  the
exact  condition  of  Christianity  in  this  country,  I  beg,
once  for  all,  that  all  those  men  and  women  who  have
hitherto  contributed  to  the  means  for  the  instruction  of
these  Peoples,  either  through  their  prayers,  or  through
their  other  charities  and  benefactions,  or  to  whom


20  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

charitez  &  bien-faits;  ou  a  qui  Dieu  en  donneroit
d'orefnauant  la  penf6e,  de  confiderer  que  le  fruidt
apres  lequel  nous  trauaillons,  eft  fruidt  de  l'Euagile,
lequel  s'il  doit  eftre  bon  &  de  duree,  ne  viendra  [34]
qu' apres  beaucoup  de  patience:  &  par  confequent  de
ne  fe  point  laffer  d'exercer  cefte  charite\  la  plus
grande  qui  puiffe  eftre  exercee  en  ce  monde.  Enui-
fageant  toufiours  ces  affaires  auec  1'ceil  de  la  foy,  qui
feul  leur  en  fera  veoir  le  merite  &  1' excellence;  &
que  de  fi  grands  ouurages  ne  fe  font  pas  tout  d'vn
coup.  Combien  faut-il  en  France  de  temps  &  de
peine,  pour  conuertir  vn  feul  heretique,  ou  bien  quel-
que  ieune  ou  vieux  Pecheur?  He*  qu'eft-ce  de  cela
en  comparaifon  de  la  conuerfion  de  tout  vn  monde,
terreftre  &  brutal  au  dernier  point,  enuieilly  depuis
tant  de  fiecles  dans  fes  erreurs  &  f uperftitions  ?

Nous  nous  trouuons  icy  comme  au  milieu  d'vne
mer,  ou  vn  million  de  perf onnes  f e  noyent :  &  ne  f ca-
chants  auquel  courir,  nous  fentons  nos  cceurs  fe  fendre,
&  nous  nous  trouuons  reduits  au  point  d' experimenter
ce  que  dit  l'Apoftre  des  Gentils,  Charitas  Chrijii  vrget
nos.  Le  malheur  n'arriue  qu'a  faute  d'ouuriers,  ou
pluftoft  des  moyens  de  les  pouuoir  faire  icy  fubfifter,
&  de  les  entretenir  dans  vn  Pays,  &  parmy  des  peu-
ples,  ou  il  faut  par  neceflite\  auec  Saindt  Paul,  renon-
cer  aux  droidts  de  l'Euangile,  &  viure  du  [35]  fien,
au  moins  pour  le  prefent :  fi  on  ne  veut,  en  vn  mo-
ment, voir  le  tout  renuerfe*  &  les  affaires  reduites  au
defe[f]poir.

Ie  fcay  bien  que  les  difficultez  d'apporter  de  dehors
dequoy  y  fubfifter,  font  extremes :  mais  apres  tout,
il  ne  laiffe  pas  d'y  auoir  vn  monde  entier  a  conuer-
tir; &  n'y  a  point  de  porte  plus  commode  pour  y


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  21

God  shall  hereafter  grant  the  purpose  to  do  this,  will
consider  that  the  fruit  for  which  we  labor  is  the  fruit
of  the  Gospel, —  which,  if  it  is  to  be  good  and  dur-
able, will  only  come  [34]  after  much  patience.  I  beg
them,  therefore,  not  to  grow  weary  of  practicing  this
charity,  the  greatest  that  can  be  exercised  in  this
world, — looking  at  these  matters  always  with  the
eye  of  faith,  which  alone  will  reveal  to  them  the
merit  and  excellence  thereof, — and  to  consider  also
that  works  so  important  are  not  accomplished  all  at
once.  How  much  time  and  trouble  is  necessary  in
France  to  convert  a  single  heretic,  or,  indeed,  any
Sinner,  young  or  old  ?  Ah !  what  is  that  in  compari-
son with  the  conversion  of  a  whole  world,  earthy  and
brutal  to  the  last  degree,  grown  old  in  its  errors  and
superstitions  during  so  many  centuries?

We  find  ourselves  here  as  if  in  the  midst  of  a  sea
where  a  million  persons  are  drowning,  and,  not  know-
ing to  which  one  we  should  hasten,  we  feel  our  hearts
breaking,  and  find  ourselves  reduced  to  the  point  of
experiencing  what  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  said,
Charitas  Christi  urget  nos.  This  misfortune  occurs
only  through  a  lack  of  workers,  or  rather  of  means
of  affording  them  subsistence  here  and  of  maintain-
ing them  in  a  Country  and  among  peoples,  where
one  must  of  necessity,  with  Saint  Paul,  renounce  the
dues  of  the  Gospel  and  live  upon  [35]  his  own  means,
at  least  for  the  present,  if  one  would  not  see,  in  a
moment,  all  overthrown,  and  affairs  reduced  to  a
hopeless  condition.

I  know  very  well  that  the  difficulties  of  bringing
hither  from  outside  the  means  of  subsistence  are  ex-
treme ;  but  after  all,  there  remains  here  a  whole  world
to  be  converted,  and  there  is  no  more  convenient  gate


22  LES  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.17

paffer,  que  celle  oil  nous  fommes  auiourd'huy  &  c'efl
ce  qui  afflige  noflre  coeur  &  noflre  efprit.

Que  fi  ces  pertes  nous  font  fi  fenfibles  a  qui  ces
peuples  ne  font  rien;  combien  a-on  fuiet  de  croire,
qu'elles  font  confiderables  a  celuy  qui  leur  a  donne"
l'eflre,  pour  les  rendre  bien-heureux ;  &  de  plus  vne
vie  diuine,  &  fon  fang  pour  leur  rachapt,  Heureufes
les  Ames  a  qui  le  S.  Efprit  donne  &  conferue  la  deuo-
tion  de  contribuer  felon  leur  pouuoir  a  eftancher  la
foif  de  IESVS  Chrift  mourant  en  Croix ;  &  a  ramaffer
les  gouttes  de  fon  fang  precieux,  on  pour  mieux
dire ;  la  marchandif e  dont  ce  fang  adorable  a  efte*  le
prix.

Ie  ne  puis  icy  obmettre  la  loiiage  qui  eft  deue  a
meffieurs  les  affociez  de  la  Compagnie  de  la  Nouuelle
France,  qui  continuent  plus  que  iamais,  a  contribuer
de  ce  [36]  qu'ils  peuuent  pour  vne  fi  fainte  entreprife.
Et  c6t  ouurage  auffi  bien  que  tous  les  autres  de  la
Nouuelle  France,  aura  a  iamais  vne  tres-particuliere
obligation  a  Monfieur  le  Cheualier  de  Mont-magny
noflre  Gouuerneur;  a  la  prudence,  generofit6,  charite*
&  zele  duquel,  il  ne  femble  pas  qu'il  foit  poffible  de
rien  adioufler :  toutes  lef quelles  vertus  &  belles  qua-
litez  fe  font  auffi  bien  fentir  icy  a  trois  cent  lieues,
que  nous  fommes  de  fon  fejour,  que  fur  les  lieux  ou
il  fait  fa  demeure.

II  y  en  a  encore  plufieurs  autres,  qui  meriteroiet
vne  bone  part  a  la  loiiange  de  contribuer  felon  leur
pouuoir  a  vn  fi  faint  ouurage,  Mais  ce  ne  feroit  iamais
fait,  &  c'efl  le  point,  que  le  liure  de  vie  en  coferue
pour  iamais  la  memoire.  Pour  nous,  tout  ce  que
nous  pouuons,  c'efl  de  leuer  les  mains  au  Ciel,  &  de
dire  de  tout  noflre  cceur,  de  rore  cceli  &  de  pinguedine
terrce,  &  defuper  fit  benediclio  vejira.


1639-40]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  23

through  which  to  reach  them  than  this  where  we  are
to-day ;  and  it  is  this  which  afflicts  our  hearts  and
minds.

And  if  these  losses  are  so  keenly  felt  by  us,  to
whom  these  peoples  are  nothing,  how  much  reason
have  we  to  believe  that  they  are  important  to  him
who  has  given  them  existence,  in  order  to  render
them  happy, —  and,  more,  a  divine  life,  and  his  own
blood  to  redeem  them.  Happy  the  Souls  in  whom
the  Holy  Ghost  inspires  and  maintains  the  devout
purpose  to  contribute  according  to  their  power  to
quench  the  thirst  of  JESUS  Christ,  dying  upon  the
Cross,  and  to  collect  the  drops  of  his  precious  blood, —
or,  to  express  it  better,  the  wares  of  which  this  ador-
able blood  was  the  price.

I  cannot  omit  here  the  praise  that  is  due  to  mes-
sieurs the  associates  of  the  Company  of  New  France,
who  continue  more  than  ever  to  contribute  [36]  what
they  can  to  so  holy  an  enterprise.  And  this  work,
as  well  as  all  the  others  of  New  France,  will  always
be  under  most  special  obligation  to  Monsieur  the
Chevalier  de  Mont-magny,  our  Governor,  to  whose
prudence,  generosity,  charity,  and  zeal  it  does  not
seem  possible  to  add  anything ;  all  of  which  virtues
and  noble  qualities  make  themselves  felt  as  well  here
where  we  are,  three  hundred  leagues  from  his  resi-
dence, as  in  the  locality  where  he  makes  his  home.

There  are  still  many  others  who  would  merit  a
good  share  of  praise  for  contributing  according  to
their  means  to  so  holy  a  work,  but  that  would  never
be  completed,  and  the  point  is  this,  that  the  book  of
life  preserves  the  memory  thereof  forever.  As  for
us,  all  that  we  can  do  is  to  raise  our  hands  to  Heav-
en, and  to  say  with  all  our  hearts,  de  rore  cceli  et  de
pinguedine  terrce,  et  desuper  sit  benedictio  vestra.


24  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17


[37]  CHAP.  IV.

DE  CE QUI EST ARRIU£ DE PLUS REMARQUABLE EN

LA RESIDENCE  DE LA  CONCEPTION  AU  BOURG

D'OSSOSSANE,  &  PARTICULIEREMENT

DE  LA  NOUUELLE EGLISE

DE CE BOURG.

LE  nombre  des  enfans  baptifez  en  maladie  en  cette
Refidence,  eft  de  52.  dont  vingt-fept  s'en  font
enuolez  au  Ciel.  Celuy  des  plus  aagees  qui
ont  efte  baptifez  a  la  mort,  ou  en  extremity  de  mala-
die, de  feptante-quatre  dont  vingt-deux  font  morts,
&  comme  il  eft  a  prefumer  de  la  bonte"  &  mifericorde
de  Dieu,  ont  pris  le  mefme  chemin  du  Ciel.  Celuy
des  Catechumenes,  baptifez  en  bonne  fant6,  de  qua-
rante-neuf.

Deuant  que  de  declarer  ce  qu'il  y  a  eii  de  plus
remarquable  en  tout  cecy,  il  faut  que  ie  parle  de  ceux
qui  ont  dauantage  participe  a  ce  bon-heur,  &  qui
nous  rendront  en  fuite,  plus  que  iamais,  adorables
les  fecrets  profonds,  &  les  abyfmes  de  la  fageffe,
Bonte"  &  Prouidence  diuine  fur  [38]  fes  Efleiis.

Les  tfenrohronons  faifoient  par  le  paffe"  vne  des
Nations  aflociees  a  la  Nation  Neutre,  &  eftoient  fituez
fur  les  confins  du  cofte"  des  Hiroquois  les  Ennemis
communs  de  tous  ces  Peuples.  Tant  que  cette  Na-
tion d'Henrohronons  a  efte"  en  bonne  intelligence  auec
ceux  de  la  Nation  Neutre,  elle  a  efte"  baftante  pour
refifter  aux  Ennemis,  fubiifter  &  fe  maintenir  contre


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  25


[37] CHAP. IV.

OF THE MORE REMARKABLE EVENTS THAT HAVE OC-
CURRED IN  THE  RESIDENCE  OF  LA CONCEPTION
AT  THE  VILLAGE  OF  OSSOSSANE,  AND  ES-
PECIALLY OF  THE  NEW CHURCH
OF THAT VILLAGE.

THE  number  of  children  baptized  in  sickness  at
this  Residence  is  52,  of  whom  twenty-seven
have  flown  away  to  Heaven;  that  of  elderly
persons  who  were  baptized  at  death,  or  at  the  crisis
of  their  illness,  is  seventy-four,  of  whom  twenty-two
died,  and,  as  may  be  presumed  from  the  goodness
and  mercy  of  God,  took  the  same  road  to  Heaven;
that  of  Catechumens,  baptized  while  in  good  health,
forty-nine.

Before  relating  what  was  especially  remarkable  in
all  these  baptisms,  I  must  speak  of  those  who  have
longest  partaken  of  this  blessing,  and  who  will  there-
fore render,  more  than  ever,  adorable  to  us  the  pro-
found secrets  and  the  abysses  of  divine  wisdom,  Good-
ness, and  Providence  respecting  [38]  his  Elect.

The  Wenrohronons 1  formed  in  the  past  one  of  the
associate  Nations  of  the  Neutral  Nation,  and  were
located  on  its  boundaries,  toward  the  Hiroquois,  the
common  Enemies  of  all  these  Peoples.  As  long  as
this  Nation  of  Wenrohronons  was  on  good  terms  with
the  people  of  the  Neutral  Nation,  it  was  sufficiently
strong  to  withstand  its  Enemies,  to  continue  its  exist-
ence, and  maintain  itself  against  their  raids  and  in-


26  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

leurs  courf  es  &  inuafions :  mais  par  ie  ne  f gay  quel
mefcontentement,  ceux  de  la  Nation  Neutre  s'eftans
retirez  &  feparez  d'interefts  auec  eux,  ils  font  demeu-
rez  en  proye  a  leurs  Ennemis,  &  n'euffent  pas  efte"
encore  long  temps  fans  eflre  du  tout  exterminez,  s'ils
n'euffent  fonge*  a  la  retraite,  &  a  f e  mettre  a  couuert
de  la  protection,  &  affociation  de  quelque  autre
Nation.

Tout  bien  confidere,  ils  aduiferent  qu'ils  ne  pou-
uoient  mieux  choifir  que  celle  de  nos  Hurons.  Ils
deputent  done  les  plus  intelligens  d'entr'eux,  pour
en  venir  faire  la  propofition :  qui  f ut  faite  aux  conf eils
&  affembl£es  particulieres  &  generales  de  tout  le
Pais :  ou  en  fin  fut  conclu,  de  les  receuoir,  leur  ar-
rive ne  feruant  pas  de  [39]  peu  a  la  defenfe  &  con-
feruation  du  pais.

En  fuite  de  cefte  refolution,  le  temps:  fut  pris
pour  les  aller  querir,  &  affifter  en  leur  voyage :  foit
pour  les  foulager,  au  portage  de  leurs  meubles  &  en-
fants,  n'y  ayant  en  toutes  ces  contrees  autre  voiture
par  terre,  que  celle  de  la  tefte,  ou  des  efpaules  des
hommes  &  des  f emmes ;  foit  aufli  pour  les  defendre
de  leurs  ennemis  communs,  &  leur  faire  efcorte,

Quelque  foulagement  qu'on  leur  peuft  donner,  la
fatigue  &  les  incommoditez  d'vn  tel  voyage,  de  plus
de  quatre-vingts  lieues,  ou  eftoient  plus  de  fix  cens
perfonnes,  dont  les  femmes  &  les  petits  enfants  fai-
f oient  le  plus  grand  nombre ;  furent  fi  grandes,  que
plufieurs  en  moururet  en  chemin,  &  prefque  tous  arri-
uerent  malades,  ou  le  furent  incontinent  apres.

Ce  Bourg  fut  le  premier  du  pais  ou  ils  aborderent,
&  auffi-tofl  que  la  nouuelle  fut  venue  qu'ils  apro-
choient,  tout  le  monde  forti[t],  pour  aller  au  deuant;


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  27

vasions ;  but  the  people  of  the  Neutral  Nation  having,
through  I  know  not  what  dissatisfaction,  withdrawn
and  severed  their  relations  with  them,  these  have
remained  a  prey  to  their  Enemies;  and  they  could
not  have  remained  much  longer  without  being  entire-
ly exterminated,  if  they  had  not  resolved  to  retreat
and  take  refuge  in  the  protection  and  alliance  of  some
other  Nation.

All  things  considered,  they  decided  that  they  could
not  do  better  than  to  choose  that  of  our  Hurons.  Ac-
cordingly, they  deputed  the  most  intelligent  among
them  to  come  and  make  such  proposal,  which  was
done  in  the  councils  and  assemblies,  both  special  and
general,  of  the  whole  Country;  here,  finally,  it  was
concluded  to  receive  them,  their  arrival  serving  not
a  [39]  little  for  the  defense  and  preservation  of  the
country.

In  consequence  of  this  resolution  they  took  the
time  to  go  after  them  and  assist  them  in  their  jour-
ney, both  to  relieve  them  in  carrying  their  household
goods  and  children, — as  they  have  in  all  these  coun-
tries no  other  conveyance  on  land  than  the  heads  or
shoulders  of  men  and  women, — and  also  to  defend
them  from  their  common  enemies  and  act  as  escort
for  them.

Notwithstanding  the  help  that  could  be  given  them,
the  fatigue  and  inconveniences  of  such  a  voyage  —  of
more  than  eighty  leagues,  made  by  over  six  hundred
persons,  of  whom  the  majority  were  women  and  little
children  —  were  so  great  that  many  died  on  the  way,
and  nearly  all  were  sick  when  they  arrived,  or  imme-
diately afterwards.

This  Village  was  the  first  one  in  the  country,  at
which  they  arrived ;  and  as  soon  as  the  news  of  their


28  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.  17

&  les  Capitaines  s'y  trotmerent,  &  exhorterent  leurs
gens  auec  tant  d'ardeur  &  de  companion,  a  prendre
conrage,  &  affifter  ces  pannres  eftrangers,  qne  ie  ne
fcay  pas  qui  eufl  peu  faire  dauantage  le  Predicateur
[40]  Chreftien  le  pins  zele"  ponr  les  ceuures  de  chari-
ty, &  de  mifericorde.

lis  fnrent  incontinent  diftribuez  par  les  principanx
Bonrgs  dn  pais.  La  pins  grande  part  tontefois  s'ar-
refla  en  celny-cy,  comme  vn  de  pins  ayfez  &  accom-
modez  de  tons ;  mais  par  tout  ou  ils  furent  receus,
les  meilleures  places  dans  les  cabane  leur  furent  don-
nees ;  les  greniers  ou  quaifles  de  bled  ouuertes  auec
liberte"  d'en  difpofer  comme  fi  elles  leur  apparte-
noient.

Le  gros  arriua  en  ce  bourg,  au  mefme  temps  que
i'y  arriuay  auec  quelques  domeftiques  intelligens  a
la  faign6e,  &  aux  remedes,  que  nous  auions  amene"
de  France :  &  iamais  rien  ne  f e  rencontra  plus  a  pro-
pos.  Car  aufu-toii  auec  ce  fecours,  on  courut  aux
plus  malades,  qui  eftoient  en  danger  de  mort,  pour
auoir  entree  par  la,  de  pouruoir  a  leur  falut.  C'eft
icy  que  nous  parurent  premierement  les  fecrets  ado-
rabies  de  la  bonte"  de  Dieu,  fur  ces  pauures  refugiez,
car  ce  fecours  vint  fi  a  propos  pour  quelques-vns
d'entr'eux,  tant  enfants  que  plus  aagez  qu'il  le  trou-
ua  que  depuis  leur  arriu^e  iufques  a  la  mort,  il  n'y
eufl  que  le  temps  qu'il  falloit,  pour  les  inflruire  &
baptifer.

[41]  Depuis  ce  temps,  ces  malades  donnerent  tant
d'occupation,  qu'ils  emporterent,  Tefpace  de  quelque
temps,  la  plus  grand  part  de  1'  employ  de  nos  ouuri-
ers,  qui  ne  pouuoient  retenir  les  regrets  &  les  plaintes
innocentes,  de  ne  pouuoir  pour  ce  fuiet,  vacquer  a  la


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  T/ON,  i63g  29

approach  had  been  brought,  every  one  went  out  to
meet  them ;  the  Captains  were  present,  and  exhorted
their  people  with  so  much  earnestness  and  compas-
sion to  take  courage  and  help  these  poor  strangers,
that  I  do  not  know  what  more  could  have  been  done
by  a  Christian  Preacher,  [40]  most  zealous  in  works
of  charity  and  mercy.

They  were  immediately  distributed  through  the
principal  Villages  of  the  country ;  the  greater  part  of
them,  however,  remained  in  this  Village,  as  one  of
the  most  commodious  and  suitable  of  all.  But,  wher-
ever they  were  received,  the  best  places  in  the  cabins
were  given  to  them,  the  granaries  or  chests  of  corn
were  opened  and  they  were  given  liberty  to  dispose
of  them  as  if  they  were  their  own.

The  main  body  of  them  arrived  in  this  village  at
the  same  time  that  I  came  here  with  some  domestics
whom  we  had  brought  from  France,  who  were  skill-
ful in  bleeding  and  in  the  use  of  remedies ;  and  noth-
ing ever  happened  more  opportunely.  For,  with  this
help,  we  immediately  hastened  to  the  very  sick,  who
were  in  danger  of  death,  that  we  might,  being  thus
admitted,  provide  for  their  salvation.  It  was  here
that  the  adorable  secrets  of  the  goodness  of  God
towards  these  poor  refugees  first  appeared  to  us ;  for
this  help  came  so  opportunely  to  some  of  them,  both
children  and  older  people,  that  it  was  found  that
between  their  arrival  and  their  death  there  was  only
the  time  necessary  to  instruct  and  baptize  them.

[41]  From  that  time,  these  sick  people  gave  us  so
much  to  do  that,  for  some  time,  they  almost  wholly
engrossed  the  attention  of  our  workers,  who  could
not  repress  their  regrets  and  innocent  complaints  at
not  being  able,  on  this  account,  to  devote  themselves


30  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

culture  de  ceux  de  leur  quartier,  dont,  comme  nous
auons  dit,  vn  chacu  eft  charge.  Mais  ils  ne  s'apper-
ceuoient  pas,  que  tandis  qu'ils  gardent  l'ordre  de  la
charity,  la  mifericorde  de  Dieu  paffe  par  deflus  l'ordre
de  leurs  penfees  &  induftrie,  &  aduance  luy  mefme
leur  tafche,  qu'ils  eftimoient  de  beaucoup  reculer.

Deux  mois  done  ou  enuiron  apres  l'arriuee  de  ces
pauures  eftrangers,  leurs  malades  commencant  a  dimi-
nuer:  nos  ouuriers  eurent  plus  de  temps  &  de  loifir,
de  vifiter  les  champs,  que  par  le  pafle"  ils  auoient  en-
femence\  Et  voila  qu'auffi-toft,  contre  toute  leur
attente,  ils  en  appercoiuent  la  plus  part,  tout  difpo-
fez  a  la  moiffon,  rencontrants  les  efprits  de  plufieurs
de  ceux  qu'ils  auoient  par  le  paife*  cultiu6,  pleins  de
fatisfadtion,  &  de  conuidtion  des  veritez  de  la  Foy,
&  ne  defirans  autre  chofe,  que  d'eftre  au  pluftoft
baptifez.

[42]  Leur  ferueur  paffa  fi  auant,  que  nous  nous
trouuames  obligez  de  mettre  en  deliberation,  fi  nous
les  differerions  iufques  aux  temps  qu'il  femble  que
l'Eglife  defline  pour  le  Baptefme  des  Cathecumenes,
fcauoir  Pafques  &  la  Pentecofte :  mais  l'vn  &  l'autre
fe  trouuoit  trop  efloigne' ;  tout  bien  confider6,  il  fut
refolu,  d'ouurir  a  ce  commencement  la  porte  a  tous
ceux  qui  fe  prefenteroient,  a  mefure  qu'ils  s'en  trou-
ueroient  capables;  puis  qu'il  eftoit  queftion  d'vne
nouuelle  Eglife,  a  laquelle  il  falloit  fonger  de  don-
ner  l'eftre,  deuant  que  des  s'appliquer,  a  luy  donner
fa  perfection .  Que  toutefois  il  y  falloit  proceder
auec  beaucoup  de  retenue,  &  nous  fouuenir  toufiours
que  nous  auions  a  f aire  a  des  Sauuages ;  a  la  diffimu-
lation  &  legerete"  def quels  il  ne  femble  pas  qu'il  y  ait
rien  de  pareil.


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  31

to  the  cultivation  of  the  people  of  their  quarter,  with
whom,  as  we  have  said,  each  one  is  charged.  But
they  did  not  perceive  that,  while  they  observe  the
mandate  of  charity,  the  mercy  of  God  overlooks  the
order  of  their  thoughts  and  industry,  and  itself
advances  their  task  which  they  considered  so  greatly
retarded.

Two  months  or  thereabout,  then,  after  the  arrival
of  these  poor  strangers,  the  number  of  their  sick  be-
ginning to  diminish,  our  laborers  had  more  time  and
leisure  to  visit  the  fields  that  they  had  sown  in  the
past.  And  lo !  they  immediately  perceived,  contrary
to  all  their  expectations,  the  greater  part  of  it  all
ready  for  harvest,  finding  the  minds  of  many  of  those
whom  they  had  cultivated  in  the  past  fully  satisfied
with  and  convinced  of  the  truths  of  the  Faith,  and
desiring  nothing  else  than  to  be  baptized  as  soon  as
possible.

[42]  Their  fervor  went  so  far  that  we  found  our-
selves obliged  to  deliberate  whether  we  should  put
them  off  until  the  times  that  the  Church  seems  to
appoint  for  the  Baptism  of  Catechumens,  namely,
Easter  and  Pentecost ;  but  both  were  too  far  away.
Upon  careful  consideration,  it  was  decided  to  open
the  door,  in  this  beginning,  to  all  those  who  should
present  themselves,  according  as  they  were  found  to
be  qualified  therefor;  since  it  was  a  question  of  a
new  Church,  which  it  was  necessary  to  think  of  bring-
ing into  existence  before  applying  ourselves  to  give
it  perfection.  But  nevertheless  it  was  necessary  to
proceed  with  much  reserve  in  this  matter,  and  always
to  remember  that  we  had  to  do  with  Savages,  for
whose  dissimulation  and  fickleness  there  would  seem
to  be  no  comparison.


32  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

C'eft  ce  qui  nous  fit  conclure,  de  n'en  receuoir  au
commencement,  que  fort  peu,  &  des  Anciens  &  plus
confiderables  des  Chefs  de  families,  &  perfonnes
mariees  auec  ftabilite.  Crainte  que  fi  nous  en  admet-
tions  d'autres,  fans  vne  plus  grande  experience,  les
fondemens  venans  a  crouler,  nous  ne  viffions  bien-
toffc  tout  l'edifice  [43]  a  bas,  &  fa  mine  totale  aupara-
uant  fon  eftablifTement,  &  le  fepu[l]chre  de  cefte
nouuelle  Eglife  dans  fon  berceau.

Ayant  done  l'ceil  a  toutes  ces  circonftances,  &  fur
ce  que  la  diuine  Prouidence  nous  prefentoit,  on  donna
iour  a  la  fefte  de  S.  Martin  a  trois  chefs  de  famille
des  plus  anciens,  &  plus  confiderables  du  Bourg.
Done  l'vn  fut  baptife  auec  fa  femme,  &  trois  de  fes
enfants.  Des  deux  autres  l'vn  eftoit  veuf  &  fans
enfants  qui  fuffent  petits;  Tautre  ne  iugea  pas  que  fa
femme  fuft  encore  capable  de  ce  bien,  comme  en
effecT:  elle  ne  V eftoit  pas.

Enuiron  vn  mois  apres,  feauoir  a  la  Fefte  de  la  Con-
ception de  la  faincte  Vierge,  fe  firent  les  feconds
baptefmes  de  f eize  perfonnes :  entre  lefquels  eftoient
trois  ou  quatre  chefs  de  families,  auec  leurs  femmes
&  enfans ;  ce  qui  joint  auec  les  precedens,  en  la  famille
de  Iofeph  Chihtfatenhtfa,  celuy  dont  a  efte"  parle*
amplement  en  la  derniere  relation,  faifant  vne  compa-
gnie  d'vne  trentaine  de  perfonnes,  qui  affifterent
enfemble  ce  iour  la  a  la  faindte  MefTe  pour  la  pre-
miere fois,  ou  fe  communierent  tous  ceux  qui  eftoient
en  aage  de  le  f aire ;  il  f emble  que  nous  auons  tout
[44]  fubiedt  de  recognoiffcre,  &  de  remarquer  ce  fainct
iour,  deffcin6  a  la  memoire  &  a  Thonneur  de  la  pre-
miere grandeur  de  cefte  faindte  Vierge ;  pour  celuy
de  la  Naiffance  de  cefte  nouuelle  Eglife,  &  du  com-


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  T/OJV,  i639  33

This  made  us  conclude  to  receive  at  first  only  a
very  few, —  some  Old  Men,  and  the  more  prominent
Heads  of  families,  and  persons  whose  marriages  were
stable, — fearing  that,  if  we  admitted  others  without
more  experience,  the  foundations  would  begin  to
crumble,  and  we  would  soon  see  the  whole  edifice
[43]  prostrated,  its  total  ruin  before  its  establishment,
and  the  grave  of  this  new  Church  in  its  cradle.

Having  in  view,  then,  all  these  circumstances,  and
what  divine  Providence  offered  us,  we  devoted  a  day,
on  the  feast  of  St.  Martin,  to  three  heads  of  families,
among  the  oldest  and  most  prominent  of  the  Village.
One  was  baptized,  then,  with  his  wife  and  three  of
his  children.  Of  the  two  others,  the  one  was  a
widower  and  without  small  children,  the  other  did
not  think  his  wife  was  yet  capable  of  receiving  this
blessing,  as,  in  fact,  she  was  not.

About  a  month  later,  namely,  on  the  Feast  of  the
Conception  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  occurred  the  second
group  of  baptisms,  of  sixteen  persons,  among  whom
were  three  or  four  heads  of  families,  with  their  wives
and  children, —  who,  added  to  the  previous  baptisms
in  the  family  of  Joseph  Chihwatenhwa,  of  whom  we
spoke  fully  in  the  last  relation,  make  a  company  of
thirty  persons,  who  together  attended  the  holy  Mass
that  day  for  the  first  time,  where  all  those  who  were
of  an  age  to  do  so  received  communion.  It  seems
that  we  have  every  [44]  reason  to  acknowledge  and
to  observe  this  holy  day,  devoted  to  the  memory  and
to  the  honor  of  the  first  dignity  of  this  holy  Virgin,
as  that  of  the  Birth  of  this  new  Church,  and  of  the
beginning  of  happiness  and  blessing  for  this  country.

We  are  certainly  right  in  believing  that  she  to


34  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

mencement  du  bon-lieur  &  de  la  benedidtion  du  pais.

Nous  auons  bien  raifon  de  croire,  que  celle  en
l'honeur  de  laquelle  eft  confacree  cefle  Fefte,  a  mis
la  main  a  cet  ouurage,  &  Ta  conduit  depuis,  au  point
que  nous  dirons  cy-apres,  &  que  nous  voyons  de  nos
yeux,  auec  vne  confolation,  qui  ne  fe  pent  expliquer.

II  y  eut  trois  ans  a  ce  mefme  iour,  que  le  vceu  fut
fait  par  nos  Peres,  pour  obtenir  la  faueur  de  cefle
grand  Princeffe,  en  reftabliffement  du  Chriftianifme
en  ces  contrees  de  ieufner  la  veille  de  cefte  Fefte,  &
de  dire  tous  les  mois  vne  Meffe,  en  l'honneur  de
cefte  fienne  premiere  grandeur:  &  en  outre  que  la
premiere  Chappelle  que  nous  baftirions  dans  le  pais,
feroit  en  fon  honneur,  &  fous  le  titre  de  fa  faindte
Conception.  Cefte  Chapelle  a  efte*  celle  dans  laquelle
fe  font  faits  ces  premiers  Baptefmes,  dans  laquelle
nous  auons  veu  reflect  [45]  que  nous  pretendions,
deuant  que  d'eftre  parfaidtement  defchargez  de  T obli-
gation de  ce  que  nous  auions  promis,  puis  que  la
Chappelle  n'eftoit  encore  acheu6e  iufqu'au  point,
qu'on  y  peuft  dire  la  MefTe  auec  bien  feance,  &  ne
fembloit  eftre  capable  que  d'y  faire  les  Baptefmes,
qui  en  effedt  y  furent  faits.

Que  loiiange  done  &  adtion  de  graces  f  oient  a  iamais
rendues  a  cefte  grande  Reyne  du  Ciel,  &  de  la  terre,
par  tous  ceux  qui  ont  &  auront  cy-apres  intereft  a  c6t
ouurage,  &  quant  aux  perfonnes  qui  ont  vne  pieufe
&  faindte  affedtion  pour  cette  entreprife,  elle  nous
obligeront  grandement  de  nous  ayder  a  remercier
cefte  faindte  Vierge  de  tant  de  graces  que  nous  auons
receu,  &  receuons  continuellement  de  fa  faueur  &
amftance,  laquelle  nous  fait  efperer  que  fon  facre*
Fils  noftre  tres-honore  Seigneur  &  Maiftre,  qui  feul
pouuoir  mettre  le  fondement  de  c6t  edifice,  aura  agre-


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  5  RELA  TION,  i639  36

whose  honor  this  Feast  is  consecrated  has  put  her
hand  to  this  work,  and  has  since  conducted  it  to  the
point  that  we  shall  mention  hereafter,  and  which  we
see  with  our  own  eyes,  with  a  consolation  which  can-
not be  expressed.

It  was  three  years  before,  on  this  same  day,  that
our  Fathers  had  made  the  vow,  in  order  to  obtain  the
favor  of  this  great  Princess  in  the  establishment  of
Christianity  in  these  countries,  to  fast  on  the  eve  of
this  Feast,  and  to  say  a  Mass  every  month  in  honor
of  this  her  first  dignity;  and  also,  that  the  first
Chapel  we  should  build  in  the  country  should  be  in
her  honor,  and  under  the  title  of  her  holy  Concep-
tion. This  Chapel  is  the  one  in  which  these  first
Baptisms  took  place;  in  this  we  saw  the  result  [45]
that  we  desired,  even  before  we  were  entirely  released
from  the  obligations  of  our  vow  —  since  the  Chapel
was  not  yet  finished  so  far  that  we  could  conveniently
say  Mass  therein,  and  seemed  fit  only  for  the  Bap-
tisms, which  were,  in  fact,  administered  there.

Let,  then,  praise  and  thanksgivings  be  forever
rendered  to  this  great  Queen  of  Heaven  and  of  earth,
by  all  those  who  have  and  shall  hereafter  have  an
interest  in  this  work ;  and  as  for  persons  who  have  a
pious  and  holy  affection  for  this  enterprise,  they  will
oblige  us  greatly  by  helping  us  thank  this  blessed
Virgin  for  the  many  gifts  we  have  received  and  are
continually  receiving  through  her  favor  and  assistance,
which  makes  us  hope  that  her  divine  Son,  our  most
honored  Lord  and  Master,  who  alone  can  lay  the
foundation  of  this  edifice,  will  be  pleased  to  continue
his  blessing  upon  it  and  to  bring  it  to  the  summit  and
height  of  its  perfection.

Since  that  day  we  have  continued  at  intervals  to


36  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

able  d'y  continuer  fa  benedidtion,  &  le  conduire  iuf-
ques  au  comble  &  au  point  de  fa  perfection.

Depuis  ce  iour  on  a  continue  par  intervalles  de
baptifer  ceux  &  celles  qui  fe  font  prefentez,  qu'on  a
iuge  capables  de  ce  bon-heur,  [46]  en  forte  que  le
nombre  des  fideles  faifant  profeffion  du  Chriftianifme,
monte  pref entement  ce  Bourg  a  pres  de  60.  dont  plu-
lieurs  font  tfenroronons,  du  nombre  de  ces  pauures
Eftrangers  refugiez  en  ce  pais,  comme  nous  auons  dit
au  commencement  de  ce  Chapitre;  la  diuine  Proui-
dence  les  ayant  attendu  pour  donner  commencement
a  cette  nouuelle  Eglife,  comme  predeftinez  de  toute
Eternit6,  pour  en  eftre  vne  partie  des  pier  res  fonda-
mentales.  Dans  ce  nombre  fe  font  trouuez  encore
quelque  autres  Eflrangers  de  diuerfes  Nations  qui
depuis  fe  font  retirez  en  leur  pais,  qui  toft  ou  tard
pourront  bien  feruir  a  quelque  deffein  de  Prouidence,
Bonte*  &  Mifericorde  de  Dieu.

Ie  dy  pres  de  60.  Fideles,  faifants  profeffion  du
Chriftianifme ;  car  de  baptif ez  en  extremite*  de  mala-
die,  il  y  en  a  beaucoup  d'autres  dans  le  Bourg,  mais
qui  ayans  recouure"  la  fante\  n'ont  fait  aucun  eftat  du
bien  qu'ils  auoient  receu,  auquel  toutesfois  il  eft  croy-
able,  au  moins  pour  quelques-vns,  qu'ils  luy  font
encore  obligez  de  la  vie,  temporelle.

II  faut  aduoiier  que  le  trauail  d'vn  enfantement
fpirituel,  eft  grand  pour  le  regard  [47]  de  ces  peuples
Barbares  &  fauuages  au  dernier  point ;  mais  auffi  eft-
il  veritable  que  la  confolation  eft  grande  de  voir  ces
pauures  creatures  reduites  a  la  reconnoiffance,  refpect,
&  obeiflance  a  leur  Createur  &  Redempteur,  &  fe
ranger  aux  deuoirs  de  veritables  Chrefliens.

Seroit-il  poffible  de  retenir  les  larmes  de  ioye,  voy-
ant  vn Dimanche  matin, arriuer  chez  nous,  pour


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  i6S9  37

baptize  men  and  women  who  have  presented  them-
selves, who  have  been  deemed  qualified  for  this  bless-
ing, [46]  so  that  the  number  of  the  faithful  who
make  profession  of  Christianity  in  this  Village  now
amounts  to  nearly  60,  of  whom  many  are  Wenroro-
nons  from  among  those  poor  Strangers  taking  refuge
in  this  country,  whom  we  mentioned  at  the  begin-
ning of  this  Chapter, —  divine  Providence  having
waited  for  them  to  furnish  the  nucleus  for  this  new
Church,  as  if  they  were  predestined,  from  all  Eter-
nity, to  be  a  part  of  the  foundation  stones.  In  this
number  are  also  some  other  Strangers  of  different
Nations  who  have  since  retired  to  their  own  country,
who,  sooner  or  later,  may  be  very  useful  in  carrying
out  some  design  of  the  Providence,  Goodness,  and
Mercy  of  God.

I  said,  '  ■  nearly  60  of  the  Faithful  making  a  profes-
sion of  Christianity;"  for  of  those  baptized  in  the
extremity  of  their  sickness  there  are  many  others  in
the  Village,  who,  nevertheless,  having  recovered
their  health,  have  attached  no  value  to  the  blessing
they  had  received, —  to  which,  for  all  that,  it  may  be
believed,  at  least  in  the  case  of  some,  that  they  are
indebted  also  for  temporal  life.

It  must  be  confessed  that  the  travail  of  a  spiritual
birth  is  painful,  in  the  case  [47]  of  these  peoples,  Bar-
barous and  savage  to  the  last  degree.  But  it  is  also
true  that  there  is  great  consolation  in  seeing  these
poor  creatures  brought  to  recognize,  to  respect,  and
to  obey  their  Creator  and  Redeemer,  and  to  assume
the  duties  of  real  Christians.

Hardly  could  one  repress  the  tears  of  joy,  who
should  see,  on  a  Sunday  morning,  these  poor  people
arrive  at  our  house  to  hear  Mass,  having  departed


38  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

entendre  la  Meffe,  ces  pauures  gens  partis  de  leurs
cabanes  a  point  nomme,  &  quelque  temps  qu'il  fafle
trauerfer  vn  efpace  notable  qu'il  y  a  de  leur  Bourg
a  noftre  demeure,  nuds  pour  la  plufpart,  comme  la
main,  excepte  vne  fimple  peau  qu'ils  ont  fur  le  dos
en  forme  de  mante;  &  dans  la  rigueur  de  l'hyuer
quelques  peaux  a  l'entour  de  leurs  pieds,  &  de  leurs
iambes,

Mais  fur  tout  quand  on  les  voit  fe  mettre  a  genoux,
ce  qui  leur  eft  vne  pofture  du  tout  eftrange  &  extra-
ordinaire, faire  leurs  prieres  a  haute  voix,  en  la  pre-
fence  du  faindt  Sacrement,  &  fe  communier  pefle-
mefle  auec  nos  Francois.  II  faut  confeffer  que  le
contentement  eft  tel,  que  le  centuple  la  dedans,  nous
eft  richement  paye,  &  au  dela,  &  que  nous  n'aurons
iamais  fuiet  [48]  d'eftre  en  peine  de  voir  en  ce  point
accomplies  les  promeffes  de  l'Euangile.

On  a  foin  Thyuer  de  tenir  en  plufieurs  endroidts
de  la  Chappelle  des  foyers  pleins  de  braif e,  pour  reme-
dier  aux  inconueniens  qui  s'en  pourroient  enfuiure
du  froid,  &  de  leur  nudite\  Cela  les  fatisfait  de  la
forte,  que  quelques- vns  demeurent  fouuent  de  leur
plein  gre"  les  heures  entieres  apres  le  feruice,  a  s'en-
tretenir  de  nos  myfteres,  &  a  f e  faire  inffcruire  touf-
iours  de  plus  en  plus.

La  premiere  occafion  qui  fe  prefenta  apres  leurs
baptefmes,  de  faire  paroiftre  leur  deuotion,  fut  a  la
nuidt  de  Noel,  laquelle  plufieurs  pafferent  partie  dans
noftre  cabane,  partie  dans  la  Chappelle  nouuelle,  qui
fe  trouua  en  eftat  de  feruir  a  cefte  folemnite\  On
difpofa  les  chofes  auec  le  plus  d'ornement,  &  d'efclat
qui  fut  poffible,  pour  leur  faire  apprehender  le  merite
de  ce  iour.  Et  la  chofe  reufiit  de  la  forte,  que  ces
pauures  gens  ont  fouuent  depuis  demande,  quand  eft-


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  39

from  their  cabins  at  the  appointed  time,  and  some-
times when  they  had  to  traverse  a  considerable  dis-
tance which  lies  between  their  Village  and  our  dwell-
ing,—  naked,  for  the  most  part,  as  the  hand,  except
a  single  skin  that  they  wear  upon  their  backs  in  the
form  of  a  mantle,  and  in  the  rigor  of  winter  some
skins  around  their  feet  and  legs.

But  above  all  [would  one  rejoice]  to  see  them  get
upon  their  knees,  which  to  them  is  a  posture  alto-
gether strange  and  extraordinary,  and  offer  their
prayers  aloud  in  the  presence  of  the  blessed  Sacra-
ment, and  receive  communion  promiscuously  with
our  French  people.  It  must  be  confessed  that  the
satisfaction  is  such  that  by  it  we  are  inwardly  repaid
a  hundredfold,  and  more,  and  that  we  shall  never
have  reason  [48]  for  difficulty  in  seeing  the  promises
of  the  Gospel  fulfilled  in  this  respect.

In  winter,  we  are  careful  to  have  fireplaces  full  of
burning  coals  in  several  parts  of  the  Chapel,  to  pro-
vide against  the  discomforts  that  might  arise  from
the  cold  and  their  nakedness.  This  so  pleases  them
that  some  often  remain,  of  their  own  free  will,  whole
hours  after  the  service,  to  converse  about  our  mys-
teries, and  to  become  better  and  better  instructed.

The  first  occasion  that  presented  itself  after  their
baptisms  to  show  their  devotion  was  on  Christmas
night,  part  of  which  several  spent  in  our  cabin,  others
in  the  new  Chapel,  which  proved  to  be  in  condition
for  use  at  this  solemnity.  Things  were  arranged
with  as  much  decoration  and  splendor  as  possible,  to
make  them  realize  the  importance  of  this  day ;  and
the  affair  succeeded  so  well  that  these  poor  people
have  often  asked  since  then  when  that  night  would
return, —  or  rather  this  kind  of  a  beautiful  day;  for,


40  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J ^SUITES [Vol.  17

ce  que  cette  nuidt  reuiendroit,  ou  pluftoft  cette  forte
de  beau  iour:  car  ces  peuples  n'ayans  aucun  vfage  de
chandelles,  voyant  quantite  de  lumieres  qui  bril-
loient  &  efclattoient  [49]  dans  cefte  Chapelle,  auoient
quelque  fujet  de  doute  s'il  faifoit  iour  ou  nuidt.

Noftre  Chreftien,  ainli  appellons  nous  Iofeph  Chi-
Hatenhtfa,  tant  par  ce  qu'il  a  efte"  le  premier  en  ce
Bourg,  &  feul  neuf  ou  dix  mois  auec  fa  famille,
faifant  profeflion  du  Chriftianifme,  nonobftant  tous
les  difcours  &  les  perfecutions  de  langue  de  fes  Com-
patriotes;  que  par  ce  qu'il  eft  incomparablement  emi-
nent par  deffus  tous  les  autres,  en  connoiffance  &
pieufe  affedtion  a  nos  myfleres,  &  a  l'efprit  du  Chri-
ftianifme. Ce  braue  Chreftien  dif-ie  ne  man  qua  pas
en  cefte  occafion  de  prendre  fouuent  la  parole,  &  y
faire  fondtion  de  fraire  aifn6,  en  inftruifant  &  enfei-
gnant  fes  cadets  auec  vn  aduantage  &  fuccez  tout
particulier,  pour  auoir  tout  enfemble  l'efprit,  la  pa-
role, la  probit6,  la  reputation,  la  cognoiffance  de  nos
myfteres,  &  1' affection  en  vn  eminent  degr6;  de
forte  que  nous  commencons  a  le  regarder  pluftoft
comme  vn  Apoftre,  que  comme  vn  Barbare  de  ces
contr6es.  Ah,  difoit-il,  mes  Freres,  que  veulent  dire
ces  lumieres  brillantes  &  eclatantes  au  milieu  de  la
nuidt,  fmon  que  celuy  dont  nous  honorons  mainte-
nant  la  memoire,  a  par  fa  naiffance  [50]  dimpe"  les
tenebres  &  T  ignorance  du  monde;  ce  qu' ay  ant  fait
pour  la  premiere  fois  depuis  tant  de  fiecles,  il  nous
va  auiourd'huy  pour  la  premiere  fois  en  ces  contr6es,
faifant  la  mefme  grace  &  mifericorde.  Ce  font  des
deffeins  &  des  iugemens  qu'il  ne  faut  qu'adorer,
pourquoy  c'efl  qu'il  ne  l'a  pas  fait  pluftoft,  mais  c'eft
vne  grace  &  vne  faueur  pour  nous,  qui  ne  fe  peut
prifer,  ny  recognoiftre  fumfamment,  que  fa  proui-


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  41

as  these  people  are  not  in  the  habit  of  using  candles,
seeing  many  lights  shining  and  sparkling  [49]  in  this
Chapel,  they  had  some  reason  to  question  whether
it  were  day  or  night.

Our  Christian, — it  is  thus  we  call  Joseph  Chiwa-
tenhwa,  both  because  he  was  the  first  one  in  this  Vil-
lage, and  for  nine  or  ten  months  the  only  one  who,
with  his  family,  made  a  profession  of  Christianity,
notwithstanding  all  the  speeches  and  the  verbal  per-
secutions of  his  Countrymen;  and  because  he  is
incomparably  superior  to  all  the  others  in  knowledge
of  and  pious  affection  to  our  mysteries  and  to  the
spirit  of  Christianity, — this  brave  Christian,  I  say,
did  not  fail  on  this  occasion  often  to  address  the  peo-
ple, and  to  perform  the  duty  of  an  elder  brother  by
instructing  and  teaching  his  juniors  with  most  special
benefit  and  success,  because  he  had  at  once  intelli-
gence, eloquence,  integrity,  reputation,  the  knowl-
edge of  our  mysteries,  and  the  affection  for  them,
in  an  eminent  degree ;  so  we  are  beginning  to  regard
him  as  an  Apostle  rather  than  a  Barbarian  of  these
countries.  u  Ah,  my  Brothers,"  said  he,  V  what  do
these  lights  shining  and  sparkling  in  the  midst  of  the
night  mean,  if  not  that  he  whose  memory  we  are  now
honoring  has  through  his  birth  [50]  dissipated  the
shadows  and  the  ignorance  of  the  world ;  having  done
this  the  first  time  so  many  centuries  ago,  he  is  about
to  grant  us  to-day,  for  the  first  time  in  these  coun-
tries, the  same  grace  and  mercy.  There  are  purposes
and  reasons,  which  can  only  be  adored,  for  which  he
has  not  done  this  sooner ;  but  it  is  a  grace  and  a  favor
toward  us,  which  cannot  be  sufficiently  estimated  or
acknowledged,  that  his  providence  has  arranged  this
blessing  for  our  country  while  we  are  still  living."


42  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  17


dence  ait  menage  ce  bien  a  noftre  pais,  pendant  que
nous  fommes  encore  en  vie.

De  tels  &  femblables  difcours  entretint  ce  bon
Chreftien  vne  bonne  partie  de  la  nuidt,  le  petit  trou-
peau  de  cefte  Eglife  naiffante,  laquelle  il  n'edifia  pas
moins  de  fes  exemples  que  de  fa  parole.  Car  entre-
autres  ne  fe  contenant  pas  d'vne  Meffe,  il  en  entendit
cinq  tout  de  fuite,  la  plus  part  a  genoux :  Ce  qui  pour
vn  Barbare,  qui  n'a  iamais  fceu  que  c'eftoit  de  cefte
contenance,  pourroit  bien  paffer  pour  vn  petit  mar-
tyre.  D'autres  a  fon  imitation  n'en  entendirent  gui-
ere  moins,  &  tous  fe  conf efferent,  communierent,  &
donnerent  en  cefte  occafion  tant  de  contentement  &
de  fatisfadtion,  qu'on  n'en  pouuoit  [51]  plus  fouhai-
ter  dauantage.

Ie  puis  dire  le  mefme  a  proportion  de  toutes  les
grandes  Feftes  &  Dimaches,  qui  depuis  ont  fuiuy,
aufquels  on  garde  tout  ce  qui  fe  peut  des  ceremonies
de  1' Eglife;  entr'autres  celle  du  pain  benit,  que  ces
bons  Neophytes  font  chacun  a  fon  tour,  auec  beau-
coup  de  deuotion,  particulierement  quelques-vns.

Ce  n'eft  pas  que  pour  conduire  le  tout  de  la  forte,
il  n'y  faille  apporter  beaucoup  de  peine  &  de  foin,  &
autant  pour  le  moins  qu'a  efleuer  des  enfans  malades,
mais  le  contentement  d'auoir  en  fin  mis  ces  enfans
au  mode,  ou  pluftoft  dans  la  grace  du  Chriftianifme,
&  le  defir  &  efperance  de  les  voir  deuenir  hommes
dans  T Eglife  de  Dieu,  fait  qu'on  ne  fent  prefque
point  fon  mal,  &  qu'on  eft  tout  difpofe*  a  en  fouffrir
beaucoup  dauantage.

Cefte  grace  de  Dieu  fur  ces  peuples,  n'eft  conce-
uable  qu'a  ceux  qui  fcauent  iufques  a  quel  point  ces
pauures  Barbares  font  terreftres,  &  d'eux-mefmes
efloignez,  &  incapables  de  conceuoir  &  eftimer  les


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  i6jg  43

With  this  and  similar  discourses  this  good  Chris-
tian entertained  for  a  great  part  of  the  night,  the
little  flock  of  this  rising  Church,  whom  he  edified  no
less  by  his  examples  than  by  his  words.  For,  among
other  things,  not  contenting  himself  with  one  Mass,
he  heard  five  in  succession, — during  most  of  them,
on  his  knees ;  this,  for  a  Barbarian,  who  has  never
known  what  that  posture  is,  might  well  pass  for  a
petty  martyrdom.  Others,  imitating  him,  heard
almost  as  many  Masses,  and  all  confessed  and  re-
ceived communion,  and  on  this  occasion  gave  so  much
comfort  and  satisfaction,  that  one  could  not  [51]  wish
for  more  besides.

I  can  say  the  same,  relatively,  of  all  the  great
Feasts  and  Sundays  which  have  followed  that  time,
on  which  occasions  we  observe  as  many  as  possible  of
the  ceremonies  of  the  Church, —  among  others,  that
of  the  consecrated  bread,  of  which  these  good  Neo-
phytes partake,  each  in  his  turn,  with  great  devotion,
some  in  especial.

Not  that,  in  order  to  direct  all  in  this  way,  a  great
deal  of  trouble  and  care  must  not  be  taken, —  as  much,
at  least,  as  to  raise  sickly  children ;  but  the  satisfac-
tion of  having  finally  brought  these  children  into  the
world,  or  rather  into  the  grace  of  Christianity,  and
the  desire  and  hope  of  seeing  them  become  men  in
the  Church  of  God,  renders  one  almost  insensible  to
his  pains,  and  makes  him  quite  ready  to  suffer  a  great
many  more.

This  grace  of  God  upon  these  peoples  is  not  con-
ceivable except  to  those  who  know  to  what  extent
these  Barbarians  are  of  the  earth,  and  of  themselves
disinclined  and  incompetent  to  understand  or  con-
sider the  things  of  the  spirit  and  of  Eternity. But


44  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

chofes  de  l'efprit  &  de  1' Eternity,  mais  celuy  a  qui
rien  n'eft  impofiible,  &  qui  n'eft  pas  mois  puifTant  en
vn  temps  qu'en  vn  [52]  autre,  femble  en  fin  aggreer,
de  fufciter  de  ces  pierres  &  rochers  des  vrays  enfans
d' Abraham,  &  de  l'Eglife.

Ce  qui  apres  rafiiftance  du  Ciel  femble  auoir  le  plus
contribue*  a  Taduancement  de  c£t  ouurage,  font;
Premierement,  la  patience  &  le  courage  des  Peres  qui
ont  efte*  icy  par  cy-deuant,  qui  ne  fe  font  pas  rebutez
ny  laffez  dans  l'attente  des  temps  &  des  moments  de
la  diuine  Prouidence :  &  qui  nonobflant  toutes  les  per-
fections &  dangers  de  maffacre,  dont  ils  fe  font  veus
a  la  veille  fouuent,  &  parti culierement  l'ann£e  prece-
dente,  n'ont  rien  relafche  de  leurs  foins  &  charitez  a
vifiter  &  affifter  les  malades,  voire  mefme  dans  les
cabanes  de  ceux  qui  fembloient  leur  vouloir  le  plus
de  mal.

Et  il  femble  en  effet  que  Dieu  ait  voulu  tefmoigner
que  c'efloit  la  le  grain,  qui  auoit  produit  ce  fruidt,
difpofant  les  chofes  de  la  forte,  qu'au  mefme  mois
d'Odtobre,  auquel  Tann6e  d'auparauant  on  auoit  con-
clu  leur  mort,  ca  [sc.  c'a]  efte  en  ce  mefme  mois  l'an-
n^e  d'apres,  que  penfants  eftre  encore  bien  efloignez
de  la  recolte,  ils  ont  aperceu  les  fruidts  tous  meurs
&  prefts  a  cueillir.

[53]  En  fecond  lieu,  l'exemple  de  nos  Francois
feculiers  ou  domeftiques,  n'y  a  pas  de  peu  feruy.
Nous  n'experimentons  que  trop  la  force  de  cet  article,
foit  pour  le  bien,  foit  pour  le  mal.  Et  ie  ne  doute
point  que  l'affaire  ne  fe  fufl  pluftoit  aduanc^e,  fi
tous  les  Francois  qui  ont  monte"  en  ce  pais  iufques
icy,  euffent  eR6  d'vne  vie  irreprochable.  Au  moins
efl-il  affeure*  que  les  Barbares  ne  nous  euffent  pas  fi
fouuent  arrefte\  leur  propofant  les  Commandements


1639-40]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  45

he  to  whom  nothing  is  impossible,  and  who  is  not
less  powerful  at  one  time  than  at  [52]  another,  seems
finally  pleased  to  raise  up  from  these  stones  and  rocks
true  children  of  Abraham  and  of  the  Church.

The  things  which  seem,  after  the  aid  of  Heaven,
to  have  contributed  most  to  the  advancement  of  this
work,  are :  First,  the  patience  and  the  courage  of  the
Fathers  who  were  here  before,  who  were  not  rebuffed
or  wearied  in  waiting  for  the  times  and  moments  of
divine  Providence,  and  who, — notwithstanding  all
the  persecutions  and  dangers  of  massacre,  on  the
verge  of  which  they  often  found  themselves,  and  par-
ticularly last  year, — in  no  wise  relaxed  their  atten-
tions and  kindnesses  in  visiting  and  assisting  the  sick,
yea,  even  in  the  cabins  of  those  who  seemed  to  have
the  most  ill-will  towards  them.

And  indeed  it  seems  that  God  wished  to  show  that
that  was  the  seed  which  produced  this  fruit, — so  ar-
ranging matters  that  in  the  very  month  of  October
in  which,  the  year  before,  their  death  had  been
decreed,  in  this  same  month  the  next  year,  when
they  thought  themselves  to  be  still  very  far  from  the
harvest,  they  perceived  the  fruit  quite  ripe  and  ready
to  be  gathered.

[5  3]  In  the  second  place,  the  example  of  our  secular
French,  or  domestics,  has  been  of  no  little  service.
We  experience  only  too  strongly  the  force  of  this
element,  either  for  good  or  for  evil ;  and  I  do  not
doubt  that  the  cause  might  have  been  sooner  advanced
if  all  the  French  who  have  come  up  to  this  country
had  been  of  irreproachable  lives.  At  least  it  is  cer-
tain that  the  Barbarians  would  not  so  often  have
stopped  us  when  we  were  proposing  to  them  the  Com-
mandments  of God,  and brought forward,  in the


46  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  17

de  Dieu,  &  reprefente"  le  contraire  de  ce  que  nous
enfeignons  dans  les  adtions  &  les  oeuures  de  quelques
perfonnes.  Mais  Dieu  difpofant  les  affaires  au  poinct
que  nous  les  voyons,  femble  auoir  infpire"  a  Meffieurs
de  la  Compagnie  de  la  Nouuelle  France  de  fi  bonnes
penfees  &  refolutions  la  deffus,  &  Monfieur  le  Cheua-
lier  de  Montmagny  noflre  Gouuerneur  y  apporte  vn
fi  bon  ordre,  que  nous  efperons  que  cette  pierre  d'a-
choppement  ne  fe  trouuera  plus  en  noflre  chemin.
Et  en  effedt  ceux  qui  font  icy  de  prefent,  non  feule-
ment  meinent  vne  vie  irreprochable,  mais  en  outre
viuent  &  fe  comportent  de  la  forte,  que  nous  auons
tout  fuiet  de  croire  que  Dieu  en  leur  confideration,
[54]  a  donne  vne  particuliere  benedidtion  a  c£t  ou-
urage,  auquel  ils  s'eftudient  felon  leur  pouuoir  &
induflrie,  de  prendre  vne  bonne  part.

Ie  mets  au  rang  des  caufes  de  raduancement  de
ce  mefme  ouurage,  les  difcours  &  comportemens  de
Iofeph  Chihtfatenhtfa,  ce  bon  Neophyte,  duquel  nous
auons  defia  plufieurs  fois  parle",  qui  femble  auoir  efte*
ce  leuain  de  l'Euangile,  qui  a  faidt  leuer  toute  la
mafle  de  cette  nouuelle  Eglife  des  Hurons,  non  feule-
ment  en  ce  bourg,  mais  encore  par  tout  ailleurs  ou
nous  auons  trauaille"  a  faire  des  Chreftiens,  foit  en
celuy  de  Teanauffcaye  ou  nous  auons  vne  Refidence,
foit  aux  Miflions ;  s'eftant  trouu6  par  tout  aux  meil-
leures  occafions,  pour  faire  profeflion  publique,  &
rendre  copte  de  fa  foy  &  de  fa  conuerfion.  En  quoy
il  s'eft  comport^  par  tout  auec  vne  fatisfadtion  pleine
&  entiere  de  fes  compatriotes,  qui  ne  fe  laffent  iamais
de  Tentendre.  Vous  vous  rebutez,  mes  Freres,  (leur
dit-il  quelquefois)  fur  ce  que  les  affaires  de  voflre
falut  que  vous  propofent  les  Francois,  font  chofes
nouuelles, & leurs propres couftumes  qui  renuer-


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  47

actions  and  deeds  of  certain  persons,  the  opposite  of
what  we  were  teaching.  But  God,  in  bringing  affairs
to  the  condition  in  which  we  see  them,  seems  to  have
inspired  the  Gentlemen  of  the  Company  of  New
France  with  so  good  ideas  and  resolutions  thereupon,
and  Monsieur  the  Chevalier  de  Montmagny,  our  Gov-
ernor, has  brought  about  so  good  order,  that  we  hope
this  stumbling-block  will  no  longer  be  found  in  our
way.  And,  in  fact,  those  who  are  here  at  present
not  only  lead  irreproachable  lives,  but  besides  live
and  behave  in  such  a  way  that  we  have  every  reason
to  believe  that  God  upon  their  account  [54]  has  given
a  special  blessing  to  this  work,  in  which  they  strive,
according  to  their  power  and  skill,  to  take  a  worthy
part.

I  place  among  the  causes  for  the  advancement  of
this  same  work  the  speeches  and  behavior  of  Joseph
Chihwatenhwa,  the  good  Neophyte  of  whom  we  have
already  spoken  several  times,  who  seems  to  have  been
the  leaven  of  the  Gospel  that  has  made  the  whole
lump  of  this  new  Church  of  the  Hurons  rise, —  not
only  in  this  village,  but  also  everywhere  else  where
we  have  striven  to  make  Christians,  either  in  the
town  of  Teanaustaye*  where  we  have  a  Residence,  or
in  the  Missions, — he  having  been  everywhere  pres-
ent on  the  most  suitable  occasions,  to  make  a  public
profession  and  to  render  an  account  of  his  faith  and
his  conversion.  In  this  he  conducted  himself  every-
where to  the  full  and  entire  satisfaction  of  his  com-
patriots, who  were  never  tired  of  hearing  him.  ' '  You
are  disheartened,  my  Brothers ' '  (he  sometimes  said
to  them),  ' '  because  the  matters  of  your  salvation  that
the  French  propose  to  you  are  new  things,  and  cus-
toms of  their  own  which  overthrow  ours. You  tell


48  ;  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  17

fent  les  noftres.  Vous  leur  dites,  que  chaque  pais
[55]  a  fes  facons  de  faire:  que  comme  vous  ne  les
preffez  pas  de  prendre  les  noftres,  auffi  vous  efton-
nez-vous  de  ce  qu'ils  nous  preffent  de  prendre  en
cela  les  leur,  &  de  recognoiftre  auec  eux  le  mefme
Createur  du  Ciel  &  de  la  Terre,  &  le  Seigneur  vni-
uerfel  de  toutes  chofes.  Ie  vous  demande,  quand
au  commencement  vous  veifles  de  leurs  haches  &
chaudieres,  apres  auoir  recognu  qu'elles  eitoient
incomparablement  meilleures  &  plus  commodes  que
nos  haches  de  pierre,  &  que  nos  vaifTeaux,  de  bois  &
de  terre,  auez  vous  pour  cela  reiette  leurs  haches  &
chaudieres,  parce  que  c'eftoit  chofe  nouuelle  a  voftre
pais,  &  la  couftume  de  France  de  s'en  feruir,  &  non
pas  la  voftre.  Que  s'ils  nous  preffent  de  croire  ce
qu'ils  croyoient,  &  de  viure  conformement  a  cefte  cre-
ance,  nous  leur  en  auons  beaucoup  d' obligation:  car
en  effet  fi  ce  qu'ils  difent  eft  vray,  comme  il  eft,  nous
fommes  les  plus  miferables  gens  du  monde,  fi  nous
ne  faifons  ce  qu'ils  nous  difent.

Ie  n'aurois  iamais  faidt,  fi  ie  me  voulois  eftendre
plus  au  long  fur  tous  les  difcours,  ou  pluftoft  fur
toutes  les  faillies  de  l'efprit  de  Dieu,  qui  femble  par-
ler  fouuent  par  la  [56]  bouche  de  ce  bon  Neophyte.
Ie  dis  faillies  de  l'efprit  de  Dieu,  car  nous  ne  fcauons
que  penfer  autre  chofe,  le  voyant  quelquefois  fe
mettre  a  benir  Dieu,  &  le  loiier  tout  en  la  mefme
facon  &  maniere,  que  firent  autrefois  les  enfans  das
la  fournaife,  fans  que  iamais  il  ait  eu  cognoiffance  de
ce  que  la  faindte  Efcriture  nous  en  apprend.

Ie  ne  me  trouuerois  pas  moins  empefch6,  fi  i'auois
entrepris  de  declarer  tous  les  adtes  de  vertu  remar-
quables,  &  tous  les  bons  exemples  qu'il  a  continue"
de  faire  paroiftre  depuis  le  temps  de  la  derniere  Rela-


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  1639  49

them  that  every  country  [55]  has  its  own  ways  of
doing  things ;  that,  as  yon  do  not  nrge  them  to  adopt
onrs,  so  yon  are  surprised  at  their  urging  us  to  adopt
theirs  in  this  matter,  and  to  acknowledge  with  them
the  same  Creator  of  Heaven  and  of  Earth,  and  the
universal  Lord  of  all  things.  I  ask  you,  when  at  first
you  saw  their  hatchets  and  kettles,  after  having  dis-
covered that  they  were  incomparably  better  and  more
convenient  than  our  stone  hatchets  and  our  wooden
and  earthen  vessels,2  did  you  reject  their  hatchets
and  kettles,  because  they  were  new  things  in  your
country,  and  because  it  was  the  custom  of  France  to
use  them  and  not  yours?  Now  if  they  urge  us  to
believe  what  they  believe,  and  to  live  conformably
to  this  belief,  we  are  under  great  obligations  to  them ;
for  indeed,  if  what  they  say  is  true,  as  it  is,  we  are
the  most  miserable  people  in  the  world  if  we  do  not
do  as  they  tell  us. ' '

I  would  never  finish  if  I  were  to  dwell  at  length
upon  all  the  discourses,  or  rather  upon  all  the  flashes
of  the  spirit  of  God,  which  often  seems  to  speak
through  the  [56]  mouth  of  this  good  Neophyte.  I
say  ' '  flashes  of  the  spirit  of  God, "  for  we  cannot  think
of  anything  else  when  we  see  him  sometimes  begin-
ning to  bless  God  and  to  praise  him  in  the  same  fash-
ion and  manner  as  did  in  olden  time  the  children  in
the  furnace,  without  his  ever  having  learned  what
the  holy  Scriptures  teach  us  thereof.

I  would  not  find  myself  less  embarrassed  if  I  had
undertaken  to  declare  all  the  acts  of  remarkable  vir-
tue and  all  the  good  examples  he  has  continued  to
manifest  since  the  time  of  the  last  Relation,  whether
in  health  or  in  sickness,  in  prosperity  or  in  adversity.

When  it  was  a  question  of  going  after  those  poor


50  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

tion,  foit  en  fante,  foit  en  maladie,  foit  dans  la  prof-
perite*,  foit  dans  l'aduerfite\

Quand  il  fut  queftion  d'aller  querir  ces  pauures
eftrangers  dont  nous  auons  parle*  cy-deffus,  il  ne  fe
contenta  pas  d'aller  a  my  chemin  comme  plufieurs
autres ;  mais  il  fit  le  voyage  entier,  &  prift  tant  de
peine  &  de  foin  a  les  amfter,  par  des  motifs  veri-
ta[b]lement  Chreftiens,  qu'eftant  icy  de  retour,  il  en
tomba  malade  d'vne  fieVre  qui  luy  dura  40  iours,  pen-
dant lefquels  on  le  tint  par  plufieurs  fois  pour  defef-
pere\  II  pleut  toutefois  a  Dieu  donner  benediction
aux  remedes  &  aux  charitez  [57]  dont  nous  l'affi-
ftames,  en  forte  qu'au  bout  des  40  iours  il  fe  trouua
entierement  hors  de  danger.  Au  plus  fort  de  fon
mal,  eflant  furpris  de  refuerie,  fes  difcours  &  extra-
uagance  n'eftoient  que  des  chofes  de  Dieu  &  de  la
Foy :  il  fe  leuoit  quelquesf ois  tout  nud,  &  fe  tenant
aupres  du  feu :  Qu'ils  viennent,  qu'ils  viennent,  di-
foit-il,  qu'ils  me  bruflent,  &  qu'ils  voyent  fi  c'efl  tout
de  bon  que  ie  croy,  ou  fi  c'efl  feulement  du  bout  des
levres.

Depuis  ce  temps,  cefte  bonne  Ame  nous  a  femble*
de  plus  en  plus  fe  remplir  du  S.  Efprit,  &  entrer  dans
fe  -fender  des  Saints,  dont  il  a  donne"  plufieurs  autres
preuues,  tant  aux  attaques  contre  la  chaftetS,  &  la
Religion,  qu'aux  exercices  de  charite*  &  de  mife-
ricorde.

Ie  ne  fcay  a  quoy  ie  dois  attribuer,  ce  qui  luy  arri-
ua  rEfte"  pafs6,  lors  qu'eftant  a  la  pefche,  il  pleut
par  tout  le  pais,  &  fpecialement  tout  a  l'entour  du
lieu  ou  il  efboit,  ce  qui  caufa  vn  grand  degaft  de  poif-
fon,  &  cependant  il  ne  plut  iamais  a  l'endroit  ou  il  fe
trouua  auec  ceux  de  fa  copagnie,  &  fit  fa  pefche  fort


1630  -40 J  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TION,  i639  51

strangers  whom  we  have  mentioned  above,  he  was
not  satisfied  to  go  halfway,  like  many  others;  but
he  made  the  entire  journey,  and  took  so  much  pains
and  care  to  assist  them,  through  truly  Christian  mo-
tives, that  after  he  returned  hither  he  fell  sick  of  a
fever  that  lasted  40  days,  during  which  he  was
several  times  considered  a  hopeless  case.  It  pleased
God,  however,  to  grant  a  blessing  to  the  remedies  and
charities  [57]  with  which  we  assisted  him,  so  that  at
the  end  of  40  days  he  proved  to  be  entirely  out  of
danger.  At  the  height  of  his  illness,  being  overtaken
with  delirium,  his  utterances  and  ravings  were  only
about  the  things  of  God  and  of  the  Faith.  He  some-
times arose,  entirely  naked,  and,  keeping  near  the
fire,  "  Let  them  come,  let  them  come,"  said  he;  "  let
them  burn  me,  and  let  them  see  if  it  is  in  good  ear-
nest that  I  believe,  or  if  it  is  only  with  my  lips. '  ■

Since  that  time,  this  good  Soul  has  seemed  to  us  to
be  more  and  more  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to
have  entered  the  path  of  the  Saints,  of  which  he  has
given  many  other  proofs,  not  only  in  attacks  against
his  chastity  and  Religion,  but  in  his  exercises  of
charity  and  mercy.

I  do  not  know  to  what  I  should  attribute  what  hap-
pened to  him  last  Summer, — when,  being  engaged
in  fishing,  it  rained  throughout  the  country,  and
especially  all  around  the  place  where  he  was,  which
caused  great  havoc  among  the  fish ;  and  yet  it  never
rained  in  the  locality  where  he  was  with  his  com-
pany, and  his  fishing  was  very  successful.  One  thing
is  certain  —  he  never  omitted  in  all  that  time  to  pray,
[58]  and  to  have  all  those  who  were  with  him  pray,
to  God  morning  and  evening ;  besides  this,  he  with-


52  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

heureufement.  Vne  chofe  eft  affeuree,  qu'il  n'obmit
iamais  en  tout  ce  temps  de  prier,  [58]  &  faire  prier
Dieu  matin  &  f oir  tous  ceux  qui  eftoient  auec  luy :
Outre  que  tous  les  iours  il  fe  retiroit  feul  dans  le  bois,
pour  vacquer  auec  moins  de  diuertiffement,  &  plus
long-temps  a  l'oraifon.

En  fin,  il  me  femble  que  ce  foit  ce  bon  grain  de
l'Euangile,  &  du  meilleur,  qui  rend  non  feulement
60.  mais  100.  puis  qu'a  la  S.  Iofeph  de  Tan  pafse,  n'y
ay  at  que  luy  en  fa  famille  de  baptifez,  faifants  pro-
f eflion  du  Chriftianifme ;  vn  an  apres  au  mefme  iour,
il  y  en  auoit  pr6s  de  cent  dans  le  pais,  faifants  la
mefme  profeflion,  a  la  conuerfion  defquels  il  n'auoit
pas  peu  contribue.

Ie  ne  m'eftendray  point  dauantage  en  ce  Chapitre,
ny  aux  fuiuants,  fur  plufieurs  autres  particularitez
des  affaires  qui  fe  font  paff£es,  nommement  fur  les
Baptefmes,  tant  des  enf ants  que  des  adultes  malades ;
tant  pour  6uiter  la  longueur,  que  pour  ne  donner  de
l'ennuy  a  ceux  qui  pourront  ietter  les  yeux  fur  ce
Narre.  Car  quoy  qu'en  plufieurs  il  y  ait  beaucoup
de  chofes  confiderables,  &  qui  font  ouurages  excel-
lens  de  la  bont6,  iuflice  &  Prouidence  de  Dieu  fur
ces  Creatures,  il  en  eft  toutefois  de  ces  affaires,  comme
des  ouurages  de  [59]  peinture  ou  de  fculpture,  def-
quels fi  les  traits  font  fubtils  &  delicats,  ils  ne  fe  peu-
uent  voir  de  loin  auec  contentement,  pour  excelles
qu'ils  puiffent  eftre,  &  demandent  des  perfonnes  qui
ne  foiet  point  efloign6es  pour  les  voir  de  pr6s,  &  en
conceuoir  le  merite.  Ces  cas  done  feront  referuez  a
l'entretien  des  faindtes  Ames  au  feiour  bienheureux
de  V Eternite\  Qui  cependant  nous  ayderont  encore,
s'il  leur  plaift,  a  remercier  la  diuine  Maiefte\  auffi


1639-40]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  53

drew  alone  into  the  woods,  every  day,  that  he  might,
with  less  interruption  and  for  a  longer  time,  devote
himself  to  prayer.

Finally,  it  seems  to  me  that  it  is  this  good  Gospel
seed,  the  very  best,  which  yields  not  only  60  but
100-fold;  since  on  St.  Joseph's  day  of  last  year  we
had  only  him  with  his  family,  of  those  baptized,  who
made  a  profession  of  Christianity;  one  year  after-
wards, on  the  same  day,  there  were  nearly  a  hundred
in  the  country  making  the  same  profession,  to  whose
conversion  he  had  contributed  not  a  little.

I  shall  not  dwell  further  in  this  Chapter,  nor  in
the  following  ones,  upon  many  other  details  of  the
events  which  have  taken  place, —  especially  upon  the
Baptisms  of  children  and  of  sick  adults, — both  to
avoid  prolixity,  and  not  to  weary  those  who  may  cast
their  eyes  over  this  Narrative.  For  although  in  sev-
eral there  are  many  important  features,  which  are
notable  achievements  of  the  goodness,  justice,  and
Providence  of  God  toward  his  Creatures,  yet  some  of
these  things  are  like  works  of  [59]  painting  or  of
sculpture,  which,  if  the  lines  are  subtle  and  delicate,
cannot  be  seen  satisfactorily  from  a  distance,  how-
ever excellent  they  may  be,  and  require  persons  who
are  not  far  away,  that  they  may  see  them  close  at
hand  and  judge  their  merits.  These  cases,  then,
will  be  reserved  for  the  entertainment  of  the  saintly
Souls  in  the  blessed  sojourn  of  Eternity, —  who,
meanwhile,  will  still  aid  us,  if  they  please,  in  thank-
ing the  divine  Majesty  for  special  and  hidden  favors,
as  well  as  for  manifest  and  general  ones.

I  would  be  wholly  wrong  if  I  were  to  close  this
Chapter  before  enumerating  another  cause  for  the


54


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  17


bien  des  faueurs  particulieres  &  occultes,  que  des
efclatantes  &  generates.

Faurois  tous  les  torts  du  monde  fi  ie  fermois  ce
Chapitre,  deuant  que  d'adioufter  vne  autre  caufe  de
raduancement  de  c6t  ouurage.  Ce  font  les  faindtes
prieres  &  deuotions  de  tant  de  bonnes  Ames  qui
font  en  France,  &  qui  prennent  vne  fi  grande  part,  &
vn  fi  grand  intereft  a  toutes  ces  affaires.

Ie  me  fuis  quelquefois  eftonn6  de  l'ordre  que  tenoit
autrefois  ce  grand  Apoftre  des  Indes  S.  Francois
Xauier,  inuitant  &  coniurant  la  diuine  Maieft6  de
ramfter  a  l'entreprife  de  la  conuerfion  des  infidelles
des  contrees  ou  il  eftoit,  en  vne  fienne  Oraifon  qu'il
difoit  tous  les  iours  a  ce  fuiet,  [60]  &  qui  fe  trouue
dans  fa  vie,  il  y  met  en  premier  lieu  les  prieres  des
faindtes  Ames,  comme  les  plus  puiffants  moyens  qu'il
euft  de  flechir  Dieu,  &  le  porter  a  faire  mifericorde  a
ces  pauures  Errans.

Mais  l'experience  me  fait  fortir  de  I'eftonnement,
car  confiderant  dans  la  recolte  de  cefte  ann£e,  ce  qu'il
plaift  a  Dieu  nous  faire  efperer  a  l'aduenir  de  nos
trauaux  en  ces  contrees,  &  cependant  le  peu  de  pro-
portion de  nos  forces  auec  tels  ouurages,  ie  me  fens
force  de  recognoiftre  que  comme  dans  le  Ciel,  qui
roule  deflus  nos  teftes,  il  y  a  des  Eftoilles  &  des  con-
flellations  fi  puiffantes,  que  la  premiere  &  principale
vertu  produdtiue  de  certaines  richefTes  de  la  terre
leur  eft  attribute ;  ce  qui  fe  fait  ordinairement  par  les
Philofophes,  lors  qu'ils  ne  rencontrent  icy  bas  aucune
caufe  proportionn6e  a  l'eff ect :  Que  pareillement  dans
le  Ciel  de  l'Eglife,  il  y  a  des  Eftoilles  &  des  conftel-
lations  myftiques  fi  puiffantes  a  influer  fur  les  affaires
que  nous  auons  entre  les  mains,  que  la  premiere  &


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  55

advancement  of  this  work, — the  holy  prayers  and
devotions  of  so  many  good  Souls  in  France,  who  take
so  great  a  share  and  so  much  interest  in  all  these
affairs.

I  am  sometimes  astonished  at  the  order  formerly
observed  by  that  great  Apostle  of  the  Indies,  St.
Erancois  Xavier, —  when  he  was  engaging  and  en-
treating the  divine  Majesty  to  assist  him  in  the  enter-
prise of  converting  the  unbelievers  of  the  countries
where  he  was, — in  one  of  his  Prayers  which  he  said
every  day  with  this  object,  [60]  and  which  is  found
in  the  narrative  of  his  life ;  in  this  he  gives  the  first
place  to  the  prayers  of  saintly  Souls,  as  the  most
powerful  means  he  had  of  influencing  God  and  caus-
ing aim  to  show  mercy  to  those  poor  Wanderers.

But  experience  causes  me  to  recover  from  this
astonishment.  For  considering,  in  the  harvest  of
this  year,  what  it  pleases  God  to  make  us  hope  for
the  future  of  our  labors  in  these  countries,  and  yet
the  small  ratio  of  our  forces  to  such  labors,  I  feel
myself  compelled  to  acknowledge  that,  as  in  the  Sky
which  turns  above  our  heads  there  are  some  Stars
and  constellations  so  powerful  that  the  first  and  prin-
cipal virtue  productive  of  certain  riches  of  the  soil
is  artributed  to  them, — this  being  done  usually  by
Philosophers,  when  they  cannot  find  here  below  any
cause  proportionate  to  the  effect, —  so,  likewise,  in
the  Sky  of  the  Church  there  are  some  mystical  Stars
and  constellations  so  powerful  to  influence  the  affairs
thst  we  have  in  hand,  that  the  first  and  principal  vir-
tus productive  of  the  good  that  we  can  do  here  should
be  attributed  to  them,  since,  in  fact,  we  do  not  see
d3wn  here  any  other  causes  proportionate  [61]  to
taese  effects.


56  LES  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  17

principale  vertu  produdtiue  des  biens  que  nous  pou-
uons  faire  icy,  leur  doit  eflre  attribute,  puis  qu'en
effedt  nous  n'y  voyons  point  icy  bas  d'autres  caufes
proportionn6es  [61]  a  ces  effects.

Ie  pretens  par  cecy  en  faire  vne  reconnoi fiance,
vn  remerciement  general,  duquel  chaque  faindte  Ame
&  communaute"  prendra  s'il  luy  plaift  la  part  qu'elle
y  pretend,  &  qui  luy  eft  deue,  fi  elle  n'ayme  mieux
quittant  fes  droits,  attendre  de  Dieu  fa  recompenf<


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  57

I  intend  by  this  to  offer  a  general  acknowledg-
ment and  expression  of  thanks,  of  which  each  saintly-
Soul  and  community  will  take,  if  it  please,  the  share
that  it  claims,  and  that  is  its  due,  unless  it  prefer  to
give  up  its  rights  to  wait  for  its  reward  from  God.


58  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.17


CHAPITRE  V.

DE LA RESIDENCE  DE S. IOSEPH AU BOURG DE  TEA-

NAUSTAYfAE]  ;  DE  CE  QUI  S'Y  EST  PASS£  DE  PLUS

REMARQUABLE,  &  PRINCIPALEMENT  DE  LA

NAISSANCE  &  ESTABLISSEMENT  DE  LA

NOUUELLE EGLISE DE

CE BOURG.

LA  refolution  eftant  prife  de  quitter  la  demeure
d'lhonatiria,  a  faute  d'habitans,  la  plufpart
ayant  efte"  emportez  ou  diflipez  par  la  maladie,
comme  a  efte*  dit  cy-deffus,  &  plus  amplement  encore
en  la  precedente  Relation :  on  ne  f ut  pas  long-temps
a  aduifer  de  quel  cofte*  il  feroit  a  propos  de  tirer.  Le
bourg  de  Teanauftayae"  eftant  le  plus  confiderable  de
tout  le  [62]  pais,  &  qui  par  confequent  eftant  vne  fois
gagne"  a  Dieu,  donneroit  vn  grand  branfle  a  la  con-
uerfion  de  tout  le  refte.

Mais  quelle  apparence  d'entamer  cefte  affaire,  &
moins  encore  d'en  venir  a  bout;  ce  bourg  ayant  efte"
vn  peu  auparauant  vne  des  principales  boutiques,  ou
s'eftoient  forgoes  des  calomnies^les  plus  noires,  &  les
deffeins  les  plus  pernicieux  contre  nous.  Iufques-la
que  les  Capitaines  auoient  publiquement  exhorte*  la
ieunefle  a  nous  venir  maffacrer  a  ce  bourg-icy  ou  nous
eftios  d'Offofane.  Toutefois  celuy  a  qui  rien  n'eft
impoffible,  a  donn6  plus  de  facilite*  a  l'vn  &  a  l'autre
que  nous  n'euffions  iamais  of 6  efperer.

Appuye"  done  fur  Dieu  feul,'le  P.  lean  de  Brebeuf


1639-40]  LE/EUNE'S  RELATION,  j6S9  59


CHAPTER  V.

OF THE RESIDENCE OF ST. JOSEPH AT THE VIL-
LAGE OF TEANAUSTAY[A£]  ; OF THE MORE RE-
MARKABLE EVENTS THAT HAVE OCCURRED
THERE,  AND ESPECIALLY OF THE BIRTH
AND ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NEW
CHURCH OF THAT VILLAGE.

HAVING  resolved  to  abandon  the  dwelling  at
Ihonatiria,  on  account  of  its  lack  of  inhab-
itants,—  the  majority  of  them  having  been
carried  off  or  scattered  by  the  disease,  as  has  been
related  above,  and  still  more  fully  in  the  preceding
Relation, — we  were  not  long  in  deciding  to  what
place  it  would  be  wise  to  go,  the  village  of  Teanaus-
tayae3  being  the  most  important  in  the  whole  [62]
country,  and  one  which,  consequently,  being  once
won  to  God,  would  give  a  strong  impulse  to  the
conversion  of  all  the  rest.

But  what  a  prospect  for  commencing  this  undertak-
ing, to  say  nothing  of  success  therein!  For  that
village  had  been,  a  little  while  before,  one  of  the
principal  shops  in  which  were  forged  the  blackest
calumnies  and  most  pernicious  plots  against  us, — to
such  an  extent  that  the  Captains  had  publicly  ex-
horted the  young  men  to  come  and  massacre  us  at
this  village  of  Ossosane,  where  we  then  were.  Never-
theless, he  to  whom  nothing  is  impossible  has  facili-
tated the  enterprise,  in  both  respects,  more  than  we
would  ever  have  dared  to  hope.


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J ^SUITES [Vol.17

fe  tranfporte  a  ce  Bourg,  parle  aux  particulieres,  puis
au  Cofeil,  &  faidt  11  bien,  qu'il  gagne  les  vns  &  les
autres ;  de  forte  qu'en  peu  de  temps  ils  arrefterent  de
nous  receuoir  dans  leur  bourg,  &  de  nous  y  donner
vne  cabane.  Ce  qui  fut  execute,  la  premiere  Mefle
y  fut  dite  le  25.  de  Iuin,  au  grand  contentement  de
nos  Peres,  qui  auoient  de  la  peine  de  croire  ce  qu'ils
voyoient;  tant  vn  peu  auparauant,  ce  bourg  nous
auoit  eu  en  abomination.

[63]  II  eft  vray  que  cefle  cabane  eft  fi  pauure  &  11
chetiue,  que  11  le  Sauueur  du  monde  n'eut  autrefois
pris  luy-mefme  dans  le  neceffite,  le  logement  de  l'e-
flable  de  Bethlee,  nous  aurions  de  la  peine  de  luy
donner  tous  les  iours  vne  efpece  de  nouuelle  naiffance
en  ce  lieu,  qui  n'eft  couuert  que  de  mefchantes  efcor-
ces,  par  ou  le  vent  entre  de  tous  coflez.  Mais  le
neceffite'  &  l'impuiflance  de  mieux,  nous  excufe  facile-
ment  enuers  la  diuine  Maiefte\  Voila  la  premiere
anne*e  accomplie  depuis  l'eftablilfement  de  cefle  Refi-
dence:  voicy  les  fruidts  qu'elle  a  porte\

Enfants  baptifez  en  danger  de  mort,  au  nombre  de
49.  dont  dix-huidt  s'en  font  enuoles  au  Ciel.  Des
autres  qui  font  r6chapez,  ie  ne  ffay  fi  plulleurs  n'en
ont  point  V obligation  au  fainct  Baptefme.

Adultes  baptifez  dans  la  maladie,  apres  auoir  efte"
inflruits  au  nombre  de  quarante-quatre,  dont  vingt-
fix  ont  pris,  comme  il  eft  a  efperer,  le  mefme  chemin
du  Ciel.  De  ceux  qui  font  racheptez,  quelques-vns
ont  fait  profeflion  d'en  auoir  Tobligation  au  faindt  bap-
tefme ;  mais  tous  ceux  qui  luy  ont  cefte  obligation,
n'en  ont  pas,  a  noftre  grad  regret,  tel  reiTentimet
qu'ils  deuroiet.

[64]  Adultes  Cathecumenes  baptifez  en  plaine  fante*
auec  leurs  enfans,  au  nombre  de  vingt-huidt.


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  T/ON,  i63g  61

Accordingly,  sustained  by  God  alone,  Father  Jean
de  Brebeuf  repaired  to  this  Village,  spoke  to  individ-
uals and  then  to  the  Council,  and  did  so  well  that  he
won  them  both  over, —  so  that  in  a  little  while  they
decided  to  receive  us  in  their  village  and  give  us  a
cabin  there.  This  was  accomplished,  and  the  first
Mass  was  said  there  on  the  25th  of  June, — to  the
great  satisfaction  of  our  Fathers,  who  could  hardly
believe  what  they  saw,  so  greatly  had  this  village
abominated  us  a  little  while  before.

[63]  It  is  true  that  this  cabin  is  so  poor  and  so  mean
that,  if  the  Savior  of  the  world  had  not  himself
once,  in  time  of  need,  taken  lodging  in  the  stable  of
Bethlehem,  we  would  be  at  a  loss  to  give  him  each
day  a  sort  of  new  birth  in  this  place,  which  is  covered
only  with  wretched  bark,  through  which  the  wind
enters  on  every  side.  But  necessity,  and  our  inabil-
ity to  have  anything  better,  excuses  us  easily  to  the
divine  Majesty.  Now  is  completed  the  first  year  since
the  establishment  of  this  Residence ;  behold  the  fruits
it  has  borne.

Children  baptized,  in  danger  of  death,  to  the  num-
ber of  49,  of  whom  eighteen  have  flown  away  to
Heaven.  Of  the  others  who  have  recovered  I  do  not
know  if  several  are  not  under  obligation  therefor  to
holy  Baptism.

Adults  baptized  in  sickness  after  having  been  in-
structed, to  the  number  of  forty-four,  of  whom  twen-
ty-six, it  is  to  be  hoped,  have  taken  the  same  road  to
Heaven.  Of  those  who  survived,  some  have  professed
to  be  under  obligations  to  holy  baptism ;  but,  to  our
great  regret,  not  all  those  who  are  under  this  obliga-
tion feel  such  gratitude  as  they  should.

[64]  Adult  Catechumens,  baptized  in  full  health


62  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

Venons  aux  particularitez  les  plus  remarquables
de  ces  baptefmes.

Le  premier  baptist  dans  ce  bourg  ayant  efte*  vn
pauure  malheureux  Hiroquois,  prifonnier  de  guerre,
qu'on  menoit  a  vn  autre  bourg  voifin,  pour  le  donner
en  recompenfe,  aux  parents  de  ce  braue  Tarattfane,
qui  fut  pris  ces  ann6es  pafI6es  par  les  ennemis,
comme  il  a  eft6  remarque*  dans  les  precedentes  Rela-
tions. Ie  ne  fcay  fi  ie  ne  dois  point  vn  peu  arrefter
a  confiderer  &  admirer  T adorable  Prouidence  de  Dieu,
fur  ce  pauure  mal  heureux,  &  fur  fes  femblables,  au
nombre  de  12.  ou  13.  baptifez  par  les  Peres  de  cefte
Refidence,  mais  i'ayme  mieux  laiffer  cefte  reflexion
a  ceux  qui  ietteront  les  yeux  fur  ce  Narr6,  &  m' ar-
refter feulemet  a  remarquer  quelques  circonftance  de
ces  rencotres  qui  les  rendent  plus  confiderables.

De  long-temps  les  Hurons  n'ont  eu  plus  de  bon-
lieur  &  dauantage  fur  leurs  ennemis,  que  l'ann6e
derniere.  Eft  ants  allez  a  la  guerre  auec  quelques
Algonquains  leurs  voifins,  ils  prirent  pour  vn  [65]
coup,  de  leurs  ennemis  enuiron  quatre-vingts,  qu'ils
amenerent  en  vie  dans  le  pais.  Outre  c6t  aduantage
le  plus  confiderable  de  tous,  ils  en  ont  eu  d'autres  de
moindre  importance,  qui  en  tout  leur  ont  donne"  plus
de  cent  prifonniers.

Tous  ceux  qui  ont  efte"  deftinez  pour  les  Bourgs  ou
nous  auons  des  refidences,  ou  pour  les  voifins ;  ont  efte\
graces  a  Dieu,  inftruidts  &  baptifez ;  &  prefque  pas
vn  fans  des  rencontres  fi  particulieres,  qu'il  y  a  fuiet
de  croire,  qu'il  y  auoit  en  leur  fait  quelque  conduite
fpeciale  de  la  diuine  Prouidence  &  de  leur  predefti-
nation.  En  plufieurs  on  n'a  eu  que  le  temps  precif6-
ment  qu'il  falloit  pour  leur  inftrudtion  &  baptefme :


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE  S  RELA  T/ON,  i63g  63

with  their  children,  to  the  number  of  twenty-eight.

Let  us  come  to  the  most  noteworthy  particulars  of
these  baptisms.

The  first  one  baptized  in  this  village  was  a  poor  un-
fortunate Hiroquois,  a  prisoner  of  war,  who  was  taken
to  another  village,  near  this,  to  be  given  as  a  recom-
pense to  the  relatives  of  that  brave  Taratwane  who
was  captured  during  these  last  years  by  the  enemy,  as
has  been  mentioned  in  previous  Relations.  I  do  not
know  if  I  should  not  tarry  for  a  moment  to  consider
and  admire  the  adorable  Providence  of  God  towards
this  poor  wretch,  and  his  fellow  prisoners,  to  the
number  of  12  or  13,  baptized  by  the  Fathers  of  this
Residence ;  but  I  prefer  to  leave  these  reflections  to
those  who  shall  cast  their  eyes  over  this  Narrative,
and  to  stop  only  to  observe  some  circumstances  of
these  events  which  render  them  more  important.

For  a  long  time,  the  Hurons  had  no  more  good
fortune  or  advantage  over  their  enemies  until  last
year.  Having  gone  to  war,  together  with  some  Al-
gonquains,  their  neighbors,  they  captured  at  one  [65]
stroke  about  eighty  of  their  enemies,  whom  they
brought  home  alive.  Besides  this  victory,  the  most
notable  of  all,  they  had  others  of  less  importance,
which  in  all  gave  them  more  than  a  hundred  pris-
oners.

All  those  who  were  assigned  to  the  Villages  where
we  have  residences,  or  which  are  near  these,  were,
thank  God,  instructed  and  baptized,  and  hardly  one
without  circumstances  so  peculiar  that  there  is  reason
to  believe  that  there  was,  in  their  cases,  some  special
guidance  of  divine  Providence  and  of  their  predestina-
tion. In  many  instances,  we  had  only  the  exact  time
necessary  for  their  instruction  and  baptism ;  others,


64  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

d'autres  apres  eftre  baptifez,  fe  font  trouuez  li  confo-
lez,  qu'ils  ne  fe  pouuoient  tenir  de  mettre  en  chanfon
ce  fuiet  de  leur  confolation,  qu'au  moins  dorefnauant
ils  eftoient  affeurez  d'aller  au  Ciel.  D'autres  ont
refufe  genereufement  de  contrefaire  des  actions  fales
&  impudiques,  a  quoy  on  les  vouloit  porter:  D'au-
tres en  fuite  ont  fait  paroiftre  tant  de  conftance  dans
leurs  tourmens,  que  nos  Barbares  prirent  refolution
de  ne  plus  fouffrir  qu'on  baptifaft  ces  pauures  infor-
tunez,  reputans  [66]  a  mal-heur  pour  leur  pais,  quand
ceux  qu'ils  tourmentent  ne  orient  point  ou  fort  peu.

En  effet,  cela  nous  a  donne*  depuis  tant  de  peine,
qu'il  n'y  en  a  eu  pas  vn  pour  lequel  baptifer  il  n'ait
fallu  donner  des  batailles  contre  ceux  qui  en  font  les
Maiftres  &  les  Gardiens.  Et  quelquef ois  [il]  a  efle*  ne-
ceffaire  de  redimer  cefte  violence  de  quelque  prefent.

Entre  ceux  qui  ont  fait  paroiftre  plus  de  conftance
&  plus  de  cognoiflance  de  leur  bon-heur,  a  efle  vn
nomme*  Ononeltfaia,  &  en  fon  baptefme  Pierre,  qui
fut  vn  des  prifonniers  de  cette  principale  d£faite,  dont
nous  venons  de  parler,  Capitaine  des  OneiHchronons
nation  d'Hiroquois.  Celuy-cy  eftant  attache*  a  vn
pieu  fur  vn  theatre,  non  guiere  loin  d'vn  fien  compa-
gnon  attache*  a  vn  autre,  ou  nos  barbares  les  tour-
mentoient  a  l'enuy  les  vns  des  autres,  par  1' applica-
tion des  flammes,  des  tifons,  &  des  fers  ardents,  auec
des  f aeons  cruelles  au  dela  de  tout  ce  qui  s'en  peut
efcrire,  &  de  toute  l'imagination  de  ceux  qui  ne  l'ont
point  veu.  Pierre,  dif-ie,  voyant  ce  fien  compagnon
perdre  patience  dans  ces  tourmens,  le  confoloit  &
l'encourageoit  [6y]  par  la  reprefentation  du  bon-heur
qu'ils  auoient  rencontre  dans  leur  mal-heur,  &  de
celuy  qui  leur  eftoit  prepare*  apres  cette  vie. En  fin


1639  - 40]  LE  JEUNE ' S  RELA  T10N,  ib39  65

after  having  been  baptized,  were  so  comforted  that
they  could  not  refrain  from  putting  into  song  the
cause  of  their  consolation, — that  thenceforward,  at
least,  they  were  sure  of  going  to  Heaven.  Others
nobly  refused  to  imitate  foul  and  immodest  actions  to
which  their  captors  tried  to  incite  them.  Others
afterward  displayed  so  much  fortitude  in  their  tor-
ments that  our  Barbarians  resolved  no  longer  to  allow
us  to  baptize  these  poor  unfortunates,  reckoning  [66]
it  a  misfortune  to  their  country  when  those  whom
they  torment  shriek  not  at  all,  or  very  little.

Indeed,  this  has  given  us  so  much  trouble  since
then,  that  there  has  not  been  one  of  these  for  whose
baptism  we  have  not  been  obliged  to  give  battle  to
those  who  are  their  Masters  and  Guardians ;  and  some-
times it  has  been  necessary  to  atone  for  this  violence
by  some  present.

Among  those  who  showed  most  fortitude,  and  most
appreciation  of  their  good  fortune,  was  one  Ononel-
waia,  in  baptism  named  Pierre,  who  was  one  of  the
prisoners  at  that  principal  defeat  of  which  we  have
just  spoken,  a  Captain  of  the  Oneiouchronons,  a  na-
tion of  the  Hiroquois.4  This  man,  being  fastened  to
a  stake  upon  a  platform,  not  very  far  from  his  com-
panion fastened  to  another, — where  our  barbarians,
every  one  according  to  his  pleasure,  tormented  them,
by  the  application  of  flames,  firebrands,  and  glowing
irons,  in  ways  cruel  beyond  all  power  of  description,
and  beyond  all  imagination  of  those  who  have  not
seen  it, —  Pierre,  I  say,  seeing  this  companion  of  his
lose  patience  in  the  midst  of  these  torments,  com-
forted and  encouraged  him  \6j~\  by  representing  the
blessedness  they  had  found  in  their  misfortune,  and
that  which  was  prepared  for  them  after  this  life.


66  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.17

le  voyant  mort,  ah,  dit-il,  mon  pauure  camarade,  as
tu  demande  pardon  a  Dieu  deuant  que  de  mourir?
craignant  que  ce  qu'il  auoit  tefmoigne*  de  douleur,  ne
fut  quelque  peche*  confiderable.

Ce  braue  courage  qui  meritoit  vne  meilleure  for-
tune, ne  fut  iamais  plus  tourmente"  par  nos  barbares
que  depuis  la  mort  de  ce  Hen  compagnon.  Car  celuy-
cy  eftat  mort  pluftoft  qu'ils  ne  s'attendoient,  ils  def-
chargerent  tous  enfemble  le  refte  de  leur  fureur  fur
celuy  qui  reftoit.  La  premiere  chofe  done  qu'en  fuite
ils  luy  firent,  fufl  qu'vn  d'eux  lui  cerna  auec  vn  cou-
rt eau  la  peau  de  la  teffce,  laquelle  il  efcorcha,  pour
emporter  la  cheuelure,  &  la  garder  felon  leur  cou-
ftume  fort  precieufement.

Apres  vn  tel  traidtement,  a  peine  croyoit-on  qu'il
reftaft  en  vn  corps  fi  vse"  de  tourments  aucun  fenti-
ment  de  la  vie :  mais  voila  qu'il  f e  leue  f ubitement,
&  ne  voyant  fur  l'ef chaff aut  que  le  cadaure  de  fon
cher  compagnon,  il  arme  fes  mains  qui  [68]  efloient
toutes  en  lambeaux,  d'vn  tifon,  pour  ne  pas  mourir
en  captif,  &  defendre  ce  peu  de  liberte"  qu'il  auoit
recouur^e  vn  peu  auparauant  la  mort.  La  rage  &  les
cris  de  fes  ennemis  redoublent  a  ce  fpedtacle,  ils  ac-
courent  a  luy  les  fers  tous  rouges  a  la  main.  Son
courage  luy  donne  des  forces,  il  fe  met  en  deffences,
il  darde  fes  tifons  fur  ceux  qui  Tapprochet  plus  pres,
il  abat  les  efchelles  pour  leur  rompre  chemin,  &  fe
fert  des  feux  &  des  flammes  dont  il  venoit  d'efprou-
uer  la  rigueur,  pour  repouffer  fortement  leur  affaut.
Le  fang  qui  rejalliffoit  de  fa  tefte  fur  tout  fon  corps
eufl  fendu  de  pitie"  vn  cceur  qui  euft  eu  quelque  refte
d' humanite" :  mais  la  fureur  de  nos  barbares  y  trou-
uoit  fon  contentement. Les  vns  luy  iettent  des  char-


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  i63g  67

Finally  seeing  him  dead,  "  Ah,  my  poor  comrade,"
said  he,  "  didst  thou  ask  pardon  of  God  before  dy-
ing?"—  fearing  that  the  evidence  of  suffering  he  had
given  was  some  grievous  sin.

This  brave  spirit,  who  merited  a  better  fate,  was
more  tormented  than  ever  by  our  barbarians  after
the  death  of  his  companion;  for,  the  latter  having
died  sooner  than  they  expected,  they  all  wreaked  the
rest  of  their  fury  upon  him  who  remained.  Accord-
ingly, the  first  thing  they  did  to  him  afterward  was
that  one  of  them  cut  with  a  knife  around  his  scalp,
which  he  stripped  off  in  order  to  carry  away  the  hair,
and,  according  to  their  custom,  to  preserve  it  as  very
precious.

After  such  treatment  one  would  hardly  believe  that
there  could  remain  any  sensation  of  life  in  a  body  so
worn  out  with  tortures.  But  lo !  he  suddenly  rises,
and,  seeing  upon  the  scaffold  only  the  corpse  of  his
dear  companion,  he  takes  in  his  hands,  which  [68]
were  all  in  shreds,  a  firebrand,  that  he  might  not  die
as  a  captive,  and  that  he  might  defend  the  brief  liber-
ty he  had  recovered  a  little  while  before  death.  The
rage  and  the  cries  of  his  enemies  redouble  at  this
sight ;  they  rush  towards  him  with  pieces  of  red-hot
iron  in  their  hands.  His  courage  gives  him  strength ;
he  puts  himself  on  the  defensive ;  he  hurls  his  fire-
brands upon  those  who  come  nearest  him ;  he  throws
down  the  ladders,  to  cut  off  their  way,  and  avails
himself  of  the  fire  and  flame,  the  severity  of  which
he  has  just  experienced,  to  repel  their  attack  vigor-
ously. The  blood  that  streamed  down  from  his  head
over  his  entire  body  would  have  rent  with  pity  a
heart  which  had  any  remnant  of  humanity ;  but  the
fury  of  our  barbarians  found  therein  its  satisfaction.


68  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

bons  &  des  cendres  ardentes,  les  autres  de  deffous
l'efchafaut  trotment  paffage  a  leurs  tifons.  II  voit
de  toutes  parts  quafi  autant  de  bourreaux  que  de
fpedtateurs,  lors  qu'il  6uite  vn  feu,  il  en  rencontre  vn
autre,  &  ne  fait  aucune  demarche  qu'il  ne  tombe  dans
le  mal-heur  qu'il  fuit.

En  fe  defendant  vn  long  temps  de  la  forte,  vn  faux
pas  le  fait  tomber  en  arriere  [69]  par  terre.  Ses
ennemis  en  mefme  temps  fondent  fur  luy,  le  bruflent
derechef,  puis  le  iettent  au  feu.  Ce  courage  inuin-
cible  fe  releue  du  milieu  des  flammes,  tout  reueftu
du  cendres  qui  s'efloient  imbues  dans  fon  fang.  Deux
tifons  tous  flambans  en  fes  mains,  il  fe  tourne  vers
le  gros  de  fes  ennemis,  pour  leur  donner  la  peur
encore  vne  fois  auant  que  de  mourir.  Pas  vn  n'eft  fi
hardy  que  de  l'attendre,  il  fe  fait  place  &  marche  vers
le  Bourg,  comme  pour  y  mettre  le  feu.

II  auance  enuiron  cent  pas,  qu'on  luy  iette  vn
baft  on  qui  le  renuerfe  a  terre;  ruant  [sc.  auant]  qu'il
fe  releue,  on  eft  fur  luy,  ils  luy  coupent  les  pieds  &
les  mains,  &  ayants  pris  le  refte  de  ce  corps  troncon-
ne\  ils  le  tournent  de  tous  coltez  fur  neuf  diuers  bra-
ziers, qu'il  eftouffa  quafi  tous  de  fon  fang.  En  fin
ils  le  fourrent  fous  vn  tronc  d'arbre  tout  en  feu,  ren-
uers6  par  terre;  afin  qu'en  mefme  temps  il  n'y  eut
partie  de  fon  corps  qui  ne  fuit  cruellement  bru(16e.
Ce  fut  alors  que  la  nature,  deuant  que  ceder  a  la  cru-
aute"  des  fupplices,  fit  vn  dernier  effort  que  iamais  on
n'euft  attendu.  Car  n'ayant  ny  pieds  ny  mains,  il
fe  roula  dedans  les  flammes,  &  s'en  eitant  mis  hors,
marcha  [70]  plus  de  dix  pas  fur  les  coudes  &  fur  les
genoux  du  colte"  de  fes  ennemis,  qui  s'enfuirent  de
luy,  redoutans  les  approches  d'vn  homme  auquel  rien


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  69

Some  throw  upon  him  coals  and  burning  cinders;
others  underneath  the  scaffold  find  open  places  for
their  firebrands.  He  sees  on  all  sides  almost  as  many-
butchers  as  spectators ;  when  he  escapes  one  fire,  he
encounters  another,  and  takes  not  one  step  without
falling  into  the  evil  that  he  flees.

While  defending  himself  thus  for  a  long  time,  a
false  step  causes  him  to  fall  backward  [69]  to  the
ground.  At  the  same  time,  his  enemies  pounce  upon
him,  burn  him  anew,  then,  throw  him  upon  the  fire.
This  invincible  spirit,  rising  again  from  the  midst  of
the  flames, —  all  covered  with  cinders  that  were  im-
bued in  his  blood,  two  flaming  firebrands  in  his
hands, — turns  towards  the  mass  of  his  enemies,  to
inspire  them  with  fear  once  more  before  he  dies.
Not  one  is  so  hardy  as  to  touch  him ;  he  makes  a  way
for  himself,  and  walks  towards  the  Village,  as  if  to
set  it  on  fire.

He  advances  about  a  hundred  paces,  when  some
one  throws  a  club  which  fells  him  to  the  ground ;  be-
fore he  can  rise  again,  they  are  upon  him ;  they  cut
off  his  feet  and  hands,  and,  having  seized  the  rest  of
this  mangled  body,  they  turn  it  round  and  round
over  nine  different  fires,  which  he  almost  entirely
extinguished  with  his  blood.  Finally  they  thrust  him
under  an  overturned  tree-trunk,  all  on  fire,  so  that,
at  the  same  time,  there  may  be  no  part  of  his  body
which  is  not  cruelly  burned.  It  was  then  that  nature,
before  yielding  to  the  cruelty  of  these  torments,
made  one  last  effort,  that  could  never  have  been
expected.  For,  having  neither  feet  nor  hands,  he
rolled  over  in  the  flames,  and,  having  fallen  outside
of  them,  he  moved  [70]  more  than  ten  paces,  upon
his  elbows  and  knees,  in  the  direction  of  his  enemies,


70  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  17

ne  refloit  que  le  courage,  qu'ils  ne  pou[u]oient  pas
luy  rauir,  finon  luy  arrachant  la  vie.

Ce  qu'ils  firent  en  fin,  vn  d'eux  luy  couppant  la
tefte  avec  vn  coufleau :  coup  heureux  qui  luy  donne
la  liberty,  car  nous  auons  fuiet  de  croire  que  ce  braue
courage  ioiiit  maintenant  dans  le  Ciel  de  la  liberte"
des  enfans  de  Dieu,  puifque  mefme  fes  ennemis
crioyent  tout  haut  qu'il  y  auoit  plus  que  de  l'humain
la  dedans,  &  que  fans  doute  le  baptefme  luy  auoit
donne"  fes  forces  &  ce  courage,  qui  furpafloit  tout  ce
que  iamais  ils  auoient  veu.

Quelques  Sauuages  ont  rapporte  auec  admiration,
&  quelque  efpece  de  conuidtion  des  veritez  que  nous
leurs  prefchos,  qu'vn  peu  deuant  qu'il  receut  le  der-
nier coup  qui  luy  apporta  la  mort,  il  leua  les  yeux  au
Ciel,  &  s'efcria  auec  ioye ;  Allons  done,  allons,  comme
s'il  euft  refpondu  a  vne  voix  qui  l'inuitoit.

Certes  il  femble  qu'il  ne  s'agiffoit  d' autre  voyage
que  de  celuy  du  Ciel,  ou  fans  diftinction  le  captif  s'il
le  veut  a  autant  de  [71]  droidt  &  d'accez  que  celuy
qui  eft  en  liberty.  On  apprit  des  autres  prifonniers
fes  compagnons  de  fortune  &  de  mifere  ce  qui  fuit.

Quelques  Auanturiers  de  la  bande  de  nos  Hurons
&  Algonquains,  ayans  en  cefte  principale  d£faite
deuance"  leur  troupe  qui  eftoit  de  trois  cens  hommes ;
pour  decouurir  s'il  n'y  auoit  point  d' ennemis  en
embuf cade,  s'en  trouuerent  pluftoft  plus  proches  qu'ils
penfoient.  Ils  ne  furent  pas  toutesf ois  tellement  fur-
pris,  que  la  plufpart  ne  peut  f  e  retirer  vers  le  gros :
vn  d'eux  feulement  fut  atrappe  par  les  ennemis,  qui
fe  voyans  defcouuerts  prinrent  refolutio  de  s'en  re-
tourner  auec  cefte  feule  conquefte,  quoy  qu'ils  fuffent
au  nombre  de  cent. Mais  le  captif  les  voyant  en  cefte


1 630  -  40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TION,  i63g  71

who  fled  from  him,  dreading  the  approach  of  a  man
to  whom  nothing  remained  but  courage,  of  which
they  could  not  deprive  him  except  by  wresting  away
his  life.

This  they  finally  did,  one  of  them  cutting  off  his
head  with  a  knife.  Happy  stroke  which  gave  him
freedom !  For  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  this
brave  spirit  is  now  enjoying  in  Heaven  the  freedom
of  the  children  of  God,  since  even  his  enemies  loudly
exclaimed  that  there  was  something  more  than  human
within  him,  and  that  without  doubt  baptism  had  given
him  his  strength  and  courage,  which  surpassed  all
that  they  had  ever  seen.

Several  Savages  have  reported  with  wonder,  and  a
sort  of  conviction  of  the  truths  that  we  preach  to
them,  that,  shortly  before  he  received  the  last  blow
which  caused  his  death,  he  raised  his  eyes  to  Heaven
and  cried  out  joyfully,  "  Let  us  go,  then,  let  us  go,'*
as  if  he  were  answering  a  voice  that  invited  him.

Surely  it  would  seem  that  he  had  in  mind  no  other
journey  except  that  to  Heaven,  to  which,  without
distinction,  the  captive,  if  he  so  will,  has  as  much
[71]  right  and  admission  as  he  who  is  free.  The  fol-
lowing was  learned  from  some  of  the  other  prisoners,
his  companions  in  misfortune  and  misery :

Some  Adventurers  from  the  band  of  our  Hurons
and  Algonquains  having,  in  that  most  important
defeat,  gone  on  ahead  of  their  troop  of  three  hundred
men  to  discover  if  there  were  any  of  the  enemy  in
ambush,  found  themselves  rather  nearer  than  they
thought.  They  were  not,  however,  so  greatly  taken
by  surprise  that  the  majority  of  them  could  not  retreat
to  the  main  body ;  only  one  of  them  was  caught  by
the  enemy,  who,  finding  that  they  were  discovered,


72  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

difpofition,  leur  donna  a  entendre  que  ceux  qui
venoient  apres  eux  n'eftoient  pas  en  tel  nombre  qu'ils
n'en  peuffent  facilement  venir  a  bout:  II  leur  dit
cela  d'vn  tel  air,  &  d'vn  tel  accent,  qu'ils  le  creurent,
&  fe  refolurent  de  faire  vn  fort,  &  la  d'attendre  tout
le  gros  de  leurs  ennemis.  Mais  ils  furent  bien  eflon-
nez  a  l'approche  de  nos  Barbares  d'en  voir  la  multi-
tude, &  de  fe  voir  entournez  de  la  forte,  qu'a  peine
[72]  auoient-ils  le  moyen  de  fuyr.  Toutefois  y  ayant
encore  quelque  endroit  par  ou  ils  pouuoient  efchap-
per,  apres  auoir  decharge  leur  colere  fur  leur  captif ,
qu'ils  mirent  auffi-toft  en  pieces,  on  mit  en  delibera-
tion ce  qu'il  y  auoit  a  faire.

La  plufpart  opinant  a  la  fuite,  Ononkb'aia  ou  Pierre,
celuy  dont  nous  venons  de  parler,  iettant  les  yeux  au
Ciel,  &  voyant  le  Soleil  fans  aucun  nuage.  Cefte  re-
folution,  dit-il,  feroit  paffable,  fi  le  Ciel  eftoit  couuert
&  fi  le  Soleil  ne  deuoit  eftre  fpedtateur  de  cefte  laf-
chete ;  mais  cela"  n'eftant  pas,  il  faut  combattre  tant
que  nous  pourrons,  &  puis  vn  chacun  aduifera  a  ce
qu'il  a  a  faire,  ainfi  dit,  ainli  execute.  Mais  nos
Hurons  &  Algonquains  ioiierent  ii  bien  leur  perfon-
nage,  que  n'en  ayant  tu6  fur  la  place  que  17.  ou  18.
ils  prirent  tout  le  refte  en  vie,  a  la  referue  de  quatre
ou  cinq  qui  leur  efchaperent.  Et  les  ayans  tous
amenez  au  pais,  ils  furent  difkribuez  par  tous  les
bourgs,  ou  on  leur  fit  fouffrir  ce  qu'il  n'efl  pas
poflible  d'expliquer.

Ie  ne  puis  toutefois  obmettre  icy  vne  circonftance
des  cruautez  que  Ton  exerga  fur  celuy  qui  le  premier
depuis  mon  arriu6e  en  ce  pais,  y  fufl  amene"  prifon-
nier  de  [73]  guerre,  ce  fut  le  premier  iour  de  Decem-
bre,  ce  qui  donna  occafion  de  le  nommer  en  fon  Bap-


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3g  73

decided  to  return  with  this  one  trophy,  although  they
were  a  hundred  in  number.  But  the  captive,  seeing
them  in  this  mind,  gave  them  to  understand  that
those  who  were  coming  against  them  were  not  so
numerous  that  they  could  not  easily  overpower  them.
He  told  them  this  in  such  a  manner  and  such  a  tone
that  they  believed  him,  and  resolved  to  make  a  fort,
and  there  await  the  entire  body  of  their  enemies.
But  they  were  utterly  astounded,  when  our  Barba-
rians approached,  to  see  the  multitude  of  these,  and
to  find  themselves  so  surrounded  that  they  hardly
[72]  had  a  chance  to  flee.  However,  there  being  still
a  certain  place  through  which  they  could  escape,
they  began  —  after  having  vented  their  wrath  upon
their  captive,  whom  they  immediately  tore  to  pieces  —
to  consider  what  was  to  be  done.

The  majority  advising  flight,  Ononkwaia,  or  Pierre,
he  of  whom  we  have  just  spoken,  casting  his  eyes  on
the  Sky  and  seeing  the  unclouded  Sun,  said,  "  This
resolution  would  be  passable  if  the  Sky  were  covered
and  if  the  Sun  were  not  a  spectator  of  this  coward-
ice; but  as  it  is,  we  must  fight  as  stoutly  as  we  can,
and  then  each  one  shall  decide  what  he  ought  to  do."
No  sooner  said  than  done.  But  our  Hurons  and  Al-
gonquains  played  their  parts  so  well  that,  having  killed
upon  the  spot  only  17  or  18,  they  took  alive  all  the
rest,  except  four  or  five  who  escaped  them ;  and  all
these,  having  been  brought  to  this  country,  were
distributed  through  all  the  villages,  where  they  were
made  to  endure  sufferings  which  it  is  not  possible  to
describe.

I  cannot,  however,  omit  here  one  detail  of  the
cruelties  that  were  practiced  upon  the  first  captive
tormented  after  my  arrival  in  this  country,  who  had


74  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

tefme  Francois,  en  l'honneur  de  faindl  Francois
Xauier,  dont  le  lendemain  nous  failions  la  fefte.  Ce
pauure  mal-henreux  la  nuidt  de  fes  tourmens  (car  il
eft  de  1'efTence  d'y  employer  an  moins  tonte  vne
nuidt)  fnt  entr'autres  entrepris  par  vn  de  nos  Bar-
bares  :  qni  lny  ayant  commande*  de  mettre  les  mains
contre  terre,  les  lny  perca  l'vne  anpres  1' autre  auec
vn  fer  ardent,  &  ne  cefla  de  les  hauffer  &  baiffer,  &
les  tirailler  le  long  du  fer,  iufques  a  ce  que  le  feu  en
fut  efteint.  On  a  dit  qu'vne  autre  luy  en  fit  autant
aux  pieds :  il  ne  falloit  plus  que  luy  ouurir  le  cofte\
pour  efkre  en  quelque  maniere  f emblable  a  celuy  dont
le  fang  luy  auoit  eft6  vn  peu  auparauant  appliqu6
par  le  S.  Baptefme,  &  cela  pareillement  ne  luy  man-
qua  pas:  car  vn  peu  deuant  que  d'expirer,  on  le  luy
ouurit  pour  luy  arracher  le  cceur.  Si  cefte  efpece  de
tourment  n'a  feruy  a  ce  pauure  inf ortune*  pour  fe  con-
foler  de  fe  voir  en  cefte  facon  femblable  a  celuy  qu'il
ne  cognoiffoit  que  pour  ne  le  pas  ignorer,  &  autant
feulement  qu'il  efloit  neceffaire  pour  l'experimenter
fon  Sauueur;  au  moins  a-il  [74]  feruy  a  d'autres  qui
ont  reflenty  des  touches  particulieres  de  l'obligatio
que  nous  auions  a  ce  bon  Seigneur  &  Maiftre,  qui
par  les  playes  qu'il  a  voulu  receuoir  pour  nous,
nous  a  deliure*  des  feux  &  des  tourmens,  dont  ceux
que  nos  Barbares  exercent  enuers  leurs  captifs  ne
font  qu' ombres  &  figures  paffageres.

Nos  Barbares  qui  fcauent  le  defplaifir  que  nous
auons  de  ces  cruautez,  &  en  particulier  de  leur  inhu-
manity a  manger  les  corps  de  ces  pauures  vidtimes
apres  leur  mort,  trouuerent  le  moyen  pour  nous  faire
defpit,  de  ietter  par  vne  cabane  vne  des  mains  de  ce
pauure  defundt,  comme  nous  donnant  noftre  part  du


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  75

been  brought  hither  as  a  prisoner  of  [73]  war.  It
was  the  first  day  of  December,  which  gave  us  reason
to  name  him,  at  his  Baptism,  Francois,  in  honor  of
saint  Francois  Xavier,  whose  feast  we  celebrated  the
next  day.  This  poor  wretch  on  the  night  of  his  tor-
tures (for  it  is  essential  to  employ  therein  at  least  one
whole  night)  was,  among  others,  taken  in  hand  by
one  of  our  Barbarians,  who,  having  commanded  him
to  put  his  hands  to  the  ground,  pierced  them  one
after  the  other  with  a  heated  iron,  and  did  not  cease
raising  and  lowering  them,  and  sliding  them  along
the  iron,  until  its  glow  was  quenched.  It  was  said
that  some  one  else  did  the  same  thing  to  his  feet.
Nothing  more  was  wanting,  except  to  open  his  side,
to  make  him  in  some  sort  like  him  whose  blood  a
little  while  before  had  been  applied  to  him  through
Holy  Baptism, — that,  likewise,  did  not  fail  him,  for
shortly  before  expiring,  it  was  opened  to  tear  out  his
heart.  If  this  kind  of  torture  did  not  serve  this  poor
wretch  as  a  consolation, — in  seeing  himself  in  this
respect  like  him  whom  he  knew  simply  in  not  being
ignorant  of  him,  and  only  as  much  as  was  necessary
to  experience  him  as  his  Savior, — at  least  it  [74]
availed  with  the  others,  who  experienced  a  special
sense  of  the  obligation  laid  upon  us  by  this  good
Lord  and  Master,  who,  by  the  wounds  that  he  con-
sented to  receive  for  us,  has  delivered  us  from  the
fires  and  torments,  of  which  those  that  our  Barba-
rians exercise  upon  their  captives  are  only  transient
shadows  and  images.

Our  Barbarians, — who  know  the  displeasure  that
we  feel  at  these  cruelties,  and  particularly  at  their  in-
humanity in  eating  the  bodies  of  these  poor  victims
after  their  death, —  found  means,  in  order  to  annoy


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  17

feflin.  Nous  fufmes  furpris  voyans  a  nos  pieds  cefte
main  percee;  &  confiderans  que  c'eftoit  la  main  d'vn
Chreftien,  nous  l'enterrafmes  en  noftre  Chapelle,  &
priafmes  Dieu  pour  le  repos  de  fon  ame.

On  feroit  vn  Roman  des  aduentures  de  ce  pauure
captif .  II  eftoit  Agnierhonon  de  Nation,  qui  fait  vne
des  cinq  des  Hiroquois,  la  plus  efloign£e  de  nos  Hu-
rons,  il  partit  de  fon  pais  pour  venir  aux  nations  des
Hiroquois  les  plus  proches  de  nous,  auec  deffein  d'y
traiter  quelque  pourcelaine  [75]  qu'il  portoit,  pour
des  caflors.  Mais  eftant  arriu6,  au  lieu  de  faire  ce
pourquoy  il  eftoit  venu,  il  fe  met  a  ioiier,  &  perd
tout  ce  qu'il  auoit  apporte\  Honteux  de  retourner
au  pais  fans  autre  effecT;,  il  prend  refolution  de  s'ar-
refker  la  quelque  temps,  &  voyant  vn  peu  apres  que
quelques-vns  du  lieu  ou  il  eftoit  s'en  venoient  a  la
guerre  en  nos  quartiers,  il  fe  met  de  la  partie,  mais
leurs  deffeins  ayants  mal  reuffi,  il  fut  du  nombre  des
captifs,  &  amene"  en  ce  bourg,  ou  il  fit  la  fin  que  nous
venons  de  reprefenter.

Mais  laiffons  ces  pauures  captifs,  &  venons  a  d'au-
tres  fortes  de  baptefme  &  de  conuerfion.

Ce  n'eft  pas  l'ordre  de  la  Nature  de  d5ner  les  fruidts
de  la  terre  finon  apres  vne  ann6e  efcoul6e  des  influ-
ences des  aftres,  du  Ciel,  &  du  trauail  des  hommes :
mais  la  grace  ne  s' attache  pas  toufiours  aux  loix  de
la  Nature,  &  il  a  pleu  a  Dieu  en  difpenfer  en  l'efta-
bliffement  de  la  nouuelle  Eglife  de  ce  bourg.  Ou
apres  fix  mois  de  trauail  on  a  veu  ce  qu'en  plufieurs
ann6es  on  n'a  peu  faire  ailleurs.  En  fuitte  done  des
inftrudtions  generales  &  particulieres  qui  ont  efte"
<lonn6es  aux  habitans  de  ce  bourg  [76]  par  les  Peres
de  cefle  Refidence,  felon  l'ordre  declare"  au  chap.  2.


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  i6jg  77

us,  of  throwing  one  of  the  hands  of  this  poor  dead
man  into  our  cabin,  as  if  giving  us  our  share  of  the
feast.  We  were  surprised  to  see  at  our  feet  this
pierced  hand ;  and  considering  that  it  was  the  hand
of  a  Christian,  we  buried  it  in  our  Chapel  and  prayed
to  God  for  the  repose  of  his  soul.

One  could  make  a  Romance  of  the  adventures  of
this  poor  captive.  He  was  of  the  Agnierhonon  Na-
tion, which  forms  one  of  the  five  Nations  of  the  Hiro-
quois,  the  one  farthest  from  our  Hurons.  He  left
his  own  country  to  come  to  the  Hiroquois  nations
nearer  to  us,  intending  to  trade  some  porcelain  [75]
that  he  had  brought  for  some  beavers.  But,  when
he  arrived,  instead  of  doing  this  for  which  he  had
come,  he  began  to  gamble  and  lost  all  he  had  brought
with  him.  Ashamed  to  return  home  without  any
other  achievement,  he  decided  to  remain  there  for
some  time ;  and,  a  little  while  afterwards  seeing  some
people  from  that  place  who  were  undertaking  a  raid
into  our  region,  he  became  one  of  the  party;  but,
their  plans  having  resulted  unsuccessfully,  he  was
one  of  the  captives,  and  was  brought  to  this  village,
where  he  came  to  the  end  we  have  just  described.

But  let  us  leave  these  poor  captives  and  come  to
other  kinds  of  baptism  and  conversion.

It  is  not  the  order  of  Nature  to  give  the  fruits  of
the  earth  until  after  a  year  spent  under  the  influences
of  the  stars,  of  the  Sky,  and  of  the  work  of  man ;  but
grace  does  not  always  adhere  to  the  laws  of  Nature,
and  it  has  pleased  God  to  dispense  with  them  in  the
establishment  of  the  new  Church  of  this  village,
where,  after  six  months  of  labor,  has  been  seen  what
one  could  not  expect  to  do  elsewhere  in  several  years.
In  consequence,  then,  of  the  instructions,  both  gen-


78  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

le  premier  des  Cathecumenes  qui  fe  declare  pour  con-
u[a]incu  &  refolu  de  fuiure  la  Vocation  &  femonce  du
S.  Efprit,  qui  en  fuite  demanda  inftamment  le  Bap-
tefme,  fut  vn  bon  vieillard  d'enuiron  yo  ans  nomme*
Aochiati.

On  ne  fuft  pas  long  temps  a  reconnoiftre  qu'il  par-
loit  tout  de  bon,  &  qu'en  effedt  il  croyoit,  &  vouloit
tout  ce  qui  effort  neceflaire  pour  receuoir  le  Bap-
tefme.  Et  quoy  qu'en  fuitte  on  euft  fuiet  d'efperer
qu'il  ne  feroit  pas  moins  qu'il  promettoit,  toutefois
fa  quality  de  Sauuage  nous  empefchoit  de  nous  hafter
en  cefle  affaire,  &  de  luy  donner  contentement  auffi-
toft  qu'il  le  defiroit.  Mais  le  temps  le  preffant  d'aller
a  vne  traite,  ou  il  deuoit  pafTer  trois  mois  de  temps
auec  beaucoup  de  dangers  de  fa  vie,  il  redoubla  fes
inftances,  priant  qu'on  donna  cede  confolation  a  fon
ame,  qui  ne  pouuoit  autrement,  difoit-il,  eflre  en
repos;  puis  qu'apres  la  mort,  ceux  qui  n'eftoient
point  baptifez  alloient  en  des  feux  qui  ne  s'efteignent
iamais.

Nonobftant  toutes  ces  inftances,  on  iugea  a  propos
de  le  differer,  &  fe  contenta-on  de  le  bien  inftruire
&  informer  de  l'adte  [y6  i.e.,  77]  de  contrition:  &  ce
pour  bonnes  raifons  &  confiderations.  Mais  il  femble
que  la  diuine  Prouidence  nous  voulut  faire  voir  claire-
ment  qu'elle  l'auoit  deftine"  de  toute  Eternite"  pour
eftre  la  premiere  pierre  fondamentale  de  la  nouuelle
Eglife  de  ce  bourg.  Car  deux  iours  apres  fon  depart,
le  voila  fu[r]pris  d'vn  fi  mauuais  temps,  &  aduerty
par  tant  de  perfonnes  des  embufches  des  ennemis,
qu'il  fut  contraint  de  rebroufler  chemin,  &  de  reuenir
icy  attendre  vn  temps  plus  fauorable,  &  de  meilleurs
nouuelles.


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  79

eral  and  individual,  that  were  given  to  the  inhab-
itants of  this  village  [76]  by  the  Fathers  of  this  Resi-
dence, according  to  the  order  mentioned  in  chapter
2nd,  the  first  of  the  Catechumens  who  declared  him-
self convinced,  and  determined  to  follow  the  Call  and
invitation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  who,  consequently,
earnestly  desired  Baptism,  was  a  good  old  man  about
70  years  old,  named  Aochiati.

It  did  not  take  long  to  recognize  that  he  spoke  in
earnest,  what  he  said,  and  that  he  really  believed  and
purposed  all  that  was  necessary  in  order  to  receive
Baptism.  And  although  we  therefore  had  reason  to
hope  that  he  would  not  do  less  than  he  promised,  yet
his  Savage  character  forbade  us  to  be  hasty  in  this
matter,  and  to  give  him  satisfaction  as  soon  as  he
desired  it.  But  —  as  he  had  little  time  before  de-
parting for  the  trade,  in  which  he  must  pass  three
months  with  many  dangers  to  his  life  —  he  redoubled
his  entreaties,  praying  that  this  consolation  might  be
given  to  his  soul,  which  could  not  otherwise,  said  he,
remain  at  peace,  since  after  death  those  who  were
not  baptized  went  into  fires  which  were  never  ex-
tinguished.

Notwithstanding  all  these  entreaties,  they  con-
sidered it  wise  to  put  him  off,  and  contented  them-
selves with  instructing  him  thoroughly  and  teaching
him  the  act  [76  i.e.,  yy']  of  contrition,  and  this  for
excellent  reasons  and  considerations.  But  it  seems
that  divine  Providence  wished  to  make  us  see  clearly
that  it  had  destined  him  from  all  Eternity  to  be  the
first  foundation  stone  of  the  new  Church  of  this  vil-
lage. For,  two  days  after  his  departure,  he  was
overtaken  by  so  bad  weather,  and  warned  by  so  many
persons  regarding  ambushes  of  the  enemy,  that  he


80  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

Au  mefme  temps  de  fon  retour,  fe  troutta  icy  ce
braue  Chreftien  de  la  Refidence  de  la  Conception
Iofeph  Chihtfatenhtfa,  les  difcours  &  la  conuerfation
duquel  l'ayant  efchauf6  plus  que  iamais,  il  redoubla
fes  inftances  du  baptefme,  qui  en  fin  fut  accorde*  le
20.  de  Decembre,  &  fut  nomine"  Mathias,  comme  celuy
fur  lequel  eftoit  tomb6  le  fort  de  premier  Chreflien
de  ce  bourg,  comme  de  Cathecumene  baptise  en
pleine  fante,  &  auec  folemnite.  Et  il  fe  trouua  que
fa  cabane  portoit  le  nom  de  ce  fainct  Apoflre,  confor-
m£ment  a  la  deuotion  qu'on  a  eue  de  mettre  chaque
cabane  de  Sauuages,  des  bourgs  ou  nous  trauaillons,
[78]  fous  le  patronage  &  la  protection  de  quelque
faindt  ou  faindte  du  Paradis.

Ce  qui  nous  fit  plus  facilement  condefcendre  a  fon
defir,  fut  qu'il  eftoit  tous  les  iours  fur  le  poindt  de  fe
mettre  en  chemin,  &  que  quatre  ou  cinq  iours  aupara-
uant  il  auoit  protefte"  a  quelques  Chefs  du  bourg  qu'il
eftoit  preft  de  quitter  toutes  les  danfes  &  fuperftitions
diaboliques  du  pais,  mais  particulierement  la  danfe
des  Nuds,  dont  il  eftoit  le  chef  &  le  Maiftre.  Ce  bon
homme  apres  auoir  refpondu  &  fatisfait  a  toutes  les
abrenonciations  qui  f  e  trouuent  dans  les  ceremonies  du
Baptefme,  pendant  la  Meffe  repaflant  dans  fon  efprit
s'il  y  auoit  plus  rien  de  mal  a  quoy  il  euft  de  1' at-
tache, ne  luy  eftant  rien  venu  dont  il  douta,  que  le
Petun ;  il  demanda  aufli-tofl  fi  le  petun  eftoit  def endu,
&  donna  a  entendre  qu'il  eftoit  tout  preft  de  le  quitter,
&  abandonner  en  cas  qu'il  ne  fuft  pas  permis  de  s'en
feruir.  Cefte  refolution  peut  pafler  pour  des  adtes
des  plus  heroi'ques  que  puiffe  faire  vn  Sauuage,  qui  fe
pafferoit  ce  femble  auffi-toft  de  viure  que  de  petuner.

Auec  ce  bon  homme  qui  eftoit  veuf ,  furent  bapti-


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  81

was  obliged  to  retrace  his  steps  and  return  hither  to
await  more  favorable  weather,  and  better  news.

At  the  very  time  of  his  return,  there  happened  to
be  here  that  brave  Christian  of  the  Residence  of  la
Conception,  Joseph  Chihwatenhwa,  whose  speeches
and  conversations  having  more  than  ever  kindled
him,  he  redoubled  his  earnest  requests  for  baptism,
which  was  finally  granted  him  on  the  20th  of  Decem-
ber ;  he  was  named  Mathias,  as  the  one  to  whose  lot
it  had  fallen  to  be  the  first  Christian  of  this  village,
as  well  as  the  first  Catechumen  baptized  in  good
health  and  with  solemnity.  And  it  happened  that
his  cabin  bore  the  name  of  this  holy  Apostle,  in
accordance  with  the  devout  purpose  that  we  have
entertained  to  place  every  cabin  of  the  Savages,  in
the  village  where  we  labor,  [78]  under  the  patronage
and  protection  of  some  saint  of  Paradise.

What  caused  us  the  more  readily  to  yield  to  his
wishes  was  that  he  was  daily  upon  the  point  of  set-
ting out  on  his  journey,  and  that,  four  or  five  days
before,  he  had  protested  to  some  Chiefs  of  the  village
that  he  was  ready  to  give  up  all  the  dances  and  dia-
bolical superstitions  of  the  country,  but  particularly
the  dance  of  the  Naked  ones,  of  which  he  was  the
head  and  Master.  This  good  man,  after  having
answered  and  performed  all  the  renunciations  that  are
found  in  the  ceremonies  of  Baptism,  during  Mass
mentally  revolving  the  question  if  there  were  any
evil  thing  to  which  he  was  attached,  and  nothing
occurring  to  him  but  Tobacco,  immediately  asked  if
tobacco  were  forbidden,  explaining  that  he  was  quite
ready  to  give  it  up  and  abandon  it,  in  case  it  were
not  allowable  to  use  it.  This  resolution  may  pass
for  one  of  the  most  heroic  acts  of  which  a  Savage  is


82  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  17

f6es  deux  fiennes  petites  filles,  lefquelles  il  cheriffoit
vniquement,  ce  [79]  qui  n'eftoit  pas  vne  petite  mar-
que de  fa  foy,  &  de  fon  affedtion  au  Chriftianifme,
veu  Timagination  commune  de  tout  le  pais  que  le
Baptefme  fait  mourir  toute  forte  de  perfonnes,  mais
particulierement  les  enfants.

L'exemple  de  celuy-cy  fut  fuiuy  quelques  iours
apres  d'onze  autres  perfonnes,  choifies  du  nombre
des  Cathecumenes,  qu'on  auoit  foigneufement  in-
ftruidts,  &  qui  ne  ceffoient  de  demander  le  baptefme.
Ces  douze  ou  quinze  done  fe  trouuas  tous  enfemble
a  la  Meffe  le  premier  iour  de  Tann6e  1639.  e'eft  le
iour  que  nous  remarquerons  &  recognoiftrons  a  iamais
pour  celuy  de  la  naiffance  de  cette  Nou.  Eglife,  comme
celuy  de  la  Conception  de  la  Vierge,  pour  la  naiffance
de  celle  de  la  Refidence  de  la  Conception.

Depuis  ce  temps  on  a  continue"  de  fois  a  autre  de
baptifer  ceux  &  celles  qui  fe  font  trouuez  difpofez  &
capables  de  ce  bien ;  de  forte  que  le  nombre  des  per-
sones  baptiz^es  en  ce  Bourg,  faifans  profeffion  du
Chriftianifme,  monte  de  prefent  a  pres  de  trente,
comme  nous  auons  dit  cy-deffus.

Ie  ne  m'eftendray  point  icy  fur  le  contentement  &
la  fatisfadtion  que  nous  donne  [80]  ce  petit  troupeau,
&  particulierement  quelques- vns :  non  plus  que  fur  les
caufes  qui  ont  precede"  &  concouru  a  ce  faint  Ouurage,
le  tout  eftant  femblable,  &  prefque  en  rien  different
de  ce  que  nous  auons  deduit  au  Chapitre  precedent,
parlant  de  la  naiffance  de  la  Nou.  Eglife  de  la  Refi-
dence de  la  Conception.  Quand  il  n'y  auroit  que  la
refolution,  &  la  confiance  de  ces  Neophytes,  a  faire
profeffion  du  Chriftianifme  au  beau  milieu  de  leur
Nation,  1'vne  des  plus  peruerfes  de  la  terre;  ou  ils  fe


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  83

capable,  who,  it  seems,  would  as  soon  dispense  with
eating  as  with  smoking.

With  this  good  man,  who  was  a  widower,  were
baptized  two  of  his  granddaughters,  whom  he  singu-
larly cherished,  which  [79]  was  no  small  mark  of  his
faith  and  of  his  love  for  Christianity,  considering  the
idea  common  throughout  the  country  that  Baptism
caused  all  classes  of  people  to  die,  but  especially
children.

This  man's  example  was  followed  a  few  days
afterwards  by  eleven  other  persons,  chosen  from  the
number  of  Catechumens,  who  had  been  carefully
instructed  and  who  were  continually  asking  for  bap-
tism. Accordingly,  these  twelve  or  fifteen  being  all
present  at  Mass  on  the  first  day  of  the  year  1639,  this
is  the  day  which  we  shall  always  observe  and  recog-
nize as  that  of  the  birth  of  this  New  Church, — as
that  of  the  Conception  of  the  Virgin,  as  the  birthday
of  the  church  at  the  Residence  of  la  Conception.

Since  then  we  have  continued  from  time  to  time  to
baptize  men  and  women  who  have  been  found  willing
and  fitted  to  receive  this  blessing ;  so  that  the  num-
ber of  persons  baptized  in  this  Village,  making  pro-
fession of  Christianity,  at  present  amounts  to  nearly
thirty,  as  we  have  said  above.

I  shall  not  enlarge  here  upon  the  comfort  and  satis-
faction that  is  afforded  us  [80]  by  this  little  company,
and  especially  by  some  of  them,  nor  upon  the  causes
which  have  preceded  and  contributed  to  this  holy
Work, —  the  whole  resembling,  and  in  scarcely  any
respect  unlike,  what  we  have  related  in  the  preced-
ing Chapter,  in  speaking  of  the  birth  of  the  New
Church  of  the  Residence  of  la  Conception.  If  it  were
only  a  matter  of  resolution  and  courage  of  these  Neo-


84  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

trouuent  dans  les  attaques  continuelles  des  railleries
&  calomnies,  des  craintes  &  frayeurs,  des  mal-heurs
dont  on  les  menace  de  tous  coflez ;  en  fuite  de  ce
qu'ils  fe  font  faits  Chreftiens:  Quand,  dif-ie,  il  n'y
auroit  que  ce  poindt,  nous  aurions  tout  fuiet  d'eftre
con  tens.  Et  c6t  article  femble  fi  confiderable,  qu'il
merite  qu'on  en  parle  vn  peu  plus  au  long,  mais  cela
fe  fera  plus  commodement  en  l'vn  des  Chapitres  fui-
uants ;  ou  nous  traidterons  des  trauerf es  &  dimcultez
qui  fe  font  trouu6es,  &  fe  rencontret  encore  tous  les
iours  en  la  naiffance  &  eflablilTement  de  ces  nou-
uelles  Eglifes.  Difons  auparauant  quelque  chofe  des
Millions.


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6jg  85

phytes  in  professing  Christianity  in  the  very  midst  of
their  Nation, —  one  of  the  most  perverse  on  earth,
where  they  find  themselves  continually  assailed  by
mockery  and  slander,  by  fears  and  panics,  by  misfor-
tunes threatening  them  on  all  sides,  in  consequence
of  their  having  become  Christians, — if,  I  say,  this
were  the  only  thing,  we  would  have  every  reason  to
be  satisfied.  And  this  feature  seems  so  important,
that  it  deserves  to  be  spoken  of  somewhat  more  at
length ;  but  that  will  occur  more  conveniently  in  one
of  the  following  Chapters,  where  we  shall  treat  of
the  obstacles  and  difficulties  that  still  exist,  and  are
every  day  encountered,  in  the  birth  and  establish-
ment of  these  new  Churches.  Let  us  first  say  some-
thing of  the  Missions.


86  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  17


[81] CHAP. VI.

DE CE QUI S'EST  PASSE  DE  PLUS  REMARQUABLE  DANS
LES MISSIONS.

DE  dix  Peres  de  noftre  Compagnie  qu'il  y  a  icy,
s'en  eflant  trouue*  fept  fur  la  fin  de  l'ann6e
paffee  (non  fans  vne  grace  &  faueur  tres  fpe-
ciale  de  Dieu)  qui  entendoient  la  langue  de  nos  Sau-
uages,  &  la  parloient  fuffifamment  pour  conuerfer
auec  fruidt  parmy  eux,  &  leur  donner  les  inflrudtions
neceff aires  pour  leur  f alut :  Et  trois  autres  derniers
venus,  qui  deux  ou  trois  mois  apres  leur  arriu6e,  par
le  fecours  &  afliftance  des  autres,  qui  ont  heureufe-
ment  reufli  a  reduire  cette  langue  &  preceptes,  &  en
faciliter  Tentr6e  a  ceux  qui  viennent  de  nouueau,  fe
trouuoient  capables  de  tenir  vne  petite  efcole,  pour
enf eigner  les  enfans  a  prier  Dieu :  On  confidera  que
trois  des  anciens,  auec  vn  nouueau,  pouuans  en  quel-
que  facon  fufnre  au  trauail  de  la  vigne  de  chaque
Refidence,  on  pourroit  fe  feruir  d'vn  ancien  auec  vn
[82]  nouueau,  pour  aller  battre  la  campagne,  &  feruir
aux  deffeins  de  la  diuine  Prouidence  fur  quelque
predeftine\

Le  Bourg  fur  lequel  d'abord  on  ietta  les  yeux,  fut
celuy  de  Scanonaenrat,  tant  parce  que  c'eft  vn  des
plus  considerables  du  pays,  faifant  luy  feul  vne  nation
entiere,  des  quatre  qui  compofent  les  Hurons,  ainfi
que  nous  auons  declare*  au  Chapitre  premier,  que
parce  qu'il  n'efl  efloigne*  que  de  cinq  quarts  de  lieues


1639-40]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  87


[8 1] CHAP. VI.

OF THE MOST REMARKABLE EVENTS THAT HAVE OC-
CURRED IN THE MISSIONS.

OF  the  ten  Fathers  of  our  Society  who  are  here,
there  were  seven  at  the  end  of  last  year  (not
without  most  special  grace  and  favor  of  God)
who  understood  the  language  of  our  Savages,  and
spoke  it  well  enough  to  converse  profitably  among
them,  and  give  them  the  instruction  necessary  for
their  salvation;  and  three  others,  newcomers,  who,
two  or  three  months  after  their  arrival, — by  the  help
and  assistance  of  the  others,  who  fortunately  have
succeeded  in  reducing  this  language  to  rules,  thereby
facilitating  its  acquisition  by  those  who  have  recently
come, — found  themselves  qualified  to  conduct  a  little
school  where  they  might  teach  the  children  to  pray
to  God.  We  considered  that, —  as  three  of  the  sen-
iors, with  one  new  man,  would  be  sufficient,  in  some
fashion,  for  the  work  of  the  vineyard  in  each  Resi-
dence,—  one  senior,  with  one  new  man,  could  be
employed  [82]  to  go  and  scour  the  country,  and  help
to  execute  the  designs  of  divine  Providence  upon
some  predestined  soul.

The  Village  upon  which,  at  the  outset,  we  cast  our
eyes  was  Scanonaenrat,  both  because  it  is  one  of  the
most  important  of  the  country, — itself  alone  forming
one  entire  nation  of  the  four  that  compose  the  Hu-
rons,  as  we  have  explained  in  the  first  Chapter, — and
because  it  is  distant  only  one  and  one-fourth  leagues


88  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

de  la  Refidence  de  faindt  Iofeph.  D'ou  s'enfuiuoit,
que  fi  Dieu  donnoit  benediction  an  trauail  qu'on  auoit
a  prendre  en  ce  bonrg,  les  Peres  de  cette  Refidence
ponrroient  facilement  entretenir  &  arronfer  le  champ,
qui  anroit  efte  enfemence\

Si  nous  n'euffions  en  efgard  a  la  puiflance  dn  Mai-
fire  qne  nons  feruons,  &  dont  nons  portons  la  parole,
fans  donte  il  y  anoit  deqnoy  s'efTrayer,  &  fe  rebnter
de  ce  deffein,  les  barbares  de  ce  bourg  paffans  en
commnn  difcours  des  habitans  de  ces  contr6es  pour
les  Demons  dn  pays.  Mais  tant  s'en  fant  qne  cette
qualite*  qu'on  leur  donne  nons  deftournaft,  que  plu-
ftoft  elle  nons  porta,  appniez  vniqnement  fur  le  fenl
fondement  &  reflort  de  telles  entreprifes,  [83]  qui  eft
Iesvs-Christ,  a  donner  d'orefnauant  a  ce  bonrg  le
nom  de  faindt  Michel,  en  l'honnenr  des  faindts  Anges ;
anfqnels  nous  ne  defefperions  pas  que  ces  pauures
peuples  vn  iour  feroient  pluftoft  femblables,  qu'a
ceux  dont  on  leur  donnoit  le  nom.

Ie  ne  fcay  fi  ce  fut  de  l'inuention  &  ftratageme  de
l'ennemy  commun  des  hommes,  qui  n'agreoit  pas
vne  telle  ref olution ;  que  le  iour  que  les  deux  Peres
partirent,  deuant  arriuer  au  gifte  fur  les  quatre  heures
du  foir,  en  cette  mefme  heure  ils  s'efgarent  de  la
forte  dans  les  bois,  qu'ils  n'y  arriuerent  qu'aux  quatre
heures  du  matin  du  lendemain,  ayans  marche*  douze
heures  durant  &  toute  la  nuidt,  chargez  pour  la  pluf-
part  du  temps  chacu  d'vn  paquet,  dont  en  fin  ils
furent  contraints  de  fe  d^charger  du  pi9  pesat,  &  le
cacher  proche  d'vn  ruiffeau,  pour  le  pouuoir  plus  aife-
ment  retrouuer,  quand  on  feroit  en  eftat  de  le  pou-
uoir chercher.

II  auoit  neige*  vne  bonne  partie  du  iour  &  fi  la  nuidt


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  89

from  the  Residence  of  saint  Joseph ;  whence  it  fol-
lowed that,  if  God  gave  his  benediction  to  the  work
that  had  been  undertaken  in  that  village,  the  Fa-
thers of  this  Residence  could  easily  maintain  and
water  the  field  that  had  been  sown.

If  we  had  not  been  regardful  of  the  power  of  the
Master  whom  we  serve,  and  whose  message  we  carry,
doubtless  there  would  have  been  reason  to  be  daunt-
ed, and  to  recoil  from  this  plan, — the  barbarians  of
that  village  passing,  in  the  common  talk  of  the  inhab-
itants of  these  regions,  for  the  Demons  of  the  coun-
try. But  this  character  that  was  given  them,  far
from  turning  us  back,  rather  incited  us  —  resting
solely  upon  the  only  foundation  and  resource  of  such
enterprises,  [83]  which  is  Jesus  Christ  —  to  give
henceforth  to  this  village  the  name  "  saint  Michel,"
in  honor  of  the  holy  Angels,  like  to  whom  we  did
not  despair  that  these  poor  peoples  would  one  day
become,  rather  than  like  to  those  whose  name  had
been  given  them.

I  do  not  know  whether  it  was  due  to  the  ingenuity
and  strategy  of  the  common  enemy  of  mankind,  who
was  not  pleased  with  such  a  determination,  that  on
the  day  when  the  two  Fathers  set  out,  expecting  to
reach  their  destination  about  four  o'clock  in  the  even-
ing, at  that  same  hour  they  went  so  far  astray  in  the
woods  that  they  did  not  arrive  until  four  o'clock  the
next  morning,  having  walked  twelve  hours,  through-
out the  night, —  each  burdened,  for  the  greater  part
of  the  way,  with  a  bundle,  from  the  heaviest  part  of
which  they  were  finally  obliged  to  free  themselves,
and  to  hide  it  near  a  brook,  that  they  might  be  able
the  more  easily  to  find  it  when  it  should  be  possible
for  them  to  search  it  out.


90  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  17

eut  efte*  telle  qu'il  fembloit  qu'elle  deuoit  eftre:  les
deux  Peres  poffible  n'en  eufset  pas  efte"  quittes  a
meilleur  marche"  que  quelques-vns  de  nos  Sauuages
qui  [84]  s'eftans  pareillemet  quelque  temps  apres,
efgarez  dans  les  bois  pendant  la  nuidt,  furent  trouuez
morts  de  lendemain.  La  neige  qui  eftoit  tomb6e,
leur  fit  plus  de  bien  que  de  mal ;  car  elle  leur  f  eruit  a
appaifer  la  faim,  &  fur  tout  la  foif,  qui  dans  le  tra-
uail  &  le  f oucy  de  perfonnes  efgarees  ne  leur  donnoit
pas  peu  de  peine:  Et,  a  leur  rapport,  la  neige  n'eft
pas  vn  fi  mauuais  manger  qu'on  pourroit  penfer:  ou
pour  mieux  dire,  la  neceflite*  eft  vn  maiftre  cuifmier.

Quoy  que  s'en  foit,  ils  fe  trouuerent  fains  &  faufs
a  la  maifon  fur  les  quatre  heures  du  matin,  &  leur
pacquet  laifTe"  proche  d'vn  ruiffeau,  oil  eftoit  vne
bonne  partie  de  la  Chappelle,  fut  heureufement  re-
trouue  le  mefme  iour.

II  pleut  a  Dieu  difpofer  les  affaires  de  la  forte,  que
l'on  fit  rencontre  d'vne  cabane  dans  le  bourg  de
faindt  Michel,  la  plus  commode  qui  f e  pouuoit  rencon-
trer,  pour  ce  qu'on  y  pretendoit.  II  n'y  auoit  qu'vn
feul  feu  ou  famille,  qui  eftoit  iuftement  ce  qu'il  fal-
loit  pour  eftre  defchargez  du  foin  du  viure :  il  s'y
trouua  vn  petit  retranchement  propre  a  y  dreffer  vne
Chappelle,  ou  l'on  dit  tous  les  iours  la  Meffe,  tant
[85]  qu'on  y  demeura,  qui  fut  l'efpace  de  trente
iours.

De  premier  abord,  on  parle  a  TafTemblee  des  Capi-
taines,  qui  eftoiet  au  nombre  de  dix  ou  douze,  a  qui
on  declare  ce  qu'on  pretendoit:  qui  eftoit  de  leur
donner  &  a  tout  le  bourg,  la  cognoifsace  d'vn  feul
Dieu,  &  de  Iesvs-Christ  N.  Seigneur  &  Redemp-
teur. Pourquoy  leur  doner  mieux  a  entendre  les


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6jg  91

It  had  snowed  a  good  part  of  the  day,  and,  if  the
night  had  been  such  a  one  as  it  seemed  bound  to  be,
the  two  Fathers  possibly  would  not  have  come  out  of
it  more  cheaply  than  did  some  of  our  Savages,  who,
[84]  having  likewise,  some  time  later,  gone  astray  in
the  woods  during  the  night,  were  found  dead  the
next  day.  The  snow  which  had  fallen  did  them
more  good  than  harm,  for  it  served  to  appease  their
hunger,  and  above  all  their  thirst,  which,  in  their
labor  and  anxiety  as  lost  persons,  gave  them  no  little
trouble ;  and,  according  to  their  story,  snow  is  not  so
poor  eating  as  one  might  imagine, —  or,  to  put  it  bet-
ter, necessity  is  a  master  cook.

Be  that  as  it  may,  they  reached  home  safe  and
sound  towards  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  their
bundle,  that  had  been  left  near  a  brook,  and  con-
tained a  good  part  of  the  Chapel,  was  fortunately
recovered  the  same  day.

It  pleased  God  to  so  arrange  matters  that  they  came
across  a  cabin  in  the  village  of  saint  Michel,  the
most  convenient  that  could  be  found  for  the  use  that
was  to  be  made  of  it.  There  was  only  a  single  fire-
place or  family,  which  was  precisely  the  condition
necessary  to  relieve  them  from  care  in  regard  to
food;  there  was  a  little  compartment  suitable  for
erecting  a  Chapel,  where  Mass  was  said  daily,  as  long
[85]  as  they  stayed  there,  which  was  for  the  space  of
thirty  days.

At  the  very  outset,  they  spoke  in  the  assembly  of
the  Captains,  who  were  ten  or  twelve  in  number,  to
whom  they  declared  their  intention,  namely,  to  give
to  them  and  to  the  entire  village  the  knowledge  of
the  one  and  only  God,  and  of  Jesus  Christ,  Our
Lord  and  Redeemer. To  make  them  understand


92  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  17

Peres  portoient  ordinairement  vn  Crucifix  pendu  au
col.  Le  confeil  agrea  la  propofition  de  ce  deflein,
auec  des  formes  &  des  complimens  qui  furpaflent
de  beaucoup  1' imagination  ordinaire  qu'on  a  des
Sauuages.

D6s  le  lendemain,  l'vn  des  Peres  commenca,  a
faute  de  la  clochette,  d'aller  faire  vne  cri6e  par  tout
le  bourg,  felon  la  couflume  du  pays  pour  les  ailem-
ble*es  generales :  en  fuite  de  laquelle  on  ne  manqua
pas  de  voir  bien-toft  la  cabane  toute  pleine.  II  y
auoit  trop  de  nouueaute'  &  d'appareil,  pour  en  atten-
dre  moins,  mais  la  confufion  obligea  les  iours  fuiuans
d'en  exclurre  les  enfans,  &  leur  afligner  le  temps
d'apres  les  aflembl6es  pour  venir  a  la  petite  efcole.

Ce  concours  toutesfois  fi  general  ne  dura  [86]  pas
long-temps.  On  veit  bien-toft  la  feparation  du  bon
grain  d'auec  le  mauuais,  &  qui  eftoiet  les  brebis
entendant  la  voix  du  Pafteur,  &  qui  ne  T eftoiet  pas.
Les  premiers  continuoient  d'y  venir,  &  efcoutoient
volon tiers :  les  autres  apres  auoir  f atisf ait  a  leur  curi-
ofite\  ne  s'y  trouuerent  plus:  ou  s'ils  y  venoient,  ce
n'eftoit  que  pour  y  broiiiller,  &  pour  y  commettre
des  infolences.  C'eft  ce  qui  obligea  de  changer  de
batterie,  &  de  s'appliquer  totalement  a  la  vifite  des
cabanes:  ou  apres  qu'on  auoit  recogneu  plus  parti cu-
lierement  les  terres  ou  le  grain  auroit  pris  racine,
ou  pourroit  faire  des  affembl£es  particulieres  de  ceux
qu'on  auroit  recogneu  auoir  quelque  pieufe  affedtion
au  Chriftianifme  qu'on  leur  auoit  public.

L' experience  nous  a  fait  voir  par  tout  que  c'eftoit
de  la  forte  qu'il  en  falloit  vfer,  au  moins  auec  ce
Barbares,  parmy  lef quels  nous  viuons.  Au  com-
mencement qu'on  les  aborde,  il  eft  a  propos,  voire


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  i639  93

this  better,  the  Fathers  usually  wore  each  a  Crucifix
suspended  from  his  neck.  The  council  accepted  the
statement  of  this  purpose,  with  formalities  and  com-
pliments which  greatly  exceed  what  one  usually
imagines  of  the  Savages.

From  the  next  day,  one  of  our  Fathers  began,  for
lack  of  a  bell,  to  go  throughout  the  village,  making  an
announcement,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  coun-
try for  general  assemblies, — in  consequence  of  which,
they  soon  saw  the  cabin  entirely  filled.  There  was
too  much  novelty  and  preparation  to  expect  anything
less ;  but  the  confusion  obliged  them,  on  the  follow-
ing days,  to  exclude  the  children  and  to  appoint  the
time  after  the  assembly  for  them  to  come  to  the
little  school.

This  so  general  concourse,  however,  did  not  con-
tinue [86]  long.  Soon  was  seen  the  separation  of  the
good  seed  from  the  bad, —  and  of  those  who  were
the  sheep  waiting  for  the  voice  of  the  Shepherd,  from
those  who  were  not.  The  former  continued  to  come,
and  listened  willingly ;  the  latter,  after  having  satis-
fied their  curiosity,  were  no  longer  to  be  seen  there, —
or,  if  they  did  come,  it  was  only  to  make  mischief
and  perpetrate  insolent  acts.  It  was  this  that  obliged
us  to  change  our  tactics,  and  to  devote  ourselves
entirely  to  visiting  the  cabins, —  where,  after  we  had
more  carefully  surveyed  the  soil  where  the  seed
might  have  taken  root,  we  could  form  special  gather-
ings of  those  whom  we  recognized  as  having  some
pious  inclinations  towards  the  Christianity  that  had
been  proclaimed  to  them.

Experience  has  shown  us  everywhere  that  this  is
the  method  that  must  be  adopted,  at  least  with  these
Barbarians  among  whom  we  live. When  one  first


94  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

neceffaire,  de  faire  tant  de  predications  publiques
que  Ton  peut,  puis  dans  la  continuation  s'il  arriue
du  defordre,  &  de  l'infolence,  on  fe  contete  des  vifites
dans  les  cabanes,  &  des  fufdites  affembl6es  particu-
lieres,  [87]  &  feulement  de  fois  a  autre  renouueller
le  cry,  en  la  publication  de  l'Euangile,  pour  feruir  au
moins  a  iuftifier  vn  iour  la  bonte"  &  mifericorde  de
Dieu  fur  ces  peuples.

On  iugea  auffi  que  des  affemblees  particulieres  de
Capitaines  &  plus  anciens  du  bourg,  pourroient  eftre
de  grand  profit,  Ce  que  iugeans  bien  qu'on  ne  pou-
uoit  pas  efperer  que  par  quelque  attraict.  temporel,  il
fallut  fe  refoudre  de  ietter  chaque  fois  quelques  pains
de  petun  au  milieu  de  l'affembl6e,  lef quels  auffi  toil
efloient  couppez  par  morceaux,  &  diflribuez  par  les
principaux  Capitaines,  ou  par  leur  ordre.  Ce  qui
reiiffit  comme  on  le  pretendoit.  C'eft  en  ces  affem-
blees ou  fe  trouua  quelquefois  le  Chreftien  de  la
Conception  Iofeph  Chetfatenhtfa,  dans  lefquels  il  fit
merueilles  de  bien  parler  &  expliquer  nos  myfleres.

Mais  il  faut  aduoiier,  que  fi  Dieu  ne  met  fortement
la  main  a  tels  ouurages,  il  n'y  a  rien  a  gaigner  que
des  paroles,  &  des  propofitions  qui  s'en  vont  en  fum6e.
II  s'en  eft  trouu6  tel  dans  ces  affemb[l]6es  particu-
lieres de  Capitaines,  qui  [i]ettant  fa  peau  ou  mante
bas,  venoit  tout  nud  proche  des  [88]  Peres,  prefen-
tant  fa  tefle  &  tout  fon  corps  a  baptifer,  mais  c' efloient
des  faillies  qui  n'eftoient  pas  de  faifon,  dont  le  len-
demain  on  ne  voyoit  ny  fruidl,  ny  fleur.

En  fin  tout  bien  confidere,  reflendue  d'vn  mois,
qui  efloit  le  temps  qu'on  s'efloit  propos6,  s'en  allant
efcouler,  on  fe  refolut  de  prendre  ce  qui  fembloit
paroiflre  de  plus  aff eure" :  &  le  fort  tomba  fur  quatre


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  »5

approaches  them,  it  is  wise,  even  necessary,  to  have
as  much  public  preaching  as  possible ;  then  if,  while
continuing  the  work,  disorder  and  insolence  occur,
we  content  ourselves  with  visits  in  the  cabins,  and
with  the  aforesaid  special  meetings, —  [87]  only  now
and  then  renewing  our  public  utterance,  in  the  proc-
lamation of  the  Gospel,  that  at  least  it  may  serve  to
justify  some  day  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  God
toward  these  peoples.

It  was  thought  also  that  special  assemblies  of  Cap-
tains and  the  elders  of  the  village  might  be  highly
profitable.  Judging  rightly  that  this  could  not  be
hoped  for  except  through  some  temporal  attraction,
the  Father  felt  obliged  to  throw,  each  time,  some
cakes  of  tobacco  into  the  midst  of  the  assembly,
which  were  immediately  cut  into  pieces,  and  dis-
tributed by  the  principal  Captains,  or  by  their  order.
This  succeeded  as  it  was  intended.  It  was  in  these
assemblies  that  the  Christian  of  la  Conception,  Joseph
Chewatenhwa,  was  sometimes  present,  where  he  did
wonders  in  praising  and  explaining  our  mysteries.

But  it  must  be  confessed  that  if  God  does  not  put
his  hand  powerfully  to  such  works,  there  is  nothing
to  be  gained  but  words  and  propositions  that  go  up
in  smoke.  There  was  a  certain  man  in  these  special
assemblies  of  Captains,  who,  casting  down  his  skin
or  mantle,  came  up  to  the  Fathers  entirely  naked,
[88]  presenting  his  head  and  his  whole  body  to  be
baptized ;  but  these  were  shoots  that  were  out  of  sea-
son, of  which  neither  flower  nor  fruit  could  be  seen
the  next  day.

Finally,  having  taken  everything  into  considera-
tion,—  the  period  of  a  month,  the  time  they  had
planned,  having  elapsed, — it  was  decided  to  receive


96  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

chefs  de  famille,  qui  furent  baptifez  folemnellement :
dont  l'vn  eftoit  noftre  Hofle.  Ce  qui  donna  beau-
coup  de  cofolation  aux  Peres,  &  deux  autres  Capi-
taines  du  bourg;  dont  l'vn  femble  eftre  plus  du  nom-
bre  de  ceux  pour  lefquels  les  Anges  viendroient  du
Ciel  au  defaut  des  hommes,  pluoftoft  que  Dieu  man-
quaft  a  leur  pouruoir  des  moyens  de  fe  fauuer,  tant
ce  bon  homme  &  toute  fa  famille  fe  font  trouuez  rai-
fonnables,  &  exadts  obferuateurs  de  la  loy  de  Nature.
Leurs  femmes  toutefois  &  leurs  enfans  ne  furent
point  baptifez,  la  crainte  &  la  frayeur  reftant  encore
trop  grande  dans  ce  bourg,  aufll  bien  que  dans  le
refte  du  pays,  que  le  baptefme  faifoit  mourir,  ou  ren-
doit  ceux  qui  le  receuoient  fuiets  a  mille  maux  &  mi-
feres.  En  quoy  eft  de  plus  confiderable  la  refolution
[89]  de  ces  pauures  Neophytes,  dont  quelques-vns  fe
font  portez  au  baptefme,  auffi  bie  que  plufieurs  autres
aux  autres  edroits,  auec  cette  pens6e.  En  deufle-ie
mourir.

Ce  fut  le  premier  iour  de  l'an  1639.  que  ces  bap-
tefmes  fe  firent,  dont  le  lendemain  qui  eftoit  Diman-
che,  ces  Neophytes  s'eftant  trouuez  enfemble  pour
la  premiere  fois  a  la  Meffe,  au  nombre  de  cinq  ou
fix,  on  pourroit  remarquer  ce  2.  iour  de  la  prefente
ann£e,  pour  la  premiere  de  la  naiffance  de  cefte  Eglife
nouuelle,  le  nombre  eftat  fufnfant  pour  porter  le  nom
d'affembl^e  ou  Congregation.  Quelques  iours  apres
on  en  baptifa  quelques  autres,  &  en  fuite  encore  d'au-
tres  en  diuerf es  occafions  &  vifites  qui  ont  efte*  f aites
depuis  en  ce  bourg :  de  forte  que  de  pref ent  le  nombre
des  Chreftiens  qui  y  monte  a  vne  vingtaine,  quel-
qu'  autre  perfonnes,  foit  enfans  ou  plus  aag6es,  y  ont
efte*  baptises  en  extremit6  de  maladie  ou  mifere,


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  97

those  who  apparently  manifested  the  most  stability ;
and  the  lot  fell  upon  four  heads  of  families,  who  were
solemnly  baptized, —  one  of  these  being  our  Host,
which  gave  great  consolation  to  the  Fathers,  and  two
others,  Captains  of  the  village,  one  of  whom  seems
to  be  more  of  the  number  of  those  for  whose  sake
Angels  would  come  down  from  Heaven  in  default
of  men,  rather  than  that  God  should  fail  to  provide
them  with  a  means  of  escape,  so  reasonable  and  exact
observers  of  the  law  of  Nature  are  this  good  man  and
all  his  family.  Their  wives  and  children,  however,
were  not  baptized, — the  fear  and  terror  still  remain-
ing too  strong  in  this  village  as  well  as  in  the  rest
of  the  country,  that  baptism  causes  death,  or  renders
those  who  receive  it  liable  to  a  thousand  evils  and
miseries.  In  view  of  this,  is  most  important  the
resolution  [89]  of  these  poor  Neophytes,  several  of
whom,  as  well  as  many  others  in  other  places,  have
resorted  to  baptism  with  this  thought,  "  [I  will  re-
ceive it,]  even  if  I  must  die  for  it."

It  was  on  the  first  day  of  the  year  1639  that  these
baptisms  were  administered.  On  the  following  day,
which  was  Sunday,  these  Neophytes  being  present
together  for  the  first  time  at  Mass,  to  the  number  of
five  or  six,  we  could  note  this  2nd  day  of  the  present
year  as  the  first  of  the  birth  of  this  new  Church,  the
number  being  sufficient  to  bear  the  name  of  assem-
bly or  Congregation.  Some  days  later,  a  few  others
were  baptized,  and  thereafter  others  besides,  on
different  occasions,  and  on  visits  which  were  after-
wards made  in  this  village,  so  that  at  present  the
number  of  Christians  amounts  to  about  twenty.  A
few  more,  either  children  or  elderly  persons,  were
baptized  in  the  extremity  of  sickness  or  misery,  as,


98  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

comme  entr'autres  vn  pauure  prifonnier  Hiroquois,
qui  y  fut  amene*  pendant  que  les  Peres  y  eftoient
pour  la  premiere  fois.  Ce  pauure  mal  heureux  ay  ant
dure*  24  heures  apres  fon  baptefme,  on  aprit  qu'en  fa
derniere  &  funefte  nuidt  il  auoit  fait  effort,  pour  [90]
s'eftouffer  de  luy-mefme.  Cela  obligea  de  Taller  trou-
uer,  vn  peu  deuant  qu'on  exergaft  fur  luy  les  dernieres
cruautez,  &  luy  faire  recognoiftre  fa  faute,  le  porter
a  s'en  accufer,  &  en  demander  pardon;  ce  qu'ayant
fait,  on  luy  donna  l'abfolution,  &  deux  heures  apres
il  boiiilloit  dans  vne  chaudiere,  dont  ceux  de  la  ca-
bane  des  Peres  furent  inuitez  de  venir  prendre  leur
part.

Voila  la  principale  Miffion  de  cette  ann6e.  C'efloit
bien  le  deflein  d'en  faire  au  moins  vne  ou  deux  autres
femblables  pendant  le  refte  de  l'hyuer,  qui  eft  le  feul
temps  qu'on  peut  ioiiir  des  Sauuages:  qui  en  toute
autre  faifon  font  en  guerre  ou  en  traite.  Mais  s'eftant
trouue*  plus  de  peine  &  de  foin  a  nourrir  &  efleuer  les
enfans  fpirituels  de  ces  trois  nouuelles  Eglifes,  qu'on
n 'auoit  eu  a  leur  donner  la  vie  de  la  grace,  &  beau-
coup  plus  d'affaire  a  l'affermifTement  qu'a  l'eftabliffe-
ment  de  ces  Ouurages,  il  a  fallu  vacquer  au  plus
prefse\  On  n'a  pas  laifI6  de  faire  quelques  courfes
en  diuers  endroits  de  moins  de  dur6e,  qui  ont  eu  de
bons  effets. En  voicy  quelques  exemples.

Le  30.  de  Decembre  [sc.  Nouembre]  iour  de  faindt
Andr6,  [91]  vn  de  nos  Peres  eftant  all6  au  Bourg  de
Tahententaron,  que  nous  auons  furnomme*  de  faindt
Ignace,  efloigne*  d'enuiron  2  lieues  de  celuy  de  la  Re-
fidence  de  faindt  Iofeph,  il  y  baptiza  vn  ieune  enfant
fort  malade,  &  vn  vieillard  d'enuiron  quatre-vingts
ans,  qui  n' auoit  autre  maladie  que  celle  de  fa  vieil-


1639  -  40J  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  1639  99

among  others,  a  poor  Hiroquois  prisoner,  who  was
taken  thither  while  the  Fathers  were  there  for  the
first  time.  This  poor  unfortunate  having  held  out  24
hours  after  his  baptism,  it  was  learned  that  during
his  last  and  fatal  night  he  had  made  an  effort  to  [90]
choke  himself.  This  obliged  them  to  go  and  visit
him  a  little  while  before  the  final  cruelties  were  exer-
cised upon  him,  to  make  him  acknowledge  his  fault,
to  lead  him  to  accuse  himself  thereof,  and  ask  par-
don for  it.  Having  done  this,  he  was  granted  abso-
lution ;  and  two  hours  later  he  was  boiling  in  a  kettle,
of  which  the  inmates  of  the  Fathers'  cabin  were
invited  to  come  and  take  their  share.

That  is  the  principal  Mission  of  this  year.  It  was,
indeed,  the  intention  to  form  at  least  one  or  two  other
similar  ones  during  the  remainder  of  the  winter,
which  is  the  only  time  when  one  can  hold  the  Sav-
ages, who,  in  all  other  seasons,  are  engaged  in  war
or  in  trade.  But  having  found  more  trouble  and
anxiety  in  nourishing  and  rearing  the  spiritual  chil-
dren of  these  three  new  Churches  than  it  had  been  to
give  them  the  life  of  grace,  and  much  more  to  do  in
strengthening  than  in  establishing  these  Works,  it
has  been  necessary  to  devote  ourselves  most  closely
to  them.  We  have  not  omitted  to  make  some  shorter
visits  to  various  places,  which  have  had  some  good
results. Of  these,  I  will  give  some  examples.

On  the  30th  of  November,  saint  Andrew's  day,
[91]  one  of  our  Fathers  having  gone  to  the  Village  of
Tahententaron,5  —  which  we  have  surnamed  saint
Ignace,  distant  about  2  leagues  from  that  of  the
Residence  of  saint  Joseph, — he  there  baptized  a
young  child  who  was  very  sick,  and  an  old  man  aged
about  eighty  years,  who  had  no  other  ailment  except


100  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

leffe ;  mais  au  refte  fe  trouuoit  tout  difpofe"  a  efcouter.
Et  en  fuite  donna  a  entendre  qu'il  croyoit,  &  eftoit
tout  refolu  de  faire  ce  qu'il  falloit  pour  eftre  fauue.
Le  Pere  fentit  de  1' inclination  a  ne  point  differer
plus  long-temps  a  le  metre  en  eflat  de  ce  faire,  &  la-
deffus  le  baptize.

Deux  iours  apres,  iour  de  fefle  de  S.  Francois  Xa-
uier,  la  nouuelle  eftant  venue  affeur6e  de  l'arriuee
d'vn  prifonnier  de  guerre,  Hiroquois  de  nation,  au
fufdit  bourg,  qu'on  y  auoit  amen6  des  dernieres  bour-
gades  du  pais,  pour  le  donner  a  quelque  parent  de
ceux  qui  auoient  efte"  pris  autrefois  par  les  Ennemis.
Le  mefme  Pere  qui  y  auoit  efte"  deux  iours  aupara-
uant,  fut  depute"  auec  vn  autre,  pour  aller  prompte-
ment  a  la  defpoiiille  de  ce  pauure  mal-heureux ;  &
trauailler  pour  leur  part  au  gain  de  fon  Ame.  Comme
ils  approchent  du  [92]  bourg,  ils  apercoiuent  vne  foffe
que  Ton  faifoit;  ils  demandent  pour  qui?  on  refpond
que  c'eft  pour  vn  tel  vieillard  mort  le  iour  precedent,
&  c'eftoit  iuftement  celuy  qu'on  auoit  baptife\  qui
eftoit  mort  le  lendemain  de  fon  Baptefme.  Ils  s'en-
queftent  des  nouuelles  de  l'enfant  qui  fut  baptife"  en
mefme  temps ;  &  ils  apprirent  qu'il  f e  portoit  mieux.
Paffant  plus  auant,  ils  arriuerent  a  la  cabane  ou  eftoit
ce  pauure  prifonnier.  C eftoit  vn  ieune  home  de  22
ans  d'auffi  bonne  grace,  &  auffi  bien  fait  qu'on  en
puifle  rencontrer,  qui  ne  fembloit  auoir  rien  de  bar-
bare,  que  la  mifere  &  la  condition  ou  il  eftoit.  II
portoit  deux  mains  toutes  faigneufes  des  doigts  qu'en
riant  &  par  plaifir  on  luy  auoit  coupez  par  auance  du
traitement  qu'on  s'attendoit  de  luy  faire  la  nuidt
fuiuante.

Ce  pauure  ieune  homme,  aux  premieres  paroles  que


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  101

that  of  his  old  age,  and,  moreover,  proved  to  be  very
willing  to  listen ;  he  afterwards  gave  us  to  understand
that  he  believed  and  had  firmly  resolved  to  do  what
was  necessary  to  be  saved.  The  Father  felt  inclined
no  longer  to  defer  enabling  him  to  do  this,  and  there-
upon baptized  him.

Two  days  later,  the  day  of  the  feast  of  St.  Francois
Xavier,  authentic  news  was  brought  of  the  arrival  of
a  prisoner  of  war,  a  Hiroquois  by  nation,  to  that
village,  who  had  been  brought  thither  from  the  fron-
tier villages  of  the  country,  that  he  might  be  given
to  some  relative  of  those  who  had  been  formerly  cap-
tured by  the  Enemies.  The  same  Father  who  had
been  there  two  days  before  was  appointed,  with
another,  to  go  promptly  to  the  execution  of  this  poor
wretch,  and  to  labor,  on  their  part,  for  the  welfare
of  his  Soul.  As  they  approached  the  [92]  village,
they  perceived  that  a  grave  was  being  made;  they
asked  for  whom,  and  were  told  that  it  was  for  a
certain  old  man  who  had  died  the  day  before,  and  it
was  the  very  one  who  had  been  baptized,  who  had
died  the  day  after  his  Baptism.  They  inquired  for
news  of  the  child  that  had  been  baptized  at  the  same
time,  and  were  told  that  it  was  better.  Passing
farther  on,  they  arrived  at  the  cabin  where  this  poor
prisoner  was.  He  was  a  young  man  of  22  years,  as
graceful  and  well-made  a  savage  as  one  could  meet,
seeming  to  have  nothing  of  the  barbarian  about  him
except  the  wretched  condition  in  which  he  was.
Both  of  his  hands  were  all  covered  with  blood,  because,
as  a  jest  and  for  diversion,  two  of  his  fingers  had
been  cut  off,  in  anticipation  of  the  treatment  that  his
captors  expected  to  give  him  the  next  night.

This  poor  young  man,  at  the  first  words  our  Fa-


102  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  17

ltty  dirent  nos  Peres,  parut  li  abatu  de  la  douleur
qu'il  fouflroit,  &  de  fon  mal-heur,  que  Ton  douta  fi
on  en  pouuoit  efperer  beaucoup  de  contentement,  on
s'aduifa  de  tirer  quelque  image  de  N.  Seigneur.  A
cette  veue  l'efprit  de  ce  ieune  homme  fe  refueille;  il
efcoute  ce  qu'on  luy  dit.  Et  pour  le  faire  court,  il
donne  toute  [93]  la  fatisfadtion  necelTaire  pour  ce
qu'on  pretendoit;  voire  mefme  fe  met  a  chanter  fon
adte  de  contrition,  tefmoignant  beaucoup  de  contente-
ment &  de  confolation,  il  fut  done  baptife.

Mais  voicy  ou  parut  particulierement  adorable  la
Prouidence  diuine  fur  ce  pauure  inf ortune" :  car  les
affaires  ne  s'eflant  pas  trouu6es  telles  qu'il  falloit
pour  le  laiffer  a  la  difpofition  de  ceux  de  ce  bourg,
on  prit  refolution  de  le  remener  d'ou  il  eftoit  party,
pour  aduifer  de  rechef  a  ce  qu'on  en  feroit.  Mais  y
eftant  vne  fois  arriu6,  il  n'en  fortit  plus,  &  paffa  la
par  les  cruautez  ordinaires  aux  Barbares  de  ces  co-
trees:  comme  s'il  n'y  pouuoit  mourir,  qu'auparauant
il  n'euft  efl6  bapti[z]e\  &  comme  s'il  n'y  auoit  autre
affaire  pour  luy  en  nos  quartiers,  que  d'y  recontrer
cette  heureufe  fortune,  par  laquelle  il  fe  trouua  en
eflat  d'ef changer  fon  extreme  mifere  en  vne  felicite*
Eternelle.

Au  commencement  du  Printemps,  les  Chrefliens
des  Bourgs  ou  nous  auons  des  Refidences,  &  qui  font
les  2.  principales  Eglifes  ou  affembl6es,  s'eftans  diffi-
pez,  &  allez  qui  deca  qui  dela,  les  vns  en  traite,  les
autres  a  la  pefche,  d'autres  principalement  [94]  a  la
guerre:  les  ouuriers  de  l'Euangile  fe  trouuerent  auec
vn  peu  de  relafche.  Apres  auoir  done  vn  peu  refpire"
des  trauaux  paffez,  &  s'eflre  rafraifchis  fpirituelle-
met,  on  en  a  applique"  ce  qu'on  a  peu  aux  Millions,


1639-40]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib39  103

thers  said  to  him,  appeared  so  depressed  by  the  pain
he  was  suffering,  and  by  his  misfortune,  that  they
doubted  whether  they  could  look  for  much  satisfac-
tion from  him.  They  bethought  themselves  to  take
out  a  picture  of  Our  Lord ;  at  this  sight  the  young
man's  interest  was  aroused ;  he  listened  to  what  was
said  to  him,  and,  to  be  brief,  he  gave  all  [93]  the
satisfaction  necessary  for  their  purpose  —  even  begin-
ning to  chant  his  act  of  contrition,  and  evincing  much
satisfaction  and  consolation ;  he  was,  therefore,  bap-
tized.

But  behold  where  divine  Providence  appeared
especially  adorable  toward  this  poor  unfortunate.
For,  since  affairs  were  not  found  to  be  in  the  condi-
tion necessary  to  leave  him  at  the  disposition  of  the
people  of  this  village,  it  was  decided  to  take  him
back  to  the  place  whence  he  had  come,  to  consider
again  what  should  be  done  with  him.  But,  having
once  reached  that  place,  he  did  not  leave  it  again,
and  there  passed  through  the  cruelties  common  to
the  Barbarians  of  these  countries, — as  if  he  could  not
die  until  he  had  been  baptized,  and  as  if  he  had  no
other  business  in  our  quarters  than  to  meet  there  this
blessed  fate,  by  which  he  was  enabled  to  exchange
his  extreme  misery  for  Eternal  happiness.

Early  in  the  Spring,  the  Christians  of  the  Villages
where  we  have  Residences,  and  which  form  the  2
principal  Churches  or  assemblies,  having  dispersed
here  and  there, —  some  to  engage  in  trading,  others
in  fishing,  others  principally  [94]  in  war, — the  Gos-
pel laborers  obtained  a  little  relaxation.  After  hav-
ing breathed  a  little,  then,  from  our  past  labors,  and
become  spiritually  refreshed,  we  applied  ourselves
as  well  as  we  could  to  the  Missions,  and  to  visiting


104  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

&  aux  vifites  des  bourgs  &  bourgades  du  pais,  auec
deffein  de  ne  laiffer  pas  vne  cabane  de  Sauuages,
dans  laquelle  on  ne  fe  prefente,  &  qu'on  n'y  parle  &
agiffe  autant  qu'il  faut,  pour  feruir  aux  deffeins  de
Dieu  fur  fes  Efleus.  Pour  ce  fuiet,  quatre  Peres  ont
efte"  deftinez,  deux  d'vn  cofte,  &  deux  de  l'autre,  qui
apres  auoir  parcouru  leur  quartier,  retournent  fur
leurs  pas  pour  arroufer  ce  qu'ils  ont  feme.  Leur
foin  principal  eft  d' auoir  l'ceil  aux  enfans,  vieillards
&  malades,  fans  negliger  l'inftrudtion  des  autres.
Nous  auons  tous  fuiet  de  croire  que  Dieu  recoit
beaucoup  de  contentement  de  c£t  exercice:  &  nos
confciences  fe  trouuent  en  fin  par  la  en  repos,  &  en
affeurance,  que  rien  n'eft  oublie\  de  ce  qui  peut  eftre
fait  maintenant  pour  fa  gloire  &  pour  fon  feruice  en
ces  contr6es.  Ces  Millions  depuis  Pafques  iufques  a
l'Afcenfion,  nous  ont  donne*  28  baptifez,  dont  plu-
fieurs  font  allez  au  Ciel,  comme  nous  le  prefumons
de  la  [95]  bonte"  &  mifericorde  de  Dieu.  Mais  ie  n'e-
ftime  pas  moins  l'impremon  &  la  difpofition  qu'on  a
laifs6  dans  les  efprits  &  les  cceurs  de  tous  ceux  du
pays,  ce  qui  en  fon  temps,  comme  nous  efperons,  fer-
uira  aux  deffeins  de  la  Prouidence  diuine,  &  nous
donnera  des  fruidts  lors  que  nous  y  penferons  le
moins

Entr' autres  baptifez  par  les  Perez  deftinez  aux
Miffions,  ont  efte"  onze  prifonniers  de  guerre,  de  douze
qui  furent  amenez  au  pays  fur  la  fin  du  mois  de  May
de  cette  prefente  ann£e.  Ce  ne  fut  pas  fans  peine  &
trauail  qu'ils  vindrent  a  bout  d'vne  telle  entreprife,
pour  les  dimcultez  qui  fe  rencontrent  aux  baptefmes
de  telles  perfonnes,  comme  nous  auons  plus  ample-
ment  declare"  au  chap.  5.  mais  il  faut  aduouer  qu'il
n'y  a  rien  que  la  charite  ne  furmonte.


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  T63g  105

the  villages  of  the  country,  large  and  small,  intend-
ing not  to  leave  a  cabin  of  the  Savages  in  which  we
did  not  present  ourselves,  and  say  and  do  whatever
was  necessary  to  carry  out  God's  plans  for  his  Elect.
For  this  object,  four  Fathers  were  appointed, —  two
to  go  in  one  direction,  two  in  another, —  who,  after
having  traveled  over  their  districts,  retrace  their
steps  to  water  what  they  have  sown.  Their  chief
care  is  to  have  their  eyes  upon  the  children,  the  old,
and  the  sick,  without  neglecting  the  instruction  of
the  others.  We  have  every  reason  to  believe  that
God  has  received  much  satisfaction  from  this  prac-
tice ;  and  our  consciences  are,  in  short,  thereby  at
peace,  and  assured  that  nothing  is  neglected  that  can
now  be  done  for  his  glory  and  for  his  service  in  these
countries.  These  Missions,  from  Easter  until  Ascen-
sion day,  have  given  us  28  baptized,  of  whom  several
have  gone  to  Heaven,  as  we  judge  from  the  [95]  good-
ness and  mercy  of  God.  But  I  do  not  less  value  the
impression  and  disposition  that  have  been  left  in  the
minds  and  hearts  of  all  those  of  the  country, —  which
in  due  time,  as  we  hope,  will  subserve  the  designs
of  divine  Providence  and  will  give  us  fruits  when  we
shall  least  expect  them.

Among  others  baptized  by  the  Fathers  appointed
to  the  Missions,  were  eleven  prisoners  of  war,  out  of
twelve  that  were  brought  into  the  country  toward  the
end  of  the  month  of  May  of  this  present  year.  It
was  not  without  difficulty  and  hard  work  that  they
succeeded  in  this  undertaking,  on  account  of  the  hin-
drances that  are  encountered  in  the  baptisms  of  such
persons,  as  we  have  more  fully  stated  in  chapter  5 ;
but  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  there  is  nothing
that  charity  will  not  conquer.


106  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.17

II  femble  que  Dieu  nous  voulut  confirmer  en  ce
rencontre  dans  la  penfee  que  V  experience  nous  auoit
defia  fait  auoir  d'autres  occafions  femblables.  Que
les  baptefmes  de  telles  perfonnes  n'efloient  pas  fans
vne  fpeciale  difpofition  de  fa  bote  &  mifericorde,  fur
ces  pauures  mal  heureux,  &  fans  que  luy-mefme  y
mit  la  main,  [96]  celuy  feul  des  douze  qui  ne  fut  pas
baptise,  ne  fut  pas  celuy  qui  y  euft  moins  de  vocation
&  d'atrait.  On  trouua  moins  de  refiftance  a  l'abor-
der  de  la  part  des  Sauuages  qui  le  gardoient,  qu'on
n' auoit  faidt  aux  autres:  On  euft  le  moyen  de  luy
rendre  plus  de  tefmoignages  de  bone  volonte  &  affe-
ction, &  cependant  il  ne  fut  iamais  poffible  d'obtenir
de  ce  mal-heureux  aucun  agreement  de  ce  qui  luy
eftoit  dit  &  reprefente.  On  l'attaque  par  trois  diuers
iours,  &  le  fuit-on  la  part  ou  on  le  menoit,  on  ne
peuft  iamais  rien  gagner  fur  cet  efprit,  voire  mefme
empefcha-il  pour  vn  temps  qu'vn  fien  compagnon  ne
fe  fit  baptifer,  qui  d'ailleurs  tefmoignoit  autant  d' in-
clination &  de  pieufe  affedtion  a  eftre  inftruit,  que  ce
mal  heureux  en  auoit  d'auerfion :  mais  vne  fois  ayant
efte  trouue*  feparez,  on  accomplit  enuers  ce  2.  ce  dont
la  compagnie  de  T autre  1' auoit  deftourn6,  1' ayant
rencontre*  en  aufli  bonne  difpofition  qu'auparauant.

D£s  12.  il  y  en  euft  deux  qui  furent  deftinez  pour
ce  bourg  d'ou  i'efcris,  &  abandonnez  a  l'ordinaire,
par  ceux  qui  en  efloient  les  mailtres,  aux  cruautez
ordinaires  du  pays.  Tous  deux  efloient  du  [97]  nom-
bre  des  baptifez:  dont  l'vn  particulierement  fit  pa-
roiftre  vne  conftance  dans  fes  tourmens,  au  dela  non
feulement  de  ce  que  iamais  on  n'a  veu,  mais  peut-
eftre  au  dela  de  ce  qu'on  euft  peu  s'imaginer  fi  on  ne
l'eufl  veu. L'efpace  des  deux  premieres  heures  de


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  107

It  seems  as  if,  in  this  occurrence,  God  intends  to
confirm  us  in  the  thought  that  experience  had  already
suggested  to  us  on  other  similar  occasions, —  that  the
baptisms  of  such  persons  were  not  without  a  special
arrangement  of  his  goodness  and  mercy  toward  those
poor  unfortunates,  and  without  himself  putting  his
hand  thereto.  [96]  The  only  one  of  the  twelve  who
did  not  receive  baptism  was  not  the  one  who  had
the  fewest  calls  and  inducements  to  do  so.  Less
resistance  in  approaching  him  was  met  from  the
Savages  who  were  guarding  him,  than  would  have
been  made  in  the  case  of  the  others,  and  opportunity
was  found  to  show  him  more  evidences  of  good  will
and  affection;  yet  it  was  never  possible  to  obtain
from  this  poor  wretch  any  acceptance  of  what  was
said  and  represented  to  him.  They  accosted  him  on
three  different  days,  and  followed  him  to  the  place
whither  he  was  taken,  but  nothing  could  ever  be
gained  from  this  man.  He  even  prevented,  for  a
time,  one  of  his  companions  from  being  baptized,
who  otherwise  showed  as  much  inclination  and  pious
desire  to  be  instructed  as  this  wretch  had  felt  aver-
sion to  it.  But  happening  once  to  be  apart,  we
accomplished  for  this  2nd  man  what  the  companion-
ship of  the  other  had  diverted  him  from,  having
found  him  as  favorably  inclined  as  before.

Of  the  12,  two  were  assigned  to  this  village  whence
I  am  writing,  and  abandoned,  as  usual,  by  those  who
were  their  masters,  to  the  customary  cruelties  of  the
country.  Both  were  of  the  [97]  number  of  the  bap-
tized; one  of  them,  especially,  showed  a  constancy
in  his  torments  beyond  not  only  anything  that  one
had  ever  seen,  but  perhaps  beyond  what  one  could
have  imagined  if  one  had  not  seen  it. During  the


108  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JJ&SUITES [Vol.  17

la  nuict  qu'il  fut  tourmente'  de  toutes  les  f  aeons,  auec
tifons  ardens,  haches  bruflantes,  &  autres  ferremens
tout  en  feu  qu'on  luy  appliquoit  par  tout,  il  ne  branfla
ny  remua  non  plus  que  s'il  euft  efte*  de  marbre.  II
ne  fe  plaignit  iamais,  ny  ne  ietta  aucun  cry,  non  pas
mef me  vn  f oufpir  qui  tefmoignaft  de  la  douleur :  ce  qui
mettoit  en  furie  ceux  qui  le  tourmentoiet,  qui  impu-
tent  a  grand  mal-heur  quand  ils  font  rencontre  d'vne
telle  conffcance,  ils  eurent  beau  faire,  ils  fe  lafferent
pluftoft  de  le  tourmenter,  que  luy  de  f ouffrir ;  luy-
mefme  s'arreftoit  &  fe  prefentoit  a  ceux  qui  plus  le
vouloient  tourmenter :  &  tandis  qu'ils  le  faifoient  il
s'entretenoit  aum  froidement  auec  tous  ceux  qui  le
vouloient  queftionner,  de  mefme  que  fi  c'euft  efte*  vn
autre  qu'on  euft  tourment6:  &  au  defaut  d'entretien
il  ne  ceffoit  de  chanter,  &  fouuent  repetoit  dans  fa
chanfon  Aronhiac  Eskenonteta,  ie  m'en  vay  done  au
Ciel:  [98]  Quoy  qu'il  n'y  euft  pas  vn  des  noftre  pre-
fens  pour  le  faire  reffouuenir  de  fon  bon-heur.  Lors
qu'on  l'aborda  pour  l'inftruire  la  premiere  fois,  vous
eufflez  dit  qu'on  luy  euft  porte"  vne  nouuelle  qu'il  y
a  trente  ans  qu'il  attendoit,  &  a  laquelle  de  longue
main  il  s'eftoit  prepare,  tant  il  agrea  &  conceut  tout
d'vn  coup  le  poinct  de  l'affaire.  Toutes  ces  rencon-
tres nous  font  toucher  au  doigt  les  fecrets  adorables
de  la  predeftination  de  Dieu  fur  fes  Efleus.  En  fin
le  matin  venu,  nos  Barbares  le  firent  mourir  prompte-
ment,  voyans  que  la  prolongation  de  fes  tourmens
eftoit  celle  de  leur  confufion,  &  qu'ils  ne  perdoient
que  leur  peine  fans  en  retirer  ny  donner  au  public
aucun  plaifir,  qui  confifte  fur  tout  a  entendre  crier
ces  pauures  vidtimes  de  leur  fureur.  Vn  entr'autres
qui  pendant  fon  inftrudtion  n'y  auoit  pareillement


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  i63g  109

first  two  hours  of  the  night,  while  he  was  tormented
in  every  way, —  with  burning  brands,  glowing  hatch-
ets, and  other  iron  tools,  red-hot,  that  were  applied
to  every  part  of  his  body, — he  did  not  tremble  or
flinch  any  more  than  if  he  had  been  of  marble.  He
never  complained  or  cried  out,  or  even  sighed,  as  an
indication  of  his  suffering, —  which  threw  into  a  fury
those  who  tormented  him,  who  count  it  a  great
misfortune  when  they  encounter  such  steadfastness.
They  strove  in  vain, — they  sooner  became  weary  of
tormenting  him  than  he  of  suffering;  he  himself
stood  still,  and  offered  himself  to  those  who  most
desired  to  torment  him ;  and,  while  they  did  this,  he
conversed  as  coolly  with  all  those  who  chose  to  ques-
tion him  as  if  it  were  some  one  else  that  was  being
tortured.  And,  when  he  was  not  talking,  he  never
ceased  to  sing,  often  repeating  in  his  song,  ' !  Aron-
hiac  Eskenonteta, ' '  "  I  am  going  away  to  Heaven,
then," — [98]  although  there  was  not  one  of  ours
present  to  remind  him  of  his  good  fortune.  When
they  first  accosted  him  to  give  him  instruction,  you
would  have  said  that  they  brought  him  tidings  for
which  he  had  been  waiting  thirty  years,  and  for  which
he  was  long  since  prepared,  so  readily  did  he  accept
and  grasp  all  at  once  the  essential  points.  All  these
occurrences  make  us  see  close  at  hand  the  adorable
secrets  of  God's  predestination  concerning  his  Elect.
Finally,  when  morning  came,  our  Barbarians  quickly
put  him  to  death,  seeing  that  the  prolongation  of  his
tortures  was  that  of  their  own  confusion,  and  that
their  exertions  were  only  thrown  away,  without
obtaining  therefrom,  or  giving  to  the  public,  any
pleasure,  which  consists  above  all  in  hearing  these
poor  victims  of  their  fury  shriek. One,  among  others,


110  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

donn6  beaucoup  de  contentement  ayant  efl6  donne*  a
quelques  peuples  efloignez;  ceux-cy  par  ie  ne  fcay
quelle  confideration  fe  refoluent  de  luy  dormer  la  vie,
&  de  le  remener  a  fon  pais;  mais  lors  qu'on  fut  fur
le  poind:  de  l'y  conduire,  comme  li  fon  baptefme  ne
luy  eut  deu  de  rien  feruir  s'il  fortoit  de  ces  contr^es,
il  tomba  dans  vne  [99]  maladie,  qui  luy  apportant  la
mort  luy  donna  la  vie,  &  fufl  raccompliffement  de  fa
predeflination.

Ie  ne  fcay  fi  ce  que  nos  Sauuages  apprehendent  de
mal-heur  du  prefage  de  conflance  de  leurs  prifonniers
leur  arriuera :  Ie  prie  Dieu  qu'il  le  deftourne  de  deffus
leurs  tefles:  mais  ie  fcay  bien  qu'ils  ont  tout  fuiet
d'ailleurs  de  l'apprebender.  Ces  12.  prifonniers  font
les  premices  d'vne  guerre  qu'ils  ont  entrepris  de  nou-
ueau  cette  ann6e  contre  vn  Peuple  puiffant,  nomm6
Senontouerbonons,  les  plus  procbes  de  tous  leurs  en-
nemis,  auec  qui  depuis  quelques  ann6es  ils  auoient  la
paix.  Ils  voyent  bien  que  cela  ne  leur  peut  apporter
que  malbeur :  mais  quelques-vns  de  leurs  ieunes  gens
ayans  recommence*  l'ann6e  pafI6e  a  tuer  quelqu'vn
de  cette  Nation ;  le  ref ouuenir  &  le  refentiment  de
ceux  de  leurs  parens,  qui  autrefois  ont  efl6  mal  trai-
tez  par  ces  peuples,  a  fait  refoudre  tout  le  pai's,  a  re-
prendre  la  guerre  contr'eux,  &  les  attaquer  pluflofl
qu'a  reparer  la  faute.


1639-40]  LE  JEUNES  RELA  T/OJV,  ib39  111

who  during  his  instruction,  unlike  this  man,  had  not
afforded  much  satisfaction,  having  been  given  to
some  remote  tribes, —  they,  from  I  know  not  what
motives,  resolved  to  grant  him  his  life,  and  to  take
him  back  to  his  own  country.  But  when  they  were
on  the  point  of  conducting  him  thither,  as  if  his  bap-
tism would  have  availed  him  nothing  if  he  left  these
countries,  he  perished  in  an  [99]  illness,  which,  in
bringing  him  death,  gave  him  life,  and  was  the  ful-
fillment of  his  predestination.

I  do  not  know  whether  the  misfortune  our  Savages
apprehend,  as  presaged  by  the  fortitude  of  their  pris-
oners, will  happen ;  I  pray  God  that  he  may  avert  it
from  their  heads, — but  I  know  very  well  that  they
have  every  reason,  on  other  accounts,  to  apprehend
it.  These  12  prisoners  are  the  first  fruits  of  the  war
that  they  have  undertaken  anew  this  year  against  a
powerful  Tribe,  named  Senontouerhonons,  the  near-
est of  all  their  enemies,  with  whom  they  were  at
peace  for  several  years.  They  see  clearly  that  this
can  only  bring  them  misfortune ;  but,  some  of  their
young  men  having  last  year  recommenced  hostilities,
by  killing  some  member  of  that  Nation,  the  bitter
memories  and  the  resentment  of  those  of  their  kin-
dred who  were  formerly  badly  treated  by  those  tribes,
have  caused  a  determination  throughout  the  country
to  resume  war  against  them,  and  to  attack  them,
rather  than  to  make  amends  for  the  fault.


112  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17


[IOO] CHAP. VII.

DE DIUERSES TRAUERSES & DIFFICULTEZ QUI SE

SONT  RENCONTREES  EN  LA  NAISSANCE  DE  CES  NOU-

UELLES  EGLISES: &  DE  CELLES  QUI  SE  PRE-

SENTENT ENCORE TOUS  LES IOURS

EN LEUR ESTABLISSEMENT.

CONSIDERANT  de  prSs  auffi  bien  que  de  loing
ce  pais  des  Hurons,  &  autres  peuples  voifms,
il  m'a  toufiours  femble"  vne  des  principales
fortereffes,  &  comme  vn  donjon  des  Demons.  Et  en
effedt  ie  ne  penfe  pas  qu'il  y  ait  perfonne  qui  ay  ant
confidere  ou  veu  les  difficultez  d'y  aborder,  &  d'y  fub-
fifter ;  le  fouuerain  Empire,  &  le  repos  auec  lequel
les  Demons  y  ont  domine*  depuis  tant  de  fiecles,  en
fafle  vn  autre  iugement.

La  refolution  des  ouuriers  de  l'Euangile  en  ces  der-
nieres  annees,  de  les  venir  attaquer  en  vn  tel  Fort,  &
leur  donner  l'alarme,  les  auoir  irrite*  iufques  au  poind:
qu'on  a  bien  veu :  particulierement  ces  deux  dernieres
ann6es,  qu'ils  auoient  coniure"  leur  [101]  ruine.
Mais  comme  ils  ne  peuuent  pas  tout  ce  qu'ils  voulent,
leurs  efforts  ont  abouti,  ou  depuis  le  commence-
ment du  monde  ils  font  arriuez  &  arriueront  a  iamais ;
fcauoir  a  la  plus  grande  gloire  de  Dieu,  &  a  leur  con-
fufion,  comme  on  a  peu  voir  aux  Chapitres  precedes.
Ce  n'eft  pas  toutefois  1'humeur  de  ces  efprits  orgueil-
leux  de  f e  rendre  fi  toft :  tant  plus  leur  confufion  eft
grande,  tant  plus  leur  rage  croift,  qui  leur  fournit  tous


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6jg  113


[IOO] CHAP. VII.

OF VARIOUS OBSTACLES AND DIFFICULTIES ENCOUN-
TERED IN CONNECTION WITH THE BIRTH OF
THESE  NEW  CHURCHES; AND  OF  THOSE
THAT STILL APPEAR DAILY IN
THEIR ESTABLISHMENT.

CONSIDERING  from  anear  as  well  as  from  afar
this  country  of  the  Hurons,  and  other  neigh-
boring peoples,  it  has  always  seemed  to  me
one  of  the  principal  fortresses  and,  as  it  were,  a  don-
jon of  the  Demons.  And,  in  fact,  I  do  not  think
there  is  any  person  who  —  having  considered  or  seen
the  difficulties  of  reaching  it  and  of  subsisting  here,
as  well  as  the  sovereign  Power  and  the  security  with
which  the  Demons  have  ruled  here  during  so  many
centuries, —  could  form  any  other  opinion  of  it.

The  resolution  of  the  Gospel  workers  in  these  lat-
ter years  to  come  and  attack  them  in  such  a  Fort,  and
give  them  the  alarm,  has  irritated  them  to  the  utmost,
as  we  have  plainly  seen, —  especially  in  these  last  two
years,  when  they  had  plotted  our  [101]  ruin.  But  as
they  cannot  do  all  that  they  would,  their  efforts  have
resulted  as  they  have  since  the  beginning  of  the
world,  and  as  they  always  will  result, —  namely,  in
the  greater  glory  of  God,  and  in  their  own  confusion,
as  may  be  seen  in  the  preceding  Chapters.  It  is  not,
however,  the  humor  of  these  proud  spirits  to  yield
so  soon ;  the  greater  their  confusion,  the  more  their
rage  increases,  which  daily  furnishes  them  with  new


114  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.17

les  iours  de  nouuelles  inuentions  de  trauerfer  les
affaires  de  Dieu ;  fur  tout  quand  ils  voyent  qu'il  s'agift
de  Tefhendue  du  Royaume  de  Iefus  Chrift,  de  luy
former  de  nouuelles  Efpoufes ;  en  vn  mot  d'eftablir
de  nouuelles  Eglifes  ou  affembl£es  de  Chrefliens,  cela
allant  a  la  mine  fondamentale  de  leur  Empire,  &  au
renuerfement  de  leurs  principales  pretentions.

En  effedt,  lors  que  i'arriuay  icy  fur  la  fin  du  mois
d' Aoufl,  i'y  trouuay  les  efprits  des  Sauuages  en  affez
grand  repos,  &  comme  dans  le  regret  &  le  repentir
de  ce  qui  s'effcoit  paffe\  s'eftonnans  de  leur  aueugle-
ment  &  peu  d'efprit  d'auoir  de  tels  ombrages,  &  de
fi  mauuaifes  inclinations  pour  des  perfonnes  comme
nous,  [102]  qui  ne  leur  faifions  que  du  bien.  Mais
apres  le  retour  des  traites,  on  n'euft  pas  pluflofl  re-
double* les  bateries  des  Predications  &  inftrudtions,
tant  generales  que  parti culieres ;  &  a  trauailler  tout
de  bon  a  reftabliffement  de  l'ouurage  que  Ton  preten-
doit,  que  voila  les  langues  qui  fe  deflient  plus  que
iamais :  on  renouuelle  toutes  les  plaintes  &  les  cris.
Que  depuis  que  nous  eftions  au  pais,  &  que  nous  y
auions  feme*  noflre  dodtrine,  on  n'y  voyoit  plus  que
mal  heur  &  mif ere ;  on  n'y  voyoit  plus  de  vieillards ;
que  tout  le  pais  s'en  alloit  en  decadence  &  en  mine ;
qu' apres  auoir  fait  mourir  tous  ceux  du  quartier  ou
nous  nous  eftions  mis  d'abord,  nous  allions  par  tous
les  autres  bourgs  pour  faire  le  mef me  d6gaft ;  que  fi
on  n'arreftoit  la  caufe  de  tous  ces  maux,  bien-toft  on
verroit  toute  leur  nation  aneantie.

Ces  difcours  ne  fe  tenoient  pas  feulement  dans  le
particulier  &  en  cachette,  mais  aufli  en  public  &  dans
nos  cabanes  mefmes,  &  aux  afTembl6es  de  nos  Cate-
chifmes. II  s'eft  trouue*  quelquefois  qu'en  mefme


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  115

devices  for  hindering  the  affairs  of  God, —  above  all,
when  they  see  that  it  is  a  question  of  extending  the
Kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ,  of  creating  new  Brides  for
him,  in  a  word,  of  establishing  new  Churches  or
assemblies  of  Christians,  this  tending  to  the  funda-
mental ruin  of  their  Empire,  and  to  the  overthrow  of
their  principal  claims.

In  fact,  when  I  arrived  here  toward  the  end  of  the
month  of  August,  I  found  the  minds  of  the  Savages
quite  tranquil,  and,  as  it  were,  in  a  condition  of
regret  and  repentance  for  what  had  taken  place,  being
astonished  at  their  own  blindness  and  lack  of  sense  in
holding  such  umbrage  and  so  evil  passions  toward
persons  like  us,  [102]  who  had  only  done  them  good.
But  after  their  return  from  trading,  no  sooner  had
we  redoubled  our  batteries  of  Sermons  and  instruc-
tions, general  as  well  as  individual,  and  labored  in
earnest  for  the  establishment  of  our  intended  enter-
prise, than  lo,  tongues  were  more  than  ever  loosened.
All  their  complaints  and  clamors  were  renewed, —
that  since  we  were  in  the  country,  and  had  sown  our
doctrine  there,  one  saw  no  longer  aught  but  misfor-
tune and  misery,  and  no  more  old  men  were  seen ;  that
the  whole  country  was  going  to  decay  and  ruin ;  that,
after  having  caused  the  death  of  all  those  in  the  quar-
ter where  we  had  first  settled,  we  went  through  all
the  other  villages  to  create  the  same  havoc ;  that,  if
the  cause  of  all  these  evils  were  not  suppressed,  they
would  soon  see  their  entire  nation  annihilated.

These  speeches  were  not  made  only  in  private  and
secretly,  but  also  in  public  and  even  in  our  cabins,
and  in  the  meetings  of  our  Catechumens.  It  hap-
pened sometimes  that  at  the  same  time  that  a  Father
was  going  through  the  village  to  ring  the  bell,  or  to


116  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  17

temps  qu'vn  Pere  alloit  par  le  bourg,  fonner  ou  faire
la  criee  pour  affembler  le  monde ;  au  mef me  temps
quelque  [103]  Capitaine  mal  affedtionne"  fortoit  de  fa
cabane,  qui  faifoit  vn  cry  contraire,  difant  qu'on  fe
donnaft  bien  de  garde  d'y  venir,  que  nous  eftions  for-
ciers,  qui  n'auions  autre  deflein  que  de  les  perdre  &
rui'ner?  qu'il  f alloit  plufloft  fonger  a  fe  d^faire  de
nous,  que  de  croire  &  faire  ce  que  nous  difions.

Ces  mefmes  difcours  f e  font  faits  pendant  les  Cate-
chifmes,  ou  ces  organes  du  diable  interrompoient  le
Catechifte,  pour  faire  leur  Prefche,  auec  des  blaf-
phemes  qui  donnoient  bien  auant  dans  le  cceur  de  nos
Peres ;  mais  qui  pour  cela  ne  leur  ofloient  pas  la  pa-
role, pour  refpondre  a  ces  fols,  &  les  traiter  comme
il  falloit;  non  pas  toutefois  tant  felon  leur  merite,
qu'auec  la  patience  &  la  companion  auec  laquelle  il
faut  agir  auec  ces  pauures  malheureux.

L'infolence  de  telles  perfonnes  d'authorit6,  aug-
mente  beaucoup  la  hardieffe  des  enfans  &  des  per-
fonnes du  commun,  defquelles  en  fuite  il  n'a  pas  fallu
peu  fourTrir.  On  a  veu  les  plotes  de  neige,  les  ba-
flons,  les  troignons  de  bled,  &  autres  fatras,  a  faute  de
pierres,  (qu'on  ne  trouue  pas  toufiours  quand  on  veut
en  ce  pais)  voler  fur  les  teftes  des  Peres,  pendant
mef  me  [104]  les  Catechifmes :  &  le  long  de  la  iour-
n6e,  par  les  trous  de  la  cabane  qui  feruent  de  feneftre
&  de  cheminee.  Pour  ne  point  parler  dauantage  de
plufieurs  autres  dif graces  qui  s'enfuiuent  tous  les
iours,  viuans  parmy  vn  peuple  barbare,  contre  lequel
nous  n'auons  ny  ne  pouuons  auoir  aucune  defenfe.

Quelques-vns  des  plus  aduifez  entre  les  Capitaines
&  anciens,  voyans  bien  que  cela  eft  contre  les  droidts
de  l'alliance  dont  ils  font  profeflion  auec  les  Francois,


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  117

make  the  announcement  for  assembling  the  people,
at  this  very  time  some  [103]  evil-minded  Captain
would  come  out  from  his  cabin  and  declaim  against
this, —  warning  the  people  to  beware  of  going  there;
that  we  were  sorcerers,  who  had  no  other  purpose
than  to  undo  and  ruin  them ;  that  they  ought  rather
to  think  of  getting  rid  of  us  than  to  believe  and  do
what  we  said.

These  same  speeches  were  made  during  the  Cate-
chisms, where  these  instruments  of  the  devil  inter-
rupted the  Catechist  to  preach  their  own  Sermon,
with  blasphemies  which  sank  deep  into  the  hearts  of
our  Fathers,  but  which,  nevertheless,  did  not  deprive
them  of  speech  to  answer  these  fools,  and  treat  them
as  they  deserved, — not,  however,  so  much  according
to  their  merit,  as  with  the  patience  and  compassion
with  which  one  should  deal  with  these  poor  unfor-
tunates.

The  insolence  of  such  persons  of  authority  greatly
increases  the  boldness  of  the  children  and  common
people,  from  whom,  consequently,  one  has  to  suffer
not  a  little.  Snowballs,  clubs,  cornstalks,  and  other
rubbish,  for  lack  of  stones  (which  are  not  always  to
be  found  in  this  country  when  they  are  wanted),  have
been  seen  flying  over  the  Fathers'  heads,  even  during
[104]  the  Catechisms,  and,  in  the  course  of  the  day,
through  the  holes  of  the  cabin  which  serve  as  win-
dow and  chimney, —  to  say  nothing  of  many  other
indignities  that  occur  every  day,  living  among  a  bar-
barous people,  against  whom  we  have,  and  can  have,
no  defense.

Some  of  the  more  prudent  among  the  Captains  and
old  men,  seeing  clearly  that  this  is  contrary  to  the
rights  of  the alliance  that  they  profess with the


118  LES  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.17

en  font  bien  quelquefois  des  excufes,  &  tafchent  d'y
apporter  quelque  ordre :  mais  le  tout  fe  fait  11  froide-
ment,  &  auec  fi  peu  d' authority,  que  cela  fouuent
augmete  plus  le  mal,  qu'il  ne  le  guerit.

Toutes  ces  imaginations  de  ces  pauures  Barbares,
que  nous  fommes  la  ruine  &  la  perte  de  leur  pais,
s'augmente  autant  de  fois  que  quelque  mal-heur  leur
arriue  de  nouueau,  foit  maladie,  foit  famine,  laquelle
regne  maintenant  en  quelques  endroits  du  pais,  par-
ticulierement  au  bourg  de  la  Refidence  de  la  Concep-
tion, nous  imputans  tous  ces  mal-heurs,  comme  fi
nous  en  eftions  la  caufe,  ou  qu'y  pouuans  apporter
remede,  nous  ne  le  vouluflions  pas.

[105]  Sur  ce  que  nous  leur  predifons  les  Ecclypfes
de  la  Lune  &  du  Soleil,  dont  ils  ont  beau  coup  de
peur,  ils  fe  font  imaginez  que  nous  en  eftions  les
maiflres ;  que  nous  fcauions  toutes  les  chof es  a  adue-
nir;  &  que  c'eft  nous  qui  en  difpofons.  Et  en  cefte
cofideration,  ils  s'adrelfent  a  nous  pour  fcauoir  11
leurs  bleds  reiifliront;  ou  font  leurs  ennemis,  &  en
quelle  quantite*  ils  viennent ;  ne  f e  pouuans  perf uader
qu'en  toutes  chofes  nous  n'en  fcachions  dauantage
que  leurs  forciers,  qui  font  profeffion  de  defcouurir
femblables  fecrets.  Et  voicy  ce  qui  les  confirme
encore  dauantage  dans  leur  imagination ;  car  la  cou-
flume  du  pais  eftant  qu'aux  neceflitez  publiques  on  a
recours  aux  Sorciers  les  plus  fameux;  ceux  cy  ne
manquans  pas  de  promettre  merueilles,  pourueu  qu'on
leur  faff e  des  prefens ;  nous  ne  pouuons  pas,  en  telles
occalions  nous  taire :  particulierement  depuis  que  nous
auons  des  Chreftiens  qui  fe  trouuent  engages  &  enue-
loppez  dans  telles  affaires,  nous  parlons  done  &  difons
ce  qu'il  faut : Mais  aulfi  toft  a  les  entendre,  nous  voila


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  119

French,  sometimes  make  excuses  therefor,  and  try  to
bring  about  some  order ;  but  it  is  all  done  so  coldly,
and  with  so  little  authority,  that  it  often  augments
more  than  it  remedies  the  evil.

All  these  fancies  of  these  poor  Barbarians,  that  we
are  the  ruin  and  the  destruction  of  their  country,
increase  whenever  some  new  misfortune  happens  to
them, —  be  it  sickness,  or  famine,  which  is  now  prev-
alent in  some  parts  of  the  country,  especially  in  the
village  of  the  Residence  of  la  Conception, — imputing
to  us  all  their  afflictions,  as  if  we  were  the  cause
thereof,  or,  being  able  to  furnish  some  remedy  for
them,  we  would  not  do  so.

[105]  Because  we  predict  to  them  the  Eclipses  of
the  Moon  and  Sun,  which  they  greatly  fear,  they
imagine  that  we  are  the  masters  of  these,  that  we
know  all  future  events,  and  that  it  is  we  who  order
them.  And  with  this  idea,  they  address  themselves
to  us  to  know  if  their  crops  will  succeed ;  where  their
enemies  are,  and  in  what  force  they  are  coming, —
being  unable  to  persuade  themselves  that  we  are  not
wiser  in  all  things  than  their  sorcerers,  who  profess
to  discover  such  secrets.  And  what  confirms  them
still  more  in  their  notion  is  that, — it  being  the
custom  of  the  country  in  public  necessities  to  have
recourse  to  the  most  famous  Sorcerers,  and  these  not
hesitating  to  promise  wonders,  provided  they  are
given  presents, —  we  cannot,  at  such  times,  keep
silent,  especially  since  we  have  Christians  who  are
found  to  be  engaged  and  involved  in  such  matters ;
we  speak,  therefore,  and  say  what  we  ought.  But
forthwith,  according  to  them,  we  are  declared  ar-
raigned and  convicted  of  that  of  which  they  accuse
us, — of  intending  nothing  else  than  the  destruction


120  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

declarez  atteints  &  conuaincus  de  ce  dont  on  nous
accufe.  De  ne  pretendre  autre  chofe  que  la  perte  &
la  [106]  taine  \sc.  ruine]  du  monde,  puifque  nous  ne
les  voulons  pas  deliurer  de  leurs  mif  eres,  ny  leur  per-
mettre  qu'ils  fe  pouruoient  des  remedes  ordinaires
pradtiquez  dans  leurs  pays,  de  tout  temps  contre
leurs  mal  heurs,  parti culierement  dans  la  creance
qu'ils  ont  que  c'eft  nous  qui  en  fommes  la  catrfe.  Et
en  fuite  on  ne  menace  de  rien  moins  que  de  coups
de  hache,  &  de  toute  forte  de  maffacre.

Ces  difcours  f e  tiennent  plus  fouuent  que  tous  les
iours,  a  l'occafion  des  afflictions  parti culieres,  parti-
culierement  de  leurs  maladies.  Car  comme  ils  n'ont
point  d'autres  Medecins  que  Sorciers  ou  Magiciens,
&  que  la  plufpart  de  leurs  remedes  confiftent  en  des
danfes,  feflins,  ceremonies,  &  circonftances  du  tout
diaboliques;  nous  ne  pouuons  pas  ne  leur  declarer
que  tout  cela  ne  vaut  rien,  &  qu'ils  ioiient  en  fin  a  fe
perdre,  &  tout  leur  pays.  Cela  les  met  au  defefpoir ;
car  d'vn  cofte"  ils  ne  fe  peuuent  refoudre  de  quitter
ces  remedes,  qu'en  quittant  l'efperance  de  viure,  qui
eft  cependant  leur  fouuerain  bien :  de  1' autre  ils  voy-
ent  des  perfonnes  qui  les  menacent  de  la  colere  &
de  la  Iuftice  de  Dieu,  s'ils  continuent  de  s'en  feruir.
II  eft  croyable  [107]  que  ce  defefpoir  les  portera  vn
iour  a  faire  pis  qu'ils  n'ont  encore  fait  par  le  paH6,
mais  nous  feruons  vn  maiftre  qui  fcaura  bien  tirer  fa
gloire  dequoy  que  ce  f oit  qui  puiffe  arriuer :  Et  on
eft  bien  ref olu  de  faire  voir  que  ceux  qui  le  f eruent
ne  craignet  rien  finon  de  luy  defplaire.

Les  Demons,  pour  fouffler  &  efcbauffer  dauantage
cette  fournaife,  femblent  auoir  achemine*  quelques
eftrangers  en  ces  contrees  des  derniers  confins  de  la


1639-40]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  121

and  the  [106]  ruin  of  the  world,  since  we  will  not
deliver  them  from  their  troubles,  nor  permit  them  to
provide  themselves  with  the  ordinary  remedies  em-
ployed in  their  country  from  all  time  against  their  mis-
fortunes, especially  when,  in  their  belief,  it  is  we
who  are  the  cause  of  these.  And  consequently,  there
are  threats  of  nothing  less  than  blows  with  the
hatchet,  and  every  kind  of  murder.

These  speeches  are  made  oftener  than  once  a  day,
in  times  of  special  afflictions,  particularly  in  their
sicknesses.  For  —  as  there  are  no  other  Doctors  than
Sorcerers  or  Magicians,  and  as  the  greater  part  of
their  remedies  consists  of  dances,  feasts,  ceremonies,
and  accompanying  details  altogether  diabolical  —  we
cannot  refrain  from  telling  them  that  all  that  avails
nothing,  and  that  they  are,  in  the  end,  risking  their
own  ruin  and  that  of  the  whole  country.  This
throws  them  into  despair ;  for,  on  the  one  hand,  they
cannot  resolve  to  abandon  these  remedies  without
giving  up  therein  the  hope  of  living,  which  is,  how-
ever, their  sovereign  good;  on  the  other,  they  see
persons  who  threaten  them  with  the  anger  and  the
Justice  of  God,  if  they  continue  to  use  them.  It  is
probable  [107]  that  this  despair  will  some  day  prompt
them  to  act  worse  than  they  have  yet  done  in  the
past.  But  we  serve  a  master  who  knows  how  to
derive  his  own  glory  from  every  possible  occurrence,
and  we  are  fully  resolved  to  show  that  those  who
serve  him  fear  nothing  but  his  displeasure.

The  Demons,  to  fan  and  heat  this  furnace  more,
seem  to  have  despatched  some  strangers  to  these
countries  at  the  outer  confines  of  the  earth.  These
are  barbarians  of  the  countries  near  the  Ocean,  deal-
ing with  certain  European  Islanders  who  have  settled


122  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

terre.  Ce  font  barbares  des  pays  voifins  de  1  Ocean,
qui  ont  habitude  auec  certains  Europeans  Infulaires,
qui  fe  font  habituez  aux  coftes  de  la  mer,  tirant  aux
Midy;  &  qui  font  perfonnes  qui  ont  toufiours  paru
efgalement  mal  affedtionnez  a  l'Eglife  Romaine,  &  a
ceux  de  noftre  robe.  Ces  barbares  eftrangers,  dif-ie,
fe  trou[u]ans  en  ces  quartiers  par  ie  ne  fcay  qu'elle
rencontre,  ont  donne"  a  entendre  que  ces  Europeans,
dont  nous  venons  de  parler,  ayans  fceu  que  nous
eftions  icy ;  leur  auoient  dit  de  nous,  que  nous  eftions
gens  a  perdre  &  ruiner  le  monde !  qu'il  y  en  auoit
comme  nous  en  leur  pays  en  Europe,  mais  qu'ils  y
efloient  cachez  fans  ofer  fe  monflrer,  &  [108]  qu'au-
tant  qu'on  en  attrappoit  on  les  faifoit  mourir.

Toutes  ces  rencontres  ont  tellement  confirme*  ces
pauures  gens  en  leur  imagination,  qu'aux  premieres
prifes  que  nous  auons  auec  eux  a  l'occafion  de  leurs
infolences,  c'efl  auffi  toft  a  tomber  fur  ces  reproches,
&  a  prier  qu'on  ne  les  faffe  pas  languir,  mais  qu'on
les  depefche  promptement  comme  on  fait  les  autres.
II  s'efl  trouu6  des  proches  parens,  come  neueux,
qui  a  la  mort  de  leurs  oncles  ont  fait  tout  leur  poffible
pour  leur  faire  dire  que  c'efloit  no9  qui  les  faifios,
mourir,  arm  d'auoir  f ondement  de  def charger  leur  ref-
fentiment  fur  nous,  &  fe  confoler  de  la  mort  des  per-
fonnes qu'ils  cheriffoient  tendrement,  par  le  maflacre
de  ceux  qui  en  auroient  efte"  declarez  la  caufe,  par  la
bouche  des  defundts.  Mais  Dieu  n'a  pas  permis  que
ceux  qui,  peut-eflre,  pendant  leur  vie  l'auoient  dit
plufieurs  fois  en  general,  le  confirmaffent  pour  leur
regard  a  la  mort,  mais  pluftofl  ont  tefmoigne  tout  le
contraire.

Nonobftant  tout  ce  que  deffus,  c'efl  vn  plaifir  de


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  123

on  the  seacoast  towards  the  South,  and  are  persons
that  have  always  seemed  alike  hostile  to  the  Roman
Church  and  to  those  of  our  robe.  These  outlying
barbarians,  I  say,  finding  themselves  in  these  quarters
through  I  know  not  what  chance,  have  stated  that
these  Europeans  of  whom  we  have  just  spoken,  hav-
ing learned  that  we  were  here,  told  them  that  we
were  associated  to  destroy  and  ruin  the  world! — that
there  were  some  like  us  in  their  own  country  in
Europe,  but  concealed  there  without  daring  to  show
themselves;  and  [108]  that,  as  soon  as  any  of  them
were  caught,  they  were  put  to  death.

All  these  incidents  have  so  confirmed  these  poor
people  in  their  ideas  that,  at  the  first  disputes  we
have  with  them  on  account  of  their  insolent  acts,  we
immediately  stumble  upon  these  reproaches,  and  are
entreated  not  to  make  them  linger,  but  to  despatch
them  promptly,  as  we  have  the  others.  There  have
been  near  relatives,  such  as  nephews,  who  at  the
death  of  their  uncles  did  all  they  could  to  make  them
say  that  it  was  we  who  made  them  die,  in  order  to
have  an  excuse  to  vent  their  resentment  upon  us,
and  to  solace  themselves  for  the  death  of  persons
whom  they  tenderly  cherished,  by  the  massacre  of
those  who  would  have  been  declared,  by  the  lips  of
the  deceased,  the  cause  thereof.  But  God  did  not
permit  that  those  who,  perhaps,  during  their  lifetime
had  often  said  so  in  a  general  way,  should  confirm  it
for  their  sake  at  death,  but  rather  that  they  should
testify  quite  the  contrary.

Notwithstanding  all  the  above,  it  is  interesting  to
reflect  upon  what  takes  place  during  the  course  of  a
week.  For,  bringing  together  the  various  opinions
that  we  have  encountered  [109]  in  discoursing  with


124  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

faire  reflexion  fur  ce  qui  fe  paffe  le  long  d'vne  fep-
maine :  car  ramaffant  enf emble  les  diners  f entimens
qu'on  a  reconnen,  [109]  traidtant  anec  les  Sauuages
qu'on  a  vifit6:  vons  y  voyez  ce  femble  clairement
l'efprit  de  Dien  &  dn  diable  fe  combattans  dans  leur
efprit  &  dans  leur  cceur.  On  voit  vn  iour  tout  le
monde  qui  fe  tue  de  dire  qu'il  croid,  &  qu'il  veut
eftre  baptize" :  vn  autre  iour  tout  f e  trouue  renuers6
&  defefpere\  Ce  contrafte  eft  vn  figne  manifefte  de
combat  &  de  bataille:  mais  il  f aut  aduoiier  que  nous
ne  voyons  pas  encore  de  quel  cofte*  panche  l'entiere
vidtoire.  Et  fi  nous  n'auions  autre  principe  pour
nous  conduire  dans  nos  efperances,  que  ce  qui  paroift
aux  yeux,  nous  aurions  fujet  de  penfer  que  l'affaire
eft  encore  fort  efloign£e,  mais  comme  il  n'y  a  rien
d'impomble  a  Dieu,  &  que  fa  benediction  depend
fouuent  de  certains  temps  &  moments,  &  de  certains
reflorts  qui  nous  font  inconneus,  il  nous  faut  attendre
auec  patience  &  courage  tout  ce  qu'il  luy  plaift  en
ordonner.

L' excellence  eft,  que  les  plus  fpirituels  entre  ces
pauures  Barbares  ne  pouuans  comprendre  le  fuiedt  &
le  motif  qui  nous  a  fait  quitter  la  France,  &  venir  de
fi  loing  auec  tant  de  peine  &  de  trauail,  ne  nous  voy-
ans  pretendre  aucun  profit  ny  aduantage  [no]  de
noftre  demeure  parmy  eux,  ny  des  biens  que  nous
leurs  faifons  continuellement ;  ils  concluent,  qu'il
faut  done  que  nous  pretendions  leur  mine ;  puifque
nous  ne  pouuons  pas  ne  pretendre  quelque  chofe  de
grand  dans  vne  telle  refolution.

On  a  beau  leur  dire  que  e'eft  pour  leur  annoncer
les  biens  &  les  richeffes  de  l'autre  vie,  ils  n'y  con-
coiuentrien:  n'apprehendans  autres  biens  que  ceux


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  125

the  Savages  whom  we  have  visited,  you  see  therein
clearly,  it  would  seem,  the  spirit  of  God  and  of  the
devil  struggling  in  their  minds  and  hearts.  One  day,
you  see  them  all  killing  themselves  to  say  that  they
believe,  and  that  they  wish  to  be  baptized ;  another
day,  everything  is  overthrown  and  hopeless.  This
contrast  is  a  manifest  sign  of  combat  and  battle ;  but
it  must  be  confessed  that  we  do  not  yet  see  to  which
side  the  complete  victory  leans,  and  if  we  had  no
other  principle  to  guide  us  in  our  hopes  than  what
appears  to  our  eyes,  we  would  have  reason  to  think
that  the  end  is  still  very  far  away ;  but,  as  there  is
nothing  impossible  to  God,  and  as  his  blessing  often
depends  upon  certain  times  and  moments,  and  cer-
tain resources  that  are  unknown  to  us,  we  must  await
with  patience  and  courage  all  that  it  may  please  him
to  ordain.

The  climax  of  it  is,  that  the  most  intelligent  among
these  poor  Barbarians,  not  being  able  to  comprehend
the  object  and  motive  that  have  caused  us  to  leave
France  and  come  so  far,  with  so  much  difficulty  and
labor,  and  not  seeing  us  claim  any  profit  or  advan-
tage [no]  from  our  residence  among  them,  nor  from
the  kindnesses  that  we  are  continually  rendering  to
them,  conclude  that  we  must,  therefore,  desire  their
ruin,  since  we  can  only  aim  at  some  object  of  great
importance  in  such  a  resolution.

It  is  useless  to  tell  them  that  this  is  to  announce  to
them  the  blessings  and  riches  of  the  other  life ;  they
have  no  conception  of  these,  realizing  no  other  good
things  than  those  they  see  with  their  eyes.  And  as
we  are  obliged  to  tell  them  that  the  blessings  we
preach  to  them  are  seen  only  after  death,  those
speeches  into  which  death  enters  confirm  them  more


126  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

qu'ils  voyet  de  leurs  yeux.  Et  comme  on  eft  con-
traint  de  leur  dire  que  les  biens  que  nous  leur  pref-
chos  ne  fe  voyent  qu'apres  la  mort;  ces  difcours  ou
la  mort  entre,  les  confirment  plus  que  iamais  dans
leur  imagination  que  nous  les  faifons  mourir.  De
forte  que  les  plus  moderez,  &  mefmes  quelques-vns
de  nos  pauures  Chreftiens,  penfent  tout  fimplement
qu'il  en  eft  ainfi :  mais  que  ce  que  nous  en  faifons,
c'eft  par  amour  &  affection  que  nous  auons  de  leur
faire  voir  Dieu  au  pluftoft,  &  de  les  rendre  ioiiyffans
de  ces  biens  dont  nous  faifons  tant  d'eftat.  Mais  la
deffus  ces  pauures  gens  fe  trouuent  bien  empefchez.
Les  vns  difent  qu'ils  ne  voyent  pas  comment  ayans
de  fi  mauuaifes  iambes  ils  pourront  faire  vn  fi  [in]
grand  voyage,  &  arriuer  iufques  au  Ciel.  D'autres
tefmoignent  auoir  defia  peur,  &  craindre  de  cheoir  de
fi  haut:  ne  pouuans  pas  aprehender  coment  ils  fe
pourront  tenir  la  long-temps  fans  tomber.  Vous  en
trouuerez  qui  font  en  peine  s'il  y  aura  du  petun,  di-
fant  qu'ils  ne  s'en  peuuent  paffer.  Bref  ce  font  des
foibleffes  inimaginables,  qu'a  ceux  qui  les  voyent.
Or  apres  tout,  ce  font  creatures  raifonnables,  capa-
bles  du  Paradis  &  de  l'Enfer,  racheptez  du  fang  de
Iesvs-Christ,  defquelles  il  eft  efcrit:  Et  alias
cues  habeo  qua  non  funt  ex  hoc  ouili,  &  Mas  oportet  me
adducere.  Et  pour  c6t  effedt  il  les  enuoye  chercher
dans  les  buiffons,  &  par  tout.

Les  orages  dont  nous  venons  de  parler  eftoient  a
la  verite*  confiderables,  &  de  cofequence,  puis  qu'ils
alloient  a  la  rui'ne  ou  a  l'efloignement  des  vniques
ouuriers  de  cette  vigne.  Ce  ne  font  pas  toutesfois
ces  rencontres  qui  nous  ont  donne*  plus  de  peine  &  de
foucy :  mais  bien  dauantage,  les  tempeftes  &  les  ten-


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  127

than  ever  in  their  notion  that  we  make  them  die  —  so
that  the  most  moderate,  and  even  some  of  our  poor
Christians,  quite  artlessly  think  that  it  is  so  in  their
case,  but  that  what  we  accomplish  upon  them  is
through  love,  and  through  our  desire  to  reveal  God
to  them  the  sooner,  and  to  give  them  the  enjoyment
of  those  blessings  that  we  value  so  highly.  But
these  poor  creatures  find  themselves  greatly  per-
plexed thereat;  some  say  that  they  do  not  see  how,
as  they  have  so  weak  legs,  they  can  make  so  [in]
long  a  journey  and  reach  Heaven.  Others  assert
that  they  are  already  afraid,  and  dread  lest  they
may  fall  from  so  great  a  height,  not  being  able  to
understand  how  they  can  remain  there  long  without
falling.  You  will  find  some  of  them  anxious  to  know
if  there  will  be  tobacco  there,  saying  that  they  can-
not dispense  with  it.  In  short,  there  are  weaknesses
unimaginable  except  to  those  who  see  them.  But,
after  all,  these  are  rational  creatures,  capable  of
Paradise  and  of  Hell,  redeemed  by  the  blood  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  of  whom  it  is  written,  Et  alias
oves  habeo  qua  non  sunt  ex  hoc  ovili,  et  Mas  oportet  me
adducere.  And  for  this  reason  he  sends  to  seek  them
in  the  hedges,  and  everywhere.

The  storms  of  which  we  have  just  spoken  were,  in
truth,  serious  and  of  consequence,  since  they  tended
toward  the  ruin  or  banishment  of  the  sole  laborers  in
this  vineyard.  It  was  not  those  incidents,  however,
that  gave  us  the  most  trouble  and  anxiety,  but  far
more,  the  tempests  and  temptations  that  our  Neo-
phytes have  encountered  since  their  baptism  and  the
birth  of  these  new  Churches,  of  which  we  have  spoken
in  the  preceding  Chapters, —  considering  the  tender-
ness of  these  young  plants  [112]  and  the  little  founda-


128  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  17

tations  furuenues  a  nos  Neophytes  depuis  leur  bap-
tefme,  &  la  naiflance  de  ces  nouuelles  Eglifes,  dont
nous  auons  parle  dans  les  Chapitres  precedens.  Veu
la  tendreffe  de  ces  ieunes  plantes,  [112]  &  le  pen  de
fond  qui  fe  trouue  dans  le  natnrel  &  le  genie  des
Barbares,  pour  aider  la  femence  de  1'Euangile  a  y
ietter  de  grandes  &  profondes  racines.

Si  vn  pannre  Barbare  fe  fait  Chreftien,  aufli-toft,  il
eft  accueilly  de  tons  cenx  de  fa  cognoiffance,  qni  le
lamentent  &  le  deplorent  comme  s'il  eftoit  defia  per-
du, &  que  ce  fuft  fait  de  luy.  Les  vns  l'affeurent,  li
c'efl  Tliyuer,  qu'au  Printemps  (s'il  eft  encore  en  vie)
tous  les  cheueux  luy  tomberont.  Les  autres,  qu'il
ne  faut  plus  qu'il  faffe  eftat  d'aller  a  la  chaffe,  en
traite,  ou  a  la  guerre,  deuant  eflre  afTeur6,  que  par
tout  dorenauant  il  fera  mal-heureux.  On  donne
l'apprehenfion  aux  femmes  qu'elles  ne  porteront  plus
d'enfans,  bref  on  les  menace  tous,  ou  pluftoft  on  les
affeure  que  ce  qu'ils  craignent  le  plus  au  monde,  ne
manquera  pas  de  leur  arriuer.

On  leur  reprefente  en  outre,  que  les  voila  dorefna-
uant  fruftrez  de  feftins,  &  par  confequent  de  l'vnique
douceur  ou  beatitude  du  pays.  Qu'il  faut  neceffaire-
ment  en  fuite  qu'ils  renoncent  a  tous  les  droicts  &
entretiens  de  1' auntie*  enuers  leurs  proches  &  compa-
triotes.  Et  li  ce  font  Capitaines  qui  ayent  charge  de
faire  les  [113]  crimes,  &  les  ceremonies,  qu'ils  faffent
eftat  de  f e  voir  defpoiiillez  de  leur  credit  &  authority.

Et  voila  la  plus  forte  batterie,  &  qui  en  effet  en
empefche  le  plus,  &  en  a  le  plus  esbranle  du  nombre
de  ces  pauures  Neophytes.  Car  en  effet,  la  plufpart
de  leurs  danfes,  feftins,  Medecins  &  medecines,  cere-
monies &  couflumes  eftant  ou  manifeftement  diabo-


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  129

tion  there  is  in  the  nature  and  spirit  of  the  Barba-
rians to  help  the  seed  of  the  Gospel  throw  out  therein
strong  and  deep  roots.

If  a  poor  Barbarian  become  a  Christian,  he  is  im-
mediately assailed  by  all  those  of  his  acquaintance,
who  lament  and  deplore  him  as  if  he  were  already
lost,  and  it  were  all  over  with  him.  Some  assure
him,  if  it  be  winter  time,  that  in  the  Spring  (if  he  is
still  living)  all  his  hair  will  fall  off ;  others,  that  he
need  no  longer  count  upon  going  hunting,  trading,
or  to  war,  except  with  the  certainty  that  thenceforth
he  will  be  unlucky  in  everything;  they  inspire  in
the  women  the  fear  that  they  will  bear  no  more  chil-
dren. In  short,  they  are  all  threatened,  or  rather
assured,  that  what  they  fear  the  most  in  the  world
will  surely  happen  to  them.

It  is  represented,  besides,  that  thenceforth  they
will  be  defrauded  of  feasts,  and  consequently  of  the
sole  delight  or  bliss  of  the  country ;  that,  as  a  neces-
sary result,  they  must  renounce  all  the  rights  and
intercourse  of  friendship  with  their  kinsmen  and
compatriots.  And  if  they  be  Captains  who  have
charge  of  making  the  [113]  announcements  and  man-
aging ceremonials,  they  are  told  that  they  may  count
upon  seeing  themselves  despoiled  of  their  influence
and  authority.

And  in  this  behold  the  strongest  battery,  and  that
which,  in  reality,  has  most  hindered  and  most  dis-
quieted the  majority  of  these  poor  Neophytes.  For,
indeed,  the  greater  part  of  their  dances,  feasts,  Physi-
cians, and  medicines,  ceremonies,  and  customs,  being
either  manifestly  diabolical,  or  filled  with  so  many
senseless  ceremonies  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to
judge  or  interpret  them  as  being  free  from  supersti-


130  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.  17

liques,  on  remplies  de  tant  de  ceremonies  imperti-
nentes,  qn'il  eft  prefqne  impomble  de  les  inger  on
interpreter  exemptes  de  fuperftition,  on  padt  &  com-
munication tacite  anec  le  diable ;  on  eft  contraint  de
tenir  tout  ponr  fufpedt,  &  d'en  donner  le  fcrupule  a
nos  Catechnmenes  &  Neophytes.  Arrinant  done,  ce
qni  arrine  tons  les  ionrs,  que  quelqu'vn  de  la  famille,
par  exemple,  tombe  malade :  voila  auffi-toft  le  pauure
Cateclinmene  on  Neophyte  ponrfniuy  de  tonte  la
parents,  a  ce  qn'il  ait  a  faire  venir  le  Medecin,  e'eft  a
dire  le  vilitenr  on  Sorcier,  &  faire  mettre  en  execu-
tion les  remedes  ordinaires  du  pais,  qui  font  les  ordon-
nances  du  Sorcier,  lequel  on  n'agift  que  dependem-
ment  de  la  cognoiffance  que  luy  donne  le  diable,  de
la  nature  de  la  maladie,  &  des  remedes  [114]  qu'il  y
f aut  apporter ;  on  ordonne  des  chof es  qui  ne  font  qu'a-
bomination  ou  diableries.  Que  fera  en  ces  rencon-
tres vn  pauure  Neophyte?  S'il  le  fait,  il  renonce
publiquement  a  fa  profemon;  s'il  ne  le  fait,  le  voila
dans  la  haine  &  l'abandonnement  des  fiens,  qui  luy
reprochent,  qu'a  fon  tour  on  l'amftera  comme  il  a
affifte*  les  autres ;  &  que  pour  lors  il  ait  recours  a  de
mal-heureux  eflrangers,  qui  ne  font  venus  a  leurs
pais  que  pour  les  perdre  &  les  miner.

A  la  verite"  toutes  ces  rencontres  ne  f eruiroient  que
de  matiere  &  de  fuiet  de  vidtoire  &  de  triomphe  a  ces
nouueaux  Champions,  s'ils  auoient  aflez  de  refolution
&  de  courage :  mais  le  mal  de  tous  les  maux  eft  au
dedans  de  ces  pauures  creatures.  Leur  efprit,  pour
la  plufpart,  eft  foible  au  dernier  poind;,  pour  conce-
uoir  &  apprehender  les  chofes  qu'ils  ne  voyent  pas,
&  pour  fe  fouftenir  dans  ces  attaques  par  l'efprit  de
la  Foy,  en  l'efperance  du  futur. Et  leur  cceur  femble


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  i63g  131

tion  or  tacit  pact  and  communication  with  the  devil,
we  are  obliged  to  hold  all  these  under  suspicion,  and
to  raise  scruples  against  them  in  our  Catechumens
and  Neophytes.  When  there  happens,  then,  what
happens  every  day,  that  one  of  the  family,  for  ex-
ample, falls  ill, —  behold  the  poor  Catechumen  or
Neophyte  immediately  beset  by  all  his  relatives  to
go  to  summon  the  Physician,  that  is,  the  visitor  or
Sorcerer,  and  to  put  into  execution  the  usual  reme-
dies of  the  country,  which  are  the  decrees  of  the
Sorcerer,  who  acts  only  as  dependent  upon  the  knowl-
edge that  the  devil  gives  him  of  the  nature  of  the
disease,  and  of  the  remedies  [114]  that  must  be  em-
ployed therein;  he  orders  things  that  are  nothing
but  abominations  or  deviltries.  What  shall  a  poor
Neophyte  do  in  such  emergencies?  If  he  take  part
in  them,  he  publicly  renounces  his  profession ;  if  he
do  not,  he  incurs  the  hatred  and  desertion  of  his
people,  who  fling  the  taunt  at  him  that  he,  in  his
turn,  will  be  assisted  as  he  has  assisted  the  others,
and  that  then  he  may  have  recourse  to  some  wretched
foreigners,  who  have  come  to  their  country  only  to
destroy  and  ruin  them.

In  truth,  all  these  occurrences  would  serve  only  as
material  and  occasion  for  victory  and  triumph  to
these  new  Champions,  if  they  had  enough  resolution
and  courage.  But  the  evil  of  all  evils  is  within  these
poor  creatures, —  their  minds,  for  the  most  part,  are
weak  in  the  extreme  in  conceiving  and  apprehending
things  that  they  do  not  see,  and  in  sustaining  them-
selves in  these  attacks,  by  the  spirit  of  Faith,  in  the
hope  of  the  future.  And  their  hearts  seem  incapable
of  resisting  the  assaults  of  the  affection  of  corrupted
nature  for  kindred,  and  for  the  comforts  and  con-


132  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  17

incapable  de  pouuoir  refifter  aux  aflauts  de  1' affection
de  la  nature  corrompue  enuers  les  proches ;  &  pour
les  douceurs  &  commoditez  de  cette  vie,  dans  laquelle
depuis  vn  fi  [115]  long  temps  ils  ont  mis  leur  fou[u]e-
rain  bien.

L'attache  qu'ils  ont  la  dedans,  fait  que  ce  qui  leur
paroiffoit  au  commencement  facile,  lors  qu'ils  ne  le
mefuroient  que  par  la  raifon,  leur  deuient  dans  1'  ex-
ecution fi  difficile :  que  vous  les  voyez  a  tous  coups
donner  du  nez  en  terre,  &  perdre  courage,  fe  plai-
gnans  que  le  Chriftianifme  ne  leur  fert  de  rien,  &  ne
leur  apporte  aucun  profit  en  cette  vie.

Ces  reffentimens  f e  renouuellent  autant  de  f ois  que
quelqu'vn  des  leur  deuient  malade,  ou  fe  meurt,  ou
que  quelque  autre  mal  heur  leur  arriue.  Vous  diriez,
a  les  entedre  parler,  qu'ils  n'ont  pretendu,  fe  faifans
Chreftiens,  que  de  viure  long-temps,  eux  ou  au  moins
leurs  enfans.  Et  ie  ne  fcay  fi  ce  qui  fe  trouue  dans
la  facon  de  propofer  les  Comandements  de  Dieu,  ou
il  eft  promis  vne  longue  vie  a  ceux  qui  honorent  pere
&  mere,  ne  les  abufe  &  trompe  point  pour  V ordi-
naire.

Ie  ne  m'eftonne  plus  d'ou  vient  que  les  Epiftres
des  Apoftres  font  fi  fort  remplies  du  modicum  nunc  fi
oportet  contrijlari  in  variis  tribulationibus \  Ils  efcri-
uoient  a  des  Cathecumenes  &  Neophytes  qui  ne  fcau-
roient  [116]  eftre  affez  eftanconnez  de  ce  cofte"  la.
Et  nous  nous  trouuons  fort  fouuent  dans  la  mefme
peine,  que  ce  grand  Apoflre  des  Gentils,  qui  difoit,
Filioli  quos  iterum  parturioy  donee  formetur  Chrijius  in
vobis.

II  femble  que  le  paffage  du  chapitre  14.  de  TEuan-
gile  de  fainct  Luc,  ne  fe  peut  mieux  entendre  que  de


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  133

veniences  of  this  life,  in  which  so  [115]  long  they
have  placed  their  supreme  good.

Their  inward  attachment  for  these  things  makes
that  which  at  first  seemed  to  them  easy,  when  they
only  measured  it  by  reason,  to  become  so  difficult  in
the  execution,  that  you  see  them  becoming  confused
at  every  turn,  and  losing  courage,  complaining  that
Christianity  is  of  no  service  to  them  and  brings  them
no  profit  in  this  life.

These  feelings  are  revived  whenever  any  of  them
become  sick,  or  die,  or  when  some  other  misfortune
happens  to  them.  You  would  say,  to  hear  them
talk,  that  their  sole  aim  in  becoming  Christians  was
to  live  long, —  they,  or  at  least  their  children.  And
I  do  not  know  if  the  manner  of  stating  the  Com-
mandments of  God,  where  a  long  life  is  promised  to
those  who  honor  father  and  mother,  does  not,  ordi-
narily, impose  upon  and  deceive  them.

I  no  longer  wonder  why  the  Epistles  of  the  Apostles
are  so  full  of  modicum  nunc  si  oportet  contristari  in
variis  tribulationibus.  They  wrote  to  Catechumens
and  Neophytes  who  could  not  [116]  be  sufficiently
fortified  on  that  side ;  and  we  very  often  find  ourselves
in  the  same  trouble  as  that  great  Apostle  of  the  Gen-
tiles, who  said,  Filioli  quos  iterum  parturio,  donee  forme-
tur  Christus  in  vobis.

It  seems  that  that  passage  in  the  14th  chapter  of
the  Gospel  of  saint  Luke  cannot  be  better  understood
than  in  reference  to  our  poor  barbarians,  in  the  men-
tion there  made  of  those  who,  at  the  very  last,  were
invited  to  the  supper  of  the  adorable  Man- God  to  fill
the  places  which  remained  empty  at  the  banquet
table,  and,  in  fine,  to  supply  the  absence  of  all  those
who  had  been  earlier  invited. These  were  people


134  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  17

nos  pauures  barbares,  lors  qu'il  y  eft  parle  de  ceux
qui  tous  les  derniers  furent  inuitez  au  fouper  de  l'ado-
rable  Homme- Dieu,  pour  parfournir  les  places  qui
reftoient  vuides  dans  la  table  du  banquet,  &  fuppleer
en  fin  au  defaut  de  tous  ceux  qui  auparauant  auoiet
efte  inuitez.  C'eftoient  des  perfonnes  qu'on  alia
chercher  dans  les  fentiers,  parmy  les  ronces  &  les
broffailles,  &  qu'on  auoit  commiffion  d'amener,  &
faire  entrer  par  force.  Nous  n'auons  icy  &  n'y  pou-
uons  auoir,  ny  la  force  de  la  contrainte,  ny  les
chaines  des  bien-faits,  au  point  qu'il  fan  droit,  pour
rendre  ces  peuples  entierement  noftres.  Tout  noftre
force  eft  au  bout  de  la  langue ;  en  la  monftre  &  pro-
duction de  nos  liures  &  Efcritures,  dot  ils  ne  ceffent
tous  les  iours  d' admirer  les  effets.  Ce  qui  nous  fert
vniquement  enuers  [117]  ces  peuples,  au  lieu  de  tout
autre  motif  de  credibility.  Leur  faifans  voir  par  la,
que  ceux  qui  nous  ont  precede^  &  qui  ont  efte"  depuis
le  commencement  du  monde,  ont  peu  nous  donner
cognoiffance  &  affeurance  de  ce  que  nous  leur  pref-
chons;  la  ou  eux  ne  peuuent  auoir  aucune  marque,
que  ce  que  leurs  peres  leur  ont  enfeigne*  n'a  point
efte"  controuue"  par  eux,  ou  par  d'autres  qui  leur  en
ont  voulu  faire  accroire.

II  eft  croyable  que  quelque  grand  don  de  miracle,
feroit  bien  capable  d'efbranler  les  vns,  &  confirmer
les  autres.  Mais  outre  que  tous  ceux  qui  ont  veu  les
miracles  du  Sauueur  du  monde,  &  ceux  des  Apoftres,
n'ont  pas  pour  cela  creu,  au  moins  auec  fermete'  &
conftance,  il  femble  que  Dieu  nous  ait  mefme  voulu
faire  voir  par  experience,  que  ce  n'eftoit  pas  cela  a
quoy  il  tenoit.  Et  qu'il  falloit  quelque  autre  chofe
que  des  miracles  pour  conuertir  des  Sauuages,  audi


1639-40]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  135

whom  they  sought  for  in  the  lanes,  among  the  bram-
bles and  hedges,  and  whom  they  were  commissioned
to  bring,  and  compel  to  enter.  We  have  not  here,
nor  can  we  have,  either  the  power  of  constraint  or  the
chains  of  benefits,  to  the  extent  that  would  be  neces-
sary to  render  these  people  entirely  ours.  All  our
power  lies  at  .the  end  of  our  tongues,  in  the  exhibi-
tion and  production  of  our  books  and  Writings,  the
effects  of  which  they  never  cease  to  wonder  at.  This
is  the  only  thing  that  avails  us  with  [117]  these  peo-
ples, in  lieu  of  all  other  ground  for  credibility, —
causing  them  to  see  through  this  means  that  those
who  have  preceded  us,  and  who  have  existed  from
the  beginning  of  the  world,  have  been  able  to  impart
to  us  a  knowledge  and  assurance  of  what  we  are
preaching  to  them,  while  they  can  have  no  proof  that
what  their  fathers  have  taught  them  was  not  invented
by  them,  or  by  others  who  wished  to  make  them
believe  it.

It  is  probable  that  some  great  gift  of  miracle  would
be  quite  capable  of  shaking  some  and  confirming
others.  But, — besides  that  not  all  those  who  saw
the  miracles  of  the  Savior  of  the  world,  and  those  of
the  Apostles,  as  a  result  thereof  believed,  at  least
with  firmness  and  constancy, — it  would  seem  that
God  may  have  even  intended  to  make  us  see,  through
experience,  that  it  was  not  that  which  he  was  con-
sidering, and  that  something  else  beside  miracles
was  needed  to  convert  Savages,  as  well  as  to  convert
all  other  classes  of  people.

In  the  extreme  heat  of  last  Summer,  when  the
fields  around  the  village  of  the  Residence  of  la  Con-
ception were  all  parched  with  heat  and  drouth  for
want  of  rain,  the  inhabitants,  being  in  despair,  ad-


136  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

bien  que  pour  conuertir  toute  autre  forte  de  perfonnes.

Au  plus  fort  de  l'Efte"  dernier,  les  champs  d'al en-
tour  le  bourg  de  la  Refidence  de  la  Conception  eftans
tous  grillez  de  challeur  &  de  feichereffe  a  faute  de
pluye,  les  habitans  eftans  au  defefpoir,  s'adrefTerent
a  nos  [118]  Peres,  qui  firent  vceu  de  dire  quelques
Meffes.  Le  lendemain  on  n'eut  pas  pluftoft  com-
mence" la  premiere,  qu'il  commenca  a  pleuuoir  vne
pluye  la  plus  fauorable  qu'on  euft  peu  fouhaitter,
qui  dura  trois  iours.  Ce  ne  furent  fur  le  champ
qu' admirations  &  remerciemens ;  mais  en  fuite,  de
renoncer  a  leurs  fuperftitions,  c'eft  a  quoy  ils  ne  fe
peuuent  refoudre.

Au  bourg  de  la  Refidence  de  fainct  Iofeph,  vn  des
principaux  &  plus  anciens  Capitaines,  nomme"  Ondi-
horrea,  eftant  par  maladie  reduit  a  V extremity,  &
ayant  au  commencement  refuse"  nos  vifites  &  noftre
affiftance,  apres  auoir  experiments  en  vain  tous  les
remedes  ordinaires  du  pais  pour  le  recouurement  de
fa  f ante" :  Eftant  abandonne"  &  comme  aux  abois  de
la  mort,  fe  fentit  porte"  par  quelque  efpece  de  vifion
qu'il  euft  de  nous  efcouter  en  fin,  &  receuoir  le  bien
&  les  bons  offices  que  nous  luy  defirions  rendre  en
telle  occafion,  comme  a  celuy  qui  auoit  le  plus  contri-
bu6  a  noftre  eftabliffement  dans  ce  bourg.  Le  voila
done  inftruict  &  baptise" ;  &  aufii  toft  le  voila  fur  pied,
auec  l'eftonnement  de  tous  ceux  qui  l'auoient  vn
peu  [119]  auparauant  tenu  pour  defefperS,  auf quels
comme  a  toute  autre  forte  de  perfonnes  qui  le
venoient  voir  de  tout  le  pais,  il  ne  fe  laffoit  iamais
de  leur  racoter  ce  qui  s'eftoit  pafT6;  &  qu'il  tenoit
entierement  fa  vie  du  baptefme  qu'il  auoit  receu.

Qui  n'euft  penfe"  que  cette  rencontre  en  vne  per-


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  T/ON,  i63g  137

dressed  themselves  to  our  [118]  Fathers,  who  made  a
vow  to  say  several  Masses.  The  next  day,  they  had
no  sooner  begun  the  first  one,  than  there  began  to
pour  down  a  rain,  the  most  favorable  that  one  could
have  desired,  which  lasted  three  days.  There  was,
at  the  time,  only  admiration  and  thanks ;  but  after-
ward, to  renounce  their  superstitions  was  something
they  could  not  resolve  to  do.

In  the  village  of  the  Residence  of  saint  Joseph,
one  of  the  principal  and  oldest  Captains,  named  Ondi-
horrea,  being  brought  very  low  by  sickness,  at  first
refused  our  visits  and  our  help.  After  having  tried
in  vain  all  the  usual  remedies  of  the  country  for  the
recovery  of  his  health, — being  abandoned  and,  as  it
were,  confronted  by  death, — he  was  prompted,  by
some  sort  of  vision  that  he  had,  at  last  to  listen  to
us,  and  to  receive  the  kindness  and  the  good  offices
that  we  would  desire  to  render  him  in  such  an  emer-
gency, as  to  the  one  who  had  contributed  most  to
our  establishing  ourselves  in  that  village.  Accord-
ingly, he  was  instructed  and  baptized;  and  behold
him  immediately  upon  his  feet,  to  the  astonishment
of  all  those  who  had  a  little  while  [119]  before
despaired  of  his  life, — to  whom,  as  to  all  other  per-
sons who  came  to  see  him  from  all  parts  of  the  coun-
try, he  never  wearied  recounting  what  had  occurred,
and  that  he  owed  his  life  entirely  to  the  baptism  he
had  received.

Who  would  not  have  thought  that  this  event,  hap-
pening to  so  important  a  personage,  would  affect,  as
it  ought,  the  whole  country?  But,  so  far  from  any
one  profiting  thereby,  the  very  man  to  whom  it  had
happened,  who  testified  so  much  gratitude  for  it,
after  having  been present once at  Mass,  did not


138  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  17

fonne  fi  confiderable,  n'euft  deu  esbranler  tout  le
pais?  mais  tant  s'en  faut  qu'elle  ait  profits  a  perfonne :
que  celuy  mefme  a  qui  elle  efl  arriu6e,  qui  en  tefmoi-
gnoit  tant  de  recognoiffance,  apres  auoir  afilfte*  vne
fois  a  la  Meffe,  n'y  efl  pas  retourne"  pour  la  feconde;
voyant  qu'en  fuite  de  la  profeffion  qu'il  feroit  du
Chriftianifme,  il  luy  falloit  quitter  certaines  confrai-
ries  diaboliques,  dont  il  eftoit  le  chef ;  &  les  f onctions
&  exercices  du  miniflere  de  Satan,  en  qualite  d'an-
cien  &  principal  Capitaine,  a  qui  il  appartient  de
regler  &  maintenir  les  couflumes  du  pays.

Ie  pourrois  produire  quelques  autres  exemples  fem-
blables  des  merueilles  qu'il  a  pleu  a  Dieu  de  faire
en  de  pareille[s]  rencontres,  lefquelles  ii  elles  ne  font
miracles,  n'en  font  guieres  loin.  Mais  ce  n'eft  pas
icy  ce  que  nous  pretendons.  Cecy  feulement  foit  dit,
pour  faire  voir  qu'il  femble  [120]  que  ce  n'eft  pas  a
vn  defaut  des  merueilles,  que  le  retardemet  de  la
conuerfion  generale  de  ces  peuples  doit  eftre  attri-
bu6:  &  qu'il  y  a  quel  que  autre  chofe  d'ou  depend  ce
bon  heur,  qu'il  faut  attendre  auec  patience  de  la
main  de  Dieu.

Au  refte,  il  femble  que  Dieu  nous  ait  encore  voulu
faire  voir,  que  ce  n'eft  pas  feulement  pour  le  temps
paffe  qu'il  a  choifi  les  pauures,  &  non  les  riches  •  les
perfonnes  de  peu  de  confideration  aux  yeux  du
monde,  &  non  pas  celles  qui  font  dans  l'efclat,  &  en
dignite" ;  pour  eftre  les  pierres  fondamentales  de  fon
Eglife,  mais  encore  au  temps  prefent.  Toutes  les
perfonnes  les  plus  confiderables  des  bourgs  ou  nous
auons  trauaille"  a  faire  des  Chreftiens ;  ou  on  fait  la
fourde  oreille;  ou,  apres  auoir  embrafle*  le  Chrifti-
anifme, l'ont  d'eux  mefmes  abandonn6;  ou  fe  font


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  139

return  a  second  time, — seeing  that,  as  a  result  of  his
profession  of  Christianity,  he  would  have  to  leave
certain  diabolical  fraternities,  of  which  he  was  the
chief,  and  also  the  functions  and  duties  of  the  ministry
of  Satan,  in  his  character  of  old  and  principal
Captain,  to  whom  it  belongs  to  regulate  and  maintain
the  customs  of  the  country.

I  could  produce  some  other  like  examples  of  the
wonders  it  has  pleased  God  to  perform  in  like  cases, —
which,  if  they  are  not  miracles,  are  not  far  from
them.  But  this  is  not  our  object.  Let  that  alone
be  said,  in  order  to  show  that  apparently  [120]  it  is
not  to  a  lack  of  miracles  that  we  should  attribute  the
delay  in  the  general  conversion  of  these  tribes ;  and
that  there  is  some  other  thing  upon  which  this  bless-
ing depends,  which  must  be  awaited  with  patience
from  the  hand  of  God.

Moreover,  it  seems  that  God  has  also  wished  to
make  us  see  that  it  is  not  only  in  times  past  that  he
has  chosen  the  poor  and  not  the  rich,  persons  of  little
importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and  not  those  who
are  eminent  and  of  high  rank,  to  be  the  foundation
stones  of  his  Church,  but  in  the  present  time  also.
All  the  more  prominent  persons  of  the  villages  where
we  have  labored  to  make  Christians  either  have  turned
a  deaf  ear,  or,  after  having  embraced  Christianity,
have  of  themselves  abandoned  it,  or  have  behaved  in
such  a  manner  —  resuming  their  wicked  customs,  and
showing  a  desire  to  continue  in  them  —  that  we  have
been  obliged  to  advise  them  not  to  be  present  any
more  at  the  meetings  of  the  Christians.  We  are
determined  sooner  to  see  the  whole  undertaking
reduced  to  naught  than  to  surfer  such  an  intermix-
ture, and  spots  and  wrinkles  so  enormous  upon  these


140  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  17

comportez  de  la  forte,  reprenans  leurs  matmaifes  cou-
ftumes,  auec  volonte*  d'y  perfeuerer,  que  nous  auons
efte*  contraints  de  leur  dormer  aduis  de  ne  fe  plus
trouuer  a  l'affembl^e  des  Chreftiens,  refolus  de  voir
pluftoft  le  tout  reduit  au  neant,  que  de  fouffrir  vn  tel
meflange,  &  des  tafches  &  des  rides  fi  enormes  dans
ces  nouuelles  [121]  Efpoufes,  que  nous  pretendons
offrir  a  celuy  qui  a  refpandu  fon  fang  diuin,  pour
leur  donner  l'eftre  &  la  vie :  &  qui  nous  a  icy  enuoye*
pour  en  recueillir  les  fruidts.  Cette  douce  rigueur
que  nous  auons  exerc6e  enuers  ces  pauures  efclaues
de  Satan,  n'a  pas  feruy  de  peu  a  releuer  l'eftime  de
nos  myfteres  &  du  Chriftianifme,  dans  l'efprit  de
tous  ceux  qui  en  ont  eu  la  cognoiffance,  &  a  com-
mence* a  les  defabufer  de  la  creance  que  plufieurs
ont,  que  lors  que  nous  defirons  &  les  preffons  de  fe
faire  Chreftiens,  &  d'en  faire  profeffton,  c'eft  noftre
intereft  &  noftre  affaire,  non  la  leur ;  &  qu'il  n'y  a
rien  pour  eux  a  y  profiter.

Apres  tout,  ie  ne  fcay  fi  nous  auons  plus  de  fuiet
de  plaindre  &  ddplorer  ces  defaftres,  que  de  nous  en
refioui'r,  &  remercier  Dieu  des  lumieres  &  du  cou-
rage qu'il  donne  a  quelques-vns  de  ce  petit  troupeau:
n'y  ayant  pas  vne  de  ces  trois  Eglifes,  dans  laquelle
il  ne  fe  trouue  des  Chrefties,  en  la  procedure  defquels
il  ne  femble  pas  qu'il  y  ait  rien  a  fouhaiter  de  plus
net  &  de  plus  accomply,  auec  des  tendreffes  de  con-
fcience  &  vn  recours  cordial  a  la  confeffion,  qui  ne
furent  iamais  du  creu  d'vn  [122]  Sauuage.  Ce  que
nous  auons  dit  aux  Chapitres  precedens,  fuffira  pour
le  prefent.  C'eft  vn  leuain  que  le  S.  Efprit  va  for-
mant  &  conferuant,  qui  en  fon  temps  feruira  &  fera
de  bons  effedts  comme  nous  efperons,  &  nous  nous
promettons  de  la  bonte*  mifericorde  de  Dieu.


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  $  RELA  T/ON,  1639  141

new  [121]  Brides,  whom  we  purpose  to  offer  to  him
who  has  shed  his  divine  blood  to  give  them  being
and  life,  and  who  has  sent  us  here  to  gather  the
fruits  thereof.  This  gentle  severity  which  we  have
exercised  towards  these  poor  slaves  of  Satan  has
served  not  a  little  to  raise  the  value  of  our  mysteries
and  of  Christianity  in  the  minds  of  all  those  who  had
any  knowledge  of  them ;  and  it  has  begun  to  disabuse
them  of  the  belief  that  many  have,  that,  when  we
desire  and  urge  them  to  become  Christians,  and  to
make  such  profession,  it  is  our  interest  and  our  busi-
ness, not  theirs,  and  that  there  is  no  profit  therein
for  them.

After  all,  I  do  not  know  whether  we  have  more
reason  to  complain  of  and  deplore  these  disasters
than  to  rejoice  over  them,  and  to  thank  God  for  the
light  and  courage  he  has  given  to  some  of  this  little
band, —  for  there  is  not  one  of  these  three  Churches
in  which  are  not  found  Christians,  in  whose  practice,
it  would  seem,  nothing  purer  or  more  complete  could
be  desired,  combined  with  a  tenderness  of  conscience,
and  a  cordial  recourse  to  confession,  which  were
never  natural  to  a  [122]  Savage.  What  we  have  said
in  the  preceding  Chapters  will  suffice  for  this  one.
It  is  a  leaven  that  the  Holy  Ghost  continues  to  form
and  preserve,  which  will,  in  its  time,  be  of  service
and  have  good  results,  as  we  hope  and  promise  our-
selves from  the  merciful  goodness  of  God.

I  have  said  nothing  here,  to  avoid  tediousness,  of
the  difficulty  these  Barbarians  have  in  abstaining
from  work  on  Sundays, — these  tribes  living  only
from  hand  to  mouth,  and  finding  it  hard  to  do  other-
wise. Neither  have  I  spoken  of  the  trouble  they
have  in  observing  Lent, — which  always  comes  in  the


142  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.17

Ie  n'ay  rien  dit  icy,  pour  6uiter  la  longueur,  de  la
difficult^  que  ces  Barbares  ont  de  chommer  les  Di-
manches:  ces  peuples  ne  viuans  qu'au  iour  la  iour-
n6e,  &  y  ayant  de  la  peine  a  le  faire  autrement.  Ie
n'ay  point  aufli  parle"  de  la  peine  qu'il  y  a  de  garder
le  Carefme,  qui  fe  trouue  toufiours  en  la  faifon,  dans
laquelle  eft  le  retour  de  leur  chaff e ;  &  par  conf equent
l'vnique  temps  de  l'ann6e  auquel  ils  ont  quelque  peu
de  chair ;  non  plus  que  de  tout  plein  d  autres  diffi-
cultez  qui  fe  rencontrent  en  l'eftabliffement  de  ces
nouuelles  Eglifes;  dont  l'vne  des  plus  confiderables
eft  rinftabirite"  de  leurs  mariages;  ce  font  difficultez
qui  fe  conceuront  ayfement,  &  mieux  peut-eftre  que
ie  ne  les  pourrois  expliquer :  Venons  a  la  principale
de  toutes  leurs  difficultez,  ou  pour  mieux  dire  a  la
fource  de  tous  leurs  mal-heurs.


1639 -40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TION,  i63g  143

season  when  they  return  from  the  chase,  and  conse-
quently is  the  only  time  of  the  year  when  they  have
a  little  meat, — any  more  than  of  many  other  difficul-
ties which  are  encountered  in  the  establishment  of
these  new  Churches,  one  of  the  most  important  of
which  is  the  instability  of  their  marriages.  These
are  difficulties  which  will  be  easily  imagined,  and
perhaps  better  than  I  could  explain  them.  Let  us
come  to  the  chief  of  all  their  difficulties, —  or,  to
express  it  better,  to  the  source  of  all  their  misfortunes.


144  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17


[123]  CHAP.  DERNIER.

DU REGNE DE SATAN EN CES CONTREES. ET DES
DIUERSES  SUPERSTITIONS  QUI  S'Y  TROUUENT  IN-
TRODUCES & ESTABLIES,  COMME  PREMIERS
PRINCIPES  &  LOIX  FONDAMENTALES
DE L'ESTAT & CONSERUA-
TION  DE  CES  PEUPLES.

IE  n'entreprends  pas  de  traiter  cefte  affaire  a  fonds.
Quiconque  l'entreprendroit,  fe  trotmeroit  a  mon
iugement  plus  empefche"  que  ne  fufk  iamais  Her-
cule  a  efcurer  les  eftables  d'Aug£e.

Ce  que  ie  pretends,  n'eft  autre  chofe  que  de  par-
courir  quelques  actions  particulieres  qui  fe  font
paff 6es  cet  hyuer  au  feul  bourg  de  la  Refidence  de  la
Conception,  oil  i'ay  fait  ma  principale  demeure,  dans
lefquelles  nous  nous  fommes  trouuez  obligez  d' exa-
miner les  tenants  &  aboutiffants  de  ces  miferes,  en
confideration  de  nos  Chreftiens,  a  la  confcience  def-
quels  nous  eftions  obligez  de  pouruoir.

Iettans  les  yeux  fur  les  couftumes  &  f aeons  [124]
de  faire  de  ces  peuples,  elles  nous  auoient  toufiours
bien  paru,  comme  de  vieilles  mares  puantes,  toute-
fois  nous  n'en  auions  quafi  veu  par  le  pafT6,  que  le
delfus.  Mais  depuis  qu'a  Toccafion  de  nos  Cbre-
fliens,  il  nous  a  fallu  foiiiller  dedans,  &  remuer  ce
cloaque,  il  n'eft  pas  croyable  combien  on  y  a  trouu6
de  puanteur  &  de  mifere.

Vn vieillard de ce bourg nomme' Taorhenche\


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  145


[123]  CHAP.  THE  LAST.

OF  THE REIGN OF SATAN IN THESE COUNTRIES; AND
OF  THE  VARIOUS  SUPERSTITIONS  INTRODUCED  AND
ESTABLISHED THEREIN, AS THE FIRST  PRIN-
CIPLES AND FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF
THE CONDITION AND PRESERVA-
TION  OF THESE PEOPLES.

1DO  not  undertake  to  treat  this  subject  exhaust-
ively,—  whoever  should  undertake  this  would,
in  my  opinion,  find  himself  before  a  greater  task
than  ever  had  Hercules  in  cleansing  the  Augean
stables.

What  I  do  intend  to  do  is  merely  to  survey  briefly
some  special  incidents  that  have  occurred  this  win-
ter,—  only  in  this  village  of  the  Residence  of  la  Con-
ception, where  I  have  made  my  principal  abode, — in
which  we  have  found  ourselves  obliged  to  examine
the  circumstances  and  details  of  these  calamities,  in
behalf  of  our  Christians,  for  whose  consciences  we
are  obliged  to  provide.

Casting  our  eyes  over  the  customs  and  practices
[124]  of  these  peoples,  they  had  always  appeared
to  us  like  stagnant,  ill-smelling  pools;  yet  we  had
hardly  seen,  in  the  past,  more  than  the  surface.  But
since  we  have  been  obliged,  on  account  of  our  Chris-
tians, to  search  within,  and  remove  this  sewer,  it
cannot  be  believed  what  a  stench  and  what  wretched-
ness we  have  found  there.

An  old  man  of  this  village,  named  Taorhenche\


146  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

auoit  depuis  enuiron  deux  ans  vn  chancre  au  bras,
qui  du  poignet  ou  il  commenca,  luy  eftoit  toufiours
monte*  vers  l'efpaule,  &  commencoit  a  entrer  dans  le
corps.  L'on  dit  que  par  le  paff6  il  n'auoit  oublie*  au-
cune  ceremonie,  ou  pour  mieux  dire,  aucune  fuper-
ftition  de  celles  qui  fe  pratiquent  dans  le  pais,  pour  le
recouurement  de  fa  fante\  Cet  hyuer  dernier,  vn
peu  deuant  que  de  mourir,  il  donna  a  entendre  aux
Capitaines  qu'il  defiroit  quelque  chofe  pour  fa  confo-
lation,  &  pour  faire  vn  dernier  effort  de  fa  guerifon.
On  affemble  le  Confeil,  on  depute  des  perfonnes,
pour  aller  apprendre  fes  dears,  qui  aboutiffoiet  a  cinq
ou  fix  chefs:  A  quelque  nombre  de  chiens  d'vne  cer-
taine  facon  &  couleur  pour  faire  feffcin  trois  iours
[125]  durant:  a  quantity  de  farine  pour  le  mefme
f uiet :  a  quelques  danf es  &  chof es  f emblables :  mais
principalement  a  la  ceremonie  de  l'andactfander,  qui
eft  vn  accouplement  d'hommes  auec  filles  qu'il  fe
fait  a  1'ifTue  du  feftin,  il  fpecifia  qu'il  falloit  12  filles,
&  vne  treiziefme  pour  luy.

La  refponfe  ported  au  confeil,  on  luy  fo[u]rnit  aufli
toft  ce  qui  f e  pouuoit  donner  fur  le  champ ;  &  ce  de
la  liberalite  &  contribution  volontaire  des  particu-
liers,  qui  fe  trouuerent  la,  ou  en  entendirent  parler.
Ces  peuples  faifants  gloire  en  telles  rencontres,  de  fe
defpoiiiller  de  ce  qu'ils  ont  de  plus  precieux.  En
fuite,  les  Capitaines  furent  par  les  rues  &  carrefours,
&  par  les  cabanes  crier  a  pleine  tefte,  declarants  les
defirs  du  malade,  &  exhortants  qu'on  euft  a  y  fatis-
faire  promptement.

lis  ne  fe  contentent  pas  d'y  aller  vne  fois,  ils  y  re-
tournent  trois  &  quatre,  auec  des  termes  &  des  accents
tels,  qu'en  effedt  on  euft  iuge"  qu'il  y  alloit  du  bien


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  147

had,  for  two  years  past,  an  ulcer  on  his  arm,  which
continued  to  increase  from  the  wrist,  where  it  com-
menced, towards  the  shoulder,  and  began  to  enter
the  body.  It  was  said  that  in  the  past  he  had  not
forgotten  any  ceremony  —  or,  to  express  it  better,
any  superstition  —  of  all  those  which  are  practiced
in  the  country,  for  the  recovery  of  his  health.  This
last  winter,  a  little  before  his  death,  he  gave  the
Captains  to  understand  that  he  desired  something  as
a  consolation,  and  that  one  last  effort  should  be  made
for  his  recovery.  The  Council  is  assembled,  and
some  persons  are  deputed  to  go  and  learn  his  desires ;
these  turn  upon  five  or  six  points, —  a  number  of
dogs  of  a  certain  shape  and  color,  with  which  to
make  a  three  days'  feast;  [125]  a  quantity  of  flour  for
the  same  purpose;  some  dances,  and  like  perform-
ances; but  principally  upon  the  ceremony  of  the
"  andacwander,"  a  mating  of  men  with  girls,  which
is  made  at  the  end  of  the  feast.  He  specified  that
there  should  be  12  girls,  and  a  thirteenth  for  himself.

The  answer  being  brought  to  the  council,  he  was
furnished  immediately  with  what  could  be  given  at
once,  and  this  from  the  liberality  and  voluntary  con-
tributions of  individuals  who  were  present  there  and
heard  the  matter  mentioned, —  these  peoples  glory-
ing, on  such  occasions,  in  despoiling  themselves  of
the  most  precious  things  they  have.  Afterward,  the
Captains  went  through  the  streets  and  public  places,
and  through  the  cabins,  announcing  in  a  loud  voice
the  desires  of  the  sick  man,  and  exhorting  people  to
satisfy  them  promptly.

They  are  not  content  to  go  on  this  errand  once, —
they  repeat  it  three  or  four  times,  using  such  terms
and  accents  that,  indeed,  one  would  think  that  the


148  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  17

de  tout  le  pais.  lis  ont  cependant  foin  de  marquer
le  nom  des  filles  &  des  hommes  qui  fe  prefentent
pour  T  execution  du  principal  defir  du  malade,  &  dans
l'afTembl^e  du  feflin,  on  les  nomme  tout  haut,  apres
[126]  quoy  s'enfuiuent  les  congratulations  de  toute
l'affiflance,  &  les  meilleurs  morceaux  qui  font  portez
a  ces  deputez  &  deputies,  qui  doiuent  ioiier  de  £L
mal-heureux  perfonnages  a  1'ifTue  du  feflin,  apres
quoy  s'enfuiuent  les  remerciements  de  la  part  du
malade,  &  de  la  fante*  qu'on  luy  a  redonn£e,  fe  pro-
feffant  tout  a  fait  guery  par  vn  tel  remede.

Ce  miferable  jeu  continua  deux  iours,  le  troifiefme
il  ne  fe  fifl  pas,  quoy  qu'il  fe  deufl  faire  felon  le  pre-
mier deffein  &  intention  du  malade.  On  nous  a  vou-
lu  faire  croire  que  ce  fuft  nous  qui  en  fufmes  la
caufe,  pour  auoir  tefmoigne  le  defplaifir  &  la  peine
que  nous  en  auions.  Quoy  qu'il  en  foit,  toute  la
ceremonie  fe  paffa,  fans  que  la  malade  pour  cela  s'en
porta  mieux,  &  bien  toft  apres  il  mourut.  Dans  fon
dernier  feflin  auant  la  mort,  il  dit  qu'il  mouroit  vo-
lontiers,  &  qu'il  n'auoit  qu'vn  feul  regret  de  fe  voir
priue"  des  bons  morceaux  dont  toute  fa  vie  on  l'auoit
honore"  dans  les  feflins.  Cefle  ame  efloit  trop  de
chair,  pour  goufler  les  chofes  de  l'efprit.

Deuant  que  le  fort  de  la  maladie  eufl  attache"  ce
pauure  mal-heureux  fur  fa  natte,  il  venoit  quelque-
fois  en  noflre  cabane,  [127]  &  en  fuite  dans  noflre
Chappelle ;  ou  apres  auoir  confidere"  toutes  les  images ;
ie  ne  fcay,  difoit-il,  qui  eft  celuy-la,  monflrant  l'i-
mage  de  noflre  Seigneur,  mais  il  n'y  a  que  luy  qui
me  faffe  peur.

II  auoit  bien  raifon  de  le  dire,  particulierement
apres  auoir  tant  de  fois  mefprife*  fes  faindles  femonces.


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  14®

welfare  of  the  whole  country  was  at  stake.  Mean-
while, they  take  care  to  note  the  names  of  the  girls
and  men  who  present  themselves  to  carry  out  the
principal  desire  of  the  sick  man ;  and  in  the  assem-
bly of  the  feast  these  are  named  aloud,  after  [126]
which  follow  the  congratulations  of  all  those  pres-
ent, and  the  best  pieces,  which  are  carried  to  the
men  and  women  deputed  to  appear  in  so  wretched
characters  at  the  end  of  the  feast ;  then  ensue  the
thanks  of  the  sick  man  for  the  health  that  has  been
restored  to  him,  professing  himself  entirely  cured  by
this  remedy.

This  wretched  play  continued  for  two  days ;  on  the
third,  it  was  not  enacted,  although  it  should  have
been,  according  to  the  first  plan  and  intention  of  the
patient.  They  tried  to  make  us  believe  that  it  was
we  who  were  the  cause  of  this,  for  having  shown  the
displeasure  and  pain  that  we  felt.  Be  that  as  it  may,
the  whole  ceremony  took  place  without  the  sick  man
feeling  any  better  in  consequence,  and  soon  after-
ward he  died.  In  his  last  feast  before  death,  he  said
that  he  died  willingly,  and  that  he  had  only  one
regret, —  that  of  seeing  himself  deprived  of  the  deli-
cious morsels  with  which  he  had  all  his  life  been
honored  in  the  feasts.  This  soul  belonged  too  much
to  the  flesh  to  enjoy  the  things  of  the  spirit.

Before  the  severity  of  the  disease  had  confined
this  poor  creature  to  his  mat,  he  sometimes  came  to
our  cabin,  [127]  and  afterward  to  our  Chapel, —  where,
after  having  surveyed  all  the  images,  he  said,  "Ido
not  know  who  that  one  is  " —  pointing  to  the  image
of  our  Lord  — '  ■  but  he  is  the  only  one  who  makes
me  afraid."

He  had  good  reason  to  say  this,  especially  after


150  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J ^SUITES [Vol.17

On  fit  tons  les  efforts  imaginables  pendant  fa  maladie
pour  le  gaigner  a  Dieu;  mais  c6t  efprit  railleur  n'a-
uoit  de  la  langue  que  pour  demander  des  pruneaux
&  des  raifins,  &  des  oreilles  pour  entendre  la  refponfe :
hors  de  cela  on  luy  rompoit  la  tefte,  ou  fe  mettoit  a
railler.

On  redoubla  les  efforts  a  fa  mort ;  &  en  fin  on  fit
tant,  qu'au  moins  en  apparence  il  tefmoigna  defirer
le  baptefme.  On  l'inftruit  done  plus  particuliere-
ment  encore  que  par  le  paffe\  Mais  comme  il  auoit
toute  fa  vie,  mefprife'  nos  myfteres,  &  qu'il  venoit
tout  fraifchement  de  donner  vn  fcandale  public,  on
iugea  a  propos  qu'il  donnaft  quelque  marque  de  fa
bonne  volonte\  &  qu'il  n'y  auoit  point  de  fidtion,  ny
en  fa  foy,  ny  en  fa  penitence.

On  luy  propofe  done  qu'il  euft  au  moins  a  inuiter
deux  ou  trois  perfonnes  du  [128]  bourg,  des  plus
confiderables,  auf quels  il  s'eftoit  adreffe"  pour  ces
mefchates  actions;  &  qu'en  leur  prefence  il  tefmoi-
gnaft  le  defir  qu'il  auoit  du  baptefme ;  &  fon  defplaifir
&  regret  de  ce  qui  s'eftoit  paffe"  pendant  fa  vie  fi
deteflable  &  abominable.  II  receut  fort  froidement
cefte  propofition,  &  ne  fe  voulut  mettre  en  peine  de
l'executer.  Ce  qu'eftant  adioufte\  auec  plufieurs
autres  indices  de  peu  de  difpofition  qu'il  y  auoit  en
luy,  on  fut  contraint  de  l'abandonner.

Ce  mif erable  vn  peu  deuant  que  de  mourir,  tomba
en  pafmoifon,  de  laquelle  reuenant  il  dit,  a  ce  qu'on
nous  a  rapport6,  qu'il  venoit  de  l'autre  monde,  ou  il
n'auoit  rien  veu  de  ce  que  difent  les  Francois;  mais
bien  qu'il  y  auoit  rencontre"  plufieurs  de  fa  famille
&  parents,  qui  luy  auoient  fait  tres-bon  accueil,  l'af-
feurants  qu'il  y  auoit  long- temps  qu'on  l'attendoit


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  151

having  so  often  despised  his  holy  invitations.  All
imaginable  efforts  were  made  during  his  sickness  to
win  him  to  God ;  but  this  scoffing  spirit  had  a  tongue
only  to  ask  for  prunes  and  raisins,  and  ears  to  hear
the  answer ;  beyond  that  one  would  either  split  his
head  or  set  him  to  scoffing.

These  efforts  were  redoubled,  at  the  time  of  his
death;  and,  finally,  so  much  was  done  that,  at  least
in  appearance,  he  showed  a  desire  to  be  baptized.
He  was  instructed,  therefore,  still  more  thoroughly
than  he  had  been  in  the  past ;  but,  as  he  had  all  his
life  despised  our  mysteries,  and  as  he  had  quite
recently  caused  a  public  scandal,  it  was  considered
best  that  he  should  give  some  sign  of  his  good  will,
and  proof  that  there  was  no  hypocrisy  in  his  faith  or
in  his  penitence.

It  was  proposed  to  him,  then,  that  he  should  at  least
invite  two  or  three  of  the  [128]  more  prominent
persons  of  the  village,  to  whom  he  had  addressed
himself  in  regard  to  these  wicked  actions ;  and  that
in  their  presence  he  should  declare  the  desire  he  had
for  baptism,  and  his  displeasure  and  regret  at  what
had  taken  place  during  his  so  detestable  and  abom-
inable life.  He  received  this  proposition  very  coldly,
and  would  not  put  himself  to  the  trouble  of  execut-
ing it.  This,  added  to  several  other  indications  of
the  little  willingness  that  he  felt,  obliged  us  to  aban-
don him.

This  wretch,  a  little  while  before  he  died,  fell  into
a  swoon ;  coming  out  of  it,  he  said,  according  to  what
was  told  us,  that  he  came  from  the  other  world,
where  he  had  seen  nothing  of  what  the  French  told ;
but,  rather,  that  he  had  met  there  several  of  his  own
family  and  relatives,  who  had  most  kindly  welcomed


152  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

en  bonne  deuotion,  &  qu'on  fe  difpofoit  pour  faire  en
fa  confideration  force  danfes  &  feftins  excellens.  En
effedl  fe  le  perfuadent  de  la  forte,  pour  s'y  trouuer
dans  le  mefme  equipage  &  appareil  qu'il  auoit  veu
les  autres,  il  fe  fift  peindre  tout  le  vifage  de  rouge ;
fe  fift  apporter  &  mettre  deffus-foy  ce  [129]  qu'il
auoit  de  plus  beau,  on  luy  donne  fon  plat  &  fa  culier;
&  la  deffus  meurt.

Ce  barbare  paffoit  dans  le  iugement  commun  des
Sauuages,  pour  vn  des  plus  honeftes  hommes  &  des
plus  gens  de  bien  de  tout  le  pais.  Que  fi  vous  leur
demandez,  en  vertu  de  quoy?  c'eft,  difoient-ils,  que
c'eftoit  vn  homme  paifible,  qui  ne  faifoit  mal  a  per-
fonne,  &  qui  fe  plaifoit  fort  a  fe  r6ioiiir  &  faire  feflin.
Si  le  iugement  des  Sauuages  eft  veritable,  ie  laiffe  a
penfer  ce  que  valent  tous  les  autres.

A  l'occafion  de  ce  mal-heureux  qui  s'eftoit  plu-
fieurs  fois  feruy  des  remedes  dont  nous  venons  de
parler,  &  qui  auoit  certaine  danfes  &  chanf ons  affedt6es
en  toutes  les  ceremonies  qui  fe  faifoient  a  fon  occa-
fion.  Nous  apprifmes  qu'il  n'y  a  point,  ou  prefque
point  de  famille  en  ces  contr£es,  dont  les  chefs  n'ay-
ent  quelques  danfes,  feftins  &  autres  ceremonies
affedtees  pour  le  remede  de  leurs  maladies,  &  le  bon-
heur  de  leurs  affaires :  mais  que  le  tout  a  efte"  enf ei-
gne* par  les  Demons,  foit  en  la  fagon  que  nous  dirons
tantofl,  foit  en  leur  apparoiffant  en  fonge,  tan  toft  en
forme  de  corbeau,  ou  autre  oyffeau ;  tantofl  en  forme
de  couleuure,  comme  il  eftoit  arriu6  [130]  celuy  dont
nous  venons  de  parler,  ou  d'autre  animal,  qui  leur
parle,  &  leur  declare  le  fecret  de  leur  bon-heur,  foit
pour  le  recouurement  de  leur  fant6,  quand  ils  feront
tombez  malades, foit  pour  le  bon  fuccez  de  leurs


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  r63g  153

him, — assuring  him  that  his  coming  had  been  devout-
ly awaited  for  a  long  time,  and  that  they  were  ready
to  have  many  fine  dances  and  feasts  on  his  account.
In  fact,  he  so  convinced  himself  of  the  truth  of  this,
that,  in  order  to  be  present  there  in  the  same  dress
and  magnificence  in  which  he  had  seen  the  others,
he  had  his  whole  face  painted  red,  had  brought  and
placed  over  him  [129]  the  finest  articles  he  had,  was
given  his  plate  and  spoon ;  and  thus  he  died.

This  barbarian  passed,  in  the  common  opinion  of
the  Savages,  as  one  of  the  most  respectable  and  vir-
tuous men  of  the  whole  country ;  if  you  asked  them
upon  what  grounds,  they  said,  "  Because  he  was  a
peaceable  man,  who  did  no  harm  to  any  one,  and  who
greatly  delighted  in  merrymaking  and  in  giving
feasts."  If  the  opinion  of  the  Savages  is  correct,  I
leave  you  to  imagine  of  what  value  all  the  others  are.

In  connection  with  this  unhappy  man,  who  had
several  times  employed  the  remedies  of  which  we
have  just  spoken,  and  who  had  certain  special  dances
and  songs  in  all  these  ceremonies  which  were  per-
formed in  his  behalf, — we  learned  that  there  is
hardly  any  family  in  these  countries,  the  heads  of
which  do  not  have  some  dances,  feasts,  and  other
ceremonies  suitable  for  the  cure  of  their  diseases  and
the  success  of  their  business ;  but  that  all  these  have
been  taught  by  the  Demons,  either  in  the  manner
that  we  shall  presently  describe,  or  by  appearing  to
them  in  dreams, — now  in  the  form  of  a  raven,  or
some  other  bird,  now  in  the  form  of  a  serpent,  as
happened  [130]  to  him  of  whom  we  have  just  spoken,
or  of  some  other  animal,  which  speaks  to  them  and
reveals  the  secret  of  their  good  fortune,  either  in  the
recovery  of  their  health  when  they  fall  sick,  or  in  the


164  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.17

affaires.  Et  ce  fecret  s'appelle  Ondinoc:  c'eft  a  dire,
defir  infpire*  par  le  Demon.  Et  en  effedt  fi  vous
demandez  a  celuy  qui  defire  en  cette  maniere  qu'elle
eft  la  caufe  de  ce  defir,  il  n'a  autre  refponfe,  finon
ondays  ihatonc  oKi  haendaerandic,  la  chofe  fous  l'ap-
parence  de  laquelle  mon  D6mon  familier  m'apparoift
m'a  donne*  c6t  aduis.

Ces  Ondinoncs  font  toufiours  accompagnez  de
feftins  ou  de  danfes,  dont  les  ceremonies,  &  mefmes
les  chanfons  qui  s'y  chantent,  font  pour  la  plufpart
didtees,  par  le  Demon,  qui  exprime  le  tout  auec  des
precautions  &  menaces,  que  tout  eft  perdu  ft  on  man-
que a  la  moindre  circonftance.  C'eft  ce  qui  fait,
que  lors  que  les  Capitaines  vont  publier  les  defirs  des
malades,  ou  autres,  perfonnes  qui  ont  fonge",  &  qu'ils
difent  que  c'eft  lOndinonc  d'vn  tel,  aum-toft  chacun
fe  met  en  peine,  &  s'applique  de  tout  fon  pouuoir  a
donner  contentement  &  fatisfadtion  a  qui  il  appar-
tient.  [131]  Cecy  femble  entierement  confirme*  par
la  formule,  de  laquelle  fe  feruent  les  Capitaines,
apportants  a  la  perfonne  les  chofes  qu'elle  a  defir£es,
au  temps  de  la  premiere  affemblee.  Efcoute  vn  tell,
ou  vne  telle,  crient-ils,  &  toy  voix  de  Demon  (fcauoir
qui  l'as  infpir£)  voila  ce  qu'vn  tel,  ou  vne  telle
donnent.  Et  en  difant  cela,  ils  iettent  les  prefents
fur  la  malade.

C'eft  la  forme  dont  on  s'eft  feruy  dans  vne  cere-
monie  qui  s'eft  paff6e  pendant  que  i'efcriuois  ce  que
deffus;  a  l'occafion  d'vne  femme  malade,  qui  felon
l'vn  de  fes  defirs,  fuft  danf6e  d'vne  danfe  particu-
liere  trois  heure  durant,  par  cinquante  perfonnes.
On  a  efte"  trois  iours  a  fe  preparer  a  cefte  danfe,  &  le
iour  qu'elle  s'eft  faite,  les  Capitaines  firent  plus  de


1639-40]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  165

successful  issue  of  their  business.  And  this  secret
is  called '  •  Ondinoc, ' '  that  is  to  say, ' '  a  desire  inspired
by  the  Demon. ' '  And,  in  fact,  if  you  ask,  from  him
who  desires  in  this  manner,  what  is  the  cause  of  the
desire,  he  makes  no  answer  except,  V  ondays  ihatonc
oki  haendaerandic, ' '  "the  thing  under  the  form  of
which  my  familiar  Demon  appeared  to  me,  gave  me
this  advice."

These  Ondinoncs  are  always  accompanied  by  feasts
or  dances;  the  ceremonies  of  these  and  even  the
songs  that  are  sung  there  are  for  the  most  part  dic-
tated by  the  Demon,  who  utters  all  with  cautions  and
threats  that  all  will  be  lost  if  they  fail  to  carry  out
the  least  detail.  The  result  is,  that,  when  the  Cap-
tains go  about  publishing  the  desires  of  the  sick,  or
other  persons  who  have  dreamed,  and  when  they
say  that  it  is  the  Ondinonc  of  a  certain  person,  each
one  immediately  takes  pains  and  applies  himself  with
all  his  might  to  give  pleasure  and  satisfaction  to  that
one  to  whom  it  belongs.  [131]  This  seems  entirely
confirmed  by  the  formula  observed  by  the  Captains
when  they  take  to  the  person  the  things  that  he
desired,  at  the  time  of  the  first  assembly.  u  Listen,
such  a  man  or  woman,"  they  cry,  "  and  thou,  voice
of  Demon  "  (meaning  the  one  who  has  inspired  him),
"  behold  what  such  a  man  or  woman  gives;  "  and,
thus  saying,  they  throw  the  presents  upon  the  patient.

This  is  the  formula  used  in  a  ceremony  which  took
place  while  I  was  writing  the  above,  in  behalf  of  a  sick
woman,  who,  according  to  one  of  her  desires,  had  per-
formed for  her,  by  fifty  persons,  a  special  dance  last-
ing three  hours.  Three  days  were  spent  in  prepar-
ing for  this  dance ;  and,  on  the  day  it  took  place,  the
Captains made more than five public announce-


156  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  17

cinq  crimes  publiques,  tantoft  pour  aduertir  qu'on
commencaft  a  fe  lauer  le  corps,  tantoft  que  Ton  fe
graiffaft,  tantoft  que  Ton  fe  paraft  d'vne  parure,  &
puis  d'vne  autre.  En  fin  vous  euffiez  dit  que  le  feu
efloit  au  bourg,  &  que  tout  alloit  eftre  confomme\
La  derniere  cri6e  fe  fift,  pour  exciter  tout  le  monde
a  s'y  trouuer,  &  d'entrer  auparauant  l'arriu6e  de
ceux  qui  deuoient  danfer,  deuant  lefquels  vint  vn
Capitaine  [132]  qui  apportant  le  re  fie  des  defirs  de
la  malade,  fift  fa  clameur  en  la  forme  que  nous  ve-
nons  de  dire,  fuiuit  vn  peu  apres  la  compagnie  des
danfeurs  hommes  &  femmes,  a  la  tefle  de  laquelle
marchoient  deux  maiftres  de  ceremonie,  chantants,
&  la  Tortue  en  main,  de  laquelle  ils  ne  ceffoient  de
ioiier.  Cette  Tortue  n'eft  pas  vne  veritable  Tortue,
il  n'y  a  que  l'efcaille  &  la  peau,  difpofez  a  faire  vne
efpece  de  tambour,  dans  lequel  iettans  certains  petits
noyaux,  ils  en  font  vn  inflrument  femblable  a  celuy
dont  fe  feruent  quelques  enfans  en  France  pour
ioiier.  II  y  a  ie  ne  fcay  quoy  de  mifterieux  dans
cefte  apparence  de  Tortue,  a  laquelle  ces  peuples
attribuent  leur  origine.  Nous  fcaurons  auec  le  temps
ce  qui  en  eft.

Ces  maiftres  de  ceremonie  fe  mettent  tantoft  a  la
tefte  de  la  malade,  qui  eft  au  milieu  de  la  cabane ;  &
tantoft  fe  diuifant,  l'vn  demeurat  a  la  tefte,  &  1' autre
allat  aux  pieds.  Tous  les  autres  qui  danfent  font
vne  efpece  d'ouale,  &  ne  cefTent  de  tourner  a  1' en-
tour  de  la  malade  tant  que  les  maiftres  de  la  ceremo-
nie chantent,  &  iouent  de  la  tortue.  II  ne  fembloit
pas  qu'on  y  peuft  apporter  plus  de  foin,  &  de  [133]
myftere;  &  qu'il  fut  poflible  d'y  auoir  plus  d'appli-
cation,  que  celle  que  chacun  auoit  a  bien  ioiier  fon


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  157

ments, — now  to  warn  them  that  they  should  begin
to  wash  their  bodies,  now  that  they  should  grease
them,  now  that  they  should  adorn  themselves  with
one  ornament,  and  again  with  another.  In  short,
you  would  have  said  there  was  a  fire  in  the  village,
and  that  everything  was  about  to  be  consumed.  The
final  announcement  was  made  to  urge  all  the  people
to  be  there,  and  to  enter  before  the  arrival  of  those
who  were  to  dance,  before  whom  came  a  Captain
[132]  who,  bearing  the  rest  of  the  desires  of  the
patient,  made  his  announcement  in  the  form  that  we
have  just  mentioned ;  there  followed,  a  little  distance
behind,  the  company  of  dancers,  men  and  women,
at  whose  head  marched  two  masters  of  ceremonies,
singing,  and  holding  the  Tortoise,  on  which  they  did
not  cease  to  play.  This  Tortoise  is  not  a  real  Tor-
toise, but  only  the  shell  and  skin  so  arranged  as  to
make  a  sort  of  drum ;  having  thrown  certain  pebbles
into  this,  they  make  from  it  an  instrument  like  that
which  children  in  France  use  to  play  with.  There  is
a  mysterious  something,  I  know  not  what,  in  this
semblance  of  a  Tortoise,  to  which  these  peoples  attrib-
ute their  origin.  We  shall  know  in  time  what  there
is  to  it.

These  masters  of  ceremony  now  place  themselves
at  the  head  of  the  patient,  who  is  in  the  middle  of
the  cabin,  and  now  move  apart,  one  remaining  at  her
head,  the  other  going  to  her  feet.  All  the  others  who
dance  form  a  sort  of  flock,  and  incessantly  wheel
round  and  round  the  patient  as  long  as  the  masters
of  the  ceremony  sing  and  play  on  the  tortoise.  It
did  not  seem  as  if  they  could  use  more  care,  or  more
[133]  mystery,  or  that  there  could  be  more  earnest
attention  than  each  one  gave  to  playing  well  his


158  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.17

perfonnage,  &  cependant  la  malade  ne  fe  plaignit
d' autre  chofe,  finon  qu'on  n'auoit  pas  garde*  toutes
les  formes,  &  qu'elle  n'en  gueriroit  pas,  comme  en
effect  elle  empira.

Cinq  ou  fix  iours  apres,  elle  fe  fait  porter  en  vn
autre  bourg,  ou  elle  a  efte*  danf6e  &  redanf6e  dere-
chef ,  auec  auffi  peu  de  fuccez,  &  le  mefme  mefcon-
tentement  de  fa  part.  Retournee  qu'elle  a  efte*  icy,
on  a  recommence*  a  luy  ordonner  de  pareils  remedes,
&  entr'autres  force  feftins  de  Feu,  de  la  nature  def-
quels  a  efte*  implement  parle*  aux  precedentes  Rela-
tions. En  fin  au  milieu  de  l'vne  de  ces  ceremonies,
cefle  pauure  mal-heureufe  a  miferablement  expire^
paffant  d'vn  feftin  de  feu,  a  vne  autre,  mais  qui  a
bien  d'autres  mets,  &  d'autres  feruices ;  &  pour  comble
de  malheur  n'a  aucune  iffue

Elle  eftoit  fille  d'vn  Sauuage,  qui  eft  en  reputa-
tion d'eftre  vn  des  plus  riches  &  des  plus  confide-
rables  du  pais  en  nombre  de  forts  dits  AfcSandies,
ou  diables  familiers,  qui  y  foit;  &  qui  pour  Taffection
qu'il  leur  portoit  voulut  que  cette  fienne  fille  [134]
qu'il  cheriffoit  vniquement  portaft  le  nom  d'Afctfan-
dic :  ce  barbare  f ut  prie*  de  prefter  ces  forts  pour  vne
ceremonie  du  jeu  de  Plat,  dont  nous  parlerons  cy-
apres,  fa  fille  s'y  en  va,  ou  fe  fiant  fur  les  threfors  de
fon  pere,  elle  fe  met  a  parier  comme  les  autres;
comme  elle  eftalloit  les  forts,  la  voila  furprife  de  la
maladie,  qui  fit  tant  danfer  de  monde,  &  dont  en  fin
elle  mourut,  comme  nous  venons  de  dire.  Tous  lef-
quels  mal-heurs  ne  fot  attribuez  a  autre  chofe  qu'aux
defauts  &  manquemets  aux  formes  &  circonftances
des  ceremonies.

C'eft  la  plainte  ordinaire  des  Capitaines  que  tout  fe


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE  S  RELA  TIONy  i6S9  1 59

part ;  yet  the  sick  woman  only  complained  that  they
had  not  observed  all  the  forms,  and  that  she  would
not  recover;  and,  in  fact,  she  grew  worse.

Five  or  six  days  later,  she  had  herself  carried  to
another  village,  where  dances  were  again  and  again
performed  for  her,  with  as  little  success,  and  the  same
discontent  on  her  part.  Having  returned  hither,
people  began  to  prescribe  similar  remedies  for  her,
and  among  others  many  Fire  feasts,  the  nature  of
which  has  been  amply  set  forth  in  preceding  Rela-
tions. Finally,  in  the  midst  of  one  of  these  ceremo-
nies, this  poor  unhappy  woman  miserably  expired,
passing  from  one  fire  feast  to  another,  but  one  which
has  quite  different  dishes,  and  different  attendance,
and,  as  a  climax  of  misfortune,  has  no  end.

She  was  the  daughter  of  a  Savage  who  is  reputed
to  be  one  of  the  richest  and  most  important  persons
that  there  is  in  the  country,  in  the  number  of  charms,
called  Ascwandies,  or  familiar  demons, — and  who,
on  account  of  the  affection  he  had  for  them,  ordered
that  this  daughter  of  his,  [134]  whom  he  singularly
loved,  should  bear  the  name  Ascwandic.  This  bar-
barian was  requested  to  lend  these  charms  for  a  cele-
bration of  the  game  of  Dish,  of  which  we  shall  speak
hereafter.6  His  daughter  went  to  this  game,  and,
relying  upon  her  father's  treasures,  she  began  to  bet
like  the  others.  As  she  was  displaying  these  charms,
she  was  suddenly  overtaken  by  the  illness  which
caused  the  people  to  dance  so  much,  and  of  which
she  finally  died,  as  we  have  just  said.  All  these  mis-
fortunes are  attributed  to  nothing  else  than  to  the
defects  and  omissions  in  the  forms  and  details  of  the
ceremonies.

It  is  the  common  complaint  of  the  Captains  that


160  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

va  perdant,  a  faute  de  garder  les  formes  &  couflumes
de  leurs  anceflres.  Si  on  brufle  vn  prifonnier,  &  que
la  ietmefle  la  dedas  foit  infolente,  vn  vieillard  fe  met
a  crier  &  tempefter  qu'on  ioue  a  perdre  le  pais,  que
c'efl  vne  affaire  d'importance  &  qu'on  n'y  procede  pas
affez  ferieufemet.  Si  on  refufcite  vn  Capitaine,  ou,
pour  mieux  dire,  fon  nom,  quand  on  vient  a  chanter
la  chanfon  des  morts,  ft  deux  femmes  ne  font  entries
pour  donner  le  ton,  tout  eft  pe[r]du,  &  on  ne  s' at-
tend a  voir  que  teftes  cafI6es  fous  vn  tel  Capitaine
qui  prend  le  nom.

[135]  Bref,  c'eft  la  feruitude  &  l'efclauage  le  plus
eflrange  qu'on  fe  puiffe  imaginer;  &  iamais  galerie
ne  craignit  tant  de  manquer  a  fon  deuoir,  que  ces
peuples  ont  de  frayeur  de  faillir  a  la  moindre  des  cir-
conftances  de  toutes  leurs  mal-heureufes  ceremonies,
s'enfuiuant  de  ce  defaut,  non  feulement  la  priuation
de  ce  qu'ils  attendoient,  mais  encore  punition  fen-
fible,  que  le  diable  pour  ce  fuiet  exerce  fur  ces  pau-
ures  mal-heureux.  Les  plus  iudicieux  d'entr'eux
aduouent  franchement  leur  mifere,  &  difent  nette-
ment  que  les  f euls  demons  font  les  veri tables  maiftres
du  pais.  Que  ce  font  eux  qui  reglent  &  ordonnent
tout,  foit  en  fonge,  foit  autrement:  qu'ils  voyent  bien
cela,  mais  qu'il  n'y  a  point  de  remede;  qu'ils  ont
toufiours  vefcu  de  la  forte,  &  qu'il  n'y  a  apparence
ny  moyen  de  viure  d'autre  maniere,  autrement  que
tout  feroit  perdu.

Les  Capitaines  &  anciens  difent,  que  s'ils  auoient
entrepris  ce  changement,  ils  verroient  bien-tofi  leur
bourgs  abandonnez,  &  que  chacun  infailliblement  fe
retiroit,  ou  il  verroit  les  couflumes  du  pais  obferu£es,
&  ou  il  trouueroit  les  remedes  ordinaires  de  leurs


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6J9  161

everything  is  going  to  destruction  through  their  fail-
ure to  observe  the  forms  and  customs  of  their  ances-
tors. When  a  prisoner  is  burned,  if  the  young  men
are  turbulent  thereat,  some  old  man  begins  to  exclaim
and  storm  because  they  are  risking  the  ruin  of  the
country,  saying  that  this  is  a  matter  of  importance
and  that  they  do  not  behave  seriously  enough  in  it.
If  they  resuscitate  a  Captain, —  or,  to  speak  more  cor-
rectly, his  name,7  —  when  they  come  to  sing  the  song
of  the  dead,  if  two  women  do  not  come  in  to  pitch
the  tone,  all  is  lost,  and  they  expect  to  see  only  brok-
en heads  under  a  Captain  who  assumes  the  name.

[135]  In  short,  it  is  the  strangest  servitude  and
slavery  that  can  be  imagined ;  and  never  did  galley
slave  so  fear  to  fail  in  his  duty  as  these  peoples  dread
to  fall  short  in  the  least  detail  of  all  their  wretched
ceremonies, —  for  there  would  follow  from  this  omis-
sion, not  only  the  privation  of  what  they  were  expect-
ing, but  even  physical  punishment,  which  the  devil
for  this  reason  exercises  upon  these  poor  wretches.
The  more  thoughtful  among  them  freely  admit  their
misery,  and  frankly  say  that  the  demons  alone  are
the  real  masters  of  the  country, —  that  it  is  they  who
regulate  and  decree  everything,  whether  in  dreams
or  otherwise;  that  they  see  this  plainly,  but  that
there  is  no  remedy  for  it;  that  they  have  always
lived  in  this  way,  and  that  there  is  no  prospect  or
means  of  living  differently, — in  other  words,  that
[were  any  detail  omitted]  all  would  be  lost.

The  Captains  and  old  men  say  that  if  they  under-
took to  make  this  change,  they  would  soon  see  their
villages  abandoned,  and  that  each  one  would  infalli-
bly retire  where  he  could  see  the  customs  of  the
country  observed,  and  where  he  could  find  the  usual


162  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

maladies.  C£t  article  [136]  eft  le  pretexte  que  pren-
nent  quelques-vns  de  ces  plus  anciens  &  Capitaines,
pour  ne  fe  pas  encore  rendre  aux  femonces  du  faindt
Efprit.  Celuy  qui  leur  frappe  fi  fouuent  l'oreille,
ouurira  la  porte  du  cceur  quand  il  luy  plaira.

Outre  les  Ondinoncs  ou  Defirs  dont  nous  venons
de  parler,  didtez  par  le  demon  qui  apparoifl  fous
quelque  forme  empruntde,  il  y  a  d'autres  fecrets  &
defirs  moins  confiderables  qui  viennent  de  certains
fonges,  dont  ils  croient  leurs  demons  les  autheurs,
auf quels  ils  n'ofent  refufer  d'obeir,  a  moins  que  de
s'expofer  a  vn  danger  de  quelque  grand  mal-heur.
Les  plus  confiderables  pour  le  iugement  &  1' experi-
ence d'entre  nos  Chreftiens,  nous  ont  donne*  a  en-
tendre qu'il  ne  fe  fait  quafi  dans  le  pais  aucune  danfe
ny  feftin  qui  ne  vienne  de  ce  mefme  principe  du
d6mon :  d'ou  vient  qu'on  y  tient  toutes  ces  chofes  pour
fi  augufles,  que  nous  n'en  ferions  pas  dauantage  pour
les  chofes  les  plus  faindtes  &  facr6es  de  nos  myfteres.

S'il  arriue  quelquefois  que  les  enfans  fe  veulent
refiouir,  &  danfer  quelques-vnes  des  danfes  qu'ils  ont
veu  danfer  a  leurs  ceremonies ;  auffi-toft  on  les  tanfe,
&  reprend,  [137]  on  fort  rudement.  Comme  fi  en
France  on  voyoit  quelques  perfonnes  profaner  vne
chof e  f aindte ;  qui  ne  doit  auoir  autre  vf age  que  celuy
auquel  elle  eft  confacr6e.

Que  dire  la  deffus  a  nos  pauures  Chreftiens,  quand
ils  demandent  s'ils  pourront  affifter  aux  feftins,  qui
font  les  f euls  repas  extraordinaires  du  pais  ?  Tout  le
meilleur  poiffon  &  la  chair  ne  fe  mangeant  ordinaire-
ment  qu'a  tels  feftins?  Ou  en  outre  pour  le  plus
fouuent,  on  exige  des  affiftans,  des  prefens  &  des
ceremonies, qu'on a bien de la peine d'excufer


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TJON,  i639  163

remedies  for  their  diseases.  This  idea  [136]  is  the
pretext  that  some  of  the  older  men  and  Captains
assume  for  not  yet  yielding  to  the  admonitions  of  the
holy  Ghost.  He  who  so  often  knocks  at  the  ear  will
open  the  door  of  the  heart  when  it  shall  please  him.

Besides  the  Ondinoncs  or  Desires,  of  which  we
have  just  spoken,  dictated  by  the  demon  who  appears
under  some  borrowed  form,  there  are  other  secrets
and  desires,  less  important,  that  come  from  certain
dreams,  of  which  they  believe  their  demons  to  be
the  authors,  which  they  dare  not  refuse  to  obey,  at
least  fearing  to  expose  themselves  to  the  risk  of  some
great  misfortune.  Those  most  eminent  in  judgment
and  experience,  among  our  Christians,  have  given  us
to  understand  that  hardly  any  dance  or  feast  in  the
country  is  given  that  does  not  come  from  this  same
theory  of  the  demon;  whence  it  happens  that  all
these  things  are  looked  upon  as  so  august,  that  we
would  not  do  more  for  the  sake  of  the  holiest  and
most  sacred  of  our  mysteries.

If  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  children  wish  to
enjoy  themselves,  and  dance  some  of  the  dances  they
have  seen  danced  at  their  ceremonies,  they  are  imme-
diately chided  and  reproved  [137]  very  roughly  for  it,
as  would  happen  in  France  if  people  were  seen  pro-
faning some  holy  thing,  which  ought  not  to  have  any
other  use  than  that  to  which  it  is  consecrated.

What  is  to  be  said  on  this  subject  to  our  poor
Christians,  when  they  ask  if  they  may  be  present  at
the  feasts,  which  are  the  only  extraordinary  repasts
of  the  country,  all  the  best  fish  and  meat  being  usu-
ally eaten  at  such  feasts?  There,  besides,  they  usu-
ally exact,  from  those  who  attend,  presents  and  cere-
monies that  one  can hardly"  exonerate  from  being


164  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

d'hommage  rendu  a  ce  cruel  tyran  &  vfurpateur  de
1' empire  de  Dieu :  voire  mefme  que  plufieurs  a  ces
feftins  f emblent  de  veritables  facrifices,  fur  tout  quand
il  s'agit  d'vn  chien  qui  fe  tue,  &  fe  mange  particu-
lieremet  en  quelques  rencontres,  auec  telles  circon-
ftances  &  ceremonies,  qu'il  ne  femble  pas  qu'on  en
puiffe  faire  vn  autre  iugement.  Mais  ce  n'eft  pas
maintenant  dequoy  il  eft  queftion,  venons  a  d'autres
niftoires.

Vne  femme  natifue  de  ce  bourg,  mais  marine  dans
vn  autre  prochain  nomine*  Angtftenc,  fortant  vne
nuidt  de  fa  cabane  auec  vne  fienne  petite  fille  entre
fes  bras,  au  temps  que  Ton  faifoit  dans  le  bourg  vne
[138]  fefle  femblable  a  celle  que  ie  m'en  vay  racon-
ter:  veifl  en  vn  inflant,  dit-elle,  la  Lune  fondre  fur
fa  tefte,  qui  auffi-toft  luy  parut  comme  vne  belle
grande  femme,  tenant  vne  petite  fille  femblable  a  la
fienne  entre  fes  bras.

Ie  fuis,  luy  dit  ce  fpedtre,  Timmortel  feigneur
general  de  ces  contr^es,  &  de  ceux  qui  y  habitent:
en  foy  dequoy  ie  veux  &  ordonne  que  tous  les  quar-
tiers  de  mon  domaine  ceux  qui  y  habitent  t*  off  rent
des  prefents,  qui  foient  du  creu  de  leur  pais.  Des
Khionontaterons  ou  Nation  du  petun :  des  Attitfanda-
rons  ou  Nation  neutre,  des  robes  d'fctay:  des  Aski-
ctfaneronons,  ou  Sorciers,  vne  ceinture  &  chauffes,
auec  leur  ornement  de  por[c]s-efpics :  des  Ehonkero-
nons  ou  de  ceux  de  rifle,  vne  peau  de  cerf.  Et  con-
tinue ainfi  a  luy  nommer  quelques  autres  nations,
dont  il  vouloit  que  de  chacune  on  luy  fit  quelque
prefent,  &  entr'autres  nomma  les  Franfois  qui  habi-
toient  en  ce  pais,  comme  nous  dirons  incontinent.

La  folemnite'  qui  fe  fait  maintenant  dans  le  bourg


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  165

homage  rendered  to  this  cruel  tyrant  and  usurper  of
the  empire  of  God,  especially  as  many  of  these  feasts
seem  to  be  veritable  sacrifices, —  above  all,  when  it
is  a  question  of  killing  a  dog  and  eating  it,  especially
in  some  cases,  with  such  details  and  ceremonies,  that
it  does  not  seem  as  if  one  could  come  to  any  other
conclusion.  But  that  is  not  the  question  now;  let  us
come  to  other  stories.

A  woman,  born  in  this  village,  but  married  in
another,  near  by,  named  Angoutenc,  going  out  one
night  from  her  cabin  with  one  of  her  little  daughters
in  her  arms,  at  a  time  when  they  were  celebrating
in  the  village  a  [138]  feast  like  that  I  have  just
described,  saw  in  an  instant,  she  said,  the  Moon  stoop
down  from  above,  forthwith  appearing  to  her  like  a
beautiful  tall  woman,  holding  in  her  arms  a  little
girl  like  her  own.

"  I  am,"  quoth  this  specter  to  her,  "  the  immortal
seignior  general  of  these  countries,  and  of  those  who
inhabit  them;  in  testimony  whereof  I  desire  and
order  that  in  all  quarters  of  my  domain,  those  who
dwell  therein  shall  offer  thee  presents  which  must  be
the  product  of  their  own  country, — from  the  Khio-
nontaterons  or  tobacco  Nation,  some  tobacco;  from
the  Attiwandarons  or  neutral  Nation,  some  robes  of
outay;8  from  the  Askicwaneronons,  or  Sorcerers,  a
belt  and  leggings,  with  their  porcupine  ornaments ;
from  the  Ehonkeronons  or  Islanders,  a  deer  skin."
Thus  it  continued  to  name  to  her  certain  other
nations,  each  one  of  which  it  ordered  to  make  her
some  present,  and,  among  others,  named  the  French
who  dwelt  in  this  country,  as  we  shall  soon  relate.

■  *  The  feast  which  is  now  being  solemnized  in  the
town  "  (adds  this  Demon)  "  is  very  acceptable  to  me,


166  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J t  SUITES [Vol.17

(adioufte  ce  Demon)  m'eft  fort  agreable;  &  ie  pre-
tends bien  que  Ton  en  faffe  plufieurs  femblables  dans
tous  les  autres  [139]  endroits  &  bourgs  du  pays.  Au
refte,  luy  dit-il,  ie  t'ayme;  &  en  cefte  confideratio  ie
veux  que  dorefnauat  tu  me  fois  femblable,  &  que
comme  ie  fuis  tout  de  feu,  que  tu  fois  aufli  au  moins
en  couleur  de  feu.  Et  la  deffus  luy  ordone  vn  bonet
rouge,  vne  plume  rouge,  vne  ceinture,  chauffes,  fou-
liers,  &  le  refte  de  fes  veftements  auec  leurs  orne-
mens  rouges:  qui  eft  en  effet  l'appareil  auec  lequel
elle  parut  dans  la  ceremonie  qui  fut  faite  en  fuite
a  fon  occafion.

Cefte  pauure  creature  retourne  en  fa  cabane,  &
aufli-toft  qu'elle  y  eft  arriu6e,  la  voila  par  terre  auec
vn  tournoyement  de  tefte,  &  vne  contraction  de  nerfs,
qui  fit  iuger  qu'elle  eftoit  malade  d'vne  maladie,
dont  le  remede  eft  vne  ceremonie,  qui  en  la  langue  de
nos  barbares  s'appelle  Ononhtfaroia,  ou  tournoyement
de  tefte ;  mot  pris  du  premier  f ymptome  de  cefte  mala-
die, ou  pluftoft  belle  fuperfitio.  La  malade  fuft  con-
firmee en  cefte  creance,  ne  voyant  en  fonge  qu'allees
&  venues,  &  clameurs  par  fa  cabane;  ce  qui  l'a  fit
refoudre  de  demander  au  public  qu'on  luy  celebraft
cefte  fefte.

Sa  deuotion,  ou  pluftoft  celle  du  diable  pour  nous
faire  defpit  &  trauerfer  les  affaires  [140]  du  Chrifti-
anifme  qui  eftoient  en  leur  premier  luftre  &  efclat,
la  porta  a  s'adreffer  a  ce  bourg  icy  ou  nous  fommes
d'Offofane  ou  refidence  de  la  Conception,  d'oii,  comme
nous  auons  dit,  elle  eftoit  natifue.  On  vient  done
de  fa  part  en  faire  la  propofition  aux  Capitaines,  qui
auffi-toft  affemblent  le  confeil.  Ou  il  fut  declare^
que  cefte  affaire  eftoit  vne  de  celles  qui  eftoient  des


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6Sg  167

and  I  desire  that  many  like  it  be  held  in  all  the  other
[i  39]  quarters  and  villages  of  the  country.  Besides, "
it  informs  her,  "  I  love  thee,  and  on  that  account  I
wish  that  thou  shouldst  henceforth  be  like  me ;  and,
as  I  am  wholly  of  fire,  I  desire  that  thou  be  also  at
least  of  the  color  of  fire ; ' '  and  thereupon  it  ordains
for  her  a  red  cap,  a  red  plume,  a  belt,  leggings,  shoes,
and  the  rest  of  her  clothes  with  red  ornaments ;  this
is,  indeed,  the  garb  in  which  she  appeared  at  the
ceremony  that  afterward  was  solemnized  for  her
benefit.

This  poor  creature  returned  to  her  cabin,  and  no
sooner  had  she  reached  it  than  behold  her  prostrated
with  a  giddiness  in  the  head  and  a  contraction  of  the
muscles,  which  made  them  conclude  that  she  was
sick  of  a  disease  of  which  the  remedy  is  a  ceremony,
which  is  called,  in  the  language  of  our  barbarians,
Ononhwaroia,  or  turning  round  the  head, — a  name
taken  from  the  first  symptom  of  this  disease,  or
rather,  this  pretty  superstition.9  The  sick  woman
was  confirmed  in  this  belief  by  seeing  in  her  dreams
only  goings  and  comings  and  outcries  through  her
cabin;  this  made  her  resolve  to  demand  in  public
that  they  should  celebrate  this  feast  for  her.

Her  devotion  —  or  rather  the  purpose  of  the  devil
to  spite  us,  and  to  thwart  the  affairs  [140]  of  Chris-
tianity, which  were  in  their  first  splendor  and  glory  —
prompted  her  to  address  herself  to  this  village  where
we  are,  Ossosane,  or  residence  of  la  Conception,  of
which,  as  we  have  said,  she  was  a  native.  They
came,  then,  in  her  behalf,  to  make  the  proposition  to
its  Captains,  who  immediately  summoned  the  coun-
cil. There  it  was  declared  that  this  affair  was  one
of  those  most  important  to  the  welfare  of  the  coun-


168  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

plus  importances  pour  le  bien  du  pais,  &  qu'il  fal-
loit  bien  fe  donner  de  garde  de  manquer  en  telle
occafion,  de  donner  tout  contentement  &  fatisfadtion
a  la  malade.

Le  lendemain  matin  on  publie  1'  affaire  par  le
bourg,  &  exhorte-on  puiffamment,  qu'on  euft  a  aller
promptement  querir  la  malade,  &  a  f e  preparer  a  la
fefte.  On  y  court  pluftoft  que  d'y  aller,  de  forte  que
fur  le  midy  la  voila  qu'elle  arriue,  ou  pluftoft  qu'on
la  porte  fur  les  efpaules,  dans  vne  certaine  efpece  de
hotte,  auec  vn  conuoy  de  vingt-cinq  ou  trente  per-
fonnes  qui  fe  tuoient  de  chanter.

Vn  peu  deuant  qu'elle  arriuaft,  on  affemble  le  con-
feil  general,  auquel  nous  fufmes  inuitez.  Trois  de
nos  Peres  s'y  en  vont  fans  fcauoir  dequoy  il  eftoit
queftion.  D'abord  [141]  on  leur  donne  a  entendre
qu'on  auoit  defire"  de  nous  voir  en  ce  confeil,  pour
fcauoir  noftre  aduis  fur  la  proportion  qu'vne  telle
malade  auoit  fait,  &  ce  que  nous  en  penlions.  La
ref ponce  &  fubftance  fut  qu'ils  ne  pouuoient  faire  vne
plus  mauuaife  affaire  pour  le  pays :  que  c'eftoient  des
hommages  qu'ils  continuoient  de  rendre  aux  malins
efprits,  defquels  par  confequent  ils  confirmoient  de
plus  en  plus  l'empire  fur  eux,  &  fur  le  pais,  &  qu'il
ne  leur  pouuoit  arriuer  que  mal-heur,  continuant  de
feruir  vn  li  mauuais  maiftre.

Le  principal  Capitaine  qui  fous  main  dirigeoit
toute  1' affaire,  homme  adroit  &  delie*  fi  iamais  la  terre
en  porta,  au  lieu  de  parler  a  propos  de  ce  que  nous
auions  dit,  s'adreffe  a  toute  l'affembl6e,  &  fe  met  a
crier,  courage  done  ieuneffe,  courage  femmes,  cou-
rage mes  freres,  rendons  a  noftre  pais  ce  feruice  li
neceffaire  &  important,  fuiuant  les  couftumes  de  nos


1639-40]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  169

try,  and  that  they  certainly  ought  to  avoid  any  fail-
ure, on  such  an  occasion,  to  give  every  pleasure  and
satisfaction  to  the  sick  woman.

The  next  morning,  the  matter  was  published
throughout  the  village,  and  people  were  vigorously
exhorted  to  go  promptly  to  bring  the  sick  woman,
and  to  prepare  themselves  for  the  feast.  They  ran
thither,  rather  than  walked,  so  that  towards  noon
she  arrived, —  or,  rather,  she  was  carried  upon  their
shoulders  in  some  kind  of  basket,  with  an  escort  of
twenty-five  or  thirty  persons  who  were  killing  them-
selves with  singing.

A  little  while  before  she  arrived,  the  general  coun-
cil was  assembled,  to  which  we  were  invited.  Three
of  our  Fathers  went  to  it  without  knowing  the  sub-
ject for  discussion.  At  the  outset,  [141]  we  were
informed  that  they  desired  to  see  us  at  this  council  in
order  to  get  our  advice  upon  the  proposition  that
such  a  sick  woman  had  made,  and  to  know  what  we
thought  of  it.  The  substance  of  the  response  was,
that  they  could  not  do  a  worse  thing  for  the  coun-
try,—  that  they  were  continuing  to  render  homage
to  evil  spirits,  whose  empire,  consequently,  they
were  more  and  more  confirming  over  themselves  and
over  the  country;  and  that  only  misfortune  could
happen  to  them  if  they  continued  to  serve  so  bad  a
master.

The  principal  Captain,  who  secretly  directed  the
whole  affair, — an  adroit  and  crafty  man,  if  ever  the
earth  bore  one, — instead  of  speaking  in  reference  to
what  we  had  said,  addressed  the  entire  assembly,  and
began  to  exclaim,  il  Courage,  then,  young  men;  cour-
age, women ;  courage,  my  brothers ;  let  us  render  to
our  country  this  service,  so  necessary  and  important,


170  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  17

anceftres.  Et  continue  vn  grand  difcours  de  mefme
air  &  accent,  puis  d'vne  voix  vn  peu  plus  baffe,  s'a-
dreffant  a  ceux  qui  eftoient  a  l'entour  de  luy:  c'eft,
dit-il,  le  confeil  que  i'auois  donne"  a  mes  nepueux  les
Francois,  rAutomne  paffe\  Vous  verrez  c6t  Hyuer,
[142]  leur  difois-ie  plufieurs  chofes  qui  vous  deplai-
ront,  des  Ononhtfaroia,  des  tftaerohi,  &  femblables
ceremonies:  ne  dites  mot  ie  vous  prie,  leur  difois-
ie  ne  faites  pas  femblant  de  voir  ce  qui  fe  pafTera,
auec  le  teps  cela  pourra  changer.  On  nous  a  dit
autrefois  aux  trois  Riuieres  &  a  Quebec,  adioufla-il,
que  pourueu  que  dans  quatre  ans  Ton  creuft,  c'eftoit
affez.

Comme  il  continuoit  femblables  difcours,  entrent
les  deputez  de  la  part  de  la  malade,  qui  venoient  figni-
fler  fon  arriu6e  au  confeil,  &  dire  de  fa  part  qu'on  luy
enuoyafl  deux  hommes  &  deux  filles  parses  de  robes
&  de  coliers  de  telle  &  telle  facon,  auec  tels  &  tels
poiff ons  &  pref ents  en  main ;  &  ce  pour  apprendre
de  fa  propre  bouche  fes  defirs,  &  ce  qu'il  luy  falloit
pour  fa  guerifon :  aufli-toft  propofe\  auffi  toft  execute.

Deux  hommes  done  &  deux  filles  s'en  vont  chargez
de  tout  ce  que  la  malade  auoit  defire\  &  retournerent
aufli-toft  nuds  d'vn  coite*  comme  la  main,  excepte"  le
braye;  tout  ce  qu'on  auoit  porte,  eftant  demeure  a  la
malade;  mais  de  1' autre  chargez  de  demandes  qui
eftoient  les  importantes,  &  celles  dont  raccompliffe-
ment  [143]  deuoit  commencer  le  recouurement  de  fa
fant£,  ce  qu'on  luy  auoit  porte"  ne  paffant  que  pour
compliment  &  agreement  de  fon  arriuee.  Les  depu-
tez done  declarent  vingt-deux  pref  ents  qu'elle  defiroit
qu'on  luy  fift,  qui  eftoient  ceux  que  le  diable  luy
auoit  fpecifiez  en  fon  apparition,  ainfi  que  nous  auons


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  171

according  to  the  customs  of  our  ancestors ! ' '  Now
followed  a  great  speech  in  the  same  strain  and  tone ;
then,  in  a  somewhat  lower  voice,  he  said,  addressing
himself  to  those  who  were  around  him,  il  This  is  the
advice  I  gave  to  my  nephews,  the  French,  last  Au-
tumn. '  You  will  see  this  Winter,'  [142]  I  said  to
them,  '  many  things  that  will  displease  you, — the
Ononhwaroia,  the  Outaerohi,9  and  similar  ceremo-
nies; do  not  say  a  word,  I  pray  you,'  I  said  to  them;
1  pretend  not  to  see  what  shall  take  place ;  with  time,
it  may  change. '  We  were  formerly  told  at  the  three
Rivers  and  Quebec,"  he  added,  "that,  provided  we
believed  in  four  years,  it  was  enough."

As  he  continued  the  like  discourse,  the  deputies
entered  on  the  part  of  the  patient,  who  came  to  an-
nounce her  arrival  to  the  council,  and  to  say  for  her
that  they  should  send  her  two  men  and  two  girls
arrayed  in  robes  and  collars  of  such  and  such  a  fash-
ion, with  certain  fish  and  presents  in  their  hands, —
and  this,  in  order  to  learn  from  her  own  lips  her
desires  and  what  was  necessary  for  her  recovery.
No  sooner  proposed,  than  executed.

Two  men,  therefore,  and  two  girls  went,  loaded
with  all  that  the  sick  woman  had  desired,  and  imme-
diately returned, —  for  one  thing,  as  naked  as  the
hand,  except  their  clouts,  all  they  had  carried  having
been  left  with  the  sick  woman;  and,  for  another,
charged  with  demands  which  were  the  essential  ones,
and  those  the  fulfillment  of  which  [143]  should  begin
the  recovery  of  her  health,  what  had  been  carried  her
being  accepted  only  as  a  compliment,  and  a  token  of
their  pleasure  at  her  arrival.  Accordingly,  the  depu-
ties announced  twenty-two  presents  that  she  desired
they  should  give  her,  which  were  those  the  devil  had


172  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

dit  vn  peu  auparauant.  L'vn  efloit  fix  chiens  d'vne
certaine  facon  &  couleur.  Vn  autre  efloit  cinquante
pains  de  petun.  Vn  autre,  vn  grand  canot;  &  ainfi
du  re  fie,  &  entr' autre  fut  nommee  vne  couuerture
bleue,  mais  auec  cefle  circonflance,  qu'il  falloit
qu'elle  appartint  a  vn  Francois.

Le  rapport  fait  par  les  deputez,  les  Capitaines  fe
mettet  a  exhorter  tout  le  monde  de  fatisfaire  promp-
tement  aux  defirs  de  la  malade,  leur  reprefentant  &
inculquant  fans  cefle  l'importance  d'vne  telle  affaire.
On  s'y  efchauffe  de  la  forte,  que  deuant  que  nos  Peres
fuffent  fortis  de  l'afTembl^e,  on  auoit  defia  fourny
quinze  de  ces  prefens.

On  attaque  cependant  nos  Peres  a  diuerfes  occafions
&  reprifes,  &  les  exhorte-on  de  ne  pas  efpargner  au
moins  ce  qui  les  regardoit  &  dependoit  d'eux.  Nos
Peres  [144]  a  cela  refpondent  qu'on  fe  mocque  de
nous,  &  que  fi  c'eft  pour  ce  fuiet  qu'on  nous  a  appel-
lez  au  confeil,  que  le  malade  s'en  peut  bien  retour-
ner,  fi  fans  noflre  contribution  &  noflre  hommage
rendu  au  diable  &  a  fes  ordonnances  elle  ne  peut
guerir.

Nonobflant  cela,  vne  demie-heure  apres  que  nos
Peres  furent  retournez  a  la  cabane,  vne  Capitaine  y
vint  de  la  part  du  confeil :  pour  nous  dire  que  tout
efloit  fourny,  excepte"  la  couuerture  qu'on  attendoit
de  nous,  fuiuant  le  defir  de  la  malade.  Cefle  recharge
n'eut  autre  refponfe,  finon  qu'en  cas  qu'on  ne  vou-
lufl  pas  pafler  outre  en  cefle  ceremonie,  qui  n' efloit
encore  qu'a  fon  commencement,  &  qu'on  voulufl  ren-
uoyer  la  malade  d'ou  elle  efloit  venue,  qu'en  ce  cas
nous  ferions  volon tiers  au  public  prefent  d'vne  cou-
uerture, ou  de  quelque  autre  chofe  de  plus  grande
valeur.


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  T/ON,  i6jg  173

specified  to  her  in  the  apparition,  as  we  related  a
little  earlier.  One  was  six  dogs  of  a  certain  form
and  color;  another  was  fifty  cakes  of  tobacco;  an-
other, a  large  canoe ;  and  so  on, —  among  other  things,
was  named  a  blue  blanket,  but  with  this  condition,
that  it  must  belong  to  a  Frenchman.

The  report  having  been  made  by  the  deputies,  the
Captains  began  to  exhort  every  one  to  satisfy  prompt-
ly the  desires  of  the  sick  woman,  constantly  repre-
senting and  inculcating  upon  them  the  importance
of  such  a  matter.  They  became  so  excited  over  it
that,  before  our  Fathers  went  out  of  the  assembly,
fifteen  of  these  presents  had  already  been  furnished.

Meanwhile,  our  Fathers  were  repeatedly  attacked,
on  various  occasions,  and  exhorted  not  to  spare  what
at  least  concerned  them,  and  depended  upon  them.
Our  Fathers  [144]  answered  to  this  that  they  were
making  sport  of  us,  and  that,  if  it  were  for  this  pur-
pose that  we  had  been  called  to  the  council,  the  sick
woman  might  as  well  return,  if,  without  our  con-
tribution and  our  homage  rendered  to  the  devil  and
to  his  ordinances,  she  could  not  recover.

Notwithstanding  this,  a  half -hour  after  our  Fathers
had  returned  to  the  cabin,  a  Captain  came  there  on
behalf  of  the  council,  to  tell  us  that  everything  was
furnished  except  the  blanket  they  were  expecting
from  us,  according  to  the  desire  of  the  sick  woman.
This  second  charge  received  no  answer  except  that,
in  case  they  would  go  no  further  in  this  ceremony,
which  was  still  only  in  its  beginning,  and  if  they  would
send  the  sick  woman  back  to  the  place  whence  she
came,  we  would,  in  such  case,  willingly  make  to  the
public  a  present  of  a  blanket,  or  of  some  other  article
of  greater  value.


174  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

Voila  la  premiere  ceremonie  de  la  fefle.  Ie  luy
eufTe  volontiers  done  le  nom  de  premier  adte,  fi  i'euffe
peu  eflre  afTeure  de  la  cataftrophe  de  toute  l'affaire,
pour  le  qualifier  felon  fon  efpece ;  ce  terme  toutefois
nous  feruira  d'orefnauant.

[145]  Le  fecond  adte  done,  ou  la  feconde  ceremonie
de  cefte  fefte,  fut  que  tous  les  prefents  eflans  fournis
&  portez  a  la  malade,  auec  les  formes  ordinaires  dont
nous  auons  parle"  cy-deuant,  fur  le  foir  on  fit  vn  cry
public,  pour  aduertir  toutes  les  cabanes  &  toutes  les
families  de  tenir  leurs  feux,  allumez  &  les  places  de
part  &  d'autre  toutes  difpofe*es  pour  la  premiere
vifite  que  la  malade  y  deuoit  faire  fur  le  foir.

Le  Soleil  done  eftant  couch6,  au  fon  de  la  voix  des
Capitaines  qui  redoubloient  le  cry,  on  attife  les  feux,
&  les  entretient-on  auec  grand  foin,  la  malade  faifant
recommander  par  tout  qu'on  les  faffe  les  plus  grands
&  les  meilleurs  qui  fe  pourra,  &  que  cela  feruiroit
beaucoup  a  fon  foulagement.

L'heure  venue  qu'il  luy  fallut  partir,  fes  nerfs,  ce
dit-on  fe  deffererent,  &  la  liberte"  de  marcher  mieux
qu'auparauant  luy  fut  rendue,  mais  il  femble  plus
affeur6  que  cela  ne  fe  fit  qu'apres  auoir  paffe*  par  quel-
ques  feux,  ce  qui  eft  l'ordinaire;  quoy  que  s'en  foit
deux  Sauuages  fe  tinrent  toufiours  a  fes  coftez  pen-
dant fa  promenade,  luy  f ouftenans  chacun  vne  main ;
&  elle  ainfi  [148  i.e.,  146]  appuy£e,  marcha  au  milieu
des  deux,  &  s'en  alia  par  toutes  les  cabanes  du  bourg.

Dans  les  cabanes  des  Sauuages,  qui  font  en  longueur
&  en  facon  comme  des  berceaux  de  jardins,  les  feux
font  au  beau  milieu  de  la  largeur ;  &  plufieurs  feux
dans  la  longueur  felon  le  nombre  des  families,  &  la
grandeur  de  la  cabane,  diftats  ordinairemet  de  deux


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  175

Such  was  the  first  ceremony  of  the  feast.  I  would
prefer  to  call  it  the  first  act,  if  I  could  be  sure  of  the
catastrophe  of  the  whole  affair,  that  I  might  accu-
rately characterize  it ;  this  term,  however,  will  serve
us  henceforward.

[145]  The  second  act,  then,  or  the  second  ceremony
of  this  feast,  was  that  —  all  the  presents  being  fur-
nished and  carried  to  the  patient,  with  the  customary
forms  of  which  we  have  spoken  above  —  towards
evening  public  notice  was  given,  warning  all  the
cabins  and  all  the  families  to  keep  their  fires  lighted,
and  the  places  on  both  sides  of  them  all  ready  for
the  first  visit  which  the  sick  woman  was  to  make
there,  in  the  evening.

Accordingly,  the  Sun  having  set,  upon  hearing  the
voices  of  the  Captains,  who  redoubled  their  cries,  all
stirred  up  their  fires,  and  maintained  them  with  great
care, — the  patient  having  caused  it  to  be  recom-
mended everywhere  that  these  should  be  made  as
large  and  bright  as  possible,  and  that  this  would  avail
much  for  her  relief.

The  hour  having  come  when  she  was  to  set  out,
her  muscles,  it  was  said,  relaxed,  and  the  freedom  to
walk,  even  better  than  before,  was  restored  to  her ;
but  it  seems  more  certain  that  this  did  not  occur  until
after  she  had  passed  through  several  fires,  which  usu-
ally results  thus.  Be  that  as  it  may,  two  Savages
remained  beside  her  all  the  time  during  her  prom-
enade, each  one  holding  up  one  of  her  hands ;  and,
thus  [148  i.e.,  146]  supported,  she  walked  between
the  two,  and  went  through  all  the  cabins  of  the
village.

In  the  cabins  of  the  Savages,  which  are  in  length
and  form  like garden  arbors, the  fires  are  in  the


176  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  17

a  trois  pas.  C'eft  par  le  milieu  des  cabanes,  &  par
confequent  par  le  beau  milieu  des  feux  que  paffa  &
marcha  la  malade  pieds  &  jambes  nues,  c'eft  a  dire,
par  plus  de  deux  &  trois  cent  feux,  fans  fe  faire
aucun  mal,  voire  fe  plaignant  continuellement  du  peu
de  feu  qu'elle  trouuoit  qui  ne  la  foulageoit  point  con-
tre  le  froid  qu'elle  fentoit  aux  pieds  &  aux  iambes.
Ceux  qui  luy  fouftenoient  les  mains  pafferent  aux
deux  coflez  du  feu;  &  l'ayant  conduite  de  la  forte
par  toutes  les  cabanes,  ils  la  ramenerent  au  lieu  d'ou
elle  effcoit  partie,  fcauoir  en  la  cabane  ou  elle  auoit
fa  retraidte,  &  ainfi  fe  finit  le  fecond  Adte.

Suiuit  le  troifiefme,  qui  felon  les  formes  &  cou-
ftumes  confifle  en  vne  manie  generale  de  tous  ceux
du  bourg ;  qui  excepte*  peut-eftre  quelques  Vieillards,
f e  mettent  a  courir  par  tout  ou  a  paffe"  la  malade ;
matafchiez  [147]  ou  barboiiillez  a  leur  mode,  auec  des
deformitez  efpouuantables  de  vifage,  a  l'enuy  les  vns
des  autres,  faifant  par  tout  vn  tintamarre,  &  des  ex-
trauagances  telles,  que  pour  les  exprimer,  &  les
mieux  donner  a  entendre,  ie  ne  fcay  fi  ie  les  dois
comparer,  ou  a  nos  mafcarades  les  plus  extrauagants,
dont  on  ait  oiiy  parler,  ou  aux  baccantes  des  anciens,
ou  pluftoft  aux  furies  d'Enfer.  Ils  entrent  done  par
tout,  &  ont  pendant  le  temps  de  la  fefle  fur  tous  les
foirs  &  les  nuicts  des  trois  iours  qu'elle  dure,  liberty
de  tout  faire,  fans  qu'on  leur  ofe  rien  dire.  S'ils
trouuent  des  chaudieres  fur  le  feu,  ils  les  reuerfent;
caflent  les  pots  de  terre,  affomment  les  chiens,  jettent
le  feu  &  les  cendres  par  tout,  fi  bien  &  fi  beau,  que
fouuent  les  cabanes  &  les  bourgs  entiers  en  bruflent.
Mais  le  poind;  eftant,  que  tant  plus  on  fait  de  bruit
&  de  tempefle, tant  plus la perfonne malade en


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  177

very  middle  of  their  breadth,  and  there  are  several
fires  along  its  length,  according  to  the  number  of
families  and  the  size  of  the  cabin,  usually  two  or  three
paces  apart.  It  was  through  the  middle  of  the  cab-
ins, and  consequently  through  the  very  middle  of  the
fires,  that  the  sick  woman  marched,  her  feet  and  legs
bare,  —  that  is  to  say,  through  two  or  three  hundred
fires, — without  doing  herself  any  harm,  even  com-
plaining all  the  time  how  little  heat  she  felt,  which
did  not  relieve  her  of  the  cold  she  felt  in  her  feet  and
legs.  Those  who  held  up  her  hands  passed  on  either
side  of  the  fires ;  and,  having  led  her  thus  through
all  the  cabins,  they  took  her  back  to  the  place  whence
she  had  departed,  namely,  to  the  cabin  where  she
was  sheltered ;  and  thus  ended  the  second  Act.

The  third  followed,  which,  according  to  forms  and
customs,  consists  in  a  general  mania  of  all  the  people
of  the  village,  who, —  except,  perhaps,  a  few  Old
Men, — undertake  to  run  wherever  the  sick  woman
has  passed,  adorned  [147]  or  daubed  in  their  fashion,
vying  with  one  another  in  the  frightful  contortions
of  their  faces, — making  everywhere  such  a  din,  and
indulging  in  such  extravagances,  that,  to  explain
them  and  make  them  better  understood,  I  do  not
know  if  I  ought  not  to  compare  them,  either  to  the
most  extravagant  of  our  maskers  that  one  has  ever
heard  of,  or  to  the  bacchantes  of  the  ancients,  or
rather  to  the  furies  of  Hell.  They  enter,  then,
everywhere,  and  have  during  the  time  of  the  feast,
in  all  the  evenings  and  nights  of  the  three  days  that
it  lasts,  liberty  to  do  anything,  and  no  one  dares  say
a  word  to  them.  If  they  find  kettles  over  the  fire,
they  upset  them ;  they  break  the  earthen  pots,  knock
down  the  dogs,  throw  fire  and  ashes  everywhere,  so


178  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  17

reflent  de  f  oulagement,  on  ne  f e  f  oucie  de  rien :  &
chacun  fe  tue  a  faire  pis  que  fon  compagnon.

Nos  cabanes  qui  font  dans  les  bourgs,  ne  font  pas
exemptes  des  fruidts  d'vne  telle  fefte.  La  porte  de
la  cabane  de  la  Refidence  de  faindt  Iofeph  fut  bris6e
trois  fois  [148]  en  vne  pareille  ceremonie.  Pour
cefte  refidence  icy  ou  ie  fuis,  de  la  Conception,  nous
auons  efte"  plus  en  repos  pendant  telles  tempeftes,
pour  eflre  efloignez  du  bourg  d'enuiron  vne  port6e
de  moufquet.  Voila  quel  eft  le  troifiefme  adte,  ve-
nons  au  quatriefme.

Le  Soleil  du  lendemain  eftant  leue,  tout  le  monde
fe  difpofe  a  aller  derechef  par  toutes  les  cabanes  ou
la  malade  a  pafs6,  &  particulierement  en  celle  ou  elle
eft  retiree.  Et  ce  pour  propofer  a  chaque  feu,  fon
propre  &  particulier  defir  ou  Ondinonc,  felon  que
chacun  en  peut  auoir  eu  lumiere  &  efclaircifTement
en  fonge;  non  pas  toutefois  ouuertement,  mais  par
Enigmes.  Par  exemple,  quelqu'vn  dira  ce  que  ie
defire  &  que  ie  cherche,  c'eft  ce  qui  porte  vn  lac
dedans  foy,  &  par  cela  il  entend  vne  courge  ou  cale-
bace.  Vn  autre  dira,  ce  que  ie  demande  fe  voit  a
mes  yeux,  qui  feront  marquez  de  diuerfes  couleurs,
&  par  ce  que  le  mefme  mot  Huron,  qui  fignifie  ceil,
fignifie  auffi  de  la  raffade,  on  a  entree  a  deuiner  qu'il
en  defire  fcauoir  quelque  forte  de  grains  de  cefte
nature,  &  de  diuerfes  couleurs.  Vn  autre  donnera
a  entendre  qu'il  defire  vn  feftin  d'Andactfandet,  c'eft
[149]  a  dire,  force  fornications  &  adul teres.  Son
Enigme  eftant  deuin6,  on  ne  manque  pas  de  perfon-
nes  qui  fatisfont  a  fon  delir.

Ie  ne  m'eftonne  plus  que  Satan  ait  fi  fort  agreable
cefte  fefte  &  folemnite*,  felon  qu'il  le  tefmoigna  a


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  179

thoroughly  that  often  the  cabins  and  entire  villages
burn  down.  But  the  point  being  that,  the  more  noise
and  uproar  one  makes,  the  more  relief  the  sick  per-
son will  experience,  they  have  no  concern  for  any-
thing, and  each  one  kills  himself  to  do  worse  than
his  companion.

Our  cabins  that  are  in  the  villages  are  not  exempt
from  the  results  of  such  a  feast.  The  door  of  the
cabin  of  the  Residence  of  saint  Joseph  was  broken
down  three  times  [148]  in  a  like  ceremony.  As  for
this  residence  here  where  I  am,  that  of  la  Concep-
tion, we  have  been  more  quiet  during  such  storms,
because  we  are  about  a  musket-shot  from  the  village.
This,  then,  is  the  third  act;  let  us  come  to  the  fourth.

The  next  day's  Sun  having  risen,  every  one  pre-
pares to  go  again  through  all  the  cabins  where  the
sick  woman  has  passed,  and  particularly  to  that  one
in  which  she  is  harbored.  This  is  for  the  purpose
of  proposing  at  each  fire  each  person's  own  and  spe-
cial desire  or  ' '  Ondinonc, " —  according  as  he  is  able  to
get  information  and  enlightenment  by  dreams, —  not
openly,  however,  but  through  Riddles.  For  example,
some  one  will  say,  "  What  I  desire  and  what  I  am
seeking  is  that  which  bears  a  lake  within  itself ;  "  and
by  this  is  intended  a  pumpkin  or  calabash.  Another
will  say,  "  What  I  ask  for  is  seen  in  my  eyes, —  it
will  be  marked  with  various  colors;"  and  because
the  same  Huron  word  that  signifies  '  ■  eye  ' '  also  sig-
nifies * '  glass  bead, ' '  this  is  a  clue  to  divine  what  he
desires, — namely,  some  kind  of  beads  of  this  mate-
rial, and  of  different  colors.  Another  will  intimate
that  he  desires  an  Andacwandet  feast, — that  is  [149]
to  say,  many  fornications  and  adulteries.  His  Riddle
being  guessed,  there  is  no  lack  of  persons  to  satisfy
his  desire.


180  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.17

cefte  pauure  mal-heureufe  creature  dont  il  s'agift:
puis  qu'en  icelle  toutes  les  facttltez  interieures  &
exterieures  femblent  trauailler  a  luy  rendre  vne
efpece  d'hommage  &  de  reconnoiffance.  Et  il  femble
qu'entre  toutes  les  ceremonies  de  la  fefle,  il  fafle  vn
particulier  eflat  de  celle  cy,  ou  l'efprit  mefme  tra-
uaille  de  la  forte  a  fon  occafion,  comme  il  fe  peut
voir  en  ce  qui  fuit.

Auffi-toft  done  que  l'Enigme  eft  propose^  auffi-
toft  on  s'efuertue  de  le  deuiner :  &  en  difant  e'eft  cela,
en  mefme  temps  on  le  jette  a  la  perfonne  qui  de-
mande  &  propofe  fes  defirs.  Si  e'eft  en  effet  fon  mot,
elle  s'efcrie  qu'on  l'a  trouue\  &  la  deffus  e'eft  vne
refioiiiffance  de  toute  la  cabane,  qui  fe  met  d'aife  a
frapper  contre  les  efcorces,  qui  font  les  murailles  de
leurs  cabanes :  &  en  mefme  temps,  la  malade  fe  fent
foulag6e,  &  ce  autant  de  fois  qu'on  trouue  les  defirs
de  ceux  qui  les  ont  propose  par  Enigme.  II  fe  trou-
ua  dans  le  confeil  qui  fut  tenu  [150]  pour  conclufion
de  cefte  prefente  ceremonie,  ou  cela  s'examina  felon
les  formes  &  couftumes  que  cent  Enigmes  auoient
efte"  tro[u]u£es  cefte  fois.

Que  fi  ce  que  Ton  deuine  n'eft  pas  le  mot  de  celuy
qui  a  propofe"  l'Enigme,  il  dit  qu'on  en  a  approch6,
mais  que  ce  ne  l'eft  pas:  il  ne  laiffe  pas  pour  cela
d'emporter  ce  qu'on  luy  a  donne\  pour  le  monftrer  par
les  autres  cabanes,  &  par  la  leur  faire  voir  &  donner
mieux  a  entendre  que  ce  n'efl  pas  cela,  afin  que  par
l'exclufion  de  plufieurs  chofes  on  ait  plus  d' entree  a
dire  ce  que  e'eft.  II  eft  vray  qu'apres  il  reporte  ce
qu'on  luy  a  donn6,  foit  qu'on  ait  en  fin  trouue"  fon
defir,  foit  qu'on  ne  l'ait  pas  trouu6,  ne  referuant  que
ce  qui  efloit  veritablement  fon  mot. Quelques-vns


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  181

I  am  no  longer  surprised  that  Satan  is  so  greatly
pleased  with  this  feast  and  solemnity, —  as  he  declared
to  the  poor,  wretched  creature  concerned  therein, —
since  in  it  all  the  internal  and  external  faculties
apparently  strive  to  render  him  a  sort  of  homage  and
acknowledgment.  And  it  would  seem  that,  of  all
the  ceremonies  of  the  feast,  he  especially  values  this
one,  where  even  the  mind  so  labors  in  his  behalf,  as
may  be  seen  in  what  follows.

As  soon,  then,  as  the  Riddle  is  proposed,  they  im-
mediately strive  to  guess  it;  and  saying,  "  It  is  that,"
they  at  the  same  time  throw  the  object  to  the  person
who  demands  and  announces  his  desires.  If  this  is
really  his  thought,  he  exclaims  that  it  has  been  found,
and  thereupon  there  is  rejoicing  by  all  those  in  the
cabin,  who  manifest  their  delight  by  striking  against
the  pieces  of  bark  that  form  the  walls  of  their  cabins ;
at  the  same  time  the  patient  feels  relieved ;  and  this
happens  as  often  as  they  find  the  desires  of  those  who
have  proposed  them  in  Riddles.  It  was  found  in  the
council  that  was  held  [150]  as  the  conclusion  of  this
present  ceremony, —  where  this  matter  was  examined,
according  to  their  forms  and  customs, — that  a  hun-
dred Riddles  had  been  guessed  this  time.

But  if  what  is  guessed  is  not  the  answer  of  him
who  has  proposed  the  Riddle,  he  says  that  they  are
near  it,  but  that  that  is  not  it ;  he  does  not  refrain,
for  all  that,  from  carrying  away  what  has  been  given
him,  in  order  to  show  it  through  the  other  cabins,
and  thus  make  them  see  and  understand  better  that
it  is  not  that, — so  that,  by  the  exclusion  of  many
things,  one  is  better  prepared  to  tell  what  it  is.  True,
he  afterward  brings  back  what  was  given  him, —
either  because  his  desire  has  finally  been  ascertained,


182  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

obferaent  le  tout  fort  religieufement,  mais  ie  ne
doute  point  qu'il  ne  fe  gliffe  auffi  la  dedans  beau-
coup  de  frafque  &  de  friponnerie.  Tant  y  a  que
voila  le  4.  adte,  qui  auec  le  precedent  recommence
toutes  les  trois  nuidts,  &  les  trois  iours  que  dure  la
fefte.

Le  cinquiefme  ou  dernier  fe  commence  le  3.  iour.
Cela  confifte  en  vn  fecond  voyage  ou  promenade  de
la  malade  par  les  cabanes  [151]  qui  ferme  toute  la
fefte,  &  ce  pour  propofer  fon  dernier  &  principal
defir,  non  pas  ouuertement,  comme  elle  auoit  fait
d'abord  en  arriuat,  mais  par  Enigme,  comme  les
autres  ont  fait  les  iours  precedents.  C'eft  icy  ou  le
diable  triomphe,  &  fait  le  maiftre  &  le  feigneur  tout
de  bon.  Car  premierement,  cefte  pauure  mal-heu-
reufe  fortant  de  la  cabane  eft  afliftee  de  nombre  de
perfonnes,  qui  la  fuiuent,  &  de  quelques-vns  qui  vont
deuant,  tous  file  a  file,  &  vn  a  vn  fans  dire  mot,  auec
des  vifages,  des  mines  &  des  contenances  de  perfon-
nes amig6es  &  penitentes :  &  fur  tous  la  malade  qui
paroift  feule  au  milieu,  &  dont  tous  les  autres  deuant
&  derriere  font  vn  peu  efloignez ;  de  forte  que  le  voy-
ant  marcher  comme  ils  marchent,  il  eft  impoffible  de
faire  vn  autre  iugement,  finon  que  ce  font  perfonnes
qui  pretendet  de  donner  de  la  companion,  &  flechir  a
mifericorde  quelque  puiffance  fouueraine  qu'ils  re-
connoifl ent  eftre  le  principe  &  la  caufe  du  mal  de  la
perfonne  dont  il  s'agit;  &  de  la  volonte"  duquel  en
depend,  a  leur  iugement,  la  continuation  ou  la  gueri-
fon,  &  en  effedt,  c'eft  cela  mefme.

Or  il  ne  faut  pas  que  pendant  que  cefte  [152]  efpece
de  proceflion  dure,  pas  vn  Sauuage  paroiffe  au  de-
hors des  cabanes:  de  forte  que  de  fi  loing  qu'on  en


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  R  EL  A  TION,  i639  183

or  because  it  has  not,  only  reserving  what  was  really
his  thought.  Some  observe  the  whole  ceremony  very
religiously ;  but  I  do  not  doubt  that  many  tricks  and
cheats  also  creep  into  it.  At  all  events,  behold  the
4th  act, —  which,  with  the  preceding,  is  repeated  on
each  of  the  three  nights  and  the  three  days  that  the
feast  lasts.

The  fifth  or  last  is  begun  on  the  3rd  day.  This
consists  of  a  second  journey  or  promenade  by  the
sick  woman  through  the  cabins,  [151]  which  closes
the  whole  feast,  this  being  done  to  propose  her  last  and
principal  desire, — not  openly,  as  she  did  when  she
first  arrived,  but  in  a  Riddle,  as  the  others  had  done
on  the  preceding  days.  It  is  here  that  the  devil
triumphs,  and  acts  the  master  and  lord  in  earnest.
For  first,  when  this  poor  unhappy  woman  goes  out
from  her  cabin  she  is  attended  by  a  number  of  per-
sons, some  following  her,  and  some  going  before ;  all
filing  along,  one  by  one,  without  saying  a  word,  with
the  faces,  appearance,  and  attitudes  of  persons  afiiicted
and  penitent, —  and  especially  the  sick  woman,  who
appears  alone  in  their  midst,  all  the  others,  before
and  behind,  being  at  some  distance  from  her.  See-
ing them,  then,  walk  as  they  do,  it  is  impossible  to
form  any  other  opinion  than  that  they  are  persons
who  desire  to  inspire  with  compassion,  and  bend  to
mercy,  some  powerful  sovereign  whom  they  recognize
as  the  origin  and  cause  of  the  trouble  of  the  person
in  question,  and  on  whose  will  depends,  in  their
opinion,  its  continuation  or  its  cure;  and,  in  fact,
such  is  precisely  the  case.

Now  it  is  necessary  that  while  this  [152]  sort  of
procession  lasts,  not  one  Savage  should  appear  out-
side of  the  cabins,— so  that,  as  far  away  as  one  can


184  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J ^SUITES [Vol.17

voit,  ceux  qui  affiftent  le  malade,  fe  tuent  de  faire
des  fignes  &  des  geftes  qu'on  ait  a  fe  retirer,  &  a
rentrer  au  dedans.

Entree  qu'eft  la  malade  dans  les  cabanes,  c'effc  a
racompter  fa  mifere  d'vne  voix  plaintiue  &  languif-
fante:  donnant  au  refle  a  entedre  que  fa  guerifon
depend  de  la  fatisfadtion  a  fon  dernier  defir,  dont
elle  propofe  l'Enigme.  Aum-toft  vn  chacun  s'ap-
plique  a  en  trouuer  1' explication,  &  en  mefme-temps
iettent-ils  a  la  malade  ce  qu'ils  ont  penfe"  que  ce
pouuoit  eftre,  ainfi  que  nous  venons  de  declarer.

Ceux  qui  affiftent  la  maladie  ramaffent  tout;  &
fortent  chargez  de  chaudieres,  de  pots,  de  peaux,  de
robes,  de  couuertes,  de  capots,  de  coliers,  ceintures,
chauffes,  fouliers,  de  bled,  de  poiffon,  bref  de  tout
ce  qui  eft  dans  l'vfage  des  Sauuages,  &  qui  leur  eft
peu  venir  en  penf£e,  pour  arriuer  a  la  fatisfadtion  du
defir  de  la  maladie.

Voila  ce  qui  paroift,  &  non  fans  grand  fondement,
aux  yeux  efclairez  de  la  lumiere  de  la  foy,  de  veri-
tables  trophies  de  Satan ;  ou  pluftoft  vne  ceremonie
accomplie  [153]  de  foy  &  hommage  que  ces  peuples
rendent  a  celuy  qu'ils  recognoiffent  pour  fouuerain
maiftre  &  Seigneur,  d'ou  ils  eftiment  que  depend  tout
leur  bon  heur  ou  mal-heur.

En  fin,  la  malade  fait  tant,  &  donne  tant  &  tant
d'ouuertures  pour  l'explication  de  fon  Enigme,  que
Ton  trouue  fon  mot.  Et  auffi-toft  voila  vne  clameur
&  reiiouiffance  generale  de  tout  le  monde,  on  frappe
par  tout  contre  les  efcorces,  ce  ne  font  que  congratu-
lations qu'on  luy  fait ;  &  de  f a  part  des  remerciemens
de  la  fante"  qu'elle  a  recouuree.  Elle  retourne  pour
ce  fuiet  vne  troifiefme  fois  par  toutes  les  cabanes,


1639-40]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  185

see  them,  those  who  are  escorting  the  sick  person
nearly  kill  themselves  making  signs  and  gestures
that  all  must  retreat  and  go  indoors.

The  sick  woman  having  returned  to  the  cabins,
she  begins  to  relate  her  troubles  in  a  plaintive  and
languishing  voice,  giving  the  rest  to  understand  that
her  recovery  depends  upon  the  satisfaction  of  her  last
desire,  of  which  she  proposes  the  Riddle.  Each  one
straightway  applies  himself  to  ascertain  its  solution,
and  at  the  same  time  they  throw  to  the  sick  woman
whatever  they  imagine  it  may  be,  as  we  have  just
stated.

Those  who  are  attending  the  sick  woman  collect
all  these  things  and  go  out  burdened  with  kettles,
pots,  skins,  robes,  blankets,  cloaks,  necklaces,  belts,
leggings,  shoes,  corn,  fish, — in  short,  everything
that  is  used  by  the  Savages,  and  which  they  have
been  able  to  think  of,  to  attain  the  satisfaction  of  the
sick  woman's  desire.

These  appear,  and  not  without  good  cause,  to  eyes
illumined  by  the  light  of  faith,  as  veritable  trophies
of  Satan, —  or,  rather,  a  thorough  ceremony  [153]  of
faith  and  homage  that  these  peoples  render  to  him
whom  they  recognize  as  their  sovereign  master  and
Lord,  upon  whom  they  consider  that  all  their  happi-
ness or  unhappiness  depends.

Finally,  the  patient  does  so  much,  and  gives  so
many  and  such  hints  as  to  the  explanation  of  her  Rid-
dle, that  her  answer  is  found ;  and  at  once  there  is
a  general  outcry  and  rejoicing  of  all  the  people,  who
everywhere  strike  against  the  bark  walls, —  which  is
only  by  way  of  congratulations  offered  her,  and,  on
her  part,  of  thanks  for  the  health  she  has  recovered.
She  returns,  for  this  purpose,  a  third  time  through


186  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  17

apres  quoy  fe  tient  le  dernier  confeil  general,  ou  on
fait  rapport  de  tout  ce  qui  s'eft  paffe\  &  entr'autres
du  nombre  des  Enigmes  trouuez.  S'enfuit  le  dernier
prefent  de  la  part  du  public,  qui  confifte  a  parfournir
&  combler  le  dernier  defir  de  la  malade  par  deffus  ce
que  celuy  des  particuliers  qui  l'aura  deuine\  aura  peu
donner ;  &  la  fe  termine  la  ceremonie.

II  eft  a  prefumer  que  la  veritable  fin  de  cet  Acte  &
fa  cataftrophe,  ne  fera  autre  que  d'vne  Tragedie,
n'eftant  pas  la  couftume  du  diable  de  fe  comporter
autrement.  [154]  Toutesfois  cefte  pauure  mal  heu-
reufe  s'eft  trouue*  apres  la  fefte  plus  foulag^e  de  beau-
coup  qu'auparauant,  quoy  qu'elle  ne  fuft  pas  entiere-
met  libre  &  deliur^e  de  fon  mal.  Ce  qui  eft  attribu6
par  les  Sauuages  a  l'ordinaire,  au  defaut  &  manque-
ment  de  quelque  circonftance  &  perfection  de  la  cere-
monie ;  ce  qui  entretient  ces  peuples  dans  les  frayeurs
continuelles,  &  applications  fi  exadtes  aux  formes  &
particularitez  de  leurs  ceremonies.

Ie  ne  fcay  fi  felon  1' ordinaire  du  diable  de  ne  s'ab-
ftenir  iamais  d'vn  mal,  que  pour  en  faire  vn  autre,  il
n'auoit  pas  deffein  de  faire  mourir  en  contr'ef change,
la  petite  fille  de  cefte  femme,  dont  nous  auons  parle"
au  commencement  de  cefte  hiftoire.

Tant  y  a  qu' apres  la  fefte  elle  deuint  grandement
malade :  &  qui  porta  celuy  de  nos  Peres  qui  auoient
charge  de  la  cabane  ou  elle  eftoit  de  la  baptif er  comme
en  extremite*  au  def ceu  de  fa  mere ;  apres  quoy  la
petite  fille  f e  porta  mieux :  nous  ne  f cauons  pas  toute-
fois  au  vray  ce  qui  eft  depuis  arriue\  foit  a  la  mere,
foit  a  la  fille,  qui  font  retournez  a  leur  bourg.

Pendant  la  maladie  de  la  fille,  vne  bruflure  qui  luy
arriua, pour laquelle on cherchoit [155]  quelque


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  187

all  the  cabins,  after  which  the  last  general  council  is
held,  where  a  report  is  made  of  all  that  has  taken
place,  and,  among  other  things,  of  the  number  of
Riddles  solved.  Then  follows  the  last  present,  on
the  part  of  the  public,  which  consists  in  completing
and  crowning  the  last  desire  of  the  sick  woman,  over
and  above  what  that  individual  who  has  guessed  it
has  been  able  to  give ;  and  there  ends  the  ceremony.

It  is  to  be  presumed  that  the  true  end  of  this  Act,
and  its  catastrophe,  will  be  nothing  else  but  a  Trag-
edy, the  devil  not  being  accustomed  to  behave  other-
wise. [154]  Nevertheless,  this  poor  unhappy  crea-
ture found  herself  much  better  after  the  feast  than
before,  although  she  was  not  entirely  free  from,  or
cured  of  her  trouble.  This  is  ordinarily  attributed
by  the  Savages  to  the  lack  or  failure  of  some  detail,
or  to  some  imperfection  in  the  ceremony, — which
keeps  these  peoples  in  continual  fears,  and  in  so  exact
observance  of  the  forms  and  details  of  their  cere-
monies.

I  do  not  know  whether  the  devil  —  according  to  his
common  practice  of  never  abstaining  from  one  evil
act,  except  to  commit  another, —  intended,  in  ex-
change, to  kill  the  little  daughter  of  this  woman,  of
whom  we  spoke  at  the  beginning  of  this  account.

At  all  events,  she  became  very  ill  after  the  feast,
which  induced  that  one  of  our  Fathers  who  had  charge
of  the  cabin  where  she  was  to  baptize  her,  when  in
a  critical  condition,  without  the  knowledge  of  her
mother ;  after  this,  the  little  girl  grew  better.  We
do  not  know  with  certainty,  however,  what  has  hap-
pened since  then,  either  to  the  mother  or  the  daugh-
ter, who  have  returned  to  their  own  village.

During  the  daughter's  sickness,  a  burn  that  she


188  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.  17

remede,  ayant  donne"  accez  au  fufdit  Pere  au  feu  ou
elle  eftoit  auec  fa  mere.  Les  careffes  qu'on  fit  a  la
fille,  appriuoifoient  l'efprit  de  la  mere ;  de  forte  que  le
Pere  trouua  entree  fuffifante  pour  l'aborder,  &  luy
faire  raconter  tout  ce  qui  s'  eftoit  pafse.  Ce  fuft  de  fa
bouche  que  nous  eufmes  la  confirmation  &  l'efclar-
ciffement  de  ce  que  deffus,  que  nous  auions  defia
appris  d'ailleurs,  tant  pour  ce  qui  regardoit  cefte
hiftoire  particuliere,  que  pour  la  nature  de  la  mala-
die  en  foy,  &  ce  par  des  perfonnes  qui  auoient  eu  le
mefme  mal,  &  qui  auoient  efte  gueris  par  vn  fem-
blable  remede.  Elle  nous  apprit  toutefois  plufieurs
circonflances,  que  nous  ne  fcauions  pas ;  &  en  outre
nous  dit  que  le  diable  apres  le  refus  que  nous  luy
fifmes  de  donner  la  couuerture  qu'il  auoit  ordonn6e,
qu'on  nous  demanda,  luy  eftoit  apparu  de  nuidt,  &
luy  auoit  dit  que  nous  faifions  bande  a  part,  &  que
partant  nonobftant  noftre  refus,  elle  ne  laifToit  pas
de  guerir,  le  refte  alloit  bien:  qu'au  refle,  dorefna-
uant  il  ne  nous  mettroit  plus  de  la  partie.

Si  cela  eft,  ie  ne  fcay  pas  comme  il  l'entend,  ou  fi
c'eft  vn  tour  du  meftier  qu'il  a  [156]  exerce*  d£s  le
commencement  du  monde  Qui  mendax  erf  ab  initio.
Mais  il  eft  affeure"  que  depuis  ce  temps,  il  n'a  pas
laifT6  de  nous  faire  folliciter,  foit  a  la  Refidence  de
faindt  Iofeph  en  cas  pareil,  foit  icy  en  quelques  autres
rencontres,  &  toufiours  auec  auffi  peu  de  fuccez.

II  faut  qu'a  ce  propos  ie  raconte  en  pafTant  ce  qui
eft  icy  arriue*  pendant  que  i'efcriuois  ce  que  deffus.
Vn  Sauuage  d'vn  bourg  voifin  eft  entre'  chez  nous,
portant  derriere  foy  vn  pacquet  d'vne  robe  de  Caftor,
difant  qu'il  la  venoit  traiter  pour  vne  couuerture,  ou
quelque  autre  piece  d'eftofTe;  la  refponfe  a  efte\  qu'il


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE  *  S  RELA  TION,  i63g  189

had  received,  for  which  they  were  seeking  [155]  some
remedy,  having  given  to  this  Father  access  to  the  fire
where  she  was  with  her  mother,  the  caresses  given
to  the  daughter  so  mollified  the  mother's  heart  that
the  Father  found  sufficient  opportunity  to  approach
her,  and  induce  her  to  relate  to  him  all  that  had
taken  place.  It  was  from  his  lips  that  we  had  the
confirmation  and  elucidation  of  the  above,  which  we
had  already  learned  elsewhere,  both  as  regarded  this
particular  story,  and  the  nature  of  the  malady  itself, —
and  this  from  persons  who  had  had  the  same  disease,
and  had  been  cured  by  a  similar  remedy.  She  in-
formed us,  however,  of  many  circumstances  that  we
did  not  know,  and  told  us,  besides,  that  the  devil  —
after  our  refusal  to  give  her  the  blanket  that  he  had
ordered  and  that  was  asked  of  us  —  had  appeared  to
her  in  the  night,  and  had  told  her  that  we  remained
aloof,  and  that  therefore,  notwithstanding  our  refusal,
she  would  not  fail  to  recover  if  the  rest  went  well ;
that,  moreover,  thenceforward  he  would  no  longer
have  us  participate  therein.

If  that  be  so,  I  do  not  know  how  he  understands  it,
or  whether  it  is  a  trick  of  the  trade  which  he  has
[156]  practiced  since  the  beginning  of  the  world,  Qui
mendax  est  ab  initio;  but  it  is  certain  that  since  that
time  he  has  not  ceased  to  have  us  solicited,  both  at
the  Residence  of  saint  Joseph  in  a  similar  case,  or
here  on  certain  other  occasions,  and  always  with  as
little  success.

In  this  connection,  I  must  relate  in  passing  what
happened  here  while  I  was  writing  the  above.  A
Savage  from  a  neighboring  village  came  into  our
house,  carrying  behind  him  a  Beaver  robe  in  a  pack-
age, saying  that  he  had  come  to  trade  it  for  a  blanket,


190  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

n'y  en  auoit  point  a  la  maifon  qui  fut  a  cet  vfage.
Helas,  dit-il,  ie  n'en  demande  qu'vn  petit  morceau
grand  comme  le  coude.  On  fe  douta  auffi-toft  qu'il
y  auoit  de  l'Ondinonc:  C'eft  pour  quelque  perfonne
malade :  luy  dit-on ;  Helas  oiiy,  refpond-il,  i'ay  vne
pauure  petite  fille  aag6e  de  quatre  ans  ou  enuiron,
qui  depuis  rAutomne  dernier  eft  dans  le  plus  piteux
eftat  qui  fe  puiffe  voir.  I'ay  fait  iufques  icy  tout  ce
que  i'ay  peu  pour  le  recouurement  de  fa  fante\  En
fin  le  Sorcier  l'a  vifit£e  pour  la  derniere  fois,  &  a  dit
que  fon  ame  defiroit  ce  que  ie  [157]  fuis  venu  vous
demander,  &  qu'au  pluftoft  ie  vous  vinffe  trouuer
pour  ce  fuiet.

II  n'en  fallut  pas  dauantage.  Incontinent  vn  de
nos  Peres  fe  difpofe  pour  partir  auec  le  Sauuage,  &
aller  trouuer  la  Petite  fille  la  part  oil  elle  feroit,  fous
pretexte  de  luy  porter  quelque  douceur,  qui  pafle  icy
pour  medecine.  II  y  va,  la  trouue  telle  qu'on  auoit
dit,  la  baptife  fans  faire  femblant  de  rien,  par  court
quelques  autres  cabanes  felon  leur  loifir,  pour  voir  s'il
n'y  auoit  point  encore  quelque  autre  proye  a  enleuer
des  mains  de  Satan.  Et  voila  d' ordinaire  ce  qu'il
gaigne,  a  rechercher  de  nous  des  hommages  &  des
recognoiffances  de  fa  fouuerainete*  en  ces  contr^es,
cette  pauure  petite  fille  eft  morte  heureufement  quel-
que temps  apres.

Ce  Loup  infernal  ne  gaigneroit  guiere  dauantage
fur  les  ouailles  que  fur  les  Pafteurs,  fi  toutes  eftoient
femblables  a  Iofeph  Chitfatenhtfa,  ce  braue  Neophyte,
duquel  nous  auons  parle"  aux  Chapitres  precedens.
Ce  bon  homme  nourrit  en  fa  cabane  vne  Brenefche,
qui  eft  vne  efpece  d'oye  fauuage ;  qui  a  defia  efte"  ie
ne  fcay  combien  de  fois  l'Ondinonc,  ou  le  fonge  de


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  1639  W

or  some  other  piece  of  stuff;  the  answer  was  that
there  was  none  in  the  house  suitable  for  such  use.
*l  Alas!"  said  he,  "  I  only  ask  for  a  little  piece  as
long  as  your  arm."  We  immediately  wondered  if
he  had  not  some  Ondinonc  in  this.  "  Is  it  for  some
sick  person?"  we  said  to  him.  "Alas,  yes!"  he
answered ;  "  I  have  a  poor  little  girl  about  four  years
old,  who,  since  last  Autumn,  has  been  in  the  most
pitiable  state  that  one  could  see.  I  have  until  now
done  all  that  I  could  for  the  recovery  of  her  health.
Finally  the  Sorcerer  visited  her  for  the  last  time  and
said  that  her  soul  desired  that  which  I  [157]  have
come  to  ask  from  you,  and  that  as  soon  as  possible  I
should  come  and  see  you  for  this  purpose."

Nothing  more  was  needed.  Immediately  one  of
our  Fathers  arranged  to  depart  with  the  Savage,  and
to  go  and  find  the  Child,  wherever  she  was,  under
pretext  of  carrying  her  some  dainty  that  passes  here
for  medicine.  He  went,  found  her  as  the  man  had
said,  baptized  her  without  appearing  to  do  so,  and
went  through  some  of  the  other  cabins,  where  they
were  at  leisure,  to  see  if  there  were  not  yet  some
other  prey  to  rescue  from  Satan's  hands ;  and  this  is
what  he  usually  gains  by  seeking  from  us^  homage
and  acknowledgment  of  his  sovereignty  in  these
countries.  This  poor  little  girl  died  happily,  some
time  afterward.

This  infernal  Wolf  would  gain  but  little  more  over
the  flock  than  over  the  Shepherds,  if  all  were  like
Joseph  Chiwatenhwa,  that  brave  Neophyte  of  whom
we  have  spoken  in  preceding  Chapters.  This  good
man  was  raising  in  his  cabin  a  Brenesche,  which  is
a  sort  of  wild  goose,10  and  which  has  already  been,
I  know  not  how  many  times,  the  Ondinonc,  or  dream,


192  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  17

tout  plein  de  perfonnes;  &  pour  laquelle  [158]  en
f trite  auoir  de  luy,  ie  ne  feay  ce  qu'on  ne  luy  a  pas
presete*.  Ce  n'eft  pas  toutefois  ce  qui  luy  a  donne*
plus  de  peine,  que  de  refufer  ceux  qui  fe  font  prefen-
tez  pour  la  traiter :  mais  bien  dauantage,  de  refufer  a
fes  amis  qui  la  luy  ont  demande*  pour  ce  fujet  iufques
a  1' importunity :  mais  encore,  dit  fa  femme,  s'ils  nous
la  demandoient,  fans  dire  que  c'eft  l'Ondinonc,  mais
vous  diriez  qu'on  veut  que  ce  foit  expreffement  pour
cela,  ils  ne  tiennent  rien !  Plaif  e  a  Dieu  nous  donner
plufieurs  families  de  Barbares  femblables  a  celle-la.
Mais  retournons  a  noftre  hiftoire.

II  arriue  quelquefois  que  le  diable  en  cefte  grande
ceremonie  dont  nous  venons  de  parler,  a  recommande*
entr'autres  chofes  a  la  perfonne  malade,  de  faire
maifon  nouuelle.  En  ce  cas,  il  ne  faut  pas  qu'elle
retienne  chof e  du  monde  de  ce  qui  luy  appartient :
elle  doit  done  donner  tout  ce  qu'elle  a,  a  mefme  que
ceux  du  bourg  pendant  les  trois  iours,  vont  propofer
leurs  defirs  par  les  cabanes.  Et  il  eft  quelquefois
arriue\  que  pour  vn  feul  plat  de  bois  retenu  par  affe-
ction &  attache,  le  Diable  s'en  eft  fi  fort  reflenty;
qu' outre  qu'il  n'a  pas  accorde*  la  guerifon,  il  a  mar-
que en  fonge  a  [159]  la  perfonne  malade,  le  lieu  &
Tendroit  ou  elle  en  deuoit  mourir,  pour  auoir  man-
que\  en  ce  point  d'obeiflance  &  de  deference  a  fes
ordres,  ce  qui  en  effedt  eft  arriu6.

Vne  ceremonie  fi  folemnelle  nous  porta  a  en  re-
chercher  la  fource  &  l'origine;  &  nous  auons  trouue*
par  le  rapport  des  anciens,  tant  de  ce  bourg,  que  de
celuy  de  la  Refidence  de  S.  Iofeph.  Que  les  autheurs
tant  de  cefte  fefte,  que  de  toutes  les  autres  ceremo-
nies du  pais, & nommement des danfes nues, &


1639-40]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  193

of  many  persons,  and  for  which,  [158]  consequently,
to  obtain  it  from  him,  I  do  not  know  what  they  have
not  offered  him.  That  which  has  given  him  the
most  trouble,  however,  is  not  to  refuse  those  who
have  presented  themselves  to  barter  for  it,  but,  far
more,  to  refuse  his  friends,  who  have  demanded  this
from  him  until  he  is  vexed.  "  But,"  said  his  wife,
* '  even  if  they  should  demand  it  from  us  without  say-
ing that  it  was  the  Ondinonc, —  but,  you  would  say,
they  desired  it  expressly  for  that  purpose, —  they
would  get  nothing!  "  May  it  please  God  to  give  us
many  families  of  Barbarians  like  that  one.  But  let
us  return  to  our  story.

It  sometimes  happens  that  the  devil  in  this  great
ceremony  of  which  we  have  just  spoken  has  recom-
mended to  the  sick  person,  among  other  things,  to
furnish  his  house  anew.  In  this  case,  he  must  not
keep  anything  whatever  of  his  possessions,  and  must,
therefore  give  away  all  that  he  has,  while  those  of  the
village,  during  three  days,  go  through  the  cabins,
stating  their  desires.  And  it  sometimes  happens
that,  for  a  single  wooden  plate  retained  through  affec-
tion and  attachment,  the  Devil  has  become  so  incensed
that,  besides  not  granting  a  cure,  he  has  pointed  out
in  a  dream  to  [159]  the  sick  person  the  place  and  spot
where  he  was  to  die,  for  having  failed  in  this  matter
of  obedience  and  respect  for  his  orders, —  which  really
happened.

A  ceremony  so  solemn  prompted  us  to  search  for
its  source  and  origin ;  and  we  have  found,  through
the  accounts  of  the  old  men,  both  of  this  village  and
of  that  of  the  Residence  of  St.  Joseph,  that  the  authors
of  this  feast, — as  well  as  of  all  the  other  ceremonies
of  the  country,  and  especially  of  the  nude  dances  and


194  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.  ]7

chofes  femblables,  ne  font  autres  que  les  Demons.

On  nomme  la  Nation  &  le  bourg  ou  cela  commen-
ca;  &  le  Capitaine  qui  les  ayant  apperceu  fur  vn  lac
patter  le  temps  de  la  forte,  les  pria  inftamment  d'a-
border  a  fon  Bourg,  &  leur  enfeigner  tous  ces  beaux
myfteres.  Ce  qu'apres  beaucoup  d'inftance,  &  de
facrifices  de  chiens,  que  ce  Capitaine  leur  fit,  ils
s'accorderent  en  fin.

Or  nos  barbares  aduoiient  que  de  la  s'efuiuit  la
mort  du  Capitaine  &  la  ruine  du  bourg,  &  apres  celle
de  toute  la  Nation,  dont  quelques  reliquats  a  peine
reflent  refugiez  parmy  eux,  def quels  ils  ont  appris
plus  particulierement  toutes  les  ceremonies  de  ces
folemnitez.  Toutesfois  [160]  ils  affeurent  que  ceux
qui  par  apres  les  ont  pradliqu6,  s'en  font  bien  trouuez ;
&  partant  que  les  mal-heurs  de  mortality  &  de  mi-
fere,  qui  les  achemine  a  vne  pareille  fin,  ne  doiuent
pas  eflre  attribuez  a  cela,  comme  nous  leur  difons  &
prefchons  cotinuellement,  mais  a  noftre  demeure
parmy  eux,  a  laquelle  feule  ils  s'en  prennent.

Au  refte,  le  corps  des  Hurons  n'eftant  qu'vn  amas
de  diuerfes  families  &  petites  Nations,  qui  fe  font
iointes  les  vns  aux  autres  pour  fe  maintenir  contre
leurs  ennemis  communs,  chacune  a  apporte"  fes  dan-
fes,  fes  couflumes  &  ceremonies  particulieres  toutes
eman6es  du  mefme  principe,  qui  fe  font  communi-
ques a  tout  le  pais,  &  qui  fe  font  en  fuite  dependem-
met  du  fonge  ou  de  l'ondinonc  d'vn  chacun,  quand  il
eft  malade,  ou  par  l'ordonnance  du  Medecin  du  pays,
ou  vifiteur  qu'on  a  eu  fuiet  de  nommer  Sorcier  ou
Magicien,  comme  nous  pourrons  dire  cy-apres.  Et
telles  affaires  s'appellent  chez-eux  Onderha,  c'eft  a
dire  la  terre ;  comme  qui  diroit,  le  f ouftien  &  la  ma-


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  195

like  performances, —  are  no  others  than  the  Demons.

The  Nation  and  the  village  where  this  began  are
named,  also  the  Captain  who,  having  perceived  them
upon  a  lake  passing  away  the  time  thus,  begged  them
earnestly  to  come  to  his  Village  and  teach  them  all
these  fine  mysteries,  to  which,  after  much  urging,
and  many  sacrifices  of  dogs  which  this  Captain
offered  to  them,  they  finally  consented.

Now  our  barbarians  admit  that  thence  ensued  the
death  of  the  Captain  and  the  ruin  of  the  village,  and,
later,  that  of  the  whole  Nation, —  of  which  some  few
remain  as  refugees  among  them,  from  whom  they
have  most  minutely  learned  all  the  ceremonies  of
these  solemnities.  However,  [160]  they  assert  that
those  who  practiced  them  afterwards  were  much
benefited  thereby;  and  that,  therefore,  the  evils  of
mortality  and  misery,  which  condemn  them  to  a  like
end,  are  not  to  be  attributed  to  that,  as  we  are  con-
tinually saying  and  preaching,  but  to  our  dwelling
among  them,  upon  which  alone  they  lay  the  blame.

Moreover,  the  body  of  the  Hurons  being  only  an
assemblage  of  various  families  and  petty  Nations,
which  are  associated  together  for  the  purpose  of
maintaining  themselves  against  their  common  ene-
mies, each  one  has  brought  its  special  dances,  cus-
toms, and  ceremonies,  all  emanating  from  the  same
source,  which  are  communicated  to  the  whole  coun-
try, and  which  are  then  observed  according  to  the
dream  or  the  ondinonc  of  each  one,  when  he  is  sick,
or  by  the  order  of  the  native  Physician,  or  visitor,
who  has  with  reason  been  styled  "Sorcerer"  or
"  Magician,"  as  we  shall  relate  hereafter.  And  such
observances  are  called  among  them  "  Onderha,"  that
is  to  say  "  the  ground,"  as  one  might  say,  the  prop


196  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  17

nutention  de  tout  leur  Eflat.  Voila  nous  difent  les
anciens  &  les  Capitaines  ce  que  nous  appellons  affaires
d*  importance.

[161]  Pour  plufieurs  de  ces  fuperftitions  il  y  a  des
Confrairies  inftitutees,  aufquelles  &  particulierement
aux  Maiflres  d'icelles  il  fe  faut  adrefler.

Tous  ceux  qui  ont  efte"  autrefois  le  fuiet  &  l'occa-
fion  de  la  danfe  ou  de  la  fefte  font  de  la  Confrairie,
auf quels  apres  leur  mort  fuccede  vn  de  leurs  enf ans :
quelques-vns  en  outre  ont  vn  fecret  ou  vn  fort  qui
leur  a  efle  declare"  en  f onge  auec  la  chanf on ;  pour
s'en  feruir  deuant  que  d'aller,  par  exeple,  au  feflin
de  feu :  apres  quoy  ils  manient  le  feu  fans  s'offenf er.

Voicy  vne  hiftoire  qui  fe  paffa  pendant  le  temps
de  cette  grande  ceremonie.  Vn  des  ieunes  gens  du
bourg  des  plus  confiderables,  courant  l'vne  de  ces
trois  nuidts,  &  faifant  1' enrage"  fit  rencontre  d'vn
fpedtre  ou  demon,  auec  lequel  il  eut  quelque  parole,
cefte  rencontre  luy  renuerfa  de  la  forte  la  ceruelle,
qu'il  tomba,  &  en  effet  en  deuint  fol.  De  remede
fufl  de  tuer  promptement  deux  chiens,  &  entr'autres
vn  qu'il  cheriffoit  vniquement,  dont  on  fit  feflin:  en
fuite  dequoy  il  fe  porta  mieux,  &  en  fin  retourna  en
fon  bon  fens.

Ce  ne  feroit  iamais  fait,  fi  i'auois  entrepris  [162]
de  dire  tous  les  tenans  &  aboutiffans  de  ces  miferes.
En  voila  affez  de  cette  facon,  venons  a  d'autres
myfteres.

Sur  le  milieu  du  mois  de  Mars,  le  faifon  de  pefcher
a  la  Seine  eflant  venue,  on  parla  de  la  marier  felon
la  couftume  du  pais  a  deux  ieunes  filles,  ou  pluflofl
a  deux  enfans,  qui  n'euflent  iamais  eu  connoiffance
d'homme : Et  en  fuite  de  faire  les  nopces  ou  le  feflin,


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  197

and  maintenance  of  their  whole  State.  "  These,"  the
old  men  and  the  Captains  say  to  us,  "  are  what  we
call  affairs  of  importance."

[161]  For  several  of  these  superstitions  there  are
organized  Fraternities,  to  which,  and  especially  to
the  Masters  of  which,  one  must  address  himself.

All  those  who  have  once  been  the  object  and  occa-
sion of  the  dance  or  the  feast,  belong  to  the  Frater-
nity, to  which,  after  their  death,  one  of  their  chil-
dren succeeds;  some  have,  besides,  a  secret  or  a
charm  which  has  been  declared  to  them  in  a  dream,
with  the  song  to  be  used  before  going,  for  example,
to  the  fire  feast,  after  which  they  can  handle  the  fire
without  hurting  themselves.

I  will  give  an  account  of  something  that  happened
during  the  time  of  this  great  ceremony.  One  of  the
prominent  young  men  of  the  village,  while  running
during  one  of  those  three  nights,  and  acting  the  mad-
man, encountered  a  specter  or  demon,  with  whom
he  had  some  words ;  this  meeting  so  upset  his  brain
that  he  fell  down,  and  actually  became  insane.  The
remedy  was,  promptly  to  kill  two  dogs,  and,  among
others,  one  which  he  held  especially  dear,  of  which
a  feast  was  made.  In  consequence  of  this  he  became
better,  and  finally  returned  to  his  senses.

I  would  never  reach  the  end,  if  I  should  undertake
[162]  to  tell  all  the  circumstances  and  details  of  these
wretched  affairs.  But  enough  of  this;  let  us  come
to  other  mysteries.

In  the  middle  of  the  month  of  March,  the  season
having  arrived  for  fishing  with  the  Seine,  they  talked
of  marrying  it,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  coun-
try, to  two  young  girls,  or  rather  to  two  children,
who  had  never  had  intercourse  with  men, — and  then


198  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  17

auquel  felon  la  forme,  la  Seine  feroit  au  milieu,  &
les  deux  ieunes  filles  aupres.  C'efl  la  oil  on  exhorte
puifTamment  la  Seine  a  prendre  bon  courage,  &  de
faire  en  forte  que  la  pefche  foit  heureufe,  comme  a
efte*  dit  plus  amplement  aux  precedentes  Relations.

On  ietta  les  yeux  entr'autres  fur  vne  de  nos  petites
Chreftiennes,  aagee  de  quatre  ou  cinq  ans,  pour  eflre
l'vne  des  deux  marines;  On  nous  en  donne  aduis,
nous  voila  auffi  toft  a  la  recherche  du  fond  de  1' affaire,
pour  aduifer  a  ce  que  nous  auions  a  dire  la  deflus.
II  fe  trouue  done  qu'il  y  a  quelques  ann£es  que  les
Algonquains,  qui  font  peuples  voifms  tres-intelligens
&  excellents  en  toute  forte  [163]  de  pefche,  y  eftans
allez  en  cette  faifon,  pour  pefcher  auec  la  Seine,  du
commencement  ne  prirent  rien.  Surpris  &  eflon-
nez  d'vn  fuccez,  qui  leur  eftoit  fi  extraordinaire,  ils
ne  fcauoient  que  penfer.  La  deffus,  l'Ame,  le  Ge-
nie, ou  TOKi  de  la  Seine,  car  nos  Sauuages  l'appel-
lent  de  toutes  ces  f aeons,  leur  apparoift  en  forme
d'vn  grand  homme  bien  faidt,  tout  m£content  &  en
colere,  qui  leur  dit.  I 'ay  perdu  ma  femme,  &  ie
n'en  puis  trouuer  qui  n'ait  cogneu  d'autres  hommes
deuant  moy :  voila  ce  qui  fait  que  vous  ne  reumffez
pas,  &  ne  reiimrez  iamais  iufques  a  ce  qu'on  m'ait
donne"  contentement  fur  ce  poindt.

Les  Algonquains  la  deflus  tiennent  confeil,  &  ad-
uif ent  que  pour  appaifer  &  donner  fatisfadtion  a  la
Seine,  il  luy  falloit  pref enter  des  Filles  en  fi  bas  aage,
qu'il  n'euft  plus  de  fuiet  de  fe  plaindre;  &  que  pour
plus  grande  fatisfadtion,  il  luy  en  falloit  pref  enter
deux  pour  vne,  ils  le  font  done  en  la  maniere  que
i'ay  marque"  cy-deffus  dans  vn  feftin,  &  aufn-toft  leur
pefche  reiiffit  a  merueilles.


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  190

of  celebrating  the  nuptials  or  feast,  at  which,  accord-
ing to  the  formality,  the  Seine  would  be  in  the  mid-
dle, and  the  two  young  girls  beside  it.  On  this
occasion,  then,  the  Seine  is  vigorously  exhorted  to
be  of  good  courage,  and  so  to  act  that  the  fishing  be
successful,  as  has  been  more  amply  told  in  preceding
Relations.

They  had  in  mind,  among  others,  one  of  our  little
Christian  girls,  four  or  five  years  old,  to  be  one  of  the
two  brides.  We  are  informed  of  this,  and  immedi-
ately begin  to  investigate  the  matter,  in  order  to
understand  what  we  ought  to  say  about  it.  We  have
ascertained,  then,  that  some  years  ago  the  Algon-
quains, — who  are  neighboring  people,  very  intelli-
gent, and  excelling  in  all  kinds  [163]  of  fishery, —
having  gone  at  this  season  to  fish  with  the  Seine,  at
first  took  nothing.  Surprised  and  astonished  at  a
result  which  was  for  them  so  unusual,  they  knew  not
what  to  think.  Thereupon,  the  Soul,  the  Genie,  or  the
Oki  of  the  Seine,  for  our  Savages  call  it  by  all  these
names,  appeared  to  them  in  the  form  of  a  tall,  well-
formed  man,  greatly  dissatisfied  and  in  a  passion,
who  said  to  them,  "  I  have  lost  my  wife,  and  I  can-
not find  one  who  has  not  known  other  men  before
me ;  that  is  the  reason  why  you  do  not  succeed,  and
you  never  will  succeed  until  I  have  been  given  satis-
faction in  this  respect."

The  Algonquains,  thereupon,  hold  a  council  and
decide,  that  to  appease  and  give  satisfaction  to  the
Seine,  they  must  present  him  Girls  so  young  that  he
would  no  longer  have  reason  to  complain, — and  that,
for  his  greater  satisfaction,  they  must  present  him
two  for  one.  They  do  this,  then,  in  the  manner  that
I  have  related  above,  at  a  feast;  and  immediately
their  fishing  succeeds  wonderfully.


200  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

Les  Hurons  leurs  voifins  n'en  eurent  pas  pluftoft
le  vent,  que  voila  vne  fefte  [164]  &  folemnite"  infti-
tu6e,  qui  depuis  a  toufiours  dure*,  &  fe  celebre  tous
les  ans  en  cette  mefme  faifon.  Cela  eftant,  ie  laifle
a  penfer  ce  que  nous  difmes  &  confeillafmes  aux
parents  de  la  Fille :  mais  voicy  le  grief ;  car  toute  la
famille  profitant  notablement  d'vn  tel  mariage,  vne
partie  de  la  pefche,  luy  reuenant  l'ann^e  quelle  fe
faidt ;  en  quoy  luy  eftant  deue  &  affedtee  en  confide-
ration  d'vne  telle  alliance ;  refufer  fon  confentement
a  tel  mariage,  c'eft  fe  priuer  &  fruftrer  toute  vne
famille  de  la  plus  grande  douceur,  &  de  la  meilleure
rencontre  qui  fe  fafle  dans  le  pais.

Ie  ne  fcay  fi  Dieu  eut  agreable  de  mettre  particu-
lierement  la  main  a  cette  affaire,  pour  la  rompre  tout
a  fait,  tant  y  a  que  la  ceremonie  ne  fe  fit,  ny  d'vne
facon,  ny  d'autre.

Vne  des  dernieres  folies  qui  fe  foit  paff£e  en  ce
bourg  a  efte"  a  l'occafion  d'vn  malade  d'vn  bourg  voi-
fin,  qui  pour  fa  fant6,  fongea  ou  receut  Tordonnance
du  Medecin  du  pais,  qu'on  luy  fifl  vn  ieu  de  plat.  II
en  parle  aux  Capitaines,  qui  auffi-toft  aflemblent  le
confeil,  arreftent  le  temps,  &  le  Bourg  qu'il  falloit
aller  inuiter  [165]  pour  ce  fuiedt,  &  ce  bour[g]  fut  le
noflre.  On  depute  de  la  pour  en  venir  faire  icy  la
propofition;  elle  eft  agre6e,  &  en  fuite  on  fe  pre-
pare de  part  &  d'autre.

Ce  jeu  de  plat  confifte  a  faire  fauter  dans  vn  plat
de  bois  quelques  noyaux  de  prunes  fauuages,  chacun
blanc  d'vn  cofte\  &  noir  de  V autre,  d'ou  s'enfuit
perte  ou  gain  felon  les  loix  du  jeu.

II  eft  hors  de  mon  pouuoir  de  reprefenter  l'appli-


1639  -  40]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TIONy  ib39  201

The  Hurons,  their  neighbors,  no  sooner  got  wind
of  this,  than  lo,  there  was  a  feast,  [164]  and  a  solem-
nity was  instituted,  that  has  ever  since  continued,  and
is  celebrated  every  year  at  this  same  season.  This
being  so,  I  leave  it  to  be  imagined  what  we  said  and
counseled  to  the  parents  of  this  Girl;  but  lo,  there
ensued  a  grievance.  For,  as  the  whole  family  profit
considerably  from  such  a  marriage, — part  of  the  fish
caught  reverting  to  them  in  the  year  when  it  takes
place,  and  being  then  due  and  appropriated  to  them,
in  consideration  of  such  an  alliance, — to  refuse  their
consent  to  such  a  marriage  is  to  deprive  and  defraud
an  entire  family  of  the  greatest  pleasure  and  the  best
opportunity  that  can  be  found  in  the  country.

I  do  not  know  whether  God  were  pleased  to  inter-
vene especially  in  this  affair,  and  break  it  up  alto-
gether or  not ;  at  all  events,  the  ceremony  did  not
take  place,  in  any  form.

One  of  the  latest  fooleries  that  has  occurred  in  this
village  was  in  behalf  of  a  sick  man  of  a  neighboring
village,  who,  for  his  health,  dreamed,  or  received  the
order  from  the  Physician  of  the  country,  that  a  game
of  dish  should  be  played  for  him.  He  tells  it  to  the
Captains,  who  immediately  assemble  the  council,  fix
the  time,  and  choose  the  Village  that  they  must  invite
[165]  for  this  purpose, —  and  that  village  is  ours.  An
envoy  from  that  place  is  sent  hither  to  make  the
proposition;  it  is  accepted,  and  then  preparations
are  made  on  both  sides.

This  game  of  dish  consists  in  tossing  some  stones
of  the  wild  plum  in  a  wooden  dish, — each  being
white  on  one  side,  and  black  on  the  other, —  whence
there  ensues  loss  or  gain,  according  to  the  laws  of
the  game.


202  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

cation  &  radtiuite"  de  nos  Barbares  a  fe  preparer,  &  a
rechercher  tous  les  moyens  &  les  augures  de  quelque
bon-heur  &  fuccez  en  leur  ieu.  lis  s'affemblent  les
nuidts,  &  les  paffent  partie  a  remuer  le  plat,  &  a  re-
cognoiftre  qui  a  la  meilleure  main ;  partie  a  eftaller
leurs  forts,  &  a  les  exhorter.  Sur  la  fin  ils  fe  met-
tent  a  dormir  dans  la  mefme  cabane,  ayans  au  prea-
lable  ieufn6,  &  s'eftans  abftenus  quelque  temps  de
leurs  femmes :  le  tout  pour  auoir  quelque  fonge  fauo-
rable,  &  le  matin  c'eft  a  raconter  ce  qui  s'eft  pafI6
la  nuidt.

En  fin  on  aflemble  tout  ce  qu'on  a  fonge"  qui  pour-
roit  apporter  bon-heur,  &  en  remplit-on  des  facs  pour
porter.  On  [166]  recherche  en  outre  par  tout,  ceux
qui  ont  des  forts  propres  pour  le  jeu,  ou  des  AfcHan-
dics  ou  diables  familiers,  pour  affifter  celuy  qui  tient
le  plat,  &  eftre  le  plus  proche  de  luy,  lors  qu'il  le
remuera.  S'il  y  a  quelques  vieillards  dont  la  pre-
fence  foit  recognue  efficace,  &  augmenter  la  force  &
la  vertu  de  leur  fort,  on  ne  fe  contente  pas  de  porter
leur  forts,  mais  encore  les  charge-on  quelquefois  eux
mefmes  fur  les  efpaules  des  ieunes  gens,  pour  les
porter  au  lieu  de  l'affembl^e.  Et  d'autant  que  nous
paflons  dans  le  pais  pour  maiflres  forciers,  on  ne
manque  pas  de  nous  aduertir,  de  nous  mettre  en
prieres,  &  faire  force  ceremonies  pour  les  faire
gaigner.

On  n'eft  pas  pluftofi  arriu6  au  lieu  de  Taffignation,
que  chaque  party  fe  range  de  coft6  &  d'autre  de  la
cabane,  &  la  rempliffent  depuis  le  haut  iufques  en
bas,  deflus  &  deilous  les  Andichons,  qui  font  efcorces
faifant  comme  vn  ciel  de  lict,  ou  couuerture  ref-
pondant  a  celle  d'enbas  cole"  fur  terre,  fur  laquelle


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  20&

It  is  beyond  my  power  to  picture  the  diligence  and
activity  of  our  Barbarians  in  preparing  themselves,
and  in  seeking  all  the  means  and  omens  for  good  luck
and  success  in  their  game.  They  assemble  at  night,
and  spend  the  time  partly  in  shaking  the  dish  and
ascertaining  who  has  the  best  hand, —  partly  in  dis-
playing their  charms,  and  exhorting  them.  Towards
the  end  they  lie  down  to  sleep  in  the  same  cabin,
having  previously  fasted,  and  for  some  time  abstained
from  their  wives, —  and  all  this  to  have  some  favor-
able dream ;  in  the  morning,  they  have  to  relate  what
happened  during  the  night.

Finally,  they  collect  all  the  things  which  they
have  dreamed  can  bring  good  luck,  and  fill  pouches
with  them,  in  order  to  carry  them.  They  [166]
search  everywhere,  besides,  for  those  who  have
charms  suitable  to  the  game,  or  Ascwandics  or  famil-
iar demons,  that  these  may  assist  the  one  who  holds
the  dish,  and  be  nearest  to  him  when  he  shakes  it.
If  there  be  some  old  men  whose  presence  is  regarded
as  efficacious  in  augmenting  the  strength  and  virtue
of  their  charms,  they  are  not  satisfied  to  take  the
charms  to  them,  but  sometimes  even  load  these  men
themselves  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  young  men,  to
be  carried  to  the  place  of  the  assembly.  And,  inas-
much as  we  pass  in  the  country  for  master  sorcerers,
they  do  not  fail  to  admonish  us  to  begin  our  prayers,
and  to  perform  many  ceremonies,  in  order  to  make
them  win.

They  have  no  sooner  arrived  at  the  appointed
place  than  the  two  parties  take  their  places  on  oppo-
site sides  of  the  cabin  and  fill  it  from  top  to  bottom,
above  and  below  the  Andichons, —  which  are  sheets
of  bark  making  a  sort  of  canopy  for  a  bed,  or  shelter,


204  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

on  fe  couch  e  la  nuidt.  II  s'en  met  fur  les  perches
conchies  &  fufpendues  le  long  de  la  cabane.  Les
deux  ioiieurs  font  au  milieu  [167]  auec  leurs  affef-
feurs  qui  tiennent  les  forts,  Chacun  de  ceux  qui  font
a  l'aflemblee,  partie  contre  quel qu* autre  ce  qu'il
veut:  &  on  commence  le  ieu.

C'eft  pour  lors  que  tout  le  monde  fe  met  a  prier
ou  marmoter  ie  ne  fcay  qu'elles  paroles,  auec  des
geftes  &  des  empreffemens  de  mains,  d'yeux,  &  de
tout  le  vif age :  le  tout  pour  attirer  a  f oy  le  bon-heur,
&  exhorter  leurs  Demons  de  prendre  courage,  &  de
ne  fe  pas  laiffer  tourmenter.

Quelques-vns  font  deputez  pour  faire  des  execra-
tions &  des  geftes  tout  contraires,  a  deflein  de  re-
poufler  le  mal-heur  de  l'autre  coft6,  &  en  faire  peur
au  Demon  du  parti  contraire.

Ce  ieu  s'eft  ioue"  c£t  Hyuer  plufieurs  fois  par  tout
le  pais ;  mais  ie  ne  fcay  comment  il  eft  arriue"  que
ceux  des  bourgs  ou  nous  auons  des  Refidences  y  ont
touliours  efte*  mal  heureux  au  dernier  poindt ;  &  tel
bourg  y  a  perdu  trente  colliers  de  pourcelaine,  cha-
cun de  mille  grains,  qui  eft  en  ce  pais,  comme  fi
vous  difiez  en  France  cinquante  mille  perles  ou
piftoles.  Mais  ce  n'eft  pas  tout,  car  efperants  tou-
liours regaigner  ce  qu'ils  ont  vne  fois  [168]  perdu,
ils  ioiient  facs  a  petun,  robes,  foiiillers  &  chaufles,  en
vn  mot  tout  ce  qu'ils  ont.  De  forte  que  fi  le  mal-
heur  leur  en  veut,  comme  il  eft  arriue*  a  ceux-cy,  ils
reuiennent  a  la  maifon  nuds  comme  la  main,  ayans
quelquefois  perdu  iufques  a  leur  braye\

Ils  ne  s'en  vont  pas  toutesfois  deuant  que  le  ma-
lade  les  ait  remercie"  de  la  fant6  qu'il  a  recouur6e
par  leur  moyen,  fe  profeffant  toufiours  guery  a  la  fin


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  205

which  corresponds  to  that  below,  which  rests  upon
the  ground,  upon  which  they  sleep  at  night.  It  is
placed  upon  poles  laid  and  suspended  the  whole
length  of  the  cabin.  The  two  players  are  in  the
middle,  [167]  with  their  assistants,  who  hold  the
charms ;  each  of  those  in  the  assembly  bets  against
whatever  other  person  he  chooses,  and  the  game
begins.

It  is  then  that  every  one  begins  to  pray  or  mutter
I  know  not  what  words,  with  gestures,  and  eager
motions  of  the  hands,  eyes,  and  the  whole  face, —  all
to  attract  to  himself  good  luck,  and  to  exhort  their
Demons  to  take  courage  and  not  let  themselves  be
tormented.

Some  are  deputed  to  utter  execrations,  and  to  make
precisely  contrary  gestures, —  with  the  purpose  of
driving  ill  luck  back  to  the  other  side,  and  of  impart-
ing fear  to  the  Demon  of  the  opponents.

This  game  was  played  several  times  this  Winter,
all  over  the  country ;  but  I  do  not  know  how  it  has
happened  that  the  people  of  the  villages  where  we
have  Residences  have  always  been  unlucky  to  the
last  degree,  and  a  certain  village  lost  thirty  porce-
lain collars,  each  of  a  thousand  beads, — which  are
in  this  country  equal  to  what  you  would  call  in  France
fifty  thousand  pearls  or  pistoles.  But  this  is  not  all ;
for,  hoping  always  to  regain  what  they  have  once
[168]  lost,  they  stake  tobacco  pouches,  robes,  shoes,
and  leggings, —  in  a  word,  all  that  they  have.  So
that  if  ill  luck  attack  them,  as  happened  to  these,
they  return  home  as  naked  as  the  hand,  having  some-
times lost  even  their  clouts.

They  do  not  go  away,  however,  until  the  patient
has  thanked  them  for  the  health  he  has  recovered


206  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

de  toutes  ces  belles  ceremonies ;  quoy  que  f otment  ils
ne  la  faffent  pas  longue  apres  en  ce  monde.

Le  bon  eft  qu'en  fuite  de  ces  pertes,  nos  Barbares
retournez  a  la  maifon,  ne  manquent  pas  de  nous
venir  reprocher,  que  voila  iuftement  a  quoy  profite
de  croire,  &  qu'on  voit  bien  en  effet  que  tout  ce  que
nous  pretendons,  n'eft  que  de  rui'ner  les  lieux  ou
nous  faifons  noftre  demeure,  &  ainfi  peu  a  peu  ruiner
tout  le  pais.  Que  depuis  que  nous  fommes  auec  eux
&  qu'on  leur  a  parle*  de  Dieu  ils  ne  fongent  plus,
leurs  forts  &  Afctfandics  n'ont  plus  de  forces,  ils  font
mal-heureux  par  tout,  bref  il  n'y  a  mifere  qui  ne  les
accompagne.

[169]  le  ferois  infiny  fi  ie  voulois  raconter  tout  ce
qui  s'eft  pafse"  de  femblable  a  ce  que  deffus,  qui
regarde  les  ceremonies  publiques,  les  danfes  diffe-
rentes,  les  feftins  d'tftaerohi,  ou  du  feu,  &  de  fem-
blables  fuperftitions,  qui  fe  font  dif-je  paflees  c6t
hyuer  dernier  en  ce  feul  bourg  d'ou  i'efcry :  ou  toute-
fois  ie  puis  dire  auec  affeurance,  qu'on  en  a  moins
faidt  qu'en  pas  vn  autre  bourg  du  pays.  Ie  ne  puis
me  refoudre  voyant  la  longueur  ou  cela  me  porteroit,
a  entamer  le  narr6,  &  le  difcours  a  fonds  des  autres
fuperftitions  particulieres  qu'on  defcouure  tous  les
iours. Ie  me  contenteray  de  ce  qui  fuit.

Quelques-vns  de  nos  Barbares,  &  entr' autres  vn
de  nos  pauures  Renegats,  racontant  vn  iour  a  vn  de
nos  Peres  les  aduantages  qu'ils  ont  a  retenir  &  con-
feruer  leur  Afctfandic,  ou  diable  familier,  que  le  Pere
l'exhortoit  de  quitter.  Helas,  dit-il,  que  me  dis-tu
la?  quand  ie  vay  en  traite  ie  n'ay  qu'a  ouurir  le  fac
ou  il  eft,  ie  luy  recommande  de  me  faire  auoir  vn
colier  de  pourcelaine  de  tant  de  grains,  vne  robe  ou


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  207

through  their  help,  always  professing  himself  cured
at  the  end  of  all  these  fine  ceremonies, —  although
frequently  he  does  not  do  this  long  afterward  in  this
world.

The  best  of  it  is,  that,  in  consequence  of  these
losses,  our  Barbarians  upon  returning  home  do  not
hesitate  to  come  and  reproach  us, — saying  that  this
is  precisely  what  they  gain  by  believing ;  and  that
indeed  they  plainly  see  that  our  sole  intention  is  but
to  ruin  the  places  where  we  have  made  our  abode,
and  thus,  little  by  little,  to  ruin  the  whole  country ;
that  since  we  have  been  with  them,  and  have  told
them  of  God,  they  no  longer  dream,  their  charms
and  Ascwandics  have  no  more  power,  they  are  un-
lucky in  everything, —  in  fact,  there  is  no  evil  that
does  not  accompany  them.

[169]  My  task  would  be  endless  if  I  should  recount
all  that  has  taken  place  like  the  above,  as  regards
public  ceremonies,  the  various  dances,  the  feasts  of
Outaerohi  and  of  fire,  and  like  superstitions, —  which
have,  I  say,  taken  place  this  last  winter  in  this  one
village  whence  I  am  writing,  where,  however,  I  can
say  with  certainty  that  fewer  of  them  have  been
observed  than  in  any  other  village  of  the  country.
I  cannot  bring  myself,  seeing  the  length  to  which
that  would  take  me,  to  enter  upon  a  narrative  and
exhaustive  discussion  of  the  other  individual  super-
stitions that  one  encounters  every  day.  I  will  con-
tent myself  with  the  following :

Some  of  our  Barbarians,  and,  among  others,  one
of  our  poor  Renegades,  were  recounting  one  day  to
one  of  our  Fathers  the  advantages  that  they  possess
in  retaining  and  preserving  their  Ascwandic,  or
familiar  demon. When  the  Father  exhorted  him  to


208  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.17

mante  de  tant  de  peaux  de  caftor ;  ie  luy  iette  en
hommage  &  recognoiflance  [170]  quelques  grains  de
pourcelaine,  &  quelque  piece  ou  morceau  de  caflor;
finalement  ie  fais  le  feftin:  Ie  m'en  vay  la  deffus,  &
ce  que  i'ay  pretendu  ne  manque  iamais.  Ma  femme,
dit-il,  tremble  quand  ie  la  tire  pour  luy  parler,  mais
c'eft  vne  femme :  Le  Pere  le  pria  de  le  l'y  faire  voir.
O,  dit-il,  mon  nepueu  voila  vne  grade  demande;
mais  que  donneras  tu?  C6t  homme  paffe  pour  vn
des  plus  fages  &  des  plus  referuez  du  bourg,  &  en
effet  il  reft!  iugez  du  refte.  Ce  pauure  malheureux
eft  alle  a  la  guerre  auec  des  regrets  de  noftre  part
qui  ne  fe  peuuent  expliquer,  &  des  craintes  des  mal-
heurs  qui  luy  peuuent  arriuer,  &  en  fuitte  a  fa  famille,
qui  eft  grande  &  confiderable.

Vn  autre  fe  plaignant  que  fon  fort  n'auoit  plus  de
force,  ny  pour  la  pefche,  ny  pour  la  chaffe,  ny  pour
la  traidte,  mais  fur  tout  pour  le  jeu.  Le  Pere  luy
demanda,  que  faudroit-il  pour  luy  rendre  fa  vertu?
vn  feftin,  refpond  le  barbare,  mais  quoy  ie  n'ay  ny
chair,  ny  poiflon.

Ie  ne  fcay  comme  qualifier  les  f eftins  au  regard  de
nos  Sauuages,  c'eft  l'huyle  de  leurs  onguents,  le  miel
de  leurs  medecins,  le  preparatif  de  leurs  maux,  l'e-
ftoille  [171]  de  leur  conduite,  l'Alcyon  de  leur  repos,
le  reffort  de  leurs  refforts  &  Afctfandics,  bref  l'inftru-
ment  general  ou  condition  fans  laquelle  rien  ne  fe
fait,  C'eft  a  cela  &  pour  cela  que  font  referuez  les
meilleurs  morceaux  defquels  toute  la  famille  fe  pri-
uera  pour  les  conferuer  pour  les  occafions  d'vn  fonge
ou  de  maladie.  Le  Diable  ay  ant  gaigne*  qu'on  luy
gardaft  toufiours  &  referuaft-on  le  meilleur  &  le  plus
beau : Et  c'eft  ce  qui  donne  fuiet  de  les  qualifier  veri-


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  209

give  it  up,  \i  Alas!  "  said  lie,  "  what  is  that  thou  art
saying  to  me?  When  I  go  to  trade,  I  have  only  to
open  the  pouch  where  he  is ;  I  request  him  to  procure
for  me  a  porcelain  collar  of  so  many  beads,  or  a
robe  or  mantle  of  so  many  beaver  skins;  I  throw
him,  in  homage  and  gratitude,  [170]  some  porcelain
beads,  and  a  piece  or  morsel  of  beaver;  finally,  I
make  the  feast;  then  I  go  away,  and  what  I  have
aimed  at  never  fails  me.  My  wife,"  said  he,  "  trem-
bles when  I  draw  him  out  to  speak  to  him;  but  she  is
a  woman. ' '  The  Father  begged  that  he  would  let  him
see  it.  M  Oh,  my  nephew,  what  a  great  favor  thou
askest !  "  said  he ;  ' '  but  what  wilt  thou  give  ?  • '  This
man  passes  for  one  of  the  wisest  and  most  discreet
men  of  the  village;  and,  in  fact,  he  is!  Judge  of
the  rest.  This  poor  wretch  has  gone  to  war,  with
inexpressible  regrets  on  our  part,  and  fears  of  mis-
fortune that  may  happen  to  him,  and  consequently
to  his  family,  which  is  a  large  and  prominent  one.

Another,  complaining  that  his  charm  had  no  more
power, —  either  in  fishing,  or  hunting,  or  trading,
but  above  all,  in  gambling, — the  Father  asked  him
what  would  be  necessary  to  restore  to  it  its  virtue.
1 '  A  feast, ' '  replied  the  barbarian,  l '  but  how  ?  I  have
neither  meat  nor  fish ! "

I  do  not  know  how  to  characterize  feasts,  as  regards
our  Savages.  They  are  the  oil  of  their  ointments,
the  honey  of  their  medicines,  the  preparations  for
their  hardships,  a  star  [171]  for  their  guidance,  the
Alcyon  of  their  repose,  the  spring  of  their  activities
and  of  their  Ascwandics, —  in  short,  the  general
instrument  or  condition  without  which  nothing  is
done.  It  is  to  this  and  for  this  that  the  best  pieces
are  reserved,  of  which  the  whole  family  will  deprive


210  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES (Vol.  17

tables  facrifices,  particulierement  lors  que  le  fonge
ou  la  maladie  demande  le  maffacre  d'vn  chien,  com-
me  nous  auons  tantoft  dit;  ce  qui  n'arriue  que  trop
fouuent.

Mais  pour  retourner  a  nos  Afctfandics  ou  diables
familiers,  la  refponfe  commune  de  ceux  que  nous
perfecutons  fur  ce  fujet;  eft,  qu'il  n'y  a  perfonne  qui
n'en  ait,  &  que  s'ils  n'en  auoient,  ils  feroient  en  tout
&  par  tout  mal-heureux.  II  eft  vray,  qu'il  y  a  en
cela  du  plus  &  du  moins :  quelques  vns  en  ont  en
nombre  &  de  plus  expr6s  &  plus  emcaces  que  les
autres.  Les  vns  les  acheptent  des  Nations  voiiines,
particulierement  des  Algonquains  qui  font  en  repu-
tation d'en  auoir  d'excellens,  [172]  &  c'eft  la  mar-
chandife  la  plus  chere  &  precieufe  du  pais,  les  autres
les  ont  herite*  de  leurs  parens.  C'eft  de  la  facon
qu'en  auoit  eu  le  Chreftien  fufmentionne*  de  ce  bourg,
Iofeph  Chihtfatenhtfa,  qui  aufli-toft  qu'il  eut  appris
que  cela  eftoit  contre  les  commandemens  de  Dieu,  &
luy  defplaifoit,  le  ietta  bien  loing  au  premier  voyage
qu'il  fit:  par  ou  depuis  lors  qu'il  repaffe,  il  a  tou-
fiours  peur  qu'il  ne  fe  remette  dans  fon  fac,  comme
il  eft  arriu6  a  plufieurs,  qui  par  defpit  de  n' auoir  pas
eu  ce  qu'ils  auoient  demande"  ayans  iette"  leur  AfcSan-
dic,  l'ont  apres  trouu6,  ou  dans  leur  fac,  ou  dans
quelqu'vne  de  leur  quaifle.

Ie  ne  diray  rien  des  Vifiteurs  ou  Medecins,  nom-
mez  en  leur  langue  Ocata:  ny  aufii  des  Apotiquaires,
ou  donneurs  de  remedes,  nommez  Ontetfans.  Ie
diray  feulement  que  les  premiers  fe  feruent  fouuent
d'eau  ou  de  feu  pour  recognoiftre  l'eftat  &  le  mal  de
la  perfonne  malade,  &  prononcer  en  fuite  leurs  ordon-
nances :  &  ce  toufiours  auec  les  circonftances  de  tortue


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  t63g  211

itself  in  order  to  save  them  for  the  emergencies  of  a
dream  or  of  sickness,  the  Devil  having  induced  them
always  to  keep  and  reserve  for  him  the  best  and  finest.
And  it  is  this  that  gives  reason  to  call  them  veri-
table sacrifices,  especially  when  the  dream  or  the
sickness  requires  the  slaughter  of  a  dog,  as  we  said  a
little  while  ago, —  which  happens  only  too  often.

But  to  return  to  our  Ascwandics  or  familiar  demons ;
the  common  answer  of  those  whom  we  importune
upon  this  subject  is,  that  there  is  not  one  who  does
not  have  them,  and  that,  if  they  did  not  have  them,
they  would  be  always  and  everywhere  unlucky.  It
is  true  that  there  is  more  or  less  difference  in  these ;
some  persons  have  many  of  them,  and  some  are  more
positive  and  efficacious  than  are  others.  Some  buy
them  from  the  neighboring  Nations,  especially  from
the  Algonquains,  who  are  reputed  to  have  excellent
ones,  [172]  and  this  is  the  most  costly  and  precious
merchandise  of  the  country;  others  have  inherited
them  from  their  relatives.  It  was  in  this  way  that
one  came  into  the  possession  of  the  above-mentioned
Christian  of  this  village,  Joseph  Chihwatenhwa, —
who,  as  soon  as  he  learned  that  this  was  contrary  to
the  commandments  of  God  and  displeased  him,
threw  it  far  away  on  the  first  journey  he  made ;  and
since  then,  when  he  passes  over  that  route,  he  is
always  afraid  that  it  will  return  into  his  pouch, — as
has  happened  to  several,  who,  through  vexation  at
not  having  obtained  what  they  had  asked  for,  hav-
ing thrown  away  their  Ascwandic,  found  it  after-
wards in  their  pouch,  or  in  one  of  their  chests.

I  will  say  nothing  of  the  Visitors  or  Physicians,
called  in  their  language  '  •  Ocata ; ' '  nor  of  their  Apoth-
ecaries, or  givers  of  remedies,  called  "  Ontetsans."


212  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SU1TES [Vol.  17

qu'ils  remuent,  dont  nous  auons  parle  cy-deflus,  &
de  chanfon  qu'ils  chantent,  &  autres  circonftances
du  tout  impertinentes.

[173]  Les  feconds  ne  donnent  aufli  d' ordinaire
leurs  remedes  qu'auec  l'appareille  de  femblables  cir-
conftances, &  des  exhortations  a  leurs  remedes,  d'a-
uoir  l'effecl:  pretendu.  Que  fi  l'Ocata,  ou  Vifiteur  a
prononce  que  c'eft  vn  fort;  l'Apotiquaire  ou  l'Aret-
fan  ne  manque  pas  de  faire  voir  quelque  chofe  dans
fa  main  par  foupleffe  ou  autrement,  &  quelquefois
dans  la  matiere  qu'il  a  fait  vomir,  de  ce  qui  dans  le
fens  commun  de  ceux  du  pais  paffe  pour  fort.

Les  tfenroronons,  qui  font  ces  eftrangers  arriuez  de
nouueau  en  ce  pays,  dont  nous  auons  parle"  aux  Cha-
pitres  precedens,  font  excellens  pour  tirer  vne  fleche
du  corps  &  en  guerir  la  playe,  mais  la  recepte  n'a
point  de  force  qu'en  pre  fence  d'vne  femme  grofle:
dont  le  diable  a  rendu  la  circonftance  grandement
confiderable  en  ces  pays,  foit  a  bon-heur,  foit  a  mal-
heur  en  mille  rencontres  &  occafions,  mais  il  faut  bri-
fer  icy.

En  voila  affez  pour  fair  voir  vn  efchantillon  de
l'eftat  miferable  de  ces  pauures  peuples  parmy  lef-
quels  nous  viuons.  Ce  qui  ne  peut  qui  ne  donne  de
la  compaflion  a  tous  ceux  qui  ont  vne  foy  faindle
[174]  &  viue,  de  ce  que  les  hommes  font  a  Dieu,
&  Dieu  aux  hommes,  &  de  ce  que  nous  deuenons
apres  la  mort.

Ie  prie  tous  ceux  qui  ietteront  les  yeux  fur  ce  narre"
de  confiderer  le  befoin  que  nous  auons  de  leurs
f aindtes  prieres  &  deuotions  ?  veu  les  combats  &  batail-
les  que  nous  auons  a  liurer  &  a  fouftenir  tous  les
iours,  pour  eftablir  en  ce  pays  vn  autre  Souuerain


1639-40]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  213

I  will  only  mention  that  the  former  often  employ-
water  or  fire  to  ascertain  the  condition  and  disease
of  the  sick  person,  and  to  give  their  orders  accord-
ingly,—  this  being  always  accompanied  by  the  shak-
ing of  the  tortoise,  which  we  have  already  mentioned,
and  the  singing  of  songs,  and  by  other  altogether
senseless  adjuncts.

[173]  The  latter  class  also  do  not  usually  give  their
remedies  except  with  the  pomp  of  similar  accompani-
ments, and  with  exhortations  to  their  remedies  to
attain  the  desired  effect.  But  if  the  Ocata,  or  Visitor,
has  declared  that  it  is  a  case  of  a  charm,  the  Apothe-
cary, or  the  Aretsan,  does  not  fail  to  show  something
in  his  hand,  by  dexterity  or  otherwise,  and  some-
times in  the  matter  that  has  been  vomited  up,  which,
in  the  general  opinion  of  the  natives,  passes  for  a
charm.

The  Wenroronons, —  those  strangers  who  recently
arrived  in  this  country,  and  of  whom  we  have  spok-
en in  preceding  Chapters, —  excel  in  drawing  an  arrow
from  the  body  and  in  curing  the  wound ;  but  the  pre-
scription has  no  efficacy  except  in  the  presence  of  a
pregnant  woman,  whose  condition  the  devil  has
rendered  highly  important  in  these  countries,  for
good  as  well  as  bad  luck,  in  a  thousand  contingencies
and  occasions. But  we  must  break  off  here.

This  is  enough  to  give  a  specimen  of  the  wretched
condition  of  these  poor  peoples  among  whom  we
live,  which  cannot  fail  to  inspire  with  compassion  all
those  who  possess  a  holy  and  living  faith  [174]  *n
what  men  are  to  God,  and  God  is  to  men,  and  in
what  becomes  of  us  after  death.

I  pray  all  those  who  shall  cast  their  eyes  over  this
narrative  to  consider  the  need  we  have  of  their  holy


214  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  17

que  celuy  qui  depuis  tous  les  fiecles  y  a  fi  tirannique-
ment  vfurp6  l'empire  de  Dieu  &  de  Iesvs  Christ,
pour  les  droidts  &  la  gloire  duquel  puifiions  nous  tous
eftre  confommez. Ainu  foit-il.


1639-40]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  215

prayers  and  devotions, —  seeing  the  combats  and  bat-
tles we  have  to  give  and  sustain  every  day,  in  order
to  establish  in  this  country  a  Sovereign  other  than
he  who,  since  all  ages,  has  tyranically  usurped  the  em-
pire of  God  and  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  whose  rights  and
glory  may  we  all  entirely  devote  ourselves. Amen.


XXXV  — XXXVII
Miscellaneous  Documents,  1640

XXXV. —  Lettre  du  P.  Hierosme  Lalemant,  a  Mgr.  Cardinal
Due  de  Richelieu  ;  Des  Hurons,  28  mars,  1640

XXXVI. —  Epistola  Patris  Hieronymi  Lalemant,  ad  R.  P.
Mutium  Vitelleschi,  Prsepositum  Generalem  ;
Apud  Hurones,  1  April.,  1640

XXXVII. —  Epistola  Patris  Jacobi  Buteux,  ad  R.  P.  Mutium
Vitelleschi,  Praepositum  Generalem  ;  Tria  Flu-
mina,  [1640]


SOURCE :  Document  XXXV.  is  reprinted  from  Roche-
monteix's  Les  J  ^suites  et  la  Nouvelle-France ,  vol.  i.,  pp.
479-481;  the  French  original  is  in  the  Archives  du  minis-
tere  des  Affaires  £trangeres,  Paris.  For  Documents  XXXVI.
and  XXXVII.,  we  follow  Father  Felix  Martin's  apographs
of  the  original  Latin,  MSS.  Soc.  Jes.


218  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  17


[479]  Lettre  du  P.  Hierosme  Lalemant  de  la  Com-

pagnie  de  Jesus  a  Monseigneur  l'Emi-

nentissime  Cardinal  Due

de  Richelieu.

Des  Hurons  en  la  Nouvelle- France
28  mars  1640.

MONSEIGNEUR,
Les  dernieres  lettres  qui  nous  sont  venues
de  France  rautomne  passe\  nous  ont  fait  sca-
voir  entr'autres  choses  qu'il  avoit  plu  a  Vostre  Emi-
nence estendre  son  zele  et  sa  charite*  jusques  a  ce
bout  du  monde  ou  nous  sommes,  assignant  un  fond
pour  l'entretien  de  quelques  uns  de  nostre  Compa-
gnie  qui  y  travaillent  a  la  conversion  des  barbares.
II  faut  avouer,  Monseigneur,  que  e'est  une  des  sen-
sibles  consolations  que  nous  ayons  receu,  que  de  nous
voir  dans  le  souvenir  d'une  personne  que  les  glori-
euses  actions  ont  rendu  recommandable  a  toute  la
postSrite* :  et  les  esp6rances  que  nous  avons,  du  bon
succes  des  affaires  que  la  divine  providence  nous  a
mis  en  main,  se  sont  trouv6es  accrues  de  beaucoup,
nous  voyant  doresnavant  employes  par  celui  a  qui  se
mesler  d'une  affaire  et  lui  causer  un  bon  succes,  sem-
ble  estre  une  mesme  chose.  Nous  n'avons  jamais
pense*  pouvoir  faire  a  Votre  Eminence  un  remerci-
ment  digne  d'une  telle  faveur,  mais  nous  avons  bien
eu  du  regret  de  ne  pouvoir  faire  au  moins  plustost
nous  mesmes,  celuy  que  nous  pouvions. En  atten-


1639-40]  /.  LALEMANT  TO  RICHELIEU  219


[479]  Letter  from  Father  Hierosme  Lalemant  of
the  Society  of  Jesus,  to  Monseigneur  the
Most  Eminent  Cardinal,  Duke
de  Richelieu.

From  the  Hurons  in  New  France.
March  28,  1640.

MONSEIGNEUR,
The  last  letters  that  came  to  us  from  France
last  autumn  made  known  to  us,  among  other
things,  that  it  had  pleased  Your  Eminence  to  extend
your  zeal  and  your  charity  even  to  this  end  of  the
world ^where  we  are,  assigning  a  fund  for  the  main-
tenance of  some  of  our  Society  who  work  here  for
the  conversion  of  the  barbarians.  It  must  be  con-
fessed, Monseigneur,  that  it  is  one  of  the  touching
consolations  that  we  have  received,  to  see  ourselves
remembered  by  a  personage  whom;;  glorious  deeds
have  rendered  deserving  of  praise  from  all  posterity ;
and  the  hopes  that  we  entertain,  of  a  favorable  out-
come to  the  affairs  that  divine  providence  has  placed
in  our  hands,  are  materially  strengthened  by  seeing
ourselves  henceforth  employed  by  one  to  whom  tak-
ingj;part  in  an  affair  and  bringing  it  to  a  successful
issue,  seem  to  be  one  and  the  same  thing.  We  never
expected  to  be  able  to  render  Your  Eminence  thanks
worthy  of  such  a  favor,  but  we  have  deeply  regretted
our  inability  to  accomplish,  at  least  sooner,  what  may
be  in  our  power. While  awaiting  the  opportunity


220  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

dant  le  moyen  de  nous  en  acquitter,  nous  avons  tas-
che*  de  satisfaire  a  1'  interest  de  ce  retardement,  par
un  redoublement  de  prieres  envers  Dieu  pour  la  sant6
et  prosperity  de  Vostre  Eminence ;  et  voicy  mainte-
nant  qu'au  nom  de  tous  ceux  de  nostre  Compagnie
qui  sont  icy,  je  luy  en  fay  le  plus  humble  et  le  plus
cordial  remerciment  qui  m'est  possible.

Que  si  Vostre  Eminence  desire  scavoir  en  peu
de  mots  quel  bien  a  produit  sa  charit6,  voicy,  Mon-
seigneur,  ce  que  j'en  puis  dire:  On  a  annonce*
l'Evangile  a  plus  de  dix  mille  sauvages,  non  tant  en
general,  qu'a  chaque  famille,  et  presque  a  chaque
personne  [480]  en  particulier :  on  en  a  baptis6  dans
les  maladies  extraordinaires  qui  sont  survenues  plus
de  mille,  dont  au  moins  plusieurs  petits  enfans  s'en
sont  envois  au  Ciel ;  et  pour  comble  de  bonheur,  on
a  endur6  force  persecutions.

Nous  trouvans  asse"s  forts  de  langue,  pour  nous
estendre  encore  da  vantage,  nous  ne  songeons  qu'au
plus  ultra ;  mais  il  faut  avouer  que  les  difficult6s  en
sont  du  tout  extraordinaires.

J'abuserais  de  la  patience  de  Vostre  Eminence,  de
les  luy  declarer  plus  particulierement ;  je  lui  dire"
seulement  que  nous  avons  icy  toutes  les  difficulty
de  ceux  qui  ont  travaille*  en  ces  derniers  siecles  a  la
conversion  des  gentils,  ou  d'autres,  qui  pour  le  moins
les  esgalent;  et  nous  n'avons,  ny  ne  pouvons  avoir,
les  secours  et  assistances  qu'ont  eu  les  autres  pais.
Cela  ne  nous  fait  aucunement  perdre  courage,  nous
souvenant  du  Maistre,  qui  nous  applique  a  cette  par-
tie  de  son  champ ;  au  contraire,  nous  ne  sommes  pas
peu  consoles  de  nous  voir  engag6s  par  son  ordre  a  un
employ,  ou  nous  sommes  contraints  de  d£pendre
uniquement  de  sa  Providence,  et  assistance.


1639-40]  /.  LALEMANT  TO  RICHELIEU  221

for  acquitting  ourselves  thereof,  we  have  tried  to
make  amends,  with  interest,  for  this  delay  by  redou-
bling our  prayers  to  God  for  the  health  and  prosperity
of  Your  Eminence ;  and  here  I  now  offer  you,  in  the
name  of  all  those  of  our  Society  who  are  here,  the
most  humble  and  most  cordial  thanks  that  I  am  able
to  express.

Now  if  Your  Eminence  desire  to  know  in  a  few
words  what  good  your  charity  has  accomplished,  this,
Monseigneur,  is  what  I  can  say:  The  Gospel  has
been  announced  to  more  than  ten  thousand  savages,
not  only  in  general,  but  to  each  family,  and  almost
to  every  person  [480]  individually;  more  than  a
thousand  have  been  baptized,  in  the  extraordinary
epidemics  which  have  come  upon  them,  and  of  these
many  little  children,  at  least,  have  taken  flight  to
Heaven;  and  to  crown  this  good  fortune,  we  have
endured  many  persecutions.

Finding  ourselves  strong  enough  in  the  language
to  launch  out  still  more,  all  our  thoughts  are  of  the
plus  ultra;  but  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  difficul-
ties therein  are  altogether  extraordinary.

I  would  abuse  the  patience  of  Your  Eminence  by
mentioning  these  in  more  detail ;  I  will  only  say  that
we  have  here  all  the  difficulties  of  those  who  have
labored  in  these  later  centuries  for  the  conversion  of
the  Gentiles,  or  others  that  are  at  least  equal  to
them, — and  we  have  not,  nor  can  we  have,  the  suc-
cor and  assistance  that  the  other  countries  have  had.
This  causes  us  in  no  wise  to  lose  courage,  keeping
in  mind  the  Master  who  assigns  us  to  this  part  of  his
field ;  on  the  contrary,  we  are  not  a  little  consoled  at
seeing  ourselves  engaged  by  his  order  in  an  occupa-
tion in  which  we  are  obliged  to  depend  solely  upon
his  Providence  and  aid.


222  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

Entre  les  difficulty  que  nous  apprehendons  plus
grandes  que  jamais,  au  progres  des  affaires  de  sa
divine  Majest6,  est  le  voisinage  des  Anglais  et  Fla-
mans,  qui  bordent  les  costes  de  l'oc6an  de  nostre
coste\  et  qui  rehaussent  et  fortifient  puissament  le
courage  des  ennemis  des  peuples  qui  sont  nos  alli6s,
parmy  lesquels  nous  vivons,  et  par  le  seul  moyen
desquels  nous  pouvons  passer  plus  avant  soit  au  mi-
dy,  soit  a  l'occident.  Les  entreprises  de  ces  nations
ennemies  leur  ayant,  particulierement  depuis  quel-
ques  ann6es,  r6ussi  a  souhait,  ils  ont  reduit  ces  pauvres
peuples  icy  a  un  tel  poinct,  que  je  ne  croy  pas  que,
si  on  n'arreste  le  mal  en  sa  source,  il  puissent  plus
longtemps  subsister;  c'est  ce  qu'on  accordera  facile-
ment  si  on  considere  qu'en  moins  de  dix  ans,  ils  se
trouvent  r6duits  du  nombre  de  trente  mille  ames  a
celuy  de  dix  mille ;  de  sorte  que  si  par  le  passe*,  dans
la  multitude  qu'ils  6toient,  ils  n'ont  pu  register  a  leurs
ennemis,  qu'en  pouvons  nous  esperer  a  l'avenir?

Et  quoy  qu'ils  se  trouvassent  assez  puissans  pour
y  register  encore  quelque  temps  dans  leur  pais,  il  se
faudrait  au  moins  attendre,  d'en  voir  bientost  le  com-
merce entierement  rompu  avec  nos  frangois,  les  enne-
mis devenant  tous  les  ans  plus  puissans,  et  plus  re-
dou tables  sur  la  riviere  qui  est  1' unique  passage  qu'ils
[481]  ayent  pour  y  arriver:  cette  rupture  nous  seroit
esgale  a  leur  mine,  puisqu'elle  nous  mettroit  dans
l'impuissance  de  subsister  icy  plus  longtemps,  et  y
faire  les  affaires  de  nostre  Maistre,  cela  ne  se  pou-
vant  sans  communication  avec  nostre  France.

Oserais-je,  Monseigneur,  dire  la  dessus  a  Vostre
Eminence  'une  de  mes  pens^es,  qu'il  semble  que  le
ciel  attende  de  son  zele  et  de  sa  g6nerosite\  que
comme  elle  n'a  pu  soufrir  que  l'heresie  et  les  estran-


1639-40]  /.  LALEMANT  TO  RICHELIEU  223

Among  the  difficulties  that  we  apprehend  to  be
more  formidable  than  ever  to  the  progress  of  the
affairs  of  his  divine  Majesty,  is  the  proximity  of  the
English  and  Flemish,  who  line  the  seacoasts  on  our
side,  and  who  excite  and  strongly  fortify  the  courage
of  the  enemies  of  the  tribes  allied  to  us,  among  whom
we  live,  and  by  whose  means  alone  we  can  advance
farther,  either  to  the  south  or  to  the  west.  The
enterprises  of  these  hostile  nations  having  succeeded,
especially  within  a  few  years,  according  to  their
desires,  they  have  reduced  these  poor  peoples  here  to
such  a  degree  that  I  do  not  think,  unless  the  evil  be
stopped  at  its  source,  that  they  can  much  longer  exist.
This  will  be  readily  granted,  when  one  considers  that
in  less  than  ten  years  they  have  become  reduced  from
thirty  thousand  souls  to  ten  thousand ;  so  that  if  in
the  past,  when  their  numbers  were  great,  they  were
unable  to  resist  their  enemies,  what  can  we  expect
for  them  in  the  future  ?

And  although  they  might  prove  strong  enough  to
resist  them  for  some  time  yet  in  their  own  country,
we  must  at  least  expect  soon  to  see  their  trade  with
our  French  entirely  broken  off, —  for  the  enemies
become  every  year  stronger  and  more  formidable
upon  the  river,  which  is  the  only  road  they  [481]
have  for  access  thither.  This  rupture  would  be,  for
us,  equivalent  to  their  ruin,  since  it  would  render  us
unable  to  subsist  here  longer,  and  to  carry  on  among
them  the  affairs  of  our  Master,  which  cannot  be  done
without  communication  with  our  France.

Might  I  dare,  Monseigneur,  to  express  thereupon
to  Your  Eminence  one  of  my  thoughts, —  that  it
seems  as  if  heaven  expects  from  your  zeal  and  gen-
erosity that,  as  you  could  not  suffer  heresy  and  for-


224  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.17

gers  jettassent  en  France  de  plus  grandes  racines,
atissy  ne  permette  elle  pas  qu'en  ce  nouveau  fleuron
de  la  couronne,  ils  y  prennent  pie.  II  semble  jus-
ques  icy,  que  Dieu  a  eu  aggreable  de  reserver  a  Vos-
tre  Eminence  1'  execution  de  tous  les  desirs  et  sou-
haits  de  la  France,  voire  mesme  pour  le  regard  de  la
nouvelle.  On  demandait  autrefois  avec  tant  d'ardeur
1' expulsion  des  huguenots  qui  tenaient  le  milieu  de
ces  terres;  sans  Vostre  Eminence,  qui  a  pour  ce  sujet
sacrine"  ses  propres  interests,  la  chose  serait  encore  a
faire,  au  grand  prejudice  du  bien  de  ce  pays :  je  tiens
pour  assur6,  que  de  cent  ans  d'icy,  et  peut-estre  ja-
mais, nous  ne  nous  voirons  quittes  de  ces  autres  enne-
mis  de  Dieu  et  de  l'Estat,  si  Vostre  Eminence  ne
met  la  main  a  cet  ouvrage.  Peut  estre  que  les  ad-
vantages que  Ton  feroit  a  quelque  particulier  assist6
de  vos  faveurs,  Monseigneur,  et  de  Tautorit6  de  sa
Majeste,  leveroient  bien  des  difficult^,  qui  se  pou-
ront  rencontrer  en  ce  dessein;  mais  il  nous  suffit
pour  en  bien  esperer  que  Vostre  Eminence  l'ayt
agr6e\  J'espere,  Monseigneur,  que  vous  me  par-
donnerez  cette  liberie" ;  mais  je  m'assure  que  Vostre
Eminence  le  feroit  encore  plus  volontiers,  si  elle
pouvait  connoistre  l'inclination  et  V affection  avec
laquelle  [nous]  touts  tant  qui  sommes  icy  de  nostre
Compagnie,  souhaitons  et  demandons  a  Dieu  la  con-
servation, et  le  comble  de  tant  de  benedictions  que
son  infinie  liberalit6  a  verse  sur  elle,  mais  moy  par-
ticulierement  qui  suis,

Monseigneur,
Les  Hurons  en  la  Nouvelle- Vostre  tres  humble,  tres
France,  ce  28  de  mars  1640. obeissant,  e  tres  oblige"

serviteur  selon  Dieu.
Hierosme  Lalemant,
de  la  Compagnie  de  Jesus.


1639-40]  /.  LALEMANT  TO  RICHELIEU


eigners  to  take  deeper  root  in  France,  so  you  will  not
permit  them  to  gain  a  foothold  in  this  new  jewel  of
the  crown?  It  would  seem  that,  hitherto,  God  has
been  pleased  to  reserve  to  Your  Eminence  the  execu-
tion of  all  the  desires  and  wishes  of  France,  even  as
regards  new  France.  Some  time  ago,  the  expulsion
of  the  Huguenots,  who  occupied  the  midst  of  these
lands,  was  so  eagerly  desired;  without  Your  Emi-
nence, who  for  this  object  sacrificed  your  own  inter-
ests,11 the  thing  would  still  remain  to  be  done,  to
the  great  detriment  of  the  welfare  of  this  country.
I  regard  it  as  certain,  that  not  for  a  hundred  years
hence,  and  perhaps  never,  shall  we  see  ourselves  rid
of  these  other  enemies  of  God  and  of  the  State,  if
Your  Eminence  do  not  put  your  hand  to  this  work.
Perhaps  the  advantages  that  might  accrue  to  some
individual  assisted  by  your  favors,  Monseigneur,  and
by  the  authority  of  his  Majesty,  would  remove  many
of  the  difficulties  that  may  be  encountered  in  this
plan ;  but  it  is  enough  for  us  to  hope  that  it  may  be
acceptable  to  Your  Eminence.  I  trust,  Monseigneur,
that  you  will  pardon  me  this  liberty,  but  I  am  sure
that  Your  Eminence  would  do  so  still  more  willingly
if  you  could  know  the  interest  and  affection  with
which  all  of  our  Society  who  are  here  desire,  and
request  from  God,  the  continuance  and  the  plenitude
of  the  many  blessings  that  his  infinite  liberality  has
poured  out  upon  you, — but  especially  I,  who  am,

Monseigneur,
The  Hurons,  New  France, Your  most  humble,  most
this  28th  of  March,  1640.  obedient, and most

obliged  servant  in  God,
Hierosme  Lalemant,

of  the  Society  of  Jesus.


226  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.  17


Epistola  Patris  Hieronymi  Lalemant,  Superioris

Missionis  Huronensis,  ad  Reverendissimum

Patrem  Mutium  Vitelleschi,  Pras-

positum  Generalem  Socie-

tatis  Jesu,  Roirae.

MISSIONES  habuimus  5  in  his  huronum  regio-
nibus:  amplius  quam  10,000  barbaris  praedi-
cantium  Evangelium,  idq.  singulis  eorum
familiis.  Linguam  habebamus  et  ipsi  aures.  Deo
in  quibusdem  occasionibus  ministri  defectum  sup-
plente,  et  tamen  dum  sani  corpore  fuerunt,  non  au-
dierunt :  placuit  igitur  Deo  aures  vellere  per  quoddam
pestilential  genus,  quod  universam  regionem  perva-
sit  et  plures  sepulchro  addixit,  verum  nibilo  meliores
facti  sunt,  immo  solito  amplius  exacerbati,  in  nos
tanquam  in  autores  oium  suorum  malorum  conversi
sunt:  nescio  quibus  nos  calumniis  non  oppresserunt,
ventum  ad  minas,  ad  infestationem,  ad  privata  et
generalia  de  internecione  nostra  consilia,  ad  verbera
denique  sed  levia  et  nondum  sanguine  multo  tincta ;
aliquid  amplius  nisi  Deus  aliter  statuat,  prima  occa-
sione  suspicamur  et  speramus.  .  .  .  Certe  mi-
rari  satis  non  possumus  quod  nunc  etiam  vivimus ;
nam  prseterquam  quod  sine  ullo  milite,  aut  loci
praesidio  hie  sumus,  cum  ne  una  quidem  frumenti  pa-


1639-40] /.  LALEMANT  TO  THE  GENERAL  227


Letter  from  Father  Jerome  Lalemant,  Superior
of  the  Huron  Mission,  to  the  Very  Rev-
erend Father  Mutio  Vitelleschi,
General  of  the  Society  of
Jesus,  at  Rome.

WE  have  had  5  Missions  in  these  regions  of  the
Hurons, — preaching  the  Gospel  to  more
than  10,000  barbarians,  and  that  to  their
several  families.  We  had  the  tongue,  and  they  them-
selves the  ears, —  God  on  certain  occasions  supplying
the  want  of  a  minister, —  and  yet,  while  they  were
sound  in  body,  they  did  not  hear ;  it  therefore  pleased
God  to  pull  their  ears  through  a  certain  kind  of  pes-
tilence, which  spread  over  the  whole  country,  and
adjudged  many  to  the  grave.  Nevertheless,  they
have  become  nowise  better, —  nay,  they  are  even
more  incensed  at  us  than  usual,  and  have  turned  upon
us  as  if  we  were  the  authors  of  all  their  troubles.  I
know  not  with  what  calumnies  they  have  not  loaded
us ;  they  have  come  to  threats,  to  hostility,  to  private
and  public  councils  respecting  our  slaughter,  and
finally  to  blows, —  but  light  ones,  and  not  yet  stained
with  much  blood.  We  suspect  and  look  for  some-
thing further,  on  the  first  occasion,  unless  God  deter-
mine otherwise.  .  .  .  Certainly,  we  cannot  suffi-
ciently wonder  that  we  are  even  now  alive;  for  —
besides  the  fact  that  we  are  here  without  any  soldier
or  local  defense, —  since  we  have  not  even  a  grain  of


228  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  17

trii  granum  nisi  barbaris  illis  vendentibus  habeamus,
ne  sine  ipsis  ab  ullo  aut  ulla  ratione  habere  hactenus
potuerimus,  facillimum  erat  ipsis,  et  nunc  adhuc  est
vel  ex  condicto  victum  negando,  eoque  tendere  visi
sunt  pervenire :  et  tamen  quae  f uit  erga  nos  Dei  pro-
vident! a,  nee  nobis,  nee  domesticis  nostris  27  scilicet
capitibus,  nihil  quicquam  defuit  eorum  quae  his  in
locis  ad  victum  et  vestitum  sunt  usui  immo  et  viliori
pretio  oia  nobis  quam  indigenis  ipsis,  abunde  sup-
peditata.

Caeterum  nequicquam  fremente  dsemone,  ex  mori-
bundis  baptisati  plus  1000,  inter  quos  infantes  pluri-
mi  vitam  infelicem  felici  morte  praevenerunt.  Istud
nos  feliciter  dicam,  an  infeliciter  fefellet,  cum  enim
non  exiguos  nascentis  ecclesiae  nostrae  progressus  hoc
anno  speraremus,  ecclesiam  quidem  nova  prole  fce-
cundavimus,  sed  non  earn  quam  intendebamus,  de
militanti  enim  erat  cogitatio  nostra,  et  providit  Deus
triumphanti.  Is  enim  fuit  his  temporibus  persecu-
tionis  turbo  ut  non  tantum  nulla  facta  fuerit  ad
militantem  nostram  ecclesiam  accessio,  verum  etiam
congregatam  illam  superiore  anno,  pene  omnino  dis-
persarit  et  aboleverit :  suspicamur  eum  forte  ordinem
esse  in  decretis  Dei,  et  per  triumphantem  barbaro-
rum  nostrorum  ecclesiam,  militans  hasc  statuatur;
Dominus  est,  quod  bonum  est  in  oculis  suis  faciat ;
certe  semen  nobis  reliquit,  sed  exiguum  illud  et  te-
nue,  capita  tria  vel  quatuor  familiarum,  anus  aliquot
semen  omnino  sinapis  dicas, aut  fermentum illud


1639-40] /.  LALEMANT  TO  THE  GENERAL  229

native  corn,  except  as  these  barbarians  sell  it, — nor
without  them  have  we  hitherto  been  able  to  obtain
it  from  any  one  or  by  any  process  —  it  was  therefore,
and  certainly  is  now,  very  easy  for  them  by  conven-
tion to  cut  off  our  food,  and  this  they  have  appar-
ently striven  to  accomplish.  And  yet,  such  has  been
God's  providence  toward  us  that  neither  for  us  nor
for  our  27  domestics,  forsooth,  has  anything  at  all
been  wanting  of  those  things  which  in  these  places
are  usual  in  the  way  of  food  and  clothing:  nay,  even,
all  things  were  abundantly  supplied  to  us  at  a  cheap-
er rate  than  to  the  natives  themselves.

But,  the  demon  raging  in  vain,  more  than  1,000
were  baptized  from  among  the  dying,  among  whom
a  great  number  of  children  prevented  an  unhappy
life  by  a  happy  death.  This,  I  will  say,  deceived  us,
whether  happily  or  unhappily;  for,  while  we  hoped
for  no  small  progress  in  our  infant  church  this  year,
we  did  indeed  enrich  the  church  with  a  new  offspring,
but  not  the  one  which  we  had  in  mind:  for  our
thought  was  of  the  church  militant,  whereas  God
provided  for  the  church  triumphant.  For  such  was
the  disturbance  in  these  times  of  persecution,  that
not  only  has  no  addition  been  made  to  our  church
militant,  but  even  the  one  congregated  last  year  has
been  almost  altogether  dispersed  and  disbanded :  we
surmise  that  this  disposition  is  perhaps  in  the  decrees
of  God,  and  that,  through  the  triumphant  church  of
our  barbarians,  this  militant  one  may  be  established.
He  is  the  Lord :  let  him  do  what  is  good  in  his  sight.
Certainly  he  has  left  us  a  seed,  but  that  a  small  and
scanty  one, — three  or  four  heads  of  families,  a  few
old  women, — a  seed  altogether  as  of  mustard  you
may  say,  or  that  hidden  leaven  of  the  gospel,  and


230  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  17

evangelii  absconditum,  atque  utinam!  verum  quid
non  speramus  adjuti  V&  Pis  vix  et  totius  Societatis
nostrae  SS.  et  pp. . . .
apud  hurones  in  nova  Gallia
i  april.  1640

A.  R.  P.  V.
servus  humill.  et  obseq.  idemq.
fil.  in  C.  indig.

HlERON.  LALEMANT.


1639-40] /.  LALEMANT  TO  THE  GENERAL  231

would  it  might  be  that!  What  indeed  do  we  not
hope  in  the  way  of  help  from  Your  Paternity  and
from  the  Sacrifices  and  prayers  of  our  whole  So-
ciety? . . .

Among  the  Hurons  in  new  France,
i  April,  1640.

Your  Very  Reverend  Paternity's
most  humble  and  obedient  and
likewise  unworthy  son  in  Christ,

Jerome  Lalemant.


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  17


Epistola  Patris  Jacobi  Buteux  ad  Reverendissimum

Patrem  Mutium  Vitelleschi,  Praepositum

Generalem  Societatis  Jesu,  Roma*.

AR.  IN  Xo  P.
P.C.

Sex  anni  sunt,  cum  missus  in  canadensem  pro-
yinciam  totidem  annos  in  residentia.  Conceptse  B.  V.
ad  tria  flumina  peregi.  De  qua  paucis  scribere  ad
V.  P.  ex  officio.  Quartum  jam  annum  superioris
habeo.  Quod  si  adhuc  non  praestiti,  dabit  hoc  potius
animo  pusillo  vel  ignorantiae  vitio  quam  negligentiae.
Sita  est  haec  residentia  ad  ripas  fluminis  quod  a  sep-
tentrionali  parte  in  celeberrimum  S11  Laurentii  flumen
per  tres  alv[e]os  influit.  ccelum  habet  salubre,
solum  vero  ferendis  frugibus,  turn  nostratibus  tritico
scilicet,  ordeo,  pisis,  cujusque  generis  oleribus,  turn
indicis  seminibus  idoneum.  frequentibus  undique
fluviis  ac  stagnis,  iisque  piscibus  abundantissimis  in-
tersecatur.  Vnde  fit  ut  a  Gallis  juxta  ac  sylvestri-
bus  ametur.  hi  non  ita  multi  cum  primum  hue
appulimus  imo  et  sequentibus  4  annis  nos  quasi  leta-
lis  morbi  (quo  absumebantur)  autores  publice  convi-
teabantur.  Sed  tandem  (quod  est  Dei  beneficium)
procul  ab  eorum  mentibus  recessit  haec  opinio.  Pa-
rentum  loco  nos  habent,  mansuetiores  fiunt,  et  qui


1639-40]  BUTEUX  TO  THE  GENERAL


Letter  from  Father  Jacques  Buteux  to  the  Very

Reverend  Father,  Mutio  Vitelleschi,  General

of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  at  Rome.

Very  Reverend  Father  in  Christ,
Pax  Christi.
Six  years  have  elapsed  since  I  was  sent  to
the  Canadian  province ;  I  have  spent  the  same  num-
ber of  years  in  the  residence  of  the  Conception  of
the  Blessed  Virgin  at  the  three  rivers,  concerning
which  I  have  a  few  things  to  write  to  Your  Paternity
officially.  I  am  now  serving  my  fourth  year  as
superior.  But  if  hitherto  I  have  not  fulfilled  this
office,  you  will  assign  the  fact  rather  to  my  limited
mind  or  to  the  fault  of  ignorance,  than  to  neglect.

This  residence  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  a  river
which  flows  into  the  very  famous  river  Saint  Law-
rence by  three  mouths,  from  the  north.  The  climate
is  salubrious;  the  soil,  indeed,  adapted  to  bearing
fruits  not  only  for  our  fellow  countrymen, — namely,
wheat,  barley,  peas,  and  vegetables  of  every  kind, —
but  also  Indian  grains.  It  is  everywhere  cut  up  by
numerous  rivers  and  marshes;  and  these  are  very
abundant  in  fish.  Whence  it  happens  that  it  is  loved
nearly  as  much  by  the  French  as  by  the  savages.
These,  not  in  very  great  numbers,  publicly  abused
us  when  we  first  landed  here, —  and  that,  too,  in  the
following  4  years, —  as  the  authors  of  a  certain  mor-
tal disease  (by  which  they  were  consumed).  But
finally  (which  is  a  favor  from  God),  this  opinion  has


234  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.17

ultra  hominum  memoriam  quaerendo  per  sylvas  victu
assuescebant,  agros  hoc  anno  sedesque  fixas  juxta  nos
habere  cceperunt.  Magnum  certe  imo  et  necessari-
um  adjumentum  ad  illos  informandos,  continendos-
que  in  officio  christiano.  Crescit  in  dies  crescetque
illorum  numerus.  Alios  enim  sylvestres  turn  finiti-
mos  turn  remotos  quibuscum  agunt  muneribus  ad  nos
pellicere  sibique  concives  adsciscere  nituntur.  fre-
quences intersunt  iis  quae  spectant  ad  pietatem  cul-
tumq.  divinum.  Ab  eo  tempore  quo  versamur  inter
eos  hie  ad  500  sacris  aquis  lustra vimus  quorum  pleri-
que  (infantes  certe)  ccelo  fruuntur.  Alii  non  minus
assidui  sunt  in  obeundis  hominis  christiani  partibus,
quam  nostrates  Galli  aliunde  sane  pii,  quibus  adagium
immerito  tribuebatur.  ccelum,  non  animum  mutant,
qui  trans  mare  currunt.  Adeo  ut  tritum  sit  inter
Gallos  qui  velit  melior  fieri  transeat  in  novam  fran-
ciam.

Ad  hoc  magnopere  confert  Gubernatoris  hujusce
novi  orbis  Dni.  Montmagny,  militensis  eques  viri
sane  satis  nun  quam  laudati,  singularis  prudentia,
quae  non  vulgari  adjuncta  pietati  omnia  continet  in
officio. Sed  de  hac  nostra  residentia  jam  satis.

De  superioribus  novae  franciae  partibus  dicam  bre-
viter  quod  a  sylvestribus  accepi,  septentrionem  inter
meridiemq.  fixae  sunt  nationes  oppidis  hominibusq.
numerosissimae.  Ad  illas  Europaeorum  nemo,  nec-
dum  Evangelii  praeco  accessit,  saltern  Europaeus.  De
barbaris  aliquis  ad  quasdam  eorum  perferre  potuit


1639-40]  BUTEUX  TO  THE  GENERAL  235

receded  far  from  their  minds.  They  regard  us  as
parents ;  they  become  gentler ;  and  those  who  beyond
the  memory  of  men  were  accustomed  to  seek  their  liv-
ing through  the  forests,  begin  this  year  to  have  fields
and  fixed  abodes  the  same  as  we.  It  is  surely  a  great,
nay,  even  a  necessary,  help  for  training  them  and
keeping  them  in  the  Christian  duty.  Their  number
grows  and  will  increase  from  day  to  day.  For  they
strive  to  allure  to  us,  by  means  of  rewards,  other  sav-
ages, both  neighboring  and  remote,  with  whom  they
deal ;  and  to  unite  these  with  themselves  as  fellow
citizens.  They  are  frequently  interested  in  those
things  which  regard  piety  and  divine  worship.  Since
we  have  been  occupied  among  them,  we  have  here
purified  about  500  with  the  sacred  waters;  most  of
whom  (certainly  the  children)  are  enjoying  heaven.
Others  are  no  less  assiduous  in  discharging  the  duties
of  a  Christian  man  than  our  French  fellow  country-
men,—  truly  pious,  moreover;  to  whom  the  adage
was  unjustly  applied,  coelumy  non  animum  mutant,  qui
trans  mare  currunt, — insomuch  that  it  is  proverbial
among  the  French,  that  "  he  who  wishes  to  become
better,  let  him  cross  over  to  new  France. ' '

To  this  there  greatly  contributes  the  singular  pru-
dence of  the  Governor  of  this  new  world  —  the  Sieur
de  Montmagny,  a  military  man  surely  never  suffi-
ciently praised  —  which,  in  connection  with  an  uncom-
mon piety,  keeps  all  things  in  due  order.  But
enough  of  this  our  residence.

Concerning  the  upper  parts  of  new  France,  I  will
briefly  say  what  I  have  learned  from  the  savages:
between  the  north  and  the  south  are  some  stationary
nations,  greatly  abounding  in  towns  and  men.  To
these,  no  European,  nor  yet  a  herald  of  the  Gospel,


236  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  17

quod  a  nobis  audivit  de  evangelio;  bene  spero  de
nostris  sylvestribus  christianis.  horum  enim  bene-
ficio  (juvante  Deo)  patebit  aditus  Evangelio  ejusq.
lumen  affulgebit  ambulantibus  in  tenebris  et  umbra
mortis.

Ad  opus  tarn  arduum  opus  est  hoibus  bonse  vale-
tudinis,  felicis  memoriae  probataeq.  virtutis.  Sunt
hie  ubi  jam  degimus  obviae  passim  cruces  (ut  ita  lo-
quar)  at  illic  tota  nostrorum  vita  quos  Spiritus  sanctus
ad  suum  opus  segregavit  tota  crux  erit.  Quod  de  me
futurum  sit  ignoro.  Quod  si  me  divina  bonitas
(nil  sub  meritum)  tanti  boni  participem  faciat,  o  me
beatum !  qui  ad  impleam  in  corpore  meo  quae  desunt
passionum  Christi.  Interim  sacris  vestrae  P.  geni-
bus  advolvar  a  qua  pusillus  sacram  benedictionem
praestolabor.

A.  R.  in  C.  P.

humill.  in  D.  fil.

Jacobus  Buteux
In  Residentia  Conceptionis
ad  3  flumina.


1639-40]  BUTEUX  TO  THE  GENERAL  237

has  come, —  at  least  not  a  European  herald.  Some
one  of  the  barbarians  may  have  conveyed  to  certain
of  these  nations  what  he  has  heard  of  the  gospel  from
us.  I  hope  well  of  our  Christian  savages:  for  by
their  favor  (God  helping),  entrance  for  the  Gospel  will
be  opened,  and  its  light  will  shine  upon  them  that
walk  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of  death.

For  a  work  so  arduous  there  is  need  of  men  of  good
health,  excellent  memory,  and  proved  virtue.  There
are  here  where  we  have  already  lived,  crosses  every-
where at  hand  (so  to  speak),  but  there  the  whole  of
our  life, —  of  those  whom  the  holy  Ghost  has  set
apart  for  his  work, — will  be  one  whole  cross.  What
is  to  become  of  me,  I  know  not.  But  if  the  divine
goodness  make  me  (not  at  all  through  my  deserts)
partaker  of  so  great  a  good, —  O  happy  me!  who
shall  fulfill  in  my  body  what  sufferings  are  wanting
to  Christ.  Meanwhile  I  am  prostrate  at  your  Pater-
nity's sacred  knees:  whose  holy  blessing  I  shall
humbly  expect.

Very  Reverend  Father  in  Christ,
your  most  humble  son  in  the  Lord,
Jacques  Buteux.
At  the  Residence  of  the  Conception
at  3  rivers.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  DATA: VOL  XVII

XXXIV

For  bibliographical  particulars  of  this  document,
see  Vol.  XV.

XXXV -XXXVII

Document  XXXV.  is  a  letter  sent  by  Jerome  Lale-
mant  to  Cardinal  Richelieu,  from  the  Huron  coun-
try, under  date  of  March  28,  1640.  The  original
French  MS.  is  in  the  archives  of  the  minister  of
Foreign  Affairs,  in  Paris.  We  follow  the  version
given  in  Rochemonteix's  J  ^suites  et  la  Nouvelle-France,
vol.  i.,  pp.  479-481.

Document  XXXVI.  is  a  Latin  letter  written  to  the
Father  General  by  Lalemant,  also  from  the  Huron
country,  under  date  of  April  1.  The  original  is  in
the  archives  of  the  Society.  We  follow  Father  Felix
Martin's  apograph  thereof,  made  by  him  while  in
Europe  in  1858,  and  now  in  the  Archives  of  St.  Mary's
College,  Montreal.

Document  XXXVII.  is  also  a  Latin  letter  to  the
Father  General,  written  by  Jacques  Buteux,  at  Three
Rivers.  It  is  undated,  but  internally  bears  evidence
of  having  been  sent  in  1640.  The  original  is  in
the  Society's  archives;  we  follow  Father  Martin's
apograph,  as  above.


NOTES  TO  VOL  XVII


(Figures  in  parentheses,  following  number  of  note,  refer  to  pages
of  English  text.)

i  (p.  25). —  Regarding  the  Wenr6hronons,  see  vol.  xvi.,  note  15.

2  (p.  49). — The  arms,  utensils,  ornaments,  and  dress  introduced
by  the  French,  in  their  barter  for  peltries,  were  at  once  seen  by  the
Indians  to  be  superior  to  those  manufactured  by  themselves,  and
were  eagerly  sought.  The  French  early  induced  the  natives  to  turn
their  attention  almost  exclusively  to  the  hunting  of  fur-bearing  ani-
mals,—  to  this  end  teaching  them  the  use  of  European  firearms.
The  tribesmen  finding  it  easier  to  acquire  what  goods  they  needed
by  trading  furs  for  them,  many  of  the  arts  of  domestic  manufacture
were  soon  lost  among  them;  and,  in  time,  they  became  almost
wholly  dependent  on  white  traders  for  their  supplies.

3  (P-  59)- — For  location  of  Teanaustayae,  see  vol.  xiii.,  note  2;
also  map  in  vol.  x.,  facing  p.  319.

4  (p.  65). —  For  sketch  of  this  and  of  the  other  Iroquois  clans,  see
vol.  viii.,  note  34.

5  (p.  99). — Martin  {Life  of  Jogues,  app.  A.)  is  correct  in  saying
that  there  were  two  missions  bearing  the  name  of  St.  Ignace.  The
one  captured  by  the  Iroquois  in  1649  was  apparently  thus  named  but
a  short  time  before  its  destruction  {Relation  of  1648,  chap,  ix.);  it
was  not  more  than  five  miles  from  Ste.  Marie-on-the-Wye.

The  other,  known  by  the  Hurons  as  Taenhatentaron,  is  placed  by
Lalemant  {Relation  of  1644,  chap,  vii.)  at  a  distance  of  about  six
leagues  from  Ste.  Marie ;  this  is  evidently  the  St.  Ignace  marked  on
Du  Creux's  map  as  near  Sturgeon  River.  Martin  inclined  to  the
view  that  this  mission  was  situated  on  what  is  now  the  Fox  farm  —
lot  no.  20,  in  concession  10  of  Medonte  township,  on  the  slope  facing
Coldwater  River;  for,  when  he  visited  the  district  (1845 ;  see  vol.  v.,
p.  295),  the  remains  found  on  this  farm  were  upon  the  only  site  then
known  in  the  neighborhood.  In  subsequent  years,  however,  when
the  forest  came  to  be  cleared,  remains  indicating  other  sites  were
found  from  two  to  three  miles  west  of  this  one,  and  facing  Sturgeon
River.  One  of  these  corresponds  more  closely  than  does  the  Fox
site,  with  the  reference  in  the  text  to  Taenhatentaron,  as  being
about  five  miles  from  St.  Joseph  (Teanaustayae),  and  also  with  the


242  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£S  UITES

position  assigned  to  that  village  by  Du  Creux;  it  also  furnishes
better  evidence  in  other  respects.

Tache*  appears  to  have  overlooked  the  distinction  between  the  two
villages  named  St.  Ignace.  He  minutely  examined  the  site  on  the
Fox  farm  in  the  mistaken  belief  that  it  was  the  scene  of  Br6beuf's
and  Lalemant's  martyrdom  (Parkman's  Jesuits,  p.  385,  note), —  in
this,  adopting  Martin's  view,  and  also  forgetting  that  there  was  a
second  St.  Ignace ;  so  that  the  site  thus  designated  by  him  does  not
correspond  with  the  true  position  of  either  mission.  The  St.  Ignace
at  which  the  martyrs  perished  was  in  the  present  Tay  township,
about  ten  miles  distant  from  Taenhatentaron. — A.  F.  Hunter.

6  (p.  159). —  See  Brebeuf's  account  of  the  game  of  dish,  in  vol.  x.,
pp.  187,  189.  Cf.  Davis's  "Indian  Games,"  in  Essex  Inst.  Bull.,
vol.  xvii.,  pp.  106- 114;  by  him  it  is  called  "the  game  of  platter."

7  (p.  161). —  This  "  resuscitation"  of  a  dead  person  is  thus  de-
scribed by  Sagard  (  Voy.  Hurons,  pp.  289,  290):  "The  Attiuoin-
darons  celebrate  Resurrections  of  the  dead, —  especially  of  persons
who  deserved  well  of  the  country  by  their  signal  services, —  in  order
that  the  memory  of  illustrious  and  valorous  men  may,  in  some  sort,
live  again  in  others.  Accordingly,  they  convene  assemblies  for  this
purpose,  and  hold  councils,  at  which  they  choose  one  of  their  num-
ber who  has  the  same  virtues  and  characteristics  (if  such  a  person
can  be  found),  as  he  whom  they  purpose  to  resuscitate, —  or,  at
least,  his  life  must  be  without  reproach  among  a  Savage  people.
Proceeding,  then,  to  the  Resurrection,  they  all  stand  upright,  except
him  who  is  to  raise  the  dead;  on  him  they  impose  the  name  of  the
deceased,  and  all,  placing  their  hands  low  down,  feign  to  raise  him
from  the  ground, —  meaning  by  this  that  they  draw  out  of  the  tomb
that  eminent  deceased  personage,  and  bring  him  back  to  life  in  the
person  of  this  other  man.  The  latter  stands  up,  and,  after  loud
acclamations  from  the  people,  he  receives  the  gifts  offered  by  those
who  are  present,  who  repeat  their  congratulations  at  many  feasts,
and  thenceforth  regard  him  as  if  he  were  the  deceased  person  whom
he  represents.  Thus  the  memory  of  good  persons,  and  of  worthy
and  valorous  Captains,  never  dies  among  them. ' '  The  names  given
by  the  Indians  to  the  missionaries  were,  in  accordance  with  this
custom,  continued  to  their  respective  successors, —  as  Echon,  pass-
ing from  Brebeuf  to  Chaumonot  (vol.  v.,  note  44);  and  Teharonhia-
gannra,  as  Le  Mercier  and  Milet  were  entitled  by  the  Iroquois,  was
their  name,  two  hundred  years  later,  for  Father  Marcoux  (Shea's
Cath.  Missions,  p.  345).  Cf.  "  Patliasse,"  among  the  Micmacs  (vol.
i.,  note  25).

Of  interest,  in  this  connection,  is  a  phase  of  the  belief  in  transmi-
gration of  souls,  current  among  the  tribes  of  the  Northwest,  thus


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XVII  243

described  by  Dorman  {Prim.  Superstitions,  p.  45) :  "The  medicine-
men of  the  Cocomes  pretend  to  receive  the  spirit  of  the  dead  in  their
hands,  and  are  able  to  transfer  it  to  any  one,  who  then  takes  the
name  of  the  dead  person.  When  a  body  is  burned  among  the  Tacul-
lies,  the  priest  receives  the  spirit  of  the  deceased  into  his  hands ;
and,  with  a  motion  as  though  throwing  it,  he  blows  the  spirit  into
some  person  selected,  who  takes  the  name  of  the  deceased  in  addi-
tion to  his  own."

8  (p.  165). — Outay:  probably  the  black  squirrel,  then  abundant
in  the  region  of  the  Great  Lakes,  and  valued  for  its  fur.  Sagard
thus  describes  the  Huron  Otay  (  Voy.  Hurons,  p.  308),  which  he
probably  fails  to  class  among  the  squirrels  of  that  country  (pp.
305  -  306)  only  because  of  its  size  —  the  other  Canadian  species  of
squirrel  being  much  smaller  than  those  of  France:  "They  have
another  species  of  animal  named  Otay,  as  large  as  a  small  Rabbit ;
this  has  very  black  fur,  so  soft,  smooth,  and  fine  that  it  resembles
plush.  They  highly  value  these  skins,  of  which  they  make  robes,
placing  around  the  edges  of  these  all  the  heads  and  tails."  This
sort  of  trimming  suggests  to  Lafitau  ' '  the  Amices  of  the  Canons. ' '
Charlevoix  {Nouv.  France,  vol.  i.,  p.  273)  says:  "But  the  finest
Peltry  of  this  [Iroquois]  country  is  the  skin  of  the  black  Squirrel.
This  animal  is  as  large  as  a  Cat  three  months  old ;  it  is  exceedingly
agile,  but  very  gentle  and  easily  caught.  The  Iroquois  make  robes
of  this,  which  they  sell  for  as  much  as  seven  or  eight  pistoles."  Cf.
Le  Jeune  (vol.  vii.  of  this  series,  p.  13).

9  (p.  167). —  Cf.  Brebeuf's  description  of  Ononharoia  and  other
superstitious  rites  (vol.  x.,  pp.  175,  183).

10  (p.  191). — Brenesche :  the  wild  goose  of  Canada  (Bernic/a
canadensis,  Baird;  Anser  canadensis,  Audubon),  or  outarde  (Prov.
austarda,  from  Lat.  avis  tarda);  it  is  especially  abundant  along
the  lower  St.  Lawrence  and  the  Atlantic  coast.

11  (p.  225). —  Reference  is  here  made  to  the  compensation  given
to  the  De  Caens  for  their  losses  in  connection  with  the  dissolution
of  their  company  by  Montmorency,  and,  later,  with  Kirk's  capture
of  Quebec;  see  vol.  iv.,  pp.  257,  258.  Cf.  Le  Jeune's  allusion  (vol.
viii.,  p.  229):  "  They  rejoice  to  be  delivered  from  the  importunity
of  a  man  whose  hands  it  has  been  necessary  to  bind  with  chains  of
gold."


1-11


i
